Types of Mankind (Josiah Clark Nott and George Robins Gliddon, 1854)
==========================================================
1854 polygenist treatise arguing for separate human creations; a foundational text in the history of scientific racism, widely cited in scholarship on American ethnology and the defense of slavery. Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/typesmankindore01pattgoog).

This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  library  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project 
to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online. 

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject 
to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books 
are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover. 

Marks,  notations  and  other  marginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the 
publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you. 

Usage  guidelines 

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the 
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  this  resource,  we  have  taken  steps  to 
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying. 

We  also  ask  that  you: 

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for 
personal,  non-commercial  purposes. 

+  Refrain  from  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine 
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the 
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help. 

+  Maintain  attribution  The  Google  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  informing  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find 
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it. 

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just 
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other 
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of 
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner 
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liability  can  be  quite  severe. 

About  Google  Book  Search 

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.  Google  Book  Search  helps  readers 
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web 

at|http  :  //books  .  google  .  com/ 

fi^^SSM 

HARVARD 
COLLEGE 
LIBRARY 

Digitized  by 

Google 

Digitized  by 

Google 

Digitized  by 

Google 

Digitized  by 

Google 

Digitized  by 

Google 

TYPES  OF  MANKIND. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

Digitized  by 

Google 

Digitized  by 

Google 

ty/^:2y7^/<L^.^^^c,-^-^^^^^ 

Digitized  by 

Google 

0 

TYPES  OF  MANKIND: 

OB, 

Ctjltinlngiriil  IReHmrJitB, 

BASED  UPON  THX 

ANCIENT    MONUMENTS,  PAINTINGS,   SCULPTURES, 
AND  CBANIA  OF  RACES, 

AXD  VPOH  THBIB 

NATURAL,   GEOGRAPHICAL,  PHILOLOGICAL, 
AND  BIBLICAL  HISTORY: 

ILLUSTRATED  BT  8SLB0TI0K8  f  SOU  THB  INSDITXD  PAPBBS  01 

SAMUEL  GEORGE  MORTON,  M.D., 

(un  rugaam  or  vbi  aoaudct  of  lunnuL  samraxB  ax  TBnAUBJKU,) 

y«/         D     i    iif  ^*^  ^^  ADDITIOITAL  C0HTBIBUTI0H8  rEOM 

PROP.  L.  ^ASSIZ,  ILD.;  W/tJSHEB,  MJ).;  AND  PROP..H.  S.  PATTERSON,  MJ).: 

J.  C.  NOTT,  M.D.,  AND  GEO.  R.  GLIDDON, 

iuiiMi,  loumLT  V.  1.  oonm  ax  OAXBa 

v'  _.i       ^ 

— ^  Word!  trc  thingi;  and  »  null  drop  of  ink, 

railing,  lika  daw  upon  a  thought,  prodveea 

That  wliiob  makea  tbovaandf,  parbapa  ""TPV**^  think."- 

-       PHILADELPHIA:  '  -  •'''-4/?.0  UNW^^^) 

LIPPINCOTT,  GRAMBO    k   00. 

LONDON:    TBUBNEB   ft   00. 
1854. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

i  harvard 
university! 

V    LIRRARY 

tan  nraniD  at  rahoiibiiP  bail,  bt  nmBXiiiosrAL  ABaAaoDosY  wira  tbb  imhwaw  PBOFSBfOBS. 

Entered,  according  to  Act  of  Congress,  in  tha  year  1854,  by 

LIPPINCOTT,   GRAMBO  A  CO., 

in  the  Clerk's  Office  of  the  District  Coart  of  the  United  States  for  the  Eastern 
District  of  Pennsylvania. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

TO  THE 

MEMORY 

OP 

MORTON. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

Digitized  by 

Google 

SECOND   EDITION. 

PUBLISHERS'  ADVERTISEMENT. 

The  interest  now  directed  towards  Anthropological  Researches 
induces  us  to  issue  another  edition  of  the  present  work,  in 
form  and  style  less  costly  than  the  one  already  furnished  to 
the  Subscribers  whose  names  are  printed  in  Appendix  11. 

Bound  copies  of  the  First  (or  Subscribers')  Edition  will  con- 
tinue to  be  supplied,  to  order,  at  seven  doUara  and  a  half  each. 

LIPPINCOTT,  GRAMBO  &  CO. 

Piiblishers. 

PhHiApelphia,  April  1,  1854. 

(yii) 

Digitized  by 

Google 

Digitized  by 

Google 

PREFACE. 

BT  OBO.  B.  GLIDIKON. 

'*The  subject  of  Ethnology  I  deem  it  expedient  to  postpone.  On  this  I 
haye  collected  a  mass  of  new  materials,  which  I  hope  in  time  to  produce ; 
but  until  they  haye  'been  submitted  to  the  masterly  analysis  of  my  honored 
Ariend,  Samuil  Giobqb  Mo&tok,  M.  D.,  Philadelphia,  a  synopsis  from  my 
hands  would  be  premature."  * 

Little  did  I  expect,  while  penning  the  ahove  note,  that,  ere  four 
years  had  run  their  course,  it  would  fell  to  the  lot  of  Dr.  Nott  and 
myself  to  "close  ranks"  and  partially  fill  the  gap  left  in  American 
Ethnology  when  the  death-shot  struck  down  our  friend  and  leader. 
To  him  the  "new  materials"  were  submitted:  by  him  they  were 
analyzed  with  his  customary  acutenesfi ;  and  from  him  would  the  world 
have  received  a  series  of  works  superseding  the  necessity  for  the 
present  volume,  together  with  any  public  action  of  my  colleague  and 
i^iyself  in  that  science  so  indelibly  marked  by  Morton  as  his  own. 
The  15th  of  May,  1851,  arrested  his  hand,  and  left  us,  with  all  who 
knew  him,  to  sorrow  at  his  loss:  nor,  for  eleven  months,  did  the 
endeavor  to  raise  a  literary  monument  to  his  memory  suggest 
itself  either  to  Dr.  Nott  or  to  myself. 

"Types  of  Mankind"  owes  its  origin  to  the  following  incidents:  — 
After  a  gratifying  winter  at  New  Orleans,  I  visited  Mobile  in  April, 
1862 ;  partly  to  deliver  a  course  of  Lectures  upon  "  Babylon,  Nine- 
veh, and  Persepolis,"  but  mainly  to  renew  with  Dr.  Nott  those 
interchanges  of  thought  which  amity  had  commenced  during  my 
preceding  sojourn,  in  1848,  at  one  of  the  most  agreeable  of  cities. 
Morton  and  Ethnology ^  it  may  well  be  supposed,  were  exhaustless 
topics  of  conversation.  Deploring  that  no  one  had  stepped  forward 
to  make  known  the  matured  views  of  the  father  of  our  cis- Atlantic 
school  of  Anthropology,  it  occurred  to  us  that  we  would  write  one 
or  more  articles,  in  some  Review,  based  upon  the  correspondence  and 

»  Hand-hook  to  the  Nile;  London,  Madden,  1849;  p.  18,  note. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 

X  PREFACE. 

printed  papers  of  Morton  in  onr  several  possession.  Before  doing  so, 
however,  we  conceived  it  to  be  due  to  Mrs.  Morton  and  her  home-circle, 
to  inquire  by  letter,  if  such  proceeding  would  obtain  their  sanction; 
and  also  whether,  in  Mrs.  Morton's  opinion,  there  were  among  the 
Doctor's  manuscripts  any  that  might  be  eligibly  embodied  in  our  pro- 
posed articles.  The  graceful  readiness  with  which  our  proffer  was  met 
is  best  exemplified  by  the  fact  that  Dr.  Nott  and  myself  received  im- 
mediately, by  express  from  Philadelphia,  a  mass  of  Dr.  Morton's  auto- 
graphs on  scientific  themes,  together  with  such  books  and  papers  as 
were  deemed  suitable  for  our  purposes.  On  a  subsequent  visit  to 
Philadelphia,  I  was  permitted  to  select  from  the  Doctor's  shelves 
whatever  was  held  to  be  appropriate  to  our  studies;  and,  while 
this  book  has  been  passing  through  the  press,  the  whole  of  Dr.  Mor- 
ton's correspondence  with  the  scientific  world  waa  entrusted  to  Dr. 
Patterson  and  myself  for  mutual  reference.  But,  the  unbounded 
confidence  with  which  we  have  been  honored,  whilst  most  precious 
to  our  feelings,  enhances  greatly  our  responsibility.  Actuated,  indi- 
vidually, by  the  sole  desire  to  render  justice  to  our  beloved  friend, 
each  of  us  has  executed  his  part  of  the  task  to  the  best  of  his  ability : 
at  the  same  time  we  can  emphatically  declare  that,  until  the  pages  of 
our  work  were  stereotyped,  no  member  of  Dr.  Morton's  family  was 
cognizant  of  their  verbal  contents.  Thus  much  it  is  my  privilege  to 
testify,  in  order  that,  if  any  of  the  writers  have  erred  in  their  concep- 
tions of  Morton's  scientific  opinions,  the  ontu  of  such  inadvertence 
may  fall  upon  themselves  exclusively.  Nevertheless,  the  singleness 
of  purpose  and  harmony  of  method  with  which  Dr.  Nott,  Dr.  Patter- 
son, and  myself,  have  striven  to  fulfil  our  pledges,  are  guarantees 
that  no  erroneous  interpretations,  if  any  such  exist,  can  have  arisen 
intentionally.    Throughout  this  volume,  Moeton  speaks  for  himself. 

The  receipt  at  Mobile  of  such  welcome  accretions  to  our  ethno- 
graphical stock  prompted  a  change  of  plan.  In  lieu  of  ephemeral 
notices  in  a  Review,  Dr.  Nott  united  with  me  in  the  projection  of 
"  Types  of  Mankind  " ;  the  scope  of  which  has  daily  grown  larger,  in 
the  ratio  of  the  facilities  with  which  we  have  been  signally  favored. 

On  the  first  printed  announcement  of  our  intention  [New  Orleans, 
December,  1852],  the  interest  manifested  amon^  the  jfriends  of  science 
was  such,  that,  by  March,  I  counted  nearly  500  subscriptions  in 
furtherance  of  the  work. 

Prof.  Agassiz's  very  opportune  visit  to  Mobile  during  April, 
1853,  led  to  a  contribution  from  his  own  pen  that  bases  the  Natural 
History  of  mankind  upon  a  principle  heretofore  unanticipated. 
Dr.  Usher  kindly  volunteered  a  synopsis  of  the  geological  and  palw- 
ontological  features  of  human  history ;  and  Dr.  Patterson,  fellow- 

Digitized  by 

Google 

PREFACE.  XI 

citizen,  professional  colleague,  and  admiring  fiiend  of  Dr.  Morton, 
undertook  the  biographical  Memoir  which  justifies  this  volume's 
dedication.  The  frank  concurrence  of  Messrs.  Lippincott,  Grambo 
k  Co.  has  removed  every  obstacle  to  effective  publication ;  and  thus, 
through  the  Uberality  and  thirst  for  information,  so  eminently 
characteristic  of  American  republicanism,  "Types  of  Mankind,*' 
invested  with  abundant  signatures,  issues  into  day  as  one  among 
multitudinous  witnesses  how,  in  our  own  age  and  land,  scientific 
works  can  be  written  and  published  without  solicitation  of  patron- 
age from  Governments,  Institutions,*  or  Societies ;  but  solely  through 
the  co-operative  support  of  an  educated  and  knowledge -seeking 
people. 

The  departments  of  our  undertaking,  respectively  assumed  by  Dr. 
Nott  and  myself,  having  been  already  set  forth  {infray  Part  m., 
Essay  I.,  p.  626),  repetition  is  here  superfluous.  But  While,  on  my 
side,  I  was  enabled  to  devote  nearly  twelve  months  of  uninter- 
rupted seclusion  (in  Baldwin  county,  Alabama)  to  my  portion  of  th^ 
labor,  it  must  not  be  forgotten,  on  the  other,  that  my  colleague  at 
Mobile  performed  his  task  under  the  ceaseless  pressure  of  the  severest 
professional  duties.  In  view,  therefore,  of  the  amount  of  Dr.  Nott's 
achievements  under  such  adverse  circumstances,  the  reader  who  may 
be  pleased  to  criticize  the  editorship  of  "Types  of  Mankind,"  whilst 
recognizing  my  colleague's  hand  in  every  line  of  Part  I.,  and  his 
frequent  suggestions  throughout  Parts  IE.  and  HE.,  as  concerns  the 
substance,  will  act  but  justiy  if,  as  regards  modes  of  expression, 
he  should  direct  any  strictures  towards  myself;  whose  part  it  has 
been  occasionally  to  connect  the  various  sections  of  this  work  by 
reconstructed  sentences,  or  through  a  few  intercalated  paragraphs, 
consequent  upon  the  reception  of  new  "  copy"  fix>m  Dr.  Nott  during 
the  passage  of  these  sheets  through  the  press.  Even  at  this  later 
stage  of  our  enterprise,  owing  to  the  distance  between  Mobile  and 
Philadelphia,  and  to  the  dire  havoc  produced  by  a  yellow  fever 
simultaneously  among  our  friends  around  Mobile  Bay,  I  have  not 
possessed  the  advantage  of  Dr.  Nott's  revision  of  "proof-sheets," 
nor  had  he  the  time  to  propose  alterations. 

The  Prefiice  to  my  Otia  JEgyptiaca  assigns  sufficient  reasons  why 
any  aspirations  of  mine  towards  excellence  in  English  composition 
would  be  vain.  "With  myself,  style  is  ever  subordinate  to  matter ; 
but  my  valued  friends,  Mr.  Bbdwood  Fisher,  Mr.  Lloyd  P.  Smith, 
and  Dr.  Hbney  S.  Pattbrson,  have  most  obligingly  looked  over  a 
large  portion  of  the  "  revises"  as  they  came  from  the  hands  of  the 
stereotyper. 

I  indulge  the  hope  that  all  those  gentiemen  who  have  directly 

Digitized  by 

Google 

XU  PBEFAOE. 

promoted  the  scientific  interests  of  our  work,  will  find  in  it  due 
acknowledgment  of  their  courtesies.  For  the  free  use  of  the  col- 
lection of  Egyptological  works  — the  best  accessible  to  the  public  in 
this  country  —  belonging  to  the  Philadelphia  Library  Company,  Dr. 
Morton's  brother-in-law,  Mr.  John  Jay  Smith,  will  accept  my  sincere 
thanks. 

The  Publishers  state,  on  another  page,  the  endeavor  made  to 
furnish  our  Subscribers  with  counter-value  for  their  subscriptions  fer 
in  excess  of  my  original  promises ;  and  with  these  brief  expository 
remarks  my  pen  would  stop,  did  not  personal  gratitude  claim 
expression. 

Those  acquainted  with  my  earlier  life  (spent  in  the  Levant  until 
the  age  of  thirty-two)  may,  perhaps,  read  some  portions  of  this 
volume  with  feelings  of  surprise  at  the  range  of  studies  once  so  alien 
to  my  vocations,  prospects,  aud  ambition.  By  way  of  explanation 
let  me  state,  that,  whatever  may  have  been  the  ground-work  previ- 
•ously  laid  for  the  prosecution  of  self-culture,  there  was  one  obstacle 
to  progress  which  would  have  been  insurmountable,  when  (one  among 
the  million  seeldng  fi^edom)  I  re-landed  in  the  United  States  (1842), 
but  fi)r  the  friendship  of  a  gentieman  who  —  unlike  Pharaoh's  chief 
butler  that  did  not  "  remember  Joseph,  but  forgat  him" — had  known 
mo  in  iUo  tempore  at  Memphis.  The  munificence  of  Mr.  R.  K. 
Haight  of  New  York  obviated  all  difficulty  by  placing  the  necessary 
materials  for  study  at  my  disposal ;  and  not  content  with  fiicilitating 
the  attainment  of  my  desires  by  his  encouraging  acts  at  home,  Mr. 
Haight,  on  two  occasions,  enabled  me  to  seek  instruction  abroad,  at 
the  fountain-sources  of  Paris,  London,  and  Berlin.  The  pulsations 
of  a  grateful  heart,  and  the  hope  that  some  readers  may  deem  favore 
so  magnanimous  not  uselessly  bestowed,  are  the  only  reciprocities 
that  can  at  present  be  tendered  to  him  by 

G.  B.  G. 

Fhtlapblphta,  l0t  Jan.,  1S64. 

POSTSCRIPTUM. 

BY   J.  C.   NOTT. 

I  have  just  received  from  Philadelphia  proof-%heet$  of  the  above 
PrefiEtce,  and  hasten  to  add  a  few  words. 

Above  t^ree  hundred  and  sixty  wood-cuts,  besides  many  litho- 
graphic plates,  adorn  this  volume,  and  upon  them,  to  some  extent, 
depend  its  value  and  success.     The  reader  can  well  imagine  the 

Digitized  by 

Google 

PBBFAGE.  XIU 

immense  labor  atid  heavy  expense  required  to  prepare  a  series  of 
illustrations  of  this  kind,  wherein  minnte  accuracy  is  so  indispensable, 
and  where  such  accuracy  can  be  attained  only  through  long-con- 
tinued and  patient  industry  combined  with  high  artistic  skill.  So 
great,  indeed,  were  the  difficulties  to  be  overcome,  that  the  authors 
could  never  for  a  moment  have  entertained  the  idea  of  publishing  a 
work  like  "Types  of  Mankind,"  had  it  not  been  for  the  aid  gener- 
ously proffered  by  Mrs.  Gliddon,  the  accomplished  lady  of  my  col- 
league. To  her  amateur  pendl  are  we  indebted  for  the  drawings  of 
more  than  three  hundred  of  otir  wood-cuts,  together  with  those  for 
tiie  lithographed  Berlin-effigies. 

To  say  nothing  of  the  outiay  which  these  illustrations  must  other- 
wise have  involved,  it  would  have  been  impossible  for  us  to  obtain, 
here,  an  equal  conformity  to  ori^nals  through  hired  artists.  Mrs* 
Gliddon's  hand  was  stimulated  by  no  mercenary  considerations ;  and 
we  have  enjoyed  the  incalculable  advantage  of  having  her  near  us  at 
Mobile,  for  more  than  twelve  months;  laboring  with  us  and  for  us: 
ever  ready  to  alter  or  amend  as  our  caprice,  or  necessity,  might  dic- 
tate. Although  Mrs.  Gliddon  was  unaccustomed  to  drawing  on 
wood,  and  notwithstanding  that  the  wood-engravers  at  Philadelphia 
(compelled,  owing  to  the  nature  of  the  case,  to  carve  from  her 
drawings  alone  without  recurrence  to  the  originals),  may  here  and 
there  have  slightly  erred,  I  venture  to  assert  that  no  scientific  work 
in  our  language  presents  as  long  a  series  of  illustrations  more  reliable 
for  iaithfalness  to  originals. 

Many  of  the  heads,  however,  are  given  in  simple  outline,  and  the 
majority  have  required  reduction;  but  persons  who  are  familiar  with 
the  great  works  of  Rosellini,  ChampoUion,  Piisse,  Lepsius,  Botta, 
Flandin,  Layard,  Dumoutier,  &c.,  from  which  these  figures  have 
been  copied,  will  at  once  recognize  a  truthfulness  in  Mrs.  Gliddon's 
designs  (viewed  ethnologically)  which  speaks  more  than  the  enco- 
miums of  an  admiring  friend. 

Nor  is  it  proper  that  I  should  close  this  Po9t$crtpt  without  some 
acknowledgment  to  her  husband.  In  the  first  place,  it  is  mere  justice 
to  state,  that  Parts  11.  and  HI.  are  almost  exclusively  his  own  work : 
because,  although  not  uninformed  on  the  points  therein  treated,  and 
agreeing  in  their  scientific  results,  I  wish  to  mention  that  the  materials, 
conception,  and  execution  of  these  portions  of  our  volume  are  due  to 
him.  Of  Part  L,  on  the  other  hand,  a  fuller  share  of  responsibility 
must  fitU  upon  myself.  The  special  province,  which  I  have  attempted 
to  explore,  is  the  Natural  HUtory  proper  of  mankind  i-  and  I  have 
sought  to  illustrate  it  through  the  physical  and  linguistic  history  of 
primeval  races,  as  deduced  fit>m  the  time-worn  pionuments  of  nations 

Digitized  by 

Google 

XIV  PREFAOE. 

by  the  leading  archeeologists  o£onr  nineteenth  centory.  This  effort 
has  also  been  much  £Eu;ilitated  through  the  zeal  and  experience  of 
my  collaborator,  Mr.  Gliddok. 

It  is  with  no  small  gratification  I  now  feel  assured  that,  through 
Dr.  Pattbeson's  effective  "Memoir,"  Morton's  cherishedt  fiame  will 
evermore  preserve  its  rightful  place  among  men  of  science;  and, 
again,  that  thDse  grand  Truths,  for  which  I  have  long  "fought  and 
bled,"  are  at  last  established  by  the  unanswerable  "  Sketch"  of  our 
chief  naturalist,  Prof.  Agassiz  ;  as  well  as  triumphantiy  confirmed 
through  the  teachings  of  scholars  who  have  investigated  the  records 
of  antiquity  in  Egypt,  China,  Assyria,  India,  Palestine,  and  other 
Oriental  countries. 

J.  0.  N. 
MoBiLB,  Ala.,  Jamiaiy  12tb,  1854. 

.    I 

Digitized  by 

Google 

CONTENTS. 

FBONTISPIECE— PoBTBAiT  or  Samusl  Obobgi  Mobtoh.    [SUeUSngravinff.] 

DEDICATION «^«' To  Tm  Mmioet  of  Moetok" ▼ 

PREFACE— BT  Geo.  R.  Guddob ^ - ix 

PoiUer^ftum--' BY  J.  C.  Nott - zii 

(!)         MEMOIR — *<KoTiOB  or  thb  Lutb  ahd  SciEimno  Labobs  or  thb  late  Samuel 

Geo.  Mobtob,  M.  J>,"~'-€oninlmted  hrfProf,  Heeet  S.  Pattbesob,  M.D.  z?ii 

0  SKETCH — "or  the  Katubal  Pboyimcis  or  the  Ahimal  Wobld  abb  thbib  Rela- 
tion TO  THE  DirrBBBBT  Ttpbs  or  Mab  "  —  eontributed  by  Prof,  L. 
AoABSiz,  LL.  D.     [  WUh  colored  Uthographie  Tableau  and  Map."] Iviii 

INTRODUCTION  so  "Ttpss  or  Mabkibd"  —  bt  J.  C.  Non 49 

PART    I. 

Chap.  I.  —  (hioaBAPHioAL  Dutbibutiob  or  Abimals  abb  thb  Races  or  Meb 62 

n.  —  Gebbbal  Rbmabks  OB  Types  or  Mabkibd., 80 

IIL  —  SPEOino  Ttpes  —  Cauoasiab 88 

IT.  —  Phtsioal  Histobt  or,  the  Jews »- •«• Ill 

V.  —  The  Cauoastab  Types  oabbied  thbovoh  Eotptiab  Mobbmbbts  ..»« 141 

YI.  —  Atbioab  Types » 180 

YIL — Egypt  abd  Egyptiabs.   [Fowr  Uthographie  PUaet."] 210 

^    Tm.— Negbo  Types - 246 

IX. — Amebioab  abb  othbb  Types  —  Abobioibal  Races  or  Akebica 272 

X.  —  EzcEBPTA  PBOM  Mobtob's  ibedited  Mabbscbipts 298 

0      XL  —  Geology  abd  Paljeobtolooy,  ib  Cobbeotiob  with  Humab  Obioibs  — 

contributed  hff  yiiLLiKM.  Usheb,  M.  D ^ ; 827 

Xn.  —  Hybbidity  or  AbimXls,  ytbweb  ib  Cobbeotiob  with  the  Natubal 

HisTOBY  or  Mabkibd  —  BY  J.  C.  Nott 872 

^>^XIIL — COMPABATITB  AbATOMY  OP  RaCBS  —  BY  J.    C.   NOTT •   411 

0  («0, 

Digitized  by 

Google 

XVI  CONTENTS. 

PART    II. 

PACT 

Geap.  XrV. —  The  Xth  Chapter  of  Genesis  —  P&eliminabt  Remabks 466 

Sect,  A, — Analtsis  of  the  Hebrew  Nomsnolatube 469 

B,  —  Obsertations  on,  the  annexed  Genealogical  Tableau 

OF  THE    **SONS   OF  NOAH  " ^ 651 

Qenealogical  Tableau 652 

C,  —  Obsebvations   on   the   AoooMPAiTTiNa    *<Map   of   the 

World" 652 

Lithographic  tinted  Map^  exhibiting  the  Countries  more  or 
less  known  to  the  ancient  Writer  of  Xth  Genesis 662 

2>.  —  The  Xth  Chapter  of  Genesis  modernized,  in  its  Nomen- 
clature, to  display  popxtlarlt,  and  in  modern 
English,  the  Meaning  of  its  ancient  Writer 658 

XV.  —  Bibuoal  Ethnographt  :  — 

Sect,  E.  —  Terms,  universal  and  specific. 557 

F.  —  Structure  of  Genesis  I.,  11.,  and  m 561 

Q,  —  Cosmas-Indicopleustes 666 

CosMAs's  Map  {wood^eut'\ 669 

iT.— Antiquity  of  the  Name  "ADaM" « 672 

PART    III.  —  Supplement  — -BY  Geo.  R  Gleddon. 

Essay  I. — Arch^ological  Introduction  to  the  Xth  Chapter  op  Genesis 675 

IL  —  Paljsographic  Excursus  on  the  Art  of  Writing 628 

Table  —  <*  Theory  of  the  Order  of  Deyelopment  in  Human  Writings'* ...  630 

III.  —  Mankind's  Chronology  :  — 

Introductory • 653 

Chronology  —  Egyptian 667 

Chinese .«*.«.  689 

Assyrian 697 

Hebrew 702 

Hindoo 715 

APPENDIX  I. —Notes  and  Bcferences  to  Parts  I.  and  II.. 717 

IL — Alphabetical  List  of  StBSCRiBERS  to  "Types  of  Mankind"...  781 

Digitized  by 

Google 

®  MEMOIR 

THE  LIFE  AND  SCIENTIFIC  LABORS 
or 

SAMUEL  GEORGE  MORTON. 

BY  HENRY  S.  P^ATTERSON,  M.  D., 

KMEBITUS  PROFESSOB  OT  MATERIA.  XBDICA  AND  THBRAPBDTICS  IN  THB  MEDICAL  DBPARTICEHT  OF 

PBimSTLYABIA  OOLLBGB  ;  PBLLOW  OF  THB  C0LLB6B  OP  PHTBICIAH 8  ;  BBCOBDIKO 

.  8BCRBTABT  OP  THB  MBDICAL  SOCnTT  OP  THB  8TATB  OP  PBUHBTLyAJflA. 

When  the  authors  of  the  present  work,  pressed  with  the  labor  of 
preparing  for  the  printer  their  abundant  materials,  first  suggested 
that  I  should  assist  them  by  iurnishing  a  notice  of  the  scientific  life 
of  our  deceased  fiiend  and  leader  in  Ethnology,  I  hesitated  somewhat 
to  undertake  the  task,  feeling  that  the  selection,  dictated  by  their 
partial  fiiendship,  might  by  others  be  ^eemed  inappropriate,  and 
myself  considered  deficient  in  those  relations  which  would  warrant 
the  assumption  of  the  office.  Subsequent  reflection,  however,  con- 
vinced me  that  an  acquaintance  of  fifteen  years,  approaching  to  inti- 
macy,— ^frequent  professional  and  social  intercourse, — my  position  in 
the  Medical  Faculty,  that  was  founded  mainly  by  his  labors,  —  devo- 
tion in  a  great  degree  to  the  same  studies, — community  of  sentiment 
in  regard  to  the  topics  of  most  interest  to  both, — that  all  these  com- 
bined to  constitute  a  sufficient  reason  why  I  should  fireely  accept  the 
duty  assigned  me.  I  do  it  cheerfully,  for  to  me  it  is  a  grateful  duty 
and  a  source  of  pleasure,  thus  to  be  allowed  to  bear  testimony  to  the 
worth  and  services  of  the  great  and  good  man  whom  we  all  had  so 
much  cause  to  love  and  honor.  His  life  I  do  not  propose  to  write. 
There  is  but  little  in  the  quiet  daily  walk  of  any  civilian,  to  ftimish  a 
theme  for  biographical  narrative.  That  of  Morton  was  eminently 
placid  and  regular ;  and  all  that  can  be  said  upon  it  has  already  been 
well  and  eloquently  caressed  in  the  able  addresses  of  Professors 

(XTii) 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC 

XVUl  HEMOIB  OF  SAMUEL  GEORGE  MOR^^ON. 

Meigs,  Wood,  and  Grant*  To  Dr.  Wood  also  we  are  indebted  for 
his  exposition  of  Morton's  eminent  services  to  medical  science,  both 
as  a  teacher  and  writer ;  a  point  too  frequently  overlooked  in  regard- 
ing him  in  the  more  prominent  light  of  a  ITaturalist.  Passing  over 
these  topics,  my  object  will  be  to  consider  mainly  his  contributions 
to  Natural  Science,  and  especially  to  Ethnology.  As  introductory  to 
a  work  upon  anthropological  subjects,  we  desire  to  present  Morton 
as  the  Anthropologist,  and  as  virtually  the  founder  of  that  school  of 
Ethnology,  of  whose  views  this  book  may  be  regarded  as  an  authentic 
exponent. 

Let  me  be  permitted,  however,  a  few  words  in  relation  to  the  per- 
sonal character  and  private  worth  of  Morton.  At  the  mention  of  his 
name  there  arise  emotions  which  press  for  utterance,  and  which  it 
would  do  viol^ice  to  my  feelings  to  leave  unexpressed  If  I  have 
felt  this  aflTection  for  him,  it  is  only  what  was  shared  by  all  who  knew 
him  well.  What  was  most  peculiar  in  him  was  that  magnetic  power 
by  which  he  attracted  and  bound  men  to  him,  and  made  them  glad 
to  serve  him.  This  influence  was  especially  manifested,  as  I  shall 
have  occasion  to  observe  again,  in  the  collection  of  his  Cabinet  of 
Crania.  In  looking  over  his  correspondence  now,  it  is  surprising  to 
see  the  number  of  men,  so  different  one  from  another  in  every  re- 
spect, who  in  all  quarters  of  the  globe  were  laboring  without  expec- 
tation of  reward  to  secure  a  cranium  for  Morton,  and  to  read  the 
reports  of  their  varied  successes  and  disappointments.  In  his  whole 
deportment,  there  was  an  evident  singleness  of  purpose  and  a  candor, 
open  as  the  day,  which  at  once  placed  one  at  his  ease.  Combined 
with  this  was  a  most  winning  gentleness  of  manner,  which  drew  one 
to  him  as  with  the  cords  of  brotherly  affection.  He  possessed,  more- 
over, in  a  remarkable  degree,  the  fiiculty  of  imparting  to  others  his 
own  enthusiasm,  and  filling  them,  for  the  time  at  least,  with  ardor 
for  his  own  pursuit  Hence,  in  a  measure,  his  success  in  enlisting 
the  numerous  collaborators,  so  necessary  to  him  in  his  peculiar 
studies.  It  may  be  afltaied  that  no  man  ever  cftme  within  the 
sphere  of  his  influence  without  forming  for  him  some  degree  of 

*  A  memoir  of  Samufil  G«orge  Morton,  M.  D.,  Ute  President  of  the  Academy  of  Natural 
Sciences  of  Philadelphia,  by  Charles  D.  Meigs,  M.  D.  Read  Not.  6th,  1851,  and  published 
by  direction  of  the  Academy:  Philada.  1851. 

A  Biographical  Memoir  of  Samuel  George  Morton,  M.  D.,  prepared  by  appointment  of 
the  College  of  Physicians  of  Philadelphia,  and  read  before  that  body  No?.  8d,  1852,  by 
George  B.  Wood,  M.  D.,  President  of  the  CoUege :  Philada.  1858. 

Sketch  of  the  Life  and  Character  of  Samuel  George  Morton,  M.  D.  Lecture,  introdnO' 
tory  to  a  course  of  Anatomy  and  Physiology  in  the  Medical  Department  of  PennsyWanit 
College.  Deliyered  Oct.  18th,  1851,  by  William  R.  Grant,  M.  I).  Published  by  request  of 
the  Class:  Philada.  1852 

Digitized  by 

Google 

MEMOIR    OF    SAMUEL    GEORGE    MORTON.  XIX 

personal  attachment.  His  circle  of  attached  friends  was  therefore 
large,  and  the  expression  of  regret  for  his  untimely  loss  general  and 
sincere. 

It  was  in  London,  and.while  seated  at  the  hospitable  board  of  Dr. 
Thomas  Hodgkin,  (to  whom  I  had  been  introduced  by  a  letter  from 
Morton,*)  that  I  first  heard  the  news  of  his  decease.  He  was  the  subject 
of  an  animated  and  interesting  conversation  at  the  moment,  (for  Dr.  H. 
and  he  had  been  classmates  at  Edinburgh,)  when  a  gentleman  entered 
with  an  American  newspaper  received  by  the  morning's  mail,  and 
containing  the  sad  intelligence.  A  cloud  came  over  every  counte- 
nance, and  every  voice  was  raised  in  an  exclamation  of  sudden  grief 
and  regret ;  for  he  was  more  or  less  known  to  all  present.  My  next 
appointment  for  that  day  was  with  Mr.  S.  Birch,  of  the  Archseological 
department  of  the  British  Museum,  who  had  been  a  correspondent 
of  Morton,  and  could  appreciate  his  great  worth.  During  tte  day, 
Mr.  Birch  or  myself  mentioned  the  melancholy  tidings  to  numerous 
gentiemen,  in  various  departments  of  that  great  institution,  and 
always  with  the  same  reply.  All  knew  his  name,  and  felt  that  in 
his  decease  the  cause  of  sdelkce  had  suffered  a  serious  deprivation. 

And  this  seemed  to  me  his  true  fame.  Outside  the  walls  of  this 
noble  Temple  of  Science  rolled  on  the  turmoil  of  the  modem 
Babylon,  with  its  world  of  business,  of  pleasure,  and  of  care,  to 
all  which  the  name  of  Morton  was  unknown,  and  from  which  its 
mention  could  call  up  no  response.  Within  these  walls,  however, 
and  among  a  body  of  men  whom  a  more  than  princely  munificence 
enables  to  devote  themselves  to  labor  like  his  own,  he  was  uni- 
versally recognized  and  appreciated,  and  mourned  as  a  leading 
spirit  in  their  cosmopolite  fraternity.  But  always  there  was  this 
peculiarity  to  be  noticed,  that  wherever  a  man  had  known  Morton 
personally  at  all,  he  mourned  not  so  much  for  the  untimely  extinction 
of  an  intellectual  light,  as  for  the  loss  of  a  beloved  personal  friend. 
Certainly  the  man  who  inspired  others  with  this  feeling,  could  him- 
self have  no  cold  or  empty  heart.     On  the  contrary,  he  overflowed 

*  Among  the  letters  with  which  Dr.  Morton  fsTored  me,u>n  my  Tisit  to  Europe,  wm  one 
to  Dr.  Alexander  Hamiay  of  Glasgow.  This  he  partionlarly  wished  me  to  deli?er,  and  to 
bring  him  a  report  of  his  old  fHend ;  for  Dr.  H.  had  been  aa  intimate  of  his  sttident  days, 
ilthoQgh  their  correspondence  had  long  been  interrupted.  The  letter  was'  written  in  a 
playful  mood,  and  contained  sportire  allusions  to  their  student  life  at  Edinburgh,  and  a  wish 
that  they  might  meet  again.  On  reaching  Glasgow  late  in  May,  I  sought  Dr.  H.,  and  found 
that  he  had  recently  deceased.  Morton  himself,  as  I  afterwards  learned,  had  then  also  ceased 
to  breathe.  That  letter,  so  full  of  genial  Tiracity  and  present  life,  was  flrom  the  hand  of  one 
detd  man  addressed  to  another  I  And  should  they  not  meet  again  T  Bather  had  they  not 
already  met  where  the  darkness  had  become  day !  It  is  a  beautiful  and  oonsolatoTy  belief; 
and  one  that  the  subject  of  this  notice  could  undoubUngly  hold  and  rejoice  in. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

XX       MEMOIR  OP  SAMUEL  GEORGE  MORTON. 

with  all  kindly  and  gentle  affections. '  Quiet  and  unobtrusive  in  man- 
ners, and  fond  of  the  retirement  of  study,  it  was  only  in  the  privacy 
of  the  domestic  circle  that  he  could  be  rightly  known ;  and  those  that 
were  privileged  to  approach  nearest  the  Sanctum  Sanctorum  of  his 
happy  home,  could  best  see  the  full  beauty  of  his  character.  That 
sacred  veil  cannot  be  raised  to  the  public  eye,  but  beneath  its  folds 
is  preserved  the  pure  memory  of  one  who  illustrated  every  relation 
of  life  with  a  new  grace  that  was  all  his  own,  and  who,  in  departing, 
has  left  behind  him  an  impression  on  all  hearts,  which  not  the  most 
exacting  affection  could  wish  in  any  respect  other  than  it  is. 

The  early  training  of  Morton  was  in  strict  accordance  with  the 
principles  of  the  Society  of  Friends,  of  which  his  mother  was  a  mem- 
ber. His  school  education — ^whose  deficiencies  he  always  mentioned 
with  regret,  and  remedied  by  sedulous  labor  in  after  years  —  was 
throughout  of  that  character,  and  had  all  the  consequent  merits  and 
demerits.  It  is  a  system  which  represses  the  imagination  and  senti- 
ments, while  it  cultivates  carefully  the  logical  powers ;  and  which 
strives  to  turn  all  the  energies  of  the  pupil's  mind  toward  the  useful 
arts,  rather  than  what  may  be  deemedf  merely  ornamental  accom- 
plishments. When  it  carries  him  beyond  the  rudiments,  it  is  usually 
into  the  higher  mathematics  and  mechanical  philosophy.  Its  aim 
is  utility,  even  if  necessary  at  the  expense  of  beauty.  It  therefore 
does  not  generally  encourage  the  study  of  the  dead  languages,  with 
its  incidental  belles-lettres  advantages,  and  free  access  to  poets  and 
rhetoricians.  This  plan  of  education  I  believe  to  be  an  unsuitable, 
and  even  an  injurious  one  for  a  youth  of  cold  temperament  and 
dull  sensibilities.  When,  however,  the  subject  of  its  operation 
is  one  of  opposite  tendencies,  so  decided  as  to  be  the  better  for 
repression,  it  may  become  not  only  useful,  but  the  best  training  for 
that  particular  case.  Such  I  conceive  to  have  been  the  fact  in  regard 
to  Morton.  Endowed  by  nature  with  a  deUcate  and  sensitive  tem- 
perament, with  warm  affections,  a  keen  sense  of  natural  beauties,  a 
fertile  imagination,  and  that  nice  musical  appreciation  which  made 
him  delight  in  the  accord  of  measured  sounds,  he  had  an  early  passion 
for  poetical  reading  and  composition.  Even  in  boyhood  he  wrote 
very  creditable  verses ;  and  his  later  productions,  —  for  he  continued 
to  indulge  the  muse  occasionally  to  the  end  of  his  life,  although  he 
wouM  not  publish,  —  often  rose  considerably  above  mediocrity. 

The  following  hues  may  answer  as  an  average  specimen  of  his  easy 
flow  of  versification,  as  well  as  of  his  youthful  style  of  thought  and 
feeling.  They  were  written  on  the  occasion  of  a  visit  to  Kilcoleman 
Castle,  county  Cork,  Ireland,  where  Spenser  lived,  and  is  believed  to 
have  written  his  immortal  poem. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC 

MEMOIR    OP    SAMUEL    GEORGE    MORTON.  XXI 

LINES 

WBITTEN  ON  A  BLANK  LEAF   OF   8PEN8EB*8    "FABRY   QUEENS." 
L 

Through  many  a  winding  maze  in  **  Faery  Lande*' 

0  Spenser !  I  have  followed  thee  along ; 

Aye,  I  have  laughed  and  sigh'd  at  thy  command, 
And  joy'd  me  in  the  magic  of  thy  song : 
Wild  are  thy  numbers,  but  to  them  belong 
The  fire  of  Genius,  and  poetic  skill *; 
'Tis  thine  to  paint  with  inspiration  strong, 
The  fate  of  knight,  or  dame  more  knightly  still. 
To  sway  the  feeling  heart,  and  rouse  it  at  thy  wilL 

IL 

And  musing  still  upon  the  fairy  dream, 

1  sought  the  hall  oft  trod  by  thee  before ; 
I  bent  me  clown  by  MuUa's  gentle  stream. 
And,  looking  far  beyond,  gazed  fondly  o*er 
Old  Ballyhoura,  where  in  days  of  yore 

Thou  watched  thy  flocks  with  all  a  shepherd's  pride ; 
And  fancy  listened  as  to  catch  once  more 
Thy  Harp's  loT'd  echo  f^om  the  mountain  side, — 
But  ah !  no  harp  is  heard  in  all  that  region  wide  I 

IIL 
The  flocks  are  fled,  and  in  the  enchanted  hall 
No  Toice  replies  to  yoice ;  but  there  ye  see 
The  Uy  clasp  the  sad  and  mould'ring  wall, 
As  if  to  twine  a  votive  wreath  for  thee : 
An  —  all  is  desolate,  —  and  if  there  be 
A  lonely  sound,  it  is  the  raven's  cry ! 
Let  years  roll  on,  let  wasting  ages  flee. 
Let  earthly  things  delight,  and  hasten  by. 
But  thy  immortal  name  and  song  shall  never  die ! 

Had  this  inherent  tendency  been  fostered,  he  would  doubtless  have 
taken  a  high  rank  among  our  American  poets.  Certainly  he  would 
have  been  another  man  than  we  have  known  him.  Perhaps  his 
nervous  temperament,  delicate  fibre,  acute  feelings  and  ardent  sym- 
pathies, might  have  been  developed  into  the  same  super-sensitiveness 
we  have  seen  in  John  Keats  and  other  gifted  minds  of  a  constitution 
similar  to  his  own.  But  the  tendency  was  checked  and  repressed 
from  the  outset  by  his  domestic  influences,  by  his  teachers,  and  sub- 
sequently by  himself.  When  he  devoted  himself  to  a  life  of  science, 
he  was  earnest  to  cultivate  that  style  of  thought  and  composition 
which  accorded  with  his  pursuits ;  for  only  by  severe  mental  disci- 
pline, and  long-continued  effbrt,  could  he  have  acquired  that  cau- 

Digitized  by 

Google 

XXU      MEMOIR  OF  SAMUEL  GEORGE  MORTON. 

tion  and  rigid  accuracy  of  diction,  which  characterize  his  produc 
tions.  His  school  appears  to  have  been  nnsatisfactoiy  to  him, 
for  he  never  had  a  fondness  for  the  mathematics,  the  main  topic  of 
study.  He  was  nevertheless  of  a  studious  turn,  reading  industriously, 
and  with  special  interest,  all  the  works  on  History  to  which  he  had 
access.  It  is  probable  that  in  these  readings  was  laid  the  foundation 
of  a  taste  for  those  anthropological  studies  which  have  since  rendered 
him  famous,  and  in  the  prosecution  of  which  his  extensive  historical 
knowledge  gave  him  eminent  fijcilities. 

At  the  same  time  probably  he  imbibed  his  first  fondness  for  Natural 
Science.  Prom  his  stepfather,  (for  his  mother  married  again  when  he 
was  thirteen  years  old,)  he  derived  a  taste  for  and  knowledge  of 
mineralogy  and  geology,  the  first  branches  to  which  he  turned  his 
attention. 

Destined  originally  for  mercantile  pursuits,  young  Morton  soon 
found  the  atmosphere  of  the  counting-house  uncongenial  to  him. 
He  resolved  to  adopt  the  medical  profession,  which  was  indeed  the 
only  course  open,  to  one  of  his  tastes,  and  in  his  circumstances.  The 
Society  of  Friends,  by  closing  the  Pulpit  and  the  Bar  against  the  able 
and  aspiring  among  its  youth,  has  given  to  Medicine  many  of  its 
brightest  ornaments,  both  in  Great  Britain  and  in  this  country.  This 
fact  will  -serve  to  explain  the  great  success  of  so  many  physicians  of 
that  persuasion,  as  well  as  the  preponderating  infiuence  of  the  medical 
profession  in  all  Quaker  neighborhood^.  May  not  the  eminence  of 
Philadelphia  in  medicine  be  accounted  for,  in  part  at  least,  in  the 
same  way  ?  Carlyle  has  said  that  to  the  ambitious  fancy  of  the  Scot- 
tish schoolboy  "  the  highest  style  of  man  is  the  Christian,  and  the 
highest  Christian  the  teacher  of  such."  Hence  his  ultimate  aspira- 
tion is  for  the  clerical  position.  But  to  the  aspiring  youth  among 
Friends  there  is  but  the  one  road  to  intellectual  distinction, — 
that  is  through  medicine  and  its  cognate  sciences.  The  medical 
preceptor  of  Morton  was  the  late  Dr.  Joseph  Parrish,  then  in  the 
height  of  his  popularity.  Elevated  to  his  prominent  position  against 
early  obstacles,  and  solely  by  force  of  character,  industry,  and  pro- 
bity, he  was  extensively  engaged  in  practice ;  and,  although  uncon- 
nected with  any  institution,  his  office  overflowed  with  pupils.  His 
mind  was  practical  and  thoroughly  medical,  and  so  entirely  did  his  pro- 
fession occupy  it,  that  he  seemed  to  me  never  to  allow  himself  to  think 
upon  other  topics,  except  religious  ones,  in  which  also  he  was  deeply 
interested.  A  strict  and  conscientious  Friend,  he  illustrated  all  the 
best  points  in  that  character.  As  the  remarkable  graces  of  his  person 
proverbially  gave  a  beauty  to  the  otherwise  ungainly  garb  of  his  sect, 
and  rendered  it  attractive  upon  him,  so  the  graces  of  his  spirit,  obli- 
terating all  that  might  otherwise  have  been  harsh  or  angular,  contri- 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 

MEMOIR    OF    SAMUEL    GEORGE    MORTON.  XXlll 

bdted  to  form  a  character  gentle,  kindly,  lovely,  that  made  him  the 
light  of  the  sick  chamber,  and  a  comforting  presence  at  many  a  dying 
bed.  To  no  member  of  our  profession  could  the  proud  title  of  Opifer 
be  more  truly  applied,  for  his  very  smile  brought  aid  to  the  suffering, 
and  courage  to  the  despondent.  The  reader  will  pardon  me  this 
digression ;  but  as  the  Highland  clansman  could  not  pass  by  without 
adding  another  stone  to  the  monumental  cairn  where  reposed  his 
departed  chief,  so  can  I  never  pass  by  the  mention  of  his  name  with- 
out offering  some  tribute,  however  humble,  of  reverence  and  respect, 
to  the  memory  of  my  excellent  old  master.  Such  was  the  teacher 
from  whom  mainly  Morton  also  received  the  knowledge  of  his  pro- 
fession; though,  had  the  influence  of  Dr.  Parrish  alone  controlled 
his  mind,  it  would  have  been  confined  rigorously  to  the  channels  of 
purely  medical  study  and  investigation.  But,  in  order  to  provide 
adequate  tuition  for  his  numerous  pupils.  Dr.  Parrish  had  associated 
with  himself  several  young  physicians  as  instructors  in  the  various 
branches.  Among  them  was  Dr.  Richard  Harlan,  then  enthusiasti- 
cally devoted  to  the  study  of  Natural  History,  between  whom  and 
the  young  student  there  was  soon  established  a  bond  of  sympathy  in 
congeniality  of  pursuits.  That  the  friendship  thus  originated  was 
subsequently  interrupted,  was  in  no  inanner  the  fault  of  Morton,  to 
whom  it  was  always  a  subject  of  regret.  Harlan  has  now  been  dead 
some  years,  and  although  by  no  means  forgotten  in  the  world  of 
science,  he  has  not  been  accorded  the  full  measure  of  his  merited 
distinction  among  American  naturalists.  An  unfortunate  infirmity 
of  temper,  which  was  not  at  all  calculated  to  conciliate  attach- 
ments, but  rather  the  reverse,  deprived  him  of  the  band  of  friends 
who  should  have  watched  over  his  fame,  and  so  his  memory  has  suf- 
fered by  default.  Yet  at  one  period  he  was  the  leading  auAority  on 
this  side  the  Atlantic  in  certain  departments  of  Zoology.  By  him 
Morton  appears  to  have  been  introduced  to  the  Academy  of  Natural 
Sciences,  in  whose  proceedings  he  was  afterwards  to  take  such  an 
important  part.  He  attained  his  majority  in' January  1820,  received 
his  Diploma  of  Doctor  of  Medicine  in  March,  and  was  elected  a 
member  of  the  Academy  in  April  of  the  same  year.  He  had  pro- 
bably taken  an  active  interest  in  its  affidrs  before  this  time,  although 
not  eligible  to  membership  by  reason  of  age ;  for  in  one  of  his  later 
letters  now  before  me,  he  speaks  of  it  as  an  institution  for  which  he 
had  labored,  "boy  and  man,"  now  some  thirty  years. 

Soon  after  this  last  event  he  sailed  for  Europe,  on  a  visit  to  his 
uncle,  James  Morton,  Esq.,  of  Clonmel,  Ireland,  a  gentleman  for 
whom  he  always  preserved  a  high  regard  and  grateful  affection.  His 
transatlantic  friends  seem  to  have  attached  but  little  value  to  an 

B 

Digitized  by 

Google 

XXIV  MEMOIR  OF   SAMUEL  GEORGE  MORTON. 

American  diploma,  and  desired  him  to  possess  the  honors  of  the 
University  of  Edinburgh,  then  but  little  passed  beyond  the  zenith 
of  its  glory.  After  spending  the  summer  at  his  uncle's  house,  he 
went  to  Edinburgh,  where  he  heard  the  last  course  of  lectures,  deU- 
vered  by  the  chaste  and  classical  Gregory.  The  American  schools 
not  being  recognized  by  the  University  as  ad  eundem^  he  found  him- 
self obliged  to  attend  the  full  term  of  an  under-graduate.  This  would 
have  left  him  ample  leisure  as  far  as  his  mere  college  studies  were 
concerned ;  for  the  youth  who  had  graduated  with  approbation  under 
the  tuition  of  "Wistar,  Physick,  and  James,  and  their  compeers,  could 
not  have  fallen  far  short  of  the  requisitions  of  any  other  Medical 
Faculty  in  Christendom.  But  his  time  was  not  spent  in  idleness. 
He  sedulously  cultivated  his  knowledge  of  the  classical  tongues, 
hitherto  imperfect,  and  he  devoted  himself  to  the  study  of  French 
and  Italian,  both  of  which  languages  he  learned  to  read  with  facility. 
He  also  attended  with  great  interest  the  lectures  of  Professor  Jameson 
on  Geology,  thus  confirming  and  reviving  his  early  fondness  for  that 
branch  of  science.  After  his  return  to  America,  he  presented  to  the 
Academy  a  series  of  the  green-stone  rocks  of  Scotland,  and  a  section 
of  Salisbury  Craig  near  Edinburgh,  collected  by  himself  at  this  time. 
In  October  1821,  he  visited  Paris,  and  spent  the  winter  there  mainly 
in  clinical  study.  The  next  summer  was  devoted  to  a  tour  in  Italy 
and  other  portions  of  the  continent,  and  in  the  fall  he  returned  again 
to  Edinburgh,  where,  afl^r  attendance  upon  another  session,  he  re- 
ceived the  honors  of  the  doctorate.  His  printed  thesis*  may  be  taken 
as  a  fair  exponent  of  his  mental  condition  and  calibre  at  this  period. 
It  is  very  like  himself,  and  yet  with  a  difference  from  him  as  we  knew 
him  later  in  life.  It  is  quiet  and  indeed  even  simple  in  tone,  without 
affectation  and  without  any  of  the  declamation  in  which  young  writers 
are  so  apt  to  indulge.  Its  style  is  clear  and  sufficiently  concise,  and 
as  a  piece  of  Latinity  it  is  correct  and  graceful.  It  takes  up  the 
subject  of  bodily  pain,  and  considers  it  in  regard  to  its  causes,  its 
diagnostic  value,  and  itS  effects,  both  physical  and  psychical, Reaving 
very  little  more  to  be  said  with  regard  to  it.  But  it  is  evident  through- 
out that  the  essay  is  the  production  of  one  who  is  more  ambitious  of 
the  reputation  of  the  litUrateurihdiXi  of  the  savant;  who  writes, — ^and 
that  probably  marks  the  distinction,  —  with  his  face  turned  to  his 
auditory  rather  than  to  his  subject.  The  sentence  marches  some- 
times with  a  didactic  solemnity  almost  Johnsonian,  while  the  fre- 
quency of  the  poetical  references  and  quotations, — ^Latin  and  Italian 
ns  well  as  English, — and  the  facile  fitness  with  which  they  glide  into 

•  TenUmen  Inaogorale  de  Corporis  Dolore,  etc. — ^Edinburgi,  m.d.cccxxiit. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 

MEMOIR  OF  SAMUEL  GEORGE  MORTON.     XXV 

the  text,  show  how  familiar  they  must  have  been  to  the  mind  of  the 
author.  Indeed  Edinburgh  was,  at  the  period  in  question,  the  prin- 
cipal ceatre  of  taste  and  philosophy,  as  well  as  of  science,  in  Great 
Britain ;  and  it  is  not  likely  that  one  of  Morton's  literary  turn  and 
studious  habits  would  miss  the  opportunity  to  pasture  in  either  of 
these  rich  fields.  The  ethical  tone  of  this  production  is  also  worthy 
of  note.  It  is  characteristic  of  the  writer,  and  grew  in  a  great  mea- 
sure out  of  his  mental  constitution,  which,  free  from  all  violence  of 
passion,  was  habitually  cheerful,  hopeful,  and  kindly.  Hence  coihes 
that  beautiful  spirit  of  philosophical  optimism,  which,  perceiving  in 
all  seeming  evil  only  the  means  to  a  greater  ultimate  good,  attains  all 
that  stoicism  proposed  to  itself,  by  the  shorter  way  of  a  cheerful  and 
unquestioning  resignation  to  the  Divine  Will,  not  because  it  is  omni- 
potent and  irresistible,  but  solely  because  it  is  the  wisest  and  best. 
The  following  extracts  will  sufficientiy  explain  my  meaning : — 

'*  Almarerum  Parens  nil  fhistra  fecit;  ne  dolor  qnidem  absque  suis nsibos  est;  et  semper 
oogimur  earn  agnoscere  velati  fidelem  qnamvis  ingratum  monitorem,  et  quoqne  inter  pras- 
sidla  vitse  nonnonquam  numerandum."  —  (p.  9.) 

« Dolor  enim  nos  nascentes  aggreditor,  per  totam  yitam  insidiosus  comitator,  et  quasi 
nunquam  satiandos;  adest  etiam  morientibus,  horamque  supremam  angoiibos  infestat. 
At  ego  tamen  Dolorem,  qnanqaam  invisum,  et  ab  omnibus,  quantum  fieri  potest,  ab  ipsis 
semotum,  non  omnino  inutilem  depinxi,  sed  potius  eum  protuli,  ad  vitam  conservandam 
neeessarium,  a  Deo  Optimo  Maximo  constitutum/'  —  (p  87.) 

This  conviction  animated  Morton  throughout  his  life,  consoled  him 
in  sufifering,  cheered  him  in  sickness,  and  gave  to  his  deportment  much 
of  its  calm  and  beautiful  equanimity.* 

*  The  subjoined  graceful  lines  breathe  the  same  spirit  They  occur  among  his  MSS.  with 
the  date  of  May  1828.    I  quote  them  as  illostratiye  of  the  thought  aboye  indicated. 

THl    SPIRIT    or    DISTINT. 

Spirit  of  Light !  Thou  glance  dlTine 

Of  Heayen*8  immortal  fire, 
I  kneel  before  thy  hallowed  shrine 

To  worship  and  admire. 
I  cannot  trace  thy  glorious  flight 

Nor  dream  where  thou  dost  dwell. 
Yet  canst  thou  g^ard  my  steps  aright 

By  thine  uneartl^y  speU. 

I  listen  for  thy  Toice  in  vain, 

£*en  when  I  deem  thee  nigh ; 
Yet  ere  I  yenture  to  complain, 

Thou  know'st  the  reason  why ; 
And  oft  when,  worldly  cares  forgot, 

I  watch  the  yaeant  air, 
I  see  thee  not, — I  hear  thee  not,— 

Yet  knew  that  thou  art  there. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

XXvi  HEMOIR    OP    SAMUEL    GEORGE    MORTOK. 

In  1824,  he  returned  to  PhUadelphia,  and  commenced  his  career  as 
a  practitioner  of  medicine.  He  seems  immediately  to  have  resumed 
bis  place  and  labors  in  the  Academy  of  Natural  Sciences,  which,  in 
the  next  year,  was  deprived  of  the  active  services  of  some  of  its  most 
efficient  members,  hj.  the  removal  of  Messrs.  Maclure,  Say,  Troost, 
Lesueur,  and  others,  to  New  Harmony,  whither  they  went  to  parti- 
cipate in  the  benevolent  but  ill-starred  social  experiment  of  Robert 
Owen.  .It  was  a  pleasant  dream  of  a  good  heart  and  a  visionary 
braiti,  and  has  now  feded  away  from  every  one  but  the  originator, 
who  holds  it  still  in  his  extreme  old  age  with  the  same  fervor  as  in 
his  ardent  youth ;  but  then  it  had  many  firm.believers.  So  enthusiastic 
was  Maclure  especially  in  its  advocacy,  that  he  declined  about  this 
period  to  assist  the  Academy  in  the  erection  of  a  new  Hall,  from  a 
conviction  that,  in  the  reorganization  of  society,  living  in  cities  would 
be  abandoned,  and  their  edifices  thus  left  untenanted  and  useless.  One 
cannot  imagine  a  body  of  more  simple-hearted,  less  worldly,  and  less 
practical  men,  than  the  Philadelphia  naturalists  who  went  to  recon- 
stitute the  framework  of  society  on  the  prairies  of  Indiana ;  and  it  is 
impossible  to  repress  a  smile  at  their  Quixotism,  even  while  one  heaves 
a  sigh  for  the  bitterness  of  their  disappointment. 

They  left  in  1825,  and  the  first  papers  of  Morton  were  read  in  1827. 
His  main  interest  still  seems  to  have  been  in  Geology.  In  the  year 
mentioned  he  published  an  Analysis  of  Tabular  Spar  from  Bucks 
County y  and  the  next  year  some  Geological  Observations^  based  upon 
the  notes  of  his  friend,  Mr.  Vanuxem.  About  this  time  his  attention 
was  turned  to  the  special  department  of  Palseontology,  by  an  exami- 
nation of  the  organic  remains  of  the  cretaceous  formation  of  New 
Jersey  and  Delaware ;  and  with  this  his  active  scientific  life  may  be 
regarded  as  commencing. 

Some  few  of  the  fossils  of  the  'New  Jersey  marl  had  been  noticed 
by  Mr.  T.  Say,  and  by  Drs.  Harlan  and  Dekay ;  but  no  thorough  in- 
vestigation of  this  interesting  topic  was  attempted  until  Morton  as- 
sumed the  task.  He  labored  in  it  industriously,  being  assisted  in  the 
collection  of  materials  by  his  scientific  friends.  Three  papers  on  the 
subject  were  published  in  1828,  and  from  this  time  the  series  was 
continued,  either  in  Silliman's  Journal  or  the- Journal  of  the  Aca- 

And  when  with  heedless  step,  too  near 

I  tempt  destniotioxi's  brink. 
Deep,  deep,  within  my  soul  I  hear 

Thy  voice,  and  backward  shrink. 
The  poisoned  shaft,  by  thee  controlled. 

Speeds  swift  and  harmless  by ; 
Bat,  when  the  days  of  life  are  told. 

Thou  smitest — and  we  die  I 

Digitized  by 

Google 

MEMOIR    OF    SAMUEL    GEORGE    MORTON.  XXYU 

demy,  uDtil  it  closed  with  the  fourteenth  paper  in  1846.  In  1884, 
the,  results  then  obtained  were  collected  and  published  in  a  volume 
illustrated  with  nineteen  admirable  plates.* 

This  book  at  once  gave  its  author  a  reputation  and  status  in  the 
scientific  world,  and  called  forth  the  warm  commendations  of  Mr. 
Mantell  and  other  eminent  Palseontologists.  It  traces  the  formation 
in  question  along  the  borders  of  the  Atlantic  and  the  Gulf  of  Mexico 
from  New  Jersey  to  Louisiana,  following  it  by  the  identification  of 
its  organic  remains.  The  great  body  of  the  work  is  original,  scarcely 
any  of  the  species  enumerated  having  ever  been  noticed  before.  Sub- 
sequent researches  enabled  him  to  add  considerably  to  this  collection, 
and,  among  others,  to  describe  a  species  of  fossil  crocodile  {0.  elavi- 
rostris)  entirely  new  and  differing  considerably  in  structure  from  its 
congeners  hitherto  known.  In  regard  to  the  fossils  of  the  cretaceous 
series,  he  is  still  the  principal  authority. 

Nor  was  he  neglectful  of  the  other  branches  of  Natural  Science, 
although  too  well  aware  of  the  value  of  concentrated  effort  to  peril 
his  own  success,  by  a  too  wide  diffusion  of  his  labors.  Still  he  miun- 
tained  a  constant  interest  in  the  operation  of  eveiy  department  of 
the  Academy,  and  watched  its  onward  progress  with  solicitude  and 
satis&ction.  To  the  Geological  and  Mineralogical,  and  especially  to 
the  Paleeontological  collection,  he  was  a  liberal  contributor.  Among 
the  papers  read  by  him  before  the  Academy  was  one  in  1881  on 
"  some  Parasitic  "Worms,"  another  in  1841,  on  "  an  Albino  Racoon,*' 
and  a  third  in  1844,  on  "  a  supposed  new  species  of  Hippopotamus.*' 
This  animal,  which  has  been  called  H.  minor  vel  LiberiensiSj  was  en- 
tirely unknown  to  Zoology  until  described  by  Morton,  who  received 
its  skull  from  Dr.  Goheen,  of  Liberia,  and  at  once  recognized  its 
diversity  from-  the  known  species.t  Notwithstanding  the  published 
opinion  of  Cuvier,  that  the  field  of  research  was  exhausted  in  regard 
to  the  Mammalia,  our  gifted  townsman  was  enabled  to  add  an  im- 
portant pachyderm  to  the  catalogue  of  Mammalogy,  and  that  too 
from  the  other  hemisphere. 

Let  it  not  be  supposed  that,  amid  these  absorbing  topics  of  research, 
he  relaxed  for  a  moment  his  attention  to  his  professional  pursuits. 
On  the  contrary,  he  was  constantly  and  largely  engaged  in  practice, 
and,  at  his  decease,  was  one  of  the  leading  practitioners  of  our  city. 
Neither  did  he  allow  himself  to  fall  behind  his  professional  colleagues 
in  the  literature  of  medicine.  He  was  among  the  first  to  intro- 
duce on  this  side  the  Atiantic  the  physical  means  of  diagnosis  in 

*  Synopsis  of  tbe  Organic  Bemains  of  the  Cretaceons  Group  of  the  United  States.    By 
Samnel  George  Morton.     Philadelphia:  Key  and  Biddle.     lSd4. 
t  The  Academy  has  recently  (Janaary  1862)  receiyed  a  specimen  of  it 

Digitized  by 

Google 

XXviu  MEMOIR    OF    SAMUEL    GEORGE    MORTON. 

thoracic  affections.  He  was  also  one  of  the  earliest  investigators  of 
the  morbid  anatomy  of  Phthisis  Pulmonalis ;  and  his  volume  on  that 
subject,  although  superseded  by  the  later  and  more  extensive  re- 
searches of  the  French  pathologists,  is  a  monument  of  his  industry 
and  accuracy,  and  a  credit  to  American  medicine.*  He  also  edited 
Mackintosh's  Practice  of  Physic,  with  notes,  which  add  materially  to 
its  value  to  the  American  physician.f  In  1849,  he  published  a  text- 
book of  anatomy,  remarkable  for  its  clearness  and  succinctness,  and 
the  beauty  of  its  illustrations.^  He  was  early  selected  by  Dr.  Parrish 
as  one  of  his  associates  in  teaching,  and  lectured  upon  anatomy  in 
that  connexion  for  a  number  of  years.  He  subsequently  filled  the 
chair  of  anatomy  in  the  Medical  Department  of  Pennsylvania  College 
fix)m  1839  to  1843.  As  a  lecturer  he  was  clear,  calm,  arid  self- 
possessed,  moving  through  his  topic  with  the  easy  regularity  of  one 
to  whom  it  was  entirely  familiar.  He  served  for  several  years  as  one 
of  the  physicians  and  clinical  teachers  of  the  Alms-house  Hospital, 
and  it  was  there  that  most  of  his  researches  on  consumption  were 
made.  He  was  a  Fellow  of  the  College  of  Physicians,  but  did  not 
take  an  active  part  in  their  proceedings,  from  the  fact  that  their  stated 
meetings  occurred  on  the  same  evenings  aa  those  of  the  Academy, 
where  he  felt  it  his  first  duty  to  be.  His  only  contribution  to  their 
printed  Transactions  is  a  biographical  notice  of  his  valued  friend. 
Dr.  George  McClellan,  prepared  by  request  of  the  College. 

We  now  come  to  a  portion  of  his  scientific  labors,  upon  which  I 
must  be  allowed  to  dwell  at  greater  length.  I  refer  of  course  to  his 
researches  in  Anthropology,  commencing  with  what  may  be  desig- 
nated Comparative  Cranioscopy,  and  running  on  into  general  Ethno- 
logy. The  object  proposed  primarily  being  the  determination  of 
ethnic  resemblances  and  discrepancies  by  a  comparison  of  crania, 
(thus  perfecting  what  Blumenbach  had  left  lamentably  incomplete,) 
the  work  could  not  be  commenced  until  the  objects  for  comparison 
were  brought  together.  The  results  of  Blumenbach  were  invalidated 
by  the  small  number  of  specimens  generally  relied  upon  by  him ;  for 
in  a  case  where  allowance  is  to  be  made  for  individual  peculiarities 
of  form  and  stature,  the  conclusions  gain  infinitely  in  value  by  exten- 
sion of  the  comparison  over  a  sufficient  series  to  neutralize  this 
disturbing  element.     There  was  therefore  necessaiy,  first  of  all,  a 

*  niustrations  of  Pulmonary  Consamption,  its  Anatomical  Characters,  Causes,  Symptoms 
and  Treatment.    Yiith  twelve  colored  plates.     Philadelphia :  1884. 

f  Principles  of  Pathology  and  Practice  of  Physio.  By  John  Mackintosh,  M.  D.,  &c.  First 
American  from  the  fourth  London  edition.  "With  notes  and  additions.  In  2  yoIs.  Phila- 
delphia: 1835. 

X  An  niustrated  System  of  Human  Anatomy,  Special,  General,  and  Microscopic  Phi- 
ladelphia: 1849. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

MEMOIR    OF    SAMUEL    GEORGE    MORTON.  XXIX 

collection  of  crania,  and  that  not  of  a  few  specimens,  but  widely 
enough  extended  to  give  reliable  results.  The  contemplation  of 
these  facts  shows  the  magnitude  and  boldness  of  the  plan,  which 
would  have  sufficed  to  deter  most  men  from  the  attempt.  But  Mor- 
ton was  not  easily  discouraged,  and  although  he  doubtless  occupied 
a  wider  field  in  the  end  than  he  proposed  to  himself  in  the  outset, 
it  is  evident  that  from  the  beginning  he  contemplated  a  full  cabinet 
of  universal  Craniology,  Human  and  Comparative.  His  own  account 
of  the  commencement  of  the  collection  is  as  follows :  "  Having  had 
occasion,  in  the  summer  of  1830,  to  deliver  an  introductory  lecture 
to  a  course  of  Anatomy,  I  chose  for  my  subject  The  different  forms 
of  the  skull  as  exhibited  in  the  Jive  races  of  men.  Strange  to  say,  I 
could  neither  buy  nor  borrow  a  cranium  of  each  of  these  races ;  and 
I  finished  my  discourse  without  showing  either  the  Mongolian  or  the 
Malay.  Fordbly  impressed  with  this  great  deficiency  in  a  most  im- 
portant branch  of  science,  I  at  once  resolved  to  make  a  collection  for 
myself."*  Dr.  Wood  {Memoir^  p.  13,)  states  that  he  engaged  in 
this  stucjy  soon  after  he  commenced  practice ;  and  adds,  "  among  the 
earliest  recollections  of  my  visits  to  his  office  is  that  of  the  skulls 
he  had  collected."  The  selection  of  the  topic  above-mentioned  shows 
that  he  was  already  interested  in  it. 

The  increase  was  at  first  slow,  but  the  work  was  persevered  m  with 
a  constancy  and  energy  that  could  know  no  failure.  Every  legitimate 
means  was  adopted,  and  every  attainable  influence  brought  to  bear 
upon  the  one  object.  Time,  labor,  and  money,  were  expended  with- 
out stint.  The  enthusiasm  he  felt  himself  he  imparted  to  others,  and 
he  thus  enlisted  a  body  of  zealous  collaborators  who  sought  contri- 
butions for  him  in  every  part  of  the  world.  Many  of  them  sympa- 
thized with  him  in  his  scientific  ardor,  and  quite  as  many  were 
actuated  solely  by  a  desire  to  serve  and  oblige  the  individual.  A  friend 
of  the  writer  (without  any  particular  scientific  interest)  expos^  his 
life  in  robbing  an  Indian  burial-place  in  Oregon,  and  carried  his 
spoils  for  two  weeks  in  his  pack,  in  a  highly  unsavory  condition,  and 
when  discovery  would  have  involved  danger,  and  probably  death. 
Before  his  departure  he  had  promised  Morton  to  bring  him  some 
skulls,  and  he  was  resolved  to  do  it  at  all  hazards.  This  eftbrt  also 
involved,  of  course,  a  very  extensive  and  laborious  correspondence. 
He  was  in  daily  receipt  of  letters  from  all  countries  and  from  every 
variety  of  persons.  It  was  mainly  by  the  free  contributions  of  these 
assistants  that  the  collection  eventually  grew  so  rapidly.    Among  the 

*  Letter  to  J.  R.  Bartlett,  Esq.  Transactioiks  of  the  American  Ethnological  Society, 
ToLii.    New  York:  1848. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

XXX      MEMOIR  OF  SAMUEL  GEORGE  MORTON. 

contributors  I  may  mention  William  A.  Foster,  Esq.^  as  presenting 
135  specimens,  Dr.  J.  C.  Cisneros  58,  and  Dr.  Ruschenberger  39. 
George  R.  Gliddon,  Esq.  presented  30,  bedde  the  137  originally  pro- 
cured by  his  agency ;  William  A.  Gliddon,  Esq.,  19 ;  M.  Clot-Bey  15 ; 
and  Professor  Retzius  17,  with  24  more  received  since  the  death  of 
Dr.  M.  Over  one  hundred  gentlemen  are  named  in  the  catalogue  as 
contributing  more  or  less,  sixty-seven  of  them  having  presented  one 
skull  each.  It  is  not  to  be  supposed,  however,  that  even  the  portion 
thus  ^ven  led  to  no  outlay  of  means.  The  mere  charges  for  freight 
from  distant  portions  of  the  globe  amounted  to  a  considerable  sum« 
Dr.  Wood  {loe.  cit)  estimates  the  total  cost  of  the  collection  to  its 
proprietor  from  ten  to  fifteen  thousand  dollars.  At  this  moment  it 
is  undoubtedly  by  fax  the  most  complete  collection  of  crania  extant 
There  is  nothing  in  Europe  comparable  to  it  I  have  recently  seen  a 
letter  from  an  eminent  British  ethnologist,  containing  warm  thanks 
for  the  privilege  even  of  reading  the  catalogue  of  such  a  collection, 
and  adding  that  he  would  visit  it  anywhere  in  Europe,  although  he 
cannot  dare  the  ocean  for  it.  At  the  time  of  Dr.  Morton's  death  it 
consisted  of  918  human  crania,  to  which  are  to  be  added  51  received 
since,  and  which  were  then  on  their  way.  The  collection  also  con- 
tains 278  crania  of  mammals,  271  of  birds,  and  88  of  reptiles  and 
nshes : — ^in  all,  1656  skulls !  I  rejoice  to  state  that  this  magnificent 
cabinet  has  been  secured  to  our  city  by  the  contribution  of  liberal 
citizens,  who  have  purchased  it  for  $4,000,  and  presented  it  to  the 
Academy. 

Simultaneously  with  his  accumulation  of  crania,  and  based  upon 
them,  he  carried  on  his  study  of  Ethnology,  if  I  may  use  that  term 
in  reference  to  a  period  when  the  science,  so  called  at  present,  could 
scarcely  be  said  to  exist.  Indeed  it  is  almost  entirely  a  new  science 
within  a  few  years.  While  medical  men  occupied  themselves  exclu- 
sively with  the  intimate  structure  and  function  of  the  human  frame, 
no  investigator  of  nature  seemed  to  turn  his  attention  to  the  curious 
diversities  of  form,  feature,  complexion,  &c.,  which  characterize  the 
difierent  varieties  of  men.  With  a  very  thorough  anatomy  and  phy- 
siology, our  de$criptive  hiftory  of  the  human  species  was  less  accurate 
and  extensive  than  that  of  most  of  the  well-known  animals.  So  true 
was  this  that  Buffon  pithily  observed  that  "  quelque  inter6t  que  nous 
ayons  a  nous  connaitre  nous  mSmes,  je  ne  sais  si  nous  ne  connaissons 
pas  mieux  tout  ce  qui  n*est  pas  nous."  But  every  branch  of  this 
interesting  investigation  has  recently  received  a  sudden  and  vigorous 
impulse,  and  there  has  grown  up  within  a  few  years  an  Ethnology 
with  numerous  and  devoted  cultivators.  That  it  still  has  much  to 
accomplish  will  appear  from  the  number  of  questions  which  the  pages 

Digitized  by 

Google 

MEMOIB  OF  SAMUEL  GEORGE  MORTON.    XXXI 

q{  this  book  show  to  be  still  $ub  judiee.  Indeed  it  is  the  widest  and 
most  attractive  field  open  to  the  naturalist  of  to-day.  To  quote  the 
admirable  language  of  Jomard : 

«  Car  il  ne  faut  pas  perdre  de  Yue,  maintenant  que  la  oonnaissanee  ext^rieure  da  globe 
et  de  ses  prodactions  a  fait  d'immenses  progr^s,  que  la  eonnaissaxice  de  rhomme  est  le 
but  fiaal  des  sciences  g^ograpUqnes.  Une  cambre  non  mdas  Taste  que  la  premiere  est 
ouTerte  au  g^nie  des  Tojrages ;  U  importe,  il  est  urgent  mtoe,  pour  TaTenir  de  re^>^ee 
humaine  et  pour  le  besoin  de  TBarope  sortout,  de  oonnaitre  i  fond  le  degr^  de  ciTilisation 
de  toutes  lee  races;  de  savoir  exaetement  en  quoi  elles  different  ou  se  rapprochent; 
quelle  est  Fanalogie  ou  la  dissemblance  entre  leurs  regimes,  leurs  moeurs,  leurs  religions, 
leurs  langages,  leurs  arts,  leurs  industries,  leurs  e<mstitations  physiques,  afln  de  Uer  entre 
•lies  et  nous  des  rapports  plus  tfirs  et  plus  avantageux.  Tri  est  l*o1^t  de  Tethnologie,  oe 
qui  est  la  seience  mdme  de  la  geographic  yue  dans  son  ensemble  et  dans  touts  sa  haute 
g^n^rallt^.  Bien  que  cette  mati^re  ainsi  enyisag^e  soit  presque  toute  nouTelle,  nous  ne 
pouTons  trop,  n^anmoins,  recommander  les  obserrations  de  oette  esp^oe  au  iMe  des 
foyageurs."* 

The  attempt  to  establish  a  rule  of  diversity  among  the  races  of 
men,  according  to  cranial  conformation,  commenced  in  the  last  cen- 
tury with  Camper,  the  originator  of  the  facial  angle.  The  subject 
was  next  taken  up  by  Slumenbach,  who  has  been  until  recently  the 
controlling  authority  upon  it  His  Decades  Cranicrumj  whose  publi- 
cation was  begun  in  1790^  and  continued  until  1828,  covers  the  period 
when  Morton  began  this  study.  His  method  of  comparing  crania,  (by 
the  ncrma  verticaUsj)  and  his  distribution  of  races,  were  then  both  un- 
disputed. The  mind  of  the  medical  profession  in  Great  Britain  and 
in  this  country  had  then,  moreover,  been  recently  attracted  to  tbe 
subject  by  the  publication  (in  1819)  of  the  very  able  book  of  Mr.  Law- 
rence, f  avowedly  based  upon  the  researches  of  the  great  Professor 
of  Gottingen.  Dr.  Prichard  had  published  his  Inaugural  Dissertation, 
De  Hommum  Varutatibu^y  in  1808,  and  a  translation  of  the  same  in 
1812,  under  the  title  of  Researches  on  the  Physical  Bistory  of  Mdn^ 
constituting  the  first  of  a  series  of  publications,  afterwards  of  great 
influence  and  value.  Several  treatises  had  also  been  published  with 
the  intention  of  proving  that  the  color  of  the  negro  might  arise  firom 
climatic  influences,  the  principal  work  being  that  of  President  Smith, 
of  Princeton  College,  New  Jerseyl  Beyond  this,  nothing  had  been 
done  for  the  science  of  Man  up  to  Morton's  return  to  this  country  in 
1824.  A  new  impetus  had  been  given,  however,  to  the  speciality  of 
Craniology  by  the  promulgation  of  the  views  of  Gall  and  Spurzheim, 
then  creating  their  greatest  excitement.  These  distinguished  persons 
completed  the  publication  of  their  great  work  at  Paris  in  1819,  both 

«  Etudes  Q^ograpbiques  et  Historiques  sur  TArabie,  p.  408. 

f  Lectures  on  Pbysiology,  Zoology,  and  the  Natural  History  of  Man,  dellTered  at  the 
Boyal  College  of  Surgeons,  by  W.  Lawrence,  F.  B.  S.,  &e. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

XXXU     MEMOIR  OF  SAMUEL  GEORGE  MORTON. 

before  and  after  which  time  Spurzheim  lectured  in  Great  Britain, 
making  many  proselytes.  The  phrenolo^sts  of  Edinburgh  mnst 
have  been  in  the  very  fervor  of  their  first  love  during  Morton's  resi- 
dence there,  and  they  included  in  their  number  some  men  of  eminent 
ability  and  eloquence.  Collections  of  prepared  crania,  of  casts  and 
masks,  became  common ;  but  they  were  brought  together  in  the  hope 
of  illustrating  character,  not  race,  and  were  prized  according  as  fan- 
ciful hypothesis  could  make  their  protuberances  correspond  with  the 
distribution  of  intellectual  fEiculties  in  a  most  crude  and  barren 
psychology.  Morton's  collection  was  ethnographic  in  its  aim  fix)m 
the  outset ;  nor  can  I  find  that  he  ever  committed  himself  fully  to  the 
miscalled  Phrenology  —  a  system  based  upon  principles  indisputably 
true,  but  which  it  holds  in  common  with  the  world  of  science  at 
hxgQj  while  all  that  is  peculiar  to  itself  is  already  feding  into  obli- 
vion.** Attractive  by  its  easy  comprehensibility  and  facility  of  appli- 
cation, it  acquired  a  sudden  and  wide-spread  popularity,  and  so  passed 
out  of  the  hands  of  men  of  science,  step  by  step,  till  it  has  now  become 
the  property  of  itinerant  charlatans,  describing  characters  for  twenty- 
five  cents  a  head.  The  veiy  name  is  so  degraded  by  these  associa- 
tions, that  we  are  apt  to  forget  that,  thirty  years  ago,  it  was  a  scientific 
doctrine  accepted  by  learned  and  thoughtiU  men.  There  can  be  no 
doubt  that  it  had  its  effect  (important  though  indirect)  upon  the 
inind  of  Morton,  in  arousing  him  to  the  importance  of  the  Craniology 
about  which  everybody  was  talking,  and  leading  him  to  make  that 
application  of  it,  which,  although  neglected  by  his  professional 
brethren,  was  still  the  only  one  of  any  real  and  permanent  value. 

It  is  evident  that  the  published  matter  for  Morton's  studies  was 
very  limited.  A  pioneer  himself  he  had  to  resort  to  the  raw  mate- 
rial, and  obtain  his  data  at  the  hand  of  nature.  Fortunately  for  him 
he  resided  in  a  country  where,  if  literary  advantages  are  otherwise 
deficient,  the  inducement  and  opportunities  for  anthropological  re- 
search are  particularly  abundant  There  are  reasons  why  Ethnology 
should  be  eminently  a  science  for  American  culture.  Here,  three  of 
the  five  races,  into  which  Blumenbach  divided  mankind,  are  brought 
together  to  determine  the  problem  of  their  destiny  as  they  best  may, 

•  The  ensuing  paragraph  will  sbow  n\pre  dearly  Morton's  matured  opinion  on  this  subject. 
It  is  from  an  Introductory  Lecture  on  **  The  Biyersities  of  the  Human  Species,"  deliTered 
before  the  Medical  Class  of  Pennsylyania  College  in  NoTember  1842. 

**  It  (Phrenology)  farther  teaches  us  that  the  brain  is  the  seat  of  the  mind,  and  that  it 
is  a  congeries  of  organs,  each  of  which  performs  its  own  separate  and  peculiar  fonctioo. 
These  propositions  appear  to  me  to  be  physiological  truths ;  but  I  allude  to  them  on  thiB 
occasion  merely  to  put  you  on  your  guard  against  adopting  too  hastily  those  minute  details 
of  the  localities  and  functions  of  supposed  organs,  wluch  hare  of  late  found  so  many  and 
such  xealous  adTOcates." 

Digitized  by 

Google 

MEMOIR  OF  SAMUEL  GEORGE  MORTON.    XXXUl 

while  Chinese  immigration  to  California  and  the  proposed  importa- 
tion of  Coolie  laborers  threaten  to  bring  ns  into  equally  intimate 
contact  with  a  fourth.  It  is  manifest  that  our  relation  to  and  ma- 
nagement of  these  people  must  depend,  in  a  great  measure,  upon  their 
intrinsic  race-character.  "While  the  contact  of  the  white  man  seems 
fEttal  to  the  Red  .^merican,  whose  tribes  fitde  away  before  the  onward 
march  of  the  firontier-man  like  the  snow  in  spring  (threatening  ulti- 
mate extinction),  the  Negro  thrives  under  the  shadow  of  his  white 
master,  &lls  readily  into  the  position  assigned  him,  and  exists  and 
multiplies  in  increased  physical  well-being.  To  the  American  states- 
man and  the  philanthropist,  as  well  as  to  the  naturalist,  the  study 
thus  becomes  one  of  exceeding  interest  Extraordinary  facilities  for 
observing  minor  sub-divisions  among  the  &milies  of  the  white  race 
are  also  presented  by  the  resort  hither  of  inmiigrants  fix)m  every  part 
of  Europe.  Of  all  these  advantages  Morton  availed  himself  freely, 
and  soon  became  the  acknowledged  master  of  the  topic.  Extending 
his  studies  beyond  what  one  may  call  the  zoological,  into  the 
archseological,  and,  to  some  extent,  into  the  philological  department 
of  Ethnography,  his  pre-eminence  was  speedily  acknowledged  at 
home,  while  the  publication  of  his  books  elevated  him  to  an  equal 
distinction  abroad.  Professor  Retzius  of  Stockholm,  writing  to  him 
April  3d,  1847,  says  emphatically :  "  Tou  have  done  more  for  Ethno- 
graphy than  any  living  phyeiologist;  and  I  hope  you  will  continue  to 
cultivate  this  science,  which  is  of  so  great  interest" 

The  first  task  proposed  to  himself  by  Morton,  was  the  examination 
and  comparison  of  the  crania  of  the  Indian  tribes  of  North  and  South 
America. .  His  special  object  was  to  ascertain  the  average  capacity 
and  form  of  these  skulls,  as  compared  among  themselves  and  with 
those  of  the  other  races  of  men,  and  to  determine  what  ethnic  dis- 
tinctions, if  any,  might  be  inferred  from  them.  The  result  of  this 
labor  was  the  Orania  Americana^  published  in  1889.  This  work  con- 
tains admirably  executed  Uthographic  plates  of  numerous  crania,  of 
natural  size,  and  presenting  a  highly  creditable  specimen  of  American 
art  The  letter-press  includes  accurate  admeasurements  of  the  crania, 
especially  of  their  interior  capacity ;  the  latter  being  made  by  a  plan 
peculiar  to  the  author,  and  enabling  him  to  estimate  with  precision 
the  relative  amount  of  brain  in  various  races.  The  introduction  is 
particularly  interesting,  as  containing  the  author's  general  ethnologi- 
cal views  so  far  as  matured  up  to  th|^t  time.  He  adopts  the  quintuple 
division  of  Blumenbach,  not  as  the  best  possible,  but  as  sufficient  for 
his  purpose,  and  each  of  the  five  races  he  again  divides  into  a  certain 
number  of  characteristic  &milies.  TTia  main  conclusions  concerning 
the  American  race  are  these : 

Digitized  by 

Google 

XXXIV  MIirOIR    OF    SAMUEL    GEORGE    MORTON. 

"  1st  Tbat  the  Amerioan  nee  differs  eMentiany  from  all  otlien,  not  eioepting  the  Mongo- 
lian ;  nor  do  the  feeUe  analogies  of  langoage,  and  the  more  obTioos  ones  in  eiTil  and 
religions  institutions  and  the  arts,  denote  anything  beyond  casual  or  colonial  commu- 
nication with  the  Asiatic  nations ;  and  eren  those  analogies  may  perhaps  be  accounted 
for,  as  Humboldt  has  suggested,  in  ^e  mere  coincidence  arising  from  similar  wants 
and  impulses  in  nations  inhabiting  similar  latitudes. 

<*  2d.  That  the  American  nations,  excepting  the  polar  tribes,  are  of  one  race  and  one  spe- 
cies, but  of  two  great  families,  which  resemble  each  other  in*  physical,  but  differ  in 
intellectual  character. 

*<8d.  That  the  cranial  remains  discoTsred  in  the  mounds 'from  Pent  to  Wisconsin,  belong 
to  the  same  race,  and  probably  to  the  Tolteoan  fiuoily." 

The  publication  of  a  work  of  such  costly  character,  and  necessarily 
addressed  to  a  very  limited  number  of  readers,  was  a  bold  under- 
taking for  a  man  of  restricted  means.  It  was  published  by  himself 
at  the  risk  of  considerable  pecuniary  loss.  The  original  subscription 
list  fell  short  of  paying  the  expense,  but  I  am  happy  to  say  that  the 
subsequent  sale  of  copies  liquidated  the  deficit.  The  reception  of 
the  book  by  the  learned  was  all  he  could  have  desired.  Everywhere 
it  received  the  warmest  commendations.  The  following  extract  from 
a  notice  in  the  London  Medico-Chirurgical  Review  for  October  1840, 
will  show  the  tone  of  the  British  scientific  press : 

**  Dr.  Morton*s  method  and  iUustrations  in  eliciting  the  elements  of  his  magnificent 
Craniography,  are  admirably  concise,  without  being  the  less  instructiyely  con^rehensivet 
His  work  constitutes,  and  will  ever  be  highly  appreciated  as  constituting  an  exquisite 
treasury  of  ikcts,  well  adapted,  in  all  respects,  to  establish  permanrat  organic  principles 
in  the  natural  history  of  man." 

**  Here  we  finish  our  account  of  Dr.  Morton's  American  Cranioscopy ;  and  by  its  extent 
and  copiousness,  our  article  will  show  how  highly  we  hare  appreciated  his  classical  pro- 
duction. We  haye  studied  his  Tiews  with  attention,  and  examined  his  doctrines  with  fair- 
ness ;  and  with  perfect  sincerity  ii^  rising  f^m  a  task  which  has  afforded  unusual  gratifi- 
cation, we  rejoice  in  ranking  his  *  Crania  Americana'  in  the  highest  <dass  of  transatlantio 
literature,  foreseeing  distinctly  that  the  book  will  ensure  for  its  author  the  well-eamed 
meed  of  a  Caucasian  reputation." 

From  among  the  warmly  eulo^stic  letters  received  from  distin- 
guished savaMy  I  select  but  one,  that  of  Baron  Humboldt,  who  is 
himself  a  high  authority  on  American  subjects. 

<*  Monsieur, -^Les  liens  intimes  d'interdt  et  d'affection  qui  m'attachent,  Monsieur,  depuis 
«n  d^mi-si^le  &  Themisph^  que  tous  habitex  et  dont  j'ai  la  ranit^  de  me  croire  citoyen, 
ont  ijout^  &  rimpression  que  m'ont  fait  presque  &  la  f<aa  yotre  grand  ouTrsge  de  physio- 
logic philosophique  et  I'admirable  histoire  de  la  conqudte  du  Mexique  par  M.  William 
Prescott  VoiU  de  ces  trayaux  qui  ^tendent,  par  des  moyens  tr^s  differens,  la  sphere  de 
BOS  connussanoes  et  de  nos  Tues,  et  ^Joutent  4  la  gloire  natlonale.  Je  ne  puis  tous  exprimer 
•asses  Tiyement,  Monsiear,  la  profonde  reconnaissance  que  Je  tous  dois.  Am^ricain  bien 
plus  que  Sib^en  d'H>'^  ^^  couleur  de  mes  opinions,  je  snis,  &  men  grand  age,  singnli^re- 
ment  flatty  de  TinterSt  qu'on  me  conserre  encore  de  I'autre  cot4  de  la  grand  Tall4e  atlantique 
sur  laquelle  la  yapeur  a  presque  jet^  un  pont  Les  richesses  craniologiques  que  tous  ayes 
M  assei  henrenz  de  r€unir,  ont  trour^  en  yous  un  digne  interpr^te.  Votre  ouyrage.  Mon- 
sieur, est  ^galement  remarquable  par  la  profondenr  des  yues  aaatomiques,  par  le  detail 

Digitized  by 

Google 

KSMOIR  OF  SAMUEL  GEORGE  MORTON.     XXXT 

Bom^iiqiie  dee  rapports  de  eonformation  organiqve,  par  TabMBoe  des  rftteries  po^tiqves 
qoi  Bont  1«8  mythes  de  1&  Physiologie  modeme,  par  les  g^n^ralit^  d<Hit  Totre  '<  latroductory 
Essay*'  abonde.  RMigeant  dans  ee  moment  le  plos  important  de  mes  onyrages  qui  sera 
pnbli^  sons  le  titre  imprudent  de  Kotmot,  je  sanrai  profiter  de  tants  d'exeellents  apper9a8 
tor  la  destribntion  des  raees  bumaines  qni  se  trouTent  ^pars  dans  Totre  bean  Tolnme.  Que 
de  saoriflces  p^cnniares  n'ayez  yous  pas  dft  faire,  poor  atteindre  vne  si  graade  perf^tion 
artistiqne  et  prodnire  itn  ouTrage  qui  riyalise  ayeo  tout  ce  que  Ton  a  fait  de  plus  beau  en 
Angleterre  et  en  France. 

'*  Agrees,  je  tous  supplie,  Monsieur,  I'bommage  renouyelM  de  la  baute  consideration 
areo  laqneUe  j'ai  rhonneur  d'etre, 

«  Monsieur,  Totre  tr^bumble  et  tr^obeissant  senriteur, 

"  Albxahdbb  Humboldt. 

'<i  Berlin,  ee  17  JauTier,  1844." 

The  eminent  success  of  this  work  determined  definitely  its  author's 
ulterior  scientific  career.  From  this  time  forward  he  devoted  his 
powers  almost  exclusively  to  Ethnology.  He  sought  in  every  direc- 
tion for  the  materials  for  his  investigation,  when  circumstances  led 
to  his  acquaintance  with  Mr.  George  R.  Gliddon,  whose  contributions 
opened  to  him  a  new  field  of  research,  and  gave  him  an  unexpected 
triumph.  Mr.  G.  first  visited  this  country  in  1887,  being  sent  out  by 
Mehemet  Ali  to  obtain  information,  purchase  machinery,  &c.,  in  re- 
ference to  the  promotion  of  the  cotton-culture  in  Egypt  Morton, 
who  never  lost  the  opportunity  of  securing  an  useful  correspondent, 
sought  his  acquaintance,  but  failing  to  meet  him  personally,  wrote 
him  at  New  York  under  date  of  Nov.  2d,  1837,  inquiring  his  precise " 
address,  and  soliciting  permission  to  visit  him  in  reference  to  busi- 
ness. Illness  preventing  this  visit,  he  wrote  again,  Nov.  7th.  The 
following  extract  is  interesting,  as  displaying  his  mode  of  procedure 
in  such  cases,  as  well  as  the  state  of  his  opinions,  at  the  date  in 
question : — 

**  You  wiU  obserre  by  tbe  annexed  Prospectus  tbat  I  am  engaged  in  a  work  of  considera- 
ble noTeltj,  and  wbicb,  as  regards  tbe  typography  and  illustrations  at  least,  is  designed  to 
be  equal  to  any  publication  hitherto  issued  in  this  country.  Tou  may  be  surprised  that  I 
should  address  you  en  the  subject,  but  a  moment's  eiplanation  may  suffice  to  convey  my 
▼lews  and  wishes.  The  prefatory  chapter  will  embrace  a  view  of  the  varUtia  of  the  Human 
Race,  embracing,  among  other  topics,  some  remarks  on  the  ancient  Egyptians.  The  posi- 
tion I  have  always  assumed  is,  that  the  present  Copts  are  not  the  remains  of  the  ancient 
Egyptians,  and  in  order  more  fully  to  make  my  comparisons,  it  is  tery  important  that  I 
should  get  a  few  heade  of  Egyptian  mummies  Arom  Thebes,  &o.  I  do  not  care  to  have  them 
entirely  perfect  specimens  of  embalming,  but  perfect  in  the  bony  structure,  and  with  the 
hair  preserred,  if  possible.  It  has  occurred  to  me  that,  as  you  will  reside  at  Cairo,  and 
with  your  perfect  knowledge  of  affairs  in  Egypt,  you  would  have  it  in  your  power  to  em- 
ploy a  confidential  and  well-qualified  person  for  this  trust,  who  would  save  you  all  personal 
trouble ;  and  if  twenty-five  or  thirty  skulls,  or  even  half  that  number  can  be  obtained, 
(and  I  am  assured  by  persons  who  have  been  there  that  no  obstacles  need  be  feared,  but 
of  Ais  you  know  best,)  I  am  ready  to  defray  every  expense,  and  to  advance  the  money,  or 
any  part  of  it  note,  or  to  arrange  for  payment,  both  as  to  expenses  and  commissions,  at 
any  time  or  in  any  way  you  may  designate.    With  the  Egyptian  heads,  I  should  be  very 

Digitized  by 

Google 

XXXvi  MEMOIR  OF  SAMUEL  GEORGE  MORTON. 

glad  to  haT6  a  skull  of  a  Copt  and  a  Fellah,  and  indeed  of  any  other  of  the  present  tribes 
in  or  bordering  on  Egypt,  and  which  could  be  probably  obtained  through  any  one  of  your 
medical  Mends  in  Cairo  or  Alexandria.  I  hope  before  you  leave  to  be  able  to  srad  you  one 
of  the  lithographs  for  my  work,  to  prove  to  you  that  it  will  be  no  discredit  to  the  arts  of 
this  country.  Sensible  how  infinitely  yoo  may  serve  me  in  a  favorite  though  novel  inquiry, 
I  cannot  but  hope  to  interest  your  feelings  and  exertions  on  this  occasion,  and  therefore 
beg  an  eariy  answer." 

To  this  letter  Mr.  G.  responded  freely  and  cordially,  readily  under- 
taking the  commission,  which  resulted  in  supplying  Morton  with 
crania,  which  form  the  basis  of  his  renowned  Crania  JEgyptiaca. 
Without  the  aid  thus  afforded,  any  attempt  to  elucidate  Egyptian 
ethnology  from  this  side  the  Atlantic  would  have  been  absurdly  hope- 
less; witii  it,  a  difficult  problem  was  solved,  and  the  opinion  of  the 
scientific  world  rectified  in  an  important  particular.  The  correspond- 
ence thus  originated  led  to  a  close  intimacy  between  the  parties, 
which  essentially  modified  the  history  of  both,  and  ended  only  with 
life ;  and  which  resulted  in  a  warmth  of  attachment,  on  the  part  of  the 
survivor,  that  even  death  cannot  chill,  as  the  dedication  of  this  volume 
attests.  With  the  prospect  of  obtaining  these  Egyptian  crania, 
Morton  was  delighted.  How  much  he  anticipated  appears  from  the 
following  passage  in  the  preface  to  his  Orania  Americana: — 

"  Nor  can  I  close  this  preface  without  recording  my  sincere  thanks  to  George  B.  Qliddon, 
.Esq.,  United  States  Consul  at  Cairo,  in  Egypt,  for  the  singular  seal  with  which  he  has  pro- 
moted my  wishes  in  this  respect ;  the  series  of  crania  he  has  already  obtained  for  my  use, 
of  many  nations,  both  ancient  and  modem,  is  perhaps  without  a  rival  in  any  existing 
collection ;  and  will  enable  me,  when  it  reaches  this  country,  to  pursue  my  comparisons  on 
an  extended  scale."  (p.  5.) 

The  skulls  came  to  hand  in  the  fall  of  1840,  and  Morton  entered 
eagerly  upon  their  examination,  and  upon  the  study  of  Ifilotic 
Archaeology  in  connection  therewith.  Mr.  Gliddon  arrived  in  Janu- 
ary 1842,  with  the  intention  of  delivering  a  course  of  lectures  in  this 
country  upon  hieroglyphical  subjects ;  and  the  two  friends  could  now 
prosecute  their  studies  together.  They  had  already  been  engaged  in 
active  correspondence,  Morton  detailing  the  considerations  which 
were  impelling  him  to  adopt  views  diverse,  in  several  points,  from  what 
were  generally  considered  established  opinions.  I  regret  that  I  have 
not  access  to  the  letters  of  Morton  of  this  period,  but  the«  following 
extract  from  a  reply  of  Gliddon,  dated  London,  Oct  2l8t,  1841, 
will  show  the  state  of  their  minds  in  regard  to  Egyptian  questions  at 
that  time : — 

"  With  regard  to  your  projected  work,  (Crania  j^^Uaca,)  I  will,  with  every  deference, 
fTBnkXj  state  a  few  OTanescent  impressions,  which,  were  I  with  you,  could  be  more  fully 
deyeloped.  I  am  hostile  to  the  opinion  of  the  African  origin  of  the  Egyptians.  I  mean 
of  the  high  eaft»— kings,  priests,  and  military.    The  idea  that  the  monuments  support  such 

Digitized  by 

Google 

MEMOIR    OF    SAMUEL    GEORGE    MORTON.        XXXVU 

theory,  or  the  oondasion  that  they  came  dovm  the  Nile,  or  that '  Merawe*  is  the  Father  of 
Egypt,  is,  I  thio^  unteiiable,  and  might  be  refuted.  Herodotus*s  authority,  unless  modi- 
fied in  the  way  you  mention,  dark  tkmned  and  curly  haired,  is  in  this,  as  in  fifty  other  in- 
stances, quite  insignificant  We,  as  hieroglyphists,  know  Egypt  better  now,  than  all  the 
Greek  authors  or  the  Roman.  On  this  ground,  unless  you  are  couYinced  from  ComparatiTe 
Anatomy,  with  which  science  I  am  totally  unacquainted,  and  be  backed  by  such  eyidence 
as  is  incontroyertible,  I  urge  your  pausing,  and  considering  why  the  ancient  Egyptians 
may  not  be  of  Asiatic,  and  perhaps  of  Arabic  descent ;  an  idea  which,  I  fancy,  from  the 
tenor  of  your  letters,  is  your  present  conclusion.  At  any  rate,  they  are  not,  and  nerer 
were,  Africans,  still  less  Negroes.    Monumental  cTidence  appears  to  oyerthrow  the  African 

theory *  .    Look  at  the  portraits  of  the  kings  of  Egypt,  in  the  plates  of 

Prof.  Rosellini's  MonumenU  Storiei,  and  then  read  his  2d  toI.  text,  at  the  end.  They  are  fac- 
similes, and  is  there  anything  AArican  in  them,  (excepting  in  the  Amunoph  family,  where 
this  cross  is  shown  and  explained,)  until  you  come  down  to  the  Ethiopian  dynasty  !  For 
'Merawe'  read  Hoskins's  Ethiopia — it  id  a  Taluable  work,  but  I  dijTer  m  toto  from  his 
ohronology,  or  his  connection  between  Egypt  and  '  Meroe'  down  the  Nile. 

"  The  Copts  may  be  descendants  of  the  ancient  race,  but  so  crossed  and  recrossed,  as  to 
haTe  lost  almost  every  restige  of  their  noble  ancestry.  I  should  think  it  would  be  difficult, 
with  100  skulls  of  Copts,  to  get  at  an  exact  criterion,  they  are  so  raried.  Do  not  forget 
also  the  elSect  of  wearing  the  turban  on  the  Eastern  races,  except  the  Fellahs,  who  seldom 
can  afford  it,  and  wear  a  cap. 

"  It  has  been  the  fashion  to  quote  the  Sphinx,  as  an  evidence  of  the  Negro  tendencies 
of  ancient  Egyptians.^  They  take  his  wiy  for  woolly  hair — and  as  the  nose  is  off,  of  course 
it  is  flat.  But  even  if  the  fBoe  (which  I  fiilly  admit)  has  a  strong  AfHcan  cast,  it  is  an 
ahnost  solitary  example,  against  10,000  that  are  not  African,  We  may  presume  firom  the 
fact  that  the  tablet  found  on  it  bears  the  name  of  the  6th  Thotmes— b.  o.  1702 — Rosellini, 
No.  106^that  it  represents  some  king,  (and  most  probably  Thotmes  5th  himself,)  who,  by 
ancestral  intermarriage,  was  of  African  blood.  In  fact,  we  find  that  Amunoph  1st — b.  o. 
1822 — ^  and  only  five  removes  flrom  this  same  Thotmes  his  successor,  had  an  Ethiopian 
wife —  a  black  queen — '  Aahmes  KoflrearL'  If  the  Sphinx  were  a  female,  I  should  at  once 
tay  it  stood  for  *  Nofreari,'  who,  as  the  wife  of  the  expeller  of  the  Hykshos,  was  much 
revered.  The  whole  of  the  Thotmes  and  Amunoph  branches  had  an  African  cast — vide 
Amunoph  8d  —  almost  a  Nubian :  but  this  cast  is  expressly  given  in  their  portraits,  in 
^oontradistinction  to  the  aquiline-nosed  and  red  Egyptians.  Look  at  the  Ramses  family — 
their  men  are  quite  Caucasian — their  women  are  white,  or  only  yellowish,  but  I  can  see 
nothing  African.  ^  I  wish  I  were  by  your  side  with  my  notes  and  rambling  ideas  —  they 
are  crude,  but  under  your  direction  could  be  licked  into  shape.  The  masses  of  facts  a^e 
extraordinary,  and  known  but  to  very,  very  few.  Unless  a  man  now-a-days  is  a  hierogly- 
phist,  and  has  studied  the  monuments,  believe  me,  his  authority  is  dangerous ;  and  but  few 
instances  ^  there  in  which  aimongst  the  thousand-and-one  volumes  on  Egypt,  the  work  is  not 
a  mere  repetition  or  copy  of  the  errors  of  a  preceding  work — and  this  is  but  repeating  what 
the  Romans  never  comprehended,  but  copied  from  the  Greeks,  who  made  up  for  their  igno- 
rance then,  as  they  do  now,  by  Uee,  All  were  deplorably  ignorant  on  Egyptian  matters. 
Anything  of  the  ChampoUion,  Rosellini,  and  Wilkinson  school  for  ancient  subjects,  is 
taft — for  the  modem,  there  is  only  Lane.  I  mention  ^ese  subjects  just  to  arrest  your 
attention,  before  you  take  a  leap ;  though  I  have  no  doubt  you  leave  no  stone  unturned. 
Pardon  my  apparent  officiousness,  but  I  do  this  at  the  haxard  of  intruding,  lest  in  your 
earnest  comparisons  of  '  Crania,'  you  may  not  lay  sufficient  stress  on  the  vast  monumental 
evidences  of  days  of  yore,  and  mean  this  only  as  a  <  caveat.' " 

But  they  soon  found  themselves  in  want  of  books,  especially^  of 
costly  illustrated  works.  Kot  only  was  it  essential  to  verify  quotations 
by  reference  to  the  text,  but  the  plates  were  absolutely  indispensable. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

^ttXVm       MEMOIR    OF    SAMUEL    GEORGE    MORtON. 

The  desired  books  did  not  exist  in  any  library  in  the  TTnited  States, 
and  Morton  had  ab*eady  gone  as  far  as  pradenee  permitted.  In  a 
letter  now  before  me,  Gliddon  writes  him  from  New  York  in  despair, 
stating  that,  for  his  part,  he  could  not  move  a  step  further  without 
access  to  Rosellini,  {Monumentij  &c.,)  of  which  there  was  not  a  copy 
in  the  country.  This  serious  difficulty  was  finally  removed  by  the 
munificent  liberality  of  Richard  K  Haight,  Esq.,  of  New  York,  who, 
actuated  solely  by  a  generous  desire  to  promote  the  interests  of 
science,  imported  and  placed  at  the  disposal  of  our  students  the 
superb  volumes  in  question. 

Morton's  study  now  was  more  than  ever  "  a  place  of  skulls."  His 
correspondence,  having  been  widely  extended,  was  at  last  bearing  its 
fruit  Contributions  came  dropping  in  fi^m  various  quarters,  not 
always  accompanied  with  reliable  information,  and  requiring  careful 
deliberation  before  being  assigned  a  place  in  his  cabinet.  Nothing  short 
of  positive  certainty,  however,  would  induce  him  to  place  a  name  upon 
a  cranium.  The  ordeal  of  examination  each  had  to  undergo,  was  rigid 
in  the  extreme.  Accurate  and  repeated  measurements  of  every  part 
were  carefully  made.  Where  a  case  admitted  of  doubt,  I  have  known 
him  to  keep  the  skull  in  his  office  for  weeks,  and,  taking  it  down  at 
every  leisure  moment,  sit  before  it,  and  contemplate  it  fixedly  in 
every  position,  noting  every  prominence  and  depression,  estimating 
the  extent  and  depth  of  every  muscular  or  ligamentous  attachment, 
until  he  could,  as  it  were,  build  up  the  soft  parts  upon  their  bony 
substratum,  and  see  the  individual  as  in  life.  His  quick  artistic  per- 
ception of  minute  .resemblances  or  discrepancies  of  form  and  color, 
gave  him  great  facilities  in  these  pursuits.  A  single  glance  of  his  rapid 
eye  was  often  enough  to  determine  what,  with  others,  would  have 
been  the  subject  of  tedious  examination.  The  drawings  for  the  Crania 
JEgyptiaca  were  made  by  Messrs.  Richard  H.  and  Edward  M.  Kern,* 

•  Even  while  I  write  (Deo.  Ist,  1858)  the  news  has  reached  us  of  the  brutal  murder  by 
Utah  Indians  of  Richard  H.  Kern,  with  Lieut  Gunnison,  and  others  of  the  party  engaged 
in  the  surrey  of  the  proposed  middle  route  for  a  Paoiiio  BaHroad.  So  young,  and  so  full 
of  hope  and  promise !  to  be  out  off  thus,  too,  just  as  his  matured  intellect  began  to  oom« 
mand  him  position,  and  to  realixe  the  bright  anticipations  of  his  many  friends !  The  rela- 
tions of  Mr  Gliddon  and  myself  to  this  new  rictim  of  sarage  ferocity  were  so  intimate, 
that  we  may  be  excused  if  we  pause  here  to  giTO  to  his  memory  a  si^ — one  in  which  the 
subject  of  our  memoir,  were  he  still  with  us,  would  join  in  deepest  sympathy.  But  the 
sorrow  we  feel  is  one  that  cannot  be  fk«e  ftrom  bittetness,  while  the  bones  of  Dick  Kern 
bleach  unaTenged  upon  the  arid  plains  of  Deseret.  We  haye  had  too  much  of  sentimen- 
talism  about  the  Red-man.  It  is  time  that  cant  was  stopped  now.  Not  all  the  cinnamon- 
colored  Tcrmin  west  of  the  Mississippi  are  worth  one  drop  of  that  noble  heart's-blood.  The 
busy  brain,  the  artist's  eye,  the  fine  taste,  the  hand  so  ready  with  either  pen  or  pencil, — 
could  these  be  restored  to  us  again,  they  would  be  cheaply  purchased  back  if  it  cost  the 
estermination  of  CTCiy  miserable  Pah-Utah  under  heaTcn!    He  is  the  second  member  of 

Digitized  by 

Google 

MEICOIB    OF    SAMUEL    GEORGE    MORTON.      XXxlt 

who  were  then  also  engaged  in  preparing  the  magnificent  illustrations 
oi  Mr.  Gliddon*8  hierological  lectures;  and  these  gentlemen  have 
informed  me  that  not  the  slightest  departure  from  literal  accuracy 
could  escape  the  eye  of  Morton.  This  was  true,  not  only  of  human 
figures,  but  equally  of  the  minutest  hieroglyphic  details.  Dr.  Meigs,  in 
his  Memoir,  relates  an  instance  of  his  acumen,  in  which,  while  inspect- 
ing the  segis  in  the  hand  of  a  female  di  vinily ,  he  noticed  the  resemblance 
to  the  face  of  a  certain  queen,  and  at  once  referred  it  to  that  reign ; 
which,  on  examining  the  text,  proved  correct.  The  two  following 
anecdotes,  for  whicli  I  am  indebted  to  Mr.  Qliddon,  resemble  the  well- 
known  instances  of  scientific  acuteness  and  perspicacity  that  are  related 
of  Cuvier. 

Li  the  summer  of  1842,  Mr.  G.  met  in  New  York  with  Mr.  John 
L.  Stephens,  then  recently  returned  from  his  second  visit  to  Yucatan, 
The  conversation  turning  upon  crania,  Mr.  S.  regretted  the  destruc- 
tion of  all  he  had  collected,  in  consequence  of  their  extreme  brittle- 
ness.  One  skeleton  he  had  hoped  to  save,  but  on  unpacking  it,  that 
morning,  it  was  found  so  dilapidated  that  he  had  ordered  it  thrown 
away.  Mr.  G.  begged  to  see  it,  and  secured  it,  comminuted  as  it 
was.  Its  condition  may  be  inferred  from  the  fact  that  the  entire 
skeleton  was  tied  up  in  a  small  India  handkerchief,  and  carried  to 
Philadelphia  in  a  hat-box.  It  was  given  to  Morton,  who  at  first  de- 
plored it  as  a  hopeless  wreck.  The  next  day,  however,  Mr.  G.  found 
him,  with  a  glue-pot  beside  him,  engaged  in  an  effort  to  reconstruct 
the  skull.  A  small  piece  of  the  occiput  served  as  a  basis,  upon  which 
he  put  together  all  the  posterior  portion  of  the  cranium,  showing  it  by 
characteristic  marks  to  be  that  of  an  adult  Indian  female.  From  the 
condition  of  another  portion  of  the  skeleton,  he  derived  evidence  of 
a  pathological  fact  of  considerable  moment,  in  view  of  the  antiquity 
of  these  remains.  How  much  interest  he  was  able  to  extract  from 
this  handful  of  apparent  rubbish  will  appear  from  the  following 
passages : — 

**  The  purport  of  his  opinion  is  as  follows  i— In  the  first  pltoe,  the  needle  did  not  deceive 
the  Indian  who  picked  it  np  in  the  grave.  The  bones  are  those  of  a  female.  Her  height 
did  not  exceed  five  feet,  three  or  four  inches.  The  teeth  are  perfect  and  not  appreciably 
worn,  while  the  epiphyieSf  those  infallible  indications  of  the  growing  state,  have  just  become 
consolidated,  and  mark  the  completion  of  adult  age.  The  bones  of  the  hands  and  feet  are 
remarkably  small  and  delicately  proportioned,  which  observation  applies  also  to  the  entire 

his  family  that  has  met  this  melancholy  fSate.  His  brother.  Dr.  Benjamin  J.  Kern— a  pupil 
of  Morton,  and  surgeon  to  the  ill-fated  expedition  of  Colonel  Fremont  in  the  winter  of 
184S-49  —  was  cruelly  massacred  by  Utahs  in  the  spring  of  184§,  in  the  mountains  near 
Taos.  So  long  as  our  government  allows  oases  of  this  kind  to  remain  without  severe  retri- 
bution, so  long,  in  savage  logic,  will  impunity  in  crime  be  considered  a  free  license  to 
murder  at  will. 

2 

Digitized  by 

Google 

Xl        MEMOIR  OF  SAMUEL  GEORGE  MORTON. 

skeleton.  The  skull  was  crushed  into  many  pieces,  but,  by  a  cautious  manipulajtion,  Br. 
Morton  succeeded  in  reconstructing  the  posterior  and  lateral  portions.  The  occiput  is 
remarkably  flat  and  Tertical,  while  the  lateral  or  parietal  diameter  measures  no  l«ss  than 
five  inches  and  eight-tenths. 

<*  A  chemical  examination  of  some  fragments  of  the  bones  proTcs  them  to  be  almost 
destitute  of  animal  matter,  which,  in  the  perfect  osseous  structure,  constitutes  about  thirty- 
three  parts  in  the  hundred.  On  the  upper  part  of  the  left  tibia  there  is  a  swelling  of  the 
bone,  called  in  surgical  language  a  nodef  an  inch  and  a  half  in  length,  and  more  than  half 
an  inch  aboTC  the  natural  surface.  This  morbid  condition  may  haye  resulted  ftrom  a  variety 
of  causes,  but  possesses  greater  interest  on  account  of  its  extreme  infirequency  among  the 
primidye  Indian  population  of  the  countiy."* 

Mr.  Gliddon,  while  in  Paris  in  1845-r6,  presented  a  copy  of  the 
Crania  Mgyptiaca  to  the  celebrated  orientalist,  M.  Fulgence  Fresnel, 
(well  known  as  the  decipherer  of  the  Himyaritic  inscriptions,  and 
now  engaged  in  Ninevite  explorations,)  and  endeavored  to  interest 
him  in  Morton's  labors.  More  than  a  year  afterwards,  having  returned 
to  Philadelphia,  he  received  there  a  box  from  R.  K.  Haight,  Esq., 
then  at  I^aples.  The  box  contained  a  skull,  but  not  a  word  of  infor- 
mation concerning  it.  It  was  handed  over  to  Morton,  who  at  once 
perceived  its  dissimilarity  to  any  in  his  possession.  It  was  evidently 
very  old,  the  animal  matter  having  almost  entirely  disappeared.  Day 
after  day  would  Morton  be  found  absorbed  in  its  contemplation.  At 
last  he  announced  his  conclusion.  He  had  never  seen  a  Phoenician 
skull,  and  he  had  no  idea  where  this  one  came  from ;  but  it  was  what 
he  conceived  that  a  Phoenician  skull  should  be,  and  it  could  be  no 
other.  Things  remained  thus  until  some  six  months  afterwards,  when 
Mr.  Haight  returned  to  America,  and  delivered  to  Mr.  G.  the  letters 
and  papers  sent  him  by  various  persons.  Among  them  was  a  slip  in 
the  hand-writing  of  Fresnel,  containing  the  history  of  the  skull  in 
question.f  He  discovered  it  during  his  exploration  of  a  Phcenician 
tomb  at  Malta,  and  had  consigned  it  to  Morton  by  Mr.  H.,  whom  he 
met  at  Naples.  These  anecdotes  not  only  show  the  extraordinary 
acuteness  of  Morton,  but  they  also  prove  the  certainty  of  the  anato- 
•  mical  marks  upon  -yhich  Craniologists  rely. 

The  Crania  Mgyptiaca  was  published  in  1844,  in  the  shape  of  a 
contribution  to  the  Transactions  of  the  American  Philosophical  So- 
ciety. This  apparent  delay  in  its  appearance  arose  from  the  author's 
extreme  caution  in  forming  his  conclusions,  especially  in  view  of  the 
fact  that  he  found  himself  compelled  to  differ  in  opinion  from  the 
majority  of  scholars,  in  regard  to  certain  points  of  primary  import- 
ance.   Most  ethnologists,  with  the  high  authority  of  Prichard  at  their 

•Stephens'  Yucatan,  toI.  L  pp.  281-2.  —  Morton's  Catalogue  of  Crania,   1849»  No. 
1050. 
t  Catalogue,  No.  1852. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

MEMOIR    OF    SAMUEL    GEORGE    MORTON.  xli 

head,  ascribed  the  Nilotic  family  to  the  African  race ;  while  the  great 
body  of  ArchfiBologists  were  disposed  to  consider  the  aborigines  of 
Egypt  as  (probably  black)  Troglodytes,  from  the  Upper  Nile,  whose 
first  halting-place  and  seat  of  civilization  was  at  Meroe.  But  Morton 
took  counsel  with  none  of  those  authorities  of  the  day.  Optimi  con- 
iuUores'mortui;  and  these  dead,  but  still  eloquent  witnesses  of  the 
past,  taught  him  clearly  the  identity  of  cranial  conformation  in  the 
ancient  Egyptian  and  the  modem  wbite  man.  He  established,  beyond 
question,  that  the  prevailing  type  of  skull  must  come  into  the  Cauca- 
sian category  of  Blumenbach.  He  pointed  out  the  distinctioiis  be- 
tween this  and  the  neighboring  Semitic  and  Pelasgic  types.  The 
population  of  Egypt  being  always  a  very  mixed  one,  he  was  able  also 
to  identify  among  his  crania  those  displaying  the  Semitic,  Pelasgic, 
Negro  and  Negroid  forms.  Turning  next  to  the  monuments,  he  ad- 
duced a  multitude  of  facts  to  prove  the  same  position.  His  historical 
deductions  were  advanced  modestiy  and  cautiously,  but  most  of  them 
have  been  triumphantiy  verified.  While  he,  in  his  quiet  study  at 
Philadelphia,  was  inferentially  denying  the  comparative  antiquity  of 
Meroe,  Lepsius  was  upon  the  spot,  doing  the  same  thing  beyond  the 
possibility  of  further  cavil.  The  book  was  written  when  it  was  still 
customary  to  seek  a  foreign  origin  for  the  inhabitants  of  every  spot 
on  earth  except  Mesopotamia ;  and  the  author,  therefore,  indicates, 
rather  than  asserts,  an  Asiatic  origin  for  the  Egyptians.  But  his 
resume  contains  propositions  so  important,  that  I  must  claim  space 
for  them  entire,  taking  the  liberty  of  calling  the  attention  of  the 
reader,  by  Italics,  particularly  to  the  last. 

1.  The  TftUej  of  the  Nile,  both  in  Egjpt  and  in  Nubis,  was  originally  peopled  by  a  branch 

of  the  Caucasian  race. 

2.  These  primeyal  people,  since  called  Egyptians,  were  the  Mixraimites  of  Scriptare»  the 

posterity  of  Ham,  and  directly  associated  with  the  Libyan  family  of  nations. 
8.  In  their  physical  character,  the  Egyptians  were  intermediate  between  the  modem  Euro- 
pean and  Semitic  races. 

4.  The  Austral-Egyptian  or  Meroite  communities  were  an  Indo-Arabian  stock,  engrafted 

on  the  primitiTC  Libyan  inhabitants. 

5.  Besides  these  exotic  sources  of  population,  the  Egyptian  race  was  at  different  periods 

modified  by  the  influx  of  the  Caucasian  nations  of  Asia  and  Europe — Pelasgi  or  Hel- 
lenes, Scythians  and  Phoenicians. 

6.  Kings  of  Egypt  appear  to  have  been  incidentally  derived  firom  each  of  the  abore 

nations. 

7.  The  Copts,  in  part  at  least,  are  a  mixture  of  the  Caucasian  and  Negro,  in  extremelj 

Tariable  proportions. ' 

8.  Negroes  were  numerous  in  Egypt.    Their  social  position,  in  ancient  times,  was  the  same 

that  it  is  now ;  that  of  servants  or  slayes. 

9.  The  natural  characteristics  of  all  these  families  of  man  were  distinctly  figured  on  the 

monuments,  and  all  of  them,  excepting  the  Scythians  and  Phoenicians,  hare  been  iden- 
tified in  the  catacombs. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

Slii  MEMOIR    OF    SAMUEL    QI0R6S    MORTON* 

10.  The  present  Fellahs  are  the  lineal  and  least  mixed  descendants  of  the  ancient  Egjp- 
tians ;  and  the  latter  are  collaterally  represented  by  the  Tnaricks,  Eabyles,  Siwahs, 
ai^d  other  remains  of  the  Libyan  family  of  nations. 

11.  The  modem  Nubians,  with  few  exceptions,  are  not  the  descendants  of  the  monumental 
Ethiopians ;  but  a  Tarionsly  mixed  race  of  Arabians  and  Negroes. 

12.  WhatOYor  may  have  been  the  sixe  of  the  cartilaginous  portion  of  the  ear,  the  osseous 
structure  conforms,  in  every  instance,  to  the  usual  relative  position. 

18.  The  teeth  differ  in  nothing  from  those  of  other  Caucasian  nations. 

14.  The  hair  of  the  Egyptians  resembles  in  texture  that  of  the  fairest  Europeans  of  the 
present  day. 

15.  The  phyncdl  or  organic  eharaeUn  which  duUnffuith  the  eeveral  racee  of  men  an  at  old  09 
ilte  oUktl  records  of  our  epedes. 

The  sentiments  here  enunciated  he  subsequently  modified  in  one 
essential  particular.  In  his  letter  to  Mr.  Bartlett  of  Dec.  Ist,  1846, 
(published  in  vol.  2d  of  the  Transactions  of  the  American  Ethnolo- 
gical Society,  p.  216,)  after  reiterating  his  conviction  that  the  pure 
Egyptian  of  the  remotest  monumental  period  differed  as  much  from 
the  negro  as  does  the  white  man  of  to-day,  he  continues : — 

*<  My  later  investigations  have  confirmed  me  in  the  opinion,  that  the  Talley  of  the  Nile 
was  inhabited  by  an  indigenous  race,  before  the  iuTasion  of  the  Hamitic  and  other  Asiatic 
nations;  and 'that  this  primoTal  people,  who  occupied  the  whole  of  Northern  Africa,  bore 
much  the  same  relation  to  the  Berber  or  Berabra  tribes  of  Nubia,  that  the  Saracens  of  the 
middle  ages  bore  to  their  wandering  and  untutored,  yet  cognate  bretiiren,  the  Bedouins  of 
the  desert." 

Further  details  on  this  point  will  be  found  on  pp.  231  and  232  of 
the  present  work. 

The  reception  of  this  book  was  even  more  flattering  than  had  been, 
that  of  its  predecessor.  To  admiration  was  added  a  natural  feeling 
of  surprise,  that  light  upon  this  interesting  subject  should  have  come 
from  this  remote  quarter.  Lepsius  received  it  on  the  eve  of  departure 
on  his  expedition  to  Djebel-Barkal,  and  his  letter  acknowledging  it 
was  dated  from  the  island  of  Philse.  One  can  imagine  with  what  in- 
tense interest  such  a  man,  so  situated,  must  have  followed  the  lucid 
deductions  of  the  clear-headed  American,  writing  at  the  other  side  of 
the  world.  But  probably  the  most  gratifying  notice  of  the  book  is 
that  by  Prictard,  in  the  Appendix  t6  his  Natural  Histoiy  of  Man,  of 
which  I  attract  a  portion.  He  quotes  Morton  largely,  and  always 
with  commendation,  even  where  the  conclusions  of  the  latter  are  in 
conflict  with  his  own  previously  published  opinions. 

**  A  most  interesting  and  really  important  addition  has  lately  been  made  to  our  know- 
ledge of  the  physical  character  of  the  ancient  Egyptians.  This  has  been  deriyed  from  a 
quarter  where  local  probabilities  would  least  of  all  have  induced  us  to  have  looked  for  it. 
In  France,  where  so  many  scientific  men  haye  been  devoted,  ever  since  the  conquest  of 
Egypt  by  Napoleon,  for  a  long  time  under  the  patronage  of  government,  to  researches  into 
this  subject ;  in  England,  possessed  of  the  immense  advantage  of  wealth  and  commercial 
resources ;  in  the  academies  of  Italy  and  Germany,  where  the  arts  of  Egypt  have  been 
studied  in  national  museums,  scarcely  anything  has  been  done  since  the  time  of  Blumen- 

Digitized  by 

Google 

KXKOIR    OF    SAMUEL    GEORGE    MORTON.  xUii 

bftch  to  «laoidato  the  physical  history  of  Uie  UKsient  Egyptian  noe.  In  nono  of  these 
eoantries  haTo  any  extensiTe  collections  been  formed  of  the  materials  and  resonroet  which 
alone  can  afford  a  secure  fonndation  for  snch  attempts.  It  is  in  the  United  States  of  Ame- 
rica that  a  remarkable  adTancement  of  this  part  of  physical  science  has  been  at  length 
aehiered.  *  The  Transactions  of  the  American  Philosophical  Society'  contain  a  memoir  by 
Br.  Morton  of  Philadelphia,  in  which  that  able  and  lealous  writer,  already  distinguished 
by  his  admirable  researches  into  the  physical  characters  of  the  natiTO  American  races,  has 
brought  forward  a  great  mass  of  new  information  on  the  ancient  Egyptians."  (p.  57.) 

This  brings  us  at  once  to  the  consideration  of  Morton's  opinion 
upon  the  mnch-vexed  question  of  the  unity  or  diversity  of  the  various 
races  of  men,  or  rather  of  their  origin  fit)m  a  single  pair;  for  that  alone 
practically  has  been  the  topic  of  discussion.  It  is  a  subject  of  too  • 
much  importance,  both  to  the  cause  of  science  and  the  memory  of 
Morton,  ip  be  passed  over  slightly.  Above  all,  there  is  necessary  a 
clear  and  fair  statement  of  his  opinions,  in  order  that  there  may  be 
no  mistake.  His  mind  was  progressive  on  this  subject,  as  upon  many 
others.  He  had  to  disabuse  himself  of  erroneous  notions,  early  ac- 
quired, as  well  as  to  discover  the  truth.  It  is  therefore  possible  so  to 
quoto  him  as  to  misrepresent  his  real  sentiments,  or  to  make  his 
assertions  appear  contradictory  and  confused.  I  propose  to  show  the 
gradual  growth  of  his  convictions  by  the  quotation,  in  their  legitimate 
series,  of  his  published  expressions  on  the  subject 

The  unity  and  common  origin  of  mankind  have,  until  recently,  been 
consiflered  undisputed  points  of  doctrine.  They  seem  to  have  been  re- 
garded as  propositions  not  scientifically  established,  so  much  as  taken 
for  granted,  and  let  alone.  All  men  were  held  to  be  descended  from 
the  single  pair  mentioned  in  Genesis;  every  tribe  was  thought  to  be 
historically  traceable  to  the  regions  about  Mesopotamia ;  and  ordinary 
physical  influences  were  believed  sufficient  to  explain  the  remarkable 
diversities  of  color,  Ac.  These  opinions  were  thought  to  be  the  teach- 
ings of  Scripture  not  impugned  by  science,  and  were  therefore  almost 
universally  acquiesced  in.  By  Blumenbach,  Prichard,  and  others, 
the  unity  is  assumed  as  an  axiom  not  disputed.  It  is  curious  that 
the  only  attack  made  upon  this  dogma,  until  of  late,  was  made  from  a 
theological,  and  not  from  a  scientific  stand-point  The  celebrated  book 
of  Peyrerius  on  the  pre-Adamites  was  written  to  solve  certain  diffi- 
culties in  biblical  exegesis,  (such  as  Cain's  wife,  the  city  he  builded^ 
&c.,)  for  the  writer  was  a  mere  scholastic  theologian.*  He  met  the 
fete  of  all  who  ventured  to  defy  the  hierarchy,  at  a  day  when  they 
had  the  civil  power  at  their  back.  Now  they  are  confined  to  the 
calling  of  names,  as  infidel  and  the  like,  although  mischief  enough 

*  Pne-AdamiUe,  bItc  ezeroitatio  super  Tersibns  duodecimo,  decimotertio  et  decimo  quarto 
capitis  quint!  Epietohs  D.  Paull  ad  Romanos.  Quibus  inducuntur  primi  Homines  ante 
Adammn  conditl.    Anno  Salutis  mdolt. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

Xliv  MEMOIR  OF  SAMUEL  GEORGE  MORTON. 

can  they  thus  do,  inflicting  a  poisoned  wound.  Then  they  had  their 
fagots  in  the  Place  de  Qr^ve,  and  as  they  could  not  catch  Peyrerius, 
the  Sorbonne  ordered  his  book  publicly  burned  by  the  common  hang- 
man. There  is  something  ludicrously  pathetic  in  the  manner  in  which 
he  addresses  his  essay  to  the  then-persecuted  Jews,  with  an  utinam  ex 
^vobU  unus!  and  adds,  "Hoc  mihi  certe  cum  vobis  commune  est; 
quod  vitam  duco  erraticam,  quaeque  parum  convenit  cum  otio  medi- 
tantis  et  scribentis."  The  press  fairly  rained  replies  to  this  daring 
work,  from  both  Catholic  and  Protestant  writers,  but  not  one  of  them 
based  on  scientific  grounds,  nor,  indeed,  in  the  defence  of  Genesis. 
Peyrerius  would  appear  to  have  confessedly  the  advantage  there.  But  it 
was  asserted  that  the  denial  of  mankind's  imiversal  descent  from  the 
loins  of  Adam,  militated  with  the  position  of  the  latter  i^  "  federal 
head"  of  the  race  in  the  "  scheme  of  redemption."  The  writer's  offence 
was  purely  theological,  and  hence  the  charge  of  Socinianism  and  the 
vehemence  with  which  even  a  phlegmatic  Dutchman  could  be  roused 
to  hurl  at  his  devoted  head  the  anathema :  Perturhet  te  DomtnuSy  quia 
perturbasti  Israelem  !  *  This  excitement  over,  the  subject  was  heard  of 
no  more  until  the  French  writers  of  the  last  century  again  agitated -it. 
Voltaire  repeatedly  and  mercilessly  ridicules  the  idea  of  a  common 
origin.  He  says — "II  n'est  permis  qu'A  un  aveugle  de  douter  que 
les  blancs,  les  K^gres,  les  Albinos,  les  Hottentots,  les  Lappons,  les 
Chinois,  les  Americains,  soient  des  races  enti^rement  diff6rentes."t 
But  Voltaire  was  not  scientific,  and  his  opinion  upon  such  questions 
would  go  for  nothing  with  men  of  science.  Prichard  therefore  sums 
up  his  Natural  History  of  Man,  {Landotif  1845,)  with  the  final  em- 
phatic declaration  "  that  all  human  races  are  of  one  species  and  one 
femily."  The  doctrine  of  the  unity  was  indeed  almost  universally 
held  even  by  those  commonly  rated  as  "Deistical"  writers.  D'Han- 
carville,  and  his  fellow  dilettanti^  will  certainly  not  be  suspected  of 
any  proclivity  to  orthodoxy ;  yet,  in  his  remarks  upon  the  wide  dis- 
semination of  Phallic  and  other  religious  emblems,  he  gives  the 
ensuing  forcible  and  eloquent  statement  of  his  conviction  of  tiie  full 
historical  evidence  of  unity : — 

<«  Comme  let  ooqnillages  et  les  d^ris  des  productions  de  la  mer,  qui  Bont  d^pos^s  sans 
•ombre  et  eans  mesure  sur  toate  U  anrfaoe  du  globe,  attestent  qa'il  dee  terns  incoDnuB  i 
toutes  les  histoires,  11  fClt  ooeup^  et  recouyert  par  les  eanx ;  ainsi  ces  embldmes  singnliersy 
admis  dans  toutes  les  parties  de  Tancien  continent,  attestent  qu'&  des* terns  ant^rienrs  i 
tons  cenx  dont  parlent  les  historiens,  toutes  les  nations  chex  laqnelle  ezist^rent  ces  em- 
bldmes  eurent  un  mdme  culte,  une  mdme  religion,  une  mdme  th^ologie,  et  Traisemblable- 
ment  une  mdme  langage.*'t 

*  Non-ens  PnB-A.damiticunL  Sito  conf^tatio  Tani  et  Sodnlsantis  cujusdam  Somnii,  &o. 
Autore  Antonio  Hulsio.    Lugd.  Bata?.  xbolvi.  f  Essai  sur  les  Moeurs,  Introd. 

%  Reoherches  sdr  Forigine,  Tesprit  et  les  progrte  des  arts  de  la  Gr^ce,  London,  17S5, 
L.  1.  zif. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

MEMOIR    OF    SAMUEL    GEORGE    MORTON.  xlv 

Morton  was  educated  in  youth  to  regard  this  doctrine  as  a  scriptural 
verity,  and  he  found  it  accepted  as  the  first  proposition  in  the  existing 
Ethnology.  As  such  he  received  it  implicitly,  and  only  abandoned  it 
when  compelled  by  the  force  of  an  irresistible  conviction.  What  he 
received  in  sincerity,  he  taught  in  good  feith.  There  can  be  no  doubt 
that  in  that  early  course  of  1830,  he  inculcated  the  unity  doctrine  as 
strongly  as  ever  did  Pilchard. 

But  this  state  of  opinion  could  not  continue  undisturbed.  The 
wide  ethnic  diversities  which  so  forcibly  impressed  one  who  contem- 
plated them  merely  as  an  historian  and  critic  (as  Voltaire),  could  not 
fail  to  engage  the  attention  of  naturalists.  The  difiiculties  of  the* 
popular  doctrine  -became  daily  more  numerous  and  apparent,  and  it 
owed  its  continued  existence,  less  to  any  inherent  strength,  than  to  the 
forbearance  of  those  who  disliked  to  awaken  controversy  by  assailing 
it.  The  ordinary  exposition  of  Genesis  it  was  impossible  for  natu- 
ralists longer  to  accept,  but  they  postponed  to  the  utmost  the  inevita- 
ble contest.  The  battle  had  been  fought  upon  astronomy  and  gained; 
so  that  Ma  pur  ii  muave  had  become  the  watchword  of  the  scientific 
world  in  its  conflict  with  the  parti  pritre.  The  Geologists  were  even 
then  coming  victorious  out  of  the  combat  concerning  the  six  days  of 
Creation,  and  the  uiiiversality  of  the  Deluge.  The  Archaeologists 
^  were  at  the  moment  beating  down  the  old-fiushioned  short  chronology.  - 
Now  another  exciting  struggle  was  at  hand.  Unfortunately  it  seems 
out  of  the  question  to  discuss  topics  which  touch  upon  theology  with- 
out rousing  bad  blood.  "Religious  subjects,"  says  Payne  Knight, 
"  being  beyond  the  reach  of  sense  or  reason,  are  always-  embraced  or 
rejected  with  violence  or  heat.  Men  think  they  Icnow  because  they  are 
sure  they  feel^  and  are  firmly  convinced  because  strongly  agitated."*  • 
But  disagreeable  as  was  the  prospect  of  controversy,  it  could  not  be 
avoided.  It  is  curious  to  read  Lawrence  now,  and  see  how  he  piles 
up  the  objections  to  his  own  doctrine,  until  you  doubt  whether  he 
believes  it  himself!  The  main  diflBiculty  concerns  a  single  centre  of 
creation.  The  dispersion  of  mankind  from  such  a  centre,  somewhere 
on  the  alluvium  of  thip  Euphrates,  might  be  admitted  as  possible ; 
but  the  gathering  of  all  animated  nature  at  Eden  to  be  named  by 
Adam,  the  distribution  tiience  to  their  respective  remote  and  diver- 
sified habitats,  their  reassembling  by  pairs  and  sevens  in  the  Ark,  and 
their  second  distribution  from  the  same  centre  —  these  conceptions 
are  what  Lawrence  long  ago  pronounced  them,  simply  "  zoologically 
impossible."  The  error  arises  from  mistaking  the  local  traditions  of 
a  circumscribed  community  for  universal  history.  As  Peyrerius  re- 
marked two  centuries  ago,  "  peccatur  non  raro  in  lectione  sacrorum 

•  B.  Payne  Knight    Letter  to  Sir  Joi.Banke8  and  Sir  Wm.  Hamilton,  p.  28. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC 

^vi      MEMOIR  OF  SAMUEL  GEORGE  MORTON. 

codicam,  quoties  generalinB  acdpitur,  quod  specialius  debuit  intel- 
ligi.'^'i'  The  most  rigid  criticism  has  demonatrated,  beyond  the  possi- 
bility of  disputation,  that  all  the  nations  and  tribes  mentioned  in  the 
Pentateuch,  are  included  strictly  within  the  so-^^lled  Caucasian  race, 
and  that  the  writer  probably  never  heard  of  (as  he  certainly  never 
mentions)  any  other  than  white  men.  This  discussion,  even  to  t][Le 
limited  extent  to  which  it  has  gone,  has  called  forth  much  bittemeaer; 
not  on  the  part  of  sincere  students  of  the  sacred  text,  but  of  that 
prStraille  which,  arrogant  in  the  direct  ratio  of  its  ignorance,  substi- 
tutes clamor  and  denunciation  for  reason,  and  casts  the  dirt  of  oppro- 
brious epithets  when  it  has  no  arguments  to  offer.  But  already  this 
advantage  has  arisen  from  the  agitation: — that  some  prelindnary 
points  at  least  may  be  considered  settled,  and  a  certain  amount  of 
scholarship  may  be  demanded  of  those  who  desire  to  enter  the  dis- 
cussion ;  thus  eliminating  from  it  the  majority  of  persons  most  ready 
to  present  themselves  with  noisy  common-place,  already  ten  times 
refuted.  The  men  who,  in  the  middle  of  the  nineteenth  century,  can 
still  find  the  ancestors  of  Mongolians  and  Americails  among  the  sons 
of  Japhet,  or  who  talk  about  the  curse  of  Canaan  in  connexion  with 
Negroes,t  are  plainly  without  the  pale  of  controversy,  as  they  are 
beyond  the  reach  of  criticism.  There  is,  even  in  some  who  have  re- 
centiy  published  books  on  the  subject  such  a  helpless  profundity 
of  ignorance  of  the  very  first  facts  of  the  case,  that  one  finds  no 
fitting  answer  to  them  but>— expressive  silence !  To  endeavor  to  raise 
such  to  the  dignity  of  Ethnologists,  even  by  debate  with  them,  is 
to  pay  them  a  compliment  beyond  their  deserts.  They  have  no  right 
whatever  to  thrust  themselves  into  the  field, — the  lists  are  opened  for 
another  class  of  combatants.  Therefore  they  cannot  be  recognised. 
.  With  Dante, 

** Nod  ngioiuiiii  di  lor ;  in»  goarda,  e  pasnl  ** 

It  was  impossible  for  Morton,  in  the  prosecution  of  his  labors,  to 
avoid  these  exciting  questions.  We  have  his  own  assurance  that  he 
early  felt  the  insuperable  difficulties  attending  the  hypothesis  of  a 
common  origin  of  all  races.  He  seems  soon  to  have  abandoned,  if 
he  ever  entertained,  the  notion  that  ordinary  physical  influences  will 
account  for  existing  diversities,  at  least  within  the  limits  of  the  popu- 
lar short  chronology.  There  are  two  ways  of  escaping  tliis  difficulty — 
one  by  denying  entirely  the  competency  of  physical  causes  to  produce 
the  effects  alleged ;  and  the  other  to  grant  them  an  indefinite  period 
for  their  operation,  as  Prichard  did  in  the  end,  with  his  ''  chiliads 

*  Op.  cit.,  p.  168. 

f  The  Dootrine  of  the  Unity  of  the  Human  Race,  examined  on  the  Principles  of  Science^ 
bj  John  Baohman,  D.  D.    Charleston:  1850.  pp.  291-292. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

MEMOIR^   OP    SAMUEL    aEOBGE    MORTOIT.  xlvii 

of  years,"  for  man's  existence  upon  earth.  Morton  inclined  to  the 
other  view,  mainly  in  consequence  of  the  historical  evidence  he  had 
accumulated,  showing  the  unalterable  permanency  of  the  charac- 
teiistics  of  race,  within  the  limits  of  human  records.  But  he  was 
dow  to  hazard  the  publication  of  an  opinion  upon  a  question  of  so 
great  moment.  He  preferred  to  wait,  not  only  until  his  own  convic- 
tion became  certwity,  but  until  he  could  adduce  the  mass  of  testi- 
mony necessary  to  convince  others.  This  extreme  caution  charac- 
terized an  his  literary  labors,  and  made  his  conclusions  always 
reliable.*  A  true  disciple  of  the  inductive  philosophy,  he  labored 
long  and  hard  in  the  verification  of  his  premises.  With  an  inex- 
haustible patience  he  accumulated  &ct  upon  fact,  and  published 
observation  upon  observation,  often  apparently  dislocated  and  object- 
less, but  all  intended  for  future  use.  Many  of  his  minor  papers  are 
mere  stores  of  disjointed  data.  More  than  once,  when  observing  his 
untiring  labor  and  its  long  postponed  result,  he  has  brought  into  my 
mind  those  magnificent  lines  of  Shelley : 

Harkt  the  mshing  snow! 
Thd  BOiMiwake&ed  avalanche!  whose  mass, 
Thrice  lifted  by  the  storm,  had  gathered  thete 
Flake  after  flake,  in  heayen-defying  minds 
As  thought  by  thought  is  piled,  till  some  great  truth 
Is  loosened,  and  the  nations  echo  round. 
Shaken  to  tbeir  veots,  as  do  the  uoutdns  now.f 

In  fact,  he  had  an  eye,  in  all  his  investigations,  to  the  publication  at 
some  future  period  of  a  work  on  the  Elements  of  Ethnology^  which 
should  contain  the  fully  ripened  fruits  of  so  many  years  of  toil.  Of 
this  project  he  speaks  in  some  of  his  letters  as  ^'  perhaps  an  idle 
dream,"  but  one  for  whose  realization  he  would  make  many  sacri- 
fices. For  it  he  reserved  the  complete  expression  of  his  ethnological 
doctrines^  This  conoderation,  and  his  extreme  dislike  of  controversy, 
made  him  particularly  guarded  in  his  statements.  Constitutionally 
averse  to  all  noisy  debate  and  contention,  he  was  well  aware  also  that 
they  are  incompatible  with  the  calmness  essential  to  successful  scien- 
tific inquiry.  ^Nothing  but  an  aggravated  assault  could  have  drawn 
fipom  him  a  reply.    That  assault  was  made,  and,  as  I  conceive,  most 

*In  ft  letter  of  Prof.  O.  W.  HotUis  t6  Dr.  Morton,  (Asted  Boston,  Not.  27th,  1849,)  I 
find  the  foUowing  passage,  so  jnst  in  its  appreeiatien  oi  hk  leieBtitc  character,  that  I  tak» 
the  liberty  of  quoting  it : — 

^  The  more  I  read  on  these  snbjeett,  the  more  I  am  delighted  with  the  severe  and  can- 
tSoas  character  of  yonr  own  most  extended  researches,  which,  ftrom  their  yerj  nature,  are 
permaaent  data  for  all  fntiurt  stodents  of  Ethnology,  whose  leader  pn  this  side  the  Atlantic, 
to  say  ihe  least,  yon  have  so  happily  oonstitated  yourself  by  weU-directed  and  long-eon- 
timed  efforts." 

f  P)romethens  Unbound,  Act  It,  Scene  8d. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC 

xlviii  KEMOIR    OF    SAMUEL    GEORGE    MORTON. 

fortunately  fcr  his  reputation.  Without  it,  he  would  probably  have 
ceased  from  his  labors  without  having  published  any  such  explicit 
and  unmistakeable  expression  of  opinion,  on  this  important  question, 
as  his  scientific  friends  would  have  desired.  As  it  is,  he  has  left  no 
room  for  doubt  or  cavil  as  to  his  position  in  the  very  front  of  our 
onward  progress  in  Anthropology. 

The  first  published  opinion  of  Morton  in  reference  to  this  question 
is  found  in  the  Crania  Americana.  It  will  be  perceived,  that,  recog- 
nizing the  entire  incompetency  of  ordinary  climatic  and  similar  in- 
fluences to  produce  the  iJleged  effects,  he  suggests,  as  an  escape  from 
the  difficulty,  that  the  marks  of  Sace  were  impressed  at  once  by 
Divine  Power  upon  the  immediate  family  of  Adam. 

'*  The  reetnt  disooTeries  in  Egypt  giTe  additional  force  to  the  preceding  statement,  inae- 
mveh  as  they  show,  beyond  all  qneation,  that  the  Ganeaeian  and  Negro  races  were  as  per- 
fectly distinct  in  that  coontiy,  upwards  of  three  thousand  years  ago,  as  they  are  now; 
whence  it  is  evident,  that  if  the  Caacasian  was  derlTed  ftrom  the  Negro,  or  the  Negro  firom 
the  Caacasian,  hy  the  action  of  external  eauset^  the  change  must  hare  been  effected  in,  kt 
most,  one  thousand  years ;  a  theory  which  the  subsequent  eridenoe  of  thirty  centuriee 
proTcs  to  be  a  physical  impossibility ;  and  we  haye  already  ventured  to  insist  that  such  ft 
commutation  could  be  effected  by  nothing  short  of  a  miracle."  (p.  88.) 

In  his  printed  Introductoiy  Lecture  of  1842,  the  same  views  are 
repeated,  and  the  insufficiency  of  external  causes  again  insisted  upon. 
In  April  of  the  same  year,  he  read,  l>efore  the  Boston  Society  of  Na- 
tural Histoiy,  a  paper  which  was  republished  in  1844,  under  the  title 
of  An  Inquiry  into  the  Dietinetive  Oharaeterietice  of  the  Aboriginal  Race 
of  America,    From  this  paper  I  extract  the  following  striking  passage : 

In  fine,  our  own  conclusion,  long  ago  deduced  from  %  patient  examination  of  the  fitots 
thus  briefly  and  inadequately  stated,  is,  that  the  American  race  is  essentially  separate  and 
peculiar,  whether  we  regard  it  in  its  physical,  moral,  or  its  intellectual  relations.  To  us 
there  are  no  direct  or  obyious  links  between  the  people  of  the  old  world  and  the  new ;  for 
eren  admitting  the  seeming  analogies  to  which  we  hsTe  alluded,  these  are  so  few  in  num- 
ber, and  eyidenkly  so  casual,  as  not  to  inyaUdate  the  main  position ;  and  eren  should  it  be 
hereafter  shown  that  the  arts,  sciences,  and  religion  of  America  can  be  traced  to  an  ezotio 
source,  I  maintain  that  the  organic  characters  of  the  people  themseWes,  through  all  their 
endless  ramifications  of  tribes  and  nations,  proTO  them  to  belong  to  one  and  the  same  race, 
and  that  this  race  is  distinct  from  all  others."  (p.  86.) 

Ss  unequivocal  assertion  of  the  permanency  of  the  distinctive 
marks  of  Eace  in  the  final  proposition  of  his  resume  of  the  Oranta 
^gyptiacahsA  abeady  been  given,  {tupray  p.xlii.)Two  years  afterwards 
he  published  this  emphatic  declaration : 

« I  can  ayer  that  sixteen  years  of  almost  daUy  comparisons  haye  only  confirmed  me  in 
the  conclusions  announced  in  my  «  Crania  Americana,"  that  all  the  American  nations,  ex- 
cepting the  Eskimaux,  are  of  one  race,  and  that  this  race  is  peculiar  and  distinct  from  aU 
others."* ^ 

«  Ethnography  and  ArbhsM^ogy  of  the  American  Aborigines.    NewHayen:  1846.  (p.  9.) 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC 

KEMOIR    OF    SAMUEL    GEORGE    MORTON.  xlix 

The  next  citation  is  from  the  letter  to  Mr.  Bartlett  before  men- 
tioned : 

<*  Bat  it  is  neeeesaiy  to  e^lain  what  is  here  meant  by  the  word  raoe.  I  do  not  use  it  to 
imply  that  all  its  diTiaions  are  deilTed  tnm  a  single  pair ;  on  the  contrary,  I  believe  they 
hare  originated  from  several,  perhaps  even  from  many  pairs,  which  were  adapted,  from  the 
beginning,  to  the  varied  localities  they  were  designed  to  ooenpy ;  and  the  Fnegians,  less 
migratory  than  the  cognate  tribes,  will  serve  to  illustrate  this  idea.  In  other  words,  I  re- 
gard the  American  nations  as  the  tme  autocthones,  the  primeval  inhabitants  of  this  vast 
continent ;  and  when  I  speak  of  thmr  being  of  one  raoe  or  of  one  origin,  I  allude  only  to 
their  indigenous  relation  to  each  other,  as  shown  in  all  those  attributes  of  mind  and  body 
wMch  have  been,  so  amply  illustrated  by  modem  ethnography."* 

In  a  note  to  a  paper  in  Silliman's  Journal  for  1847,  he  says : — 

« I  may  here  observe,  that  whenever  I  have  ventured  an  opinion  on  this  question,  it  has 
been  in  fkvor  of  the  doctrine  of  primeoal  diveniUet  among  men — an  original  adaptation  of 
the  several  races  to  those  varied  circumstances  of  climate  and  locality,  which,  while  con- 
genial to  the  one,  are  destructive  to  the  other ;  and  subsequent  investigations  have  con- 
firmed me  in  these  views,  ^f 

One  would  suppose  that  whoever  had  read  the  above  publications 
could  have  no  doubt  as  to  Morton's  sentiments ;  yet  Dr.  Bachman 
and  others  have  affected  to  be  suddenly  surprised  by  the  utterance 
of  opinions  which  had  been  distinctly  implied,  and  even  openly  pub- 
lished years  before.  To  leave  no  further  doubt  upon  the  subject,  he 
thus  expresses  himself  in  his  letter  to  Dr.  Bachman  of  March  30th, 
1850:— 

«<  I  commenced  the  study  of  Ethnology  about  twenty  years  since ;  and  among  the  first 
aphorisms  taught  me  by  all  the  books  to  which  I  then  had  access,  was  tlib  —  that  all  man- 
kind were  derived  from  a  single  pair ;  and  that  the  diversities  now  so  remarkable,  origin- 
ated solely  ftx>m  the  operations  of  climate,  locality,  food,  and  other  physical  agents.  In 
other  words,  that  man  was  created  a  perfect  and  beautiAil  being  in  the  first  instance,  and 
that  chance,  chance  alone  has  caused  all  the  physical  disparity  among  men,  from  the  noblest 
Caucasian  (jprm  to  the  most  degraded  Australian  and  Hottentot  I  approached  the  sulject 
as  (me  of  great  difficulty  and  delicacy ;  and  my  first  convictions  were,  that  these  diversities 
are  not  acqidred,  but  have  existed  ab  origine.  Such  is  the  opinion  expressed  in  my  Crania 
Americana;  but  at  that  period,  (twelve  years  ago,)  I  had  not  investigated  Scriptural  Eth* 
nology,  and  was  content  to  suppose  that  Uie  distinctive  characteristics  of  the  several  races 
had  been  marked  upon  the  immediate  frunily  of  Adam.  Further  investigation,  however, 
in  connection  with  loological  science,  has  led  me  to  take  a  wider  view  of  this  questioti,  of 
which  an  outline  is  given  above."t 

In  order  to  present  still  more  fully  and  clearly  the  ^al  conclusions 
of  our  revered  friend  on  this  topic,  I  append  two  of  his  letters.  The 
first  is  addressed  to  Dr.  Nott,  under  date  of  Januaiy  29th,  1850. 

*  Transactions  of  American  Ethnological  Society,  vol.  iL    New  Tork:  1S48.  (p.  219.) 
f  Hybridity  in  animals  and  plants,,  considered  in  reference  to  the  question  of  the  Unity 

of  the  Human  Spedes.    New  Haven :  1847.  (p.  4.) 
%  Letter  to  the  Rev.  John  Bachman,  D.  D.,  on  the  question  of  Hybridity  in  animals. 

Charieeton:  1860.  (^  16.) 

Digitized  by 

Google 

1  MBMOiR  OF  SAMITEL  QEOIUJB  UOKJOl^. 

"  I  hare  read  and  Mrzigad  your  Tmo  Leeimu  with  great  pleasure  and  instriMtion*  I  am 
espeoiallj  pleased  with  the  triumphant  manner  in  which  yon  hare  treated  the  absurd  pos- 
tulate, that  one  race  can  be  transmuted  into  another.  The  only  illustrations  that  can  be 
adduced  by  its  adTocates,  as  you  justly  obserrey  are  certain  diseased  and  abnormal  Organi- 
sations, that,  by  a  wise  law  of  nature^  wear  out  in  a  few  generatioos*  Some  of  yous  apho-> 
risms  have  delighted  me,  *  Man  oan  momi  noiUng  in  science  or  religion  but  falsehood ; 
and  all  the  truths  whi<di  he  diseovin  ^aro  but  fscts  or  laws  which  haye  emanated  Arom  th» 
Creator.'  This  is  a  noble  sentiment  admirably  expressed.  I  am  slowly  preparing  my- 
memoir  *  On  the  Site  of  die  Brain  in  Tariooa  Bacesand  Families  of  Man ;  with^Btiawelopoal 
Remarks.'  The  latter  clanse  will  gire  me  sulleient  scope  for  the  expression  of  my  Ti/sw» 
on  those  sensitiye  points  of  Ethnology  in  wlueh  I  entirely  agree  with  you  in  opinion; 
leaying  out  all  theological  discussion,  which  I  have  carefully  avoided.  Ton  will  observe  a 
note  in  my  Essay  on  Hybiidity,  in  which  I  aTOW  my  belief  in  a  plurality  of  origins  for  the 
human  spedes,  and  I  haye  now  extended  those  obserrations,  and  briefly  illustrated  them ; 
but  in  so  doing  I  find  no  difficulty  with  the  text  of  Genesis,  which  is  just  as  manageable  in 
Ethnology  as  it  has  proTed  in  Astronomy,  Geology,  and  Chronology.  When  I  took  this 
ground  four  years  ago,  (and  in  the  Crania  Americana  my  position  is  the  same,  though  more 
cautiously  worded,}  it  was  with  some  misgivings,  not  because  I  doubted  the  truth  of  my 
opinions,  but  because  I  feared  they  would  lead  to  some  controTersy  with  the  clergy.  No* 
thing  of  the  kind  has  happened ;  for  I  hare  aToided  coming  into  collision  with  men  who 
too  often  uphold  a  garbled  text  of  Scripture,  to  defeat  the  progress  of  truth  and  science. 
I  haye  had  some  letters  from  the  clergy  and  from  other  piously-disposed  persons^  but  the. 
only  qpe  that  had  any  spice  of  yehemence  was  from  a  friend.  Dr.  Baohman,  of  Charleston. 
A  number  of  olergymen  haye  called  upon  me  for  infbi^ation  on  this  subject,  and  I  confess 
to  you  my  surprise  at  the  liberal  tone  of  feeling  they  haye  expressed  on  this  seasitiye  ques- 
tion ;  and  I  really  belieye  that  if  they  are  not  pressed  too  hfrd,  they  will  finally  ooncedei 
all  that  can  be  asked  of  the  mere  question  of  diyersity ;  for  it  can  be  far  more  readily 
reconciled  to  tiie  Mosaic  annals  than  some  other  points,  Astronomy,  &c.,  for  example.  As 
for  Chronology,  we  all  know  it  to  be  a  hrokm  reed.  Look  at  the  last  page  of  Dr.  Prichard's 
great  work  —  the  last  page  of  his  fifth  and  last  yolume  —  and  he  there  gWes  it  as  his  ma- 
tured opinion  that  the  human  race  has  befSQ  '  ehiliads  of  centnriea'  upon  the  earth  1  He 
had  before  found  it  necessary  to  proye  the  Deluge  a  partial  phenomenon,  and  he  also  admits 
that  no  physical  agents  could  oyer  haye  produced  the  existing  diyerslties  among  men ;  and, 
ascribes  them  to  aeciderUal  varittitt  which  haye  been. careful  to  intemux^only  among  them- 
sely^,  and  thereby  perpetuated  their  race !  Compared  with  this  last  inadequate  hypothesis^ 
how  beautiful,  how  evidently  and  inherently  truthful  is  the  propositioQ — that  our  species, 
had  its  origin,  not  in  one,  but  in  seyeral  or  in,  many  creations;  and  that  these  diyerging 
from  their  primitiye  centres,  met  and  amalgamated  in  the  progress  of  tlipe^  aod  haye  thua. 
glyen  rise  to  these  intermediate  links  of  organisation  which  now  connect  the  extremes,  to- 
gether. Here  is  the  truth  dlyested  of  mystery ;  a.  system  that  explains  the  oth^fiuseum,- , 
telligible  phenomena  so  remarkably  stamped  on  the  races  of  men." 

The  remaining  letter  is  addressed  to  Mr.  Qliddon,  under  date  of 
Philadelphia,  April  27th,  1851,  little  more  than  two  weeks  before  its 
author  ceased  to  breathe.  I  publish  it  verbatim^  so  that  the  reader 
may  see  that  the  concluding  emphatic  declaration  stands  imqualifiecl 
by  anything  in  the  context. 

"  My  dear  Sir : — Haye  you  Squier's  pampUets  on  California  and  New  Mexico  t  Is  it  not 
in  them  that  is  contained  a  refutation  of  the  old  fable  of  whiu  Indiana  on  or  near  the  Rio 
Gila  ?  If  so,  please  send  me  the  aboye  paper  by  mail  as  soon  as  you  can.  I  must  haya- 
them  somewhere,  but  I  am  in  an  emergency  for  them,  and  they  cannot  be  fonnd.  I  am 
hard  at  work  at  my  chapter  for  Schoolcraft's  book,  and  am  desirous  to  get  it  off  my  handa« 

Digitized  by 

Google 

MEMOIR    OP    SAMUEL    GEORGE    MORTON,  li 

I  send  yen  %  pftragrapli  Anom  th«  Ledger  wUeh  wtQ  gi^tfty  you.  Meire  is  no  Uglier  praise 
th«n  tliis.  It  is  all  the  better  for  being  so  aphorismally  expressed.  The  doetriru  of  th$ 
^riffin^  iivernty  of  mankind  unfoldt  iUdf  to  me  more  and  more  with  the  dietinetnett  of  reve- 
iaihn, 

''With  kindest  remembrances  to  Mrs.  0.  and  yonr  fine  boy,  I  am, 

^  "  Etot  fkithftdly  years, 

"8.  6.  Morton."    ' 

These  citations  are  sufficient  for  our  purpose,  I  apprehend,  especially 
the  laconic  emphasis  of  the  last,  which  may  be  regarded  as  the  ethnolo- 
gical testament  of  our  lamented  friend.  I  have  been  thus  full  upon  this 
point,  because  I  believe  it  but  justice  to  his  memoiy  to  show  that  he 
was  among  the  very  earliest  to  accept  and  give  shape  to  the  doctrine 
fitated.  As  the  mountain  summits  are  gilded  with  the  early  dawn, 
while  the  pltun  below  still  sleeps  in  darkness,  so  it  is  the  loftiest  spirit 
among  men  that  first  receives  and  reflects  the  radiance  of  the  coming 
truth.  Morton  has  occupied  that  position  among  us,  in  relation  to  this 
important  advance  in  scientific  opinion.  I  have  desired  to  put  the 
evidence  of  it  feirly  upon  record,  and  thus  to  claim  and  secure  the 
distinction  that  is  justly  due  him. 

Many  well-meaning,  but  uninformed  pereons  have,  however,  raised 
an  outci7  of  horror  against  the  assertion  of  original  human  diversities, 
in  which  they  have  been  joined  by  others  who  ought  to  know  better. 
The  attack  is  not  made  upon  the  doctrine  itself,  nor  upon  any  direct 
logical  consequence  of  it  The  alleged  grievance  consists  entirely  in 
the  loss  of  certain  corollaries  deducible  from  the  opposite  proposition. 
Thus  it  is  asserted  that  our  religious  system  and  our  doctrine  of  social 
and  political  rights,  alike  result  from  ihe  hypothesis  of  human  consan- 
guinity and  common  origin,  and  stand  or  fell  with  it.  To  this  effect 
we  have  constantly  quoted  to  us  the  high  authority  of  Humboldt,  who 
says,  "  En  maintenant  Tunitfe  de  Tespfece  humaine,  nous  rejetons  par 
consequence  n^cessaire,  la  distinction  d^solante  de  races  superieures 
et  de  races  infferieures."* 

In  a  note  he  again  applies  the  term  de$alante  to  this  doctrine.  I 
have  used  the  French  translation,  because  it  is  the  more  forcible,  and 
because  it  was  that  read  by  Morton,  whose  felicitous  commentary 
upon  it  I  am  fortunately  able  to  adduce,  from  a  letter  to  Mr.  Gliddon, 
of  May  80th,  1846. 

"  Hnmboldt's  word  dieolante  is  true  in  sentiment  and  in  morals — ^but,  as  yon  obserre,  it  is 
WboUy  inapplicable  to  the  pbyrical  reality.  Nothing  so  hnmbles,  so  omshes  my  spirit,  as 
to  look  into  a  mad-honse,  and  behold  the  driTelling,  bmtal  idiocy  so  conspionons  in  snch 
places ;  it  conreys  a  terrific  idea  of  the  disparity  of  hnman  intelligences.    Bnt  there  is  the 

*  Cosmos :  tradoit  par  H.  Faye.  Paris :  1846.  I.  p.  480.  Also,  note  42,  p.  579.  Ott^ 
translates  by  depreeemg  in  one  place,  and  eheerleea  in  another.  Cosmos :  New  Tork,  1850. 
L  p.  858. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

lii  MEMOIR  OF  SAMUEL  GEORGE  MORTON. 

unyieldingy  insnperable  realitj.  It  is  didolanU  indeed  to  think,  to  know,  that  many  of  these 
poor  mortals  were  bom,  were  created  so !  Bat  it.  appears  to  me  to  make  little  difference 
in  the  tmUment  of  the  qaestion  whether  they  came  into  the  world  without  their  wits,  or 
whether  they  lost  them  afterwards.  And  so,  I  woold  add,  it  makes  little  difference  whe- 
ther the  mental  inferiority  of  the  Negro,  the  Samoiyede,  or  the  Indian,  is  natural  or 
acquired ;  for,  if  they  erer  possessed  equal  intelligence  with  the  Caucasian,  they  haTO  lost 
.it;  and  if  they  never  had  it,  they  had  nothing  to  lose.  One  party  would  arraign  Provi- 
dence  for  creating  them  orij^nally  different,  another  for  placing  them  in  circumstances  by 
which  they  inevitably  became  so.  Let  us  search  out  the  truth,  and  reconcile  it  after- 
wards." 

.  Here  are  sound  philosophy  and  plain  common  sense.  As  the  facts 
are  open  to  investigation,  let  ns  first  examine  them,  and  leave  the  in- 
ferences for  future  consideration.  If  the  proposition  prove  true,  we 
may  safely  trust  all  its  legitimate  deductions.  There  is  no  danger 
from  the  truth,  neither  will  it  conflict  with  any  other  truth.  Our 
greater  danger  is  from  the  cowardice  that  is  afraid  to  look  fact  in  the 
iace,  and,  not  daring  to  come  in  contact  with  reality,  for  fear  of  con- 
sequences, must  rest  content  with  error  and  half-belief.  The  question 
here  is  one  of  fact  simply,  and  not  of  speculation  nor  of  feeling. 
Humboldt  may  deny  the  existence  of  unalterable  diversities,  but  that 
is  another  question,  also  to  be  settled  only  by  a  wider  observation  and 
longer  experience.  The  ethical  consequences  he  so  eloquently  depre- 
cates, moreover,  appear  to  me  not  to  be  fairly  involved,  unless  he 
assumes  that  the  solidarity  and  mutual  moral  relations  of  mankind 
originate  solely  in  their  relationship  as  descendants  of  a  single  pair. 
K  so,  he  has  built  upon  a  sandy  foundation,  and  one  which  eveiy 
moralist  of  note  will  tell  him  is  inadequate  to  the  support  of  his 
superstructure.  The  inalienable  right  of  man  to  equal  liberty  with 
his  fellows  depends,  if  it  has  any  sanction,  upon  higher  considerations 
than  any  mere  physical  fact  of  consanguinity,  and  remains  the  same 
whether  the  latter  be  proved  or  disproved.  Ethical  principles  require 
a  different  order  of  evidence  from  material  phenomena,  and  are  to  be 
regarded  from  another  point  of  view.  The  scientific  question  should, 
therefore,  be  discussed  on  its  own  merits,  and  without  reference  to 
false  issues  of  an  exciting  character,  if  we  hope  to  reach  the  truth.  I 
cannot  forbear  the  conclusion  that,  in  this  matter,  the  Kestor  of 
science  has  been  betrayed  into  a  little  piece  of  popular  declamation, 
unworthy  of  his  pen,  otherwise  so  consistently  logical.  But  the  acme 
of  absurdity  is  reached  by  those  clerical  gentiemen  at  the  south,  who 
have  been  so  eager  to  avail  themselves  of  Humboldt's  great  authority 
in  opposition  to  the  doctrine  of  diversity,  while  they  deny  all  his  pre- 
mises. Do  they  consider  all  doctrine  necessarily  de%olante^  because 
an  argument  in  favor  of  slavery,  true  or  false,  may  be  based  upon  it  ? 
Humboldt  does.  And  again,  if  the  denial  of  a  common  paternity 
involves  all  the  deplorable  consequences  indicated  by  the  latter,  does 

Digitized  by 

Google 

KEKOIB    OF    SAMUEL    GEORGE    KORTON.  liii 

itB  assertion  cany  with  it  the  contrary  inferences  ?  They  say  not  If, 
then,  the  doctrine  of  unity  gives  no  essential  guarantee  of  universal 
liberty  and  equality,  why  reproach  the  opposite  doctrine  with  destroy- 
ing what  never  existed?  Thus,  these  gentlemen  must  stultify  either 
themselves  or  their  champion,  while  that  which  with  him  was  merely  a 
rhetorical  flourish  becomes,  in  their  hands,  a  ridiculous  non  sequitur. 

In  the  course  of  these  discussions  it  became  necessary  to  define, 
with  greater  precision,  certain  terms  in  constant  use.  This  was  espe- 
dally  the  case  with  the  word  species^  the  loose  employment  of  which 
occasioned  much  confusion.  According  to  the  prevalent  zoological 
doctrine,  the  production  of  a  prolific  ofispring  is  the  highest  evidence 
of  specific  identity,  and  vice  versd.  The  important  results  of  the 
application  of  this  law  to  the  races  of  men  are  apparent.  But  other 
authorities  deny  the  validity  of  the  alleged  law  and  its  application. 
"  Wir  durften,"  says  Rudolphi,  "  also  wohl  deswegen  auf  Keine  Einheit 
des  Menschengesclilechts  schliessen,  weil  die  verschiedenen  Menschen- 
stamme  sich  fruchtbar  mit  einan<^er  begatten."  The  question  of 
Hybridity,  therefore,  presented  itself  to  Morton  in  a  form  that  de- 
manded attention  and  settlement  before  going  farther.  He  seized  the 
subject,  not  to  speculate,  and  still  less  to  declaim  about  it,  but  cau- 
tiously to  gather  and  sift  its  fiicts.  His  first  papers  were  read  before 
the  Academy  of  Natural  Sciences  in  November,  1846,  and  published 
in  Silliman's  Journal  the  next  year.  They  contain  a  large  number  of 
&cts,  from  various  authorities,  together  with  the  author's  inferences. 
For  these,  and  the  entire  discussion  of  the  topic,  I  refer  the  reader 
to  Chapter  XH.  (on  Hybridity)  in  this  work.  But  the  controversy 
into  which  it  led  Morton  forms  too  prominent  a  part  of  his  scientific 
histoiy  to  be  passed  over  in  silence.  It  was  not  of  his  seeking,  but 
was  forced  upon  him.  A  literary  club  at  Charleston,  S.  C,  being 
engaged  in  the  discussion  of  the  Origin  of  Man,  the  Rev.  Dr.  Bach- 
man  assumed  the  championship  of  the  unitaiy  hypothesis,  taking 
ground  upon  the  evidence  afforded  by  an  invariably  prolific  ofepring. 
His  opponents  met  him  with  Morton's  papers  on  Hybridity.  These 
he  must,  of  course,  examine ;  but  he  first  addressed  Morton  a  letter, 
of  which  the  following  is  an  extract : — 

CharUiUm,  Oct.  15/A,  1S49. 
"We  are  both  in  the  eeareh  of  troth.  I  do  not  think  that  these  soientific  inyestigations 
affeet  the  soriptare  question  either  way.  The  Author  of  Reyelation  is  also' the  Author  of 
Nature,  and  I  haye  no  fear  that  when  we  are  able  to  read  intelligibly,  we  will  discoyer  that 
both  harmonixe.  We  can  then  investigate  these  matters  without  the  fear  of  an  auto-da-fe 
from  men  of  sense.  In  the  meantime  all  must  go  with  respect  and  good  feeling  towards 
each  other.  Although  hard  at  work  in  finishing  the  last  Tolume  of  Audubon's  work,  I  will 
BOW  and  then  haye  time  to  look  at  this  matter ;  and  here  let  me  in  anticipation  state  some 

of  my  objections But  I  am  OTcrrun  with  calls  of  duty,  and  haye 

written  this  under  all  kinds  of  ihterraptions.  I  shall  be  most  sorry  if  my  opposition  to 
your  theory  would  produce  the  slightest  interruption  to  our  good  feeling,  as  I  regard  you, 
in  your  many  works,  as  a  benefactor  to  your  country,  and  an  honor  to  science.    I  feel  oon-  t 

liT  XEXOIB  OF  aU-MUEIi  G£l>RGE  HOBTOK. 

IMent  HhU  I  can  sottter  tome  of  jenrfaoti  to  tho  winds «t- fiat i»  ottnra  you  irtll  be<T«y 
apt  to  trip  up  my  own  heels ;  bo  let  us  work  hamioiuoQ^j  lo^e^er.  Ai  the  English  Uidr 
Tersides  thej  haye  wranglers,  hut  no  qnarrellers." 

This  seems  manly  and  fiiendly,  and  JCortooi,  4^e^g  it  to  be  soeh^ 
was  very  much  gratified.  He  certaualy  neirer  could  have  regarded  it 
as  a  prelude  to  an  attack  upon  himself ;  yet  fluoh  it  was.  The  neoct 
spring  (1860)  witnessed  the  publication  of  Dr.  B/s  book  on  Unity,  as 
well  as  his  Monograph  on  Hyhridity,  m  the  dttrleston  Medical  Joumal, 
in  both  of  which  Morton  is  made  the  objeot  of  assault  and  attempted 
ridicule.  The  former  work  I  have  already  jrefinared  to,  (p.  xlvi.)  The 
author  starts  with  what  amounts,  under  the  ciitcmnstances,  to  a  broaA 
and  unequivocal  confession  of  ignorance  of  his  topic — a  confession 
which,  however  praiseworthy  on  the  eeooe  of  ftankness,  may  be  »^ 
garded  as  wholly  supererogatory ;  for  no  reader  of  (nrdinaiy  intelligence 
can  open  the  book  without  paroeiving1be&ct£drbimself.  His  reading 
seems  to  have  been  singularly  limited,*  while  &b  ti^ic,  involving,  as 
it  does,  the  characteristics  of  remote  caces,  &;e«,  demands  a  wide  and 
careful  consultation  of  authorities.  For  one  who  is  confessedlj 
neither  an  archaeologist,  an  anatcmiist,  nor  a  philologist,  to  attempt 
to  teach  Ethnology  on  the  strength  of  having,  many  years  ago,  read 
on  the  subject  a  single  work — and  he  scarcely  recollects  what — is  a 
conception  as  bold  as  it  is  original.  His  production  requined  no 
notice,  of  course,  at  the  hand  of  Morton*  On  the  special  subject  of 
Hybridity,  however,  he  was  entitled  to  an  attentive  hearing  as  a  genr 
tleman  of  established  authority,  particularly  in  the  mammalian  do* 
partment  of  Zoology.  Had  he  discussed  it  in  the  spirit  foreshadowed 
by  his  letter,  and  which  Morton  anticipated,  there  would  have  been 
no  controversy,  but  an  amicable  comparison  of  views,  advancing  the 
cause  of  science.  But  his  tone  was  arrogant  and  dFensive.  'Not  only 
tp  the  general  reader  in  his  book,  but  also  to  M(»ion  in  his  letten, 

*  « In  preparing  these  notes  we  haTO  eyen  resoWed  not  to  refer  to  Prichard--who,  we 
believe,  is  jnsUy  regarded  as  one  of  oar  best  authorities — vfhote  work  we  read  with  great  «b- 
ieresi  tome  yeare  ago,  (and  which  is  aHowed  even  by  his  opponents  to  have  been  written  in  « 
spirit  of  great  fairness,)  and  many  of  whose  argnmente  we  st  the  time  considered  nnaft- 
swerable."  (p.  16.) 

«  After  tiiis  work  was  neac^  printed,  we  procured  Prichard's  Natural  History  of  Han-* 
Aw  oHur  worka  we  have  mt  teen.  We  were  aware  of  the  eonolnsioBS  at  which  hie  mind  had 
arrived,  bnt  not  of  the  proeefis  by  whioh  his  investigatiens  had  besn  pursued."  (p.  804.) 

Now,  as  the  Natoral  History  was  not  published  nntil  IS4S,  it  eonld  hardly  be  the  boeik 
read  '*  some  years  ago"  (prior  to  1S49) ;  especially  as  Dr.  B.  confesses  ignorance  <'of  th« 
prooess,  &a"  [«i^a.]  That  most  have  been  one  of  the  earlier  yolumes  of  the  Phynetd 
Retearehetf  commenced  in  1S12,  probably  the  very  first,  which  leaves  the  snbject  short  of 
the  point  to  which  Blomenbach  subsequently  brought  it  But  Dr.  B.  assures  us  again,  that 
other  work  of  Prichard  than  the  Natural  History  he  '<  has  never  seen."  Then  he  never  saw 
any,  before  writing  his  own  book  I  His  memory  is  certainly  extremely  vague.  It  is  safi 
to  conclude,  however,  that  he  undertook  to  write  upon  this  difficult  subject  without  the 
diieot  consultation  of  a  single  authority :— the  result  is  what  might  be  readily  anticipated. 

Digitized  by  , -^ 

KEMOIB    OF    SAK^E^    OEORGfi    MORTON.  It 

does  he  speak  de  7u^  sn  basj  as  if,  from  the  height  of  the  pulpit,  he 
was  looking  down  upon  men  immeasurably  removed  from  him  by 
Jus  sacred  office.  This  fitulty  manner  perhaps  results  fr^m  his  pro- 
fession, as  does  his  yerbose  and  declamatory  siyle.  But  this  coned- 
deration  will  not  excuse  the  patronizing  way  in  which  he  addresses 
.^ne  of  higher  ficientifio  rank  than  himself.  He  reminds  l^Iorton  of 
the  counten;raice  he  has  heretcfore  given  him, — ^thathe  even  subscribed 
£>r  his  book !  The  wt&oiTties  relied  upon  by  the  latter  he  treats  with 
supreme  contempt,  individually  and  collectively,  characterizing  them 
^0  pedantic,  antiquated,  and  .^^  musty .^^  All  this  is  carried  through 
in  a  bold,  dashing,  offJiand  way,  calculated  to  impress  forcibly  any 
leader  ignorant  of  the  mattor  under  discussion.  It  argues  the  most 
^eonfident  selfcomplaoency  and  conviction  of  superiority  on  the  part 
jof  the  writer,  and  doubtiess  his  admiring  readers  shared  the  feeling. 
For  a  short  season  there  was  quite  a  jubilation  over  the  assumed 
defeat  of  the  physiciBts. 

But  there  is  an  Italian  provei*b  which  says,  Nbn  sempre  chi  cantando 
viene^  cantando  va!  and  which  Dr.  B.  was  destined  to  illustrate.  To 
his  first  paper  ICorton  replied  in  a  letter  dated  March  80th,  1850,  the 
tone  of  which  is  calm,  dignified,  and  friendly.  He  defends  his  autho- 
rities, accumulates  new  evidence,  and  strengthens  and  defines  his 
position.  This  called  forth  Dr.  B.'s  most  objectionable  letter  of  June 
12th,  1850,  also  published  in  the  Charleston  Journal,  and  in  which 
he  entirely  passes  the  bounds  of  propriety.  No  longer  satisfied  with 
his  poor  attempts  at  wit,  which  consist  almost  exclusively  in  the  use 
of  the  word  "  old"  and  its  synonymes,  he  becomes  denunciatory,  and 
even  abusive.  He  charges  Morton  with  taking  part  in  a  deliberate 
conspiracy,  having  its  ramifications  in  four  cities,  for  tie  overthrow 
of  a  doctrine  ^'nearly  connected  with  the  faith  and  hope  of  the  Chris- 
tian, for  this  world  and  for  eternity.^'  In  another  paragraph,  (p.  507,) 
he  says,  that  infideUty  must  inevitably  spring  up  as  the  consequence 
of  adopting  Morton's  views.  Now,  we  all  know  that  when  gentle- 
men of  Dr.  B.'s  cloth  use  that  word,  they  mean  war  vsque  ad  necem. 
Its  object/is  simply  to  do  mischief  and  give  pain.    It  cannot  injure 

*  Dr.  Bachman's  contempt  for  eyerytbing  "  old*'  is  certaiDlj  Tery  onriou  in  one  so  likely, 
from  calling  and  position,  to  be  particolarly  conservative.  Nor  is  this  his  only  singularity. 
His  pertinaoioos  ascription  of  a  remote  date  to  every  one  whose  name  has  a  Latinized 
termination,  reminds  one  of  the  story  told  of  the  backwoods  lawyer,  who  persisted  in 
numbering  *<  old  Cantimrides"  among  the  sages  of  antiquity.  He  is  particularly  hard  npon 
<*  old  Hellenius,"  never  failing  to  give  him  a  passing  flont,  and  talking  about  raising  his 
ghost  The  writings  of  Dr.  B.  do  not  indicate  a  very  sensitive  person,  yet  even  he  must 
have  felt  a  considerable  degree  of  the  sensation  known  as  culit  anterina,  when  he  receivea 
the  information,  conveyed  in  Morton's  quietest  manner,  that  "  old  Hellenius,"  with  others 
of  his  so-called  <<  musty*'  authorities,  were  his  own  contemporaries !  The  work  of  Chevreul, 
which  he  disposes  of  in  the  same  supereilious  wny,  bears  the  extreme  date  of  1S46 1 

Digitized  by 

Google 

Ivi  MEICOIB    OF    SAMUEL    GEORGE    MORTON. 

the  person  attacked,  so  far  as  the  scientific  world  is  concerned  —  for 
there  the  phrase  can  now  only  excite  a  smile — but  it  may  impair  his 
business  or  his  public  standing,  or,  still  worse,  it  may  enter  his  do- 
mestic circle,  and  wound  him  through  his  tenderest  sympathies. 
Was  such  the  intention  in  the  present  case  ?  Charity  bids  us  think 
otherwise ;  and  yet  the  attack  has  a  very  malignant  appearance.  To 
Morton  it  occasioned  great  surprise  and  pain.  He  answered  it  calmly 
in  a  paper  in  the  same  Journal,  entitled  Additional  Observationsy  kc. 
He  is  unwavering  in  the  assertion  of  his  opinion ;  and,  inasmuch  as 
its  triumphant  establishment  would  be  his  own  best  justification,  he 
piles  up  still  more  and  more  evidence,  often  from  the  highest  autho- 
rities in  I^atural  Histoiy.  The  personalities  of  Dr.  B.  he  meets  and 
refutes  briefly,  but  with  firmness  and  dignity,  declining  entirely  to 
allow  himself  to  be  provoked  into  a  bandying  of  epithets.  His  con- 
duct was  in  striking  contrast  with  that  of  his  reverend  opponent ; 
and,  while  it  exalted  him  in  the  estimation  of  the  learned  everywhere, 
showed  the  latter  to  be  a  stranger  to  the  courtesies  that  should 
characterize  scientific  discussion.  More  of  a  theological  polemic  than 
a  naturalist,  he  uses  the  tone  and  style  proverbially  displayed  by  the 
former,  and  is  offensive  accordingly.  He  has  his  punishment  in 
general  condemnation  and  impair^  scientific  standing.  In  the 
mean  time,  Morton  was  stimulated  to  a  determination  to  exhaust 
whatever  material  there  was  accessible  in  regard  to  Hybridity.  Dr. 
Bachman  he  dropped  entirely  after  the  second  letter;  but  he  an- 
nounced to  his  friends  his  intention  of  sending  an  article  regularly 
for  each  successive  number  of  the  Charleston  Journal,  so  long  as  new 
matter  presented.  Two  only  of  these  supplementaiy  communications 
appeared,  the  last  being  dated  January  31st,  1851. 

But  the  solemn  termination  of  all  these  labors  waa  near  at  hand. 
Never  had  Morton  been  so  busy  as  in  that  spring  of  1861.  His  pro- 
fessional engagements  had  largely  increased,  and  occupied  most  of 
his  time.  His  qraniological  investigations  were  prosecuted  with  un- 
abated zeal,  and  he  had  recentiy  made  important  accessions  to  his 
collection.  He  was  actively  engaged  in  the  study  of  Archseology, 
Egyptian,  Assyrian,  and  American,  as  collateral  to  his  favorite  sub- 
ject. His  researches  upon  Hybridity  cost  him  much  labor,  in  his 
.extended  comparison  of  authorities,  and  his  industrious  search  for 
&cts  bearing  on  the  question.  In  addition  to  all  this,  he  was  occu- 
pied with  the  preparation  of  his  contribution  to  the  work  of  Mr. 
Schoolcraft,  and  of  several  minor  papers.  Most  of  these  labors  were 
left  incomplete.  The  fragments  published  in  this  volume  will  show 
how  his  mind  was  engaged,  and  to  what  conclusions  it  tended  at  the 
close.  For  it  was  now,  in  the  midst  of  toil  and  useftilness,  that  he 
was  called  away  from  us.    Five  days  of  illness  —  not  considered 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 

MEMOIR    OF    SAMUEL    GEORGE    MORTON.  Ivli 

alarming  at  first — ^had  scarcely  prepared  his  friends  for  the  sad  event, 
when  it  was  announced,  on  the  16th  of  May,  that  Morton  was  no  more ! 
It  was  too  true  —  he  had  left  vacant  among  us  a  place  that  cannot 
soon  be  filled.  Peacefully  and  calmly  he  had  gone  to  his  eternal  rest, 
having  accomplished  so  much  in  his  shoil;  space  of  life,  and  yet 
leaving  so  much  undone,  that  none  but  he  could  do  as  well ! 

So  lived  and  so  died  our  lamented  friend.  While  we  deplore  his 
loss,  however,  we  cannot  but  perceive  that  few  men  have  been  more 
blessed  in  life  than  he.  His  career  waa  cin  eminently  prosperous  and 
successftd  one.  Very  few  have  ever  been  so  uniformly  successful  in 
their  enterprises.  He  established,  with  unusual  rapidity,  a  wide- 
spread scientific  fame,  upon  the  white  radiance  of  which  he  has, 
dying,  left  not  a  single  blot.  His  life  was  also  a  fortunate  and  happy 
one  in  its  more  private  relations.  His  first  great  grief  came  upon 
him,  precisely  a  year  before  his  own  decease,  in  the  loss  of  a  beloved 
son,  to  whom  he  was  tenderly  attached.  No  other  cloud  than  this 
obscured  his  clear  horizon  to  the  last.  That  he  felt  it  deeply  there 
can  be  no  doubt ;  but  he  had,  at  his  heart's  core,  the  sentiment  that 
can  rob  sorrow  of  its  bitterness,  and  death  of  its  sting.  To  that  seYi- 
timent  he  has  given  utterance  in  these  lines ;  and,  with  their  quotation, 
I  conclude  this  notice,  the  preparation  of  which  has  been  to  me  a 
labor  of  love,  and  the  solace,  for  a  season,  of  a  bed  of  suffering. 

Jan.  1854.  H.  S.  P. 

What  art  thoa,  world !  with  thy  beguiliDg  dreamB, 

Thjr  banquets  and  carousals,  pomp  and  pride  I 
What  is  thy  gayest  moment,  when  it  teems 

With  pleasures  won,  or  prospects  yet  untried? 
What  are  thy  honors,  titles  and  renown, 

Thy  brightest  pageant,  and  thy  noblest  sway? 
Alas!  like  flowers  beneath  the  tempest's  frown, 

They  bloom  at  mom, — at  eve  they  fade  away  t 
A  few  short  years  reToWe,  and  then  no  more 

Can  Memory  rouse  them  from  their  resting-place ; 
The  Joys  we  courted,  and  the  hopes  we  bore, 

Have  pass'd  like  shadows  from  our  fond  embrace. 
But  is  there  nought,  amid  the  fearful  doom, 

That  can  outlast  the  wreck  of  mortal  things  T 
There  is  a  spirit  that  does  not  consume, 

But  mounts  o'er  ruin  with,  triumphant  wings. 
And  thou,  Religion  1  like  a  guardian  star 

Dost  glitter  in  the  firmament  on  high, 
And  lead'st  us  still,  tho'  we  have  wander'd  fkr, 

To  hopes  that  cheer,  and  joys  that  nerer  diet 
And  if  an  erring  pilgrim  on  his  way 

Casts  but  a  pure,  a  suppliant  glance  to  HeaTen, 
*'  Fear  not — benighted  child*' — ^he  hears  thee  say— 

*<  For  they  are  doubly  blest  that  are  forgiven  I " 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 

& 

SKETCH 

NATURAL  PROVINCES  OF  THE  ANDCAL' WORLD  AND  THEIR  RELATION 
TO  TraE  DIFFERENT  TTPES  OF  MAN. 

BT    LOUIfl    JlOIlSSIS. 

llMtrs.  NoTT  and  Gliddoh. 

Dear  Sirt: — In  ooiiipliane«  wHh  your  request  that  I^shoald  ftuniflli  yoa  with  certain 
Bcie&tifio  facts  respecting  the  Natural  History  of  Man,  to  which  you  are  now  deroting  par- 
ticularly your  attention,  I  transmit  to  you  some  general  remarks  npon  the  natural  relations 
of  the  human  family  and  the  organic  world  surrounding  it ;  in  the  hope  that  it  may  call 
the  attention  of  naturalists  to  the  dose  eormeetum  then  ia  between  ike  geographU(d  diHribuHon 
iff  animaU  and  the  natural  bowtdariee  of  the  deferent  raeee  of  man  -4-  a  iVtet  which  must  be 
explained  by  any  theory  of  the  origin  of  life  iHiich  claims  to  coyer  the  whole  of  this  diffi- 
cult problem.  I  do  not  pretend  to  present  such  a  theory  now,  but  would  simply  illustrate 
the  facts  as  they  are,  to  lay  the  foundation  of  a  more  extensiye  work  to  be  puUished  at 
some  future  time.  Nor  is  it  my  intention  to  characterize  here  all  the  zoological  provinces 
recognized  by  naturalists,  but  only  those  the  animals  of  which  are  known  with  sufficient 
accuracy  to  throw  light  upon  the  sulifject  under  consideration.  Of  the  marine  animals,  I 
shall  therefore  take  no  notice,  except  so  far  as  they  bear  a  special  relation  to  the  habits 
of  uncivilized  races  or  to  the  commercial  enterprise  of  the  world.  The  views  illustrated 
in  the  following  pages  have  been  expressed  for  the  first  time  by  me  in  a  paper,  published 
in  French,  in  the  Revue  Sutete  for  1845. 

Very  truly,  jroiOB, 

Ls.  Agassis. 

Cambridge,  Mass.,  Dec.  19th,  1858. 

There  is  one  feature  in  the  physical  history  of  mankind  which  has 
been  entirely  neglected  by  those  who  have  studied  this  subject,  viz., 
the  natural  relations  between  the  different  ^ypes  of  man  and  the 
animals  and  plants  inhabiting  the  same  regions.  The  sketch  here 
presented  is  intended  to  supply  this  deficiency,  as  far  as  it  is  possible 
in  a  mere  outline  delineation,  and  to  show  that  the  boundaries,  within 
which  the  different  natural  combinationM  of  animaU  are  known  to  be 
eircuTMcribed  upon  the  surface  of  our  earth,  coincide  with  the  natural 
range  of  distinct  types  of  man.  Such  natural  combinations  of  animals 
circumscribed  within  definite  boundaries  are  called  faunee,  whatever 

Digitized  by  VjTyOQlC 

PRoyracBS  OF  the  jinimal  -woblix,  «tc.        lix 

be  their  home  •*- land,  sea,  or  river.  Among  the  animals  which  com- 
pose  the  fauna  of  a  country,  we  find  types  belonging  exclusively 
there,  and  not  occurring  elsewhere ;  such  are,  iGar  example,  the  omi- 
thorhynchus  of  New  Holland,  the  sloths  of  America,  the  hippopota- 
mus of  Africa,  and  the  walruses  of  the  arctics :  others,  which  have 
only  a  small  number  of  representatives  beyond  the  feuna  which  they 
specially  characterize,  as,  for  instance,  the  marsupials  of  New  Hol- 
land, of  which  America  has  a  few  species,  such  as  the  opossum ;  and 
again  others  which  have  a  wider  range,  such  as  the  bears^  of  which 
there  are  distinct  species  in  Europe,.  Asia,  or  America,  or  the  mice 
and  bats,  which  are  to  be  found  all  over  the  world,  except  in  the 
arctics.  That  fauna  will,  therefbre,  be  most  easily  characterised 
which  possesses  the  largest  number  of  distinct  types,  proper  to  itself, 
and  of  which  the  other  animsds  have  little  analogy  with  those  of 
neighboring  regions,  as,  for  example,  the  fauna  of  New  Holland. 

The  inhabitants  of  fresh  waters  furnish  also  excellent  characters 
for  the  .circumscription  of  fanned.  The  fishes,  and  other  fluviatile 
animab  from  the  larger  h^'drographic  basins,  differ  no  less  from  each 
other  than  the  mammalia,  the  birds,  the  reptiles,  and  the  insects  of 
the  countries  which  ^Jiese  rivers  water.  Neverflieless^  some  authors 
have  attempted  to  separate  the  fresh  water  animals  from  those  of  the 
limd  and  sea^  and  to  establish  distinct  divisions  for  them,  under  the 
name  of  fluviatile  faunsd^  But  the  inhabitants  of  the  rivers  and 
lakes  are  too  intimately  connected  with  those  of  their  shores  to  allow 
of  a  rigorous  distinction  of  this  kind.  Rivers  never  establish  a  sepa* 
ration  between  terrestrial  faun»«  For  the  same  reason,  the  faunse  of 
the  inland  seas  cannot  be  completely  isolated  from  the  terrestrial 
ones,  and  we  shall  see  here^ter  that  the  animals  of  southern  Europe 
are  not  bound  by  the  Mediterranean,  but  are  fi>und  on  the  southern 
shore  of  that  sea^  as  &r  as  the  Atlas*  ^Ve  shall,  therefore,  distin- 
guish our  zoological  regions  according  to  -the  combination  of  species 
which  they  enclose^  ratJbk^  than  according  to  the  element  in  which 
we  find  them* 

If  the  grand  divisions  of  the  animal  kingdom  are  primordial  and 
independent  of  climate,  this  is  net  the  caae  with  regard  to  the  Tilti- 
mate  local  circumscription  of  species:  these  are,  on  the  contrary, 
intimately  connected  with  the  conditions  of  temperature,  soil,  and 
vegetation.  A  remarkable  instance  of  this  distribution  of  animals 
with  reference  to  climate  may  be  observed  in  the  arctic  &una,  which 
contains  a  great  number  of  species  common  to  the  three  continents 
converging  towards  the  North  Pole,  and  which  presents  a  striking 
uniformity,  when  compared  with  the  diversity  of  the  temperate  and 
tropical  faunse  of  those  same  continents. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

Ix  PROVINCES  OP  THE  ANIMAL  WORLD 

The  arctic  fi&una  extends  to  the  utmost  limits  of  the  cold  and  bar- 
ren regions  of  the  North.  But  from  the  moment  that  forests  appear, 
and  a  more  propitious  soil  permits  a  larger  development  of  animal 
life  and  of  vegetation,*  we  see  the  fauna  and  flora,  not  only  diversified 
according  to  the  continents  on  which  they  exist,  but  we  observe  also 
striking  distinctions  between  different  parts  of  the  same  continent ; 
thus,  in  the  old  world,  the  animals  vary,  not  only  from  the  polar 
circle  to  the  equator,  but  also  in  the  opposite  direction  —  those  of  the 
western  coast  of  Europe  are  not  the  same  as  those  of  the  basin  of  the 
Caspian  Sea,  or  of  the  eastern  coast  of  Asia,  nor  are  those  of  the 
eastern  coast  of  America  the  same  as  those  of  the  western. 

The  first  fauna,  the  limits  of  which  we  would  determine  with  pre- 
cision, is  the  arctic.  It  offers,  as  we  have  just  seen,  the  same  aspects 
in  three  parts  of  the  world,  which  converge  towards  the  North  Pole, 
The  uniform  distribution  of  the  animals  by  which  it  is  inhabited 
forms  its  most  striking  character,  and  gives  rise  to  a  sameness  of 
general  features  which  is  not  found  in  any  other  region.  Though  the 
air-breathing  species  are  not  numerous  here,  the  large  number  of 
individuals  compensates  for  this  deficiency,  and  among  the  marine 
animals  we  find  an  astonishing  profrision  and  variety  of  forms. 

In  this  respect  the  vegetable  and  animal  kingdoms  differ  entirely 
fi^m  each  other,  and  the  measure  by  which  we  estimate  the  former 
is  quite  Mse  as  applied  to  the  latter.  Plants  become  stunted  in  their 
growth  or  disappear  before  the  rigors  of  the  climate,  while,  on  the 
contrary,  all  classes  of  the  animal  kingdom  have  representatives, 
more  or  less  numerous,  in  the  arctic  &una. 

Neither  can  they  be  said  to  diminish  in  size  under  these  influences ; 
for,  if  the  arctic  representatives  of  certain  classes,  particularly  the 
insects,  are  smaller  than  the  analogous  types  in  the  tropics,  we  must 
not  forget,  on  the  other  hand,  th^t  the  whales  and  larger  cetacea 
have  here  theirTuost  genial  home,  and  make  amends,  by  their  more 
powerful  structure,  for  the  inferiority  of  other  classes.  Also,  if  the 
animals  of  the  North  are  less  striking  in  external  ornament — if  their 
colors  are  less  brilliant — yet  we  cannot  say  that  they  are  more 
uniform,  for  though  their  tints  are  not  so  bright,  they  are  none  the 
less  varied  in  their  distribution  and  arrangement 

The  limits  of  the  arctic  fituna  are  veiy  easily  traced.  We  must 
include  therein  all  animals  living  beyond  the  line  where  forests  cease, 
and  inhabiting  countries  entirely  barren.  Those  which  feed  upon 
flesh  seek  fishes,  hares,  or  lemmings,  a  rodent  of  the  size  of  our  rat. 
Those  which,  live  on  vegetable  substances  are  not  numerous.  Some 
gramineous  plants,  mosses,  and  lichens,  serve  as  pasture  to  the  rumi- 
nants and  rodents,  while  the  seeds  of  a  few  flowering  plants,  and 

Digitized  by 

Google 

AND  THEIR  RELATION  TO  TYPES  OP  MAN  hd 

of  the  dwarf  birches,  afford  nourishment  to  the  little  granivorous 
birds,  such  as  linnets  and  buntings.  The  species  belonging  to  the 
sea-shore  feed  upon  marine  animals,  which  live,  themselves,  upon 
each  other,  or  upon  marine  plants. 

The  larger  mammalia  which  inhabit  this  zone  are — the  white 
bear,  the.  walrus,  numerous  species  of  seal,  the  reindeer,  the  musk 
ox,  the  narwal,  the  cachalot,  and  whales  in  abundance.  Among  the 
smaller  species  we  may  mention  the  white  fox,  the  polar  hare,  and 
the  lemming.  The  birds  are  not  less  characteristic.  Some  marine 
eagles,  and  wading  birds  in  smaller  number,  are  found;  but  the 
aquatic  birds  of  the  femily  of  palmipedes  are  those  which  especially 
prevail.  The  coasts  of  the  continents  and  of  the  numerous  islands 
in  the  arctic  seas  are  peopled  by  clouds  of  gannets,  of  cormorants, 
of  penguins,  of  petrels,  of  ducks,  of  geese,  of  mergansers,  and  of 
gulls,  some  of  which  are  as  large  as  eagles,  and,  like  them,  live  on 
prey.  No  reptile  is  known  in  this  zone.  Fishes  are,  however,  very 
numerous,  and  the  rivers  especially  swarm  with  a  variety  of  species 
of  the  salmon  fEanily.  A  number  of  representatives  of  the  inferior 
classes  of  worms,  of  Crustacea,  of  moUusks,  of  echinoderms,  and  of 
mousse,  are  also  found  here. 

fWiOnu  the  limits  of  this  fauna  we  meet  a  peculiar  race  of  men, 
known  in  America  under  the  name  of  Esquimaux^and  under  the 
names  of  Laplanders,  Samojedes,  and  Tchuktshes  m  the  north  of 
Asia.    This  race,  so  well  known  since  the  voyi^e  of  Capt  Cook  and 
the  arctic  expeditions  of  England  and  Bussia, (differs  alike  from  the 
Indians  of  North  America,  from  the  whites  of  Europe,  and  the  Mon- 
gols of  Asia,  to  whom  they  are  adjacent)    The  uniformity  of  their  ) 
characters  along  the  whole  range  of  the  arctic  seas  forms  one  of  the  . 
most  striking  resemblances  which  these  people  exhibit  to  the  &una ' . 
with  which  they  are  so  closely  connected.  *^ 

The  semi-annual  alternation  of  day  and  night  in  the  arctic  regions 
has  a  great  influence  upon  their  modes  of  living.  They  are  entirely 
dependent  upon  animal  food  for  their  sustenance,  no  farinaceous 
grains,  no  nutritious  tubercles,  no  juicy  fruits,  growing  under  those 
inhospitable  latitudes.  Their  domesticated  animals  are  the  reindeer 
in  Asia,  and  a  peculiar  variety  of  dog,  the  Esquimaux  dog,  in  JETorth 
America,  where  even  the?  reindeer  is  not  domesticated. 

Though  the  arctic  fauna  is  essentially  comprised  in  the  arctic  circle, 
its  organic  limit  does  not  correspond  rigorously  to  this  line,  but 
rather  to  the  isotherme  of  82**  Fahr.,  the  outline  of  which  presents 
numerous  undulations.  This  limit  is  still  more  natural  when  it  is 
made  to  correspond  with  that  of  the.  disappearance  of  forests.  It 
then  circumscribes  those  immense  plains  of  the  Forth,  which  the 
Bamoyedes  call  tundrat,  and  the  Anglo-Americans,  iarren  land$. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 

bm  BROTIirCXS   OF  THS^  ilK CUJIL.  VTOBXD,. 

The  nataralistBy  w!io  have  orerlbokcd  this  &mia,  and  connected  it 
with  those  of  the  temperate  zone,  have  introduced  much  confusion  in 
tiie  geographical  distribution  of  animals,  and  have  Mled  to  recognize 
the  remarkable  coincidence  existing  between  the  extensive  range  of 
/the  arctic  race  of  men^  and  the  uniformitp^  of  the  axumal  world  around 
the  Northern  Pole* 

The  first  column  of  the  accompanying  tableau  r^reeents  the  types 
which  characterize  best  this  fauna ;  viz^  the  white  or  polar  bear,  liM 
walrus,  the  seal  of  Greenland,  the  reindeer,  Ihe  right  whale,  and  the 
eider  duck.  The  vegetation  is  represented  by  the  so-ealled  reindeer^ 
moss,  a  lichen  which  constitutes  the  chief  food  of  the  herbivorous 
animals  of  the  arctics  and  the  high  Alps,  during  winter. 

To  the  glacial  zone,,  which  incloses  a  single  fauna,  succeeds  the 
temperate  zone,,  included  between  the  isothermes  of  32^,  and  74^ 
Fahr.,  characterised  by  its  pine  forests,  its  amentacea,  its  maples,  its 
walnuts,  and  its  fruit  trees,  and  from  the  midst  of  which  anse  like 
islands,  lofty  mountain  chains  or  high  table-lands,  clothed  with  a 
vegetation  which,  in  many  respects,  recalls  that  of  the  glacial  regions. 
The  geographici^  distribution  of  animals  in  tiiia  zone,  forms  several 
closely  connected,  but  distinct  combinations.  It  is  the  country  of  the 
terrestrial  bear,  of  the  wolf,  the  fox,  the  weasel,  the  marten,  the  otter, 
tiie  lynx,  the  horse  and  the  ass,  the  boar,  and  a  great  number  of 
stags,  deer,  elk,  goats,  sheep,  bulls,  hares,  squirrels,  rats,  &c. ;  to 
which  are  added  soutiiward,  a  few  representatives  of  the  tropical 
aone. 

Wherever  this  zone  is  not  modified  by  extensive  and  high  table- 
lands and  mountain  chains,  we  may  distinguish  in  it  four  secondary 
zones,  approximating  gradually  to  the  character  of  the  tropics,  and 
presenting  therefore  a  greater  diversity  in  the  types  of  its  southern 
representation  than  we  &ad  among  those  -of  its  northern  boundaries. 
We  have  first,  adjoining  the  arctics,  a  sttb-arcttc  zone,  with  an  almost 
uniform  appearance  in  the  old  as  well  as  the  new  worid,  in  which 
pine  forests  prevail,  the  home  of  the  moose ;  next,  a  cold  temperate 
zane^  in  which  amentaceous  trees  are  combined  with  pines,  the  home 
of  the  fur  animals ;  next,  a  warm  temperate  zoncy  in  which  the  pines 
recede,  whilst  to  the  prevailing  amentaceous  trees  a  variety  of  ever- 
greens are  added,  the  chief  seat  of  the  culture  of  our  fruit  trees,  .and 
of  the  wheat ;  and  a  mb-tropical  zoncy  in  which  a  number  of  tropical 
forms  are  combined  with  those  characteristic  of  the  warm  temperate 
zone.  Yet  there  is  throughout  the  whole  of  the  temperate  zone  one 
feature  prevailing ;  the  repetition,  under  corresponding  latitudes,  but 
under  diflferent  longitudes,  of  the  same  genera  and  families,  repre- 
sented m  each  botanical  or  zoological  proviAce  by  distinct  so-called 

Digitized  by 

Google 

AND   THEIR    RELATION   90   TYPES   OF   MAN.  Ixiii 

analogous  or  repre%entat%ve  speoiea^  with  a  very  few  subordinate  types, 
peculiar  to  each  province ;  for  it  is  not  until  we  reach  the  tropical 
zone  that  we  find  distinct  types  prevailing  in  each  fauna  and  flora. 
Again,  owing  to  the  inequalities  of  the  sur£arce,  the  secondary  zones 
are  more  or  less  blended  into  one  another,  as  for  instance,  in  the 
table-lands  of  Central  Asia,  and  Western  North  America,  where  the 
whole  temperate  zone  preserves  the  features  of  a  cold  temperate  re- 
gion; or  the  colder  zones  may  appear  like  islands  rising  in  the  midst 
of  the  warmer  ones,  as  the  Pyrenees,  the  Alps,  &c.,  the  summits  of 
which  partake  of  the  peculiarities  of  the  arctic  and  sub-arctic  zones, 
whilst  the  valleys  at  their  base  are  characterised  by  the  flora  and 
feuna  of  the  cold  or  warm  temperate  zones.  It  may  be  prop^  to 
remark,  in  this  connection,  that  the  study  of  the  laws  regulating  the 
geographical  distribution  of  natural  fetmilies  of  animak  and  plants 
upon  the  whole  surfiace  of  our  globe  differs,  entirely,  fix)m  that  of  the 
associations  and  combinations  of  a  variety  of  animals  and  plants^ 
within  definite  regions,  forming  peculiar  fitunse  and  flora. 

Considering  the  whole  range  of  the  temperate  zone  from  east  to 
west,  we  may  divide  it  in  accordance  with  the  prevailing  physical 
features  into  —  1st,  an  ^ato^  realm,  embracing  Mantchuria,  Japan,, 
China,  Mongolia,  and  passing  through  Turkestan  into  2d,  the  JEuro^ 
pean  realm,  which  includes  Iran  as  well  as  Asia  Minor,  Mesopotamia,, 
northern  Arabia  and  Bar'bary,  as  well  as  Europe,  properly  so  called ;. 
the  western  parts  of  ALsia,  and  the  northern  parts  of  Africa  being 
intimately  connected  by  their  geological  structure  with  the  southem 
parts  of  Europe ;  *  and,  3d,  the  North  American  realm,  which  Qxiiends 
as  far  south  as  the  table-land  of  Mexico. 

With  these  qualifications,  we  may  proceed  to  consider  th&  ftiiinsB 
which  characterize  these  three  realms.  But,  before  studying  the  or- 
ganic characters  of  this  zone,  let  us  glance  at  its  physical  constitulaon. 
The  most  marked  character  of  the  temperate  zone  is  found  in  the 
inequality  of  the  four  seasons,  which  give  to  the  earth  a  peculiar 
aspect  in  different  epochs  of  the  year,  and  in  the  gradual,  though 
more  or  less  rapid  passage  of  these  seasons  into*  each  other.  The 
v^etation  particularly  undergoes  marked  modifications;  completely 
arrested,  or  merely  suspended,  for  a  longer  or  shorter  time,  according 
to  the  proximity  of  the  arctic  or  the  tropical  zone,  we  find  it  by 
turns  in  a  prolonged  lethargy,  or  in  a  state  of  energetic  and  sustained 
development.  But  in  this  respect  there  is  a  decided  contrast  between 
the  cold  and  warm  portions  of  the  temperate  zone.    Though  they 

*  For  further  eridence  that  Iran,  Asia  Minor,  Mesopotamia^  Northern  Arabia  and 
Northern  Africa,  belong  naturally  to  the  European  realm,  see  Qvyoi*9  Earth  and  Man. 
5 

Digitized  by 

Google 

bdv       PROVINCES  OP  THE  ANIMAL  WORLD 

are  both  characterized  by  the  predominance  of  the  same  families  of 
plants,  and  in  particular  by  the  presence  of  numerous  species  of  the 
coniferous  and  amentaceous  plants,  yet  the  periodical  sleep  which 
deprives  the  middle  latitudes  of  their  verdure,  is  more  complete  in  the 
colder  regidn  than  in  the  warmer,  which  is  already  enriched  by  some 
southern  forms  of  vegetation,  and  where  a  part  of  the  trees  remain 
green  all  the  year.  The  succession  of  the  seasons  produces,  more- 
over, such  considerable  changes  in  the  climatic  conditions  in  this 
zone,  that  all  the  animals  belonging  to  it  cannot  sustain  them  equally 
well.  Hence  a  large  number  of  them  migrate  at  different  seasons 
from  one  extremity  of  the  zone  to  the  other,  especially  certain  fami- 
lies of  birds.  It  is  known  to  all  the  world  that  the  birds  of  If  orthem 
Europe  and  America  leave  their  ungenial  clittiate  in  the  winter,  seek- 
ing wacmer  regions  as  far  as  the  Gulf  of  Mexico  and  the  Mediterra- 
nean, the  shores  of  which,  even  those  of  the  African  coasts,  make  a 
part  of  the  temperate  zone.  Analogous  migrations  take  place  also 
in  the  north  of  Asia.  Such  migrations  are  not,  hQwever,  limited  to 
the  temperate  zone ";  a  number  of  species  from  the  arctic  regions  go 
for  the  winter  into  the  temperate  zone,  and  the  limits  of  these  migra- 
tions may  aid  us  in  tracing  the  natural  Hmits  of  the  faunae,  which  thus 
link  themselves  to  each  other,  as  the  human  races  are  connected  by 
civilizatioii. 

The  temperate  zone  is  not  <^aracterized,  like  the  arctic,  by  one  and 
the  same  fauna ;  it  does  not  form,  as  the  arctic  does,  one  continuous 
zoological  zone  around  the  globe.  Not  only  do  the  animals  change 
from  one  hemisphere  to  another,  but  these  differences  exist  even  be- 
tween various  regions  of  the  same  hemisphere.  The  species  belonging 
to  the  western  countries  of  the  old  world  are  not  identical  with  those 
of  the  eastern  countries.  It  is  true  that  they  often  resemble  each 
other  so  closely,  that  until  very  recently  they  have  been  confounded. 
It  has  been  reserved,  however,  for  modern  zoology  and  botany  to 
detect  these  nice  distinctions.  For  instance,  the  coniferae  of  the  old 
world,  even  within  the  sub-arctic  zone,  are  not  identical  with  those 
of  America.  Instead  of  the  Norway  and  black  pine,  we  have  here 
the  balsam  and  the  white  spruce ;  instead  of  the  common  fir,  the 
PinuB  rigida;  instead  ot  the  European  larch,  the  hacmatac,  &p. ;  and 
farther  south  the  differences  are  still  more  striking.  In  the  temperate 
zone  proper,  the  oaks,  the  beeches,  the  birches,  the  hornbeams,  the 
hophornbeams,  the  chestnuts,  the  buttonwoods,  the  elms,  the  linden, 
the  maples,  and  the  walnuts,  are  represented  in  each  continent  by 
peculiar  species  differing  more  or  less,  vj^eculiar  forms  make,  here 
and  there,  their  appearance,  such  as  the  gum-trees,  the  tulip-trees,  the 
magnolias.    The  evergreens  are  still  more  .diversified, — ^we  need  only 

Digitized  by  Google. 

AND   THEIR   RELATION    TO   TYPES   OP   MAN,  Ixv 

mention  the  camelias  of  Japan,  and  the  kalmias  of  America  sa  exam- 
ples. Among  the  tropical  fonns  extending  into  the  warm  temperate 
zone,  we  notice  particularly  the  palmetto  in  the  southern  United 
States,  and  the  dwarf  chamaerops  of  southern  Europe. .  The  animal 
kingdom  presents  the  same  features.  In  Europe  we  have,  for  in- 
stance, the  brown  bear ;  in  North  America,  the  black  bear ;  in  Asia, 
the  bear  of  Tubet :  the  European  stag,  and  the  European  deer,  are 
represented  in  North  America  by  the  Canadian  stag,  or  wapiti,  and 
the  American  deer ;  and  in  eastern  Asia,  by  the  musk-deer.  Instead 
of  the  mouflon,  North  America  has  the  big-horn  or  mountain  sheep, 
and  Asia  the  argali.  The  North  American  buffalo  is  represented  in 
Europe  by  the  wild  auerochs^  of  Lithuania,  and  in  Mongolia  by  the 
yak ;  the  wild-cats,  the  martens  and  weasels,  the  wolves  and  foxes, 
the  squirrels  and  mice  (excepting  the  imported  house-mouse),  the 
birds,  the  reptiles,  the  fishes,  the  insects,  the  moUusks,  &c.,  though 
more  or  less  closely  allied,  are  equally  distinct  specifically.  The  types 
peculiar  to  the  old  or  the  new  world  are  few ;  among  them  may  be 
mentioned  the  horse  and  ass  and  the  dromedary  of  Asia,  and  the 
opossum  of  North  America ;  but  upon  this  subject  more  details  may 
be  found  in  every  text-book  of  zoology  and  botany.  We  would  only 
add  that  in  the  present  state  of  our  knowledge  we  recognise  the  fol- 
lowing combinations  of  animals  within  the  limits  of  the  temperate 
zone,  which  may  be  considered  as  so  many  distinct  zoological  pro- 
vinces or  faunse. 

In  the  Asiatic  realms  —  1st,  a  north-eastern  fauna,  the  Japanese 
fauna;  2d,  a  south-eastern  fauna,  the  Chinese  fauna^  and  a  central 
fauna,  the  Mongolian  fauna^  followed  westwards  by  the  Caspian 
fauna,  which  partakes  partly  of  the  Asiatic  and  partly  of  ihe  Euro- 
pean zoological  character;  its  most  remarkable  animal,  antelope 
saiga,  ranging  west  as  &r  as  southern  Russia.  The  Japanese  and 
the  Chinese  faunae  stand  to  each  other  in  the  same  relation  as  southern  ^ 
Europe  and  north  Africa,  and  it  remains  to  be  ascertained  by  farther 
investigations  whether  the  Japanese  fauna  ought  not  to  be  subdivided 
into  a  more  eastern  insular  fauna,  the  Japanese  fauna  proper^  and  a 
more  western  continental  fauna,  which  might  be  called  the  Mandshu- 
rian  or  Tongousian  fauna.  But  since  it  is  not  my  object  to  describe 
separately  all  faunse,  but  chiefly  to  call  attention  to  the  coincidence 
existing  between  the  natural  limitation  of  the  races  of  man,  and  the 
geographical  range  of  the  zoological  provinces,  I  shall  limit  myself 
here  to  some  general  remarks  respecting  the  Mongolian  fauna,  in 
order  to  show  that  the  Asiatic  zoological  realm  differs  essentially 
from  the  European  and  the  American.  In  our  Tableau,  the  second 
column  represents  the  most  remarkable  animals  of  this  fauna ;  the 

Digitized  by 

Google 

Ixvi       PKOVINCES  OP  THE  ANIMAL  WORLD 

bear  of  Tubet  (ursue  thibetanus),  the  musk-deer  (moschus  moschiferus), 
the  Tzeiran  (antilope  gatturosa),  the  Mongolian  goat  (capra  sibirica), 
the  argali  (ovis  argali),  and  the  yak  (bos  grunniens).  Thii^  is  also  the 
home  of  the  Bactrian  or  double-hunched  camel,  and  of  the  wild 
horse  (equus  caballus),  the  wild  ass  (equus  onager),  and  another  equine 
species,  the  Dtschigetai  (equus  hemionus).  The  wide  distribution 
of  the  musk-deer  in  the  Altai,  and  the  Himmalayan  and  Chinese 
Alps,  shows  the  whole  Afiiatic  range  of  the  temperate  zone  to 
be  a  most  natural  zoological  realm,  subdivided  into  distinct  pro- 
vinces by  the  greater  localization  of  the  largest  number  of  its  repre- 
sentatives. 

K  we  now  ask  what  are  the  nations  of  men  inhabiting  those  re- 
gions, we  find  that  they  all  belong  to  the  so-called  Mongolian  race, 
the  natural  limits  of  which  correspond  exactly  to  the  range  of  the 
Japanese,  Chinese,  Mongolian  and  Caspian  faunee  taken  together, 
and  that  peculiar  types,  distinct  nations  of  this  race,  cover  respec- 
tively the  different  faunse  of  this  realm.  The  Japanese  inhabiting 
the  Japanese  zoological  province;  the  Chinese,  the  Chinese  pro- 
vince; the  Mongols,  the  Mongolian  province;  and  the  Turks,  the 
Caspian  province ;  eliminating,  of  course,  the  modem  establishment 
of  Turks  in  Asia  Minor  and  Europe. 

The  unity  of  Europe,  (exclusive  of  its  arctic  regions,)  in  connection 
with  soutii^westem  Asia  and  northern  Africa,  as  a  distinct  zoological 
realm,  is  established  by  the  range  of  its  mammalia  and  by  the  limits 
of  the  migrations  of  its  birds,  as  well  as  by  the  physical  features  of 
its  whole  extent.  Thus  we  find  its  deer  and  stag,  its  bear,  its  hare, 
its  squirrel,  its  wolf  and  wild-cat,  its  fox  and  jackal,  its  otter,  its 
weasel  and  marten,  its  badger,  its  bear,  its  mole,  its  hedgehogs,  and 
a  number  of  bats,  either  extending  over  the  whole  realm  in  Europe, 
western  Asia,  and  north  Afiica,  or  so  linked  together  as  to  show  that 
in  their  combination  with  the  birds,  reptiles,  fishes,  &c.,  of  the  same 
countries,  they  constitute  a  natural  zoological  association  analogous 
to  that  of  Asia,  but  essentially  different  in  reference  to  species.  Like 
the  eastern  realm,  this  European  world  may  be  sub-divided  into  a 
number  of  distinct  faunse,  characterized  each  by  a  variety  of  peculiar 
animals.  In  western  Asia  we  find,  for  instance,  the  common  camel, 
instead  of  the  Bactrian,  whilst  Mount  Sinai,  Mounts  Taurus  and 
Caucasus  have  goats  and  wild  sheep  which  diflFer  as  much  fi^m  those 
of  Asia,  as  they  difter  from  those  of  Greece,  of  Italy,  of  the  Alps, 
of  the  Pyrenees-,  of  the  Atlas,  and  of  Egypt.  Wild  horses  are 
known  to  have  inhabited  Spain  and  Germany ;  and  a  wild  bull  ex- 
tended over  the  whole  range  of  central  Europe,  which  no  longer 
exists  there.    The  Asiatic  origin  of  our  domesticated  animals  may. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

AND  THEIR  RELATION  TO  TYPES  OP  MAN  Ixvii 

therefore,  well  be  questioned,  even  if  we  were  still  to  refer  western 
Asia  to  the  Asiatic  realm ;  since  the  ass,  and  some  of  the  breeds  of 
our  horse,  only  belong  to  the  table-lands  of  Iran  and  Mongolia,  whilst 
the  other  species,  including  the  cat,  may  all  be  traced  to  species  of 
the  European  realm.  The  domesticated  cat  is  referred  by  Riippell  to 
felis  maniculata  of  Egypt;  by  others,  to  felis  catus  ferus  of  central 
Europe ;  thus,  in  both  cases,  to  an  animal  of  the  European  realm. 
Whether  the  dog  be  a  species  by  itself,  or  its  varieties  derived  from 
several  species  which  have  completely  amalgamated,  or  be  it  descended 
from  the  wolf,  Ihe  fox,  or  the  jackal,  every  theory  must  Hmit  its  natural 
range  to  the  European  world.  The  merino  sheep  is  still  represented 
in  the  wild  state  by  the  mouflon  of  Sardinia,  and  was  formerly  wild  in 
all  tiie  mountains  of  Spain ;  whether  the  sheep  of  the  patriarchs  were 
derived  from  those  of  Mt  Taurus,  or  fit)m  Armenia,  still  they  differed 
from  those  of  western  Europe ;  since,  a  thousand  years  before  our 
era,  the  Phoenicians  preferred  the  wool  fi^m  the  Iberian  peninsula  to 
that  of  their  Syrian  neighbours.  The  goats  differ  so  much  in  different 
parts  of  the  world,  that  it  is  still  less  possible  to  refer  them  to  one 
common  stock;  and  while •Nepaul  and  Caahmere  have  their  own 
breeds,  we  may  well  consider  those  of  Egypt  and  Sinai  as  distinct, 
especially  as  they  differ  equally  from  those  of  Caucasus  and  of 
Europe.  The  common  bull  is  derived  from  the  wild  species  which 
has  become  extinct  in  Europe,  and  is  not  identical  with  any  of  Ihe 
wild  species  of  Asia,  notwithstanding  some  assertions  to  the  contrary. 
The  hog  descends  fi^m  the  common  boar,  now  found  wild  over  the 
whole  temperate  zone  in  the  Old  World.  Both  ducks  and  geese 
have  their  wild  representatives  in  Europe ;  so  also  the  pigeon.  As 
for  the  common  fowls,  they  are  decidedly  of  east  Asiatic  origin ;  but 
the  period  of  their  importation  is  not  well  known,  nor  even  the  wild 
species  fit)m  which  they  are  derived.  The  wild  turkey  is  well  known 
as  an  inhabitant  of  the  American  continent. 

Now,  taking  further  into  account  the  special  distribution  of  all  the 
animals,  wild  as  well  as  domesticated,  of  the  European  temperate 
zone.  We  may  sub-divide  it  into  the  following  eight  faunae:  —  1st, 
Scandinavian  fauna;  2d,  Russian  fauna ;  3d,  27ie  fauna  of  Central 
Europe;  4th,  The  fauna  of  Southern  Europe;  5th,  The  fauna  of 
Iran ;  6th,  The  Syrian  fauna ;  7th,  The  Egyptian  fauna ;  and  8th, 
The  fauna  of  the  Atlas.  The  special  works  upon  the  zoology  of 
Europe,  the  great  works  illustrative  of  the  French  expeditions  in 
Egypt,  Morocco,  and  Algiers,  the  travels  of  Ruppell  and  Russeger  in 
Egypt  and  Syria,  of  M.  Wagner  in  Algiers,  of  Demidoff  in  southern 
Russia,  &c.  &c.,  and  the  special  treatises  on  the  geographical  distribu- 
tion of  mammalia  by  A.  Wagner,  and  of  animals  in  general  by 

Digitized  by 

Google 

Ixviii  PROVINCES   OF    THE    ANIMAL   WORLD 

Schmarda,  may  furnish  more  details  upon  the  zoology  of  these 

countries. 

^    Here,  again,  it  cannot  escape  the  attention  of  the  careful  observer, 

that  the  European  zoological  realm  is  circumscribed  within  exactly 

^  the  same  limits  as  the  so-called  white  race  of  man,  includinjej,  as  it 
does,  the  inhabitants  of  south-western  Asia,  and  of  north  Africa, 
with  the  lower  parts  of  the  valley  of  the  Nile.  "We  exclude,  of 
course,  modem  migrations  and  historical  changes  of  habitation  from 
this  assertion.  Our  statements  are  to  be  und.erstood  aa  referring  only 
to  the  aboriginal  or  ante-historical  distribution  of  man,  or  rather  to 
the  distribution  as  history  finds  it.  And  in  this  respect  there  is  a 
singular  fact,  which  historians  seem  not  to  have  sufficiently  appre- 
ciated, that  the  earliest  migrations  recorded,  in  any  form,  shgw  us 
man  meeting  man,  wherever  he  moves  upon  the  inhabitable  surface 
of  the  globe,  si^iall  islands  excepted. 

It  is,  farther,  very  striking,  that  the  diflferent  sub-divisions  of  this 
race,  even  to  the  limits  of  distinct  nationalities,  cover  precisely  the 

:   same  ground  as  the  special  faunse  or  zoological  provinces  of  this  most 

'  important  pfirt  of  the  world,  which  in  all  ages  has  been  the  seat  of 
the  onost  advanced  civilization.  In  the  south-west  of  Asia  we  find 
(along  the  table-land  of  Iran)  Persia  and  Asia  Minor ;  in  the  plains 
southward,  Mesopotamia  and  Syria ;  along  the  sea-shores,  Palestine 
and  Phoenicia;  in  the  valley  of  the  Nile,  Egypt;  and  along  the 
southern  shores  of  Africa,  Bai'bary.  Thus  we  have  Semitic  nations 
covering  the  north  African  and  south-west  Asiatic  feunse,  while  the 
south  European  peninsulas,  including  Asia  Minor,  are  inhabited  by 
Grseco-Eoman  nations,  and  the  cold,  temperate  zone,  by  Celto-Ger- 
manic  nations ;  the  eastern  range  of  Europe  being  peopled  by  Sclaves. 
This  coincidence  may  justify  tiie  inference  of  an  independent  origin 
for  these  different  tribes,  as  soon  as  it  can  be  admitted  that  the  races 
of  men  were  primitively  created  in  nations ;  the  more  so,  since  all 
of  them  claim  to  have  been  autochthones  of  the  countries  they  inhabit. 
This  claim  is  so  universal  that  it  well  deserves  more  attention.  It 
may  be  more  deeply  founded  than  historians,  generally,  seem  inclined 
to  grant. 

f  The  third  column  of  our  Tableau  exhibits  the  animals  characteristic 
of  the  temperate  part  of  the  European  zoological  realm,  and  shows 
their  close  resemblance  to  those  of  the  corresponding  Asiatic  fauna; 
the  species  being  representative  species  of  the  same  genera,  with  the 
exception  of  the  musk-deer,  which  has  no  analogues  in  Europe. 

Though  temperate  America  resembles  closely,  in  its  animal  crea- 
tion, the  countries  of  Europe  and  Asia  belonging  to  the  same  zone, 
T^e  meet  with  physical  and  organic  features  in  this  continent  which 

Digitized  by 

Google 

AND   THEIR    RELATION    TO    TYPES   OP    MAN.         IxJX 

differ  entirely  from  those  of  the  Old  World.  The  tropical  realms, 
connected  there  with  those  of  the  temperate  zone,  though  bound 
together  by  some  analogies,  differ  essentially  from  one  another. 
Tropical  Africa  has  hardly  any  species  in  common  with  Europe, 
though  we  may  remember  that  the  lion  once  extended  to  Greece,  and 
that  the  jackal  is  to  this  day  found  upon  some  islands  in  the  Adriatic, 
and  in  Morea.  Tropical  Asia  differs  equally  from  its  temperate 
regions,  and  Australia  forms  a  world  by  itself.  Not  so  in  southern 
America.  The  range  of  mountains  which  extends,  in  almost  un- 
broken continuity,  from  the  Arctic  to  Cape  Horn,  establishes  a 
similarity  between  North  and  South  America,  which  may  be  traced 
also,  to  a  great  degree,  in  its  plants  and  animals.  Entire  families 
which  are  peculiar  to  this  continent  have  their  representatives  in 
North,  as  well  as  South  America,  the  cactus  and  didelphis,  for 
instance ;  some  species,  as  the  puma^  or  American  lion,  may  even  be 
traced  from  Canada  to  Patagonia.  In  connection  with  these  facts, 
we  find  that  tropical  America,  though  it  has  its  peculiar  types,  as 
characteristic  as  those  of  tropical  Africa,  Asia,  and  Australia,  does 
not  furnish  analogues  of  the  giants  of  Africa  and  Asia;  its  largest 
pachyderms  being  tapirs  and  pecans,  not  elephants,  rhinoceroses,  and 
hippopotami ;  and  its  largest  ruminants,  the  llamas  and  alpacas, 
and  not  camels  and  giraffes ;  whilst  it  reminds  us,  in  many  respects, 
of  Australia,  with  which  it  has  the  type  of  marsupials  in  common, 
though  ruminants  and  pachyderms,  and  even  monkeys,  are  entirely 
wanting  there.  Thus,  with  due  qualification,  it  may  be  said,  that  the 
whole  continent  of  America,  when  compared  with  the  corresponding 
twin-continents  of  Europe  —Africa  or  Asia—  Australia  is  characterized 
by  a  much  greater,  uniformity  of  its  natural  productions,  combined 
with  a  special  localization  of  many  of  its  subordinate  types,  which 
will  justify  the  establishment  of  many  special  feunse  within  its 
boundaries.  ;;^ 

With  these  fects  before  us,  we  may  expect  that  there  should  be  no 
great  diversity  among  the  tribes  of  man  inhabiting  this  continent ; 
and,  indeed,  the  most  extensive  investigation  of  their  peculiarities 
has  led  Dr.  Morton  to  consider  them  as  constituting  but  a  single  race,) 
from  the  confines  of  the  Esquimaux  down  to  the  southernmost  ex- 
tremity of  the  continent.  But,  at  the  same  time,  it  should  be 
remembered  that,  in  accordance  with  the  zoological  character  of  the 
whole  realm,  this  race  is  divided  into  an  infinite  number  of  small 
tribes,  presenting  more  or  less  difference  one  from  another.  / 

As  to  the  special  faunae  of  the  American  continent,  we  may  distin- 
guish, within  the  temperate  zone,  a  Canadian  fauna^  extending  from 
Newfoundland  across  the  great  lakes  to  the  base  of  the  Rocky  moun- 

Digitized  by 

Google 

IXX  PROVINCES  OP  THE  ANIMAL  WORLD 

tains,  a  feuna  of  the  North  American  tahle-landy  a  fauna  of  the  North- 
we9t  coast,  a  fauna  of  the  middle  United  States,  a  fauna  of  the  soiUhem 
United  States,  and  a  Oalifomian  fauna,  the  characteristic  features  of 
which  I  shall  describe  on  another  occasion. 

/  When  we  consider,  however,  the  isolation  of  the  American  conti- 
nent from  those  of  the  Old  "World,  nothing  is  more  striking  in  the 
\     geographical  distribution  of  animals,  than  the  exact  correspondence 
\  of  all  the  animals  of  the  northern  temperate  zone  of  America  with 
those  of  Europe :  all  the  characteristic  forms  of  which,  as  may  be  seen 
by  the  fourth  column  of  our  Tableau,  belong  to  the  same  genera, 
with  the  exception  only  of  a  few  subordinate  typeb,  not  represented 
among  our  figures  —  such  as  the  opossum  and  the  skunk. 
""  In  tropical  America  we  may  distinguish  a  Central  American  fauna, 
a  Brazilian  fauna,  2i,  fauna  of  the  Pampas,  v^  fauna  of  the  Cordilleras,  a 
Peruvian  fauna,  and  a  Patagonian  fauna  ;  but  it  is  unnecessary  for 
our  purpose  to  mention  here  their  characteristic  features,  which  may 
be  gathered  from  the  works  of  Prince  New  Wied,  of  Spix  and  Martins, 
of  Tschudi,  of  Poppig,  of  Ramon  de  la  Sagra,  of  Darwin,  &c. 

The  slight  differences  existing  between  the  faunse  of  the  temperate 
zone  have  required  a  ftiUer  illustration  than  maybe  necessary  to  char- 
acterize the  zoological  realms  of  the  tropical  regions  and  the  southern 
hemisphere  generally.  It  is  sufficient  for  our  purpose  to  say  here,  that 
these  realms  are  at  once  distinguished  by  the  prevalence  of  peculiar 
types,  circumscribed  within  the  natural  limits  of  the  three  continents, 
extending  in  complete  isolation  towards  the  southern  pole.  In  this 
req)ect  there  is  already  a  striking  contrast  between  the  northern  and 
the  southern  hemisphere.  But  the  more  closely  we  compare  them 
with  one  another,  the  greater  appear  their  differences.  We  have 
already  seen  how  South  America  differs  from  Africa,  the  East  Indies, 
and  Australia,  by  its  closer  connection  with  North  America.  Not- 
withstanding, however,  the  absence  in  South  America  of  those 
sightly  animals  so  prominent  in  Africa  and  tropical  Asia,  its  gen- 
eral character  is,  like  that  of  all  the  tropical  continents,  to  nourish 
a  variety  of  types  which  have  no  close  relations  to  those  of  other 
continents.  Its  monkeys  and  edentata  belong  to  genera  which 
have  no  representatives  in  the  Old  World ;  among  pachyderms  it  has 
pecaris,  which  are  entirely  wanting  elsewhere ;  and  though  the  tapirs 
occur  also  in  the  Sunda  Mauds,  that  type  is  wanting  in  Africa,  where 
in  compensation  we  find  the  hippopotamus,  not  found  in  either  Asia  or 
America.  We  have  already  seen  tliat  the  marsupials  of  South  Ame- 
rica differ  entirely  from  those  of  Australia.  Its  ostriches  differ  also 
generically  from  iiose  of  Africa,  tropical  A^ia,  New  Holland,  &c. 
If  we  compare  ftirther  the  southern  continents  of  the  Old  World 

Digitized  by 

Google 

IN  THEIR  EELATION  WITH  TYPES  OP  MAN.  Ixxi 

With  one  another,  we  find  a  certain  nniformity  between  the  animals 
of  Africa  and  tropical  Asia.  They  have  both  elephants  and  rhinoce- 
roses, though  each  has  its  peculiar  species  of  these  genera,  which 
occur  neither  in  America  nor  in  Australia ;  whilst  cercopitheci  and 
antilopes  prevail  in  Africa,  and  long-armed  monkeys  and  stags  in 
tropical  Asia.  Moreover,  the  black  orangs  are  peculiar  to  Africa,  and 
the  red  orangs  to  Asia.  As  to  Australia,  it  has  neither  monkeys  nor 
pachyderms,  nor  edentata,  but  only  marsupials  and  monotremes.  "We 
need  therefore  not  carry  these  comparisons  ftirther,  to  be  satisfied  that 
Africa,  tropical  Asia,  and  Australia  constitute  independent  zoological 
realms. 

The  continent  of  Africa  south  of  the  Atlas  has  a  veiy  uniform 
zoological  character.  This  realm  may  however  be  subdivided,  accord- 
ing to  its  local  peculiarities,  into  a  number  of  distinct  faunae.  In  its 
more  northern  parts  we  distinguish  the  fauna  of  the  Sahara,  and  those 
of  Nubia  and  Abyssinia ;  the  latter  of  which  extends  over  the  Red 
Sea  into  the  tropical  parts  of  Arabia.  These  faunae  have  been  par- 
ticularly studied  by  Eiippell  and  Ehrenberg,  in  whose  works 
more  may  be  found  respecting  the  zoology  of  these  re^ons.  They 
are  inhabited  by  two  distinct  races  of  men,  the  Nubians  and  Abys- 
sinians,  receding  greatly  in  their  features  from  the  woolly-haired 
Negroes  with  flat  broad  noses,  which  cover  the  more  central  parts  of 
the  continent.  But  even  here  we  may  distinguish  the  fauna  of 
Senegal  from  that  of  Guinea  and  that  of  the  African  Table-land.  In 
the  first,  we  notice  particularly  the  chimpanzee ;  in  the  second,  the 
gorilla.  There  is  no  anthropoid  monkey  in  the  third.  The  fifth 
column  in  our  Tableau  gives  figures  of  the  most  prominent  animals 
of  the  genuine  "West  African  type.  A  ftiller  illustration  of  this  subject 
might  show,  how  peculiar  tribes  of  Negroes  cover  the  limits  of  the 
different  faunce  of  tropical  Africa,  and  establish  in  this  respect  a  paral- 
lelism between  the  nations  of  this  continent  and  those  of  Europe. 
We  are  chiefly  indebted  to  French  naturalists  for  a  better  knowledge 
of  the  Natural  History  of  this  part  of  the  world.  In  the  sixth  column 
of  our  Tableau  we  have  represented  the  animals  of  the  Cape-lands, 
in  order  to  show  how  the  African  fauna  is  modified  upon  the  southern 
extremity  of  this  continent,  which  is  inhabited  by  a  distinct  race  of 
men,  the  Hottentots.  The  zoology  of  South  Africa  may  be  studied 
in  the  works  of  Lichtenstein  and  Andrew  Smith. 

The  East  Indian  realm  is  now  veiy  well  known  zoologically,  thanks 
to  the  efforts  of  English  and  Dutch  naturalists,  and  may  be  subdivided 
into  thrfee  faunae,  that  of  Dukhun,  that  of  the  Indo-Chinese  peninsula, 
and  that  of  the  Sunda  Islands,  Borneo,  and  the  Philippines.    Its . 
characteristic  animals,  represented  in  the  seventh  column  of  our 

Digitized  by 

Google 

r 

Ixxii  PROVINCES  OF  THE  ANIMAL  WORLD 

Tableau,  may  be  readily  contrasted  with  those  of  Africa.  There  is, 
however,  one  feature  in  this  realm,  which  requires  particular  atten- 
tion, and  has  a  high  importance  with  reference  to  the  study  of  the 
races  of  men.  We  find  here  upon  Borneo  (an  island  not  so  extensive 
as  Spain)  one  of  the  best  known  of  those  anthropoid  monkeys,  the 
orang-outan,  and  with  him  as  well  as  upon  the  adjacent  islands  of 
Java  and  Sumatra,  and  along  the  coasts  of  the  two  East  Indian  penin- 
sula, not  less  than  ten  other  different  species  of  Hylobates,  the  long- 
armed  monkeys;  a  genus  which,  next  to  the  orang  and  chimpanzee, 
ranks  nearest  to  man.  One  of  these  species  is  circumscribed  within 
the  Island  of  Java,  two  along  the  coast  of  Coromandel,  three  upon 
that  of  Malacca,  and  four  upon  Borneo.  Also,, eleven  of  the  highest 
organized  beings  which  have  performed  their  part  in  the  plan  of  the 
Creation  within  tracts  of  land  inferior  in  extent  to  the  range  of  any 
of  the  historical  nations  of  men !  In  accordance  with  this  fact,  we 
find  three  distinct  races  within  the  boundaries  of  the  East  Indian 
realm :  the  Telingan  race  in  anterior  India,  the  Malays  in  posterior 
India  and  upon  the  islands,  upon  which  the  Negrillos  occur  with  them. 

^Such  combinations  justify  fiilly  a  comparison  of  the  geographical 
range  covered  by  distinct  European  nations  with  the  narrow  limits 
occupied  upon  earth  by  the  orangs,  the  chimpanzees,  and  the  gorillas ; 
and  though  I  still  hesitate  to  assign  to  each  an  independent  ori^n 

,  (perhaps  rather  fi-om  the  diflBiculty  of  divesting  myself  of  the  opinions 
universally  received,  than  from  any  intrinsic  evidence),  I  must,  in 
presence  of  these  facts,  insist  at  least  upon  the  probability  of  such  an 

\  independence  of  origin  of  all  nations ;  or,  at  least,  of  the  independent 
origin  of  a  primitive  stock  for  each,  with  which  at  some  future  period 

,  migrating  or  conquering  tribes  have  more  or  less  completely  amal- 
gamated, as  in  the  case  of  mixed  nationalities.  The  evidence  adduced 
from  the  aflS.nities  of  the  languages  of  different  nations  in  fevor  of  a 
community  of  origin  is  of  no  value,  when  we  know,  that,  among 
vociferous  animals,  every  species  has  its  peculiar  intonations,  and  that 
the  different  species  of  the  same  family  produce  sound  as  closely 
allied,  and  forming  as  natural  combinations,  as  the  so-called  Indo- 
Germanic  languages  .compared  with  one  another.  Nobody,  for 
instance,  would  suppose  that  because  the  notes  of  the  different  species 
of  thrushes,  inhabiting  different  parts  of  the  world,  bear  the  closest 

'  affinity  to  one  another,  those  birds  must  all  have  a  common  origin ; 
and  yet,  with  reference  to  man,  philologists  still  look  upon  the  affini- 
ties of  languages  as  affording  direct  evidence  of  such  a  community 
of  origin,  among  the  races,  even  though  they  have  already  discovered 
the  most  essential  differences  in  the  very  structure  of  these  languages. 
^  Ever  since  New  Holland  was  discovered,  it  has  been   known 

Digitized  by 

Google 

AND   THEIR   RELATION    TO   TYPES   OP   MAN.       Ixxiii 

as  the  land  of  zoological  marvels.  All  its  animals  differ  so  completely 
from  those  of  other  parts  of  our  globe,  that  it  may  be  said  to  consti- 
tute a  world  in  itself,  as  isolated  in  that  respect  from  the  other  conti- 
nents, as  it  truly  is  in  its  physical  relations.  As  a  zoological  realm, 
it  extends  to  New  Guinea  and  some  adjacent  islands.  New  Holland, 
however,  constitutes  a  distinct  fauna,  which  at  some  future  time  may 
be  still  ftirther  subdivided,  differing  fit)m  that  of  the  islands  north 
of  it.  The  characteristic  animals  of  this  insular  continent  are  repre- 
sented in  the  eighth  column  of  our  Tableau.  They  all  belong  to  two 
&milies  only,  considering  the  class  of  mammalia  alone,  the  marsu- 
pials, and  the  monotremes.  Besides  these  are  found  bats,  and  mice, 
and  a  wild  dog ;  but  there  are  neither  true  edentata,  nor  ruminants, 
nor  pachyderms,  nor  monkeys,  in  this  realm,  which  is  inhabited  by 
two  races  of  men,  the  Australian  in  Ncfw  Holland,  and  the  Papuans 
upon  the  Islands.  The  isolation  of  the  zoological  types  of  Australia,'^ 
inhabiting  as  they  do  a  continent  partaking  of  nearly  all  the  physical 
features  of  the  other  parts  of  the  world,  is  one  of  the  most  striking 
evidences  that  the  presence  of  animals  upon  earth  is  not  determined 
by  physical  conditions,  but  established  by  the  direct  agency  of  a 
Creator.  ^  ^ 

Of  Polynesia,  its  races  and  animals,  it  would  be  difficult  to  give  an 
idea  in  such  a  condensed  picture  as  this.  I  pass  them,  therefore, 
entirely  unnoticed.  The  mountain  fauna  have  also  been  omitted  in 
our  Map  from  want  of  space. 

Before  closing  these  remarks  I  should  add,  that  one  of  the  greatest    • 
.difficulties  naturalists  have  met  with,  in  the  study  of  the  human  races, 
has  been  the  want  of  a  standard  of  comparison  by  which  to  estimate 
the  value  and  importance  of  the  diversities  observed  between  the 
different  nations  of  the  world.  But  (since  it  is  idle  to  make  assertions 
upon  the  character  of  these  differences  without  a  distinct  understand- 
ing respecting  the  meaning  of  the  words  constantly  used  in  reference* 
to  the  subject),  it  may  be  proper  to  ask  here.  What  is  a  species,  what  // 
a  variety,  and  what  is  meant  by  the  unity  or  the  diversity  of  the  races  ? 

In  arder  not  to  enter  upon  debateable  ground  in  answering  the 
first  of  these  questions,  let  us  begin  by  considering  it  with  reference 
to  the  animal  kingdom ;  and,  without  alluding  to  any  controverted  point,, 
limit  ourselves  to  animals  well  known  among  us.  "We  would  thus 
remember  that,  with  universal  consent,  the  horse  and  ass  are  con- 
sidered as  two  distinct  species  of  the  same  genus,  to  which  belong 
several  other  distinct  species  known  to  naturalists  under  the  namea 
of  zebra,  quagga,  dauw,  &c.  The  buffalo  and  the  bull  are  also  distinct 
species  of  another  genus,  embracing  several  other  foreign  species. 
The  black  bear,  the  white  bear,  the  grizzly  bear, give  another  example 

Digitized  by 

Google 

Ixxiv  PROVINCES   OP   THE   ANIMAL   WORLD 

of  three  different  species  of  the  same  genus,  &c.  &c.  "We  might 
select  many  other  examples-  among  our  common  quadrupeds,  or 
among  birds,  reptiles,  fishes,  &c.,  but  these  will  be  sufficient  for  our 
purpose.  In  the  genus  horse  we  have  two  domesticated  species,  the 
common  horse  and  the  donkey ;  in  the  genus  bull,  one  domesticated 
species  and  the  wild  buffalo ;  the  three  species  of  bear  mentioned  arc 
only  found  in  the  wild  state.  The  ground  upon  which  these  animals 
are  considered  as  distinct  species  is  simply  the  fact,  that,  since  they 
have  been  known  to  man,  they  have  always  preserved  the  same  cha- 
racteristics. To  make  specific  difference  or  identity  depend  upon 
genetic  succession,  is  begging  the  principle  and  taking  for  granted 
^^at  in  reality  is  under  discussion.  It  is  true  that  animals  of  the 
same  species  are  fertile  among  themselves,  and  that  their  fecundity 

,  is  an  easy  test  of  this  natural  relation ;  but  this  character  is  not  ex- 
clusive, since  we  know  that  the  horse  and  the  ass,  the  buffalo  and 
our  cattle,  like  many  other  animals,  may  be  crossed ;  we  are,  there- 

j  fore,  not  justified,  in  doubtful  cases,  in  considering  the  fertility  of 

I  two  animals  as  decisive  of  their  specific  identity.  Moreover,  gene- 
ration is  not  the  only  way  in  which  certain  animals  may  multiply, 
as  there  are  entire  classes  in  which  the  larger  number  of  indivi- 
duals do  not  originate  from  eggs.  Any  definition  of  species  in 
which  the  question  of  generation  is  introduced  is,  therefore,  objec- 
tionable. The  assumption,  that  the  fertility  of  cross-breeds  is  neces- 
sarily limited  to  one  or  two  generations,  does  not  alter  the  case; 
since,  in  many  instances.  It  is  not  proved  beyond  dispute.  It  is, 
,  'however,  beyond  all  qtiestton  that  individuals  of  distinct  species  may, 

J  in  certain  cases,  be  productive  with  one  another,  as  well  as  with 

their  own  kind.    It  is  equally  certain  that  their  offspring  is  a 

t   half-breed ;  that  is  to  say,  a  being  partaking  of  the  peculiarities  of 

the  two  parents,  and  not  identical  with  either.    The  only  definition 

*of  species  meeting  all  these  difficulties  is  that  of  Dr.  Morton,  who 

"^characterizes  them  as  primordial  orgdnic  forrm.  Species  are  thus 
distinct  forms  of  organic  life,  the  origin  of  which  is  lost  in  the 
primitive  establishment  of  the  state  of  tilings  now  existing,  and 
varieties  are  such  modifications  of  the  species  as  may  return  to  the 
typical  form,  under  temporary  influences.  Accepting  this  definition 
with  the  qualifications  just  mentioned  respecting  hybridity,  I  am 
prepared  to  show  that  the  differences  existing  between  the  races  of 
men  are  of  the  same  kind  as  the  differences  observed  between  tho 

^different  families,  genera,  and  species  of  monkeys  or  other  animals; 
and  that  these  different  species  of  animals  differ  in  the  same  degree 
one  from  the  other  as  the  races  of  men — nay,  the  differences  between 
distinct  races  are  often  greater  than  those  distinguishing  species  of 

Digitized  by 

Google 

AND  THEIE  RELATION  TO  TYPES  OP  MAN.         IxXV 

animals  one  from  the  other.  The  chimpanzee  and  gorilla  do  not 
differ  more  one  from  the  other  than  the  Mandingo  and  the  Guinea 
Negro :  they  together  do  not  differ  more  from  the  orang  than  the 
Malay  or  white  man  differs  from  the  Negro.  In  proof  of  this  assertion, 
I  need  only  refer  the  reader  to  the  description  of  the  anthropoid 
monkeys  published  by  Prof.  Owen  and  by  Dr.  J.  Wyman,  and  to 
such  descriptions  of  the  races  of  men  as  notice  more  important 
peculiarities  than  the  mere  differences  in  the  color  of  the  skin.  It 
is,  however,  but  fidr  to  exonerate  these  authors  fix)m  the  responsibility 
of  any  deduction  I  would  draw  fi*om  a  renewed  examination  of  the 
same  &cts,  differing  fi*om  theirs;  for  I  maintain  distinctly  that  Qie  ' 
differences  observed  among  the  races  of  men  are  of  the  same  kind  : 
and  even  greater  than  those  upon  which  the  anthropoid  monkeys 
are  considered  as  distinct  species. 

Again,  nobody  can  deny  that  the  offipring  of  different  races 
is  always  a  half-breed,  as  between  animals  of  different  species,  and 
not  a  diild  like  either  its  mother  or  its  ^ther.  These  conclusions 
in  no  way  conflict  with  the  idea  of  the  unity  of  mankind,  which 
is  as  close  as  that  of  the  members  of  any  well-marked  type  of 
animals;  and  whosoever  will  consult  history  must  remain  satisfied, - 
that  the  moral  question  of  brotherhood  among  men  is  not  any  more 
affected  by  these  views  than  the  direct  obligations  between  immediate 
blood  relations.  Unity  is  determinal  by  a  typical  structure,  and  by 
the  similarity  of  natural  abilities  and  propensities ;  and,  unless  we  deny 
the  typical  relations  of  the  cat  tribe,  for  instance,  we  must  admit  that 
unity  is  not  only  compatible  with  diversity  of  origin,  but  that  it  is  '^ 
the  universal  law  of  nature.  "^ 

This  coincidence,  between  the  circumscription  of  the  races  of  man  ^ 
and  the  natural  limits  of  different  zoological  provinces  characterized 
by  peculiar  distinct  species  of  animals,  is  one  of  the  most  important 
and  unexpected  features  in  the  Natural  Sstory  of  Mankind,  which 
the  study  of  the  geographical  distribution  of  all  the  organized  beings, 
now  existing  upon  earth,  has  disclosed  to  us.    It  is  a  fact  which  can- 
not fail  to  throw  light,  at  some  future  time,  upon  the  veiy  origin 
of  the  differences  existing  among  men,  since  it  shows  that  man's 
physical  nature  is  modified  by  the  same  laws  as  that  of  animals, 
and  that  any  general  results  obtained  from  the  animal  kingdom 
regarding  the  organic  differences  of  its  various  types  must  also  apply 
toman. 
Now,  there  are  only  two  alternatives  before  us  at  present :  — 
Ist.  Either  mankind  originated  fi*om  a  common  stock,  and  all 
the*  different  races  with  their  peculiarities,  in  their  present 
distribution,  are  to  be  ascribed  to  subsequent  changes  — * 

Digitized  by 

Google 

Ixxvi       PROVINCES  OP  THE  ANIMAL  WORLD,  ETC. 

an  assumption  for  which  there  is  no  evidence  whatever, 
and  which  leads  at  once  to  the  admission  that  the  diver- 
sity amoi^  animals  is  not  an  original  one,  nor  their  dis- 
tribution determined  by  a  general  plan,  established  in  the 
beginning  of  the  Creation;  —  or, 
2d.  "We  must  acknowledge  that  the  diversity  among  animals 
^         is  a  fact  determined  by  the  will  of  the  Creator,  and  their 
geographical  distribution  part  of  the  general  plan  which 
unites  all  organized  beings  into  one  great  organic  con- 
ception :  whence  it  follows  that  what  are  called  human 
races,  down  to  their  specialization  as  nations,  are  distinct 
primordial  forms  of  the  type  of  man. 
The  consequences  of  the  first  alternative,  which  is  contrary  to  all 
the  modern  results  of  science,  run  inevitably  into  the  Lamarkian 
development  theory,  so  well  known  in  this  country  through  the 
work  entitled  "Vestiges  of  Creation;"  though  its  premises  are  gen- 
erally adopted  by  those  who  would  shrink  from  the  conclusions  to 
which  they  necessarily  lead. 

Whatever  be  the  meaning  of  the  coincidence  alluded  to  above, 
it  must  in  future  remain  an  important  element  in  ethnographical 
studies ;  and  no  theory  of  the  distribution  of  the  raqes  of  man,  and 
of  their  migrations,  can  be  satisfactory  hereafter,  which  does  not 
account  for  that  feet 

We  may,  however,  draw  already  an  important  inference  from  this 
investigation,  which  cannot  fail  to  have  its  influence  upon  the 
ferther  study  of  the  human  races:  namely,  that  the  laws  which 
regulate  the  diversity  of  animals,  and  their  distribution  upon  earth, 
apply  equally  to  man,  within  the  same  limits  and  in  the  same  degree; 
and  that  all  our  liberty  and  moral  responsibility,  however  spon- 
taneous, are  yet  instinctively  directed  by  the  All-wise  and  Omni- 
potent, to  fulfil  the  great  harmonies  established  in  Nature. 

L.  A. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 

§ 

Digitized  by 

Gc^J 

EXPLANATIONS 

or  nn 
TABLEAU    ACCOMPANYING    PROP.    AGASSIZ'S    SKETCH. 

I.-ARCTIC  REALM. 
LHead— .^fctnunuB.    [Fbauxun: 

2d  £cp.  FtiLSea;  1838;  Lpl.  13.] 
2.  SkuU  —  Afcimotix.      [MoBfOH : 

Cr.  Amer. ;  p.  70.  No.  1.] 
8.  White  Bear  (Urnti  narUimut). 

[Cirvm:  Bigne  Anim.;  Atlu, 

Mamm.,  pL  30,  flg.  8.] 
4.  Walrus   (Tricheaa  Boimarut), 

[Cijtixe:  op.  dL;  pi.  45,  llg.  1.] 
b.  Beindeer    ( OarvuM    Tcarandus). 

[Cutizb:  op.  cU.;  pL  87,  flg.  2.] 
0.  Harp  Seal  {Phooa  granlandiea). 

[Shaw:  ZooL;  Mamm.,  L  pi. 71.] 

7.  RightWhaleCAitena  JfyxMoeiiM). 

[CunxE :  op,  cU. ;  pL  100,  fig.  1.] 

8.  Eider  Dock   {AnoM  mdOiwna). 

[AuDCBOir :  Birdi;  1843;  tL  pi. 
406,  flg.  1.] 
9l  Beindeer^non  (jOenomyot  ranffi- 
ferina).   [LouMif :  £^l%m<i; 
p.  009,  No.  15,630.] 

II.-M0N601  REALM. 
K).  Head  — C^tiuae.    [Ham.  Smith: 

NaL  Hi$L  Human  Speda;  1848; 

pLlO,  "Mongol."] 
IL  Skull  —  C^^new.    [Cutzib:  op. 

eat.;  pi.  8,  ilg.  UL] 
12.  Bear  {Vrtu8  tkOxtanm).  [Schbs- 

bsb:  SUuffthiere :  til  pi.  141  im]. 
IS.  Musk-deer  (Motchut  mo$dU/enu), 

[CunxR:  op.  cit.;  pL  86.] 
14.Antf]ope     (AnOope  ffuUurrm). 

[ScnnxE :  op.cU.;  pL  275.] 

15.  Goat  (Cizpra  tiberica).     [Scbsb- 

bkk:  op.dL;  pL281.] 

16.  Sheep  (Ocic  AtyaH).     [Cutbb: 

Jbonoffraphu;  I  pL44hi8,flg.l.] 

17.  Yak  {Bos  gnrnnxeHi).     [Va«t: 

Ox  Tribe;  1851;  p.  45.] 

IM.-EUROPEAN  REALM. 

18.  Head— CuTiKft'8  portrait  [Bigne 
Anim.;  Atlaa,  Mamm.;  ««Me- 
dalion.*^ 

19.  Skull  — Aropeon.  [CiTTXBi:op. 

cU.;  pL  8,  flg.  1.] 
SO.  Bear  (27rna  ^rctof).  [flGBBBOE: 

op.  eU. ;  pi.  189.] 
ii.  Btag  {Ctrvui  Ecipkut).    [Scmo- 

bxb:  ep.cit.;  pi.  247  a.] 
22.Autllope  (AntOcpe  RupteapnC). 

[ScuEKBOt:  op.  eit;  pL  279.] 

23.  Goat  (ChprQ,  Ibex).    [ScmtiBnu 

op.ciL;  pi.  2810.] 

24.  Sheep  (One  JAtftmon).    Sohu- 

bkb:  qp.ei:t.;pL288A.] 

25.  Aueroehs  (Bm  Urut).    [Yabkt: 

op.  oft.;  p.  40.] 

IV.-AMERiCAN  REALM. 

26.  Head  — ifu2umC9U</:  {>lAZ.Pm. 

M  Wixd:  Tracdi;  pi.  8.] 

27.  SkuU  —  JIbttmi  in  Tameisee,^ 

[Mobiom:  Cr.  Amer.;  pi.  55.] 

28.  B9i{Ur$u$(aMricanMu).  [Sohu- 

bkr:  op.dL;  pi.  141  b.] 
29.Stag(arv.  oify^nuznttf).  [Schkx- 

bxr:  op.ctt.*  pl.246H.l 
30.  Antilope  (Jnt/urc^/lhi).   [U.S. 

FtU,  Off.  Bep.  1852  ;  pt  IL  pi.  1.] 

81.  Goat  (Cbpra  amaioaxya^,  [U.  S. 

Bat.  Off.;  pi.  6.] 

82.  Sheep  (Ovit  fnoniana).     [U.  S, 

FU,  Off.;  pL  5.]  . 
33.  Bison  (Bos  amerioama),    [U.  S. 
iW.0#.;pL7.] 

V.-AFRICAN  REA4M. 
ZLUead  —  Mosambijue  Negro.— 

OouKTST  n  L'JsLi:  TMeau  Bth- 

nog.  du  Qexre  Humain ;  1849; 

pU5.] 
85.  Skull— Ct^eob  Negro.    [Latham  : 

Varittia  qf  Man;  p.  6.] 
36.  Chimpanzee  (Troglodyle*  niger). 

[CuTDOi :  Bignt  An,;  pL  iL  flg.  1.] 

87.  Elephant   (EUphat  mfrioanm). 

Cuthh  :  Bigne  onun. ;  i.  p.] 

88.  Bhinoeeros  (B.  bioonrit).  [Smith  : 

South  Africa;  pL  2.] 

89.  Hippopotamus  {H.  amphHriui). 

[Smith:  South  A/Hm;  pi.  6.] 

40.  Wart -Hog    (PhaaxAcaiu  jEli- 

ani).    [Schubir:   op.  ciL;  pi. 
826  a.] 

41.  Giraffe    (QmehopardaUt  (H- 

raffi).    fCumm:  loonographie : 
I  pi.  43.] 

VI.-HOTTEMTOT  PAUNA. 

42.  Head— AM^moM.  [Ham.  Smith: 

iVat.fiti<.;pl.l3.] 
43. SkuU— AoAoum.  [Ham. Smith: 
op.c«.;  pi.  2.] 

44.  Uyen%Qenet(Pratdei  LaUtmUi). 

[mm.  du  Muthm;  xi.  p.  354.] 

45.  Quagga  (.ETuta  Quo^)  [Sobu- 

bib:  op.cU.;  pL317.] 

46  Bhinooeros  {B.  Simu$).  [Smith. 
South  Africa;  pi.  19.] 

47.  Cape  Hyraz  (Hjfrax  capentu). 

[Sohbxbkb:  op.  dt. ;  pL  240.] 

48.  Anteater(Orycferqpitt  oopeiutf.^ 

[Nouv.  JHcL  <FHi$L  NaturtHU; 
xxir.  p.  182.] 
40.  Cape  Ox  (Bos  eaffkr).    [Yaset  . 
Ox  Tribe;  p.  86.] 

VII.-MALAYAN  REALM. 

50.  Head— Jfa lay.    [Wabd :  iVaf. 

£M.  </ifoiaMid;  1S40;  p.  54.] 

51.  Skull  — Jfalay.    [DcMOimxB: 

AOas  AnthrppoL;  pi.  87,  flg.  5.) 

52.  Orang-utan  (Pithecus  Satfrus), 

[Tbmmihck:   Monographic;  iL 
pL41.] 

53.  Elephant  (Elephas  indicus).— 

[Schbebkb  :  op.  od. ;  pi.  817  oo J  , 

54.  Bhinooeros  (B.  sondaicus).  [Hobs- 

nxLD:  ZooL  Besearches;  1824.] 

55.  Tapir  (Ihpirus  wudayamu).^ 

[HoBsnxLD:  op.eil.] 

56.  Stag  (Cervus  JTw^fac).     HoBS- 
miD:  op.eit.} 

57.  Ox   (Bos  Amu).    [Yasbt:   Ox 
'■      Tribe;  p.  lU.] 

Vlli.-AUSTRAL^AN  REALM. 

58.  Head— jlt/burottx.  [CunxBrqp. 
dL;  pl.8,  flg.  1.] 

59.  Skull— J(/bwrot.  [Ham.  Smith: 

Nat. Hid.;  pi.  2.] 

60.  Spotted  Opossum  (i>aiyurtaF»v.). 

[ScHBJEBXB :  op.  dt.;  pi.  152 b.] 

61.  Ant-eater     (Jfymwoo&iiM  fas- 

datus).  [Trans.  ZooUgioaiSoc; 
iL  p.  154.] 

62.  Babbit  (JPiaramaes  Lagotis).— 

[Watbbhousb:    Marsupials;  L 

pL18.] 
68.  VhsAtaigent(Fhakmgistavu^ina), 

[Watbbhousb:  op. dt.;  L pL  8.J 
64.  Wombat  (Fhasociarctos  dnereus). 

[Schbebxb:  op.  dL;  pL  155  a.] 
66.  Squihvl  (Pdaunu  sdureus).^ 

[Watbbhousb:  op.  et^ ;  L  p.  88.] 

66.  Kangaroo    (Macropus  gigaadf 

ui).    [Watibhousb:  op.  ciL;  L 
p.  62.] 

67.  Duck-bill  (OmJftorAyncftitfjMra- 

dofKuii.  [Watbbhousb:  ep^di  ; 
Lp.26.1 

Note.  —  Adhering  as  elosely  as  possible  to  the  written  instructions  of  ProC  AoASsn,  the  annexed  Tableau 
was  drawn  and  tinted,  under  my  own  eye,  in  the  Library  of  the  Academy  of  the  Natural  Sciences  at  Philadel 
phia.  Erery  effort  at  correctness  has  been  made ;  although,  owing  to  unaroidable  reduction  to  so  small  a  scale. 
the  edoring  especially  can  be  but  suggestire. 

To  Prod  Joseph  Lbtot,  Dr.  Wm.  S.  Zabtxwobb,  and  Major  Johh  Lb  Oostb,  who  ftoost  obligingly  gare  me  tnn 
adrantage  of  their  aid  and  eonnsel  in  selecting  the  originals  of  these  flgures,  must  be  ascribed  the  merit  of 
CBRying  Prot  Agassis's  oonoeptlon  into  detailed  elbct.    (January,  1854.)  , 

G.  B.  G.,  Cbrr.  Mm,  Acad, NaL8dmM\<^ 
^"         (IxxtU)      ^ 

EXPLANATIONS 

or  tn 

MAP   AOOOMPANTINa    PBOF.  AOASSIZ'S    SKETCH. 

I.-ARCT1C  REALM-inlwUtodliy  tfTPSBBOBiEANB;  wdoontainiiig:-. 
AAA^aa  Ji|gxr6orea»flwm«. 

I.-A8IATIC  RE ALM-iBbiMtidliy  MONGOLS;  wdrabdlTldediiito:- 

B— ft  CMReM  ft.iiiu,  in  the  iTMBMr  put. 

F— ft  Oaapian  (w«ttem)  ikimft. 

'"  -EUROPEAN   REAlM-inluUtedliy  WHITS.HBN;  and dirktod into :^ 

O — ft  iSboMKnaviaii  &mta. 
H  —  ft  Bu9iian  fannft. 
I  —  ft  Cfenfrtrf-Jkrqpeaw  &mift. 
J~a  iSbiiflb-Airqpean  fkonft. 
K — ft  Nmih'Jfrican  ftona. 
L  •;- an  i^[73i!p(um  flrauuL 
H — ft  iS^frian  and  an /rcDiiaii  £muuu 

IV.-tAMERICAN   REAlM-iBbaUtadliy  AMBBIOAN  INDIANS. 
NOBIH  Ajuiioa— diTided  into:  — 

N  --  ft  OBmadian  ftwma. 

0— an  Mkghmian  fkona,  or  fknna  of  tha  Middla  Stataa. 

P— a  Xoiiitidiiitm  fknna,  or  ft,nna  of  Uia  Sonthern  Stataa 

Q— a  TabMand  flinna,  or  ft.nnft  of  tha  Boekj  Mffimtihit. 

B — ft  iVbr0ktoMi>€lMu(  iknna. 

8 — ft  CU^AmAm  Iknna. 
CnauL  Amboca — inbdlTidad  into :  — 

T — a  Jf<»tfi4afid  &nna. 

U  ~  an  jintOIet  fknna. 
South  Ajuuga — dirlded  into : — 

T  —  a  BrarOJan  fknna. 
~a  Amjxu  ftnna. 

X  —  ft  (hrdmenu  fkunft. 

T  — ft  Jb-NvAm  ftnna.  ^ 

V.-AFRICAN   REAlM-InbaUtad  1)7  NUBIANS,  ABTSSINIANS,  VOOLAHS,  NB. 

OBOBS,      HOTTINTOTS,     BOSJISMANB) 
'         and  diTkled  into:  — 
aa^%  Saharan  Ikuna. 
hb  —  m  Nubian  fknna. 

oe — an  AbsfititiioH  fknna  (extending  to  Axablft). 
dd — m  SeneffdUan  tkanA. 
[ee— a  G^i«R«an  Jknna. 
ff—  an  Jfrio-TabMand  fknna. 
gg—%  Oap&^if-Good-Hope  fkon*. 
hh —  a  Mttdaffatcar  (diTcrging)  fkaam. 

VI.-EA8T-INDIAN  (or  MALAYAN)  REALM-inhaUted  hj  TBLINGANS,  MALAYS, 

NEOBILLOS;  and dirided into:— 
ti  —  a  i>Milfttm  fknna. 
jj — an  itdo'Chmete  &nna. 
X:fe  —  a  Sundorldandie  &nna(inolnding  Borneo  and  the  Fhillppinea). 

VII.-AUSTRALIAN  REAlM-inlMUted  l7   PAPUANS,    AUSTBALIANS;    and  diyided 

into:— 
S  —  a  Papuan  fknna. 
mM — a  New-HoBand  fknna. 

VIII.-P0LYNE8IAN  REAlM-inhaUtedby  SOUTH-SBA  ISLANDBBS;  and  containing : — 
'  fm,  nn- Alyn««ia»fknn». 

N  B.    It  haa  not  been  in  my  power  to  ftliow  Pio£  Agaaaii'a  initmottona  in  regard  to  the  ooioring  of  tUa 
ikap.  the  aoale  adopted  being  too  small. —O.B.O.  T^ 

Digitized  by  (^JaETiiir)^^  *-^ 

Digitized  by 

Google 

I 

t 

TYPES    OF    MANKIND. 

INTRODUCTION. 

Mr.  Luke  Bubeb,  the  bold  and  able  Editor  of  the  London  JEthno- 
logiealJoumaly  defines  Ethnology  to  be  "  a  science  which  investigates 
the  mental  and  physical  differences  of  Mankind,  and  the  organic  laws 
upon  which  they  depend;  and  which  seeJsB  to  deduce  from  these 
investigations,  principles  of  human  guidance,  in  all  the  important 
relations  of  social  existence."  *  To  the  same  author  are  we  indebted 
not  only  for  the  most  extensive  and  lucid  definition  of  this  term, 
but  for  the  first  truly  philosophic  view  of  a  new  and  important  science 
that  we  have  met  with  in  the  English  language. 

The  term  "Ethnology"  has  generally  been  used  as  synonymous 
with  "Ethnography,"  understood  as  the  Natural  History  of  Man ;  but 
by  Burke  it  is  made  to  take  a  fii.r  more  comprehensive  grasp  —  to 
include  the  whole  mental  and  physical  history  of  the  various  Types 
of  Mankind,  as  well  as  their  social  relations  and  adaptations ;  and, 
under  this  comprehensive  aspect,  it  therefore  interests  equally  the 
philanthropist,  the  naturalist,  and  the  statesman.  Ethnology  demands 
to  know  what  was  the  primitive  organic  structure  of  each  race  ?  — 
what  such  race's  moi:al  and  psychical  character? — ^how  far  a  race  may 
have  been,  or  may  become,  modified  by  the  combined  action  of  time 
and  moral  and  physical  causes?  —  and  what  position  in  the  social  J  y/ 
scale  Providence  has  assigned  to  .each  type  of  man  ?  ^  ^ 

**  Ethnology  diyides  itself  into  two  principal  departments,  the  Sdmtifie  and  the  Hiatonc 
Under  the  former  is  comprised  erery  thing  connected  with  the  Natural  History  of  Man 
and  the  fundamental  laws  of  liring  organisms ;  under  the  latter,  e^Tery  fact  in  civil  history 
which  has  any  important  bearing,  directly  or  indirectly,  upon  the  question  of  races  —  every 
fact  calculated  to  throw  light  upon  the  number,  the  moral  and  physical  peculiarities,  the 
early  seats,  migrations,  conquests  or  interblendings,  of  the  primary  divisions  of  the  humac 
family,  or  of  the  leading  niixed  races  which  have  sprung  from  their  intermarriages.''' 

Y  Digitized  by  ^(^W-^  — 

\ 

50  INTRODUCTION. 

Such  is  the  scope  of  this  science  —  born,  we  may  say,  within  our 
own  generation  —  and  we  propose  to  examine  mankind  under  the 
above  two-fold  aspect,  while  we  point  out  some  of  the  more  salient 
results  towards  which  modem  investigation  is  tending.  The  press 
everywhere  teems  with  new  books  on  the  various  partitions  of  the 
wide  field  of  Ethnology;  yet  there  does  not  exist,  in  any  language,  an 
attempt,  based  on  the  highest  scientific  lights  of  the  day,  at  a 
systematLj  treatise  on  Ethnology  in  its  extended  sense.  Morton 
was  the  first  to  conceive  the  proper  plan ;  but,  unfortunately,  Uved 
not  to  carry  it  out ;  and  although  the  present  volume  falls  very  far 
below  the  just  requirements  of  science,  we  feel  assured  that  it  wiU 
at  least  aid  materially  in  suggesting  the  right  direction  to  fixture 
investigators. 

The  grand  problem,  more  particularly  interesting  to  all  readers,  is 
that  which  involves  the  common  origin  of  races ;  for  upoi;i  the  latter 
deduction  hang  not  only  certain  reli^ous  dogmas,  but  the  more 
practical  question  of  the  equality  and  perfectibility  of  races  —  we  say 
"more  practical  question,'*  because,  while  Almighty  Power,  on  the 
one  hand,  is  not  responsible  to  Man  for  the  distinct  origin  of  human 
races,  these,  on  the  other,,  are  accountable  to  Him  for  the  manner  in 
which  their  delegated  power  is  used  towards  each  other. 

Whether  an  original  diversity  of  races  be  admitted  or  not,  the 
permanence  of  existing  physical  types  will  not  be  questioned  by  any 
Archaeologist  or  Naturalist  of  the  present  day.  Nor,  by  such  com- 
petent arbitrators,  can  the  consequent  permanence  of  moral  and 
intellectual  peculiarities  of  types  be  denied.  The  intellectual  man  is 
inseparable  fix)m  the  physical  man;  and  the  nature  of  the  one  cannot 
be  altered  without  a  corresponding  change  in  the  other. 

The  truth  of  these  propositions  had  long  b%en  familiar  to  the 
master-mind  of  John  C.  Calhoun;  who  regarded  them  to  be  of  such 
paramount  importance  as  to  demand  the  fullest  consideration  fi-om 
those  who,  like  our  lamented  statesman  in  his  day,  wield  the  destinies 
of  nations  and  of  races.  An  anecdote  will  illustrate  the  pains-taking 
laboriousness  of  Mr.  Calhoun  to  let  no  occasion  slip  whence  informa- 
tion was  attainable.  Our  colleague,  G.  R.  Gliddon,  happened  to  be  in 
"Washington  City,  early  in  May,  1844,  on  business  of  his  father  (United 
States'  Consul  for  Egypt)  at  the  State  Department;  at  which  time 
Mr.  Calhoun,  Secretary  of  State,  was  conducting  diplomatic  negotia- 
tions with  France  and  England,  connected  with  the  annexation  of 
*  V  Texas.  Mr.  Calhoun,  suffering  fi*om  indisposition,  sent  a  message  to 
Mr.  Gliddon,  requesting  a  visit  at  his  lodgings.  In  a  long  interview 
which  ensued,  Mr.  Calhoun  stated,'  that  England  pertinaciously  con- 
tinned  to  interfere  with  our  inherited  Institution  of  Negro  Slavery, 

Digitized  by 

Google 

INTRODUCTION.  51 

and  in  a  manner  to  render  it  imperative  that  lie  should  indite  veiy 
strong  instructions  on  the  subject  to  the  late  Mr.  Wm.  R.  Kino,  of 
Alabama,  then  our  Ambassador  to  France.  He  read  to  Mr.  Gliddon 
portions  of  the  manuscript  of  his  celebrated  letter  to  Mr.  King,  which, 
issued  on  the  12th  of  the  following  August,  ranks  among  our  ablest 
national  documents.  Mr.  Calhoun  declared  that  he  could  not  foresee 
what  course  the  negotiation  might  take,  but  wished  to  be  forearmed 
for  any  emergency.  He  was  convinced  that  the  true  difficulties  of 
the  subject  could  not  be  fully  comprehended  without  first  considering 
the  radical  difference  of  humanity's  races,  which  he  intended  to  dis- 
cuss, should  he  be  driven  to  the  necessity.  Knowing  that  Mr.  Gliddon 
had  paid  attention  to  the  subject  of  African  ethnology;  and  that, 
from  his  long  residence  in  Egypt,  he  had  enjoyed  imusual  advantages 
for  its  investigation,  Mr'.  Calhoun  had  summoned  him  for  the  purpose 
of  ascertaining  what  were  the  best  sources  of  information  in  this 
coimtiy.  Mr.  Gliddon,  after  laying  before  the  Secretary  what  he 
conceived  to  be  the  true  state  of  the  case,  referred  him  for  ftirther 
information  to  several  scientific  gentlemen,  and  more  particularly  to 
Dr.  Morton,  of  Philadelphia.  A  correspondence  ensued  between 
Mr.  Calhoun  and  Dr.  Morton  on  the  subject,  and  the  Doctor  presented 
to  him  copies  of  the  Orania  Americana  and  JEgyptiaca^  together  with 
minor  works,  all  of  which  Mr.  Calhoim  studied  with  no  less  pleasure 
thaor  profit  He  soon  perceived  that  the  conclusions  which  he  had 
long  before  drawn  from  history,  and  from  his  personal  observations 
in  America,  on  the  Anglo-Saxon,  Celtic,  Teutonic,  French,  Spanish, 
Negro,  and  Indian  races,  were  entirely  corroborated  by  the  plain 
teachings  of  modem  science.  He  beheld  demonstrated  in  Morton's 
works  the  important  fiict,  that  the  Egyptian,  Negro,  several  White,  and 
sundry  Yellow  races,  had  existed,  in  their  present  forms,  for  at  least 
4000  years ;  and  that  it  behoVed  the  statesman  to  lay  aside  all  current 
speculations  about  the  origin  and  perfectibility  of  races,  and  to  deal, 
in  political  argument,  with  the  simple  fitcts  as  they  stand. 

What,  on  the  vital  question  of  African  Slavery  in  our  Southern 
States,  was  the  utilitarian  consequence  of  Calhoim's  memorable 
dispatch  to  King  ?  Strange,  yet  true,  to  say,  although  the  English 
press  anxiously  complained  that  Mr.  Calhoun  had  intruded  Ethnology 
into  diplomatic  correspondence,  a  communication  from  the  Foreign 
OflSce  promptly  assured  our  Government  that  Great  Britain  had  no 
intention  of  intermeddling  with  the  domestic  institutions  of  other 
nations.  Nor,  from  that  day  to  this,  has  she  violated  her  formal, 
pledge  in  our  regard.  During  a  sojourn  of  Mr.  Calhoun,  on  his  retire-' 
ment  from  oflSce,  with  us  at  Mobile,  we  enjoyed  personal  opportunities 
of  knowing  the  accuracy  of  the  above  facts,  no  lees  than  of  receiving  ^ 

Digitized  by 

Google 

52  INTBODUCTION. 

ample  corroborations  illustrative  of  the  incanvenienee  whicli  true 
ethnological  science  might  have  created  in  philanthropical  diplomacy, 
had  it  been  frankly  introduced  by  a  Calhoun. 

N"o  class  of  men,  perhaps,  understand  better  the  practical  import- 
ance of  Ethnology  than  the  statesmen  of  England;  yet  from  motives 
of  policy,  they  keep  its  agitation  studiously  out  of  right  Dr.  Peichari), 
when  speaking  of  a  belief  in  the  diversity  of  races,  justiy  remarks — 

**  If  these  opinions  are  not  erery  day  expressed  in  this  oonntry  [England],  it  is  because 
the  aTowal  of  them  is  restrained  by  a  degree  of  odiun^  that  would  be  excited  by  it"  9 

Although  the  press  in  that  coimtry  has  been,  to  a  great  extent, 
muzzled  by  government  influence,  we  are  happy  to  see  tiiat  her  peri- 
odicals are  beginning  to  assume  a  bolder  and  more  rational  tone ;  and 
we  may  now  hope  that  the  stereotyped  errors  of  Prichard,  and  we 
might  add,  those  of  Latham,^  will  soon  pass  at  their  true  value.  The 
immense  evils  of  false  philanthropy  are  becoming  too  glaring  to  be 
longer  overlooked.  While,  on  the  one  hand,  every  true  philanthropist 
must  admit  that  no  race  has  a  right  to  enslave  or  oppress  the  weaker, 
it  must  be  conceded,  on  the  other,  that  all  changes  in  existing  insti- 
tutions should  be  guided,  not  by  fanaticism  and  groimdless  hypo- 
theses, but  by  experience,  sotmd  judgment,  and  real  charity. 

"  No  one  that  has  not  worked  much  in  the  element  of  History  can  be  aware  of  the 
immense  importance  of  clearly  keeping  iii  view  the  differences  of  race  that  are  discernible 
among  the  nations  that  inhabit  different  parts  of  the  world.  In  inractical  politics  it  is  cer- 
tainly possible  to  push  snch  ethnographical  considerations  too  fttr ;  as,  for  example,  in  onr 
own  cant  abont  Celt  and  Saxon,  wh^  Ireland  is  under  discussion;  but  in  speculatiye 
history,  in  questions  relating  to  the  past  career  and  the  future  destinies  of  nations,  it  is 
only  by  a  firm  and  efficient  handling  of  this  conception  of  our  species  as  broken  up  into  so 
many  groups  or  masses,  physiologically  different  to  a  certain  extent,  that  any  progress  can 
be  made,  or  any  ayailable  conclusions  accurately  arriTed  at 

**  The  Negbo,  or  AfHcan,  with  his  black  skin,  woolly  hur,  and  compressed  elongated 
skull ;  the  MoxaoLiAN  of  Eastern  Asia  and  America,  with  his  oliye  complexion,  broad  and 
all  but  beardless  face,  oblique  eyes,  and  square  skull ;  and  the  Cavoasian  of  Western  Asia 
and  Europe,  with  his  fiur  skin,  otsI  face,  full  brow,  and  rounded  skull :  such,  as  ereiy 
Bohool-boy  knows,  are  the  three  great  types  or  Tarietiies  into  which  naturalists  have  divided 
the  inhabitants  of  our  planet.  Accepting  this  rough  initial  conception  of  a  world  peopled 
CTerywhere,  more  or  less  completely,  with  these  three  Tarieties  of  human  beings  or  their 
combinations,  the  historian  is  able,  in  virtue  of  it,  to  announce  one  important  fact  at  the 
very  outset,  to  wit:  that^  up  to  the  present  moment,  the  destinies  of  the  species  appear  to 
have  been  carried  forward  almost  exclusiyely  by  its  Caucasian  variety."  ^ 

In  the  broad  field  and  long  duration  of  Negro  life,  not  a  single 
civilization,  spontaneous  or  borrowed,  has  existed,  to  adorn  its  gloomy 
past.  The  ancient  kingdom  of  Mero^  has  been  often  pointed  out  as 
an  exception,  but  this  is  now  proven  to  be  the  work  of  Pharaonic 
Egyptians,  and  not  of  Negro  races.  Of  Mongolian  races,  we  have  the 
prolonged  semi-civilizationd  of  China,  Japan,  and  (if  they  be  classed 

Digitized  by 

Google 

INTRODUCTION.  53 

nn  er  the  same  head)  the  still  feebler  attempts  of  Peru  and  Mexico. 
What  a  contrast,  if  we  compare  with  thoBe, 

*'  Caacasian  progress,  as  exhibited  in  the  splendid  succession  of  distinct  ciTilizations, 
from  the  ancient  Egyptian  to  the  recent  Anglo- American,  to  which  the  Caucasian  part  of 
the  species  has  given  birth.*' 

^  Nor  when  we  examine  their  past  history,  their  anatomical  and  phy- 
siological characters,  and  philological  differences,  are  we  justified  in 
throwing  all  the  Indo-European  and  Semitic  races  into  one  indivisible 
mass. 

**  Cor  species  is  not  a  huge  collection  of  perfectly  similar  hnman  beings,  but  an  aggre- 
gation of  a  number  of  separate  groups  or  masses,  haying  such  subordinate  differences  of 
organization  that,  necessarily,  they  must  understand  nature  differently,  and  employ  in  life 
yery  different  modes  of  procedure;  Assemble  together  a  Negro,  a  Mongol,  a  Shemite,  an 
Armenian,  a  Scythian,  a  Pelasgian,  a  Celt,  and  a  German,  and  you  will  have  before  you 
not  mere  illustrations  of  an  arbitrary  classification,  but  positively  distinct  human  beings  — 
men  whose  relations  to  the  outer  world  are  by  no  means  the  same/' 

'<  In  an,  indeed,  there  will  be  found  the  same  fundamental  instincts  and  powers,  the 
same  obligation  to  recognized  truth;  the  same  feeling  for  the  beautiful,  the  same  abstract 
sense  of  justice,  the  same  necessity  of  reyerence ;  in  all,  the  same  liability  to  do  wrong, 
knowing  it  lo  be  wrong.  These  things  excepted,  however,  what  contrast,  what  variety ! 
The  representative  of  one  race  is  haughty  and  eager  to  strike,  that  of  another  is  meek  and 
patient  of  injury ;  one  has  the  gift  of  slow  and  continued  perseverance,  another  can  labour 
only  at  intervals  and  violently ;  one  is  full  of  mirth  and  humour,  another  walks  as  if  life 
were  a  pain ;  one  is  so  faithftd  and  clear  in  perception,  that  what  he  sees  to-day  he  will 
report  accurately  a  year  hence ;  through  the  head  of  another  there  perpetually  sings  such 
a  buzz  of  fiction  that,  even  as  he  looks,  realities  grow  dim,  and  rocks,  trees,  and  hills,  reel 
before  his  poetic  gaze.  Whether,  with  phrenologists,  we  call  these  differences  craniological ; 
or  whether,  in  the  spirit  of  a  deeper  physiology,  we  adjourn  the  question  by  refusing  to 
connect  them  with  aught  less  than  the  whole  corporeal  organism — bone,  chest,  limbs,  skin, 
muscle,  and  nerve;  they  a^e,  at  all  events,  real  and  substantial;  and  Englishmen  will 
never  conceive  the  world  as  it  is,  will  never  be  intellectually  Its  masters,  until,  realizing 
this  as  a  fact,  they  shall  remember  that  it  is  perfectiy  respectable  to  be  an  Assyrian,  and 
that  an  Italian  is  not  necessarily  a  rogue  because  he  wears  a  moustache."  ^ 

Looking  back  over  the  world's  history,  it  will  be  seen  that  human 
progress  has  arisen  mainly  from  the  war  of  races.  All  the  great 
impulses  which  have  been  given  to  it  from  time  to  time  have  been 
the  results  of  conquests  and  colonizations.  Certain  races  would  be 
stationary  and  barbarous  for  ever,  were  it  not  for  the  introduction  of 
new  blood  and  novel  influences ;  and  some  of  the  lowest  types  are 
hopelessly  beyond  the  reach  even  of  these  salutary  stimulants  to 
melioration. 

It  has  been  naively  remarked  that  — 

<<  Climate  has  no  influence  in  permanentiy  altering  the  varieties  or  races  of  men ;  destroy 
them  it  may,  and  does,  but  it  caimot  convert  them  into  any  other  race ;  nor  can  this  be 
done  by  an  act  of  parliament ;  which,  to  a  thoroughgoing  Englishman,  with  all  his  amusing 
nationalities,  will  appear  as  something  amazing.  It  has  been  tried  in  Wales,  Ireland,  and 
Caledonia,  and  failed.'' 7 

Not  enough  is  it  for  us  to  know  who  and  what  are  the  men  who 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 

54  INTRODUCTION. 

play  a  prominent  part  in  these  changes,  noir  what  is  the  general 
character  of  the  masses  whom  they  influence.  None  can  predict  how 
long  the  power  or  existence  of  these  men  will  last,  nor  foretell  what 
will  be  the  character  of  those  who  succeed  them.  If  we  wish  to  pre- 
dict the  future,  we  must  ascertain  those  great  fundamental  laws  of 
humanity  to  which  all  human  passions  and  human  thoughts  must 
ultimately  be  subject.  We  must  know  universal,  as  well  as  individual 
man.  These  are  questions  upon  which  science  alone  has  the  right  to 
pronoimce. 

"  Where,  we  ask,  are  the  historic  evidences  of  universal  human  equality,  or  unity  ?  The 
farther  we  trace  back  the  records  of  the  past,  the  more  broadly  marked  do  we  find  all 
human  diversities.  In  no  part  of  Europe,  at  the  present  day,  can  we  discover  the  striking 
national  contrasts  which  Tacitus  describes,  still  less  those  represented  in  the  more  ancient 
pages  of  Herodotus."  8 

And  nowhere  on  the  face  of  the  globe  do  we  find  a  greater  diver- 
sity, or  more  strongly-marked  types,  tiian  on  the  monuments  of  Egypt, 
antedating  the  Christian  era  more  than  3000  years. 

Dr.  James  Cowles  Prichard,  for  the  last  half  century,  has  been  the 
grand  orthodox  authority  with  tiie  advocates  of  a  common  origin  for 
the  races  of  men.  His  ponderous  work  on  the  "  Physical  History  of 
Mankind"  is  one  of  the  noblest  monuments  of  learning  and  labour 
to  be  found  in  any  language.  It  has  been  the  never-exhausted  reser- 
voir of  knowledge  from  which  most  subsequent  writers  on  Ethnology 
have  drawn ;  but,  nevertheless,  as  Mr.  Burke  has  sagely  remarked, 
Prichard  has  been  the  "victim  of  a  false  theory."  He  commenced, 
when  adolescent,  by  writing  a  graduating  thesis,  at  Edinburgh,  in 
support  of  the  unity  of  races,  and  the  remainder  of  his  long  life  was 
devoted  to  the  maintenance  of  this  first  impression.  We  behold  him, 
year  after  year,  like  a  bound  giant,  struggling  with  increasing  strength 
against  the  cords  which  cramp  him,  and  we  are  involuntarily  looking 
with  anxiety  to  see  him  burst  them  asunder.  But  how  few  possess 
the  moral  power  to  break  through  a  deep-rooted  pifejudice ! 

Prichard  published  no  less  than  three  editions  of  his  "  Physical 
History  of  Mankind,"  viz. :  in  1813,  1826,  and  1847.  To  one,  how- 
ever, who,  like  ourselves,  has  followed  him  line  by  line,  throughout  his 
whole  literary  life,  the  constant  changes  of  his  opinions,  his  "  special 
pleading,"  and  his  cool  suppression  of  adverse  facts,  leave  little  confi- 
dence in  his  judgment  or  his  cause.  He  set  out,  in  youth,  by  distort- 
ing history  and  science  to  suit  the  theological  notions  of  the  day;  and, 
in  his  mature  age,  concludes  the  final  chapter  of  his  last  volume  by 
abandoning  the  authenticity  of  the  Pentateuch,  which  for  forty  years 
had  been  the  stumbling-block  of  his  life. 

Dr.  Prichard's  defence  of  the  Book  of  Genesis,  in  the  Appendix  to 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 

•s^ 

INTRODUCTION.  55 

the  $fth  volume  of  his  "Researches,"  is  certainly  a  very  extraordinary 
performance.  He  denies  its  genealogies ;  denies  its  chronology;  de- 
nies all  its  historical  and  scientific  details ;  denies  that  it  was  written 
by  Moses;  admits  that  nobody  knows  who  did  write  it;  and  yet, 
withal,  actually  endeavours  "  to  show  that  the  sacred  and  canonical 
authority  of  the  Book  of  Genesis  is  not  injured.** 

We  confess  that  we  cannot  understand  why  one  half  of  the  historical 
portion  of  a  book  should  be  condemned  as  fiilse  and  the  other  received 
as  true,  when  both  stand  upon  equal  authority.  Nor  do  we  think  that 
hi»  dissection  of  other  parts  of  the  Old  Testament  leaves  them  in 
much  better  condition,  as  regards  their  account  of  human  origins. 
Behold  a  sample : 

<<  The  time  of  Ezra,  after  the  Captiyity,  was  the  era  of  historical  compilation,  soon  after 
which  the  Hebrew  language  gave  way  to  a  more  modem  dialect  There  are  indications 
that  the  whole  of  the  Sacred  Books  passed  nnder  seyeral  recensions  during  these  successiye 
ages,  when  they  were,  doubtless,  copied,  and  recopied,  and  iUu8tr€Ued  by  addilioncUpassaffes, 
or  by  glosses,  that  might  be  requisite,  in  order  to  preserve  their  meaning  to  later  times. 
Such  passages  and  glosses  occur  frequently  in  the  different  Books  of  Moses,  aii(l  in  the 
older  historical  books,  and  we  may  thus,  in  a  probable  way,  account  for  the  presence  of 
many  explanatory  notices  and  comments,  of  comparatively  later  date,  which,  unless  thus 
accounted  for,  would  add  weight  to  the  hypotheses  (?)  of  some  German  writers,  who  deny 
the  high  antiquity  of  the  Pentateuch,"  ^ 

On  the  degree  of  orthodoxy  ^aimed  by  the  erudite  Doctor  in  respect 
to  chronology,  the  following  extract  will  speak  for  itself: 

(« Beyond  that  event  [arrival  of  Abraham  in  Palestine,]  we  can  never  know  how  many 
centuries,  nor  even  how  many  thousands  of  years,  may  have  elapsed  since  the  first  man  of 
clay  received  the  image  of  God,  and  the  breath  of  life.  Still,  as  the  thread  of  genealogy 
has  been  traced,  though  probably  with  many  great  intervals,  the  whole  duration  of  tioie 
firom  the  beginning  must  apparently  have  been  within  moderate  bounds,  and  by  no  means 
80  wide  and  vast  a  space  as  the  great  periods  of  the  Indian  and  Egyptian  fabulists," 

Instead  of  thus  nervpusly  shifting  his  scientific  and  theological 
grounds  from  year  to  year,  how  much  more  dignified,  and  becoming 
to  both  science  and  religion,  would  it  have  been,  had  Prichard  simply 
followed  facts,  wherever  they  might  lead  in  science;  and  had  he 
frankly  acknowledged  that  the  Bible  really  gives  no  history  of  all  the 
races  of  Men,  and  but  a  meagre  account  of  one  ?  He  was  indeed  the 
victim  of  a  false  theory ;  and  we  could  not  but  be  struck  by  the 
applicability  of  the  following  pencil-note  to  his  first  volume  (1813), 
written  on  the  margin,  just  forty  years  ago,  by  the  late  distinguished 
Dr,  Thomas  Cooper,  President  of  South  Carolina  College  : 

«This  is  a  book  by  an  industrious  compiler,  but  an  inconclusive  reasoner ;  he  wears  the 
orthodox  costume  of  his  nation  and  his  day.  No  man  can  be  a  good  reasoner  who  is  marked 
by  clerical  prejudices." 

Alas !  for  his  fame.  Dr.  Prichard  continued  to  change  his  costume 
with  the  feshion ;  and  some  truths  of  the  Universe,  most  essential  to 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC 

66  INTEODUCTIOK. 

Man,  have  thereby  been  kept  in  darkness,  that  is,  out  of  the  popular 
sight,  by  erroneous  interpretations  of  God's  works,  ^ 

Albeit,  in  his  last  edition,  Prichard  evidentiy  perceived,  in  the 
distance,  a  glimmer  of  light  dawning  from  the  time-worn  monuments 
of  "  Old  Egypt,"  destined  eventually  to  dispel  the  obfiiscations  with 
which  he  had  enshrouded  the  history  of  Man ;  and  to  destroy  that 
darling  unitaiy  fabric  on  which  all  his  energies  had  beeu  expended. 
Had  he  lived  but  two  years  longer,  until  the  mighty  discoveries  of 
Lepsius  were  unfolded  to  the  world,  he  would  have  realized  that  the 
honorable  occupation  of  his  long  life  had  been  only  to  accumulate 
fitcts,  which,  properly  interpreted,  shatter  everything  he  had  built 
upon  them.    In  the  preface  to  vol.  iii.,  he  says : 

**  If  it  should  be  found  that,  within  the  period  of  time  to  which  historical  testimony 
extends,  the  distingnishing  characters  of  human  races  haye  been  constant  and  undeviating, 
it  would  become  a  matter  of  great  difficulty  to  reconcile  this  conclusion  [t.  e.  the  unity  of 
all  mankind,]  with  the  inferences  already  obtained  from  other  considerations." 

In  other  words,  if  hypotheses,  and  deductions  drawn  from  analo- 
gies among  the  lower  animals,  should  be  refuted  by  well-ascertained 
fects,  demonstrative  of  the  absolute  independence  of  the  primitive 
types  of  mankind  of  all  existing  moral  and  physical  causes,  during 
several  thousand  years,  Prichard  himself  concedes,  that  every  argu- 
ment heretofore  adduced  in  support  of  a  common  origin  for  human 
families  must  be  abandoned.  •* 

One  of  the  main  objects  of  this  volume  is  to  show,  that  the  criterion- 
point,  indicated  by  Prichard,  is  now  actually  arrived  at ;  and  that  the 
diversity  of  races  must  be  accepted  by  Science  as  a/a<?f,  independentiy 
of  theology,  and  of  all  analogies  or  reasonings  drawn  from  the 
animal  kingdom. 

It  will  be  observed  that,  with  the  exception  of  Morton's,  we 
seldom  quote  works  on  the  Natural  Histoiy  of  Man;  and  simply 
for  the  reason,  that  their  arguments  are  all  based,  more  or  less,  on 
fabled  analo^es,  which  are  at  last  proved  by  the  monuments  of  Egypt 
and  Assyria  to  be  worthless.  The  whole  method  of  treating  the 
subject  is  herein  changed.  To  our  point  of  view,  most  that  has  been 
written  on  human  Natural  History  becomes  obsolete ;  and  therefore 
we  have  not  burthened  our  pages  with  citations  from  authors,  even 
the  most  erudite  and  respected,  whose  views  we  consider  the  present 
work  to  have,  in  the  main,  superseded. 

Such  is  not  our  course,  however,  where  others  have  anticipated  any 
conclusion  we  may  have  attained ;  and  we  are  happy  to  find  that 
Jacquinot  had  previously  recognized  tiie  principle  which  has  over- 
thrown Prichard's  unitary  scheme : 

"  If  the  great  branches  of  the  human  family  haye  remidned  distinct  in  the  lapse  of  ages, 
with  their  characteristics  fixed  and  unalterable,  we  are  justified  in  regarding  mankind  as 
diTisible  into  dutinci  tpedet."  w  r^  l 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 

INTRODUCTION.  57 

Four  years  ago,  in  our  "Biblical  and  Physical  History  of  Man,"" 
we  published  the  following  remarks :  — 

"  If  the  Unity  of  the  Races  or  Species  of  Men  be  assumed,  there  are  but  three  supposi- 
tions on  which  the  diveraity  now  seen  in  the  white,  black,  and  intermediate  colors,  can  be 
accounted  for,  yiz, : 

<*  Ist  A  tniraele,  or  direct  act  of  the  Almighty,  in  ohapging  one  type  into  another. 
**  2d.   The  gradual  action  of  Physical  causes,  such  as  climate,  food,  mode  of  Ufe,  &c 
'*  Sd.   Congenital,  or  accidental  Tarieties. 
<*  There  being  no  eyidence  whatever  in  fftTor  of  the  first  hypothesis,  we  pass  it  by.     The 
second  and  third  have  been  sustained  with  signal  ability  by  Br.  Prichard,  in  his  Physical 
History  of  Mankind." 

Although,  even  then,  thoroughly  convinced  ourselves  that  the  second 
and  third  hypotheses  were  aheady  refuted  by  facts,  and  that  they 
would  soon  be  generally  abandoned  by  men  of  science,  we  confess 
that  we  had  little  hope  of  seeing  this  triumph  achieved  so  speedily ; 
still  less  did  we  expect,  in  this  matter-of-fact  age,  to  behold  a  miracUj 
which  exists  too,  not  in  the  Bible,  but  only  in  feverish  imaginations, 
assumed  as  a  scientific  solution.  Certain  sectarians^  of  the  evange- 
lical school  are  now  gravely  attempting,  from  lack  of  argument,  to 
revive  the  old  hypothesis  of  a  miraculous  change  of  one  race  into 
many  at  the  Tower  of  Babel !  Such  notions,  however,  do  not  deserve 
serious  consideration,  as  neither  religion  nor  science  has  anything  to  do 
with  unsustainable  hypotheses. 

The  views,  moreover,  that  we  expressed  in  1849,  touching  Phy- 
sical Causes,  Congenital  Varieties,  &c.,  need  no  modification  at  the 
present  day ;  but,  on  the  contrary,  will  be  found  amply  sustained  by 
the  progress  of  science,  as  set  forth  in  the  succeeding  chapters.  We 
make  bold  to  add  an  extract  fi:om  our  opinions  published  at  that 
time:  — 

**  Is  it  not  strange  that  all  the  remarkable  changes  of  type  spoken  of  by  Prichard  and 
others  should  have  occurred  in  remote  antehistoric  times,  and  amongst  ignorant  erratic 
tribes  ?  Why  is  it  that  no  instance  of  these  remarkable  changes  can  be  pointed  out  which 
admits  of  conclusive  evidence  ?  The  civilized  nations  of  Europe  have  been  for  many  cen- 
turies sending  colonies  tO'Asia^  Africa,  and  America ;  amongst  Mongols,  Malays,  Africans, 
and  Indians ;  and  why  has  no  example  occurred  in  any  of  these  colonies  to  substantiate 
the  argument  ?  The  doubtful  examples  of  Prichard  are  refuted  by  others,  which  he  cites 
on  the  adverse  side,  of  a  positive  nature.  He  gives  examples  of  Jews,  Persians,  Hindoos, 
Arabs,  &c.,  who  have  emigrated  to  foreign  climates,  and,  at  the  end  of  one  thousand  or 
fifteen  hundred  years,  have  preserved  their  original  types  in  the  midst  of  widely  different 
races.     Does  nature  anywhere  operate  by  such  opposite  and  contradictory  laws  ? 

**  A  few  generations  in  animals  are  sufficient  to  produce  all  the  changes  they  usually 
undergo  from  climate,  and  yet  the  races  of  men  retain  their  leading  characteristics  for 
ages,  without  approximating  to  aboriginal  types. 

**  In  fact,  so  unsatisfactory  is  the  argument  based  on  the  influence  of  climate  to  Prichard 
himself,  that  he  virtually  abandons  it  in  the  following  paragraph :  '  It  must  be  observed,' 
says  he,  *  that  the  changes  alluded  to  do  not  so  often  take  place  by  alteration  in  the  phy- 
sical  character  of  a  whole  tribe  simultaneously,  as  by  the  apringing  up  of  some  new  congenital 
peculiarity,  which  is  afterwards  propagated,  and  becomes  a  character  more  or  less  constant 

8  Digitized*by  VjOOQIC 

58  INTRODUCTION. 

in  the  progeny  of  the  indiyidaals  in  vhom  it  first  appeared,  and  is  perhc^  gradually  oom- 
municated  by  intermarriages  to  a  whole  stock  or  tribe.  This,  it  is  obTious,  can  only  happen 
in  a  long  course  of  time.* 

"  We  beg  leaTe  to  fix  yoor  attention  on  this  Tital  point  It  is  a  commonly  received  error 
that  the  influence  of  a  hot  climate  is  gradually  exerted  on  successiye  generations,  until  one 
species  of  mankind  is  completely  changed  into  another ;  a  dark  shade  is  impressed  on  the 
first,  and  transmitted  to  the  second ;  another  shade  is  added  to  the  third,  which  is  handed 
down  to  the  fourth ;  and  so  on,  through  successiye  generations,  until  the  fair  German  is 
transformed,  by  climate,  into  the  black  African ! 

**  This  idea  is  proven  to  be  falte,  and  is  abandoned  by  the  well-informed  writers  of  all 
parties.  A  sunburnt  cheek  is  never  handed  down  to  succeeding  generations.  The  exposed 
parts  of  the  body  alone  are  tanned  by  the  sun,  and  the  children  of  the  white>skinned  Euro- 
peans in  New  Orleans,  Mobile,  and  the  West  Indies,  are  bom  as  fair  as  their  ancestors,  and 
would  remain  so,  if  carried  back  to  a  colder  climate.  The  same  may  be  said  of  other  . 
acquired  characters,  (except  those  from  want  and  disease.)  They  die  with  the  individual, 
and  are  no  more  capable  of  transmission  than  a  flattened  head,  mutilated  limb,  or  tattooed 
skin.    We  repeat,  that  this  fact  is  settled,  and  challenge  a  deniaL 

**  The  only  argument  left,  then,  for  the  advocates  of  the  unity  of  the  human  species  to 
fall  back  upon,  is  that  of  *  congenital^  varieties  or  peculiarities,  which  are  said  to  spring  up, 
and  be  transmitted  firom  parent  to  child,  so  as  to  form  new  races. 

*<  Let  us  pause  for  a  moment  to  illustrate  this  fanciful  idea.  The  Negroes  of  Africa,  for 
example,  are  admitted  not  to  be  offsets  from  some  other  race,  which  have  been  gradually 
blackened  and  changed  in  moral  and  i^hysical  type  by  the  action  of  climate ;  but  it  is  asserted 
that,  *  once  in  the  flight  of  ages  past,'  some  genuine  little  Negro,  or  rather  many  such,  were 
bom  of  Caucasian,  Mongol,  or  other  light-skinned  parents,  and  then  have  turned  about 
and  changed  the  type  of  the  inhabitants  of  a  whole  continent  So  in  America :  the  count- 
less aborigines  found  on  this  continent,  which  we  have  reason  to  believe  (see  Squier's  work) 
were  building  mounds  before  the  time  of  Abraham,  are  the  offspring  of  a  race  changed  by 
accidental  or  congenital  varieties.  Thus,  too,  old  China,  India,  Australia,  Oceanica,  etc., 
all  owe  their  types,  physical  and  mental,  to  congenital  or  aeeidental  varieOet,  and  all  are 
descended  from  Adam  and  Eve !  Can  human  credulity  go  farther,  or  human  ingenuity 
invent  any  argument  more  absurd  ?  Yet  the  whole  groundwork  of  a  common  origin  for 
some  nine  dr  ten  hundred  millions  of  human  beings,  embracing  numerous  distinct  types, 
which  are  lost  in  an  antiquity  far  beyond  all  records  or  chronology,  sacred  or  profane,  is 
narrowed  down  to  this  '  baseless  fabric' 

"  In  support  of  this  argument,  we  are  told  of  the  Porcupine  family  of  England,  ,which 
inherited  for  some  generations  a  peculiar  condition  of  the  skin,  characterized  by  thickened 
warty  excrescences.  We  are  told  also  of  the  transmission  fh>m  parent  to  child  of  club  feet, 
cross  eyes,  six  fingers,  deafhess,  blindness,  and  many  other  familiar  examples  of  congenital 
peculiarities.  But  these  examples  merely  serve  to  disproye  the  argument  they  are  intended 
to  sustain.  Did  any  one  ever  hear  of  a  club-foot,  cross-eyed,  or  six-fingered  race,  although 
such  indiriduals  are  exceedingly  common?  Ar^  they  not,  on  the  contrary,  always  swallowed 
up  and  lost  ?  Is  it  not  strange,  if  there  be  any  truth  in  this  argument,  that  no  race  has 
ever  been  formed  from  those  congenital  varieties  which  we  know  to  occur  frequently,  and 
yet  races  should  originate  firom  congenital  yarieties  which  cannot  be  proved,  and  are  not 
believed,  by  our  best  writers,  ever  to  have  existed  ?  No  one  ever  saw  a  Negro,  Mongol,  or 
Indian,  bom  from  any  but  his  own  species.  Has  any  one  heard  of  an  Indian  child  bom 
fh>m  white  or  black  parents  in  America,  during  more  than  two  centuries  that  these  races 
have  been  living  here  ?  la  not  this  brief  and  simple  statement  of  the  case  sufficient  to 
satisfy  any  one,  that  the  diversity  of  species  now  seen  on  the  earth,  cannot  be  accounted 
for  on  the  assumption  of  congenital  or  accidental  origin  ?  If  a  doubt  remains,  would  it  not 
be  expelled  by  the  recollection  of  the  fact  that  the  Negro,  Tartar,  and  white  man,  existed, 
with  their  present  types,  at  least  one  thousand  years  before  Abraham  journeyed  to  Egypt 
M  a  Buppiioant  to  the  mighty  Pharaoh  ? 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC 

INTRODUCTION.  59 

« The  unity  of  the  human  species  has  also  been  stoutly  maintained  on  psychological 
grounds.  Numerous  attempts  have  been  made  to  establish  the  intellectual  equality  of  the 
dark  races  with  the  white ;  and  the  history  of  the  past  has  been  ransacked  for  examples, 
but  they  are  nowhere  to  be  found.  Can  any  one  call  the  name  of  a  ftill-blooded  Negro  who 
has  ever  written  a  page  worthy  of  being  remembered  ?  " 

The  avowal  of  the  above  views  drew  down  upon  us,  as  might  have 
been  expected,  criticisms  more  remarkable  for  virulence  of  hostility, 
than  for  the  scientific  education  of  the  critics.  Our  present  volume 
is  an  evidence  that  w;e  have  survived  these  transient  cavils ;  and  while 
we  have  much  satisfaction  in  submitting  herein  a  mass  oi  facU  that, 
to  the  generality  of  readers  in  this  country,  will  be  surprising,  we 
would  remind  the  theologist,  in  the  language  of  the  very  orthodox 
Hugh  Miller  (Footprints  of  the  Creator),  that 

**  The  clergy,  as  a  class,  suiTer  themselves  t^  linger  far  in  the  rear  of  an  intelligent  and 
accomplished  laity.  Let  them  not  shut  their  eyes  to  the  danger  which  is  obTiously  coming. 
The  battle  of  the  CTldences  of  Christianity  will  haye,  as  certainly  to  be  fought  on  the  field 
of  physical  scienoe,  as  it  was  contested  in  the  last  age  on  that  of  the  metaphysics." 

The  Physical  history  of  Man  has  been  likewise  trammelled  for  ages 
by  arbitrary  systems  of  Chronology ;  more  especially  by  that  of  the 
Hebrews,  which  is  now  considered,  by  all  competent  authorities,  as 
altogether  worthless  beyond  the  time  of  Abraham,  and  of  little  value 
previously  to  that  of  Solomon ;  for  it  is  in  his  reign  that  we  reach 
their  last  positive  date.  The  abandonment  of  this  restricted  system 
is  a  great  point  gained ;  because,  instead  of  being  obliged  to  crowd 
an  immense  antiquity,  embracing  endless  details,  into  a  few  centuries, 
we  are  now  fi:ee  to  classify  and  arrange  facts  as  the  requirements  of 
history  and  science  demand.  «> 

It  is  now  generally  conceded  that  there  exist  no  data  by  which  we 
can  approximate  tiie  date  of  man's  first  appearance  upon  eartii ;  and, 
for  aught  we  yet  know,  it  may  be  thousands  or  millions  of  years 
beyond  our  reach.  The  spurious  systems,  of  Archbishop  Usher  on  the 
Hebrew  Text,  and  of  Dr.  Hales  on  the  Septuagint,  being  entirely 
broken  down,  we  turn,  unshackled  by  prejudice,  to  the  monumental 
records  of  Egypt  as  our  best  guide.  Even  these  soon  lose  themselves, 
not  in  the  primitive  state  of  man,  but  in  his  middle  or  perhaps  modem 
ages ;  for  the  Egyptian  Empire  first  presents  itself  to  view,  about 
4000  years  before  Christ,  astthat  of  a  mighty  nation,  in  fiill  tide  of 
civilization,  and  surrounded  by  other  realms  and  races  already 
emerging  fix>m  the  barbarous  stage. 

In  order  that  a  clear  understanding  with  the  reader  may  be  estab- 
lished in  the  following  pages,  it  becomes  necessary  to  adopt  some 
common  standard  of  chronology  for  facility  of  reference. 

An  esteemed  correspondent,  Mr.  Birch,  of  the  British  Museum, 
aptly  observes  to  us  in  a  private  letter — "Although  I  can  see  what  ia 

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 

60  INTRODUCTION. 

not  the  fact  in  chronology,  I  have  not  come  to  the  conclusion  of  what 
is  the  truth."  Such  is  precisely  our  own  condition  of  mind ;  nor  do 
we  suppose  that  a  conscientious  student  of  the  subject,  as  developed 
under  its  own  head  at  the  close  of  this  volume,  can  at  the  present 
hour  obtain,  for  epochas  anterior  to  Abraham,  a  solution  that  must  not 
itself  be,  vague  for  a  century  or  more.  Nevertheless,  in  Egyptian 
chronology,  we  follow  the  system  of  Lepsius  by  assuming  the  age  of 
Menes  at  B.  C.  3893 ;  in  Chinese,  we  accept  Pauthier's  date  for  the 
Ist  historical  dynasty  at  B.  C.  2637 ;  in  Assyrian,  the  results  of 
Layard's  last  Jouraey  indicate  B.  C.  1250  as  the  probable  extreme  of 
that  country's  monumental  chronicles  ;  and  finally,  in  Hebrew  com- 
putation, we  agree  with  Lepsius  in  deeming  Abraham's  era  to  approxi- 
mate to  B.  C.  1500.  Our  Supplement  offers  to  the  critical  reader  every 
facility  of  verification,  with  comparative  Tables,  the  repetition  of 
which  is  here  superfluous. 

To  Egyptology,  beyond  all  question,  belongs  the  honor  of  dissi- 
pating those  chronological  fables  of  past  generations,  continued  belief 
in  which,  since  the  recent  publication  of  Chev'r  Lepsius's  researches, 
implies  simply  the  credulity  of  ignorance.  One  of  his  letters  from 
the  Pyramids  of  Memphis,  in  1843,  contained  the  following  almost 
prophetic  passage :  ^ 

**  We  are  still  basy  with  stmctares,  sculptures,  and  insoriptioDS,  which  are  to  be  classed, 
by  means  of  the  now  more  accurately-determined  groups  of  kings,  in  an  epoch  of  highly- 
flourishing  civilization,  as  far  back  as  the  fourth  Millennium  before  Christ  We  cannot  suffi- 
ciently impress  upon  ourselTCS  and  others  these  hitherto  incredible  dates.  The  more 
criticism  is  proToked  by  them,  and  forced  to  serious  examination,  the  better  for  the  cause. 
Conyiotion  will  soon  follow  angry  criticism ;  and,  finally,  those  results  will  be  attained, 
which  are  so  intimately  connected  with  CTery  branch  of  antiquarian  research." 

We  subscribe  without  reservation  to  the  above  sentiment;  and 
hope  we  shall  not  be  disappointed  in  the  amount  of  "  angry  criticism  " 
which  we  think  the  truths  embodiejd  in  this  volume  are  calculated  to 
provoke.  Scientific  truth,  exemplified  in  the  annals  of  Astronomy, 
Geology,  Chronology,  Geographical  distribution  of  animals,  &c.,  has 
literally  fought  its  way  inch  by  inch  through  false  theology.  The  last 
grand  battle  between  science  and  dogmatism,  on  the  primitive  origin  of 
races,  has  now  commenced.  It  requires  no  prophetic  eye  to  foresee 
that  science  must  again,  and  finally,  triumph. 

It  may  be  proper  to  state,  in  conclusion^  that  the  subject  shall  be 
treated  purely  as  one  of  science,  and  that  our  colleague  and  ourself 
will  follow  fiacts  wherever  they  may  lead,  without  regard  to  imaginary 
consequences.  Locally,  the  "Friend  of  Moses,'*  no  less  than  other 
"friends  of  the  Bible"  everywhere,  have  been  compelled  to  make 
large  concessions  to  science.  We  shall,  in  the  present  investigation, 
treat  the  Scriptures  simply  in  their  historical  and  scientific  bearings. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 

INTRODUCTION.  61 

On  fonner  occasions,  and  in  the  most  respectful  manner,  we  had 
attempted  to  conciliate  sectarians,  and  to  reconcile  the  plain  teachings 
of  science  with  theological  prejudices ;  but  to  no  useful  purpose.  In 
return,  our  opinions  and  motives  have  been  misrepresented  and  vilified 
by  self-constituted  teachers  of  the  Christian  religion !  We  have,  in 
consequence,  now  done  with  all  this ;  and  no  longer  have  any  apologies 
to  offer,  nor  fitvors  of  leniont  criticism  to  ask.  The  broad  banner 
of  science  is  herein  nailed  to  the  mast  Even  in  our  own  brief  day, 
we  have  beheld  one  flimsy  religious  dogma  after  another  consigned  to 
oblivion,  while  science,  on  the  other  hand,  has  been  gaining  strength 
and  majesty  with  time.  "Nature,"  says  Luke  Burke,  "has  nothing 
to  reveal,  that  is  not  noble,  and  beautiful,  and  good." 
In  our  former  language, 

*'  Man  can  invent  nothing  in  soienoe  or  religion  but  falsehood ;  and  aU  the  trnths  which 
he  dUeavart  are  but  facts  or  laws  which  haye  emanated  from  the  Creator.  All  science, 
theVefore,  may  be  regarded  as  a  rcTclation  from  Hm ;  and  although  newly-discovered  laws, 
or  facts,  in  nature,  may  conflict  with  religious  erron,  which  haye  been  written  and  preached 
for  centuries,  they  never  can  conflict  with  religious  truth.  There  must  be  harmony  between 
the  works  and  the  words  of  the  Almighty,  and  idiererer  they  teem  to  conflict,  the  discord 
has  been  produced  by  the  ignorance  or  wickedness  of  mm." 

J.  C.  N. 

HoBiLi,  Avffwt^  1868. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

PART    I. 

CHAPTER   I. 

GEOGRAPHICAL  DISTBIBUTION  OF  ANIMALS,  AND  THE  RACES  OF  MEN. 

Have  all  the  living  creatures  of  our  globe  been  created  at  one 
common  point  in  Asia,  and  thence  been  disseminated  over  its  wide 
surfece  by  degrees,  and  adapted  to  tiie  varied  conditions  in  which 
they  have  been  found  in  historical  times  ?  or,  on  the  other  hand,  have 
different  genera  and  species  been  created  at  points  far  distant  from 
each  other,  with  organizations  suited  to  the  circumstances  in  which 
they  were  originally  placed? 

Two  schools  have  long  existed,  diametrically  opposed  to  each  other, 
on  this  question.  The  firit  may  be  termed  that  of  the  Theological 
Katuralists,  who  still  look  to  the  Book  of  Genesis,  or  what  they  conceive 
to  be  the  inspired  word  of  God,  as  a  text-book  of  Natural  History,  as 
,they  formerly  reputed  it  to  be  a  manual  of  Astronomy  and  Geology. 
The  second  embraces  the  Naturalists  proper,  whose  conclusions  are 
derived  from  facts,  and  fix)m  the  laws  of  God  as  revealed  in  his  works, 
which  are  immutable. 

Not  only  the  authority  of  Genesis  in  matters  of  science,  but  the 
Mosaic  authenticity  of  this  book,  is  now  questioned  by  a  veiy  large 
proportion  of  the  most  authoritative  theologians  of  the  present  day ; 
and,  inasmuch  as  its  language  is  clearly  opposed  to  many  of  the  well- 
established  facts  of  modem  science,  we  shall  unhesitatingly  take  the 
benefit  of  this  liberal  construction.  The  language  of  Scripture  touching 
the  point  now  before  us  is  so  imequivocal,  and  so  often  repeated,  as 
to  leave  no  doubt  as  to  the  author's  meaning.  It  teaches  clearly  that 
the  Deluge  was  universalj  that  every  living  creature  on  the  face  of  the 
earth  at  the  time  was  destroyed,  and  that  seeds  of  all  the  organized 
beings  of  after  times  were  saved  in  Noah's  Ark.  The  following  is  but 
a  small  portion  of  its  oft-repeated  words  on  this  head :  — 

(62) 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 

DISTRIBUTION    OP    ANIMALS,    ETC.  63 

«  And  the  waters  preraUed  exceedingly  upon  the  earth,  and  all  the  high  hills  that  were 
under  the  whole  heayen,  were  covered.  *  *  *  Fifteen  cubits  upward  did  the  waters  prevail 
and  the  mountains  were  covered.  *  *  *  And  all  flesh  died  that  m^ved  npon  the  earth,  both 
of  fowl,  and  of  cattle,  and  of  beast,  and  every  creeping  thing  that  creepeth  upon  the  earth, 
and  evei^  man.  All  in  whose  nostrils  was  the  breath  of  life ;  of  all  that  was  in  the  dry 
land.  *  *  *  And  Noah  only  remained  alive,  and  they  that  were  with  him  in  the  Ark."  ^^ 

Now  we  reiterate  that  speech  cannot  be  more  explicit  than  this ;  and 
if  it  be  true,  it  must  apply  with  equal  force  to  aU  living  creatures  — 
ajiimals  as  well  aa  mankind  It  is  really  trifling  with  language  to 
say,  that  the  Text  does  not  distiuctly  convey  the  idea  that  all  the 
creatures  of  our  day  have  descended  from  the  seed  saved  in  the  Ark ; 
or  that  they  were  all  created  within  a  certain  area  around  the  point 
at  which  Adam  and  Eve  are  supposed  first  to  have  had  their  being. 

Although  the  same  general  laws  prevail  throughout  the  entire  Fauna ' 
and  Flora  of  the  globe,  yet  in  the  illustration  of  our  subject,  we 
restrict  our  remarks  mainly  to  the  class  of  MammiferB,  because  a  wider 
range  would  lead  beyond  our  prescribed  limits. 

It  has  been  a  popularly-received  error,  from  time  immemorial,  that 
degrees  of  latitude,  or  in  other  words,  temperature  of  countries,  were 
to  be  regarded  as  a  sure  index  of  tiie  color  and  of  certain  other  physical 
characters  in  races  of  men.  This  opinion  has  been  supported  by  many 
able  writers  of  the  present  century,  and  even  in  the  last  few  years  by 
no  less  authority  than  that  of  the  distinguished  Dr.  Prichard,  in  the 
^^Physical  HUtory  of  Mankind^*  A  rapid  change,  however,  is  now 
going  on  in  the  public  mind  in  tiiis  respect,  and  so  conclusive  is  the 
recent  evidence  drawn  irom  the  monuments  of  Egypt  and  other 
sources,  in  support  of  the  permanence  of  distinctly  marked  types 
of  mankind,  such  as  the  Egyptians,  Jews,  Negroes,  Mongols,  American 
Indians,  etc.,  that  we  presume  tio  really  well-informed  naturalist  will 
again  be  found  advocating  such  philosophic  heresies.  Indeed,  it 
is  difficult  to  conceive  how  any  one,  with  the  facts  before  him,  (recorded 
by  Prichard  himself,)  in  connection  with  an  Ethnographical  Map,  should 
believe  that  climate  could  account  for  the  endless  diversity  of  races 
seen  scattered  over  the  earth  from  the  earliest  dawn  of  history. 

It  is  true  that  most  of  the  black  races  are  found  in  Africa ;  but,  on 
the  other  hand,  many  equally  black  are  met  with  in  the  temperate  cli- 
mates of  India,  Australia,  and  Oceanica,  though  differing  in  every 
attribute  except  color.  A  black  skin  would  seem  to  be  the  best  suited 
to  hot  climates,  ana  for  this  reason  we  may  suppose  that  a  special 
creation  of  black  races  took  place  in  Africa.  The  strictly  white  races 
lie  mostly  in  the  Temperate  Zone,  where  they  flourish  best;  and  they 
certainly  deteriorate  physically,  if  not  intellectually,  when  removed 
to  hot  climates.  Their  type  is  not  in  reality  changed  or  obliterated, 
but  they  undergo  a  degradation  from  their  primitive  state,  analogouB 

Digitized  by 

Google 

64       '  DISTRIBUTION    OP    ANIMALS. 

to  the  operation  of  disease.  The  diurk-skinned  Hyperboreans  are 
found  in  the  Frigid  Zone ;  re^ons  most  congenial  to  their  nature,  and 
from  which  they  cannot  be  enticed  by  more  temperate  climes.  The 
Mongols  of  Asia,  and  the  aborigines  of  America^  with  their  peculiar 
types,  are  spread  over  almost  all  degrees  of  latitude. 

So  is  it  with  the  whole  range  of  Mammifers,  as  well  as  birds,  and 
other  genera.  The  lightest  and  the  d^kest  colors — the  most  gorge- 
ous and  most  sombre  plumage,  are  everywhere  found  beside  each 
other;  though  brilliant  feathers  and  colors  are  commoner  in  tlie 
tropics,  where  men  are  generally  more  or  less  d^k. 

Every  spot  on  the  earth's  surfiEWje,  from  pole  to  pole — the  moun- 
tains and  valleys,  the  dry  land  and  the  water — has  its  organized 
beings,  which  find  around  a  given  centre  all  the  conditions  necessary 
for  their  preservation.  These  living  beings  are  as  innumerable  as 
the  conditions  of  the  places  they  inhabit;  and  their  difierent  stations 
are  as  varied  as  their  instincts  and  habits.  To  consider  these  stations 
under  the  simple  point  of  view  of  the  distribution  of  heat  on  their 
,surfitce,  is  absolutely  to  see  but  one  of  the  many  secondary  natural" 
causes  that  influence  organized  beings. 

Amidst  the  infinitude  of  beings  spread  over  the  globe,  the  Class  of 
Mammifers  stands  first  in  organization,  and  at  its  head  Zoologists 
have  placed  tibte  JSimanes  (Mankind).  It  is  the  least  numerous,  and 
its  genera  and  species  are  almost  entirely  known. 

This  class  is  composed  of  about  200  genera,  which  may  be  divided 
into  two  parts.  1st  Those  whose  habitations  are  limited  to  a  single 
Zone.  2d.  Those,  on  the  contrary,  which  are  scattered  through  all 
the  Zones.  There  would  at  first  seem  to  be  a  striking  contrast 
between  these  two  divisions ;  on  the  one  side,  complete  immobility ^ 
and  on  the  other,  great  mobility;  but  this  irregularity  is  only  apparent, 
for  when  we  examine  attentively  the  difierent  genera,  we  find  them 
governed  by  the  same  laws.  Those  of  the  first  division,  whose  habitat 
is  limited,  are  in  general  confined  to  a  few  species;  while  those  of 
the  second,  on  the  contrary,  contain  many  species^  but  which  are 
themselves  confined  to  certain  localities,  in  the  same  manner  as  the 
fewer  genera  of  the  first  division.  Thus  we  find  the  same  law 
governing  species  in  both  instances.  We  will  cite  a  single  example 
out  of  many.  The  White  Bear  .is  confined  to  the  Polar  regions, 
while  other  ursine  species  inhabit  the  tempclh^te  climates  of  the 
mountain  chains  of  Europe  and  America;  and  finally,  the  Malay 
Bear,  and  the  Bear  of  Borneo,  are  restricted  to  torrid  climates. 

We  may  then  consider  the  different  species  of  Mammifers  as  ranged 
under  an  identical  law  of  geographical  distribution,  and  that  each 
species  on  the  globe  has  its  limited  space,  beyond  which  it  does  not 

Digitized  by 

Google 

AKD    THE    RACES    OF    HEK.  65 

extend ;  and  that  eveiy  country  on  the  globe,  whatever  may  be  its 
temperature,  its  analogies,  or  differences  of  climate,  possesses  its 
own  Mammifers,  different  from  those  of  other  countries,  belonging 
to  its  region  alone.  There  are  apparent  exceptions  to  this  law,  but 
they  are  all  susceptible  of  explanation.^ 

A  few  species  are  really  common  to  the  two  continents,  but  only  in 
the  Arctic  region.  America  and  Asia  are  there  united  by  icy  plains, 
which  may  be  easily  traversed  by  certain  animals ;  and,  while  the 
White  Bear,  the  Wol^  the  Red  Fox,  the  Glutton,  are  common  to 
both,  the  continents  and  climates  may  there  be  really  considered  as 
one.  We  shall  show,  as  we  proceed,  that  with  a  few  exceptions  in  the 
Arctic  region^  the  Faun»  and  Florce  of  the  two  continents  are  entirely 
distinct,  and  that  even  the  Temperate  Zones  of  Korth  and  South  . 
America  do  not  present  the  same  types,  although  they  are  separated 
by  mere  table-lands,  presenting  none  of  the  extremes  of  climate 
encountered  in  the  Tropic  of  Afiica. 

But  this  immobility,  imposed  by  nature  on  its  creatures,  is  illustrated 
in  a  still  more  striking  manner  if  we  turn  to  those  Mammifers  that 
inhabit  the  oceanj  where  there  are  no  appreciable  impediments,  none 
of  those  infinitely  varied  conditions  which  are  seen  upon  land,  even 
in  the  same  parallels  of  latitude.  The  temperature  of  the  ocean 
varies  all  but  insensibly  with  degrees  of  latitude ;  and  among  the 
inmiense  crowd  of  animals  that  inhabit  it,  we  find  numerous  families 
of  Mammifers.  Although  endowed  with  great  powers  of  locomotion^ 
and  notwithstanding  the  trifling  obstacles  opposed  to  them,  they  are, 
like  animals  of  the  land,  limited  to  certain  localities.  The  genera 
Calocephalu9y  Stemmatopes  and  Moraey  are  peculiar  to  the  Northern 
Seas.  In  the  Southern,  on  the  contraiy,  we  find  the  genera  Otarity 
Stenwrynchu9y  Platyrynchu%y  &c.  Other  species  inhabit  only  hot  or 
temperate  regions. 

The  various  species  of  Whales  and  Dolphins,  despite  their  prodi- 
^ous  powers  of  locomotion,  are  confined  each  to  regions  originally 
assigned  them ;  and,  while  there  is  so  littie  difference  of  temperature 
in  the  oc^an,  that  a  human  being  might,  in  the  mild  season,  swim 
with  delight  from  the  North  Temperate  Zone  to  Cape  Horn,  along 
either  coast  of  America,  there  is  no  degree  of  latitude  in  which  we 
do  not  discover  species  peculiar  to  itself. 

After  a  resume  of  these  and  many  kindred  fiacts,  M.  Jacquinot 
uses  this  emphatic  language : 

*<  To  recapitnUte,  it  seems  to  us,  after  all  ire  haTe  said,  that  ire  may  draw  the  foUoiring 
conclusions,  Tix.,  that  all  Mammifers  on  the  globe  haye  a  habitation,  limited  and  circum- 
scribed, which  thej  never  OTcrleap ;  their  assemblage  contributes  to  giye  to  each  country  its 
particular  stamp  of  creation.  What  a  contrast  between  the  Mammifers  of  the  (Hd  and 
New  World,  and  the  creations,  so  special  and  so  singular,  of  New  Holland  and  Madagascar ! " 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 

C8  nisTKiBUTioir  Or  animals 

Facts,  therefore,  point  to  numerous  centres  of  creation,  wherein  we 
find  creatures  fixed,  with  peculiar  temperaments  and  organizations, 
which  are  in  unison  with  surrounding  circumstances,  and  where  all 
their  natural  wants  are  supplied.  But  the  strongest  barrier  to  volun- 
tary displacements  would  seem  to  be  that  of  instinct  —  that  force,, 
imknown  and  incomprehensible,  which  binds  them  to  the  soil  that 
has  witnessed  their  birth. 

While  passing  these  sheets  through  the  press,  we  have  eiyoyed  the 
privilege  of  perusing  The  Q-eographicdl  Distributiqn  of  AnimaU  and 
JPlantSy^^  by  our  valued  friend,  Charles  Pickering,  M.  D.,  Naturalist 
to  the  United  States'  Exploring  Expedition  under  Captain  Wilkes. 
This  is  to  be  "  regarded  as  an  introduction  to  the  volume  on  Geogra- 
phical Distribution,  prepared  during  the' voyage  of  the  Expedition,*' 
and  published  in  Volume  IX.  of  the  same  compendium. 

In  connection  with  our  own  work,  the  utterance  of  Dr.  Pickering's 
views  is  most  opportune;  because,  with  thorough  knowledge  of 
Egypt,  derived  from  personal  travels,  and  acquaintance  with  hiero- 
glyphical  researches,  he  has  traced  the  Natural  History  of  that  country 
from  the  remotest  monumental  times  to  the  present  day.  The  various 
pictorial  representations  of  Faunse  and  Florae  are  thereby  assigned  to 
,  their  respective  chronological  epochas;  and,  inasmuch  aa  they  are 
identified  with  living  species,  they  substantiate  our  assertions  regarding 
the  unexceptional  permanence  of  types  during  a  period  of  more  than 
6000  years.  Dr.  Pickering's  era  for  "  the  commencement  of  the 
Egyptian  Chronological  Reckoning"  being  B.  C.  4493,"  we  find  our- 
selves again  in  unison  with  him  upon  general  principles  of  chronolo- 
gical extension. 

The  gradual  introduction  of  foreign  animals,  plants,  and  exotic 
substances,  into  the  Lower  VaUey  of  the  Nile — the  extinction  of 
sundry  species  once  indigenous  to  that  soil,  during  the  hundred  and 
fifty  human  generations  for  which  we  possess  contemporaneous  registry 

—  and  the  infinitude  of  proofe  that  such  changes  could  not  have 
been  effected  without  the  intervention  of  these  long  historical  ages 

—  are  themes  which  Dr.  Pickering  has  concisely  and  ingeniously 
elaborated :  and  although  our  space  does  not  permit  the  citation  of 
the  numerous  examples  duly  catalogued  by  him,  it  affords  us  pleasure 
to  concur  in  the  following  results,  viz.: 

**  That  the  names  of  animals  and  plants  used  in  Egypt  are  Scriptoral  [i.  e.  old  Semitish] 
names.  Further,  in  some  instances,  these  current  Egyptian  names  go  behind  the  Greek 
language,  supply  the  meaning  of  obsolete  Qreek  words,  and  show  international  relationship, 
the  more  intimate  the  further  we  recede  into  antiquity."  ^s 

It  will  become  apparent^  in  its  place,  that  the  philological  views 
i;iow  held  by  Birch,  De  Roug6,  and  Lepsius,  upon  the  primeval  intro- 
duction of  Semitic  elements  in  Egypt,  are  confirmed  by  these  indepen- 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 

AND    THE    RACES    OP    KEN.  67 

dent  researches  of  Pickering  into  the  Natural  History  of  Egyptian 
animals  and  plants,  as  we  trust  will  be  now  demonstrated  through 
the  monumental  evidences  of  human  physiology. 

Let  us  next  turn  to  the  races  of  Mankind  in  their  geographical  dis- 
tribution, and  see  whether  they  form  an  exception  to  the  laws  which 
have  been  established  for  the  other  orders  of  Mammifers.  Does  not 
the  same  physical  adaptation,  the  same  instinct,  which  binds  animals 
to  their  primitive  localities,  bind  the  races  of  Men  also  ?  Those  races 
inhabiting  the  Temperate  Zones,  as,  for  example,  the  whit^  races  of 
Europe,  have  a  certain  degree  of  pliabiUty,  that  enables  them  to  bear 
climates  to  a  great  extent  hotter  or  .colder  than  their  native  one ; 
but  there  is  a  limit  beyond  which  they  cannot  go  with  impunity 
— they  cannot  live  in  the  Arctic  with  the  Esquimaux,  nor  in  the 
Tropic  of  Africa  with  the  Negro.  The  Negro,  too,  (like  the 
Elephant,  the  Lion,  the  Camel,  &c.,)  possesses  a  certain  pliability  6f 
constitution,  which  enables  him  to  enter  the  Temperate  Zone ;  but 
his  Northern  limit  stops  far  short  of  that  of  natives  of  this  Zone. 
The  higher  castes  of  what  are  termed  Caucasian  races,  are  influenced 
by  several  causes  in  a  greater  degree  than  other  races.  To  them  have 
been  assigned,  in  aU  ages,  the  largest  brains  and  the  most  powerful 
intellect ;  theirs  is  the  mission  of  extending  and  perfecting  civiliza- 
tion— ^they  are  by  nature  ambitious,  daring,  domineering,  and  rctcklees 
of  danger — impelled  by  an  irresistible  instinct,  they  visit  all  climes, 
regardless  of  difficulties;  but  how  many  thousands  are  sacrificed 
annually  to  climates  foreign  to  their  nature ! 

It  should  also  be  borne  in  mind,  that  what  we  term  Caucasian 
races  are  not  of  one  origin :  they  are,  on  the  contrary,  an  amalgama- 
tion of  an  infinite  number  of  primitive  stocks,  of  different  instincts, 
teinperam«its,  and  mental  and  physical  characters.  Egyptians,  Jews, 
Arabs,  Teutons,  Celts,  Sclavonians,  Pelasgians,  Eomans,  Iberians,  etc., 
etc.,  are  all  mingled  in  blood ;  and  it  is  impossible  now  to  go  back  and 
unravel  this  heterogeneous  mixture,  and  say  precisely  what  each  type 
originally  was.  Such  co;nmingling  of  blood,  through  migrations, 
w^trs,  captivities,  and  amalgamations,  is  doubtless  one  means  by  which 
Providence  carries  out  great  ends.  This  mixed  stock  of  many  primir 
tive  races  is  the  only  one  which  ean  really  be  considered  cosmopolite. 
Their  infinite  diversity  of  characteristics  contrasts  strongly  with  the 
immutable  instincts  of  oiLer  human  types. 

How  stands  the  case  with  those  races  which  have  been  less  subjected 
to  disturbing  causes,  and  whose  moral  and  intellectual  structure  is 
lees  complex  ?  The  Greenlander,  in  his  icy  region,  amidst  poverty, 
hardship,  and  want,  clings  with  instinctive  pertinacity  to  his  birth- 
{dace,  in  spite  of  all  apparent  temptations -*- the  Temperate  Zone, 

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 

68  DISTRIBUTION   GP   ANIMALS 

with  its  luxuries,  has  no  charm  for  him.  The  Africans  of  the  Tropic, 
the  Aborigines  of  America,  the  Mongols  of  Asia,  the  inhabitants  of 
Polynesia,  have  remained  for  thousands  of  years  where  history  first 
found  them ;  and  nothing  but  absolute  want,  or  self-preservation,  'can 
drive  them  from  the  countries  where  the  Creator  placed  them.  These 
races  have  been  least  adulterated,  and  consequently  preserve  their 
original  instincts  and  love  of  home.  This  truth  is  illustrated  in  a 
most  remarkable  degree  by  the  Indians  of  America!  We  still  behold 
the  smal^  remnants  of  scattered  tribes  fighting  and  dying  to  preserve 
the  lands  and  graves  of  their  ancestors. 

We  shall  have  more  to  say,  in  another  chapter,  on  the  amalgama- 
tion of  races,  but  may  here  remark,  that  the  infiision  of  even  a  minute 
proportion  of  the  blood  of  one  race  into  another,  produces  a  most 
decided  modification  of  moral  and  physical  chai^acter.  A  small  trace 
of  white  blood  in  the  negro  improves  him  in  intelligence  and  morality ; 
and. an  equally  small  trace  of  negro  blood,  as  in  the  quadroon,  will 
protect  such  individual  against  the  deadly  influence  of  climates  which 
the  pure  white-man  cannot  endure.  For  example,  if  the  population 
of  New  England,  Germany,  France,  England,  or  other  northern  cli- 
mates, come  to  Mobile,  or  to  New  Orleatis,  a  large  proportion  dies 
of  yellow  fever:  and  of  one  hundred  such  individuals  landed  in  the 
latter  city  at  the  commencement  of  an  epidemic  of  yellow  fever,  pro- 
bably half  would  fiill  victims  to  it.  On  the  contrary,  negroes,  under 
all  circumstances,  enjoy  an  almost  perfect  exemption  from  this  dis- 
ease, even  though  brought  in  from  our  Northern  States ;  and,  what  is 
still  more  remarkable,  the  mulattoes  (under  which  term  we  include 
all  mixed  grades)  are  almost  equally  exempt.  The  writer  (J.  C.  Nott) 
has  witnessed  many  hundred  deaths  from  yellow  fever,  but  never  more 
than  three  or  four  cases  of  mulattoes,  although  hundreds  &re  exposed 
to  this  epidemic  in  Mobile.  The  fact  is  certain,  and  shows  how  diffi- 
cult is  the  problem  of  these  amalgamations. 

That  negroes  die  out  and  would  become  extintt  in  New  England,  if 
cut  off  fipom  immigration,  is  clearly  shown  by  published  statistics. 

It  may  even  be  a  question  whether  the  strictiy-white  races  of  Europe 
are  perfectiy  adapted  to  any  one  climate  in  America.  We  do  not  gene- 
rally find  in  the  United  States  a  population  constitutionally  equal  to  tiiat 
of  Great  Britain  or  Germany ;  and  we  recollect  once  hearing  this  remark 
strongly  endorsed  by  Henry  Clay,  although  dwelling  in  Kentucky, 
amid  the  best  agricultural  population  in  the  country.  Knox^  holds  that 
the  Anglo-Saxon  race  would  become  extinct  in  America,  if  cut  off 
fix)m  immigration.  Kow,  we  are  not  prepared  to  endorse  this  asser- 
tion ;  but  inasmuch  as  nature  works  not  through  a  few  generations,  but 
through  thousands  of  years,  it  is  impossible  to  conjecture  what  time 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 

AND    THE    RACES    OP    MEN.  '  69 

may  effect.  It  would  be  a  curious  inquiiy  to  investigate  the  physio- 
logical causes  which  have  led  to  the  destraction  of  ancient  empires, 
and  the  disappearance  of  populations,  like  Egypt,  Assyria,  Greece,  and 
Sx>me.  Many  ancient  nations  were  colonies  from  distant  climes,  and 
may  have  wasted  away  under  the-  operation  of  laws  that  have  acted 
slowly  but  surely.  The  commingling  of  different  bloods,  too,  under 
the  law  of  hybridity,  may  also  have  played  an  important  part.  Mr. 
Lataed  tells  us  that  a  few  wandering  tribes  only  now  stalk  around 
the  sites  of  the  once-mighty  Nineveh  and  Babylon,  and  that,  but  for 
the  sculptures  of  Sargan  and  Sennacherib,  no  one  could  now  say 
what  race  constructed  those  stupendous  cities.  But  let  us  return 
from  this  digression. 

To  this  inherent  love  of  primitive  locality,  and  instinctive  dislike 
to  foreign  lands,  and  repugnance  towards  other  people,  must  we 
mainly  attribute  the  fixedness  of  the  unhistoric  types  of  men.  The 
,  greater  portion  of  the  globe  is  still  under  the  influence  of  this  law. 
In  America,  the  aboriginal  barbarous  tribes  cannot  be  forced  to 
change  their  habits,  or  even  persuaded  to  successftil  emigration :  they 
are  melting  away  from  year  to  year ;  and  of  the  millions  which  once 
inhabited  that  portion  of  the  United  States  east  of  the  Mississippi 
river,  all  have  vanished,  but  a  few  scattered  families ;  and  their  repre- 
sentatives, removed  by  our  Government  to  the  "Western  frontier,  are 
reduced  to  less  than  one  hundred  thousand.  It  is  as  clear  as  the  sun 
at  noon-day,  that  in  a  few  generations  more  the  last  of  these  Red  men 
vrill  be  numbered  with  the  dead.  We  constantly  read  glowing  ac- 
counts, from  interested  missionaries,  of  the  civilization  of  these  tribes ; 
but  a  civilized  full-blooded  Indian  does  not  exist  among  them.  We 
see  every  day,  in  the  suburbs  of  Mobile,  and  wandering  through  our 
streets,  tiie  remnant  of  the  Choctaw  race,  covered  with  nothing  but 
blankets,  and  living  in  bark  tents,  scarcely  a  degree  advanced  above 
brutes  of  the  field,  quietly  abiding  their  time.  No  human  ingenuity 
can  induce  them  to  become  educated,  or  to  do  an  honest  day's  work: 
they  are  supported  entirely  by  begging,  besides  a  littie  traffic  of  the 
squaws  in  wood.  To  one  who  has  Uved  among  American  Indians,  it 
is  in  vain  to  talk  of  civilizing  them.  You  might  as  well  attempt  to 
change  the  nature  of  the  buffiilo. 

The  whole  continent  of  America,  with  its  mountain-ranges  and 
table-lands — its  valleys  and  low  plains — its  woods  and  prairies — ex- 
hibiting eveiy  variety  of  climate  which  could  influence  the  nature  of 
man,  is  inhabited  by  one  great  family,  that  presents  a  prevailing  type. 
Small  and  peculiarly  shaped  crania,  a  cinnamon  complexion,  small 
feet  and  hands,  black  straight  hair,  wild,  savage  natures,  characterize 

Digitized  by 

Google 

70  DISTRIBUTION    OP    ANIMALS 

the  Indian  everywhere.    There  are  a  few  .trivial  exceptions,  easily 
accounted  for,  particularly  on  the  Pacific  coast. 

The  eastern  part  of  Asia  presents  a  parallel  case.  From  65°  north 
latitude  to  the  Equator,  it  presents  the  greatest  inequalities  of  surface 
and  climate,  and  is  peopled  throughout  by  me  yellow,  lank-haired 
Mongols ;  the  darkest  families  lying  at  the  North,  and  the  fairest  at 
the  South.  Their  crania,  their  instincts,  their  whole  moral  and  phy- 
sical characteristics,  distinguish  them  from  the  American  race,  which 
otherwise  they  most  resemble. 

The  other  half  of  this  northern  continent,  that  is  to  say  Europe  and 
the  rest  of  Asia,  may  be  divided  into  a  northern  and  a  southern  pro- 
vince. The  first  extends  from  the  Polar  region  to  45°  or  60°  north 
latitude — from  Scandinavia  to  the  Caspian  Sea ;  and  contains  a  group 
of  men  with  light  hair,  complexion  fair  and  rosy,  aad  blue  eyes. 
The  second  or  southern  division,  running  north-west  and  south-east, 
stretches  from  the  British  Isles  to  Bengal  and  the  extremity  of  Hin- 
dostan  —  from  60°  to  8°  or  10°  north.  This  vast  area  is  covered  by 
people  with  complexions  more  or  less  dark,  oval  faces,  black  smooth 
hair,  and  black  eyes. 

Now,  it  is  worthy  of  remark,  that  since  the  discovery  of  America, 
and  during  several  centuries,  the  fair  races  have  inhabited  North 
America  extensively,  while  the  dark  races,  as  the  Spaniards,  have 
occupied*  South  and  Central  America,  and  Mexico ;  both  have  dis- 
placed the  Aboriginal  races,  and  yet  neither  has  made  approximation 
in  type  to  the  latter,  nor  does  any  person  suppose  they  could  in  a 
hundred  generations.  And  so  with  liie  Negroes,  who  have  lived  here 
through  eight  or  ten  generations.  We  have  no  more  reason  to  sup- 
pose that  an  Anglo-SaxotL  will  turn  into  an  Indian,  th^n  imported 
cattle  into  buffidoes.  We  shall  show,  in  another  chapter,  that  the 
oldest  Indian  crania  from  the  Mounds,  some  of  which  are  probably 
several  thousand  years  old,  bear  no  resemblance  to  those  of  any  race 
of  the  old  continent. 

When  we  come  to  Africa,  we  shall  perceive  various  groups  of  peculiar 
types  occupying  their  appropriate  zoological  provinces,  which  they 
have  inhabited  for  at  least  5000  years.  But,  having  to  develop  some 
new  views  respecting  Egypt  in  another  place,  we  shall  take  up  the 
races  of  the  African  continent  in  eztenso. 

Taking  leave,  for  the  present,  of  continents,  let  us  glance  for  a 
moment  at  New  HoUand.  This  immense  country,  extending  from 
latitude  10°  to  40°  south,  attests  a  special  creation  —  its  population,  its 
animals,  birds,  insects,  plants,  etc.,  are  entirely  unlike  those  found  in. 
any  other  part  of  the  world.  The  men  present  altogether  a  very 
peculiar  type:  they  are  black,  but  without  the  features,  wooUy  heads, 

Digitized  by 

Google 

AND    THE    RACES    OP    MEN.  71. 

or  other  physical  characters  of  Negroes.  Beyond,  we  have  Van  Die- 
men's  Land,  extending  to  44°  80ut|i  latitude,  which  presents  a  tem- 
perate climate,  not  unlike  that  of  France ;  and  what  is  remarkable, 
its  inhabitants,  unlike  those  of  New  Holland,  are  black,  with  frizzled 
heads,  and  very  similar  to  the  African  races. 

Not  far  from  New  Holland,  under  the  same  parallels,  and  extend- 
ing even  farther  south,  we  find  New  Zealand;  where  commences  the 
beautiful  Polynesian  race,  of  light-brown  color,  smooth  black  hair, 
and  almost  oval  fiace.  This  race  extends  from  50°  south,  descends  to 
the  equator,  then  remounts  to  the  Sandwich  Islands,  20°  north  — 
scattered  over  islands  without  number  —  encircling  about  half  the 
globe — without  presenting  any  material  differences  in  their  color  or 
forms — in  a  word,  in  their  zoological  characters. 

India  affords  a  striking  illustration  of  the  fallacy  of  arguments 
drawn  from  climate.  We  there  meet  with  people  of  all  shades,  from 
fidr  to  black,  who  have  been  living  together  from  time  immemorial. 
We  have  the  well-known  testimony  6f  Bishop  Heber,  and  others,  on 
this  point ;  and  Desmoulins  adds,  "  The  Rohillas,  who  are  blonds,  and 
situated  south  of  the  Ganges,  are  surrounded  by  the  Nepauleans  with 
black  skins,  the  Mahrattas  with  yellow  skins,  and  the  Bengalees  of  a 
deep  brown  ;  and  yet  the  Rohillas  inhabit  the  plain,  and  the  Nepau- 
leans the  mountains."^  Here  we  have  either  different  races  inhabit- 
ing the  same  climate  for  several  thousand  years  without  change ;  or 
the  same  race  assuming  every  shade  of  color.  Of  this  dilemma,  the 
advocates  of  unity  may  choose  either  horn. 

We  might  thus  recite  innumerable  facts  to  the  same  effect,  but  the 
labor  would  be  superfluous. 

The  diflferent  shades  of  color  in  races  have  been  regarded,  by  many 
naturalists,  as  one  of  their  most  distinctive  characters,  and  still  serve 
as  the  basis  of  numerous  classifications ;  but  M.  Jacquinot  thinks  too 
much  importance  has  been  attached  to  colors,  and  that  they  cannot 
be  relied  upon.  For  example,  all  the  intermediate  shades  from  white 
to  black  are  found  in  those  races  of  oval  face,  large  facial  angle, 
smooth  hair,  etc.,  which  Blumenbach  has  classed  under  the  head 
Caucasian.  Commence,  for  example,  with  the  fiiir  Pins  and  Sclavo- 
nians  with  blond  hair,  and  pass  successively  through  the  Celts,  Iberi- 
ans, ItaUans,  Greeks,  Arabs,  Egyptians,  and  Hindoos,  till  you  reach 
the  inhabitants  of  Malabar,  and  you  find  these  laat  to  be  as  black  as 
Negroes. 

Among  the  Mongols,  likewise,  we  encounter  various  shades.  Amid 
the  Africans  there  exist  all  tints,  from  the  pale-yellow  Hottentots, 
Bushmen,  and  dusky  Caflfres,  to  the  coal-black  Negro  of  the  Tropic  and 
confines  of  Egypt.    In  short,  the  black  color  is  beheld  in  Caucasians, 

Digitized  by 

Google 

72  DISTRIBUTION    OP   ANIMALS 

Negroes,  Mongols,  AustraKans,  etc.,  while  yellows  or  browns  are 
visible  Hirougbout  all  the  above  types,  as  well  as  among  Americans, 
Malays,  and  Polynesians. 

In  the  present  mixed  state  of  the  population  of  the  earth,  it  is  per- 
haps impossible  to  determine  how  £eu*  this  opimon  of  Jacqninot  may 
be  correct.  We  possess  certainly  many  examples  to  prove  that  color 
has  been  permanent  for  ages ;  while,  on  the  contrary,  it  is  impossible 
to  show  that  the  complexion  of  a  pure  primitive  stock  has  been 
altered  by  climate.  As  before  stated,  we  conceive  that  too  much 
importance  has  been  given  to  arbitrary  classifications,  and  that  the 
Caucasian  division  may  include  innumerable  primitive  stod^.  This 
fiact  is  illustrated  further  on,  particularly  in  the  history  of  the  Jews, 
whose  type  has  been  permanent  for  at  least  8000  years.  We  have 
no  reason  to  believe  that  the  Hebrew  race  sprang  from,  or  ever  origi- 
nated, any  other  type  of  man. 

We  therefore  not  merely  regard  the  great  divisions  of  Caucasian, 
Mongol,  Malay,  Kegro  and  Indian,  bs  primitive  stocks,  but  shall  estab- 
lish thatHistoiy,  Anatomy,  Physiology,  Psychology,  Analogy,  all  prove 
that  each  of  these  stocks  comprehends  many  original  subdivisions. 

Let  us  acknowledge  our  large  indebtedness  to  Prof.  Agassiz,  who 
has  given  the  most  masterly  view  of  the  geographical  distribution  of 
animals  written  in  our  language,  or  perhaps  in  any  other.  Not  a 
line  can  be  retrenched  fix)m  his  already  condensed  articles  without 
inflicting  a  wound,  and  we  take  much  pleasure  in  referring  the  reader 
to  them.*'  He  shows,  conclusively,  that  not  only  are  there  numerous 
centres  of  creation,  or  zoological  provinces,  for  our  pending  geo- 
logical epoch,  but  that  these  provinces  correspond,  in  a  surprising 
manner,  to  those  of  former  epochas ;  thus  proving  that  the  Creator 
has  been  working  after  one  grand  and  uniform  plan  through  myriads 
of  years,  and  through  consecutive  creations. 

« It  is  satisfaoionlj  ascertained  at  present,  that  there  haye  been  many  distinct  successiTe 
periods,  daring  each  of  which  large  numbers  of  animals  and  plants  haye  been  introduced 
upon  the  surface  of  our  globe,  to  live  and  multiply  for  a  time,  then  to  disappear  and  be 
replaced  by  other  kinds.  Of  such  distinct  periods  —  such  successive  creations — we  know 
now  <U  Uaat  about  a  dozen,  and  there  are  ample  indications  that  the  inhabitants  of  our  globe 
have  been  successively  changed  at  more  epochs  than  are  yet  fully  ascertained." 

In  the  earliest  formations',  but  few  and  distant  patches  of  land  having 
emerged  from  the  mighty  deep,  the  created  beings  were  comparatively 
few,  simple,  and  more  widely  disseminated ;  but  yet  mAny  distinct 
species,  adapted  to  localities  where  they  were  brought  into  existence, 
are  discovered.  In  the  more  recent  fossil  beds,  we  find  a  distribu- 
tion of  fossil  remains  which  agrees  most  remarkably  with  the  pre- 
sent geographical  arrangement  of  animals  and  plants.  The  fossils 
of  modem  geological  periods  in  New  Holland  are  types  identical  with 

Digitized  by 

Google 

'     AND    THE    RACES    OF    MEN.  73 

most  of  the  animalB  now  Kving  there.  Brazilian  fossils  belong  to 
the  same  families  as  tiiose  alive  there  at  the  present  day ;  though  in 
both  cases  the  fossil  species  are  distinct  from  the  surviving  ones.  If, 
therefore,  the  organized  beings  of  ancient  geological  periods  had 
arisen  from  one  central  point  of  distribution,  to  be  dispersed,  and 
finally  to  become  confined  to  those  countries  where  their  remains  now 
.  exist  in  a  fossil  condition ;  and  if  the  animals  now  living  had  also 
spread  from^t  common  origin,  over  the  same  districts,  and  had  these 
been  circumscribed  within  equally  distinct  limits;  we  should  be  led  to 
the  unnatural  supposition,  argues  Agassiz,  that  animals  of  two  distinct 
creations,  dififering  specifically  throughout,  had  taken  the  same  lines 
of  migration,  had'  assumed  finally  the  same  distribution,  and  had 
become  permanent  in  the  same  regions  without  any  other  inducement 
for  removal  and  final  settlement,  than  the  mere  necessity  of  covering 
more  extensive  ground,  after  they  had  become  too  numerous  to 
remain  any  longer  together  in  one  and  the  same  district. 

Now  it  would  certainly  be  very  irrational  to  attribute  such  instincts 
to  animals,  were  such  a  line  of  march  possible ;  but  the  very  possi- 
bility vanishes,  however,  when  we  reflect  upon  the  wide-spread  phy- 
sical impediments  opposing  such  migrations,  and  that  neither  the 
animals  nor  plants  of  one  province  can  flourish  in  an  adverse  one. 
"So  Arctic  animals  or  plants  can  be  propagated  in  the  Tropics,  nor 
vice  versa.  The  whole  of  the  Monkey  tribe  belong  to  a  hot  climate, 
are  retained  there  by  their  temperaments  and  instincts,  and  cannot 
by  any  ingenuity  of  man  be  made  to  exist  in  Greenland.  The  same 
rule  applies  to  the  aboriginal  men  of  the  Tropical  and  the  Arctic 
regions. 

That  the  animals  and  plants  now  existing  on  the  earth  must  be 
referred  to  many  widely-distant  centres  of  creation,  is  a  fact  which 
might,  if  necessary,  be  confirmed  by  an  infinite  number  of  circum- 
stances; but  these  things  are  nowadays  conceded  by  every  well- 
informed  naturalist ;  and  if  we  have  deemed  it  necessary  to  illustrate 
them  at  all,  it  is  because  this  volume  may  fall  into  the  hands  of  some 
possibly  not  versed  in  such  matters. 

Another  question  of  much  interest  to  our  present  investigation  is 
—  Have  all  the  individuals  of  each  tpeeies  of  animals,  plants,  &c., 
descended  from  a  single  pair  ?  Were  it  not  for  the  supposed  scientific 
authority  of  G-enens  to  this  eflFect,  the  idea  of  community  of  origin 
-would  hardly  have  occurred  to  any  reflecting  mind,  because  it  in- 
volves insuperable  difliculties ;  and  science  can  perceive  no  reason  why 
the  Creator  should  have  adopted  any  such  plan.  Is  it  reasonable  to 
sappose  that  the  Almighty  would  have  created  ona  seed  of  grass,  one 
10 

Digitized  by 

Google 

74  DISTRIBUTION    OF    ANIMALS 

acorn,  one  pair  of  locusts,  of  bees,  of  wild  pigeons,  of  herrings,  of 
buffaloes,  as  the  only  starting-point  of  these  almost  ubiquitous  species  ? 

The  instincts  and  habits  of  animals  differ  widely.  Some  are  soli- 
tary, except  at  certain  seasons ;  some  go  in  pairs ;  others  in  herds  or 
shoals.  The  idea  of  a  pair  of  bees,  locusts,  herrings,  buffiiloes,  is 
as  contrary  to  the  nature  and  habits  of  these  creatures,  as  it  is  repug- 
nant to  the  nature  of  oaks,  pines,  birches,  &c.,  to  grow  singly,  and  to 
form  forests  in  their  isolation.  In  some  species  males- — in  others, 
females  predominate ;  and  in  many  it  would  be  easy  to  show,  that,  if 
the  present  order  of  things  were  reversed,  the  species  could  not  be 
preserved  —  locusts  and  bees,  for  example :  the  former  appear  in  my- 
riads, and  by  far  the  greater  number  of  those  produced  are  destroyed; 
and  though  they  have  existed  for  ages,  a  naturalist  cannot  see  that 
they  have  increased,  nor  can  he  conceive  how  one  pair  could  continue 
the  species,  considering  the  number  of  adverse  chances.  As  regards 
bees,  it  is  natural  to  have  but  one  female  for  a  whole  hive,  to  whom 
many  males  are  devoted,  besides  a  large  number  of  drones^ 

Again,  Agassiz  gives  this  striking  illustration :  — 

"  There  are  animals  which  are  impelled  by  nature  to  feed  on  other  animals.  Was  the 
first  pair  of  lions  to  abstain  from  food  until  the  gaxelles*  and  other  antelopes  had  multiplied 
sufficiently  to  preserve  their  races  from  the  persecution  of  these  ferocious  beasts  ?  " 

So  with  other  carnivorous  animals,  birds,  fishes,  and  reptiles.  We 
now  behold  all  their  various  species  scattered  through  land  and  water 
in  harmonious  proportions.  Thus  they  may  continue  for  ages  to 
come. 

Eybridity  has  been  considered  a  test  for  species ;  but,  when  we 
come  to  this  theme,  it  shall  be  proven  that,  in  many  instances,  what 
have  been  called  varieties  are  really  distinct  species:  hence,  that  hybri- 
dity  is  no  test.  All  varietiesof  dogs  and  wolves,  for  example,  are  pro- 
lific inter  se;  yet  we  shall  prove  that  many  of  them  are  specifically 
distinct,  that  is,  descended  from  different  primitive  stocks  at  distant 
points  of  the  globe.  Agassiz  has  beautifiiUy  illustrated  tbe  fact  by  the 
natural  history  of  Uons.  These  animals  present  very  marked  varieties, 
extending  over  immense  regions  of  country.  They  occupy  nearly 
the  whole  continent  of  Africa,  a  great  part  of  Southern  Asia,  as, 
formerly,  Asia  Minor  and  Greece.  Over  this  vast  tract  of  country 
several  varieties  of  lions  are  found,  differing  materially  in  their  phy- 
sical characters :  these  varieties  also  are  placed  remotely  from  each 
other,  and  each  one  is  surrounded  by  entirely  distinct  Faunae  and 
Florae :  natural  fiicts  confirming  the  idea  of  totally  distinct  zoological 
provinces.  It  will  readily  be  conceded  by  naturalists,  that  all  the 
animals  found  in  such  a  province,  and  nowhere  else,  must  have  been 
therein  created;  and  although  Uons  may  possess  in  common  that 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC 

AND    THE    EACES    OF    MEN.  75 

assemblage  of  characters  which  has  been  constraed  into  evidence  of 
community  of  species,  y^t  it  by  no  means  necessitates  community  of 
origin.  The  same  question  here  arises  as  in  considering  the  varieties 
of  mankind,  with  regard  to  the  definition  of  the  term  species.  We 
hold  that  a  variety  which  is  permanent,  and  which  resists,  without 
change,  all  known  external  causes,  must  be  regarded  as  a  primitive 
species  —  else  no  criteria  exist  by  which  science  can  be  governed  in 
Natural  History. 

Monkeys  afford  another  admirable  illustration,  and  are  doubly 
interesting  from  the  fact  of  their  near  approach  to  the  human  family. 
The  following  paragraph  is  one  of  peculiar  interest :  — 

*'  As  already  mentioned,  the  monkeys  are  entirely  tropicaL  But  liere  again  we  notice  a 
very  intimate  adaptation  of  their  types  to  the  particular  continents ;  as  the  monkeys  of 
tropical  America  constitute  a  family  altogether  distinct  from  the  monkeys  of  the  old  world, 
there  being  not  one  species  of  any  of  the  genera  of  Quadrumana,  so  numerous  on  this  con- 
tinent, found  either  in  Asia  or  Africa.  The  monkeys  of  the  Old  World,  again,  constitute  a 
natural  family  by  themselyes,  extending  equally  over  Africa  and  Asia ;  and  there  is  even  a 
close  representative  analogy  between  those  of  diflferent  parts  of  these  two  continents — the 
orangs  of  Africa,  the  Chimpanzee  and  Orilla,  corresponding  to  the  red  orang  of  Sumatra 
and  Borneo,  and  the  smaller  long-armed  species  of  continental  Asia.  And  what  is  not  a 
little  remarkable,  is  the  fact  that  the  black  orang  pccdrs  upon  that  continent  which  is 
inhabited  by  the  black  human  race,  while  the  brown  orang  inhabits  those  parts  of  Asia 
over  which  the  chocolate-colored  Malays  have  been  developed.  There  is  again  a  peculiar 
family  of  Quadrumana  confined  to  the  Island  of  Madagascar,  the  Makis,  which  are  entirely 
peculiar  to  that  island  and  the  eastern  coast  of  Africa  opposite  to  it,  and  to  one  spot  on  the 
western  shore  of  Africa.  But  in  New  Holland  and  the  adjacent  islands  there  are  no  mon- 
keys at  all,  though  the  climatic  conditions  seem  not  to  exclude  their  existence  any  morQ 
than  those  of  the  large  Asiatic  Islands,  upon  which  such  high  types  of  this  order  are  found. 
And  these  facts,  more  than  any  other,  would  indicate  that  the  special  adaptation  of  animals 
to  particular  districts  of  the  surface  of  the  globe  is  neither  accidental  nor  dependent  upon 
physical  conditions,  but  is  implied  in  the  primitive  plan  of  creation  itself.  Whatever 
classes  we  may  take  into  consideration,  we  shall  find  similar  adaptations,  and  though  per- 
haps the  greater  uniformity  of  some  families  renders  the  difference  of  types  in  various  parts 
of  the  world  less  striking,  they  are  none  the  less  real.  The  carnivora  of  tropical  Asia  are 
not  the  same  as  tho3e  of  tropical  Africa,  or  those  of  tropical  America.  Their  birds  and 
reptiles  present  similar  differences.  The  want  of  an  ostrich  in  Asia,  when  we  have  one, 
the  largest  of  the  family,  in  Africa,  and  two  distinct  species  in  Southern  America,  and  two 
cassowaries,  one  in  New  Holland  and  another  in  the  Sunda  Islands,  shows  this  constant 
process  of  analogous  or  representative  species,  repeated  over  different' parts  of  the  world, 
to  be  the  principle  regulating  the  distribution  of  animals ;  and  the  fact  that  these  analo- 
gous species  are  different,  again,  cannot  be  reconciled  to  the  idea  of  common  origin,  as 
each  type  is  peculiar  to  the  country  wh^e  it  is  now  found.  These  differences  are  more 
striking  in  tropical  regions  than  anywhere  else.  The  rhinoceros  of  the  Sunda  Islands 
differs  from  those  of  Africa,  and  there  are  none  in  America.  The  elephant  of  Asia  differs 
from  that  of  Africa,  and  there  are  none  in  America.  One  tapir  is  found  in  the  Sunda  Islands ; 
there  are  none  in  Africa,  but  we  find  one  in  South  America.  .  .  .  Everywhere  special  adap- 
tation, particular  forms  in  each  continent,  an  omission  of  some  allied  type  here,  when  in 
the  next  group  it  occurs  all  over  the  zone." 

The  same  authority  has  so  well  expressed  his  opinion  on  another 
point,  that  we  cannot  resist  the  temptation  of  making  an  additional 
extract. 

'  Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 

76  DISTBIBUTION   OP   ANIMALS 

«  We  are  thus  led  to  distingQish  epeoitl  proTinees  in  the  natnral  diBtribution  of  ftnimals, 
and  we  may  adopt  tlie  following  division  as  the  most  natural  First,  the  Arctic  proTince, 
with  preyailing  uniformity.  Second,  the  Temperate  Zone,  with  at  least  three  distinct 
zoological  provinces  —  the  European  Temperate  Zone,  west  of  the  VM  Mountains ;  the 
Asiatic  Temperate  sfone,  east  of  the  Ural  Mountuns ;  and  the  American  Temperate  Zone, 
which  may  be  subdivided  into  two,  the  Eastern  and  Western,  for  the  animals  east  and  west 
of  the  Rocky  Mountains  differ  sufficiently  to  constitute  twt>  distinct  zoological  provinces. 
Next,  the  Tropical  Zone,  containing  the  AfHcan  Zoological  province,  which  extends  over 
the  main  part  of  the  African  continent,  including  all  the  country  south  of  the  Atlas  and 
north  of  the  Cape  colonies ;  the  Tropical  Asiatic  province,  south  of  the  great  Himalayan 
chain,  and  including  the  Sunda  Islands,  whose  Fauna  has  quite  a  continental  character,  and 
differs  entirely  from  that  of  the  Islands  of  the  Pacific,  as  well  as  Arom  that  of  New  Holland; 
the  American  Tropical  province,  including  Central  America,  the  West  Indies,  and  Tropical 
South  America.  New  Holland  constitutes  in  itself  a  special  province,  notwithstanding  the 
great  differences  of  its  northern  and  southern  climate,  the  animals  of  the  whole  continent 
preserving  throughout  their  peculiar  typical  character.  But  it  were  a  mistake  to  conceive 
that  the  Faunn,  or  natnral  groups  of  animals,  are  to  be  limited  according  to  the  boundaries 
of  the  mainlands.  On  the  contrary,  we  may  trace  their  natural  limits  into  the  ocean,  and 
refer  to  the  Temperate  European  Fauna  the  eastern  shores  of  the  Atlantic,  as  we  refer  its 
western  shores  to  the  American  Temperate  Fauna.  Again,  the  eastern  shores  of  the  Pacific 
belong  to  the  Western  American  Fauna,  as  the  western  Pacific  shores  belong  to  the  Asiatic 
Fauna.  In  the  Atiantic  Ocean  there  is  no  peculiar  Oceanic  Fauna  to  be  distinguished ;  but 
in, the  Pacific  we  have  such  a  Fauna,  entirely  marine  in  its  main  character,  though  inter- 
spread  with  innumerable  islands,  extending  east  of  the  Sunda  Islands  and  New  Holland  to 
the  western  shores  of  Tropical  America.  The  islands  west  of  this  continent  seem,  indeed,  to 
have  very  slight  relations,  in  their  zoological  character,  with  the  western  parts  of  the  main- 
land. South  of  the  Tropical  Zone  we  have  the  South  American  Temperate  Fauna  and  that 
of  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  as  other  distinct  zoological  provinces.  Van  Diemen's  Land, 
however,  does  not  constitute  a  zoological  province  in  itself,  but  belongs  to  the  province  of 
New  Holland  by  its  zoologictil  character.  Finally,  the  Antarctic  Circle  encloses  a  special 
zoological  province,  including  the  Antarctic  Fauna,'  which,  in  a  great  measure,  corresponds 
to  the  Arctic  Fauna  in  its  uniformity,  though  it  differs  from  it  in  having  chiefly  a  maritime 
character,  while  the  Arctic  Fauna  has  an  ahpost  entirely  continental  aspect 

**  The  fact  that  the  principal  races  of  men,  in  their  natural  distribution,  cover  the  same 
extent  of  ground  as  the  same  zoological  provinces,  would  go  far  to  show  that  the  differences 
which  we  notice  between  them  are  also  primitive." 

These  facts  prove  conclusively  that  the  Creator  has  marked  out 
both  the  Old  and  New  Worlds  into  distinct  zoolo^cal  provinces,  and 
that  Faunse  and  Florae  are  independent  of  cUmate  or  other  known 
physical  causesj  while  it  is  equally  clear  that  in  this  geographical  dis- 
tribution there  is  evidence  of  a  Plan  —  of  a  design  ruling  the  climatic 
conditions  themselves. 

It  is  very  remarkable,  too,  that  while  the  races  of  men,  and  the 
Fauna  and  Flora  of  the  Arctic  region,  present  great  uniformity,  they 
follow  in  the  different  continents  the  same  general  law  of  increasing 
dissimilarity  as  we  recede  from  the  Arctic  and  go  South,  irrespectively 
of  climate.  We  have  already  shown  that,  as  we  pass  down  through 
America,  Asia,  and  Africa,  the  farther  we  travel  the  greater  is  the  dis- 
similarity of  their  Faunae  and  Florae,  to  their  veiy  terminations,  even 
when  compared  together  in  the  same  latitudes  or  zones;  and  an 

Digitized.by 

Google 

AND   THE    RACES    OP    MEN.  77 

examination  will  Bhow,  that  differences  of  types  in  the  human  fSetmily 
become  more  strongly  marked  as  we  recede  fipom  the  Polar  regions, 
and  reach  their  greatest  extremes  at  those  terminating  points  of  con- 
tinents where  they  are  most  widely  separated  by  distance,  although 
occupying  nearly  the  same  parallels  of  latitude,  and  nearly  the  same 
climates.  For  instance,  the  Fuegians  of  Cape  Horn,  the  Hottentots 
and  Bushmen  of  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  and  the  inhabitants  of  Van 
Piemen's  Land,  are  the  tribes  which,  under  similar  parallels,  differ 
most  Such  differeuces  of  races  are  scarcely  less  marked  in  the  Tro- 
pics of  the  earth ;  as  testified  by  the  Negro  in  Africa,  the  Indian  in 
America,  and  the  Papuan  in  Polynesia.  Tn  the  Temperate  zone,  we 
have  in  the  Old  World  the  Mongolians  and  the  Caucasians,  no  less 
than  the  Indians  in  America,  living  in  similar  climates,  yet  whoUy 
dissimilar  themselves. 

History,  traditions,  monuments,  osteological  remains,  every  literary 
record  and  scientific  induction,  all  show  that  races  have  occupied  sub- 
stantially the  same  zones  or  provinces  from  time  immemorial.  Since 
the  discovery  of  the  mariner's  compass,  mankind  have  been  more  dis- 
turbed in  their  primitive  seats ;  and,  with  the  increasing  facilities  of 
communication  by  land  and  sea,  it  is  impossible  to  predict  what 
changes  coming  ages  may  bring  forth.  The  Caucasian  races,  which 
have  always  been  the  representatives  of  civilization,  are  those  alone 
that  have  extended  over  and  colonized  a]l  parts  of  the  globe ;  and 
much  of  this  is  the  w6rk  of  the  last  three  hundred  years.  The  Creator 
has  implanted  in  this  group  of  races  an  instinct  that,  in  spite  of 
themselves,  drives  them  through  all  difficulties,  to  cany  out  their 
great  mission  of  civilizing  the  earth.  It  is  not  reason,  or  philanthropy, 
which  urges  them  on ;  but  it  is  destiny.  When  we  see  great  divisions 
of  the  human  family  increasing  in  numbers,  spreading  in  all  direc- 
tions, encroaching  by  degrees  upon  all  other  races  wherever  they  can 
live  and  prosper,  and  gradually  supplanting  inferior  types,  is  it  not 
reasonable  to  conclude  that  they  are  fiilfilling  a  law  of  nature  ? 

We  have  always  maintained  diverntj/  of  origin  for  the  whole  range 
of  organized  beings.  K  it  be  granted,  as  it  is  on  all  hands,  that 
there  have  been  many  centres  of  creation,  instead  of  one,  what  reason 
13  there  to  suppose  that  any  one  race  of  animals  has  sprung  from  a 
single  pair,  instead  of  being  the  natural  production  of  many  pairs  ? 
And,  as  was  written  by  us  many  years  ago,  '^  if  it  be  conceded  that 
there  were  two  primitive  pairs  of  human  beings,  no  reason  can  be 
assigned  why  there  may  not  have  been  hundreds."  " 

AoASSiz  thus  expresses  himself:  — 

<<  Under  ffneh  drentnitanoef ,  we  slumld  ask  if  we  are  not  entitled  to  oonclode  that  these 
races  mnat  haTe  origiAated  where  thejr  ocenr,  as  well  as  the  animals  and  plants  inhabiting 

Digitized  by 

Google 

78  DISTRIBUTION    OP    ANIMALS 

the  same  countries,  and  have  originated  there  in  the  same  nnmerical  proportions  and  over 
the  same  area  in  which  they  now  occur  ;•  for  these  conditions  are  the  conditions  necessary 
to  their  maintenance,  and  what  among  organized  beings  is  essential  to  their  temporal  exist- 
ence must  be  at  least  one  of  the  conditions  under  which  they  were  created. 

**  We  maintain  that,  like  all  organized  beings,  mankind  cannot  have  originated  in  single 
individuals,  but  must  have  been  created  in  that  numerical  harmony  which  is  characteristic 
of  each  species.  Men  must  have  originated  in  nationt,  as  the  bees  have  originated  in 
swarms,  and,  as  the  different  social  plants,  have  covered  the  extensive  tracts  over  which 
they  have  naturally  spread." 

We  remarked,  in  the  commencement  of  this  chapter,  that  M.  Agas- 
siz  had  presented  his  views  in  such  a  condensed  and  irrefragable 
manner,  that  it  would  be  impossible  to  attempt  a  rfeswrwe,  or  to  do 
him  justice  without  repeating  the  whole  of  his  article ;  but  although 
we  have  already  borrowed  freely,  we  cannot  refrain  from  a  concluding 
paragraph,  our  object  being  rather  to  give  a  synopsis,  or  "posting  up" 
to  date,  of  facts  illustrative  of  our  subject,  than  to  claim  any  great 
originality:  if  we  can  bring  the  truth  out^  our  goal  is  attained. 

**  The  circumstance  that  wherever  we  find  a  human  race  naturally  circumscribed,  it  is 
connected  in  its  limitation  with  what  we  call,  in  natural  history,  a  zoological  and  botanical 
province — that  is  to  say,  with  the  natural  limitations  of  a  particular  association  of  animals, 
and  plants — shows  most  unequivocally  the  intimate  relation  existing  between' mankind 
and  the  animal  kingdom  in  their  adaptation  to  the  pdiysical  world.  The  Arctic  race  of  men, 
covering  a  treeless  region  near  the  Arctics  in  Europe,  Asia,  and  America,  is  circumscribed, 
in  the  three  continents,  within  limits  very  similar  to  those  occupied  by  that  particular  com- 
bination of  animals  which  are  peculiar  to  the  same  tracts  of  land  and  sea. 

<*The  region  inhabited  by  the  Mongolian  race  is  also  a  natural  zoological  province, 
covered  by  a  combination  of  animals  naturally  circumscribed  within  the  same  regions.  The 
Malay  race  covers  also  a  natural  zoolo^cal  province.  New  Holland  again  constitutes  a 
very  peculiar  zoological  province,  in  which  we  have  another  particular  race  of  men.  And 
it  is  further  remarkable,  in  this  connection,  that  the  plants  and  animals  now  living  on  the 
continent  of  Africa  south  of  Atlas,  within  the  same  range  within  which  the  Negroes  are 
naturally  circumscribed,  have  a  eharacter  differing  widely  from  that  of  the  plants  and 
animals  of  the  northern  shores  of  Africa  and  the  valley  of  Egypt ;  while  the  Cape  of  Good 
Hope,  within  the  limits  inhabited  by  Hottentots,  is  characterized  by  a  vegetation  and  a 
Fauna  equally  peculiar,  and  differing  in  its  features  from  that  over  which  the  African  race 
is  spread. 

*'  Such  identical  circumscriptions  between  the  limits  of  two  series  of  organized  beings  so 
widely  differing  in  men  and  animals  and  plants,  and  so  entirely  unconnected  in  point  of 
descent,  would,  to  the  mind  of  the  naturalist,  amount  to  a  demonstration  that  they  origi- 
nated together  within  the  districts  which  they  now  inhabit.  We  say  that  such  an  accumu- 
lation of  evidence  would  amount  to  demonstration ;  for  how  could  it,  on  the  contrary,  be 
supposed  that  man  alone  would  assume  new  peculiarities  and  features  so  different  from  his 
primitive  characteristics,  whilst  the  animals  and  plants  circumscribed  within  the  same  limits 
would  continue  to  preserve  their  natural  relations  to  the  Fauna  and  Flora  of  other  parts  of 
the  worid  ?  If  the  Creator  of  one  set  of  these  living  beings  had  not  abo  been  the  Creator 
of  the  other,  and  if  we  did  not  trace  the  same  general  laws  throughout  nature,  there  might 
)>e  room  left  for  the  supposition  that,  while  men  inhabiting  different  parts  of  the  world 
'originated  from  a  common  centre,  the  plants  and  animals  nssocmted  with  them  in  the  same 
countries  originated  on  the  spot.  But  such  inconsistencies  do  not  occur  in  the  laws  of 
nature. 

**  The  coincidence  of  the  geographical  distribution  of  the  human  races  with  that  of 

Digitized  by 

Google 

AND    THE    RACES    OF    MEN..  79 

animals,  the  disconnection  of  the  climatic  conditions  where  we  have  similar  races,  and 
the  connection  of  climatic  conditions  where  we  have  different  human  races,  shows  further, 
that  the  adaptation  of  different  races  of  men  to  different  parts  of  the  world  must  be  inten- 
tional, as  well  as  that  of  other  beings ;  that  men  were  primitively  located  in  the  rarious 
parts  of  the  world  they  inhabit,  and  that  they  arose  everwhere  in  those  harmonious  numeric 
proportions  with  other  liying  beings  which  would  at  once  secure  their  preservation  and 
contribute  to  their  welfare.  To  suppose  that  all  men  originated  from  Adam  and  Eve,  is  to 
assume  that  the  order  of  creation  has  been  changed  in  the  course  of  historical  times,  and 
to  give  to  the  Mosaic  record  a  meaning  that  it  was  never  intended  to  have.  On  that  ground, 
we  would  particularly  insist  upon  the  propriety  of  considering  Genesis  as  chiefly  relating 
to  the  history  of  the  white  race,  with  special  reference  to  the  history  of  the  Jews." 

Zoologically,  the  races  or  species  of  mankind  obey  the  same  organic 
laws  which  govern  other  animals :  they  have  their  geographical  points 
of  origin,  and  are  adapted  to  certain  external  conditions  that  cannot 
be  changed  with  impunity.  The  natives  of  one  zone  cannot  always 
be  transferred  to  another  without  deteriorating  physically  and  men- 
tally. Races,  too,  are  governed  by  certain  psychological  influences, 
which  differ  among  the  species  of  mankind  as  instincts  vary  among 
the  species  of  lower  animals.  These  psychological  characteristics  form 
part  of  the  great  mysteries  of  human  nature.  They  seem  often  to 
work  in  opposition  to  the  physical  necessities  of  races,  and  to  drive 
individuals  and  nations  beycftid  the  confines  of  human  reason.  We 
see  around  us,  daily,  individuals  obeying  blindly  their  psychological 
instincts ;  and  one.  nation  reads  of  the  causes  which  have  led  to  the 
decline  and  fall  of  other  empires  without  profiting  by  the  lesson. 

The  laws  of  God  operate  not  through  a  few  thousand  years,  but 
throughout  eternity,  and  we  cannot  always  perceive  the  why  or  where- 
fore of  what  passes  in  our  brief  day.  Nations  and  races,  like  indivi- 
duals, have  each  an  especial  destiny:  some  are  bom  to  rule,  and 
others  to  be  ruled.  And  such  has  ever  been  the  history  of  mankind. 
No  two  distinctly-marked  races  can  dwell  together  on  equal  terms. 
Some  races,  moreover,  appear  destined  to  live  and  prosper  for  a  time, 
until  the  destroying  race  comes,  which  is  to  exterminate  and  supplant 
them.  Observe  how  the  aborigines  of  America  are  fading  away 
before  the  exotic  races  of  Europe. 

Those  groups  of  races  heretofore  comprehended  under  the  generic 
term  Caucasian,  have  in  all  ages  been  the  rulers;  and  it  requires 
no  prophet's  eye  to  see  that  they  are  destined  eventually  to  conquer 
and  hold  every  foot  of  the  globe  where  climate  does  not  interpose  an 
impenetrable  barrier.  No  philanthropy,  no  legislation,  no  missionary 
labors,  can  change  this  law:  it  is  written  in  man's  nature  by  the 
hand  of  his  Creator.  . 

While  the  mind  thus  speculates  on  the  physical  history  of  races  and 
the  more  or  lees  speedy  extermination  of  some  of  them,  other  prob- 
lems start  up  in  the  distance^  of  which  the  solution  is  far  beyond  the 

Digitized  by 

Google 

80  GENERAL    REMARKS 

reach  of  human  foresight    We  have  akeady  hinted  at  the  mysterious 
disappearance  of  many  great  races  and  nations  of  antiquity. 

When  the  inferior  types  of  mankind  shall  have  fulfilled  their  des- 
tinies and  passed  away,  and  the  superior,  becoming  intermingled  in 
blood,  have  wandered  from  their  primitive  zoological  provinces,  and 
overspread  the  world,  what  will  be  the  ultimate  result?  May  not 
that  Law  of  nature,  which  so  often  forbids  the  commingling  of  species, 
complete  its  work  of  destruction,  and  at  some  friture  day  leave  the 
fossil  remains  alone  of  man  to  tell  the  tale  of  his  past  eidstence  upon 
earth 

CHAPTER    II. 

GENERAL  REMARKS  ON  TTFES  OF  MANKIND. 

Wb  propose  to  treat  of  Mankind,  both  zoologically  and  historically ; 
and,  in  order  that  we  may  be  clearly  understood,  it  is  expedient  that 
we  should  define  certain  terms  which  will  enter  into  fi^uent  use  as 
we  proceed. 

TYPE. — The  definition  of  H.  Cassini,  given  in  Jourdan's  Dictwri' 
naire  deB  Terme$j  is  adopted  by  us,  as  sufficiently  precise :  — 

*'  Tt/picdl  characters  are  those  which  belong  only  to  the  mi^Jority  of  natural  bodies  com- 
prised in  any  group,  or  to  those  which  occupy  the  centre  of  this  group,  and  in  some  sort 
serve  as  the  type  of  it,  but  presenting  exceptions  when  it  approaches  its  extremities,  on 
account  of  the  relations  and  natural  affinitiei  which  do  not  admit  well-defined  limits 
between  species." 

In  speaking  of  Mankind,  we  regard  as  Ti/pes  those  primitive  or 
original  forms  which  are  independent  of  Climatic  or  other  Physical 
influences.  All  men  are  more  or  less  influenced  by  external  causes, 
but  these  can  never  act  with  sufficient  force  to  transform  one  type 
into  another. 

SPECIES. — The  following  definition,  by  Prichard,  may  be  received 
as  one  of  the  most  lucid  and  complete :  — 

**  The  meaning  attached  to  the  term  tpedet^  in  natural  history,  is  very  definite  and  intel- 
ligible. It  includes  ordy  the  following  conditions :  namely,  sqMuraU  origin  and  ditiinctneu 
of  race,  evinced  by  a  eofutant  trarumimon  of  9ome  charaeterittif  peculiarity  of  organization,  A 
race  of  animals  or  of  plants  marked  by  any  peculiar  character  which  it  has  constantly  dis- 
played, ifl  termed  a  <  species* ;  and  two  races  are  considered  specifically  different,  if  they 
are  distinguished  from  each  other  by  some  characteristic  which  the  one  cannot  be  supposed 
to  have  acquired,  or  the  other  to  haye  lost,  through  any  known  operation  of  physical  causes; 
for  we  are  hence  led  to  conclude,  that  tribes  thus  distinguished  hare  not  descended  firom 
the  same  original  stock. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

ON    TYPES    OF    MANKIND.  81 

«  This  is  the  import  of  the  word  tpeeiet,  as  it  has«long  been  understood  by  writers  on 
different  departments  of  natural  history.  They  agree  essentially  as  to  the  sense  which  they 
appropriate  to  this  term,  though  they  haye  expressed  themselyes  differently,  according  as 
they  haye  blended  more  or  less  of  hypothetit  with  their  conceptions  of  its  meaning." 

**  VARIETIES,"  continues  Prichard,  *<  in  natural  history,  are  such  diyersities  in  indiyi- 
duals  and  their  progeny  as  are  obterved  to  take  place  witiiin  the  limits  of  species. 

«  PERMANENT  VARIETIES  are  those  which,  having  onoe  taken  pUce,  continue  to  be  • 
propagated  in  the  breed  in  perpetuity.  The  fact  of  their  origination  must  be  knoton  by 
obiervalion  or  inference,  since,  the  proof  of  this  fact  being  defeotiye,  it  is  more  philosophical  ' 
to  consider  characters  which  are  perpetuaUy  inherited  as  tpec^  or  original  The  term  per- 
manent variety  would  otherwise  express  the  meaning  which  properly  belonge  to  tpeeiee.  The 
properties  Of  species  are  two:  tIx.,  original  difference  of  characters,  and  ihe perpetuity  of 
their  tranemiseion,  of  which  only  the  latter  can  belong  to  permanent  Tarieties. 

«  The  instances  are  so  many  in  which  it  is  doubtful  whether  a  particular  tribe  is  to  be 
considered  as  a  distinct  species,  or  only  as  a  yariety  of  some  other  tribe,  that  it  has  been 
found,  by  naturalists,  conyenient  to  haye  a  designation  applicable  in  either  case."  23 

Dr.  Morton  defines  speciet  simply  to  be  "a  primordial  organic 
form.''^  He  classes  species,  "according  to  their  disparity  or  affi- 
nity," in  the  following  provisional  manner  j  — 

<<  REMOTE  SPECIES,  of  the  same  genus,  are  those  among  which  hybrids  are  neyer 
produced. 

«  ALLIED  SPECIES  produce,  inter  ee,  an  infertile  offspring. 

«  PROXIMATE  SPECIES  produce,  with  each  other,  a  fertile  offspring." 

QROUP.  —  Under  this  term  we  include  all  those  proximate  races, 
or  species,  which  resemble  each  other  most  closely  in  type,  and  whose 
geographical  distribution  belongs  to  certain  zoological  provinces ;  for 
example,  the  aboriginal  American^  the  Mongol^  the  Malay ^  the  Negro^ 
the  Polynesian  groups,  and  so  forth. 

It  will  be  seen,  by  comparison  of  our  definitions,  that  we  recognize 
no  substantial  difference  between  the  terms  types  and  species — ^perma- 
nence of  characteristics  belon^ng  equally  to  both.  The  horse,  the  ass, 
the  zebra,  and  the  qnagga,  are  distinct  species  and  distinct  types:  and 
so  with  the  Jew,  the  Teuton,  the  Sclavonian,  the  Mongol,  the  Austra- 
lian, the  coast  Negro,  the  Hottentot,  &c. ;  and  no  physical  causes  known 
to  have  existed  during  our  geological  epoch  could  have  transformed 
one  of  these  types  or  species  into  another.  A  type,  then,  being  a  pristine 
or  primordial  form,  all  idea  of  common  origin  for  any  two  is  excluded, 
otherwise  every  landmark  of  natural  history  would  be  broken  down. 

It  has  been  sagaciously  remarked  by  Bodichon :  — 

"  That  when  a  people  writes  its  history,  time,  and  often  space,  have  placed  them  yery 
fu  firom  their  origin.  It  is  then  composed  of  diverse  elements,  and  its  national  traditions 
are  altered :  there  happens  to  it  that  which  occurs  to  the  man  who  has  arrived  at  adult 
age — the  remembrance  of  his  early  years  has  seized  upon  his  imagination  more  than  upon 
his  mind,  and  incites  him  to  cast  over  his  cradle  a  coloring,  brilliant,  but  deceptive.  Thus 
some  pretend  they  are  descended  ftrom  Abraham,  others  from  JEneas,  some  from  Japhet, 
some  from  stonea  thrown  by  Deucalion  and  Psyche :  the  greatest  number  from  some  god 
or  demigod  —  Pluto,  Hercules,  Odin."  » 
11 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC 

82  GENERAL    REMARKS 

It  may  then  be  truly  said,  that  we  posBess  no  data  by  whicb  science 
can  at  all  approximate  to  the  epoch  of  man's  first  appearance  upon 
earth;  for,  as  shown  in  our  chronological  essay,  even  the  Jewish 
history,  whose  febulous  chronology  is  so  perseveringly  relied  on  by 
many,  does  not  reach  back  to  the  early  history  of  nations.  It  cannot 
now  reasonably  be  doubted,  that  Egypt  and  China,  at  least,  existed 
a«  nations  3000  years  before  Christ;  and  there  is  monumental  evidence 
of  the  simultaneous  existence  of  various  Types  of  Mankind  quite  as 
far  back.  Inasmuch  as  these  types  are  more  or  less  fertile  inter  se, 
and  as  they  have,  for  the  last  5000  years,  been  subjected  to  successions 
of  wars,  migrations,  captivities,  intermixtures,  &c.,  it  would  be  a  vain 
task  at  the  present  day  to  attempt  the  unravelling  of  this  tangled 
thread,  and  to  make  anything  Hke  a  just  classification  of  types ;  or 
to  determine  how  many  were  primitive,  or  which  one  of  tiem  has 
arisen  fix)m  intermixture  of  types.  This  difficulty  holds  not  alone 
with  regard  to  mankind,  but  also  with  respect  to  dogs,  horses,  cattle, 
sheep,  and  other  domestic  animals,  as  we  shall  take  occasion  to  show. 
All  that  etlmography  can  now  hope  to  accomplish  is,  to  select  some 
of  the  more  prominent  types,  or  rather  groups  of  proximate  types, 
compare  them  with  each  other,  and  demonstrate  that  they  are,  and 
have  always  been,  distinct 

A  vulgar  error  has  been  sedulously  impressed  upon  the  public  mind, 
of  which  it  is  very  hard  to  divest  it,  viz.,  that  all  the  races  of  the  globe 
set  out  originally  fix)m  a  single  point  in  Asia.  Science  now  knows  that 
no  foundation  in  fact  exists  for  such  a  conclusion.  The  embarrassment 
in  treating  of  types  or  races  is  constantiy  increased  by  false  classifi- 
cations imposed  upon  us  by  prejudiced  naturalists.  It  is  argued, 
for  example,  that  all  the  Mongols,  all  the  African  Kegroes,  all  the 
American  Indians,  have  been  derived  fix)m  one  common  Asiatic  pair 
or  unique  source ;  whereas,  on  the  other  hand,  there  is  no  evidence 
that  human  beings  were  not  sown  broadcast  over  the  whole  face  of 
tiie  earth,  like  animals  and  plants :  and  we  incline  to  the  opinion  of 
M.  Agassiz,  that  men  were  created  in  nations^  and  not  in  a  single  pair. 

Since  the  time  of  Linnseus,  who  first  placed  man  at  the  head  of  the 
Animal  kingdom  and  in  the  same  series  with  monkeys,  numerous 
classifications  of  human  races  have  been  proposed ;  and  it  may  be 
well  to  give  a  rapid  sketch  of  a  few  of  them,  in  order  to  show  the 
difficulties  which  encompass  the  subject,  and  how  hopelessly  vague 
every  definitive  attempt  of  this  kind  must  be,  in  the  present  state  of 
our  knowledge. 

BuFFON  divides  the  human  race  into  six  varieties  —  viz.,  Polar, 
Tartar,  Austral-Asiatic,  European,  Kegro,  and  Aqierican. 

Eant  divides  man  into/<mr  varieties — White,  Black,  Oopper,  and 

O^V®-  Digitized  by  Google 

ON    TYPES    OP    MANKIND.  83 

Hunter,  into  teven  varieties;  Metzan,  into  two — ^White  and  Black; 
ViRBY,  into  three;  Blumenbach,  into  five — viz.,  Caucasian,  Mongol, 
Malay,  Negro,  and  American ;  Desmoulins,  into  aixtsen  species;  Bory 
DB  St.  Vincent  makes  fifteen  species,  subdivided  into  races.  * 

Morton  classifies  man  into  twenty-two  families;  Pickering,  into 
eleven  races ;  Luke  Burke,  into  9ixty^hree^  whereof  twenty-eight  are 
distinct  varieties  of  the  intellectual^  and  thirty-five  of  the  pht/iical  races. 

Jacquinot*  divides  mankind  into  three  species  of  a  genus  homo  — 
viz.,  Oaueatian,  Mongol^  and  Negro. 

The  Oaueasiany  says  Jacquinot,  is  the  only  species  in  which  white 
races  with  rosy  cheeks  are  found ;  but  it  embraces  besides  sundry 
brunette,  brown,  and  black  races — not  regarding  color  aa  a  satisfac- 
tory test  of  race.  The  principal  races  which  he  includes  under  the 
Caucasian  head  are,  the  Germanic,  Celtic,  Semitic,  and  Hindoo.  The 
latter  differ  much  in  color,  some  being  black,  and  others  fair,  com- 
prising all  intermediate  shades,  and  are  probably  a  mixture  of  differ- 
ent primitive  stocks. 

The  Mongol  species  embraces  the  Mongol,  Sinic,  Malay,  Polynesian, 
and  American. 

The  Negro  species  comprehends  the  Ethiopian,  Hottentot,  Oceanic- 
Kegro,  and  Australian.  The  Ethiopian  race  comprises  those  l^egroes 
inhabiting  the  greater  part  of  Afiica,  having  black  skins,  woolly 
heads,  kc. ;  Hottentots  and  Bushmen  exhibiting  light-brown  com- 
plexions. 

This  classification  of  M.  Jacquinot  is  supported  by  much  ingenuity. 
In  many  respects  it  is  superior  to  others ;  and  inasmuch  as  some 
classification,  however  defective,  seems  to  be  indispensable,  his  may 
be  received,  as  simple  and  the  least  objectionable.  Like  all  his  pre- 
decessors, however,  who  have  written  on  anthropology,  he  seems  not 
to  be  versed  in  the  monumental  literature  of  Egypt ;  and,  therefore, 
he  classes  together  races  which  (although  somewhat  similar  in  type), 
having  presented  distinct  physical  characteristics  for  several  thousand 
years,  cannot  be  regarded  as  of  one  and  the  sam6  species,  any  more 
than  his  Caucasians  and  Negroes. 

Though  many  other  classifications  might  be  added,  the  above 
suffice  to  testify  how  arbitrary  all  classifications  inevitably  must  be ; 
because  no  reason  has  yet  been  assigned  why,  if  two  original  pairs 
a>f  human  beings  be  admitted,  we  should  not  accept  an  indefinite 
number;  and,  if  we  are  to  view  mankind  as  governed  by  the  same 
laws  that  regulate  the  rest  of  the  animal  kingdom,  this  conclusion 
is  the  most  natural,  no  less  than  apparentiy  most  in  accordance  with 
the  general  plan  of  the  Creator.  We  have  shown  that  sundry  groups 
of  human  beings,  presenting  general  resemblances  in  physical  char- 

Digitized  by 

Google 

84  GENERAL    REMARKS 

acters,  are  found  in  certain  zoological  provinces  where  everything 
conveys  the  idea  of  distinct  centres  of  creation ;  and  hence,  we  may 
conclude  that  mankind  only  constitutes  a  link  in  Nature's  great 
chain. 

But  many  of  our  readers  will  doubtless  be  startled  at  being  told 
that  Ethnology  was  no  new  science  even  before  the  time  of  Moses. 
It  is  clear,  and  positive,  that  at  that  early  day  (fourteen  or  fifteen 
centuries  b.  c),  the  Egyptians  not  only  recognized,  and  faithfully 
represented  on  their  monuments,  many  distinct  races,  but  that  they 
possessed  their  own  ethnographic  systems,  and  already  had  classified 
humanity,  as  known  to  them,  accordingly.  They  divided  mankind 
m\jofour  species:  viz.,  the  Red,  Black,  White,  and  Yellow;  and,  what 
is  note-worthy,  the  same  perplexing  diversity  existed  in  each  of  their 
quadripartite  divisions  which  still  pervades  our  modem  classifica- 
tions. Our  divisions,  such  as  the  Caucaiianj  Mongol^  NegrOy  &c.,  each 
include  many  sub-types ;  and  if  different  painters  of  the  present  day 
were  called  upon  to  select  a  pictorial  type  to  represent  a  man  of  these 
arbitrary  divisions,  they  would  doubtless  select  different  human 
heads.  Thus  with  the  Egyptians :  although  the  Red^  or  Egyptian,  type 
was  represented  with  considerable  uniformity,  the  White,  Yellow, 
and  Black,  are  oft^n  depicted,  in  their  hieroglyphed  drawings,  with 
different  physiognomies ;  thus  proving,  that  the  same  endless  variety 
of  races  existed  at  that  ancient  day  that  we  observe  in  the  same 
localities  at  the  present  hour.  So  far  fi'om  there  being  a  stronger 
similarity  among  the  most  ancient  races,  the  dissimilarity  actually 
augments  as  we  ascend  the  stream  of  time ;  and  this  is  naturally 
explained  by  the  obvious  fact  that  existing  remains  of  primitive  types 
are  becoming  more  and  more  amalgamated  every  day. 

There  are  several  similar  tableaux  on  the  monuments;  but  we  shall 
select  the  celebrated  scene  from  the  tomb  of  Seti-Menephtha  L 
[generally  called  "Belzoni's  Tomb,"  at  Thebes],  of  the  XEXth 
dynasty,  about  the  year  1500  b.  c,  wherein  the  god  HoRUS  conducts 
sixteen  personages,  each /(mr  of  whom  represent  a  distinct  type  of  the 
human  race  as  known  to  the  Egyptians ;  and  it  will  be  seen  that 
Egyptian  ethnographers,  like  the  writers  of  the  Old  and  New  Testa- 
ments, have  described  and  classified  solely  those  races  dwelling  within 
the  geographical  limits  known  to  them.  We  cannot  now  say  exactly 
how  far  the  maximum  geographical  boundaries  of  the  ancient  Egyp- 
tians Extended ;  for  their  language,  the  names  of  places  and  names 
of  races  in  Asia  and  Africa,  have  so  changed  with  time  that  a  margin 
must  be  left  to  conjecture ;  although  much  of  our  knowledge  is 
positive,  because  the  minimum  extent  of  antique  Egyptian  geography 
is  determined. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

ON    TYPES    OP    MANKIND. 

85 

Pio.  1. 
Th«  indent  Egyptian  dlTiskm  of  mankind  into  finur  ipeeles— fifteenth  eentmy  b.  a 

A  B  O  D 

Bed. 

Yellow. 

Black. 

White. 

The  above  figures,  which  may  be  8een,^in  plates  on  a  folio  scale, 
in  the  great  works  of  Belzoni,  ChampoUion,  Rosellini,  Lepsius,  and 
others,  are  copied,  with  corrections,  from  the  smaller  work  of  Cham- 
pollion-Figeac.^  They  display  the  Boty  the  Ndmu,  the  NaJisu,  and 
the  Tamhuj  as  the  hieroglyphical  inscription  terms  them;  and  al- 
though the  efBgies  we  present  are  small,  they  portray  a  specimen  of 
each  type  with  sufBcient  accuracy  to  show  that  four  races  were  very 
distinct  3300  years  ago.  We  have  here,  positively,  a  scientific  quad- 
ripartite division  of  mankind  into  Bedj  Yellow^  Blacky  and  WhitCj 
antedating  Moses ;  whereas,  in  the  Xth  chapter  of  Genesis^  the  sym- 
bolical division  of  "Shem,  Ham,  and  Japhet,"  is  only  tripartite — the 
Black  being  entirely  omitted,  as  proved  in  Part  II.  of  this  volume. 

The  appellative  "iZo^**  applies  exclusively  to  one  race,  viz.,  the 
Egyptian;  but  the  other  designations  may  be  somewhat  generic,  each 
covering  certain  groups  of  races,  as  do  our  terms  Caucasian,  Mongol, 
&c. ;  also  including  a  considerable  variety  of  types  bearing  general 
resemblance  to  one  another  in  each  group,  through  shades  of  color, 
features,  and  other  peculiarities,  to  be  discussed  hereafter.^ 

EXPLANATION  OF  FIG.  1. 
A  —  This  figure,  together  irith  his  three  fao-simile  associates,  extant  on  the  original 
painted  relioTO,  is,  then,  typical  of  the  Egyptian*;  who  are  called  in  the  hieroglyphics 
**Bot,**  or  Race ;  meaning  the  Human  race,  par  ezeellenee.  Like  all  other  Eastern  nations 
of  antiquity  —  like  the  Jews,  Hindoos,  Chinese,  and  others  —  the  Egyptians  regarded 
themselves  alone  as  the  chosen  people  of  God,  and  contemptuously  looked  down  upon  other 
races,  reputing  such  to  be  Gentiles  or  outside-barbarians.  The  above  representation  of  the 
Egyptian  type  is  interesting,  inasmuch  as  it  is  the  work  of  an  Egyptian  artist,  and  must 
therefore  be  regarded  as  the  Egyptian  ideal  representation  of  their  own  type.    Our  con- 

Digitized  by 

Google 

86  GENERAL    REMARKS 

elusion  is  much  strengihened  by  the  fact,  that  the  same  head  is  often  repeated  on  different 
montiments.  This  and  the  other  portraits  of  the  Egyptian  type  to  which  we  allude,  were 
figured  daring  the  XYIIIth  dynasty  of  Rossllini  ;  and  possess,  to  Ethnologists,  peculiar 
interest,  f^om  the  fact  of  their  Tivid  similitude  to  the  oldEgypHma  type,  (subsequently  resus- 
citated by  Lepsius),  on  the  earlier  monuments  of  the  IVth,  Vth,  and  Vlth  dynasties ;  at  the 
same  time  that  these  particular  effigies  offer  a  marked  dissimilarity  to  the  Asiatioo-Egyptlan 
type,  which  becomes  oomnkon  on  the  later  monuments  of  the  XVIIth  and  subsequent 
dynasties ;  that  is,  firom  1500  B.  o.  downwards. 

B  —  This  portndt  is  the  representatiTe  of  that  Asiatic  group  of  races,  by  ethnographers 
termed  the  SemiUe.  The  hieroglyphic  legend  OTcr  his  head  reads  **Namu;**  which,  toge- 
ther with  **Aamu,"  was  the  generic  term  for  yeZ^ov-skinned  races,  lying,  in  that  day, 
between  the  Isthmus  of  Suez  and  Tatilric  Assyria,  Arabia  and  Chaldsa  InclusiTC. 

C  —  Neffro  races  are  typified  in  this  class,  and  they  are  designated,  in  the  hieroglyphics, 
^^NaJuu,"  The  portrait,  in  colour  and  outline,  displays,  like  hundreds  of  other  Egyptian 
drawings,  how  well  marked  was  the  Negro  type  seTcral  generations  anterior  to  Moses.  We 
possess  no  actual  portraits  of  Negroes,  pictorially  extant,  earlier  than  the  seTcnteenth  cen- 
tury before  Christ ;  but  there  is  abundant  proof  of  the  existence  of  Negro  raced  in  the 
Xllth  dynasty,  2800  years  prior  to  our  era.  Lepsius  tells  us  that  AfHcan  language  ante- 
date CTcn  the  epoch  of  Msms,  b.  c,  8898 ;  and  we  may  hence  conclude  that  they  were  then 
spoken  by  Negroes,  whose  organic  idioms  bear  no  affinity  to  Asiatic  tongues. 

D  —  The  fourth  diyision  of  the  human  family  is  designated,  in  the  hieroglyphics,  by  the 
name  ^^Tamhu;**  which  is  likewise  a  generic  term  for  those  races  of  men  by  us  now  called 
Japethie,  including  all  the  ipAtto-skinned  families  of  Asia  Minor,  the  Caucasian  mountains, 
and  '*  Scythia"  generally. 

But  we  sliall  return  to  tins  Egyptian  classification  in  another 
chapter.  Our  object,  here,  is  simply  to  establish  that  the  ancient 
Egyptians  had  attempted  a  systematic  anthropology  at  least  3500 
years  ago,  and  that  their  ethnographers  were  puzzled  with  the 
same  diversily  of  types  then,  that,  after  this  lapse  of  time,  we  encounter 
in  the  same  localities  now.  They  of  course  classified  solely  the  races 
of  men  within  the  circumference  of  their  own  knowledge,  which 
comprehended  necessarily  but  a  small  portion  of  the  earth's  surfece. 
Of  their  contemporaries  in  China,  Australia,  Northern  and  Western 
Asia,  Europe,  and  America,  the  Pharaonic  Egyptians  knew  nothing; 
because  all  of  the  latter  types  of  men  became  known  even  to  Europe 
only  since  the  Christian  era,  most  of  them  since  1400  a.  d. 

We  have  asserted,  that  all  classifications  of  the  races  of  men  here- 
tofore proposed  are  entirely  arbitrary ;  and  that,  unfortunately,  no 
data  yet  exist  by  which  these  arrangements  can  be  materially  im- 
proved. It  is  proper  that  we  should  submit  our  reasons  for  this 
assertion.  The  field  we  here  enter  upon  is  so  wide  as  to  embrace 
the  whole  physical  history  of  mankind ;  but,  neither  our  limits  nor 
plan  permitting  such  a  comprehensive  range,  we  shall  illustrate  our 
views  by  an  examination  of  one  or  two  groups  of  races ;  premising 
the  remark  that,  whatever  may  be  true  of  one  human  division-Kjall  it 
Caucasian,  Mongol,  Negro,  Indian,  or  other  name — applies  with  equal 
force  to  all  divisions.  If  we  endeavor  to  treat  of  mankind  zoologically, 

Digitized  by 

Google 

ON    TYPES   OP    MANKIND.  87 

we  can  but  follow  M.  Agassiz,  and  map  them  off  into  those  great 
groups  of  proximate  races  appertaining  to  the  zoological  provinces 
into  which  the  earth  is  naturally  divided.  We  might  thus  make 
some  approach  towards  a  classification  upon  scientific  principles; 
but  all  attempts  beyond  this  must  be  wholly  arbitrary. 

^^  Unity  of  races*'  seems  to  be  an  idea  introduced  in  comparatively 
modem  times,  and  never  to  have  been  conceived  by  any  primitive 
nation,  such  as  Egypt  or  China.  Neither  does  the  idea  appear  to  have 
occurred  to  the  author  of  Q-enesU.  Indeed,  no  importance  could,  in 
Mosaic  days,  attach  to  it,  inasmuch  as  the  early  Hebrews  have  lefb  no 
evidences  of  their  belief  in  a  future  state,  which  is  never  declared  in 
the  Pentateuch.®  This  dogma  of  "  unity,"  if  not  borrowed  from  the 
Babylonians  during  the  captivity  of  the  Israelites,  or  from  vague 
rumors  of  Budhutic  suavity  in  the  sixth  centuiy  b.  c,  may  be  an 
outgrowth  of  the  charitable  doctrine  of  the  "Essenes;"*  just  as  the 
present  Socialist  idea  of  the  ^^dolidarite  of  humanity"  is  a  conception 
borrowed  from  St.  Paul. 

The  authors  have  now  candidly  stated  their  joint  views,  and  will 
proceed  to  substantiate  the  foots,  upon  which  these  deductions  are 
based,  in  subsequent  chapters ;  unbiassed,  they  trust,  by  precon- 
ceived hypotheses,  as  well  as  indifferent  to  other  than  scientific 
conclusions. 

With  such  slight  modifications  as  the  progress  of  knowledge  — 
especially  in  hieroglyphical,  cuneiform,  and  Hebraical  discovery  — 
may  have  superinduced  since  the  publication  of  his  Crania  Mgyptiaca^ 
in  1844,  they  adopt  the  matured  opinions  of  their  lamented  friend. 
Dr.  Samuel  George  Morton,  as,  above  all  others,  the  most  authorita* 
tive.  In  the  course  of  this  work,  abundant  extracts  from  Morton's 
writings  render  unmistakeable  the  anthropological  results  to  which 
be  had  himself  attained ;  but  the  authors  refer  the  reader  particu- 
larly to  Chapter  XL  of  the  present  volume,  containing  "Morton's 
inedited  manuscripts,"*  for  the  philosophical  and  testamentary  deci- 
sions of  the  Founder  of  the  American  School  of  Ethnology. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

88  SPECIFIC    TYPES — CAUCASIAN. 

CHAPTER   III. 

SPECIFIC    TYPES — CAUCASIAN. 

What  is  meant  by  the  word  "  Caucasian  f  "  Almost  every  Ethno- 
logist would  give  a  different  reply.  Commonly,  it  has  been  received, 
since  its  adoption  by  Blnmenbach,  as  a  sort  of  generic  term  which 
includes  many  varieties  of  races.  By  some  writers,  all  these  varieties 
are  reputed  to  be  the  descendants  of  one  species ;  and  the  manifest 
diversity  of  types  is  explwned  by  them  through  the  operation  of 
physic^  causes.  By  others,  the  designations  Caucasian^  Mongol^ 
Negroy  &c.,  are  employed  simply  for  tiie  convenience  of  grouping 
certain  human  varieties  which  more  or  less  resemble  each  other, 
without  paying  due,  if  any  regard,  to  specific  characters.  Under  the 
head  Caucasian  are  generally  associated  the  Egyptians,  the  Berbers, 
the  Arabs,  the  Jews,  the  Pelasgians,  the  Hindoos,  the  Iberians,  the 
Teutons,  the  Celts,  the  Sclavonians:  in  short,  all  the  so-called 
Semitic  and  Indo-Qermanic  races  are  thrown  together  into  the  same 
group,  and  hence  become  arbitrarily  referred  to  a  common  origin. 

Now,  such  a  sweeping  classification  as  this  might  have  been  main- 
tained, with  some  degree  of  plausibility,  a  few  years  ago ;  when  it  was 
gravely  asseverated  that  climate  could  transform  one  type  into  an- 
other:  but  inasmuch  as  this  argument,  apart  firom  new  rebutting  data, 
revealed  through  the  decyphering  of  the  monuments  of  Egypt  and 
of  Assyria,  is  now  abandoned  by  every  well-educated  naturalist,  (and, 
we  may  add,  enlightened  theologian,)  it  is  difficult  to  conceive  how  it 
can  any  longer  be  accepted  with  favor.  "We  know  of  no  archaeologist 
of  respectable  authority,  at 'the  present  day,  who  will  aver  that  the 
races  now  found  throughout  the  valley  of  the  Nile,  and  scattered  over 
a  considerable  portion  of  Asia,  were  not  as  distinctly  and  broadly 
contrasted  at  least  3500  years  ago  as  at  this  moment.  The  Egyptians, 
Canaanites,  Nubians,  Tartars,  Negroes,  Arabs,  and  other  types,  are 
as  faithfully  delineated  on  the  monuments  of  the  XVIIth  and  XVHIth 
Dynasties,  as  if  the  paintings  had  been  executed  by  an  artist  of  our 
present  age. 

Some  of  these  races,  owing  to  the  recent  researches  of  Lepsius, 
have  even  been  carried  backwards  to  the  IVth  Dynasty ;  which  he 
places  about  3400  years  before  Christ.  It  becomes  obvious,  conse- 
quently, ttat  all  the  countries  known  to  Egyptians  in  those  remote 

Digitized  by 

Gc)ogle 

SPECIFIC    TYPES — CAUCASIAN.  89 

ages  presented  types  which  were  as  essentially  different  then  as  they  now 
exhibit.  It  is  equally  certain,  that  the  Pharaonic  Egyptians  repudiated 
all  idea  of  aflinity  to  these  coetaneous  races ;  and  it  would  seem  to 
follow,  as  a  corollary,  that  the  other  parts  of  the  world  were  contem- 
poraneously occupied  by  many  aboriginal  species.  Ancient  history 
nowhere  acquaints  us  with  habitable  countries  known  to  be  uninha- 
bited, and  the  earliest  discoverers  always  found  new  types  in  distant 
lands.  Hence,  nothing  short  of  a  miracle  could  have  evolved  all  the 
multifarious  Caucasian  forms  out  of  one  primitive  stock;  because  the 
Canaanites,  the  Arabs,  the  Tartars  and  Egyptians,  were  absolutely  as 
distinct  from  each  other  in  primeval  times  as  they  are  now ;  just  as  they 
all  were  then' from  co-existent  Negroes.  Such  a  miracle,  indeed,  has 
been  invented  and  dogmatically  defended;  but  it  is  a  bare  postulate, 
unsupported  by  the  Hebrew  Bible,  and  positively  refuted  by  scientific 
facts.  The  Jewish  chronology,  (fabricated,  as  we  shall  render  appa- 
rent, after  the  Christian  era,)  for  the  human  femily,  since  the  Deluge, 
carries  us  back,  according  to  Usher's  computation,  only  to  the  year 
2348  B.  c. ;  or,  at  farthest,  according  to  the  Septuagint  version  (whose 
history  we  shall  see  is  somewhat  apocryphal),  to  3246  b.  c.  ;  but  the 
monuments  of  Egypt  remove  every  shadow  of  doubt,  by  establishing 
that  not  merely  races  but  nations  existed  prior  to  either  of  those 
imaginary  dates.  If  then  the  teachings  of  science  be  true,  there  must  » 
have  been  many  centres  of  creation,  even  for  Caucasian  races,  instead 
of  one  centre  for  all  the  types  of  humanity. 

The  multiform  races  of  Europe,  with  trifling  exceptions,  have  been 
classed  under  the  Caucasian  head ;  and  it  has  been  assumed  for  ages, 
that  each  of  these  races  must  have  been  derived  fiH)m  Asia.  It  is 
strange,  moreover,  that  naturalists  should  have  spent  their  time  in 
studying  remote,  barbarous  and  obscure  tribes,  while  they  have  passed 
in  silence  over  the  historical  races,  lying  close  at  hand :  nevertheless, 
we  think  this  branch  of  our  subject  may  be  readily  elucidated  by 
analyzing  those  types  of  mankind  which  surround  us. 

It  is  to  M.  Thierry  and  M.  Edwards,  the  one  honorably  known  as 
an  historian  and  the  other  as^  a  naturalist,  that  we  are  indebted  for  the 
first  philosophical  attempt  to  break  in  upon  this  settied  routine.  They 
have  penetrated  directly  into  the  heart  of  Europe,  and  by  a  masterly 
examination  of  the  history  and  physical  characteristics  of  long-known 
races,  have  endeavored  to  trace  them  back  to  their  several  primitive 
sources. 

Ancient  Gaul  is  the  chosen  field  of  their  investigations;   and, 
although  we  admit  that,  from  the  very  nature  of  the  case,  it  is  impos- 
sible at  this  late  day  to  arrive  at  definite  results,  yet  their  facta  are  so 
fairly  posited,  and  their  deductions  so  interesting,  as  to  conamand 
12 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC 

90  SPECIFIC    TYPES — CAUCASIAN. 

attention ;  no  less  than  to  induce  the  belief  that  their  plan,  if  persevered 
in,  may  lend  most  efficient  aid  in  classifying  the  races  of  men.  They 
have  at  least  shown,  conclusively,  that  very  opposite  types  have  dwelt 
together  in  Europe  for  more  than  two  thousand  years ;  that  tiane  and 
identical  physical  causes  have  not  yet  obliterated  or  blended  them ; 
and  that,  while  nations  may  become  expunged,  there  is  every  reason 
to  believe  that  primitive  diversities  are  rarely,  if  ever,  wholly  effiaiced. 

Inasmuch  as  the  labors  of  these  gentiemen  stand  unparalleled,  and 
possess  very  important  bearings  upon  certain  opinions  long  held  by 
ourselves,  and  which  we  are  about  to  develop,  no  apology  need  be 
offered  for  the  following  extended  remme  of  their  combined  labors. 

Cjesar  begins  his  comm|entaries  with — 

"All  Gaul  ifl  divided  into  three  parts,  of  which  one  is  inhabited  by  the  JBdffiant,  another 
by  the  Aquitaniafu,  and  the  third  by  those  who,  in  their  own  langoage,  eall  themselyes 
Celts f  and  who  in  oar  tongne  are  called  Galls  (Oalli),  These  people  differ  among  them- 
selyes  by  their  language,  their  manners  and  their  laws."^^ 

To  these  three  divisions,  taken  in  mass,  he  applies  the  collective 
denomination  of  Galliy  corresponding  to  the  French  term  Gaulois. 

Strabo  confirms  this  account,  and  adds  that  the  Aquitanians  differ 
from  the  Celts,  or  Gallic  and  from  the  Belgians,  not  only  in  language 
and  institutions,  but  also  in  conformation  of  body;  and  that  they 
resemble  much  more  the  Iberians;  while  he  regards  the  Celts  and  the 
Belgians  as  of  the  same  national  type,  although  speaking  different 
dialects.  There  are,  however,  valid  reasons  for  doubting  the  latter 
opinion. 

From  their  physical  character  and  language,  Strabo  considers  the 
Aquitanians,  as  well  as  the  Ligurians,  who  occupied  a  part  of  the 
coast  of  France,  to  be  a  branch  of  the  Iberians,^  the  ancient  people 
'  of  Spain.  These  Iberei,  or  "people  beyond,*'  seem  to  have  been  trans- 
planted, from  time  immemorial,  on  the  soil  of  France,  and  are  still 
beheld^  distinct  from  all  other  men,  in  the  modem  Basques. 

In  consequence  of  their  position  on  the  coaat  of  the  Mediterranean, 
the  Ligurians  became  known  to  ancient  navigators  before  the  other 
populations  of  Gktul.  Greek  historians  and  geographers  speak  of 
them  in  very  early  times.  They  figure  among  the  barbarous  allies 
of  the  Carthaginians,  as  fiu*  back  as  480  b.  c.  Thieny  adopts, 
enforcing  by  mahy  proofe,  the  opinion  that  the  Aquitanians  and 
Ligurians  were  both  of  the  Iberian  stock,  and  also  that  they  were 
alien  to  the  Ghdlic  fiunily,  properly  speaking.® 

These  races  disposed  o^  Thieny  says  that  the  Celts,  or  Galli,  and  the 
Bel^ans  remain  to  be  examined;  and  he  views  them  as  two  branches 
of  the  same  ethnic  trunk:  —  ^ 

'<Two  fractions  of  the  same  family,  isolated  during  many  ages,  deyeloped  s^Murately, 
•nd  become,  by  means  of  their  long  separation,  distinct  races.    The  OalU,  or  Celts,  were 

Digitized  by 

Google 

SPECIFIC    TYPES — CAUCASIAN.  91 

the  most  ftneient  inlutbitants  of  the  ooimtry,  and  it  is  from  them  that  it  deriTes  its  name : 
and  an  idea  of  theiv  antiquity  may  be  obtained  from  the  statement  that  <  the  CeUt  subju- 
gated Spain  in  the  sixteenth  century  b.  o.  The  Galls  made  a  descent  on  Italy,  under  the 
name  of  Ombra,  about  two  centuries  after ;  and  the  Boman  antiquaries  designate  these 
ancestors  of  the  Ombrians  by  the  name  of  Old  OaUtJ' ...  In  short,  we  ehould  consume 
much  time,  were  we  to  cite  aU  the  authorities  at  command,  to  proye  that  the  Galls  were 
the  most  ancient  population.  On  the  contrary,  the  word  Btigiana  is  comparatiyely  modem : 
it  la  found,  for  the  first  time,  in  Cbsas;  and  they  are  recogniied  under  the  name  of  CVm- 
brians,  in  118  b.  o." 

It  seems  tolerably  well  established,  that  the  Belgians  invaded  Gkral 
on  their  first  advent  fix)m  the  North,  and  that  the  Celts  were  driven 
before  them.  The  Bel^ns  settled  in  the  north  of  Gkinl  and  in  Italy, 
where  they  were  not  only  located  by  ancient  historians,  but  where, 
according  to  Thierry  and  Edwards,  they  are  still  resident  The  Celts, 
rented,  and  impelled  to  the  South  and  East,  took  refuge  in  mountains, 
peninsulas,  and  islands  —  historical  £a,cts  also  elucidated  by  Db 
Brotonnb.^ 

M.  Thierry  has  shown  that  the  Armoricans  and  the  Belgians  are 
an  identical  people,  and  that  the  Welsh  of  Great  Britain  are  also 
derived  from  the  same  stock.  Prichard,  it  is  true,  does  not  concur 
in  this  opinion ;  but  Thierry,  so  far  as  we  can  perceive,  is  thoroughly 
sustained  in  his  views  by  French,  German,  and  other  continental 
writers.  He  places  the  entrance  into  Gaul  of  the  conquering  Bel- 
gians between  the  years  849  and  290  b.  c.  The  Armoricans  apper- 
tained to  the  same  stock,  but  their  establishment  in  Gaul  was  still 
more  ancient. 

The  Celts,  or  &attB  proper,  according  to  M.  Thieny  as  well  as  to 
ancient  historians,  were  already  inhabitants  of  Gaul  about  1500  b.  c, 
or  previously  to  the  time  of  Moses.  They  then  existed  as  a  nation, 
warring  with  other  races  around  them ;  nor  can  a  conjecture  be  formed 
as  to  the  number  of  centuries,  anterior  to  this  date,  during  which  they 
had  occupied  that  territory. 

The  Pr^Odtic  researches  of  Wilson,®  among  the  peat-hoga  of 
the  British  Isles,  have  carried  the  existence  of  man  in  England  and 
Scotland  back  to  ages  immensely  remote ;  at  the  same  time  that  those 
of  BoucHBB  BE  PERTHES,  amid  the  alluvial  stratifications  of  the  river 
Soarne^  indicate  a  still  more  ancient  epoch  for  the  cinerary  urns, 
bones,  and  instruments,  of  a  primordial  people  in  France ;  who,  if 
geological  observations  be  correct,  are  yet  posterior  to  the  Mex- 
evidences  of  human  entity  on  the  same  spots  before  the  "  diluvial 
drift."  These  fiwts  correspond  with  the  exhumations  of  Eetzius,  in 
Scandinavia,'^  and  the  human  vestiges  discovered  in  European  caves.* 

But,  leaving  such  points  to  janother  section  (ably  handled  by  our 
colleague,  Dr.  TTshbr,)  it  remains  now  for  us  to  ask,  who  were  the 
Belgians  f    M.  Thieny  shows,  from  an  elaborate  historical  investiga- 

Digitized  by 

Google 

92  SPECIFIC    TYPES — CAUCASIAN. 

tion,  that  the  Cirribri^  who  played  so  important  a  part  in  the  history 
of  early  Europe,  Tt^ere  of  the  same  race  as  the  Belgiaiis ;  and  that  old 
writers,  coeval  with  the  time  of  Alexander,  or  fourth  century  b.  c, 
place  this  race  on  the  Northern  Ocean,  in  Jutland.  Between  the 
years  118  and  101  b.  c,  the  Cimbri  were  set  in  motion,  and  eventually 
devastated  Q^ul,  Spain,  and  Italy.  It  is  a  striking  feet,  that,  in  this 
invasion,  when  they  reached  Northern  Gaul,  where  the  Belgians  were 
already  seated,  the  latter  immediately  joined  them,  as  allies,  against 
the  Celts ;  and  it  seems  to  be  clearly  proven  that  the  Cimbri  and 
the  Belgians  spoke  dialects  of  the  same  language. 

This  Cimmerian  race  was  diffusely  scattered  through  the  north  of 
Europe,  and  even  into  Asia  Minor,  at  an  early  period. 

«  Down  to  the  Bevent]!  century  before  our  era,  the  history  of  the  Cimbri  near  the  Euxine 
remains  enyeloped  in  the  fabulous  obscurity  of  Ionian  traditions ;  it  does  not  commence 
with  any  certamty  before  the  year  631  b.  c.  This  epoch  was  fruitful  in  disturbances  in  the 
west  of  Asia  and  east  of  Europe." 

About  this  time,  it  is  to  be  inferred  from  Herodotus,  the  Genesiacal 
GoMRi,  GomerianSy  or  Kymri^  abandoned  the  Tauric  Chersonesus,  and 
marched  westward.^ 

We  pretend  not  to  afford  a  complete  analysis  of  M.  Thierry's  able 
work.  He  has  tracked  out,  with  vast  research,  the  settlements  and 
subsequent  history  of  the  various  Caucasian  races  of  ancient  Gaul ; 
and  to  him  we  refer  the  reader  for  corroboration  of  the  fa<jts  we  are 
succinctly  sketching.  The  resume  at  the  end  of  his  Introduction 
explains  his  general  conclusions.  He  considers  the  following  points 
to  be  unanimously  demonstrated  by  authorities :  — 

** Two  great  human  families  furnished  to  Gaul  its  ancient  inhabitants:  Tii.,  the  Iberian 
and  the  Oallic  (Oauloites)  families.  The  Aquitanians  and  Ligurians  appertained  to  the 
Iberian  family.  The  Gallic  family  occupied,  out  of  Gaul,  the  British  Isles.  It  was  divided 
into  two  branches  or  races,  presenting,  under  a  common  type,  essential  differences  of  lan- 
guage, manners,  and  institutions,  and  forming  two  individualities  widely  separated.'* 

M.  Thierry,  notwithstanding,  asserts  that  the  Cimbri  and  Celts 
were  branches  of  the  same  family;  but  this  we  doubt  They  were 
both  fair,  and  strikingly  contrasted  with  the  dark-skinned,  black- 
haired,  and  black-eyed  Iberians :  M.  Edwards,  however,  proves  that 
their  physical  characters  were  exceedingly  different  No  proof  can 
be  adduced  of  their  common  origin,  beyond  some  affinity  between 
their  languages :  arguments  that  we  shall  show  to  be  no  longer  satis- 
factory evidence  of  aboriginal  consanguinity. 

**  The  first  branch  had  preceded,  in  Gaul  and  the  neighboring  Archipelago,  the  dawn 
of  history.  The  ancients  considered  them  as  autochthones.  From  Gaul  they  extended  to 
Spain,  Italy,  and  Ulyria.  Their  generic  name  was  Gaelf  or  rather  a  word  which  the  Romans 
rendered  by  Oallw,  and  the  Greeks  by  Oalat  and  Oalatet.  The  latter  had  improperly  attri- 
buted to  the  whole  stem  the  denomination  of  Celtj  which  properly  belonged  only  to  its 
southern  tribes.    The  second  branch,  colonized  in  the  west  of  Europe  since  historic  times, 

Digitized  by 

Google 

SPECIFIC    TYPES — CAUCASIAN.  93 

was  represented  in  Ganl  by  the  Armoricans  atid  Belgians,  and  by  their  descendants  in  the 
British  Isles.  Armoriean  was  a  local  designation ;  Belgian^  the  name  of  a  belligerent  con- 
federation ;  Cimbri,  the  name  of  a  race.  The  relatiTC  position  of  the  two  Oallic  branches 
was  as  follows :  the  Cimbrian  branch  occupied  the  north  and  west  of  Ganl  —  the  east  and 
south  of  Britain ;  the  Celtic  branch,  on  the  contrary,  the  east  and  south  of  Gaul,  and  the 
west  and  north  of  the  British  Isles." 

It  becomes  apparent,  then,  fix)m  the  facts  detailed,  and  which  no 
historian  will  question,  that  the  territory  of  ancient  Gaul  was  occupied, 
some  1500  years  b.  c,  by  at  least  two  distinctly-marked  Caucasian 
races  —  the  Celts  and.  the  Iberians :  the  one  fair-skinned  and  light- 
haired  ;  the  other  a  dark  race ;  and  each  speaking  a  language  bearing 
no  afl^ty  to  that  of  the  other  —  precisely,  for  instance,  as  the  Euskal- 
dune  of  the  present  Basques  is  unintelligible  to  Gaelic  tribes  of  Lower 
Brittany.  But  history  justifies  us  in  going  beyond  this  dual  division. 
Each  type  was  doubtless  a  generic  one,  including  many  subordinate 
types.  There  are  no  data  to  warrant  the  conclusion  that  either  of  these 
stocks  was  an  ethnic  unit.  It  will  be  made  to  appear,  when  we  come 
to  the  monuments  of  Egypt,  that  various  Caucasian  types  existed  in 
Egypt  and  Asia  2000  years  befol'e  the  most  ancient  Celtic  histo^ 
be^ns ;  and  the  same  diversity  of  races,  without  question,  prevailed 
simultaneously  in  Europe. 

Let  us  inquire  whether  some  positive  information  cannot  be  obtained 
with  regard  to  the  types  of  primitive  European  races.  The  work  of 
Edwards,  to  which  we  have  already  alluded,**^  stands  in  many  respects 
unrivalled.  The  high  reputation  of  its  author  as  a  naturalist  guaran- 
tees his  scientific  competency ;  and  he  has  directed  his  attention  into 
an  unexplored  channel.  After  perusing  Thierry's  HUtoire  dea  CfatUoiSy 
of  which  we  have  just  spoken,  M.  Edwards  made  a  tour  of  France, 
Belgium  and  Switzerland  {%.  e.  ancient  Gaul),  and  Italy,  engaged  in  care- 
ful study  of  the  present  diversified  races,  in  connection  with  their 
ancient  settlements;  and  he  asserts  that  now,  at  the  end  of  2000  years, 
the  types  of  the  Belgians  (Cimbri),  the  GkiUs  or  Celts,  the  Iberians  or 
Aquitanians,  and  the  Ligurians,  are  still  distinctly  traceable  among 
their  living  descendants,  in  the  very  localities  where  history  at  its 
earliest  dawn  descries  these  families. 

G^ul  has  been  the  receptacle  of  other  races  than  those  named,  but 
these  were  comparatively  small  in  popular  multitude ;  and  although 
a  great  variety  of  types  is  now  visible,  yet  M.  Edwards  contends 
that  such  exotic  constituents  of  later  times  form  but  trivial  exceptions, 
and  that  three  major  types  stand  out  in  bold  relief. 

Edwards  upholds  sundry  physiological  laws  to  account  for  this  pre- 
servation of  types ;  and  a  few  shall  be  noticed  incidentally,  as  we  go 
on.  He  lays  down  a  fundamental  proposition,  the  importance  of  which 
will  be  at  once  recognized :  — 

Digitized  by 

Google 

94  SPECIFIC   TYPES — CAUCASIAN. 

«  Where  there  it  no  natural  repugnance  to  each  other,  and  races  meet  and  mix  on  eitiial 
terms,  the  rdaUve  number  of  the  two  races  influences  greatly  the  result:  the  type  of  the 
lesser  number  may  disappear  entirely.  Take,  for  example,  a  thousand  white  iiunilies  and 
one  hundred  black  ones,  and  place  them  together  on  an  island.  The  result  would  be,  that 
the  black  tj^pe  would  after  a  while  disappear,  although  there  is  reason  to  beUeye  that  traces 
of  it  would  *  crop  out'  occasionally  during  a  Tcry  long  time.  Where  two  fiit-skimied  races 
are  brought  into  contact,  the  extermination  of  one  would  probably  sooner  be  effected; 
'  nevertheless,  even  here,  it  is  impossible  to  destroy  the  germ  entirely.  The  Jews  form  a 
oonTincing  illustration  of  the  influence  of  the  larger  orer  the  smaller  number.  This,  from 
the  time  of  Abraham  to  the  present,  has  been  a  more  or  less  adulterated  race ;  yet  its  type 
has  been  predominant,  is  preserved,  and  is  likely  to  be  for  ages  to  come.  Such  a. law  is 
well  illustrated  in  the  lower  animals.  Cross  two  domestic  animahi  of  different  races ;  take 
the  offspring,  and  cross  it  with  one  of  the  parent  stocks ;  continue  this  process  fbr  a  few 
generations,  and  the  one  becomes  swallowed  up  in  the  other. 

«  Even  where  two  races  meet  in  tqual  numbers,  which  is  an  extreme  supporition,  in  order 
to  make  a  uniform  type  they  would  have  to  pair  off  uniformly,  one  race  with  another,  and 
not  each  race  to  intermarry  among  themselves.  This  equilibrium  could  not  be  maintained ; 
and  without  it,  each  race  would  preserve  its  own  type. 

<*  There  is  another  tendency  in  nature,  that  interests  us  here  particulariy,  and  which  has 
been  curiously  and  ingeniously  illustrated  by  M.  Celadon,  of  Geneva.  He  bred  a  great 
many  white  and  ffra^  niioe,  on  which  he  made  experiments  by  crossing  constantly  a  white 
vrith  a  gray  one.  The  product  invariably  was  a  while  or  a  grojf  mome,  with  the  characters 
of  the  pure  race :  <  point  de  m^tis,  point  de  begarmre,  rien  d'interm^di^re,  enfin  le  type 
parfait  de  Tune  ou  de  I'autre  vifri^t^.  Ce  cas  est  extrtoe,  a  la  verity ;  mais  le  pr€c^dent 
ne  Test  point  moins ;  ainsi  les  deux  procM4s  sent  dans  la  nature :  aucua  ne  r^ne  exdu- 
sivement'"« 

The  habit  of  reflecting  on  the  relations  in  which  primitive  races 
are  found,  induces  us  to  consider  the  following  as  the  conditions 
which  may  make  one  or  the  other  of  these  effects  preponderate. 
Where  races  differ  considerably,  which  animals  do  whenever  they 
are  of  different  species,  (like,  for  example,  the  horse  and  the  ass, 
the  dog  and  the  wolf  or  fox,)  their  product  is  constantly  hybrid. 
If,  on  the  other  hand,  they  are  very  proximate,  (er^  vomneSy  says  M. 
Edwards,)  they  may  not  give  birth  to  mixtures  {in^nge$)y  but  repro- 
duce pure  or  primitive  types. 

On  examining  fects  closely,  the  greatest  conformity  is  encountered 
precisely  where  we  perceive,  at  first  glance,  the  strongest  contrast 
In  the  crossing  of  mdely  different  races,  the  hybrid  presents  a  type 
diverse  from  that  of  the  mother;  notwithstanding  certain  conformities. 
So  also  when  two  proximate  races  reproduce  the  one  and  the  other  primi- 
tive type,  the  mother  gives  birth  to  a  being  which  differs  from  herself. 
Behold  here  an  imiformity  of  facts ;  but  remark  likewise,  that  in  this 
last  crossing,  the  mother  produces  a  being  more  like  herself  than  in 
the  former  case.  She  departs  then  less  fix)m  the  general  tendency 
of  nature,  which  is  the  propagation  of  the  same  types. 

« In  the  higher  order  of  animals,  the  two  sexes  concur  in  the  formation  of  two  indivi- 
duals which  represent  them ;  thus  the  mother  gives  birth  sometimes  to  one  made  in  her  own 
image— at  others  to  one  after  the  image  of  the  fttther.  Here  she  produces  two  very  distinct 

Digitized  by 

Google 

SPBCIPIO    TYPES — CAUCASIAN.  95 

Ijpes,  Botwitlurtiiiduig  their  reUtioiis,  and  to  sooh  a  point  that  the  male  and  tnaale  of  the 
same  epeeiea  often  differ  more  between  themaelTes,  than  one  or  the  other  dHFere  from  indi- 
▼idnals  of  the  same  sex,  in  proximate  species.  This  is  so  tnie,  that  the  male  and  its 
female,  among  animals  whpse  habits  there  has  been  no  opportonitj  of  examining,  haye 
fireqnentlj  been  classified  as  distinct  species ;  insects  and  birds  especially  haye  famished 
nnmerons  examples. 

« It  is  manifest  that  the  obserratlons  of  M.  Coladon  belong  to  this  order  of  &cts,  consi- 
dered in  their  general  bearing ;  as  the  mother  produces  two  types,  of  which  one  repre- 
sents that  of  her  own  race,  and  the  other  the  physical  characters  of  the  race  of  the  father. 
Other  examples  of  the  same  kind  might  be  presented,  but  this  is  sufficiently  striking. 

<*  The  most  important  consideration  is,  that  the  same  phenomoia  are  seen  in  the  human 
races,  and,  fMher,  in  the  same  conditions  indicated.  Those  hnman  raoet  which  differ  most 
prodnce  constantly  hybrids  (mStk).  It  is  thns  that  a  mulatto  always  resnlts  from  the 
mixture  of  white  and  black  races.  The  other  fact,  of  the  reprodoction  of  two  primitiTe 
types,  when  the  parents  are  of  two  proximate  (vaitmet)  Tarieties,  is  1ms  notorious,  but  is 
not,  on  that  account,  the  lees  true.  The  fact  is  common  among  European  nations.  We 
haye  had  fluent  occasions  to  notice  it  The  phenomenon  is  not  constant— but  what  of 
that?  Crossing  sometimes  produces  ftision,  sometimes  the  separation  of  types ;  whence 
we  arriye  at  this  Aindamental  conclusion :  that  people  appertaining  to  Tarieties  of  different, 
i  but  proximate  races,  in  vain  unite,  in  the  hypothetical  manner  we  haye  described  aboTC ; 
a  portion  of  the  new  generations  wiU  preserre  the  primitiye  types." 

These  fiicts  are  no  less  true  than  curious ;  and  eyery  American, 
especially,  has  the  means  at  hand  for  veriifying  them.  When  a  white 
man  and  a  negress  marry,  the  product  is  a  mulatto  or  intermediate 
type.  When  a  white  man  and  white  woman  marry,  the  one  having 
dark  hair,  eyes  and  complexion,  with  one  cast  of  features,  and  the 
other  light  hair  and  eyes,  and  feiir  complexion,  with  different  features, 
some  of  the  children  will  generally  resemble  one  parent,  some  the 
other ;  while  others  may  present  a  mixed  type,  being  a  reproduction 
of  the  likeness  of  an  ancestor  (generally  forgotten)  of  either  parent 

Every  race,  at  the  present  time,  is  more  or  less  mixed.  A  nation, 
that  is,  a  numerons  population,  may  be  dispossessed  o^  and  displaced 
fix>m,  a  large  extent  of  its  territory;  but  this  is  extremely  rare  — 
savages  alone  furnishing  almost  all  such  examples.  In  America, 
witness  the  Indians  driven  before  the  whites,  without  leaving  a  trace 
behind  them.  There  is  a  fixed  incompatibility  between  civilized  and 
savage  man :  they  cannot  dwell  together.  On  the  Old  Continent,  it 
is  not  now  a  question  of  savages ;  science  has  there  to  deal  at  most  with 
barbarians;  that  is,  people  possessing  the  commencements  of  civili- 
zation. Otherwise,  it  would  be  neither  the  interest  of  conquerors  to 
drive  them  all  oSj  nor  is  it  their  inclination  to  abandon  their  native 
soil;  of  which  history  afifords  abundant  proof.  Mythology,  fable,  and 
Utopian  philanthropy,  have  traced  imaginaiy  pictures ;  but  history 
nowhere  shows  us  a  people  who,  first  discovered  in  the  savage  state, 
afterwards  invented  a  civilization,  or  learned  the  arts  of  their  dis- 
coverers. The  monuments  of  Egypt  prove,  that  Negro  races  have 
not,  during  4000  years  at  least,  been  able  to  make  one  solitary  step,  in 

Digitized  by 

Google 

96  SPECIFIC    TYPES — CAUCASIAN. 

Ifegro-land,  from  their  savage  state ;  the  modem  experience  of  the 
United  States  and  the  West  Indies  confirms  the  teachings  of  monu- 
ments and  of  history;  and  our  remarks  on  Oraniay  hereinafter, 
seem  to  render  fugacious  all  probability  of  a  brighter  future  for  these 
organically-inferior  types,  however  sad  the  thought  may  be. 

There  is  abundant  evidence  to  show  that  the  principal  physical 
characters  of  a  people  may  be  preserved  throughout  a  long  series  of 
ages,  in  a  great  part  of  the  population,  despite  of  climate,  mixture  of 
races,  invasion  of  foreigners,  progress  of  civilization,  or  other  known 
influences ;  and  that  a  type,  can  long  outlive  its  languagey  history ^  reli- 
giony  ciistomSy  and  recollections.  The  accession  of  new  people  multi- 
plies races,  but  it  does  not  confound  them:  their  numbers  are  in- 
creased by  those  which  the  intruders  introduce,  and  also  by  those 
which  they  create  by  commingling ;  but  all  these  incidents,  neverthe- 
less, still  leave  the  old  type  in  existence. 

In  tracing,  at  this  late  day,  ancient  types  of  men,  we  shall,  of  ne- 
cessity, meet  chiefly  with  those  of  great  and  powerful  nations,  that  have 
been  able  to  maintain  themselves  more  or  less  inviolate,  through  a 
thousand  diflicultiefe,  by  their  force  or  knowledge.  Small  and  feeble 
fractions  of  humanity  have  generally  been  swallowed  up  and  oblite- 
rated, like  the  Guanches  of  the  Canary  Isles.  The  world  now  advances 
in  civilization  more  rapidly  than  in  former  times,  and  mainly  for  the 
substantial  reason  that  the  higher  types  of  mankind  have  so  increased 
in  power  that  they  can  no  longer  be  molested  by  the  inferior;  nor, 
arguing  from  the  past  and  present,  can  we  doubt  that  a  time  must 
come,  when  the  very  memory  of  the  latter  will  survive  solely  on  the 
page  of  history.  The  days  of  the  aborigines  of  America  are  num- 
bered ;  no  victorious  Tartar-hordes  will  ever  set  foot  again  on  Euro- 
pean soil;  and  the  white  races,  or  lapetidsey  have  commenced  the 
career  of  Oriental  conquest,  and  already  "dwell  in  the  tents  of  Shem." 

Examinations  of  Roman  history  throw  important  light  on  this 
subject.  The  Empire  was  crushed  by  successive  hordes  of  barbarians ; 
but  still  their  numbers,  compared  to  the  population  of  Italy,  have  been 
much  overrated.  The  human  waves  of  Visigoths,  Vandals,  Huns, 
Herules,  Ostrogoths,  Lombards,  and  Normans,  rolled  successively  into 
Italy ;  and  yet,  it  may  be  asked,  what  vestiges  remain,  in  Italy  itself 
of  these  barbarian  surges?  The  first  three  passed  over  it  like 
tornados.  The  two  next,  within  a  short  time,  had  to  contend  with  the 
Goths,  and  were  expelled  fro^  the  country ;  and  of  the  whole  con- 
glomerate mass  but  small  fragments  were  left:,  too  insignificant  mate- 
rially to  influence  the  native  Italic  types.  The  Lombards,  on  the  - 
contrary,  remained,  and  have  implanted  their  name  on  a  portion  of 
Italy.    The  Normans  were  numerically  but  a  handftd.    Gkiul  changed 

Digitized  by 

Google 

SPECIFIC    TYPES — CAUCASIAN,  97 

its  government  and  name  under  the  Franks;  however,  the  army  .of 
Clovis  was  small ;  while  William  the  Conqueror  subjugated  England 
with  60,000  men :  but,  as  if  to  illustrate  our  axioms  of  the  indelibility 
of  type  and  the  vigor  of  the  white  race,  not  a  head  in  Christendom 
that,  legitimately,  wears  a  crown — not  an  individual  breathes  in  whose 
veins  flows  blood  acknowledged  to  be  "royal,"  but  traces  his  or  her 
genealogy  to  this  Norman  colossus,  William  the  Conquekor  !  ^ 

Such  are  some  of  the  great  conquests  of  European  antiquity  that 
have  considerably  affected  the  condition  of  men  and  things,  but 
which,  notwithstanding,  have  not  produced  much  alteration  in  the 
type  of  the  conquered  people.  Some  mixture  of  types  is  still  seen  — 
here  and  tiiere  the  alien  races  "  crop  out,"  but  the  indigenous  thou- 
sands have  swallowed  up  the  exotic  hundreds. 

Conquest»are  often  merely  political,  resulting  in  territorial  annexa- 
tion or  in  tributary  accessions,  where  little  or  no  mingling  of  races 
takes  place.  Other  examples  there  are,  where  the  conquerors  continue 
to  pour  into  a  country  from  time  to  time,  and  thereby  greatly  influence 
native  types.  It  is  thus  that  the  Saxons,  taking  possession  of  Eng- 
land, have  perpetuated  their  race :  but  it  is  ever  the  higher  type  that 
in  the  end  predominates. 

«  The  ignorant  Tnrk,  yon  say,  snbjoeted  withont  difj^onlty  the  intellectoal  and  lettered 
Qreeks ;  the  ferooions  Tartar  handcnffed  the  poliahed  and  learned  Chinese ;  the  Tiolent 
Mongol  bent  under  his  scimetar  the  head  of  the  stadious  Brahman ;  the  Vandal,  finally, 
ravaged  Borne  and  Italy,  then  the  centre  of  European  ciTiliiation.  Take  care  not  to  accuse 
the  kiences  of  a  humiliation  entirely  due  to  despotism,  which  alohe  degrades  and  debases 
human  hearts.  Certainly,  no  one  exposes  his  life  to  defend  a  goTomment  he  abhors  and 
despises.  *  *  *  Perha)>8  a  new  Tanquisher  may  be  more  generous;  he  cannot,  at  any  rate, 
display  himself  more  atrocious  and  more  cruel  than  those  monitersi  in  their  infSunies."^ 

Creative  laws,  as  we  have  said,  work  by  myriads  of  ages.  Six  cen- 
turies have  not  elapsed  since  Turh9^  Tart^irs,  and  Mongols^  appeared 
in  Europe.  The  Vandal  had  already  disappeared.  At  every  point 
of  the  European  continent,  the  remnants  of  these  Central- Asiatic 
swarms  are  melting  away  before  the  higher  Caucasian  types,  wher- 
ever complete  subserviency  to  the  latter  does  not  suspend  the  extermina- 
tion of  the  former.  Were  it  not  that  politics  are  eschewed  in  the  present 
volume,  events  of  the  past  flve  years  might  supply  signal  examples. 

In  characterizing  typety  M.  Edwards  justly  regards  form  and  size 
of  the  head,  and  the  traits  of  the  fieice,  as  most  important :  all  other 
criteria  are  delusive  and  changeable;  such  as  hair,  complexion, 
stature,  &c.,  though  not  to  be  neglected.  Even  these  are  less  mutable, 
we  think,  than  M.  Edwards  supposes.  There  are  many  examples  of 
complexion  and  hair  resisting  climates  for  centuries,  without  the 
slightest  alteration ;  and,  in  fact,  we  know  of  no  authentic  instance 
where  a  radical  change  of  complexion  or  hair  has  been  prod'iccd.** 
18 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC 

98  SPECIFIC    TYPPS — CAUCASIAN. 

"We  liave  mentioned  timt,  in  order  to  put  the  question  to  a  practical 
test,  M.  Edwards  made  a  journey  through  France,  Italy,  Belgium, 
and  Switzerland.  In  passing  through  Florence,  he  took  occasion  to 
visit  the  Ducal  gallery,  to  study  the  ancient  Raman  type.  He  selected, 
in  preference,  the  busts  of  the  early  Eoman  emperors,  because  they 
were  descendants  of  ancient  families.  They,  too,  are  so  alike,  and 
withal  so  remarkable,  that  they  cannot  be  mistaken.  Augustus, 
Tiberius,  Germanicus,  Claudius,  Nero,  Titus,  &c.,  exemplify  this 
type  in  Florentine  collections.    The  following  is  his  description :  — 

'*  The  Tertical  diameter  of  the  head  is  short,  and,  consequently,  the  face  broad.  As  the 
summit  of  the  cramum  is  flattened,  and  the  inferior  margin  of  the  jaw-bone  almost  hori- 
zontal, the  contour  of  the  head,  riewed  in  Aront,  approaches  a  square.  The  lateral  parts, 
aboTO  the  ears,  are  protuberant ;  the  forehead  low ;  the  nose  truly  aquiline,  that  is  to  say, 
the  curve  commences  near  the  top  and  ends  before  it  reaches  the  point,  so  that  the  base  is 
horixontal ;  the  chin  is  round,  and  the  stature  short"  [A  sailor  came  to  my  office,  a  few 
months  ago,  to  have  a  dislocated  arm  set  When  stripped  and  standing  before  me,  he  pr^ 
sented  this  type  so  perfectly,  and  combined  with  such  extraordinary  development  of  bone 
and  muscle,  that  there  occurred  to  my  mind  at  once  the  beau-ideal  of  a  Roman  soldier. 
Though  the  man  had  been  an  American  sailor  for  twenty  years,  and  spoke  English  with- 
out foreign  accent,  I  could  not  help  asking  where  he  was  bora.  He  replied  in  a  deep  strong 
voice,  "  In  Rome,  sir  I "  —  J.  C.  N.] 

This  is  the  characteristic  type  of  a  Roman ;  but  we  cannot  expect 
now  to  meet  with  absolute  uniformity  in  any  race,  however  seemingly 
pure.  Such  a  type  M.  Edwards  found  to  predominate  in  Rome  and 
certain  parts  of  Italy  at  the  present  day.  It  is  the  original  type  of 
the  country,  which  has  swallowed  up  all  intruders,  has  remained 
unchanged  for  2000  years,  and  probafcly  existed  there  from  the 
epoch  of  creation. 

The  Etruscans  present  an  extraordinary  historical  enigma.    Science 
knows  not  whence  they  came,  nor  whence  their  institutions,  arts,  or 
language — whether,  indeed,  they  were  indigenous  to  the  Italian  soil, 
or  strangers.    We  can  trace  their  civilization  fiir  beyond  that  of 
.  Rome  —  more  than  1000  years  B.  c.     Cita- 

tions from  Etruscan  archseplogists,  to  this 
effect,  are  given  further  on.  Some  of  their 
descendants  now  resemble  Romans,  but 
they  present  a  mixed  type.  The  well-known 
head  of  Dantb  affords  an  illustration,  pecu- 
liar, and  strikingly  typical ;  for  it  is  loi^g 
and  narrow,  with  a  high  and  developed  fore- 
head, nose  long  and  curved,  with  sharp  point 
and  elevated  wings.  [Here  is  the  portrait 
in  question,  to  afford  an  idea  of  its  style ; 
which,  however,  requires  to  be  studied  upon 
DAivTB.tf  designs  of  a  larger  scale.]  M.  Edwards  waa 

Digitized  by 

Google 

SPEOIPIC   TYPES — CAITCASIAN.  99 

struck  by  the  great  frequency  of  this  type  in  Tuscany  (ancient  Etru- 
ria),  among  the  peasantry ;  in  the  statues  and  busts  of  the  Medici 
family ;  and  also  amid  the  illustrious  men  of  the  Republic  of  Flor- 
ence, in  their  effigies  and  bas-reliefs.  This  type  is  well  inarked  since 
the  time  of  Dante,  as  doubtless  long  before.  It  extends  to  Venice, 
and  is  visible  over  a  large  extent  of  country.  In  the  Ducal  palace, 
M.  Edwards  had  occasion  to  observe  that  it  is  common  among  the 
Doges.  The  type  became  more  predominant  as  he  approached  Milan ; 
hence  he  traced  it  through  a  great  part  of  France,  and  through  the 
settlements  of  the  ancient  Cymbri  or  Belgse,  who,  Thierry  has  shown, 
occupied  Cis- Alpine 'and  Trans- Alpine  Gaul.  The  physical  charac- 
teristics of  the  present  population,  therefore,  correspond  exactly  with 
the  historical  colonies ;  showing  that  the  ancient  type  of  this  wide- 
spread people,  the  Oymhriy  has  been  preserved  for  more  than  2000 
years. 

After  visiting  and  analyzing  thoroughly  the  population  and  history 
of  Italy,  M.  Edwards  next  investigated  Gaul,  passing  by  the  southern 
and  western  part,  where  Thierry  places  the  Basques  or  ancient  Ligu- 
rians.  In  the  other  parts  of  Prance,  as  we  have  seen,  there  existed, 
at  a  remote  epoch,  two  great  fitmilies,  differing  in  language,  habits 
and  social  state ;  and  these  two  formed  the  bulk  of  the  ancient  popula- 
tion. Examination  ascertains  that  two  dominant  types  even  yet  prevail 
throughout  the  kingdom,  too  saliently  marked  and  distinct  from  each 
other  to  be  confounded.  There  have  been  many  conquests  and  com- 
minglings  of  races ;  but  inasmuch  as  the  greater  number  has  swal- 
lowed up  the  lesser,  no  very  obvious  impression  has  been  produced 
by  these  causes.  Of  the  two  families,  the  Q-alU,  or  Celts,  and  the 
Qjnnbri,  or  Belgse,  the  former  should  be  the  most  numerous,  because 
they  are  the  most  ancient,  and  had  covered  the  whole  country  before 
the  entrance  of  the  latter:  in  consequence,  we  find  that  the  type  with 
round  heads  and  straight  noses,  that  of  the  Q-alUy  has  prevailed  over 
that  of  the  Cymbri. 

Oriental  Gtiul  was  occupied  by  the  Galli  proper  of  Csesar,  whom  . 
Thierry  denominates  "(?aZ&."  Northern  Gaul,  including  the  Belgica 
and  Armorica  of  Caesar,  on  the  other  hand,  was  occupied  by  the 
Cymbri.  The  population  of  Eastern  Gaul  —  the  &auU  proper  — 
according  to  the  historical  facts,  ought  to  be  the  least  mixed,  because 
the  Belgfie  never  penetrated  among  them  by  force  of  arms,  but  took 
quiet  possession  of  their  outskirts,  along  the  northern  parts  of  the 
country.  ^ 

"In  traTeramg  the  pmrt  of  France  which  corresponds  to  Oriental  Gaol,  from  north  to 
south,  yix. :  Bnrgondj,  Lyons,  Daaphiny,  and  SaToy,  I  haTe  distinguished  (says  M.  Ed- 
wards,) that  ^ype,  so  well  marked,  to  which  we  hare  giyen  the  name  of  ChXU," 

Digitized  by 

Google 

100  SPECIFIC   TYPES — CAUCASIAN. 

He  thus  deecribes  the  type  of  the  Cf^aU: 

''The  head  is  so  round  as  to  approach  the  spherical  fona;  the  forehead  is  moderate, 
slightly  protaberanty  and  receding  towards  the  temples;  eyes  large  and  open;  the  nose, 
from  the  depression  at  its  commencement  to  its  termination,  almost  straight — that  is  to 
say,  without  any  marked  curre ;  its  extremity  is  rounded,  as  well  as  the  chin ;  the  stature 
medium.  It  will  be  seen  that  the  features  are  perfectly  in  harmony  with  the  form  of  the 
head." 

In  the  northern  part  of  Gaul,  the  principal  seat  of  the  Belgse,  you 
again  encounter  the  same  striking  coincidence. 

*<  In  a  prcTious  journey  I  trayersed  a  great  part  of  the  coast  of  OaUia  Bdgka  of  Csasar, 
from  the  month  of  the  Somme  to  that  of  the  Seine.  It  was  here  that  I  distinguished,  for 
the  first  time,  the  assemblage  of  traits  which  constitutes  the  other  type,  and  often  to  such 
an  exaggerated  degree  that  I  was  very  forcibly  struck ;  the  long  head,  the  broad,  high  fore- 
head ;  the  curred  nose,  with  the  point  below  and  wings  tucked  up ;  the  chin  boldly  de- 
Teloped ;  and  the  stature  talL" 

M.  Edwards  has  pursued  this  type  in  its  various  settlements,  with 
numerous  and  valuable  scientific  results.  He  concludes  a  division  of 
his  subject  with  the  following  strong  language : 

«  Without  the  preceding  discussions,  and  the  facts  we  ha^e  just  unrayelled,  how  could 
we  reco^iuze  the  Oaulci$  in  the  north  of  Italy,  among  the  Sieukif  the  LtgvrtB,  the  Etrus' 
cans,  the  VeMt98,  the  Bomans,  the  Ootht,  the  Lombardi  f  But  we  possess  the  thread  to 
guide  us.  First,  whatcTer  may  haye  been  the  anterior  state,  it  is  certain,  from  your  re- 
searches (M.  Thierry's),  and  the  unanimous  accord  of  all  historians,  that  the  Peuples  Oauloit 
have  predominated  in  the  north  of  Italy,  between  the  Alps  and  Apennines.  We  find  them 
established  there  in  a  permanent  manner,  according  to  the  first  lights  of  history.  The 
most  authentic  testimony  represents  them  with  all  the  characters  of  a  great  nation,  from  this 
remote  period  down  to  a  Tery  adyanced  point  of  Roman  history.  Here  is  all  I  demand. 
I  haye  no  need  to  occupy  myself  with  other  people  who  haye  mingled  with  them  since ;  to 
discuss  their  relatiye  numbers — the  nature  of  their  language— the  duration  of  their  estab- 
lishment. It  is  su£5cient  for  me  to  know  that  the  Oaulois  haye  existed  in  great  numbers. 
I  know  the  features  of  their  compatriots  in  Trans-Alpine  Gaul.  I  find  them  again  in  Cis- 
Alpine  Gaul." 

It  has  often  struck  us,  that,  even  in  the  heterogeneous  population 
of  our  United  States,  we  could  trace  these  European  ancient  races. 
The  tall  figure  and  aquiline  nose  of  the  Cymbrian  are  generally  seen 
together ;  while  the  traits  of  the  Gaul  are  more  frequently  accompa- 
nied by  short  stature. 

The  Celts  and  Gymbri  have  spread  themselves  extensively  through 
Eastern  Europe,  beyond  the  limits  of  Gaul  and  Italy :  but,  for  our 
objects  their  pursuit  being  irrelevant,  we  resume  the  explorations  of 
M.  Edwards ;  who,  after  his  survey  of  Western,  takes  a  glance  at 
several  other  races  of  Eastern  Europe,  although  he  does  not  claim  to 
have  analyzed  these  with  the  same  rigojous  detail  as  those  of  Gaul. 

The  Sclavonic  type,  another  of  the  thousand-and-one  Caucasians 
t^rhose  types  stretch  beyond  the  reach  of  history,  is  thus  described  by 
our  observant  ethnologist ;  and  it  seeihs  to  be  just  as  distinct  and 
sharply  marked  over  half  of  Europe,  as  that  of  the  Jews  everywhere: 

Digitized  by 

Google 

SPECIFIC   TYPES — CAUCASIAKT. 

101 

*<The  contour  of  the  head,  Tiewed  in  front,  approaches  nearly  to  a  square;  ^e  height 
surpasses  a  little  the  breadth ;  the  summit  is  sensibly  flattened ;  and  the  direction  of  the 
jaw  is  horizontal.  The  length  of  the  nose  is  less  than  the  distance  from  its  base  to  the 
chin ;  it  is  almost  straight  from  the  depression  at  its  root,  that  is  to  say,  irithout  decided 
cnrration ;  but,  if  appreciable,  it  is  slightly  concaTC,  so  that  the  end  has  a  tendency  to  turn 
up ;  the  inferior  part  is  rather  large,  and  the  extremity  rounded.  The  eyes,  rather  deep- 
set,  are  perfectly  on  the  same  line ;  and  when  they  have  any  particular  character,  they  are 
smaller  than  the  proportion  of  the  head  would  seem  to  indicate.  The  eyebrows  are  thin, 
and  very  near  the  eyes,  particularly  at  the  internal  angle ;  and  from  this  point,  are  often 
directed  obliquely  outwards.  The  mouth,  which  is  not  salient,  has  thin  lips,  and  is  much 
nearer  to  the  nose  than  to  the  top  of  the  chin.  Another  singular  characteristic  may  be 
added,  and  which  is  rery  general :  viz.,  their  small  beard,  except  on  the  upper  lip.  Such 
is  the  common  type  among  the  Poles,  SOesians,  Moravians,  Bohemians,  Sclavonic  Hunga- 
rians, and  is  very  common  among  the  Russians.'* 

This  type  is  also  frequent  through  eastern  Gtermany,  and  although 
it  has  become  much  mixed  with  the  German,  their  separate  historical 
settlements  may  yet  be  followed,  and  the  two  races  traced  out  and 
identified,  like  those  of  the  Celts  and  Cymbri  in  Gaul. 

iHistory,  from  its  commencement,  has  mentioned  immense  Cauca- 
sian populations,  ranging  throughout  northern  and  eastern  Europe  and 
western  Asia,  to  the  confines  of  Tartar  and  Mongol  races.  From  their 
remoteness,  and  the  absence  of  communication,  littie  was  known  an- 
ciently about  them ;  and  even  at  the  present  day,  they  are  looked  upon 
as  "  outside  barbarians,"  exciting  trivial  interest  among  general  readers. 
This  group,  however,  at  all  times,  has  comprised  the  most  numerous 
of  all  the  fair-skinned  races  upon  earth :  intellectually  equal  to  any 
others.  To  give  the  reader  an  idea  of  the  actual  extent  of  Sclavonic 
races,  we  subjoin  statistics,  as  quoted  by  Count  Krasinsld,  ft^m  the. 
Sclavonian  Ethnography  of  Schafferick :  — 

Moscovites,  or  i 
Qrtni  Russians  i 
Little  Russians,  / 
Ruthenians  \ 
White  Russians.... 

Balgarians 

Servians  and   / 
niyrians  J  *" 

Croats- 

Oarinthians 

Poles 

Bohemians  and  > 
Moravians  ) 

Slovacks   in    > 
Hungary  i '" 

Lusatiana,  or  ( 
Wends  ( *" 

Total.. 

Boflfis. 

85,814,000 

10,870,000 

2,720,000 

80,000 

100,000 

4,912,000 

58,602,000 

Aoftrift. 

2,774.000 

7,000 

2,594,000 

801,000 
1,151,000 
2,841,000 

4,870.000 
2,758,000 

16,791,000 

8,500,000 
2,000,000 

1,982,000 
44,000 

82,000 

2,108,000 

Turkey. 

6,100,000 

Ctmow. 

180,000 

180,000 

Baxosj. 

60,000 

TOCAL. 

85,814,000 

18,144,000 

2,726,000 

8,587,000 

5,294,000 

801,000 
1,151,000 
9,865,000 

4,414,000 
2,758,000 
142,000 

60,00078,691,000 

From  the  same  North  British  Review  we  extract  sufficient  to  illus- 

/  Google 

Digitized  by^ 

102  SPECIFIC    TYPES — CAUCASIAN. 

Irate  our  own  views;  but  nothing  adequate  to  evince  the  ability 
of  the  best  article  we  have  met  with  on  these  Shlaves. 

**  Much  oonfosion  has  been  produced  by  the  constant  use  in  books  of  words  denoting  the 
supposed  state  of  flux  and  restlessness  in  whlth  the  early  nations  of  Europe  liyed.  7he 
natural  impression,  after  reading  such  books,  is,  that  masses  of  people  were  continually 
coming  out  of  Asia  into  Europe,  and  driving  others  before  them.  .  .  .  But  care  must  be 
taken  to  confine  these  stories  of  wholesale  colonization  to  their  proper  place  in  the  ante- 
historic  age.  For  all  intents  and  purposes,  it  is  best  to  conoeiye  that  at  the  dawn  of  the 
historic  period  the  leading  European  races  were  arranged  on  the  map  pretty  much  as  they 
are  now.  Regarding  the  Slayonians,  at  least,  this  has  been  established ;  they  are  not,  as 
has  generally  been  supposed,  a  recent  accession  out  of  the  depths  of  Asia,  but  are  as  much 
an  aboriginal  race  of  Eastern,  as  the  Oermans  are  of  Central  Europe.  In  short,  had  a 
Roman  geographer  of  the  days  of  the  Empire  advanced  in  a  straight  line  from  the  Atlantic 
to  the  Pacific,  he  would  have  traversed  the  exact  succession  of  races  that  is  to  be  met  in 
the  same  route  now.  First,  he  would  have  found  the  Celts  occupying  as  far  as  the  Rhine ; 
thence,  eastward  to  the  "N^tula  and  the  Carpathians,  he  would  have  found  Germans; 
beyond  them,  and  stretching  away  into  Central  Asia,  he  would  have  found  the  so-called 
Scythians  —  a  race  which,  if  he  had  possessed  our  information,  he  would  have  divided  into 
the  two  great  branches  of  the  Slavonians  or  European  Scythians,  and  the  Tatars,  Turks, 
or  Asiatic  Scythians ;  and,  finally,  beyond  these,  he  would  have  found  Mongolian  hordes 
overspreading  Eastern  Asia  to  the  Pacific.  These  successive  races  or  populations  he  would 
have  found  shading  off  into  each  other  at  their  points  of  junction ;  he  would  have  remarked 
also  a  general  westward  pressure  of  the  whole  mass,  tending  toward  mutual  rupture  and 
invasion,  the  Mongolian  pressing  against  the  Tatars,  the  Tatars  against  the  Sclavonians, 
the  Slavonians  against  the  Germans,  and  the  Germans  against  the  Celts. 

*<The  Slavonians,  we  have  said,  are  an  aboriginal  European  branch  of  the  great 
Scythian  race."  <® 

One  of  the  most  striking  examples  in  history  of  preservation  of 
type,  after  the  Jews,  is  that  of  the  Magyar  race  in  Hungary.  Com- 
pletely encircled  by  Sclavonians,  they  have  been  living  there  for  1000 
years,  speaking  a  distinct  language,  and  still  presenting  physical 
characters  so  peculiar  as  to  leave  no  doubt  of  their  foreign  origin. 

<*Head  nearly  round,  forehead  little  developed,  low,  and  bending;  the  eyes  placed 
obliquely,  so  that  the  external  angle  is  elevated ;  the  nose  short  and  flat ;  mouth  prominent, 
and  lips  thick ;  neck  veiy  strong,  so  that  the  back  of  the  head  appears  flat,  forming  almost 
a  straight  line  with  the  nape ;  beard  weak  and  scattering ;  stature  small."  47 

This  picture,  which  is  a  faithful  description  of  a  modem  Hungarian 
of  the  Magyar  race,  corresponds  with  the  accounts  given  of  this  people 
by  older  writers,  and  of  the  ancient  Huns. 

BBstoiy  teaches  that  the  Huns  settled  in  Hungary  in  the  fifth,  cen- 
tury after  Christ,  and  to  these  succeeded  a  body  of  the  Magyars,  under 
Arpad,  in  the  ninth.  The  type  of  the  two  races  was  identical.  This 
type,  so  peculiarly  exotic,  is  totally  unlike  any  other  in  Europe.  It 
belongs  to  the  great  Uralian-Tatar  stem  of  Asia.  The  derivation  is 
conceded  by  every  naturalist,  from  Pallas  to  the  present  day :  but  it  is 
a  curious  fact  that,  although  differing  in  type,  the  Magyars  speak  a 
dialect  of  the  language  of  the  Fins;  and  the  two  races  must  have  been 
associated  in  some  way  s^t  a  remote  epoch,  previously  to  the  settle- 

Digitized  by 

Google 

SPECIFIC    TYPES — CAUCASIAN,  103 

ment  of  the  Magyars  in  Hungary.  Db  Guionbs  had  traced  other 
connections,  making  also  the  grand  error  of  confounding  the  Huns 
with  the  Chinese  Hbung-nou:  but  that  identity  of  language  is  no 
irrefragable  argument  in  favor  of  identity  of  race,  will  be  a  positive 
result  of  the  resiearches  in  this  volume. 

Grecian  annals  afford  an  instructive  lesson  in  the  history  of  lypes 
of  mankind.  We  trace  her  circumstantial  history,  with  sufficient 
truthfulness,  some  centuries  beyond  the  foundation  of  Rome,  and  her 
traditions  back  to  about  the  epoch  of  Moses.  This  we  can  do  with 
enough  certainty  to  know,  that  Hellenic  Europe  was  then  populated,  and 
inarching  towwd  that  mighty  destiny  which  has  been  the  wonder  and 
object  of  itnitation  of  all  subsequent  ages.  Who  were  the  people  that 
achieved  so  much  more  than  all  others  of  antiquity  ?  And  what  was 
there  in  climate  and  other  local  circumstances  that  could  produce 
such  intelligence,  coupled  with  the  noblest  physical  type  ?  Or,  we 
may  ask,  did  Greece  owe  her  marvellous  superiority  to  an  indigenous 
race  ?  The  Hellenes  and  Pilasgt  are  the  two  races  identified  with  her 
earliest  traditions ;  but  when  we  appeal  to  history  for  their  origin,  or 
seek  for  the  part  that  each  has  played  in  the  majestic  drama  of  anti- 
quity, there  is  Uttle  more  than  conjecture  to  guide  us.  Greece  did 
not  come  fistirly  within  the  scope  of  M.  Edwards's  researches,  yet  he 
has  ventured  a  few  note-worthy  observations,  in  connection  with  the 
point  before  us.  He  thinks  the  same  principles  that  governed  his  exami- 
nation of  Gaul  may  be  applied  to  Greece ;  and  that  the  Hellenes  and 
Pelasgi  might  be  followed,  ethnologicially,  like  the  Celts  and  Cymbri. 
Everybody  speaks  of  the  Oreek  type^  regarded  as  the  special  charac- 
teristic of  that  country,  referring  it  to  a  beau-ideal  conformation. 
Nevertheless,  all  ancient  monuments  of  art  in  Greece  exhibit  a  wide 
diversity  of  types,  and  this  at  every  period  of  their  sculpture.  M.  Ed- 
wards draws  a  happy  distinction  between  the  heroic  and  the  historic 
age  of  Greece :  the  first,  if  chiefly  fabulous,  has  doubtless  a  semi- ' 
historical  foundation ;  the  latter  is  the  true  historic  age  —  although 
no  people  of  antiquity  appears  to  have  conceived  the  "historical  idea" 
correctly ;  nor  is  it  popularly  understood,  even  at  the  present  day, 
among  ourselves. 

*<  Most  of  the  diTinities  snd  personages  of  the  htroie  times,"  says  M.  Edwards,  <*  are 
formed  on  the  same  model  that  constitntes  what  we  term  the  htaurideal.  The  forms  and 
proportions  of  the  head  and  features  are  so  regular  that  we  may  describe  them  with  mathe- 
matical precision.  A  perfeoUy  otsI  contour,  forehead  and  nose  straight,  without  depres- 
sion between  them,  would  suffice  to  distinguish  this  type.  The  harmony  is  such  that  the 
presence  of  these  traits  implies  the  others.  But  such  is  not  the  character  of  the  person- 
ages of  truly  hiatorie  times.  The  philotophert,  orators,  warriort,  and  poetSt  almost  all  differ 
firom  it,  and  form  a  group  apart  It  cannot  be  confounded  with  the  first— I  will  not 
attempt  to  describe  it  here.  It  is  sufficient  to  point  it  out,  for  one  to  recogniie  at  once 
how  far  it  is  separated.  It  greatly  resembles,  on  the  contrary,  the  type  which  is  seen  in 
other  countries  of  Europe,  whUe  the  former  is  scarcely  met  with  there."  ^^ 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 

104 

SPECIFIC   TYPES — CAUCASIAN. 

To  fecilitate  the  reader's  appreciation  of  the  differences  betwixt 
the  heroic  and  the  kutorie  types,  the  following  heads  are  selected : 

Fio.  8— ir«roM  typ«;  esp^oiany  No.  4J» 

LtOUEGU8.<0  ESATOSTHBHIfl.SO  AlKZANDEK  THl  GbIAT.^^ 

Fio.  7.  Fia  8. 

PBIUP  iLXBIDMfSB,^ 

Cleopatba.^ 

Digitized  by 

Google 

SPECIFIC    TYPES — CAUCASIAN,  105 

The  lineaments  of  Lycurgus  and  Eratosthenes,  excepting  the 
beard,  are  such  as  those  one  meets  with  daily  in  our  streets ;  and  the 
same  applies  to  the  other  familiar  personages  whose  portraits  we 
present 

"  Were  ve  to  Judge  solely  bj  the  monQments  of  Greece,  on  aeoount  of  the  oontrast  I 
haye  pointed  oat,  we  ahoold  be  tempted  to  regard  the  type  of  the  fabulous  or  heroic  per- 
sonages as  ideal.  Bat  imas^tion  more  readily  creates  monsters  than  models  of  beauty ; 
and  this  principle  alone  will  suffice  to  conyince  us  that  it  has  existed  in  Greece,  and  the 
countries  where  its  population  has  spread,  if  it  does  not  sUll  exist  there." 

The  learned  travellers,  MM.  db  Stackelberg  and  de  Bronsted, 
have  journeyed  through  the  Morea,  and  closely  investigated  the  popu- 
lation. They  assert  that  the  heroie  type  is  still  extant  in  certain 
localities.**  Here,  then,  there  has  heen  a  notable  preservation  of  a 
peculiar  type  —  within  a^  small  geographical  space  —  through  time, 
wars,  famines,  plagues,  immigrations,  multifarious  foreign  conquests; 
although  the  Greeks  of  the  histaric  type  are,  out  of  all  proportion, 
the  most  abundant  at  the  present  day;  which  is  precisely  what, 
under  the  circumstances,  an  ethnographer  would  have  expected. 

«  Nul  peuple  n'a  conserve  avec  plus  de  iid^lit^  la  langue  de  ses  aieux.  Nol  peuple  n'a 
conserve  plus  d'usages,  plus  de  coutumes,  plus  de  sonrenirs  des  temps  antiques ;  au  milieu 
d'eux  les  mnrs  d'Argos,  de  Myc^ne  et  de  Tyrinthe,  qui  deji  du  temps  d'Hom^re  6taient 
d'nne  haute  antiquity,  sent  encore  dobout :  des  Rapsodes  parcourent  encore  le  pays,  et 
chantent  ayec  le  mdme  accent  et  les  m^mes  paroles,  les  ^v^nements  memorables:  eux- 
mSmes  sont  l*image  de  ceux  que  ces  sourenirs  rappelent  ayec  tant  de  force ;  et  la  ressem- 
blance  des  traits  est  rehauss^e  par  la  similitude  des  ^y^nements.  S*ils  ne  repr^sentent  pas 
sous  le  rapport  de  la  ciyilisation  leurs  anodtres  des  beftux  si^cles  de  la  GrSce,  ils  repr^sen- 
tent  ceux  qui  les  ont  am^n^s." 

Of  the  two  types  indicated,  it  is  positive,  M.  Edwards  thinks, 
that  the  first  {heroic)  is  pure:  but  not  certain  that  the  second  [hUtoric) 
is.  It  may  be,  that  the  latter  is  the  result  of  a  mixture  of  the  first 
with  some  other,  the  elements  of  which  are  now  unknown  to  us ; 
because  it  does  not  seem  to  be  sufficiently  uniform  to  be  original. 
Albeit,  if  we  set  forth  with  M.  Edwards  to  hunt  for  the  required 
elements  of  modification  through  Greece,  (giving  to  this  name  its 
most  extensive  ^ense) — 

**  We  discoyer  a  people. that  has  not  been  sufficiently  studied.  They  speak  a  language 
peculiar  to  themselyes.  It  is  not  known  whence  they  come,  nor  when  they  established 
themselyes  there.  The  Albaniaru  seim  to  be  in  some  respects  in  Greece,  what  the  Basques 
are  on  the  two  sides  of  the  Pyrenees,  the  Bretons  in  France,  the  Gaels  in  England,  and 
those  who  speak  the  Erse  in  Scotland  and  Ireland — a  remnant  of  ancient  inhabitants. 
Why  not  regard  them  as  such,  if  it  be  true  that  we  can  find  no  trace  of  their  foreign  origin 
in  their  traditions,  histoiy,  nor  in  the  comparison  of  language  7  Why  may  they  not  be 
descendants  of  the  PeUugiV*  [They  call  themselyes  "  Sldppetar ;"  but  their  Turkish  name 
is  Amaoot.'} 

This  ethnolo^cal  question  of  heroic  and  historic  types,  mooted  by 
Edwards,  is  worthy  of  careful  study ;  but  we  must  pass  on. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC 

106  SPECIFIC    TYPES — CAUCASIAN. 

M.  BoDiCHON,  a  surgeon  distinguished  for  fifteen  years  in  the  Frendi 
army  of  Algeria,  examines  the  races  of  Europe  from  another  point 
of  view ;  throwing  considerable  light  on  this  abstruse  subject,  con- 
firmatory of  the  very  early,  no  less  than  permanent,  diversity  of 
types  in  the  populations  of  Gavl  and  other  European  countries. 

After  establishing  the  insufficiency  of  Philology  in  tracing  the 
origin  of  races,  Bochchon  makes  the  following  forcible  remarks  in 
vindication  of  Physiology,  as  a  more  certain  instrument  of  analysis : 

*^  To  throw  light  upon  the  qaestion  of  oriffitu,  it  is  neoessaiy  to  appeal  to  a  science  more 
precise,  and  founded  on  the  nature  of  the  object  which  we  examine.  This  science  is  the 
Phynology  of  races,  or,  in  other  words,  a  knowledge  of  their  moral  and  physical  characters. 
Throagh  Physiology  has  been  established  the  existence  of  antedilnriaB  beings,  their  genera, 
their  species  and  their  Tarieties ;  by  it  also  we  shall  discorer  the  origin  of  races  of  men, 
OTen  the  most  mysterious.  Through  it  we  shall  one  day  be  able  to  classify  populations  as 
surely  as  we  now  class  animals  and  plants :  histoiy,  philology,  annals,  inscriptions,  the 
monuments  of  arts  and  of  religion,  will  be  auxiliaries  in  these  researches.  Herein  we  con- 
sider its  indications  as  motiyes  of  certitude,  and  its  decinons  as  a  criterion." » 

The  first  inhabitants  of  southern  and  western  Europe,  according 
to  his  system,  belonged  to  two  very  distinct  races ;  but  that  region, 
from  time  to  time,  received  many  accretions  from  other  tribes,  mainly 
Oriental,  such  as  Phoenicians,  Pelasgians,  Cretans,  Rhodians,  Hel- 
lenes, Carthaginians,  Phocians,  Saracens,  Huns,  &c. 

His  generic  characters  of  the  two  primitive  races  may  be  gathered 
from  the  comparative  columns  we  subjoin ;  and,  although,  at  this  late 
day,  it  is  impossible  to  separate  completely  elements  so  interblended, 
we  think  there  is  much  truth  in  his  observations,  and  refer  at  the 
same  time  to  a  book  that  teems  with  solid  material  for  reflection. 

"BLOND  EACE.  "BROWN  RACE. 

"  Head  generallj  large,  of  elongated,  and  "  Head  generally  small,  of  round,  but 

often  square,  form ;  eyes  blue,  or  bordering  rarely  square,  form ;  eyes  black  or  brown, 

on  blue ;  hair  and  beard  blond,  often  red,  or  bordering  on  these  colors ;  hair  and  beard 

but  without  Albinism.                                   .  black,  sometimes  red ;  but  then  there  is  Al- 
binism, which  is  a  pathological  state. 

"  Stature  tall,  and  skin  fair.    In  love,  na-  "  Short  stature,  and  brown  skin.   In  loTe» 

tural  chastity,  with  inclination  to  sentiment  sensuality  more  dereloped  than  sentiment 
rather  than  sensuality. 

"  Aptitude  to  unite  in  great  assemblies,  to  "  Aversion  to  all  unitary  systems, '  for 
make  leagues,  to  choose  a  system  of  poli-  great  assemblies  or  leagues.  Peculiar  dis- 
tical  unity,  to  live  under  the  monarchical  position  to  liye  in  a  social  state  by  pre- 
form, rinces. 

"Fond  of  narigation,  long  voyages,  ad-  "Tenacious  of  their  locality ;  opposed  to 

venturous  expeditions.  distant  expeditions. 

" Commenced  by  the  pastoral  or  nomadio  "Have  commenced  by  the  agricultural 
state,  have  been  developed  in  plains,  on  the  state,  and  fixed  habitations.  Have  been  de- 
borders  of  great  rivers,  on  the  coasts  of  large  veloped  in  mountains,  islands,  and  coun- 
bodies  of  water,  and  in  countries  which  pos-  tries,  lacking  natural  channels  of  communi- 
eess  natural  modes  of  communication.  cation.    Have  at  all  times  been  addicted  to 

the  exploration  of  mines. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC 

SPECIFIC   TYPES — CAUCASIAN. 

107 

**  In  war,  prefer  eavalry  to  infantry,  the 
attack  to  defence,  open  moyements  to  am- 
biiBcades,  pitched  battles  to  small  combats. 

*«  Rush  impetaoosly  into  danger. 

*<  Unreserved,  gay,  fond  of  noise,  orations, 
strong  drinks,  and  good  eating.  Frtok  and 
naiye. 

«  Minds  naturally  open  to  doubt,  to  ex- 
mination,  to  discussion.  Tolerant,  and  hold 
to  the  religious  idea  rather  than  to  forms. 

*'  Seek  strangers,  noTelties,  andameliora- 
tiona.  Inconstant,  Tiolent,  and  impetuous, 
bat  eaoly  forgi?e  iiguries. 

«Are  eminently  sympathetic,  initiatory, 
marching  incessantly  towards  new  ends. 

«<  From  its  origin,  has  been  under  the  in- 
flnenoe  of  cold  climates. 

« Its  faculties  dcTelop  in  the  North. 

**  It  produces,  in  preference,  savans,  re- 
formers, creators  of  systems — philosophers : 
men  whose  genius  is  manifested  by  profound 
meditations,  by  dcTated  reason,  by  tariff 
froidj  by  coldness  and  inyestigation.  Thus, 
Bacon,  Luther,  Descartes,  Liebnitx,  New- 
ton, CuTier,  Washington,  and  Franklin. 

<'  Predominance  'of  the  aristocratic  ele- 
ment, and  political  influence  accorded  to 
women^ 

«<  Its  rarities  are,  the  Celtic^  which  is  di- 
Tided  into  the  Gaelic,  Belgic,  and  Cymbric ; 
then  the  Germanic,  divided  into  Germans, 
Franks,  Vandals,  Goths,  Angles,  Saxons, 
Scandinavians,  and  other  blue-eyed  nations, 
which  have  played  so  important  a  part  in 
the  formation  of  the  modem  nations  of 
Europe. 

**  Of  Asiatic  origin,  it  penetrated  Europe 
from  the  East  and  North ;  thus,  the  Volga 
and  the  Baltic. 

"  Considered  in  relation  to  the  countries 

where  we  first  see  them,  they  are  Sttxtn- 

»i    • 

"  In  war,  prefer  infantry  to  cavalry,  de- 
fence to  attack,  ambuscades  to  open  move- 
ments, and  guerillas  to  pitched  battles. 

**  Await  danger  with  firmness. 

**  Uncommunicative,  sober.  Perfidious  and 
reserved. 

«  Credulous,  intolerant,  fanatical ;  attach- 
ed to  religious  forms  rather  than  the  idea ; 
and  reject  disctission,  doubt,  and  inquiry. 

**  Hold  strongly  to  ancient  usages ;  feel  a 
repugnance  with  regard  to  strangers. 

«  Unsympathetic ;  possess,  to  an  extreme 
point,  the  genius  of  resistance ;  tend  pecu- 
liarly to  immobility  and  isolation. 

«  From  its  origin,  has  been  under  the  in- 
fluence of  hot  climates. 

'<  Its  faculties  develop  in  the  South. 

<*,It  produces,  in  preference,  orators,  war- 
riors, artists,  poets :  men  whose  genius  ma- 
nifests itself  by  the  exaltation  of  sentiments 
and  ideas,  by  enthusiasm,  a  rapid  concep- 
tion. Thus,  Hannibal,  Cicero,  Cesar,  Mi- 
chelangelo, Tasso,  Napoleon. 

**  Predominance  of  the  democratic  ele- 
ment, and  littie  political  influence  granted 
to  women. 

"Its  varieties  are,  the  Atlanta,  dirided 
into  Libyans  and  Berbers ;  next,  the  iWt- 
orw,  divided  into  the  Sioanians,  Ligurians, 
Cantabrians,  Asturians,  Aquitanians,  and 
other  people  of  brown  skins,  who  have 
played  an  important  part  in  the  formation 
of  the  ancient  nations  of  Europe. 

«  Aborigines  of  Atlantis  [  ?  ] ;  penetrated 
Europe  from'  the  South  and  West;  thus, 
Spain  and  the  Ocean. 

**  Con8idere4  in  relation  to  the  countries 
where  we  first  see  them,  they  are  Autoe- 
IhonetJ" 

M.  Bodichon,  with  most  writers,  thinks  that  the  hlond  race  entered 
Europe  originally  from  Asia^  and  many  strong  reasons  support  this 
position,  in  respect  to  those  races  found  in  Gaul  and  in  countries 
north  of  it,  during  the  recent  times  of  the  Greeks  and  Romans.  Older 
races,  notwithstanding — &ted  like  our  American  aborigines  —  may 
have  been  exterminated  by  them,  or  have  become  amalgamated 
with  them.  He  supposes  these  blond  inmiigrants  from  Asia  to  have 
been  of  the  same  race  as  the  HyksoSy  who  conquered  and  took  posses- 

Digitized  by 

Google 

108 

SPBCIPIO    TYPES — CAUCASIAN. 

Fio.  9.M 

sion  of  Egypt  some  2000  years  b.  o.  ;  but  our  modifications  of  this 
view,  from  the  study  of  her  monuments,  will  appear  in  their  place. 

*<  On  arriting  in  Gftol,  the  Gaels  found  the  banks  of  the  Rhone,  the  Garonne  and  the  Loire, 
in  possession  of  a  people  who  spoke  a  different  language  and  had  different  usages.  They, 
from  time  immemorial,  had  crossed  the  Pyrenees,  and  iield  the  soil  as  first  occupants. 
They  were  Iberians." 

About  the  time  alluded  to,  there  seems  to  have  been  a  great  com- 
motion among  the  white  races  of  Asia;  and  the  Gauls  or  Celts,  and 
perhaps  the  Hyksos,  (whose  name  means  "  royal  shepherd,*')  may 
have  been  diverging  streams  of  the  same  stock.  Dr.  Morton  points 
out  a  head,  often  repeated  on  the  monuments  of  Egypt,  which  he 

regards  as  of  Celtic  stock.  These  people, 
called  "Tokkari**  in  hieroglyphics,  are  pri- 
soners in  a  sea-fight  of  Eamses  HE*,  of  the 
XXth  dynasty,  about  the  thirteenth  century 
B.  c.  They  are,  without  question,  the 
Tochari  of  Btrabo.  In  his  manuscript 
"Letter  to  Mr.  Gliddon,"  Dr.  Morton  re- 
putes these  people  to 

<<  Have  strong  Celtic  features ;  as  seen  in  the  sharp 
face,  the  largie  and  irregularly-formed  nose,  wide  mouth, 
and  a  certain  harshness  of  expression,  which  is  character- 
istic of  the  same  people  in  aU  their  raried  localities. 
Those  who  are  familiar  with  the  Southern  Highlanders 
(of  Scotland)  may  recognise  a  speaking  resemblance."^ 

But  the  interest  in  them  is  greatly  en- 
hanced by  cuneiform  discovery. 

Here  are  the  same  "Tokkari,"  from 
Assyrian  monuments  of  the  age  of  Senna- 
cherib, about  b.  c.  too.* 

It  is,  to  say  the  least,  a  very  remarkable 
fact,  that  we  find  upon  Egyptian  monu- 
ments, be^nning  from  the  XVIIth  dy- 
nasty, b.  c.  1600,  portraits  in  profusion, 
corresponding  in  all  particulars  with  the 
blond  races  of  Europe,  whose  written 
history  opens  as  far  west  as  Gaul  and 
Germany:  and  now  Assyrian  sculptures 
present  us  with  the  same  blond  races  in 
the  Viith  and  VJLJLLth  century  before  our 
era. 

When  the  two  races  first  met  in  Europe, 
the  blond  from  the  south-east  and  the  dark 
from  the  west,  they  encountered  each  other 
as  natural  enemies,  and  a  severe  struggle 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 

Fig.  10. 

SPECIFIC    TIPES — CAUCASIAN.  109 

# 

ensued.^  The  Gaels  finally  forced  their  way  into  Spain,  and  esta- 
blished themselves  there;  became  more  or  less  amalgamated  with 
the  darker  occupants,  and  were  called  the  OeU-Iberians.  These  two 
types  have  ever  since  been  commingling ;  but  a  complete  fusion  has 
not  taken  place,  and  the  types  of  each  are  still  clearly  traceable. 
One  pristine  population  of  the  British  Isles  was  probably  Iberian; 
and  their  type  is  still  beheld  in  many  of  the  dark-haired,  dark-eyed 
and  dark-skinned  Irish,  as  well  as  occasionally  in  Great  Britain  itself. 

The  enormous  antiquity  of  the  Iberians  in  Europe  is  admitted  on 
all  hands ;  but  their  origin  has  been  a  subject  of  infinite  disputes. 
Their  type,  both  moral  and  physical,  is  so  entirely  distinct  firom  that 
of  the  ancient  fair-skinned  immigrants  from  Asia,  that  it  would  be 
unphilosophical  to  claim  for  botLa  common  source,  in  the  present 
state  of  knowledge. 

DuPONCEAU  long  ago  wrote  of  the  BasqiiCy  living  representative 
of  the  Iberian  tongue  —  Sr 

«  This  language,  preserred  in  a  corner  of  Europe,  by  a  few  thontaad  meantaineers,  is 
the  sole  remaining  firagment  of,  perhaps,  a  hundred  dialects,  constrocted  on  the  same  plan, 
which  probably  existed,  and  were  uniTcrsally  spoken  at  a  remote  period,  in  that  quarter 
of  the  world.  Like  the  bones  of  the  mammoth,  and  the  relics  of  unknown  races  «which 
have  perished,  it  remain^  a  monument  of  the  destruction  produced  by  a  succession  of  ages. 
It  stands  single  and  alone  of  its  Idnd,  surrounded  by  idioms  whose  modem  construction 
bears  no  analogy  to  it*' 

We  borrow  the  quotation  from  Peichard,*®  who  has  profoundly  in- 
vestigated the  theme ;  and  this  idea  of  the  antiquity  of  the  Basque  or 
"  Iberic"  tongue,  termed  ^^Euskaldune"  by  its  speakers,  is  eloquently 
exemplified  by  Latham. 

«  Just  as,  in  geology,  the  great  primary  strata  underlie  the  more  recent  superimpose^ 
formations,  so  does  an  older  and  more  primitiTe  population  represent  the  original  occu- 
pants of  Europe  and  Asia,  previous  to  the  extension  of  the  neiTer,  and  (so  to  say)  second- 
ary— the  Indo-Oermans. 

<*  And  just  as,  in  geology,  the  secondary  and  tertiary  strata  are  not  so  continuous  but 
thai  the  primary  formations  may,  at  intervals,  show  themselTes  through  them,  so  also  do 
the  fragments  of  the  primary  population  still  exist — discontinuous,  indeed,  but  still  capable 
of  being  recognised. 

<*  With  such  a  view,  the  earliest  European  population  was  once  homogeneous,  from  Lap- 
land to  Grenada,  from  Tomea  to  Gibraltar.  But  it  has  been  overlaid  and  displaced :  the 
only  remnants  extant  being  the  Finns  and  Laplanders,  protected  by  their  Arctic  climate, 
the  Basques  by  their  Pyrenean  fastnesses,  and,  perhaps,  the  next  nati<m  in  order  of  notice. 
The  Euskaldune  is  only  one  of  the  isolated  languages  of  Europe.  There  is  another — the 
Albanian."  w 

There  was,  truly  then,  an  Iberian  world  before  the  Celtic  world.*^ 

*  '<  Persons,"  continues  Bodichon,  <*  who  have  inhabited  Brittany,  and  then  go  to  Algeria, 
are  struck  with  the  resemblance  which  they  discover  between  the  ancient  Armoricans  {the 
Britons)  and  the  Cabyles  (of  Algeria),  la.  fact  the  moral  and  physical  character  is  identical 
•  The  Breton  of  pure  blood  haiB  a  bony  head,  lig|ht  yellow  complexion,  of  bistre  tinge,  eyes 
black  or  brown,  stature  short,  and  the  black  hair  of  the  Cabyle.  Like  him,  he  instinct- 
ively hates  strangers.    In  both  the  same  perverseness  and  obstinacy,  same  endurance  of 

Digitized  by 

Google 

110  SPECIFIC    TTPBS — CAUCASIAN. 

fatigne,  same  lore  of  independence,  same  inflexion  of  Toioe,  same  expression  of  feelings. 
Listen  to  a  Cabyle  speaking  his  natlfe  tongue,  and  you  will  think  yon  hear  a  Br^n  talking 
Celtic" 

The  Bretons  to  this  day  form  a  striking  contrast  with  the  people 
around  them,  who  are  — 

<*  Celts,  of  tall  stature,  with  blue  eyes,  white  skins  and  blond  hair — they  are  com- 
*municatiTe,  impetuous,  Tersatile;  they  pass  rapidly  firom  courage  to  timidity,  and  from 
audacity  to  despair.    This  is  the  distinotiTe  character  of  the  Celtio  race,  now,  as  in  the 
ancient  Gauls. 

**  The  Bretons  are  entirely  different :  they  are  taciturn ;  hold  strongly  to  their  ideas  and 
usages ;  are  persoTering  and  melancholic ;  in  a  word,  both  in  moralt  and  physique,  they 
present  the  type  of  a  southern  race—of  the  AtUmteatu  [AtalantidsB,  Berbers  t]." 

The  early  histoiy  of  the  world  is  so  enshrouded  in  darkness,  that 
science  leaves  us  to  probabilities  in  all  attempts  to  explain  the  manner 
of  the  wandering  of  nations  from  primitive  seats. 

«  Formerly,"  says  Bodichon,  '*  northern  AfHca  was  joined  to  Europe  by  a  tongue  of 
land,  afterwards  diyided  by  the  Straits  of  Gibraltar.    The  ensemble  of  the  Atlantic  coun- 

«es  formed  the  [imaginary]  island  of  Atlantis,  Is  it  not  probable  that  the  Atlanteans,  fol- 
ring  the  coast,  penetrated  Spain,  Gaul,  and  reached  Armorica?  I9  contact  with  the 
Celts,  may  they  not  have  adopted  some  of  their  usages  ?  These  AfHcan  tribes,  too,  might 
have  reached  Europe  by  sea.  The  Atlanteans,  among  the  ancients,  passed  fbr  the  faTorite 
children  of  Neptune ;  they  made  known  the  worship  of  this  god  to  other  nations  —  to  the 
Egyptians,  for  example.  In  other  words,  the  Atlanteans  were  the  first  known  naTigators. 
Like  all  navigators,  they  must  have  planted  colonies  at  a  distance — the  Bretons  {race  Bri- 
tonne)  in  our  opinion  sprang  from  one  of  them."  ® 

Our  historical  proofe  of  the  early  diversity  of  Caucasian  types  in 
Europe  might  be  greatly  enlarged ;  »but  the  fact  will  be  admitted  by 
every  candid  student  of  anient  histoiy,  who,  to  the  propositions  that 
we  have  already  supported  by  cumulative  testimony,  will  add  those 
more  recently  established  in  Scotland,  through  tihie  inestimable  re- 
searches of  Dr.  Daniel  Wilson  and  his  erudite  fellov-laborers : 

«  The  CeltsB,  we  have  seen  reason  to  beUeve,  are  by  no  means  to  be  regarded  as  the 
primal  heirs  of  the  land,  but  are,  on  the  contrary,  comparatiyely  recent  intruders.  Agee 
before  their  migration  into  Europe,  an  unknown  Allophylian  race  had  wandered  to  this 
remote  island  of  the  sea,  and  in  its  turn  gave  place  to  later  Allophylian  nomades,  also  des- 
tined to  occupy  it  only  for  a  time.  Of  these  antehistorical  nations,  Archeology  alone 
roTeals  any  traces."  ^ 

For  our  inmiediate  objects,  however,  the  acknowledgment  that 
Europe  and  Asia  Minor  were  covered,  at  epochas  antecedent  to  all 
record,  by  dark  as  well  as  by  fair-skinned  races,  suffices.  The  farther 
back  we  journey  chronologically,  the  more  conflicting  become  the 
tribes,  and  the  more  salient  their  organic  diversities;  and  no  reflecting 
man  can,  at  the  present  day,  cast  his  eye  upon  the  infinitude  of  types 
now  extant  over  this  vast  area,  and  disbelieve  that  their  originals 
were  already  located  in  Europe  in  ages  parallel  with  the  earliest  pyra- 
mids of  Egypt,  nor  that  some  of  them  were  indigenous  to  the  European 
soil.  The  reader  will  hardly  controvert  this  conclusion,  after  he  has  ^ 
followed  us  through  the  types  of  mankind  depicted  upon  ancient 
monuments. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

PHTSICAL   HISTOBT   OP   THE   JKWS.  Ill 

CHAPTEB   IV. 

PHTSICAL    HISTOBT    OP    THE    JEWS. 

This  historical  people  ftimishes  so  striking  an  example  of  the  perma- 
nence of  a  Oauciman  type,  throughout  ages  of  time,  and  in  spite  of 
all  the  climates  of  the  globe,  that  we  assign  it  a  chapter  apart ;  and 
if  indelibility  of  type  be  a  test  of  specific  character,  the  Jews  must  be 
regarded  as  a  primitive  stock.  ' 

If  the  opinion  of  M.  Agassiz,  which  coincides  with  what  we  have 
long  maintained,  viz.,  that  mankind  were  created  in  nations^  be  cor- 
rect, it  follows  that,  in  reality,  there  is  no  such  thing  as  a  pure  Abra- 
hamie  race;  but  that  this  so-called  "  race"  is  made  up  of  the  descend- 
ants of  many  proximate  races,  which  had  their  origin  around  "Ur  of 
the  Chaldees." 

We  have  already  set  forth  that  the  various  zoological  provinces 
possess  their  groups  of  proximate  species  of  animals,  plants,  and 
races  of  men ;  which  differ  entirely  from  those  of  other  provinces. 
In  like  manner,  around  the  waters  of  the  Tigris  and  Euphrates,  for 
an  indefinite  distance,  and  extending  westward  to  the  land  of  Canaan 
on  the  Mediterranean,  were  grouped  certain  races  bearing  a  general 
resemblance  to  each  other,  although  of  distinct  origins.  This  is  not 
simply  a  conjecture ;  because  we  see  these  races  painted  and  sculp- 
tured on  the  monuments  of  Assyria  and  Egypt.  The  striking 
reseniblance  of  physical  characters  among  the  whole  of  them  is  unmis- 
takeable,  and  wherever  the  portrait  of  another  foreigner  to  their  stock 
is  introduced,  the  contrast  is  at  once  evident. 

Let  us,  in  the  first  place,  take  a  glance  at  the  history  of  the  Jews, 
as  given  by  their  own  chroniclers.  In  O-enestSj  chap,  xi.,  we  are  told 
that  Abraham,  their  great  progenitor,  is  descended  in  a  direct  line 
from  Shem,  the'son  of  Noah.  Only  ten  generations  intervene  "between 
Shem  and  Abraham ;  and  the  names,  ages,  and  time  of  birth  of  each, 
being  given  by  the  Hebrew  writers  themselves,  we  are  enabled  to 
ascertain,  with  much  precision,  the  length  of  time  they  estimated 
between  the  Jewish  date  of  the  flood  and  the  birth  of  Abraham. 
According  to  the  Hebrew  text,  which  must  be  regarded  as  the  most 
authentic,  it  was  292  years. 

It  is  certainly  reasonable  to  infer  that  Abraham  inherited,  through 
these  few  generations,  the  type  of  Shem  and-  Noah  (supposing  the 

Digitized  by 

Google 

112  PHYSICAL    HISTORY    OF    THE   JEWS. 

latter  to  be  historical  personages) ;  for  there  are  many  examples  where 
races  have  preserved  their  types  for  a  much  longer  time ;  and  the 
Jews  themselves,  as  we  shall  show,  have  maintained  their  own  type, 
fix)m  the  epoch  assigned  to  Abraham,  down  to  the  present  day.  The 
»  era  of  Abraham  has  been  variously  estimated,  from  1500  even  to 
2200  years  b.  c.  ;  which  would  give  to  his  descendants  at  least  one 
hundred  generations,  according  to  the  common  rules  of  vital  statistics. 

It  should  be  kept  in  view  that  we  fire  here  treating  the  Book  of 
Genesis  according  to  the  vulgar  understanding  of  its  language.  In 
Pabt  IL,  and  in  the  SuppLEMEirr,  it  is  shown  that  a  &r  different  con- 
struction has  been  adopted  by  the  best  scholars  of  the  day;  who 
regard  the  so-called  ance$tor$  of  Abraham  as  geographical  names  of 
nationsj  and  not  as  individuals. 

The  inadequacy  of  King  James's  Version  to  express  literally  the 
meaning  of  Hebrew  writers,  compels  us  to  follow  the  Bible  of  Cahen, 
Director  of  the  Israelite  School  of  Paris,  and  one  of  the  ablest  trans- 
lators of  the  day.  This  work,  printed  under  the  patronage  of  Louis- 
Philippe,  commenced  in  1831,  and  completed  its  twenty-two 
volumes  in  1848:  "ia  Bibles  Traduction  NouvelUj  avec  THehreu 
en  regard;  accampagne  des  poinU-^oyelUs  et  des  aecens-taniqueSj  avec 
des  notes  philologiqueSy  geographiques  et  Utteraires;  et  les  variantes 
des  Septante  et  du  texte  Samarttain."  There  is  nothing  like  it 
in  the  English  language ;  nor  shall  we  discuss  Old  Testament  ques- 
tions with  those  who  are  unacquainted  with  Cahen  and  the  Hebrew 
Text,  Neither  must  the  reader  infer,  from  our  general  conformity  with 
the  ordinary  mode  of  expression,  that  we  regard  the  documents  of 
Genesis  otherp^e  than  from  the  scientific  point  of  view. 

The  country  of  Abraham's  birth  was  Upper  Mesopotamia,  between 
the  waters  of  the  Tigris  and  Euphrates,  not  very  fer  from  the  site  of 
Nineveh ;  and,  after  his  marriage  with  Sarai,  his  histoiy  thus  con- 
tinues : — 

'*  And  Terah  took  Abram,  his  son,  and  Lot  the  son  of  Haran  his  son's  son,  and  Sarai  his 
daoghter-in-law,  his  son  Abram's  wife ;  and  they  went  forth  together  firom  Ur  of  the  ChaK 
dees  [AUR-EaSDIM],  to  go  into  the  land  of  Canaan;  and  thej  came  nnto  Haran  and 
dwelt  there,  and  the  days  of  Terah  were  205  "years,  and  Terah  died  in  Haran. 

**  Now  leHOnaH  said  unto  Abram,  Get  thee  out  of  thy  country  and  from  thy  birth-place  and 
firom  thy  father's  house,  unto  a  land  which  I  will  show  thee.  And  I  will  make  of  thee  a 
great  nation^  and  I  will  bless  thee,  and  I  will  aggrandize  thy  name,  and  thou  shalt  be  a 
blessing."  6* 

Accordingly,  Abraham  and  Lot,  with  their  families  and  their  flocks, 
journeyed  on,  "and  in  the  land  of  Canaan  they  arrived."  "And 
JeHOuaH  appeared  unto  Abram  arid  said.  Unto  thy  seed  will  I  give 
this  land/' 

They  were  soon  driven  to  Egypt,  by  a  grievous  famine,  to  beg  com 

Digitized  by 

Google 

PHYSICAL    HISTORY    OP    THE    JEWS,  113 

of  the  Pharaoh  wl^o  then  ruled  over  that  country ;  but,  after  a  short 
sojourn  there,  they  returned  to  the  Promised  Land,  and  pitched  their 
tents  agam  on  the  very  spot  from  which  they  had  been  taken.  "And 
the  Canaanite  and  the  Perizzite  then  dwelled  in  the  land.*' 

Abram  and  Lot  soon  separated ;  and  "  Abram  struck  bis  tents,  and 
came,  and  established  himself  in  the  grove  of  Mamre,  which  is  near 
Khebron,  and  Jthere  he  built  an  altar  to  leHOuaH."  In  his  eighty- 
sixth  year  of  age,Abram's  Egyptian  concubine  Hagar  (whose  name 
means  de$ertj  9t(me)  gave  birth  to  Ishmael  ;  wHo,  launched  into  Ara- 
bian deserts,  became  the  legendary  parent  of  Bedouin  tribes ;  while, 
to  us,  he  is  the  earliest  Biblical  instance  of  the  mixture  of  two  types 
—  Semitic  and  Egyptian. 

Then  the  patriarch's  name  wa^  changed :  "  Thou  shalt  no  longer 
be  called  ABBaM  {father  ^  AyrA-land) ;  thy  name  shall  be  ABBaHaM 
(father  of  a  7nuUitude\  because  I  have  rendered  thee  parent  of  many 
nations."®  ^ 

Sarah,  at  ninety  years  of  age,  gave  birth  to  Isaac,  IT^XAaE, 
"laughter."  Her  own  name,  also,  had  previously  been  changed: 
"  Thou  shalt  no  longer  call  her  SaBal  [ladyship],  het  name  is  now 
SaBaH  [a  woman  of  great  fecundityy  ^  She  died  at  the  age  of  one 
hundred  and  twenty-seven  years,  and  was  buried  in  the  family  cave, 
which  Abram  had  purchased  in  Canaan.  Wishing  then  to  dispose 
of  his  son  Isaac  ^n  marriage,  Abraham  said  to  his  most  aged  slave^  "  I 
will  make  thee  swear  by  leHOuaH,  God  of  the  skies  and  God  of  the 
earth,  that  thou  shalt  not  take /or  mg  son  of  the  daughters  of  the  (7a- 
naanite  [nether-landers]  amongst  whom  I  dwell,  but  thou  shalt  go 
into  my  country^  and  to  my  birth-place,  to  take  a  woman  for  my  son 
Isaac."  ^  And,  accordingly,  tiie  slave  went  back  into  Mesopotamia, 
unto  the  city  of  Kahor,  and  brought  Bebecca,  the  cousin  of  Isaac^ 
whom  the  latter  married. 

The  next  link  in  the  genealogy  is  Jacob ;  who,  after  defrauding  hift 
brother  Esau  of  his  birthright,  retired,  from  prudential  motives,  into 
the  land  of  his  forefathers,  and  there  married  Leah  and  Bachel,  the 
two  daughters  of  Laban.  Isaac  lived  to  be  one  hundred  and  eighty, 
and  Jacob  one  hundred  and  forty-seven  years  old ;  and  they  were 
both  deposited  in  the  femily  cave,  or  mausoleum.  So  tenacious  were 
they  of  their  customs,  that  Jacob,  after  being  embalmed  with  great 
ceremony,  was  carried  all  the  way  back  from  Egypt,  as  was  afterwards 
his  son  Joseph,  to  repose  in  the  same  family  burial-place;  which, 
our  Supplement  shows,  is  not  a  cave  called  "Machpelah,"  but  "the 
cavern  of  the  field  contracted  for j  facing  Mamre," 

Here  closes  the  history  of  those  generations  which  preceded  tue 
depwi^ur^  of  the  Israelites  for  Egypt ;  and  t3i0  evidence  is  clear,  up  to 
15 

Digitized  by 

Google 

114  PHYSICAL    HISTORY    OP    THE    JEWS. 

this  epoch,  as  to  the  extreme  particularity  (Ishicaex<  being  outlawed) 
with  which  they  preserved  the  purity  of  their  blood,  as  well  as  the 
custom  of  "  sleeping  with  their  fathers." 

Who  the  Canaanites  were  has  been  amply  treated  in  Part  11.  It 
Suffices  here  to  note  that  Knd  means  "  low ;"  and  that  Cailaanites, 
as  lowlanders^  were  naturally  repugnant,  at  first,  to  the  ABRaMuIap, 
or  "  highlanders"  of  Chaldsean  hiUs.  , 

Let  us  follow  this  peculiar  people  through  the  next  remarkable  page 
of  their  history.  Th^  whole  sept  amounted  to  seventy  persons  in 
number^  viz. :  Jacob  and  his  eleven  sons,  who,  with  their  families, 
by  the  invitation  of  Joseph,  the  twelfth,  migrated  to  Egypt;  and  were 
thereupon  settled  in  the  land  of  Goshen,  apart  from  the  Egyptians. 
Thus  secluded,  ttiey  must  have  preserved  their  national  type  tolerably 
unchanged  down  to  the  time  of  the  Exodus,  when  they  carried  it  back 
with  them  to  the  land  of  Canaan.  Exceptional  instances  fortify  the 
rule :  else  why  should  the  genesiacal  writer  particularize  the  marriage 
of  Joseph  with  ASNeiTA  (the  devoted  to  the  goddess  Neith)j  daughter 
of  PoTiPHAR  (PET-HER-PHRE,  the  belonging  to  the  gods  fforug  and 
Jia — "priest  of  On,"  HeliopolU\  an  Egyptian  woman  ?  *  Judah  had 
befgotten  illegitimate  children  by  the  Canaanite  Shuah  ;*  Moses,  bom, 
and  educated  in  Egypt  so  thoroughly  as  to  be  called  a  "Afimte- 
wiaw,"'®  had  wedded  an  Arabian  Zipporah,  Tw-PARaH  (literally, 
daughter  of  the  god  Bd)^  the  daughter  of  Jethro,  a  pagan  "  priest 
of  Midian:"^  and,  besides  the  GouM  AdRaB,  Arab-horde  (falsely 
rendered  "mixed  multitude**'^,  that  journeyed  with  the  Sinaic  Israel- 
ites, and  with  whom  there  must  have  been  illicit  connexions,  there  was 
at  least  one  son  of  an  Egyptian  man^  by  an  leraelitish  woman^  in  the 
camp."^  Other  examples  of  early  Hebrew  proclivity  can  be  found ; 
but  these  suffice  to  indicate  exceptions  to  the  law  afterwards  promul- 
gated. Under  the  command  of  Joshua,  the  land  of  Canaan  was  con- 
quered, and  divided  amongst  the  twelve  tribes ;  and  from  that  time 
down  to  the  final  destruction  of  the  Temple  by  Titus  (70  a.  d.),  a 
period  of  about  1500  years,  this  country  was  more  or  less  occupied  by 
them.  They  were,  however,  almost  incessantly  harassed  by  civil  and 
tbreign  wars,  captivities,  •and  calamities  of  various  kinds ;  and  their 
blood  became  more  or  less  adulterated  with  that  of  Syro- Arabian  races 
around  them ;  ti^e  type  of  whom,  however,  did  not  differ  materially 
from  their  own. 

We  shall  not  impose  on  the  patience  of  the  reader,  by  recapitulat- 
ing the  long  list  of  levidences  which  are  found  in  histoiy,  both  sacred 
and  profane,  to  prove  the  comparative  purity  of  the  blood  of  the 
Israelites  down^tofthe  time  of  their  dispersion  (70  a.  d.).  The  avoid- 
ance, of  marriages  with  other  races  was  ei\joined  by  their  religion, 

Digitized  by 

Google 

PHYSICAL    HISTORY    OP    THE    JEWS.  115 

and  this  custom  has  been  perpetuated,  in  an  extraordinary  degree, 
through  all  their  wanderings,  and  under  all  their  oppressions,  dowti 
to  the  present  day. 

But,  while  all  must  agree  that  the  Jews  have,  for  ages,  clung 
together  with  an  adhesiveness  and  perseverance  unknown,  perhaps,  to 
any  other  people,  and  that  their  lineaments,  in  consequence,  have 
been  preserved  with  extraordinaiy  fidelity;  it  must,  on  the  other 
hand,  be  admitted  that  the  race  has  not  entirely  Mcaped  adultera- 
tion ;  and  it  is  for  this  reason  that  we  not  unftequently  see,  amongst 
those  pitofessing  the  Jewish  religion,  faces  which  do  not  bear  the 
stamp  of  the  pure  Abrahamic  stock.  We  have  only  to  turn  to 
the  records  of  the  Old  Testament,  to  find  proofs,  on  almost  every 
page,  that  the  ancient  Hebrews,  like  the  modem,  were  but  human 
beings,  and  subject  to  ^11  the  infirmities  of  our  nature.  Even  those 
venerable  heads  of  the  Hebrew  monarchy,  whose  names  stand  out 
as  the  land-marks  of  sacred  history,  were  not  untarnished  by  the 
moral  darkness  which  covered  the  early  inhabitants  of  the  earth. 

The  histoiy  of  the  connubial  life  of  the  patriarchs,  Abraham  and 
Jacob,  presents  a  picture  quite  revolting  to  the  standard  of  our  day. 
After  tlie  promulgation  of  the  Mosaic  laws,  the  Israelites  were 
expressly  forbidden  to  intermany  with  aliens;  and  yet  the  injunction 
was  often  disregarded.  Abraham,  besides  his  Arab  wife  Ketourah, 
and  Joseph,  as  just  shown,  had  both  taken  women  from  among  the 
Egyptians ;  and  Moses  had  espoused  an  Arab  (Cushite  ?).  David,  the 
man  after  God's  own  heart,  long  after  the  promulgation  of  the  lawy 
not  only  had  his  concubines,  but  so  far  forgot  himself  as  to  commit 
adulteiy  with  Bathsheba,  the  wife  of  Uriah,  the  Hittite ;  and,  after 
murdering  the  husband,  married  her,  and  she  became  the  mother  of 
the  celebrated  Solomon.  Kext,  on  the  throne,  came  Solomon  him- 
self whose  career,  opening  with  murder,  closed  in  Paganism.  He  also 
married  an  Egyptian  (a  princess);  enjoying,  besides,  seven  hundred 
other  wives  and  three  hundred  concubines :  for  "  King  Solomon  loved 
many  strange  women,  together  with  the  daughter  of  Pharaoh  —  wo- 
men of  the  MoabiteSy  AmmoniteSy  JEdomiteSy  SidonianSy  Hittite%y  and  of 
other  nations:"^*  and  so  promiscuous  was  liis  philogamy,  that  some 
conmientators  have  imputed  scandal  even  to  the  "Queen  of  Sheba,*' 
the  sombre  belle  of  Southern  Arabia.  Even  the  noble-hearted  Judah, 
the  "ii<m'«  Whelpy"  the  last  column  of  the  twelve  that  stood  erect 
in  the  sight  of  Jehovah,  and  whose  especial  mission  it  was  to  rege- 
nerate and  raise  up  the  fellen  race  in  purity  and  power,  even  he,  not 
only  wedded  an  impure  Canaanite,  but  was  tempted  to  crime  by  his 
own  daughter-in-law,  disguised  as  a  harlot,  on  the  road-side ;  and,  so 
fear  from  repenting  the  sin,  he  had  two  children  by  her.    Nor  need 

Digitized  by 

Google 

116 

PHYSICAL    HISTORY    OF    THE    JEWS. 

Fig.  11. 

we  reinind  (he  reader  of  the  unfortunate  affair  of  Sarah  with  Pharaoh^ 
and  again  with  Ahimelech. 

We  might  thus  go  on,  and  multiply  examples  of  similar  import 
from  Jewish  annals;  but  to  us  it  is  much  more  pleasing  to  draw 
the  veil  of  oblivion  over  the  depravity  of  those  primitive  days/  and  to 
remember  only  the  noble  moral  precepts  bequeathed  us  by  the  kings 
and  prophets  of  Judea.  These,  however,  are  historical  facts,  having 
important  bearings  on  the  subject  before  us,  and  must  not,  therefore, 
be  passed  over  in  silence.  They  show  clearly  that  the  ancient  Israel- 
ites were  restrained  by  no  moral  force  which  could  keep  their  gene- 
alogies pure ;  but,  in  comparison  with  eveiy  other  people,  there  is 
enough  to  justify  us  in  believing  that  their  pedigrees  are  to  be  relied 
on  for  a  long  series  of  generations.  Those  among  Jews  of  the  present 
day  who  preserve  what  is  regarded  as  the  national  type,  must  neces- 
sarily be  of  pure  blood;  while  those  who  do  not,  must  be  traced  up 
to  foreign  alliances. 

It  will  illustrate  the  indelibility  of 
the  Abrahamic  type  to  present  here 
a  mummied  Shemitish  head,  from 
Morton's  collection."'*  Being  bitu- 
minized,  the  skull  cannot  be  much 
older  than  the  time  of  Moses  —  say, 
fifteenth  century  b.  c.  Nor,,  inas- 
much as  general  mummification 
ceased  about  300  years  after  Christy 
can  it  be  less  than  1600  years  old. 
From  its  style  and  Theban  extrac- 
tion, it  may  be  referred  to  Solomonic 
days'*  —  yet,  how  perfectly  the  He- 
brew type  is  preserved ! 

Fresh  from  exhumations  in  the 
father-land  of  Abraham,  we  add  a 
higher  variety  of  the  same  type  — 
Part  of  a  Colossal  Head  from  Kou- 
yunjih.'"  Its  age  is  fixed  between 
the  reign  of  Sennacherib  and  the 
fall  of  Nineveh,  about  the  seventh 
century  b.  c.  And  still,  after  2500 
years,  so  indelible  is  the  type,  every 
resident  of  Mobile  will  recognize, 
in  this  Chaldsean  effigy,  the  fac- 
simile portrait  of  one  of  their  city's 
most    prominent    bitizens,   who    is 

Pio.  12. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

PHYSICAL    HISTORY    OP    THE    JEWS.  117 

honored  alike  by  the  affection  of  his  co-religionists,  and  the  confi- 
dence of  the  community  which  has  just  elevated  him  to  a  seat  in  the 
National  Councils. 

All  written  descriptions  of  early  times,  relative  to  the  Jewish 
race,  concur  in  estahhshing  the  permanence  of  their  type.  We  are 
informed,  by  modem  travellers,  that  the  same  features  are  common 
in  Mesopotamia,  their  original  seat,  and  also  scattered  through  Persia, 
Afghanistan,  &c. ;  the  direction  in  which,  we  are  taught  by  the  annals 
of  modem  times,  some  descendants  of  the  ten  tribes  were  dispersed, 
long  after  the  Assyrian  captivity  in  the  eighth  century  b.  c.  In  short, 
the  Jewish  features  meet  one  in  almost  eveiy  country  under  the  sun ; 
but  it  is  worthy  of  special  remark,  that  Hebrew  hneaments  are  found 
in  no  region  whither  history  cannot  track  them,  and  rarely  where  their 
possessors  do  not  acknowledge  Jewish  origin.  Nor  will  the  fact  be 
questioned,  we  presume,  that  well-marked  Israelitish  features  are 
never  beheld  out  of  that  race ;  although  it  has,  as  we  shall  show, 
been  contended  that  Jews  in  certain  climates  have  not  only  lost  their 
own  type,  but  have  become  transformed  into  other  races  1 

The  number  of  Jews  now  existing  in  the  world,  (of  those  that  are 
regarded  as  descendants  in  a  direct  line  from,  and  maintaining  the 
same  laws  with,  their  forefathers,  who,  above  8000  years  ago,  retreated 
from  Egypt  under  the  guidance  of  the  lawgiver,  Moses,)  is  estimated 
by  Weimer,  Wolff,  Milman,^  and  others,  variously,  from  three  to 
five  millions.  In  all  climates  and  countries,  they  are  recognized  as 
the  same  race.  "Weimer,  whose  statistics  are  lowest,  gives  the  fol- 
lowing :  — 

«*  Afbioa.  —  They  are  scattered  along  the  irhole  coast,  from  Morocco  to  Egypt,  besides 
being  found  in  many  other  parts.  Morocco  and  Fez,  800,000 ;  Tunis,  180,000 ;  Algiers, 
80,000;  Gabes  or  Habesh,  20,000;  Tripoli,  12,000;  &c.    Total,  504,000. 

<'  Asia.  —  In  Mesopotamia  and  Assyria.  The  ancient  seats  of  the  Babylonian  Jews  are 
still  occupied  by  5,270  families,  exclusiye  of  those  of  Bagdad  and  Bassora.  Asiatic  Turkey, 
880,000;  Arabia,  200,000;  Hindostan,  100,000 ;  China,  60,000;  Turldstan,  40,000 ;  Pro- 
Tince  of  Iran,  85,000;  &o.     Total,  788,000. 

"Europe. —  Russia  and  Poland,  608,000;  European  Turkey,  821,000;  Germany, 
188,000;  Prussia,  184,000;  Netherlands,  80,000;  France,  60,000;  Italy,  86,000;  Great 
Britain,  12,000;  &c.     Total  in  Europe,  1,918,058." 

In  America,  Milman  averages  them  at  6000  only;  but  this  wa? 
certainly  very  far  below  the  mark,  even  when  his  book  was  published, 
and  they  have  since  been  increasing,  with  immense  rapidity.  We 
should  think  that  an  estimate  of  100,000,  for  North  and  South 
America,  would  not  be  an  exaggeration. 

This  sketch  suffices  to  show  how  the  Judaic  race  has  become  scat- 
tered throughout  the  regions  of  the  earth;  many  femilies  being  domi- 
ciliated, ever  since  the  Christian  era,  in  climates  the  most  opposite : 
and,  yet,  in  obedience  to  an  organic  law  of  animal  life,  they  have  pre- 

Digitized  by 

Google 

118  PHYSICAL    HISTORY    OF    THE    JEWS. 

served,  unchanged,  the  same  features  which  the  Almighty  stamped  on 
the  first  Hebrew  pairs  created.  It  may  be  well  to  denounce,  as  vulgar 
and  unscriptural,  the  notion  that  the  features  of  the  Jews  are  attri- 
butable to  a  subsequent  miracle,  or  that  God  has  put  a  marh  upon 
them,  by  which  they  may  be  always  known,  and  for  the  mere  purpose 
of  distinguishing  them  from  other  races.  K  we  are  correct  in  carry- 
ing their  type  back  to  times  preceding  the  Exodus,  this  superstition 
must  fall  to  the  ground.  The  Almighty,  no  doubt,  individualized 
all  human  races,  from  the  beginning. 

It  is  admitted,  by  etjinographers  of  eveiy  party,  that  mankind  are 
materially  influenced  by  climate.  The  Jewish  skin,  for  example,  may 
become  more  fidr  at  the  north,  and  more  dark  at  the  tropics,  than  in 
the  Land  of  Promise ;  but,  even  here,  the  limit  of  change  stops  far  short 
of  approximation  to  other  types.  The  complexion  may  be  bleached,  or 
tanned,  in  exposed  parts  of  the  body,  but  the  Jewish  features  stand 
unalterably  through  all  climates,  and  are  superior  to  such  influences. 

Nevertheless,  it  is  stoutly  contended,  even  at  the  present  day,  that 
Jews,  in  various  parts  of  the  world,  have  been  transmtUed  into  other 
types.  Several  examples  (so  supposed)  have  been  heralded  forth  to 
sustain  the  doctrine  of  the  Unity  of  the  human  species.  We  have 
examined,  with  care,  all  these  vaunted  examples,  and  feel  no  hesitation 
in  asserting  that  not  one  of  them  possesses  any  evidence  to  sustain  it, 
while  the  proof  is  conclusive  on  the  opposite  side. 

The  most  prominent  of  these  mendacious  instances  is  that  of  the 
black  Jews  in  Malabar ;  and  this  has  been  confidently  cited  by  all 
advocates  of  the  doctrine  of  Unity,  down  to  the  Edinburgh  Review, 
1849.  Prichard,  in  his  great  work,  has  dodged  this  awkward 
point,  in  a  manner  that  we  are  really  at  a  loss  to  understand.  In 
the  second  edition  (1826)  of  his  "Physical  History  of  Mankind,**  he 
stated  the  facts  with  suflicient  fairness ;  whereas,  in  the  last,  he  sup- 
presses them  entirely,  and  passes  over  them  without  uttering  one  word 
in  support  of  his  previous  assertions  —  merely  saying  that  there  is 
"  no  evidence"  to  show  that  the  black  Jews  are  not  Jews.  We  shall 
here  introduce  testimony  to  prove  our  position,  that  the  subjoined 
facts,  though  familiar  to  our  author,  are  eluded  by  him  with  most 
ominous  silence. 

Under  thp  protection  and  patronage  of  the  British  government,  the 
Rev,  Claudius  Buchanan,  D.  D.,  late  Vice  Provost  of  the  College  of 
Fort  William,  in  Bengal ;  well  known  for  his  learning,  fidelity,  and 
piety ;  visited  and  spent  some  time  amongst  the  white  and  the  black  Jews 
of  Malabar,  near  Cochin,  in  1806-7-8 ;  and  the  testimony  given  in 
his  "Asiatic  Researches'*  is  so  remarkable,  and  the  subject  so  im- 
portant, that  we  venture  a  long  extract.    The  "  Jerusalem,  or  white 

Digitized  by 

Google 

PHYSICAL    HISTORY    OF    THE   JEWS.  119 

Jews,"  he  tells  us,  live  in  Jewi'  town,  about  a  mile  from  Cocliin,  and 
the  "  ancient,  or  black  Jews,'*  with  small  exceptions,  inhabit  towns  in 
the  interior  of  the  province. 

'<  On  my  inquiry  (continues  Dr.  Buchanan)  into  the  antiquity  of  the  irhite  Jews,  they 
first  delivered  me  a  narratiTe,  ii\  the  Hebrew  language,  of  their  arrival  in  India,  which  has 
been  handed  down  to  them  from  their  fathers ;  and  then  exhibited  their  ancient  brass  plate, 
containing  their  charter  and  freedom  of  residence,  given  by  a  king  of  Malabar.  The  fol- 
lowing is  the  narrative  of  the  events  relating  to  their  first  arrival :  — 

<*<  After  the  second  Temple  was  destroyed,  (which  may  God  speedily  rebuild!)  our 
fathers,  dreading  the  conqueror's  wrath,  departed  from  Jerusalem — a  numerous  body  of 
men,  women,  priests  and  Levites — and  came  into  this  land.  There  were  among  them  men 
of  reputokfor  learning  and  wisdom ;  and  God  gave  the  people  favor  in  the  sight  of  the  king 
who  at  that  time  reigned  here,  and  he  granted  them  a  place  to  dwell  in,  called  Cranganor, 
He  allowed  them  a  patriarchal  jurisdiction  in  the  district,  with  certain  privileges  of  nobility ; 
and  the  royal  grant  was  engraved,  according  to  the  custom  of  those  days,  on  a  plate  of 
brass.  This  was  done  in  the  year  Arom  the  creation  of  the  world  4250  (A.  D.  490) ;  and 
this  plate  of  brass  we  still  have  in  possession.  Our  forefathers  continued  at  Cranganor  for 
about  one  thousand  years,  and  the  number  of  heads  who  governed  were  seventy-two.  Soon 
after  our  settlement,  other  Jews  followed  us  from  Judea ;  and  among  them  came  that  man 
of  great  wisdom,  Babbi  Samuel,  a  Levite,  of  Jerusalem,  with  his  son,  Rabbi  Jehuda  Levita. 
They  brought  with  them  the  Hlver  trumpeU  made  use  of  at  the  time  of  the  Jubilee,  which 
were  saved  when  the  second  Temple  was  destroyed ;  and  we  have  heard,  from  our  fathers, 
that  there  were  engraven  upon  those  trumpets  the  letters  of  the  Ineffable  Name.  There 
joined  us,  also,  from  Spain  and  other  places,  Arom  time  to  time,  certain  tribes  of  Jews,  who 
had  heard  of  our  prosperity.  But,  at  last,  discord  arising  among  ourselves,  one  of  our 
chiefs  called  to  his  assistance  an  Indian  king,  who  came  upon  us  with  a  great  army,  de- 
stroyed our  houses,  palaces  and  strongholds,  dispossessed  us  of  Cranganor,  killed  part  of 
OS,  and  carried  part  into  captivity.  By  these  massacres  we  were  reduced  to  a  small  number. 
Some  of  the  exiles  came  and  dwelt  at  Cochin,  where  we  have  remained  ever  since,  suffering 
great  changes,  from  time  to  time.  There  are  amongst  us  some  of  the  children  of  Israel 
(Beni-Israel),  who  came  from  the  country  of  Ashkenaz,  from  Egypt,  from  Tsoha,  and  other 
pUces,  besides  those  who  formerly  inhabited  this  country.' 

<<  The  native  annals  of  Malabar  confirm  the  foregoing  account,  in  the  principal  circum- 
stances, as  do  the  Mahommedan  histories  of  the  later  ages ;  for  the  Mahommedans  have 
been  settied  here,  in  great  numbers,  since  the  eighth  century. 

<<The  desolation  of  Cranganor  the  Jews  describe  as  being  like  the  desolation  of  Jeru- 
lem  in  miniature.  They  were  first  received  into  the  country  with  some  favor  and  confidence, 
agreeably  to  the  tenor  of  the  general  prophecy  concerning  the  Jews  —  for  no  country  was 
to  reject  them ;  and,  after  they  had  obtained  some  wealth,  and  attracted  the  notice  of  men, 
they  are  precipitated  to  the  lowest  abyss  of  human  suffering  and  reproach.  The  recital  of 
the  Bufferings  of  the  Jews  at  Cranganor  resembles  much  that  of  the  Jews  at  Jerusalem,  as 
given  by  Josephus.  [Exaotiy !   Notice  also  the  *<  72"  governors,  and  the  '*  7"  kings. — G.  R.  G.] 

*<  I  now  requested  they  would  show  me  their  brass  plate.  Having  been  given  by  a  native 
iong,  it  is  written,  of  course,  in  the  Malabaric  language  and  character,  and  is  now  so  old 
that  it  cannot  well  be  understood.  The  Jews  preserve  a  Hebrew  translation  of  it,  which 
they  presented  to  me ;  but  the  Hebrew  itself  is  very  difficult,  and  they  do  not  agree  among 
themselves  as  to  the  meaning  of  some  words.  I  have  employed,  by  their  permission,  an 
engraver,  at  Cochin,  to  execute  a  fac-simile  of  the  original  plate  on  copper.  This  ancient 
document  begins  in  th6  following  manner,  according  to  the  Hebrew  translation :  — 

**  *  In  the  peace  of  God,  the  King,  which  hath  mode  the  earth  according  to  his  pleasure — 
To  this  God,  I,  AIRYI  BRAHMIN,  have  lifted  up  my  hand  and  have  granted,  by  this  deed, 
which  many  hundred  thousand  years  shall  run — ^I,  dwelling  in  Cranganor,  have  granted,  iu 

Digitized  by 

Google 

120  PHYSICAL    HISTORY    OP    THE    JEWS. 

the  thirtj-dzth  year  of  my  mgn,  in  the  strength  of  power  I  have  given  in  inheritance,  to 
JbssPH  Rabban — '" 

(Here  follow  several  privileges,  &c.) 

**  What  proves  the  importance  of  the  Jews,  at  the  period  when  this  grant  was  made,  is, 
that  it  is  signed  by  seven  kings  as  witnesses.    (The  names  are  here  given.) 

**  There  is  no  date  to  the  document,  farther  than  what  may  be  collected  from  the  reign 
of  the  prince,  and  the  names  of  the  royal  witnesses.  Bates  are  not  usual  in  old  Malabario 
writings.  One  fact  is  evident,  that  the  Jews  must  have  existed  a  considerable  time  in'  the 
country  before  they  could  have  obtained  such  a  grant  The  tradition,  before-mentioned, 
assigns  for  the  date  of  the  transaction  the  year  of  the  creation  4250,  which  is,  in  Jewish 
computation,  A.  D.  490.  It  is  well  known  that  the  famous  Malabaric  king,  Oobam  Pbbu- 
MAL,  made  grants  to  the  Jews,  Christians,  and  Mahommedans,  daring  his  reign ;  but  that 
prince  flourished  in  the  eighth  or  ninth  century.'* 

Archseologically,  the  date  assigned  to  this  document  is  a  manifest 
imposture,  for  any  epoch  anterior  to  900  years  after  Christ.  That 
change  of  religion  from  Brahminism  to  Judaism  cannot  metamor- 
phose Hindoo  renegades  into  Jews^  is  evident  from  what  follows. 

Speaking  of  the  black  JewSjDr.  Buchanan  thus  continues :  — 

"  Their  Hindoo  complexion,  and  their  very  imperfect  resemblance  to  the  European  Jews, 
indicate  that  they  have  been  detached  from  the  parent  stock,  in  Judea,  many  ages  before 
the  Jews  in  the  west,  and  that  there  have  been  intermarriages  with  families  not  Israeliiish, 
I  had  heard  that  those  tribes,  which  had  passed  the  Indus,  had  assimilated  so  much  to  the 
customs  and  habits  of  the  countries  in  which  they  live,  that  they  sometimes  may  be  seen 
by  a  traveller  without  being  recognized  as  Jews.  In  the  interior  towns  of  Malabar,  I  was 
not  always  able  to  distinguish  the  Jew  Arom  the  Hindoo.  I  hence  perceived  how  easy  it 
may  be  to  mistake  the  tribes  of  Jewish  descent  among  the  Affghans  and  other  nations,  in 
the  northern  parts  of  Hindostan.  The  white  Jews  look  upon  the  black  Jews  as  an  inferior 
race,  and  as  not  of  pure  caste,  which  plainly  demonstrates  that  they  do  not  spring  from  a 
common  stock  in  India.**  "^ 

The  evidence  of  Dr.  Buchanan  can  scarcely  leave  room  for  a  doubt 
that  the  white  Jews  had  been  living  at  least  a  thousand  years  in 
Malabar,  and  were  still  white  Jews,  without  even  an  approximation, 
in  type,  to  the  Hindoos ;  and  that  the  black  Jews  were  an  "  inferior 
race"  —  "not  of  pure  caste"  —  or,  in  other  words,  adulterated  by 
dark  Hindoos — Jews  in  doctrine,  but  not  in  stock. 

But  we  have  anotiier  eye-witness,  of  no  less  note,  to  the  same  effect, 
namely,  Joseph  Wolff,  a  Christianized  Jew,  whose  authority  is  quoted 
in  places  where  modem  Jews  are  spoken  of.  He  assures  us,*'  that 
the  black  Malabar  Jews  are  converted  Hindoos,  and  at  most  a  mix- 
ture only  of  the  two  races.  Similar  opinions  have  been  expressed 
by  every  competent  authority  we  have  seen  or  can  find  quoted ;  and 
even  Prichard,  in  his  laborious  work,  while  he  slurs  over  all  these 
facts  with  the  simple  remark  that  there  is  "  no  evidence"  in  favor  of 
Buchanan's  opinion,  ventures  to  give  not  a  single  authority  to  rebut 
him,  and  offers  not  a  solitary  reason  for  doubting  his  testimony.  And, 
we  say  it  with  regret,  that  this  is  but  one  of  Dr.  Prichard's  many, 
imfidr  modes  of  sustaining  the  doctrine  of  the  unity  of  mankind.   We 

Digitized  by 

Google 

PHYSICAL    HISTORY    OF    THE    JEWS.  121 

may  add,  also,  that  the  opinions  of  Buchanan  and  Wolff  are  those  of 
all  Judseans  of  our  day,  as  fisw  as  we  have  been  able  to  ascertain 
them.  Mr.  Isaac  Leeser,  the  learned  and  estimable  editor  of  the 
^^Occidenty'  at  Philadelphia,  in  answer  to  our  inquiries,  thus  writes :  — 

''Ton  may  freelj  assert  that,  in  all  easeDtialB,  the  Jews  are  the  same  they  are  repre- 
,  sented  on  the  Egyptian  monuments ;  and  a  comparison  of '8600  years  ought  to  be  sufficieni 
to  prove  that  the  intermediate  links  have  not  degenerated.  .  .  .  The  black  Jews  of  Malabar 
are  not  a  Jewish  race,  according  tQ  the  accounts  which  haye  appeared  from  time  to  time  in 
the  papers.  They  are  most  likely  converts  to  Judaism,  who,  never  haying  intermarried  with 
the  white  Jews,  haye  retained  their  original  Hindoo  complexion,  and,  I  belieye,  language." 

Although  this  letter  of  Mr.  Leeser  was  written  in  haste,  and  not 
for  publication,  his  well-known  respectabilify  and  talent  lend  so  much 
weight  to  any  thing  he  would  utter  about  his  co-religionists,  that  we 
cannot  forego  the  pleasure  of  giving  another  and  longer  extract 
from  it.    He  says  :  — 

**  In  respect,  howeyer,  to  the  true  Jewish  complexion,  it  ia/air;  which  is  preyed  by  the 
Tariety  of  the  people  I  haye  seen,  from  Persia,  Russia,  Palestine,  and  Africa,  not  to  men- 
tion those  of  Europe  and  Axperica,  the  latter  of  whom  are  identical  with  the  Europeans, 
like  all  other  white  inhabitants  of  this  continent.  All  Jews  that  eyer  I  haye  beheld  are 
idmiiccd  infeatttret;  though  the  color  of  their  skin  and  eyes  differs  materially,  inasmuch  as 
the  Southern  are  nearly  all  black-eyed,  and  somewhat  sallow,  while  the  Northern  are  blue- 
eyed,  in  a  great  measure,  and  of  a  fair  and  clear  complexion.  In  this  they  assimilate  to 
all  Caucasians,  when  transported  for  a  number  of  generations  into  yarious  climates.  [?] 
Though  I  am  free  to  admit  that  the  dark  and  hazel  eye  and  tawny  sUn  are  oftener  met 
with  among  the  Germanic  Jews  than  among  the  German  natiyes  proper.  There  are  also 
red-haired  and  white-haired  Jews,  as  well  as  other  people,  and  perhaps  of  as  great  a  pro- 
portion. I  speak  now  of  the  Jews  north  —  I  am  myself  a  native  of  Germany,  and  among 
Toy  own  family  I  know  of  none  without  blue  eyes,  brown  hiur  (though  mine  is  black),  and 
yery  fair  skin  —  still  I  recollect,  when  a  boy,  seeing  many  who  had  not  these  characteristics, 
and  had,  on  the  contrary,  eyes,  hair,  and  skin  of  a  more  southern  complexion.  In  America, 
you  will  see  lUl  yarieties  of  complexion,  from  the  yery  fair  Canadian  down  to  the  almost 
yellow  of  the  West  Indian — the  latter,  however,  is  solely  the  effect  of  exposure  to  a  delete- 
rioue  climate  for  several  generations,  which  changes,  I  should  judge,  the  texture  of  the  hair 
and  skin,  and  thus  leaves  its  mark  on  the  constitution — otherwise  the  Caucasian  type  is 
strongly  developed;  but  this  is  the  case  more  emphatically  among  those  sprung  from  a 
German  than  a  Portuguese  stock.  The  latter  was  an  original  inhabitant  of  the  Iberian 
Peninsula^  and  whether  it  was  preserved  pure,  or  became  mixed  with  Moorish  blood  in  the 
process  of  centuries,  or  whether  the  Germans  contracted  an  intimacy  with  Teutonic  nations, 
and  thus  acquired  a  part  of  their  national  characteristics,  it  is  impossible  to  be  told  now. 
But  one  thing  is  certain,  that,  both  in  Spain  and  Germany,  conversions  to  Judaism  during 
the  early  ages,  say  from  the  eighth  to  the  thirteenth  century,  were  by  no  means  rare,  or 
else  the  governments  would  not  have  so  energetically  prohibited  Jews  from  making  prose- 
lytes of  their  servants  and  others.  I  know  not,  indeed,  whether  there  is  any  greater  phy- 
sical discrepancy  between  northern  and  southern  Jews  than  between  English  families  who 
continue  in  England  or  emigrate  to  Alabama  -^  I  rather  judg^e  there  is  not'' 

Mr.  Leeser  professes  not  to  have  paid  any  special  attention  to  the 
physical  history  of  the  Jews ;  but,  nevertheless,  his  remarks  corro 
borate  very  strongly  two  important  points:  1st,  That  the  j'ews  merelj 
undergo  those  temporary  changes  from  climate  which  are  admitted  by 
16 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 

122  PHYSICAL    HISTORY    OF    THE    JEWS. 

all  ethnographers ;  and  2d5  that  they  have  occasionally  mingled  in 
blood  with  Gentile  races ;  amalgamations  that  account  for  any 
visible  diversity  of  type  amongst  them. 

And  that  we  have  sought  for  information  among  the  best  informed 
of  the  Hebrew  community  in  the  United  States,  may  be  inferred  from 
the  subjoined  letter  of  an  authority  universally  known,  and  by  all 
respected.  His  testimony  confirms  Mr.  Leeser's,  no  less  than  that  of 
every  Hebrew  we  have  been  able  to  consult 

**  The  black  Jews  of  Malabar  are  not  descendants  of  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob,  bat  are 
of  Hindoo  origin.  At  Cochin,  there  are  two  distinct  communities  of  Jews:  one,  white,  was 
originally  settled  at  Cranganor,  but  when  the  Portuguese  became  too  powerful  on  that  coast 
(a,  d.  1600  to  1690)  remoTed  to  Cochin.  These  Jews  have  been  residents  in'  India  consider- 
ably above  1000  years,  but  still  retain  their  Jewish  cast  of  features,  and,  though  of  dark 
complexion,  are  not  black.  They  never  intermarry  with  the  second  community,  also  Jews, 
but  black,  of  Hindoo  origin,  and,  according  to  tradition,  originally  bondmen,  but  convert^ 
and  manumitted  some  800  yiears-  ago.  Though  of  the  same  religion,  the  two  races  are,  and 
keep  distinct  In  the  interior  of  Africa,  many  Negroes  are  found  who  profess  to  be  Jews, 
practise  circumcision,  and  keep  the  Sabbath.  These  are  held  to  be  the  descendants  of 
slayes  who  were  converted  by  their  Jewish  masters,  and  then  manumitted.  All  the  Jews 
in  the  interior  of  Africa  who  are  of  really  Jewish  descent,  as,  for  instance,  in  Timbuctoo, 
the  Desert  of  Sahara,  &c.,  though  of  dark  complexion,  are  not  black,  and  retain  the  charac- 
teristic cast  of  features  of  their  race  —  so  they  do  likewise  in  China. 

-J.  C.  Norr,  M.  D.,  MobUe."  " Y°^"'  *«•  ^'  ^'  ^^=^- 

We  think  it  is  now  shown  satisfactorily  that  the  "Black  Jews"  of 
India  are  not  Jews  by  race,  any  more  than  the  Negro  converts  to  Ju- 
daism known  to  exist  at  Timbuctoo,  or  the  many  Moorish  adherents 
to  the  Hebrew  faith  scattered  throughout  the  States  of  Barbaiy. 
There  are  authors  living  who  insist  that  the  aborigines  of  our  Ameri- 
can continent  are  lineal  descendants  of  the  lost  ten  tribesj  which  have 
run  so  wild  in  our  woods  as  to  be  no  longer  recognizable !  Other 
examples  of  Jewish  physical  transformation  have  been  alleged,  but 
they  are  even  less  worthy  of  credit  than  the  preceding.  The  Jews 
of  Abyssinia,  or  FalashaSy  as  they  are  called,  may  be  noticed.  They 
do  not  present  the  Jewish  physiognomy,  but  are,  doubtless,  composed 
of  mixed  bloods,  Arabian  with  African,  and  converts.  Before  us 
lies  a  pamphlet  by  Dr.  Charles  Beee,  the  very  erudite  Abyssinian 
traveller.®*  This  essay  was  read  on  the  8th  of  February,  1848,  before 
the  Syro-Egyptian  Society  of  London,  and  Dr.  Beke's  standing  as  an 
orientalist  requires  no  comment.  His  information  was  obtained 
from  the  Falashas  themselves;  his  opinion  formed  in  presence  of 
the  speakers.  * 

«  There  is,  howeyer,  no  reason  for  imagining  that  these  Israelites  of  Abyssinia,  who  are 
known  in  that  conntrybj  the  name  of  FdUuhaa,  are,  as  a  people,  the  lineal  descendants  of 
any  of  the  tribes  of  Israel.  Their  peculiar  language,  which  they  still  retain,  differs  entirely 
from  the  Syro- Arabian  class  to  which  the  Ethiopic  and  Amharic,  as  well  as  the  Hebrew  and 
Arabic^  belong,  and  is  cognate  with,  and  closely  allied  to,  the  existing  dialects  spoken  by  the 

Digitized  by 

Google 

PHYSICAL    HISTORY    OF    THE    JEWS,  123 

A*gaiis  of  Lasts  and  the  A'ganmider :  a  circumstance  affording  a  strong  argument  in  sup- 
port of  the  opinion  that  all  these  people  are  descended  from  an  aboriginal  race,  which  has 
been  forced  to  gire  way  before  the  advances  of  a  younger  people  from  the  opposite  shores 
of  the  Red  Sea — first  in  Tigr^,  and  subsequently  in  the  countries  adjacent  to  B&b-el 
Mandeb.  * 

"It  is  not  till  about  the  tenth  century  of  the  Christian  era  thi^t  we  possess  any  his- 
tory of  the  Israelites  of  Abyssinia,  as  a  separate  people ;  and  even  then  the  particulars 
respecting  them,  which  are  to  be  gathered  from  the  annals  of  the  country  as  given  by 
Bruce,  must,  in  the  earlier  portions  at  least,  be  received  with  great  caution." 

Bruce,  in  the  second  volume  of  his  Travels,  gives  an  interesting 
account  of  this  people.  He  regards  them  really  as  Jews,  but  expresses 
sundry  doubts,  and  thinks  the  question  must  be  determined  by  fixture 
philological  researches.  Such  researches  have  been  made  since  his 
day,  and  the  decision  of  Beke  is  recorded  above.  Even  Prichard  did 
not  credit  Bruce's  narrative. 

The  history  of  the  ten  tribes  affords  also  conclusive  evidence  of  the 
influence  of  Jewish  intermixtures  with  alien  races.  In  the  eighth  cen- 
tury B.  c,  they  were  conquered,  and  carried  captive,  by  Tiglathpilesar 
and  Shalmanasar,  into  the  north-western  parts  of  the  Assyrian  empire ; 
their  places  being  supplied  by  foreign  colonists  fi^om  that  country. 
These,  with  a  few  remaining  Israelites,  formed  the  Samaritans  of  after 
times ;  but  the  ten  tribes  have  been  scattered,  and  most  of  them  lost 
by  Assyrian  amalgamations,  or  absorption  into  cognate  Chaldeean 
tribes. 

*<  The  Affghans,  as  before  remarked,  bear  strong  marks  of  the  Jewish  type,  and  are 
doubtless  descended  from  the  ten  tribes.  .  .  .  The  Affghans  have  no  resemblance  to  the 
Tartars  who  surround  them,  in  person,  habits,  or  language.  Sir  William  Jones  (and  this 
opinion  is  now  preyalent)  is  inclined  to  believe  that  their  descent  may  be  traced  to  the 
Israelites,  and  adds,  that  the  best-informed  Persian  historians  haTe  adopted  the  same 
opinion.  The  Affghans  hare  traditions  among  themseWes  which  render  it  Tery  probable 
that  this  is  the  just  account  of  their  origin.  Many  of  their  families  are  distinguished  by 
names  of  Jewish  tribes,  though,  since  their  conversion  to  Islathf  they  conceal  their  descent 
with  the  most  scrupulous  care ;  and  the  whole  is  confirmed  by  the  circumstance  that  the 
Pushto  has  so  near  an  affinity  with  the  Chaldaic  that  it  may  justly  be  regarded  as  a  dialect 
of  that  tongue.    They  are  now  confounded  with  the  Arabs.  "^2 

This  quotation  is  a  fiair  specimen  of  the  fabulous  ethnography  cur- 
rent among  orthodox  litterateurs  of  our  day.  There  is  no  Biblical 
or  historical  basis  for  the  first  assumption :  the  second  is  a  misappre- 
hension, attributing  to  Judaism  that  which  is  due  to  Islamism  in  the 
last  1000  years ;  and  the  third  is  explained  by  linguistic  importations, 
Persic  and  Arabian ;  because  the  Pvshto  is  a  Medo-Persian  branch  of 
Indo-European  languages.  Prichard  himself  treats  Affghan  derivation 
from  the  Israelites  with  a  sneer®  —  but  the  reader  is  referred  to  oui 
Supplement  for  further  citations  on  the  subject,  fix)m  the  works  of 
thorough  orientalists,  who  unite  in  testifying  that  the  Semitic  element 
in  Affghanistan,  out  of  the  synagogues,  is  exclusively  Arabian. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

124 

PHYSICAL    HISTOBY    OP    THE    JEWS. 

Fio.  18.  The  portrait  of  Dost-Mohammed* 

blends  Semitic  features  with  those 
of  the  true  Affghan  ;  and  suffices  to 
illustrate  the  similitudes  perceived 
by  tourists  who,  partial  to  a  theory 
of  the  "ten  tribes*"  journey  into 
Tartaiy,  have  been  blinded  to  the 
palpable  diversities  of  osteological 
structure,  which  even  Arab  blood 
has  not  obliterated. 

"We  have  thus  gone  over  the  phy- 
sical history  of  the  Jewish  race ;  and, 
although  the  argument  is  very  far 
from  being  exhausted,  we  think 
enough  has  been  said  to  satisfy  any 
unprejudiced  mind  that  this  species 
has  preserved  its  peculiar  type  from 
the  time  of  Abraham  to  the  present  day,  or  through  more  than  one 
hundred  generations;  and  has  therefore  transmitted  directly  to  us 
the  features  of  Noah's  family,  which  preceded  that  of  Abraham,  ac- 
cording to  the  so-termed  Mosaic  account,  by  only  ten  generations. 

If,  then,  the  Jewish  race  has  preserved  the  type  of  its  forefathers  for 
3500  years,  in  all  climates  of  the  earth,  and  under  all  forms  of  govern- 
ment—through extremes  of  prosperity  and  adversity — ^if,  too,  we  add  to 
all  tjiis  the  recently  developed  facts  (which  cannot  be  negatived),  that 
the  Tartars,  the  Negroes,  the  Assyrians,  the  Hindoos,  the  Egyptians, 
and  others,  existed,  2000  years  before  the  Christian  era,  ai  distinct  a$ 
now;  where,  we  may  ask,  is  to  be  found  the  semblance  of  a  scientific 
argument  to  sustain  the  assumption  of  a  common  Jewish  origin 
for  every  species  of  mankind  ? 

Accounts  of  the  Oipsies  offer  such  curious  analogies  with  those 
of  the  Israelites,  that  it  may  not  be  out  of  place  to  add  a  word  respect- 
ing them. 

**  Both  haT6  had  an  Exodus ;  both  are  exiles,  and  dispersed  among  the  gentiles,  by  whom 
they  are  hated  and  despised,  and  whom  they  hate  and  despise,  under  the  names  of  Busneea 
and  Goyim ;  both,  though  speaking  the  language  of  the  gentiles,  possess  a  peculiar  tongue, 
which  the  latter  do  not  understand ;  and  both  possess  a  peculiar  cast  of  countenance ^  by  which 
they  may  be  without  difficulty  dittinguished  from  all  other  nations  ;  but  with  these  points  the 
similarity  terminates.  The  Israelites  haye  a  peculiar  religion,  to  which  they  are  fanati- 
cally attached ;  the  Romas  (Gipsies)  have  none.  The  Israelites  have  an  authentic  history ; 
the  Gipsies  have  no  history — they  do  not  e^en  know  the  name  of  their  original  C9untry." 

This  isolated  race  is  involved  in  mystery,  owing  to  absence  of  tradi- 
tions ;  though,  from  their  physical  type,  language,  &c.,  it  is  conjectured 
that  the  Gipsies  came  fi^m  some  part  of  India,  but  at  what  time,  and 

Digitized  by 

Google 

PHYSICAL    HISTOBT    OF    THE    JEWS.  126 

why,  cannot  now  be  determined.  It  has  been  said  that  they  fled 
from  the  extenninating  sword  of  the  great  Tartar  conqueror,  Timiir 
Leng  (Tamerlane),  who  ravaged  India  in  1408-'9  a.  d.  ;  but  there  will 
be  found,  in  Borrow's  work,  very  good  reason  for  beUeving  that  they 
might  have  migrated,  at  a  much  earlier  period,  north,  amongst  the 
Sclavonians,  before  they  entered  Germany  and  other  countries  where 
we  first  trace  them.  However,  we  know  with  certainty  that,  in  the 
beginning  of  the  fifteenth  centuiy  (about  the  time  of  Timur's  con-, 
quest),  they  appeared  in  Germany,  and  were  soon  scattered  over 
Europe,  as  far  as  Spain.  They  arrived  in  France  on  the  17th  of 
August,  1427  A.  D.  Their  number  now,  in  all,  has  been  estimated  at 
about  700,000,  and  they  are  scattered  over  most  countries  of  the 
habitable  globe  —  Europe,  Asia,  Africa,  South  America,  and  some 
few  in  North  America.  "  Their  tents  are  pitched  on  the  heaths  of 
Brazil  and  the  ridges  of  the  Himalaya  hills ;  and  their  language  is 
heard  in  Moscow  and  Madrid,  in  London  and  Stamboul."  ■*' Their 
power  of  resisting  cold  is  truly  wonderful,  as  it  is  not  unconamon  to 
find  them  encamped  in  the  midst  of  the  snow,  in  slight  canvass  tents, 
'  where  the  temperature  is  25°  to  30°  below  the  freezing  point  accord- 
ing to  Eeaumur ; "  while,  on  the  other  hand,  they  withstand  the  sultry 
climes  of  Africa  and  India.®* 

The  Gipsies  are  the  most  prominent  of  numerous  and  diverse  tribes 
diffused  in  Uttle  groups  over  the  four  continents,  to  whom  Priehard's 
term  "AJlophylian  races"  would  properly  apply.  A  list  might 
be  made  of  them ;  their  occurrence  in  islands,  remote  valleys  and 
naountain-fastnesses,  or  even  amid  dense  populations,  being  fi^r  more 
firequent  than  is  generally  supposed.  In  the  absence  of  all  record  beyond 
that  of  modem  days,  (their  existence  known  only  by  their  discovery,) 
we  refrain  from  the  labor  of  enumeration,  with  the  sole  remark,  that 
to  us  they  all  are  mementos  of  the  permanence  of  type,  athwart  vicis- 
situdes certainly  endured,  but  unrecorded  by  themselves :  each  being 
a  relic  of  some  primitive  type  of  man,  generally  displaced  from  its 
geographical  centre  of  creation,  that,  having  served  in  days  of  yore 
the  purposes  of  the  Creator,  is  now  abandoned  (with  so  many  others, 
now  lost  like  the  Cruanehe%)  to  its  fiate,  scarcely  affording  history  sufli- 
cient  for  an  epitaph.* 

But  it  is  time  to  illustrate  the  subject  monumentally;  and  the  words 
of  an  illustrious  countryman  will  usher  in  the  fects  with  which  none 
are  better  conversant  than  himself.  After  alluding  to  changes 
.wrought  by  climate  on  domestic  animals  and  plants,  Db.  Pickering 
maintains :  — 

"  Not  80  howeTer  with  the  human  family.  Notwithstanding  the  mixtures  of  race  daring 
two  centnries,  no  one  has  remarked  a  tendency  to  a  development  of  a  new  race  in  tli« 

Digitized  by 

Google 

126 

PHYSICAL    BISTORT    OP    THE    JEWS. 

United  States.  In  Arabia,  where  the  mixtures  are  more  complicated,  and  have  been  going 
on  from  time  immemorial,  the  result  cU>es  not  appear  to  have  been  different  On  the  Egyp- 
tian monuments,  I  was  unable  to  detect  any  change  in  the  races  of  the  human  family. 
Neither  does  written  history  afford  evidence  of  the  extinction  of  one  physical  race  of  men, 
or  of  the  dcYelopment  of  another  previously  unknown.  "87 

Proceeding  retrogressively,  and  closely  as  the  theme  can  be  eluci- 
dated, we  present  the  only  bas-relief  which,  throughout  the  entire 
range  of  hieroglyphical  or  cuneiform  discovery  hitherto  published,  in 
all  probability  represents  JewB. 

YiQ.  14. 

(2  King9  zviii.  14 ;  haiah  zzzvi.  2.    About  700  b.  o.) 

"  Jewish  Captives  from  Lachish"  (Fig.  14),  disinterred  from  Senna- 
cherib's palace  at  Kouyunjik,  is  the  title  given  to  the  original  by 
its  discoverer,*  who  says  — 

**  Here,  therefore,  was  the  actual  picture  of  the  taking  of  Lachish,  the  city,  as  we  know 
f^om  the  Bible,  besieged  by  Sennacherib,  when  he  sent  his  generals  to  demand  tribute  of 
Hezekiah,  and  which  he  had  captured  before  their  return.  .  .  .  The  captives  were  undoubt- 
edly Jews  —  their  physiognomy  was  strikingly  indicated  in  the  sculptures;  but  they  had 
been  stripped  of  their  ornaments  and  their  fine  raiment,  and  were  left  barefooted  and  half- 
dothed." 

Allowance  made  for  reduction  to  so  small  a  scale,  the  ethnological 

character  of  this  bas-relief  is  not  so 
strikingly  effective  in  respect  to  true 
Hebrew  physiognomy,  as  it  is  (when 
compared  with  other  Chaldsean  effi- 
gies) to  show  the  pervading  cha- 
racter of  many  Syrian  and  Meso- 
potamian  races  2500  years  ago. 

These  JElamites  (Fig.  15).  pro- 
bably, if  not  Arabs,  ^^  loading  a 
<?am«i,"^  belong  to  the  same  age, 
and  supply  one  variety ;  while  here 

Fio.  15. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

PHYSICAL    HISTORY    OF    THE    JEWS. 

127 

^^ Captives  employed  ly  Assyrians'*^ 
(Fig.  16),  furnish  another. 

Divested  of  beard,  other  "  cap- 
ttves  in  a  cart*'^  (Fig.  17)  portray 
characteristics  verging  toward  an 
upland,  or  Armenian^  expression; 
at  the  same  time  that  these  upon 

Pio.  16. 

Fio.  17. 

Fig.  19. 

f^i^^ 

an  undated  "Babylonian  cy-    *  Pia.  18. 

Under"  « (Fig.  18),  too  minute 
in  size  for  ethnographical  pre- 
cision, indicate  more  of  wild 
Arab  lineaments:    an  infer- 
ence which  the  low-land  site 
of  Babylon,  where  Mr.  Layard 
found  it,,  may  justify.     If  we 
contrast  these  last  with  (Fig.  • 
19),  anHgypiian  artistic  idea  of  u  "Canaanite" 
(Kanaka  — 6ar6amn),«  the  prevalence  of  this  so- 
called  Semitic  type  from  the  Euphrates,  through 
Palestine,  to  the  eastern  confines  of  the  Nile,  be- 
comes  exemplified,  back  to  the  twelfth  and  fif- 
teenth  centuries  b.  c,  as  thoroughly  as  ocular  ob- 
servation can  realize  similar  features  in  the  same 
regions  at  the  present  day. 

Each  "  canon  of  art,"  «  in  Egypt  and  in  Assyria, 
was  dogmatically  enforced  (let  it  be  remembered) 
upon  principles  entirely  diflFerent:  the  former,  or 
anterior,  being  primitive,  and  dependent  rather 

upon  its  relations  to  graphical  expression,  more  . 

rigidly  approximates  to  the  ante-monumental  age  of  "picture-writing." 
In  the  latter,  we  behold  a  developed,  and  consequently  more  florid, 
style  of  art;  which,  if  nothing  else  existed  to  demonstrate  the  truth 

Digitized  by 

Google 

128 

PHYSICAL    HISTORY    OF    THE    JEWS. 

of  this  inherent  law  of  artistic  progression,  would  of  itself  classify 
monumental  Assyria  as,  clironologically,  a  swcedaneum  of  Egypt; 
and  vindicate  De  Longp6rier's  conclusions  of  Assyrian  modemness, 
no  less  than  Rawlinson's  acknowledgments  of  Egyptian  antiquity.^ 

The  combined  action  of  art  and  of  the  prevalence,  in  and  around 
Mesopotamia,  of  a  preponderating  type  which  approaches  the  beau- 
ideal  of  Semitic  humanity,  may  be  seen  by  comparing  the  captives  of 
Assyrian  triumphs  with  the  conmion  soldiery  of  Ninevite  armies. 
Thus,  this  Syrian  (Fig.  20),  with  his  leathern  scuU-cap,  whom  a  pass- 

Fio.  21. 

Fig.  20. 

Steiak  Captive.9« 

ASSTBIAK  SOLDIBSB.^ 

age  in  Herodotus  identifies  with  the  people  "Milyse,"*  or  else  of  ad- 
jacent Cilicia,  could  not  otherwise  be  distinguished  from  common 
Assyrian  spearmen  (Fig.  21)  attacking  a  stronghold  which,  if  not  in 
Samaria,  belongs  to  the  same  mountainous  region.  Both  drawings 
are  from  Khorsabad,  and  the  expeditions  of  Sargan,  late  in  the  eighth 
century  b.  c. 

But  it  is  in  the  likenesses  of  the  patricians  and  of  royalty  wherein, 
partly  owing  to  more  pains-taking  treatment  by  artists,  and  partly  to  a 
higher  caste  of  race,  that  the  pure  Assyrian  type  becomes  vigorously 
"  scolpito.'' 

Sargan*s  minister,  (Fig.  22)  probably  his  Vizeer^  displays  the  same 
noble  blood  as  the  King  (Fig.  28)  himself.* 

Above  all  the  portraits  of  Ninevite  sovereign^  discovered,  that  of 
Sargan  is  the  most  interesting ;  Ist,  because  it  was  the  first  royal 
likeness  unearthed  from  Khorsabad  byBoTTA;^**  2ndly,  because  it 
was  the  first  whose  cuneatic  legends  were  ascribed  to  the  besieger  of 
A%hdod  by  a  most  felicitous  guess  of  Lowenstern  ;  ^^  and  8dly,  be- 
cause it  was  the  first  identified  of  those  sublime  sculpture?  that, 
rescued  from  perdition  by  French  munificence,  arrived  in  Europe, 

Digitized  by 

Google 

FHYSIGAL  HISTORY   OF   THE   JEWS, 

Fia.28. 

129 

Th»  YmiB. 

TBI  KlHO. 

Fzo.  24. 

and  once  again  tower  majestically  in  the  Louvre  Museum/"*  after 
some  2515  years  of  oblivion. 

We  present  a  rough  tracing  (Fig.  24)  of  Botta's  earliest  lithographs, 
wherein  the  head-dress  is  tinted  red,  like 
the  original  bas-reliefl 

It  was  established,  twenty  years  ago, 
by  RosBLLiNi,  that,  in  Egyptian  art,  the 
andro-sphinxes  (human  head  on  lion's 
body,  symbolical  of  royalty,)  always  bear 
the  likeneHU  bi  the  kings  or  queens  in 
whose  reign  they  were  chiselled.  Thus, 
were  the  features  of  the  Great  Sphinx  at 
the  pyramids  of  Memphis  adequately 
preserved,  we  should  probably  behold 
the  lost  portrait  of  AAHMES,  founder 
of  the  XVnth  dynasty,  in  the  seven- 
teenth century  b.  c. ;  to  whom,*  under 
the  Greek  form  of  Amam^  a  tradition  in 
Pliny's  time  still  attributed  this  colossus.'® 
The  symbol  "sphinx,"  by  the  Greeks 
17 

Saroah,  (ItaidKy  kz.  1). 
B.  C.  710  to  668. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

180 

PHYSICAL    HISTOBY    OF    THE    JEWS. 

Fio.  26. 

reputed  to  be  female^  and  by  Wilkinson  to  be  always  male  in  Egypt, 
has  the  body  of  a  lion  when  {e.  g.  in  the  splendid  granite  Sphinx  of 
Bamses  at  the  Louvre,)  it  typifies  the  king;  or  of  a  lioness,  (as  in 
Maut-hem-wa's  at  Turin,)  when  the  queen.  Another  rule  of  Egyp- 
tian art  is,  that  the  human  fiujes  of  Divinities  wear  the  portrait  of  the 
reigning  monarch.  Now,  in  Assyrian  sculpture  —  an  ofehoot  of 
Nilotic  art — the  same  rules  hold  good.  Those  gigantic  human-heade4 
buUs,  and  those  superb  winged-gods,  of  scenes  in  which  human-faced 
deities  are  introduced,  assume  the  portraits  of 
the  sovereigns  in  whose  age  they  were  carved : 
truths  easily  verified  by  comparison  of  tie 
folio  plates  of  Flandin  or  of  Layakd.  In 
consequence,  regretting  the  necessity  for  reduc- 
tion of  size,  we  submit,  fix)m  one  of  the  winged- 
bulls  at  Paris'^  the  likeness  (Fig.  25)  of  him 
whose  cuneatic  legend  reads:  —  "SARGON", 
great  king,  puissant  king,  king  of  the  kings  of 
the  land  of  Assour*' — Ashurj  or  Assyria — of 
whom  ISALAH  relates  —  "In  the  year  that 
Tartan  came  unto  Ashdod  (when  Saroon,  the 
king  of  Assyria^  sent  him,)  and  fought  against 

Saboom. 

Fio.  26.W8 

Fio.27. 

SlNKAOmBIB  — B.  0.  700. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

PHYSICAL    HISTOBY    OF    THE    JEWS; 

131 

Fig.  2a 

Aslidod,    and   took   it;"  events    of  the    seventh    century  before 
Christ. 

To  complete  the  series,  we  add  a  royal  head,  (Fig.  26)  of  the  same 
times,  but  name  unknown  to  us,  surmounting  a  winged-lion  ;  its  only 
peculiarity  being  the  ponderous  nose. 

Not  less  curiously  valuable,  whether  in  its  historical,  biblical,  or 
ethnographic  associations,  is  the  portrait  (Fig.  27,)  of  Sargan's  son — 
"  Sennacherib,  on  his  throne  before  Lachish."** 

We  have  already  beheld  (Fig.  14)  his  Jewish  captives.  Mr.  La- 
yard  unfolds,  through  translation  of  this  king's  cuneiform  inscrip- 
tions, points  of  the  grandest  scriptural  interest  ^^ — "Hezekiah,  king 
of  Judah,"  says  the  Assyrian  king,  "  who 
liad  not  submitted  to  my  authority,  forty- 
six  of  his  principal  cities,  and  fortresses 
and  villages  depending  upon  them,  of  which 
I  took  no  account,  I  captured,  and  carried 
away  their  spoil.  I  %hut  wp  (?)  himself 
within  Jerusalem,  his  capital  city." 

We  commenced  at  the  seventh,  and  now 
advance  into  the  eighth  century,  b.  c. 

A  "Bas-relief  (Fig.  28)  representing 
PuL,  or  TiGLATH-Pileser,"  from  Nimroud,^" 
places  us  about  the  year  b.  c.  760. 

Here  the  same  high  type  is  preserved  in 
the  features  of  the  king,  his  bearded 
chariot-driver,  and  his  depilated  eunuch: 
while  inscriptions  that  contain  the  name 
of  "Menahem,  king  of  Israel,"  tributary 
to  Assyria,^"  evince  the  intimate  relations 
already  existing  between  that  emigrant 
branch  of  the  Abrdhamidee  domiciliated  in 
Jud£Ba,  and  the  indigenous  stem  still  flou- 
rishing in  Chaldfiea,  whence  they  had  issued 
about  1000  years  before.  The  same  type 
is  carried  back  to  the  tenth  century  b.  c, 
by  this  copy  (Fig.  29)  of  the  statue  of 
Sardanapalus  I.^^;  whose  era  falls  about 
930  years  before  ours. 

"  On  the  breast  is  an  inscription  nearly 
in  these  words : — ^after  the  names  and  tities 
of  the  king,  *The  conqueror  from  the 
upper  passage  of  the  Tigris  to  Lebanon 
and  the  Great  Sea>  who  all  countries,  from 

Fig.  29. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

132  PHTSIGAL   BISTORT   07   THS   JE^S. 

tiie  rising  of  the  son  to  the  going  down  thereof  lias  reduced  tmder 
his, authority.'  The  statae  was,  therefore,  probably  raised  after  his 
retom  from  the  campaign  in  Syria" — where,  the  l^fnansy  3idonian$y 
Arvaditesj  and  others^  acknowledged  his  soaerainty. 

An  epoch  has  now  been  reached  that  is  more  ancient  liian  the 
registiy  of  Hebrew  annals,^  by  a  century,  peihi^ps ;  and  hence  liiey 
cease  to  tlirow  light,  for  times  antmor  to  Solomon,  upon  nationalities 
outside  the  topographical  boundaries  of  Palestine.  But,  where  Ju- 
dffian  chronicles  are  oUent,  when  cuneiform  records  &lter,  the  hiero- 
glyphics of  Egypt  supply  abundance  of  ethnological  information,  and 
enable  us  to  demonstrate  the  perpetual  indelibility  of  this  (let  us  call 
it,  for  mere  convenience  sake,)  ChaUaie  type.  Already,  "half-breeds," 
between  Nilotic  and  Euphratic  populations,  must  haye  been  numerous. 
Palestine  was  the  neutral-ground  of  contact ;  and  Solomon's  wedding 
with  the  "  daughter  of  Pharaoh"  shows  that  Abrahamic  royalty  only 
followed  a  matrimonial  practice  familiar  to  the  Israelites*  since  that 
patriarch's  first  visit  to  Egypt ;  which  duly  received  Mosaic  sanetioi^ 
in -the  law — ^' Abhor  not  the  MiT^RI  {Egyptiavi) : "  ^  benignantiy  pro- 
>  viding  for  its  prolific  consequences  by  adding  the  clause  —  "The 
children  that  are  bom  of  them,  at  the  tidrd  generation,  shall  enter  into 
the  assembly  of  leHOuaH." 

Mr.  Birdi  was  the  first  to  establish,  fiv«  yesni  ago,"*  the  intimate 
conneidons  between  Egypt  and  Assyria,  in  the  tenth  eentuiy  b.  c.  ; 
the  veiy  age  of  Solomon's  marriage  with  an  Egyptian  princess,  and 
of  the  punishment  inflicted,  about  971-8,  by  Shbshonk  upon  Jeru- 
salem, "  in  the  fifth  year  of  Rehoboam."  The  kings  of  Egypt  during 
the  XXnd  or  Buba$tite  dynasty,  were  proved,  by  tins  erudite  palseo- 
grapher,to  bear  not  Egyptian,  but  AB9firian  names :  thus,  Shbshonk, 
Shishaky  was  assimilated  to  the  "  Sesacea"  of  Babylon ;  Osoreon  to  Se- 
rakj  Saraeu9 ;  the  son  of  Osorkon  IE.  was  shown  to  be  a  NIM-ROT, 
Nimrod  ;  and  the  appellative  Takblloth,  TKLT,  of  the  hieroglyphics, 
to  contain  DiGLaTA,  which  is  the  same  river  Tigris  that  is  embodied 
in  the  royal  Assyrian  name  of  TiGLAin-PUeier, 

Here  is  a  mute  witness  of  those  events  and  those  times  —  GOT- 
THOTHI-^wi*  (Fig.  80),  "  Chief  of  the  Artificers,"  at  Thebes,"*  who 
died,  according  to  inscriptions  on  his  cerements,  in  the  "  Year  X"  of 
the  reign  of  King  Osorkon  m. ;  that  is,  he  was  alive  in  the  year  900 
B.  c. !  His  complete  mummj/  lies  in  the  Anatomical  Museum  of  the 
University  of  Louisiana,  New  Orleans ;  and  we  shall  describe  it  in 
the  proper  place:  our  object  at  present  being  merely  to  indicate 
an  atom  of  the  .  ethnological  abundance  that  Egypt  and  Assyria 
supply.  And  the  reader  will  realize  the  harmony  of  these  archaeolo- 
gical researches,  when  he  beholds  the  portrait  of  the  king  (Fig.  81)  in 

Digitized  by 

Google 

PHYSICAL    HISTORY   OP    THE   JEWS.  133 

Pio.80.  Pig.  81. 

OsoEXOH  nLUA 

whose  reign  this  mummy  was  made.  LeeMans  published  a  date  of 
the  IXth,  and  Buksen  one  of  this  Pharaoh's  Xlth  regnal  year.  The 
legend  on  tbe  munimy  has  added  another  of  his  Xth. 

Several  coincidences  have  been  ingeniously  put  together  by  Mr. 
Sharps  ;  "•  but,  while  we  refer  to  Layard's  Second  ExpeditUmj^^''  for 
realizations  of  the  almost-prophetic  science  of  Birch,  the  latter's 
opportune  discovery  of  the  relationship  of  Ramses  XTV.,  by  marriage, 
to  the  daughter  of  the  Semitic  "  King  of  Ba%hanj'  ***  is  merely  noted 
here,  because  it  will  be  elucidated  under  the  chapter  on  Egypt  In 
the  following  Asiatic  prisoners,  recorded  among  the  foreign  conquests 
of  Amunoph  HI.,  at  Soleb,***  there  is  no  difficulty  of  recognizing — 

Pig.  82. 

1.  P€i4ar^na^  Padan-Aram;  2.  A-n^-rUj  Ashuvj  Assyria;  8.  ii-rw- 
ka-muhi,  Carchemish.  The  names  of  SaenkaVy  Shinar,  and  Naha- 
rainoj  in  Hebrew  Naharaim,  the  "two  rivers,"  or  Mesopotamia, 

Digitized  by 

Google 

134  PHYSICAL    HISTOBY    OF    THE    JEWS. 

hieroglyplied  in  the  same  Pharaoh's  reign,  have  long  been  familial 
to  Egyptologists ;  and  thus  Assyrian  data  and  connexions  with  the 
Nile  are  positively  carried  back  to  the  XVIIth  dynasty,  and  the  six- 
teenth century  b.  c. 

But  although,  amid  the  ruins  of  Babylon  itself,  nothing  has  been 
yet  disclosed  of  an  earlier  date  than  iN'EBUCHADKBZZAB,  b.  c.  604 ;  and 
no  genealogical  list,  not  to  say  contemporaneous  monument,  older 
than  B.  c.  1250,^^  at  IJineveh;  hieroglyphics  of  an  ancestor  of  Amu- 
NOPH  rH.,  viz.,  Thotmes  HL,  prove  the  existence  of  both  Babylon  and 
Nineveh,  as  tributaries  to  the  Pharaohs,  at  least  one  generation  earlier, 
or  about  1600  years  b.  c."^  This  king,  in  an  inscription  more  recently 
translated  by  Birch,  is  said  to  have  "  erected  his  tablet  in  Naharaina 
(Mesopotamia),  for  the  extension  of  the  frontiers  of  Kami  (Egypt)."  ^ 
The  sixteenth  century  b.  c,  according  to  Lepsius's  system  of  chro- 
nology, touches  the  advent  of  Abraham  and  later  sojourn  of  his  grand- 
son Jacob's  children  in  the  land  of  Goshen.  Relations  of  war,  com- 
merce, and  intermarriage,  between  the  people  of  the  Nile  and  those 
from  the  Tigris  and  Euphrates,  in  these  times,  were  incessant.  Semitic 
elements  (as  we  shall  see  in  the  gallery  of  royal  Egyptian  portraits 
further  on)  flowed  from  Asia  into  Africa  in  unceasing  streams.    The 

Queens  of  Egypt,  especially,  betray 
the  commingling  of  the  Chaldaie 
type  with  that  indigenous  to  the 
lower  valley  of  the  Nile;  and,  al- 
though we  shall  resume  these  evi- 
dences, the  reader  will  recognize  the 
blending  of  both  types  in  the  linea- 
ments of  Queen  Aahmes-Neferabi 
(Fig.  38),  wife  of  Amunoph  L,  son 
of  the  founder  of  the  AViitii  dynasty, 
/     ^..<-r-rr^        \    h-^r-^^  about  1671  b.  c.    Hers  is  the  most 

.-'^'''^^  \  \  I        i^/TTTy^    ancient  of  regal  feminine  likenesses 

identified ;  ^  and  of  it  Morton  wrote, 
"Perhaps  the  most  Bd>rew  portrait  on  the  monuments  is  that  of 
Aahmes-Nofre-Ari."  ^ 

Having  thus  traced  back  the  Cfhaldaic  type  into  Egypt  before  the 
arrival  of  Abraham,  first  historical  ancestor  of  the  Jews,  we  have 
proved  the  perpetuity  of  its  existence,  through  Egyptian  and  Assyrian 
records,  during  8500  years  of  time,  down  to  our  day.  But  the 
Jewish  type  of  man  must  have  existed  in  Chaldsea  for  an  indefinite 
time  before  Abraham.  After  all,  he  was  merely  one  emigrant ;  and 
his  ancestral  stock,  at  1600  b.  c.*,  must  have  amounted  to  an  immense 
population.    We  hold,  without  hesitation,  that  2000  years  before 

Digitized  by 

Google 

PHYSICAL    HISTOBY    OF    THE    JEWS. 

135 

Abraham,  there  had  ahready  been  intermarriages  between  the  Chaldaie 
and  the  Egyptian  species.  No  ethnographer  but  will  perceive,  with 
us,  the  Jewish  cross  upon  Egyptians  of  the  IVth  Memphite  dynasty, 
8500  years  b.  c,  say  about- 5400  years  ago:  and  such  amalgamations 
must  then  have  been  far  more  ancient  Examine  the  following  — 
(Figs.  84,  85) :  we  shall  revert  to  them  by-and-by. 

Fio.  84.125 

Fio.  85. 

We  shall  yet  be  able  to  sketch  out  the  durability  of  the  cognate 
Arabian  race  2000  years  earlier  than  Ishmael,  son  of  Abraham,  when 
we  deal  with  Egyptian  primitive  relations  with  Asia;  and  as,  for 
thirty-five  centuries  (not  to  say  fifty-five,  when  the  Chaldaie  blood  first 
appears),  Jews  and  Arabs  have  been  monumentally  coexistent  and 
distinct  in  type,  therefore  the  demonstration  of  the  existence  of  the 
latter  people  5500  years  ago  will  naturally  imply  the  simultaneous 
presence  of  the  former  in  their  Mesopotamian  birth-place ;  although 
neither  from  Assyrian  nor  Hebrew  records  can  we  produce  annals  to 
that  effect — simply  because  such  chronicles,  if  any  were  kept,  have 
not  reached  our  modem  day. 

Before  quitting,  for  the  present,  Semitish  immigrations  into  Africa, 
we  may  allude  to  early  Phoenician  colonization  of  Barbary,  as  another 
prolific  source  of  comminglings  between  Chaldaie  and  Berber j  or  Ata- 
lantic,  types.  These  must  have  preceded,  by  centuries,  the  foundation 
of  Carthage,  estimated  at  b.  c.  878 ;  and,  in  those  days  (the  camel  not 
having  been  introduced  into  Africa  before  the  first  or  second  century 
B.  c),  the  Sahara  desert  being  absolutely  impassable,  the  Atalan- 
tid8B  of  the  Barbary  coast  held  no  communication  with  Negro  races 
of  inland  Africa.    The  subject  is  discussed  in  Part  IE.  of  this  volume. 

The  illiterate  advocates  of  a  pseudo-negrophilism,  more  ruinous  to 
the  Africans  of  the  United  States  than  the  condition  of  servitude  in 

Digitized  by 

Google 

136 

FHTSIOAL    HISTORY   OP    THE   JEWS. 

Fio.  86. 

which  they  thrive,  mTiltiplj,  and  are  happy,  have  actually  daimed 
St.  Augustiiie,  Eratosthenes,  Juba,  Hannibal,  and  other  great  men, 
as  historical  vouchers  for  the  p^ectibility  of  the  Negro  race,  because 
bom  in  Afiica !  It  might  hence  be  argued  that  ^'  birth  in  a  stable 
makes  a  man  a  horse."    We  submit  the  following  portraits. 

Eratosthenes^^  (Fig.  86),  bom  at  the  Greek 
colony  of  Cyrene,  on  the  coast  of  Barbary,  about 
276  B.  c.  What  more  perfect  sample  of  the 
Greek  historieal  type  could  be  desired  ? 

Hannibal*^  (Fig.  87),  son  of  Bamilcar  Bareoij 
bom  at  Carthage,  about  b.  o.  247.  The  highest 
*' Caucasian  "  type  is  so  strongly  marked  in  his 
face,  that,  if  his  father  was  a  Phoenico-Carthagi- 
nian,  one  would  suspect  that  his  mother,  as 
among  the  Ottomans  and  Persians  of  the  preeent 
day,  was  an  imported  white  slave,  or  other  fe- 
male of  the  purest  Japhetic  race. 

Fio.  87. 

Fio.  88. 

Fio.  89. 

JuBA^  (Fig;  88),  son  of  Eiempealy 
king  of  Numidia,  ascended  the 
throne  about  b.  c.  60.  If  not  Berber 
(and  we  have  no  means  of  compa- 
rison), the  Arab  type  predominates 
in  his  countenance;  and  that  this 
closely  approximated  to  the  trae 
Tyrian^  or  Phoenician,  is  evident 
by  comparing  it  with  the  features 
of  an  ancient  citizen  of  Tyre  (Fig. 
89),  figured  at  Thebes,  in  the  reign 

Digitized  by 

Google 

PHYSICAL    HISTORY    OT   THE    JEWS. 

137 

of  Kamses  HI.,  of  the  XXth  dyna3ty,  during  the  thirteenth  century 

Abundant  illustrations  of  the  permanence  of  type,  in  other  varieties 
of  Semitish  races,  will  be  given  in  due  course ;  but,  on  our  road  to 
Persia,  let  us  indicate  a  Syrian  form,  in  this  mountaineer  of  Lebanon^ 
(Fig.  40),  from  the  conquests  of  the  same  Ramses ;  and  contrast  it 
with  a  genuine  (huhite  Arabj  or  Himyarite^^  (Fig.  41),  who  appears 
in  the  tomb  of  Seti-Meneptha  L,  about  1400  years  b.  a 

Fio.  40. 

Fig.  41. 

Fio.  42. 

As  we  cross  through  Chaldsea,  we  again  encounter  (Fig.  42)  the 
true.  Jewish  type  in  the  land  of  its  origin.  A  full-length  figure  of 
this  individual  will  be  given  in  a 
succeeding  Chapter;  and  it  is  the 
more  curious,  inasmuch  as  we  be- 
hold in  its  design  an  Egyptian  art- 
ist's conception  of  a  Chaldee  during 
the  fifteenth  century  b.  c.  ;  that  is, 
about  500  years  before  any  cunei- 
form monuments  yet  found,  and  600 
years-before  any  Jewish  records,  now 
known,  were  inscribed  or  written. 

Persian  monumental   ethnogra- 
phy, (like  the  native,  the  Hebrew, 

and  the  Greek  chronicles  of  that  Iranian  land,)  can  but  commence 
with  Cyrus  ; — ^that  mighty  name,  which,  until  recent  hieroglyphical 
and  cuneatic  discoveries  threw  open  the  portals. of  ages  anterior, 
marked  the  grand  terminus  of  historical  knowledge  concerning 
Oriental  events  and  nations.  We  accompany  th0  following  series 
with  Rawlinson's  translation  of  the  Persepolitan  arrow-headed 
legends. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC 

188 

PHYSICAL    HISTOBY    OP    THE    JEWS. 

Fio.  48.  «I  am  Cyras,  the  King;   the 

Aoh»meniaii."  ^ 

Such  is  the  simple  epitaph 
of  sterling  greatness,  on 
the  ruined  pilasters  of  Mur- 
gh&b,  or  Parsagadasj  adja- 
.  cent  to  the  tomb  of  Cybus  : 
built  about  b.  c.  528. 

The  abraded  condition 
of  the  face  (Fig.  43)  en- 
ables us  merely  to  distin- 
guish that  high-class  type, 
which  the  grandson  of  a 
Mede  (Astyages)  and  a  Ly- 
dian  (Mandane,  sister  of 
Cbcesus),  and  the  son  of  a 
Pertianj  would  naturally 
present. 

Singularly  enough,  the 
effigy  wears  an  Egyptian 
(Kneph-Osiris)  head-dress ; 
which  confirms  Letronnb'b 
argument  of  the  very  inti- 
mate relations  between  Per- 
sia  and  Egypt,  before  the 
conquest  by  Cambyses.^ 

"  I  am  DariuB,  (Fig.  44)  the  great 
King,  the  King  of  Kings,  the  King 
of  Persia,  the  King  of  (the  depen- 
dent) provinces,  the  son  of  Hys- 
taspes,  the  grandson  of  Arsames, 
the  Aohsemenian."  13S 

We  see  Dabius  in  the 
attitude  of  uttering  that 
noble  address,  which  stands^ 
inscribed  on  the  vast  cu- 
neiform Tablet  of  BehUitUn, 
cut  about  482  b.  c. 

Bas-Bilibt  or  *<  Xerxes,  the  great  King,  the 

XiBXBS.  "^  King  of  Kings,  the  son  of  King 

Darius,  the  AchsBmenian."  ^ 

We  are  uncertain  whether  the  effigy  (Fig.  45)  be  not  that  of  his 
son,  Abtaxebxes:  but,  ethnologically,  the  point  is  immaterial;  for 
the  Persic  type  of  the  line  of  Achsemenes  is  rigorously  preserved  in 
these  sculptures  of  PersepoUs. 

Bas-Biusf  or  Ctbus.^^s 

Fio.  44. 

Fio.  45. 

Bas-Bslhf  or 
Darius.  138 

Digitized  by 

Google 

PHYSICAL   HISTORY   OP    THE   JEWS. 

139 

«*  This  is  the  face  (Fig.  46)  of  the  (Maxd»an)  servant  of  Ormuid,  of  the  god  Sapor, 
king  of  the  kings  of  the  Iranians  and  of  the  non-Iranians,  of  the  race  of  the  gods ;  son 
of  the  (Maidfloan)  serrant  of  Ormnsd  Ardethir^  king  of  the  kings  of  Iran,  of  the  race  of 
the  gods;  grandson  of  the  god  Babek^  king.''  i» 

Fio.  46. 

BOMAV. 

Sapob.i« 

This  Qreeh  version  of  the  trilinguar  inscription  carved  upon  Sha- 
poor's  horse  at  NakBhi-Re4Jeb,  near  Persepolis,  is  the  more  precious, 
because  it  served  to  Grotbpbnd,  1802,  the  same  purpose  that  the  tri- 
glyphic  RoBetta  Stone  answered  to  Young,  in  1816.  The  latter 
became  the  finger-post  to  Champollion  le  Jeune's  deciphering  of 
all  Egyptian  hieroglyphics ;  just  as  the  former  to  Rawlinson's  of  all 
cuneiform  writings. 

Our  heads,  however,  are  taken  from  the  bas-relief  of  the  same 
king  Shapoob,  Sapor,  at  Nakshi-Boustam :  where  a  Roman  suppliant, 
no  less  a  personage  than  the  captive  emperor  VALtoiAN,  kneels  in  vain 
hope  of  exciting  Persian  humanity.  The  scene  refers  to  events  of 
about  A.  D.  260 ;  when,  under  the  Sassanian  dynasty,  art  had  wofuUy 
declined.  The  contrast,  notwithstanding,  between  the  Persian  and 
the  Eoman,  is  here  preserved;  and, still  more  effectively  in  another 
tableau"*  at  Chapour. 

Among  the  prisoners  of  Darius  at  Behisttm,  the  nations  carved  on 
his  rock-hewn  sepulchre  at  Persepolis,  and  the  troops  supporting  the 
throne  of  Xerxes,  may  be  seen  many  varieties  of  the  Median,  Per- 
sian, and  Chaldsean  races ;  although,  in  the  latter  instances,  the  ab- 
sence of  names  prevents  identification :  but  this  son  of  the  desert, 
(Fig.  47)  of  the  age  of  Sapor,**^  affords  a  variant,  with  some  Arabian 
lineaments,  that  we  are  inclined  to  refer  to  BeloochistAn,  or  the 
Indian  side  of  the  Persian  Gulf. 

Still  nearer  to  the  Indus  do  we  assign  the  first  of  two  eflSgies  (Figs. 
48,  49)  painted  in  Egypt  about  1800  years  previously.    The  second 

Digitized  by 

Google 

HO  PHYSICAL   HISTOBT   OF   THE   JEWS. 

P40.  47.  Jio.  48. 

may  even/perhaps,  approach  the  Himalayaa  range.  They  are  from 
the  "  G];^nd  Procession "  of  Thotmbs  HI.,  in  the  sixteenth  century 
B.  c,  to  be  elucidated  hereinafter. 

He  (Fig.  48)  leads  an  elephant,  which,  like  that  on  the  Obelisk  of 
Nimroudy^*^  points  towards  Hindostanic  intercourse ;  and  his  features, 
surmounted  by  the  straw  hat,  are  peculiarly  Hindoo. 

The  other  (Fig.  49)  carries  an  elephant's  tooth,  at  the  same  time 
that  he  leads  a  bear — by  Morton  denominated  an  Urnu  Lahiatus — 
and  a  certain  Arian  cast  of  countenance  £EiTors  the  vague  geogra- 
phical  attribution  we  adopt  for  him. 

Finally,  to  establish  the  diversity^  of 
Asiatic  types,  in  every  age  parallel  with 
the  Jewish,  here  is  a  Tartar  (Fig.  60)  from 
the  conquests  of  Ramses  II.,*^  painted  at 
Aboosimbel  in  the  fourteenth  century  b.  c. 
His  £Etce  is  unmistakeable ;  as  are  those  of 
his  associates,  some  of  whom  wear  their 
hair  long,  in  the  same  tableau. 

The  question  of  the   "  Chinese*'   (un- 
known to  any  nation  west  of  the  Euphrates 
prior  to  the  Christian  era,)  has  been  set- 
tled in  our  Supplement;  and  it  suffices  here  to  note  that,  the  custom 

Fio.  60. 

r^^ 

Digitized  by 

Google 

THE    CAirCASIAK    TYPES,    ETC.  I41 

of  shaven  heads,  with  scalp-lock,  is  essentially  Tartar.  The  Chinese 
always  wore  their  hair  long  until  compelled  to  shave  their  heads  by 
the  present  dynasty  of  Mimtchou-Tartars  ;^^  and  the  Turkish  branch 
of  those  hordes  introduced  this  usage  in  the  modem  Levimt. 

Beader !  we  have  followed  the  Ohaldaie  type  fix>m  Mesopotamia  to 
Memphis;  and  thence,  via  Carthage,  through  Palestine,  Syri(^  Arabia, 
Assyria,  and  Persia,  .until  it  disappeared ;  when,  looking  towards  the 
Caspian  and  the  Indus,  we  descried  the  cradle-lands  of  Arian,  Tartar, 
and  Hindoo  races.  May  we  not  now  consider  permanence  of  type 
among  JEWS,  for  more  than  8000  years,  to  be  a  matter  proved  ?  and 
with  it,  the  simultaneous  existence  in  the  same  countries  of  eveiy 
variety  of  iype  and  race  visible  there  now,  ever  distinct  during  the 
same  period? 

The  monuments  of  Egypt  and  Ascfyria,  history  and  the  Bible,  have 
enabled  us  to  ascend  to  the  age  of  Abraham,  first  historical  progenitbr 
of  the  Israelitish  line,  and  demonstrate  the  indelibility  of  the  Jewish 
type  fix)m  his  .era  downWards.  The  sculptures  of  the  IVth  dynasty 
have  also  exhibited  the  admixture,  or  engraftment  of  the  same 
ChiUdaic  type  upon  native  £Eimilies  of  Egypt  at  a  date  which  is  some 
2000  years  beyond  Abraham's  era  upwards. 

Other  analogical  proofs  will  appear  in  the  sequel ;  but,  in  the  in- 
terim, the  Jews  themselves  are  living  testimonies  that  their  type  has 
survived  every  vicissittide ;  and  that  it  has  come  down,  century  by 
century,  from  Mesopotamia  to  Mobile,  for  at  least  6600  years,  unaltered 
and,  save  through  bloodralliance  with  Gentiles,  unalterable. 

o^^w^^^^^i^^^^j* 

CHAPTER  r. 

THE  CAUCASIAN  TYPES  CAIttUED  THROUGH  EGTPTIAK  MONUMENTS. 

In  a  preceding  chapter,  portions  of  the  European  group,  generi- 
cally  styled  the  **  Caucasian,"  were  traced  backwards  through  hieterieal 
times.  This  sketch  was  followed  by  areeumi  of  the  Physical  History 
of  the  Jews,  whose  annals  constitute  the  boundaiy  of  written  history, 
by  supplying  the  most  ancient  literary  link  that  connects  us  with 
remoter  monumental  periods.*  We  now  propose  to  track  this  Cau- 
casian tyjie  onwards,  through  the  stone  records  of  Egypt,  up  to  the 
earliest  of  such  documents  extant. 

The  incipient  history  of  the  Israelites  is  indissolubly  woven  with 
that  of  Egypt ;  nor  could  we  separate  the  two  if  we  would.  Although 
the  earliest  positive  synchronism,  or  ascertained  era  of  contact,  be- 
tween these  people,  is  the  year  971  b.  a ;  vis. :  the  conquest  of  Judsea* 

Digitized  by 

Google 

142  THE    CAUCASIAN    TYPES 

nnder  Rehoboam  by  Shishak  or  Shetilwnk — nevertheless,  there  are 
other  periods  of  intercourse  much  earlier  in  date,  which  may  be 
reached  approximately :  and  while,  on  the  one  hand,  Egyptian  monu- 
ments, so  £Etr  as  known  synchronisms  extend,  bear  testimony  to  the 
historical  truth  of  Jewish  records  posterior  to  Solomon,  these,  on  the 
other,  fiimish  evidence  in  favor  of  the  reliability  of  the  hieroglyphics. 
The  histories  of  Abraham,  of  Joseph,  of  Jacob  and  his  descendants, 
and  of  Moses,  all  bear  witness  to  the  antiquity,  grandeur,  and  high 
civilization  attained  by  Egypt's  Old  Empire  before  the  birth  of  the  first 
Hebrew  patriarch :  but  when  we  compare  the  genealogical  and  chro- 
nological systems  of  the  two  people,  as  well  as  their  respective  phy- 
sical types,  there  is  really  nothing  in  common  between  them.  Abra- 
ham, according  to  the  Babbinical  account,  is  but  the  tenth  in  descent 
from  Koah;  his  birth  occurring  292  years  after  the  Deluge:  but, 
substituting  the  more  critical  computation  of  Lepsius,  Abraham  must 
have  lived  in  the  time  of  Amunoph  IH,  ifemnon,  of  the  AVlllth 
dynaaty,  about  1500  years  b.  c.  Now,  the  epoch  of  Msnes,  the  first 
Pharaoh  of  Egypt,  is  placed  by  the  same  $avant  at  8898  b.  c,  or  some 
2400  years  before  Abraham. 

The  epoch  of  Abraham  Has  ordinarily,  indeed,  been  computed  by 
Biblical  commentators,  a  few  centuries  farther  back  than  the  date 
assigned  to  him  by  Lepsius ;  but  we  are  inclined  to  adopt  the  esti- 
mate of  this  superior  authority,  for  tihe  following  simple  reasons :  — 
There  are  but  five  generations — viz. :  Isaac,  Jacob,  Levi,  Kohath, 
Ambam — between  Abraham  and  Moses;  and  the  era  of  the  latter 
is  now  approximately  fixed  in  the  fourteenth  century  b.  c.  By  adding 
to  the  latter  age  —  assuming  the  Exodus,  when  Moses  was  80  years 
old,  at  B.  c.  1822*^ — ^the  average  duration  of  life  for  five  generations, 
the  time  of  Abraham  falls  about  1500  b.  c.  It  may  be  objected  that 
people  in  olden  times  were  gifted  with  a  longevity  immeasurably 
greater  than  our  modem  generations;  but  this  presumption  is  contra- 
dicted by  a  thoroughly-established  fact,  that  the  Egyptians,  whose 
ages  are  recorded  on  the  hieroglyphical  tombstones  for  twenty  centu- 
ries before  Abraham's  nativity,  and  whose  mummied  crania^  of  gene- 
rations long  anterior  to  this  patriarch,  abound,  lived  no  longer  than 
people  do  now.  Another  proof^' likewise,  that  numerical  errors  have 
always  existed  in  the  Book  of  Genesis,  is  the  fSEict,  that  the  manuscript 
Texts  differ  irreconcilably  in  respect  to  the  ages  of  the  Patriarchs ; 
while  tnese  extraordinary  ages  are  rendered  nugatory  by  the  physio- 
logical laws  governing  human  life.  If  farther  proof  be  wanted,  it 
may  oe  gathered  from  the  stoiy  of  Abraham  and  Sarah.  Though 
contefnporary  with  every  one  of  her  ancestors  back  to  Noah  himself,  (all 
of  whom,  according  to  Genesis,"'  lived  from  205  to  600  years),  yet 

Digitized  by 

Google 

CARRIED    THROUGH    EGYPTIAN    MONUMENTS.        143 

Sarah,  when  told,  in  her  ninetieth  year,  that  she  should  bear  a  child, 
laughed  twice,  having  never  heard  of  such  an  occurrence !  But,  even 
admitting  such  superhuman  longevities  for  the  Patriarchs,  that  does 
not  mend  the  difficulty ;  for,  after  all,  there  are  but  ten  generations 
between  Abraham  and  Noah,  to  set  off  against  no  less  than  seventeen 
dynasties  of  Egypt,  each  of  which  included  many  kings,  whose  united 
ages  exceed  2000  years. 

The  following  is  the  popular  view  of  the  genealogy x)f  Abraham : 
the  scientific  results  of  Hebraical  inquiry  into  which  are  discussed  in 
Part  HI.  of  our  work. 

1.  Shem. 

2,Arj>haxad. 

Z.8alah. 

4.JSber. 

6.PeUff. 

6.  J?«i. 

l.Serug. 

S^Nahar. 

'9.  Terah. 

10.  Ahrakam, 

Now,  as  we  have  stated,  Abraham  was  not  only  contemporary  with 
this  ancestry,  but,  according  to  the  Jewish  system,  58  years  old  when 
Noah  himself  died ;  and  yet,  when  he  visits  Egypt,  he  meets  with  no 
acquaintances  nor  kindred  there;  but,  on  the  contrary,  he  finds  a 
great  empire,  composed  of  millions  of  strange  people ;  and  beholds 
standing  around  him  pyramids  and  temples,  erected  by  this  more  an- 
cient and  distinct  race  —  with  records,  hieroglyphical  and  hieratic, 
vmtten  in  a  language  to  him  foreign,  stretching  back  more  than  2000 
years  before  his  birth.  The  reasons,  then,  are  obvious,  for  passiiig 
over  that  part  of  Egyptian  history  subsequent  to  b.  c.  1500,  and  for 
conmiencing  our  analysis  of  the  monuments  with  those  of  the  JLVlith 
dynasty,  (of  Lepsius — JLVJlith,  of  Bosellini,)  which  was  contempo- 
rary with  Abraham.  Although  Jewish  chronicles,  as  they  have 
reached  us,  beyond  this  Abrahamic  point  are  all  confusion,  it  will  be 
seen  that  Egyptian  monuments  afford  vast  materials,  bearing  upon 
some  Types  of  Mankind,  in  Asia  and  Afiica,  whose  epoch  antedates, 
by  twenty  centuries,  that  of  the  Father  of  the  Abrahamidse. 

It  is  now  known  to  every  educated  reader  that  the  Egyptians  fi'om 
the  very  earliest  times  of  which  vestiges  remain,  viz.,  the  Did  and 
IVth  dynasties,  were  in  the  habit  of  decorating  their  temples,  royal 
and  private  tombs,  &c.,  with  paintings  and  sculptures  of  an  historical 
character;  and  that  a  voluminous,  though  interrupted,  series  of  such 
hieroglyphed  monuments  and  papyri  is  preserved  to  the  present  day. 
These  sculptures  and  paintings  not  only  yield  us  innumerable  por^ 
traits  of  the  Egyptians  themselves,  but  also  of  an  infinitude  of  foreign 
people,  with  whom  they  held  intercourse  through  wars  or  commerce. 
They  have  portrayed  their  dlies,  their  enemies,  their  captives,  servants, 
and  slaves ;  and  we  possess,  therefore,  thus  faithfully  delineated,  most 
if  not  all  the  Asiatic  and  African  racea  known  to  the  Egyptians  3500 
years  ago  —  races  which  are  recognized  as  identical  with  those  thi^t 
occupy  the  same  countries  at  the  present  day. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 

144  THE   0AUCA3IAK   TTFBS 

We  shall  commence  our  iUostratioiiB  by  a  series  of  royal  portraits 
of  the  XVnth  and  succeedmg  dynasties.  They  are  faithfully  copied, 
on  a  reduced  scale,  from  the  magnificent  Monumenti  of  Kosellini. 
Although  reasons  will  be  produced  hereinafter  for  regarding  this  line 
of  Pharaohs  as  of  mixed  Asiatic  ori^  (t.  e.  not  of  the  pure  Egyptian: 
type  proper),  yet  they  will  serve  admirably  as  a  baris  whence  to  con- 
tinue tracing,  upwards,  our  Cdticanan  types.  Not  only  are  all  these 
heads  of  high  Asiatic  or  Caucasian  outline,  but  sevend  of  llieir 
features  strongly  betray  the  Abrahamic  cross. 

When  the  celebrated  VisConti  printed,  in  Italy,  his.  "  Chreek  and 
Roman  leonographyj'  containing  the  portrait  of  the  most  famous 
personages  q£  classical  antiquity,  he  lamented  the  absence  oi Egyptian 
portraits;  littie  expecting  that,  a  few  years  later,  Kosellini^*®  should 
pul^ish  a  complete  gallery  of  likenesses  of  Pharaohs  and  Ptolemies 
from  the  monuments  of  the  Nile ;  still  less  could  either  of  those  great 
scholars  foresee  that,  ere  one  generation  elapsed,  we  should  possess 
the  portraits  of  Sennacherib  and  other  Assyrian  monarchs  from  the 
palaces  of  Nineveh ! 

Mankind  have  always,  and  in  every  countiy  (China,  fiY>m  most 
ancient  times,  particularly),  taken  extreme  interest  in  knowing  the 
features  of  those  who  have  been  renowned  in  stoiy.  Pliny  praises 
the  70Q  portraits  collected  by  Varbo,  Solomon,  or  the  writer  of 
Wtsdom^^^  says,  *^  Whom  men  could  not  honor  in  presence,  because 
they  dwelled  afar  off,  they  took  ^eeowderfeit  of  his  visage,  and  made 
an  express  ima^e  of  a  king  whom  they  honored ; "  and  while  to  Gre- 
cian art  we  owe  the  perpetuation  of  the  sublime  busts  of  tiieir  worthies 
back  to  tiie  fourth  centuiy  b.  o.,  we  can  no  longer  tolerate  the  illusion, 
now  that  we  possess  the  likeness  of  Prince  Mbrhbt  (to  be  exhibited 
v^  due  course)  who  lived  about  5800  years  ago,  that  Ltsistbatus,  who 
flourished  in  the  114th  Olympiad,  was  either  the  first  portrait-sculptor 
or  moulder.  Such  sparse  remfuns  of  Hellenic  art  as  appertain  to  the 
sixth  centuiy  b.  c.  differ  altogether  from  the  perfection  of  later  ages, 
and  betray  the  stiflhess  of  antiquity.  They  c^respond  in  style  to  the 
old  Lydan  sculptures,  which  are  known  derivatives  of  Assyrian  art; 
and  it  is  sufiBicient  to  glance  at  the  efiigies  of  Ninevite  kings  mid 
nobles,  so  splendidly  illustrated  in  the  folio  plates  of  Botta  and  of 
Layard,  to  be  convinced  that  the  art  of  porirait-taking  ascends,  in  As- 
syria at  least,  to  the  tenth  century  b.  c.  ;  while,  in  Egypt^  its  origin 
precedes  the  oldest  pyramids  —  because,  at  the  IVth  dynasty,  the 
likene$$€$  of  individuals  are  repeated  times  out  of  number  in  their 
tombs,  as  any  one  can  verify  by  opening  Lepsius's  Denkmaler. 

The  general  exactitude  of  E^rptian  iconography  being  now  a  matter 
beyond  dispute,  we  have  only  to  remind  the  reader,  while  submitting 

Digitized  by 

Google 

CARRIED   THBOtrOB   B6YPTIAK    MONUMENTS. 

145 

fhe  following  eelections,  that^  if  he  makes  allowance  for  want  of  per- 
spective in  antique  Egyptian  art,  wherein  the  eye  is  always  presented 
in  full,  he  will  find  the  profiles  admirably  truthful.  Moreover,  he 
will  be  struck  with  the  likenesses  firom  father  to  son  in  each  family 
group — which  is  another  guarantee  of  artistic  fidelity ;  at  the  same 
time  that  the  infusion  of  new  blood  in  each  dynasty,  and  the  conse- 
quent alteration  of  lineaments,  are  apparent  to  every  eye. 

PHABAONIC   POBTBAITS.uo 

Amunophitbs  and  Thotmbsitbs,— -aretes  J^wpw-^— XVnth  Theban 
dynasty — commencing  at  b.  c.  1671  (Lepsius),  with  Aahmes,  AmoM; 
whose  portrait  being  unknown,  we  begin  witii  his  son's.  Our  ethno- 
logical conceptions  are  very  briefly  given  under  each  head,  leaving  the 
reader  to  emend  where  we  may  not  have  seized  the  exact  definitions. 

Fio.44. 

Fio.  45. 

BSBwife. 

Y-^ 

'--««m 

Akuvofk  L 
(A  Oncktm  oovntoiuunoe.) 

AAHMSfl-NonUB-AKL 

(Strong  Semiiie  faatiiiei.) 

Pio.  46. 

Pio.  47. 

THOfMSS  L 

(Strikingly  HtUmk.) 
19 

(Abtolatel7«7MM.) 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 

146 

THE   CAUCASIAN   TTPES 

Fio.  48. 

Fio.  49. 

Thotmbb  n. 
(Blends  his  fiither's  with  his  mother's  face.) 

FiQ.  60. 

Thotmbs  IIL 
(Preserrei  the  same  chanuster.) 

.  Fio.  61. 

AxuvoPH  n. 
(Unites  J^ypOfm  with  EeUmik.) 

Fio.  62. 

Thotmbs  IV. 
(Betoins  Uiih%M  BgypUan  form.) 

Fio.  68. 

Maut-Hbmwa. 
{^Nubianf   CuiAiYe^Arab?) 

Amunoph  m.    Mfmnon, 
(A  hyhrid^  bat  not  of  Negro  intermixture.) 

Digitized  by 

Google 

CARRIED   THROUGH   EGYPTIAN   MONUMENTS. 

Fio.  56. 

Fig.  54, 

147 

At  the  close  of  the  AVillth  dynasty,  and  just  before  the  inaugura- 
tion of  the  XlXth,  intervenes  a  period  of  anarchy,  technically  known 
to  Egyptologists  as  the  "Disk  Heresy;"  wherein  the  above  extraor- 
dinary personage  (Fig.  56)  plays  a  not  less  extraordinary  part  He 
turned  the  orthodox  priests  out  of  the  sanctuaries  —  abolished  the 
polytheistic  orisons  to  Egypt's  ancient  gods — and  introduced  during 
his  reign  (followed  for  a  short  time  by  successors),  the  worship  of  the 
9un*9  disk.  These  events  took  place  in  Upper  Egypt,  during  the 
fifteenth  century  b.  c.  ;  or  some  time  before  the  birth  of  Moses,  ac- 
cording to  the  emended  Biblical  chronology  of  Lepsius. 

Fio.  56. 
After  aziarohical  times. 

HOEUB. 

(A  Uneal  deeoendant  from  Thotmes  m.,  whose  SemUk  ancestors  he  reproduces.) 

And  the  XVHIth  Dt/nasty  ends  in  tuurpationa. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

148 

THE   CAUGASIAK   TYPES 

XlXtli  Dynasty — New  Family — Bamesides — about  B.  a  1525. 

Fio.  67.  Fni.  68. 

Bamxsu.    RamuM  L 
(Qnoco-Egrptiaii !) 

Fio.  69. 

Skti-Msiisptiia.1^ 
(Mother  unknown;  but  tho  Semitic  eaite 
reappears.) 

Fio.  60. 

SBTI-lfSXSPTHA  L 

(NotagoodlikeiiMsr} 
Fio.  61. 

Sin-MBirxpTHA  L 
(More  like  his  ywOhfiU  style.) 

Fio.  62. 

TSIKA. 

(Entirely  Jewish.) 

Ramsss  n.,  the  €htU,^ 

(His  features  are  as  superblj  Bwnpeam 

as  NAPOLKon'Sy  whom  he  resemUes.) 

Digitized  by  , ^^ 

CARRIED    THROUGH    EGYPTIAN   MONUMENTS.        149 

Fra.  68. 

Fig.  64. 

Nonti-ABi. 
(Very  hi^^-caste  lineaments.) 

BonAsn. 
(Chiefly  SemUie.) 

Fig.  66. 

Fia.66. 

MunpTHAlL    Mm^Kiket. 
(LepiinB'fl  Pharaoh  of  the  JSxodut.^  ) 

Unu.    Sanurru 
(iSWIwo-Bgyptian.) 

And  tte  XlXtli  dynasty  ends  about  1800  B.  o. 

We  pass  Over  the  various  portraits  of  the  XXth  and  XXIst  dy- 
nasties ;  because,  where  identified,  the  type  is  the  same,  except  that 
it  is  in  the  females  that  we  perceive  the  Asiatic  caste  of  race  most 
prominently;  a  &ct,  of  singular  ethnographical  import.  We  renew 
the  illustrations  at  about  971-8  b.  o.,  with  the  portrait  of  Shiehaky 
eonqueipr  of  ^^ Jerusalem,'*  as  recorded  at  Eamac;  and  ''in  the  fifth 
year  of  Behoboam,"  as  chronicled  by  the  Hebrew  writers. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

150 

THE   CAUCASIAN   TYPES 

XXnd  Dynasty— Manbtho's  "Bubastitee;" 

Proved  by  Mr,  Birch  to  have  A»$yrian  names ;  but  the  Pharaonic 
stock  has  now  become  so  mixed,  that  it  is  difficult  to  determine 
whether  the  Hellepic,  the  Semitic^  or  the  Egyptian  preponderates. 

Fio.  67. 

Fio.  68. 

Sbbshohk  L 

OSOEKON  nL 

There  are  little  or  no  remains  of  the  XXIIld  or  xxtvfh  dynasties ; 
but,  in  order  to  show  that  the  so-called  ^^  Ethiopian"  dynasty  had  no 
Negro  blood  in  their  veins,  we  subjoin  their  three  portraits.  Dr. 
Morton  calls  them  ^^Austro-Egyptians ; "  and  we  opine  that  they  may 
be  derived  from  an  Egyptian  colony,  crossed  with  Old  Beja  (Begawee), 
or  perhaps  with  (^&&e-Arabian  blood. 

XXVth  Dynasty—  b.  c.  719  to  696. 
Fia.  69.  Fio.  70. 

Shabax-^b&om. 
(MerotUT) 

SHABATOK-SlVeeAtlf. 

(Pharaoh  Sua.    2  Km^fs,  xriL  4.) 

Digitized  by 

Google 

CABBIED   THBOUGH   EGYPTIAN    MONUMENTS.        151 
Fio.  71. 

("Mdek-KoSA."    2  ii:ti^  xiz.  0.) 

It  is  nnnecesBary,  for  ethnolo^cal  purposes,  to  continue  the  series 
of  Egyptian  portraits  down  to  the  Ptolemies,  and  ending  with  Cleo- 
patra (abready  given,  Fig.  8,  page  104,)  and  her  son  by  Julius  CiSSAB, 
Cjssabion.  The  reader  can  behold  the  whole  of  them  in  Bosellini's 
magnificent  folios.  Having  presented  the  royal  likenesses,  to  serve 
as  evidence  of  Egyptian  artistic  accuracy,  we  shall  now  investigate 
the  foreign  nations  with  whom  the  men,  whose  portraits  we  have  jnst 
seen,. were  acquainted;  together  with  such  others  as  their  ancestors 
had  known  during  twenty  centuries  previously. 

It  will  become^pparent,  in  a  succeeding  chapter,  that  even  as  fEu* 
back  as  the  IVth  dynasty,  b.  o.  8600,  the  population  of  Egypt  already 
exhibited  abundant  instances  of  mixed  types  of  African  and  Asiatic 
ori^ns ;  at  the  same  time  that  the  language  then  spoken  on  the  Lower 
Nile,  and  recorded  in  the  earliest  hieroglyphics,  also  presents  evi- 
dence of  these  amalgamations.  ,  The  series  of  Royal  portraits  just 
submitted  not  only  demonstrates  this  commingling  of  races,  but 
shows  that  Asiatic  intruders  had,  at  the  foundation  of  the  New  Empire, 
to  a  great  extent,  supplanted,  in  the  royal  family  at  least,  the  indige* 
nous  Egyptians.  Their  foreign  type  is  vividly  impressed  upon  the 
iconographic  monuments.  Bo  much  do  the  Pharaonic  portraits  of 
the  XVnth,  XVmth,  and  XlXth  dynasties  resemble  those  of  the 
later  Greek  and  Boman  sovereigns,  that  tlie  eye  passes  through  the 
long  series  given  by  Rosellini  without  being  arrested  by  any  striking 
contrast  between  the  former  and  the  latter.  Although  the  common 
people  were  also  greatly  mixed,  the  Egyptian  type  proper,  neverthe- 
less, among  them,  predominated  over  the  Asiatic.  Even  admitting 
that  the  autocthonous  Egyptian  race  was  always,  down  to  the  Persian 
conquest,  b.  c.  625,  the  ruling  one,  yet  the  royal  families  of  the  Nile, 
as  in  other  countries,  become  modified  by  marriages  with  alien  races. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

153  THE   CAUCASIAN   TYPES 

We  know,  through  classical  histoiy,  of  numerous  alliances  between 
the  Ethiopians  and  Egyptians.  Solomon  too,  an  Asiatic,  married  an 
Egyptian  princess;  and  we  have  mentioned  other  instances  of  Jewish 
predilection  for  the  women,  no  less  thim  for  the  ^^  flesh-pots,  of  Egypt" 
Mr.  Birch^  has  recentiy  fiimished  some  quite  novel  particulars 
concerning  tl^e  matrimonial  alliance  of  a  Pharaoh  of  the  XXth 
dynasty  (probably  Ramses  XTV.)  with  an  Asiatic  princess  of  Buk- 
hitana;  to  whom  was  ^ven  the  titie  of  ^^B(MieferUj  the  king's  chief 
wife."  With  regard  to  the  exact  locality  in  Asia  of  this  country, 
.  although  it  might  be  Scb/itana  in  Media,  Birch  takes  it  to  be  the 
celebrated  Boihan  mentioned  in  Deuteronomy  (iii.  1,  &c.)  This  tablet, 
brought  from  the  temple  of  Chons  at  Kamac,  in  1844,  by  M.  Piisse, 
is  so  intensely  cuiioua  that  we  extract  two  of  Birch's  translations, 
adding  interlineary  explanations :  -^ 

•'IdneS.  <TlMn  the  ehief  of  BsUiiUiia  [JB^Mionf]  Miisodhisirilwte  tobebraagkt; 
he  gaye  his  eldest  deughter  [to  the  Kiog  of  Egypt]  ....  in  adoring  his  ni^esfy,  and  ia 
promising  her  to  him :  she  bdng  a  Terj  beanti^il  person,  his  mijestj  prised  her  abore  sH 
tUngs.' 

'•Lm$  6.  *Then  mm  giyen  her  the  title  [  t  ]  of  Ra-nef^nro,  the  king's  chief  irife,  and 
when  his  mijesty  arrired  in  Egypt,  she  was  n^de  hinges  wife  in  all  respects.' " 

Here,  then,  is  a  positive  example  of  the  marriage  of  an  Egyptian 
king  with  an  AHatie  female,  that  entirely  corroborates  the  intermix- 
ture of  races  we  derived  from  the  physical  aspects  of  the  royal  portraits. 
Whether  the  hieroglyphic  BMkteny  or  Bakhtany  be  the  Bashan  of 
Palestine  or  Median  Ecbatana,  to  etJbnology  the  &ct  is  the  same ;  a^d 
probabilities  £Eivor,  in  either  case,  the  lady's  Semitish  extraction.  It 
is  with  regret  that  we  cannot  digress  about  the  cure  wrought  upon 
this  lady's  sister,  ^^  Benteresh  "  [Hebraic^,  Daughter  of  the  Ee$hy  chiel^ 
or  king],  who  was  ^^  possessed  by  devils ; "  but  her  name,  being  Ara* 
bic  no  less  than  Hebrew,  setties,  philologically,  her  Semitic  lineage. 

It  may  be  worthy  of  passing  notice  to  the  reader,  tliat  the  conven- 
tional color  by  wUch  the  Egyptians  always  represented  their  own 
males  was  redy  and  their  ovm  females,  yellauf ;  and  that,  with  few 
exceptions,  other  races  were  painted  in  such  different  colors  as  the 
artist  deemed  most^conformable  to  their  cuticular  hues.  Wby  were 
exceptions  made  ?  Was  it  because  the  Egyptians,  in  such  instances, 
had  formed  marriage  connections  with  some  of  these  races,  and 
ennobled  them,  therefore,  witii  the  red  color?  Our  Figs. 41, 82, and 
88,  belon^ng  to  tiie  fourteenth  and  fifteenth  centuries  b.  c,  are,  in 
BosBLLiNi,  thus  represented  in  r^d;  showing,  perhaps,  that  tbqr 
were  esteemed  as  equals,^  or  that  they  belonged  to  cognate  Hamitic 
affiliations. 

Let  us  now  select  for  examination  a  few  monumental  heads  of  ^b» 
yaiious/prei^n  races  so  faithfully  portrayed.  Itwill  then  be  apparent 

Digitized  by 

Google 

CABRIED    THROUGH   EGYPTIAN'   MONUMENTS. 

163 

that  the  same  diversity  has  ever  existed  among  the  so-called  Cauecman 

epecies,  up  to  the  very  earliest  monuments  of  above  fifty  centuries  ago. 

By  way  of  general  introduction  to  this  vast  subject^  we  present  one 

group  wherein  three  distinct  typee  of  mankind  are  grasped  by  a  fourth. 

Ro.  71.  *a,  wy 

Bamses  II.,  in  the  fourteenth  centuiy  b.  o.  (or  during  the  early  part 
of  the  lifetime  of  Moses),  at  the  temple  of  Aboosimbel  in  Nubia,  sym- 
bolizes  his  Asiatic  and  African  conquests  in  a  gorgeously-colored 
tableau.  He,  an  Egyptian^  brandishes  a  pole-axe  over  the  tiie  heads 
of  Negroes  J  Nubians  (Bar&bera),  and  AeiatieSj  each  painted  in  their 
true  colors:  viz.,  black,  brick-dust,  and  yellow  flesh-color;  while, 
above  his  head,  runs  the  hieroglyphic  scroll,  ^^  The  beneficent  living 
god,  guardian  of  glory,  smites  the  South;  puts  to  flight  tiie  Saet; 
rules  by  victory;  and  drags  to  his  country  all  the  earth,  and  all 
foreign  lands."'  Bamses  inclusive,  here,  to  begiil  with,  are /our  types 
of  men  —  one  mixed,  two  purely  Afiican,  and  one  true  Asiatic,  co- 
existent at  1400  years  B.  c,  or  some  8850  years  ago.  Their  geography 
extends  fix)m  the  confluence  of  the  Blue  and  White  Kiles,  beyond 
the  northern  limit  of  the  tropical  rains,  in  Negro-land ;  down  the 
river  to  Egypt,  and  thence  to  the  banks  of  the  Euphrates.  Precisely 
the  same  four  types  occupy  the  same  countries  at  the  present  day. 

■  Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC 

164  THE   GAUGASIAK   TTFES 

^y^e  next  proceed  to  examine  the  Asiatic  class ;  but  it  should  be 
remembered  that  .we  are  about  to  trace  retrogressiyelyy  into  the  very 
night  of  antiquity^  varions  races — say,  an  indefinite  point  of  time, 
more  than  5000  years  anterior  to  our  age ;  and  that  languages,  toge- 
ther with  the  names  of  people  and  of  places,  have  so  changed,  that  it 
is  in  these  days  impossible  to  identify,  in  several  instances,  either  the 
nations  or  their  habitats,  except  en  moise.  Often,  the  type  alone, 
which  has  never  altered,  remains  to  guide  us.  It  were  irrational  to 
be  surprised  at  these  difficulties*  We  must  ever  bear  in  mind  the 
confusion  of  races  and  countries  seen  among  thc^  Hebrew,  Greek,  and 
Roman  historians,  and  even  in  our  geographies  of  much  later  ages. 
Tfcloincal  topography  be  so  ofteQ  vague,  that  of  the  primevd  hiero- 
glyphics may  well  be  still  more  so. 

Most  of  our  illustrations  are  taken  from  the  great  works  of  Bosel- 
lini  and  Lepsius;  but  we  subjoin  references  to  other  hierological 
commentators. 

This  head  (Fig.  72),  one  of  several  similar, 
^'    '  is  taken  from  the  Nubian  temple  of  Aboosim- 

hely  by  Lepsius  placed  in  the  fourteenth  cen- 
tury B.  c.  They  appear  on  a  tableau  wherein 
RamsesII.,  during  the  fifth  year  of  his  reign, 
attacks  a  fortress  in  Aeia^  which,  it  is  be- 
lieved, belonged  to  a  tribe  of  people  called 
the  Bomenen,  ReMeNeN,  near  the  ^^  land  of 
Omar;""®  probably  mountaineers  of  the 
Tauric  range,  and,  in  any  case,  not  remote 
from  Mesopotamia. 
The  Bomenen  are  a  branch  of  the  Lodan-noUy  or  ^^Ludim,"  Lydians ; 
by  which  general  designation  are  known,  on  the  monuments,  divers 
Anatice  iii^abiting  Asia-Minor,  Syria,  Assyria,  and  adjacent  countries ; 
probably,  Bosellini  thinks,  this  side  of  the  Euphrates :  but  we  incline, 
with  Morton,  to  consider  that  Fig.  72  ^^  represents  ancient  8eyihian%j 
the  easternmost  Caucasian  races;  who,  as  histoiy  informs  us,  pos- 
sessed fair  complexions,  blue  eyes,  and  reddish  hair."  Contrasted 
with  the  other  Asiatics,  grouped  in  Fig.  71,  it  affords  a  very  distinct 
type.  The  lower  and  most  salient  of  the  latter  profiles  presents,  as 
Morton  has  duly  noted,  ^'  a  finely-marked  Semitic  head,  in  which  the 
forehead,  though  receding,  is  remarkably  voluminous  and  expres- 
sive.''^^ An  additional  reason  for  supposing  that  Fig.  72  does  not 
belong  tx)  Semitic  races  on  the  Euphrates,  is  the  fistct  that  it  offers  no 
resemblance  to  the  true  Ohaldssanj  or  indigenous  type,  beheld  on  the 
royal  monuments  of  Nineveh  or  Babylon;  but  may  possibly  be 
recognized  among  their  prisoners  of  war  or  foreign  nations. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

GABBIED   THROUGH   EGYPTIAN    MONUMENTS.        155 

Fio.  78.  Allowance  made  for  difference  be- 

tween Egyptian  and  Assyrian  art,  cou- 
pled with  the  proviso  that  the  Kinevite 
sculptors  were  by  no  means  so  precise 
in  etimic  iconography  as  those  of  Egypt, 
we  reproduce  here  a  head  (Fig.  78), 
from  the  sculptures  of  Blorsabii,  by 
way  of  comparison :  noting  tixe  iden- 
tity of  the  head-dress,  which  is  a  leathern 
cap.    (Fife  »i/ra,  page  128). 

West  of  the  Euphrates,  more  or  less 
of  the  Jewish  type  prevailed.  The 
heads,  of  which  Fig.  72  is  a  specimen, 
represent  a  race  which,  some  1400  years  b.  c,  was  distinct  from  con- 
temporaneous Mesopotamian  families.  People  with  yellowish  skins, 
blue  eyes,  and  reddish  hair,  are  certainly  not  of  Semitic  extraction ; 
and,  judging  from  the  physiognomy  of  this  man  and  his  associates, 
these  were  probably  cognate  Scythian  tribes,  inasmuch  as  they  do  not 
differ  among  themselves  more  than  individuals  of  any  Caucasian 
nation  of  our  day.  It  is  known  that  Scythic  tribes  settled  in  Syria, 
and  even  at  Scythopolisy  in  Judsea;  nor  do  we  employ  the  term 
"Scythian"  here  in  a  sense  more  specific  than  as  distinct  from 
"  Semitic"  and  from  "Hamitic"  populations. 

OSBUBN  figures  this  head,  classing  it  as  one  of  the  Canaanitish 
"  Znzim ;"  but  we  certainly  should  not  regard  blue  eyes,  red  hair, 
eye-brows,  and  beard,  as  characteristic  of  Canaanites,  nor  of  any 
other  Eamitic  families  situate  in  this  region  of  country,  west  of  the 
Euphrates.  The  same  author  calls  our  Asiatic,  Fig.  71  bisj  a  "  Moabite 
of  Babbah,"  and  describes  him  among  the  Eittites;  but  he  likewise 
bas  classed  our  Fig.  98  as  a  Hittite ;  and  we  cannot  imagine  how 
heads  so  entirely  different  could  be  deemed  identical  by  an  ethnologist 

Fio.  74.i« 

This  head  (Fig.  74)  is  taken  from  the  celebrated  tomb  of  Seti-Hx 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 

156 

THE    CAUCASIAN   TYPES 

Fio,  76.  NBFTHA  L,  of  XTXJh  dynasty,  about  the  fifteenth 

centoiy  b,  c.  We  have  akeady  alluded,  when 
speaking  of  classifications  of  races,  to  this 
scene,  and  illustrated  it  in  Fig.  1.  The  god 
Horns  is  represented,  conducting  sixteen  per- 
sonages, in  groups  of  four ;  each  of  which 
groups  represents  a  distinct  division  of  the 
human  fieunily;  and  these  divisions  include  all 
the  races  known  to  the  Egyptians.  Our  full 
length  (Fig.  75)  is  a  reduced  copy  of  the  same 
personage ;  but  taken  from  the  Prussian,^  where- 
as the  head  (Fig.  74)  is  from  the  Tuscan  work. 

A  similar  scene  occurs  in  the  tomb  of  Ramses 

in.  of  the  XXth  dynasty,  in  which  the  same 

divisions  are  kept  up ;  but  the  individuals  selected 

differ  in  race  from  the  preceding,  though  bearing 

a  certtdn  generic  resemblance.    As  before  stated,  each  Egyptian 

division,  like  our  generic  designatioxis  —  Caucasian,  Mongol,  Kegro, 

&c.,  contained  many  proximate  types. 

Although  previously  published  in  his  colored  folio  plates  by  the 
indefatigable  Belzoni,  the  ethnological  importance  of  tbis  tableau,  in 
the  sepulchre  of  Sbti  L,  was  not  perceived  until  Champollion-le- 
Jeune  visited  Thebes  in  1829 ;  nor,  indeed,  to  this  day,  has  its  quad- 
ripartite classification  of  mankind  been  adequately  appreciated. 
Some  writers  have  mistaken  its  import  altogether;  while  none,  that 
we  know  of,  have  deduced  from  it  the  natural  consequence,  that 
Egyptian  ethnographers  already  knew  of  four  lypes  of  mankind  — 
redf  blacky  whiUy  and  yellow  —  several  centuries  before  the  writer  of 
Xth  Genesis;  who,  omitting  the  black  or  Negro  races  altogether,  was 
acquainted  with  no  more  than  three  —  ^^  Shem,  Ham,  and  Japheth." 

Champollion,  with  his  consummate  acuteness,  at  once  pronounced ' 
this  scene  to  represent 

«  The  inhabitants  of  the  four  qnarten  of  the  irorldy  aooording  to  the  ancient  Egyptian 
eystem:  Tix.,  1st,  the  inhabitants  of  Egypt;  2€l9  the  Asiatics;  Sd,  the  inhabitants  of 
Africa,  or  the  blacks ;  and  4th,  the  Enropesns." 

We  merely  object  to  the  term  "Europeans,"  instead  of  "wA&e 
races ;"  becai}se,  in  the  fifteenth  century  B.  c.  there  was  no  necessity 
for  travelling  out  of  Asia  Minor  in  quest  of  white  men;  nor  could  the 
Egyptians,  at  that  time,  have  possessed  much  knowledge  of  Europe. 

To  our  eye.  Fig.  74  marks  a  type  of  the  white  races  in  the  fifteenth 
century  b.  o-  The  particular  nation  to  which  he  belongs  is  the  Bebo 
of  hieroglyphics ;  probably  the  Rhibii  of  the  classics. 

Figure  76^®  is  from  another  part  of  the  tomb  of  Sbh  L,  also  dating 

Digitized  by 

Google 

CARRIED   THROUGH   EGYPTIAN    MONUMENTS. 

157 

Pia  76. 

about  1500  years  b.  c.  This  head,  in  Bosellini's  colored  plates,  pre- 
sents all  the  lineaments  of  a  Himyarite  Arab,  except  the  blue  eye ; 
which,  possibly,  may  be  a  mistake  of  the  artist.  "Himyir"  means 
redj  and  the  Pisan  copy  is  colored  red.  Upon  reference,  notwith- 
standing, to  the  great  Prussian  work,*®  wherein,  it  is  to  be  assumed, 
the  colors  of  the  original  paintings  are 
reproduced  with  greater  accuracy,  this 
&ce  is  of  a  light  brqum  compleidon, 
with  black  eyes  and  beard.  While, 
perhaps,  it  is  not  possible  (considering 
the  numerous  transfers  of  copies  be- 
tween ancient  originals  in  Egypt  and 
their  multiplied  reproductions  in  mo- 
dem plates,)  always  to  avoid  discrepan- 
cies, it  will  be  remembered  that  the 
erinuan  or  scarlet  tints,  adopted  by  the 
Egyptians  for  their  own  males,  is  purely  conventional — ^that  is,  being 
impossible  in  real  nature — so  that,  whether  the  skin  be  colored  red 
or  brown,  the  osteological  structure  of  the  features  remains  the  same ; 
and  these  are  genuine  ^Arab. 
Morton  remarks,  in  his  MS.  letter :— > 

**  This  is  the  Tery  image  of  a  Southern  Arab,  with  his  sharp  features,  dark  skiii,  and 
eertain  national  expression,  admirably  giren  in  the  "drawing/' 

As  such,  his  effigy  furnishes  another  antique  type  of  man. 

This  head  (Fig.  77)  {vide  supra  page  108, 
fig,  9,)  has  been  already  compared  with 
the  Tochari  of  Strabo  and  of  the  Ninevite 
sculptures.  There  is  nothing  to  favor  Os- 
bum's  theory,  tliat  this  man  and  his  ma- 
ritime associates  were  Philistines;  nor  to 
oppose  Morton's,  that  they  exhibit  Celtic 
features.  We  present  it,  without  comment, 
as  another  evidence  of  the  ancient  diversity 
of  "  Caucasian  tjf^s  :'*  and  with  an  indica- 
tion of  the  incompatibility  of  this  man's 
features  with  any  tongue  not  a  congener  of 
that  class  bearing  the  name  of  '^  Indo-European."  He  cannot, 
therefore,  be  a  Philistine. 

From  the  prisoners  of  Kahses  HI.,  of  the  XXth  dynasty,  thirteenth 
century  b.  c,  we  take  Fig.  78:  sculptured  on  the  base  of  his  pavilion 
at  Medeenet-Haboo.*^  A  fracture  in  the  wall  has  obliterated  the 
hieroglyphics,  so  that  there  is  no  name  for  him ;  but  adjacent  to  him 
are  prisoners  of  the  Tokkari  or  Tochari.    He  may  be  a  mountaineer 

Fw.  77. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

158 

THE   CAUCASIAN   TYPES 

Pio.  78. 

Fio.  79. 

Ahoixnt  Asiatic. 

MODBBH  KUBD. 

of  the  Tanrns  chain;  because  he  bears  a  strong  resemblance  to 
modem  Kurdish  families ;  seen  by  comparing  this  profile  with  the 
head  of  a  Kurd  (Pig.  79),  from  the  work  of  Hamilton  Smith.  To 
our  minds,  here  is  a  strong  example  of  permanence  of  type  through 
8000  years;  whilst  the  name  "Kurdah,"  Kurds,  is  read  in  ancient 
cuneiform,  by  Db  Saulcy,  upon  Assyrian  inscriptions. 

Asiatic  conquests  of  Bamses  IL  yield  us  Fig.  80 ;  within  the  four- 
teenth century  b.  c,  preserved  at  Bfeytrel-Wilee.*"  Mr.  Birch's  detidled 
account  of  this  important  historical  document  is  accompanied  by 
colored  drawings,  in  which  the  victories  of  that  monarch  over  various 
Asiatic  and  African  races  are  represented  with  amazing  truthfulness 
and  spirit  The,  head  itself  possesses  a  Semitic  caste,  blended^ 
perhaps,  with  Arian  elements. 

Fio.  80. 

Fig.  81. 

Another  captive  (Fig.  81)  from  the  Asiatic  conquests  of  Bamses  IIL 

yGoogle 

Digitized  by^ 

CARRIED   THROUGH   EGYPTIAN    MONUMENTS.        159 

at  Medeenet-Haboo.  *"     "Wilkinson  reads  the  name  "Lemanon," 
identical  with  Lebanon  ;  which  is  probable,  inasmuch  as  Birch  agrees ; 
whilst  Osbum,  by  reading  ffemuh 
niteSy  fixes  their  locality  at  Mount  Fro.  82. 

Hermon,  anti-Libanus,  in  the  north- 
east  of  Palestine.  This  character- 
istic specimen  is  essentially  Semitic, 
of  the  Syrian  form.  • 

Fig.  82  belongs  to  the  "Grand 
Procession"  of  the  age  of  Thotmes 
m.,  of  the  XVnth  dynasty,  1600 
B.  c.^^  No  head  in  our  whole  cata- 
logue has,  perhaps,  caused  as  much 
archseolo^cal  debate;  nor  is  our 
knowledge  of  his  race  and  country  as  yet  satisfactory. 

Bosellini  figures  this  head  without  comment  ChampoUion  Figeac 
copies  it,  but  his  explanations  lead  to  no  tangible  result.  Hoskins 
has  beautifully  colored  the  whole  file  (sixteen  persons  in  number)  of 
these  tributary  people,  regarding  them  as  n'atives  of  MeroHj  in  Ethi- 
opia ;  but  subsequent  researches,  by  Lepsius  and  others,  render  such 
estimate  of  Meroite  antiquity  radically  wrong.  We  now  know  that, 
in  the  time  of  Thotmes  HL,  the  only  civilized  points  in  Nubia  were 
those  occupied  by  Egyptian  garrisons.  The  Meroe  of  Greek  aimalists 
did  not  then  exist 

Wilkinson  accurately  designs  the  whole  scene,  but  without  colors ; 
thereby  rendering  it  less  clear,  in  an  anthropological  point  of  view ; 
but  his  hieroglyphics  are  more  exact,  and  he  observes : — "  The  people, 
Kufa  (which  is  their  name),  appear  to  have  inhabited  a  part  of  iim, 
lying  considerably  to  the  north  of  the  latitude  of  Palestine ;  and  their 
long  hair,  rich  dresses,  and  sandals  of  the  most  varied  fonn  and  color, 
render  them  remarkable  among  the  nations  represented  in  Egyptian 
sculpture."  Birch'calls  them  "  the  people  of  Kaf  or  Kfouy  an  Asiatic 
race ;  *'  placing  them  near  Mesopotamia.  Prisse  denominates  them, 
"  le  peuple  de  Kaufa  (race  Asiatique,  peinte  en  rouge)." 

From  the 'foregoing  we  may  conclude — 1st,  that  these  Kaufa  were 
Aiiatics;  2d,  that  they  resided  near  Mesopotamia;  8d,  that,  as  they 
are  painted  red  on  the  monuments,  they  presented  certain  affinities 
with  the  Egyptians,  confirmed  by  the  physiological  characteristics  of 
the  latter  race  observed  by  Morton — "  shortness  of  the  lower  jaw  and 
chin ;"  and  4th,  that,  if  they  be  OuektteSy  they  are  of  the  Hamitic  stem. 
They  are  probably  of  the  KCTSA-ite  fiwnilies  of  Arabia,  cognate  to  the 
Egyptians  (perhaps  allied  by  royal  marriages),  who  in  consequence 
honored  them  with  the  red  color.    Inasmuch  as  they  bring  a  tribute 

Digitized  by 

Google 

160 

THE    CAUCASIAN    TYPES 

Fio.  88. 

of  golden  vessels,  they  may  liave  had  access  to  the  Arabian  Ophir;  and  * 
as  they  carry  elephanti'  teethy  they  had  communication  with  the  Indies, 
or  widi  Africa.  Judging  from  tilieir  portraits,  they  certainly  belonged 
not  to  any  of  the  Abrahamic  or  Chaldfiean  tribes*  They  bear,  frirtheF- 
more,  considerable  resemblance  to  those  primeval  heads  we  shall 
exhibit  in  a  succeeding  chapter  as  illustrative  of  the  type  of  the 
founders  of  the  Egyptian  empire ;  and  slightly  also  to  the  later  Egyp- 
tian type  {Bot)f  as.  represented  by  Theban  artists  in  their  quadruple 
classification  of  races.  These  Kovfa  may  possibly  have  been  the 
descendants  of  an  Egyptian  colony,  near  the  Persian  Gulf:  like  that 
of  Colchis,  if  we  can  trust  Herodotus,  in  Asia  Minor. 

This  figure  is  from  the  conquests  of 
Seti-Meneptha  L,  fifteenth  centuiy  b.  c, 
at  the  temple  of  Kamac.^®  The  people 
come  under  the  generic  class  of  White 
races ;  and  their  tribe  is  called  Tohen^  by 
Rosellini.  The  same  head,  in  one  of 
the  tombs,  appears  as  the  type  of  White 
races  in  the  quadrupartite  division  of 
which  we  have  already  spoken.  Birch 
calls  them  Tohen^  Tahno^  or  Ten-hno  — 
,  "evidently  belonging  to  the  white  blood, 
or  Japhetic  fiBunily  of  mankind."  Mor- 
ton, in  his  MS.  letter,  writes,  "they 
present  Pelasgic  features ;  but  the  blue  eye,  reddish  hair,  and  harsh 
expression,  are  not  unlike  the  Scythian  race."  The  Egyptians  seem 
to  have  entertained  towards  them  an  excess  of  hatred,  and  to  have 
slaughtered  them  with  more  fury  than  any  other  people.  But  we 
leave  their  exact  race  and  country  an  open  question,  although  their 
Caucadan  features  cannot  be  mistaken. 

We  have  compared  this  (Fig.  84) 
and  the  next  (Fig.  85)  with  the 
Jewish  type  (viae  mipra^  p.  140). 
Bosellini  gives  no  explanations. 
Supposed,  by  ChampolUon,  to  be 
Lydian$ — their  name  reading  Iai^ 
dannuj  or  Bot^n-no.  This  head  be- 
longs to  the  same  Grand  Proces- 
sion of  Thotmes  ICL,  so  eflfectively 
colored  in  Hoskins;  but  we  have 
copied  Rosellini's  outline,  as  more 
correct.^®  Hoskins  again  perceives  "white  slaves"  of  the  king  of  his 
Ethiopia!    Osbum  terms  them  Arvadite$;  but  Birch,  refuting  both 

Fxa.  84. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

CARRIED   THROUGH   EGYPTIAN    MONUMENTS. 

161 

Fio.  85. 

opinions,  puts  these  people  down  as  CappadocianSj  or  Leuco-Syrians ; 
which  seems  more  rational,  did  not  an  elephant's  tooth  suggest  some 
geographical  obstacle.  The  man  leads  an  animal — disputed,  whether 
it  is  a  bear  or  Zum,  the  drawing  being  so  very  defective.  He  also 
carries  an  elephant's  tusk.  Morton  figures  this  head  as  Indo-Semitic, 
or  Indo-Persian ;  and  all  attending  circumstances  assign  him  a  habi- 
tation between  Persia  and  the  Upper  Indus. 

Another  from  the  same  scene  as  the  pre- 
ceding figure.^'®  He  wears  a  light  dress  and 
straw  hat,  and  leads  an  elephant:  conditions 
indicative  of  a  southern  climate.  Morton 
observes  —  "This  is  a  yet  more  striking 
Hindoo^  in  whom  the  dark  skin,  black  eye, 
delicate  features,  and  fine  fiicial  angle,  are 
all  admirably  marked.  The  presence  of 
the  elephant  assists  us  in  designating  the 
national  stock,  while  the  straw  hat  sends 
us  to  the  Ganges" — or,  much  nearer,  to  the 
Indus? 

Peculiar  interest  attaches  to  both  of  the  above  effigies ;  the  latter 
of  which  enables  us  to  carry  the  existence  of  a  Hindoo  national  type 
back  to  the  sixteenth  century  b.  c.  Although  no  written  Hindostanic 
monuments  are  extant  of  an  age  coetaneous  with  even  the  sixth  cen- 
tury prior  to  our  era,  native  traditions,  zoological  analogies,  and 
admissions  of  the  more  sceptical  Indologists,  justify  our  considering 
the  Hindoos  to  have  inhabited  their  vast  peninsula  as  early  as  the 
Egyptians  did  the  shores  of  their  Nile,  or  any  other  type  of  men  its 
original  centre  of  creation,  whether  in  Asia,  Afiica,  Europe,  America, 
or  Oceanica. 

"We  now  come  to  that  Egyptian  tableau  the  most  frequently  alluded 
to,  and  which  has  prompted  much  nonsensical,  if  pious,  discussion. 
The  head  (Fig.  86)  is  one  of  the  "  BrickmakerSy" 
jfrom  the  tomb  of  an  architect —  "  Prefect  of  the 
country,  Intendant  of  the  great  habitations, 
RoKSHEBB "  —  of  the  time  of  Thotmes  HI., 
XVHth  dynasty,  sixteenth  centuiy  b.  c.*^  We 
copy  firom  Bosellini,  who  thought  them  Israelites  ; 
but,  according  to  the  chronology  of  Lepsius, 
they  antedate  Jacob;  though  they  may  be  a 
cognate  race  —  perhaps  some  of  his  ancestry. 
Wilkinson  honestly  observes :  — 

**  To  meet  inth  HebrewM  in  the  soalptiires  oani^  reasonably  be  expected,  since  the 
in  that  part  of  Egypt  where  they  lired  hare  not  been  preserred ;  bat  it  is  onrioos 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 

Fio.  S6. 

162  THE   CAUCASIAN   TYPES 

to  diseorer  other  foreign  et^vet  occupied  in  the  same  manner,  oreriooked  by  similar 
masters/  and  performing  the  yery  same  labors  as  the  Israelites  described  in  the  Bible." 

The  same  author  again  insistfl  — 

<*  They  are  not,  how erer,  Jews,  as  some  have  erroneonsly  supposed,  and  as  I  haye  elaa- 
where  shown." 

Kotwithstanding  the  palpable  anachronism  and  contradicting  figora- 
,tive  circumstances,  certain  evangelical  iheologers  have  wasted  much 
crocodilean  grief  over  these  unfortunate  and  oppressed,  however  apo- 
chryphal,  Israelites;  forgetting,  in  their  exceeding-great-thankfulness 
over  a  wondrous  "confirmation,"  to  weep  for  the  Egyptian  brick- 
makers,  who  toil  in  the  same  scene. 

The  following  items  may  assist  the  reader  in  forming  an  indepen- 
dent opinion :  — 

Ist.  The  hieroglyphics  do  not  mention  the  name  or  country  of 
these  brickmakers. 

2d.  The  scene  is  not  an  historical  record;  but  a  pictorial  illustration 
of  brick-making,  among  other  constructive  arts  that  embellished  the 
tomb  of  an  architect,  at  Thebes — that  is,  600  miles  from  "Goshen." 

3d.  The  people  wear  no  beards  —  their  little  chin-sprouts  are  but 
the  usual  unshaven  state  of  Egyptian  laborers,  no  less  than  of  pea- 
santry everywhere. 

4th.  They  are  a  Semitic  people — possibly,  with  their  beards  cut 
off  in  Egyptian  slavery ;  but  whether  Canaanites,  Hebrews,  Arabs, 
Qhaldseans,  or  others,  cannot  be  determined. 

5th.  There  is  not  the  slightest  monumental  evidence  that  the  Jews 
(in  the  manner  described  by  the  writers  of  Genesis  and  Exodus)  were 
ever  in  Egypt  at  all !  Their  type,  however,  had  existed  there,  2000 
years  before  Abraham's  birth. 

6th.  These  brickmakers  are  not  more  Jewish,  in  their  lineaments, 
than  Egyptian  Fellihs  of  Lower  Egypt  at  the  present  day,  where 
the  Arab  cross  is  strong.  Indeed,  they  greatly  resemble  lie  living 
mixed  race,  who  now  make  Nilotic  bricks,  every  day,  at  Cairo,  exactly 
as  these  brickmakers  did  8500  years  ago,  and  think  nothing  of  it 

Finally — if  these  brickmakers  are  claimed  to  be  Israelites,  we  can 
have  no  objection,  because  their  effigies  will  corroborate  the  perma- 
nence of  the  Jewish  type  for  8500  years :  if  they  be  not,  to  us  they 
answer  just  as  well — ^being  tacit  witnesses  of  the  durability  of  Semitic 
features  in  particular,  no  less  than  proofe  of  one  more  form  of  ancient 
Caucasian  types  in  general. 

The  next  head  (Fig.  87),  we  now  submit,  is  really  out  of  place  among 
our  Ca'ucasian  group ;  but,  from  the  man's  associations,  he  may  have 
a  position  here.  "We  are  induced  to  portray  his  singular  type  for 
another  reason :  viz.,  that,  being  represented,  in  the  same  picture  with 
foreign  allies,  as  well  as  with  native  Egyptian  soldiers,  it  serves  to 

Digitized  by 

Google 

CARRIED    THROUGH    EGYPTIAN    MONUMENTS.        163 

illustrate  the  correctness  of  Egyptian  out-  ^w*  87. 

line  drawing,  and  also  the  minute  knowledge 
their  artists  hid  of  various  types  of  man- 
kind at  that'  early  day.  The  people  of 
whom  this  is  a  sample  have  been  reputed 
by  many  to  be  ancient  Ohinese.  There  are 
much  better  reasons  for.  believing  them  to 

be  Tartar  tribes;  which  form  the  geogra- 

phical  link  between  Mongols  and  Cauca-       "^^^     llM^^^^^ 
sians — aboriginal  consanguinity  with  either  *  '   I»Tt^   , 

excluded. . 

Morton  took  this  head  for  Mongolian;  and  too  hastily  adopted 
ancient  Egypto-Chinese  connexions,  on  the  feith  of  certain  pseudo- 
antique  Chinese  "  vases ; "  which,  not  manufectured  prior  to  a.  d, 
1100,  could  not  have  been  found  in  Theban  tombs  shut  up  2000 
years  before. 

Under  the  heading  of  "Alphabetical  Origins,"  our  Supplement 
establishes  that  the  Chinese,  before  the  Christian  era,  possessed  no 
knowledge  whatever  of  nations  whose  habitats  lay  north  and  west  of 
Persia.  The  splendid  tableau  from  which  the  above  ethnographic  re- 
cord is  taken,  contains  many  heads  of  the  same  type^ — some  of  which 
are  shaven,  except  the  scalp-lock  on  the  crown ;  while  others,  though 
adorned  with  the  thin  moustache,  wear  the  hair  long  and  untouched 
by  scissors.  Now,  it  can  be  seen,  by  reference  to  Pauthier,  that  the 
MantchoU' Tartar 8y  in  a.  d.  1621-27,  forced  the  Chinese  to  shave  their 
heads,  and  wear  the  pig-tail.  Previously,  the  Chinamen  had  worn 
their  hair  long.  This  scalp-lock  (called  Shoosheh,  by  the  Arabs), 
therefore,  is  a  Tartar  custom ;  and  inasmuch  as  in  the  reign  of 
Eamses  IL,  fourteenth  century  b.  c,  China  and  Chinese  were  equally 
unknown  to  the  Egyptians,  Jews,  or  Assyrians,  we  must  suppose 
that  these  fair,  oblique-eyed,  and  scalp-locked  enemies  of  Ramses,  were 
TartarSy  or  a  branch  of  the  great  easterly  Scythian  hordes.^? 

Osbum  repeats  this  scene,  calling  the  people  Sheti,  whilst  striving 
to  restrict  their  habitat  to  Canaan,  in  which  he  signal^  fiuls.  Birch's 
more  consistent  geography  carries  them  to  the  Caspian,  where  Tartars 
would  naturally  be  found ;  to  which  critical  induction  we  may  add 
the  recent  opinions  of  RawUnson,  De  Saulcy,  Hincks,  and  Lowen- 
stem,  that  the  Tartar,  or  "  Scythic,"  element  in  cuneatic  inscriptions, 
especially  of  the  Acheemeno-iferfurn  style,  establishes  the  proximity 
of  Turkish  (call  them  Tartar  or  Scythic,  for  the  terms  are  still  vague; 
tribes  to  Persia  at  a  much  earlier  period  than  ethnolo^sts  had  here- 
tofore suspected. 

Aft  such,  this  effigy  (Fig.  87)  exemplifies  the  remotest  Asiatic  people 

Digitized  by 

Google 

164 

THE    CAUCASIAN    TYPES 

depicted  on  Pharaonic  monuments,  in  days  parallel  with  Moses, 

during  the  fourteenth  century  b.  c. 
Ramses  IT.,  at  Beyt-el-Wilee — fourteenth  century  b.  c. — ^grasps  the 

subjoined  foreigner  (Fig.  88)  by  the  hair  of  his  head.    Considered,  by 

Rosellini,  to  be  typical  of  the  "Tohen,"  a  people  of  Syria:  whereas 

Morton  deemed  him  a  "  Himyar- 
^^^'  ^-  ite-Arab.'*^^    We  have  naught 

to  oppose;  and  may  add,  that 
his  red  {HimyHr)  color  aflUiates 
him  with  the  Arabian  KUS  A-ites. 

Fia.  89. 

Fio.  90^ 

As  the  type  of  Yellow  races,  (Fig.  89)  stands  in  the  tomb  of  Ramses 
m.,  XXth  dynasty,  about  thirteen  centuries  b.  c."*  Nothing  is  certain 
respecting  the  history  of  the  people  he  represents ;  but  Osburn  perhaps 
is  right  in  calling  him  an  ancient  Tyrianr  everything — features, 
purple  dres%  &c. — ^harmonizes  with  this  view,  adopted  by  us  in  a  pre- 
ceding chapter.     {I^fray  p.  186.) 

An  identical  type,  possibly  from 
another  Phoenician  colony,  is  met 
with  at)out  150  years  earlier.  From 
the  Theban  tomJ>at  Qoomet  Murrai, 
of  the  time  of  Amuntuonch  {Amen- 
anchut  of  Birch),  we  select  (Fig.  90) 
one  instance  of  the  many,  to  illtfs- 
trate  physiological  similitudes,^'^ 
that  time  has  not  extinguished, 
along  the  present  coasts  of  Pales- 
tine, in  the  fishermen  of  Sour  and 
Sfeyda  (Tyre  and  Sidon),  even  to 
this  day. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

CARRIED    THROUGH    EGYPTIAN    MONUMENTS. 

165 

This  great  Asiatic  cliief  (Fig,  91)  is  killed,  in  single  combat,  by 
Ramses  IE.;  the  colored  original  being  drawn  on  a  magnificent  tableau, 
at  Aboosimbel.^^  Rosellini  makes  him  one  of  the  Scythian  "  Tohen,*' 
beyond  the  Euphrates;  and  Morton  deems  him  "Pelasgic.*'  His 
features  depart  essentially  from  the  Semitic  cast ;  and  the  face  offers 
the  earliest  instance  wherein  Egyptian  art  has  figured  the  eye  closed. 

In  this  instance,  as  in  many  others, 
our  copy  is  reversed;  but  such  inad- 
vertencies do  not  affect  ethnogra- 
phic precision. 

Fia.  92. 

Fio.  91. 

Fio.  98. 

We  detach  Fig.  92  from  the  bas-reliefe  of  Ramses  HI.,  XXth  dynasty, 
at  Medeenet  Haboo ;  where  he  is  called  "  Captive  prince  of  the  per- 
verse race  of  the  inimical  country  of  Sheto,  hving  in  captivity."  ^^ 
Morton,  very  naturally,  holds  him  to  be  a  "variety  of  the  Semitic 
stock;"  and  ShetOj  if  read  KhetOj  signifies  a  Hittite;  using  the  Biblical 
term  KAeT^  in  its  widest  acceptation. 

As  the  type  of  White  r%ces.  Fig. 
98  appears  in  one  of  the  Theban 
tombs ;  and,  name  unknown,  is  con- 
jectured, by  Bosellini,  to  be  "  an  an- 
cient example  of  the  Greeks  of  Asia 
Minor,  and  especially  of  lonians.  To 
strengthen  this  conjecture,  I  recall 
how  among  the  monuments  of  Thot- 
mes  V.  [TV.],  and  of  Meneptha  I., 
mention  is  made  of  this  people."^'® 
The  lonianSj  Javan,  &c.,  are  sufficiently  discussed  in  our  Part  U., 
where  the  ItTN"  of  Xth  Genesis  is  analyzed ;  but  "  Yavan,"  and  the 
"people  of  Yavan,"  as  Grecian  tribes  of  the  seventh  century  B.C., 
occur  repeatedly  upon  the  monuments  of  Nineveh.  Morton  takes 
him  to  be  " Pelasgic."    In  his  MS.  letter,  he  adds:  — 

Digitized.by  VjOOQ iC 

166 

THE    CAUCASIA:!^    TYPES 

Fio.  96. 

Fig.  96. 

«  This  head  presents  ns  with  the  trae  Hellenio  line  of  nose  and  forehead ;  for*  althongn 
the  latter  is  more  receding  than  we  continaally  see  in  the  Greek  heads,  it  forms  an  unin- 
terrapted  line  with  the  nose.  The  black  hair  is  in  nnison  with  the  other  traits ;  but  the 
red  tint  of  the  eye  [perhaps  an  error  of  artist  ?]  is  not  so  readily  accounted  for.  The  £Msial 
angle,  moreoyer,  in  this  head,  is  liitle  short  of  a  rightpangle." 

^^'  ^  For  the  sake  of  comparison,  we  first  give 

Lepsius's  copy  of  the  enlarged  head  (Fig.  94) 
of  the  standard  iype  of  Telhw  races,  from 
the  quadripartite  division  in  Seti's  tomb,  de- 
scribed in  a  former  place.  Beneath  it,  (Fig. 
95)  is  a  redaction  of  one  of  the  same  four 
persons  at  full  length.  Opposite,  we  put 
Rosellini's  copy  (Fig.  96), 
for  the  express  purpose  of 
indicating  an  error  in  the 
Tu9ean  work  which  the 
Prussian  has  removed :  re- 
ferring to  our  note^''  for 
explanations. 

Numerous  are  the  com- 
rades of  Fig.  97  in  the 
conquests  of  Bamses  11., 
at  Bfeyt-el-Wilee,  XlXth 
dynasty,  fourteenth  cen- 
tury B.  c.  Birch  considers 
them  tribes  of  Canaan; 
because,  at  £[amac,  the 
same  people  are  called,  in 
the  text,  "The  feUen  of  the  ShoasaUy  in  their  elevation  on  the  fortress 
of  Pelou,  which  is  in  the  land  of  Kanana.'*^^  And  the  next  (Fig.  98)  is 
an  individual  appertaining  to  another  set  of  prisoners,  from  some 
adjacent  district    Osbum  figures  them  as  Jebusites;  to  which  we 

Fio.  98. 

•  Fio.  97. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

CARRIED    THROFGH    EGYPTIAN    MONUMENTS.        167 

offer  no  objection ;  and  thus  we  should  behold  one  of  the  inhabitants 
of  ant^-Judaic  Jerusalem,  leBTJS  or  Jebusi  before  its  capture  by 
Joshua,  and  long  prior  to  the  eiq)al8ion  of  the  Jebufian  from  Mount 
Zion  by  the  prowess  of  David^ 

Fig.  99.  Fio.  100. 

Both  the  head  and  the  full-length  figure, 

here  presented,  illustrate  four  personages 

identical  in  all  respects."' 

They  are  the  type  of  the  Telhw  races,  in 

one  of  the  tombs  coeval  with  Mosaic  tinies. 

Rosellini,  who  wrote  before  the  Persian  and 
the  Ninevite  arrow-heads  were  deciphered,  suggested  their  resem- 
blance to  the  sculptures  of  Assyria  and  Persepolis.  They  portray, 
certainly,  strong  Chaldsean  aflSnities,  cognate  with  the  Hebrew  race ; 
and  their  elegant  green  dresses,  embroidered  with  skilftil  taste,  show 
a  very  polished  people.  Osbum  figures  them  as  Hamaihite% — citizens 
of  Samah^  between  Damascus  and  Aleppo,  ever  renowned  for  their 
beautiful  manufectures,  brocades,  shawls ;  together  with  those  richly- 
colored  silk-and-cotton  goods,  now  dear  to  Levantine  merchants  as 
**All^gias ; "  nor  does  his  view  militate  against  ours.  Champollion- 
Figeac  gives  this  efiigy,  with  the  conjecture  of  his  brother  that  they 
are  Medes,  corresponding  to  Persepolitan  relievos.  -Chaldsea  seems 
to  be  the  centre-point  of  all  these  authorities;  and  we  have  classified, 
elsewhere,  this  head  among  Jewish  tribes. 

JBelonging  to  the  same  sculptures  of  the  thirteenth  to  fifteenth 
centuries  b.  c,  and  located  geographically  in  the  same  Syrian  pro- 
vinces, we  group  together  na?  more  specimens  of  varieties  of  this 
all-pervading  Semitic  type.  Representatives  of  ancient  Sidonians, 
Aradians,  and  so  forth,  along  the  coast  of  Syria,  and  ou  the  spurs  of 
Liebanon,  each  one  still  lives  in  thousands  of  descendants,  who  now 
throng  the  Bazaars  of  Sfeyda,  Beyroot,  Tripoli,  Latachia,  Antioch 
and  Aleppo.  Substitute  the  turban  for  the  military  casque  and  civic 
cap ;  and,  in  the  same  localities,  still  speaking  dialects  of  the  same 

Digitized  by 

Google 

168 

THE    CAUCASIAN    TYPES 

Semitisli  tongues,  you  will  recognize  in  the  ^^Shawdmj**  people  of 
ShUmj  or  Syria  (SAeMites), — aa  the  Arabs  still  designate  the  DamoH 
eenes  technically,  and  the  Syrians  generally — the  very  men  whose 
ancestral  images  were  chiselled  by  Diospolitan  artists  not  less  than 
8200  years  agone. 

Fio.  lOl.wa 

Fio,  102.1® 

Pio.  108.ifli 

Fio.  104.i» 

Fio.  106.1M 

Fio.  106.1W 

Digitized  by 

Google 

CABRIED    THROXIGH    EGYPTIAN    MONUMENTS.        169 

Here  let  US  pause.  Thirtyvarieties,  more  or  less,  of  the  (7a««<?a«ww  type, 
solely  among  ancient  foreigners  to  Egypt,  have  now  been  submitted 
to  the  reader.  They  have  been  taken,  almost  at  random,  from  the 
Jkfonumenti  of  Rosellini,  with  occasional  reference  to  the  Denkmdler 
of  Lepsius :  and  their  epochas  range  between  the  thirteenth  and  the 
seventeenth  centuries  b.  c. ;  a  period  of  about  400  years,  including, 
moreover,  whatever  era  is  assignable  to  Moses.  There  is  diversity 
enough  among  them  to  satisfy  the  most  exacting,  that  men,  in  the 
same  times  and  countries,  were  just  as  distinctly  marked  as  they  are 
now  in  the  Levant,  after  some  8800  years ;  and  hence,  again,  it  follows 
that,  in  the  same  lands,  time  has  prodpced  no  change,  save  through 
amalgamation ;  because,  in  the  streets  of  Cairo,  Jerusalem,  Damascus, 
Beyroot,  Aleppo,  Antioch,  Mosul,  and  Bagdad,  every  one  of  these 
varieties  strikes  your  vision  daily. 

Mark,  too,  that  the  whole  of  these  diversified  Oriental  fiunilies  occu- 
pied a  very  limited  geographical  area ;  viz. :  from  the  river  Nile  east- 
ward to  tiie  Tauric  range  of  mountains;  at  most,  to  the  western 
borders  of  the  Euxine  and  Caspian  Seas,  and  across  from  the  Medi- 
terranean to  the  Persian  Gulf — the  Indus,  perhaps,  inclusive.  This 
superficies  constitutes  but  a  petty  segment  of  the  earth.  Neither  have 
we  yet  looked  beyond  such  narrow  horizon,  whether  for  Mongols,  Ma- 
lays, Polynesians,  Australians,  Americans,  Esquimaux ;  nor  for  Finnish, 
Scandinavian,  endless  European,  TJralian,  and  other  races,  with  the 
above  types  necessarily  coexistent,  although  to  old  Pharaonic  ethno- 
graphy utterly  unknown !  Observe  likewise,  that,  Egypt  deducted, 
Africa  and  her  multifarious  types  are  yet  untouched. 

How,  we  feel  now  emboldened  to  ask,  have  the  defenders  of  the 
17n%-doctrine  met  the  above  facts  ?  The  answer  is  simple.  By  sup- 
pressing every  one  of  them. 

Dr.  Prichard  published  the  third  edition  of  the  lid  volume  of  his 
Besearches  into  the  Phyeical  Hittory  of  Mankind^  in  1887,  at  the  vast  me- 
tropolis of  London,  surrounded  with  facilities  unparalleled.  He  de- 
votes fifty-nine  pages  to  the  "Egyptians;""®  yet,  beyond  a  passing 
sneer  at  Champollion-le-Jeune,^  whose  stupendous  labors  were  then 
endorsed  by  the  highest  continental  scholars — De  Sacy,  Humboldt, 
Arago,  Bunsen,  &c.  — he  never  quotes  a  single  hierologist !  Now-a- 
days,  every  archfleoloffist  knows  that  three-fourths  of  those  very  writers 
whom  Prichard  does  cite  on  Egypt  have  been  consigned  to  the  "tomb 
of  the  Capulets."  Now,  in  1887,  Rosellini's  Plates  and  Tezt^  compre- 
hen(}ing  almost  every  pictorial  fact  by  us  brought  forward,  had  been 
published — ^in  great  part,  for  above  four  years,  conmiencing  in  1882-8. 
Common  enough  was  the  Tuscan  work  in  London,  to  say  naught  of 
Paris,  close  at  hand.  How  could  Prichard  ignore  the  existence  also 
22 

Digitized  by 

Google 

170  THE   CAUCASIAN   TYPES 

of  these  identical  subjects  in  Champollion's  folio  M6nufnent$  d'Egypte  f 
But,  worse  than  that,  viewing  the  question  merely  as  one  of  scientific 
knowledge  and  good  fEdth,  Prichard  continued  to  publish,  yolume  IIL 
in  1841 ;  volume  IV.  in  1844 ;  and  volume  V.  in  1847.  The  world 
seems  exhausted  to  prove  his  unitary-hypothesis.  He  never  reverts 
to  Egyptian  archseology,  nor  reveals  one  iota  of  all  these  splendid 
discoveries.  Why?  Because  they  flatiy  contradict  him,  and  the 
antiquated  school  of  whidi  he  was  the  steel-clad  war-horse. 

Who  forced  Prichard,  at  last,  either  to  accept  hieroglyphical  disco- 
veries in  some  of  their  hearings  upon  the  Natural  History  of  Man,  or  to 
become  placed,  so  to  say,  witl^ut  the  pale  of  scientific  anthropology  ? 

Our  countryman,  Morton, — ^a  student  who,  deprived  of  every  fiicilily 
in  Egyptian  matters  until  1842,  printed,  in  1844,  his  ^^Orania  JEgj/pt- 
iacay  or  Observations  on  Egyptian  Ethnography,  derived  fix)m  Ana- 
tomy, BBstoiy,  and  the  Monuments ; "  and  thereby  founded  the  true 
principle  of  philosophical  inquiry  into  human  origins. 

Prichard  (in  justice  to  his  memory  let  us  speak,)  acknowledged 
Morton's  work  in  the  handsomest  manner,^  although  not  in  the 
"  Researches."  But,  how  came  it  that  Prichard  should  have  allowed 
an  American  savan  (cut  off  by  the  Atlantic  fit>m  all  his  own  un- 
bounded facilities,)  to  anticipate  him  ?  In  truth,  only  because  Egyp- 
tian archseology  had  shattered  Prichard's  im^-doctrine  from  the 
weather-vane  to  its  foundations. 

Having  disposed  thus  of  their  champion,  weaker  .sustainers  of 
"  unity"  who  have  pinned  their  creed  on  his  obstinacy,  adding  their 
own  blindness  to  his  cecity,  may  be  passed  over,  without  distressing 
the  reader  by  recapitulation  of  shallow  arguments  and  unphiloso- 
phical  crudities.  Numbers  of  their  books  lie  on  our  shelves  undusted, 
because  there  is  not  a  monumental  ^act  to  be  culled  from  the  whole 
of  them.  Nor  shall  we  do  more  than  allude  to  the  opinions  of  the 
learned  Mure,***  or  of  the  erudite,  though  mystical,  Henry,^  who 
endeavored  to  confine  all  these  Asiatic  wars  of  the  Pharaohs  to  the 
valley  of  the  Nile ;  because,  as  neither  scholar  could  read  a  hierogly- 
phicy  they  debated  upon  that  which  they  did  not  understand ;  and,  in 
consequence,  uttered  views  that  are  now  entirely  superseded  by  later 
Egyptologists,  to  whose  pages  we  make  a  point  of  referring  those  who 
may  choose  to  criticise  the  bibliographical  ground-work  of  "  Types 
of  Mankind." 

But  we  have  not  finished  with  the  monuments. 

M.  Prissb's  copy  of  the  heterodox  king,  Atenrii-Bakhan  {Bex-en- 
Aten)j  now  proved  to  be  Amunoph  IV.,  need  not  here  be  repeated. 
Its  reduced  fiw-simile  may  be  consulted  (wfpra,  page  147);  while  every 
reference  required  is  thrown  into  a  note :  '^  and,  inasmuch  as  one  of 

Digitized  by 

Google 

CABBIED    THBOXIGH    EGTPTIAN   MONUMENTS.        171 

the  writers  (G.  R.  G.)  was  present  at  the  temple  of  Eamac,  1889-40, 
w^hen  the  ori^al  stone  was  found,  and  the  design  made,  we  can 
vouch  for  the  accuracy  of  Prisse's  copy  of  this  unique  bas-relief. 
We  mention  this,  because  it  differs,  though  not  materially,  from  the 
later  reproductions  of  the  same  portrait  in  Lepsius's  Denkmaler:^  a 
divergence  accounted  for  by  the  fact  that  the  French  original  lay  At 
Thebes,  whereas  the  Prussians  copied  others  at  TeUeUAmamay  200 
miles  off:  nor  is  it  to  be  expected  that  ancient  Egyptian  portrait- 
sculptors  could  multiply  likenesses  of  a  man  more  uniformly  similar 
among  themselves,  than  can  our  own  artists,  or  even  daguerrio- 
typiBtSy  at  the  present  day.    In  proof  of  how  artists  differ,  we  here 

Pio.  107. 

Skai,  or  AL 

BlKHBH-ATBir. 

present  other  less  faithful  copies,  followed  by  Morton.^  The  cut 
contains,  moreover,  an  attempted  portrait  of  anotlwr  king^  formerly 
termed  SKAI,  whose  place,  though  proved  to  be  neariy  eoend  with 
that  of  Bakhan,  was  enigmatical  until  Lepsius  discoretvd  that  he 
was  an  inmiediate  successor  of  the  arch-heretic,  and,  like  him^  became 
effiu^d  from  the  monuments  when  Amun's  priests  regained  the  upper 
hand.>« 

•'  This  king,  AI,  wfts  formerlj  a  printe  indiTidnal,  aad  took  his  taeerdotal  title  into  his 
cartouche  at  a  later  period.  He  appears  with  hia  wife  in  the  tombs  of  Amama,  not  unfre- 
qnently  as  a  noble  and  peenliarly-honored  officer  of  king  Amnnoph  IV. ;  that  puritanical 
•on- worshipper,  who  ohanged  his  name  into  that  of  'Bech-en-Aten'^— i.  e.  Adorer  of  the 
sun's  disk. 

In  Rosellini's  copy,^  the  features  of  this  king  AI  are  atrocious. 
Lepsius  has  since  pronounced  Bex-en-aten  to  be  Amunoph  IV.,  son 

Digitized  by 

Google 

172  THE    CAUCASIAN    TYPES 

of  Am\mo]fh'Memnon.  Ethnologically,  his  strange  countenance 
attests  very  mixed  blood ;  but  nothing  of  the  Negro  in  either  parent. 
His  face  is  Asiatic,  typifying  no  especial  race ;  but  it  is  one  of  those 
accidental  deviations  from  regularity  that  anatomists  are  familiar  with, 
especially  among  mongrel  breeds.  We  have  seen  in  our  Pharaonio 
gallery  tiiat  Amunoph  m.  (Fig.  53)  himself  was  not  of  pure  Egyp- 
tian stock. 

We  now  take  a  long  and  portentous  stride  in  Egyptian  history ; 
viz. :  from  the  AViith  back  to  the  Xllth  dynasty,  a  period  obscure 
for  about  four  centuries.  The  country  during  this  hiatus  seems  to 
have  been  greatly  disturbed  by  wars,  conquests,  by  Ht/ksos-migrar 
tions  of  population,  and  other  agitating  causes ;  and  hence  arises  the 
lack  of  monuments  to  guide  our  investigations.  In  ethnographical 
materials,  especially,  there  is  almost  an  entire  blank.  But  with  the 
Xnth  dynasty,  one  of  the  most  eflftilgent  periods  of  Egyptian  history 
bursts  upon  us ;  and  we  can  again,  with  ample  documents,  take  up 
our  Caucasian  type,  and  pursue  it  upwards  along  the  stream  of  time. 

According  to  Lepsius,  the  Xllth  dynasty  closed  about  the  year 
2124  B.  c.  K  we  add  to  this  the  sunmiation  for  the  eiglt  kings,  given 
in  the  Turin  Papyrus,  of  "218  years,  1  month,  and  15  days,""*  this 
dynasty  commenced  about  the  year  2337  b.  c.  ;  which  is  only  some 
eleven  years  after  TJsher's  date  for  the  Deluge,  when  most  good  Chris- 
tians imagine  that  but  eight  fdults,  four  men  and  four  women  (with  a 
few  children),  were  in  existence !  The  monuments  of  this  dynasty 
afford  abundant  evidence  not  only  of  the  existence  of  Egypto-Cauca- 
sian  races,  but  of  Asiatic  nations,  as  well  as  of  Negroes  and  other 
African  groups,  at  the  said  diluvian  era. 

Fio.  108. 

Fio.  109. 

« I'hirty'teven  Pritonen^*  of  Beni-HasBan.  ,      General  Nbtotph  :  now,  Num-hoUp. 

Let  US  dispose  first  of  Pig.  110.    It  is  one  of  three  recently  pub- 
lished by  Lepsius ;  characterized  by  red  hair,  and  distinct  from  No. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

CARRIED    THROUGH    EGYPTIAN    MONUMENTS.        173 

108,  whose  hair  is  black.    We  refer  to  ^^^^^- 

the  Denkmdler^^  for  their  colored  por- 
traits, adding  Lepsius's  comments 
below. 

The  head  (Fig.  108)^  on  the  preced- 
ing page,  jfrom  the  celebrated  tombs  of 
^eni-Hassan,  so  often  alluded  to  by 
Egyptologists,  represents  one  of  a  group 
of  personages,  generally  known  as  the 
^^thirty-seven prisoners  of  Beni-Hassan.'' 
The  scene  has  been  repeatedly  and  va- 
riously explained,  by  ChampoUion,  Ro-  ^'^''^'  '"""  Beni-Hassan. 
sellini,  Wilkinson,  ChampoUion-Figeac,  Birch,  and  Osbum — leaving 
aside  the  trashy  speculations  of  mere  tourists ;  for,  as  usual,  there 
have  been  printed  many  extravagant  theories  as  to  the  country  and 
condition  of  tiiese  "thirty-seven  prisoners."  They  were,  indeed,  sup- 
posed, by  orthodox  credulity,  to  represent  the  visit  of  Abraham  to 
Egypt,  or  else  the  arrival  of  Jacob  and  his  family.  More  critical  authori- 
ties have  beheld  in  them  Israelitish  wanderers,  Ionian  Greeks,  Hyksos, 
and  what  not.  But,  alas !  all  Jewish  partialities  received  a  death- 
blow when  it  was  proved,  through  the  discovery  of  the  Xllth  dynasty, 
that  this  tableau  had  been  painted  at  Beni-Hassan  several  generations 
before  Abraham's  birth !  The  first  rational  account,  in  English,  of 
this  scene  was  put  forth  by  Mr.  Birch,  in  1847.  •  He  says :  — 

•<  An  officer  of  Usr-t-sen  L,  as  recorded  in  his  tomb  at  Benihassan,  receiyed  in  the  sixth 
regnal  year  of  that  monarch,  by  royal  command,  a  convoy  of  thirty-nine  (87)  Met-aeffem, 
foreigners,  headed  by  their  hyk,  or  leader,  Ab-sha.  These  were  of  the  great  Semitio 
family,  called,  by  the  Egyptians,  **Aamu.**^^ 

This  lection  he  confirms  in  1852  — 

«  The  Mes-ftem  foreigners,  who  approach  the  nomarch  Neferhetp,  come  throngh  the  Ara- 
bian Desert  on  asses."  208 

Lepsius  had  described  the  impressions  made  upon  him,  at  first 
sight  of  tbis  unique  series :  — 

**  In  these  remarks,  I  am  thinking  especially  of  that  yery  remarkable  scene,  on  the 
grave  of  iVeA^a-«e-NuMHETEP,  which  brings  before  our  eyes,  in  such  lively  colors,  the 
entrance  of  Jacob  with  his  family,  and  would  tempt  us  to  identify  it  with  that  event,  if 
ehronoloffy  would  allow  vt,  (for  Jacob  came  under  the  Hyksos  [t.  «.,  centuries  later]),  and 
if  we  were  not  compelled  to  beUeve  that  eueh  family  immigratione  were  by  no  meane  of  rare  occur- 
renee.  These  were,  however,  the  forerunners  of  the  Hyksos  [and  of  the  Israelites],  and 
doubtless,  in  many  ways,  paved  the  way  for  them."203 

From  the  excellent  translation  of  Lepsius's  Brief e  by  Mr.  Kenneth 
B.  H.  Mackensie,^  wo  extract  the  following  particulars,  referring  at 
the  same  time  to  the  Prussian  Benhmdler^  for  exquisite  plates  of 
these  splendid  sepulchres :  — 

Digitized  by 

Google 

174  THE    CAUCASIAN    TYPES 

«It  must  then  haTe  been  a  proud  period  for  Egypt  — that  is  proTed  bj  these  mightj 
tombs  alone.  It  is  interesting,  likewise,  to  trace  in  the  rich  representations  on  the  walls, 
which  put  before  our  eyes  the  high  advance  of  the  peaceful  arts,  as  well  as  the  refined 
luxury  of  the  great  of  that  period ;  also  the  foreboding  of  that  great  misfortune  which 
brought  Egypt,  for  several  centuries,  under  the  rule  of  its  northern  enemies.  In  the  repre- 
sentations of  the  warlike  games,  which  form  a  characteristically  recurring  feature,  and  take 
up  whole  sides  in  some  tombs,  which  leads  to  a  conclusion  of  their  general  use  at  that 
period  afterwards  disappearing,  we  often  find  among  the  red  or  dark-brown  men,  of  the 
Egyptian  and  southern  races,  very  light-colored  people,  who  have,  for  the  most  part,  a 
totally  different  costume,  and  generally  red-colored  haur  on  the  head  and  beard,  and  blue 
eyes,  sometimes  appearing  alone,  sometimes^  in  small  divisions.  They  also  appear  in  the 
traius  of  the  nobles,  and  are  evidently  of  northern,  probably  of  Semitic,  origin.  We  find 
victories  over  the  Ethiopians  and  Negroes  on  the  monuments  of  those  times,  and  therefore 
need  not  be  surprised  at  the  recurrence  of  black  slaves  and  servants.  Of  wars  against  the 
northern  neighbors  we  learn  nothing ;  but  it  seems  that  the  immigration  from  the  north- 
east was  already  beginning,  and  that  many  foreigners  sought  an  asylum  in  fertile  Egjrpt  in 
return  for  service  and  other  useful  employments.  ...  I  have  traced  the  whole  representa- 
tion, which  is  about  eight  feet  long,  and  one-and-a-half  high,  and  is  very  well  preserved 
through,  as  it  is  only  painted.  The  Royal  Scribe,  Nefruhotep,  who  conducts  the  company 
into  the  presence  of  the  high  officer  to  whom  the  grave  belongs,  \k  presenting  him  a  leaf  of 
papyrus.  Upon  this  the  sixth  year  of  King  Sesurtesen  II.  is  mentioned,  in  which  that 
family  of  thirty-seven  persons  came  to  Egypt  Their  chief  and  lord  was  nuned  Absha, 
they  themselves  Aama,  a  national  designation,  recurring  with  the  light-complexioned  race, 
often  represented  in  thcToyal  tombs  of  the  XlXth  dynasty,  together  with  three  other  races, 
and  forming  the  four  principal  divisions  of  mankind,  with  which  the  Egyptians  were 
acquainted.  Champollion  took  them  for  Greeks  when  he  was  in  Benihassan,  but  he  was 
not  then  aware  of  the  extreme  antiquity  of  the  monuments  before  him.  Wilkinson  con- 
siders them  prisoners,  but  this  is  confuted  by  their  appearance  with  arms  and  lyres,  with 
wives,  children,  donkeys,  and  luggage ;  I  hold  them  to  be  an  immigrating  Hyksos-family, 
which  begs  for  a  reception  ihto  the  favored  land,  and  whose  posterity  perhaps  opened  the 
gates  of  Egypt  to  the  conquering  tribes  of  their  Semitic  relations." 

The  writer  (G.  R.  Q.),  who  had  explored  all  these  localities  in 
1889,  with  Mr.  A.  C.  Harris,  would  mention,  that  immediately  above 
Beni-Hassan  (at  the  Speos-ArtemidoSy  overlooked  by  Wilkinson  from 
1823  to  *34),  a  defile  through  the  precipitous  hills  leads  from  the  Nile 
into  the  Eastern  Desert,  and  thence  trends  through  the  Widee-el- 
Arabah  to  the  Isthmus  of  Suez:  as,  indeed,  may  be  perceived  in 
Russegger's  map,**  before  us.  At  the  Egyptian  mouth  of  this  ravine 
are  remains  of  walls,  &c.,  that  once  blocked  the  passage ;  and,  in 
ancient  times,  here  doubtless  was  a  military  post,  to  prevent  nomadic 
ingress  into  the  cultivated  lands  without  the  surveillance  of  the  police. 
Owing  to  the  intricacies  of  the  limestone  ravines  in  this  part  of  the 
Eastern  Desert,  any  strangers,  becoming  entangled  in  these  intersec- 
tions, would,  in  the  end,  debouche  at  this  pass,  and  be  at  once  arrested 
by  the  guard.  It  is  thus  that,  without  speculative  notions,  we  arrive 
at  the  conclusion  that  these  "thirty-seven  foreigners"  (although  the 
artist  has  drawn  but  fifteen — men,  women,  and  children)  were  merely 
Arabian  wanderers ;  who,  motives  unknown,  entered  Egypt  during 
the  twenty-third  century  b.  c.    Natural  history,  heretofore  too  fre- 

Digitized  by 

Google 

CABRIED  THROUGH  EGYPTIAN  MONUMENTS.    175 

quently  left  aside  by  archflBologists,  not  only  confinns  our  view,  but 
indicates  the  Peninsula  of  Mount  Sinai,  if  not  as  their  homestead,  at 
least  as  the  road  by  which  they  came.  The  reason  we  are  abotit  to 
give  establishes  two  things :  Ist,  the  minute  accuracy  of  Egyptian 
draughtsmen  in  the  Xllth  dynasty, 4200  years  ago ;  2dly,  the  prompt 
acuity  of  Prof.  Agassiz,  in  April,  1853. 

At  the  house  of  their  friend,  Mr.  A.  Stein,  of  Mobile,  the  authors 
were  looking  over  his  copy  of  the  noble  Prussian  DenkmaleVy  when 
Prof.  Agassiz,  the  moment  we  reached  this  plate  {ubi  supra)^  pointed 
out  the  ^^Capra  Siniaca — the  goat  with  semicircular  horns,  laterally 
compressed,"  as  the  first  animal ;  and  the  ^^Antilope  Saiga^  or  gazelle 
of  temperate  Western  Asia,"  as  the  siecond :  animals  offered  in  pro- 
pitiatory tribute  to  General  Num-hotep,  by  Absha,  the  Hyh^  chief,  of 
these  MeS'Segemy  foreigners. 

Our  Fig.  109  presents  the  likeness  of  the  excellent  governor  of  the 
province;  and  the  contrast,  between  their  yellow  Semitic  counte- 
nances and  his  rubescent  Egyptian  face,  spares  us  from  fears  that 
consanguinity  will  be  claimed  for  them. 

At  least  two  types,  then,  of  Caucasian  families — the  one  Semitish, 
and  the  other  Egyptian  —  were  distinct  from  each  other,  and  co- 
existent, 4200  years  ago.  K  twoy  why  not  more?  Why  not  each 
one  of  all  the  primitive  typfes  of  humanity  now  distinguishable  in 
Asia,  Africa,  Europe,  America,  or  Oceanica  ?  Science  and  logic  can 
assign  no  negative  reason:  dogmatism,  which  excludes  both,  will 
doubtless  continue  to  worry  the  hapless  "general  reader"  with  many. 

We  must  span,  for  want  of  intervening  ethnographic  monuments, 
the  gulf  that  separates  the  Xllth  from  the  Vlth  dynasty,  assuming 
the  latter  at  about  2800  years  b.  c.  Here  again,  however,  our  Cau- 
casian type  reappears  not  only  perfectly  marked,  but  identical  with 
many  of  the  heads  we  have  abeady  beheld  among  the  royal  portraite 
of  the  XVnth  and  succeeding  dyijaties.  Lepsius's  precious  Benk" 
miUer  yields  us  the  following :  — 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC 

176 

THE    CAUCASIAN    TYPES 

The  above  heads  are  from  patrician  tombs  of  the  Vlth  dynasly, 
which,  according  to  Lepsius,  commenced  about  the  year  2900  b.  c. 
Concerning  the  type  of  these,  and  numerous  other  eflBgies  of  this 
epoch,  admirably  figured  by  the  same  author,  there  can  be  no  dispute ; 
but,  the  plates  being  unaccompanied  by  text,  we  are  unable  to  supply 
historical  details  of  the  personages  represented  in  these  early  dynas- 
ties.   Lepsius  himself  will  ere  long  elucidate  them. 

The  following  two  (Figs.  118  and  114)  are  selected  as  examples  of 
the  same  type,  in  the  anterior  Vth  dynasty,  and  are  Egypto-Cauca- 
sians,  no  less  clearly  defined.  In  Fig.  113,  the  fitcial  angle  is  actually 
ffellenic. 

Fio.  118.»B 

Fia.  114.210 

Lastly,  here  are  some  of  the  earliest  portraits  of  the  human  species 
now  extant  —  effigies  5300  years  old. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

CARBIED    THROUGH    EGYPTIAN    MONUMENTS. 

177 

The  preceding  four  heads  are  all  from  painted  sculptures  in  tombs  of 
the  IVth  dynasty ;  which  commenced  at  Memphis,  according  to  Lep- 
sius,  about  3400  years  b.  c.  The  second  and  third  of  these  heads 
assimilate  closely  to  many  of  those  already  given  of  A  V  11th  and 
.XVmth  dynasties;  demonstrating  that  mixed  Caucasian  types  in- 
habited Egypt  from  the  first  to  the  last  of  her  surviving  monuments. 
We  have  stated  our  reasons,  in  another  place,  for  regarding  this  spe- 
cial physiognomy  to  be  commingled  with  foreign  and  Asiatic  elements ; 
and  not  representative,  consequently,  of  the  aboriginal  Egyptian  stem. 
The  third  of  these  heads  is  strongly  Chaldaic  in  its  outlines ;  and  we 
think  there  is  little  reason  to  doubt  that  the  ancestral  Mesopotamian 
stock  of  Abraham  had  long  been  mingling  its  blood  with  the  royal 
and  aristocratic  families  of  Egypt ;  because,  in  the  IVth,  Vth,  and 
Vlth  dynasties,  we  find  two  distinct  types  sculptured  on  the  monu- 
ments— ^the  one  African  or  Negroidy  and  the  other  Asiatic  or  Semitic. 
Of  course,  when  speaking  of  Abraham's  ancestral  itockj  the  reader 
will  understand  that  we  make  no  reference  to  this  patriarch's  indivi- 
duality. To  us,  his  name  serves  merely  to  classify  some  proximate 
or  identical  Chaldaic  family  of  man,  originally  connected  with  a  com- 
mon Euphratic  centre  of  creation,  of  which  the  existence  very  likely 
preceded  Abraham's  birth  by  myriads  of  ages. 

Our  fourth  portrait  (Fig.  118)  is  the  only  one  we  can  identify,  and 
its  associations  are  most  interesting.  Prince  and  Priest  Mbrhbt — 
probably  a  relative,  if  not  son,  of  King  ShoopHo,  CheopSy  builder  of 
the  Great  Pyramid — is  the  man  whose  tomb,  transferred  from  Mem- 
phis to  Berlin,  and  now  built  into  the  Royal  Museum,  has  escaped 
the  vicissitudes  of  time  for  above  fifly-two  centuries.  His  bas-reliefed 
visage  has  endured  almost  intact ;  whilst,  of  the  "  chosen  people," 
eveiy  Hebrew  portrait^  from  Abraham  to  Paul,  has  been  expunged 
from  human  iconography.    In  his  lineaments,  we  behold  the  pure 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC 

178 

THE    CAUCASIAN    TYPES 

Egyptian  type,  which  we  shall  endeavor  to  render  more  obvious 
through  lithogr§-phs  that  are  genuine  fac-similes  of  stamps  made,  on 
the  monuments  themselves,  by  the  hand  of  Lepsius,  at  Berlin. 

Meanwhile,  it  is  worthy  of  notice,  that,  in  the  ratio  of  our  descent 
from  the  sculptures  of  the  IVth  dynasty,  through  the  Old  Empire, 
our  conventionally-termed  "Chaldaic"  type  supplants  the  Nilotic  to 
such  an  extent,  that,  under  the  New  Empire,  and  among  the  aristocracy 
of  the  land,  it  almost  entirely  supersedes  the  African  type  of  incipient 
times.  The  admixture,  in  the^e  later  ages,  of  such  Asiatic  blood, 
may  be  due  to  the  so-called  Sykaos  ;  who  commenced,  even  before 
the  time  of  Menes,  intruding  upon,  and  settling  in  Egypt.  Alliances 
and  intermixtures  of  races,  similar  to  those  seen  at  the  present  day, 
have  operated  among  nations  in  all  ages,  and  everywhere  that  men 
and  women  have  encountered  each  other  on  pur  planet. 

Four  instances  may  be  consulted  in  Lepsius's  Denkmdlerj  of  Egyp- 
tian monarchs  who  have  left  at  the  copper-mines  of  Mt.  Sinai,  on  Stelagj 
inscribed  with  hieroglyphical  legends,  their  bas-relief  effigies ;  repre- 
senting each  king  in  the  act  of  braining  certain  foreigners :  whose 
pointed  beards,  aquiline  noses,  and  other  Semitish  characteristics,  com- 
bine with  the  Arabian  locality  to  identify  ihem  as  Arabs.  We  ^ve 
entire  (Fig.  119,  A)  a  specimen  of  the  earliest  Tablets — "Num-Shufu 

Fio.  119.2W 

Digitized  by 

Google 

CARRIED    THROUGH    EGYPTIAN    MONUMENTS.        179 

stunning  an  Arah-harharian  ;*'  a^d  the  head  of  another  smitten  by 
"  Senufru;"  both  kings  of  the  IVth  dynasty,  during  the  thirty-fourth 
century  b.  c. 

The  other  two  examples  (by  us  not  copied)  are  identical  in  style, 
but  a  little  posterior  in  age ;  one  being  of  the  reign  of  king  Shore, 
(or  Besho)  in  the  Vth,  and  the  other  of  Merira-Pepi,  in  the  Vlth 
dynasty.  A  fifth  example  might  be  cited  of  the  IVth,  but  it  is  of  the 
same  Senufru  mentioned  above.^^^ 

Here  then  are  represented  Egyptian  Pharaohs  striking  Asiatics ; 
and  here,  we  are  informed  epistolarily  by  Chev.  Lepsius,  is  the  re- 
motest monumental  evidence  of  two  distinct  types  of  man ;  although, 
an  analytical  comparison  of  such  antipodean  languages  as  the  ancient 
Chinese  with  the  old  Egyptian,  of  the  Atlantic  Berber  with  the  Medic 
of  Darius's  inscriptions,  of  the  Hindoo  JPali  with  the  Hebrew  of 
Habbakuk,  and  a  dozen  others  we  might  name,  would  result  in  estab- 
lishing for  each  of  these  distinct  tongues  such  an  enormous  and  inde- 
pendent antiquity,  as  to  leave  not  a  shadow  of  doubt  that  all  primitive 
A&ican  and  Asiatic  races  existed,  from  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  to 
China,  as  far  back  as  the  foundation  of  the  Egyptian  Empire,  and 
long  before.  It  is  in  the  IVth  Memphite  dynasty,  however,  that  we 
find  the  .oldest  sculptural  representations  of  man  now  extant  in  the 
world. 

In  the  above  figures  two  primordial  types,  one  Asiatic  and  the 
other  Egyptian,  stand  conspicuous.  If  then,  as  before  asserted,  two 
races  of  man  existed  simultaneously  during  the  IVth  dynasty,  in 
^uflicient  numbers  to  be  at  war  with  each  other,  their  prototypes 
must  have  lived  before  the  foundation  of  the  Empire,  or  far  earlier 
than  4000  years  b.  c.  If  two  types  of  mankind  were  coetaneous,  it 
follows  that  all  other  Asiatic  and  African  races  found  in  the  subse- 
quent Xnth  dynasty  must  have  been  also  in  existence  contempora- 
neously with  those  of  the  IVth,  as  well  as  with  all  the  aboriginal 
races  of  America,  Europe,  Oceanica,  Mongolia — in  short,  with  every 
spedes  of  mankind  throughout  the  entire  globe. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

180  AFRICAN    TYPES. 

CHAPTER   VI. 

AFRICAN    TYPES. 

Our  preceding  chapters  have  established  that  the  so-called  Oauea- 
Stan  iypes  may  be  traced  upwards  jfrom  the  present  day,  in  an  infinite 
variety  of  primitive  forms,  through  every  historical  record,  and  yet 
farther  back  through  the  petroglyphs  of  Egypt  (where  we  lose  them, 
in  the  mediaeval  darkness  of  the  earliest  recorded  people,  some  3500 
years  before  Christ),  not  as  a  few  stray  individuals,  but  as  populous 
nations,  possessing  distinct  physical  features  and'  separate  national 
characteristics.  We  now  turn  to  the  African  types,  not  simply  be- 
cause they  present  an  opposite  extreme  from  the  Caucasian,  but 
mainly  because,  fit)m  their  early  communication  with  Egypt,  much 
detail,  in  respect  to  their  physical  characters,  has  been  preserved  in 
the  catacombs  and  on  the  monuments. 

In  our  general  remarks  on  specieSy  we  have  shown  that  no  classifica- 
tion of  races  yet  put  forth  has  any  foundation  whatever  in  nature ; 
and  that,  after  several  thousands  of  years  of  migrations  of  races  and 
comminglings  of  types,  all  attempts  at  following  them  up  to  their 
original  birth-places  must,  from  the  absence  of  historic  annals  of 
those  primordial  times,  and  in  the  present  state  of  knowledge,  be 
utterly  hopeless.  This  remark  applies  with  quite  as  much  force  to 
Negroes  as  to  Caucasians :  for  Africa  first  exhibits  herself,  from  one 
extreme  to  the  other,  covered  with  dark-skinned  races  of  various 
shades,  and  possessing  endless  physical  characters,  which,  being  dis- 
tinct, we  must  regard  as  primitive,  until  it  can  be  shown  that  causes 
exist  capable  of  transforming  one  type  into  another.  The  Negroes 
may  be  traced  on  the  monuments  of  Egypt,  with  certainty,  as  nations, 
back  to  the  Xllth  dynasty,  about  2300  yeafs  b.  c.  :  and  it  cannot  be 
assumed  that  they  were  not  then  as  old  as  any  other  race  of  our  geo- 
logical epoch. 

In  order  to  develop  our  ideas  more  clearly,  we  propose  to  take  a  rapid 
glance  at  the  population  of  Africa.  We  shall  show,  that  not  only  is 
that  vast  continent  inhabited  by  types  quite  as  varied  as  those  of  Europe 
or  Asia,  but  that  there  exists  a  regular  ^radatim,  from  the  Cape  of  Good 
Hope  to  the  Isthmus  of  Suez,  of  w)iich  the  Hottentot  and  Bushman 
form  the  lowest,  and  the  Egyptian  and  Berber  types  the  highest  links ; 

Digitized  by 

Google 

AFRICAN    TYPES.  181 

that  all  these  gijadations  of  African  man  are  indigenous  to  the  soil ; 
and  that  no  historical  times  have  existed  when  the  same  gradations 
were  not. 

When  we  compare  the  continent  of  Aj6ica  with  the  other  great 
divisions  of  the  world,  it  is  apparent  that  it  forms  a  striking  contrast 
in  every  particular.  Its  whole  physical  geography,  its  climates,  its 
populations,  its  faunae,  its  florae,  &c.,  are  all  peculiar.  Upon  exami- 
nation of  maps  of  Europe,  Asia,  and  America,  we  see  indeed,  in  each 
continent,  great  diversities  of  climate,  soil,  elevations  of  surfece,  and 
other  phenomena ;  still  no  natural  barriers  exist  so  insurmountable 
as  to  prevent  the  migrations  and  comminglings  of  races,  and  con- 
sequent confusion  of  tongues  and  types :  but  jn  Africa  the  case  is 
quite  different  Here  stand  obstructions,  fixed  by  nature,  which  man 
in  early  times  had  no  means  of  overcoming.  Not  only  from  the  time 
of  Menes,  the  first  of  the  Pharaohs,  to  that  of  Moses,  but  from  the 
latter  epoch  to  that  of  Christ,  Africa,  south  of  the  Equator,  was  as 
much  a  terra  incognita  to  the  inhabitants  of  Europe,  Asia,  Egypt,  and^ 
the  Barbary  States,  as  certain  interior  parts  of  that  continent  are  to 
us  at  the  present  day.  We  know  that,  long  after  the  Christian  era, 
the  nautical  skill  necessary  for  exploring  expeditions,  no  less  than  for 
.  the  transportation  of  emigrants  to  those  distant  latitudes,  was  want- 
ing ;  and  we  have  only  to  turn  to  any  standard  work  (Ritter's,  for 
instance)  on  Ancient  Geography,  to  be  satisfied  of  these  facts.  It  is 
equally  certain  that  what  is  now  termed  "  Central  Africa"  could  not 
have  been  reached  by  caravan  from  the  Mediterranean  coast,  before 
the  introduction  of  cameU  from  Asia,  through  Egypt,  into  Barbary. 
The  epoch  of  this  animal's  introduction  is  now  known  to  antedate 
the  Christian  era  but  a  century  or  two.  It  is  contended,  by  the  advo- 
cates of  a  common  origin  for  mankind,  that  this  African  continent* 
was  first  populated  by  Asiatic  emigrants  into  Egypt ;  that  these  im- 
migi;^nts  passed  on,  step  by  step,  gradually  changing  their  physical 
organizations,  under  climatic  influences,  until  the  whole  continent, 
from  the  Mediterranean  to  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  was  peopled  by 
the  various  tribes  we  now  behold  scattered  over  that  enormous  space. 
But  such  an  hypothesis  can  hardly  be  maintained,  in  the  face  of  the 
fiw;£  asserted  by  Lepsius,  and  familiar  to  all  Egyptologists,  that  Negro 
and  other  races  already  existed  in  Northern  Africa,  on  the  Upper  Nile, 
2300  years  b.  c.  —  existed,  we  repeat,  in  despite  of  natural  barriers 
which  could  not  have  been  passed  by  any  means  previously  known ; 
and,  moreover,  that  all  truly  African  races  have,  from  the  earliest 
epochas,  spoken  languages  radically  distinct  from  every  Asiatic  tongue. 
Linguistic  researches  have  established  that,  prior  to  the  introduction 
of  Asiatic  elements  into  the  Lower  Valley  of  the  Nile,  the  speech  of 

Digitized  by 

Google 

182  AFRICAN    TYPES. 

/ 

the  ante-monumental  Egyptians  could  have  borne  no  aflEinity  towards 
the  latter.  Lepsius,  Birch,  and  De  Roug6  —  our  highest  philological 
authorities  in  this  question  —  coincide  in  the  main  principle,  that  the 
lexicology  deduced  from  the  earliest  hieroglyphics  exhibits  .two  ele- 
ments: viz.,  a  primary,  or  African;  and  a  secondary,  or  Asiatic, 
superimposed  upon  the  former.  It  is  also  certain  that,  Syro- Arabian 
engraftments  being  deducted  from  the  present  jVwJian  and  the^^}^ 
vernaculars  spoken  above  and  westward  of  Egypt,  these  languages 
are  as  purely  African  now  as  musjb  have  been  the  idiom  uttered  by 
the  Egyptian  ancestry  of  those  who  raised  the  pyramids  of  the  IVth 
dynasty,  5300  years  ago. 

Such  are  the  results  of  archseology,  applied  by  that  school  of  Egyp- 
tian philologists  which  alone  is  competent  to  decide  upon  the  language 
of  the  hieroglyphics.  They  harmonize  with  the  physiological  con- 
clusions we  have  reached  through  monumental  iconography.  But, 
requesting  the  critical  reader  to  accompany  us  upon  a  map  of  the 
African  continent,  such  as  those  contained  in  the/PAy«i^aZ  Atiases  of 
Berghaus,  or  Johnston,  we  propose  commencing  at  the  Cape  of  Good 
Hope,  and  following  the  African  races  from  Table  Eock  to  the  Medi- 
terranean. Our  limits  do  not  permit  a  detailed  analysis,  nor  is  such 
necessary,  as  the  few  prominent  facts  we  shall  present  are  quite  suffi- 
cient for  the  purpose  in  hand,  and  will  at  once  be  admitted  by  eveiy 
reader  who  is  at  all  competent  to  pursue  this  discussion. 

What  is  now  called  Cape  Colony  lies  between  30°  and  35°  of  south 
latitude.  It  rises,  as  you  recede  from  the  coast,  into  high  table- 
lands and  mountains,  and  possesses  a  comparatively  temperate  and 
agreeable  climate;  nevertheless,  it  is  here  that  we  find  the  lowest  and 
most  beastly  specimens  of  mankind :  viz.,  the  Hottentot  and  the  Bush- 
man. The  latter,  in  particular,  are  but  little  removed,  both  in  moral 
and  physical  characters,  from  the  orang-outan.  They  are  not  black, 
but  of  a  yellowish-brown  {tallow-colored^  as  the  French  term  them), 
with  woolly  heads,  diminutive  statures,  small  ill-shapen  crania,  veiy 
projecting  mouths,  prognathous  faces,  and  badly  formed  bodies ;  in 
short,  they  are  described  by  travellers  as  bearing  a  strong  resemblance 
to  the  monkey  tribe.  They  possess  many  anatomical  peculiarities, 
known  to  physiologists  if  not  recapitulated  here.  Lichtenstein,  one 
of  our  best  authorities,  in  describing  this  race,  says :  — 

"  Tl^eir  common  objects  of  pursuit  are  serpents,  lizards,  ants,  and  grasshoppers.  They 
-will  remain  whole  dajs  without  drinking ;  as  a  substitute,  they  chew  succulent  plants : 
they  do  not  eat  salt.  They  have  no  fixed  habitation,  but  sleep  in  holes  in  the  ground  or 
under  the  branches  of  trees.  They  are  short,  lean,  and,  in  appearance,  weak  in  their 
limbs ;  yet  are  capable  of  bearing  much  fatigue.  Their  sight  is  acute,  but  their  taste, 
smeU,  and  feeling,  ^are  feeble.  They  do  not  form  large  societies,  but  wander  about  in 
families.''  > 

Digitized  by 

Google 

AFRICAN    TYPES.  183 

The  ffottentots  have  heen  supposed  by  many  to  belong  to  the  same 
race  as  the  Bosjesman  or  Bushmen ;  and  although  we  do  not  partake 
of  this  opinion,  the  point  is  too  unimportant  to  our  purpose  to  justify 
critical  discussion  here.  In  most  particulars,  the  physical  characters  of 
Bushmen  and  Hottentots  do  not  differ  greatly — the  Hottentots  ex- 
hibit much  of  the  orang  character  of  the  Bushmen,  and  their  females 
often  present  two  very  remarkable  peculiarities  or  deformities :  viz., 
humps  behind  their  buttocks,  like  those  on  the  backs  of  dromedaries, 
and  a  disgusting  development  of  the  labia  pudendi,  (See  an  example 
in  the  Hottentot  VentLS,  figured  in  our  Chapter  Aill.) 

The  complexion  of  the  Hottentots  is  compared  by  travellers  to  that 
of  a  person  "  affected  with  jaundice'*  —  "a  yellowish-brown,  or  the 
hue  of  a  faded  leaf]*  —  "a  tawny  buff,  or  fawn-color."  Barrow 
relates  that — 

"The  hair  is  of  a  yery  singolar  nature — it  does  not  coTer  the  whole  surface  of  the 
ficalp,  bat  [grows  in  small  tufts,  at  certain  distances  from  each  other,  and  when  clipped 
short  has  the  appearance  and  feel  of  a  hard  shoe-brnsh,  except  that  it  is  curled  and 
twisted  into  small*  round  lumps,  about  the  size  of  a  marrowfat  pea.  When  suffered  to 
grow,  it  hangs  on  the  neck  in  hard-twisted  tassels,  like  fringe." 

The  Hottentots  are  also  very  strongly  distinguished  from  all  other 
races  by  their  singular  language.  Their  utterance,  according  to 
Lichtenstein,  is  remarkable  for  numerous  rapid,  harsh,  shrill  sounds, 
emitted  from  the  bottom  of  the  chest,  with  strong  aspirations,  and 
modified  in  the  mouth  by  a  singular  motion  of  the  tongue.  The 
name  for  it  is  commonly  "  gluckings."  The  peculiar  construction  of 
the  vocal  organs  of  this  race  greatly  facilitates  the  formation  and 
emission  of  these  sounds,  which  to  other  species  of  men  would  be 
very  diflicult.  [We  had  the  pleasure,  two  years  ago,  at  a  meeting  of  the 
Ethnological  Society  in  New  York,  to  hear  some  specimens  of  this 
language  from  Prof.  Haldemann,  of  Pennsylvania,  who  possesses  an 
extraordinary  talent  for  imitating  sounds,  and  we  can  readily  beUeve 
that  the  Hottentot  vocalization  has  no  affinity  with  any  other  in 
existence.  — tf.  C.  N.] 

The  next  race  we  encounter,  after  leaving  the  Cape,  is  the  Kafirs, 
or  Caffres.  They  are  not  only  found  along  the  coast  to  the  north- 
east in  CafiBraria,  but  extend  far  beyond,  into  the  interior  of  Africa. 
They  display  certain  aflEinities  with  the  Fulahs,  Foolahsy  or  FeUatahs, 
who  are  prolonged  even  into  Northern  Africa  —  whence  an  opinion 
that  the  two  races  are  identical ;  but  the  fact,  to  say  the  least,  is  a 
matter  of  great  doubt.  The  Caffres  are  traced  northward,  under 
various  names;  and  their  language  and  customs  are  very  widely 
spread.  Though  they  are  now  encountered  in  considerable  numbers 
near  the  Cape,  their  original  seat  is  doubtftil.    In  geography,  Central 

Digitized  by 

Google 

184  AFRICAN    TYPES. 

Africa  is  yet  a  terra  incognita,  and  we  cannot,  therefore,  fix  their 
birth-place  with  precision,  however  manifest  may  be  the  Caflfrarian 
link  in  the  chain  of  gradation  we  have  assumed.  Albeit,  they  resem- 
ble the  true  Negro  much  more  than  the  Hottentot ;  whilst,  both  intel- 
lectually and  physically,  they  are  greatly  superior  not  only  to  Hot- 
tentots, but  to  many  Negro  tribes  on  the  Slave-Coast.  They  possess 
some  knowledge  of  agriculture  and  the  use  of  metals ;  they  drefss  in 
skins,  and  live  in  towns.  Descriptions  of  the  Caflfres,  by  diffierent 
writers,  vary  considerably;  and  it  is  probable  that  several  closely 
allied  though  diverse  types  have  been  included  under  this  general 
appellation.  No  one  has  had  better  opportunities  for  studying  this 
race,  or  can  be  more  competent,  than  Lichtenstein,  and  we  shall 
therefore  adopt  his  description. 

**  The  uniyersal  characteristics  of  all  the  tribes  of  this  great  nation  consist  in  an  external 
form. and  figure,  varying  exceedingly  from  the  other  nations  of  Africa:  they  are  much 
taller,  stronger,  and  their  limbs  better  proportioned.  Their  color  is  brovm;  their  hair 
black  and  woolly.  /  Their  countenances  haye  a  character  peculiar  to  themselves,  and  which 
does  not  permit  their  being  included  in  any  of  the  races  of  mankind  above  enumerated. 
They  have  the  high  forehead  and  prominent  nose  of  the  Europeans,  the  thick  lips  of  the 
Negroes,  and  the  high  cheek-bones  of  the  Hottentots.  Their  beards  are  black,  and  much 
fuller  than  those  of  the  Hottentots." 

This  race,  it  will  thus  be  seen,  is  a  very  peculiar  one,  combining 
both  moral  and  physical  traits  of  the  higher  and  the  lower  African 
races.  Widely  disseminated,  they  exhibit  such  singular  affinities 
with  opposing,  such  strange  differences  from'  proximate,  Africans, 
that  it  is  impossible  to  fix  them  to  one  locality :  at  the  same  time, 
being,  like  all  savage  races,  without  a  history,  we  are  unable  to  say, 
with  any  probability,  to  what  latitude  or  to  which  coast  they  belong. 

When,  however,  taking  our  departure  from  the  C&pe  (the  central 
regions  of  the  continent  being  unknown),  we  continue  our  examina- 
tion [along  the  eastern  and  western  coasts,  as  far  as  the  transverse 
belt,  just  beyond  the  Equator,  which  separates  the  two  great  deserts^ 
Northern  and  Southern,  we  find  a  succession  of  well-maiked  types, 
seemingly  indigenous  to  their  respective  localities.  Along  the  East- 
tern  coast  we  encounter  the  various  tribes  inhabiting  Inhambane, 
Sabia,  Sofala,  Botonga,  Mozambique,  Zanguebar,  &o.,  each  present- 
ing physical  characters  more  :or  less  hideous ;  and,  almost  without 
exception,  not  merely  in  a  barbarous,  but  superlatively  savage  state. 
All  attempts  towards  humanizing  them  have  failed.  Hopes  of  even- 
tual improvement  in  the  condition  of  these  brutish  families  are  enter- 
tained by  none  but  missionaries  of  sanguine  temperament  and  littie 
instruction.    Even  the  Slaver  rejects  them. 

If  we  now  go  back  to  Cape  Colony,  and  thence  pass  upwards  along 
the  Western  coast,  we  meet  with  another,  equally  diversified,  series 

Digitized  by 

Google 

AFRICAN    TYPES.  185 

of  Negro  races,  totally  distiifct  from  those  of  the  eastern  side,  inha- 
biting Cimbebas,  Benguela,  Angola,  Congo,  Loango,  Matembas,  and 
Guinea ;  where  we  again  reach  the  Equator.  These  are  all  savage 
tribes,  but  little  removed,  in  physical  nature  and  moral  propensities, 
from  the  Hottentots.  Anything  like  a  detailed  analysis  of  them  would 
be  but  an  unprofitable  repetition  of  descriptions,  to  be  found  in  all 
travelers'  accounts,  exhibiting  pictures  of  the  most  degraded  races 
of  mankind.  In  a  word,  the  whole  of  Africa,  south  of  10°  N.  lat., 
shows  a  succession  of  human  beings  with  intellects  as  dark  as  their 
skins,  and  with  a  cephalic  conformation  that  renders  all  expectance 
of  their  future  melioration  an  Utopian  dream,  philanthropical,  but 
somewhat  senile. 

North  of  the  Equator,  and  dividing  the  two  great  Northern  and 
Southern  deserts,  we  fall  in  with  a  belt  of  country  traversing  the 
whole  continent  of  Africa,  terminating  on  the  east  with  the  highlands 
of  Abyssinia  —  on  the  west  with  the  uplands  of  Senegambia ;  and, 
between  these  two  points,  including  part  of  the  SoodUn,  Negro-land 
proper,  or  Nigritia.  About  10°  N.  lat.  stretches  an  immense  range 
of  gnountains,  which  are  supposed  to  run  entirely  across  the  conti- 
nent, and  to  form  an  insurmountable  barrier  between  the  Southern 
Deserts  and  the  Northern  Sahara.  Throughout  this  region,  we  behold 
an  infinitude  of  Negro  races,  differing  considerably  in  their  external 
characters.  The  annexed  extracts  from  Prichard,  bearing  upon  this 
subject,  contain  some  important  facts  requiring  comment. 

**  The  whole  of  the  countries  now  described  are  sometimes  called  Nigritia,  or  the  Land 
of  Negroes — they  have  likewise  been  termed  Ethiopia.  The  former  of  these  names  is  more 
frequently  giyen  to  the  Western,  and  the  latter  to  the  Eastern  parts ;  but  there  is  no  exact 
limitation  between  the  countries  so  termed.  The  names  are  taken  f^om  the  races  of  men 
inhabiting  different  countries,  and  these  are  interspersed,  and  not  separated  by  a  particular 
line.  Black  and  woolly-haired  races,  to  which  the  term  Negro  is  applied,  are  more  predo- 
minant in  Western  Africa ;  but  there  are  also  woolly-haired  tribes  in  the  East :  and  races 
who  resemble  the  Ethiopians,  in  their  physical  characters,  are  found  likewise  in  the  West. 
We  cannot  mark  out  geographical  limits  to  these  different  classes  of  nations ;  but  it  will 
be  usefVil  to  remember  the  difference  in  physical  characters  which  separates  them.  The 
Negroes  are  distinguished  by  their  well-known  traits,  of  which  the  most  strongly  marked 
is  their  woolly  hair;  but  it  is  difficult  to  point  out  any  common  property  characteristic  of 
the  races  termed  Ethiopians,  unless  it  is  the  negative  one  of  wanting  the  above-mentioned 
peculiarity  of  the  Negro :  any  other  definition  will  apply  only  in  general,  and  will  be  liable 
to  exceptions.  The  Ethiopian  races  have  generally  something  in  their  physical  character 
which  is  peculiarly  Africanj  though  not  reaching  the  degree  in  which  it  is  displayed  by  the 
black  people  of  Soudan.  Their  hair,  though  not  woolly,  is  commonly  frizzled,  or  strongly 
curled  or  crisp.  Their  complexion  is  sometimes  black,  at  others,  of  the  color  of  bronze,  or 
olive,  or  more  ftrequentiy  of  a  dark-copper  or  red-brown ;  such  as  the  Egyptian  paintings 
display  in  human  figures,  though  generally  of  a  deeper  shade.  In  some  instances,  their 
hair,  as  well  as  their  complexion,  is  somewhat  brown  or  red.  Their  features  are  often  fuU 
and  rounded — not  so  acute  and  salient  as  those  of  the  Arabs ;  their  noses  are  ^ot  flattened 
or  depressed,  but  scarcely  so  prominent  as  those  of  Europeans ;  their  lips  are  generally 

24 

Digitized  by 

Google 

186  AFRICAN    TYPES. 

thick  or  foil,  bat  seldom  tarned  out  like  the  thick  lips  of  Negroes ;  their  figure  is  slender 
and  well  shaped,  and  often  resembling  that  form  of  which  the  Egyptian  paintings  and 
statues  afford  the  most  generally  known  exemplifications.  These  characters,  though  in 
some  respects  approaching  towards  those  of  the  Negro,  are  perfectly  distinct  from  the 
peculiarities  of  the  mulatto  or  mixed  breed.  Most  of  these  nations,  both  classes  being 
equally  included,  are  originally  African.  By  this  I  do  not  mean  to  imply  that  their  first 
parents  were  created  on  the  soil  of  Africa,  but  merely  that  they  cannot  be  traced,. by  his- 
torical proofs,  from  any  other  part  of  the  world,  and  that  they  appear  to  have  grown  into 
clans  or  tribes  of  peculiar  physical  and  social  character,  or  that  their  national  existence 
had  its  commencement  in  that  continent."  ^n 

The  above  paragraph  establishes  that  Prichard,  in  accordance  here 
with  our  own  views,  cuts  loose  the  population  of  the  basin  of  the  Nile 
from  all  the  Negro  races  scattered  between  Mount  Atlas  and  the  Cape 
of  Good  Hope.  In  fact,  one  of  Prichard*s  great  objects,  throughout 
his  "Researches,"  is  to  show  that  there  exists  a  VQgyAiiv gradation  of 
raceSy  from  the  highest  to  the  lowest  types,  not  only  in  Africa,  but 
throughout  the  world.  The  learned  Doctor  spared  no  labor,  for  forty 
yeai^,  to  prove  that  this  gradation  is  the  result  of  physical  causes,  act- 
ing, as  he  says,  "during  chiliads  of  years,"  upon  one  primitive 
Adamic  stock.  We,  on  the  contrary,  contend,  that  many  primitive 
types  of  mankind  were  created  in  distant  zoological  provinces ;  and, 
that  the  numerous  facts,  ignored  by  Dr.  Prichard,  which  have  lately 
come  to  light  from  Egyptian  monuments  and  other  new  sources, 
confirm  this  view.  In  fact,  Prichard  himself,  in  the  fifth  or  fijial 
volume  of  his  last  edition,  virtually  abandons  the  position  he  had  so 
long  and  so  ably  maintained. 

The  range  of  mountains  which  bounds  Guinea  on  the  north  is  sup- 
posed, by  EiTTER  and  other  distinguished  geographers,  to  be  the 
commencement  of  a  huge  chain  which  trends  across  the  continent 
about  the  tenth  degree,  connecting  itself  with  the  so-called  "  Moun- 
tains of  the  Moon,"  on  the  East;^^®  and  thus  constituting  an  impass- 
able wall,  athwart  the  continent,  between  the  North  and  the  South. 
Certain  it  is  that  the  whole  of  Africa  south  of  this  parallel  was  utterly 
.  unkno\vn  600  years  ago  to  any  writers,  sacred  or  profane — the  coast, 
on  either  side,  until  reached  by  navigators,  in  quite  modem  times — 
the  interior,  or  central  portion  of  this  mountain-land,  continues  to  be 
less  known  than  even  the  moon's. 

One  interesting  fact,  however,  is  clear:  viz.,  that  when,  passing 
onwards'from  the  South,  we  overleap  this  stupendous  natural  wall,^^^ 
we  are  at  once  thrown  among  tiibes  of  higher  grade ;  although  con- 
tinuing still  within  the  region  of  jet-black  skins  and  woolly  heads. 
The  excessively  prognathous  type  of  the  Hottentots,  Congos,  Guinea- 
Negroes,  and  so  forth,  is  no  longer,  we  now  perceive,  the  prevailing  type 
north  of  this  mountain-range.  We  here  meet  with  features  approach- 
ing the  Caucasian  coupled  with  well-formed  bodies  and  neatly-turned 

Digitized  by 

Google 

AFRICAN    TYPES.  187 

limbs ;  improved  cranial  developments,  and  altogether  a  mueli  higher 
intellectual  character.  Here,  likewise,  the  rudiments  of  civilization  are 
met  with  for  the  first  time  in  our  progress  from  the  South.  Here 
and  there,  though  surrounded  by  pastoral  nomadism,  many  of  the 
tribes  are  rude  agriculturists;  manufacturing  coarse  cloth,  leather, 
&c. ;.  knowing  somewhat  of  the  use  of  metals,  and  living  in  towns  of 
from  ten  to  thirty  thousand  inhabitants.  It  must  be  conceded,  how- 
ever, that  most  of  this  progress  is  attributable  to  foreign  immigration 
and  exotic  influences.  In  the  fertUe  low-countries,  beyond  the  Sahara 
deserts,  watered  by  rivers  which  descend  northwards  from  water- 
sheds upon  the  central  highlands,  Africa  has  contained,  for  centuries, 
several  Nigritian  kingdoms,  founded  by  Mohammedans ;  while  many 
Arabs,  and  many  more  Atlantic  Berbers,  have  settled  among  the 
native  tribes.  To  these  influences  we  should  doubtless  ascribe  tho 
maintenance  of  their  Muslim  religion  and  infant  civilization :  for  it 
is  indisputable  that  the  rulers  (petty  kings  and  aristocracy)  are  not  of 
pure  Negro  lineage.^ 

This  superiority  of  races  north  of  the  mountain-range  does  not 
extend  to  all  indigenous  tribes ;  for  Denham  and  Clapperton  describe 
some  of  the  tribes  around  Bomou  and  Lake  Tchad  as  extremely 
ugly,  savage,  and  brutal.  It  would  seem  that  nature  preserves  such 
aboriginal  specimens  in  every  region  of  the  globe :  as  if  to  demonstrate 
that  tt/pes  are  independent  of  physical  causes,  and  that  species  of  men, 
like  those  of  animals,  are  primitive. 

We  have  also  numerous  accounts,  from  Bruce,  Riippel,  Cailliaud, 
Linant,  Beke,  "Weme,  Combes  et  Tamisier,  Rochet  d'Hericourt,  Eus- 
segger,  Mohammed-el-Tounsy,  Lepsius,  and  other  explorers,  of  Sen- 
niar,  Dar-Four,  Kordo^n,  Fazoql,  of  the  wild  Shillooks,  &c.,  bordering 
on  the  White  Nile  and  its  tributaries,  and  of  the  western  slopes  of 
Abyssinia ;  and  they  concur  in  representing  most  of  these  superla- 
tively barbarous  tribes  as  characterized  by  Negro  lineaments,  more 
or  less  well  marked.  Of  such  unaltered  types  we  see  many  authentic 
samples  depicted  on  the  Egyptian  monuments  of  the  XVHth  dynasty ; 
and  we  find  that  some  are  r^erred  to  in  the  hieroglyphical  inscrip- 
tions as  early  as  the  Xllth.  Indeed,  the  first  authentic  evidences 
extant  of  Expeditions,  made  to  penetrate  towards  the  Nile's  unknown 
sources,  date  with  the  Xllth  dynasty,  about  2300  b.  c.  ;  when  Sesour- 
tesen  HI.  had  extended  his  conquests  up  the  river  at  least  as  high  as 
Samnehj  in  Upper  Nubia,  where  a  harbor,  or  arsenal,  and  a  temple 
(the  former  repaired  by  the  Amenemhas,  and  the  latter  rebuilt  by 
Thotmes  HE.),  with  other  remains,  prove  that  the  Pharaohs  of  the 
Xnth  dynasty  had  established  frontier  garrisons.  But,  as  the  Tablet 
of  Wddee  Haifa  contains  the  names  o(  nations  undoubtedly  Nigritian, 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC 

188  AFRICAN    TYPES. 

and  inasmuch  as  there  are  abnndant  arguments  to  prove  that  the 
habitat  of  Negro  races  anciently,  as  at  this  day,  never  approximated 
to  Egypt  closer  than,  if  as  near  as,  the  northern  limit  of  tiie  Tropical 
Bains,  we  can  ascend  without  hesitation  to  the  age  of  Sesourtesen  L; 
and  confidently  assert  that,  in  the  twenty-third  century  b.  c,  the  know- 
ledge possessed  by  the  Pharaonic  Egytians  concerning  the  upper 
regions  of  the  Nile  extended  to  points  as  austral  as  that  derived  be- 
tween A.  D.  1820  and  1835,  by  civilized  Europe,  from  the  C^JuizwaSj  or 
slave-hunts,  of  Mohanmied-Ali.^  Time  has  transplanted  some  of  these 
upper  Miotic  families,  over  a  few  miles,  from  one  district  to  another; 
but  that  such  movements  have  entailed  no  physical  mutations  of 
race,  we  shall  perceive  hereinafter. 

We  have  already  stated,  that  Senegambia,  on  the  west  of  Central 
Africa^  like  the  eastern  extremity  at  Abyssinia,^  rises  into  mountains 
and  elevated  table-lands  —  physical  characters  which  usually  accom- 
pany higher  grades  of  humanity  than  those  of  the  burning  plains 
below.  It  is  here  that  we  find  sundry  of  the  superior  (so-called)  Negro 
races  of  Africa:  viz.,  ttie  Mandingos,  the  Fulahs,  and  ttie  lolofe. 
The^Mandingos,  sl  very  numerous  and  powerftil  nation,  are  remarkable 
among  the  African  races  for  their  industry  and  energy ;  and,  of  the 
genuine  Negro  tribes,  have  perhaps  manifested  the  greatest  aptitude 
for  mental  improvement.  They  are  the  most  zealous  and  rigid  Mo- 
hammedans on  the  continent.  Agriculturists,  catlle-breeders,  cloth- 
manufacturers,  living  in  towns,  they  possess  schools,  engage  in  exten- 
sive commerce,  and  use  Arabic  writing.  Goldberry,  Park,  Laing, 
Durand,  and  other  travellers,  coincide  in  the  statement  that  these 
Mandingos  are  less  black,  and  have  better  features,  than  Negroes ; 
indeed,  Goldbeny,  who  is  good  authority,  says  they  resemble  dark 
Hindoos  more  than  Negroes. 

The  FulaJ^^  are  a  still  more  pecuhar  people,  whose  history  is 
involved  in  much  obscurity.  They  are  supposed,  by  many  authorities, 
to  be  a  mixed  race.  Their  type  and  language  are  totally  distinct 
from  all  surrounding  Africans.  According  to  Park  and  others,  they 
rank  themselves  among  white  people,  and  look  down  upon  their 
neighbors  as  inferiors ;  at  the  same  time,  they  are  always  the  domi- 
nating families,  wherever  found.  The  contradictory  descriptions  of 
travellers  lead  us  to  suspect  some  diversity  of  physical  characters 
among  these  Fulahs,  or  Fellatahs.  They  are  not  black,  but  of  a 
mahogany  color,  with  good  features,  and  hair  more  or  less  straight, 
and  often  very  fine.  They  are  commercial,  intelligent,  and,  for  Afri- 
cans, considerably  advanced  in  the  civilization  they  owe  to  Islamism 
and  the  Arabs. 

The  lolofs,  between  the  Senegal  and  Gambia,  the  most  northerly 

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 

AFBICAN    TYPES.  189 

Negro  nations  on  the  West  coast,  are  represented  to  be  the  comeliest 
of  all  Negro  tribes. 

«*  They  are  always  well  made  [says  Goldberry] ;  their  features  are  regular,  and  like 
those  of  Europeans,  except  that  their  nose  is  rather  round,  and  their  lips  thick.  They  are 
said  to  be  remarkably  handsome  —  their  women  beautiful.  The  complexion  of  the  race  is 
a  fine  transparent  d€q>  black;  their  hair  crisp  and  woolly." 

Here,  again,  is  a  combination  of  physical  characters  which  contra- 
dicts the  alleged  influence  of  climate ;  because  the.  lolofe,  and  some 
other  races  north,  are  jet-black,  while  the  Fulahs,  and  others,  under 
and  south  of  the  Equator,  are  comparatively  fair. 

We  shall  show,  in  another  place,  that  history  affords  no  evidence 
that  education,  or  any  influence  of  civilization  that  may  be  brought 
to  bear  on  races  of  inferior  organization,  can  radically  change  their 
physical,  nor,  consequently,  their  moral,  characters.  That  the  brain, 
for  example,  which  is  the  organ  of  intellect,  cannot  be  expanded  or 
altered  in  form,  is  now  admitted  by  every  anatomist ;  and  Prichard, 
in  recapitulating  his  results  as  to  the  races  of  Central  AMca,  makes 
the  following  important  admission :  — 

'<  On  reriewing  the  descriptions  of  all  the  races  enumerated,  we  may  observe  a  relation 
between  their  physical  character  and  moral  condition.  Tribei  having  tohat  is  called  the  Negro 
character  in  the  moat  striking  degree  are  the  least  dviliud.  The  Papels,  Bisagos,  n>os,  who  are 
in  the  greatest  degree  remarkable  for  deformed  countenances,  projecting  jaws,  flat  fore- 
heads, and  for  other  Negro  peculiarities,  are  the  most  savage  and  morally,  degraded  of  the 
nations  hitherto  described.  The  converse  of  this  remark  is  applicable  to  all  the  most  civilized 
races.  The  FiUahs,  Maddingos,  and  some  of  the  Dahomeh  and  Inta  nations  hare,  as  far  as 
form  is  concerned,  nearly  European  countenances,  and  a  corresponding  configuration  of  the 
head.  ...  In  general,  the  tribes  inhabiting  elevated  countries,,  in  the  interior,  are  very 
superior  to  those  who  dwell  on  low  tracts  on  the  the  seacoast,  and  this  superiority  is  mani- 
fest both  in  mental  and  bodily  qualities."  »4 

The  truth  of  these  observations  is  sustained  by  aU  past  hii^iy, 
backed  by  every  monument.  Much  as  the  success  of  the  infant 
colonj  at  Liberia  is  to  be  desired  by  every  true  philanthropist,  it 
is  with  regret  that,  whilst  wishing  well  to  the  Negroes,  we  cannot 
divest  our  minds  of  melancholy  forebodings.  Dr.  Morton,  quoted  in 
another  chapter,  has  proven,  that  the  Negro  races  possess  about  nine 
cubic  inches  less  of  brain  than  the  Teuton ;  and,  unless  th^re  were 
really  some  facts  in  history,  something  beyond  bare  hypotheses,  to 
teach  us  how  these  deficient  inches  could  be  artificially  added,  it 
would  seem  that  the  Negroes  in  Africa  must  remain  substantially  in 
that  same  benighted  state  wherein  Nature  has  placed  them,  and  in 
which  they  have  stood,  according  to  Egyptian  monuments,  for  at 
least  6000  years. 

Prichard's  herculean  work  is  so  replete  with  interesting  facts  and 
valuable  deductions,  that  we  are  tempted,  almost  at  every  page,  to 

Digitized  by 

Google 

190  AFRICAN    TYPES. 

make  extracts.    The  following  resume  is  certainly  decisive  in  estab- 
lishing the  entire  want  of  connexion  between  Types  and  Climate. 

<<  The  distinguishing  peculiarities  of  the  African  races  may  be  summed  up  into  four 
heads ;  Tiz. :  the  characters  of  complexion,  hair,  features  and  figure.  We  have  to  remark — 

"  1.  That  some  races,  with  woolly  hair  and  complexions  of  a  deep  black  color,  have  fine 
forms,  regular  and  beautiful  features,  and  are,  in  their  figure  and  countenances,  scarcely 
different  from  Europeans.  Such  are  the  lolofs,  near  the  Senegal,  and  the  race  of  Guber, 
or  of  Hausa,  in  the  interior  of  Sudan.  Some  tribes  of  the  South  African  race,  as  the 
darkest  of  the  Kafirs,  are  nearly  of  this  description,  as  well  as  some  families  or  tribes  in 
the  empire  of  Kongo,  while  others  have  more  of  the  Negro  character  in  their  countenances 
and  form. 

**2.  other  tribes  have  the  form  and  features  similar  to  those  above  described:  their 
complexion  is  black  or  a  deep  olive,  or  a  copper  eolor  approaching  to  black,  while  their 
hair,  though  often  crisp  and  frizzled,  is  not  the  least  woolly.  Such  are  the  Bishari  and 
Danakil  and  Hazorta,  and  the  darkest  of  the  Abyssinians. 

<<  8.  Other  instances  have  been  mentioned  in  which  the  complexion  is  black  and  the  fea- 
tures have  the  Negro  type,  while  the  nature  of  the  hiur  deviates  considerably,  and  is  even 
said  to  be  rather  long  and  in  flowing  ringlets.  Some  of  the  tribes  near  the  Zambezi  are 
of  this  class. 

<<  4.  .Among  nations  whose  color  deviates  towards  a  lighter  hue,  we  find  some  witH  woolly 
hair,  with  a  figure  and  features  approaching  the  European.  Such  are  the  Bechuana  Kafirs, 
of  a  light  brown  complexion.  The  tawny  Hottentots,  though  not  approaching  tiie  Euro- 
pean, differ  from  the  Negro.  Again,  some  of  the  tribes  on  the  Gold  Coast  and  the  Slave 
Coast,  and  the  Ibos,  in  the  Bight  of  Benin,  are  of  a  lighter  complexion  than  many  other 
Negroes,  while  their  features  are  strongly  marked  with  the  peculiarities  of  that  race." 

These  observations,  Prichard  thinks,  cannot  be  reconciled  with  the 
idea  that  the  Negroes  are  of  one  distinct  species ;  and  that  the  opiriibn 
sustaining  the  existence,  among  them,  of  a  number  of  Separate  spe- 
cies, each  distinguished  by  some  peculiarity  which  another  wants, 
might  be  more  reasonably  maintained.  The  latter  supposition  he 
conjectures,  hpwever,  to  be  refuted  by  ttie  fact  that  species  in  no  case 
pass  so  insensibly  into  each  other.  It  will  appear,  notwithstanding, 
when  we  come  to  the  questions  of  hyhridity  and  o£  specific  characters, 
that  Prichard's  doctrine,  besides  being  in  itself  a  non  sequitur,  is  over- 
thrown by  positive  fitcts. 

Prichard  himself  tells  us,  "  there  are  no  authentic  instances,  either 
in  Afiica  or  elsewhere,  of  the  transmutation  of  other  varieties  of 
mankind  into  Negroes.*'  ^  We  have,  however,  he  continues,  examples 
of  very  considerable  deviation  in  ihe  opposite  direction.  The  de- 
scendants of  the  genuine  Negroes  are  no  longer  such :  they  have  lost 
in  several  instances  many  of  the  peculiarities  of  the  stock  from  which 
they  spring.  To  which  fallacies  we  reply,  that  vague  reports  of  mis- 
informed travellers  alone  support  such  assertion.  Our  remarks  on 
the  Permanence  of  Types  establish,  that  what  physiological  changes 
Prichard  and  his  school  refer  to  climatic  influences,  are  indisputably 
to  be  ascribed  to  amalgamation  of  races. 

Let  us  now  travel  through  Nigritia,  and  ascend  the  table-lands  of 

Digitized  by 

Google 

AFRICAN    TYPES.  191 

Abyssinia;  where  another  climate,  another  Fauna,  another  Flora, 
and  another  Type  of  Man,  arise  to  view.  Here,  for  the  first  time 
since  our  departure  fix)m  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  we  stand  among 
tribes  of  men  who  are  actually  capacitated  to  enjoy  a  higher  stage 
of  civilization;  and,  although  we  have  not  yet  reached  God's 
** noblest  work,*'  we  have  happily  waded  through  the  "slough  of 
despond"  in  human  gradations  of  Africa. 

Reader!  let  us  imagine  ourselves  standing  upon  the  highest  peak  in 
Abyssinia ;  and  that  our  vision  could  extend  over  the  whole  continent, 
embracing  south,  east,  north  and  west :  what  tableaiLx-vivants  would  be 
presented  to  the  eye,  no  less  than  to  the  mind !  ^o  the  south  of  the 
Sahara  we  should  descry  at  least  50,000,000  of  Nigritians,  steeped  in 
irredeemable  ignorance  and  savagism ;  inhabiting  the  very  countries 
where  history  first  finds  them  —  vast  territorial  expanses,  which  the 
nations  of  the  north,  in  ancient  times,  had  no  possible  means  of  visit- 
ing or  colonizing.  Do  we  not  behold,  on  every  side,  human  character- 
istics so  completely  segregated  from  ours,  that  they  can  be  explained 
in  no  other  way  than  by  supposing  a  direct  act  of  creation  ? 
Upon  the  moral  and  intellectual  traits  of  such  abject  types  no  impres- 
sion has  been  made  within  5000  years :  none  can  be  made,[(so  far  as 
science  knows,)  until  their  organization  becomes  changed  by — silliest 
of  desperate  suppositions — ^a  "  miracle."  Turn  we  now  towards  the 
north.  There  we  behold  the  tombs,  the  ruined  temples,  the  gigantic 
pyramids  of  Pharaonic  Egypt,  which,  braving  the  hand  of  time  for 
6000  years  past,  seem  to  defy  its  action  for  as  many  to  come.  These 
monuments,  moreover,  were  not  only  built  by  a  people  diflFering  from 
all  others  of  Asia  and  Europe,  in  characters,  language,  civilization,  and 
other  attributes;  but  diverging  still  more  widely  from  every  other  human 
type.  Positive  evidence,  ftui^hermore,  exists,  that  Negroes,  at  least  as 
&r  back  as  the  XMth  dynasty,  in  the  twenty-fourth  century  b.  c,  dwelt 
contemporaneously  in  Africa :  \f  hich  is  parallel  with  (b.  c.  2348)  the 
era  ascertained,  to  a^fittction  by  Rabbinical  arithmetic,  for  Noah's 
Flood ;  when  all  creatures  outside  of  the  Ark,  except  some  fishes, 
had  found  a  watery  grave !    But  we  pursue  our  journey. 

Abyssinia,  according  to  Tbllbz,  is  called  by  its  inhabitants  Alhere- 
gran  or  the  "lofty  plain ; "  by  which  epithet  they  contrast  it  with  the 
low  countries  surrounding  it  on  almost  every  side.  It  is  compared 
by  the  Abyssinians  to  the  flower  of  the  Denguelety  which  displays  a 
magnificent  corolla  surrounded  by  thorns  —  in  allusion  to  the  many 
barbarous  tribes  who  inhabit  the  numerous  circumjacent  valleys  and 
low  lands.^ 

The  highlands  of  Abyssinia,  properly  so  called,  stretch  from  the 
southern  provinces  of  Shoa  and  Efiit,  which  are  not  for  distant  from 

Digitized  by 

Google 

192  AFRICAN    TYPES. 

Enarea  under  9°,  to  Tscherkin  and  Waldubba  under  15°  N.  lat.; 
where  they  make  a  sudden  and  often  precipitous  descent  into  the 
stunted  forests  occupied  by  the  Shangalla  Negroes.  From  east  to 
west  they  extend  over  9°  of  longitude.  Rising  at  the  steep  border 
or  terrace  of  Taranta  from  the  depressed  tract  along  the  Arabian 
Gulf,  they  reach  the  mountains  of  Fazolco,  Dyre  and  Touggoula ; 
which  overhang  the  flat,  sandy  districts  of  SennAar  and  the  valleys 
of  Kordofan.    (Ritter.) 

The  researches  of  Bruce,  Salt,  Ritter,  and  Beke,  have  shown  that 
the  high  country  of  Habesh,  Abyssinia,  consists  of  three  terraces  or 
distinct  table-lands,  rising  one  above  another;  and  of  which  the 
several  grades  or  ascents  present  themselves  in  succession,  to  the  tra- 
veller who  advances  from  the  shore  of  the  Red  Sea.'*' 

The  plain  of  Bahamegash  is  first  met  after  traversing  the  low  and 
arid  steppe  of  Samhard,  inhabited  by  the  black  DanhkU  and  Dtmiboeta, 
where  the  traveller  ascends  the  heights  of  Taranta. 

The  next  level  is  the  kingdom  of  Tigr6,  which  formerly  contained 
the  kingdom  of  Axum.  "Within  this  region  lie  the  plains  of  Enderta 
and  Giralta;  containing  Chelicut  and  Antalow,  principal  cities  of 
Abyssinia.  The  kingdom  of  Tigre  comprehends  the  provinces  of 
Abyssinia  westward  of  the  Tacazze,  of  which  the  larger  are  Tigr6 
anfi  Shire  towards  the  north,  Woggerat  and  Enderta  and  the  moun- 
tainous regions  of  Lasta  and  Samen  towards  the  south. 

High  Abyssinia — kingdom  of  Amhara — ^is  a  name  now  given  to  the 
realm  of  which  Gondar  is  the  capital,  and  where  the  Amharic  lan- 
guage is  spoken,  eastward  of  the  Tacazze.  Amhara  proper  is  a 
mountain  province  of  that  name  to  the  southeast,  in  the  centre  of 
which  was  Tegulat,  the  ancient  capital  of  the  empire ;  and,  at  one 
period,  the  centre  of  civilization  of  Abyssinia.  This  province  is  now 
in  the  possession  of  the  Galla ;  a  barbarous  people  who  have  overcome 
ihB  southern  parts  of  Habesh.  The  present  kingdom  of  Amhara  is 
the  heart  of  Abyssinia,  the  abode  of  the  Emperor  or  Negush.  It  con- 
tains the  upper  course  of  the  Blue  Nile.  The  climate  is  delightftil — 
perpetual  spring;  and  the  mean  elevation  about  8000  feet  The  upland 
region  of  Amhara,  or  rather  the  province  of  Dembea,  breaks  off 
towards  the  northeast,  by  a  mountainous  descent  into  the  plains  of 
Senn^  and  lower  Ethiopia.  On  the  outskirts  of  the  highlands,  and 
at  their  feet,  are  the  vast  forests  of  Waldubba  and  Walkayat,  abound 
ing  with  troops  of  monkeys,  elephants,  buffaloes  and  wild  boars. 
The  human  inhabitants  of,  these  tracts  and  the  adjoining  forests,  and 
likewise  of  the  valleys  of  the  Tacazze  and  the  Angrab,  are  Shang- ' 
alia  Negroes,  who  in  several  parts  environ  the  hill-country  of 
Abyssinia.^ 

Digitized  by 

Google 

AFRICAN    TYPES.  193 

Races  inhabiting  Abyssinia. — Several  different  races  inhabit  the  old 
empire  of  the  Negush  or  Abyssinian  sovereign,  who  are  commonly 
included  under  the  name  of  Hahesh  or  Abyssinians.  They  differ  in 
language,  but  possess  a  general  resemblance  in  their  physical  charac- 
ters and  customs.  Whether  they  really  are  of  unique  origin  is  a 
question  which  science  has  no  data  for  settling.  Those  who  believe 
tihiat  the  Hebrew  and  the  Hottentot  (as  well  as  camels  and  cameleo- 
pards)  are  of  one  and  the  same  stock,  will  unhesitatingly  answer  in 
the  affirmative. 

1.  The  Tiffranij  or  Alyssins  of  Tigre. — These  are  the  inhabitants  of 
the  kingdom  of  Tigr6,  on  the  east  of  Tacazze  —  speaking  the  lingua 
Tigrana. 

2.  The  Amharas.  —  They  have  for  ages  been  the  dominant  people 
of  Abyssinia,  and  speak  the  widely-spread  Amharic  language. 

3.  The  Agows. — There  are  two  tribes  bearing  this  appellation^  who 
speak  distinct  tongues,  and  inhabit  different  parts  of  tiie  country. 

4.  The  Falashas. — This  race  has  much  puzzled  ethnographers,  and 
their  history  is  involved  in  obscurity.  They  possess  strong  affinities 
with  the  Fulahs  on  the  western  coast,  and  have  not  only  been  sup- 
posed by  many  to  be  of  the  same  stock,  but  both  have  been  regarded 
as  identical  with  the  Kafirs  (Caffi-es)  of  Southern  Africa.  The  Fala- 
shas are  Jews  in  religion,  though  their  language  has  no  affinity  with 
the  Hebrew ;  and  they  use  the  Gheez  version  of  the  Old  Testament. 

5.  .The  Q-afats  are  another  tribe,  possessing  a  language  of  their 
own. 

6.  The  Gongas  and  Enareans  have  also  a  language  distinct  from  all 
the  above. 

There  are  other  tribes  which  might  be  enumerated,  speaking  lan- 
guages hitherto  irreconcilable.^  Whether  these  really  present  affi- 
nities, or  whether  some  of  them  be  not  radically  distinct,  are  questions 
yet  undetermined. 

Physical  Characters*  —  Human  races  of  the  plateaux  of  Abyssinia 
are  said  to  resemble  each  other,  although  it  is  admitted  on  all  hands 
that  they  vary  considerably  in  complexion  and  features. 

Prichard,  who  has  brought  all  his  immense  erudition  to  bear  on 
these  families,  cuts  them  loose  entirely  from  Ifegro  races ;  and  classes 
them  under  the  head  of  Ethiopians  ;  who,  we  shall  see,  have  been 
very  improperly  confounded  with  Negroes.  After  treating  on  the 
general  resemblance,  in  physical  characters,  of  these  nations,  he 
concludes — 

**  By  this  national  character  of  conformation,  the  Abyssinians  are  associated  with  that 
class  of  African  nations  which  I  hare  proposed  to  denominate  by  the  term  Ethiopian,  as 
diiiiitffuiihinff  (hem  from  Negroet,    The  distinction  has  indeed  been  already  established  by 

26 

Digitized  by 

Google 

194  AFRICAN    TYPES. 

Baron  Larrey,  Dr.  KUppell,  M.  de  Chabrol,  and  others.  Some  of  these  writers  include  in 
the  same  department  the  Abyssins,  the  natiye  Egyptians  and  the  Barabra,  separating  them 
by  a  broad  line  from  the  Negroes,  and  almost  as  widely  from  the  Arabs  and  Europeans. 
The  Egyptians  or  Copts,  who  form  one  branch  of  this  stock,  ha^e,  according  to  Larrey,  a 
*  yellow,  dusky  complexion,  like  that  of  the  Abyssins.  Their  countenance  is  full  without 
being  puffed ;  their  eyes  are  beautiful,  clear,  almond-shaped,  and  languishing ;  their  cheek- 
bones are  projecting ;  their  noses  nearly  straight,  rounded  at  the  point ;  their  nostrils 
dilated ;  mouth  of  moderate  size ;  their  lips  thick ;  their  teeth  white,  regular,  but  a  little 
projecting ;  their  beard  and  hair  black  and  crisp.'  ^^  In  all  these  characters,  the  Egyptians, 
according  to  Larrey,  agree  with  the  Abyssins,  and  are  distinguished  fh>m  the  Negroes." 

The  Baron  enters  into  a  minute  comparison  of  the  Abyssinians, 
Copts,  and  Negroes ;  concluding  that  the  two  former  are  of  the  same 
race ;  and  supporting  ttiis  idea  with  Egyptian  sculptures  and  paint- 
ings, and  the  crania  of  mummies. 

M.  DB  Chabrol,  describing  the  Copts,  says  that  they  evince  decidedly 
an  African  character  of  physiognomy ;  which,  he  thinks,  establishes 
that  they  are  indigenous  inhabitants  of  Egypt,  identifying  them  with 
the  ancient  inhabitants :  — 

*<  On  pent  admettre  que  leur  race  a  su  se  oonserrer  pure  de  toute  melange  ayec  le  Grecs, 
puisqu'ils  n'ont  entre  eux  aucun  trait  de  ressemblanoe."  23i 

[This  must  be  taken  with  many  grains  of  allowance ;  for  the  present 
Copts  are  hybrids  of  every  race  that  has  visited  Egypt :  at  the  same 
time  that  his  "African  physiognomy"  evidently  means  no  more  than 
that  the  character  of  countenance  termed  Ethiopian  is  not  that  of  the 
Negro.— G.R.G.] 

Dr.  Riippell  has  also  portrayed  the  Ethiopian  style  of  counte- 
nance and  bodily  conformation  as  peculiarly  distinct  from  the  type 
both  of  the  Arabian  and  the  Negro.  He  describes  its  character  as 
more  especially  belonging  to  the  Barabra,  or  Berberins,  among  whom 
he  long  resided ;  but  he  says  that  it  is  common  to  them,  together 
with  the  Ababdeh  and  the  Bishari,  and  in  part  with  the  Abyssinians. 
This  type,  according  to  Riippell,  bears  a  striking  resemblance  to  the 
characteristics  of  the  ancient  Egyptians  and  Nubians,  as  displayed  in 
the  statues  and  sculptures  in  the  temples  and  sepulchral  excavations 
along  the  course  of  the  Nile. 

The  complexion  and  hair  of  the  Abyssinians  vary  very  much :  their 
complexion  ranging  from  almost  white  to  dark  brown  or  black;  and 
their  hair,  from  straight  to  crisp,  frizzled,  and  almost  woolly.  Hence 
the  deduction,  if  these  are  facts,  that  they  must  be  aft  exceedingly 
mixed  race.  Dr.  Prichard,  in  defining  the  Abyssinians,  has  taken  much 
pains,  as  we  have  said,  to  prove  that  they,  together  with  fiamilies 
generally  of  the  eastern  basin  of  the  Nile,  down  to  Egypt  inclusive, 
not  only  are  not  Negro,  but  were  not  originally  Asiatic  races ;  display- 
ing somewhat  of  an  intermediate  Jype,  which  is  nevertheless  essen- 

Digitized  by 

Google 

AFRICAN    TYPES.  195 

tially  African  in  character.  To  us,  it  is  veiy  gratifying  to  see  this 
view  so  ably  sustained ;  because,  regarding  it  as  an  incontrovertible 
fact,  we  have  made  it  the  stand-point  of  our  argument  respecting  the 
origin  of  the  ancient  Egyptians,  whose  effigies  present  this  African 
type  on  the  earliest  monuments  of  the  Old  Empire  more  vividly  than 
upon  those  of  the  New.  This  autochthonous  type,  as  we  shall  prove, 
ascends  so  far  back  in  time,  is  so  peculiar,  and  withal  so  connected 
with  a  primordial  tongue — presenting  but 'small  incipient  affinity 
with  Asiatic  languages  about  3500  years  b.  c. — as  to  preclude  every 
idea  of  an  Asiatic  origin  for  its  aboriginally-Nilotic  speakers  and 
hieroglyphical  scribes. 

Languages  of  Aht/sainia.  —  In  tracing  the  history  of  this  country, 
we  find  the  Gheez,  or  Ethiopic,  the  Amharic,  and  other  Abyssinian 
languages.  It  is  no  longer  questionable,  that  the  Gheez  or  Ethiopic 
—  idiom  of  the  Ethiopic  version  of  the  Scriptures,  and  other  modem 
books  which  constitute  the  Uterature  of  Abyssinia — is  a  Semitic  dia- 
lect, akin  to  the  Arabic  and  Hebrew. 

'<  There  is  no  reason  to  doubt  [says  Prichard],  that  the  people  for  whose  use  these 
books  were  written,  and  whose  yemacular  tongue  was  the  Qheez,  were  a  Semitic  race. 
How,  and  at  what  time,  the  highlands  of  Abjssinia  came  to  be  inhabited  by  a  Semitic 
people,  and  what  relations  the  modem  Abjssinians  bear  to  the  family  of  nations,  of  which 
that  people  were  a  branch,  are  questions  of  too  much  importance,  in  African  ethnography, 
to  be  passed  without  examination." 

The  Gheez  is  now  extant  merely  as  a  dead  language. 

The  Amharic,  or  modem  Abyssinian,  has  been  the  vernacular  of 
the  country  ever  since  the  extinction  of  the  Gheez,  and  is  spoken  over 
a  great  part  of  Abyssinia.  It  is  not  a  dialect  of  the  Gheez  or  Ethiopic, 
as  some  have  supposed,  but  is  now  recognized  to  be,  as  Prichard 
aflirms,  "a  language  fdndamentally  distinct."  It  has  incorporated 
into  itself  many  words  of  Semitic  origin ;  but  accidents  of  recent  date 
do  not  alter  the  case,  as  concerns  the  former  existence  of  local  Abys- 
synian  idioms,  non-Asiatic  in  structure.  So  with  the  Atlantic  Berber 
language,  which  has  likewise  become  much  adulterated  by  foreign 
grafts :  yet  Venture,  Newman,  Castiglione,  and  Gr^berg  de  Hemso, 
have  fully  proved  that  it  is  essentially,  and  in  the  primary  or  most 
original  parts  of  its  vocabulary,  a  speech  entirely  apart,  and  devoid 
of  any  relation  whether  to  Semitic  or  to  any  other  known  language. 
The  same  remark  applies  with  equal  truth  to  the  Amharic,  which  was 
probably  an  ancient  African  tongue,  and  one  of  the  aboriginal  idioms 
of  the  inhabitants  of  the  south-eastern  provinces  of  AbyssiAia.  Prich- 
ard winds  up  his  investigation  with  the  following  emphatic  avowal, 
so  that  we  may  consider  the  question  settled :  —  "  The  languages  of 
all  these  nations  are  essentially  distinct  from  the  Gheez  and  every 
other  Semitic  dialect."    Our  own  general  conclusion  from  the  pre 

Digitized  by 

Google 

196  AFRICAN    TYPES. 

mises  is,  tbat,  while  the  Abyssinians  are  absolutely  distinct,  on  the 
one  hand,  from  every  Xegro  race,  they  are,  on  the  other,  equally  dis- 
tinct, in  type  and  languages,  fit)m  all  Asiatic  races ;  and  they  must 
therefore  be  regarded  as  autocthones  of  the  country  where  they  are 
now  found-    • 

On  the  south  and  south-east  of  Abyssinia  there  exist  other  races 
which  might  be  enumerated ;  the  Gallas,  for  example,  with  brown 
complexion,  long  crisp  hair,  and  features  not  unlike  the  Abyssinians. 
Also,  the  Danakil,  the  Somauli,  &c. — none  of  whom  are  Xegroes: 
their  types  being  intermediate  —  long  hair,  skins  more  or  less  dark, 
good  features,  &c. ;  all  partaking  far  more  of  the  Ethiopian  than  of 
the  Negro.  [No  Abyssinian  native  having  fallen  under  the  writer's 
personal  eye,  he  cannot  pronounce  upon  them  with  the  same  con- 
fidence that  he  speaks  of  Ifegroes ;  but  his  colleague,  Mr.  Gliddon, 
whose  twenty-odd  years'  residence  in  Egypt,  individual  aptitude  of 
observation,  and  extensive  Omental  knowledge,  render  his  opinions 
of  some  weight  in  these  Nilotic  questions,  refers  to  the  exquisite  plates 
of  Prisse  d' Avenues^  for  what  may  be  considered  the  most  perfect 
expression  of  this  Abyssinian  type.  "We  accept  M.  Prisse's  life-like 
sketches  the  more  readily,  inasmuch  as  they  harmonise  with  the  best 
accounts  w^  have  read,  and  with  our  own  ethnological  deductions, 
through  analogy,  of  the  characteristics  that  Abyssinians  must  pre- 
sent—J.  C.  K] 

On  resuming  our  line  of  march,  then,  norfli  towards  Egypt,  we 
turn  our  backs  upon  the  Soodan^  '^  black  coimtries,"  ever  the  true 
land  of  Negroes ;  and  descend  from  the  Abyssinian  highlands  on  the 
north-west  and  north,  along  the  borders  of  Gondar  and  Dembea. 
Here,  again,  we  meet  divers  scattered  tribes,  with  black  skins  and 
woolly  heads  —  varieties  of  the  intrusive  Shangalla,  who  now  are 
found  not  only  on  the  west,  but  on  the  northern  borders  of  Habesh ; 
while  on  the  south-east  we  descry  the  Dobos.  In  Senn^r  we  again 
encounter  Negro  tribes  —  the  Shilooks  and  the  Tungi;  inhabiting 
the  islands  of  the  Bahr-el-Abiad,  above  WMee  Shallice.  Fully  de- 
scribed by  Seetzen,  Linant,  Lord  Prudhoe,  Russegger,  and  others ; 
they  present  Negro  types  more  or  less  marked.  This  fact  might  seem 
to  contradict  our  statement  with  regard  to  the  primitive  localities  of 
Nigritian  races.  We  look  upon  such  minutiae,  however,  as  unimport- 
ant ;  because,  contending  simply  for  a  gradation  of  African  races,  a 
few  hundred  miles,  within  the  same  upper  Nilotic  basin,  do  not  affect 
the  main  principle.  Dr.  Euppell,  than  whom  there  is  certainly  no 
better  authority  on  this  question,  corroborates  our  assumption,  by 
asserting  that  the  present  stations  of  those  Negro  races  are  not  their 
ancient  abodes.    He  assures  us  that  — 

Digitized  by 

Google 

AFRICAN    TYPES.  197 

**  The  Shilukh  Negroed  are  a  numerous  and  widely  spread  people,  in  the  country  of 
Bertal,  bordering  on  Fertit,  and  to  the  southward  of  Eordofan,  beyond  the  tenth  degree  of 
latitude,  whence  they  have  dispersed  themselves^  towards  the  East  and  North,  along  the  course 
of  the  White  Nile." 

Prichard  ftirthennore  admits,  that  "  the  people  of  Sennkar  are  no 
longer  ITegroes,"  quoting  M.  Cailliaud  to  sustain  himself;  and  adding 
the  latter*8  description  of  the  physical  character  of  the  races  of  Sen- 
nkar  in  general :  — 

<<  Les  indigenes  du  Sennaar  ont  le  teint  d'un  brun  cuivr^ ;  leurs  cheveux,  quoique  cr^pus, 
different  de  ceux  des  vrais  Nfegres :  ila  n*ont  point,  comme  ceuxci,  le  nex,  les  l^vres,  et  les 
joues,  saillantes — I'ensemble  de  leur  physioguomie  est  agr^able  et  reguUer." 

Cailliaud  further  remarks,  that  — 

"Among  the  inhabitants  of  the  kingdom  of  Sennaar,  and  the  adjoining  countries  to 
the  south,  the  results  of  mixture  of  race,  in  the  intermarriage  of  Soudanians,  Ethiopians, 
and  Arabs,  were  frequently  to  be  traced." 

He  holds,  as  does  also  Cherubini,^  that  bix  distinct  castes  are  well 
known  in  that  country,  the  names  and  descriptions  of  which  they 
give.^  \ 

After  a  careful  review  of  most  leading  authorities  on  the  races  of 
Africa,  we  have  arrived  at  the  conclusion  that,  upon  ascending  the 
table-lands  of  Abyssinia,  at  the  south  and  west,  we  bid  adieu  to  the 
true  Negro-land  (believing  that  every  dispassionate  inquirer  miist  come 
to  results  identical).  Which  departure  taken,  we  find,  along  the 
descending  waters  of  the  Nile,  only  some  few  scattered  Negro  types, 
who  have  wandered  from  their  indigenous  and  more  austral  soil. 
Dr.  Prichard,  we  have  stated,  ftiUy  recognizes  \hQ  gradation  of  African 
races  for  which  we  have  been  contending,  but  he  attributes  it  entirely 
to  the  operation  of  physical  causes  —  assigning  imaginary  reasons, 
unsubstantiated  by  even  the  slenderest  proof,  and  in  negation  of  which 
we  hope  to  adduce  overwhelming  testimony. 

Nubians.  —  Next  in  order,  we  must  glance  at  the  races  inhabiting 
Nubia  and  other  countries  between  Abyssinia  and  Egypt,  about  whom 
much  unnecessary  confusion  has  existed,  simply  because  few  European 
travellers  among  them  have  been  competent  physiologists.  One 
people  who  inhabit  the  valley  of  the  Nile  above  Egypt,  and  from  that 
country  to  Senn^r,  give  themselves  the  appellation  of  Berberri  (in  fne 
singular).  By  the  Arabs,  they  are  termed  Nuba  and  BarHbera.  The 
same  people  in  Egypt,  whither  they  immigrate  in  large  numbers,  are 
by  Europeans  called  Berberins.  These  races,  through  similarity  of 
name,  have  been  erroneously  confounded  with  the  Berbers  of  the 
Barbary  States;  but  they  differ  in  language,  features,  and  eveiy 
essential  particular.^  The  Nubians  constitute  altogether  a  group  of 
peculiar  races,  differing  from  Arabs,  Negroes,  or  Egyptians  —  pos- 
sessing a  physiognomy  and  color  of  their  own.  They  speak  languages 

Digitized  by 

Google 

198  AFRICAN    TYPES. 

peculiar  to  themselves ;  in  which,  from  the  time  of  Moses,  they  were 
hieroglyphed  as  BaRaBeRa,  no  less  than  as  Nuba.  They  are  in  the 
habit  of  coming  down  to  Egypt,  where  their  offices  are  wholly  menial ; 
and  among  other  articles  of  traffic,  some  clans  bring  Ifegroes  pro- 
cured from  the  caravans  of  Senn^ar,  and  are  commonly  known  at 
Cairo  under  the  name  of  Q-ellahSy  "fetchers,"  or  slave-dealers. 

The  discrepancy  in  the  descriptions  given  of  this  ]S"ubian  race  by 
travellers,  demonstrates  that  there  exists  among  them  considerable 
variety  of  colors ;  and  hence,  at  once,  we  feel  persuaded  of  no  little 
mixture  of  races.  Denon  describes  them  as  of  a  "  shining  jet-black,** 
but  adds,  "  they  have  not  the  smallest  resemblance  to  the  itsTegroes  of 
Western  Africa."  Other  travellers  speak  of  them  as  copper-colored, 
or  black,  with  a  tinge  of  red,  &c.  The  fact  is,  the  mothers  are  often 
pure  negresses,  and  their  children  mulattoes  of  all  shades.  Their 
proper  physical  character  is,  we  think,  well  described  by  M.  Costaz  :  — 

"  La  conlear  des  Bar&bras  tient  en  quelque  sorte  le  miliea  entre  le  no^  d*^b^ne  des  habi- 
tans  de  Sennaar  et  le  teint  basan^  des  Egyptiens  da  Sayd.  EUe  est  exactement  semblable 
il  celle  de  Tacigoa  poll  fonc^.  Les  Barabras  se  prevalent  de  cette  nnance,  poor  se  ranger 
parmi  les  blancs.  .  .  Les  traits  des  Bar&bras  se  rapproohent  effeotiTement  plus  de  cenx  des 
Enrop^ens  que  de  oeox  des  Nbgres :  lenr  pean  est  d'nn  tissu  extrSmement  fin — sa  cooleitr 
ne  prodnit  point  un  e£feot  d^sagr^ble ;  la  nuance  rouge,  qui  j  est  mSl^e^  leur  donne  un 
air  de  sant4  et  de  Tie.  ns  diff^ent  des  N^gres  par  leur  cheyeuz,  qui  sont  longs  et  leg^re- 
nient  cr^pus  sans  dtre  laineux. 

Dr.  Riippeirs  very  scientific  account  of  the  races  inhabiting  the 
province  of  Dongola  contains  the  following:  — 

''The  inhabitants  of  Dar  Dongola  are  divided  into  two  principal  classes:  namely,  the 
Barabra,  or  the  descendants  of  the  old  Ethiopian  natiyes  of  the  eountry,  and  the  races  of 
Arabs  who  have  emigrated  from  Hedjas.  The  ancestors  of  the  Barabra,  who,  in  the  course 
of  centuries,  haye  been  repeatedly  conquered  by  hostile  tribes,  must  have  undergone  some 
intermixture  with  people  of  foreign  blood ;  yet  an  attentiye  inquiry  will  still  enable  us  to 
distinguish  among  them  the  old  national  physiognomy,  which  their  forefathers  have  marked 
upon  colossal  statues  and  the  bas-reliefs  of  temples  and  sepulchres.  A  long  OTal  counte- 
nance ;  a  beautifully  curred  nose,  somewhat  rounded  towards  the  top ;  proportionally  thick 
lips,  but  not  protruding  excessively;  a  remarkably  beautiful  figure,  generally  of  middle 
size,  and  a  brown  color,  are  the  characteristics  of  the  genuine  Dongalawi.  These  same 
traits  of  physiognomy  are  generally  found  among  the  Ababdi,  Bishari,  a  part  of  the  inha- 
bitants of  the  province  of  Schendi,  and  partly  also  among  the  Abyssinians." 

Many  of  the  Baribra  speak  Arabic,  and  with  an  accent  ever  "  %ui 
generis;''  but  very  few  free  Arabs  consider  it  respectable  to  learn  Ber- 
berree,  which  they  affect  to  despise  as  Rut^na^  a  "  jargon.'*  Both  races 
keep  themselves  separate ;  and  marriage  connexions  between  them, 
entailing  disgrace  upon  the  Arab,  are,  at  the  present  day,  of  so  rare 
occurrence,  that  Berberri  husbands  at  Cairo  are  only  adopted  for  one 
day,  in  cases  of  "triple  divorce."^  There  are  many  citations  of  Arab 
historians  to  support  the  conclusion  that  some  septs  of  these  so-termed 

Digitized  by 

Google 

AFRICAN    TYPES.  199 

Bar^bra  derived  their  origin  from  a  country  westward  of  the  Nile, 
and  not  far  from  KordofiLn.  A  doubt  thus  arises  not  only,  as  above 
mentioned,  with  regard  to  Negroes,  but  whether  some  Nubians  them- 
selves did  not  come  originally  from  the  west  of  the  White  Nile.  This 
opinion,  confirmed  to  some  extent  by  aflSnity  of  language  and  by 
modem  traditions,  is  contradicted,  apparently,  by  the  monuments :  — 
Ist,  Egyptian  monarchs  of  the  XViiith  dynasty  conquer  the  Nouba^ 
no  less  than  the  Bardhera^  in  their  expeditions  of  the  fourteenth  and 
fifteenth  centuries  b.  c.  2d,  The  portraits  of  these  Ancient  Nubians 
exhibit  precisely  the  same  traits,  whilst  occupying,  3500  years  ago, 
the  same  topographical  habitats,  as  their  descendants  at  the  present 
day;  and  the  nostalgic  tendencies  of  the  modem  Berherri  are  so  noto- 
rious, that  voluntary  displacements  on  his  part  seem  improbable. 

In  Part  11.  of  this  volupae,  under  the  head  of  KUSA,  the  reader  will 
meet  with  ample  investigations:  although,  beyond  general  accuracy,  a 
minutely-exact  geographical  settlement  of  these  Nubian  groups  is  not 
essential  to  antiiropology ;  because,  whether  in  the  Lower  or  Upper 
Nubias,  or  in  Kordofin,  they  lie  now,  where  their  progenitors  ever 
did,  along  the  Nile ;  that  is,  between  the  Egyptians  at  the  north  and 
the  Negroes  at  the  south.  And,  after  all,  their  mightiest  dislocations 
are  confined  within  an  area  of  500  miles,  up  or  down  a  single  river. 
To  us  they  are,  consequently,  merely  Nubian  aborigines. 

The  population  of  Kordof&n  now  consists  of  three  races  at  least, 
who  are  physically  distinct,  each  speaking  different  languages:  — 
1.  Bedouin  Arabs  fit)m  the  HedjAz.  2.  Colonists  from  Dongola. 
3.  Original  natives  of  the  country,  who  call  themselves  Nouhay 
whereas,  in  race,  they  are  genuine  Negroes.  We  dwell  not,  however, 
on  exotic  races ;  but  upon  the  Nubians  proper :  whose  type  is  inde- 
pendent of  this  chaos  of  national  names,  often  erroneously  given  to 
them,  aj3  well  as  misappropriated  by  them.    Dr.  Prichard  says :  — 

<*  The  descent  of  the  modem  Nubians  or  Barabra,  from  the  Novha  of  the  hill  country  of 
Kordof^n,  seems  to  be  as  weU  established  as  yeiy  many  facts  which  are  regarded  as  certain 
by  writers  on  ethnography." 

Bat  the  BarHbra  are  not  Negroes ;  their  hair,  though  slightly  friz- 
zled and  crisp,  is  long  and  not  woolly:  and  Prichard*s  surmise  of  any 
great  Nubian  displacements  since  Pharaonic  times,  was  doubted  by 
Morton,^  and  is  overthrown  by  facts  we  owe  to  Birch.^  Burckhardt, 
Cailliaud,  and  other  travellers  who  have  visited  this  part  of  Africa, 
tell  us  that  the  Novibas^  who  are  Negroes,  do  not  here  resemble  in  form, 
features,  hair,  complexion,  &c.,  other  Negroes  of  the  west  coast,  but 
approximate  more  closely  to  the  type  of  Barabra  or  true  Nubians. 
It  is  clear  that  there  exists  some  strongly-marked  difference  between 

Digitized  by 

Google 

200  AFRICAN    TYPES. 

the  Novha  of  Kordof^n  and  the  Barhhra  of  Nubia;  which  Dr. 
Prichard  is  at  a  loss  whether  to  attribute  to  climate  or  to  commin- 
glings  of  races.  Of  the  two  opinions  the  latter  is  the  only  reasonable 
one ;  because  the  Nubians  or  modem  Baribra  are  the  representatives 
of  an  original  indigenous  stock;  whose  normal  position  stands  north- 
ward of  pure  Negro  races. 

The  inhabitants  of  Dar-Four  and  Pezzin  exhibit  some  striking 
peculiarities,  but  we  shall  pass  them  by,  as  non-essential  to  our  pre- 
sent objects,  with  the  obseiTation  that,  while  the  former  approximate 
the  Nubian,  the  latter  verge  towards  the  Atlantic  Berber  type. 

The  Hastem  Nubians,  or  Bisharine  or  Bejawy  Eace. — To  the  east- 
ward of  Nubia,  throughout  the  deserts  and  denuded  hill-country  east 
of  Egypt,  we  encounter  different  tribes  and  nations,  all  supposed  to 
belong  to  the  same  race,  which  is  one  of  the  most  widely-spread  in 
Ethiopia,  stretching  from  the  Eastern  desert  at  Thebes,  to  the  So- 
mauli-country  below  Shoa.  The  Bishari  are  the  most  powerful  of 
tiiese  clans.  The  Sadharebe,  to  the  southward  of  the  Bishari,  and 
the  Ababdeh,  to  the  northward,  belong,  it  is  believed,  to  the  same 
stock.  Under  the  appellation  Hadharebe  arO  included  numerous 
tribes,  which  it  would  be  tedious  and  useless  to  enumerate.'^  ®  SiUtkimy 
or  Su^Mn,  is  their  principal  settlement ;  and  of  this  place  and  its 
inhabitants  Burckhardt  supplies  an  ample  account. 

**  The  Snakiny  haye,  in  general,  handsome  and  expressiye  features,  with  thin  and  yery 
short  beards ;  their  color  is  of  the  darkest  brown,  approaching  black,  but  they  haye  nothing 
of  the  Negro  character  of  countenance."  339 

To  the  same  excellent  observer  we  are  indebted  for  a  fact  that, 
seized  upon  to  sustain  the  exploded  idea  of  physical  changes  through 
climate,  in  reality  affords  the  happiest  illustration  of  the  mode  through 
which  types  of  man  become  naturally  effaced ;  viz. :  by  foreign  amalga- 
mations. The  town  of  SuAkim ;  in  Ptolemaic  times  Berenice  ;  and 
containing  (970  b.  c.)  the  ancestors  of  the  same  Suhhiim^  that  now 
reside  in  its  neighborhood ;  exhibited  in  Burckhardt's  day  a  triple 
population,  viz.:  native  Hadharebe,  Arabs  from  the  opposite  coast, 
and  the  descendants  of  some  Turkish  soldiery  left  there  by  Sooltan 
Seleem.  "The  present  race,"  says  Burckhardt,  "have  the  African 
features  and  manners,  and  are  in  no  way  to  be  distinguished  from  the 
fladherebe."^^ 

Turkish  soldiery  cohabit  with  the  females  of  every  land  in  which 
ibey  are  posted ;  and,  while  they  rarely  carry  their  own  women  with 
them,  of  all  points  of  Ottoman  conquests,  SuitJcim,  on  the  African  desert- 
coast  of  the  Eed  Sea,  would  be  the  least  likely  to  have  been  occupied 
by  Turkish  married  couples.  In  consequence,  Seleem's  garrison  there, 

Digitized 

br  Google 

AFRICAN    TYPES.  201 

after  the  subjugation  of  Egypt  in  a.  d.  1517,  adopted  as  wives  and 
concubines  the  females  of  the  Hadharebe  ;  and  in  less  than  ten  gene- 
rations, down  to  the  period  of  Burckhardt's  travels,  their  descendants 
had  been  already  absorbed  into  the  aboriginal  masses  whence  the 
mothers  had  been  drawn.^  Sustainers  of  "unity,'*  who  once 
snatched  franticly  at  Turks  metamorphosed,  by  climate,  into  Afri- 
cans, are  welcome  henceforward  to  what  capital  they  can  evolve  i^om 
Burckhardt's  narrative. 

The  country  of  the  Bishari  reaches  from  the  northern  frontier  of 
Abyssinia,  along  the  course  of  the  river  Mareb,  which  flows  through 
the  northern  forests  of  the  Shangallah  to  the  BeUd-el-Taka  and  At- 
bara,  where  dwell  the  Hadendoa  and  Hammadab,  said  to  be  the 
strongest  tribe  of  the  Bishari  race.  Tribes  of  the  Bishari  reach  north- 
ward as  far  as  Gebel-el-Ottaby  in  the  latitude  of  Derr,  where  the  Nile, 
after  its  great  western  bend,  turns  back  towards  the  Red  Sea ;  they 
occupy  all  the  hilly  country  upon  the  Nile  from  Senn^ar  to  Dar  Berber 
and  to  the  Eed  Sea.  (Prichard.)  Travellers  do  not  give  a  flattering 
account  of  their  social  condition.  Burckhardt  states :  "  The  inhos- 
pitable character  of  the  Bisharein  would  alone  prove  them  to  be  a 
true  African  race,  were  this  not  put  beyond  all  doubt  by  their  lan- 
guage." Riippell  declares  that  the  physical  character  of  the  Bishari  is 
very  like  that  of  the  BarAbra.  Burckhardt  again  observes,  "  The  Bi- 
shari of  Atbara,  like  their  brethren,  are  a  handsome  and  bold  race  of 
people.  I  thought  the  women  remarkably  handsome  ;  they  were  of 
a  dark  brown  complexion,  with  beautitiil  eyes  and  fine  teeth ;  their 
persons  slender  and  elegant."  Hamilton,  who  saw  a  few  of  them 
during  his  short  stay  about  Assouan  and  Philse,  yields  very  much  the 
same  account,  with  the  commentary,  that  many  of  them  are  beheld 
with  "  a  cast  of  the  Negro,  others  with  very  fine  profile."  Prichard 
makes  the  following  just  and  significant  remark  on  this  description : 
"  This  sort  of  variety  in  physiognomy  is  observed  by  almost  every 
traveller  in  the  eoBtem  parts  of  the  continent,  from  E^affirland  to 
Nubia  and  Egypt."  Now,  on  the  west,  the  population  has  been  cut 
oflT,  by  deserts  and  other  natural  impediments,  from  all  foreign  ad- 
mixtures, in  consequence  of  their  isolated  position;  while,  on  the 
east,  they  have  been  subjected  from  time  immemorial  to  adulteration 
from  Semitic  immigrants.  Both  the  Bishari  and  Ababdeh  have  been 
somewhat  adulterated  with  Arab  blood ;  and,  doubtless,  far  more  so 
through  Negresses,  their  slaves.  They  may,  however,  be  considered 
a  tolerably  pure  African  race,  inasmuch  as  the  marks  of  adulteration 
are  not  by  any  means  universal ;  at  the  same  time  they  have  preserved 
their  native  tongue,  while  the  Arabic  idioms  have  supplanted  other 
languages  around  them. 
26 

Digitized  by 

Google 

202  AFRICAN    TYPES. 

The  Ababdeh  occupy  the  country  to  the  northward  of  the  Bishari ; 
viz. :  from  the  parallel  of  Derr  to  the  frontiers  of  Egypt,  and  in  the 
eastern  desert  as  far  northward  as  Qosseyr :  they  were  scarcely  known 
previously  to  the  French  Expedition  to  Egypt.  M.  du  Bois  Aymfe,  a 
member  of  Napoleon's  Egyptian  commission,  affords  the  earliest  de- 
scription of  the  Ababdeh :  — 

'<Les  Ababdeh  sont  nn  triba'nomade,  qui  habitent  les  montagnes  Bita^es  a  rorient  du 
Nil,  au  sud  de  la  valine  de  Qo^eyr.  Us  different  enti^rement,  par  leur  moeurs,  leur  lan- 
guage, leuT  costume,  leur  constitution  physique,  des  tribus  d'Arabes,  qui,  comme  ceux  oi, 
ocoupent  les  deserts  qui  enyironnent  I'Egypte.  Les  Arabs  sont  blancs,  se  rasent  la  tSte, 
sont  yetus.  Les  Ab&bdeh  sont  noirs,  mais  leur  traits  ont  beaucoup  de  ressemblance  avec 
ceux  des  Europ^ens.     Us  ont  les  cheyeuz  naturellemerU  boucUs^  mais  point  laineux." 

Belzoni,  who  knew  them  well,  says  their  complexions  are  naturally 
of  a  dark  chocolate ;  their  hair  quite  black ;  their  teeth  fine  and  white, 
protuberant  and  very  large. 

It  will  be  seen,  from  what  precedes,  that  considerable  is  the  discre- 
pancy among  descriptions  by  travellers  of  these  Ababdeh  and  Bisha- 
reen,  as  well  as  of  other  races.  This  arises,  doubtless,  from  two  facta : 
1,  That  they  are  a  mixed  population,  descended  from  several  primitive 
races ;  2,  That  they  have  been  described  at  different  topographical 
points. 

The  following  observations  of  M.  Pbisse — ^whose  residence  among 
these  tribes  in  Upper  Egypt  counts  years  where  others  reckon  months, 
or,  more  frequently,  weeks,  is  a  guarantee  for  the  accuracy  of  his 
ethnological  drawings^ — completely  demonstrate  the  truth  of  our 
deductions :  — 

*<  The  manners  of  the  Bedjah  described  by  Arab  authors  are  even  yet  those  of  these 
pop\ilations,  who,  under  the  name  of  Ababdeh,  of  Bishari,  or  Bichareen,  and  others  less 

•  known,  inhabit  the  same  countries  at  this  day In  1836,  out  of  600  men  (Ababdeh) 

of  the  tribe,  assembled  at  Louqsor  for  the  transportation  of  wheflt  to  Ooss^ir,  nearly  100 
Arabs  were  found,  who  had  married  Ababdeh  girls  to  ayoid  the  conscription  and  the  taxes. 

The  Ababdeh  haTC  a  peculiar  idiom,  which  seems  to  be  that  of  the  aborigines,  or 

the  ancient  Ethiopians. The  BUhari  commence  at  the  north,  where  the.  Ababdeh 

finish,  and  extend  to  the  south  as  far  as  the  Ticinity  of  Souakim.  They  occupy  all  that 
chain  of  mountains  which  runs  along  the  eastern  coast  of  Africa,  and  that  seems  to  be  the 
cradle  of  all  these  Wandering  septs,  liying  in  grottoes,  and  designated  in  consequence  under 
the  name  of  Troglodytet,  They  derive  their  origin  from  the  Blemmyes,  a  nomad  people  of 
the  environs  of  Axum,  which  the  love  of  pillage  drew  towards  Egypt  [that  is,  in  Roman 
times ;  when  Coptic  annals  recount  the  ravages  as  low  as  Esneh  of  the  Bal-n-Moui,  "  Eye- 
of-Lion,"  or  Blemmyes.  ^     The  manners  of  the  Bishari  differ  little  Arom  those  of  the 

Ababdeh,  with  whom,  nevertheless,  they  are  ever  at  war Their  language  has  drawn 

nothing  from  the  Arabic,  and  seems  to  approach  the  Abyssinian  and  the  Berber  [t.  e.  Ber- 
berree.'^  This  people,  truly  indigenoue  to  Africa,  is  cruel,  avaricious,  and  vindictive ;  tiiese 
dispositions  are  restrained  by  no  law,  human  or  divine.  "244 

"We  copy  (Fig.  120)  one  of  Prisse's  engravings.  It  exhibits  the 
perfect  Bishariy  but  differs  too  slightly  from  the  Ababdeh  characteris- 
tics not  to  exemplify  both  tribes  equally  well. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

AFRICAN    TYPES. 

203 

Among    Dr.    Morton's  Fia.  120: 

papers  we  find  the  copy 
of  a  letter,  addressed  from 
the  hie  of  Philsej  Sept.  15, 
1844,  by  Chev.  Lepsius,  to 
our  erudite  countryman, 
the  late  John  Pickering, 
of  Boston.  Being  medited, 
and  mentioned  only  by  one 
writer^  that  we  know  of, 
we  translate  such  passages 
as  bear  upon  Nubian  sub- 
jects,  not  merely  for  their 
intrinsic  value,  but  in  tri- 
bute to  the  memory  of  the 
profoundest  native  philo- 
logist that  our  country  has 
hitherto  produced. 

'<  I  haye  no  need,  certainly,  to  insist,  as  regards  yourself,  npon  the  high  importance 
-which  linguistic  researches  always  possess  in  ethnographical  studies.  I  haye  not  neglected, 
either,  to  study,  to  the  extent  that  time  permitted,  the  different  tongues  of  the  Soud&n, 
wheneyer  I  could  find  indiyiduals  who  were  in  a  state  to  communicate  anything  about  their 
own  language,  through  the  medium  of  Arabic.  The  three  principal  tongues  which  I  haye 
studied  in  this  manner,  and  of  which  I  now  possess  the  grammar  and  yocabulary,  suffi- 
ciently complete  to  giye  an  idea  of  their  nature,  are — the  Nohinga^  or  Nouba,  ordinarily 
known  under  the  strange  name  "of  Berber,  which  is  spoken  in  three  different  dialects  in  the 
valley  of  the  Nile,  from  Assouan  to  the  southern  frontier  of  the  proyince  of  Dongola,  as  also 
in  certain  parts  of  £o]rdifal  (this  is  the  true  pronunciation  in  lieu  of  KordofUn) :  2d,  The 
KofiffAra,  or  language  of  Dar-Four,  a  very  extended  speech  of  Negroes,  of  which  until  pow 
even  the  name  was  unknown :  3d,  The  BSgaioie,  or  the  language  of  the  Bichaiiba,  who  oc- 
cupy the  country  west  of  the  Nile  from  23"  to  15°,  and  principally  the  fertile  proyince  of 
Taka.  The  most  interesting  among  these  three  tongues  is,  without  doubt,  the  third.  The 
grammar  causes  it  to  be  recognized  without  difficulty  as  appertaininff  to  (he  great  family  of 
Caucanan  langttages,  as  I  think  I  was  the  first  to  demonstrate  of  the  Egyptian  tongue  (in 
1835,  by  comparison  of  the  pronouns ;  in  1886  by  that  of  the  names  of  number) ;  and  as 
known  concerning  the  Abyssinian  tongue.  This  fact  alone  proyes  tiiat  the  primitiye  origin 
of  all  these  people,  of  this  eastern  part  of  Africa,  must  have  been  in  Asia.  [We  do  not 
perceiye  why  such  deduction  necessarily  follows.  **  Caucasian"  is  a  term  that  physiology 
miist  abandon,  as  a  misnomer  productiye  of  confusion ;  but  the  above  was  penned  in  haste, 
nine  years  ago,  and  the  erudite  writer  may  since  haye  seen  occasion,  as  we  have  ourselves, 
to  modify  first  impressions].  .  .  .  Finally,  this  tongue  becomes  to  us  of  a  far  higher  import- 
ance, through  the  circumstance  that  I  think  I  shall  be  able  to  prove  that  the  same  people, 
who  now  speak  this  tongue,  formerly  inhabited  the  Itle  ofMeroe;  built  the  temples  and  the 
pyramids,  of  which  we  still  there  find  the  ruins.  .  .  .  The  people  who  ruled  then,  in  this 
great  kingdom,  called  themseWes  BSga  (Bedja) ;  a  name  which  is  now  entirely  lost  as  the 
name  of  a  people,  but  which  originated  the  name  of  the  tongue  Bigaidey  of  which  I  haye 
spoken  aboye.  .  .  .  One  facilely  perceiyes  at  once,  by  many  well-preseryed  paintings,  that  the 
people  who  built  the  pyramids  [of  Meroe]  were  a  red  people,  or,  rather,  very  reddish  [bim 
rougedire"],  as  might  have  been  expected  if  they  spoke  veritably  a  Catioasian  language.  Bat 

Digitized  by 

Google 

204  AFRICAN    TYPES. 

nothing  presents  itself  to  the  most  scrapulons  investigations  that  could  lead  vlb  to  suspect 
that  a  single  one  of  the  monuments  [of  Meroe]  might  ascend  higher  than  tiie  first  century 
after  j.  c.  The  greater  part  belong,  without  doubt,  even  to  much  later  times ;  and  we  must 
place  the  most  flourishing  epoch  of  MeroS  nearly  at  the  second  or  third  of  our  era.  And, 
not  only  upon  the  Isle  of  Meroe,  but  in  all  Ethiopia,  from  one  end  to  the  other,  then?  is  not 
the  slightest  trace,  I  will  not  say  of  a  primitive  civilization  anterior  to  the  Egyptian  civili- 
zation, as  has  been  dreamed,  but  not  even  whatsoever  of  an  Ethiopian  civilization,  properly 
so  called." 216 

These  most  scientific  views  of  Chev.  Lepsius  were  communicated 
to  us  long  ago ;  and  they  have  materially  aided  our  endeavors  to  dis- 
criminate between  the  true  and  the  false,  the  certain  and  the  impro- 
bable, in  Ethiopic  problems ;  about  which,  we  grieve  to  say,  consider- 
able mystification  is  still  kept  up  between  the  Northern  and  the 
Southern  States  of  our  Federal  Union,  which  a  little  reading  might 
remove. 

On  the  northern  coast  of  Africa,  between  the  Mediterranean  and 
the  Great  Desert,  including  Morocco,  Algiers,  Tunis,  Tripoli,  and  Ben- 
gazi,  there  is  a  continuous  system  of  highlands,  which  have  been 
included  under  the  general  term  Atlas^  anciently  Atalantis^  now  the 
Barbary  States.  This  immense  tract,  in  very  recent  geological  times, 
was  once  an  Island,  with  the  ocean  flowing  over  the  whole  of  the 
Sahara;  thus  cutting  off  all  land-communication  between  Barbary,  on 
the  Mediterranean,  and  the  remote  plateaux  of  Nigritia.  Throughout 
Barbary  we  encounter  another  peculiar  group  of  races,  subdivided 
into  many  tribes  of  various  shades,  now  spread  over  a  vast  area,  but 
which  formerly  had  its  principal,  and  probably  aboriginal,  abode, 
along  the  mountain-slopes  of  Atlas.  The  tribes  have  different  appel- 
latives in  different  districts :  e.  g.,  the  Shillouhs,  now  a  separate 
people,^''  have  been  included  under  the  general  name  of  Berbers  or 
Berehhers :  but  from  the  primitive  Berbers  the  north  of  Africa  seems 
to  have  derived  the  designation  of  Barbary  or  Berberia^  "  Land  of  the 
Berbers.''  To  speak  correctly,  the  real  name  of  the  Berbers  proper 
is  Mazirgh  ;  with  the  article  prefixed  or  suflixed,  T-amazirgh,  or  Ama- 
zirgh'T :  meaning,  free,  dominant,  or  "  noble  race."  Their  name,  in 
Latin  mouths,  was  softened  into  Masyes,  Masiges,  Mazici,  &c. ;  and  in 
Grecian,  into  Ma^ui^,  as  far  back  as  Herodotus  {lib,  iv.  191).  These 
people  have  spoken  a  language  unlike  any  other  from  time  immemo- 
rial ;  and,  although  it  has  been  a  fruitful  theme  of  discussion,  yet  no 
affinity  can  be  established  between  its  ancient  words,  stripped  of 
Phoenician  and  Arabic,  and  any  Asiatic  tongue.  We  have  every 
reason  to  feel  persuaded  that  the  Berbers  existed  in  the  remotest 
times,  with  all  their  essential  moral  and  physical  peculiarities.  In  a 
word,  the  reader  of  Part  11.  of  this  work  will  see,  that  there  exists 
no  ground  for  regarding  them  in  any  other  light  than  as  the  autoc- 

Digitized  by 

Google 

AFRICAN    TYPES.  205 

thones  of  Mount  Atlas  and  its  prolongations.  The  Berber  was,  pro- 
bably, as  Mr.  W.  B.  Hodgson  (of  Savannah —  one  of  the  highest 
authorities  in  Berber  lore,)  remarks,  the  language  which  "  Tyria  Bi- 
lingua*'  was  obliged  to  learn  in  addition  to  a  Carthaginian  mother- 
tongue,  the  Punic  or  Phoenician  speech.  We  know  that  this  people, 
with  their  language  stamped  upon  the  native  names  of  rivers,  moun- 
tains, and  localities,  have  existed  apart  for  the  last  2500  years ;  and 
inasmuch  as  Egypt,  back  to  the  time  of  Menes,  barred  their  inter- 
course by  land  with  races  on  the  eastern  side  of  the  Suez  isthmus, 
there  is  every  reason  to  beUeve  that  the  Berbers  existed,  at  that  re- 
mote date,  in  the  same  state  in  which  they  were  discovered  by  Phoenician 
navigators,  previously  to  the  foundation  of  Carthage.  At  thje  time 
of  Xieo  AMcanus,  the  Berber  was  the  language  of  all  Atlas.  It  has 
remained  so  since,  except  where  crowded  out  by  Arabic.  They  are 
an  indomitable  nomadic  people,  who,  since  the  introduction  of  camels^ 
have  penetrated,  in  considerable  numbers,  into  the  Desert,  and  even 
as  far  as  Nigritia.  These  Berbers  are  the  Numidians  and  Maurita- 
nians  of  classical  writers,  by  the  Romans  termed  ^^  genua  insuperabile 
hello ;"  and  French  Algeria  can  testify  to  the  indeUble  bellicosities 
of  the  living  race. 
We  gather  from  Shaw,  that  — 

'*The  tribes  who  speak  this  language  have  dififerent  names:  those  of  the  mountains 
belonging  to  Morocco  are  termed  ShiUoukht ;  those  who  inhabit  the  plains  of  that  empire, 
dwelling  nnder  tents,  after  the  manner  of  Arabs,  are  named  Verier;  and  those  of  the 
mountains  belonging  to  Algiers  and  Tunis  call  themselyes  Cabaylis,  or  OtbtM*  [a  designa- 
tion which  is  merely  Qabdil,  Arabic  for  a  "  tribe,"  when  not  Oebdi/lee,  "  mountaineer."] 

A  fourth  and  prominent  branch  must  be  added  to  this  division : 
viz.,  the^  Tuaryhj  who  are  now  widely  spread  over  the  Sahara  and  its 
oases,  and  on  both  banks  of  the  Niger. 

Mr.  Hodgson,  long  resident  officially  in  the  ^arbary  States,  who 
has  devoted  much  time,  talent,  and  learning,  to  this  subject,  seems 
to  have  settled  the  question,  that  all  these  Berber  races  (except  such 
few  as  have  adopted  the  Arabic)  speak  dialects  of  the  same  language. 
In  consequence,  it  has  been  assumed,  by  Prichard  and  others  of  the 
Unity-school,  that  they  must  all  be  of  a  common  origin.  But,  while 
of  this  there  is  no  evidence  beyond  a  community  of  languages,  the 
manifest  diversity  of  physical  characters  would  prove  the  contrary. 
^  Some  of  these  clans  are  white ;  others  black,  with  woolly  hair ;  and 
there  is  no  fact  better  estabUshed  in  ethnography,  than  that  physical 
characters  are  far  more  persistent  than  unwritten  tongues.  The  great 
mass  of  the  Berber  tribes  have,  in  all  likelihood,  substantially  pre- 
served their  physical  as  well  as  moral  characters  since  their  creation ; 
altliough  they  have  been  to  some  extent  subjected  to  adulterations 

Digitized  by 

Google 

206  AFRICAN    TYPES. 

of  blood.  The.  Phoenicians,  Greeks,  Romans,  and  Vandals,  sncces- 
sively,  founded  colonies  in  the  Barbary  States :  but  they  built  and 
inhabited  towns  for  commercial  purposes  —  mixed  little  socially  with 
the  people  —  never  resided  in  the  interior,  and  have  disappeared  from 
the  scene,  leaving  nearly  imperceptible  traces  behind  them.  Arabs 
have  since  overrun  the  country,  but  their  numbers  have  been  small, 
compared  with  the  natives ;  and,  except  during  and  since  Saracenic 
culture  in  the  towns,  they  have  generally  preserved  their  nomadic 
habits — keepi^g  much  aloof  from  the  indigenous  Barbaresques ;  and 
there  is  not  merely  no  reason  for  thinking  that  Arabia  has  exercised 
great  influence  on  the  Berber  type,  but  circumstances  rather  indicate 
Barbary's  action  over  the  Arab  colonists.  The  ruling  tuition  of  the 
Arabs,  the  genial  vitahty  of  Jjtew,  and  the  constant  reading  of  the 
Korin,  have  had  the  effect  of  spreading  the  Arabic  language  much 
faster  and  fiEurther  than  Arabian  blood.  In  some  of  the  more  civilized 
cities — Morocco,  Fez,  &c. — Arabic  is  the  only  tongue  spoken  among 
the  patrician  Berbers;  thus  affording  another  evidence  of  the  utter 
fallacy  of  arguments  in  fevor  of  the  identity  of  origin  or  eonsanguinity 
of  races  based  solely  upon  community  of  language. 

The  Mohammedan  in  Africa,  like  the  Christian  religion  elsewhere, 
is  spreading  its  own  languages  over  races  of  all  colors :  just  as  did 
Shamanism,  Budhism,  or  Judaism,  in  many  parts  of  Asia,  during  ages 
past.  Many  Jews  are  scattered  throughout  Barbary,  but  especially 
in  the  empire  of  Morocco,  where  their  number  is  estimated  at  500,000. 
Some  black  blood  too  has  infiltrated  from  the  South. 

No  little  difference  exists  in  descriptions  of  the  physical  characters 
of  Barbary  Moors  (corruption  of  the  Latin  Maurt)y  no  less  than 
concerning  the  native  tribes  of  Atlas  now  diffused  over  the  Sahara. 
Prichard  says  — 

*^  Their  figure  and  statore  are  nearly  the  same  as  those  of  the  Southern  Europeans ;  and 
their  complexion,  if  darker,  is  only  so  in  proportion  to  the  higher  temperature  of  the  coun- 
tries which  they  inhabit    It  displays,  as  we  shall  see,  great  varieties.'' 

The  influence  of  climate  is  here  again  boldly  assumed  by  Prichard, 
without  one  particle  of  evidence.  What  reason  is  there  to  suppose 
that  climate  influences  Berbers,  any  more  than  it  does  Mongols, 
American  Indians,  or  other  races,  who,  each  with  their  typical  com- 
plexions, are  spread  over  most  latitudes  ?  Moreover,  the  complexion 
of  the  Berbers  does  not,#in  very  many  cases  at  least,  correspond  with 
climate.  The  same  action,  we  presume,  operates  in  Barbaresque  locali- 
ties that  seems  to  prevail  in  various  parts  of  the  earth;  and  which  we 
have  insisted  upon  in  our  general  Eemarks  on  Types.  The  Berber 
family,  at  present,  appears  to  be  made  up  of  many  tribes,  presenting 
a  sort  of  generic  resemblance,  but  differing  specifically,  and  possess- 

Digitized  by 

Google 

AFRICAN    TYPES.  207 

ing  physical  characteristics  that  are  original,  and  not  amenable  to 
climatic  influences  any  more  than  those  which  denote  the  Jew,  the 
Iberian,  or  the  Celt 

We  submit  a  few  examples  of  Atalantic  physical  characters,  as 
described  by  various  travellers.    Jackson  informs  us,  that  — 

«<  The  men  of  Temsena  and  Showiah  are  of  a  strong,  robust  make,  and  of  a  copper-color — 
the  women  beantifoL  . .  .  The  women  of  Fez  are  fair  as  the  European,  but  hair  and  eyes 
al'wajB  dark.  .  .  .  The  women  of  Mequinas  are  Tory  beautiful,  and  have  the  red  and  vhUe 
complexion  of  EnglUh  women" 

EozET  gives  the  annexed  description  of  the  Moors :  — 

<*  n  existe  cependant  encore  un  certain  nombre  de  families,  qui  n*ont  point  contracts 
d'alliances  avec  des  strangers,  et  chez  lesquelles  on  retrouye  les  caract^res  de  la  race  pri- 
mitiye.  Les  hommes  sont  d'une  taille  au  dessus  de  la  moyenne ;  lenr  d-marche  est  noble 
et  grave ;  ils  ont  les  cheveux  noirs ;  la  peau  unpeu  basanSe,  mais  plutdt  blanche  que  brune ; 
*  le  yisage  plein,  mais  les  traits  en  sent  moins  bien  prononc^s  que  ceux  des  Arabes  et  des 
Berb^res.  Ds  ont  g^^ralement  le  nez  arrondi,  la  bouche  moyenne,  les  yeux  tree  ouyerts, 
mais  peu  yifis ;  leurs  muscles  sont  bien  prononc^s,  et  ils  ont  le  corps  plutdt  gros  que  maigre." 

Spix  and  Mabtius,  the  well-known  German  travellers,  depict 
them  as  follows:  — 

«  A  high  forehead,  an  oral  countenance,  large,  speaking  blmck  eyes,  shaded  by  arched 
and  strong  eyebrows ;  a  thin,  rather  long,  but  not  too  pointed,  nose ;  rather  broad  lips, 
meeting  in  an  acute  angle ;  thick,  smooth,  and  black  hair  on  the  head  and  in  the  beard ; 
broumUh-yellow  complexion;  a  strong  neck,  joined  to  a  stature  greater  than  the  middle 
height,  characterize  the  natives  of  Northern  AfHca,  as  they  are  frequently  seen  in  the  streets 
of  Gibraltar." 

M.  Eozet  recounts,  that — 

«The  Berbers  or  Eabyles  of  the  Algerine  territory  are  of  middle  stature;  their  com- 
plexion is  brown,  and  sometimes  almost  black  {noirfirtre) ;  hair  brown  and  smooth,  rarely 
blond ;  they  are  lean,  but  extremely  robust  and  neryous,  very  well-formed,  and  with  the 
elegance  of  antique  statues ;  their  heads  more  round  than  the  Arabs'." 

Lieutenant  Washington  declares  — 

«  The  Moors  are  generally  a  fine-looking  race  of  men,  of  middle  stature,  disposed  to 
become  corpulent;  they  have  good  teeth;  complexions  of  all  ihadee,  owing,  as  some  have 
supposed,  to  intermixture  with  Negroes,  though  the  latter  are  not  sufficiently  numerous  to 
account  for  the  fact** 

He  describes  the  Shillouhs  or  Shilhas  as  having  light  complexions. 

Prichard  thus  sums  up  his  inquiries :  — 

<  It  seems,  from  these  accounts,  that  the  nations  whose  history  we  have  traced  in  this 
chapter,  present  all  varieties  of  complexion ;  and  these  variations  appear,  in  some  instances 
a$  least,  to  be  nearU/  in  relation  to  the  temperature," 

With  all  his  inclination  that  way,  however,  it  is  evident  that  ne 
himself  cannot  make  his  own  climatic  theory  fit. 

Our  reasonings  are  based  upon  comparison  of  Barbaresque  fami- 
lies difiused  over  a  vast  superficies  —  comprising  tribes  now  more  or 
less  commingled,  and  in  all  social  conditions,  civic,  agricultural,  and 
nomadic.    We  may  mention,  although  we  exclude,  as  too  local  and 

Digitized  by 

Coogle 

208  AFRICAN    TYPES. 

modem  to,  be  important  out  of  towns  on  the  seaboard,  the  combined 
influences  of  European  captives,  at  Salee,  Tangiers,  Algiers,  Tunis, 
Tripoli,  Bengazi,  and  other  privateering  principalities ;  which  circum- 
stances, in  the  maritime  cities,  have  blended  every  type  of  man  that 
could  be  kidnapped  around  the  Black  Sea,  Mediterranean,  and  East* 
em  Atlantic,  by  Barbary  pirates.  [As  an  illustration  —  Mr.  Gliddon 
tells  us,  that,  in  1830,  just  after  the  French  conquest  of  Algiers,  the 
hold  of  a  Syrian  brig,  in  which  he  sailed  from  Alexandria  to  Sidon, 
was  occupied  by  one  Wealthy  Algerine  family,  fleeing  from  Gallic 
heresies  to  Arabian  Islim,  anywhere.  Exclusive  of  siervants  and 
slaves,  there  were  at  least  fifty  adults  and  minors,  under  the  control 
of  a  patriarchal  grand  or  great-grandfather.  Of  course,  our  infor- 
mant saw  none  of  the  grown-up  females  unveiled ;  but,  while  the 
patriarch  and  some  of  the  sons  were  of  the  purest  white  complexion, 
their  various  children  presented  every  hue,  and  every  physical  diver- 
sity, frojn  the  highest  Circassian  to  a  Guinea-Negro.  In  this  case, 
no  Arabic  interpreter  being  needed,  it  was  found  that  each  individual 
of  the  worthy  corsair's  family,  unprejudiced  in  all  things,  save  hatred 
towards  Christendom  in  general  and  Frenchmen  in  particular,  bad 
merely  chosen  females  irrespectively  of  color,  race,  or  creed. — J.  C.  K.] 
Hodgson  states  — 

«  The  Tuarycks  are  tLVfhiie  people,  of  the  Berber  race. .  . .  The  Moxabicks  are  a  remark- 
ably white  people,  and  are  mixed  with  Bedouin  Arabs.  .  .  .  The  Wadreagans  andWorgelans 
are  of  a  dark  bronze,  with  ivooUy  hair  .  .  .  are  certainly  not  pure  Caucasian,  like  the  Berber 
race  in  general.  .  .  .  There  is  every  probability  that  the  Eushites,  Amalekites,  and  Kah- 
tanites,  or  ^eni-Yokt^  Arabs,  had,  in  obscure  ages,  sent  forward  tribes  into  Africa.  Bat 
the  first  historic  proof  of  emigration  of  the  Aramean  or  Shemitio  race  into  this  region  is 
that  of  the  Canaanites  of  Tyre  and  of  Palestine.  This  great  commercial  people  settled 
Carthage,  and  pushed  their  traders  to  the  Pillars  of  Hercules.''^ 

Upon  these  various  branches  of  a  supposed  common  stock,  there 
have  been  engrafted  some  shoots  of  foreign  origin ;  for,  amidst  a  uni- 
formity of  language,  there  exist  extraordinary  differences  of  color  and 
of  physical  traits  —  at  the  same  time,  are  we  sure  of  this  alleged 
uniformity  of  speech  itself?  IN'ow,  we  repeat,  history  affords  no  well- 
attested  example  of  a  language  outliving  a  clearly-defined  physical 
type ;  and,  in  a  preceding  chapter,  wo  fully  instanced  how  the  Jews, 
scattered  for  2000  years  over  all  climates  of  the  earth,  have  adopted 
the  language  of  every  nation  among  whom  they  sojourn — thus 
affording  one  undeniable,  proof  of  our  assertion,  not  to  mention  many 
others  one  might  draw  from  less  historical  races. 

Mr.  Hodgson  is  a  strenuous  advocate  of  an  extreme  antiquity  foi 
the  Berbers,  or  Libyans :  — 

"  Their  history  is  yet  to  be  investigated  and  written.  I  yet  maintain  the  opinion  ad- 
Tanced  some  years  ago,  that  these  people  were  the  terrai  geniti — the  aboriginal  inhabitants 

Digitized  by 

Google 

AFRICAN   TYPES.  209 

of  Bgypt,  prior  to  the  hUtorio  or  monumental  era,  and  before  the  Blisratmites  and  their 
descendants,  the  Copts."  ^ 

In  our  Part  11.,  these  skilful  inferences  are  singularly  recondled 
with  the  monuments  and  histoiy,  and  from  an  altogether  different 
point  of  view.  When  we  remember  how,  in  Hebrew  personifications, 
MiZRAiM  was  the  grandson  of  !N'oah,  and  how  Lepsius  traces  the 
Egyptian  Empire  back  nearly  4000  years  before  Christ,  a  claim  of 
such  antiquity  for  the  Berbers  is  certainly  a  high  one,  although, 
according  to  our  belief  not  extravagant ;  for  we  regard  the  Berbers 
as  a  primitive  type,  and  therefore  as  old  as  any  men  of  our  geolo^cal 
period.  Hodgson  confirms  his  statement,  by  abundant  proo&,  that 
"  the  grammatical  structure  of  the  Berber  dialects  is  everywhere  the 
same;"  and,  in  allusion  to  the  aflinities  among  these  languages, 
avers :  — 

^  Tet,  with  all  this  identity  of  a  pecnliar  elass  of  words  and  rimHarity  of  some  inflections, 
a4hu^ct  particles,  and  formations— tA«  three  most  aneieiU  amd  iUrtoriea^  languages,  Arabit!^. 
Serber,  and  Coptic,  are  essentialljf  distinet,** 

With  perfect  propriety,  our  friend  might  have  added  the  Clunese 
speech,  which  is  equally  peculiar,  and  can  be  traced  monumentally 
fisu-ther  back  than  either  the  Arabic  or  the  Berber — if  not,  certainly, 
so  £Eur  as  that  ante-monumental  tongue  which  is  prototype  of  the 
Coptic  It  seems  to  us,  that  no  one  can  read  Pauthibr's  several 
works  on  Chinese  histoiy,  language,  and  literature,  without  coincid- 
ing in  this  opinion ;  and  eveiy  one  can  verify  that  the  languages  of 
America,  according  to  Gallatin,  Duponceau,  and  other  qualified 
judges,  are  radically  distinct  from  eveiy  tongue,  ancient  or  modem, 
of  ^e  Old  Continent 

Our  ethnological  sweep  over  the  African  Continent,  fi^m  the  Cape 
of  Qood  Hope  northwards  to  the  ilfubias  on  the  right  hand,  and  to 
Barbary  on  the  left,  incomplete  as  it  is — wearisome,  to  many  read- 
ers, as  it  may  be — has  brought  us  to  the  confines  of  Egypt.  In  that 
most  ancient  of  historical  lands  we  propose  to  halt,  for  a  season ;. 
devoting  the  next  chapter  to  its  study.  But,  by  way  of  succinct 
recapitulation  of  some  results  we  think  the  present  chapter  has 
elicited,  we  would  inquire  of  the  candid  reader,  whether,  at  the 
present  moment,  the  human  races  indigenous  to  Africa  do  not  pre- 
sent themselves,  on  a  map,  so  to  say,  in  lay  en  f  Whether  the  most 
Bouthem  of  its  inhabitants,  the  Hottentots  and  Bushmen,  are  not  the 
lowest  types  of  humanity  therein  found  ?  And  lastiy,  whether,  in  the 
ratio  of  our  progress  towards  the  Mediterranean,  passing  successively 
through  the  Caffi^,  the  Kegro,  and  the  Foolah  populations,  to  the 
Abyssinian  and  Nubian  races  on  the  east,  and  to  the  Atalantic  Berber 
'27 

Digitized  by 

Google 

210  EGYPT   AND   EGYPTIANS- 

races  on  the  west,  we  have  not  beheld  the  Types  of  Mankind  rising, 
ahnost  continuously,  higher  and  higher  in  the  scale  of  physical  and 
intellectual  gradations  ? 

Such  are  the  phenomena.  Climate^  most  certainly,  does  not  explain 
them ;  nor  will  any  student  of  Natural  History  sustain  that  each  type 
of  man  in  Africa  is  not  essentially  homogeneous  with  the  &una  and 
the  flora  of  the  special  province  wherein  his  species  now  dwells. 

Two  questions  arise: — 1st,  Within  human  record,  has  it  not  always 
been  thus  ?  and  2d,  Do  Ihe  JEffyptianSy  northernmost  inhabitants  of 
Africa,  obey  the  same  geographical  law  of  physical,  and  consequently 
of  mental  and  moral,  progression  ? 

Our  succeeding  chapters  may  suggest,  to  the  reflective  mind,  some 
data  through  which  both  interrogatories  can  be  answered. 

<^i<^^^a^^^<VS^^»»»MW^»»»»^W<»W<^^»»^«W 

CHAl»TER  VII.  ^ 

t 

EGYPT    AND    EGYPTIANS. 

Our  survey  of  Afiican  races,  so  far,  has  been  rapid  and  imperfect^ 
but  still  we  hope  it  is  sufficiently  full  to  develop  our  idea  of  gradation 
in  the  inhabitants  of  that  great  continent  A  more  copious  analysis 
would  have  surpassed  our  limits,  while  becoming  unnecessarily  tedious 
to  flie  reader.  Prichard  has  devoted  a  goodly  octavo  of  his  "PAy««rf 
Jlwfory"  to  these  races  alone ;  whereas  we  can  afford  but  a  few  pages. 

"We  now  approach  Egypt,  the  last  geographical  link  in  African 
Ethnology.  She  has  ever  been  regarded  as  the  mother  of  arts  and 
sciences ;  and,  strange  as  it  may  seem,  Science  now  appeals  to  her  to 
settle  questions  in  the  Natural  Histoiy  of  Man,  mooted  since  the  days 
of  Herodotus,  the  fitther  of  our  historians. 

When  we  cast  a  retrospect  through  the  long  and  dreary  vista  of 
years,  which  leads  to  the  unknown  epoch  of  Man's  creation,  in  quest 
of  a  point  of  departure  where  we  can  obtain  the  first  historical 
glimpse  of  a  human  being  on  our  globe,  the  Archaeologist  is  com- 
pelled to  turn  to  the  monuments  of  the  ISile.  The  records  of  India 
cannot  any  longer  be  traced  even  to  the  time  of  Moses.  Hebrew 
chronicles,  beyond  Abraham,  present  no  stand-point  on  which  we 
can  rely;  whilst  their  highest  pretension  to  antiquity  falls  short 
by  2000  years  of  the  foundation  of  the  Egyptian  Empire.    The 

Digitized  by 

Google 

EGYPT    AND   EGYPTIANS*  211 

Chinese,  according  to  their  own  historians,  do  not  carry  their  tme 
historic  period  beyond  2637  years  before  Christ  Nineveh  and  Ba- 
hylon,  monumentally  speaking,  are  still  more  modem.  But,  Egypt's 
proud  pyramids,  if  we  are  to  believe  the  Champollion^school,  elevate 
us  at  least  1000  years  above  eveiy  other  nationality.  And,  what  is 
more  remarkable,  when  Egypt  first  presents  herself  to  our  view,  she 
stands  forth  not  in  childhood,  .but  with  the  maturity  of  manhood's 
age,  arrayed  in  the  time-worn  habiliments  of  civilization.  Her  tombs, 
her  temples,  her  pyramids,  her  mimners,  customs,  and  arts,  all  betoken 
a  full-grown  nation.  The  sculptures  of  the  IVth  dynasty,  the  earliest 
extant,  show  that  the  arts  at  that  day,  some  8500  b.  c,  had  already 
arrived  at  a  perfection  little  inferior  to  that  of  the  AVlUth  dynasty, 
which,  until  the  last  five  years,  was  regarded  as  her  Augustan  age. 

Egyptian  monuments,  considered  ethnologically,  are  not  only  in- 
estimable as  presenting  us  two  types  of  mankind  at  this  early  period, 
but  they  display  other  contemporary  races  equally  marked — thus 
affording  proof  that  humanity,  in  its  infinite  varieties,  has  existed 
much  longer  upon  earth  than  we  have  been  taught;  and  that  physical 
causes  have  not,  and  cannot  transform  races  Jfrom  one  type  into 
another. 

Auj^ong  former  objections  against  the  antiquity  of  Egyptian  monu- 
ments, it  has  been  urged,  tliat  such  numerous  centuries  could  not 
have  elapsed  with  so  little  change  in  people,  arts,  customs,  language, 
and  other  conditions.  This  adverse  charge,  however,  does  not  in 
itself  hold  good,  because  the  fixedness  of  civilization,  or  veneration 
for  the  customs  of  ancestors,  seems  to  be  an  inherent  characteristic 
of  Eastern  nations.  Through  tlie  extensive  portion  of  Egyptian  his- 
tory which  is  now  known  with  sufficient  certainty,  we  may  admit  a 
comparative  adhesion  to  fixed  foitnulsd,  and  an  indisposition  to 
change:  but  no  Egyptolo^st  will  deny  that,  during  nearly  6000 
years,  for  winch  monuments  are  extant,  the  developing  mutations  in 
Egyptian  economy  obeyed  the  same  laws  as  in  that  of  other  races  — 
witih  this  signal  advantage  in  the  former's  favor,  that  we  possess  an 
almost  unbroken  chain  of  coetaneous  records  for  each  progressive 
step.  Oriental  histoiy  anteceding  Christian  ages  (when  viewed 
through  the  eye-glasses  of  pedagogues  who  rank  among  Carltlb's 
"  doleful  creatures,")  looms  monstrously,  like  a  chaotic  blur,  precisely 
where  arch^Bology,  using  mere  naked  eyes,  has  long  espied  most  lumi- 
nous stratifications:  and  human  developments,  requiring  '< chiliads 
of  years,"  even  yet  are  popularly  restricted  to  the  action  of  one 
patriarchal  lifetime.  For  ourselves,  referring  to  the  works  of  the 
hierologists  for  explanation,  we  would  readily  join  issue  with  objectors 
upon  the  IbUowing  heads :  — 

Digitized  by 

Google 

212  EGYPT   AND    EGYPTIANS. 

IViH  DTNASTY-B.  0. 8400.  ^^^J^^!^^^^  ^  ^ 

CHBISTIAN  ERA 

1st  Laxouaoi  —  Only  16  ArtioiiUtioiis, dereloped,  in  the  Coptic,  to  81  letters. 

2d.  Wbitiko — Hiero^Tphics, then  Hientic,  next  Demotic,  and  lastly  (7<;pt£e. 

8d.  AmoHiTBOTUBS — Pyramids, -  then  temples  with  Dmic^  and  lastly  with  erery 

kind  of  odimm. 

4th.  Obogsapht — Egypt  proper, then,  gradually,  knowledge  as  extensiTe  as 

that  of  the  Eyangelists. 
6th.  ZooLOGT-No  horses,  camels,  or com-l^^^^^j^,^^^ 4^ 
mon  fowls,  j 

6th.  Abts — No  chariots, :. thai,  all  Tchicles  generally  used  By  theaadents. 

7th.  Somrois — No  bitomenised  mommies, .  then,  eyery  form,  with  many  kinds  of  fiortign 

dmgs,  &0. 
8th.  Ethnoloot,  Ao/JM — Ist  Egyptian  type,  then 
2d.  Egypto-Asiatic, 
8d.  Egypto-Negroid. 
Foreign —      IVth  dynasty — Arahi. 

Xnth  dynasty — ^ra&tant,  Ltb^akt,  Nvbitmt,  Ntfroei, 
XVnith  dynasty — CanaaniUtf  Jewtf  Phcemeumi,    Anffrvnu^ 
Tartartf    Smdootf    Thradaiu,    lomoM, 
L^diatu,  Zi&jfaiw— jyW6t<WM,  Abj^mmmUf 
Nigroti. 
And,  thence  to  OrimUdl  mankind^  as  known  to  the  Greeks  in 
Albxaitdbe's  day. 

We  might  extend  this  nmemonical  list  through  many  other  depart- 
ments of  knowledge ;  but^  until  these  positive  instances  of  develop- 
ment be  overthrown,  let  us  hear  no  more  fiables  about  ^^  stationary 
Egyptians/' 

It  was,  however,  only  through  alien  rule,  introduced  in  later  times 
by  Persians,  Greeks,  Bomans,  Arabs,  and  Turks,  that  all  old  habits 
were  uprooted.  Look  at  India  and  China ;  which  countries,  accord- 
ing to  popular  superstitions,  seem  to  have  been  stereotyped  some 
three  or  four  thousand  years  ago :  yet,  what  enormous  changes  does 
not  the  historian  behold  in  them !  Neverflieless,  eveiy  type  is  more 
or  less  tenacious  of  its  habits ;  and  we  might  cite  how  the  Arabs,  the 
Turks,  and,  still  more,  the  Jews,  now  scattered  throughout  all  nations 
of  the  earth,  cUng  to  the  customs  of  their  several  ancestnes :  but,  as 
we  are  merely  suggesting  a  few  topics  for  the  reader's  meditation,  let 
us  inquire,  what  was  the  type  of  that  Ancient  Egyptian  race  which 
linked  Africa  with  Asia  ?  This  interrogatoiy  has  ^ven  rise  to  endless 
discussions,  nor  can  it,  even  now,  be  regarded  as  absolutely  answered. 
For  many  centuries  prior  to  the  present,  as  readers  of  Kollin  and  of 
VoLNBY  may  remember,  the  Egyptians  were  reputed  to  be  Negroe$y 
and  Egyptian  civilization  was  believed  to  have  descended  the  !N'ile 
from  Ethiopia!  Champollion,  Rosellini,  and  others,  while  unanimous 
in  overthrowing  the  former,  to  a  great  extent  consecrated  the  latter 
of  these  errors,  which  could  hardly  be  considered  as  fully  reftited 

Digitized  by 

Google 

EGYPT    AND    EGYPTIANS.  213 

nntil  the  appearance  of  Gliddon's  Cfhapfers  on  Ancient  Egypt j  in  1848, 
and  of  Morton's  Crania  JEgyptiaca^  in  1844.  The  following  extract 
presents  the  first-named  author's  deductions :  — 

*<  The  importance  of  confining  hiatory  to  its  legitimate  plaoOf— to  Lower  Egypt <•— is 
erident : 

"  let  Because  it  was  in  Lower  Egypt  tliat  the  Caucasian  children  of  Ham  must  have 
first  settled,  on  their  arriyal  firom  Asia. 

**  2d.  Because  the  adyocates  of  the  theory  which  would  assert  the  African  origin  of  the 
ISgyptians  say  that  they  rely  chiefly  on  history  for  their  African,  or  Ethiopic,  predilections. 

'*  8d.  Because  the  same  theorists  assume,  that  we  must  begin  with  AJriearu,  at  the  top 
of  the  NUe,  and  come  downward  with  civiliiation ;  instead  of  commencing  with  AtiaHcM  and 
WhiU  men,  at  the  bottom,  and  carrying  it  up. 

«  I  haye  not  as  yet  touched  on  ethnography,  the  effects  of  climate,  and  the  antiquity  of 
the  different  races  of  the  human  family ;  but  I  shall  come  to  those  suljects,  after  establish- 
ing a  chronological  standard,  by  defining  the  liistory  of  Egypt  according  to  the  hierogly- 
phics. At  present,  I  intend  merely  to  sketch  the  events  connected  with  the  Caucasian 
children  of  Ham,  the  Asiatic,  on  the  first  establishment  of  their  Egyptian  monarchy,  and 
the  foundation  of  their  first  and  greatest  metropolis  in  Lower  Egypt 

<'The  AAican  theories  are  based  upon  no  critical  examination  of  early  history  — are 
founded  on  no  Scriptural  authority  for  early  migrations — are  supported  by  no  monumental 
eridence,  or  hieroglyphical  data,  and  cannot  be  borne  out  or  admitted  by  practical  common 
sense.  For  dyUization,  that  never  came  northvford  out  of  benighted  AfHca,  (but  ftrom  the 
Delugi  to  the  present  moment  has  been  only  partially  carried  into  it — to  sink  into  utter 
oblivion  among  the  barbarous  races  whom  Providence  created  to  inhabit  the  Ethiopian  and 
Nigritian  territories  of  that  vast  continent,)  could  not  spring  from  Negroes,  or  from  Berbers, 
end  never  did, 

"  So  far,  then,  as  the  record.  Scriptural,  historical,  and  monumental,  will  afford  us  an 
hisight  into  the  early  progress  of  the  human  race  in  Egypt,  the  most  ancient  of  all  civilized 
countries,  we  may  safely  assert,  that  history,  when  analysed  by  common  sense  —  when 
scrutinized  by  the  application  of  the  experience  bequeathed  to  us  by  our  forefathers — when 
subjected  to  a  strictiy  impartial  examination  into,  and  comparison  of,  the  physical  and 
mental  capabilities  of  nations  —  when  distilled  in  the  alembic  of  chronology,  and  submitted 
to  the  touchstone  of  hieroglyphical  tests,  will  not  support  that  superannuated,  \^i  unten- 
able, doctrine,  that  civilization  originated  in  Ethiopia,  and  consequentiy  among  an  African 
people,  by  whom  it  was  brought  down  the  Nile,  to  enlighten  the  less  polished,  therefore 
inferior,  Caucasian  children  of  Noah,  the  Asiatics ;  or,  that  we,  who  trace  back  to  Egypt 
the  origin  of  every  art  and  science  known  in  antiquity,  have  to  thank  the  sable  Negro,  or 
the  dusky  Berber,  for  the  first  gleams  of  knowledge  and  invention. 

We  may  therefore  oonolude  with  the  observation  that,  if  civilization,  instead  of  going 
from.  North  to  South,  came  (contrary,  as  shown  befbre,  to  the  annals  of  the  earliest  histo- 
rians and  all  monumental  fSacts)  down  the  ** Sacred  Nile,"  to  illumine  our  darkness;  and, 
if  the  Ethiopic  origin  of  arts  and  sciences,  with  social,  moral,  and  religious  institutions, 
were  in  other  respects  poeeible,  these  African  theoretic  conclusions  would  form  a  most 
astounding  exception  to  the  ordinations  of  Providence  and  the  organic  laws  of  nature, 
otherwise  so  undeviating  throughout  all  the  generations  of  man's  history. 

'*  I  have  already  stated  that  Sir  J.  Gardner  Wilkinson's  critical  observations,  during  his 
long  residence  in  Egypt,  and  his  comparisons  between  the  present  Egyptians  and  the  ancient 
race,  as  depicted  in  the  monuments,  had  led  him  to  assert  the  AnaHe  origin  of  the  early 
inhabitants  of  the  Nilotio  valley.  The  learned  hierologist,  Samuel  Birch,  Esq.,  of  the 
British  Museum,  informed  me,  in  London,  that  he  had  arrived  at  the  same  conclusion — 
while  to  his  suggestion  I  am  indebted  for  the  first  idea  'that  the  most  ancient  Egyp- 
tian monuments  Ue  North.^    The  great  naturalists,  Blumenbach  and  Curier,  dedarec^ 

Digitized  by 

Google 

214*  EGYPT    AND    EGYPTIANS. 

that  all  the  mmnmies  they  had  opportunities  of  examining  presented  the  Cancadan  type. 
M.  Jomard,  the  eminent  hjdrographer  and  profound  Orientalist,  in  a  paper  on  Egyptian 
ethnology,  sustains  the  Arabian,  and  consequently  the  Aaiaiie  and  Caucatian,  origin  of 
the  early  Egyptians ;  and  his  opinions  are  more  Taluable,  as  he  draws  his  conclusions  inde- 
pendently of  hieroglyphioal  discoveries.  On  the  other  hand,  Prof.  Bosellini,  throughout  his 
*  MontuMnti,*  aooepts  and  continues  the  doctrine  of  the  detcmt  of  ciTilization  ftrom  Ethiopia, 
and  the  African  origin  of  the  Egyptians.  Champollion-Figeao  supports  the  same  theory, 
which  his  illustrious  brother  set  forth  in  the  sketch  of  Egyptian  history  presented  by  him 
to  Mohammed- All,  in  1829  (published  in  his  *  LUUnfrom  Egypt  and  Nvhia*),  wherein  he 
derives  the  Ancient  Egyptians,  according  to  the  Grecian  authorities,  fh>m  Ethiopia,  and 
considers  them  to  belong  to  5  la  race  Barabra,*  the  Berbert  or  Nubiana,  Peeming  the  original 
BarHbra  to  have  been  an  African  race,  engrafted  at  the  present  day  with  Caucasian  as  well 
as  Negro  blood,  I  r^ect  iheir  similitude  to  the  monumental  Egyptians  in  toto,  and  am  fain 
to  belieye  that  Champollion-le-Jeune  himself  had  either  modified  his  prerious  hastOy-formed 
opinion,  or,  at  any  rate,  had  not  taken  a  decided  stand  on  this  important  point,  from  the 
following  extract  of  his  eloquent  address  Arom  the  academic  chair,  delivered  May  10, 1831  : 
— C'est  par  Tanalyse  raisonn^  de  la  languedes  Pharaons,  que  Fethnographie  dSddera  si  la 
TieUle  population  ^gyptienne  fut  d'origine  AnaUquty  ou  bien  «t  dU  deteendit,  arec  le  fleure 
dirinis^,  des  plateaux  de  TAfrique  centrale.  On  d^cidera  en  m^me  temps  si  les  Egyptiens 
n'appartenaient  point  &  une  race  distincte ;  car,  il  faut  le  declarer  ici  [in  which  I  entirely 
agree  with  him],  centre  Topinion  commune,  les  Coptet  de  TEgypte  modeme,  regard^ 
comme  les  demiers  rejetons  des  anciens  Egyptiens,  n'ont  offert  ft  mes  yeux  ni  la  conlevr 
ni  aucUn  des  traits  caraot^ristiques,  dans  les  lineaments  du  visage  ou  dans  les  formes  du 
corps,  qui  piit  constater  une  aussi  noble  descendance.' "  2S0 

[These  views  received  considerable  extension  in  Mr.  Gliddon's  Otia 
j3Egt/ptiaca  ;^  and  our  colleague's  enthusiastic  concurrence  in  the 
work  now  put  forth,  in  our  joint  names,  suflBiciently  attests  his  adop- 
tion of  our  personal  modifications,  derived  especially  from  Anatomy, 
compared  with  the  more  recent  hieroglyphical  discoveries. — J.  C.  K] 

Others,  however,  though  not  so  decidedly  out-spoken  in  tone,  had 
rejected  African  delusions.  Thus,  Pettigrew,^  following  Blumenbach 
and  Lawrence,  had  previously  alluded  to  the  probability  of  the  ascent 
of  civilization,  introduced  by  an  Asiatic  people,  along  the  Nile,  from 
north  to  south.  De  Brotonne,^  succeeded  by  Jardot,^  ably  sustained 
the  Asiatic  colonization  of  Egypt  against  the  Nigritian  hypothesis  of 
Volney  ;^  and,  a  hundred  years  ago,  the  academician  De  Pourmont^ 
declared,  "The  Egyptians,  for  the  three-fourths,  issued  either  out  of 
Arabia  or  Phoenicia ; .  . .  Egypt  being  composed  of  Chald»an,  Phoe- 
nician, Arab  people,  &c.,  but  especially  of  liiese  last" 

Morton,  drawing  from  his  vast  resources  in  craniology,  skilfully 
combined  with  history  and  such  monuments  as  were  deciphered  iu 
1842,  terminated  his  Crania  JEgyptiaoa  with  the  subjoined  conclusions 
—  the  utterance  of  which  commenced  a  new  era  in  anthropological 
researches :  —    . 

"  The  Valley  of  the  Nile,  both  in  Egypt  and  Nubia,  was  originally  peopled  by  a  branch 
of  the  Caucasian  race. 

«  These  primeral  people,  since  called  the  Egyptians,  were  the  Mizraimites  of  Scripture, 
the  posterity  of  Ham,  and  directly  affiliated  with  the  Libyan  fanuly  of  natloDi. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

EGYPT   AND   EGYPTIANS.  215 

**  The  Aiutral-BgjrptUii  or  MeroiU  oommnnities  were  ta  Indo-Arabitn  stock,  engrafted 
on  the  primitiTe  Libyan  inhabitants. 

«  Besides  these  exotic  sources  of  population,  the  Egyptian  race  was  at  different  periods 
nodiiied  hj  the  inlhuc  of  the  CaneasiaA  nations  of  Asia  and  Europe :  Pelasgi,  or  Hellenes, 
Scjthians,  and  PhoBnUaans. 

'<  The  Copts,  in  part  at  leasts  are  a  miztnre  of  the  Caucasian  and  the  Negro»  in  extremely 
Tariable  proportions. 

**  Negroes  were  nomerons  in  Egypt,  but  their  socisl  position  in  ancient  times  was  the 
•aVM  as  it  now  is :  that  of  serranta  and  slaTcs. 

**  The  present  Fellahs  are  the  lineal  and  least  mixed  descendants  of  the  And^t  Egyp- 
tians; and  the  latter  are  collaterally  represented  by  the  Tnariks,  Eabyles,  Siwahs,  and 
other  remains  of  the  Libyan  family  of  nations. 

**  The  modem  Nubians,  with  a  few  exceptions,  are  not  the  descendants  of  the  menu- 
aental  Ethiopians,  but  a  Variously  mixed  race  of  Arabs  and  Negroes. 

'<  The  physical  or  orgtaie  characters  which  distinguish  the  scTcral  races  of  men  are  as 
old  as  the  oldest  records  of  our  species.'* 

Such  were  the  best  and  most  natural  results  of  ethnography  prior 
to  Lepsius's  unanticipated  exhumations  at  Memphis,  in  1842-'3 ;  but 
the  latter's  discoveries  did  not  become  accessible  to  the  authors'  joint 
studies  imtil  1850.  We  can  now  assert,  with  the  plates  of  his  splendid 
DenknUUer  before  us,  that,  notwithstanding  the  labors  of  our  prede- 
cessors, they  have  left  many  doubts  and  difficulties  still  hanging  around 
the  primitive  inhabitants  of  Egypt  ITot  only  her  written  traditions, 
but  her  monumental  history,  as  far  back  as  it  has  been  traced,  prove 
that,  from  the  Mmaie  foundation  of  the  Empire,  she  had  been 
engaged  in  constant  strifes  with  foreign  nations  of  types  veiy  different 
from  that  of  Ker  own  aboriginal  population,  and  that  she  has  been 
often  conquered  and  temporarily  ruled  by  foreigners.  Hence  the 
consequence,  prima  faeisy  that  the  blood  of  her  primitive  inhabitants 
must  have  become  greatly  adulterated. 

Morton's  Crania  Egyptiaca  issued  in  1844 ;  at  which  day  the  dis- 
coveries of  Lepsius  were  in  progress,  but  not  published ;  at  the  same 
time  tiiat  the  works  of  Bosellini,  ChampoUion,  Wilkinson,  &c. — ^then 
the  best  sources  of  information  respecting  the  monuments  —  did  not 
extend,  with  the  exception  of  some  meagre  materials  of  the  Xllth 
dynasty  (by  all  three  scholars  then  supposed  to  be  the  A  V  11th),  be- 
yond tike  XVnith,  or  about  1600  b.  c.  All  these  complicated  data 
were,  nevertheless,  most  admirably  worked  up  by  our  revered  friend ; 
and  he  showed  conclusively  that,  while  there  existed  a  pervading 
^^ Caucasian"  Type,  which  he  regarded  as  the  Egyptian  proper,  the 
population  already,  at  the  JLV  111th  dynasty,  was  a  very  mixed  one, 
comprising  many  diverse  Asiatic  and  African  elements. 

Did  archaeological  science  now  solely  rely,  as  before  Champollion's 
day,  upon  the  concurrent  testuponyof  early  Greek  writers,  we  should 
be  compelled  to  conclude  that  the  Egyptians,  previously  to  the  Chris- 
tian era,  were  literally  Negro€$;  so  widely  do  such  Gr»co-Romau  de- 

Digitized  by 

Google 

216  EGYPT   AND   EGYPTIANS. 

BcriptionB  vary,  and  so  strangely  in  their  writings  do  Egyptian  attri- 
butes diverge,  from  the  Caucasian  type.  A  pastoge  in  Herodotus  has 
been  often  cited ;  and  it  possessed  the  more  weight,  inasmuch  as  he 
travelled  in  Egypt ;  and  because  his  authority  is  generally  reliable  in 
such  matters  as  fell  beneath  his  personal  observation.  Of  the  people 
of  Colchis  he  says,  that  they  were  a  colony  of  Egyptians ;  supporting 
his  assertion,  unique  among  ancient  authorities,  by  the  argument  that 
they  were  "black  in  complexion  and  woolly-haired.*^^ 

Pindar  also,  copying  the  Halicamassian,  in  his  fourth  Pythian 
Ode,  speaks  of  the  Colchians  as  black.  In  another  passage,  when 
retailing  the  fable  of  the  Dodonian  Oracle,  Herodotus  again  alludes 
to  the  swarthy  complexion  of  the  Egyptians,  as  if  it  were  exceedingly 
dark,  or  even  black.  ^scfiYLUS,  in  tiie  Supplices,  mentions  the  cre^ 
of  an  Egyptian  bark  seen  from  the  shore.  The  person  who  espies 
them  concludes  they  must  be  Egyptians  from  their  black  complexion : 

''The  sulora  too  I  marked, 
Conspiouoos  in  white  robes  their  eable  limbs." 

Prichard  has  collected  ample  Greek  and  Latin  testimony,  of  similar 
import,  to  show  that  the  Egyptians  were  darh  His  erudition  renders 
any  further  ransacking  of  the  Classics  here  supererogatory :  but  we  may 
remark  that  the  Greek  terms  might  often  apply  with  equal  propriety  to 
a  jet-black  Negro,  or  to  a  brown  or  dusky  Nubian.  The  various 
names  given  to  Egypt  and  her  people,  together  with  the  mistakes  of 
translators,  are,  however,  analyzed  in  our  Part  11.,  where  we  treat 
upon  "  Mizraim ; "  and  therefore  a  pause  to  discuss  ^em  now  would 
be  superfluous. 

Prichard  sums  up  in  the  following  strong  language :  — 

*<  From  comparing  these  accounts,  some  of  which  were  written  by  persons  who  had  tr»- 
Telled  in  Egypt,  and  whose  testimony  is  hot  likely  to  hare  been  biassed  in  Any  respect,  we 
must  conclude  that  the  subjects  of  the  Pharaohs  had  tamethuijf  m  their  pkyneal  eharaeUr 
tsppnmmaUn^  to  that  of  the  Negro" 

In  opposition  to  which  classical  opinions,  Beee,  in  a  paper  ^'On  the 
Complexion  of  the  Ancient  JSgyptians,**^  had  set  forth :  — 

1st  The  negative  testimony  of  the  Hebrew  Scriptures — how 
Joseph's  brethren,  when  they  first  saw  him  in  Egypt,  supposed  him 
to  be  an  Egyptian :  ^  how  alliances  with  the  Egyptians  were  permitted 
by  the  Israelitish  lawgiver:^  how  an  Egyptian  woman  was  the 
mother  of  the  heads  of  two  of  the  tribes  of  Israel :  ^  another  the 
wife  of  Solomon,  &c. : 

2d.  That  "  a  description  given  by  Lucian,  in  one  of  his  Dialogues, 
(*Navigium,  sen  Vota,')  of  a  young  sailor  on  board  an  Egyptian 
vessel,  who,  besides  being  blacky  is  represented  as  having  potUing  lip$  ' 

Digitized  by 

Google 

EGYPT   AND   EGYPTIANS.  217 

and  9pindU4hanh%^'  —  rather  proves  an  exception  to  the  usual  tint  of 
the  Egyptian  people : 

8d.  The  incontrovertible  evidence  of  the  paintings,  and  mummy- 
cases. 

We  place  these  discussions  of  the  learned  in  juxta-position ;  although 
new  facts  supersede  the  necessity  for  recurring  to  past  disputations. 

That  the  skins  of  Egyptians,  in  Grecian  times,  were  much  darker 
than  those  of  Greeks  and  other  white  races  around  the  Archipelago, 
there  can  be  no  question ;  noT  that  this  complexion  was  accompanied 
sometimes  with  curly  or  frizzled  hair^  tumid  lips,  slender  limbs,  small 
heads,  with  receding  foreheads  and  chins,  which,  by  contrast,  excited 
the  wonder  or  derision  of  the  fisdr-skinned'  Hellenes.  But,  while  it 
must  be  conceded  that  Negroes,  at  no  time  within  the  reach  even 
of  monumental  histoiy,  have  inhabited  any  part  of  Egypt,  save  as 
captives ;  it  may,  on  the  other  hand,  be  equally  true,  that  the  ancient 
Egyptians  did  present  a  type  intermediate  between  other  Afiiean  and 
Asiatic  races ;  and,  should  such  be  proved  to  have  been  the  case,  the 
autoethones  of  Egypt  must  cease  to  be  designated  by  the  misnomer 
of  "Caucasian." 

Whatever  the  complexion  of  the  real  Egyptians  may  have  been, 
all  authorities  agree  that  the  races  south  of  Egypt  were  and  are 
darker;  and  it  is  equally  clear  that  the  local  habitats  of  IN'egroes  in 
eaiiy  times,  having  ever  been  the  same  as  they  are  now,  render  it 
geographically  impossible  that  Egyptians  could  be  confounded  with 
distinct  types  of  men,  never  voluntarily  resident  within  1200  miles  of 
the  Mediterranean. 

The  Egyptians,  on  their  oldest  monuments,  always  painted  their 
males  in  red  and  their  females  in  yellow;  thus  adopting  in  their  painted 
sculptures,  (in  order  to  demarcate  themselves  from  foreign  nations 
around  them,)  colors  which,  of  course,  were  conventional.  That  there 
was  considerable  diversity  of  color  among  the  denizens  of  Egypt. 
need  not  be  doubted,  inasmuch  as  we  now  find  parallel  diversity  of 
hues  among  Berbers,  Abyssinians,  Nubians,  &c.  The  "Ethiopians" 
were  always  darker  than  the  Egyptians  proper,  as  their  Greek  name 
(ai^,  hurriy  and  «>}/,  f(nce)  of  "  mn-bumed  face9  "  implies.  In  the  Ptole- 
msdc  papyrus  published  by  Young,*"  and  cited  by  Morton,  one  of  the 
parties  to  a  sale  of  land,  Psammouthes,  is  described  as  being  of  a 
dark,  while  the  four  others  are  stated  to  possess  saUoWy  complexions. 
Bosellini  supposes  the  Egyptians  to  have  been  of  a  brown  or  reddish 
brown  color  (roiio-foseo)  like  the  present  inhabitants  of  Nubia ;  but 
Morton  thinks  this  remark  applicable  only  to  Austral  Egyptians,  and 
not  to  the  inhabitants  of  Egypt  proper,  except  when  arising  from 
intermixture  of  races. 
28 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC 

218  EGYPT   AND    EGYPTIANS. 

In  the  Crania  JEffyptiaca^  Dr.  Morton  bad  laid  much  stress  upon  an 
observation  of  Ammianus  Marcellinus,  quoting  but  a  line.  Among 
bis  inedited  MSS.  for  an  improved  edition  of  tbat  work,  we  find  the 
whole  citation  as  he  intended  that  it  should  appear :  — 

<*  The  following  paragn^  embraeea  aU  of  tkb  author'a  remarks,  which  only  make  iu 
lament  that  he  had  not  been  more  full  and  esplioit :  '  Homines  antem  Mgjptiiplenyat  mb' 
fuseuU  sunt,  et  atrati,  magisque  moestiores,  gracilenti  et  aridi,  ad  singulos  motos,  ezcan- 
desoentes,  controTorsi  et  reposcones  acerrimL  Embescit  apud  eos  si  qnis  non  infiolando 
tributa,  plorimas  in  oovpove  TiMces  ostendat'    {Rerum  ffettarum,  lib.  xxxii.) " 

But,  as  the  Doctor  critically  notices,  it  is  difficult  to  associate  tibe 
idea  of  a  black  skin  with  the  fact  related  by  the  same  writer,  that 
the  Egyptians  "blush  and  grow  red."  • 

Investigation  of  this  point,  in  1844,  impressed  upon  our  judicious 
ethnographer's  mind,  results  which  he  defines  as  follows :  — 

"  From  the  preceding  facts,  and  many  others  which  might  be  adduced,  I  think  we  majr 
safBly  eondnde  that  the  complexion  of  the  Egyptians  did  not  differ  from  that  of  the  other 
Caucasian  races,  in  the  same  latitudes.  That,  while  the  higher  classes,  who  were  screened 
from  the  action  of  the  sun,  were  fair,  in  a  comparatiTe  sense,  the  middle  and  lower  classes, 
like  the  modem  Berbers,  Arabs,  and  Moors,  presented  Tarious  shades  of  complexion,  even 
to  a  dark  lind  swarthy  tint,  which  the  Greeks  regarded  as  black,  in  comparison  with  their 
own." 

So  much  contradiction  is  patent  in  the  opinions  of  the  early  Qreek 
writers,  with  regard  to  the  coinplexion  and  physical  charactera  of  the 
Egyptians,  and  the  dubiousness  has  been  increased  to  such  an  inex- 
tricable extent  by  the  opposing  scholasticisms  of  modem  historians, 
yoked  with  the  "  first  impressions  "  of  unscientific  tourists,  that  the  only 
inference  "We  can  attain  is,  that  the  Egyptians  of  the  New  Empire  — 
that  is,  fi'om  the  XVIIth  dynasty  downwards — were  a  mixed  popula- 
tion ;  presenting  considerable  varieties  of  color  and  conformation. 
Morton  took  the  whole  question  out  of  the  hands  of  the  Greeks  and 
their  subsequent  copyists,  when  he  appealed  directly  to  the  iconography 
of  the  sculptures,  and  to  the  mummied  remains  of  the  old  population 
found  in  the  catacombs.  Before  pursuing,  therefore,  the  monumental 
history  of  the  Egyptian  type  into  the  earliest  times,  let  us  endeavor 
to  see  what  were  its  physical  characters  subsequently  to  the  BeMtora- 
tion  in  the  seventeenth  centuiy  b.  c;  and  afterwards  we  can  better  com- 
pare them  with  the  pictorial  and  embalmed  vestiges  of  earlier  date. 

Although  it  will  be  shown  that  Dr.  Morton,  since  the  publication 
of  his  Crania  JEgyptiacay  had  made  important  modifications  in  some 
of  his  opinions,  there  are  others  which  have  withstood  triumphantly 
the*  test  of  time.  When  he  published  in  1844,  his  object  was  to  de- 
scribe and  figure  the  people  of  Egypt  as  they  appear  on  the  monu- 
ments and  exist  in  the  sepulchres.  Whatever  the  physical  type  of  the 
anterior  population  may  have  been,  previously  to  the  date  of  his 

Digitized  by 

Google 

EaYPT   AND   EGYPTIANS.  219 

materials,  had  nothing  to  do  with  the  task  proposed.  He  was  dealing 
exclusively  with  known  facts,  and  we  cannot  but  admire  the  sagacity 
with  which,  for  the  first  time  in  Egyptian  ethnology,  Morton  brought 
order  out  of  a  chaos  —  universally  seen  among  authors  prior  to  1844. 
Considering  that  he  had  before  him  but  a  few  monuments  of  the 
Xnth  dynasty  (in  his  day  called  the  XVIIth  of  Manetko)y  and  no- 
thing of  earUer  date,  his  analysis  of  these,  and  of  the  XVTEIth  and 
succeeding  dynasties,  must  remain  an  imperishable  attestation  to 
his  genius.  * 

In  order  to  institute  comparisons  between  the  population  of  these 
later  dynasties  with  that  upon  the  sculptures  of  the  Old  Empire,  since 
discovered,  extracts  at  length  from  the  Crania  JEgyptiaca  will  place 
before  the  reader  the  ideas  of  our  great  craniologist,  together  with 
abundant  exemplifications  of  the  type  of  man  prevalent  in' Egypt 
during  the  New  Empire. 

"  The  monuments  from  MeroS  to  Memphis,  present  a  perrading  type  of  physiognomj, 
which  is  ererTwhere  distinguished  at  a  glance  from  the  Taried  forms  which  not  tinfirequentlj 
attend  it,  and  which  possess  so  much  nationality,  both  in  outline  and  expression,  as  to  give 
it  the  highest  importance  in  Nilotic  ethnography.  We  may  repeat  that  it  consists  in  an 
upward  dongation  of  the  head,  with  a  receding  forehead,  delicate  features,  but  rather  sharp 
and  prominent  face,  in  which  a  long  and  straight  or  gently  aquiline  nose  forms  a  principal 
feature.  The  eye  is  sometimes  oblique,  the  chin  short  and  retracted,  the  Ups  rather  tumid, 
and  the  hair,  whenever  it  is  represented,  long  and  flowing. 

*'  This  style  of  features  pertains  to  erery  dass,  kings,  priests  and  people,  and  can  be 
readily  traced  through  erery  period  of  monumental  decoration,  tnm  the  early  Pharaohs 
down  to  the  Greek  and  Roman  dynasties.  Among  the  most  ancient,  and  at  the  same  time 
most  characteristic  examples,  are  th'e  heads  of  Amunoph  the  Second  and  his  mother,  as 
represented  in  a  tomb  at  Thebes,»3  which  dates,  in  Bosellini's  chronology,  1727  years 
before  our  era.  In  these  effigies  all  the  features  are  strictly  ^^yptian,  and  how  strikingly 
do  they  correspond  with  those  of  many  of  the  embalmed  heads  from  the  Theban  cataoombi  X 

FiQ.  121.  Fio.  122. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

220 

EGYPT    AND   EGYPTIANS. 

"  A  similar  physiognomy  preponderates  among  the  royal  Egyptian  perBonages  ot  BTeiy 
epoch,  as  will  be  manifest  to  any  one  who  will  turn  over  the  pages  of  ChampoUion  and 
Bosellini.  The  head  of  Horus  [see  our  Fig.  56]  is  an  admirable  illustration,  while  in  the 
portraits  of  Rameses  IV.,  [IIL,  of  Lepsius]  and  Rameses  IX.,  the  same  lines  are  apparent, 
though  much  less  strongly  marked.  How  admirably  also  are  they  seen  in  the  sabjoined 
juvenile  head,  (Fig.  128)  which  is  that  of  a  royal  prince,  copied  f^om  the  very  ancient 
puntings  in  the  tomb  of  Pehrai,  at  Eletheia8.364  So  also  in  the  fSue  of  Rameses  YII.  (Fig. 
124),  who  liTed  perhaps  one  thousand  years  later  in  time. 

FiQ.  128. 

Fro.  124. 

"  I  observe  that  the  priests  almost  invariably  present  this  physiognomy,  and,  in  accord- 
ance with  the  usage  of  their  caste,  have  the  head  closely  shaven.  Wh^n  colored  they  are 
red,  like  the  other  Egyptians.  The  subjoined  drawing  (Fig.  125),  which  is  somewhat  harsh 
in  outline,  is  fh>m  the  portico  of  one  of  the  pyramids  of  Mero$,36ft  and  is  probably  one  of 
the  oldest  human  effigies  in  Nubia.  They  abound  in  all  the  temples  of  that  country,  and 
especially  at  Semneh,  Dakkeh,  Soleb  Gebel-Berkel,  and  Me880ura.9(» 

**  From  the  numberless  examples  of  similar  conformation,  I  select  another  of  a  priest  from 
the  bas-relief  at  Thebes,  which  is  remarkable  for  delicacy  of  outline  and  pleasing  serenity 
of  expression.a^   (Fig.  126). 

**  So  invariably  are  these  characters  allotted  to  the  sacerdotal  caste,  that  we  readily  detect 
them  in  the  two  priests  who,  by  some  unexplained  contingency,  become  kings  in  the  XXth 
dynasty.  Their  names  read  Amensi-Hrai-Pehor  and  Phisham  on  the  monuments ;  and  the 
accompanying  outline  is  a  fac-simile  of  Rosellini's  portrait  of  the  latter  personage,  who 
lived  about  1100  years  before  the  Christian  era.36B  in  this  head  the  Egyptian  and  Pelasgio 
characters  appear  to  be  blended,  but  the  former  preponderate.    (F^g.  127). 

"  The  last  outline  (Fig.  128)  represents  a  modification  of  the  same  type,  that  of  the 
Harper  in  Bruce*s  tomb  at  Thebes.  The  beautiful  form  of  the  head  and  the  intellectual 
character  of  the  face,  may  be  compared  with  similar  eflfbrts  of  CKrecian  art.  It  dates  with 
Rameses  IV.^ 

Fia.  126. 

Fio.  126. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

EGYPT   AND   EGYPTIANS. 
Jha.  127.  Fia.  128. 

221 

«  As  I  beliere  tUs  to  be  a  most  important  ethnograpic  indicatioiiy  and  one  whidi  points 
to  the  Tast  body  of  the  Egyptian  people,  I  subjoin  four  additional  heads  of  priests  (Figs. 
129,  180,  181, 182,)  f^om  a  tomb  at  Thebes  of  the  XYIIIth  dynasty.  We  are  Vordbly  im- 
pressed with  the  deUcate  features  and  oblique  eye  of  the  left-hand  personage,  and  with  the 
ruder  but  characteristio  outline  of  the  other  figures,  in  which  the  prominent  fftoe,  though 
strongly  drawn,  is  essentially  Egyptian.a^ 

Fio.  129. 

Fro.  180. 

Fig.  181. 

FiQ.  182. 

"The  annexed  outlines  (Fig.  188),  which  present 
more  pleasing  examples  of  the  same  ethnographic  cha- 
racter, are  copied  from  the  tomb  of  Titi,  at  Thebes,  and 
date  with  the  remote  era  of  Thotmes  IV.sti  They  repre- 
sent fiTC  fmcUn  in  the  act  of  drawing  their  net  OTcr  a 
flock  of  birds.  The  long,  flowing  hair  is  in  keeping  with 
the  facial  traits,  which  latter  are  also  well  characterised 
in  the  subjoined  drawings  (Figs.  184,  186,  186,  187), 
dwiTed  f^m  monuments  of  different  epochs  and  lo- 
dOitiea. 

Fia.,188. 

Fig.  184. 

Fro.  186. 

Fro.  186. 

Fig.  187. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

222 

EOYPT   AND   EGYPTIANS. 

« Ilg.  184  is  the  head  of  a  wtaver,  from  the  paintings  in  the  Tery  ancient  tomb  of  Eoti 
and  Menoph  at  Beni-Hassan,  wherein  the  same  cast  of  cooatenanoe  is  rdterated  without 
namber.2^ 

'<  Fig.  185,  a  iPtne^eMer,  is  also  from  Beni-Hassan,  and  dates  with  Osortasen,  more  than 
2000  yeairs  before  the  Christian  era.^ 

<'  Fig.  186  is  a  eook^  who,  in  the  tomb  of  Barneses  IV,  at  Thebes,  is  r^reaented  with 
many  others  in  the  active  duties  of  his  yocation.37i 

«  Fig.  187.  I  haTe  selected  this  head  as  an  exaggerated  or  oaricatored  illnstration  of 
the  same  type  of  physiognomy.  .  It  is  one  of  the  ffoai-herdi  painted  in  the  tomb  of  Boti,  at 
Beni-Hassan.275 

«The  most  recent  of  these  last  fonr  Tenerable  monuments  of  art  dates  at  least  1450 
years  before  our  era:  the  oldest  belongs  to  nn^ironided  times;  and  the  -same  physical 
characters  are  common  on  the  Nnbian  and  Egyptian  monnments  down  to  the  Ptdlemaio  and 
Boman  epochs. 

*<  Tbe  peculiar  head-dress  of  the  Egyptians  often  greatly  modifies,  and  in  some  degree  c4Hii- 
oeals,  their  characteristic  features ;  and  may,  at  first  sight,  lead  to  the  impresnon  that  the 
priests  possessed  a  physiognomy  of  a  distinct  or  peculiar  kind.  Such,  howerer,  was  not 
the  oase^  as  a  little  obserration  will  prove.    Take,  for  example,  the  four  foUowiag  draw* 

Fio.  188. 

Via.  189. 

ings,  tnmk  a  Theban  tomb,  in  which  two  mourners  (Fig.  188)  hate  head-dresses,  and  two 
priests  (Fig.  189)  are  without  them.  Are  not  the  national  ^MMMteristics  unequiTOcally 
manifest  in  them  aU?'' 276 

Such,  textually,  are  Morton*B  words,  witii  the  sole  exception  that, 
while  preserving  his  references,  we  have  substituted  our  own  numerah: 
but,  for  tbe  express  object  of  removing,  once  for  all,  current  impreBsions 
of  Egyptian  affinity  with  Negro  races,  we  intercalate  a  relevant  series 
of  illustrations,  and  group  into  one  page  various  heads  Srom  the  Ora. 
nia  JEgypUaea — five  of  which  (Figs.  140 — 144)  apt)ertai9L  to  ^femiJes 
of  different^  classes,  and  two  (Figs.  145  and  146)  to  males ;  imficating 
underneath  each  the  vocations  in  which  they  are  sevemlly  represented 
on  the  mnnnmentB.  Apart  from  their  £acial  angles  and  high-caste 
configuration,  it  is  their  long  Tiavr  to  which  tiie  attentipn  of  Kegro- 
philism  is  more  particularly  invited. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

EdYPt   AN»  fiGtPtlANS.  223 

Pio.  140.  Fm.  141. 

A  Mourner. 
Fto.  142. 

Alfottmer. 
fto.144. 

Fid.  148. 

Alfoiinar;  A  Fewdt  Atidett. 

^^  1*        •  Ro.  146. 

A  C»»p«t«r.  ^  A  Butio-wrwder. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC 

'224  EGYPT   AND   EGYPTIANS^ 

"  It  is  thus  tliat  ve  trace  this  peculiar  style  of  countenanoe,  in  its  seTeral  modiiicatioiu, 
through  epochs  and  in  localities  the  most  remote  from  each  other,  and  in  erery  class  of  the 
Egyptian  people.  How  different  from  the  Pelasgio  type,  yet  how  obTiously  Caueasiaa  t 
How  varied  in  outline,  yet  how  readily  identified  1  And,  if  we  compare  these  features  with 
those  of  the  Egyptian  series  of  embalmed  heads,  are  we  not  forcibly  impressed  with  % 
striking  analogy  not  only  in  osteological  conformation,  but  also  in  the  rexy  expression  of 
the  face  7 ...  No  one,  I  conceive,  will  question  the  analogy  I  hare  pointed  out  This  lype 
is  certainly  natwnal^  and  presents  to  our  riew  the  genuine  Egyptian  phynognomyt  yi\difiht  in 
the  ethnographic  scale,  is  intermediate  between  the  Pelasgic  and  Semitic  forms.  We  may 
add,  that  this  conformation  is  the  same  which  Prof.  Blnmenbaoh  refers  to  the  JStndoo 
Tariety,  in  his  triple  classification  of  the  Egyptian  people.3^  And  this  leads  us  briefly  to 
inquire,  who  were  the  Egyptians? " 

That  this  ^^ genuine  Egyptian  pTiymgnomy'^  was  the  preponderant 
lype^  seen  throughout  the  whole  monumental  period  known  to  Mor- 
ton^  cannot  be  questioned ;  but  we  do  not  think  it  is  so  universal  in 
the  royal  families  as  in  the  other  classes.  There  is  such  a  want  <^ 
portraits  and  other  information  of  the  dynasties  between  the  xiitli 
and  XVnth,  that  we  know  little  or  nothing  of  the  predominant  type 
of  those  intermediate  times.  But  it  is  highly  probable,  owing  to 
Hyksos  traditions,  that  the  royal  families  of  that  period,  called  the 
^^  Middle  Empire/'  were  in  great  part  Asiatics ;  and  we  are  certain 
tiiat,  after  the  Bestoration,  marriages  with  foreigners  were  not  uncom- 
mon. Alliances  of  this  kind  occurred  in  the  XXth  and  preceding 
dynasties ;  and  it  is  but  reasonable  to  conclude  that  such  had  been 
the  custom  of  the  countiy  in  earlier  times ;  inasmuch  as  the  Bible 
has  helped  us  to  prove  the  same  habits  respecting  Jtmnlh  amalgama- 
tions with  denizens  of  the  ITile. 

In  order  that  the  reader  may  be  enabled  to  judge  for  himself  of  the 
characteristics  of  tiie  royal  families,  we  have  already  exhibited  some 
of  their  portraits,  back  to  the  AVJIth  dynasty.  It  is  evident  to  us, 
that  these  portraits  do  not  fiilly  correspond  to  Dr.  Morton's  Egyptian 
Typty  but  that,  on  the  contraiy,  they  are  eminentiy  Asiatic,  and  not 
African.  However,  it  cannot  be  denied  that  the  pervading  type, 
throughout  Egypt  proper,  was  tiie  one  described  by  him ;  though  we  are 
not  prepared  to  admit  this  as  the  then-c^jmmpn.type  in  the  Nubias, 
or  so  high  up  as  Meroe.  The  monuments  of  Meroe,  on  which  his 
opinions  were  based,  have  since  been  discovered  to  be  mere  bastard 
and  modem  copies  of  those  of  Egypt  This  countiy,  until  the  eighth 
century  b.  c,  formed  part  of  the  Egyptian  Empire ;  and  its  later 
edifices  were  built  by  consecutively  ruling  races — Egypto-Meroite, 
tiien  Nubian,  and  lastly  Negro-Nubian.  But  we  have  abundant 
reason  for  opining  that  the  populations  of  the  Nubias,  in  ancient 
times,  were  what  (Arab  elements  deducted)  they  are  now :  viz.,  types 
intermediate  between  Negroes  and  Egyptians ;  viewing  the  latter  such 
as  we  behold  them  at  the  XVHIth  dynasty,  or  about  1500  b.  c. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

EGYPT    AND    EGYPTIANS.  225 

We  read  the  Crania  JEgyptiaea^  with  intense  interest,  so  soon  as  it 
-was  published ;  and,  down  to  the  time  when  Lepsius's  plates  of  the 
IVth,  Vth,  and  Vlth  dynasties  appeared,  we  had  not  ceased  to  regard 
Morton's  Egyptian  type  as  the  true  representative  of  that  of  the  Old 
Empire ;  but  the  first  hour's  glance  over  those  magnificent  delinea- 
tions of  the  primeval  inhabitants  produced  an  entire  revolution  in  the 
authors'  opinions,  and  enforced  the  conviction  that  the  Egyptians 
of  the  earliest  times  did  not  correspond  with  our  honored  friend's 
description,  but  with  a  type  which,  although  not  Negro ^  nor  akin  to 
any  Negroes,  was  strictly  African  —  a  type,  in  fact,  that  supplied  the 
long-sought-for  link  between  Aiiican  and  Asiatic  races. 

There  are  no  portraits,  yet  discovered,  older  than  the  IVth  dynasty, 
or  the  thirty-fifth  century  b.  c.  ;  and  although  what  may  be  called  a 
Negroid  type  preponderates  at  that  period,  yet  the  race,  even  there,  is 
already  a  mixed  one;  and  we  distinguish  many  heads  which  are 
clearly  Asiatic  —  possessing,  as  we  have  shown  {arUey  Figs.  84,  85), 
Semitish  features.  The  history  of  Egypt  fi'om  the  Xllth  to  the 
AVJith  dynasty  is  so  mutilated,  that,  for  this  interregnum,  there  is 
but  little  material  for  definite  opinions.  Lepsius,  upon  Manethonian 
tradition,  states,  that  during  this  time  the  bulk  of  native  Egyptians 
were  driven  up  the  Nile  by  Asiatic  races,  and  retired  into  Nubia ; 
and  that  when  the  Hyksos  were  expelled,  their  Pharaonic  conquerors 
came  down  the  river.  It  is  not  probable  that  every  individual  of  the 
Hyksos  race,  however,  could  have  been  driven  out ;  and  when  we 
compare  the  monumental  portraits  of  the  IVth,  Vth,  and  Vlth  dynas- 
ties with  those  of  the  XVIIth  and  XVIIIth,  we  cannot  doubt  that  an 
immense  amount  of  Asiatic  blood  remained  in  the  country,  notwith- 
standing these  expulsions.  Lepsius  considers  that  those  Asiatic  Shep- 
herds impressed  their  type  and  language  upon  the  native  race,  although 
the  Egyptian  people  and  their  tongue  still  remained  essentially  Afri- 
can. It  should  be  observed  that,  if  Hyksos  invasions  be  accepted  as 
historical,  so  must  the  many  centuries  of  the  intruders*  sojourn ;  and 
during  Manetho's  five  hundred  and  eleven  years,  or  sixteen  genera- 
tions, these  warriors  must  have  found  abundant  leisure  to  stamp  their 
paternity  upon  the  offspring  of  Egyptian  women,  whose  sentiments 
of  chastity  have  never  been  other  than  somewhat  lax. 

But  the  Negroid  type  of  the  earlier  dynasties  seems  never  to  have 
become  extinguished,  notwithstanding  the  immense  influx  of  Asiatics 
into  Egj-pt;  which  has  been  going  on,  literally  for  thousands  of  years, 
to  the  present  hour.  It  may  be  received,  in  science,  as  a  settled  fact, 
that  where  two  races  are  thrown  together  and  blended,  the  type  of 
the  major  number  must  prevail  over  that  of  the  lesser ;  and,  in  timl^ 
the  latter  will  become  effaced.  This  law,  too,  acts  with  greater  force 
29 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC 

226 

EGYPT   AND   EGYPTIANS. 

where  a  foreign  is  attempted  to  be  engrafted  upon  a  native  type 
aboriginally  suited  to  the  local  climate.  The  Fellahs  of  Upper  and 
IGddle  Egypt,  at  the  present  day,  continue  to  be  an  unmistakeable 
race,  and  are  regarded  by  most  travelled  authorities  as  the  best  living 
representatives  of  the  ancient  population  of  Egypt  [Mr.  Oliddon,  resi- 
dent in  Egypt  for  more  than  twenty  years,  may  certainly  be  accepted 
as  competent  authority  respecting  the  physical  characteriErtics  of  the 
present  inhabitants,  whose  idioms  and  customs  in  all  their.ramifica- 
tions  have  been  familiar  to  hiiu  from  boyhood.  He  assures  us,  that 
the  predominant  type  of  the  modem  Fellah,  t.  «.,  peasant  (deducting 
Arab  blood),  is  just  as  identical  with  the  majority  of  portraits  on  the 
earliest  monuments,  as  Morton  concluded  by  comparing  the  crania  of 
ancient  mummies  with  Fellah-skulls  from  the  present  cemeteries. 
To  render  the  latter  point  o^bvious,  we  subjoin,  fipom  the  Crania 
JEgyptiaca^  an  authentic  series  of  both.  The  practised  eye  of  the 
anatomist  will  at  once  recognize  the  similitudes  between  the  ancient 
and  the  modem  heads,  and  detect  in  these  last  the  osteological 
divergences  produced  by  Arab  infQtrations :  — 

Fio.  147. 

Ahchvt  Cbavia,  «  from  the  front  of  Northern  Brick  Pyramid  of  Daahonr." 

Fio.  148. 

AAnr  Cbavia,  f^m  Thebes ;  by  Morton  termed  "  Negroid  Heads/'  whereas  to  us  they 
yield  rather  the  Old  Egyptian  type. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

EayPT    AND   BGTPTIANS. 
FiQ.  149. 

227 

MoDSBH  Skulls — « the  FellahB,"  of  Lower  Egypt 

Fia.  160. 

MoDBRV  Skitlls  —  **  the  Arabs ; "  BSdaweajDt  the  Isthmus  of  Saes. 

Fia.  161. 

MoDBRV  Skulls  —  "  the  Copts  ;*'  firom  their  Christian  cemeteries. 

With  these  positive  data  before  him,  the  reader  will  be  the  better 
able  to  follow  our  general  argument.  —  J.  C.  N.] 

But  we  have  not  yet  done  with  the  Egyptian  Type  as  understood 
by  Morton;  which,  although  without  question  popularly  prevalent 
opder  the  New  Empire,  was  not,  we  think,  the  predominant  lype  of 

Digitized  by 

Google 

^28  EGYPT    AND    EGYPTIANS. 

the  royal  families.  This  last,  to  our  eyes,  as  portrayed  in  Rosellini's 
Iconography^  is  clearly  Asiatic :  and  not  only  Asiatic,  but  Semitic ;  and 
not  merely  Semitic,  but  strongly  Abrahamic,  or,  to  repeat  our  adopted 
term,  Chaldaic.  From  the  XTTth  to  the  XVIIth  dynasty  (a  period  of 
some  511  years,  according  to  Manetho,  in  Josephus),  Egypt  must 
have  been  subjected  to  extraordinary  disturbing  causes,  which,  how- 
ever terrible  to  her  denizens,  to  us,  at  the  present  day,  are  shrouded 
by  darkness,  and  as  if  circumscribed  within  a  moment  of  time. 
Ample  evidence  is  now  exhumed  of  the  minuteness  and  fidelity 
with  which  the  Egyptians,  before  and  after  the  Hyksos-period, 
recorded  events  and  delineated  the  physical  characters  of  their  own 
people,  as  well  as  of  the  foreigners  with  whom  they  held  intercourse ; 
but  during  this  hiatus  our  monuments  are  comparatively  few,  and 
sculptured  portraits,  to  guide  the  ethnographer,  are  wanting.  The 
XVnth  dynasty  (about  1761  b.  c,  according  to  Lepsius)  opens  to 
view  with  a  completeness  and  splendor  truly  astounding ;  and  jfrom 
this  point  downward,  for  more  than  1000  years,  (we  cannot  too  often 
insist  upon  with  general  readers,)  there  are  ample  materials  for  study- 
ing the  natural  history  as  well  of  Asiatic  as  of  African  humanity. 
In  the  magnificent  plates  of  Eosellini,  faithftil  representations  of 
these  painted  sculptures  are  preserved ;  and  in  order  that  the  reader 
might  judge  of  the  quantity  of  materials  and  the  correctness  of  our 
deductions,  we  selected  {ante^  pp.  145  — 150)  a  copious  series  of  the 
Koyal  Portraits  of  the  STVIIth  and  XVmth  dynasties.  We  have 
also  illustrated  how  the  same  physical  characteristics  prevail,  in  pro- 
fusion, down  to  the  XXVth  dynasty,  when  the  so-called  Ethiopian 
sovereigns  come  in  for  a  brief  season,  to  change  a  dynastic  fianily, 
but  not  the  national  type.^ 

In  the  absence  of  parallel  history  (the  "  Middle  Empire,"  orHj/ksos- 
period,  separating  us  from  the  Xilth  dynasty),  nothing  remains 
beyond  genealogical  tablets  and  papyri  to  guide  us,  as  to  the  ancestral 
origin  of  Pharaonic  fiimilies  of  the  New  Empire,  except  their  phy- 
sical type,  depicted  or  carved  upon  coeval  monuments.  There  is  a 
family-contour  about  them  all,  whi6h  at  once  indicates  to  the  observer 
that  they  were  of  high  "Caucasian"  caste,  with  but  littie  African  of 
any  grade,  except  what  was  derived  from  Old  Egyptian  lineage. 

Having  enlarged  sufficiently  upon  the  Egyptian  race,  as  portrayed 
upon  the  sculptures  of  the  New  Empire,  coetaneously  with  the  times  of 
Abraham,  Moses,  Solomon,  and  Josiah ;  (or,  from  about  sixteen  cen- 
turies before  our  era  down  to  the  apogee  of  Assyria's  glory);  none  can 
now  doubt  that  Pharaonic  Egypt,  at  least  among  royalty,  nobility, 
and  gentry,  exhibited  in  those  generations  a  very  mixed  type,  wherein 
Asiatic  elements  predominated  over  the  Nilotic.    Let  us  next  take  a 

Digitized  by 

Google 

EGYPT    AND    EGYPTIANS.  229 

retrogressive  leap,  over  the  Rt/ksos-ipenod,  from  the  JLViith  to  the 
XHth  dynasty,  and  inquire.  What  was  the  type  of  Egyptians  under  the 
Old  Empire  —  that  is,  backwards,  from  about  the  twentieth  century 
before  Christ?  But  before  doing  so,  fairness  renders  it  incumbent 
on  the  part  of  one  of  the  authors  [G.  R.  G.],  ^ose  province  it  is  to 
eraperintend  "  Types  of  Mankind"  as  it  passes  through  the  press,  to 
give  place  to  some  general  observations  of  his  absent  colleague*  The 
former,  immediately  in  contact  with  their  lamented  friend.  Dr.  Mor- 
ton, at  Philadelphia,  until  within  a  few  weeks  of  his  demise  in  1851, 
naturally  became  more  conversant  with  the  great  ethnographer's 
matured  views ;  whereas  Dr.  Nott's  residence  at  Mobile  restricted  his 
studies  within  his  own  resources :  so  that  what  of  merit  and  origi- 
nality may  attach  to  the  following  analysis  of  the  Old  Egyptian  type, 
belongs  to  his  individual  ratiocinations. 

[On  the  publication  of  Dr.  Morton's  Crania  JEgyptiaca,  we  studied 
it  carefully,  and  compared  it,  step  by  step,  with  the  works  of  Cham- 
pollion  and  Rosellini.  No  other  conclusion  than  the  one  adopted  by 
tim,  viz.,  that  the  physical  traits  which  he  had  assimied  as  character- 
istic of  the  Egyptians  were  really  and  truly  typical  of  the  first  settlers 
of  Egypt,  resulted  from  our  researches ;  but,  after  several  years,  the 
Denkmdler  of  Lepsius,  (the  first  livraisons  of  which  reached  us  about 
two  years  ago,)  essentially  modified  our  former  conclusions.  Exami- 
nation of  these  plates,  and  a  more  thorough  investigation  of  the  sub- 
ject, have  satisfied  us,  that  the  Egyptian  type  as  known  in  1844  to 
Morton,  existed  no  longer  in  its  pristine  purity,  but,  aft«r  the  Xllth 
dynasty,  was  absolutely  an  amalgam  of  foreign  (chiefly  Asiatic)  stocks, 
engrafted  on  an  antecedent  and  aboriginal  African  type ;  that  the 
latter,  although  not  Negro,  was  Nilotic ;  and  that  it  constituted  the 
true  connecting  grade  between  Afiican  and  Asiatic  races.  When  Mr. 
Gliddon  and  the  writer  again  met,  at  Mobile,  above  eighteen  months 
ago,  after  five  years'  separation,  we  mentioned  this  conclusion  to  him ; 
and  he  placed  in  our  hands  various  letters,  received  by  him  between 
the  years  1846  and  1851,  from  Morton ;  through  which  it  became  evi- 
dent that  the  Doctor  himself  had  also  so  far  changed  his  opinions  as 
to  feel  assured  that  the  primordial  Egyptians  were  not  an  Asiatic,  but 
an  aboriginal  population,  indigenous  ix)  the  Nile-land,  although  he 
says  nothing  of  their  primitive  Negroid  type :  the  ultimatum  which 
our  personal  researches  had  then  attained.  We  afterwards  wrote  to 
Chevalier  Lepsius,  informing  him  of  the  impression  his  Old  Egyptian 
portraits  had  left  on  our  mind,  and  were  much  gratified  to  learn,  fix)m 
his  reply,  that  our  new  convictions  accorded  with  his  own.  A  very 
obliging  letter  also,  from  Mr.  Birch,  enables  us  to  add  his  valid 

Digitized  by 

Google 

230  EGYPT   AND   EGYPTIANS. 

authority  to  argaments  hereinafter  presented,  without,  in  either  < 
infringing  upon  the  sanctity  of  private  corres^ndence. — J.  C.  K".} 

Although  Dr.  Morton  had  insisted  strongly  upon  his  conyentional 
Egyptian  type^  nevertheless,  a  critical  perusal  of  his  work  will  show 
that,  even  in  1844,  he  felt  by  no  means  certain  as  to  its  Asiatic  ori^ 
—  glimmerings  of  the  light  that  was  ere  long  to  break  through 
^<  Egyptian  darkness"  ahready  dawning  upon  the  mind  of  our  acute 
anthropologist.    In  the  Crania^  he  says :  — 

<<  We  haTe  already  alladed  to  the  opinion  of  Prof.  Bitter  and  others,  that  the  old  B^as 
and  modem  Bidiareens  were  deriTod  from  the  Berber  or  Libyan  etock  of  nations.  I  am 
ready  to  go  fkrther,  and  adopt  the  sentiment  of  the  learned  Dr.  Mnrray,  that  the  Egyptians 
and  monumental  Bthiopians  were  of  the  same  lineage,  and  probably  descended  from  a 
Libyan  tribe. 

<'  This  Tiew  of  the  case  [he  continaes]  at  once  reconciles  the  statement  of  Ghampc^on, 
Bosellini,  Heeren,  and  Bfippell,  that  they  could  detect  the  JVtiiiaii  physiognomy  erery  where 
on  the  monuments ;  but,  at  the  same  time,  it  supersedes  the  necesd^  of  their  infarence 
that  Nubia  was  the  cradle  of  dTilisation,  and  that  the  arts,  descending  the  river,  were  per- 
fected in  Egypt" 

In  further  support  of  the  common  origin  of  the  Egyptians,  Berbers, 
and  other  tribes  of  Northern  Afidca,  Morton  refers  to  evidences  fur- 
nished by  !Ritter,  Heeren,  Shaler,  Hodgson,  &c. —  showing  how  '^  the 
Libyan  or  Berber  speech  was  once  the  language  of  all  Northern 
Africa,"  and  infinitely  more  ancient  than  the  Coptic  —  probably  as 
old  as  the  monumental  language  of  Egypt's  pyramidal  period. 

[Foi:  the  sake  of  perspicuity,  and  to  convey  to  the  reader  some  idea 
of  the  chronological  order  of  linguistic  developments  in  Egypt,  it  may 
be  well  to  mention,  that  the  name  Coptic  (i.  e.  Christian  Jacobite)  repre- 
sents the  vernacular  Egyptian  from  the  seventh  century  after  Christ 
back  to  about  the  Christian  era ;  that2>6mo^u?,  or  Enchorial,  refers  to 
the  colloquial  idiom  thence  used  backwards  to  the  seventh  century 
B.  c. ;  that  Hieraticj  or  Sacerdotal,  means  only  the  cursive  character 
in  which  the  "  lingua  saneta*'  of  the  old  hieroglyphics  was  written,  in 
every  age,  back  to  at  least  the  Vlth  dynasty,  or  2800  years  b.  c.  ;  and 
finally,  that  the  hieroglyphicSj  ^'sacred  sculptured  characters,''  repre- 
sent that  antique  tongue  which  was  the  speech  of  Egypt  when,  long 
prior  to  the  pyramids  of  the  IVth  dynasty  (that  is,  centuries  anterior 
to  8500  years  b.  o.)  phonetic  hieroglyphs  succeeded  an  earlier  picture- 
writing.  With  the  reservation  that  where  our  Anglo-Saxon  tongue 
counts  centuries,  the  language  of  Egypt  reckons  up  its  thousands  of 
years,  if  we  were  to  call  the  English  of  Thackeray,  Bulwer,  and  Irving, 
"  Coptic"  —  that  of  the  forty-seven  translators  of  Eing  James's  Ver- 
sion, "Demotic" — that  of  Chaucer,  "Hieratic,"  and  that  of  the  old 
Doom's-day  Book,  "  Hieroglyphic,"  we  should  perceive,  in  modem 
English,  some  of  the  linguistic  gradations  and  some  phases  in  the  writ- 

Digitized  by 

Google 

EGYPT   AND   EGYPTIANS.  2^1 

in^  of  Egypt  during  4000  monumental  years,  down  to  the  introduc- 
tion of  Christianity  into  the  Valley  of  the  Nile.^  Consequently,  all 
pliilologers  who^  when  comparing  Coptic  with  Atalantic  Berber  dia- 
lects, imagined  they  were  dealing  with  ancient  Egyptian  lexicography, 
Ixaye  committed,  ip9o  facto^  a  wondrous  anachronism ;  and  science 
must  set  their  futile  labors  respectfully  aside — Latham's  inclusive. 
G.  R.  G.] 

We  must  remark,  in  passing,  that  Dr.  Morton's  mind  had  not  yet 
freed  itself  from  the  old,  arbitrary,  divisions  of  races,  and  that  he  here 
attempted  to  force  into  one  common  stock  many  African  races  which 
in  themselves  merely  constitute  a  group  of  proximate,  but  quite  dis- 
tinct, types.  But,  it  is  interesting  to  observe  the  change  gradually 
working  in  a  brain  so  eminently  reflective,  as  new  archeeological  fects 
offered  themselves  to  its  well-disciplined  scrutiny ;  nor  can  we  ade- 
quately express  our  admiration  at  the  simple-hearted  honesty  with 
which  Morton  sacrificed  many  hard-earned  opinions,  in  the  ratio  that 
the  field  of  Egyptian  science  widened  before  his  contemplation.  We 
derive  extreme  pleasure  in  ofifering  some  instances. 

On  the  26th  of  February,  1846,  but  two  years  after  his  Crania 
^gyptiaea  had  appeared,  in  a  letter  to  Oliddon  at  Paris,  he  thus 
utters  thoughts  which  it  seems  had  been  half-formed  for  years  pre- 
viously, though  proo&  were  yet  wanting  to  mould  them  into  definitive 
shape:  — 

« I  am  more  than  erer  oonflnned  in  mj  old  sentimeiit,  thftt  Nortlieni  Afirioft  was  peopled 
by  an  incGgenons  and  aboriginal  people,  who  were  dispossessed  by  Asiatic  tribes.  These 
aborigines  covid  not  haTO  been  Negroes,  becanse  the  latter  were  noTor  adapted  to  the  climate, 
and  are  nowhere  now,  nor  erer  haye  been,  inhabitants  of  these  latitudes.  Were  they  Bera- 
bra  ?  —  or  some  better  race,  mere  nearly  allied  to  the  Arabian  race  f  " 

*  This  gleam  of  light  received  expression  long  previously  to  the  pub 
lication  of  any  of  the  pictorial  results  of  Lepsius's  Expedition.  To 
our  view,  Morton  here  struck  the  true  key  to  the  type  of  the  Egyptian 
population  of  the  "Sew  Empire.  They  were  then  already  a  mixed 
race,  derived  from  Afliatic  supeipositions  upon  the  abori^al  people 
of  the  lower  Nile.  Prom  the  dawn  of  monumental  history,  which 
antedates  all  chronicles,  sacred  or  profane,  we  see  the  whole  basin  of 
the  Nile,  together  with  that  part  of  AMca  lying  north  of  the  Sahara, 
inhabited  by  races  unlike  Asiatics,  and  equally  unlike  Negroes :  but 
forming  in  anthropology  a  connecting  link,  and,  geographically^ 
another  gradation.  To  say  nothing  of  Egyptians  proper,  such  were 
and  are  the  Nubians,  the  Abyssinians,  the  Gallas,  the  Barilbra,  no 
less  than  the  whole  native  population  of  the^  Barbaiy  States ;  which 
last,  in  those  ancient  days,  were  absolutely  cut  ofi^,  tlirough  want  of 
eameUy  from  communication  with  Nigritia  athwart  the  Saharan  wastes. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

232  EGYPT    AND    EGYPTIANS. 

About  the  time  the  preceding  letter  was  penned,  Dr.  Morton  was 
in  correspondence  with  a  very  distinguished  savan  in  Paris  —  our 
mutual  friend,  M.  le  Dr.  Boudin,  latterly  M6decin  en  chef  de  Tarm^ 
des  Alpes  —  who  proposed  to  translate  and  republish  the  Crania 
JEgyptiaca.  The  work  was  to  bo  rewritten ;  and  we  have  before  us 
its  MS.  emendations  for  a  second  edition.  Writing  to  Gliddon,  then 
in  London,  in  May,  1846,  Morton  holds  the  following  language :  — 

**  In  this  work  I  iiiamtain,  without  resenration,  the  following  among  other  opinions — that 
the  human  race  has  not  sprong  from  one  pair,  bn*  ftrom  a  plnralitj  of  centres ;  that  these 
were  created  ab  initio  in  those  parts  of  the  world  best  adapted  to  their  physical  nature ; 
that  the  epoch  of  creation  was  that  undefined  period  of  time  spoken  of  in  the  first  chapter 
of  Genesis,  wherein  it  is  related  that  God  formed  man,  <  male  and  female  created  he  ihem;'^ 
that  the  deluge  was  a  mere  local  phenomenon  ;  that  it  affected  but  a  small  part  of  the  then- 
ezis^g  inhabitants  of  the  earth ;  that  these  Tiews  are  consistent  with  the  &ots  of  the  ease, 
as  well  as  with  analogical  evidence.*' 

In  another  letter  to  Gliddon,  at  New  York,  December  14, 1849,  we 
read:  — 

<<  67  the  hands  of  the  person  to  whom  you  confided  them,  I  last  night  receiTed  Lepsius's 
"  Ghronologie,"  and  the  tin  case  of  fao-simile  drawings.380  These,  when  studied  in  connec- 
tion with  the  Egyptian  heads  [skylW],  and  especially  with  the  small  series  sent  me  [fh>m 
Memphis]  by  your  brother  William  [seyenteen  in  number,  and  Tery  ancient,],  compel  me 
to  recant  so  much  of  my  published  opinions  as  respects  the  origin  of  the  Egyptians.  They 
never  came  from  Asia,  but  are  the  indigenous  or  aboriginal  inhabitants  of  the  valley  of  the 
Nile.  I  haTC  taken  this  position  in  my  letter  to  Mr.  J.  R.  Bartlett  (i^ev  York  Ethnologicdl 
80c.  Journal,  I.) :  every  day  has  verified  it,  and  your  drawings  settle  it  forever  in  my 
mind.  It  has  cost  me  a  mental  struggle  to  acknowledge  this  conviction,  but  I  can  withhold 
it  no  longer."    [See  confirmations  in  the  MSS.  of  Dr.  Morton ;  infrat  Ohap.  XI. J. 

Again,  to  the  same,  January  30,  1850 :  — 

'<  Tou  allude  to  my  altered  views  in  Ethnology ;  but  it  all  consists  in  regarding  the 
Egyptian  race  as  the  indigenous  people  of  the  valley  of  the  Nile.  Not  Asiatics  in  any 
sense  of  the  word,  but  autocthones  of  the  country,  and  the  authors  of  their  own  civilization. 
This  view,  which  you  will  recollect  is  that  of  GhsEtaapollion,  Heeren,  and  others  [excepting 
•only  that  they  do  not  apply  the  word  indigenous  to  the  Egyptians],  in  nowise  conflicts  with 
their  Caucasian  position ;  for  the  Caucasian  group  had  many  primordial  centres,  of  which 
the  Egyptians  represent  one." 

Here,  then,  we  behold  the  matured  and  deliberately-expressed 
opinion  of  Dr.  Morton,  that  the  earliest  monumental  type  of  Egyp- 
tians was  not  Asiatic,  but  that  of  an  aboriginal  African  race. 

A  few  months  ago  the  writer  (J.. C.N.)  addressed  the  Chevalier 
Lepsius,  stating  the  impressions  relative  to  what  we  shall  call  a 
Negroid  type,  left  on  our  mind  by  an  examination  of  his  plates  of  the 
IVth  dynasty.  We  received  from  him  a  most  obliging  and  compre- 
hensive letter :  an  extract  below  indicates  its  nature. 

We  ought  to  premise  that  the  Chevalier,  like  Baron  von  Humboldt,** 
is  a  sustainer  of  the  unity  of  races,  for  linguistical  and  other  reasons 
to  be  detailed  by  his  own  pen  some  day.    We  wish  here  simply  to 

Digitized  by 

Google 

EGYPT    AND    EGYPTIANS.  283 

p-resent  the  results  of  some  of  his  *^ Unguigtique'*  researches  —  a  de- 
partment of  seience  in  which  he  is  so  justly  renowned.  His  reply  to 
oTir  interrogatory  begins-^"  Je  laisse  de  cote  le  point  de  vue  th6olo- 
gique  qui  n'a  rien  k  faire  avec  la  science."  Our  clerical  adversaries 
need  not  lean,  therefore,  upon  savans  whose  sole  object  is  scientific 
truth;  nor,  for  ourselves,  can  we  refrain  from  admiring  the  philoso- 
phic tone  with  which  such  intelligences  as  Agassiz,  Lepsius,  and 
Morton,  have  pursued  it 

«  Voos  parlez  cTune  gradation  des  peoples  dn  eontiiieiit  d'Afriqne  deptds  le  Gapjusqu'ii 
dans  le  nord.  D  j'a  un  fait  bien  curienz,  que  lee  langues  des  Hottentots  et  des  Bnshmans 
sont  essentieUement  diflf<grentes  des  langues  de  tout  le  reste  du  continent  jusqu'lk  T^quateur. 
Et  ce  qui  est,  peut-Stre,  encore  plus  curieux,  leur  langue  porte  quelques  traits  cbaract^ris* 

tlques,  qui  ne  se  retrouTent  que  dans  les  langues  du  nord-est  de  TAfrique Tout  le 

contittent  Africain  avait,  selon  mon  id^e,  dans  un  certain  temps,  une  population  parente,  et 
les  langues  par  cons^uent  analogues  aussi.  Plus  tard  les  peuples  Asiatiques  immigraient 
du  nord-est  Le  melange  des  races  produisait  oe  large  bandeau  de  peuples  et  de  langues 
disperses  et  apparemment  incoh^rens  qui  se  trouvent  maintenant  entre  la  ligne  et  le  15'n« 
degr^  lat  nord.  Ces  langues  ont  perdu  leur  caract^re  Africain  sans  acqu^rir  le  caract^re 
Asiatiqne ;  matt  k  fbtid  du  lanpttet  et  du  iong  Mt  Africain 

«  Je  comprends  ce  que  tous  appeles  un  type  negroids  dans  les  figures  Egjptiennes,  et  je 
n'ai  rien  centre  cette  observation ;  mais  cela  n'emp^che  pas  que  leur  caract^re  principal 
ne  soit  Asiatique.  Pendant  le  temps  des  Hyksds,  la  race  ancienne  se  changeait  conside- 
rablcment." 

We  repeat  that  Prof.  Lepsius  declares,  in  the  same  letter,  his  con- 
firmed belief  in  the  unity  of  races ;  but  the  occurrences  he  speaks  of 
must  antedate  the  era  by  him  defined  for  th^  foundation  of  the  Egyp- 
tian Empire,  8898  years  b.  c,  as  Frenchmen  express  it,  by  "  des 
millions  et  des  milliards  d'annees." 

Not  less"  do  we  esteem,  on  these  archaic  subjects,  the  high  authority 
of  Mr.  Birch,  of  the  British  Museum ;  who,  in  a  private  letter  (to  J. 
C.  K),  dated  October,  1862,  writes :  — 

"  You  are,  I  agree,  quite  rigbt  as  to  the  intermediate  relation  of  Egypt  to  the  Asiatic  and 
Nigritian  races.  Benfey  and  others  haTO  already,  I  think,  pointed  out  that  the  so-called 
Semitic  languages  are  prineipally  spoken  in  Africa,  and  the  hieroglyphs  are  of  Semitic  con- 
nection— resembling  Uie  Semitic  languages  in  the  construction  and  copda  verborum  ;  at  the 
same  time  they  diflfer  in  many  essential  points,  and  haTc  a  fair  claim  to  be  considered  a 
separate  species  of  language.  The  astounding  fact  is,  that  Egyptian  civilization  was  the 
oldest — ^and  that  the  Assyrian  and  other  nations  haye  left  no  remains  to  compare  with  them 
in  respect  of  time." 

It  cannot  fail  to  be  remarked,  that  certain  of  the  portraits  on  the 
earliest  pyramidal  monuments  already  represent  a  very  mixed  people ; 
and,  consequently,  it  is  clear  that  Egypt,  for  anterior  centuries  unnum- 
bered, must  have  been,  so  to  say,  the  battle-ground  of  Asiatic  impinging 
against  African  races.  Some  of  the  heads  we  have  selected  as  illus- 
trative jof  the  antiquity  of  a  high  "  Caucasian**  type,  might  readily 
pass  unnoticed  at  the  present  day  in  the  streets  of  London,  Paris,  or 
N^wYork;  while  others,  again,  are  so  strictly  African,  that  the 
80 

Digitized  by 

Google 

234  EGYPT   AND   EGYPTIANS. 

typical  difference  cannot  be  mistaken.  It  is  note-worthy,  besides, 
that  many  of  these  Egypto-Cancasian  heads  are  no^  only  strongly 
Semitic,  but  even  Abrahaniic  in  type:  thus  affording  support  to 
legends  running  through  the  fragments  of  Manetho,  and  his  muti- 
lator, JosEPHUS,  as  to  connections  between  the  Hyksos  and  the  early 
population  of  Canaan.  The  same  Chaldak  features  beheld  in  some 
of  the  royal  likenesses  of  the  XVIIth,  XVmth  and  XTXth  dynasties, 
are  seen  upon  the  sculptures  of  the  IVth,  Vth  and  Vlth. 

Philological  science  generally  admits  that  the  roots  of  the  modem 
Coptic  language  are,  in  the  main,  (alien  engraftments  deducted)  the 
same  as  those  of  the  ^^  lingua  sancta,"  or  Old  Egyptian  tongue,  spoken 
by  the  priesthood  and  educated  classes,  &om  Roman  times,  through 
all  dynasties,  back  to  the  earliest  Phf^raohs,  when  the  latter  was  the 
colloquial  idiom  of  every  native.  As  a  medium  of  oral  communica- 
tion, the  Coptic  language  ceased  to  be  used  in  the  twelfth  century, 
and  the  last  person  who  could  speak  it  is  said  to  have  died  in  a.  n. 
1668  :^  but  an  old  Egyptian  (G.  R.  G.)  avers  that  he  met  with  good 
authority  for  its-decease  about  ninety  years  ago,  with  a  priest,  in  the 
Thebaid. 

The  Upd  dioXixror,^  sacerdotal  dialectj  or  antique  language,  affords 
one  of  the  strongest  evidences  of  the  high  antiquity  of  the  early 
population  of  Egypt,  and  also  of  their  Ifilotic  or  aboriginal  emana- 
tion. Egypt  has  been,  Jiterally,  for  many  thousands  of  years,  the 
football  of  foreign  conquerors ;  and  her  primordial  language  became 
infiltrated,  from  age  to  age,  with  Arabic,  Persian,  Greek,  Libyan, 
Latin,  and  words  of  other  tongues,  known  to  us  only  at  a  later  stage 
of  development ;  but,  when  these  exotic  injecta  are  abstracted,  there 
remains,  nevertheless,  a  stone-recorded  vernacular,  possessing  all  the 
marks  of  originality,  and  in  itself  totally  distinct  from  the  utmost 
circumference  of  Asiatic  languages.  The  proper  names  of  very  few 
Nilotic  objects,  natural  or  artificial,  in  primitive  hieroglyphics,  are 
really  identical  with  the  vocalization  of  Syro- Arabian  languages ;  and 
their  Egyptian  structure  is  characteristically  different ;  being  mono- 
syllabic, in  lieu  of  the  posterior  trUiteral  shape  in  which  Semitic 
tongues  have  come  down  to  us.  ''  If  all  these  languages  be  kindred, 
Benfey,  who  has  compared  them  most  elaborately,  holds,  they  must 
have  split  off  from  a  parent  stock,  not  only  at  a  period  too  remote  for 
all  historical  or  monumental  evidence,  but  even  for  plausible  con- 
jecture." **  Such,  in  brief,  are  the  current  opinions  of  Lepeius,  Birc^, 
of  Bunsen,  Hincks,  De  Saulcy,  Lanci,  and  other  eminent  authorities 
of  the  day,  as  regards  Egypt :  supported,  moreover,  by  the  philological 
discoveries  of  Bawlinson,  Hincks,  and  De  Longp4rier,  in  cuneiform 
Assyria ;  and  by  the  studies  of  Gesenius,  Ewald,  Munls^  and  Fresnel, 

Digitized  by 

Google 

EGYPT   AND   EGYPTIANS.  236 

in  Sliemitisli  paleBOgraphy.  It  is  the  dedtiction  of  Lepsios,  that 
Egypt  had  possessed  an  African  population,  and  a  Miotic  language, 
before  the  foundation  of  the  Old  Empire ;  And  that  various  disturbing 
causes  superimposed,  gradually,  an  Asiatic  type  and  Semitic  dialects 
upon  the  imterior  people  of  the  Lower  Nile,  without  obliterating  the 
abcNTigiaal  frame-work  which,  as  well  in  type  of  man  as  in  speech, 
was  exclusively  African. 

Affinities,  tending  to  establish  a  remote  contemporaneousness,  have 
been  traced  among  various  languages  of  Northern  Africa:  and 
Hodgson,  quoted  in  the  last  chapter,  long  ago  put  forth  the  doctrine 
that  the  Berber  speech,  as  now  extant,  had  preceded  the  Coptic  of 
Christianized  Egypt  He  insisted  that  many  old  names  of  places, 
divinities,  &;c.,  along  the  Nile,  were  Berber,  and  neither  Coptic  nor 
Semitic.  Allowance  made  for  some  slight  anachronisms,  in  terms 
rather  than  in  fitcts,  we  think  our  learned  countsyman's  arrow  has 
not  flown  wide  of  the  target 

The  high  antiquity  formerly  clwned  for  civilization  in  India,  and 
many  coincidences  of  doctrine  and  usages  that,  imagined  by  Indolo- 
gists,  have  entirely  vanished  from  Egypt  since  her  hieroglyphics  have 
become  readable,  had  led  Prichard,  and  other  scholars  less  eminent, 
to  connect  the  Ganges  with  the  Nile :  but,  so  fiur  from  any  evidence 
of  intercommunication,  we  have  nothing  to  show  that  the  nations  on 
these  two  rivers,  in  the  time  of  Solomon,  much  less  of  Moses  or 
Abraham,  were  even  acquainted  with  each  others'  existence.  The 
ancient  Egyptians  never  surmised  a  Hindostanic  origin  for  their  own 
nation ;  they  believed  themselves  to  be,  in  the  strictest  sense,  autoc- 
thoneSy  natives  of  the  soil.  Nor  do  Eastrlndians  (since  Wilfobd's 
misconceplions  became  exposed)  possess,  any  tradition  of  having  re* 
ceived  an  Egyptian  or  sent  forth  a  Hindoo  colony.**  Moreover,  the 
rumored  resemblances  between  the  languages  of  India  and  Egypt — 
Sanscrit  and  Coptic — compared  in  their  modem  phases,  are  few  and 
slight,  where  not  altogether  fietctitious.  The  whole  genius  of  both, 
and  almost  their  entire  stock  of  words,  are  entirely  different  The 
hieroglyphic  system  of  Egypt  is  clearly  indigenous  to  the  valley  of 
the  Nile,  whilst  not  even  a  legendary  tale  remains  to  show  that  such 
mode  of  writing  ever  prevailed  in  India. 

When  we  reflect  that  this  hieroglyphic  writing  is  found  in  high 
perfection  on  the  earliest  monuments  extant,  viz. :  those  of  the  IVth 
dynasty,  3400  years  b.  o.,  and,  therefore,  must  have  existed  many  cen- 
turies previously ;  that  the  figure .  of  eveiy  animal,  plant,  or  thing, 
delineated  in  these  hieroglyphics,  is  NUotie  to  the  exclusion  of  every 
foreign  idea ;  and  that  Egyptian  economy  in  manners,  customs,  arts, 
&c.,  must  have  been  radically  diverse  from  those  of  all  otiier  raoes, 

Digitized  by 

Google 

236  EGYPT    AND    EGYPTIANS. 

at  the  time  such  writing  received  its  incipient  projection;  —  when, 
too,  we  remember  the  fact  that,  the  physical  characters  of  each  type 
of  man  in  India  and  Egypt  were  different,  and  that  no  physical  causes 
but  amalgamation  have  ever  transformed  one  race  into  another,  it  is 
impossible  to  resist  the  conviction  that  these  Gangeatic  and  Nilotic 
races  have  always  been,  that  which,  modem  ftisions  deducted,  they 
are  now,  distinct. 

The  Egyptians,  for  instance,  had  practised  circumcision  from  time 
immemorial,  long  before  Abraham  adopted  this  mark  after  his  visit  to 
Egypt,  in  common  with  the  later  Ethi^pic  tribes ;  but  this  Nilotic  rite 
was  not  practised  in  India,  until  introduced  by  Mohammedan  conquests. 
So,  again,  with  regard  to  "  castes,"  heretofore  almost  insolently  ob- 
truded, in  order  to  identify  Egyptian  with  Hindostanic  customs !  It 
will  be  news  to  some  coryphaei  of  the  unity-doctrine,  when  they  are 
taught,  in  our  Part  ILL.,  that  the  "  caste-system"  has  never  existed 
along  the  Nile,  and  that,  on  the  Ganges,  it  is  a  veiy  modem  invention. 

To  the  extreme  climatic  dryness  of  Egypt  are  we  mainly  indebted 
for  the  preservation  of  her  monumental  history.  While  the  remains  of 
Greece,  Rome,  and  other  nations,  none  of  them  8000  years  old,  cmmble 
at  first  touch,  Egypt's  granitic  obelisks,  at  the  end  of  4000  years,  have 
not  yet  lost  their  polish ;  and  had  all  the  early  monuments  of  that 
country  been  spared  by  barbarian  hands,  we  should  not  now,  after 
fifty-three  centuries,  have  to  accuse  Time  as  the  cause  of  disputations 
over  the  history  of  the  old  Empire. 

That  Menes  of  This  was  the  first  mortal  king  of  Egypt,  is  one  of 
the  points  in  which  classical  authorities,  Herodotus,  Manetho,  Eratos- 
thenes, and  Diodoras,  agree  with  the  genealogical  lists  upon  tablets 
and  papyri;  and  we  must  regard  him  as  the  first  historical  founder  of 
an  empire,  which,  for  untold  ages  previously,  had  been  approaching 
its  consolidation.  His  reign  is  placed  by  Lepsius  at  3898  years  b.  o.  ; 
and  although  criticism  grants  that  this  date  may  be  a  few  centuries 
below  or  above  the  trae  era,  yet  there  is  so  much  irrefragable  evi- 
dence of  the  long  duration  of  the  empire  prior  to  the  fixed  epoch  of 
the  Xllth  dynasty,  2800  years  b.  c,  that  any  error,  if  there  be  such, 
in  his  chronological  computations,  cannot  be  very  great,  while  almost 
immaterial  to  our  present  purposes.  The  august  name  of  Menes  is 
gloriously  associated  with  the  building  of  Memphis,  the  oldest  metro- 
polis, with  foreign  conquests,  with  public  monuments,  with  the  pro- 
gress of  the  arts  and  of  internal  improvements.  To  admit  the  pos- 
sibility of  such  legislative  actions,  a  numerous  population  and  a  long 
preparatory  civilization  must  have  preceded  him :  to  say  nothing  of 
the  contemporary  nations  with  which  this  military  Pharaoh  held 
intercourse,  that  must  have  been  at  least  as  old  as  the  Egyptians 

Digitized  by 

Google 

EGYPT    AND    EGYPTIANS.  23T 

themselves.  To  one  who  knows  anything  of  the  topography  of  the 
Nile-land,  it  need  not  be  told  that  the  science  of  hydraulic  engineer- 
ing, in  particular,,  must  have  existed  in  high  perfection  before  the 
Lower  Valley  of  the  Nile  could  have  been  studded  to  any  extent  with 
towns  on  the  alluvium :  because  this  stream  had  to  be  controlled  by 
dykes,  canals,  sluices,  and  similar  works,  long  before  the  soil  on  its 
banks  could  be  uniformly  cultivated ;  and,  what  an  antiquity  do  not 
these  facts  necessitate ! 

But,  whatever  uncertainty  may  hang  over  the  first  three  dynasties 
(of  which  coetaneous  records  are  now  lost),  when  we  come  to  the  IVth — 

**  We  may  [in  the  language  of  the  ReT.  John  Eenrick]  congratulate  ourselTes  that  we 
have  at  length  reached  the  period  of  undoubted  cotemporaneous  monuments  in  Egyptian 
history.  The  pyramids,  and  the  sepulchres  near  them,  still  remain  to  assure  us  that  we 
are  not  walking  in  a  land  of  shadows,  but  among  a  powerful  and  populous  nation,  far 
adyanced  in  the  arts  of  life ;  and,  as  a  people  can  only  progressively  attain  such  a  station, 
the  light  of  historic  certainty  is  reflected  back  flrom  this  era  upon  the  ages  which  precede 
it  .  .  The  glimpse  which  we  thus  obtain  of  Egypt,  in  the  fifth  century  after  Menes,  accord- 
ing to  the  lowest  computation,  rcTeals  to  us  some  general  facts,  which  lead  to  important 
inferences.  In  all  its  great  characteristics,  Egypt  was  the  same  as  we  see  it  1000  years 
later.  A  well-organized  monarchy  and  religion  elaborated  throughout  the  country.  The 
system  of  hieroglyphic  writing  Uie  same,  in  aU  its  leading  peculiarities,  as  it  continued  to 
the  end  of  the  monarchy  of  the  Pharaohs."  ^ 

Bas-reliefs  beautifully  cut,  sepulchral  architecture,  and  pyramidal 
engineering — reed-pen»,  inks  (red  and  black),  papyrus-paper,  and 
chemically-prepared  colors  !  —  these  are  proud  evidences  of  the  Mem- 
phitic  civilization  of  fifty-three  centuries  ago,  that  every  man  with 
eyes  to  see  can  now  behold  in  noble  folios,  published  by  France, 
Tuscany,  and  Pruspia ;  and  concerning  which  any  one,  not  an  igno- 
ramus through  education,  or  a  blockhead  by  nature,  can  acquire  ade- 
quate knowledge  by  merely  reading  those  English,  French,  German, 
or  Italian  works,  printed  within  the  last  fifteen  years,  and  abundantly 
cited  at  the  end  of  this  volume,  which  are  at  the  present  hour  very 
accessible  to  all  intelligent  readers,  everywhere  but  on  the  bookshelves 
of  primary  seminaries.  This  reservation  made,  we  appeal,  through 
these  popular  works,  to  the  most  ancient  sculptures,  in  hopes  of 
ascertaining  —  What  was  the  Type  of  the  primitive  Egyptians? 

Let  our  departure  be  taken,  in  this  inquiry,  from  one  of  those 
four  efilgies  extant  in  the  sepulchral  habitation  of  Seti  I.,  before 
alluded  to  {vide  ante^  p.  85,  Fig.  1),  which  establishes  what  Egyptian 
art  considered,  in  the  fifteenth  century  b.  c,  the  beau-ideal  of  the 
Egyptians  themselves.  Beneath  the  head  (Fig.  152)  we  place  a  re 
duction  of  one  of  the  same  full-length  figures  (Fig.  153),  which,  on 
the  original,  is  colored  in  deep  red.  The  reader  has  now  before  his 
eye  the  standard  effigy ^  typical  of  the  Egyptian  race,  such  as  the  "hun- 
dred-gated*' Thebes  exhibited  in  her  streets  about  3400  years  ago. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

238 

EGYPT    AND    EGYPTIANS. 

Fio.  158. 

FiQ.  152.387  This  head  we  regc^rd  as  a  most  inte- 

resting one,  in  connection  with  the  Egyp- 
tian type ;  because  it  gives  the  Egyptian 
idea  of  their  own  people,  whom  the 
accompanying  hieroglyphics  call  the 
RoT,  that  is,  "race,"  par  excellence  — 
viewed  by  the  Egyptians  as  the  only 
human  species,  to  Ihe  exclusion  of  "out- 
side barbarians"  of  every  nation  around 
the  "land  of  purity  and  justice." 

JETow,  although  this  effigy  was  designed, 
at  Thebes,  as  typical  of  the  Egyptian  na- 
tion during  the  XVTHth  dynasty,  to  us 
it  seems  rather  to  be  the  long-settled 
type  of  that  race,  handed  down  from,  early 
times;  for,  assuredly,  it  does  not  corres- 
pond with  the  royal  portraits  of  the  New 
Empire,  which,  we  have  seen,  were 
strongly  Semitic  in  their  lineaments,  and 
therefore  chiefly  Asiatic  in  derivation. 

This  BoT,  if  placed  alongside  the  ico- 
nographic  monuments  of  the  IVth,  Vth, 
and  Ylth  dynasties,  is  closely  analogous 
to  the  predominant  type  of  that  day; 
which  fiw^  serves  to  strengthen  our  view 
that  the  Egyptians  of  the  early  dynasties 
were  rather  of  an  African  or  Negroid 
type  —  resembling  the  Biihari,  in  some 
respects,  in  others,  the  modem  Fellah,  or 
peasantry,  of  Upper  Egypt.  To  show  its 
analogy  to  the  primitive  stock,  we  repro- 
duce a  better  copy  of  the  colored  head 
of  Prince  Mbrhet  (Fig.  154),  "Priest  of 
Shufu"  builder  of  the  great  pyramid, 
and  probably  his  son  (wp*a,p.  177,  Fig. 
118).  More  than  1700  years  of  time  sepa- 
rate the  two  sculptures,  and  yet  how  in- 
delible is  the  type ! 
Fig.  155  is  taken  from  the  temple  of  Aboosimbel  —  Wars  in  Asia 
of  Jlamses  IT.,  AViilth  dynasty,  during  the  fourteenth  century  b.  c. 
This  head  is  one  of  a  group  of  full-length  portraits  of  the  same  type, 
nnd  they  are  J^^yp^ian  picked  soldiers  of  the  royal  body-guard — pro- 

FlG.  154.28^ 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC 

Flaxe.l. 

THt  P«./,;,:;' 

Digitized  by 

Google 

Digitized  by 

Google 

EGYPT   AND   EGYPTIANS.  239 

Fio.  166.»  bably  Oalinrtans:  a  word  which  means  "  joung 

guard/'  and  also  persons  wearing  the  ealanrUj 
"fringed  tunic." «^ 

[The  pictorial  illustrations  designed  in  1842 
for  Qliddon's  Lectures  having  required  a  cri- 
tical study  of  every  head  then  known  upon 
the  monuments,  we  will  here  introduce  an 
extract  from  his  Ethnographic  Nbte$y  written 
eleven  years  ago — when,  without  theory  to 
sustain,  he  could  have  no  idea  that  his  private 
memoranda  would  become  available  to  ana- 
tomists in  the  year  1858. — J.  C.  N.] 

"  These  are  Egyptian  soldiers,  of  the  royal  body-giuurd — probably  Hermotyhiant,  or  Ca- 
l<wtrMMu;  but,  as  the  latter  name  seems  deriTable  firom  the  Coptic  SHELOSHIBI,  ytmng, 
and  since  these  soldiers  are  young  men,  it  is  likely  that  they  represent  Calaimam  of  the 
royal  goard* — like  the  yonng  gnard  of  Napoleon,  or  the  Tenie-eheri  (corrupted  by  Euro- 
peans into  Jamacaut)^  'new  guard*  of  the  Ottomans.  The  Hermotybiafu  were  the  vete- 
ran» — the  old  guard,  in  whose  charge  were  the  fortresses. 

'*  Now,  as  these  soldiers  were  quartered  in,  and  chiefly  drafted  firom,  Lcwer  Bgypt,  this 
soldier  is  a  good  specimen  of  the  *  thews  and  sinews*  of  Bgypt  See  his  athletic  build,  his 
muscular  frame,  and  look  of  bull-dog  determination  —  the  Teiy  htau4deal  of  a  soldier! 
This  man  is  precisely  similar  to  the  mass  of  the  FtMht  of  Lower  Egypt  at  this  day,  espe- 
cially on  the  Damiata  branch,  and  I  could  pick  thousands  in  these  prorinoes  to  match  him ; 
whereas,  aboTe  MiddU  Egypt,  as  you  approach  Nubia,  this  type  disappears,  to  be  replaced 
by  lank,  tall,  dark,  spare  men,  until  the  Fellah  merges  in  the  Nubian  races,  aboTe  Esn^. 
I  therefore  contend  that  this  soldier  is  a  perfect  specimen  of  the  picked  men  of  Lower  Egypt, 
B.  o.  1660.  He  shows  the  superiority  of  thc^  people  of  Lower  Egypt  in  that  day;  while,  as 
he  is  idenUeal  with  the  picked  men  of  the  Fell&hs  of  Lower  Egypt  at  i^^pramt  day,  it  fol- 
lows that  Tory  great  changes  haTC  not  taken  place,  in  8500  years,  between  the  aneimt  and 
modem  Lower  Egyptians ;  and  supports  my  assertion  that,  apart  from  a  certain  amount  of 
Arab-cross  (easily  explained,  and  easily  detected),  it  is  in  Lower  Egypt,  among  the  Felldhe, 
you  will  find  the  descendants  of  the  ancient  race — more  than  among  Uie  CopU  (whose 
females  are,  and  haye  been,  the  *0iu8arieyeh  of  Nations*) ;  and  infinitely  more  than  among 
the  half-witted,  dissolute,  corrupt,  and  mongrel  African  race  of  Bardberat," 

Morton's  comparison  of  ancient  and  modem  skulls  confirms  this 
view ;  and  it  will  remove  some  erroneous  notions  from  the  reader  of 
Osbum,^  to  mention  an  indisputable  proof  of  the  Egyptian  origin  of 
those  guards  —  that  is^  the  &ct  that  they  are  painted  red  in  the  tableau 
at  Aboosimbel. 

Now,  a  remark  made  by  us  when  speaking  of  the  last  race  (RoT), 
applies  equally  to  this  figure :  viz.,  that  although  both  are  represent- 
ations of  Egyptians,  drawn  and  colored  by  an  Egyptian  artist,  during 
the  XVmth  dynasty,  yet  this  soldier  does  not  display  the  same  type 
as  the  le^timate  line  of  royal  portraits,  fi^m  Ahbnoph  I.  downwards. 
There  is  nothing  Asiatic  about  his  physiognomy  —  on  the  contrary, 
it  perpetuates  the  African  or  Negroid  type  of  the  first  dynasties. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

240 

EGYPT    AND    EGYPTIANS. 

Fig.  166. 

Nevertheless,  already  the,  military 
caste  of  Egypt  was  a  mixed  one ;  for 
here  are  two  soldiers  (Fig.  156),  from 
another  brigade,  who,  as  Morton  ob- 
served, present  rather  the  Hellenic 
style  of  feature.^ 

So  too,  allowance  made  for  very 
possible  inattentions  on  the  part  of 
European  copyists,  where  the  subject 
was  not  royal  iconography,  do  some 
of  the  following  heads  of  lower 
classes  of  people  (Figs.  167-161), 
also  selected  by  Morton:  — 

FiQ.  168. 

Fio.  157. 

Fio.  160. 

Pea8ant8.a8» 

8OTniiit8.3W 

The  modem  FelUihSy  constituting  the  mass  of  the  common  people 
of  the  country,  have  not  even  yet  become  sufficiently  adulterated  for 
their  ancestral  type  to  be  extinguished,  inasmuch  as  the  same  pre- 
ponderating characteristics  can  be  traced,  backwards,  from  the  Yiving 
race,  through  five  millennia  of  stone-chroniclings,  to  the  earliest  times. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

ninitiypH  h\/ VjOOQIC 

Plat 

^ 

Digitized  by 

Google 

fi,BeH{n . 

NOTTft  Gi  I nnnNs  /^/./..c .,fMvih'mim.\ 

EGYPT   AND   EGYPTIANS.  241 

It  is  &ir  to  conclude  that  these  FeUiths  really  preserve  much  of  the 
aboriginal  Egyptian  type.  Such  type  hears  not  the  slightest  resem- 
blance (except  in  casual  instances,  themselves  doubtful,  when  we  first 
see  it  in  the  IVth  dynasty,  about  3400  b.  c.)  to  any  Asiatic  race,  and 
must  therefore  have  been  inherent  in  that  indigenous  race  which  was 
created  to  people  the  Valley  of  the  Nile. 

.  The  authors  esteem  it  a  very  high  privilege  that  "  Types  of  Man- 
kind" should  be  the  first  work  to  remove  all  doubts  upon  the  type 
of  the  earliest  monumental  Egyptians.  Further  discussion  becomes 
superseded  by  the  publication  of  the  annexed  lithographic  Plates  I.,  • 
IL,  nL,  and  IV.  Being  &c-6imiles  of  the  most  ancient  human  heads 
now  extant  in  the  world,  and  transfer-copies  of  impressions  stamped, 
by  the  hand  of  CHievalier  Lepsius  himself,  upon  the  original  bas-reliefe 
preserved  in  the  Royal  Museum  of  Berlin,  their  intrinsic  value  in  eth- 
nography cannot  be  overrated ;  at  the  same  time  that,  like  an  axe, 
these  effigies  cleave  asunder /acte  and  9uppo9ition9  as  to  what  primor- 
dial art  at  Memphis,  above  5000  years  ago,  considered  to  be  the 
^'canonical  proportions"  ascribable  to  the  facial  and  cephalic  struc- 
ture of  the  hecuia  of  the  Egyptian  people  themselves. 

Prefacing  our  exposition  of  the  guarantees  the  lithographs  possess 
for  exactitude  and  authenticity  with  the  remark,  that  these  portraits 
belong  to  the  tombs  of  princely,  aristocratic,  and  sacerdotal  person- 
ages, who  lived  during  the  IVth,*  Vth,  and  Vlth  Memphite  dynasties, 
we  proceed  to  state  how  such  illustrations  (alike  precious  fix)m  their 
enormous  antiquity  and  for  their  unique  excellence)  have  been 
obtained. 

Attendants  on  Mr.  Gliddon's  Archaeological  Lectures  in  the  United 
States  have  been  informed^  yearly,  fix)m  1842  to  1852,"^  of  the 
discoveries  of  the  Prussian  Scientific  Mission  to  Egypt :  in  every  case, 
before  the  winter  of  1849,  far  in  advance  of  detailed  publication, 
whether  in  America  or  in  Europe.  In  that  year,  the  first  volume  of 
Lepsius's  quarto  Chranologie  der^gypter  was  quickly  followed  by  the 
first  Uvrai$(m$  of  the  folio  Denkmaler  au$  Mgypten  und  j^thiopien  — 
the  former  judiciously  constructing  the  chronological  and*  historical 
framework  within  which  the  stupendous  facts  unfolded  by  the  latter 
are  enclosed.  To  fiewilitate  popular  appreciation  of  the  magnitude  of 
these  Prussian  labors  and  discoveries,  Lepsius  put  forth,  at  Berlin,  iu 
1852,  his  octavo  Brief e  au$  ^gypten^  ^ihxopxen^  &c. ;  which,  trans 
lated  and  ably  annotated  by  Mr.  Kenneth  Mackenzie,  being  now 
equally  accessible  to  every  reader  of  our  tongue,  renders  any  account 
81 

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 

242  EGYPT   AND   EGTPTJAKS. 

here  of  these  Nilotic  explorations  superfluous,  heyond  mentiomn^ 
that  four  of  the  most  ancient  tombs  discovered  at  Memphis  by  1j&^ 
sius,  independently  of  his. vast  collection  of  other  materials,  were 
taken  to  pieces  on  the  spot,  with  the  utmost  care,  and  became  rebuilt 
into  the  Royal  Museum  at  Beriin. 

Invited  by  Chevalier  Lepsius  to  visit,^  and  i]iq>ect  personally,  anti- 
quarian treasures  endeared  by  a  lifetime's  Egyptian  associations,  Mr. 
Gliddon  was  at  once  so  struck  with  the  ethnographic  importance  of 
these  sepulchral  bas-reliefe,  that  he  solicited  paper-impressians  of  a  few 
heads  for  the  joint  and  future  studies  of  Dr.  Morton  and  himself;  and, 
on  the  10th  of  May,  1849,  he  had  the  gratification  of  assisting  Cheva- 
lier Lepsius  to  make  numerous  estampages;  while,  to  insure  perfection 
and  authenticity,  the  paper  was  stamped  upon  the  sculptures  by  the 
Chevalier's  own  hands. 

One  singular  fstct,  illustrative  of  the  superior  antiquity  of  these 
tombs  of  pyramidal  magnates  to  any  heretofore  described  by  Egypt- 
olo^ts,  may  here  be  mentioned.  Laid  bare,  through  excavation,  at 
a  depth  of  many  feet  below  the  rocky  surfSsu^,  and  emptied  of  the 
sand  with  which  they  had  become  refilled  since  their  desecration  by 
unknown  hands  (probably  Saraeenie)  centuries  ago,  the  relievos  pre- 
sented themselves  in  colors  so  vivid  as  to  appear  "  fi:^h  and  perfect, 
as  if  painted  only  yesterday;"  but,  despite  every  precaution,  on 
removing  each  slab  into  the  opei^  air,  the  painted  stucco-superficies 
fell  oS —  leaving,  however,  the  uninjured  louhreUef  (about  the  sixth 
of  an  inch)  sculpture  to  endure  long  as  time  shall  respect  the 
Berlin  Museum.  Now,  in  the  dry  climate  of  Memphis,  Egyptian 
colors  known  to  range  fix>m  2500  to  4000  years  old,  where  not  exposed 
to  the  dew,  or  to  the  Etesian  winds,  still  adhere  on  the  wall  of  tombs 
in  their  pristine  freshness  and  brilliancy.  "Well,  therefore,  is  an  anti- 
quity of  at  least  5800  years  for  these  now  colorless  relievos  (imperi- 
ously demanded  also  by  their  hieroglyphical  and  other  conditions) 
corroborated  by  their  exceptional  friability.  With  his  wonted  fore- 
sight, Lepsius  had  caused  the  colored  sculptures  to  be  copied  by  his 
draughtsmen,  in  sitUy  before  removal ;  and  in  the  Denkmdler,^  their 
gorgeous  paintings  may  still  be  admired. 

On  the  writer's  (G.  R.  G.'s)  return  to  London,  these  estampages^ 
after  being  outlined,  were  transferred  upon  tracing-paper  by  his 
wife's  accurate  pencil,  in  duplicate,  for  Dr.  Morton  and  himsel£ 
The  originals,  as  acknowledged  by  the  Doctor  in  a  foregoing  letter 
(p.  282,  ante)y  were  duly  passed  on  to  his  cabinet,  where  their  inspec- 
tion completed  that  revulsion  of  earlier  views  toward  which  his  pro- 
gressive studies  had  long  been  leading.  The  second  copy,  shaded 
and  colored  in  imitation  of  the  limestone  originals,  has  often  embel- 

Digitized  by 

Google 

Digitized  by 

Google 

Digitized  by 

Google 

EGYPT   AND   EGYPTIANS,  243 

lislied  Mr.  QHddon's  lecture-rooms  when  "Egyptian  Etiinology"  was 
the  topic  of  his  address. 

When  the  authors  projected  the  present  work,  at  Mobile,  in  the 
spring  of  1852,  they  acquainted  Chevalier  Lepsius,  among  other  Eu- 
ropean colleagues,  *with  their  respective  desiderata,  archaeological  or 
ethnographical.  Answering  one  of  Qliddon's  letters,  the  Chevalier 
complaisantly  remarks :  — 

''Bbbux,  1  Novmbrt,  1862. 

..."  Pour  lee  indiiddos  toqs  ne  ponrei  Toni  fier  que  eur  1m  mnpremta  que  toqs  ayei ; 
et  si  Tons  en  desirex  Je  Tons  en  enTerrai  encore  d'aTantage. . . .  Lea  empreintee  dee  bas- 
reliefs  et  les  pl&tres  des  anciennes  statues  sont»  ik  ce  qn'il  me  pandt^  les  seals  mat^anx 
utiles  ponr  €tadier  Tancien  caract^re  des  ]6gyptiens ;  et  mdme  pour  ceox-U  il  faut  admettre 
qa'on  ponrrait  se  tromper  snr  plnsienr  traits  qui  pandssent  itre  snrs,  parceqne  le  eanon 
[that  is,  the  eanon  ofprcportion  accorded  by  Old  Egyptian  art  to  the  human  fig;are. —  G.  R. 
G.]  re$u  pouTsit  s'^carter  en  quelques  points  de  la  t^rit^  comme  dans  la  position  haute  de 
roreille." 

We  have  to  record  our  joint  obligations  for  the  receipt,  in  August 
of  the  present  year,  of  the  second  collection  of  stamps  promised  in 
the  above  letter ;  and  it  is  from  careful  comparison  of  the  duplicate 
originals  with  their  tracings,  that  the  models  for  our  lithographic 
plates  were  designed.  We  feel  confident,  therefore,  that  our  litho- 
graphs SLre  faC'SimUes — submitting  them  to  Chevalier  Lepsius  for  com- 
parison with  the  original  bas-reliefs,  while  taking*  the  liberty  to  urge 
upon  his  scientific  attention,  no  less  than  upon  that  of  possessors  of 
such  remains  generally,  the  benefit  theywould  confer  upon  ethno- 
logical studies;  were  they  to  publish  similar  fitc-similes,  where  the 
lithographer,  copying  the  original  monument  under  their  own  critical 
eyes,  would  attain  precision  from  which  the  Atlantic  debars  art  in 
this  country. 

Abstraction  made  of  the  divergence  from  nature  in  the  "high  posi- 
tion of  the  ear,"  to  which  the  above  epistolary  fevor  alludes,  as  a 
subject  set  at  rest  by  Morton  ;***  and  repeating  our  previous  notice  of 
fake  delineation  of  the  ej/e  in  Egyptian  profiles :  there  remains  no 
doubt  that  ihe  facial  outlineij  and,  where  naked,  the  cranial  conforma- 
tion^ in  these  most  antique  of  all  known  sculptures,  are  rigorously 
feithful.  Without  hesitation,  these  heads  may  be  accepted  by  eth- 
nography as  perfect  representations  of  the  type  of  Egyptians  under 
the  Old  Empire. 

Assuming  such  to  be  facts — and,  beyond  accidents  of  some  trivial 
slip  of  a  pencil,  none  can  dispute  them  but  the  unlettered  in  these 
sciences  —  we  may  now  claim  as  positive  that  the  originals  of  our 
fiic-simile  heads  date  back,  as  a  minimum,  from  8000  to  8500  years 
before  Christ,  or  to  generations  deceased  above  5000  years  ago ;  at 

Digitized  by 

Google 

244  EGYPT    AND    EGYPTIANS. 

which  time  Egypt  had  ah'eady  existed  for  many  centuries  as  a  powerfiil 
empire,  borne  along  on  AiU  tide  of  civilization :  and,  let  us  ask,  'v^hat 
trace  of  an  Aitatic  type  does  the  reader  perceive  in  these  hoary  like- 
nesses ?  How  distinct,  physiologically,  are  these  heads  from  the  royal 
portraits  of  the  New  Empire !  Does  not  the  low,  elongated  head ;  the 
imperfectly-developed  forehead;  the  short,  thick  nose;  the  large,  full 
lip ;  the  short  and  receding  chin ;  with  their  tout-ensembley  all  point  to 
Africa  as  the  primeval  birth-place  of  these  people  ?    When,  too,  nve 
look  around  and  along  this  ancient  valley  of  the  Nile  at  the  present 
day,  and  compare  the  mingled  types  of  races,  still  dwelling  where 
their  fathers  did — the  FellAhs,  the  Bishariba,  the  Abyssinians,  the 
Nubians,  the  Libyans,  the  Berbers  (though  they  are  by  no  means  iden- 
tical among  each  other),  do  we  not  behold  a  group  of  men  apart  from 
the  rest  of  human  creation  ?  and  all,  singularly  and  collectively,  in- 
heriting something  in  their  lineaments  which  clusters  around  the  type 
of  ancient  Egypt  ?  A  powerful  and  civilized  race  may  be  conquered, 
may  become  adulterated  in  blood;  yet  the  typey  when  so  widely 
spread,  as  in  and  around  Egypt,  has  never  been  obliterated,  can 
never  be  washed  out    History  abundantly  proves  that  human  lan- 
guage may  become  greatly  corrupted  by  exotic  admixture — ^nay,  even 
extinguished ;  but  physiology  demonstrates  that  a  type  will  survive 
tongues,  writings,  religions,  customs,  manners,  monuments,  tradi- 
tions, and  history  iteelf. 

Dr.  Morton's  voluminous  correspondence  with  scientific  men 
throughout  both  hemispheres  is  replete  with  interest,  exhibiting  as  it 
does  so  many  charming  instances  of  that  philosophical  abandon^  or 
jfreedom  from  social  ri^dities,  which  characterizes  true  devotees  to 
science  in  their  interchanges  of  thought  There  is  one  epistle  among 
these,  that  almost  electrified  him**'  on  its  reception,  bearing  date 
"Alexandria,  Dec.  17, 1848."  It  is  invested  with  the  signature  of  a 
voyager  long  "blanched  under  the  harness"  of  scientific  pursuits; 
who,  as  Naturalist  to  the  United  States'  Exploring  Expedition,  had 
sailed  round  the  world,,  and  beheld  ten  types  of  mankind,  before  he 
wrote,  after  exploring  the  petroglyphs  of  the  Nile :  — 

**  I  have  seen  in  all  eleven  races  of  men ;  and,  though  I  am  hardly  prepared  to  fix  a 
positiye  limit  to  their  number,  I  confess,  after  haying  yisited  so  many  different  parts  of  the 
globe,  that  I  am  at  a  loss  where  to  look  for  others."  ^^^^ 

Qualified  to  judge,  through  especial  training,  varied  attainments, 
and  habits  of  keen  observation  that,  in  Natural  History,  are  pre- 
eminent for  accuracy,  the  first  impressions  of  the  gentleman  fit)m 
whose  letter  to  his  attached  friend  we  make  bold  to  extract  a  few 
i*entences, (preserving  their  original  form,)  are  strikingly  to  the  point: 

Digitized  by 

Google 

Digitized  by 

Google 

Digitized  by 

Google 

EGYPT   AND   EGYPTIANS.  ^  245 

**  DlAB  MOBTON  : 

'*.Tlu8  iB  the  fourth  day  I  have  been  in  the  land  of  the  Pharaohs Well,  now  for 

the  Egyptian  problem. 

«  Yoar  October  letter  is  now  before  me,  and  the  left-h%nd  drawing  bears  a  most  aston- 
ishing resemblance  to  my  long-legged  yalet,  Alii  (whom  I  intend  to  get  dagterreotyped,  if 
such  a  thing  can  be  found  at  Cairo).  The  Robber  Race  has  swept  sway  everything  at 
Alexandria;' — nerertheless,  by  means  of  a  $peeimen  here  and  there,  I  had  not  been  three 
hours  in  the  \sountry  before  I  arriTcd  at  the  conclusion,  that  the  ancient  Egyptians  were 
neither  Malays  nor  Hindoos,  but  ■ 

Egyptians. Yours,  truly, 

"ChABLBS  PlOKBBDfa." 

So  inferred  Champollion-lb-Jeune;^  so  pronounced  Morton, 
after  a  formal  recantation  of  his  published  views ;  so,  finally  and 
deliberately,  think  the  authors  of  this  volume ;  viz. :  that  the  primi- 
tive Egyptians  were  nothing  more  nor  less  than  —  EGYPTIANS. 

Objectors  must  restrict  themselves  henceforward  merely  to  cavils  as 
to  the  antiquity  of  these  Egyptian  records.  In  Part  HI.  their  claims 
to  reverence  are  superabundantly  set  forth.  For  ourselves  we  are 
content  to  rest  the  chronological  case  upon  the  authority  of  Baron 
Alexander  von  Humboldt:*— 

"  The  valley  of  the  inie,  which  has  occupied  so  distinguished  a  place  in  the  history  of 
Man,  yet  preserves  authentic  portraits  of  kings  as  far  back  as  the  commencement  of  the 
IVth  dynasty  of  Manetho.  This  dynasty,  which  embraces  the  constructors  of  the  great 
pyramids  of  Ghiza,  Chefren  or  Schafra,  Cheops,  Choufou,  and  Menkara  or  Menker^ 
commences  more  than  8408  years  b.  c,  and  twenty-four  centuries  before  the  invasion  of 
Peloponnesus  by  the  HeracUde8."9M 

Digitized  by 

Google 

246  I^EGRO   TYPES. 

CHAPTEK   VIII. 

NEGRO    TYPES. 

<*  When  the  prof^et  Jeremiah  305  exclaims,  '  Can  the  Ethkjfitu^  change  hit 
akin*  or  the  leopard  hia  spots?'  he  certainly  means  os  to  infer  that  the  one 
was  as  impossible  as  the  other."  —  Mobton's  MSS. 

'<  Niger  in  die  (qnodam)  eicait  Testes  suas,  inoe^tque  capere  nivem  et  frioare 
com  ea  corpns  snum.  Dictom  antem  ei  fait :  qnare  fHoas  corpns  tanm  niTO  t 
Et  dixit  (ille) :  fortaue  albeicam.  Yenitqne  Tir  (qvddiim)  sapiens,  (qui)  dixit 
eit  0  to,  ne  afflige  te  ipsnm ;  fieri  enim  potest,  at  corpus  toam  nigram  faciat 
niTom,  ipsain  antem  n<m  amittet  nigredinem."  —  LooMan  Fabui.a>  XXIII  : 
trandaUdJinm  <A#  ArabU  b^  So$mmuUtr.^ 

HiD  every  nation  of  anti<]piky  emulated  Egypt,  and  perpetuated 
the  portraits  of  its  own  people  with  a  chisel,  it  would  now  be  evident 
to  the  reader  that  each  type  of  manhindy  in  all  zoological  centres  of 
man's  creation,  is  hj  nature  as  indelibly  permanent  as  the  stone- 
pages  upon  whiqh  I^gyptifms,  Chinese,  Assyrians,  Lyoianb,  Gredcs, 
Bomans,  Carthaginians,  Mero'ites,  Hindoos,  Peruvians,  Mexicans^  (to 
say  naught  of  other  races,)  have  cut  their  several  iconographies.  How 
instantaneously  would  vanish  pending  disputes  about  the  Unity  or 
the  JDiversity  of  human  origins ! 

Contenting  ourselves  at  present  with  the  now-acquired  fact,  that 
the  Egyptians,  according  to  monumental  and  craniological  evidences, 
no  less  than  to  all  history,  written  or  traditionary,  were  really  autoc- 
thanes  of  the  Lower  Nile,  we  think  the  question  as  to  their  "  type" 
has  been  satisfactorily  answered.  In  reply,  ftirthermore,  to  our  pre- 
vious interrogatory,  whether  this  ancient  family  obeyed  the  same  law 
of  "gradation"  established  for  other  Afiican  aborigines;  we  may  now 
observe,  that  the  Egyptians,  astride  as  it  were  upon  the  narrow  isthmus 
which  unites  the  once-separate  continents  of  Africa  and  Asia,  figure, 
when  the  Aurora  of  human  tradition  first  breaks,  as  at  one  and  the 
same  time,  the  highest  among  African,  and  (physiologically,  if  not 
perhaps  intellectually)  as  the  lowest  type  in  West-Asiatic  gradations. 

Were  we  to  prosecute  our  imaginary  journey  northwards,  the  dark 
CWA^-Arabs  would  naturally  constitute  the  next  grade,  and  the 
ancient  Canaanites  probably  the  one  immediately  succeeding.  The 
primitive  group  of  Semitic  nations  would  be  found  to  have  aborigi- 
nally occupied  geographical  levels  commencing  with  Mount  Lebanon 
and  rising  gradually  in  physical  characters  as  we  ascend  the  Taurio 

Digitized  by 

Google 

NBGBO   TYPES. 

247 

diain — passing,  almoBt  insensibly,  into  the  Japethic  or  whitest  races 
(also  possessing  their  own  gradatwrn),  until  the  highest  types  of  pre- 
historic humsuiitj  would  rereal  their  birth-places  around  the  Caueoim. 
But,  dealing  mainly  with  the  Natural  History  of  Man,  elucidated 
through  new  arch»olo^eal  data,  the  scope  of  our  work  permits  no 
geographical  digressions  beyond  the  Caucasian  mountains.  "We  have 
already  insisted  that  the  term  ^^  Caucasian"  is  a  misnomer,  productive 
of  infinite  embarrassments  in  anthropology ;  because  a  name  in  itseljf 
specifically  restricted,  since  the  times  of  Herodotus,  to  one  locality 
and  to  one  people,  has  become  misapplied  generically  to  types  of 
mankind  whose  origins  have  no  more  to  do  with  the  mountains  of 
Caueams  than  with  those  of  the  moon.  Would  4t  not  be  ridiculous 
to  take,  for  example,  the  name  ^^Englander"  (a  compound  oiAngl 
and  2a9u2-r-^^inan  of  the  Icmd  of  the  AnglV\  and  to  classify  under 
such  an  appellative,  Hebrews,  Egyptians,  Hindoos,  &c.  ?  That  "  Cau- 
casian" is  equally  &llacious,  will  be  made  clear  to  the  reader,  'in  Part 
n.,  under  the  article  on  MaGUG ;  but  we  imtioipate  a  portion  of  the 
philological  argument  by  mentioning,  that  the  Hellenized  name 
CAXJC-A80S  means  simply  the  ^^ Mountain  of  the  An;''  being  the 
tndo-Germanic  word  Khogh,  signifying  "mountain,"  prefixed  to  the 
proper  name  of  a  nation  and  a  race :  viz.,  the  Aa$y  Asij  Jaseiy  Ossethj 
or  Osses;  who,  dwelling  even  yet  at  the  foot  of  that  Cauc-Asos  where, 
firom  immemorial  time,  their  ancestors  lived  before  them,  would  be 
astonished  to  learn  that  European  geographers  had  bestowed  their 
national  name  upon  the  whole  continent  of  Asiay  and  that  modem 
ethnologists  actually  derive  a  dozen  groups  of  distinct  human  animals 
from  the  motmtain  ("Ehogh")  of  which  such  An 
are  aborigines !  ^ 

Turning  our  backs  upon  the  Caucasus,  and 
retracing  our  steps  toward  Africa,  let  us  inciden- 
tally notice  the  recognition  by  ante-Mosaic  Egyp- 
tian, and  by  post-Mosaic  Hebrew,  ethnographers, 
of  the  general  principle  of  gradation  among  such 
types  of  mankind  as  lay  within  the  horizons  of 
/SSSann^Xi         tiidr  respective  geognqphical  knowledge.    The 
'  u  ^  M^^^       Egyptians,  for  instance,  in  their  quadripartite 
tiSSl*.^^  ^       division  of  races,  already  explained  {ante^  p.  85, 
Fig.  1),  assigned  the  most  northerly  habitat  to 
the  "  fffhite  race,"  of  which  we  here  reproduce  the 
11J2M\  ESS  standard  type  (Fig.  162)  —  one  of  the  four  de- 

[^  \  y^  signed  in  the  tomb  of  Beti  I.,  about  1500  b.  c. 

'^^^^  '        "■  Precisely  does  the  writer  of  Xth  Q-enenij  as 

Wiu  rocet— Javbbzh.     set  forth  elaborately  in  Part  H.,  follow  the  same 

Digitized  by 

Google 

248 

NEGRO    TYPES. 

Fia.  168. 

Fellow  racet — Shbk. 

system,  in  his  tripartite  division;  inasmuch  as  he  groups  the  ^^Affi^ 
liations  of  Japheth,"  that  is,  his  "wAiYA' races,"  between  the  Tauric 
chain  of  mountains  and  the  Caucasian,  along  and  within  the  northern 
coast  of  Asia  Miuor  to  the  Black  Sea. 

So,  again,  Egyptian  ethnography  chose,  for 
the  standard-type  of  "yeZfow  races,"  four  effi^es 
which  entirely  correspond,  in  every  desideratum 
of  locality,  color,  and  physical  conformation, 
with  those  families  classified,  in  Xth  Genesisj  as 
the  ^'Affiliations  of  Shbm;"  and  like  the  He- 
brew geographer,  the  Theban  artist  must  have 
known,  that  the  yellaWy  or  Semitic,  groups  of 
men  occupied  countries  immediately  south  of 
the  "  white  races,"  and  stretching  froiji  the  Tau- 
rus to  the  Isthmus  of  Suez,  including  the  river- 
lands  of  the  Tigris  and  Euphrates,  together  with 
the  Arabian  Peninsula. 

The  specimen  illustrative  of  these  groups  of 
yellow-skinned  races  here  presented  in  Fig.  168, 
is  also,  like  the  following  (Figs.  164, 165),  a  re- 
production from  the  four  figures  before  shown 
on  page  85. 

Equally  parallel  is  the  Jewish  classification,  in  respect  to  the  '^ Affili- 
ations of  Ham"  (Fig.  164),  with  those  "red  races"  among  which  the 
Egyptians  placed  the  RoT,  or  themselves.  To  the 
latter,  EAaM  was  nothing  but  the  hieroglyphical 
name  of  Egypt  proper ;  KAeMe,  or  KAiMe,  "  the 
dark  land"  of  the  Nile;  corrupted  by  the  Greeks 
into  "Chemmis"  and  "Chemia,"  and  by  ub 
preserved  in  such  words  as  "<?Aam-istry"  and 
"  aJ-cAem-y,"  both  Egyptian  sciences ;  while,  in 
Hebrew  geography,  KAaM,  signifying  darh^  or 
swarthy y  merely  meant  all  those  non-Shemitish 
families  which,  under  the  especial  cognomina  of 
CmhiteSy  CanaaniteSy  MizraimiteSy  Libyans,  Ber- 
bersy  and  so  forth,  formed  that  group  of  proxi- 
mate types  situate,  aboriginally,  east  and  west 
of  the  Nile,  and  along  its  banks  north  of  thu 
first  cataract  at  Syene.  Our  wood-cut  illustrates 
the  Egyptian  standard-type  of  these  populations. 
But  here  the  analogy  between  the  earliei 
Egyptian  and  the  posterior  Hebrew  systems 
ceases.  Nigritian  races,  never  domiciled  nearer  to  Palestine  than 
1500  miles  to  the  south-westward^  did  not  enter  into^4be  social 

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 

Fig.  164. 

Swarthy  {or  red)  raeet — 
Ham. 

NEGRO    types: 

249 

Fig.  165. 

Black  racet. 

economy  of  the  Solomonic  Jews,  any  more  than  into  that  of  the 
Homeric  Greeks ;  and,  if  not  perhaps  absolutely  unknown,  Negroes 
were  then  as  foreign  to,  and  remote  fix>m,  either  nation's  geography, 
as  the  Samoidans  or  the  Tungousians  are  to  our  popular  notions  of 
the  earth's  inhabitants  at  the  present  day.  In  consequence,  (as  it  is 
thoroughly  demonstrated  in  Pai:t  n.),  the  writer  of  Xth  Genesis  omits 
Negro  races  altogether,  froni  his  tripartite  classifi- 
cation of  humanity  under  the  symbolical  appel- 
latives of  "  Shem,  Ham,  and  Japheth ; "  whereas 
the  Egyptians  of  the  XI  Xth  dynasty,  about  1500 
years  b.  c,  having  become  acquainted  with  the 
existence  of  Negroes  some  eight  centuries  previ- 
ously (when  Sesourtasen  L,  of  the  XMth  dynasty, 
about  B.  c.  2300,  pushed  his  conquests  into  Up- 
per Nubia),  could  not  fail  to  include  iin&  fourth 
type  of  man  in  their  ethnological  system ;  be- 
cause the  river  Nile  was  the  most  direct  viaduct 
through  which  the  SoodAn,  Negro-land,  could 
be  reached,  or  Negro  captives  procured. 

"With  this  prelinfinary  basis,  calling  attention 
to  the  effigy  (Fig.  165)  by  which  they  personified 
Negroes  generally,  we  proceed  to  draw  from  the  * 
ancient  stone-books  of  Egypt  such  testimonies 
concerning  the  permanence  of  type  among  Nigritian  races  as  they 
may  be  found  to  contain. 

Our  Negro  (Fig.  166)  is  from 
the  ba8-relie&  of  Ramses  HI. 
(XXth  dynasty,  thirteen  centu- 
ries B,  c),  at  Medeenet-Haboo, 
where  he  is  tied  by  the  neck  to 
an  Asiatic  prisoner.  The  head, 
in  the  original,  is  now  unco- 
lored;  and  it  serves  to  show 
how  perfectly  Egyptian  artists 
represented  these  races.^  "We 
quote  from  Qliddon's  Ethnogra- 
phic NoteSj  before  referred  to: 
"  This  head  is  remarkable,  fur- 
thermore, as  the  tisual  type  of 
two-thirds  of  the  Negroes  in  Egypt  at  the  present  day."  And  any 
one  living  in  our  Slave-States  will  see  in  this  face  a  type  which  is 
frequently  met  with  here.  We  thus  obtain  proof  that  the  Negro  has 
remained  unchanged  in  Africa,  above  Egypt^  for  8000  years ;  coupled 

/Google 

Fia.  166. 

Digitized  by^ 

250 

KEGRO   TYPES. 

with  the  &ct  that  the  same  type,  during  some  eight  or  ten  genera- 
tions of  sojoom  in  the  United  States,  i»  still  preserved,  despite  of 
transplantation. 

The  following  representation  (Fig.  167)  is  traced  upon  a  spirited 
reduction  by  Cherubini,**  It  is  a  double  file  of  Negroes  and  Bardbra 
(Nubians),  bound,  and  driven  before  his  chariot  by  Ramses  II.,  at 
AboosimbeL    This  pictore  answers  well  as  a  complement  to  the  two 

Fio.  167. 

Fio.  168. 

preceding;  for  we  here  have  the  brown  Nubian — a  dark  one,  and  a 
light-colored  femily — admirably  contrasted  with  the  jet-black  Negro; 
thus  proving  that  the  same  divisions  of  African  races  existed  then  as 
now,  above  the  first  cataract  of  the  Nile  at  Syene. 

One  of  the  same  series  (Fig.  168),  on  a  larger 
scale,  taken  from  RosellinL^  It  should  be  ob- 
•served  that  he  is  shaded  Inwner  than  the  next 
head  (Fig.  169) ;  thereby  showing  the  two  com- 
monest colors  and  physiognomical  lineaments 
prevalent  among  Nubian  Barbhra  of  the  present 
day ;  who,  whether  owing  to  amalgamation,  or 
from  original  type^  approach  closer  to  the  Negro 
than  do  the  adjacent  tribes  —  Ahabdeh^  BUhor 
riba^  &c. 
The  same  group  supplies  a  lighter  (cinnamon)  shaded  sample  of  a 
Nubian  Berberri  (Fig.  169);  whose  name  in  the  Arabic  plural  is  Bar- 
Ubra.  The  identical  designation,  BaRaBaBa,  is  applied  to  the  same 
people  in  the  sculptures  of  several  Pharaohs  of  the  AVllth  and 
XVmth  dynasties,  1500  years  b.  c,^" 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 

KEGRO  TYPES. 

251 

Fio.  169. 

Fia.  170. 

To  render  the  contrast  more  striking,  we  place  in  jnxtarposition  an 
enlarged  head  (Fig.  170)  of  the  last  Negro  from  the  above  prisoners. 
The  face  is  ingeniously  distorted  by  the  Egyptian  artist,  who  repre^ 
sents  thia  captive  bellowing  with  rage  and  pain. 

One  of  Mr.  Gliddon's  personal  verifications  on  the  ISTile  is  here 
worthy  of  note.  He  observed  that  the  fusion  between  Nubian  and 
modem  Arab  racQs  is  first  clearly  apparent,  exactly  where  nature  had 
placed  the  boundary-line  between  Egypt  and  Nubia :  viz.,  at  the  first 
cataract.  Here  dwell  the  ShelUtheiy  or  "  cataract-men"  —  descended, 
it  is  said,  fix)m  ifitermisinire  between  the  Saracenic  garrisons  at  As- 
souan and  the  W3im»^  q£  Lower  Nubia.  Persian,  Greek,  and  Roman 
troops  had  be^iv  opu^ecutively  stationed  there,  centuries  before  the 
Arabs ;  while  !^ig:ppean  and  Americsua  tourists  at  the  present  day 
cooperate  vigorooply  to  stem  the  blackening  element  as  it  flows  in 
from  the  South*  The  SheWtlees  count  perhaps  500  adults  and  children ; 
and  they  are  mulattoe&  of  various  hues,  compounded  of  Nubian,  Arab, 
Egyptian,  Turkish^  and  European  blood ;  whilst,  incidentally,  Negresses 
enter  as  slaves  among  the  less  impoverished  &milies — ^their  cost  there 
seldom  exceeding  fifty,  dollars.  But,  the  predominating  color,  especiaUy 
among  the  female  ShelalUeyehy  is  alight 
cinnamon;  and  in  both  sexes  are  seen 
some  of  the  most  beautiftd  forms  of  hu- 
manity ;  as  may  be  judged  from  the 
**  Nubian  Girl,"  so  tastefiiUy  portrayed 
by  Prisse  d'Avesnes.^ 

This  (Fig.  171)  is  the  type  of  the 
NaHSU  {Negroes)^  on  a  larger  scale, 
among  the  four  races  in  the  tomb  of 
Seti-Menbitha  I. ;  before  spoken  o^ 
and  delineated  at  fiill  length  on  pages 
85  and  249,  supra^ 

Beautifully  drawn  and  strikingly  contrasted,  see  two  of  the  nine 
Asiatic  and  African  heads  (Pig.  172)   smitten  by  king,  Sbti  L,  at 

Pia.  171.313 

Digitized  by 

Google 

252 

NEGRO    TYPES. 
Fio.  172.314 

Karmac.  The  Negro's  features  are  true  to  the  life,  if  we  deduct  the 
ancient  defective  drawing  of  the  eye ;  as  must  be  done  in  all  copies 
of  Egyptian  art. 

We  next  present  (Fig.  173)  one  of  the  many  proofi  that  Negro 
slavery  existed  in  Egypt  1500  years  b.  c.  An  Egyptian  scribe,  colored 

Fio.  178.314 

red,  registers  the  black  slaves ;  of  which  males,  females,  and  their 
children  are  represented ;  the  latter  even  with  the  little  tufts  of  wool 
erect  upon  their  heads :  while  the  leopard-skin  around  the  first  Negro's 
loins  is  grotesquely  twisted  so  as  to  make  the  animal's  tail  belong  to 
its  human  wearer. 

In  connection  with  this  scene,  which  is  taken  from  a  monument  at 
Thebes,  "Wilkinson  remarks :  — 

**  It  is  evident  that  both  white  and  black  slaves  were  employed  as  servants ;  they  attended 
6n  the  gaests  when  invited  to  the  honse  of  their  master ;  and  firom  their  being  in  the  fami- 
lies of  priests  as  well  as  of  the  military  chiefs,  we  may  infer  that  they  were  pnrohased 
with  money,  and  that  the  right  of  possessing  slaves  was  not  confined  to  those  who  had 
taken  them  in  war.  The  traffic  in  slaves  was  tolerated  by  the  Egyptians ;  and  it  is  reason- 
able to  suppose,  that  many  persons  were  engaged,  as  at  present^  in  bringing  them  to  £gyp( 

Digitized  by 

Google 

NEOBO    TTPES. 

253 

for  public  sale,  independent  of  those  who  were  sent  as  part  of  the  tribute,  and  who  were 
probably,  at  first,  the  property  of  the  monarch ;  nor  did  any  difficulty  occur  to  the  Ishmael- 
ites  in  the  purchase  of  Joseph  Arom  his  brethren,  nor  in  his  subsequent  sale  to  Potiphar  on 
arriying  in  Egypt" 

In  his  comments  on  the  antiquity  of  "eunuchs,"  Gliddon  has  ex- 
tended these  analogies  of  slavery  among  the  Hebrews,  and  other 
ancient  nations.^*® 

We  might  thus  go  on,  and  add  numberless  portraits  of  Negro  races. 
Hundreds  of  them  are  represented  as  slaves,  as  prisoners  of  war,  as 
fugitives,  or  slain  in  large  battle-scenes,  &c. ;  all  proving  that,  as  far 
back  as  the  XVHth  dynasty,  b.  c.  1600,  they  existed  as  distant  na- 
tions, above  Egypt. 

Taken  at  random  firom  the  plates  of  Rosellini,  the  three  subjoined 
portraits  (Pigs.  174,  175,  176)  are  submitted,  to  fortify  our  words. 

Fig.  174.  Fia.  175. 

Fig.  176. 

The  lotiM'hxxd  at  the  end  of  their  halters  means  the  word  "  south,"  in 

hieroglyphical    geography :    while 

their  varieties  of  physical  confoooia- 

tion  suflBice  to  show  that  anciently, 

as  at  this  day,  the  basin  of  the  upper 

]Srile  included  many  distinct  Negro 

races. 

It  has  been  for  several  years  as- 
serted ^^  by  the  authors  of  the  pre- 
sent volume,  and  it  is  now.  finally 
demonstrated  in  Part  H.,  that  Negro 
races  are  never  alluded  to  in  ancient 
Jewish  literature ;  the  Greek  word 

"  Ethiopia"  being  a  false  interpretation  of  the  Hebrew  KTJSA,  which  al- 
ways meant  Southern  Arabia^  and  nothing  but  the  CWAtYe- Arabian  race. 

The  Greeks,  of  course,  were  unacquainted  with  the  existence  of 
Negroe»  until  about  the  seventh  century  b.  c.  ;  when  Psametik  I. 
opened  the  ports  of  Lower  Egypt  to  Grecian  traffickers.  Their 
"Ethiopians,"  Brm-bumed-faeeSj  before  that  age,  were  merely  any 

-^^ 

Digitized  by 

Google 

254  NEGRO    TYPES. 

people  darker  than  a  Hellene — ^Arabe,  EgyptiimB,  and  Libyans,  from 
Joffa  (Jafia)  westward  to  Carthage :  nor,  camels  being  unknown  to 
the  Carthaginians,  as  well  as  to  the  early  Cyreneans,  could  Negroe» 
have  been  brought  across  the  Sahara  deserts  into  the  Barbary  States, 
until  about  the  first  century  before  the  Christian  era.  The  only 
channel  to  the  natural  habitat  of  Negro  races,  (which  never  has  lain 
geographically  to  the  northward  of  the  limit  qf  the  Tropical  rains^  or 
about  16^  N.  lat.,)  until  camels  were  introduced  into  Barbary,  after 
the  fall  of  Carthage,  was  along  the  Nile,  and  through  Egypt  exclu- 
sively. The  Carthaginians  never  possessed  Negro  slaves,  excepting 
what  they  may  have  bought  in  Egyptian  bazaars ;  of  which  incidents 
we  have  no  record.  It  is  worthy  of  critical  attention,  that  in  the 
Periplus  of  Hanno,  and  other  twiditionary  voyages  outside  the  Pillars 
of  Hercules,  while  we  may  infer  that  these  Carthaginian  navigators 
(inasmuch  as  they  reached  the  country  of  the  (?mZte,  now  known 
to  be  the  largest  species  of  the  chimpanzee,)  must  have  beheld 
Negroes  also;  yet,  after  passing  the  LixitaSj  and  other  "men  of 
various  appearances,"  they  merely  report  the  whole  coast  to  be  inha- 
bited by  "  Ethiopians."^®  Now,  the  Punic  text  of  this  voyage  being 
lost,  we  cannot  say  what  was  the  original  Carthaginian  word  which 
the  Greek  translator  has  rendered  by  "  Ethiopians ; "  so  that,  even  if 
Negroes  be  a  very  probable  meaning,  these  Atlantico- African  voyages 
prove  nothing  beyond  the  fact  that,  in  Hanno's  time,  b.  c.  five  or  six 
centuries,  there  was  already  great  diversity  of  races  along  the  north- 
western coast  of  Africa,  and  that  all  of  them  were  strange  to  the 
Carthaginians. 

It  is  now  established,  moreover,  that  the  account  given  by  Hero- 
dotus of  the  Nasamonian  expedition  to  the  country  of  the  Garamantes, 
never  referred  to  the  river  Niger,  but  to  some  western  journey  into 
Mauritania ;  as  we  have  explained  in  Part  H. 

Apart,  then,  from  a  few  specimens  of  the  Negro  type  that,  as  curi- 
osities, may  have  been  occasionally  carried  from  Egypt  into  Asia, 
there  was  but  one  other  route  through  which  Negroes,  until  the  times 
of  Solomon,  could  have  been  transported  from  Afiica  into  Asiatic 
countries ;  viz. :  by  the  Indian  Ocean,  Persian  Gulf,  and  Red  Sea. 
We  have  diligently  hunted  for  archseological  proo&  of  the  existence 
of  a  Negro  out  of  Egypt  in  such  ancielit  times,  and  have  found  but 
two  instances;  dependent  entirely  upon  the  fidelity  of  the  superb 
copies  of  Texibr,  and  of  Flandin. 

In  Texier's  work^®  we  think  a  Negro j  (in  hair,  lips,  and  facial 
angle,)  may  be  detected  as  the  last  figure,  on  the  third  line,  among 
the  foreign  supporters  of  the  throne  of  one  of  the  Achsemenian  kings 
at  Persepolis.    There  is  nothing  improbable  in  the  circumstance ;  for 

Digitized  by 

Google 

NEGRO    TYPES. 

256 

the  vast  Satrapies  of  Persia,  in  the  fifth  century  b.  c,  extended  into 
Africa.  The  more  certain  example  we  allude  to  is  found  in  the  sculp- 
tures of  Khorsabad,  or  Nineveh;^  and  probably  appertains  to  the 
reign  of  Saeoan,  b.  c.  710-668.  It  is  a  solitary  figure  of  a  beardless 
Negro  with  woolly  hair,  wounded,  and  in  the  act  of  imploring  mercy 
from  the  Assyrians. 

Turn  we  now  to  Roman  authority. 

Latin  description  of  a  Nboubss,  written  early  in  the 
eeeond  century  after  c. 

*'  iBterdam  dsmat  Oybftlen ;  erat  imioa  onstos ; 
Afhk  genus,  tota  patriam  testante  fignra ; 
Torta  comam,  labroque  tamens,  et  fusoa  colorem ; 
Pectore  lata,  jacens  mammia,  compressior  alTO, 
Cruribas  exilis,  spatiosa  prodiga  planta ; 
Continuifl  rimia  caloanea  soissa  rigebant" 

<'In  the  meanwhile  he  calls  Cybale.  She  was 
liis  only  [house-]  keeper.  AfHcan  by  race,  her 
whole  face  attesting  her  father-land :  with  crisped 
hair,  swelling  lip,  and  blackish  complexion ;  broad 
in  chest,  with  pendant  dugs,  [and]  very  contracted 
paunch ;  her  spindle-shanks  [contrasted  with  her] 
enormous  feet ;  and  her  cracked  heels  were  stiffened 
by  perpetual  clefts." 

Sffyj^iim  delineation  of  a  Nbobbss, 
out  and  painted  eome  1600  yeare 
before  the  Latin  deter^tion, 

Fio.  177. 

To  Mr.  Gustavus  A.  Myers,  (an  eminent  lawyer  of  Richmond,*  Va.,) 
are  we  indebted  for  indicating  to  us  this  unparalleled  description  of  a 
Negress ;  no  less  than  for  the  loan  of  the  volume  in  which  an  un- 
applied passage  of  Virgil*"  is  contained.  Through  it  we  perceive 
that,  in  the  second  century  after  c,  the  physical  characteristics  of  a 
"field,"  or  agricultural,  "Nigger"  were  understood  at  Rome  1800 
years  ago,  as  thoroughly  as-  by  cotton-planters  in  the  State  of  Ala- 
bama, still  flourishing  in  A.  d.  1858. 

Time^  as  every  one  now  can  see,  has  effected  no  alteration,  even  by 
transfer  to  the  New  World,  upon  African  types  (save  through  amalga- 
mation) for  3400  years  downwards.  Let  us  inquire  of  the  Old  conti- 
nent what  metamorphoses  time  may  have  caused,  as  regards  such 
alleged  transmutations,  upwards. 

About  the  sixteenth  century  b.  c,  Pharaoh  Horus  of  the  AVlLLth 
dynasty  records,  at  Hagar  Silsilis,  his  return  from  victories  over  Ni- 
gritian  families  of  the  upper  Nile.*^  The  hieroglyphical  legends 
above  his  prisoners  convey  the  sense  of —  "  K^SA,  barbarian  country, 
perverse  race ;"  expressive  of  the  Egyptian  sentimentalities  of  that 
day  towards  Nubians,  Negroes,  and  "  foreigners  "  generally. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC 

256  NEGRO    TYPES. 

Among  his  captives  is  the  Negress  abeady  portrayed  (Fig.  177);  to 

whose  bas-reliefed  effigy  we  have  merely  restored  one  of  the  colors  now 

effaced  by  time.   We  present  (Fig.  178)  a  head  indicative  of  her  male 

companions,  traced  upon  Eosellini's  size;  our 

Fig.  178.  reduction  of  her  full-length  figure  being  taken 

from  the  Prussian  Denkmdler,^ 

Here,  then,  is   a.  Negress,  sculptured   and 

'  painted  in  Egypt  about  b.  c.  1660,  whose  effigy 

corresponds  with  Virgil's  description  at  Rome  a 

little  after  a.  d.  100 ;  which  female  is  identical 

with  living  Negresses,  of  whom  American  States, 

south  of  ^^  Mason  and  Dixon's  line,"  could  produce  many  hundreds 

in  the  present  year,  1853. 

Have  3400  years,  or  any  transplantations,  altered  the  NEGRO  race  ? 

When  treating  of  the  "  Caucasian"  type,  we  were  obliged  to  jump 
from  the  XVHth  back  to  the  Xllth  dynasty,  owing  to  the  lack  of  in- 
tervening monuments,  since  destroyed  by  foreign  invaders.  The  same 
difficulty  recurs  with  regard  to  Negro  races.  In  fact,  our  materials 
here  become  still  more  defective ;  for,  although  in  the  Xllth  dynasty 
abundant  hieroglyphical  inscriptions  attest  the  existence  of  Ifeffro 
nations,  no  portraits  seem  to  be  extant,  of  this  epoch,  upon  whose 
coetarieous  date  of  sculpture  we  can  rely.  That  Negroes  did,  how- 
ever, exist  in  the  twenty-fourth  century  b.  c,  or  contemporaneously 
with  Usher's  date  of  the  Flood,  we  shall  next  proceed  to  show. 

Aside  from  the  Tablet  of  Wady  Haifa,  cut  by  Sesourtasen  I.,  of 
the  Xllth  dynasty,  {supra^  p.  188,)  we  quoted  fix)m  Lepsius  (stcpra, 
p.  174),  a  paragraph  illustrative  of  the  diversity  of  types  at  this  early 
period,  of  which  the  following  is  a  portion  rendered  fr^m  his  Brief e  : 

**  Mention  is  often  made  on  the  monnments  of  this  period  of  the  yietories  gained  by  Uie 
Mngs  oyer  the  Ethiopians  and  Negroes,  wherefore  we  must  not  be  surprised  to  see  Uadt 
sUves  and  serrants." 

Mr.  Birch  kindly  sent  us,  last  year,  an  invaluable  paper,  wherein 
the  political  relations  of  Egypt  with  Ethiopia  are  traced  by  his  mas- 
terly hand,  fix)m  the  earliest  times  down  to  the  XlXth  dynasty.  The 
"Historical  Tablet  of  Bamses  11.,"  fi^m  which  the  most  recent  fects 
are  drawn,  dates  fr^m  the  sixteenth  year  of  a  reign,  that  lasted 
upwards  of  sixty  years.^  The  subjoined  extract  is  especially  import- 
ant, not  only  because  demonstrative  of  the  existence  of  Negroes  as  far 
back  as  the  XTTth  dynasty,  but  also  because  it  establishes  the  extended 
intercourse  which  Egypt  held  at  that  remote  day  (b.  c.  2400-2100) 
with  numerous  Asiatic  and  African  races. 

**  The  principal  indnoements  which  led  the  Pharaohs  to  the  south  were  the  Taluable  pro- 
ducts, especially  the  minerals,  with  which  that  region  abounded.    At  the  early  period  of 

Digitized  by 

Google 

NEGEO    TYPES.  257 

the  IVtli  and  Ylth  Egyptian  dynasties,  no  traces  occur  of  Ethiopian  relations,  and  the 
frontier  was  probably  at  that  time  Eileithyia  (El  Hegs).  So  far  indeed  from  the  Egyptian 
dvilixation  haying  descended  the  cattoicts  of  the  Nile,  there  are  no  monuments  to  show 
that  the  Egyptians  were  then  even  acquainted  with  the  black  races,  the  Nahsi  as  they 
were  called.325  Some  information  is  found  at  the  time  of  the  Xlth  dynasty.  The  base  of 
a  small  statue  ins<;ribed  with  the  name  of  the  king  Ea  nub  Cheper,  apparently  one  of  the 
monarchs  of  the  Xlth  dynasty,  whose  prenomen  was  discovered  by  Mr.  Harris  on  a  stone 
built  into  the  bridge  at  Coptos,  intermingled  with  the  Enuentefs,  has  at  the  sides  of  the 
throne  on  which  it  is  seated  Asiatic  and  Negro  prisoners.  Under  the  monarchs  of  the 
Xllth  dynasty,  the  vast  fortifications  of  Samneh  show  the  growing  importance  of  Ethiopia, 
while  the  conquest  of  the  principal  tribes  is  recorded  by  Sesertesen  L  at  the  advanced 
point  of  the  Wady  Haifa.  The  most  remarkable  feature  of  this  period  are  the  hydraulic 
observations  carefully  recorded  under  the  last  monarchs  of  the  line,  and  their  successors 
the  Sebakhetps  of  the  Xlllth  dynasty.  A  tablet  in  the  British  Museum,  dated  in  the  reign 
of  Amenemha  I.  has  an  account  of  the  mining  services  of  an  officer  in  ^Ethiopia  at  that 
period.  <  I  worked,*  he  says,  <  the  mines  in  my  youth ;  I  have  regulated  all  the  chiefs  of 
the  gold  washings ;  I  brought  the  metal  penetrating  to  the  land  of  Phut  to  the  Nahsi.'  It 
is  probably  for  these  gold  mines  that  we  find  in  the  second  year  of  Amenemha  IV.  an  officer 
bearing  the  same  name  as  the  king,  stating  that  he  *  was  invincible  in  his  migesty's  heart 
in  smiting  the  Nahsi.*  In  the  nineteenth  year  of  the  same  reign  were  victories  over  the 
NahsL  At  the  earliest  age  Ethiopia  was  densely  colonized,  and  the  gold  of  the  region 
descended  the  Nile  in  the  way  of  commerce ;  but  there  are  no  slight  difficulties  in  knowing 
the  exact  relations  of  the  two  countries. 

<<  The  age  of  the  XVIIIth  dynasty  is  separated  from  the  Xllth  by  an  interval  during 
irhich  the  remains  of  certain  monarchs  named  Sebakhetp,  found  in  the  ruins  of  Nubia, 
Bhow  that  they  were  at  least  iBthiopian  rulers.  The  most  important  of  the  monuments  of 
this  age  is  the  propylon  of  Mount  Barkal,  the  ancient  Napata,  built  by  the  so-called  S-men- 
ken,  who  is  represented  in  an  allegorical  picture  vanquishing  the  JSthiopians  and  Asiatics. 
The  XVIIIth  dynasty  opened  with  foreign  wars.  The  tablet  of  Aahmes-Pensuben  in  the 
liOuvre  records  that  he  had  taken  *  two  hands,'  that  is,  had  killed  two  Negroes  personally 
in  Eish  or  Ethiopia.  More  information,  and  particularly  bearing  upon  the  Tablet  of 
Barneses,  is  afforded  by  the  inscription  of  Eilethyia,  now  publishing  in  an  excellent  memoir 
by  M.  de  Roug^,  in  the  line,  *  Moreover,*  says  the  officer,  '  when  his  majesty  attacked  the 
Mena-en-shaa,'  or  Nomads,  '  and  when  he  stopped  at  Penii-han-nefer  to  cut  up  the  Phut, 
and  when  he  made  a  great  rout  of  them,  I  led  captives  from  thence  two  living  men  and 
one  dead  (hand).  I  was  rewarded  with  gold  for  victory  again ;  I  received  the  captives  for 
■laves.'  During  the  reign  of  Amenophis  L,  the  successor  of  Amosis,  the  Louvre  tablet 
informs  that  he  had  taken  one  prisoner  in  Kash  oriBthiopia.  At  El  Hegs,  the  functionary 
states,  *  I  was  in  the  fleet  of  the  king — the  sun,  disposer  of  existence  (Amenophis  L),  jus- 
tified ;  he  anchored  at  Kush  in  order  to  enlarge  the  frontiers  of  Kami,  he  was  smiting  the 
Phut  with  his  troops.'  Mention  is  subsequentiy  made  of  a  victory,  ,and  the  capture  of 
prisoners.  It  is  interesting  to  find  here  the  same  place,  Penti-han-nefer,  which  occurs  in 
a  Ptolemaic  inscription  on  the  west  wall  of  the  pronaos  of  the  Temple  of  PhileD,  where  Isis 
is  represented  as  '  the  mistress  of  Senem  and  the  regent  of  Pent-han-nefer.*  From  this  it 
is  evident  that  these  two  places  were  close  to  each  other,  and  that  this  locality  was  near 
the  site  more  recently  called  Ailak  or  Phile.  The  spebs  of  this  monarch  at  Ibrim,  the 
chapels  at  Tennu,  or  the  Gebel  Selseleh,  show  that  the  permanent  occupation  of  Nubia  at 
the  age  of  the  XVIIIth  dynasty  extended  beyond  Philss.  Several  small  tesserra  of  this 
reign  represent  the  monarch  actually  vanquishing  the  JEthiopiana. 

'*  The  immediate  successors  of  Amenophis  occupied  themselves  with  the  conquest  of  JEthi- 
opia.  There  is  a  statue  of  Thothmes  I.  in  the  island  of  Argo,  and  a  tablet  dated  on  the 
15  Tybi  of  his  second  year  at  Tombos.  The  old  temple  at  Samneh  was  repaired  and  dedi- 
cated to  Sesertesen  IIL,  supposed  by  some  to  be  the  Sesostris  who  is  worshipped  by  Thoth- 

83 

Digitized  by 

Google 

258  KE6R0    TYPES. 

met  IIL  as  the  god  Tftt-un,  or  <  Toimg  Tat'  It  is  at  the  temple  of  Samneli  that  the  iint 
indieatioii  ocean  of  that  line  of  princes  who  ruled  orer  JEtbiopia,  by  an  officer  wlio  had 
serred  onder  Amosis  and  Thothmes  I.,  in  which  last  reign  he  had  been  appointed  Prince 
of  Ethiopia.  The  reign  of  Thothmes  IIL  shows  that  Kuth  figured  on  the  regular  rent-roll 
of  Egypt  The  remains  of  the  mutOated  aooount  of  the  fortieth  regnal  year  of  the  king  is 
mentioned  as  '  240  ounces'  or  '  measures  of  cut  precious  stones  and  100  ingots  of  gold.' 
Subsequently  <  two  canes'  of  some  Taluable  kind  of  wood,  and  at  least '  800  ingots  of  gold,' 
are  mentioned  as  coming  fh>m  the  same  people.  It  appears  Arom  the  tomb  of  Bech-sha-ra, 
who  was  usher  of  the  Egyptian  court  at  the  time,  and  who  had  duly  introduced  the  tribute- 
bearers,  that  the  quota  paid  firom  this  country  was  bags  of  gold  and  gems,  monkeys,  pan- 
ther-skins, logs  of  ebony,  tusks  of  ivory,  ostrich-eggs,  ostrich-feathers,  camelopards,  dogs, 
oxen,  slaves.  The  permanent  occupation  of  the  country  is  at  the  same  time  attested  by 
the  constructions  which  the  monarch  made,  at  Samneh,  and  the  Wady  Haifa.  At  Ibrim, 
Nehi,  prince  and  goTemor  of  the  South,  a  monarch,  seal-bearer,  and  counsellor  or  eunuch, 
leads  the  usual  tribute  mentioned  as  '  of  gold,  ivory,  and  ebony'  to  the  king.  Set,  or  Ty- 
phon,  called  'Nitb*  or  'Nub-yiib,*  Nubia,  instructs  him  in  the  art  of  drawing  one  of  those 
long  bows  which  these  people,  according  to  the  legend,  contemptuously  presented  to  tiie 
envoys  of  Cambyses.  The  successor  of  this  monarch  seems  to  have  held  the  same  extended 
territory,  since,  in  the  fourth  year  of  his  reign,  these  limits  are  mentioned,  and  some  blocks 
with  the  remains  of  a  dedication  to  the  local  deitite.  One  of  the  rock  temples  at  Ibrim 
was  excavated  in  the  reign  of  Amenophis  II.  by  the  Prince  Naser-set,  who  was  '  monarch' 
{ripa  ha),  *  chief  counsellor*  {$abu  ihaa),  and  'governor  of  the  lands  of  the  south.'  ^le 
wall-paintings  represent  the  usual  procession  of  tribute-bearers  to  the  king,  with  gold, 
silver,  and  animals,  some  of  whom,  as  the  jackals,  were  enumerated.  The  same  monarch 
oontinued  the  temple  at  Amada,  and  a  colossal  figure  of  him,  dedicated  to  Chnumis  and 
Atiior,  and  sculptured  in  the  form  of  Phtha  or  Vulcan,  has  been  found  at  Begghe,  and  in 
the  fourth  year  of  his  reign  the  limits  of  the  empire  are  still  placed  as  Mesopotamia  on  the 
north,  and  tbe  Kalu  or  Qallfe  on  the  south. 

"  In  the  reign  of  his  successor  Thothmes  IV.  a  servant  of  the  king,  apparently  his  chari- 
oteer, states  he  had  attended  the  king  from  Naharaina  on  the  north,  to  Kalu,  or  the  Galle, 
in  the  south. 

«  The  constructions  of  this  monarch  at  Amada  and  at  Samneh,  show  that  tribute  came 
at  the  same  time  from  the  chiefs  of  the  Naharaina  on  the  north,  and  also  from  JEthiopia. 
This  is  shown  by  the  tombs  of  the  military  chiefli  lying  near  the  hill  which  is  situate  be- 
tween Medinat  Haboo  and  the  house  of  Jani,  one  of  whom  hod  exercised  the  office  of  royal 
scribe  or  secretary  of  state,  from  the  reign  of  Thothmes  IIL  to  that  of  Amenophis  IIL 
The  reign  of  his  successor,  the  last  mentioned  monarch,  is  the  most  remarkable  in  the 
monumental  history  of  Egypt  for  the  JBthiopian  conquests.  The  marriage  scarabsei  of  the 
king  place  the  limits  of  the  empire  as  the  Naharaina  (Mesopotamia)  on  the  north,  and  the 
Karu  or  Kalu  (the  Gallfe)  on  the  south.  .  Although  these  limits  are  found,  yet  it  is  erident 
from  the  number  of  prisoners  recorded  that  the  Egyptian  rule  was  by  no  means  a  settled 
one.  They  are  Kish,  Pet  or  Phut,  Pamaui,  Patamakai  Uaruki,  Taru-at,  Baru,  .  .  .  kaba, 
Aruka,  Makaiusah,  Matakarbu,  Sahabu,  Sahbaru,  Ru-nemka,  Abhetu,  Turusy,  Shaarusbak, 
Akenes,  Serunik  Karuses,  Shaui,  Buka,  Shau,  Taru  Taru,  Turusu,  Turubenka,  Akenes, 
Ark,  Ur,  Mar. 

Amongst  these  names  will  be  seen  in  the  list  of  the  Pedestal  of  Paris  that  of  the  Akaiat 
or  Aka-ta,  a  name  much  resembling  that  of  the  Ath-agau,  which  is  still  preserved  in  the 
Agow  or  Agows,  a  tribe  near  the  sources  of  the  Blue  Nile.  Amenophis  appears  by  no 
means  to  have  neglected  the  conquests  of  his  predecessors,  and  his  advance  to  Soheb,  in  the 
prorince  of  El  Sokhot,  and  Elmahas,  proves  that  the  influence  of  Egypt  was  still  more 
extended  than  in  the  prerious  reigns. 

<*  In  the  reign  of  Amenophis,  Ethiopia  appears  to  have  been  governed  by  a  rieeroy,  who 
was  an  Egyptian  officer  of  state,  generally  a  royal  scribe  or  military  chief,  sent  down  for 

Digitized  by 

Google 

NEGRO    TYPES.  259 

the  purpose  of  administering  the  country ;  the  one  in  this  reign  bore  the  name  of  Merimes, 
and  appears  to  iiave  ended  his  days  at  Thebes,  as  his  sepniehre  remains  in  the  western 
hills.  He  was  called  the  ta  tuten  en  Kuth^  or  prince  of  Rush,  which  comprised  the  tract 
of  country  lying  south  of  Elephantina.  In  all  the  Ethnic  lists  this  Eash  or  J^thiopia  is 
placed  next  to  the  head  of  the  list,  <  all  lands  of  the  south,*  and  its  identity  with  the  Bibli- 
cal Rush  is  uniTcrsally  admitted.  It  is  generally  mentioned  with  the  haughtiest  contempt, 
as  ihe  vile  Rush  {Kath  kh^aat,)  or  Ethiopia,  and  the  princes  were  of  red  or  Egyptian 
Idood.    They  dutifully  rendered  their  proscynemata  to  the  kings  of  Egypt,  "^as 

[Substantial  reasons  may  be  found  in  our  Part  11.  for  questioning 
a  somewhat  unlimited  extension  of  the  Biblical  EXTSA,  which  certain 
opponents  might  draw  from  Mr.  Birch's  language.  The  hierogly- 
phical  name  for  "Negroes  is  Nahta^  or  Nahn;  and,  on  the  other  hand, 
the  Egyptian  (not  the  Mebretc)  word  ESA,  KeSh,  KaSAI,*"  was  ap- 
plied to  the  ancient  Bardbra  of  Nubia,  between  the  first  and  second 
cataracts,  specifically ;  and  sometimes  to  all  Nvhian  families,  gene- 
ricaily.  The  vowels  a,  «,  t,  o,  in  antique  Egyptian  no  less  than  in 
old  Semitic  writings,  when  not  actually  inserted,  are  entirely  vague : 
nor  is  the  hieroglyphical  word  ever  spelt  iTJ«A,  like  the  Hebrew  desig- 
nation "  Cush;"  which  is  maltranslated  by  "Ethiojlia,"  because  it  de- 
notes Southern  Arabia.  —  G.  R.  G.] 

The  authors  regret  that  their  space  compels  them  to  abstain  from 
reproducing  the*  archaeological  references  with  which  Mr.  Birch  sup- 
ports his  erudite  conclusions. 

Ethnological  science,  then,  possesses  not  only  the  authoritative  tes- 
timonies of  Lepsius  and  Birch,  in  proof  of  the  existence  of  Negro 
races  during  the  twenty-fourth  century  b.  c.  ;  but,  the  same  &ct  being 
conceded  by  all  living  Egyptologists,  we  may  hence  infer  that  these 
Nigritian  types  were  contemporary  with  the  earliest  Egyptians.  Such 
inductive  view  is  much  strengthened  by  a  comparison  of  languages ; 
concerning  the  antiquity  of  which  we  shall  speak  in  another  chapter. 

To  one  living  in,  or  conversant  with,  the  Slave-States  of  North 
America,  it  need  not  be  told,  that  the  Negroes,  in  ten  generations, 
have  not  made  the  slightest  physical  approach  either  towards  our 
aboriginal  population,  or  to  any  other  race.  As  a  mnemonic,  we 
here  subjoin,  sketched  by  a  friend,  the  likenesses  of  two  Negroes  (Figs. 

Fio.  179.  Fio.  180. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

260  NEGRO    TYPES. 

179, 180),  who  ply  their  avocations  every  day  in  the  streets  of  Mobile; 
where  anybody  could  in  a  single  morning  collect  a  hundred  others 
quite  as  strongly  marked.  Fig.  179  (whose  portrait  was  caught  when, 
chuckling  with  delight,  he  was  "shelling  out  com**  to  a  favorite  hog) 
may  be  considered  caricatured,  although  one  need  not  travel  far  to 
procure,  in  daguerreotype,  features  fully  as  animal ;  but  Fig.  180  is  a 
fair  average  sample  of  ordinary  field-Negroes  in  the  United  States. 

Mr.  Lyell,  in  common  with  tourists  less  eminent,  but  in  this  ques- 
tion not  less  misinformed,  has  somewhere  stated,  that  the  Negroes  in 
America  are  undergoing  a  manifest  improvement  in  their  physical 
^e.  He  has  no  doubt  that  they  will,  in  time,  show  a  development 
in  skull  and  intellect  quite  equal  to  the  whites.  This  unscientific 
assertion  is  disproved  by  the  cranial  measurements  of  Dr.  Morton. 

That  Negroes  imported  into,  or  bom  in,  the  United  States  become 
more  intelligent  and  better  developed  in  their  phi/sique  generally  than 
their  native  compatriots  of  Africa,  every  one  'v\dll  admit ;  but  such  intel- 
ligence is  easily  explained  by  their  ceaseless  contact  with  the  whites, 
from  whom  they  derive  much  instruction;  and  such  physical  improve- 
ment may  also  be  readily  accounted  for  by  the  increased  comforts 
with  which  they  are  supplied.  In  Africa,  owing  to  their  natural  im- 
providence, the  Negroes  are,  more  frequently  than  not,  a  half-starved, 
and  therefore  half-developed  race ;  but  when  they  are  regularly  and 
adequately  fed,  they  become  healthier,  better  developed,  and  more 
humanized.  Wild  horses,  cattle,  asses,  and  other  brutes,  are  greatly 
improved  in  like  manner  by  domestication :  but  neither  climate  nor 
food  can  transmute  an  ass  into  a  horse,  or  a  buffalo  into  an  ox. 

One  or  two  generations  of  domestic  culture  effect  all  the  improve- 
ment of  which  Negro-organism  is  susceptible.  We  possess  thousands 
of  the  second,  and  many  more  of  Negro  families  of  the  eighth  or  tenth 
generation,  in  the  United  States ;  and  (where  unadulterated  by  white 
blood)  they  are  identical  in  physical  and  in  intellectual  characters. 
No  one  in  this  country  pretends  to  distinguish  the  native  son  of  a 
Negro  from  his  great-grandchild  (except  through  occasional  and  ever- 
apparent  admixture  of  white  or  Indian  blood) ;  while  it  requires  the 
keen  and  experienced  eye  of  such  a  comparative  anatomist  as  Agassiz 
to  detect  stractural  peculiarities  in  our  few  African-bom  slaves. 
The  "  improvements"  among  Americanized  Negroes  noticed  bytMr. 
Lyell,  in  his  progress  from  South  to  North,  are  solely  due  to  those 
ultra-ecclesiastical  amalgamations  which,  in  their  illegitimate  conse- 
quences, have  deteriorated  the  white  element  in  direct  proportion  that 
they  are  said  to  have  improved  the  black. 

But,  leaving  aside  modem  quibbles  upon  simple  facts  in  nature,  (so 
often  distorted  through  philanthropical  panderings  to  political  ambi- 

Digitized  by 

Google 

NEGEO    TYPES. 

261 

Fio.  181. 

Fia.  182. 

tion),  we  select,  from  Abrahamic  antiquity,  two  other  heads  (Figs. 
181, 182)  which,  although  not  Negroes,  constitute  an  interesting  link 
in  the  gradation  of  races;  being  placed,  geographically  and  physicallj^ 
between  the  two  extremes. 

This  sj)ecimen  (Fig.  181)  is  from 
the  "  Grand  Procession  "  of  Thot- 
mes  in. — XVlith  dynasty,  about 
the  sixteenth  century  b.  c.  The 
original  leads  a  leopard  and  car- 
ries ebony-wood :  and  his  skin  is 
ash'Colored  in  Rosellini.^  The 
same  scene  is  given  in  Hoskins's 
Ethiopia^  where  this  man's  person 
is  improperly  painted  red.^  He  is 
again  figured  without  colors  by 
Wilkinson,^  no  less  than  by  ChampoUion-Figeac.^  He  is  another 
sample  of  those  ^^gentes  subfu^ci  coloris  " — abounding  around  Ethiopia, 
above  Egypt — neither  Negro,  Berberri,  nor  Abyssinian;  but  of  a 
race  affiliated  probably  to  the  latter;  judging,  that  is,  by  characteristics 
alone,  in  the  absence  of  hieroglyphical  explanations  now  effiu^ed  by  time. 

Here  we  behold  (Fig.  182),  un- 
'  doubtedly,  a  true  Abymntan,  who 
should  be  represented,  as  he  is  at 
Thebes,  orange-color.^  We  have 
the  valid  authority  of  Pickering^ 
on  this  point ;  who  concludes  his 
chapter  on  Abyssinians  as  fol- 
lows:— 

"  It  seems,  howerer,  that  the  true  Abys- 
sinian (as  first  pointed  ont  to  me  by  Mr. 
Gliddon)  has  been  separately  and  distinctly 
figored  on  the  Egyptian  monuments :  in  the 
two  men  leading  the  camelopard  in  the  tri- 
bute procession  of  Thoutmosis  III.;  and  this 
opinion  was  confirmed  by  an  examination  of  the  original  painting  at  Thebes." 

Pickering's  Raee9  of  Men  contains  a  beautiftil  (rfnnamon-colored 
portrait  of  an  Abyssinian  warrior,  taken  by  Prisse ;  and,  as  before 
remarked,  offers  to  the  reader  a  good  idea  of  tiie  living  type  of  this 
people. 

It  is  worthy,  too,  of  special  note,  that  the  above  Fig.  182  is  repre- 
sented, in  the  Theban  procession,  leading  a  giraffe  ;  which  animal  is 
not  met  with  nearer  to  Egypt  than  Dongola ;  a  fact  that  fixes  his 
parallel  of  latitude  along  the  Abyssinian  regions*of  the  Nile.  Such 
heads  seem  to  confirm  the  fidelity  of  Egyptian  draughtsmen,  together 
with  the  correctness  of  their  ethnographical  conceptions  and  varied 

Digitized  by 

Google 

262  KEGRO    TYPES. 

materials.  Our  Abyssinian  head  exhibits  the  same  fonn  and  color 
as  the  present  race  of  tkat  coxintiy,  even  after  the  lapse  of  3800  years ; 
and  it  stands  as  another  proof  of  the  permanence  of  human  types. 

Conceding  the  extreme  probability  of  Birch's  conjecture,  that  the 
Negro  captives  discovered  by  Mr.  Harris  belong  to  the  Xlth  dynasty, 
(which  thus  would  place  the  earliest  known  effigies  of  Negroes  in  the 
twenty-fourth  or  twenty-fifth  century  b.  c.,)  we  cannot  lay  hold' of  the 
indication  as  a  stand-point;  because  the  sculpture  may  (through  cir- 
cumstances of  recent  masonry)  be  assigned  to  a  later  age.  But,  of 
one  feet  we  are  made  certain  by  Birch's  former  studies:®*  viz.,  that 
the  officers  or  superintendents  appointed  by  the  Pharaohs  to  regulate 
their  Nubian  provinces,  were  invariably  Egypiiane^  painted  red,  and 
never  Nigritians  of  any  race  whatever.  The  title  "  Prince  of  KeSA" 
was  that  of  Egyptian  viceroys,  or  lord-Ueutenants,  nominated  by  the 
Diospolitan  government  to  rule  over  distant  territories  occupied  by 
Nubians  and  Negroes  oi  the  austral  Nile. 

In  the  Theban  tomb,  opened  previously  to  1880  by  Mr.  "WiUrinaon, 
(about  the  epoch  of  which  the  theory  of  an  Argive,  "Danaus,"^  led 
him  into  some  odd  hallucinations),  and  critically  examined  in  1889- 
'40  by  Harris  and  Gliddon,  there  was  an  amazing  collection  of  Nesgro 
scenes.  A  Negress,  apparently  a  princess,  arrives  at  Thebes,  drawn 
in  a  plaustrum  by  a  pair  of  humped  oxen — the  driver  and  groom 
being  red-colored  Egyptians,  and,  one  might  almost  infer,  eunuchs.^ 
Following  her,  are  multitudes  of  Negroes  and  Nubians,  bringing 
tribute  from  the  Upper  country,  as  well  as  black  slaves  of  both  sexes 
and  all  ages, 'among  which  are  some  red  children,  whose /aMer#  were 
Egyptians.  The  cause  of  her  advent  seems  to  have  been  to  make 
offerings  in  this  tomb  of  a  "royal  son  of  KeSA  —  Amunoph,"  who 
may  have  been  her  husband.  The  Pharaoh  whose  prenomen  stands 
recorded  in  this  sepulchral  habitation  is  an  Amenophis ;  ^  but,  beyond 
the  fact  that  his  reign  must  fell  towards  the  close  of  the  AVJLJLlth 

Fxa.  188.  Fia.  184.33B 

Digitized  by 

Google 

KEGRO    TYPES. 

263 

dynasty,  and  about  the  times  of  the  ^^  disk-heresy/'  we  were  not  aware 
that  his  place  could  be  determined,  until  we  opened  the  Denkmdler; 
where  the  m^jor  portion  of  these  varied  African  subjects,  unique  for 
their  singularity  and  preservation,  are  reproduced  in  brilliant  colors. 
We  have  already  chosen  a  Semitic  head,  deemed  by  us  to  present 
Phoenician  affinities  {iupra^  p.  164,  Fig.  90),  from  sculptures  of  the 
same  times.  We  here  repeat  it  (Fig.  188),  fox  the  sake  of  contrasting 
its  type  with  a  Negro,  and  a  Ifubian 
apparently  (Fig.  184),  taken  firom  the 
menagerie  of  African  curiosities  above 
mentioned.  We  say  apparentlj/j  be- 
cause the  slighter  shade,  given  by 
Elgyptian  artists  to  figures  grouped 
closely  together,  sometimes  arises 
firom  the  necessity  of  distinguishing 
the  interlocked  limbs,  &c.,  of  men  of 
the  same  color.  Instances  may  be 
foxmd,  of  this  attempt  at  perspective, 
in  various  colored  scenes  indicated  in 
the  notes,^  so  that  the  unblackened 
&ce  in  our  Fig.  184  may  be  that  of 
a  Kegro  also. 

For  the  sake  of  illustrating  that, 
even  in  Ancient  Egypt,  African  sla- 
very was  not  altogetlier  unmitigated 
by  moments  of  congenial  ei\joyment ; 
not  always  inseparable  fix)m  the  lash 
and  the  hand-cuff;  we  submit  a  copy 
of  some  Negroes  ^^  dancing  in  the 
streets  of  Thebes  "  (Fig.  186),  by  way 
of  archseological  evidence  thit,  8400 
years  ago;  (or  before  the  Exodus  of 
Israel,  b.  c.  1822),  "de  same  ole  Nig- 
ger" of  our  Southern  plantations 
could  spend  his  Nilotic  sabbaths  in 
saltatory  recreations,  and 

**Tnm  about,  and  irheel  about,  tsAJump 
Jhn  Crowr 

Before  closing  our  comments  upon 
^^  Ethiopians,"  it  is  due  to  the  me- 
mory of  the  author  of  Crania  JEgyp- 
Uaea  not  to  omit  some  notice  of  two 

Digitized  by 

Google 

264 

NEGRO    TTPES^ 

problems  that  attracted  his  penetrating  researches.  The  first  con- 
cerns the  ancient  Meroites ;  the  second,  that  mixed  family  in  which, 
under  the  name  of  "Austral-Egyptifens,"  Morton  perceived  some 
possibly- Hindoo  afiGinities.  Commencing  with  the  former  question, 
we  recall  to  mind  how  the  discoveries  of  the  Prussian  Scientific  Mis- 
sion {suprUj  p.  204),  in  and  around  the  far-famed  Isle  of  Meroe,  have 
relieved  archaeologists  firom  fiirther  discussions  as  to  the  illusory  anti- 
quity of  a  realm  that,  previously  to  the  eighth  century  b.  c,  was  merely 
a  Pharaonic  province  and  an  Egyptian  colony ;  and  which,  moreover, 
did  not  become  important,  as  an  independent  kingdom,  until  Ptole- 
maic times.  It  was  not,  however,  until  after  the  publication  of  his 
JEgyptiaca  (of  which  Chevalier  Lepsius  received  a  first  copy,  together 
with  Gliddon's  Chapters,  under  the  pyramid  of  Gebel  Birkel,  in  Ethi- 
opia itself^*),  that  Dr.  Morton  was  informed,  by  the  Chevalier  directiy, 
of  results  so  demolishing  to  the  learned  theories  of  Heeren,  Prichard, 
and  other  scholars.  Unhappily  for  science,  death  arrested  the  hand 
of  our  illustrious  friend  before  it  could  register  the  emendations  con- 
sequent upon  such  immense  changes  in  former  historical  opinions. 
Although  one  of  the  authors  (G.  E.  G.)  has,  in  the  interim,  enjoyed 
the  advantage  of  beholding,  at  Berlin,  the  sculptures  brought  from 
Ethiopia,  and  of  hearing  Chevalier  Lepsius's  criticisms,  viva  voce,  upon 
Mero'ite  subjects,  we  deem  ourselves  peculiarly  unfortunate  that  the 
Denkmaler,  so  far  as  its  Uvraisom  have  reached  us,  has  not  yet  com- 
prised copies  of  these  newly-discovered  bas-reliefe.  We  are  unable, 
at  present,  therefore,  to  demonstrate  to  the  reader,  by  the  reproduction 
of  portraits  of  Queen  Candace  and  her  mulatto  court,  the  true  causes 
why  the  civilization  of  Meroe  declined,  and  finally  became  extin- 
guished :  viz.,  owing  to  Negro  amalgamations,  during  the  first  centu- 
ries of  our  era.  This  fact  may  serve  as  a  topic  for  some  future 
Appendix  to  our  volume. 

To  obviate,  however,  any  argu- 
ment respecting  Mero'ite  afllnities 
with  regard  to  Negro  races  in  ante- 
rior times,  we  reproduce  the  portrait 
of  Manetho*s  "Ethiopian**  sovereign, 
Tirhaka  (supra,  p.  151,  Fig.  71) ;  the 
"Melek-KUSA,  or  Cushite  king  (2 
Kings,  xix.  9) ;  contemporary  with  the 
Assyrian  Sennacherib,  whose  like- 
ness has  also  been  submitted  under 
our  Fig.  27  (supra,  p.  130.) 

Nor  did  the  high-caste  lineaments 
of  these  "Ethiopian**  princes,  and 

Fig.  186. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

NEGEO    TYPES. 

265 

the  total  absence  of  Nigritian  elements  in  the  physiognomies  of  all 
Meroites,  as  known  in  1844,  escape  Morton's  attention.^*^  His  com- 
ments on  the  accompanying  effigies  from  M^H)e  suffice. 

Fio.  187.3«3 

Fio.  188.3U 

"The  one  on  the  left  hand  [Fig  87]  (that  of  an  Fio.  189.3«s 

unknown  king),  has  mixed  lineaments,  neither 
BtricUy  Pelasgic  nor  Egyptian;  while  the  right- 
hand  personage  [Fig.  188],  who  appears  to  be  a 
priest  doing  homage,  presents  a  ooontenanoe  which 
corresponds,  in  essentials,  to  the  Egyptian  type, 
although  the  profUe  approaches  closely  to  the  Gre- 
cian. The  annexed  head  [Fig.  189— is]  also  a  king^ 
bearing  some  resemblance  to  the  one  aboTC  figured.*' 

With  regard  to  the  "Hindoo"  re- 
semblances perceived  by  Morton  in  cer- 
tain Egyptian  crania  of  his  vast  collection,  while  we  vnll  neither 
affirm  nor  deny  them,  the  authors  cannot  but  think  that  their  lamented 
colleague  was  herein  biassed,  rather  by  traditionary  data  (even  yet 
supposed  to  be  historical),  than  by  anatomical  evidences  which,  at 
any  rat^,  do  not  strike  our  eyes  as  salient.  Indeed,  we  know  per- 
sonally that,  had  Morton  lived,  Prichard's  scholastic  learning,  but 
pertinacious  ignorance  of  hieroglyphical  Egypt,  would  have  been  dealt 
with  as  by  ourselves,  under. full  recognition  of  the  one,  and  through 
respectful  exposure  of  the  other.  Part  HI.  of  our  volume  renders  it 
unnecessary  to  dwell,  in  this  place,  upon  SirW.  Jones's  Oriental  eru- 
dition, or  upon  Col.  Wilford*s  self-delusions,  in  re'spect  to  now-exploded 
connections  between  ancient  India  and  primordial  Egypt. 

The  Greek  tradition  (Latinici)  runs  as  follows :  ^^JEthtope$j  ab  Indo 
fluvio  profecti,  supra  -^gyptum  sedem  sibi  eligerunt.**^  But,  who 
are  these  Ethiopiam  f    At  most,  Asiatic  "  sun-tumei  faces  "  —  some 

84  Digitized  by  Google 

266 

NE6B0    TYPES. 

people,  darker  in  hue  than  Qreeks,  who  emigrated  from  the  Ihdns. 
The  era,  assigned  for  their  migration  to  countries  south  of  Egypt,  is 
attributed  to  that  of  one  among  many  Pharaohs,  called  bv  Grecian 
narrators  ^^Amenophis;"  and  the  legend  reaches  us  through  a  Byzan- 
tine monk,  the  SyneeUu%  (writing  2000  years  after  the  events),  at  once 
the  most  diligent^  and  the  least  critical,  compiler  the  seventh  century 
of  our  era  produced.  To  say  the  leasts  the  historical  surface  we  tread 
on  trembles,  as  though  it  floated  over  a  quagmire.  These  doubts 
suggested,  we  submit  extracts  from  the  Crania  JEgyptiaea:  — 

*'  I  obserre,  among  the  Egyptian  crania,  some  which  differ  in  nothing  from  the  Hindoo 
type,  either  in  respect  to  sixe  or  configuration.  I  have  already,  in  my  remarks  upon  the 
ear,  mentioned  a  downward  elongation  of  the  upper  jaw,  which  I  haye  more  firequentlj 
met  with  in  Egyptian  and  Hindoo  heads  than  in  any  other,  although  I  haye  seen  it  ocear 
sionally  in  aU  the  races.  This  feature  is  remarkable  in  two  of  the  foUowing  fiTe  crania 
(A,  B),  and  may  be  compared  with  a  similar  form  from  Abydos."3*7 

Fio.  190. 

Fia.  191. 

Fia.  192. 

'<  It  is  in  that  mixed  family  of  nations  which  I 
haye  called  Austral-Egyptian  that  we  should  expect 
to  meet  with  the  strongest  eyidence  of  Hindoo  lineage ; 
and  here,  again,  we  can  only  institute  adequate  com- 
parisons by  reference  to  the  works  of  Champollion  and 
KoseUini.  I  obserye  the  Hindoo  style  of  features  in 
seyeral  of  the  royal  e£Bgies;  and  in  none  more  deci- 
dedly than  in  the  head  of  Asharramon  (Fig.  191),  as 
sculptured  in  the  temple  of  Debdd,  in  Nubia.  The 
date  of  this  king  has  not  yet  been  ascertained ;  but, 
as.  he  ruled  oyer  MeroS,  and  not  in  Egypt,  (probably 
in  Ptolemaic  times  [b.  o.  200-800],)  he  may  be  re- 
garded as  an  illustration  of  at  least  one  modification 
of  the  Austral-Egyptian  type. 

"Another  set  of  features,  but  little  different,  how- 
eyer,  fVom  the  preceding,  is  seen  among  the  middling 
class  of  Egyptians  as  pictured  on  the  monuments, 
and  these  I  also  refer  to  the  Hindoo  type.  Take, 
for  example,  the  four  annexed  outlines  (Fig.  192), 
copied  from  a  sculptured  fragment  presenred  in  the 
museum  of  Turin.  These  elBgies  may  be  said  to  be 
essentially  Egyptjan ;  but  do  they  not  fordb^  remiad 
us  of  the  Hindoo?" 

Digitized  by 

Google 

NEGRO    TYPES.  267 

So  great  is  our  respect  for  Morton's  judgment ;  such  manifold  ex- 
periences have-we  acquired  of  his  perceptive  acuteness  in  craniological 
anatomy,  that  we  should  prefer  the  affirmatory  decisions  of  others 
relative  to  this  Hindoo-Meroite  problem,  to  any  negation  on  our  own 
parts. 

The  preceding  brief  digressions  enable  us  to  leave  Meroe,  and  re- 
sume with  a  more  positive,  because  osteolo^cal,  proof  of  the  perdu- 
rable continuance  of^the  Negro  type. 

This  semi-embalmed  cranium  of  a 
NegreM  (Fig.  193),  from  Morton's-  Fio.  198.3« 

cabinet,  is  preserved  at  the  Acade- 
my of  Natural  Sciences  in  Phila- 
delphia. Beyond  the  fact  that  mum- 
mification ceased  towards  the  fifth 
century  of  our  era ;  and  that,  being 
from  an  ancient  tumulus  at  the  sa- 
cred Isle  of  Beghe,  the  female 
owner  of  the  annexed  skull  may 
have  been  a  domestic  slave  of  some 
"Ethiopian"    worshipper    at    the 

shrine  of  Osiris,  on  the  adjacent  Isle  of  Philee ;  all  that  can  be  said 
as  to  the  antiquity  of  our  specimen  confines  it  to  a  period  between 
the  fourth  century  b.  c.  (when  Pharaoh  Nectanbbo  founded  the  temple 
of  Philse),  and'the  extinction  of  embalming,  coupled  with  the  substi- 
tution of  Christianity  (as  understood  by  "  Ethiopians,")  for  the  reli- 
gion of  Osiris,  about  the  fifth  century  after  c.^  Fifteen  hundred 
years  may,  therefore,  be  assumed  as  the  reasonable  lapse  of  time  since 
this  aged  Negress  was  consigned  to  the  mound  where  hundreds  of 
other  Osirian  pilgrims  lie,  coarsely  swathed  in  bitumenized  wrappers. 
The  specimen  is  unique  in  the  annals  of  Egyptian  embalmment ;  inas- 
much as  no  other  purely-Negro  vestiges  have  as  yet  turned  up  in 
tumuli  or  catacombs. 

Trivial  to  many  as  the  incident  may  seem.  Science,  nevertheless, 
can  make  "these  dry  bones  speak"  to  the  following  points.  First, 
they  establish  Nigritian  indelibility  of  type,  even  to  the  woolly  hair ; 
because,  our  American  cemeteries  could  yield  up  thousands  of  heads 
identical  with  this  woman's.  Secondly,  they  attest  the  comparative 
paucity  of  Negro  individuals  in  Egypt  during  all  ancient  times ;  be- 
cause, although  the  priests  embalmed  every  native  pauper,  such  Ni- 
gritian mummies  have  never,  that  we  can  learn,  been  ^covered  by 
ransackers  of  that  country's  sepulchres.  And,  thirdly,  as  this  skuU 
is  a  solitary  exception,  among  millions  of  mummies  disinterred,  it 
demonstrates  that  the  Egyptians  possessed  no  craniological  proximity 

Digitized  by 

Google 

268 

NEGRO    TYPES. 

Fia.  194. 

to  those  Negro  types  with  whom  their  existence  was  ever  coeval. 

Indeed,  this  head  was  not  found  in  Egypt  proper,  but  immediately 

above  the  first  cataract  in  Lower  Nubia. 

As  Mr.  Birch  has  mentioned, 
in  the  extract  previously  given, 
history  reposes  upon  the  Tablet 
of  Wd,dee'ffalfa  for  the  conquest 
of  Upper  Nubia ;  and  also  for 
the  earliest  monumental  ren- 
contre with  Negroes,  by  Sb- 
souRTESBN  I.,  secoud  king  of  the 
Xnth  dynasty,  near  about  2848 
years  b.  c.  ;  which  is  the  autho- 
rized date  of  the  Deluge  in 
King  James's  version.  The 
tablet  is  small,  and  very  much 
abraded ;  but,  Morton  having 
enlarged  the  royal  portrait,*" 
we  repeat  it  here,  for  what  it 
may  be  worth  ethnologically. 
It  proves,  at  least,  that  Sbsoub- 
tesbn's  lineaments  were  any- 
thing but  AMcan. 

The  heads  of  austral  captives, 
surmounting  shields  in  which 

their  national  names  are  written,  exist  in  this  tablet,  too  mutilated 

for  us  to  distinguish  anything  beyond  the  African  contour  of  their 

features.    Birch  ^^  reads  their  cognomina — 

4.  Shaat, 

5.  KkUukai;  or,  perhaps  the  SiUougit,  who 
now  are  called  <  ShUlooks '  ?  " 

"  1.  Ka8y  or  Chu, 
2.  Shmki,  or  TmkL 
8.  Chaaaa, 

It  therefore  becomes  settled  by  the  hieroglyphics,  that  the  Egyptians 
had  ascended  the  Nile,  and  had  encountered  JVigrro-races,  at  least  as 
far  back  as  the  twenty-fourth  century  b.  c. 

liVe  can  now  add  a  most  extraordinary  fact,  since  discovered  by 
Viscount  De  Roug6,  to  the  extracts  we  have  culled  from  Birch's 
memoir.  An  inscription  on  the  rocks  near  Samneh,  in  Nubia,^  cut 
by  Sesourtesen  m.  (of  the  same  Xllth  dynasty  —  about  2200  b.  c), 
in  the  "  VULlth  year"  of  his  reign,  establishes  that  he  had  then  ex- 
tended the  southern  frontier  of  Egypt  to  that  pointy  viz.,  the  third 
cataract ;  whereas  his  predecessor,  Sesourtesen  L,  had  only  guarded 
the  passes  at  WAiee  Haifa,  the  second  cataract,  some  180  miles 
below.  M.  De  Roug6,^  with  that  felicitous  acumen  for  which  hens 
renowned,  reads  a  passage  in  this  inscription  as  follows^:  —     t 

o 

NEGRO    TYPES.  269 

"  Frontier  of  the  South.  Done  in  the  year  VIII.,  under  King  Sesourtesen  [HI.],  ever 
living;  in  order  that  it  may  not  be  permitted  to  any  Negro  to  pass  by  it  in  navigating" 
[down  the  river]. 

The  repugnance  of  the  Egyptians  towards  Nigritian  races,  exhibited 
in  their  epithet  of  "NaHSI  —  barbarian  Qoxmiiy^  perverse  race,"  be- 
comes now  a  solid  fact  in  primeval  history ;  at  the  same  time  that 
the  above  inscription  proves  conclusivelyJiow,  just  about  4000  years 
ago,  the  geographical  habitat  of  Negroes  commenced  exactly  where 
it  does  at  this  day :  viz.,  above  the  third  cataract  of  the  Nile. 

We  have  shown,  by  their  portraits,  that  the  three  "Ethiopian" 
kings  (Sabaco,  Sevechus,  and  .Tarhaka)  of  the  XXVth  dynasty,  b.  c. 
719-695),  possess  nothing  Negroid  in  their  visages.  Meroe,  as  Lep- 
sius  has  determined  irrevocably,  became  an  independent  principaUty 
at  a  far  later  day ;  and,  so  soon  as  she  was  cut  off  from  Egyptian 
blood  and  civilization,  the  influx  of  Negro  concubii^es  deteriorated 
her  people,  until,  by  the  fifth  century  after  Christ,  she  sank  amid  the 
billows  of  surrounding  African  barbarism,  mentally  and  physically 
obliterated  for  ever. 

To  our  lamented  countryman,  Morton,  belongs  the  honor  of  first 
rendering  these  data  true  as  axioms  in  the  science  of  anthropology. 
Our  part  has  been  to  demonstrate  that  the  principles  of  his  method 
were  correct,  as  well  as  to  support  them  with  fresher  evidences  than 
he  was  spared  to  investigate.  At  the  time  of  the  pubUcation  of  the 
Crania  j^gyptiaea^  the  "  Gallery  of  Antiquities  in  the  British  Mu- 
seum**^ had  not  reached  him;  consequently  he  was  not  then 
aware  that  the  vast  tableau  from  Beyt-el-WMee,  out  of  which  he 
had  selected  the  following  heads  (Fig.  161)  stands,  moulded  in  fac- 
simile and  beautifully  colored,  on  the  walls  of  an  Egyptian  hall  in 
that  great  Institution.  The  copy  lies  before  us,  elucidated  by  Mr. 
Birch's  critical  description.  Here  NegroeB  and  Nubians  are  painted 
in  all  shades  —  blacks  and  browns ;  while  the  red  (or  color  of  honor) 
is  given  to  the  Egyptians  alone. 

With  these  emendations,  which  unfortunately  the  nature  of  our 
^ork  does  not  permit  us  to  portray  in  colors,  Morton's  own  words 
and  wood -cuts  may  appropriately  close  this  chapter  on  the  Negro 
Type  : — 

**  For  the  purpose  of  illustration,  we  select  a  single  picture  from  the  temple  (hemispeos) 
of  Beyt-el-W4lee,  in  Nubia,  in  which  Barneses  II.  is  represented  in  the  act  of  making  war 
npon  the  Negroes  —  who,  overcome  with  defeat,  are  flying  in  consternation  before  him. 
From  the  multitude  of  fugitives  in  this  scene  (which  has  been  yiyidly  copied  by  Champol- 
HoqSss  and  Rosellini,  and  which  I  have  compared  in  both),  I  annex  a  fao-simile  group  of 
lune  heads,  which,  while  they  preserre  the  national  features  in  a  remarkable  degree,  pre- 
sent also  considerable  diyersity  of  expression. 

**  The  hair  on  some  other  figures  of  this  group  is  dressed  in  short  and  separate  tufts,  or 

Digitized  by 

Google 

270 

NEGRO    TYPES. 
Fia.195. 

inverted  cones,  precisely  like  those  now  worn  by  the  Negroes  of  Madagascar,  as  figured  in 
Botteller's  Voyage, 

**  In  the  midst  of  the  yanquished  AfHcans,  standing  in  his  oar  and  urging  on  the  conflict, 
is  Rameses  himself;  whose  manly  and  beantifUl  countenance  will  not  soffer  by  comparison 
with  the  finest  Caucasian  models.  The  annexed  outline  (for  all  the  figures  are  represented 
in  outline  only),  will  enable  the  reader  to  form  his  own  conclusions  respecting  this  extra- 
ordinary group,''  which  dates  in  the  fourteenth  century  before  the  Christian  enL^ss 

Fio.  196. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

ABORIGINAL    RAGES    OF    AMERICA.  271 

The  authors  confidently  trust,  that  the  antiquity  of  Negro  races, 
no  less  than  ihe  permanence  of  Negro  types,  during  the  (1853+2848) 
4201  years  that  have  just  elapsed  since  Usher's  Flood,  are  questions 
now  satisfectorily  set  at  rest  in  the  minds  of  lettered  and  scientific 
readers.  A  parable,  thrown  back  among  our  notes,^^  suflices  to  illus- 
trate popular  impressions  in  regard  to  the  cuticular  and  osteological 
changes  produced  by  elimatey  and  in  respect  to  the  philological  meta- 
morphoses caused  by  transplantation^  upon  human  races  aboriginally 
distinct  It  is  not  incumbent  upon  us  to  inquire,  whether  the  delu- 
sions, generally  current  upon  such  very  simple  matters  of  fact,  are 
to  be  ascribed  to  intellectual  apathy  among  the  taught,  or  to  ignorance 
and  mystifications  among  their  teachers. 

At  tie  close  of  Chaptep  VI.  {supra,  p.  210),  in  reference  to  the  per- 
manency of  Asiatic  and  African  types  in  their  respective  geographical 
gradations,  we  asked,  "  Within  human  record,  has  it  not  always  been 
thus?"  Every  national  tradition,  all  primitive  monuments,  and  the 
-whole  context  of  ancient  and  modern  history,  answer  affirmatively 
for  each  of  those  parts  of  the  Old  continents  hitherto  examined. 
Deviations  from  the  historical  point  of  view  requiring  no  notice,  at 
the  present  day,  by  any  man  of  science,  it  would  be  sheer  waste  of 
time  to  discuss  them.  "We  lose  none,  therefore,  in  passing  over  at 
once  to  that  continent  which  no  students  of  Natural  History  now 
miscall  "theJVw." 

CHAPTER   IX. 

AMERICAN  AND  OTHER  TYPES. — ABORIGINAL  RACES  OP  ABIERICA. 

The  Continent  of  America  is  often  designated  by  the  appellation 
of  the  New  World;  but  the  researches  of  modern  geologists  and 
archffiologists  have  shown  that  the  evidences  in  favour  of  a  high  anti- 
quity, during  our  geological  epoch,  as  well  as  for  our  Fauna  and  Flora, 
are,  to  say  the  least,  quite  as  great  on  this  as  on  the  eastern  hemi- 
sphere. Prof.  Agassiz,  whose  authority  will  hardly  be  questioned  in 
matters  of  this  kind,  tells  us  that  geology  finds  the  oldest  landmarks 
here ;  and  Sir  Charles  Lyell,  from  a  mass  of  well-digested  facts,  and 
from  the  corroborating  testimony  of  other  good  authorities,  concludes 
that  the  Mississippi  river  has  been  running  in  its  present  bed  for  more 
than  one  hundred  thousand  years.^  The  channel  cut  by  the  Niagara 
liver,  below  the  Falls,  for  twelve  miles  through  solid  rock,  in  the 

Digitized  by 

Google 

272  ABORIGINAL    RACES  OF    AMERICA.  . 

estimation  of  the  same  distinguished  author,  as  well  as  of  others,  gives 
no  less  satisfactory  proof  of  the  antiquity  of  the  present  relative 
position  of  continents  and  oceans. 

Dr,  Bennet  Dowler,  of  New  Orleans,  in  an  interesting  essay,^ 
recently  published,  supplies  some  extraordinary  facts  in  confirmation 
of  the  great  age  of  the  delta  of  the  Mississippi,  assumed  by  Lyell, 
Eiddell,  Carpenter,  Forshey,  and  others.  From  an  investigation  of 
the  successive  growths  of  cypress  forests  around  that  city,  the  stumps 
of  which  are  still  found  at  different  depths^  directly  overlying  each  other; 
from  the  great  size  and  age  of  these  trees,  and  from  the  remains  of 
Indian  bones  and  pottery  found  below  the  iX)ots  of  some  of  these 
stumps,  he  arrives  at  the  following  conclusion :  — 

<*  From  these  data  it  appears  that  the  human  race  exiq^  in  the  delta  more  than  67,000 
years  ago ;  and  that  ten  subterranean  forests,  and  the  one  now  growing,  will  show  that  an 
exuberant  flora  existed  in  Louisiana  more  than  100,000  years  anterior  to  these  eyidences 
of  man's  existence." 

The  delta  of  the  Alabama  river  bears  ample  testimony  to  the  same 
effect.  Along  the  Mobile  river  and  bay  we  find  certain  shell-fish, 
whose  relative  positions  are  determined  at  present,  as  they  always 
have  been,  by  certain  physical  conditions,  viz. :  the  unio  and  ^aZucZmd, 
the  gnathodon,  and  the  oyster.  The  first  are  always  found  above 
tide-water,  where  the  water  is  perfectly  fresh;  the  second  flourishes  in 
brackish  water  alone;  and  the  oyster  never  but  in  water  that  is 
almost  salt.  As  the  delta  of  the  river  has  extended,  they  have  each 
greatly  changed  their  habitats.  The  most  northern  habitat^  ftt  the  pre- 
sent day,  for  example,  of  the  gnathodon,  stands  about  Choctaw  Point, 
one  mile  below  Mobile ;  whereas  we  have  abundant  evidence  that  it 
formerly  existed  fifty  miljes  above.  The  unio,  paludina,  and  oyster 
have  changed  positions  in  like  manner. 

Immense  beds  of  gnathodon  shells  are  found,  and  in  the  greatest 
profusion,  all  along  the  coast  of  the  Gulf  of  Mexico,  where  they 
have  doubtless  been  deposited  by  Indians  in  former  times.  Great 
numbers  of  these  beds  exist  on  the  Mobile  bay,  and  along  the  river, 
for  fifty  miles  above  the  city,  where  only  a  scattering  renmant  of  the 
living  species  is  still  found.  The  Indians  had  no  means  for,  and  no 
object  in,  transporting  such  an  immense  number  fifty  miles  up  the 
river ;  and  we  must,  therefore,  conclude  that  the  Mobile  bay  once  ex- 
tended to  the  locality  of  these  upper  "  shell  banks ;"  and  that  the 
Indians  had  collected  them  for  food,  near  where  these  banks  are  now 
beheld.  One  strong  evidence  of  this  conclusion  is  gathered  fi'om  the 
fact,  that  the  different  artificial  beds  of  the  unio,  the  gnathodon,  and 
the  oyster,  are  never  here  formed  of  a  mixture  of  two  or  more  shells  j 
which  would  be  the  case  if  their  locations  had  been  near  each  other. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

ABOTRIGINAL    RACES  OP    AMERICA.  273 

That  these  beds  are  of  Indian  origin  is  clear,  from  the  fact  that  the 
shells  have  all  been  opened,  and  that  we  find  in  them  the  marks  of 
fire,  extending  over  considerable  spaces  —  the  shells  converted  into 
quick-lime,  and  mingled  with  charcoal,  so  that  the  successive  accu- 
mulations of  shells  may  be  plainly  traced.^  Fish-bones  and  other 
remains  of  Indian  feasts  are  common :  i.  e.  fragments  of  Indian  pot- 
tery ;  and  of  human  bones,  which  can  be  identified  by  their  crania. 

Some  of  these  beds  are  covered  over  by  vegetable  mould,  from  one 
to  two  feet  thick,  which  must  have  been  a  veiy  long  time  forming ; 
and  upon  this  are  growing  the  largest  forest  trees,  beneath  whose 
roots  these  Indian  remains  are  often  (Uscovered.  It  is  more  than 
probable,  too,  that  these  huge  trees  are  the  successors  of  former 
growths  quite  as  large. 

We  cannot,  by  any  conjecture,  approximate,  within  many  centu- 
ries, perhaps  thousands  of  years,  the  time  consumed  in  thus  extending 
the  delta  of  the  Alabama  river,  and  in  producing  the  changes  we 
have  hinted  at;  nor  dare  we  attempt  to  fix  the  time  at  which  the  Red 
men  fed  upon  the  gnathodons  that  compose  the  first  beds  to  which  we 
have  alluded. 

It  is  worthy  also  of  special  remark  that  the  gnathodon,  of  which 
a  few  surviving  specimens  still  endure  along  the  Gulf  coast  of  Florida, 
Alabama,  and  Mississippi,  was  once  a  living  species  in  the  Chesapeake 
bay-,  but  has  been  so  long  extinct  that  it  now  exists  there  only  in  a 
fossil  state.  This  would  extend  the  living  fauna  very  much  farther 
back  than  the  Chesapeake  deposits :  all  our  recent  shells,  or  nearly 
all,  being  found  in  the  pliocene,  and  many  shells  in  still  earlier  forma- 
tions. Such  facts,  with  many  others  of  similar  import,  which  might 
be  adduced,  point  to  a  chronology  very  &r  beyond  any  heretofore 
received :  and  who  will  doubt  that,  when  the  Mississippi,  Alabama, 
and  Niagara  rivers  first  poured  their  waters  into  the  ocean,  a  fauna 
and  a  flora  already  existed?  and,  if  so,  why  did  not  man  exist? 
They  all  belong  to  one  geological  period,  and  to  one  creation. 

These  authorities,  in  support  of  the  extreme  age  of  the  geological* 
era  to  which  man  belongs,  though  startling  to  the  unscientific,  are^ 
not  simply  the  opinions  of  a  few ;  but  such  conclurions  are  substan- 
tially adopted  by  the  leading  geologists  everywhere.  And,  although 
antiquity  so  extreme  for  man's  existence  on  earth  may  shock  some 
preconceived  opinions,  it  is  noue  the  less  certain  that  the  rapid  accu- 
mulation of  new  facts  is  fiist  familiarizing  the  minds  of  the  scientific 
world  to  this  conviction.  The  monuments  of  Egypt  have  already  ' 
carried  us  far  beyond  all  chronologies  heretofore  adopted ;  and  when 
these -barriers  are  once  overleaped,  it  is  in  vain  for  us  to  attempt  to 
approximate,  even,  the  epoch  of  man's  creation.  This  conclusion  is 
35 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 

274  ABORIGINAL    RAGES    OF   AMERItA. 

not  based  merely  on  the  researches  of  such  archseologists  as  Lepsins, 
Bunsen,  Birch,  Be  Longp6rier,  Humboldt,  &c.,  but  on  those,  also,  of 
strictly-orthodox  writers,  Kenrick,  Hincks,  Osbum ;  and,  we  may  add, 
of  all  theolo^ns  who  have  really  mastered  the  monuments  of 
Egypt  Nor  do  these  monuments  reveal  to  us  only  a  single  race,  at 
this  early  epoch  in  full  tide  of  civilization,  but  they  exhibit  feithful 
portraits  of  the  same  African  and  Asiatic  races,  in  all  their  diversity, 
which  hold  intercourse  with  Egypt  at  the  present  day. 

Now,  4he  question  naturally  springs  up,  whether  the  aborigines  of 
America  were  not  contemporary  with  the  earliest  races,  known  to  us, 
of  the  eastern  continent?  If,  as  is  conceded,  "Caucasian,'*  Negro, 
Mongol,  and  other  races,  existed  in  the  Old  "World,  already  distinct, 
what  reason  can  be  assigned  to  show  that  the  aborigines  of  America 
did  not  also  exist,  with  their  present  types,  6000  years  ago  ?  The 
naturalist  must  infer  that  the  fauna  and  flora  of  the  two  continents 
were  contemporary.  All  facts,  and  all  analogy,,  war  against  the  sup- 
position that  America  should  have  been  left  by  the  Creator  a  dreary 
waste  for  thousands  of  years,  while  the  other  half  of  the  world  was 
teeming  with  organized  beings.  This  view  is  also  greatly  strength- 
ened by  the  acknowledged  fact,  that  not  a  single  animal,  bird,  rep- 
tile, fish,  or  plant,  was  common  to  the  Old  and  New  Worlds.  No 
naturalist  of  our  day  doubts  that  the  animal  and  vegetable  kingdoms 
of  America  were  created  where  they  are  found,  and  not  in  Asia. 

The  races  of  men  alone,  of  America,  have  been  made  an  exception 
to  this  general  law ;  but  this  exception  cannot  be  maintained  by  any 
course  of  scientific  reasoning.  America,  it  will  be  remembered,  was 
not  only  unknown  to  the  early  Romans  and  Greeks,  but  to  the  Egyp- 
tians ;  and  when  discovered,  less  than  four  centuries  ago,  it  was  found 
to  be  inhabited,  from  the  Arctic  to  Cape  Horn,  and  from  ocean  to 
ocean,  by  a  population  displaying  peculiar  physical  traits,  unlike  any 
races  in  the  Old  World ;  speaking  languages  bearing  no  resemblance 
in  structure  to  other  languages;  .and  living,  everywhere,  among 
animals  and  plants  specifically  distinct  from  those  of  Europe,  Asia, 
Africa,  and  Oceanica. 

But,  natural  as  this  reasoning  is,  in  fovor  of  American  origin  for  our 
Indians,  we  shall  not  leave  the  question  on  such  debatable  ground. 
There  is  abundant  positive  evidence  of  high  antiquity  for  this  popu- 
lation, which  we  proceed  to  develop. 

In  reflecting  on  the  aboriginal  races  of  America,  we  are^  at  once 
•met  by  the  striking  fact,  that  their  physical  characters  are  wholly  in- 
dependent of  all  climatic  or  known  physical  influences.  Notwith- 
standing their  immense  geographical  distribution,  embracing  every 
variety  of  climate,  it  is  acknowledged  by  all  travellers,  that  there  is 

Digitized  by 

Google 

ABORIGINAL    RACES    OP    AMERICA.  275 

among  this  people  a  pervading  type^  around  which  all  the  tribes  (north, 
south,  east,  and  west)  cluster,  though  varying  within  prescribed  limits. 
With  trifling  exceptions,  all  our  American  Indians  bear  to  each  other 
some  degree  of  family  resemblance,  quite  as  strong,  for  example,  as 
that  seen  at  the  present  day  among  full-blooded  Jews ;  and  yet  they 
are  distinct  from  every  race  of  the  Old  World,  in  features,  languages, 
customs,  arts,  religions,  and  propensities.  In  the  language  of  Morton, 
who  studied  this  people  more  thoroughly  than  any  other  writer :  — 
"All  possess,  though  in  various  degrees,  the  long,  lank,  black  hair; 
the  heavy  brow ;  the  dull,  sleepy  eye ;  the  fiill,  compressed  lips ;  and 
the  salient,  but  dilated  nose.'*  These  characters,  too,  are  beheld  in  the 
civilized  and  the  most  savage  tribes,  along  the  rivers  and  sea-coasts,  in 
the  valleys  and  on  the  mountains;  in  the  prairies  and  in  the  forests; 
in  the  torrid  and  in  the  ice-bound  regions ;  amongst  those  that  live 
on  fish,  on  flesh,  or  on  vegetables. 

The  only  race  of  the  Old  World  with  which  any  connection  has 
been  reasonably  conjectured,  is  the  Mongol ;  but,  to  say  nothing  of 
the  marked  difference  in  physical  characters,  their  languages  alone 
should  decide  against  any  such  alliance. 

"The  American  race  differs  essentially  f^om  all  others,  not  excepting  the  Mongolian; 
nor  do  the  feeble  analogies  of  language,  and  the  more  obvious  ones  of  civil  and  religious 
institutions  and  arts,  denote  anything  beyond  casual  or  colonial  communication  with  the 
Asiatic  nation^ ;  and  even  these  analogies  may,  perhaps,  be,  accounted  for,  as  Humboldt 
has  suggested,  in  the  mere  coincidence  arising  ftrom  similar  wants  and  impulses  in  nations 
inhabiting  similar  latitudes/' ^^^ 

No  philologist  can  be  found  to  deny  the  fact  that  the  Chinese  are 
now  speaking  and  writing  a  language  substantially  the  same  as  the 
one  they  used  5000  years  ago;  and  that,  too,  a  language  distinct  from 
every  tongue  spoken  by  the  Caucasian  races.  On  the  other  hand, 
we  have  the  American  races,  all  speaking  dialects  indisputably 
peculiar  to  this  continent,  and  possessing  no  marked  aflinity  with  any 
other.  Now,  if  the  Mongols  have  preserved  a  language  entire,  in 
Asia,  for  6000  years,  they  should  have  likewise  preserved  it  here,  or 
to  say  the  least,  some  trace  of  it.  But,  not  only  are  the  two  linguistic 
groups  radically  distinct,  but  no  trace  of  a  Mongol  tongue,  dubious 
words  excepted,  can  be  found  in  the  American  idioms.  If  such  imagi- 
nary Mongolians  ever  brought  their  Asiatic  speech  into  this  country, 
it  is  clear  that  their  fictitious  descendants,  the  Indians,  have  lost  it ; 
and  the  latter  must  have  acquired,  instead,  that  of  some  extinct  race 
which  preceded  a  Mongol  colonization.  It  will  be  conceded  that  a 
colony,  or  a  nation,  could  never  lose  its  vocabulary  so  completely, 
unless  through  conquest  and  amalgamation ;  in  which  case  they  would 
adopt  another  language.     But,  even  when  a  tongue  ceases  to  be 

Digitized  by 

Google 

276  ABORIGINAL    RAGES   OF   AMITRIOA. 

spoken,  some  trace  of  it  will  continue  to  survive  in  the  'names  of 
individuals,  of  rivers,  places,  countries,  &;c.  The  names  of  Moses, 
Solomon,  David,  Lazarus,  Isaac  and  Jacob,  are  still  found  among  the 
Jews  everywhere,  although  the  Hebrew  language  has  ceased  to  be 
spoken  for  more  than  2000  years.  And  the  appellatives  Mississippi, 
Missouri,  Orinoko,  Ontario,  Oneida,  Alabama,  and  a  thousand  other 
Indian  names,  will  live  for  ages  after  the  last  Red  man  is  mingled 
with  the  dust.  They  have  no  likeness  to  any  nomenclature  in  the 
Old  World. 

In  treating  of  American  races,  our  prescribed  limits  do  not  permit 
us  to  go  intp  details  respecting  the  infinitude  of  types  which  compose 
them.  Our  purpose  at  present  is  simply  to  bring  forward  such  fB^cto 
as  may  be  sufficient  to  establish  their  origin  and  antiquity.  The 
broad  division  of  Dr.  Morton,  into  two  great  femilies,  which  conti^ast 
in  many  points  strongly  with  each  other,  is  sufficiently  minute,  viz. : 
"The  ToUeean  nationa  and  the  Barbarous  tribes.''  This  classification 
is  somewhat  arbitrary ;  but  it  is  impossible,  in  our  day,  to  establish 
any  but  very  wide  boundary-lines.  Here,  as  in  the  Old  World,  wars, 
migrations,  amalgamations,  and  endless  causes,  have,  during  several 
thousand  years,  disturbed  and  confused  Nature's  original  work ;  and 
we  must  now  deal  with  masses  as  we  find  them.  In  fact,  our  main 
object  in  alluding  at  all  to  the  diversity  of  types  among  the  aborigines 
of  America,  is  to  give  another  illustration  of  a  position  advanced  dse- 
where  in  this  volume.  We  have  shown  that  th'e  major  divisions  of 
the  earth,  or  its  different  zoological  provinces,  were  populated  by 
groups  of  races,  bearing  to  each  other  certain  family  resemblances ; 
notwithstanding  that,  in  reality,  these  races  originated  in  nationsj  and 
not  in  a  single  pair ;  thus  forming  proximate,  but  not  identical  spe- 
cies. The  Mongols,  the  Caucasians,  the  Negroes,  the  Americans, 
each  constitute  a  group  of  this  kind.  In  our  chapters  on  the  Caucor 
sian  races,  for  example,  we  have  shown  how  the  Jews,  Egyptians, 
Hindoos,  Pelasgians,  Romans,  Teutons,  Celts,  Iberians,  Ac,  which 
had  all  been  classed  under  this  common  head,  can  be  traced,  as  dis- 
tinct forms,  beyond  all  human  chronology.  The  same  law  applies  to  ^ 
the  American  races.  Although  every  tribe  has  some  characters  that 
mark  it  as  American,  yet  there  are  certain  sharply- drawn  distinctions, 
among  some  of  these  races,  which  cannot  be  explained  by  climatic 
influences.  The  Toltecan,  and  Barbarous  tribes,  taken  separately,  en 
masse,  afford  a  good  illustration,  for  they  differ  essentially  in  their 
moral  and  physical  characteristics.  The  most  prominent  distinction 
between  these  two  families  results  from  comparison  of  their  cranio- 
logical  developments.  Dr.  Morton,  whose  collection  of  human  crania 
is  the  most  complete  in  the  world,  bestowed  unrivalled  attention  on 

Digitized  by 

Google 

ABORIGINAL    RACES    OP    AMERICA.  277 

American  races,  and  has  given  actual  measurements  of  888  Indian 
skulls,  in  which  the  two  great  divisions  are  almost  ^equally  represented. 
1st.  The  Toltecan  Family  —  comprising  all  the  semi-civilized  nations 
of  .Mexico,  Peru,  and  Bogota,  who,  there  is  every  reason  to  believe, 
were  the  builders  of  the  great  system  of  mounds  found  throughout 
North  America.  Of  213  skulls,  Mexican  and  Peruvian,  201  belong 
to  the  latter — each  having  been  obtained  from  the  oldest  burial- 
grounds  and  through  the  most  reliable  sources.  On  these  heads, 
Morton  makes  the  following  striking  comment :  — 

<'  When  we  consider  the  institutions  of  the  old  Peruvians,  their  comparatively  advanced 
ciTlHzation,  their  tombs  and  temples,  mountain-roads  and  monolithic  gateways,  together 
with  their  knowledge  of  certain  ornamental  arts,  it  is  surprising  to  find  that  they  possessed 
a  brain  no  larger  than  the  Hottentot  or  New  Hollander^  and  far  below  the  barbarous  hordes 
of  their  own  race.'*  [We  have  shown,  in  our  remarks  on  anatomical  characters  of  races, 
that  the  Hottentot  has  a  brain  on  the  average  17  cubic  inches  less  than  the  Teutonic  race 
—  the  latter  being  92,  and  the  former  75  cubic  inches.]  *'  For,  on  measuring  155  crania, 
nearly  all  derived  from  the  sepulchres  just  mentioned,  they  give  but  75  cubic  inches  for 
the  average  bulk  of  brain,  while  the  Teutonic,  or  highest  developed  white  race,  gives  92 
cabic  inches.  Of  the  whole  number,  one  only  attains  the  capacity  of  101  cubic  inches  — 
[the  highest  Teutonic  in  Dr.  Morton's  collection  is  114  cubic  inches]  —  and  the  minimum 
sinks  to  58 ;  the  smallest  in  the  whole  series  of  641  measured  crania  o/  aU  nations.  It  is 
important  \h  remark,  also,  that  the  sexes  are  nearly  equally  represented :  viz.,  80  men  and 
76  women.  ^ 

The  mean  of  twenty-one  Mexican  skulls  is  seventy-nine,  or  five 
cubic  inches  above  the  Peruvian  average ;  but  the  authenticity  of  this 
series  is  not  so  well  made  out  as  the  other,  and  it  may  be  too  small 
for  the  establishment  of  a  very  correct  mean. 

2d.  The  Barbarous  Tribes.  —  The  semi -civilized  communities  of 
America  'seem  at  all  times  to  have  been  hemmed  in  and  pressed  upon 
by  the  more  restless  and  warlike  barbarous  tribes,  as  they  are  at  the 
present  day.  We  now  see  the  unwarlike  Mexican  constantly  pillaged 
by  daring  Camanches  and  relentless  Apaches ;  who,  since  the  intro- 
duction of  horses,  have  become  most  fearftd  marauders,  scarcely 
inferior  td  the  Tartars  or  Bedouins  of  Asia. 

On  this  series,  collected  both  from  modem  tribes  and  ancient  tumuli 
the  most  widely  separated  by  time  and  space,  Morton  remarks :  — 

^Ot  211  crania  derived  Arom  the  various  sources  enumerated  in  this  section,  161  have 
been  measured,  with  the  following  results:  the  largest  cranium  gives  104  cubic  inches ^- 
the  smallest,  70 ;  and  the  mean  of  all  is  84.  There  is  a  disparity,  however,  in  the  male 
•nd  female  heads,  for  the  former  are  96  in  nuhiber,  and  the  latter  only  65. 

*'  We  have  here  the  surprising  fact,  that  the  brain  of  the  Indian,  in  his  savage  state,  is 
far  larger  than  that  of  the  old  demi-civilized  Peruvian  or  ancient  Mexican.  How  nre  we 
to  explain  this  remarkable  disparity  between  civilizadon  and  barbarism  ?  The  largest  Pe- 
ruvian brain  measures  101  cubic  inches ;  and  the  untamed  Shawnee  rises  to  104 ;  and  the 
average  difference  between  the  Peruvian  and  the  savage  is  nine  cubic  inches  in  favor  of  the 
latter.  Something  may  be  attributed  to  a  primitive  difference  of  stock ;  but  more,  perhaps, 
to  tiie  contrasted  activity  of  the  two  races."  [Here  Dr.  Morton  might  appear  to  endorse  the 

Digitized  by 

Google 

278  ABORIGINAL    RACES    OF    AMERICA. 

theory  that  ciiltiyation  of  the  mind,  or  of  one  set  of  faculties,  can  give  expansion  or  increased 
size  of  brain.  There  is  no  proof  of  the  truth  of  such  a  hypothesis.  The  Teutonic  races,  in 
their  barbarous  state,  2000  years  ago,  possessed  brains  as  large  as  now ;  and  so  with  other 
races.  —  Ji  C.  N.] 

Taken  collectively,  the  American  races  yield  an  average  mean,  for 
the  whole  338  crania,  of  only  seventy-nine  cubic  inches,  or  thirteen 
below  that  of  the  Teutonic  race.   , 

The  general  law  laid  down  byr craniologists,  that  size  of  brain  is  a 
measure  of  intellect,  would  seem  to  meet  with  an  exception  here ; 
but  it  is  only  apparent.  A  very  satisfectory  solution  of  the  fact  will 
be  found  in  Mr.  J.  S.  Phillips's  Appendix  to  Morton's  memoir  on  the 
Physical  Type  of  the  American  Indians;^  also,  in  Mr.  George  Combe's 
Phrenological  Remarks^  in  the  Appendix  to  Morton's  Crania  Americana. 
The  appendix  of  Mr.  Phillips,  published  after  Morton's  death,  adds 
some  new  materials,  which  the  Doctor  had  not  time  to  work  up 
before  his  demise.  The  additional  crania  make  a  little  variation 
from  the  means  or  averages  obtained  by  Morton,  but  too  'slight  to 
influence  the  general  conclusions.  Mr.  Phillips's  closing  observations 
are  so  well  expressed  that  we  are  sure  the  reader  will  prefer  them 
entire,  to  wit:  — 

**  The  average  Yolume  of  the  brain  in  the  Barbarous  tribes  is  shown  to  be  from  83}  to  84 
cubic  inches,  while  that  of  the  Mexicam  is  but  79,  and  in  the  Peruyians  only  75 ;  thus  exhi- 
biting the  apparent  anomaly  of  barbarous  and  unciyilized  tribes  possessing  larger  brains 
than  races  capable  of  considerable  progress  in  civilization.  This  discrepancy  deserres 
more  investigation  than  time  permits  at  present ;  but  the  following  views  of  the  sulject 
may  make  it  appear  less  anomalous :  — 

**  The  prevailing  features  in  the  character  of  the  North  American  savage  are,  stoicism,  a 
severe  cruelty,  excessive  watchfulness,  and  that  coarse  brutality  which  results  from  the 
entire  preponderance  of  the  animal  propensities.  These  so  outweigh  the  intellectual  por- 
tion of  the  character,  that  it  is  completely  subordinate,  making  the  Indian  what  we  see 
him  —  a  most  unintellectual  and  uncivillzable  man. 

**  The  intellectual  lobe  of  the  brain  of  these  people,  if  not  borne  down  by  such  over- 
powering animal  propensities  and  passions,  would  doubtless  have  been  -capable  of  much 
greater  efforts  than  any  we  are  acquainted  with,  and  have  enabled  these  barbarous  tribes 
to  make  some  progress  in  civilization.  This  appears  to  be  the  cerebral  difference  between 
the  Mexicans  and  Peruvians  on  the  one  hand,  and  tfie  Barbarous  tribes  of  North  America 
on  the  other.  The  intellectual  lobe  of  the  brain  in  the  two  former  is  at  least  as  large  as  in 
the  latter — the  difference  of  volume  being  chiefly  confined  to  the  occipital  and  basal  por- 
tions of  the  encephalon ;  so  that  the  intellectual  and  moral  qualities  of  the  Mexicans  and 
Peruvians  (at  least  as  large,  if  not  larger  than  those  of  the  other  group)  are  left  more  free 
to  act,  being  not  so  subordinate  to  the  propensities  and  violent  passions.  This  view  of  the 
subject  is  in  accordance  with  the  history  of  these  two  divisions :  barbaroui  and  dvifaahU, 
When  the  former  were  assailed  by  the  European  settlers,  they  fought  desperately,  but 
rather  with  the  cunning  and  ferocity  of  the  lower  animals,  than  with  the  system  and  courage 
of  men.  They  could  not  be  .subjugated,  and  were  either  exterminated,  or  continued  to 
retire  into  the  forests,  when  they  could  no  longer  maintain  their  ground.  Had  their  intel- 
lect been  in  proportion  to  their  other  qualities,  they  would  have  been  most  formidable  ene- 
mies. With  the  Mexicans  and  Peruvians  the  case  has  been  the  reverse.  The  original 
inhabitants  of  Mexico  were  entirely  subjugated  by  the  Aztecs,  who  appear  to  have  been  a 

Digitized  by 

Google 

ABORIGINAL    RACES    OP    AMERICA.  279 

email  tribe  in  comparison  with  the  Mexicans ;  and  then  they  were  all  conquered  and  enslaved 
by  a  mere  handful  .of  Spaniards  —  although  the  Mexicans  had  the  advantage  over  the  bar- 
barous tribes  of  concerted  action,  some  discipline,  and  preparation,  in  which  the  latter  were 
greatly  deficient.  The  Mexicans,  with  small  brains,  were  evidently  inferior  in  resolution, 
in  attack  and  defence,  and  the  more  manly.traits  of  character,  te^  the  Barbarous  races,  who 
contested  every  inch  of  ground  until  they  were  entirely  outnumbered.  And  at  the  present 
time,  the  Camanches  and  Apaches,  though  a  part  of  the  great  Shoshonee  division  (one  of 
the  lowest  of  the  races  of  North  America),  are  continually  plundering  and  destroying  the 
Indians  of  Northern  Mexico,  who  scarcely  attempt  resistance. 

"  Viewed  in  this  light,  the  apparent  contradiction  of  a  race  with  a  smaller  brain  being 
superior  to  tribes  with  larger  brains,  is  so  far  explained,  that  the  volume  and  distribution 
of  their  respective  brains  appear  to  be  in  accordance  with  such  facts  in  their  history  as 
have  come  to  our  knowledge." 

Again,  Mr.  Phillips  remarks,  of  the  Indians  of  the  United  States, 
that  he  has  "grouped  them,  on  a  large  scale,  into  families,  according 
to  language ;  and  the  result  of  measureilient  of  the  volume  of  brain 
is  strikingly  in  accordance  with  the  ascertained  character  of  the  differ- 
ent groups  thus  constituted.  His  arrangement  is  —  1st,  Iroquois; 
2d,  Algonquin  and  Apalachian ;  3d,  Dacota ;  4th,  Shoshonees ;  5th, 
Oregonians.     Of  the  first  division  (the  Iroquois),  he  observes :  — 

**  The  average  internal  capacity  of  the  cranium  in  this  group  is  about  8}  inches  higher 
than  the  lowest  types,  and  4^  inches  higher  than  the  average  —  being  88}  cubic  inches. 
This  result  is  strikingly  in  keeping  with  the  fact  that  they  were  so  completely  the  master- 
spirits of  the  land ;  that,  at  the  ^e  of  the  first  settlement  of  this  country  by  the  white 
race,  they  were  so  rapidly  subduing  the  other  tribes  and  nations  around  them ;  and  that,  if 
their  career  of  conquest  had  not  been  cut  short  by  the  Anglo-Saxon  predominance,  they 
bade  fair  to  have  conquered  all  within  their  reach." 

He  then  states  the  measurements  and  characters  of  other  families, 
in  all  of  which  the  morale  and  physique  most  strikingly  corresponds 

These  facts  afford  very  instructive  material  for  reflection.  We 
here  behold  one  race,  with  the  larger,  though  less  intellectual  brain, 
subjugating  the  unwarlike  and  half-civilized  races;  and  it  seems 
clear,  that  the  latter  were  destined  to  be  either  swallowed  up  or  exter- 
minated by  the  former.  Who  can  doubt  that  similar  occurrences 
had  been  going  on  over  this  continent  for  many  centuries  or  even 
thousands  of  years  ?  There  are  scattered  over  North  America  count- 
less tumuli,  which  it  is  believed  were  built  by  races  different  from  the 
savage  tribes  found  around  them  on  the  advent  of  the  whites,  and 
an  impenetrable  oblivion  rests  upon  these  earth-works.  There  are 
many  reasons  for  supposing  that  these  mound-builders  were  either 
^identical  with,  or  closely  allied  to,  the  Toltecs;  and,  that  they  were 
driven  south  or  exterminated  by  more  savage  and  bellicose  races, 
such  as  the  Iroquois :  for  the  traditions  of  the  Mexicans  point  to  the 
North  as  their  original  country. 

At  the  present  day,  we  see  in  America  large  settlements  of  Span- 
iards, French,  Germans,  &c.,  as  well  as  Indians  —  all  speaking  their 

Digitized  by 

Google 

2S0  ABOBiaiNAL    RACES    05"   AMERICA. 

r 

own  languages ;  yet  who  doubts  that  in  a  century  or  two  the  Indians 
will  be  extmct^  and  the  others  swallowed  up  in  the  Anglo-Saxon 
tongue  and  type  ?  Then,  when  the  ethnographer  shall  undertake  to 
analyze  the  population,  what  can  he  learn  of  the  history  of  raceB 
that  first  overspread  this  continent,  or  what  light  upon  the  origins  of 
lost  or  absorbed  autocthones  can  he  draw  from  the  European  dialects 
spoken  by  their  destroyers?  What  will  be  the  condition  of  this 
country  two  or  three  thousand  years  hence,  we  may  ask,  when  we 
see  Europe  pouring  its  population  into  it  from  the  East  and  Asia  fitan 
the  West  ?  We  can  reason  on  the  things  of  this  world  merely  from 
what  we  see  and  know ;  and  we  must  infer  that  a  succession  of  events 
has  been  going  on  for  ages,  during  ante-historic  times,  similar  to  those 
we  encounter  in  the  pages  of  written  history.  Human  nature  never 
changes,  else  it  would  cease  to  be  human  nature. 

Now,  how  are  we  to  explain  these  opposite  intellectual  and  physical 
characters  in  the  two  great  fomilies  of  America,  except  by  primitive 
cranial  conformations,  each  aboriginally  distinct?  Certainly,  no 
known  facts  exist  leading  to  the  conclusion  that  any  particular  mode 
of  life  can  change  the  size  or  form  of  brain  in  man ;  while,  on  the 
contrary,  we  have  abundant  reason  to  be  convinced  that  the  size  and 
form  of  brain  play  a  conspicuous  part  in  the  advancement  and  destiny 
of  races.  The  large  heads,  in  many  instances,  having  emerged  from 
barbarism  (Teutons,  Celts,  for  example),  within  historical  times,  have 
reached  the  higher  pinnacles  of  civilization,  and  everywhere  outstrip- 
ped and  dominated  over  the  small-headed  races  of  mankind. 

It  is  interesting  here  to  note  that  the  ancient  Egyptians  and  Hin- 
doos, who  in  very  early  times  reached  a  considerable  degree  of  civili- 
zation, had,  like  the  Mexicans  and  Peruvians,  much  smaller  heads 
than  the  savage  tribes  around  them.*'  Each  of  these  people  give  an 
internal  mean-capacity  of  eighty  cubic  inches,  which  is  but  one  inch 
above  the  average  of  American  races.  The  Negro  races,  exclusive 
of  Hottentots,  yield  an  average  of  eighty-three  inches. 

If  the  Jews  have  lived  during  1600  years  in  Malabar,  the  Magyars 
1000  in  Hungary,  the  Parsees  as  many  ages  in  India,  the  Basques  or 
Iberians  in  Prance  and  Spain  for  more  than  8000,  without  material 
change  —  and,  if  the  Anglo-Saxons  and  Spaniards  have  lived  through 
ten  generations  in  America  without  approximating  the  aboriginal 
type  of  the  country,  it  is  a  reasonable  inference  that  the  intellectual 
and  physical  differences  of  the  Toltecan  and  Barbarous  tribes  are  not 
attributable  to  secondary  causes,  either  moral  or  physical. 

Mr.  Squier  makes  the  following  philosophical  remarks :  — 

<*  The  casual  resemblance  of  certain  words  in  the  languages  of  America  and  those  of  the 
Old  World  cannot  be  taken  as  eTideoce  of  a  common  origin.    Such  coincidences  may  be 

Digitized  by 

Google 

ABORIGINAL    RACES    OF    AMERICA.  281 

easily  accounted  for  as  the  result  of  accident,  or,  at  most,  of  local  inftisions,  which  were 
without  any  extended  effect.  The  entire  number  of  common  words  is  said  to  be  one  hun- 
dred and  eighty-seyen ;  of  these,  one  hundred  and  four  coincide  with  words  found  in  the 
languages  of  Asia  and  Australia,  forty-three  with 'those  of  Europe,  and  forty  with  those  of 
Africa.  It  can  hardly  be  supposed  that  these  facts  are  su£Bicient  to  proTe  a  connec- 
tion between  the  four  hundred  dialects  of  America  and  the  yarious  languages  of  the 
other  continent  It  is  not  in  accidental  coincidences  of  sound  or  meaning,  but  in  a 
comparison  of  the  general  structure  and  diaracter  of  the  American  languages  with  those 
of  other  countries,  that  we  can  expect  to  find  similitudes  at  all  condusiTe,  or  worthy  c^ 
remark,  in  determining  the  question  of  a  common  origin.  And  it  is  precisely  in  these  ' 
respects  that  we  discover  the  strongest  eridences  of  the  essential  peculiarities  of  the  Ame- 
rican languages :  here  they  coincide  with  each  other,  and  here  exhibit  the  most  striking 
contrasts  with  all  the  otiiers  of  the  globe.  The  dlTcrsities  which  haye  sprung  up,  and 
which  haye  resulted  in  so  many  dialectioal  modifications,  as  shown  in  the  numberless  yoca- 
bularies,  furnish  a  wide  field  for  inyestigation.  Mr.  Gallatin  draws  a  conclusion  from  the 
circumstance,  which  is  quite  as  fatal  to  the  popular  hypothesis,  respecting  the  origin  of  the 
Indians,  as  the  more  sweeping  conclusion  of  Dr.  Morton.  It  is  the  length  of  time  which 
this  prodigious  subdirision  of  languages  in  America  must  hare  required,  making  eyery 
allowance  for  the  greater  changes  to  which  unwritten  languages  are  liable,  and  for  the 
necessary  breaking  up  of  nations  in  a  hvnter-state  into  separate  communitiea.  For  these 
changes,  Mr.  Gallatin  claims,  we  must  haye  the  yery  longest  time  which  we  are  permitted 
to  assume ;  and,  if  it  is  considered  necessary  to  deriye  the  American  races  from  the  other 
continent,  that  the  migration  must  haye  taken  place  at  the  earliest  assignable  period. 

"  The  following  conclusions  were  advanced  by  Mr.  Duponoeau,  as  eariy  as  1819,  in  sub- 
stantially the  following  language :  — 

**  1.  That  the  American  languages,  in  general,  are  ridi  in  words  and  grammatical 
forms ;  and,  that  in  their  complicated  construction  the  greatest  order,  method,  and  regu- 
larity preyail. 

*<  2.  That  these  complicated  forms,  which  he  calls  polysynthetic,  appear  to  exist  in  all 
these  languages,  ft'om  Greenland  to  Cape  Hem. 

«  8.  That  these  forms  differ  essentially  f^m  those  of  the  ancient  and  modem  languagea 
of  the  Old  Hemisphere."  364 

The  type  of  a  race  would  never  change,  if  kept  from  adulterations, 
as  we  have  shown  in  the  case  of  the  Jews  and  other  peoples.  So 
with  languages:  we  have  no  reason  to  beUeve  that  a  race  would 
ever  lose  its  language,  if  kept  aloof  from  foreign  influences.  It  is 
,  a  feet  that,  in  the  little  island  of  Great  Britain,  the  Welch  and  the 
Ei^se  are  still  spoken,  although  for  2000  years  pressed  upon  by  the 
strongest  influences  tending  to  exterminate  a  tongue.  So  with  the 
Basque  in  France,  which  can  be  traced  back  at  least  8000  years,  and 
is  still  spoken.  Coptic  was  the  speech  of  Egypt  for  at  least  5000 
years,  and  still  leaves  its  trace  in  the  languages  around.  The  Chinese 
has  existed  equally  as  long,  and  is  still  undisturbed. 

**  An  effort  has  been  made  by  Mr.  Blackie,  Professor  of  Greek  in  the  UniTersity  of 
Bdinburgh,  to  reform  the  pronunciation  of  Qreek  in  that  .UniTersity.  He  ift  teaching  his 
students  to  pronounce  Greek  aa  they  do  in  Greece,  insisting  that  it  is  not  a  dead,  but  a 
living  language  —  as  any  one  may  see  by  looking  at  a  Greek  newfl|»fl4[>er.  Prof.  Blackie 
gives  an  extract  from  a  newspaper  printed  last  year,  at  Athens,  giving  an  account  of  Eos* 
suth's  visit  to  America,  from  which  it  is  evident  that  the  language  of  Homer  lives  in  a  state 
of  purity  to  which,  considering  the  extraordinary  duration  of  its  literary  existence  (2500 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC 

282  ABORIGINAL    RAGES  OF    AMERICA. 

yeArs  at  least),  there  is  oo  parallel,  perhaps,  on  the  face  of  the  globe.  After  noti<nDg  a  few 
tritiiDg  modifications,  which  distinguish  modem  from  ancient  Greek,  he  states,  as  a  fact, 
that  in  three  columns  of  a  Greek  newspaper  of  the  year  1852,  there  do  not  certainly  occur 
three  words  that  are  not  pure  natlTe  Greek  —  so  Tery  slightly  has  it  been  corrupted  from 
foreign  sources."  3^ 

Although  the  nations  of  Europe  and  Western  Asia  have  been  in 
constant  turmoil  for  thousands  of  years,  and  their  languages  torn  to 
pieces,  yet  they  have  been  moulded  into  the  great  heterogeneous 
Indo-European  mass,  everywhere  showing  affinities  among  its  own 
fragments,  but  no  resemblance  to  American  languages.  The  subjoined 
extract  from  a  paper  of  Prof  Agassiz  admirably  expresses  new  and 
most  interesting  views  upon  the  natural  origin  of  speech :  — 

"  As  for  languages,  their  common  structure,  and  eren  the  analogy  in  the  sounds  of  differ- 
ent languages,  far  from  indicating  a  deriration  of  one  ftrom  another,  seem  to  us  rather  the 
necessary  result  of  that  similarity  in  the  organs  of  speech  which  causes  them  naturally  to 
produce  the  same  sound.  Who  would  now  deny  that  it  is  as  natural  for  men  to  speak  as 
it  is  for  a  dog  to  bark,  for  an  ass  to  bray,  for  a  lion  to  roar,  for  a  wolf  to  howl,  when  we 
see  that  no  nations  are  so  barbarous,  so  depriyed  of  all  human  character,  as  to  be  unable 
to  express  in  language  their  desires,  their  fears,  their  hopes  ?.  And  if  a  unity  of  language, 
any  analogy  in  sound  and  structure  between  the  languages  of  the  white  races,  indicate  a 
closer  connection  between  the  different  nations  of  that  race,  would  not  the  difference  which 
has  been  obserred  in  the  structure  of  the  languages  of  the  wild  races  —  would  not  the 
power  the  American  Indians  have  naturally  to  utter  gutturals  which  the  white  can  hardly 
imitate,  afford  additional  evidence  that  these  races  did  not  ori^ate  fh>m  a  common  stock, 
but  are  only  closely  allied  as  men,  endowed  equally  with  the  same  intellectual  powers,  the 
same  organs  of  speech,  the  same  sympathies,  only  dcTcloped  in  slightly  different  ways  in 
the  different  races,  precisely  as  we  obserre  the  fact  between  closely  allied  species  of  the 
same  genus  among  birds  ? 

**  There  is  no  ornithologist  who  ever  watched  the  natural  habits  of  birds  and  their  notes, 
who  has  not  been  surprised  at  the  similarity  of  intonation  of  the  notes  of  closely  allied 
species,  and  the  greater  difference  between  the  notes  of  birds  belonging  to  different  genera 
and  families.  The  cry  of  the  birds  of  prey,  are  alike  unpleasant  and  rough  in  all ;  the 
song  of  all  the  thrushes  is  equally  sweet  and  harmonious,  and  modulated  upon  similar 
rhythms,  and  combined  in  similar  melodies ;  the  chit  of  all  titmice  is  loquacious  and  hard ; 
the  quack  of  the  duck  is  alike  nasal  in  all.  But  who  ever  thought  that  the  robin  learned 
his  melody  from  the  mocking-bird,  or  the  mocking-bird  from  any  other  species  of  thrush  ? 
Who  ever  fancied  that  the  field-crow  learned  his  cawing  from  the  raven  or  jackdaw  ?  Cer- 
tainly, no  one  at  all  acquainted  with  the  natural  history  of  birds.  And  why  should  it  be 
different  with  men  ?  Why  should  not  the  different  races  of  men  have  originally  spoken . 
distinct  languages,  as  they  do  at  present,  differing  in  the  same  proportions  as  their  organs 
of  speech  are  variously  modified  ?  And  why  should  not  these  modifications  in  their  turn 
be  indicative  of  primitive  differences  among  them  ?  It  were  giving  up  all  induction,  all 
power  of  arguing  from  sound  premises,  if  the  force  of  such  evidence  were  to  be  denied.  "S^s 

To  whict  may  be  added  the  familiar  instance,  that,  although  the 
Negro  has  been  domiciliated  in  the  United  States  for  many  genera- 
tions among  white  people,  he  nevertheless,  whether  speaking  English, 
French,  or  Spanish,  preserves  that  peculiar,  unmistakeably-iPef^ro,  in- 
tonation, which  no  culture  can  eradicate.  So,  again,  who  ever  heard  die 

Digitized  by 

Google 

ABORIGINAL    RAGES    OF    AMERICA.  283 

voice  of  an  Indian  uttering  English,  and  could  not  instaiitly  detect 
the  articulations  of  the  Red  man  ? 

A  review  of  the  preceding  facts  shows  conclusively,  we  think,  that 
the  Natural  History  of  the  American  aborigines  runs  a  close  parallel 
with  that  of  races  in  other  countries.  We  have  made  but  two  divisions ; 
but  it  is  more  than  probable  that  each  of  these  families,  instead  of 
springing  from  a  single  pair,  have  originated  in  many.  But  we  have 
discussed  this  point  elsewhere,  and  need  not  reopen  it  here. 

Let  us  now  glance  at  the  history  of  those  aboriginal  races  which 
made  the  only  approach  towards  civilization.  It  is  true  that  our  ma- 
terials are  very  defective  in  many  particulars,  yet  enough  remain  to 
lead  ethnologists  to  some  important  results. 

No  trace  of  an  alphabet  existed  at  the  time  of  the  conquest  of  the 
continent  of  America;  but  some  tribes  possessed  an  imperfect  sort  of 
picture-writing,  from  which  a  little  archaeological  aid  can  be  derived ; 
though  we  are  compelled  to  look  chiefly  to  traditions,  which  are 
often  vague,  and  to^the  light  which  emanates  from  the  physical  cha- 
racters, antiquities,  religions,  arts,  sciences,  languages,  or  agriculture. 

The  decided  structural  connection  which  exists  among  the  various 
Indian  languages  has  been  regarded  as  sufficient  evidence,  not  only 
of  the  common  origin  of  these  languages,  but  of  the  races  speaking 
them.  The  venerable  Albert  Gallatin,  who  devoted  much  time  and 
talent  to  American  ethnography,  says :  — 

"All  those  who  haye  inyestigated  the  subject  appear  to  have  agreed  in  the  opinion  that, 
however  differing  in  their  ▼ocabularies,  there  is  an  evident  similarity  in  the  stmoture  of  all 
the  American  languages,  bespeaking  a  common  origin.  "367 

.Xow,  we  are  not  disposed  to  deny  the  close  affinity  of  these  lan- 
guages, but  we  cannot  agree  that  this  affords  any  satisfactory  proof 
of  unity  of  their  linguistic  derivation.  The  conclusion,  to  our  minds, 
is  a  non  dequitur. 

Let  us  assume,  with  Agassiz  and  Morton,  that  all  mankind  do  not 
spring  from  one  pair,  nor  even  each  race  from  distinct  pairs;  but^that 
men  were  created  in  nations,  in  the  different  zoological  provinces  where 
history  first  finds  them.  The  Caucasians,  Mongols,  Indians,  Negroes, 
were,  for  example,  created  in  large  numbers,  or  in  scattered  tribes. 
What,  let  us  ask,  would  necessarily  be  the  result  as  regards  types  and 
languages  ?  Various  individuals  of  these  tribes,  having  no  language, 
would  soon  come  in  contact,  either  through  proximity,  or  early  wan- 
derings. Unions  would  soon  take  place,  and  there  would  be  a  fusion 
of  types,  so  as  perhaps  to  change,  more  or  less,  each  original ;  just  as 
amalgamations  have  taken  place  among  all  historical  nations,  and  are 
now  going  on  in  every  country  of  the  globe. 

So  with  languages.    As  soon  as  individuals  came  in  contact,  they 

Digitized  by 

Google 

^4  ABOEIGINAL    RACES    OF    AMERICA. 

would  necessarily  commeilce  the  first  steps  towards  forming  a  speech, 
as  birds  instinctively  sing  and  dogs  bark.  The  wants,  and  range  of 
ideas  of  these  tribes,  would,  for  a  long  time,  be  very  limited,  and 
their  vocabulary,  thus  formed,  very  meagre.  The  aboriginal  races  of 
America,  though  not  identical,  display  a  certain  similarity  in  their  phy- 
sical and  intellectual  characters,  as  species  of  a  genus  in  the  animal 
kingdom  possess  certain  physical  characters  and  instincts  in  common ; 
and  it  is  probable  that  their  primitive  languages  would,  in  conse- 
quence, more  or  less,  resemble  each  other.  This  view  is  strengthened 
by  the  fact  of  general  resemblance  amongst  American  crania.  But 
nothing  in  human  anatomy  can  be  more  striking,  than  the  wide  dif- 
ference in  the  conformation  of  the  skulls  of  American  and  African 
races. 

If  two  distinct  races,  created  on  incommunicable  continents,  had 
been  left  alone,  originally,  each  to  form  its  own  languages  indepen- 
dently of  the  other,  is  it  not  presumable,  A  priori^  that  there  would 
accrue  a  much  greater  similarity  among  the  tongues  of  the  one  race, 
on  the  same  continent,  than  between  these  tongues  and  those  spoken 
on  the  other  continent  by  the  other  race  ?  Especially,  when  tiie  phy- 
sical and  moral  characteristics  of  the  former  diflfer  radically  from 
those  of  the  latter  ? 

As,  then,  the  crania  of  American  races  resemble  each  other,  while 
diftering  entirely  from  those  of  African  races,  so  do  American  and 
African  languages  differ  from  each  other  in  structure  and  vocabulary; 
although  both  are  in  harmony  with  the  various  dialects  spoken  on 
their  respective  continents  by  races  osteologically  similar. 

Whether  the  above  proposition  be  true  or  false,  all  languages  which, 
in  their  infant  state,  came  together,  would  necessarily  become  fused  into 
one  heterogeneous  mass.  Let  us  illustrate  this  point  a  little  farther. 
Suppose  that,  five  thousand  years  ago,  a  country  had  existed  large  as 
Europe,  covered  by  a  virgin  forest,  and  that  the  Creator  had  scattered 
over  it  tribes,  bearing  the  type  of  the  old  Teutonic  stock  —  each  of 
whom  commenced  at  once  in  forming  a  language — what  would  be 
the  result  in  our  day,  after  5000  years  of  migrations,  wars,  amalga- 
mations ?  Can  any  one  doubt  that  these  languages  would  be  fiised 
into  one  whole,  quite  as  homogeneous  as  those  of  the  aborigines  of 
America  ?  When  we  reflect  that  there  is  every  reason  to  believe  that 
this  continent  has  been  inhabited  for  more  than  5000  years,  such  case 
becomes  a  much  stronger  one.  Niebuhr,  in  one  of  his  letters,  ex- 
presses views  very  similar.*® 

" These  great  national  races  have  never  sprung  from  the  growth  of  a  single  family 

into  a  nation,  but  always  from  the  association  of  several  families  of  human  beings,  raised 
above  their  fellow  animals  by  the  nature  of  their  wants,  and  the  gradual  invention  of  a 

Digitized  by 

Google 

J^BORIGINAL    RAGES    OF    AMERICA.  28& 

langaage ;  each  of  which  families  probably  had  originally  formed  a  langnage  peculiar  to 
itself.  This  last  idea  belongs  to  Reinhold.  By  this  I  explain  the  immense  yariety  of  lan- 
gnages  among  the  North  American  Indians,  which  it  is  absolutely  impossible  to  refer  to  any 
common  source,  but  which,  in  some  cases,  hsTe  resolved  themselyes  into  one  language,  as 
in  Mexico  and  Peru,  for  instance ;  and  also  the  number  of  synonyms  in  the  earliest  periods 
of  languages.  On  this  account,  I  maintain  that  we  must  make  a  very  oautious  use  of  dif- 
ferences of  language  as  applied  to  the  theory  of  races,  and  have  more  regard  to  physical 
conformation ;  which  latter  is  exactly  the  same,  for  instance,  in  most  of  the  Indian  tribes 
of  North  America.  I  believe,  farther,  that  the  origin  of  the  human  race  is  not  connected 
with  any  give^  place,  but  is  to  be  sought  everywhere  over  the  face  of  the  earth ;  and  that 
it  is  an  idea  more  worthy  of  the  power  and  wisdom  of  the  Creator,  to  assume  that  he  gave 
to  each  zone  and  each  climate  its  proper  inhabitants,  to  whom  that  lone  and  climate  would 
be  most  suitable,  than  to  assume  that  the  human  species  has  degenerated  in  such  innumer- 
able instanoes." 

Wiseman  approaches  the  subject  from  a  dijfferent  point  of  view, 
offering  another  explanation  for  the  dissimilarity  of  languages.  He 
maintains  that  there  are  affinities  among  all  languages,  which  can  only 
be  explained  by  original  unitf/y  but  acknowledges,  on  the  other  side, 
certain  radical  differences,  which  are  only  to  be  explained  by  a  mi- 
racle.   He  says,  in  Lecture  second :  — 

*<  As  the  radical  difference  among  the  languages  forbids  their  being  eonsidered  dialects, 
or  offshootSkOf  one  another,  we  are  driven  to  the  conclusion  that,  on  the  one  hand,  these 
languages  must  have  been  originally  united  in  one,  whence  they  drew  their  common  ele- 
ments, essential  to  them  all ;  and,  on  the  other,  that  the  separation  between  them,  which 
destroyed  other  and  no  less  important  elements  of  resemblance,  could  not  have  been  caused 
by  any  gradual  departure,  or  individual  development — for  these  we  have  long  since  ex- 
cluded—  but  by  some  violent,  unusual,  and  active  force,  sufficient  alone  to  reconcile  these 
conflicting  appearances,  and  to  account  at  once  for  the  resemblances  and  the  differences."  ^es 

This  view  of  the  enigma  would  be  much  the  most  agreeable  to 
many  readers,  inasmuch  as,  by  the  obtrusion  of  an  unwarranted  phy- 
sical impossibility,  it  gets  clear  of  that  radical  diversity  of  languages 
which  philology  has  not  yet  been  able  to  overcome.  Such  reasoning, 
however  plausible  at  the  time  when  it  was  written,  will  not  stand 
ihe  test  of  criticism  in  the  year  1853.  The  fects  revealed  to  us  by 
the  subsequent  discoveries  of  Lepsius  and  others,  require  a  much 
higher  antiquity  for  nations  and  languages  than  the  Cardinal  had  any 
idea  of;  and  which  is  entirely  irreconcilable  with  the  Jewish  date  for 
the  "confusion  of  tongues'*  at  Babel,  to  which  he  plainly  points.  If 
that  confusion  of  tongues  in  Genesis  were  even  taken  as  literally  true, 
it  could  neither  have  applied  to  all  the  nations  of  the  earth,  nor, 
particularly,  to  those  inhabiting  parts  of  the  world  unknown  to 
Oriental  geography  in  the  time  of  Moses  or  Abraham;  and  this 
owing  to  exegetical  reasons  hereinafter  set  forth. 

Clavigero,  whose  ability  and  opportunities  confer  upon  his  autho- 
rity especial  weight,  gives  the  following  chronology,  derived  from 
data  obtained  through  Mexicans :  — 

Digitized  by 

Google 

286  ABORIGINAL    RACES    OF  AMERICA. 

A.  D. 

The  Toltecs  arriyed  in  Anahuao,  or  the  country  now  called  Mexico, 

migrating  from  th^  North .^ 648 

They  abandoned  the  country 1051 

The  Chichemecs  arriyed 1170 

The  Achblchnans  arrived  about 1200 

The  Mexi<»ns  reached  Tula 1296 

They  founded  Mexico'. 1825 

Here,  then,  we  have  the  dates  of  successive  migrations  of  these 
Toltecan  races,  from  the  seventh  to  the  fourteenth  century;  and, 
although  much  doubt  exists  with  regard  to  the  accuracy  of  some  of 
these  dates,  no  one  who  investigates  the  subject  will  deny  that  they  are 
sufficiently  close  for  all  practical  purposes,  and  maybe  taken  as  the  basis 
of  chronological  calculation.  Clavigero,  Qallatin,  Humboldt,  Pres- 
cott,  Squier,  Morton — in  short,  all  authorities,  are  substantially  agreed 
on  this  point.  These  Toltecan  ^ace^,  who  it  seems  inhabited,  though 
perhaps  at  different  epochs,  almost  every  portion  of  the  present  terri- 
tory of  the  United  States,  must  have  been  pressed  upon  by  causes 
now  unknown  to  us,  and  forced  to  migrate  from  their  original  abodes. 
They  sought  an  asylum  in  the  southern  countries  —  Mexico,  Central 
America,  Peru ;  and  here  gave  birth  to  the  semi-civilization  found  at 
the  time  of  the  Spanish  conquest.  Gallatin,  however,  thinks  it  most 
probable  that  the  Toltecan  races  and  their  civilization  commenced  in 
the  tropic,  and  spread  towards  the  north.  Over  an  immense  territory, 
bounded  by  the  Atlantic  and  Pacific,  the  Qulf  of  Mexico  and  the 
Great  Lakes,  are  scattered  those  countless  mounds,  on  the  origin 
of  which  the  savage  tribes  surrounding  them  for  the  last  three  or 
four  centuries  have  not  even  preserved  a  tradition! 

'*  Not  far  from  one  hundred  enclosures,  of  yarious  sizes,  and  five  hundred  mounds,  are 
found  in  Ross  county,  Ohio.  The  number  of  tumuli  in  the  State  may  be  safely  estimated 
at  ten  thousand,  and  the  number  of  enclosures  at  one  thousand  or  fifteen  hundred."  370 

From  this  single  State,  constituting  but  a  small  fraction  of  the 
surface  over  which  they  are  scattered,  may  be  formed  some  idea  of 
the  enormous  number  of  these  remains  and  of  the  ante-historical  popu- 
lation which  constructed  them.  These  tumuli  were  of  several  distinct 
kinds,  viz.,  sepulchral  and  sacrificial ;  dikes,  fortifications,  &c.  Squier's 
investigations  lead  him  to  aver :  — 

**  The  features  common  to  all  are  elementary,  and  identify  them  as  appertaining  to  one 
grand  system,  owing  its  origin  to  a  family  of  men  moving  in  the  same  general  direction, 
acting  under  common  impulses,  and  influenced  by  similar  causes.*' 

These  mounds,  from  their  number  and  magnitude,  present  indis- 
putable evidence  of  the  existence  of  very  large  agricultural  popula- 
tions. How  many  centuries  were  these  people  increasing,  migrating, 
and  concentrating,  around  so  many  thousand  widely-scattered  nuclei  ? 

Digitized  by 

Google 

ABORIGINAL    RACES    OF    AMERICA.  287 

How  long  was  it  before  they  possessed  a  density  and  command  of 
labor  requisite  for  such  structures  ?  How  long,  after  building  such 
national  monuments,  did  they  live  around,  before  abandoning  them  ? 
"Were  they  not  the  same  people  who  migrated  into  Mexico  and  Cen- 
tral America  from  the  seventh  to  the  thirteenth  century  a.  c.  ?  Surely, 
any  reply  to  this  view  of  the  subject  alone,  in  connection  with  the 
physical  type  of  the  race,  must  carry  them  back  to  times  contempo- 
rary with  the  Pharaohs  of  Egypt. 

Too  valuable  to  be  mutilated,  a  long  extract  from  the  standard 
work  before  quoted  is  here  introduced. 

'*  The  antiquity  of  the  ancient  monuments  of  the  Mississippi  V&llej  has  been  made  the 
subject  of  incidental  remark  in  the  foregoing  chapters.  It  will  not  be  out  of  place  here  to 
allade  once  more  to  some  of  the  facts  bearing  upon  this  point  Of  course,  no  attempt  to 
fix  their  data  accurately,  from  the  circumstances  of  the  case,  can  now  be  successful.  The 
most  that  can  be  done  is,  to  arrive  at  approximate  results.  The  fact  that  none  of  the 
ancient  monuments  occur  upon  the  latest  formed' terraces  of  the  riyer-yalleys  of  Ohio,  is  one 
of  much  importance  in  its  bearing  upon  "this  question.  If,  as  we  are  amply  warranted  in 
belieying,  these  terraces  mark  the  degrees  of  the  subsidence  of  the  streams,  one  of  the  four 
(which  may  be  traced)  has  been  formed  since  those  streams  hsTO  followed  their  present 
courses.  There  is  no  good  reason  for  supposing  that  the  mound-builders  would  have 
aToided  building  upon  that  terrace,  while  they  erected  their  works  promiscuously  upon  all 
the  others.  And  if  they  had  built  upon  it,  some  slight  traces  of  their  works  would  yet  be 
risible,  however  much  influence  one  may  assign  to  disturbing  causes— overflows,  and  shift- 
ing channels.  Assuming,  then,  that  the  lowest  terrace,  on  the  Scioto  river,  for  example, 
has  been  formed  since  the  era  of  the  mounds,  we  must  next  consider  that  the  excavating 
power  of  the  Western  rivers  diminishes  yearly,  in  proportion  as  they  approximate  towards 
a  general  level.  On  th^  Lower  Mississippi,  where  alone  the  ancient  monuments  are  some- 
times invaded  by  the  water,  the  bed  of  the  stream  is  rising,  from  the  deposition  of  the  ma- 
terials brought  down  from  the  upper  tributaries,  where  the  excavating  process  is  going  on. 
This  excavating  power,  it  is  calculated,  is  in  an  inverse  ratio  to  the  square  of  the  depth  — 
tl^at  is  to  say,  diminishes  as  the  square  of  the  depth  increases.  Taken  to  be  approxi- 
mately correct,  this  rule  establishes,  that  the  formation  of  the  latest  terrace,  by  the  opera- 
tion of  the  same  causes,  must  have  occupied  much  more  time  than  the  formation  of  any  of 
the  preceding  three.  Upon  these  premises,  the  time  since  the  streams  have  flowed  in  their 
present  courses  may  be  divided  into  four  periods  of  different  lengths — of  which  the  latest, 
ntpposed  to  have  elapsed  tinee  the  race  of  the  mounds  flourished^  is  much  the  longest, 

**  The  fact  that  the  rivers  in  shifting  their  channels  have  in  sottie  instances  encroached 
upon  the  superior  terraces,  so  as  in  part  to  destroy  works  situated  upon  them,  and  after- 
wards receded  to  long  distances  of  a  fourth  or  half  a  mile  or  upwards,  is  one  which  should 
not  be  overlooked  in  this  connection.  In  the  case  of  the  *  high  bankworks,'  the  recession 
has  been  nearly  three-fourths  of  a  mile,  and  the  intervening  terrace  or  '  bottom'  was,  at 
the  period  of  the  early  settlement,  covered  with  a  dense  forest.  This  recession  and  subse- 
quent forest  growth  must  of  necessity  have  taken  place  since  the  river  encroached  upon  the  . 
ancient  works  here  alluded  to. 

**  Without  doing  more  than  to  allude  to  the  circumstance  of  the  exceedingly  decayed  state 
of  the  skeletons  found  in  the  n)Ounds,  and  to  the  amount  of  vegetable  accumulations  in  the 
ancient  excavations  and  around  the  ancient  works,  we  pass  to  another  fttet,  perhaps  more 
important  in  its  bearing  upon  the  question  of  the  antiquity  of  these  works,  than  any  of 
those  presented  above.  It  is,  that  they  are  covered  with  primitive  forests,  in  no  way  dis- 
tinguishable from  those  which  surround  them,  in  places  where  it  is  probable  no  clearings 

Digitized 

zed  by  Google 

288  ABORIGINAL    RAGES   OF   AXl&RICA. 

were  ever  made.  Some  of  the  trees  of  these  forests  have  a  pontiTe  sntiqiufy  of  from  six 
to  eight  hundred  years.  They  are  found  surrounded  with  the  mouldering  remains  of 
others,  undoubtedly  of  equal  original  dimensions,  but  now  fallen  and  almost  incorporated 
with  the  soil.  Allow  a  reasonable  time  fw  the  eneroaohment  of  the  forest,  after  all  the  woito 
were  abandoned  by  their  builders,  and  for  the  period  interrening  between  that  eroit  and 
the  date  of  their  oonstruotion,  and  we  are  oompelled  to  assign  them  no  inconsiderable  anti- 
quity. But,  as  already  obserred,  the  forests  covering  these  worlEi  correspond  in  all 
respects  witl^  the  surrounding  forests ;  the  same  yarieties  of  trees  are  found,  in  the  same 
proportions,  and  they  have  a  like  primitlTe  aspect  This  Aict  was  remarked  by  the  late 
President  Habjuson,  and  was  put  forward  by  him  as  one  ot  the  strcmgest  evidences  of  the 
high  antiqui^  of  these  works.  In  an  address  before  the  Historical  Soeiety  of  Ohio,  he 
said:  — 

« <  The  process  by  which  nature  restores  the  forest  to  its  original  state,  after  being  onoe 
cleared,  is  extremely  alow.  The  rich  lands  of  the  West  are  indeed  soon  covered  again,  but 
the  character  of  the  growth  is  entirely  different,  and  continues  so  for  a  long  period.  In 
several  places  upon  the  Ohio,  and  upon  the  farm  which  I  occupy,  clearings  were  made  in 
the  first  settlement  of  the  country,  and  subsequently  abandoned  and  suffered  to  grow  up 
Some  of  these  new  forests  are  now,  sure,  of  fifty  years'  growth ;  but  they  have  made  so 
little  progress  towards  attaining  the  appearance  of  the  immediately  contiguous  forest,  as 
to  induce  any  man  of  reflection  to  determine  that  at  least  ten  times  fifty  years  must  elapse 
before  their  complete  assimilation  can  1>e  effected.  We  find,  in  the  ancient  works,  all  tiiat 
variety  of  trees  which  give  such  unrivalled  beauty  to  our  forests,  in  natural  proportions* 
The  first  growth,  on  the  same  kind  of  land,  once  cleared  and  then  abandoned  to  nature,  on 
the  contrary,  is  nearly  homogeneous,  often  stinted  to  one  or  two,  at  most  three,  kinds  of 
timber.  If  the  ground  has  been  cultivated,  the  yellow  locust  vrill  thickly  spring  up ;  if 
not  cultivated,  the  black  and  white  walnut  vrill  be  the  prevailing  growth.  ...  Of  what 
immense  age,  then,  must  be  the  works  so  often  referred  to,  covered,  as  they  are,  by  at 
least  the  second  growth  after  the  primitive-forest  state  was  regained  ? ' 

'<  It  is  not  undertaken  to  assign  a  period  for  the  assimilation  here  indicated  to  take  place. 
It  mu8tf  however,  be  metuured  by  eenturiee. 

**  In  respect  to  the  extent  of  territory  occupied  at  one  time^  or  at  successive  periods,  by 
the  race  of  the  mounds,  so  far  as  indicated  by  the  occurrence  of  their  monuments,  little 
need  be  said,  in  addition  to  the  observations  presented  in  the  first  diapter.  It  cannot,  how- 
ever, have  escaped  notice,  that  the  relics  found  in  the  mounds— composed  of  materials  pe- 
culiar to  places  separated  as  widely  as  the  ^ranges  of  the  AUeghanies  on  the  east,  and  the 
Sierras  of  Mexico  on  the  west,  the  waters  of  the  great  lakes  on  the  north,  and  those  of  the 
Gulf  of  Mexico  on  the  south  —  denote  the  contemporaneous  existence  of  communication 
between  these  extremes.  For  we  find,  side  by  side,  in  the  same  mounds,  native  copper 
from  Lake  Superior,  mica  from  the  Alleghanies,  shells  from  the  Gulf,  and  obsidian  (perhaps 
porphyry)  from  Mexico.  This  fact  seems  to  conflict  seriously  vrith  the  hypothesis  of  a 
migration,  either  northward  or  southward.  Further  and  more  extended  investigations  and 
observations  may,  nevertheless,  serve  satisfactorily  to  settle,  not  only  this,  but  other  equally 
interesting  questions,  connected  with  the  extinct  race,  whose  name  is  lost  to  tradition  itself, 
and  whose  very  existence  is  left  to  the  sole  and  silent  attestations  of  the  rude,  but  oft  im- 
posing monuments,  which  throng  the  valleys  of  the  West.'' 

A  dispassionate  review  of  the  evidences  thus  cursorily  presented, 
in  support  of  the  contemporaneousness  of  American  races  with  those 
first  recorded  on  the  monuments  of  the  eastern  world,  when  taken 
together,  ought,  we  think,  to  satisfy  any  unprejudiced  mind.  Nor 
can  anything  be  twisted  out  of  the  Jewish  records  to  show  that,  at 
the  time  when  many  races  were  already  formed  in  the  old  Levant, 

Digitized  by 

Google 

ABORIGINAL    RAGES    OF  AMERICA.  289 

at  least  one  distinct  type  of  man  did  not  exist  on  the  Western  Gonti- 
nest.  But,  to  our  minds,  stronger  than  all  other  reasonings,  not  ex- 
cepting the  antithesis  of  languages,  is  that  drawn  from  the  antiquity 
of  skulls. 

The  vertical  occiput,  the  prominent  vertex,  the  great  interparietal 
diameter,  the  low  defective  forehefad,  the  small  internal  capacity  of 
the  skrrtl,  the  square  or  rounded  form,  the  quadrangular  orbits,  the 
massive  maxUlse,  are  peculiarities  which  stamp  the  American  groups, 
more  especially  the  Toltecan  family,  and  distinguish  them  widely 
from  any  other  races  of  the  earth,  ancient  or  modem. 

As  before  remarked,  these  characters  are  seen  to  some  extent  in  all 
Indians :  although  the  savage  tribes  exhibit  a  greater  development 
of  the  posterior  portion  of  the  brain  than  the  Toltecs  —  thus  supply- 
ing, in  Natural  History,  the  link  of  organism  which  assimilates  the 
Barbarous  septs  of  America  to  the  savage  races  of  the  Old  World. 

An  interesting  fact  was  mentioned  to  us  by  an  American  office]^, 
of  high  standing,  who  accompanied  our  army  in  its  march  through 
Mexico  during  the  late  war.  Although  his  head,  which  we  mea- 
sured, is  below  the  average  size  of  the  Anglo-Saxon  race,  he  told  us 
that  it  was  with  difikjulty  he  could  find,  in  a  large  hat-store  at  Mata- 
moras,  a  single  hat  which  would  go  on  his  head.  Hats  suited  to 
Mexicans  are  too  small  for  Anglo-Saxons:  a  fact  corroborated  by 
ample  testimony.  Throughout  the  winter  season,  in  Mobile,  at  least 
one  hundred  Indians  of  the  Choctaw  tribe  wander  about  the  streets, 
endeavoring  to  dispose  of  their  little  packs  of  wood ;  and  a  glance 
at  iheir  heads  will  show  that  they  correspond,  in  every  particular,  with 
the  anatomical  description  just  given.  They  present  heads  precisely 
analogous  to  those  ancient  crania  taken  from  the  mounds  over  the 
whole  territory  of  the  United  States;  while  they  most  strikingly 
contrast  with  the  Anglo-Saxons,  French,  Spaniards  and  Negroes, 
among  whom  they  are  moving. 

It  is  impossible  to  say  how  long  human  bones  may  be  preserved  in 
a  dry  soil.  There  are  some  curious  statements  of  Squier,  and  many 
more  of  Wilson,^  respecting  the  barrows  of  the  ancient  Britons,  where 
skeletons  have  been  preserved  at  least  2000  years :  — 

**  CoBsidering  that  the  earth  aroimd  these  Bkeletona  is  wonderfallj  compact  and  dry,  and 
that  the  conditions  for  their  preserration  are  exceedingly  faTorable,  while  they  are  in  fact 
80  much  decayed,  we  may  form  some  approximate  estimate  of  thdr  remote  antiquity.  In 
the  barrows  of  the  ancient  Britons,  entire,  well-preserved  skeletons  are  found,  although 
possessing  an  undoubted  antiquity  of  at  least  eighteen  hundred  years.  Local  causes  may 
produce  singular  results  in  particular  instances,  but  we  speak  now  of  these  remains  in  the 
aggregate."  372 

From  the  ruins  of  Nineveh  and  Babylon  we  have  bones  of  at  least 
2600  years  old  ;^  from  the  pyramids^*  and  the  catacombs  of  Egypt, 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC 

290  ABORIGINAL    RAGES   OF   AMERICA. 

both  mummied  and  unmummied  crania  have  been  taken,  of  still 
higher  antiquity,  in  perfect  preservation ;  and  numerous  other  proo& 
might  be  brought  forward  to  the  same  effect :  nevertheless,  the  ske- 
letons deposited  in  our  Indian  mounds,  from  the  Lakes  to  the  Qulf, 
are  crumbling  into  dust  through  age  alone ! 
Speaking  of  the  mound-builders,  it  is  said :  — 

<«  The  only  skull  inoontestobly  beloDging  to  an  indiTidual  of  that  noe,  whieh'has  been 
recovered  entire,  or  suffioientlj  well  preserved  to  be  of  value  for  purposes  of  comparison, 
was  taken  from  the  hill-mound,  numbered  8  in  the  map  of  a  section  of  twelve  miles  of  the 
Scioto  Valley." 

Squier*s  account  continues:  — 

"  The  circumstances  under  which  this  skull  was  found  are,  altogether,  bo  eztraordinarj 
as  to  merit  a  detailed  account  It  will  be  observed,  ftrom  the  map,  that  the  mound  aboT* 
indicated  is  situated  upon  the  summit  of  a  high  hill,  overlooking  the  valley  of  the  Scioto, 
about  four  miles  below  the  city  of  Chilicothe.  It  is  one  of  the  most  prominent  and  com- 
manding positions  in  that  section  of  country.  Upon  the  summit  of  this  hill  rises  a  conical 
knoll,  of  so  great  regularity  as  almost  to  induce  the  belief  that  it  is  itself  artificiaL  Upon 
the  very  apex  of  this  knoll,  and  covered  by  the  trees  of  the  primitive  forests,  is  the  monnd. 
It  is  about  eight  feet  high,  by  forty  or  fifty  feet  base.  The  superstructure  is  a  tough  yeUow 
day,  which,  at  the  depth  of  three  feet,  is  mixed  with  large,  rough  stones ;  as  shown  in  the 
accompanying  section,  (Fig.  197). 

"  These  stones  rest  upon  a  dry,  calcareous  deposit  of  buried  earth  and  small  stones,  of  m 
dark  black  colour,  and  much  compacted.  This  deposit  is  about  two  feet  in  thickness,  in 
the  centre,  and  rests  upon  the  original  soil.    In  excavating  the  mound,  a  large  plate  of 

mica  was  discovered,  placed  upon  the  stones Immediately  underneath  this  plate  of 

mica,  and  in  the  centre  of  the  buried  deposit,  was  found  the  skuU  figured  in  the  plates 
(Figs.  198,  199).  It  was  discovered  resting  upon  its  face.  The  lower  Jaw,  as,  indeed,  the 
entire  skeleton,  excepting  the  clavicle,  a  few  cervical  vertebrsB,  and  some  of  the  bones  of 
the  feet,  all  of  which  were  huddled  around  the  skull,  were  wanting. 

«  From  the  entire  singularity  of  this  burial,  it  might  be  inferred  that  the  deposit  was  a 
comparatively  recent  one ;  but  the  Jfact  that  the  various  layers  of  carbonaceous  earth,  stones^ 
and  clay  were  entirely  undisturbed,  anti  in  no  degree  intermixed,  settles  the  question  be- 
yond doubt,  that  the  skull  was  placed  where  it  was  found,  at  the  time  of  the  construction 
of  the  mound.  .  .  . 

**  This  skull  is  wonderfiilly  preserved ;  unaccountably  so,  unless  the  circumstances  under 
which  it  was  found  may  be  regarded  as  most  favorable  to  such  a  result  The  imperviou»> 
ness  of  the  mound  to  water,  from  the  nature  of  the  material  composing  it,  and  its  position 
on  the  summit  of  an  eminence,  subsiding  in  every  direction  from  its  base,  are  circumstances 
which,  joined  to  the  antiseptic  qualities  of  the  carbonaceous  deposit  enveloping  the  skull, 
may  satisfactorily  account  for  its  excellent  preservation." 

A  twofold  interest  attaches  to  the  mound  (Fig.  197),  of  whi«h  we 
offer  a  sectional  tracing.    On  the  one  hand  it  indicates  the  pains 

Fio.  197. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

ABOBIOINAL    RAGES    OF    AMERICA. 

291 

bestowed  by  ancient  American  man  upon  the  dead ;  thus  evincing 
considerable  civilization :  on  the  other,  the  central  tumular  position 
in  which  this  unique  cranium  was  discovered,  establishes  an  ante* 
Columbian  age  for  its  builders,  and  segregates  it  entirely  from  the 
ruder  sepulchres  of  our  modern  Indians. 

We  present  a  vertical  and  a  profile  engraving  of  this  ancient  skull,. 
one  exceedingly  characteristic  of  our  American  races,  although  more 

Fio.  198. 

Fio.  109. 

particularly  of  the  ToUecan ;  having  already  stated  that  the  Barha- 
rous  tribes  possessed  more  development  of  the  posterior  part  of  the 
brain  than  the  Toltecs.  An  examination  of  this  skull  will  elicit  the 
following  characteristic  peculiarities  —  forehead  low,  narrow,  and  re- 
ceding ;  flattened  occiput ;  a  perpendicular  line  drawn  through  the 
external  meatus  of  the  ear,  divides  the  brain  into  two  unequal  parts, 
of  which  the  posterior  is  much  the  smaller ;  forming,  in  this  respect, 
a  striking  contrast  with  other,  and  more  particularly  the  Negro,  races. 
Viewed  from  above,  the  anterior  part  of  the  brain  is  narrow,  and  the 
posterior  and  middle  portion,  over  the  organs  of  caution,  secretive- 
ness,  destructiveness,  &c.,  veiy  broad,  thus  lending  much  support  to 
phrenology:  vertex  prominent.  [These  peculiarities  are  confirmed  by 
the  numerous  measurements  of  Dr.  Morton,  and  by  the  observations 
of  many  other  anatomists,  as  well  as  our  own.  Identical  characters, 
too,  pervade  all  the  American  races,  ancient  and  modern,  over  the 

whole  continent.  We  have  compared 
many  heads  of  living  tribes,  Cherokees, 
Choctaws,  Mexicans,  &c.,  as  well  as  cra- 
nia from  mounds  of  all  ages,  and  the 
same  general  organism  characterizes 
each  one.  — J.  C.  N.] 

Any  South- African  race,  compared 
with  an  American  Indian,  would  ex- 
hibit a  contrast  almost  as  salient ;  but 
a  Bosjesman  (Fig.  200)  from  the  Cape 

Fia.  200.^5 

Digitized  by 

Google 

292  ABORIGINAL    RAGES   OF   AXERIGA. 

of  Good  Hope  answers  our  purpose.  Osteolo^cally,  they  are  as  dis- 
tinct fi*om  each  other  as  the  skull  of  a  fossil  hyena  is  from  that  of  a 
prairie  wolf;  at  the  same  time  that  each  human  cranium  is  emphati- 
cally typical  of  the  race  to  which  it  appertains. 

But,  if  comparison  of  an  antique  American  cranium  (Fign98) 
with  the  skull  of  a  modem  Bushman  (Fig.  200),  evolves  instant^ie- 
ously  such  palpable  contrasts,  still  more  extraordinary  and  startling 
are  those  which  resile  when  we  compare  either  or  both  with  one  of 
the  primeval  "Jfcu>n6e-ig>AaK<?,"  or  boat^haped  skulls  (Pigs.  201,  202), 

Fia.  202. 

fio.  201. 

exhumed  from  the  pre-Celtic  caims  of  Scotland.*^  Can  anything 
human  be  more  diverse  than  the  osteolopcal  conformation  of  the  most 
ancient  type  of  man  known  in  America  fix)m  that  of  the  primordial 
Briton  ?  Be  it  duly  noted,  too,  that  while,  on  the  American  conti- 
nent, the  earliest  cranium  resulting  from  Squier's  researches  is  eveiy 
way  identical  (as  we  shall  demonstrate  hereinafter)  with  crania  of  the 
Cfreeksy  and  other  Indian  nations  of  our  own  generation,  men  of  this 
kumhe-kephalic  type  occupied  the  British  Isles  long  prior  to  the  ad- 
vent of  those  brachf/'kephalic  races,  who  were  precursors  of  the  old 
Celts;  themselves,  in  Britain,  antedating  all  history!  Of  this  fact 
"Wilson's  Archoeology  of  Scotland  furnishes  exuberant  evidences ;  to 
be  enlarged  upon  by  us  in  dealing  with  "Comparative  Anatomy." 

Hamilton  Smith  and  Morton  have  contended  that  no  test  is 
known  by  which  fossil  human  are  distinguishable  from  other  fossil 
bones  of  extinct  species.^  The  question,  to  say  the  least,  is  an  open 
one ;  although  none  can  aver  that  there  are  not  human  fossils  as  old 
as  those  of  the  mastodon  and  other  extinct  animals.  The  following 
extract  from  Morton's  memoir  is  interesting,  taken  in  connection 
with  the  American  type :  — 

Digitized  by 

Google 

ABORIGINAL    RAGES   OF    AMERICA.  293 

**  It  18  necessary  to  advert  to  the  diseoyeries  of  Dr.  Land,  among  the  bone-eayes  of  Minas 
Gerdas,  in  Brazil.  This  distingnished  trayeller  has  found  the  remains  of  man  in  these 
oayems  associated  with  those  of  extinct  genera  and  species  of  animals ;  and  the  attendant 
eircamstances  lead  to  the  reasonable  conclusion  that  they  were  contemporaneous  inhabit- 
ants of  the  region  in  which  they  were  found.  Tet,  eyen  here,  the  form  of  the  skull  differs 
in  nothing  fh)m  the  acknowledged  type,  unless  it  be  in  the  still  greater  depression  of  the 
forehead  and  a  peculiarity  of  form  in  the  teeth.  With  respect  to  the  latter,  Dr.  Lund 
describes  the  incisors  as  haying  an  oyal  surface,  of  which  the  axis  is  antero-posterior,  in  ' 
place  of  the  sharp  and  chisel-like  edge  of  ordinary  teeth  of  the  same  class.  He  assures  us, 
that  he  found  it  equally  in  the  young  and  the  aged,  and  is  confident  it  is  not  the  result  of 
attrition,  as  is  manifestly  the  case  in  those  Egyptian  heads  in  which  Professor  Blumenbach 
noticed  an  analogous  peculiarity.  I  am  not  prepared  to  question  an  opinion  which  I  hayo 
not  been  able  to  test  by  personal  obseryation ;  but  it  is  obyious  that,  if  such  differences 
exist  independently  of  art  or  accident,  they  are  at  least  specific,  and  consequently  of  the 
highest  interest  in  etlmology. 

«  The  head  of  the  celebrated  OttadiUoupe  tkeUUm  forms  no  exception  to  the  type  of  the 
race.  The  skeleton  itself,  which  is  in  a  semi-fossil  state,  is  presenred  in  the  British  Mu- 
seum—  but  wants  the  cranium,  which,  howeyer,  is  supposed  to  be  recoyered  in  the  one 
found  by  M.  L'H^minier,  in  Guadaloupe,  and  brought  by  him  to  Charleston,  South  Carolina. 
Dr.  Moultrie,  who  has  described  this  yery  interesting  relic,  makes  the  following  obser- 
yations :  <  Compared  with  the  cranium  of  a  Peruyian  presented  to  Professor  Holbrook, 
by  Dr.  Morton,  in  the  Museum  of  the  State  of  South  Carolina,  the  craniological  similarity 
manifested  between  them  is  too  striking  to  permit  us  to  question  their  national  identity, 
There  is  in  both  the  same  coronal  eleyation,  occipital  compreiteion,  and  lateral  protu- 
berance, accompanied  with  frontal  depression,  which  mark  the  American  yariety  in 
general ' " 

It  seems  clear,  that  the  iDdians  of  America  are  indigenous  to  the 
soil;  but  it  does  not  follow,  that. in  ancient  times  there  might  not 
have  been  some  occasional  or  accidental  immigrations  from  the  Old 
World,  though  too  small  to  affect  materially  the  language  or  the  type 
of  the  aborigines.  There  are  several  quite  recent  examples  recorded, 
where  boats  with  persons  in  them  have  been  blown,  from  the  Pacific 
islands  and  other  distant  parts,  to  the  shores  of  America ;  and  in  this 
way  may  be  explained  certain  facts,  connected  with  language,  which 
have  been  adduced  as  evidence  of  Asiatic  origin  for  our  Indians. 
But  we  protest,  in  the  name  of  science,  against  the  notion  that  any 
of  these  ancient  possibilities  have  yet  entered  into  the  category  of 
ascertained  facts.  On  the  contrary,  all  known  anatomical,  archseo- 
lo^cal,  and  monumental  proofs  oppose  such  hypothesis. 

Possible,  also,  is  it  that  the  Northmen  discovered  tMs  country 
several  hundred  years  before  Columbus,  and  held  intercourse  with  it 
as  far  as  Labrador;  yet  they  have  left  no  trace  of  tongue  nor  vestige 
of  art. 

Agriculture  is  acknowledged  on  all  hands,  to  have  incited  the  first 
steps  toward  civilization,  and,  for  some  most  curious  facts  on  this  head, 
the  reader  is  referred  to  Mr.  Gallatin's  paper.^  Was  the  agriculture 
found  in  America  by  the  Whites,  introduced  at  an  early  epoch  from 
abroad,  or  was  it  of  domestic  origin?    This  question  has  excited 

Digitized  by 

Google 

294  ABORIGINAL    RACES    OP    AMERICA. 

much  conjecture,  and  is  an  important  one,  as  it  necessarily  involves 
the  origin  of  American  civilization.  The  following  facts  are  certainly 
very  significant :  — 

1.  All  those  nutritious  plants  cultivated  and  used  for  food  in  the 
other  hemisphere,  such  as  millet,  rice,  wheat,  rye,  barley,  and  oats, 
as  well  as  our  domestic  animals — horses,  cattle,  sheep,  camels,  goats, 
&c.,  were  entirely  unknown  to  the  Americans. 

2.  Maize,  the  great  and  almost  sole  foundation  of  American  civili- 
zation, is  exclusively  indigenous,  and  was  not  known  to  the  other 
hemisphere  imtilafter  the  discovery  of  America.^ 

The  kind  of  beans  by  the  Spaniards  called  frijohi^  still  cultivated 
by  the  Indians  in  Mexico  and  Central  America,  is  indigenous  to  our 
continent,  and  even  now  unused  in  the  other. 

If  these  facts  be  conceded,  as  they  have  heretofore  been  by  all 
naturalists  and  archseologists,  it  will  not  be  questioned  that  the  agri- 
culture of  America  was  of  domestic  origin,  as  well  as  the  semi-civiliza- 
tion of  any  Indian  cultivators.  These  premises  alone  establish  a 
primitive  origin  and  high  antiquity  for  the  American  races. 

Inquiry  into  their  astronomical  knowledge,  their  arithmetic,  divi- 
sion of  time,  names  of  days,  &c.,  will  show  that  their  whole  system  was 
pecuhar ;  and,  if  not  absolutely  original,  must  antedate  all  histories^ 
times  of  the  Old  World,  since  it  has  no  parallel  on  record.  The 
Chaldeans,  the  Chinese,  the  Egyptians,  and  other  nations  of  the  East- 
em  hemisphere,  had  divisions  of  time  and  astronomical  knowledge 
more  than  2000  years  b.  c.  ;  nevertheless,  among  ancient  or  modem 
Indians,  there  remains  no  trace  of  these  trans-Atlantic  systems. 

*<  Almost  all  the  nations  of  the  world  appear,  in  their  first  attempts  to  compute  time^  to 
hETe  resorted  to  Innar  months,  which  they  afterwards  adjusted  in  yarious  wajs,  in  order  to 
make  them  correspond  with  the  solar  jear.  In  America,  the  Peruvians,  the  Chilians,  and 
the  Muyscas,  proceeded  in  the  same  way ;  but  not  so  with  the  Mexicans.  And  it  is  a 
remarkable  feust,  that  the  short  period  of  seven  days  (our  week),  so  universal  in  Europe  and 
in  Asia,  was  unknown  to  all  the  Indians,  either  of  North  or  South  America.''  360  [Had  this 
learned  and  unbiassed  philolo^t  lived  to  read  Lepsius,^^  he  would  have  excepted  the 
Egyptians ;  who  divided  their  months  into  ihiru  decadeSf  and  knew  nothing  of  weeks  of 
seven  days.  Neither  did  the  Chinese,  ancient  or  modem,382  ever  observe  a  **  seventh  day  of 
rest"  — G.B.  G.] 

**  All  the  nations  of  Mexico,  Tucatan,  and  probably  of  Central  America,  which  were 
within  the  pale  of  civilization,  had  two  distinct  modes  of  computing  time.  The  first  and 
vulgar  mode,  was  a  period  of  twenty  days ;  which  has  certainly  no  connection  with  any 
celestial  phenomenon,  and  which  was  clearly  derived  from  their  system  of  numeration,  or 
arithmetic,  which  was  peculiar  to  them. 

<*  The  other  computation  of  time  was  a  period  of  thirteen  days,  which  was  designated  as 
bemg  the  count  of  the  moon,  and  which  is  said  to  have  been  derived  from  the  number  of 
days  when,  in  each  of  its  evolutions,  the  moon  ^)pears  above  the  horizon  during  the  greater 
part  of  the  night  .  .  . 

*<  We  distinguish  the  days  of  our  months  by  their  numerical  order —  first,  second,  third, 
&o.,  day  of  tiie  month;  and  the  days  of  our  week  1^  specific  names  —  Sunday,  Monday, 

Digitized  by 

Google 

A&ORIGINAL    RACES    OF    AMERICA.  295 

Ae.  Tht  tfezicans  distingaiidied  eyery  one  of  their  days  of  the  period  of  twenty  days,  by 
a  specific  name— (7t>aci/t,  JEheeatl,  &c. ;  and  every  day  of  the  period  of  thirteen  days,  by  a 
numerical  order,  from  one  to  thirteen."  383 

These  can  be  neither  called  weeks  nor  months  —  they  were  arbi- 
trary divisions,  used  long  before  the  Christian  era,  and  no  doubt  long 
before  the  Americans  had  any  idea  of  the  true  length  of  the  solar 
year.  This  they  arrived  at  with  considerable  accuracy,  but,  as  we 
have  reason  to  believe,  not  many  centuries  before  the  Spanish  con- 
quest With  regard  to  the  origin  of  the  astronomical  knowledge  of 
American  races,  there  has  been  much  discussion.  Humboldt  has 
pointed  out  some  striking  coincidences  in  the  Mexican  modes  of  com- 
puting time,  names  of  their  months,  and  similar  accidents,  with  those 
of  Thibet,  China,  and  other  Asiatic  nations ;  which  (were  philology 
certainty,  and  old  Jesuit  interpretation  safe,)  would  look  very  much 
as  if  they  had  been  borrowed,  and  engrafted  on  American  systems 
at  a  comparatively  recent  period.  On  the  other  hand,  he  has  laid 
stress  upon  some  of  the  peculiarities  especially  distinguishing  the 
Mexican  calendar,  and  which  cannot  be  ascribed  to  foreign  origin  — 
such  as  the  feet  abeady  mentioned,  that  the  Mexicans  never  counted 
by  months  or  weeks. 

<<  What  is  remarkable  too  [says  Humboldt],  is,  that  the  calendar  of  Pern  affords  indubit- 
able proofs  not  only  of  astronomical  obserrations  and  of  a  certain  degree  of  astronomical 
knowledge,  but  also  that  their  ori^  was  independent  of  that  of  the  Mexicans.  If  both 
the  Mexican  and  PeruTian  calendars  were  not.  the  result  of  their  own  independent  obser- 
Tations,  we  must  suppose  a  double  importation  of  astronomical  knowledge — one  to  Peru, 
and  another  to  Mexico  —  coming  from  different  quarters,  and  by  people  possessed  of  differ- 
ent degrees  of  k;nowledge.  There  is  not  in  Peru  any  trace  of  identity  of  the  names  of  the 
iays,  or  of  a  resort  to  the  combination  of  two  series.  Their  months  were  alternately  of 
iwen^-nine  and  thirty  di^s,  to  which  eleven  days  were  added,  to  complete  the  year.'* 

Now,  if  the  Mexican  calendar  differed,  ^^toto  ecdo"  from  that  of  the 
Peruvian,  it  follows  that  their  respective  origins  were  distinct ;  and 
if  neither,  as  Humboldt  indicates,  was  constructed  upon  a  foreign  or 
Asiatic  basis,  how  are>ny  suppositions  of  luitique  intercourse  between 
the  two  hemispheres  justified  by  astronomy  ?  Why,  if  the  Peruvians 
did  not  borrow  from  the  Mexicans,  (tiieir  contemporaries  on  the  same 
continent,)  should  they  not  have  taught  themselves,  just  as  the  Mexi- 
cans did  their  ownselves,  systems  as  unlike  each  other  as  they  are 
separated  by  nature,  times,  and  spaces,  from  eveiy  one  adopted  by 
those  types  of  mankind,  whose  physical  structure  is  from  these  Ame- 
ricans utterly  diverse  ? 

Some  of  the  astronomical  observations  of  the  Mexicans  were  also 
clearly  local :  the  two  transits  of  the  sun,  for  instance,  by  the  zenith 
of  Mexico,  besides  others. 

Assuredly  the  major  portion,  then,  of  the  astronomical  knowledge 
of  the  aboriginal  Americans  was  of  domestic  origin ;  and  any  of  the 

Digitized  by 

Google 

296  AB0BI6IKAL    RACES  OF   AMERICA. 

few  points  of  contact  with  the  calendars  of  the  Old  World,  if  not 
accidental,  must  have  taken  place  at  an  exceedingly  remote  period 
of  time.  In  fact,  whatever  may  have  come  from  the  Old  World  was 
engrafted  upon  a  system  itself  still  older  than  the  exotic  shoots. 

But,  if  it  still  he  contended  that  astronomy  was  imported,  why  did 
not  the  immigrants  hring  an  alphabet  or  Asiatic  system  of  writing, 
the  art  of  working  iron,  mills,  wheel-barrows  (all,  with  remembrance 
even  of  Oriental  navigation,  unknown  in  America)  ?  Or  at  least  the 
seeds  of  millet,  rice,  wheat,  oats,  barley,  &c.,  of  their  respective  bota- 
nical provinces  or  countries  ?  Alas !  sustainers  of  the  £7ntVy-doctrine 
will  be  puzzled  to  find  one  fact  among  American  aborigines  to  sup- 
port it 

In  conclusion,  we  have  but  to  sum  up  the  facts  briefly  detailed, 
and  these  results  will  be  clearly  deducible,  namely :  — 

1.  That  the  continent  of  America  was  unknown  not  only  to  the 
ancient  Egyptians  and  Chinese,  but  to  the  more  modem  Hebrews, 
Greeks,  and  Romans. 

2.  That  at  the  time  of  its  discovery,  this  continent  was  populated 
by  millions  of  people,  resembling  each  other,  possessing  peculiar 
moral  and  physical  characteristics,  and  in  utter  contrast  with  any 
people  of  the  Old  World. 

3.  That  these  races  were  found  surrounded  everywhere  by  animals 
and  plants  specifically  diflferent  from  those  of  the  Old  World,  and 
created,  as  it  is  conceded,  in  America. 

4.  That  these  races  were  found  speaking  several  hundred  languages, 
which,  although  oft;en  resembling  ea,ch  other  in  grammatical  structure, 
differed  in  general  entirely  in  their  vocabularies,  and  were  all  radi-. 
cally  distinct  from  the  languages  of  the  Old  World. 

6.  That  their  monuments,  as  seen  in  their  architecture,  sculpture, 
earth-works,  sheU-banks,  &c.,  from  their  extent,  dissemination,  and 
incalculable  numbers,  ftimish  evidence  of  very  high  antiquity. 

6.  That  the  state  of  decomposition  in  which  the  skeletons  of  the 
mounds  are  found,  and,  above  all,  the  peculiar  anatomical  structure 
of  the  few  remaining  crania,  prove  these  mound-builders  to  have  been 
both  ancient  and  indigenous  to  the  soil ;  because  American  crania, 
antique  as  well  as  modem,  are  unlike  those  of  any  other  race  of  an- 
cient or  recent  times. 

7.  That  the  aborigines  of  America  possessed  no  alphabet  or  truly- 
phonetic  system  of  writing — that  they  possessed  none  of  the  domestic 
animals,  nor  many  of  the  oldest  arts  of  the  Eastern  hemisphere ;  whilst 
their  agricultural  plants  were  indigenous. 

8.  That  their  syst€$m  of  arithmetic  was  unique — that  their  astro- 
nomical knowledge,  in  the  main,  was  indubitably  of  cis-Atlantic 

Digitized  by 

Google 

ABORIGINAL    BAGES    OF    AMEBIOA.  297 

origin;  while  their  calendar  was  unlike  that  of  any  people,  ancient  or 
modem,  of  the  other  hemisphere. 

Whatever  exception  may  be  taken  to  any  of  these  propositions 
separately,  it  must  be  conceded  that,  when  viewed  together,  they  form 
a  mass  of  cumulative  testimony,  carrying  the  aborigines  of  America 
back  to  the  remotest  period  of  man's  existence  upon  eartii. 

The  entire  scope  of  argument  on  these  subjects  may  be  presented 
in  the  vigorous  language  of  LordEAiMSS;  expressing  ideas  entertained 
by  himself  and  the  authors  in  common,  although  more  than  seventy- 
nine  years  interlapse  between  their  respective  writings :  — 

**  The  frigidity  of  the  North  Amerioans,  men  and  women,  differing  in  that  particular  from 
all  other  saTages,  is  to  me  eridence  of  a  separate  race.  And  I  am  the  more  confirmed  in 
that  opinion,  when  I  find  a  celebrated  writer,  whose  abilities  no  person  calls  in  question, 
endeaToring  in  vain  to  ascribe  that  circumstance  to  moral  and  physical  causes.  Si  Pergama 
dextra  defendi  potteU 

« In  concluding  Arom  the  foregoing  fkcts  that  there  are  different  races  of  men,  I  reckon 
npon  strenuous  opposition ;  not  only  from  men  biassed  against  what  is  new  or  uncommon, 
but  from  numberiess  sedate  writers,  who  hold  every  distinguishing  mark,  internal  as  weU 
as  external,  to  be  the  effect  of  soil  and  climate.  Against  the  former,  patience  is  my  only 
shield ;  but  I  cannot  hope  for  any  conTcrts  to  a  new  opinion,  without  removing  the  argu- 
ments urged  by  the  latter. 

"  Among  the  endless  number  of  writers  who  ascribe  supreme  efficacy  to  the  climate, 
VitruTius  shall  take  the  lead.384  .  .  . 

**  Upon  summing  up  the  whole  particulars  mentioned  aboye,  would  one  hesitate  a  mo- 
ment to  adopt  the  following  opinion,  were  there  no  counterbalancing  eridence :  viz.,  *  That 
God  created  many  pairs  of  the  human  race,  differing  from  each  other  both  externally  and 
internally ;  that  he  fitted  these  pairs  for  different  climates,  and  placed  each  pair  in  its 
proper  climate ;  that  the  peculiarities  of  the  original  pairs  were  preserved  entire  in  their 
descendants — who,  baring  no  assistance  but  their  natural  talents,  were  left  to  gather 
knowledge  from  experience,  and  in  particular  were  left  (each  tribe)  to  form  a  language  for 
itself;  that  signs  were  sufficient  for  the  original  pairs,  without  any  language  but  what 
nature  suggests ;  and  that  a  language  was  formed  gradually,  as  a  tribe  increased  in  num- 
bers and  in  different  occupations,  to  make  speech  necessary  ? '  But  this  opinion,  howeyer 
plausible,  we  are  not  permitted  to  adopt,  being  taught  a  different  lesson  by  reyelation :  yiz., 
That  Qod  created  but  a  single  pair  of  the  human  species.  Though  we  cannot  doubt  of  the 
authority  of  Moses,  yet  his  account  of  the  creation  of  man  is  not  a  little  puzzling,  as  it 
seems  to  contradict  eyery  one  of  the  facts  mentioned  aboye.  According  to  that  account, 
different  races  of  men  were  not  formed,  nor  were  men  Aramed  originally  for  different  cli- 
mates. All  men  must  have  spoken  the  same  language,  rii.,  that  of  our  first  parents.  And 
what  of  all  seems  the  most  contradictory  to  that  account,  is  the  sayage  state :  Adam,  as 
Moses  informs  us,  was  .endued  by  his  Maker  with  an  eminent  degree  of  knowledge ;  and  he 
certainly  must  haye  been  an  excellent  preceptor  to  his  children  and  their  progeny,  among 
whom  he  lived  many  generations.  Whence  then  the  degeneracy  of  all  men  unto  the  savage 
state  ?  To  account  for  that  dismal  catastrophe,  mankind  must  have  suffered  some  terrible 
convulsion. 
•<  That  terrible  convulmon  is  revealed  to  us  in  the  history  of  the  Tower  ofBabd"  365  ..  , 

Babylon's  Tower  (it  is  known  to  cuneiform  students  of  the  present 
day)  did  not  exist  before  the  reign  of  Nebuchadnbzar  ;  who  built  it 
during  the  seventh  centuiy  b.  c.*^  As  the  edifice  does  not  concern 
Ethnology,  we  pass  ony^ard. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC 

298  MORTON'S    INEDITED    MSS. 

CHAPTEB  X. 

Exeerpta 

PBOM  Morton's  inedited  manuscripts. 

[Although  not  in  the  mature  shape  in  which  Dr.  Morton  habitu- 
ally submitted  his  reflections  to  the  scientific  world,  and  destitute,  alas ! 
of  his  own  improvements,  a  contribution,  so  valuable  to  that  study 
of  Man  which  owes  its  present  momentum  to  his  genius,  must  not  be 
overlooked  in  "  Types  of  Mankind."  With  their  joint  acknowledg- 
ments to  Mrs.  S.  Geo.  Morton,  for  the  unreserved  use  of  whatever 
autographs  their  much-honored  friend  intended  for  eventual  publica- 
tion, the  authors  annex  two  fragmentary  essays.  Overcome  by  ill- 
ness, the  Doctor  withdrew  from  his  library  on  the  6th  of  May,  1851 ; 
leaving  these,  among  other  evidences  of  an  enthusiasm  for  science 
which  death  alone  could  stifle.  The  authors  take  the  more  pleasure 
and  pride  in  embodying  such  first  rough-draughts,  fi^sh  as  they  flowed 
from  his  mind  —  not  unstudied,  but  unadorned.  Dr.  Morton  is  here 
beheld  in  his  office,  writing  down  with  characteristic  simpUcity,  while 
disturbed  by  professional  interruptions,  the  results  of  his  incessant 
labor  and  meditation,  couched  in  the  language  of  truth.] 

[MANUSCRIPT  A.] 

"  On  the  Size  of  the  Brain  in  Various  Races  and  Families  qf  Man; 
with  Ethnological  Remarks.  By  Samuel  George  Morton,  M.  D.  : 
Philadelphia  and  Edinburgh.'' 

The  importance  of  the  brain  as  the  seat  of  the  fieujulties  of  the 
mind,  is  preeminent  in  the  animal  economy.  Hence  the  avidity  with 
which  its  structure  and  functions  have  been  studied  in  our  time ;  for, 
although  much  remains  to  be  explained,  much  has  certainly  been  ac- 
complished. We  have  reason  to  believe,  not  only  that  the  brain  is 
the  centre  of  the  whole  series  of  mental  manifestations,  but  that  its 
several  parts  are  so  many  organs ;  each  one  of  which  performs  its 
peculiar  and  distinctive  office.  But  the  number,  locality,  and  func- 
tions of  these  several  organs  are  far  from  being  determinea:   nor 

Digitized  by 

Google 

ON    THE    SIZE    OP    THE  BRAIN    IN    MAN.  299 

should  this  uncertainty  surprise  us,  when  we  reflect  on  the  slow  and 
devious  process  by  which  mankind  have  arrived  at  some  of  the  sim- 
plest physiological  truths,  and  the  difficulties  that  environ  all  inquiries 
into  the  nature  of  the  organic  functions. 

In  studying  ethnology,  and  especially  in  comparing  the  crania  of 
the  several  races,  I  was  struck  with  the  inadequacy  of  the  methods  in 
use  for  determining  the  size  and  weight  of  the  brain.  On  these 
methods,  which  are  four  in  number,  I  submit  the  following  remarks : 

1.  The  plan  most  frequently  resorted  to  is  that  which  measures  the 
exterior  of  the  head  or  skull  within  Various  corresponding  points. 
We  are  thus  enabled  to  compare  the  relative  conformation  in  different 
individuals,  and  in  this  manner  obtain  some  idea  of  the  relative  size 
of  the  brain  itself.  Such  measurements  possess  a  great  value  in  cra- 
niology,  and,  we  need  hardly  add,  are  the  only  ones  that  are  available 
in  the  living  man. 

2.  The  plan  of  weighing  the  brain  has  been  extensively  practised 
in  modern  times,  and  with  very  instructive  results.  Haller  found  the 
encephalon  to  vary,  in  adult  men,  from  a  pound  and  a  half  to  more 
than  five  pounds ;  and  the  Wenzels  state  the  average  of  their  experi- 
ments to  range  fi^m  about  three  pounds  five  ounces  to  three  pounds 
ten  ounces.* 

The  experiments  of  the  late  Dr.  John  Sims,  of  London,  which,  from 
their  number  and  accuracy,  deserve  great  attention,  place  the  average 
weight  of  the  recent  brain  between  three  pounds  eight  and  three 
pounds  ten  ounces,  or  nearly  the  same  weight  as  that  obtained  by  the 
"Wenzels.  Of  253  brains  weighed  by  Dr.  Sims,  191  were  adults  from 
^twenty  years  old  to  seventy,  and  upwards ;  and  of  the  whole  series, 
the  lowest  weighed  two  pounds,  and  the  highest  an  ounce  less  than 
four  pounds.f 

Prof.  Tiedemann,  of  Heidelberg,  a  learned  and  accomplished  ana- 
tomist, has  pursued  the  same  mode  of  investigation.  After  giving 
the  weight  of  fifty-two  European  brains,  he  adds  that 

<*  The  weight  of  the  brain  in  an  adult  Enropean  varies  between  three  pounds  two  ounces 
and  four  pounds  six  ounces  Troy.  The  brain  of  men  who  have  distinguished  themselves 
by  their  great  talents  are  often  very  large.  The  brain  of  the  celebrated  Cuvier  weighed 
four  pounds,  eleven  ounces,  four  drachms,  thirty  grains,  Troy ;  and  that  of  the  distin- 
guished surgeon,  Dupuytren,  weighed  four  pounds  ten  ounces  Troy.  The  brain  of  men  en- 
dowed with  but  feeble  intellectual  powers,  is,  on  the  contrary,  often  very  small,  particularly 
in  congenital  idiotismus.  The  female  brain  is  lighter  than  that  of  the  male.  It  varies  be- 
tween two  pounds  eight  ounces  and  three  pounds  eleven  ounces.  I  never  found  a  femde 
brain  that  weighed  four  pounds.  The  female  brain  weighs,  on  an  average,  fh)m  four  to 
dght  ounces  less  than  that  of  the  male ;  and  this  difference  is  already  perceptible  in  a 
new-born  child."  J 

*  Medico-Chirurg.  Trans.,  zix.  p.  851.  f  Idem,  p.  269. 

X  Trans,  of  the  Boyal  Soc.  of  London. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

800  Morton's  inedited  mss. 

Sir  W.  Hamilton  adds,  that  in  the  male  ahout  one  brain  in  seven 
is  found  above  four  pounds  Troy ;  in  the  female  hardly  One  in  an 
hundred. 

These  results  are  highly  instructive,  and  furnish  the  average  weight 
of  the  cerebral  organs  at  the  time  of  death ;  but  whoever  will  examine 
the  valuable  tables  of  Dr.  Sims,  will  observe  that  various  circum- 
stances may  affect  the  weight  of  the  brain,  without,  at  the  same  lime, 
modifying  its  size;  viz.:  extreme  sanguineous  congestion;  fluids 
contained  in  the  ventricles;  interstitial  effusion;  extravasation  of 
blood,  and  softening  and  coptlensation  of  structure.  These  morbid 
changes  sometimes  take  place  rapidly,  while  the  absolute  btdk  of  the 
brain  remains  unaltered.  Again,  the  plan  of  weighing  the  encephalon 
must  always  be  a  very  restricted  one ;  and  is  not  likely  ever  to  be 
practised  on  an  extensive  scale,  except  in  the  Caucasian  and  Negro. 

8.  Another,  but  indirect,  mode  of  ascertaining  the  weight  of  the 
brain,  has  been  practised  by  Sir  William  Hamilton,  who  "  examined 
about  300  human  skulls,  of  determined  sex,  the  capacity  of  which, 
by  a  method  he  devised,  was  taken  in  sand,  and  the  original  weight 
thus  recovered."  * 

Respecting  the  process  employed  in  these  experiments  I  am  not 
informed ;  and  I  agree  with  Dr.  Sims,  that  the  weight  of  the  bnun> 
cannot  be  determined  by  ascertaining  the  capacity  of  the  cranium,  by 
any  method,  however  accurate  in  itself. 

More  recently.  Prof.  Tiedemann  has  performed  an  elaborate  series 
of  experiments  to  determine  the  comparative  weight  of  the  brain  in 
the  different  human  races. 

**  For  this  purpose,"  he  observes,  **l  fiUed  the  skull  through  the  foramen  magnum  with, 
millet-seed,  taking  care  to  close  the  foramina  and  fissures,  so  as  to  preyent  the  escape  of 
the  seed,  and  at  the  same  time  striking  the  cranium  with  the  palm  of  the  hand,  in  order  to 
pack  its  contents  more  closely.  I  then  weighed  the  skull  thus  filled,  and  subtracted  from 
it  the  weight  of  the  empty  one,  and  I  thus  determined  the  capacity  of  the  oraniuih  from 
the  weight  of  the  seed  it  was  capable  of  containing."  f 

The  results  obtained  by  Prof.  Tiedemann,  like  those  of  Sir  William 
Hamilton,  possess  a  great  value  in  researches  of  this  kind ;  yet,  un- 
fortunately, they  are  not  absolute  either  as  respects  the  size  or  weight 
of  the  brain ;  for  it  is  evident  that  the  second  of  these  objects  could 
only  be  obtained  by  employing  a  medium  of  the  same  density  as'the 
brain ;  and  as  to  capacity^  no  method  had,  at  that  time  (1837),  been 
devised  for  obtaining  it  in  cubic  inches. 

4.  Seeing,  therefore,  that  the  several  processes  just  described  are 
not  absolute,  but  only  comparative  in  their  results,  without  affording 

*  Essays  and  Heads  of  Lectures :  by  Dr.  A.  Monro,  zzxix. 
•I-  Pas  Hein  des  Negers,  &c.  p.  21. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

ON    THE    SIZE    OF    THE    BBAIN    IN    HAN.  301 

either  the  true  weight  or  true  bulk  of  the  brain,  I  solicited  my  Mend, 
Mr.  John  S.  Phillips,  to  devise  some  more  satisfactory  method  of  ob- 
taining the  desired  object ;  and  this  has  been  entirely  successful  in 
the  following  manner. 

A  tin  cylinder  was  made,  about  two  inches  and  three-fourths  in 
diameter,  and  two  feet  two  inches  in  height,  standing  on  a  foot,  and 
banded  with  swelled  hoops  about  two  inches  apart,  and  firmly  sol- 
dered to  prevent  accidental  flattening.  A  glass  tube,  hermetically 
sealed  at  one  end,  was  cut  off  so  as  to  hold  exactly  five  cubic  inches 
of  water  by  weight,  at  60°  Fahrenheit  A  fioat  of  light  wood,  well 
varnished,  two  and  one-fourth  inches  in  diameter,  with  a  slender  rod 
of  the  same  material  fixed  in  its  centre,  was  next  dropped  into  the 
tin  cylinder.  Then  five  cubic  inches  of  water,  measured  in  the  glass 
tube,  were  poured  into  the  cylinder,  and  the  point  at  which  the  rod 
on  the  float  stood  above  the  top  of  the  cylinder,  was  marked  by  the 
edge  of  a  file  laid  across  its  top.  And,  in  like  manner,  the  successive 
gradations  on  the  fioat-rod,  indicating  five  cubic  inches  each,  were 
obtained  by  pouring  five  cubic  inches  fi'om  the  glass  tube  gradatim^ 
and  marking  each  rise  on  the  float-rod.  The  gradations  thus  ascer- 
tained were  transferred  to  a  mahogany  rod,  fitted  with  a  fiat  foot,  and 
these  were  again  subdivided  by  means  of  compasses  to  mark  the  cubic 
inches  and  parts.* 

In  order,  to  measure  the  internal  capacity  of  a  cranium,  the  larger 
foramina  must  be  first  stopped  with  cotton,  and  the  cavity  then  filled 
with  leaden  shot  one-eighth  of  an  inch  in  diameter,  poured  into  the 
foramen  magnum.  This  process  should  be  effected  to  repletion ;  and 
for  this  purpose  it  is  necessary  to  shake  the  skull  repeatedly,  and,  at 
the  same  time  to  press  down  the  shot  with  the  finger,  or  with  the  end 
of  the  funnel,  until  the  cavity  can  receive  no  more.  The  shot  are 
next  to  be  transferred  to  the  tin  cylinder,  which  should  also  be  well 
shaken.  The  mahogany  rod  being  then  dropped  into  the  tin  cylinder, 
with  its  foot  resting  on  the  shot,  the  capacity  of  the  cranium  will  be 
indicated  by  the  number  observed  on  the  same  plane  with  the  top  of 
the  tube. 

I  thus  obtain  the  absolute  capacity  of  the  cranium,  or  bulk  of  the  brain 
in  cubic  inches;  nor  can  I  avoid  expressing  my  satisfaction  at  the 
singular  accuracy  of  this  method ;  inasmuch  as  a  skull  of  100  cubic 
inches  capacity,  if  measured  any  number  of  times  with  reasonable 
care,  will  not  vary  a  single  cubic  inch. 

On  first  using  this  apparatus,  I  employed,  in  place  of  shot,  white- 
pepper  seed,  which  possessed  the  advantage  of  a  spheroidical  form 

*  Cntnift  Americana,  1889,  p.  268. 

Digitized  by^VjOOQlC 

362  Morton's  inedited  mss. 

and  general  uniformity  in  the  size  of  the  gra^ins.  But  it  was  soon 
manifest  that  the  utmost  care  could  not  prevent  considerable  variation 
in  several  successive  measurements,  sometimes  amounting  to  three 
or  four  cubic  inches.  Under  these  circumstances,  but  not  until  all 
the  internal  capacity  measurements  of  the  Crania  Americana  had  been 
,made  in  this  way,  I  saw  the  necessity  of  devising  some  other  medium 
with  which  to  fill  the  cranium ;  and  after  a  ftiU  trial  of  the  shot,  have 
permanently  adopted  it,  with  the  satisfactory  results  above  stated.* 
These  remarks  will  explain  the  difference  between  the  measurements 
published  in  the  Crania  Americana  and  those  obtained  from  the  same 
skulls  by  the  revised  method.f 

In'  an  investigation  of  this  nature,  the  question  arises — At  what 
age  does  the  brain  attain  ftill  development?  On  this  point,  there  is 
great  diversity  of  opinion.  Professor  Sommering  supposes  this  period 
to  be  as  early  as  the  third  year.  Sir  William  Hamilton  expresses 
himself  in  the  following  terms :  "  In  man,  the  encephalon  reaches  its 
ftiU  size  about  seven  years  of  age.  This,"  he  adds,  "  was  never  before 
proved.*'  The  latter  remark  leads  us  to  infer  that  this  able  and  labo- 
rious investigator  regarded  his  proposition  as  an  incontestable  fact. 
Professor  Tiedemann  assumes  the  eighth  year  as  the  period  of  the 
brain's  maximum  growth. 

Dr.  Sims,  on  the  other  hand,  inferred  from  an  extended  series  of 
experiments  on  the  brain  ftpm  a  year  old  to  upwards  of  seventy, 
that  "  the  average  weight  goes  on  increasing  from  one  year  to  twenty ; 
between  twenty  and  tiiirty  there  is  a  slight  increase  in  the  average ; 
afterwards  it  increases,  and  arrives  at  the  maximum  between  forty 
and  fifty.  After  fifty,  to  old  age,  the  brain  gradually  decreases  in 
weight."  These  observations  nearly  correspond  with  those  of  Dr. 
Gall,  but  are  liable  to  various  objections. 

Dr.  John  Reid  has  also  investigated  this  question  on  a  large  scale 
and  with  great  care.  After  weighing  253  brains  of  both  sexes  and 
of  various  ages,  he  arrives  at  the  conclusion  that  the  encephalon 
arrives  at  its  maximum  size  sooner  than  the  other  organs  of  the  body; 
that  its  relative  dze,  when  compared  with  the  other  organs,  and  to 
the  entire  body,  is  much  greater  in  the  child  than  in  the  adult ;  and 
that  although  the  average  weight  of  the  male  brain  is  absolutely 
heavier  than  that  of  the  female,  yet  the  average  female  brain,  relative 
to  the  whole  body,  is  somewhat  heavier  than  the  average  male  brain. 
Finally,  he  observes  that  his  experiments  do  not  afford  any  support 
to  the  proposition  that  the  encephalon  attains  its  maximum  weight 
at  or  near  the  age  of  seven  years.     On  this  latter  point,  which  is  of 

*  l^rooeedings  of  the  Academy  of  Nat  Sciences  of  PMlad.  for  Apnl^  1841. 
t  See  my  Catalogue  of  Skulls,  8d  ed.  1849. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

ON    THE    SIZE    OF    THE    BRAIN    IN    MAN.  303 

great  importance  in  the  present  inquiry,  I  shall  offer  a  few  remarks. 
— The  most  obvious  use  of  the  sutures  of  the  cranium  is  to  subserve 
the  process  of  growth,  which  they  do  by  osseous  depositions  at  their 
margins.  Hence  one  of  these  sutures  is  equivalent  to  the  interrupted 
structure  that  exists  between  the  shaft  and  epiphysis  of  a  long  bone 
in  the  growing  state.  The  shaft  grows  in  length  chiefly  by  accretions 
at  its  extremities ;  and  the  epiphysis,  like  the  cranial  suture,  disap- 
pears when  the  perfect  development  is  accomplished.  Hence  we  may 
infer  that  the  skuU  ceases  to  expand  whenever  the  sutures  become 
consolidated  with  the  proximate  bones.  In  other  words,  the  growth 
of  the  brain,  whether  in  viviparous  or  in  oviparous  animals,  is  con- 
sentaneous with  that  of  the  skull,  and  neither  can  be  developed  with- 
out the  presence  of  free  sutures.* 

From  these  considerations,  and  from  many  comparisons,  I  cannot 
admit  that  the  brain  has  attained  its  physical  maturity  at  the  age  of 
seven  or  eight  years ;  neither  is  there  satisfactory  evidence  to  prove 
that  it  continues  to  grow  after  adult  age.  It  may  possibly  increase 
and  decrease  in  size  and  weight  after  that  period,  without  altering 
the  internal  capacity  of  the  cranium,  which  last  measurement  will 
always  indicate  the  maximum  size  the  encephalon  had  attained  at 
(the)  period  of  its  greatest  development ;  for  in  those  instances  in 
which  this  organ  has  been  observed  in  a  contracted  or  shrunken 
state,  in  veiy  old  persons,  the  cranial  cavity  has  remained  to  all  ap- 
pearance unaltered,  t 

We  know  that  at,  and  often  before,  the  age  of  sixteen  years  the 
sutures  are  already  so  firmly  anchylosed  as  not  to  be  separated  with- 
out great  difficulty,  or  even  without  fracture ;  whence  we  may  reason- 
ably infer  that  the  encephalon  has  nearly,  if  not  entirely,  attained  its 

*  I  hare  in  mj  possession  the  skull  of  a  mulatto  boy  who  died  at  the  age  of  eighteen 
years.  In  this  instance,  the  sagittal  suture  is  entirely  wanting ;  in  consequence,  the  lateral 
expansion  of  the  cranium  has  ceased  in  infancy,  or  at  whatoTor  period  the  suture  became 
consolidated.  Hence  also  the  diameter  between  the  parietal  protuberances  is  less  than  4.6 
inches,  instead  of  6,  which  last  is  the  Negro  ayerage.  The  squamous  sutures,  however, 
are  fully  open,  whence  the  skull  has  continued  to  expand  in  the  upward  direction,  until 
it  has  reached  the  ayerage  yertioal  diameter  of  the  Negro,  or  5.5  inches.  The  coronal 
suture  is  also  wanting,  excepting  some  traces  at  its  lateral  termini ;  and  the  result  of  this 

last  deficiency  is  seen  in  the  yery  inadequate of  the  forehead,  which  is  low  and  narrow, 

but  elongated  below  through  the  agency  of  the  yarious  cranio-facial  sutures.  The  lamdoidal 
suture  is  perfect,  thus  permitting  posterior  elongation ;  and  the  growth  in  this  direction, 

together  with  the  full  vertical  diameter,  has  enabled  the  brain  to  attain  the  bulk  of 

cubic  inches,  or  about  — —  less  than  the  Negro  average.  I  believe  that  the  absence  or 
partial  development  of  the  sutures  may  be  a  cause  of  idiocy  by  checking  the  growth  of  the 
brain,  and  thereby  impairing  or  destroying  its  functions.  See  Proctedinge  ^f  the  Academy, 
far  Auguit,  1841.  ^ 

f  Mr.  George  Combe,  Stfttem  of  Phrenology,  p.  88,  is  of  the  opinion  that  when  the  brain 
contracts,  the  inner  table  of  the  skull  follows  it,  while  the  outer  remains  stationary. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

304  hobtok's  inedited  mss 

growth ;  and  I  have  therefore  commenced  my  expeiicients  with  this 
period  of  life.  I  am  aware  that  it  cannot  be  as  safely  assumed  for 
the  nations  who  inhabit  the  fiigid  and  temperate  zones,  as  for  some 
inter-tropical  races — the  Hindoos,  Arab-Egyptians,  and  Negroes,  for 
example ;  for  these  people  are  proverbially  known  to  reach  the  adult 
age,  both  physically  and  morally,  long  before  the  inhabitants  of  more 
northern  climates.  But,  if  the  average  period  of  the  full  development 
of  the  brain  could  be  ascertained  in  all  the  races,  it  would,  perhaps, 
not  greatly  vary  from  the  age  of  sixteen  years. 

It  is  evident  that  this  age  cannot  be  always  positively  determined 
in  the  dried  skull ;  yet  by  a  carefril  comparison  of  the  teeth  and 
sutures,  in  connection  with  the  general  development  of  the  cranial 
structure,  I  have  had  little  difficulty  in  keeping  within  the  prescribed 
limit 

In  classing,  these  skulls  into  the  two  sexes,  I  have  been  in  part 
governed  by  positive  data ;  but  in  the  greater  number  this  question 
has  been  proximately  determined  by  merely  comparing  the  develop- 
ment and  conformation  of  the  cranial  structure. 

I  have  excluded  from  the'  Table  the  crania  of  idiots,  dwarfe,  and 
those  of  persons  whose  heads  have  been  enlarged  or  otherwise  modi- 
fied by  any  obvious  morbid  condition.  So,  also,  no  note  has  been 
taken  of  individuals  who  blend  dissimilar  races,  as  the  mulatto,  for 
example  —  the  o&pring  of  the  Caucasian  and  the  !N'egro.  Those 
instances,  however,  which  present  a  mixture  of  two  divisions  of  tiie 
same  great  race,  are  admitted  into  the  Table.  Such  is  the  modem 
Fellah  of  the  Valley  of  the  Nile,  in  whom  the  intrusive  Arab  is 
engrafted  on  the  Old  Egyptian. 

The  measurements  comprised  in  this  Memoir  have  been  derived, 
without  exception,  from  skulls  in  my  own  collection,  in  order  that 
their  accuracy  may  kt  any  time  be  tested  by  myself  or  by  others.  I 
have  also  great  satisfaction  in  stating,  that  all  these  measurements 
have  been  made  with  my  own  hands.  I  at  one  time  employed  a 
person  to  assist  me ;  but  having  detected  some  errors  in  his  numbers, 
I  have  been  at  the  pains  to  revise  them  all,  and  can  now  therefore 
vouch  for  the  accuracy  of  these  multitudinous  data. 

My  collection  at  this  time  embraces  [*]  human  crania,  among  which, 
however,  the  different  races  are  very  unequally  represented.  Nor  has 
it  been  possible,  for  reasons  already  mentioned,  to  subject  the  entire 
series  to  the  adopted  measurement.  Again,  some  of  these  are  too 
much  broken  for  this  purpose ;  while  many  others  are  embalmed 
heads,  which  cannot  be  measured,  on  account  of  the  presence  of 
bitumen  or  of  desiccated  tissues.     ***** 

[•  In  Ma7»  1S61,  about  S87  skiilU  {MS,  addenda  to  Oatalogue  of  1849).  Since  angmentad 
by  one  or  two  dozen.  —  G.  B.  G.] 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC 

ON    THE    ORIGIN    OP    THE    HUMAN    SPECIES.  305 

[MANUSCRIPT    B.] 
{Origin  of  the  Human  Species.) 

Before  proceeding  to  an  analysis  of  these  materials,  I  purpose  to 
make  a  very  few  remarks  on  the  origin  of  the  Human  Species  as  a 
zoological  question,  and  one  inseparably  associated  with  classification 
in  Ethnology. 

After  twenty  years  of  observation  and  reflection,  during  which 
period  I  have  always  approached  this  subject  with  diflidence  and 
caution ;  after  investigating  for  myself  .the  remarkable  diversities  of 
opinion  to  which  it  has  ^ven  rise,  and  after  weighing  the  difficulties 
that  beset  it  on  every  side,  I  can  find  no  ^tisfectoiy  explanation  of 
the  diverse  phenomena  that  characterize  physical  Man,  excepting  in 
the  doctrine  of  an  original  plurality  of  races. 

The  commonly  received  opinion  teaches,  that  all  mankind  have 
been  derived  from  a  primeval  pair;  and  that  the  diflferences  now^ 
observable  among  the  several  races,  result  from  the  operation  of  two 
principal  causes : 

1.  The  influence  of  climate,  locality,  civilization,  and  other  physical 
and  moral  agents,  acting  through  long  periods  of  time.  The  mani- 
fest inadequacy  of  this  hypothesis,  led  the  late  learned  and  lamented 
Dr.  Prichard  to  offer  the  following  ingenious  explanation. 

2.  The  diversities  among  mankind  are  mainly  attributable  to  the 
rise  of  accidental  varieties,  which,  from  their  isolated  position  and 
exclusive  intermarriage,  have  rendered  their  peculiar  traits  permanent 
among  themselves,  or,  in  other  words,  indelible  among  succeeding 
generations  of  the  same  stock. 

The  preceding  propositions,  more  or  less  modified  and  blended 
together,  are  by  many  ethnologists  regarded  as  adequate  to  the  expla- 
nation of  all  the  phenomena  of  diversity  observable  in  Man. 

If,  however,  we  were  to  be  guided  in  this  inquiry  solely  by  the 
evidence  derived  from  Nature,  whether  directly,  in  the  study  of  man 
himself,  or  collaterally  by  comparison  with  the  other  divisions  of  the 
zoological  series,  our  conclusions  might  be  altogether  different :  we 
would  be  led  to  infer  that  our  species  had  its  origin  not  in  one,  but 
in  many  creations;  that  these  were  widely  distributed  into  those 
localities  upon  the  earth's  surface  as  were  best  adapted  to  their  pecu- 
liar'wants  and  physical  constitutions ;  and  that,  in  the  lapse  of  time, 
these  races,  diverging  from  their  primitive  centres,  met  and  amalga- 
mated, and  have  thus  given  rise  to  those  intermediate  links  of  oi^n- 
ization  which  now  connect  the  extremes  together.* 

*  The  doctrine  of  a  plonlity  of  original  creations  for  the  homan  family,  is  by  no  means 

39 

Digitized  by 

Google 

306  Morton's  inedited  mss. 

In  accordance  with  this  view,  what  are  at  present  termed  Hie  five 
races  would  be  more  appropriately  called  groups.  Each  of  these 
groups  is  again  divisible  into  a  smaller  or  greater  number  of  primary 
races,  each  of  which  has  itself  expanded  from  a  primordial  nucleus  or 
centre.  To  illustrate  this  proposition,  we  may  suppose  that  there 
were  several  centres  for  the  American  groups  of  races,  of  which  the 
highest  in  the  scale  are  the  Toltecan  nations  —  the  lowest,  the  Fue- 
gians.  Nor  does  this  view  conflict  with  the  general  principle,  that 
all  these  nations  and  tribes  have  had,  as  I  have  elsewhere  expressed 
it,  a  common  origin ;  for  by  this  term  is  only  meant  an  indigenous 
relation  to  the  country  they  inhabit,  and  that  collective  identity  of 
physical  traits,  mental  and  moral  endowments,  language,  &c.,  which 
characterise  all  the  American  races.* 

The  same  remarks  are  applicable  to  all  the  other  human  races ;  but 
in  the  present  infant  state  of  ethnological  science,  the  designation  of 
these  primitive  centres  would  be  a  task  of  equal  delicacy  and  dijEculty. 

It  would  not  be  admissible  in  this  place,  to  inquire  into  the  respec- 
tive merits  of  these  propositions ;  and  we  shall  dismiss  them  for  the 
present  with  a  few  brief  remarks. 

K  all  the  varieties  of  mankind  were  derived  fix)m  a  single  aboriginal 
type,  we  ought  to  find  the  approximation  to  this  type  more  and  more 
apparent  as  we  retrace  the  labyrinth  of  time,  and  approach  the  primeval 
epochs  of  history.  But  what  is  the  result  ?  We  examine  the  vener- 
able monuments  of  Egypt,  and  we  see  the  Caucasian  and  the  Negro 

new ;  for  it  was  belieyed  and  expounded  by  a  learned  Babbi  of  the  Apostolic  age,  in  a  < 
mentarj  (the  Targum)  on  the  Pentateuch.     Rev,  J»  Pye  Smithy  Relation  between  the  Hcis 
Seripturet  and  Oeology^  p.  898. 

I  have  InTariablj,  when  treating  of  this  subject,  ayowed  mj  belief  in  the  aboriginal  diver^ 
iUy  of  mankind,  independentlj  of  the  progressiTe  action  of  anj  physical  or  accidental  causes. 
The  words  of  the  Hebrew  Targum  are  precisely  to  the  point:  «God  created  Man  red, 
white,  and  black.'* 

I  now  Tcnture  to  giye  a  fuller  and  somewhat  modified  ea^lanaiion  of  their  origin.  See 
Crania  Americana,  p.  8 ;  Crania  JEgyptiaca,  p.  87 ;  Distinetive  Charaeterieiice  of  the  Aboriginal 
Race  of  America,  p.  86 ;  and  Hyhridiiy  of  Animals  contidcred  in  reference  to  the  questian  of  the 
Unity  of  the  Human  Speeiet,  in  Amer.  Journal  of  Science  and  Art8»  1847. 

*  Niebuhr  expresses  this  idea  admirably  when  he  remarks,  that  it  is  *<  false  reasoning'* 
to  say,  **  that  nations  of  a  common  stock  must  have  had  a  common  origin,  from  which  they 
were  genealogically  deduced."  History  of  Rome,  I.,  p.  87.  In  other  words,  people  of  a 
common  etock  may  have  had  eeveral  or  many  origine.  Such  appears  to  be  the  fact  not  only 
with  man,  but  with  all  the  inferior  animals.  We  are  nowhere  told  the  latter  were  created 
in  pairs,  **  Male  and  female  created  He  them"  —  and  the  same  words  are  used  in  refer- 
ence to  the  whole  zoological  series. 

Prof.  Bailey  of  West  Point,  one  of  the  most  successfld  microscopists  of  the  present  day, 
has  shown,  that  the  mud  taken  from  some  of  the  deep-sea  soundings  on  the  coast  of  the 
United  States  contains,  in  every  cubic  inch^  hundreds  of  millions  of  living  calcareous  Poi^ 
thalmia.  Will  any  one  pretend  that  these  animals  were  created  in  pairs,  or  had  th^ 
origin  in  Mesopotamia  ? 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC 

ON    THE    ORIGIN    OP    THE    HUMAN    SPECIES.  307 

depicted,  side  by  side,  master  and  slave,  twenty-two  centuries  before 
Christ ;  while  imertption9  establish  the  same  ethnological  distinctions 
eight  hundred  years  earlier  in  time,  [^]  Abundant  confirmation 
of  the  same  general  principle  is  also  found  on  the  numberless  vases 
from  the  tombs  of  Etruria ;  the  antique  sculptures  of  India ;  the  pic- 
torial delineations  of  the  earliest  Chinese  annals ;  the  time-hopored 
ruins  of  Nineveh,  and  from  the  undated  tablets  of  Peru,  Yucatan,  and 
Mexico.  In  all  these  localities,  so  &r  removed  by  space  from  each 
other,  and  by  time  from  us,  the  distinctive  characteristics  of  the 
human  races  are  so  accurately  depicted  as  to  enable  us,  for  the  most 
part,  to  distinguish  them  at  a  glance. 

We  earnestly  maintain  that  the  preceding  views  are  not  irrecon- 
cileable  with  the  Sacred  Text,  nor  inconsistent  with  Creative  Wisdom 
as  displayed  in  the  other  kingdoms  of  Nature.  On  the  contrary,  they 
are  calculated  to  extend  our  knowledge  and  exalt  our  conceptions  of 
Omnipotence.  By  the  simultaneous  creation  of  a  plurality  of  original 
stocks,  the  population  of  the  Earth  'became  not  an  accidental  result, 
but  a  matter  of  certainty.  Many  and  distant  regions  which,  in  accord- 
ance with  the  doctrine  of  a  single  origin,  would  have  remained  for 
thousands  of  years  unpeopled  and  unknov^  received  at  once  their 
allotted  inhabitimts ;  and  these,  instead  of  being  left  to  struggle' with 
the  vicissitudes  of  chance,  were  from  tiie  beginning  adapted  to  those 
varied  drcumstancee  of  climate  and  locality  which  yet  mark  their 
req>ective  positions  upon  the  earth.'*' 

I.    THE    CAUCASIAN    GBOUP. 

The  Teutonic  Race. — I  use  this  appellation  in  the  comprehensive 
sense  in  which  it  has  been  employed  by  Professor  Adelung;  for  the 
great  divisions  established  by  this  distinguished  scholar,  though  based 
exclusively  on  philqlogical  data,  are  ftilly  sustained  by  comparisons 
in  physical  ethnology.  Of  tbe  three  great  divisions,  the  Scandinavian 
lies  chiefly  to  the  north  of  the  Baltic  sea ;  the  Suevic  and  Cimbric 
on  the  south. 

1.  The  Suevic  nations  embrace  the  Prussians  on  one  hand,  the 
Tyrolese  on  the  other;  while  between  these  lie  the  Austrians,  Swiss, 
Bavarians,  Alsatians,  and  the  inhabitants  of  the  Upper  and  Middle 

f  '  "' 

*  Bee  Rev.  J,  Pye  Smith:  Relstion  between  the  Holj  Seriptures  and  Oeology,  8d.  ed. 
pp.  898-400.    Also,  Hon.  and  Ber.  William  Herbert:  AmyriUidaeem,  p.  888. 

**  Les  lines  Juifs  n'eatendent  pas  ^tablir  que  leor  premier  hom'me  ait  ^t^  le  p^re  du 
genre  humaln,  mais  seulement  celui  de  leur  esp^ce  priyil^gi^.  n  ne  pent  cons^qnemment  y 
AToir  ancnne  impiety  &  reoonnaitre  parmi  nous  phisieurs  esp^oes  qui,  chaqone,  auront  en 
leur  Adam  et  leur  beroean  pavtieiilier."    Bory  de  St  Vincent :  VHvmme^  L,  p.  66. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

308  Morton's  ikedited  mss. 

Bhine.    These  nations  once  extended  into  the  north-eastern  section 
of  Europe,  whence  they  were  driven  by  the  Sclavonic  tribes. 

2.  The  CiMBRic  nations  occupy  western  Germany,  and  among 
many  subordinate  &milies,  embrace  the  Saxons,  Frisians,  Holland- 
ers, &c. 

8.  The  Scandinavian  race  is  regarded  by  Adelung  as  a  mixture  of 
Suevic  and  Cimbric  tribes.  It  includes  the  Danes,  Swedes,  Groths, 
and  Icelanders ;  for  although  it  is  a  disputed  question,  whether  the 
Goths  came  Grom  Scandinavia,  or  from  the  northern  shores  of  the 
Baltic  sea,  the  evidence  preponderates  in  fevor  of  the  former  opinion. 
The  Vandals,  however,  appear  to  have  been  strictly  a  Suevic  people. 

Of  these  great  divisions  I  possess  but  twenty-three  skuUs,  of  whidi 
twenty-one  are  used  in  the  Tabk.  Of  this  number,  all  but  one  have 
been  obtained  from  hospitals  and  institutions  for  paupers,  whence  we 
may  infer  that  they  pertain  to  the  least  cultivated  portion  of  their 
race.    The  proportion  of  males  to  females  is  twelve  to  nine. 

The  exception  alluded  to  above  is  the  skull  of  a  Dutch  gentleman 
of  noble  fiunUy,  who  was  bom  in  Utrecht,  received  a  good  education, 
was  of  convivial  habits,  and  died  at  an  early  age,  in  the  island  of 
Java.  I  particularize  this  cranium,  because  it  is  by  far  the  largest  in 
my  whole  series;  for  it  measures  114  cubic  inches  of  internal  capa- 
city. Contrasted  with  this  is  a  female  Swedish  head,  kindly  sent 
me,  with  several  others,,  by  Professor  Retzius  of  Stockholm,  which 
sinks  to  sixty-five  cubic  inches.  Between  these  extremes  the  mean 
or  average  is  ninety. 

The  Anglo-Saxons.  —  The  next  division  of  the  Teutonic  race  is 
the  Anglo-Saxon  ;  that  remarkable  people  who  have  made  their  way 
with  the  sword,  but  marked  their  track  with  civilization.  At  an 
early  period  of  the  Christian  era,  Angli  and  SaxoneSj  two  powerfiil 
tribes,  occupied  the  country  between  the  Cimbrian  peninsula,  (now 
called  Jutland,)  and  along  ike  western  shore  of  the  Elbe  to  the  termi- 
nation of  this  river  in  the  Baltic  sea.  These  people  commenced  their 
piratical  incursions  to  the  coast  of  Britain  in  the  fourth  century,  and 
were  masters  of  the  island  as  early  as  a.  d.  449.  They  found  it  chiefly 
inhabited  by  the  native  Britons,  who  were  Celts  ;  but  these  latter 
people  had  been  for  nearly  400  years  under  the  dominion  of  the  Ro- 
mans, who  had  largely  colonized  the  country ;  and  so  complete  was 
this  subjugation,  that  the  Latin  language  was  the  colloquial  speech 
of  all  Britain  at  the  fall  of  the  Soman  empire,  excepting  among  the 
Picts  of  the  coast  of  Scotland.*  From  the  period  of  the  Anglo-Saxon 
invasion,  the  population  became  a  blended  mixture  of  the  Celtic,  Pe- 

•  Betham :  EtnirU  Celtioa,  L  4. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC 

ON    THE    ORIGIN    OP    THE    HUMAN    SPECIES.  309 

lasgic,  and  Teutonic  ra<;e8,  among  which  the  latter  soon  took  the 
preponderance,  and  gave  its  language  to  the  liritish  Islands.  The 
Norman  conquest  added  another  physical  element  of  the  Teutonic 
stock. 

This  fusion  of  three  families  into  one,  varying  in  degree  in  different 
sections  of  these  islands,  haa  given  rise  to  a  physiognomy  varying  in 
several  respects  from  the  Teutonic  caste ;  while  the  cranium  itself  is 
less  spheroidal,  and  more  decidedly  oval,  than  is  characteristic  of  that 
people. 

I  have  not  hitherto  exerted  myself  to  obtain  crania  of  the  Anglo- 
Saxon  race,  except  in  the  instance  of  individuals  who  have  been  sig- 
nalized by  their  crimes ;  and  this  number  is  too  small  to  be  of  much 
importance  in  a  generalization  like  the  present.  Yet,  since  these 
skulls  have  been  procured  without  any  reference  to  their  size,  it  is 
remarkable  that  five  give  an  average  of  96  cubic  inches  for  the  bulk 
of  the  brain ;  the  smallest  head  measuring  91,  and  the  largest  105 
cubic  inches.  It  is  necessary,  however,  to  observe,  that  these  are  all 
male  crania;  but,. on  the, other  hand,  they  pertained  to  the  lowest 
class  of  society,  and  three  of  them  died  on  the  gallows  for  the  crime 
of  murder. 

The  Anolo- Americans  conform,  in  all  their  characteristics,  to  the 
parent  stock.  They  possess,  in  common  with  their  English  ancestors, 
a  more  elongated  head  than  the  unmixed  Germans.  The  few  crania 
in  my  possession  have,  without  exception,  been  derived  from  the 
lowest  and  least  cultivated  portion  of  the  community  —  malefactors, 
paupers,  and  lunatic^.  The  largest  brain  has  been  ninety-seven  cubic 
inches ;  the  smallest,  eighty-two ;  and  the  mean  of  ninety  accords 
with  that  of  the  collective  Teutonic  race.  The  sexes  of  these  seven 
skulls  are,  four  male  and  three  female. 

Two  or  three  circumstances  connected  with  the  ethnology  of  the 
Anglo-American  race,  seem  to  call  for  a  passing  notice  on  this 
occasion. 

Mr.  Haldemann  has  observed  that  when,  in  the  last  century,  the 
color  of  the  American  Indian  was  supposed  to  be  owing  to  climate, 
it  was  boldly  insisted  that  the  descendants  of  Europeans  in  this 
country  had  already  made  some  progress  in  a  change  of  color.  Since 
that  time  an  hundred  years  have  elapsed ;  yet,  I  presume  that  no  sen- 
sible person  will  maintain  that  they  have  brought  with  them  any  con- 
firmation of  the  postulate  in  question. 

Dr.  Prichard  hap  been  informed  that  the  heads  of  Europeans  in  the 
West  Indies  approach  those  of  the  aboriginal  Indian  in  form,  inde- 
pendently of  intermixture.  On  this  point  I  feel  qualified  to  express 
an  opinion.    I  passed  three  months  in  the  West  Indies,  and  visited 

Digitized  by 

Google 

310  mobton's  inedited  mss. 

eight  of  the  islands,  wheu  slavery  was  everywhere  in  vogue  (1884); 
and  I  can  unhesitatingly  declare  that  I  saw  nothing  to  confiim  thk 
assertion,  which  I  regard  as  wholly  idle  and  gratuitous.  The  only 
difference  that  occurred  to  me  was,  that  the  better  class  of  Englisk 
women  had  become  paler,  or  whiter,  and  thinner,  on  account  of  the 
great  and  constant  heat  of  the  climate,  and  consequent  n^ect  of 
exercise. 

The  observations  of  Dr.  Pinkard,  an  intelligent  English  author,* 
correspond  entirely  with  my  own.  He  relates  that  he  saw  in  the  Island 
of  Barbadoes  (where  I  myself  passed  six  weeks),  an  English  fiunily 
that  had  lived  there  through  at  least  six  generations ;  "  and  yet,"  be 
adds,  ^^  one  would  suppose  them  to  have  been  bom  in  Europe,  so  fine 
was  the  skin,  so  clear  the  complexion,  and  so  well  formed  the  fea- 
tures." Similar  remarks  have  been  made  respecting  the  Mexican 
Spaniards,  and  the  colonists  of  South  America  generally. 

Although  but skulls  are  included  in  the  preceding  Teutonic 

series,  yet,  when  we  take  into  consideration  their  variety  and  authen- 
ticity, and  the  fitct  that  they  have  been  collected  without  regard  to 
size,  I  have  no  hesitation  in  assuming  ninety  cubic  inches  for  the 
average  of  the  brain  in  the  Qermanic  family  of  nations ;  and  I  am 
further  convinced  that  this  standard  is  the  highest  among  the  races 
of  men. 

We  should  reasonably  look  for  a  preponderating  brain  in  a  race 
that  is  not  more  remarkable  for  its  conquests  and  its  colonies,  than 
for  the  extent  of  its  civilization ;  a  race  that  has  peopled  North  Ame- 
rica, reduced  all  India  to  vassalage,  and  is  fast  spreading  itself  over 
Polynesia,  Southern  Africa  and  Australia ;  a  race  that  is  destined  to 
plough  the  field  of  Palestine,  and  reap  the  harvests  of  the  Nile. 

Thb  Sclavonic  Race. — ^It  is  remarked  by  Dr.  Prichard,  that  our 
acquaintance  with  the  Germanic  nations  dates  back  three  centuries 
before  Christ ;  but  the  history  of  the  Slavonic  tribes  begins  nine  cen- 
turies later.  They  are  obviously  the  descendants  of  the  ancient  Sar- 
matians,  and,  among  many  smaller  nations,  at  present  embrace  the 
Russians,  Poles,  Lithuanians,  Bohemians,  and  Moravians. 

I  much  regret  that  my  cranial  series  possesses  but  a  single  example 
derived  from  this  race, — ^the  skull  of  a  woman  of  Olmutz  sent  me  by 

Prof.  Retzius,  and  which  measures  only cubic  inches.    I  record 

this  deficiency  in  my  coflection,  in  the  hope  that  some  person  inte- 
rested in  pursuits  of  this  nature  may  be  induced  to  provide  me  with 
materials  for  making  the  requisite  comparisons.  My  impression  is, 
that  the  Sclavonic  brain  will  prove  much  less  voluminous  than  that 
of  the  Teutonic  race. 

*  Quoted  by  Bndolphi:  Anthropologie,  p.  158. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC 

ON    THE    ORIGIN    OP    THE  HUMAN    SPECIES.  Sll 

The  Finnish  Race. — Among  these  people  I  consider  the  true  type 
to  be  presen^d  in  the  "Western  Finns — the  aboriginal  inhabitants  of 
Scandinavia,  the  predecessors  of  the  Teutonic  nations;  for  the  Estho- 
nians,  the  Tehadic  tribes  of  Middle  Russia  and  Permia,  and,  above 
all,  the  Ugrians  of  Siberia,  have  lived  so  long  in  contact  with  the 
Mongolian  races,  that  they  often  present  a  very  mixed  physical  cha- 
racter*.* We  should,  therefore,  be  cautious  in  grouping  these  com- 
munities into  a  supposed  cognate  race,  merely  from  analogies  of 
language,  which,  however  important  as  aids  in  ethnology,  are  often 
no  better  than  blind  guides.f 

I  am  the  more  particular  in  making  these  remarks,  because  the 
Madjars  of  Hungary  have  been  classed,  not  only  with  the  Finns,  but 
even  with  the  Bashkirs  and  Votiaks  of  Siberia,  upon  no  other  grounds 
than  those  just  mentioned-J  But  mark  a  single  admitted  fact :  the 
Tchudisii  tribe  of  Metzegers  speaks  the  Turkish  language^  and,  for 
this  reason,  has  been  by  some  writers  actually  classed  with  the  Tartar 
races,  with  whom  they  were  supposed  to  be  affiliated !  And,  since 
the  stronger  often  gives  its  language  to  the  weaker  race,  is  it  not 
most  probable  that  the  Bashkirs,  Votiaks,  and  other  tribes  have  de- 
rived their  language,  by  adoption,  from  the  contiguous  Tchudic 
population  ? 

Again,  the  present  Madjars  of  Hungary  entered  that  country  in  the 
middle  of  the  ninth  Century,  not  to  take  possession  of  an  uninhabited 
region,  but  to  mingle  with  a  numerous  existing  population ;  whence 
their  characteristics,  both  of  mind  and  body,  must  have  undergone  a 
remarkable  change,  and  become  highly  improved. 

History  indicates  the  cause  of  these  changes  when  it  tells  us,  that 
when  the  Madjars  arrived  in  Hungary  they  at  once  formed  political 
alliances  with  the  German  princes,  in  order  to  check  or  expel  "  the 
common  enemies  of  both  nations,  the  Sclavonian  races."  It  is  to  be 
inferred,  as  a  matter  of  course,  under  these  circumstances,  that  the 
intrusive  Madjars  formed  social  connexions,  not  only  with  the  Sclavo- 
nians,  whom  they  reduced  to  subjection,  in  the  heart  of  Pannonia, 
but  also  with  the  surrounding  German  communities ;   and,  in  this 

*  For  evidence  of  tlus  kind  in  relation  to  the  inhabitnnts  of  north-western  Asia,  eyen  in 
Tery  ancient  times,  see  Herodotus,  Melpomene,  cap.  cviii.,  and  Dr.  Wiseman's  Lectures,  pp. 
108, 105.  Pallas  fuiher  informs  ns  that  the  Nogais,  who  are  decided  Mongolians,  are  fast 
losiDg  their  natural  traits  by  inUrmarriage  teiih  the  Rutnans. — TVav,  in  Xuana,  p.  425. 

f  A  single  example,  now  before  onr  ejes,  will  iUustrate  this  proposition.  "  Two  hundred 
years  since,  the  Irish  language  prevailed  oyer  the  whole  province  of  Leinster.  English  was 
spoken  only  in  the  cities  and  great  towns.  At  the  present  moment  not  one  person  in  a 
thousand,  even  of  the  lowest  rank  of  the  natives  of  that  district,  understand  Irish.*'-* 
B^ham :  Etrttria  Celtiea,  L  81.  Here,  then,  are  2,000,000  of  Celts,  who,  if  judged  solely 
by  their  spoken  language,  would  be  classed  with  the  Anglo-Saxon  race. 

I  Prichard:  Researches,  &o.  iii.  826,  880. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

312  Morton's  inedited  mss. 

manner,  the  blending  of  dissimilar  stocks  has  produced  the  modified 
race  so  favorably  known  in  the  modem  Madjar. 

For  the  only  skull  I  possess  of  this  race  I  am  indebted  to  Prof. 
Eetzius,  of  Stockholm.  It  is  that  of  a  woman  from  the  parish  of 
Kemi,  in  Finland.  It  has  all  the  characteristics  of  an  unmixed  Euro- 
pean head,  and  measures  eighty-six  cubic  inches  of  internal  capacity. 

The  Pelasgio  Rage.  —  Every  one  knows  that  the  Pelasgic  tribes 
were  the  aboriginal  inhabitants  of  Greece ;  that  they,  in  the  progress 
of  time,  and  for  unknown  reasons,  changed  their  name  to  HelleneSy 
and  were  thus  the  ancestors  of  the  Greeks. 

The  Pelasgic  occupation  of  Greece  ascends  into  "the  night  of 
time."  They  may  be  regarded  as  the  indigenous  possessors,  the 
autocthones  of  the  soil.  Indeed  there  is  reason  to  believe  that  there 
was  a  civilization  in  Pelasgia  long  before  that  which  history  attributes 
to  the  Hellenic  race,  though  generally  attributed  to  the  pro*genitor8 
of  that  people ;  for  a  priest  of  Sais  assured  Solon  (b.  c.  400)  that  the 
Saitic  writings  accounted  for  an  antecedent  Grecian  epoch  of  8000 
years ;  and  that  Greece  had  moreover  possessed  a  great  and  beautiftd 
city  yet  1000  years  earlier  in  time.* 

Statements  of  this  kind,  which  were  once  rejected  on  account  of 
their  seeming  extravagance,  now  claim  a  respectful  notice  when 
viewed  in  connexion  with  the  new  lights  of  chronology.  "We  are, 
indeed,  compelled  to  acknowledge  a  great  antiquity  for  a  race  that 
could  produce  the  divine  morality  of  Hesiod  900  years  before  Christ 

I  do  not  use  the  term  Pelasgic  with  ethnological  precision,  but  in 
this  designation  place  the  Greeks  and  Romans,  and  their  descendants 
in  various  parts  of  Europe  —  Greece  and  Italy,  and,  in  more  isolated 
examples,  in  Spain,  France,  and  Britain.  In  the  same  category  I 
place  the  Persians,  Armenians,  Circassians,  Georgians,  and  many 
other  kindred  tribes,  together  with  the  Grseco-Egyptians. 

Of  four  adult  Circassian  crania  brought  me  by  Mr.  Gliddon,  two 
are  male  and  two  female.  The  former  we  may  suppose,  from  appear- 
ances, to  have  been  associated  with  a  fiill  share  of  manly  beauty,  and 
measure  ninety  and  ninety-four  cubic  inches  of  internal  capacity;  the 
female  heads  measure  seventy-nine  and  eighty ;  whence  we  obtain 
eighty-six  cubic  inches  as  the  mean  of  all.  One  of  these  skulls,  that 
of  a  woman  who  had  passed  the  prime  of  life,  is  remarkable  for  the 
harmony  of  its  proportions,  and  especially  for  the  admirable  conforma- 
tion of  the  nasal  bones. 

I*posse8s,  through  the  kindness  of  Mr.  Gliddon,  two  female  Parsee 
skulls,  which,  though  small,  present  a  beautiftil  form.  One  measures 
eighty-nine  cubic  inches,  the  other  only  seventy-five. 

*  See  the  TiuiaBus  of  Plato.  Taylor's  Trans,  ii.  p.  466.  The  accurate  Niebuhr  remarks 
that,  « in  yery  remote  times  the  Peloponnesus  was  not  Grecian.'* 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC 

ON    THE    ORIGIN    OP  THE    HUMAN    SPECIES.  313 

It  is  a  highly  interesting  fact,  that  whenever  the  ruling  caste  is  re- 
presented in  the  statues  and  bas-reliefe  of  ancient  Persia,  the  physiog- 
nomy always  conforms  to  the  Pelasgic  type.  A  remarkable  example 
is  seen  in  the  head  of  the  first  Darius  (b.  c.  500),  sculptured  on  the 
Tablet  of  Behistun,  and  copied  by  Major  Bawlinson.  \_Supra,  Fig. 
44].  Of  the  same  character  are  the  antique  heads  of  Pereepolis, 
Teheran  and  Chapoor.  But  we  no  sooner  enter  Assyria  than  the 
type  is  wholly  changed  for  those  in  which  the  Semitic  features  are 
dominant,  as  seen  at  itfineveh,  Eliorsabad,  and  other  places. 

The  arts  have  become  the  handmaid  of  ethnology ;  and  it  may  be 
regarded  as  an  axiom  in^this  science,  that  the  older  the  sculptures  and 
paintings,  the  more  perfect  and  distinctive  are  the  cranial  types  they 
represent.  Again,  there  is  no  evidence  to  prove  that  any  one  of  the 
ancient  races,  simply  as  such,  is  older  than  another. 

Of  four  adult  Armenian  skulls,  three  pertain  to  men ;  and  the  ave- 
rage size  of  the  brain  is  but  eighty-three  cubic  inches.  I  have  felt 
some  hesitancy  in  admitting  these  skulls  in  this  place,  for  two  rea- 
sons^ 1st,  because  their  characteristics  incline  almost  as  much  to  the 
Arab  type  as  to  the  Pelasgic ;  and,  2dly,  because  the  term  Armenian 
is  not  always  used  in  a  strictly  national  sense  in  the  East,  but  is  ap- 
plied to  a  class  of  merchants,  whose  ethnological  affinities  must  be 
often  very,  mixed  and  uncertain.  But,  inasmuch  as  these  crania  are 
inserted  in  my  ori^nal  Tabhy  I  will  not  now  displace  them. 

O^reek  and  GhrsecO'Egyptian  Seads.  —  Mr.  Combe  describes  several 
ancient  Greek  skulls  he  had  seen,  as  of  large  size,  with, a  full  deve- 
lopment of  the  coronal  and  frontal  regions.  The  head,  in  classic 
sculpture,  is  often  small  in  comparison  with  the  whole  figure ;  whence 
the  remark  that  a  woman  proportioned  like  the  Venus  de  Medicie 
would  necessarily  be  a  fool.  The  same  disparity  has  been  noticed  by 
Winkelmann  in  the  Fames^  Hercules ;  but  in  the  Apollo  Belvidere, 
[infra.  Fig.  339]  the  perfect  type  of  manly  beauty,  the  head  is  faultless. 

Whether  this  smallness  of  head  was  a  reality  among  the  Qreeks,  or 
only  a  conventional  rule  of  art,  has  been  a  disputed  question ;  but  we 
may  safely  adopt  the  latter  proposition.  There  can  be  no  doubt,  how- 
ever, that  the  ancient  Pelasgic  was  smaller  than  the  modem  Teutonic 
brain ;  and  the  proofs,  which  are  derived,  not  from  Greece  itself,  but 
from  Egyi^t,  are  contained  in  the  following  section :. 

Of  129  embalmed  heads  in  my  collection,  22  present  Pelasgic  cha- 
racters, and  of  these  18  are  capable  of  measurement  Some  of  them 
present  the  most  beautiful  Caucasian  proportions,  while  others  merge 
by  degrees  into  the  Egyptian  type ;  and  I  am  free  to  admit  that,  in 
various  instances,  I  have  been  at  a  loss  in  my  attempts  to  classify 
these  two  great  divisions  of  the  Nilotic  series.    Hence  it  is  that  nine 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC 

314  Morton's  inedited  mss. 

skulls,  which  in  my  original  analysis  were  placed  with  the  Pelasgic 
group,  I  have,  on  a  further  and  more  elaborate  comparison,  transferred 
to  the  Egyptian  series. 

The  Greeks  were  numerous  in  Egypt  even  before  the  Persian  in- 
vasion, B.  0.  525,  and  their  number  greatly  increased  after  the  con- 
quest by  Alexander  the  Great,  nearly  200  years  later  (b.  c.  382). 
When  the  Romans,  in  turn,  took  possession  of  the  country  thirty 
years  before  our  era,  the  Greeks  had  abeady  enjoyed  uninterrupted 
communication  with  it  for  five  centuries.  Their  colonies  were  800 
years  old ;  and  it  is,  therefore,  by  no  means  surprising  that  the  Egyp- 
tian-Greek population,  which  chiefly  ihhabited  Lower  Egypt,  should 
be  largely  represented  in  the  catacombs  of  Memphis.  They  are  fewer 
in  proportion  in  Theban  sepulchres ;  and  yet  fewer  as  we  ascend  the 
Nile ;  and  are  hardly  seen  in  the  cemeteries  of  the  rural  districts. 
The  peaceful  occupation  of  the  Delta  by  the  Greeks,  for  a  long  period 
of  time,  must  necessarily  have  caused  an  interminable  mixture  of  the 
two  races,  and  fully  accounts  for  that  blended  type  of  cranial  con- 
formation so  common  in  the  catacombs. 

It  is  further  remarkable  that  these  Graeco-Egyptian  heads,  which  I 
have  separated  from  the  other  Miotic  crania  by  their  conformation 
only,  and  consequently  without  any  regard  to  size,  present  an  average 
of  eighty-seven  cubic  inches  for  the  size  of  the  brain ;  or,  no  less  than 
seven  cubic  inches  above  that  of  the  pure  Egyptian  race,  and  but 
three  inches  less  than  the  average  I  have  asstimed  for  the  Teutonic 
nations,  ^et,  no  one  of  this  series  is  of  preponderating  size ;  for 
the  largest  measures  but  ninety-seven  .cubic  inches,  while  the  smallest 
descends  to  seventy-four.* 

Again,  if  we  take  the  mean  of  the  whole  twenty-eight  crania  em- 
braced in  the  present  division,  we  find  it  to  be  eighty-six  cubic 
inches. 

The  Celtic  Eacb. — The  Celts  who,  with  the  cognate  Gauls,  at  one 

*  Dr.  J.  C.  Warren,  of  Boston,  possesses  two  finely  preserred  Jtoman  crania,  from  tiie 
ashes  of  Pompeii.  It  is  manj  jears  since  I  saw  them,  but  they  appeared  to  be  highly  oha- 
racteristrc  of  this  diyision  of  the  Pelasgic  race.  The  difference  between  the  Roman  and 
Greek  heads  is  familiar  to  all  observers,  bat  it  has  not  been  satisfactorily  explained.  It 
may  have  arisen  firom  alliances  between  the  intmsiye  Pelasgic  and  some  neighboring,  but 
dissimilar  tribe,  in  Italy.  One  of  the  first  acts  of  the  Romans  was  to  seize  the  Sabine 
women,  in  order  to  people  their  infant  colony.  These  Sabines,  howeyer,  are  said  also  to 
haye  been  of  Pelasgic  origin ;  but  that  the  rural  population  of  Italy,  at  that  period,  em- 
braced a  large  proportion  of  Celts,  may  be  inferred  from  history  and  confirmed  by  the  Etrus- 
can yases ;  for  wherever  these  relics,  now  so  numerous,  picture  the  sylvan  deities,  whether 
AS  fauns  or  satyrs,  they  are  represented  with  marked  Celtic  features ;  while  the  higher  and 
ruling  caste,  represented  on  the  same  vessels,  has  a  perfect  Grecian  physiognomy.  See 
Sir  William  Hamilton's  Etruscan  VaseSf  passim.  The  true  Roman  profile,  however,  is  not 
onfrequent  on  the  antique  bas-reliefs  of  Persia.     Flandin :   Voyage  en  Ferse^  pi.  88,  48. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

ON    THE    ORIGIN    OF    THE    HUMAN    SPECIES.  315 

period,  extended  their  tribes  from  Asia  Minor  to  the  British  Islands, 
are  now  chiefly  confined,  as  an  unmixed  people,  to  the  west  and  south- 
west of  Ireland,  whence  have  been  derived  the  six  crania  embraced 
in  the  Table.  These  range  between  ninety-seven  as  a  maximum  and 
seventy-eight  as  a  minimum  of  the  size  of  the  brain ;  and  the  mean, 
which  is  eighty-Beven  cubic  inches,  will  probably  prove  to  be  above 
that  of  the  entire  race,  and  not  exceed  ei'ghty-five. 

France,  Spain,  and  parts  of  Britain,  partake  largely  of  Celtic  blood, 
but  so  variously  blended  with  the  Teutonic  and  Pelasgic  branches  of 
the  Caucasian  group  as  to  form  a  singularly  mixed  population.  If  a 
series  of  crania  could  be  obtained  from  the  old  Provincial  divisions 
of  Prance,  they  would  constitute  a  study  of  extreme  interest;  for 
those  of  the  northern  section  ought  to  conform  in  a  marked  degree 
to  the  German  type,  from  their  long  intercourse  (since  a.  d.  420)  with 
the  Franks,  Burgundians,  Visigoths,  and  other  Teutonic  tribes.  Those 
in  the  south  would  present  a  greater  inftision  of  the  Eoman  physiog- 
nomy, with  some  Greek  traits ;  while  the  intermediate  communities 
would  retain  a  marked  preponderance  of  their  primitive  Celtic  char- 
acteristics. For  Csesar  restricts  the  true  Continental  Celts  between 
the  Garonne  on  the  south  and  the  Seine  on  the  north:  for  although 
the  genuine  Gtauls  were  a  Celtic  people,  many  German  tribes  bore 
the  same  collective  name  among  the  Romans,  in  the  same  way  that 
all  the  nations  of  the  far  North  were  designated  Scythians. 

Europe  was  successively  invaded  by  the  Celtic,  Teutonic,  and  Scla- 
vonic races.  The  Celtic  migi^ation  is  of  extreme  antiquity,  yet  there 
can  be  no  question  that  they  displaced  preexisting  tribes.  Among 
the  latter  may  be  mentioned  the  Iberians  of  Spain,  who  are  yet  repre- 
sented by  a  fragment  of  their  race  — the  Basques  or  Euskaldunes  of  * 
Biscay. 

The  Indostanic  Family.  — No  part  of  the  world  presents  a  greater 
diversity  of  human  races  than  the  country  which  bears  the  collective 
name  of  India.  Exotic  nations  have  repeatedly  conquered  that  un- 
fortunate region,  and  to  a  certain  degree  amalgamated  with  its  primi- 
tive inhabitants.  In  other  instances,  the  original  Hindoos  remain 
unmixed;  and  beside  these,  again,  the  mountainous  districts  still 
contain  what  may  be  called  fragments  of  tribes  which  have  taken 
refuge  there,  in  remote  timfes,  in  order  to  escape  the  sword  or  the 
yoke  of  strangers. 

That  peninsular  India  was  originally  peopled,  at  least  in  part,  by 
races  of  very  dark  and  even  black  complexion,  is  beyond  a  question. 
These  people  are  stigmatised  as  Barbarians  by  their  conquerors,  the 
Ayras — a  fidr  race,  with  Sanscrit  speech,  whose  primal  seats  were  in 
Bastem  Persia.    They  now  occupy  the  country  between  the  Himalaya 

Digitized  by 

Google 

316  MORTON^S    INEDITED    MSS. 

mountains  on  the  north,  the  Vindya  on  the  south,  and  between  the 
Indian  ocean  and  the  Bay  of  Bengal.*  In  this  region,  called  Ayra- 
Varta,  or  India  Proper,  live  those  once-powerfdl  tribes  which  it  has 
taken  the  English  more  than  half  a  century  to  subdue.  The  occu- 
pancy of  India  by  these  Persian  tribes  dates,  according  to  M.  Quigniaut 
from  the  year  8101  before  Christ,  when  also  it  is  supposed  the  divi- 
sion o{  castes  was  instituted.  [^] 

Of  thirty-two  adult  Indostanic  skulls  in  my  collection,  eight  only 
can  be  identified  with  tribes  of  the  Ayra  or  conquering  race ;  nor 
even  in  this  small  number  is  there  unequivocal  proof  of  the  affinity  in 
question.  The  largest  head  in  the  series,  that  of  a  Brahmin  who  was 
executed,  in  Calcutta,  for  murder,  measures  ninety-one  cubic  inches 
for  the  size  of  the  brain  —  the  smallest  head,  seVenty-nine.  Two 
others  pertain  to  Thuggs^  remarkable  for  an  elongated  form  and 
lateral  flatness.  The  mean  of  these  Ayra  heads  is  eighty-six  cubic 
inches. 

Contrasted  with  this  people,  and  occupying  the  country  adjacent  to 
the  Bay  of  Bengal,  are  the  Bengalees  —  small  of  stature,  feeble  in 
constitution,  £|,nd  timid  in  disposition.  They  are  obviously  an  abori- 
ginal race,  upon  whom  a  foreign  language  has  been  imposed ;  and 
are  far  inferior,  both  mentally  and  physically,  to  the  true  Ayras. 
"Weak  and  servile  themselves,  they  are  surrounded  by  warrior  castes; 
and  perhaps  the  most  remarkable  feature  of  their  character  is  the 
absence  of  will,  and  implicit  obedience  to  those  who  govern  them. 

Of  these  child-like  people,  my  collection  embraces  twenty-four  adult 
crania,  of  which  the  largest  measures  ninety  cubic  inches ;  the  small- 
est, sixty-seven ;  and  the  mean  of  all  is  but  seventy-eight 

All  the  Caucasian  families  of  which  we  have  spoken,  belong  to  that 
vast  chain  of  nations  called  Indo-European^  in  consequence  of  their 
having  one  common  tongue,  the  Sanscrit,  as  the  basis  of  their  varied 
languages.  This  is  also  the  Japetic  race^  and  it  extends  from  India 
proper  in  one  direction  to  Iceland  in  .the  other. 

The  Semitic  Family.  —  This  group  includes  the  Chaldeans,  Assy- 
rians, Syrians,  and  Lydians  of  antiquity,  together  with  the  Arabians 
and  Hebrews. 

The  immense  number  of  Jews  in  Egypt,  even  after  the  Exode  (b.  c. 
1528),  and  especially  during  the  Greek  dominion  of  the  Lagid8e,t 
Vould  lead  us  to  search  for  the  embalmed  bodies  of  this  people  in  the 
catacombs ;  and  hence  it  was  no  surprise  to  me  to  identify,  with  con- 
siderable certainty,  sevfen  Semitico-Egyptian  heads,  in  all  of  which 

*  See  President  Salisbury's  Discourse  on  Sanscrit  and  Arabic  Literature :  New  Haven, 
1S48.    The  Ayra  race  derive  their  name  froih  Iran,  Persia, 
t  Josephns,  B.  XII.  Chap.  2. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

ON   THE    ORIGIN   OP    THE   HUMAN    SPECIES.  317 

the  Hebrew  physiognomy  is  more  or  less  apparent,  and  in  some  of 
them  unquestionable.  This  identity  is  further  confirmed  by  the  fact, 
that  the  Jews  in  Egypt  adopted  the  custom  of  embalming  at  a  very 
early  period  of  time  (Genesis  1.  26).  And  again,  the  two  nations  appear 
to  have  fraternized  in  a  remarkable  manner ;  for  Adad  married  the 
sister  of  Pharaoh's  wife,  and  one  of  Solomon's  wives  was  the  daughter 
of  an  Egyptian  king,  who  is  supposed  to  have  been  Osorkon.  [*•]  To 
these  facts  we  may  add  the  marriage  of  Joseph,  at  a  fsir  earlier  period 
of  history,  with  a  daughter  of  the  priest  of  Heliopolis.  For  these  rea- 
sons, I  repeat,  the  Hebrew  nation  should  be  largely  represented  in 
the  catacombs. 

Five  of  my  embalmed  Semitic  heads  are  susceptible  of  measure- 
ment, and  give  the  low  average  of  eighty-two  cubic  inches — the 
largest  measuring  eighty-eight;  the  smallest,  sixty-nine.*  In  these 
crania,  and  also  in  others  of  existing  Semitic  tribes,  I  have  looked  in 
vain  for  the  pit  described  by  Mulder  as  situated  on  the  outer  wall  of 
the  orbit  at  the  attachment  of  the  temporal  muscles ;  and  conse- 
quently there  is  no  trace  of  the  corresponding  elevation,  also  described 
by  him,  within  the  orbitar  cavity. 

I  have  had  but  little  success  in  procuring  the  crania  of  the  modem 
Semitic  tribes ;  and  for  the  three  that  I  possess  I  am  indebted  to  Mr. 
Gliddon.  Of  these,  two  are  Baramka  or  Barmecide  Arabs ;  the  third, 
a  Bedouin.  The  largest  measures  ninety-eight  cubic  inches ;  the  small- 
est, eighty-four ;  and  the  mean  is  eighty-nine ;  but  if  we  take  the 
average  of  these  eight  Semitic  heads,  ancient  and  modem,  it  will  be 
eighty-five  inches. 

I  also  received  from  Mr.  Qliddon  three  additional  skulls,  from 
Cairo,  which  he  was  assured  were  those  of  Jews ;  [*^].  but  their  form 
has  induced  me  to  class  them,  perhaps  erroneously,  with  the  Fellahs 

ofEgyptt 

The  Nilotic  Race.  —  In  this  designation  I  include  the  ancient 
Egyptians  of  the  pure  stock,  and  the  modem  Fellahs. 

For  the  extensive  series  of  Egyptian  skulls  in  my  possession,  I  am 
indebted  to  the  kindness  of  Mr.  Gliddon,  Mr.  A.  C.  Harris  of  Alex- 
andria, in  Egypt,  Dr.  Charles  Pickering,  and  Mr.  "William  A.  Qlid- 
don. Of  these  129  embalmed  heads,  88  present  the  Egyptian  confor- 
mation; and  of  the  latter  number,  55  are  capable  of  being  measured. 

I  may  here  repeat  a  previous  remark,  that  some  of  these  crania 
present  both  Pelasgic  and  Egyptian  lineaments,  and  thus  form  a 
transition  between  the  two  races ;  but  I  have  classed  them  in  one 
group  or  the  other,  according  to  the  preponderance  of  national  char- 

*  Crmnift  iBgypUaca,  pp.  41  and  46,  and  the  aocompanjiiig  platef. 
t  Catalogae  of  skiilU,  Nos.  771,  772,  778. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

318  Morton's  inedited  mss. 

actere.  In  the  great  m^ority  of  instances,  however,  the  Egyptian 
conformation  is  detected  at  a  glance. 

The  Egyptian  skull  is  unlike  that  of  any  other  with  which  I  am 
acquainted.  This  opinion,  which  I  long  since  announced,'*'  has  been 
fully  confirmed  by  subsequent  compmsons,  and  especially  by  the 
receipt  of  seventeen  very  ancient  and  most  characteristic  crania  fitom 
tombs  opened  in  1842,  at  the  base  of  the  Qreat  Pyramid,  by  Dr. 
Lepsius-t 

It  may  be  observed  of  these  crania  (for  the  rest  of  the  seriee  has 
been  elaborately  described  in  the  Orania  Egyptiaca)^  eleven  at  least 
are  of  the  unmixed  type,  and  present  the  long,  oval  form,  with  a 
slightly  receding  forehead,  straight  o^  gently  aquiline  nose,  and  a  some- 
what retracted  chin.  The  whole  cranial  structure  is  thin,  delic^e, 
and  symmetrical,  and  remarkable  for  its  small  size.  The  fistce  is  nar^ 
row,  and  projects  more  than  in  the  European,  whence  the  facial 
angle  is  two  degrees  less,  or  78°.  Neither  in  these  skulls,  nor  in  any 
others  of  the  Egyptian  series,  can  I  detect  those  peculiarities  of  struc- 
ture pointed  out  by  the  venerable  Blumenbach,  in  \mDeeade9  Qroniih 
rum;  and  the  external  meatus  of  the  ear,  whatever  may  have  been 
the  form  or  size  of  the  cartilaginous  portion,  is  predisely  where  we 
find  it  in  all  the  other  races  of  men.  The  hair,  whenever  any  of  it 
remains,  is  long,  curling,  and  of  the  finest  texture. 

On  comparing  these  crania  with  msjiy /(tc-Hmiles  of  monumental 
efligies  most  kindly  sent  me  by  Prof.  Lepsius  and  M.  Prisse  d'Avesnes, 
I  am  compelled,  by  a  mass  of  irresistible  evidence,  to  modify  the 
opinion  expressed  in  the  Orania  JEgyptiaca  —  viz.:  that  the  Egyp- 
tians were  an  Asiatic  people.  Seven  years  of  additional  investigation, 
together  with  greatly  increased  materials,  have  convinced  me  that 
they  were  neither  Asiatics  nor  Europeans,  but  abori^nal  and  indi- 
genous inhabitants  of  the  Valley  of  the  Nile  or  some  contiguous 
region :%  peculiar  in  their  physiognomy,  isolated  in  their  institutions, 
and  forming  one  of  the  primordial  centres.of  the  human  fiwnily. 

Egypt  was  the  parent  of  ^,  science,  and  civilization.  Of  th^se 
she  gave  much  to  Asia,  and  received  some  modifying  influences  in 
return ;  but  nothing  more.  Her  population,  pure  and  peculiar  in  the 
early  epochs  of  time,  derived  by  degrees  an  element  from  Europe  and 
Asia,  and  this  was  increased  in  the  lapse  of  years,  until  the  Delta 
became  a  Qreek  colony,  with  an  interspersed  multitude  of  Jews. 

Effigies  and  portraits  of  Egyptian  sovereigns  and  citizens  are  yet 

*  Crania  ^gyptjaca,  1844. 

f  Proceedings  of  the  Academy  [of  Nat  Sciences,]  for  October,  1844. 
%  This  opinion,  with  some  mocKfiootions,  has  been  entertained  by  several  learned  Egypt* 
ologists — Champollion,  Heeren,  Lenormant,  &c. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

ON    THE    OBIGIN    OP    THE    HUMAN    SPECIES.  319 

preserved  in  monuments  that  date  back  5000  years,*  and  they  con- 
form, in  all  their  characteristic  lineaments,  with  the  heads  jfrom  the 
tombs  of  Gizeh  and  other  Nilotic  sepulchres. 

Of  the  fifty-five  Egyptian  heads  measured  in  the  Tahle^  it  will  be  seen 
that  the  largest  measures  but  ninety-six  cubic  inches  of  internal  capa- 
city, the  smallest  sixtyreight ;  and  the  mean  of  them  all  is  but  eighty. 
This  result  was  announced  in  the  Qrania  JEgyj^iacay  and  has  been 
confirmed  by  the  numerous  additional  measurements  made  since  that 
work  was  published.  Tet,  on  computing,  by  themselves,  the  fifteen 
crania  from  the  ancient  tombs  of  Qizeh,  I  find  them  to  present  an 
average  of  eighty-four  cubic  inches.  The  persons  whose  bodies  had 
reposed  in  these  splendid  mausolea,  were  no  doubt  of  the  highest 
and  most  cultivated  class  of  Egyptian  citizens ;  f  and  this  fact  de- 
serves to  be  considered  in  connexion  with  the  present  inquiry.  To 
this  we  may  add^  that  the  most  deficient  part  of  the  Egyptian 
skull  is  the  coronal  region,  which  is  extremely  low,  while  the  poste- 
rior chamber  is  remarkably  full  and  prominent 

The  Fellahs. — The  Arab-Egyptians  of  the  present  day  constitute  a 
population  of  more  than  2,500,000 ;  and  that  they  are  the  lineal  de- 
scendants of  the  ancient  rural  Egyptians,  is  proved  by  the  form  of 
the  skull,  the  mental  and  moral  character  of  the  people,  and  their 
existing  institutions,  among  which  phallic  worship  is,  even  yet,  con- 
spicuous. Clot-Bey  has  drawn  a  graphic  moral  parallel  between  these 
two  extremes  of  a  single  race,  by  showing  that  both  were  sober,  ava- 
ricious, insolent,  self-opinioned,  satirical,  and  licentious.  Contrasted 
with  these  defects  in  the  old  Egyptians^  were  the  many  household 
virtues,  and  that  genius  for  the  arts  which  has  been  a  proverb  in  all 
ages. 

When  the  Saracenic  Arabs  conquered  Egypt  in  the  seventh  centuiy 
of  our  era,  an  unlimited  fusion  of  races  was  a  direct  and  obvious  con- 

*  Lepsios:  Chronologie  der  '^gypter,  p.  196.  Dr.  Lepsius  dates  the  age  of  Menes,  the 
first  Egyptian  king,  8898  before  Christ,  or  6748  years  from  the  present  time ;  and  jet,  in 
thai  remote  time,  Egypt  was  already  possessed  of  her  arts,  institutions,  and  hieroglyphic 
language.  The  researches  of  the  learned  Chevalier  Bunsen  famish  conclusions  nearly  the 
same  as  those  of  Lepsius.  Of  the  great  antiquity  of  the  Human  Species  there  can  be  no 
question.     In  the  words  of  Dr.  Prichard,  it  may  have  been  chUiadi  of  years. 

The  ancient  Egyptians  appear  to  have  had  no  doubts  on  this  subject ;  for  a  priest  of  Sais, 
addressing  Solon,  spoke  of  **  the  muHitade  and  Tariety  of  the  destructions  of  the  Human 
race  which  formerly  have  been,  and  again  will  be ;  the  greatest  of  these,  indeed,  arising 
from  fire  and  water;  but  the  lesser  from  ten  thousand  other  contingencies.**  —  Timceus  of 
Plato  :  Taylor's  Trans,  ii.  466. 

f  Dr.  Lepsius  did  not  desire  to  retain  thestf  crania,  because  they  bore  no  collateral  eyi- 
dence  of  their  epoch  or  national  lineage.  The  bones  were  in  great  measure  already  de- 
nuded by  time ;  and  the  appliances  of  mummification  (which,  in  the  primitiTe  ages,  con- 
nsted  of  little  more  than  desiccating  the  body,)  had  long  since  disappeared.  As  heretofore 
obserred,  I  judge  these  relics  solely  by  their  intrinsic  characters. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

320  Morton's  inedited  mss. 

aequence ;  but  M.  Clot-Bey  has  judiciously  remarked,  that  the  Arabs, 
nevertlielesB,  present  but  a  feeble  element  in  the  physical  character  of 
the  great  mass  of  people : — 

«  D*oa  il  r^sulte  qae  TEgyptien  actuel  ti^t  beauoonp  plus,  par  ses  formes,  par  son  earae- 
t^re,  et  par  ses  moenrs,  des  andens  Egyptiens  que  des  yeritables  Arabs,  dooi  on  ne  trouTS 
le  type  pur  qu'en  Arable.*'* 

The  skull  of  the  Fellah  is  strikingly  like  that  of  the  ancient  Egyp- 
tian. It  is  long,  narrow,  somewhat  flattened  on  the  ddes,  and  veiy 
prominent  in  the  occiput  The  coronal  region  is  low,  the  forehead 
moderately  receding,  the  nasal  bones  long  and  nearly  straight,  the 
cheek-bones  small,  the  maxillary  region  slightly  prognathous,  and  the 
whole  cranial  structure  thin  and  delicate.  But,  notwithstanding 
these  resemblances  between  the  Fellah  and  Egyptian  skulls,  the  latter 
possess  what  may  be  called  an  ogteological  expremouy  peculiar  to  them- 
selves, and  not  seen  in  the  Fellah. 

The  Fellahs,  however,  do  not  appear  to  be  the  only  descendants  of 
the  monumental  Egyptians ;  for  they  exist  also  in  Nubia,  and  west- 
ward, in  isolated  communities,  in  the  heart  of  Afiica.  Of  such  origin 
I  regard  the  Red  Bakkari,  so  well  described  by  Pallme.  [*^]  So,  also, 
the  proper  Libyans,  the  Tuaricks,  Kabyles,  and  Siwahs,  who,  on  the 
testimony  of  Dr.  Oudney,  and  the  more  recent  observations  of  Dr. 
Furnari,  possess  at  least  the  physical  traits  of  the  Egyptian  race :  — 

<'  Chez  quelqnes  nnes  des  nombrenses  [peuplades]  qui  babiteni  rimmense  plains  da  Sa- 
hara, chez  les  Tonaricks,  et  ehex  qnelques  tribns  limitropbes  de  TEgypte,  les  yenx  ecart^s  Fun 
de  Taotre,  sont  long,  oonp^s  en  amandes,  &  moiti^  ferm^  et  reley^s  anx  angles  ext^rienrs." 

There  are  other  reasons  for  supposing  that  the  Libyan  and  Nilotic 
nations  had  a  cognate  source,  though  their  social  and  political  sepa- 
ration may  date  with  the  earliest  epochs  of  time. 

A  few  words  respecting  the  OapU,  Almost  every  investigation  into 
the  lineage  of  these  people  results  in  considering  them  a  mixed  pro- 
geny of  ancient  Egyptians,  Berabera,  Negroes,  Arabs,  and  Europeans ; 
and  these  characteristics  are  so  variously  blended,  as  to  make  the 
Copts  one  of  the  most  motiey  and  paradoxical  communities  in  the 
world.  The  Negro  traits  are  visible,  in  greater  or  less  degree,  in  a 
large  proportion  of  this  people,  and  are  distinctly  seen  in  the  three 
skulls  in  my  possession.  The  two  adult  heads,  which,  on  account  of 
their  hybrid  character,  are  excluded  from  the  Tabhy  measure  respect- 
ively eighty-five  and  seventy-seven  cubic  inches  for  the  size  of  the 
brain,  and  consequently  give  the  low  average  of  eighty-one. 

From  the  preceding  observations  it  will  appear  that  the  Fellahs  are 
the  rural  or  agricultural  Egyptians,  blended  with  the  intrusive  Ara- 
bian stock ;  but  the  Copts,  on  the  other  hand,  represent  the  descend- 

*  Aper9U  G^n^rale  snr  TEgypte,  L  p.  160. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC 

ON    THE    ORIGIN    OF    THE  HUMAN    SPECIES.  321 

«nts  of  the  old  urban  population,  whose  blood,  in  the  It^se  of  ages, 
has  become  mixed  with  that  of  all  the  exotic  races  which  have  domi- 
ciliated themselves  in  the  cities  of  Egypt  The  mercenary  licentious- 
ness of  the  Copts  is  proverbial  even  at  the  present  day. 

I  shall  conclude  these  remarks  on  this  part  of  the  inquiiy  by 
observing,  that  no  mean  has  been  taken  of  the  Caucasian  races 
collectively,  because  of  the  very  great  preponderance  of  Hindoo, 
Egyptian,  and  Fellah  skulls  over  those  of  the  Germanic,  Pelasgic  and 
Celtic  families.  Kor  could  any  just  eoUeetive  comparison  be  instituted 
between  the  Caucasian  and  Negro  groups  in  such  a  Table  as  we  have 
presented,  unless  the  small-brained  people  of  the  latter  division 
(Hottentots,  Bushmen  and  Australians)  were  proportionate  in  number 
to  the  Hindoos,  Egyptians,  and  Fellahs  of  the  other  group.  Such  a 
comparison,  were  it  practicable,  would  probably  reduce  the  Caucasian 
average  to  about  eighty-seven  cubic  inches,  and  the  Negro  to  seventy- 
eight  at  most,  perhaps  even  to  seventy-five ;  and  thus  confiimatively 
establish  the  difference  of  at  least  nine  cubic  indies  between  the 
mean  of  the  two  raceb. 

II.    THE  MONGOLIAN  GROUP. 

The  learned  Klaproth,  in  his  tableau  de  VAsiey  has  shown  that 
before  the  year  1000  of  our  era,  the  Mongols  were  inconsiderable 
tribes  in  the  northwest  of  Asia,  and  hence  have  erroneously  had  their 
name  given  to  the  most  multitudinous  of  the  five  great  divisions  of 
the  human  family ;  but  from  an  unwillingness  to  interfere  with  the 
generally  adopted  nomenclature  of  ethnology,  I  have  used  the  word 
Mongolian  in  the  comprehensive  sense  of  Buffon  and  Blumenbaeh. 
It  embraces  nations  of  dissimilar  features,  among  whom,  however, 
there  is  a  common  link  of  resemblance  that  justifies  the  classification 
for  generic  purposes.  Hence  we  group  together  the  Chinese,  the 
Eamtschatkans,  and  the  Kalmucks. 

I  possess  but  eight  Mongolian  crania,  and  of  these  seven  are  Chi- 
nese—too small  a  number  firom  which  to  deduce  a  satisfiictory  result. 
The  largest  of  them  measures  niftety-one  cubic  inches,  the  smallest 
seventy ;  and  they  ^ve  an  average  of  eighty-two.  They  are  all  de- 
rived fix)m  the  lowest  class  of  people ;  and  it  is  not  improbable  that 
an  average  drawn,  at  least  in  part,  from  the  higher  castes,  would 
approximate  much  more  nearly  to  the  Caucasian  mean,  perhaps  to 
eighty-five?  cubic  inches. 

By  the  kindness  of  Prof.  Retzius  of  Stockholm,  I  possess  a  single 
skull  of  a  Laplander — a  man  of  about  forty  years  of  age — whose 
brain  measures  no  less  than  ninety-four  cubic  inched.  The  charader* 
41 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC 

322  MOBTON'S    IlfEDITED   MSS. 

islics  are  obviously  Mongolian,  to  which  race  the  Lappes  nnqneetion* 
ably  belong.  Dr.  Prichard  has  produced  philological  evidence  in 
proof  of  an  opinion  maintained  by  himself  and  some  other  learned 
men,  that  these  people  are  FinnSj  who  have  acquired  Mongolian  fea- 
tures from  a  long  residence  in  the  extreme  north  of  Europe.  Yet,  it 
must  be  remembered  that,  in  former  ages  they  lived  much  Airther 
south,  in  Sweden,  and  side  by  side  with  the  proper* Finns;  whence 
has,  no  doubt,  been  derived  any  visible  blending  of  the  characters  of 
the  two  races,  and  some  affinities  of  language  which  are  known  and 
admitted  by  all. 

This  is  a  vital  question  in  ethnology;  and,  although  we  have 
already  made  some  remarks  upon  it,  it  may  be  allowable  in  this 
place  to  inquire  how  it  happens  that  the  people  of  Iceland,  who  are 
of  the  unmixed  Teutonic  race,  have  for  600  years  inhabited  their 
Polar  region,  as  &r  north,  indeed,  as  Lapland  itself,  without  approxi- 
mating in  the  smallest  degree  to  the  Mongolian  type,  or  losing  an  iota 
of  their  primitive  Caucasian  features.'*' 

A  recent  traveller,t  equally  remarkable  for  talent  and  enterprise, 
has  briefly  embodied  the  &ct8  of  this  question  in  a  manner  sufficient 
to  decide  it  in  any  unprejudiced  mind.  He  declares  that  the  Finns 
and  Laplanders  "have  scarcely  a  single  trait  in  common.  The 
general  physiognomy  of  the  one  is  totally  unlike  that  of  the  other ; 
and  no  one  who  has  ever  seen  the  two  could  mistake  a  Finlander  for 
a  Laplander.'*  The  very  diseases  to  which  they  are  subject  are  diffe- 
rent;  and  he  quotes  the  learned  Prof.  Betzius  of  Stockholm  for  the 
fact,  that  the  intestinal  parasitic  worms  of  the  one  race  are  different 
from  those  of  the  other.  Finally,  they  differ  almost  as  widely  in  their 
ipental  and  moral  attributes. 

But,  to  show  how  litfle  mere  philology  can  be  depended  on  in  this 
and  other  instances,  in  deciding  the  affiliation  of  races,  we  may  adduce 
the  researches  of  the  learned  Counsellor  Haartman.  This  eminent 
philologist  has  shown  that  the  Carelians,  who,  from  analogy  of  lan- 
guage, have  hitherto  been  grouped  with  the  proper  Finnidli  race, 
belong  to  a  totally  different  &mily,  which  invaded  the  region  of  the 
Lake  Ladoga,  and  gave  their  name  to  the  conquered  country.  This 
race,  he  adds,  had  a  language  o^its  own,  which  was  lost  in  the  course 

«  DeemoulhiB :  ffitt  Nat.  dei  Races  Bumaines,  p.  166.  Were  it  not  for  tbe  evidence  of 
poeitiye  luatoTy,  some  fatore  ethnolo^^t  might  gniTely  insist  that,  because  the  Negroes  of 
St  Domingo  speak  the  French  language,  they  are  Frenchmen,  to  whom  a*  tropical  sim, 
altered  aliments,  and  change  of  habits,  have  imparted  the  black  skin,  projecting  face,  and 
wooU^  hafar  of  the  African. 

f  A  Winter  in  Lapland  and  Sweden:  by  Arthur  de  Capell  Brooks,  M.  A., F.  R.  S.  P. : 
London,  1S27,  p.  586-87. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

ON    THE    ORIOIN    OP    THE    HUMAN    SPECIES.  623 

of  time,  "  and  lias  been  superseded  by  the  Finnic,  fix)m  the  over- 
powering influence  of  the  neighboring  tribes."*  Such  evidence 
needs  no  commentary. 

III.    THE  MALAY  GROUP. 

Besides  the  true  Malays,  the  Malay  race  is  composed  of  people  of 
dissimilar  stock;  whence  the  opinion  of  M.  Lesson,  that  those  of  the 
Indian  Archipelago  are  a  mixture  of  Indo-Caucasians  and  Mongols. 
That  this  amalgamation  exists  to  a  certain  extent,  there  is  no  question ; 
and  in  other  instances  they  are  variously  blended  with  the  indigenous 
or  Oceanic  Negro.  Hence  the  origin  of  the  Papuas  of  New  Zealand, 
who  are  the  littoral  inhabitants  of  that  continent 

Independently,  however,  of  these  mixed  breeds,  two  great  families 
are  conspicuous — the  Malays  proper  and  the  Polynesians — and  to 
these  pertidn  the  twenty-three  heads  embraced  in  the  Table. 

The  true  Malays  have  a  roimded  cranium,  with  a  remarkable  ver- 
tical diameter  and  ponderous  structure.  The  fiice  is  flat,  the  cheek- 
bones square  and  prominent,  the  ossa  nasi  long  and  more  or  less  flat- 
tened, and  the  whole  maxillary  structure  strong  and  salient.  The 
twenty  skulls  in  my  possession  have  been  collected  with  ethnological 
precision,  and  so  much  resemble  each  other,  as  to  remind  us  of  the 
remark  of  M.  Crawford — ^that  the  true  Malays  are  alike  among  them- 
selves, but  unlike  among  all  other  nations. 

The  largest  of  this  series  of  skulls  measures  ninety-seven  cubic 
inches,  the  smallest  sixty-eight ;  and  they  give  a  mean  of  eighty-six : 
a  large  brain  for  a  roving  and  uncultivated  people,  who  possess,  how- 
ever, the  elements  of  civilization  and  refinement 

Of  the  Polynesian  Family  I  possess  but  three  crania  that  can  be  > 
measured,  and  they  give  a  mean  of  eighty-three  cubic  incites.  An 
extended  series  would  probably  show  a  larger  average ;  but  the  brain 
of  the  Polynesian,  if  measured  from  skulls  obtained  to  the  eastward 
of  New  2iealand  and  the  Marquesas  islands,  will  prove  smaller  than 
that  of  the  true  Malay. 

*  Tram,  of  the  Royal  Society  of  Sukkholm,  for  1847.  Egypt  affords  a  remarkable  example 
of  the  mntability  of  language ;  and  Niebnhr  {Hiet,  of  Rome,  i.  p.  87)  eonsiders  it  prored 
that  the  FeUsgi,  aU  the  eariieet  inhabitants  of  the  P^oponnesns,  and  many  Arcadian  and 
Attie  nations,  possessed  originally  a  different  language  fh>m  the  Greeks,  and  obtained  the 
Hellenie  tongne  by  adoption. .  He  adds,  that  those  Epirotes  whom  Thnoydides  calls  Bar- 
biarians,  **  changed  their  language,  without  conquett  or  eoloniiation,  into  Oreek.**  Diodoms 
and  Cicero  mention  the  same  fiMt  with  respect  to  the  Sionli,  <<  although  the  Greek  colonies 
in  Siofly  liad  only  extended  to  a  Tery  few  towns  in  the  interior/' — Niebuhr,  loco  dUU. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

324  Morton's  inedited  mss. 

ly.  t^e  american  group. 

I  have  hitherto  arranged  the  numberless  indigenous  tribes  of  itTorth 
and  Sputh  America  into  tv^  great  families:  one  of  which,  the  Tolte- 
can,  embraces  the  demi-civili^ed  communities  of  Mexico,  Bogota,  and 
Peru;  while  the  other  division  includes  all  the  Barbarous  tribes. 
This  classification  is  manifestly  arbitrary,  but  every  attempt  at  sub- 
division has  proved  yet  more  so.  Much  time  and  care  will  be  requi- 
site for  this  end,  which  must  be  based  on  the  observations  of  D'Or- 
bigny  for  South  America,  and  those  of  Mr.  Gallatin  for  the  Northern 
[division  of  the]  continent. 

These  subdivisions,  after  all,  must  be  for  the  most  part  geographi- 
cal ;  for  the  physical  character  of  the  American  races,  from  Cape  Horn 
to  Canada,  is  essentially  the  same.  There  is  no  small  variety  of  com- 
plexion and  stature ;  but  the  general  form  of  the  skull,  the  contour 
and  expression  of  the  face,  and  the  color  and  texture  of  the  hair, 
together  with  the  mental  and  moral  characteristics,  all  point  to  a 
common  standard,  which  isolates  these  people  fix)m  the  rest  of  man- 
kind. The  same  remark  is  applicable  to  their  social  institutions  and 
their  archaeological  remains ;  for  Humboldt  has  shown  that  the  latter 
are  marked  by  the  same  principles  of  art,  from  Mexico  to  Peru  ;* 
and  Mr.  Qallatin  has  decided,  beyond  controversy,  that  while  their 
multitudinous  tongues  are  connected  by  obvious  links,  they  are  at 
the  same  time  radically  different  from  the  Asiatic  or  any  other 
languages. 

Mr.  Qallatin  finds  this  analogy  among  the  American  languages  to 
extend  to  the  Eskimaux  —  and  he  accordingly  separates  them  fix)m 
the  Mongolian  race,  and  regards  them  as  a  section  of  the  great  Ame- 
rican family.  This  view  may  possibly  be  sustained  by  future  inqui- 
ries ;  but  the  mere  fact  that  the  Eskimaux  and  the  proximate  Indian 
tribes  speak  dialects  of  one  language,  is  of  itself  no  proof  that  they 
belong  to  the  same  race.  Thus,  we  may  reasonably  suppose  that  the 
Asiatic  nomades,  having  arrived  on  this  continent  at  various  and  dis- 
tant periods,  and  in  small  parties,  would  naturally,  if  not  unavoid- 
ably, adopt  more  or  less  of  the  language  of  the  people  among  whom 
they  settled,  until  their  own  dialect  was  finally  merged  in  that  of  the 
Chippewyan  and  other  Indians  who  bound  them  on  the  south. 

"When,  on  the  other  hand,  famine,  caprice,  or  a  redundant  popula- 
tion, has  forced  some  of  these  people  back  again,  across  Behring's 
Strait,  to  Asia,  they  have  carried  with  them  the  mixed  dialect  of  the 
Eskimaux ;  whence  it  happens  that  the  latter  tribes  and  the'Tohutdi- 

*  Monuments,  II.  p.  5. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC 

OK    THE    ORIGIN    OF    THE    HUKAN    SPECIES.  325 

chi  possess  some  linguistic  elements  in  common :  but  here  the  ana- 
logy ceases  abruptly,  and  is  traced  no  fiarther.* 

My  collection  embraces  410  skulls  of  64  different  nations  and  tribes 
of  Indians,  in  which  the  two  great  divisions  of  this  race  are  repre- 
sented in  nearly  equal  proportions,  as  the  following  details  will  show. 

The  Toltecan  Family. — Of  218  skulls  of  Meidcans  and  Peruvians, 
201  pertain  to  the  latter  people,  whose  remains  have  been  selected 
with  great  care  by  the  late  Dr.  Burrough,  Dr.  Ruschenberger,  and  Dr. 
Oakford.  To  the  latter  gentleman,  I  am  under  especial  obligations 
for  his  kindness  in  personally  visiting,  on  my  behalf,  the  venerable 
sepulchres  of  Pisco,  Pachacamac,  and  Arica.  These  cemeteries,  at 
least  the  last  two,  are  believed  not  to  have  been  used  since  the  Span- 
ish conquest ;  and  they  certainly  contain  the  remains  of  multitudes 
of  Peruvians  of  very  remote,  as  well  as  of  more  recent  times. 

Every  one  who  has  paid  attention  to  the  subject  is  aware,  that  the 
Peruvian  skull  is  of  a  rounded  form,  with  a  flattened  and  nearly  ver- 
tical  occiput  It  is  also  marked  by  an  elevated  vertex,  great  inter- 
parietal diameter,  ponderous  structure,  salient  nose,  and  a  broad, 
prognathous  maxillary  region.  This  is  the  type  of  cranial  conforma- 
tion, to  which  all  the  tribes,  jfrom  Cape  Horn  to  Canada,  morje  or  less 
approximate.  I  admit  that  there  are  exceptions  to  this  rule,  some  of 
which  I  long  ago  pointed  out,  in  the  Crania  Americanaj  and  others 
have  recently  been  noticed  among  the  Brazilian  tribes  by  Prof.  Eetzius. 

This  rounded  form  of  the  head,  so  characteristic  of  the  American 
nations,  is  in  some  instances  unintentionally  exaggerated  by  the  sim- 
ple use  of  the  cradle-board,  in  common  use  among  the  Indians.  *  *  * 
But  on  tiie  other  hand,  whole  tribes,  from  time  immemorial,  have 
been  in  the  practice  of  moulding  the  head  into  artificial  forms  of  sin- 
gular variety  and  most  distorted  proportions.  These  were  made  the 
subject  of  the  following  experiment.  *  *  * 

[The]  indomitable  savages  who  yet  inhabit  the  base  of  the  Andes, 
on  the  eastern  boundary  of  Peru,  will  no  doubt  prove  to  have  a  far 
larger  brain  than  their  feeble  neighbors  whose  remains  we  have  exa- 
mined, from  the  graves  of  Pachacamac,  Pisco,  and  Arica. 

Kwe  take  the  collective  races  of  America,  civilized  and  savage,  we 
find,  as  in  the  Tahle^  that  the  average  size  of  the  brain,  as  measured 
in  the  whole  series  of  838  skulls,  is  but  79  cubic  inches. 

In  connexion  with  this  subject,  it  may  not  be  irrelevant  to  observe 
that  the  human  cranial  bones,  discovered  by  Dr.  Lund,  in  the  cavern 
near  the  Lagoa  do  Sumidouro,  in  Brazil,  and  seemingly  of  a  strictly 
fossil  character,  conform  in  all  respects  to  the  aboriginal  American 

*  8«e  my  iDqui^  into  the  DiBtmotiTe  Charaoteristies  of  the  Aboriginal  Race  of  America, 
p.  27. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC 

326  Morton's  inedited  mss. 

confonnation  ;*  thus  forming  a  striking  example  of  the  pennanenoe, 
we  might  say,  immutabiliiy  of  the  primordial  type  of  organization, 
when  this  has  not  been  modified  by  admixture  with  intrusive  and 
dissimilar  races. 

I  have  no  do\ibt  that  Man  will  yet  be  foxmd  in  the  fossil  state  as 
low  down  as  the  Eocene  deposits,  and  that  he  walked  the  earth  with 
the  Megalonyx  and  Paleotherium.  His  not  having  been  hitherto 
discovered  in  the  older  stratified  rocks  is  no  proof  that  he  will  not  be 
hereafter  found  in  them.  Ten  years  ago,  the  Monkey-tribes  were 
unknown  and  denied  in  the  fossil  state ;  but  they  have  since  been 
identified  in  the  Himalaya  mountains,  Brazil,  and  England.t 

[Undo/ M<frUm'9  MSS.} 

•  M^moire  de  la  Soc.  Boy.  des  AntaquaiTes  dn  Nord,  1846-47,  p.  78.  See  also  Dr.  Magi's 
highly  interesting  commiinication  on  the  Homan  Bones  found  at  Santos,  in  Brazil,  in  Trans. 
of  the  Amer.  Philos.  Soc.  f^r  1880;  and  Lt  Strain's  Letter  to  me,  in  Proceedings  of  the 
Academy  for  1844. 

f  Proofii  of  the  Tast  antiquity  of  the  earth,  and  of  man's  long  sojourn  upon  it,  multiply 
eyery  day.  The  Hebrew  chronology  is  a  human  computation  from  the  Book  of  GenesiB, 
and  while  it  falls  far  short  of  the  time  requisite  for  the  works  of  Man,  is  infinitely  con- 
tracted when  considered  in  reference  to  the  creations  of  God.  The  Egyptian  monuments, 
OS  we  have  seen,  date  far  beyond  the  period  allotted  to  the  Deluge  of  Noah  (which  was  eri- 
,  dently  a  partial  phenomenon) ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  the  irresistible  CYidence  of  Gedo- 
gical  Science  realises  the  sentiment  of  Plato  —  that  Past  time  is  an  eternity. 

« These-  Tiews,"  obserres  Sir  Charles  Lyell,  **  have  been  adopted  by  all  geologiats, 
whether  their  minds  haye  been  formed  by  the  ;literature  of  France,  or  of  Italy,  or  Scandi- 
nayia,  or  England  —  all  have  arrived  at  the  same  conclusion  respecting  the  great  antiquity 
of  the  globe,  and  that  too  in  opposition  to  their  earlier  prepossessions,  and  to  the  popular 
belief  of  their  age." 

All  human  calculations  of  time  are  ftitile  in  Geological  and  Ethnologioal  inquiries.  Epodis 
of  vast  duration  are  fully  established  by  the  nature  of  the  organic  remains  of  plants  and 
animals  that  characterise  the  different  formations;  while  the  very  intervals  that  separate 
these  formations  are  evidences  of  other  periods  hardly  less  astonishing.  In  fsct,  Geological 
epochs  present  some  analogy  to  Astronomical  distances:  the  latter  have  been  computed; 
the  former  are  beyond  calculation  —  and  the  mind  is  almost  as  incapable  of  realising  the 
one  as  the  other.    It  cannot  grapple  with  numbers  which  approximate  to  infinitude. 

It  is  stated  by  Prof  i^ehol,  of  Edinburgh,  that  "light  travels  at  the  rate  of  192,000 
miles  in  a  second  of  time,  and  that  it  performs  its  journey  firom  the  Sun  to  the  Earth,  a 
distance  of  05,000,000  of  miles,  in  about  eight  minutes.  And  yet,  by  Bosse's  great  tele- 
scope, we  are  informed  that  there  are  stars  and  systems  so  distant,  that  the  ray  of  light 
which  impinges  on  the  eye  of  the  observer,  and  enables  him  to  detect  it,  issued  from  that 
orb  60,000  years  back."     WutmtMter  Review,  1846. 

'<  In  the  beginning  God  created  the  Heavens  and  the  Earth  "  —  a  sublime  exordium,  tiiat 
points  to  an  aboriginal  creation,  antedating  the  works  of  the  Seven  Day$,  Science  has 
raised  the  veil  of  that  ancient  world,  with  all  its  numberless  forms  of  primeval  organisation ; 
but  these  are  not  noticed  in  the  text,  neither  man,  nor  the  inferior  animals.  When,  how- 
ever, we  find  the  fossil  remains  of  the  latter  so  varied  and  so  multitudinous,  it  is  not  incon- 
sistent with  true  philosophy  to  anticipate  the  discoveiy  of  human  remains  among  the 
ruins  of  that  primal  creation.  In  fact,  I  consider  geology  to  have  already  dedded  this 
question  in  the  affirmative. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

GEOLOGY   AND   PALiBONTOLOGT.  ftJT 

[IJnayailable,  owing  to  its  unfinished  condition,  the  Table  mentioned 
in  the  foregoing  Memoirs  is  necessarily  omitted.  We  cannot  abstain, 
notwithstanding,  from  recalling  the  reader's  attention — first,  to  the 
imqnalified  emphasis  with  which  Dr.  Morton's  posthumous  language 
insists  upon  an  dbmgmal  plurality  of  races  ;  and  secondly,  to  the  clear 
presentiments  (engendered  by  his  extensive  researches  in  Comparative 
Anatomy)  that  our  revered  President  of  the  Academy  of  Natural 
Sdences  avows  respecting  the  eventual  discovery  oiMan  in  a  fossil 
state. 

Palseontological  investigation^had  not  fallen  within  the  specialities 
of  either  author  of  this  volume ;  and,  in  consequence,  embarrassment 
was  long  felt  by  both,  whether  to  mould  what  materials  they  pos- 
sessed, concerning  fossilized  humaniiy,  into  a  Chapter,  or  to  relinquish 
a  task  in  itself  so  indispensable  to  tiie  nature  of  their  work,  no  less 
than  to  the  right  understanding  of  Man's  position  in  Creative  history. 
The  authors'  hesitancy  ceased  when  an  accomplished  friend,  familiar 
with  geological  and  other  scientific  literature,  volunteered  a  digest 
of  the  most  recent  discoveries :  nor  will  the  general  reader  fidl  to  be 
surprised,  as  well  as  edified,  through  the  perusal  of  Dr.  TTsheb's 
paper ;  which,  with  many  acknowledgments  on  the  part  of  J.  C.  N. 
and  G.  £.  G.,  is  embodied  in  the  ensuing  pages.] 

»^^^^^^^^^^^^»<»<»<^^«^^»^^^i»  ^<»ir< 

e 

CHAPTER   XI.. 

GEOLOGY  AND  PAUBONTOLOGY,  IN  CONNECTION  WITH  HUMAN 

ORIGINS. 

[CONTBIBUnD  BT  WiLUAM  USHBB,  M.  D.,  Of  MOBILl.] 

Every  discovery  in  modem  science  tends  to  enlarge  our  ideas  of 
the  Universe,  and  to  prove  that  the  date  of  its  creation  is  as  &r  distant 
in  the  past,  as  the  probable  consummation  of  its  destiny  is  remote  in 
the  foture.  Sir  William  Herschel  has  shown  that  there  are  stars  in 
the  heavens  so  distant,  that  the  light  by  which  they  are  visible  to  us 
has  been  myriads  of  years  in  its  passage  to  the  earth ;  and  the  won- 
derful powers  of  Lord  Rosse's  telescope  have  not,  even  yet,  penetrated 
to  the  circumference  of  the  starry  sphere.  It  is  the  glory  of  astronomy 
to  have  demonstrated  that  the  planetary  bodies  may  retain  their  pre- 

Digitized  by 

Google 

3j38  aBOLOGT   AND   FALJIONTOLOGT, 

sent  mevements  undistarbed  through  a  coming  eteraity ;  while  che- 
mistry illustrates  the  perpetual  antagonism  of  the  two  great  depart- 
ments of  organical  nature  on  our  globe,  by  which  the  vital  properties 
of  the  atinosphere  have  been  preserved  for  ages,  as  they  may  continue 
forever,  unimpaired ;  and,  finally,  geology  informs  us  that  the  earth 
has  been,  from  the  beginning,  the  theatre  of  constant  and  progreadve 
changes,  having  for  their  object  the  fitting  it  for  the  support  of  the 
various  races  of  beings  which,  in  regular  succession,  have  been  its 
inhabitants. 

The  first  great  change  in  the  condition  of  the  earth  was  the  con- 
densation of  its  surface  to  a  solid  state,  and  the  contraction  of  the 
newly-formed  crust  during  the  process  of  cooling;  by  which  the  Plu- 
tonic rocks  of  our 'system,  the  granite,  porphyry  and  basalt,  were 
formed  in  unstratified  and  crystallized  masses.  These  underlie  all 
the  other  rocks,  and  are  sometimes  forced  up  through  them  by  the 
irresistible  power  of  central  heat  Their  great  eminences  we're  separated 
by  valleys  filled  with  seas,  (through  the  condensation  of  the  drcum- 
ambient  vapors),  along  whose  bottoms  the  stratified  rocks  were  formed 
by  the  deposition  of  various  mineral  matters  resulting  from  the  dis- 
integration of  the  primitive  formations.  The  metamorphic  rocks 
were  thus  formed;  and,after  becoming  solidified  by  the  heat  of  the  cool- 
ing mass  below  them,  were  finally  upheaved  by  the  central  force,  and 
composed  immense  masses  in  different  parts  of  the  globe.  Most  of  the 
considerable  mountain  ranges  belong  to  this  system.  They  rest  upon 
a  basement  of  granite,  and  have  been  thrown  by  the  upheaving  forces 
into  positions  inclining  at  all  angles  to  the  horizon.  The  upturned 
edges  of  these  primary  strata  in  many  plpxjes  show  a  thickness  of 
fifteen  or  twenty  miies  —  they  were  formed  entirely  from  sediment 
produced  by  the  disintegration  of  the  hardest  rocks,  and  by  the  gra- 
dual action  of  the  elements;  while  their  deposition,  consolidation  and 
elevation  must  have  required  periods  of  time  which  the  mind  shrinks 
from  contemplating. 

The  Koran  declares  that  the  world  was  created  in  two  days ;  and  . 
"  Omar  the  Learned,"  for  assigning  a  longer  period,  was  obliged  to 
fly  from  his  country,  to  escape  the  disgrace  of  recanting  his  opinions. 
Happily,  we  live  now  under  a  more  enlightened  dispensation. 

In  these  rocks  we  find  no  traces  of  organic  remains  to  show  that 
the  earth  was  yet  inhabited  by  living  beings.  But  the  creation  of  the 
earth  consisted  of  a  long  succession  of  events,  each  occupying  a  dis- 
tinct geolo^cal  period,  and  leaving  indelible  records  of  its  history  in 
the  solid  crust  of  the  globe.  The  creation  of  organized  beings  exhi- 
bits a  similar  succession  —  each  race  appearing  as  soon  as  the  earth 
was  prepared  for  its  reception,  continuing  so  long  as  the  same  state  of 

Digitized  by 

Google 

IN    CONNBCTIOK   WITH   HUMAN    ORIGINS.  S29 

thingB  existed,  and  vankhing  when  the  improvement  of  the  earth  had 
rendered  it  fit  for  the  maiutenance  of  a  higher  type  of  living  creatures. 
All  living  creatures  were  exactly  adapted  through  their  organizatioii 
to  the  peculiar  localities  they  were  placed  in.  They  perished  when  the 
conditions  necessary  to  theirweU-being  were  changed  or  ceased  to  exist. 

In  the  next  series  of  strata  we  find  the  earliest  traces  of  those  tribes 
of  organized  beings  which  occupied  the.  primeval  earth,  and  have  left 
the  monuments  of  their  existence  in  the  rocks  which  form  their  tombs. 
These  primary  fossiliferous  strata  are  entirely  of  marine  origin, 
having  been  formed  at  the  bottom  of  the  ocean;  and  they  contain  the 
remains  of  marine  animalfl  only.  The  types  of  these  animals  are 
easily  recognized — they  include  representatives  of  all  the  great  de- 
partments of  the  animal  kingdom — but  the  species  and  even  the 
genera  are  entirely  lost.  The  animals,  however,  all  belong  to  the 
lowest  divisions  of  the  different  classes.  Thus  the  radiata  are  repre- 
sented by  zoophytes,  crinoidea  and  polyps  —  each  the  lowest  in  their 
respective  classes.  Mollusks,  in  like  manner,  exhibit  only  the  lower 
types ;  articulata  are  mostiy  confined  to  trilobites ;  and  fishes  of  the 
lowest  forms  are  the  sole  representatives  of  the  vertebrata :  there  are 
here  no  reptiles,  no  birds,  and  no  mammals. 

These  primary  strata  are  many  thousand  feet  in  thickness,  and 
the  organic  remains  imbedded  in  them,  though  belonging  to  a  few 
species,  show  that  animal  life  already  existed  in  immense  profusion, 
and  extended  over  wide-spread  regions  of  the  globe.  They  flourished 
for  countless  generations,  and  their  remains  are  found  reposing  in 
earth's  earliest  sepulchres. 

In  the  next  stage  of  the  earth's  history  we  have  the  Silurian  system. 
Here  the  forms  of  life  are  more  varied  and  abundant — species  are 
multiplied ;  fishes  now  make  their  appearance  in  numbers  and  varie- 
ties corresponding  with  th^  improved  conditions  for  their  existence ; 
and  sea-plants  are  found  among  the  fossils  of  this  era.  In  the  old  red 
sandstone,  the  same  orders  are  continued ;  new  fishes  are  still  more' 
abundant,  and  all  the  silurian  species  have  already  disappeared. 
These  fossils,  again,  are  entirely  distinct  from  the  corresponding 
species  of  the  carboniferous  era  which  succeeds  them.  Not  a  single 
fish  found  in  the  old  red  sandstone  has  been  detected,  either  in  the 
Silurian  system  on  the  one  side  or  in  the  carboniferous  on  the  other. 
Throughout  all  subsequent  geological  eras  simUar  changes  took  place, 
and  new  species  replaced  the  old  at  every  new  formation.  In  propor- 
tion as  the  earth  approached  its  perfect  state,  the  organic  types  became 
more  complex;  but  the  types  originally  created  were  never  destroyed, 
they  have  been  preserved  through  every  succeeding  modification  and 
improvement,  up  to  their  highest  manifestation  in  man.  Begarding 
42 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC 

330  GEOLOGY   AND    PALEONTOLOGY, 

only  the  great,  predominant  groups  of  animalB,  M.  Agassiz  has  clas- 
sified the  "Ages  of  Nature"  as  follows :  —  1.  The  primary  or  PaUeo- 
zoic  age,  comprising  the  whole  era  preceding  the  new  red  sandstone, 
constituted  the  reign  of  fishes.  2.  The  secondary  age,  up  to  the 
chalk,  constituted  the  reign  of  reptiles.  8.  The  tertiary  age  was  the 
reign  of  mammals ;  and  the  modem  age,  embracing  the  most  perfect 
of  created  beings,  is  the  reign  of  man.* 

A  more  minute  classification  would  give  us,  since  the  first  appear- 
ance of  organized  beings,  not  less  than  ten  or  twelve  great  groups  of 
animals  specifically  independent  of  one  another:  so  many. entire 
races  have  passed  away  and  been  successively  replaced  by  others;  thus 
changing  repeatedly  tiie  whole  population  of  the  globe. 

The  fossiliferous  strata  have  been  estimated  to  be  eight  miles  in 
thickness.  They  were  formed,  like  the  metamorphic  rocks,  at  the 
bottom  of  the  sea,  by  sedimentary  deposits,  and  afterwards  upheaved 
in  their  consolidated  form  by  central  heat.  Such  a  process,  doubtiess, 
must  have  been  very  slow :  e.  g.  the  hydrographic  basin  of  the  Tigris 
and  Euphrates  is  189,000  square  miles ;  and  the  alluvial  deposit  along 
the  course  of  those  rivers,  in  the  centre,  is  about  82,400  square  nules 
in  extent.  The  average  rate  of  encroachment  on  the  sea,  at  their 
mouths  on  the  Persian  Gulf,  is  about  a  mile  in  thirty  years.  During 
its  season  of  flood,  the  Euphrates  transports  about  one-eightieth  of 
its  bulk  of  solid  matter ;  and  the  earthy  portion  carried  by  the  Tigris 
past  the  city  of  Bagdad,  was  ascertained  by  Mr.  Ainsworth  to  be  one- 
hundredth  of  its  bulk,  or  about  7160  pounds  every  hour.f  But  these 
rivers  are  insignificant  compared  with  the  Qtmges,  which  hourly  car- 
ries down  700,000  cubic  feet  of  mud ;  or  the  Yellow  river,  in  China, 
which  transports  2,000,000  feet  of  sediment  to  the  sea.  Our  own 
Mesha-sebey  "  the  Father  of  Waters,"  though  purer  than  either  of  the 
rivers  we  have  named,  has  already  formed  a  delta  80,000  square  miles 
in  extent,  and  is  yearly  sweeping  to  the  sea,  from  his  many  tributa- 
ries, the  enormous  amount  of  8,702,758,400  cubic  feet  of  solid  matter. 
Yet,  notwithstanding  such  immense  deposits,  it  has  been  estimated 
that,  if  the  sediment  from  all  the  rivers  in  the  world  were  spread 
equally  over  the  floor  of  the  Ocean,  it  would  require  1000  years  to 
raise  its  bottom  a  single  foot ;  or  about  4,000,000  of  years  to  form  a 
mass  equal  to  that  of  the  fossiliferous  rocks :  and  if,  instead  of  merely 
the  present  extent  of  the  sea,  we  include  the  whole  surface  of  the 
globe  in  suchestimate,  the  time  requiredmust  be  extended  to  15,000,000 
of  years.|    When  we  consider  that  these  strata  were  formed  at  the 

*  ^gassix :  Principles  of  Zoology,  p.  189. 

f  Ainsworth:  Auyria,  Babylonia  and  ChaldcM;  Enphrates  Ezpeditiony  1888,  p.  111. 

X  Somerville :  PhyeloAl  Geography. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

IN    CONNECTION    WITH    HUMAN   ORIGINS.  331 

bottom  of  the  sea,  and  thence  upheaved  by  the  operation  of  natural 
causes ;  and  that  in  many  cases  this  process  has  been  more  than  once 
repeated ;  we  may  claim  a  very  respectable  antiquity  for  our  planet, 
since  such  changes  must  have  required  a  duration  wholly  incalculable.  » 

We  have  seen  that  every  great  geological  change  was  accompanied 
by  the  disappearance  of  existing  species  and  the  introduction  of  new: 
while  the  present  geographical  distribution  of  plants  and  animals  coin- 
cides with  the  rise  of  those  strata  constituting  the  surface  of  the  globe. 
All  has  been  successive  and  progressive ;  plants  and  animals  were 
produced  in  regular  order,  ascending  from  simple  to  complex ;  one 
law  has  prevailed  from  earth's  foundations  to  its  superficies;  and 
thus  our  present  species  are  atUoetJu>notj  originating  on  the  continents 
or  islands  where  they  were  first  found.  Man  himself  is  no  exception 
to  this  law;  for  the  inferior  races  are  everywhere  "gleb»  adscripti." 

Each  of  these  orders  of  living  beings  occupied  the  earth  for  an  ap- 
pointed time,  and  gave  way  in  turn  to  higher  organizations.  Fishes 
ruled  over  the  primeval  waters :  as  land  gradually  formed  itself,  they 
made  way  for  the  great  amphibious  reptiles.  Just  as  fishes  represent 
the  first  vertebrata  of  the  sea,  so  reptiles  are  their  earliest  representa- 
tives on  land.  Reptiles  presided  over  the  formation  of  continents,  and 
next  came  the  birds.  As  huge  reptiles  of  the  sea  were  succeeded  by 
the  marine  mammalia — ^the  cetaceans — so,  on  the  land,  when  moun- 
tain chains  were  thrown  up  and  dry  plains  formed,  leaving  extensive 
marshy  borders,  monstrous  wading  birds,  which  have  left  but  their 
footmarks  behind  them,  succeeded  the  reptiles,  and  were  followed  in 
their  turn  by  the  amphibious  mammals.  Each  epoch  of  the  land,  as 
of  the  sea,  (whilst  our  "  earth  formed,  reformed,  and  transformed 
itself,")  was  marked  by  the  appearance  of  suitable  inhabitants,  ne- 
cessary to  the  gi;^at  plan  of  creation  in  preparing  the  globe  for  the 
reception  of  mankind. 

The  tertiary  formation  extends  over  most  of  Europe,  and  comprises 
those  &mous  geological  basins  which  are  the  sites  of  its  principal  cities, 
London,  Paris,  and  Vienna ;  while,  in  America,  it  embraces  nearly  all 
the  level  region  of  the  Middle  and  the  Southern  States.  Its  fossils 
comprise  a  mixture  of  marine,  fresh-water,  and  land  species,  occurring' 
in  such  succession  as  to  show  extensive  alternations  of  sea  and  land ; 
and  giving  reason  to  believe  that  large  portions  of  the  present  surface 
of  the  land  were  covered  with  immense  lakes,  like  Erie  or  Ontario. 
The  animals  of  the  tertiary  period,  while  entirely  diflferent  from  those 
of  the  secondary,  were  similar  to  those  now  existing :  marine  ani- 
mals no  longer  predominated  in  the  creation  —  the  higher  orders 
of  land  animals  had  now  appeared.  The  same  advance  is  visible  in 
all  the  great  departments  of  animated  nature.    Of  the  radiates,  the   , 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 

382  OBOLOGY   AND    PALEONTOLOGY, 

moUi^sks,  and  the  articulata,  the  lower  forma  have  entirely  disap- 
peared ;  and  the  tertiary  species  are  frequently  almost  identical  with 
those  now  living:  among  vertebratl^  the  enamelled  fishes  of  the  ear- 
lier epochs  have  been  replaced  by  those  with  scales  like  the  living 
species;  and,  in  a  word,  the  whole  tertiary  fanna  resembles  oui 
present 

Anotiier  important  change  is  noticed  in  the  relative  distribution  of 
animals  and  plants.  In  the  early  history  of  the  earth,  the  same  ani- . 
mals  were  spread  widely  over  the  face  of  the  globe ;  nearly  the  whole 
earth  was  covered  with  water,  and  a  uniform  temperature  everywhere 
prevailed :  none  but  marine  animals  existed,  and  there  was  nothing 
to  prevent  a  great  uniformity  of  type.  In  the  t^iiaiy  era  everything 
had  altered — the  earth's  surface  was  varied  with  islands  and  con- 
tinents, with  mountains  and  valleys,  with  hills  and  plains ;  tiie  sea, 
gathered  into  separate  basins,  was  divided  by  impassable  barriers. 
Here,  accordingly,  we  find  another  great  step  towards  the  present 
condition  of  organized  nature  on  the  earth's  surfiice :  not  only  have 
higher  orders  of  animals  appeared,  but  tiiey  are  confined  within  nar- 
rower limits.  The  fossils  of  the  tertiary  system,  in  difierent  regions, 
are  as  distinct  as  the  present  fanned  and  florse  of  those  countries. 
Each  portion  of  the  land,  as  it  rose  above  the  deep,  became  peopled  with 
animals  and  plants  best  adapted  to  its  occupancy ;  and  the  waters 
necessarily  partaking  of  the  physical  change,  the  marine  species  which 
swarmed  along  the  shores  underwent  a  corresponding  modification. 

The  earth  was  now  inhabited  by  the  great  mainmifers,  whose  con- 
stitution most  nearly  resemble^  that  of  mankind :  where  they  existed, 
assuredly,  man  could  have  existed  also.  They  approximate  to  humanity 
in  their  intelligence,  their  senses,  their  wants,  their  passions,  their  anU 
mal  functions;  and  when  they  had  "  multiplied  exceedingly,"  we  may 
suppose  that  man  would  not  be  long  in  making  his  appearance.  Here 
we  meet  for  the  first  time  with  fossil  monkeys ;  the  type  whose  organiz- 
ation most  closely  assimilates  to  the  human.  It  is  only  within  a  few 
years  that  fossil  monkeys  have  been  discovered,  and  their  supposed 
absence  was  formerly  cited  as  a  proof  of  their  recent  origin.  Monkeys, 
in  still  prevalent  systems  of  creation,  are  supposed  to  have  been  coeval 
with,  or  at  least  but  littie  anterior  to,  man ;  the  absence  of  their  or- 
ganic remains  being  considered  as  satisfactoiy  evidence  that  both 
men  and  monkeys  were  mere  creations  of  yesterday !  Fossil  monkej^ 
nevertheless,  have  been  found  in  England,  France,  India,  and  South 
America.  In  India,  several  different  species  have  turned  up  in  ter- 
tiary strata,  on  the  Himalaya  mountains.  The  French  fossils,  found 
in  fresh-water  strata  of  the  tertiary  era,  belong  to  the  gibbon  or  tail- 
less ape,  which  stands  next,  in  the  scale  of  organization,  to  the  orangs. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

IN   COKNECTION   WITH   HITMAN   ORIGINS.  388 

The  American  specimen,  bronght  from  Brazil  by  Di*.  Lund,  is  re- 
ferred to  an  extinct  genus  and  species  peculiar  to  that  countiy.  And 
the  English  fossils,  belonging  to  the  genus  macacus  and  an  extinct 
species,  exhumed  from  the  London  clay,  were  associated  tvith  cro- 
codiles, turtles,  nautili,  besides  many  curious  tropical  fiiiitB.* 

Only  a  few  fossil  quadrumanes  have  as  yet  been  discovered ;  but 
a  single  one  is  sufficient  to  establish  their  existence.  The  number  of 
animals  preserved  in  rocky  strata  may  bear  but  a  small  pt^portion  to 
those  which  have  been  utterly  destroyed.  Thus,  in  the  Cfonnecticut 
sandstone,  the  trac^  of  more  than  forty  species  of  birds  and  quadru- 
peds have 'been  found  distinctly  marked.  Some  of  these  birds  must 
have  been  at  least  twelve  or  jSfteen  feet  high;  and  yet  no  other  vestige 
of  their  existence  has  been  discovered.  They  were  the  colossal  resi- 
dents <^  that  valley  for  ages ;  they  have  all  vanished ;  and  had  it  not 
been  for  the  plastic  nature  of  the  yielding  sand  whereon  they  waded 
alon^  the  river's  banks,  they  wotdd  not  have  left  even  a  footprint 
behind  them.  May  there  not  be  other  creatures  which  have  left  no 
trace  whatever  of  their  existence  ?  f 

In  each  of  the  great  geological  epochas,  life  was  quite  to  abundant  as 
at  the  present  day.  All  departments  of  the  Animal  Kingdom  had  their 
representative  and  some  of  them  were  even  more  numerous  then  than 
at  present  Tl^ose  immense  tracts  formed  by  zoophytes,  and  the  incom- 
prehensible masses  of  midroscopic  shells,  would  almost  seem  to  &vor 
the  theory  that  the  whole  earth  is  formed  of  the  d6bris  of  organized 
beings.    Fossil  fiishes  ate  &r  more  plentifril  than  their  living  repre- 
selitatives ;  and  mtore  shells  have  been  found  in  the  single  basin  of 
Paris  than  now  exist  in  the  whole  Mediterranean.!    The  remains  of 
the  giant  reptiles  show  their  exuberance ;  and  now-extinct  species  of 
mammals  must  have  at  least  equalled  in  numbers,  as  they  fer  exceed 
in  size,  their  living  successors.    Perhaps  the  most  striking  example 
is  seen  in  the  inexhaustible  multitude  of  fosdl  elephants  daily  dis- 
covered in  Siberia.  Their  tusks  have  been  an  object  of  traffic  in  ivory 
for  centuries;  and  in  some  places  they  have  existed  in  such  prodi^ous 
qumtities,  that  Ihe  ground  is  still  tainted  with  the  smell  of  animal 
matter.    Their  huge  skeletons  are  found  fiom  the  frontiers  of  Europe 
through  all  Korthem  Asia  to  its  extreme  eastern  point,  and  from  the 
foot  of  the  Altai  Mountains  to  the  shores  of  the  Frozen  Ocean  —  a 
surface  equal  in  extent  to  the  whole  of  Europe.    Some  islands  in  the 
Arctic  Sea  are  chiefly  composed  of  their  remains,  mixed  with  the 
bones  of  various  other  animals  of  living  genera,  but  of  extinct 

*  LyeU :  Prinoiples.  f  Hitchcock :  (Hology.  ^  t  Agaasii. 

)  lieat  Ai\ioa'8  Polar  Voyage. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

334  6X0L06Y   AND   PALEONTOLOGY, 

In  whatever  way  we  may  accoimt  for  the  series  of  geological 
changes  thus  cursorily  enumerated,  they  must  have  required  immense 
periods  of  time ;  and  we  have  Mr.  Babbage's  authority  for  saying, 
that  even  those  formations  which  are  nearest  to  the  sur&ce  have 
occupied  vast  periods,  probably  miUiofu  of  years."^  It  is  only  with 
these  latest  formations,  however,  that  we  shall  have  any  immediate 
concern. 

The  Diluvium,  or  drifts  as  now  called^  is  ahnost  universal  in  extent 
(except  within  the  tropics) ;  and  is  marked  by  deposits  of  day  and 
sand;  and  erratic  blocks  or  boulders  of  all  sizes,  from  common 
pebbles  to  masses  thousands  of  tons  in  weight,  occur  at  all  levels  up 
to  the  supmits  of  lofty  mountains,  where  no  agency  now  in  <q>eration 
could  have  placed  them.  The  drift  abounds  in  fossil  remains  of 
animals ;  such  as  the  elephant,  mastodon,  rhinoceros,  hippopotamus, 
and  other  large  mammalia;  genera  which,  now  living  only  in  wann 
climates,  must  have  then  existed  in  England,  France,  Germany,  and 
other  norttiem  countries.  These  animals  were  destroyed  by  the  same 
inundations  which  left  the  deposits  we  call  drift:  yet  the  woiks  and 
the  remains  of  man  have  been  found  among  them !  These  drift^orma- 
tions  are  of  immense  antiquity,  being  in  this  country  older  than  the 
basin  of  thelfississippi;  and  may  be  regarded  as  the  last  great  tranei- 
tion  in  the  earth's  geolo^cal  history. 

All  formations  of  the  drift  do  not  belong  to  one  and  the  same  period; 
nor  were  they  produced  by  the  same  causes.  According  to  the 
glacial  theory  of  Prof.  Agassiz,  the  climate  of  the  northern  hemi- 
sphere, which  had  been  of  tropical  warmth,  became  colder  at  the 
close  of  the  tertiary  era.  The  polar  glaciers  advanced  towards  the 
south,  leaving  the  marks  of  their  passage  in  the  ground  and  upon 
striated  surfiEices  of  rocks  and  mountains,  whilst  distributing  on  every 
side  the  blocks  and  masses  they  had  entangled  in  their  course :  which 
last,  with  the  finer  detritus,  were  swept  fiur  and  wide  by  torrents 
occasioned  by  the  melting  of  these  glaciers. 

At  other  times,  a  sudden  elevation  of  mountain-chains  firom 
beneath  the  surfiEtce  of  the  sea,  produced  violent  inundations  of 
surrounding  countries,  and  transported  boulders  and  drift  in  every 
direction.  The  Alps  furnish  illustrations  in  point  They  have  been 
heaved  up  since  the  deposition  of  the  tertiary  strata ;  for  those  statta 
are  found  capping  their  summits  or  lying  in  their  mountain-valleys ; 
while  the  "drift"  is  seen  scattered  in  all  directions  —  on  the  range 
of  the  Jura,  and  over  the  plains  of  Lombardy.  Blocks  of  granite, 
10,000  cubic  feet  in  size,  have  been  found  in  the  Jura  mountaiils, 
2000  feet  above  the  Lake  of  Geneva.   The  rock  in  Horeb,  from  which 

*  Babbage :  Bridgewater  Treatise. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 

IN    CONNECTION   WITH    HUMAN   ORIGINS.  335 

the  leader  in  Israel  miraculously  drew  water,  is  a  mass  of  syenitic 
granite,  six  yards  square,  lying  insulated  upon  a  plain  near  Moxmt 
Sinai.  There  are  displays  of  the  drift  in  our  own  country,  on  a  mag- 
nificent scale,  but  as  our  object  does  not  require,  nor  our  limits  allow, 
more  than  a  mere  reference  to  this  as  an  interesting  stage  in  the 
earth's  antiquity,  we  pass  on. 

Last  comes  the  Alluvium;  that  is,  the  formation  along  the  margins 
of  rivers  and  the  deltas  at  their  mouths,  and  the  deposition  of  those 
superficial  coverings  of  soil  which  have  taken  place  since  the  earth 
assumed  its  present  configuration  of  sea  and  land.  Of  the  antiquity 
of  the  older  formations,  fossils  have  afforded  unerring  information ; 
each  set  serving  as  medals  to  mark  the  epoch  of  their  Existence.  The 
alluvium  must  be  judged  by  comparison,  and  all  we  shall  attempt 
is,  to  show  that  the  earth,  in  its  present  condition,  has  been  the  habi- 
tation of  man  for  many  thousand  years  longer  than  people  com- 
monly suppose. 

It  appears,  fix)m  recent  observations,'*'  that  the  hydrographic  basin 
of  the  Kile  (within  the  limits  of  rain),  is  about  1,550,000  square  miles, 
and  the  whole  habitable  land  of  Egypt  is  formed  of  the  alluvial  de- 
posits of  the  river.  The  Delta  is  of  a  &n-like  form,  narrow  at  its 
apex  below  Cairo,  and  spreading  out  as  it  extends  towards  the  se% 
until  its  outer  border  is  about  120  miles  in  extent  The  same  im- 
mense deposits  are  still  carried  annually  to  the  sea,  yet  the  Delta  has 
not  perceptibly  increased  within  the  limits  of  history.  Tanis,  the 
Hebrew  Zoan,  at  a  very  remote  period  of  Egyptian  annals,  was  built 
upon  a  -plsin  at  some  distance  fix>m  the  sea;  and  its  ruins  may  still  be 
seen,  within  a  few  miles  of  the  coast.  The  lapse  of  more  than  8000 
years,  fix>m  the  time  of  Eamses  n.,  has  not  produced  any  great  increase 
in  the  alluvial  plain,  nor  extended  it  feirther  into  the  Mediterranean. 
Cities  which  stood,  in  his  day,  upon  the  coast,  and  were  even  then 
referred  to  the  gods  Osiris  and  Horus,  may  still  be  traced  at  the  same 
localities ;  and  Homer  makes  Menelaus  andhor  his  fleet  at  Canopus, 
at  the  mouth  of  the  Egyptus  or  Nile.f  In  short,  we  know  that  in 
the  days  of  the  earliest  Pharaohs,  the  Delta,  as  it  now  exists,  was 
covered  with  ancient  cities,  and  filled  with  a  dense  population,  whose 
civilization  must  have  required  a  period  going  back  ft,r  beyond  any 
date  that  has  yet  been  assigned  to  the  Deluge  of  Koah  or  even  to  the 
Creation  of  the  world. 

The  average  depth  of  the  Gulf  of  Mexico,  between  Cape  Florida 

•  Beke,  in  Gliddon's  Handbook  to  the  Nile,  1849,  p.  29;  ind,  Map  of  the  «  Basin  of  the 
Nile.". 

f  Wilkinson :  Manners  and  Customs,  i.  p.  6-11 ;  ii.  106-121 :  — ^Qliddon,  Chaptm^  p.  42-8. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

336  OfiOLOfit   AND    PALiEOKTOLOOT, 

and  the  mouth  of  the  ^GBsissippi,  is  about  500  feet  Borings  have 
been  made  near  New  Orieans  to  a  depth  of  600  feet,  without  reaching 
the  bottom  of  the  alluvial  matter ;  so  that  the  depth  of  the  delta  of 
the  Mississippi  may  be  safely  taken  at  500  feet  The  entire  aUuvial 
plain  is  80,000  square  miles  in  extent,  and  the  smallest  complement 
of  time  required  for  its  formation  has  been  estimated  at  100,000  years.* 
This  calculation  merely  embraces  the  deporits  made  by  the  river  since 
it  ran  in  its  present  channel ;  but  such  an  antiquity  dwindles  into 
utter  insignificance  when  we  consider  the  geological  features  of  the 
country*  The  blufis  which  bound  the  valley  of  the  Mississippi  rise 
in  many  places  to  a  height  of  250  feet,  and  consist  of  loam  containing 
i^lls  of  various  species  still  inhabiting  the  country.  These  shells 
ore  accompanied  with  the  remains  of  the  mastodon,  elephant,  and 
tapir,  the  megalonyz,  imd  other  megatheroid  animals,  together 'with 
the  horse,  ox,  and  other  mammaha,  mostly  of  extinct  species.  These 
bluffi  must  have  belonged  to  an  ancient  plain  of  ages  long  anterior 
to  that  through  which  the  Mssissippi  now  flows,  and  which  was  inha- 
bited by  occupants  <^  land  and  fresh-water  shells  agreeing  with  those 
now  existing,  fmd  by  quadrupeds  now  mostiy  extinotf 

ThB  plain  on  which  the  city  of  New  Orleans  is  built,  rises  only  nine 
feet  above  the  sea;  and  excavations  are  <^ten  made  far  below  the 
level  of  the  Gulf  of  Mexico.  In  these  sections,  several  succeenve 
growths  of  cypress  timber  have  been  brought  to  light.  In  digging 
the  foundations  for  the  gas-works,  the  Irish  spadesmen,  finding  they 
had  to  cut  thrcmgh  timber  instead  of  soil,  gave  Up  the  work,  and  were 
replaced  by  a  corps  of  Kentucky  axe-men,  who  hewed  their  w^ 
downwards  through  four  successive  growtiis  of  timber — the  lowest 
so  old  that  it  cut  like  cheese.  Abrasions  of  the  river-banks  show 
similar  growths  of  sunken  timber;  while  stately  live-oaks,  flourishing 
on  the  bank  directly  above  them,  are  living  witnesses  that  the  soil 
has  not  changed  its  level  for  ages.  Messrs.  Bickeson  and  Brown 
have  traced  no  less  tiian  ten  distinct  cypress  forests  at  different  levels 
below  the  present  surface,  in  parts  of  Louisiana  where  the  range  b^ 
tween  high  and  low  water  is  much  greater  than  it  is  at  New  0rlett[i8. 
These  groups  of  trees  (the  live-oaks  on  the  banks,  and  the  successive 
cypress  beds  beneath,)  are  arranged  vertically  tfbove  each  other,  and 
are  seen  to  great  advantage  in  many  places  in  the  vicinity  of  New 
Orleans. 

Dr.  Bennet  Dowl^l  has  made  an  ingenious  calculation  of  the  last 
emergence  of  the  site  of  that  city,  in  which  these  cypress  forests  play 

♦  Lyell*8  Prinoiples  of  Qeology,  Cap.  xt.  f  Lyell'e  8eooAd  Visit,  Cap.  jCxxIy. 

X  Bennet  Dowler:  Tableaiix  of  New  Orleam,  1S62. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

IN    CONNECTION   WITH    HUMAN    ORIGINS.  337 

an  important  part.  He  divides  the  history  of  this  event  into  three 
eras :  — 1.  The  era  of  colossal  grasses,  trembling  prairies,  &c.,  as  seen 
in  the  lagoons,  lakes,  and  sea-coast.  2.  The  era  of  the  cypress  basins. 
8.  The  era  of  the  present  live-oak  platform.  Existing  types,  from 
the  Balize  to  the  highlands,  shov^  that  these  belts  were  successively 
developed  from  the  water  in  the  order  we  have  named :  the  grass 
preceding  the  cypress,  and  the  cypress  being  succeeded  by  the  live- 
oak.  Supposing  an  elevation  of  five  inches  in  a  century,  (which  is 
about  the  rate  recorded  for  the  accumulation  of  detrital  deposits  in 
the  valley  of  the  Nile,  during  seventeen  centuries,  by  the  nilometer 
mentioned  by  Strabo,)  we  shall  have  1500  years  for  the  era  of  aquatic 
plants  until  the  appearance  of  the  first  cypress  forest ;  or,  in  other 
words,  for  the  elevation  of  the  grass  zone  to  the  condition  of  a  cypress 
basin. 

Cypress  trees  of  ten  feet  in  diameter  are  not  uncommon  in  the 
swamps  of  Louisiana ;  and  one  of  that  size  was  found  in  the  lowest 
bed  of  th6  excavation  at  the  gas-works  in  New  Orleans.  Taking  ten 
feet  to  represent  the  size  of  one  generation  of  trees,  we  shall  have  a 
period  of  5700  years  as  the  age  of  the  oldest  trees  now  growing  in 
the  basin.  Messrs.  Dickeson  and  Brown,  in  examining  the  cypress 
timber  of  Xouisiana  and  Mississippi,  found  that  they  measured  from 
95  to  120  rings  of  annual  growth  to  an  inch :  and,  according  to  the 
lower  ratio,  a  tree  of  ten  feet  in  diameter  will  yield  5700  rings  of 
annual  growth.  Though  many  generations  of  such  trees  may  have 
grown  and  perished  in  the  present  cypress  region.  Dr.  Dowler,  to 
avoid  all  ground  of  cavil,  has  assumed  only  two  consecutive  growths, 
including  the  one  now  standing :  this  gives  us,  as  the  age  of  two 
generations  of  cypress  trees,  11,400  years. 

The  maximum  age  of  the  oldest  tree  growing  on  the  live-oak  plat- 
form IB  estimated  at  1500  years,  and  only  one  generation  is  counted. 
These  data  yield  the  following  table :  — 

^^Oeohgical  Chronology  of  ike  latt  emergence  of  the  present  titeof  New  Orleans. 

Years. 

£ra  of  aquatic  plants .' 1,600 

£ra  of  cypress  basin 11,400 

Era  of  Uye-oak  platform 1,500 

Total  period  of  eleyation 14,400" 

Each  of  these  sunken  forests  must  have  had  a  period  of  rest  and 
gradual  depression,  estimated  as  equal  to  1500  years  for  the  dura- 
tion of  the  live-oak  era,  which,  of  course,  occurred  but  once  in  the 
series.  We  shall  then  certainly  be  within  bounds,  if  we  assume  the 
period  of  such  elevation  to  have  been  equivalent  to  the  one  above 
43 

Digitized  by 

Google 

338  GEOLOGY    AND    PALEONTOLOGY, 

arrived  at ;  and,  inasmucli  as  there  were  at  least  ten  such  changes,  we 
reach  the  following  result :  — 

Tesn. 

''Last  emergence,  as  above 14,400 

Ten  elerationa  and  depressions,  each  equal  to  the  last  emergence 144,000 

Total  age  of  the  delta 158,400"* 

In  the  excavation  at  the  gas-works,  above  referred  to,  burnt  wood 
was  found  at  the  depth  of  sixteen  feet ;  and,  at  the  same  depth,  the 
workmen  discovered  the  skeleton  of  a  man.  The  cranium. lay  be- 
neath the  roots  of  a  cypress  tree  belon^g  to  the  fourth  forest  level 
below  the  surface,  and  was  in  good  preservation.  The  other  bones 
crumbled  to  pieces  on  being  handled.  The  ti/pe  of  the  cranium 
was,  as  might  have  been  expected,  that  of  the  aboriginal  American 
Baoe. 

If  we  take,  then,  the  present  era  at 14,400  years, 

And  add  three  subterranean  groups,  each  equal 
to  the  living  (leaving  out  the  fourth,  in  which 
the  skeleton  was  found), 43,200 

We  have  a  total  of 57,600  years. 

From  these  data  it  appears  that  the  human  race  existed  in  .the  delta 
of  the  Mississippi  more  than  67,000  years  ago ;  and  the  ten  subterra- 
nean forests,  with  the  one  now  growing,  establish  that  an  exuberant 
flora  existed  in  Louisiana  more  thdh  100,000  years  earlier :  so  that, 
150,000  years  ago,  the  Mississippi  laved  the  magnificent  cypress 
forests  with  its  turbid  waters.f 

In  a  note  addressed  to  our  colleagues,  Nott  and  Gliddon,  April  19, 
1853,  Dr.  Dowler  says :  — 

<<  Since  I  sent  you  the  *  Tableaux/  sereral  important  disooyeries  haTc  been  made,  illoBtra- 
tiye  and  confirmatory  of  its  fundamental  principles  in  relation  to  the  antiqnitj  of  the  human 
race  in  this  delta,  as  proyed  by  works  of  art  underlying,  not  only  the  liye-oak  platform,  but 
also  the  seoond  range  of  subterranean  cypress  stumps,  exposed  during  a  recent  excayation 
in  a  cypress  basin." 

The  cypress  trees  of  Louisiana,  and  the  antiquity  claimed  for  them 
here,  naturally  remind  us  of  the  longevity  of  other  trees  in  connexion 
with  the  antiquity  of  the  present  era.  The  baobab  of  Senegal,  as  is 
well  known,  grows  to  a  stupendous  size,  and  is  supposed  to  exceed  all 
other  trees  in  longevity.  The  one  measured  by  Adanson  was  thirty 
feet  in  diameter,  and  estimated  to  be  5250  years  old.  Having  made 
an  incision  to  a  certain  depth,  he  counted  300  rings  of  annual  growth, 
and  observed  what  thickness  the  tree  had  gained  in  that  period ;  the 
average  growth  of  younger  trees  of  the  same  species  was  then  ascerr 

♦  Dowler :  Tableaux  of  New  Orleans.  f  ^^^^^ 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 

IN    CONNECTION    WITH    HUMAN    ORIGINS.  3'39 

tained,  and  the  calculation  made  according  to  the  mean  rate  of  in- 
crease. Baron  Humboldt  considered  a  cypress  in  the  gardens  of 
Chapultepec  as  yet  older ;  it  had  already  reached  a  great  age  in  the 
reign  of  Montezuma,  and  is  supposed  to  be  now  more  than  6000 
years  old.  If  we  could  apply  the  criterion-scale  of  Dickeson  and 
Brown,  some  of  these  trees  might  prove  to  be  older  still.  •  These 
gentlemen  counted  95  to  120  rings  of  annual  growth  in  the  cypresses 
of  Louisiana,  and  say,  moreover,  that  the  ligneous  rings  in  the  cypress 
are  remarkably  distinct,  and  easily  counted.  Now  the  cypress  mea- 
sured by  Humboldt  was  40J  feet  in  diameter.  A  semi-diameter  of 
243  inches,  multiplied  by  95,  the  smaller  number  of  rings  to  an  inch, 
would  give  24,036  years  as  the  age  of  one  generation  of  living  trees. 
The  harder  woods  are  of  very  slow  growth,  and  some  of  the  huge 
mahoganies  of  Central  America  must  be  extremely  old.  The  cour- 
baril  of  the  Antilles  reaches  a  diameter  of  twenty  feet,  and  is  one  of 
the  hardest  timber  trees ;  and  the  ironwood,  from  the  same  data,  may 
be  ranked  among  the  patriarchs  of  the  forest. 

Travellers  have  often  been  deterred  from  attempting  to  ascertain 
the  age  of  remarkable  trees  by  the  apparent  hopelessness  of  the  task. 
To  fell  one  of  these  giants  of  the  woods  was  evidently  impossible, 
nor  was  it  an  easy  matter  even  to  make  such  a  section  as  would  faci- 
litate the  calculation.  This  difficulty  is  now,  happily,  to  a  great 
extent  removed,  and  scientific  travellers  can  hereafter  obtain  mea- 
Burements  of  the  largest  and  hardest  trees  in  the  places  of  their 
growth.  Mr.  Bowman  has  devised  an  instrument  something  like  a 
.surgeon's  trephine,  which,  by  means  of  a  circular  saw,  cuts  out  cylin- 
ders of  wood  from  opposite  sides  of  the  tree,  and  thus  furnishes  the 
most  satisfiactory  results.* 

Having  drawn  the  general  reader's  attention  to  a  few  geological  f 
and  botanical  evidences  of  the  incalculable  lapse  of  time  required  for 
the  existing  condition  of  things  upon  our  globe,  let  us  endeavor  to 
raise  &  comer  of  the  veil  which  obscures  human  sight  of  epochas  an- 
terior to  ours.  Where  our  alluvial  rivers  flowed,  where  our  present 
vegetation  flourished,  where  our  mammiferous  animals  abounded, 
science  cannot  assign,  H  priori^  a  reason  why  all  our  different  species 
of  mankind  should  not  also  have  exisjbed  coetaneously.  Cuvier  (says 
Schmerling  most  truly,)  does  not  contest  the  existence  of  man  at  the 
epoch  in  which  gigantic  species  peopled  the  surface  of  the  earth.J 
We  content  ourselves  with  lesser  quadrupeds : 

Foisil  Dogs. — The  dog  has  been  the  constant  companion  of  man  in 

•  J.  Pye  Smith. 

f  For  the  para^el  antiquity  of  the  Nile's  deposits,  cf.  Gliddon,  Otia  ^gyptiaca,  p.  61-69. 

X  Becherehes  snr  les  Ossemens  Fossiles :  Liege,  1888,  i.  p.  58. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

340  GEOLOGY   AND    PAL-fiONTOLOGT, 

all  his  migrations  to  distant  regions  of  tl;e  earth,  and  has  suffered  fix)ixx 
the  same  injustice  which  ignorance  metes  to  his  lord.  The  wise  Ulysses 
has  been  rutiilessly  referred  to  a  consanguineous  origin  with  the  Papuan 
and  the  Hottentot ;  and  the  noble  animal  that  died  fix)m  joy  on  re- 
cognizing his  master  (when  all  Ithaca  had  forgotten  the  twenty  years' 
wanderer),  is  left  to  choose  a  descent  from  the  savage  wolf  or  the 
abject  jackal,  and  must  perforce  share  its  parentage  with 

*<  Mongrel,  puppy,  whelp,  and  honnd. 
And  cur  of  low  degree.'' 

The  monuments  of  Egypt  have  also  shed  new  light  upon  the  historical 
antiquity  of  both  men  and  dogs,  showing  that  the  different  races  of 
each  were  as  distinct  5000  years  ago  as  they  are  to-day ;  and  we  now 
propose  to  inquire  whether  geology  does  not  confer  upon  dogs  a  still 
more  ancient  origin. 

Few  questions  in  the  history  of  fossil  animals  are  more  difficult  to 
solve  than  that  of  dogs ;  for  tiie  differences  between  skeletons  of  the 
dog,  the  wolf,  and  the  fox,  are  so  trifling  as  to  be  almost  undistinguish- 
able.  Indeed,  some  perceive  no  difference  between  them  except  in 
point  of  size.  Consequently,  when  we  meet  with  a  fossil  of  the  dog 
species,  we  are  at  a  loss  whither  to  refer  it;  and  so  strong  are  vulgar 
prejudices  against  the  antiquity  of  everything  immediately  associated 
with  man,  that  it  is  almost  certain  to  be  called  a  wolf,  a  fox,  a  jackal, 
or  anything  else,  sooner  than  a  common  dog. 

It  does  not  appear  that  any  canidee  have  yet  been  found  in  the 
oolite,  the  earliest  position  of  mammal  remains;  they  are  rare  in  the 
tertiary  strata,  and  are  chiefly  met  with  in  the  caves  of  the  pliocene, 
in  the  drift,  and  the  alluvium. 

Owen  says  that  fossil  bones  and  teeth  extant  in  caves,  and  their  as- 
sociation with  other  remains  of  extinct  species  of  mammalia  found  in 
the  same  state,  carry  back  the  existence  of  the  cants  lupus  in  Great 
Britain  to  a  period  anterior  to  the  deposition  of  the  superficial  drift;. 
In  the  famous  Erkdale  cave.  Dr.  Buckland  discovered  bones  of  a 
fossil  canis  associated  with  those  of  tigers,  bears,  elephants,  the  rhino- 
ceros, hippopotamus,  and  other  animals  which  Cuvier  pronounced  to 
belong  to  extinct  species.  Fossil  bones  of  a  species  of  canis,  similarly 
associated  with  extinct  animals,  turned  up  in  the  cave  of  Paviland^ 
in  Glamorganshire ;  and  the  Oreston  cavern  ftimished  other  examples. 
In  all  these  cases  it  was  difficult  to  designate  the  species  of  canis  the 
fossils  belonged  to,  and  the  Doo  was  never  allowed  the  benefit  of  the 
doubt 

-Cuvier,  Daubenton  and  De  Blainville  inform  us,  that  the  shades  of 
difference  in  canine  skeletons  are  so  slight,  that  distinctions  are  often 
more  marked  between  two  individual  dogs,  or  two  wolves,  than  between 

Digitized  by 

Google 

IN    CONNECTION    WITH    HUMAN    ORIGINS.  341 

the  various  species.  But,  in  spite  of  these  difficulties,  recognizable 
remains  of  the  true  dog,  canU  familiaris,  have  been  jfrequently  ob- 
tained. Dr.  Lund  discovered  fossil  dogs  larger  than  those  now  living, 
in  the  cave  of  Lagoa  Santa,  in  Brazil ;  associated,  as  we  have  else- 
where stated,  with  an  immense  variety  of  extinct  species  of  animals, 
and  in  a  position  whose  geological  antiquity  cannot  be  doubted.  In 
this  case  the  dog  was  partner  with  an  extinct  monkey;  and  a  similar 
association  has  been  found  in  a  stratum  of  marl,  surmounted  by  com- 
pact limestone,  in  the  department  of  Gers,  at  the  foot  of  the  Pyrenees. 
Here  the  bones  of  a  true  dog  were  found,  in  company  with  the  re- 
liquiae of  not  less  than  thirty  mammiferous  quadrupeds';  including 
three  species  of  rhinoceros,  a  large  anaplotherium,  three  species  of 
deer,  a  huge  edentate,  antelopes,  and  a  species  of  monkey  about  three 
feet  high.  This  fact  is  the  more  interesting,  because  fossil  monkeys 
are  almost  as  rare  as  fossil  men  in  the  fauna  of  the  tertiary  era ;  and, 
tmtil  recently,  their  existence  was  quite  as  strenuously  denied.  In 
the  catalogue  of  the  casts  of  Indian  fossils,  recently  presented  to  the 
Boston  Society  of  Natural  History  by  the  East  India  Company,  we 
find  two  crania  of  canine  animals  from  the  Sivalik  Hills,  but  have 
no  information  as  to  their  species. 

Dr.  Schmerling  has  described  several  fossils  of  the  true  dog,  which 
evidently  belonged  to  two  distinct  varieties,  notably  differing  from  each 
other  in  size,  as  well  as  from  the  wolf  and  fox,  whose  bones,  together 
with  those  of  bears,  hyenas,  and  other  animals,  reposed  in  the 
same  locality.  Cuvier,  speaking  of  the  bones  of  a  fossil  animal  of 
the  genus  canis^  found  in  the  cave  of  Qaylenreuth,  says  that  they 
resemble  the  dog  more  than  the  wolf,  and  that  they  are  in  the  8am6 
condition  with  those  of  thQ  hyenas  and  tigers  associated  with  them : 
"  they  have  the  same  color,  the  same  consistence,  the  same  env^op, 
and  they  evidently  date  from  the  same  epoch"  Cuvier  does  not  posi- 
tively declare  these  remains  to  be  those  of  the  dog:  he  observes  the 
"caution  which  he  exhibited,  in  1824,  when  asked  whether  human  . 
bones  had  yet  been  discovered  and  proved  to  be  coeval  with  those  of 
extinct  mammalia  —  ^^Pas  encore,"  was  his  simple  reply. 

In  the  quarries  of  Montmartre,  Cuvier  found  the  lower  jaw  of  a 
species  of  canis,  differing  from  that  of  any  living  species,  and  which 
we  have  the  right  to  say  belbnged  to  an  extinct  species  of  dog. 
M.  Marcel  de  Serres  has  described  two  species  of  dogs  from  Lunel 
Vieil.  One  he  supposed  to  resemble  the  pointer,  and  the  other  was 
much  smaller.  The  caves  of  Lunel  Vieil  are  situated  in  a  marine- 
tertiary  limestone.  In  some  dogs,  the  frontal  elevation  of  the  skull 
exceeds  that  of  the  wolf,  and  this  characteristic  is  usefiil  as  a  distinc- 
tive mark.    The  skull  of  a  small  variety  of  dog,  with  this  mark  well 

Digitized  by 

Google 

342  GEOLOGY    AND    PAL-fiONTOLOGY, 

developed,  was  obtained  from  an  English  bone-cave,  and  submitted  to 
Mr.  Clift,  who  pronounced  it  to  belong  to  a  small  bull-dog  or  large  pug. 

Our  domestic  dog  has  the  last  tubercular  tooth  toider  than  that  of 
the  wolf;  which  fact,  together  with  slighter  structure  of  the  jaw,  shows 
the  dog  to  be  less  carnivorous.  The  teeth  of  the  cave-dogs  differ 
only  in  size  from  those  of  the  common  dog,  being  larger;  and  it 
appears  almost  certain  that  many  of  the  fossil  dogs  were  of  a  greater 
size  than  any  of  the  varieties  now  common  among  us.  This  circum- 
stance, together  with  their  general  similarity  of  structure,  has  doubt- 
less led  to  their  being  almost  universally  designated  as  Wolves.  We 
read  of  wolves  being  constantly  found  in  a  completely  fossilized  state, 
associated  with  numerous  extinct  animals,  and  even  with  man  him- 
self;  and  considering  the  difficulty  of  distinguishing  skeletons  of  the 
wolf  from  those  of  the  dog,  we  have  no  doubt  that  many  of  these 
fossils  belonged  to  man's  natural  companion  —  the  dog. 

Marcel  de  Serres  observes,  in  reference  to  the  large  size  of  the 
fossil  dogs  which  came  under  his  observation,  that  they  bear  a  stronger 
resemblance  to  the  animal  such  as  we  may  suppose  him  to  have  been 
before  he  came  under  the  influence  of  man,  than  most  of  our  -domestic 
canes.  Their  stature  is  intermediate  between  the  wolf  and  the  pointer, 
their  muzzle  is  more  elongated,  and  all  the  parts  of  the  skeleton  are 
proportionally  stronger.  But  there  is  no  gi'ound  for  assuming  a 
specific  unity  among  these  fossil  dogs,  any  more  than  among  the 
domesticated  races.  A  careful  examination  of  the  bones  found  in 
the  caves  has  shown  the  existence  of  different  sizes,  and  probably  of 
different  species ;  and  inasmuch  as  we  find,  in  the  same  caves,  remains  of 
animals  which  have  suffered  the  greatest  influence  from  man,  e.  g.  the 
horse  and  ox,  so  we  may  reasonably  infer  that  these  dogs  themselves 
have  been  contemporaneous  with  man;  especially  because  no  vestiges, 
either  of  domestic  animals  or  dogs,  have  ever  been  found  in  countries 
uninhabited  by  mankind  since  the  earliest  human  tradition.  The 
gigantic  size  of  fossil  dogs  appears  less  formidable  to  us  than  it  proba- 
bly did  to  M.  de  Serres,  since  Eawlinson  has  figured  an  enormous  dog, 
from  the  sculptures  of  Nineveh,  as  large  as  the  largest  of  the  extinct 
animals,  and  Vaux  assures  us  that  a  similar  species  is  still  living  in 
Thibet.  \Infra^  Chap.  XII.]  Moreover,  the  skeleton  of  an  immense 
dog  was  recently  found  in  a  cave  at  the  Canaries,  with  remains  of  the 
extinct  Guanches,  and  thence  taken  to,  Paris;  Here,  however  the 
man  may  have  met  his  death, 

<*  His  faithfiil  dog  still  bears  him  company." 

Very  distinct  traces  exist,  then,  of  at  least  four  types  of  dogs,  in 
fossilized  state :  the  Canary  dog,  the  pointer,  the  hound,  and  the  bull- 

Digitized  by 

Google 

IN    CONNECTION    WITH    HUMAN    ORIGINS.  343 

dog,  together  with  a  smaller  animal,  supposed  by  Schmerling  to  have 
been  a  turnspit.  As  we  know  some  of  these  races  to  be  hybrids,  the 
list  must  be  still  further  enlarged ;  for  there  can  be  no  doubt  that 
many  other  fossil  canidse  appertained  to  different  species  of  dog9. 
These  species  enjoy  a  very  respectable  antiquity ;  sufficient,  we  think,  to 
destroy  the  claims  of  the  wolf  or  the  jackal  to  their  common  pater- 
nity: especially,  when  to  our  list  of  species  is  added  the  fossil  dog 
discovered  by  Mr.  W.  Mantell,  in  the  remote  region  of  New  Zealand, 
associated  with  the  bones  of  the  Dinornis  giganteus.  We  have  no 
doubt  that  Man  himself  existed  contemporaneously  with  these  fossil-, 
ized  animals,  and  that  both  enjoyed  an  associated  antiquity  upon 
earth  which  has  not  yet  been  generally  conceded,  but  cannot  much 
longer  be  denied.  As  the  hound,  baying  in  our  American  woods, 
announces  the  presence  of  the  hunter,  so  we  may  rest  assured  that  a 
palseontological  "fidus  Achates"  noiselessly  implies  the  proximity  of 
fossil  Man  himself. 

Suman  Fossil  Remains  have  now  been  found  so  frequently,  and  in 
circumstances  so  unequivocal,  that  the  facts  can  hardly  be  denied ; 
except  by  persons  who  resolutely  refuse  to  believe  anything  that  can 
militate  against  their  own  preconceived  opinions.  Cuvier  remarked, 
long  since,  that  notions  in  vogue  (30  years  ago)  upon  this  subject  would 
require  considerable  modification ;  and  Morton  left  among  his  papers 
a  record  of  his  matured  views  still  more  emphatically  expressed :  — 

«  There  is  no  good  reason  for  doubting  the  existence  of  man  in  the  fossil  state.  We  have 
already  several  weU-anthenticated  examples ;  and  we  may  hourly  look  for  others,  even  from 
the  upper  stratified  rocks.  Why  may  we  not  yet  discover  them  in  the  tertiary  deposits,  in 
the  cretaceous  beds,  or  even  in  the  oolites  ?  Contrary  to  all  our  preconceived  opinions, 
the  latter  strata  have  already  afiforded  the  remains  of  several  marsupial  animals,  which 
have  surprised  geologists  almost  as  much  aa  if  they  had  discovered  the  bones  of  man 
himself."  * 

Human  bones,  mixed  with  those  of  lost  mammifers,  have  been 
found  in  several  places, — in  England,  by  Dr.  Buckland,  in  the  famous 
cave  of  Wokey  Hole,  at  Paviland,  and  Kirkby .  The  question,  whether 
an  equal  antiquity  should  be  assigned  to  such  remains  with  that  of 
extinct  inferior  species  accompanying  them  —  or,  in  other  words, 
whether  man  lived  at  the  same  time  with  rhinoceroses,  hippopotami, 
hyenas,  and  bears,  whose  entire  species  have  disappeared  from  earth, 
bequeathing  but  their  foswl  remains  to  tell  us  that  th^y  once  existed — 
was  one  of  mighty  import;  and  Dr.  Buckland,  Oxonian  Professor, 
was  loth  to  admit  that  these  remains,  human  and  animal,  belonged 
to  beings  which  had  been  swept  from  existence  by  the  same  catas- 
trophe.   Instances  of  human  fossils  had  often  been  reported,  but  they 

*  Morton :  Posthumous  MSS. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

344  GEOLOGY   AND   PAL-fiONTOIiOGY, 

were  always  treated  with  contemptuoufl  neglect-     A  foesil  skeleton, 
found  in  the  schist-rock  at  Quebec,  when  excavating  the  fortifications, 
excited  but  a  moment's  incredulous  attentioti ;  and  the  well-known 
Guadaloupe  skeletons  were  pronounced  recent,  in  a  manner  the  most 
summary.   Human  bones  are  known  to  have  been  found  in  England, 
under  circumstances  whichrenderedtheirfossil  condition  probable;  but, 
owing  to  prejudice  or  ignorance,  they  were  cast  aside  sS  worthless,  or 
buried  with  mistaken  reverence.    In  some  instances,  they  were  used, 
with  the  limestone  in  which  they  were  imbedded,  to  mend  highways; 
and  at  aU  times  were  disposed  of  without  examination,  or  apparent 
knowledge  of  their  scientific  importance.     There  is  an  instance, 
recorded  by  Col.  Hamilton  Smith,  which,  whether  true  or  not,  will 
serve  to  show  a  culpable  indifference  on  this  subject.     A  completely 
fossilized  human  body  was  discovered  at  Gibraltar,  in  1748.    The  feet 
is  related  in  a  manuscript  note,  inserted  in  a  copy  of  a  dissertation  on 
the  Antiquity  of  the  Earth,  by  the  Eev.  James  Douglas,  read  at  the 
Royal  Society,  in  1785.    In  substance,  it  relates  that,  vrhile  the  writer 
himself  was  at  Gibraltar,  some  miners,  employed  to  blow  tip  rocks  for 
the  purpose  of  raising  batteries  about  fifty  feet  above  the  level  of  the 
sea,  discovered  the  appearance  of  a  human  body ;  which  they  blew  up, 
because  the  officer  to  whom  they  sent  notice  of  the  fact  did  not  think 
it  worth  the  trouble  of  examining !    One  human  pelvis  found  near 
Natchez,  by  Dr.  Dickeson,  is  an  undoubted  fossil ;  yet  we  are  tola 
that  ferruginous  oxides  act  upon  an  os  innominatum  differently  than 
upon  bones  of  extinct  genera  lying  in  the  same  stratum,  lest  nature 
incidents  might  give  to  man,  in  the  valley  of  the  Mississippi,  an  anti- 
quity altogether  incompatible  with  received  ideas :  and  Sir  Charles 
Lyell  accordingly  suggests  a  speedy  solution  of  the   difficulty,  hy 
saying  that  a  fossilized  pelvn  may  have  fallen  from  an  old  Indjan 
grave  near  the  summit  of  the  cliff.    Attempts  have  been  made  to 
throw  doubt  upon  every  discovery  of  human  fossils  in  the  same 
manner;  and  the  greatest  ingenuity  is  exhibited  in  adapting  adequate 
solutions  to  the  ever-varying  dilemmas.    In  the  case  of  the  fossus 
brought  from  BrazU,  a  human  skuU  was  taken  out  of  a  sandstone 
rock,  now  overgrown  with  lofty  trees.     Sir  Charles  Lyell  again  h^ 
recburse  to  his  favorite  Indian  burying-ground ;  although  this  tiine 
it  had  to  be  sunk  beneath  the  level  of  the  sea,  and  become  again 
upheaved  to  its  present  position.    But,  supposing  all  this  to  be  true, 
what  an  antiquity  must  we  assign  to  this  Indian  skull,  when  we  re- 
member the  ancient  trees  above  its  grave,  and  reflect  upon  the  fact 
that  bones  of  numerous  fossil  quadrupeds,  and,  among  others,  of  a ' 
horse  (both  found  in  the  alluvial  formation),  must  be  of  a  more  recent 
origin  than  the  human  remains ! 

Digitized  by 

Google 

IN    CONNECTION    WITH    HUMAN    ORIGINS.  345 

Human  fossil  remains  have  been  most  commonly  found  in  caves 
connected  with  the  diluvium,  usually  known  as  ossuaries  or  bone- 
caverns.  These  caves  occur,  for  the  most  part,  in  the  calcareous  strata, 
BB  the  large  caves  generally  do,  and  they  have  been,  in  all  the  in- 
stances we  shall  cite,  naturally  closed  until  their  recent  discovery.  The 
floors  are  covered  with  what  appears  tor  be  a  bed  of  diluvial  clay,  over 
which  a  crust  of  stalagmite  has  formed  since  the'clay  bed  was  depo- 
sited ;  and  it  is  under  this  double  covering  of  lime  and  clay  that  the 
bony  remains  of  animals  are  discovered.  As  the  famous  Kirkdale 
cavern  may  serve  as  a  general  type  of  caves  of  this  descriptiop,  ve 
will  here  give  a  brief  sketch  of  it :  — 

The  Kirkdale  cave  is  situated  on  the  older  portion  of  the  oolite  for- 
mation—  in  the  coral-rag  and  Oxford  clay  —  on  the  declivity  of  a 
vaUey.  It  extends,  as  an  irregular  narrow  passage,  250  feet  into  the 
hill,  expanding  here  and  there  into  small  chambers,  but  hardly  enough 
anywhere  to  allow  of  a  man's  standing  upright.  The  sides  and  floor 
were  found  covered  with  a  deposite  of  stalagmite,  beneath  which  there 
was  a  bed  from  two  to  three  feet  thick  of  sandy,  micaceous  loam, 
the  lower  part  of  which,  in  particular,  contained  an  innumerable 
quantity  of  bones,  with  which  the  floor  was  completely  strewn.  The 
animals  to  which  they  belonged  were  the  hyena,  bear,  tiger,  lion, 
elephant,  rhinoceros,  hippopotamus,  horse,  ox,  three  species  of  deer, 
water-rat,  and  mouse — appertaining  wholly  to  extinct  species.  The 
most  plentiful  were  hyenas,  of  which  several  hundreds  were  found, 
and  the  animals  must  have  been  one-half  larger  than  any  living  spe- 
cies. The  'bears  belonged  to  the  cavernous  species,  which,  accord- 
ing to  Cuvier,  was  of  the  size  of  a  large  horse.  The  elephants  were 
Siberian  mammoths ;  and  of  stags,  the  largest  equalled  the  moose  in 
size.  From  all  the  facts  observed.  Dr.  Buckland  concluded,  that 
the  Kirkdale  cave  had  been  for  a  long  series  of  years  a  den  inhabited 
by  hyenas,*  who  had  dragged  into  its  recesses  other  animal  bodies 
whose  remains  are  there  commingled  with  their  own,  at  a  period 
antecedent  to  that  submersion  which  produced  the  diluvium ;  because 
the  bones  are  covered  by  a  bed  of  this  formation.  Finally  raised 
from  the  waters,  but  with  no  direct  •communication  with  the  open 
air,  it  remained  undisturbed  for  a  long  series  of  ages,  during  which 
the  clay  flooring  received  a  new  calcareous  covering  from  the  drop- 
pings of  thecoof.  Such  is  a  general  description  of  the  bone-caves: 
but  it  does  not  apply  to  all  of  those  which  contained  human  fossils,  as 
we  shall  presently  see. 

Apart  from  the  geological  formation  they  are  found  in,  the  only 

*  Buokland :  Reliquiae  DiluTianeB. 

44 

Digitized  by 

Google 

346  GEOLOGY    AND    PAL-fiONTOLOGT, 

method  of  judging  of  the  age  of  bones  is,  by  the  proportions  of  ani- 
mal and  mineral  matters  which  they  retain.  Where  animal  matter 
is  present,  the  bone  is  hard  without  being  brittle,  and  does  not  adhere 
to  the  tongue ;  when  nothing  but  earthy  matter  remains,  the  bone  is 
both  brittle  and  adhesive.  K  we  wish  to  be  more  particular  in  cm 
examination,  we  treat  the  bone  in  question  with  dilute  muriatic  acid: 
the  fossil  bone,  dissolving  with  effervescence,  is  reduced  to  a  spongy 
flocculent  mass :  whereas  the  recent  bone  undergoes  a  quiet  digestion, 
and  after  the  removal  of  all  the  earthy  matter,  the  gelatine  still  retains 
the  form  of  the  entire  b^ne  in  a  fibrous,  flexible,  elastic,  and  trans- 
lucent state.  If  both  solutions  be  treated  with  sulphuric  acid,  we 
obtain  the  same  insoluble  sulphate  of  lime  from  each. 

CqI.  Hamilton  Smith  mentions  several  instances,  occurring  in  Eng- 
land, where  human  bones  were  found  kneaded  up  in  the  same 
osseous  breccia,  or  calcareous. paste,  with  those  of  extinct  animals, 
wherein  the  most  rigid  chemical  examination  could  detect  no  difterence 
between  them.  In  1833,  the  Rev.  Mr.  M*Enery  collected,  from  the 
caves  of  Torquay,  human  bones  and  flint  knives  amongst  a  great 
variety  of  extinct  genera — all  from  under  a  crust  of  stalagmite,  re- 
posing upon  which  was  the  head  of  a  wolf.  Caves  have  been  opened 
at  Oreston,  near  Plymouth,  in  the  Plymouth  Hoe,  and  at  Yealm 
Bridge,  in  all  of  which  human  bones  were  found,  mixed  with  fossil 
animal  remains.  Mr.  Bellamy  subjected  a  piece  of  human  bone,  from 
the  cave  at  Yealm  Bridge,  to  treatment  by  muriatic  acid,  ascertaining 
that  its  animal  matter  had  almost  entirely  disappeared;  while  the 
metatarsal  bone  of  a  hyena,  from  the  same  cave,  9till  retained  such 
an  abundance  of  animal  matter  that,  after  separation  of  the  earthy 
parts,  this  bone  preserved  its  complete  form,  was  quite  translucent, 
and  had  all  the  appearance  of  a  recent  specimen.  Pieces  of  human 
bone,  from  a  sub-Appenine  cavern  in  Tuscany,  (probably  not  less 
than  twenty-five  or  thirty  centuries  old,  and  which  had  all  the  appear- 
ance of  being  completely  fossilized  and  even  converted  into  chalk,) 
when  subjected  to  the  searching  powers  of  such  muriatic-acid  test, 
revealed  their  recent  origin.  And  human  bones  from  the  Brixham 
cavern,  in  England,  were  in  lil^e  manner  pronounced  recent,  though 
it  was  evident  that  they  had  been  gnawed  by  hyenas  or  other  beasts 
of  prey.  Not  far  from  the  cave  whence  these  were  taken,  the  thoroughly 
fossilized  head  of  a  deer  was  picked  up.  This  test  was  alto  fairly  tried 
1  in  the  case  (to  be  presently  cited)  of  sundry  human  fossils  found  in  the 
Jura.  MM.  Ballard  and  de  Serres  compared  them  with  some  bones 
taken  from  a  Gaulish  sarcophagus,  supposed  to  have  been  buried  for 
1400  years,  but  the  fossil  bones  proved  to  be  much  the  more  ancient. 

It  may  be  granted,  that  Dr.  Buckland  was  justified  in  concluding 

Digitized  by 

Google 

IN    CONNECTION    WITH    HUMAN    ORIGINS.  347 

fronL  the  instances  which  came  under  his  observation,  that  whenever 
human  bones  were  discovered  mixed  with  those  of  animals,  they 
must  have  been  introduced  at  a  later  period ;  but  even  Cardinal  Wise- 
man admits  that  there  are  cases  of  an  entirely  different  character.* 

The  cave  of  Durfort,  in  the  Jura,  has  been  examined  and  described 
by  MM.  Firmas  and  Marcel  de  Serres.  It  is  situated  in  a  calcareous 
mountain,  about  300  feet  above  the  level  of  the  sea,  And  is  entered 
by  a  perpendicular  shaft,  twenty  feet  deep.  You  enter  the  cavern  by 
a  narrow  passage  from  this  shaft,  and  there  find  human  bones  in  a 
true  fossil  state,  and  completely  incorporated  in  a  calcareous  matrix. 
A  still  more  accurate  examination,  attended  with  the  same  results, 
was  made,  by  M.  de  Serres,  of  certain  bones  found  in  tertiary  lime- 
stone at  Pondres,  in  the  department  of  the  H^rault.  Here  M.  de 
Cristolles  discovered  human  bones  and  pottery,  mixed  with  the 
remains  of  the  rhinoceros,  bear,  hyena,  and  many  other  animals. 
They  were  imbedded  in  mud  and  fragments  of  the  limestone  rock  of 
the  neighborhood;  this  accumulation,  in  some  places,  being  thir- 
teen feet  thick.  These  human  fossils  were  proved,  on  a  careful  exa- 
mination, to  have  parted  with  their  animal  matter  as  completely  as 
those  bones  of  hyenas  which  accompanied  them ;  and  they  further- 
more came  out  triumphantly  from  a  comparison  with  the  osseous 
relics  of  the  long-buried  Gaul,  as  just  related. 

A  fossil  human  skeleton  is  preserved  in  the  Museum  at  Quebec, 
which  was  dug  out  of  the  solid  schist-rock  on  which  the  citadel  stands ; 
and  two  more  skeletons  from  Guadaloupe  are  deposited*  one  in  the 
British  Museum,  and  the  other  in  the  Royal  Cabinet  at  Paris.  The 
skeleton  in  the  British  Museum  is  headless ;  but  its  cranium  is  sup- 
posed to  be  recovered  in  the  one  found  in  Guadaloupe  by  M.  L'Her- 
minier,  and  carried  by  him  to  Charleston,  South  Carolina.  Dr. 
Moultrie,  who  has  described  this  very  interesting  relic,  says  that  it 
possesses  all  the  characteristics  which  mark  the  American  race  in 
general.f  The  rock  in  which  these  skeletons  were  found  is  described 
as  being  harder,  under  the  chisel,  than  the  finest  statuary  marble. 

Dr.  Schmerling  has  examined  a  large  number  of  localities  in  France 
and  Liege,  particularly  the  "caveme  d'Engihoul;"  where  bones  of 
man  occurred,  together  with  those  of  animals  of  extinct  species :  the 
human  fossils  being  found,  in  all  respects,  under  the  same  circum- 
stances of  age  and  position  as  the  animal  remains.^  Near  these  relics, 
works  of  art  were  sometimes  disclosed;  such  as  fragments  of  ancient 
urns,  and  vases  of  clay,  teeth  of  dogs  and  foxes  pierced  with  holes 

^  Lectures  on  the  Connection  between  Science  and  RoTealed  Religion,  by  Nicholas  Wise- 
E  r,  D.  D.     London,  1849. 
f  Morton :  PhTsioal  Tjpe  of  American  Indians.  %  Becherches,  I.  pp.  59-66. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

348  GEOLOGY    AND    PAL.EONTOLOGT, 

and  doubtless  worn  as  amulets.  Tiedemann  exhumed,  in  caverns  of 
Belgium,  human  bones,  mixed  with  those  of  bears,  elephants,  hyenas, 
horses,  wild  boars,  and  ruminants.  These  human  relics  were  pre- 
cisely like  those  they  were  associated  with,  in  respect  to  the  changes 
either  had  undergone  in  color,  hardness,  degree  of  decomposition,  and 
other  marks  of  fossilization.  In  the  caves  of  France  and  Belgium, 
we  often  find,  in  the  deepest  and  most  inaccessible  places,  for  remote 
from  any  communication  with  the  surface,  human  bones  buried  in 
the  clayey  deposit,  and  cemented  fast  to  the  sides  and  walls.  On 
every  side,  we  may  see  crania  imbedded  ia  clay,  and  oft»n  accompa* 
nied  by  the  teeth  or  bones  or  hyenas.  In  breccias  containing  the 
bones  of  rodents  and  the  teeth  of  horses  and  rhinoceroses,  we  also 
meet  with  human  fossils. 

There  are  many  other  cases  on  record,  of  human  remains  being 
found  associated  with  animal  fossils,  both  in  England  and  on  the  Con- 
tinent. As  well  at  Eately  as  at  Brixham,  such  associations  have  been 
noticed;  and  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  human  fossils  exist  in 
caverns  and  formations  beneath  the  present  level  of  the  sea:  e.g.  at 
Plymouth  and  other  places,  where  remains  of  elephants  have  been 
washed  up  by  the  surf. 

In  the  caverns  of  Bize,  in  France,  human  bones  and  shreds  of  pot- 
tery turned  up  in  the  red  clay,  mixed  with  remains  of  extinct  ani- 
mals ;  and  on  the  Rhine,  they  have  been  found  in  connection  with 
skulls  of  gigantic  bisons,  uri,  and  other  extinct  species.  The  cave 
of  Gailenreuth,  in  Franconia,  is  situated  in  a  perpendicular  rock,  its 
mouth  being  upwards  of  300  feet  above  the  level  of  the  river.  Those 
of  Zahnloch  and  Kiihloch  are  similarly  elevated ;  and  the  latter  is 
supposed  to  have  contained  the  vestiges  of  at  least  2500  cavem-bears; 
while  the  cave  of  Copfingen,  in  the  Suabian  Alps,  is  not  less  than 
2500  feet  above  the  sea.  These  caves  contained  collections  of  human 
and  of  animal  remains ;  while  their  elevation  places  them  above  the 
reach  of  any  partial  inundations.  Ossuaries  in  the  vale  of  Kostritz, 
Upper  Saxony,  are  more  interesting,  because  they  have  been  more 
carefully  studied.  They  are  situated  in  the  gypsum  quarries ;  and 
the  undulating  country  about  them  is  too  elevated  to  permit  of  their 
deposits  having  been  influenced,  in  the  least,  by  those  inundations 
which  are  made  to  answer  for  such  a  multitude  of  sins.  No  partial 
inundation  could  possibly  have  disturbed  them  since  the  present  geo- 
logical arrangement ;  nor  were  there  external  openings  or  indications 
of  any  kind  revealing  the  existence  of  an  extensive  cave  within. 
The  soil  is  the  usual  ossiferous  loam,  and  the  stalagmite  rests  \ipon  it 
as  in  other  caverns.  Beneath  these  deposits,  human  and  animal  fos- 
sils have  been  discovered,  at  a  depth  of  twenty  feet.     These  deposits 

Digitized  by 

Google 

IN    CONNECTION    WITH    HUMAN    ORIGINS.  349 

were  first  described  by  Baron  von  Scblotheim,  who  concludes  his 
account  with  these  remarks :  — 

**  It  is  evident  that  the  human  bones  could  not  have  been  buried  here,  nor  have  fallen 
into  fissures  during  battles  in  ancient  times.  They  are  few,  completely  isolated,  and  de- 
tached. Nor  could  they  have  been  thus  mutilated  and  lodged  by  any  other  accidental  cause 
in  more  modem  times,  inasmuch  as  they  are  always  found  with  the  other  animal  remains, 
under  the  same  relations  —  not  constituting  connected  skeletons,  but  gathered  in  various 
groups." 

Besides  those  of  man  at  different  periods  of  life,  from  infancy  to 
mature  age,  bones  of  the  rhinoceros,  of  a  great  feline,  of  Jiyena,  horse, 
ox,  deer,  hare,  and  rabbit,  were  found ;  to  which  owl,  elephant,  elk, 
and  reindeer  relics  have  since  been  added.  Specimens  of  the  human 
fossils  are  in  possession  of  the  Baron,  of  the  Prince  of  Reuss,  Dr. 
Schotte,  and  other  gentlemen  residing  near  the  spot ;  and  Mr.  Fair- 
holme,  who  visited  Saxony  expressly  to  satisfy  himself  of  the  facts  by 
a  careful  examination  of  the  locality,  brought  specimens  to  England, 
which  he  presented  to  the  British  Museum.  It  is  worthy  of  being 
noted  here,  that  the  above  bones  were  not  all  entombed  in  caverns  or 
fissures,  but  that  some  human  fossils  were  dug  out  of  the  clay,  at  a 
depth  of  eighteen  feet,  and  eight  feet  below  the  remains  of  a  rhi- 
noceros.* Enough  has  thus  been  said  upon  fossil  i!fa»  disinterred 
accidentally  in  that  Old  World  which,  in  natural  phenomena,  is  actu- 
ally younger  than  the  "New." 

Crossing  from  Europe  to  our  own  continent,  we  behold,  in  the 
Academy  of  Sciences  at  Philadelphia,  a  fossilized  human  fragment, 
surpassingly  curious,  if  of  disputed  antiquity :  — 

"  Dr.  Dickeson  presented  another  relic  of  yet  greater  interest:  viz.,  the  fossil  O9  umomi" 
Mtum  of  the  human  subject,  taken  fh>m  the  above-mentioned  stratum  of  blue  clay  [near 
Natchez,  Biississippi],  and  about  two  feet  below  the  skeletons  of  the  megalonyz  and  other 
genera  of  extinct  quadrupeds ;  . . .  that  of  a  young  man  of  sixteen  years  of  age."  f  . .  * 

**  Ten  of  these  interesting  relics  [of  the  fossil  Aotm],  cohsisting  of  five  superior  and  infe- 
rior molars.  Dr.  Dickeson  relates,  were  obtidned,  together  with  remains  of  the  megalonyx, 
unus,  the  0$  hominis  mnommaium  fomU,  &o.,  in  the  vicinity  of  Natchez,  Mississippi,  firom  a 
stratum  of  tenaoioua  blue  clay,  underlying  a  diluvial  deposit''  % 

Aware  of  the  critical  objections  to  this  fossil  put  forward  by  Lyell, 
we  neither  affirm  nor  deny  its  antiquity  by  mentioning  that  Morton, 
and  other  pateontologists,  did  not  consider  these  demurrers  conclu- 
sive :  nor  is  much  geological  erudition  requisite  to  comprehend  that, 
under  the  atmospheric  conditions  in  which  a  horse  and  a  bear  could 
inhale  the  breatii  of  life,  a  human  mammifer  might  equally  well  have 
respired  it  with  them. 

*  Hamilton  Smith :  Natural  History  of  the  Human  Species.  Edinburgh,  1848 ;  p.  98-107. 
t  Proceed.  Acad.  Nat  Sciences,  Philad. ;  October,  1846,  p.  107. 

X  Leidy:  On  the  Fossil  Horse  of  America,  op.  ciC,  Sept  1847,  p.  266.  Vide,  olio,  Pirc- 
e««dlQgB  Acad.  Nat  Sciences ;  Deo.  1847,  p.  828. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

350  ,  GEOLOGY    AND    PALEONTOLOGY, 

How  comes  it  that,  with  the  exception  of  brief  notices  by  Morton, 
the  subjoined  unequivocal  instance  of  American  fossil  man  has  been 
generally  overiooked  for  a  quarter  of  a  century  ?  His  fossil  bones 
were  discovered  by  Capt  J.  D.  Elliott,  U.  S.  N.,  and  are  now  in  the 
Academy  of  Natural  Sciences  at  Philadelphia:  eight  fossilized  human 
relics,  besides 

*'  A  specimen  of  the  rock  of  which  the  mound  is  composed,  and  in  which  the  skeletons 
are  imbedded.    It  consists  of  fragments  of  shells  united  by  a  stalactio  matter." 

Dr.  Meigs  philosophically  remarked,  twenty-six  years  ago :  — 

The  present  specimens  are  particularly  interesting,  inasmuch  as  they  belong  to  the  Ame- 
rican continent)  and  as  adding  another  link  to  that  chain  of  testimony  concerning  the  eariy 
occupation  of  this  soil,  of  which  the  remains  are  so  few  and  unsatisfactory,  but  of  which 
finother  link,  a  strong  analogue  exists  in  the  Island  of  Guadaloupe,  in  good  measure  neg- 
lected or  disregarded,  on  account  of  its  loneliness  or  want  of  connection  with  dmilar 
facts."* 

Here,  then,  is  one  "homo  Diluvii  negator j^*  to  be  coupled  with  Dr, 
Dowler's  sub-cypress  Indian,  who  dwelt  on  the  site  of  New  Orleans 
57,600  years  ago. 

The  next  most  important  and  valuable  contribution  to  this  depart- 
ment of  knowledge,  in  every  point  of  view,  has  been  zfiade  by  the 
distinguished  Danish  naturalist.  Dr.  Lund,  who  has  given  an  interest- 
ing account  of  the  calcareous  caves  of  Brazil,  so  peculiarly  rich  in 
animal  remains.  He  discovered  human  fossils  in  eight  different  loca- 
lities, all  bearing  marks  of  a  geological  antiquity.  In  some  instances, 
the  human  bones  were  not  accompanied  by  those  of  animals.  In  the 
province  of  Minas  Geraes,  human  skeletons,  in  a  fossil  state,  were 
found  among  the  remains  of  forty-four  species  of  extinct  animals, 
among  which  was  a  fossil  horse.  This  learned  traveller  discovered 
both  the  human  and  the  animal,  reliques  under  circumstances  which 
lead  to  the  irresistible  conclusion  that  all  of  them  were  once  contem- 
poraneous inhabitants  of  the  region  in  which  their  several  vestiges 
occur.  With  respect  to  the  race  of  these  fossil  men,  Pr.  Lund  found 
that  the  form  of  the  cranium  differed  in  no  respect  from  the  acknow- 
ledged American  type ;  proper  allowance  being  made  for  the  artificial 
depression  of  the  forehead.  The  peculiarity  in  the  arrangement  of 
the  teeth  has  been  noticed  elsewhere. 

In  a  cave  on  the  borders  of  a  lake  called  Lagoa  Santa,  Dr.  Lund 
again  collected  multifmous  human  bones,  in  the  same  condition  with 
those  of  numerous  extinct  species  of  animals.  They  belonged  to  at 
least  thirty  different  individuals,  of  every  age,  from  creeping  infancy 
to  tottering  decrepitude^  and  of  both  sexes ;  and  were  evidentiy  de- 

*  An  Account  of  some  Human  Bones,  found  on  the  Coast  of  Brazil,  near  Santas ;  latitude 
240  W^  S.,  longitude  46<»  W.  By  C.-D.  Meigs,  M.  D.  Read  7th  December,  1827 :  Tran$. 
Amer.  Philos.  Soc^  Philad.  1880,  iiL  pp.  286-291. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

IN    CONNECTION    WITH    HUMAN    ORIGINS.  351 

posited  where  the  bodies  lay  with  the  soft  parts  entire:  immense 
blocks  of  stone  with  which  Nature  had  partly  covered  them,  bearing 
unanswerable  testimony  to  the  great  revolutions  which  the  cave  had 
undergone  since  their  introduction  into  it. 

These  bones  were  thoroughly  incorporated  with  a  very  hard  breccia, 
every  one  in  the  fossil  state.  A  single  specimen  of  an  extinct 
femily  of  apes,  callithrix  primcevuB^  was  found  among  them ;  but  large 
numbers  of  rodents,  carnivora,  and  tardigrades,  were  intermixed  pro- 
miscuously with  the  human  fossils.  All  their  geological  relations  unite 
to  show,  that  they  were  entombed  in  their  present  position  at  a  time 
long  previous  to  the  formation  of  that  lake  on  whose  borders  the 
cavern  is  situated ;  thereby  leaving  no  doubt  of  the  coexistence,  in 
life,  of  the  whole  of  the  beings  thus  associated  in  death.  These  facts 
establish  not  only  that  South  America  was  inhabited  by  an  ancient 
people,  long  before^  the  discovery  of  the  New  Continent,  or  that  the 
population  of  this  part  of  the  world  must  have  preceded  all  historical 
notice  of  their  existence :  they  demonstrate  that  aboriginal  man  in 
America  antedates  the  Mississippi  alluvia,  because  his  bones  are  foi- 
silized;  and  that  he  can  even  boast  of  a  geolo^cal  antiquity,  because 
numerous  species  of  animals  have  been  blotted  from  creation  since 
American  humanity's  first  appearance.  The  form  of  these  crania, 
moreover,  proves  that  the  general  type  of  races  inhabiting  America 
at  that  inconceivably-remote  era  was  the  same  which  prevailed  at  the 
period  of  the  Columbian  discovery:  and  this  consideration  may  spare 
science  the  trouble  of  any  further  speculation  on  the  modus  through 
which  the  JSTew  World  became  peopled  by  immigration  from  the  Old ; 
for,  after  carrying  backwards  the  existence  of  a  people  monumentally 
into  the  very  night  of  time,  when  we  find  that  they  have  also  pre- 
served the  same  Type  back  to  a  more  remote,  even  to  a  geologicaly 
period,  there  can  be  no  necessity  for  going  abroad  to  seek  their  origin. 

Thus  much  information,  upon/M«7  man  in  America,. was  common 
property  of  the  authors  of  this  volume  and  the  writer,  until  March, 
1863 :  and  such,  in  substance,  were  the  consequent  ethnological  de- 
ductions in  which  they  coincided.  However  convinced  themselves, 
in  regard  to  the  real  fossiliferous  antiquity  of  the  o%  innominatum 
unearthed  by  Dr.  Dickeson  from  the  bluffs  near  Natchez,  they  were 
aware  of  the  conditions  obnoxious  to  its  special  acceptance  as  evi- 
dence in  court;  and  would,  therefore,  have  che^uUy  resigned,  to 
their  fellow-continentals  of  South  America,  the  honor  of  exhibiting 
the  oldest  human  remains  upon  the  oldest  continent,  but  for  an  un- 
anticipated event,  which  enables  North  America  to  claim  (in  human 
palaeontology  at  least)  a  republican  equality. 

Prof.  Agassiz,  during  March  and  April,  &vored  Mobile  with  a 

Digitized  by 

Google 

352  GEOLOGY    AND    PAL-fflONlTOLOGT, 

Course  of  Lectures ;  the  sixth  of  which  (concisely,  but  admirably, 
reported  in  our  "  Daily  Tribune  "  *)  bore  directly  upon  the  themes 
discussed  in  Types  of  Mankind.  The  subjects  of  the  present  work 
were  passed  in  daily  review,  while  the  Professor  sojourned  amongst 
us.  We  need  not  recapitulate  the  obvious  advantages  its  readers  in 
consequence  derive.  Its  authors  and  the  writer  consider  the  follow- 
ing abstract  to  be,  in  all  senses  of  the  word,  a  memorandum :  — 

<<  Respecting  the  foflsil  remaiiis  of  the  human  body  I  possess,  from  Florida,  I  can  onlj 
state,  thai  the  identity  with  hmnan  bones  is  beyond  aU  question ;  the  parts  preserved  being 
the  jatoi  with  perfeet  Ueth,  and  portiont  of  a  foot  They  were  discoTored  by  my  friend.  Count 
F.  de  Pourtal^s,  in  a  bluff  upon  the  shores  of  Lake  Monroe,  in  Florida.  The  mass  in  which 
th^  were  found  is  a  conglomerate  of  rotten  coral-reef  limestone  and  shells,  mostly  ampol- 
larias  of  the  same  species  now  found  in  the  St  John  liyer,  which  drains  lake  Monroe.  The 
question  of  their  age  is  more  difficult  to  answer.  To  understand  it  fully,  it  must  be  remem- 
bered that  the  whole  peninsula  of  Florida  has  been  formed  by  the  suooessiTe  growth  of  eoral 
reefs,  added  oonoentrioaUy  from  north  to  south  to  those  first  formed,  and  the  accumulation 
between  them  of  decomposed  corals  and  fragments  of  shells ;  the  corals  preTailing  in  some 
parts,  as  in  the  everglades ;  and  in  others,  the  shells,  as  aboBt  St  Augustine  and  Cape 
Sable.  In  all  these  deposits,  we  find  remains  of  the  animals  now  liTing  along  the  coasts  of 
Florida,  sometimes  buried  in  limestone  as  hard  and  compact  as  the  rocks  of  the  Jurassic 
formation.  I  have  masses  of  this  coral  rock,  containing  parts  of  the  skeleton  of  a  large 
sea-turtie,  which  might  be  mistaken  for  turtle-limestone  of  Soleure,  from  the  Upper  Jura. 
Upon  this  marine-limestone  formation  and  its  inequalities,  fresh-water  lakes  haye  been 
collected ;  inhabited  by  animals  the  species  of  which  are  now  still  in  existence,  as  are  also, 
along  the  shores,  the  marine  animals,  remains  of  which  may  be  found  in  the  coral  forma- 
tion. To  this  lacustrine  formation  belongs  the  conglomerate  containing  the  human  bones 
« mentioned  above ;  and  it  is  more  than  I  can  do,  to  establidi,  with  precision,  the  date  of  its 
deposition.  This,  however,  is  certain,  that  Upper  Florida,  as  fSur  south  as  the  headwaters 
of  the  St  John,  constituted  already  a  prominent  peninsula  before  Lake  Okeechobee  was 
formed;  and  that  the  whole  of  the  southern  extremity  of  Florida,  with  the  everglades,  has 
been  added  to  that  part  of  the  continent  since  the  basin  has  been  in  existence,  in  which  the 
conglomerate  with  human  bones  has  been  accumulating.  Tlie  question,  then,  to  settle,  (in 
order  to  determine  the  probable  age  of  this  anthropolithio  conglomerate,)  is,  the  rate  of 
increase  of  the  peninsula  of  Florida  in  its  southward  progress:  remembering  that  the 
southernmost  extremity  of  Florida  extends  for  more  than  three  degrees  of  latitude  south 
of  the  fresh-water  system  of  the  northern  part  of  the  .peninsula.  If  we  assume  that  rate 
of  growth  to  be  one  foot  in  a  century,  froma  depth  of  seventy-five  feet,  and  that  every  succes- 
sive reef  has  added  ten  miles  of  extent  to  the  peninsula,  (which  assumption  is  doubling  the 
rate  of  increase  famished  by  the  evidence  we  now  have  of  the  additions  forming  upon  the 
reef  and  keys  south  of  the  mainland,)  it  would  require  186,000  years  to  form  the  southern 
half  of  the  peninsula,  f  Now,  assuming  further — ^which  would  be  granting  by  far  too  much — 
tiiat  the  surface  of  the  northern  half  of  the  peninsula,  already  formed,  continued  for  nine- 
tenths  of  that  time  a  desert  waste,  upon  which  the  fresh  waters  began  to  accumulate  before 
the  fossiliferous  conglomerate  could  be  formed,  (though  we  have  no  right  to  assume 
that  it  stood  so  for  any  great  length  of  time)  there  would  still  remain  10,000  years, 
during  which,  it  should  be  admitted,  that  the  mainland  was  inhabited  by  man  and  the  land 

•  «  The  Lecture  of  Agassis ; ''  Mobile  DaUy  TribuM^  April  14,  1858. 

f  *<  Say  100,000  years,  since  which  time  at  least  the  marine  animals,  now  living  along  the 
coast  of  Florida,  have  been  in  existence ;  for  their  remains  are  found  in  the  coral  limestone 
of  the  everglades,  as  well  as  in  that  of  the  keys,  and  upon  the  reef  now  growing  up  outside 
of  tiiem." 

Digitized  by 

Google 

IN    CONNECTION    WITH    HUMAN    ORIGINS.  353 

fud  fresh-water,  animals,  Yestiges  of  whicli  have  been  buried  in  the  depoBits  formed  by  the 
fresh  waters  coyering  parts  of  its  surface.  So  much  for  the  probable  age  of  our  conglome- 
rate. ...  '  L.  Agassis." 

Man,  absolutely  fossilized,  exists  therefore  in  North  America. 
We  have  shown  that  the  alluvion  of  our  river  beds  and  deltas  pos- 
sesses an  antiquity,  which  would  permit  of  the  existence  of  man  upon 
the  earth  at  a  much  more  remote  period  than  has  been  commonly 
assigned  to  him.  We  have  ^ven  instances  of  his  exhumation  also  in 
the  fossil  state.  The  human  fossils  of  Brazil  and  Florida  carry  back 
the  aboriginal  population  of  this  continent  far  beyond  any  necessity 
of  hunting  for  American  man's  foreign  origin  through  Asiatic  immi- 
gration :  and  the  body  of  one  Indian  beneath  the  cypress  forests  at 
New  Orleans  is  certainly  more  ancient  than  the  lost "  tribes  of  Israel," 
to  whom  the  American  type  has  been  rather  fancifully  attributed. 

Man's  vast  antiquity  can  now  be  proved,  moreover,  by  his  works  as  . 
well  as  by  his  fossil  renldns.  Authentic  relics  of  human  art  have 
been,  at  last,  found  in  the  diluvian  drift.  This  drift,  with  its  beds  of 
rolled  stones,  the  detritus  of  older  rocks,  its  masses  of  sand  and 
gravel,  and  the  traces  of  its  passage  over  mountain  and  plain  in 
almost  every  region  of  the  earth,  is  vulgarly  regarded  as  famish- 
ing irrefi*agable  evidence  of  the  Noachian  deluge;  as,  indeed, 
every  remarkable  geological  appearance  was  supposed  to  prove  the 
universality  of  that  visitation.  The  numerous  bones  of  the  elephant, 
the  rhinoceros,  and  other  extinct  species  of  quadrupeds,  occurring  in  this 
deposit,  were  commonly  denominated  "  antediluvian  remains,"  and 
M8amed  to  be  unquestionable  vestiges  of  the  ^^  world  before  the  flood !" 
Among  9U€h  remains,  in  deposits  clearly  belonging  to  the  diluvial 
epoch,  traces  of  human  industry  are  revealed,  of  an  indisputable 
character.  For  these  revelations  fix)m  an  earlier  world  we  are  chiefly 
indebted  to  the  zeal  and  liberality  of  M.  Boucher  de  Perthes,  who 
has  given  us  an  extraordinary  work  on  the  primitive  industry  of 
man.*  In  1835,  M.  Eavin  f  published  a  description  of  a  ^^Piroguc 
Q-autoUcy'  found  under  the  turf  at  Estreboeuf  on  the  Somme;  and  in 
tbe  same  year  M.  Picard  described  an  ornament  made  of  the  teeth  of 
the  wild  boar,  and  some  very  ancient  axe-sheaths,  &€.,  disclosed  in  a 
similar  situation  near  Picquigny.  These  researches,  interrupted  by 
the  death  of  M.  Picard,  were  subsequently  resumed  by  M.  Boucher 
de  Perthes ;  who  pursued  them  until  1849,  when  he  published  the 
result  of  his  truly  arduous  labors. 

M.  de  Perthes  caused  numerous  excavations  to  be  made  in  the  Celtic 

— m  "• 

*  Antlquit^s  Celtiques  et  Ant^diluTiennes :  M^moire  sur  Tlndustrie  primitiTt,  et  lee  art* 
H  leur  origine:  par  M.  Boucher  de  Perthes — Paris,  1849. 
t  M^moires  de  la  Soci^t^  d'EmulaUon  d'AbbcTiUe  — 1885. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 

354  GEOLOGY    AND    PAL-fiONTOLOGT, 

burial-places,  and  in  diluvian  beds,  over  the  departments  of  the  Somme 
and  Seine;. besides  examining  all  subterranean  localities  brought  to 
light  by  the  works  of  civil  and  military  engineers,  during  a  period  of 
ten  years.  He  did  not  succeed  in  finding  fossil  human  remains  in 
the  diluvian  deposits,  but  he  has  produced  what  he  considers  their 
equivalent :  because,  among  relics  of  elephants  and  mastodons,  and 
even  below  these  fossils,  at  a  depth  where  no  archaeolo^st  had  ever 
suspected  traces  of  man,  he  discovered  weapons,  utensils,  figures, 
signs,  and  symbols,  which  must  have  been  the  work  of  a  surpassingly- 
ancient  people. 

Besides  his  researches  in  the  diluvian  beds,  he  opened  many  mounds 
and  burial-places,  Gaulish,  Celtic,  and  of  unknown  origin,  some  of 
them  evidently  of  extreme  antiquity :  and  he  describes  successive 
beds  of  bones  and  ashes,  separated  from  each  other  by  strata  of  turf 
and  tufit,  with  no  less  than  five  different  .stages  of  cinerary  urns, 
belonging  to  distinct  generations,  of  which  the  oldest  were  deposited 
below  the  woody  or  diluvian  turf.  The  coarse  structure  of  these 
vases,  (made  by  hand  and  dried  in  the  sun,)  and  the  rude  utensils  of 
bone,  or  roughly-carved  stone,  by  which  they  were  surrounded,  to- 
gether with  their  position,  announce  their  appertaining,  if  not  to  the 
earliest  ages  of  the  world,  at  least  to  a  fiir  more  remote  antiquity  than 
has  usually  been  assigned  to  such  ceramic  remains. 

«<  In  the  Tarions  excaTations  made  in  the  ooone  of  theae  inquiries,  we  become  acquainted 
irith  snccessiye  periods  of  ciyilisation,  which  correspond  with  the  written  historj  of  the 
country.  Thns,  after  passing  through  the  first  stratom  of  the  soil,  we  come  to  relics  of  the 
middle  ages ;  and  then  meet,  in  regular  order,  with  traces  of  the  Roman,  the  Gallic,  the 
Celtic,  and\he  dilnrian  epochs.  It  is  always  in  the  neighborhood  of  lakes  and  riTera  thai 
we  find  Tcetiges  of  the  most  numerous  and  ancient  people.  If  their  banks  were  not  the 
earliest  seats  of  humJan  habitations,  they  were  probably  the  most  constant,  and  whoi  onoe 
settled  were  seldom  afterwards  deserted.  This  was  owing  to  water,  the  first  necessary  of 
life,  and  surest  pledge  of  fertility;  and  to  the  abundance  of  fish  and  game,  so  indispensable 
to  a  hunting  people.  We  may  add,  that  all  andent  people  had  a  superstitious  reTorenee 
for  great  waters,  and  made  them  the  fSarorite  resorts  of  their  gods.  On  the  banks  of  their 
riTors  they  deposited  the  ashes  of  chiefs  and  relatiyes,  and  there  they  desired  to  be  buried 
themselTes.  The  possession  of  these  banks  was,  therefore,  an  object  of  general  ambition, 
and  became  the  continual  subject  of  war  and  conquest  This  explains  the  accumulation  of 
relics  which  sometimes  coYcrs  them,  and  which,  on  the  banks  of  the  Somme  and  the  Seine, 
conducts  us  from  the  middle  ages,  throu|^  the  Roman  and  the  Gaulish  soils,  back  to  the 
Celtic  period."* 

We  have  nothing  to  do  now  with  the  comparatively-modern  history 
of  the  Gauls ;  the  excellent  works  of  MM.  d^  Caumont  and  Thierry 
may  be  consulted  on  that  subject :  our  business  is  with  the  Celtic  soil, 
the  cradle  of  the  people,  the  earth  trodden  by  ijie  primordial  popula- 
tton  of  Gaul. 

*  Ibid.  —  Antiquit^s  Celtiques. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC 

IN    CONNECTION    WITH    HUMAN    ORIGINS.  355 

**  Here  we  natnrallj  inquire,  who  were  these  myBterious  Celts,  these  primitire  ixLhabit- 
aiits  of  Gaol  ?  We  are  told  that  this  part  of  Europe  is  of  modem  origin,  or  at  least  of 
recent  population.  Its  annals  scarcely  reach  to  twenty  centuries,  and  e^en  its  traditions 
do  not  exceed  2500  years.  The  yarious  people  who  haye  occupied  it,  the  Galls,  the  Celts, 
the  Belgians,  the  Yeneti,  Ligurians,  Iberians,  Cymbrians,  and  Scythians,  haye  left  no  yes- 
tige  to  which  we  can  assign  that  date.  T^e  traces  of  those  nomadic  tribes  who  rayaged 
Qaol  scarcely  precede  the  Christian  era  by  a  fsw  centories.  Was  Gaol  then  a  desert  before 
this  period  ?  Was  its  sun  less  genial,  or  its  soil  less  fertile  ?  Were  not  its  hills  as  pleasant, 
and  its  plains  and  yalleys  as  ready  for  the  hanrest  ?  Or,  if  men  had  not  yet  learned  to 
plough  and  sow,  were  not  its  riyers  filled  with  fish,  and  its  forests  with  game  ?  And,  if  the 
land  abeunded  with  eyerything  calculated  to  attract  and  support  a  population,  why  should 
it  not  haye  been  inhabited  ?  The  absence  of  great  ruins  would  indicate  that  Gaul,  at  this 
period,  and  eyen  much  later,  had  not  attained  a  high  degree  of  ciyilization,  nor  been  the 
Beat  of  powerful  kingdoms ;  but  why  should  it  not  haye  had  its  towns  and  yillages  ?  or, 
rather,  why  should  it  not,  like  the  steppes  of  Russia,  the  prairies  and  yirgin  forests  of  Ame- 
rica, and  the  fertile  plains  of  Africa,  haye  been  oyerrun  fVom  time  immemorial  by  tribes 
of  men,  sayages  perhaps,  but,  neyertheless,  united  in  families  if  not  in  nations  ? " 

Those  circles  of  upright  stones,  of  which  Stonehenge  is  the  most 
familiar  example,  are  admitted  to  be  of  great  antiquity,  but  no  one 
can  tell  how  far  back  that  antiquity  may  extend.  They  are  found 
throughout  Europe,  from  Norway  to  the  Mediterranean ;  and  they 
must  have  been  erected  by  a  numerous  people,  (being  faithful  ex- 
ponents of  a  general  sentiment,)  since  we  find  them  in  so  many  coun- 
tries. They  are  commonly  called  Celtic  or  Druidical,  but  it  would  be 
liard  to  say  on  what  authority ;  or,  in  what  circumstances  and  for 
what  purpose  those  mysterious  vDruids  erected  them.  Having  neither 
date  nor  inscription,  they  must  be  older  than  written  language; 
for  people  who  can  write  never  leave  their  own  names  and  ex- 
ploits uncelebrated.  The  ancients  were  as  ignorant  on  this  subject 
as  ourselves ;  and,  at  the  period  of  the  Roman  invasion,  the  origin 
of  those  monuments  was  abeady  shrouded  in  obscurity.  Neither 
Roman  historians  nor  Christian  chroniclers  have  been  able  to  throw 
any  light  upon  their  unknown  founders.  Even  tradition  is  silent 
Political  or  religious  monuments,  they  were  probably  the  first  temples, 
the  first  altars,  or  the  first  trophies  vowed  to  the  gods,  to  victory,  and 
to  the  memory  of  warriors ;  for  among  all  people  the  ravages  of  war 
were  deified  before  the  benefits  of  peace :  man  has  always  venerated 
the  slayer  of  man.  The  people  who  erected  them  are  entirely  for- 
gotten ;  and  they  must  have  been  separated  from  the  living  genera- 
tions by  an  extreme  antiquity,  as  well  as  by  some  great  and  over- 
whelming social  revolution,  probably  involving  the  entire  destruction 
of  their  nation.  Being  unable,  then,  to  attribute  these  monuments 
either  to  the  Romans  or  the  Gauls,  sciolists  have  ignorantly  termed 
them  Celtic  or  Druidic ;  not  because  they  were  raised  originally  by 
Druids,  but  because  they  had  been  used  in  the  Druidical  worship, 
though  erected  for  other  uses,  or  dedicated  to  other  divinities.  In  like 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 

356 

GEOLOGY    AND    PALJSONTOLOGY, 

manner  did  the  temples  of  Paganism  afterwards  serve  for  the  solemxii- 
ties  of  Christianity. 

We  have  cited  the  example  of  these  Celtic  temples  as  a  standard 
of  comparison ;  for,  if  their  antiquity  is  so  extreme  as  to  be  ^itirely 
lost  out  of  our  sight,  what  date  shall  we  assign  to  human  works  found 
at  a  considerable  distance  below  their  foundations  7  In  the  same  soil 
upon  which  these  druidical  monuments  stand,  but  many  feet  beneath. 
their  base,  numbers  of  those  stone  wedges,  commonly  called  Celtic 
axes,  have  been  discovered ;  and  these,  with  other  similar  instroments, 
only  varying  in  the  finish  of  their  workmanship,  according  to  the 
depth  at  which  they  are  found,  have  been  collected  at  different  levels, 
even  as  low  down  as  the  diluvian  drift. 

The  annexed  cut  represents  a  section  of  an  aUuvial  formation  at 

Fio.  208. 
Allvtial  Dkpositbs  at  Pobtklstts,  showing  tKe  Arrangenunt  of  the  SoU  and  the  S^uUmti. 

Metret. 
800.. 

2-00., 

300... 

8-00., 

:-^:^:> 

...m. 

..TV. 

.VI. 

..vn. 

..VUL 

>  Indicates  the  leyel  of  the  actual  waters  of  the  Somme,  whose  depth  U 

three  metres. 
I.  AllQTial  formation. 
II.  Vegetable  soil  —  coToring  transported  earth  or  rabble. 

III.  Calcareous  tufa — porous,  and  containing  compact  masses. 

IV.  Mnddj  sand  —  blue,  and  Tery  fine. 

V.  Turf — containing  Celtic  antiquities;  indicated  by  =  . 
VI.  Muddy  sand. 

VII.  Detrital  diluTium— rolled  silex,  &e. 
Vm.  White  chalk.  ^  t 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC 

IN    CONNECTION   WITH    HUMAN   ORIGINS. 

357 

Portelette,  on  the  Somme,  where  some  beautiful  specimens  of  Celtic 
axes  were  obtained.  At  a  depth  of  nine  feet,  a  large  quantity  of 
bones  was  found ;  and  one  foot  lower,  a  piece  of  deer's  horn,  bearing 
marks  of  human  workmanship.  At  twenty  feet  from  the  surface, 
and  five  feet  below  the  bed  of  the  river,  three  axes,  highly  finished, 
and  perfectly  preserved,  turned  up  in  a  bed  of  turf.  Some  axe-cases 
of  stag's  horn  were  also  discovered  in  the  same  bed.  ITear  these 
objects  was  a  coarse  vase  of  black  pottery,  very  much  broken,  and 
surrounded  with  a  black  mass  of  decomposed  pottery — there  were 
also  large  quantities  of  wrought  bones,  human  and  animaL  The  entire 
bones  were  those  of  the  boar,  urus,  bull,  dog,  and  horse ;  but  none 
of  man.  In  another  locality,  in  the  nei^iborhood  of  Portelette,  the 
skull  of  a  man  was  found.  Here  was  evidently  a  Celtic  sepulchre. 
The  axes  were  entirely  new,  bearing  no  marks  of  use,  and  were  doubt- 
less votive  offerings.  This  case  is  only  cited  to  show  tibat  the  same 
kind  of  utensils  extend  fix)m  the  comparatively  recent  Celtic  back  to 
&r  remoter  diluvian  and  antediluvian  q[K>cha8.  We  annex  sketches 
of  the  deer's-hom  axe-cases  (Figs.  204  and  205),  because  in  the  more 

Fig.  204. 

Fig.  205. 

Celtic Imck-lioni  « Axe-Cases."* 

andent  excavations  none  were  discovered.  Fig.  204  is  an  axe-case  made 
of  the  horn  of  a  "  stag  often,"  and  is  six  inches  in  length,  two  inches 

*B<moker,  PL  L 

Digitized  by 

Google 

358  GEOLOGY    AND    PALAEONTOLOGY, 

wide  at  one  end,  and  a  Utile  more  than  one  incli  wide  at  the  other. 
Around  the  opening  intended  to  receive  the  stone,  a  line  has  been 
drawn  by  way  of  ornament.  The  axe  is  of  grayish  silex,  polished  f^ong 
its  whole  length,  and  is  three  inches  long,  and  one  inch  and  a  half 
wide.  At  the  upper  end  of  the  case,  broken  remains  of  a  large 
wild  boar's  tusk  were  firmly  driven  into  the  horn ;  while  the  axe  itself 
was  veiy  loose,  and  seems  always  to  have  been  so  —  the  looseness 
being  increased  by  its  smooth  polish.  It  was  evidently  intended  to 
be  thrown,  or  detached  fi'om  the  case,  whenever  a  blow  was  struck 
with  it.  The  handle  of  this  axe  was  twenty  inches  long,  made  of 
oak,  and  in  a  tolerable  state  of  preservation ;  but  became  reduced  one^ 
half  in  drying,  by  crumbling  and  splitting  off  in  flakes.  Carelessly 
worked,  it  had  been  hardened  at  both  ends  in  the  fire.  This  was  the 
only  wooden  handle  found  —  some  being  of  bone,  and  many  others 
entirely  decomposed. 

Eig.  205  was  an  axe-case  and  axe  similar  in  most  respects  to  Fig. 
204,  except  its  handle  of  horn. 

A  great  variety  of  other  instruments,  made  of  deer's  horn,  oc- 
curred in  this  and  other  alluvial  excavations ;  but  as  our  main  con- 
cern is  with, those  of  higher  antiquity,  we  must  pass  them  by  without 
notice,  and  proceed  to  the  diluvian  vestiges. 

In  the  gravel-pits  of  Menchecourt,  on  the  Somme,  M.  de  Perthes 
found  a  number  of  stone  axes  and  other  works,  associated  with  the 
remains  of  extinct  animals.  The  character  of  this  formation  is  marked 
by  erratic  blocks  and  the  organic  remains  which  it  contains:  the 
erratic  blocks  being  here  represented  by  boulders  of  sandstone,  and 
by  massive  flints,  which  have  been  visibly  rolled  and  rounded,  de- 
spite of  their  weight.  Its  organic  remains  are  chiefly  those  of  the 
elephant,  the  rhinoceros,  hippopotamus,  bear,  hyena,  stag,  ox,  urus^ 
and  other  mammalia,  of  races  either  extinct  or  foreign  to  the  pre- 
sent climate,  belonging  to  the  diluvian  epoch.  In  the  post-diluvian 
or  alluvial  formations  already  spoken  of,  only  living  or  indigenous 
species  are  met  with ;  and  the  human  bones  are  mixed  with  scorise, 
worked  metals,  pieces  of  pottery,  and  other  vestiges  of  the  civilization  of 
the  period  to  which  these  buried  men  belonged.  The  alluvia,  whatever 
be  the  materials  which  compose  them,  are  easily  recognized  through 
the  horizontal  position  of  their  beds.  Such  regular  stratifications  do 
not  exist  in  the  Diluvial  formations.  Here  different  sands,  gravels, 
marls,  broken  and  rolled  flints,  everywhere  scattered  in  disturbed 
beds,  and  repeated  at  irregular  distances,  announce  the  movement 
of  a  great  mass  of  water  and  the  devastating  action  of  a  furious  cur- 
rent. Indeed  it  is  scarcely  possible  to  be  deceived  in  the  diluvial 
cnaracter  of  these  formations,  or  to  confound  them  with  a  posterior 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 

IN    CONNECTION    WITH    HUMAN    ORIGINS.  359 

deposit    Everything  announces  the  diluvial  origin  of  these  beds  at 

Menchecourt :  the  total  absence  of  modem  relics  and  of  any  remains 

of  recent  animals ;  the  large  lumps  of  silex ;  the  scattered  boulders ; 

the  pure  sands  (yellow,  green,  and  black),  sometimes  in  distinct  layers, 

at  other  times  mixed  with  the  silex  whose  couches^  descending  to  a  great 

depth,  .rise  again  immediately  to  the  surface  of  the  soil.    Buch  is  the 

cliaracter  of  these  formations ;  wherein  we  meet  at  every  st^  the  traces 

of  an  immense  catastrophe,  especially  in  valleys  where  the  diluvian 

waters  had  precipitated  the  ruins  accumulated  in  their  course.'*' 

M.  Baillou,  speaking  of  this  locality,  says :  — 

**  We  begin  to  find  bones  at  the  depth  of  ten  or  tweWe  feet,  in  the  graTol  of  Menoheconrt ; 
bat  they  are  more  plentiful  at  eighteen  or  twenty  feet  deep.  Among  them  are  bones  which 
irere  braised  and  broken  before  they  were  entombed,  and  others  whose  angles  haTe  been 
rounded  by  friction  in  water ;  but  neither  of  these  are  found  as  deep  as  those  which  remain 
entire.  These  last  are  deposited  at  the  bottom  of  the  graTol  bed ;  they  are  whole,  being 
neither  roonded  nor  broken,  and  were  probably  articulated  at  the  time  of  their  deposition. 
I  fonnd  the  whole  hind  leg  of  a  rhinoceros,  the  bones  of  which  were  stiU  in  their  proper 
relatiye  position.  They  must  haTe  been  connected  by  ligaments,  and  eren  coTered  with 
muscles,  at  the  time  of  their  destruction.  The  rest  of  the  skeleton  of  the  same  animal  lay 
ftt  a  small  distance.  I  haTe  remarked  that  whencTer  we  meet  with  bones  disposed  in  this 
manner — that  is  to  say,  articulated — we  also  find  that  the  sand  has  formed  a  hard  agglo- 
meration against  one  side  of  thesL" 

Subjoined  is  a  list  of  the  mammifers  discovered  by  M.  Baillon  in  the 
sands  of  Menchecourt:  namely,  elephant,  rhinoceros,  fossil  horse  (of 
medium  size  and  more  slender  form  than  the  living  species),  felis 
spelea,  canis  speleus,  hyena,  bear,  stag,  and  bos  bombifrons  of  Harlan. 
A  scale  from  the  neck  of  a  great  crocodile  was  also  exhumed  from 
gravel  of  Menchecourt,  being  only  the  third  instance  in  which  traces 
of  that  saurian  had  been  found,  tiius  associated,  in  Europe :  once  at 
Brentford  in  England,  once  in  the  diluvial  beds  of  the  Val  d'Amo, 
and  once  at  Menchecourtf 

"We  have  said  that,  among  these  diluvian  remains,  (amid  bones  of 
elephants,  rhinoceroses,  and  crocodiles,  under  many  beds  of  sand  and 
gravel,  and  at  a  depth  of  several  feet  below  the  modem  soil,)  vestiges 
o{ human  indu%try  had  been  met  with;  and  we  now  give  a  section  of 
the  locality  (Fig.  106)  from  which  flint  axes,  agglutinated  with  a  mass 
of  bones  and  sand,  were  procured.  These  axes  were  taken  from  the 
ossiferous  beds;  one  at  four  and  a  half  metres,  or  nearly  thirteen  feet, 
and  the  other  at  nine  metres,  or  about  twenty-seven  feet,  below  the 
surface.  The  character  of  the  soil  and  of  the  superposed  layers  of 
compact  sand,  free  from  any  appearance  of  modem  detritus,  forbids 
a  supposition  that  they  could  ever  have  reached  such  a  depth  through 
accident  since  the  formation  of  the  bed  itself,  or  by  any  infiltration  from 

*  Boucher  de  Perthes ;  p.  217«-240.  f  CuTier :  Ossemens  Fosnles. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 

360 

GEOLOGY    AND    PALJSONTOLOGT, 

Sicnov  OF  THB  Gbatxl-Bkds  at  Mihgbscovxt.* 
Fio.206. 

»  Modem,  or     r 
AlhniaL        \ 

Dilwian,  or 
JBTongiiuni, 

I.  Soperficial  Togetable  earth — humus. 
n.  Lower  yegetable — argiHaeeous. 
m.  Brown  day. 

IV.  Upper  bed  of  silex— rolled  and  broken,  with  Itimps 
of  white  marl  and  rolled  chalk,  in  amygdaloid 
fragments. 
T.  Compact  ferm^oiu  «lay. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC 

,IN    CONNECTIOK   WITH   HTJMAN   ORIGINS. 

361 

a  superior  level :  because,  in  such  cases,  some  trace  must  have  been 
left  of  tbeir  occurrence.  No  doubt  exists  that  those  axes  had  lain  in 
the  same  position  ever  since  the  fossilized  bones  were  there,  or  that 
they  were  brought  thither  by  the  same  causes. 

Many  other  excavations  •were  examined,  as  opportunities  occurred ; 
and  stones  bearing  unmistakeable  evidence  of  human  workmanship 
were  discovered  so  frequently  in  the  drif^  as  to  establish  the  fact 
beyond  all  room  for  question.  The  occurrence  of  similiu:  axes  in 
sepulchres  of  the  Celtic  era,  might  otherwise  support  the  idea  that 
they  had  found  their  way  by  subsidence  from  upper  to  lower  levels ; 
but  the  character  of  the  formation,  as  before  remarked,  renders  such 
contingencies  highly  improbable,  if  not  impossible;  and  it  seems 
much  more  likely  that  old  diluvian  remains  were  discovered  by  a 
more  modem  people,  who  adopted  these  ancient  tools  in  later 
fimebral  ceremonies.  But  it  is  not  necessary  to  assume  either  hj^po- 
fhesis:  the  same  wants  would  suggest  similar  utensils.  Forms,  vene- 
rated as  symbolical  of  any  religious  rite  or  sentiment,  are  very  per- 
manent, especially  among  a  rude  people :  and,  whether  we  suppose 
the  more  ancient  race  to  have  been  entiirely  destroyed,  and  suc- 
ceeded by  another  after  a  catastrophe,  or  the  same  type  to  have  con- 
tinued tlurough  tiiat  long  period  which  must  have  elapsed  between 
the  diluvian  and  the  Celtic  epochas,  the  circumstance  that  the  same 
instruments  are  found  in  both  positions  is  not  attended  with  any 
insuperable  difficxdties.  Indeed,  Indian  axes,  discovered  by  *  Mr. 
Squier  in  our  Western  mounds,  are  so  precisely  similar  in  form  and 
materiid  to  those  we  have  been  describing,  tiiat  one  should  not  be 
much  surprised  at  seeing  them  adduced,  by  some  sapient  advocate 
of  the  unity  of  human  races,  as  decisive  proofs  of  the  Celtic  origin 
of  American  Indians. 

The  annexed  cuts  (Figs.  207  and  208)  represent  different  sections 

Cfytmien 

ZAmoneuxof- 

Bnmgniart, 

LUfMM-ii' 

Cla^0!f  and 
iondp. 

Clfm 

Sandif. 

\ 

{ 

YI.  Marlj  eUj,  with  broken  flints,  white  extemallj. 
VIL  Mftrly  sand,  containing  bones  of  manunifers. 
VIIL  Beds  of  rolled  ohalk,  in  pisiform  fragments,  mixed 
with  silioeons  gr»rel. 
IX.  White  olaj. 
X.  White  sand. 
XL  Gray  sandy  day. 
XXL  Clay  and  sand,  oohry,  in  Tttns. 
XIIL  Pure  gray  clay. 
XIV.  OdtryTein.  . 

XV.  Alternate  beds,  slighUy  obliqne,  with  shcUs  and  dila- 

fian  bones. 
XYI.  Lower  bed  of  flints,  rolled  and  broken. 

**aa"*   These  marics  show  the  position  of  the  fliai-azat. 
46 

Digitized  by 

Google 

362 

GEOLOGY   J»KD   PALJEONTOLOGT, 

of  a  bank  at  Abbeville ;  *  after  excayations  made  by  militaiy  engi- 
neers, while  repairing  the  fortifications  of  the  place.  Here,  in  a  bed 
of  gravel  some  eight  feet  below  the  surface,  fossil  bones  of  an  elephant 
were  found ;  and,  immediately  below  them,  a  flint  knife ;  while  at 
a  still  lower  level,  stone  axes  were  discovered. 

The  existence  of  human  works  in  Gallic  diluvian  drift,  appears  to  be 
proven.  Similar  works  have  also  been  found  in  the  alluvium  of  the 
same  localities:  and,  inasmuch  as  the  best  geologists  say  that  each  of 
these  formations  may  have  occupied  myriads  of  years,  it  will  be  inte- 
resting to  trace  connexions  between  the  two  periods.  This  we  shall 
now  attempt  by  an  examination  of  some  rude  mementos  of  those 
ancient  times  entombed  in  mother  earth.  In  later  Celtic  sepulchres, 
(besides  stone  axes,  of  regular  shape  and  high  polish,)  numerous  uten- 
sils wrought  from  deers'  horns  were  discovered,  of  which  we  have 
given  specimens  when  treating  of  axes. 

*  IsT.  Seotzon  or  Dilxtviak  Bbds  at  thi  Rakpabtb  or  Abbsyills. 
Fio.  207. 
Hint  Jbninet 

11.^ 

I.  Recent.  —  Thickness  6  feet 

a.  Vegetable  mould. 

b.  Rubble. 

II.  Diluvian  formation  (cljsmien  Br.). 

A.  First  bed— 1}. 

1.  Tellow  sand — argillo-fermginous. 

2.  Silex,  rolled  and  broken,  mixed  with 

gravel. 
8.  Green  sand. 

B.  Second  bed— d^tritique  Br.— 900. 
1111.  Masses  of  silex,  rolled  and  broken, 

mixed  with  gravel  and  ferruginous 

sand.     Below  this  mass  the  silex 
tends  to  form  oblique  beds. 
2.  The  same  silex,  forming  a  large  band 
in  green  sand. 
8  8  8.  The  same  silex,  forming  sinuous  veins 
in  black  sand,  colored  by  carbon  from 
the  decomposition  of  lignite. 
4t  4.  Vein  of  white  sand,   containing  a 
layer  of  silex  and  bands  of  day. 
5.  Veins  of  green  sand — 16. 
=.  Celtic  instruments  found  in  the  dila- 
vian  mass. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

IN    CONNECTION    WITH    HUMAN    OBIGINS. 

863 

An  instance  of  the  early  use  of  deers'  Fio.  209. 

horn,  (mentioned  by  Dr,  Wilson  in  his 
Memoir  on  the  pre-Celtie  races  of  Scotland, 
read  before  the  British  Association  for 
1850,)  may  be  here  cited.  Remains  of  a 
fossil  whale  have  recently  been  exhumed 
ixi  Blair  Drummond  Moss,  seven  miles 
above  Stirling  bridge,  and  twenty  miles 
fix)m  the  nearest  point  of  the  river  Forth 
-where  by  any  possibility  a  whale  could 
be  naturally  stranded.  Nevertheless,  a 
rude  harpoon  of  deers'  horn*,  found  along 
with  the  cetaceous  mammal,  proves  that 
this  fossilized  whale  pertains  to,  and  falls 
within,  human  historical  periods;  at  the 
same  time  that  it  points  to  an  era  subse- 
quent to  man's  first  colonization  of  the 
British  Isles. 

Sketches  of  other  instruments,  made  of 
the  same  material,  equally  illustrate  the 
rude  state  of  Celtic  arts.  Fig.  209,  made 
of  an  antler  and  part  of  the  horn  attached  to  the  head,  was  used  as 

Celtic  hammer,  of  back-horn.* 

IL, 

2nd.  Trantvene  Section  — 

1.  Recent 

a.  Vegetable  earth. 

b.  Transported  earth, 
n.  DilQTian  formation  (djsmien  Br.). 

A.  First  bed. 
1 1.  Mixture  of  rolled  silex  and  clay. 

2.  Lumps  and  oblique  yeins  of  white 

sand,  mixed  with    graTcl   and 
silex. 
8.  Bed  of  ferraginoos  dilujian  grit 
Sand  agglutinated  by  a  cement 
of  hjdrated  iron. 

B.  Second  bed.     (D^tritique  Brong.) 

1.  Bfasses  of  rolled  silex,  mixed  with 

grayeL 

2.  Sinuous  band  of  silex  (rolled)  in 

black  sand. 
8.  Mass  of  rilex  and  graTcl,  in  brown 
ferruginous  sand. 

ZZ'  Celtic  instruments  contained  in  the 
mass  of  silex,  coyered  with  fer- 
ruginous sand ;  one  set  8}  metres 
below  the  surface,  the  other  at 
5  metres  60  centimetres. 

•  Boucher,  Plate  IIL 

..B. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

364 

GEaLOGY   AKD   FALJEOKTOLOGT^ 

Celtic  pielutM, 
m&de  of  buck-horn.* 

fto-  210.  a  hammer;  and  Fig.  210  is  evi- 

dentfy  intended  for  a  pickaxe. 

Many  other  specimens,  equaUy 

mde  in  decign  and  execntiony 

were  found  in  these  alluvial 

deposits ;  but,  notwithstanding 

the   most  careM   search,  no 

traces  of  worked  bones  have 

been  ever  discovered  in  the  diluvial  beds ;  exc^ 

in  two  doubtAil  instances,  where  fragments  of  fouU 

deers'  horn   appeared  to  show  some  traces  oi 

workmanship. 

Among  the  weapons  used  by  ancient  people^ 
axes  have  always  been,  if  not  the  most  common^ 
at  least  the  b€«t  known.  We  have  spoken  of 
those  foimd  in  the  Celtic  sepulchres,  and  will  now 
give  sketches  of  a  few  of  them.  Figs.  211,  212 
and  218  are  Celtic  axes.  The  first  is  composed  of 
silex,  the  second  of  jade,  and  the  third  of  por- 
phyry :  they  are  all  of  elegant  form  and  perfect 
polish.  This  is  the  prevailing  form;  though  the  instruments  vaiy 
in  size  from  eight  inches  down  to  two  inches  and  a  half  in  length, 

with  aproportionate  width. 
An  elegant  little  jasper  axe 
(Fig.  214)  is  of  the  smaller 
size. 

Serpentine  is  another 
common  material,  fi^m  its 
beautiful  appearance  and 
fieujility  of  workmanship: 
chalk  and  even  bitumen 
are  also  frequently  found 
moulded  into  the  typical 
form.  The  subjoined  (Figs. 
216,  216,  217)  appear  to 
have  been  intended  for 
amulets.  Fig.  216  is  of 
grit,  two  inches  long,  con- 
taining a  rude  representa- 
tion of  a  human  &ce,  and 
pierced  so  as  to  be  worn 
C«ltic  az80,  adBM,  ftcf  as  an  amulet    Fig.  216  is 

Fio.  211. 

FiQ.  212. 

FiQ.  218. 

Fig.  214. 

•  BoQolier,  Plate  IV. 

f  Idem,  Plate  XIIL 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 

IN    CONNECTION    WITH    HUMAN    OBIGINS. 

365 

Fio.  216. 

Fio.  216. 

Pio.  217. 

Celtic  Amulets.* 

of  black  basalt;  and  Fig. 
217,  which  is  more  of  the 
typical  shape,  is  made  of 
^wrhite  marble,  ornamented 
^vith  small  bas-relie&,  and 
pierced  with  holes  for  sus- 
pension as  an  amulet,  or 
to  facilitate  £EU9tening  in  a 

case.  Several  other  specimens  of  different  sizes,  material,  and  finish, 
l>i3t  all  of  the  same  general  form,  were  found  in  the  Celtic  sepulchres, 
TirMch  it  is  unnecessary  to  our  purpose  to  enunierate  or  describe. 

Besses  the  axes,  numbers  of  flints,  wrought  in  the  form  of  knives, 
ivere  found  in  the  Celtic  depositories,  and  instruments  of  both  kinds 
-were  also  discovered  in  the  diluvian  deposites ;  the  only  difference 
between  the  Celtic  and  diluvian  remains  lying  in  the  fineness  of  the 
Tvorkmanship,  as  the  form  and  material  were  in  both  cases  the  same. 
Figs.  218,  219,  and  220,  represent  axesv  from  the  diluvian  deposites ; 
and  here  it  may  be  as  well  to  remark,  once  for  all,  that  the  word  axe 
is  merely  a  conventional  term,  applied  generally  to  all  stones  of  a 
peculiar  typical  shape,  and  is  not  intended  to  convey  the  idea  that 
those  instruments  were  always  used  as  weapons  or  as  mechanical 
tools,  as  we  shall  take  occasion  to  explain. 

Figs.  221,  222,  and  223,  are  sketches  of  Celtic  knives;  and  Figs. 
224, 225,  and  226,  are  corresponding  instruments  of  the  diluvian  epoch. 

Pio.  219. 

Fio.  221. 

Fio.  222. 

Fio.  218. 

Fio.  220. 

Fio.  228. 

DilaTial  ]iatohet8.f 

Celtio  kniTes.t 

»  Boncher,  PL  XVI. 

t  Boucher,  H.  XVIL 

^  Ibid.,  Pis.  xxrv.,  3mr.       j 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 

366 

GEOLOGY   AND   PALiEONTOLOGT, 

Fig.  226. 

Fio.224. 

Fia.  226. 

DiluTial  knives.*  % 

Besides  the  ax^  and  knives,  there  were  still  other  specimens  of 
wrought  silex  and  sandstone,  which  appear  to  have  been  used  as 
symbols  or  signs  connected  with  the  rites  of  religion.  Some  of  these 
were  probably  the  original  forms  or  models  of  the  Celtic  stones,  so 
widely  known ;  viz.,  cromlechsy  dolmens^  lichaven$y  &c.  They  certainly 
have  the  same  shapes,  and  it  is  not  easy  to  assign  any  otitier  use  or 
origin  to  them.  Generally  pyramidal  or  cubic  in  form,  they  are  found, 
with  little  variation,  from  tiie  oldest  diluvian  to  the  Celtic  period, 

Fio.  227. 

FiQ.  228. 

Fio.  229. 

Droidioal  MonQmeiit8.f 

and  even  down  to  near  the  Roman  times.    They  are  represented  in 
Figs.  227,  228,  229,  and  230. 

•  Boneher,  PL  XXVII. 

t  Ibid.,  Pis.  XXXin.  and  XXXIV. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 

IN    CONNECTION    WITH    HUMAN    OBIGINS.  367 

"We  should  remember  that  many  of  the  instruments  we  call  axes  were 
probably  used  only  in  sacrifices,  and  some,  perhaps,  merely  as  votive 
offerings  or  amulets ;  being  too  small,  and  made  of  materials  too  fira- 
ple,  to  have  been  of  any  use  either  as  weapons  or  as  tools.  Moreover, 
they  were  fitted  so  slightly  to  their  cases,  that  they  must  have  become 
detached  whenever  a  blow  was  struck,  and  would  thus  have  been  left 
in  the  wound,  or,  in  case  of  sacrifice,  would  have  dropped  into  the 
hole  of  the  dolmen  made  to  receive  the  blood  of  the  victim.  This 
superstition  still  exists  among  some  savage  tribes,  who,  in  their  human 
sacrifices, always  leave  the  knife  in  the  wound;  and  may  perhaps  be 
traced  in  the  practice  of  Italian  bravos,  with  whom  it  is  a  point  of 
professional  honor  to  leave  the  stiletto  sticking  in  the  body  of  the 
murdered  man. 

'*  The  triaDgnlar  axe  was  probably  a  form  consecrated  hj  cnstom  among  those  rade 
tribes,  like  the  crescent  among  the  Turks.  Being  neyer  employed  as  an  instrument  of 
death,  except  in  sacrifices ;  when  the  sacrifice  was  consummated,  on  ftoereal  occasions,  it 
would  be  deposited  near  the  urn  containing  the  ashes  of  the  chief  they  wished  to  honor,  or 
under  the  altar  of  the  god  they  would  propitiate.  At  any  rate,  the  permanence  of  so  rude 
a  state  of  art  during  so  many  ages,  or  perhaps  so  many  hundreds  of  ages  —  Arom  a  period 
of  unknown  antiquity,  separated  from  historic  times  by  one  of  the  great  reyolutions  of  the 
earth  —  and  disappearing,  not  gradually,  but  suddenly ;  and  either  by  death  or  conquest ; 
to  be  succeeded  by  remains  of  the  Roman  era — indicates  the  existence  of  a  people  in  a  state 
of  barbarism  from  which  they  would  probably  neyer  haye  emerged.  Inhabiting  a  country 
fnU  of  lakes  and  forests,  they  may  haye  resembled  the  Indians  of  North  America ;  or,  to 
select  a  more  ancient  example,  we  may  compare  them  to  the  nomadic  tribes  of  Asia  and 
Africa :  the  Tartars,  Mongols,  and  Bedouins.  The  duration  of  their  stationary  state  defies 
all  speculation ;  since  the  most  ancient  traditions,  especially  of  the  pastoral  Arabs,  repre- 
sent them  precisely  as  we  see  them  to-day,  and  there  is  no  sensible  difference  between  the 
tent  of  Jacob  and  that  of  a  modem  Sh^ykh.*'  * 

The  supposition  that  these  pre-Celtic  populations  of  Europe  may 
have  resembled  our  North  American  Indians  is  exceedingly  just,  so 
long  as  similitudes  are  restricted  merely  to  social  habits,  superinduced 
on  both  continents  by  the  same  natural  causes ;  but  that  the  abori- 
gines of  Europe  were  not,  in  any  case,  identical  physiologically  with 
the  trans- AUeghanian  mound-builders,  has  been  already  exemplified 
[jmpraj  p.  291].  This  leads  us  to  the  ^^Pre-Celtie  Annah  of  Scotland  '* 
—  one  of  those  sterling  works,  replete  with  solid  instruction,  that 
reflects  infinite  honor  on  the  "native  heath,"  which  Dr.  Daniel 
Wilson  has  recently  exchanged  for  a  Canadian  home.  Whilst 
heartily  welcoming  such  an  accession  of  science  to  our  continent,  we 
lack  space  to  do  more  than  present  the  learned  archeeologist's  results 
in  the  concisest  form.  Caledonia,  in  ages  anterior  to  ajiy  Celtic  tra- 
ditions, appears  to  have  been  successively  occupied  by  two  types  of 
man  (heretofore  unknown  to  historians),  distinct  from  each  other  no 

*  M.  Bonehtr  de  Perthes :  Antiquity  CeUlques. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC 

868 

GEOLOGY   AND    PALiBONTOLOGT, 

less  than  from  their  Celtic  destroyers;  and  this  long  prior  to  the 
Boman  invasion  of  Britain.  The  most  ancient  of  these  extinct  races, 
viz.,  the  '^Kumhe-hephalV  (or,  men  with  Joo^haped  skulls),  flourished 
during  the  earlier  part  of  the  "  Primeval  or  Stime  period ; "  and  their 
successors,  the  '^ Brachy-kephali''  (or,  thort  heads)  lived  towards  the 
latter  part.  Both  became  more  or  less  displaced  by  intrusive  Celts, 
during  the  subsequent  "Archaic  or  Bronze  period;"  while  these  last 
gradually  gave  way  before  the  precursors  of  Saxons,  Angli,  Scoti, 
Norwegians,  &c.,  who  usher  in  the  "Teutonic  or  Iron  period." 
Place  the  Boman  invasion  of  Scotland  in  the  year  80  a.  d.,  and  at 
what  primordial  era  did  Caledonia's  abori^es  begin  ? — With  this 
exordium,  let  C^edonian  archaeology  speak  £)r  itself:  — 

Fia.  281. 

<<  Of  the  Allopjlian  oolonists  of  SoandinaTia,  Professor  NiUson  assigns  to  the  most  i 
the  short  or  braohj-kephalio  form  of  cranium,  with  prominent  parietal  tubers,  and  broAd 
and  flattened  occiput  To  this  aboriginal  race,  he  oonoeiTee,  succeeds  another  with  a  trm^ 
nium  of  a  more  lengthened  OTal  form,  and  prominent  and  narrow  occiput  The  third  raoe, 
which  Scandinayian  antiquaries  incline  to  regard  as  that  of  Uie  bronxe  or  first  metiQie 
period,  is  characteriied  by  a  cranium  longer  than  the  first  and  broader  than  the  seeoad, 
and  marked  by  greater  prominence  at  the  sides.  The  last.  Professor  Nillson  connders  to 
haTo  been  of  Celtic  origin.  To  this  suoceeded  the  true  Scandina^rian  race,  and  the  firat 
workers  of  the  natiTe  iron  ore.*  ... 

'<  Fortunatelj  a  few  skulls  from  Scottish  tu- 
muli and  cists  are  preserred  in  the  MuseuBu 
of  the  Scottish  Antiquaries  and  of  the  Sdhn- 
burg^  Phrenological  Society.  A  comparison 
of  these  with  the  specimens  of  craida  drawn 
by  Dr.  Thuznam  firom  examples  found  in  an 
ancient  tunular  cemetery  at  Lam^  Hill,  near 
York,  beUered  to  be  of  the  Anglo-Saxon 
period,  abundantly  proTes  an  essential  diffsr- 
ence  of  races,  f  The  latter,  though  belonging 
to  the  superior  or  dolicho-kephalic  type,  are 
small,  Tory  poorly  dereloped,  low  and  narrow 
in  the  forehead,  and  pyramidal  in  forsL  A 
striking  feature  of  one  type  of  crania  from  th« 
Scottish  baiTOWS  is  a  square  compact  form.  .  . 
«No.  7  [Figs.  281  and  282]  was  obtained 
fhim  a  cist  discoTered  under  a  large  o^m  at 
Nether  Urquhart,  Fifeehire,  in  1885.  An  ao- 
count  of  the  opening  of  several  cidms  and 
tumuli  in  the  same  district  is  giyen  by  Lieu- 
tenant-Colonel Miller,  in  his  *  Inquiiy  respect- 
ing the  ffite  of  the  Batde  of  Mens  Grampiua.'{ 
Some  of  them  contained  urns  and  burnt  bonea, 
ornaments  of  Jet  and  shale,  and  the  like  eariy 
relics,  while  in  others  were  found  implements 
or  weapons  of  iron.    It  is  selected  here  at 

Fio.282. 

«No.7.   McthtrUiqalKartOiini.* 

*  PrimitiTe  inhabitants  of  Scandinaria,  by  Professor  Nillson  of  Lund. 

f  Natural  History  of  Man,  p.  198.  %  Arohssd.  toL  it.  pp.  48,  44. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

IN    CONNECTION    WITH    HUMAN    OBIGINS. 

369 

smother  example  of  the  same  dau  of  eraala. .  . .  The  whole  of  theae,  more  or  less,  nearly 
lliec  irith  the  lengthened  OTal  form  described  bj  Professor  NUlson  as  the  second  race  of 
the  Soandinavian  tomoli.  They  haTO  mostly  a  singularly  narrow  and  elongated  occiput ; 
sind  with  their  comparatiTely  low  and  narrow  forehead,  might  not  inaptly  be  described  by 
the  familiar  term  boat^thi^fed.  It  is  probable  that  f^irther  inTCStigation  will  establish  this 
as  the  type  of  a  primitiTC,  if  not  of  the  primeyal  natiTC  raoe.  Though  they  approach  in 
form  to  a  superior  type,  falling  under  the  first  or  Dolicho-kephalio  class  of  Professor  Ret- 
siiis's  arrangement,  their  capacity  is  generally  small,  and  their  derelopment,  for  the  most 
pmrty  poor ;  so  that  there  is  nothing  in  their  cranial  characteristica  inconsistent  with  such 
OTidenoe  as  seems  to  assign  to  them  the  rude  arts  and  extremely  limited  knowledge  of  the 
Britlah  Stone  Period. . . . 

Fio.  288. 

Fio.  284. 

«  The  skull,  of  which  the  measurements  are 
C^Tcn  in  No.  10  [Figs.  288  and  284],  is  the 
same  here  referred  to,  presented  to  the  Phren- 
ological Museum  by  the  Ber.  Bir.  LiddelL  It 
is  a  Teiy  striking  example  of  the  British 
Brachy-kephalie  type ;  square  and  compact  in 
form,  broad  and  short,  but  well  balanced,  and 
with  a  good  frontal  dcTelopment  It  no  doubt 
pertained  to  some  primitiTe  chief;  or  arch* 
priest,  sage,  it  may  be,  in  oouneil,  and  braTe 
in  war.  The  site  of  his  place  of  sepulture  has 
obviously  been  choeen  for  the  same  reasons 
which  led  to  its  selection  at  a  later  period  for 
the  erection  of  the  belfry  and  beacon-tower 
of  the  old  burgh.  It  is  the  most  eleyated  spot 
in  the  neighborhood,  and  here  his  cist  had 
been  laid,  and  the  memorial  mound  piled  oTer 
it,  which  doubtless  remained  untouched  so 
long  as  his  memory  was  cherished  in  the  tra- 
ditions of  his  people.  . .  . 

**  Few  as  these  examples  are,  they  will  pro- 
bably be  found,  on  further  inyestigation,  to 
belong  to  a  race  entirely  distinct  from  those 
prcTiously  described.  They  correspond  very 
nearly  to  the  Brachy-kephalie  crania  of  the 
supposed  primeral  race  of  Spandinam,  de- 
scribed by  Professor  Nillson  as  short,  with 
prominent  parietal  tubers,  and  broad  and  flat- 
tened occiput.  In  frontal  development,  how* 
ever,  they  are  decidedly  superior  to  the  previous  class  of  crania,  and  such  evidence  as  we 
possess  seems  to  point  to  a  very  different  succession  of  races  to  that  which  Scandinavian 
ethnologists  now  recognise  in  the  primitive  history  of  the  north  of  Europe. .  .  .  ^ 

"  So  far  as  appears  firom  the  table  of  measurements,  the  following  laws  would  seem  to 
be  indicated :  —  In  the  primitive  or  elongated  dolicho-kephalio  type,  for  which  the  distinc- 
tive iatle  of  kumbe-kephalic  is  here  suggested — the  parietal  diameter  is  remarkably  small, 
being  frequently  exceeded  by  the  vertical  diameter;  in  the  second  or  brachy-kephalie  class, 
the  parietal  diameter  is  the  greater  of  the  two ;  in  the  Celtic  crania  they  are  neariy  equal ; 
and  in  the  medieval  or  true  dolicho-kephalic  heads,  the  parietal  diameter  is  again  found 
decidedly  in  excess ;  while  the  preponderance  or  deficiency  of  the  longitudinal  in  its  rela- 
tive proportion  to  the  other  diameters,  furnishes  the  most  characteristic  features  referred 
to  in  the  classification  of  the  kumbe-kephalic,  brachy-kephalie,  Celtic,  and  dolicho-kephaUo 
types.    Not  the  least  interesting  indications  which  these  results  afford,  both  to  the  ethno- 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC 

«No.lO.   Old  Steeple, 

370  GEOLOGY    AND    PAL.EONTOLOGT, 

logist  and  the  arohsBologist,  are  the  eridences  of  natiTe  primitrre  races  in  Scotland  prior  to 
the  intrusion  of  the  Celts ;  and  also  the  probability  of  these  races  haring  sacceeded  each 
other  in  a  different  order  from  the  primitiTe  colonists  of  Scandinaria.  Of  the  former  iaot, 
viz.,  the  existence  of  primitiTe  races  prior  to  the  Celts,  I  think  no  doubt  can  be  now  enter- 
tained. Of  the  order  of  their  succession,  and  their  exact  share  in  the  changes  and  pro- 
gressiTC  deyelopment  of  the  natiTO  arts  which  the  archseologist  detects,  we  still  stand  in 
need  of  further  proof.  ... 

"  The  peculiar  characteristic  of  the  primeyal  Scottish  type  appears  rather  to  be  a  narrow 
prolongation  of  the  occiput  in  the  region  of  the  cerebellum,  suggesting  the  term  already 
applied  to  them  of  bo€Ur$ha^ped,  and  for  which  the  name  of  KumbehphaUB  may  periiaps  be 
conTcniently  employed  to  distinguish  them  from  the  higher  type  with  which  they  are  other> 
wise  apt  to  be  confounded.  ...  '  ' 

"  The  peculiarity  in  the  teeth  of  certidn  classes  of  ancient  crama  aboTO  referred  to  is  of 
very  general  application,  and  has  been  observed  as  common  eyen  among  British  sailors. 
The  cause  is  obrious,  resulting  frt>m  the  similarity  of  food  in  both  cases.  The  old  Briton 
of  the  Anglo-Boman  period,  and  the  Saxon  both  of  England  and  the  Scottish  Lothians,  had 
liyed  to  a  great  extent  on  barley  bread,  oaten  cakes,  parched  ^eas,  or  the  like  fare,  pro- 
ducing the  same  results  on  his  teeth  as  the  hard  sea-biscuit  does  on  those  of  the  British 
sailor.  Such,  howeyer,  is  not  generally  the  case,  and  in  no  instance,  indeed,  to  the  same 
extent  in  the  skulls  found  in  the  earlier  British  tumuli.  In  the  Scottish  examples  described 
aboye,  the  teeth  are  mostly  yery  perfect,  and  their  crowns  not  at  all  worn  down.  .  . . 

«  The  inferences  to  be  drawn  from  such  a  comparison  are  of  considerable  yalue  in  the 
indications  they  afford  of  the  domestic  habits  and  social  life  of  a  race,  the  last  surriyor  of 
which  has  mouldered  underneath  his  green  tumulus,  perchance  for  centuries  before  the  era 
of  our  earliest  authentie  chronicles.  As  a  means  of  comparison  this  characteristic  appear- 
ance of  the  teeth,  manifestly  furnishes  one  means  of  discriminating  between  an  early  and  a 
still  earlier,  if  not  primeval  period,  and  though  not  in  itself  conclusive,  it  may  be  found  of 
considerable  value  when  taken  in  connexion  with  the  other  and  still  more  obrious  peculiari- 
ties of  the  crania  of  the  earliest  barrows.  We  perceive  from  it,  at  least,  that  a  very  decided 
change  took  place  in  the  common  food  of  the  country,  from  the  period  when  the  native 
Briton  of  the  primeval  period  pursued  the  chase  with  the  flint  lance  and  arrow,  and  the 
spear  nf  deer's  horn,  to  that  comparatively  recent  period  when  the  Saxon  marauders  began 
to  effect  settlements  and  build  houses  on  the  scenes  where  they  had  ravaged  the  villages  of 
the  older  British  natives.  The  first  class,  we  may  infer,  attempted  little  cultivation  of  the 
soiL  . .  . 

«  Viewing  ArchsBology  as  one  of  the  most  essential  means  for-the  elucidation  of  primitive 
history,  it  has  been  employed  here  chiefly  in  an  attempt  to  trace  out  the  annals  of  our 
country  prior  to  that  comparatively  recent  medieval  period  at  which  the  boldest  of  our  his- 
torians have  heretofore  ventured  to  begin.  The  researches  of  the  ethnologist  carry  us  back 
somewhat  beyond  that  epoch,  and  confirm  many  of  those  conclusions,  especially  in  relation 
to  the  close  affinity  between  the  native  arts  and  Celtic  races  of  Scotland  and  Ireland,  at 
which  we  have  arrived  by  means  of  archaeological  eridence.  .  .  .  But  .we  have  found  from 
many  independent' sources  of  eridence,  that  the  primeval  history  of  Britain  must  be  sought 
for  in  the  annals  of  older  races  than  the  Celts,  and  in  the  remains  of  a  people  of  whom  we 
have  as  yet  no  reason  to  believe  that  any  philological  traces  are  discoverable,  though  they 
probably  do  exist  mingled  with  later  dialects,  and  especially  in  the  topographical  nomen- 
clature, adopted  and  modified,  but  in  all  likelihood  not  entirely  superseded  by  later  colo- 
nists. With  the  earliest  intelligible  indices  of  that  primeval  colonization  of  the  British  Isles 
our  archeeological  records  begin,  mingling  their  dim  historic  annals  with  the  last  giant 
traces  of  elder  worlds ;  and,  as  an  essentially  independent  element  of  historical  research, 
they  terminate'  at  the  point  where  the  isolation  of  Scotland  ceases  by  its  being  embraced 
into  the  unity  of  medieval  Christendom."  * 

*  Wilson:  ArchssoL  and  Prehist  Annals  of  Scotland;  Edinb.  1851 ;  pp.  168-187,  695-^ 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 

IN    CONNECTION    WITH    HUMAN    ORIGINS.  371 

Neither  in  Scotia  nor  in  Scandinavia,  then,  any  more  tljan  in  Gal- 
lia, are  lacking  mtite,  but  incontrovertible  testimonies  to  the  abori- 
ginal diversity  of  mankind,  as  well  as  to  human  antiquity  incalculably 
beyond  all  written  chronicles.  Ere  long,  ^^Crania  Brttannicay  or  De- 
lineations of  the  Skulls  of  the  Aboriginal  Inhabitants  of  the  British 
Islands,  and  of  the  Eaces  immediately  succeeding  them,"  will  vouch 
for  existing  evidences  of  the  same  unanswerable  facts  in  England. 
The  forthcoming  work  of  Doctors  Davis  and  Thurnam  promises  — 

*'Not  merely  to  reproduce  the  most.liTely  and  forcible  traits  of  the  primeval  Celtic 
hunter  or  warrior,  and  his  Roman  oonqi^eror,  suoceedM  by  Saxon  or  Angle  chieftains  and 
settlers,  and  later  still  by  the  Vikings  of  Scandinaria ;  but  also  to  indicate  the  peculiarities 
which  marked  the  different  tribes  and  races  who  haye  peopled  the  diversified  regions  of  the 
British  Islands." 

We  conclude  this  imperfect  sketch  with  remarks,  truthftd  as  they 
are  eloquent,  of  M.  Boucher  de  Perthes,  on  the  subject  of  these  pre- 
Celtic  resuscitations : — 

'*  My  discoveries  may  appear  trifling  to  some,  for  they  comprise  4ittle  save  crumbling 
bones  and  rudely  sculptured  stones.  Here  are  neither  medals  nor  inscriptions,  neither  bas- 
reliefs  nor  statues — no  vases,  elegant  in  form,  and  precious  in  material  —  nothing  but 
bones  and  rudely  polished  flints.  But  to  the  observer  who  values  the  demonstration  of  a 
truth  more  than  the  possession  of  a  jewel,  it  is  not  in  the  finish  of  a  work,  nor  in  its  market- 
price,  that  its  value  consists.  The  specimen  he  considers  most  beautiful  is  that  which 
afibrds  the  greatest  help  in  proving  a  fact  or  realizing  a  prerision ;  and  the  flint  which  a 
coUector  would  throw  aside  with  contempt,  or  the  bone  which  has  not  even  the  value  of  a 
bone,  rendered  precious  by  the  labor  it  has  cost  him,  is  preferred  to  a  Murrhine  vase  or  to 
its  weight  in  gold. 

"  The  arts,  even  the  most  simple,  those  which  seem  bom  with  nature,  have,  like  nature 
herself,  had  their  infancy  and  their  vicissitudes;  and  industry,  properly  so  called  —  that 
is,  the  indispensable  arts — has  always  preceded  the  ornamental.  It  is  the  same  with  men 
as  with  animals ;  and  the  first  nightingale,  before  he  thought  of  singing  or  of  sporting, 
sought  a  branch  for  his  nest  and  a  worm  for  food :  he  was  a  hunter  before  he  became  a 
musician. 

*'  However  great  the  number  of  ages  which  shroud  the  history  of  a  people,  there  is  one 
method  of  interrogating  them,  and  ascertaining  their  standing  and  intelligence.  It  is  by 
their  works.  If  they  have  left  no  specimens  of  art,  it  is  because  they  have  merely  appeared 
and  vanished ;  or,  even  if  they  have  continued  stationary  for  any  time,  they  must  have 
remained  weak  and  powerless.  Experience  proves  that  this  total  absence  of  moniynents 
only  exists  among  a  transplanted  people  —  among  races  who  have  been  cast  upon  an 
abnormal  soil  and  under  an  unfriendly  sky,  where  they  lingered  out  a  miserable  existence, 
always  liable  to  momentary  extinction.  But  among  a  people  who  had  a  country,  and  whom 
davery  and  vice  had  not  entirely  brutalized,  we  may  always  find  some  trace,  or  at  least  some 
tradition  of  art,  evanescent  perhaps,  but  still  sufficient  to  recal  by  a  last  reflection  the  physi- 
ognomy of  the  people,  their  social  position,  and  the  degree  of  civilijzation  they  had  attained 
when  that  art  was  cultivated. 

«  Among  these  specimens  of  primitive  industry,  some  belong  to  the  present,  and  illus- 
trate the  material  life ;  while  others  clearly  refer  to  the  future.  Such  are  the  arms  and 
amulets  which  were  intended  to  accompany  their  owners  into  the  tomb,  or  even  to  follow 
them  beyond  the  grave ;  for,  in  all  ages,  men  have  longed  for  an  existence  after  death.  In 
these  tokens  from  the  tomb — these  relics  of  departed  ages  —  coarse  and  imperfect  as  they 
appear  to  an  artistic  eye,  there  is  nothing  that  we  should  despise  or  reject:  last  witnesses 

Digitized  by 

Google 

372  HTBRIDITY    OP    ANIMALS, 

of  the  infancy  of  man  and  of  his  first  footsteps  upon  eartli,  thej  present  ns  with  the  only 
remains  of  nations  who  reared  no  columns  nor  monuments  to  record  their  existence.  In 
these  poor  relics  lie  all  their  history,  aU  their  religion :  and  ftrom  these  few  mde  hieroglyphics 
must  we  evoke  their  existence  and  the  reyelation  of  their  customs.  If  we  were  engaged 
with  Egyptians,  Ghreeks,  or  Romans,  people  who  haye  fdmished  us  with  ohefs-d'oeuTre 
which  still  serve  as  our  models,  it  would  be  irksome  to  examine  the  ancient  oak  to  find 
whether  it  had  fallen  before  the  tempest  or  the  axe,  or  to  argue  whether  the  angle  of  a 
stone  had  been  smoothed  by  the  hand  of  man  or.  the  action  of  running  water.  But  when 
the  soil  we  explore  has  no  other  signs  of  intelligent  life,  and  the  yery  existence  of  a  people 
is  in  question,  every  vestige  becomes  history.  It  is  easy  to  conceive  that  of  all  the  wwks 
of  man  in  those  ancient  deposits,  only  such  instruments  of  stone  should  remun.  They 
alone  were  able  to  resist  the  action  «f  time  and  decomposition,  and  above  all  of  the  waters 
which  put  the  whole  in  motion.  All  these  flints  bear  marks  of  mutual  concussion  and  incessant 
friction,  which  silex  alone  could  have  resisted.  The  time  when  they  were  deposited  wh^e 
we  now  find  them,  was  no  doubt  that  of  the  formation  of  the  bank  itself:  it  must  be  sepa- 
rated from  our  epoch  by  an  immense  period,  perhaps  by  many  revolutions ;  and  of  all  the 
monuments  known  upon  earth,  these  are  doubtless  the  mott  ancient.** 

w.v. 

M^S/'^«^^W^S^'WV^W«'V^VN^^W\/^^W* 

CHAPTER    XII. 

HYBRIDITY  OF  ANIMALS,  VIEWED  IN  CONNECTION  WITH  THE 
NATURAL  HISTORY  OF  MANKIND. 

[By  J.  C.  N.] 

The  subjects  embraced  in  this  and  the  succeeding  Chapter  apper- 
taining more  to  my  individual  studies  than  the  rest,  the  reader  will 
perceive  that  I  generally  speak  in  the  first  person  ;  at  the  same  time 
that  every  recognition  is  due  to  my  colleague  (G,  R.  G.)  for  material 
aid  in  the  archseological  department  Without  ftirther  preface  let 
me  remark,  that  the  importance  of  Hybridity  begins  to  be  acknow- 
ledged by  all  anthropologists ;  because,  however  imposing  the  array 
of  reasonings,  drawn  from  other  sources,  in  favor  of  the  plurality  of 
origin,  may  seem,  yet,  so  long  as  unlimited  prolificness^  inter  m,  of  two 
races  of  animals,  or  of  mankind,  can  be  received  by  naturalists  as 
evidence  of  specific  affiliation,  or,  in  other  words,  of  common  origin, 
every  other  argument  must  be  abandoned  as  illusory. 

We  are  told  that,  when  two  distinct  species  are  brought  together, 
they  produce,  like  the  ass  and  the  mare,  an  unprolific  progeny;  or, 
at  most,  beget  offipring  which  are  prolific  for  a  few  generations  and 
then  run  out.  It  is  further  alleged,  that  each  of  our  own  domestic 
animals  (such  as  horses,  dogs,  cattle,  sheep,  goats,  hogs,  poultiy,  &c.) 

Digitized  by 

Google 

VIEWED    IN   CONNECTION    WITH    MANKIND.  373 

is  derived  from  a  single  Mesopotamian  pair ;  and  that  the  varieties 
of' these,  springing  np  spontaneously  in  diverse  climates  differ  as 
widely  as  do  the  races  of  men.  Hence  an  argument  is  deduced  in 
&vor  of  the  common  origin  of  mankind.  The  grand  point  at  issue 
is  here  feirly  presented :  but  reasons  exist  for  dissenting  from  the 
above  foregone  conclusions. 

In  1842  I  published  a  short  essay  on  Hybridity^  the  object  of  which 
was,  to  phow  that  the  White  Man  and  the  Negro  were  distinct  "  spe- 
cies ; "  illustrating  my  position  by  numerous  facts  from  the  Natural 
History  of  Man  and  that  of  the  lower  animals.  The  question,  at  that 
time,  had  not  attracted  the  attention  of  Dr.  Morton.  Many  of  my 
fiwjts  and  arguments  were  new,  even  to  him ;  and  drew  from  the  great 
anatomist  a  private  letter,  leading  to  the  commencement  of  a  friendly 
correspondence,  to  me,  at  least,  most  agreeable  and  instructive,  and 
which  endured  to  the  close  of  his  useful  career. 

In  the  essay  alluded  to,  and  several  which  followed  it  at  short  inter- 
vals, I  maintained  these  propositions :  — 

'  1.  That  mukatoet  are  the  shortest-liTed  of  any  class  of  the  human  race. 
2.  That  mulattos  are  intermediate  in  intelligence  between  the  blacks  and  the  whites. 
8.  That  thej  are  less  capable  of  undergoing  fatigue  and  hardship  than  either  the  blacks 
or  whites. 

4.  That  the  mulatto-women  are  peculiarly  delicate,  and  subject  to  a  Tariety  of  chronic 
diseases.  That  they  are  bad  breeders,  bad  nurses,  liable  to  abortions,  and  that  their  chil- 
dren generally  die  young. 

5.  That,  when  mulattoei  intermany,  they  are  less  prolific  than  when  crossed  on  the 
parent  stocks. 

6.  That,  when  a  yegro  man  married  a  white  woman,  the  offspring  partook  more  largely 
of  the  Negro  type  than  when  the  reyerse  connection  had  effect 

7.  That  mulattoei,  like  Negroes,  although  unacclimated,  enjoy  extraordinary  exemption 
firom  yelloW'feTer  when  brought  to  Charleston,  Sayannah,  Mobile,  or  New  Orleans. 

Almost  fifty  years  of  residence  among  the  white  and  hlack  races, 
spread  in  nearly  equal  proportions  through  South  Carolina  and  Ala- 
bama, and  twenty-five  years'  incessant  professional  intercourse  with 
both,  have  satisfied  me  of  the  absolute  truth  of  the  preceding  deduc- 
tions. My  observations,  however,  during  the  last  few  years,  in  Mobile 
and  at  New  Orleans,  where  the  population  differs  essentially  from 
that  of  the  Northern  Atlantic  States,  have  induced  some  modification 
of  my  former  opinions ;  although  still  holding  to  their  accuracy  so 
far  as  they  apply  to  the  intermixture  of  the  strictly  tt^hite  race  (i.  e.  the 
Anglo-Saxon,  or  Teuton,)  with  the  true  Negro.  I  stated  in  an  article 
printed  in  "  De  Bow's  Commercial  Review,"  that  I  had  latterly  seen 
reason  to  credit  the  existence  of  certain  ^^ affinities  and  repulsions" 
among  various  races  of  men,  which  caused  their  blood  to  mingle 
more  or  less  perfectly ;  and  that,  in  Mobile,  New  Orleans  and  Pensa- 
cola,  I  had  witnessed  many  examples  of  great  longevity  among 

Digitized  by 

Google 

374  HTBBIDITT    OF    ANIMALS, 

mulattoes  ;  and  sundry  instances  where  their  intermarriages  (contrary 
to  my  antecedent  experiences  in  South  Carolina)  were  attended  with. 
manifest  prolificacy.  Seeking  for  the  reason  of  this  positive,  and,  at 
first  thought,  unaccountable  difference  between  mulattoes  of  the  At- 
lantic and  those  of  the  Gulf  States,  observation  led  me  to  a  rationale; 
viz.,  that  it  arose  from  the  diversity  of  ttfpe  in  the  "  Caucasian"  races 
of  the  two  sections.  In  the  Atlantic  States  the  population  is  Teu- 
tonic and  Celtic :  whereas,  in  our  Gulf  cities,  there  exists  a  prepon- 
derance of  the  blood  of  French,  Italian,  Spanish,  Portuguese,  and 
other  dari-skinned  races.  The  reason  is  simple  to  the  historiian. 
Our  States  along  the  Gulf  of  Mexifco  were  chiefly  colonized  by  emi- 
grants from  Southern  Europe.  Such  European  colonists  belonged  to 
types  genealogically  distinct  from  those  white-skinned  "Pilgrim 
Fathers"  who  landed  north  of  Florida.  Thus  Spain,  when  her  tra- 
ditions begin,  was  populated  principally  by  Iberians.  France  re- 
ceived a  considerable  inftision  of  the  same  blood,  now  almost  pure  in 
her  Basque  provinces.  Italy's  origins  are  questions  in  dispute ;  but 
the  Italians  are  a  dark-skinned  race.  Such  races,  blended  in  America 
with  the  imported  Negro,  generally  give  birth  to  a  hardier,  and, 
therefore,  more  prolific  stock  than  white  races,  such  as  Anglo-Saxons, 
produce  by  intercourse  with  Negresses.  Herein,  it  occurred  to  me, 
might  be  found  a  key  to  solve  the  enigma.  To  comprehend  the 
present,, we  must  understand  the  past;  because,  in  ethnology,  there 
is  no  truer  saying  than,  "  Ocelum,  non  animam,  mutant  qui  trans  mare 
currunt.'*  This  sketch  indicates  my  conceptions.  I  proceed  to  their 
development. 

Bodichon,  in  his  curious  work  on  Algeria,  maintains  that  this  Ibe- 
rian, or  Basque  population,  although,  of  course,  not  Negro,  is  really 
an  African,  and  probably  a  Berber^  family,  which  migrated  across  the 
Straits  of  Gibraltar  some  2000  years  before  the  Christian  era ;  and 
we  might,  therefore,  regard  them  as  what  Dr.  Morton  calls  a  proxi- 
mate race. 

The  Basques  are  a  dark-skinned,  black-eyed,  black-haired  people, 
such  as  are  often  encountered  in  Southern  Europe ;  and  M.  Bodichon, 
himself  a  Frenchman,  and  attached  as  Surgeon  to  the  French  army 
during  fifteen  years  in  Algeria,  holds,  that  not  only  is  the  physical 
resemblance  between  the  Berbers  and  Basques  most  striking,  but  that 
they  .assimilate  in  moral  traits  quite  as  much ;  moreover,  that  their 
intonations  of  voice  are  so  similar  that  one's  ear  cannot  appreciate 
any  difference.  Singularly  enough,  too,  the  Basque  tongue,  while 
radically  distinct  from  all  European  and  Asiatic  languages,  is  said  to 
present  certain  affinities  with  the  Berber  dialects.  The  latter  opinion, 
however,  requires  confirmation. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

VIEWED    IN    CONNECTION    WITH    MANKIND.  375 

Subsequently  to  my  incidental  notices,  Dr.  Morton  took  up  the 
entire  question  of  hybridity,  with  his  accustomed  zeal ;  publishing 
his  first  two  articles  on  it  in  Silliman' b  Journal^  1847 ;  after  which  he 
continued  a  series  of  papers,  in  the  Charleston  Medical  Journal,  down 
to  the  time  of  his  death  in  1851.  I  attach  little  importance  to  my 
own  labors  on  this  subject,  beyond  that  of  attracting  Dr.  Morton  to 
its  investigation.  None  more  than  mjself  can  honor  him  for  the 
glorious  triumph  which  his  publications  on  this  theme  achieved  for 
science.  My  object,  then,»being  solely  to  place  the  question  before 
the  public  as  it  actually  stands,  I  shall  use  not  only  Dr.  Morton's 
ideas,  but  his  language,  freely,  throughout  this  chapter ;  morely  ex- 
tending to  the  races  of  men  those  principles  of  hybridity  which  Dr. 
Morton  chiefly  confined  to  known  intermixture  among  the  lower 
animals. 

Hybridity,  heretofore,  has  generally  been  treated  as  if  it  were  a 
unit ;  whereas  its  facts  are  as  susceptible  of  classiflcation  as  any  other 
series  of  physiological  phenomena.  For  the  terms  remote,  allied,  and 
proximate  species,  there  will  be  frequent  call ;  and,  in  consequence, 
the  reader  is  requested  to  look  back  {supra,  p.  81)  in  this  volume,  to 
tmderstand  the  meanings  which,  in  common  with  Morton,  I  attach 
to  them.  Finding  that  the  definitions  customarily  given  of  "  species  " 
^ply  as  readily  to  mere  varieties  as  to  acknowledged  species,  the 
Doctor  proposed  the  subjoined  emendations :  — 

'<  Ab  the  result  of  much  obserratioii  and  reflection,  I  now  submit  a  definition,  which  I 
hope  will  obyiate  at  least  some  of  the  objections  to  which  I  haTO  alluded :  Species — a 
jmmordial  organic  form.  It  inll  be  jostly  remarked  that  a  difficulty  presents  itself,  at  the 
outset,  in  determining  what  forms  are  primordial ;  but  independently  of  Tarious  other  sources 
of  OTidenoe,  we  may  be  greatly  assisted  in  the  inquiry  by  those  iponumental  records,  both 
of  Egypt  and  Assyria,  of  which  we  are  now  happily  possessed  of  the  proximate  dates.  My 
▼lew  may  be  briefly  explained  by  saying,  that  if  certain  existing  organic  types  can  be  traced 
back  into  the  *  night  of  time'  as  dissimilar  as  we  now  see  them,  is  it  not  more  reasonable 
to  regard  them  as  aboriginal,  than  to  suppose  them  the  mere  accidental  derivations  of  an 
Isolated  patriarchal  stem,  of  which  we  know  nothing  ?  Hence,  for  example,  I  believe  the 
dog-iamily  not  to  have  originated  from  one  primitive  form,  but  in  many  forms.  Again, 
what  I  call  a  species  may  be  regarded  by  some  naturalists  as  t^ primitive  variety;  but,  as 
the  difference  is  only  in  name  and  no  way  influences  the  xoologioal  question,  it  is  unneces- 
sary to  notice  it  ftirther."  388 

Morton  himself  has  suggested  the  objection  which  really  holds 
against  his  definition ;  and,  for  myself,  I  should  prefer  the  following : 
Species  —  a  type,  or  organic  form,  that  is  permanent;  or  which  has 
remained  unchanged  under  opposite  climatic  influences  for  ages.  The 
Arab,  the  Egyptian,  and  the  Negro;  the  greyhound,  the  turnspit, 
and  the  common  wild  dog — all  of  which  are  represented  on  monu- 
ments of  Egypt  4000  years  old,  precisely  as  they  now  exist  in  human 
and  canine  nature — may  be  cited  as  examples. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

376  HTBBIDITT   OP   AKIMALS, 

It  is  believed  that  the  series  of  fiacts  herein  embodied  will  establish 
the  natural  existence  of  the  following  degrees  of  hybridity,  viz. :  — 

Ist  That  in  which  hybrids  nerer  reprodnee;  in  other  words,  where  the  mixed  progeay 

begins  and  ends  with  the  first  erees. 
2d.  That  in  which  the  hybrids  are  incapable  of  reprodnoiBg  fmiw  m,  bat  multiply  by  muoB 

with  the  parent  stock. 
8d.  That  in  which  animals  of  nnqnestionably  £stinct  spedes  produce  a  progeny  whidi  ic 

prolific  inter  ae. 
4th.  That  which  takes  plaoe  between  dosely  proximate  species — among  mankind,  for 

example,  and  among  those  domestio  animals  most  essential  to  human  wants  and 

happiness :  here  the  prolificacy  is  onKmited. 

There  is,  moreover,  what  may  be  called  a  mixed  farm  of  hybridily, 

that  certainly  has  exerted  very  great  influence  in  modifying  some 

domestic  animals ;  and  which  cannot  be  better  expressed  than  in  the 

language  of  Hamilton  Smith :  — 

*'  The  adTaaoes  towards  hybrid  eases  are  always  made  by  tiie  domestic  spedes  to  the 
wild ;  and  when  thns  obtained,  if  kept  by  itself,  and  the  cross-breed  gradually  becomes 
sterile,  it  does  not  prerent  repeated  intermixtore  of  one  or  the  other ;  and  therefore  the 
admisdon  of  a  great  proportion  of  alien  blood,  which  may  again  be  crossed  npon  by  other 
hybrids  of  another  sonree,  whether  it  be  a  wdf,  pariah,  Jackal,  or  dingo."  sbb 

Mankind,  zoologically,  must  be  governed  by  the  same  laws  which 
regulate  animals  generally ;  and  if  the  above  propositions  apply  to 
other  animals,  no  reason  can  be  adduced  in  science  why  the  races  of 
men  should  be  made  an  exception.  The  mere  prolificacy,  whether 
of  human  or  of  animal  races,  cannot  therefore  be  received  per  se  as 
proof  of  common  origin  in  respect  to  either. 

After  the  lapse  of  so  many  centuries,  or,  to  repeat  Prichard's  lan- 
guage, chiliads  of  yeai^,  since  the  last  Creation,  it  would  be  strange 
indeed  did  not  many  difficulties  surround  the  question  of  hybridity: 
but  one  thing  seems  certain,  viz.,  that  as  regards  unity  or  plurality 
of  ori^,  mankind,  together  with  all  our  domestic  animals,  stand  on 
precisely  the  same  footing.  The  origin  of  our  horses,  dogs,  cattle, 
sheep,  goats,  ho^,  &c.,  no  less  than  that  of  humanity,  is  wholly  un- 
known ;  nor  can  science  yet  determine  from  how  many  primal  crea- 
tive centres,  or  from  how  many  pairs,  each  may  have  originated.  Our 
Chapter  L,  on  the  Geographical  Distribution  of  Anirnah,  has  detailed 
(what  is  now  conceded  by  naturalists  whose  authority  is  decisive), 
that,  so  far  from  a  supposititious  common  centre  of  origin  for  all 
organized  beings  on  our  globe,  there  are  in  reality  many  specific 
centres  or  zoolo^cal  provinces,  in  which  the  fauna  and  flora  of  each 
are  exclusively  peculiar.**  The  present  volume  establishes,  through 
evidences  varied  as  they  are  novel,  that  history  finds  the  difierent 
races  of  mankind  everywhere  under  circumstances  which  lead  irre- 
sistibly to  the  conclusion,  that  humanity  obeys  the  same  laws  which 
preside  over  the  terrestrial  distribution  of  other  organized  beings. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

VIEWED    IN    CONNECTION    WITH    MANKIND.  377 

*'  A  principal  cause  [well  obserres  Jaoqninot]  of  Tarieties  among  domestic  animals  is,  the 
blending  of  dissimilar  species  among  themselres ;  and  it  is  this  powerfU  agency  which  has 
eontribnted  in  the  largest  degree  to  obscure  and  entangle  the  question  of  the  yarieties  of 
men  and  of  domestic  animals.*' 

Passing  over,  as  non-essential  to  the  point  immediately  before  us, 
the  numerous  examples  illustrative  of  hybridity,  in  Dr.  Morton's  ^r«^ 
and  second  degrees,  we  shall  throw  together  a  few  of  the  more  promi- 
nent instances  of  his  third  and  fourthj  in  their  direct  bearings  upon 
the  plurality  of  the  human  species^  in  order  to  exemplify  the  question 
at  ifisue. 

Equine  Htbrids. 

The  genus  equw  (horse)  is  divided  by  Cnvier  into  fiye  spedes ;  tIx.  :  the  horse  {tqnu^ 
>  eahaUut) ;  the  dziggpietai  {eq.  hemomut) ;  the  ass  {eq.  asmwt) ;  the  zebra  {eq,  zebra) ; 
the  couagga  (eq,  quaeeha) ;  the  onagga,  or  dau-w  {eq.  monUxnut), 

So  far  as  experiments  prove,  these  all  breed  Aredj  mUr  m;  bat  the  degrees  of  fer- 
tility among  their  Tarions  hybrid  offisprikig,  are  matters  yet  to  be  determined. 

Oar  common  moles,  or  progeny  of  the  ast  and  the  mare,  are  the  best  known  hy- 
brids, and  tb^  are  never  prolii&c  with  each  other ;  bat  there  are  a  few  instances  recorded 
where  males  have  produced  offspring  when  crossed  on  the  parent  stocks:  sach  acci- 
dents being,  as  even  Herodotas  observed,^^  more  common  in  hot  dimates  than  in  cold. 

The  Hinny — 

Offspring  of  the  horse  and  she-ass — is  rarely  seen  in  the  United  States  (bat,  we  are 
told,  is  more  frequent  in  Egypt,  and  in  the  Levant ;  where  some  hinnies  are  said  to 
be  even  handsome) :  being  a  small,  refractory,  and  (for  draught)  a  comparatiyely  useless 
animal,  there  is  no  practical  object  in  our  breeding  them.  I  have  seen  one  example  in 
Mobile,  very  like  a  dwarfed,  mean  horse.  The  horse's  likeness  here  greatly  predomi- 
nated: the  head  and  ears  w^re  small,  and  precisely  like  its  father's ;  the  legs  and  feet 
were  slender  and  small,  like  those  of  the  mother ;  and  the  tiul,  as  in  the  ass,  was  lank, 
with  little  hair.  In  the  common  mule,  the  head,  on  the  contrary,  resembles  the  ass. 
Jod^g  by  this  example  alone,  it  would  seem  as  if  the  type  of  the  sire  predominated 
in  hybrids.  Such  probable  law,  according  to  my  observations,  applies  in  some  degree 
to  the  human  hybrid.  Ex.  gr.,  when  the  pure  white  man  is  crossed  on  the  Negress, 
the  head  of  their  mulatto  child  ordinarily  resembles  more  the  father  than  the  mother ; 
but  where  a  Negro  man  has  been  coupled  with  a  white  woman,  in  their  offspring  the 
color,  the  features,  and  the  hair  of  the  Negro  father  greatly  preponderate.  We  cannot 
state,  from  observation,  what  may  be  the  grade  of  intellect  in  the  latter  hybrid ;  but 
in  a  common  mulatto  the  degree  of  intelligence  is  absolutely  higher  than  in  the  full- 
blooded  Negroes.  About  this  deduction  no  dispute  exists  among  medical  practitioners 
in  our  Southern  States,  where  means  of  verification  are  peculiarly  abundant 

Not  only  do  the  female  ass  and  the  male  onagga  breed  together,  but  a  male  offspring 
of  this  cross,  with  a  mare,  produces  an  animal  more  docile  than  dther  parent,  and 
combining  the  best  physical  qualities,  such  as  strength,  speed,  &c. ;  whence  the  an- 
eiente  preferred  the  onagga  to  the  ass  for  the  production  of  mules.3M  This  opinion, 
Mr.  Gtiddon  says,  is  still  prevalent  in  Egypt;  and  is  acted  upon  more  particularly  in 
Arabia,  Persia,  &c.,  where  the  gouTy  or  wild  ass,  still  roams  the  desert.  Cuvier  had 
seen  the  cross  between  the  ass  and  the  zebra,  as  well  as  between  the  female  zebra  and 
the  horse. 

An  important  point  should  be  borne  in  mind,  viz. :  that  the  ass  is  not  the  prcximaU^ 
or  nearest  species,  of  the  genus  equui,  compared  with  the  horse ;  but  that  place  Curier 
assigns  to  the  eq.  kemonUu.    BeH  and  Gray  are  even  disposed  to  place  the  ass  in  a  dis- 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC 

878  HTBBIDITY    OP    ANIMALS, 

tinct  genus.  If,  therefore,  it  were  desired  to  experimentalixe  furly,  with  the  Tiew  ci 
producing  a  prolific  hybrid,  the  true,  horse  should  be  coupled  with  the  eg.  henumiu$  in  « 
proper  climate,  and  under  favorable  conditions.  This  experiment,  as  far  as  we  know, 
not  having  been  properly  tried,  analogy  warrants  the  suspension  of  a  negative. 

From  the  unlimited  productiveness  among  the  different  races  of  horses,  it  has  been 
boldly  inferred  that  all  horses  have  sprung  from  a  solitary  pair,  possessing  a  common 
Mesopotamian  origin,  and  therefore  constituting  a  single  species ;  but  an  assumptioa 
^  without-proof,  while  valid  reasons  support  the  contrary,  may  be  summarily  dismissed. 
The  elaborate  and  skilful  researches  of  Hamilton  Smith  have  thrown  strong  doubts 
over  this  superannuated  idea  of  equine  unity.  He  separates  horses  into  five  primitive 
stocks ;  which  appear  to  constitute  '*  distinct  though  oscillatiDg  species,  or  at  least 
races,  separated  at  so  remote  a  period,  that  they  claim  to  havo  been  divided  from  the 
earliest  times  of  our  present  zoology."  3^  So  true  is  this,  that  already  two  distinct 
species,  if  not  more,  of  fosHl  horses  exist  in  geological  formations  of  this  Continent, 
independently  of  the  others  familiar  in  European  palsBontology.^n 
About  horses,  Morton's  later  MSS.  enable  us  to  quote  the  following  textually  :-t 
**  After  an  elaborate  and  most  instructive  inquiry  into  the  natural  history  of  the 
horse,  CoL  Hamilton  Smith  has  arrived  at  the  following  conclusions,  Irhioh  we  prefisr 
to  give  in  his  own  words :  <  That  there  was  a  period  when  equidsB  of  distiuot  forms,  or 
closely-approximating  species,  in  races  widely  different,  wandered  in  a  wild  state  in 
separate  regions,  the  residue  of  an  anterior  animal  distribution,  perhaps  upon  the  great 
mountain  line  of  Central  Asia,  where  plateaux  or  table-lands,  exceeding  Armenian 
Ararat  in  elevation,  are  still  occupied  by  wild  horses ;  that  of  these  /Some  raeee  still 
extant  have  been  entirely  subdued ;  such  for  example  as  the  Tarpans,  tiie  Eirguise  and 
Pamere  woolly  white  race,  and  the  wild  horses  of  Poland  and  Prussia ;  that  from  their 
similarity,  or  antecedent  unity,  they  were  constituted  so  as  to  be  fusible  into  a  common, 
single,  specific,  but  very  variable  stock,  for  the  phrposes  of  man,  under  whose  fostering 
care  a  more  perfect  animal  was  bred  from  their  mixture,  than  any  of  the  preceding, 
singly  taken.  These  inferences  appear  to  be  supported  by  the  ductility  of  all  the 
secondary  characters  of  wild  and  domestic  horses,  which,  if  they  are  not  admitted  to 
constitute  in  some  cases  specific  differences,  where  «r6  we  to  find  those  that  are  suffi- 
cient to  distinguish  a  wild  from  a  domestic  species  ?  And  with  regard  to  different^ 
though  oscillating  species,  why  should  the  conclusions  be  unsatisfactory  in  horses, 
when  in  goats,  ^heep,  wolves,  dogs,  and  other  species,  we  are  forced  to  accede  to 
them?'"3w 

Some  of  these  races  still  flourish  in  a  wild  state  on  the  table-lands  of  Central  Asia; 
at  the  same  time  that  all  have  united  to  form,  in  domestication,  very  mixed  and  vari- 
able types. 

A  singular  fact,  which  I  have  never  seen  noticed,  is  worthy  of  mention.  The 
thorough-bred  race-horse  is  rarely,  if  ever,  beheld  of  a  cream,  or  a  dun  color,  or  pie- 
bald. My  attention,  directed  to  this  point  for  more  than  twenty  years,  as  yet  meets 
with  no  example ;  nor,  through  inquiry  among  turf-men,  have  I  been  able  to  hear  of  a 
single  case  where  the  pedigree  was  well  authenticated.  Horses  of  the  above  colors  are 
exceedingly  common  in  the  United  States ;  far  more  so,  as  I  know  Arom  personal  ob- 
servation, than  in  England  or  France ;  and  the  only  solution  that  occurs  to  me  is,  the 
^  supposition  that  the  early  Spanish  emigrants  may  have  brought  over  to  America  some 
breed  of  horses,  distinct  from  the  Arabian  stock  of  England,  or  from  any  of  the  races 
of  France  and  Belgium. 

**  When  C»sar  invaded  Britain  he  found  there  a  race  of  indigenous  ponies,  with 
bushy  manes  and  tails,  and  of  fTdun  or  sooty  color,  with  the  black  streak  on  the  spine 
which  marks  the  wild  races  of  northern  Europe.  This  variety  was  known  in  a  wild 
state  for  centuries  after,  and  in  every  part  of  the  island.  This  horse  was  subsequently 
amalgamated  with  the  Boman  and  Saxon  breeds,  whence  a  great  diversity  of  eit^  and 

Digitized  by 

Google 

VIEWED    IN    CONNECTION    WITH    MANKIND.  379 

color  in  our  own  times. ^oo   These  nati?e  British  horses  were  the  ancestors  of  the  ponies 
now  called  Shetland,  Scottish,  Galloway,  and  by  Tarious  other  names." ^o^ 

Naturalists  remark  that  those  animals,  such  as  the  ass,  the  camel,  the  dromedary, 
llama,  &c.,  upon  which  the  most  sensible  reasons  are  based  for  alleging  a  community 
of  speties,  do  pot  run  into  those  endless  and  extreme  Tarieties  obAenrable  in  dogs, 
horses,  cattle,  toeep,  goats,  or  hogs. 

BoviNB  Hybrids. 

The  ox  tribe  occupy,  among  naturalists,  a  position  identical  with  that  of  the  horse ; 
many  of  our  best  authorities  contending  for  plurality  of  species.  The  origin  of  our 
Taried  domestic  races  is  wholly  unknown,  and  the  domestication  of  catth  antedates  the 
earliest  Egyptian  monuments,  together  with  the  writier  of  Oenetit  [L  24,  25,  26,]  him- 
self. The  bison  or  American  buffalo  and  our  common  cattle  produce  hybrid  offspring 
which  is  unprolific  inter  te;  but  these  hybrids  reproduce  without  limit  when  coupled 
with  the  parent  stocks ;  and  this  again  fiunishes  another  undeniable  deffree  in  the  his- 
tory of  hybridity. 

Caprinb  and  Ovine  Hybrids. 

The  weight  of  authority,  as  yl<^riously  proTen  by  Dr.  Morton,  decidedly  faTors 
plurality  of  species  for  our  domestic  goats  and  sheep.  I  shall  not  tax  our  readers  with 
the  details  of  the  discussion,  which  they  can  find  in  the  CharUaUm  Med.  Journal  ^^ 
(between  his  dispassionate  science  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  captious  garrulity  displayed 
by  dogmatism  on  the  other) :  but  one  of  the  most  note-worthy  examples  of  a  prolific 
hybrid  anywhere  to  be  found  in  the  range  of  natural  history,  must  not  be  passed  orer; 
Tiz. :  the  ofbpring  of  ffoaU  and  sheqf  when  coupled  together.  The  goat  and  the  sheep 
being,  not  merely  distinct  species,  but  distinct  genera,  the  example  therefore  becomes 
the  more  precious,  whilst  its  authenticity  is  irrefragable :  sustaining,  furthermore,  the 
authority  of  Buffon  and  CuTier.for  the  fertility  of  such  hybrids,  which  are  not  only 
fertile  with  the  parent  stocks,  but  inter  h,*^ 

Another  instance  of  hybridily,  not  less  curious,  and  perfectly 
attested,  is  that  of  the  deer  and  ramj  quoted  by  Morton  from  Carl  K 
Hbllenius,  published  in  the  Memoirs  of  the  Royal  Swedish  Academy 
of  Stockholm.  After  going  through  his  experiments  in  detail,  Hel- 
lenius  concludes  with  the  following  summary :  — 

*<  I  haye  thus,  from  this  pair  (female  deer  —  eervtu  eapriohu,  and  the  male  sheep  —  otrii 
ttries)y  obtained  seven  offtpringe:  fix., 

*<  Four  ftrom  the  ram  and  deer  —  two  of  each  sex. 

**  TxDo  fh>m  the  deer's  first  hybrid  male  offspring,  yIz.,  by  crossing  this  latter  animal  with 
the  Finland  ewe ;  and  by  crossing  this  same  male  with  the  female  offspring  of  the  deer 
and  ram.  « 

**  One,  a  ewe,  by  pairing  the  Finland  ewe  with  one  of  her  own  progeny,  firom  the  first 
hybrid  male  deriyed  from  the  deer  and  ram." 

Hellenius  furthermore  gives  a  copious  narrative  of  the  form,  fleece, 
and  mixed  habits  of  these  animals,  which  were  alive,  healthy,  and 
vigorous,  when  the  account  was  published,  and  may  be  so  still. 

It  is  clear,  from  this  unmistakeable  testimony  of  Hellenius,  that  a 
mixed  race  of  deer  and  sheep  might  be  readily  produced  and  perpetu- 
ated by  bringing  together  many  pairs;  precisely  as  is  done  daily  with 
the  goats  and  sheep  of  Chili  alluded  to  by  the  well-known  naturalist 
and  academician,  M.  Chbvrbul.    Here  we  obtain  a  prolific  hybrid 

Digitized  by 

Google 

360  HYBRIDITT   OF    ANIMALS, 

again,  from  distinct  ^«nera  ;  and,  what  is  singular,  the  female  progeny 
resembles  the  mother,  and  the  male  the  father.  Another  fistct  to  show 
the  absurdity  of  querulous  arguments  drawn  by  the  misinformed  from 
"  analogy-" 

The  old  and  standard  authority  of  Molina,  in  his  Natural  History 
of  Chili,  sustains  the  recent  assertion  of  Chevreul,*^  in  the  JoumcU 
des  SavanSy  as  to  the  fact  that  the  inhabitants  of  Chili,  for  a  long  time 
have  been  in  the  habit  of  crossing  goats  and  sheep  expressly  with  the 
view  of  improving  their  fleece  in  a  hybrid  progeny,  whose  prolificacy 
knows  no  limits. 
Camellinb  Hybrids. 

Jiinnttns,  Rseher,  Bantani,  H.  Smitli,  LeMon,  Dtimeril,  Dtmnaattst,  Desmoelint, 
Qaatrefages,  Bory,  Fleming,  Cuvier,  and  all  well-read  naturalists  of  the  present  gene- 
ration, regard  the  camel  and  dromedary  as  distinct  species,  and  admit  thdr  prolificacy 
inter  ae.  Baffon,  in  whose  day  Oriental  matters  were  little  known,  denied  that  they 
are  distinct  species,  simply  on  the  ground  that  they  are  prolific.  The  Arabian  camel 
and  dromedary,  no  less  than  the  camdtu  haetfianut^  are  figured  on  the  monuments  of 
Ninereh,  at  least  2500  years  ago,  precisely  as  we  see  them  now.  Onr  Fig.  15  («i^ff, 
p.  126)  eihibits  the  single-humpe^  species ;  and  the  rest  are  easily  Tcrified  in  the  folio 
plated  of  Botta  and  Flandin,  and  Layard. 

The  following  is  extracted  from  one  of  many  communications 
obligingly  made  to  the  authors  by  their  honored  fii^nd  Col.  W.  W. 
S.  Bliss,  U.  S.  A. ;  in  whose  person  knowledge  the  most  diversified 
and  accomplishments  of  the  highest  order  were  combined  with  that 
military  science  and  cool  braveiy  which  won  universal  admiration  on 
the  blood-stained  field  of  Buena  Vista.  Alas !  his  eyes  were  closed 
•by  the  writer's  hands  on  the  5th  of  August,  1853. 

«  ETcrsmann,  who  is  known  as  an  inyestigator  of  Natural  History  in  Bochara,  remarks 
that  ihree  different  epecUt  ofeamd  are  found  there,  all  of  which  copulate  together  and  bring 
forth  prolific  young. 

**  1.  An  is  the  iwO'huny>$d  baeirian  (eamelw  baeiriantit),  with  long  wool. 

<*  2.  Nab  is  the  one-humped  camel,  which  Eyersmann  calls  camelut  dromedariue,  but  which  it 
cameku  vulgcanUf  the  common  Arabian  camel ;  for  the  dromedary  is  only  a  particular  breed, 
not  a  particular  species. 

<<  8.  LvK  is  the  name  given  to  a  camel  with  one  hump,  larger  than  the  aboTe,  and  having 
quite  crisp,  short,  dark-brown  wooL  ^ 

<*  The  copulation  of  camels,  says  the  aboTO-named  naturalist  and  trayeller  (ETersmann), 
takes  place  in  Bucharei  in  March  and  April,  and  between  camels  and  bactoians,  as  well  as 
the  third  race:  its  products  are  again  prolific,  self-propagating,  foals.  We  might  from 
this,  as  Buffon  and  Zimmermann  have  already  done,  infer  the  unity  of  genus  and  mere 
Tarieties  of  species ;  but  iqsart  from  this,  the  number  of  humps  at  least  seems  to  be  no 
essential  indication  of  species ;  for,  says  ETersmann,  it  cannot  be  determined  beforehand 
whether  the  progeny  of  such  crossing  of  races  will  baye  one  or  two  humps :  they  are  always 
bastards,  and  not  of  a  pure  species."  ^os 

SuBiNB  Hybrids. 

We  dismiss  this  somewhat  obscure  theme  by  merely  stating  that,  according  to  the 
best  naturalists,  sustained  by  Dr.  Morton's  critical  essays,  the  weight  of  authority  in 
faYor  of  plurality  of  species  predominates  here  also.  So  it  does  again,  in  respect  to 
Feline  Hyhride, 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC 

VIEWED    IN    CONNECTION    WITH    MANKIND.  381 

Canine  Hybrids. 

No  question,  perhaps,  in  natural  history  has  caused  more  contro- 
versy than  that  of  the  origin  of  domestic  dogs.    Our  highest  authori- 
ties have  expressed  most  opposite  opinions,  and  many  are  the  im- 
portant points  yet  at  issue.    Nevertheless,  the  last  three  years  have 
accomplished  much  towards  settling  sundry  pugnacious  dilettanti^  if 
not  all  scientific  disputes.    Some  writers  have  derived  all  our  dogs 
firocm.  the  wolf :  thus  assigning  to  ]!^oah*8  unaccountable  preelections 
in  behalf  of  a  tame  lupine  pair  ("species"  unrecorded)  the  present 
existence  of  hyenas,  jackals,  foxes — ^laughing,  or  round-backed ;  big, 
or  little ;  white,  black,  red,  gray,  or  blue  —  as  well  as  eveiy  kind  and 
size  of  dog^  from  a  Muscovite  "muffdog**  to  the  colossal  St.  Ber- 
nard; now  eaten  by  Chinamen  and  Sandwich  Islanders;  driven  by 
Esquimaux;  kicked  by  Muslim  orthodoxy ;  whipped  in  English  hunts; 
fondled  by  Parisian  dames ;  abhorred  by  thieves  and  vagrants,  if  loved 
by  shepherds,  sportsmen,  wagoners,  and  hostlers,  besides  all  other 
lionest  men  with  their  prattling  children,  universally  since  the  Flood. 
Others  assert  that  dogs  are  animals  absolutely  not  descended  from 
the  wolf,  and  also  that  they  comprise  many  distinct  species,  created 
in  many  different  zoological  regions;  whilst  others,  again,  believe 
that  all  living  dogs  proceed  from  intermixtures  of  wolf,  fox,  jackal, 
and  hyena — in  short,  from  any  eanideej  except  from  canbs. 

As  facts  now  stand,  the  opinion  of  Dr.  Morton  may  probably  be 
deemed  the  most  correct.  His  convictions  are,  that  the  origin  of 
domestic  dogs  is  at  least  threefold :  viz.  — 

Ist  From  seTeitd  species  of  lapine  and  vulpine  animals. 

2d.  From  yarions  species  of  wild  dogs. 

8d.  From  the  blending  of  these  together,  with  perhaps  occasional  admixture  ofj 
jackal,  under  the  inflnence  of  domestication. 

A  subject  so  replete  with  scientific  interest  in  its  general  connections  with  other 
departments  of  natural  history,  and  ^peciallj  on  account  of  its  bearings  on  the  physical 
history  of  man,  renders  it  imperative  that  facts  should  here  be  presented  somewhat  in 
detail ;  and  I  shall  again  interweave  without  reserve  the  language  of  Dr.  Morton. 

Martin,  in  his  Hutory  of  the  Dog,  justly  remarked  that  *<  the  name  wolf  is  a  vague 
one,  because  there  are  various  speoies  of  wolves  in  Europe,  Asia,  and  America ;  and 
further,  if  each  of  these  species  has  given  rise  to  a  breed  of  dogs  in  the  different  coun- 
tries where  they  are  found,  then,  as  all  domesUc  dogs  promiscuously  breed  together, 
the  advocate  of  the  non-admixture  of  species  is  plunged  into  a  dilemma.*'  ^oe 

M.  de  Blainville,  speaking  of  the  experiments  of  Buffon  on  dogs  and  wolves,  adopts 
the  idea  of  distinct  species  for  these  animals ;  thereby  leaving  the  inference  that  all 
dogs  are  not  descendants  from  one  primitive  stock.  The  great  naturalist  tested  the 
question  as  follows : 

1st  He  brought  together  a  cur-dog  and  a  she-wolf.  The  result  of  this  union  was  a 
litter  of  four  pups — two  male,  and  two  female.  No  difficulty  occurred  in  procuring 
this  cross. 

2d.  A  male  and  a  female  of  the  first  generation  were  coupled ;  whence  four  pups-* 
of  which  two  lived  to  maturity :  a  male  and  a  female. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

382  HYBRIDITT    OF    ANIMALS, 

8d.  The  Becond  generation  being  crossed,  a  third  generation  of  aeren  pops  was  the 
conseqaeoce. 

4th.  A  female  of  the  third  generation,  crossed  by  her  sire,  gaye  birth  to  four  paps, 
of  which  one  male  and  one  female  liTed. 

Buffon  sent  two  of  snch  hybrids  to  M.  Le  Boi,  Inspector  of  the  Park  at  Versailles. 
Here  they  bred  together,  producing  three  pnps.  Two  were  given  to  the  Prince  de 
Cond^  —  but  of  these  no  account  remains.  The  third,  retained  by  M.  Le  Boi,  was 
killed  in  a  boar-hunt.  The  father  of  these  whelps  was  then  mated  with  a  she-wolf^ 
who  bore  three  pups.    Here  the  report  closes.<<^ 

*'  I  haye  seen,  in  Moscow,"  says  Pallas,  "  about  twenty  spurious  animals  from  dogs 
and  black  woItos  (c.  lyeaon).  They  are,  for  the  most  part,  like  woWes ;  except  that 
they  carry  their  tails  higher,  and  have  a  kind  of  hoarse  barking.  They  multiply 
among  themselyes ;  and  some  of  the  whelps  are  grayish,  rusty,  or  even  of  the  whitisli 
hue  of  the  Arctic  woWes."  ^^  Crosses  of  this  kind  haye  been  known  firom  remote  anti- 
quity, and  are  called  wolf-doga  (e,  pomerantu).  One  of  them  is  figured  on  an  Eteuscan 
medal  of  the  second  or  third  century  before  Christ  Orid,  describing  the  pack  of 
Acteon,  enumerates  some  thirty  dogs,  which  appear  to  represent  many  different  breeds ; 
and  he  is  careful  to  obserye  that  one  of  them  (Napi)  sprang  from  a  wolf;  while  an- 
other {LycUea)  is  eyidently  the  dog  which  Pliny  refers  to  similar  mixed  bloods. 

By  a  feral  dog,  is  meant  a  domesticated  dog  which  has  run  wild.  Numberiess  are  the 
instances  of  this  kind,  where  dogs  haye  become  wild  and  multiplied ;  but  in  no  inatanee, 
saye  through  lupine  admixture,  haye  dogs  ever  been  brought  to  resemble  wolyes.  The 
dog  of  New  Holland,  called  the  dingo^  is  a  reclaimed  lupine,  or  wild  dog.  It  is  still 
found  abundantly  in  the  wild  state  in  that  country.  Some  naturalists  consider  the 
dingo  to  be  a  distinct  species,  or  an  aboriginal  dog ;  others,  a  variety  of  the  commoa 
dog.  Australia,  it  should  be  remembered,  possesses  an  exdusiye/iitMia  and/ora;  and 
the  cania  dingo  would  seem  to  be  the  aboriginal  canine  element  pertaining  to  this  spe- 
cial zoological  province.  The  dingo,  wild  or  tame,  preserves  its  own  physical  charac- 
teristics when  pure,  but  breeds  freely  with  other  dogs. 

Systems  of  zoology  mostly  limit  our  North  American  wolves  (exdurively  of  those 
of  Mexico  and  Califomia)  to  two  species  —  eama  luptu  and  camt  latrans.  But  there  is 
little  reason  to  doubt  that  the  grey  wo\f  of  Canada  and  other  northern  parts  of  this 
continent,  is  a  different  species  from  any  of  the  Old  World.  Bichardson  adopts  for  it 
the  name  of  (7.  oeddentalie,  and  long  ago  hesitated  about  its  relation  to  the  C  ^upuf, 
because  they  differ  both  in  conformation  and  character.  Townsend  describes  the 
giant  wolf  as  a  distinct  species,  by  the  name  of  C,  gigat;  and  Peale  makes  tbe  same 
distinction. 

While  the  dogs  indigenous  to  North  America,  according  to  Morton,  are  derived  finnn 
at  least  two  species  of  wolves,  which  he  considers,  in  common  with  Gray,  Agassiz, 
Bichardson  and  others,  to  be  peculiar  to  our  continent,  the  European  race  (although 
in  some  instances  largely  crossed  by  another  wolf)  is  for  the  most  part  devoid  of  any 
such  lupine  mixture.  The  domestic  dogs  of  Europe,  when  they  assume  the  feral  state, 
cannot  be  mistaken  by  naturalists  for  wolves.  Besides,  it  will  be  proved  further  on, 
that  the  dog,  the  wolf,  the  jackal,  and  the  hyena  are  figured  as  distinct  animi^  on 
the  monuments  of  Egypt,  in  company  with  many  different  races  of  dogs,  as  far  back 
as  8500  years  before  Christ. 

Dr.  Morton  held  the  Indian  dogs  of  North  America  to  be  derived  from  at  least  two 
distinct  species  of  wolves ;  that  these  two  species  have  combined  to  form  a  third,  or 
hybrid  race,  and  that  this  last  unites  again  with  the  European  dog. 

Sir  John  Bichardson  travelled  over  more  than  20,000  miles  of  the  northern  regions 
of  America;  traversing  80<»  of  latitude,  and  upwards  of  SO®  of  longitude;  occupied  for 
seven  years  in  making  observations.  To  him  are  we  mainly  indebted  for  the  following 
facts;  — 

Digitized  by 

Google 

VIEWED    IN    CONNECTION    WITH    MANKIND.  383 

The  Esquimaux  Dog  {O.  familiaris,  Deem,) 

<<  The  great  resemblance  which  the  domesticated  dogs  of  aboriginal  Americans  bear 
to  the  wolyes  of  the  same  country,  was  remarked  by  the  earliest  settlers  from  Europe, 
and  has  induced  some  naturalists  of  much  observation  1g  consider  them  to  be  merely 
half-tamed  wolves.  Without  entering  at  all  into  the  question  of  the  origin  of  the  do- 
mestic dog,  I  may  state  that  the  resemblance  between  the  wolves  of  those  Indian  na- 
tions who  still  preserve  their  ancient  mode  of  life,  continues  to  be  very  remarkable ; 
and  it  is  nowhere  more  so  than  at  the  very  northern  extremity  of  the  continent —  the 
Esquimaux  dogs  being  not  only  extremely  like  the  grey  wolf  of  the  Arctic  Circle  in 
form  and  color,  but  also  nearly  equalling  them  in  mze"*^ 

This  famed  Arctic  voyager  and  naturalist  adds,  that  he  saw  a  family  of  these  wolves, 
when  playing  together,  occasionally  carry  their  tails  curved  upwards ;  which  seems  to 
be  the  principal  character  which  Linnseus  supposed  to  distinguish  the  dog  from  the 
wolf. 

Capt  Parry  relates  that  his  officers,  seeing  thirteen  wolves  in  a  single  pack,  mistook 
them  for  Esquimaux  dogs ;  so  complete  was  the  resemblance.  He  observed,  that  when 
the  wolf  is  tamed,  the  two  animals  will  readily  breed  together.^io 

From  these  and  other  facts  familiar  to  naturalists,  it  would  appear  that  the  Esqui- 
maux dog  is  a  reclaimed  northern  wolf  (eanit  oeeiderUaUt). 

"  The  common  American  wolf,"  Richardson  observes,  *'  sometimes  shows  a  remark- 
able diversity  of  color.  On  the  banks  of  the  Mackenzie  I  saw  five  young  wolves  leaping 
and  tumbling  over  each  other  with  all  the  playfulness  of  the  puppies  of  the  domestic 
dog,  and  it  is  not  improbable  that  they  were  all  of  one  litter.  One  of  them  was  pied, 
another  entirely  black,  and  the  rest  showed  the  colors  of  the  common  grey  wolves.". 

So  variable,  however,  are  the  external  characters  of  the  latter  animal,  both  as  to 
size  and  color,  that  naturalists  have  endeavored,  at  different  times,  to  establish  no  less 
than  five  species  in  the  northern  part  of  America  alon^.  Two  of  these,  however  ((7. 
ater  and  C,  nubiltu),  are  generally  regarded  as  mere  varieties  of  the  common  grey 
wolf.  Hence,  it  would  naturally  follow,  that  the  domestication  of  these  several  varieties 
would  develop  a  corresponding  difference  between  our  northern  Indian  and  the  more 
Arctic  dogs  of  the  Esquimaux ;  although  both  kinds  may  daim,  in  part,  the  same  spe- 
cific origin.  Speaking  of  the  wolves  of  our  Sashatchewan  and  Copper-mine  rivers, 
Richardson  states :  — 

«  The  resemblance  between  the  northern  wolves  and  the  domestic  dog  of  the  Indians 
is  so  great,  that  the  size  and  strength  of  the  wolf  seems  to  be  the  only  difference.  I 
have  more  than  once  mistaken  a  band  of  wolves  for  the  dogs  of  a  party  of  Indians ; 
and  the  howl  of  the  animals  of  both  species  is  prolonged,  and  so  exactiy  in  the  same 
key,  that  even  the  practised  ear  of  an  Indian  fails  at  times  to  discriminate  between 
them.<u  At  certain  seasons  they  breed  f^ely  with  the  wolf,  while,  on  other  occasions, 
both  male  and  female  wolves  devour  the  dogs  as  they  would  any  other  prey." 
The  Hare-Indian  Bog  (0.  familiaris  lagopus). 

The  author  just  quoted  observes,  that  similitudes  between  this  animal  and  'the 
prairie-wolf  ((7.  latrant)  are  «  so  great,  that  on  comparing  live  specimens,  I  could  de- 
tect no  difference  in  form  (except  the  smallness  of  the  cranium),  nor  in  the  fineness 
of  the  fur,  and  the  arrangement  of  its  spots  and  color.  In  fact,  it  bears  the  same  re- 
lation to  the  prairie-wolf,  that  the  Esquimaux  dog  does  to  the  great  grey  wolf  (C7. 
oeddentality*  *i^ 

Like  the  cognate  wolf,  these  dogs  vary  considerably  in  color,  size,  and  shape ;  <^ 
those  on  the  Mackenzie  river  being  so  remarkably  small,  as  to  have  been  sometimes 
compared  to  the  Arctic  fox.  In  the  Mandan  country  the  dogs  are  larger ;  and  are  like- 
wise assimilated  by  Say,  the  Prince  de  l^ed,  and  other  travellers,  to  the  prairie-wolf. 

«  During  my  residence  in  the  Michigan  Territory,  in  the  year  1831-82  (wrote  Dr.  J. 
C.  FiSHBB  to  Dr.  Morton),  I  on  several  occasions  shot  the  Ojibeway  or  Indian  dogs,  by 

Digitized  by 

Google 

384  HTBBIDITT   OF    ASTIKALS, 

mistake,  for  the  prairie-wolf,  and  sapposed  that  I  knew  itirell ;  bat,  after  the  frequent 
mistakes  I  made,  I  became  Tety  caatioiis  about  shooting  them,  lest  I  shonkl  kill  more 
dogs.  They  were  the  conunon  dogs  of  the  Ojibewaj,  Pottawatomie  and  Ottawa  tribes." 

The  North  American  ow  common  Indian  Bog  {0,  familiaris  OanadenM). , 

<'  By  the  above  title,"  says  Richardson,  "  I  wish  to  designate  the  kind  of  dogs  which 
is  most  generally  onltiTated  by  the  native  tribes  of  Canada  and  the  Hadson  Bay  conn- 
tries.  It  is  intermediate,  in  size  and  form,  between  the  two  preceding  varieties ;  and 
by  those  ^ho  consider  the  domestic  races  of  dogs  to  be  derived  from  wild  animals,  this 
may  be  termed  a  cross  between  the  pndrie  and  gray  wolves." 

In  the  Appendix  to  Capt  Back's  Narrative,  Dr.  Bichardson  subsequently  obeervee, 
that  '<  the  offspring  of  the  wolf  and  the  Indian  dog  are  prolific,  and  are  prized  by  the 
voyagers  as  beasts  of  draught,  being  much  stronger  than  the  ordinaiy  dog."  ^^  '*  This 
fisct  is  corroborated,"  writes  Morton,  <<  by  my  friend  Dr.  John  Evans,  who  has  recently 
passed  some  time  in  the  Blandan  country,  where  the  dogs,  however,  appear  to  be  de- 
rived from  the  prairie  wplf ;  and  he  assures  me,  that  frequent  and  spontaneous  inter- 
course between  these  dogs  and  the  wolf  of  that  country  (which  is  now  almost  exdu- 
sively  the  eoftif  aeddmtaUif  or  common  gray  wolf,)  is  a  fact  known  to  every  one." 

Again,  the  conk  MexieamUf  or  **  Tichichi"  of  the  Mexicans,  by  Humboldt  said  to  be 
very  much  like  this  dog  of  the  northern  Indians,  is  also  supposed  to  derive  its  parent- 
age frx)m  a  wolf. 

Hie  intermixture  of  these  two  species  was  indeed  manifest  to  the  acute  perceptions 
of  Bichardson  himself,  who  remariu,  that  it  "  seems  to  support  the  opinion  of  Buffon, 
lately  advocated  by  Desmoulins,  that  the  dog,,  the  wolf,  the  Jackal,  and  corsac,  are,  in 
fact,  but  modifications  of  the  same  species ;  or,  that  the  races  of  domestic  dqgs  ought 
to  be  referred,  each  in  its  proper  country,  to  a  corresponding  indigenotu  wild  ^tda ; 
and  that  the  species  thus  domesticated  have,  in  the  course  of  their  migrations  in  the 
train  of  man,  produced  by  their  various  crosses  with  each  other,  with  their  ofbpring, 
and  with  their  proteges,  a  stm  ftirther  increase  of  different  races,  of  whidi  about 
fifty  or  sixty  are  at  present  cultivated." 

Such  doctrines  accord  with  that  adopted  by  Morton,  who  concludes  his  notice  of 
wolf-dogs  as  folli/ws:  —  "The  natural,  and  to  me  very  unavoidable,  conclusion,  is 
simply  this,  tliat  two  species  of  wolves  (acknowledged  to  be  distinct  from  each  other 
by  all  zoologists)  have  each  been  trained  into  a  domestic  dog ;  that  these  dogs  have  re- 
produced not  only  with  each  other,  but  with  the  parent  stocks,  and  even  with  the  Eu- 
ropean dog,  until  a  widely-extended  hybrid  race  has  arisen,  in  which  it  is  often  impoe* 
Bible  to  tell  a  wolf  fh)m  a  dog,  or  the  dogs  from  each  other." 

We  extract  entire  Morton's  observations  concerning 

Aboriginal  American  DogSyfrom  vulpine  and  other  eaureee. 

**  Besides  the  two  indigenous  wolf-dogs  of  the  North,  of  which  we  have  spoken  (the 
Hare-Indian  and  Esquimaux  races),  and  the  third  or  mixed  species  (the  common  Indian 
dog),  the  continent  of  America  possesses  a  number  of  other  aboriginal  forms,  which 
terminate  only  in  the  inter-tropical  regions  of  South  America.  One  of  these  was  ob- 
served by  Columbus,  on  landing  in  the  AntiUee,  a.  n.  1402.  <  These,*  says  Buffon, 
*  had  the  head  and  ears  very  long,  and  resembled  a  fax  in  ajfpearwiec.'  They  are  called 
Affuara  dogs  in  Mexico,  and  AUot  in  Peru. 

»<  ( There  are  many  species,'  adds  Buffon,  <  which  the  natives  of  Ouiana  have  called 
dogs  ofihe  woods  {chieru  da  bois),  because  they  are  not  yet  reduced,  like  our  dogs,  to  a 
state  of  domestication ;  and  they  are  thus  rightiy  named,  becauis  they  brstd  (ogslksr  with 
domesUe  raees.* 

<<  The  wild  Aguaras,  I  believe,  are  classed,  by  most  naturalists,  with  the  fox-tribe ; 
but  Hamilton  Smith  has  embraced  them  in  a  generic  group,  called  daneyon^  to  which 
iie  and  Martin  refer  four  species.    The  latter  zoologist  sums  up  a  series  of  critical 

Digitized  by 

Google 

VIEWED    IN    CONNECTION   WITH   MANKIND.  385 

mqoirieB  with  the  fbllowing  vemMrka:  —  *It  is  almost  incontestably  proTed,  that  the 
aborigiiial  Agaara  tame  dogs,  and  others  of  the  Amerioan  contineDt,  which,  on  the  dis- 
co^evy  of  its  different  regions,  were  in  snbjeetion  to  the  savage  or  semi-civilized  nations, 
were  not  only  indigenons,  but  are  the  descendants  of  several  wild  Agaara  dogs,  exist- 
ing ootemporary  with  themselves,  in  the  woods  or  plains;'  and  granting  that  a  Euro- 
pean race  [as  is  the  case  since]  had  by  some  chance  contribnted  to  their  production, 
the  case  is  not  altered,  but  the  theory  of  the  blending  ofepedee  eor^firmed.* "  *^*  * 

Dr.  Tchndi,  one  of  the  most  distinguished  zoologists  of  the  present  day,  has  paid 
especial  attention  to  the  charaoter  and  history  of  two  dooMsticated  dogs  <^  South 
America,  which  he  regards  as  distinct  species :  — 

Cams  Ingse  {Perr<hdogj  or  Ako). 

The  dog  to  which  Tchudi  gives  this  name  is  the  same  th^t  the  Peruvians  possessed 
and  worshipped  befare  the  arrival  of  the  Spam^ds,  and  is  founid  in  the  tumuli  of  those 
people  of  the  oldest  epoch.  It  is  so  inferior,  however,  to  the  exotic  breeds,  that  it  is 
rapidly  giving  way  to  them,  and  an  unmixed  individual  is  now  seldom  seen ;  and  they 
present  "  the  undetermined  form  of  the  mixture  of  all  the  breeds  that  have  been  im- 
ported from  Europe,  and  thus  assume  the  shape  of  cur-dogs,  or  of  a  primitive 
8peclee."*i« 

We  have  already  seen  that  the  Aguara,  ovfox-dog$f  of  North  America  mingle  freely 
with  the  incUgenous  dogs  of  this  continent  The  following  facts  are  equally  curious 
and  valuable :  - 

Canis  Oaribceus. 

Desmarest  has  given  this^ame  to  the  hairless  dog,  which,  as  Humboldt  remarks, 
was  found  by  Columbus  in  Uie  Antilles,  by  Cortes  in  Mexico,  and  by  Pizarro  in  Peru. 
Desmarest,  if  we  mistake  not,  supposes  this  dog  to  be  descended  from  the  e.  eanerivo- 
rue,  a  native  species,  which,  according  to  Blainville,  belongs  to  the  section  of  true 
wolves.  But  Rengger,  who  had  ample  opportunities  of  deciding  this  question,  regards 
it  as  an  aboriginal  wild  dog,  which  the  Indians  have  reduced  to  domestication ;  and  he 
adds,  in  explanation,  that  it  does  not  readily  mix  with  the  European  species,  and  that 
^e  Indian  tribes  have,  in  their  respective  languages,  a  particular  name  for  it,  but 
none  for  any  domestic  animal  of  exotic  dorivation.^i^ 

This  animal  much  resembles  the  Barbery  dog  (eanie  ^gypUacue) ;  but  there  is  no 
ground  but  resemblance  for  supposing  them  to  be  of  common  origin. 

Here  then,  once  more,  we  may  recognize  two  aboriginal  dogs  —  one  seemingly  de- 
rived from  the  fox-tribe,  or  at  least  from  fox-like  wild  dogs;  the  other,  from  an 
unknown  source :  yet  both  unite  more  or  less  readUy  with  the  exotic  stocks,  producing 
a  hybrid  race,  partiy  peculiar  in  appearance,  and  partiy  resembling  the  mongrel  races 
of  Europe. 

The  Rev.  Mr.  Daniel  states  that  Mr.  Tattersall  **had  a  terrier  bitch  which  bred  by 
a  fox,  and  the  produce  again  had  whelps  by  dogs.  The  woodman  of  the  manor  of 
Mongewell,  in  Oxfordshire,  had  a  bitch,  his  constant  attendant,  the  offspring  of  a  tame 
dog-fox  by  a  shepherd's  cur,  and  she  again  had  puppies  by  a  dog.  These  are  such 
authentic  proofs  of  the  continuance  of  the  breed,  that  the  fox  may  be  fairly  added  to 
the  other  supposed  original  eioeke  of  these  faithful  domestics."  ^i? 

Dr.  Morton  states  that  his  friend  Dr.  Woodbouse,  who  had  been  much  in  Texas  and 
on  the  frontier,  had  proven,  by  a  comparison  of  skulls,  skins,  &c.,  that  **  the  Cayotte, 
or  jackal,  of  Texas  and  Mexico  is  a  perlbctly  distinct  species,  to  which  Dr.  W.  gives 
the  name  of  ecmie  puetor,"  They  breed  readily  with  European  and  Indian  dogs  —  this 
£sct  is  notorious. 

The  jackal  coupled  with  the  domestic  dog,  produces  also  a  fertile  offspring ;  yet 
they  must  be  conceded  to  be  a  distinct  species.  Hunter  records  an  example  where  the 
hybrid  produced  six  pups;  and  one  of  these  again  brought  five  pups  when  lined  by  a 
49 

Digitized  by 

Google 

386  HTBRIDITT    OP    ANIMALS, 

terrier  dog.  There  is  no  difficulty  in  producing  or  keeping  np  encb  a  mixture;  bat 
there  is  no  practical  object  in  porpetaating  it  To  what  extent  the  blood  of  the  jackal 
was  originallj  mingled  with  dogs,  and  how  far  it  has  influenced  our  present  types,  can- 
not now  be  determined,  although  we  should  imagine  that  the  trace  is  lost 

"  It  seems  rarely  to  happen  that  the  mule  offspring  is  truly  intermediate  in  charac- 
ter between  the  two  parents.  Thus,  Hunter  mentions  that,  in  his  experiments,  one 
of  the  hybrid  pups  resembled  the  wolf  much  more  than  the  rest  of  the  litter ;  and  we 
are  informed  by  Wiegamann,  that  of  a  litter  lately  obtained  at  the  Royal  Menagerie  at 
Berlin,  from  a  white  pointer  and  a  she-wolf,  two  of  the  cubs  resembled  the  oommon 
wolf-dog;  but  the  other  was  like  a  pointer,  with  hanging  ears.''^^^ 

Pacts  enough,  and  authorities  enough  have  abeady  been  given,  to 
prove,  we  think,  to  any  unprejudiced  mind,  a  plurality  of  origin  for 
the  numerous  canine  species,  whose  blood  has  become  mingled  in  our 
domestic  dogs.  Kthis  point  be  conceded  by  scientific  men — ^td  whom 
alone  we  appeal  —  an  immense  stride  is  at  once  made  in  the  Natural 
History  of  Humanity ;  because,  zoologically  speaking,  mankind  and 
canidcB  occupy  precisely  the  same  position.  Grant  that  diflFerent  spe- 
cies may  produce  offipring  prolific  inter  «e,  and  the  dogma  of  the 
unity  of  human  families  can  no  longer  be  sustained,  either  by  facts, 
or  by  analogies  derivable  from  the  rest  of  the  animal  kingdom. 
Science,  we  are  persuaded,  will  grant  this  truth  ere  long. 

MONUMENTAL   HISTORY   OP    DOGS. 

Whatever  doubts  may  still  linger  in  the  reader's  min^  as  to  the 
diversity  of  canine  species,  we  feel  confident  that  they  must  ^ve  wiay 
before  the  new  fects  we  are  now  about  to  present.  Like  the  races  of 
men,  many  races  of  dogs  can  be  traced  back,  in  their  present  forms, 
on  the  monuments  of  Egypt,  from  4000  to  6000  years  anterior  to  our 
day ;  and,  inasmuch  as  there  is  no  evidence  that  dogs  did  really  all 
proceed  from  one  stock,  or  that  their  different  types,  such  as  grey- 
hounds, mastiflfe,  turnspits,  ftc,  can  be  transformed  into  each  other 
by  physical  causes;  and,  again,  considering  that  all  these  canine 
types  did  preserve,  side  by  side  in  Egypt>  their  respective  forms  for 
thousands  of  years,  these  animals  must  be  regarded,  by  every  natu- 
ralist, as  specifically  distinct. 

Substantiating  our  doctrine  with  reduced  fac-similes  of  these  monu- 
mental dogs,  we  shall  thereby  enable  the  reader  to  form  his  own 
conclusions. 

Hieroglyphic  for  "  Dog**— (Clanw  LupoiUr?). 

The  dog  was  one  of  the  figurative  and  sjmfoolio  forms  used  by  the  primordial  Egyp- 
tians in  their  hieroglyphic  writings ;  and  may  be  traced  on  the  inscriptions  of  the 
monuments  from  the  earliest  to  the  latest  Two  forms  were  need,  which  seem  to  bate 
been  taken  from  yery  distinct  races ;  and  these,  again,  were  totally  unlike  the  beau- 
tiful grey-hoiund  which  is  often  s^n  upon  contemporary  monuments.^^ 

Digitized  by 

Google 

VIEWED    IN    CONNECTION    TTITH    MANKIND.  387 

Hieroglyphic  writing  had  attained  its  ftill  perfection  at  the  IVth  dynasty,  and  ire 

poBsess  abundant  legends  of  the  thirty-fifth  century^,  c. ;  but  the  invention  of  writing, 

as  CTcry  hierologist  declares,  must  inevitably  antedate  these  monumente  by  many  cen- 
turies ;  ascending  certainly  to  the  time  of  Memes,  b.  c. 

8898 ;  and,  pictorially,  to  ages  anterior.     The  pure  hiero-  Fia.  285. 

glyphioB  represent  things  in  their  appropriate  shapes  and 

colors;  which  things  are  all  indigenous  in  Egypt,  to  the 

exclusion  of  any  element  foreign  to  the   Nile.    Among 

them  is  this  hieroglyphic  (Fig.  236)  for  "  dog,"  which,  like 

CTery  other  primitiTe  sign,  continued  to  mean  *<  dog,"  down 

to  the  extinction  of  hieroglyphical  writing,  about  the  fifth 

century  after  c.    Thus,  one  species  of  the  common  dog,  at 

least,  existed  in  Egypt  1500  years  before  Usher's  deluge; 

to  say  nothing  of  the  Archbishop's  fabulous  era  for  the  world's  creation. 

This  (Fig.  286)  is  called  t^fox-doghj  Dr.  Morton ;  not  to  be  confounded,  howeyer,  with 
the  «  fox-hound"  of  English  kennels.  It  is  found  in  the  catacombs  embalmed  in  great 
numbers  through  Tarious  parts  of  the  country;  and  appears  to  haTO  been  **  the  parent 
stock  of  the  modem  red  wild"  (or  Pariah)  **  dog  common  at  Cairo  and  other  towns  in 
Lower  Egypt"  These  dogs.  Clot  Bey  ob- 
serves, lead  a  nomadic  life,  and  are  inya-  Fio.  286. 
riably  without  individual  masters.  They 
are  also  found,  semi-wild,  on  the  confines 
of  the  desert  An  interesting  account  of 
these  Nilotic  canida  may  be  consulted  in 
Martin's  Hittory  of  the  Dog — and  he  pro- 
perly regards  them  as  a  distinct  species, 
that,  we  may  add,  has  come  down  unal- 
tered from  immemorial  time. 

A  similar  —  we  dare  not  say  the  same  — 
species  prevails  throughout  Barbary ;  and  ^^  ^~ 

the  Levant,  from  Greece  and  European  Persian  WUd  Dog. 

Turkey,  through  Ana  Minor,  Syria,  Pales- 
tine, Assyria,  Persia,  into  Hindostan.  They  belong  to  civic  communities,  rather  than 
to  any  particular  person.  If  taken  young  into  domestic  keeping,  when  adult  they  in- 
stinctively abandon  the  house ;  and,  if  grateM  for  kindnesses,  they  will  obey  no 
master ;  but  hang  around  the  localities  of  their  birth,  neither  enticeable  into  familiarity, 
nor  expulsable  from  the  precincts  of  their  earliest  associations.  They  are  the  eeaven- 
gere  of  oriental  cities ;  and  Muslim  charity,  whilst  shuddering  at  the  unclean  touch  of 
a  dog's  nose,  recognizes  their  utility,  and  protects  them  by  municipal  laws  as  well  as 
by  alimentary  legacies.  If  love  for  their  human  acquaintances  be  not  vociferous,  their 
hatred  to  strangers  is  intensely  so :  and  it  is  in  the  attitude  of  annoying  intruders  that 
the  annexed  wild  dog  of  Persia  (Fig.  286)  is  represented. 

Dr.  Pickering,  in  the  letter  from  Egypt  to  Morton  before  cited  [supra,  p.  245],  after 
"Viewing  these  semi-wild  dogs  with  the  critical  eye  of  a  naturalist,  aptly  remarks :  — 
"  By  the  way,  the  dogs  here  J  find  all  of  one  breed, — the  same,  if  my  memory  serve  me, 
with  a  mummied  skull  presented  by  Mr.  Qliddon  [1840]  to  the  National  Institute  at 
Washington : — with  upright  ears,  and  very  much  of  a  jackal,  or  small  wolf,  in  appear- 
ance, —  often,  even  in  color.  They  bark,  however,  as  I  can  well  attest,  like  other 
dogs ;  — and  if  this  be,  as  alleged  by  some,  a  matter  of  education,  there  seems  to  be 
here  no  danger  of  the  loss  of  the  art" 

The  Qret/'hound 

Is  a  very  common  animal  throughout  all  Eastern  nations,  and  presents  great  divergent 
des  of  external  form.   Several  varieties,  probably  three,  are  seen  on  the  monuments  of 

Digitized  by 

Google 

388 

HYBRIDITT    OF    ANIMALS, 

Grey-hound. 

Fxa  287.  Sgypt;  and  the  speeimen  here  delineated 

(Fig.  287)  is  from  one  of  the  tombs  of  thelVth 
dynasty,  8400  years  b.c.430     This  deg  is 
cotemporary  with  the  hieroj^jphic  dog»  and 
next  to  that  is  the  oldest  form  of  grey-haimd 
we  possess.    There  are  now  extant  only  the 
monnments  of  the  lYth,  Tth,  and  Ylth  dy- 
nasties in  detail,  and  yery  few  of  other  dyna»> 
ties  to  the  Xlth  inolnsiye;  or  we  shonld,  in 
all  probability,  haye  behdd  portrayed  many 
other  yarieties  of  dogs.    Again,  it  is  qnite 
by  aooideot  that  iogM  are  figured  at  all  in  the 
early  pyramid  days ;  beoanse  the  Egyptian 
artist  was  not  exhibiting  a  gallery  of  Natural  History  in  these  painted  sepoldires, 
but  merely  introducing,  with  the  likeness  of  the  deceased  proprietor,  those  things  the 
/  latter  had  loyed  during  his  lifetime ;  among  them  the  portrait  of  his  fayorite  grey- 
I  hound.    When  arriyed  at  the  Xnth  dynasty  we  find  a  yeryrrioh  coHeotion,  beeaose 
we  happen  to  haye  stumbled  upon  the  tomb  of  a  great  dog-fonder.    It  is  worthy  of 
remark,  howeyer,  that  although  the  Egyptians  haye  accidentally  represented  almost 
the  whole  fauna  of  the  mie  on  the  monuments,  yet  there  were  s<mie  eoiamon  animals 
which  neyer  appear  in  sculptures  now  extant  —  as  the  wild  ass,  the  wild  boar,  fte. 
Some  dogs  haye  likewise  been  left  out,  because  there  was  no  object  in  drawing  them. 
Martin  {HiaU  of  the  Dog)  informs  us  that  a  similar  yariety  of  grey-hound  is  yeiy  com- 
mon still  in  Asia  and  AfHca ;  and  Mr.  William  A.  Gliddon,  who  has  spent  years  in  the 
Indian  Archipelago,  informs  me  that  a  curl-tailed  grey-hound  of  this  form  is  quite 
common  among  the  Dyaks  of  Borneo,  and  among  the  aboriginal  inhabitants  of  the  Ma- 
layan peninsula.   They  make  good  hunting  dogs.   Color — dark  brown,  with  black  spots. 
The  species  of  grey-hound  giyen  in  the  aboye  sketch  is  often  repeated  on  the  monu- 
ments of  the  IVth,  Vth,  and  Vlth  dynasties,  with  precisely  the  same  characters — long, 
erect  ears,  curled  tail,  &c. ;  only  the  tail  in  some  specimens  is  much  shorter  than  in 
others,  haying  eyidently  been  cut 

Fio.  288.«i 

Fio.  289.*a 

Wolf. 

Hyena. 

Fig.  240.*23 

For  the  instruction  of  orthodox  naturalists,  who  deriye  all  canidee  fh>m  the  Noaehian 
pair  of  wolyes,  we  submit  the  grandsire  (Fig.  288)  of  the 
said  lupine  couple,  who  was  aliye  in  Egypt  3400  years  b.  c; 
together  with  one  of  their  hyena  uncles  (Fig.  289) ;  and  a. 
jackal  (Fig.  240)  —  Uieir  cousin  in  perhaps  the  forty- 
second  degree. 

The  scarcity  of  documents  from  the  IVth  to  the  end  ef 
the  Xlth  dynasty,  compels  us  to  descend  to  the  Xllth  — 
2400-2100  years  b.  o.    Here  we  stand,  not  merely  at  a 
point  which  is  seyeral  centuries  before  the  birth  of  Abraham ;  but,  at  a  day  when,  if 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 

Jackal. 

VIEWED    IN    CONNECTION    WITH    MANKIND. 

389 

Fjo.  242.  »8s 

the  delude  occurred  at  B.  6.  2848,  the  Egyptians,  besides  the  woWes,  hyenas,  and 
jackals,  in  a  wild  state,  possessed  many  kinds  of  dogs  running  about  their  houses, 
along  with  the  common  dog  and  grey-hound,  preceding ;  whereas  Noah's  seamanship, 
several  hundred  years  afterwards,  could  only  rescue  one  pair  of  woWes  firom  drowning 
on  the  summit  of  Mount  Ararat,  thousands  of  feet  above  the  line  of  perpetual  glaciers. 

The  subjoined  specimen  (Fig.  241)  of  an- 
other species,  is  from  the  tomb  of  Ron,  who  Fio.  241.<3« 
kept  his  kennel  admirably  stocked,  during 
the  Xllth  dynasty.  This  dog  is  btontifully 
drawn  and  colored  on  the  monument,  and 
is  one  of  the  most  superb  canine  relics  of 
smtiquity.  Mr.  Gliddon  informs  me  that 
this  is  not  only  the  common  gaxelle  dog  of 
Kubia  at  the  present  day,  but  that  their 
are  still  cropped  by  the  natiyes  in  the 
way ;  as  Prisse's  drawing  attests.^^ 
We  hare  not  been  able  to  find  the  por- 
trait of  an  ancient  rough  hound,  alluded  to 
by  Hamilton  Staith;  but  here  (Fig.  242)  is 
the  modern  rough-haired  grey-hound  of 
Arabia,  probably  the  same;  and  which 
irill  be  interesting  to  the  reader  as  a  con- 
trast to  the  other  grey-hounds :  it  bears  all 
the  marks  of  a  distinct  species;  but  re- 
sembles the  Laeonian  breed. 

Another  yariety  of  grey-hound  is  said  by 
Morton  to  be  represented  with  rougher 
bair,  and  bushy  tail,  not  unlike  the  modem  Arabian  grey-hound. 

A  grey-hocmd  exactly  like  the  English  grey-hound,  with  semi-pendent  ears,  is  seen  on 
a  statue  of  the  Vatican  at  Rome. 

Martin,  whose  work  is  full  of  instructiTO  matter,  says  —  «  Now  we  haye,  in  Modem 
Egypt  and  Arabia,  and  also  in  Persia,  yarieties  of  grey-hound  closely  resembling  those 
on  the  ancient  remains  of  art ;  and  it  would  appear  that  two  or  three  yarieties  exist — 
one  smooth,  another  long-haired,  and  another  smooth  but  with  long-haired  ears  resem- 
bling those  of  a  spaniel.   In  Persia,  the  grey-hound,  to  judge  from  specimens  we  haye 
seen,  is  silk-haired,  with  a  fringed  tail.     They  were  of  a  black  color ;  but  a  fine  breed, 
we  are  informed,  is  of  a  slate  or  ash  color,  as  are  some  of  the  smooth-haired  grey- 
hounds depicted  in  Egyptian  paintings.    In  Arabia,  a  large,  rough,  powerfiil  race 
exists;  and  about  Akaba,  according  to  Laborde,  a  breed  of  slender  form,  fleet,  with 
a  long  tail,  yery  hairy,  in  the  form  of  a  brush,  with  the  ears  erect  and  pointed  — 
closely  resembling,  in  fact,  many  of  those  figured  by  the  ancient  Egyptians.     In  Rou- 
melia,  a  spaniel-eared  race  exists.    Col.  Sykes,  who  states  that  none  of  the  domesti- 
eated  dogs  of  Dukhun  are  common  to  Europe,  obseryes  that  the  first  in  strength  and 
mxe  is  the  Brinjaree  dog,  somewhat  resembling  the  Persian  grey-hound  (in  the  posses- 
sion of  the  Zoological  Society),  but  more  powerful.    North  of  the  Caspian,  in  Tartary 
and  Russia,  there  exists  a  breed  of  large,  rough  grey-hounds.   We  may  here  allude  to 
the  great  Albanian  dog  of  former  times,  and  at  present  extant,  which  perhaps  belongs 
to  the  grey-hound  family."  «7 
The  grey-hound  can  thus  be  distinctly  traced  back  in  seyeral  forms  for  20(X),  and  in 
^  one  for  more  than'60(X)  years ;  and  there  is  eyery  reason  to  belieye  the  Egyptian  class 
f   embraced  at  least  two,  if  not  more,  distinct  species.   Unlike  all  other  dogs  of  the  chase, 
they  are  almost  destitute  of  smell,  and  pursue  game  by  the  eye  alone.     This  deficiency 
of  smell  is  connected  with  anatiynical  peculiarities,  which  must  'not  be  oyerlooked ; 
because  you  cannot,  by  breeding,  giye  a  more  powerful  organ  of  scent  to  a  grey-hound, 
withgut  changing  the  animal  into  something  else  than  a  grey-hound. 

1 

Digitized  by 

Google 

390 

HYBRIDITT    OF    ANIMALS, 

The  Bound. 

Like  the  grey-hound,  the  bloody  stagy  and/oz  hounds,  present  many  forms ;  and  it  is 
impossible,  at  the  present  day,  to  say  whether  they  are  Tarieties  of  one  speeies,  or 
whether  they  are  deriyed  from  soTeral  primitiye  species.  As  far  back  as  histoiy  eaa 
trace  hounds,  there  seems  to  haye  been  seyeral  yery  distinct  animals  of  this  kind.  Oar 
Egyptian  monuments  abound  in  hunting-scenes,  in  which  hounds  are  represented  in 
pursuit  of  wild  animals  of  yarious  kinds.  These  scenes  are  drawn  oftentimes  with  great 
spirit;  and  the  truthfulness  of  the  delineations  cannot  be  questioned,  because  they 
are  perfectly  true  to  nature  at  the  present  day,  as  will  be  seen  by  the  subjoiBed 
drawings. 

Fia.  248.<28  This  leash  of  hounds  (Fig. 

248)  presents  two  Tarieties 
of  the  African  blood-hound; 
one  with  erect,  the  other  wilh 
drooping  ears.  They  be- 
longed to  Ron's  hunting- 
establiahment,  about  the  22d 
century  before  Christ,  at  Be- 
ni-Hassan. 

In  Bosellini's  cdored  copj 
of  the  same  couple,  here  re- 
duced in  sixe,  the  ofT-dogis 
painted  brick-dust ;  the  near  one  is  a  light  chestnut,  with  black  patches. 
Another  of  the  same  choice  breed  (Fig.  244),  in  full  gaie. 

Fio.  244.4» 

Fio.  246.00 

Fig.  246.*3i 

A  fourth  (Fig.  246),  in  the  act  of 
slaying  a  gaxelle. 

Here  is  a  noble  brace  (Fig.  246), 
with  the  antelope  they  haye  captured, 
and  their  groom,  returning  to  the 
kennel. 

This  (Fig.  247)  is  a  yariety  of  tiie 
same  hound,  pensiyely  awaiting  his 
dinner,  about  4000  years  ago. 

Fw.  247.<« 

Digitized  by 

GT 

VIEWED    IN    CONNECTION    WITH    MANKIND. 

391 

Fio.  248.*35 

These  hounds  are  a  few  speoimoDs,  selected  from  the  seTeral  works  of  Lepsius, 
BoseUini,  and  Wilkinson.  We  could  easily  add  a  hundred  more,  npt  less  characteristio. 
It  is  truly  wonderful  to  compare  these  delineations,  commencing  as  far  back  as  the 
Xllth  dynasty  (twenty-third  century  b.  c),  and  extending  down  for  1000  years,  with 
the  common  fox-hound  and  stag-honnd  of  the  present  day — still  more,  with  the  Afri- 
can blood-hound. 

In  the  Grand  Frocesnon  of  Thotmbs  HI.  (1660  b.  o.)>  scYeral  of  them  are  associated 
with  the  people  and  producUons  of  the  interior  of  Afrioa.^3  Again,  in  a  later  tomb 
at  Qoumeh,  near  Thebes,  iSgured  by  ChampoUion.  Dr.  Morton  says  —  '*  If  we  com- 
pare the  oldest  of  these  delineations,  yiz.,  those  of  Beni-Hassan,  with  the  blood-hounds 
of  AfHca  lately  living  in  the  Tower  Menagerie  in  London,  we  cannot  deny  their  iden- 
tity, so  complete  is  the  resemblance  of  form  and  insect"  43^ 

**  On  reading  Mr.  Birch's  <  Obsenrations  on  the  Statistical  Table  of  Eamac'  (p.  66), 
I  was  much  pleased  to  find  this  hound  designated,  beyond  all  question,  in  a  letter  of 
Candace,  Queen  of  Ethiopia,  to  Alexander  the  Qreat,  in  which  the  former,  among  other 
presents  to  the  Macedonian  king,  sends  'ninety  dogs  which  hunt  men'  —  canes  tUam 
in  homines  efferadseimoi  nonagmta.  And,  that  nothing  may  be 'necessary  in  explanation, 
the  Queen  Airther  designates  them  as  '  animals  of  our  country.' " 

The  same  blood-hounds^  therefore,  of  which  tribute  was  sent  f^om  the  Upper  Nile,  in 
the  sixteenth  century  b.  c,  had  preserved  their  blood  pure,  down  to  b.  o.  826,  just  as 
it  is  found  at  this  day,  in  the  same  regions,  after  8400  years. 

Tumipit  {0.  Vertagus.) 

Wilkinson,  Blainville,  Martm,  and  all,  I  believe,  are  agreed  upon  the  identity  of 
this  dog.    The  portrait  (Fig.  248),  and  others 
of  the  same  well-marked  character,  are  faithful 
representatives  of  the  modem  turnspit,  which 
is  still  common  in  Asia  and  Europe. 

The  figure  above  is  from  the  tomb  of  Ron,  at 
Beni-Hassan,  in  the  twenty-third  century  before 
Christ. 

To  the  same  ante-Abrahamio  age  (the  Xllth 
dynasty)  belongs  this  slut  (Fig.  249),  who  stands 
under  her  master's  chur,  in  his  tomb  at  El' 
Bersheh,  Middle  Egypt  She  is  another  species, 
but  we  hesitate  in  ascribing  to  it  a  name :  al- 
though the  common-dog  of  the  Nile  approaches 
nearest  to  the  design.^^^ 

Not  only  have  we  various  other  forms  of  dogs 
on  the  monuments  of  Egypt  as  far  back  as  the 
Xllth  dynasty,  which,  to  our  mind,  cannot,  from 
mere  outline  drawings,  be  satisfactorily  ideiiti- 

fied  with  any  of  our  European  or  American  races ;  but,  as  we  have  shown,  there  also 
exist,  in  abundance,  representations  of  wolves,  jackals,  hyenas,  and  foxes,  each  and  all 
of  which  have  been  supposed  to  be  pro- 
genitors of  our  domestic  dogs — just  as  Fio.  250.^ 
Noah  is  said,  by  the  same  school  of 
naturalists,   to  be  the  fSetther  of  Jews, 
Australians,    White-men,   Mongols,  Ne- 
groes, American  aborigines,  &c. 

Wolves. 

As  this  animal  has,  by  the  minority 
of  old-school  naturalists,  been  believed 
to  be  the  original  parent  of  all  dogs,  wo 

Fia.  249.*» 

Digitized  by 

Google 

392 

HTBRIDITY    OP    ANIMALS, 

shall  introduce  here  one  specimen  (Fig.  260)  of  a  group  of  four  Egyptian  wolTee, 
figured  by  Lepsius,  fh>m  tombs  of  the  IVth  dynasty  (aboot  8400  years  b.  o.).  These 
Nilotic  animals,  which  are  difTerent  in  speeies  from  European,  are  repeatedly  seen, 
on  sculptures  of  eyery  epoch,  sometimes  chased  by  dogs,  at  other  times  caught  in 
traps ;  in  short,  accompanied  by  so  many  corroborating  circumstances  as  to  leaie  no 
doubt  that  they  were  nothing  but  wild  woWes.  They  are  often  depicted  on  the  same 
monuments  with  dogs,  ever  perfectly  contrasted. 

BulMogs  {0.  Molossus.) 

The  term  molosius  has  been  rather  yaguely  applied  by  writers ;  but  the  type  of  the 
huUrdog  is  well  understood.  It  is  skilfully  portrayed  on  a  piece  of  antique  Greek 
sculpture  in  the  Vatican.  M.  de  BlaiuTUle  (in  his  OtUographity  Cani*,  p.  74),  states 
that  the  form  and  expression  of  the  head  are  perfectly  characteristic,  eyen  to  the 
peculiar  arrangement  of  the  teeth.  This  spedes,  too,  is  yet  the  common  dog  of 
Albania. 

Mastiff  (C.  Laniarius).  . 

We  haTO  nowhere  yet  met  with  this  dog  on  the  monuments  of  the  l^e,  altiioag^  it 

must  haye  been  known  to  the  Egyptians,  through  their  constant  intercourse  with  Aa- 

syria,  in  early  times.    The  magnificent  original  of  the  sketch  here  given  (Fig.  251) 

was  taken  from  the  Birt  Nuih 
Fio.  261.4»  roud,  or  Babylon,  age  of  Ne- 

buchadnexsar,*^  and  would  do 
honor  to  a  prince  of  the  present 
day.  [His  duplicate,  we  ni^t 
almost  say,  is  still  aliye;  and 
belongs  to  my  excellent  friend 
Mrs.  Jenkins,  at  Bichmond,  Ya. 
—  G.R.  G.] 

Alexander,  in  his  march  to  the 
Indus,  received  presents  of  dogs 
of  gigantic  stature,  which  were 
no  doubt  of  the  same  family  as 
the  Thibetan  mastiffs.  To  these 
dogs  Aristotle  applied  the  name 
of  Uontomyx ;  and  they  are  fig- 
ured on  two  ancient  Greek  ned- 
als  —  one  of  which,  that  of  Se- 
gestus  of  Sicily,  dates  in  the 

fourth  or  fifth  century  b.  o.  ;  the  other,  which  is  of  Aquileia  Severa,  Dictator  of  Crete, 

is  about  two  centuries  later.^^i 

Shepherd* %  Dog  {0.  Domestictts), 

This  dog,  being  (if  a  Scotch  or  EngUah  '* shepherd-dog"  be  meant)  altogether  alien 
io  the  Nile  at  this  day,  is  not  figured  on  Egyptian  monuments ;  but  is  doubfless  veiy 
ancient  in  Europe.  The  earliest  efSgy,  also  mentioned  by  Aristotle,  is  preserved  on 
an  ancient  Etruscan  medal  of  tmknown  date,  but  probably  as  old  as  our  Ninevita 
mastiff. 

These  remarks  on  the  different  species  of  dogs,  faithfully  delineated 
upon  ancient  monuments,  might  he  very  easily  extended ;  hut  I  have 
set  forth  enough  to  establish  that  the  natural  history  of  doga  and  the 
natural  history  of  mankind  stand  precisely  in  the  same  position.  In 
whatever  direction  an  inquirer  may  turn — wherever  written  history, 

Digitized  by 

Google 

VIETTED    IK    CONNECTION    WITH    MANKIND.  393 

raonuments,  analogies,  or  organic  remains,  exist  to  direct  us  —  in 
«very  zoological  province  upon  earth,  I  repeat,  a  specifically  diverse 
fiauna  is  encountered,  in  wliich  distinct  species,  as  well  of  mankind 
as  of  dogs,  constitute  a  part 

The  earliest  monuments  yet  publis^ied  by  Lepsius  are  those  of  the 
IVth  dynasty ;  and  from  these  we  here  already  have  borrowed  the. 
"hieroglyphic"  or  fax-dog^  the  prick-eared  grey-kaund^  the  blood-houndy 
the  turn$pit,  with  other  species ;  together  with  the  wolf,  the  hyena, 
and  the  jackal.  The  Egyptian  fox  has  not  fallen  under  our  eye  at 
this  early  epoch,  although  it  is  seen  on  later  monuments.  Notwith- 
standing that  the  monuments  of  the  earliest  times  do  not  exhibit  every 
form  of  dogs  that  existed  at  the  subsequent  Xllth  dynasty,  their 
absence  is  no  argument  why  these  multifarious  species  did  not  exist 
from  the  very  beginning;  and  while  all  the  canine  forms  just  men- 
tioned must  ascend  even  beyond  the  date  of  Mekbs,  (which  Lepsius 
places  at  the  year  3893  b.  c.,)  science  can  perceive  no  reason  to 
doubt,  that  other  unrecorded  varieties  of  canidss  are  quite  as  ancient 
as  those  of  which  fortuitous  accident  has  preserved  the  pictorial 
register  down  to  this  day. 

Concerning  fossil  dogs^  the  terrestrial  vitality  of  wh^ch  antedates 
Egyptian  monuments  by  chiliads  of  years.  Dr.  Usher's  enumeration 
(supra,  Chap.  XI.)  of  the  numerous  varieties  discovered  in  geolo- 
gical formations,  all  over  the  world,  precludes  the  necessity  for  saying 
more  now,  than  that  certain  forms  of  true  canidee  are  primordial 
organic,  types;  and,  hence,  utterly  independent  of  alterations  pro- 
duced, in  later  times,  by  domestication. 

Logical  criticism  will  allow  that,  if  specific  diflferences  among  dogs 
were  the  result  of  climate,  all  the  dogs  of  each  separate  country 
should  be  alike.  Such,  notoriously,  is  not  the  case ;  for  the  reader 
has  just  beheld  several  species  of  dogs,  depicted  (at  Various  epochs, 
during  4000  years  of  coeval  existence)  on  the  monuments;  which 
species  are  not  only  now  seen  in  Egypt  alive,  but  are  permanent,  always 
and  everywhere,  in  other  countries  of  climates  the  most  opposite. 

Indeed,  "  like  begets  like,"  to  use  dog-fancy  terms ;  and  a  terrier 
is  a  terrier,  and  a  dingo  a  dingo,  all  the  world  over,  else  language  has 
no  meaning;  and  wherever  climatic  action  may  be  hostile  to  the 
permanency  of  either  type,  it  does  not  transform  the  one  into  the 
other,  nor  into  any  species  diverse  from  each :  it  kills  them  both  out- 
right, or  their  offspring  within  a  generation  or  two.  Thus,  New- 
foundlands perish  within  very  limited  periods  after  transplantation 
fi^m  American  snows  to  African  suns.  Their  short-lived  whelps  are 
as  likely  to  become  kittens  as  to  be  changed,  by  climate,  into  bull- 
pups.    An  interesting  exception,  nevertheless,  should  be  observed : 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 

394  HTBBIDITY   OF   ANIMALS, 

viz.,  where  dogs,  becoming  wildy  return  to  a  state  of  nature,  thejr 
have,  in  the  course  of  time,  resumed  very  different  types ;  say,  eh^K 
herd's  dog,  Danish  dog,  grey-hound,  terrier,  and  so  on.  "  In  ottier 
words,  they  constantly  tend  to  recur  to  that  primitive  type  tjohich  is  mamt 
dominant  in  their  physical  conhitution ;  and  it  is  remarkable,  that  in 
the  Old  World  this  restored  type  is  never  the  wolf,  aUhotigh  it  is  sonte^ 
times  a  lupine  dog,  owing  to  the  cause  just  mentioned.*** 

Where  opposite  types  of  dogs  are  bred  together,  and  their  hybrid 
progeny  becomes  again  intermingled,  all  sorts  of  mongrel,  degene- 
rate, or  deformed  varieties  arise ;  such  as  pugs,  shocks,  spaniels,  kc  ; 
which  Cuvier  calls  "  the  most  degenerate  productions ;"  and  they  are 
found,  by  experience,  "to  possess  a  short  and  fleeting  existence — the 
common  lot  of  all  types  of  modem  origin."  Such  deformities  arise 
in  nature  everywhere.  There  is  one  instance  of  dwarfish  canine  m^- 
formation,  4000  years  old,  in  Lepsius's  plate  *^  of  the  Xllth  dynasty; 
and  embalmed  monstrosities  of  other  genera  were  found  by  Passaliwqua. 

Among  North  American  Lidian  dogs,  says  Dr.  Morton,  <<ihe  original  forms  are  Tery 
few,  and  closelj  allied ;  whence  it  happens  that  these  grotesque  yarieties  neyer  appear. 
Neither  have  they  any  approximation  to  that  marked  family  we  call  houndt ;  and  this  fact 
is  the  more  remarkable,  since  the  Indian  dogs  are  employed  in  the  same  manner  of  hunting 
as  the  hounds  of  Europe,  Asia,  and  AfHoa.  Tet,  this  similarity  of  employment  has  caused 
no  analogy  of  exterior  form.  No  Tarieties  Kke  those  so  familiar  in  Europe,  spring  up  inUr  m 
among  them.  They  are  as  homogeneous  as  wolf-races,  from  whom  they  are  descended ; 
and  Dr.  Richardson  quotes  Theodat  to  show  that  the  wmmcn  Indian  dog  has  not  materiallj 
changed  during  two  hundred  and  twenty  years.  Again,  the  same  remark  applies  to  the 
indigenous  agwxroL,  alcOf  and  techieki  dogs  of  Mexico  and  South  America,  which,  before  their 
admixture  with  European  breeds,  conformed  to  the  types  or  species  from  which  they  sprung, 
without  branching  into  the  thirty  varUiiet  of  Buffon,  or  the  sixty  of  Brown." 

In  the  words  of  Jacquinot,  whose  "Anthropolo^e****^  is  the  ablest 
work  on  Man  yet  put  forth  in  the  French  language,  let  me  close  these 
few,  out  of  infinite,  analo^es  in  the  animal  kingdom,  which  space 
confines  to  the  foregoing  paragraphs  on  dogs.    "H  est  indubitable  ; 
que  les  vari6t6s  du  chien  appartiennent  k  plusieurs  types  primitife."    j 

The  facts'  aboye  detailed  establish,  conclusively,  that  Sybridity  is 
not  a  "unit;**  or,  in  other  words,  they  prove  that  different  degrees 
of  affinity  exist  in  Nature,  to  be  taken  into  account  in  all  inquiries 
into  the  prolificacy  of  diverse  "species."  Equally  certain  is  it,  that 
climate  and  domestication  affect  animal  species  differently:  some 
of  them  becoming  variously  modified  in  form  and  color  —  as  horses, 
cattle,  goats,  sheep,  fowls,  pigeons,  &c. ;  while  others,  to  considerable 
extent,  resist  such  physical  influences  —  like  the  ass,  the  buffalo,  the 
elk,  the  reindeer,  pea-fowls,  guinea-fowls,  and  so  forth. 

Now,  it  is  equally  singular  and  true,  that  these  identical  species, 
whence  Natural  History  deduces  very  strong  reasons  for  believing 

Digitized  by 

Google 

VIEWED    IN    CONNECTION    WITH    MANKIND.  395 

them  to  be  derived  from  many  primitive  stocks,  are  those  which 
imdergo  the  greatest  changes ;  wtereas,  on  the  contrary,  other  spe- 
cies, which  equally  good  reasons  induce  us  to  regard  as  simple — ^that 
is,  derived  from  one  primitive  stock — are  precisely  those  in  which  the 
experience  of  ages  chi'onicles  the  smallest  alteration.  This  law  (if  it 
be  such)  seems  to  apply  not  merely  to  the  lower  animals,  but  also  to 
mankind.  In  America,  for  example,  where  the  autocthonous  popu- 
lation has  been  isolated,  very  little  variety  is  found  among  Indian 
tribes ;  whereas,  in  Europe,  Asia,  and  Africa  (more  particularly  in 
and  around  Egypt  and  India),  we  encounter  infinite  diversities  among 
human  beings,  manifested  in  every  form  and  by  all  colors. 

The  perplexing  anomalies  that  beset  this  investigation  may  be 
illustrated  by  the  following  resumcy  in  which  I  have  incorporated 
some  very  interesting  facts,  published  by  Dr.  Alexander  Harvey  in 
the  London  Monthly  Journal  of  the  Medical  Sciences  :*** 

InsUnoes  are  suffioientlj  common  among  the  lower  animals  where  the  offspring  exhibit, 
more  or  less  distinctly,  in  addition  to  the  characters  of  the  male  by  which  they  were  be- 
gotten, the  peculiarities  also  of  a  male  by  which  their  mother  had  at  some  former  period 
been  impregnated :  —  or,  as  it  has  been  otherwise  expressed,  where  the  peculiarities  of  a 
male  animal,  that  had  once  held  fruitful  intercourse  with  a  female,  are  more  or  less  dis- 
tinctly recognized  in  the  offspring  of  subsequent  connections  of  that  female  with  other 
males.  It  is  interesting  to  inquire  wheUier  this  is  a  general  law  in  animal  physiology ;  and 
if  it  be,  whether,  and  how  far,  it  is  modified  in  its  operation  in  different  aniq^ds,  and  under 
different  circumstances  r  and  it  is  of  still  more  immediate  interest  to  us  to  inquire  whether, 
or  not,  the  fact  extends  also  to  the  human  species.  The  facts  bearing  upon  this  subject 
may  be  most  conyeniently  noticed^^lst,  in  relation  to  the  lower  animals ;  2d,  in  relation  to 
the  human  species. 

1,  In  the  Brute  Creation,  — A  young  chestnut^nare,  scTen-eighths  Arabian,  belonging  to 
the  Eari  of  Morton,  was  co?ered  in  1815  by  a  quagga,  which  is  a  species  of  wild  ass  from 
Africa,  and  marked  somewhat  like  a  xebra.  The  mare  was  ooYered  but  once  by  the  zebra ; 
and,  after  a  pregnancy  of  eleyen  months  and  four  days,  gaTC  birth  to  a  hybrid  which  had 
distinct  marks  of  the  quagga,  in'  the  shape  of  its  head,  black  bars  on  the  legs  and  shoul- 
ders, &o.  In  1817,  1818,  and  1821,  the  same  mare,  which  had  become  the  property  of  Sir 
Gore  Ouseley,  was  co?ered  by  a  yery  fine  black  Arabian  horse,  an^  produced  successiTcly 
three  foals,  all  of  which  bore  unequiyocal  marks  of  the  quagga.  A  mare  belonging  to  Sir 
Gore  Ouseley  was  ooTcred  by  a  zebra,  and  gaye  birth  to  a  striped  hybrid.  The  year  fol- 
lowing the  same  mare  waf  ooTcred  by  a  thorough-bred  horse,  and  the  next  succeeding  year 
by  another  horse.  Both  the  foals  thus  produced  were  striped:  i,e,,  partook  of  the  cha- 
racters of  the  zebra.  It  is  stated  by  Haller,  and  also  by  Becker,  that  when  a  mare  has 
had  a  mule  by  an  ass,  and  afterwards  a  foal  by  a  horse,  the  foal  exhibits  traces  of  the  ass. 
We  can  ourseWes  Youch  for  the  truth  of  similar  facts.  A  Tast  number  of  mules  are  bred 
in  the  United  States,  from  the  ass  and  the  mare ;  and  we  haye  fr^uenUy  seen  colts  from 
horses,  out  of  mares,  which  had  preriously  had  mules;  many  of  them  were  distinctly 
marked  by  the  ass. 

In  these  cases,  the  mares  were  coTered  in  the  first  instance  by  animals  of  a  different 
species  from  themselyes.  But  cases  are  recorded  of  mares  coTcred  in  eyery  instance  by 
horses,  but  by  different  horses  on  different  occasions,  where  the  offspring  partook  of  the 
characters  of  ^e  horse  by  which  the  impregnation  was  first  effected.  Thus,  in  seyeral 
fonls  in  the  royal  stud  at  Hampton  Court,  got  by  the  horse  Aeteon,  there  were  unequiyocal 
marks  of  the  horse  Cohmel^ihe  dams  of  these  foals  had  been  bred  from  by  Colonel  the 

Digitized  by 

Google 

396  HTBRIDITY    OP    ANIMALS, 

preyioas  year.  Agidn,  a  ooH,  the  property  x>f  the  Earl  of  Snffield,  got  by  Laurdy  so  i 
bled  another  horse,  Camel,  **  that  it  was  whispered,  nay  eyen  asserted  at  New  Market^ 
that  he  must  have  been  got  by  Camel."  It  was  ascertained,  however,  that  the  mother  of 
the  Lanrel  colt  had  been  covered  the  previous  year  by  Camel. 

It  has  often  been  observed,  also,  that  a  well-bred  bitch,  if  she  have  been  impregnated  bj 
a  mongrel  dog,  will  not,  although  lined  subsequently  by  a  pure  dog,  |j»ear  thorou^-bred 
puppies  in  the  next  two  or  three  litters.  The  like  occurrence  has  been  noticed  with  the 
sow.  A  sow  of  a  peculiar  black-and-white  breed  was  impregnated  by  a  boar  of  the  wild 
breed,  of  a  deep  chestnut  color ;  the  pigs  produced  were  duly  mixed,  the  oelor  of  Ae  boar 
in  some  being  very  predominant.  The  sow  being  afterwards  put  to- a  boar  of  the  same  breed 
as  her  own,  some  of  the  produce  were  observed  to  be  marked  with  the  chestnut  odor  that 
prevailed  in  the  former  litter :  and,  on  a  subsequent  impregnation,  the^oar  being  still  of 
the  same  breed  as  the  sow,  the  litter  was  also  observed  to  be  slightly  stained  with  the 
chestnut  color.  What  adds  to  the  value  of  the  fact  now  stated  is,  that,  hi  the  course  of 
many  years'  observation,  the  breed  in  question  was  never  known  afterwards  to  prodnoe  progeny 
having  the  smallest  tinge  of  chestnut  color.  We  may  here  remark  that  it  is  only  in  a  state  of 
domestication  that  animals  produce  offspring  of  various  colors.  When  left  entirely  to  the 
operation  of  natural  causes,  they  never  exhibit  this  sporting  of  colors;  they  are  distin- 
guished by  various  and  often  beautiful  shades  of  color ;  but  then  each  species  is  true  to  its 
own  family  type,  even  to  a  few  hairs  or  small  parts  of  a  feather.  It  is  needless  to  repeat 
examples  of  these  facts  —  they  are  familiar  to  all  rearers  of  animals ;  among  cattle  they 
are  of  every-day  occurrence.  There  is  another  fact  worthy  of  notice.  It  is  well  known 
to  cattle-breeders,  that  the  term  of  utero-gestation  is  much  influenced  by  the  sire — the- 
calves  of  one  bull  will  be  carried  longer  in  utero  than  those  of  another. 

2.  In  the  JBuman  Species,  —  There  are  equally  distinct  breeds  of  the  human  £unily  as  of 
any  of  the  lower  animals ;  and  it  is  affirmed  that  the  human  female,  when  twiee  married, 
bears  occasionally  to  the  second  husband  children  jresembling  the  first  both  in  bodily  struc- 
ture and  mental  powers.  Where  all  the  parties  are  of  the  same  color,  this  statement  is  not 
80  easy  of  verification ;  but,  where  a  woman  has  had  children  by  two  men  of  different  colors, 
such  as  a  black  and  a  white  man,  it  would  tfe  comparatively  easy  to  observe  whether  the 
offspring  of  the  latter  connexion  bore  any  resemblance  to  the  former  parent  Count  Strse- 
leoki,  in  his  Phyiicetl  Hittory  of  Van  Diemen^e  Land,  asserts  that,  when  a  native  woman 
has  had  a  child  by  a  European  male,  **  she  loses  the  power  of  coneeptian,  on  a  renewal  of  m- 
tercoUrse,  with  a  male  of  her  own  race,  retaining  only  that  of  procreating  with  the  white  men" 
**  Hundreds  of  instances  (says  the  Count)  of  this  extraordinary  fact  are  recorded  in  the 
writer's  memoranda,  aU  oeeurrmg  invariably  underthe  same  dreumstanees,  amongst  the  Hu- 
rons,  Seminoles,  Red  Indians,  Takies  (Sinaloa),  Mendosa  Indians,  Auiveos,  South  8ea' 
Islanders,  and  natives  of  New  Zealand,  New  South  Wales,  and  Van  IHemen's  Land ;  and 
all  tending  to  prove  that  the  sterility  of  the  female,  which  is  relative  only  to  one  and  not 
to  another  male,  is  not  aocidental,  but  follows  laws  as  cogent,  thou^  as  mysterious,  as  the 
rest  of  those  oonneeted  with  generation."  In  this  sweeping  asseftion  the  Count  may  have 
been  mistaken:  a  traveller  could  hardly  have  had  opporttinities  for  ascertaining  a  tt^ 
which  it  must  require  years  of  careful  observation  to  confirm.  It  is  certain  that  no  such 
thing  exists  between  the  whites  and  Negroes;  the  two  races  with  which  we  are  the  most 
familiar;  because  examples  are  of  frequent  occurrence,  where  a  Negress,  after  having 
had  a  child  by  a  white  man,  has  had  a  family  by  a  husband  of  her  own  color. 

Instances  are  eited,  where  a  Negro  woman  bore  mulatto  children  to  a  white  man,  and 
afterwards  had  by  a  black  man  other  children,  who  bore  a  strong  resembUnoe  to  the  white 
&ther.  both  in  features  and  complexion.  It  is  supposed  by  some,  that  the  influence,  exerted 
on  the  generative  system  of  a  female  of  one  race  by  sexual  intercourse  with  the  male  of 
another,  may  be  increased  by  repeated  connexions ;  and  Dr.  Laing  informs  us  of  the  case 
of  an  English  gentleman  in  the  West  Indies,  who  had  a  large  family  by  ^^egro  woman, 
and  where  the  children  exhibited  successively,  more  and  more,  the  European  features  and 
complexion.    I  have  living  with  me  a  black  woman,  whose  first  child  was  by  a  white  man : 

Digitized  by 

Google 

VIEWED    IN    CONNECTION    WITH    MANKIND.  397 

she  bM  had  lix  children  sinoe,  by  a  black  bosband,  who  are  p«rf)Mtlj  black,  and  unlike  the 
first  fiuher;  yet,  it  is  a  singular  fact  that  these  children,  though  strongly-marked  Negroes, 
bear  no  family  likeness  to  either  father  or  mother — their  physiognomy  is  as  distinct  as  that 
of  any  two  families  of  the  same  race.  The  children  of  a  second  husband  may  resemble 
the  first  sufficiently  to  attract  attention,  eyen  where  there  is  no  striking  contrast  of  color ; 
thus  Dr.  Harrey  cites  a  case  where  a  lady  was  twice  married,  and  had  issue  by  both  hus- 
bands. One  of  the  children  by  the  second  marriage  bears  an  unmistakeable  resemblance 
to  her  mother's  first  husband ;  and  what  makes  the  likeness  more  discernible  is,  that  there 
was  a  marked  diiference  in  features  and  general  appearance  between  the  two  husbands. 

The  chain  of  tacis  heroin  by  this  time  linked  together,  aside  from 
many  more  of  identical  force  that  might  easily  be  added,  proves  con* 
cluaively  that  prolificacy  between  two  races  of  animals  is  no  test  of 
Specific  affiliation ;  and  it  therefore  follows,  as  a  corollary,  that  proli- 
ficacy among  the  different  races  of  men  carries  with  it  no  evidence 
of  common  origin.  On  the  other  hand,  if  it  can  be  shown  that  the 
law  of  hybridity  prevails  between  any  two  human  races,  the  argu- 
ment in  favor  of  plurality  of  species  would  thereby  be  greatly 
strengthened. 

I  think  that  the  genus  homo  includes  many  primitive  spedes ;  and 
that  these  species  are  amenable  to  the  same  laws  which  govern  spe- 
cies in  many  other  genera.  The  species  of  men  are  all  proximate^ 
according  to  the  definition  already  giv^n ;  nevertheless,  some  are  per- 
fectly prolific ;  while  others  are  imperfectly  .so — ^possessing  a  tendency 
to  become  extinct  when  their  hybrids  are  bred  together.  At  the 
beginning  of  this  chapter  I  referred  to  my  own  observations,  made 
some  years  ago,  oh  the  crossing  of  white  and  black  races :  and  my 
investigations  since  that  time,  as  well  as  those  of  many  other  anato- 
mists, confirm  the  views  before  enunciated.  So  isx  as  the  races  of  men 
can  be  traced  through  osteography,  histoiy  and  monuments,  the  pre- 
sent volume  establishes  that  they  have  always  been  distinct.  No 
example  is  recorded,  where  one  race  has  been  transformed  into  an- 
other by  external  causes.  Permcmenee  of  type  must  therefore  be 
regarded  as  an  infallible  test  of  specific  character.  M.  Jacquinot 
very  dexterously  remarks  that,  according  to  the » theory  of  unity  of 
races,  a  mulatto  belongs  to  a  ^'  species"  as  much  as  any  other  human 
being,  and  that  the  white  and  black  races  would  be  but  "  varieties.** 

When  two  proximate  species  of  mankind,  two  races  bearing  a 
general  resemblance  to  each  other  in  type,  are  bred  together—  e.g.y 
Teutons,  Celts,  Pelasgians,  Iberians,  or  Jews — ^ihey  produce  offipring 
perfectly  prolific:  although,  even  here,  their  , peculiarities  cannot 
become  so  entirely  fused  into  a  homogeneous  mass  as  to  obliterate 
the  original  types  of  either.  One  or  the  other  of  these  types  will 
'**  cr<^M)ut,7  fix)m  time  to  time,  more  or  less  apparently  in  their  pro- 
geny.   When,  on  the  other  hand,  species  the  most  widely  separated. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

398  HYBRIDITY    OF    ANIMALS, 

such  as  the  Anglo-Saxon  with  the  Negro,  are  crossed,  a  different  result 
has  course.     Their  mulatto  oftspring,  if  still  prolific,  are  but  partiaUj 
60 ;  and  acquire  an  inherent  tendency  to  run  out,  and  become  eventa- 
ally  extinct  when  kept  apart  from  the  parent  stocks.     This  opiDiOD 
is  now  becoming  general  among  observers  in  our  slave  States ;  and  it 
is  very  strongly  insisted  upon  by  M.  Jacquinot    This  skilful  natu- 
ralist (unread  in  cis- Atlantic  literature)  claims  the  discovery  as  original 
with  himself;  although  erroneously,  because  it  had  long  previously 
been  advocated  by  Estwick  and  Long,  the  historians  of  Jamaica ;  by 
Dr.  Caldwell  ;***  by  Professors  Dickson  and  Holbrook,  of  Charleston, 
S.  C. ;  and  by  numerous  other  leading  medical  'men  of  our  SouHiem 
States.    There  are  some  4,000,000  of  Negroes  in  the  United  Stat^; 
about  whom  circumstances,  personal  and 'professional,  have  afibrded 
me  ample  opportunities  for  observation.    I  have  found  it  impossible, 
nevertheless,  to  collect  such  statistics  as  would  be  satisfactory  to  others 
on  this  point;  and  the  difficulty  arises  solely  from  the  want  of  chastity 
among  mulatto  women,  which  is  so  notorious  as  to  be  proverbial 
Although  often  married  to  hybrid  males  of  their  o\^n  color,  their 
children  are  begotten  as  frequently  by  white  or  other  men,  as  by  their 
husbands.    For  many  years,  in  my  daily  professional  visits,  I  have 
been  in  the  habit  of  meeting  with  mulatto  women,  either  free  or 
slaves ;  and,  never  omitting  an  opportunity  of  inquiry  with  regard 
to  their  prolificacy,  longevity  of  offspring,  color  of  parents,  age,  &c, 
the  conviction  has  become  indelibly  fixed  in  my  mind  that  the  posi- 
tions laid  down  in  the  beginning  of  this  chapter  are  true. 

Hombron  and  Jacquinot  have  asserted  on  their  o*wn  authority,  as 
well  as  upon  that  of  others,  that  this  law  of  infertility  holds  also  with 
the  cross  of  the  European  on  the  Hottentot  and  Australian. 

*<  Les  quelques  tribus  qni  se  tronyaieiit  aax  enTirons  de  Port  Jackson,  Tont  chaque  jour 
en  d^croissant,  et  c'est  H  peine  si  Ton  cite  quelqnes  rares  m^tis  d'Aostralien  et  d'Eorop^en. 
Cette  absence  de  m^tis  entre  deux  peuples  yivant  en  contaote  sur  la  mime  terre,  prouTe  bien 
incontestablement  la  difference  des  esp^ces.  On  con9oit  da  reste  que,  si  ces  m^tis  exis- 
taient,  lis  seraient  bien  faoiles  &  reconnoitre,  et  ll  diff§rencier  des  esp^oes  m^res. 

**A  Hobart  Town  et  sur  toute  la  Tasmanie,  il  n'y  a  pas  d'ayantage  de  m^tis;  tontce 
qni  reste  des  indigenes  (qoarante  enyiron)  H  M  transports  dans  one  petite  ile  dn  d^troit  de 
Bass."*^ 

The  official  reports  published  by  the  British  Parliament  confirm  this 
statement  as  to  Australia. 

French  and  Spanish  writers  have  maintained  that,  when  the  grade 
of  quinteroon  is  arrived  at,  the  Negro  type  is  lost,  and  that  such  man 
becomes  no  longer  distinguishable  from  the  pure  white.  In  some  of 
the  West  India  Islands  this  grade  of  slave  by  law  becomes  free.  Now, 
it  must  be  remembered  that  the  Spaniards,  and  a  certain  proportion' 
of  the  population  of  France,  are  themselves  already  as  dark  as  any 

Digitized  by 

Google 

VIEWED    IN    CONNECTION    WITH    MANKIND.  399 

quinteroon,  or  even  a  quadroon ;  and  thus  it  may  readily  happen 
that  very  few  crosses  would  merge  the  dark  into  the  lighter  race :  but, 
when  the  Anglo-Saxon  and  the  Negro  are  brought  together,  no  such 
result  has  been  perceived,  or  hinted  at,  in  the  United  States,  where 
the  latter  amalgamation  is  going  on  upon  an  immense  scale.  Slaves 
of  Southern  States,  seduced  by  delusive  representations,  are  constantly 
making  attempts  to  escape  to  free  States ;  and  would  succeed  without 
difficulty  in  most  cases,  were  it  not  for  their  color :  yet  they  have 
rarely,  if  ever,  beeome  so  fair  through  white  lineage  as  to  escape  de- 
tection. I  am  not  sure  that  I  ever  saw  at  the  South,  one  of  such  adult 
mixed-bloods  so  fair  that  I  could  not  instantaneously  trace  the  Negro 
type  in  complexion  and  feature.  When  we  bear  in  mind  the  length 
of  time  during  which  the  two  races  have  been  commingling  in  the  . 
United  States,  how  are  we  to  explain  this  fact  ?  The  only  physiolo- 
gical reason  that  may  be  assigned  is  this :  the  mulattoesj  or  mixed- 
breeds^  die  off  before  the  dctrh  stain  can  be  washed  out  by  amalgamation. 
No  other  rational  explanation  can  be  oflfered. 

Mr.  Lyell  q)eaks  of  some  mulattoes  he  met  with  in  North  Carolina, 
whom,  he  says,  he  could  not  distinguish  from  whites ;  but,  if  any  such 
examples  exist,  among  the  multiform  crosses  between  Anglo-Saxons 
and  Negroes,  they  must  be  extraordinarily  few;  because  my  half 
century's  residence  in  our  slave  States  should  have  brought  me  in  con- 
tact with  many  instances.  However,  an  Englishman,  coining  from 
an  island  where  a  Negro  is  a  "  rara  avis,"  and  running  through  the 
United  States  at  Mr.  Lyell's  speed,  could  not  become  femiliarized  with 
these  various  grades,  and  therefore  his  eye  might  well  be  deceived. 
The  great  geologist  certainly  made  many  other  decidedly  erroneous 
observations  in  his  American  tour ;  quite  innocently  we  all  admit. 

M.  Gerdy  claims  {TraUk  de  Physiologie)  that  primitive  human  spe- 
cies have  all  disappeared  through  amalgamations;  giving  a  most 
erudite  rehearsal  of  the  wars  and  migrations  which  have  influenced 
races,  from  the  earliest  times  downwards :  but  it  is  a  hard  matter  to 
wash  out  blood ;  and  we  oppose  the  fact,  that  the  representatives  of 
many  original  types  still  live :  such  as  the  Greeks  (heroic  type),  the 
Basques,  the  Jews,  the  Australians,  the  Indians,  and,  above  all,  the 
Egyptians. 

M.  Jacquinot,  whose  ability  and  great  opportunities  for  investi- 
gation add  much  weight  to  his  authority,  lays  down  the  following 
conclusions :  —  • 

« 1.  A  fpeeiet,  or  race  which  represeDts  it,  is  primitiTe,  when  all  the  indlTidaals  that  com- 
pose it  present  the  same  physical  characters,  same  color  of  skin,  same  type  of  face,  same 
conformation,  same  kind  of  hair — notwithstanding  the  yarieties  of  physiognomy  of  indi* 
Tldoals,  which  yary  to  infinitude  in  all  species. 

« In  a  species,  according  to  CuYier,  <  the  children  resemble  the  father  and  mother,  as 
much  as  these  resemble  each  other.' 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC 

400  HYBRIDITT   OP   AlflMAL^, 

<*  2.  It  18  impossible,  no  matter  how  we  prodituM  erosses  between  speeies  or  rteee  on  tke 
globe,  to  obtain  a  prodaot  which  represents  exactly  one  of  the  primitiYe  types ;  Uiat  is  to 
saj,  we  shall  never  be  able  to  construct,  with  all  the  pieces,  a  Negro,  an  American,  a  Ger- 
man, or  a  Celt. 

«  8.  The  speeies  will  separate  ftrom  the  primitiTe  type,  and  will  become  the  more  altered 
by  crosses  with  other  species,  in  proportion  as  the  indiifidnals  which  compose  it  differ  fro« 
each  other,  and  as  the  types  are  more  numerons. 

**  4.  The  greater  the  differences  among  individuals,  the  less  the  species  which  haye  pro- 
duced them  win  be  near  {voisines)  to  each  other,  and  tiee  venH"  ^^ 

The  laws  governing  hybridity  have  as  yet  been  but  imperfectly 
studied.  Some  points  of  vital' interest,  connected  with  the  crossing 
of  races,  have  passed  by  without  notice ;  for  example,  the  relative 
Influence  of  the  male  and  the  female  on  progeny.  The  physical 
characteristics  of  the  common  mule  (offipring  of  the  ass  and  mare) 
are  well  known.  It  partakes  of  the  characters  of  both  parents ;  but  in 
the  form  of  the  head  and  ears,  as  well  as  in  disposition,  it  inherits  more 
of  the  ass  than  of  the  horse.  The  bardeauy  or  hinny  (offspring  of 
horse  and  she-ass)  partakes,  on  the  contrary,  much  more  of  the  pecu- 
liarities of  the  horse  —  the  head  being  small,  closely  resembling  the 
horse ;  the  ears  short ;  the  disposition  rather  that  of  the  horse ;  and 
the  voice  is  not  a  bray,  but  the  neigh.  The  mule  and  hinny  are 
almost  as  much  unlike  each  other  as  the  horse  and  ass.  How  fiar 
this  rule  may  be  applicable  to  other  infertile  hybrids,  I  am  not  pre- 
pared to  say. 

Where  proximate  species  are  bred  together,  the  above  rule,  based 
upon  equidas,  applies  with  less  force ;  e.g.^  the  dog  and  wolf,  or  differ- 
ent species  of  dogs,  \  have  seen  pups  from  the  cross  of  the  cur-dog 
and  wolf,  which  presented  an  intermediate  type ;  but  the  following 
appears  to  show  that  a  different  breed  of  dog  may  produce  a  diver- 
gent result : — 

'*  In  the  recent  experiments  of  Wiegemann,  in  BerUn,  of  the  offspring  of  a  pointer  and 
she-wolf,  two  resembled  the  father,  with  hanging  ears,  while  the  other  was  like  a  wolf- 
dog." «» 

When  the  grey-hound  and  fox-hound,  the  fox-hound  and  terrier, 
are  coupled,  their  ofispring  partake  rather  of  the  half-and-half  type. 

We  are  unable  to  declare  what  shades  of  difference  may  arise  fipom 
the  manner  of  crossing  canine  males  and  females.  A  grey-hound  pos- 
sesses great  speed,  has  a  peculiar  shape,  and  pursues  his  game  by 
sight  alone ;  being  so  destitute  of  smell  as  to  be  incapable  of  trailing 
it.  The  fox-hound,  on  the  contrary,  tracks  game  almost  solely  by 
scent,  has  little  speed,  but  great  endurance.  Now,  when  fox-hound 
and  grey-hound  are  bred  together,  their  offipring  is  intermediate  in 
form,  in  speed,  in  sense  of  smell,  and  in  every  attribute.  Such  law, 
I  believe,  holds  with  regard  to  all  dogs,  when  thorough-bred. 

Some  years  ago,  I  was  intimate  with  a  gentleman  who  owned  a 

Digitized  by 

Google 

VIEWED   IN    CONNECTION    WITH    MANKIJ^D.  401 

I 

fine  pack  of  fox-hounds.  Wishing  to  retain  the  sense  of  smell,  and 
at  the  same  time  procure  more  speed,  he  commenced  by  crossing 
them  with  grey-hounds;  and  continued  crossing  until  he  obtained 
a  stock  of  but  one-eighth  gre^-hound,  which  dogs  gave  him  all  the 
qualities  desired. 

Now  it  would  appear,  from  sundry  facts  already  set  forth  under  our 
'^Caucasian''  type,  that  even  proximate  species  are  not  invariably 
governed  by  the  same  laws.  Some  species  produce  an  intermediate 
type,  like  tiie  dogs  just  cited;  while  others  possess  a  tendency  to 
reproduce  each  of  the  parent  stocks.  We  may  instance  the  white 
and  gray  mice,  the  deer  And  ram,  no  less  than  the  fair  and  the  dark- 
skinned  races  of  men. 

During  a  professional  visit  (which  interrupted  these  lines)  to  the 
house  of  a  friend,  Mr.  Garland  Gk)ode,  my  notice  was  attracted  by 
some  curious  facts  respecting  the  crossing  of  races.  Among  his  slaves 
he  owns  three  &milies,  all  crosses  of  white  and  black  blood,  as  fol- 
lows :  — 

1st.  A  woman,  three-fonrtlis  white,  married  to  a  half-breed  mulatto  man.  She  had  four 
children ;  the  two  first  and  the  last  of  which  we»e  eren  more  fair  than  the  mother.  The 
other  presented  a  dark  complexion — that  of  the  fSather. 

2d.  A  mulatto  woman,  half-breed,  married  to  a  foU-blooded  Negro  man,  not  of  the  Jet- 
tiest  hue,  although  black.  They  had  thirteen  children ;  of  which  most  were  even  blacker 
than  the  father,  while  two  exhibited  tiie  light  complexion  of  tiie  motiier. 

8d.  A  mulatto  man,  married  to  a  yery  black  Negroes.  Thej  had  twelye  children;  and 
here  again  the  minority  of  the  children  were  coal-black,  whereas  two  or  three  were  as  li|^t 
an  complexion  as  the  father. 

With  respect  to  these  examples,  it  is  evident  that,  in  the  first  case, 
white-blood  predominated  in  the  parents.  In  the  two  latter,  the  Ne- 
gro blood  was  paramount  Thus,  in  three  cases,  the  law  of  hybridity 
seems  clearly  to  have  been  called  into  action.  The  children  had  a 
tendency  to  run  into  the  type  of  the  predominant  blood ;  because,  in 
the  first  example,  white-blood  preponderated  in  the  children ;  in  the 
two  last,  black-blood.  Now,  I  do  not  consider  this  rule  to  be  con- 
stant ;  but  such  examples  are  common.  Mr.  Lyell  has  ag^,  in  these 
matters,  made  statements  upon  exceptions  to  ndes,  and  not,  assuredly, 
upon  the  rules  themselves. 

Observations  are  wanting  to  settie  many  of  the  laws  that  govern, 
the  mixing  of  human  species.  In  the  United  States,  the  mulattoes 
and  other  grades  are  produced  by  the  connection  of  the  white  male 
with  the  Negress;  the  mulattoes  with  each  other ;  and  the  white  male 
with  the  mtUattress.  It  is  so  rare,  in  this  country,  to  see  the  offipring 
of  a  Negro  man  and  a  white  woman,  that  I  have  never  personally 
encountered  an  example ;  but  such  children  are  reported  to  partake 
more  of  the  type  of  the  Negro,  than  when  the  mode  of  crossing  is 
51 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC 

402  HYBRIDITT    OP    ANIMALS, 

reversed.  I  am,  however,  told  that  the  progeny  derived  firom  a  Negro 
father  presents  characteristics  different  from  those  where  the  male 
parent  of  mulattoes  is  white ;  and  consequently  I  suspend  decision. 

Our  ordinary  mulattoes  are  nearly  intermediate  between  the  parent 
stocks ;  governed,  apparently,  very  much  by  laws  similar  to  those  we 
have  instanced  in  the  grey-hound  and  fox-hound.  They  are,  how- 
ever, as  before  stated,  less  prolific  than  the  parent  stock ;  which  con- 
dition is  coupled  with  an  inherent  tendency  to  run  out,  so  much  so, 
that  mulatto  humanity  seldom,  if  ever,  reaches,  through  subsequent 
crossings  with  white  men,  that  grade  of  dilution  which  washes  out 
the  Negro  stain.  • 

While  speaking  of  dogs,  we  hinted,  that  the  brain  and  nervous 
system,  in  animal  nature,  are  so  influenced  by  crossing,  asi  to  make 
instincts  and  senses  partake  of  intermediate  characters.  The  same 
law  applies  to  human  white  and  black  races ;  for  the  mulatto,  if  cav 
tainly  more  intelligent  than  the  Negro,  is  less  so  than  the  white  man. 
His  intelligence,  as  a  general  rule,  augments  in  proportion  to  the 
amount  of  white-blood  in  his  veins.  This  is  invariably  the  case  in 
the  United  States.  In  Hayti,  4nulattoe8  governed  until  exterminated 
by  the  blacks ;  and  it  is  the  mulatto  element  which  now  dominates, 
and  always  will  govern  in  Liberia,  until  this  experimental  colony  be 
annexed  by  Anglo-Saxons,  or  annihilated  by  native  Negroes.  Com- 
parisons of  crania  alone  substantiate  this  view,  upon  anatomical 
grounds ;  the  past  ratifies  it,  upon  historical  data :  future  Liberian 
destinies,  if  deduced  from  such  premises,  are  not  exhilarating.  Again,  in 
Africa  itself,  all  Negro  empires  are  ruled  by  the  superior  Foolah  races. 

It  may  be  received,  I  think,  as  a  fact,  that  in  white  races  the 
intellect  of  children  is  derived  much  more  from  the  mother  than  the 
father.  Popular  experience  remarks,  that  great  men  seldom  be^t 
great  sons ;  and  it  is  equally  true,  that  dull  women  do  not  often  pro- 
duce intelligent  children.  On  the  other  hand,  the  mothers  of  great 
men  almost  invariably  have  been  distinguished  by  vigorous  natural 
intellects,  whether  cultivated  or  not.  Now,  it  is  singularly  note- 
worthy, in  connection  with  the  above  phenomena,  that  this  doctrine 
seems  to  be  reversed  where  black  are  crossed  with  white  races.  The 
intellect  of  a  mulatto,  child  of  a  white  male  and  a  Negress,  is  cer 
tainly  superior  to  that  of  the  Negro ;  and  I  have  pointed  out,  when 
speaking  of  the  mule  and  bardeau,  that  the  farm  of  the  head  is  given 
by  the  sire.  Space  now  precludes  my  doing  more  than  suggest  in- 
quiry into  a  new  and  interesting  point,  unfortunately  not  illumined 
by  Morton's  penetration. 

Again  and  again,  in  previous  publications,  I  have  alluded  to  the 
fallibility  of  arguments  drawn  from  analogy  alone,  while  insisting 

_  Digitized  by 

Google 

VIEWED    IN    CONNECTION    WITH    MANKIND.  403 

that  no  true  analogies  can  be  said  to  exist.  Every  animal,  from  man 
to  the  worm,  is  governed  by  special  physiological  laws.  Let  me 
notice,  en  passant,  the  curious  fact,  that  natural  giants  and  dwarfs  are 
next  to  fabulous  in  the  animal  kingdom,  although'frequent  enough 
in  the  human  family ;  subjoining  an  extract  from  one  of  my  earlier 
articles  on  hybridity :  — 

*<  Catherine  de  Medicis  amused  herself  and  court  by  collecting,  from  various  quarters,  a 
number  of  male  and  female  dwarfs,  and  forming  marriages  amongst  them ;  but  they  were 
ftU  unprolifio.  The  same  experiment  was  made  by  the  Electress  of  Brandenburg,  wife  of 
Joachim  Frederic,  and  with  the  same  result.  Geoffrey  Saint  Hilaire,  in  his  researches,  has 
been  able  to  discover  but  one  exception,  the  famous  dwarf  Borwilaski,  and  there  are  strong 
doubts  about  the  faithfulness  of  his  wife,  who  was  a  woman  of  full  stature.  Giants  are 
likewise  impotent,  deficient  in  intellect,  feeble  in  body,  and  short-lived.  It  is  a  remarkable 
|act,  that  giants  and  dwarfs  proper  are  almost  unknown  in  the  animal  kingdom,  while  they 
are  common  in  all  the  races  of  men,  and  under  all  circumstances."  ^^9 

Our  chapter  on  O-eographical  Distribution  alludes  to  one  peculiar 
effect  in  the  crossing  of  races,  as  illustrated  by  the  blacks  and  whites 
in  our  Southern  States :  viz.  — how  the  smallest  admixture  of  'Negro 
blood  is  equivalent  to  acclimation  against  yellow  fever,  being  almost 
tantamount  to  complete  exemption.  * 

Much  passes  current,  among  breeders  of  domestic  animals,  about 
the  improvements  of  breeds  by  crossing  them ;  and  similar  ideas  have 
been  suggested  by  many  writers,  as  applicable  to  the  human  family ; 
but  the  notion  itself  is  very  unphilosophical,  and  could  never  have 
originated  with  any  intelligent  naturalist  of  thorough  experience  in 
such  matters.  It  is  mindj  and  mind  alone,  which  constitutes  the 
proudest  prerogative  of  man ;  whose  excellence  should  be  measured 
by  his  intelligence  and  virtue.  The  Negro  and  other  unintellectual 
tj^es  have  been  shown,  in  another  chapter,  to  possess  heads  much 
smaller,  by  actual  measurement  in  cubic  inches,  than  the  white  races; 
and,  although  a  metaphjrBiciaa  may  dispute  about  the  causes  which 
may  have  debased  their  intellects  or  precluded  their  expansion,  it  can 
not  be  denied  that  these  dark  races  are,  in  this  particular,  greatly 
inferior  to  the  others  of  fairer  complexion.  Now,  when  the  white 
and  black  races  are  crossed  together,  the  offspring  exhibits  through- 
out a  modified  anatomical  structure,  associated  with  sundry  character- 
istics of  an  intermediate  type.  Among  other  changes  superinduced, 
the  head  of  a  mulatto  is  larger  than  that  of  the  Negro;  the  forehead 
is  more  developed,  the  facial  angle  enlarged,  and  the  intellect  becomes 
manifestly  improved.  This  fact  is  notorious  in  the  United  States ;  and 
it  is  historically  exemplified  by  another:  viz.,  that  the  mulattoes, 
although  but  a  fraction  of  the  population  of  Hayti,  had  ruled  the 
island  till  expelled  by  the  overwhelming  jealousy  and  major  numerical 
force  of  the  blacks.    In  Liberia,  President  Roberts  boasts  of  but  one- 

Digitized  by 

Google 

404  HTBRIDITT   OP    ANIMALS, 

fourth  Negro  blood ;  while  all  the  colored  chiefe  of  departments  in 
that  infant  repubUc  hold  in  thfeir  veins  more  or  less  of  white-blood ; 
which  component  had  been  copiously  inf^trated,  prior  to  emigra- 
tion from  America,  into  that  population  generally.  If  all  the  white- 
blood  were  suddenly  abstracted,  or  the  flow  of  whitening  elements  from 
the  United  States  to  be  stopped,  the  whole  fabric  would  doubtless 
soon  fall  into  ruins ;  and  leave  as  little  trace  behind  as  Herodotus'^ 
famous  Negro  colony  of  Colchis,  or  the  more  historical  one  of  Meroe. 
From  the  best  information  procurable,  we  know  that  there  has  been 
a  vast  deal  of  exaggeration,  among  colonizationists  at  home,  about 
this  mulatto  colony  of  Liberia  abroad ;  nor,  much  as  we  should  be 
gratified  at  the  success  of  the  experiment,  can  we  perceive  how  any 
durable  good  can  be  expected  from  it,  unless  some  process  be  disco- 
vered by  which  a  Negro's  head  may  be  changed  in  form,  and  enlarged 
in  size.  History  affords  no  evidence  that  cultivation,  or  any  known 
causes  but  physical  amalgamation,  can  alter  a  primitive  conformation 
in  the  slightest  degree.    Lyell  himself  acknowledges :  — 

'*  The  separation  of  the  colored  children  in  the  Boston  schools  arose,  not  from  an  indul- 
gence in  anti-Negro  feelings,  but  because  thej  find  they  can  in  this  way  bring  on  boCb  rmoei 
fabter.  Up  to  the  age  of  fourteen,  the  black  children  advance  as  ftist  as  the  whites;  but 
after  that  age,  unless  there  be  an  admixture  of  white-blood,  it  becomes  in  most  instances 
extremely  difficult  to  carry  them  forward.  That  the  half-breeds  should  be  intermediate 
between  the  two  parent-stocks,  and  that  the  colored  race  should  therefore  gain  in  menttl 
capacity  in  proportion  as  it  approximates  in  physical  organisation  to  the  whites,  seems 
natural ;  and  yet  it  is  a  wonderftd  fact,  psychologically  considered,  that  we  should  be  able 
to  trace  the  phenomena  of  hybridity  CTon  into  the  world  of  intellect  and  reason."  *^ 

To  persons  domiciled  in  our  slave-States,  it  is  really  amusmg  to 
hear  the  many-toned  hosannahs  sung  in  Old  England  and  in  New 
England,  over  the  success  of  the  Eepublic  of  Liberia ;  while  the  world- 
shakes  with  laughter  at  Frenchmen  for  attempting  a  repuhlioy  or  any 
other  stable  form  of  government  shcfft  of  absolute  despotism ;  as  if 
Negroes  were  a  superior  race  to  the  Franco-Gauls ! 

Robespierre  gave,  in  palliation  of  his  cruelties,  that  you  could  not 
reason  with  a  Gallic  opposition :  the  only  way  to  silence  it  being 
through  the  guillotine.  It  would  be  a  curious  investigation  to  inquire, 
what  was  the  type  of  those  turbulent  spirits  ?  I  have  little  doubt  that 
each  despot  of  tiie  hour  would  be  found  to  have  been  one  of  those 
dark-skinned,  black-haired,  black-eyed  fellows,  depicted  so  well  [iupra] 
by  Bodichon ;  and  if  the  imperial  government  were  simply  to  chop 
off  the  head  of  every  demagogue  who  was  not  a  blond  trAife-man, 
they  might  "get  along"  in  France  as  tranquilly  as  in  England,  Qer^ 
many,  and  the  United  States.  DarAr-skinned  races,  history  attests, 
are  only  fit  for  military  governments.  It  is  the  unique  rule  genial  to 
their  physical  nature:  they  are  unhappy  without  it,  even  now,  at 

Digitized  by 

Google 

VIEWED    IN    CONNECTION    WITH    MANKIND.  405 

Paris,  None  but  the  fair-sTdnned  types  of  mankind  have  been  able, 
hitherto,  to  realize,  in  peaceful  practice,  the  old  Gennanic  system 
described  by  Tacitus  —  "  De  minoribus  rebus,  principes  consultant ; 
de  majoribus,  omnes"  —  omnesy  be  it  understood,  signifying  exclu- 
sively white  men  of  their  own  type. 

If  these  remarks  be  true  in  basis,  it  is  evident,  theoretically,  that 
the  superior  races  ought  to  be  kept  free  from  all  adulterations,  other- 
wise the  world  will  retrograde,  instead  of  advancing,  in  civilization. 
It  may  be  a  question,  whether  there  is  not  already  too  much  adultera- 
tion in  Europe.  Spain  and  Italy,  where  the  darker  races  are  in  the 
majority,  continue  still  behind  in  the  march.  France,  although  teem- 
ing with  gigantic  intellects,  has  been  struggling  in  vain  for  sixty 
years  to  found  a  stable  government  —  her  population  is  tainted  with 
bad  elements ;  and  wherever  Portuguese  or  Spanish  colonies  attempt 
to  compete  with  Anglo-Saxons,  they  are  left  astern,  when  not  "an- 
nexed." It  is  the  strictly-white  races  that  are  bearing  onward  the 
flambeau  of  civilization,  as  displayed  in  the  Germanic  families  alone. 
Sir  Walter  Scott  declares :  — 

**  The  goTemment  of  Spain,  i^  worn-out  despotism,  lodged  in  the  hinds  of  a  family 
of  the  lowest  degree  of  inteUect,  was  one  of  the  worst  in  Europe ;  and  the  state  of  the 
nobility  in  general  (for  there  were  noble  exceptions)  seemed  scarcely  less  degraded.  The 
incestaoos  practice  of  marrying  within  the  near  degrees  of  propinquity  had  long  existed, 
with  its  nsnal  conseqnences :  the  dwarfing  of  the  body  and  the  degeneracy  of  the  under- 
standing."^! To  which  Mr.  Percital  Hunter  adds,  that  '*  writers  on  lunacy  attribute  the 
insanity,  or  rather  the  innate  idiocy,  so  frequent  among  certain  Scotch  fSunilies,  to  the  old 
national  practice  of  neter  marrying  out  of  their  clan."  ^^ 

The  civilization  of  ancient  Rome,  achieved  by  a  very  mixed  race, 
although  grand  in  its  way,  was,  nevertheless,  characterized  throughout 
by  cruelty,  a  certain  degree  of  barbarism  and  want  of  refinement. 

These  crude  elements  of  the  laws  of  hybridity  —  laws  by  no  means 
clearly  defined  in  anthropological  science  —  derive  some  illustration 
by  contrasting  the  aristocracies  of  Europe.  In  England,  where  inter- 
marriages between  impoverished  nobles  of  the  Norman  stock  with 
wealthy  commoners  of  the  homogeneous  Saxon,  and  where  elevation 
of  plebeians  to  the  peerage,  reinvigorate  the  breed,  such  patrician 
classes  comprehend  more  manly  beauty  (Circassia,  perhaps,  excepted) 
than  exists  in  the  same  number  of  individuals  throughout  the  globe. 

"  What  proportion,"  weU  asks  the  Wettmiruter  Review^  "  of  Uie  old  Percy  blood  flows  in 
the  yeins  of  those  who  claim  the  honor  of  the  family's  representation  ?  The  fanatics  of 
<  blood,'  i.  e.,  thoee  who  are  not  content  to  yield  that  reasonable  amount  of  regard  to  it, 
which  sense  and  sentiment  botii  permit,  should  remember  that  when  the  main  line  has 
merged,  again  and  again,  into  other  families,  the  original  blood  must  be  but  a  small  consti- 
tuent of  the  remote  descendant's  personality. 

<*  The  great  subverter  of  the  aristocratic  principle  in  the  creation  of  peers,  was  Pitt  In 
fighting  his  battle  against  the  Whigs,  he  ayiuled  himself  immensely  of  the  moneyed  interest ; 

Digitized  by 

Google 

406  HTBRIDITT    OP    ANIMALS, 

and  rewarded  the  supporters  of  party  with  the  honors  of  the  crown.  At  eyery  general 
election  a  batch  was  made :  eight  peerages  were  created  in  1790 ;  and  in  1794,  when  a  Whig 
defection  to  him  took  place,  ten  were  created.  Sir  Egerton  Brydges,  a  very  accomplished 
man,  both  as  a  geneidogist  and  a  man  of  letters,  published  a  special  pamphlet  on  the  point 
in  1798.    He  undoubtedly  expressed  the  views  of  the  aristocratic  party  when  he  said  — 

*< '  In  every  parliament  I  have  seen  the  number  augmented  of  busy,  intriguing,  pert,  low 
members,  who,  without  birth,  education,  honorable  en^ployments,  or  perhaps  even  fortune, 
dare  to  obtrude  themselves,  and  push  out  the  landed  interest' 

.  .  .  *<  What  then  is  at  present  the  portion  of  genuine  aristocracy  in  the  House  of  Lords? 
Calculations  have  been  made  by  genealogists  on  this  subject,  of  iduch  we  shall  avail  our- 
selves. 

"  The  learned  author  of  the  Origines  OenealogiccB  analysed  the  printed  peerage  of  1828, 
and  found  that  of  249  noblemen  85  *  laid  claim'  to  having  traced  their  descent  beyond  the 
Conquest;  49  prior  to  1100;  29  prior  to  1200;  82  prior  to  1800;  26  prior  to  1400;  17  to 

1500 ;  and  26  to  1600.    At  the  same  time  80  had  their  origin  but  little  before  1700 

Here  then  we  have  a  result  of  one-half  of  the  peerage  being  at  all  events  traceabie  to  a 
period  antecedent  to  the  Wars  of  the  Roses.  But  of  these  a  third  only  had  emerged  at  aU 
out  of  insignificance  during  the  two  previous  centuries. 

"  Sir  Harris  Nicolas  fixes  as  his  standard  of  pretension  in  Family,  the  having  been  of 
consideration,  baronial  or  knightly  rank,  that  is,  in  the  reign  of  Queen  Elizabeth ;  and  ap- 
plying that  test  to  the  English  Peerage  in  1880,  found  that  oM-tkird  of  the  body  were  enti- 
tled to  it. 

^*  There  still  remains  in  the  male  line,  up  and  down  England,  a  considerable  number  of 
landed  families  of  very  high  antiquity ;  but  the  gradual  decay  and  extinction  of  these  is  the 
constant  theme  of  genealogists.    Hear  old  Dugdale  in  the  Preface  to  his  Baronage  in  1675. 

<*  He  first  speaks  of  the  Roll  of  Battle  Abbey,  and  says  of  it :  —  <  There  are  great  errors 
or  rather  falsities  in  most  of  these  copies.  .  .  .  Such  hath  been  the  subtilty  of  some  monks 
of  old.'    But,  speaking  of  his  labors,  generally,  he  has  these  more  remarkable  words :  — 

«  (For  of  no  less  than  270  families,  touching  which  this  first  volume  doth  take  notice, 
there  will  hardly  be  found  above  eight  which  do  to  this  day  continue ;  and  of  those  not  any 
whose  estates  (compared  with  what  their  ancestors  enjoyed)  are  not  a  little  diminished. 
Nor  of  that  number  (I  mean  270)  above  twenty-four  who  are  by  any  younger  male  branch 
descended  from  them,  for  aught  I  can  discover.' "  ^^ 

Hence  ethnology  deduces,  that  the  prolonged  superiority  of  the 
EngUsh  to  any  other  aristocracies  is  mainly  due  to  the  continuous 
upheaval  of  the  Saxon  element:  and,  at  such  point  of  view,  the  social 
aspirations  of  Lord  John  Manners  would  seem  to  be  as  philosophical 
as  his  poetic  effusions  are  unique :  — 

**  Let  arts  and  manners,  laws  and  commerce,  die ; 
But  leave  us  stiU  our  old  nobili/y  /  " 

So,  again,  in  Muscovy.  German  wives  and  Teutonic  officers  have 
metamorphosed  the  old  Tartar  nobility  into  higher-castes  than  Ivan 
and  his  court  would  have  reputed  to  be  Euasian.  On  the  other  hand, 
the  recreant  crew  of  contij  baroniy  rnarchesi,  in  Spain,  Portugal,  Italy, 
Sicily,  and  parts  of  Southern  Europe,  include  some  of  the  most  abject 
specimens  of  humanity  anywhere  to  be  found.  The  physical  causeof  this 
deterioration,  from  the  historical  greatness  of  their  ancestral  names,  is 
said  to  be — "breeding  in  and  in."  Now,  this  may  be  true  enough,  as 
an  apparent  reason ;  but  is  there  not  a  latent  one  ?  Historj-  shows  that 

Digitized  by 

Google 

VIEWED    IN    CONNECTION    WITH    MANKIND.  407 

the  femilies  most  degraded  (in  Portugal  especially,  where  the  lowest 
forms  are  encountered,)  are  compounded  of  Iberian,  Celtic,  Arab, 
Jewish,  and  other  types  —  pure  in  themselves,  but  bad  in  the  amal- 
gam. Pride  of  birth,  for  centuries,  has  prevented  them  from  mawy- 
ing  out  of  the  circle  of  aristocracy.  With  rare  exceptions,  they  are 
too  mean  in  person  to  be  accepted  by  the  white  nobility  of  Northern 
Europe.  The  consequence  is,  they  intermarry  with  themselves ;  and, 
as  in  other  mulatto  compounds,  the  offipring  of  such  mongrel  com- 
minglings  deteriorate  more  and  more  in  every  generation.  They 
cease  to  procreate,  and  there  are  some  hopes  that  the  corrupt  breed  is 
extinguishing  itself.  The  Peninsular  war,  and  the  still  mor^  recent 
Don-Pedro-experiences,  left  on  the  mind  of  every  foreign  legionary 
concerned,  the  sentiment  that,  "  if  you  take  a  Castilian,  and  strip 
Jiim  of  all  his  good  qualities,  you  will  leave  a  respectable  Portuguee." 
It  is  precisely  the  same  with  the  PeroteSy  Greek  aristocracy  of  Istam- 
boul :  on  whom  read  Commodore  Porter's  "  Letters  from  Constanti- 
nople, by  an  American."  Such  are  unsolved  enigmas  in  the  rough- 
hewn  conceptions  we  can  yet  form  of  human  hyhridity. 

It  seems  to  me  certain,  however,  in  human  physical  history,  that  the 
superior  race  must  inevitably  become  deteriorated  by  any  intermix- 
ture with  the  inferior;  and  I  have  suggested  elsewhere,  that,  through 
the  operation  of  the  laws  of  hybridity  alone,  the  human  family  might 
possibly  become  exterminated  by  a  thorough  amalgamation  of  all  the 
various  types  of  mankind  now  existing  upon  earth. 

Sufficient  having  been  said  on  the  crossing  of  races,  I  shall  close 
this  chapter  with  a  few  remarks  on  the  propagation  of  a  race  from  a 
single  pair,  or  what  in  conmion  parlance  is  termed  "  breeding  in  and 
in.*'  It  is  a  common  belief,  among  many  rearers  of  domestic  ani- 
mals, and  one  acted  upon  every  day,  that  a  race  or  stock  deteriorates 
by  this  procedure,  and  that  improvement  of  breed  is  gained  by  cross- 
ing. Whether  such  rule  be  constant  or  not,  with  regard  to  inferior 
animals,  I  am  unprepared  to  aver — some  authors  having  cited  facts 
to  the  contrary.  Science  possesses  no  criteria  by  which  it  can  de- 
termine beforehand  the  degree  of  prolificacy  of  any  two  species 
when  brought  together ;  and  so  diflferently  are  animals  affected  by 
physical  agents,  that  actual  experiment  alone  can  ascertain  the  com- 
parative operations  of  climate  upon  two  giveii  animals  when  moved 
from  one  zoological  province  fo  another  —  some  becoming  greatly 
changed,  others  but  little,  and  man  least  of  all;  Recurring  to  oui 
definitions  of  remote^  allied^  and  proximate  "species"  Isupra,  p.  81], 
let  us  inquire  what  are  the  data  as  respects  mankind. 

Will  any  one  deny  that  continued  intermarriages  among  blood 
relations  are  destructive  to  a  race,  both  physically  and  intellectually  ? 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC 

408  HTBRIDITT   OF   ANIMALS, 

The  fact  is  proverbial.  Do  we  not  see  it  most  folly  illustrated  in  flie 
royal  families  and  nobility  of  Europe,  where  such  matrimdnial  alli- 
ances have  long  been  customary?  The  reputation  of  the  House  of 
Lofds  in  England  would  long  since  have  been  extinct,  had  not  the 
Crown  incessantly  manufiwjtured  nobles  from  out  of  the  sturdy  sons 
of  the  people.  Cannot  every  one  of  us  individually  point  to  degene- 
rate offipring  which  have  arisen  from  ffunily  intermarriages  for  mere 
property-sake  ? 

In  early  life,  I  witnessed  a  most  striking  example,  in  the  upper 
part  of  South  Carolina,  where  my  &ther  owned  a  country-seat.  Al- 
most the  entire  population  of  the  neighborhood  was  made  up  of  Irish 
Covenanters,  who  had  moved  to  that  country  before  the  Eevolutionary 
war.  They  had  intermarried  for  many  generations,  until  the  same 
blood  coursed  through  the  veins  of  the  whole  of  them ;  and  there  are 
many  persons  now  living  in  South  Carolina  who  will  bear  me  out 
when  I  state,  that  the  proportion  of  idiots  and  deformed  was  unpre- 
cedented in  that  district,  of  which  the  majority  in  its  population  was 
stupid  and  debased  in  the  extreme.  I  could  mention  several  other 
striking  examples,  beheld  in  higher  life,  but  it  would  be  painful  to 
particularize. 

And  do  not  the  instincts  of  our  nature,  the  social  laws  of  man,  all 
over  the  civilized  world,  and  the  laws  of  God,  from  Genesis  to  Reve- 
lations, cry  aloud  against  incest  f  Does  not  the  father  shrink  with 
horror  from  the  idea  of  manying  his  own  child,  or  from  seeing  the 
bed  of  his  daughter  polluted  by  her  brother?  Do  not  children  them- 
selves shudder  at  the  thought?  And  can  it  be  credited,  that  a  God 
of  infinite  power,  wisdom,  and  foresight,  should  have  been  driven  to 
the  necessity  of  propagating  the  human  family  from  b,  single  pair, 
and  then  have  stultified  hi&  act  by  stamping  incest  as  a  crime  ?  *^ 

I  do  not  believe' that  true  reli^on  ever  intended  to  teach  a  common 
ori^n  for  the  human  race.  "  Cain  knew  his  wife,"  whom  he  found 
in  a  foreign  land,  when  he  had  no  sister  to  marry ;  and  although  cor- 
ruption and  sin  were  not  wanting  among  the  patriarchs,  yet  nowhere 
in  Scripture  do  we  see,  after  Adam's  sons  and  daughters,  a  brother 
marrying  his  sister. 

It  is  shown,  in  our  Supplement^  that  many  of  the  genealogies  of 
Genesis  have  been  falsely  translated,  and  otherwise  misconstrued,  in 
our  English  Bible ;  and  that  the  names  of  Abraham's  ancestors  re- 
present countries  and  fkfltionSy  and  not  individuals.  Moreover,  no- 
where in  Gtenesis  is  the  dogma  of  a  foture  state  hinted  at :  and  its 
ancient  authors  could  have  had  no  object  in  teaching  the  modem 
idea  of  unity  of  races,  when  those  writers  themselves  possei^ed  no 
clear  perceptions  upon  "salvation"  hereafter. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

VIEWED    IK    CONNECTION    WITH    MANKIND.  409 

In  my  remarks,  five  years  ago,  on  "TJniverBal  Terms,"  reproduced 
and  extended  in  this  volume,  I  showed  that  the  only  text  in  the  N"ew 
Testament  whidi  refers  directly  to  the  unity  of  races,  is  that  in  ActSy 
where  St.  Paul  says,  that  God  "hath  made  of  one  blood  all  nations 
of  men."  I  hold  that  no  scientific  importance  should  be  attached 
to  this  isolated  passage,  inasmuch  as  the  writer  of  Act^  employed  uni- 
versal terms  very  loosely ;  at  the  same  time  that  he  knew  nothing  of 
the  existence  of  races  or  nations  beyond  the  circumference  of  the 
Boman  Empire. 

Dr.  Morton,  in  one  of  his  letters  to  me  (Sept  27, 1850),  shortly 
before  his  demise,  thus  emphatically  expressed  himself:  — 

*'  For  my  own  part,  !f  I  oouM  beUere  that  the  humi^i  race  had  its  ori^^  in  incetty  1 
should  think  that  I  had  at  onoe  got  the  clue  to  aU  ungodliness.  Two  lines  of  Catechism 
would  explain  more  than  all  the  theological  discussions  since  the  Christian  era.  I  have  put 
it  into  rii  jme. 

«  Q,  Whence  came  that  curse  we  oaU  primeral  sin  ? 

**A.  Fran  Adam's  children  iM^edlng  in  and  in." 

The  reader  can  now  appreciate  some  of  the  contradictory  pheno- 
mena that  perplex  the  investigator  of  human  Hyhridity.  I  have 
purposely  set  them  before  him  in  juxtaposition.  .  To  me  tiiey  appear 
irreconcileable ;  unless  the  theory  of  plurality  of  origin  be  adopted, 
together  with  the  recognition  that  there  exist  remote^  allied^  and  proxi- 
maUj  "  species,"  as  well  of  mankind  as  of  lower  animals. 

Having  speculatively  alluded  {supra,  p.  80)  to  a  possible  extermina- 
tion  of  races  in  an  unknown  fiiturity,  I  would  here  briefly  justify  such 
hypothesis  by  saying,  that  Kature  marches  steadily  towards  perfec- 
tion ;  and  that  it  attains  this  end  through  the  consecutive  destruction 
of  living  beings.  Geology  and  palaeontology  prove  a  succession  of 
creations  and  destructions  previously  to  any  effacements  of  Man ;  and 
it  is  contended  by  Hombron  and  other  naturalists,  that  the  inferior 
races  of  manldnd  were  created  before  the  superior  types,  who  now 
appear  destined  to  supplant  their  predecessors.  Albeit,  whatever 
may  have  been  the  order  of  creation,  the  unintellectual  races  seem 
doomed  to  evenfbal  disappearance  in  all  those  climates  where  the 
higher  groups  of  fair-skinned  families  can  permanentiy  exist. 

The  entire  race  of  the  Guanches,  at  the  Canary  Islands,  was  exter- 
minated by  the  Portuguese  during  the  thirteenth  and  fourteenth  cen- 
turies ;  not  a  living  vestige  remaining  to  tell  the  tale.  Some  of  the 
pre-Celtic  inhabitants  of  Britain,  Gaul,  and  Scandinavia,  seem  to  have 
shared  a  similar  fate :  16,000,000  of  aborigines  in  North  America 
have  dwindled  down  to  2,000,000  since  the  "Mayflower"  discharged 
on  Plymouth  Rock ;  and  their  congeners,  the  Caribs,  have  long  been 
extinct  in  the  West  Indian  islands.  The  mortal  destiny  of  the  whole 
American  group  is  already  perceived  to  be  running  out,  like  the  sand 
52 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC 

410  HYBRIDITT   OP    ANIMALS. 

in  Time's  hour-glass.  Of  400,000  inhabitants  of  the  Sandwich  Islands, 
far  less  than  100,000  survive,  and  these  are  daily  sinking  beneath 
civilization,  missionaries,  and  rum.  In  New  Holland,  New  Guinea, 
many  of  the  Pacific  islands,  and  other  parts  of  the  world,  the  same 
work  of  destruction  is  going  on ;  and  the  labors  of  proselytism  are  . 
vain,  save  to  liiisten  its  accomplishment. 

<*  Pourquoi  cela?*'  asks  BodichoiL^ss  «//  ^  hecauu  their  social  state  it  a  perpetual  ttrife 
againet  humanity.  Thus,  murder,  depredations,  incessant  useless  strifes  of  one  against  an- 
other, are  their  natural  state.  They  practise  human  sacrifices  and  mutilations  of  men ; 
they  are  imbued  with  hostility  and  antipathy  towards  all  not  of  tiieir  race.  They  maintain 
polygaidy,  slavery,  and  submit  women  to  labor  incompatible  with  female  organization. 

'<  In  the  eyes  of  theology  they  are  lost  men ;  in  the  eyes  of  morality  Ticious  men ;  in  the 
eyes  of  humanitary  economy  they  are  non-producers.  From  their  origin  they  have  not 
recognized,  and  they  still  refuse  to  recognize,  a  supreme  law  imposed  by  the  Almighty; 
Tiz. :  the  obligation  of  labor, 

**  On  the  other  hand,  all  nations  of  the  earth  haye  made  war  upon  the  Jews  for  4O00 
years:  the  Egyptians,  the  Assyrians,  the  Greeks,  the  Romans,  &o.; — Christians  and  Ma- 
hommedans  by  turns ;  with  innumerable  cruelties,  physical  and  moral :  nevertheless,  that 
race  lives  and  prospers.  Why  ?  Because  they  have  everywhere  played  their  part  in  the 
progress  of  civilization. 

'*  True  philanthropy  (insists  Bodichon)- should  not  tolerate  the  existence  of  a  race  whose 
nationality  is  opposed  to  progress,  and  who  constantly  struggle  against  the  general  rights 
and  interests  of  humanity." 

Omnipotence  has  provided  for  the  renovation  of  manhood  in 
countries  where  effeminacy  has  prostrated  human  energies.  Earth 
has  its  tempests  as  well  as  the  ocean.  There  are  reserved,  without 
doubt,  in  the  destinies  of  nations,  fearful  epochs  for  the  ravage  of 
human  races ;  and  there  are  times  marked  on  the  divine  calendar  for 
the  ruin  of  empires,  and  for  the  periodical  renewal  of  the  mundane 
features. 

<*  In  the  midst  of  this  crash  of  empires  (says  the  philosophical  Visit),  which  rise  and  M 
on  every  side,  immutable  Nature  holds  the  balance,  and  presides,  ever  dispassionately,  over 
such  events ;  which  are  but  0e  re-establishment  of  equilibrium  in  the  systems  of  organized 
beings.*' 

J.  C.  K 

Digitized  by 

Google 

COMPABATIVE    ANATOMY    OF    RACES.  411 

CHAPTER    XIII. 

COMPARATIVE    ANATOMY    OF    RACES. 
[By  J.  C.  N.] 

'*  Craniormn  inquam  qnibus  ad  gentilitias  varietates  distiiignendas  et  defi- 
niendas  nulla  alia  hnmani  corporis  pars  aptior  videtur,  cum  caput  osseum 
(prsterquam  quod  animse  domioilium  et  officina,  .imo  yero  interpres  quasi  et 
explanator  ejus  sit,  utpote  universffi  physiognomise  basin  et  firmamentum 
oonstituens)  stabilitati  suee  maximam  conformationis  et  partium  relatiyee 
proportionis  Tarietatem  junctam  habeat,  unde  characieres  nationum  certttsimas 
detumere  lieei.^*  Blumenbach. 

In  examining  the  physical  organization  of  races,  the  anatomist  of 
the  present  day  possesses  many  advantages  over  his  predecessors: 
his  materials  for  comparison  are  far  more  complete  than  theirs ;  and 
the  admission  now  generally  made  by  anthropologists,  that  the  leading 
types  of  mankind  now  seen  over  the  earth  have  existed,  indepen- 
dently of  all  known  physical  causes,  for  some  6000  years  at  least, 
gives  quite  a  new  face  to  this  part  of  the  investigation. 

It  has  been  shown  in  preceding  chapters  that  permanence  of  type 
must  be  considered  the  most  satisfactory  criterion  of  specific  character, 
both  in  animals  and  plants.  The  races  of  mankind,  when  viewed 
zoologically,  must  hav^e  been  governed  by  the  same  universal  law ; 
and  the  Jew,  the  Celt,  the  Iberian,  the  Mongol,  the  Negro,  the  Poly- 
nesian, the  AustraUan,  the  American  Indian,  can  be  regarded  in  no 
other  light  than  as  distinct,  or  as  amalgamations  of  veiy  proximate, 
species.  When,  therefore,  two  of  these  species  are  placed  beside  each 
other  for  comparison,  the  anatomist  is  at  once  struck  by  their  strong 
contrast ;  and  his  task  is  narrowed  down  to  a  description  of  those 
well-marked  types  which  are  known  to  be  permanent.  The  form  and 
capacity  of  the  skull,  the  contour  of  the  face,  many  parts  of  the  ske- 
leton, the  peculiar  development  of  muscles,  the  hair  and  skin,  all 
piesent  strong  points  of  contrast 

It  matters  not  to  the  naturalist  how  or  when  the  type  was  stamped 
upon  each  race ;  its  permanence  makes  it  specific.  If  all  the  races 
sprang  from  a  single  pair,  nothing  short  of  a  miracle  could  have  pro- 
duced such  changes  as  contenders  for  "unity"  demand;  because  (it 
is  now  generally  conceded)  no  causes  are  in  operation  which  can 

Digitized  by 

Google 

412  COMPAEATIYE   AN"ATOMT   OP   RACES. 

transmute  one  type  of  man  into  another.  If,  as  for  centuries  it 
was  supposed,  the  races  became  actually  transformed  when  tongues 
were  confounded  at  Babel,  I  presume  this  was  effected  by  an  instan- 
taneous fiat  of  the  Almighty;  and  when  done  it  was  "ipso*fiicto" 
irrevocable.  No  terrestrial  causes,  consequently,  could  reverse  His 
decree ;  nor,  afterwards,  metamorphose  a  white  man  into  a  Negro,  or 
vice  versay  any  more  than  they  could  change  a  horse  into  an  ass. 

However  important  anatomical  characteristics  may  be,  I  doubt 
whether  the  phyiiognomy  of  races  is  not  equally  so.  There  exist 
minor  differences  of  features,  various  minute  combinations  of  details, 
certain  palpable  expressions  of  face  and  aspect,  which  language  cannot 
describe :  and  yet,  how  indelible  is  the  image  of  a  type  once  im- 
pressed on  the  mind's  eye !  When,  for  example,  the  word  "  Jew"  is 
pronounced,  a  type  is  instantly  brought  up  by  memory,  which  could 
not  be  so  described  to  another  person  as  to  present  to  his  mind  a 
faithful  portrait.  The  image  must  be  seen  to  be  known  and  remem- 
bered ;  and  so  on  with  the  faces  of  all  men,  past,  present,  or  to  come. 
Although  the  Jews  are  genealo^cally,  perhaps,  the  purest  race  living, 
they  are,  notwithstanding  (as  we  have  shown),  an  extremely  adulte- 
rated people ;  but  yet  there  is  a  certain  face  among  them  that  we 
recognize  as  typical  of  the  race,  and  which  we  never  meet  among 
any  other  than  Chaldaic  nations. 

If  we  now  possessed  correct  portraits,  even  of  those  people  who 
were  contemporary  with  the  founders  of  the  Egyptian  empire,  how 
many  of  our  interminable  disputes  would  be  avoided !  Fortunately, 
the  early  monuments  of  Egypt,  Assyria,  Greece,  Eome,  &c.,  and  even 
of  America,  afford  much  information  of  this  iconographic  Idnd,  whidi 
decides  the  early  diversity  of  types :  but  still,  science  is  ill-supplied 
with  these  desiderata  to  afford  a  full  understanding  of  the  subject 
Our  first  glimpse  of  human  races,  though  dating  &r  back  in  time, 
does  not  (we  have  every  reason  to  believe  with  Bunsen,)  reach 
beyond  the  "middle  ages"  of  mankind's  duration. 

The  very  earliest  monumental  record,  or  written  history,  exhibits 
man,  not  in  nomadic  tribes,  but  in  full-grown  nations  borne  on  the 
flood-tide  of  civilization.  Even  the  writers  of  the  Book  of  GenetU 
could  not  divest  their  imaginations  of  the  idea  of  some  civilization 
coeval  with  the  creation  of  their  first  parents;  because  the  man, 
A-DaM,  gave  names,  in  Paradise,  "to  all  the  cattle^'* ^  BeHaiMaH; 
which  implies  either  that,  in  the  cosmogenical  conception  of  those 
writers,  some  animals  (oxen,  horses,  camels,  and  so  forth,)  had  been 
already  domesticated ;  or,  writing  thousands  of  years  subsequently 
to  animal  domesticity,  they  heedlessly  attributed,  to  ante-historic 
times  past,  conditions  existing  in  their  own  days  present     They 

Digitized  by 

Google 

COMPAEATIVE   ANATOMY   OF   KACES.  413 

could  not  conceive  such  a  thing  as  a  time  when  cattle  were  nntamed; 
any  more  than  archaeology  can  admit  that  anybody  could  describe 
events  prior  to  their  occurrence. 

[This  is  no  delusion.  Open  Lepsius's  Denkmdkry  and  npon  the  copies  of  monnments  of 
the  IVth  Memphite  dynasty,  dating  more  than  2000  years  before  Moses,  (to  whom  the  Pen- 
tateuch is  ascribed,)  yon  will  behold  eatth  of  many  genera^-bnlls,  cows,  calyes,  oxen,  oryxes, 
donkeys  (no  hortet  or  emndt)  —  together  with  dogs,  sheep,  goats,  gateUes;  besides  birds, 
011OI1  as  yMM,  croiMff,  duekt  (no  common  fowls),  i^wes,  &c. ;  the  whole  of  them  in  a  state 
of  entire  subjection  to  man  in  Egypt ;  and  none  represented  bnt  those  animals  iiidigenons 
to  the  Nilotic  zoological  centre  of  creation. 

Wherever  we  may  turn,  in  ancient  annals,  the  domestication  of  eyery  domettieahU  animal 
has  preceded  the  epoch  of  the  chronicle  through  which  the  fact  is  made  known  to  us ;  and, 
still  mere  extraordinaiy,  there  are  not  a  dozen  quadrupeds  and  birds  that  man  has  tamed, 
or  subdued  from  a  wild  to  a  prolifically-domestic  condition,  but  were  already  in  the  latter 
state  at  the  age  when  the  document  acquainting  us  with  the  existence,  anywhere,  of  a  given 
domestic  animal,  was  registered.  In  these  new  questions  of  monumental  zoology,  Greece, 
Etmria,  Bome,  Jnd»a,  Hindostan,  and  Europe,  are  too  modem  to  require  notice ;  because 
none  of  their  earliest  historians  antedate,  while  some  fall  centuries  below,  Solomon's  era, 
B.  o.  1000.  Verify,  in  any  lexicons,  upon  all  cases  but  Jewiah  fabled-antiquity,  and  no  ex- 
ception to  this  rule  wUl  be  found  sustainable  against  historical  criticism.  The  monuments  of 
Atsyria,  whose  utmost  antiquity  may  be  fixed  ^S7  about  1800  b.  0.,  only  prove  that  every 
tameable  animal  represented  by  Ghaldeeans  (single  and  double  humped  camels,  elephants, 
&o.,  inclusive)  was  alrea(](y  tamed  at  the  epoch  of  the  sculpture.  Egyptian  zoology  has  been 
cited.  Chinese,4^(in  this  respect  the  only  detailed),  proves  that,  in  the  times  of  the  ancient 
writer,  the  domestication  of  six  animals ;  viz. :  the  horse,  ox,  fowl,  hog,  dog,  and  sheep  — 
was  ascribed  to  Fou-hi's  semi-historical  era,  about  8400  years  before  Christ. 

When  Columbus  reached  this  country,  a.  d.  1492,  he  found  no  animals  alien  to  our  Ame- 
rican continent,  and  none  undomesticated  that  man  could  tame ;  and,  when  Pizabro  over- 
tamed  the  Inca-kingdom,  the  llama  had  been,  for  countiess  ages,  a  tamed  quadruped  in  Peru. 
Gsomoi  St.  Hilaibb  is  one  of  those  authorities  seldom  controverted  by  naturalists. 
These,  in  substance,  are  his  words :  — 

There  9rt  forty  tpeeiet  of  animals  reduced,  at  this  day,  to  a  state  of  domestication.  Of 
these,  thirty-five  are  now  cosmopolitan,  as  the  horse,  dog,  ox,  pig,  sheep  and  goat.  The 
other  five  have  remained  in  the  region  of  their  origin,  like  the  llama  and  the  alpaca  on  the 
plateaux  of  Bolivia  and  Pern ;  or  have  been  transplanted  only  to  those  countries  whidi 
most  approximate  to  thdr  original  habitats  in  climatic  conditions ;  as  the  Tongousian  rein- 
deer at  St  Petersburg.  Out  of  the  thirty-five  domesticated  speoiee  possessed  by  Europe, 
thirty-one  originate  in  Central  Asia,  Europe,  and  North  Africa.  Only  four  species  have 
been  contributed  by  the  two  Americas,  Central  and  Southern  Africa,  Australia  and  Poly- 
nesia ;  although  these  portions  of  the  globe  contain  the  mijor  number  of  our  zoological 
types.  In  consequence,  the  great  bulk  of  tamed  animals  in  Europe  are  of  exotic  origin. 
Hardly  any  are  derived  from  countries  colder  than  France:  on  the  contrary,  almost  the 
whole  were  primitively  inhaldtants  of  warmer  climates.^90 

We  thus  arrive  at  the  great  fact,  that  the  domestication  by  man  of  all  domestic  animals 
antecedes  every  history  extant ;  and,  measured  chronologically  by  Egypt's  pyramids,  most 
of  these  animals  were  already  domesticated  thirty-five  centuries  b.  c,  or  over  6800  years 
ago.  Indeed,  the  first  step  of  primordial  man  toirards  civilization  must  have  been  the  sub- 
jection of  animals  susceptible  of  domesticity ;  and,  it  seems  probable,  that  the  doff  became 
tiie  first  instrument  for  the  subjugation  of  other  genera.  And,  while  these  preliminary 
advances  of  incipient  man  demand  epochas  so  far  remote  as  to  be  inappreciable  by  ciphers, 
on  the  other  hand  it  is  equally  astounding,  that  modem  civilization  has  scarcely  reclaimed 
fh)m  the  savage  state  even  half-a-dozen  more  animals  than  were  already  domesticated  m 
every  point  of  our  globe  whcm  history  dawns. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

414  COMPARATIVE    ANATOMY    OP    RACES. 

Conseqaentlj,  inasmuch  as  all  these  domestications,  together  with  the  perfecting  of  those 
arts  and  sciences  that  enabled  king  Chbops  to  build  the  Great  Pyramid,  occupied  Egyptian 
humanity  unnumbered  ages  before  the  IVth  dynasty,  or  prior  to  b.  c.  8400,  ire  may  well 
consider  that  the  earliest  monuments  of  Egypt  represent  but  the  <*  middle  ages"  of  humanity, 
and  not  mankind's  commeneemenit.  —  G.  R.  G.] 

There  was,  then,  a  time  before  all  history.  During  that  blank 
'period,  man  taught  himself  to  write;  and  until  he  had  recorded  his 
thoughts  and  events  in  some  form  of  writing —  hieroglyphics,  to  wit 
—  his  existence  prior  to  that  act,  if  otherwise  certain,  is  altogether 
unattainable  by  us,  save  through  induction.  The  historical  vicissi- 
tudes of  each  human  type  are,  therefore,  unkilown  to  us  until  the 
age  of  written  record  began  in  each  geographical  centre.  Of  th^e 
documentary  annals  some  go  back  5300  years,  others  extend  but  to  a 
few  hundreds.  Anatomy,  however,  possesses  its  own  laws  indepen- 
dently of  history;  and  to  its  applications  the  present  chapter  is 
devoted. 

A  minute  and  extended  anatomical  comparison  of  races,  in  their 
whole  structure,  would  afford  many  curious  results ;  but  such  detail 
does  not  comport  with  the  plan  of  this  work,  and  would  be  fatiguing 
to  any  but  the  professed  anatomist.  It  is  indispensable,  however,'  that 
we  should  enter  sconewhat  fully  into  a  comparison  of  crania ;  and  it 
may  be  safely  assumed,  as  a  general  law,  that  where  important  pecu- 
liarities exist  in  crania,  others  equally  tangible  belong  to  the  same 
organism. 

While  engaged  on  this  chapter,  I  had  the  good  fortune  to  welcome  Prof.  Agassii  in  Mo- 
bile, where  he  lectured  on  the  **  Geographical  Distribution  of  Animals/*  &c.  The  instruc- 
tion derived  from  his  lectures  and  private  conversation  on  these  themes,  I  here  take  occa- 
sion to  acknowledge. 

Prof.  Agassiz's  researches  in  embryology  possess  most  important  bearings  on  the  natural 
history  of  mankind.  He  states,  for  instance,  that,  during  the  foetal  state,  it  is  in  most 
cases  impossible  to  distinguish  between  the  species  of  a  genus;  but  that,  after  birth,  ani- 
mals, being  governed  by  specific  laws,  advance  each  in  diverging  Unee.  The  dog,  wolf,  fox, 
and  jackal,  for  example  —  the  different  species  of  ducks,  and  even  ducks  and  geese,  in  the 
footal  state  —  cannot  be  distinguished  from  each  other;  but  their  distinctive  characters 
begin  to  develop  themselves  soon  after  birth.  So  with  the  races  of  men.  In  the  foetal 
state  there  is  no  criterion  whereby  to  distinguish  even  the  Negro's  from  the  Teuton's  ana- 
tomical structure ;  but,  after  birth,  they  develop  their  respective  characteristics  in  diver- 
ging lines,  irrespectively  of  climatic  influences.  This  I  conceive  to  be  a  most  important 
law;  and  it  points  strongly  to  ^ec^fie  difference.  Why  should  Negroes,  Spaniards,  and 
Anglo-Saxons,  at  the  end  often  generations  (although  in  the  foetal  state  the  same),  still  diverge 
at  birth,  and  develop  specific  characters  ?  Why  should  the  Jews  in  Mftl&bar,  at  the  end 
of  1500  years,  obey  the  same  law  ?  That  they  do,  undeviatingly,  has  been  already  demon- 
strated in  Chapter  lY. ;  and  while  this  sheet  is  passing  through  the  press,  a  letter  from  my 
friend  Dr.  J.  Barnard  Davis  (one  of  the  learned  authors  of  the  forthc<»ning  Crania  Briton- 
ntca),  opportunely  substantiates  my  former  statement :  — 

**  I  find  you  have  come  to  the  same  conclusions  respecting  them  [the  Jews]  as  myself.  See- 
ing that  tne  most  striking  circumstance  adduced  in  the  whole  of  Prichard's  work  was  that 
of  the  change  of  the  Jews  to  black  in  Cochin  and  Malabar ;  and  finding  Lawrence  to  state 

Digitized  by 

Google 

COMPARATIYE    ANATOMY    OP    RACES.  415 

Dr.  Claud.  Buohanan's  eTidence  altogether  on  the  other  side,  I  was  indaced  to  inquire  into 
tihe  matter,  and  settle  where  the  truth  lay.  I  therefore  wrote  my  friend  Mr.  Crawford, 
the  author  of  the  *  Indian  Archipelago'  and  TariouB  other  yalnable  works  on  the  East,  who 
oleared  up  the  mystery  at  onoe.  He  said,  he  had  often  seen  the  Jews  of  Malabar  serving 
in  the  ranks  of  our  Sepoy  regiments  at  Bombay,  and  that  they  are  as  black  as  the  Hindoos  of 
the  same  country,  who  are  amongst  the  darkest  people  of  India ;  that,  although  they  have 
preserved  the  religion  of  Moses,  they  have  intermixed  with  the  natives  of  the  country 
extensively,  and  it  is  probable,  have  little  Semitic  blood  in  their  Teins.  He  says,  he  knew 
Dr.  CL  Buchanan,  who  spent  his  Indian  life  in  the  totm  of  Calcutta,  except  the  single  jour- 
ney in  which  he  saw  the  Indian  Jews  and  Christians  of  St  Thomas."  Little  value  can  in 
consequence  attach  to  this  woHhy  churchman's  ethnological  authority. 

Another  of  the  preceding  chapters  (IX.)  demonstrates  how  the  aboriginal  Americans 
present,  everywhere  OTer  this  continent,  kindred  types  of  specific  character,  which  they 
have  maintained  for  thousands  of  years,  and  which  they  would  equally  maintain  in  any 
other  country. 

Prof.  Agassis  also  asserts,  tiiat  a  pecvliar  conformation  characterises  tiie  brain  of  an 
adult  Negro.  Its  development  never  goes  beyond  that  developed  in  the  Caucasian  in  boy- 
hood ;  and,  besides  other  singularities,  it  bears,  in  several  particulars,  a  marked  resem- 
blance to  the  brain  of  the  orang-outan.  The  Professor  kindly  offered  to  demonstrate  those 
cerebral  characters  to  me,  but  I  was  unable,  during  his  stay  at  Mobile,  to  procure  the 
brain  of  a  Negro. 

Although  a  Negro-brain  was  not  to  be  obtained,  I  took  an  opportunity  of  submitting  to 
M.  Agassiz  two  native-African  men  for  comparison ;  and  he  not  only  confirmed  the  distinc- 
tive marks  commonly  enumerated  by  anatomists,  but  added  others  of  no  less  importance. 
The  peculiarities  of  the  Negro's  head  and  feet  are  too  notorious  to  require  specification ; 
although,  it  must  be  observed,  these  vary  in  different  African  tribes.  When  examined  from 
behind,  the  Negro  presents  several  peculiarities ;  of  which  one  of  the  most  striking  is,  the 
deep  depression  of  the  spine,  owing  to  the  greater  curvature  of  the  ribs.  The  buttocks  are 
more  flattened  on  the  sides  than  in  other  races ;  and  join  the  posterior  part  of  the  thigh 
almost  at  a  right-angle,  instead  of  a  curve.  The  pelvis  is  narrower  than  in  the  white  race ; 
which  fact  every  surgeon  accustomed  to  applying  trusses  on  Negroes  will  vouch  for.  In- 
deed, an  agent  of  Mr.  Sherman,  a  very  extensive  truss-manufacturer  of  New  Orleans, 
informs  me  that  the  average  droumforenoe  of  adult  Negroes  round  the  pelvis  is  from  26  to 
28  inches ;  whereas  whites  measure  from  80  to  86.  The  scapulss  are  shorter  and  broader.  The 
muscles  have  shorter  bellies  and  longer  tendons,  as  is  seen  in  the  calf  of  the  leg,  tiie  arms, 
&c.  In  the  Negress,  the  mammn  are  more  conical,  tiie  areole  much  larger,  and  the  abdo- 
men projects  as  a  hemisphere.  Such  are  some  of  the  more  obvious  divergences  of  the  Ne- 
gro from  the  white  types :  others  are  supplied  by  Hermann  Bubhiistbb,  Professor  of 
Zoology  in  the  University  of  HaUe,^^  whose  excellent  researches  in  Brazil,  during  fourteen 
months  (185(X-'l),  were  made  upon  ample  materials.  Space  limits  me  to  the  following 
extract:  — 

'*  If  we  take  a  profile  view  of  the  European  face,  and  sketch  its  outlines,  we  shall  find 
that  it  can  be  divided  by  horizontal  lines  into  four  equal  parts :  the  first  enclosing  the  crown 
of  the  head ;  the  second,  the  forehead ;  the  third,  the  nose  and  ears ;  and  the  fourth,  the 
lips  and  chin.  In  the  antique  statues,  the  perfection  of  the  beauty  of  which  is  justly  ad- 
mired, these  four  parts  are  exactly  equal ;  in  living  individuals  slight  deviations  occur,  but 
in  proportion  as  the  formation  of  the  face  is  more  handsome  and  perfect,  these  sections 
approach  a  mathematical  equality.  The  vertical  length  of  the  head  to  the  cheeks  is  measured 
by  three  of  these  equal  parts.  The  larger  the  faee  and  smaller  the  head,  the  more  unhand- 
some they  become.  It  is  especially  in  this  deviation  from  the  normal  measurement  that 
the  human  features  become  coarse  and  ugly. 

"In  a  comparison  of  the  Negro  head  with  this  ideal,  we  get  the  surprising  result  that  the 
rule  with  the  former  is  not  the  equality  of  the  four  parts,  but  a  regular  increase  in  length  from 

Digitized  by 

Google 

416  GOMPABATIYE   ANATOMY   OF   RACES. 

aboTe  downwards.  The  measiiremeat^  made  by  the  help  of  drawinge,  ahowed  a  very  eoi- 
siderable  differenoe  in  the  four  sectioiie,  and  an  increase  of  that  difference  with  the  age. 
This  latter  peculiarity  is  more  sigoificant  than  the  mere  inequality  between  the  four 
parts  of  the  head.  All  zoologists  are  aware  of  the  great  differenoe  in  the  formation  of  tjbe 
heads  of  the  old  and  the  young  ofang-outans.  The  charaoteristio  d  both  is  the  laigi 
size  of  the  whole  fAce,  particnlarly  the  jaw,  in  comparison  with  the  skull ;  in  the  young 
orang-outan,  the  extent  of  the  latter  exceeds  that  of  the  Jaw ;  In  the  old  it  is  the  rereiM^ 
in  consequence  of  a  series  of  large  teeth  hating  taken  the  plaee  of  the  earlier  small  ones, 
which  resemble  the  milk-teeth  of  man.  In  fkct,  in  all  men,  the  proportion  between  the 
skull  and  face  changes  with  the  maturity  of  life ;  but  tins  change  is  not  so  considerable  in 
the  European  as  in  the  .Afrioani  I  ha?e  before  me  a  Tery  exaet  profile-drawing  of  a  Negro 
boy,  in  which  I  find  the  total  height,  from  the  crown  to  the  chin,  four  inches ;  the  upper 
of  the  four  sections,  not  quite  nine  lines;  the  second,  one  inch ;  the  third,  thirteen  Hncs; 
the  fourth,  fourteen  and  one-quarter  lines.  The  drawing  is  about  three-quarters  of  the 
natural  size ;  and,  accordingly,  these  numbers  should  be  proportionately  increased.  The 
strongly-marked  head  of  an  adult  Caffre,  a  cast  of  which  is  in  the  Beriin  Museum,  shows  a 
much  greater  difiisrence  in  its  proportions.  I  haye  an  exact  drawing  of  it,  reduced  to  two- 
thirds  of  the  natural  size,  and  I  find  the  various  sections  as  foUows :  —  the  first  is  11  fines ; 
the  second,  18 ;  the  third,  15 ;  and  the  fourth,  18  lines.  This  would  give,  for  a  full-sised 
head  of  7}  inches,  16}  lines  for  the  crown ;  19}  for  the  forehead:  22}  for  the  part  indnd- 
ing  the  nose ;  and  27  lines  for  that  of  the  jaws  and  teeth.  In  a  normal  European  head,  te 
height  of  which  is  supposed  to  be  8},  each  part  generally  measures  2  inches,  while  the 
remaining  i  may  be  yariously  distributed,  in  fractions,  throughout  Ihe  whole. 

**  Any  difference  of  measurement  in  the  European  seldom  surpasses  a  few  lines,  at  the 
most :  it  is  impossible  to  find  a  case  of  natural  formation  where  the  difference  between  the 
parts  of  the  head  amounts,  as  in  the  Caffre,  to  one  indi.  I  would  not  assert,  that  this 
enormous  difference  is  a  law  in  the  Negro  race.  I  grant,  that  the  Caffre  has  the  Negro 
type  in  its  excessiYe  degree,  and  cannot,  therefore,  be  taken  as  a  model  of  the  whole  Afri- 
can race.  But,  if  the  normid  difference  only  amounts  to  half  that  indicated,  it  still  renudns 
so  much  larger  than  in  the  European,  as  to  be  a  yery  significant  mark  of  distinction  betweon 
the  races,  and  an  important  point  in  the  settlement  of  the  questimt  of  their  comparatifs 
mental  faculties. 

'<  The  peculiar  expression  of  the  Negro  physiognomy  depends  upon  this  difference  be- 
tween the  four  sections.  The  narrow,  flat  crown ;  the  low,  slanting  forehead ;  the  pr<^ 
tion  of  tiie  upper  edges  of  tiie  orUt  of  the  eye ;  the  short,  ffat,  and,  at  the  lower  part,  broed 
nose ;  the  prominent,  but  slightly  tumed-up  lips,  which  are  more  thick  than  curred ;  the 
broad,  retreating  chin,  and  the  peculiarly  small  eyes,  in  which  so  littie  of  the  white  eyebeU 
can  be  seen ;  the  yery  smaU,  thick  ears,  which  stand  off  from  the  head ;  the  short,  cri^, 
woolly  hair,  and  the  black  color  of  the  skin — are  the  most  marked  peculiarities  of  the  Ne- 
gro head  and  face.  On  a  dose  examination  of  the  Negro  races,  similar  differences  will  be 
found  among  them,  as  among  Europeans.  The  western  AfHcans,  from  Guinea  to  Conge, 
have  yery  short,  tumed-up  lips.  They  are  ordinarily  yery  ugly,  and  represent  the  purest 
Negro  type.  The  southern  races,  which  inhabit  Loanda  and  Benguela,  have  a  longer  nose, 
with  its  bridge  more  eleyated  and  its  wings  contracted;  they  haye,  howeyer,  the  full  lips, 
while  their  hair  is  somewhat  thicker.  Some  of  the  indiyiduals  of  these  races  haye  tolerably 
good,  agreeable  faces.  A  peculiar  arch  of  the  forehead,  aboye  its  middle,  is  common 
among  them.  4 

**  In  the  eastern  part  of  Southern  Africa,  the  natives  haye,  instead  of  the  concaye  bridge 
of  the  nose,  one  more  or  less  conyex,  and  yery  thick,  flat  lips,  not  at  all  tomed-up.  The 
Negroes  of  the  East  are  commonly  more  light-colored  than  those  of  the  West ;  their  color 
tends  rather  to  brown  than  to  black,  and  the  wings  of  their  noses  are  thinner.  The  people 
of  Mozambique  are  the  chief  representatiyes  of  this  race  —  the  Caffres  also  belong  to  it 
Thto  nose  of  the  Caffre  is  shorter  and  broader  than  that  of  the  others,  but  it  has  the  convex 
bridge.    The  short,  curly  hair  shows  no  essential  deviation.    The  dark,  brownish-black 

Digitized  by 

Google 

OOMFARATIYB   ANATOMY  OF   EAOES.  417 

^yebaU,  vMeh  is  hardly  distliigiiiahable  from  the  pvpfl,  remains  constant  The  white  of 
the  eje  has  in  all  Negroes  a  yellowish  tinge.  The  lips  are  always  brown,  never  red-oolored ; 
they  hardly  differ  in  color  from  the  skin  in  the  neighborhood ;  towards  the  interior  edges, 
however,  they  become  lighter,  and  assume  the  daik-red  flesh-color  of  the  inside  of  the 
month.  The  teeth  are  very  strong,  and  are  of  a  glistening  whiteness.  The  t<mgae  is  of  a 
large  sise,  and  remai^ble  in  thickness.  The  ear,  in  conformity  with  the  nose,  is  surpris- 
ingly small,  and  is  very  unlike  the  large,  flat  ear  of  the  ape.  In  all  Negroes,  the  external 
-botrder  of  the  ear  is  very  much  curred,  especially  behind,  which  is  quite  different  in  the 
ape.  This  currature  of  the  ear  is  a  marked  peculiarity  of  the  human  species.  The  ear-lobe 
is  very  small,  althon^  the  whde  ear  is  exceedingly  fleshy. 

"  The  small  ear  of  the  Negro  cannot,  however,  be  called  handsome ;  Its  substance  is  too 
thick  for  its  sise.  The  whole  ear  gives  the  impression  of  an  organ  that  is  stunted  in  its 
growth,  and  its  upper  part  stands  off  to  a  great  distance  from  the  head." 

It  may  be  objected  against  perfect  exactitude  in  the  above  minatiaB, 
that  races  run  insensibly  into  each  other;  but  I  contend,  on  the  other 
hand,  that  gradation  is  the  law,  as  illustrated  in  our  Chapter  YI. 

Looking  for  a  point  of  departure,  in  this  brief  anatomical  compari- 
son of  types,  one  naturally  turns  to  Egypt^  where  the  most  ancient 
and  satisfiBU^ry  materials  are  found :  there  lie  not  only  the  embalmed 
bodies  of  many  races,  deposited  in  catacombs  several  thousand  years 
old,  but  all  anatomical  fiicts  deducible  fix)m  these  are  confirmed  by 
those  charact€fristic  portraits  of  races,  on  the  monuments,  with  which 
our  volume  abounds. 

And  here  it  is,  that  homage  is  more  especially  due  to  our  great 
countryman,  Morton,  whose  Orania  Americana  and  Crania  j^gyptiaea 
created  eras  in  anthropology.  His  acumen,  in  this  department  of 
science,  is  admitted  by  those  who  have  studied  his  works ;  for,  beyond 
all  other  anatomists,  he  eigoyed  the  advantage  of  possessing,  in  several 
departments,  the  most  complete  assortment  of  skulls  in  the  world. 
HiR  collections  of  American  and  Egyptian  crania,  especially,  are  copi- 
ous, and  of  fidngular  interest 

In  1844,  Dr.  Morton  had  received  "137  human  crania,  of  which  100 
pertain  to  the  ancient  inhabitants  of  Egypt."  ^^  Seventeen  additional 
of  the  latter  reached  his  cabinet  in  the  same  year  ;^  the  more  inte^ 
resting  as  they  were  taken  from  tombs  opened  by  Le^sius  around  the 
pyramids  of  the  IVth  dynasty ;  and,  in  some  instances,  may  have 
been  coeval  with  those  early  sepulchres.  Through  the  enthusiastic 
cooperation  of  his  many  friends,  about  twenty-three  more  mummied 
heads*®  were  added  by  1861 :  so  that  his  studies  were  matured  over 
the  crania  of  some  140  ancient,  compared  with  87  skulls  of  modem 
Egyptian  races.  Such  jQsk^ilities  are  as  unexampled  as  the  analytical 
labor  bestowed  upon  them  by  the  lamented  Doctor  was  conscien- 
tiously severe.  Possessors  of  his  works,  correspondence,  and  inedited 
manuscripts,  my  colleague  and  myself  can  now  speak  unhesitatingly 
upon  Morton's  testamentary  views. 
53 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC 

418  COMPARATIVE   ANATOMY   OF    RACES. 

Morton  very  judiciously  remarked,  that  the  Egyptian  catacombs  do 
not  always  contain  their  original  occupants;  for  these  were  often  dis- 
placed, and  the  tombs  resold  for  mercenary  purposes ;  whence  it  hap- 
pens that  mummies  of  the  Greek  and  Roman  epochas  have  been 
found  in  those  more  ancient  receptacles,  which  had  received  the 
bodies  of  Egyptian  citizens  of  a  far  earlier  date.  This  I  conceive . 
to' constitute  one  of  the  greatest  obstacles  to  investigation,  for,  save 
in  four  very  probable  instances,  there  is  no  positive  evidence  that  he 
possessed  a  single  mummy-head  beyond  the  tenlh  century  b.  c.  , 
although  there  are  tombs  that  date  more  than^OOO  years  earlier,  tc 
which  some  of  the  Doctor's  specimens  doubtless  belong,  even  if  the 
proof  be  defective. 

We  have  shown  through  the  portraits  on  the  monuments  that  the 
population  of  Egypt  was  already  a  very  mixed  one  in  the  IVth  dy- 
nasty ;  which  Lepsius  places  at  8400  b.  c.  Dr.  Morton  confirms  this 
conclusion  by  his  anatomical  comparisons.  In  the  Orania  JEgyptiaca 
he  referred  his  series  df  Egyptiau  skulls  to  "two  of  the  great  races 
of  men,  the  Caucasian  and  the  Negro  : "  subdividing  the  Caucasian 
class  into  three  principal  types^  viz. :  the  PeU^giCj  the  Semitic^  and 
the  Egyptian. 

Referring  to  his  work  for  specification  of  the  others,  I  confine  my 
observations  to  the  last. 

**  The  Egyptian  form  (mjs  Dr.  Morton)  differs  from  tiie  Pelasgio  in  banng  a  narrow  and 
more  receding  forehead,  while  the  face  being  more  prominent,  the  facial  angle  is  conae- 
quentlj  less.  The  nose  is  straight  or  aquiline,  the  face  angolar,  the  features  often  sharps 
and  the  hair  uniformlj  long,  soft,  and  curling.  In  this  series  of  crania  I  include  many  of 
which  the  conformation  is  not  appreciably  different  from  that  of  the  Arab  and  Emdoo  ;  but 
I  have  not,  as  a  rule,  attempted  to  note  these  distinctions,  although  they  are  so  marked  as 
to  haye  induced  me,  in  the  early  stage  of  this  investigation  and  for  reasons  which  will  ap- 
pear in  the  sequel,  to  group  them,  together  with  the  proper  Egyptian  form,  under  the  pro- 
Yisional  name  of  Auitral-Egyptian  crania.  I  now,  however,  propose  to  restrict  the  latter 
torm  to  those  Caucasian  communities  which  inhabited  the  Nilotic  valley  above  Egypt 
Among  the  Caucasian  crania  are  some  which  appear  to  blend  the  Egyptian  and  Pelasg^ 
characters ;  these  might  be  called  the  Egypto-PeUugie  heads ;  but  without  making  use  of 
this  term,  except  in  a  very  few  instances  by  way  of  illustration,  I  have  thought  best  to 
transfer  these  example!  from/the  Pelasgio  group  to  the  Egyptian,  inasmuch  as  they  so  far 
conform  to  the  latter  series  as  to  be  identified  without  difficulty.''  <m 

On  reading  over  this  classification  several  comments  strike  me  as  worthy  of  utterance. 
1st  That,  out  of  100  erania  presented  in  a  tabular  shape  (op,  eit.  p.  19),  only  49  are  <tf 
the  Egyptian  form,  while  29  are  of  the  Pelasgio  or  foreign  type ;  and  of  the  crania  from 
Memphis,  ascertained  to  be  the  oldest  necropolis,  the  Pelasgio  prevail  over  the  Egyptian  in 
the  proportion  of  IG  to  7.  Those  of  Thebes  are  80  Egyptian  to  10  Pelasgio.  This  proves 
that  the  Egyptian  population,  if  such  classification  be  correct,  was  an  exceedingly  mixed 
one. 

2d.  The  Semitic  was,  at  all  times,  a  ^e  distinctly  marked ;  and  diverse  both  t^m  the 
Pelas^^c  and  the  Egyptian,  as  our  previous  chapters  illustrate. 

?A.  Hence,  the  conclusion  is  natural,  that  the  earliest  population  of  Egypt  was  a  native 
African  one,  resembling  closely  Upper  Egyptian  Fellahs,  and  assimilating  to  the  l^ubian 

Digitized  by 

Google 

COMPARATIVE    ANATOMY    OP    RACES.  419 

(Berber)  population:  that  this  stock  soon  became  intermingled  with  Arab  and  other  Asiatic 
races  of  Semitio  and  Pelasgic  type.  Therefore,  little  confidence  can  be  reposed  upon  any 
▼ery  minute  classification  of  such  a  mixed  people.  Of  craniolog^cal  ability  to  distinguish 
a  pure  Pelasgjic,  Semitic,  or  AiHean  head,  as  a  general  rule,  I  do  not  doubt ;  but  blended 
types  must  ever  present  difficulties.  It  is  enough  to  know  that  we  possess  portraits  of 
Pelasgic,  Semitic  and  Egyptian  types }  and  that  the  truthfulness  of  these  portraits  is  attested 
by  the  crania  of  the  catacombs. 

"With  all  his  acuteness  and  experience  in  craniology,  it  is  clear  that 
Dr.  Morton  felt  himself  much  embarrassed  in  making  this  classifica- 
tion. He  has  several  times  modified  it  in  his  different  published 
papers ;  and  it  is  seen  above,  that  in  his  Egyptian  form  of  crania,  he 
**  includes  many  of  which  the  conformation  is  not  appreciably  diflTe- 
rent  fix)m  that  of  the  Arab  and  Hindoo." 

To  exemplify  how  much  caution  is  necessary  in  classifications  of 
this  kind,  it  may  be  proper  to  refer  to  Morton's  earlier  opinion,  that 
the  AustraUEgyptiani  were  greatly  mixed  with  Hindoos,  whose  crania 
he  thinks  he  can  designate ;  adding,  "  That  there  was  extensive  and 
long-continued  intercourse  between  the  Hindoos  and  Egyptians  is 
beyond  a  question,*'  &c.  Now,  so  great  has  been  the  advance  of 
knowledge  within  the  last  five  years,  that,  were  Dr.  Morton  now  alive, 
such  doctrine  would  no  longer  be  advocated  by  him ;  because  it  is 
generally  conceded  by  Egyptologists — our  best  authorities — ^that  facts 
are  opposed  to  any  such  intercourse,  until  after  the  Persian  invasion, 
B.  c.  625. 

Di\  Morton  classified  the  crania  procured  (1888-'40)  from  each 
locality  for  his  cabinet  by  my  colleague  Mr.  Qliddon  (then  our  Con- 
sul at  Cairo),  into  the  following  series :  — 

Fir9t  Seriet,  Arom  tlie  Memphite  Necropolis : 

A.  Pyramid  of  Five  Steps % 2  Bkulls. 

B.  Saccara,  generally 11     ** 

C.  Front  of  the  Brick  Pyramid  of  Dashonr. 8    ** 

D.  North-west  of  Pyramid  of  Five  Steps 9    " 

£.  Toora  (quarries)  on  the  Nile 1     *' 

Second  Seriitt  ttom  Qrottoea  of  MnAhdeh 4    ** 

Third        "      "      jjibydos 4    " 

Fourth      "      "     the  Catacombs  of  Thebes 55    " 

Fifth        "      "     KonmOmbos 3    " 

Sixth        «      «     the  Island  of  Beggeh,  near  Philes 4    << 

Seventh     -"      "     Debdd,  in  Nubia 4    " 

On  the  first  series,  Morton  remarks:  —  **A  mere  glance  at  this  group  of  skoUs  will 
satisfy  any  one  aocostomed  to  comparisons  of  this  kind,  that  most  of  them  possess  the  Cau- 
casian traits  in  a  most  striking  and  unequiyocal  manner,  whether  we  regard  their  form, 
size,  or  facial  angle.  It  is,  in  fact,  questionable  whether  a  greater  proportion  of  beauti- 
fully moulded  heads  would  be  found  among  an  equal  number  of  individuals  taken  at  random 
from  any  existing  European  nation.  The  entire  series  consists  of  sixteen  examples  of  the 
Pelasgic,  and  seven  of  the  Egyptian  form ;  a  single  Semitic  head,  one  of  the  Negroid  variety 
and 'one  of  mixed  conformation.  Of  the  antiquity  of  these  remains  there  can  be  no  ques- 
tion," Ac 

Digitized  by 

Google 

420 

COMPARATIYE   ANATOMY   OP   RACES. 

Reasons  are  then  addnced  for  assigning  a  high  antiqoiiy  to  some  of  these  heads,  and,  as 
relates  to  Mosaic  oontemporaneonsness,  they  are  certainly  snbetantial ;  hut  still,  sdenoe  i» 
▼ery  exacting ;  and  I  doubt  that  many  more  than  the  following  can  ascend  to  times  an- 
terior to  the  HykfOi  period,  say  not  earlier  than  b.  o.  2000. 

Excluding  all  bUumenued  skulls,  which,  Biboh  has  established^  cannot  be  older  than 
Egyptian  conquests'  of  Assyria,  sixteenth  century  before  Christ,  the  question  stands  open  in 
favor  of  four :  riz.  — 

C.  —  Three  from  the  trtmi  of  the  Brick  Pyramid  of  Dashour.  Being  in  wooUen  wrappers, 
and  desiccated  rather  than  embalmed,  they  correq>ond  with  the  human  fragments 
found  in  the  Third  Pyramid,  which,  by  BuNSXir,^  are  attributed  to  King  Menkera, 
These  may  be  of  the  Old  Empire. 

E.  —  One  from  Toora,  on  the  Nile.  There  are  grounds  for  supposing  that  the  rectangular 
sarcophagi,  at  this  locality,  contained  the  bodies  of  quarry-men  who  cut  stones  for 
the  pyramids. 

Another  criterion,  in  behalf  of  antiquity  for  these  four  crania,  is  the  great  diminution  of 
animal  matter ;  but,  with  regard  to  all  the  rest,  probabilities  militate  against  an  ^^  be- 
yond the  New  Empire ;  and  they  range,  consequently,  from  the  sixteenth  century  before 
Christ  downwards. 

Besides  the  want  of  any  positive  data  for  the  remainder,  we  hare  the  fact  stated  by 
Morton,  that  the  great  minority  of  them  do  not  correspond  trith  the  Egyptian  type  in  fcroi, 
tiu,  or  facial  angle;  as  will  be  explained  when  I  ^)eak  of  the  Internal  CapaeUy  of  Crunia. 

Fio.  262.  One  head  QFig.  252), 

with  Dr.  Morton's  com- 
mentaiy,  will  explain 
his  idea  of  the  Egyptian 
type. 

<*The  subjoined  wood-eat 
illustrates  a  remarkable  head, 
which  may  serre  as  a  type  of 
the  genuine  Egyptian  confor- 
mation. The  long,  oral  cra- 
nium, the  receding  forehead, 
gently  aquiline  nose,  and  re- 
tracted chin,  together  with  the 
marked  distance  between  the 
nose  and  mouth,  and  the  long, 
smooth  hair,  are  all  character- 
istic of  the  monumental  Egyp- 
tian." 

The  Orania  j^gyptiaca^  here  presents  an  "Ethnographic  Tahle 
of  100  Ancient  Egyptian  Crania,**  arranged  in  the  first  place,  accord- 
ing to  their  sepulchral  localities ;  and,  in  the  second,  in  reference  to 
their  national  afiinities — but,  while  preserving  the  subjoined  com- 
ments, I  prefer  the  substitution  (overleaf)  of  a  later  and  more 
extended  synopsis. 

**  The  preceding  table  speaks  for  itself.  It  shows  that  more  than  eight-tenths  of  the 
crania  pertain  to  the  unmixed  Caucasian  race ;  that  the  Pelasgic  form  is  as  one  to  one  and 
two-thirds,  and  the  Semitic  form  one  to  eight,  compared  with  the  Egyptian ;  that  one- 

Digitized  by 

Google 

COMPARATIVE   ANATOMY   OF   RACES.  421 

r 

twentieth  of  the  wb<Me  is  composed  of  heads  in  which  there  exists  a  trace  of  Ke^o  and  other 
exotic  lineage ;  tha(  the  Negroid  conformation  exists  in  eight  instances,  thns  constitoting 
about  one-thirteenth  part  of  the^irhole ;  and  finally,  that  the  series  contains  a  single  un- 
mixed Negro."    [  Vide,  ante,  p.  267,  Fig.  198  ^  the  yegreatJ] 

I  have  already  mentioned,  that,  subsequently  to  the  appearance  of 
the  Crania  JSgjfptiaca^  a  second  lot  of  antique  skulls  arrived  from 
Egypt  They  had  been  collected  by  Mr.  Wm.  A.  Gliddon,  from  some 
of  the  Memphite  tombs  opened  by  the  Prussian  Mission,  in  1842-*8 ; 
and,  although  these  heads  may  be  a  secondary  or  tertiaiy  deposit  in 
these  sepulchres,  which  contained  fragments  of  cofins  and  cerements 
as  late  as  the  Ptolemaic  period,  yet  among  them,  as  Morton  has  well 
observed  [mpra^  pp.  318,  819],  there  are,  very  probably,  some  speci- 
mens of  the  olden  time.  Mr.  W.  A.  G.  took  tiie  precaution  to  mark, 
upon  those  skulk  identifiable  as  ^  locality,  the  cartotiche%  of  the 
Mngs  to  whose  reigns  the  tombs  belonged ;  and  the  hoary  names  of 
AssA,  SAoRB,  and  Akiu  (JSTeraiu),**  carry  us  back  to  the  IVth  and 
Vlth  dynasties,  or  about  8000  years  before  Christ 

The  reader  may  be  gratified  to  peruse  a  condensation  of  Morton's 
digest  (October,  1844)  of  their  craniological  attributes ;  and  I  have 
the  more  pleasure  in  reproducing  his  words,  as  they  may  be  unknown 
or  inaccessible  to  the  majority  of  ethnologists. 

«  The  following  is  an  ethnographic  analysis  of  this  series  of  crania :  — 

Egyptian  form *.. 11 

Egyptian  form,  with  traces  of  Negro  lineage...... 2 

Negroid  form 1 

Pelasgio  form 2 

Semitic  form 1 

17 

«  Bbxabks. — 1.  The  Egyptian  form  is  admirahly  characterised  in  eleven  of  these  heads, 
and  corresponds  in  eyery  particular  with  the  Nilotlt  physiognomy,  as  indicated  by  monn- 
mental  and  sepulchral  evidences  in  my  Crania  ^gypUaea ;  vix.,  the  small,  long,  and  nar- 
row head,  with  a  somewhat  receding  forehead,  narrow  and  rather  projecting  face,  and  deli- 
cacy of  the  whole  osteological  structure.  No  hair  remains,  and  the  bony  meatus  of  the  car 
corresponds  with,  that  of  all  other  Caucasian  nations. 

"Two  other  heads  present  some  mixture  of  Negro  lineage  with  the  Egyptian.  . .  . 

"  Of  these  thirteen  crania,  eleven  are  adult,  of  which  the  largest  has  an  internal  capacity 
of  98  cubic  inches,  and  the  smallest  76 — giving  a  mean  of  86  cubic  inches  for  the  size  of 
the  brain.  This  measurement  exceeds,  by  only  three  cubic  inches,  the  average  derived 
from  the  entire  series  of  Egyptian  heads  in  my  Crania  JEgyptiaca, 

**  The  fiacial  angle  of  the  adult  heads  gives  a  mean  of  82<' ;  the  largest  rising  as  high  as 
86®,  and  the  smallest  being  78^.  Two  other  heads  are  those  of  children,  in  whom  the  Egyp- 
tian conformation  is  perfect,  and  these  give,  respectively,  the  large  facial  angle  of  89 <»  and 
91«.  The  mean  adidt  angle  is  greater  than  that  given  by  the  large  series  measured  in  the 
Crania  JEgyptiaea,  .  .  . 

"  2.  The  Negroid  head,  as  I  have  elsewhere  explidned,  is  a  mixture  of  the  Caucasian  and 
Negro  form,  in  which  the  ItMm  prtdonmaUt, . . .  This  hefui  strongly  resembles  those  of  two 
modem  Copts  in  my  possession.  It  gives  81  cubic  inches  for  the  size  of  the  brain,  and  a 
fadal  angle  of  80O 

Digitized  by 

Google 

122 

COMPARATIVE    ANA.TOMY    OP    RACES. 

**  Of  two  Pdatgic  heads,  one  is  perfect,  and  well  characterised  in  most  of  its  proportions. 
It  has  an  internal  capacity  of  93  cabic  inches,  and  a  facial  angle  of  SO^*.  .  .  . 

<'  The  solitary  Semitic  head  has  rather  the  common  Arab  than  the  Hebrew  cast  of  features. 
It  measures  internally  87  cubic  inches,  and  has  a  facial  angle  of  79^. 

**  The  ages  of  the  individuals  to  whom  these  seventeen  sknlls  pertained  may  be  proxi- 
mately  stated  as  follows:  5,  7,  18,  20,  20,  25,  80,  40,  40,  40,  50,  50,  50,  50,  60,  50,  55." 

"  The  result  derived  ftrom  this  series  of  crania  sustain,  in  a  most  gratifying  manner,  those 
obtained  from  the  greater  collecUon  of  100  skulls  sent  me  from  Egypt,  by  my  friend  Mr.  0. 
B.  Gliddon,  and  which  have  afforded  the  materials  of  my  Crania  JEgypiiaca ;  and,  withoat 
making  further  comparisons  on  the  present  occasion  (for  I  design  from  time  to  time  to 
resume  the  subject,  as  facts  and  materials  may  come  to  my  hands),  I  shall  merely  subjoin 
my  Ethnographic  Table  ftrom  the  Crania  ^gyptiaca,  so  extaided  as  to  embrace  all  the 
ancient  Egyptian  sknlls  now  in  my  possession. 

Ethnographic  Table  of  one  hundred  and  seventeen  Ancient  Egyptian  Crania, 

Sepulchral  LocaUtias. 

No. 

Egypfn. 

Pelaaglc 

Semltie. 

Mixed. 

Negroid. 

Negro. 

Idiot 

Memphis... 

26 
17 
4 
4 
55 
8 
4 
4 

7 

11 
1 
2 

80 
8 
2 
4 

16 
2 

1 

1 

10 

i 
... 

1 

1 

"i 

4 

1 
2 

4 

1 
1 
2 

5 

"i 

"2 

Ghizeh 

Maabdeh 

Abydos.. 

Thebes 

Ombos  •...........••..••..•. 

Phil© 

Deb6d 

117 

60 

81 

7 

7 

9 

1 

2 

Internal  Capacity  of  the  Cranium. 

The  part  of  Dr.  Morton's  work  bearing  this  superscription,  I  re- 
gard as  one  of  his  most  valuable  contributions  to  science,  and  it 
demands  a  close  examination. 

*'As  this  measurement/'  says  he,  ''.gives  the  size  of  the  brain,  I  have  obtained  it  in  til 
the  crania  above  sixteen  years  of  age,  unless  prevented  by  fractures  or  the  presence  of 
bitumen  within  the  skulls;  and  this  investigation  has  confirmed  the  proverbial  fact  of  the 
general  tmallnesa  of  the  Egyptian  head,  at  least  as  observed  in  the  oataoombs  south  of  Mem- 
phis. Thus,  the  Pelasgic  crania,  from  the  latter  city,  give  an  average  internal  capacity  of 
89  cubic  inches ;  those  from  the  same  group  from  Thebes,  give  86.  This  result  is  some- 
what below  the  average  of  the  existing  Caucasian  nations  of  the  Pelasgic,  Germanic,  and 
Celtic  families,  in  which  I  find  the  brain  to  be  about  98  cubic  inches  in  bulk.  It  is  also 
interesting  to  observe  that  the  Pelasgic  brain  is  much  larger  than  the  Egyptian,  which  last 
gives  an  average  of  but  80  cubic  inches ;  thus,  as  we  shall  hereafter  see,  approximating  to 
that  of  the  Indo- Arabian  nations."  ^^ 

*'  The  largest  head  in  the  series  measures  ninety-seven  cubic  inches:  this  occurs  three 
times,  and  always  in  the  Pelasgic  group.  The  smallest  cranium  gives  but  sixty-eight  cubic 
inches ;  and  this  is  three  times  repeated  in  the  Egyptian  heads  from  Thebes.  Thil  last  is 
the  smallest  cranium  I  have  met  with  in  any  nation,  with  three  exceptions — a  Hindoo,  a 
Peruvian,  and  a  Negro." 

Morton  then  reduces  his  measurements  of  100  ancient  Egyptian 
crania  into  the  subjoined  tabular  form :  *— 

Digitized  by 

Google 

COKPABATIYE   ANATOMT   OF    BACES. 

423 

Xtlmographie  DlTiikni. 

PlLASaiO   FOBM.. 

8BXITI0   FOBM.. 

Egtftian  Form. 

Nboboib  Fobm.. 

Nbobo  . 

LooaUty. 

Memphis 
Abjdos .. 
Thebes .. 
Philse 

Memphis 
Abydos ... 
Thebes .., 

Memphis 
Abydos... 
Thebes.., 
Ombos.... 
Debdd 

Maabdeh 
Thebes ... 

Philn..... 

Number  of 

Largest 

SmaUest 

Mean. 

Cruiia. 

Brain. 

Brain. 

1  ^ 

14 

97 

79 

89 

i 

1 

89 

89 

89 

6 

92 

82 

86 

■s 

1 

74 

74 

74 

p 

1 

88 

88 

88 

^ 

1 

69 

69 

69 

8 

85 

79 

79 

s 

7 

88 

78] 

79 

1  K 

3 

96 

86 

90 

.1 

25 

95 

68 

80 

2 

77 

68 

73 

.   ^ 

8 

82 

70 

75 

S 

1 

71 

71 

71 

i 

5 

88 

71 

.81 

CO 

1 

1 

73 

78 

78 

•*1 

CO 

J 

An  examination  of  this  table  again  brings  to  view  the  fact  that  the 
Pelasgic  heads  (which  are  foreign  to  Egy^t,  and  possibly  belonging 
to  some  of  the  so-called  Hykshos,)  predominate  at  Memphis ;  the 
point  which  invaders  from  Asia  would  first  reach/  and  where  they 
would  be  most  likely  to  settle  in  ancient,  no  less  than  in  present, 
times.  The  Pelasgic  are  here  as  14  to  7,  compared  with  the  Egyp- 
tian form. 

[Thus,  Cairo,  on  the  eastern  bank,  has  but  replaced  Memphis  on  the  western ;  at  the 
Bune  time  that  Tanis  (Zoan),  Bubastis  (Fibeteih),  and  Heliopolis  (On),  owing  to  their  proxi- 
mity to  the  Isthmus  of  Sues,  oyer  thronged  with  Asiatic  foreigners.  Here  too,  after  the 
pyramidal  period  and  the  Xllth  dynasty,  was  the  land  of  Goshen — also,  the  shepherd' 
capita],  Ayaris ;  the  frontier  proyince  whence  issued,  with  Israel's  host,  that  QouM-&RaB 
(exactly  the  same  as  Ooum^el-ArcA),  '*  Arab-leyy," ^''o  mistranslated  *< mixed  multitude;" 
and  the  scene  of  incessant  Arabian  relations,  from  Necho*8  canal  down  to  Omar's,  from  the 
wars  of  Sesostris  down  to  Mohammed- All's.  In  Coptic  times  this  eastern  proyince,  now  the 
Sherqleyeht  yr9M  the  Tarabia  (the-Araby);  in  Saracenic,  the  Khauf;*'^^  and  here,  at  this 
day,  the  modem  Fellahs  are  almost  pure  Arabs. — G.  B.  G.] 

At  Thebes,  higher  up  the  river,  the  reverse  is  observed ;  the  Egyp- 
tian form  prevails  over  the  Pelasgic  in  the  proportion  of  25  to  5.  It 
is  evident,  also,  that  the  size  of  the  brain  in  the  Pelasgic  heads  is 
mucli  greater  than  that  of  the  Egyptian  type;  and  at  Ombos,  and 
Debod  in  Nubia,  the  crania  are  still  much  smaller  than  those  of  the 
Egyptians.  Such  facts  afford  much  plausibility  to  the  idea,  that  the 
Pelasgic,  as  Dr.  Morton  terms  them,  or  at  least  some  large*headed 
superior  race,  had  come  into  Egypt  across  the  Isthmus  of  Suez,  had 

Digitized  by 

Google 

424  COMPARATIVB   ANATOMT   OF   RAGES. 

taken  possession  of  the  cotintiy,  and  probably  drove  multitudes  of 
the  native  Egyptians  before  their  invading  swarmg.  These  Pelasgic 
heads,  as  before  stated,  resemble  greatiy  the  population  of  ancient 
Hellas,  of  the  heroic  age ;  and  instead  of  migrating  to  Greece  from 
Egypt  in  ancient  times,  similar  tribes  may  have  branched  off  from 
their  original  abode  in  Asia  direct  to  the  Peloponnesus.  The  latter 
view  is  strengthened  by  the  fietct  that,  in  Greece,  there  are  no  traces 
of  Nilotic  customs,  hieroglyphic  writing,  style  of  art,  &c. ;  which 
would  have  been  the  case  had  that  countiy  been  colonized  by 
Egyptians. 

These  anatomical  deductions,  then,  establish  conclusively  that,  in 
proportion  as  we  ascend  the  "Nile  through  Middle  Egypt,  the  Asiatic 
elements  of  the  ancient  crania  diminish,  to  become  replaced,  after  pass- 
ing Thebes,  by  others  in  which  African  comminglings  are  conspicuous. 
Craniology,  therefore,  testifies  to  the  accuracy  of  Lepsius's  opinion, 
that  the  Hyksos  invasion  forced  a  large  body  of  the  Egyptians  to 
emigrate  to,  and  sojourn  for  a  long  period  in,  the  Kubias.^^ 

One  grand  difficulty,  however,  still  remains  with  regard  to  the 
origin  of  the  Egyptian  type,  as  formerly  understood,  but  since  dis- 
avowed, by  Morton.  Thousands  of  paintings  and  sculptures  on  the 
monuments  prove  that  ancient  Egyptian  feces  often  present  a  strong 
resemblance  to  the  Grecian  profile ;  but,  according  to  the  preceding 
table,  there  is  a  difference  of  eight  cubic  inches  in  the  size  of  the 
crania  of  the  two  races !  Were  not  the  Egyptians,  then,  such  as  are 
represented  on  the  monxmients  of  the  AVlith  and  succeeding  dynas- 
ties, a  mixed  Pelasgic  and  African  race  ? 

To  the  authors  of  this  volume,  in  common  with  Morton's  amended 
views,  as  before  and  finally  set  forth  [suprOj  p.  245],  the  Egyptians 
had  been  once  an  aboriginally-Filotic  stock,  pure  and  simple ;  upon 
which,  in  after  times,  Semitic,  Pelasgic  and  Nubian  elements  became 
engrafted. 

Our  comments  on  monumental  iconography  [Clusters  IV.,  V., 
Vn.,  Vin.]  have  demonstrated  that  almost  every  type  of  mankind, 
of  northwestern  Asia,  northern  Africa,  with  some  of  southern 
Europe,  is  portrayed  so  feithfiilly,  as  to  leave  no  doubt  of  the  primi- 
tive existence  of  distinct  races ;  some  of  which  we  are  enabled  to 
date  back  to  the  IVth  dynasty,  or  8400  years  b.  c.  •But 'it  has  been 
objected  that  the  drawing  of  the  Egyptians  was  imperfect  or  conven- 
tional, and  therefore  not  to  be  relied  upon.  Such  assertions,  if  again 
obtruded  at  the  present  day,  would  merely  argue  small  acquaintance 
with  the  laws  of  Egyptian  attt;*^  because,  however  fiilse  may  be  the 
canonical  position  given  to  the  ear,  however  defective  the  non-fore- 
shortening of  the  ejfey  I  defy  Bbkvekuto  Cellini  himself  to  carve 

Digitized  by 

Google 

COMPARATIVE    ANATOMY    OP    RACES. 

425 

profiles  more  ethnologically-exact  than  thope  bas-relief  effigies  we 
possess,  in  myriads,  from  the  IVth  down  to  the  XXlTd  dynasties. 
But,  I  proceed  to  give  copies  of  various  crania  firom  the  catacombs ; 
which  most  triumphantly  confirm  all  preceding  asseverations  concern- 
ing the  accuracy  of  these  Egyptian  portniit-painters.  The  materials 
are  drawn  mainly  firom  *  the  collection  of  Morton,  which  I  have  ex- 
Mnined  carefully  for  myself.  These  heads,  too,  having  been*obtained 
in  Egypt,  direct  fixnn  the  tombs,  by  one  of  the  authors  of  this  volume, 
I  can  speak  authoritatively,  because  all  attendant  circumstances  are 
known  to  me. 

«•  A  large,  eloogaie<K)Tal  head  (Fig.  258),  with  a  htokd^  high  forehead,  low  coronal  re- 
gion, and  atrongly  aquiline  noee.  The  orbita  nearly  ronnd;  teeth  perfect  and  yerUcaL 
Internal  capacity  97  cubic  inches ;  facial  angle  T?**.    PeUugie  form.'*  *•''* 

Fm.  268. 

Fig.  254. 

'<A  beantifuny-formed  head  (Rg.  254),  with  a 
forehead,  high,  ftiU,  and  nearly  Tertical,  a  good 
coronal  region,  and  largely-developed  ocoipot.  The 
nasal  bones  are  long  and  straight,  and  the  whole 
fiftcial  structare  delicately  proportioned.  Age  between 
80  and  85  years.  Internal  capacity  88  cubic  inches ; 
fsoial  angle  810.   Pdatgie  form."  ^^i 

«  SkuU  of  a  woman  of  twenty  years  (Fig.  255)  ? 
with  a  beautifdlly-deyeloped  forehead,  and  remark- 
ably  thin  and  delicate  structure  throughout.  The 
fh>ntal  suture  remains.  Internal  capacity  82  cubic 
inches ;  facial  angjle  80o.    Pola^  form."  «78 

'<  Head  of  a  woman 
(Fig.  256)  of  thirty, 
of  a  faultless  Cauca- 
dan  mould.  The  hair, 
which  is  in  profusion, 
is  of  a  dark-brown 
tint,  and  delicately 
enrled.  Pdatgwform^* 
fh>m  Thebes. 

The  following  series 
(Hgs.  257,  258,  259, 
260,  261),  iUustrates 
tiie  Sgy^iian  form. 
54 

Fia.  256.*'7 

Fio.  257.*w 

Digitized  by 

Google 

426 

COMPARATIVE    ANATOMY   OP    RAGES. 

Fio.  268.*7»  Pio.  269.4W  "  An  elongated  head, 

with  a  broad,  receding 
forehead,  gently  aqui- 
line nose,  and  retract- 
ed ohin,  together  with 
the  marked  distance 
between  the  nose  and 
mouth,  and  the  long, 
smooth  hair,  are  all 
characterisUcs  of  the 
monumental  Egyp- 
tian." 

Ofthe/Sifwii^i? 
Fio.  260.*8i  Fia.  26l.<o  form,   foregoing 

chapters  have 
supplied  many 
portraits.  One, 
out  of  numerous 
mummied  cra- 
nia, will  suffice 
to  illustrate  its 
existence  in  the 
sepulchres  of 
Egypt. 

"  This  head  "  (Fig.  262),  says  Morton,  «  possesses 
great  interest,  on  account  of  its  decided  Hebrew  fea- 
tures, of  which  many  examples  are  extant  on  the 
monuments"  of  Egypt;  and  we  have  already  com- 
pared it  with  those  of  Assyria  [wpra^  p.  116.] 

"  The  colossal  head*'  from  Nineveh 
proclaimed  the  existence  of  a  }iigher 
order  of  Chaldaic  type  upon  Assyrian 
sculptures.    The  reader  will  be  grati- 
fied to  observe  hovr  faithfully  ancient 
Chaldsea's  tombs  testify  to  the  exacti- 
tude of  her  iconographic  monuments ;  at  the  same  time,  he  will  per- 
ceive how  art  and  nature  conjointly  establish  the  precision  of  modem 
anatomy's  deductions. 

The  following  sketch  (Figs.  268  and  264)  is  a  faithftd  reduction  of  an  Assyrian  skull, 
recently  exhumed  by  Dr.  Latard,  Arom  one  of  the  ancient  mounds,  and  now  deposited  in 
the  British  Museum.  Its  fac-simile  drawing  has  just  been  most  kindly  sent  me  from  Eng- 
land, by  Mr.  J.  B.  Dayis,  F.  S.  A.,  one  of  the  authors  of  the  Crania  Britanniea  (a  great 
work,  which  is  shortly  to  be  published).  I  have  no  history  of  the  skull,  beyond  the  facts 
aboY»  stated  ;  but  it  is  believed  to  be  the  representatiye  of  an  ancient  Assyrian.  Speaking 
of  the  drawings,  Mr.  Dayis  says  in  his  letter  to  me,  <*  they  are  of  the  exact  size  of  nature, 
and  Yeiy  faithful  representations  of  the  cranium." 

It  is  much  to  be  regretted  that  we  have  as  yet  no  series  of  ancient  skulls  from  l^nereh 
and  Babylon,  as  they  would  throw  great  light  upon  the  early  connection  between  the  races 
of  Egypt  and  Assyria. 

Fio.  262. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

COMPABATIVE   ANATOMY   OF   BACES. 

427 

This  skull  is  Tery  interesting  in  several  Fia.  263. 

points  of  Tiew.  Its  immense  size  confirms 
history  by  showing  that  none  but  a  high 
**Caacasian"  race  could  have  achieved  so  much 
greatness.  The  measurements  taken  tram 
the  drawing  are  — 

Longitudinal  diameter,  7}  inches. 
Transverse  "        5f      " 

Vertical  "        6J      " 

It  is  probable  that  the  parietal  diameter  is 
larger  than  the  measurement  here  given ;  be- 
cause, possessor  of  only  front  and  profile  views, 
I  think  these  may  not  express  fairly  the  poste- 
rior parts  of  the  head.  There  are  but  two  heads 
in  Morton's  whole  Egyptian  series  of  equal 
size,  and  these  are  *'Pelasgic;"  nor  more 
than  two  equally  large  throughout  his  Ame- 
rican series.  Daniel  Webster's  head  measured  ' 
— longitudinal  diameter,  7}  inches;  trans- 
verse, 5} ;  vertical,  5} :  and  comparison  will 
show  that  the  Assyrian  head  is  but  a  frac- 
tion the  smaller  of  the  two. 

This  Assyrian  head,  moreover,  is  remark- 
able tor  its  close  resemblance  to  several  of 
Morton's  Egyptian  series,  classed  under  the 
<*  Pelasgio  form."  It  thus  adds  another  pow- 
erful confirmation  to  the  fact  this  volume 
establishes,  viz.,  that  the  Egyptians,  at  all 

monumental  times,  were  a  mixed  people,  and  in  all  historical  ages  were  much  amalgamated 
with  Chaldaic  races.  Any  one  familiar  with  crania,  who  will  compare  this  Assyrian  head 
with  the  beautiftil  Egyptian  series  lithographed  in  the-  Crania  ^gyptiaeat  cannot  fail  to  be 
•truck  with  its  resemblance  to  many  of  the  latter,  even  more  forcibly  than  anatomists  will, 
through  our  small,  if  accurate,  wood-cuts. 

To  vary  these  illustrations,  while  confirming  the  deductions  already 
drawn,  I  borrow  two  admirably-preserved  heads  (Figs.  265  and  266) 

Fio.  265. 

Fio.  266. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

428 

COMPARATIVE    AI^ATOMT    OP   RACES. 

from  Champollion-Figbac,*®  who  has  reduced  them  from  the  folio- 
plates  of  Napoleon's  Description  de  VEgypte.  Fig.  266  yields  the  per- 
fect Egyptian  type. 

From  the  mummy  itself,  now  possessed  by  the  Universily  of  Louisi- 
ana, at  New  Orleans,  (and  which  I  have  personally  scrutinized,)  I 
present  the  most  valuable  specimen  among  all  known  to  me ;  inas- 
much as  it  is  one  of  the  extremely  rare  instances  where  the^daf^  of  a 
deceased  Egyptian  can  be  positively  determined  by  documentary 
evidence. 

Fia.  267. 

PoriraU  (Fig.  267)  of  the 
Mummy  iff  Gor-THorai-AUim, 
«<  Chief  of  the  Ar^eera,"  who 
died  in  the  vTear  X."  of  theragn 
of  OsoBKoir  III.  A  man  be- 
tween thirty  and  forty  years  of 
age,  who  waa  alive  in  the  year 
B.  0.  900 ;  or,  before  a  single 
Btone  yet  diaooyered  at  ancient 
Babylon  was  inaeribed  with  cn- 
neatic  oharacters.  Here  is  the 
history  of  ita  transmission  to 
this  country :  — 

In  1846,  BIr.  Gliddon  inti- 
mated, from  Paris,  to  his  friend 
Mr.  A.  C.  Harris,  the  most  in- 
fluential resident  in  Egypt,  his 
desire  to  procure  a  series  of  funereal  antiquities  to  illuste«te  his  Lectures  in  the  United 
States.  The  letter  fortunately  overtook  Mr.  Harris  during  one  of  this  gentleman's  arcbso- 
ological  risits  at  Thebes ;  where  accident  enabled  him  to  obtain  one  adourable  mummy,  from 
the  well-known  Wbbba,  in  perfect  condition.  It  was  conveyed  in  his  own  yacht  to  Alex- 
andria, with  a  dozen  other  human  mummies  collected  at  Thebes,  Abydos,  and  Memphis, 
intended  for  Mr.  Gliddon. 

In  1846,  after  fruitless  efforts  to  ship  them,  four  were  sequestrated  at  the  Alexandrian 
Custom-house :  Mohammed  Ali,  since  1885,  having  forbidden  the  exportation  of  Antiquities 
by  any  but  agents  of  European  powers.^  An  ofScial  application,  made  by  the  United  States' 
Consul  to  the  '\^ceroy  failed;  and,  in  1849,  these  four  mummies  were  found  to  have 
perished,  through  damp,  in  the  Custom-house.  Happily,  Mr.  Harris  had  preserved  the 
most  valuable  specimen  at  his  own  residence. 

In  1848,  after  Mohammed  All's  superannuation,  penuission  to  export  BIr.  Gliddon's  collec- 
tion was  revised  by  Ibraheem  Pasha.  On  his  death,  1849,  Mr.  Harris's  personal  claims 
upon  the  courtesies  of  the  Government  obtained  leave  from  Abbass  Pasha ;  and  the  mummy, 
(with  two  others  divested  of  their  coffins),  was  forwarded  to  Liverpool,  where  the  influential 
complaisance  of  Messrs.  Baring  Brothers  obtained  their  transhipment  to  the  United  States, 
free  of  Examination  at  the  Quarantine  and  Custom-house.  At  New  Tork,  similar  facilities 
were  accorded  to  BIr.  B.  K.  Height ;  and,  after  five  years  of  disappointments,  Mr.  Gliddon 
received  these  specimens  in  November,  1849. 

Opened  at  Boston,  June,  1850,  in  the  presence  of  two  thousand  persons,  by  Prof.  Agassiz, 
and  a  committee  of  sixteen  of  the  leading  physicians,  these  coffins  yielded  the  embalmed 
corpse  of  the  Theban  Priest  Got-thothi-auhkh,  {latinkk,  **  Dixit  Thoth,  rivat !  ")  who  died 
in  the  tenth  year  of  lOng  Osorkon  IIL,  early  in  the  ninth  century  b.  o.,  or  about  2750  years 
ago.    The  amusing  equivoque  of  gender  that  occurred  at  its  opening  received  satisfactory 

Digitized  by 

Google 

COMPARATIVE    ANATOMY    OP    RACES. 

429 

Fio.  268. 

Fxo.  269. 

eluoidation  in  the  **  Letter  firom  Mr.  Oliddon  about  the  Papynis  found  on  the  Boston  Mum- 
mj,"  published  in  the  Botton  Evening  7Vanscry>t,  August  21st  and  22d,  1850.  A  copy  of 
this  article  ia  appended  to  the  mummy,  ivhich,  with  all  its  documentary  cerements,  now 
lies  open  to  inspection  at  the  Anatomical  Museum  of  the  Louisiana  University. 

Fac-similes  of  all  the  hieroglyphical  insoriptions  on  this  mummy  were  forwarded  by  Mr. 
Qliddon  to  Mr.  Birch ;  and  the  only  material  emendation  of  the  former's  readings,  added 
by  this  erudite  hierologist,  is,  that  the  legend  on  the  papyrus  designates  the  corpse  as  that 
of  the  **  Chief  of  the  Arlifieert  of  the  abode  of  Ammon,"  i.  e,  Thebes. 

Submitted,  at  Philadelphia,  to  the  scientific  scrutiny  of  the  late  Pr.  Morton,  this  mum- 
mied body  was  not  only  prohounced  to  be  **  unequi- 
Tocally  identified  with  the  reign  of  Osorkon  III.,  by 
finding  the  cartouche  or  oval  of  that  king  stamped,  in 
four  different  places,  on  a  leather  cross,  placed  dia- 
gonally on  the  thorax  in  fhmt ; "  but  the  same' autho- 
rity also  declares,  <'  there  are  180  embalmed  Egyptian 
heads  in  the  collection  of  tHe  Academy,  but  none  of 
them. can  be  even  approximately  dated;  whence  the 
great  interest  that  attaches  itself  to  the  present  ex- 
ample.''<»  And  finally,  on  the  28d  of  January,  1862, 
the  whole  of  these  arohnological  facts  haye  been  con- 
firmed, at  New  Orleans,  by  the  personal  inyestiga- 
tion  of  Monsieur  J.  J.  Ampere,  whose  opinions  in 
Egyptology  are  deoisiyc^w  Mr.  Gliddon  pointed  out 
to  me,  on  thie  corpse,  the  only  absolute  confirmation, 
he  says,  of  Scripture,  with  which  long  studies  of 
Egyptian  lore  haye  made  him  personally  acquainted. 
All  male  mummies  comply  with,  the  ordinances  of 
Genena  xli.  14 ;  and  with  Oen,  xyii.  11 ;  Ezod,  iy.  26— 
but  GoT-THOTHi*8  illustrates  the  accuracy  of  Ea- 
kul's  description  of  an  ''Egyptian"— >xyi  26;  and 
xxiU.  19,  20. 

These  Figs.,  268  and  269,  are  copies  of  the  mnmmy-oaMf.  Tht  fiMM  of  the  inner 
one  is  gilt ;  but  bitumm  had  obliterated  the  legends. 

That  the  influx  of  Asiatics  into  the  Valley  of  the  Nile  commenced 
long  before  the  foundation  of  the  Empire  under  Mbnbs  —  that  is, 
prior  to  B.  c.  4000 — there  can  be  no  further  question ;  and  that  amal- 
gamations of  foreign  with  the  Nile's  domestic  races  commenced  at  a 
pre-historic  epoch,  is  now  equally  certain.  Hence  it  is  evident,  that 
it  must  be  often  impossible  to  define  some  crania  of  these  blended 
Egyptian  races  with  precision,  so  great  is  the  intermixture  of  primi- 
tive types.  The  facts  however,  drawn  by  Morton  fix)m  the  monu- 
ments and  crania,  prove,  that  the  Egyptians-proper  possessed  small, 
elongated  heads,  with  receding  foreheads,  and  an  average  internal 
capacity  of  80  cubic  inches.  Such  view  is  fortified  by  the  resem- 
blance of  this  type  to  the  modem  native  races  of  Egypt  and  surround- 
ing countries ;  as  the  Fellahs,  theBedawees  on  both  sides  of  the  river 
•  and  in  the  western  oases,  the  Nubians,  Berbers,  &q.  Their  skulls 
have  been  already  figured  Isuproj  pp.  226,  227]. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

430 

COMPARATIVE    ANATOMY   OF    RACES. 

Fio.  270.«7 

Bushman. 

Fio.  271 .«« 

African-Negro  Crania. 

Our  Chapter  VJJUL.  has  already  shown  that  Negroes  are  faithfiilly 

delineated  on  the  monuments  of  the  XVIIth  dynasty,  or  b.  c.  1600 — 

'3700 ;  and  that,  although  we  produced  no  positive  Nigritian  portraits 

of  earlier  date,  yet  it  is  conceded 
that  Negro  tribes  were  abundant, 
along  the  Upper  Nile,  as  far  back 
as  the  Xnth  dynasty ;  and  ergo^  they 
must  have  been  also  contemporary 
with  the  earliest  settlers  of  Egypt. 

Although  Negro  races  present  con- 
siderable variety  in  their  cranial  con- 
formations, yet  they  all  possess  cer- 
tain unmistakeable  traits  in  common, 
marking  them  as  Negroes,  and  dis- 
tinguishing them  from  all  other  spe- 
cies of  man.  Prognathous  jaws, 
narrow  elongated  forms,  receding 
foreheads,  large  posterior  develop- 
ment, small  internal  capacity,  &c, 
characterize  the  whole  group  crani- 
ologically. 

A  few  examples  suffice  to  give  the 
reader  a  good  idea  of  their  promi- 
nent characteristics,  and  will  enable 
him  to  appreciate  cranial  distinctions 
between  the  varied  Negro  and  other 
Afiican  types.    (See  Figs.  270-275.) 

It  cannot  feil 
Fio.  273.490  to  be  noticed 

that  the  Caffre 
and  the  Ash- 
antee  exhibit 
far  higher  con- 
formations 
than  the  rest; 
in  accordance 
with  recent 
historical 

Mozambique. , 

Fia.  272.<w 

Cftffre. 

Ashantee. 

events.    They  approach  the  Foolah  "gradation." 

Digitized  by 

Google 

COMPAEATIVE    ANATOMY   OP   BAOES.  431 

Pio.  274.«i  Fig.  275.492 

Creole  N^xo. 

MuBunied  Negreae. 

Pig.  276.49i 

Pigore  276  is  the  portrait  of  a  celebrated  Hottentot  female,  irhich  (Beemingly,  to 
Europeans)  presents  an  extraordinary  deformity.  Some  writers  affirm  that  her  bump,  or 
hnmp,  is  an  accidental  freak  of  nature,  or  a  peculiarity  resulting  from  local  causes.  It 
is  furthermore  asserted,  that  such  posterior  development  cannot 
be  characteristic  of  any  special  race.  But,  while  all  these  ei^la- 
nations  are  nullified  by  the  fact  that,  around  the  Cape  of  Good 
Hope  (and  among  Hottentot  and  Bushman  races  alone)  similar 
retrotuberance  is  still'  quite  common,  it  should  not  be  forgotten 
that  the  proclivities  of  exotic  Dutch  Boors,  combined  with  the 
action  of  local  aborigines,  have  already  modified  the  Hottentot  and 
Bushman,  and  consequently  divested  both,  to  some  extent,  of  their 
pristine  uniformity.  Rittbb  [iupra,  p.  880]  shows  that  Arabian 
mngle,  and  Bactrian  double-humped  camels  (although  distinct 
"species"),  when  bred  together,  produce  effspring  sometimes 
with  one,  at  others  with  two  humps ;  and  as  the  Hottentots  are 
now  a  very  mixed  race,  why  should  not  the  bump,  once  unde- 
viatingly  characteristic  of  the  good  old  race,  be  frequently  ab- 
sent, or  else  diminished  in  volume,  in  the  present  genera- 
tion ? 

That  the  laws  governing  the  phenomena  of  Nature,  if  as  yet 
often  inscrutable,  are  nevertheless  perdurable,  may  be  exempli- 
fied, monumentally,  even  through  instances  of  idiocy  or  lunacy.  Rosellini's  plates,  com- 
pared with  Egyptian  mummied  skulls,  and  examined  by  the  keen  eyes  of  such  comparative 
anatomists  as  Morton,  ftimish  evidence  that  the  natural  deformities  of  humanity  were  ap- 
preciated, thousands  of  years  ago,  by  Nilotic  art ;  because  the  *<  sagacity  of  the  Egyptian 
artist  has  admirably  adapted  this  man's  (Fig.  278)  vocation  to  his  intellectual  developments, 
for  he  is  employed  in  stirring  the  fire  p^^  277 

in  a  blacksmith's  shop."  ^ 

Pio.  278. 

Hottentot  Yennt. 

Sculptarod  Fool. 

Mummied  Idiot. 

I  Idiot.  /--^  T 

^.   zedbyCjOOgle 

438         '      COMPABATIVB   ANATOMY   OP   BACKS, 

Oceanic  Baces. 

Gteographers  divide  our  globe  into  Europe,  Aaia,  Afiica,  America, 
and  Oceanica.  This  last  region  has  been  subjected  to  many  system- 
atic divisions  by  different  writers ;  but  M.  Jacquinot's  are  both  simple 
and  comprehensive :  — 

"  1.  Australia— embrao68  New  Holland,  and  Tasmania  or  Van  Biemen's  Land. 

*'  2.  PoLTNBSiA— all  the  islands  of  the  Pacific  Ocean,  fttna  th^  irest  coast  of  America  to 
the  Philippines,  and  the  Moluccas ;  comprising  irhat  haye  been  tenned  Micronesia  and 
Melanesia. 

«  8.  Malaysia,  or  Eatt  /m2£ef— Indian  Archipelago ;  containing  theSnnda,  Philip^ne  and 
Molucca  Islands.'* 

The  three  dirisions  together  are  termed  Oceanica;  and  the  races  of  men  distributed  OTer 
this  yast  area  present  an  infinite  diyersity  of  ^es,  irhich  haye  also  been  yariously  clas- 
sified. Prichard  yery  justly  remarks  that  these  Oceanic  types  differ  so  much  among  each 
other,  and  from  the  ii^bitants  of  the  Old  and  Neir  World,  that  it  is  now  ii^possible  ie 
trace  their  origin.^^ 

{Ethnographic  knowledge  of  the  whole  of  them  does  not  antedate  the  sixteenth  centuiy. 
Thus,  the  existence  of  Malay  tribes  was  unknown  to  Europe  before  their  discoyeiy  by  Lopes 
de  Sequeira,  in  a.  d.  1610,  followed  by  Albuquerque  about  1518.  Mkronenam  were  first 
seen  by  Ferdinand  Magelhaens  in  1520 ;  Polytmietu  by  Buy  JLopes  de  ViUalobos  in  1548, 
and  by  Alyaro  de  Mendana  in  1595 :  while  Abel  Jansen  Tasman,  in  1642-8,  sailed  around 
Van  Diemen's  Land,  seeing  <*  no  people,  but  some  tmoaks^"  and  afterwards  had  some  of  his 
men  killed  by  naUves  of  New  Zealand— which  seems  to  be  the  first  historic  notice  of  AiU" 
tralian  families.  When  we  recollect  that  the  Hoond  *<yoyage  arovnd  the  world'*  was  not 
undertaken  by  Francis  Drake  before  the  year  1557,^  it  will  be  comprehended  at  once  how 
yery  recent  is  the  information  which  ethnology  possesses  of  Malayan,  Polynesian,  and 
Australian  types ;  whose  separate  existence,  neyertheless,  must  be  as  ancient  as  that  of  the 
animals  and  plants  of  their  respectiye  prorinces  of  creation. — Q.  B.  G.] 

As  every  classification  of  these  races  is  wholly  arbitrary',  and  inas- 
much as  any  attempts  at  emendation  would  here  be  ftitile,  I  shall 
merely  select  for  illustration  a  few  of  their  more  prominent  types. 
"We  have  shown,  from  the  monuments  of  Egypt  an(i  other  sources, 
that  various  distinct  races  of  men  stood,  face  to  face,  5000  years  ago, 
and  that  no  physical  causes  have  since  transformed  one  type  into  an- 
other. We  may,  therefore,  reasonably  assume  Ihat  these  Oceanic 
races  have  ever  been  contemporaiy  wifli  others  elsewhere,  and  were 
created  where  originally  found  by  modem  navigators.  There  is  a 
more  or  lees  intimate  connection,  it  is  said,  among  most  of  the 
Polynesian  tongues;  but  the  Australian,  whose  type  is  altogether 
peculiar,  Prichard  declares,  ^^  is  the  only  one  whose  language  is  known 
to  be  distinct" 

Australians. 

Australia  comprises  such  immense  superficies  as  to  deserye  the  name  of  a  continent ;  and, 
consequently,  its  inhabitants  present  considerable  diyersity  of  types.  This  is  inferred  fh>m 
the  contradictory  accounts  of  trayellers,  who  haye  described  them  at  different  geographies! 
points.  It  should  be  remarked,  that  the  natiyes  of  Australia,  Van  Diemen's  Land,  New 
Guineii,  aoU  some  other  of  these  islands,  although  differing  in  many  particulars,  are  all  to 

Digitized  by 

Google 

COMPARATIVE    ANATOMY    OF    RACES. 

433 

black  in  complexion  08  to  have  been  termed  Oceanic  Negroe»,  They  partake  of  the  cranial 
conformation  of  African  Negroes;  displaying,  like  them,  narrow,  elongated  heads,  defeotiye 
foreheads,  small  internal  capacity,  projecting  jaws,  &c. 

Gapt  WiLKBs,  commander  of  the  late  U.  S.  Exploring  Expedition,  thns  describes  them : — 

**  The  natlTes  of  Australia  differ  from  any  other  race  of  men  in  features,  complexion, 
habits,  and  language.  Their  color  and  features  assimilate  them  to  the  AfHcan  type :  their 
long,  black,  silky  hair  has  a  resemblance  to  the  Malays.  The  natiyes  are  of  middle  height, 
perhaps  a  little  aboVe  it ;  they  are  slender  in  make,  with  long  arms  and  legs.  The  cast  of 
the  face  is  between  the  African  and  the  Malay ;  the  forehead  unusually  narrow  and  high ; 
the  eyes  small,  black,  and  deep-set ;  the  nose  mudi  depressed  at  the  upper  part,  between 
the  eyes,  and  widened  at  the  base,  which  is  done  in  infancy  by  the  mother,  the  natural 
shape  being  of  an  aquiline  form ;  the  cheek-bones  are  high,  the  mouth  large,  and  ftimished 
with  strong,  well-set  teeth ;  the  chin  frequently  retreats ;  the  neck-is  thin  and  short  The 
color  usually  approaches  a  deep  umber,  or  reddish-black,  yarying  much  in  shade ;  and  in- 
dividuals of  pure  blood  are  sometimes  as  light-colored  as  mulattoes.  Their  most  striking 
distinction  is  their  hair,  which  is  like  that  of  dark-haired  Europeans,  although  more  silky. 
It  is  fine,  disposed  to  ourl,  and  gives  them  a  totally  different  aspect  from  the  African,  and 
also  from  the  Malay  and  American  Indian.  Most  of  them  have  thick  beards  and  whiskers, 
and  they  are  more  hairy  than  the  whites." 

Jacquuvot,  of  the  French  Exploring  Expedition,  gives  a  very  dinilar  description,  except 
that  "  leur  couJeur  itait  d*un  noir  fuUgmeux  atta  tntenae."  ^ 

M.  DB  Fbetcinbt,  who  passed  considerable  time  at  different  points  of  the  country,  de- 
aoribes  these  tribes  in  the  same  manner.  He  says :  <<  The  people  everywhere  assimilate. 
Their  color  varies  fh>m  intense  black  to  reddish  black.  Their  hair  is  invariably  black  and 
smooth,  though  undulating,  and  never  has  the  woolly  appearance  seen  in  other  races."  ^^s 

Pia.  279.^ 

Fia.  280.500 

Australian. 

<  This  man  (Fig.  279),  whose  name  was  Durabub,  was  killed  in  a  fray,  after  having  {dm- 

self  killed  two  savages 
of  a  hostile  tribe,  a.  d. 
1841.  His  skull  (adds 
Morton)  is  the  nearest 
approach  to  the  orang 
type  that  I  have  seen. 
JBUt.40.  J.C.  81." 
Fig.  281  is  from  la 
BaU  Raffle,^  coast  of 
New  Holland;  taken 
from  the  Atlas  of  Du- 
moutier. 

55 

Fio.  282.M2 

Fia.  281.»i 

Nttfrvof  NvirfinUavd. 

NatlT4  of  tho  IiUmei  of  Timor 

Digitized  by 

Google 

434 

COMPARATIVE    ANATOMY   OP    RACES. 

Fig.  282  —  «Natif  d'AnmoalMUig,  lie  Timor." 

To  these  heads  from  New  Holland  and  the  Island  of  Timor  many  others  might  be  added, 
ftrom  the  yarious  irorks  on  the  Physical  History  of  Mankind.  Onr  series,  hoirerer,  supplies 
fair  specimens  of  these  races,  who  represent  the  lowest  grade  in  the  human  family.  Their 
anatomical  characteristicB  are  certainly  Tery  remarkable.  While,  in  countenance,  they 
present  an  extreme  of  the  prognathous  type  hardly  aboTe  that  of  the  orang-outan,  they 
possess  at  die  same  time  the  smallest  brains  of  the  whole  of  mankind;  being,  according  to 
Morton's  measurements,  serenteen  cubic  inches  less  than  the  brain  of  the  Teutonic  race. 
In  my  own  collection  I  haTe  a  oast  of  the  head  figured  aboTO  in  Morton's  catalogue ;  and, 
decidedly,  it  exhibits  more  of  tha  animal  tium  of  man. 

Tasmaniaj  or  Van  Diemen's  Land. 

It  is  certainly  an  extraordinary  flust,  that  this  comparatiTely-small  island,  merely  sepa* 
rated  from  Australia  by  a  narrow  channel,  should  be  occupied  by  people  of  entirely  diffe- 
rent type.  The  tribes 
Fig.  288.»3  Fio.  284.fiM  of   New  HoUand,  it 

has  been  just  set 
forth,  are  more  or 
less  black,  but  pos- 
sess fine,  straight  and 
silky  hair ;  while  their 
neighbors  of  Tasma- 
nia are  thus  described 
by  Capt  Cook:  — 

«•  The  color  of  the 
people  of  Van  Die- 
men's  Land  is  a  dull 
black,  and  not  quite 
BO  deep  as  that  of  the 
African  Negroes.  The 
hair  is  perfectly 
woolly.  Their  noses, 
though  not  flat,  are 
broad  and  fulL  The 
lower  part  of  the  face 
projects  a  good  deal." 
The  reader  can  se- 
lect from  the  follow- 
ing 4  samples  (Figs. 
283-286)  which  he 
considers  the  worst 
expression  of  the  most 
inferior  grades  of  hu- 
manity. 
Fig.  A  ftrom  Martin,  and  B  ftrom  Dumoutier,  compare  well  with,  the  heads  of  Austra- 
lians ;  and  not  less  disagreeably. 

B.— TMiiianlui. 

Fig.  286.«» 

Fig.  286.»fi 

C—Taam  Milan. 

D.— TaonaniaB. 

Faptuuj  of  New  Chiinea. 

New  Guinea  is  the  largest  of  all  these  islands  after  New  Holland.  Numerous  narigators, 
the  old  as  well  as  the  liring,  haye  described  this  people  at  yarious  localities  on  the  coast 

Digitized  by 

Google 

COMPARATIVE   ANATOMY   OP   RACES. 

435 

Ifew  OofaiMrman. 

FiO.  288.S08 

The  tribes  appear  everywhere  to  be  substantially  the  same :  Pio.  287.50' 

s'kin  more  or  less  black,  features  Negro,  hair  woolly  and 
formed  into  enormous  tufts. 

This  (Fig.  287)  is  a  fair  specimen  of  the  inhabitants 
of  New  Guinea,  which  not  only  presents  the  Negro  com- 
plexion, and  features  like  the  Australian,  but  also  the 
-woolly  hair.  We  may  consider  this  skull  an  average  type 
of  the  Papuan  race. 

Hatfours^  or  Alforians. 

In  Malaysia,  under  the  names  of  Harfours,  Alfoors,  Ha- 
raforas,  &c.,  have  been  designated  the  inhabitants  of  the 
interior  of  the  large  islands,  or  mountain  regions.  But  great 

diversity  exists  in  the  type  of  these  families ;  and  much  oonf^ion  in  descriptions.    They  seem 
generally  to  be  a  true  Negro  race,  of  the  lowest  order ;  and  ftrom  their  position  in  the  inte- 
rior, no  less  than  from  their  degraded  condition,  they  are,  most  probably,  the  true  abori- 
gines of  many  of  these  islands,  who  have  been 
iriyen  back  by  immigrants  ftrom  other  islands. 
One  skull  (Fig.  288)  sufficiently  represents  them. 

I  shall  not  overload  our  pages  with  detailed  de- 
Bcriptions  of  the  various  Oceanic  Negro  types  in- 
habiting the  smaller  islands.  Materials  lack  for 
satisfactory  anatomical  comparison.  There  is  to  be 
found  in  print  very  litUe  to  aid  the  craniologist, 
beyond  the  magnificent  plates  Of  Dumoutier,  ftrom 
which  we  have  extensively  borrowed ;  but  his  text 
has  not  yet  been  published ;  nor  do  drawing^  alone 
furnish  the  information  required.  All  travellers 
and  every  anatomist  agree,  however,  in  plachig 
these  Oceanic  Negroes  at  the  bottom  of  the  scale 
of  races ;  and,  at  the  same  time,  the  Alforians  are 
described  as  totally  diiferexit  ftrom  every  group  of  Alltmr. 

Negroes  on  the  African  continent 

Therefore,  the  supposition  of  any  community  of  origin  between  these  Australasians  and 
the  true  Nigritians — neither  of  them  migratory  races,  and  widely  separated  by  oceans  — 
would  be  too  gratuitous  to  merit  refutation.  So  also  would  be  any  hypotheses  based  upon 
dimatie  influences,  when  the  lones  of  their  respective  habitats  are  as  opposite  in  nature, 
as  the  races  of  Malaysia  are  distinct  from  those  of  Afirica,  and,  at  the  same  time,  geogra- 
phically remote. 

Polynesian  Race. 

An  elaborate  aooeunt  of  this  race  may  be  found  in  Prichard's  "  Physical  History  of  Man- 
kmd;"  but  I  rely  more  particularly  on  the  later  work  of  M.  Jacquinot;  inasmuch  as  it  is, 
in  every  respect,  deserving  of  confidence  and  admiration :  coming,  besides,  fh>m  a  naturalist 
who  has  MM  these  tribes  in  their  various  localities : — 

**  The  Polynesian  race  is  well  marked  and  distinct ;  it  inhabits  all  Malaysia  and  the  greater 
part  of  Polynesia,  comprising  the  numerous  islands  separated  by  d'Urville  under  the  name 
of  Mioronesia. 

«  The  general  characters  of  this  race  may  be  thus  given : — Skin  tawny,  of  a  yellow  color 
washed  with  bistre,  more  or  less  deep ;  very  light  in  some,  almost  brown  in  others.  Hair, 
black,  bushy,  smooth  and  sometimes  frizzled.  Eyes  black,  more  split  than  open,  not  at  all 
oblique.    Nose  long,  straight,  sometimes  aquiline  or  straight;  nostrils  large  and  open. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

436 

COMPABATIVE   ANATOMY    OF    RACES. 

irhich  makes  it  sometimes  look  fist,  especially  in  iromen  and  children ;  in  them,  also,  the 
lips,  which  in  general  are  long  and  corred,  are  slightly  prominent  Teeth  fine;  indsors 
large.  Cheek-bones  large,  not  salient ;  enlarging  the  face,  irhich,  nerertheless,  is  longer 
than  wide." 

Blnmenbach  describes  the  cranium  thus :  —  *'  Summit  of  the  head  slightly  contracted ; 
forehead  rather  oonTCz ;  cheek-bones  not  prominent ;  superior  maxillary  bone  rather  pro* 
jecting ;  parietal  protuberances  veiy  prominent" 

Jacquinot  declares  that  these  characters  are  constant  in  all  the  indiTiduals  of  the  Poly- 
nesian race ;  and  he  says  his  description  is  confirmed  by  Forster,^!^  Moerenhout,^^  Ellis,  ^^ 
Quoy  et  Oaimord,  and  others. 

Most  authors  recogniie  three  distinct  races  among  the  Polynesians :  independent  of  those 
just  described,  they  designate  the  inhabitants  of  the  Carolines,  or  Micronesians,  and  the 
Malays ;  but  M.  Jacquinot  regards  this  diyision  as  unfounded  in  nature.  That  there  is 
considerable  variety  of  types  in  these  scattered  ishmds  is  admitted ;  and  the  question  re- 
duces itself  to,  whether  these  islanders  are  really  of  one  stock  or  of  seyeral.  Anthropo- 
logy perceiTes  no  reason  for  supposing  that  they  are  all  descended  from  one  pair ;  and  I 
therefore  regard  them  as  a  group  of  proximate  races,  like  the  numerous  other  groups 
already  signaliied  on  the  earth's  superficies.  They  haye  been  separated,  by  some  writers, 
on  philological  grounds ;  but  I  hold  it  to  be  a  demonstrable,  eyen  if  not  demonstrated  fict, 
that  zoological  characters  are  far  more  reliable  than  mere  analogies  of  language ;  which 
(critically  examined)  are  firequentiy  less  real  than  fancif^ 

After  surreying  the  Polynesian  race  in  detail,  through  all  the  islands,  from  the  Philip- 
pines to  New  Zealand  and  the  Sandwich,  Jacquinot  concludes : — 

«  Thus  this  race  is  found  spread  firom  20<'  N.  lat  to  60^  S.  lat ;  that  is  to  say,  it  occu- 
pies a  space  of  about  8500  miles  of  latitude  by  4500  of  lon^tude.  Certainly,  within  these 
extremes,  the  climate  offers  numerous  Tariations.  Some  of  these  islands  are  flat,  others 
mountainous ;  some  are  yery  fertile,  others  sterile ;  and,  notwitiistanding  all  these  ciroum- 
isfances,  the  Polynesians  remain  the  same  eyerywhere.  They  are  all  in  the  same  degree  of 
civilization,  of  industry  and  intelligence ;  their  color  is  not  more  dark  under  the  equator 
than  without  the  tropics — and  eyerywhere  we  find  some  more  brown  than  others. 

*'  We  repeat  that,  before  such  facts  fall  all  theories  respecting  the  influence  of  atmosphere 
and  of  climate. 

<*  They  prove  also,  in  the  clearest  manner,  that  the  Polynesians  cannot  be  a  hybrid  race ; 
because,  if  it  were  so,  they  could  not  preserve,  in  the  numerous  islands,  a  homogeneouaneas 
of  character  so  perfect;  there  would  necessarily  be  mixed  breeds  in  different  degrees,  and 
showing  every  shade  and  grade.    The  Polynesian  race  then  is  primitive," 

The  original  of  Fig.  289 
Fia.  289.  Fio.  290.  died  in  the  Marine  hospital 

at  Mobile,  while  under  the 
charge  of  my  friends  Drs. 
Levert  and  Mastin;  and 
the  skull  was  presented  to 
Agassis  and  myself  <or  ex- 
amination, without  being 
apprised  of  its  history. 
Notwithstanding  there  was 
something  in  its  form  which 
appeared  unnatural,  yet  it 
resembled  more  than  any 
other  roce  the  Polynesian ; 
and  as  such  we  did  not  he- 
sitate to  class  it.  It  turned  out  afterwards  that  we  were  right;  and  that  our  embarraas- 
ment  had  been  produced  by  an  artificial  flattening  of  the  occiput;   which  process  the 

Sandwloh  Ulandcr. 

TerUcal  Tiew. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

COMPARATIVE   ANATOMY   OF   EACES. 

437 

XBlaader,  while  at  the 
bospital,  had  told  Dra. 
Tterert  and  Mas  tin 
-was  habitual  in  his 
family.  The  profile 
▼iow  displays  less  pro- 
taberanoe  of  brain  be- 
hind, and  the  vertical 
view  more  compres- 
sion of  oociput,  than 
belongs  generally  to 
his  race;  bat  still 
there  remains  enongh 
of  cranial  characteris- 
tics to  mark  his  Poly- 
nesian ori^n;  e?en 
were  not  the  man's 
history  preserred,  to 
attest  the  gross  de- 
pravity of  his  animal 
propensities. 

The  first  of  these 
heads  (Fig.  291)  is  an: 
ancient  Ouanehe  from 
the  Canary-Isles; 
and,  though  out  of 
place  here,  is  one  of 
Dnmoutier's  series. — 
Beudes  being  itself 
interesting,  it  con- 
trasts still  more  pow- 
erfully with  American 
aborigines. 

The  other  five  (Figs. 
292-296)  are  Polyne- 
nans  from  different 
islands,  presenting  a 
strong  family  likeness 
to  each  other— reced- 
ing foreheads;  elon- 
gated heads ;  project- 
ing jaws,  ponderous 
behind,  Ac 

Fio.  291.612 

Fio.  292.613 

Onaache. 

Fio.  298.M4 

Xoaka-HiTaiaB. 

Fia.  294.5W 

F^M-Idaiider. 

8aiidwlcli.Islaiider. 

I  have  pursued  the  Ocean,ic  races,  somewhat  in  detail,  from  the 
Indian  seas  across  the  whole  extent  of  the  Pacific  Ocean  to  the  shores 
of  America ;  whe^e  another  group  of  races,  of  entirely  different  tj-pe, 
remains  yet  to  be  described.  My  object  in  this  tedious  voyage  has 
been,  to  place  before  the  reader  such  material  as  might  enable  him 
to  judge  whether  there  is  any  proof,  in  this  geographical  direction, 
of  migrations  from  the  Old  to  the  New  World,  that  could  account 
for  its  primitive  manner  of  population.  We  have  beheld,  during  our 
Oceanic  travels,  very  opposite  types  in  localities  near  to  each  other, 

Digitized  by 

Google 

438  COMPARATIVE    ANATOMY   OF    RACES. 

as  well  as  many  distinct  languages ;  and  we  have  seen  tbe  same  type 
as  that  of  the  Polynesians  scattered  throughout  all  climates,  and  yet 
speaking  dialects  of  the  same  language. 

It  now  remains  to  be  shown  that^  (with  perhaps  some  very  partial 
exceptions  along  the  Pacific  coast,)  the  types  of  America  are  entirely 
distinct  from  those  of  Oceanica;  and  that  American  languages,  civiliza- 
tions, social  institutions,  &c.,  are  utterly  opposed  to  Oceanic  influence, 
while  differing,  too,  amongst  each  other.  It  is  from  the  so-called 
Polynesian  and  Malay  races  that  many  writers  have  derived  the  popula- 
tion of  America;  yet  in  no  two  types  of  man  do  we  find  cranial 
characters  more  widely  different  The  heads  which  we  have  copied 
from  the  Atlas  of  M.  le  Docteur  Dumoutier,  (who  accompanied  M.  Jac- 
quinot  in  the  Exploring  Expedition  of  1887- 8-'9-'40,  of  the  Astro- 
labe and  Z^l^e,  sent  out  by  the  French  government,)  were  all  taken 
by  the  daguerreotype  process,  either  from  nature  or  from  plaster- 
casts  ;  and  are  therefore  not  only  beautifully  executed,  but  perfectly 
reliable.  To  the  eye  of  the  anatomist,  these  heads  will  be  found  to 
present  a  most  striking  contrast  with  those  of  the  aboriginal  Ameri- 
cans which  we  are  about  to  produce.  It  is  much  to  be  regretted, 
however,  that  we  have  not  complete  measurements  of  these  Oceanic 
heads,  their  various  diameters,  internal  capacity,  &c.,  after  the  plan 
adopted  by  Morton;  but  I  presume  such  essentials  .will  appear  in 
full,  when  the  text  is  published.  It  will  be  observed,  frirthermore,  that 
the  American  heads  differ  more  widely  from  all  the  Oceanic,  crania  than 
they  do  even  from  those  of  the  Chinese  or  true  Mongol  races,  whence 
our  American  Indians  are  still  supposed  by  fabulists  to  be  derived. 
The  Oceanic  races,  including  even  the  Sandwich  Islanders,  when 
compared  with  our  Indians,  exhibit  crania  more  elongated,  more 
compressed  laterally,  less  prominent  at  the  vertex,  and  more  prog- 
nathous, in  type.  American  races,  I  shall  render  evident,  aie 
strongly  distinguished  by  the  veiy  reverse  of  all  these  points,  in 
addition  to  their  own  greatiy-flattened  occiput  Whilst  running  the 
eye,  too,  over  Dumoutier's  long  series  of  Oceanic  heads,  I  was  struck 
by  one  remarkable  difference :  viz.,  the  greater  amount  of  brain 
behind  the  meatus  of  the  ear  than  in  the  skulls  of  the  aborigines 
of  America ;  and  the  reader  will  notice  vertical  line$^  rendering  this 
fact  obvious. 

American  Group. 

The  author  of  Crania  Americana  separated  [iuproy  p.  276]  the 
races  of  this  continent  into  two  grand  divisions :  viz.,  the  Toltecan  and 
the  Barbarous  tribes.  That  luminous  paper — Inquiry  into  the  Dis- 
tinctive Characteristics  of  the  Aboriginal  Mace  of  America^^^ — amply 

Digitized  by 

Google 

COMPABATIYE    ANATOMY   OP   PACES.  439 

Justified  the  traveller's  adage,  that  "he  who  has  seen  one  tribe  of 
Xndians,  has  seen  all/' 

«  The  half-clad  Faeglan,  shrinking  from  his  drearj  winter,  has  the  same  characteristic 
lineaments,  thongh  in  an  exaggerated  degree,  as  the  Indians  of  the  tropical^  plains ;  and 
these,  again,  resemble  the  tribes  which  inhabit  the  region  irest  of  the  Rocky  Mountains — 
those  of  the  great  Valley  of  the  Biississippi,  and  those,  again,  which  skirt  the  Eskimaux  on 
the  North.  All  possess  alike  the  long,  lank,  black  hair,  the  brown  or  cinnamon-colored 
skin,  Uie  hea^y  brow,  the  doll  and  sleepy  eye,  the  full  and  compressed  lips,  and  the  salient, 
but  dilated  nose.  .  .  .  The  same  conformity  of  organization  is  not  less  obviqas  in  the  osteo- 
logical  structore  of  these  people,  as  seen  in  the  square  or  rounded  head,  the  flattened  or 
vertical  occiput,  the  large  quadrangular  orbits,  and  the  low,  receding  forehead.  .  .  .  Mere 
exceptions  to  a  general  rule  do  not  alter  the  peculiar  physiognomy  of  the  Indian,  which  is 
as^undeviatingly  characteristic  as  that  of  the  Negro ;  for  whether  we  see  him  in  the  athletic 
Gharib  or  the  stunted  Chayma,  in  the  dark  Califomiaa  or  the  fair  Borroo,  he  is  an  Indian 
BtfiU,  and  cannot  be  mutaktnfor  a  being  of  any  other  raee.'* 

And,  above  all  anatomists,  Morton  had  the  best  right  to  pronounce. 
We  have  seen  [supraj  p.  326]  how  his  unrivalled  "collection  embraces 
410  skulls  of  64  different  nations  and  tribes  of  Indians.'* 

Time,  moreover,  fix>m  ante-historical  —  nay,  even  from  geohgical 
epochas,  down  to  the  present  hour,  appears  to  have  wrought  little  or 
no  change  on  the  physical  structure  of  the  American  aborigines.  Dr. 
Lund's  communication  to  the  Historical  and  Geographical  Society  of 
Brazil,"*  on  the  human  fossil  crania  discovered  by  him  in  the  Pro- 
vince of  Minas  G^raes,  added  to  the  published  decisions  of  Dr.  Meigs 
on  the  Santas  fossilized  bones,  with  those  of  Dr.  Moultrie  on  the 
Guadaloupe  fossilized  head,  settle  that  matter  conclusively  [supray 
pp.  347,  350] :  nor  do  the  last-discovered  fossilized  jaws  with  perfect 
teeihy  and  portions  of  a  foot,  from  Florida,  now  in  the  possession  of 
Prof.  Agassiz,  negative  this  deduction ;  although  such  vestiges,  still 
imbedded  in  conglomerate,  may  not  be  cited  in  the  affirmative. 
Lund's  language,  as  rendered  by  Lieut  Strain,  U.  S.  IS".,  is  unequi- 
vocal :  — 

"IDhe  question  then  arises,  irho  were  these  people  ?  what  their  mode  of  life  ?  of  what 
race  ?  and  what  their  intellectoal  perfection  ?  The  answers  to  these  questions  are,  happily, 
less  difficult  and  doabtftLl.  He  examined  Tarions  crania,  more  or  less  perfect,  in  order  to 
determine  the  place  they  onght  to  occupy  in  the  system  of  Anthropology.  The  narrowness 
of  the  forehead,  the  prominence  of  the  zygomatic  bones,  the  maxillary  and  orbital  confor- 
mation, all  assign  to  these  crania  a  place  among  the  characteristics  of  the  American  race. 
And  it  is  known,  says  the  Doctor,  in  continuation,  that  the  race  which  approximates  nearest 
to  this  is  the  Mongolian ;  and  the  most  distinctiTC  and  salient  character  by  which  we  dia- 
tinguish  between  them,  is  by  the  greater  depression  of  the  forehead  of  the  former.  In  this 
point  of  organization,  these  ancient  crania  show  not  only  the  peculiarity  of  the  American 
race,  but  this  peculiarity,  in  many  instances,  in  an  excessiye  degree ;  eyen  to  the  entire 
disappearance  of  the  forehead.  We  must  allow,  then,  that  the  people  who  occupied  this 
country  in  those  remote  times,  were  of  the  same  race  as  those  who  inhabited  it  at  the  time 
of  the  conquest.  We.  know  that  the  human  figures  found  sculptured  on  the  ancient  monn- 
ments  of  Mexico  represent,  for  the  greater  part,  a  singular  conformation  of  the  head  -^ 
being  without  forehead  —  the  cranium  retreating  backward,  immediately  abo^e  the  supers 

Digitized 

d  by  Google 

440 

COMPABATIVE    ANATOMY   OF    BACES. 

dliary  arch.  This  anomaly,  which  is  generally  attributed  to  an  artiiioial  disfigoration  of 
the  head,  or  the  taiste  of  the  artist,  now  admits  a  more  natural  explanation ;  it  being  now 
proyed  by  these  anthentlo  documents,  that  there  really  existed  on  this  continent  a  raoe 
exhibiting  this  anomalous  conformation.  The  skeletons,  which  were  of  both  sexes,  were 
of  the  ordinary  height,  although  two  of  the  men  were  above  the  common  stature.  These 
heads,  according  to  (he  received  opinions  in  Craniology,  could  not  have  occupied  a  high 
position  in  intellectual  standing.  This  opinion  is  corroborated  by  finding  an  instrument  of 
imperfect  construction  joined  with  the  skeletons.  This  instrument  is  simply  a  smooth  stone, 
of  about  ten  inches  iu  circumference,  evidently  intended  to  bruise  seeds  or  hard  substances. 
« In  other  caverns  he  has  found  other  human  bones,  which  show  equally  the  character- 
istics of  fossils,  being  deprived  of  aU  the  gelatinous  parts,  and  consequentiy  very  brittle 
and  porous  in  the  firacture." 

Finally,  the  "Peruvian  Antiquities"  of  Rivero  and  Tschudi®^  cor- 
roborate the  above  scientific  view,  viz.,  that  the  artificial  disfigure- 
ment of  the  skxdl  among  the  Inca-Peruvians  and  other  South  Ameri- 
cim  fiimilies,  owes  its  origin  to  the  prior  existence  of  an  autocthonous 
race,  in  whose  crania  such  (to  us,  seemingly)  a  deformity  was  natural: 
and  thus  the  contradictory  materials  which  induced  Dr.  Morton  at 
first  to  deem  this  peculiarity  to  be  congenital,  and  afterwards  so  exclu- 
sively artificial,  become  reconciled ;  while  due  regard  is  preserved  to 
his  truthful  candor  and  craniological  acumen. 

F      9ff7  aa  ^  ^^  ^^'^^  forms  of  the  head  among 

the  Old  Peruvians,  which  were  produced 
by  artificial  means  (as  established  by  Mor- 
ton, in  Ethnography  and  Archeology  of  Ihi 
Ammcan  Abariginet,  1846),  space  reetriota 
me  to  one  example  (Fig.  297),  on  which 
the  "  course  of  every  bandage  is  in  every 
instance  distinctiy  marked  by  correspond- 
ing cavity  of  the  bony  structure;'*  and 
another  form  (Figs.  298,  299}  is  monu- 
mentally illustrated  through   Del  Rxo's 
Account  of  Palenque,^^ 
The  learned  antiquaries,  Bivero  and  Tschudi,  whose  researches  establish  that  these 
grotesque  forms  are  primeval,  no  less  tium  congenital  (being  exhibited  even  in  the 
fcttU9  among  Peruvian  mammies),  do  not  appear  to  hav^  been  aware  that  Dr.  Morton 

had  already  classified  the 
Fig.  298. 

Fio.  299. 

four  varieties  of  such 
distortions,  in  a  paper 
published  five  years  pre- 
viously to  their  worlL^s) 
The  compression  of 
the  head  practised  by 
various  Indian  tribes,  al- 
though it  causes  distor- 
tion of  the  cranium  in 
different  directions,  does 
not  diminish  the  volume 
of  the  brain.  This  sin* 
gular  fact  Vas  announced 
many  years  ago  by  Pro£ 
Tiedemann,andhas  since 
been  a b  u  n d a ntly  con- 
Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 

COMPABATIVE   ANATOMY   OF   RACES. 

441 

flrm^  by  the  multiplied  obseryations  of  Morton.  From  the  measurements  of  tirenty-six 
Peruvian  crania,  all  extremely  distorted,  some  elongated,  others  conical,  and  others  again 
flattened  on  the  forehead  and  expanded  laterally,  he  obtained  a  mean  of  76  cubic  inches, 
or  one  inch  more  than  the  Peruvian  average.  From  twenty-one  native  skulls  from  Oregon, 
all  more  or  less  distorted  by  artificial  means,  he  obtained  a  mean  rather  below  the  average 
of  the  barbarous  tribes ;  but  from  the  whole  of  his  measurements  of  distorted  crania,  as 
dLerived  from  the  Peruvian  and  Nootka-Columbian  series  collectively^  he  found  the  average 
Toluzne  of  the  brain  to  be  79  cubic  inches,  or  precisely  the  mean  of  the  whole  American 
Iproup  of  races.  I  may  add  that,  as  mechanical  distortion  of  the  skull  does  not  lessen  the 
Tolume  of  the  brain,  neither  does  it  appear  to  affect  the  intellect* 

These  points  established,  I  would  remark,  that  the  most  striking 
anatomical  characters  of  the  American  crania  are,  small  size,  averag- 
ing but  seventy-nine  cubic  inches  internal  capacity ;  low,  receding 
forehead;  short  antero-posterior  diameter;  great  inter-parietal  dia- 
meter ;  flattened  occiput ;  prominent  vertex ;  high  cheek-bones ;  pon- 
derous and  somewhat  prominent  jaws.  Such  characteristics  are  more 
universal  in  the  Toltecan  than  the  Barbarous  tribes.  Among  the 
Iroquois,  for  instance,  the  heads  were  often  of  a  somewhat  more 
elongated  form ;  but  the  Cherokees  and  Choctaws,  who  of  all  modem 
Barbarous  tribes  display  greater  aptitude  for  civilization,  present  the 
genuine  type  in  a  remarkable  degree.  My  birth  and  long  residence 
in  Southern  States  havQ  permitted  the  study  of  many  of  these  living 
tribes  (a  hundred  Choctaws  may  be  seen  daily,  even  now,  in  the 
streets  of  Mobile),  and  they  exhibit  this  conformation  almost  without 
exception.  I  have  also  scrutinized  many  Mexicans,  besides  Catawbas 
of  South  Carolina,  and  tribes  on  the  Canada  Lakes,  and  can  bear 
witness  that  the  living  tribes  everywhere  confirm  Morton's  type. 

One  might,  indeed,  describe  an  Indian's  skull  by  saying,  it  is  the 
opposite  in  every  respect  from  that  of  the  Negro ;  as  much  as  the 
brown  complexion  of  the  Red-man  is  instantly  distinguishable  from 
the  Black's ;  or  the  long  hair  of  the  former  differs  in  substance  from 
the  short  wool  of  the  latter. 

The  annexed  sketches  of 
three  heads  (Figs.  aOO-806)  ^  Fia.  801. 

will,  by  comparison,  illus- 
trate this  type  better  than 
.  langoage.     Figs.  800  end 
'301,  a  Negro;    Figs.  802 

and  303,  the  head  (in  my 

possession)  of  a  Cherokee 

Chief,  who    died  while   a 

prisoner,   near  Mobile,  in 

1837;   and  Figs.  805  and 

806,  the  antique  cranium 

from  Squier's  mound  [«dt 

*m>ray  p.  291.] 

I  shall  now  proceed 
56 

Fio.  800.«* 

Negro — Profile  View. 

YertioalYtoW. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

442 

COMPARATIVE    ANATOMY    OF    BACES. 

Fia.  802. 

Fig.  804. 

Creek  Chief—  Profile  VIeir. 

FiQ.  805. 

Hound-bnllder'—  Profile  Yiew. 

TerticKl  Tlmr. 

Fio.  806. 

TtftietlYleir. 

to  s^ow,  through 
faithful*  copies,  that 
the  type  just  attri- 
buted to  lie  Ameri- 
can races  is  found 
among  tribes  the 
most  scattered — 
among  the  semi-ci  vil- 
izedf  and  the  barbar- 
ous—  among  living 
as  well  as  among  ex- 
tinct races ;  and  that 
no  foreign  race  has 
intruded  itself  into 
their  midst,  even  in 
the  smallest  appreci- 
able degree:  availing 
myself  of  some  of 
the  original  wood- 
cuts of  the  Crania 
Amerieanaj  placed  by 
Mrs.  Morton's  kind- 
ness at  our  disposal. 

Peruvians^  from  Temple  of  the  Sun. 

This  head  (Fig.  807)  from  the  Gemeteiy  of  Paohaoamao,  ii  chaiaoteriBtio  of  tiie*AmericiB 
type,  as  irill  be  seen  at  a  glance :  the  parietal  and  longitudinal  diameters  being  nearly  equal ; 
the  vertex  prominent 

Fia.  808. 

Fig.  807.825 

PeniTian— Profile  Yieir. 

TertkalYiAW. 

BtdiTtow. 

Longitudinal  diameter,  6  inches ;  parietal,  6-9 ;  fh>ntal,  44 ;  yertioal,  5.    Internal  oa- 
padly,  77  eubie  inches. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

COMPARATIVB    ANATOMY   OP    RACES. 

443 

Fig.  810,  fh>m  the  InoA  Cemetery,  U  perfeetiy  Fia.  810.^ 

typical  of  the  race. 

Longitadinal  diameter,  6*5  inches;  parietal, 
6-5 ;  frontal,  4*6 ;  Tertical,  5-6.  Internal  capa- 
city, 68-5  onbio  inches* 

Morton  supplies  the  measurements  of  twenty- 
three  adult  skulls  of  the  '*  pure  Inca  race,"  ftrom 
the  cemetery  called  Pachacamac,  or  the  Temple 
of  the  Sun,  near  Lima ;  obtained  and  presented 
to  him  by  Dr.  Busohenberger,  U.  S.  N.  As  this 
Bepulohre  was  reserred  for  the  exdusiye  use  of 
the  higher  class  of  Penmans,  it  is  reasonable  to 
infer  that  the  skulls  thence  disinterred  belonged 
to  persons  of  intelligence  and  distinction;  al- 
though I  am  aware  that  Rivero  and  Tschudi  express  doubts  that  any  of  these  can  hate 
belonged  to  royal  PeruTian  personages.^^^ 

The  largest  cranium  of  this  series  yields  an  internal  capacity  of  89*5  cubic  inches,  which 
is  a  fraction  short  of  the  Caucasian  mean ;  while  the  smallest  measures  but  60.  The  mean 
of  the  whole  is  but  78  cubic  inches. 

The  following  examples  of  Mexican  heads  suffice  to  show  the  identity  of  the  two  races. 

TTET 

PeruTian. 

Mexicans. 

This  (Fig.  811)  is  a 
relic  of  the  genuine 
Tolteoan  stock,  hav- 
ing been  exhumed 
Arom  an  ancient  ce- 
metery at  Cerro  de 
Qnesilas,  near  the 
eity  of  Mexico.  It 
was  accompanied  by 
numerous  antique  Tea- 
sels, weapons,  &c.,  in- 
dicating a  personage 
of  disUncdon.  This 
cranium  was  brought 
f^m  the  city  of 
Mexico  by  the  Hon. 
J.  R.  Poinsett,  and  by 
him  presented  to  the 
Academy  of  Sciences 
of  Philadelphia. 

Longitudinal  diam- 
eter, 7*1  inches;  pa- 
rietal, 6*7;  ftrontal, 
4*4 ;  Tertical,  5*2.  In- 
temskl  capacity,  88 
cubic  inches. 

A  remarkably-well 
charocterixed  head 
(Fig.  818)  ft-om  an 
ancient  tomb  near  the 
city  of  Mexico,  whence 
it  was  exhumed  with 
a  great  variety  of  an- 

Pio.  811.aa 

Fio.  812. 

Mezicaii— Ttrtkal  YUiw, 

FlO.  818.fiW 

Back  View. 

FiO.  814. 

MMdoiii-yartlodYlew. 

BMdLTWw. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

444 

COMPARATIVE   ANATOMY   OP   RACES. 

Fia.  815.530 

tiqae  Teasels,  masks,  ornaments,  &o.  It  is  preserred  in  the  collection  of  the  American  Plii- 
losophical  Society.  The  forehead  is  low,  but  not  very  receding ;  the  face  prq}ects,  and  the 
whole  craniom  is  extremely  unequal  in  its  lateral  portions.  I  had  almost  omitted  .the 
remark,  that  this  irregularity  of  form  is  common  in  and  peculiar  to  American  crania. 

Let  us  now  track  the  American  type  into  the  Barbarous  races.  Among  the  Iroquois  and 
some  other  tribes  of  Both  North  and  South  America,  heads  of  more  elongated  form  are 
occasionally  met  with ;  but  the  type  truly  characteristic  predominated  largely  among  the 
Creeks — under  which  appellation  were  embraced  most  of  the  tribes  of  Alabama,  Georg^ 
and  Florida.  Having  personally  examined  many  of  these  nations,  I  can  vouch  for  this  fact. 
While  Prof.  Agassiz  was  in  Mobile  last  spring,  I  took  occasion  to  point  out  this  cranial  uni- 
formity ;  and  his  critical  eye  detected  no  exception  in  at  least  100  living  Choctaw  Indiana 
whom  we  examined  together  in  and  around  the  city.  The  modem  Cruk  ekkf  [n^vo,  Fig. 
802]  affords  satisfactory  evidence. 

Seminole  {Creek  Tribe)  and  Dacota  (Sioux). 

Fig.  816.  Seminole  wai^ 

rior  (Fig.  315) 
slain  at  the  bat- 
tle of  St.  Jo- 
seph's, 80  miles 
below  St.  Au- 
gustine, in  June, 
1886,  by  Capt. 
Justin  Dimmieky 
U.  S.  Artillery. 
Longitudinal  di- 
ameter, 7*3  in. ; 
parietal,  5-9; 
fh>ntal,  4-6;  Ter- 
tical,  5&  Itt- 
temal  capacity, 
98  cuUc  inches, 
fig.  818  is  the 
head  of  a  Sioox 
,warrior;  very 
characteristic  of 
his  tribe.  Longi- 
tudinal diameter 
6*7  inches;  pa- 
rietal, 5-7 ;  finon- 
tal,  4-2;  vertical, 
5*4.  Internal  ca- 
pacity, 85  cubic 
inches. 

Reference  to 
the  Crania  Ame-- 
ricana  will  show 
that  examples 
might  be  greatly 
multiplied,  to  prove  that  our  Indian  aborigines  are  everywhere  comprehended  under  one 
group.  I  have  already  spoken  of  the  ancient  mounds  and  the  mound-builders ;  have  shown 
how  numerous  and  widely-extended  they  are,  and  that  they  all  belonged  to  the  great 
Toltecan  family.  .  In  addition  to  the  cranium  discovered  by'Squier[Fig.  198],  I  suljoii^ 
two  more  of  these  mound-skulls,  selected  from  points  separated  by  immense  distance. 

SemiDoIe-^Proflle  Yiew. 

Fio.  817. 

Tertlcal  View. 

FlO.  818.531 

5/^^--- 

.^ 

Seminole— Back  View. 

Daoota— Profile  Yiew. 

COMPARATIVE    ANATOMY   OF    RAGES. 

445 

SkuU  from  a  Mound  on  the  Upper  MisBiB^ippi. 

Fio.  820. 

SkuU  (Fig.  819)  taken  Fio.  819.Aa2 

from  a  moond  seated 
on  the  high  blnff  which 
OTerlooks  the  Missis* 
sippi  liTer,  160  miles 
above  the  month  of  the 
Missoori.  There  were 
rix  mounds,  placed  over 
each  in  a  right  line, 
commencing  with  A 
small  one,  onlj  a  few 
feet  high,  and  termi- 
nating in  another  of 
eight  or  ten  feet  eleia- 
tion  and  twenty  in  di- 
ameter. This  sknll  was 
obtained  from  the  fifth 

mound  of  the  series.    It  is  a  large  cranium,  Tery  taXi  in  the  yertical  diameter,  and  broad 
between  the  parietal  bones. 

Longitudinal  diameter,  7*1  inches;  parietal,  5*8;  frontal,  4-8 ;  Tertical,  6*5.    Internal 
capacity,  85*5  cubic  inches. 

TflTtietl  Yieir. 

BMikTtow. 

Fia.  822. 

8kuU  from  a  Mound  in  Tennessee. 

This   cranium  (Fig.  Fio.  821.^33. 

821)  was  eihumed  by 
the  late  distinguished 
Dr.  Troost,  of  Nash- 
ville, Tennessee,  ftrom  a 
mound  in  that  State,  at 
the  junction  of  the 
French,  Broad  and  Hol- 
ston  rivers.  Many  other 
moonds  are  found  in 
this  section  of  country. 
This  skull  is  remarkable 
for  its  vertical  and  pa- 
rietal diameters,  flat- 
ness and  elevation  of 
the  occiput  The  facial 
angle  is  also  unusually 
great. 

Longitudinal  diameter,  6*6  inches ;  parietal,  5*6 ;  frontal,  4*1 ;  vertical,  5*6.  Internal 
capacity,  87*5  cubic  inches. 

To  the  reader  have  thus  been  submitted  specimens  of  American 
skulls,  from  parts  of  the  continent  the  most  widely  separated  —  some 
crania  collected  fit>m  the  Toltecan,  some  from  the  Barbarous  tribes 
of  the  present  times,  and  others  from  ancient  mounds  and  burial- 
places  :  and,  although  there  are  sundry  minor  varieties  in  the  forms 
of  crania  —  a  few  exceptions  to  the  general  rule,  yet  the  type  which  I 

TarttnlYlew. 

BaekTtow. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

446 

COMPARATIVE    ANATOMY   OF    RACBS. 

laid  down  as  characteristic  of  this  people,  largely  predominates  over 
all  others.  It  is  everywhere  peculiar,  and  bears  no  resemblance  to 
any  known  nation  of  ancient  or  modern  epochas  throughout  the 
world. 

Mean  Results,  selecttd  from  MoETOK*d  Table.S34 

Tolteon  nft- 

tions,  indnding 

skulls  from  the 

mounds. 

tionSjWithskuUs 

from  theVaUey 

oftbeOhlo. 

American  Baoe, 
embndntf  the 
Toltecans  &  Bar- 

Flat-hetd  tribes 

of  Columbia 

Birer. 

AndeatFera. 

Tians. 

Facial  an-  \ 
gle         i 

Internal  ^ 
capacity  > 
incu.in. . 

750  86^ 
76-8 

76<»  13^ 
82-4 

750  46' 
79-6 

690  8(y 
79-26 

67«  2(y 
78-2 

Mongol- Americans — Eskimaux. 

The  Polar  family,  which  are  identical  on  both  continents,  display  one  of  the  strongest 
possible  contrasts  inth  the  aboriginal  Americans ;  and  no  one  can  compare  the  crania  of 
the  two,  and  suppose  that  one  continent  was  populated  from  the  other  through  the  Eski- 
maux channeL  In  fact,  the  Eskimaux  are  confined  to  a  polar  zone,  as  well  in  America  as 
in  Asia. 

Dr.  Morton  obtained,  from  Mr.  George  Combe,  four  genuine  Eskimaux  skulls,  of  whick 
figures  are  grouped  below  (Figs.  828-826).  The  eye  at  once  remarks  their  narrow  eUm- 
^ted  form,  the  projecting  upper  jaw,  the  extremely  flat  nasal  bones,  the  expanded  zygo- 
matic arches,  the  broad,  expanded  cheek-bones,  and  the  full  and  prominent  occipital  region. 

«  The  extreme 
Fig.  828.  Fia.  824.  elongation  of  the 

upper  jaw  000- 
tracts  the  fadal 
angle  to  a  mean 
of  78^  while  the 
mean  of  3  heads 
of  the  4,  gires  an 
internal  capacity 
of  87  cubic  in.y 
a  near  approach 
to  the  Caucaaan 
aTerage."S35  The 
diagrams  here 
^▼en  will  enable 
the  reader  to 
make  his  Eski- 
maux compan- 
sons  still  more  in 
detail.  Fig.  828 
is  **  from  Daria'a 
Strait,  the  larg> 
est  head  in  the 
series,  and  the 
best  frontal  de- 
velopment. The 
nasal  bones  are 

Fig.  826. 

Fig.  826. 

Isklmanx. 

EsUmanz. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

dOMPABATIVE    ANATOMY    OP    RACES. 

447 

80  flat  as  to  be  scaroelj  perceptible."  "  On  this  skull  (Fig.  824)  is  written  the  brief  me- 
morandam  *  Found  in  the  snow,  by  Capt  Parry.'  In  erery  particular,  a  well-characterized 
Sskimaux  head. "  Fig.  825  was  '*  found  by  Mr.  John  Tumbull,  Surgeon,  upon  Disco 
Island,  coast  of  Greenland,  in  the  sununer  of  1825.''  And  "  this  skull  (Fig.  826)  was  ob- 
tained at  Icy  Cape,  the  northwest  extremity  of  America,  and  is  marked,  *  from  A.  Oollie, 
Ssq.,  Surgeon  of  H.  BL's  ship  Blossom.' " 

Nothing  can  be  more  obyious  'than  the  contrast  between  these  EsMmaux  heads  and  those 
of  all  other  tribes  of  this  continent.  They  are  the  only  people  in  America  who  present  the 
diaracters  of  an  Asiatio  race ;  and,  being  bounded  closely  on  the  south  by  genuine  abori- 
ginesy  they  seem  placed  here  as  if  to  gi^e  a  practical  illustration  of  the  irrefragable  distinct- 
ness of  races ;  together  with  an  example,  that  modifications  of  human  types  are  independent 
of  any  physical  causes  but  direct  amalgamation. 

M.  Jacquinot  not  only  regards  all  the  American  races  (exdudye  of  the  Bsldmaux)  as  one 
race,  but  as  a  branch  of  the  same  race  as  the  Polynesians.  He  is  yery  poeitiTe  in  this 
opinion,  and  rests  it  solely  upon  resemblance  of  type;  at  the  same  time  acknowledging 
that,  to  the  present  day,  no  affinity  between  the  languages  of  America  and  Polynesia  has 
been  discoTcred.^  It  is  with  reluctance  that  we  differ  from  an  authority  we  prize  so 
highly  ^  but,  apart  from  the  strange  circumstance  that  M.  Jaeqninot  was  unacquainted 
with  Morton's  labors,  we  do  so  on  materials  ftumished  by  M.  Dumoutiw,  who  was  his  com- 
pagnon  de  voyage;  for  which  we  refer  to  our  remarks  upon  Polynesian  crania.  No  anato- 
mist, who  has  examined  Dr.  Morton's  collection,  or  liyed,  as  I  haye  done,  for  half  a  cen- 
tury among  Indian  tribes,  can  subscribe  to  the  opinion  of  M.  Jacquinot ;  who  does  not  appear 
to  hsTO  bestowed  adequate  consideration  upon  American  craniology,  nor,  indeed,  upon  our 
Indian  questions  generally. 

Ethnography  is  yet  unaware  of  its  resources.  The  London  <*  Times"  of  the  8th  of  Octo- 
ber, 1858,  publishes  the  despatches  of  Commander  McClure,  to  the  British  Admiralty, 
through  which  the  existence  of  Arctic  mm  is  announced,  flourishing  in  a  higher  latitude 
than  any  other  Eskimaux  heretofore  known :  — ^*  Tou  will,  I  am  certain,  be  very  happy  to 
learn  that  the  Northwest  Passage  has  been  discoTered  by  the  luTCStigator,  which  event  was 
decided  on  the  26th  dctober,  1850,  by  a  sledge-party  oyer  the  ice,  from  the  position  the 
ship  was  frozen  in. ...  We  haTc  been  most  highly  faTored, ...  in  being  able  to  extend  our 
search  in  quest  of  Sir  John  Franklin  oyer  a  yery  large  extent  of  coast,  which  was  not 
hitherto  known,  and  found  inhabited  by  a  numerous  tribe  of  Esquimaux,  who  had  nerer 
ere  our  arrival  seen  the  face  of  the  white  man,  and  were  really  the  most  simple,  interesting 
people  I  CTcr  met — living  entirely  by  the  chase,  and  having  no  weapons  except  those  used 
for  that  object  The  fierc»  passions  of  our  nature  appeared  unknown :  they  gave  me  a 
pleasing  idea  of  man  fresh  from  his  Maker's  hand,  and  uncontaminated  by  intercourse  with 

our  boasted  civilization.    All  those  who  traded  with  the Company  were  found  the 

greatest  reprobates." 

Annexed  are  Fio.  828.^ 

given,  by  way  of 
contrast,  but 
without  com- 
nent,  two  skulls 
(Figs.  327,  828) 
of  the  most  pro- 
minent Asia  tic 
types:  viz.,  the 
Tartar^  and  the  i 
Mongol^  which  ' 
will  show  how 
greatly  modern 
races  differ;  not- 
withstanding the 

Pio.  827.«y 

Google 

448  GOMPABATIYE   ANATOMY   OF   RACES. 

amalgamations  whioh  haye  been  going  on  for  seTeral  thooaaad  yean.  These  raeea  aB* 
nnquestionablj,  antedate  the  foundation  of  the  Egyptian  Empire — proTing  how  difficult  U 
is  to  obliterate  a  ^rpe. 

Thus  far,  in  the  Comparative  Anatomy  of  Races,  I  have  permitted 
myself  to  cuU  but  a  few  of  the  more  salient  facts  touching  the  races 
of  Europe,  America,  Afiica,  and  Oceanica,  and  already  are  my  pre- 
scribed limits  exhausted.  Asia,  with  a  population  incomparably  the 
most  numerous  of  any  division  of  the  globe,  and  presenting  an  infini- 
tude of  widely  different  types,  must  be  abandoned ;  although  no  ter- 
restrial sphere  affords  a  richer  and  more  interesting  field  of  research. 
However,  I  can  scarcely  regret  the  omission — regarding  our  side  of 
the  case  to  be  sufficiently  well  made  out 

All  the  types  of  mankind  known  to  history  or  monumental  re- 
searches vanish  into  pre-historical  antiquity ;  and  investigation  shows 
that  this  remark  applies  with  full  force  to  the  Mongolian  group  of 
Asia.  Tartar  races  are  distinctly  portrayed  on  the  monuments  of  the 
XlXth  dynasty  of  Egypt ;  and  a  reference  to  our  chapter  on  Chron- 
ology will  prove  that  the  Chinese  Empire,  with  the  same  Mongolian 
types  now  seen,  together  with  their  peculiar  language,  inMatutions, 
arts,  &c.,  were  contemporary  with  the  Old  Egyptian  Empire.  Such 
facts  confirm  the  only  rational  theory :  viz.,  that  races  were  created 
in  each  zoological  province,  and  therefore  all  primitive  types  must  be 
of  equal  antiquity. 

Pattthieb,  whose  work  ii  the  only  Teritable  key  to  Chinese  history  and  literature  y^ 
put  forth  in  Europe,  admirably  remarks :  -^  <'  Of  all  historical  phenomena  that  strike  the 
human  understanding,  and  which  it  seeks  to  comprehend  when  wishing  to  embrace  the 
whole  of  oniyersal  life,  as  well  as  the  general  deyelopment  of  humanity,  the  most  curious 
and  the  most  extraordinary  is  assuredly  the  indefinite  existence  of  the  Chinese  Empire. 
Like  the  great  riyer  of  Egypt,  which  Teils  to  irayellers  one-half  of  its  course,  the  grand 
empire  of  High  Asia  has  only  reyealed  itself  to  Europe  after  trayersing  an  unknown  region 
of  more  than  forty  ages  of  existence.    It  was  during  our  Middle  Ages — epoch  of  profound 

darkness  in  the  West,  and  of  immense  moye- 
Fia.  820.^  ment  in  the  East —  that  the  noise  of  a  colossal 

empire  at  the  extremity  of  Asia  reached  Euro- 
pean ears,  simultaneously  with  the  clangor  of 
those  Tartarian  armies  which  (like  an  aya- 
lanche)  then  began  to  fall  upon  our  panio- 
stricken  Occident"  s» 

But  the  deficiency  of  Mongolian  skuiU,  com- 
plained of  by  Morton,  may,  in  part,  be  counter- 
balanced through  Chinese  iconography.  The 
following  selections  are  made  merely  with  the 
view  to  illustrate  Mongolian  permanence  of 
type. 

A  portrait  (Hg.  829)  of  the  Miao-tm^ 
|<sons  of  the  uncultiyated  fields"  —  the  un- 
subdued and  aboriginal  sayage  tribes  of 
China;  whose  existence  recedes  to  theaat** 

Digitized  by 

Google 

COMPABATITE    ANATOMY   OF    RACES. 

449 

liistorieal  times  of  Fo-hi  (b.  o.  8400),  and  de- 
seends  to  the  present  day,  in  Tarions  wild  and 
mountainous  regions  of  the  empire,  as  well 
as  among  the  hills  near  Canton.  They  haye 
OTer  been  reputed,  by  the  Chinese,  to  be  un- 
tameable,  and,  in  this  respect,  resemble  the 
aborigines  of  America.  ParaTey  says  he 
oopied  this  figure  from  a  Chinese  work  of 
2400  plates,  now  in  Holland. 

Portrait  of  Ehouhg-Eou-Tseu  (Fig.  880), 
Con/udw;  bom  661  years  B.  o. ;  whom  the 
Chinese  Tenerate  as  the  *'most  saintly,  the 
most  sage,  and  the  most  yirtuous,  of  human 
Institutors."  His  face,  while  Sinico-Mongol, 
possesses  the  massiTe  lineaments  of  a  great 

Fia.  880.541 

Pro.  881.M2 

Another  form  of  Chinaman  is  beheld  in  the 
historian  Ssb-ka-Thsian  (Fig.  881),  who,  bom 
B.  c.  146,  composed  the  grand  history  of  the 
Empire,  in  180  books. 

Tb  e  work  of  Pauthier  is  illustrated  by  an 
infinitude  of  Chinese  likenesses  of  all  ages ; 
and  it  is  so  Tery  aoeeesible  in  form  and  price, 
that  we  refer  our  readers  to  the  original  for 
proofs  that,  with  the  exception  of  iYi^  pig-tail 
introduced  by  the  Tartars,  the  Chinese  haTe* 
not  altered  in  the  4000  years  for  which  we 
possess  their  records. 

The  subjoined  (Figs.  882-886)  are  authentic 
Chinese  portraits  ^43  of  the  ancient  foreign 
people  at  the /our  eziremitieif  or  four  cardinal 
points,  of  the  Empire :  — 

Fig.  882  —  «  The  men  of  Tai-ping  (at  the 
east)  are  humane,  beneyolent" 

Pig.  888 —  *'  The  men  of  Tan-Joung  (at  the  south)  are  sage,  pradent 

Kg.  884 —  '<  The  men  of  Tai-moung  (at  the  west)  are  faithful,  sincere" — Indian  natiooa. 

Pro.  882. 

Pig.  888. 

Pro.  884. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

450 

COMPARATIVE    ANATOMY    OP    RACES. 

Fig.  835. 

Fig.  885 — *'  The  men  of  Kcung-lhovng  (at  the  north)  are  war- 
like, Toliant "  —  Tartar  nations. 

I  have  merely  to  remark,  on  these  foreigners,  that  thej* 
represent  varieties  of  the  Mongol  type,  snch  as  naturally 
belong  to  that  centre  of  human  creations;  referring  the 
reader  to  Pauthier's  sketch  of  the  <*  Relations  of  Foreign  Na- 
tions with  China," 6*4  and  to  Jardot's  "Tableau  synoptique, 
chronologique,  et  par  Race,"^^  for  the  best  specification  of 
ancient  Mongol-Tartar  subdiTlsions. 

I  conclude  these  few  words  on  crania  with 
some  comments  upon  the  following  Table,  taken, 
from  Morton's  printed  Catalogue  (Philadelphia, 
3d  edition,  1849):  — 

Table,  showing  the  Size  of  the  Brain  in  cubic  inches,  as  obtained  from  the  measurement  of  628 
Crania  of  various  Races  and  Families  of  Man. 

RACES    AND  FAMILIES. 

Modern  Caucasian  Group. 

Teutonic  Family — Germans. . 

Pdasgic 

Celtic 
Indostanic 
Semitic 
Nilotic 

English . 
Anglo-Americans . . 

Persiau 

Armenians 

Circassians 

NatiTe  Irish 

Bengalees,  &c 

Arabs 

Fellahs 

Ancient  Caucasian  Group. 

Pdasgic  Family  —  GrsBCO-Egyptians  (catacombs). 
Nilotic         **         Egyptians  (from  catacombs).. 

MoNQOLiAN  Group. 

Chmese  Family  , 

Malat  Group. 

Malayan  Family 

Polynesian    **    

American  Group. 

Toltecan  Family  —  Peravians 

**  *<         Mexicans 

Barbarous  Tribes — Iroqnois 

"  "         Lenapig 

"  "         Cherokee 

"  "         Shoshone,  &c... 

Neoro  Group. 

Native-African  Family 

American-bom  Negroes 

Hottentot  Family 

A^orian  Family  —  Australians 

Na  of 
Skulls. 

l^ 

18 

114 

6 

106 

7 

97 

10 

94 

6 

97 

82 

91 

.  8 

98 

17 

96 

18 

97 

55 

96 

6 

91 

20 

97 

8 

84 

165 

101 

22 

92 

•  161 

104 

62 

99 

12 

89 

8 

83 

8 

88 

Smallest 

La 

70 
91 

82 

76 

78 
67 
84 
66 

74 

68 

70 

68 
82 

58 
67 

65 
78 
68 
68 

Mean. 

90 

96 
90 

84 

87 
80 
89 
80 

88 
80 

82 

Meu. 

92 

79 
84 

82 
75 
75 

85 

79 

88 

Digitized  by 

Google 

COMPARATIVE    ANATOMY   OF    RACES.  451 

Some  classification  of  races,  however  arbitraiy,  seems  to  be  almost 
indispensable,  for  the  sake  of  conveying  clear  ideas  to  the  general  ^ 
reader ;  yet  the  one  here  adopted  by  Dr.  Morton,  if  accepted  without 
proper  allowance,  is  calculated  to  lead  to  grave  error.  Like  Tiede- 
mann,  he  has  grouped  together  races  which  between  themselves  pos- 
sess no  affinity  whatever-^ that  present  the  most  opposite  cranial 
characters,  and  which  are  doubtless  specifically  difterent.  In  the 
"Caucasian"  group,  for  example,  are  placed,  among  so-called  white 
races,  the  Hindoos,  the  ancient  and  m6dem  Egyptians,  &c.,  who  are 
dark.  Our  preceding  chapters  have  shown  that  this  group  contains 
many  diverse  types,  over  which  physical  causes  have  exercised  very 
little,  if  any  influence. 

Two  unportant  facts  strike  me,  in  glancing  over  this  Table :  —  Ist,  That  the  Ancient 
Pelasgio  heads  and  the  Modern  White  races  gire  the  same  size  of  brain,  yiz.,  8&  cubic 
inches.  2<L  The  Ancient  Egyptians,  and  also  their  representatives,  the  modem  Fellahs, 
yield  the  same  mean,  tIz.,  80  cubic  inches.  The  difference  between  the  two  groups  being 
eight  cubic  inches. 

Hence  we  obtain  strong  eyidence,  that  time,  or  climate,  does  not  influence  the  size  of 
ciunia ;  thus  adding  another  confirmation  to  our  Tiews  respecting  the  permanence  of  primi- 
tiye  types.  The  Hindoos,  likewise,  it  will  be  obeerred,  present  the  same  internal  capacity 
as  the  Egyptians.  Now,  I  repeat,  that  no  historical  or  scientific  reason  can  be  alleged, 
why  these  races  should  be  grouped  together,  under  one  common  appellative ;  if,  by  such 
name,  it  is  understood  to  conyey  the  idea  that  these  human  types  can  haye  any  sanguioous 
affiliation. 

Again,  in  the  Negro  group — while  it  is  absolutely  shown  that  certain  African  races, 
"whether  bom  in  Africa  or  in  America,  give  an  internal  capacity,  almost  identical,  of  88 
cubic  inches,  one  sees,  on  the  contrary,  the  Hottentot  and  Australian  yielding  a  mean  of  but 
75  cubic  inches,  thereby  showing  a  like  difference  of  eight  cubic  inches.  Indeed,  in  a 
Hottentot  cranium,  (now  at  the  Academy  of  Natural  Sciences  in  Philadelphia,)  "pertaining 
to  a  woman  of  about  twenty  years  of  age,  th<  facial  angle  giyes  75  degrees;  but  the 
internal  capacity,  or  size  of  brain,  measures  but  68  cubic  inches,  which.  Dr.  Morton 
remarked,  was  as  small  an  adult  brain  (with  one  exception,  and  this  also  a  native  African) 
as  he  had  ever  met  with ;"  so  that,  in  reality,  the  average  among  Hottentots  may  be  still 
lower. 

In  the  American  group,  also,  the  same  parallel  holds  good.  The  Toltecan  family,  our 
most  civilized  race,  exhibit  a  mean  of  but  77  cubic  inches,  while  the  Barbarous  tribes  give 
84 ;  that  is,  a  difference  of  seven  cubic  inches  in  favor  of  the  sava£^. 

The  contrast  becomes  still  more  pronounced,  when  we  compare  the  highest  with  the  lowest 
races  of  mankind;  riz. :  the  Teutonic  with  the  Hottentot  and  Australian.  The  former 
family  show  a  mean  internal  capacity  of  ninety-two,  Whilst  the  two  latter  have  yielded  but 
seventy-five  cubic  inches ;  or  a  difference  of  seventeen  cubic  inches  between  the  skull  of 
one  type  and  those  of  two  others !  Now,  it  is  herein  demonstrated,  through  monumental,  cra- 
nial, and  other  testimonies,  that  the  various  types  of  mankind  have  been  ever  permanent ; 
have  been  independent  of  all  physical  influences  for  thousands  of  years ;  and,  I  would  ask, 
what  more  conclusive  eridence  could  the  naturalist  demand,  to  establish  a  specific  diffe- 
rence between  any  species  of  a  genus  ? 

These  facts,  too,  determine  clearly  the  arbitrary  nature  of  all  classifications  heretofore 
invented.  What  reason  is  there  to  suppose  that  the  Hottentot  has  descended  from  the  same 
stem  as  the  African  Mandingo,  or  lolof,  any  more  than  from  the  Samoldes  of  Northern  Asia  T 
or  the  Hindoo  frt>m  the  same  stock  as  the  Teuton  ?  The  Hindoo  is  almost  as  Ux  removed  in 

Digitized  by 

Google 

452  COMPARATIVE    ANATOMY   OP   RACES. 

strncture  firom  the  Teuton  as  is  the  Hottentot :  and  we  might  joat  as  well  class  mndeer 
and  gazelles  together  as  the  Tenton  and  Hindoo,  the  Negro  and  Hottentot  Can  any  natu- 
ralist derive  a  PeruYian  from  a  Circassian  ?  a  Papuan  from  a  Tnrk  ? 

Dr.  Morton's  collection  of  crania,  though  extraordinarily  copious  in  some  races,  is  very 
defectiTO  in  others ;  and,  although  his  measurements  doubtless  approximate  sufficiently  to 
the  truth  to  prove  a  wide  difference  in  the  form  and  size  of  crania,  yet  they  are  by  far  too  few 
to  afford  perfectly  accurate  admeasurements.  The  first,  or  Teutonic  group,  for  example, 
gives  a  mean  of  ninety-two  cubic  inches ;  and  this  average  is  based  on  the  measurements 
of  but  thirty  skulls ;  whereas  800  might  not  suffice  to  evolve  a  fair  average  of  Qermanie 
cranial  developments. 

In  these  anatomical  statistics  the  science  of  anthropology  is  wofully  deficient;  nor  can 
the  vacuum  be  filled  without  the  universal  concurrence  of  physiologists.  Morton's  cabinet, 
the  largest  in  the  world,  fails  to  supply  adequate  materials.  In  African,  American,  and 
Egyptian,  types,  it  leaves  little  to  be  desired ;  but  the  great  ethnographer  himself  frankly 
calls  attention  to  its  requirements :  **  For  example,  it  contains  no  skulls  of  the  Eskimaux, 
Fnegians,  Califomians  or  Brazilians.  The  distorted  heads  of  the  Oregon  tribes  are  also 
but  partially  represented ;  while  the  long-headed  people  of  the  Lake  of  Titicaca,  in  Bolivia, 
are  altogether  wanting.  Skulls  also  of  the  great  divisions  of  the  Caucasian  and  Mongolian 
races  are  too  few  for  satisfactory  comparison ;  and  the  Slavonic  and  Tchndio  (Finnish)  na- 
tions, together  with  the  Mongol  tribes  of  Northern  Asia  and  China,  are  among  tiie  especial 
desiderata  of  this  collection."  5*« 

Nevertheless,  it  is  vrith  some  feelings  of  national  and  professional  pride  that  I  remind 
the  reader  how  an  American  physician,  unsupported  by  any  government,  and  amidst  in- 
cessant devotion  to  a  most  arduous  practice,  who  "  commenced  the  study  of  ethnology  in 
1880"  without  a  single  cranium,  has  bequeathed  to  posterity  above  8i0  human  skulls,  and 
above  620  of  the  inferior  animals,  so  thoroughly  illumined  by  his  personal  labors,  that,  in 
the  absence  of  Aresher  materials,  science  must  pause  before  she  hazards  a  doubt  upon  any 
result  at  which  Samuil  Geobqb  Morton  had  maturely  arrived. 

Deploring  the  absence  of  these  cranial  desiderata,  the  idea  occurred 
to  me  that  such  deficiency  might,  in  some  degree,  be  supplied  by  hat- 
manufacturers  of  various  nations ;  notwithstanding  that  the  informa- 
tion derived  from  this  source  could  give  but  one  measurement ;  viz. : 
the  horizontal  periphery.  Yet  this  one  measurement  alone,  on  an  ex- 
tended scale,  would  go  far  towards  determining  the  general  size  of 
the  brain.  Accordingly,  I  applied  to  three  hat-dealers  in  Mobile,  and 
to  a  large  manufiicturer  in  Newark,  New  Jersey,  for  statements  of  the 
relative  number  of  each  size  of  hat  sold  to  adult  males.  Their  tables 
agree  so  perfectly,  as  to  leave  no  doubt  of  the  cih^umference  of  the 
heads  of  the  white  population  of  the  United  States.  The  three  houses, 
together,  dispose  of  about  15,000  hats  annually. 

The  following  table  was  obligingly  sent  me  by  Messrs.  Vail  and  Yates  of  Newark ;  and 
they  accompanied  it  with  the  remark,  that  their  hats  were  sent  principally  to  our  Western 
States,  where  there  is  a  large  proportion  of  German  population ;  also  that  the  sizes  of  these 
hats  were  a  little  larger  (about  one-fourth  of  an  inch)  than  those  sold  in  the  Southern 
States.  This  useful  observation  was  confirmed  by  the  three  hat-dealers  in  Mobile.  Our 
table  gives — 1st,  the  number,  or  size  of  the  hat ;  2d,  the  circumference  of  the  head  corre- 
sponding ;  8d,  the  circumference  of  the  hat ;  and,  lastly,  the  relative  proportion  of  each 
sold  out  of  twelve  hats. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

COMPARATIVE    ANATOMY    OP    RACES.  453 

8ife— Iirahes.  Clrcam.  of  Head— IneliM.  Girenim.  of  Hat— IndMS.   JUL  Pxoportioii  tn  12. 

H  21f     22|  1 

7  22      22i  2 

7i  22|    28i  ^  8 

7i  22t    28}  ^ 8 

7|  28i    28}  2 

7}  28}    24t  1 

All  hats  larger  than  these  are  called  <*  extra  sizes." 

The  aTerage  sise,  then,  of  the  crania  of  white  races  in  the  United  States,  is  about  22} 
inches  circumference,  including  the  hair  and  scalp,  for  which  about  1}  inches  should  be 
deducted ;  leading  a  mean  horizontal  periphery,  for  adult  males,  of  21  inches.  The  mea- 
surements of  the  purest  Teutonic  races  in  Germany,  and  other  nations  of  Europe,  would 
give  a  larger  mean ;  and  I  haTe  reason  to  beliere  that  the  population  of  France,  which  is 
principally  Celtic,  would  yield  a  smaller  mean.  I  hope  that  others  will  arail  themselyes  of 
better  opportunities  for  comparison. 

Dr.  Morton's  measurements  of  aborij^al  American  races  present  a  mean  of  but  about 
19}  inches;  and  this  mean  is  substantially  confirmed  by  the  fact  stated  to  me  by  my 
friend,  Capt  Boakbitt,  U.  S.  A  {jn^a^  p.  289].  Although  his  head  measures  but  22  inches, 
it  was  with  great  difficulty  that  he  found  one  hat  amid  seyeral  hundred  to  fit  him ;  thus 
proTing  that  the  Anglo-American  mean  is  equal  to  the  maximum  of  the  Mexican  Indians ; 
who  are  here,  at  Metamoras,  more  or  less  mixed,  too,  with  Spanish  blood. 

Hamilton  Smith  states :  —  "We  haye  personally  witnessed  the  issue  of  military  chacos 
(caps)  to  the  Second  West  India  regiment,  at  the  time  when  all  the  rank  and  file  were 
bought  out  of  slaye  ships,  and  the  sergeants  alone  being  part  white,  men  of  color,  Negroes 
from  North  America,  or  bom  Creoles :  and  it  was  obseryed  that  scarcely  any  fitted  the 
heads  of  the  prlyates  excepting  the  two  smallest  sizes ;  in  many  cases  robust  men  of  the 
standard  height  required  padding  an  inch  and  a  half  in  thickness,  to  fit  their  caps ;  while 
those  of  the  non-commissioned  officers  were  adjusted  without  any  additional  aid.'*^'' 

My  own  experience  abundantly  proyes  the  correctness  of  these  facts  in  the  United  States-, 
and  my  colleague,  Mr.  Gliddon,  who  resided  two  years  in  Greece,  1828-80,  informs  me  that 
he  saw  hundreds  of  the  Greek  regulars,  at  reyiews,  drills,  or  on  guard,  who  were  compelled 
to  wind  a  handkerchief  around  their  heads  to  preyent  their  newly-adopted  chacos,  made 
for  EngUsh  soldiers,  falling  oyer  their  noses.  The  modem  Greek  head,  like  the  Armenian, 
is  somewhat  sugar-loafed,  owing  to  early  compression  by  the  turban. 

The  largest  skull  in  Dr.  Morton's  collection  g^yes  an  internal  capacity  of  but  114  cubic 
inches ;  and  we  know  that  heads  of  this  size,  and  eyen  larger,  are  by  no  means  uncommon 
in  the  Anglo-Saxon  race.  Br.  Wyman,  in  his  post-mortem  examination  of  the  famed  Daniel 
Webster,  found  the  intemal  capacity  of  the  cranium  to  be  122  cubic  inches :  and,  in  a  pri- 
yate  letter  to  me,  he  says,  '*  The  circumference  was  measured  outside  of  the  integuments, 
before  the  scalp  was  remoyed,  and  may,  perhaps,  as  there  was  much  emaciation,  be  a  little 
less  than  in  health."  It  was  28|  inches  in  circumference ;  and  the  Doctor  states  that  it  is 
well  known  there  are  seyeral  heads  in  Boston  larger  than  Mr.  Webster's. 

Mr.  Arnold,  a  yery  intelligent  hat-dealer  in  Mobile,  writes  me  in  a  note  as  follows :  — 
<*  Frequently  I  haye  calls  for  the  following  sizes  (measured  from  head) — ^24,  24f ,  and,  about 
once  a  year,  25  inches." 

I  haye  myself,  in  the  last  few  weeks,  measured  half-a-dozen  heads  as  large  and  larger 
than  Webster's ;  while  a  reference  to  Morton's  tables  will  show  that  in  his  whole  Egyptian 
group  only  one  reaches  97  inches  intemal  capacity ;  and,  out  of  888  aboriginal  American 
skulls,  but  one  attains  to  101,  and  another  to  104  cubic  inches. 

It  has  been  asserted  by  Prof.  Tiedemann  of  Heidleberg,  that  the  brain  of  the  Negro  is  as 
large  as  that  of  the  White  races;  but  Dr.  Morton  has  refuted  this  opinion  by  a  mass  of 
facts  which  cannot  be  oyerthrown.  He  has,  moreoyer,  shown  that  Tiedemann's  own  tables 
eontradict  such  deduction. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

454 

COMPARATIVE    ANATOMY    OF    RACES. 

BA.OES. 

LC. 

La 

Moan. 

Tiedemann  adopted  the  eommon  error  of  gronping  together,  under  the  term  Caueanan, 
all  the  White  races  (Egyptians,  Hindoos,  &c.) ;  no  less  than  all  the  African  dark  races  nndw 
the  unscientifie  term  of  Negrots,  Now,  I  have  shown,  that  the  Egyptians  and  Hindoos  pos- 
sess about  tweWe  cubic  inches  less  brain  than  the  Teutonic  race ;  and  the  Hottentots  about 
eight  inches  less  than  the  Negro  proper.  I  affirm  that  no  reason  can  be  assigned  why  the 
Hottentot  and  Negro  should  be  classed  together  in  their  cranial  measurements ;  nor  the 
Teuton  with  the  Hindoo.  I  can  diaooTer  no  data  by  which  to  assign  a  greater  age  to  one 
type  than  to  another;  and,  unless  Professor  Tiedemann  can  overcome  this  difficulty,  he 
has  no  right  to  assume  identity  for  all  the  races  he  is  pleased  to  include  in  each  of  his 
groups.  Mummies  from  catacombs  of  Egypt,  and  portraits  ft'om  the  monuments,  exhibit 
the  same  disparity  of  sixe  in  the  heads  of  races  who  lived  4000  years  ago,  as  among  anj 
human  species  at  the  present  day. 

As  Dr.  Morton  tabulated  his  skulls  on  a  somewhat  arbitrary  basis,  I 
abandon,  that  arrangement,  and  present  his  facts  as  they  stand  in 
nature,  allowing  the  reader  to  compare  for  himself. 

Si2€  of  the  Brmn  m  Cubic  Ineha. 

Absolute  measurements 
array  themselves  into  a 
sliding  scale  of  %eventeen 
cubic  inches,  between  the 
lowest  and  the  highest 
races.  Here  we  behold 
cranial  measurements  as 
history  and  the  monuments 
first  find  them;  nor  can 
such  iiEtcts  be  controverted. 
Let  me  again  revert  to 
the  question  of  hyhridity, 
in  connection  with  endea- 
vors to  obtain  accurate  cra- 
nial statistics.  The  adul- 
teration of  primitive  types, 
at  the  present  day  conspi- 
cuous among  many  races  of  mankind,  renders  precision,  in  regard  to 
the  commingled  inhabitants  of  various  countries,  frequently  impos- 
sible ;  especially  wherever  the  rfari-skinned  races  of  Europe,  and  the 
lower  grades  of  humanity  elsewhere,  have  co-operated  in  mutual  con- 
taminations. Of  the  latter,  our  own  continent  supplies  two  deplorable 
regions,  from  which  real  philanthropy  might  take  warning.  Tschudi's 
"  Travels  in  Peru  "  furnishes  a  list  of  the  crosses  resulting:  from  the 
intermixture  of  Spanish  with  Indian  and  Negro  races  in  that  country. 
The  settlement  of  Mexico  by  Spaniards  took  place  at  the  same  time, 
and  the  intermixture  of  races  has  been  perhaps  greater  there  than  in 
Peruvian  colonies.  Mexican  soldiers  present  the  most  unequal  char- 
acters that  can  be  met  with  anywhere  in  the  world.    If  some  are 

Modem  White  Races  ; 

Teutonic  Group 

Pelasgio 

Celtic  

Semitic , 

Ancient  Pelasgio... 

Malays 

Chinese 

Negroes  (African) , 

Indostanees 

Fellahs  (Modem  Egyptians). 
Egyptians  (Ancient).... , 

American  Oroup; 

Tolteoan  Family , 

Barbarous  Tribes... 

Hottentots 

Australians 

92 

S4 
87 
89 
88 

86 

82 
83 
80 
80 
80 

77 
84 

76 
76 

92 
188 

}m 

k79 

:76 

Digitized  by 

Google 

COMPARATIVE    ANATOMY   OF    RACES.  455 

brave,  others  are  quite  the  reverse — possessing  the  basest  and  most 
"barbarous  qualities.  This,  doubtless,  is  a  result,  in  part,  of  the  cf  oss- 
in^  of  the  races.  Here  is  Tschudi's  catalogue  of  such  amalgamations 
in  Peru:  — 

Pttrmtt.  Children, 

««  White  father  and  Negro  mother MnUtto. 

White  father  and  Indian  mother Mestixs. 

Indian  father  and  Negro  mother Chlno. 

White  father  and  Mulatto  mother. Cuarteron. 

White  fSather  and  Mesdia  mother Creole — pale,  brownish  complexion. 

White  father  and  China  mother. Chino-blaaco. 

White  father  and  Coarterena  mother..... Qointero. 

White  father  and  Quintera  mother White. 

Negro  father  and  Indian  mother Zambo. 

Negro  father  and  Mulatto  mother Zambo-Negro. 

Negro  father  and  Meetiza  mother Mulatto-osouro. 

Negro  father  and  China  mother Zambo-Chino. 

Negro  father  and  Zamba  mother Zambo-Negro — perfectly  black. 

Negro  father  and  Qointera  mother Mulatto — rather  dark. 

Indian  father  and  Mulatto  mother Chino-oscuro. 

Indian  father  and  Mestiza  mother Mestizo-claro  — frequently  very  beautifuL 

Indian  father  and  Chino  mother Chino-cola. 

Indian  father  and  Zamba  mother Zambo-claro. 

Indian  father  and  China-cholar  mother Indian  —  with  ftrizzly  hair. 

Indian  father  and  Quintera  mother Mestizo — rather  brown. 

Mulatto  father  and  Zamba  mother Zamba  —  a  miserable  race. 

Mulatto  father  and  Mestiza  mother Chino — rather  clear  complexion. 

Mulatto  father  and  China  mother Chino  —  rather  dark. 

«*  To  define  their  characteristics  correctly,"  adds  the  learned  German,  '*  would  be  impos- 
sible ;  for  their  minds  partake  of  the  mixture  of  their  blood.  As  a  general  rule,  it  may  be 
fiairly  said,  that  th^  unite  in  themselres  all  the  faults,  without  any  of  the  virtues,  of  their 
progenitors ;  as  men,  they  are  generally  inferior  to  the  pure  races ;  and  as  members  of 
Bodety,  they  are  the  worst  class  of  citizens." 

In  Pern,  be  it  also  obserred,  these  mongrel  families  are  produced  by  the  intermixture 
of  two  distinct  ^es  {Indiam  and  Negroa)  with  a  third  (Portugue$€  and  J^aniarth),  which 
I  haye  shown  to  have  been  already  corrupted  by  European  oomminglings,  previously  to 
their  landing  in  South  America.  After  all,  in  the  United  States,  the  bulk  of  mulatto  grades 
is  occasioned  solely  by  the  union  of  Negro  with  the  Teutonic  stock  —  Indian  nmalgamations 
being  so  unft'equent  as  to  be  rarely  seen,  save  along  the  frontier. 

This  leads  me  to  substantiate  prerious  remarks  on  Liberia.  **  Got.  Roberts,  of  Liberia, 
a  fair  mulaito,  and  Busswarm,  of  Cape  Palmas,  are  deyer  and  estimable  men ;  and  we 
have  in  these  two  men  unanswerable  proofs  of  the  capacity  of  the  colored^  people  for  self- 
gOTemment. 

**  The  climate  of  Western  Africa  cannot  be  considered  as  unwholesome  to  colored  colonists. 
Every  one  must  pass  [otoinff  to  the  unaeclimated  exotic  blood  in  hit  veint]  through  the  acclimat- 
ing fever ;  but,  now  that  more  convenient  dwellings  are  erected,  so  that  the  sick  may  be 
properly  attended  to,  the  mortality  has  considerably  decreased.  Once  well  through  this 
sickness,  the  [mulatto]  colonist  finds  the  climate  and  the  air  suitable  to  his  constitution ;  not 
so  the  WHiTi  man.     The  residence  of  a  few  years  on  this  coast  is  certain  death  to  Aim." 

So  far  Commodore  M.  C.  Peny,  U.  S.  N.,  in  his  report  on  Liberia.    Miss  Frederika 

• 

Digitized  by 

Google 

456  COMPARATIVE    ANATOMY   OP    RACES. 

Bremer  adds,  with  that  charming  simplicity  so  pecnliariy  Swedish  (Jenny  land,  Ole  Ball, 
&c.«  VttTe  fAmilarixed  Americans  with  its  philanthropioal  self-sacrifices):  —  *<It  thus  ap- 
pears as  if  Liberia  and  Sierra  Leone  would  become  the  nurseries  fW>m  which  the  new  dri- 
lization  and  more  beantifal  fatore  of  Africa  wonld  proceed.  I  cannot  beUeve  but  that  these 
[mulatto]  plants  from  a  foreign  land  most,  before  that  time,  undergo  a  metamorphons  ^ 
must  become  more  Afrkan"^^  , 

The  most  inveterate  anthropoloc^  could  not  better  foreshadow  Libeiian  destinies  I 

And,  as  concerns  the  "beautifdl"  likely  to  arise  in  Africa  when 
the  half-civilized  mulatto  becomes  re-absorbed  into  the  indigenous 
Negro  population,  let  me  add,  that,  were  authority  necessary  at  this 
day  to  rebut  the  good-natured  Abb6  Gr6goire's  testimony  in  favor  of 
mulatto-poesies,  (and  9ueh  posies!)  ethnography  might  begin  with 
Mr.  Jefferson's.    His  Note%  on  Virginia  contain  this  sentence :  — 

**  Never  yet  could  I  find  that  a  Black  had  uttered  a  thought  above  the  level  of  plain  nar- 
ration ;  never  saw  even  an  elementary  trait  of  painting  or  of  sculpture." 

I  have  looked  in  vain,  during  twenty  years,  for  a  solitary  exception 
to  these  characteristic  deficiencies  among  the  Negro  race.  Every 
Negro  is  gifted  with  an  ear  for  music ;  some  are  excellent  musicians; 
all  imitate  well  in  most  things ;  but,  with  every  opportunity  for  cul- 
ture, our  Southern  Negroes  remain  as  incapable,  in  drawing,  as  the 
lowest  quadrumana. 

As  before  stated,  the  plan  of  this  work  does  not  permit  a  complete  anatomical  comparison 
of  races ;  and  I  have  merely  selected  such  illustrations  as  I  deem  sufficient  to  demonstrate 
plurality  of  origin  for  the  human  family.  A  few  others  are  suljoined,  with  a  brief  cooi- 
mentary.  The  **  Caucasian,"  Mongol,  and  Negro,  constitute  three  of  the  most  prominent 
groups  of  mankind ;  and  the  vertical  views  of  the  following  crania  (Figs.  886-838)  display, 
at  a  glance,  how  widely  separated  they  are  in  conformation.  How  they  differ  in  sixe  and 
in  facial  angle  has  been  already  shown.  So  uniform  are  these  cranial  characters,  that  the 
genuine  types  can  at  once  be  distinguished  by  a  practised  eye. 

If,  as  we  have  reiterated  times  and  again,  those  types  depicted  on 
the  early  monuments  of  Egypt  have  remained  permanent  through  all 
subsequent  ages  —  and  if  no  causes  are  now  visibly  at  work  which 
can  transform  one  type  of  man  into  another — they  must  be  received, 
in  Natural  History,  as  primitive  and  specific.  When,  therefore,  they 
are  placed  beside  each  other  {elg.  as  in  Figs.  33ft-838)  such  types  speak 
for  themselves ;  and  the  anatomist  has  no  more  need  of  protracted 
comparisons  to  seize  their  diversities,  than  the  school-boy  to  distin- 
guish turkeys  from  peacocks,  or  pecaries  from  Guinea-pigs. 

Our  remarks  on  African  types  have  shown  the  gradations  which, 
ever  ascending  in  caste  of  race,  may  be  traced  from  the  Cape  of 
Good  Hope  northward  to  Egypt.  The  same  gnwiation  might  be 
followed  through  Asiatic  and  European  races  up  to  the  Teutonic ; 
and  with  equal  accuracy^  were  it  not  for  migrations  and  geographical 

Digitized  by 

Google 

COMPARATIVE    ANATOMY    OF    RACES. 

457 

displacements  of  these  last,  to  which  aborigines  in  Africa  have  been 
less  subjected. 

Fio.  886.6«» 

Fio.  887.«o 

Fia.  888.561 

Mongol. 

N«gro. 

Although  I  do  not  believe  in  the  intellectual  equality  of  races,  and 
can  find  no  ground  in  natural  or  in  human  history  for  such  popular 
credence,  I  belong  not  to  those  who  are  disposed  to  degrade  any  type 
of  humanity  to  the  level  of  the  brute-creation.  Nevertheless,  a  man 
must  be  blind  not  to  be  struck  by  similitudes  between  some  of  the 
lower  races  of  mankind,  viewed  as  connecting  links  in  the  animal 
kingdom ;  nor  can  it  be  rationally  affirmed,  that  the  Orang-Outan 
and  Chimpanzee  are  more  widely  separated  from  certain  African  and 
Oceanic  Negroes  than  are  the  latter  from  the  Teutonic  or  Pelasgic 
types.  But  the  very  accomplished  anatomist  of  Harvard  University, 
Dr.  Jeffiies  Wyman,  has  placed  this  question  in  its  true  light :  — 

*<  The  organization  of  the  anthropoid  qnadrumana  joBtifies  the  natnralist  in  placing  them 
at  the  head  of  the  brnte-oreation,  and  placing  them  in  a  position  in  which  they,  of  all  the 
animal  series,  shall  be  nearest  to  man.  Any  anatomist,  howerer,  who  will  take  the  trouble 
to  compare  the  skeletons  of  the  Negro  and  Orang,  cannot  fail  to  be  struck  at  sight  with  the 
wide  gap  which  separates  them.  The  dlfiference  between  the  cranium,  the  pelTis,  and  the 
conformation  of  the  upper  extremities,  in  the  Negro  and  Caucasian,  sinks  into  insignificance 
when  compared  with  the  Tast  difference  which  exists  between  the  conformation  of  the  same 
parts  in  the  Negro  and  the  Orang.  Tet  it  cannot  be  denied,  howcTer  wide  the  separation, 
that  the  Negro  and  Orang  do  afford  the  points  where  man  and  the  brute,  when  the  totality 
of  their  organization  is  considered,  most  nearly  approach  each  other."  ^^ 

The  truth  of  these  observations  becomes  popularly  apparent  through 
the  following  comparative  series  of  likenesses.  There  are  fourteen  of 
them ;  and,  by  reference  to  the  works  whence  they  are  chosen,  the 
reader  can  verify  the  fidelity  of  the  major  portion.  For  the  remain- 
der, taken  from  living  nature,  the  authors  are  responsible  when 
vouching  for  their  accuracy. 
58 

Digitized  by 

Google 

Fia.  839.  —Apollo  BelTW«w.*53 

Fio.  841.— Negw).M* 

Fia.  840,«8 

Qnek. 

PiO,  842.3*7 

Creole  Negro. 

PiO.  844.fi« 

Young  Chhnpantne. 

Digitized  by 

Gfj^gle 

Pio.  346.fiM 

Fia.  346.5M 

Onng-Outan. 

Pia.  847.«« 

MoUle  Negro,  1858. 
Fio.  851. 

Negro,  8200  ytan  old  Itupra,  pp.260-Sn]. 

Hottentot  Wagoner  —  Caffre  War. 
Fia.  848.5fl2 

Hottentot  from  SomenH. 
Fio.  350. 

MobOe  Negro,  1868. 
Fia.  352. 

Nuliian,  8200  yean  old,^ 

Digitized  by(!@«30gle 

460  COMPARATIVE    ANATOMY   OP    RACES. 

It  will  doubtless  be  objected  by  some  that  extreme  examples  are 
here  selected ;  and  this  is  candidly  admitted :  yet,  each  animal  type 
has  a  centre  around  which  it  fluctuates — and  such  a  head  as  the  Greek 
is  never  seen  on  a  Negro,  nor  such  a  head  as  that  of  the  Negro  on 
a  Greek. .  Absolute  uniformity  of  type  is  not  a  law  of  Nature  in  any 
department :  in  the  gradations  of  species,  extremes  meet,  and  are 
often  confounded. 

Morton's  manuscripts  supply  an  extract  which  shows,  that  "  skep- 
tical physicians"  are  not  the  only  honest  men  who  cannot  descry 
imity  of  human  origins  in  Nature's  phenomena :  — 

**  We  fully  concur  with  a  learned  and  eloquent  divine  (the  Hon.  and  Ber.  William  Her- 
bert), that  we  possess  no  information  concerning  the  origin  of  the  dififerent  races  of  man- 
kind, *  which  are  as  different  in  appearance  as  the  species  of  vegetables. '  No  one  of  these 
races  has  sprung  up  within  the  period  of  historical  certainty ;  nor  are  we  any  better  in- 
formed in  respect  to  their  *  innumerable  languages,  which  cannot  be  reunited ;  and  no  person 
can  show  how  or  when  any  one  of  them  arose,  although  we  may  trace  the  minglings  of  one 
with  another  in  the  later  years  of  the  world.'  **^^ 

Intellect. 

I  had  intended  to  publish  an  entire  chapter  on  tl^e  "  Comparative 
Mental  Characters  of  Races;"  but  our  Part  I.  has^  already  swelled 
beyond  its  prescribed  limits ;  and,  in  consequence,  although  this  field 
is  a  broad  and  fertile  one,  I  must  be  content  with  a  few  brief  remarks. 
It  has  been  admirably  observed  by  Dr.  Robert  Knox,  that 

«  Human  Listory  cannot  be  a  mere  chaptto  of  accidents.  The  fate  of  nations  cannot  be 
always  regulated  by  chance ;  its  literature,  science,  art,  wealth,  religion,  language,  laws 
and  morals  cannot  surely  be  the  result  of  mere  acci(^ental  circumstances.'*^^ 

It  is  the  primitive  organization  of  races,  their  mental  instincts^ 
which  determine  their  characters  and  destinies,  and  not  blind  hazard. 
All  history,  as  well  as  anatomy  and  physiology,  prove  this. 

Reason  has  been  called  the  "proud  prerogative  of  man" — being 
the  faculty  which  disunites  him  from  iha  brute  creation.  Metaphy- 
sicians propose  many  definitions  of  instinct  and  of  reason;  and  learned 
tomes  have  been  written  to  show  wherein  the  one  differs  from  the 
other :  and  yet  no  true  mental  philosopher  will  contend  that  the  line 
of  demarcation  can  be  drawn,  nor  can  he  point  out  where  animal 
intellect  ends  and  that  of  man  begins.  Even  Prichard  admits  that 
animals  do  reason,  and  I  might  quote  observations  of  the  ablest  natu- 
ralists to  support  him ;  but  the  following  resume  suflices. 

To  judge  the  true  nature  of  a  **  species"  of  animals,  it  must  be  viewed  in  its  natural 
state ;  that  is,  unchanged  either  by  domestication,  or  through  foreign  influences.  To  Judge 
a  **  type"  of  the  human  family,  it  must  also  be  studied  separately ;  unadulterated  in  blood, 
and  in  the  natural  condition  in  which  its  instincts  and  energies  have  placed  it  Onr 
domestic  animals,  influenced  by  artificial  causes,  now  diflfer  exceedingly  in  physique  and  in 

Digitized  by 

Google 

COMPARATIVE    ANATOMY   OP    RACES.  461 

wu>rale  from  their  primitiTe  wild  progenitors.  The  races  of  men  are  goyemed  by  similar 
laws.  '  Intelligence,  actiTitj,  ambition,  progression,  high  anatomical  deyelopment,  charac- 
terize some  races ;  stnpiditj,  indolence,  immobility,  sayagism,  low  anatomical  deyelopment 
distiiigmsh  others.  Loftj  ciyilixation,  in  all  cases,  has  been  achieyed  solely  by  the  **  Cau- 
casian" group.  Mongolian  races,  saye  in  the  Chinese  family,  in  no  instance  haye  reached 
beyond  the  degree  of  semi-ciyilization ;  while  the  Black  races  of  Africa  and  Oceanica,  no 
less  than  the  Barbarous  tribes  of  America,  haye  remained  in  utter  darkness  for  thousands 
of  years.  Negro  races,  when  domestieated,  are  susceptible  of  a  limited  degree  of  improye- 
ment ;  but  when  released  from  restraint,  as  in  Hayti,  they  sooner  or  later  relapse  into 
barbarism. 

Furthermore,  certain  sayage  types  can  neither  be  dyiliied  nor  domesticated.  The  Bar' 
harout  races  of  America  (excluding  the  Toltecs),  although  nearly  as  low  in  intellect  as  the 
Negro  races,  are  essentially  untameable.  Not  merely  haye  all  attempts  to  ciyilixe  them 
failed,  but  also  eyery  endeayor  to  enslaye  them.  Our  Indian  tribes  submit  to  extermina- 
tion,  rather  than  wear  the  yoke  under  which  our  Negro  slayes  fatten  and  multiply. 

It  has  been  falsely  asserted,  that  the  Choctaw  and  Cherokee  Indians  haye  made  great  pro- 
gress in  ciyilixation.  I  assert  positiyely,  after  most  ample  inyestigation  of  the  facts,  that  the 
pure-blooded  Indians  are  eyerywhere  unchanged  in  their  habits.  Many  white  persons,  settling 
among  the  aboye  tribes,  haye  intermarried  with  them ;  and  all  such  trumpeted  progress 
exists  among  these  whites  and  their  mixed  breeds  alone.  The  pure-blooded  sayage  still 
skulks  untamed  through  the  forest,  or  gallops  athwart  the  prairie.  Can  any  one  call  the 
name  of  a  single  pure  Indian  of  the  Barbarotu  tribes  who  —  except  in  death,  like  a  wild 
cat  —  has  done  anything  worthy  6f  remembrance  ? 

Sequoyah,  alias  George  Guess,  the  "Cherokee  Cadmus,"  so  re- 
nowned for  the  invention  of  an  alphabet,  was  a  half-breed,  owing  his 
inventive  genius  to  his  Scotch  father.  My  information  respecting 
these  Cherokee  tribes  has  been  obtained  from  such  men  as  Governor 
Butler,  Major  Hitchcock,  Colonel  Bliss,  and  other  distinguished  offi- 
cers of  our  army  —  all  perfectly  conversant  with  these  hybrid  nations. 

While,  on  the  one  hand,  it  must  be  admitted,  that  animals  possess 
a  limited  degree  of  reason,  it  is  equally  true,  on  the  other,  that  the 
races  of  men  also  have  their  instincts.  They  reason,  but  this  "  reason," 
as  we  term  it,  is  often  propelled  by  a  blind  internal  force,  which  can- 
not be  controlled.  Groups  of  mankind,  as  we  have  abundantly  seen, 
diflfer  in  their  cranial  developments ;  and  their  instincts  drive  them 
into  lines  diverging  from  each  other— *•  giving  to  each  one  its  typical 
or  national  character. 

The  Egyptians/  the  Assyrians,  the  Jews,  the  Qreeks,  the  Bomans,  the  Celts,  the  Chinese, 
or  the  Hindoos,  haye  not  been  solely  goided  by  simple  reamm.  Each  type  possessed,  at  the? 
start,  mental  instinct,  which,  driTing  reason  before  it,  determined  each  notional  character. 
The  earliest  dTilisation  known  to  ns  is  that  of  Egypt ;  and  Arom  this  foundation,  it  is  couk- 
monly  said,  aU  more  modem  dnlizations  are  deriTod.  •  Of  this,  science  is  by  no  means 
certain.  From  Egypt,  the  stream  is  sopposed  to  haye  flowed  steadily  on,  through  Assyria, 
Palestine,  Tyre,  Persia,  Greece,  Rome,  Oaol,  Ofrmany,  Spain,  Britain,  until  it  crossed  the 
Atlantic  to  onr  Federal  Union.  Certain  it  is,  that  Western  Europe  has  rifted  the  bonds  of 
barbarism  only  within  recent  historical  times.  European  races,  notwithstanding,  possessed 
those  cranial  deyelopments,  and  those  moral  instincts,  which  forced  them  to  play  their 
parts  in  the  grand  drama,  as  soon  as  the  light  penetrated  to  them,  and  that  forms  of 
government  and  stabili^  became  secured.    The  Celtic  and  the  Germanic  races  required  no 

Digitized  by 

Google 

462  COMPARATIVE    ANATOMY    OP    RACES. 

gradnftl  '<  expansion  of  brain,"  tfaroogh  suooesaiTe  educated  generationa.  Created  witk 
the  follest  '*  expansion,"  they  only  awaited  opportnmty  to  practise  it  But,  -what  has  been 
the  history  of  the  dark  races !  When  the  stream  originating  in  M  Oriental  dTilixaticMi 
bounded  across  the  Atlantic,  instead  of  emnkmsly  drinking  of  its  glorioos  waters,  the  abori* 
gines  of  America  hare  succumbed  beneath  its  eddy,  as  thoogh  it  exhaled  an  epidemie 
pestilence. 

The  Black- African  races  inhabiting  the  South  of  Egypt  have  been 
in  constant  intercourse  with  her,  as  we  prove  fix)m  the  monuments, 
during  4000  years ;  and  yet  they  have  not  made  a  solitary  step  to- 
wards civilization — neither  will  they,  nor  can  they,  until  their  physical 
organization  becomes  changed.  With  our  verbal  reservations  about 
the  term  "Caucasian,"  [supraj  p.  247,]  the  following  paragraph,  fix)m 
the  trenchant  pen  of  Theodorb  Parker,  speaks  incontestable  truths: — 

*<  The  Caucasian  differs  from  all  other  races :  he  is  humane,  he  is  ciTilized,  and  progresses. 
He  conquers  with  his  head,  as  well  as  with  his  hand.  It  is  intellect,  after  all,  that  con- 
quers—  not  the  strength  of  a  man's  arm.  The  Caucasian  has  been  often  master  of  the 
other  races — never  their  slave.  He  has  carried  his  religion  to  other  races,  but  never 
taken  theirs.  In  history,  all  religions  are  of  Caucasian  origin.  All  the  great  limited  forms 
of  monarchies  are  Caucasian.  Republics  are  Caucasian.  All  the  great  sciences  are  of 
Caucasian  origin ;  aU  inventions  are  Caucasian ;  literatui:e  and  romanoe  come  of  the  same 
stock ;  all  the  great  poets  are  of  Caucasian  origin ;  Moses,  Luther,  Jesus  Christ,  Zoroaster, 
Bndha,  Pythagoras,  were  Caucasian.  No  other  race  can  bring  up  to  memory  such  cele- 
brated names  as  the  Caucasian  race.  The  Chinese  philosopher,  Confticius,  is  an  exception 
to  the  rule.  To  the  Caucasian  race  belong  the  Arabian,  Persian,  Hebrew,  Egyptian ;  and 
all  the  European  nations  are  descendants  of  the  Caucasian  race." 

It  is  vehemently  maintained,  that  mankind  must  be  of  common 
origin,  because  all  men  are  endowed  with  more  or  less  of  reason,  with 
some  moral  sense,  and  are  impressed  with  the  idea  of  responsibility 
to  a  Supreme  Being ;  but  the  verj'  statement  of  such  proposition  car- 
ries with  it  the  conviction  that  it  is  simply  an  hypothesis,  unsupported 
by  facts.  No  line  can  be  drawn  between  men  and  animals  on  the 
ground  of  "reason,"  and  more  than  one  of  the  savage  races  of  men 
possess  no  perceptible  moral  or  religious  ideas. 

If  the  Bible  had  been  so  construed  as  to  teach  that  there  were,  from  the  beginning, 
many  primitive  races  of  men,  instead  of  one,  the  psychological  grades  would  doubtless  have 
been  regarded  by  everybody  as  presenting  the  plainest  analogies  when  compared  wiUi  the 
species  of  inferior  animals.  It  would  have  been  allowed  at  once;  that  beings  so  distinct  in 
physical  characters  should  naturally  present  diversity  of  mental  and  moral  traits.  All  the 
species  of  equidm  exhibit  certain  habits  and  instincts  in  common,  whilst  diffiering  in  othen. 
Amongst  camivora,  the  felines — such  as  lions,  tigers,  panthers,  leopards,  lynxes,  cats— 
present  a  unity  of  moral  and  intellectual  character,  so  to  say,  quite  as  striking  as  that  dis- 
played by  the  human  family;  and,  scientifically  speaking,  there  is  just  as  much  ground, 
at  this  point  of  riew,  for  saying  that  aU  the  felines  are  of  one  **  species,"  as  all  the  various 
types  of  mankind. 

Nor  can  any  valid  argument  be  drawn  from  credence  in  a  Ood,  or  in  a  future  sUte. 
There  exists  among  human  races  not  the  sli^test  unity  of  thought  on  these  recondite 
points.  Some  believe  in  one  Ood ;  the  g^ter  number  in  many :  some  in  a  future  state, 
whilst  others  have  no  idea  of  a  Deity,  nor  of  the  life  hereafter.     Many  of  the  African,  and 

Digitized  by 

Google 

COMPARATIVE   AKATOMY   OP    RACES.  468 

an  of  the  Oceanio  Negroes,  as  missionaries  loudly  proclaim,  possess  only  the  crudest  and 
most  groTelling  superstitions.  Such  tribes  entertain  merely  a  confused  notion  of  **  good 
spirits,"  whose  bencTolenoe  relieves  the  sarage  firom  any  fatiguing  illustration  of  his  grati- 
tude ;  and  an  intense  dread  of  *'  bad  spirits,"  whom  he  spares  no  clumsy  sacrifice  to  propi- 
tiate. Did  space  permit,  I  could  produce  historical  testimonies  by  the  dozen,  to  oyerthrow 
that  postulate  which  claims  for  sundry  inferior  types  of  men  any  inherent  recognition  of 
Divine  Providence  —  an  idea  too  exalted  for  their  cerebral  organixations :  and  which  is 
fondly  attributed  to  them  by  untravelled  or  unlettered  **  Caucasians ;"  whose  kind-hearted 
simplicity  has  not  realized  that  diyerse  lower  races  of  humanity  actually  exist  uninyested 
by  the  Almighty  with  mental  faculties  adequate  to  the  perception  of  religious  sentiments, 
or  abstract  philosophies,  that  in  themselTcs  are  exclusiyely  <*  Caucasian." 

Men  and  animals  are  naturally  imbued  with  an  instinctiye  fear  of  death ;  and  it  is  per- 
haps more  universal  and  more  intense  in  the  latter  than  the  former.  Man  not  only  shud- 
ders instinctiyely  at  the  idea  of  the  grave,  but  his  mind,  developed  by  culture,  carries 
him  a  step  Airther.  He  shrinks  from  total  annihilation,  and  longs  and  hopes  for,  and  be- 
lieves in,  another  existence.  This  conception  of  a  future  existence  is  modified  by  race  and 
through  education.  Like  the  pre-Celts  of  ancient  Europe,  the  Indian  is  still  buried  with 
his  stone-headed  arrows,  his  rude  amulets,  his  dog,  &c.,  equipped  all  ready  for  Elysian 
hunting-fields ;  at  the  same  time  that  many  a  white  man  imagines  a  heaven  where  he  shall 
have  nothing  to  do  but  sing  Dr.  Watts'  hymns  around  the  Eternal  throne. 

It  matters  not  from  whatever  point  we  may  choose  to  view  the  arg^ument,  unity  of  races 
cannot  be  logically  based  upon  psychological  grounds.  It  is  itself  a  pure  hypothesis, 
which  one  day  will  cease  to  attract  the  criticism  of  science. 

In  a  Review  by  Geo.  Combe  of  Morton's  Crania  Amerieanaj^  may 
be  found  a  most  interesting  comparison  of  the  brains  of  American 
aborigines  with  the  European.  Comparisons  of  any  two  well-marked 
types  would  yield  results  quite  as  striking.  A  few  extracts  are  all  we 
can  afford  from  an  article  that,  commanding  the  respect,  will  excite 
the  interest  of  the  reader. 

<*  No  adequately-instructed  naturalist  doubts  that  the  brain  is  the  organ  of  the  mind. 
Bnt  there  are  two  questions,  on  which  great  difference  of  opinion  continues  to  prevail :  — 
1.  Whether  the  size  of  the  brain  (health,  age  and  constitution  being  equal,)  has  any,  and  if 
so,  what  influence,  on  the  power  of  mental  manifestations  !    2.  Whether  different  faculties . 
are,  or  are  not,  manifested  by  particular  portions  of  the  brain.'* 

I  believe  that  all  scientific  men  concede  that  brains  below  a  certain 
size  are  always  indicative  of  idiocy,  and  that  men  of  distinguished 
mental  faculties  have  large  heads. 

«  One  of  the  most  singular  features  in  the  history  of  this  continent  is,  that  the  aboriginal 
races,  with  few  exceptions,  have  perished,  or  constantly  receded,  before  the  Anglo-Saxon 
race ;  and  have  in  no  instance  [not  even  Cherokee]  either  mingled  with  them  as  equals,  or 
adopted  their  manners  and  civilixation." 

<*  Certain  parts  of  the  brain,  in  all  classes  of  animals  [says  Curier^s  ]  are  large  or  small, 
according  to  certain  qualities  of  the  animals." 

<*  If  then  there  be  reason  to  believe  that  different  parts  of  the  brain  manifest  different 
mental  faculties,  and  if  the  sixe  of  the  part  influence  the  power  of  manifestation,  the  ne- 
cessity is  very  evident  of  taking  into  consideration  the  relative  proportiont  of  different  pant 
of  the  brain,  in  a  physiological  inquiry  into  the  connection  between  the  crania  of  nations 
And  their  mental  faculties.  To  illustrate  this  position,  we  present  exact  drawings  of  two 
oasts  from  nature ;  one  (Fig.  858)  is  the  brain  of  an  American  Indian ;  and  the  other 
(Fig.  854)  the  brain  of  an  European.  Both  casts  bear  evidence  of  compression  or  flattening 

Digitized  by 

Google 

464 

COMPARATIVE    ANATOMY    OP    RACES. 

out,  to  some  extent,  by  the  pressure  of  the  plaster;  bat  the  European  brain  is  the  flatter 
of  the  two.  We  haye  a  cast  of  the  entire  head  of  this  American  Indian,  and  it  oorreapondt 
doselj  with  the  form  of  the  brain  here  represented.  It  is  obTions  that  the  absolnte  riaa 
of  the  brain  (althoogh  probably  a  few  ounces  less  in  the  American)  miffhi  be  the  tame  m  both  ; 
and  yet,  if  different  portions  manifest  different  mental  powen,  the  characten  of  the  indi- 
yidoals,  and  of  the  nations  to  which  they  belonged  (assuming  them  to  be  types  of  the  races), 
might  be  exceedingly  different    In  the  American  Indian,  the  anterior  lobe,  lying  between 

A  A  and  B  B,  is  small,  and  in  the  European  it  is  large,  in  proportion  to  tiie  middle  lobe, 
lying  between  B  B  and  C  C.  In  the  American  Indian,  the  posterior,  lobe,  lying  between  G 
and  D,  is  much  smaller  than  in  the  European.  In  the  American,  the  cerebral  conyolutions 
on  the  anterior  lobe  and  upper  surface  of  the  brain,  are  smaller  than  in  the  European. 

**  If  the  anterior  lobe  manifest  the  intellectual  faculties  —  the  middle  lobe,  the  propensi- 
ties common  to  man  with  the  lower  animals — and  the  posterior  lobe,  the  domestic  and  social 
affections  —  and  if  siie  influence  the  power  of  manifestation,  the  result  will  be,  that  in  the 
natiye  American,  intellect  will  be  feeble — in  the  European,  strong;  in  the  American,  ani- 
mal propensity  will  be  yery  great — in  the  European,  more  moderate;  while,  in  the  Ame- 
rican, the  domestic  and  social  affections  will  be  feeble,  and,  in  the  European,  poweif^Dd. 
We  do  not  state  these  as  established  results ;  we  use  the  cuts  only  to  illustrate  the  fiust 
that  the  natiye  American  and  European  brains  differ  widdy  in  the  proportion  of  iheir  different 
parte  ;  and  the  conclusion  seems  natural,  that  if  different  functions  be  attached  to  different 
parts,  no  inyestigation  can  deserye  attention  which  does  not  embrace  the  sise  of  the  diffe- 
rent regions,  in  so  far  as  it  can  be  ascertained." 

Prof.  Tiedemann  admits  that  **  there  is,  undoubtedly,  a  yery  close  connection  between 
the  abeolute  eize  of  the  brain  and  the  intellectual  powen  and  functions  of  the  mind ; "  as- 
serting also  that  the  Negro  races  possess  brain  as  large  as  Europeans :  but,  while  he  oyer- 
looked  entirely  the  comparatiye  sixe  of  parts,  Morton  has  refuted  him  on  the  equality  in 
absolute  size. 

The  above  comparison  of  two  human  brams  illustrates  anatomical 
divergences  between  European  and  American  races.  Could  a  com- 
plete series  of  engravings,  embracing  specimens  firom  each  type  of 
mankind,  be  submitted  to  the  reader,  his  eye,  seizing  instantaneously 

Digitized  by 

Google 

COMPARATIVE    ANATOMY  OP    RACES.  465 

the  cerebral  distinctions  between  Peravians  and  Australians,  Mon- 
]gol8  and  Hottentots,  would  compel  him  to  admit  that  the  physical 
difference  of  human  races  is  as  obvious  in  their  internal  brains  as  in 
their  external  features. 

liet  us  here  pause,  and  inquire  what  landmarks  have  been  placed 
along  the  track  of  our  journey.  The  reader  who  has  travelled  with 
us  thus  fiirlvill  not,  I  think,  deny  that,  from  the  fiicts  now  accessible, 
the  following  must  be  legitimate  deductions :  — 

1.  That  the  surface  of  our  gklU  i»  naturdUy  divided  into  several  zoological  provinces^  each  of 

which  is  a  disUnct  centre  of  creation,  possessing  a  peculiar  fauna  and  flora;  and  that  every 
species  of  animal  and  plant  was  originally  assigned  to  its,  appropriate  province, 

2.  That  the  human  family  offers  no  exertion  to  tKis  general  law,  hut  fully  conforms  to  it: 

Mankind  being  divided  into  several  groups  of  Races,  each  of  which  constitutes  a  primitive 
element  in  the  fauna  of  its  peculiar  province, 
8.  That  history  affords  no  evidence  of  the  transformation  of  one  Type  into  another,  nor  of  the 
origination  of  a  new  and  pebmanbnt  7)^e, 

4.  That  certain  Types  have  been  pbshanbnt  through  all  recorded  time,  and  despite  the  most 

opposite  moral  and  physical  it^luences, 

5.  That  PBBXANBiros  of  Type  is  accepted  by  science  as  the  surest  test  of  bpeoifio  character, 

6.  That  certain  Types  have  existed  {the  same  as  now)  m  and  around  the  Valley  of  the  Nile, 

from  ages  anterior  to  8500  years  b.  o.,  and  consequently  long  prior  to  any  alphabetic 
chronicles,  sacred  or  profane, 

7.  That  the  ancient  Egyptians  had  already  classified  Mankind,  as  known  to  them,  into  tojtbl 

Bacbs,  previously  to  any  date  assignable  to  Moses. 

8.  That  high  antiquity  for  distinct  Races  is  amply  sustained  by  Unguistic  researches,  by  psycho^ 

logical  history,  and  by  anatomical  characteristics, 

9.  That  the  primeval  existence  of  Man,  in  widely  separate  pwtions  of  the  ghhe,  is  proven  by  the 

discovery  of  his  osseous  and  industrial  remains  in  alluvial  deposits  and  in  diluvial  drifts; 
and  more  especially  of  his  fossil  bones,  imbedded  in  various  rocky  strata  along  with  the 
vestiges  of  extinct  species  of  anmtils, 

10.  That  PBOLiPiCAOT  of  distinct  species,  inter  Be,  w  now  proved  to  be  no  test  of  oommok 

ORIGIN. 

11.  That  thou  Races  of  men  most  separated  in  physical  organization — such  as  the  blacks. 
€tnd  the  WHITB8 — do  not  amalgamate  perfectly,  but  obey  the  Laws  offfybridity.    Hence 

12.  It  follows,  as  a  corollary,  that  there  exists  a  Gbnus  Homo,  embracing  many  primordial 

Types  or  **  Species,*' 

Here  terminates  Part  I.  of  this  volume,  and  with  it  the  joint 
responsibilities  of  its  authors.  It  remains  for  my  colleague,  Mr. 
QUddon,  to  show  what  light  has  been  thrown  by  Oriental  researches 
upon  those  parts  of  Scripture  that  bear  upon  the  "Origin  of 
Mankind." 

J.  0.  K 

59 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC 

PART    11. 

CHAPTER    XIV. 

THE    Xth    chapter    OP    GENESIS. 

*<Coiin]iiim  ig^tar  fUt  traetatni  de  Paradiso  pro  appendice  sabnectere 
breu^  ezpositioneiii  decimi  capitis  Geneseos  de  hnmani  generis  propagatione 
ex  stirpe  Kon.  Ex  qui  naa  yeteres  modo  sed  et  nouUiot  mterpretes  honM 
ignoraticne  d  taai  Ser^toris  teopo  aaspt  aheratte patent  ....  Itaqne  hoe  restat 
TnioTim,  Tt  ad  sacram  anchoram  hoc  est  ad  Scriptoram  confugiamiis :  Que 
non  solum  in  genere  doeet  oivmet  homines  ex  tmd  eemine  esse  edUas,  nempe  ex 
Adamo  in  creatione,  et  post  dilaninm  ex  No&  et  tribus  filiis,  sed  et  recenset 
nepotes  Noe,  et  qui  popnli  ex  singulis  ortom  doxeriBt" 

(Phai»i  ami  Db  I>iBPEBaora  Genthim  vi  Tterarom  diTiakme  fteta  is 
ae^fioaticne  turrit  Babd—  aoeiore  Samtu  Bochabxo:  lASl.)^ 

Preliminary  Remarks. 

Two  centuries  intervene,  as  well  as  many  thousand  miles  of  land 
and  water,  between  the  completion  of  Bochabt's  unsurpassable  labors 
and  the  seemingly-audacious  resumption  of  his  inquiries  in  the  present 
volume.  The  author  of  G-eographia  Sacra  would  ^  smile,  with  more 
complacency  perhaps  than  some  of  our  readers,  did  he  know  that  the 
edifice  raised  by  his  enormous  erudition,  in  old  scholastic  Belgium, 
had  been  taken  to  pieces  stone  by  stone ;  and,  aftey  a  scrutinizing, 
but  frugal,  rejection  of  time-rotted  superfluities,  has  been  reverentially 
rebuilt,  in  the  piny-woods  of  Alabama,  on  the  rough,  though  beaute- 
ous, shore  of  Mobile  Bay. 

It  is  with  some  regret  that,  in  order  to  compress  their  work  into  a 
portable  tome^  the  authors  lop  away  unsparingly  the  evidences  of 
studies  to  which  many  months  were  conjointly' and  exclusively  de- 
voted :  but,  at  present,  they  must  content  themselves  with  the  briefest 
synopsis  of  results.  Their  references  indicate  the  sources  of  all  emen- 
dations proposed  —  by  far  the  greater  bulk  of  which  (with  the  sole 
exception  of  Micrelis's  criticisms  of  seventy  years  ago)^  arise  from 
discoveries  made  by  living  Egyptologists,  Hebraists,  Cuneatic-students, 

(466) 
Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 

PRELIMINARY    REMARKS.  467 

and  similar  masters  of  Oriental  lore.  These  references  will  establish, 
that,  in  the  conscientious  application  of  enlightened  learning  to  the 
Hebrew  Text  of  Xth  O-enetiSy  commentaries  of  the  genuine  English 
evangelical  school  have  ever  played  an  insignificant  part  Where  the 
latter  sometimes  happen  to  be  right,  their  facts  are  taken — generally 
at  second-hand,  and  mostly  without  acknowledgment — ^from  Bochart ; 
and  wherever,  more  frequently,  they  are  wrong,  they  have  either 
ignored  his  text  or  the  very-accessible  criticism  of  Continental  archse- 
ologists.  Of  trivial  value  in  themselves,  such  popular  commentaries 
possess  less  weight  in  science ;  and,  having  wasted  their  own  time  in 
hunting  through  dozens  of  them  for  a  new  fact  or  an  original  obser- 
vation, the  authors  will  spare  the  reader's  by  leaving  them  unmen- 
tioned. 

"  Friteorum  mendax  eommmta  at/abtUa  vatum, 

Sineerumgue  ittAtY,  nil  sine  lahtfuiL 

Sordibus  ex  istis  densa  et  caligine  lueem 

Erueref  humancB  nonfuit  artis  opus. 

Dtsperata  aUis  unus  tentare  Boohaetyb 

Ausus,  et  ^^tas primus  inire  vias,** 

**  The  ethnographio  chart  ^^'i'  contained  in  the  tenth  chapter  of  Genesis,  presents,"  says 
Dr.  Eadie,  ''a  broad  and  in^resting  field  of  investigation.  It  carries  ns  back  to  a  dim  and 
remote  era — irhen  colonization  was  rapid  and  extensive,  and  the  princes  of  successive 
bands  of  emigrants  gave  their  names  to  the  countries  which  they  seized,  occupied,  and 
divided  among  their  followers.  This  ancient  record  has  not  the  aspect  of  a  legend  which 
has  arisen,  no  one  can  teU  how,  and  received  amplification  and  adornment  in  the  course  of 
ages.  It  is  neither  a  confused  nor  an  unintelligible  statement  Its  sobriety  vouches  fof 
its  accuracy.  As  its  genealogy  is  free  fh>m  extravagance,  and  as  it  presents  facts  without 
the  music  and  fiction  of  poetry,  it  must  not  be  confounded  with  Grecian  and  Oriental  my  the, 
which  is  so  shadowy,  contradictory  and  baseless  —  a  region  of  grotesque  and  cloudy  phan- 
toms, where  Phylarohs  are  exalted  into  demigods,  bom  of  Nymph  or  Nereid,  and  claiming 
some  Stream  or  River  for  their  sire.  The  founders  of  nations  appear,  in  such  fables,  as 
giants  of  superhuman  form — or,  wandering  and  reckless  outcasts  and  adventurers,  exhibit- 
ing in  their  nature  a  confused  mixture  of  divine  and  human  attributes ;  and  the  very  names 
of  Ouranos,  Okeanos,  Eronos,  and  Gaea,  the  occupants  of  this  illusory  cloud-land,  prove 
their  legendary  character.  In  this  chapter  there  is,  on  the  other  hand,  nothing  that  lifts 
itself  above  vulgar  humanity,  nothing  that  might,  nothing  that  did  not  happen  in  those  dis- 
tant and  primitive  epochs.  The  world  must  have  been  peopled  by  tribes  that  gave  them- 
selves and  their  respective  regions  those  several  names  which  they  have  borne  for  so  many 
ages ;  and  what  certainly  did  thus  occur,  may  have  taken  place  in  the  method  sketched  in 
these  Mosaic  annals.  No  other  account  is  more  likely,  or  presents  fewer  diiBculties ;  and, 
if  we  credit  the  inspiration  of  the  writer  of  it,  we  shall  not  only  receive  it  as  authentic,  but  be 
grateful  for  the  information  which  it  contains.  Modem  ethnology  does  not  contradict  it  Many 
of  the  proper  names  occurring  on  this  roll  remain  unchanged,  as  the  appellations  of  races 
and  kingdoms.  Others  are  found  in  the  plural  or  dual  number,  proving  that  they  bear  a 
personal  and  national  reference  {Gen.  x.  IS) :  and  a  third  class  have  that  peculiar  termina- 
tion which,  in  Hebrew,  signifies  a  sept  or  tribe  (x.  17)."  ^^ 

The  above  scholar-like  definition  of  what  Dr.  Bitles  styles  "  that 
most  venerable  and  valuable  Geographical  Chart,  the  tenth  chapter  of 
ChneMy^^  indicates  the  absolute  impossibility  of  obtidning  satisfactory 

Digitized  by 

Google 

468  THE    TENTH    CHAPTER    OF  GENESIS. 

glimpses  of  a  large  portion  of  humanity*s  earliest  migrations  without 
discussing,  at  the  very  threshold  of  inquiry,  that  antique  document. 
Apart  from  this  fundamental  classification  of  some  human  primordial 
wanderings,  bootless  indeed  would  be  attempts  to  follow  the  cobweb 
threads  of  our  own  ancestral  creepings,  backward  from  America  to 
Europe,  and  thence  to  their  primitive  European  or  Asiatic  starting- 
points.  Every  aboriginal  tradition  we  Anglo-Saxons  cherish,  is  bat 
a  ray  of  morning  light,  flitting  though  it  be,  projected  from  the  Au- 
rora of  our  Eastern  homes. 

**  The  Orient^  with  her  immense  reeoUeoiions  that  touch  the  endle  of  the  world,  as  tliis 
itself  touches  the  cradle  of  the  sun,  with  her  seas  of  sand,  beneath  which  nations  He  for- 
gotten, endures  still.  She  preserres,  yet  living  in  her  bosom,  the  first  enigma  and  the  first 
traditions  of  the  human  race.  In  histoxy  as  in  poetry,  in  religious  manifestations  as  ia 
philosophical  speculations,  the  East  is  erer  the  antecedent  of  the  West  We  must  therefore 
seek  to  know  her,  in  order  to  become  well  acquainted  with  ourselTes.'*  ^^ 

But,  before  the  historical  character  of  this  Ethnic  map  can  be  appre- 
ciated—  before  our  unhesitating  acceptance  of  it  as  a  witness  demon- 
strably credible  —  its  antiquity,  its  nature,  and  its  authorship,  are 
indispensable  points  of  preliminary  inquiiy. 

The  authors  of  the  present  work,  impressed  with  the  necessity  of 
using  the  Xth  chapter  of  Q-enms  as  a  "ground-text'*  for  a  large  sec- 
tion of  their  anthropological  researches,  coincided  in  the  opinion  that 
an  "Archaeological  Introduction  to  its  study"  ought  to  preface  their 
adoption  of  its  data.  In  consequence,  it  was  decided,  that  the  labor 
hivolved  in  such  undertaking  should  be  allotted  to  that  one  of  the 
writers  whose  Oriental  specialities  naturally  indicated  him  as  per- 
former of  the  task.  Too  complex  in  nature,  no  less  than  too  bulky 
in  size,  to  serve  for  a  chapter  in  the  text  of  "  Types  of  Mankind," 
this  Archeeohgical  Introduction  now  becomes  a  Supplement  to  the 
work  itself;  thereby  preserving  its  own  unity,  at  the  same  time  that 
to  the  reader  it  is  equally  accessible,  being  bound  up  in  the  same 
volume. 

The  perusal,  then,  of  the  Supplement  is  recommended  to  the  reader 
previously  to  his  further  continuation  of  this  work ;  because  the  para- 
graphs upon  Xth  O-enesis^  hereto  immediately  following,  are  projected 
under  the  impression  that  such  will  be  the  natural  course. 

Which  taken  for  granted,  we  place  before  us  Cahen's  Q-en^ef^  for 
the  Hebrew  text  of  Xth  Genesis^  and  proceed  to  its  critical  dissection. 
The  method  we  shall  adopt,  if  at  first  sight  novel,  will  be  found 
strictly  archaeological.  It  would  be  unphilosophic  to  set  forth  with 
any  theory  as  to  age,  authorship,  or  true  place,  of  this  documentj  in 
the  arrangement  of  the  canonical  books.  These  points  can  resile 
solely  through  exegetical  analysb  of  the  document  itself;  which— 
written  in  the  $quare-letter  Hebrew  character  (not  invented  prior  to 

Digitized  by 

Google 

HEBREW    NOMENCLATURE.  469 

the  third  century  after  c.) ;  divided  into  words  (a  system  of  writiog 
not  introduced  in  the  earliest  Hebrew  MSS. — tenth  century  after  c); 
punptuated  by  the  "Masora**  (commencing  in  the  sixth,  and  closing 
about  the  ninth  century  after  c.) ;  and  subdivided  into  verses  (not 
begun  before  the  thirteenth  century  after  c.)  —  now  presents  itself  to 
our  contemplation. 

Section  A, — Analysis  of  the  Hebrew  Nomenclature. 

Omitting,  for  the  present,  any  comment  upon  vene  1 :  "  Behold 
the  generations  of  the  children  of  Noah,  Shem,  Ham,  and  Japheth ; 
they  had  children  after  the  deluge  *'  —  our  point  of  departure  is  ver%e 
2.  "  The  children  of  Japheth,"  eldent  of  the  three  brethren ;  whose 
descendants,  upon  grounds  to  be  justified  hereinafter,  we  denominate 

Iapetid^,  or  White  Races. 

[  Before  proceeding,  let  me  mention  that,  after  onr  Oeiualogical  Table  was  in  type,  Prof. 
Agassii  fayored  me  with  the  loan  of  by  far  the  most  important  work  I  haye  eyer  met  with 
on  Japethic  quesUons :  yix.,  Voyage  autour  du  Caucatey  ehez  let  Tcherkeues  et  let  Abkhates, 
en  Colchide,  en  Qiorgie^  en  Armenie,  et  en  Crimde,^'^*  par  F&idebio  Dubois  db  Mohtpkbbux. 
Extreme  was  my  satisfaction  to  perceive  that  our  reeuUs  not  only  had  been  anticipated,  but 
that  they  were  so  accurate  as  to  demand  no  alterations  of  the  Table.  Following  the  pro- 
found researches  of  Omalius  db  Hallot,^^  and  of  Count  John  Potocbi,^!^  the  personal 
explorations  of  M.  Dubois  supersede  everything  printed  on  "  Caucasian"  subjects.  I  have 
made  the  freest  use  of  his  ethnological  inquiries,  as  will  be  perceived  under  each  Japethic  ^ 
name ;  but  it  is  not  in  my  power  to  convey  to  the  reader  adequate  knowledge  of  the  maps 
with  which  this  magnificent  folio  Atlae  is  profusely  adorned.  On  these,  the  successive  dis- 
placements occasioned  by  the  migrations,  &c.,  of  ancient  "Caucasians". are  so  skilftiUy 
shown,  that  one*s  eye  seizes  instantaneously  some  2500  years  of  history.  To  take  GoMeR, 
or  Kimmeriantf  as  an  example.    Beginning  in  the 

6th  oent  b.  a — PI.  TUIa.  gives  **  PrimitiTo  Georgia  before  the  invasion  of  the  Sq^thians  (Khaxars)." 
**  SoTthIa  and  Oaneasus  of  Herodotus." 
**  Pertplns  of  Sogrlax  Garyandlnian.*' 
**  Taoride,  Caneasus,  and  Armoiia  of  Strabo." 
**  Taoride,  Canoasus,  and  Armenia  of  Plisj.' 
«  Arrian's  Periplos  of  the  Blaok  Sea." 
**  Wars  of  the  Romans  and  Persians." 
"  Uassoodi's  deeorlption  of  Oaneasns,"  to. 

Now,  on  Boeh  maps,  the  transplantations  of  these  Kimmeriant  can  be  followed,  almost  sta- 
tion  by  station :  so  minutely,  that  one  might  infer  that  GoMeR-umt  became  known  to  the 
Hebrew  geographer  after  they  had  abandoned  the  northern  Tauride  to  the  Scythians,  b.  c. 
638,  and  had  settled  about  Paphlagonia,  on  the  south-eastern  side  of  the  Black  Sea.  And  so 
on  with  all  the  lapetida  of  Xth  Genesis.  It  need  hardly  be  said  that,  in  common  with  Bo- 
ohart  and  ourselves,  Dubois  i>erceiTe8  naHone  and  eouniriee,  and  not  individuals,  in  the 
Hebrew  chart  ^G.  B.  G.] 

.  na»  03— BNI-IPATe— "AffiUations  of  Japhbt."— (?en.  x.  2. 
1.  noj  —  GMR— 'GoMER.' 

Essentially  Indo-Germanic,  this  name,  as  well  as  all  those  of  Japethites,  is  irresolv- 
able into  Semitish  radicals ;  and  its  Hebrew  lexicographic  affinities,  such  as  to  *  com' 
pletej  eoMumef*  &c.,  are  rabbinical,  spurious,  and  irrelevant 

6th       « 

M 

IX. 

8d         «* 

U 

X. 

1st        " 

U 

XlBU 

1st  cent  A.a 

<« 

xn. 

ad      « 

U 

xra. 

6th       « 

a 

XIV. 

10th       « 

w 

XVo. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

470  THE    TENTH    CHAPTER    OP    GENESIS. 

(1  Chron.  i.  5,  6)  —  "  Gomee,  and  all  Ms  hordes—"  (Ezek,  xxxyUL  6).  In  Homer 
and  in  Diodorus,  Ki/i/iepiot ;  in  Herodotus,  Bo^ropof  KtmUptos,  In  Josephos  the  GaltUet 
are  called  Fonaptts ;  possibly  also  understood  in  the  Scytho-Bactrian  Chomari,  Comari^ 
of  Ptolemy.  These  are,  undoubtedly,  the  Oomeriant,  Cimmerian*,  Crtmeem,  who, 
under  the  various  forms  of  Cymrf  Kymr,  Kumero,  Cimbrif  Cambrt,  and  QaktUt,  Qael^ 
OauU,  Kelts,  Celts,  figure  as  a  branch  of  Cdtic  migrations  in  later  European  history. 
If  Celtic  migrators  be  considered  anterior  to  the  age  of  Xth  Genesis,  we  should  not 
'  hesitate  in  adopting  the  Germanic  Sigambri,  Sicambri,  or  the  OambrivO,  or  the  Gama- 
briuni,  as  memorials  of  *Gomer.*  Bawlinson  eyolTCS  *Tsimri'  from  the  cuneatie 
legends  of  Ehorsabad. 

The  name  Gt'MeRtan,  in  endless  forms,  is  scattered  from  Asia  Minor  to  ScandinaTia, 
for  the  following  historical  reason.  About  the  year  b.  c.  688,  the  Scytho-Ehazara  ex- 
pelled the  Eimmerians  from  Kimmericum,  One  set  of  fugitives  sought  asylum  in 
Western  Europe;  while  the  other  skirted  the  eastern  shores  of  the  Black  Sea;  and, 
settling  in  and  around  Phiygia,  became  known* to  the  writer  of  Xth  Genesis.  BochmrC 
had  happily  remarked  "Itaque  omnibus  expensis  terra  Gomer  mihi  ridetur  ease 
Phrygia,  cujns  portio  estregio  Karaxcicao/iA^."  This  word  signifies  the  <  6«rn^dbtrict:' 
and  Dubois  thoroughly  establishes  that  the  volcanic  nature  of  such  Eimmerian  localities 
explains  all  their  mythic  associations  with  the  infernal  waters,  Styx,  Phlegethon,  Co- 
cyttts,  Acheron,  &c.,  which  cluster  around  the  naphtha-springs  and  mud-volcanoes  of 
the  present  UnikaU, 

The  Tauric  Chersonesus,  north  of  the  Black  Sea,  would  seem  to  have  been  ^e  ex- 
tremest  geographical  boundary  assumed  by  the  Hebrew  writer ;  and  by  a  simple  trans- 
position of  letters,  GMR  (GRiMea)  is  still  apparent  in  the  name  of  this  eariy  Kimmerian 
halting-place,  viz. :  the  Crimea.!^ 

2.  :i1J0—MGUG  —  ' Magog.' 

Indo-Germanic,  or  Scythio ;  and,  therefore,  not  the  Hebrew  <*he  who  covert  and  <&- 
solves."    {Gen.  x.  2;  Chron.  i.  5;  Ezek.  xxxvilL  2;  xxxix.  6). 

Magog  is  not  associated  with  Gog  until  the  times  of  Ezekiel,  during  the  Captivity, 
from  about  *  the  80th  year*  of  Nabopolossar,  595  b.  o.  down  to  572  b.  o.  {Ezek.  i.  1 ; 
xxxix.  17).  In  the  post-Christian  but  uncertain  age  of  the  writer  of  the  Apocalypse 
(between  a.  d.  95  and  the  Council  of  Laodicea,  which  r^ected  it  as  apocryphal,  86(>- 
369,  A.  D.,)  *GoG  and  Magog'  appear  together  as  nations  {Rev.  xx.  20);  whereas, 
seven  to  eight  centuries  preriously,  Gog,  "the  Prince  of  Rhos,  Meshech  and  Tubal," 
would  seem  to  have  been  understood  as  the  proper  name  of  a  king.  King  James's 
version  {Ezek.  xx^viii.  2,  8,  &c.),  by  **  Chief  prince  of  Meshech  and  Toubal,"  effaces 
RAS  (i.  e.  Rhos  ;  the  river  Arazes,  and  the  nation  i^oz-Alani,  or  Alains),  and  perpet- 
uates an  error  detected  by  Bochart  200  years  ago. 

Arab  tradition,  under  the  appellatives  Yadjooj  and  Madjooj,  prolongs  the  unioa 
down  to  the  seventh  century  after  Christ ;  with  the  commentary,  that  they  are  two 
nations  descended  from  Japheth ;  Gog  being  attributed  to  the  Turks,  and  BIaooo  to  the 
GeeUtn,  the  Geli  and  Gels  of  Ptolemy  and  Strabo,  and  our  Alam, 

In  ancient  Greek  and  Latin,  Hyaf,  Gygas,  read  also  Gttg-tA,  signified  giani ;  and 
oriental  legend  associated  giants  with  Scythians  in  the  north  of  Asia.  Maqoo  has  been 
assimilated  to  the  Massageice  (perhaps  Massa-QeiBd,  ifonan-Geto,  of  Mount  Masitu)  who 
are  to  Getce  what  Magog  is  to  Gog  ;  the  prefixes  of  ma  and  massa  being  considered 
intensitives  to  indicate  either  the  most  honored  branch  of  the  nation,  or  the  whole 
nation  itself.  Tacitus  and  Pliny  mention  the  *ChaucoTum  gentes,*  and  the  Chetuci, 
.    among  powerful  tribes  in  Germany  at  their  day ;  and  Gog  may  underlie  these  migrations. 

Ezekiel  groups  Gog  witii  Rhos,  Toubal  and  Meshech ;  and,  inasmuch  as  Roxalani, 
Tibareni,  and  Moschii,  no  less  than  the  transplanted  Crimeans  (Gombb),  were  geo- 
graphically located  in  Asia  Minor,  between  the  Black  Sea  and  the  Caspian,  the  habitats 

Digitized  by 

Google 

HEBREW    NOMEITGLATURE.  471 

of  them  all  lay  in  that  region.  By  Strabo,  the  country  of  Oog-areiu  (Gog-airanian  ? 
otr  =Bs  man ;  *  man  of  CAUo-asne '  ?)  is  placed  near  that  of  the  MoMchu  Josephus  renders 
the  name  of  Maooo  by  Scyikiant ;  and  Jerome,  *<  Magog  esse  gentes  Scythicas  immanes 
et  innnmerabiles,  qosB  trans  Cancasum  montem  et  Meotidem  palndem,  et  props  Caspium 
mare  ad  Indiam  nsqne  tendantnr." 

But,  ingenions  as  they  are,  snoh  etymologies  become  henceforth  superfluous  through 
Dubois's  excellent  svggestions.  The  Hebrew  word  is  Mo-GUG.  The  first  syllable 
refers  to  the  MaSoUa,  MceUt,  Matet^  Meoteat  tribes  of  the  Sarmates,  royoZ-Medes,  Sauro- 
Madai,  (i.  e.rTaurio  Medians,  transplanted  from  the  Taurus  to  the  east  of  the  Caspian,) 
of  the  Sea  of  Azof.  The  second  syllable,  GUG,  is  simply  the  Indo-Germanic  word 
Khogk,  *  mountain'  (as  in  the  celebrated  diamond,  K6h-tn-noor,  *  mountain  of  light ') ; 
irhich  has  been  preserred  in  the  Hellenized  name  JTauib-asos,  or  Coue-asus,  from  the 
time  of  Herodotus,  b.  o.  480 ;  as  also  in  the  **  inscription  de  P^risades,  premier^archonte 
du  Bosphore,  en  849  avant  j.-o."  Having  thus  fixed  GUG  to  a  <  mountain,'  Cautf-asos, 
the  root  of  asos  is  instantly  recognized  in  the  national  name  of  the  Omc*,  Otsethy  Taset, 
Aqs,  Asi;  whence  the  continent  of  'Asia'  deriTcs  its  European  designation.  These 
OtseSy  or  As^  are  traceable  in  the  ancient  JaxamaU$,  or  Yas-Meotes,  as  perfectly  as  in 
the  modem  Jaziffees,  Tam/ffkes  (or  JTu-rjiks),  *  Jaz-Cjiks ' ;  who  now  call  themseWes 
Teherkestet,  by  us  corrupted  into  *  Circassians.'  They  haye  been  likewifle  termed 
(hani,  Aeiat,  Akat,  and  eyen  Kergia^  by  the  old  trayellers ;  and  while  the  first  syllable 
of  their  ante-historical  name  yet  fioats  oyer  the  Sea  of  ASo/(Azo^),  and  lives  in  the 
Abkh-^«et-mountaineers,  it  has  been  borne  to  Asaland  (land  of  the  Asa)  no  less  than 
to  Asgard  (city  of  the  Asa),  in  old  Scandinavia.  In  this  manner  ably  sums  up  Dubois, 
**  As  far  back  as  history  mounts,  she  finds  within  the  angle  circumscribed  between  the 
Cauc-asus,  the  Palus  M^otis,  and  the  Tanais,  an  Ana-proper,  inhabited  by  a  people, 
<  AS,'  of  Indo-Germanic  race:  "  and  we  discover,  in  the  ifa-Iotes  of  the  *  mountain' 
Cauc-asus,  the  long-lost  and  mystified  nation^  Ma-GUG,  of  Xth  Oenent, 

Thus,  this  co|lecUye  name  of  Maooo  desig^ted  one  of  many  barbarous  Caucasian 

hordes,  roaming  of  yore  between  the  Euxine  and  the  Caspian,  including,  probably, 

"    Qothic  amid  Scythio  families  \  and  Goo  has  left,  even  to  this  day,  besides  the  living 

089e9y  a  trail  still  visible  in  the  very  etymon  of  his  ancient  homestead,  the  QXVQ- Asian 

mountains.  ^''^ 

8.  no  — MDI—' Madai.' 

Indo-Germanic,  or  Scythic.    Not  Hebrew,  <  covering,'  <  coat,'  &c. 

The  LXX  transcribe  Ma&c,  in  lieu  of  Mc&c  The  Persian  word  madhya,  the  *  middle,' 
its  supposed  derivation.  Herodotus  tsounted  seven  naticms,  and  says  their  andent- 
name  was  Arioi,  the  'braves';  that  is,  ArOj  'Arians.'  It  is  probable,  however,  that 
the  root  aXr,  which  in  Scythio  tongues  means  '  man,'  may  have  been  assimilated  to  Art, 
*  lion,'  in  the  alien  speech  of  Semitic  nations.  The  name  is  spread  over  a  vast  area, 
fh>m  Arhan,  *  Armenia,'  through  Irin,  '  Persia,'-  to  the  conquering  Aryas,  Ayrat,  of 
Hindostan. 

In  primitive  times,  the  originet  of  all  nations  were  personified ;  and,  according  to 
Strabo,  Medua,  son  of  the  mythological  Jaaon  and  Medea,  was  the  progenitor  of  the 
Modes.  The  name  Madah  occurs  in  the  seventh  century,  written  in  Assyrian  cunei- 
form, on  sculptures  firom  Ehorsabad ;  and  BawUnson  transcribes  Mddiya  ftrom  the  in- 
>  numerable  legends  of  Behistun  and  Persepolis,  deciphered  through  his  acumen. 

Ragci  'Media,'  was  called  Ruka  by  the  Egyptians  of  the  XYUIth  dynasty;  and 
perhaps  Matai  is  Media  itself 

The  name  Mede  still  survives  in  Hamadan  (Ecbatana),  just  as  that  of  Arian  (Aria, 
Arii)  in  the  HaRA  of  1  Chron.  v.  26. 

They  are  the  Medea :  and  further  reference  to  Scriptural  or  to  classical  passages, 
in  their  case,  is  superfluous. ^^ 

Digitized  by 

Google 

472  THE  zth  chafteb  of  genesis. 

4.  p»  — lUN— 'Javan.' 

Indo-Germanio ;  and  not  from  the  Hebrew,  <  mud»'  or  *  oppressor.' 

In  this  instanoe,  the  Masoretic  poinU  (not  added  to  the  Text  until  after  the  filth  < 
tnry  of  our  era),  and  the  modem  Jewish  reading  of  V  for  U,  alone  obscure  a  i 
whose  literal  meaning  springs  out  at  first  glance. 

<*  The  barbarians  called  all  Greeks  by  the  name  of  I(mian$y"  says  the  Scholiast  oa 
Aristophanes :  and  the  Greeks  rcTengecL  themseWes  by  teaming  all  other  people  6ar- 
boriofu. 

The  LXX  correctly  transcribe  I»vav ;  for  laovc;  is  the  older  form  in  Homer;  a  name 
to  be  distinguished  from  the  later  luv€s,  according  to  Pausanias.  Herodotus  recounts 
how  the  Athenians,  previously  called  Feloiffi,  receiTcd  the  name/omoiM,  from  ION,  sob 
of  Xuthtu  ;  the  traditionary  ancestor  of  the  Ionian  race. 

In  Daniel  xi.  2,  where  King  James's  version  renders  (Treeto,  the  original  has  lUK; 
but  the  age  of  this  document  not  ascending  earlier  than  b.  c.  175-160,  in  the  reign  of 
Antiochus  Epiphanes,  we  go  back  to  the  27th  March,  b.  o.  19Q,  date  of  the  coronation 
of  Ptolemy  Epiphanes  at  Memphis,  recorded  on  the  ItoteUa  Stone;  where  the  woM 
EXAi/yiKois,  in  Oreek,  is  rendered,  on  the  corresponding  demode  and  k^eroff^^pkie  texts, 
by  lUNiN :  a  name  given  by  Egyptians  to  the  Greeks  at  every  age,  back  to  the  earliest 
records  we  possess  in  which  lonians  are  meotioned — documents  anterior  to  Xth  (7ai- 
em  by  some  centuries,  because  ascending  to  the  XYIUth  dynasty. 

Upon  the  Assyrian  monuments  of  Khorsabad,  the  same  name,  jAOuinir,  is  read  1^ 
cuneiform  scholars,  as  early  as  the  eighth  century  b.  c.  ;  and  upon  the  Persian  sculp- 
tures of  the  Achoemenidan  dynasty,  in  the  sixth  century  b.  o.,  the  Qreekty  as  YUNA, 
or  loniay  frequently  appear. 

Javanatf  or  Tavanas^  is  the  Hindoo  appellative  of  the  Greeks,  in  the  *'Laws  of 
Manou,"  who  therein  are  classed  among  the  Soudrat^  or  *  degenerates' ;  and,  althou^ 
the  fabulous  antiquity  of  these  Sanscrit  records  has  sunk  far  below  the  pretensions 
of  the  so-called  Moeaic^  their  compilation  certainly  ascends  to  the  fourth  century  of 
our  era,  if  not  beyond.  While,  finally,  among  the  Arabs,  ancient  and  modem,  Yoondn 
is  the  generic  name  for  Greeks  in  general,  and  loniane  in  particular. 

By  lUN,  or  Toniatif  the  writer  of  Ath  Oeneeit  seems  to  class  the  Greeks  collectively, 
OS  far  as  they  were  known  to  him ;  and  Ionia,  on  the  westem  coast  of  Asia  Minor,  is 
the  approximate  limit  of  its  geographical  application.^ 

5.  San— TtBL  —  *  Tubal.' 

Indo-Germanic.    Not  the  Hebrew,  *  he  who  is  eondueUd,*  &c 

The  LXX  place  before  Tkubal  another  son  of  Japheth,  called  Flua;  but  Isaiae,  by 
exiling  '*  those  who  escape"  to  "  Tubal  and  Javan,  the  ttatet  afar  off,"  shows  that,  m 
the  idea  of  the  writer  of  the  second  (or  spurious)  part  of  the  oracles  ascribed  to  this  pith 
phet,  Thubal  ranked  among  distant  northern  nations  of  the  gentile  worid.  Connected, 
in  Ezbkiel,  always  with  Meeheeh,  by  whom  Tubal  is  immediately  followed  in  Xth  Oenetit, 
these  two  nations  of  the  <<  unciroumcised  "  must  have  lain  close  together  in  Hebrew 
geography. 

IberiOy  from  the  roots  bbe,  and  vwtp,  <  beyond,'  "or,  so  to  say,  « the  yonderer,'  was  the 
name  of  an  Asiatic  country  east  of  Colchis,  south  of  Caucasus,  west  of  Albania,  and  north 
of  Armenia ;  in  short,  corresponding  to  Georgia  of  the  present  day ;  classicaUy  deno- 
minated ItnerUi.  The  substitution  of  b  for  m,  at  once  changes  the  Imeriti  into  the  Ibe- 
riii:  to  which  prefixing  the  antique  particle  t,  we  obtain  the  Ulbarenea  of  Herodotus 
and  Strabo :  a  designation  equivalent  to  u^a-Caucasians.  The  word  Iberian^  in  the 
sense  of  <  yonderer,'  was  {^ven  to  many  remote  nations  by  aliens  to  the  formers'  autoc- 
thonous  traditions. 

Identified  as  the  Tdupnpot  of  Strabo,  who,  by  Herodotus,  are  located  with  the  Jfotckoi^ 

Digitized  by 

Google 

HEBREW    NOMENCLATURE.  473 

th^y  seem  to  haye  been  subject  to  Ooff,  CAVO'Atuif  in  the  days  of  Ezekiel,  and  to 
have  sopplied  slaTes  and  brazen  yessels  to  the  bazaars  of  Tyre. 

Through  the  common  mutation  of  r  for  l,  Tubal  is  fixed  among  the  Tibarenij  (about 
Pontus,  on  the  south-east  of  the  Black  Sea,  in  the  neighborhood  of  Colchis,)  from  ante- 
historical  times  down  to  the  Christian  era ;  and  it  is  in  Tain,  therefore,  that  Spanish 
orthodoxy,  in  efforts  to  affiliate  its  ancestry  with  some  Genesiacal  worthy,  (confounding 
the  Celio-Ibem  with  the  Ihtriana  of  Asia,)  should  claim  Tubal  as  progenitor  of 

**  The  identity  of  Thobel,  or  Tubal,  with  the  Oeorgiaru,"  holds  Dubois,  whilst 
substantiating  Bochart,  'Ms  nowadays  well  recognized;  because  Flavius  Josephus 
expressly  says,  that  Tubal  represented  the  Iberians  of  his  time,  the  Iberians  of  Pliny, 
of  Strabo,  of  Procopius,  who  are  the  Georgians  of  our  day.  The  transition  between 
Tubal  and  Iberia  is  the  Tibarmi  of  Herodotus.  This  name  has  neyer  been,  among  the 
Georgians  themselyes,  that  of  the  nation ;  they  give  themseWes  the  generic  name  of 
KarthU$ :  but  it  has  remained  in  their  capital  Tbeliui,  our  Tiflis.''  The  root  vtrcp,  over, 
*  ultra,'  probably  underlies  T-ibar-mif  and  its  Hebriucized  form  of  TmBaL ;  as  well  in 
the  Hisponian  Iberet,  as  in  the  Caucasian  Iberiant — both  being  a  *<  people  beyond."  ^^ 

6.  "jiro— MSK  — *Meshech.' 

Indo-Germanic.    Not  from  the.  Hebrew,  <  drawn  with  force,'  &c. 

Erroneously  substituted  for  the  Shemite  Math  (in  1  Chron.  L  17),  and  confounded 
with  the  Arabian  Meteq  (in  Paalm  cxx.),  by  the  forty-seyen  translators  of  King  James's 
▼ersion ;  mere  analogy  of  sound  has  led  some  commentators  to  behold  in  Mesheoh  the 
parent  of  the  MtucovUett  incarnated  founder  of  the  city  of  Moscow  I  At  the  same  time 
that  the  Arabio  yersion  transcribes  Khoraudn! 

As  above  stated,  **  Tubal  and  Meshech"  were  deemed  cognate  nations  by  the  writer 

.  of  Xth  Genen*  and  by  Ezekiel ;  confirmed  by  Herodotus  —  Mo9xovs  fitv  km  TtBaptivovs ; 

i  and  the  concurrent  testimony  of  Mela,  Pliny,  Stephanus,  and  Procopius,  places  the 

Mo«x«(»  or  Mwxot,  on  the  Mosehian  range,  a<yacent  to  Iberia,  {Tubal,)  Armenia,  and  the 

Colchide,  between  the  Black  and  Caspian  seas ;  still  called  Mesu^'i-ddffh,  or  *  Meshech- 

mountains,'  by  the  recent  Turks.     The  Mitek  of  Rawlinson's  cuneatic  inscriptions  ? 

More  ancient  than  classical,  Hebraical,  Assyrian,  or  other  extant  annals,  is  the  name 
of  Meshxoh.  Early  as  the  age  of  Ramses  II.,  in  the  fourteenth — fifteenth  century 
B.  c,  or  prior  to  the  fugacious  era  of  Moses,  (even  supposing  the  Xth  chapter  of  Oen- 
€iu  to  proceed  Aromhis  Indiyiduality,)  the  Maaeu,  [Masii,  Mt>schii,]  whose  cognomen 
is  still  preseryed  in  **  Mens  Mamu  "  of  the  Taurus  chain,  are  chronicled  on  Egyptian 
papyri,  inscribed  in  days  contemporary  with  Ramses's  reign. 

*  Meskhes '  is  the  Georgian  appellative  for  the  people  of  Moskhike,  or  MoacMe.  They 
were  a  mixed  population  of  primitive  Phrygians  (Thargamosians)  and  Modes,  on  the 
southern  slope  of  Caucasus ;  who  in  classical  geographies,  as  the  Motunieoi,  Moeyrueci, 
MoBchid,  are  always  neighbors  of  the  Colchians,  the  Tibareni,  the  Khalybes,  &c. ; 
while  Ezekiel,  as  above  shown,  groups  together,  in  the  land  of  Oog  (i.  e.,  Caucasus), 
nations  under  the  sway  of  the  "  Prince  of  Rhos,  Mesheeh,  and  Tubal ; "  that  is,  the 
Araxians,  the  Meakhea,  and  the  Iberians  —  inhabitants  of  that  mountainous^egion. 

MxsHBCH  and  Motehi  are  identified.fl62/ 

7.  DTn— TelRS  — <TiRAs/ 

Indo-Germanic.    Not  hebraically,  *  demolisher,'  &c 

Occurring  but  twice,  no  light  can  be  gathered  upon  this  appellative  from  other 
Biblical  sources  than  the  context  of  Oen.  x.,  and  its  repetition  in  1  Chron,  i.  5. 

The  Armenian  historian,  Moses  Chorenensis,  remarks  —  **  Our  antiquities  agree  in 
regarding  Tiraa  not  as  the  son  of  Japheth,  but  as  his  grandson." 
Ofa^y  *  Thracia,'  is  unanimously  reputed  to  be  the  ethnological  synonyme  of  Tkirat; 
60 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 

474  THE  Xth  chapteb  of  genesis. 

and  the  riTor  Ttpas,  *  Tjras,'  of  Ptolemy,  flowing  into  the  Enzine,  now  etlled  I>wkMitT^ 
to  be  its  geographical,  as  Thura$,  Blan,  was  its  mythio,  corre^pondeat. 

TIRoaS,  and  TVoaSt  In  western  Myaia,  so  closely  resembling  each  othw,  it  is  iKit 
impossible  that  the  Troad  is  intended  by  the  Hebrew  writer ;  especially  since  t^e  Temeri 
were  perhaps  of  Thracian  origin:  but  no  reasonable  objection  can  be  raised  to  tbe 
nsnal  attribntion  of  Tirat;  and  Thrace,  the  Thraeti,  or  TMrMciam,  may  be  eafeiy 
assumed  as  the  "  ultima  Thule  "  of  Hebrew  knowledge,  towards  the  north,  in  tlie  ttiae 
of  the  writer  of  Xth  Oenuit;  whose  dim  horiionin  that  direction  was  doubtlesa  siinllar 
to  that  of  the  Egyptians  during  the  XYIIIth  dynasty.  Stm^rii  (in  this  narratiTe, 
Bamses  IL)  had  pushed  his  oonquesto  into  Thrace,  aoomrdiag  to  Herodotus  and  vnitad 
classical  tradition.  ThriJuu,  *  Thradans,'  are  recorded  in  hierof^yphies  at  the  mined 
temple  north  of  Esneh,  among  the  conquests  of  Ptolemy  ETcrgatea  L^B3 

Gen.  X.  8.  —  lOJ  03 — BeNI-GMR— *  AffiliationB  of  the  Crimba.  ' 
8.  UDB^N  — ASKNZ  — *A8HKENAZ.' 

Indo-Qermanic ;  and,  although  traced  to  a  <  fire  that  distils,*  so  alien  to  Hebrew, 
that  cTen  Rabbinical  philologers  abandon  it,  as  <*  obscure."  In  consequence,  some 
perceiye  the  parent  of  the  Oermam  ! 

Oriental  Jews  call  those  of  their  co-religionists  who  are  settled  in  GenMBy  Atkk^ 
fuuilfii,  which  has  been  confounded  with  the  ASKNZ  of  Xth  Omem ;  whereas  the  real 
source  of  this  mistake  lies  in  their  intonation  of  the  Indo-Germanio  name,  Stinmatkt 
Satemak,  old  form  of  our  word  Sazon. 

ASKIN,  ISQIN,  in  'many  dialectic  Tarieties,  is  the  national  name  of  the  Batquet ; 
and  inasmuch  as  nobody  seems  to  know  whence  they  came  to  Bisoayan  neighborhoods, 
we  pass  on  this  suggestiTC  similitude  as  cautiously  as  it  was  giren  to  us. 

Repeated  in  1  Chron,  i.  6,  the  '<  Kingdoms  of  Ararat,  Minni,  and  ^AeAaios,"  seem 
to  have  been  limitrophic  in  the  time  of  Jeremiah —  629  to  588  b.  o.  — and  henoe  the 
province  termed  Atikkisene  by  Strabo  has  been  looked  upon  as  its  equiTalent 

The  Phrygians  appear  to  have  been  anciently  called  Atcanuina ;  and  footprints  of 
this  migratory  name  are  traceable  throughout  Bithynian  licinities,  in  8mM»'A9eanht$f 
Ateaniut'lacut  and  amnis;  and  likewise  in  Lesser  Phiygia — Aacama,  and^«esfiur- 
Iiwda.  AsoAKius,  son  of  .£neas,  bore  the  original  patronyme  fh>m  Troas  to  Latinm. 
Bordering  on  the  Black  Sea,  these  Aseanian  similarities  reoeiTe  natural  explanation 
through  Pliny,  <'  Pontus  Euxmua,  quondam  AXENUS ; "  and  Ko(«m(,  the  £uxmey  or 
Black  Sea,  preserres  a  mnemonic  of  Ateamani  and  Aahkenai, 

Rawlinson  perceives  analogies  between  Atkmaz  and  the  Arzwkofi  mentioned  in  cunei- 
form inscriptions  of  the  Nimroud  obelisk,  the  date  of  which,  is  now  assigned  to  about 
860  B.  c. 

*' Pontus,"  says  Bochart,  *<olim  AicenaM,  Qrwdb  a(cm(,  quart  inhoepitalis  diotus;" 
which  wears  very  much  the  guise  of  an  Hellenic  play  upon  a  fordgn  word  Potoek^ 
followed  by  Dubois,  **  finds  the  Askhanaz  (Rheginians  of  Flayius  Josephus)  in  the  My 
sian-Askanians,  who  came  from  Great-Mysia,  and  established  themselyes  in  the  Phiy 
gia  of  Olympus :  it  was  a  Germanic  colony."  May  not  ASKN,  as  Ateanimi,  or  as  EuxiM 
be  an  a(JljectiTe  to  aZ,  the  Aaif 

Suffice  it  for  our  purposes,  to  accept  the  southern  coast  of  the  Euxme  as  one  of  the 
pristine  habitats  of  a  people  called  Ashkbmaz.^ 

9.  nan— RiPT«— ^riphath.' 

Also  Indo-Germanic ;  not  *  medicine,'  nor  <  pardon.' 

Owing  to  the  slight  distinction  between  the  letters  1,  tmA,  b,  and  *i>  dalelhf  n,  of  the 
modem  iquare-leUer  character  in  which  the  Hebrew  text  is  written,  some  copyist  has 

Digitized  by 

Google 

HEBREW    KOMENGLATUBE.  475 

bfA^ueathed  to  us  a  dilemma  —  whether  the  'R^hath  of  Oen,  z.  8,  should  be  Diphath, 
or  the  Diphath  of  1  Chron,  i.  6,  B,y9kath  I  Commentators  agree,  howoTer,  in  preferring 
Riphath;  and,  while  some,  following  the  psendo-Josephus,  have  identified  the  name 
with  Great  Britain,  there  are  many  olaimants  for  Frane$ !  The  LXX  read  Pi^a9,  in 
Xth  OenesU, 

Josephns  restricts  the  name  to  Paphlagonia;  in  which  country  Mela  places  the 
Riphaeet. 

Mon*  Niphatea  (snowy),  in  Armenia,  through  the  substitotion  of  h  for  b,  has  learned 
defenders.  But  the  Pir«ui  opti,  the  R^heeia  moniibvt,  and  the  Rk^ctat  placed  by  Pto- 
lemy where  no  movntaim  exist,  near  his  imaginary  sources  of  the  Tanais,  or  Don,  are 
the  fayorite  localities  chosen  for  Riphath, 

To  this  fiew  there  are  weighty  objections.  If  the  M<mU$  RhipcBij  or  Hyperhorei,  be 
the  Ural  chain,  they  were  too  remote  eyen  for  the  Tision  of  geographers  who  wrote 
at  least  nine  centuries  later  than  the  author  of  Om,  x.  The  mere  accidental  analogy 
of  a  proto-syllable — RlP-ean  with  BlV-alt  —  when  the  second  radically  differs,  (the 
only  ground  upon  which  the  hypothesis  rests,)  cannot  be  allowed  as  negatiye  proof 
against  simpler  reasons ;  especially  when  the  geo^phical  position  of  the  Riphean 
mountains,  saye  as  the  tenebrous  hyperborean  limit  of  Greek  geognosy,  is  utterly 
unknown. 

The  writer  of  Xth  Genetia  must  haYe  had  some  reason,  more  or  less  scientific,  for 
the' order  in  which  he  mapped  out  the  nations  he  enumerates.  In  the  present  instance, 
among  the  **  affiliations  of  the  Cimmerian,"  or  Crimea,  he  places  R^hath  between  the 
£uxine  (Ashkenaz)  and  Armenia  (Togarma) ;  confirmed  by  Latin  writers  who  station  the 
J^At^i  east  of  the  Euzine. 

*<  Riphath,"  adds  Dubois,  firom  the  authentic  researches  of  Potocki,  **  is  the  yeritable 
and  most  ancient  name  of  the  people  Shlaye.  ffdnitee  and  Honoriata  are  but  transla- 
tions of  a  Sclayonian  word  which  signifies  honored,  distinguished."  The  Latins  added 
a  letter  to  Enitee;  which,  becoming  Venetee,  Venedee,  Vmdee,  Vinidet,  and  Wend*,  was 
the  title  of  those  Wendo-Shlavee  from  whom  descended  the  ancient  Prussians,  together 
with  the  present  Lithuanians,  and  whence  Venice  inherits  her  name. 

Paphlagonia  for  the  country,  and  Riphacea  for  its  inhabitants,  corroborated  by  the 
opinions  of  Josephus  ond  Mela,  sufficiently  define  the  position  of  Riphath.^ 

10.  nonjn — TtGEMH  — '  Togarmah/ 

Indo-Germanio,  or  Boythic ;  not,  <  which  is  all  bone ' ! 

**  They  of  the  house  of  Togarmah  traded,"  in  the  fairs  of  Tyre,  "  with  horses,  horse- 
men, and  mules,"  in  the  time  of  Eukid  xxyii.  14 ;  and,  based  upon  this  text,  Moses 
Chorenensis  deriyes  the  Armenians,  Georgians,  &c.,  from  Thaboamos,  grandson  of 
Noah. 

Its  classical  similitudes  are  yisible  in  the  Trocmi,  Trogmi,  about  Pontus  and  Cappa- 
doda;  and,  at  the  Council  of  Chaloedon,  there  was  a  bishop,  r^^xi'mim,  of  the  TVo^ 
madea.    Josephus  makes  Aram,  Minyaa,  and  Khoul,  acyacent  to  Togarmah, 

The  name  of  Armenia  now  is  Arhan,  identical  with  IRAN,  Triana,  original  cradle 
of  Persians. 

The  «<  History  of  Ckorgia,"  compiled  in  the  reign  of  Vakhtang  V.,  King  of  Karthli, 
in  1708-*21,  is  one  of  the  rarest  works.  Dubois  translates  some  curious  extracts  of 
its  commencement :  —  "  According  to  these  traditions,  the  Armenians,  the  Georgians, 
the  inhabitants  of  Rani  (Arran),  of  Moyakani  ((7Aaifci,  Chirvan,  ikdMaugan),  of  HMthi 
(Cakheth),  the  Lesgians,  the  Mingrelians,  and  the  Caucasians,  aU  descend  fh>m  the 
same  father,  who  was  called  Tbaboaiios.  This  Thargamos  was  the  son  of  Tarehia,  son 
of  Avanan,  son  of  Japhet,  son  of  Noah,  and  was  a  yaliant  man."  Like  Moses  of  Cho- 
rene,  in  the  fifth  century,  Vakhtang  wished  to  hitch  his  local  traditions  on  to  Biblical 
origins.    The  former  historian  metamorphoaed  the  names  Zrowm^  Didan,  and  Sabi* 

Digitized  by 

Google 

476  THE  xth  chapter  op  genesis. 

d0$th  (whieh  he  found  in  an  old  Chaldaean  Tolome),  into  **  Sbem,  Ham,  and  Ja|Ai^  ;** 
and  the  race  of  Habedosth,  Merod^  Sirath^  and  ThaJdaiK,  became,  in  his  pious  hands, 
**  Gomer,  Thiras,  and  Thorgomos !  "  **  It  was  thus  that  he  reconciled  the  sacred  with 
the  profane,  and  that  the  Haik  of  the  ancient  Chaldean  Tolnme,  son  of  ThaJdath^  was 
superimposed  upon  Thorgomiu^  as  a  descendant  of  Japheth."  History  abounds  with 
similar  fraudulent  genealogies.  Thus,  skilftallj  obserres  Jardot,  **  lUshid-ed-Deen, 
Vizir  of  the  Emperor  Gazan-Kh&n,  has  left  at  the  commencement  of  the  fourteenth  cen- 
tury, upon  the  origin  of  the  MongoU^  erroneous  notions,  which  Arab,  Turkish,  and  Per- 
sian historians  haye  copied ;  and  even  Aboo  1-Ghizee,  Goveknor  of  Kharizm,  in  1654. 
Misguided  by  a  false  religious  sentiment,  R2lshid-ed-Deen  attached  the  antique  tradi- 
tions of  the  nomad  hordes  of  Asia  to  those  of  the  Jews,  as  preserred  in  the  KoriLn :  — 
Japhet,  ion  of  Noah^  transported  himtdf  to  the  Eaet,  and  U  it  from  him  thai  descend  the 
people  of  those  countries^  afterwards  partiUoned  between  two  brothers,  Tatar^Khdn  and  Mo- 
gouUKhUn,  All  this  recital  is  fabulous,  and  does  not  correspond  with  any  of  the 
accounts  furnished  by  the  Chinese."  Even  in  our  day,  the  <*  Caucasian"  missionary  is 
stipended  to  instil  into  the  ill-ftimished  crania  of  African  Hottentots  and  Australian 
Papuas  the  fond  hope  that  they  are  positively  and  lineally  descended  Arom  Ham! 

The  Twks  did  not  approach  the  Euphrates  from  their  aboriginal  hive  on  the  confines 
of  China  until  about  1000  a.  d.  ;  and  consequently  all  ascriptions  of  the  name  Togat' 
mah  to  them  seem  to  be  linguistically  and  historically  fallacious.  Whether  in  tiie 
appellatiye  'Turcoman'  there  be  any  demonstrable  connexion,  we  will  not 'aver  or 
deny.  But  the  Armenians,  a  primordial  people  upon  their  natiTC  mountains,  call 
themseWes  **the  house  of  rAor^om ; '^  and  there  is  no  good  reason  to  suppose  that 
Armenia  is  not.TooARMAH.^.86 

Qen.  X.  4.  — p»  'ja— BeNI-IDN  — "AfSUations  of  Ionia." 
11.  ntr'Sx — ALISH — •  Elishah.' 

Indo-Germanic ;  not,  '  God  that  gives  help.' 

Elisa,  *  Elis,'  on  the  coast  of  Peloponnesus,  one  of  the  earliest  historical  settlemrati 
of  Greece,  divides  with  Hellas  the  honor  of  being  catalogued  In  Hebrew  geography. 
The  former,  'EXk,  or  the  EUde,  would  seem  supported  by  E»k.  xzriL  7 —  *<  blue  and 
purple  from  the  isles  of  Elishah ;  "  purple-bearing  shells  having  been  abundant,  an- 
ciently, on  the  Laconian  shore.  The  latter,  '£XX<(,  whence  'EX>«m(  became  the  national 
name  for  Greeks,  does  not  appear  to  have  possessed,  in  the  times  of  Homer  (whose 
disputed  era  cannot  be  much  removed  ftrom  that  of  the  writer  of  Xth  (Tenent),  the  pan- 
Hellenio  extension  it  had  acquired  about  the  fifth  century  b.  c,  when  Herodotus  and 
Thucydides  flourished :  having  previously  been  restricted  to  a  district  and  town  of 
Thessaly.  But,  adds  Grote,  no  sooner  do  we  step  beyond  the  <*  first  Olympiad,  776 
B.  0.,  our  earliest  trustworthy  mark  of  Grecian  time,"  than  the  quicksands  of  mythical 
legend  engulph  the  criteria  by  which  the  relationship  of  facts  can  alone  be  decided. 
Thus,  to  the  Judaic  compiler  of  Xth  Genesis,  lUN,  Ionia,  would  seem  to  have  been  the 
parent  of  EUSaH,  Elis,  or  Hellas.  On  the  contrary,  Grecian  tradition  reverses  the 
order;  and  Ionia,  in  Asia  Minor,  becomes  an  affiliation  of  Hellas,  about  1050  years  b  o. 
There  is  no  S&  in  Greek  alphabets*  and  consequently  that  articulation  was  foreign  to 
the  people.  The  author  of  Xth  Genesis  wrote  A,  L,  I,  S,  H,  in  the  unknown  alphabet 
he  used.    Eushah,  is  not  older  than  the  Masora  Rabbis.    The  LXX  read  'KAi«rf. 

Either  view,  however,  establishes  a  close  affinity  between  lonians  and  Hellenes^  or 
Eleans;  and  Greeks  in  general,  as  well  along  the  shores  of  the  Morea  as  on  the  isles 
of  the  Archipelago,  would  adequately  represent  the  geography  of  Alish  ;  but,  in  view 
of  restricted  knowledge  (and  no  8h),  it  seems  more  probable  that  jEoI^s  and  jSolia^ 
in  Asia  Minor,  were  the  nation  and  otuntry  intended  by  the  writer  of  Xth  Genesis,^ 

Digitized  by 

Google 

HEBREW    NOMENCLATURE.  477 

12.  B^^B^nn  — TfRSIS  — *Tarshish.' 

Indo-Germftnic  ( ?  ),  or  Semitic  ( ?  ) ;  not,  *  contemplation.' 

Perhaps,  in  endeaToring  to  attain  the  exact  point  of  yiew  of  the  author  of  Xth  Oen" 
eais,  this  Is  the  most  enigmatical  problem  left  to  modem  solution ;  although  commen- 
tators of  the  present  day  slide  oTcr  its  difficulties,  and  range  themseWes  under  one  of 
two  schools :  the  first  of  which  cliums  Tarteastu  on  the  Spanish,  the  second,  Tarnu  on 
the  Cilician  coast,  to  be  the  true  locality. 

The  question  is  so  far  important,  that  in  it  is  inToWed  the  occidental  limit  of  the 
geographical  knowledge  of  the  Hebrews  at  the  time  when  Xth  Genesis  was  compiled ; 
and,  as  customary,  modem  orthodoxy,  which  discoyers  the  Chinese  in  the  SINIM  of 
Is,  xlix.  12 — the  Negroes  in  EAaM,  Ham^  of  Oen.  x.  1 !  and  the  "ten  lost  tribes  of 
Israel "  in  the  American  aborigines,  contends  for  the  widest  interpretation. 

Scriptural  texts  require  the  word  Tabshish  to  be  classed  under  three  categories :  — 

A.  —  Tarsus,  Tapeot  —  now  Tarsous,  on  the  coast  of  Caramania — an  ancient  city  on 
the  river  Cydnus :  birth-place  of  Paul,  and  sepulchre  of  Julian.  Between  TiiRSlB 
of  Xth  Genesis,  or  other  passages  of  the  text,  and  TaRSoS,  there  is  no  di£ference,  philo- 
logically,  except  a  **  mater  lectionis,"  or  Towel,  which,  in  palssography,  is  Tague. 
The  Masorelie  points,  like  the  Greek  tonic  accents,  are  unauthoritatiTe,  beyond  indicat- 
ing the  traditionary  phonetism  of  post-Christian  writers  in  either  tongue:  and  the 
Masora  commences  only  six  centuries  after  Christ 

The  amphibious  adventure  of  Jonah,  which,  the  Rev.  Prof.  Stuart  says,  **  plainly 
savors  of  the  miraculous,"  might  possibly  indicate  the  Spanish  Tartessus,  as  the  cor- 
respondent of  Tarshish  during  the  uncerta\p,  but  recent,  age  at  which  this  prophetic 
book  was  composed  —  a  treatise  that  must  not  be  confounded  with  the  scientific  and 
more  ancient  document — Xth  Genesis. 

[The  NaBI,  <  Jonah,'  rebelled  against  leHOtiaH's  command,  <*  go  to  Nineveh,"  and 
therefore  encountered  the  fate  Arom  which  Perseus  delivered  Andromeda,  vix. :  that 
of  deglutition  by  **  a  great  fish,"  or  monstrous 

eetus—ihe  Whale:  which  became  a  sempiternal  Fio.  866.«e 

emblem  of  icthyophagy,  when,  assuming  the 
forms  of  Cephsus  and  Cassiepea,  it  ascended  to 
the  heavens,  or,  as  Glaucus,  descended  to  the 
sea.  In  1860,  a  paragraph,  started  in  the  New 
York  <<  Sunday  Messenger"  by  Mijor  Noah, 
went  the  rounds  of  the  religious  and  profane 
newspapers  throughout  the  Union.  It  asserted 
that  the  portrait  of  the  Prophet  Johah  had  been 
found  on  the  walls  of  Nineveh  !  Here  he  is  (Fig. 
865). 

Ovany,  Oannes  (of  Berosus)  as  IOANm;  and 
Jonah,  *  Jonas,'  as  lONAS ;  both  being  t-ON-M  a=  *  the  sun '  —  were  identified  long 
ago  with  Dagon,  DAQ-ON ;  t.  e.  the  *<  sun  in  pieces,"  incarnated  in  this  Assyrian  fish- 
god.  'The  same  mythe  lies  in  AUrgatis,  or  Derceto,  and  especially  in  those  Christian 
forgeries  called  the  '*  Sibylline  verses,"  beneath  the  acrostical  Ix'^i' 

I  should  not  hesitate,  but  for  the  above  pnetematuralities,  in  reading  the  Tarsus  of 
Cilicia  at  the  destination  of  the  ship  whereupon  Jonah  took  his  passage,  and  *^aid  the 
fare,"  on  an  obedient  voyage  fh>m  Joppa  to  Nineveh,  (as  a  convenient  route  anciently, 
before  j^eom-navigation,  as  now  "ceteris  paribus"),  for  compliance  with  the  "tetra- 
gramraaton's"  behests:  but  he  spitefully  **rose  up  to  fiee  unto  Tarshish,  from  the 
presence  of  ADONAI " ;  and,  in  consequence,  while  Jonah  was  righteously  punished 
for  his  obduraey,  it  seems  that  his  intention  was  to  escape  through  a  western,  in  lieu 
of  proceeding  in  an  easterly,  direction ;  and  therefore  Tartessus  of  Hispania,  or  else- 
iHiere  so  long  as  Jonah  could  realize  a  contrary,  would  appear  to  have  been  the 
country  for  which  the  vessel  cleared,  and  wherein  dwelt  her  consignees.  —  O.  R.  0.] 

Digitized  by 

Google 

478  THE  xth  chapter  op  genbsis. 

B.  —  Tarietnu^  Taprrfcffos,  probably  a  Phoenician  emporium,  whetber  among  tlM 
TarUmi  io  the  Ticinity  of  the  present  Cadiz,  or  at  some  other  point  within  the  Medi- 
terranean, lay  unquestionably  in  Spain.  Hither  Solomon 'and  Hiram  dispatched  their 
commercial  navies  (1  Kinffi  x.  22 ;  2  Ckron,  ix.  21) ;  and  thence,  about  the  time  of 
the  Babylonish  captivity  (Ezekiel  zxviL  12;  Jeremiah  x.  9),  silveTf  (in,  tron,  and  lead^ 
were  imported,  through  Tyre,  into  the  Levant  The  presence  of  m/o^r,  /m,  and  lead^ 
upon  Egyptian  mumtnies  of  every  age  back  to  the  XVIIIth  dynasty,  establishes, 
beyond  dispute,  epochas  far  earlier  than  those  of  any  Hebrew  writers,  Moses  in- 
clusive, for  relations  of  trade  between  the  Nile  and  whatever  western  regionfli, 
probably  Spain,  whence  those  articles  were  introduced :  so,  no  doubts  on  relative  anti- 
quity need  arise  upon  Iberian  Tartesnu,  It  corresponds  perfectly  to  Tar9hUh  in  later 
parts  of  Hebrew  annals.  But  there  is  a  third  element  in  the  discnssioD,  unknown  to 
Anglo-Saxon  divinity,  which  it  is  due  to  our  contemporary  Michel-Angelo  Lanci,  Pro- 
fessor of  Sacred  Philology  at  the  Vatican,  not  to  overlook. 

C.  —  Tartis  does  not  proceed  from  Tur-atu;  but  from  the  old  Semitic  root  roMj,  pre- 
served in  Arabic,  meaning  *  to  wet,'  *  to  lave.'  With  the  primeval  feminine  article  t 
prefixed  to  it,  Tarshith  means  *  land  laved  by  .the  sea,'  that  is,  the  tea^hore ;  and,  in 
consequence,  *<  vessels  of  Tarehith  "  often  signifies  coaeiere,  irrespectively  of  any  geogra- 
phical attribution.  For  example  —  we  should  read,  **thou  breakest  the  eoastw^ 
vessels  "  (not  slups  of  a  place  called  Tarehish,)  **  with  an  east-wind."  (P«.  xlviiL  7.) 
Again,  <*  The  kings  of  maritime  states  (Tarehith)  and  of  inland  regions  (ilm)  shall  pre- 
sent offerings."  (P«.  Ixxii.  10.)  And  finally,  not  to  digress  here  on  that  most  prolific 
theme,  the  mistranslations  consecrated  in  King  James's  Version,  compare  *'  Sheba  and 
Dedan,  and  the  merchants  of  Tarshis£,  with  all  the  young  Uone  ( I )  thereof"  —  {Euk, 
xxxviiL  18)  —  with  Land's  lucid  Italian  rendering :  *<  The  inhabitants  of  the  strong 
places  of  ierra-firma,  Saba  and  Dedan,  and  the  maritime  merchandisers  and  thdr  colo- 
nists will  say  to  thee  "  —  {Gli  abitatori  di  forti  Iwghi  di  terra  ferma,  Saba  e  JDedaUy  e  i 
mercatanli  marittimi  e  t  laro  coloni  diranno  ate,) 

This  derivation  of  Tarehieh,  from  T-tmm,  bears  upon  the  geographical  inqoixy  so  f^ 
as  concerns  the  marine  position  of  a  territory  to  which  the  name  is  applied. 

The  following  passages  are  note-worthy  in  our  discussion:  — 

1st.  —  (2  Chron,  xx.  86.)  Jehoshaphat  <*  joined  himself  with  him  (Ahaiiah)  to  make 
ships  to  go  to  Tarehieh;  and  they  made  the  ships  at  Etnon-gaberJ**  Now,  this  arsenal 
lay  near  Elathj  on  the  Elanitic  arm  of  the  Bed  Sea,  not  far  from  Akaba;  and  there- 
fore, in  those  days,  the  Jews  were  not  likely  to  have  intended  a  circumnavigation  of 
Africa  to  reach  Tarteeeui  in  Spain  I  Nor  is  it  probable  that,  after  building  galleys  at 
enormous  cost  on  the  Bed  Sea,  the  Hebrews  contemplated  transportation  backwards 
over  the  Isthmus  to  launch  them  again  on  the  Mediterranean. 

2d.  —  (1  Kinffe  xxiL  48.)  But  we  learn  that  '*  Jehoshaphat  made  ships  of  Tar^kith 
to  go  to  Ophir  for  gold :  but  they  went  not ;  for  the  ships  were  broken  at  Etsion-gaber.'' 
What  other  construction  but  **  coasting  voyages"  will  suit  Tarehieh,  in  the  former  pass- 
age? What  other  than  ''coasting  vessels"  could  go  by  sea  from  Akaba  to  Ophir  (on 
the  Persian  Gulf,  as  we  shall  see,)  in  the  latter! 

Here,  then,  without  question,  Tarehieh  refers  to  ''coasters,"  or  "maritime  merohan- 
dizers,"  sailing  down  the  Bed  Sea  towards  India,  and  not  to  Spain. 

8d.  —  (2  Chron,  ix.  21.)  "  For  the  king's  (Solomon)  ships  went  to  Tarehieh  with  the 
servants  of  Huram ;  every  three  years  once  came  (back)  the  ships  of  Tarehieh,  bringing 
gold  and  silver,  SAiN-HaBIM  (teeth,  of  elephants?),  EUPAIM  (apes),  and  TAEIIM 
(peacocks  ?)."  The  parallel  passage  1  Kinffe  x.  22,  enumerates  the  same  articles,  but 
has  "fleet  of  Tarehieh"  So,  "coasting  vessels,"  and  not  a  locality,  seems  intended  by 
both  writers.  This  is  confirmed  by  Clesenius,  who  says  that  "  a  eh^  of  Tarehieh  "  meant 
"  any  large  merchant  vessel  in  general." 

All  the  articles  named,  with  one  exception,  might  have  been  imported  equally  well 
firom  the  African  coast  of  the  Gates  of  Hercules,  opposite  to  the  Spanish  Tarteeeue,  as 

Digitized  by 

Google 

HEBREW    NOMENCLATUBB.  479 

from  Sonthem  Arabia,  OpMr,  &o. ;  becaufle  eUphantt  abounded  in  Barbary,  eren  in 
Boman  timea;  while  **Apei'Wlj**  at  Gibraltar,  OTen  now  corresponds  to  the  opposite 
Atlantic  range,  where  apet  are  as  common  as  African  babootu  in  Arabia;  whence  the 
latter  are  brought  now-a-days  to  CSairo. 

But  the  exception  exclades  Spain,  and  all  Northern  AfHca.  The  singular  T^E, 
pointed  Thuk,  like  its  homonyme  Taotk,  and  Taodt,  in  Arabic,  Turkish,  &c.,  is  con- 
sidered to  miaan  'peacock.'  If  so  —  and  there  is  no  actual  impossibility  that  such  a 
**  rara  ayis"  should  haTC  been  brought  via  Aral^  by  the  coasting  trade — India  is  the 
country  6f  peaeoeka;  and  therefore  these  birds  were  not  procurable  at  Tariessutf  in 
Spain,  1000  years  b.  o. 

Peacocks  are  not  impossible;  but  a  new  reading  is  submitted,  equally  destmctiTe 
of  Spanish  Tartemi  in  these  texts. 

It  is  certain  that  cocks  and  hens  (the  common  fowl),  as  well  as  geet«,  are  never  men- 
tioned in  the  canonical  writings  of  the  Hebrews.  Kor  fowls  in  authentic  works  of 
Homer ;  nor  by  Herodotus.  The  Pharaonic  EgypUans  knew  not  the  common  fowl ; 
using  geescy  ducks,  and  these  birds'  eggs,  instead.  But  one  instance  of  posribly  a 
'<  cocl^s  head,"  and  that  a  stuffed  specimen,  occurs  on  Nilotic  monuments.  It  is  in  the 
'*  Grand  Procession"  of  tributes  to  Thotmes  III.,  as  Pickering  first  indicated.  Etruscan 
rases,  being  of  later  manufSaoture,  are  no  exception  to  the  rule  that  the  common  fowl 
had  not  reaped  Europe,  or  Asia  west  and  north  of  the  Euphrates,  or  AfHca,  before 
the  conquests  of  the  Achemsnuans,  b.  o.  640,  downwards.  It  is  also  positiTC,  that  the 
centres  of  creation  for  this  bird  are  Indo-Chinese  and  Australasian;  and  that,  like 
peacocks,  they  had  to  be  imported  into  A^alna  from  India.  Now,  in  Arabic,  a  cock  is 
called  <D^yk,'  JHEL  Stripped  of  the  modem  Masora,  the  Hebrew  word  is  TtK,  or 
DiE.  May  not  the  common  fowl,  in  lieu  of  peacock,  be  alluded  to  in  the  aboTC  pass- 
ages ?  It  is  as  probable  as  pheasant,  proposed  by  others ;  and  about  the  same  ages 
(B.  c.  1110)  whiis  pheasants,  probably  firom  Cajfraria,  were  receiyed  at  the  court  of 
Tching-wang,  in  China;  accorcfing  to  Pauthier. 

Bodiarty  following  Eusebius's  Oapnii  If  iv  lAypcs — the  Iberians  of  Spain  —  and  the 
generality  of  English  commentators,  fix  upon  Tariessus  as.  the  equlTalent  for  Tarshish 
of  Xth  Genesis.  Continental  orientalists  of  our  day  lean  towards  the  Cilician  TharsiSf 
Tarsus ;  upon  the  earlier  authority  of  Josephus,  and  of  Jonathan,  the  Chaldee  para- 
phrast  And,  without  dogmatizing  in  the  least  upon  either  Tiew,  the  order  in  which 
Ionic  affiliations  succeed  each  other — jEolia,  Tarshish,  Kittim  the  Cyprians,  and  Rho- 
danim  the  Bhodians  —  coupled  with  the  geographical  proximity  of  Rhodes  and  Cyprus 
to  Tarsoitt,  on  the  Caramanian  coast,  seems  confirmatory  of  those  opinions  which 
select  Tarsus,  in  CHicia,  as  the  locality  indicated  by  the  writer  of  Xth  Genesis  for 
Tabshish.  There  is  no  difficulty  with  regard  to  the  antiquity  of  Cilician  Tarsous ; 
because  Mr.  Birch  read,  long  ago,  '*  This  is  the  Tile  sIstc  from  Tarsus  of  the  sea," 
inscribed  in  hieroglyphics,  during  the  thirteenth  century  b.  c,  oyer  a  captiye  of 
Ramies  IIL*© 

18.  jyrO — KTilM — *  Kittim  ' ;  plural  of  KIT^ 

Language  uncertain.    Not,  *they  that  bruise,'  at  gold;  nor,  'hidden,"  &o. 

Three  Mediterranean  countries  haye  been  supposed  by  commentators  to  be  figured 
by  the  yarious  etymons  of  this  word:  Italy,  Macedonia,  and  Cyprus;  besides  many 
<*  islands."  The  first,  resting  solely  upon  the  fanciful  analo^es  of  Krrta,  in  Latium, 
and  Kcrof,  a  riyer  near  Cnmee,  although  supported  by  the  erudition  of  Bochart,  may 
now  be  dismissed  without  ceremony. 

Kittim,  as  'UlaKtria,  after  Alexander's  conquests  had  made  Macedonia  renowned,  is 
the  acceptation  in  which  it  appears  in  two  latest  books  of  the  Hebrews  —  Daniel  (xi. 
80)  and  1  Maccabees  (i.  1) ;  equally  canonical  in  archsBology. 

The  books  belonging  mainly  to  the  period  between  Alexander  (b.  o.  880)  and  the 
Babylonish  captirity  —  say,  from  Hilkiah's  high-priesthood,  about  b.  o.  680,  down- 

Digitized  by 

Google 

480  THE   Xth   chapter   OF   GENESIS. 

wtrds — giTe  to  Kittim  a  wider  extensioii  than  can  well  be  deduced  from  Xth  Geneda ; 
for  Jeremiah  (iL  10)  and  Exekiel  (xziiL  6)  speak  of  the  states  or  "isles  <tf  JKtffiar  " 
the  latter  with  referenoe  to  works  in  ivoiy  thenee  imported.  Greeee  was  eeMnated 
for  chryselephantine  mannfactores,  certainly  in  the  80Ch  (Hympiad,  660  a.  c,  and  per- 
haps before. 

In  the  Hebrew  text  of  the  doabtfol  parts  of  Isaiah  (IxrL  19),  l^anUMk  {Tmrwm), 
Phul  (probably  Vnm-phyUa),  Lud  (Lydia),  TkMbal  (Paphlagonia),  Jawm  (locna),  and 
Kittm,  are  grouped  together ;  hence  their  proximity  is  inferable. 

Josephns  adopts  the  Oriental  form  of  personification  when  he  rdates  that  "JTrfJbi'—i 
possessed  the  island  otKetkima,  which  now  is  called  Gypms;  and  from  this,  by  the 
Hebrews,  all  islands  and  maritime  places  are  termed  Kethim." 

Hence,  modem  researches  nnite  upon  the  island  of  Cj^pnu  as  the  centre-point  of 
probabilities — CV^Rim,  x<"»v««Xif,  of  Ptolemy,  a  city  in  Cypms,  now  Kiti;  and  the 
Phoenician  CfUiad,  applied  by  deero ;  justifying  the  adoption.  Confirmed,  moreorer, 
by  Boeckh's  Ore^  inscriptions,  wherein  ^PJ  BTK,  a  *  man  of  KiT^'  is  explained  hj 
Kiruvf ;  a  KUUmf  or  Clypriote. 

Bnt  the  tme  position  of  KUium^  as  Cypms,  is  now  fixed  by  "  coins  of  the  anonym- 
ous kings  of  (Httium ; "  no  less  than  by  a  cuneatic  inscription  of  the  time  of  the  Assy- 
rian king  Bargon  (recently  found  at  Lamica,  and  couTeyed  to  Berlin),  which  eanies 
the  name  back  to  the  eighth  century  b.  o.  Egyptian  monuments,  elucidated  by  Kreh, 
enable  us  to  behold  it  again  in  hieroglyphics  of  the  thirteenth  century  b.  c,  where  the 
'<  Chief  of  the  KkUat  as  a  liTing  ci^tiTe,"  surmounts  one  of  the  prisoners  of  Ramses  IH. 
Nor  is  this  our  earliest  record ;  because  the  KeFa,  portrayed  in  the  **  Grand  Proces- 
.  sion"  of  Thotmes  IIL  [tupra,  p.  159,  Fig.  82],  are  said  to  come  *<  from  the  isles  in 
the  sea,"  t.  e,  Cypnu;  and,  again,  **Khe/a  (Cyprus),  Kkiia  (Eettisi),"  stands  r^;istered 
in  the  sculptures  of  Amunoph  IIL,  at  Soleb.  So  the  people,  and  their  island,  are  as 
old  as  the  XVIIIth  dynasty,  or  the  sixteenth  century  b.  o. 

The  inhabitants  of  Cyprus  in  particular,  and  of  the  adjacent  coasts  and  islands  ia 
general,  are  undoubtedly  the  KiT<IM  (OgprioU)  of  the  later  projector  of  Xth  Omem 
a  conclusion  ratified  by  their  propinquity  to  the  nation  immediately  succeeding.^so 

14.  D*Jn  —  DDNIM  —  *  DoDANiM ' ;  plural  of  Dodan. 

Between  Dodanim  of  Xth  Genesis,  and  Bodanim  of  1  (Thron.  L  7,  a  literal  disoordance, 
produced  by  the  error  of  some  unknown  transcriber,  leaTcs  the  decision  for  posterity 
(as  Cardinal  Wiseman  declares  in  respect  to  1  Tim.  iii.  16)  to  '*  rest  on  what  judgment 
it  can  form  amid  so  many  conflicting  statements ! "  ¥rho,  fh»m  the  text  alone,  can  tell 
whether  we  must  read  Rodbmm  in  Xth  Genesis,  or  Dodanim  in  1  Chronicles?  In  con- 
sequence, conjecture  has  had  full  scope;  and  Bochart's  ingenious  assimilation  of  the 
river  Rhodanm,  Rhone,  has  been  seized  upon  by  a  standard  Anglican  diyine  (Bishop 
Patrick,  to  wit),  who  beholds  in  France  the  country  of  the  Rodahim  !  •*  Gur  old  chron- 
iclers," says  Champollion-Figeac,  *<  equally  robust  etymologists  as  able  critics,  do  they 
not  found  the  realm  of  France  by  JVaaetit ,  one  of  the  sons  of  Hector,  saTed  expressly 
from  the  sack  of  Troy  I "  The  Hungarians  caused  Attila  to  descend  from  Nimrod  in  a 
straight  line ;  the  Donee,  from  the  Danai  issuing  from  Dodona,  crossed  the  Danube^  to 
which  they  gave  their  name,  and  finally  settled  in  the  country  they  named  Danemark! 

Dodanim  possesses  advocates ;  and  of  course  Dodona,  in  Epirus,  site 'of  Gnecia's  most 
ancient  oracle,  at  once  suggests  that  the  Dodoncei  must  be  the  people  intended.  Nor, 
except  its  remoteness  from  the  neighborhood  of  other  proper  names  whose  geography 
is  tolerably  positiye,  can  a  negation  be  absolutely  demonstrated. 

HoweTer,  the  Samaritan  Pentateuch,  reading  Mhodiane  where  the  LXX  have  TSSm, 
affords  a  preponderating  vote  in  favor  of  the  R.  And,  other  conditions  being  equal, 
this  fixes  attention  on  the  isle  of  Rhodee;  by  excluding  the  possibilities  of  D.  Its 
early  Grecian  occupancy ;  its  location  between  Cyprue  and  JEoUa;  and  their  common 
affiliation  from  Ionia;  support  the  view  that  R«^of,  the  roseate  island  of  the  Rhodiane^ 
was  the  habitat  of  the  Genesiacal  RodasIm .^^ 

Digitized  by 

Google 

HEBREW    NOMENCLATURE.  481 

HAMiDiB,  or  Swarthy  Baces. 
on  ♦JD—BNI-KAM—"  Affiliations  of  Ham."—  (7en.  x.  6. 
16.  tyi3— KU8— *CusH.' 

By  the  LXX,  and  in  the  Vulgate,  this  word,  whenever  translated,  is  made  to  figure 
under  the  Greek  form  of  AtOievta,  Ethiopia,  Through  Cruden's  Concordance,  it  appears 
that  Cu9h  is  transcribed  in  King  James's  Version  as  if  in  the  primary  Hebrew  Text  the 
name  had  occurred  only  fivt  times :  whereas,  if  we  restore  to  its  relative  passages  in 
the  Text  the  ori^nal  EUS,  in  every  instance  where  in  our.  version  we  find  its  supposed 
equivalents,  *  Ethiopia,^  *Ethiopian,*  *Ethiopiant,*  it  will  be  perceived  that  Cush  is  re- 
peated, (5-|-84aB)  ihirty'fiim  times  in  the  canonical  Hebrew  Scriptures. 

It  may  occur  to  a  simple  believer  in  plenary  inspiration  to  inquire,  why,  and  upon 
what  principle  of  logic  or  philology,  the  translatort  of  our  authorized  version — <<By  Her 
Majesty's  special  command — appointed  to  be  read  in  Churches"  —  took  upon  them- 
selves the  suppression  of  the  Hebrew  word  KUSA  thirty-four  times,  and  its  preserva- 
tion only  five  ?  How  happens  it,  that  strict  uniformity  was  not  adopted ;  and  that  they 
did  not  either  substitute  Ethiopia  all  the  way  through,  or  preserve  the  original  Ktuh 
in  every  instance ;  according  to  the  consistent  method  of  Cahen,  in  his  much  more 
accurate  translation  ?  To  answer  such  queries  is  beyond  human  power,  because  the 
aforesaid  translators  did  not  know  themselves :  but  some  explanation  may  be  found  in 
the  fact  that,  little  versed  in  Hebrew  literature,  the  fifty-four  revisers,  in  1608,  followed 
the  versions,  and  not  the  Text ;  as  our  Part  III.  thoroughly  establishes. 

Investigation  must  first  be  directed  towards  the  Hebrew  triliteral  EUS.  Its  trans- 
lation by  the  Greek  word  Ethiopia  is  a  secondary  inquiry.  BTD,  EUS,  are  its  radicals ; 
and  must  have  been  its  components,  at  whatever  time,  and  in  whatever  alphabet,  ante- 
rior to  the  Hebrew  square-letter  (not  invented  until  the  third  century  after  o.),  the  Xth 
chapter  of  Genesis  was  first  written.  The  diacritical  points,  added  by  the  Masoretes 
after  the  sixth  century  of  our  era,  make  ita  sound  KUSA ;  whilst,  as  regards  its  ori- 
ginal Hebrew  phonetism,  the  terminal  Sh  is  (Chaldaically)  likely,  and  we  adopt  it  in 
the  form  EUSA. 

What  did  EUSA  signify,  in  the  mind  of  the  compiler  of  Xth  (Genesis  ?  There  is  not 
one  per  mil  of  our  contemporary  divinity-students  who  will  not  glibly  reply —  "  Ethi- 
pia,  to  be  sure — Africa,  above  Egypt"  I 

[  Five  years  have  passed  since  the  authors  of  the  present  volume  denounced  such 
answer  to  be  simply  ridiculous  (J.  C.  N. :  Biblieal  and  Physical  History  of  Man,  1849, 
pp.  188-146  ;->G.  R.  G.:  Otia  JEffyptiaca,  1849,  pp.  16,  188-4).  Between  replies  so 
diametrically  opposed  there  can  be  no  reconciliation.  One  of  the  two  must  be  abso- 
lutely false.  Among  the  many,  however,  who  have  felt  themselves  called  upon  to  con- 
travene our  assertions,  not  having  hitherto  met  with  one  person  really  acquainted  with 
the  Hebrew  alphabet,  we  may  be  excused  by  Hebraists  from  recognizing  as  **  Biblical 
authorities"  those  teachers  who  (even  the  articulations  of  M,  3,  :i,  being  to  them  un- 
known) are  yet  ignorant  of  the  A,  B,  C,  of  Scriptural  language,  meanings,  and  history. 

It  was  the  authors'  intention,  when  projecting  **  Types  of  Mankind,"  to  publish 
an  investigation  of  Ethiopian  questions,  sufficientiy  copious  and  radical  as  to  leave 
few  deductions  ungrounded;  and  their  MSS.  were  prepared  accordingly:  but,  so 
much  extra  space  has  been  occupied  by  Part  I.,  that  **  copy,"  to  the  extent  of  some 
200  of  these  pages,  must  be  suppressed  for  the  present  The  reader  will,  in  conse- 
quence, be  lenient  enough  to  accept  dry  references,  in  lieu  of  logical  argument  If 
**  truth"  be  the  object  of  his  search,  we  feel  confident  that  our  bibliographical  Indices 
will  at  any  rate  place  such  reader  on  the  easiest  route  of  verification.  —  G.  R.  G.] 

Bochart's  words  show  that  we  were  not  the  first,  by  more  than  1000  years,  to  daim 

61 

Digitized  by 

Google 

482  THE  xth  chapter  of  genesis. 

«ArabU**  for  EUSA,  instead  of  « Ethiopia.'*  «Chiifl  alii  Ethiopian),  alii  Arabiam 
ezplicant  Priorem  interpretatioDem  prater  Hebr»08  fere  tjaotqnot  sint,  etiam  Gred 
Beqnuntor,  et  TulgataB  interprea,  et  Philo,  et  Josephus,  et  Ensebius,  et  Hierooymiia,  et 
Enatathius  in  Hexsmeron,  et  author  Chronioi  Alexandrini,  et  choros  patnim  fniuersos. 
Arabs  etiam  nnper  editos  qui  hie  habet  VfjrhiK  Abasenorom  sen  Abissinomm  terrain, 
id  est  iBthiopiam.  Posteriorem  h  Teteribos,  quod  soiam,  ioiw  Jonathan,  in  eujus  para- 
phrasi  Oen,  x.  6,  pro  HebrsBO  Chtu  est  ¥!*y^p  Arabia,  ...  Ex  iis  quse  haotenus  & 
nobis  disputata  sunt,  credo  constare  luce  clarins  Chusseos  in  iis  locis  habitasse  quss 
supra  indicauimus,  nimirum  supra  ^gyptum  ad  Bubri  maris  sinum  intimum,  in  parte 
Arabia  Petrcsa  et  FeUdt.'* 

Circumscribed  within  a  few  pages,  our  part  limits  itself  to  the  production  of  such 
atoms  of  new  data  as  haTe  been  attained  since  Bochart's  day :  beginning  with  the 
four  riTers  of  Eden, 

"  The  name  of  the  second  river,  Gihon ;  that  which  encompasseth  aH  the  land  of 
KUSA"  {Oen.  ii.  18)  —  part  of  the  Jehovietic,  and  consequently  later  document — may 
be  dismissed  from  the  discussion;  because,  relating  to  ante-diluvian  epochas,  its 
geography  is  unknown.  If  there  OTor  was  an  uniyersal  Dduge^  all  land-marks  were 
necessarily  obliterated.  If  there  was  not,  as  some  geologists  now  maintain,  the  Serf 
thith  (from  Oen.  i.  1  to  Oen.  j\.  9,  rabbinical  diTision)  ceases  to  contain  history ;  and, 
when  not  accepted  in  the  allegorical  sense  maintained  by  learned  Christian  fathen^ 
must  be  abandoned,  by  science,  to  thaumaturgical  ingenuity ;  while  the  KUSA  of  Oem. 
iL  remains  to  be  sought  for  "near  the  isle  Utopia  of  Thomas  Moms.  Utopia! 
expressiTO  name !  —  inyentecl  by  the  satirical  Rabelais  (Pantagruel),  and  afterwards 
applied  by  the  great  Chancellor  of  England  (Sir  Thomas  More)  to  the  beautiful  land 
(Oceana)  of  which  he  dreamed — this  Greek  iioun  seems  made  expressly  to  indicate  the 
sole  degree  of  latitude  under  which  the  poetic  marvels  of  the  grand  Atalantio  island 
(and  of  the  fottr  riven  in  Eden)  could  have  ever  been  produced.  It  has  been 
beUeved,"  continues  Martin,  the  ablest  critic  upon  Plato,  **  that  it  [the  river  Cfikm] 
might  be  recognised  in  the  New  World.  No :  it  belongs  to  another  worlds  which  exists 
not  within  the  domain  of  space,  but  in  that  of  fancy." 

In  the  geographical  nomenclature  of  Xth  Genesis,  KUSA  is  the  "son  of  Kham;^*  a 
n&me  applied  to  I^ypt  and  her  colonial  affiliations :  of  which  some  are  A&ican,  and 
others,  such  as  Canaanitet,  indi^utably  Asiatic.  To  which  continent  did  the  Hebrews 
refer  the  name  KUSA  f 

In  1667,  Walton,  the  upright  and  most  proficient  compiler  of  JBiblia  Polygl&tta^ 
inveighed  against  the  notion  that  KUSA  could  be  the  African  "Ethiopia;"  citing  the 
best  scholars  of  his  day  to  the  same  effect  So,  again,  Beroaldus,  Bochart,  and 
Patrick,  following  the  Targum  of  Jonathan,  the  Chaldee  paraphrast — third  to  eighth 
century  after  Christ — render  KUSA  by  Arabia,  on  the  subjoined,  among  other 
grounds :  —  "^ 

1st  Moses'  wife  is  termed  a  KUSAeon  {Num.  xiL  18).  Tsipora  was  a  daughter  of 
Jethro,  the  Cohen  (priest)  of  Midian  {Exod.  iL  16,  21 ;  iiL  1) ;  and  Midianites  being 
Arabians,  here  KUSA  is  Arabia.  No  other  wife  is  given  to  Moses  in  the  Pentateuch; 
nor  can  any  supematuralist  so  torture  the  plain  worda  of  its  text  as  to  prove,  to  a 
man  of  common  sense,  that  Moses  ever  visited  Ethiopia  above  Egypt  The  Abb6 
Glaire,  Doyen  de  la  Sorbonne,  whose  two  volumes  —  models  of  erudition  and  style 
that  protestant  divines  would  do  well  to  imitate — ^lie  before  us,  never  resorts  to  such 
pitiful  subterfuges. 

2d.  '*  I  will  make  the  land  of  Mitzraim  a  waste  of  wastes,  from  the  tower  of  Syene 
even  unto  the  frontier  of  KUSA  "  (Ezek.  xxix.  10).  Syene  being  Aeaovdn,  at  the  first 
cataract,  on  the  bbrder-line  of  (Ethiopia)  Nubia  and  Egypt,  the  writer  cannot  mean 
«  ftrom  Ethiopia  to  Ethiopia,^*  but  from  Syene  to  KUSA,  beyond  the  Isthmus  of  Sues, 
on  the  north-eastern  frontier  of  Lower  Egypt,  and  consequently  here  indicates 
Aratna, 

Digitized  by 

Google 

HEBRBW    NOMENCLATURE.  483 

Modem  researches  f ornisfa  more  critical  light  In  the  first  place.  Dr.  Wells  stistains, 
mnd,  to  a  certain  extent,  demonstrates,  that  the  word  KUSA  refers  exolasively  to  the 
Asiatic  ''Ethiopia,'*  and  noTor  to  African  localities;  summing  np  his  reasonings  With, 
*'the  nation  of  Cnsh  did  first  settle  in  Arabia;  and  the  word  is,  generaUy,  to  be  so 
understood  in  Scripture."  In  the  second,  believers  in  the  unify  of  all  mankind's 
descent  from  *'  Noah  and  his  three  ionty"  mast  concede  that  Nimrodj  and  many  other 
afiUiations  of  EUSA,  settled  in  Assyrian  ricinities;  eyen  if  offshoots  did  afterwards 
eross  through  Arabia  Into  Africa,  and  there,  owing  to  "  effects  of  climate,"  originato 
Nigritian  races ;  beginning  with  the  comparatiTely  high-caste  Berber,  and  descending  ' 
down  to  the  lowest  grade  of  Botjeiman — always  along  a  sliding  scale  of  deterioration, 
from  the  Talley  of  the  Nile  to  the  Cape  of  Oood  Hope — where,  unfortunately,  200 
years  of  oooupancy  ha^e  not  yet  transmuted  Dutch  Boert  into  animals  different  from 
those  left  behind  them  in  Holland  and  Flanders. 

The  text  mo«t  triumphantly  quoted  to  prove  the  African  hypothesis  is  Jerem.  xiii. 
28. — "  Can  the  Ethiopian  change  his  skin,  or  the  leopard  his  spots  ?"  A  glance  at  the 
Hebrew  shows  that  here,  as  in  other  instances,  the  fifty-font  rerisers  of  King  James's 
Tersion  blindly  copied  the  LXX,  or  the  Vulgate;  because  "Can  the  EUSAeon  change 
his  skin"  leaves  the  question  vague  until  the  real  application  of  EUSA  be  determined. 
The  same  proclivity  leads  many  divines  to  cite  another  text,  fh>m  the  so-called  "  Song 
of  Solomon,"  in  behalf  of  their  negrophile  theories. — "  I  (am)  blacky  but  comely.  .  .  . 
Look  not  upon  me,  because  I  (am)  black,  because  the  sun  hath  looked  upon  me :  my 
mother's  children  were  angry  with  me ;  they  made  me  keeper  of  the  vineyards ;  (but) 
mine  own  vineyard  have  I  not  kept."  {Cant.  i.  5,  6.)  The  absence  of  notes  of  inter- 
rogation in  Hebrew  palseography,  coupled  with  the  philological  inanity  of  modern 
translators  of  this  ancient  erotic  ballad,  perpetuates  a  delusion,  removeable  by 
Land's  rendering:  —  *'I  (am)  browned,  but  comely.  .  .  .  Look  not  [disparagingly] 
upon  me  that  I  (am)  browned  ['*  fosoa"  «=  tawny,  dark],  because  the  sun  has  tanned 
me :  the  sons  of  my  mother  [«.  e.  my  step-brothers]  becoming  free  to  dispose  of  me 
[according  to  Oriental  usage],  posted  me  (as)  custodian  of  vines ;  my  own  vine,  have 
I  not  guarded  [taken  care  of]  it?"  Besides,  as  it  has  been  remarked  on  the  above 
interrogatory  of  Jeremiah,  —  "  If  Cnsh  means  a  Negro,  then  we  have  revelation  to 
prove  that  climate  vdll  not  change  a  Negro  into  a  white  man ;  if  it  means  an  Arab 
(dark)  Caucasian,  then  it  will  not  change  a  white  man  into  a  Negro !" — Indeed,  the 
nkra-high-church  orthodoxy  of  a  living  English  divine,  and  profound,  whilst  fantastic, 
Orientalist,  unhesitatingly  endorses  this  critical  view. — "  Among  the  great  land-marks 
of  national  descent,  none,  it  may  safely  be  afllrmed,  are  eurer,  or  more  permanent,  than 
those  physical  varieties  of  form,  countenance,  and  color,  which  distinguish  from  each 
other  the  various  racee  of  mankind.  ...  In  Arabia,  one  of  the  earliest  seats  of  post- 
diluvian colonisation;  a  country  rarely  violated,  and  never  occupied,  by  a  foreign 
conqueror ;  and  peopled,  in  all  ages,  by  the  same  primitive  tribes,  .  .  .  peculiarity  of 
form  and  feature  may  be  justiy  received,  in  any  specific  or  authentic  example,  as  evi- 
dence of  identity  of  origin,  littie,  if  at  all,  short  of  demonstration.  This  principle 
we  are  enabled,  by  Scripture,  to  apply  as  an  index  to  the  Arab  tribes  descended  from 
Cush,  and  especially  to  the  posterity  of  his  first-bom,  Seba." 

If  we  had  penned  the  above  paragraph  ourselves,  we  could  not  have  embodied  more 
fordbly  Morton's  decisive  opinions  on  those  '*  primordial  organic  forms,"  which  are 
perpetuated  to  this  day,  as  the  Rev.  Charles  Forster,  B.  D.,  justly  remarks,  among 
"  the  various  races  of  mankind." 

After  the  citation  of  **  Can  the  Cushiie  change  his  skin  ?"  the  geographer  of  Arabia 
proceeds :  —  '<  This  indeUble  characteristic  of  race  would  seem  to  identify  with  the 
families  of  Cnrii  the  inhabitants  of  the  southern  coast"  of  Arabia.  "Now,  since  the 
Cushites  generally  were  distinguished  by  the  darkness  of  their  skin,  and  the  Sebaim 
{Isa.  xlv.  14),  particularly,  were  noted  for  the  prooerity  of  their  stature,  if  we  find, 
in  Arabia  or  its  vidnity,  a  race  uniting  both  distinctive  marks,  the  probability  cor- 

Digitized  by 

Google 

484  THE  xth  chapter  of  genesis. 

tainlj  is  not  a  low  one,  tliat,  in  that  race,  we  recover  a  portion  of  the  family  of  Seba." 
In  testimony  whereof,  the  reyerend  author  quotes  Burckhardt's  description  pf  the  Do- 
waser  tribe  of  Arabs  —  **  very  tall  men,  and  almost  black  **  —  as  well  as  passages  from 
Gheanej,  Niebuhr  and  Wellsted,  corroborating  the  dark  complexion  obserred  by  these 
authoritative  trayellers  among  B^dawees  of  the  Persian  Gulf;  to  whom  we  could  add 
multitudes,  were  they  needed.  ^ 

Having  indicated  to  the  reader  suflScient  sources  to  substantiate  the  existence  at  this 
day,  in  Southern  Arabia,  of  tribes  dark  enough  to  justify  Jeremiah's  simile  (xiiL  23),  we 
>  might  proceed  at  once  to  the  identification  of  EUSA  in  its  geographical  affiliations. 
Inasmuch,  however,  as  one  of  the  objects  of  the  present  work  is  to  bring  the  arch»o- 
logical  and  ethnographical  facts  contained  in  Hebrew  literature  from  out  of  a  deplorable 
mysticism  into  the  domain  of  science,  there  are  other  scriptural  passages  that  daim 
priority  of  analysis. 

Ist.  lioiah  (xL  II)  —  **  from  Assyria,  and  from  Egypt,  and  firom  Pathros,  and  from 
EUSA,  and  from  Elam,  and  from  Shinar,  and  ftrom  Hamath,  and  from  the  islaads  of 
the  sea.''  Circumso^bed  within  the  geographical  limits  to  be  established  for  the  He- 
brew writers.  Southern  Arabia  is  here  the  equivalent  of  EUSA,  because,  otherwise,  an 
immense  peninsula,  very  familiar  to  them,  would  be  omitted. 

2d.  leaiah  (xvilLl,  2)  —  the  prophet  in  Palestine  here  apostrophises  JEffypL  We 
have  given  Rosellini's  rendering  in  Part  III.,  and  need  merely  now  remark  that  **  The 
rivers  of  EUSA"  have  no  relation  to  the  Nile,  nor  to  <*  Ethiopia"  above  Egypt,  but  are 
the  torreru  .Xgypti^  the  <*  streamlets  of  Misraim" — the  Beaor,  Corys^  now  "  Widee  d- 
Arish ; "  the  winter-brook,  or  Seyl^  which  divides  Palestine  firom  Egypt  at  Rhinocorura. 
Indeed,  this  is,  and  has  ever  been,  the  boundary-line ;  the  extremest  West ;  beyond 
which,  towards  Africa,  the  word  EUSA  never  passes,  in  the  geography  of  the  earlier 
Hebrews :  and,  from  that  occidental  line,  it  stretches  backwards  to  the  Euphrates  and 
its  lower  territories  south-east  of  Syria.  The  term  **  earlier  "  Hebrews  is  used  ad- 
visedly, to  distinguish  those  parts  of  their  literature  that  belong  to  times  preceding  the 
Captivity,  from  others  composed  during  and  after,  when  EUSA  may  have  possessed  a 
less  restricted  sense. 

The  most  formidable  objection  to  the  Asiatic  restriction  of  EUSA  would  seem  to 
originate  from  2  Chronicles  (xiv.  9, 12 ;  xvi.  8),  where  the  rout  of  *<  Zerah  the  EUSAcon," 
with  a  milUon  of  combatants,  by  Asa,  is  described  —  events  attributed  to  the  year 
941  B.  0.  But  this  has  been  ably  overthrown  by  Wells,  sustained  by  the  later  work  of 
Forster ;  who  shows  that  Oerar,  *  whither  Zerah  the  EUSAeon  fled,  '*  lay  on  the 
border  of  the  Amalekites  and  Ishmaelites,  between  the  kingdom  of  Judah  and  the 
wildernesses  of  Shur  and  Paran ; "  and,  consequently,  the  scene  lies  in  Arabia,  and 
Zerah  was  some  marauding  potentate,  probably  Sh^kh  of  a  powerful  Arab  horde, 
whose  foray  was  repelled  into  the  '*  land  of  EUSA,"  Southern  Arabia,  whence  he  came. 
Saracus,  moreover,  (the  classical  transcription  of  Zerak-tu,)  was  a  proper  name  among 
Ktishean  dynasties  descended  from  Ntmrod,  and  also  in  Arabian  traditions.  To  the 
Egyptologist,  in  consequence,  the  now-preposterous  identification  of  Zerah  the  KUShean 
witii  OSOBEON  (as  oSoBEon,  or  SRE),  second  king  of  the  XXIId  dynasty  of  Bn- 
bastites,  has  long  ceased  to  be  of  interest,  because  this  text  has  no  relation  to  Egyptian, 
any  more  to  **  Ethiopian,"  events. 

The  narrow  circle  of  geography  comprehended  by  all  ancient  nations  situate  around 
the  Mediterranean  as  late  as  the  Persian  period,  in  the  sixth  century  b.  c,  to  which  the 
Hebrews  form  no  exception,  forbids  any  such  deduction  as  Jewish  acquaintance  with 
Nigritia.  That  analogy  and  comparison  of  the  literal  texts  do  not  require  EUSA  to 
be  sought  out  of  South-western  Asia  in  general,  and  Arabia  in  particular,  in  any  Scrip- 
tural passages,  could  be  shown  text  by  text,  did  space  allow.  The  **  onus  probandi" 
of  the  contrary  may  now  be  left  to  "  le  th^ologien"  —  for,  as  Letronne  philo8<^>hically 
observed,  *'  id  le  rdle  de  I'hagiographe  commence ;  celui  de  Tarch^ologue  finit "  **  Le 
th^ologien,"  neatiy  declares  Cahen,  «*  en  tradnisant^  ne  perd  jamaia  de  vue  son  igfia^ 

Digitized  by 

Google 

HEBREW    NOMENCLATURE.  485 

* 

son  temple,  sa  synagogae ;  bom^  par  cet  horizon,  il  allonge,  racconrci,  taille,  entre- 
taille,  oontretaille,  les  pens^es  de  son  anteor,  jnsqn'  IL  ce  qo'elles  aient  la  dimension 
Toulue  pour  entrer  dans  Tenceinte  sacr^e.  Tel  est  le  /aire  du  thiologim ;  nous  ne  le 
bUtmoru  pat ;  tnais  ee  n*  eat  pat  le  n^tre,** 

The  reader,  who  may  be  pleased  to  yerify  the  exactitade  of  the  following  retultt,  will 
be  enabled  to  do  so  through  the  ref|Brence8  appended  to  this  condensation  of  a  com- 
plete chapter  of  our  work,  which  lack  of  room  compels  us  to  curtail. 

In  hieroglyphics  coeval  with  the  Xllth  dynasty  at  least,  or  2200  years  b.  c,  an 
African  nation,  situate  immediately  south  of  Egypt,  always  bore  the  following  desig- 
V      iiftAfim  nation,  in  one  of  many  dialectic  forms  —  as 

"  KSM,  barbarian  country" ;  or  spelt  KASA,  KeSA, 
^^^^^^  K  KidA,  or  KSA  ;  with  or  without  the  terminal  I. 

I    i^^      I     «,  The  human  portraits,  wherever  accompany- 

^         ^  ing  this  name  on  the  monuments,  are  invari- 

W      \      I  ably  A/rieant,  but  more  generally  of  the  dark 

^^1^  I        —  country,  barbarian,    mahogany-colored  Nubian  than  of  the  jet-black 
■  Negro  type. 

We  contend  that  this  proper  name,  which,  indigenous  to  AfHcan  Nubian  was  ascribed 
by  the  ancient  Egyptians  to  Nubiant  alone,  has  no  relation  (except  through  fanciful 
resemblances,  prodqced  in  modem  times,  through  corrupt  Tocaliiations  of  Rabbis  on 
the  one  hand,  and  of  Copts  on  the  other,)  to  the  Hebrew  word  KUS,  conyentionally 
pronounced  Kuth,  which,  to  the  Jews,  meant  *'  Southern  Arabia,"  and  no  country  or 
nation  out  of  Asia. 

To  render  this  clear,  one  must  commence  with  a  query  —  When,  and  how,  was  the 
Old  Testament  translated  into  Coptic  f  Quatrem^re,  sustained  by  the  old  Coptologists, 
claims,  '<  que  la  Bible  avait  €t^  traduite  sur  le  texte  hibreu  en  langue  £gyptienne."  De 
Wette  and  the  Hebrew  exegetists  aver,  that  « the  origin  of  these  yersions  {Memphitie 
and  Sahidie)  is  probably  to  be  referred  to  the  end  of  the  third  and  the  beginning  of  the 
fourth  century ;  for  at  that  time  Christianity  seems  first  to  have  been  extended  to  the 
Egyptian  provinces  [it  had  not  even  then  reached  the  temple  of  Otirit  at  Phils].  Both 
follow  the  Alexandrian  version,  but  it  is  doubtful  which  of  the  two  is  the  oldest" 

The  question  is  somewhat  important,  inasmuch  as  upon  it  hinges  whether  the  Copts 
followed  the  LXX*s  Greek  mistranslation  of  JLthona,  or  the  original  Hebrew  word  KUS. 
There  can  be  little  doubt  that  such  translators  imitated  the  Alexandrian  Version,  and 
not  the  Text ;  and  substituted  Ethauth  and  Kouth  for  **  Ethiopia."  Champollion  gives 
P-KA-N-NGHOOSH,  NEGOOSH,  and  ETHAUSH,  from  various  Coptic  topographical 
MSS.,  as  synonymes  for  the  Greek  At^iona,  the  Arabic  el-Habeth  (Abyssinia),  and  the 
vulgar  Ethiopia;  while  Lenormant  states  —  *'the  Coptic  books  employ  the  same  ex- 
pression {Kbuteh)  that  is  fluently  met  with  in  its  altered  form,  Ethotch."  Peyron 
and  Parthey  establish  the  same  fact ;  but  Lanci*8  deeper  philology  traces  Ethaoth  into 
two  Semitic  radicals,  Jieet  =  *  form,'  and  abet  =  *  to-be-black.*' 

Champollion's  Orammaire,  Dietionnaire,  and  Nbtieet  Detay>tivet,  prove  that  the  great 
master,  whose  discoveries  were  made  through  Coptic,  always  transcribes  the  ancient 
bieroglyphical  ESA  by  the  modem  Coptic  form  of  Kouteh,  or  Khooth,  Hence,  it  has 
been  universally  taken  for  granted  that  Champolllon's  Coptic  transcript  of  the  old  hicro- 
glyphical  AfHcan  name  of  EiSA  is  identical  with  the  Hebrew  Asiatic  KUS  —  that  both 
are  comprehended  under  the  Greek  mal translation  of  "Ethiopia"  by  the  LXX  —  and 
thus  Arabs  and  Nubians,  the  Arabian  Peninsula  and  the  Upper  Nile,  Hamitic  and 
Semitic  distinct  roots,  have  become  jumbled  up  into  <*  confusion  worse  confounded !  " 

Now,  it  so  happens  that  the  old  bieroglyphical  KSA  is  never  written  with  a  medial 
*  a,'  which  is  a  radical  "  mater  lectionis"  in  the  Hebrew  kUs  —  a  strong  point  of  dis- 
dmilarity  to  begin  with.  On  the  former  word.  Birch  had  critically  remarked  —  **  The 
term  Eash  is  a  fluctuating  and  uncertain  territorial  appellation :  it  is  tuppoted  to  be 
the  Eusfa  of  Scripture,  the  Thoth  or  Ethoth  of  the  Copts,  which,  after  all,  is  merely 

Digitized  by 

Google 

486       THE  xth  chapter  of  genesis. 

<the  frontier.'*'  We  haie  alreadj  [tuproy  pp.  256-9]  foniiahed  abundant  extracts 
from  Mr.  Birch's  more  recent  definitions  of  ESA's  localities  aboTe  Egypt. 

Bnt,  in  addition  to  the  perplexing  difficulties  of  archaic  Egyptian  and  Hebrew  names, 
and  the  anachronisms  of  modem  philologers,  there  is  a  third  element  of  medl^,  on 
which  it  behooYes  us  to  say  a  few  words :  yii.,  Ethiopia^  and  EUdopiatu,  Indeed,  it  is 
the  prevalence  of  misconceptions  upon  the  latter  which  lies  at  the  bottom  of  mistakes 
coQceming  the  former. 
*  Already  in  a.  p.  1657,  the  scholarship  of  Walton  protested  against  "  Ethiopian*'  de- 

lusions, with  a  citation  from  Waser —  <*  Grssci  Aithiopiam  dedncont  ab  «l^  eremo^  uro^ 
et  8>1/,  iit6i,  fades,  aspeetut,  quia  a  soils  yioinitate  ita  uruntur  et  torrentur,  ut  atro  sint 
colore."  Hence  it  is  immediately  percelTed  that  Ethiopian^  meaning  simply  a  *  sun- 
burned-face"  possessed  at  one  time  a  geperio  application  to  the  color  of  the  human 
skin,  and  not  an  attribution  to  one  specific  geographical  locality.  During  Homeric  ages, 
by  Ai0ttf>J/,  the  fair-skinned  Hellenes  merely  meant  a  foreigner  darker  than  themselres; 
and,  by  LiBiAwia  (the  existence  even  of  true  Negro  races  being  then  utteriy  unknown  to 
the  Greeks)  early  Grecian  geographers  unde^tood  (not  our  modem  **  Ethioina"  aboye 
Egypt)  the  courtries  of  all  tvoartky  Asiatic  and  Barbaresque  nations — Persians,  Assy- 
rians, Syrians,  Arabs,  Phoenicians,  Ganaanites,  Jews,  Egyptians,  Carthaginians,  and 
Libyans — especially  those  situate  along  the  coast  of  the  Mediterranean  from  the 
Orontes  to  Joppa. 

This  fact  has  been  established  beyond  all  controyersy  by  the  yast  emditioD  (^  a 
Letronne,  a  Raoul-Rochette,  and  a  Lenormant.^^  Its  etymoldgioal  tmth  can  be  yerified 
in  any  Greek  lexicon ;  while  it  is  adopted,  although  not  with  sufficient  arohsDolo^cal 
rigor,  in  the  popular  cyolopsdias  of  Anthon  and  Eitto. 

Want  of  space  alone  compels  us  to  suppress  many  pages  of  extracts  from  the  three 
first-named  savans;  through  which  it  would  become  demonstrated  that  AiOt^nc,  in  all 
writers  down  to  the  fifth  century  d.  o.,  meant  nothing  more  than  ^'yisages  bml^"; 
that  is,  <<  VQik'humi'facet"  By  way  of  example,  take  Memnon,  who  by  Hesiod  is  termed 
Al^t4irmv  ^aotXsta,  and  by  Homer,  the  most  beautiful  of  men.  Pausanias,  Strabo,  Di- 
odorus,  ^schylus,  and  Herodotus,  affirm  that  he  was  an  Asiatic  demigod,  probably 
from  Shuean,  or  Chtmstan,  on  the  confines  of  Persia.  Now,  Hesiod  neyer  meant  that 
modem  interpreters  should  understand  that  Memnon  was  **  king  of  the  Ethiopiamt^* — 
of  our  Ethiopia  above  Egypt!  The  poet  wrote  that  Memnon  was  **  king  of  the  bmnU- 
faces;"  that  is,  his  followers  were  a  dark-skmned  people,  such  as  the  Ci<«Ai^Armiiians 
are  on  Persian  confines  to  this  day.  It  is  the  same  in  Homer's  *'  Eastern  and  Western 
JEihiopians"  —  again  the  same  in  Herodotus's  J^Mto^Ttant,  enrolled  in  the  Persian  army 
.of  Xerxes ;  some  of  whom  were  Asiatics,  and  others  Africans — and,  not  to  enumerate 
instances  by  the  dozen,  it  is  the  same  in  wSnian's  Indians  (Hindoos),  whom  he  terms 
Ethiopians  also.  In  all  those  cases,  the  writers  meant  **  swi-humed-faeet^*  of  the  so- 
called  <*  Caucasian"  type ;  and  it  is  but  the  inanity  of  modem  liHiraieurs  which  ascribes 
any  of  the  above  JSthiopians  to  countries  south  of  Egypt 

However,  the  time  came,  (after  the  Persian  conquest,  d.  c.  525,  and  hardly  before 
Ptolemaic  days,)  that  Greek  geographers,  having  discovered  that  there  was  a  race 
*<nigro  nigrior"  whose  habitat  lay  south  of  Egypt,  began  to  restrict  .^SIcAk^  and 
Ethiopians  to  the  mahogany-colored  Nubians  and  to  the  jet-black  Negroes;  and  it  is 
in  this,  the  later  specific,  not  in  the  older  generic,  sense,  that  scientific  geographers 
understand  a  name  which,  without  such  reservation,  is  as  vague  as  Indians  (East  and 
West  Indies,  and  American  aborigines !)  ;  as  Scythian  (from  the  Himalaya  to  the  Bal- 
tic !)  ;  or,  as  that  wretched  term  *<  Caucasian." 

Now,  it  was  during  the  prevalence  of  such  geographical  misconceptions — ^when  Africa 
meant  littie  more  than  Carthaginian  and  Cyrenaic  territories  along  the  face  of  Barbery; 
when  Asia  signified  Asia  Minor — in  the  interval  between  Eratosthenes  the  first  scien- 
tific geographer,  and  Strabo  the  second  —  whilst  Hindostan  was  termed  Ethiopia,  or 
f^ice-vcrsa  —  pending  the  notions  that  the  Nile  and  the  Indus  were  one  and  the  same 

Digitized  by 

Google 

HEBREW    NOMENCLATURE.  487 

Btream ;  and  that  a  oircnmambient  ocean  snrrounded  what  little  of  a  flat  and  sta- 
tionary earth  was  known  to  Alexandrian  science:  —  during  snch,  and  hondreds  of 
similar  cosmographioal  views  since  proved  to  be  false,  it  was,  we  repeat,  that  the  Jewt 
of  Alexandria,  (having  forgotten  not  only  their  parental  Hebrew,  bat  even  the  Chaldee 
dialect  subsequently  acquired  through  the  Captivity,)  caused  the  books  of  the  Old 
Testament  to  be  translated  into  Greek;  in  the  form  preserved  to  us  under  the  mystic 
No.  LXX,  and  by  us  consecrated  as  the  Sepiuagint:  translations  fluctuating  in  date 
between  b.  c.260,  and  b.  o.  180. 

Books  of  different  origins,  translated  at  different  epochas,  and  by  different  persons, 
necessarily  teem  with  imperfections;  nor  can  uniformity  be  expected  from  literary 
labors  under  those  circumstances,  and  in  such  uncritical  times.  Geographical  criticism 
was  certainly  not  a  paramount  object  with  any  of  these  ''uninspired"  translators. 
They  never  foresaw  arohsdological  discussions  that  occur  now,  2000  years  after  their 
day,  in  a  language  not  formed  for  1600  years  later,  by  a  distin€t  people,  (whose  infan- 
tine traditions  attain  not  their  Alexandrine  lifetimes,)  and  on  a  Continent  (6000  miles 
from  Alexandria)  whose  existence  was  still  undreamed  of,  even  sixteen  centuries  after 
the  original  Septuaffint  MSS.  were  completed.  In  consequence,  some  of  the  Hellenizing 
Jews,  or  Judaixing  Hellenes,  when  they  met  with  the  Hebrew  word  KUSA,  simply 
transcribed  it  into  Greek  characters  as  Ko^f,  Kao,  or  Kas :  others  translated  KUSA  by 
Ai0tona  —  a  word  at  that  time  equally  applicable,  etymologically  in  the  sense  of 
*  eun-bttmed  facesy*  no  less  than  geographically,  to  India,  Persia,  Arabia,  and  the  Nu- 
bias, indifferently  to  its  Asiatic  or  African  association.  And  this  explains  why,  after 
2000  years,  the  imaginary  sanctity  of  Hebrew  and  Greek  tcorde,  accidentally  preserved 
in  recent  MSS.,  or  through  Latin  and  other  re*translations,  and  despite  innumerable 
recensions,  enables  us  yet  to  admire  in  King  James's  version  the  English  transcript  of 
Ctuh  only  five  times,  and  its  Alexandrian  substitute,  Ethiopia,  some  thirty-four  [ubl 
supra] ;  at  th«  same  time  that,  in  the  far  elder  and  original  Hebrew  Text  (copies  of 
which,  only  about  800  years  old,  have  come  down  to  us),  Providence  permits  our 
counting  the  triliteral  EUSA  in  about  forty  differrat  places. 

Under  these  circumstances  (notoriously  accessible  to  anybody  who  can  read  Eng- 
Hsh),  to  quote  the  Septuagini  authoritatively  on  doubtful  relations  of  *'  Ethiopia,"  as  if 
it  had  applied  to  Africa  exclusively  at  the  time  when  this  Greek  literary  work  was  in 
progress,  may  be  exceedingly  praiseworthy  on  the  part  of  professional  ha^ographers, 
but,  archseologically,  is  ''  vox,  et  preeterea  nihil,"  leaving  the  radical  issue  untouched. 

But  there  is  yet  one  more  rock  of  confusion  to  be  indicated,  upon  which  the  adopters 
of  Wilford*s  Puranic  delusions,  Faber's  fantastic  reconciliations,  and  Delafield*s  Ame- 
rican extravaganzas,  have  always  split  It  occurs  when,  through  disregard  of  phi- 
lology and  palsBOgraphy,  they  prefix  an  8,  or  other  sibilant,  to  the  Hebrew  KUSA ; 
and,  reading  SEUCH,  Scuihi,  Sicv0ac,  &c.,  make  this  patriarch  the  father  of  Scythians, 
SacoB,  Saxons,  Scotchmen,  and  even  of  American  Indians !  One  blushes  to  treat  such 
absurdities  seriously  in  a.  d.  1858.  Nevertheless,  the  disease  is  inveterate  with  many 
writers  <'  &  qui  il  ne  manque  rien  que  la  critique ;"  and  it  behooves  us  to  note  our 
''caveat,"  because,  as  Bishop  Taylor  says,  "it  is  impossible  to  make  people  under- 
stand their  ignorance ;  for  it  requires  knowledge  to  perceive  it,  and  therefore  he  that 
can  perceive  it  hath  it  not."  • 

A  dry  recapitulation  of  the  results  of  studies,  that  could  not  be  presented  in  full 
under  half  this  volume,  together  with  references  throtigh  which  the  reader  may  verify 
.exactness,  is  all  that  the  authors  can  now  offer  on  the  hieroglyphieal  ESA,  the  Hebrew 
EUS,  and  Greek  JLieidria, 

1st.  That  the  EeSA  were  African  aborigines  —  probably  similar  to  the  Bardbera  of 
the  present  day ;  but  were  not  NAHSI,  Negroes. 

2d.  That  their  habitat,  Arom  the  XYIIth  dynasty  downwards,  was  closer  to  Egypt 
than  that  of  any  other  Africans  —  probably  Lower  Nubia,  because  the  EeSA  arc  Ihe 
first  people  encountered  in  Egyptian  expeditions  above  Philie. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

488  THE  xth  chapter  op  genesis. 

8d.  That  their  name,  Btill  preserved  at  Tutzis  in  KUh^  was  never  EuSA,  but  EeSA» 
KUhf  or  Kcuh, 

[Lower  Nubia,  nearest  to  Egypt,  would  seem  to  have  been  the  residence  of  the  Kuk^ 
or  EeSA,  anciently;  just  as  we  find  a  similar  people,  the  BarHbera  (who  present 
striking  similarities),  there  now.  A  curious  little  fact  comes  in  opportunely  to  sup- 
'  port  this  position.  The  ruins  of  the  ancient  town  of  Tut^,  or  Tusis,  Uie  militaiy 
station  "  Dodecaschoeni,"  are  identified  in  the  modem  Gerf  Huss^yn.  A  Coptic 
papyrus,  found  there  in  1818,  established  that  its  former  name  was  Thosh;  and  the 
similarity  of  this  word  with  "  Ethaush,''  the  Coptic  form  of  "  Ethiopia,"  or  Koutk 
[ubi  supra],  was  long  ago  pointed  out  by  Wilkinson,  who  ascertained,  moreover,  that 
the  present  Nubian  name  of  TVi^sis  is  EiSH.] 

4th.  That  this  appellative,  KeSh^  in  hieroglyphics,  refers  to  a  special  Nubian  people, 
without  the  slightest  relation,  linguistically,  geographically,  or  anthropologically,  to 
Tirhaka,  beyond  the  fact  that,  like  his  pharaonic  predecessors,  he  conquered  and  ruled 
over  them  [supra,  p.  264,  Fig.  186.] 

6th.  That  the  African  EeSA  of  the  hieroglyphics  are  totally  distinct  from  the  Asiatio 
EXJSA  of  the  Hebrew  writers,  and  are  never  implied  by  the  latter  in  this  term. 

6th.  That  the  confusion,  still  prevalent  on  this  subject,  proceeds  from  an  insufficient 
examination  of  old  Hebrew  ethnic  geography  on  the  one  hand,  and  of  Egyptian 
records  on  the  other,  after  starting  with  a  fundamental  error  as  to  the  Greek  word 
"Ethiopia." 

7th.  That  EXJSA  of  Xth  Genesis  denotes  Arabia  in  its  widest  sense,  and  AraMan 
tribes  of  dark  completion. 

8th.  That,  except  perhaps  in  two  or  three  doubtful  instances,  in  the  later  biblical 
books,  where  geographical  precision  is  sacrificed  to  poetic  license,  the  biblical  word 
EUSA  never  crosses  the  Bed  Sea  into  Africa ;  and,  even  if  it  be  sometimes  coupled  by 
a  coDJunction  to  Phut,  and  to  Lud,  it  never  embraces  those  races  we  term  yi^ro — 
the  context,  in  every  case,  being  susceptible  of  more  rational  exegesis. 

9th.  That  EUSA  in  Hebrew  is  radically  distinct  A*om  the  Nubian  EeSA  of  hiero- 
glyphics, as  well  as  from  the  Kuh  of  our  present  day. 

10th.  That  EUSA  is  not  Zicv0ac,  jS^/A,  or  Scot!  does  not  include  Scjthic,  Indo- 
Germanic,  Tartar,  Mongolian,  or  other  races  outlying  the  boundaxy  of  ancient  Hebrew 
geography. 

11th.  That,  excepting  as  regards  its  application  to  Asiatic  tribes  of  dark  complexion, 
EUSA  cannot  be  rendered  by  Actfiono,  in  the  ^nse  in  which  this  Greek  word  was  used 
during  Ptolemaic  times  at  Alexandria,  and  by  ourselves,  without  leading  to  equiroque; 
but,  if  we  restore  to  *<  iBthiopia "  its  old  Homeric  meaning  of  **  aun-bumt-fae^ 
people,"  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  EUSA,  mentioned  in  parallel  ages  by  Hebrew 
writers,  were  sometimes  included  among  the  Eastern^  i, «.  Asiatic,  ^ihiopiant  of  Hesiod, 
Homer,  and  Herodotus. 

12th.  That,  in  archaic  anthropology,  Ethiopian  is  as  Tague  an  a<i|jectiTe  (without 
specific  warning,  on  the  author's  part,  of  the  meaning  he  attaches  to  it)  as  Septhian^ 
Indian,  or  Caucasian,  and  therefore  had  better  be  avoided  by  ethnographers. 

13th.  That  the  Coptic  EHOUSH,  and  Thauth,  or  J^o^A,  belong  to  post-Christian 
days,  and  represent  "  Ethiopia  "  in  the  corrupt  sense  in  which  the  Hebrew  name  EUS& 
was  already  understood  by  the  Hellenistic  Jews  called  the  LXX,  and  by  Josephus. 
The  former  word,  meaning  dark,  was  naturally  applied  by  Egyptian  (Copts)  Jaeobiim 
to  African  families  and  localities  above  the  first  cataract  of  the  Nile;  the  latter, 
meaning  **  ihe  Jrontier,**  and  also  (through  dialectic  mutations  of  E  and  TA),  being  a 
homonyme  of  EHOUSA,  was  a  natural  transcript  of  <*  Ethiopia ; "  a  name  which,  f^om 
similarity  of  sound  as  much  as  from  identity,  in  Coptic  days,  of  association  with 
Africa  above  Egypt,  had  been  previously  given  to  the  Niibias  by  Alexandrian  writers. 

14th.  Finally,  that,  unless  words  and  names  are  restricted  to  the  acceptation  in 
which  they  were  used  by  each  writer  in  his  own  age,  the  natural  history  of  humanity, 

Digitized  by 

Google 

HEBREW    NOMENCLATURE.  489 

greatly  dependent  as  it  is  upon  historical  phenomenal  can  never  rise  to  the  ley^  of  ft 
pon^tv^Mcienoe ;  and  that  sublime  sentence,  **  the  proper  study  of  mankind  is  man^^* 
mouthed  by  rote  without  perceptions  of  its  lofty  import,  and  still  overlaid  by  theo- 
logical clap-trap,  will  never  reach  practical  realiiation. 

To  us,  therefore,  EUSA  of  Xth  Genesis  tneans  Atia  geographically,  Arabia  topo- 
*  graphically,  and  the  dark  Arabs  ethnologically.    We  pass  on  to  classify  KVBhean  af&li- 
ations,  in  hopes  that  they  will  justify  our  d  priori  assumptions.^ 

KTJSA  as  Arabian. 

We  have  shown  in  the  foregoing  ritunU  that,  amid  geographical  personifications  of 
the  Hebrews,  EUSA  was  Anatic  generally,  no  less  than  Assyrian  and  Arabian  espe- 
pecially.  In  consequence,  it  seems  rational  to  seek  for  EUSAeon  origins  among  Arabic 
traditions,  and  Arab  localities. 

And  here  it  is  that  the  Recherehes  NouveUes  of  Volney  take  precedence  over  all  those 
made  during  the  first  quarter  of  the  nineteenth  century.  Yolney :  **  Un  des  hommes 
les  plus  p^n^trants  de  ce  si^cle.  ...  Si,  parmi  nous,  Volney  a  profits  des  Merits  de 
Richard  Simon,  ce  n'est  pas  parceque  Yolney  ^tait  imbu  des  principes  de  T^cole  ma- 
t^rialiste,  mais  ^  cause  de  I'instinct  scientifique  qu*il  poss^dait  profond^ment  et  qui, 
dans  ses  Merits,  s'est  souvent  fait  jour,  en  d^pit  meme  de  ses  pr^jug^s  philosophiques." 
Orthodoxy  can  find  no  fault  with  the  words  of  Lenormant,  whose  views  are  eminently 
catholic,  even  in  archeology.  We  gladly  follow  his  example,  when  taking  departure, 
in  Arabian  inquiries,  from  Yolney.  Nevertheless,  since  the  peace  of  1815,  multitudes 
of  scientific  Europeans,  profoundly  versed  in  Arabic  lore  through  arduous  studies, 
or  far  more  adventurous  travels,  have  given  to  Arabian  researches  a  propulsion  similar 
to  that  received,  since  1822,  by  Egyptian,  and,  since  1848,  by  Assyrian.  Primus  inter 
pares  among  the  abov^,  whether  in  the  cabinet  or  on  the  road,  ranks  M.  Fulgence 
Fresnel.  Than  his  opinion  French  and  German  scholarship  at  this  day  recognizes 
none  higher :  because,  in  addition  to  a  mind  disciplined  by  thirty  years  of  devotion  to 
this  speciality,  no  man,  in  Arabian  investigations,  has  yet  eigoyed  M.  Fresnel's  facili- 
ties of  actual  observation.  We  select  him,  then,  as  our  standard  authority  on  EUSA, 
and  Cushitf4 :  supporting  it  by  the  concurrence  of  distinguished  Orientalists  to  whom 
his  publications  are  familiar. 

The  arbitrary  Ptolemaic  repartition  of  the  Peninsula  into  Happy ^  Desert^  and  P&- 
ircean  Arabia,  has  long  ago  been  abandoned  by  geographers.  To  the  Arabs  these 
foreign  divisions  were  unknown.  Into  the  varied  districts  designated  by  such  alien 
names,  old  Arab  tradition  recognizes  the  Introduction  of  three  races,  forming  three 
distinct  nationalities ;  whose  several  origins  being  lost  in  the  night  of  time,  Moham- 
medan writers  have  appropriated,  through  the  Eor^  Hebrew  genealogies  in  the  absence 
of  history ;  so  that  it  is  now  impossible  to  separate  much  of  the  exotic  from  the  autoc- 
thonous.  These  three  divers  stocks  of  primitive  Arabian  nations,  t.  e.,  dRaB,  Western 
men — according  to  Ebn-Dihhiyah,  followed  by  Fresnel  and  Jomard  —  were, 

1st.  The  ARBA,  or  Abibah,  Arabs  par  excellence  —  subdivided  into  nine  tribes, 
claiming  descent  from  Ibam  (Aram  of  Oen,  x.  23),  son  of  Shem :  from  whom  the  semi- 
Egyptian,  semi-Hebrew,  Ishmael  is  said  to  have  learned  Arabic ! 

2d.  The  MOUTA'ARIBA,  naturalized  and  not  pure  Arabs;  whose  genealogies 
ascend  to  Qahtan  (Joktan  of  Oen.  x.  25),  son  of  Heber,  son  of  Salah,  son  of  Arphaxad, 
son  of  Shem.     . 

3d.  The  MOUSTAARIBA,  still  less  pure  Arabs ;  descendants-  of  Ishmael,  son  of 
Abraham  and  Hagar. 

These,  in  general,  are  reputed  to  be  the  surviving  Arabs ;  in  contradistinction  to  the 
lost  tribes  of  Ad,  Thamood,  &c.  &c.,  destroyed  for  their  impieties,  between  the  times 
of  <*  the  prophet  Hood  "  {Heber  of  Oen,  x.  24)  and  Abraham.  <'  But  the  spirit  of  that 
entire  table  (Oen,  x.),  in  which  names  of  people,  cities,  and  lands,  are  personified, 

62 

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC 

490  THE    Xth    chapter   OP    GENESIS. 

leads  ufl  to  conclude,'*  says  Gesenios,  **  that  Eeber  was  not  an  historical,  bnt  only  a 
mythical  personage,  whose  name  was  first  formed  from  that  of  the  peoples  This  was, 
doubtless,  the  case  with  Ion,  Dorus,  and  iBolus." 

None  of  the  aboye  nations,  howeTer,  attribute  their  deaoent  to  an  ffamiiie  affiliation 

through  EUSA  .*  and  Hyde  sustains  that  the  Cuthitet  migrated  from  Ckutuldn^  or  Sn- 

siana,  to  the  shores  of  the- Euphrates  and  Persian  Gulf;  whence  it  is  probable  their 

offshoots  spread  oTcr  Southern  Arabia,  and  CT^tually  crossed  the  Bed  Sea,  in  common 

'         with  Arabs  of  the  Semitic  stock,  into  Abyssinia  and  other  Upper  Nilotic  provinces. 

With  the  Ithmaeliiish  tribes  of  Arabia,  as  they  are  not  included  in  Xth  Genesis,  our 
inquiries  haye  little  to  do.  Their  distribution  has  been  worked  up,  as  completely  as 
the  subject  admits,  by  Forster ;  although  the  attentiye  comparisons  of  Fresnel  result 
in  but  nine  or  ten  nominal  identifications  of  Arab  tribes  mentioned  in  the  Bible,  while 
above  forty  biblical  tribes  are  wanting  in  the  lists  of  the  Arabs.  The  purely  Semitish 
families  of  Xth  Genesis  tire  allotted  their  own  places  in  our  Essay.  To  determine 
EUSAtYe  occupation  of  Arabia  is  our  bbject,  now  that,  except  as  *<  Bun-bumed-faeet^'* 
they  had  no  relation  to  African  **  Ethiopia,"  at  the  remote  age  of  our  historical 
horizon. 

No  one  will  dispute  that,  in  the  idea  of  the  writer  of  Xlth  Genesis,  the  affiliations 
of  Shem,  Ham,  and  Japhbth,  catalogued  in  the  Xth,  assembled,  when  **  thi  whole  earth 
was  of  one  language,"  on  the  plain  of  Shinar  (Oen,  zi.  1,  2),  whence  they  were  <&- 
persed  by  miraculous  interposition.  Among  the  number  was  EUSA,  the  father  of 
NiMnoD ;  and  consequently  Amj  on  the  banks  of  the  Euphrates,  was  the  primitiTe 
starting-place  of  himself  and  children,  riewed  as  men.  Conceding  to  orthodoxy  thdr 
departure  thence  towards  Africa,  Arabia  was  inevitably  their  road  and  halting-place. 
The  only  differences  between  debaters  are  questions  of  time:  our  riew  being  that 
the  KUShean9  remained  there  for  indefinite  ages,  and  that  their  African  emigrations  • 
were. partial,  as  well  as  chronologically  recent;  to  be  demonstrated,  anon,  by  the 
Arabian  concentration  of  their  several  -descendants. 

The  many  scriptural  citations  of  our  preceding  remarks  establish  that  EUSAi^et  were 
still  in  Arabia  at  a  far  later  period :  a  notable  instance  being  Zb&ah  the  Cuthiie,  in  the 
time  of  Asa ;  to  place  whom  in  Africa,  because  the  LMm  and  Cuthlm  are  united  in 
2  Chron.  xri.  8,  when  the  Ctuhlm  alone  are  recorded  in  the  historical  narrative  (2  Chron, 
ziv.  8-14),  merely  to  accumulate  proofs  that  no  confidence  can  be  given  to  either  account 
at  all,  is,  to  say  the  least,  incautious.  The  KVSheant  were  yet  in  Arabia,  at  the  time  of 
Jeremiah's  (xiii.  28)  interrogatory,  **  Can  the  Ctuhean  change  his  skin  ?"  which  con- 
trast, we  have  shown,  applies  to  the  dark  Arabian  tribes,  abounding  in  Arabia  then  as 
.  now.  Bnt,  lest  our  application  should  be  considered  dubious,  this  Uct  must  be  con- 
templated Arom  a  more  philosophic  point  of  view. 

It  is  acknowledged  by  the  highest  ethnolo^cal  students  of  our  generation,  Prichard, 
De  Brotonne,  Jacquinot,  Bodichon,  Pauthier,  and  others,  that  wherever  in  Austral- 
Asiatic  latitudes,  Hindostan  for  example,  tradition  yet  pierces  through  the  gloom  of 
time,  the  dark,  or  black,  families  of  mankind^(Bpeoimens  of  whom  also  survive  there  to 
our  day)  have  invariably  preceded  colonisations  by  the  WhUee^  or  higher  castes.  It  is 
also  claimed  by  Eenrick,  Bunsen,  De  Brotonne,  and  Lenormant,  that  the  great  Hamitk 
migration  westwards  through  Arabia  antedates  the  Semitic:  in  other  words,  that 
EUSAife«  were  settled  in  Southern  Arabia  prior  to  the  arrival  of  I)jowhomid(ty  Job- 
tanida,  or  Ahrahamida — Semitish  tribes,  like  the  Hebrews,  of  fairer  complexion.  The 
new  doctrines  advanced  in  this  volume  [tuproy  Chapter  YL]  relative  to  the  Improving 
gradations  of  type,  in  humanity's  scale,  when  we  consider  each  family  of  mankind,  one 
by  one,  from  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  to  the  Caucasian  mountains,  show  how  a  dark 
group  of  men  ought  to  present  itself  in  Arabiii,  as  the  immediate  Asiatic  successors  of 
the  swarthy  Egyptians :  ij^/^r-proper,  according  to  ancient  opinions,  now  corroborated 
by  zoological  facts,  being  far  more  Asiatic  than  African  in  its  natural  history  and  phe- 
nomena.   What  group  answers  all  these  conditions  but  the  one  to  which,  from  imme* 

Digitized  by 

Google 

HEBREW    NOMENCLATURE.  491 

morial  time,  the  name  of  EUSA  has  been  appropriately  referred  ?  Even  as  late  as  the 
fifth  cMitnry  after  Christ,  Syrian  authors,  cited  by  Assemani,  designated  HimyariU 
Arabs  by  the  name  of  EUSAt/M. ' 

And  this  brings  us  to  the  point  where  FresneVs  discoTeries  establish  the  entity  of  a 
fourth  group  of  **  Arabs/'  distinct  from  Semitish  families,  dating  in  Southern  Arabia 
from  ante-historical  ages  to  the  present  hour. 

Carsten  Niebuhr,  in  1768,  first  announced  to  Europe  the  positiye  existence  in  South- 
em  Arabia  of  inscriptions  which  old  Arab  authors  had  characterixed  as  Musnad, 
<  fropped  up,'  and  had  considered  anterior  in  age  to  Isl^  no  less  than  to  the  present 
Netkee  and  its  parent  the  Cuphie  writing  of  Mohammed's  day.  Be  Sacy,  1805,  with 
his  usual  acumen,  iuTeetigated  the  subject;  Seetzen,  1810;  (Jesenius,  1819;  Eopp, 
1822 ;  and  Hupfeld,  1826  ;  chiefly  from  Ethiopic  (Abyssinian)  data,  advanced  its  study ; 
until  Wellsted,  1884,  and  Crittenden,  (officers  attached  to  the  East  India  Company's 
surreys,)  disooTered  inscriptions  of  the  highest  interest,  cut  in  the  old  Himyaritio 
alphabet,  at  Sim  Ohordb,  &o. 

The  learned  critique  of  our  friend  Prof.  W.  W.  Turner  would  greatiy  simplify  an  expo- 
sitory task,  could  we  herein  digress  upon  these  Himyaritic  inscriptions,  the  earliest 
date  of  which  falls  far  below  the  Christian  era.  To  his  scathing  refusal  of  **  one  par- 
ticle of  sympathy  for  Mr.  Ferster  "  viewed  as  translator  (!)  of  the  Eimyoritic,  we  beg 
leave  to  add  ours  in  respect  to  this  gentleman's  more  recent  **  Sinaie  Inscriptions — Voice 
of  Israel  from  the  Rocks  of  Sinai  "  ;  and  to  apply  Turner's  just  strictures  to  both  of 
the  Rev.  Mr.  Forster's  fabrications.  **  His  wholly  false  and  inconclusive  method  of 
deciphering  the  inscriptions,  the  bombastic  strain  in  which  he  dilates  on  his  achieve- 
ments, and  above  all  the  disingenuous  artifices  by  which  he  seeks  to  disguise  the  hoUow- 
ness  of  his  pretensions,  render  his  performance  [whether  Himyaritic,  or  Sinaie,  or, 
worse  than  either,  his  last  ps^ndo-hieroylppkieaW]  deserving  of  all  the  ridicule  and 
censure  it  has  met  with."  It  is  sufficient  now  to  mention,  that  Hunt's  refutation  also 
lies  before  us ;  together  with  the  Recherche*  sur  lea  InaeripHone  JSimyeniqua  de  SofCA, 
KharibOy  Mareb,  &c.,  through  which  Fresnel's  claim  to  the  resuscitation  of  ancient 
Himyar  is  universally  acknowledged. 

M.  Fresnel's  IVth  and  Yth  Letters  to  the  JourruU  Aeiatique,  **I]jiddah,  Jan.  and 
Feb.  1888,"  give  a  sprightiy  account  of  his  rencontre  with  a  *<  piratical  grammarian" 
yclept  Moukhem ;  through  whose  and  other  fortuitous  aids,  he  constructed  the  voca- 
bulary of  a  still  living  tongue,  spoken  at  ZhafAr  and  Mirbdi,  in  Southern  Arabia ; 
which  speech,  now  unintelligible  to  Semitic  Arabs,  is  called  £hkih  by  native  speakers, 
and  Mahri,  or  Ohrdtri,  by  surrounding  tribes.  This  extraordinary  language,  whose  exist- 
ence was  unsuspected  until  1888  by  modem  philologers,  possesses  thirty-four  to  thirty- 
five  consonant  articulations,  six  pure  votceU,  and  as  many  naeal — approximately,  some 
forty-seven  different  sounds ;  among  which  three  are  utterly  inexpressible  in  any  Eu- 
ropean alphabet ;  and  one  is  altogether  too  inhuman  for  any  man  but  a  tme  Zhafarite  to 
enunciate !  Of  the  twenty-eight  articulations  current  during  Mohammed's  time  in  the 
Heo|j^,  two  have  become  superfluous  in  the  vernacular  Arabic  {Ddrip)  of  Cairo ;  never- 
theless the  old  Arabic  alphabet  of  twenty-eight  articulations  is  too  poor,  by  nine- 
teen phonetics,  for  tribes  living  at  Mirbilt  and  Zhaf&r  I 

[They  completely  destroy,  Fresnel  states,  *Ma  sym^trie  du  visage."  EvenMoukhsin 
thought  the  facial  contortion  ridiculous ;  though  he  told  M.  A.  d'Abbadie  that  none  of 
his  tribe  pronounced  three  of  those  letters  on  the  lefi  side  of  the  mouth.  **  Pour  rendre 
le  son  du  ^*  il  faut  chercher  ft  prononcer  un  Z,  en  portant  I'extremit^  de  la  langue 
sous  lea  molaires  sup^rieures  du  cot^  droit " — such  is  **  Himyaritic  euphony  ** !  Having 
humbly  endeavored,  **  in  auld  lang  syne  "  at  Cairo,  to  imitate  my  friend  M.  Fresnel's 
attempts  to  rival  Moukhsin's  mode  of  oral  articulation,  I  was,  and  still  am;  at  a  loss  to 
define  the  agonies  of  its  intonation,  otherwise  than  by  reprinting  how,  *<  while  (this 
letter)  somewhat  resembles  the  '  LL '  of  the  Welsh,  (it)  can  be  articulated  only  on  the 
fight  tide  of  the  mouth — being  something  between  <  LLW,'  a  vhieth  and  a  spit  I "  — 

O.  R.  G.]  ^  T 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 

492  THE  xth  chapter  op  genesis. 

Gesenins  had  dmded  Semitish  languages,  classified  as  they  are  too  Tagaely^  into 
three  main  branches :  — 

Ist.  The  Aramcsan,  spoken  in  Syria,  Mesopotamia,  and  Babylonia^  This  is  again 
diyided  into  East  and  West  AramoBan ;  that  is,  the  Chaldee  and  Syriac 

2d.  The  CanaanUUh,  or  Hebrew^  spoken  in  Palestine  and  Phoenicia.  Of  this  tli6 
Punic  is  a  descendant. 

8d.  The  Arabie,  of  which  the  ^thiopic  is  a  parallel  branch.  The. Samaritan  is  a 
mixture  of  the  Hebrew  and  Aramaean. 

To  the  above,  Presnel's  discoTeries  add  d^fimrth:  tis.,  the  "Ehk^elee*'  of  th»  inha- 
bitants of  Mirb^t  and  Zhaf&r ;  one  which  he  considers  among  the  richest  and  most 
ancient  in  the  world — allied  to  the  ^thiopic,  but  more  ardiaio;  preserred  in  Arabia 
by  a  peculiar  family  (long  ^t  off  from  the  rest  of  mankind  by  wild  B^dawees  of 
the  Semitic  stock,  with  whom,  it  is  said,  the  Zhaf&rites  noTer  intermarry)  —  descended 
probably  Arom  the  Hotnerita;  in  whose  name  classical  annalists  haye  preserred  to  us 
the  original  word  Himyar  (Arabic^,  Ahmar),  <  the  r«<i-men,'  as  the  distinguishing  title 
of  the  once-great  Himyaritet  of  Saba  and  Mariaba. 

"  He  who  enters  Zhafar  Himyarizei"  is  an  ancient  Arab  proverb,  which  shows  that 
the  Zbaf Writes  were  different,  in  some  striking  peculiarities,  from  SemiUsh  tribes,  and 
that  Tisitors  were  constrained  <*  to  speak  the  language  of  the  country ;  "  as  unintel- 
ligible  CTen  now  to  Ishmaelite  and  Joktanide  Arabs  as  the  Batque  is  to  Frenchmen  or 
Spaniards.  Now,  this  tongue  and  the  tribes  that  speak  it,  are  considered  by  M.  Fresnel 
to  be  the  true  relics  of  EUSA ;  owing  as  much  to  the  abundance  of  words  foreign 
to  Arabic  contuned  in  its  dialects,  as  to  the  singular  characteristics  of  the  speakers 
.themselyes;  whose  antiquity  Kt  Zkafttr  reaches  beyond  all  history.  The  daring  of 
Dr.  Amand,  (who,  at  Fresnel's  instigaUon,  penetrated  where  no  European  ever  reached 
preriously  to  1844,  and  copied  multitudes  of  Himyaritio  inscriptions  on  the  ruined 
edifices  of  Sana,  Ehariba,  and  Mareb,)  has  confirmed,  in  all  important  respects,  the 
existence  of  these  human  yestigies  of  EUSAt7e«  in  their  earliest  Arabian  homestead 
*<  eyen jinto  this  day  " :  and  the  men,  their  language  and  monuments,  baring  now  been 
found,  our  results  on  Xth  Genesis  may  be  finally  tabulated  as  follows :  — 

1st  That  by  KUSA  the  Hebrew  chorographer  meant  dark  tribes  of  Southern  Arabia, 
who  probably  inhabited  that  section  of  the  peninsula  prior  to  immigrations  of  strictly 
Semitish  Arabs.  They  are  the  Homerila  of  Greek  and  Roman  writers ;  Htmyaritet  of 
Arab  history ;  remnants  of  whom,  speaking  ^AM/t,  still  residing  at  Mirb^t  and  Zhafir, 
are  liring  witnesses  of  the  indelibility  of  primordial  types, 

2d.  That  other  compilers  of  Scripture  corroborate  this  riew,  and  prove  that  in  He- 
brew geography  the  KUSA)m  —  bounded  at  the  extreme  west  by  the  <<  rivers  of  CvtV* 
on  the  Isthmus  of  Sues  —  spread  across  the  peninsula  to  the  banks  of  the  Euphrates; 
perhaps  eastwardly  to  Ckuzistdn  and  Sutiana.  Their  settlements,  as  Forster  has  shown 
with  commendable  felicity,  lay  dotted  around  the  Arabian  coasts  of  the  Bed  Sea  and 
Persian  Gulf;  separated  originally  from  the  intrusive  Joktanidet,  (as  the  writer  of 
Gen.  X.  accurately  remarks,  v.  80),  by  a  line  drawn  from  **  J/e«Aa,  as  thou  goest  unto 
Sephar "  —  the  former  being  the  Zatnea  Mom  in  Central  Arabia  of  Ptolemy  the  geo- 
grapher; the  latter.  Mount  Sephar,  at  the  extreme  south-west  of  the  peninsula,  where 
in  Ptolemy's  time  dwelt  the  Sapharita;  and  where  at  Zkafdr,  Fresnel's  researches 
(unquoted  by  Forster)  prove  their  M]dli  descendants  to  live  still. 

8d.  That  before  future  hagiographers  place  KUSA  in  Africa,  as  the  Hebrew  nune 
for  Nigritian  races  (of  whom  Cdsh,  scripturally  and  physically,  is  no  more  the  father 
than  Abraham  himself),  ittmight  be  well,  perhaps,  if  they  re-read  their  "  Bibles  "  with 
a  little  attention;  and  not  perversely  close  their  eyes  to  the  new  lights  that  Oriental 
science  is  continually  shedding  upon  an  ancient  code  which,  Lanoi  emphatically  and 
truthfully  observes,  "is  the  more  honored  and  revered  as  thought  dives  into  it  to 
illustrate  and  comprehend  if 

As  Southern  Arabia,  and  as  dark  (himyar,  'red')  Arabian  tribes,  KUSA  takes  bis 
rightful  position  once  more  in  Xth  Genesis.  s<^  ^-^  I 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 

HEBREW    NOMENCLATURE.  493 

16.   DnSO— MT«RIM  — 'MizRAiM.' 

Semitic ;  bat  oertainly  not  the  Hebrew  'tribulation/  &o. 

As  it  stands,  is  the  plural  of  MT«R.  With  the  Masoretic  points,  added  since  the 
sixth  century  after  Christ,  it  is  a  du€Uy  Mits&aim,  meaning  the  two  MTxRs.  In  the 
singular,  MT<UR,  it  is  the  name  (by  modem  natives  referred  also  to  the  city  of  CairOy) 
through  which  Egypt  is  designated  in  the  form  Muss*b,  not  merely  by  her  present 
Arabicized  people,  but  by  all  Oriental  nations :  and  there  being  no  dispute  as  to  the 
application  of  MT«UR  by  Semitic  races  to  the  land  of  JEgypt,  from  the  present  hour 
back  to  the  remotest  period  for  which  we  possess  records,  our  genesiacal  purposes 
would  be  served  sufficiently  on  reading  Egypt  for  MT«R<;dm,  were  it  not  for  foolish 
rabbinical  notions,  vulgarly  current,  that,  misunderstanding  the  principle  of  Oriental 
personifications.  Still  treat  of  "  Mizraim**  in  Xth  Genesis  as  if  A«  had  been  really  a  man, 
**aon  of  Ham,"  another  individual!  One  might  as  reasonably  maintain  that  all  the 
Xumoif  or  the  **  two  Russias,"  mean  a  human  being  actually  resident  in  Muscovy ! 
Pandering  to  no  such  historical  falsehoods,  we  briefly  set  the  reader  on  the  **  royal 
road"  to  their  refutation. 

The  earliest  personification  of  JUatzur,  the  singular  of  MT«RIM,  is  not  in  the  Bible, 
but  in  Sanconiathon ;  a  very  ancient  Phoenician  writer,  who  flourished  (none  will  dis- 
pute) some  time  be/ore  Philo  Byblibs,  about  the  second  century  after  o.,  translated  into 
Greek  such  fragments  of  his  works  as  reach  our  day  through  Atheneeus,  Porphyry,  Eu- 
sebius,  and  other  transcribers.  Whether  Sanconiathon  be  a  mythe,  as  some  maintain, 
or  whether  such  a  person  really  lived  and  wrote  between  St  Martin's  adopted  era, 
1400  B.  0.,  and  Philo  Byblius's  age,  is  indifferent ;  so  long  as  it  remains  historical, 
that,  under  the  name  **  Sanconiathon,"  we  possess  some  exuviae  of  Phoenician  tradi- 
tions antedating  Christian  harmonizings,  that  cannot  have  been  written  alphabetically, 
according  to  the  laws  of  paleography,  earlier  than  the  seventh  to  tenth  century  b.  o., 
nor  later  historically  than  the  second  century  after  the  Christian  era.  We  have  no 
hypothesis  to  sustain  beyond  establishing,  through  these  ftragments,  that  *<  Misor  "  was 
the  ancestor  of  the  Egyptian  god  Thoth,  fferme$-Tritmegittua  {Eer-Mes  =s  *  begotten 
of  Horns')  of  the  Greeks ;  and  consequently,  that  this  Grssco-Phoenioian  legend  is  our 
most  valid  authority  for  making  a  man  out  of  the  <*  two  Egypta  "  —  Upper  and  Lower 
—  personified  in  Xth  Genesis  by  commentators  as  Mitzbaim. 

The  context  of  Pt,  cv.  28,  (and  wherever  else  in  canonical  Hebrew  records  the  sin- 
gular form  MTfUR  occurs,)  suffices  to  prove  that,  by  MTtUR,  each  Jevrish  writer  meant 
Egypt  as  a  country.  If  the  singular  number,  MT«UR^  in  Hebrew  grammar  and  history, 
signifies  merely  a  (^graphical  locality,  upon  what  principle  can  the  dual  or  plural 
forms  of  the  same  word  constitute  a  man  f 

Among  the  multitude  of  appellatives  given  to  Egypt  by  other  foreigners,  the  present 
name  Muss'b  reappears  in  the  Phoenician  Mvapa  —  suspected  to  be  an  error  of  copyist 
for  iftura  —  of  Stephanns  Bysontinus ;  in  the  Mter^ia  of  George  the  Syncellus ;  in 
the  Mkssbidj  of  the  Persian  *<  Boundehesch-Pahlevi " ;  and  so  on  backwards  to  the 
^  Persepolitan  cuneiform  inscriptions  of  Darius,  carved  at  B^istfin  early  in  the  fifth 
century  b.  c,  where  it  is  orthographed  M '  u  d  r  4  y  a.  Two  centuries  earlier,  the  name 
MASR,  orMadr  (also  Mesrahouan),  is  chiselled  in  Assyrian  cuneatics  on  the  thresholds 
of  Khorsabad,  among  the  conquests  of  Asarhaddon,  between  b.  o.  709  and  667 ;  and  it 
may  exist  perhaps  on  older  sculptures  of  the  ninth  century  b.  c,  discovered  by  Rawlinson. 

Albeit,  700  years  b.  o.  are  ample  for  our  object ;  inasmuch  as  they  prove  that  a 
singular  form  of  the  name  J/umV  existed  in  Asia,  in  days  parallel  with,  and  probably 
anterior  to,  those  passages  in  the  Hebrew  Text  where  MTtUR  is  its  homonyms.  Its 
dual  or  plural  representative  in  Xth  Genesis,  MT«R1M,  is  either  a  later  amplMcation, 
or  meaning  simply  the  Mm^ritett  people  of  MuetW,  Egypt,  excludes  the  supernatural 
idea  that  Miebaim  was  a  man. 

In  this  concrete  sense  of  Egyptiane,  we  find  the  correspondent  of  MtMratm  in  the 

Digitized  by 

Google 

4:y4         THE  Xth  chapter  OF  GENESIS. 

l/lcvTpatot  of  Josephus,  and  of  the  Syncellns;  but  the  latter  uses  it  in  his  preface  to  * 
document,  the  Old  Chronicle^  which  every  scholar  repudiates  in  some  mode  more  or 
less  decisiYe.  Those  who  now  pretend  to  accept  the  Old  ChronkUf  or  the  Lateradus^ 
as  genuine  Egyptian,  slur  over  Letronne's  blighting  criticisms.  The  hand  of  Judaiztng 
Christian  imposture  stands  out  undisgnisedly  in  the  other  portion  of  the  8ynceUu8*8 
chronography  —  w&ere  he  commences  his  *<  Laterculoa ''  with  MMrpoi/i  o  m  Mip^ — 
Mestraim  (for  Mizraim)  the  same  as  Msinis  !  That  the  first  Pharaoh  of  Egypt,  Menes, 
should  be  metamorphosed  into  MT<RIM,  the  EgypUatUy  of  Xth  Genesis,  by  a  harmonis- 
ing monk  of  Byzantium  some  800  years  after  Christ,  and  at  least  4500  after  the  death 
of  Menes,  is  not  extraordinary,  when  one  remembers  the  pious  frauds  of  a  school  in 
which  the  Syncellns  was  neither  the  first  nor  the  last  ornament ;  but  tliat  writers  in 
our  day  should  reason  from  such  and  similar  Greek-church  literary  jnggteries,  that 
MiUraim  of  Xth  Genesis  was  a  man,  instead  of  an  Oriental  personification  of  Egypt* 
merely  proTCS  such  writers  to  possess,  as  Bunsen  has  it,  **  little  learning,  or  less 
honesty."  Our  note  ^^  indicates  Tolume  and  page  wherein  complete  destruction  of 
rd  va\at^9  xeovuc69,  <  the  Chronicle  of  the  old  times,  or  events, '  may  be  foond ;  and  we 
are  content  to  follow  in  the  wake  of  Letronne,  Biot,  Matter,  Bamechi,  Bockh,  Bnnsoi. 
Baoul-Bochette,  Lepsius,  Eenrick,  Alfred  Maury,  &c. — all  of  whom,  more  or  less 
earnestly,  rcyect  the  Old  Chronicle,  uniting  with  Bnnsen's  condemnation  of  it  and 
*<  similia,  qusd  hominis  sunt  Christiani,  parum  docti,  at  impudentisnmi." 

All  Grecian  antiquity,  ft*om  Homer  to  Strabo,  has  designated  Egypt  by  names  in 
which  no  form  of  MiUraim  plays  a  part ;  nor  can  it  be  yet  said  that  any  true  equiva- 
lent for  the  Semitic  MuseW  has  been  discovered  amid  the  numberless  appeUattves  given 
to  their  own  country  by  Egyptian  hierogrammates.  Leaving  aside  old  fanciful  analo- 
gies that  mif^i  be  retwisted  out  of  Champollion*s  Orammaire  and  Dicticmnaire^  Dr. 
Hinck's  ingenious  TO-MuTeRI,  <  Land  of  the  ttoo  Egypts,'  fell  beneath  the  knif^  of 
Mr.  Davyd  W.  Nash,  who  substituted  TO-MuRE-KHAFTO,  <  the  beloved  land  of  the 
two  Egypts.'  Syncellus's  **  Mestreans  "  was  supposed  by  Lenormant  to  be  n  compound 
word  —  MES-n-RE,  *  son  of  the  sun' :  but,  1st,  this  has  not  been  fopnd  as  n  proper 
name  in  hieroglyphijBS ;  and,  2dly,  the  word  Utorpmia  is  but  a  modem  Greek  transcriber's 
corruption  (not  of  an  I^nfplton  name,  but)  of  the  Hebrew  and  foreign  word  MiUrm-m. 
Mr.  Birch*s  **  Merter  (Mitzrum),  is  red  under  thy  sandals,"  is  the  nearest  i^proxima- 
tion  to  Mtuir  hitherto  suggested ;  and  saves  dlsoussion  here  of  the  various  Hebraical 
solutions  proposed  l^  -Rosellini,  Portal,  or  Land ;  some  of  which  would  admirably 
explain  why  the  Hebrews  gave  to  Egypt  the  name  of  MT«RIM,  but  none  of  which  prove 
that  the  Egyptian  natives  ever  reoognised  such  foreign  designation — any  nearer,  phi- 
lologioally,  than  <<Americus  Yespuoius'*  might,  by  some  etymologieal  gladiator,  be 
wrenched  out  of  our  **  Uncle  Sam."  We  return,  therefore,  as  in  so  many  other 
instances,  to  Champollion's  fiat  of  forty  years  ago:  viz.,  that  Mueit,  MT^UR,  and 
MT«RIM,  in  all  their  forms,  were  probably  alien  to  the  deniiens  of  the  Nile,  but 
were  names  given  to  Egypt  and  Egyptians  by  Semitio  popuUitions. 

But  one  query  remains.  In  the  original  idea  of  the  writer  of  Xth  Genesis,  was 
MT«RIM  a  dual  or -a  plural?  The  surriring  punctuated  Text  (written  or  printed  is 
the  post-Christian  tquare'letter)  reads,  dualistioally,  Mittralm;  which  would  correspond 
perfectly  to  the  Pharaonio  division  into  *'  two  Egypts,"  Upper  and  Lower — preserved 
still  in  the  Saetd  and  Bakrtityeh  of  the  modem  Fellaheen.  We  would  submit^  notwith- 
standing, that  the  MaaoreU  diacritical  marks  float  between  a.  o.  506,  and  the  eleventh 
century  (age  of  the  earliest  MSS.  extant) ;  and  therefore  such  minute  contingencies  as  n 
dual  or  a  plural  become,  archsBologioally  speaking,  rather  problematicaL  For  ourselves, 
we  think  the  plural  form,  MiUiim,  most  natural — 1st,  because  it  is  the  Hebrew  literal 
expression  without  the  later  and  superfluous  points;  and,  2d,  because  the  plural 
MiT«RiM,  as  the  Israelitish  name  for  Egyptianay  amply  satisfied  all  chorographic  and 
ethnological  exigencies  whensoever  Xth  Genesis  was  projected. 

*<  Misnjim."  Bochart  declared  200  years  ago,  **  non  est  nomen  kcminia.    Id  noa 

Digitized  by 

Google 

HEBBETf    NOMENCLATUBEv  495 

patitur  forma  dnalis  ** ;  wherefore,  denying  that  there  ever  was  a  Mon  called  *<  MU- 
nxm"  we  read  simply,  for  MiT«RIM  —  the  Effypiiana,^^ 

17.    DID— PAUT  —  *  Phut.' 

Hamitic ;  not  the  Hebrew  *  fat/  '  despicable,'  &<3. ! 

Tl^at  this  is  Barbary  —  i.  «.,  the  African  coast  along  the  Mediterranean  west  of 
Egypt  —  no  one  doubts.  Differences  of  opinion  here  resolye  themselyes  into  mere 
eonjectores  ae  to  space. 

The  most  salient  feature  of  PhtU^  obserrable  in  Xth  Genesis,  is  that  this  personifica- 
tion has  no  ehUchen — ue,,  colonies,  or  aflSliations;  which,  conpled  with  the  Tague 
demarcations  of  Phut  in  other  Scriptyir&l  passages  (jYoAtim  ill.  9),  shows  that  to  the 
Hebrews  this  name  meant  generally  North-western  Afirica ;  embraoiog  families  of  man 
too  ^mote  to  be  described.  The  word  has  since  spread  very  eztenslTely  orer  Africa, 
iXFoute,  Fouta-ToTO,  FotUit-Bondon,  J^outa-Djallon,  &c.,  names  of  Fellatah  States  and 
tribes,  be  its  deritatives ;  as  Fda,  the  kingdom  of  Fei,  is,  without  question ;  nomin- 
ally replacing  4he  JUffio  PhuUnsia  of  Jerome's  time;  Ptolemy's  city  of  Foutu;  and 
Pliny's  river  Phuth  flowing  in  Mauritania,  the  country  which  Josephus  considers  the 
equiyalent  of  Pkut.  Indeed,  there  is  no  lack  of  old  names,  throughout  the  Moghreb, 
(part  of  which  containing  **  PuteM  urbs.  Phut  flumeii;  Phthia  portus,  PyikU  extrema," 
was  anciently,  called  i^V(^a),  like  PlUhamphu^  PhthemphuUy  PhautUm,  &c.,  to  establish 
Phut't  existence  at  all  recorded  ages,  close  to  the  LoMmf  Lehai^mf  and  similar  Libyan 
denguations  in  Xth  Gtenesis. 

Bunisen  reads  Phut  aa  Mauritania ;  conridering  that  tho  river  Phut  of  Pliny  is  equi- 
Talent  to  thePtmrof  hieroglyphics;  the  n  or  m  left  out,  as  laMoph  for  Memphis, 
or  Shishak  for  Shethohk.  fiireh  holds  the  hieroglyphical  sign  (which  ascends  in  anti- 
quity to  tlie  earliest  n^onuments)  to  mean  the  *<  nme  how.  This  word  has  been  read 
Feti,  and  Supposed  to  be  the  Seripturil  Phut,  the  Libyan^  or  Moors ;  but  it  must  be 
observed  tiiat  the  Meroj^yphieal  word  Peti  Is  alwayis  applied  to  a  large  unstrung  bow, 
in  ethnic  names."  Upon  the  ouneatie  sculptures  of  Assyria,  and  among  the  conquests 
of  AsarhaddoD,  De  Saoicy  has  read  -^  •*  Pepulum  Pmii,  hos  tt  gentes  foederatas." 

As  "  PAeT-^o*,*'  or  ftotts-cofwitty,  orte  ^'NiPAT — countries,^  determined  by  nine 
bowtt  this  name  fbr  the  last  quarter  of  a  centwy  has  been  identified  with  Phut,  (or 
rather,  comfounded  with  the  NiPAaiaT-^triie  representatives  of  the  Jfaphtukh\m  of 
Gen.  X.  18,)  in  Egyptiieuii  sdulptures  of  every  epoch ;  and,  without  doubt,  refers,  in 
hieroglypliics,  to  Libyan  fiimilies  of  ^maz»r^A«,  ShUlouhe,  &e.,  that  under  the  present 
general  d^iomination  of  Berbers  stretch  westwards  from  Lower  Egypt  to  the  Atlantic. 

Deferring  some  critical  minutiiB  until  we  reach  the  NapfitukXim,  our  opinion  on  Phut 
is,  that  in  Xth  Qenesis  it  means  those  countries  now  called  Barbary ;  while  in  other 
biblical  texts  it  covers  Hamitk  affiliations  along  the  Mediterranean  face  of  Africa ;  to 
the  exclusion  of  the  more  inland  Negro  races,  by  Hebrew  chroniclers  unmentioned.^^ 

18.  J];jD  —  KN'AdN'—*  Canaan/  ^ 

Hamitic;  not  the  Hebrew  < merchant,'  < tribulation,'  &c. 

Upon  no  terrestrial  personification  in  Xth  (Genesis,  except  Cush  and  Nimbod,  has 
more  theory  been  piled  upon  hypothesis,  than  in  respect  to  this  luckless  cognomen 
and  the  historical  nations  that  bore  it. 

Assuming  that  the  Jthovistie  document  of  Genesis  IXth  was  penned  by  the  same  in- 
dividuality who  compiled  the  chart  of  Genesis  Xth,  orthodox  commentators,  from  the 
Babble  and  Fathers  down  to  the  uninspired  annotators  of  orir  own  generation,  sorely 
vex  themselves  with  Noah's  inebriate  malediction  —  «  accursed  be  Kanaan.  Let  him 
be  dBD-^BDIM,  slave  oftlavea,  to  his  brethren" — (Gen.  ix.  26)  — whereas,  in  the  Text 
itself.  Hah  the  father,  not  Kanaan  the  son,  was  the  graceless  offender.    In  Hetlod's 

Digitized  by 

Google 

496  THE  xth  chapter  of  genesis. 

Greek  Ternon  of  the  same  Chaldaan  mythe,  hapless  ohpav6s,  Ctdus,  had  infinitely  more 
serious  reasons  for  swearing  at  his  unnatoral  son  Kp6pof,  ScUumtu;  while,  as  Cahen 
has  duly  noted  on  the  Noachian  cnrse,  *<this  is  the  fourth  malediction  that  one 
encounters  in  Genesis :  the  first  being  against  a  snake,  the  second  against  the  earthy 
and  the  third  against  Cain." 

Setting  forth  thence  with  a  moral  ntm-sequiiurf  commentators  next  attempt  to  justify 
a  supposititious  extermination  of  the  guiltless  grandson's  innocent  posterity,  recorded 
by  **  writer  2d ''  —  «  but  of  the  cities  of  these  people  (the  CanatadU»\  which  leHOoaH- 
thy  €h>d  gives  thee  for  heritage,  thou  shalt  spare  nothing  aliye  that  breathes"  {DwL 
XX.  16).  Tet,  despite  this  and  similar  omnipotent  injunctions  to  obliterate  poor 
ENAdN,  we  find  «  writer  8d"  {Jotk.  xr.  68)  attesting  how  « the  children  of  Judah 
eould  not  drive  out"  the Canaanites  Arom  IssaeVs  holiest  abode,  Jerusalem,  eyen  "unto 
this  day  I"  A  fkct  explained  by  "  writer  4th"  {Jud.  1. 19, 21),  <«  because  (the  Canaanitea) 
had  chariots  of  iron" ;  at  the  same  time  that  *«  writer  6th"  (2  Sem,  ▼.  7,  8,  9)  bears 
witness  that  one  band  of  Canaanites  maintuned  the  stronghold  U  Mt  Zion,  Jdm9^ 
down  to  the  reign  of  Darid.  Eyen  then,  unscrupulously  heroic  as  that  monarch  was, 
he  was  constrained,  through  political  exigencies,  chronicled  by  ''^writer  6th  "  (2  8am^ 
xxiT.  18,  24),  to  buy  from  a  Canaanitish  land-holder,  '*AraTna,  the  Jebusite,"  the 
identical  **  threshing  floor  "  on  the  site  of  which  Solomcm,  according  to  "  writer  7th  ** 
(2  Chron,  iiL  1,  8),  erected  a  little  paganish  temple  (smaller  than  its  duplicate  at 
Sierapolu)  that,  although  only  90  feet  long  by  80  firont,  is  estimated  to  hayo  cost 
about  4000  milliont  of  dollars  —  United  States'  currency. 

Other  sUcklers  for  plenary  inspiration  who,  in  direct  contrayention  of  the  plain 
words  of  Genesis  IXth  (fayoring  the  notion  that  Ham,  and  not  his  son  Canaan,  was 
accursed),  contend  that,  in  consequence  of  such  maledicUcm,  Ham  became  the  pro- 
genitor of  black  (NeffTo)  races,  may  be  set  aside  as  entirely  ignorant  of  Scripture. 
Followers  of  the  learned  Dr.  Cartwright*s  *<  Canaan  ideni^/Ud  with  tke  Ethiopian  "  may 
be  pleased  to  refer  to  the  fac- simile  portrait  {wpra,  p.  127,  Fig.  19]  for  con- 
firmation of  a  doctrine  which  has  the  douUe  misfortune  of  being  physiologieaUy  and 
historically  impossible,  as  well  as  wholly  anti-biblicaL 

We  appeal  to  the  sober  author  of  Xth  Genesis  for.  relief  ftrom  such  mental  aberra- 
tions. His  chof ography  (constructed  some  time  after  Joshua  the  son  of  Nun,  or  Nau, 
had  expelled  such  Canaanitish  tribes  as  surriyed  massacre,  or  tolerated  under  the  con- 
queror's yoke,  along  Israel's  roads  of  march  firom  Mount  Sinai  to  Palestine)  attests, 
ex  post  factOf  that  already  in  his  time  **  the  families  of  the  KNAANI  (had  been)  dit- 
persed."  {Gen,  x.  18.)  Large  bodies  of  these  people  emigrated  to  Libya,  where  their 
names,  traditions,  and  tongues,  exist  to  this  day.  Procopius,  in  the  sixth  century  ▲.  c, 
mentions  an  inscription  wherein  Fhcenidane  recorded  th^  flight  into  Africa,  "  from 
before  the  face  of  the  brigand  Joshua  son  of  Naue :  "  and  in  the  fourth  century,  St 
Augustine,  Bishop  of  Hippo,  relates  how,  in  his  diocese,  **  Our  rustics,  being  asked 
whence  they  were,  responded,  Punically,  ChananL"  Now,  it  is  a  fact  as  certain  as 
any  in  history,  that  the  Punic-Carthaginians,  their  parents  the  Phoenicians,  the  Ca- 
naanites and  the  Hebrews,  spoke  one  and  the  same  tongue,  but  with  slight  idiomatic 
provincialisms  of  difference.  *<  The  term  *  Hebrew  language '  does  not  occur  in  the  Old 
Testament,"  says  Gesenius,  <*  though  it  must  haye  been  common  when  part  of  it  was 
written.  Instead  of  this  name,  the  language  is  usually  termed  the  language  of  Canaan, 
{ha,  xiz.  18)."  So  far,  indeed,  from  Hebrew,  as  philological  science  nowadays  under- 
stands the  term,  descrying  honors,  owing  to  its  supposititious  antiquity,  as  the  **  lingoa 
sancta"  of  Paradise  (according  to  Usher,  exactly  b.  o.  4002-5!),  it  is  positiye  that 
Abraham,  grandfather  of  Israel,  when  he  emigrated  from  *<  Ur  of  the  Chaldees,"  spoke, 
not  in  Hebrew,  but,  like  his  Mesopotamian  tribe,  in  an  Arameean  dialect  Israel's  de« 
scendants,  forgetting  their  mother-tongue,  adopted  afterwards,  in  Palestine,  the  speech 
of  ENAdN;  and,  calUng  it  **  Hebrew,"  unwittingly  sanctified  the  language  of  the 
**  slaye  of  slayes,"  instead  of  that  of  the  true  Abrahamida  I    I>uring  the  Captiritj,  the 

Digitized  by 

Google 

HEBREW    NOMENCLATURE.  497 

Jews  again  forgot  KanaaniHth  **  Hebrew.*'  Retempered  by  some  seyenty  years*  scjonm 
in  the  Enpbratio  regions  of  their  primitiye  origin,  they  brought  back  with  them  a  later 
idiom  of  that  ChaJdman  language  which,  modified  by  about  1500  years  of  time,  was  a 
'  lineal  descendant  of  the  pristine  speech  of  Abraham,  son  of  Terah,  son  of  Nahor,  son 
of  Serag,  son  of  Ren,  son  of  Peleg ;  son  (that  is,  affiliatum)  of  Eber  —  not  a  man,  but 
the  geographical  personification  symbolized  in  Xth  Genesis  (21)  by  EBR,  Sber;  a 
name  which,  like  its  Greek  form,  vxtp,  and  its  Latinized  equiyalent,  Iberian,  originally 
meant  simply  "  the  yonda^  land ;  **  that  is  to  say,  Palestine ;  a  country  west  of  and 
beyond  the  river  Euphrates  I  *^  Hebretoe,**  as  the  foreign  corruption  of  EBR,  signifies 
nothing  more  than  men  from  or  of  the  other  tide  —  the  Yonderert, 

Every  effort,  therefore,  made  by  orthodox  Rabbis,  Doctors,  or  Mool&hs,  Jewish, 
Christian,  or  Muslim,  to  enhance  the  antiquity  and  holiness  of  the  tongue  they  call 
HebreWy  only  renders  more  venerable  *<  the  language  of  KNAdN** :  and  thus,  by  exalt- 
ing as  theologians  do,  unintentionally,  but  positively,  the  *^  slave  of  slaves  **  above  the 
chosen  master,  they  enable  the  retributive  justice  of  science  to  make  inhumanity^  and 
superstition  vindicate,  in  our  nineteenth  century,  the  memory  of  a  much-injured 
people,  who  called  themselves  ENA4NI  from  ante-historical  times  down  to  a  period 
far  more  modem  than  the  Christian  era. 

The  tmoeasing  proclivity  of  the  Israelites  to  adopt  Canaanitish  customs  and  worship, 
to  intermarry  with  Canaaniiith  females,  to  dwell  in  peace  with  or  among  them — despite 
denunciations  attributed  to  Moses  and  the  Prophets  —  no  less  than  the  existence  of 
Canaanites  everywhere. in  Palestine  after  the  Christian  era:  these  facts  (evident  to 
every  possessor  of  a  "Concordance  of  the  Old  and  New  Testaments**)  merely  prove 
the  strong  natural  affinities  of  language  and  of  physical  organism  common  to  both 
families.  Nay,  apart  from  supematuralistio  caprice,  the  only  satisfactory  mode  of 
justifying  such  vehement  declamations  of  hatred  towards  ENAdN,  found  in  the  writings 
of  Hebrew  reformers,  is  to  acknowledge  frankly,  that  human  nature,  rebelling  against 
these  homicidal  proscriptions,  often  rendered  them  nugatory  in  practice. 

Of  the  eleven  affiliations  of  ENAdN,  only  five,  the  Hethitea,  Yeboueitea,  Emoritet^  Chnr- 
gaeitet,  and  Hivites,  were  established  within  the  petty  territory  of  Palestine.  Add  to 
these  the  Canaanitee  (possibly  descendants  of  another  ENAdN)  and  the  Fherizitee,  who 
were  merely  peasants;  and  we  have  the  teven  peoples  which  the  Hebrews  were 
enjoined  to  expel.  {Deut.  vii.  1 ;  Josh.  iii.  10.)  The  desire  was  stronger  than  the 
deed,  for  the  Jews  never  entirely  drove  the  Canaanites  out,  even  of  Jerusalem. 

By  classical  historians,  the  ENA^NI  were  known  under  the  general  name  of  Mvtxssf 
Phcenicians ;  and  the  LXX  often  substitute  the  latter  name  where  the  Hebrew  Text 
reads  Kanaanites,  Herodotus  and  later  authors  assure  us,  that  the  Phoenicians  came 
ori^nally  from  the  Persian  Gulf;  and  the  Kanaani,  therefore,  would  not  be  indigenous 
to  Palestine;  but,  nevertheless,  they  wore  **  already  in  the  land **  (Oen.  xiL  6)  at  the 
advent  of  the  Abrahamidce,  and  we  regard  them*  as  autocthones. 

Eusebius  quotes  Sanconiathon  and  his  translator,  Philo  Byblius,  for  the  fact  that  the 
Phoenicians  called  their  country  XvH,  a  contraction  of  KNAdN.  On  Phoenician  coins 
the  city  of  Laodicea  is  called  mother  of  Kanaan,  Older  than  numismatic  record,  more 
ancient  than  Hebrew  annalists  (Moses  not  excepted),  more  positively  authentic  than 
any  source  to  i^ch  archteology  can  appeal,  are  the  Egyptian  monuments  of  Sethei- 
Meneptha  L  and  Ramses  IL  ;  whereupon  EANANA-tontf  is  frequently  mentioned  among 
conquered  Asiatic  nations,  from  the  seventeenth — sixteenth  century  b.  c.  downwards. 
And  it  may  assuage  pruriency  in  those  who  fancy  the  ENA/iNI  to  have  been  African 
«  Ethiopians,'*  (though  as  "  snu-bumed-faces"  they  were  certainly  Asiatic,)  to  take  an- 
other look  at  our  portrait  of  a  Canaanite,  copied  ftrom  sculptures  anterior  to  the  century 
in  which  the  Mosaic  Lawgiver  is  erroneously  believed  to  have  written  the  book  called. 
Genesis — a  portrait,  wherein  the  features  establish  that  (apart  from  Canaan's  priority  of 
speech  in  the  Hebraical  <*  lingua  sancta,**  as,  eventually,  <*beatorum  in  coelis**)  the  ines« 

63 

Digitized  by 

Google 

498  THE  xth  chapter  of  genesis. 

tingaishable  laws  of  type  prore  the  ENAdNI,  u  history  also  tesdftes,  to  belong  to  the 
same  zoological  proTince  of  creation,  though  to  a  lower  gradation  of  type,  as  the  Abra- 
hamids.  Indeed,  the  root  of  ENA  meaning  *  low,'  and  that  of  Abbam,  *  hig^,'  one 
may  perceiTe  the  real  cause  of  early  antipathy  between  the  CanaaniUt  and  the  Ahra" 
hamida  to  lie  in  mutual  repugnances  between  the  indigenbus  "low-lander"  and  the 
IntrusiTe  "high-lander." 

Palestine,  in  its  widest  geographical,  no  less  than  in  its  restricted  rabbinical  sense, 
is  written  history's  cradle,  and  natural  history's  birth-plaoe,  for  ENAdN.9>0 

tJ^tD  ♦ja— BNI-EUSA— "AfUiationB  of  Kush/' 
19.  K3D  — SBA^^Seba.' 

Perplexities  are  here  occasioned  by  palseographical  and  phonetic  diffnrencet  between 
the  letters  S,  SA,  and  8$, 

Four  separate  nations  or  places,  as  Bochart  reminds  us,  are  mentioned  in  Genesis 
by  names  transcribed  through  Seba  or  Sheba:  vis.  — 

A.  —  Genewz,    7  — KaD— SBA,   or  iS^,    aflUiation  of  KUSA. 

B.  —     ««        *•    7  —  ^^  —  '^^-^»  ®'  ^^'  affiliation  of  KUSA  through  Raaxas. 

C.  —     "       z.  28  ~  KOBr—  S«BA,  or  Sheba,  affiliation  of  SAeM  through  Jostas. 

D.  —     "    xxY.    8  —  xav—  S<BA,  or  Sheba,  affiliation  of  SAeM  through  Abbahaic. 

On  these  discrepancies  Fresnel  has  wisely  noted,  that  post-Mohammedan  Arabe  haye 
likewise  forged  genealogies  to  match  some  of  those  in  Xth  Genesis ;  at  the  same  time 
that  different  Hebrew  annalists  often  contradict  themselyes,  no  less  than  current  Ara- 
bian traditions.  Various  are  attempts  at  reconciliation,  to  be  consulted  under  onr 
references  to  Volney,  Lenormant,  Munk,  Jomard,  and  De  Wette ;  but,  upon  the  whole, 
Forster's  appear  to  be  the  most  successful,  yiewed  geographically.  To  us,  nererthe- 
less,  the  only  apparent  difference  between  the /our  abOTO-cited  names  is,  that  one  (A.) 
begins  with  the  letter  eameq,  S ;  and  the  other  three  (B.,  C,  D.)  with  sheen,  SA/  that 
is,  according  to  the  Masorete  points  added  to  the  modem  equare-leiter  manuscripts  after 
the  sixth  century ;  because,  those  stripped  away,  sheen  remains  Sseen,  or  Ss, 

Abraham's  grandchild,  through  Eetoura,  the  fourth  SABA  (D.),  is  excluded  from 
Xth  Genesis,  and,  therefore,  appertains  not  to  our  researches ;  ei^cept  when  noticing 
the  confusion  he  produces  in  Arabian  genealogies.  Nor,  for  similar  reasons,  do  we 
speculate  on  which  of  the  four  names  might  apply  to  the  unknown  region  whence  jour- 
neyed Solomon's  "  Queen  of  Sheba  " ;  whom  Josephus  makes  soyereign  of  Egypt  and 
Ethiopia ;  and  whom  the  Abyssinians  haye  eyer  claimed  as  their  own ;  her  illegitimate 
son,  by  Solomon,  being  the  legendary  progenitor  of  all  their  kings.  The  gifts  which 
this  "  illustrious  inquirer  after  truth  "  made  to  King  Solomon  (1  Kinys  x.  10 ;  2  Ckran, 
ix.  9)  —  estimated  at  $2,917,080,  of  U.  S.  coinage;  besides  any  quantity  of  spices  and 
precious  stones  —  are  enlarged  upon  by  Forster,  who  considers  this  lady  to  haye  been 
"Queen  of  Yemen"  in  Southern  Arabia.  Indeed,  "the  offerings  of  the  Queen  of 
Sheba  "  are  belieyed,  by  Mr.  Wathen,  to  haye  enabled  Bhamsinitus  to  build  "  the  inde- 
structible masses  of  ihe  pyramids  "  of  Egypt  Hoskins,  of  course,  appoints  this  ubiquit- 
ous dame  Queen  of  AfHcan  Meroe :  but  Fresnel,  commenting  upon  inscriptions  bronght 
by  Dr.  Amaud  from  the  WirHm-BiVcis — a  great  elliptical  temple,  considered  to  be  the 
"Sanctuary  of  the  Queen  of  Sheba** — seems  to  haye  determined  her  Yemenite  locality, 
as  well  as  the  name  B-Almakah  ;  by  which,  representing  a  form  of  Venus,  she  became 
subsequentiy  deified  by  the  Sabseans.  Oriental  tradition  has  consecrated,  elsewhere, 
the  yoyages  of  princesses,  about  the  same  period  that  Sheba*s  queen  and  King  Solomon 
interchanged  affectionate  courtesies.  So  struck,  indeed,  were  the  Jesuit  missionaries 
with  the  resemblance  between  the  journey  made,  about  1000  b.  c,  by  "  a  princess 
named  Si-wang-mou,  the  Mother  of  the  Western  king  (who  afterwards  went  to  China^ 

Digitized  by 

Google 

HEBREW    NOMBNCLATUBE.  499 

beanng  presents  to  King  Mou-wang  *')  and  Solomon's  **  qneen  of  ShebOy"  that  these 
pietists  supposed  the  Chmete  account  to  be  a  mere  travesty  of  the  Hebrew  books  of 
Kmffs  or  ChnmieUi  I  The  era ;  many  of  the  presents ;  the  miraculous  facilities  of 
transportation  oyer  similar  immense  distances;  and  the  manner  in  which  the  "  Mother 
of  the  Western  King  and  Mou-wang  abandoned  themseWes,  eren  at  the  end,  to  all  the 
delights  of  joy  and  songs,"  curiously  correspond.  Still  more  singularly ; — the  Chinese 
book,  in  which  these  parallelisms  are  recorded,  is  called  CH-i  (t.  e.  collection  of  what 
is  neglected)— a  name  identical  with  the  Hebrew  DibrS  haiamm,  and  the  Greek  Para- 
Upowtna  (things  left  out) :  in  which  latter  yolume,  under  our  English  designation  of 
<<  Chronicles,"  the  queen  of  Sheba*$  Tisit  was  registered,  like  the  Chinese  story,  by  far 
later  scribes,  until  copies  became  multiplied  ad  mflnitwn,  throu^^  the  blessing  of 
moTcable  types. 

Deeming,  in  common  with  the  highest  biblical  exegetists  of  our  age,  Solomon's 
*< queen  of  Skeba"  to  be  less  historical  than  Mou-wang's,  we  are  fain  to  leave  her  out 
of  the  argument ;  no  less  than  Josephus's  opinion  that  AfHcan  Mero9  was  intended  by 
any  **  Saba "  of  Xth  Genesis.  Which  doubts  submitted,  let  us  remember  how  Pliny 
assures  us  that  the  Sabceans  stretched  firom  sea  to  sea ;  that  is,  ftrom  the  Persian  to  the 
Arabian  Gulf:  and,  inasmuch  as  four  distinct  nations  of  Arabia  are  recorded  under 
the  appellatiTe  Seba,  Sheba,  Steba,  or  Saba,  it  is  imcertain  whether  any  one  of  them 
can  be  specially  identified  at  this  day.  Neyertheless,  they  are  all  circumscribed  by 
the  «  Geieeret-el-Arab,"  or  Itle  of  the  Arabs;  and  Seba  (A.),  the  first  of  Genesis  Xth, 
as  a  KVQhite  affiliation,  belongs  to  the  himydr  (red),  or  clorik-skinned  race ;  —  not  im- 
ptobably  now  represented  by  the  tribes  at  Mirbdi  and  ZhafAr,  who  still  speak  the  old 
EhkUUe  tongue. 

No  objections  militate  against  Forster's  skilftdly  elaborated  conclusion,  <*  that  the 
Seba  or  Sebaim  of  the  Old  Testament,  and  the  Sabi  or  Asabi  of  (Ptolemy)  the  Alex- 
andrine, denote  one  and  the  same  people ;  '>  and  that  <*  the  tract  of  country  between 
Cape  Mussendom  and  the  mountains  of  Soierm  was  originally  the  seat  of  Cushite 
oolonies ; "  because,  as  Forster's  mope  and  reasonings  establish.  Cape  Mussendom  was 
styled,  by  Ptolemy,  <*  the  promontory  of  the  Aeabi^"  near  which  now  lies  the  town  of 
CffUcan  (Cuahan  of  Hebrew  writers) ;  and  a  littoral  termed,  by  Pliny,  *'  the  shore  of 
HatHj^*  Littut  Hammetum,  now  Maham  [Ma-EAaM  ?  place  of  Ham]  ;  adgaeent  to  which 
is  tC  Wddee-ffam,  Valley  of  Ham ;  prove  that,  all  around  this  centre,  many  local  names, 
eommemoratiye  of  KUSAi^e  settlements,  eren  yet  exist 

Not  to  dogmatize,  we  conceiTO  that  OmAn,  prorince  of  Southern  Arabia,  suffices 
for  the  pristine  habitat  of  our  Seba  (A).^oo 

20.  nSnrr— KAUiLH— ^havilah. 

Two  ffaviUUut  both  spelt  exactly  the  same  way,  one  KUShiie  (v.  7),  and  the  other  . 
Joktanide  (r.  29),  occurring  in  Xth  Genesis,  their  separation  is  difficult:   without 
harassing  ourseWes  about  the  third — <<Land  of  KAUILH,"  in  Oen,  iL  11  —  which, 
being  ante-dilurian,  concerns  not  human  history. 

Here  agun  Forster  is  an  excellent  guide,  because  he  does  little  more  than  copy 
Bochart  Assigning  to  the  Joktanide  ffavUah  the  seyeral  districts  bearing  this  name 
in  Temen,  he  naturally  seeks  for  the  EUSAi<«  Havilah  about  the  Persian  Gulf,  fixing 
upon  the  Bahr^yn  islands  as  the  piTot  of  inquiry ;  one  of  which  still  retains  its  original 
name,  AvaL  **  In  order  to  illustrate  the  ancient  Arom  the  modem  Tariations  of  the 
proper  name  Hairilah,  we  must  begin,"  he  sensibly  observes,  '*by  remoriog  the  dis- 
guise thrown  over  it,  in  our  English  version  of  the  Bible,  by  its  being  there  spelled 
according  to  the  Rabbinical  pronunciation.  The  Hebrew  word,  written  ffatnlah  by 
adoption  of  the  points,  without  points  would  read  ffuiU,  or  Ifauile;**  and  thereby  its 
identity  with  the  Euaela  of  Ptolemy ;  the  ffuala  of  Niebuhr ;  the  Aval^  AiUil,  ffuale, 

Digitized  by 

Google 

500  THE    Xth    chapter    OF   GENESIS. 

Khauy  Khali,  KhaiUy  KhauUtn,  of  modern  Arabic,  becomes  transparent  to  general 
readers. 

Thus,  enlarging  Bochart's  ingenious  comparisons,  the  ZiVJr  of  the  LXX ;  the  Cka- 
blatii  of  Dionysins  (Periegetes) ;  the  EUUaan  mountains  of  Ptolemy,  still  called  AUmI; 
the  Chauloihei  of  Erastosthenes,  and  the  Ckaldcn  of  Plinj;  become  resolYed,  by  Forster, 
into  the  powerful  tribe  of  the  BmirKhHUd:  whose  encampments  dot  the  Peninsul* 
fyom  Damascus  to  the  Straits  of  Bab-el-mandeb ;  ftrom  Mekka,  on  the  Arabian  coast, 
round  to  the  Persian  Gulf  and  Mesopotamia ;  often  on  sites  where  some  remembrance 
of  their  parental  HamliU  appellatiyes  is  traditionally  presenred  **  unto  this  day.*' 

**  Se  non  ^  vero,  almeno  ^  ben  troTato  " :  and,  in  the  present  state  of  knowledge  oo 
Central  Arabia — wonderf^y  small,  our  nineteenth  century  considered — if  Carlyle's 
«  hammer  of  Thor  "  might,  perhaps,  demolish  Forster's  picturesque  edifice,  we  doubt 
that  Thor  himself  could  erect  a  substitute  more  solid. 

Albeit,  ethnology  may  well  be  content  when  Arabia,  and  espemally  the  shores  and 
islands  of  the  Persian  Gulf,  preserre  so  many  reminiscences  of  three  **  HaTiIahs ;  ** 
among  which,  throagh  closest  application  of  the  **  doctrine  of  chances,"  some  local 
habitation  must  still  exist  for  the  name  and  lineage  of  a  EUSAite  Khauilah.^^ 

21.  nn3D  — SBTtH  — *Sabtah/ 

What  may  haye  been  the  origin  of  the  word  Saba^  which,  simple  or  compound,  has 
been  preserved  in  Arabia  by  Hamitio  and  Semitic  affiliations,  firom  primordial  times  to 
the  present,  there  appears  to  be  no  means  now  of  ascertaining.  Gesenius  derives 
Sabaitm  from  Teaba,  the  heayenly  <  host  * ;  which,  as  concerns  the  root  SeAa^  appears 
somewhat  ex  pott  facto.  Arab  migration  carried  this  name  into  Abyssinia,  if  the  8«h<B 
of  Strabo  be  now  represented  by  a  town  called  Eetab ;  so  too  Josephus  imagines  MeroC 
to  have  been  called  Sabay  previously  to  its  adoption  of  the  name  of  Cambyses's  sister; 
but  Lepsius's  Men^te  discoveries  prove  the  whole  story  to  be  fabulous.  Bochart,  cau> 
tiously,  traced  Sabatha,  Sobota,  of  Pliny,  through  Sophtha^  an  island  in  the  Persian 
Gulf,  to  the  MoMabaihce  on  Median  frontiers.  Pliny,  however,  says  **AtramH<B  quorum 
eaiiputSoboiale  LX  templa  muris  includens  '* ;  which  fixes  this  city  towards  HadramauL 
Of  the  three  Arabian  sites  where  nominal  remains  of  Sabtah  are  now  traceable,  Vol- 
ney's  adoption  of  Bochart's  index  seems  most  appropriate :  that  of  Ptolemy's  city, 
Zatp$a,  Saphtha,  Sabbatha-metrcpolit,  on  the  coast  of  the  Persian  Gulf,  in  the  provinee 
of  Bahr^yn ;  where  the  Saab  Arabs  roam  at  present,  as  Forster's  maps  confirm. 

"  The  HomeritsB,"  states  the  great  hydrographer  Jomard,  **  the  HadramitaB,  the  Cha- 
tramotite,  the  Sabesi,  the  Sapharitse,  the  Omanitss,  the  Maranite,  the  Minini,  the 
Thamudeni,  lived  where  nowadays  even  are  the  people  of  ffemyar,  the  people  of  Ha- 
dramauty  the  people  of  Saba  (or  Mariaba),  the  people  of  DhafiLr,  the  people  of  Ovmm, 
those  of  Mahrahy  those  of  Mina,  of  Thamoud^  and  many  other  peoples,  of  which  the 
name,  any  more  than  the  existence,  does  not  appear  to  have  suffered  from  time.*'  And 
it  will  manifest  the  pains  now  bestowed  by  Orientalists  to  discover  these  Arabiaa 
localities,  to  add  FresneFs  successes :  —  <*  The  famous  emporium  of  Kana  is  decidedly 
identified  with  Hisn-Ghor&b  "  —  and  <*  the  town  of  Kharibet,  discovered  by  M.  Amaud, 
is  the  last  term  of  (JSlius  Gallas's)  Roman  expedition  {Caripeia)." 

Though  we  cannot  yet  place  our  finger  on  the  exact  spot,  there  is  no  reason  for  seek- 
ing Sabtah  elsewhere  than  among  KVShile  affiliations  colonized  on  the  Persian  Golf. 
If  not  found  already,  the  place  and  its  tribes  will  soon  be  recovered  by  the  seal  of 
Arabian  explorers.*^ 

22.  nOI^T  — EAdMH  — *Raamah.' 

Bochart's  acuteness  had  settled  upon  P(xf<«  of  the  LXX ;  Rkegama  of  Ptolemy ;  Btf^ 
mapolie  and  Kolpot-Regma  in  Steph.  Byzantinus.    This  name  is  said  by  Strabo  to  sig- 

Digitized  by 

Google 

HEBREW    NOMENCLATURE. 

601 

Bify  <  Btraits ' ;  which  meaning  singularly  oorresponds  to  the  narrow  entrance  of  the 
Persian  Golf,  on  the  Arabian  side  of  which  Forster's  maps  fix  Baamah,  and  its  two 
colonies  Sheba  and  Dedan  ;  already  grouped  together  by  Esekiel  (zxriL  2(X-22). 

The  inland  proTince  of  Mahrah  preserres  the  phonetio  elements  q{  Raamah;  and 
there  it  is  that,  at  Mirbdt  and  Zhafdr,  FresnePs  discoTcries  of  the  Ehkkelee  tongue,  called 
also  Mahrte,  establish  the  existence  of  a  people,  distinct  fh>m  Semitish  Arabs ;  sor- 
▼iTors  of  the  old  Himyarite  {red)  stock :  the  dorihskinned  Arabians  of  KUSAite  lineage, 
represented  by  the  swarthy  Dovdtir  tribes,  as  reported  by  Bnrckhardt  and  Wellsted. 

These  people  were  called  RkammiUB  and  Rhabamta  by  Boman  authors ;  and  Ramtt^ 
an  Arab  port  just  inside  the  Persian  Gulf,  perfectly  answers  to  the  site  of  Raamah 
catalogued  among  KUSAi^  personifications  in  Xth  Genesis.^ 

28.  lOnaO  — SBTeKA  — <Sabtechah.' 

**Sabtaka  is  thrown  by  Josephns  into  Abyuinian  Ethiopia;  by  Bochart,  into  the 
Persic  Carmania,  under  pretext  of  resembling  Samydake :  these  two  hypotheses  seem 
%o  us  Tague  and  withoat  proofs.     Sabtaka  has  no  known  trace."    So  far  Yolney. 

Yet  Bochart's  suggestion  of  b  for  m  offers  no  palseographic  difficulties;  and  if 
Samedakt  could  be  identified,  SaBeTAKe  might  be  Sabteka,  situate  in  Eermin,  near 
the  Persian  Gulf. 

**  The  Sahatiea  Regio  of  the  ancients,  a  district  apparently  in  the  neighborhood  of 
the  Shat-al-Arab,  is  the  only  probable  vestige  I  can  discover,*'  says  Forster,  <<  of  the 
name  or  settlements  of  Sabteoha.*' 

For  our  purposes,  this  excellent  indication  is  sufficient  Personifying  some  locality 
or  people  of  KUSAtte  origin,  probably  near  the  mouth  of  the  Euphrates,  the  choro- 
graphic  genealogist  of  Xth  Genesis  fixes  Sabteka  among  Arabians  of  swarthy  hue.^i>« 

24.  K3B^  —  8«BA  — '  Sheba.*    "  Affiliation  of  Eaamah." 

[Our  S«BA  second  (B.),  Mtuprd,'] 
,  We  have  already  stated  the  difficulties  of  distinguishing  which  of /our  Arabian  8BAs 
—  KUSAt^e,  Toktanidey  and  KeUntriU  or  Jokthanide  —  are  assignable  now  to  the  chart 
of  Xth  Genesis,  more  than  twenty-seven  centuries  subsequently  to  its  projection ;  but 
each  one,  by  every  process  of  reasoning  upon  facts,  is  circumscribed  within  Arabian 
denominations.  If,  on  the  one  hand,  time  has  rendered  minute  dissections  nugatory, 
on  the  other  it  spares  us  the  trouble  of  seeking  elsewhere  for  historical  lights. 

OfGdioots  of  Raamah,  **  8heba  and  Dedan"  stand  contiguously,  not  only  in  Xth  Gen- 
esis, but  in  Esekiel  (xxxviii.  18),  and  belong  to  the  same  neighborhoods ;  whilst  Isaiah's 
KVQh  and  S«BA  **  (xliiL  8),  united  by  a  conjunction,  serves  to  fix  Seba  among  the  dark- 
akinned  Arabs,  where  the  compiler  of  Xth  Genesis  had  traced  this  name's  genealogical 
affinities.  But,  ai  whatever  age  (probably  Btdraie;  C  e.,  after  return  ftrom  capUvity) 
the  ftmgmentary  documents  now  called  **  Genesis  "  were  put  together,  <*  a  sort  of  spirit 
of  investigation  and  combination  was  also  at  work.  We  are  indebted  to  this,*'  con- 
tinues De  Wttte,  **  for  the  genealogical  and  ethnographical  accounts  contained  in  the 
Peotateudi.  They  are  designed  in  sober  earnest,  and  are  not  without  some  historical 
foundation,  but  are  rather  the  result  of  fancy  and  conjecture  than  of  genuine  historical 
investigatioii.  To  test  the  accuracy  of  the  table  of  Genesis  Xth,  compare  the  following 
passages":  — 

Oenetit  X. 
7.  "The  sons  of   EUSA,   Seba,  and 
Havilah,  and  Sabtah,  and  Raamah,  and 
Sabtecha.    And  the  sons  of  Raamah; 
SkOa  and  Dedan,'* 

Oenem  XXY. 
2.  **  Abraham  [descendant  of  SAeMI 
took  a  wife  .  .  .  Ketourah ;  and  she  bare 
him  Zimran  and  Jokshan,  Medan,  and 
Midian,  and  Ishbak,  and  Shuah:  and 
JoKSHAX  begat  Sheba  and  Dedan,** 

Digitized  by 

Google 

502  THE    Xth    chapter    OF   GENESIS. 

Kow»  both  texts  concentrate  "  Skeba  and  Dedan  "  in  Arabia.    NeTertbeleas,  tlie  on- 
OBtentatioos  care  eridently  bestowed  upon  his  chorography  by  the  practical  cSmipiler 
of  Xth  Genesis,  fayors  his  saperior  accuracy,  and  therefore  we  take  his  **  Shdni  and 
Dedan  "  to  be  the  true  colonial  settlements  of  EUSA. 
'  This  is  corroborated  by  Ezekiel  (xxrii.  22)  —  <*  The  merchants  of  ShAa  and  Baahah, 

they  were  thy  merchants:  they  occupied  in  thy  fairs  with  ehi^  of  all  tpiem:"  not 
merely  referring  to  the  rich  productions  of  incense,  myrrh,  gums,  and  aronatics, 
raised  in  and  exported  firom  this  part  of  Aralna  then  as  now,  but  also  to  ^ictriu  of 
India  and  its  islands  passing  in  transit  through  Sabwm  hands:  which,  in  Joseph's 
time  {Chn,  xxxtIL  26),  were  oonTeyed  by  inland  oaraTan^rtage  to  Gilead,  whence 
ItkmadiUB  **  with  their  camels  bearing  spioery  and  balm  and  myrrh,''  canied  them  to 
Egypt ;  and  which  *<  maritime  merchandisers,"  under  the  name  of  Tarshukf  had  eon- 
signed  to  the  Royal  Firm  of  <* S^omon,  Hyram,  &  Co."  by  *«  coasters"  up  the  Red 
Sea ;  and  dispatched  via  Petra  through  this  house's  factors  at  Etsion-gaber :  (cost  of 
^transhipments,  firei^^ts,  camel-hire,  in/nirances,  interests,  brokerages,  commissions,  and 
graUagett  no  less  than  amount  of  shares  or  profits,  to  us  unknown). 

Forster  skilfnUy  compares  the  Plinean  account  of  ^uns  Gallus's  expedition,  « in 
the  words  of  Gallus  himself;  the  passage  being,  to  all  appearance,  an  extract  from  the 
report  of  that  general  to  his  master  Augustus :" — "  Sabaot,  ditissimos  sylyarum  ferti- 
litate  odorifera,  auri  metallis,  agrorum  riguis,  mollis  ceroque  protentu :"  and  more- 
OTcr  relates  how,  "  On  his  arriyal  before  Marsnabe,  the  capital  of  the  Rhainanitw, 
.Slius  Gallus,  the  Roman  geographer  informs  us,  learned  ftrom  his  prisoners  that  he 
was  within  two  days'  march  of  the  tpiee  eountry:**  the  yery  productions  for  which 
the  Prophet  of  the  Captivity  had  giyen  celebrity  to  **  Sheba  and  Ra/oiah." 

Hence,  the  geographer  of  Arabia  succeeds  in  identifying  the  Saba  of  "RAAMAif  among 
the  **  Sabcd,  with  their  capital  Mar-Suaba  or  Sabe ;  whose  locality  is  preserred  and 
determined,  in  its  modem  topography,  by  the  town  of  Sabbia,  in  the  district  of  SabUT 
mapped  by  him  towards  the  southwestern  extremity  of  the  « Isle  of  the  Arabs." 

<*  A  highly  yaluable  confirmation  of  the  identity  of  the  modem  proTinoe  of  Sabi^, 
and  of  its  ancient  inhabitants,  the  Rhamanite  Sabseans,  with  the  Cushite  Rasmwh  and 
Sheba,  arises  on  our  first  reference  to  the  <  Description  de  I'Arabie '  [Carsten  Nie- 
buhr's] ;  where  we  find,  in  the  Ijebal,  another  Sabbia,  a  large  town  or  Tillage,  seated 
in  a  district  retaining,  to  this  day,  the  patriarchal  name  of  Beni  KhCH,  or  the  sons  of 
Cush.  Another  district,  of  the  same  name,  Beni  Keit^  is  noticed  by  our  author  in  the 
Tehama.  In  the  former  district  occurs  a  village  named  Bmt  el  Ehfisi  [kowe  of  the 
EXJShite.]  A  third  small  district  connects  the  name  of  Cush  ^th  that  of  his  son 
Raamah ;  namely,  that  of  Beni  Ehfisi,  in  the  prorince  or  department  of  Rama.  The 
city  of  Kusma,  south  of  Rama,  M.  Niebuhr  rightly  conjectures  to  haye  deriyed  its 
name  and  ori|^  firom  Cush :  a  conjecture  which  reodyes  strong  light  and  ooniraia- 
tion  from  a  remote  quarter,  in  the  corresponding  denomination  of  Dooat  el  Knsma,  a 
harbor  of  the  ancient  fiarilah,  near  the  head  of  the  Persiaa  Golf;  the  acknowledged 
site  of  the  earliest  Cushite  settlements  "—i.  e.,  of  the  true  KUSittm  of  all  Israelitish 
chroniders ;  affiliated  fh>m  the  personification  KUSA,  by  which  name  the  cominler  of 
Xth  Genesis  figured  those  ewarihy  races  that  dwelt  ab  initk  exactly  where  they  do 
now,  yis :  in  Southern  Arabia, 

More  condusiye  determinations,  in  primordial  ethnology,  than  in  this  case  of  Shda 
(B.),  it  would  be  hard  to  discoyer.OQ^ 

25.  pT— DDK— *  Dedan/ 

Leaving  aside  nice  discriminations  between  the  duplex  Shebae  and  Bedam,  the  one 
Hamitic  and  the  other  Semitic,  we  remark  that,  being  a  junior  colony  to  Sheba,  in  Rha- 
manite affiliations,  this  Dedan,  through  analogy,  might  be  fixed  in  Arabia,  as  we  have 
seen  in  the  preceding  name,  even  without  the  precise  words  of  Isaiah  (xxL  18) : — <*In 

Digitized  by 

Google 

HEBBKW    NOMENCLATURE.  503 

the  woodlMidB  of  Arabia  sluU  ye  lodge,  0  ye  trayelling  companiea  of  DDNIM,"  Deda- 
mans :  which  obviates  the  neoeesity  for  seeking  oat  of  the  Peninsula. 

But  the  precise  location  of  the  geographical  son  of  Baamah,  and  brother  of  the  pre- 
ceding Sheba,  is  fixed  at  the  city  and  district  of  DadenOy  just  outside  Cape  Mussendom, 
on  the  Indian  Ocean;  and  taking  its  natural  station  among  KUSHiV«  tribes  of  Southern 
Arabia  does  not  neoesaitate  ftirther  researdL^f^^ 

With  the  exception  of  Nimrod  (to  be  discussed  as  the  next'name),  who,  none  will 
dissent,  belonging  to  Assyrian  history,  can  have  no  possible  relation  to  African  theo- 
lies,  here  closes  the  genesiacal  catalogue  of  EUSAite  affiliations. 

The  educated  reader  who  has  followed  us  through  Hebraical,  Greek,  Roman,  Coptic 
and  hieroglyphical  sources,  has  now  beheld  every  **  Ethiopian'*  postulate  on  KUSA 
fall,  one  by  one,  beneath  the  knife  of  historical  criticism.  As  one  of  the  present  authors 
indicated,  ten  years  ago,  and  as  both  partially  confirmed  at  a  subsequent  date  by  their 
several  researches,  the  EUSAiret  of  Xth  Genesis  could  have  been  then,  as  they  are 
now,  once  for  all,  glued  permanently  to  Arabia :  whence  to  detach  them  again  will  be 
a  vain  effort,  should  the  reader  be  pleased  to  wield  in  their  defence  the  weapons  herein 
tendered  him.  That  the  present  tiresome  undertaking  was  needed,  the  reader  can 
satisfy  himself  by  opening  any  English  Commentary  on  Scripture ;  and  almost  every 
English  writer  b^t  Forster ;  who,  following  Bochart,  has  consistently  vindicated  the 
Arabian  claims  of  Ku9\  to  the  exclusion  of  African  fables :  whUst  henceforward  the 
Ethnographer  may  calmly  pursue  his  inquiries  without  necessarily  exclaiming,  when  he 
stumbles  upon  the  mistranslation  <*  Ethiopia"  in  King  James*  yersioo, 

**  me  niiftr  eft;  huno  to,  Boaume,  oaytto." 

[To  my  learned  predecessors  in  KUSAi/tf  inquiries,  who  have  uttered  opinions  with- 
out first  employing  archflsologi^  processes  similar  to  those  herein  submitted  respect- 
taXLj  to  their  conmderation,  I  beg  leave  to  quote  Letronne :  —  **  One  regrets  to  see 
erudite  and  ingenious  men,  of  seal  and  perseverance  most  laudable,  thus  waste  their 
time  in  pursuit  of  such  vain  chimssras,  in  allowing  themselves  to  be  led  astray  by 
assimilations  the  most  whimsical  and  the  most  arbitrary.  One  might  say,  in  truth, 
that,  for  them,  Winckelmann  and  Visconti  had  never  appeared  on  earth,  so  much  do 
they  deviate  from  the  reserved  and  prudent  method  of  these  heroes  of  arch»ology ; 
who,  not  pretending  to  know  in  antiquity  but  that  which  it  is  possible  to  explain 
through  the  aid  of  authentic  monuments  and  of  certain  testimonies,  knew  how  to  stop, 
the  moment  they  felt  the  ground  fkil  beneath  their  tread.  It  is  thereby  that  they 
arrived  at  so  maay  positive  results,  and  not  at  simple  <  jeux  d*  esprit '  or  of  erudition, 
that  cannot  sustain  an  instant's  serious  examination.  Our  new  archsologists  proceed 
quite  otherwise :  they  take  a  monument  perfectly  obscure  [like  Ethiopia];  they  com- 
pare it  with  a  second,  with  a  third,  and  again  with  others  that  are  not  less  so ;  and, 
when  they  have  plaeed  side  by  side  all  these  obeeurtiiei,  they  pleasantly  figure  to  them- 
selves that  they  have  created  Uffht.  Upon  a  first  ootgecture,  they  place  a  second,  a 
third,  and  a  fourth.  Then,  upon  this  conjecture,  at  the  fourth  generation,  they  erect 
an  edifice,  sometimes  of  appearance  sufficientiy  goodly,  because  it  is  the  work  of  archi- 
tects who  possess  talent  and  imagination.  This  edifice  may  even  endure,  so  long  as 
nobody  thinks  of  poking  it  with  the  tip  of  a  finger ;  but  the  moment  that  criticism 
condescends  to  notice  it,  she  has  but  to  whiff  thereon,  and  down  it  tumbles  like  a 
easUe  of  cards.'* 

To  «nos  advtrsaires,'*  as  the  AhM  Glaire  facetiously  has  it— vis:  the  biblical 
dunces  in  the  United  States,  whose  zeal  in  opposing  the  long-pondered,  long-published 
views  of  Morton,  Agassis,  Nott,  Van  Amringe,  myself  and  others,  has  been  more  re- 
markable than  literary  courtesy,  I  now  turn  round  for  my  own  part,  (after  shattering 
their  anti-Scriptural  K\J Shite  illusions  in  regard  to  Africa  and  Nigritian  families,  for 
ever),  and  beg  each  individuality  to  accept  the  following  citation ;  the  more  pertinent  as 

Digitized  by 

Google 

504  THE    Xth    chapter   OF    GEKESfS. 

it  emftnates  from  one  of  themselves :  —  **  Bat  /  confess  that  /hsTe  some  comnderable 
dread  of  the  indiscreet  friends  of  religion.  /  tremble,*^  wrote  the  Rev.  Sydney  Smith, 
<*  at  that  respectable  imbecility  which  shuffles  away  the  plainest  truths,  and  thinks  the 
strongest  of  all  causes  wants  the  weakest  of  all  aids.  /  shudder  at  the  oonseqoenees 
of  fixing  the  great  proofs  of  religion  upon  any  other  basis,  than  that  of  the  iPtdeH  m- 
veattgaUon,  and  the  most  honett  statement  of  facts.  [Awee  parole,  *  golden  words,'  as 
Land  would  say],  /allow  such  nervous  and  timid  friends  to  religion  to  be  the  best 
and  most  pious  of  tnen ;  but  a  bad  defender  of  religion  is  so  much  the  more  pemidons 
person  in  the  whole  community,  that  /  most  humbly  hope  such  friends  will  evince  their 
zeal  for  religion,  by  ceasing  to  defend  it ;  and  remember  that  not  every  man  is  quali- 
fied to  be  the  advocate  of  a  cause  in  which  the  mediocrity  of  his  understanding  may 
possibly  compromise  the  dearest  and  must  affecting  interests  ^f  eodety."  And  if,  in 
consequence,  I  discard  their  CuahiU  suppositions,  I  can  only  excuse  myself  in  the 
words  of  Strauss :  —  ^*  Les  th^ologiens  trouveront  sans  doute  que  Tabeence  de  ees  sup- 
podtions  dans  mon  livre  est  peu  chr^tienne ;  moi  (je)  trouve  que  1^  pr^ence  de  oes 
suppodtions  dans  les  leurs  est  pen  sdentifique.''  —  G.  R.  G.] 

27.  TIOJ— NMRD  — *NiMROD.'     » 

Before  us  stands  the  sixth  and  la^t  affiliation  of  EUSA  —  to  whom  the  writer  of  Xtii 
Genesis  devotes  more  space  than  to  any  other  personification  secondary  to  the  parentd 
"Shem,  Ham,  and  Japhet" — inasmuch  as  five  of  the  modem  and  arbitrary  di^. 
sions  of  the  text,  called  verse$,  are  especially  set  apart  for  Nlmrod  and  his  derivations. 
Hence  we  may  infer  that,  in  the  mind  of  that  writer,  Nimrod's  honor  and  glory  were 
inherent  elements.  Now,  the  associations,  the  names  of  eUiea  attributed  to  Nimrod,  the 
language  spoken  in  different  dialects  throughout  the  Mesopotamian  vicinities  of  their 
several  locations,  and  thdr  geographical  assemblage  in  Babylonia  and  Assyria : — theee 
condderatioDS,  we  repeat,  even  were  other  historyp  silent,  would  lead  archnology  to 
suspect  strong  ChakUean  biases  on  the  part  of  the  compiler  of  Xth  Genesis ;  and  would 
increase  the  probabilities,  to  be  enlarged  upon  ere  we  dose  this  disousdon,  that  Xth 
Genesis  is  either  a  transcript  of  an  older  Babylonian  compodtion,  or  else  was  compiled 
by  some  Hebrew  imbued,  like  Daniel  for  example,  with  **  the  leaning  and  tongue  of 
the  CkaldeoM," 

Such,  primA  facie,  would  be  the  archssologist's  deduction  when,  disengaging  himsdf 
firom  prejudices,  no  less  than  from  traditions  of  comparativdy  recent  origin,  he  had 
sought  to  evolve  facts  from  the  letter  of  Xth  Genesis  itself:  espedally  when  to  this  text 
he  adds  the  only  otheir  passage,  (except,  of  course,  the  abridged  paralld  in  1  Chron.  I 
10),  in  which  Nimrod's  name  occurs  throughout  the  canonical  books,  (viz :  Mieak  v. 
6) ;  wherein  <*  the  land  of  Assyria  .  .  .  and  the  land  of  l^mrod  "  are  Chaldaio 
synonymes  for  the  same  country. 

But,  when  once  the  inquirer  steps  beyond  these  dmple  and  natural  limitations,  what 
pyramids  of  falsehood  and  misconception  intervene  to  prevent  dear  understanding  of 
the  words  of  Xth  Genesis  7  and  how  basdess  the  fabrications  upon  which  these  pyra- 
mids rest  I 

A  **  mighty  hunter,"  whose  imaginary  deeds  in  venerie  are  still  proverbial  with  mo- 
dem **  Nimrods,*'  founds  the  grandest  ciHee.  The  traditionary  builder  of  a  metropo- 
lis called  Babel  —  BAB-BL,  "  gate  of  the  Sun  " ;  like  the  Ottoman  **  Sublime  Porte" 
or  the  **  Celestial  Gates''  of  Chinese  autocracy —  **  presto"  becomes  constractor  of  the 
<<  Tower  of  Babel;"  when,  so  far  as  the  letter  of  Genesis  Xth  and  Xlth  be  concerned, 
ndther  Nimrod,  nor  his  innocent  father  KUSA,  (save  as  two  individuals  out  of  "  the 
whde  earth,"  Gen.  xi.  1),  were  more  guilty  in  such  impiety  than  EUSA'«  grandfather 
NOAH,  who  <*  lived  after  the  flood  three  hundred  and  fifty  years ; "  or  than  anybody  else 
of  the  seventy-one  or  two  persons — fathers,  sons,  grand-children,  great  grand-chil- 
dren.  undes,  brothers,  cousins,  and  what  not  —  whose  cognomina  are  enumerated  in 
Xth  Geneds. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

HEBREW  NOMENCLATITRE.  505 

Cramped  within  the  faotitious  limits  of  biblioal  compotation,  English  writers  in 
particular,  following  neither  Scripture  nor  true  history,  but  the  Rabbis;  and  unable 
to  reconcile  supposed  Noachic  orthodoxy  with  the  sudden  rise  of  s)>^aUed  **  idolatry," 
have  seised,  with  rapturous  eagerness,  upon  the  earliest  writer  who  is  ooigectured  to 
haye  known  anything  more  on  the  subject  than  we  do  ourseWes ;  and  these  authorities 
behold  in  Josephus's  Greco-Judaio  hallucinations  a  clew  to  the  enigma. 

**  It  is  Tain  we  know  that  Nimrod  became  mighty^  eyen  to  a  proverb,  if  the  nature 
and  means  of  his  elevation  cannot.be  understood;  or  that  Babylon  was  the  beginning 
of  his  kingdom,  unless  we  can  And  the  means  of  learning  for  what  purposes,  and  upon 
what  principles,  that  dty  was  established,"  reasons,  somewhat  illogioally,  the  unknown 
author  of  four  very  scarce  octavo  volumes  on  this  speciality,co7  in  which  we  abortively 
hunted  for  %faei:  so  that,  never  having  encountered  any  orthodox  commentary  on 
Nimrod  in  which  principles  of  historical  criticism  were  not  more  or  less  disregarded, 
we  are  reduced  to  the  necessity  of  attempting  to  examine  for  ourselves:  notwith- 
standing that  the  sulijoined  <'  views  will  doubtless  excite  astonishment  in  some,  and 
displeasure  in  those  who,"  avers  Oodfrey  Higgins,  the  great  Celtic  antiquary,  *'  while 
they  deny  infaUibiUty  to  the  Pope,  write,  speak,  and  act,  as  if  they  possessed  that 
attribute." 

To  begin.  Let  us  frankly  disavow  partialities,  in  the  words  which  His  Eminence, 
Cardinal  Wiseman,  aptly  borrows  from  the  great  Adelung : — **  Ich  habe  keine  Lieblings- 
meinung,  keine  Hypothese  sum  Grunde  zu  legen.  Ich  leite  nicht  alle  Sprachen  von 
Einer  her.  Noah's  Arohe  ist  mir  eine  verschlossene  Burg,  und  Babylon's  Schutt  bleibt 
vor  mir  vSUig  in  seiner  Ruhe." 

Through  the  common  Oriental  mutation  of  B  for  M,  the  word  NMRD,  of  the  Hebrew 
Text,  becomes  fHfiptS  in  the  LXX,  and  Kt0piiins  in  Josephus.  Is  it  a  inodem  or  a  prime- 
val name  ?  Cuneiform  researches,  so  far  as  we  yet  know,  have  thrown  no  monumental 
light  on  the  subject :  but  hieroglyphtcal  do.  Two  Fharaonic  princes  of  the  XXIId 
dynasty  —  between  b.  o.  986  and  860 — bore  this  appellative:  one,  son  of  Qso&kon 
II.,  spells  his  name  NIMROT;  the  other,  son  of  Takbloth  II.,  NMURT:  and,  Mr. 
Birch  observes:  —  "Aa  the  Egyptians  had  no  D,  but  employed  the  same  homophone 
of  the  T  to  express  this  sound  in  foreign  names^  this  name  is  unequivocally  the  Assy- 
rian Nimroud,  IID},  the  Tit0fH*Sris  of  the  Septuagint,  a  word  now  known  to  signify  Lord 
in  the  Assyrian,  and  unlikely  to  have  been  introduced  into  an  Egyptian  dynasty,  except 
through  intermarriage  with  an  Assyrian  house."  Subsequent  researches  have  not 
merely  corroborated  Mr.  Birch's  views  on  the  intimate  alliances  between  Egypt  and 
Assyria,  during  the  XXIId  dynasty,  but  Rawlinson  and  Layard  have  established  that 
cuneatic  writings,  and  many  other  arts  of  Nineveh  and  Babylon,  are  long  posterior  to 
Egyptian  hieroglyphics,  and  were  the  natural  sequences  of  Egyptian  tuition. 

Monumental  evidence,  then,  coetaneous  in  registration  with  the  events  recorded, 
carries  the  name  NMRD,  at  a  single  bound,  from  its  currency  in  parlance  among  the 
present  natives  of  Assyria  (as  applied  to  places,  such  as  Nimroud,  Sirs  Nimroud, 
Nimroud-daghf  &c.  &c.),  back  to  the  tenth  century  b«  o.,  in  hieroglyphics: — an  age 
anterior,  probably,  to  that  of  the  Hebrew  compiler,  or  translator,  of  Xth  Genesis ;  but, 
while  this  fact  corroborates  his  accuracy,  it  serves  to  sweep  away  sundry  rabbinical 
and  other  cobwebs  that  hang  between  our  generation  and  the  primeval  origin  of  the 
taord  itself. 

What  did  NMRD,  originally,  mean  f  No  reply  can  be  accepted  that  does  not,  in  a 
question  involving  such  vast  ramifications,  first  classify  its  components  adverbially, 
under  distinct  heads :  — 

Ist  PAi7o%wa% ;— We  know  not  why  the  translation  " Lord"  results  ftrom  arrow- 
headed  investigations,  and  therefore  relinquish  discussion,  on  that  ground,  to  such 
cuneatic  philologues  as  Rawlinson,  Hincks,  De  Saulcy,  and  others  of  the  new  schcrtoL 

It  may  at  once  be  acknowledged  that  Oriental  traditions,  of  which  the  ThalmudU 
64 

Digitized  by 

Google 

506  THE    Xth    chapter    OP  GENESIS. 

Mishna  and  Ouemaraa  of  the  present  IsraeliteB  are  bat  one  rill  oat  of  many  streams, 
concur  in  representing  Nimrod  as  every  thing  haughty,  tyrannical,  and  impiona ;  bnt 
nothing  can  be  produced  to  justify  these  gratuitous  assumptions,  earlier  in  date  than 
Josephus ;  who  merely  hands  us  the  rabbinical  notions  of  his  day  (first  century  after 
Christ),  when  he  calls  JXt0pi^€t  the  leader  of  those  who  stroTO  to  erect  "  Babel's 
tower  ;'*  and,  as  such,  that  he  rebelled  against  Divine  ProTidenoe.  Now,  before  Bpeca- 
lating,  in  opposition  to  the  express  words  of  Genesis  Xth  and  Xlth,  what  may  have 
been  NMBD's  performances  on  that  defdorable  ooeaslon,  it  ought  to  be  first  shown 
that  the  fragment  termed  **  Genesis  Xlth,  Ter.  1-9,"  possesses  real  cl^ms  to  be  consi- 
dered historical.  This  being  as  much  out  of  our  power  as  of  any  body  else  at  the 
present  day,  Josephus's  modem  views  upon  NMBD's  primordial  rebdUim  serve  nerdy 
to  illustrate  the  proneness  of  the  human  mind  to  e]q9lain  the  impossible  by  inventing 
the  marvellous.  So  we  lay  them  aside,  beyond  the  only  historical  fact  resulting  from 
Josephus,  viz :  that,. in  his  age,  NMRD  was  reputed  to  have  been  a  rebel. 

Such  being  the  unique  source  whence  flow  all  later  theories  upon  KUS&'s  heremes, 
and  his  eon's  enormities,  we  descend  the  main  stream  as  we  find  it  condnued,  **  even 
unto  this  day,"  by  the  Rabbis:  —  "According  to  the  Talmud  (tr.  Chagigu^  ch.  iL),  the 
name  NMRD,  Nimrod,  is  derived  from  MRD,  marad,  to  rthel,  because  its  writers  sup- 
pose that  he  induced  mankind  to  r^e^  against  God.  This,  however,  Ebh  Eska 
does  not  seem  willing  to  admit,  but  says —  <  Seek  not  a  cause  for  every  (Scriptural) 
name,  where  none  is  expressly  mentioned ;  *  on  which  his  commentator  (Ohel  Joseph, 
m  loco)  remarks,  *  if  the  name  of  Nimrod  is  derived  from  the  cause  stated  in  the 
Talmud,  it  ought  to  have  been,  not  NMRD,  Nimrod,  but  MMRD,  MamredJ*  But, 
according  to  Simones  (OnomasU  V.  T.  p.  472),  the  name  Nimrod  is  composed  of 
NIN,  offspring,  and  MRD,  rebellion;  so  th&t  NIN*MRD  means  filius  rebeOionis. 
A  portion  of  ^e  name  NIN  survived  in  Ninus,  under  which  appellation  he  is  known 
to  historians  as  the  builder  of  Nineveh.  .  .  .  J7e  began  to  be  a  mighty  one  in  the  earth 
( Oen.  X.  8).  *  Setting  himself  up  against  the  Omnipotent,  and  seducing  mankind  from 
their  allegiance  to  the  Lord.'  (RashL)  The  sacred  historian  intends  here  to  point  out' 
to  us  the  first  beginning  of  those  movements  and  convulsions  in  society,  which  led  to 
the  formation  of  states  and  dominions,  especially  to  that  of  royalty  [ !  ].  And,  inas- 
much as  these  movements  led  to  the  overthrow  of  the  prerious  state  of  things,  the 
name  of  the  man  by  whom  these  changes  were  first  introduced,  NMBD,  Nimrod,  frma 
MRD,  Marad,  to  rebel,  is  peculiarly  expressive."  «* 

There  is  —  excuse  the  phrase !  ^  a  verdant  lucidity  about  this  series  of  nan-seqmtMn 
that  justifies  our  tedious  extract  In  it  we  pertoeive  the  chain  of  ewdmet,  as  lawyers 
would  say,  through  which  Christian  commentators  obtain  their  first  notions  upon 
NMRD  ^  **  evidence  "  upon  which  each  opnfounder  erects  his  own  favorite  tower  of 
BEL,  confusion,  **  Nous  en  convenons,"  concedes  the  Abb6  Glaire ;  <*  we  agree  that  the 
fable  of  the  Titans  has  some  relation  to  the  history  of  the  tower  of  Babel ;  but  may 
not  one  conclude  from  it  that  the  Greek  poets  wished  to  imttate  the  legislator  of  the 
Jews,  and  surpass  (ench^rir  sur)  the  veracity  and  simplicity  of  his  recital  ?  " 

But,  suppose  somebody  happened  to  entertain  the  idea  tiukt  NMRD  may  not  be 
derivable  from  the  CanaanUish  root  MRD  at  all ;  what,  if  such  case  were  proved, 
becomes  of  Nimrod's  rebellious  propensities  ? 

To  ascertain  this  possibility,  a  philologist  must  rise  above  the  level  of  rabbinical 
hermeneutios. 

We  have  seen  that  the  word  NMRD' was  a  proper  name  among  pharaonico- Assyrian 
individuals  in  the  tenth  century  b.  c.  — an  age  anterior  to  most  if  not  to  all  parts  of 
Hebrew  literature  extant  in  our  day.  This  bisyllabic  quadriliteral  (ceasing  to  remain 
any  longer  mere  Hebrew)  merges  into  the  vast  circumference  of  Shemitish  tongues,  of 
which  Arabic  is  the  most  copious  representative. 

Now,  foremost  amid  living  Semitic  lexicographers,  stands  Blichel-Angelo  Lanci,  and 
his  views  are  supported  by  students  equally  authoritative  in  their  several  specialities. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

HEBREW    NOMENCLATURE.  507 

1*he  substance  of  their  researches  is :  — that  the  primeyal  speech  whence  all  Semitish 
tongaes  have  sprung  was,  aboriginally,  monotyllabic  in  its  articulations,  and  there- 
fore at  most  biliteral  in  its  alphabetical  expression ;  whereas,  at  the  present  day,  these 
languages,  Hebrew  and  Arabic  essentially,  are  dutyUahic  and  iriUteral,  "  As  Yowel 
sounds,"  holds  a  supreme  authority,  Rawlinson,  <*  are  now  admitted  to  be  of  secondary 
development,  and  of  no  real  consequence  in  testing  the  element  of  speech,  the  roots  of 
which  are  almost  uniTCrsally  biliterai ;  the  Babylonian  and  Assyrian  [in  which  lan- 
guages If  MRD'e  name  originated]  being  found  in  a  more  primitiTe  state  than  any  of 
the  Semitio  dialects  of  Asia  open  to  our  research  [must  be  older] ;  inasmuch  as  the  roots 
are  free  from  the  subsidiary  element  which,  in  Hebrew,  Aramaean,  and  Arabic,  has 
caused  the  iriUteral  to  be  regarded  as  the  true  base,  and  the  biliteral  as  the  defectlTe 
one."  Above  one  hundred  examples  are  given  by  Lanci ;  proving  how  those  words 
which  rabbinical  scholars  suppose  to  be  primordial  Hebrew  radicals,  {i.  e,  of  three 
letters),  are  but  a  secondary  formation  along  the  scale  of  linguistic  chronology ;  because 
suffixes,  prefixes,  or  medial  elements,  have  become  superposed,  or  interplaced,  upon  or 
within  a  pristine  monotyllable.  There  was,  then,  a  time  before  ^e  period  when  the 
law  of  triUteraU  becam*e  formed;  and  while  on  the  one  hand  the  Hebrew  tongue  pre- 
serves abundant  monosyllabic  rdiquia  of  that  remoter  age,  on  the  other,  the  prepon- 
derance of  hityUahic  roots  in  Jewish  literature  establishes  that  such  literature  arose 
after  the  law  of  triUieraU  had  already  become  prevalent.  This  later  age  oscillates,  it  is 
true,  between  700  b.  c,  and  some  centuries  previously;  but  cannot,  by  incontrovertible 
ratiocination  upon  historical  data,  be  carried  back  to  Mosaic  days  —  fourteenth 
century  b.  c.  —  a  linguistic  point  in  which  all  Oriental  phUologert  of  the  new  school 
coincide. 

2d,  ArcKaologicaUy, — NMRD,  therefore,  older  on  Egyptian  monuments  than  any  He- 
brew writings  that  have  come  down  to  us,  was  already,  in  the  tenth  century  b.  c,  a 
matured  importation  from  its  native  Assyria ;  where,  doubtless,  this  proper  name  had 
existed  long  previously :  being  distinguished  by  the,  probably-(7Aa2<2tean,  projector  of 
the  chart  of  Xth  Genesis,  as  the  earliest  traditionary  founder  of  very  ancient  cities. 
To  explain  by  a  tri-literal  verb,^RD,  itself  susceptible  of  reduction  into  an  earlier 
9?iono<y2/a6^thequadriliteralbi'Syllabic  proper  name  NMRD,  although  not  absolutely 
impossible,  presents  many  chances  of  involving  its  advocates  in  anachronisms ;  and 
most  certainly  would  never  have  occurred  to  modem  Orientalists,  had  it  not  been  for 
the  rabbinical  legend  current  in  Josephus's  days,  which,  thousands  of  years  after 
NMRD's  age,  and  hundreds  later  than  Xth  Genesis,  endeavored  to  reconcile  Assyrian 
mythes  with  a  Hierosolymite  doctrine  of  genesaical  origins.  We  have  seen  above,  that 
the  derivation  of  NMRD  from  MRD,  to  rebel,  is  considered  speculative  even  by  TaU 
mudists  themselves ;  and,  with  Gesenius's  Thetaurtu,  the  writer  (G.  R.  G.)  would  un- 
dertake, upon  legitimate  principles  of  Semitic  palaeography, — such  as  the  commonest 
mutations  of  D  for  N;  B  for  M ;  L  for  R;  T,  TA,  S,  or  SA,  for  D,  &c.  —to  draw  a 
dozen,  or  more,  happier,  and  quite  as  orthodox,  significations  for  NMRD,  HebraicaUy, 
than  that  ungrammatically  twisted  from  MRD,  which  takes  littie  or  no  account  of 
the  protogramme  N. 

Hear  Land's  more  reasonable  etymology.  We  |^ve  it  regretfully,  because  without 
the  ingenious  arguments  by  which  the  Professor  defends  it  in  his  ParaUpomeni,  and 
coupled  with  all  the  reservations  due  to  philological  intricacies  of  this  archaic  nature. 
The  word  NMRD  is  nonsense  when  wrung  out  from  the  verb  MRD,  to  rebel.  It  is  a 
compound  of  two  distinct  monosyllables,  NM  and  RD.  The  former  proceeds  fh>m  the 
radical,  preserved  in  Arabic,  N0M,  **  to  spread  a  good  odor  :*'  the  latter  from  RuD, 
*<to  be  responsible."  NtMRoD  means,  Semitically  (whether  such  was  its  pristine 
Assyrian  acceptation  or  not),  **h&-whose'royal-aetioM-eorretpond'tO'ihe^ood-odor  (of  Mi 
fame)," 

But,  difficulties  cease  not  here !  In  King  James's  version,  as  in  all  its  MS.  ances- 
tors back  to  the  LXX  (where  y^r^s  nvnydt,  a  hmtxng-gimt,  is  its  wondrous  pai»* 

Digitized  by 

Google 

508  THE    Xth    chapter    OF    GENESIS. 

phrase),  the  next  yerae  {Oen,  z.  9)  sUtes  that  NMRD  was  a  "mighty  Aunfer/" 
Upon  this  translation  hang  chiliads  of  commentariee.  LeaTing  them  in  snapenaioiiy 
we  again  present  LancPs  etymologies. 

The  Hebrew  word  T«ID  (translated  hunter)  is  not  in  this  case  derivable  from  Sim, 
a  hunUman ;  but  comes  from  the  Arabian  verb  WSD ;  instead  of  AraUc^  SUD,  He- 
braic^ T«UD,  to  hunt  Now,  WaSaD  means  **  to  be  farm"  to  possess  etmiiitmeif  and 
itabilUy;  which  quality,  applied  to  the  Tast  domains  assigned  in  Xth  Genesis  to  Nimrod, 
makes  the  words  GiBoB-T«ID  mean  ** ffreat-m-Umded'tenementt" ;  and  not  **  Tigoroos 
in  the  chase/' 

What  of  Assyrian  mythology,  on  the  question  of  Nimrod,  may  beeome  exhomed 
cTentually  through  cuneiform  researches,  it  is  useless  yet  to  speculate  upon.  In  the  pre- 
sent state  of  science,  Land's  exegesis,  grammatically  as  to  Hebrew,  philolog^eaOy 
as  to  Semiiith  tongues,  and  far  more  sensibly  in  connection  with  the  probable  meaning 
of  the  writer  of  Xth  Genesis,  stands  of  itself,  quite  as  well  as,  if  not  better  than,  the 
modem  rabbinical  notion  of  a  **  hunter."  [Always  ready  for  my  own  part  to  surren- 
der any  hypothesis  the  moment  its  irrationality  is  proTen,  I  submit  (for  what  I  con- 
ceive to  have  been  one  of  the  intentions  of  the  compiler  of  Xth  Genesis)  the  following 
retranslation  of  his  sentences,  accompanied  by  notes  to  some  extent  justificatory.  — 
G.  R.  G.] 

The  personage  who  wrote  Xth  Genesis  is  unknown.  The  language  he  adopted  was 
CanaanitUhf  afterwards  called  **  Hebrew.*'  The  age  in  which  he  flonrished  is  obscure: 
the  alphabet  used  by  him  still  more  so.  His  indiTidual  biases,  beyond  a  supposable 
Chaldaie  tendency,  enter,  as  respects  ourselves,  into  the  vast  family  of  human  coi^ 
turei.  The  media  through  which  this  document,  Xth  Genesis,  has  been  handed  down, 
are,  in  a  scientific  point  of  view,  suspicious.  The  vicissitudes  (even  when  restricted 
to  the  Hebrew  Text)  through  which  the  original  manuscript  has  passed,  in  ordo*  to 
reach  our  eye  in  printed  copies  of  King  James's  version,  are  not  few :  because,  the 
oldest  Hebrew  manuscripts  of  Xth  Genesis  now  extant  do  not  antedate  the  tenth  century 
A.  c. ;  the  Masorete  diacritical  marks,  upon  which  orthodox  commentaries  mainly 
repose,  were  not  invented  before  506  a.  o.,  nor^rfected  until  some  800  years  ago; 
and,  finally,  the  Ashouri,  square-letter,  character  of  present  Hebrew  MSS.  cannot  pos- 
sibly ascend  to  the  second  century  of  our  era.  It  will  therefore  be  conceded  that, 
before  the  personal  ideas  of  the  first  editor  of  Xth  Genesis  could  have  reached  our 
individualities,  tome  elements  of  uncertainty  intervene ; .  independently  of  errors  of 
transcribers  and  of  translators,  from  Hebrew  into  Alexandrian  Greek ;  fh>m  both  of 
these  languages  into  Latin ;  from  the  three,  in  unknown  quantities,  into  English :  all 
conditions  of  doubt  that  cannot,  nowadays,  arohssologically  (and  neither  ha^ogra- 
phically  nor  evangelically)  speaking,  be  altogether  dodged.  Upon  such  historical  con- 
siderations, we  opine,  the  algebraical  chances  of  mUtaket^  in  respect  to  Xth  Genesis, 
are  rather  more  numerous  than  those  of  exactitude  in  interpretation:  albeit,  He- 
braically,  the  subjoined  attempt  at  an  English  restoration  can  withstand  criticism  quite 
as  well  as,  according  to  St  Paul,  *<  Jannes  and  Jambres  withstood  Moaes." 

8d.  ^i6Ztea%.  — Genesis  X. 

Verte  8.  *<  And  KUSA  begat  NMRD  (Nim-Rud  =  he-whoee-^oyal-aetumi-corretpond- 
to-the-good-odor  of  hit  fame) ;  he  first  began  to  be  mighty  upon  earth : " 

Ver.  9.  «He  was  a  great-landed-proprieior  before  (the  face  of)  leHGnaH;  whence 
the  saying —  *like  NMRD,  ffreat-landed-proprietor  before  (the  face  of)  leHOuaH :' " 

Ver.  10.  '*  And  the  beginning  of  his  realm  was  BaBeL ;  and  AReK,  and  AEaD,  and 
KaLNeH,  in  the  land  of  SAiNAdR." 

Ver.  11.  "  From  this  land  he  himself  (NMRD  understood)  went  forUi  {to)  ASAUB 
(Aeeyria),  and  built  NINUeH  and  ReKhoBoTt-AaiB.  and  KaLaKA." 

Ver.  12.  « And  ReSeN  between  NINUeH  and  between  KaLaKA;  (he)  ehe  (Nineveh 
understood)  the  great  city." 

[The  text,  in  verse  11,  is  ambiguous.    It  may  be  xead,  as  in  King  James's  version, 

Digitized  by 

Google 

HEBREW    NOMENC'tATirRE.  509 

**  Out  of  that  land  went  forth  Ashnr ;"  hot  such  rendering  leaTes  oat  an  essential 
member  of  the  phrase,  the  word  HHUA,  *  he  himself,'  before  the  Terb  '<  went  forth,'* 
which  can  only  refer  to  the  antecedent  Nimrod.  On  the  other  hand,  as  the  literal 
text  has  **  went  forth  Ashnr,"  the  preposition  to  must  be  interpolated ;  but  not  alto- 
getl^er  arbitrarily,  because  learned  Hebraists  aver  that  this  preposition  is  omitted  in 
Hum,  zxxIt.  4,  and  in  Veut,  iii.  1,  and  yet  its  interpolation  is  obligatory  to  make  sense. 

Indifferent  to  either  reading,  I  will  merely  mention  that  three  new  and  distinct 
translations  of  Genesis,  by  eminent  Hebraists  (Olaire's,  Cahen's,  and  Be  Sola's),  read, 
"  Nimrod  went  to  Ashur  (Assyria) "  —  that  this  last  vindicates  such  explanation  by 
unanswerable  arguments,  while  most  of  them  quote  high  scholarship  in  its  faTor ;  and, 
finally,  that  the  Hebraioal  profundity  of  "  N.-M.,"  who  defends  this  view  in  Kitto't 
CyctajMBdiOf  is  of  more  Qermanio  hue,  and  consequently  deeper  in  Hebrew,  if  not  per- 
haps in  "  geological "  lore,  than  that  of  •*  J.  P.  S.,"  who  opposes  it  Non  notirum 
Umtoi  eomponere  Utet:  which  future  cuneiform  discoYeries  alone  can  settle. — G.  R.  0.] 

The  probable  ideas  of  the  constructor  of  Xth  Genesis  on  NMRD,  ma/  now  be 
summed  up :  — 

1st  That  Nimrod  was  an  affiliation  of  EAaM  (Egypt?),  swarthy,  or  red^  race  of  man- 
kind, through  KUSAi^e,  Arabian,  lineage. 

2d.  That,  unlike  every  other  proper  name,  after  "  Shem,  Ham,  and  Japheth,"-  iji  Xth 
Genesis,  each  of  which  is  a  geographico-ethnological  personification,  NMRD  is  an 
individual;  the  only  one  in  the  whole  chapter.  Whether  an  actual  hero,  or  a  mytho- 
logical personage,  cannot  be  gathered  from  the  text 

8d.  That,  whether  <* great  in  the  chase"  or  not,  neither  Nimrod's  name  nor  his 
deeds,  nor  any  thing  in  Scripture,  justifies  our  assumption  that  the  writer  of  Xth  i 
Genesis  did  not  entertain  high  respect  for  Nimrod's  memory :  on  the  contrary, 

4th.  This  writer  distinguishes  NMRD  from  all  his  geographical  compeers,  as  pro- 
minent "before  leHOuaH." 

6th.  That  iVtmroJ  was  positively  the  earliest  "great-landed-proprietor"  known  to 
the  writer  of  Xth  Genesis ;  who  ascribes  to  NMRD  the  foundation  of  eight  of  the 
proudest  cities  along  the  Euphrates  and  Tigris — Babel,  £rech,  Accad,  Chalne,  Mneveh, 
Rehoboth-Atr,  Kalah,  and  Eeeen,  - 

6th.  And,  finally,  that  the  practical  writer  of  Xth  Genesis  is  innocent  of  the  sin  of 
causing  those  incomprehensible  delusions  about  NMRD,  which,  commencing  with  Jose- 
phu8*s  hypotheses,  only  1800  years  ago,  pervade  all  biblical  literature  at  the  present 
day. 

Two  inferences  might,  however,  be  drawn  from  the  said  writer's  peculiarities :  — 
One,  that  the  document,  being  JehovistiCf  belongs  to  a  later  age  than  that  immediately 
after  Joshua;  earlier  than  which,  as  shown  further  on,  the  mention  of  Canaanitith 
expulsions  renders  it  archeaologically  impossible  to  place  the  writer :  -^  the  other  is, 
that  the  irriter  not  only  was  better  informed  upon  BabyUmieh  traditions  than  (to  Judge 
by  his  silence)  upon  those  of  other  countries,  but  that  he  derived  pleasure  from  the 
elevation  of  the  former  above  the  rest    Would  not  this  imply  Chaldcean  authorship  ? 

Now,  whether  Nimrod  was  originally  a  demigod,  a  hero,  or  a  "hunting-giant;" 
whether,  under  such  appellative,  lie  associations  with  Ninus,  Belus,  or  Orion ;  or 
(were  we  to  "  travel  out  of  the  record,"  what  we  should  first  examine),  whether  he 
was  not  another  form  of  the  Aetyrian  Hercules,  to  be  added  to  those  so  skilfully  illus- 
trated by  Raoul-Rochette— these  are  fpeculations  foreign  to  our  sul^ect,  and  we  refrain 
from  their  present  obtrusion. 

The  compiler  of  Xth  Genesis,  whose  meaning  we  strive  to  comprehend,  was  satisfied 
to  ascribe  to  NMRD  the  foundation  of  fiour  Babylonish  and  four  Attyrian  cities ;  and, 
although  the  positions  of  some  of  these  eight  ar6  not  yet  so  positively  fixed  as  might 
be  desired,  they  group  together  in  Mesopotamian  vicinities ;  and  thus  the  last  affilia- 
tion of  KUSA  bciconies  placed  in  Asia— further  removed  from  African  "  Ethiopia  "  than 
the  whole,  or  any,  of  his  geographical  brethren  ^^ 

DigitizeabyCjOOQlC 

510  THE   Xth    chapter    OF   GENESIS. 

"Affiliations  of  the  MT«BIM,"  or  EgyptioM. 
27.  bmS  — LUDBf  — 'LuDiM/ 

We  haTe  already  seen  that  MiUratm,  read  acoordiog  to  the  Masorete  punctaation,  is 
a  dual  referable  to  the  **  Two  Egypts,"  Upper  and  Lower ;  but,  etript  of  the  points 
which,  after  all,  are  but  recent  and  arbitrary  embeUishments,  that  MT«Bliii  is  a  ploral, 
'        meaning  the  Miss'ritesy  or  the  Egyptians. ' 

The  writer  of  Xth  Genesis,  therefore,  in  his  system  of  ethnic  geography,  deemed 
these  personified  off-shoots  from  JS^pi  to  be  so  many  colonies  or  emigrations  from  thai 
principal  stock ;  and  as  such,  we  perceiTO  that  he  suffixes  to  each  name  the  ploral  ter- 
mination IM ;  thereby  testifying  that  he  neyer  foresaw  modem  assumptions  in  King 
James's  Tersion,  that  the  LUD«,  the  AdNM«,  the  LHBx,  &c,  should  have  been  mat; 
one  yclept  Lud,  another  Anam,  and  so  forth. 

As  grand-children  of  KAeM  (iTain),  the  hoary  ithyphalUc  diTimty  of  Egypt,  these 
outstreams  class  themselves  under  the  generic  denomination  of  Hamitk  families ;  and 
their  habitats  ought  naturally  to  be  sought  for  in  regions  contiguous  to  their  ascribed 
focus  of  primitive  radiations :  without  disregarding  either,  that  the  writer  of  Xth 
Genesis,  by  making  them  oouwu  of  Palestinic  Kanaaniletf  and  of  Arabian  KJJShittt 
(all  issues  from  the  same  Hamiu  source),  never  supposed  that  they  were,  <«  could  ever 
become,  NigriUan  races :  upon  which  last  **  Type  of  Mankind  "  he,  as  well  as  every 
other  writer  in  the  Old  Testament,  observes  the  same  judicious  silence  manifested 
throughout  the  Text  towards  Tunffouaet,  JStquimauZf  CaribSf  Paiagonutn»f  Papuqtu^ 
Oceatdanif  MalayB^  Chinese^  and  other  human  races ;  the  discovery  of  whose  terrestrial 
existence  appertains  to  centuries  posterior  to  the  closure  of  the  Hebrew  canon,  Xth 
Genesis  inclusive,  at  some  period  not  earlier  than  Alexander  the  Great,  b.  c.  882 ;  nor 
posterior  to  b.  o.  180,  when  the  LXX  translations  were  probably  complete  at  Alex- 
andria. 

Hence,  to  judge  by  existing  nomenclatures  of  tribes  and  plaoes,  LUD  appears  both 
on  the  Asiatic  and  Libyan  flanks  of  lower  Egypt  Thus,  on  the  Syrian  frontier,  a  few 
miles  east  of  Yaffa,  lay  the  site  of  Loud,  Lydda,  Diospolis ;  inhabited  afterwards  by 
Bei\jamites.  So  also  Arabico-^er6«r  traditions  comprise  the  LaOUToA  among  Sabian 
tribes  of  Yemen,  reputed  to  hav6  immigrated  into  Barbary.  But,  whether  as  exotics 
or  ierrmgenxHy  it  is  on  the  Libyan  side  of  the  Nile,  prolonged  on  the  southwestern  litto- 
ral of  the  Mediterranean  to  the  Atlantic  —  districts  cut  off  through  the  absence  of 
camdi  during  primordial  ages  and  by  Saharan  wastes,  from  contact  with  Nigritian  fami- 
lies of  remote  austral  latitudes — that  the  LUDIm  have  left  memorials  of  ancient 
occupancy. 

Michselis  long  ago  corrected  Boohart,  and  suggested  the  probabilities  that  the  Ludatf, 
situate  near  the  river  Xotid,  in  Tingitana,  were  the  Ludim:  latterly  confirmed  by 
Graberg  de  Hemso;  who  shows  that  the  Oluii,  OloHy  Louat,  exist  among  Amaxir^ 
tribes  in  those  Mauritanian  neighborhoods  to  this  day;  still  admitting,  too,  the  na- 
tional prefix  aitf  **sons  of,**  to  their  names  (like  Mac,  Fits,  0',  Ap,  among  ourselves), 
as  they  did  of  yore,  when  the  Carthaginian  Amon  registered  in  his  Periplus  the  Ait-ih 
LUD,  <*  sons  of  Lud,"  or  AitoloU;  resident  in  the  same  Barbaresque  vicinities  where 
the  LudayoM  of  Spanish  writers  are  now  succeeded  by  the  ^mi-LouD.  There  is  no 
lack  of  vestiges  of  primeval  LUDs  to  be  met  with  in  the  very  redone  where  analogy 
would  lead  us  to  look  for  them ;  and  it  is  surprising  that  high  authorities  have  alto- 
gether overlooked  the  facts. 

[My  former  "  Excursus  (in  Otia  .^gyptiaca)  on  the  origin  of  some  of  the  Berber 
tribes  of  Nubia  and  Libya,**  juggested  a  ventilation  of  some  disregarded  ethnologic«l 
data,  preparatory  to  that  of  Xth  Genesis,  which,  after  five  years*  suspension,  I  am 
now  endeavoring  to  accomplish.  I  then  submitted  authorities  on  two  grand  divisions 
of  Barbaretqua  —  a  noun  not  derived  from  Barbaric  barbarians,  but  frt>m  the  tborigi- 

Digitized  by 

Google 

HEBREW    NOMENCLATURE.  511 

nal  AMcan  name  of  BRBR— the  ShUlouhM,  sod  the  t-Afnanrgh  or  Amazirgh-T ;  both 
readily  traceable  through  the  Maziees,  MaeH,  &c.,  of  Latin  authors,  back  to  the  Vla^vts 
of  HerodotuB.  —  G.  B.  0.] 

To  render  perspicuous  the  yiew  we  take  of  Barbaresque  anthropology,  it  would  be 
necessary  to  enlarge  here  upon  generalities  before  scrutinizing  each  genesiacal  name 
in  detail ;  but  space  being  wandng,  we  must  curtail  our  MS.  inTestigaUons. 

Two  human  Dunilies,  the  ^kUlouha  and  the  MazirglUy  now  called  Berbers,  have 
lain,  either  aboriginaUy  or  from  antiquity  beyond  record,  scattered  from  the  Cyre- 
naica  and  oases  west  of  Egypt,  athwart  the  northwest  face  of  Africa  to  the  Moghrtb- 
el'Akta,  or  eztremest  west,  of  Marocchine  territories  on  the  Atlantic;  and  formerly  even 
to  the  Ouanehet,  now  extinct  in  the  Canary  Isles.  Estinuted  by  OrSLberg  de  Hemso  at 
four  millions  of  population  in  Morocco  alone,  these  Berber  fltmilies  present  differences 
as  well  as  resemblances  comparable  to  those  Tisible  between  ihe  French  and  the  Belgians : 
they  speak  dialects  of  the  old  "  lingua  Atalantica,"  subdlTided  into  Berber  snd  ShUha  ; 
and  intermarrying  rarely  between  themseWes,  haye  also  imbibed  little  or  no  alien 
blood  through  amalgamation  with  others. 

Anciently  they  occupied  excluslrely  that  Atalantic  zone  of  oases,  littoral  or  inland, 
which  lies  between  the  Sahara  deserts  and  the  Mediterranean ;  now  called  Barbary ; 
"  Land  of  Bkbbebs,"  Berberia :  and  the  remoteness  of  their  residence  along  that  tract 
so  far  surpasses  historical  negation,  that  geology  alone  may  decide  whether  the  Ber^ 
bers  can  haTe  witnessed  those  epochas  when  the  now-arid  Sahara  was  an  inland  sea. 
In  any  case,  we  may  suppose  that,  in  proportion  as  its  salt-lacustrine  barriers  to  com- 
munication with  Nigritian  plateaux  became  desiccated,  the  Berber  trfbes,  driyen  from 
the  coast  by  Punic,  Kanaanttish,  Greek,  Egyptian,  and  other  early  inyaders,  spread 
theinselTCS  southwards;  and,  whilst  their  former  inyaders  haye  been  replaced  by 
successlye  Roman,  Vandal,  Saracenic,  Ottoman,  and  French  establishments,  that  they 
themselyes  gradually  crossed  the  Sahara ;  and  now,  under  the  name  of  Tuarieks,  some 
oflfshoots  of  this  main  Atalantic  stock,  modified  by  the  facilities  such  passage  has 
afforded  them  of  possessing  Negresses  in  th^  hareems,  roam  along  both  banks  of  the 
Niger  and  around  Lake  Tchad. 

But  the  southerly  expansion  of  Berbisr  families,  except  in  partial  and  conjectural 
instances,  is  bounded  chronologically  by  one  great  fact,  oyerlooked  though  it  be  by 
most  writers ;  which  is,  that,  untO  the  eamei  was  introduced  into  Barbary  from  Arabia, 
the  Saharan  wUdemess  presented  obstacles  to  nomadism  almost  insurmountable.  Now, 
the  eomeZ.was  not  imported  into  Barbary  until  Ptolemaic  times.  Mentioned  in  hiero- 
glyphics only  as  a  foreigner,  and  neyer  used  by  the  Pharaonic  Egyptians,  the  earliest 
historical  appearance  of  camels  in  Africa  dates  in  the  first  century  b.  c.  The  yulgar 
notion  of  camel-diffusion  oyer  Barbary  before  the  Ptolemies,  is  nowadays  archsBologi- 
eally  erroneous.^o 

It  therefore  follows  that,  wheneyer  Xth  Genesis  was  compiled,  the  Barbaresque 
affiliations  of  the  MTsRim  could  not  haye  penetrated  to  the  latitude  of  Negro  races, 
south  of  the  Sahara,  by  any  other  route  than  up  the  Nile  —  Negroes  neyer  haying 
existed,  in  a  state  of  nature,  north  of  the  limit  of  tropical  rains.  This  long  journey 
wa:s  not  undertaken  by  the  powerful  MTsRIm  themselyes  much  before  the  Xllth 
dynasty,  about  b.  c.  2300 :  so  that  the  LUD)m,  for  example,  like  all  their  unciyilized 
brethren,  driyen  away  from  the  Nile  by  the  Egyptians ;  restricted  from  southerly  pro- 
gress by  the. Sahara  and  the, absence  of  eatnels,  from  northerly  by  the  Mediterranean 
and  the  absence  of  ships  {Berber  habits  being  the  reyerse  of  nautical,  and  Tyrian  pri- 
yateersmen  hoyering  on  those  coasts) ;  were,  down  to  Ptolemy  Soter,  b.  o.  820  (as  the 
utmost  antiquity),  confined  in  their  nomadisms  within  Barbary  between  Egypt  and  the 
AtUntic  littoral  of  Morocco.  The  lowest  historical  age  possible  for  the  compilation 
of  Xth  Genesis  attains  to  the  Bsdraie  school — the  earUest  (if  the  document  be  Chdldak) 
may  antedate  Ezra  by  some  centuries :  but,  logically,  the  more  remote  the  antiquity 

Digitized  by 

Google 

\ 

512  THE   Xth   chapter   OF   GENESIS. 

daimed  for  this  etlmio  geogn^hical  ohftrt,  th«  1«S8  poedbto,  phyBieallyv 
intercourse  between  Berber  tribes  (atliwftrt  the  Sahftra  and  without  catmeU)  and  tkt 
true  Negro  races  of  Central  Africa. 

Content  with  offering  this  dilemma,  we  pass  onwards,  and  remark,  that  the  Berien 
were  genericallj  termed  Mauri  by  the  Romans,  and  Moore  by  **  moyen  uge  **  writoi; 
whilst,  if  we  adopt  Egypt  as  the  geographical  pirot  of  eooentrie  radiatioiis,  we  ^sl 
find,  that  these  Manritanian  Berbers  on  the  west  are  to  the  Spjfpiiame  what  we  hsie 
shown  the  Arabian  KuekUee  to  be  on  the  east^  rix.,. "  gentes  snbftisoi  eoloris  " ;  JBmo- 
piAHS,  in  its  Homeric  sense  of  wxorhtimed'/aue.  All  of  them  were  possibly  distiiigiiiihed 
by  the  red  color  on  Nilotic  monuments ;  and  the  term  HamUk  woald  be,'  gepeatacalTj, 
ethnologically,  and  geographically,  the  best  designation  for  theee  races ;  were  it  not  ftr 
modem  Negro  theories,  which  ignorance  and  charlatanism  haTe  foisted  upon  that 
mystified  name  we  now  spell  "  Ham.**  **  One*  almost  blnshes,"  Agassis  hm^  sarcas- 
tically obserred,  "to  state,  that  the  Fathers  of  the  Chnroh,  in  Northern  Afiriea,  have 
even  more  recently  been  quoted  as  evidence  of  the  high  intellectual  mad  morsl 
developments  of  which  the  Negro  raoe  is  supposed  to  be  capable,  and  that  the  Bonn- 
ments  of  Egypt  have  been  referred  to  with  the  same  view.  But,  we  ask,  heTe  mm. 
who  do  not  know  that  Egypt  and  Northern  Africa  have  never  been  inhalnted  bj  Negrs 
tribes,  but  always  by  nations  of  the  Caucasian  race,  any  right  to  express  aa  epinifls 
on  this  question  ?  " 

[Five  years  ago,  Luke  Burke's  Ethnological  Jownal,  and  the  initet^9  Otia  .^ggptiaet, 
pointed  out  several  analogies  between  some  names  of  twenty-five  Berber  tribes  men- 
tioned by  Ebn  Khaledoon,  and  various  other  ethnic  cognomina  preserved  by  the  vrritcr 
of  Xth  Oentais.  The  former  are  certainly  reliable,  inasmuch  as  Ebn  Khaledoon  was  a 
Berber  himself  and  the  historian  of  his  nation :  who  contests  their  common  descent 
from  such  legendary  sources  as  Abraham,  Goliath,  Amelek,  Afrikis,  Himyar,  and  other 
fabulous  origins;  claiming,  however,  that  the  Berbers  '* descend  from  Kbsloujim 
(Casluhim),  son  of  Mitzraim,  son  of  Ham."  So,  also,  through  Mohammedan  har- 
moniiing,  we  meet,  in  the  **  RozU  id  Suffa,**  with  a  similar  example  of  |»ous  g«Ma- 
logical  ftrauds — "  God  bestowed  on  Ham  nine  sons :  Hind,  Sind,  Ze^\  Nowba,  Kcnaan, 
Kush,  Kept,  Berbery  and  Habeeh  /•" 

It  will  be  seen,  fiirther  on,  that  the  Casluhim  undoubtedly  dwelt  in  Barbary  iriien 
Xth  Genesis  was  vrritten,  as  their  descendants  do  **  unto  this  day;**  but  it  need  scarcely 
be  insisted  upon,  with  the  reader  of  these  pages,  that  Ebn  Khaledoon,  an  Arabicixed 
Berber,  no  less  than  a  most  learned  and  conscientious  Muslim,  naturally  felt  anxious 
to  connect  his  own  pedigree  with  that  of  the  genesiacal  Patriarchs,  to  him  rendered 
orthodox  and  respectable  through  the  Korhn :  and  the  fact  that,  overiooking  the  He- 
brew plural  terminations,  he  deemed  Kisloudjim  (the  Shilki%iiie  /)  to  be  a  man,  son  of 
MiTSRAiM  (the  EgypHane  /},  another  individual,  indicates  his  literary  sources;  while  it 
serves  to  illustrate  what  we  have  maintained  elsewhere,  vix. :  that  the  Berbers  (their  owa 
indigenous  traditions  being  unrecorded)  appropriated  instead  the  language  and  reli- 
gious ideas  of  their  civiliiers,  the  Arabs ;  who  certainly,  whm  the  K^r^n  was  com- 
posed, had  never  taken  Berber  origins  into  consideration. 

Nevertheless,  this  sentimental  bias  of  Ebn  Khaledoon  does  not  touch  the  arehsBO- 
logical  fact  gained  from  his  pages  that,  in  his  time,  the  LAOUTE  are  recorded,  as  one 
of  twenty-five  Berber  tribes  then  inhabiting  Barbary. 

"  Six  hundred  lineages  of  Berbers"  —  the  enumeration  of  Marmol  and  of  Leo  A(H* 
canuB  —  resolved  themselves,  about  the  fifteenth  century  of  our  era,  into  five  main 
stems;  who,  already  imbued  with  longings  after  Islamite  respectabilities,  said  that 
their  progenitors  were  Sabteans  of  Yemen :  at  the  same  time  Leo  adds  the  noteworthy 
remark,  **subfusci  eoloris  stmt,**  The  same  quintuple  division  reappears  in  the  **  quinque- 
gentani  Barbari**  of  Roman  writers  of  the  fourth  century ;  which  is  important,  because 
it  establishes  an  identical  quinary  repartition  of  Berbers  prior  to  Mohammedan  impres- 
sions ;  and,  although  it  does  not  contradict,  this  fact  renders  it  less  likely  that  pagans  or 

Digitized  by 

Google 

HEBREW    NOMENCLATUEE.  513 

tfemi-OhristUns  should  have  leaned  towards  an  Arabian  origin,  before  religions  motiTes 
/or  such  honorary  attribution  existed  in  Berber  minds.  To  trace  whence  Barbari,  or 
Berbers,  from  about  1400  years  ago,  through  the  **  Misulani  Sabarbares,  Massylii "  of 
Pliny ;  the  Saboubourea  of  Ptolemy ;  and  4>088ibly,  in  some  instances,  the  Babbaboi 
af  Strabo,  Diodorus,  and  Herodotus :  to  resolve  the  ZtUtif  ZUea,  Zelie,  SaUrui,  ZUzaeta, 
Matsyliy  Xiiohe$,  into  the  MacroatXi/Svcr  :=  AMAZIG-Ziftyoitt,  or  the  MasscuylU  into 
A^AZlQ'ShiUouhs ;  and  then  to  deduce  the  Amasirgha  of  the  present  day  from  the 
Ma(«<f  of  Herodotus,  b.  c.  480:  —  these  are  tasks  i^ch,  following  chiefly  Castiglione, 
ikave  been  already  executed. 

History,  philology,  and  analogy  unite,  therefore,  in  establishing  that  the  T-^mo- 
wirght,  or  real  Berbers,  distinct  in  that  day  from  Asiatics  or  Negroes,  existed,  about 
Che  fifth  century  b.  c,  in  their  own  land  of  Berberia,  now  called  Barbary.  With  the 
exception  of  their  hating  embraced  Islim ;  exchanged  the  bow,  for  which  they  were 
celebrated  long  before  that  age,  for  the  musket ;  added  the  eamel  to  the  horse ;  and 
^propriated  Arabic  words  to  make  up  for  deficiencies  in  their  natiye  vocabulary ;  the 
Berbers  of  Mt  Atlas  are  precisely  the  same  people  now  that  they  were  twenty-five 
oenturies  ago ;  <iiwelling  in  the  same  spots,  speaking  the  same  tongues,  and  called  by 
the  same  names,  as  we  shall  see  presently. 

We  are  now  prepared  to  accept  an  opinion  pronounced  by  a  man  of  science  emi- 
nently qualified  to  judge ;  which,  coupled  with  Forster's  attestation  [suproy  p.  488]  of 
the  indelibility  of  color  as  a  criterion  of  type,  when  we  recall  how  all  Berbers  « sub- 
tuad  coloris  sunt,"  ought  to  possess  sufficient  weight: 

There  is  but  one  veriu^  indigenous  race  in  Barbary,  says  Bodiehon ;  vix.,  the  GJS- 
TULIAN:  —  ''Ainsi,  Atlantes,  Atarantes,  Lotophages,  Ocddentaux,  Troglodytes, 
Maurusiens,  Maures,  Pharusieni,  Qaramantes,  Aug^liens,  Psylles,  Libyens,  mdme 
Canariens,  et  toute  cette  multitude  de  peuplee  &  qui  les  andens  donnent  VAfHque  sep- 
tentrionale  pour  patrie,  se  oonfondent  en  une  seule  et  mdme  race,  la  GiTULIENNE.'* 
The  Arabs,  foreigiiers  in  Barbary,  call  the  present  descendants  of  this  race  "  Berbers 
and  Kabyles,**  Indeed,  as  tillers  of  the  soil,  t.  «.,  as  human  animals  brought  into 
direct  contact  with  the  earth  of  Barbary  (rank  with  exhalations  so  mortiferous,  even 
now,  to  Europeans),  no  type  of  humanity  could  have  outlived,  not  to  say  flourished 
amid,  the  climatic  and  geological  conditions  of  Atalantio  Africa,  but  a  few  furlongs 
from  the  sea-beach,  except  the  Oeetuiian,  For  proofs,  read  Dr.  Boudin's  Lettres  sur 
rAlgSrie. 

Cut  off  from  escape  on  the  west  by  the  ocean ;  on  the  north  by  the  Mediterranean ; 
on  the  south  by  tiie  Sahara  (onoe  a  sea  also),  and,  until  the  Christian  era,  by  the  ab- 
sence of  camels;  and  on  the  east  by  the  MTsRIM;  these  <* quinquegentani  Berberi** 
have  survived  the  extinction  of  the  elephant,  together  with  the  depressions  of  temper- 
ature consequent  upon  the  destrucdon  of  their  primeval  forests :  and,  repugntot 
through  natural  constitution  to  any  alien  institutions  but  those  of  the  Kordn  (con- 
strued after  their  own  liberal  fashion),  they  remain  now,  what  they  were  at  their 
unknown  era  of  ereatibn,  OcetuUans,  and  nothing  else. 

Inquire  of  history. 

Phoenicia  planted  her  standards  at  the  Carthaginian  ports  she  occupied:  Greece 
built  her  stronghdds  on  the  littoral  of  the  Cyrenaiea :  Rome,  prostrating  all,  sent  her 
eagles  further  into  Africa  than  any  Europeans:  Persia  inscribed  her  westernmost 
tablet  at  Tripoli :  Byiantium,  after  Belisarius's  triumph,  has  been  obliterated,  even  in 
name :  Vandals,  massacred  in  detail,  or  extinguished  by  climate  more  murderous  to 
white  races  than  Numidian  arrows,  have  vanished,  physioloj^oally,  like  other  heteroge- 
neous foreigners  on  the  sea-board :  Ottoman  and  Frank  invaders  still  surround  their  tem- 
porary havens  with  bastions  strongest  towards  the  mainland ;  And  French  prowess  over 
the  Berber  race  is  confined  to  the  latter's  preparations  for  the  next  razzia.  The  Saracens 
alone,  themselves  "  gentes  subfasci  coloris ;"  aposties  of  a  genial  polygamous  religion ; 

66 

Digitized  by 

Google 

814  THE    Xth    chapter    OP    GENESIS. 

speaking  dialects  of  a  tongue  long  familiar  to  Berberie  ears  through  anterior  Punic 
intercourse :  —  the  Arabs,  I  repeat,  cognate  Tfith  the  Berbert  in  nomadic  restlessness 
and  social  habits,  have  ridden  over  the  GcUulianSf  through  them,  and  around  them : 
but  whilst  from  the  first  hou^,  a.  d.  644,  that  the  lances  of  Islim  penetrated  into  B^r^ 
beria,  the  wise  policy  of  i)s  Arabian  Totaries  associated  the  native  Berbers  in  spoils  and 
benefits  mutually  agreeable ;  the  Arab  himself,  after  twelve  centuries  of  Barbaresque 
sojourn,  has  become  far  more  Berberized  as  a  MOGHRABEE  than  the  Berbers  have 
been  4^abicized,  And  (asks  the  reader)  what  is  the  "  ultima  ratio  "  of  all  these  soo- 
cessive  influences  upon  mankind's  Atlantic  type  f 

Merely  this :  ^  that  wherever  the  Ocetulian  hat  not  (he  has  in  Morocco)  revindicated 
his  national  supremacy,  he  rather  tolerates  Arab  encampments  in  the  domains  of  his 
birth-right,  than  hospitably  welcomes  Arabian  presence  by  practical  fusion.  **  Mo- 
hammed" is  their  moral  bond  of  Barbaresque  uniiy — their  common  battle-cry. 
Implacable  detestation  of  Turks  and  Frenchmen  is  the  only  chord  of  sympathy  between 
Abd-el-K^er  (slave  of  ih^  Puissant),  the  heroic  and  betrayed  Shemite,  and  that  mulatto- 
cross  between  Arabioo-Berbers  and  Negresses,  exhibited  in  a  beastly  individuality 
called  <*  the  Emperor  of  Morocco"  Hatred  to  aliens — to  anybody  but  one  of  them- 
selves, a  Berber — is  still  the  banner  of  Oalulian  instincts. 
If,  then,  Gsetulian  populations  cannot  have  originated  through  imaginary  importa- 
«  tions  of  Negroes  from  the  interior  of  Africa,  nor  from  imaginary  colonizations  of  vkiu 
races  from  Europe,  whence  came  they  ? 

History  being  impartially  silent,  our  alternative  lies  between  Arabian  immigratioDS 
as  one  possibility,  and  the  autocthonous  creaUon  of  Berbers  for  Barbaiy  as  the  other. 
My  own  inquiries  lend  no  support  to  the  scientific  probabilities  of  the  former  contin- 
gency.    The  latter  it  is  not  my  province  to  discuss.  —  G.  R.  G.] 

Viewing,  therefore,  Ocetulian  families  as  "une  race  apart,"  we  proceed  to  ascertain 
their  relation  to  the  chart  of  Xth  Genesis. 
Their  present  name  is  Berbers  in  Mauritania,  and  ShiUouhs  towards  the  C^yrenaiea. 
In  Ebn  Khaledoon's  <* History  of  the  Berbers"  we  have  already  noticed  thai  one 
tribe  of  this  race  was  called  LAOUTE,  or  Laouteh.  Cutting  off  the  Arabic  plural 
termination,  there  remains  LAOUT ;  which,  reduced  to  its  simplest  expression,  rowels 
being  vague,  is  LUT,  or  LUD ;  an  appellative,  as  we  have  shown,  traceable  in  Barba- 
resque nomenclatures  at  all  times,  back  to  where  history  is  lost. 

In  Xth  Genesis,  the  eldest-bom  of  the  affiliations  of  the  MTsBim  (or  Egyptians), 
and  who,  therefore,  in  the  idea  of  the  writer,  issued  first  and  went  furthest  from  the 
supposed  parental  hive,  are  the  LUDIM.  Removing  the  Hebrew  plural  suffix  Df, 
there  remains  LUD.  All  commentators  unite  in  deeming  Barbcary  the  geographical 
sphere  of  these  emigrations. 

To  have  shown  that  the  Laouteh,  LUDs,  of  Ebn  Ehaledoon,  can  be  no  others  than 
the  Ludim,  LUDs,  of  Xth  Genesis,  is  likewise  to  prove  that  Ocetulian  families  are 
included  in  that  ancient  system  of  geography,  and  that  the  LUDIM  probably  occupied 
Mauritania,  A  conclusion  which  our  inquiries  into  the  habitats  of  their  fraternal 
affiliations  will  fortify.  In  the  meanwhile,  we  rejoice  to  learn  from  ChrHberg  de  Hemso 
that  the  Ludaya  tribe  still  furnishes  the  Sultan's  body-guard  in  Morocco,  and  that 
their  river  Tagassa  is  yet  called  Laud  and  Tkaluda;  at  the  same  time  that  it  is  aads- 
fftctory  to  find  such  scholarship  as  Quatrem^re's  sustaining  how,  **  Dans  les  Londes  de 
Moise,  je  reconnais  la  grande  nation  des  Lewata,  la  plus  puissante  des  tribns  de  race 
Berb^re ;"  and  thus  ratifying  our  views  upon  the  LUDlm  of  Xth  Genesis.^! 

28.  D^D3y — AaNMTM  — '  Anamim.' 

Of  course,  this  is  a  tribe  which  (plural  termination  IM  out  off)  was  called  A&NM. 
Viewed  as  Adnams  the  analogies  falter,  unless  we  adopt  Bochart's  speculative  idea, 
that  the  Semitic  word  for  she^,  GNM,  be  the  root  of  this  name.    The  Atim-idianSy 

Digitized  by 

Google 

HEBREW    NOMENCLATURE.  515 

Nbmadea^  haTO  also  furnished  oomparisons;  which  we  dispute  not,  because  it  is  in 
Barbary  that  commentators  locate  the  people  called  ANMlm. 

^Referring  the  reader  to  the  **  causes  of  verbal  obscurity  "  in  Oriental  names,  ably 
Bet  forth  by  Forster  and  De  Sauloy,  there  are  few  literal  permutations  more  frequent 
than  those  of  M  and  N :  and  hence  it  has  been  long  remarked,  that  ANM  is  but  an 
anagrammatic  form  of  AMN.  Under  such  yiew,  the  AMN-)m  become  at  once  Amo- 
niant;  and,  from  the  ancient  worshippers  of  the  Egyptian  deity  AMN-Knephf  or 
NUM,  at  the  **  Oasis  of  Ammon  "  (now  Seewah)  ;  through  the  NasamonitiSf  Naaamones ; 
to  the  Amomanty  or  the  Oaramanietf  whether  on  the  riyer  Cinyphus  near  Ti^poli,  or 
on  the  Oir;  the  transition  is  more  rapid  than  the  results  may  appear  precise. 

CastigUone  gives  solid  reasons  why  the  Maca-AmnnmH,  or  Macc^Amnii,  should  refer 
to  Amazirgh-Ammonians ;  which  term  he  dnpposes  became  in  Greek  mouths  Mes- 
ammones,  and  thence  Nas-ammones.  Hence,  the  ANM)m  would  naturally  take  their 
places  among  Berber  tribes  next  to  the  LUDs,  their  kinsfolk. 

The  Naaamones  of  Herodotus  and  of  later  writers,  read  by  Birch  iVa^xtt-Amonians 
(iNTe^o- Amonians  ?),  were  a  very  roving  predatory  race ;  who  carried  their  name  all 
over  Barbary :  but,  without  insisting  upon  any  one  family  in  whose  name  AMN  is  a 
component,  it  is  for  objectors,  after  perusing  what  follows,  to  show  that  the  Barba- 
resque Anamim  of  Xth  Genesis,  cannot  be  represented  by  some  offshoot  of  the  Oatu- 
lian  stem  yet  stretching  between  the  Sahara  and  the  Mediterranean. 

For  ourselves,  while  descrying  the  Anamim  in  the  Berber  tribe  of  **I!nme"  cata- 
logued by  Ebn  Ehaledoon,  we  suggest  that  A&NM  may  underlie  both  the  words  "  Nasa- 
mones  "  and  "  Numidians ;  "  and  this  for  a  reason  that  no  Orientalist  acquainted  with 
hieroglyphical  permutations  will  disregard.  Bunsen,  following  Ewald,  proposed  to 
read  the  name  GUB,  Chub  [which  nation  Ezekiel  (xxx.  5)  associates  with  "  KUSA,  and 
Phut  (Barbary)  and  Ludim  (the  Ludaycu,  as  shown  above.  No.  27)  and  all  the  mingled 
people,"]  as  if  such  name  had  been  written  gNUB;  and  thence  to  apply  it  to  Nttbia  —  a 
country,  we  have  proved,  altogether  unmentioned  by  Hebrew  writers.  Volney  had 
perceived  GUB  in  the  Barbaresque  CobbU  of  Ptolemy,  and  we  adopt  his  riew  as  by  far 
more  natural,  according  to  the  context  of  Ezekiel.  Nevertheless,  Bunsen's  very  just 
remark  of  the  frequent  suppression  of  the  n  before  o  or  k,  in  the  transfer  of  Hamitic 
into  Semitic  proper  names  («z.  yr.,  Sheshonk,  Shiahak),  allows  us  to  behold  the  dNuM 
of  A&NM-IM  in  the  oNUM-tduuM  of  classical  history.  If,  however,  with  Bochart,  we 
transcribe  the  Greek  Nacra/«mf  into  Hebrew  letters,  ^-OK  ^73 ;  NiSI  AM-N,  or  other- 
wise N^I-ANuM-)m ;  we  observe  that  Hdt  means  **  people  "  in  Semitish  tongues,  and 
thereby  such  compound  name  becomes,  in  English,  **  People  of  NUMufia ; "  or  else, 
«  People  of  (the  oasis  of)  AMoN :"  in  either  case,  ^e Anamim  of  Xth  Genesis. 

But  Bochart  declared  that  these  tribes  were  **  Solinus*8  Amantesy  and  Pliny's  Ham- 
manienietf  peoples  beyond  the  Greater  Syrtis ;"  and,  reminding  us  that  *)  Jl,  GaR,  means 
**  to  inhabit,"  he  discloses  at  once  the  famed  «  Oaramantee  near  to  the  fountains  of  the 
river  Cyniphus."  Now,  let  us  add  that  this  river  is  still  called  the  Oir,  or  Oar,  by 
living  descendants  of  these  very  Amantet,  who  once  were  the  Berber  A2lMaN-lM 
alluded  to  by  the  ancient  Hebrew  geographer.^^''^ 

29.  O^anS  — LHBIM— ^EHABiM. 

The  first  orthodox  English  work  we  chanced  to  open,  in  quest  of  etymological  mean- 
ings, has,  < *  Lbhabim,  )2ame9 ;  or,  which  are  inflamed;  or,  ihe  pointe  of  a  sword T*  and 
just  below,  **  Libya,  in  Hebrew  Lubim,  the  heart  of  the  tea ;  or,  a  nation  that  has  a 
heart  /" 

Let  us  seek  elsewhere.  Detaching  the  plural  IM,  through  which  the  writer  of  Xth 
Genesis  indicates  that  he  means  a  tribey  the  singular  number  of  whom  is  LHB,  we 
realize  instantaneously  how  ignorant  of  Hebrew  were  the  forty-seven  translators  of 
King  James's  version.  This  may  be  at  once  seen  by  their  writing  **  Mizraim  begat 
Ludim,  and  Anamim,"  &c.,  instead  of  "  the  Luds  and  the  Anams**  and  so  forth.     Had 

Digitized  by 

Google 

516  THE    Xtk    chapter    OF    GENESIS. 

they  eTon  suspected  that  tM  was  already  a  plnral  termination,  they  would  not  have 
doubled  it  by  printing  "Cherabims"  for  Ckentb$,  or  **Seraphim8**  for  Sempht!  What 
should  we  think  of  the  French  scholarship  of  a  person  who  wrote  tabltauxet  f 

That  these  people  were  lAJbyant  no  commentator  now  doubts,  althoHgh  Bochaii  dis- 
sents ;  and  that  in  LHB,  the  soft  aspirate  he,  H,  may  be  eqolTalent  to  sndi  vowels 
as  0,  e,  t,  0,  Uy  no  palaeographer  will  contest :  nor  that  the  LUBIsi  of  2  Charon,  (ziL  8 : 
zri.  8),  of  Nahom  (iii.  9),  and  of  Daniel  (zz.  48),  are  tiie  same  as  th«  LHBIm;  espe- 
cially in  Nahom's  tezt^  where  a  conjonotion  couples  them  to  PAUT ;  already  shown  to 
have  been  a  generic  appeUatlve  for  the  whole  of  Bi^bary. 

Ai^tfiy  of  the  Homerio  Greeks  possessed  a  wider  territorial  extension  than  the  Liifa 
of  the  Romans ;  the  former  signifying  ^vrbary  in  general ;  l&e  latter  the  coast  from 
Egypt  to  the  Greater  Syrtis :  hence  we  may  infer  that  the  more  jnreoise  in^rmadon 
of  Boman  geographers  rested  upon  better  aoqnalntanoe  with  the  loealitiaB  where  the 
LHBs  were  domiciled.  T-LIBI  is  the  homonyme  in  Coptic  MSS ;  but  perfa^s  in  a  sense 
restricted  to  tribes  on  the  immediate  west  of  the  Nile's  aUmrinm ;  which  also  suggests 
the  easternmost  limit  of  Libyan  encampments. 

Among  the  Berber  tribes  enumerated  by  Ebn  Khaledoon  occur  the  LeWaTaH;  iriiidi 
word  in  Oriental  palttograpby  is  the  same  as  LeHaB-otoA;  and  its  analogies  with 
LeHaB-)m  are  salient.  Arab  tradition  inreets  the  present  jB^n^LeWA,  of  AmaziTgjh 
stock,  with  sufficient  correspondences  to  resohe  all  these  appellatiTes  into  the 
Acva^at,  Ac^v^i,  of  Procopius,  about  the  sixth  century  b.  o.  ;  not  forgetting  the 
Languanian  of  Corippus. 

Any  one  iuTesUgating  such  subjects,  without  preconoeptlens,  will  reoognise  in  the 
LHB«  of  Xth  Genesis  a  nomadic  population  of  OcetuHan  race,  and  of  Barbaresque 
habitats.«3 

30.  D^nnfiJ— NPATiKAIM— ^Naphtuhim.' 

Before  commencing  analyses  that  arise  through  new  resuscitations  of  Egyptology, 
it  is  desirable  to  remind  the  reader  of  a  principle  that  goTems  our  philoli^eal  inqui- 
ries into  10th  (Genesis.  Extremely  simple,  it  is  still,  oven  where  known,  mere  or 
less  disregarded  by  rabbinical  writers. 

The  genesiacal  writer's  classification  of  nations  is  tripartite,  under  the  titular  head- 
ings **  Shbm ,  B.AU,  and  Japheth  ; "  and  his  lists,  therefore,  embrace  Semiiie,  HmmUk, 
and  Japethie  families ;  corresponding  [nqtra,  pp.  86,  86]  to  die  yellow,  the  red,  and  the 
vfhiie  colors  giyen  by  Egyptian  ethnographers  to  such  Tarieties  of  man  as  were  known 
to  them  about  the  sixteenth  century  b.  o.  :  but  the  Hebrew  map  ezekides  die  Negro; 
which  race,  the  fourth  in  die  quadripartite  ethnography  of  Thebes^  is,  en  ^e  monu- 
ments, painted  bUuk, 

Arabian  languages  are  necessarily  represented  in  the  proper  namea  of  nations  be- 
longing to  the  SemiUe  stock ;  the  Egyptian  **  sacred  tongue  "  is  the  most  andeot  and 
reliable  nucleus  for  those  of  the  Hamitie;  while  those  of  the  JapeUnc,  almost  a  dis- 
tinct world,  must  belong  either  to  the  Indo-Oermame  or  to  the  Segthie  dass  of  human 
idioms. 

To  suppose  that  the  *'  speech  of  Kanaan  "  (misnamed  Eebrew)  can  answer  the  pur- 
pose of  an  «  open  Sessame"  to  the  significations  of  all  proper  names  in  Xth  Genesis, 
which  the  writer  himself  has  carefully  segregated  from  each  other  into  ihreo  groups  of 
tongues,  spoken  by  thru  groups  of  humanity  (in  his  day  as  in  ours,  fh>m  each  ether 
entirely  distinct),  is  one  of  those  aberrations  that  no  educated  pe^n  of  our  generation 
would  be  likely  to  boast  aty  if  he  reflected  that,  in  considering  Hebrew  as  a  fitting  key 
to  any  thing  more  than  to  one,  the  Semitic,  of  these  three  linguistic  portals,  he  would 
be  as  great  a  dolt  as  if  he  sustained  that  Englieh  might  be  contained  in  a  Chinese 
radical  or  in  a  Mandingo  root 

No  philologist  at  the  present  day,  when  h^  beholds  in  Xth  GtnesiB  the  proper 

Digitized  by 

Google 

HEBREW    NOMENCLATURE.  517 

name  NPATfEAIM,  would  seek  for  its  ezplanatioii  in  »  Hebrew  Tocabnliry ;  beoanse  a 
proper  name  belonging  to  the  Hamitic  group  of  languages  ought  first  to  be  examined 
Within  the  sphere  of  its  own  positiTe  domiciliations ;  and  it  is  only  when  these  are 
wanting,  or  when  comparatiye  philology  is  the  iuTestigator's  object,  that  speeulatiTe 
analogies  of  such  an  antique  cognomen  may  be  hunted  for  in  the  modem  Arabic  Qa- 
rnboMy  or  other  Shemitish  lexicon. 

NPAT(KMM  is  a  plural,'  of  which  the  singular  expression  is  NPAT<EA. 

In  Coptic  days,  accdrding  to  authentic  M8S.,  the  western  skirts  of  Lower  Egypt,  on  . 
the  south  of  Lake  Mareotis,  Marea,  Mariout,  wwe  called  NIFAIAT ;  whence,  deduct- 
ing the  plural  prefix,  NT,  we  obtain  FAIAT  as  the  Coptic  Tocalization  of  Hie  hierogly- 
phical  root  F-T ;  or  PAeT,  meaning  a  bnp ;  as  we  explained  under  the  head  PAUT. 
The  occupants  of  these  localises,  along  the  desert  ridges  ft-om  Marea  to  Ptiminhor 
(now  Dcancmhoor)  spoke  a  Berber  dialect,  and  not  pure  Egyptian ;  in  this,  resembling 
the  inhabitants  of  the  nearest  oasis,  that  of  Ammon,  or  Seewah,  who,  already  in  the 
tinie  of  Herodotus,  480  b.  c,  were  a  mixed  '*  colony  of  Egyptians  and  Mhiopians," 
t.  e.,  9un-btamed'tA6eB'y  "subfbsci  coloris,"  like  all  Berber  derivations.  We  have 
settled  that  the  preceding  affiliations  of  the  BITsRIm  occupied  parts  of  Barbary, 
and  belonged  to  branches  of  the  great  OeetvUan  trunk.  We  shall  see  that  others 
of  the  Hamitic  brethren  did  so  likewise.  What,  then,  more  natural  than  to  find, 
on  the  western  flank  of  MT«R  (Egypt)  herself,  the  NIPHAIAT  nomads  of  that  race, 
speaking  their  national  tongue,  the  Berber  f 

As  usual,  ChampoUion  was  the  first  to  carry  back  the  NIPHAIAT  of  Coptic  Christian 
literature  to  the  ancient  Pharaonio  monuments;  confirmed  by  Rosellini,  Peyron,  &c., 
and  since  nnirersally  accepted  by  Egyptologists  as  designations  of  Libya  and  lAbyans. 
Bnt,  without  doubting  in  the  least  the  Barbaresque  application  of  the  word,  whether 
in  its  Coptic  or  in  its  hieroglyphical  form,  the  original  name  PA-T-AaA  sometimes 
occurs  in  the  singular  number,  "Bow-country,"  or  plural  "Nlne-bow-country."  Now, 
the  same  distinction  holds  in  Xth  Oenesis,  where  PAUT  refers  to  Barbary  as  a  whole ; 
and  NPAT<KAIM,  in  which  the  same  radical  PAT  is  preserved,  to  (ribet  of  the  same 
Hamitic  stock.  May  we  not  assign  "  BoW-country"  to  Phut,  and  **  Nine-bow-country** 
to  the  others?  With  this  reservation,  Hengstenberg  is  right  in  seizing  upon  Niphaiat 
as  the  probable  representative  of  "  Naphtuchim.**  It  is  easy  to  prove  this  identity. 
The  Masorete  punctuation,  through  which  Naphtoukhlm  is  its  present  phonetism, 
commands  no  reverence ;  being  merely  the  rabbinical  intonation,  in  the  sixth  and  later 
centuries  after  Christ,  of  v^  foreign  proper  name  antedating  them,  and  the  writer  of  Xth 
Genesis  himself,  by  unnumbered  ages.  All  that  science  can  now  accept  are  the  six 
letters  —  NPATiKAIM. 

The  hieroglyphical  root  is  PA-T ;  the  later  Copts  added  the  medial  vowels,  and  it 
became  PAidaT :  to  make  it  an  Egyptian  plural,  the  NI,  or  N,  was  prefixed,  and  NI- 
PAaiaT,  thus  formed,  is  simply  Me-PAaiaT-s  —  the  proper  name,  as  above  shown,  of  a 
Berber  tribe  on  the  western  frontier  of  Lower  Egypt  Bat,  ChampoUion's  Orammaire 
tells  us  how,  "  in  the  graphical  system,  as  in  the  Egyptian  spoken  tongue,  the  plural 
number  (of  nouns)  was  expressed  by  the  dieineneee  or  terminations  **  —  OU,  or  U :  so 
that,  Egyptologically,  the  name  must  have  been  orthographed  NI-PAaiaTU.  Such 
was  the  word  that  presented  itself  to  the  researches  of  the  compiler  of  Xth  Qenesis, 
when  he  classified  the  MTsRi^  "affiliations  of  EAaM,  after  their  families,  after  their 
tofiffuetf  in  their  countries,  in  their  nations**  (Oen.  x.  20).  We  have  only  to  take 
the  square-letters  which  the  later  Jews  substituted  for  his  own  (unknown)  calligraphy, 
and,  inserting  the  omitted  vowels,  write  them  below  the  older  Egyptian  form -^  thus, 
Ni-PAaiaTU,  )        to  perceive  that  this  diligent  writer  (not  being  conversant, 

Ni-PAaiaT<-nKA-IM,  j  unhappily,  with  Nilotic  syntaxis)  has  suffixed  the  Hebrew 
plural,  IM,  to  a  proper  name,  NIPHAIATU,  that  was  already  in  its  indigenous  i^/ura/ 
form  when  it  reached  the  chorographic  bureau  of  Jerusalem  or  Babylon.  Hence  the 
following  conclusions :  ^ 

Digitized  by 

Google 

518  THE    Xth    chapter    OF    GENESIS. 

Ist.  That  Egyptian  tongues  and  writings  are  older  than  Hebraioal  transformatiw 
of  the  name  Ntphaiatu. 

2d.  That  the  people  Niphaiatu  existed  before  Xth  Genesis  was  written. 

8d.  That  the  Hebrew  chorographer  must  haTe  been  nnaoqoainted  ^th  the  first  ^ 
ments  of  HamUic  tongnes ;  else  he  oonld  not  have  appended  his  own  Semitic  plural,  Dl 
to  a  foreign  name  that  was  already  pluralized  by  its  national  prefix  NI,  and  suffix  U- 
a  blander  to  be  paralleled  in  English  by  the  Tulgar  Cockneyitm  of  **  post-'ses  "  for  p9A 

4th.  That,  as  a  consequence,  the  principle  laid  down  at  the  beginning  of  this  seetNL 
of  examining  ffamitie,  Shemitithf  and  Indo-Otrmanic  names  by  their  respective  ks- 
gnages,  is  both  rational  and  nsefoL 

Bat,  the  less  "inspiration"  that  is  required  for  the  constructioii  of  an  ethne 
chart,  the  more  admirable  becomes  the  haman  skill  and  knowledge  which,  its  aati- 
quity  considered,  compiled  such  an  excellent  synopsis  of  the  naiiona  exiBtiog  withia 
the  geographical  horixon  of  its  day. 

The  long-chased  families  of  the  NiPAaiaT(U-ikA-(lM)  have  been  earthed^  at  last,  where 
Bochart  indicated  his  **  Naphtuhfloi " :  rii.,  around  Mareotio  provinces  on  the  confines 
of  the  MTsBIM,  or  Egyptians.  They  spoke  Berber  dialects,  like  the  rest  of  their 
Barbaresque  brethren ;  and  may  be  safely  assumed  as  ranking  among  the  eastammest 
representatiTes  of  the  great  OcetuUan  race. 

Nor  are  their  Testiges  wanting  either  in  Arabic  or  in  classical  geographies.  He 
twelfth  tribe  catalogued  by  Ebn  Khaledoon  is  that  of  the  NePAUSeH.  T  and  S  boi^ 
paleographically  identical,  here  is  the  Arabicized  form  of  the  same  word,  precisely; 
with  its  plural  termination  «H,  in  lieu  of  IM.  The  same  name  reappears  in  the  sixth 
century  of  our  era,  and  therefore  before  Arab  inyasions,  in  the  N^futa,  or  If  ovum,  of^ 
Latin  poet  Corippus.  And,  to  back  assertions  with  authority,  one  of  the  greatest  liring 
Orientalists  of  France,  Quatrem^re,  while  commenting  on  this  passage  of  Xth  Genesis 
records:  **Iies  NaftoukU  r^pondent,  je  crois,  k  une  des  tribus  Berbbres,  oelle  des 
Nafxahf  ou  celle  des  Nafoutalk"  «* 

31.  D^DnnS  — PTtRSm— 'Pathrusim.' 

Again  stands  before  us  an  HamUic  word,  and  again  we  apply  to  it  our  rules  of  dis- 
section ;  after  lopping  away  the  excrescent  Hebrew  IM,  and  thereby  restoring  this 
name  to  its  native  simplicity  —  PTtRS. 

Orthodox  lexicography  reveals  to  an  inquirer  how  the  Pathbos  mentioned  by  Es«- 
kiel  (xxix.  14 ;  xxx.  14)  means  a  '  mouthftd  of  dew,*  or  '  persuasion,*  or  *  dilatation  of 
ruinM 

The  wonted  acuteness  of  Bochart,  two  centuries  ago,  perceived  that  PaMro«,  a  district 
in  the  Thebaid,  would  answer  very  well  to  the  exigenda  of  PT^RS ;  and  the  Coptie 
researches  of  Champollion  and  Peyron  established  that  the  western  side  of  the  Nile, 
at  Thebes,  bore  the  names  of  Patourea  (Phaturites),  Tathyritet,  PaihurU^  and  Phaircm: 
probably  orthographed  better-  by  Parthey  in  Papilhourhf  because  the  name  of  Thebeit 
**  P-API,**  as  the  **  TAo-ReeS,"  south-land,  is  preserved  in  it  But  with  all  deference, 
and  without  absolutely  denying  that  the  compiler  of  Xth  Genesis  may  have  meant 
Pathro8  in  the  Thebaid  as  the  site  of  his  PT^RSlm,  we  cannot  assent  to  such  inference, 
for  the  following  reason :  — 

**Dato  il  case,  e  non  concesso,**  that  Moses,  in  the  fourteenth  century  b.  a,  was 
the  compiler  of  this  chart — and  orthodoxy  itself  claims  no  date  more  ancient  —  the 
MT«R)m  in  that  age,  the  XlXth  dynasty,  had^een  spread  over  the  Nile's  allurium,  for 
above  2000  years,  *<  from  Migdol  to  the  Tower  of  Syene,"  and  far  more  australly  soon 
after  the  Xllth  dynasty.  Consequently,  they  had  left  to  any  people  but  themselves 
nothing  but  the  deaerU  on  either  flank  of  the  alluvials  to  roam  along.  Pathra  was 
merely  a  suburban  district  in  the  <<nome"  of  Thebes,  then  at  the  acme  of  her  glory; 

Digitized  by 

Google 

HEBREW    NOMENCLATURE.  519 

80  that  to  construe  the  general  meaning  of  Xth  Genesis  into  suOh  a  paraphrase  as, 
"out  of  the  MT«R)fn  went  forth  a  colony  and  founded  Pathrot,  whence  about  the 
seventieth  fraction  ^  all  humanity  known  to  the  Jews  was  called  PTtRSlm/'  would 
be  like  saying  (if  for  Thebes  we  read  London,  and  French  for  Hebrew)  that  "  out  of 
the  Engli$hmen  went  forth  a  colony  and  built  Waterloo  bridge,  whence  arose  the  grand 
nation  called  *  Vaterloos,' "  Besides,  "Wilkinson  has  critically  noted,  that  PaihyrU,  or 
Tathyrit,  was  so  called  after  the  goddess  Athyr;  and  meant  **the  belonging  to 
ATHTR,"  as  the  protectress  of  the  western  side  of  Thebes. 

'  The  obstacles  to  such  interpretaUon  increase  just  in  the  ratio  that  the  compilation 
of  Genesis  Xth  is  brought  down  to  a  more  historical  epoch.  It  is  evident  from  the 
context  of  the  whole  paragraph  on  the  "  affiliations  of  the  MTsR^,"  no  less  than 
firom  the  ultra-Egyptian  areas  on  which  e&ch  one  of  these  affiliations  is  naturally  fixed, 
that  such  information  as  the  Hebrew  writer  possessed  on  the  PT^BSlm  had  led  him  to 
understand  this  tribe  aH  extraneous  to  Egypt;  and  he  did  not  locate  their  habitats 
in  Egypt  itself,  because  this  country  was  already  appropriated  by  the  MTsRlm. 
Quatrem^re,  and  before  him  Golius,  had  perceived  the  physical  impediments  to  the 
location  of  the  PT<RS)ni  in  upper  Egypt :  —  "  Les  PhatrousU  out  €t6,  assez  ordinaire- 
ment,  pris  pour  les  habitants  de  la  Th^boide ;  mais  cette  conjecture  ne  me  paratt  pas 
admissible.  En  eflfet,  Misraim  ayant  6t6  le  p^re  de  I'Egypte  inf^rieure  se  trouvi^ient 
naturellement  rang^  parmi  ces  descendants,  sans  qu'il  fiit  necessaire  d'indiquer  d'une 
mani^re  sp^dale  les  habitants  de  telle  ou  telle  partie  de  cette  contr^e.  Si  je  ne  me 
trompe,  les  Pkatrousit  du  r^cit  de  Moise  nous  representent  les  PharutierUf  qui  occu- 
paient  une  partie  de  ce  qu'on  nomme  ai:\jourd'hui  TEmpire  de  Maroc." 

This  identification  tallies  with  our  views  exactly.  In  classical  geographies  the 
Pharum  lie  about  Mauritania,  east  of  the  Autololet;  and  these  last  are  identified  with 
the  Berber  tribes  of  the  AIT-o-LOT,  **  sons  of  Lud ;"  whom  we  have  already  proved 
to  have  been  the  genesiacal  LUIHm.  A  Persian  origin  has  been  ascribed  to  the  Pha- 
ruset  since  the  time  of  Sallust;  but  probably  upon  no  better  authority  than  accidental 
resemblance  of  the  word  Phare,  coupled  with  traditions  of  Aohsemenidan  invasions  of  the 
Cyrenaica ;  and  its  claims  have  been  well  contested  by  Lacroix.  To  behold  the  PT<SRlm 
of  Xth  Genesis  in  the  Pharusiaru  of  Barbary  is  obnoxious  to  no  difficulties,  beyond  the 
inconvenient  presence  of  the  letter  T^,  **  tav  "  in  the  Hebrew  transcription  of  the  name ; 
and  this  letter  may  be  the  old  Hamitic  feminine  article;  which  clings  to  Berber  words 
as  tenaciously  as  **  atl"  does  to  proper  names  in  Mexican  languages.  However,  it 
has  been  shown  above  that  these  people  must  have  resided  beyond  Egyptian  territorial 
limits ;  and  as  one  of  many  brethren  in  genesiacal  personifications,  the  major  part  of 
whom  are  unquestionably  Barbareeguei,  the  PT<RS)i»  must  lie  to  the  west  of  Egypt 
also ;  and  every  reasonable  requirement  seems  fulfilled  in  the  Pharwiu 

[Albeit,  let  me  revert  to  a  former  etymology  in  **  Otia  ^gyptiaca ;''  which,  while  it 
does  not  conflict  with  a  Pharutian  derivation,  exemplifies  how  a  compound  Hamitic 
name  has  become  Hebraicized:  for,  in  Berber  nomenclature,  PhaKRueiane,  Ma- 
Biuiantf  Ma  URij  and  their  endless  Gsetulian  homonymes,  all  inflexions  preceding  the 
RA,  or  AUR,  are  but  demonstrative  aggregations  to  that  omnific  monosyllable ;  whose 
birthplace,  according  to  D'Avezao,  might  lie  among  the  **  Divine  AMVUtce"  and  whose 
tomb  is  not  yet  constructed  in  MKRoeco  I 

The  reduction  I  formerly  proposed  of  PT<RS)i»  was  this :  —  Pi  is  the  universal 
Hamitic  masculine  article  the;  It  may  be  TAo  or  To,  Coptic  and  hieroglyphic  for 
world ;  RS,  the  Coptic  RiS  •and  hieroglyphic  RiS,  meaning  the  eotUh ;  which  con- 
nectedly read  PiT^oRiS,  the-world-touth,  or  **  the  southern  world." 

This  is  a  designation  appropriate  enough  to  austral  populations;  and  if  the 
PiT/oRIS-)7»  of  Xth  Genesis  be  lineal  **  affiliations  of  the  MTsRlm,"  their  name  muat 
be  resolvable  into  Egyptian  roots.  In  any  case,  the  Hebrew  writer  added  his  plural 
IM  to  a  word  already  formed  in  Northern  Africa  centuries  before  bis  day. — 
G.  R.  G.] 

Digitized  by 

Google 

520  THE   Xtk   chapter    OF   GENESIS. 

WUkt  snbmittiBg  the  ibore  dubious  Bolntion  as  preferable  to  any  dependent  if« 
a  spurious  Matwa,  we  nerertheless  consider  the  Fkarum  of  andent  Barbery  to  be  the 
true  PTtRSIiii  of  Xth  Genesis:  oonftrming  such  opinion  by  two  prophetic  passage! ; 
1st—  '*  They  of  Pkam  (not  Persians,  but  Pharurii)  and  of  Lmd  and  of  I*Jkui  were  m 
thine  army,"  says  Eukiel  (xxrii.  10)  to  the  Tyrian  masters  of  Barbery :  2dlj,  TMsft 
(zL  11)  prores  that  he  regarded  Frntkra  to  be  a  land  entirely  distincfe  froot  BgjpL, 
when  he  wrote  — '*flrom  Assyria,  and  Arom  Egypt,  and  fh>m  PAT/uRiS,  nnd  tnm 
Cush,"  &c«i* 

82.  D^nSoa— KSLKAIM— *Casluhim/ 

The  ground  here  beoomes  less  Arm  than  that  whereon  we  truTdled  in  quest  of  As 
preceding  tribes ;  not  merely  owing  to  the  briars  planted  in  our  way  by  oommeotntocs^ 
but  also  fh>m  the  ambiguity  of  the  text  of  Xth  Genesis  itself. 

Let  us  commence  hj  inquiring  into  ^e  latter.  King  James's  Torsion,  verse  14,  Itas: 
**  And  Casluhim,  (out  of  whom  came  Philistim,)  and  Caphtorim  ** ;  the  plnin  Kigliak 
of  which  is,  that  a  man  called  PkUitUm  issued  from  another  called  CtahMm^  The 
commas  and  parentheses  being  the  conjectural  punctuation  and  interpolation  of  Eiag 
James's  (rantkUort,  we  restore  the  text  to  its  primitiTe  simplicity,  as  cloeely  as  our 
alim  language  permits,  thus :  **  And  (the)  KSLKAIM  ftrom  whom  issued  (the)  TJkUBTh 
IM  and  (the)  KPAT<RIM.*'  Of  thU  the  plain  EnglUh  is,  that  two  families,  the  J^kO- 
ii(Un  and  the  KaphtoHtHf  issued  from  the  family  of  the  Katbtkk^m, 

In  psychological  speculations,  it  may  not  be  of  the  slightest  consequence  whether 
either  of  these  fltmilies  did,  or  both  of  them  did  not  Our  English  Bible,  as  Taylor,  the 
erudite  translator  of  Calmetj  declares,  after  Areely  acknowledging  its  manifold  miscon- 
structions, *'  suffices  for  all  purposes  of  piety,**  But  in  matters  of  areheological,  and 
essentially  of  anthropographical  sdenoe,  the  English  Bible  is  less  safe  than  any  stan- 
dard translation  ct  ffomer,  Herodotut,  Cicero,  or  Comt;  as  our  ''Introduction  to  Xth 
Genesis"  abundantly  shows. 

The  question  whether  the  CoilMm  were  the  progenitors  of  one  or  both  families  has 
amply  occupied  theological  pens,  rabbinical  as  well  as  C!hristian ;  but  we  may  mentioa 
that  BosenmttUer,  Cahen,  and  Qlaire,  confirm  our  reading. 

Let  us  endeaTor  to  ascertain  the  affinities  of  the /aMer-stock  —  the  KSLKADiL 
Excepting  the  Abb^  Mignot,  followers  of  the  few  errors  rather  than  of  the  many 
truths  of  Bochart,  had  discoyered,  until  latterly,  nothing  more  apposite  than  that  semi- 
historical  Egyptian  colony  of  Colchiaru,  planted  by  one  of  the  Sesostridaa  in  a  section 
of  Mingrelia  whence  Jason  brought  the  golden  fleece.  Without  doubting  the  mythico- 
astronomical  basis  of  the  latter  event,  we  summarily  dismiss  the  ColekianM,  as  a  colony 
of  Egypt,  for  the  very  reason  given  by  Herodotus  in  proof  of  their  extraction:  vis., 
that  the  former  people  were  "  black  in  complexion,  and  woo%-h^red,"  which  eveiy- 
body  knows  the  MTsBIM,  or  Egyptians,  were  not 

Now,  the  <*  Caucasian"  Egyptiana  being  impossible  procreators  for  Negro  Colchians, 
the  former's  *<  children,"  according  to  Xth  Genesis,  cannot  have  been  '*  woolly-haired 
blacks**  either;  and,  inasmuch  as  the  KSLKAIM  were  "sons  of  the  MTsIUm,"  they 
cannot  have  been  the  Negroee  of  Colchis.    So  we  are  compelled  to  look  elsewhere. 

Five  of  the  affiliations  of  the  Mitsbitbs — the  Ludim,  AdnanAm,  Ltkalfim,  Htpktukklm, 
and  PaikrtuUm — having  already  found  comfortable  homes  among  Gietulian  races  in 
Barbary,  it  would  seem  unnatural  if  the  sixth  had  not  left  some  mem^toes  of  coeval 
residence  in  the  same  regions,  between  the  Sahara  and  the  Mediterranean.  Indeed, 
our  Berber  historiographer,  Ebn  Khaledoon,  has  told  us  [supra]  that  his  nation 
**  descends  fh>m  Kalowffhnf**  which  name  ^is  but  the  Arabiciied  vocalization  of 
KSLKA-lm.  He,  therefore,  reputed  the  latter  to  be  a  Barbaresque  family ;  and,  in 
consequence,  we  proceed  to  test  their  appellative  by  an  HamiHe  touchstone. 

Its  protogramme  K  is  a  difficulty,  but  one  of  two  explanations  will  remove  it    The 

Digitized  by 

Google 

HEBREW    NOMENCLATURE^  521 

first  is  philological :  Tiz.,  that  all  Orientalists  know  how  such  artionlations  as  EAS, 
KSA,  ES,  glide  into  one  another  accordingly  as  they  are  enunciated  by  different  tribes. 
Thus,  in  the  very  name  before  ns,  that  which  the  native  Berbers  and  Arabs  pronounce 
ShiUouh,  an  exotic  Spaniard,  Marmol,  writes  JTUohet,  The  writer  of  Xth  Genesis,  tran- 
scribing a  fortign  name  in  the  unknown  Hebrew  alphabet  he  used,  from  six  to  hlamk 
centuries  before  the  prese&t  9quart4etUr  character  (in  which  we  now  have  his  text)  was 
invented, — this  Hebrew  writer,  we  now  repeat,  when  he  placed  a  sameg^  S,  immediately 
Sifter  the  kaf,  E,  probably  meant  the  two  letters  to  represent  a  Berber  intonation  of  ES. 
In  such  case,  interpolating  Towels,  we  diride  the  word  into  ESAiLouEA-lm,  and  writing 

beneath  it : SMLouH — «,    we  instantly 

recognise  the  Shillouhs,  one  of  the  grand  duplex  divisions  of  OatuUan  families ;  the 
other  being  the  Berber*  [vbi  et^pra].  In  tiie  Egyptian  <<  sacred  tongue"  and  character, 
such  hieroglyphical  signs  as  the  ^  sicTe,"  or  the  *<  garden,''  equally  represent  ES  and 
SH ;  and  if,  according  to  orthodox  interpi^tation,  an  individual  yclept  CatluhXm  was 
really  eon  of  a  man  called  MTsRalM,  the  father*s  vernacular  and  writing  must  have 
regulated  the  child's  baptismal  nomen. 

The  second  explanation  is  archseological ;  and  although  less  likely,  nay  superfluous 
after  the  preceding  remarks,  it  is  submitted  as  another  proof  that  the  speech  of  the 
old  MTsRIM,  ^ot  having  been  the  "lingua  sancta"  of  Shemtie  families,  serves  to  effect 
that  which  modem  Hebrew  never  can  aspire  to :  viz.,  a  rational  solution  of  the  Ham" 
iUc  word  ESLEA. 

**  Every  name  determined  by  the  sign  kah  ...  is  the  proper  name  of  a  provmee  or 
country  more  or  less  extended.**  This  is  Champollion*s  law  of  hieroglyphical  writing; 
and  so  familiar  to  anybody  who  has  read  an  Egyptological  work,  that  one  feels  ashamed 
to  pile  up  authorities. 

If  an  ancient  hierogrammateus  had  written  the  name  of  a  people  called  Shillouhf  he 
would  have  spelt  it  SALUEA-kah  ;  that  is,  SHiLLOVH-country ;  the  determinative  for 
eountry  being  inseparable  from  a  geographical  term.  It  is,  then,  possible  that,  on  expor^ 
tation  to  Jerusalem  or  Babylon  where  Xth  Genesis  was  edited,  the  determinative  kah 
may  have  become  transposed  from  the  end  to  the  beginning  of  the  word  SALEA,  in  order 
to  suit  the  Chaldaic  cuneiform  system  of  writing ;  in  which  **  determinatives  **  always 
Recede  the  proper  name ;  just  as,  in  English,  we  usually  say  eountry  of  the  Shillouhs 
in  lieu  of  SniLLOUH-coun^ry.  We  have  only  now  to  suppose  that  a  Chaidaan  original, 
vrritten  in  cuneiform,  was  transcribed  by  a  Hebrew  amanuensis  into  the  old  alphabet 
of  the  Jews ;  and  the  copies  of  this  transcription  recast,  about  two  or  three  hundred 
years  a.  c,  into  the  modem  eguare-letier  character — all  things  possible,  and  the  latter 
event  certain — to  perceive  that  the  initial  E  may  be  the  relic  of  the  sign  **kah,**  now 
incorporated  into  a  name  that  (supplying  the  vowels)  we  might  read  EaA-SAiLuEA, 
land  of  the  Shillouhs.  To  which  name,  inasmuch  as  the  Hebrew  writer  knew  that  it 
referred  to  a  people  and  not  to  a  man,  he  added  the  plural  determinative  IM,  and 
thus  has  handed  down  to  us  a  true  signification  of  Kaeluhlmy  in  **  country  of  the  Shil- 
louhs.** Still,  we  prefer  the  former  explanation,  because  it  is  the  simplest;  and 
with  these  new  lights  continue  the  inquiry. 

The  learned  Swede,  so  long  Consul-General  for  his  own  and  the  Sardinian  govern- 
ment at  Tangiers,  follows  Ebn  Ehaledoon  with  his  personal  corroborative  experience, 
when  he  deems  the  CaeluhXm  of  Xth  Genesis  to  be  no  others  than  the  ShiUouha; 
already  domiciled  in  Barbary  previously  to  the  intrusion  of  the  first  Phoenician  colo- 
nists: indeed,  he  favors  the  opinion  that  they  are  autocthones.  The  conclusions, 
drawn  by  this  eminent  scholar  ft>om  actual  Marocchine  observation,  derive  support 
from  another  quarter ;  nor  will  Orientalists  question  the  vast  profundity  of  Quatrem^re. 
In  his  judicious  critique  of  Hitzig  he  observes : — "  Quant  aux  KaeUmhit^  j*y  reconnais 
les  Sehelouh  qui,  de  nos  jours  encore,  composent  une  grande  division  de  la  nombreuse 
nation  dont  les  membres  sont  d^sign^s,  d*une  mani^re  abusive,  par  le  nom  de  Berl^ee; 

66 

Digitized  by 

Google 

522  THE  xth  chapter  of  genesis. 

on  con9oit  que  ces  hommes,  qui,  dans  tous  les  temps,  se  montr^rent  ayides  de  {Milage, 
EToient,  de  bonne  heure,  parcouru  TAfriqae  pour  y  excercer  leurs  brigandages.  Qae, 
se  trouvant  attir^  par  I'appat  des  richesses  de  TEgypte,  ils  aient  tent^  une  incursion 
dans  cette  contr^e,  et  r^ussi  4  8*en  rendre  maitres,  la  chose  n*a  rien  d'improbable. 
C'est  ainsi  qu'll  des  ^poques  plus  r^centes  nous  Toyons  les  Mazices,  qui  appartenaient 
^  la  meme  race,  infester  par  leurs  brigandages  TEgypte  et  les  contr^es  yoisines." 
,  The  ShiUouhi  (sufficiently  for  the  purposes  of  this  essay)  hare  now  been  started  in 

Morocco  and  followed  to  the  confines  of  Egypt  In  these  wildemes&es  some  of  their 
adyanced  posts  still  reside.  At  the  famed  oasis  of  Jupiter  Ammon,  or  Setwdh,  th« 
same  phenomenon  is  witnessed  at  the  present  day  for*which  this  oasis  was  remarkable 
in  the  time  of  Herodotus,  tIz  :  the  intermixture  of  Egyptian  and  Berber  tribes.  And 
just  as  its  habitants  then  spoke  Coptic  and  <*  Ethiopian  "  dialects,  so  now  their  speech 
is  Arabic  and  Shilha;  t.  e.,  the  tongue  of  the  Shillouhe;  into  which  latter  idioms 
Arabic  continues  to  become  the  more  and  more  absorbed,'  in  proportion  as  from  oaas 
to  oasis  one  journeys  westwards ;  until,  little  beyond  words  impressed  with  religiofia 
attributes  remains  of  Arabic  in  the  abori^al  tongue  of  the  Shillouh  Totary  of  IsUm. 

The  KSAiLuEA-)m  of  Xth  Genesis  resoWe  themseWes,  once  for  all,  into  the  Shu.- 
LOUHS ;  one  of  the  two  main  branches  of  the  great  GcetuUan  or  Libyan  family,  race, 
or  perhaps  "  species,''  of  mankind.  They  inhabited  Barbary  when  the  ethnio  chart 
of  Hamiiic  stocks  was  compiled.     They  do  so  still,  in  the  nineteenth  century  a.  cJ^^ 

83.   D^nC^Sfl  —  PALST^IM  — '  Philistim.' 

None  will  dispute  that,  according  to  the  Text  and  the  versions,  these  people  proceed 
from  out  of  the  ESAiLou-EA-lm.  Ergo,  the  PhiUa^m  were  of  Berber  stock,  and  must 
have  migrated  from  a  Gsstulian  birthplace  into  Palestine ;  a  land  which,  to  this  day, 
consecrates  in  its  name  the  remembrance  of  one  of  its  earliest  occupants,  the  PkUUtmn, 

Contrary  to  the  general  current  of  opinion,  here  we  encounter,  if  the  ethnic  gene- 
alogies of  Xth  Genesis  are  historical  (as  we  conceiTC  them  to  be),  a  migration  flrom 
Northern  Africa  to  Asia ;  that  is,  from  West  to  East  If  we  are  to  be  told  by  <*  tedo- 
gastri,"  that  a  man  yclept  Cailuhim,  on  his  way  from  Mount  Ararat  to  Mount  Atlaa, 
was  deliyered  in  Palestine  of  another  called  PhiluUm,  St  Augustine  will  reply  for  us 
"  credo,  quia  impossibile,"  Can  it  be  shown  when  the  "  Philistines "  were  not  in 
Palestine  ? 

The  PALSTMM  were  in  Palestine  before  the  second  Pylon  of  the  temple  of  Medemet- 
Haboo  was  erected  at  Thebes ;  else  Ramses  IIL  could  not  have  recorded,  in  the  thir- 
teenth century  b.  c,  *Mhe  POLISITE,"  among  his  Asiatic  vanquished;  by  all  hiero- 
logists  recognized  as  the  Philistines.  They  must  have  been  also  settled  in  Palestine 
before  the  advent  of  the  AbrahamidcBf  whose  presence  the  Philistines  never  quietly 
tolerated ;  and  these  Philistines  were  sufficiently  powerful,  at  the  time  of  the  Exode, 
for  Israel's  escaping  helots  to  prefer  a  wearisome  desert  march  by  the  Sinaie 
route,  lest,  peradventure  the  latter  should  *<see  war;"  if  their  valor  had  tested  ^ 
right  of  way  through  "  the  land  of  the  PALST<-)fn,  although  that  was  near."  And, 
in  their  uncompromising  abhorrence  of  later  Hebrew  domination  (which  they  success- 
fully resisted  until  Nabnchadnezzar  crushed  alike  the  intruder  and  themselves)  the 
Philistines  never  belied  their  Berber  antipathies  to  an  alien  yoke.  AXXo^vXoi,  ^Hi^ranit, 
themselves,  they  seem  never  to  have  comprehended  the  legality  of  the  charter  throu^ 
which  other  strangers  in  the  same  land  claimed  its  exclusive  possession :  nor  did  Jewish 
holders  of  this  supernatural  title-deed  ever  collect  physical  force  adequate  to  an  eviction. 

Leaving  aside,  as  Pundit  fabrications,  those  Sanscrit  apocryphas  through  which  Wil- 
ford  traced  Palestine  to  Pali-stdLn,  "country  of  the  Pali**  (Hales's  endorsement  not- 
withstanding) ;  and  by  no  means  prepossessed  in  favor  of  any  Sanscrit  etymology  for 
descendants  of  Ramitic  Shillouhs  in  Palestine  or  elsewhere,  after  Quatrem^re's  expo- 
sure of  their  impossibility — leaving  aside  all  these  Indomanias,  we  turn  to  the  Abb^ 
Mignot  for  some  reasonable  derivation  of  PLST<. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

HEBREW    NOMENCLATURE.  523 

PLS,  or  Fdeshf  in  Hebrew  means  mud;  and  the  same  bisyllable  resiles  firom  the 
Greek  kijAoj,  and  the  Latin  PaUts.  Pelunum^  frontier  city  of  Lower  Egypt,  towards 
Palestine  (surrounded  by  marshes  at  the  Pelusiac  mouth),  deriyed  its  foreign  name 
from  itd  muddy  situation;  being  called  SIN,  mud,  in  Ezekiel  (xxx.  15,  16),  and  Teeneh, 
mud,  by  the  present  Arabs.  These  coincidences,  coupled  with  the  fact  that  the  PLSTt 
dwelt  between  Pelusium  and  Palestine,  led  the  ingenious  Abb^  to  see,  in  the  miry 
neighborhoods  of  their  abode,  the  origin  of  the  name  PhiUatine,  On  the  other  hand. 
Hunk  draws  the  name  from  FLS,  to  emigrate ;  being  the  sense  in  which  the  LXX 
tmderstood  PLSTMm,  when  they  rendered  it  by  aAX*0wXoi.  Munk  supports  this  hypo- 
thesis by  the  Ethiopic  name  of  Jewish  Abyssinians,  the  Falashas,  or  emigrante,  if  their 
name  be  Semitic. 

These  appear  to  be  the  most  rational  etymologies  of  many  producible  upon  the  old 
system,  before  hieroglyphics  were  translated ;  or  rather,  in  Munk's  instance,  before 
rumors  of  Egyptian  translations  had  reached  an  erudite  Conserrator  of  the  Royal  Li- 
braiy  at  Paris,  eyen  in  1845.  Such  attempts  at  solution  must  be  abortiye,  because, 
reyolying  within  a  yicions  and  narrow  circle  of  ideas,  they  all  lean  upon  Hebraical 
explanations  of  that  which  the  Hebraicized  *< language  of  Eanaan"  cannot  explain; 
and  for  the  following  reason :  — 

Upon  Egyptian  monuments,  at  a  date  long  anterior  to  the  compilation  of  Xth  Genesis 
(neyer  supposed  by  us  to  be  Mosaic) ^  the  PLSTMm  are  recorded.  Their  name  is  ortho- 
graphed  "  POLISiTE  —  men  and  women"  Allowing  yowels  to  be  as  yague  in  hiero- 
glyphics as  eyery  one  knows  they  are  in  Hebrew^  here,  notwithstanding,  is  a  word  of 
three  or  four  syllables,  represented  by  at  letLStfour  radical  letters,  P,  L,  S,  T ;  as  well 
in  the  old  Egyptian  as  in  the  yery  modem  square-letter  calligraphy.  To  this  primitiye 
name  the  Jews  added  IM,  in  order  to  make  their  plural,  PLSTMm ;  the  Philist-ines  : 
which  word  by  the  Masora  is  read  Phelesheth  in  the  singular;  the  final  letter  *<taii" 
being  inherent :  that  is,  the  T  was  already  inseparable  from  the  name  thus  chronicled 
at  Thebes  some  three  to  more  centuries  before  the  consolidation  of  the  Hebrew  lan- 
guage itself;  taking  Solomon's  era  as  the  earliest  and  the  Captiyity  as  the  latest  points 
for  pure  Hebrew  literature.  This  historical  fact  thrust  before  them,  rabbinical  scho- 
lars must  pause,  and  settle  with  comparatiye  philology  the  yital  question  of  biliteraU 
and  monosyllables,  ere  they  can  make  Egyptologists  concede  that'  the  triliteral  FLS, 
or  PLS,  is  the  root,  not  of  a  Semitic,  but  of  an  Hamitic  nomen  of  this  Barbaresque 
affiliation  of  the  ESiLouEA-lm;  because,  in  the  Hamitic  ''language  of  ENAdN" 
(falsely  called  Hebrew)  ;  in  cognate  Berber  tongues ;  and  in  old  Egyptian ;  the  prefis 
P,  PA,  F,  no  less  than  its  Bei1)er  gradation  into  OU,  tea,  to,  &c.,  is  almost  inyariably 
the  masculine  article  ihe^  put  before  the  noun  it  determines.  We  hold,  therefore,  that 
the  hieroglyphical  POLISiTE  is  *'  the-OLlSiTE,"  or  something  similar ;  and  while  we 
pretend  not  to  know  either  the  meaning  or  the  yowelled  phonetism  of  this  noun,  the 
presence  of  the  article  P  hatchets  away  such  fabulous  etymons  as  PLS.  mud,  or  ELS. 
stranger.  It  remains  for  Berber  scholars  to  discoyer  nominal  origins  of  the  P-OLISt'TE 
among  families  of  the  GaetuUan  race :  our  part  contents  itself  with  suggesting  two 
indications  supplied  by  Quatrem^re :  — 

1st  AsHDOD,  Jzotus,  was  one  of  the  fiye  great  cities  of  Philistia.  In  the  time  of 
Nehcmiah  (xiii.  23,  24),  after  return  A-om  Captiyity,  **  the  Jews  had  married  wiyes  of 
Ashdod,"  and  "  their  children  spake  half  in  the  speech  ofAshdod,  and  could  not  speak 
in  the  Jews'  language." 

It  is  true  that  the  Jews,  (who,  considering  the  sanctity  of  their  lineage,  haye  ama- 
zingly surpassed  all  nations  in  rapidity  of  linguistic  mutation,)  in  the  days  of  Nehe- 
miah  spoke  Chaldee;  but,  it  would  appear  from  the  context  that  Hebrew^  i.  e.  the 
"  speech  of  Kanoan,"  was  the  tongue  which  their  "  Pasha"  (PKAH)  sought  to  reinstil 
into  them  by  means  yehement,  not  to  say  singular.  "  I  contended  with  them,  and 
cursed  them,  andf  smote  certain  of  them,  and  plucked  out  their  hair  I"  says  Neh«midk 
(xiil  25).  * 

Digitized  by 

Google 

624  THE  xth  chapter  of  genesis. 

Now,  Ashdod'i  inhabitants  were  PLSTMm  Eyen  as  late  as  Nehemiak,  b.  o.  620—40, 
they  had  preseired  their  own  tongue  in  Palestine.  What  more  natural,  what  other- 
wise possible,  than  that  an  **  affiliation  of  the  KSAiLouEAs"  should  hare  spoken  in 
some  dialect  of  Berber  f 

2d.  —  The  KSMLouEAs,  in  Xth  Genesis,  are  offshoots  of  the  MTsBitet.  Hear  Qua- 
trem^re : — **  Quant  k  ce  qui  conoeme  Tinfluenoe  de  la  langue  Egyptienne  sur  eellee  des 
Philistins,  nous  en  trouyons  un  yestige  reraarquable.  II  existait,  sur  le  riyage  de  la 
mer  M^diterran^e,  un  lieu  situ4  4  peu  dci  distance  de  la  yille  de  Gasa,  dont  il  formait 
le  port  Ce  lieu  ^tait  nomm€  Maiuma,  Comme  11  ayait  acquis  une  graode  importance, 
il  fut,  sous  le  r^gne  des  empereurs  de  Constantinople,  s^par^  de  T^y^eh^  de  GaM,  et 
deyint  un  si^ge  Episcopal  distinct.  Ce  nom,  dont  M.  Hitsig  a  dierch^  r^tymologie 
dans  la  langue  Sanscrite,  appartient  indubitablement  k  la  langue  de  I'Egypte.  En 
retronchant  la  terminsison  grecque,  il  se  composa  du  mot  [Coptic  and  hierogly^c] 
MA  lieu  et  de  lOM  mer,  Cette  denomination,  qui  designs  un  lieu  mmritme^  conyient 
parfaitement  4  un  port  de  mer  :**  and  establishes  the  Hamiiie  yemaoular  of  the  people 
who  named  it    Who  can  these  people  haye  been  but  the  PhiUttmee  who  built  Gaza? 

Another  consideration.  We  haye  seen  that  GsBtulian  races,  descendants  of  KAalf, 
dark^  are  **  gentes  subfusci  coloris ;"  and  also  that  to  half  the  population  of  the  oasis 
of  Ammon,  who  were  not  EgypUans,  Herodotus  giyes  the  usual  Greek  name  of  *<  mn- 
bumed-faeesJ'*  Emigrants  from  such  stock  into  Palestine  were  therefore  physiologi- 
cally twarihy;  and  such  were  the  PTSTt-)m  who  founded  Joppa,  settling  along  the 
coast  from  the  Sues  Isthmus  to  Mt  CarmeL  Now,  as  Baoul  Rochette  hks  skilfuDy 
established,  early  Greek  writers  placed  the  ooelo-piscine  adyenture  of  **  Perseus  and 
Andromeda  **  at  Joppa ;  *<  among  the  MTBi-OTiofu"  inhabitants  of  that  city  of  Pki- 
lutia.  Had  the  PLSTMnt  not  been,  like  all  Berbers^  of  the  swarthy  race,  Joppa  would 
not  haye  been  included  in  JEthiopiaj  "  land  of  bumt-faeee.** 

Sufficient  has  been  said  on  the  PLSTt-)m  to  show  that  the  traditions  collected  in  Xth 
Genesis  accurately  ascribe  these  peoples*  origins  to  Barbary.  To  r^ect  this  deduction 
is  to  deny  the  yalidity  of  Xth  Genesis,  backed  as  it  is  by  eyery  historical  desideratum; 
without  reserying  a  shadow  upon  which  contrary  hypotheses  haye  been  erected  throng 
imaginary  Saruerit  analogies  that  possess,  anthropologically  speaking,  about  as  much 
relation  to  a  man  of  Pkiliitia^  as  to  **  the  man  in  the  moon." 

**  If,  (says  Quatrem^re)  as  I  haye  attempted  to  establish,  the  Philistines  were  origi- 
nally of  the  west  of  Africa,  it  is  probable  that  their  idiom,  primitiyely,  belonged  to 
that  speech,  improperly  termed  Berber^  which  is  spoken  eyen  to-day  in  northern  Africa, 
from  Egypt  to  the  shores  of  the  Atlantic  ocean.  One  may  belieye  that,  during  thdr 
domination  (?)  in  Egjrpt,  the  Philistines  forgot  their  own  language  to  adopt  that  of  this 
country,  or  made  of  the  two  idioms  a  barbarous  mixture.  When  they  were  established 
in  Palestine,  seeing  themseWes  eurrofrnded  by  nations  that  spoke  the  Semitic  £alect% 
and  with  whom  they  had  daily  relations,  either  as  fHends,  or  as  enemies,  they  must 
haye  still  more  achieyed  modifications  or  corruptions  of  their  Imj^ua  propria,** 

Through  the  "  Annals  of  Thotmes  III,"  a  most  scientific  paper  which  reaches  us 
while  correcting  these  pages,  the  antiquity  of  the  Philislinei  can  now  be  carried  back 
to  the  sixteenth  century  b.  o.  Describing  the  hieroglyphics!  records  of  that  Pharaoh, 
Birch  reyeals  how  there  took  place  **  another  campaign  against  the  fortress  of  Aranato, 
that  of  Kanana,  and  the  land  of  Tunep ;  Kadesh  was  once  more  attacked,  and  the 
campsign  extended  to  Naharaina  or  Mesopotamia.  The  Tanai,  a  PhiUatine  tribe  who 
were  conquered  by  Ramses  III,  the  Palusata  or  Philittineay  and  the  Gakhil  or  Gali- 
leans, also  contributed  to  the  rent-roll,  and  the  *  siWer  jug  the  work  of  the  Keysu' 
refers  to  the  celebrated  metallio  works  of  the  Cyprians."  Here  the  reader  will  recog- 
nize yarious  geographical  and  ethnic  names  already  mentioned  in  our  present  disquisi- 
tion.    Mr.  Birch's  surpassingly-great  essay  will  show  him  many  more. 

And  this  is  all  we  haye  to  say  on  **  P-OLISiTE-«i«n  and  vmmen  ;**  —  except  that 
orthodox  Hebrew  dictionaries  propose,  by  way  of  explanation,  «  Piulistinss,  tKote 
that  dwell  in  viUaga  !  **  ^^^ 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC 

HEBRETT    NOMENCLATURE.  525 

84.  DnnSD  —  XPhTiRm.  — '  Caphtorim.' 

The  first  horn  of  a  dilemma  (previouslj  stated)  displays  itself  in  the  absolutely 
eqniTOcal  verse  of  the  ethnic  chart  itself.  Our  construction  is,  that  the  Caphtorim 
proceeded  (like  the  Philistines)  firom  out  of  the  ESAiLouKAs :  but  if  a  Lanci  were 
to  object  that  every  Mitsrite  name,  but  that  of  the  parenthetical  FhiUsdm,  is  preceded 
tj  the  demonstrative  AT<,  and  were  to  insist  that  "  W-AT^KP^T<RIM ''  means  **  and- 
oll-KPhTtRite*"  we  should  yield  at  once  that,  in  the  Text,  the  latter  are  $ona,  not 
grandsons,  of  the  MT«R)m.  In  mere  hagiography  a  distinction  so  minute  is  of  no  im- 
portance ;  but  in  ethnography  it  makes  all  the  difference  whether  the  KPAT^Bim  issued 
primarily  fh>m  the  Egyptians,  or  whether  they  are  a  secondary  formation  from  among 
the  ESAiLouKAs  of  Barbary ;  Getulians  who,  like  their  brethren  the  PMUttinii,  aban- 
doned their  birthplace,  and  went whither  ?    Nobody  knows ! 

Bochart  pointed  out  a  road  to  Cappadoeia,  along  which  English  orthodoxy  follows 
him  as  sheep  do  their  leading-rams — chiefly  because,  having  fixed  the  Negro  CatluKim 
in  Colchis  on  the  Euxine,  Protestant  divines  consider  that  his  brother,  or  Ait  son, 
•^Caphlorim^"  naturally  took  lodgings  next  door.  Our  restoration  of  the  ESAiLouEAs 
to  Barbary  shatters  that  hypothesis,  unless  Cappadocia,  like  Colchis,  can  show  to  some 
Halicamasian  a  population  also  **  black  in  complexion,  and  wooUy-huired,"  Strabo  tells 
us  that  the  Leuco-Syrians,  wAt^skinned-Syrians,  resided  there.  Michaelis  thought 
of  Cypnu,  which  Yolney  rejects;  Calmet,  first  Crete,  and  afterwards  Cypnu,  which 
second  thought  is  favored  in  Eitto's  cydopndia  by  <*E.  M."  Crete,  however,  is  adopted 
by  the  Germanic  scholarship  of  **  J.  B.  R." ;  and,  based  upon  similar  sources,  by  that 
of  Munk.  One  regrets  to  disturb  this  happy  uniformity ;  but,  let  a  query  or  two  be 
propounded  —  after  recalling  that,  our  preceding  analyses  having  vindicated  Bofbary 
as  the  region,  and  Ocettdian  as  the  race,  of  tenen  **  afBliations  of  the  MTsRIm,"  the 
eighth,  our  EPAT^Rs,  whether  as  offshoots  of  Shillouht  or  of  Egyptiant,  must  have  been 
likewise  **gente8  subfusci  colons";  speaking  a  dialect  ot  HamUic  tongues;  whoso 
birthplace  was  also  Northern  Africa. 

Ist  How,  in  the  remote  age  of  these  ante-historical  migrations,  could  Berber  races 
have  got  to  Crete  ?  By  navigation  ?  Not  impossible,  certainly ;  but,  it  is  one  thing 
to  suppose  a  Mb.  Caphtorim  tacking  his  ftrail  bark,  not  along  shore,  but  straight  out 
400  miles  (against  Etesian  gales)  to  windward,  to  the  Island  of  Candia ;  and  another 
to  explain  the  embarkation  of  a  whole  tribe  of  EPAT<Rs,  for  aught  we  know,  as  numer- 
ous as  the  PharutU  or  the  Philittines,  Such  a  voyage,  at  such  unnautical  epochas,  is 
rather  more  difficult  to  be  conceived,  in  arohieology,  than  some  mistake  of  a  copyist  in 
writing  that  name  which,  as  EPT<R  (save  in  the  Text,  versions,  and  rabbinical  oom- 
mentors  thereon),  has  never  yet  been  localiied. 

2d.  What  vestiges  are  there  in  Crete,  or  in  her  traditions,  of  any  such  Barbaresque 
visitation  ?  And  why,  after  they  had  landed  at  Candia,  did  the  EPATtRs  abandon  that 
splendid  island  en  masee,  and  so  thoroughly,  that  not  a  suspicion  of  their  sojourn  is  to 
be  found  in  Cretan,  in  classical,  or  in  ffamiHe  traditions  ? 
When  these  two  questions  have  received  a  reasonable  answer,  we  shall  put  our 
8d,  and  last  interrogatory  —  How  comes  it  that,  after  all  these  improbabilities,  the 
second  voyage,  from  Crete  to  Palestine,  is  unrecorded? 

It  is  true  that  three  texts  are  quoted  to  identify  the  PhiUttinet  with  Crete :  —  Bzek. 
XXV.  16,  **I  will  stretch  out  my  hand  upon  the  PhiUetinee,  and  I  will  cut  off  the 
EARTM01."  Zeph,  iL  5,  "  Woe  unto  the  inhabitants  of  the  seacoast,  the  nation  of  the 
EARTMm  /  the  word  of  leHOuaH  against  you ;  0  Eanaan,  the  land  of  the  Phaietinet.** 
1  Sam.  XXX.  14, 16,  «  We  made  an  invasion  south  of  the  EARTMm, ...  the  land  of  the 
Philietinei,*' 

Now,  if  the  resemblance  of  EART^I  to  Crete  be  the  only  reason  for  making  those 
Shillouh  affiliations,  called  P-OLISiTE  in  hieroglyphics,  navigate  from  Barbary  to  Can- 
dia, and  thence  to  Palestine  —  if  this  be  all,  why  the  same  paltBographical  analogy 
night  bring  the  EAETMm  from  KhaBTz-oinn,  the  modem  city  on  the  junetore  of  the 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC 

526  THE    Xth    CHAPTER    OP    GENESIS. 

Blue  and  Wbite  Niles !  Unluckily  for  Crete,  these  texts  merely  show  that  KARTf-liii 
was  another  name  —  a  nickname  perhaps  —  for  a  sept  of  PhiU»line»  in  Palestine. 
David's  life-guards  were  composed  of  EARTd  and  PALTrt  (2  Sam,  viii.  18 ;  1  Chnm. 
xTiii.  17).  They,  with  the  GTd  (2  Sam,  zr.  18),  made  np  a  corps  of  <*600  men.'* 
Now,  the  latter  being  citizens  of  Gath,  the  onion  of  all  three  tribes  into  a  cohort  renders 
their  homogeneity,  as  native  Palestinians,  more  than  probable.  But,  none  of  these 
passages  touch  the  Kaphtorim  ;  whose  name  is  distinct  from  that  of  the  KhertUAm. 

But,  it  is  said,  three  other  texts  confirm  the  Cretan  theory :  —  Deut,  ii.  28,  "  The 
Avim  that  dwelled  in  villages  as  far  as  (Oaza?)  Aza,  the  EPAT^Rs  who  issued  from 
EPAT^R  destroyed  them  and  established  themselves  in  their  place."  Jerem,  xlviL  4, 
« leHOuaH  will  spoil  the  Philistines,  tbe  remnant  of  the  country  of  EPAT/R."  Amot 
ix,  7,  "The  Philistines  from  EPAT<R." 

One  must  employ  double-magnifying  spectacles  to  see  anything  more  here  than  that 
Kaphtor  was  some  place  whence  Philistines  came  (far,  or  near,  nnrevealed) ;  but,  in 
what  does  all  this  concern  the  "Island  of  Candia"?  Herodotus  apd  Tacitus  are 
quoted.  The  former  merely  says,  that  Creta  was  occupied  by  barbarous  tribes  until 
the  time  of  Minos.  This  citation  does  not  help  CapfUorim  out  of  the  mire.  The  latter 
has  "  JudceoSf  CretA  insuld  profugos,  novissima  lAbyce  insedisse  memorant,"  He  speaks 
of  Jews,  driven  out  of  Candia,  taking  refuge  in  Libya.  What  has  that  incident  to  do 
with  "  Philistines  from  EPAT^R"  in  Palestine  ?  Those  who  fancy  that  Hitrig  or  Movers, 
spite  of  their  immense  learning,  and  dexterity  in  placing  one  Indo-Gerraanio  hypotheds 
ialongside  of  another,  have  mended  matters,  will  be  edified  by  the  perusal  of  Quatre- 
m^re's  critique  of  both.  From  it  we  translate :  "  It  seems  to  me  probable  that  the 
Kreti  inhabited  to  the  south  of  the  country  of  the  Philistines,  upon  the  shores  of  the 
Mediterranean  Sea,  on  the  side  which  looks  towards  the  frontiers  of  Egypt.  And  a 
passage  of  Herodotus  (iiL  6)  comes  perfectly  in  support  of  my  opinion.  ■  According  to 
the  Greek  historian,  *from  Phoenicia  to  the  environs  of  Eadytis  [Jerusalem],  the 
country  is  inhabited  by  Syrians,  called  Palestinians.  From  Eadytis  to  the  town  of 
lenusoB,  the  market-places  appertain  to  the  Arabs ;  thence  after,  to  the  Lake  Serbonis, 
dwell  the  Syrians.'  This  curious  passage  demonstrates  that  to  the  south  of  the  countiy 
of  the  Philistines  there  was  a  coast  sufficiently  considerable  occupied  by  Arabs.  Now, 
inasmuch  as  the  passages  of  the  Bible  show  us  these  Kreti  established  in  the  same  dis- 
tricts, I  think  they  constituted  an  Arab  tribe  that  the  love  of  gain  had  fixed  upon  the 
shore  of  the  Mediterranean,  that  they  (the  Kreti)  had  nothing  in  common  either  with 
the  Philistines  or  with  the  Cretans." 

Orthodox  lexicography  encourages  a  searcher  with  "Caphtob  —  ^sphere,  a  fticcHe, 
a  hand,  v^palm,  doves,  or  those  that  seek  and  inquire,"  We  do,  "  et  hino  ills  laohryme." 
The  roots  Eah-P-T<oR  might  signify  **  the-BuU-land** ;  but  neither  these,  nor  any 
others  hitherto  offered,  having  furnished  a  dew  to  the  genesiacal  EaPAT/oR-BI,  we 
humbly  place  the  name  upon  our  " Table"  coupled  with  the  word  " tiftJbioim." 

Volney,  whose  acuteness  of  perception  is  beyond  all  praise,  simply  says,  "  les  Kt^h- 
torim  peuvent  6tre  les  habitans  de  Gaza."  Wherever  may  have  been  their  abode  in 
Palestine  during  later  times,  Xth  Genesis  makes  them  so  many  affiliations  of  EAaM, 
the  dark  (red)  race,  through  the  Egyptians;  and  consequently  points  to  Barbary  for 
their  origin.    Our  "  Affiliations  of  the  MTsR)m"  now  arrange  themselves  as  follows: 

Stock  and  Tongue.  Habitat  Origin. 

1.  The  LnD,s Berber Mauritania Barbary. 

2.  "  AMaN,s "  Oases,  &c " 

8.  "  LHaB,s "  Libya ^ " 

4.  "  NiPAaiaT<,s "  Mareoticum " 

6.  "  PATmiS,s "  Pharusia " 

6.  "    ESALouEA,s "      AU  N-W.  Africa.... 

7.  "    PAiLiST^s "      Palestine "? 

8.  "    EaPATtoR,8 "?   "       "Unknown." 

Digitized  by 

Google 

HEBREW    NOMENCLATURE.  627 

[All  these  families  of  mankind  thus  re-enter  into  the  grand  Oc^uUan  group  of  North- 
western Africa :  of  which  sundry  races,  through  prehistorical  migrations,  had  par- 
tially occupied  Palestine  In  ages  anterior  to  the  arriyal  of  the  Abrahamidce.  The 
surpassing  accuracy  of  the  ancient  compiler  of  Xth  Genesis  has  now  been  triumphantly 
-vindicated  from  a  new  quarter ;  and  that  which  not  a  man  of  the  ghostly  schools, 
whence  issued  his  reyerence  doctor  smythe,  has  ever  possessed  the  knowledge  to 
expound  rationally,  herein  becomes  comprehensible  through  '*Gliddon,  skeptical 
▼lews  of,  —  Index,  p.  401."—  G.  R.  G.] 6J8 

"And  KNAdN  begat"  ((7en.x.l5.) 
35.    |TX  — T«rDN  — *SiDON/ 

One  especial  object  of  our  Section  A  has  been  achieyed  in  the  preceding  pages.  It 
was,  to  rescue  the  maligned  **  affiliations  of  EUSA,"  and  the  mystified  "  affiliations 
of  the  MTsRIm,"  from  the  sloughs  of  despond  into  which  ecclesiastical  hands  had 
plunged  them.  After  fixing  the  former  in  Southern  Arabia  among  the  dark-red  Em- 
•  yariUSf  and  the  latter  in  Barbary  among  the  **  gentes  subfusci  colons "  of  QatuUan 
origin,  we  can  now  look  down  complacentiy  upon  the  Eg3rptian  alluyium  of  the  Nile — 
whether  yiewed  as  the  true  **  Land  of  KAeM "  (the  god),  diyine  prooreator  of  the 
Egyptian  race ;  or  as  the  **  Land  of  EMM,"  the  twarthy  people  —  as  the  centre-point, 
whither  conyerge  the  traditions  and  the  anthropological  similitudes  of  Arabian  Asia 
and  of  Barbaresque  AMoa.  Our  remaining  objects  will  be  satisfied  by  a  catalogue  of 
the  other  cognomina  in  Xth  Genesis,  according  to  the  latest  yiews  of  archnologioal 
soience ;  beginning  with  T«IDoN. 

The  city  of  Sidon  is  the  simple  meaning  of  our  text ;  not  an  indiyidual  so  christened : 
the  yicissitudes  of  whose  Sidonian  inhabitants,  *'  skilled  in  many  arts,"  often  lauded 
poetically  by  Homer,  are  celebrated  prosaically  in  dassio  and  biblical  dictionaries. 
Its  local  name  waa  Sh/da  when  the  writer  (G.  R.  G.)  sojourned  there  in  1829  and 
1880.  Orthodox  philology  replies  to  our  query,  as  to  the  signification  of  the  word — 
**  SiDON  —  hunting,  fithiny,  veniton;  **  of  which  heterodoxy  can  accept  but  the  second 
term  in  this  instance ;  because  the  Semitic  roots  of  sdyd,  **  to  chase,"  here  refer,  as 
Trogus  Pompeius  tells  us,  to  the  icthyologio  facilities  of  the  locality ;  **  nam  piacem 
Phoenices  Sidon  yocant."  In  ethnic  classification  Sidon  deriyes  prominence  from  haying 
once  been  {Om,  x.  19)  the  easternmost  limit  of  Kanaanitish  occupancy ;  and  <*  after 
many  years,"  continues  Trogus,  *<  the  Philistines  of  Askalon  droye  out  the  Sidonians, 
who  sought  refuge  on  the  rocky  islet  upon  which  they  founded  Tyre" 

From  Justin,  the  epitomizer  of  Trogus's  lost  yolumes,  we  descend  to  Bochart^  and 
admire  the  subdued  irony  with  which  he  disposes  of  commentators  upon  the  word 
T«IDN :  —  **  Quod  yir  qui  in  his  Uteris  paucos  habuit  sequales  admiraiionem  explicat 
yocem  IVl^  Sidon,  non  sine  admiratione  legi."  The  most  recent,  and  incomparably 
the  best  qualified  arch^ologue  who  has  journeyed  "round  the  Dead  Sea  and  in  the  Bible 
Lands,"  is  De  Saulcy.  He  remarks  on  **  Saydah — This  is  undoubtedly  the  'LiiHn/  irtfXi( 
ca2  Xift^y  («Xc(9rd()  of  Scylax,  the  Sidon  of  Pliny,  the  Zi^y  of  Strabo,  who  places  it  at 
400  stadia  from  Berytus,  the  Sidona  of  Antonine's  Itinerary,  the  Sydone  of  Peutinger's 
Table,  and,  lastiy,  the  Civitae  Sidona  of  the  Pilgrim  firom  Bordeaux.  It  would  be  quite 
useless  to  argue  this  identity,  which  proyes  itself." 

Conformably  to  Xth  Genesis,  ENAdN,  parent  of  Sidon,  was  an  affiliation  of  Ham  , 
bat,  <<  according  to  M.  Moyers,  the  Eanaanians,  called  by  the  Greeks  Phcenicians,  were 
a  people  that  appertained  to  the  Semitic  race ;  of  which  some  tribes,"  says  he,  **  at  a 
time  which  preceded  the  commencement  of  our  history,  marched  little  by  littie,  some 
coming  from  the  north,  by  way  of  Syria;  others,  from  the  south,  by  way  of  Arabia; 
and,  according  to  all  appearances,  achieyed,  after  seyeral  centuries,  their  establish- 
ment, in  a  permanent  manner,  in  Palestine.  Called  Eanaanians,  from  the  word  Ka- 
naan,  ENAdN,  which  means  a  low  land,  by  opposition  to  the  term  Aram,  ARM,  which 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC 

528  THE  xth  ghaptek  of  genesis. 

expressed  a  high  land,  thej  composed,  seeMr^ng  to  the  redtsl  of  Moees,  ft  nn^ 
people,  but  divided  into  nuuij  nations,"  Ac. 

To  this  theory  Qoatrem^re  jadicionslj  oljects, — that  the  opinion  wMeh  attribntes  a 
Semitic  origin  to  the  Kanaanites  (aside  fironpi  its  opposition  to  Xth  Qenesis,  whi^  he 
considers  of  Mosaie  editorship)  reposes  vniqndjr  upon  the  resemblance  of  the  tongue 
spoken  bj  the  Kanaanites  -with  the  langoages  in  Togne  among  oUier  peoples  to  whom 
general  consent  now  applies  the  name  of  Shemiii$h.  He  holds  this  basis  to  be  nnsafe ; 
because  all  of  the  affiliations  of  Shem  did  not  speak  one  language;  netablj  the 
£lamitet,  of  Persia;  whose  tongue  differed  entirelj  from  that  of  Aramaans  itr  Arabs: 
at  tiie  same  time,  surrounded  as  the  KNA4NI  erer  were  bj  Semitic  influences,  their 
language  would  necessarily  imbibe  such  exotic  idioms.  Again,  it  is  by  Qnatremibre 
considered  doubtful,  either  that  KNAdN  means  a  low  land,  or  ABM  a  high  one.  In- 
deed, one  might  add  that  the  final  N  in  Kanaan  may  be  a  later  addition  to  an  onginsl 
root,  KNA  ;  said  to  be  the  pristine  name  of  the  Phoiniket,  Phoenicians ;  which  is  pro- 
iMibly  preserred  through  another  form,  tIi.  :  Bem-dJXKf  "sons  of  Ahak;  "  who  were 
not  <'  (Hants,''  as  some  commentators  imagine.  Such  dlTorsities  of  sdentiile  opinien 
are  here  presented  to  exhibit  Bome  probUmata;  not  to  soWe  them. 

To  us  the  chart  of  Xth  Genesis  has  prored  a  yery  trustworthy  guide  so  ftlr.  It 
assigns  an  ffamiHe  origin  to  ENAdN ;  and  consequently  to  the  foundation  of  the  dtj 
of  SidarL  No  facts  known  to  us  interfere  with  this  natural  view.  During  the  ei^th— 
ninth  oenturies  b.  o.  the  name  of  Sidon  was  already  sculptured,  according  to  Baw- 
Hnson  and  Laysrd,  upon  the  monuments  of  Assyria ;  but  the  yery  coi^ectnral  Identity, 
claimed  by  Osbum,  of  the  SAAIBETANA,  hieroglyphed  on  the  Egyptian  records  of 
Bamses  II.,  with  the  Stdomant,  is  now  oyerthrown  by  Hinok's  translation  of  a  cuneatie 
register  of  Sardanapalus,  wherein  the  **  Sharutinian  "  city  becomes  situate  **  between 
Atttioch  and  Aleppo."  We  have,  moreoyer  [jntpra,  p.  289,  Fig.  289],  identified  with 
Egyptian  natiye  soldiery  of  the  royal  guard  the  indiyidual  whom  Mr.  Osbum  suspected 
to  be  a  Sidoman,  None  dispute,  howeyer,  that  Sidon  must  haye  been  a  "  dty  "  when- 
soeyer  Xth  Qenesis  was  written,  so  we  proceed  to  the  next  name.<>0 

86.  nn  — KATe  — *Hbth.' 

The  HUHtea  are  well  known.  Of  them  the  patriarchal  Abraham  {Oen,  xxiiL  9, 
17, 19)  purchased  not  a  double  cayem,  called  Machpdah;  but  "  the  field  eontracUd  far," 
Thus,  under  the  magic  wand  of  such  scholarship  as  that  of  the  Vatican  Professor  of 
Sacred  Philology,  multitudes  of  mistranslated  Hebrew  words  are  replaced  by  their 
historical  meanings.  —  "  I  boschi,''  says  Land,  *<  diyentano  veneri,  le  doppie  spelondie 
spiegansi  per  eontratU,  i  torrenti  si  cangiano  in  beneficii,  le  isole  mpopoU  e  «to^  i  ixf^ 
in  virili  vergelle,  le  rohdini  in  puledri,  le  yoragini  in  montagne,*' 

In  hieroglyphics,  the  EAeT,  yariously  euphonized,  oCteur  so  often,  back  to  the  sge 
of  Thotmes  III.,  or  the  sixteenth  century  b.  c,  that  one  need  but  refer  to  Mr.  Birch's 
critical  papers  for  authority.  The  **land  ot  Kheta*  among  Egyptians  seems  to  hsTS 
meant  that  part  of  Palestine  where  we  find  the  ffiitile$  of  Scripture ;  but  the  name 
EAeT  also  designated  this  yery  wide-spread  people ;  who  reappear,  through  Layard's 
researches,  on  the  cuneatie  inscriptions  of  Assyria,  as  the  Khatii  or  Khetta  of  Syria. 
To  us,  and  to  the  writer  of  Xth  Genesis,  EAeT^  is  not  a  man,  but  h  people  so  called.^ 

87.  ♦DID*  —  IBTJSI  — '  Jebusitb.' 

In  the  book  of  Judges  (xiz.  10),  a  flagitious  act  is  recounted,  which  chroaologers 
assign  to  about  the  year  1406  b.  o.  The  date  seems  too  remote,  but  the  earlier  it  is 
placed  by  commentators,  the  more  certain  will  be  the  archedogieal  deductions  now 
about  to  be  drawn. 

A  Leyite  **  rose  up  and  departed,  and  came  oyer  against  Jebm,  which  is  Jerusalem ;" 
that  is  to  say,  the  place  had  been  known  preyiously  by  the  name  of  IBUS ;  but,  in  the 

Digitized  by 

Google 

HEBBSTf    NOMEKCLATURE.  529 

time  of  the  writer  of  Judges^  was  called  Jerusalem,  aa  a  seeond  name  for  one  and  the 
aame  locality ;  whence  the  Benjamites,  who  gave  it  this  latter  appellative,  had  failed 
to  driye  the  Jebuiites  out,  **  even  unto  this  day."  {Jud.  i.  21.)  So  Joshua  (xviii.  28), 
I.  e.  the  hook  so-called,  has  <<  and  }BUS  which  is  Jerusalem  ;*'  and  without  requiring 
further  infonnatioD,  the  following  text  corroborates  what  precedes:  —  (1  Ckron.  xi. 
4),  "  And  Dayid  and  all  Israel  went  to  Jerusalem,  which  is  IBUS,  where  the  IBUS)m 
(were  then)  the  inhabitants  of  the  land." 

Hence  it  is  certain,  that  IBUS  was  a  yery  ancient  city,  on  the  nte  of  which  the 
exotic  Israelites  founded  a  more  recent  one  they  named  Jenaalem  — literally,  YeRuS, 
heritage,  and  SAaLttM,  peace  (in  the  dual)  —  written  TeRoSAaLaiM,  and  signifying, 
according  to  Lanci,  **  She  who  inherits  two-fold  peace." 

IBUSI,  in  Xth  Qeneeis,  means  therefore  <*a  man  of^  or  bdonging  to,  IBUS,"  a  city; 
and  not  the  imaginary  son  of  a  man  of  that  name.  Around  this  topogr^hical  centre 
clustered  the  IBUSIm  before  the  irruption  of  Israel's  hosts  into  Eanaan.  There  the 
Jebueites  manfully  ylndicated  their  nationality  until  Bayid  stormed  their  citadel,  Mt. 
Zion ;  and  here  some  of  them  remained  long  after  their  city  was  changed  into  JerusO' 
2em,  until  the  invader  and  the  invaded  were  swallowed  up  by  the  Babylonians. 
.  Now,  whether  a  tribe  called  IBUS)m  built  a  city  and  named  it  after  a  mythical  ances- 
tor, divine  or  human ;  or  whether  the  anterior  name  of  a  city  was  adopted  by  a  tribe, 
is  what  neither  ourselves  nor  any  one  else  can  aver.  Xth  Genesis  speaks  of  an  Ibvs- 
ian;  just  as  it  speaks  of  an  inhabitant  of  any  more  celebrated  but  perhaps  not  more 
ancient  city  than  IBUS,  already  in  existence  when  Joshua  entered  Palestine. 

Mr.  Osborn's  reading  of  *<  Jebusite,"  among  the  *<  thirfy-seven  prisoners  of  Beni- 
Eassan,"  has  not  survived  criticism  [tupra^  p.  173] ;  but  M.  De  Saulcy  recognises 
Oabusa,  or  JebuSy  upon  the  old  cuneiform  tablets  at  Lake  Van.  We  note  a  *'  man 
appertaining  to  the  city  of  Jebut "  in  the  IBUSI  of  Xth  Genesis,  and  pass  onward8.<°i 

88.  nON— AMRI  — ^Amorite/ 

Around  half  the  circumference  of  the  Lake  Asphaltum,  and  from  the  Jordan  north- 
ward to  Mt.  Hermon,  once  dwelt  a  people  **  of  stature  high  as  cedars,  and  strong  as 
oaks  "  {Amos  ii.  9),  called  the  AmobIm  :  —  cousins  to  the  Em\m,  Rephalm,  Zuzim,  Zam- 
fumlm,  Niphitim,  and  AnafAm ;  falsely  rendered  "giants"  in  the  versions;  all, 
according  to  the  Vulgate  translators,  "  monstra  queedam  de  genere  giganteo  "  {Numb, 
ziii.  88) :  some  of  whom  were  so  tremendously  tall,  that  Caleb's  spies  reported  how 
••  we  were  in  our  own  eyes  as  grasshoppers,  and  such  were  we  in  their  eyes."  Never- 
theless, astonishing  as  such  human  proportions  seem,  those  of  a  thorough-bred  Amo- 
xite  surpassed  them  all;  according  to  the  orthodox  streiim  of  Hebraioal  t^ditions 
supplied  by  Cahen. 

"When  Og  (the  Amoritish  king  of  Bashan)  saw  the  Israelite  camp,  which  had  six 
parasangs  (twenty-four  miles)  of  extent,  he  said :  I  single-handed  will  undertake  the 
combat  with  this  people,  that  they  do  not  to  me  as  to  Sihon.  For  this  object  he  de- 
tached a  mountain  six  parasangs  (twenty-four  miles)  in  breadth,  and  placed  it  on  his 
bead  to  heave  it  upon  the  Israelites.  God  caused  an  insect  to  come,  which,  piercing 
the  mountain  through  the  middle,  caused  Og*s  head  to  sink  therein.  He,  wishing  to 
disengage  himself,  could  not  manage  it,  because  one  of  his  teeth  projected  in  front 
very  considerably.  Moses  then  seized  an  axe  ten  cubits  (fifteen  feet)  in  length,  and 
Jumping  into  the  air  to  the  height  of  ten  cubits  (fifteen  feet),  struck  the  giant  on  the 
ankle-bone  of  his  foot  On  fidling,  the  corpse  of  Og  touched  the  Israelite  camp."  To 
similar  rabbinical  stories  Horace  replied,  **  Credat  Judseus  Apella !"  After  all,  in  the 
Text,  another  and  later  writer,  during  whose  day  Og's  iron  bedstead  was  still  exhibited 
at  Rabbath,  found,  by  actual  measurement,  that  this  **  remnant  of  giants  "  had  slept 
wiUiin  an  area  of  only  thirteen  and  a  half  feet  by  six  {Deut.  ill.  11). 

67 

Digitized  by 

Google 

530  THE    Xth    chapter    OF    GENESIS. 

AmoDg  Berber  tribes,  the  name  OMARE,  AAimaref  re^ypesn  in  Ebn  Khaledoon*! 
list ;  but  whether  indigenonsly,  or  exotically  through  some  tnte-historical  Ktnaeiritish 
or  modem  Arab  afilUation  (sons  of  Omar,  or  A&mer?),  others  maj  better  determine. 

It  is  long  since  that  Rosellini  pointed  out  among  the  early  Asiatic  conquests  of  the 
XVIIIth  dynasty,  the  **  Land  of  Omar  :''  bat  Birch  first  suspected  this  conntiy  to  be 
that  of  the  Palestinio  AmoriU;  a  conclusion  enforced  by  Hincks,  and  dereloped  by 
Osbum.  There  is  a  (jnestion  still  pending  between  hierologists  and  cnndform  decy- 
pherers  in  regard  to  the  **  citadel  of  At^sA  **  in  the  land  of  AmarUf  which  leaTes  it  yet 
uncertain  whether  the  riyer  Amoor,  **  Jaxartes,"  or  the  nation  Amorite  in  Palestine,  is 
intended.  Nor  have  the  Palestinic  trarels  of  De  Sanlcy  ascertained  any  rains  of  a 
city  called  AMR,  whence  the  AMoRI  of  Xth  Genesis  might  be  derived :  although 
nothing  can  be  more  precious  to  the  ethnologist  than  the  **  Figure  of  a  MoabUe  "  dis- 
covered by  him  on  the  *<  hybrid  monument,  in  which  the  Egyptian  and  the  Assyiiaa 
styles  are  intermingled,"  at  Redjom-el-Aabed  Ignorance  of  Judaic  topography  hers 
compels  us  merely  to  read  an  AMoR-um;  a  man  of,  or  belonging  to,  the  city,  country, 
or  tribe,  of  AMR.«2 

39.  ♦trjnj  — GRGSI  — ^GiRGASiTB.' 

This,  together  with  the  two  preceding  and  all  the  following  affiliations  of  ENA4K, 
has  the  termination  I  {iod) ;  which  in  Semitic  tongues  commonly  indicates  the-hdcm§' 
tng-to  a  place ;  for  instance,  MtusW  means  Cairo ;  Muat^r-i,  a  Cairine.  In  Xth  Genesis, 
this  adjunct  to  a  geogpraphioal  proper  name  has  precisely  the  same  grammatical  accep- 
tation ;  and  if  science  cannot  always  find  the  place  alluded  to,  the  fault  lies  at  the 
door  of  travellers  less  qualified  than  a  De  Saulcy.  GRGS-I  signifies  nothing  more 
than  a  man  belongmg^to  a  locality  once  called  ORGS ;  although  its  Palestinio  situation 
still  lacks  a  discoverer.  Other  books  of  the  Hebrews  are  silent  on  this  name ;  which 
was  all  that  remained  of  a  Oirgatite  even  in  the  time  of  Josephus,  1800  years  ago; 
unless  **  the  country  of  the  Oergeeenee"  mentioned  by  Matthew  (viiL  28),  contained 
other  persons  than  those  *'  possessed  with  devils."  ^ 

40.   nn— KAUI  — *HiviTE.' 

A  man  "  of,  or  belonging  to,"  a  place  called  KAU ;  now  pronounced,  through  the 
modem  Chaldee  substitution  of  V  for  U,  *<  EAaV."  The  KhVhea  rank  among  the  aa- 
ezpelled  Kanaanites ;  because  Joshua  (xi.  19)  suffered  some  of  them  to  deceive  him 
into  a  peace;  and  Solomon  (1  Kitigt  ix.  20,  21)  exacted  "bond-service  "  from  others. 

We  must  never  forget,  in  viewing  this  name  and  its  fellow-nomina,  that  time,  dis- 
tance, foreign  and  obsolete  languages  now  reputed  to  be  "  sacred,"  combined  with  the 
singular  mixture  of  scepticism  and  marvellousness  instilled  into  our  minds  by  juvenile 
education,  lend  an  enchantment  to  these  Eanaanitish  people  that  would  vanish,  did 
we  now  possess  the  honor  of  their  acquaintance.  They  all  were  petty  tribes  of  a  few 
thousands,  at  most  of  fewer  myriads  of  population ;  comprised  within  an  area  so  very 
insignificant,  that  St  Jerome,  who  travelled  over  Palestine  (which  had  previously  in- 
I  eluded  the  whole  of  these  nations,  and  other  people  besides),  wisely  deprecates  statis- 
tics :  —  '*  Pudet  dlcere  latitudinem  terrse  repromissionis,  ne  ethnicis  occasionem  blas- 
phemandi  dedisse  videamur."  That  criticism  which,  precursor  of  Niebuhr,  the  author 
of  '*  Scienza  Nuova,"  applied  so  successfully^  to  early  Roman,  might  equally  well  be 
adapted  to  early  Jewish  history — *'  What  we  may  say  about  the  poHie  gtograpky  of  the 
Greeks  suits  the  ancient  geography  of  the  Latins.  Latium  possessed,  without  doubt,  at 
the  commencement,  but  a  petty  extent ;  inasmuch  as,  while  employing  two  hundred 
and  fifty  ytan  to  conquer  twenty  different  peoples,  Rome  during  that  time  did  not 

Digitized  by 

Google 

HEBRETf    NOMENCLATURE.  531 

stretch  out  the  firontier  of  her  empire  farther  than  twenty  miles  round  about"  Among 
'*  the  ciHes  of  the  KAU-im  "  (2  Sam.  xxiv.  7)  we  cannot  yet  place  a  finger  upon  that 
particular  one  whence  hailed  the  **  citizen"  indiyidualized  in  Xth  Qenesis.^^ 

41.  ♦piy— AdRKI  — *Arkite.' 

A  man  of  Arka^  or  Aera  ;  a  city  the  ruins'  of  which  are  still  seen  at  Tel-Arka,  mound 
of  Arka,  between  Tripoli  and  Antaradus ;  but  Akra  must  have  been  already  a  city 
-when  Asar-adan- pal  and  Temenebar  I.  recorded  its  capture  in  the  eighth — ninth 
century  b.  c.  ;  else  Rawlinson  could  not  have  discovered  its  cuneatic  name. 

[In  former  inquiries  into  the  probable  origin  of  some  Berber  names,  that  certainly 
present  some  Eanaanitish  coincidences,  I  indicated  the  ERETE  of  Ebn  Ehaledoon  as 
homonymous.  That  some  Kanaanitet  sought  refuge  in  Barbary  is  undoubtedly  histo- 
rical ;  that  some  Berbers  did  once  occupy  Kanaan  has  been  already  shown.  There  is 
a  strange  blending  of  Goetulian  and  Arabian  elements  in  Palestine  anterior  to  the 
advent  of  the  AbrahamicUe,  underlying  every  record,  which  the  supposition  of  a  crea- 
tive centre,  distinct  firom  that  of  Euphratic  tradition,  might  possibly  explain. — 
G.  R.  G.]®* 

42.  ♦J^D  — SINI— *Sinitb/ 

A  man  *'  of,  or  belonging  to  the  town  of  SIN,"  not  far  Arom  Acra^  on  the  slopes  of 
Mount  Lebanon.  This  name  reappears  among  Ebn  Khaledoon's  Berber  tribes  as  the 
ZIN-ata.« 

48.  nnX— ARUDI— *Arvadite.' 

A  man  of  Rowhfda  (as  modem  Syrians  now  designate  the  little  island  of  Aradus), 
which  town,  with  its  continental  neighbor  Antaradtu,  was  a  famed  Phoenician  empo- 
rium. Every  lexicon  explains  the  familiar  locality ;  but  Osbum  has  ^e  merit  of  indi- 
cating the  people  and  their  name  hieroglyphed  amid  the  conquests  of  Sethei  I.,  and 
Ramses  IL ;  fourteenth — sixteenth  centuries  b.  o.  ;  and  Rawlinson  that  of  reading  the 
cuneiform  inscriptions  in  which,  during  the  eighth — ninth  centuries  b.  o.,  the  existence 
of  Aradus  is  chronicled.^^ 

44.  nOV  — T«MEI  — *ZBBiARITE.' 

A  man  of  the  Phoenician  town  of  Simyra,  not  far  ftrom  Antaradus,  on  the  western 
spur  of  Mount  Lebanon ;  afterwards  occupied  by  the  Benjamites,  who  probably  ex- 
pelled its  inhabitants  —  the  T<MR-)m.  A  similar  name  occurs  among  Ebn  Ehale- 
doon's  "Berbers ;  but,  beyond  this  phonetic  and  therefore  uncertain  analogy,  we  here 
must  emujate  the  laconic  chorography,  not  merely  of  Xth  Genesis,  but  of  map-makers 
in  general,  having  nothing  to  add  to  the  investigations  of  Bochart^ 

45.  \10r?— KAMTfl  — ^Hamathite.' 

This  is  a  man  "  belonging  to  a  o/y"  situate  on  the  Orontes  at  the  eastern  frontier 
of  Palestine,  now  called  etrHdmah  by  Syrians.  Although  later  Greeks  termed  it  Epi- 
phaneia  during  their  dominion,  the  natives  have  always  preserved  its  antique  nomen. 
The  LXX  properly  wrote  E/iiO :  as  did  Assyrians,  six  oenturies  before  them,  in  cuneatic 
inscriptions  deciphered  by  Rawlinson ;  while,  at  least  four  hundred  years  previously, 
Ramses  IIL  had  hieroglyphed  the  Hamathitet  among  his  Asiatic  vanquished. 

We  would  passingly  notice  that  which,  philologieally  speaking,  is  incontrovertible  in 
regard  to  the  Hebrew  transcription  of  this  name.  The  letter  I,  iod^  has  been  shown 
above  to  be  the  demonstrative  adjunct  <*  of,  or  belonging  to  "  a  locality.  T^  tau,  in 
all  ancient  ffamUie  idioms  is  the  feminine  article,  the ;  prefixed  or  suffixed  even  now 
to  abundant  Berber  nomina — ex.  yr.,  T-Amasirgh  or  Amazirgh-T.    These  cut  away. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

$82  THE    Xtk  chapter    OF   GENESIS. 

the  pristine  moDOsyllable  ai  EJMUTtl  is  KAM;  identieal  witk  KAeM  Hie  Bsae  of 

J^pt ;  and  also  with  KAaM  the  son  of  Nosh«  personified  aymlxd  of  all  Hmamtie  CsmOies. 
We  hare  traced  the  PhUutmet  to  a  Barbaresqae  sonree,  althon^  lustory  dawns  upon 
them  in  Palestine.  The  writer  of  Xth  Genesis,  whose  authority  has  been  found  so 
nnexceptionabl J  safe  hitherto,,  makes  a  KAtM-iie  citizen  on  the  frontier  of  Palestine 
descend  from  KNA^N ;  the  fignratiye  son  of  KUSA  who  was  the  fignratiTe  son  of 
KAaM.  The  Hamitic  article  T  is  suffixed  to  the  primitiye  biliieral  name  of  a  ci^,  whose 
existence  is  carried  back  on  Egyptian  monuments  to  Mosaic  epochas.  There  is  no 
historical  limit  definable  for  the  foundation  of  the  dty;  none,  most  assured! j,  for' the 
antiquity  of  its  name.  But,  archsBology  may  draw,  from  other  data,  inferences  that 
appear  satisfactory :  before  considering  which,  justice  to  the  memory  of  human  great- 
ness suggests  a  citation :  — 

«<  The  man  who  has  anticipated  by  a  century  the  moTements  of  mind  towards  modern 
sciences ;  who  has  raised  up  questions  which,  down  to  him,  were  considered  to  be 
resolved  or  to  be  insoluble ;  who  has  carried  the  inyestigations  of  a  criticism  the  most 
intrepid  into  documents  by  aU  antiquity  respected ;  who  never  bent  himself  before  esta- 
blished prejudice ;  who  has  accomplished  the  double  enterprise  of  destroying  and  of 
reconstructing  uniTersal  history ;  who  has  treated  upon  all  the  sciences  without  being 
acquainted  precisely  with  any  one,  and  who  bequeathed  to  each  of  them  some  fecund 
teaching ;  the  man  who  has  almost  divined  all  the  discoveries  of  the  nineteenth  cen- 
tury ;  who,  appertaining  to  an  age  [1722]  and  to  a  country  [Naples]  wherein  thought 
was  never  tne,  seemed  to  ignore  that  the  saying  of  every  thing  to  every  bodj,  was  to 
expose  himself  to  be  comprehended  by  nobody;  the  man  whose  genius  recalls  the 
mighty  Intellects  of  Plato  and  of  Aristotle,  deserves  to  be  followed  step  by  step  in  the 
development  of  his  glorious  intelligence  and  in  the  vicissitudes  of  his  long  and 
unhappy  life."  That  man  was  Vico.  In  **  establishing  the  Principles  "  of  historical 
criticism,  he  laid  down,  for  the  )07tk  rule :  "  the  commencements  of  nations  preceded 
the  commencements  of  eiiiet."  A  hagiogr^her  smiles  at  its  infantine  sin^fdieity  — 
let  us  raise  a  laugh  at  his. 

We  have  seen  that,  Sidtmy  IhuSf  Arka^  8m,  Artdmsy  Simyra,  and  HamMth,  were  dtiei. 
We  know  that  the  terminal  letter  I,  iod,  to  six  of  these  seven  names,  produces,  in 
Semitic  idioms,  exactly  the  same  effect  that  our  addition  of  an  EngUsh  "tait "  changes 
them  into  a  Sidon-kin,  an  Ibus-tan,  an  Ark-ion,  a  Sin-ton,  an  Arad-ton,  a  Simyr-iaa, 
and  a  Hamath-um.  Ergo,  these  people  derive  their  appelladves  from  cUiet;  built,  of 
course,  before  men  could  hail  from  them.  What  now — let  us  turn  round  and  ask  the 
smiling  querist,  as  his  face  augments  its  longitude  while  diminishing  its  risible  lati- 
tude,— wha^  now  becomes  of  your  fables  about  those  men  called  Sidon,  Ibtu^  Arka, 
5m,  Aradutf  Simyra,  or  Hamath^  whom  your  schools  have  dored  to  find  in  Xth  Genesis, 
as  8on8f  forsooth  [!],  of  another  fabulous  human  being  your  pbilologers  spell  "Canaan"? 

But,  there  is  yet  another  deduction  which  the  reader  will  draw  at  once  from  these 
premises,  viz. :  —  that,  inasmuch  as  a  man  could  not  be  a  Hamaihian  before  the  dty 
of  Hamath  was  built,  the  fact  that  the  writer  of  Xth  Genesis  speaks  of  a  KAaMaTlI, 
or  Hamathian,  proves  that  the  document  called  "  Xth  Genesis  "  was  written  afier,  pro- 
bably long  after,  this  city  had  existed ;  and,  therefore,  that  he  (the  writer  aforesaid) 
never  dreamed  that  modem  logopoeists  would  metamorphose  his  dtiet  into  so  many 
human  beings. 

The  age  of  the  foundation  of  all  these  cities  receding  beyond  historical  chronology, 
we  have  said  enough  on  the  Hamathian  and  his  compeers:  bat,  while  taking  leave  of 
the  eiiiea  included  in  the  terrestrial  area  called  KNAdN,  we  likewise  bid  fiarewell  to 
every  commentator  who  perpetuates  rabbinical  superstitions  about  **  Canaan  "  and  his 
gigantic  progeny.  "  These,"  says  the  chorographer  of  Xth  Genesis,  on  closing  his 
Hamitic  list,  —  **  These  are  the  affiliations  of  E/mM  [t. «.,  the  twarthy^,  after  their 
families,  after  their  tonyueSf  in  their  countries,  aod  in  their  nations."  (Gen.  x.  20.) 

Nothing  can  be  plainer,  nor  more  scientifi<»l]y  concise.  In  our  journey  ttom  Bal^lon 

Digitized  by 

Google 

HEBRETf    NpMENOLATUItE,  53$ 

tltrougb  Southern  Arabia,  and  round  by  the  shores  of  the  Erythrean  (ired),  Edomite 
or  Red  Sea,  the  dark  JSimyarila  (red)  have  aeoompanied  ns,  oyer  the  Saei  bthmns, 
into  Egypt — the  trae  "  land  of  Kh^VL  "  (dark) ;  its  ancient  name  preserved  in  CAem* 
mia — abode  of  the  red  people,  "par  excellence."  Thence,  towards  the  west  along 
Barbary  we  see  the  prolongations  of  the  same  JTamitie  (dark)  families,  *'  gentes  sub- 
ftisci  coloris,**  stretching  between  the  Sahara  desert  and  the  Mediterranean,  as  far  as 
Mauritania :  whilst,  towards  the  east,  through  Palestine,  we  behold  the  wrecks  of  an 
aboriginal  population,  Knked  by  traditions  and  primitive  speech  to  JBtjiypt  and  to  Bar- 
bary, "  tinged  with  the  red  of  OsatuHan  blood,"  and  HamiUe  under  every  aspect ^^ 
We  next  take  up  the  «  Affiliations  of  Shkm." 

"And  unto  SAeM  (there  was)  issue."  {Gen.  x.  21 — ^Hebrew  Text.) 
46.  dS*I^  — AdILM  — *Elam.' 

Preceding  generations  have  bent  theur  intelligencies  towards  the  elucidation  of 
^hemiiith  sulgects  with  more  zeal,  and  therefore  with  more  success,  than  towards  that 
of  Japethio  or  of  Hamitio  problems. 

Owing  partly  to  the  fortuitous  preservation  of  this  family's  chronicles  in  greater 
completeness  than  those  of  any  people  except  the  Chmeee ;  still  more,  to  the  absence, 
unUl  this  century,  of  those  immortal  discoveries  epitomized  in  two  names,  '*Chah- 
POLLION  and  Bawlimson  " ;  and,  beyond  any  other  stimulant  of  research,  to  doctrinal 
biases  in  favor  of  a.  select  line  that,  under  the  name  of  Hebrews  and  Arabs,  -traces  its 
pedigree  backwards  to  a  biliteral  SM  —  owing,  we  repeat,  to  these  historical  accidents, 
we  happen  to  know  a  little  more  about  some  of  SM's  posterity,  their  annals,  habitats, 
and  associations,  than  we  do  concerning  other  less  respectable,  because  unrecorded, 
"  Types  of  Mankind." 

According  to  Ainsworth,  geologist  to  the  Euphrates  Expedition,  Blymau^  country  of 
the  ElymcBi  (the  capital  city  of  which  was  also  called  Elymait  when  classical  history 
first  dawns  upon  its  geography),  was  a  Persian  province,  situate  to  the  south  of  Media, 
between  the  river  Tigris  and  the  Persian  Appenines,  sloping  downwards  into  Susiana 
and  to  the  Persian  Golf.  Tradition,  through  Polybius  and  Strabo,  ascribes  to  its  Ely- 
mtBCM  inhabitants  a  northern  origin ;  and  Josephus  calls  them  *<  the  founders  of  the 
Persians  " :  with  whom  they  are  often  confounded  in  later  Hebrew  annals ;  for  Persia 
and  Persepolis  are  both  called  Elam  (1  Maccab,  vL  12 ;  2  »i.  ix.  2).  They  were,  how- 
ever, in  the  days  of  Abraham,  already  occupiers  of  a  kingdom  called  Elam  {Oen,  xiv. 
1,0);  so  that  when,  more  than  a  thousand  years  later,  the  compiler  of  Xth  Genesis 
registered  A4ILM  on  his  ethnic  chart,  he  naturally  meant  the  country  which  had  been 
80  called  from  times  immemorial  before  him. 

This  country  (generally,  if  improperly,  included  in  the  sections  of  territory  compre- 
hended by  the  term  Stuiana),  is  full  of  ancient  cuneiform  remains ;  both  of  the  Persian 
and  of  the  older  Assyrian  period:  but,  in  1846,  one  class  of  the  cuneatio  inscriptions 
there  discovered,  owing  to  <<the  number  of  new  characters  which  they  exhibit — 
characters  for  which  no  conjectural  equivalent  can  be  found  either  in  the  Babylonian 
or  the  Assyrian  alphabet"  —  was  denominated  Elymctan  by  Rawlinson,  being  monu- 
ments distinct  from  their  neighbors. 

Under  these  circumstances,  until  Rawlinson  or  his  emulous  competitors  shall 
breathe  upon  these  "  dry  bones"  of  Elymaie,  **and  say  unto  them,  0  ye  dry  bones, 
hear ! "  it  is  best  not  to  hazard  opinions  on  the  unknown,  which  the  next  mail  from 
Europe  may  perhaps  render  clear  as  day.  We  therefore  merely  indicate  a  discrepancy 
at  present  evident  between  modem  philological  and  historical  results  and  the  SemUisk 
genealogy  of  AdILM-a»,  in  Xth  Genesis.  According  to  the  latter,  the  AdlLH-ites 
should  have  spoken  a  dialect  of  the  Aramasan  class  of  languages :  but,  according  to  the 
former,  as  interpreted  by  Lenormant,  Quatrem^re,  Movers,  and  others,  the  affinities  of 

Digitized  by 

Google 

5S4  TH^  xth  chapter  of  genesis. 

AdILM,  cognate  if  not  identical  with  the  Persians,  are  Arian.  It  seems  to  us,  how* 
eyer,  that  Lowenstem's  solution  is  satisfactory.  He  shows  how  the  primitive  Elamites 
were  of  Semitic  extraction,  hnt  that,  in  after  times,  Scythio  conquerors  superimposed 
in  Elam  their  extraneous  blood,  tongues,  and  traditions ;  as  the  reader  can  Terify  in 
this  author's  learned  papers.  In  the  meanwhile,  De  Saulcy  has  read  upon  cuneatie 
inscriptions  of  the  age  of  Asar-haddon,  eighth  century  b.  c,  that  this  monarch  waa 
**rex  populi  Assur,"  and  *<rex  populi  Elam":  and  this  is  confirmed  by  Layard's 
Second  Expedition,  for  *<  Sennacherib  speaks  of  the  army  which  defended  the  workmen 
being  attacked  by  the  king  of  Elam  and  the  king  of  Babylon.'* 

Our  confidence  in  thb  compiler  of  Xth  Genesis  stands  unshaken.  If,  as  we  haye 
proved,  his  tabulation  of  the  distant  ffamites  is  so  correct,  how  much  better  must  a 
Chaldcsan  chorographer  have  been  acquainted  with  the  legendary  origins  of  a  Semitiah 
AdlLM-awfew 

47.  nWN— ASUR  — ^AssHUR.' 

While  admitting  the  equivocal  nature  of  the  text  of  OenuU  z.  11,  we  have  n^ven 
reasons  [supra,  p.  509]  for  reading —  **  From  this  land  (Shinar)  he  himself  (NiMRoD) 
went  forth  (to)  ASUR  (Assyria)  and  builded  Nineveh,"  &c.  Such  lesson  indicates 
that  we  have  now  before  us  a  geographical  name. 

*<  It  would  be  strange,"  critically  remarks  De  Sola,  <*  if  Ashub,  a  son  of  Shera 
{Oen,  X.  22)  were  mentioned  among  the  descendants  of  Cham,  of  whom  Nimrod  was 
one.  It  would  be  equally  strange  if  the  deeds  of  Ashub  were  spoken  of  (in  verse  11) 
before  his  birth  and  descent  had  been  mentioned."  The  writer  of  Xth  Genesis,  a  plain 
sensible  man,  compiling  the  Assyrian  department  of  his  chart  not  impossibly  in  ASUR 
itself,  was  not  likely  to  have  committed  such  a  needless  anachronism.  Let  us  examine 
another  text. 

King  James's  version,  Gmetia  ii.  14 — **  And  the  name  of  the  third  river  i*  Hiddekd: 
that  u  it  which  goeth  toward  the  east  of  Assyria."  This  text  has  opportunely  received 
recent  ventilation  at  Paris,  in  discussions  between  De  Longp^rier,  an  OrientaHat  as 
profound  in  biblical  as  in  all  archaic  lore,  and  a  learned  dogmatist,  M.  Hoeffer.  The 
ante-diluvian  river,  miswritten  Hiddekel  in  our  version,'!  is,  in  the  Text,  H-DKL,  ik§- 
DiELe — a  name  that,  through  various  historical  transmutations,  such  as  DiGLe, 
DidJLeh,  TiGLe,  and  TiGRE  {Tigrdm,  in  Persepolitan  inscriptions),  is  inherited  by  us 
in  its  euphonized  Latin  form  —  the  TIGRIS. 

The  Text  therefore  readgf  literally  —  ^  Tiqbis,  "  ipse  vadens  KDMTr  {anU)  ASUR;" 
Parisian  debate  turned  upon  the  meaning  of  KDMT^;  by  English  interpreters  ren- 
dered **East;"  —  a  translation  which,  if  true,  (as  dogmatism  had  maintained,)  would 
place  the  city  of  Nineveh,  built  in  the  land  of  ASUR  {Gm,  x.  11),  on  the  west  bank 
of  that  river ;  supposing  always  that  the  river  lay  to  the  eaH  of  it  (Assyria).  And 
thus  "  Holy  Scripture"  was  triumphantly  quoted  to  prove  that,  inasmuch  as  Ninevdi 
was  situate  wett  of  the  Tigris,  the  vast  exhumations  of  Botta,  Layard,  Place,  and 
Rawlinson,  on  the  eastern  bank,  which  people  fondly  supposed  to  have  been  executed 
in  ante-dilurian  Assyria,  not  having  been  made  on  the  site  of  Nineveh  at  all,  the  whole 
of  these  discoveries,  in  regard  to  Nineveh,  fell  to  the  ground  I 

But,  Mrs.  Rich  and  St.  Jerome  naively  tell  us —  <*  It  is  one  thing  to  write  history, 
and  another  to  write  prophecy  under  the  immediate  effect  of  inspiration."  If  **a 
prophet  is  not  without  honor,  but  in  his  own  country,  and  among  his  own  kin,  and  in 
his  own  house  "  (Mark  vi.  4) ;  that  is,  among  those  mortals  who  happen  to  know  him 
best ;  —  the  unfortunate  scholar  alluded  to  can  hope  for  little  elsewhere ;  sinoe  De 
Longp^rier  established : — 

1st  That  Herodotus  has  nowhere  connected  the  Tigris  with  Assyria. 

2d.  That  neither  the  Septuagint,  nor  the  Vulgate,  any  more  than  the  Hebrew  Text, 
justifies  such  a  reading  as  **  East"  in  Genesis  ii.  14. 

Sd.  That  KDMT^  here  meaning  simply  **  en  avant  vers,"  ihe  true  signification  of 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 

HEBREW    NOMENCLATURE.  535 

this  passage  most  be,  in  English,  "  the  Tigris,  flowing  in  front  towards  (say  opposite) 
Assyria." 

Our  digression  introduces  another  di£&cuUy.  Between  the  land  of  ASUR  in  lid  Gene- 
ris, and  ASUR  in  Genesis  Xth,  rolls  the  Flood  ;  which,  contrary  to  the  sophistries  of 
the  Rey.  Dr.  J.  Pye  Smith,  we  wholly  agree  with  the  "  Friend  of  Moses,"  and  the 
writer  of  Genesis  Vllth,  in  considering  to  haye  been  universal.  If  geology,  in  the  XlXth 
century  after  Christ,  discovers  phenomena  which  prove  Diluvian  momontaneous  univer- 
sality to  be  impossible,  so  much  the  worse  for  geologists.  But  to  attribute  to  Hebrew 
authors  living  long  subsequently  to  the  XlXth  century  b.  c,  the  intrepid  concep- 
tions of  modem  geology,  is  to  commit  a  most  gross  historical  anachronism ;  besides 
inventing  a  doctrine  utterly  irreconcilable  with  the  plain  square-letters  of  the  Hebrew 
Text  We  would  therefore  merely  inquire  of  the  orthodox  geologist  whether  he  con- 
siders the  land  of  ASUR,  along  which  ran  the  river  Tigris  before  the  universal  Flood, 
to  have  been  specified  (by  Moses)  proleptically  or  retroleptically  ?  His  reply  would 
enlighten  us  upon  one  of  two  propositions.  If  this  Hebrew  **  scholar  and  statesman," 
as  the  Friend  of  Moses  terms  him,  had  before  his  eyes,  as  some  maintain,  certain  docu- 
ments written  by  ante-diluvian  patriarchs,  then  ASUR,  in  such  manuscripts,  must 
have  been  the  geographical  appellative  of  a  country  existing  before  the  Flood ;  which 
country,  after  the  waters  had  passed  away,  emerged  as  ASUR,  along  with  its  river  Tigris^ 
on  the  same  terrestrial  area,  in  order  to  be  catalogued  by  the  writer  of  Xth  Genesis 
among  other  countries  existing  in  his  later  day.  Or,  if  Moses  was  enlightened  upon  events 
anterior  to  his  lifetime  through  "  Divine  inspiration,"  then  we  possess  the  authority  of 
the  Most  High  (through  Moses)  for  sustaining  that,  ASUR,  having  been  the  geographi- 
cal name  of  a  country  years  before  the  Deluge,  and  centuries  before  "  Ashub,  son  of 
Shem,"  was  bom,  the  writer  of  Xth  Genesis  was  right  in  mapping  the  "  land  of 
ASUR"  as  a  country,  according  to  its  ante-fluviatile  acceptation  in  Genesis  ii.  14  —  a 
country,  too,  wherein  the  masterly  geological  researches  of  Ainswortb  could  discover  no 
traces  of  any  Noachian  Flood.  That  which  remains  certain  is,  that  ASUR  was  already 
a  country,  according  to  the  letter  of  Scripture  itself,  whensoever,  or  by  whomsoever, 
or  wheresoever,  Xth  Genesis  was  written ;  and,  for  our  researches,  **  for  us,  that  is 
enough."  —  *^  That  you  should  wish  to  call  Moses  author  of  the  Pentateuch,  or  Esdbab 
the  restorer  of  this  same  work,  I  do  not  object,"  philosophically  wrote  St  Jerome. 

The  name  of  ASUR,  in  unpunctuated  Hebrew,  becomes  ASAUR  through  rabbinical 
marks ;  and  passing  through  different  dialects  and  ages,  as  AT<UR,  ATUR,  ATURta, 
AMURA,  ASSURui,  &c.,  it  is  now  written  Assyria  by  ourselves.  But,  while  modem 
Chaldee  Jews  have  preserved  in  Athour  the  correspondent  of  Ashour  as  intonated  by 
their  forefathers,  cuneiform  scholars  have  discovered,  in  the  land  of  ASAUR  itself,  the 
indigenous  name,  petroglyphed  Assour,  upon  innumerable  records  disinterred  from  the 
mounds  of  Ehorsabad  and  Nimroud. 

Kings  of  the  *< country  of  ASUR"  are  now  well-known  personages  to  readers  of 
Botta,  Layard,  Rawlinson,  De  Longp^rier,  De  Saulcy,  Hincks,  Birch,  Grotefend,  Lowen- 
stera,  Oppert,  Norris,  Vaux,  Eadie,  or  Bonomi ;  and  having  been  found  upon  sculptures 
coeval  with  the  epoch  of  Jehu,  king  of  Israel,  ASUR  was  already  the  name  of  Assyria 
early  in  the  ninth  century  b.  c. :  an  age,  we  think,  nearly  parallel  with  the  compilation 
of  Xth  Genesis.  These  now-familiar  topics  need  no  pause ;  but  some  of  those  things 
which  are  less  so  demand  notice  in  tracing  ASUR  to  its  primeval  source.  Rawlinson 
finds  in  Assarac,  (Assarak,  Asserah,)  *<god  of  Assyria"  —  the  deified  proto-patriarch 
of  that  land  —  called  in  the  inscriptions  *<  father  of  the  gods,"  **king  of  the  gods," 
«  great  ruler  of  the  gods ; "  whose  mythological  characteristics  are  those  of  Kronos 
or  Saturn.  '*  I  should  suppose  him,  as  head  of  the  Pantheon,  to  be  represented  by  that 
particular  device  of  a  winged  figure  in  a  circle,  which  was  subsequently  adopted  by  the 
Persians  to  denote  Obmuzd,  the  chief  deity  of  their  religious  system."  And  we  may  now 
leave  hagiography  to  rejoice  over  possible  connections  between  the  divine  Assarae  and 
Ashur  the  son  of  Shem,  among  those  of  other  genealogies  of  Xth  Genesis ;  which  doo- 

Digitized  by 

Google 

586  THE    Xth    CHAPTEB   of  GEITESIS. 

Qment  Rawlinson  does  not  consider  anjtlimg  more  Uun  **'an  liistorical  mpnaeakthaa 
of  the  great  and  lengthened  migrationB  of  the  primitiTe  Asiatic  race  of  man."  More 
recently  we  learn  from  Layard  how  —  **  A$8hur,  the  king  of  the  circle  of  the  great 
gods,"  heads  the  list  of  the  thirteen  great  gods  of  Assyria,  at  Kimroud.  At  Babylon, 
howeyer,  the  god  Marduk  is  termed  <*the  great  lord,"  ^'loid  of  lords,"  **  elder  of  the 
gods,"  &c. ;  and  Athur  no  longer  appears,  being  tha  god  of  inland  Asqrria,  and  not 
of  the  Babylonian  plains. 

The  cuneiform  documents  upon  which  ASAUB  figures  as  a  native  mythological  per- 
sonage approach  in  antiquity  the  era  of  Moses.  The  hieroglyphical  records  in  which 
A'SUrru  occurs  as  the  Egyptian  name  of  Attyria,  surpass,  by  two  hundred  years,  the 
age  of  the  Hebrew  lawgiyer,  because  Birch  disoorers  it  up<m  inscriptions  of  the  time 
of  Amunoph  III  [supra,  p.  138,  fig.  82].  Space  now  prercnts  the  demonstratioB  that, 
among  its  yarious  symbolical  meanings,  A-SUR  signifies  also  ^  tAe-^aZMand ;"  but  the 
writer  (G.  B.  G.)  will  publish  the  reasons  elsewhere.  In  the  interim,  to  the  authw  of 
Xth  Genesis,  A8AUB  meant  the  country  by  us  called  Auyria  —  notiiing  more  nor  less.^ 

48.   ne^aflnN  — ARPAKSD  — 'Arphaxad/ 

•<  Aephax  AD  (ARPAaESaD ;  Sept.  'Af^a^tfa),  the  son  of  ^lem,  and  father  of  Salah; 
bom  one  year  after  the  Deluge,  and  died  b.  o.  1904,  aged  488  years  (Oen,  xi.  12,  fte).** 

RequUieat  in  pace  I 

Such  is  the  terse  obituary  notice, — ^unaccompanied  by  the  customary  poetical  regret^ 
or  general  invitation  to  attend  the  funeral, — a  diyinity  student  encounters  when,  seek- 
ing for  instruction  about  the  Sarior's  genealogy,  he  opens  Kitto's  cyclopaedia  or  Tay- 
lor's Calmet  (the  best  English  biblical  dictionaries)  at  the  name  Arphaxad  :  and  this 
is  oZZ.  A  noble  cenotaph !  We  close  those  devout,  not  to  say  laborious,  compendia, 
and  turn  to  Volney's  Reeherches  NouveUet. 

"  A  fifth  people  of  Sem  U  Araf-Kaahd,  represented  in  the  canton  Arra-Paekiiu  of 
Ptolemy,  which  is  a  mountainous  country,  at  the  south  of  the  Lake  of  Van,  whence 
stream  forth  the  Tigris  and  the  Lycus  or  great  Zab.  This  name  signifies  boundary  of 
the  Chaldtean,  and  seems  to  indicate  that  the  Chaldeans,  before  Ninus,  had  extended 
themselves  even  thither.  This  Abaph-Kashd,  according  to  Josephus,  was  father  of 
the  Chaldseans ;  according  to  the  Hebrew,  he  produced  Shslah,  whose  trace,  as  city, 
and  country,  is  found  in  the  Salacha  of  Ptolemy.  Shblah  produced  Eber,  father  of 
all  the  peoples  on  the  other  tide  of  the  Euphrates ;  but  if  we  find  him  on  this  eide,  rela- 
tively to  Judaea,  we  have  the  right  to  say  that  this  antique  tradition  comes  fh)m  Chal- 
dtea."  Our  analyses  of  Xth  Genesis  entirely  corroborate  Volney*s  deductions  of  its 
Chaldaio  derivation ;  and  justify  Lenormanf  s  orthodox  eulogies  of  him  as  '*  un  dei 
hommes  les  plus  p^n^trants  de  oe  si^de."  From  the  latter  we  take  the  following  note — 
<<  Josephus  had  made,  before  Michjelis,  of  Arphaxad,  the  father  of  the  Caedivi  or 
Chaldeans.  M.  Bohlen  explains  Arrapachiiie  by  the  Sanscrit:  Aryapakechatd,  the 
country  bordering  upon  Aria,    This  etymology  is  not  unworthy  of  attention." 

There  is  little  to  be  added  to  Yolney's  definition;  and  that  little  confirms  him. 
ARPA-EaSD  —  after  dividing  into  two  words  that  which  in  the  Hebrew  ancient  Text 
(Synagogue  rolls)  runs  letter  after  letter,  « continue  serie,"  along  the  whole  line— 
yields  us,  as  Miehaelis  first  suggested,  ARFA,  the  Arabic  for  boundary,  and  KASD, 
Chaldtean.  The  etymology  is  in  unison  with  Aramaean  origines ;  and  Arphaxad  was 
the  brother  of  Aram :  while  Bochart's  identification  of  it  with  the  province  of  Arrapa- 
chiiie of  Ptolemy's  geography  also  stands ;  but  perhaps  not  with  "  nam  quod  Josephus 
et  alii  volunt  Chaldseos  olim  ab  e5  diotos  Arphaxadceoe  merum  somnium  est." 

It  is  strange  how  Oriental  tradition  clings  to  the  vicinities  of  Ararat  as  the  moun- 
tainous birthplace  of  Chaldaic  races.  There  we  find  the  Heden  (Eden)  of  Genesis  lid, 
and  "the  house  of  Eden"  extant  in  the  time  of  the  prophet  Amos  (i.  6);  while  an- 
other writer  tells  us  how  "  Haran  Canne,  and  Heden,  have  made  trafiBc  with  what 
came  from  Seba,  and  Assyria  learned  thy  traffic  **  (Ezek,  xxrii.  28). 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC 

HEBREW    NOMENCLATURE.  537 

There,  too,  was  the  ffaSatdan  dt  .the  Armenians ;  and  there  the  ffad/nSehe  which 
Zoroaster  ennobled  hj  the  title  of  the  **  pure  Iran "  because  his  birthplace  was  at 
Ourmi,  on  the  border  of  Lake  Ourmiah.  *<  There,"  eontiniies  Dubois,  **  is  the  antique 
Dfttive-land  of  Arpaeaad  and  of  the  Hebrews :  and  their  patriarch  Abraham,  like  Zo- 
roaster, was  bom  at  Our,  on  the  shores  of  Lake  Ourmiah,  in  Chaldeea.  There  touches 
also  IrUn,  Arhan,  the  land  of  Persian  mTthes.*'  In  which  oonneotion  let  us  likewise 
add,  that  the  river  Akhourian^  whose  sources  lie  on  the  same  <^in,,  still  bears  the 
name  of  ARPA-Tghai.    But  we  suggest  a  melioration. 

Abphakasd,  as  a  cotmigy  in  Xth  Genesis,  is  the  parental  source,  through  the  proTiuce 
of  Salaeha,  of  Ebeb,  ih4  ffonderer ;  and  from  the  latter,  according  to  the  other  docu- 
ment {Gen.  xi.  18-26),  sprang  Abraham,  progenitor  of  the  Abrahamidco;  bom  pro- 
bably at  Our  Katdlm,  «  Ur  of  the  Chaldees,"  whence  they  issued  '<  to  go  -to  the  land 
of  Kan&an."  It  is  tme  that  Mr.  Loftns  considers  the  eBormous  ruins  of  Werka  to  be 
the  real  *'  Ur  of  the  Ghaldees,"  now  traditionally  called  "  the  birthplace  of  Abraham ;" 
nor  would  the  establishmeut  of  this  fact  result  in  any  farther  alteration  of  our  view 
than  by  proring  (what  is  very  likely)  that  ARPAa-KaSD  was  a  different  place  from 
AUR-EaSDIM.  The  name  **  Chaldeean*'  is  also  ancient  enough,  having  been  found  in 
cuneiform  on  the  monuments  of  Nineveh. 

Be  all  this  as  ,it  may,  there  still  remains  one  **  Ur  of  the  Chaldees,"  AUR-KSDIM 
in  the  text,  which  is  unquestionably,  as  shown  by  Ritter  and  by  Ainsworth,  the  pre- 
sent city  and  district  of  Urhoi,  now  Or/a,  or  URPAA  (called,  in  Oreco-Roman  times, 
ChaldacpolU^  AnHoehia,  CalUrhoe,  and  Edesia),  in  Diiirbekir.  Allowing  very  common 
mutations  of  vowels,  we  behold  in  Urfa,  or  ARPAo,  ARPAa-KaSD,  "  Or/a  of  the 
Chaldaan,"  the  absolute  solution  of  Abphazad,  no  less  than  the  earliest  geographical 
source  of  the  AbraJutmidee. 

Thus,  at  every  step,  the  chorographic  exactitude  of  Xth  Qenesis  is  vindicated ;  and 
ARPAaEaSD,  no  more  a  fabulous  human  being,  regains  its  legitimate  heritage  among 
the  countriet  of  the  earth.  To  the  **late  JVr."  Arphazad,  *<aged  488  years,"  we 
repeat  our  valedictory,  *<  requiescat  in  pace ! "  ^33 

49.  T)S  — LUD  — *LuD.' 

The  high  road  f^om  Nineveh,  in  the  land  of  ASUR,  Assyria,  conducts  a  traveller 
towards  Asia  Minor,  through  ARFA-KASD,  Chaldcean-Or/a,  into  Lydia;  —  a  name 
which,  in  its  Greek  spelling  of  AvUa,  fiuthfully  transcribes  the  Hebrew  LUD-ta. 

This  country  derives  its  name,  according  to  traditions  collected  by  a  native  of  Asia 
Minor,  Herodotus  of  Halicamassus,  from  Lydns,  son  of  Atys ;  whose  crown  passed 
into  the  keeping  of  Hercules.  This  legend  indicates  the  ante-historical  ground*  we 
tread  upon;  and  probably  the  intmsion  of  Hellenic  HieracUdc^  upon  an  aboriginal 
Lydian  population,  affiliated  with  the  Shemites.  The  recent  explorations  of  Fellows 
and  the  Lyoian  monuments  now  rescued  from  perdition,  establish,  in  the  most  con- 
vincing manner,  the  transitions  of  art  in  all  its  symbolism,  through  Asia  Minor,  from 
Assyria  to  Greece ;  and  the  my  the  of  the  Auyrian  Bereule$  serves  as  a  faithful  thread 
through  the  mazes  of  this  labyrinth :  which  mythe,  Grote  observes,  exhibits  but  the 
"tendency  to  universal  personification" — being  merely  "M»^oj^  Soffa — an  universal 
manifestation  of  the  human  mind." 

But,  from  the  premises,  one  deduction  is  solid,  viz. :  that  Herodotus,  than  whom  in 
Lydian  questions  there  is  no  higher  authority,  makes  Hercules  succeed  Lydus — the 
personified  land  of  Lydia,  Now,  inasmuch  as  the  mythe  of  Herculu  antedates  all  chro- 
nology, it  follows  that  Herodotus,  who  says  that  Lydut  preceded  the  Hieraclidce,  looked 
upon  the  autoctbonous  name  and  traditions  of  Lydia  as  still  more  remote  fVom  his  own 
day ;  b.  c.  484-480.  To  us,  therefore,  the  Halicamassian's  testimony,  upon  the  ante- 
historical  affairs  of  his  native  Asia  Minor,  would  ipto  facio  outweigh  any  notices  of 

68 

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 

538  THE  xth  chapter  of  genesis. 

Li/dia  issuing  from  the  "School  of  Esdras''  in'Paleetiiie  (foreign  to  Lydian  blood,  lan- 
guage, and  traditions),  should  the  latter  contradict  him :  which,  happily,  they  do  not. 

The  compiler  of  Xth  Genesis,  educated,  as  we  now  begin  to  feel  assured,  amid  the 
**  learning  of  the  Chaldees,"  attributes  no  affiliations  to  the  geographical  locality  be 
designates  LUD ;  any  more  than,  in  his  classification  of  the  senior  Eamidct  (oer.  6), 
he  ascribes  descendants  to  PAUT ;  which,  we  haye  seen,  is  Barbary,  This  engenders 
the  supposition  that  he  knew  little  beyond  the  nam^  of  either ;  and  that  just  as  to 
him,  composing  his  ethnic  chart  in  some  Uniyersity  of  Chaldfea,  PAUT  appeared  to 
be  the  most  western  geographical  range  of  Eamitk  migrations,  bo  LUD  probably 
seemed  to  lie  among  the  most  northerly  of  Semitic,  As  such,  then,  he  duly  regietered 
them  in  his  inestimable  chorography. 

Some  centuries  prior  to  the  age  of  this  venerable  digest,  the  Lydiam  are  mentioned 
in  Egyptian  hieroglyphics.  In  the  Asiatic  conquests  of  Sethei-Meneptha,  and  of 
Ramses  II.,  to  say  nothing  of  later  Pharaohs,  associated  with  /omofu,  R^hteanij  and 
other  well-known  families  of  Asia  Minor,  we  find  the  oft-recurring  <*  Land  of  LudatUy" 
or  "  land  of  the  upper  Luden"  and  "  of  the  lower  Luden."  This  establishes  the  exist- 
ence of  Lydia  and  of  Lydiaru  at  the  XVIIItii  dynasty,  fourteenth — sixteenth  centuries 
B.  c. ;  in  days  anterior  to  and  coeval  with  Moses ;  i.  e.,  much  earlier  than  the  compilation 
of  Xth  Genesis.  But  (to  avoid  Mosaic  conflictions  with  Egyptian  records)  it  is  b^ 
perhaps  to  ascend  a  few  generations  beyond  modem  disputes  upon  the  era  of  Uie  He- 
brew *'  scholar  and  statesman ;  "  when  by  pointing  out  LUD  and  Lydiaru  in  chnmicles 
appertaining  to  the  anterior  XVIIth  dynasty,  we  show  that  Amunoph  II.,  Thotmes 
III.,  and  Amunoph  III.,  successors  of  that  **  new  king  over  Egypt  which  knew  not 
Joseph  "  (Ex.  I  8),  could  not  readily  have  heard  of  Moses's  Lydian  geography  before 
the  great  lawgiver  was  bom.  Posterior  in  epoch  to  the  former,  and  anterior  to  the 
latter  dignitary,  these  Pharaohs  of  the  XVIIth  dynasty  knew  nothing  about  either 
Joseph  or  Moses. 

Nor  is  history  wanting  to  support  the  early  spread  of  Egyptian  arms  into  Asia 
Minor ;  for  besides  a  confused  aggregation  of  events  of  different  ages  to  be  met  wi& 
in  every  classical  lexicon  under  the  head  of  "  Sesostris,'*  we  have  the  authentic  ac- 
count of  Tacitus  that  the  Priests  of  Thebes  read  to  the  Emperor  Germanious,  from 
hieroglyphical  inscriptions,  how  **  Ramses  overcame  Libya,  Ethiopia,  the  Medea  and 
the  Persians,  Bactriana,  and  Scythia,  and  held  sway  over  the  lands  which  the  Syrians, 
Armeoians,  and  neighboring  Cappadocians,  inhabit  from  Bithynia  up  to  the  Lycian  Sea." 

We  cannot  quote  authority  for  the  discovery  of  the  name  LUD  in  cuneiform  writings; 
unless  Ludenu  be  the  same  as  the  **  Rutennu  "  of  the  *'  Grand  Procession  of  Thotmes 
III."  [suprOf  p.  159],  which  Birch  fixes,  in  hieroglyphical  geography,  <*  north  of  the 
Great  Sea,"  and  compares  with  the  Assyrian  king  Sargina*s  prisoners  at  Khorsabad. 

However,  LUD,  being  identical  with  Lydia,  enters,  like  the  rest,  as  a  geographical 
appellative  into  the  catalogue  of  Xth  Genesis ;  and  the  cyclopsDdio  notion  that,  fh>m  a 
man  called  LUD,  "  the  Lydians  in  Asia  Minor  derived  their  name,"  ranks  among  the 
childish  postulates  belonging  to  an  age  of  which  science  now  hopefully  discerns  **  the 
beginning  of  the  end."  ®* 

50.  DnN  — AEM  — *Aram/ 

Orthodox  lexicography  informs  us  that  Akam  means  "Ai^Anesx,  magnificence;  others 
wise,  one  that  deceives^  or  their  curse"  In  this  instance  the  erudition  of  **  N.  M."  com- 
pensates for  the  meagre  article  by  "J.  P.  S."  in  Eitto's  cyclopseoUa. 

It  has  been  shown  already  that  Quatrem^re  doubts  Mover's  derivation  of  ARM; 
which  the  latter  considers  to  mean  a  high  land,  in  juxtaposition  to  ENA^N,  a  low  land. 
Still,  the  objection  assigned  by  the  former  is  inconclusive,  because  RM  does  actually 
signify  At^A;  and  with  the  primeval  masculine  article  akph.  A,  prefixed,  A-RM  is 
ihe-high.  Certain  it  is,  also,  that  the  geographical  brodier  of  Aipha-Easd,  *'Or/a  of  the 

Digitized  by 

Google 

HEBREW    NOMENCLATURE.  539 

Chaldsean/'  and  of  Lydia,  most  be  sought  for  along  the  same  Taaric  uplands  of  Asia 
Minor;  where  ARM  lay  among  the  "mountains  of  the  east"  {Numb,  zxiii,  7).  In 
Punio,  also,  the  same  word  means  At^A ;  for  M.  Judas  reads  on  Numidian  coins,  Juba 
BOUM  melkat  =  **  Juba,  highnett  of  the  realm." 

Diodorus*s  Apifia  Zpri  or  Arimi  Montetf  suggest  themselves  at  onoe ;  although  authorities 
disagree  upon  their  location,  in  Phrygia,  Ljdia,  Mjsia,  Cilicia,  or  Syria :  but  Strabo 
and  Josephus  inform  us  that  the  Greeks  called  Syrians  those  people  who  called  them- 
selves AranuEaru :  and  when  Homer  and  Hesiod  wrote,  the  Aft/tot  extended  to  Phrygia, 
which  they  termed  Arimata,  Syria,  therefore,  in  its  widest  acceptation,  seems  best 
to  correspond  to  ARM,  because  the  latter  merges  into  Metopoiamia  ;  and  in  Pliny  and 
Pomponius  Mela  the  name  of  Syria  is  applied  to  provinces  even  beyond  the  Euphrates 
and  Tigris. 

As  the  grand  centre  of  Shemiiith  families,  Syria  still  preserves  the  name  of  SAeM 
in  its  Oriental  appellative ;  being  known  to  Syriant  and  the  populations  around  them 
by  no  other  title  than  B6R-Es-SA&M,  land  of  Shem.  Arab  geography  explains  this 
coincidence  by  reasons  worthy  of  atttetion.  Sham  means  the  Itft  hand,  and  Ysmssn 
(Yemen  in  Arabia),  the  right;  as,  face  directed  to  the  East,  an  Arabian  worshipped  the 
rising  sun ;  or  looked  back  to  ARM  as  the  traditionary  birthplace  of  his  ancestry 
before,  by  emigration  to  Arabia,  they  had  acquired  the  right  to  call  themselves  dKB, 
teestem-men.  Damascus,  Ea-Shdm  el-kebeerf  *<  the  great  Sham,"  may  perhaps  be  the 
focus  of  these  ancient  radiations :  for  its  identity  with  Abam  is  marked  in  the  passage 
— **  The  ARaMuin«  of  Damasetu  came  to  succor  Hadadezer  king  of  Sobah,  &c.  (2  Sam, 
viii.  5.  6)  —  the  versions  generally  substituting  Syrians  for  Aramteans. 

So  extensive  was  the  range  of  ARM  in  ancient  geography  that,  to  distinguish  its 
divisions,  a  qualifying  name  was  generally  appended  to  it:  thus,  Sedeh-AR^il,  the 
"field  of  Aram,"  Porfan-ARM,  the  "plain  of  Aram,"  and  ARM-JVaAararw,  "Aram  of 
the  two  rivers,"  refer  to  parts  of  Mesopotamia:  ABM-Damashk  was  a  Damascene 
territory;  ARM-iSoftoA,  probably  Cilicia;  ARM-ifaoAraA,  east  of  the  Jordan;  and 
AfiM.'b€th'Rekhubt  on  which  authorities  vary.  ARMI,  uiAramcean,  is  a  Syrian  in  one 
scriptural  text  (2  Kings  v.  20).     It  is  a  Mesopotamian  in  another  {Oen.  xxv.  20). 

Aramaan  was  the  speech  of  the  patriarchal  Abrahamidss,  when  abandoning  ARPAa- 
EaSD,  or  its  equivalent  AUR-KaSDIm  (Chaldeean  Or/a,  or  Ur  of  the  Chaldees),  they 
arrived  in  the  land  of  Kanaan ;  where,  forgetting  their  ancestral  idiom,  they  adopted 
and  misnamed  Hebrew  "  the  language  of  Kanaan,"  or  PhcMteian, 

Thus,  from  Arabia  Deserta  to  the  confines  of  Lydia,  trom  Syria,  over  Mesopotamia, 
to  Armenia,  do  we  meet  with  infinite  reUquics  of  Aram:  without  being  able,  after  four 
or  five  thousand  years  of  migrations,  to  mark  on  the  quicksands  of  Aramtzan  geography 
any  more  specific  locality  for  ARM,  than  Stbia  in  its  most  extended  sense. 

Hieroglyphical  researches  do  not  aid  us  to  a  more  definite  ascription  of  ARM.  In 
the  Vatican  Museum,  the  statue  of  a  priest  bears  the  inscription  —  **  His  majesty, 
King  Darius,  ever  living,  ordered  me  to  go  to  Egypt,  while  his  majesty  was  in  ARMA" : 
supposed  to  be  Assyria,  Nor,  in  Persepolitan  cuneiform  records  or  in  those  of  As- 
syria, has  any  more  positive  identification  of  ARM  been  discovered  and  published  than 
what  may  exist  in  ArmHna,  Arama,  &o.,  considered  to  be  Armenia — a  country  in 
whose  name  ARM  is  also  preserved. 

The  writer  of  Xth  Genesis  may  or  may  not  have  had  more  precise  views  upon  ARM ; 
which  he  set  down  with  its  parallels,  Assyria,  Orfa,  and  Lydia,  on  his  invaluable  chart, 
and  then  proceeded  to  tabulate  those  tribes  of  the  Semitic  stock  that  looked  back  upon 
the  land  of  ARM  as  their  birthplace.^ 

"  And  the  affiliations  of  ARM." 
51.  pj?_(JUT«  — *Uz.' 

In  Gen,  x.  23,  the  four  names  after  ARM  are  called  BeNI-ARM;  i.  «.>  *'80n8  of 

Digitized  by 

Google 

640         .  THE    Xth    chapter   OP   GENESIS. 

Aram*' ;  b«t,  in  1  Chroru  i.  17,  the  sune  four  are  oatalogQed  as  BeNI-SAeM ;  th«t  is, 
*' BOBB  of  Shtm." 

Hence  one  of  two  conclusions  is  submitted  to  hftgiograpbj.  Either  the  writer  of 
Chronicles  follows  a  different  genealogical  list  ft>om  that  of  Xth  Genesis  —  in  whidi 
case  we  are  at  a  loss  to  which  document  to  ascribe  "plenary  inspiration"— or  (as  we 
maintain  with  eyery  Orientalist)  the  word  BeNI  (sons)  does  not  mean,  whether  in  the 
former  or  in  the  latter  text,  the  bona  fide  offspring  of  a  man  called  Abam,  or  of  a  msm 
called  Shbm  ;  but  simply  a  general  affiUaiion;  such  as  in  English  we  conpreliend  by 
Wilkin-*on  /  or  by  /tto-Gerald,  ife-Donald,  0*-Brien,  u4/>-Shenl^n,  Ac 

dUT<,  first  of  the  four,  cannot  well  have  been  Shem*s  son  and  grandton  at  one  and 
the  same  time;  unless  it  be  claimed  that  Shem  wedded  his  own  dau^ter :  an  escape  not 
provided  for  in  either  text ;  and  if  it  were,  what  becomes  of  Aram's  paternity  ?  Again, 
an  imaginary  human  being  called  SAeM  could  not  physically  haye  been  progenitor  of  a 
country  called  Abam.  Common  sense,  howeyer,  based  upon  the  spirit  of  familiar  Ori- 
ental personifications,  finds  no  contradiction  between  the  authors  of  Xth  Genesis  and 
of  1  Chronicles;  to  whom  dVTa  and  his  three  figurative  brethren,  as  BeNI,  ** affilia- 
tions," were  colonies  or  emigrants  fr6m  an  especial  land  termed  ARaM ;  itself  classi- 
fied generically  among  countries  occupied  by  Shemiiith  families. 

This  example,  we  presume,  suffices  to  show  the  absurdity  of  seeing  human  indivi- 
duals where  the  writer  of  Xth  Genesis  catalogued  naught  but  eountrieM^  dttea^  and 
tribetf  after  the  symbolical  names  **  Shem,  Ham,  and  Japheth."  —  But,  our  difficulties 
end  not  here. 

Oenetia  X. 
F.  28— And  tons  of  ARaM,  dUT*,  and 
EAUL,  and  GTm,  and  MaSA. 

Genesit  XXII. 
F.  20  —  Miloah  has  also  given  sont  to 

Nahor  thy  brother. 
«  21— AUT<  his  first  bom,  and  BUZ 
his  brother,  and  K  M  U  A  L , 
A  third  flUT*  occurs  among  the  de-  Father  of  ARaM. 

scendants  of  Esau  {Gen,  xxxvi.  28).  <*   22  —  And  EaSD— (i.  e.  Chaldeta)  &e. 

With  three  distinct  personificatioBS  (above  exhibited),  each  called  dUT«,  it  is  next 
to  impossible  for  a  commentator  to  avoid  equivoques ;  and  the  countxy,  or  tribe,  of 
one  dVTe  Biay  be  erroneously  assigned  to  either  of  the  two  others ;  even  without  tap- 
posing  mistakes  in  the  two  later  genealogical  lists ;  which  discrepancies,  however,  do 
not  otherwise  conoem  us.  Xth  Genesis,  in  every  instance,  has  stood  the  test  of 
critical  geography  heretofore;  and  errors  in  this  case  are  ours,  not  its  Tenerable 
compiler's. 

Nevertheless,  In  the  second  list  (Gm,  xxiL),  AVTe  becomes  the  unde  of  ARAM; 
whereas  in  Xth  Genesis  he  is  the  latter's  son:  while  EaSD,  Cheaed^  (singnlar  of 
EmSDUS.,  Chaldttam,)  unmentioned  by  the  former  author,  figures,  in  the  latter's  list, 
among  the  desoendants  of  Nahob,  Abbaham's  brother. 

It  is  to  the  kmdt  called  dVTa  in  Xth  Genesis,  that  Job's  residenee  is  genersOy 
assigned,  owing  to  its  proximity  to  Chald»a ;  wherefore  the  latter  passage  indicates  a 
€otmtr$f,  rather  than  a  tribe  —  but  in  no  case  a  man. 

These  triple  chances  of  error,  above  noticed,  compel  archseology  to  be  extremely 
wary  in  deciding  to  which  of  numerous  Arabian  resemblances  of  name  we  are  to  attri- 
bute the  /IUT«  of  Xth  Genesis— or  really  *'  land  of  4UT«."  Bochart  ingenioosly  guessed 
the  .^tU<9,  Autitu^  Aueile,  of  Ptolemy,  in  the  Syrian  desert  towards  the  Euphrates; 
where  the  Idumean  Arabs  Beni-Tamln  have  dwelt;  to  whom  Jeremiah  exclaims — 
«  Rejoice  thee,  daughter  of  Edom,  who  livest  in  the  land  of  dUTs."  Lenormant  fol- 
lows Mioheelis  in  selecting  Damascus. 

In  Arab  tradition,  Owz  was  the  parent  of  the  lost  Addite  tribes  ;  and,  assuming  this 
wild  legend  to  be  historical,  by  dint  of  mistranslations  Forster  has  raised  a  fabric  of 
delusion  exceeded  only  in  extravagance  by  the  same  enthusiastio  divine's  Sinaie  hua^ 

Digitized  by 

Google 

HEBRETT  KOICENCLATURE.  641 

tioTis  !  It  is  in  the  ill-advised  Appendix  to  bis  excellent  Geogvapbj,  entitled  "  Hadra- 
mfttlo  Inscriptions,"  that  this  erudite  Orientalist  lost  his  balance  when  supposing  that, 
in  these  very  modem  HimyarUe  petroglyphs,  he  found  himself  *'  conversing,  as  it  were, 
with  the  immediate  descendants  of  Shem  and  Noah,  not  through  the  doubtful  medium 
of  ancient  history,  or  the  dim  light  of  Oriental  tradition,  but  in  their  own  records  of 
their  own  annals,  '  graven  with  an  iron  pen,  and  lead,  in  the  rock  for  ever ! '  *'  He 
translates  the  second  line  of  Wellsted's  short  inscription  as  follows :  '*  Awa  assailed 
the  6eni-Ac,  and  hunted  [them]  down,  and  covered  their  faces  with  blackness." 

Happy,  indeed,  though  not  perhaps  to  the  pious  extent  of  the  Rev.  Mr.  Forster, 
should  we  be  to  recognize  dUT<  in  these  inscriptions ;  but  some  trifling  obstacles  iater- 
vene.  Suppose,  for  instance,  that  the  Hadramautic  inscription  (No.  4),  read  into  Arabic, 
should  say  nothing  of  the  kind  ?  £z.  gr,,  that  which  Forster  translates  "Aws  assailed 
the  Beni-Ac,"  &c.,  should  be,  according  to  Hunt,  "  the  effeminate  youths  are  adorned 
and  perfume  their  garments  and  strut  proudly " !  And  suppose,  that  the  language 
in  which  these  inscriptions  of  Hisn  Ghor^b  are  written,  being  the  old  Ehk^elee  or  Cush- 
ite  tongue,  does  not  admit  of  their  being  transcribed  directiy  into  Arabic  idioms  at  all ! 
Fresnel,  the  Himyarite  discoverer  *'  par  excellence,"  gives  the  same  inscription  (No.  4), 
in  Arabic  leltert,  but  has  ventured  no  translation.  These  suppositions  Forster,  so  far 
as  we  can  learn,  has  never  taken  notice  of;  but  goes  on  translating  anything  and 
everything  into  an  Arabic  "^  sui  generis,"  with  the  same  serene  composure  that  Father 
Kiroher,  two  centuries  ago,  read  off  at  sight  ( ! )  those  identical  Sinaie  inscriptionM  on 
which  Forster  has  latterly  exercised  his  orthodoxy  without  mentioning  the  labors  of 
his  Herculean  prototype. 

dVTSf  under  these  circumstances,  remains  on  our  hands.  Probabilities  favor  the 
JEsitcCf  AusUis,  of  Ptolemy  the  geographer ;  and  Job's  <<  land  of  dUT«,"  on  the  Arabian 
ftrontier  of  Chaldiea,  seems  to  answer  best  to  the  Aramatm  analogies  of  Xtk  Genesia. 
dVTs,  we  infer,  was  a  tribh^ 

52.  Sin— KATJL  — 'HuL. 

We  enlwen  the  reader  with  orthodox  lexicography  as  we  proceed —  <<  Hul,  pain, 
infirmity,  brinyihy  forth  children,  sand,  or  expectation!^* 

Most  authorities  abandon  EAUL  in  despair :  but  Orotius  indicated  that  a  Coelo- 
Syrian  city  called  Cholkc  by  Ptolemy  might  represent  KAUL ;  and  Bochart  noticed  the 
firequenoy  of  this  word  in  the  Armenian  localities  of  Cholua,  Ghotuata,  ChoHmma,  and 
Chotobetene;  which  last  might  be  an  Hellenio  corruption  of  KhVL-Beth,  « house  of 
KAUL."  Recent  researches  favor  the  adoption  of  the  '*  land  of  Bttkh,"  in  whijsh  is 
the  Lake  Huleh,  at  the  north  of  Palestine.^^^ 

58.  nnJ  — GTeR  — ^Gether.' 

Koranic  tradition  execrates  the  memory  of  '*  Thamoud,  son  of  Gathbb,  son  of  the 
Aram,"  among  ante-historical  tribes  distinguished  for  their  idolatry:  but  nothing  can 
exceed  the  vagueness  of  these  legends. 

Oadara,  the  metropolis  of  the  Perea,  east  of  the  Jordan,  and  one  of  the  cities  of 
Decapolis,  has  been  assumed  to  represent  GT(R.  Here  the  well-known  miracle  of  the 
*<  swine  "  is  said  to  have  been  performed.  There  are  many  other  places  whose  names, 
with  the  slightest  modifications,  Answer  equally  well :  among  them,  Katara,  a  town 
and  district  plaibed  by  Ptolemy  on  the  Persian  Gulf,  sufficiently  important  to  have 
become  the  bishopric  of  Oadara, 

Gaddir,  in  Eanaanitish  dialects  (according  to  Pliny  and  Sollnus,  also  in  the  <'  Punica 
lingua")  meaning  a  hedge,  limit,  boundary,  or  **a  place  walled-round,"  renders  the 
confusion  still  more  perplexing ;  for  in  countries  traversed  by  Phoenician  caravans, 
and  occupied  by  their  factors,  any  form  of  GT^R  is  as  likely  to  have  signified  frontier 
or  station,  as  to  be  derived  firom  the  tribe  called  GT^R  in  Xth  Genesis.^^^ 

Digitized  by 

Google 

542  THE  xth  chapter  of  genesis. 

64.  B^O— MS  — 'Mash.' 

Besides  the  discrepancy,  above  removed,  between  Xth  Genesis  and  the  parallel  in 
1  Chronicles  (i.  17),  in  regard  to  the  affiliations  of  these  four  names  from  Shem,  or 
from  Aram ;  here  is  another,  that  cannot  be  explained  save  through  an  error  of  some 
copyist.  Who  can  really  tell  whether  we  should  transpose  MSKA  into  Xth  Genesis,  or 
MfS  into  1  Chronicles  ?  [Supra,  p.  478.]  Two  reasons,  however,  seem  to  justify  the 
9  accuracy  of  the  former  text :  one  that  a  MSE  is  already  mentioned  among  the  **  sons 
of  Japheth  **  {ver.  2) ;  and  therefore  the  repetition  of  a  similar  name  amid  the  Shem^ 
ilea  is  improbable:  the  other  that  the  chart  of  Xth  Genesis  is  the  **editio  princeps," 
'of  older  and  more  standard  authority  than  the  books  called  Chronicles. 

The  MaccBf  on  the  peninsula  of  the  Persian  Gulf  whereon  now  stands  the  derlTative 
city  of  Muscat  —  the  Mascei  Arabs  in  Mesopotamia ;  the  Masani  near  the  Euphrates ; 
and  the  Massoniice  of  Yemen ;  might  entice  inquiries :  but,  we  think  their  habitats  some- 
what distant  from  the  localities  where  Aramcean  tribes  appear  to  group;  especially  as 
MSA,  Massa,  descended  from  Ishmael  (Gen.  zxt.  14),  may  well  assert  its  right  to  the 
latter  lineage. 

We  cannot  amend  the  old  view  of  Bochart  and  of  Grotius,  that  this  Aramaean  tribe 
BurYives  about  Mt  Masius;  along  Xenophon's  river  Masca;  in  the  Masieni  of  Ste- 
phanus,  and  perhaps  the  Moscheni  of  Pliny ;  all  of  which  point  to  Upper  Mesopotamia 
as  the  camping-ground  of  MoSA.^s^ 

"And  ARPAa-KaSD  engendered  SLKA,  and  SLKA  engendered 
(JEBR"((?en.  X.  24). 

55.  nSc^— SLKA  — 'Salah.' 

Orfa  in  Di&rbekir  has  been  already  demonstrated  to  be  the  fountain-source  Arpha- 
Kasd,  **Chald8Ban  Urfa,"  and  no  other  than  the  true  AUR-KaSDIM,  <*Ur  of  the 
Chaldees ;  "  whence  flow  the  earliest  traditions  of  the  Abrahamidss. 

d£BR,  the  yonderer,  third  in  descent^  seems  to  show  either  that  a  displacement  had 
taken  place  before  the  name  itself  could  well  have  been  assumed;  or  that  the  appel- 
lative **  yonderer  "  is  an  ez  post  facto  attribution — the  consequence  of  a  migration  that 
had  previously  taken  effect 

Between  these  two  names,  Orfa  as  a  fixed  geographical  point,  and  Sber  *<  he  who 
has  gone  beyond,"  stands  SLKA;  transcribed  Salah  in  king  James's  version:  perhaps 
in  this  instance  with  more  propriety  than  according  to  the  vulgar  Masoretio  Shelah ; 
which  is  suggested  as  the  marginal  reading. 

Sela  of  Ammianus  Marcellinus,  or  Sele  of  Ptolemy,  a  city  in  Susiana,  has  received  the 
concurrence  of  many  commentators.  Others  consider  SLKA  unknown.  K  Yolney*8 
suggestion  of  the  city  and  territory  called  Salacha  by  Ptolemy  be  not  the  most  probable 
halting-place  of  the  EBERi  when  they  had  left  Chaldsean  Orfa,  the  ignorance  of 
every  body  consoles  us  for  ours.««> 

56.  naj;  — fiBR,  or  rather  aBR— *Hkber.' 

[The  impossibility  of  transcribing  the  letter  Onmn  of  the  Hebrews,  din  of  the  Arabs, 
into  any  European  alphabet,  has  been  noticed  by  me  long  ago.  As  a  general  prin- 
ciple, I  follow  the  rules  of  Lane  in  these  substitutions ;  but  unless  a  European  hears 
the  sound  of  din  orientally  articulated,  his  imagination  can  realise  its  phonetism  as 
little  as  his  adult  voice  can  enunciate  it  —  G.  R.  G.] 

Etymologically,  £BR  signifies  **  one  of  the  other  side,"  or  "  the  yonder-land;"  whilst 
£BRI,  a  **  yonderer,"  or  **  a  man  fh>m  the  other  side,"  has  precisely  the  same  radical 
as  the  Oreek  Tnp,  Latinised  into  Iber  {Iberes,  Iberian)  ;  equivalent  to  trans,  ultra,  &o. 

**H£B£B  CPJ^,  one  of  the  other  side;  Sept  'E^tp  and  'E0tp),  son  of  Salah,  who 

1 

Digitized  by 

Google 

HEBREW    NOMENCLATUBE.  543 

became  the  father  of  Peleg  at  the  age  of  84  years,  and  died  at  the  age  of  464  (Gen. 
X.  24 ;  zi.  14 ;  1  Chron,  i.  25).  His  name  occurs  in  the  genealogy  of  Christ  {Luke 
iil.  85).  There  is  nothing  to  constitute  Hkbbr  an  historical  personage ;  but  there  is  a 
degree  of  interest  connected  with  him  from  the  notion,  which  the  Jews  themselves 
entertain,  that  the  name  of  Hebrews  applied  to  them,  was  derived  from  this  alleged 
ancestor  of  Abraham.  No  historical  ground  appears  whj  this  name  should  be  derived 
from  him  rather  than  from  any  other  personage  that  occurs  in  the  catalogue  of  Shem's 
descendants ;  but  there  are  so  much  stronger  objections  to  every  other  hypothesis,  that 
this  perhaps  is  still  the  most  probable  of  any  which  haye  yet  been  started." 

If  the  authors  of  this  volume  had  written  the  above  seientifio  exposS,  it  would  have 
been  seized  upon  as  another  instance  of  **  skeptical  views  "  (save  the  mark !) ;  but  the 
initials  **  J.  N."  appended  to  the  above  article  in  Kitto  are  those  of  a  profound  Ger- 
mano-Hebraist,  the  Rev.  Dr.  John  Nicholson  of  Oxford. 

Archseologioally,  the  name  £BR  marks  a  displacement,  or  dislocation,  that  must 
have  occurred  before  such  name  could  have  been  given  or  assumed. 

Of  such  dislocation  the  earliest  notice  is  the  march  of  the  Abrahamida  from  Orfa^ 
Chaldee  to  Harran  (probably  Carrce),  in  Mesopotamia,  and  thence  to  Eanaan :  where 
the  Kanaanites  gave  to  Abraham,  probably,  the  designation  of  fiBR,  as  "he  who 
comes  from  yonder-land," — transfluviantis,  or  "  from  the  other  side  "  of  the  Euphrates — 
whence  Hbbbsw,  £bRI,  became  the  cognomen  of  this  family.  Indeed,  it  is  remarked 
that  the  title  llBRIM,  yonderers,  Hebrews,  was  given  to  the  AbrahamidsB  by  foreign 
nations.  They  called  themselves  Israelites  after  Jacob's  wrestling  match  at  Phenuel ; 
and  did  not  adopt  that  of  *'  Hebrews  "  until  many  centuries  later. 

We  are  dealing,  therefore,  in  Xth  Genesis  —  a  document  compiled  at  least  five, 
if  not  ten,  hundred  years  subsequently  to  the  arrival  of  the  earliest  Abrahamids  in 
Ranaan  —  with  9^  people  upon  whom  the  name  £BR  had  been  imposed,  *'  nolens  volens  ' 
on  their  own  part.  Had  the  chorographer  of  Xth  Genesis  been  a  man  of  Abrahamio 
pedigree,  he  would  probably  have  designated  his  own  nation  by  its  most  honored  title, 
<*  Israelite ;"  but,  far  from  that,  a  Chaldcean  composing  his  ethnic  map  in  Chaldsa, 
naturally  gives  to  £BR  its  radical  sense  of  "yon(}erer^'  either  because  the  Palestinio 
Abrahamidffi  were  so  termed  by  surrounding  populatiAs,  or  because  they  were  then, 
to  him,  as  iBeBAm,  *'  people  who  had  gone  beyond"  the  Euphrates.  That  there  is  no 
"  prefiguration  "  (i.  e.,  "  cart  before  the  horse  ")  in  Xth  Genesis,  has  been  proven  by  the 
names  Sidonian,  Hamathian,  &c. ;  folks  who  could  not  well  have  been  citizens  of  those 
cities,  Sidon,  Hamath,  &c.,  until  after  the  houses  had  been  built:  and  inasmuch  as 
these  citizens  are  catalogued  in  the  same  document  with  £BR,  the  antiquity  of  the 
latter's  registration  is  brought  down  to  historical  times ;  long  ages  after  that  emi- 
gration fh>m  Chaldeean  Orfa  into  Palestine  through  which  the  foreign  application  of 
"  yonderers,"  given  to  Abraham's  descendants,  had  originated. 

**  Fama  crescit  eundo ;"  and  Oriental  mythos  —  after  Judaism,  a  little  before  the 
Christian  era,  had  penetrated  into  Arabia ;  and  still  more  forcibly  after  Islamism,  in  the 
seventh  century,  had  imbued  pagan  Arabians  with  extraneous  traditions  —  assimilated 
£bER,  now  metamorphosed  into  a  man  and  9k  patriarch,  to  the  Arab  prophet  Hood  : 
who,  in  native  Arabian  tradition,  plays  a  part  somewhat  like  that  which  Moses  does 
in  Jewish ;  being  their  earliest  metahistorical  Reformer.  Who  this  Hood  probably  is, 
the  profound  investigations  of  Fresnel  clearly  indicate : — 

DAU-NUAS,  or  Zhu-Natcdz,  is  the  subject.  "Caibe,  12  Mars,  1846. 

**  The  Greeks  knew  that  Bacchus  was  Arabian,  and  have  sought  for  the  etymology 
of  the  name  Aiivwos,  Dionysus,  after  their  own  fashion :  they  made  of  it  *  the  god  of 
Nyea,'  Nysa  being  a  city  of  Arabia,  or,  as  says  Herodotus,  of  Ethiopia,  where  Bacchus 

was  raised  by  the  Nymphs About  forty  miles  to  the  east  of  Zhafdr,  the 

most  ancient  of  all  their  (Arabian)  metropoles,  and  the  site  of  the  oldest  Arabian  oivi- 
Illation,  is  a  mountain  that  Edrisi  calls  Lods,  and  that  the  inhabitants  of  Mahrah  call 
NoHts This  mountain  of  NoHLs,  near  which  is  found,  not  the  Kabr  HoUul,  or 

Digitized  by 

Google 

£44  THE    Xth    chapter   of   aEKESIS. 

tomb  of  Heber  (fiBB),  but  th«  Kahr  SHOeh  (that  is  to  sty,  tke  tomb  of  the  Fa^bb  of 
HouD,  ftccording  to  Arab  notions)  is  the  point  where  I  pUoe  the  birth  of  Bftoch«s ;  in 
other  words,  the  point*  of  departure  for  those  ciyilizing  eonqnesta  of  which  the  Arabs 
haye  preserved  the  remembrance.  These  oonqneste  are  not  the  act  of  a  mn^e  man, 
or  if  one  might  so  express  oneself,  <  of  a  sing^  Baoefaos.'  DbowOfu  or  Dhot^Na^ 
(in  the  oblique  case,  Dhi-Om  or  Dhi-No^),  Dim  7  Kame^  (tiw  man  with  the  two 
horns),  AfriJoM  (the  god-father  of  AfHoa),  Lokmrnt,  &e^  fto,  are  to  me  se  maaf  per- 
sonifications of  Baoohos ;  and  if  you  must  abeolutdj  h»Te  a  retigious  idea  pre^exist- 
ent  to  Arab  kings,  a  Bacchus  outside  of  Yemenite  dynasties,  I  should  Tentore  to  tdl 
you  to  seek  for  Baoi^us  in  the  tomb  Sdlck  (8LKA)  [Qau  z.  24]  under  the  I>f'abal- 
Ko^.  Bacchus  then  will  be  the  &ther  of  the  patriarch  H^ser  (£bB),  of  tbe^6r«- 
hanudcR  and  of  the  Joktanidm, 

«  Wm  you  mount  up  stiU  higher?    AKhwos  is  (Hebraic^)  BU-ANOSA,  Dhom-EnoA 
(the  god  of  ^  Tulgar),  or  lastly,  Enos  himself,  Enos,  grandson  of  Adam. 
*'  Agrees,  monsieur,  &c., 

«*F.  Fessbzl." 

'<  A  M.  MoHL,  Journal  Asiatique^  Paris." 

Our  researches  do  not  require  our  accompanying  M.  Mohl  into  antediluvian  reg^oos. 
We  are  satisfied  when  shown  that  EBR  in  Xth  Qenesis  is  the  natural  appellation  of  a 
tribe;  better  known  to  modem  science  as  source  of  the  AbrahamidctM^ 

"And  unto  £lBB  were  bom  two  sone.'* 
67.  jSfi  — PLG  — ^Peleg.' 

*<  And  the  name  of  one  (was)  PLO,*'  explains  the  ituthor  of  Xth  Genesis,  <*  because 
in  his  day  the  earth  was  divickd;**  literally,  "PLGec^,"  ^Ut,  In  modem  Arabic  eroi, 
the  identical  word  FLG  means  a  "  split,"  and  '*  to  split ;''  which  again  induces  a  smile 
at  mystifications  concerning  a  **  sacred  tongue,"  every  third  word  of  which  exists  in  the 
Arabic  <2drt>,  vernacular :  every  second  in  the  Nahwee,  or  Koranic  idiom ;  every  one, 
in  some  form  or  other,  bv  easily  recognizable  changes  of  consonant  or  vowel,  in  the 
Qamoos  —  the  *'  Ocean  "  wexicon  of  Arabian  literature.  Any  well-educated  Arab,  we 
fear  not  to  maintain,  who  could  first  perase  in  some  European  tongue  a  few  phUoao- 
phical  works  on  Hebrew  literature  and  comparative  philology,  would  master  the  5642 
words  coimted  (by  Leusden)  in  this  exaggerated  Kananitish  language,  after  devoting  cme 
day  to  its  alphabet,  in  about  a  week.  This  doctrine  no  Shemitish  Orientalist  (no 
Lanci,  no  De  Saulcy,  no  Quatrem^re,  no  Fresnel,  no  Rawlinson),  wiU  deny.  "We 
have  remarked  in  it,"  comments  De  Saulcy  upon  the  Toiton  ePOr,  tk  new  Phoenician 
work  by  the  Abb4  Bourgade,  **  a  passage  the  justness  of  which  we  ought  to  applaud ; 
because,  in  order  to  write  it,  one  must  not  have  been  scared  by  the  scientific  anathe- 
mas of  certain  tOo-exclusive  savants.  Here  is  this  passage  —  *  It  is  therefore  rational 
to  make  use  of  Hebrew,  and  of  the  other  Aramaean  idioms  to  explain  the  Punic :  one 
may  also  use  Arabic,  another  ramification  of  the  Semitic  family ;  sometimes  even  it  is 
indispensable  to  have  recourse  to  this  language,  almost  all  Hebrew  words  being  found 
within  Arabic,  either  without  modification,  or  with  very  slight  modifications,  sometimes 
in  the  form,  at  others  in  the  sense,  but  not  vice-versd;  the  language  of  the  SoriUi 
being  incontestably  richer  than  that  of  the  Bible.' " 

On  the  historical  monstrosities  erected  upon  this  verse  of  Scripture,  it  is  not  for  us 
to  dwell.  FelagoSj  the  Pelasgi,  and  Pelargoe;  the  "Sea,"  the  "fossil  people"  as  Nie- 
buhr  beautifully  calls  them,  or  the  <'  Stork,"  do  not  concern  an  alien  Semitic  bisyllable, 
whose  simplest  essence  is  Anglic^  a  "split"  We  are  loath  to  reject  the  Bochartian 
assimilation  of  Phalga,  a  town  on  the  Euphrates,  near  CkarrcB ;  which  town,  some  say, 
is  Haran,  built  by  Abraham's  brother,  after  his  own  death  at  ChatdcBcm-Orfa:  just  in 
the  same  way  that  Moses  posthumously  describes  his  own  ever-unknown  burial-place, 
his  wake  of  thirty  days,  &c.  {Deut,  xxxiv.  6-12):  but  we  venture  to  submit  the 
following  doubts:  — 

Digitized  by 

Google 

HEBBEW    NOMENCLATURE.  645 

1st  If  by  PLG,  or  PALO,  the  editor  of  Xth  Genesis  meant  what,  in  eyery  Instance 
but  the  mythological  NMBD,  is  herein  proTed  to  have  been  a  country,  a  peopU,  or  a 
'  city,  then  the  parentheti(Al  passage,  "  because  in  his  day  the  earth  was  tpUt"  may  be 
a  gloss  by  some  later  hand,— rationally  suggested  through  paronomasia  of  the  triliteral 
PLG  "  split,''  combined  with  impre^ons  formed  upon  other  documents  by  such  inter- 
polator —  the  whole  haying  been  subsequently  recast  by  the  Esdraic  school  from  which 
we  inherit  (eyery  posmble  chance  of  intenrening  error  and  perrersion  inclusive)  this 
verte  of  Xth  Qeneeis. 

2nd.  If  it  were  shown  that  a  gloss  must  be  as  unlikely  as  it  is  dangerous  to  the  claims 
of  plenary  inspiration ;  then,  before  we  can  percei?e  a  necessity  for  supposing  that  the 
chorographer  of  Xth  (Genesis  here  alludes  to  the  <<  Dispersion  of  mankind,"  we  would 
inquire  whether  the  words  "  (i^as)  split  the  earth  "  do  not  refer  to  some  local  and  ter- 
restrial catastrophe— an  earthquake,  for  instance— that,  occurring  simultaneously,  may 
haye  become  traditionally  coupled  with  a  PLQum  migration.  A  similar  catastrophe, 
introduced  into  Manetho's  text  in  a  similar  manner,  oocuired  under  Bochus,  1st  King 
of  the  second  Egyptian  dynas^,  when  **  a  huge  chasm  "  was  made  at  Bnbastis. 

8rd,  and  lastly — If  none  of  the  aboye  possibilities  be  satisfactory,  then,  falling  back 
upon  the  indubitaUe  orthodoxy  of  the  Parisian  Professor  of  Egyptian  Archsdology,  we 
should  perceive  in  the  words  **  because  in  his  day  the  earth  (was)  tplit,"  merely  a  par- 
tition of  territory  between  the  PLGion  and  the  JokUmide  affiliations  of  £bB  the 
*<  yonderer." — '*  Of  the  two  sons  of  this  Patriarch,  the  first,  PhaUg  (holds  Lenormant), 
indicating  that  part  of  the  nation  that  continued  to  wander  in  Upper  Mesopotamia ; 
leetan,  the  second,  shows  us  on  the  contrary  the  other  portion  of  the  same  people  which 
first  set  itself  on  a  march  towards  the  south."  The  verb  **  divide  "  occurs  three  times 
in  the  English  version  of  Xth  Genesis  (5,  25,  82).  It  need  scarcely  be  mentioned  that, 
in  the  Hebrew,  the  play  upon  the  word  PLG  **to  split"  presents  itself  only  in  verse 
25.    The  other  two  passages  nse  a  distinct  verb,  NPARDU,  "  they  di^^ersed" 

*<  Hypotheses  non  fingo"  — and  as  everything  beyond  the  name  of  PLG,  <' split," 
is  an  hypothesis,  we  leave  hagiography  to  << split  hairs"  on  the  question;  merely 
insisting  here  ihat  PLG  has  no  relation  whatever  to  a  '<  Dispersion  of  mankind."  ^^ 

58.   JDjT  — IKTN  — *JOKTAN.' 

The  compiler  of  Xth  Genesis  closed  the  ancestral  line  of  the  A  brahamidc^  abruptly, 
vrith  PeLeG,  a  *<  split."  Yet  to  the  pedigree  of  IKTN  he  devotes  particular  attention ; 
for,  besides  cataloguing  thirteen  of  the  latter*8  descendants,  he  adds,  <*  all  these  are 
sons  of  IKTN  " :  and  then  fix^  their  dwelling-places. 

Why  this  difference  7  Were  his  partialities  Arabian  ?  Did  he  know  all  about  Arab 
migrations,  and  nothing  of  those  of  the  AbrahamidcB  f  Had  the  writer  been  a  "  He- 
brew of  the  Hebrews,"  he  would  scarcely  have  blocked  the  "  royal  line  of  David  "  at 
PLG,  <'a  split";  and  thereby  left  to  another  hand,  in  another  document  {Om.  xL 
18-26),  at  a  later  age,  the  task  of  linking  Abraham's  genealogy  to  his  own  ethnic  map 
of  nations  and  places.  Here  agdn,  a  foretgner  to  Judaism  and  Jews,  our  coigectural 
ChdldtEan  chorographer,  ''laisse  percer  le  bout  d'oreille."  Such  alien  would  not 
have  greatly  concerned  himself  with  the  ^^raAamtditB,  a  petty  tribe  that  had  wandered 
off  to  Eanaan ;  and  the  writer  of  Xth  Genesis  did  not :  such  alien  would  have  taken 
much  interest  in  the  proceedings  of  the  ever  restless  Joktanidct,  always  harrying  the 
Mesopotamian  frontier ;  and  the  writer  of  Xth  Genesis  did. 

loKTaN,  Joktan,  Toktan,  or  correctly  Qahtdn,  the  Beni-Kahtdn — most  ancient  and 
renowned  of  all  Bemitish  intruders  upon  the  domains  of  CuRhite-HimyAr  —  need  nc 
panegyrist  They  have  ground  their  lance-heads  upon  every  pebble  "  fi*om  HavUah  to 
8kur,  that  is  before  Egypt,  as  thou  goest  towards  Assyria."  Their  woollen  tents  are 
pitched  from  **Sepharf  a  mount  of  the  east,"  at  the  south-western  extremity  of  Arabia, 
even  unto  the  declivities  of  Persian  Uplands.    Their  Ne^'dee  horses  still  chase  the  wild 

Digitized  by 

Google 

646  THE  xth  chapter  of  genesis. 

nsB,  "  gouT,"  over  the  irildest  tracts  of  Arabia's  hdffor,  "  stond,"  desert :  their  drome" 
dariet  are  precious  at  Cairo,  Mecca,  Aleppo,  Bagd&d,  and  Ispahlkii.  From  them  issned 
Mohammed;  ifhose  Kordn  is  the  monotheistic  code  of  religions  and  moral  law  to 
abore  one  hundred  millions  of  mankind  in  Europe,  Asia,  Africa,  and  India's  islands : 
their  tongue,  *<  the  pure  Koriyih,**  for  tweWe  centuries  has  been  the  enyied  attain- 
ment of  poets,  historians,  and  philosophers,  of  their  own  exalted  race,  and  of  its 
Arabian  contemporaries  during  consecutiye  generations. 

By  "Beni'Qahtdn,"  sons  of  IKTN,  we  haye  hitherto  implied  the  Joktanidet  in  general ; 
but  the  great  tribe  in  Arabia  now  calling  iiBtiit  Beni-Kaktdn  claims  the  direct  lineage  of 
this  son  of  £BR.  The  j  are  traced  in  the  KatanitcB,  EUhd^amta,  and  Kottabam^  of  Ptolemy; 
the  Katabeni  of  Dionysius ;  back  to  the  CattahaneSy  Kattdbantany  of  Eratosthenes  in 
the  third  century  b.  c.  :  while  their  existence  in  Arabia  is  attested  by  the  compiler  of 
Xth  (Genesis  many  generations  anterior  to  the  age  of  the  Cyrenian  geographer. 

With  the  admirable  Ubulation  of  the  «  Settlements  of  Joktan,"  and  the  maps  that 
Forster  has  appended  to  his  geography,  the  reader  can  Terify  for  himself  the  accuracy 
of  the  following  schedule  of  loKTaN's  affiliations.^*^ 

"And  loKTaN  engendered" 
69.  miobN  — ALMUDD  — ^Almodad.' 

The  AUumaeotm,  Almodaei,  A*X>o«/faiarv<,  of  Ptolemy,  a  people  of  central  Arabia 
Felix,  represent  ALMUDaD  by  general  consent^ 

60.  t]Str  — SLP  — *8hkleph. 

Ptolemy's  Saiapem,  Salupeni,  the  Greek  transposition  of  '*  .fi^i-SeLePA,"  sons  of 
Shbliph,  are  equally  certain :  now  represented  by  the  tribe  of  Methyrf^^^ 

61.  nionvn  — KAT^BMUTe  — <Hazarmaveth.' 

Who,  unacquainted  with  corrupt  Chaldee  Tocalisations,  foisted  in  the  sixth  century 
after  Christ  upon  the  old  Hebrew  Text  (under  the  name  Mtuoretie  points),  would  see 
that  the  writer  of  Xth  Genesis  here  wrote  Khddramautf  the  very  name  which  the 
Arabs  still  give  to  their  prorince  of  ffadramdut,  or  KhiktramdU 

This  name,  '*  in  the  Septuagint  Torsion,  is  written  Sarmoth,  the  first  syllable  being 
dropped ;  by  St  Jerome  (a  well-yersed  Orientalist),  in  the  Vulgate,  written  Asarmotk; 
the  article  being  incorporated  with  the  name,  or  the  aspirate  omitted,  conformably 
with  the  dialect  of  the  NabathsBans ;  by  Pliny,  AtramiU^  and  Chatramotiia ;  and  by 
Ptolemy,  Adramiia,  Chathramitc^  and  Ckatramotilcd  or  Catkramomta " :  no  less  than 
by  Strabo.  *'So  Hadramaut,"  comments  Forster  upon  Bochart,  "is  modulated  into 
HaxarmoTcth,  merely  by  the  use  of  the  diacritic  points,  ...  an  artifice,*'  says  this 
learned  and  reverend  Orientalist,  *<  allowedly,  of  recent  and  rabbinical  invention." 

The  tribe  and  territory  of  Hadkamaut  being  fully  identified  in  Xth  Genesis ;  the 
only  salient  point  of  interest  connected  with  its  later  history,  is  the  mission  —  we  fol- 
low Mr.  Plate  —  of  a  <*  priest  of  Nagrane,  the  capital  of  Christian  Hadhramaiit,"  to 
Chinay  in  the  seventh  century  of  our  era ;  whose  successful  voyage  is  attested  by  the 
bilinguar  stone,  in  Chinese  and  Syriac  (dated  a.  d.  782),  discovered  at  Si-Oan-F^  in 
1625  ;  which  inscription  is  reputed  to  be  genuine.^^ 

62.  m»  —  IKKh  — '  Jerah.' 

This  tribe  of  Arabia,  under  the  Arabic  title  of  Yireb-bm-Qahiitn,  "  Tdtreb  son  of 
JoKTAN  ;"  or  of  Aboo-V'Tem^en,  '*  father  of  Yemen ;"  was  pointed  out  by  Golius,  upon 
Arab  authority,  as  "  Pater  populornm  Arable  Fellcis ;  primus  Arabiote  ]inga»  auctor.*' 
Forster,  continuing  his  emendations  of  Bochart,  states  that  IRKA  *'  in  the  LXX,  is 
written  *lapdx  (Jarack);  by  St.  Jerome,  lore;  by  the  modem  Arabs,  Jer/M  or  Serhi 
(pronounced  JercAa,  SercAcf ) ;  and  also,  as  shall  presentiy  be  shown,  Sherah  or  Shtra^ 

Digitized  by 

Google 

HEBREW    NOMENCLATURE.  647 

Sereiu  or  Zohrm :"  —  a  name  thrice  registered  by  Ptolemj,  "  in  his  Insnla  JeraehcBo- 
rum,  on  the  Arabian  Golf,  S.  of  Djedda,  and  in  his  Vicus  Jeraehccorum,  on  the  Lar  or 
Zar  riyer,  in  the  Tioinity  of  the  Persian  Golf;  a  town  and  an  island  bearing  in  oommon 
this  proper  name,  although  separated  from  each  other  by  a  space  of  15^,  or  more  than 
one  thousand  geographical  miles !  " 

It  was  Bochart*s  acuity,  as  our  author  honestly  remarks,  that  restored  Ptolemy's 
v90O(  *lcpdx*»v,  preriously  rendered  insula  acdpitrum,  or  "  the  Isle  of  Hawks,"  to  its  patri- 
archal origin ;  insula  Jeraehceorum,  i.  e.,  **  the  island  of  the  Beni  Jerah."  But  this  father 
of  European  commentators  on  Xth  Genesis  did  more.  He  showed  that  the  AUlcH  of 
Agatharcides  were  identical,  not  merely  with  the  tribe  Beni-Hilal  of  the  Nubian 
geographer ;  but  also  with  Ptolemy's  **  insula  lerakiorum ;"  for  the  reason  that  Hilal 
means  *'  moon  "  in  Arabic,  just  as  lerakh  does  in  Hebrew. 

Most  successfully  does  Forster  exhibit  the  settlements  of  leRaEA  within  "  a  Tast 
triangle,  formed  by  the  mouth  of  the  Zar  riyer,  on  the  Persian  Gulf;  the  town  of  Djar 
(the  Zaaram  reg.  of  Ptolemy)  on  the  coast  of  the  Hedj^z,  twenty  English  miles  south 
of  Tembo ;  and  the  district  of  Beni  Jerah  (part  of  the  ancient  Eatabania),  or  the 
southwestern  a^gle  of  the  peninsula,  terminating  at  the  Straits  of  Bab-el-Mandeb;*' 
and  the  probability  that  the  great  tribe,  known  as  the  Mimai  in  dassioal  geography, 
belonged  to  leBaEA-ian  affiliations,  is  also  by«him  perspicuously  elucidated.  ^7 

68.  Onnn  —  HDURM— *Hadoram.' 

By  Fresnel  this  liame  is  considered  to  be  the  same  as  I>jourhoum;  of  whom  Arabian 
tradition  reckons  aiv  elder  branch,  the  old  Jorhamites,  among  extinct,  and  a  younger, 
the  Koranic  Jorhamites,  among  existing  families.  Jorham  is  the  ''  Arabum  H^cusenmun 
pater  "  of  Pococke ;  and  Bochart  associated  the  name  with  the  Drimati  of  Pliny,  and 
with  Gape  Corodamon;  which  last,  by  the  facile  transposition  of  D  for  E,  is  Cape 
HcidoramuSy  or  of  HBTTRM.  Volney  accepts  Adrama  for  their  natural  representatiye ; 
confirmed  by  Forster  in  Eadrama .  and  thus,  carried  onwards  through  the  classical 
Cfhatramis,  DacKansmoiza  of  Ptolemy,  to  the  Dora  and  Dharrct  of  Pliny ;  they  are 
perpetuated  in  the  modem  town  and  tribe  of  Dahra :  at  the  same  time  that  Ras-e^ 
Had  now  preserves  one  abbreriation  of  the  name,  and  .fitmeftr^DoAAif  another — on 
the  very  promontory  «  Hadoramum  "  at  the  mouth  of  the  Persian  Gulf.^ 

64.  SnK  — AUZL  — <UzAL.' 

The  native  Jews  of  Sanaa,  capital  of  Temen,  have  abundantly  borne  witness  that 
AUZaL  was  its  ancient  Arabian  appellative,  as,  to  this  day,  it  is  among  themselves. 
The  "  Javan  from  AUZaL  "  of  Ezekiel  (xxtii.  19,)  must  be,  therefore,  as  Volney  and 
Forster  unite  in  indicating,  not  Greciaa  Ionia,  but  a  town  in  Yemen,  now  called  Deifdtn. 
Oeelis  of  Ptolemy,  Ocila  of  Pliny,  recognizable  in  the  modern  CeUa;  together  with 
Ausara,  a  town  of  the  OebaniicB  or  Yemenites ;  are  relics  of  AUZaL  long  patent 
through  the  scholarship  of  Bochart ^^ 

66.  nbpn— DKLH  — ^DiKLAH.' 

In  the  IhdkheHUB  of  Himyar,  and  the  tribe  Dku'l-Kalaah  of  Yemen,  Orientalists 
perceive  this  affiliation  of  Joktan;  that,  perhaps,  has  carried  along  with  it  some  re- 
membrance of  an  ante-historical  sojourn  on  the  Dikle,  or  Tiffris :  if,  as  Bochart  sug- 
gested, its  name  have  no  affinity  to  nukhl,  a  <*  palm  tree."  ^ 

66.  Saiy— <iXJBL  — ^Obal.' 

Among  nine  names  of  existing  Arab  tribes  identified  by  Fresnel  with  biblical  appel- 
latives (after  the  rejection  of  more  than  forty  of  the  latter  as  irreeogniiable)  AhU  is 
one.    But,  it  seems  more  than  probable  that  a  branch  of  these  Joktanida  crossed  the 

Digitized  by 

Google 

548  THE  xth  chapter  of  genesis. 

narrow  straits  of  B&b-el-Mandeb  into  Abyssinia,  '*  Arabia  Trogloditica ;"  and  gaje 
their  patronymic  dUBaL,  to  the  AtMlUet  Sinus,  AbaUUi  emporium,  AvaUke,  and  per- 
haps AdotdikB  (D  for  B),  on  the  AfHcan  coast  cf  the  Red  Sea  and  Indian  Ocean, 
recorded  in  classical  geography.  Volney  sees  them  in  Edreesee's  Eobal;  or  in 
El-Hamza's  OhH,  that,  with  nine  other  tribes,  succumbed,  about  280  years  a.  c,  in 
wars  with  Abdouan,  Radowftn,  king  of  Persia,  better  known  as  the  Sassanian  Aboi- 

67.  SnO»3N— ABDIAL  — *Abimael/ 

ABI-MAL,  in  Arabic,  is  <<  Faiher  of  MAL ;"  the  meaning  of  which  is  also  ''  posses- 
sion of  property ;"  in  allusion,  perhaps,  to  the  wealth  accruing  to  this  tribe  from  th«r 
occupancy  of  the  myrrh,  incense,  balsam,  and  spice  districts  of  Yemen. 

They  are  the  Mali  of  Theophrastus^  the  Malickm  of  Ptolemy ;  sunriying  in  the  town 
Malaij  or  d-Kheyf;  not  fax  ttom  the  tomb  of  Mohammed  at  MedeSneh.^^ 

68.  N3B^  — SBA— *Sheba/ 

The  perplexities  accruing  to  ethnic  geography  from  the  presence  ot  four  SBAs  in 
the  book  of  Genesis,  three  of  them  in  the  Xth  chapter,  haye  been  set  forth  in  our 
analysis  of  the  Eamitic  Saba  of  Himyar  [uM  supra,  p.  498] :  nor  is  it  possible  to 
escape  from  confounding  this  Joklamde^s  properties  with  some  of  those  that  appertain 
to  the  former's  inheritance. 

Nothing  daunted,  Forster  says,  <<  the  Joktanite  Sheba  gave  its  ori^,  and  his  own 
name,  to  the  primeyal  and  renowned  kingdom  of  the  Sabcaans  of  Yemen."  Peihaps 
he  did.  Possibly  the  Cuakiie  SaBA  may  have  done  so  before  him.  "Quien  sabe!" 
Nevertheless,  <'the  concurrent  testimonies  of  Eratosthenes,  Dionysius  Periegetei^ 
Prisoian,  Festus  Avienus,  and  others  of  the  ancients,"  collected  by  Bochart,  place  the 
Sabcearu  between  the  Minni  and  the  Katabeni,  at  Sdba  and  MStreb  :  whilst  the  notice 
by  AbooH'Feda  that  **  Mareb  was  inhabited  by  the  Bmi-KahUm"  or  JokUmidx^  really 
favors  oiir  author's  somewhat  peremptory  identification  of  this  SBA^S3 

69.  nSW  — AUPR  — *Ophir/ 

A  volume  would  not  suffice  to  display  the  aberrations  of  intelligence  printed  on  this 
name  I    Some  are  exposed  in  Kitto  and  in  Anthon. 

Munk  very  properly  cuts  short  discussion  by  reminding  those  who  see  Ophir  at 
Madagascar,  Malacca,  or  Peru,  that  the  writer  of  Xth  Genesis  places  AUPR  in  the 
midst  of  the  Arabian  Johtanidai  which  doctrine  Volney  had  previously  sustained, 
and  supported  by  vigorous  researches  that  identified  it  with  the  ruined  site  of  Ophof 
on  the  Persian  Gulf. 

Bochart  and  Michslis  held  the  same  judicious  views ;  and  Forster  has  left  nothing 
more  to  be  desired ;  by  proving,  once  for  all,  that  Ofor,  a  town  and  district  of  Oman, 
is  the  true  AUPAiR  of  the  Old  Testament — that  Pliny's  <<iittus  Hammsum  ubi  auri 
metalli*'  is  the  true  Oold  Coait  of  Solomon's  expeditions  —  and  that  the  whole  oT 
them  are  comprehended  within  the  domains  of  the  Joktanida,^^ 

70.  nSnn— KATJILH  — ^Havilah. 

Our  prefatory  remarks  on  ASUR,  and  its  antcHiiluvian  existence,  apply  with  equal 
force  to  that  '*  land  of  jffavilah  where  (there  is)  gold,"  which,  an  universal  Flood  not- 
withstanding, now  reappears  exactiy  where  it  stood,  antefluvially,  on  the  goU-^oatt  of 
Arabia. 

We  are  not  free,  either,  from  chances  of  error  in  attributing  to  the  present  EAUILH 
.'the  Joktanide  affiliation  of  Shem)  some  possessions  that  may  have  belonged  to  his 
namesake,  EAUILH  the  CushUe. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

HEBBEW    NOMENCLATURE.  549 

Howe?er,  the  Nubian  geographer  indicated  to  Bochart  (father  of  generiaoal  geo- 
gn^hers)  the  country  of  ChauUm  in  Arabia  Felix ;  and  Forster,  with  propriety  selects 
the  province  of  Khaul,  south-east  of  Sanaa  (  Uz€it) ;  site  of  Pliny's  tribe  of  Cagulata  ; 
now  inhabited  by  the  ^^ni-EHOLXK.  Its  topography,  moreoyer,  in  the  immediate  prox- 
imity of  Omanite  gold  regions,  satisfies  the  mineralogical  exigenda  of  the  prsddiluTian 
*<land  of  Hayilah  "  demanded  by  the  letter  of  Qm,  ii.  11, 12 ;  and  insisted  upon,  as 
a  preliminary  step  towards  precision,  by  Volney.^^ 

71.  M1»— lUBB  — *JoBAB.' 

The  lobaretai  of  Ptolemy,  through  the  ready  change  of  the  Greek  b  into  the  Latin 
r,  by  a  mistake  of  copyists,  revealed  themsdves  to  Bochart  as  the  JbbabiUB  of  Xth 
Genesis.  But,  **  the  flexible  genius  of  the  Arabic  idiom  "  suffices  to  explain  such  dif- 
ference of  pronunciation;  and  Forster  triumphantly  points  out  "the  lobaritn  of 
Ptolemy,  in  ^«nt-JuBBAB,  the  actual  name  of  a  tribe  or  district,  in  the  country  of  the 
Beni-Kahtan,  south-east  of  Beishe,  or  Baisath  Joktan,  in  the  direction  of  M&reb ;  and 
the  original,  or  Scriptural  form  of  this  name,  in  ^^nt-JoBUB  or  Jobab,  the  existing 
denomination  of  a  tribe  and  district  situated  in  the  ancient  Eatabania,  half-way  be- 
tween Sanaa  and  Zebld  **  —  Katabania  being  the  Greek  inversion  of  Beni^Qahtdrif  the 
old  JoKTAHiDii.  <<  All  these  are  sons  of  Joktak  ; "  wrote  the  venerable  compiler  of 
tills  predous  ethnic  chart,  Xth  Genesis,  above  2500  years  agc^^s 

We  have  shown  that  every  name  (but  NIMBOB's,  which  is  mythological)  in  the  Xth 
ehapter  of  Genesis,  excepting  those  of  Noah  and  **  Shem,  Ham,  and  Japheth,"  is  a  per- 
sonification of  eountrieSf  ntUiorUt  tribety  or  ciliet :  —  that  there  is  not  a  single  "  mcai "  among 
the  seventy-nine  cognomina  hitherto  examined.  [N.  B.  The  number  79  is  obtained  by 
adding  the  8  eUiet^  founded  by  Nimrod,  to  the  71  names  above  enumerated.] 

Abundant  instances  are  patent,  even  in  king  James's  version,  where  Israel,  or  Jacob,  is 
put  for  ail  the  Jewish  community ;  and  so  ASUR,  for  example,  means  Assyria  in  such  pas- 
sages as  *'  ASUR  shall  come  as  a  torrent ;  ASUB  shall  arise  like  a  conflagration ;  Jkhoyah 
win  ndse  up  ASUR  against  Moab,  against  Ammorij  against  Jiidah,  against  Israel"  Now, 
none  will  suppose  that  Asur,  Moab^  Ammon,  or  Israel,  are  individuals,  human  beings.  It 
is  evident  that  these  are  collective  names,  employed  according  to  the  genius  of  Oriental 
minds  and  tongues.  And  upon  whose  authority,  let  us  ask^  must  we  modem  foreigners 
offend  the  spirit  of  old  Oriental  vmters  (apart  from  common  sense  itself),  in  order  to  find 
men  in  the  seyenty-nine  ethnico-geographical  appellatives  of  Xth  Genesis  ? 

That,  in  some  instances,  the  name  of  an  ante-historical  founder  of  a  nation  has  been  per- 
petuated by  the  nation  itself,  no  one  denies.  Classical  history  teems  with  such ;  e,  y.  Hbllas 
for  the  Edlenes;  Doaus  for  the  Dorians ;  Ltdus  for  the  Lydians;  but  they  are,  in  general, 
about  as  historical  as  Ajbikis  of  the  Arabs ;  whom  the  Saracens  made  the  **  Father  of 
AfiieOf"  after  they  had  learned  the  Latin  name  of  this  continent  I  In  most  cases,  how- 
ever, the  nation  or  tribe  invented  a  founder ;  to  whom  they  gave  the  name  of  the  country 
they  happened  to  occupy :  nor  does  archsBology  concede  to  the  Hebrews  any  exemption 
firom  this  oniTersal  law,  merely  for  the  sake  of  conformity  to  time-honored  caprice. 

But,  if  seventy-eight  of  the  seventy-nine  names  in  Xth  Genesis  are  those'  of  countries, 
nations,  tribes,  or  cities;  such  is  not  the  case  with  four  others,  catalogued  as  the  parental 
NtiKA,  Noah,  and  his  three  sons  SAeM,  KAaM,  and  laPAeTt. 

Our  observations  on  these  names  limit  themselves  to  guesting,  as  nearly  as  we  eaa,  what 
may  have  been  meant  by  the  writer  of  Xth  Genesis. 

1st  NuEA — (Noah),  or  NUKA,  in  Hebrew  lexicons,  among  its  various  meanings, 
signifies  Repose  and  also  Cessation.  We  place  the  word  "obsoubitt"  beneath  it 
on  ou^  Genealogical  Tableau.    To  the  chorographer  of  Xt&  Genesis  this  name  NKA 

Digitized  by 

Google 

550  THE    Xth    chapter    OP    GENESIS. 

symbolized,  probably,  a  point  of  time  so  remote  from  his  own  day  that  he  eeaaed  to 
inquire  further;  and  reposed  from  his  labors  in  blissftil  ignorance,  after  having  com- 
prehended the  Tanity  of  human  efforts  to  pierce  that  primordial  gloom.  If  he  did  not, 
we  do :  and  with  the  less  regret,  because  an  expounder  (who  says  he  knows  all  about 
it)  can  be  met  with  at  every  street-comer. 

2d.  From  the  unknotcn,  then,  in  the  supposed  idea  of  a  Chaldean  writer,  proceeded  three 
grand  divisions  of  mankind ;  already  distributed,  at  the  age  of  the  compilation  of  Xth 
Genesis,  each  one  **  after  his  tonguey  in  their  lands,  after  their  nations.''  It  became 
necessary,  for  his  chorographic  and  ethnic  objects,  to  classify  them.  He  saw  they 
were  appasently  divided  into  ihree  cuticular  colors;  just  as  the  Egyptians  before 
him  had  perceived  the  same  thing,  when  they  classified  Ihree^  of  the  four  human 
varieties  known  to  them,  by  the  colors  red,  yellow,  and  white. 

8d.  He  gave  to  them,  or  adopted  through  preceding  traditions,  the  three  names  "  SAeM 
EAaM  and  IaPAeT< ";  and  called  the  nations  within  his  horizon  of  knowledge  by  these 
terms,  as  much  for  convenience  sake,  as  on  account  of  their  several  and  probable  lin- 
guistic, physiological,  geographical,  and  traditionary  relationship  to  each  other.  The 
meaning  which  he  attached  to  each  of  these  proper  names  is  utterly  unknown;  bat 
modem  lexicography  speculates  upon  their  acceptation  as  follows :  — 

A.  EAaM  is  the  ancient  name  of  Egypt ;  centre  point  of  the  populations  idiich  the  writer 
of  Xth  Genesis  classified  as  BeNI-KAaM,  <*  sons  of  Ham;  "  and  which  we  call  Ham- 
itk.  In  Hebrew,  EAM  means  hot :  but,  in  Arabic,  while  H&M  has  the  same  accepta- 
tion, EA&M  signifies  dark,  ewarihy :  perfectiy  applicable  to  the  peoples  that  this 
name  embraces  in  Xth  Genesis.  The  Egyptians  designated  themselves  as  the  r«rf 
race ;  wherefore,  for  Hamitic  types,  we  adopt  the  red  color. 

B.  SAeM,  in  Hebrew,  means  name  *'par  excellence."  It  is  also  supposed  to  possess 
the  sense  of  left  hand,  in  contrast  to  Yemen,  the  right;  but  this  seems  to  be  an  '*ex 
post  facto*'  Arabian  commentary.  The  Egyptians  always  gave  shades  of  yellow 
to  Shemitish  races,  in  accordance  with  their  cuticular  color;  and  we  adopt  it  for 
our  classification. 

C.  laPAeT^  Such  rabbinical  explanations  as  *'the  man  of  the  opening  of  the  tent" 
belong  to  the  domain  of  fable. 

Iapstus,  son  of  Coelus  and  Terra,  was  the  Titanic  progenitor  of  Greeks  in  their 
ante-historical  MUTHOI;  the  *<audax  genus  lapeti"  is  a  symbolical  periphrasis  for 
tphUe  races ;  and  an  ancient  Greek  proverb,  rov  lartrov  vpevpvnpof,  **  elder  than  lapetus,'* 
indicates  that  the  sense  in  which  Grecians  used  it  corresponds  to  our  saying  **  older 
than  Adam."  It  is  not  impossible  that  the  writer  of  Xth  Genesis,  in  his  anxiety  to 
discover  an  ancestor  for  white  fiamilies,  asked  some  Greek  traveller,  who  replied 
**  lawtros,**    To  ourselves,  as  andentiy  to  the  Egyptians,  these  families  are  white. 

We  conclude  in  the  language  of  IVAvezac  —  **  Far  from  admitting  that  Oenesit  wished  to 
make  all  the  ramifications  of  the  great  human  family  descend  from  the  unique  Noah,  we 
would  voluntarily  sustun  tiie  thesis,  that  the  genesiacal  writer  only  wished  to  designate  the 
three  great  branches  of  white  races,  individualized  for  us  in  the  three  types  Greek, 
Egyptian,  and  Byriac ;  whose  respective  traditions  have  preserved  athwart  ages,  as  an 
indelible  testimony  of  the  veracity  of  Moses  [or,  only  of  that  of  the  unknown  writer  of 
Xth  Genesis],  tiie  names  of  Japheth,  of  Ham,  and  of  Shem :  but,  without  entering  digres- 
sionally  into  a  question  so  vast,  let  us  hasten  to  say  that,  to  our  eyes,  the  Biblical  texts  are 
very  disinterested  upon  any  doubts  arising  from  that  [doubt]  as  to  the  unity  or  multiplhuty 
of  species  in  the  human  genus." 

Digitized  by 

Google 

GENEALOGICAL    TABLEAU.  651 

Section  B. — Observations  on  thb  annbxbd  Genealogical  Tableau 
OP  THE  "  Sons  op  Noah." 

So  far  as  the  authors'  reading  enables  them  to  judge,  here,  for  the 
first  time  since  Xth  Genesis  was  composed,  are  tabulated,  in  a  true 
genealogical  form,  all  the  ethnic  and  geographical  names  contained 
in  that  ancient  document 

After  the  foregoing  analysis  of  each  name  under  Section  A^^  the 
reader  requires  no  prolix  remarks  to  perceive  the  utility  of  our 
Tableau ;  which,  at  a  glance,  exhibits  Father  NuKA  (Noah),  and  his 
three  iSorw  —  his  CfrandsonSy  Oreat-grandsonSy  Great-great-grandsonSy 
Ghreat-great^reat-grandsonSf  and  Oreat-great-greaUgreat-grandeoney  ac- 
cording to  their  natural  order.  In  this  manner  (the  geography  of 
the  Hebrew  Text  being,  once  for  all,  defined,)  it  is  to  be  hoped  that 
science  will  be  relieved  from  further  discussion  of  main  principUey 
Whatever  may  be  the  light  which  future  Oriental  researches  cannot  * 
fiiil  to  shed  upon  details. 

Each  Name  is  first  displayed  in  the  "square-letter"  of  the  Hebrew 
Text,  without  the  Masoretic  points.  Below  it,  in  "  Roman  "  capitals, 
is  placed  the  conjectural  vocalization  of  our  modem,  and  colloquial, 
English  imitation  of , ancient  foreign  words.  Beneath  is  put,  in 
"Italics,"  the  spelling  of  each  name  as  printed  in  king  James's 
version.  This  is  followed,  in  "  Gothic  "  letters,  with  the  geographical 
attribution  of  the  several  cognomina,  conformably  to  the  I'esults 
attained  through  our  Section  A.  And  finally,  imder  every  one,  in 
common  "  Roman  "  type,  is  represented  the  probable  country^  nation^ 
trihcy  city  J  citizeny  and  personage  historical  or  mythic,  to  which  the 
authors'  studies  ascribe  each  name. 

**JEtumanum  est  errare." 

[The  best  pftnllel  I  have  met  with  in  ancient  history  of  the  eonversion  of  STmbolical 
and  national  names  into  persorutffetf  that  might  be  assimilated  to  the  Hebrew  map  in  Genesis 
Xth,  occurs  in  Tacitns.^^  Speaking  of  the  Germans,  he  gives  one  of  their  antique  mythes 
(which,  during  his  time,  was  current  among  them)  in  explanation  of  their  figufative  origins 
and'tripartite  distribution  into  races.  *<  Celebrant  carminibus  antiquis,  quod  unum  apud 
illos  memorisd  et  annalium  genus  est,  Tuisconem  deum,  terrH  editum,  et  filium  BIahnux 
originem  gentis  oonditoresque.  Makno  tree  filios  assignant  e  quorum  nominibus  prozimi 
oceano  Ingcevonety  medii  Hertiiinonet,  cseteris  Ittcmma  vocantur." 

TuiBCO  is  the  god  Man.  Mankus  the  Latinized  form  of  our  word  *<  Man,"  in  German 
Marm :  **  oneSf**  is  the  euphonizing  suffix  to  the  primitiTe  words  Ingcev,  Hermmy  htctv,   * 

The  learned  Zeuss^^  has  shown  that  Tngcev  is  the  same  as  Yngvi,  "noble;"  ancient 
title  of  the  royal  race  of  Sweden.  UtctVy  also  meaning  <'  illustrious,"  is  traced  in  Attmgij 
royal  race  of  the  Visigoths  and  Vandals :  and  ffermin,  in  old  Gothic  airmun,  meant  **  the 
mighty  ones." 

1.  iT^rmm-ones,  (in  Pliny,  ffermionei,)  comprehended  four  tribes :  the  Suevi,  Hermudin, 
Chatti,  and  Cherusci.    These  clans  occupied  inland  Germany. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

552  THE   Xth    chapter   OF   QENESIS. 

2.  Inff<mhone8.  These  embneed  the  Cimbri,  the  Teatones,  and  the  "  Chaacomm  geocw ;" 
inhabiting  west  and  north-west  Germany. 

8.  /4rtotM>nes  —  as  the  Vindili  of  Pliny,  indaded  the  Borgnndiones,  Yarini,  Oariniy  jnd 
Guttones.    Their  place  was  north-%astem  Germany. 

For  oar  purpose  of  simple  iUostration,  it  is  not  essential  to  detail  the  geographical  toni- 
tories  assigned  to  these  names ;  which,  mutilated  and  corrupted  by  Roman  orthography, 
preserre  as  little  relation  to  an  ancient  Oerman  pronunciation  as  the  Indo-Germanic  names 
of  GoMeB,  MaGUG,  &c.,  do  in  our  authorized  rersion  after  passing  through  Hebrew  trans- 
criptions, Septuagint  corruptions,  and  the  fabulous  rocalizations  of  Jewish  Ri^bis  of  the 
Masora.  What  we  are  driving  after  becomes  eyident  at  once,  so  soon  as  we  tabulate  the 
genealogy  of  these  tribes  as  we  have  done  that  of  those  in  Xth  Genesis. 

Tuiaco 
MARS. 

Mannua 

MAN 

Irtgmv,  ffermm,  ItUtv. 

"Noble."  •         "Puissant."  "  Ulustrious." 

yorth^ioetl  Qermcmy.  OaUrcH  GGnmany.  Ifarthead  Otnuaif. 
Cimbri,                                   Suevi,  Burgundians, 

Teutones,  Hermundiri,  Carini, 

Chauci.  ChatU,  Varini, 

\  Cherusci.  Gothones. 

It  would  be  easy  to  carry  this  method  of  Illustration,  which  classifies  the  mythical,  the 
geographical,  and  the  patronymic  personifications  of  nations  fn  their  true  historical  order, 
through  the  traditions  of  different  races  all  over  the  world.  We  content  ourseWes  by  indi- 
cating to  fellow-students  the  utility  of  a  simple  process  that  has  solved  many  a  '"rexata 
qusestio "  encountered  in  our  personal  researches :  especially  when  studying  the  PersiaB 
genealogies  of  Firdoosi's  Shah'Nameh;  as  we  hope  to  show  elsewhere.  — G.  B.  G.] 

Section  0. — Observations  on  the  accompanying  "Map  of  the 

World." 

Ist  The  parts  in  black  indicate  what  the  writer  of  Xth  Genesis 
knew  not:  those  shaded  reprcjsent  where  his  knowledge  decreases; 
it  being  unfair,  no  less  than  impossible,  to  define  his  information  by 
a  sharp  line.     Other  explanations  are  given  on  the  Map  itself. 

2d.  The  great  alteration^  which  our  results  superinduce,  is  the  pro- 
longation of  his  geographical  knowledge  (hitherto  unsuspected)  along 
the  whole  of  Barbary,  between  the  Mediterranean  Sea  and  the  Sahara 
desert.  Former  African  delusions  are  curtailed  at  the  First  Cataract, 
Syene;  southern  extremity  of  the  Egyptians^  MiT«RIM,  proper.  The 
compiler  of  Xth  Genesis  knew  nothing  of  "Ethiopia"  above;  nor  is 
any  austral  land  beyond  Egypt  mentioned  by  a  single  writer  in  the 
Old  Testament;  because  Ch'uh  (Ezek.  xxx.  5),  GUB,  conjectured  by 
Bunsen,  after  Ewald,  to  be  gWTJB,  Nubia^  is  an  unnecessary  effort 
when  we  can  identify  it  with  the  Barbaresque  Cobii  of  Ptolemy  ihe 
geographer  [supruy  p.  515]. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

Digitized  by 

Google 

Digitized  by 

Google 

MODBBNIZED    NOMENCLATURE.  553 

8d.  The  coast  of  Abyssinia  is  dotted  red  and  yeHotr,  because  some 
KVShiteSj  besides  the  Joktanidej  dUBaL,  may  have  crossed  the  Red 
Sea.  The  latter  lent  his  name  to  the  Avalites  Sinus,  &c.,  on  the 
African  continent. 

Section  D.  —  The  Xth  Chapter  op  Genesis   modernized,  in  its 
Nomenclature,  to  display,  popularlt  and  in  modern  English, 

THE  meaning  op  ITS  ANCIENT  WRITER. 
Vene 

1  Now  these  (are)  the  TtoLDTt-BNI-NoKA,  (generatioiis  of  the  sons  of^  Ceb- 
satiok);     SAeM    jellow    races,   KAaM  swarthj  races,  and  laPeTt   ivhite 

2  races:  onto  them  (were)  sons  after  the  deluge.*  (The)  aflSlialions  of  IaPeT< 
white  races;  —  CrimeU  =  GoMeR,  and  €aaoa8as=  MaGUG,  and  Media 
s=  MeDI,     and     Ionia  =  lUN,    and     Pontns  =  TtnBaL,    and     Moschia  «» 

8  MeSAeS;  and  Thrace  =  TdRaS.  And  (the)  affiliations  of  Crimea  = 
GoMeR;  —  Euzine  =»  ASEiNaZ,   and   Paphlagonia  =  RIPilaT^   and  Armenia 

4  =T<oGaRMaH.  And  (the)  affiliations  of  Ionia  =  IUN;  —  Morea==ALISaH, 
and    Tarsous  =  TaRSIS,    Cypriots  »KiT<IM,    and    Rhadians  ==  RoDaNIM. 

5  By  these  were  dispersed  the  settlements  of  Ha-GOIM  the  (white  barbarian) 
hordes  in  their  lands;    e^ery  one  after  his  tongne,  after  their  families,  in  their 

6  nations.  And  (the)  affiliations  of  KAaM  swarthy  races;  Dark  Arabiaf  = 
EUSA,    and   Egyptians  =  MiT«RIM,    and  Barbary=:PAUTA,    and  Canaan  = 

7  KNAAN.  And  (the)  affiliations  of  Dark  Arabia  =  KIJSA;  —  Asabia=  SeBA, 
and  Beni-Khllled  =  KAaUILaH,  and  Saphtha-metropolis  =  SaBTfaH,  and 
Rumss  =  lUiAMaH,    and    Sabatica-regio  £=  SaBTmEA:    and  (the)  affiliations 

8  of  Rumss  =  R^AMaH;  Marsuaba  =  SAeBA,  and  Dadena  =  DeDaN  And 
Dark  Arabia  s=  KUSA   engendered    (the  Assyrian  Hercale8?)  =  NeM-RaD, 

9  he  first  began  to  be  mighty  upon  earth.  He  was  a  great  landed-proprietor 
before    (the   face  of)    leHOuaH;   whence   the   saying,    Uke  NeM-RnD,   (a)  ffreat 

10  landed-proprietor  befo^  (the  face  of)  leHOuaH.^  And  (the)  commencement  of  his 
realm,    Babylon  t=  BaBeL,    and    Erech  =  AReK,    and   Accad  =  AEaD,    and 

11  Chalne:x=EaLNeH  in  the  land  of  Mesopotamia  =  SAiNMR.  Out  of  that 
land  he  (Nimrod)  went  forth  \td\  Assyria  =  ASAUR,  and  bnilded  Nineveh  =» 

12  NINUeH,  and  Rehoboth-Xton  =  ReEAoBoTMIR,  and  Calah  =  E:aLaEA, — 
and  Resen  =  ReSeN  between  Nineveh  =  NINUeH  and  between  Cal ah  =  EaLaEA 

18  (he)  she  (Nineveh?)  the  great  city).  And  (the)  Egyptians  =  MiT«RIM  engendered 
the  Ait-Oloti  =  LUDIM,  and  the  Ammonians  =  ANaMIM,  and  the  Libyans 

14  =LeHaBIM,  and  the  Nefousehs  =  NiPAaiT/uKAIM,  — and  the  Phamsii  = 
PAaTmRiSIM,     and     the     Shillouhs  =  KSAiLouEAIM     oat   of    whom    issued 

.*'^otrandalion  ii  intfisded  by  the  tenni  yellow,  iwarthy,  and  white  raoee.  We  use  them  merely  to 
CToWe  the  ethnological  tripartiU  dassiflcatioa  of  the  writer. 

t  Dark  Arabia  terree  fi>r  the  dark  Cusmn  (tedSbmydr)  Araba. 

X  The  mention  of  leHOuaH  makes  thie  copy  of  the  Ethnic  Chart  Jehovidie,  and  eomeqnently  xeoeat^  by  trwy 
mle  of  exegesis.    (PAmua*B  De  WeOe,  JL,  pp.  77-146.) 

70 

Digitized  by 

Google 

554  THE  xth  chapter  of  genesis. 

15  Philistines  =  PAeLiST<IM,  and  the  Caphtors  s=K»PATtoBIH.  And  Canaam 
=  ENdAN    engendered    Sidon  =  T«IDoN   his  first  bom,    and  Eheth  =  KAeTl, 

16  and  the  Jebusian  =  IBUSI,  and  the  Amorian  >e=AMoBI,  and  the  Qirgasian 

17  =6iR6aSI,     And   the    Khnian  «=  EAUI,    and   the   Accrian  =»  ARKI,   and  tbe 

18  Sinian    SINI,  —  and    the    Aradian  =  ARUaDI,  and    the   Simjrian  =  THMRI, 

19  and  the  Hamathian  =  EAaMaTtI:  (Afterwards  the  families  of  the  Eanaanian 
=  ENdANI  (were)  spread  abroad,)  And  the  boundary  of  the  Eanaanian  = 
EN/IANI  (had  been)  from  Sidon » TtlDoN,  towards  Qerar^  erea  to  A&m^ 
(round)    bj    Sodomy    and  Admora^    and  Admah,  and  Tttbcm^  as   facr   as  LathL 

20  These  (the)    affiliations   of  EAaM    swarthy   raoes,    after  their  fkmilies,   after 

21  their  tongues,  in  their  eountries,  in  their  nations.  And  to  SAeM  yellow  races 
also  (there  was)    issue:    he    (is)    the   fitther   of  all    (the)    affiliations  of  (the) 

22  Tonderer^tBeR,  brother  of  laPiieTt  the  elder.  Affiliations  of  SAeM  yellow 
races.     Elymais  as  AlLaM,  and  Assyria  =  ASAUR,  and  Chaldssan  Orfaa 

28  ARPAa-EaSD,  and  Lydia  =  LUD,  and  Aram»a  =  ARaM;  — and  (die)  affilia- 
tions   of    Arams9a»ARaM;      Ausitis » ZIUT«,    and    H^leh  =  EAUL,    and 

24  Gatara  a*  OeTmR,  and  Masonites  =  MaS.  And  Chaldean  Orfa  =  ARPia- 
EaSD   engendered   SalachaT=sSAeLaEA;   and  Salaoha  =  SikeLaEA  engendered 

26  (the)  Tenderer  as  £BeR.  And  unto  (the)  Tenderer  =>fiBeR  were  bom  two 
affiliations;  tiie  name  of  one  (was)  (a)  Split  =  PeLe0  (because  in  his  days  the 
earth  was    split),    and   (the)    name    of   his   brother    (was)    Jokt&n  =IoETaN. 

26  And  Joktftn  =  IoETaN  engendered  (the)  Allumaeot»=:ALMlIDiD,  and  (the) 
Salapeni » Si^eLePA,    and    Hadramllut  =  EAaTMRaMUT^    and   (the)    Jera- 

27  chsdis:  leRaEA,  —  and    (Cape)    Hadoramum  ■»  HaDURaM,     and     San4a  = 

28  AUZAL,    and  (the)  DhuM-EaUah  «  Di^LeH,     And  (the)  AbaUtse  =  dUBaL, 

29  and  Malai  (el-Ehy^f)  «=  ABIMAL,  and  Sllba  (Mllreb)  =  SaBA,— and  Ofor 
AUPAiR,  and  (the)  Beni-EhoUnBEAUILeH,  and  (the)  Beni-JobJLb«:irBaR 

80  All  tiiese  (are)  affiliations  of  [QahiAn]  JokUn  » loETaN;  — and  their  dweUing 
(was)    from    Zames    MonsB=MeSAA,    towards    Mount    ZaffJLrss  SePAaRaH. 

81  mountain  of  the  East  (or  mountain  oppotitef).*  These  (are)  (the)  affiliatiooi 
of  SAeM   yellow  races,  after  their  families,  after  their  tongues,  in  their  lands, 

82  after  their  nations.  Such  (are  the)  families  of  (the)  bom  of  CsssATiON=NaKA, 
after  their  generations,  in  their  nations;  and  fh>m  these  were  dispersed  Ha-GODC 
Bs  the  hordes  (the  peoples)  on  the  earth  after  the  ddnge. 

(Here  ends  the  document.) 

The  authors  cannot  but  hq>e,  after  the  CTidences  herein  accumulated,  that  the  impartiil 
reader  now  agrees  with  them  and  with  Rosellini,  that  **  la  serie  del  nomi  de'  discendenti  £ 
No^  ^  una  vera  ricenzione  geografica'delle  yarie  parti  della  terra ;''  so  far  as  the  world's 
surface  was  known  to  the  writer  of  Xth  (Genesis. 

Viewed  by  itself,  as  a  document  from  all  others  distinct,  incorporated  by  the  Esdraie 
school  into  the  canonical  Hebrew  writings,  Xth  Genesis  is  simply  an  ethnic  ekorograpk: 
wherein  three  <*  Types  of  Mankind,"  generically  classified  as  the  red,  yellow,  and  white, 
are  mapped  out —  *'  after  their  families,  after  their  tongues,  in  their  countries,  in  thor 

*  The  word  hero  is  thft  msm  KDM  upon  which  tho  analysia  of  De  Longp^rier  ww  relbmd  to  under  ASUK 

Digitized  by 

Google 

MODERNIZED    NOMENCLATURE.  555 

nationB."  In  erery  instance  where  monumental  or  -written  history  has  enabled  ns  to  check 
the  writer's  system,  his  accuracy  has  been  Tindicated.  In  not  a  few  oases  exaotitudesy  so 
minute  ad  to  be  relatively  marTcllous,  hare  been  exhibited. 

Our  genealogical  table  displays  the  order  in  which  this  compiler  supposed  the  different 
colonies,  or  affiliations,  issued  from  each  of  the  three  parental  stems.  Our  retrarulaiion  of 
Xth  Genesis,  by  substituting,  as  far  as  possible,  modem  names  for  the  same  nations  and 
countries,  has  enabled  us  to  comprehend  his  literal  meaning  more  dearly  than  when  read- 
ing Hebriucal  appellatives  now  mostly  obsolete,  no  less  than  veiled  by  an  ancient  and  foreign 
mode  of  spelling  them.  And  lastly,  our  transfer  and  redistribution  of  these  seventy-nine 
oognomina,  in  a  map,  fix,  within  a  few  degrees  of  latitude  and  longitude,  the  boundary 
of  this  writer's  geographical  circumference ;  and  thus  indicate  the  horizon,  so  to  say,  of 
all  the  knowledge  his  <*  gazetteer  "  contains. 

Learned  and  orthodo*x  works  have  frequently  defined  this  geography  before ;  and  with 
limitations  of  area  quite  as  restricted  as  ours,  as  regards  the  sum  total  of  terrestrial  super- 
ficies. Beci^use,  if  we  have  cut  off,  as  not  alluded  to  in  Xth  Genesis,  the  whole  of  Nuhia 
above  Egypt,  and  all  Africa  lying  south  of  the  northern  limit  of  the  Sahara  deserts,  our 
map,  on  the  other  hand,  prolongs  the  writer's  knowledge  throu^  Barbary,  from  Egypt  to 
the  Pillars  of  Hercules.  Thus,  upon  the  whole,  our  restoration  is  more  extensive  than 
that  of  Yolney. 

No  savant  whose  opinion  is  worthy  of  respectful  attention,  but  excludes  all  knowledge, 
on  the  part  of  the  writer  of  Xth  Genesis,  of  any  portion  of  Europe,  except  the  coasts  of 
the  Peloponnesus  and  of  Thracia.  All  reasonable  commentators,  by  cutting  off  "  Scythia  " 
at  m  line,  drawn  from  the  north«eastem  apex  of  the  Black  Sea  to  the  Caspian,  deny  tliat 
Xth  Genesis  includes  Rustian  Aeia;  while  none  extend  the  geography  of  that  document 
beyond  a  line  drawn  from  the  Caspian  Sea  to  the  mouth  of  the  Indus,  as  an  extreme ;  a 
frontier,  to  our  view,  quite  unjustifiable,  and  by  far  too  distant  from  a  Chaldcean  centre- 
point. 

In  consequence,  we  all  agree  that  Hindostan  and  its  mixed  populations ;  China  vrith  her 
immense  Mongol  and  Tartar  hordes ;  and  the  Islands  of  the  Indian  Ocean ;  are  entirely 
excluded  from  Xth  Genesis.  The  lands  of  Malayana,  Oceanica,  Australasia,  and  the  Pacific, 
having  been  discovered  within  the  last  three  centuries,  were  of  course  unknown  to  the 
school  of  Esdrai  twenty-three  hundred  years  ago.  So  was  also  the  *'  New  World ;  ** — the 
Tast  American  continent  and  its  Islands,  prior  to  the  voyages  of  Columbus,  and  his  suc- 
cessors. The  most  rigid  orthodoxy,  therefore,  concedes  that,  upon  Fmnieh,  SamcUde,  Ton- 
ffoueian,  Tartar,  Mongol,  Malay,  Polynesian,  Esquimaux,  American,  and  many  other  races, 
the  writer  of  Xth  Genesis  is  absolutely  silent ;  that,  every  one  of  these  peoples  lay  very 
fkr  beyond  the  utmost  area  demonstrable  through  his  ohorography. 

Nothing  "  heretical,"  then,  accrues  from  our  simple  demonstration  of  the  truth  of  that 
which  the  educated  of  all  Christendom  now-a-days  insist  upon. 

But,  the  orthodox  will  even  allow  a  little  more.  Beginning  at  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope, 
they  will  admit,  that  the  compiler  of  Xth  Genesis  does  not  embrace  that  region,  nor  its 
inhabitants,  the  Bo^fesmans,  Hottentots,  Kajfres,  and  Foolahs,  in  this  ethnic  geography. 
They  will  voluntarily  renounce  also,  in  the  name  of  this  genesiacal  writer,  acquaintance  with 
any  part  of  Africa  more  austral  than  a  line  drawn  athwart  its  continent  ftt)m  Senegal  on  the 
western  to  Cape  Gardafui  on  the  eastern  or  Abytsinian  coast  Thus  much,  we  opine,  no 
one  **  nisi  imperitus"  can  hesitate  to  grant. 

Upon  reflection,  in  view  of  the  impassabilities  of  the  immense  Sahain  desert  (first,  geo- 
logically, when  it  was  an  inland  sea  ;  and  secondly,  zoologically,  until  the  camel  was  intro- 
duced and  propagated  in  Barbary,  after  the  first  century,  b.  o.),  all  scholars,  we  presume,  will 
coincide  with  our  limitation;  and,  by  way  of  compensation  for  the  additional  knowledge 
which  our  analyses  have  secured  for  the  author  of  Xth  Genesis,  along  Berberia,  Barbary, 
they  will  not  insist  upon  his  acquaintance  with  anything  south  of  the  northern  edge  of  the 
Sahara: — the  oases  of  S€ewah,  £1-Kh4r^eh,  &c.,  remaining,  between  orthodox  readings 
and  ours,  '*  sub  judice.*' 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC 

656  THE  xth  chapter  of  qekesis. 

80  tvTf  to  Jadge  by  published  oommentaries,  there  are  no  insnrmoimtable  dbsttcles  to 
harmooy  between  the  most  catholic  interpreter  of  Xth  Genesia  and  onrselTes.  **  Nos  ldt«^ 
saires  "  ivill  now  fairlj  confess  that  the  battle-ground,  upon  which  their  and  our  opiniou 
have  to  be  fooght,  lies  on  a  miserable  strip  of  the  iVtV«  deposits  ;  along  the  eoantria  ve 
term,  in  common,  the  Nubias. 

Tet,  CTcn  here,  reasonable  persons — those  who  hare  of  their  own  accord,  and  for  tiie 
sake  of  truth,  already' abandoned  the  Tehoudett  /Vmu,  Samoides,  Jhn^outiatu,  Tartart,  Mm- 
ffoltf  Malayif  Polynetiaiu,  Enquimauz,  American-ahoriginet^  HoUenioU,  Bo^jesmant^  Kafm^ 
Foolahtf  SeiuffoUanif  J  bt/iutinianSf  the  Sahara  desert,  ^.,  &o.,  as  not  included  in  Xth  Gen- 
esis— such  reasonable  persons,  we  think,  cannot  make  out,  legally,  m  **  casus  belli"  betweea 
our  results  and  their  indiyidual  preconceptions,  upon  matters  so  pitiful  in  geography  ts  tke 
ITubiat, 

They  have  read  our  analysis  of  EUSA.  They  hare  seen  CTcry  afSliation  of  KUSA  settled 
in  Arabia.  Now,  if  eiery  affiliation  of  EUSA  in  Xth  Genesis  be  Arabim,  why  must  we 
seek  for  these  EUSA-i^  elsewhere?  Indeed,  if  we  both  agree  in  classification,  neither 
party  has  any  other  geneeiacal  namei  to  dispute  about 

EUSA  and  its  affiliations  being  irrcTOcably  determined  in  Arabia,  and  proTed  to  hsve 
been  generally  of  the  Himyar-rAi  stock,  it  would  be  as  absurd  to  look  for  them  inKohift 
as  on  the  Caucasian  mountains.  We  know  that  until  the  XUth  and  perhaps  the  Ilth 
dynasty,  the  boundary  of  the  MT«R)m,  Egyptiant,  was  the  1st  Cataract  of  Syene:  tnd 
inasmuch  as  the  Nubiaa  were  then  little  known  to  Egyptians,  they  were  undoubtedly  ftf 
less  known  to  Asiatics. 

Consequently,  there  was  a  time  when  Nubia  herself  was,  a  "  terra  incognita."  We  bare 
only  to  continue  this  Asiatic  ignorance  of  AfHca  for  a  few  centuries,  and  CTcry  one  wiD 
allow  that  there  is  no  improbability  involyed  in  the  assertion  that  the  Nubiat  were  unre- 
realed  to  the  compiler  of  Xth  Genesis  at  Jerusalem,  or  at  Babylon.  His  fMp  protes  thtt 
they  were  so ;  and,  thus  far,  discussion  is  at  an  end. 

With  the  Nubiat  vanishes  the  last  possibiUty  that  Negro  races  were  known  to  the  writer 
of  Xth  Genesis.  He  never  mentions  them ;  nor  indeed  does  any  other  writer  in  the  eaDon- 
ioal  Scriptures,  from  Oenetia  to  Malacki, 

Nigroet  are,  therefore,  excluded  from  mention  in  the  Old  Testament ;  together  with  /&w*» 
VralioM,  MongoU,  Tartan^   Malays,    Polynesiatu,  JStquimaux,  jimmcon-Indians,  &c-t 
The  map  of  Xth  Genesis,  under  the  heads  **  Shem,  Ham,  and  Japheth,"  merely  corers 
tiiose  families  of  mankind  classified  by  the  Egyptians,  in  the  days  of  SKTHBi-MKSiPraAi 
16th-16th  centuries  b.  c,  into  the  yellow,  the  red,  and  the  white  human  types. 

Such  is  our  conclusion.  Science  and  reason  confirm  it  Xth  Genesis  proves  it  NeTe^ 
theless,  few  persons  beyond  the  circle  of  education  exempt  fr^m  ecclesiastical  pr^Q^^ 
will,  for  some  time  to  come,  accept  this  result !     Why  f 

[Our  manuteripit  comprise  critical  answers  to  this  query  viewed  in  all  its  bearings  op<» 
the  Ante-Diluvian  Patriarchs,  and  upon  the  two  pedigrees  of  St.  Joskph  recorded  ^  ^  ' 
thew  and  Luke,  Inasmuch,  however,  as  their  production  here  would  necessitate  a  ^^^ 
volume  to  this  work,  we  postpone  their  publication ;  remembering  St  Paul's  sage  admon- 
ishments to  Timothy  and  to  Titus— "not  to  give  heed  to  fables  and  endless  genealog»<M 
—"but  avoid  foolish  questions  and  genealogies."  (1  TVm.  L4;  TttueiiL  9:  Sharpe'*-^^ 
Tettammt,  "  translated  from  Griesbach's  Text ;"  London,  1844,  pp.  880, 892-8).  —0-  ^  ^'^ 

Digitized  by 

Google 

TEBMS,    UNIVEBSAL    AND    SPECIFIC.  567 

CHAPTER    XV. 

BIBLICAL    ETHNOGBAPHT. 

Section  H. — Tebms,  universal  and  3pbcific» 

There  is  nothing  in  the  language  of  the  Bible  which  illustrates 
more  strongly  the  danger  of  a  too  rigid  enforcement  of  literal  con- 
Btruction  than  the  very  loose  manner  in  which  univer$al  terms  are 
employed.  Those  who  have  studied  the  phraseology  of  Scripture 
need  not  be  told  that  these  terms  are  used  to  signify  only  a  very  large 
amount  in  number  or  quantity.  A%  every  one,  tJie  wholcy  and  such 
like  expressions,  are  often  used  to  denote  a  great  manyy  or  a  large 
portion^  &c.  Examples  may  be  found  on  almost  every  page  of  the 
Old  Testament,  but  we  will  first  select  a  few  from  the  many  scattered 
through  the  New.  And  we  beg  the  reader  to  bear  in  mind  the  fact 
already  established,  viz.,  that  neither  the  writers  of  the  Old  or  New 
Testament  knew  anything  of  the  geography  of  the  earth  much  beyond 
the  limits  of  the  Roman  empire,  nor  had  they  any  idea  of  the  sphe- 
roidal shape  of  the  globe.  Be  it  noted  also  that,  in  order  to  avoid 
the  mistakes  of  the  English  authorized  version,  our  quotations  are 
borrowed  from  Sharpe's  New  Testament  as  closest  to  the  original 
Greek. 

In  the  account  given  by  Matthew  (iv.  8,  9)  of  the  temptation  of 
Christ,  we  have  these  words  : 

*<  Again  the  DotU  taketh  liim  on  io  a  very  lugh  mountain,  and  showeth  him  aU  the  king' 
doms  of  the  world,  and  their  glory ;  and  saith  onto  him ;  <  All  these  will  I  gire  thee,  if  thoa 
wilt  fall  down  and  worship  me.' " 

.  Before  accepting  such  words  as  "  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  world" 
in  a  literal  sense,  it  may  be  Well  to  peruse  the  commentary  of  Strauss, 
in  his  Life  of  Jesus : — 

'*  Bnt  that  which  is  tiie  veritable  stnmbling-block,  is  the  personal  apparition  of  the  DotU 
with  his  temptations.  If  eren  tiiere  coold  be  a  personal  Deyil,  'tis  said,  he  cannot  appear 
TiMblj ;  and,  if  eren  he  conld,  he  woold  not  hare  behaved  himself  as  our  Gospels  recount 
it  . . .  The  three  temptations  are  operated  in  three  different  places,  and  even  far  apart.  It 
is  asked,  how  Jesns  passed  with  the  Deyil  trom  one  to  the  other  T  .  .  .  The  expressions,  the 
Dtvil  takes  him, . . .  places  him,  in  Matthew — the  expressions, /0^«Atn^,  he  conducted,  he  placed, 
in  Luke,  indicate  incontestablj  a  displacement  operated  by  the  Deyil  himself;  furthermore, 
lAike  (It.  5)  saying  that  the  Devil  showed  Jesus  *  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  world  in  a  mo* 
^^ent  of  time;*  this  trait  indicates  something  magical.  .  .  .  Where  is  the  mountain  ftom  the 
summit  of  which  one  can  discover  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  earth  ?  Some  interpreters  reply 
that  by  the  world,  cosmos,  one  must  understand  Palestine  only,  and  by  the  kingdoms^ 

Digitized  by 

Google 

558  BIBLICAL    BTHNOGBAPHT. 

BA8ILEIAI8,  the  isolated  proYinces  and  the  tetrarchies  of  that  coantry :  a  r^lj  which  is 
not  less  ridiculous  than  the  explanation  of  those  ivho  saj  that  the  Devil  showed  to  Jesos 
the  world  on  a  geographical  map.  "^59 

In  reference  to  these  diabolical  powers  we  may  also  be  permitted  to 
rejoice  with  our  readers  over  the  following  fact,  recently  announced 
by  the  Eev.  John  Oxlee  (Rector  of  Molesworth,  Hunts,  England)  in 
his  "  Letters  to  the  Lord  Archbishop  of  Canterbury :" — 

**  In  the  Chnmiccn  Syriaeum  of  Bar  Hebrons,  we  hare  it  dnlj  recorded,  that,  in  the  jev 
of  the  Hegira  455,  or  of  our  Lord  1068,  certain  Curdean  hunters,  in  the  desert,  brou^  a 
report  into  Bi^;dad ;  how  that,  as  thej  were  hunting  in  the  desert,  they  saw  black  tents, 
with  the  Toice  of  lamentation,  weeping,  and  yelling ;  that,  on  their  approaching  them,  they 
heard  a  Toioe  saying :  <  To-day  died  Bbelzebub,  the  Prince  of  the  Devils ;  and  erery  place 
where  there  is  not  lamentation  for  three  days,  we  wiU  erase  from  its  Tery  fonndatioiL' 
.  .  .  Hence  it  is  apparent,  even  on  the  indubitable  testimony  of  the  deyila  themselTes, 
that  Beelzebub,  the  Prince  of  the  DctOs,  died  a  natural  death,  nearly  eig^t  hundred 
years  ago ;  and  was  lamented  and  bewailed,  with  all  due  honors,  by  the  municipal  author- 
ities of  Bagdad,  Mosul,  and  other  cities  in  the  land  of  Senaar.  There,  then,  let  his  mortal 
remains  peaceably  rest,  never  more  to  be  disturbed,  in  the  future,  by  human  curionty."** 

We  have  a  repetition  of  the  previous  passage  in  Luke,  which  should 
probably  be  taken  in  a  figurative  or  allegorical-  sense ;  for  although  the 
evangelists  had  little  idea  of  the  extent  or  the  shape  of  the  earth,  yet 
it  cannot  be  maintained  that  Jesus  or  the  devil  were  so  ignorant  as 
to  suppose  that  a  view  of  the  world  could  be  greatly  extended  by 
ascending  a  mountain.  K  we  could  take  this  language  in  a  literal 
sense,  it  would  at  once  settle  the  question  as  to  the  amount  of  geo- 
graphical and  ethnological  knowledge  of  the  evangelists.  Here  are 
some  more  instances  of  "universal  terms"  used  loosely  in  a  vague 
or  general  sense :  — 

{Mat,  xiiv  42)  — <<  The  queen  of  the  South  ....  came  from  t&s  endt  of  ike  mrtk  to  hear 

the  wisdom  of  Solomon.'' 
{Luke  ii.  1) — *' And  it  came  to  pass  in  those  days  that  a  decree  went  forth  fh>m  Ccear 

Augustus  that  aU  the  world  shotdd  be  registered,** 
{John  zxi.  25)  — "  And  there  are  also  many  other  things  which  Jesus  £d,  which  if  they 

should  be  written  one  by  one,  I  do  not  think  that  ike  world  itteff  would  oontam  the 

written  books. 
{Actt  ii.  6) — "  And  there  were  dwelling  in  Jerusalem  Jews,  deyout  men,  from  every  natiem 

under  keaven," 
{Aeie  ziii.  47  —  quoting  leaiak  zlix.  6)  — **l  haTC  set  thee  to  be  a  light  of  the  Gentilee^  that 

thou  shouldest  be  for  salvation  to  ike  ende  of  tke  eartk.** 
{Rom,  z.  18  —  quoting  Pe,  ziz,  4) — **  Tee,  verily,  their  sound  went  into  aU  tke  earthy  and 

their  words  unto  tke  ends  of  tke  world." 

These  examples  will  be  quite  sufficient  to  show  the  manner  in 
which  "  universal  terms**  were  used,  and  the  necessity  for  measoring 
their  extent  by  a  proper  standard.  We  now  present  a  remarkable 
text,  and  the  only  one  in  the  New  Testament  which  alludes  directly 
to  the  dogma  of  unity  of  races. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

TEBMS,    UNIVERSAL    AND    SPECIFIC.  659 

{AeU  XTiL  26) — **  And  [Qod]  hath  made  of  one  blood  aU  naUom  of  men  to  dwell  on  aU 
the  face  of  the  earth,  and  hath  determined  the  appointed  seasons,  and  the  boonds  of 
their,  habitation.''  It  will  be  noted  that  this  saying  of  Paul  is  not  autographed  in  his 
SpkUee;  but,  as  Hennell  oriticallj  annotates,  '*  rests  mainly  on  the  testimony  of. 
the  anthor  of  Aet$f  who  himself  intimates  that  he  is  the  same  as  the  author  of  the 
third  Gospel."  «i 

Now,  can  any  reason  be  assigned  why  a  wider  signification  should 
be  given  to  "  universal  terms"  here  than  in  the  previous  examples  ? 
Have  we  not  seen,  too,  in  the  quotation  just  preceding  this,  the  loose 
manner  in  which  the  same  writer  (St.  Paul)  uses  such  terms  ?  Should 
'not  this  paragraph,  also,  deserve  the  less  credit,  inasmuch  as  it  has  no 
parallel  ?  It  should  be  remembered  that  when  St  Paul  stood  upon 
Mars's  Hill  and  preached  to  the  men  of  Athens,  his  knowledge  of 
nations  and  of  races  did  not  extend  beyond  that  of  his  hearers; 
and  the  expression,  "  hath  made  of  one  Hood  all  nations  of  men,'*  was 
certainly  meant  to  apply  only  to  those  nations  about  which  he  was 
informed ;  that  is,  merely  the  Boman  Umpire. 

Leaving  the  New  Testament  we  take  up  the  Old,  and  such  pas- 
sages as  these  meet  our  eye :  — 

(1  Kinge,  rmL  10)  —  As  *<  leHOuaH  thy  God  liyeth  [most  sacred  form  of  Jewish  oath], 
there  is  no  nation  or  kingdom,  whither  my  Lord  hath  not  sent  to  seek  thee ;  and  when  they 
sud,  *  ffe  is  not  there,'  he  took  an  oath  [a  certificate]  of  the  kingdom,  that  they  found  thee 
not."  If  this  text  were  to  be  taken  literally,  Obadiah's  most  solemn  affidayit  is  here  given 
that  Ahab's  enussaries  had  visited  China,  Norway,  Peru,  Congo, — ^in  short,  drcumnaYigated 
the  whole  globe,  besides  traversing  it  in  every  direction,  during  the  tenth  century  b.  o.,  in 
quest  of  Elgah !         ^ 

(1  Kmge,  z.  24)  —  « And  all  the  earth  sought  the  face  of  Solomon,  to  hear  his  wisdom." 
Is  this  to  be  accepted  verbatim  et  literatim  f  Must  no  allowance  for  poetic  license  be  made, 
when  David  says,  —  **  And  the  channels  of  the  sea  appeared,  the  foundatione  of  the  world 
were  diteovered"  (2  Sam.  zziL  16). 

Beceding  to  previous  chapters  (that  is,  not  written  during  earlier  ages,  but  merely  bound 
up  in  books  placed  anteriorly  to  Kings  and  Samuel  in  the  present  order  of  arrangement), 
we  come  to— '<  And  now  EuL-HAReT«  (the  WHOLE  earth)  was  of  one  tiv  and  of  DeBeRIM 
AEAaDIM."  —  The  last  two  words,  plurals  in  Hebrew,  cannot  be  literally  rendered  into 
SogUsh,  as  onet  worde;  but  the  sense  is  *<  one  language." 

The  whole  context  refers  to  an  idea  purely  Chaldcean,  and  to  a  preternatural  event  exdu- 
rively  Bdhylonieh;  viz.,  tiie  city  and  the  tower  of  BaBeL,  which  leHOuaH  "  descended  to 
see  "  after  they  were  huUU  The  two  things,  tower  and  city,  are  inseparable ;  and  we  per- 
ceive that  the  people  <<  ceased  to  build  the  e%,"  after  they  were  *<  dispersed  thence  over 
the  fSftce  of  the  vtholb  babth." 

{Qen,  xi.  1)  — «0n  that  account  it  was  called  BaBet<,  because  leHOuaH  there  BeLeL 
(confounded)  the  lip  (speech)  of  the  whole  eabth."  The  root  BLL  means  to  mingle,  to 
talk-gibberish ;  and,  conformably  to  the  favorite  genius  of  Semitic  d  scription,  the  writer 
avails  himself  of  a  play  upon  words — t.  e.,  really  "  j^erpetrates  %pun  " — ^because  the  mono- 
syllabic etymon  of  BaBeL,  itself  meaning  **  confusion,"  is  the  same  as  that  of  BeLeL. — We 
mi^  say  in  English,  '<  BABWL-babble,"  and  thus  realise  part  of  the  alliteration  of  BaBeL* 
BeLeL,  while  losing  half  its  double  entendre  ;  because,  BaBeL  does  not  mean  in  English  what 
it  does  in  Semitish  idioms,  viz.,  *<  gibberish"  as  well  as  confusion.  Another  mode  of  convey- 
ing an  idea  of  this  play  upon  words  would  be,  to  translate  BaBeL-BeLeL  by  ''higgledy- 

Digitized  by 

Google 

560  BIBLICAL    ETHN06BAPHY. 

pig^edj."     Poor,  drMury,  and  mia-timod  though  such  Joonlftrity  maj  seem  to  us,  And 
inconsonant  with  the  sanctity  of  the  voliime  in  which  it  is  now  found,  nerertheleee^  no 
Orientalist  will  dispute  the  assertion,  that  similar  rdmitt,  or  riddUt,  are  the  deli^  of 
Eastern  narrators  ;^^  while,  bj  the  Talmndic  Eabbis,  this  pun  was  snpposed  to  cover  awfiil 
mysteries.    Few  persons  are  aware  that,  as  the  Text  says  nothing  about  the  duiruetian  of 
either  city  or  tower,  theologians  derire  their  notions  in  this  reqpect,  not  firom  the  Bible, 
but  fh>m  the  spurious  and  modem  tales  of  Hestieus,  of  Polyhistor,  of  Eupolemus,  and  of 
the  "  Sibylline  Qrades."     The  classical  texts  may  be  found  in  Coiy's  Ancient  FragmenU. 
The  reader,  who  has  conqraehended  the  principles  of  critieism,  established  Author  on  in 
the  ArehoBological  IntrodueUon  to  J^th  Otnem,  can  now  seise  the  historical  Talne  of  this  docu- 
ment {Oen.  xL  1-9)  in  a  moment 
Ist  It  has  no  connection  with  what  precedes  or  succeeds  it;  but  breaks  in,  pare»- 
thetically,  between  what  is  now  printed  as  the  82d  verte  of  Chap.  X.  and  the  10th  of 
Chap.  XL :  its  apparent  relation  to  either  originating  solely  through  modem,  arbitrary, 
and  therefore  unauthorised,  divisions  into  cht^tert  and  vertn, 
2d.  Age  and  authorship  unknown,  its  antiquity  cannot  asoend  beyond  the  seventh — eighth 
century  b.  o.,  because  its  divine  ascriptions  are  Jekovittie;  nor  could  it  well  have  been 
embodied  into  the  book  called  **  Genesis,''  earlier  than  about  b.  o.  420,  by  the  Esdraio 
School ;  because,  the  mention  of  **  the  land  of  Shinar" — of  **  brick  they  had  for  stone 
(or  rather  L-ABNi, /or  building)  and  bitumen  they  had  for  mortar"^  of  the  **ciig;~^ 
therefore  the  name  of  it  was  BaBeL  (Babylon)  "—carries  us  at  once  to  plains  between 
the  Shinar  hilU  and  the  Euphrates-river ;  to  the  bricks  of  Chaldean  mounds ;  to  the 
bituminous  springs  of  Bit  {Hit  of  Herodotus,  and  hieroglyphic  IS) ;  *^  and  to  the  Ba- 
bylon of  Nebucbadnesxar ;  than  whom,  although  the  name  of  a  place  called  BBL  is  as 
old  as  Tfaotmes  III.  of  the  XVIIIth  Theban  dynasty,  1600—1600  b.  o.,  nothing  eund- 
form  yet  found  at  Babylon  is  anterior. ws 
8d.  What  connections  B&B-eLM6  «  QaU  of  the  Sun"  (like  the  Chinese  «  celestial  gates;" 
or  their  Mongol  derivative,  the  Ottoman  "  Sublime  Porte"),  may  have  with  tl^is  name's 
origin :  *whether  Bblus  the  king ;  Baal  the  god ;  or  '*  Bel  and  the  dragon ;"  are  to  be 
taken  into  consideration: — these  curious  inquiries,  if  familiar  to  our  studies,  are 
foreign  to  our  present  purposes  and  objects.    But,  «in  sober  sadness,"  let  us  ask  — 
Can  such  words  as  KuL-Ha-AReT«  (the  y>h6U  earth)  be  accepted,  by  ethnological 
science  in  the  nineteenth  century,  when  contained  in  such  an  unhistorical  document? 
At  any  rate,  '*  Types  of  Mankind  "  must  respectftUly  leave  them  aside. 

**  Ids  t  dea  infelbc,  NUi  remaneblfl  ad  amnem 
Sola,  carens  et  Tocet" 

The  ignorant  of  all 'races  and  ages,  especially  inland-populations  such  as  the  Jews  were, 
when  a  foreign  tongue  strikes  their  auricular  nerves,  do  not  suppose  that  the  speaker  is 
uttering  sense,  but  believe  that  he  is  merely  exercising  his  vocal  muscles  instinctively,  in 
the  same  manner  that  geete  <*  talk."  The  writer  of  Matthew  is  not  free  firom  this  illusion ; 
because,  where  our  authorised  mistranslation  has  **Use  not  vain  repetitions,  as  the  heathen 
do  ;"  the  original  Cheek  reads  —  <*  And  when  ye  pray,  babble  not  .as  the  beatiien  do  "  {Mat 
vi.  7 : — Sharpe,  N,  T,,  p.  10).  In  the  idea  of  tiie  Hebrews,  vouched  for,  according  to  De 
Sola,  even  by  such  mighty  commentators  as  Rashi  and  Mendelssohn,^^?  the  "One  lan- 
guage "  at  Babel  was  merely  the  **  lingua  sancta ;"  that  is  to  say,  all  mankind  there  talked 
Hebrew  at  first;  but  (after  the  dispersion  thence,  when  their  speech  was  *< confounded"), 
only  Shsm's  eone  miraculously  preserved  the  Hebrew  tongue  immaculate ;  "  the  rest  of 
mankind  "  BABEL-6aM^  in  gibberish  I 

The  above  hints  are  furnished  to  others.  We  feel  as  charitably  disposed  as  Josephus  did 
when  writing.  —  **  Now,  as  to  myself,  I  have  so  described  these  matters  as  I  have  found 
them  and  read  them ;  but  if  any  one  is  inclined  to  another  opinion  about  them,  let  him 
enjoy  his  different  sentiments  without  any  blame  from  me."  ^os 

Digitized  by 

Google 

STRUCTURE    OF  GENESIS    I.,  II.,  AND    III.  561 

Section  F.  —  Structure  op  Genesis  L,  n.,  and  m. 

Far  more  important,  at  an  ethnological  point  of  view,  are  the  first 
three  chapters  of  the  book  called  "Genesis;"  and  to  them  we  can 
here  devote  bnt  a  paragraph  or  two. 

Our  Archeeological  Introduction^  in  Part  HE.,  has  pointed  out  their 
Slsdraic  age,  and  the  Perric  origin  of  some  of  the  mythes  they 
contain.  All  modem  divisions  into  chapters  and  verses,  of  course, 
are  to  be  abstracted ;  being  mere  European  addenda.  Jewish  divi- 
sions of  the  book  of  Genesis  are  entirely  different.  They  are  twelve 
in  number;  erf  which  the  first  SeDR — Chapter  I.  to  Chapter  VI., 
verBe  9  —  is  called  the  "Bereshith,"  beginning.^ 

To  understand  this  "structural  analysis  of  the  book  of  Genesis," 
according  to  exegetical  principles  now  universally  recognized  by 
Hebraists,  we  refer  the  reader  to  a  masterly  critique  by  Luke 
Burke,®^  and  to  the  solid  evidences  supplied  by  De  Wette.^  The 
more  salient  characteristics  distinguishing  the  two  documents  are, 
the  words  ELoHIIVT,  in  king  James's  version  replaced  by  "  God  ;'* 
and  leHOuaH,  for  which  our  appellative  "Lord"  is  substituted; 
aeither  of  these  two  Hebrew  divine  names  Ijeing  translated;  as  the 
writer  will  demonstrate  in  some  future  treatise.  The  relative  order 
of  these  documents  becomes  intelligible  to  the  reader  by  being  placed 
in  juxtaposition.  Our  purpose  now  being  merely  the  exhibition  of 
some  structural  peculiarities  not  generally  known,  it  is  unnecessary 
to  retranslate  the  whole  three  chapters,  and  impossible  to  justify 
herein  our  verbal  interpretations.  With  Cahen's  Bible,  the  reader 
can  easily  fill  np  gaps  for  himself  in  the  former  case:  adequate 
explanations  in  the  latter  would  require  the  publication  of  a  volume 
of  results  which,  obtained  through  ten  years'  incessant  travel  and 
study,  G.  R.  G.*s  manuscripts  embrace.  To  the  anthropologist,  how- 
ever, it  will  be  satisfactory  to  behold  the  true  place  of  the  word 
A-DaM  in  these  texts  —  mW,  says  Cahen,  "Tespfece  humaine,  sin- 
gulier  collectif."  And,  as  concerns  other  questions,  we  must  be  con- 
tent for  the  present  to  submit  an  observation  written  by  the  great 
Hellenist,  R.  Payne  Knight,  to  his  colleagues  Sir  Joseph  Bankes  and 
Sir  W.Hamilton  :  — 

« It  most  be  olwenred  that^  wben  the  ancients  speak  of  Creation  and  destruction,  they 
meaa  only  formation  and  dissolution ;  it  being  aniversallj  allowed,  through  all  systema  of 
religion  or  sects  of  philosophy,  that  nothing  could  come  from  nothing ^  and  that  no  power  what- 
ep«r  could  anmhilaie  that  which  really  existed.  The  bold  and  magnificept  idea  of  a  creation 
from  nothing  was  reserred  fbr  the  more  Tig^rous  faith,  and  more  enlightened  minds  of  the 
moderns;  who  need  seek  no  authority  to  confirm  their  belief;  for,  as  that  which  is  self- 
efvident  admits' of  no  proof,  so  that  which  is  in  itself  impossible  admits  of  no  refutation."  ^^^ 

71 

Digitized  by 

Google 

562 

BIBLICAL    ETHKTOGBAPHT. 

aE. 

^    e 

I 

IK)CnMENT  No.  I.  —  QdCBia  I.; 
U.S. 

li^rmimtcal  <D)ie  of  Creattbe 
coffmogons  —  antCque  an)i 
scfentfffc 

<«In  the  beginning,  BLoHIM  erected 
the  (oniTenality  of)  skiee,  end  the 
(aniTenaUtjof)eerth.  And  the  earth 
wee  TtoHU— and— BoHU  (literally— 
mascoline  and  ftmlnlne  prindplee  dis- 
located, or  eonfbnnded;  paraphrasti- 
caUy  —  *<«oCMoM<  /orm  ani  a  oon/uMcI 
iiwuO,  and  darkness  was  upon  the  Dice 
of  the  atiyts,  ai^d  the  (breath)  spirit  of 
ELoHIM  borered  (like  a  descending 
bird)  over  the  &ce  of  the  waters— 
[r.S,4.] 

(CAonw  lA)  «And  H  was  «ReB  (nwtem  twilight) 
and  it  was  BeKK  (early  dawn)  — l>ay 
Onl 

[r.e,7.] 

"And  it  was  IReB  (toeitom  twilight) 
and  it  was  BeKR  (early  dawn)— IToy 
Sboors! 

[F.  9—12.] 

"And  it  was  SUB  (western  twHight) 
and  it  was  BeKB  (early  dawn)— X>ay 
TmiDl 

[F.  14r-18.] 

"And  it  was  SleB  (weifom  twilight) 
and  ifwss  BeKR  (early  dawn)— i>a3f 
fomaal 

[F  «— 22.] 
0  {Chanu  5(A.)      *'And  it  was  2ReB  (vieitem  twilight) 
vL  and  it  was  BeKB  (early  dawn)— i>asf 

BOCUHENT  No.n.— 0« 
IIL94. 

{Chan»%a:i 

{Chanu  Sd.) 

Q  (CAonM4<^) 

nil 

(CAonuCO.) 

1 

"And  ELoHIM  said,  *Let  ns  make 
(the  uniTersality  of)  the  A-DaM  (thk. 
EiiHnan)  after  oar  im^^  like  onr  like* 
ness,  and  let  him  role  oyer  the  ilsh  of 
the  seas  and  orer  the  bird  of  the  skies 
and  orer  the  cattle  and  orer^all  the 
[whole]  earth  and  OTer  all  the  crawler 
crawling  upon  the  earth.'  And  ELoHIM 
created  (the  universaUty  of)  the  A-DaM 
(TH«-BXD-man)  after  his  image,  after  the 
image  of  ELoHIM  created  (he)  them. 
And  ELoHIM  blessed  them  and 
ELoHIM  said  to  them  *  Be  ft>uitftil  and 
mnltiply,  and  fill  the  (uniTcrsality  of) 
earth  and  sulked  it,  and  rule  OTcr  ilsh 
of  the  seas  and  oTer  bird  of  the  skies 
and  orer  all  the  liTing  that  crawls  upon 
the  earth.* 

[F.  29-30.] 

"And  it  was  eReB  (weitom  twilight) 
and  it  was  BeKB  (early  dawn)  —Z>ay 
theSavBl 

"  Sabbath,'*  ^bterday ;  com-' 
mendng  at  sunset  on  Fri- 
di^,  and  ending  at  sunset 
onSatuxday. 

[C%.ii.t>.l,2.] 
B  (Bmedtcttbn)      "And  ELoHIM  blessed  the  (uniyers- 
<^  ality  of)  day4he-BBVE9TH  and  sanotifled 

it,  because  Jie  8AaBaT<  (rested,  and 
KntnOwB^  fh>m  all  his  work  which 
ELoHIM  created  to  act**- («.  s.,  by  its 
own  organism  henoelbrward). 

Kdiis. 

^qpulat  Cceatfon  of  t|)e  Wetl^ 
— ^Iatet»  an)i  JPeoEfc 

'*8ueh  (the)  generations  (lltarally» 
brinffin^/orthi)  of  the  skies  and  th« 
earth  aeoordii^  to  thdr  creation,  oa 
(the)  day  leHOuaH-ELOHDi  made  earth 

[T^.6,6.] 

"And  IeHOuaH-Ei.OHXii  Ibrmed  tha 
(universality  of)  A-BaM  (TH»-BiD-man) 
of  dust  from  the  A-DaMaH  (TB»aBD- 
earth)  and  breathed  in  (his)  nostrils 
breath  of  lift,  and  the  A-DaM  (th»<ii>- 
man)  became  (a)  llTlng  creature.  And 
leHOoaH-ELOHDf  planted  (a)  garden  in 
iDtUX  (or,  it^^MiMtn)  to  (the)  East,  and 
there  placed  the  (uniTersality  of) 
A4)aM  (THB-BBD-man)  whom  he  had 
ftomed. 

[F.  9—14.] 

"And  leHOuaH-ELOHDC  took  the 
(uniTersality  of)  A-DaM  and  placed 
him  in  (the)  garden  of  ^DeN  (or,  sb- 
uoht)  to  oultiTate  it  and  to  guud  it 

[F  16-29.] 

."And  leHOuaH-ELOBDf  made  the 
A-DaM  (THB-BiD-man)  to  iUl  (hito  a) 
great  drowsiness,  and  he  slept;  and  he 
took  one  of  his  ribs  and  fllled-in  flesh 
in  plaee  thereoC  And  leHOnaH-EiiOHDi 
constructed  the  rib  whidi  he  had  taken 
from  the  A-DaM  (THB-BBD-man)  Into 
AiSftiH  (woman— or  ISE,  Ian)  and 
brought  her  to  the  A-DaM  (thb-bd- 

[F20.    C*.IiL«.19.] 

"AndtheA-DaM(THB4LBiHBan)e 
(the)  name  of  AiSAaTtU  (bis  wifo,  or 
ISeT,  Isis)  KAiUaH  Qifi),  because  she 
was  (the)  mother  of  all  KAala  QMitg). 

IV.  21-®.] 

"So  he  droT^out  the  (uniTersalitj 
of)  A-DaM  (THB-BBD-man);  and  he 
placed  at  (the)  Bast  to  (the)  garden  of 
a)eN  (ddiffht)  the  (uniTersality  of) 
KeRuBIM  (piebt-ddbs),  of  which  he 
made  the  cbntbal-flaiiz  reToWe  to 
guard  the  road  to  (the)  tree  of  the 
K;kaIaIM  (»eet). 

Digitized  by 

Google 

STRUCTURE  OF  GENESIS  I.,   II.,   AND  III.  563 

Oar  present  object  limitiDg  itself  to  the  Creation  of  Man,  as  set  forth  in  the  above  two 
doooments —  each,  the  reader  now  perceives,  distinct  altogether  the  one  from  the  other  — 
we  withhold  (conti^ary  to  our  habit)  aathorities  for  onr  arrangement  of  the  **  document 
Elokim.**  The  Hebraist  will  concede  that  we  have  adhered  with  rigid  fidelity  to  the  Text; 
and  that  suffices  until  we  resume  biblical  mysteries  on  a  Aiture  occasion,  when  authority 
enou^  shall  be  forthcoming.  Tet,  to  the^  curious  investigator,  we  feel  tempted  to  offer  the 
"Air"  of  the  Mutic  of  the  Spheres: 

f~\—f  i-g-zE^ 

1 — ' — \ 

If  he  be  n  musician,  he  can  plaj  it  on  a  piano ;  if  he  is  a  geometrician,  he  will  find  its  cor- 
responding notes  on  the  sides  of  an  equilateral  triangle  added  to  the  angles  of  a  square;  if 
he  loves  metaphysics,  Plato  will  explain  the  import  of  unity,  matter,  logoe,  perfection,  imper- 
fect, justice,  repose;  while  Pythagoras  will  class  for  him  monad,  duad,  triad,  quaternary,  qui- 
nary, senary,  and  sqptenary.  We  hope  to  strike  the  ootaye  note  some  day  ourselves ;  but, 
in  the  meanwhile,  should  the  reader  be  profound  in  astronomical  history,  and  if  he  can 
d^ermine  the  exact  time  when  the  ancients  possessed  neither  more  nor  less  than  **  five  pla- 
nets, besides  the  Sun  and  Moon,"  there  are  two  archeological  problems  his  acumen  will 
have  solved  —  Ist,  the  arithmetico-harmonical  antiquity  of  the  number  7 ;  and  2d,  the  pre- 
cise era  beyond  which  it  will  thenceforward  be  impossible  to  carry  back  the  composition 
of  that  ancient  Ode  we  term  '* Genesis  i — ii.  8." 

Being  of  an  epoch  much  more  recent ;  arranged  upon  a  geographical  basis  purely  Chaldcean; 
and  containing  allusions  to  a  garden  of  delight  (like  the  famed  **  hanging-gardens "  of 
Babylon,  and  ihe paradisiacal  parks  of  Persia) ;  the  "Jehovistic  document"  throws  little  or 
no  light  upon  ancient  ethnography.  A-DaM,  as  we  shall  see,  never  was  intended  by  the 
Jehovistic  writer,  to  be  the  proper-name  **  Adam,"  as  the  versions  pretend.  The  woman 
AiSAaH  (when  the  masoretic  points  or  other  arbitrary  and  modem  diacritical  marks  are 
removed)  becomes  ASH,  or  (vowels  being  vague)  ISE :  identified  with  the  Coptic  ISE,  as 
well  as  with  the  hieroglyphical  appellative  of  that  primordial  ISI,  whom  the  Greeks 
(through  the  addition  of  their  euphonising /S^^a)  made  into  the  goddess  ISIS:  '*for,"  says 
Clbmbhs  Alextmdrinus,  <*  in  that  which  belongs  to  the  occult  the  enigmas  of  the  Egyptians 
are  similar  to  those  of  the  Hebrews."  ^^  One  of  the  tities  of  this  myrionymed  goddess  was 
"  the  universal  mother ; "  and  natur^y  so,  **  because  she  was  the  mother  of  all  living" 
{Oen,  iii.  20). 

**i  am,"  says  ISIS,  **  Nature;  parent  of  all  things,  tiie  sovereign  of  the  elements,  the 
primary  progeny  of  Time,  the  most  exalted  of  the  deities,  the  first  of  the  heavenly  gods 
and  goddesses,  the  queen  of  the  shades,  the  uniform  countenance ;  who  dispose  with  my 
rod  the  numerous  lights  of  heaven,  the  salubrious  breezes  of  the  sea,  and  the  mournful 
^ence  of  the  dead ;  whose  single  deity  the  whole  world  venerates  in  many  forms,  with 
various  rites  and  many  names.  The  Egyptians,  skilled  in  ancient  lore,  worship  me  with 
proper  ceremonies,  and  call  me  by  my  true  name.  Queen  ISIS."  ^'^ 

In  consequence,  the  **  document  Jbhovah  "  does  not  especially  concern  our  present  sub- 
ject ;  and  it  is  incomparable  with  the  grander  conception  of  the  more  ancien^  and  unknown 
writer  of  Genesis  1st.  With  extreme  felicity  of  diction  and  conciseness  of  plan,  the  latter 
lias  defined  the  most  philosophical  views  of  antiquity  upon  cosmogony  ;  in  fact  so  well,  that 
it  has  required  the  palssontological  discoveries  of  the  XlXth  century  —  at  least  2500  years 
after  his  death  —  to  overthrow  his  septenary  arrangement  of  <* Creation;"  which,  after  all, 
would  still  be  correct  enough  in  general  principles,  were  it  not  for  one  individual  oversight, 
and  one  unlucky  blunder ;  not  exposed,  however,  until  long  after  his  era,  by  post-Copemican 
astronomy.  The  oversight  is  where  he  wrote  {Gen,  i.  6 — 8):  *'  Let  there  be  RaQU;"  i.  e.,  a 
firmament;  which  proves  that  his  notions  of  **sky  "  (solid  like  the  concavity  of  a  copper  basin 
with  stars  set  as  brilliants  in  the  metal),®^  were  tiie  same  as  those  of  acQaoent  people  of  his 
time :  indeed,  of  all  men  before  the  publication  of  Nbwton's  Prine^  and  of  Laplaok's 

Digitized  by 

Google 

£i64  BIBLICAL    ETHNOGRAPHY. 

MScanique  CiUtU.  The  blandw  U  where  he  oonceiTes  that  AUR,  « light,'*  and  lOM,  ''day" 
(Oen,  L  14 — 18),  could  have  heea  phynoally  possible  three  whole  dioyt  before  the  *'  two  great 
luminaries,"  Sun  and  Moon,  were  created.  These  Tenia!  errors  deducted,  his  mijestic  song 
beautiful] J  illustrates  the  simple  process  of  ratiocination  through  which— often  without  the 
slightest  historical  proof  of  intercourse— di£ferent  <*  Types  of  Mankind,"  at  distiaet  epochae, 
and  in  countries  widely  apart,  had  arrived,  naturally,  at  cosmogonio  conclusions  similar  to 
the  doctrines  of  that  Hebraical  school  of  which  his  harmonic  and  melodious  tmrnbere  remain 
a  magnificent  memento. 

That  process  seems  to  have  been  the  following.  The  andents  knew,  as  we  do,  that  man 
if  upon  the  earth ;  and  they  were  persuaded,  as  we  are,  that  his  appearance  was  preceded 
by  unfathomable  depths  of  time.  Unable  (as  we  are  still)  to  measure  periods  antecedent 
to  man  by  any  chronological  standard,  the  ancients  rationally  reached  the  tabulation  of 
some  eyents  anterior  to  man,  through  mdueHon — a  method  not  original  with  Lord  Bacon,  be- 
cause known  to  St  Paul;  "  for  his  unseen  things  from  the  creation  of  t^e  world,  his  eternal 
power  and  godhead,  are  deariy  seen,  being  understood  by  the  ihmge  that  are  mad^*  {Rom,  L  20). 
Man,  they  felt,  could  not  have  liTcd  upon  earth  without  animal  food;  ergo,  "cattle"  preceded 
him;  together  with  birds,  reptiles,  fishes,  &c.  Nothing  liTing,  they  knew,  could  have 
existed  without  light  and  heat ;  ergo,  the  eolar  eyetem  antedated  animal  life,  no  less  than 
the  vegetation  indispensable  for  animal  support  But  terrestrial  plants  cannot  grow  wiUiout 
earth;  ergo,  dry  land  had  to  be  separated  ft^m  pre-existent  <*  waters."  Their  geological 
speculations  inclining  rather  to  the  Niptunian  than  to  the  FhUoman  theory — for  Werner 
ever  preceded  Button — the  ancients  found  it  difficult  to  ''divide  the  waters  firom  the 
waters"  without  interposing  a  metallic  substance  that  "divided  the  waters  which  were 
under  the  firmament  f^om  the  waters  that  were  above  the  firmament;"  so  they  inferred, 
logically,  that  a  firmament  must  have  been  actually  created  for  this  oliject  [E.  g.,  <*  The 
vfindowe  of  the  skies"  {Oen,  vii.  11) ;  "the  waters  abot/e  the  skies"  (Pe.  cxlviii.  4).]  Be- 
fore the  "waters"  (and  here  is  the  peculiar  orror  of  the  genesiacal  bard),  some  of  the 
ancients  claimed  the  pre-existence  of  light  (a  view  adopted  by  the  writer  of  Genesis  1st) ; 
whilst  others  asserted  that  "chaos"  prevailed.  Both  schools  united,  however,  in  the 
conviction  that  dabkmess  —  JErebut  ^^  —  anteoeded  all  other  created  things.  What,  said 
these  ancients,  can  have  existed  before  the  "darkness?"  Ens  bntium,  the  CREATOR, 
was  the  humbled  reply.  ELoHIM  is  the  Hebrew  vocal  expression  of  that  climax;  to 
djefine  whose  attributes,  save  through  the  phenomena  of  creation,  is  an  attempt  we  leave 
to  others  more  presumptuous  than  ourselves. 

"  God,"  nobly  exclaims  Be  Bretonne,  "  has  no  need  to  strike  our  ears  materially  to  make 
himself  heard,  our  eyes  to  make  himself  seen.  The  first  act  of  triumph  of  the  spirit  over 
matter  is  the  discredit  of  emblems  thai  have  disguised  the  infinite  God ;  and  the  first  step 
towards  truth  is  to  recognize  him  without  image,  after  having,  for  so  long  a  period,  modelled 
him  after  our  own."  ^^ 
What  definition  of  the  Godhead  more  sublime  than  that  in  the  Hindoo  Vedas  f  — 

"  He  who  surpasses  speech,  and  through  the  power  of  whom  speech  is  expressed, 

"  know,  0  thou !  that  He  is  Brahma,  and  not  these  perishable  things  that  man  ad<a«8. 
"  He  who  cannot  be  comprehended  by  intelligence,  and  he  alone,  say  the  sages, 

"through  the  power  of  whom  the  nature  of  intelligence  can  be  understood,  know, 

"  0  thou !  that  He  is  Brahma,  and  not  these  perishable  things  that  man  adores. 
"  He  who  cannot  be  seen  by  the  organ  of  vision,  and  through  the  power  of  whom  the 

"organ  of  seeing  sees,  know,  0  thou !  that  He  is  Bbahma,  and  not  these  perishable 

"  things  that  man  adores. 
"  He  who  cannot  be  heard  by  the  organ  of  audition,  and  through  the  power  of 

*•  whom '  the  organ  of  hearing  hears,  know,  0  thou  I  that  He  is  Brahma,  and  not 

**  these  perishable  things  that  man  adores. 
"  He  who  cannot  be  perceived  by  the  organ  of  scent,  and  through  the  power  of 

"  whom  the  organ  of  smelling  smells,  know,  0  thou !  that  He  is  Brahma,  and  not 

"  these  perishable  things  that  man  adores."  ^ 

Digitized  by 

Google 

STRUCTUEE  OP  GENESIS  I.,  II.,  AND  III. 

PhoBnioiaii,  ChaldeBim,  and  many  other  aations'  ooemogoniee  present  both  striking  re- 
semblances and  divergences.  Some  of  them  are  compared  with  OeneHt,  rerj  ably,  by 
Palfrey ;  ^  from  whom  we  borrow  these  words  of  the  Alexandrian  cosmogony  of  Diodobus 
61CUI.U8  —  "  This  is  not  nnlike  what  Euripides  says,  who  was  a  disciple  of  Anaiagoras. 
Far  this  is  his  language  in  the  Melanippe : 

*  There  was  one  wpeet  to  Ay  toA  earUi ; 
Then  the  secret  powera  doing  their  offlee 
Produced  all  things  unto  the  regions  of  light, 
Beasts,  birds,  trees,  the  seft>flo<dE, 
FinaUjf,  men  themselTes.' " 

But  ihat  which  ancient  philosophers  attained  through  the  laws  of  inductiye  reasoning,  if 
to  themselves  clear  and  satisfactory,  could  not  be  conyeyed  in  a  form  so  indefinite  to  the  in- 
teUigenoe  of  the  illiterate,  nor  to  children.  Such  undeyeloped  minds  require  dogmatieal 
tuition.  The  teachers,  so  to  say,  had  inductiyely  ascended  along  an  imaginary  ladder, 
from  vMn  as  its  basis ;  until,  having  established  some  facts  in  nature  antecedent  to  his 
terrestrial  advent,  they  reached  its  top,  when  they  recognised  that  there  must  be  a  First 
Causi  anterior  to  the  <*  beginning :"  but,  so  soon  as  these  scientific  results  were  to  be  con- 
veyed to  pupils,  the  dogmaUcal  method  became  necessalry :  wherefore  the  preceptors  re- 
▼eraed  the  order;  and,  commencing  at  the  top  of  the  supposititious  ladder,  they  taught — 
«  in  the  beginning  ELoHIM  created"  Each  rung,  as  they  came  down,  marked,  like  degrees 
on  a  scale,  the  order  in  which  previous  induction  had  established  the  relative  places  of 
events ;  and  thus  every  intellectual  nation  possessed  a  **  Genesis.'*  That  of  the  Hebrew 
Elohistio  writer  possesses  the  superior  merit  of  being  a  scientific  hymn,^^  arranged  in  true 
accordance  with  the  eeptenary  scale  of  numerical  harmonies. 

Viewed  as  a  literary  work  of  ancient  humanity's  loftiest  conception  of  Creative  Power, 
it  is  sublime  beyond  all  cosmogonies  known  in  the  world's  history.  Viewed  as  a  narra- 
tive inspired  by  the  Most  High,  its  conceits  would  be  pitiful  and  its  revelations  false ; 
because  telescopic  astronomy  has  ruined  its  celestial  structure,  physics  have  negatived  its 
cosmic  organism,  and  geology  has  stultified  the  fabulous  terrestrial  mechanism  upon  which 
its  assumptions  are  based.  How,  then,  are  its  crude  and  juvenile  hypotheses  about  Human 
Creation  to  be  received  ?  *■ 

Before  answering  this  interrogatory,  it  may  be  instructive  to  peruse  some  Fathers  of  the 
Church: 
let.  OuGBN. — "  To  what  man  of  sense,  I  beg  of  you,  could  one  make  believe,  that  the 
first,  the  second,  and  the  third  day  of  creation,  in  which  notwithstanding  an  evening 
and  a  morning  are  named,  could  have  existed  without  «Kn,  without  moon,  and  without 
ttetre  f  — ^that,  during  the  first  day,  there  was  not  even  a  eh/  !  lYho  shall  be  found  so 
idiotic  as  to  admit  that  God  delivered  himself  up  like  a  man  to  agriculture,  by  planting 
trees  in  the  garden  of  Eden  situate  towards  the  East ;  that  one  of  those  trees  was 
that  of  life,  and  that  another  could  give  the  science  of  good  and  evil  ?  No  one,  I  think, 
can  hesitate  to  regard  these  things  as  fibres,  beneath  which  mysteries  are  hidden."  ^ 
The  same  patristic  scholar  adds  elsewhere — "Were  it  necessary  to  attach  ourselves  to 
the  letter,  and  to  understand  that  which  is  written  in  the  Law  after  the  manner  of  the 
Jews  or  the  populace,  I  should  blush  (enibeeeo  dieere)  to  say  aloud  that  it  is  God  who 
has  given  us  such  laws :  I  should  find  even  more  grandeur  and  reason  in  human 
legislations;  for  example,  in  those  of  the  Athenians,  of  Romans,  or  of  Lacediemo- 
nians."«4 

2d.  Clkmeks  AlexandHnue — "For  your  Oeneeis  in  particular  was  never  the  work  of 
Moses. "^^  —  "  Horum  ergo  scripta  (Orphei  et  Hesiodi)  in  duas  partes  intelligentin 
dividuntur ;  id  est,  secundum  litteram  sunt  ig^obilis  vulgi  turba  confluxit,  ea  vero  quss 
secundum  aUegoriam  constant  omnis  philosophorum  et  eruditorum  loquacitas  admi- 
rata  est"^^  St.  Clement  applies  exactly  the  same  principles  to  Oenesie  (xxvL),  where 
he  exclaims  —  "0  divine  jesting  \    It  is  the  same  that  Heraclitus  attributes  to  Jupiter. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

566  BIBLICAL    ETHNOGRAPHY.. 

Abimelech  is  JtsoB  Christ,  our  king,  who,  Arom  the  heaveiiB  aboye,  considen  our  ^Knrta, 
oar  actions  of  grace,  oar  transports  of  joj."^^ 
Sd.  St  AuGusTiiri — **  There  is  no  way  of  preserring  the  true  sense  of  the  first  tkrm 
chapters  of  Genesis,  without  attributing  to  God  things  unworthj  of  him,  and  for 
which  one  mutt  have  recourse  to  allegory.  "^^ 
4th.  St  Jbsomi  —  who,  in  his  commentary  upon  Jeremiah,  enforces  the  allegorical 
method  —  **  SiTC  Mosbn  dicere  Tolueris  auctorem  Pentateachi,  sitc  Esdram  ejusdem 
instauratorem  operis,  non  recuse.*' ^^ 
Let  the  most  philosophic  of  many  truly-learned  Rabbis  close  the  list : — 
Maimokidbs  —  "  There  are  some  persons  to  whom  it  is  repugnant  to  perceiye  a  motlTC  in 
a  giyen  law  of  the  (dinne)  laws ;  they  love  better  to  find  no  rational  sense  in  the  com- 
mandments and  prohibitions.     That  which  leads  them  to  this,  is  a  certain  feebleness 
they  feel  in  their  souls,  but  upon  which  they  are  unable  to  reason^  and  of  which  they  know 
not  how  to  give  any  account     This  is  what  they  think.     If  the  laws  should  profit  us 
in  this  (temporal)  existence,  and  that  they  bad  been  given  to  us  for  such  or  such  a 
motive,  it  might  very  well  be  that  they  are  the  product  of  the  reflection  and  of  the 
intelligence  of  a  man  ofgeniue:  if,  on  the  contrary,  a  thing  possesses  no  comprehensible 
sense  and  that  it  produces  no  advantage  whatever,  it  emanates,  without  doubt,  fhnn 
the  Deity,  because  human  thought  could  not  lead  to  such  a  thing.    One  would  say 
that,  according  to  these  weak  minds,  man  is  greater  than  his  Creator ;  because  fR«» 
(according  to  them)  speaks  and  acts  while  aiming  at  a  certain  object ;  whereas  God, 
far  Arom  acting  sindlarly,  would  order  us,  on  the  contrary,  to  do  that  which  to  oor- 
selves  is  not  of  the  least  utility,  and  would  forbid  us  from  actions  that  cannot  cause  us 
the  slightest  damage."     (Arabic^,  *DeUdUU  el  Khdyereen;  Hebraic^,  More  Ifeboukkim; 
"  Guide  to  the  Strayers,"  ch.  xzxi. :  Munk's  Translation,  Paris,  1888.) 
They  all — L  e.,  the  Fathers  of  the  first  centuries  —  attributed  a  double  sense  to  the 
words  of  Scripture,  the  one  obrious  and  literal,  the  other  hidden  and  mystical,  which  lay 
coi\cealed  as  it  Were  under  the  outward  letter.    The  former  they  treated  with  the  utmost 
neglect;^  following  St  Paul's  authority —  *< For  the  Z<M€r  killeth,  but  the  spirit  giveth 
life."  — (2  Corinth,  iii.  6.) 

Section  Q-.  —  Cosmas-Indicopleustes. 

But,  in  the  proportion  that  Hellenic  learning  faded  in  Alexandrian 
schools,  SO  patristic  talent  and  scholarship  also  deteriorated.  That 
"  Genesis**  which,  by  the  earlier  Fathers,  had  been  ascribed  to  Ezra 
rather  than  to  Moses,  and  the  language  of  which,  to  more  refined 
Grecian  intellects,  appeared  too  contemptible  for  Divinity  unless  con- 
strued in  an  allegorical  sense,  at  length  began  to  be  accepted  verbatim 
et  litteratim  by  Christian  writers :  the  strenuousness  of  orthodoxy,  in 
any  creed,  increasing  always  in  the  ratio  that  mental  culture  declines. 
At  last,  arose  a  Monk  who,  unjustly  forgotten  by  the  Church  though 
he  be  now,  did  more  to  petrify  theological  stolidity  in  Europe,  for 
800  years,  with  respect  to  the  first  three  chapters  of  Q-enesis,  than 
any  human  being  but  himself —  CoBiiAS'Indicopletcstes. 

**  He  is,*'  says  the  learned  Mr.  Sharpe,  "  of  the  dogmatical  sohool  which  forbids  aU 
inquiry  as  heretioaL  He  fights  the  battle  which  has  been  so  often  fought  before  and  sinee, 
and  is  eTen  still  fought  so  resolutely,  the  battle  of  religious  ignorance  against  scientifio 

Digitized  by 

Google 

COSMAS-1NDICOPI4EUSTES.  567* 

Imowledge.  He  sets  the  words  of  the  Bible  against  the  results  of  science ;  he  denies  that 
the  world  is  a  sphere,  and  quotes  the  Old  Testament  against  the  pagan  philosophers,  to 
^ow  that  it  is  a  plane,  coTered  by  the  firmament  as  a  roof,  above  which  he  places  the 
Idngdom  of  heaven.  . .  .  The  arguments  employed  by  Cosmas  were  unfortunately  but  too 
often  used  by  the  Christian  world  in  general,  who  were  even  willing  to  see  learning  itself 
fyjl  with  the  overthrow  of  paganism.  All  iKnowledge  was  divided  into  sacred  and  profane, 
and  whatever  was  not  drawn  from  the  Scriptures  was  slighted  and  neglected ;  and  this  per- 
haps was  one  of  the  chief  causes  of  the  darkness  which  overspread  the  world  during  the 
middle  ages."  eei 

To  comprehend  the  force  of  these  observations  it  may  be  well  to  preface  our  description 
of  the  Topographia  Chrutiana  by  a  few  excerpts  from  Matter.«8 

The  only  Christian  Father  whose  writings  evince  the  humblest  acquaintance  with  Egyp- 
tian studies,  Clbmbns  Alexandrimu,  expressly  says,  that  the  '* Egyptians  taught  the  Greeks 
the  movement  of  the  planets  round  the  sun ;"  and,  since  1848,  Egyptology  can  proudly  add 
the  extraordinary  discoveries  of  Lepsius  in  hieroglyphical  Astronomy,  which  are  likely 
to  be  carried  to  results  little  expected,  through  Biot.^^ 

About  B.  c.  603,  Thales  had  observed  an  eclipse  of  the  sun.  He  taught  the  tpheroidity  if 
not  the  sphericity  of  the  earth ;  he  knew  the  obliquity  of  the  ecliptic ;  knew  that  the  moon 
was  illumined  by  the  sun ;  and  explained  solar  eclipses  by  the  intervention  of  the  lunar 
disc  between  the  earth  and  the  sun.  In  the  succeeding  century,  Pythagoras  sustained  the 
sphericity  of  the  earth,  and  its  movement,  with  the  planets,  round  the  sun ;  and  his  disciples 
Leucippus  and  Democritus  added  some  acquaintance  with  the  rotary  motion  of  the  earth 
upon  its  axis.  Eudoxus  advocated  similar  doctrines.  Now,  Thales,  Pythagoras,  and  Eu- 
doxus,  had  studied  under  genuine  hierogrammatists  in  Egypt 

The  grand  Stagyrite  (who  had  not  drunk  of  Nilotic  waters)  maintained  the  contrary ; 
Til.,  that  the  sun  revolved  around  the  earth.  In  vain  did  Aristarchus  strive  to  bring  science 
back  to  truer  principles.  His  voice  was  unheard  for  sixteen  centuries.  Hipparohus  deter- 
mined the  precession  of  the  equinoxes,  &c.,  during  the  2d  century  b.  c.  ;  but,  his  more  im- 
portant works  being  lost,  "^tulit  alter  honores  ;^*  because  Ptolemy,  a  far  better  geographer 
than  astronomer,  has  not  revealed  what  of  his  great  predecessor's  views  militated  against 
his  own  celestial  dogmas.  In  the  early  part  of  the  2d  century,  after  0.,  Ptolemy  had  wo- 
tallj  retrograded  from  ancient  Oreco-Egyptian  science ;  for  he  held  to  the  absolute  immo- 
bility of  the  earth,  and  made  the  sun  revolve  around  our  globe.  Denouncing  the  contrary 
system  as  too  ridiculous  to  merit  attention,  he  gives  his  own  reason  for  opposing  it,  viz.,  **  that 
one  always  sees  the  tame  half  of  the  sky  "  I  "  The  earth,"  says  Claudius  Ptolemy,  "  is  not 
only  central,  but  also  stationary.  If  it  had  an  individual  motion  (upon  its  axis)  such  move- 
ment would  be  proportioned  to  its  mass.  It  would,  therefore,  leave  behind  it  the  animals 
and  other  bodies,  which  would  be  carried  into  the  air,  —  it  would  fly  away  from  them,  and 
escape  from  the  sky  I  No  object  not  fixed  to  the  earth,  no  bird,  could  advance  to  the  east- 
ward with  the  same  rapidity  as  the  globe  "  I  Unsuspected  before  Newton,  the  laws  of  gravi- 
tation and  attraction  could  not  ease  Ptolemy's  perplexities. 

We  have  seen  that  the  older  and  wiser  Fathers  of  the  Church  (who  must  have  been  more 
or  less  read  in  the  higher  Grecian  classics),  unable  to  reconcile  tiie  Utter  of  "  Genesis"  with 
what  they  well  knew  to  be  positive  philosophy,  had  recourse,  like  Philo,  to  aUegorieal  expla- 
nations :  which  means,  simply,  that  they  disbelieved  genesiacal  stories  as  xevealed  in  the 
Septuaffint,  and  therefore  nullified  them  by  inventing  mystic  hypotheses.  They  sustained, 
however,  in  their  writings,  no  especial  theory  upon  astronomy  or  geography:  but,  that 
with  which  Clemens,  and  Origen,  and  Anatolius,  and  Synesius,  and  Theophilus,  and  even 
Cyril,  had  refrained  from  meddlingy'^as  grasped,  with  Promethean  audacity,  by  an  itine- 
rant trader  of  the  sixth  century  after  0. ;  whose  temerarious  zeal,  when  he  had  adopted 
monastic  vows,  was  exceeded  merely  by  his  delicious  stupidity;  as  we  now  proceed  to 
prove.  Cosmas,  setting  a  Greek  copy  of  **  Genesis  "  before  him,  composed,  upon  that  poor 
▼ersion's  literal  language,  his  Topographia  ChrittianaS^    Qt  Hebrew  he  had  not  an  idea. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

0<(8  BIBLIOAJL    ETHN06RAPHT. 

H6,  Coemas  aforestid,  eoMmesoes  with  a  practical  de* 
Fio.  867.  monitratioii  of  the  abrardity  of  "  Antipo^jBe,"  —  bj  dfMF> 

Sng  a  figure  like  thia  — 

He  then  acutelj  ohaerrea  :-*-**  Cum  figvra  homiiiiB  laata 
flit,  qoi  fit  ut  qoataor  iUi  aodMi  tempore  etantes  reeti  bob 
flint;  fled  qnociunque  Tortafl  ms,  qnatuor  iUi  flinuil  nnn- 
quam  Tideantur ;  qnomodo  ergo  fieri  potest  nt  Tanas  illas 
mendacesqno  hypothesee  admittamofl  7  Qaomodo  ergo  fieri 
potest  nt  eodem  tempore  plnria  in  qnatnor  illoe  dcotdat? 
Quod  ergo  nee  natnra  nee  mm*  mo$tra  admittere  potest,  id 
ear  frostra  supponitis  ?" — ''Thus,"  coatinaes  Mont£niooB, 
*'  Oosmas  here  and  throvghont  Tepogr^>hia  Christiana,  vi 
H  multi  aiu  ex  SS,  PP,  qm  nee  gfwnUUie  eeutnem,  nee  attrom^ 
mioM  obeenMtHones,  eaUAemV*^^ 

8t  Angastine  it  was  who  had  <*  teen  folks  with  an  «ye  in  the  pit  of  their  stomachs; "  so 
his  testimoDy  is  unsafe ;  but  Lactantius  had  beheld  fewer  marrels,  and  we  quote  him :  ^- 
*'  Ineptum  credere  esse  homines  quorum  Testigia  sint  snperiora  quam  capita,  aut  ibi  que 
apud  nos  jacent  inyersa  pendere,  ftruges  et  arbores  deorsum  Tersus  cresoere.  .  .  .  Hi^ut 
erroris  originem  pAtloM^Aw  f^sse  quod  existimarint  rotundum  esse  mundum." 

For  the  sake  of  contrast  with  later  patristric  orthodoxy,  let  justice  be  meted  out  to  sone 
old  rabbinical  capacities.  The  most  ancient  authors  of  the  Ouemara  were  acquainted  with 
the  spherical  form  of  the  earth;  for  they  say,  in  the  Jerusalem  Talmud,  that  Alexander 
the  Great,  going  over  the  earth  to  conquer  it,  ascertained  that  it  was  round;  and  it  is  on 
that  account  that  statuary  represents  him  with  a  globe  in  his  hand.<M  Albeit,  there  art 
Judaical  authorities  of  higher  antiquity  in  the  Zohar  —  a  book  which  probably  antedates, 
but  in  any  case  approximates  to,  the  Christian  era<^  —  whose  knowledge  of  the  more  an- 
cient systems  of  cosmogony  led  them  to  write  as  follows :  —  ''In  the  book  of  Chamnonna 
^e  Old  one  learns,  through  extended  explanations,  that  the  earth  turns  upon  itself  in  the 
form  of  a  circle ;  that  some  (people)  are  above,  and  others  below ;  that  the  aspect  of  all 
creatures  changes  according  to  the  appearance  of  each  place,  while  preserring  nererthelesfl 
the  same  position :  that  such  a  country  of  the  earth  there  is  that  is  lighted,  whilst  auck 
others  are  in  darkness ;  the  former  haye  day  when  to  others  it  is  night ;  and  there  are  some 
countries  where  it  is  constantly  day,  or,  at  least,  where  night  lasts  but  a  few  instants. "<bb 
But  such  profanity  was  unintelligible  to  Cosmas.  No  my  of  light,  from  scientific  sources, 
could  penetrate  into  a  blockhead. 

To  him,  the  habitable  earth  is  a  plane  surface,  baring  the  form  of  a  parallelogram,  of 
whiish  the  sides  are  double  in  length  to  the  top  and  bottom.  Inside  thii  oblong  square  are 
four  basins,  the  Mediterranean,  the  Caspian,  the  Red  Sea,  and  the  Pendan  Gulf.  Outade 
the  parallelogram  the  circumambient  ocean  surrounds  the  Inner  oblong-square,  and  sepa- 
rates it  from  the  outer  continents  (primitiTely  inhabited  by  Adam*s  family),  from  paradite, 
and  from  the  "  garden  of  Eden,"  which  are  situate  upon  a  mountain  at  the  East  Here 
dwelt  our  first  parents,  until  the  ark  of  Noah,  duriog  the  deluge,  ferried  them  oyer  to  the 
inner  continent  where  we  ourselyes  reside  unto  this  day.  Cosmas  ignored  whatever  he 
could  not  find  in  the  Bible;  and,  wiser  than  our  modem  theologers,  this  modest  pattern  for 
prurient  orthodoxy  never  discovered  Chma,  Northern  Europe^  Central  Africa^  America,  Polfh 
nesiOf  or  Australia,  in  the  canonical  Scriptures.  Let  his  map,  and  his  own  perspicuous 
language,  explain  true  Mosaic  cosmology.  He  begins  with  the  exact  Greek  letter  of 
Oeneeie  L  1:  but  his  editor  kindly  furnishes  the  Vulgate: — "Scriptum  est  In  pbinoivio 
rsciT  Dbus  colum  bt  tb&ram.    Primum  itaque  ccelum  fomicatum."^"^ 

[N.  B.  My  own  tracing  (made  at  the  British  Museum,  in  1848,  for  personal  remem- 
brance) being  too  rough,  we  are  indebted  to  the  accomplished  Mrs.  Luke  Burke  for  the 
fae^mile  transcript,  of  which  the  above  is  a  copy ;  reduced  slightly  more  than  one  halil 
Typographical  exigenda  compel  us  also  to  transfer  Cosmas's  explanations  fr^m  the  mep 

Digitized  by 

Google 

COSMAS-INDICOPLEUSTES. 
Co8MA8'8  Map.  —  Pio.  868.  —  "  I.   T  A  B  U  L  A.*' 

569 

Digitized  by 

Google 

570  BIBLICAL    ETHNOGRAPHY. 

itself  into  our  text  j  but  the  letters  A,  B.  C.  &c.,  indioate  the  place  of  each.  As  the  work 
of  Cosmas  is  exoeedinglj  rare,  we  hope  theological  students  will  appreciate  the  pains  tak^ 
to  furnish  theln  with  so  clear  an  illustration  of  what  they  still  call  «  Mosaic"  cosmowmv 
—  G.  R.G.]  ^    ^' 

CosxAs's  Gbsik  Explahatiohs. 
A  — Adulis  city  {Abymnia), 

B — the  road  from  Adulis  to  the  East 

Ethiopians  trayelling.    • 
C  — Ptolemy's  chair. 
D  —  Firmament. 

E  ^  Waters  which  are  aboye  the  Firma- 

F  /      ment 

G  ^  Columns  (to   support  the  Firma- 

H  j       ment). 

I  —  inhabited  earth. 

J  —  land  beyond  the  Ocean,  where  men 

dwelt  before  the  Deluge. 
K-^land  beyond  the  Ocean. 
L  —  Caspian  Sea. 
M —  Riyer  Phison.. 

N — 4  Points  of  the  compass. 

0  —  Mediterranean  Sea. 

P  — Arabian  Gulf:  ^ 

0  — Tigris. 

R — Euphrates. 

S  —  Riyer  Gihon. 

T  —  land  beyond  the  Ocean. 

U  —  the  Sun  Occident 

V— the  Sun  Orient 

X «—  the  Sun  Occident 

T  — the  Sun  Orient 

Z  —  is  Cosmas's  picture  of  the  Almighty 

looking  down,  and  seeing  that  <<  it 

was  good." 

In  the  IVth  book  of  "  Topographia  Christiana,"  the  pious  Cosmas  describes  his  hydro- 
graphic  and  ecclesiastical  principles ;  but,  rich  as  they  are,  his  argumentation  is  too  prolix 
for  our  purposes,  which  are  served  by  translating  Montfaucon's  synopsis  of  his  author's 
elucidation  of  Plate  I. 

"  Fig.  1.  In  the  first  figure,  the  city  Adouli  or  Adulit  [in  Abyssinia]  (for  it  is  so  called 
in  both  ways  by  Cosmas)  is  shown.  Axumit,  which  is  two  miles  distant  from  the  Red 
Sea,  is  situated  to  the  East ;  for  which  reason  an  Ethiopian  is  represented,  in  his  Ethio- 
pian costume,  taking  the  Axumis  road  to  Adulis.  Then  Ptolemy's  chair  is  delineated 
in  the  form  it  is  said  to  haye  had  by  Cosmas.  That  [part  of  the  chair]  however,  sculp- 
tured all  over  in  characters,  had  only  the  last  portion  of  the  inscription  added.  But 
the  inscription  on  the  stone  tablet  placed  opposite  was  finished — a  fragment  of  which 
from  the  lower  part  together  with  its  characters  or  letters  had  been  destroyed.  Above 
the  stone  tablet  king  Ptolemy  Eybroetes  himself  is  represented  in  his  military  atttre 
as  he  appears  in  the  picture.  These  things  you  will  find  more  fully  explained  in  page 
140  and  the  following. 
"  Fig,  2.  In  the  second  figure  the  shape  of  heaven  and  earth  is  delineated  according  to 
the  opinion  of  Cosmas  and  the  old  Fathers,  who  thought  the  earth,  as  it  were,  9k  flat 
surface^  extending  beneath  and  inclosed  by  walU  on  all  sides ;  and  that  these  walls  were 
raised  to  an  immense  height,  and  finally  arranged  themselves  into  the  form  of  a  vault* 
while  tlie  firmament  pervaded  the  higher  part  of  the  vault  so  that  it  (beatorum  sedes) 
might  be  the  seat  of  the  Blest    [The  same  idea  (*  firmament,'  Hebraic^  SEAKIM 

KAZKIM  —  literally,  iolid  tkiea)  occurs  in  Job  xxxvii.  18.    Thus  Cahen  renders 

'As-tu  ^tendu  avec  lui  les  an<r,  toUdet  comme  un  miroir  m^tallique?'  And  Noyes 

— —  *Oaiust  thoa  like  bJm  spread  out  the  iky 
Whiofa  iBjIrm  like  a  molten  mirror?  *  700 

But,  under  the  firmament,  they  thought  the  sun,  moon,  and  stars,  were  put  in  mo- 
tion ;  and  that  a  conical  mountain  of  wondrous  height  rose  up  in  the  northern  parts  of  the 
earth;  and  while  the  sun,  performing  his  circuit  round  the  earth,  stood  behind  this 
mountain,  there  was  night  to  those  inhabiting  the  earth ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  it 
was  day  when  the  sun  shone  upon  us  on  the  reverse  [i.  e.,  on  our  side]  of  the  moun- 
tain :  and,  in  a  similar  way  Cosmas  reasons  with  respect  to  the  moon  and  stars ;  see 
page  186  and  the  following. 
**  Fig,  8.  Exhibits  a  prospective  view  of  the  universe ;  that  is  to  say,  of  the  heavens 

Digitized  by 

Google 

COSMAS-INDICOPLEUSTES.  571 

and  the  eftrth  in  the  part  where  they  are  more  closely  drawn  together;  for  Cosmas 
thought  the  earth  was  square  and  oblongt  and  the  same  is  assumed  with  respect  to  the 
heavens.     See  page  186  and  following. 
**Fig.  4.    Represents  a  conical  mountain,  and  the  earth,  together  with  the  sun  and 
moon,  vnder  the  firmament     But  on  the  sides  [Job  ix.  6  —  dMUDIH — *  Pillan  (of  the 
earth)* ;  Joh  xxvi.  11 — ^piUart  of  the  skies']  are  represented  the  pillan  of  heaven, 
with  an  inscription  [in  Oreek!'}  upon  the  plan  here  presented — o/ f^X«c  rod  o6pavov  — 
the  eobinmt  of  the  sky;  which  columns,  according  to  the  opinion  of  Cosmas,  I  think  to 
be  those  walls  which  arise  on  the  sides  Arom  the  earth  up  to  the  heavens  {Psalm$ 
cxlviiL  4 — *  Ye  watb&s  that  be  abcve  the  skies*). 
<*  Fiff,  5.    The  outline  of  the  earth  and  its  Uvoypa^tav  are  traced  out    You  may  observe 
that  Cosmas  coigectured  that  the  immensely-high  conical  mountain  presented  an  obsta- 
cle where  our  earth  could  not,  at  the  northern  part,  be  so  well  inclosed  by  a  right  line ; 
because  its  foundations  on  that  side  are  roundf  aa  if  they  proceeded  ft^m  a  great  pro- 
montory in  the  ocean. 
"  Fiff,  6.    Displays  the  rugged  plain  of  the  earth,  such  as  Cosmas  explains  in  many 
places ;  for  he  thought,  as  we  have  said  before,  that  the  earth  was  oblong,  and  its 
length  twice  as  long  as  its  breadth,  and  that  an  ocean  surrounded  the  entire  earth,  as  la 
here  represented.    But,  beyond  the  ocean,  there  was  yet  another  land  adhering  closely, 
on  all  sides,  to  the  walls  of  heaven.     Upon  the  eastern  side  of  this  transmarine  land  he 
judges  that  haic  was  created  ;  and  that  there  the  paradise  of  gladness  was  located, 
such  as  here,  on  the  eastern  edge,  is  described :  where  it  received  our  first  parents, 
driven  out  of  paradise  to  that  extreme  point  of  land  on  the  sea-shore.    Hence,  upon 
the  coming  of  the  deluge,  Noah  with  his  sons  was  borne  by  the  ark  to  this  earth  we 
now  inhabit     The  four  rivers,  he  supposes,  to  be  gushing  up  the  spouts  in  paradise ; 
with  subterranean  channels  through  the  ocean,  to  our  earth,  and  in  certain  places  that 
they  gush  out  anew.     He  considers  that  the  Hyrcanian  Sea  [Caspian]  is  joined  to  the 
ocean ;  which  we  have  elsewhere  shown  was  the  opinion  of  certain  ancients. 
**  Fig  7.    He  briefly  dispatches  the  whole  machinery  of  the  world,  which,  as  the  an- 
cients thought,  was  composed  of  the  sky  and  the  earth.    Its  form  he  represents,  with 
the  conical  mountain  above  alluded  to.    But  Cosmas-iEgypticus  deemed  that  the  earth 
which  we  inhabit  was  always- inclining  firom  the  north  to' the  south.    Albeit  Cosmas 
contradicts  himself.    How  can  such  a  mass  as  that  of  heaven  and  earth  stand,  sup- 
ported by  nothing,  since  it  is  always  pressed  downward  ?    He  answers  —  the  earth, 
inasmuch  as  It  is  ponderous  matter  by  nature,  seeks  the  bottom ;  but  the  igneous  parts 
tend  upward ;  therefore,  when  sky  and  earth  are  thus  joined  and  cannot  be  tern  asun- 
der, the  one  pressing  from  above  and  the  other  firom  below,  neither  yielding  to  the 
other,  the  whole  machine  remains  immovable  and  suspended,     [*  This  is  a  grand  argu- 
ment,*  says^  Mr.  Burke,  commenting  in  a  private  letter,  *  and  beats  the  Newtonian 
theory  out  and  out!    Only  fancy;  two  forces  shut  up  in  a  box,, one  pulling  up,  and 
the  other  pulling  down,  and  the  box,  in  consequence,  remaining  <  immota  et  suspensa  I ' 
This  is,  beyond  exception,  the  brightest  mechanical  idea  I  have  ever  come  across*]. 
<<  Fig,  8.    He  represents  the  conical  mountain  on  that  side  which  is  turned  adversely  to 
the  earth ;  where,  when  the  sun  arrives,  night  is  produced  to  the  earth's  inhabitants. 
In  the  same  place  the  revolutions  of  the  tun  are  indicated  by  lines  [upon  the  conical 
mountain] ;  whereby  the  various  seasons  of  the  year  are  caused.    When,  therefore,  the 
sun  arrives  at  the  lower  line,  the  nights  then  are  longer,  and  it  makes  vHnter,  rp^nf,  or 
revolution :  the  sun  performing  the  major  portion  of  his  course  behind  the  mountain. 
When,  however,  the  sun  comes  to  the  middle  line  of  the  mountain,  then  the  equinox  ia 
produced;  the  sun  in  performing  his  course  having  reached  the  equinoctial  line 
When,  finally,  the  sun  touches  the  uppermost  line,  then  the  summer  revolution  takes 
place,  and  he  attains  to  the  tropic.     This  is  in  conformity  with  the  opinion  of  Cosmas, 
who  describes  the  revolutions  of  the  sun  in  these  words — r^ty'^i  ^>  ff^eat  night;  fit^ 
vif,  middle  night;  fUKpdi  wi  little  night;  as  you  behold  in  the  picture.** 

Digitized  by 

Google 

572  BIBLICAL  ETHNOGRAPHY. 

Tbrouf^  tlie  above  parody  upon  nature,  Gosmas  expUuned  all  celestial  phenomena — 
tbe  coarse  of  the  moon,  its  phases  and  eclipses,  as  well  as  the  sun's  rotation  round  the 
earth's  flat  plain.  The  Topographia  Chrittiana  became  the  text-book  of  ecclesiastical  ortho- 
doxy, for  aboTe  800  years,  down  to  Galileo ;  and  Cosmas's  caricature  on  the  one  hand, 
coupled  with  ignorance  of  the  Hebrew  text  of  Joshua  (x.  12-14)  on  the  other,  induced  the 
murder  of  Giordano  Bruno. 

NcTertheless,  according  to  the  literal  language  of  the  first  IX  ch^>ter8  of  **  Genesis," 
Cosmas  was  not  Hr  from  Uie  truth.  Were  the  ancient  writers  of  those  chapters  to  arise 
ftrom  the  graye,  and  were  they  respectfully  requested  to  indicate  which  commentary  best 
represented  their  meaning  —  that  of  the  Topographia  Chrittiana;  or  those  recent  attempts 
•<  to  make  Moses  sound  in  the  faith  of  the  geological  section  of  the  British  Assodadon  for 
the  Advancement  of  Science  '*  '^i  — >they  woi:dd  unanimously  claim  the  former  as  their  own. 

Happy  middle-ages ;  when  Europe  made  up  in  credulity  what  it  lacked  in  intelligence ! 
«  They  had  neither  looked  into  heaven,  nor  earth ;  neither  into  the  sea^  nor  the  land,  as 
has  been  done  since.  They  had  philosophy  without  scale,  astronomy  without  demonstra- 
tion. They  made  war  without  powder,  shot,  cannon,  or  mortars ;  nay,  the  mob  made  bon- 
fires without  squibs  or  crackers.  They  went  to  sea  without  compass,  and  sailed  lacking 
chronometers.  They  viewed  the  stars  without  telescopes,  and  measured  altitudes  without 
barometers.  Learning  had  no  printing-press,  writing  no  paper,  paper  no  ink ;  magnetism 
no  telegraph,  iron  no  rails,  steam  no  boilers.  The  lover  was  forced  to  send  his  mistress  a 
deal-board  for  a  love-letter,  and  a  billet-doux  might  be  of  the  size  of  a  trencher.  They  were 
clothed  without  manufactures,  and  the  richest  robes  were  the  skins  of  formidable  monsters. 
They  carried  on  trade  wiUiout  books,  and  correspondence  without  postage :  their  merchants 
kept  no  ledgers ;  their  shopkeepers  no  cash-books.  They  had  surgery  without  anatomy, 
physicians  without  materia-medica ;  who  gave  emetics  without  ipecacuanha,  and  cured 
agues  without  quinine.  They  dispensed- with  luoifer-matches,  coffee,  sugar,  tea,  and  to> 
baoco*'  "^ —  and,  never  having  heard  of  the  first  three  chapters  of  **  Genesis,"  they  believed 
in  Topographia  Chrittiana  ! 

The  book  is  scarcely  known,  now-a-days,  to  theologers ;  but  its  commentary  (orally  trans- 
mitted from  father  to  son)  survives  all  around  us.  We  have  conceived  it  our  duty  not  to 
let  the  one  continue  without  the  other ;  and  therefore  have  rescued  from  further  oblivioa 
the  Mosaic  chart  of  Cosmaa. 

Section  ff. — Antiquity  of  the  name  "ADaM." 

After  what  has  been  already  set  forth,  there  seems  scarcely  reason 
to  answer  an  interrogatory,  above  propounded,  relative  to  "  human 
creation"  as  narrated  in  Q-enests.  Archseological  criticism  might 
finally  rest  upon  one  Hebrew  word ;  viz.  AJDaM. 

The  philological  law  of  triliteralt,  in  Semitic  tongues,  has  been  touched  upon  during  pre- 
vious examinations  of  Xth  Genesis.  *'Non  omnia  possumos"  —  aiid  the  authors  must 
reiterate  that,  in  order  to  keep  within  one  volume,  they  have  been  forced  to  expurgate 
redundancies,  often,  they  fear,  at  the  sacrifice  of  perspicuity.  In  lieu  of  extracts  from  the 
pages  of  Land,  Meyer,  Gesenius,  Neumann,  Ewald,  Wilhelm  von  Humboldt,  Prichard, 
Bunseit, — m  addition  to  those  previously  drawn  from  Rawlinson,  Be  Saulcy,  &c.  —  all  cor- 
roborating our  correctness,  we  must  substitute  reference*  to  their  authoritative  works. 

The  reader  will  observe,  notwithstanding,  that  the  bisyllable  ADM  cannot  be  a  primitive 
but  must  be  a  secondary  formation,  according  to  the  progressive  scale  of  linguistic  develop- 
ment. To  reach  the  primary  root,  or  monosyllable,  within  this  triliteral  word  contained, 
an  affiz^  a  suffix^  or  a  m^cftaMetter,  must  be  first  removed.  Among  Hebraists  of  the  highest 
modern  school,  on  the  European  continent,  the  fact  that  *<Adam"  is  a  dissyllabic  name  alone 

Digitized  by 

Google 

ANTIQUITY    OP    THE    NAME    ADAM.  578 

suffices  to  proTe  tliat  its  possessor  appeared  on  earth  thousands  of  years  snhseqnentlj  to 
the  primordial  ages  of  homanity ;  because  m  prineipio  man  articulated  but  monogyUabUt. 
Or  else  (what  is  the  same  thing  in  result,  no  less  than  more  positiye)  the  Isradite  who 
(in  some  form  of  eom-letter)  wrote  tbe  word  ADM,  of  Oenetii,  liyed  at  a  i^dogieal  epoch 
when  the  pristine  monotyllabUt  had  already  (organically  through  deyelopment)  merged  into 
words  of  two  syllables ;  and  therefore,  that  writer  committed  an  egregious  anachronism 
when  he  retro-leptically  ascribed  a  iriliieral  proper-name,  or  r*ther  noun,  to  his  first  human 
progenitor. 

The  word  ADM,  or  with  an  additional  Towel,  ADaM,  is  consequently  to  be  diyided  into 
two  separate  words,  A  and  DaM ;  or  A-DaM.  Now,  A,  aleph,  is  the  primeyal,  Semitic, 
masculine  article  A=s**  the"  : ^^  an  article  that,  in  Scripture,  is  preized  to  aboye  forty 
masculine  substantiyes ;  although,  until  recently,  the  fact  was  unperoeiyed  by  Hebrew 
grammarians,  or  Jewish  lexicographers. 

In  the  next  place,  the  word  ADkM  does  not  proceed,  as  the  Rabbis  suppose,  fh>m 
ADaMaH  {Qem,  iL  7) — a  bttyUabU  from  a  trisyllable  ! — but  the  latt^  is  an  extension  of  the 
former  root,  DaM  (Arabic^,  Dem),  meaning  blood;  the  color  of  which,  being  red,  originated 
the  secondary  signification  of  DaM,  as  **  red ;  "  and  <*  to  be  red." 

Consequently,  A,  the  letter  **alqjh,"  beiug  the  masculine  article  the;  and  the  noun  DaM 
meaning  blood,  or  **  red,"  we  haye  only  to  unite  these  two  words  into  A-DaM,  to  read  the- 
blood,  or  THS-&SD,  in  **  Genesis ;"  which  duplex  substantiye,  applied  to  man,  naturally  sig- 
nifies **  the-redr-mwa ; "  and,  when  applied  to  the  ground,  ADaMaH  ("  out  of  the  dust "  of 
which  this  the-red^mtm,  ADaM,  was  moulded),  it  means  the-^ed-earik :  i,  e,,  that  mbesceDt 
soil  out  of  which  the  Jehoyistic  writer  of  Genesis  lid  imagined  Hebrew  man  to  haye  been 
fashioned  by  Creatiye  artisanship.  The  BeNi-ADaM  also,  in  Psalms  (xlix.  2.  Comp.  Fe, 
IxH.  9:  and  contrast  irith  BeNoT^HaADaM,  Om,  yi.  2),  are  reputed  to  heptUriciant  of  t^e 
pi^  Abrahamic  stock ;  whereas  the  plebeians  (including  all  those  who  are,  like  Anglo- 
Saxons,  mere  GOIM,  OentUee)  belong  altogether  to  a  different  and  lower  leyel ...  in  the 
eye  of  leHOuaH. 

We  adopt  entirely  the  Italian  rendering  of  the  great  interpreter  of  Sacred  Philology  at 
the  Vatican ;  and  think,  with  Lanci,  that  U^omeante,  **  the-Blusher,"  is  the  happiest  trans- 
lation of  the  old  Semitic  particle  and  noun  A-DaM. 

How  does  this  interpretation  bear  upon  ethnography? 

Reader !  simply  thus.  As  no  '*  Type  of  Mankind  **  but  the  white  race  can  be  said  (phy- 
siologically) to  blush  ;  it  follows,  that,  according  to  the  conception  of  the  writers  of  Genesis 
(who  were  Jews  and  of  the  <*  white  race  "),  not  only  did  the  first  human  pair  conyerse  be- 
tween tbemselyes,  no  less  than  with  God  and  with  the  serpent,  in  pure  ffebrew,  but  they 
were  essentially  A-DaMt^e»  (r^-man  and  woman)  **  blushers :  "  —  and  therefore,  these  He- 
brew writers,  neyer  supposed  that  A-DaM  and  ISE  (yulgaric^,  Adam  and  Eye)  could  haye 
been  of  any  stock  than  of  the  white  type— in  short,  Hebrews,  Abrahamidce,  like  tbemselyes 
—  these  writers  aforesaid. 

Thus,  through  a  few  cuts  of  an  archeological  scalpel,  yanishes  the  last  illusion  that  any 
bnt  while  **  Types  of  Mankind  "  are  to  be  found  in  the  first  three  chapters  of  the  book  called 
"  Genesis." 

The  **  Chinesf  "  hariog  been  carefully  remoyed  further  on  from  connection  with  the  Me- 
sopotamian  SINIM  of  Isaiah  (xlix.  12),  nothing  remains  but  to  refer  the  reader  to  the  map 
[supra,  p,  552]  we  haye  giyen  of  Xth  Genesis  for  the  whole  of  Ethnography  comprehended 
by  the  writers  of  the  Old  Testameut :  Strabo,  who  followed  Eratosthenes  about  b.  o.  15, 
furnishing'  eyery  possible  information  upon  what  of  geography  was  attainable,  in  the  first 
eentury  after  o.,  by  the  writers  of  the  New. 

The  present  authors  haye  asserted  these  results  before. 

% 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC 

574  BIBLICAL    ETHNOGRAPHT. 

**  That  part  of  the  map  colored  deep-red  includes  all  the  world  known  to  the  inspired 
writers  of  the  Old  Testament ;  and  this,  with  the  part  colored  pale-red,  includes  all  known 
to  St  Paul  and  the  EyangeUsts.  —  As  we  haye  no  evidence  that  their  inspiration  extended 
to  matters  of  science,  and  we  know  that  they  were  ignorant  of  Astronomy,  Geology,  Natural 
History,  Geography,  &c.  —  what  eyidenoe  is  there  that  they  knew  anything  of  the  INHA- 
BITANTS of  countries  unknown  to  them,  yix. :  Americans,  Chinese,  Hindoos,  Australians, 
Polynesians,  and  other  contemporary  races?"  —  (J.  C.  N.:  Bibl.  and  Phyt.  HitL  of  Man; 
New  York,  1849;  «Map''  and  pp.  54-67.) 

<'  These  unhistorical  oriffinet  of  nations  are  now  adyerted  to,  as  a  prelude  to  the  diseusmmi 
of  the  Xth  chapter  of  Genesis  (see  Ethnologieal  Journal,  No.  VI.,  note,  page  254),  whareby 
it  will  be  demonstrated  that,  under  ihe  pertonifieationt  of  **  Shem,  Ham,  and  Japheth,"  their 
fifteen  tant,  and  seyenty-one  ffrand-children,  the  Hebrew  geographers,  whose  ken  of  the 
earth's  superficies  was  eyen  more  limited  than  that  of  Eratosthenes,  about  b.  c.  240,  haTe 
neyer  alluded  to,  nor  intended,  Mongolian,  Malayan,  Polynesian,  American,  or  Nigritiaa 
races.''— (G.  B.  G.:  OHa ^gypHaea ;  London,  1849:  p.  124,  "note.") 

Five  years  have  since  elapsed.  Most  of  the  conclusions  advanced 
by  the  authors  have  been  challenged.  Whether  those  conclusions 
were  based,  or  not,  upon  thorough  investigation  of  each  department 
of  the  subject,  the  reader  of  the  present  volume  is  now  best  qualified 
to  decide. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

PART    III. 

Supplement. 
BY    GEO.    K.    GLIDDON. 

ESSAY  I. 

ARCaffiOLOGICAL  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  Xth  CHAPTER  OF  GENESIS. 
^  Scriptura  primimi  Intelligi  debet  grammitHoft  anteqnam  potsit  ezplkari  theologkd.* 

(LUTUUU) 

"The  Xth  Chapter  op  Genesis  —  Archaeological  Introduction  to 
its  Study''  —  is  the  heading  given,  in  our  "Prospectus,"  to  Part  lEL 
of  this  work. 

To  the  generality  of  readers,  educated  under  conyictions  that  erery  process  calculated 
to  probe  the  historical  eyidences  of  the  Hebrew  Scriptnres  has  heretofore  been  rigorously 
applied  to  them,  an  Introduction  termed  '<  archaBological "  may  seem,  to  say  the  least,  super- 
fluous at  the  present  day — while  to  not  a  few  persons,  the  proposed  method  of  examina- 
tion may,  at  first  sight,  eren  wear  the  aspect  of  presumptuousness.  Nevertheless,  haying 
announced  the  intention,  it  behooyes  us  to  justify  it. 

In  common  with  other  Protestants,  since  our  earliest  childhood,  we  have  been  assured 
that  the  Bible  is  the  word  of  Qod — and  that  the  inspiration  of  the  writers  of  both  Old  and 
New  Testaments  rests  upon  testimony  the  most  irrefragable.  We  have  also  been  admonished 
in  the  language  of  the  Apostle  (1)  to  **  search  the  Scriptures  ;*'  coupled  with  the  corrobora- 
tiye  ezhortaUon,  (2)  *<  seek,  and  ye  will  find ;  knock,  and  it  will  be  opened  unto  you." 

Thus,  on  the  one  hand,  asseverations  the  most  positive  fortify  the  inquirer  who  conscien- 
tiously examines  whether  the  divine  revelation  of  the  Bible  and  the  inspiration  of  its  penmen 
are  **  built  upon  a  rock;''  at  the  same  time  that,  on  the  other,  the  Gospels  themselves  invite 
him  to  search,  seek,  and  scrutinise. 

Supported  by  such  authority,  no  legitimate  objection  can  be  sustained,  by  Protestants, 
against  the  employment  of  what  we  conceive  to  be  the  only  method  through  which  the  his- 
torical validity  of  a  given  proposition  can  be  thoroughly  tested ;  nor  will  logical  orthodoxy 
contest  Yater's  axiom — **Faith  in  Christ  can  set  no  limits  to  critical  inquiries ;  otherwise  he 
would  kinder  the  knowledge  of  TVuM." 

(1)  The  good  Tidingi  aoeording  to  John  t.  39. 

(2)  Tk9  good  Tidings  according  to  Matthkw,  tU.  7;  copied  in  The  good  Tidings  according  to  Luu^  zi.  9.    We      | 
fi>Uow  Sbakpb:  The  Neio  Tatament,  tramlated  frota  Cfriesbcuh's  Tvet;  wherein  "will"  ii  sobetitated  for  the 
^shall"  of  king  James's  yenkm. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 

576  ARCHiBOLOGICAL    INTRODUCTION 

EomOf  aooording  to  Baoon,  natures  minuUr  et  interpre$,  taatum  facU  H  mielkffit  quantum  de 
naturtt  ordine  re  vel  mmte  observaverit ;  nee  ampliue  ecU^  out  poUtL  A  finite  being,  drooB- 
seribed  within  the  inteUeetual  horizon  of  the  mundane  age  in  which  each  indiyidoal  Uitn, 
man  can  reason  merely  upon  phenomena.  Quiegvid  enim,  wrote  the  immortal  Newton,  ez 
phenomenie  non  dedueUur  hypothme  voeanda  eat;  et  hypoihetu  vel  metaphytiece,  velpkyeieee,  vel 
qualUatum  oeeuUarum  teu  meektmiUBf  in  philoeophia  loeum  nm  habent. 

What  is  PhUoecpky  f  Etymologically,  the  **  love  of  wisdom,"  and  paraphrastioally,  the 
« loTe  of  knowledge ;"  multiform  are  the  significations  through  which  this  sublime  Greek 
word  has  trayelled.  From  the  ablest  English  historian  (8)  of  its  phases,  we  extract  such 
paragraphs  as  will  conTej  to  the  reader  our  individual  perceptions  of  its  import  at  this 
day. 

«  We  shall  find  some  obscurities  cleared  up,  if  we  can  master  an  accurate  and  compre- 
hensive definition  of  Philosophy.     The  definition  I  have  finally  settled  upon  is  this : — 

**  PkUoeophy  it  the  expUmation  of  the  Phenomena  of  the  Vnweree.  By  the  term  explanation, 
the  subject  is  restricted  to  the  domain  of  the  intellect,  and  is  thereby  demarcated  f^om 
reUglon,  th9ugh  not  firom  theology. 

<*  Philosophy  is  inherent  in  man's  nature.  It  is  not  a  caprice,  it  is  not  a  plaything,  it  is 
a  necessity ;  for  our  life  is  a  mystery,  surrounded  by  mysteries :  we  are  encompassed  by 
wonder.  The  myriad  aspects  of  Nature  without^  the  strange  fluctuations  of  feeline  tnthm^ 
all  demand  from  us  an  explanation.  Standing  upon  this  ball  of  earth,  so  infinite  to  tu, 
so  trivial  in  the  infinitude  of  the  universe,  we  look  forth  into  nature  with  reverent  awe, 
with  irrepressible  curiosity.  We  must  have  explanations.  And  thus  it  is  that  Philosophy, 
in  some  rude  shape,  is  a  visible  effort  in  every  condition  of  man — in  the  rudest  phase  of 
half-developed  capacity,  as  in  the  highest  conditions  of  culture:  it  is  found  among  the 
sugar-canes  of  the  West  Indies,  and  in  the  tangled  pathless  forest  of  America.  Take  man 
where  you  will— hunting  the  buffalo  on  the  prairies,  or  immovable  in  meditation  on  the  hot 
banks  of  the  Ganges,  priest  or  peasant,  soldier  or  studeot,  man  never  escapes  from  the 
pressure  of  the  burden  of  that  mystery  which  forces  him  to  seek,  and  readily  to  accept, 
some  explanation  of  it  The  savage,  startled  by  the  muttering  of  distant  Uiunder,  asks, 
*■  What  is  that  V  and  is  restless  till  he  knows,  or  fancies  he  knows.  If  told  it  is  the  voice 
of  a  restless  demon,  that  is  enough ;  the  explanation  is  given.  If  he  then  be  told  that,  to 
propitiate  the  demon,  the  sacrifice  of  some  human  being  is  necessary,  hiis  slave,  his  enemy, 
his  friend,  perhaps  even  his  child,  falls  a  victim  to  the  credulous  terror.  The  childhood  of 
man  enables  us  to  retrace  [archsBologically]  the  infancy  of  nations.  No  one  can  live  witii 
children  without  being  struck  by  their  restless  questioning,  and  unquenchable  desire  to 
have  everything  explained;  no  less  than  by  the  fkciHty  with  which  every  authoritative 
assertion  is  accepted  as  an  explanation.  The  History  of  PfailosDphy  is  the  study  of  man's 
successive  attempts  to  explain  the  phenomena  around  and  within  him. 

**  The  first  explanations  were  naturally  enough  drawn  from  analogies,  afforded  by  con- 
sciousness. Men  saw  around  them  activity,  change,  force ;  they  felt  within  them  a  myste- 
rious power,  which  made  them  active,  changing,  potent :  they  explained  what  they  saw,  by 
what  they  felt  Hence  the  fetichism  of  barbarians,  the  mythologies  of  more  advanced 
races.  Oreads  and  nymphs,  demons  and  beneficent  powers,  moved  among  the  ceaseless 
activities  of  Nature.  Man  knows  that  in  his  anger  he  storms,  shouts,  destroys.  What, 
then,  is  thunder  but  the  anger  of  some  invisible  being?  Bloreover,  man  knows  that  a 
pretent  will  assuage  his  anger  against  an  enemy,  and  it  is  but  natural  that  he  should 
believe  the  offended  thunderer  will  also  be  appeased  by  some  offering.  As  soon  as  another 
conception  of  the  nature  of  thunder  has  been  elaborated  by  observation  and  the  study  of 
its  phenomena,  the  supposed  Deity  vanishes,  and,  with  it,  all  the  false  conceptions  it  origi- 
nated, till,  at  last,  Science  takes  a  rod,  and  draws  the  terrible  lightning  fh>m  ^e  heavens, 
rendering  it  so  harmless  that  it  will  not  tear  away  a  spider's  web ! 

'*  But  long  centuries  of  patient  observation  and  impatient  guessing,  controUed  by  logic, 
were  necessary,  before  such  changes  could  take  place.  The  development  of  Philosophy, 
like  the  development  of  organic  life,  has  been  through  the  slow  additions  of  thousands  upon 
thousands  of  years ;  for  humanity  is  a  growth,  as  our  globe  is,  and  the  laws  of  its  growth 
are  still  to  be  discovered.  .  .  .  One  of  the  great  fundamental  laws  has  been  discovered  by 
Auguste  Comte  —  vis :   the  law  of  mental  EvohUion  .  .  .  which  he  has  not  only  discovered, 

i^)Q,U.\AV^nax  BioffrofhkalHittarvttfFhikmnph^  The  snbitsiioo  of  our  rwnarks  maj  be 

IbuDd  in  vol.  iv.  pp.  245-282,  under  the  heeding  of  Aaansn  OoMn,  **  the  Bacon  of  the  nineteenth  century ,"  aul 
author  of  Oaur$  de  PhiUmphie  PotiUvt.  The  original  eource  of  this  abetraet  may  be  found  in  Comtb,  toL  U 
edit  Panfi,  ASao.  *< ExpofdUon,"  pp.  3-5,  63,  Ac.;  but  we  take  Mr.  Liwn'a  later  definitions  fh>m  The  Leader; 
London,  1852;  April  17,  24,  and  May  1.  A  profound  thinker  haa  reoently  done  full  honor  to  Mr.  LcwnPS 
work.    (Vide  McCuixob:  CredibOU^  if  the  Seripturu;  Baltimore^  1862,  toL  IL  pp.  454-458.} 

Digitized  by 

Google 

TO    THE    THE    Xth    CHAPTER    OP   GENESIS.  577 

bot  applied  historieftUj.  . .  .  This  law  may  be  thus  stated :  <*  ETery  branch  of  knowledge 
passes  suocoMively  through  three  stages :  1st,  the  tupemaiurai,  or  fictitious ;  2d,  the  netO' 
physical,  or  abstract ;  Sd,  the  positive^  or  scientific.  The  first  is  the  necessary  point  of  de- 
parture taken  by  human  intelligence ;  the  second  is  merely  a  stage  of  transition  from  the 
supernatural  to  the  positive ;  and  the  third  is  the  fixed  and  definite  condition  in  which 
knowledge  is  alone  capable  of  progressiTe  deyelopment 

<*  In  the  attempt  made  by  man  to  explain  the  varied  phenomena  of  the  universe,  history 
reveals  to  us/'  therefore,  **  three  distinct  and  characteristic  stages,  the  theological,  the  m^a- 
phytieal,  and  the  pontive.  In  the  first,  man  explains  phenomena  by  some  fanciful  concep- 
tion suggested  in  the  analogies  of  his  own  consciousness ;  in  the  second,  he  explains 
phenomena  by  some  d  priori  coneeption  of  inherent  or  superadded  entities,  suggested  in 
the  constancy  observable  in  phenomena,  which  constancy  leads  him  to  suspect  that  they 
are  not  produced  by  any  intervention  on  the  part  of  an  external  being,  but  are  owing  to  the 
nature  of  the  things  themselves ;  in  the  third,  he  explains  phenomena  by  adhering  solely 
to  these  constancies  of  succession  and  oo-existenoe  ascertained  indaotively,  and  recognised 
as  the  lawe  of  Nature. 

Consequently,  **  in  the  theological  stage,  Nature  is  regarded  as  the  theatre  whereon  the 
arbitrary  wills  and  momentary  caprices  of  Superior  Powers  play  their  varying  and  variable 
parts.  ...  In  the  metaphytieal  stage  the  notion  of  capricious  divinities  is  replaced  by  that 
of  abstract  entities,  whose  modes  of  action  are,  however,  invarialde.  ...  In  the  positive  stage, 
the  invariableness  of  phenomena  under  similar  conditions  is  recognised  as  the  sum  total  of 
human  investigation ;  and,  beyond  the  laws  which  regulate  phenomena,  it  is  -considered  idle 
to  penetrate." 

*<  Although  every  branch  of  knowledge  must  pass  through  these  three  stages,  in  obe- 
dience to  the  law  of  evolution,  neveHheless  the  process  is  not  strictly  chronologi<Md. 
Some  sciences  are  more  rapid  in  their  evolutions  than  others;  some  individuals  pass 
through  these  evolutions  more  quickly  than  others ;  so  also  of  nations.  The  present  intel- 
lectual anarphy  results  firom  that  difference ;  some  sciences  being  in  the  positive,  some  in 
the  supernatural  [or  thetdogieal],  some  in  the  metaphysical  stage :  and  this  is  further  to  be 
subdivided  into  individual  differences ;  for  in  a  science  which,  on  the  whole,  may  be  fairly 
admitted  as  being  positive,  there  will  be  found  some  cultivators  still  in  the  metaphysioid 
stage.  Astronomy  is  now  in  so  positive  a  condition,  that  we  need  nothing  but  the  laws  of 
dynamics  and  gravitation  to  explain  all  celestial  phenomena ;  and  this  explanation  we  know 
to  be  correct,  as  far  as  anything  can  be  known,  because  we  can  predict  the  return  of  a 
comet  with  the  nicest  accuracy,  or  can  enable  the  mariner  to  discover  his  latitude,  and  find 
his  way  amidst  the  *  waste  of  waters.'  This  is  tk positive  science.  But  so  far  is  meteorology 
from  such  a  condition,  that  prayers  for  dry  or  rainy  weather  are  still  offered  up  in 
churches ;  whereas  if  once  the  laws  of  these  phenomena  were  traced,  there  would  be  no 
more  prayers  for  rain  than  for  the  sun  to  rise  at  midnight" 

We  have  only  to  reverse  the  order,  and  apply  its  triple  classification  to  individuals,  and 
in  the  natural  arrangement  of  the  strata,  tracing  backwards  from  the  positive  to  the  fMta- 
physical,  from  the  latter  down  to  the  supernatural,  we  shall  perceive  that  this  last,  at 
once  the  oldest  stage  and  unhappily  the  most  common,  represents  the  least  mature,  the 
least  educated,  the  most  antiquated,  state  of  human  intelligence.  In  consequence,  thft 
mere  supematuralist  believes  anything  and  everything,  however  impossible. 

<«  The  Metaphysician  believes  he  can  penetrate  into  the  causes  and  essences  of  the  phen»* 
mena  around  him ;  while  the  Posiiivisi,  recognizing  his  own  incompetency,  limits  his  efforts 
to  the  ascertainment  of  those  laws  which  regulate  the  succession  of  these  phenomena." 

In  the  quintuple  classification  of  those  sciences  into  which  Positive  Philosophy  has  hitherto 
been  successfully  introduced,  M.  Comte  (1832-40)  admits  only  Astronomy,  Physics,  Chem- 
istry, Physiology,  and  Sociology.  It  strikes  us  that,  at  the  present  day,  this  division  is 
more  exclusive  than  the  progression  of  knowledge  any  longer  warrants.  Archceology,  for 
instance,  we  claim  to  have  arrived  at  its  positive  grade ;  and  althou^  its  laws  are  by  no 
xneana  popularly  appreciated,  to  have  become  as  certain  in  its  results  as  any  other  human 
adence.  A  brief  exposition  of  its  attributes  may  prepare  the  reader  for  a  just  recognition 
of  its  utility. 

Afx'^'h  <Mtiguus,  **  ancient,"  saidAayost  a  <*  discourse,"  are  Hdlenic  words— mcADing,  when 
mdted,  in  general  acceptation,  "  discourse  or  treatise  on  the  opinions,  customs,  and  man- 
I  of  the  ancients."    This  is  the  definition  of  Archceology  proposed  by  the  sage  Millin,  (4), 

(4)  Introductian  d  ntude  de  VJrdUdogis;  Fwia,  17M;  ]»p.  8,  SO^  22. 

73 

Digitized  by 

Google 

578  ABCH^OLOGICAL   INTRODUCTION 

adopted  bj  Lenormant,  (6)  and  recognised  by  all  trae  scholars  from  Niebnbr  to  Letronne ; 
especially  among  those  mtellectnal  giants  who  since  ChampoUion's  era  have  solved  the  chief 
enigmas  of  hieroglyp^ical  and  caneatic  records.  Archceographt/f  as  distinct  from  archae- 
ology, according  to  Fabricins,  (6)  is  a  term  which  should  be  limited  to  the  stndy  of  ancient 
monuments  especially,  whereas  arohesology  embraces  erery  process  of  investigation  into 
all  historical  subjects.  Pionysius  Halicamassensis,  in  the  first  century  before  C,  and 
Josephus  in  the  first  century  after,  treated  upon  Arehceologyj  but  entirely  neglected 
ArchiBography,  or  the  study  of  monuments;  whence  their  several  incoherencies :  the 
former,  however,  had  some  dear  perceptions  of  the  truth  when  he  named  Archaeology. 
"  the  science  of  primitive  origins.'' 

Albeit,  the  word  has  deviated  somewhat  firom  its  pristine  sense ;  for  among  the  Greeks 
an  archaologist  signified  a  man  who  brought  together  the  most  ancient  recollections  of  a 
given  country ;  whereas,  at  the  present  day,  the  name  is  applied  exclusively  to  him  who, 
possessing  intimate  acquaintance  with  the  monumenit  of  a  given  ancient  people,  strires 
through  the  study  of  their  characteristics  to  evolve  facts,  and  thence  to  deduce  logical  con- 
clusions upon  the  ideas,  tastes,  propensitiee,  habits,  and  history  of  departed  nations; 
many  of  the  greatest  and  most  essential  of  whom  having  left  but  fragmentary  pages  of 
their  tUme-bookt,  out  of  which  we  their  successors  must  reconstruct  for  ourselves  such  por- 
tions of  their  chronicles  as  are  lost ;  no  less  than  confirm,  modify,  or  refute  such  others  as 
have  reached  ns  through  original,  transcribed,  or  translated  annals. 

Archnology,  so  to  say,  has  now  become  the  ** backbone''  of  ancient  history;  its  relation 
to  human  traditions  being  similar  to  that  of  Osteology  to  Comparative  Anatomy ;  or  to  what 
fossil  remains  are  in  geological  science.  An  Antiquary  is  rather  a  collector  of  ancient  relics 
of  art,  than  one  who  understands  them ;  but  an  Arckaolofiti  is  of  necessity  an  Antiquary 
who  brings  every  science  to  bear  upon  the  vestiges  of  ancient  man,  and  thus  invests  them 
with  true  historical  value.  In  short,  an  Archeologist  is  the  monumental  historian  —  the 
more  or  less  critical  dealer  in  and  discoverer  of  historical  facts,  according  as  by  mental  dis- 
cipline, diversified  attainments,  and  the  study  of  tkioffs,  he  acquires  thorough  knowledge  of 
each  particle  preserved  to  his  research  among  the  dibrit  of  antique  humanity. 

Were  the  simplest  rules  of  this  science  popularly  taught,  we  should  not  have  to  prolong 
the  lamentations  of  Millin  at  errors  prevalent  for  want  of  a  littie  arohseological  knowledge. 
He  narrates  how  Baronius  took  a  statue  of  Isis  for  the  Virgin  Mary — how  the  apotheosia 
of  the  Emperor  Germanicus  was  mistaken  for  St.  John  the  Baptist's  translation  to  heaven — 
and  how  a  cameo  called  **  the  agate  of  Tiberius,"  which  represents  the  triumphs  of  this 
prince  and  the  apotheosis  of  Augustus,  came  to  be  long  regarded  as  the  triumphal  march 
of  Joseph !  Neptune  and  Minerva  giving  the  horse  and  olive  to  man  would  not  have  been 
metamorphosed  into  Adam  and  Eve  eating  the  forbidden  apple ;  nor  would  a  trumpery 
pottery  toy  have  been  considered  by  His  Eminence  Cardinal*  Wiseman  (7)  as  a  Roman  me- 
mento of  Noah's  Ark  after  the  universal  flood,  although  among  its  animals  were  '*  thirty- 
five  human  figures !"  Without  archseology,  says  Millin,  one  is  liable  with  the  historian 
Rollin  to  speak  of  the  Laocoon  as  a  lost  monument — to  dress  up  Greek  heroes  in  Roman 
garments  —  to  adorn  Hercules  with  a  perruque  d  la  Louis  XIV!  ^sop,  at  the  court  of 
Croesus,  would  hardly  have  addressed  himself  to  a  colonel  in  French  uniform ;  nor  Strabo, 
in  **  IMmocrite  Amoureuz,"  have  pointed  his  quiziing-glass  at  steeples,  and  amused  his 
leisure  by  making  almanacs ;  neither  would  Horace  call  Servius  Tullius  '*  Sire ; "  nor  Ra- 
cine have  invoked  a  goddess  as  **  Madame  "  in  his  classic  plays.  (8) 

More  than  half  a  century  has  elapsed  since  Millin  wrote.  Hundreds  of  archsologists 
have  made  their  works  accessible  to  the  literary  public    Tet  so  slow  is  the  diffusion  of 

(5)  Jrchiologie,  par  M.  Ch.  LnroRiusT,  dellnititot:  Sevue  Jr^M,;  Puif,  1844;  Ire  partie,  pp.  1-17. 

(6)  BibUatheoa  Antiquaria;  p.  181. 

(7)  Cbnnection  between  Sdenet  and  Revealed  Rdigitm;  1849;  toL  iL  pp.  130-148. 

(8)  See  man  J  recent  inatanoei  of  antiqaariaB  shaini  exposed  bj  Lrroxhb  — *<L*aaiiilrtte  de  Jules  Oiaar,  I« 
faehet  de  86pnllia8  Haoer,  le  mMaillon  de  Z^nobie,  le  cofitet  d'AntinoOs,  le  labre  de  Tefpasien,  et  d'autres 
antlquitta  fMdtmet  ** — Mimoirtt  d  DoGumenU;  Bev,  JreAioL;  Paris,  1840;  pp.  10^223. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

TO    THE    Xth    chapter    OF    GENESIS.  579 

eritioal  knowledge,  that  in  our  own  land  and  hour,  there  are  stUI  some  not  oncnltlTated  minds 
who  imagine  the  Aboriginet  of  this  American  continent  to  hate  descended  from  the  "  Lost 
Tribes  of  Israel  "(9) — who  see  ih^  Runic  soribblings  of  Norsemen  npon  the  Indian-scratched 
Bock  of  Dighton(lO) — who,  regardless  of  Squier's  exposare,(ll)  jet  suppose  the  local  pebble 
manufactured  for  that  muteum  since  1888,  to  attest  Phamieian  intercourse  with  the  monnd- 
boilders  of  Qrate  Creek  Flat  (12) — and  who,  disdaining  to  refer  to  the  long-published  deter- 
mination of  its  pseudo-antiquity,  (13)  still  believe  that  the  gold  Meal-ring  of  RA-NEFER- 
HET,  a  f^otionary  attached  to  a  building  called,  about  the  sixth  century  b.  o.,  after 
King  Shoophct,  should  haye  once  adorned  the  finger  of  Cheops,  builder  of  the  Great  Pyra- 
mid in  the  thirty-fourth  century  b.  o.  (14) ;  thereby  becoming  5800  instead  of  only  some 
2600  years  old  1 

The  instances  around  us  of  the  misconceptions,  which  the  slightest  acquaintance  with 
the  rudiments  of  archaeology  would  consign  forever  to  oblivion,  are  inexhaustible.  Would 
that  some  of  them  were  less  pernicious  to  moral  rectitude !  They  offend  our  vision  under 
the  prostituted  names  of  *<  PortraiU  of  Chbist  "  (16)  — they  excite  one's  derision  in  the 
ludicrous  anachronisms  of  modern  art  current  as  *<  Pictorial  Biblee  "  (16)  — they  bear  wit- 
ness to  theological  ignorance  when  Chinese  are  asserted  to  be  referred  to  in  the  SINIM  of 
Isaiah  (17) — and  they  amount  to  idiocy  when  ecclesiastics  continue  disputing  whether  Mosss 
wrote  a  reek,  R,  or  a  daleth,  D,  in  a  given  word  of  the  Hebrew  Pentateuch,  notwithstanding 
that  every  archsologist  knows  that  the  iquare-letler  characters  of  the  present  Hebrew 
Text  (18)  were  not  invented  by  the  Rabbis  before  the  second  century  aftfr  Christ ;  or  1600 
years  posterior  to  the  vague  age  when  leHOuaH  buried  the  Lawgiver  '*  in  a  valley  in  the 
land  of  Moab  opposite  to  Beth-peor ;  but  no  man  has  known  his  sepulchre  unto  thie 
dag  "(19)  But — "point  de  fonatisme  mime  centre  le  fanatisme:  la  philosophie  a  eu  le  sien 
dans  le  si^cle  dernier ;  il  semble  que  la  gloire  du  ndtre  devrait  dtre  de  n'en  connaitre 
auonn."  (20) 

The  above  illustrations  suffice  to  indicate  some  of  the  utilitarian  objects  of  the  science 
termed  <*  Archeology ;"  which  furnishes  the  only  logical  methods  of  attaining  historical 
certainties.  Its  indispensableness  to  correct  appreciations  of  biblical  no  less  than  of  all 
other  history,  nevertheless,  remains  to  be  proved  by  its  application^,  We  shall  endeavor  to 
be  precise  in  our  experiments ;  but,  must  not  forget  that  <'  precision  is  one  thing,  certainty 
another.  An  absurd  or  false  proposition  may  be  made  very  precise ;  and,  on  the  other  hand, 
although  the  sciences  vary  in  degree  of  precision,  they  all  present  results  equally  certain." 
•We  propose  to  test  the  principles  of  arohesological  criteria  by  applying  them  to  biblical 
studies,  and  to  test  the  authenticity  of  one  chapter  of  the  Hebrew  records  through  the  former's 
applioation :  and  inasmuch  as  Truth  must  necessarily  harmonize  with  itself^  if  arch»ology 
be  a  true  science  the  Scriptures  will  prove  it  to  be  so  inoontestably ;  and  if  the  Bible  be 
absolute  truth,  archseology  will  demonstrate  the  fact.  We  need  not  perplex  ourselves  with 
apprehensions.    It  would  imply  but  small  faith  in  the  Bible  were  we  to  suppose  that  arch- 

(9)  DiLAnnj) :  American  Antiqidtiet. 

(10)  TraniOctUmt  qf  the  SoyaH  Soeidy  qf  Antiquariee  of  Oopenhaffekf  1840-'43.  AiUiquitaUt  AmericancB,  1837 ; 
••etxv. 

(11)  UmiianJMncUviealJtmrHal:  *<  Monumental  STtdmee  of  the  DIsooTery  of  America  bj  the  Northmen 
eritieally  examined"  —  Deo.  1848 ;  pp.  81&-324.  • 

(12)  ScHOOLOuyr :  New  Tork  Etfmologieal  Sodelif's  Trans.  1845;  toL  1.  pp.  886-397. 

(13)  8ee  «  A  Card":  New  Tork  Omrier  and  Enquirer^  12  Feb.  1863. 

(14)  Absott:  catalogue  qf  a  CkXteetUm  qf  Egyj^ian  AnHquitiet,  now  exhibiting  at  the  StuyreMnt  Inetitute; 
New  Tork,  1863>  plate  No.  1061,  p.  64. 

(16)  founded  exelniively  npon  no  more  hiatorieal  baaes  than  the  apnriona  "Letter  of  LmuLUS^  — or 
derired  from  "  Yeroniea'i  Sodarinm  ";  Aiaxav  Duub,  1610,— Tide  Oou :  I\usioH  of  our  Lord;  London,  1844. 

(16)  HAKpna',  tor  inatance;  New  Tork,  1842-*46. 

(17)  BoT.  Dr.  SvRHi:  UMtg  qf  (Me  Biman  Baeee;  1840  —  **  And  while  eren  China  (/«.  IL  [tie]  12,  Sinim,  a 
remote  oonntry  in  the  8.  £.  extremity  of  the  earth,  aa  the  context  intimates)  and  the  islands  of  the  sea  art 
spedfled"  —  p.  48.  and  note. 

(18)  OimDOH:  OUa  JSgjfptiaea;  p.  112;  and  it\fra,  ftirther  on. 

(19)  Deuienmomg  xxxir.  6 — Gahxii'b  translation. 

(SO)  AMPiai:  JKecAercAei,Ac;Bev.dflaDeaxlIondes;8eptl84e^p.788. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

580  ARCHAEOLOGICAL    INTRODUCTION 

nologieal  soratiny  conld  mffeot  the  divine  origin  insisted  upon  for  the  book  itself  by  those 
who  make  it  the  unique  standard  of  all  scientific  as  well  as  of  all  moral  knowledge. 

Instead,  howeyer,  of  the  ordinary  mode  in  which  biblical  history  is  presented  to  us  in 
books  bearing  the  authoritatiTe  title  of  professed  *<  Christian  ETidenoes,*'  the  requirements 
of  archsBology  demand  that  we  should  rcTerse  the  order  of  examination.  In  lieu,  for  in- 
stance, of  asserting  it  prion  that  the  Creatian  of  (he  world  took  place  exactly  *<  on  October 
20th,  B.  0.  4006,  the  year  of  the  eroatkm  "  (21) — or  sustaining,  ex  cathedra^  with  uniTersal 
orthodoxy,  that  Mosbs  vtote  the  FentaUueh  —  it  is  incumbent  upon  us,  while  we  deny 
notlung,  to  take  as  little  for  granted.  If  such  be  the  era  revealed  by  the  Text,  our  pioceas 
will  lead  us  to  that  date,  with  at  least  the  same  precision  through  which  ligfatfoot  (by 
what  method  is  unknown),  ascertained  that  Anno  Mundi  I,  <«  Vlth  day  of  creation  ...  his 
(Adam*s)  wife  the  weaker  vessell :  she  not  yet  knowing  that  there  were  any  derils  at  all .  .  . 
sinned,  and  drew  her  husband  into  the  same  transgression  with  her ;  this  was  about  kiffk 
noone^  the  time  of  eating.  And  in  this  lost  condition  into  which  Adam  and  Ere  had  now 
brought  themseWes,  did  they  lie  comfortiesse  till  towards  the  cool  of  the  day,  or  three  &dodt 
o/Vemoon."  (22)  If  the  Pentateuch  was  originally  penned  in  the  Mosaic  autograph,  the 
proof  will  resile  to  our  Tiew,  through  arduBological  deductions,  with  the  force  of  an 
Buclidean  demonstration. 

The  analytical  instruments  of  archeology  are  purely  Baconian ;  tIz  :  proceeding  from 
the  known  to  the  unknown ;  tiirough  a  patient  retrogressive  march  from  to-day  to  yester- 
day, from  yesterday  to  the  day  before;  and  so  on,  step  by  step,  backwards  along  the 
stream  of  time.  Each  fkct,  when  verified,  thus  falls  naturally  into  its  proper  place  in  the 
world's  history;  each  event,  as  ascertuned,  will  be  found  tabulated  in  its  respective 
stratum.  It  is  only  when  our  footsteps  falter,  owing  to  surrounding  darkness  or  to  trea- 
cherous soil,  that  we  may  begin  to  suspect  historical  inaccuracies;  but,  at  present,  we 
have  no  right  to  anticipate  any  such  doubts,  considering  the  averments  of  oeucumenic  Pro- 
testantism, of  the  orthodox  sects,  that  the  Bible  it  the  revealed  word  of  Ood. 

Our  inquiries  are  directed  to  a  single  point.  We  desire  to  ascertain  the  origin,  epoch, 
writer,  characteristics,  and  historical  value  of  but  one  document :  vix. — The  Xth  Chapter  of 
Oenesie  ;  familiar  to  every  reader.  It  is  presented,  however,  to  our  inspection  as  one  of 
fifty  chapters  of  a  book  called  **  Genesis  " — this  book  being  the  first  of  thirty-nine  (28)  books 
that  constitute  the  compendium  entitied  the  **  Old  Testament ;"  and  th^  latter  is  bound  up 
in  the  same  volume  with  another  collection  to  which  the  name  of  **  New  Testament "  is 
given ;  the  whole  forming  together  that  literary  work  to  which  the  designation  of  **  The 
Bible"  is  reverentially  applied  in  the  English  tongue  —  a  name  derived  from  byhlot,  the 
Greek  name  for  papyruiy  being  the  most  ancient  material  out  of  which  its  derivative  paper 
was  made.  Byhlut^  the  Egyptian  plant,  gave  to  the  Greeks  their  name  fbr  paper,  and  paper 
their  name  for  « the  book  **  in  r«  fiiffXuov.  On  adopting  Christianity,  the  (}reeks  derignated 
their  earliest  translation  of  the  Hebrew  Scriptures,  TO  BIBLEION,  as  the  book — **par 
excellence ;"  which  words  we  modems  have  adopted  into  our  national  tongue  in  the  form 
of  "Bible." 

With  every  desire  on  our  part  to  obtain  solution  of  our  queries  by  the  most  direet  road 
and  in  the  shortest  method,  we  do  not  perceive  the  possibility  of  detaching  a  solitary  chapter 
of  the  Bible  from  the  volume  itself,  until  by  arcbseological  dissection  we  are  enabled  to 
demonstrate  that  such  separation  is  feasible.  In  consequence,  it  behooves  us  to  examine, 
with  as  much  brevity  as  is  consistent  with  perspicuity,  the  entire  Bible;  and,  if  we  hold 
"  all  the  books  of  the  Bible  (24)  to  be  equally  true,"  the  Xth  chapter  of  the  first  book  will  be 
found  unquestionably  to  be  true  likewise. 

Soliciting  that  the  reader  should  divest  his  mind,  as  far  as  in  him  lies,  of  preconceived 
biases ;  we  invite  him  to  accompany  us  patiently  through  an  investigation,  in  which  the 

(21)  Rer.  Dr.  Nouur:  The  Egyptian  Chrmdogy  Analysed;  London,  1848,  p.  392. 

(22)  Hcammy^  ChrmieU,  and  Order  qf  the  Old  l^dament,  *o.;  I^idon,  1M7,  p. ». 

(23)  Myitio  origin  of  the  XXXIX  *<  ArttdM"  of  the  AngUoan  Ohnrflfa. 

(3i)Poou:  London  I(«erafy(%iMM«,  1849,p.482~UBMeottBto1d7tapprMMdla  Ait«.d^^»iNao«,18a. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

TO    THB    Xth    chapter  OF  GENESIS.  581 

siibjeot  banishes   aU  ornament,  bat  that  cannot  fail  to  elicit   some  portions  of  the 
tmth. 

The  incipient  steps  of  our  analysis  do  not  call  for  much  expenditure  of  erudition.  In 
popular  Encjclopaedias  most  of  the  preliminary  information  may  be  verified  by  the  carious 
reader ;  for  Calmet,  Eitto*  and  Home,  contain  catalogues  of  the  yarious  editions  of  the 
£ibU,  done  into  English,  that  have  been  put  forth,  during  the  last  four  centuries,  from 
A.  J>.  1526  down  to  the  present  year. 

At  the  sight  of  such  catalogues  of  different  translations  said  to  proceed  from  one  and  the 
same  origiilal,  few  can  refrain  from  asking,  in  all  humbleness,  why,  if  any  one  of  them 
were  absolutely  correct,  should  there  have  been  a  necessity  for  the  others  ?  In  the  course 
of  studies  carried  over  many  years,  we  have  been  at  pains  to  compare  sundry  of  the  most 
prominent  English  translations  (among  them  ancient  as  well  as  modem  editions),  not  only 
-with  themselves,  but  often  with  the  Latin,  Greek,  or  Hebrew  originals,  of  which  each  pur- ' 
ports  to  supply  a  faithful  rendering.  They  all  differ  I  some  more  than  others ;  but  in  each 
one  may  be  found  passages  the  sense  of  which  varies  essentially  from  that  published  by  the 
others.     Hence  arose  in  our  minds  the  following  among  other  doubts. 

Some  of  these  Translators  can  have  known  little  or  nothing  of  Hebrew  —  or  they  must 
have  translated  Arom  different  originals  —  or,  they  did  not  consult  the  Hebrew  Text  at  all, 
but  rendered  ftom  the  Latin  or  the  Greek  versions  —  or  (what  recurs  with  far  more  fre- 
quency), each  translator t  wherever  the  original  was  ambiguous,  rendered  a  given  passage  in 
accordance  with  his  own  individual  biases,  or  with  the  object  of  fortifying  the  peculiar 
tenets  of  his  Church,  Kirk,  Conventicle,  Chapel,  or  Meeting-house.  Now,  these  discordant 
Bibles  being  thrust  upon  us,  each  one  as  the  only  and  true  «  Word  of  God,"  it  is  humanly  incon- 
eeivable  that  God'  should  have  uttered  that  Word  in  so  many  different  ways,  and  thereby 
have  rendered  nugatory  the  comprehension  of  one  passage,  by  permitting  a  translation,in  sig- 
nificance totally  distinct,  of  the  self-same  passage  in  other  modern  editions.  For  instance, 
that  the  reader  may  at  once  seixe  our  meaning :  there  are  few  texts  more  frequently  quoted, 
especially  under  circumstances  where  consolation  is  administered ;  there  are  none  perhaps 
that  have  originated  such  Demosthenian  efforts  at  pulpit-oratory,  or  have  produced  in  some 
minds  more  of  those  extatio  emotions  <*  that  the  world  cannot  give,"  than  the  verse  wherein 
Job  ejaculates— "For  llukoir  that  my  Bedeemer  liveth."  (xix.  25).  The  ''Multitude  of 
those  who  are  called  Christians,"  as  Origen  termed  them  in  a.  d.  258  (25) ;  the  "  Simple- 
tons, not  to  say  the  imprudent  and  the  idiotic,"  of  Tertullian,  a.  d.  245 ;  (26)  the  "  Igno- 
rant" of  St  Athanasius,  a.d.  878(27);  and  the  "Simple  believers"  of  the  milder  St. 
Jerome,  a.  d.  885  (28) ;  have  always  imagined,  in  accordance  with  the  lower  scholarship  of 
orthodoxy,  that  Job  here  foreshadows  the  Messianic  advent  of  Christ.  (29) 

The  context  does  not  appear,  philologically  or  grammatically,  to  justify  such  conclusion ; 
inasmuch  as  the  preceding  verses  (1  to  22)  exhibit  Job  —  forsaken  by  his  kindred,  forgotten 
by  his  bosom  friends,  alien  in  die  eyes  of  his  guests  and  of  his  own  servants  —  overwhelmed 
with  anguish  at  the  acrid  loquacity  of  Bildad  the  ShuhitCt  protesting  vehemently  against 
these  accusations,  and  wishing  that  his  last  burning  words  should  be  preserved  to  posterity 
in  one  of  three  ways.  To  support  our  view,  and  to  fbmish  at  the  same  time  evidences  of 
different  translations,  we  lay  before  the  reader  three  renderings  of  verses  28  to  26.  'He 
can,  by  opening  other  translators,  readily  verify  the  adage  that  "  doctors  differ,"  although 
the  Hebrew  Text  is  identically  the  same  throughout 

(^y  CbmmeiUcay  upon  John:  and  Contra  Ods^  lib.  Till.. 
(20)  Ad  PnuKcan,  aeo.  Ui. 

(27)  De  Incam.  Verb. — contra  I^nd.  SamosaUK, 

(28)  Omm.  in  Ss.  zxxiL 

(29)  Notes:  Op.  d^p.  147  — ''That  there  Is  no  aUusfon  to  Christ  in  the  term  [tiadeaiMr],  nor  to  the  resuz^ 
eeetlon  to  a  life  of  happiness,  in  the  passage,  has  been  the  opinion  of  the  most  Jodidons  and  learned  critics  for 
the  last  three  hundred  years;  such  as  Calvin,  Herder,  QroUns,  Le  Glere,  Patrick,  Warburton,  Durell,  Heath, 
Kennioott,  Doederlein,  Dathe,  Eichhom,  Jahn,  De  Wette^  and  many  others." 

Digitized  by 

Google 

582  ABCH^OLOOICAL    INTRODUCTION 

L  KiKO  Jambb'b  Vernon,     The  italicized  words  are  the  Translators'. 

23  '^  Oh  tbftt  my  words  were  now  written!  oh  that  they  were  printed  [tic/]  In  »  bookl 

24  That  thej  were  graren  with  an  iron  pen  and  lead  in  the  rock  for  ererl 

25  For  I  know  that  my  redeemer  liretli,  and  that  he  shall  stand  at  the  latter  da^  npoo  the  earth. 
2Q       And  though  after  my  skin  wormt  destroy  this  hod^y  yet  in  my  flesh  shall  I  see  God.* 

The  marginal  reading,  authority  unknown,  sabstitutes — *<  Or,  After  1  shall  awake,  tkomgk 
thii  body  he  deetroyed,  yet  out  ofmyfleth  shall  I  see  God."  In  the  authorized  version,  bj  the 
interpolation  of  '* worms,''  Job  is  made  a  belierer  in  the  resurrection  of  the  body:  in  the 
margin,  he  believes  that  he  shall  behold  God  **  out  of  the  flesh; "  that  is,  in  the  spirit! 
What  did  he  believe  ? 

II.  Notes,  New  Translation  of  the  Book  of  Job;  Boston,  1888;  p.  87. 

23  '^  0  that  my  words  were  now  wrlttenl 

0  that  they  were  inscribed  in  a  registerl 

24  That  with  an  iron  pen,  and  with  lead. 
They  were  engravm  npon  the  rock  for  ererl 

25  Tet  I  know  my  Vindicator  Uveth, 

And  will  stand  np  at  length  on  the  earth; 

26  And  though  with  my  skin  this  body  be  wasted  away, 
•          Yet  in  my  flesh  shall  I  see  Ood." 

Noyes  {Notes,  pp.  144-6)  says — "  Or  we  may  render,  Tet  without  flesh  J  shaU  see  Ood"^ 
and  enumerates  cogent  "  objections  to  the  supposition  that  Job  here  expresses  his  oonfideat 
expectation  of  a  resurrection." 

III.  Cahxn,  *<jQb;"  La  Bible,  Traduction  Nouvelle,  aveo  I'H^breu  en  regard;  Paris, 

1851 ;  pp.  86-7.     We  render  the  French  literally  into  English. 

28  "  Would  to  God  that  my  words  were  written  I    Would  to  Ood  that  th^  were  traced  in  a  book 

24  With  a  burin  of  iron  and  with  lead  I  that  they  were  mgrared  for  ever  in  the  rodcl 

25  But  I,  I  know  that  my  'redemptor'  is  liring,  and  will  remai^^the  last  upon  the  earth : 

26  And  after  that  my  skin  shall  haye  been  destroyed,  this  delirered  from  the  flesh,  I  shall  see  God.* 

In  the  foot-note,  Cahen  explains  that  the  Hebrew  word  ^lU,  GALI,  which  he  renders 
«  mon  r^dempteur,"  proceeds  from  the  verb  GAL,  **  to  deliver;"  meaning  likewise  *'  reven- 
diquer  ;*'  which  corresponds  to  the  Vindicator  of  Noyes.  The  idea  of  Job's  hope  of  a  resur- 
rection, itself  a  mythological  i^nachronism,  is  popularly  derived  from  the  LXX  and  the 
Greek  Fathers,  with  ideas  developed  in  the  Latin  Church  after  St.  Jerome. 

Thus  the  reader  has  now  before  him  three  specimens,  amid  the  wilderness  of  IVansiatioms, 
wherein  are  involved  theological  dogmas  of  <*  resurrection  of  the  body,"  **  redemption  of 
the  soul,"  and  the  antiquity  of  '<  Messianic  prefigurations  " — questions  of  no  slight  r^ 
gious  importance ;  and  yet,  withal,  unless  he  be  profound  in  ffebrew,  his  opinion  upon  the 
merits  of  either  rendering  is  alike  worthless  to  himself  and  to  others ;  nor  can  he  con- 
scientiously distinguish  which  is  veritably  the  "  word  of  God  "  among  these  triple  contra- 
dictions. The  ridiculous  anachronism  perpetrated  in  king  James's  version  (v.  28)  that 
makes  Job  wish  that  his  words  were  «  printed"  (probably  2500  years  before  the  art  was 
invented !)  (80)  has  long  ago  been  pointed  out;  and  is  alone  sufficient  to  destroy  the  alleged 
inspiration  of  that  '*  authorized  "  verse.  For  ourselves  we  mourn  that  want  of  space  com- 
pels the  suppression  of  some  archaeological  remarks  on  the  '*  book  of  Job "  (6ylUB  — 
meaning  "  L'uomo  iraoondo  che  rientra  con  rossore  in  se  stesso  ").  We  derive  them  from 
studies  at  Paris,  under  our  honored  preceptor  Michel-angelo  Land,  to  whom  we  here 
fenew  the  wannest  tribute  of  respect  and  admiration. 

To  Anglo-Saxon  Protestantism  the  biblical  profundities  of  the  "  Professor  of  Sacred  and 
Interpreter  of  Oriental  Tongues  at  the  Vatican  "(81)  since  the  year  1820,  are  entirely  un- 

(30)  Norr :  BiUical  and  Physical  HiMory  </  Man ;  1849 ;  pp.  136, 137. 

(31)  Oastaho  DumacD:  Biografia  dd  OxvaUert  D.  Mithdangdo  Land,-  Fermo,  1840;  p.  10. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

TO   THE    Xth    chapter    OP    GENESIS.  583 

known.  Written  in  the  purest  Italian  ezclnsiyely  for  the  lettered — restricted  to  one  edition 
of  125  copies  for  each  work,  at  a  cost  of  125  franet  ($25)  per  copy — and,  for  manifold  rea- 
sons, artistically  fashioned  npon  a  plan  not  easily  comprehended  without  an  oral  key  — 
Land's  enormons  labors  npon  SemiUc  palsBOgraphy,  to  the  '*  profanum  yulgus"  of  theology, 
most  long  remain  sealed  books.  In  1848-9,  no  copy  of  the  Faralipomeniy  (32)  nor  of  the 
Seeonda  Opera  Cuj^eo,  (88)  both  published  daring  1845-7,  at  Paris  (the  latter  at  the  expense 
of  Nicholas,  Czar  of  Muscory),  existed  within  the  Library  of  the  British  Museum :  not- 
withstanding that  Land's  Tolmnes  were  for  sale  at  two  leading  booksellers'  in  London ;  and 
that  thdr  absence  at  the  Mnseum-Library  had  been  formally  notified  to  its  unnational 
"  Powers  that  be."  (34)  The  Vie  Simboliehe  deUa  Bibbia  (known  to  ns  in  its  author's  manu- 
script) will  not  be  published  for  a  period  incalculable,  because  dependent  upon  human 
longCTity.  Our  mutual  friend,  Mr.  B.  E.  Haight  of  New  Tork,  is,  in  the  United  States, 
the  sole  possessor  of  Land's  works  that  we  know  of.  (85) 

History  records  that  it  was  in  consequence  of  the  discrepandes,  notorious  among  such 
iratulaUona  into'  English  as  existed  at  the  beginning  of  the  seventeenth  century,  that,  in  the 
reign  of  king  James,  a  new  yerdon  of  the  Scriptures  was  published :  which  duly  received 
the  royal,  ecdesiastical,  parliamentary,  and  national  sanction,  and  is  now  consecrated 
amongst  us  Anglo-Saxons  as  the  unique  and  immaculate  '<  Word  of  God" — the  standard  of 
flaith  among  Protestant  communities  of  our  race  throughout  the  world.  It  is,  and  ought 
to  be,  in  the  hands  of  every  one ;  so  that  no  obstacles  to  the  verification  of  such  quotations, 
as  we  shall  have  occadon  to  make,  exist  at  the  present  day  among  readers  of  English.  As 
the  document  we  are  in  quest  of,  Xth  Genesis,  is  contained  within  this  volume,  we  are 
compelled  by  the  rules  of  archeology  first  to  examine  the  book  itself;  in  order  to  obtain 
some  preliminary  insight  into  its  history,  its  literary  merits  as  a  Translation^  and  the 
repute  in  which  the  latter  point  is  held  by  those  most  qualified  to  judge. 

To  avoid  mistakes  arising  from  confusion  of  editions,  we  quote  the  title-page  of  the  copy 
before  us.—"  THE  HOLY  BIBLE,  containing  the  Old  and  New  TestamenU :  translated  out 
of  the  ori^^nal  Tongues;  and  with  the  former  Translations  diligently  compared  and 
revised,  by  His  Majesty's  Special  Command.    Appointed  to  be  read  in  Churches.    London : 

Q^  Bmaip(nMnidW  IttuelraziotuddkiaBvraSeratu^ 

(88)  Seeonda  Opera  (h^fica  —  TraUMo  ddU  timboUche  rappresenUxnte  Jrabidie  «  deZZa  varia  ffenerasionc  cU^  Afu- 
ndmani  caraUeri  eopra  differenti  vuUerie  operaH;  Parigl,  1846-'47 ;  qto.  2  toIb. 

(34)  OUDDON :  Otia  JElffyptiaca  ;  London,  1849 ;  p.  17,  note ;  see  also  p.  110. 

(86)  Through  the  Cheralier's  epistolary  kindness,  I  am  enabled  to  oorreet  a  former  mistake,  Into  which  other 

anthori^  had  led  me;  and  I  gladly  m&ae  oooasion  to  qnoto  ftom  one  of  nnmarons  Italian  autographs  In  my 

poflsession:  — 

"EOMA,  18  OWo&re,  1851. 
**Chir^AmU»t 

**Yeni  say,  in  OMa  .SgitpHaoa  (p.  81),  that  'pyramSd'  Is  derived  tcempi  and  kaaram;  the  former  being  a  Coptic 
artUde^  the  latter  an  Arabic  word,  combined  eren  nowadays  among  the  Arabs  in  [their  name,  £L>HaRaM,  for] 
pyramid.  This  is  not  according  to  gramihatical  exactness;  because  Juaram  is  not  altogether  radical.  The 
demonstratlTe  [letter  H]  A«  is  prefixed  to  it,  which  serres  in  Ilea  of  the  Coptic  pi.  Ham  [Arabic^],  RM,  is  the 
root  (altitude).  Haramy  HUM,  rays,  therefore,  ihe<tlHtude;  and  it  is  a  synonyme  of  the  Coptic  pi-nim,  in  which 
the  he,  H,  that  you  have  yoked  to  it,  plays  no  part  The  word  ram,  besides  being  a  Semitic,  is  also  a  Coptic 
word,  with  the  sense  of  heighi. . .  Bnt  rery  hnge  seems  to  me  the  error  of  Ewald,  in  Bonsen,  who  presumes  to 
explain  a  text  of  Job  (ill.  14)  l>y  changing  a  b  into  m,  and  making  a  HaraMot  of  his  own  out  of  the  biblical 
MaraBCt. ...  I  transcribe  for  you  the  complete  article  of  mine,  which  on  some  occasion  may  bo  of  aid  to  you : 

**  Artide  taken  fnm  tAe  *  Vit  StmboUche  dd  Vecehio  e  Nwno  TeetametUo*  rtgarding  a  postage  in  Job. . . .  [Wo 
hare  not  two  pages  to  spare,  and  therefore  are  compelled  to  omit  the  acute  philological  rearonings  of  our  yalued 
precq^tor.— O.  R.  G.]  The  said  two  verses,  most  entangled  in  the  versions  of  others,  through  my  inquiries 
now  read— r<  Now  should  I  have  quiet  with  the  kings  and  mighty-ones  of  the  earth  who  already  repose  in  their 
subterranean  habiUtions;  or  with  the  princes  who  had  gold  and  (who)  caused  their  sepulchres  to  be  filled 
with  silTer.'  [Comp.  Cabkn,  xt.  p.  13.] ...  I  will  not  leare  this  argument  without  first  giving  you  an  illustration 
cf  that  arduoutf  Terse  6  of  Psalm  ix.;  in  which,  It  appevs  to  me,  interpreters  hare  strayed  away  firom  truth. 
Here  recurs  that  ehartMt  which  I  explained.  Now,  if  philologers  are  wise  enough  to  accept  my  diaoorery, 
they  will  see  that  this  sentence  of  the  Psalm,  in  the  place  aboTe-named,  speaks  with  vibratory  locution—' 
"They  dosed  to  the  enemy  the  subterranean  abode  in  perpetuity:  thou  destroyedst  the  citieti,  and  with  thcM 
tha  manorial  of  thoee  perished.' "    [Compare  King  Janufs  Version  /  ]  . . . 

**Aff"*   VOftrOy  MiOHIL-iJraiLO  L&HCI.* 

Digitized  by 

Google 

684  ABGHiCOLOGIGAL   IKTBODUOTIOK 

Printed  by  Gkorge  S.  Eyre  and  Andrew  Spottinroode,  Printers  to  the  Queen's  Most  Ex- 
oellent  Mijesty,  and  sold  at  their  Warehouse,  189,  Fleet  Street,  1844.  [Nonpareil  Be- 
ference,  12mo.J''  The  Dedication  «  To  the  most  high  and  mighty  Prince,  James,"  states 
that  His  *'  Highness  had  once  out  of  deep  judgment  aj^nrehended  how  conrenient  it  was^ 
that  out  of  the  Original  Sacred  Tongues,  together  with  comparing  of  the  labours,  botii  in 
our  own,  and  other  foreign  Languages,  of  many  worthy  men  nho  went  before  us,  there 
should  be  one  more  exact  Ihttulation  of  the  Holy  Scriptures  inte  the  JBn^Ush  Tongue," 

It  thus  becomes  patent  that  our  eopy  is  not  printed  in  one  of  "  the  Original  Sacred 
Tongues,"  but  merely  professes  to  be  a  <'  more  exact  Translation**  into  English  tiian,  at  the 
date  of  its  publication,  242  years  ago,  had  preriously  appeared.  Even  conceding  that  the 
Holy  Scriptures  in  the  <*  Original  Sacred  Tongues  "  may  haTC  been  reyealed  word  for  wonl 
by  the  Almighty,  and  granting  that  their  etHOo  prmeeps  was  a  manuscript  in  the  aiHographs 
of  dirinely-inspired  Scribes,  no  reasonable  person  will  deny  the  possibility  that  this  English 
translation  may  embrace  some  errors — none  among  the  educated  will  be  so  unreasonable  as  to 
in^t  upon  the  tnfaUUnlitjf  of  ito  English  translators,  howeyer  erudite,  howcTcr  consdeo* 
tious ;  nor  perchance  will  daim  mtpwation  for  these  wertiiies.  Cliiidishly  credulous  as  we 
are  by  nature,  and  uncritical  though  the  generality  of  us  remain  through  education,  no 
sane  Anglo-Saxons,  since  the  middle  ages,  allow  *'  dirine  inapiration  "  to  men  of  their  ovm 
race.  We  accord  the  possibility  of  *'  inspiration  "  solely  to  members  of  a  single  ftmily 
that  liTod  a  long  time  ago,  and  a  great  way  off;  whose  deseendante  (although  nowadays 
ranking  among  the  best  dtlsens  of  our  cis- Atlantic  Bepublic)  are  still  abused  by  our  kins- 
folk across  the  water ;  and  who,  although  contributors  to  our  own  and  the  latter's  welfisre 
and  glory,  are  yet  debarred,  as  unworthy,  from  a  Toioe  in  the  British  Parliament :  and  all 
this,  forsooth,  in  the  same  breath  of  acknowledgment  that  we  deriTC  our  most  sacred  Code 
of  Belig^on,  Morals,  and  Laws,  from  their  inepired  ancestors !  and  whilst,  based  upon  our 
modem  notions  of  their  ancient  creed,  we  nasally  Tociferate  that  they  and  ourselyes  are 
"  of  one  blood  as  brothers  " ! 

Our  copy,  such  as  it  is,  may  be  accepted  without  hesitation  as  a  lineal  descendant  of  the 
primary  authorized  yersion  in  the  English  language,  wrested  fW>m  the  Lords  Spiritual  and 
Temporal  through  the  intelligence  of  our  ancestors,  quickened  by  the  Beformation;  who 
bled  for  the  same  righto  that  we  their  posterity  can  now  assert,  in  the  free  United  States 
of  America  and  in  Great  Britain  (without  eyen  the  merit  of  boldness),  yiz.  the  right  to 
examine  the  Scriptures^  and  eyerything  else,  for  ourselyes,  and  to  express  our  opinions 
thereon  in  the  broad  light  of  heayeo.  ' 

Archeologically  speaking,  in  order  to  insure  minute  exactness,  it  would  be  imperatiye  to 
collate,  year  by  year,  and  edition  by  edition,  the  whole  succession  of  copies  of  our  "  au- 
thorized yersion" ;  and,  by  retracing  firom  the  exemplar  on  opr  toble  backwards  to  that  first 
printed  in  black-letter  during  tiie  reign  of  king  James,  to  ascertain  whether  any  and  what 
changes,  beyond  yariations  in  typography,  may  haye  been  introduced.  But  such  dreadftil 
labor  is,  to  the  writer,  impossible  for  want  of  the  series ;  ungenial  to  his  tastes  as  well  as 
unnecessary  for  his  objects.  He  contente  himself  with  the  assertion  thai  there  are  many 
differences  between  such  copies  of  diyers  editions  that  haye  fsUen  in  his  way,  iJthough  con- 
sidered by  others  of  little  or  no  moment ;  being  chiefly  marffinal,  as  in  the  superadded  and 
spurious  chronology ;  or  ccqntular,  as  in  the  apocryphal  headings  to  chapters,  &c. ;  neither 
of  which  can  haye  any  more  to  do  with  the  original  **  word  of  God,"  than  the  printer's 
name,  the  binding,  or  the  paper. 

Aa  poeitmett  in  Philosophy  while  areheologiste  in  method,  we  clear  the  toble  of  these  com- 
paratiyely-triyial  disputotions ;  and  bounding  retrogressiyely  oyer  the  interyal  that  diyides 
our  generation  Arom  that  of  His  Migesty  King  James,  the  reader  is  requested  to  take  with 
us  the  historical  era  of  the  promulgation  of  the  "  authorized  yersion"  as  a  common  point 
of  departure ;  yiz. :  a.  d.  1611. 

The  most  ancient  printed  copy  of  king  James's  vereion^  that  has  been  accessible  to  ua, 
lies  in  the  British  Museum.  It  contains  a  memorandum  by  the  Bey.  Dr.  Home  to  the  effect 
that  the  iitlo^agee  are  of  the  primary  edition  of  the  year  1611,  but  that  the  rest  appertains 

0 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC 

TO    THE    Xth    chapter    OF   GENESIfi.  586 

io  thafc  of  1618.  The  whole  folio  is  printed  iq  black-letter.  Its  frontispieces  are  literary 
gems ;  and  so  faithfully  portraying  the  symbolism  of  £arope*S  "moyen  age"  in  their  astrolo- 
gieo-theological  emblems,  that  erery  antiquary  must  deplore  that  castigating  zeal  which 
has  effiiced  such  quidnt  expressions  of  ancestral  piety,  to  substitute  for  them,  in  some  of 
<mr  current  copies,  typographical  whims  that  cannot  pretend  CTen  to  the  renerable  halo  of 
bygone  days.  The  title-page  to  the  Old  Testament  is  embellished  by  Tignettes,  among 
which  figure  the  Liotij  Man,  Bull,  and  Eagle;  (86)  ancient  signs  for  the  solstices  and  equi- 
Bozes.  Moses  is  truthftaUy  represented,  as  in  Michel-angelo's  statue,  with  his  character- 
istic horns ;  aoeerding  to  the  Vulgaie  of  Exod.  (xzxIt.  29,  80,  86),  "  comtfta  esset  fades 
ana,"  which  preserves  one  sense  of  the  Hebrew  KRN,  horn.  The  lodiaco-heraldic  arms  of 
the  **12  Tribes"  of  Israel  are  also  preseryed ;  (87)  together  with  a  Tariety  of  other  symbols, 
•Tchsologically  precious.  That  of  the  New  Testament  is  still  more  curious,  inasmuch  as 
it  exhibits  the  esoteric  transmission  (peroeiyed  eyen  as  late  as  at  that  time  by  learned 
reformers  in  England)  of  certain  antique  symbolisms  of  Hebrew  Scriptures  into  those  of  the 
Orientalized  Greeks  or  Hellenixed  Jews.  The  *<4"  solstitial  and  equinoctial  signs  of  the 
*<4  teasont"  remain,  but  are  now  attached  to  the  figures  of  the  *'4'*  Evangelists;  while  the 
zodiaco-heraldic  arms  of  the  "12  Son*  of  Jacob**  (Om,  xlix.  1,  28),  whence  the  "12  Tribes 
o/Itrad,"  lie  parallel  with  and  officiate  as  "pendants"  to  the  "12  Apostles,"  each  with 
his  symbolical  relation  to  the  "12  months"  of  the  year,  &c. — the  whole,  indeed,  saving  its 
vneouth  artistic  execution,  so  vividly  solar  and  astral  in  conception,  as  to  betray  that  pri- 
meval JEgypto^Chaldaic  source  whence  students  of  hieroglyphical  and  cuneiform  rnonu^ 
raents,  —  exhumed  and  translated  more  than  two  centuries  subsequentiy  to  the  publication 
of  our  English  "  editio  princeps  "  —  now  know  that  the  types  of  this  imagery  are  derived. 
The  reader,  who  seeks  throughout  bur  modem  editions  in  vain  for  the  once-consecrated 
embellishments  of  ages  past,  may  now  perceive  that  we  are  not  altogether  ill-advised  when 
hinting  that  great  liberties  have  been  taken  with  the  authorized  English  Bible  between 
A.  D.  IGll,  era  of  its  first  promulgation,  and  those  copies  ostensibly  represented  in  the 
current  year  (1858)  to  be  its  lineal  and  un^utilated  offspring  .  Theologically,  however, 
these  variants,  through  omission  or  commi^on  are  not  of  the  same  importance  as  ihey 
seem  to  be  archeologically,  nor  need  we  dwell  upon  them  now. 

The  accuracy  of  this  English  version,  and  its  fidelity  to  the  original  Hebrew  and  Qreek 
HSS.,  must  rest  upon  the  opinion  we  can  form  of  its  Translators;  legalized  by  the  royal 
seal  and  confirmed  by  an  act  of  Parliament  With  the  value  of  the  twa  last  authorities^ 
regal  or  parliamentary,  in  questions  of  purely-philological  criticism  and  of  strictly-literary 
knowledge,  we  American  Republicans  may  be  excused  in  declaring  that  we  have  nothing 
to  do.  Until  it  is  proved  to  our  comprehension  that  tiie  acquaintance  of  those  worthy 
M.  P.'s  with  the  "  original  sa<{red  tongues  "  was  profound,  and  that  they  devoted  one  or 
more  Sessions  to  the  verification  of  the  minute  exactness  of  the  volume  they  endorsed,  their 
fiat  upon  the  literary  merit  of  the  book  itself  carries  with  it  no  more  weight  in  science 
than,  to  bring  the  case  home,  could  the  Presidential  signature  to  an  act  of  Congress  author- 
izing the  printing  in  Arabic,  at  national  expense,  of  the  Mohammedan  Kor^n,  in  the 
year  1858,  be  accepted  as  a  criterion  or  even  voucher  of  such  huge  folio's  historical  or 
philological  correctness. 

To  us  the  only  admissible  evidence  of  the  exactitude  of  king  James's  version,  as  a  faithftil 
exponent  of  the  "  word  of  God"  (originally  written,  and  closed  some  1600  years  before  that 
monarch's  reign,  in  Hebrew  and  in  Oreek),  must  be  twofold  —  kktoricdl,  and  exegetical:  the 
former,  by  establishing  the  learning,  oriental  knowledge,  critieal  skill,  and  integrity  of  the 
men;  the  latter,  by  demonstrating  that  rigid  examination  will  fail  to  detect  errors  in  the 
performance  itself.    Of  this  duplex  evidence  we  now  go  in  quest ;  remarking  at  the  outset, 

(80)  Con£  SALvntTK:  Sdenea  OcckUa;  \.  pp.  40,  47.  Comp.  Etekid  1.  10,  wtth  ApoccHypte  ir.  7.  Bzohil* 
ion:  PtuwytttagannerU;  Paris,  1842;  i.  p.  324,  pi.  4,  flg.  1. 

(87)  Oonf  KntCHxa:  (Bdipu*  JSffyptiaeus ;  Rome,  1663;  toI.  U.  part  1.  p.  21.  Dtiniiioim:  (BHpui  Judaieut; 
London,  1811 ;  pUte  lb—**  I>ii8ertfttion  on  XLIXth  Chapter  of  Qeneda  " :  —  and  Lamq  :  Aral^Nwiois,  pattm. 

74 

Digitized  by 

Google 

586  ABCH-aOLOGTCAL    INTRODUCTION 

that,  inasmuch  as  (precise  date  aoknown)  the  gift  of  ''diiioe  inspiration"  is  said  bj  Pro- 
testants to  bare  ceased  about  1750  years  ago  with  the  last  Apoitle^  nobodj  claims 
for  these  English  Translators  any  supernatural  assistance  during  the  progress  of  thdr 
pious  labors;  and,  therefore,  in  matters  appertaining  to  the  merelj-human  department 
of  linguistic  scholarship  (whilst  we  doubt  not  their  excellence  as  men,  their  attainments, 
nor  their  good  faith),  we  must  concede  the  chance  that  their  production,  owing  to  man's 
proneness  to  err,  may  be  found  to  fall  short,  in  a  literary  point  of  Tiew,  of  the  standard 
by  which  a  similar  performance  would  be  judged  were  a  new  TrarulaUon  of  the  Old  Testa- 
ment **  authorized,"  after  the  same  fashion,  at  the  middle  of  this  XlXth  century. 

I.  The  Historical  Testimomt. 

In  the  year  1603,  owing  to  the  enormous  defects  recognised  in  all  popular  trantlationg 
then  current,  the  reyision  that  had  been  ordered  in  the  days  of  Elisabeth  was  carried 
into  effect  by  James.  Fifty-four  of  the  most  learned  graduates  of  the  UniTcrsities  of 
Oxford  and  Cambridge  were  appointed  to  the  task,  tevm  of  whom  died  before  the  work 
was  completed :  (88)  among  the  last,  liyely,  (89)  the  best  if  not  the  only  Hdfraiat  on 
the  translation,  whose  labors  were  of  short  duration;  and,  <<  much  wei^t  of  the  woik 
lying  upon  his  skill  in  the  Oriental  tongues,"  his  loss  was  irreparable ;  because  the  sur^ 
Tiying  foriy-teven  translators  rejected  the  assistance  of  the  only  remaining  Hebraist  in 
England,  -ris.,  '*  Hugh  Broughton,  fellow  of  Christ  College,  Cambridge,  who  had  certainly 
attained  a  great  knowledge  in  the  Hebrew  and  Greek  tongues."  Indeed,  says  the  Tery 
learned  Bellamy,  (40)  from  whom  we  deriye  the  fact,  *4t  was  well  known  that  there  was 
not  a  critical  Hebrew  scholar  among  them ;  the  Hebrew  language,  so  indispensably  neces- 
sary for  the  accomplishment  of  this  important  work,  having  been  most  shamefully  neglected 
in  our  Universities ;  and,  as  at  this  day  [1818],  candidates  for  orders  were  admitted  with- 
out a  knowledge  of  this  primary,  this  most  essential  branch  of  biblical  learning.  It  was, 
as  it  is  at  present,  totally  neglected  in  our  schools,  and  a,  few  lessons  taken  from  a  Jew  in 
term-time,  whose  business  is  to  Judaize\\\f  and  not  to  Christianize,  serve  to  give  the  charac- 
ter of  the  Hebrew  scholar,"  in  England. 

In  consequence,  then,  of  the  inability  of  the /orty-teoes  translators  to  read  one  (and  the 
oldett,  the  aboriginal  *< divine  word")  of  those  *< sacred  tongues"  of  which  their  servils 
dedication  makes  parade,  **  it  appears  they  confined  themselves  to  the  Septuagint  (Greek) 
and  the  Vulgate  (Latin) ;  so  that  this  was  only  working  in  the  harness  of  the  first  transis- 
tors ;  no  translation  (excepting  perhaps  Luther's,  1580 — 1545),  from  tiie  original  Hebrew 
only,  having  been  made  for  1400  years,"  says  Bellamy. 

**  If  we  turn,"  continues  elsewhere  this  outspeaking  writer  (whose  erudition  nemo  nui 
imperitui  will  contest),  « to  the  translations  made  in  the  early  ages  of  the  Chrisdan  Church* 
we  approach  no  nearer  the  truth ;  for  as  the  common  translations  in  the  European  lan- 
guages were  made  from  the  modern  Septuagint  and  the  Vulgate,  where  errors  are  found 
in  these  early  versions  they  must  necessarily  be  found  in  all  the  translations  made  fh>m 
them." 

Whether  the  Vulgate  and  the  S^tuagint  versions  are  faultless  will  be  considered  anon. 
Our  present  affair  is  with  king  James's  trarulation,  and  certainly  appearances  are  not 
flattering. 

We  learn  from  Fuller,  (41)  how  at  once,  on  its  first  apparition,  directions  were  raised 
against  its  accuracy  in  England;  but  as  these  emanated  chiefly  from  Romamst  scholarship, 
in  those  days  of  reformation  at  a  discount,  their  validity  is  slurred  over  by  Protestant 
ecclesiastics.     Gradually,  as  Hebraical  scholarship  struggled  into  existence — that  such 

(38)  Fuileb:  CJmrck  HUtory ;  1666;  pp.  44-46. 

(39)  Ibidy  p.  47  -^  and  Hoain:  Introd.  to  the  OriL  Slud,  qfH.  Scrip.;  1838;  ii.  pp.  70,  80;  note  6. 

(40)  The  Bcljf  BSblty  newly  trandaUd  from  the  Original  Hebrtw;  with  nates  critieal  and  ts^tUmaiory ;  London, 
1818,  4to  —  pabliabed  by  the  rabecriptionf  of  Royalty,  Nobility,  and  Clergy;  bat  never  oompleted,  and  now  out 
of  print    Onr  quotations  are  from  the  **  general  preface.** 

(41)  Church  Bittory  ;  pp.  68, 60  —  also  Uoaxx:  Introd.;  IL  pp.  76-78. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

TO  THE    Xth    chapter    OP    GENESIS.  587 

giants  as  Waltoii,(42)  1657,  bad  redeemed  the  Oriental  wisdom  of  Oxford  —  the  Toioe  of 
the  great  Br.  Eennicott  (48)  was  uplifted  a  century  later,  1758-9,  protesting  Tehementlj 
against  the  perpetuation  of  fallacies  which  the  forty-teven  translators'  ignorance  of  Hebrew 
bad  spread  OTcr  the  land  through  king  James's  vertion.  He  commences  —  **  The  reader 
will  be  pleased  to  observe,  that,  as  the  study  of  the  Hebrew  language  has  only  been  reviving 
during  the  last  hundred  years,"  (44)  &c.  — that  is,  only  since  the  time  of  Walton,  his  prede- 
cessor:— which  passage  implies  that  fifty  years  preriously  to  the  latter's  epoch,  1667, 
(t.  e.,  at  the  time  of  the  forty-scTen  translators,  1608-11),  the  study  of  Hebrew  was  all 
but  defunct,  or  rather  it  had  scarcely  yet  begun  to  exist;  that  is,  in  Bnglan4'  ^ 

This  point  was  considered  so  familiar  to  every  general  reader,  that  no  hesitation  was 
felt  when  stating  it,  1849,  With  reference  to  the  same  question,  (45)  in  the  following  words: 
^  Now  the  Hebrew  language  in  1611  had  been  a  dead  language  for  more  than  two  thousand 
years,  and  though  these  men  (the  forty-seren  translators  aforesaid)  were  renowned  for 
fbeir  piety  and  learning,  yet  very  few,  if  any  of  them,  were  competent  to  so  important  a 
task.  In  fabt,  the  Hebrew  language  may  be  said  only  to  have  been  recovered  within  the 
last  century  by  modem  Orientalists :  and  firom  the  ignorance  of  these  very  translators  of 
the  original  language,  the  Old  Testament  was  taken  mostly  from  the  (ireek  and  Latin 
Tersions,  viz :  the  Sepiuagint  and  Vulgate.  Being,  then,  a  translation  of  bad  translations, 
which  had  passed  through  numerous  copyings,  how  could  it  come  down  to  us  without 
errors?" 

Nevertheless,  want  of  ordinary  information  on  Scriptural  literature  prompted  a  reviewer, 
(with  intrepidity  characteristic  of  that  undeveloped  stage  of  the  reasoning  faculties  which, 
in  accordance  widi  Comte's  positive  philosophy,  has  been  already  classed  as  **  the  theolo- 
gical,") to  indite  these  remarks: —  "  Dr.  Nott,  again,  speaks  disrespectfully  of  the  English 
Tersion  of  the  Scriptures.  He  makes  the  astounding  assertion  fhat  <  the  Hebrew  language 
may  be  said  only  to  have  been  recovered  within  the  last  century,  by  modem  Orientalists.' 
Most  surprising  is  it  that  any  one  should  believe  that  the  Jewa  should  have  wholly  lost  a 
knowledge  of  their  'ancient  and  sacred  tohgue ;  an4  that  a  knowledge  of  it  should  only 
have  been  recovered  by  modem  Orientalists,  displays  an  amazing  want  of  reading  and 
scholar-like  accuracy,  and  a  credulity  exceedingly  rare,  except  in  an  unbeliever  "  (i^) 

**  Mutato  nomine,  de  te  fabula  narratur ! "  Under  the  head  of  EN&AN  [supra^  p.  496],  the 
<<  Association  "  may  find  a  series  of  facts  on  the  permutations,  which  the  so-called  "Lingua 
Sancta  "  of  the  Israelites  has  undergone,  still  more  "  astounding,"  where  we  took  occasion 
to  repeat  and  enlarge  upon  the  positions  of  Dr.  Nott's  "Reply."  In  the  meanwhile,  the 
"  ipse  dixit "  above  quoted  of  Eennicott,  that  a  century  and  a  half  posterior  to  the  /orty- 
seven  translators  of  king  James's  version,  the  study  of  Hebrew  was  only  "  reriving,"  may, 
by  some,  be  considered  as  authoritative  a^  that  put  forth,  in  1850,  in  proof  of  the  united 
scholarship  of  an  "  Association." 

"  This  only  is  certain,  that,  in  Nehemiah's  time,  the  people  still  spoke  Hebrew  ;  that,  in 
the  time  of  Antiochus  Epiphanes  and  the  Maccabees,  the  Hebrew  was  still  written,  though 
the  Aramean  was  the  prevalent  language;  and,  on  the  contrary,  about  this  time,  and 
shortly  after  Alexander  the  Great,  even  the  learned  Jews  found  it  hard  to  understand  diffi- 
-  cult  passages  of  the  old  writing^,  becaute  the  language  had  ceased  to  be  a  living  speech.  The 
reign  of  the  SeleucidaB,  and  the  new  influence  of  an  Aramssan  people,  seem  (gradually  to 
have  destroyed  the  last  traces  of  it ;"  (47)  and  this  about  two  thousand  years  ago  I 

(42)  Biblia  Sacra  Ptiyglatta — complutentia  Teztas  Originalis  —  HebraioM  cam  Pentat  SuBarit,  Chaldaiooa, 
GneocM,  Yentonamque  Antiqaanim  -~  Samarlt,  Qrao.  Sept,  ChaIdakMe»  Sttriacn,  L«t  Vilify  Anbfo«»  JEthkH 
pk»,  Penicao. 

(43)  Anthor  of  Vetui  Testamentum  Hebraieum;  enm  varUs  L«otionibiu;  Ozon.  1T80;  and  of  Distertatio  Oen^- 
Talis  in  Vdus  Test  Heb. ;  1780. 

(44)  I.  DissertatioH— State  qftheprinUd  BOrew  Text  qffht  O.  Test,  considered;  (hdbrd,  1758;  p.  807. 

(45)  Norr:  Op.  dL;  p.  184. 

(46)  The  Rer.  Dr.  IIowb,  in  The  Southern  Presbjfterian  Resiew,  **eoiidooted  bj  an  AMOdatkm  of  HlnJsten;*' 
ColumbU,  S.O.;  toL  lU.  No.  8.;  Jan.  1860-~refated  hj  Dr.  Nor:  *« Cbronologr,  Ancient  and  Seriptnral,"  la 
SnUhem  Quarterly  Iteview;  Nor.  1860. 

^*7)  Gnoius,  apod  Fta-ktr's  De  Weite:  L,  Jppendix,  p.  467  —  oompan  also  p.  23L 

Digitized  by 

Google 

5jB8'  ARPHJ20L0GICAL    INTRODUCTION 

Saah  ie  the  position  of  Htbrwo  ia  the  world's  philological  history  as  a  9folun  iODgoe;  jet^ 
■*  a  kiiowle4ge  of  that  language  which  is  contained  in  the  scanty  relics  of  the  Old  Test*- 
ment  has  been  preserred,  though  but  imperfecUj,  by  means  of  tradition.  Some  time  after 
the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  in  the  Palestine  and  Babylonian  schools,  and  after  the  elerezith 
century  in  those  of  Spain,  this  tradition  was  aided  by  the  study  of  the  Arabic  lasgua^ 
and  its  grammar.  Jerome  learned  the  Hebrew  from  Jewish  scholars.  Their  pupils  were 
the  restorers  of  Hebrew  learning  among  the  Christians  of  the  sixteenth  century ; "  (4S)  that 
is,  on  the  continent;  for,  with  the  exception  of  Lively,  who  died,  and  Hugh  Brougbton, 
whose  aid  was  refused,  history  does  not  record  any  man  deserving  the  name  of  a  Hebrtatl 
in  Sngland,  even  during  1608-11.  Finally,  **the  name  lingua  taneta  was  first  given  to  the 
ancient  Hebrew  in  the  Chaldee  veruon  [made  long  after  the  Christian  era,  when  Stbrem 
had  orally  expired,]  of  the  Old  Testamenti  because  it  was  the  language  of  the  saered 
'  books,  in  distincticm  from  the  Chaldee,  the  popular  language^  which  was  called  Uh^im 
pro/ana, "  (49) 

SThese  citations  here  seem  indispensable,  lest  dogmatism,  peeping  from  ont  of  its  theokK 
gical  chrysalis,  should  feel  itself  again  called  upon  to  **  astound  '*  a  reader  by  charging  ns 
with  errors  of  its  own  commission :  otherwise  an  apology  would  be  due  for  this  exeursas. 
We  return  to  Dr.  Eennicott. 

After  setting  forth  the  causes  of  mistaken  renderings  in  king  James's  version,  he 
declares — "A  Jfew  Translation,  therefore,. prudentiy  undertaken  and  religiously  executed, 
is  a  blessing,  which  we  make  no  doubt  but  the  Legislature  [!]  within  a  few  years  will 
girant  us."  (50)    Six  years  later,  finding  his  h^imble  prayer  unheeded,  he  comes  out  clamor- 
ously against  **  our  authorized  versiop  " :  claiming  that  some  of  the  earlier  English  trans- 
lations were  more  faithful  and  literal,  (51)   and  backing  his  appeal  with  the  subjoined 
among  other  examples :      e 
Luke  xxiii.  82.  Christ  made  a  malefactor  I    **  And  there  were  also  two  other  malefactors 
led  with  him  to  be  put^  to  death ;"  instead  of  *'  two  others,  malefactors."     The  Greek 
reads  simply,  "  And  two  others,  evil-doers."  (52) 
Judges  xv.  4.     Three  hundred  foxes  tied  tail  to  tail,  instead  of  wheaten  sheaves  placed 
end  to  end!     **And  Samson  went  and  caught  three  hundred  fo^es,  and  took  fire- 
brands, and  turned  tail  to  tail,  and  put  a  firebrand  in  the  midst  between  two  tails." 
The  Hebrew  is,  **  And  Samson  went  and  gathered  three  hiindred  sheaves  of  wheat, 
and  taking  torches  and  turning  (the  sheaves)  end  to  end,  set  a  torch  in  the  midst 
between  two  ends."  (58) 
1  Kings  xvii.  6.    Elijah  not  fed  by  ravens,  but  by  Arabs  !    "  And  the  ravens  brought 
^im  bread  and.  flesh,"  &c.     In  the  Hebrew,    <*  And  Uie  dBBIM  (ARaB-iin)  brou^t 
him  bread  and  flesh."    Eennicott  thinks  OrVim,  inhabitants  of  Oreb,  or  Orbo — **  villm 
in  finibus  Arabum,"  says  St.  Jerome:    but,  Arabs  seem  to  us  more  natural  and 
correct     In  no  contingency  **  crows  " !  (54) 
It  is  superfluous  now  to  continue  our  excerpta  from  Eennicott,  or  narrate  how  it  comes 
to  pass  that,  owing  to  nice  appreciations  of  the  Text  that  none  of  them  could  construe, 
the  forty-seven  (in  Psalms  cix.)  have  made  pious  king  David  (disputed  author  of  that 

(4S)  Di  Witr:  Parktr's  trand.;  Boston,  1843;  L  p.  128— dted  hj  Morr,  in  the  **  Reply ."  Comp.  tbo,  Pait 
ntXT:  Academical  Lectures  on  the  Jewith  Scriptures;  Boston,  1838;  L  pp.  8-20  —  "  It  is  out  of  the  queetioa  &r 
any  man  to  suppose,  that  he  can  be  acquainted  with  Hebrew  as  famOiarly  and  thoroughly,  as  he  may  1m 
with  Latin  and  Greek." 

(49)  CosAirfs  Geseidms:  Hebrew  Grammar;  New  York,  1846;  p.  28. 

(50)  Op.  di.;  p.  567.    C£,  also,  Mcmx:  Baletitine;  Paris,  1845;  pp.  438-436. 

(51)  IL  DissenoMon;  Oxford,  1750;  pp.  579,  580^  seq. 

(52)  Sharpb:  N.  TetL;  p.  165. 

(53)  Joan  Doyit:  Vindioation  qf  the  HArew  Ser^urts;  London,  1771  —  in  his  ttniaoM  assaali upon  the  ** An* 
thorised  Version,**  and  lamentations  at  English  ignoranoe  of  Hebrew,  also  derides  the  *<lbzeB";  p.71,  scf. 
Ouau:  -Idores  Saints  VengU;  Paris,  1845;  U.  pp.  57,  58,  contests  the  "ftg6ts'*  — but  Tide  Cahsk:  tL  ppw 
66, 69,  note  4. 

(54)  QLAntx:  Op.  cH.;  U.  p.  85,  reads  '^Arabes";  but  Caheit,  viiL  p.  77,  <*oorbeaux"~  acutely  adding,  *<Unl- 
versa  historla  fabnlamm  plena  eet." 

Digitized  by 

Google 

TO    THE    THE    Xth    CHAPTER    OP    GEN13SIS.  589 

rfatpsody)  (65)  utter  such  fearftil  imprecations  ftgainst  bis  foes;  -when,  in  the  *<  original 
saered  tongae,"  he  actually  complains  that  his  enemies  are  heaping  these  outrageous  male- 
dictions upon  himself  t 

Well  might  the  Rererend  Doctor  quote  MicheUs  —  *'  I  am  amazed  vhen  I  hear  some  men 
vindicate  our  common  readings  with  as  much  seal  as  if  the  editors  had  been  inspired  by 
the  Holy  Ghost  V*  Still  better  does  he  terminate  his  earnest  work  with  supplications  for 
a  new  Hebrew  Text,  and  for  a  new  English  **  authorized  "  tranelaiion. 

Reader,  these  things  were  published  at  Oxford  and  disseminated  oyer  Great  Britain 
about  ninety-four  years  ago  —  not  in  expensiTe  folios  veiled  through  the  dead  languages, 
but  in  two  English  ociavoe — not  by  a  <* skeptic*'  whose  indignation  at  any  kind  of  impos- 
ture impels  him  to  spurn  it,  but  by  that  Church  of  England  Divine,  collator  of  six  hundred 
and  ninety-two  ancient  Hebrew  biblical  manuscripts,  (66)  whose  folios,  together  with  the 
Biblia  PolygUMa  of  his  illustrious  precursor,  Walton,  are  the  only  English  labors  on  the 
Scriptures  that  receive  homage  Arom  continental  erudition,  as  performances  on  a  par  with 
the  colossal  researches  of  Germans,  Frenchmen,  and  Italians,  even  unto  this  day  I 

Eennicott  passed  away.  Other  scholars  followed  in  his  footsteps.  From  a  few  of  tiie 
latter  we  extract  what  they  have  left  in  print  respecting  king  James's  version,  with  a  pre- 
fatory citation  from  Bellamy,  to  whom  we  owe  the  collection.  (67) 

«  It  is  allowed  by  the  learned  in  this  day  and  every  Christian  nation,  that  the  authorized 
translations  of  the  sacred  Scriptures,  in  many  places,  are  not  consistent  with  the  original 
Hebgrew.  A  few  extracts  are  here  given,  from  some  of  our  most  learned  and  distinguished 
vrriters,  who  were  decidedly  of  opinion,  that  a  New  Translation  of  the  Scriptures  was  abso- 
lutely necessary;  not  only  on  account  of  the  great  improvement  in  our  language,  but 
because  the  Translatort  have  erred  respecting  thingrs  most  essential.  The  following  are 
some  of  the  eminent  men  who  have  left  their  testimony  concerning  the  necessity  of  a  new 
translation : — 

*  Were  a  version  of  the  Bible  executed  in  a  manner  suitable  to  the  magnitude  of  the 
undertaking,  such  a  measure  would  have  a  direct  tendency  to  establish  the  faith  of  thou- 
sands. .  .  .  Let  the  Hebrew  and  Christian  prophets  appear  in  their  proper  garb :  let  us  make 
them  holy  garmenU  for  glory  and  for  beauty  \  ,  .  ,  the  attempU  of  mdividudU  should  be  pro^ 
tnoied  by  the  natural  patrons  of  sacred  learning.*  —  (Bishop  Newcombe.) 

*  Innumerable  instances  might  be  given  of  faulty  translations  of  the  divine  original.  . .  . 
An  accurate  translation,  proved  and  supported  by  sacred  criticism,  would  quash  and  silence 
most  of  the  objections  of  pert  and  profane  cavillers.'  —  (Blaokwill's  Sac,  Class, 
J^ef,  1781.) 

*  Our  English  version  is  undoubtedly  capable  of  very  great  improvements.'  —  (Wati&- 
i^and's  Script  Vindicated,  Part  8,  p.  64.) 

<  Nothing  would  more  effectually  conduce  to  this  end,  than  the  exhibiting  the  Holy  Scrip- 
tures themselves  in  a  more  advantageous  and  just  light,  by  an  accurate  revlBal  of  our  vulgar 
translation.'  —  (Dr.  Lowth's  Visital.  Sermon,  at  Durham,  1768.) 

*  The  common  version  has  many  considerable  faults,  and  very  much  needs  anotiier  review.' 
-^{BibUolh,  Lit,,  1728,  p.  72.) 

*  The  Old  Testament  has  suffered  much  more  than  the  New,  in  our  Translation.'  —  (Don- 
DBiDQs's  Fref  to  Family  EzposUor.) 

*  Many  of  the  inconsistencies,  improprieties,  and  obscurities,  are  oc<Mtsioned  by  the  trans- 
lators' misunderstanding  the  true  import  of  the  Hebrew  words  and  phrases,  showing  the 
benefit  and  expediency  of  a  more  correct  and  intelligent  translation  of  the  Bible.'  —  (Pilk- 
ihqton's  Remarks,  1759,  p.  77.) 

'  The  version  now  in  use  in  many  places  does  not  exhibit  the  sense  ef  the  Text ;  and 
mistakes  it,  besides,  in  an  infinite  number  of  instances.'  —  (Dubbll'b  Crit,  on  Job,  1772, 
Fr^.) 

•That  necessary  work,  a  New  Translation  of  the  Holy  Scriptures.'  —  (Lowth's  Frelim 
Dissert,  to  Isaiah,  p.  69.) 

(56)  CC  I>K  Wsm:  U.  pp.  520-S29— and  Cahkx  :  xUi.  p.  2Vt,  **  Sommalre,"  and  p.  218,  note  20. 
(60)  Diss.  Om.  in  Vd.  T.  Beb. ;  1790 ;  Tables,  pp.  110-112. 
(67)  Op.eU.:  ^OcneralFrdkoa";  1818. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

590  '  ARCHAEOLOGICAL    INTRODUCTION 

'  Whoerer  examines  onr  yenion  in  present  use,  will  find  that  it  is'ambigooiis  and  ineor* 
rect,  even  in  matters  of  the  highest  importaooe/  —  (Prof.  Symoxd's  Obtervaliatu  on  tks  Ex- 
pediency  of  reviting  thepraent  Version,  1789.) 

*  At  this  time,  a  New  Translation  is  mnch  wanted,  and  nuiTersallj  called  for.' — (Oaxxv's 
Preface  to  Poetical  Parts  of  the  New  Test.) 

*  Great  improyements  might  now  be  made,  because  the  Hebrew  and  Greek  languages 
have  been  much  better  coltiyated,  and  far  better  understood,  since  the  year  1600.' —  (Dr. 
Kxmmicott's  Remarks t  &c.,  1787,  p.  6.) 

<  The  common  yersion  has  mistaken  the  true  sense  of  the  Hebrew  in  not  a  few  places. 
Is  it  nothing  to  deprive  the  people  of  that  edification  which  they  might  have  received,  had 
a  fair  and  just  exposition  been  substituted  for  a  false  one  ?  Do  we  not  know  the  advan- 
tages commonly  taken  by  the  enemies  of  Revelation,  of  triumphing  in  olgections  plausibly 
raised  against  the  Divine  Word,  upon  the  basis  of  an  unsound  text  or  wrong  translation?* 
— (Blanet's  PreUm.  Disc,  to  Jeremiah,  1789.) 

<  They  [ihe  forip-seven']  are  not  acquainted  with  the  Hebrew,  without  which  no  man  dkould 
pretend  to  be  a  critic  upon  the  writings  of  the  Old  Testament.  It  has  some  peculiar  pro- 
perties and  idioms  which  no  other  language  has,  with  which  every  critic  should  be 
acquainted.  .  .  .  The  Hebrew  is  fixed  in  nature,  and  cannot  change.  ...  He  should  be 
acquainted  with  the  genius  of  the  Hebrew  tongue,  and  with  its  manner  of  expressing  spi- 
ritual things,  under  their  appointed  images  in  nature.'  —  (Romainx's  Works,  toL  t.  p.  xvL) 

'  It  is  necessary  that  translations  should  be  made  from  one  time  to  another,  accommo- 
dated to  the  present  use  of  speaking  or  writing.  This  deference  is  paid  to  the  heathen 
classics,  and  why  should  the  Scriptures  meet  with  less  regard  ?'  —  (Purvkr.) 

*  The  common  English  translation,  thpugh  the  best  I  have  seen,  is  capable  of  (eing 
brought,  in  several  places,  nearer  to  the  original.'  —  (Wxslkt.) 

For  other  arguments,  continues  our  author,  see  Bishop  Newcombe's  <*  Chief  reasons  in 
support  of  a  corrected  English  translation  of  the  Scriptures  for  national  use :  "  adding  oa 
his  own  account :  — 

"  Notwithstanding  all  that  has  been  done,  the  translators  have  left  it  [our  version]  de- 
fective in  mood,  tense,  person,  gender,  infinitive,  imperative,  participles,  cor^funetions,  kc. ;  and 
in  many  instances,  almost  in  every  page,  we  find  verses  consisting  in  a  great  part  of  iUxlia; 
in  some,  a  third  part;  in  others,  nearly  half;  as  may  be  seen  in  &e  Bibles  where  the  words 
for  which  there  is  not  any  authority  in  the  original  are  always  so  marked." 

Descending  into  works  of  less  exclusive  circulation,  what  do  we  encounter  T 

**  It  is  not  to  be  denied  that  a  translation  of  Holy  Scripture,  if  undertaken  in  the  present 
day,  would  have  many  advantages  superior  to  those  which  attended  king  James's  transla- 
tion. The  state  of  knowledge  is  much  improved.  ...  Our  language  has  undergone  some 
changes  in  the  course  of  two  centuries,  by  which  it  has  varied  from  being  precisely  the 
same  as  when  our  translators  wrote.  Many  words  which  were  then  polite  and  elegant,  are 
,  now  vulgar,  to  say  the  least  .  .' .  Nor  can  we  refrain  from  complaining  also  of  the  negligent 
manner  in  which  the  press  has  been  conducted  in  all  our  public  editions :  what  should  be 
printed  in  poetry  is  set  as  prose ;  what  should  be  marked  as  a  quotation,  or  a  speech,  reads 
like  a  common  narrative.  .  .  .  And  this  perplexity  is  occasionally  increased  by  improper 
divisioDs  of  chapters  and  verses,  which  but  too  often  separate  immediate  connection.  . .  . 
Undoubtedly,  the  present  version  is  sufficient  to  all  purposes  ot piety,** — (Taylor's  Calmefs 
Dictionary  of  the  Holy  Bible — voce  "Bible.") 

"  It  is  needless  to  pronounce  a  formal  encomium  on  our  authorized  version.  The  time, 
learning,  and  labor  expended  on  it  were  well  bestowed.  It  far  surpasses  every  other  English 
version  of  the  entire  Bible  in  the  characteristic  qualities  of  simplicity,  energy,  purity  of 
style,  as  also  in  uniform  fidelity  [/]  to  the  original.  A  revision  of  it,  however,  is  wanted, 
or  rather  a  new  translation  from  the  Hebrew  and  Greek,  based  upon  »<[/]" — ("S.  D.,"  im 
KiTTO,  ii.  p.  919.) 

"  No  less  than  80,000  various  readings  (58)  of  the  Old  and  New  Testament  have  been 

(58)  Say  rather,  with  the  Rev.  Prot  Moos  Stuabt — **  Invettigttion  haa  dtodpatad  thit  pleaaant  dveam.  la 
the  Hebrew  MSS.,  that  have  been  examined,  some  80,000  variouM  readingt  aetnaUy  oeeor,  aa  to  the  Heltw 
oonaonante.  How  many  aa  to  the  vowel-pointe  and  aooentf,  no  man  knows.  And  the  like  to  this  is  tme  of  Hw 
New  Testament"— (<V&  HisL  and  D^enct  qftheO.  Tkst,  Qmm ;  Andover,  1835*;  p.  102.)  **  Nemo  est,  qui  in  nao 
aliqao  oodke,  dve  MSto  sive  impreeso,  textnm  inoorrnptum  exhiberi  arbitntnr.  lUderait  doeti;  d  qois  eodlS> 
oem  aliqnem  com  istis  Apostolomm  autographls,  in  omnibus,  consentire  dlzwlt"— (Kumodn:  Dissert  Am.; 
par.  18,  p. «.) 

Digitized  by 

Google 

TO    THE    Xth    chapter    OP    GENESIS.  591 

'  discoyered ;  .  .  .  and  putting  alteratioi^  made  knowingly,  for  the  purpose  of  corrupting  the 
text,  out  of  the  question,  we  must  admit,  that  from  the  circumstances  connected  with  tran- 
scribing, some  errata  may  have  found  their  way  into  it ;  and  that  the  sacred  Scriptures  have 
in  this  cose  suffered  the  same  fate  as  other  productions  of  antiquity.  ...  In  the  last  220 
years,  critical  learning  has  so  much  improved,  and  so  many  new  mantucripts  have  come  to 
light,  as  to  call  for  a  revision  of  the  present  authorized  version."  —  (Siabs,  Hiet,  of  the 
Bible,  1844,  pp.  651,  666.) 

'*  The  swond  thing  which  I  would  strongly  recommend,  is  constantly  to  study  and  penuse 
the  Original  Scriptures ;  the  Old  Testament  in  the  Hebrew,  and  the  New  Testament  in  tne 
Greek.  .  .  .  There  is  n5  such  thing  as  any  written  Word  of  God  independent  on  the  word  of 
man.  The  Lord  Jehovah  may  have  uttered  the  whole  Law  from  Mount  Sinai ;  and,  yet, 
Moses  may  not  have  accurately  recorded  it.  .  .  .  In  like  manner,  the  Gospel  may  have  been 
ftiUy  preached  by  Christ ;  and,  yet,  the  Evangelists  may  not  have  fully  recorded  it. .  .  . 
One  painful  conviction  is,  that  the  plain  import -of  the  Word  of  God  has  been  most  fan- 
iaiticalli/f  ignorcaiUy,  and  wlfuUy  perverted,  as  well  in  the  translation  as  in  the  interpola- 
tions. .  .  .  Many  gross  pervereione,  not  to  say  mistranslations,  of  the  Sacred  Text  have  been 
occasioned  by  dogmatical  prejudices  and  sectarian  zeal." — (Rev.  John  Oxlee,  Letters  to  the 
Archbishop  of  Canterbury,  London,  Hatohard,  1845;  pp.  117,  187-8.) 

Fuerunt  autem,  relates  Eennicott,  qui  de  hac  re  aliter  senserunt :  among  the  non-extinct  is 
the  Rev.  Dr.  Home,  who  makes  the  fiercest  battle  in  defence  of  *'  our  authorized  version ;" 
quoting  many  writers  on  the  opposite  side  to  ours,  Vhose  combined  <*  association,"  like  the 
one  prelauded,  /ails  in  authority  for  want  of  Hebraical  knowledge  in  its  parts ;  but,  when 
the  best  is  done  for  it,  he  naively  remarks  on  our  translation — **  It  is  readily  admitted 
that  it  is  not  immaculate ;  and  that  a  rerision,  or  correction^  of  it  is  an  object  of  desire  to 
the  friends  of  religion  ^  —  and  then  the  reverend  gentleman  breaks  forth  in  rhapsodical 
glorifications  and  thanksgivings,  that  it  is  not  worse!  {59) 

Nor  are  the  erudite  among  Christians  alone  the  denouncers  of  king  James's  version. 
Anglicized  Israelites  hold  it  in  estimation  equally  low,  to  judge  by  the  following  Editorial : 

<*  What  we  should  like  to  see  at  the  Wbrld*s  Fair. — It  would  give  us  a  great  deal  of  pleasure 
to  see  at  the  World's  Fair  a  correct  English  version  of  the  Bible,  resting  upon  the  solid 
fundament  of  the  results  of  modem  criticism ;  reaching  the  elevation  of  modem  science, 
and  being  accomplished  by  men  of  a  thorough  scholastic  education,  and  free  Arom  every 
foreign  infiuence,  who  take  the  letter  for  what  it  is  without  paying  any  regard  to  authorities, 
and  without  coming  to  the  task  with  a  certain  quantity  of  prejudices.  Such  a  work  would 
reconcile  science  and  religion ;  it  would  reclidm  many  an  erring  wanderer  to  the  straight 
path  of.  truth ;  it  would  evaporate  many  a  prejudice  and  a  superstition ;  it  would  greatly 
modify  many  sectarian  views,  and  would  closely  unite  the  men  of  opposite  nations.  It  ap- 
pears, however,  that  the  men  for  this  task  are  not  yet  among  the  mortals ;  for  .the  theolo- 
gians come  to  the  Bible  with  an  established  system,  which  must  lead  them  away  from  the 
true  import  of  letters,  where  they  find  again  their  own  system  whenever  it  can  be  done 
conveniently ;  and  where  their  sentiments  frequently  overbalance  their  critical  judgment" 
— (TAc  Asmonean,  New  York,  July  22,  1858.) 

Thus  we  might  go  on,  citing  wprk  after  work  wherein,  if  king  James's  version  is  not 
denounced  for  its  perversions  of  the  '*  original  sacred  tongues,"  its  erroneous  readings  are 
more  or  less  apologetically  but  thoroughly  confirmed  by  many  instances  in  which  the 
erudition  and  fairness  of  the  anthers  compel  them  to  substitute  their  own  translations  for 
those  of  our  *' authorized"  copy.  Notable  examples  may  be  seen  in  the  recent  work 
of  our  much-honored  fellow-citizen.  Dr.  McCulloh.  (60). 

Albeit,  as  said  before,  if  our  version  were  decently  accurate,  why  should  so  many  labo- 
rious men  run  the  risks  of  incurring  some  theological  obloquy,  coupled  with  pecuniary 
loss,  in  efforts  to  correct  the  false  renderings  of  that  superannuated  edition  by  publishing 
emendatory  retranslation^  in  English  f    Among  the  many  we  have  consulted  may  be  cited : 

**  The  Holt  Biblv,  according  to  the  established  Versions,  with  the  exception  of  the  sub- 
stitution of  the  original  Hebrew  names,  in  place  of  the  words  Lobd  oir  God,  and  of  a  few 
corrections  thereby  rendered  necessary.    (London,  1830;  Westley  and  Davis.)" 

This  book,  however,  seems  to  have  closed  at  2  Kings.    The  uninitiated  may  be  informed 

— ,*— — ■ — 

(59)  Op.eiL;  IL  pp.  77-83. 

(60)  Orei&Oitv  of  the  Scripturu;  Baltimore,  1862.  See  purtiealarly  vol.  U.  Appendix,  <*  On  the  Human  SonL" 
pp.  466-480. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

692  ARCHiBOLOGICAL    INTBODUCTION 

tbftt  the  word  «  Lord"  ^  oir  rtrnoa  Tenders  Merely  the  Ihmmm^  the  Vnlgile,  and  tte 
KvpMf  of  the  Septnegint,  end  does  not  direotl j  translate  the  origimd  Hebreir  word  leHOneff ; 
the  latter  being  suppressed,  bj  **  His  Mijesty's  speoial  command,'*  in  the  *'  authorized  ** 
copies,  only  6846  timet  /  The  number  of  times  it  occurs  in  the  Eebreta  Text  are  6855 :  (61) 
on  which  hereafter.    Another  is :  — 

<*  The  Holt  Biblv,  containing  the  authorized  Tersion  of  the  Old  and  New  Testaments, 
with  twenty  thousand  [/  ]  emendations.    (London,  1841 ;  Longman,  Brown  k  Co.)" 

Its  titU  attracted  our  notice,  as  saToring  of  a  Taurie  genus  known  as  Hibeniian;  aptly 
illustrated  in  that  "same  old  knife  which  belonged  to  <my  grandfiftther,'  after  baring 
receiTod  thirteen  new  handles  and  seyenteen  new  blades."  The  prtfaee  justified  our  first 
impressions,  when  we  read — **  This  is  our  AVTHoninn  Ehoush  tumiqk,  which  is  chax^ 
acterised  by  unequalled  fidelity,  perspicuity,  simplicity,  dignity,  and  power. ...  No  one 
has  yet  detected  a  single  error  [in  it  I ! !]  in  reference  to  those  great  and  vital  truths  in 
which  all  Christians  agree."  After  which,  where  the  utility  of  20,000  emendations f 
Suffice  it,  that,  maugre  this  huge  amount,  not  percei?ing  any  of  the  catalogue  of  *<  em^i- 
dations"  hereinafter  submitted  to  the  reader,  we  reftained  from  its  purchase,  after  a 
morning's  elimination. 

A  third,  which  we  hare  long  possessed  through  the  kindness  of  its  publishers,  merits 
attention,  and  is  ushered  by  a  most  excellent  prefaoe  :  — 

*'  The  Holt  Biblb,  being  the  English  Tcrsion  of  the  Old  and  New  Teetaments,  made  by 
order  of  King  James  L,  carefully  revised  and  amended,  by  soTeral  ^blioal  Scholars.  (Sixth 
edition,  Philadelphia:  J.  B.  Lippincott  &  Co.,  1847.)" 

After  a  brief  sketdi  of  preceding  translations  into  Englidi,  finom  1290  to  1611,  the 
preface  states  —  '*  From  these  facts,  and  from  comparing  the  translation  of  king  James 
with  those  which  preceded  it,  nothing  is  more  obvious,  than  that  the  common  Tersion 
is  but  a  rcTision  of  these  executed  by  Tindal,  CoTcrdale,  and  othms,  and  that,  howcTer 
excellent  it  may  be,  the  paramount  praise,  under  Ck>d,  is  due  to  Williax  Tihdal  and 
MiLis  CovKBDALi."  In  the  aboye  sentiments  we  heartily  concur ;  haying  enjoyed  oppor- 
tunities, in  the  course  of  our  studies,  of  comparing  some  points  in  both  of  the  latters'  self- 
sacrificing  editions  with  the  so-called  **  rerision  "  of  the  fdrty-^even.  AMreitUKm^  howerer, 
like  Abderitan  DiMOCBrnra,  in  some  branches  of  Oriental  philology;  and  possessing,  fur- 
thermore, an  appasatus  tolerably  complete  of  continental  criticism  in  biblical  matters;  we 
prefer  direct  references  to  the  Hebrew  Tezt,  now  rendered  accessible  in  a  yery  handy  form, 
and  illumined  by  Cahen's  most  useftil  parallel  French  translation.  (62) 

From  the  nature  of  these  premises  it  will  be  seen  that,  saye  under  the  scientific  point  of 
yiew  and  for  the  general  cause  of  human  enlightenment,  the  writer,  as  an  indiyidual,  is 
not  urgent  in  exacting  another  <*  authorized  "  yersion  of  Texts  to  which  he  has  acquired 
(what  any  man  who  really  is  serious  in  such  matters  can  acquire  as  he  has)  access  for  him- 
self. At  the  present  day  that  in  Protestant  countries,  such  as  Great  Britain  and  the  United 
States,  it  has  become  a  common  practice  to  worthip  king  James's  translation,  and  **  study 
diyinity ;"  that  our  English  yersion,  with  all  the  unnecessary  deriations  from  its  Hebrew 
prototype,  is  reyerenced  by  the  masses  as  a  **  fetiche,"  or  yiewed  witii  a  rdio  of  tliat  send- 
idolatrous  awe  reftised  by  ProtCstants  to  crucifixes,  pictures,  or  images,  our  obseryations 
may  perhaps  seem  indecorous  to  those  who  choose  to  cramp  their  intellects  and  continue 
to  ignore  the  splendid  results  of  continental  exegesis.  We  should  regret  the  fkct,  the 
more  so  because  offence  is  unintentional ;  but,  **  the  epoch  of  constraint  has  passed  away 
[in  these  United  States]  for  oyer:  a  freeman  will  be  free  in  all  things;  material  and  political 
emancipation  suffice  no  longer  for  him.  He  knows  that  there  is  a  sublimer  liberty,  that  of 
thought  and  belief.    It  is  with  sorrow  that  he  beholds  those  sweet  illusions  fleeting  away 

(61)  Waltoh:  BibL  Biyg. ;  Prolog.  0.  8,  {  8,  p.  275.  Hokhb:  Op,ciL;  L  p.  88.  But,  al)OT«  til,  Lahci:  ite» 
hpomena;  1845;  paetim, 

(62)  Lk  Bidlb:  Traduction  NouodU;  23  ootaTo  Tolumes ;  Pirb,  1881-^51. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

TO   THE   Xtk   chapter    OF   GENESIS.  59S 

tiiftt  whilom  lutd  been  tlie  ohtna  of  hie  childhood ;  but  reaaon  exacts  it,  and  he  saeriftoeft 
his  illHsioBS  upon  the  altar  of  truth."  (68) 

Of  that  wherein  the  aspiratione  of  a  Newoombe,  a  Lowth,  and  a  Kennicott  (to  say  nothing 
aboat  others  of  the  best  of  England's  biblical  critics),  haTO  been  baulked,  it  would  be  at  this 
daj  egregious  folly  to  entertain  further  hopes,  viz :  that  the  British  Lords,  Spiritual  and 
Temporal,  will,  in  our  generation  at  least,  permit  such  a  radically-oorrect  re-trmuloHon  of 
the  Hebrew  Scriptures  as  would  supersede  the  vulgar  version  **  appointed  to  be  read  in 
ohorches."  The  UniTersities,  especially  the  Ozonian,  —  part  of  whose  support  depends, 
like  some  institutions  on  this  ^de  of  the  wat^r, — upon  a  <<Book  Concern,"  would  oppose  such 
violation  of  vested  privileges.  By  the  evangelical  dissenting  sects,  sundry  of  whose  various 
hierarchies  derive  subsistence  f^om  those  very  linguistio  quibbles  that  a  new  standard 
vermon  would  obliterate,  sneh  a  proposition  would  be  repelled  with  devout  horror.  JExtier 
ffall  shudders,  even  at  the  thought:  <<  Bible  Societies  "  whine  that  the  reign  of  Anti-Chiist 
is  oonae  indeed.  As  positivists  we  lament  not  that  our  brief  span  of  life  will  have  been 
measured,  .long  before  a  new  English  version  may  be  *'  authorized ;"  because,  through  the 
stow  but  unerring  laws  of  human  advancement  in  knowledge,  by  the  time  that  tieoU^fUts 
shall  have  accomplished  their  metaphysical  transition  and  have  awakened  to  the  stem  reali- 
ties of  the  case,  ttte  development  of  science  will  have  rendered  any  new  traneloHon  alto- 
geUier  supererogatory  among  the  educated  who  are  creating  new  reiigione  for  themselves. 

la  the  utterance  of  these  long-pondered  thoughts,  though  written  years  ago,  we  have 
been  somewhat  anticipated  by  our  learned  friend  McCulliA ;  (64)  with  a  quotation  from 
whose  adnnrable  chi^^  on  the  *<  Value  of  TransUtioas"  we  oonclude  this  kUtorkal  divi- 
tion  of  the  two-fold  evideaoe. 

*'  No  emendation  howevo*  of  oar  common  translation  would  affect  the  revelations  made 
in  the  Scripture,  upon  any  subject  which  Jehovah  has  directly  addressed  to  the  understand- 
ing or  consciences  of  mankind,  whether  as  regards  their  faith  or  practice.  That  a  new 
translation  would  considerably  affect  our  theological  creeds,  or  our  ecclesiastical  institu- 
tions, there  is  no  doubt ;  but  this  agaii^  is  a  most  desirable  object  if  such  things  are  not 
accordant  to  the  undoubted  word  of  God.  No  Christian  in  his  senses  can  wish  to  remain 
under  any  error  resp^tting  the  import  of  Jehovah's  revelatioas ;  and  hence  noUiing  caa  be 
more  absurd  than  to  oppose  a  correction  of  our  common  translation,  on  the  ground  that  it 
would  overturn  some  of  the  inventions  that  theologians  have  heretofore  constructed  iqK>n 
the  comparatively  defective  Hebrew  or  Greek  Texts  upon  which  that  translation  has  been 
made. 

**  The  popular  objections  of  unlearned  persons  to  the  amendment  of  our  present  transla- 
tion, however,  are  often,  unfortunately  for  Christianity,  sustained  by  learned  men  and 
accompli^ed  scholars,  whose  interests  or  whose  prejudices  are  too  deeply  involved  in  the 
present  condition  of  things  to  be  willing  to  admit  of  any  innovation.  Their  creeds,  insti- 
tutions, and  ecclesiastical  establishments,  for  the  most  part,  wei;^  constructed  contempora- 
neously by  divines  or  statesmen  of  similar  theological  or  ecclesiastical  riews  with  those  who 
made  our  authorized  version.  To  change  the  terms  or  texts  of  Scripture  that  have  been 
heretofore  used  as  the  basis  for  ecclesiastical  institutions,  or  theological  assumptioas  coa- 
cerning  divine  truths,  are  shocks  too  riolent,  either  for  the  pride  or  self-interests  of  men, 

to  acquiesce  in  wUlingly Dr.  Yicesimus  Knox,  (65)  of  the  Church  of  England, 

says,  *  For  my  own  part,  if  I  may  venture  to  give  an  opinion  contrary  to  that  of  the  profound 
eottatore  of  Hebrew  Manuteriptt,  I  cannot  help  thinking  a  new  translation  of  the  Bible  an 
attempt  extremely  dangeroue  and  quite  unnecessary.  Instead  of  serving  the  cause  of  religion, 
which  it  the  ottentible  motive  for  the  wish,  lam  convinced  that  nothing  would  tend  more  mmum- 
diatefy  to  shake  the  basis  of  the  Establishment  '  (t.  «.,  of  the  Church  of  England).  <  Time,' 
says  the  reverend  gentleman,  '  gives  a  venerable  air  to  all  things.  Sacred  things  acquire 
pMiliar  sanctity  by  long  duration.' " 

And  finally,  the  unlettered  dogmatist  who,  possessing  no  knowledge  of  the  real  merits 
of  the  topics  before  us,  would  thrust  into  court  "  his  "  opinion,  may  as  well  be  told  by  the 
reader,  that:  — 

*<  At  the  rational  point  of  view,  a  sentiment  such  as  is  termed  Christian  conscience,  a 

(08)  Mum:  BaoaneHt  in  OAHxys  Sxodus;  p.  iv. 

(e4)  Op.eiL;L  pp.  281, 283. 

(«)  Jbmmd  ObUuarv;  it  p.  852;— C^  dL;  p.  288,  not«. 

75 

Digitized  by 

Google 

694  ARCHiEOLOGIGAL    INTRODUCTION 

sentiment  that  reposes  upon  suppositions,  has  no  Tdoe  in  scientific  discussions ;  sud,  erery 
time  that  it  woald  meddle  with  tiiem,  it  oaght  to  be  called  to  order  through  the  simple  dio- 
torn :  Taeeat  mulier  in  eoelma,"  (66) 

IL^-Thi  ixigitioal  Eyidbhcb. 

'*  Eh !  datcTi  pace,  o  teologoni  di  Tecohia  scnola,  che  la  Terit&  tuoI  risplendere  anohe  a 
trayerso  di  quel  denso  yelo  che  la  ignoranza  di  alconi  di  toI  si  presume  di  opporie.  Intanto 
per  apprendimenio  Tostro  fateyi  or  meco  a  leggere  qoalche  altro  Tcrsetto  in  cai .  .  .  sar4 
pore  una  di  quell'  esse  noriti  che  a'  preoecnpati  leggitori  fknno  strabouare  occhi  e  naso 
aggrinsare."  (67) 

The  foregoing  section  has  prepared  the  reader  for  the  <'  ezperimentom  cmcis  **  to  which 
we  now  propose  submitting  Tarions  passages  of  king  James's  Torsion,  bj  waj  of  testing 
the  Tannted  accnracj  of  its  forty-uvm  translators.  Three  of  these  instances  haye  been 
already  indicated ;  (68)  one  of  which,  wherein  Job  longed  that  his  speech  should  be 
^^  printed  in  a  hook"  was  noticed  aboTC. 

For  conTcnience  sake,  having  now  a  few  more  of  these  literary  curiosities  to  present,  we 
will  tabulate  them  under  alphabetical  signs,  and  prefix  to  this  initial  gem  the  letter 

A.— Jb«xix.28. 

One  almost  Uushes  to  make  this  imbecility  more  palpable  to  general  intelligence  by  recall- 
ing to  mind  that  6lodk-printing  was  unknown  to  Europe  prior  to  a.  d.  1428,  and  printing  in 
typti  before  1457 — although  the  former  iuTcntion  existed,  according  to  Stanislas  Julien,(69) 
in  China  at  a.  d.  598,  and  the  latter  about  1041.  Yet,  by  this  « translation,"  the  patriarch 
must  haye  foreshadowed  the  art  six  to  ten  centuries  preyiously  to  .the  advent  of  Christ  I 
Like  every  writer  comprised  in  the  Old  Testament  Canon,  Job  knew  as  much  of  Chma  as 
they  all  did  of  America;  that  is,  to  be  frank,  just  nothing  at  alL  Vioii  foriy-uven  able- 
bodied  men  could  have  overiooked  this  blunder  while  «  correcting  proof,"  surpasses  com- 
prehension; unless  we  ourseWes  perpetrate  another  anachronism,  as  well  as  apitiftd  conun- 
drum, and  suppose  that  **  Job-printing "  may  have  suggested  some  inappreciable  aflinity 
between  the  Anglo-corrupied  name  of  that  venerable  Arab  and  the  gldrions  art  What  more 
simple  than  to  have  printed  what  the  « original  sacred  tongues"  read,  **trum6etf  in  a 
r^terf" 

B.  —  Job  xxxL  85.     [N.  B.  The  first  citations  always  present  the  textualities  of  king 

James's  version.] 

"Oh  that  oiM  would  hear  m«I  behold,  1117  dariio  i$,  that  the  Almii^lj  woaM  «ii«w«r  me^  and  Aot  mliM 
advcrMry  had  writtan  a  book." 

Can  human  intelligence  iftiderstand  what  possible  connection  Job's  supplication,  that  Qod 
should  reply  to  him,  can  have  with  his  individual  craving  that  his  own  unnamed  enemy 
should  have  indited  a  bookt  If  this  text  be  **  divinely  inspired"  in  king  James's  version, 
then  <*  the  Lord  have  mercy  upon  his  creature  "  archtdology  I  Because,  were  these  words 
authentic,  logic  could  prove:  — 

1.  That,  at  least  2500  years  ago,  polemical  works  in  the  form  of  "books"  were  not 
unknown  even  in  Arabia. 

2.  That,  inasmuch  as  Job  could  have  no  benevolent  motive  In  such  irish,  vexed  as  he  felt 
at  the  aggravations  heaped  upon  his  distressing  auctions  by  his  proverbial  eot^forter$^ 
and  knowing,  as  he  must  necessarily  have  done,  the  power  which  a  Reviewer  has  over 
an  author,  he  longed,  with  vindictive  refinement,  as  the  most  terrible  retribution  to  be 
inflicted  upon  an  adversary,  that  his  particular  enemy  should  actually  write  a  hook,  in 
order  that  Job  might  review  him ;  probably, as  Horace  Smith  conjectured,*' in  the  •/em* 
ealem  Quarterly** 

(66)  Paul:  1  OrritUhiane  ziv.  84;— Sieausb:  Fie  de  Jm»\  lA^Mfu  tranal.,  Parli,  1840;  fl.  p.  878. 

(67)  Laxoi:  Op.ca,;\. p.  160. 

(68)  Nor;  Op.  eiL  ;  pp.  186^  187. 

(60)  Oonunonkadon  to  VAcadimk;  Jana  7 — London  Mkenceum;  19  Jna«^  1847. 

1 

Digitized  by 

Google 

TO   THE    Xth    chapter    OF    GENESIS.  595 

Gahen  Tttnders  — 

**  Alas  I  that  I  hare  not  one  who  hears!  BehoM  my  vniUng  —  let  the  Almi^ty  answer  me  —  and  the 
hook  edited  \j  my  adrerse  party."  (70) 

This  Terrion  (for  reasons  to  be  elaborated  elsewhere)  is  unsatisfactory,  like  all  we  have 
seen,  but  Lanci's ;  because  among  other  OTersights  it  does  not  afford  due  weight  to  the 
word  TaU ;  Taguely  rendered  *<  sign  "  or  *<  mark  "  in  Eztkiel  ix.  4.  TaU  is  the  name  of  the 
last  letter  in  the  post-ohristian  s^are-Utier  alphabet  of  the  Jews;  which  142  years  b.  c, 
on  Uie  earlier  Maooabee  coinage  was  cruciform ;  sometimes  like  the  Latm,  at  others  like 
the  Oreek  cross.  (71)    At  the  time  when  Ezekiel  wrote  in  Ohaldea,  during  the  sixth  century 

B.  c.,  this  cruciform  letter  was  the  one  he  must  haye  used,  no  less  than  the  shape  of  that 
**  mark  "  which  should  be  stamped  upon  the  foreheads  of  the  righteous.  Its  etymological 
and  figuratire  meaning  was  "benediction"  or  « absolution;"  just  what  its  descendant,  the 
"  b^tismal  sign  **  (drawn  with  water  on  tiie  foreheads  of  infants)  signifies  at  this  day. 
£sekiel*s  TaU  had  no  direct  relation,  beyond  a  distant  resemblance  in  sh^e  and  perhaps 
an  occult  one  in  hierophantic  mysteries,  to  the  "  Crux  Ansata,"  or  the  sign  for  <*  Ankh," 
eternal  U/e,  of  the  more  ancient  Egyptian  hieroglyphics ;  but  its  original  is  now-a-days 
producible  firom  the  eund/orm  monuments  of  Assyria;  though  our  demonstration  of  the 
fkot  must  be  reserved  to  other  opportunities. 

It  is  one  thing  to  prore  that  ihe  forty-seven  were  wrong  in  their  ^>preeiation  of  the  <*word 
of  God :"  quite  another  to  emulate  the  presumptuous  part  of  theologians  and  dictate  dog- 
matically the  English  sense  of  ancient  texts  in  themselves  obscure.  Our  task  limits  itself 
to  the  former  office  in  this  essay ;  but,  not  to  shrink  from  the  utterance  of  what  littie  we 
know,  the  following  fHe  rendering  indicates  a  probable  solution  of  this  tortured  passage, 
and  combines  Land's  with  other  views : —  says  Job,  <' Who  will  give  me  one  that  will  listen 
to  me?  [i.  e.,  as  my  judge].  Behold!  (here  is)  my  TaU  [i.  e.,  he  holds  up  masonically  the 
cruciform  emblem,  as  his  **  absolution"].  The  Omnipotent  will  answer  for  me  [i.  e.,  guaran> 
tee  me,  be  my  surety,  become  responsible  for  me  — **  that  I  seek  not  to  evade,"  understood]. 
And  now  let  my  opponent  write  down  his  charge  [i.  e.,  let  my  accuser,  my  calumniator,  put 
his  accusations  into  writing — "  that  everybody  may  see  them,"  understood"]. 

And,  while  on  the  subject  of  TaU,  we  may  continue  our  expurgations  with  other 
examples. 

C.  —  Psalms  Ixxviii.  41. 

**  Yea,  they  tamed  hack  and  tempted  Ood,  and  limited  the  Holy  One  of  IsraeL" 
Bad  as  the  Jews  were,  in  this  case  they  did  precisely  the  contrary !  **  The  Psalmist," 
says  Land,  (72)  **  celebrates  in  this  canticle  the  marvels  which  the  Lord  had  done  in  behalf 
of  rebellions  Israd ;  neverthdess,  as  the  latter  finished  by  oonrerdon,  Ood  pardons  him 
and  spreads  over  the  culprit  the  most  ample  bounties.  Converdon,  therefore,  is  the  import 
of  this  verse,  and  then  it  is  said — **  they  (became)  conTerted,  they  supplicated  the  Puissant, 
and  implored  TaU  [L  e.,  <*  absolution,"  or  «  beiusdiction  "]  of  the  Holy  of  IsraeL" 

D.  —  1  Samuel  xxi.  10—15. 

**  And  David  arose;  and  fled  that  day  for  ISsar  of  Saul,  and  went  to  Aehish  the  King  of  Gath. — And  the 
serrantsof  Aehish  said  nnto  him,  iinot  this  David  the  king  of  the  land  f  did  they  not  sing  one  to 
another  of  him  in  danees,  saying,  Saul  hath  slain  his  thousands,  and  Dav^  his  ten  thousands?  — 
AnJ  David  laid  up  these  words  in  his  heart,  and  was  sore  afraid  of  Aehish  the  King  of  Oath.— 
And  he  changed  his  behavior  hefore  them,  and  Mgned  himself  mad  in  their  hands,  and  sorabhled 
on  the  doors  of  the  gate,  and  let  his  spittle  flJl  down  upon  his  heard.  —  Then  said  Aehish  nnto  his 
servants,  Lo,  ye  see  the  man  is  mad :  wherefore  then  have  ye  hronght  him  to  me?  —  Have  I  nee^ 
of  madmen,  that  ye  have  hnmght  this^Uloio  to  play  the  madman  in  my  presence?  shall  this 
fdUno  eome  into  my  boose?'* 

Reminding  the  reader  that  David,  besides  being  the  warrior-king,  was  Israel's  bard,  we 
let  Land  speak  for  himself:—**  The  LXX  (Greek)  made  a  periphrasis  at  the  first  verse,  and 

(70)  Op.eiL;  voL  xv.  p.  148. 

(71)  iKBOifiB:  EtMimen  ArcMtUcgiquit;  1846;  plate  L,  and  pp.  11-18. 

(7^  avraArieteraiauifrato;  Itoma,182r;  ch.ix.   Oabbt,  ziiL  p.  175,  note. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

596  ABOH^OLOGIGAL    INTRODUCTION 

added  to  the  (Hebrew)  Text  by  twice  mentioning  the  gatee  of  the  city,  fint  to  make  Bsrid 
play  upon  his  harp,  and  afterwards  to  cause  him  to  fall  against  the  said  gates.  There  is 
perhaps  no  passage  in  Scriptore  that  has  been  more  completely  denataralised  through  the 
obscurity  of  a  singjle  word.  It  is  erideiit  Uiat  DaTid  had  altogether  a  part  more  ^gmfied, 
more  reasonable,  to  adopt  than  to  ooonterfut  a  lonatie ;  and  moreover  that  Aohish  did  att 
display  great  esteem  for  his  court  by  saying  that  madmen  were  not  wanting  in  it  Bat  the 
famous  TaU,  misunderstood,  has  thrown  all  interpreters  into  error.  So  we  will  gire  to  it 
its  Tcritable  sense  of  to  bUm;  to  this  we  add  that  ShAak  [in  Hebrew*  as  in  ndgar  Arafaio 
now]  does  not  signify  *door'  in  this  passage,  bat  poetry,  as  its  Arabic  root  teaches: 
DALSTB  has  the  Taloe  of  <door'  in  the  same  sense  that  Chaldees  and  Arabs  caH  <doon' 
[bdb,  bib^n]  or  * hooses '  [%/,  b^^obt]  the  Mtropkm;  that  is,  those  eowmmoemmU  oftke^pUn 
and  of  tircphei  that  we  [Italians]  call  'stanse'  [and  that  in  English  is  adopted  to  poetoy  in 
our  word  $Ummm;  a  word  that  in  Italian,  like  the  aboye  noons  in  Oriental  speeoh,  has  lie 
doable  meaning  of  *stansa'  and  'chamber'].  If  it  be  insisted  that  David  was  rafingi 
it  will  be,  then,  with  poetic  tmor—  the  prophetic  transport  that  animated  him :  bat  the 
Arabic  root  shaoiA,  which  signifies  to  nhibit  valor,  bravery,  courage,  accords  much  better 
with  the  context  These  few  rays  of  light  ooghi  to  be  safficient  to  dissipate  the  thick  tene- 
brosities  which  Translators  haye  piled  upon  this  diyine  narra^ye.  Wa  may  thoaeefwward 
giye  to  these  yerses  a  reasonable  translation  and  worthy  ef  the  m^esty  of  ScriptoM:  — 
*  Dayid  arose,  and  fleeing  on  that  day  from  the  presence  of  Saal,  eame  to  Aohish  the  king 
of  Gath. — Then  the  servants  of  Aohish  said  to  him,  <  And  is  not  this  David  king  of  the 
earth!  is  it  not  in  his  htnor  that  it  was  song  in  ehoros  [not,  at  ancieat  Fanimngaa  /  }.-  Saal 
has  killed  a  thonsand,  and  David  ten  thousand  I '  —  David  weighing  these  words  in  his 
heart,  feared  greatly  in  presence  of  Achish  king  of  Gath.-*-It  was  for  this  that  in  his  pre- 
sence, kit  [David]  celebrated  their  power  in  a  varied  kywm  and  in  inspired  veraee;  and,  at 
each  eommeneement  of  a  strophe  he  made  TaU  [i.  Ot,  he  made  *  benedictions ' — he  Uomai 
them]  ;  and  already  the  evfeat  was  drifting  upon  the  chin's  honor  [L  e.,  upon  Ins  batrd,  ui 
Oriental  phraseology]  when  Achish  interrupted  him,  and  said  to  his  servant :  '  hearken  to 
this  man  who  affects  inspiration  [literally,  *  eowtes  the  in^kired'] ;  Ttpoeie  [barde,  mprovt- 
Mtort]  wanting  to  me,  that  you  must  bring  this  one  to  celebrate  my  power?  and  ahall 
(such  as)  he  come  into  my  house  ? '  Nevertheless,  David  escaped,  and  took  the  road  that 
conducted  to  the  cavern  of  AdoUa."  (78) 
Who  seem  most  "  cracked,"  David,  or  the  bibliolaters  of  king  James's  version? 

E.  —  Leviticus  Jj,  20. 

**An  ftywlt  thatcretp,  going  apon  eU  fomr,  «AcB  le  an  fchomtBalinw  to  yooJ* 

To  us,  likewise!  **BarfB  aves,"  invaluable  however  to  museums  of  Natoial  Hiatory.  Not 
merely,  irere  this  prohibition  authentic,  did  four-lsffged-fDwls  exist  in  the  days  of  Hosts, 
but  the  inhibition  to  eat  them  would  now  be  worthless  to  a  Caralte  Jew,  because  tiie  breed 
is  extinct.  Caheo  renders  —  "Every  winged-insect  [or  literally,  fining -creqiing  thing] 
that  walks  upon  four  [daws,  feet,  understood]  is  an  abomination  unto  you." 

Dwelling  not  upon  verse  21,  although  marvelling  how  **  legs  "  could  be  placed  anatomi- 
cally elsewhere  than  <*  above  their  feet,"  we  refreshen  ourselves  with 

F.--2irfii^«,  vi.  26. 

"And  there  wm  a  great  famine  in  Samaria:  and,  behold,  they  beelaged  it, until  an  aaa*!  bead  waa «oM 
fat  troxweofpteea  of  fUver,  and  the  fourth  part  of  a  cab  of  dove*!  dung  for  five  j^ieoet  of  rilTer." 

**  Stemhold  and  Hopkina  had  great  qualma 
When  they  translated  DaTld*a  pealma  "; 

but  the  sufferings  of  these  poor  men  were  infinitesimally  small  compared  to  those  the/or^ 
seven  would  have  experienced  had  they  partaken  of  that  delicate  repast,  for  about  two- 
thirds  of  a  pint  of  which  the  starviog  Samaritans  paid  such  monstrous  prices !  Pigeon's  dimg, 
or  **  doves'-dung,"  owing  to  the  quantity  of  ammonia  it  contains,  is  still  used  throughout 

CrS)  C^.e<&;0h.iz.i8.    Gabsv:  TiLp.S^preMrreathaoldiaktdiei. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC 

TO    THE    Xth    OHAPTrfR  OF  GENESIS.  597 

the  East,  in  the  abflenee  of  modern  chemistry,  to  giye  temper  to  Damasoene  8word-blade6» 
Ao.  It  ebarpene  weapons,  not  appetites  !  Can  one  conoeiTe  a  haman  stomach,  however 
depraved  by  want,  alimented  npon  **  guano  ?  "  Bochart,  (74)  two  oentnries  ago,  showed 
that  '*poi8  chiches,"  in  Italian  eeei,  in  English  "ddckpea,*'— the  commonest  Oriental 
Tetch,  or  pea,  —  is  the  rational- interpretation  of  the  word ;  and  thus  the  only  enigma  pre- 
served is,  how  foriy-teoen  Englishmen  could  have  committed  a  mistake  so  extraordinary. 
The  obsolete  word  ''cab**  aptly  illustrates  how  imperative  it  has  become,  through  una- 
Toldable  changes  of  language  within  250  yters,  to  issue  a  re-translatlon  in  our  current 
Temaoular,  lest  the  Illiterate  should  think  that  *'  eofr-riolets,"  26  centuries  ago,  plied  in  the 
streets  of  Samaria !  Superstition  is  gradually  elevating  the  vulgar  Cockney  speech  of  the 
age  of  King  James  into  our  <'  lingua  sancta ; "  and  the  translation  authorized  in  his  reign 
-will  some  day  become  unintelligible  and  useless  in  the  *<  Far  West,*'  except  to  those  who 
poseesB  glossaries  wherewith  te  read  it.  Theologers  would  act  wisely  to  consider  these 
thiBgs,  while  we  pass  on  to 

O.  — Levitieut  xxi.  18  and  17. 

**  He  thai  hath  »  flat  noae''^-  [Is  forblddeii]  —  ^approach  to  offer  the  bread  of  bis  God." 

A  fltU  note,  in  the  Abrahamio  type  of  mankind,  among  their  *<  Cohenlm"  or  priesthood, 
was,  in  the  days  of  the  Hebrew  Lawgiver,  as  it  is  now  among  Israel's  far-scattered  descend- 
anti,  too  great  a  deviation  of  physical  lineaments  from  the  indelible  standard  of  the  race 
(portrayed  as  we  exhibit  them  in  our  present  work  from  the  monuments  of  that  epoch,  and 
as  we  daily  see  them  in  our  streets)  not  to  excite  suspicion  that  such  eases  testified  to  ad- 
mixtures of  foreign  (76)  and  consequently  of  *<  impure  blood  " ;  and  therefore  to  debar  a 
priest  with  a  "  flat  nose  "  from  the  Tabernacle  was  rational  at  their  point  of  view.  Negro 
funiUes  [as  already  demonstrated,  tuprd]  are  unmentioned  throughout  the  Hebrew  Text ; 
and  negrophilism  may  accordingly  rejoice  that  the  rendering  selected  by  the  /orty-seven 
^cannot  now  be  applied  to  the  former  <*  de  jure,"  where  it  is  notoriously  (in  the  I^u  States 
of  this  Federation,  especially)  "  de  facto.'* 

Happily — no  thanks  to  our  translators  —  ** Snubs"  of  universal  humanity  may  legally 
ofBoiate  at  sanctuaries ;  the  word  EARM  (76)  meaning  only  a  **  mutilated  nose : "  and  the 
inhibition  referring  to  noses  injured  by  deformity,  accident,  disease,  or  law,  (77)  our  appre- 
hensions were  futile,  like  their  translation. 

An  ethnological  item  has  been  touched  upon  involuntarily,  and  now  we  may  as  well  give 
ventilation  to  another  much-abused  text. 

H.  —  Song  of  Solomon,  i.  6,  6. 

**laM  tdadc,  bat  eomely, . . .  Look  not  upon  me  because  I  am  blade,  becanse  the  sun  bath  looked  upon 
me:  my  mother's  children  were  angry  with  me;  th^  made  me  keeper  of  the  Tinpyaids;  but  mine 
own  Tineyard  have  I  not  kept" 

The  apocryphal  "  prologue  "  at  the  head  of  this  chapter  tells  ua  that  here  the  Church 
«  oonfesseth  her  deformity"!  It  were  well  if,  before  printing  this  acknowledgment  (which 
it  is  not  for  us  to  dispute),  the  <*  Establishment "  had  corrected  the  deformity  of  their  irant* 
lotion :  which  has  led  our  anglicized  Nigritians  to  claim  this  supposititious  bride  of  Solomon 
as  a  Tonus  of  their  own  species !    With  equal  reason,  some  commentators,  even  of  modem 

(74)  Saltbbtb;  Sdenea  Ooetdttt;  i.  p.  44.  Cabex  (whose  noU$  are  infinitely  more  Tsluable  than  his  textual 
translations),  riil.  p.  127,  note,  adds— **Selon  pludenrs  oommentateurs,  il  s'agit  id  d*une  nourriture  mis6- 
nXlie,  de  qvdque  herbe  h  vil  prix^**  to. 

(75)  On  returning  from  the  Gaptirity,  *<the  children  of  Habalah,  the  ehlldren  of  Kos,  the  ehOdren  of  Bar* 
slllal,  whidk  took  one  [sio,  in  our  Torsion  I]  of  the  daughters  of  BanOlai  the  Gileadite  to  wife,  and  was  [/  idem] 
called  after  their  name,"  were,  **w  polluted,  put  from  the  priesthood"— (NmxiAa  rfL  6S,  M.) 

(76)  Gahbh:  toL  Ui.  pp.  00, 100. 

(77)  *<  I  out  off  both  bis  fum  and  ears,"  proclaims  Dasius,  of  Phraortes,  and  of  Sitrataehmes,  at  Behistun. 
(BAWLOwm:  J^tian  Cumtf.  Intarlp.;  1846;  part  L  p.  84.)  PUIasthropy  need  not  shudder  at  atrodtles  of  the 
fifth  century  a.  a,  for  in  Turkey  such  punishment  is  as  common  now  as  it  was  8800  years  ago^  if  Mosm 
wrote  this  passage. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

598  ARGHJ50LOGIT3AL    INTRODUCTION 

times, (78)  infer  that  she  wm  '*  an  EgyptiAii  princess; "  while  others  identify  the  U47^'<^ 
'**Pharmoh'8  dsoghter;"  for  ''King  Solomon  lored  msny  strtnge  women.  .  .  .  MoahUes^ 
Ammonites,  Edomites,  Zidoniftns,  and  Hittites,"  and  what  not!  (79)  It  need  hanDj  h9 
mentioned  that,  the  dynasty  ont  of  which  the  sage  king  selected  additions  to  his  hmnem 
being  yet  nnfonnd  in  hieroglyphics,  the  monuments  of  £gypt  throw  no  lif^t  upon  this 
otherwise  Tery  probaUe  amalgamation,  (80) 

The  '*CaniieU  of  CanUeUt  of  wkieh  of  SoUmumt  thai  is  to  say,  imt  of  At  CmUkia  of 
Solomon,**  as  Land  literally  interprets  its  epigraph,  (81)  has  snffered  much  at  the  hasds  oC 
thefofiy'tevm.  They,  and  others,  lost  sight  of  the  simple  Cset  (to  be  exeaplifted  in  its 
place),  that,  in  the  andent  Hebrew  Text,  dirisions  into  ehapten,  vor$e$,  iporcb,  or  bjfmmrtM 
aiiont,  are  absolutely  unknown ;  while,  paralleled  to  this  day  in  Arabio  calligrH^J»  bo 
notes  of  admiration,  interrogation,  &c.,  mark  inflections  of  the  sense.  The  context  akae 
can  indicate  a  query ;  so  that  a  « crooked  little  thing  which  asks  a  questioa,"  addad  It 
fidelity  of  construction  and  acquaintance  with  Lerant  usages  of  the  present  hoar,  lewM 
our  pretty  Shulamite  brwuUe  firom  all  Ethiopian  hallucinations  [^ngfra,  p.  488]. 

"I  am  brown  (Itslio^  "fosca,"  dark,  tanned)  but  pretty,"  says  the  girl  coqueitishly; 
then  [deprecatin^y  to  her  swain],  *<  Do  not  mind  that  I  am  browned,  because  the  sun  has 
tanned  me ;  [which  she  explains  by  adding]  the  male-children  of  my  mother  [t.  c  my  «f^ 
brothers;  who,  in  the  East,  control  their  maiden  sisters  after  the  father's  death]  baring 
become  free  to  dispose  of  me,  placed  me  watcher  of  rines:  [**  don*t  you  see  T"  wuUrttooil 
my  own  rine,  hare  I  not  watched  it  ?  "  (82) 

One  improrement  heralds  another :  it  is  so  in  machinery :  it  is  equally  tme  in  biblieal 
hermeneutics,  the  moment  a  man's  mind  soars  abore  the  supernatural  grade  of  ratioei- 
nation.  From  the  simple  proposition  that  they  who  expound  the  Scriptures  should  mder- 
stand  them,  we  hold  that  no  one  is  competent  to  impugn  these  deductions  who  is  unse- 
quainted,  not  merely  with  the  original  Hebrew  and  Greek  languages,  but  with  the  n<^ 
achierements  of  Continental  exegesis.    Hear  a  liring  Church  of  England  dignitary :  —     * 

**  Those  who  adyocate  the  free  use  of  philology  in  the  interpretation  of  the  Scriptures, 
find  their  fiercest  and  most  uncompromising  opponents  in  the  ranks  of  those  who  are  sUtm 
to  the  Puritanical  BibUoUUry,  so  common  in  this  country.  According  to  this  school,  ereiy 
word  in  the  canonical  books  of  the  Old  and  New  Testament  (in  king  James's  Tersion)  pnh 
ceeds  from  a  dirine  and  miraculous  inspiration.  ...  By  those  who  beliere  in  the  pl^iary 
and  Terbal  inspiration  of  the  (English)  Scriptures,  sdence  in  general  and  philologicsl  sei- 
enoe  in  particular,  are  riewed  with  distrust,  if  not  with  abhorrence ;  and  Uie  more  so,  if 
this  bibUolairy  is  combined  with  a  certain  amount  of  eedetiolairy.**  (83) 

It  is  a  pity,  certainly ;  for  if  some  expounders  possessed  the  intelligenoe  they  would 
deplore'their  want  of  education :  but  we  continue. 

1,~-Habakkuk  11.11, 

"  For  tta«  ftona  ihall  crj  out  of  th«  wall,  and  th«  beam  oat  of  tha  timber  ihall  aasver  It* 
That  s^tone  should  cry  out  from  a  wall  is  an  idea  consonant  with  Oriental  hyperbole; 
but  that  a  beam  should  answer  out  of  timber  seems  to  be  an  unpoetical  and  fiur-fetohed  con- 
ception, as  it  presupposes  the  proximity  of  a  **  timber-yard  "  to  the  wsll  aforesaid.  It  tar- 
thermore  is  not  in  unison  with  the  context ;  wherein  the  prophet,  who  **  surpasses  all  which 
Hebrew  poesy  can  offer  in  this  department,''  (84)  declaims  against  (^aldsan  flagitiousBesB. 
The  propriety  of  his  metaphor  resiles  to  riew  through  Land's  rendering  and  notes  of  inter- 
rogation. 

(78)  Tlu  Friend  o/Moees;  New  Tork,  1862;  p.  468,  note. 
Ct9)lKkiffiiiLl;xLl. 

(80)  Roounn :  on  OeoMBOB  of  Manatho^a  XXbt  <|jnaaty. 

(81)  La  Soffra  Scrittura;  eh.  t.  {  4.    Oahih:  zIt.  8, 4,  baa  not  aeised  the  poet* a  meaninf. 

(82)  Lahq:  ParvUpmimi;  U.  p.  45. 

(88)  PHiULiUTimus  Anouounn:  A  Vindioation ef  PtOUdoMt  Ptinc^Ua;  hatOim,  1847;  pp. 43, 44;— Gu»> 
boh:  Otia  JEinfPfiaea;  1849;  p.  93. 
(84)DiWsRB:iLp.40S. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

fO    THE    Ttk    r?BArTER   OF    GENESIS.  599 

"FeKdv^nCare,  ahaU  the  tMue  cf  tkme  [an  AupHan  bas-relief?]  firom  the  wall  cry  oat  t 
llie  cricket  [eoaribaaa,  or  beetle]  from  out  of  the  w^od  will  it  respond  ?  "  (85) 

There  is  a  Terse  of  another  prophet  that  Lanoi  restores,  jn  which  our  forty-teocn  haye 
metamorphosed /omtMef  into  «  jonng  men,"  and  torrow$  into  ■'  uuuds  "  I 

J.  ^-  Zbchabiah  ix.  17. 

«Oorn  ahall  maka  th«  yoimg  awn  diwrfiil,  mmI  new  wiiM  the  malcU.'* 
The  «  Sons  of  Temperance"  maj  not  be  pleased  with  the  moral,  but  the  Dan^ters  will 
not  fail  to  appreciate  an  emendation  that  relicYes  their  antique  sisiers  from  the  charge  of 
unfdiiiiiiiie  indulgences. 

.  The  old  VufgaU  had  translated  —  «  For,  what  is  the  goodness  of  God,  what  is  his  glory, 
if  not  the  com  of  the  elect,  and  the  wine  which  fecundates  the  virgins  ?**  Yatablus  and 
Pagnini  make  <* concision  worse  confounded"  by  reading — "The  com  which  makes  the 
joung  men  sing,  and  the  new  wine  of  the  girls."  But,  based  upon  radicalt  preserved  in 
Arabic,  our  teacher  proposes :  — 

'*  What  is  more  sweet  and  more  agreeable  than  com  in  scarcities,  and  wine  that  fortifies 
in  afflictions?"  (86) 

<'Per  saltum,"  inasmuch  as  in  the  chaos  of  our  memoranda  of  fedtc-trantlaiUmt  orderly 
dasiification  is  inconvenient,  wl^le  to  our  objects  quite  unnecessary,  we  open — 

K.  —  QenetU  zziiL  9,  17,  19. 

"The  ATe  of  MMbpelft" 

purchased  by  Abraham  for  Sarah's  inhumation  —  to  remarjc,  that  the  word  Machptla 
which,  according  to  our  authorised  verity,  seems  a  **  proper  name,"  is  grammatically,  in 
Semitic  tongues,  "  a  thing  contraeUd-for ;"  so  that,  it  is  as  vain  for  tourists  in  Palestine  to 
search  for  Jfaekpda,  as  for  biblical  chorographers  to  define  its  latitude  and  longitude.  (87) 
L.  —  1  Samttd  zix.  18. 

« And  Hichal  took  am  image,  and  laid  i(  in  the  bed,  and  pat  a  pillow  of  goafa  fuUr  for  hia  bolster,  and 
coreredilwithadotb.'' 

Manifold  were  the  sins  of  David,  but  idolatry  was  certainly  not  one  of  the  number ; 
although  scandalous  suspicions  have  been  rife  in  regard  to  this  wMge,  Commentators  have 
likewise  expounded  how  the  imoffe  being  laid  in  the  bed,  aiid  covered  up  with  the  bed-dothes, 
the  messengers  supposed  that  the  invalid  whom  they  were  sent  to  slay  {v,  11)  was  asleep 
therein :  but  we  are  told:  — 

M.  —  l  Sarwicl  xiz.  16. 

«  And  when  the  meaaengeri  were  oome  in,  behold,  there  toot  an  image  in  the  bed,  with  a  pillow  of  goa^a 
Aoirforhiabolater:'' 9 

whence  it  is  evident  that  the  forty-^evm  deemed  the  «ku^^"  to  be  of  the  masculine 
gender.  Their  notions  of  an  Oriental  bed  too  must  have  been  peculiar,  in  England,  two 
hundred  and  fifty  years  ago,  when  a  "pillow"  was  made  to  serve  for  a  <* bolster;"  and  such 
a  hirsute  contrivance !  However,  having  commenced  rolling  down  hill,  they  reach  the  bottom 
through  a  series  of  cascades  that  would  exdte  Homeric  smiles  were  not  **  God's  word  "  the 
sniferer :  as  may  be  seen  by  the  subjoined  restitution ;  after  comprehending  that  Michal, 
the  astute  daughter  of  king  Saul,  was  a  princess  in  whose  <*  trousseau"  were  doubtless 
many  of  the  crown  regalia :  — 

**  Bfichal  took  her  casket  fuU  of  jewels,  and  placed  it  upon  the  bed ;  whence  were  reflected 
magnificent  splendors ;  and  she  hid  them  with  a  curtain  [  ?  coverlid]."  ..."  The  messengers 
having  arrived,  0  surprise!  the  jewels  [being]  upon  the  bed,  from  their  summits  was  thrown 
out  a  magnificence  of  splendors."  (88)  ^ 

(86)  Op.  dL;  L  p.  383;~GABi{r,  ziL  p,  115,  alao  reada  differently  from  our  verakm;  bat  aee  hia  naU  IL 
(80)  aag.SeriL;  ch.iLil;~GAHD, ziLp.  15«^ftUowa theRabfaia. 

(87)  Paralip.;  L  p.  144. 

QSS)  aag.ScrU.;  tyx.yVLi.  Thefiofe,18,ofGAHD,TiLp.76,ahowBhow theteztpnaaledhim.  lovo^ <p.otf, 
pforea  that  in  no  place  en  TtoRaPAIM  **  idola." 

Digitized  by 

Google 

600  ARGH^OLOGIGAL    INTRODUCTION 

Huniliftted  at  this  sigbt,  the  MSMsins  remembered  that  Miehal  wftfl  %  rojal  dau^tef 
whoM  huBband,  escaped  from  their  clatoheSf  was  just  the  man  to  reward  them  with  a 
hempen  neckcloth  on  hii  aooeeeion  to  the  throne ;  to,  apologliing  for  their  intmmon,  flio 
emissaries  withdrew. 

Ooait  appear  to  hare  been  fayorites  with  our  translators.  Not  content  with  transmuting 
jewels  into  *<  goafs  Aotr  "  and  filling  the  royal  *< bolster'*  with  this  rare,  elastic,  and  odori- 
ferooi  article,  they  mnst  needs  metamorphose  one  of  the  snblimest  Hebrew  names  of  Deity 
into  a  **9C«q9&-ffoai  **  t 

'S.^  Leviticus  xyi.  8,  10,  26. 

*< And  Aaron  ihaU  cMt  lota  upon  the  two  foats;  ona  lot  ftr  tha Lord,  iiid  the Ctbar  fcr  tbe  foapcsort. . .  • 
But  tbe  goat,  on.whkh  the  lot  fell  to  be  the  scapegoat,  ihall  be  presented  aliTe  before  tfaa  Lord,  ts 
make  an  atonement  with  him,  and  to  let  him  go  for  a  scapegoat  into  the  wildemem. . . .  And  be 
that  let  go  tbe  goat  for  the  ieapegoat,  shaU  wash  his  dothes,"  At. 

AZAZL  —  dsazel"^ in  the  Hebrew  word.  "This  terrible  and  Tenerable  name  of  God 
(says  Lanm)  through  the  pens  of  biblical  glossers  has  been  a  devU,  a  numntam^  a  wildenutit 
9iid%he-ifoaiI"{%9) 

It  will  giro  an  idea  of  the  lueidi^  of  Rabbinical  criticism,  to  quote  the  following :  — 

**  Aben  Esra,  according  to  his  habitnal  manner  when  he  is  in  trouble,  enunciates  in  the 
s^le  of  an  oracle :  *  If  thou  art  capable  of  comprehending  the  mysteiy  of  Az&xU,  thov 
wilt  learn  also  the  mystery  of  his  name;  for  it  has  similar  associates  in  Scripture;  I 
will  tell  thee  by  allusion  one  portion  of  the  mystery ;  when  thou  shalt  haye  thirty-three 
years,  thou  wilt  comprehend  us.'  He  finishes  abruptly  without  saying  anything  more  alle- 
gorically  or  otherwise."  (90) 

The  ante-Christian  Hebrew  text  was  undirided  into  wordt»  Our  preceptor  re-drrideB 
AZAZeL  into  two  distinct  nouns ;  AZAZ  and  EL.  The  latter,  eyery  sdolist  knows,  means 
^e  ttnmg^  the  puissant  par  excellence,  the  Omn^tent.  AZAZ,  identical  with  the  Arahie 
dzdSt  has  its  radical  monosyllable  in  AZ,  <<  to  conquer*'  and  **  to  be  Tictorious ;"  whereforCt 
kLAZ'Eh  signifies  the  **God  ofvte^ory"— here  used  in  the  sense  of  the  ^'Author  otdsatV* 
in  juxta-position  to  I^HOuaH,  the  **  Author  of  U/e:"  to  the  latter  of  which  Authors  the 
Jews  were  eigoined  to  offer  a  dead  goat  j  while,  by  contrast,  to  the  former  they  were  to 
offer  a  live  one.  Thus,  death  to  the  Li/e-ffiver ^lito  to  the  Death-dealer,  The  symbolical 
antithesis  is  grand  and  beautiful. « 

For  the  sake  of  perspicui^  we  submit  a  free  translation  to  the  reader :  —  *<  And  Aaron 
shall  place  lots  upon  the  two  he-goats ;  one  lot  to  I^HOtiaH,  and  one  lot  to  AZAZ-.^L. . . . 
And  the  he-goat  upon  which  the  lot  has  fallen  to  AZAZ-J?L  shall  be  placed  alive  before 
leHOuaH,  to  become  exempted  by  him,  to  be  sent  forth  to  AZAZ-JHj  in  the  desert  . . . 
And  he  who  shall  hare  led  forth  the  he-goat  to  AZAZ-.ffL  shall  cleanse  his  clothes,"  ftc 
In  Terse  9,  the  other  he-goat  offered  to  leHOtiaH  was  to  "be  MUed, 

Haying  thus  entirely  misapprdiended  the  sense  of  the  aboTC  passages,  it  was  quite  natural 
that  our  gifted  translators,  one  Divine  Name  baring  ranished  through  their  skill,  should 
haye  been  blinded  to  many  others.    Here  is  one  of  them :  — 

O.  — /oftxxi.  15, 

**  What  it  tbe  Almighty,  that  we  should  serra  him?  and  what  profit  should  we  hare,  if  we  prmy  nalo 
himr** 

We  haye  Illustrated,  under  the  preceding  letter  N,  the  splendor  of  antithesis  which  He- 
brew literature  conceiyed  in  the  selection  of  Divine  Names;  and  herein  leniency  maybe 
oeoorded  to  the  English  interpreters,  because  neither  they  nor  eariy  or  later  scholiasts, 
oould  haye  anticipated  a  discoyery  due  to  the  profoundest  Semitic  sayant  of  our  genera- 

(89)  aagra  aorittmra;  A.  UL lli  —  Bsrai^ome^;  U.  p.  85*. 

(00)  Oabbt:  iiL  p.  68.  It  maj  be  wall  to  warn  caTllIers  that  this  snltfeet  has  been  studied.  We  do  not  agree 
hi  EBfOsniima's  Idea  (^9Pt  «Mf  the  Books  efMoea;  pp.  109484),  that  OtnA  Is  ^Satan."  For  paraUelisBS 
on  the  saorifloe  of  be^^oats  to  tbe  Ood-Preserrer  and  tbe  God-Destrojer,  con!  RioHKUjax  {Bnmm;  VL  p.  316); 
HOTBS  ipu Fhamigier  ;  L  p.  867);  and BfAUBT  {QinUs  PS^ehqpompes;  Aug.  1846;  pp.  »5,  £96 » and  ArwmNV* 
dt  la  Jfert;  Ang.  1847 ;  pp.  826,  «26)  In  the  J2emie  .ircsft^oIcv^^N*- 

Digitized  by 

Google 

TO    THE    THE    Xrn    CHAPTER    OF    GENESIS.  601 

tioD,  the  affable  Professor  (for  thirty-nine  years)  of  Sacred  Philology  at  the  Boman 
•Vatican.(91) 

The  original  of  the  substantiye  rendered  <* profit"  is  NU^IL  —  a  nonn  irhich,  occurring 
bnt  once  amid  the  5642  (92)  words  preserred,  in  the  Hebrew  and  Chaldee  Bibles,  to  our  day 
(fragments,  so  to  say,  of  the  aneient  tongne)  —  is  unique;  and  consequently  its  significa- 
tion is  recoverable  solely  through  its  extant  radical  in  Arabian  dialects.  Its  true  root  is 
wAalt  "  to  be  eminent*' ;'  and  its  sense,  "  the  most  subUme."  The  prototype  of  '<  Almighty  " 
is  textually  SAaBal ;  literally,  **  the  most  valorous"  Let  the  reader  now  compare  king 
James's  yersion  with  the  subjoined :  — 

•*  lYho  is  the  moit  Valobous  (SAaDal),  that  to  him  we  must  be  serrants?  who  the  mon 
Sublucc  (NU4IL),  that  we  should  go  [out  of  our  way]  to  meet  him?" 

Variety  is  pleasing,  so  we  skip  OTer  to 

P.  —  Mieah,y.  2. 

''Bat  thou  Betblebem  Bphnte,  ^ough  fhou  be  little  mmong  the  thouMxidi  of  Judah,  pet  oat  of  thee 
shall  he  come  Ibrth  onto  me  Otat  it  to  be  roler  in  laraeL'' 

The  emendation  suggested  relates  principally  to  the  word  rendered  "  thousands,"  of 
whioh  the  singular,  in  the  unpunctuated  Hebrew,  is  ALtJPA. 

ALePA,  M*  first  letter  of  the  Hebrew  alphabet,  in  its  Phoenician  original  is  the  tachygraph 
of  a  BuWt  head;  and  its  name  is  deriyed  from  that  of  the  animal,  because  the  bull  is 
"leader"  of  the  herd.(98)  Hence  ALePA  became  a  title  as  the  ** leader,"  general,  dux, 
or  chief;  of  which  examples  are  numerous  in  the  discrepant  so-oalled  "  Dukes  "  of  Edom, 
&c. ;  corruption  of  the  Latin  <'dux,  duces";  which,  with  more  propriety  in  English,  should 
be  rendered  chiefs.  Copying  the  Latin  and  Greek  yersions,  without  archieological  know- 
ledge of  the  Hebrew  tongue,  our  translators  haye  read  Mf-lm  **  thousands,"  when  Chieft  is 
its  real  meaning ;  thus :  — 

•<  And  thou  Bethlehem  of  Euphrata,  [even]  if  thou  art  little  among  the  Chiefs  of  Juda, 
I  wiU  cause  to  issue  from  thee  the  dominator  of  Israel."  (94) 

Without  regard  to  the  fantastical  and  spurious  headings  to  this  Chapter  in  our  yersion, 
we  may  add,  that  the  reading  of  Chiefs  is  as  old  as  the  second  century  b.  o,  when  the 
LXX  Greek  yersion  was  made  by  the  HeUenistio  Jews  of  Alexandria ;  because  about  68-69 
A.  D.  the  author  of  the  *'  Good  Tidings  according  to  Matthew ^^^  in  eiting  the  aboye  passage 
ftrom  Micah,  read  ** Princes";  (95)  and  he  does  not  appear  to  haye  been  acquainted (96) 
with  the  Hebrew  Text.  Paulus  and  De  Boss!  eyen  contend  that  the  speech  of  Christ, 
Xfiorof,  was  Greek.  (97)  But,  we  wander  from  our  theme. 
Q,  —  Itaiah  xyiii.  1,  2. 

**  Woe  to  the  land  tliadowing  with  wingi,  which  it  boyond  the  ri?en  of  Bthiopia;  —  That  aendfeth  am^ 
baaaadon  bj  the  aea,  erea  in  Teaaela  of  balmahea  apon  ttie  watera,  faying^  Go,  ye  awlfb  mefsengers, 
to  a  nation  scattered  and  peeled,  to  a  people  terrible  from  their  beginning  hitherto ;  a  nation 
meted  oat  and  trodden  down,  whoee  land  the  rivera  hare  Bpoiled.** 

We  cite  this  passage  not  with  a  yiew  of  destroying  the* interpretation  of  the  forty-seven^ 
in  this  instance  excusable  enough,  but  by  way  of  elucidating  how  meritorious  it  would  be 
to  reconstruct  their  time-worn  edifice,  guided  by  ^e  lights  which  Oriental,  and  particularly 
Egyptian^  researches. of  our  liring  generation  cast  upon  subjects  until  this  century  utterly 
dark. 

All  interpreters  here  haye  been  at  fault.  The  LXX  render  *Ova/  y^i  liXoltav  xrlpvyts  —  i.  e. 
Va  ierrcB  navium  aUs,    The  Vulgate — Vce  terra  cymbalo  alarum.    Cahen  substitutes —  "Ah  I 

(91)  LAira:  Op.  dL;  p.  3M,  Ac. 

(92)  LKCSDE5,  apod  Gbskxius,  in  BxrJeer't  De  WdU;  L  p.  460 ;  ~  Mnxx:  PaHettim}  p.  48<l. 
(98)  GttCfiDB:  acHpL  lAng.  Ptumteia;  1838;  p.  19. 

(94)  Sagra  SariL;  eh.  L { 2;  —  "Trop  petit  pour  Are  parml  lea  ehtft  de  lehouda,"  Oahbt:  zn.  pp.  00^  97  — 
aeenotel. 

(95)  Jfatt.  iL  6;  Bhaep^s New  Ted.;  v-^ 

(96)  HniKCU.:  Origin  t^ Chrittianity ;  1845;  pp.  123, 124:  and  CkritUan  Theismi  pp.  82, 88w 

(97)  QasEinus;  Heb.  I^prache  und  Sehrift;  1816;  p. 40, 

76 

Digitized  by 

Google 

602  ABCHJKOLOGICAL   INTRODUCTION 

psys  BOOS  rombnge  des  TiMles*;  (98)  and  the  l*te  Major  Mordeoai  Noah  aototlly  rad 

—  ^  HaU  I  Land  of  the  (American)  EagU  '*  I  • 
Rosellini  (99)  was  Uie  first  to  indicate  that 

here  the  prophet  apostrophixes  Egypt  under  ^^'  ^^* 

the  metaphor  of  her  national  symbol  —  j 

—  the  "winged  globe "^  as  Birch  defines  it, 
^emblem  of  Khspir,  the  Creator  Sun*\(iOO) 
We  subjoin  the  learned  Pisan's  emendation, 
with  a  few  additions :  — 

"Ho!  Land  of  the  Winged  Globe  [Egypt]!  which  art  beyond  the  riTen  of  EUSA  p.  e. 
the  <*  torrens  iEgypti,''  on  the  Isthmus  of  Suei ;  n^^ra^  p.  484] :  that  eendeet  mto  the  set, 
as  messengers,  the  canals  of  thy  waters ;  and  that  narigatest  with  boats  of  papyrw  <m  the 
face  of  the  wayes.  Qo,  ye  light  messengers,  to  the  elongated  people  [L  e.  stretched  out 
along  the  narrow  allaTials  of  the  Nile,]  and  ehaved  nation  [the  Egyptians  were  essentliny  • 
ehaven  population — vide  Oenetie  xlL  14,] ;  to  a  people  terrible  from  the  time  that  wis,  wd 
also  preriously ;  to  the  geometrical  people  [Geometry  orig^ted  in  Egypt],  who  tresding 
[with  their  feet  cnltiyate  their  fields] ;  whose  Unds  the  riyers  will  deyastote  [referring  to 
some  unftilfiUed  prophecy].*' 

R.  —  Eecletiattet  zi.  1—2. 

«CMt  thjr  bTMd  upon  the  wfttera,  tat  thoa  ahalt  find  It  after  many  days. .  ..Gir*  a  partSoa  to  mtMi 
and  also  to  eight ;  for  thou  knoweet  not  what  erll  ahall  be  upcm  the  earth." 

Unless  there  was  some  cabalistio  ifc^y  to  the  latter  portion  of  these  sentences,  through 
which  the  Translators  understood  what  they  wrote,  the  super-refined  meaning  they  atttehed 
to  the  numerals  7  and  8  surpasses  our  feeble  comprehension:  e^en  Solomon,  repoted 
author  and  great  magician,  could  not  unrayel  their  knot    Let  us  substitute: — 

*'  Cast  thy  bread  where  fruits  are  borne,  because  time  will  restore  it  with  usury. .  • 
(Hye  the  measure  {portione)  eyen  to  saturity  and  abundance,  because  thou  knowest  notwhst 
eyil  may  come  upon  the  earth.*'  Here,  comments  Land,  (101)  the  sage  exhorts  man  to  do 
good,  and  to  charitable  acts  towards  the  poor  who,  satiated  with  abundant  food,  will  csnst 
to  rain  upon  him,  through  the  feryor  of  their  prayers,  ample  benedictions  during  v»n 
seasons.  But,  what  can  be  expteted  fh>m  men  who  translate  **  Tor,  Stu,  snd  Ag^  ^^ 
TtVK  ve  SUS  ve  aGUR, 

S. — Jeremiah  yiiL  7,  —  by 

**  the  tnrtle  and  the  crane  and  the  awaUow," 

—  when  the  prophet  meant  "  the  bull  and  the  horte  and  the  colt"  t  (102) 

T.—Zeehariah  y.  1,  2,  8. 

«Then  I  turned,  and  lifted  up  mine  eyea,  and  looked,  and  behold  a  flylnc r^L  ...  And  he nld toB^ 
WhAtaeeetthonf  And  I  answerwl,  I  aee  a  flyinc  roU ;  the  length  wheiwf  i»  twentj  euUtii  ^ii^ 
the  breadth  thereof  ten  onbits. ..  .Then  Mid  he  unto  me,  This  iftheeorae  that  goethfor^ovir 

the  ftoe  of  the  whole  earpk;  Ibr  erery  one  that  ftealeth  ahall  be  oat  ofi;  <w  on  thli  aide  afleonDOi 
to  It;  andereryonethatfwearethihallbeontoffatonthfttBldeaooordingtolt'' 
If  the  prophet  had  been  so  unfortunate  as  to  receiye  the  words  of  this  angelic  rision 
EngUthy  he  would  haye  required  a  second  reyelation  to  understand  its  Translators'  imp^^ 
trable  meaning. 

A  <<  flying  roll**  1  Think  of  a  parchment  synagogue  roU  (MeGiLaH,  MeghiOi),  f  *^ 
proportions,  ac  dually  ^ytii|^  through  the  air  t    Consider  the  amount  of  inspiration  it  ^^ 

(98)  IX.  pp.  as,  ez. 

(99)  MfrntamenU  CMU;  IL  pp.  99i-406.  ^ 

(100)  Quddon:  (MnJEnp^;  pp.  96, 9e:~«ltuae  Jfbmtiv  Am.-  It  la  often  eaUed  <Ac  b«n» <t^ ^^ ^ 
fi*ecor 'oomea  oat,*  </<ihe;koruofi'*  — Boob:  Egyptian  IkxrigltimaithABa^^ 

1862;  It.  p.  8. 

(101)  ay.  ftrit.;  diL  It.  f  64.    Cahw  :  XTi  p.  129,  notei  1,  2. 

(102)  Biral^.;  IL p. 801.  The  "aeaaons'*  ahoold be  *" rattlng^thnea  — althmigh CABBr, x. P^ ^ ^'^ 
fcn  the  old  reading. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

TO  THE    Xth    chapter    OP    GENESIS.  603 

have  required  to  comprehend  wfu^  side  was  mortiferous  to  thieyes,  which  to  swearers ;  for 
in  Aristotelian  logic,  "  if  the  one  is  the  other,  the  other  mast  be  Uie  one  i"  and  remember 
that  in  the  phrase  '*  according  to  it"  lies  lost,  forgotten,  and  entombed,  one-half  of  the 
inefable  Tetragrammaton  IHOH  (  Jshovah)  !  that  most  terrible,  the  most  occult  monosyllable^ 
of  the  palindromic  name  Tocalized  as  Adonai,  the  <*  Lord" !  Here  is  the  sense,  verbatim 
el  htieratm :  — 

**  And  taming  myself,  I  raised  my  eyes,  and  saw :  and  behold  a  whirling  disk  [of  fire — 
haying  a  mystic  relation  to  the  Egyptian  *  winged-globe,'  emblem  of  Ehspbk,  the  Creator- 
8un\  (108)  Then  the  angel  said  to  m^:  '  What  seest  thou  ?'  I  answered,  <  I  see  a  whirling 
disk  of  twen^  cubits  in  length  and  of  ten  in  height '  [its  wings  enlarging  the  lateral  diame- 
ter]. And  he  said  to  me :  *  This  is  the  malediction  [of  God]  which  spreads  itself  upon  the 
sor&oe  of  the  whole  earth ;  yerily,  eyery  thief  by  this  [the  whirling  disk"]  as  (if)  bg  OH 
[deuterosyllable  of  IH-OH]  shall  be  destroyed ;  and  eyery  peijurer  by  this  [the  whirling 
disk]  as  (if)  bg  OR  shall  be  destroyed.' "  (104) 

**  The  which,  philologers  will  recognize  as  common  sense  and  justness,  if  as  much  was 
not  perceiyed  by  those  wretched  theologists  (teologastri)  who,  in  philological  knowledge  not 
surpassing  the  Hebrew  alphabet,  go  hunting  about  through  lexicons  in  order  thence  to  spit 
florUi  a  doctoral  dedsion  hi  people's  faces  " ;  says  Land. (105) 

But,  as  the  time  for  the  exposition  of  these  recondite  biblical  arcana  has  not  yet  arriyed, 
our  meaning  is  best  conyeyed  to  the  lUuminati  (10^)  by  amending 

XJ.  —  Psalms  xxxyii.  7, 

**RMt  In  the  lord,  aad  wiit  patl«ntl7  ftr  him;  fr«t  not  thywlf  beeaoM  of  him  who  proeperath  in  hii 
•  wft7,  because  of  the  man  who  Iwingeth  wicked  derioef  to  paM" 

aa  follows:  —  '*£eep  silence  in  (the  secret  of)  IHOH,  and  take  delight  in  it:  dispute  not 
with  him  who  seeks  to  'penetrate  into  the  acquiring  of  it,  nor  with  any  yain  man  who 
attempU  it."  (107) 
v.  — Pm/iimcx.1— 7. 

'^Tbe  Lord  laid  unto  my  Lord,  Sit  thou  at  my  right  lumd^  nntU  I  make  thine  enemies  thy  fbotstooL— 
The  Lord  shall  send  the  rod  of  thy  strength  oat  of  Zion ;  role  thon  in  the  midst  of  tliine  enemies. 
—  Thy  people  shaU  be  willing  in  the  day  of  thy  power,  in  the  beauties  of  holiness  from  the  womb 
of  the  morning  ;  thon  hast  the  dew  of  thy  youth.  —  The  Lord  hath  sworn,  and  will  not  repen^ 
Thon  art  a  priest  for  erer  after  the  order  of  Melehlsedek.— The  Lord  at  thy  right  hand  shall  strike 
through  kings  in  the  day  of  his  wraths—  He  shall  Judge  among  the  heathen,  lie  shall  fill  ttsjrfooef 
with  the  dead  bodies;  he  shall  wound  the  heads  orer  many  countries. —  He  shall  drink  of  the 
hewk.  in  the  way:  therefore  shall  he  lift  up  the  head."  i 

This  superb  ode  has  by  some  been  suspected  to  haye  been  deriyed  from  hymns  of  pagan 
cnrigin,  sung  during  the  season  that  Exekiel  (yiii.  14)  saw  the  '*  woman  weeping  for  TtoM-UZ," 
about  the  winter  solstice,  or  21st  December,  where  the  Church  almanacs  place  the  anni- 
Tersary  of  the  unbelietnng  St  Thomas.  They  refer  to  the  fact  that  St  Jerome's  Vulgate 
renders  T(aM-UZ  by  Adonis,  fayorite  god  of  the  Phoenicians  in  Palestine  and  Syria,  to 
justify  their  reading  of  " Says  Jehovah  to  Adonis"  (ICNB)!  Others,  again,  take  Mblohi- 
ffBDEK  to  be' the  MeUk-Sadge,  the  **  just  king,"  whose  name  Stdto,  with  the  title  of  *'just" 
is  preseryed,  by  Sanconiathon,  as  the  father  of  the  Cabiri,  &c.  (109)  St  Paul,  howeyer, 
cites  this  Psalm  frequently  in  his  EpisUe  to  the  Hebrews ;  and  whoeyer  put  the  headings  to 
the  former  in  our  authorized  version  has  asserted  that  its  language  can  ap'ply  to  no  other 
tLan  the  Messiah.    With  all  deference,  the  subjoined  paraphrase  of  Land's  dose  Italian 

(103)  See  preceding  page,  under  Q. 

(104)  LAHa:  aag.Serit,;  eh.  ilL { 7 ;  —  iVaI»>omeii<;  L  p.07,  sag.;  iLp.SM;  SDALdtre  dJCPtiste;  1847, 
p.  38.    These  rlews  are  later  than  Cahsm's,  xii.  p.  144. 

(106)  i^mil^;  Lp.8. 

(106)  Mackat:  Frm-MBt9on*t  Lexieon;  2d  edit.;  Charleston,  S.  C;  1862;  yooe  Jdmak,  and  J\raMS.*~also^ 
SUxxwiix:  JHsamrH  before  the  O.  L.  of  Georgia;  Oct  80, 1861;  p.  27. 

(107)  JPctraUp.;  I  p.  140;~CAHni:  ziU.  p.  84,  note  7. 

'    (108)  Compare  Parkbubst:  Hebrew  Lexicon!  rooe  **  Adonai **;  with  AnBOir:  Class,  JHd.;Wl;  pp.  26^  27;— 
«fto  R.  P.  K9I0IIT,  to  he  dted  hereafter. 
a«8)  03t:  Jjte.  JV^.;  pp.\  0, 18, 16;  «  Saaooniatho." 

Digitized  by 

Google 

604  ABOH-ffiOLOGICAL    INTRODUCTION 

translation  of  the  "IHnt  Dominira/'  while  it  remores  tiie  senilities  ot^t/brty^teoen,  Bhom 
that  the  composer  of  that  ode  dedicated  it  to  some  contemporary  jme9<  called  Mslchibs* 
siK,  living  at  the  time  of  its  composition. 

"  Said  leHOnaH  to  mj  Lord :  <  Sit  thon  on  my  right  until  I  make  of  thy  foemen  • 
stool  for  thy  feet*. — leHOuaH  from  Zion  will  send  the  wand  of  thy  glory:  go,  role  in  the 
midst  of  thy  foes. — Thy  people  will  behold  spontaneously,  when  thou  shalt  understand  thy 
powerful  qualifications  for  the  splendor  of  the  priesthood*;  from  the  womb,  the  germ  of  thy 
birth  was  mysterious. — leHOuaH  swore,  nor  does  he  retract  his  oaths:  *Thou^  0  Mdchue- 
deky  ihali  6e,  upon  my  word.  Priest  (a  Cohen) /(>rw«r.'' — My  Lord  at  thy  right  hand  slew  kings 
in  the  day  of  his  furor^At  the  ruling  amid  the  (^utiles,  the  confines  haring  been  paeeed 
by  force,  the  chief  of  vastest  land  swooned — He  wul  pour  himself  out  more  than  a  torrent 
through  (its)  course ;  wherefore  will  he  raise  his  head."  (110) 

As  every  departure  from  the  literal  Italian  entuls  another  remove  from  the  original 
Hebrew,  grace  is  here  purposely  sacrificed  to  fidelity;  but,  from  the  general  tenor  of  the 
context,  owing  to  the  distinctions  observed  by  the  writer  between  Uie  use  of  the  terras 
«  Jehovah "  and  *'  my  Lord,"  one  might  infer,  that  this  poetical  effusion  commemoratas 
some  conquest  over  foreigners,  with  which  the  composer  and  his  sacerdotal  friend  Melohi- 
SEDBK  were  familiar ;  scenes  in  which  the  latter  personage  (named  after  the  long-anterior 
<*  King  of  Salem")  (111)  had  been  an  actor.  We  must  console  ourselres  (under  the  expected 
charge  that  all  this  is  mere  conjecture)  by  reflecting  how,  if  Land's  shaft  may  haTe  nrisupd 
the  buirs  eye,  the  arrows  of  forty-seyen  able-bodied  men  flew  wide  of  the  target ;  and  Ihat 
another  nail  has  been  driven  into  the  letters*  Tersion,  which  we  shall  have  the  satisfactioB 
of  *<  clinching  "  under  the  succeeding  letters. 

According  to  CrOden's  laborious  work,  (112)  the  words  "grove"  and  "groves"  are 
«  authorized  "  to  re-appear  in  the  English  Bible  about  thirty-six  times.  Theologians  of  the 
lower  grade  naturally  suppose  that,  in  the  **  original  sacred  tongue,"  one  single  noun, 
repeated  throughout  the  Text,  as  its  substitute  is  in  our  version,  must  be  the  latter's  repre- 
sentative. Tain  illusion  I 
W.  —  OenuU  xxi.  88. 

"  And  Ahraham  planted  a  grove  In  Beer^heba,  and  called  there  on  the  name  of  the  Lord,  tbe  ereriasttoc 
God." 
He  did  nothing  of  the  kind !     He,  Abraham,  <<  set  up  (Sisrx,  ASeL)  a  tablet  (or  adi) 
in  Beersheba,  and  (lOp,  KaRA,  read;  also,  wrcte)  engraved  it  vrith  the  naaie  of  leHOuaH 
to  perpetual  duration."  (118)    Here,  take  note,  the  original  for  "  groTe  *'  is  ASeL. 
X.  — 2irmy«xxiii.  6. 

**  And  be  brought  out  the  grove  from  the  house  of  the  Lord,  witiiout  Jenualem,  unto  the  brook  KUnn, 
and  burned  it  at  the  brook  Kldron,  and  stamped  il  small  to  powder,"  kc 

A  word  occurs  frequently  in  the  Text,  written  in  two  ways,  dSTrURT^  and  dSATrBUT^; 
which  is  punctuated,  by  the  Massora,  Aetdret,  and  Athtardt,  At  other  times,  according  to 
the  peculiar  provincialism  (patois)  of  each  biblical  writer,  the  same  word  appears  in  the 
form  of  ASeRA,  or  plural  ASAeR-IM.  These  are  all  proper  names  of  one  person ;  and 
that  person  is  no  other  than  the  goddess  Astaete  of  the  Palestinians;  Hathor  of  the 
Egyptians ;  ^tyr  of  the  Himyaritic  Arabs  ;  the  VENUS  of  Gneco-Roman  mythology,  and 
of  our  vernacular.  Now,  here  the  word  for  "  grove  "  is  ASAeRaH :  and  our  Translators' 
deed  in  rendering  ASeL  by  " grove"  in  one  place,  and  ASAeRaH  by  **  grove"  in  another, 

(110)  Parat^.;  U.  p.  110.  How  eztenslTely  obscure  is  the  senM  of  this  Psatan  m«j be  ■em  from  Camob^ 
notety  xiU.  pp.  261-256, 866, 366. 

(111)  Qtniuii  xiT.  18.  <*  Salem,''  commentators  tell  us,  was  the  name  of  Jemsofem— TeRuSUJ^IH,  fttm 
Tenuy  **  heritage,**  and  Shdkgm,  ^'peaee,'*  In  the  dual;  Hterally,  <<She  who  inherits  twolbld  peace**  (ParaH^; 
in  loe.).  They  also  tell  us  that  Hoses  wrote  OeMsit,  about  the  14th— 16th  century  b.  c.  Perhaps  Uieir  arcb» 
ological  ingenuity  will  explain  how  it  came  to  pass  that  the  old  town  otJebut  was  called  *< Salem**  befora  it  was 
taken  by  the  Jews  of  Joshua  (Joeh,  zriU.  28 ;  Judges  1. 21 ;  six.  10, 11 ;  Ac.),  long  after  MoeEs^  de^th  !  Until 
they  do,  that  Moeu  wrote  XlVth  Cfeiusie  is  sCmpIy  i^aposcible ;  as  likewise  the  contemporaneousness  of  jIkap 
HAM  with  a  **King  of  Salem.**  Such  acachron!«m^  betny  tbe  modem  age  of  this  chapter;  and  render  the 
elder  Mblcbiekdik  resj  like  the  Pboenlclanfc*  **  Sadto  the  /r<<,**  rh<re  plao*  in  history  Is  mytholosioaL 

(112)  Omoortiaiioe-^fron:  10th  Lond.  edit;  I^iodolphla,  KHl:  r  i54. 
(118)  i^ini2^.;  L  p.  97,  seq. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

TO    THE    Xth    chapter    OP    GENESIS.  605 

is  cedij,  if  not  worse.  We  pass  oyelr,  therefore,  the  extrftordinary  drenmstanoe  how 
JosiAH  could  find  a  *'  grove  "  in  a  hotuef  unless  that  groye  was  yery  small,  or  the  house 
Tory  large,  which  Solomon's  temple,  onlj  ninety  feet  by  thirty,  was  assuredly  not — and 
how  he  could  carry  about  and  break  up  with  facility  an  entire  "  groye"  seems  inexplicable. 
Not  so.  when  we  read  —  **  And  he  dragged  the  (wooden  statue  of)  VENUS  (ASAeBaH)  (114) 
out  of  the  house  of  leHOuaH :" —  a  proceeding  which  begins  to  reyeal  to  us,  what  some 
^^teologastri"  haye  yentured  recently  to  doubt,  (116)  yiz.,  the  infamous  atrocities  of  ancient 
Jewish  templar  worship ;  that  we  propose  to  lay  bare  in  another  place.  <*  Ex  abundantly,'* 
we  giye  a  correct  but  modeet  restoration  of  verte  7  of  the  same  chapter,  which  intelligent 
readers  can  compare  with  the  blundering  performance  of  the  forty'sevm :  —  **  And  he 
(Josiah)  broke  down  the  little  ehapels  of  the  ehameUu  priests  that  were  in  the  house  of 
leHOuaH,  where  the  women  spread  perfumes  before  the  niehee  of  VENUS  **  —  for,  says 
V0ne  5  —  the  Jews  "  had  burned  incense  to  Baal,  to  Shbms,  to  the  Mborif  and  to  the  Signs 
of  Ihs  ZodtaCf  and  to  all  the  Asterisms  of  Heayen ! " 

It  was  the  discovery  (about  620  b.  c),  to  say  the  least,  of  the  '*Book  of  the  Law"  of 
Moses,  (116)  lost  and  forgotten  for  some  700  years,  which  instigated  the  reforming  Josiah 
to  these  yigorons  measures :  but  pious  iconoclasts  had  been  shocked  at  similar  abominations 
before;  as  the  following  text  clearly  exhibits;  while  it  also  relieyes  poor  Joash,  the 
worthy  father  of  the  yaHant  Qideoh,  from  the  accusation  of  idolatry  that  /orty-seven  men 
stimulate  "  simple  belieyers  "  to  hurl  at  his  innocent  head. 

y.— Juifyef  yL26,  26. 

<*  And  it  oama  to  paM  th«  lane  night,  that  the  Lord  Mid  unto  him,  TiIm  thy  ftth«^  yonng  honoek,  efren 

•         the  aeeond  hnllock  of  seven  yean  old,  and  throw  down  the  altar  of  Baal  that  th  j  fiither  hath,  and 

eat  down  the  grore  that  <t  by  it :— And  hoUd  an  altar  onto  the  Lord  th  j  God  npon  the  top  of  the 

roek,  in  the  ordered  place,  and  take  the  aeeond  hnllodc  and  offer  a  burnt  aacrlfioe  with  the  wood 

of  the  grore  which  then  shalt  eat  down." 

Decency  forbids  that  we  should  explain  the  sculptural  obscenities  that  Gmioii's  eyes 
beheld.  Orientalists,  whose  studies  may  haye  led  them  into  antique  jTonM^cpAy,  will  com- 
prehend us  and  the  exactitude  of  the  yenerable  Land's  translation,  (117)  of  which  we 
submit  a  close  but  softened  paraphrase :  — 

«*And  it  Iras  in  that  night  that  leHOuaH  said  to  him  [Qideon]:  <Take  the  young 
bollock  of  thy  &ther,  and  another  bullock  of  seyen  years,  and  thou  shalt  fell,  witii  the 
altar  [supporter]  of  Baal  [the  obscene  God]  that  [bullock]  which  is  thy  father's ;, 
afterwards  thou  shalt  break  down  the  VENUS  [Ashbea,  the  foul  goddess]  which  was' 
aboye  it  Then  thou  shalt  build  up,  in  regular  proportion  [L  e.,  according  to  Mosaio 
rules],  an  altar  to  leHOuaH,  thy  Eloh,  on  the  summit  of  that  [yonder]  rock;  and, 
taking  tiie  second  bullock,  thou  shalt  bum  it  in  holocaust  with  the  wood  of  the  VENUS 
by  thee  broken  up.' " 

We  may  now  inquire  of  the  reader,  in  all  good  faith,  whether,  in  eyery  instance  laid 
hitherto  before  his  acumen,  our  emendations  haye  not  made  plain  sense  of  that  which  was 
utter  nonsense ;  and  whether  the  Bible,  properly  translated,  is  not  a  much  loftier  book,  far 
grander,  as  regards  mere  literary  excellence,  than  the  yersion,  ''authorised"  exactly  260 
years  ago,  has  oyer  made  it  appear  ? 

If  such  be  his  candid  opinion,  he  wUl  feel  a  high  gratification  at  the  reyisal,  through 
the  application  of  pure  grammar  and  philology,  of  that  imaginary  text,  on  the  authority 
of  which  the  Copertiican  system  was  traduced  by  ecclesiastical  ignorance ;  while  the  tele- 
scopic discoyeries  of  the  immortal  Galileo,  a.  d.  1616,  condemned,  as  "  absurd,  false  in 
philosophy,  and  formally  heretical,  being  contrary  to  the  express  word  of  God,"  nearly 
brought  him  to  those  fagots  whereupon,  only  fifteen  years  before,  Giordano  Bruno's  living 

(114)  GiHnr  preaeryee  "laefaera  "  in  hia  translatioa  (tiU.  p.  IM,  te.) ;  aecarately  remarking  that,  if  the  Rabbis 
beatowed  more  attention  on  **ui}it»9ut^5»Wi7iie»"--<<therewonld  not  be  then  leaareipect  for  the  aacred  writ- 
Snga,  hot  they  woald  no  longer  be  regardM  aa  the  PiUars  of  Herealea  of  all  driUsation''  (p.  206). 

(115)  Inter  aUot,  the  Ber.  Dr.  Smnii  of  Charleaton,  8.  C:  UMt^;  p.  112,  note. 

(116)  2  Kingt  zzIL  8;  and  2  Chron,  voir.  14. 

(117)  BxraHp,;  iL  28-81.    Cahih:  tL  p.  81,  "  Aachera.*' 

Digitized  by 

Google 

606  ARCHJEOLOGICAL    INTRODUCTION 

bodj  WM  ctleined  '<  at  qnam  olemenlissime  et  citra  Bangoinis  effarionem,  puniretor.'' (118) 
Had  Land  neyer  turned  his  Tast  Semitic  acquirements  to  any  other  Scriptural  text  bvt 
Joshua  Xth,  12, 18,  astronomical  posterity  should  weaye  for  him  a  wreath  of  laurels.  But, 
to  appreciate  his  labors,  one  must  bestow  a  final  smile  of  pl^  npon  the  fortysevtiL 

Z.—JiwAttax.  12,  18,14. 

**  Then  0iwk«  Joshua  to  the  Lord  in  the  day  when  the  Lord  deliTored  np  the  Amoritee  hetne  the  ddUna 

of  lareel,  and  he  said  in  the  light  of  Israel,  Son,  stand  thou  still  npom  Gfbeon,  and  thou,  Mooa, 

in  the  Tall^  of  AJaloo. . . .  And  the  son  stood  Mil,  and  the  moon  stayed,  until  the  people  had 

avensed  themselTee  upon  their  enemies.    Jt  not  this  written  in  the  book  of  Jasherf   So  tte  no 

stood  stiD  in  the  midst  of  heaven,  and  hasted  not  to  go  down  ahont  a  whole  daj. . . .  And  then 

was  no  daj  like  that  hefi>re  it  or  after  it,  that  the  Lord  hearkened  to  the  roloe  of  a  man:  tot  tbe 

Lonl  ibugfat  tn  IsraeL** 

So  far  "  authorized  yersion !  '*  and,  in  lieu  of  examining  whether  the  ancient  Text  hu 

been  truthfVilly  rendered,  those  among  whom  knowledge  has  not  yet  adranced  beyond  the 

theological  grade  are  lavishly  vituperatiye  of  scholars  who,  knowuig  the  English  traniflatioo 

of  this  passage  to  be  an  absurdity,  despise  the  commentaries  upon  it  as  a  sham. 

To  place  the  reader  at  our  point  of  Tiew,  let  us  first  ask  the  question — ^what  is  ^s  "book 
of  Jasher  ?"  One  of  the  twenty  loH  books  of  the  Hebrews  cited  in  the  Old  Testament,  is 
the  facile  reply.  '*  The  book  ofjasher,  that  is,  the  RighUoue.  (Jbeh.  z.  18 ;  2  Sam.  1 1&) 
This  book  must  have  been  of  no  yery  ancient  date,  for  it  contained  the  Lamentations  of 
Dayid  on  the  death  of  Saul  and  Jonathan.  A  spurious  work  with  this  title  has  come  down 
to  us,  containing  the  history  recorded  in  the  first  seyen  books  of  the  Old  Testament"  (119) 
According  to  Cahen  (yii,  pp.  121-124;  2  Samuel  i  17-27),  the  yerse  runs  — 

**17.  David  composed  this  lament  upon  Saul  and  upon  Jonathan  his  son.  — 18.  A^d 
ordered  to  be  taught  to  the  children  of  Judah  [the  elegiac  Lament  called]  the  Bow;  behold, 
it  is  written  in  the  book  of  Jasher." 

Then  foUowt  the  lament  itself,  from  vern  19  to  27:  in  which  David,  in  poetio  stnioi 
8ays(r.  22,28)  — 

**  The  how  of  Jonathan  never  retreated; 

The  sword  of  Saul  never  returned  emp^ : 

(Oh)  Saul  and  Jonathan  I  *> 
Consequently,  David,  about  b.  o.  1056,  had  composed  this  beautiful  ode;  and  a  later  wnter 
says,  "  behold,  it  is  written  in  the  Book  ofJaeher;"  that  is,  David's  ode  is.    Brgo»  ^  ^ 
ofJaehtr  was  a  collection  of  poems  compiled  after  b.  o.  1056.     Now,  the  writer  of  "  Josho* 
Xth"  quotes,  from  this  same  Book  of  Jaeher,  the  passage  which  in  king  James's  version 
runs  —  "  So  the  sun  stood  still  in  the  midst  of  heaven  and  hasted  not  to  go  down  about  a 
whole  day ;"  continuing  his  citation  down  to  **  the  Lord  fought  for  Israel."    Henoe  it  JJ 
positive  that  **  Joshua-6€fi-NUN,"  could  not  have  been  the  author  of  the  "Book  of  Joshua; 
because,  having  departed  this  life  aboutn.  o.  1426,  he  could  have  known  nothhig  of  *  sdr 
sequent  collection  of  poems  that  contained  the  lamentations  of  David  upon  events  tba 
happened  some  870  years  after  Joshua  himself  was  dead  and  buried.     Moses  is  the  onlj 
man  who  is  privileged  by  orthodoxy  to  describe  his  own  demise :  (120)  a  second  instanoe 
cannot  be  tolerated.    Now,  this  author  of  «« the  Book  of  Joshua  "  is  utterly  unknown,  ww 
its  date  is  very  modem,  perhaps  as  low  as  the  sixth  century  b.  o.  ;  (121)  as  are  likevise 
the  <*  Books  of  Samuel," 

The  next  point,  to  which  attention  is  invited,  regards  the  sentence— « le  not  this  wntten 
in  the  Book  of  Jasher  ?"  What  was  written  in  the  said  book  ?  Commentators,  '^P^^^ 
of  Oriental  usages,  concur  in  the  notion  that  those  passages  which  precede  the  hook  oiteOf 
were  contained  in  the  said  book.  Such  opinion  is  fallacious,  because,  as  Orientalists  koo  i 
it^is  the  universal  custom  of  Semitic  writers  to  quote  the  authorities  they  introduce  W 

(118)  HncBOLW:  Obmot;  transL  OIU;  New  York,  1861;  UL  p.  17. 
019)  I>i  WiRi:  i.  p.  411. 

(120)  Deuteron.  xxxiv.  5-12.    N.  B.  The  data  are  from  the  margin  of  our  SngUsh  BlUe. 

(121)  Di  Wsxn:  ii.  pp.  180-101;  and  p. 228,  lira-  JSamud, 

Digitized  by 

Google 

TO    THE   Xth    chapter    OF    GENESIS.  607 

the  extracts  or  citations  they  make  ftrom  the  latter's  works ;   so  that,  what  follows  the 
words  '<Book  of  Jasher"  must  be  the  quotation  from  that  book. 

The  literary  criticism  of  age,  manner,  and  anthorship,  being  briefly  defined,  we  glance 
next  at  the  topography;  observing,  that  any  proposed  Terifications  of  the  latitude  and  lon^- 
tude  of  Oibeon  and  AjdUm  by  tourists  in  modem  Palestine  are  mere  **  trayeller's  tales :"  for 
Gabd-Ov,  "  occultation  of  the  son,"  and  Aial-OSf  (122)  "  dawning  of  the  sun,'*  refer  respeo- 
tiTcly,  the  former  to  the  West,  the  latter  to  the  East,  as  points  of  the  compass.  Now,  sup- 
pose two  towns,  one  on  either  side  of  a  Talley,  opposite  to  each  other ;  the  one,  Oabd-Ov, 
on  the  western  summit ;  the  other,  Aidl-On,  on  the  eastern ;  while  a  battle  was  raging  be- 
tween Israelites  and  Ammonites  in  the  yalley  between  and  beneath.  Suppose,  again,  by 
anticipation  of  the  text  (and  you  haye  as  much  right  to  suppositions,  in  this  case,  as  the 
forty-seven  coUectiTely),  that  the  twenty-four  hours  during  which  this  fight  went  on  occurred 
at  an  equinox  ;  and  that  it  so  happened,  by  a  singular  juncture  of  the  solar  and  lunar  mo- 
tions, that,  at  six  o'clock  p.  x.  precisely,  the  sun  set  in  the  West  at  the  same  apparent  mo« 
ment  that  a  full  moon  ro9e  in  the  East ;  you  would  haye  light  for  twenty-four  hours  in  the 
Talley ;  or  twelve  hours  of  sunlight  through  the  day,  and  twelve  hours  of  moonlight  through 
the  night  Such  combinations  are  so  natural,  although  rare,  that  if  any  tourist  were  to  furnish 
an  astronomer  with  the  exact  latitude  and  longitude  of  such  a  vaUey  in  Palestine,  the  latter 
could  calculate  the  precise  day  when  such  celestial  combinations  occurred,  and  thus  fix  the 
era  alluded  to  in  the  "Book  of  Joshua."  Finally,  in  the  Hebrew,  these  two  lines  are  rhyth- 
mical, besides  containing  a  play  npon  the  words  GBdUN  and  AILUN,  by  poetic  license :  — 

*<To  the  eyes  oflsrael,  0  Sunt  in  the  hOlt  [B<3BdUN]  eren  hide  tfayself : 
Bat  thou,  0  Moon  I  be  moft  leeplendent  in  the  [B-AMKAXLUN]  voZZey^ 

We  conclude  with  the  lesson  of  that  sage  ftrom  whom  both  text  and  commentary  are 
derived.  (128) 

**  In  precisely  that  day  that  leHOuaH  [the  document  is  Jehovistic]  delivered  up  the  Amo- 
rean  in  face  of  the  children  of  Israel,  Joshua  spake  to  leHOuaH  and  said :  To  the  itbs 
or  Israel,  0  sun!  in  the  hills  even  hide  thtselt:  but  thou,  0  koon!  be  most 
BEspLENDBNT  IN  THE  YALLET.  And  the  suu  set,  and  tiie  moon  endured  imtil  the  multitude 
glutted  (their)  vengeance  upon  their  enemies : — And  is  it  not  written  in  the  book  [entitied] 
the  Just  f  [here  follows  the  quotation]  *  The  sun  which,  running  along  the  tneiidional  partt' 
tion  of  the  heavens  [i.  e.  along  the  equinoctial  line],  goes  down  [sets],  was  not  as  precise 
[true,  exact],  as  by  day,  intent  upon  new-birth  ?'  For  certainly  there  was  not  before,  nor 
after,  a  day  equal  to  that  in  which,  leHOnaH  having  listened  to  the  voice  of  man, 
leHOuaH  (himself)  fought  for  Israel." 

It  may  be  prudent  to  observe  that  a  passage  in  Isaiah,  and  another  in  JSedesiastes,  pro- 
perly translated,  lend  no  support  to  the  supematuralist  commentary.  That  of  Hahakkuk 
(liL  11)  has  no  relation  to  the  event;  as,  with  *'one  longing,  lingering  look"  at  king 
James's  translation,  we  prove  by  the  subjoined  rendering:  —  "Sun  and  moon  set  at 
their  season ;  by  the  light  of  thy  arrows  they  shall  march,  by  the  splendor  of  the  lightning 
of  thy  lance.'*  (Referring  probably  to  a  night  attack.) 

Thus  vanishes  <* Joshua's  miracle!"  The  late  Rev.  Moses  Stuart,  than  whom  as  a 
Hebraist,  and  upright  champion  of  theology,  none  superior  have  yet  appeared  in  these 
tJnited  States,  supplies  this  definition  of  a  "  miracle  "  —  *'  I  have  it  before  me,  in  a  letter 
firom  one  of  the  first  philologists  and  antiquarians  that  Germany  has  produced.  It  is  this: 
*  The  laws  of  nature  are  merely-  developments  of  the  Godhead.  God  cannot  contradict,  or 
be  inconsistent  with  himself.  But  inasmuch  as  a  miracle  is  a  contradiction  of  the  law^  of 
ziature,  or  at  least  an  inconsistency  with  them,  therefore  a  miraek  is  impossible,* "  (124) 

Reader !  We  have  submitted  seriatim  to  yow  judgment  a  positive  example  of  the  errors 
of  our  truly-vulgar  version  for  every  letter  of  the  English  alphabet    We  have  kept  no 

(122)  like  BethOV  —  **  House  of  the  San  >*;  or  ON,  the  Sun,  Hebrew  name  Ibr  EdtcpoUs. 
(128)  Lahq:  BaraUpomeni:  iL  pp.  381-990.    It  is  of  no  use  to  oonsnlt  Gahbt  on  theee  pessages,  except  tat  the 
itxt  (points  dedneted);  tL  pp.  88,  89. 

(124)  OrU Hitt. andDtfenoe,  Ac.;  Andover;  1846;  p.  19. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

608  ARGH^OLOGIGAL   INTSODUCTIOK 

Moonnt  of  digressioiiftl  insUncet  of  other  blii^<l«Ri»  mft<W  bj  th^fortsf-teBm  truiBlftUn  2S0 
yean  ago ;  although  these  are  numeroaa,  they  are  thrown  in  to  make  weight.  The  whole 
are  taken,  almost  promisonously,  firom  oar  biblical  portfolio,  referred  to  years  g0Deb7.(125) 
Ton  may  now  begin  to  think  that  we  may  be  serious,  when  we  affirm  that  onr  theolo^cal 
armory  contains  hmdredt  more,  to  prove  that  king  James's  transUtors  were  not  **  inspind;" 
and  that,  whateyer  may  be  the  fact  as  regards  the  **  original  tongaee,"  the  English  Tcniim 
cannot  be  accepted  by  science  as  a  eritemn  in  matters  coneeming  anthropology. 

The  ladder  of  time  has  been  ascended  to  the  year  1600,  when  oiur  *<  anthoriaed  TenMa" 
was  not ;  but  when  many  Enj^ish  translations,  some  in  MSS.,  others  in  print,  reqvied  bit 
an  act  of  Parliament  to  make  Uiem  orthodox.  With  the  former,  chiefly  Saxon  nrwim, 
from  Altbbd  the  Great  down  to  John  Wtoufi ,  car  inquiries  do  not  meddle ;  none  of  thai 
haying  been  seen  by  us :  nor,  indeed,  do  we  take  intense  interest  in  the  latter,  wft  to 
remember  how  William  Tyndal,  **  homo  doctos,  pius,  et  bonu%"  for  pruUm0  the  etifieit 
En^dsh  translation  of  the  New  Testament,  in  1526,  and  of  parts  of  the  Old,  was  rewuded 
by  strangulation  and  cineraUon  in  the  yoar  1536.  Copies  of  his  work,  together  with  tint 
of  Myles  CoTsrdale,  1586,  haye  been  before  us  for  examination ;  and  it  is  a  singiiltf  M 
that,  in  the  nu^ority  of  cs^ks,  where  king  James's  translators  departed  from  the  imvid 
Tyndal,  or  more  particularly  from  that  of  Coyerdale,  they  commenced  floundering  ia  tke 
mire ;  and  that  where  they  haye  appropriated  the  readings  of  either,  it  has  been  don 
without  acknowledgment  Fuller,  the  Church  historian  of  those  times,  says  of  Tjsdtl 
that  "his  skiUe  in  Hebrew  was  not  considerable:  yea,  generally,  learning  in  langusges  wai 
then  in  y«  infanoie  thereof — and  we  haye  shown  (ubi  tupra)  that  Etbrew  scholsnhip 
was  all  but  unknown  in  England  until  the  generation  of  Walton ;  that  is,  half  a  oentoy 
later  than  the  emission  of  king  James's  standard  yersion. 

The  period  of  English  history  embraced  within  the  sixteenth  century  is  distinguished  o& 
the  one  hand  by  the  snccessiye  intellectual  upheayals  of  the  educated  classes,  each  surge 
towering  higher  and  higher;  and  on  the  other  by  the  mind-comprpssing  enactments  of  the 
<*  Lords  Spiritual  and  Temporal "  in  the  repeated  erection  of  barriers  that  graduallj  su^ 
lower  andiower.  Tyndal's  body  was  burnt;  that  of  Qrafton,  (126)  guilty  of  prii*«« 
«  Matthew's  Bible,"  was  incarcerated ;  the  Inquisition  at  Paris  merely  confiscated  2d00 
copies  of  the  edition  afterwards  known  as  *'  Cranmer's ;"  in  1546,  an  act  of  Parlismeot 
only  forbade  the  possession  and  reading  of  either  *<  Tyndal's  "or  *'  Coyerdale's."  "^ 
reaction  now  began  to  feel  its  weakness,  the  progressiyes  their  strength :  and  so  loog  ** 
the  sacerdotal  caste  could  keep  before  the  popular  mind  a  parliamentary  idM  thit 
Tyndal's  yersion  was  "  crafty,  false,  and  untrue,"  its  sages,  satisfied  that  resistsBoe  hw 
begun  to  endanger  the  **  Establishment,"  as  it  is  still  called,  were  prei>aring  to  give  W^* 
Unhappy  Tyndal,  as  the  first  Englishman  to  trample  upon  theological  impediments  throegv 
pubUcaUofty  has  ever  remained  the  "  bSte  noire "  of  High  Church  orthodoxy ;  »or,  o^m 
to  the  obfuscations  of  history  by  ecclesiastical  writers,  has  his  memory  yet  received  froo^ 
posterity  the  justice  that  it  merits. 

About  1542,  an  act  permitting  certain  persons  to  possess  the  "Word  of  God,"  **  ^^ 
term  it  now,  "  not  being  of  TyndoTs  iraruUuion,"  was  graciously  issued.     It  pro^des— 

"  That  no  manner  of  person  or  persons  after  the  first  day  of  October,  the  next  ensojoS' 
should  take  upon  him  or  them  to  read  openly  to  others  in  any  church  or  open  sssembiyt 
within  any  of  the  king's  dominions,  the  Bible  or  any  part  of  the  Scripture  in  l£oB"^' 
unless  he  was  so  appointed  thereunto  by  the  king,  or  any  ordinarie,  on  pain  of  ^"^^"L 
month's  imprisonment.  Prorided,  that  the  Chancellor  of  England,  captaines  of  the  warrest 
the  king's  justices,  the  recorders  of  any  city,  borough,  or  town,  the  speaker  of  P**^*^!- 
&c.,  which  heretofore  had  been  accustomed  to  declare  or  teach  any  good,  rirtnous,  or  go^a^y 
exhortations  in  anie  assemblies,  may  use  any  part  of  the  Bible  or  holie  Scriptures  ^^7 
haye  been  wont ;  and  that  every  nobleman  sAid  gentieman,  being  a  householder,  may  i"^^ 

(126)  NOTT :  BOL  and  Phgi.  BUL;  1840;  p.  186. 

(IM)  See  HuifT,  ffutory  qf  Jourwdttwt,  1860,  for  the  legal  iMrbarltiM  tboi  perpetrated  upon  VttiiUm  P^ 
rally — iiiH<tZatfor»,  hamgingt,  drawingi  and  quarlerinffi,  gibbtl$,  wadjoffottl 

Digitized  by 

Google 

TO    THE    Xtk    chapter  OF  GENESIS.  609 

• 
or  Ciose  to  be  read  by  any  of  his  familie  senraots  in  his  house,  orchards,  or  garden,  and 
to  bis  own  familie,  anie  text  of  the  Bible  or  New  Testament,  and  also  every  merchant-man, 
being  a  householder,  and  any  other  persons  other  than  women^  prentises,  &c.,  might  read 
to  themselves  privately  the  Bible.  But  no  woman  [except  nobU-womm  and  gmiU-vxnnen, 
•rho  might  read  to  themselves  alone,  and  not  to  others,  any  texts  of  the  Bible],  nor  arti- 
fioars,  prentises,  journeymen,  serving-men  of  the  degrees  of  yomen  or  under,  husband-men, 
or  laborers,  were  to  read  the  Bible  or  New  Testament  in  Englishe  to  himselfi  or  any  other, 
privately  or  openly,  upon  paine  of  one  month's  imprisonment."     ^ 

Three  hundred  years  have  eflfaoed  even  the  remembrance  of  such  legislative  prohibitions. 
The  **  general  reader  "  of  our  day  never  dreams  that  "  my  Bible  "  was  once  forbidden  to 
his  plebeian  use.  He  claps  his  hands  at  Missionary  Meetings  when  it  is  triumphantly 
announced  that  myriads  of  trantkUums  of  the  Scriptures  are  yearly  diffused  among  the 
Moslims,  the  Pagans,  and  other  **  heathen,"  printed  in  more  languages  than  are  spoken,  in 
Bore  alphabets  than  there  are  readers.  Has  it  never  struck  him  to  inquire,  when  the 
damor  of  gratulation  has  subsided,  whether  these  myrionymed  versions  are  correct?  If 
they  are,  what  is  commonly  Uie  case,  mere  servile  paraphrases  of  king  James's  EngU»h 
translation,  aa  we  have  provein  the  latter's  woeftd  corruptions  (yhi  mpra),  must  not  the 
mistranslations  of  that  text  be  pmcpetuated  and  increased  by  transfer  into  another  tongue  ? 
and  if  so,  is  not  that  one  of  the  providential  reasons  why  the  spiritual  effect  of  these 
versiens  among  the  *'  heathen  "  UUb  below  that  material  one  produced  by  drops  of  rain 
en  the  Atlantic  T  Or,  if  the  Missioiiary  translators  of  the  Scriptures  into  Fe^'ee,  KanUeha' 
daUf  or  Pataffonian,  possess  (what  is  so  rare,  as  to  be  a  pleasant  proverb)  sufficient  Hebrai- 
oal  emdi^on  to  translate  into  the  above,  or  any  other  tongue,  direct  firom  the  Tesdt,  do  not 
these  excellent  men  *Mpso  facto"  confirm  all  we  have  asserted  in  regard  to  our  ** authorised" 
version,  by  leaving  its  interpretations  aside  T 

There  are  (Although  few  Anglo-Saxons  know  it)  human  dialects,  orally  extant,  wherein 
there  is  no  nanae  for  *•  Qod,"  no  appellative  for  '<  Heayen,"  because  such  ideas  never  entered 
the  brain  of  those  low  <*  Ty^  of  Mankind  "  for  which  a  Missionary  version  has  been  manu- 
tketured.  The  highly-cultivated  Chinese  remained  impenetrable  to  the  disputes,  sustained 
by  the  learned  Jesuits  and  the  evangelical  Dondnioans  with  the  quintessence  of  <*  odium 
theologicum,"  on  the  follovring  heads :  — 

m 

**  Isi,  if,  by  the  words  TAtan,  and  Chanp'ti,  the  Chinese  understand  but  the  material  sky, 
or  if  they  understand  the  Lord  of  Heaven?  —  2d.,  if  the  ceremonies  made  by  the  Chinese 
in  honor  of  their  ancestors  or  of  their  national  pliilosopher  Khoung-Ueu,  are  religious  ob- 
servances or  eivil  and  political  praeticts  ?"  (127) 

Unable  to  settle  the  first  problem  by  reference  to  Chinese  lexicons,  those  Catholic  Mission- 
aries submitted  it  to  the  decision  of  the  Emperor  £hang-hi;  and  the  solution  of  the 
second  dilemma  was  referred  to  the  Pope !  ^ 

Regarding  this  <<  Foreign  Missionary  "  discussion  from  the  same  point  of  view,  as  here 
in  the  United  States  we  should  look  upon  a  dispute  between  Chinese  Bonzes  as  to  what  we 
mean  by  «* Providence,"  or  in  what  light  we  celebrate  the  "  Anniversary  of  Washington" ; 
and  feeling  the  same  sort  of  astonishment  that  would  fill  ourselves  were  We  told,  that  by 
one  (Chinaman  the  first  doubt  had  been  submitted  to  His  Excellency  the  President,  and  that 
the  settlement  of  the  latter  had  been  left  by  the  other  Chinaman  to  His  Holiness  the  Dalai- 
Loma  of  Thibet :  —  the  wise  and  jocular  Emperor  wrote  in  autograph  beneath  the  Pope's 
CwatUuiion  ;  — 

"  This  species  of  decree  concerns  none  but  vile  Europeans :  how  can  it  decide  anything 
open  the  grand  doctrine  of  the  ChsMse^  of  whom  these  people  in  Europe  do  not  understand 
erenth^  language?" 

And  then  enforced  his  jest  by  banishing  both  Jesuits  and  Dominicans,  about  1721,  to  Macao 
Protestant  successors  in  the  Celestial  Empire  are  still  perplexed  with  the  same  linguistio 
obstacle ;  for  about  1844,  it  iras  proposed  to  invent  a  new  name  for  Deity,  (that  is,  neither 

(127)  PAOXmBi:  CMm;  pp.4l»-4A8. 
77 

Digitized  by 

Google 

610  ARCH^OLOGIGAL    INTRODUCTIOK 

• 
diinete  nor  En^uh,)  tad  compromise  the  mftttar  hj  writiiig  7AH;  (128)  wlifle  tibe  ] 
hsTe  siiiee  held  out  hopes  that  the  scruples  of  conTerted  neophytes  in  Chinn  are  nboot  (e 
be  OTercome  bj  ndopting  **  Shin" 

On  the  African  coast  the  SooaheUe  dialect,  so  restaricted  in  its  baibarons  jargon  thai  aD 
its  Tocables  implying  dfilization  are  borrowed  tnrn  the  Arabie,  (129)  a  MIseionajy,  who 
tramlaUi  the  "  First  three  Chapters  of  Genesis  "  into  the  natiye  tongue,  can  find  no  mere 
enphonions  rendering  of  onr  word  **  God  "  than  MooioxuzofooxGo.  (130)  And,  in  Ame- 
rica, no  idea  of  "  Original  Sin  "  can  be  conyeyed  to  an  OOofin-Indian,  withoot  the  agg^nti- 
nation  of  monosyllables  into  TLACATZINTILIZTLATLACOLLI;  nor  will  the  last  Dd^ 
var^$  heart  experience  "Repentance"  until  his  mind  has  percei?ed  the  meaning  of 
SCHIWELENDAMOWITCHEWAGAN.  (181)    But,  we  apologize  for  the  digresmoa. 

During  the  second  half  of  the  sixteenth  century,  the  frail  hedge  planted  around  the  pop- 
ular accessibility  of  the  Scriptures  yanished  beneath  the  spades  of  the  accumulating  ddycrs 
for  knowledge.  At  the  Conyocation  of  Hampton  Court,  in  1608,  those  measures  woe 
adopted  that  haye  placed  the  Bible  before  the  people.  Far,  far,  be  it  from  us  to  under- 
yalne  the  <'  Great  Fact "  —  stUl  farther  to  contest  its  yast  educational  utility.  Would  that 
atf  the  *'  Sacred  Books  "  of  the  East  were  equally  accesnble  and  equally  read !  The  canon- 
ical literature  of  the  Hebrews  would  be  eleyated  infinitely  beyond  its  present  scientific  esti- 
mation by  such  free  comparisons;  but  not  so  its  MnglUh  << authorized"  translation,  and 
that  is  the  only  p<^t  for  which  these  paragr^hs  contend. 

In  the  years  1608-11,  then,  our  Forty-seyen  Translators  had  before  their  eyes  wnamf 
English  translations  of  the  (Hd  Testament.  They  possessed,  furthermore,  the  Laim  Ynl- 
gates,  first  printed  in  1462,  and  reyised'in  the  8extm$  edition  of  1590,  and  the  CUmaOmt 
in  1592 :  together  with  numerous  editions  of  the  Qretk  Septuagint,  both  printed  and  maam- 
script  Their  critical  apparatus  was  copious  enough  wherewith  to  study  the  Origynl 
Hebrew  Text,  which  lay  before  them  in  a  yariety  of  editions,  more  or  less  accurate^,  printed 
between  the  years  1488  and  1661 ;  besides  Jewish  ManuteripU.  If  to  their  unquestioned 
knowledge  of  Latin  and  Greek,  had  been  added  a  little  Hebrew  of  the  genuine  scho<^  whieh 
might  yery  easily  haye  been  imported  from  the  Continent,  their  yersion  would  haye  been 
better ;  but  the  confession  of  ignorance  to  themseWes  was  as  irksome,  as  to  their  race  sad 
country  anti-national.  They  completed  their  labors  without  the  contemporary  aids  within 
call;  and  "His  Mijesty*8  Special  Command"  has  consecrated  them  for  two  hundred 
and  forty-two  years.  **  Undoubtedly,  the  present  yersion  is  sufficient  to  all  purposes 
of  piety  " ;  (182)  our  part  is  to  show  that  it  has  long  ceased  to  be  adequate  to  the  require- 
ments of  science. 

It  seems,  therefore,  considering  the  facilities  they  enjoyed,  and  still  more  the  many  they 
disdained,  that  errors  so  tremendous  as  those  which  modem  criticism  exposes  should  haye 
been  backed  by  orthodoxy  with  praises  less  extrayagant ;  because,  their  ffebraieal  quafifi- 
cations  for  the  task  being  nil,  the  multiplicity  of  foreign  yersions,  without  that  discrimi- 
nating criterion,  could  but  augment  the  multiplicities  of  their  mistakes.  (188) 

The  earlier  English  yersions,  if  here  and  there  superior  to  readings  adopted  by  the  Fotty- 
Seyen,  were  radically  defectiye,  owing  to  the  same  natural  causes  that  precluded  the  possi- 
bility of  making  a  direct  translation  from  the  Hebrew  in  1611 ;  yiz. ;  small  aoquaintance 
with  the  yocabulary  and  grammar  of  the  language  itself.  Fuller,  for  instance,  infers  that 
poor  Tyndal  rendered  the  Old  Testament  from  the  Latin,  *'  as  his  friends  allowed  that  he 
had  no  skills  in  Hebrew" ;  and  the  same  authority  explains  that  the  reason  why  king  JasMS 

« 

(128)  Dr.  BowBora:  In  London  lAkrory  OantU. 

(129)  QUDDOX:  Otia;  p.  120. 

(130)  R«T.  Dr.  Kxapp:  Jew.  Amur.  OriaUa!  «SbcV  iU.;  Bo«ton  1847;  pp.  281-374. 
(181)  OALLiTor :  Tram,  Awur.  Bthnohgkal  Soc;  N«ir  York,  1848 ;  1  pp.  38-36. 

(183)  Tatus:  lnbothth«BngUahand  Am«riMn«dttien«or€UM«f«2Netfaiwnr;  yeet^Blbte.* 

(133)  AtUt  thif  WM  written, »  Mend  asked  ne  to  reed  **  The  Trandaton  Bevind;  a  Bio^raphiai  yiwiii^  ef 

Oe  A^dkon  <tfthe  BngUA  Venkn"*;  by  A.  W.  MoClubi;  12mo;  New  Tork,  1868.  It  meriti  nothing  here  kejoad 

thia  mration,  bat  a  review  in  any  newspaper  is  modi  at  its  author's  serrioa. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

TO    THE    Xth    chapter    OF    GENESIS.  611 

appdnted  J^ftj-Fonr  Translators  was  because  ''manyund  great  faults"  were  already  noto- 
rious amid  the  earlier  translations. 

The  Samaritan  text  was  nnayailable  to  them  for  two  reasons ;  one,  that  no  copy  had 
reached  Europe  until  1628,  or  tweWe  years  later  than  the  publication  of  king  James's  yer- 
8ion;(134)  the  other,  that  those  whose  Hebraical  accomplishments  were  so  slender  could 
have  elicited  nothing  ttom  any  cognate  Oriental  idiom.  It  is  superfluous,  therefore,  to 
speculate  upon  what  philological  feats  our  Forty-Seyen  might  haye  performed  through  Sa- 
maritan contexts. 

As  the  oldest  of  all  *' printed**  books,  a.  d.  1462,  the  Latin  VulgaU  must  haye  riyeted  the 
attention  of  men  whose  reyerence  for  the  inyention  induced  them  to  carry  the  antiquity  of 
moyeable  types  back  to  the  age  of  Job  (xix«  28 ;  ubi  tupra).  With  the  numerous  Latin  yer- 
sions,  (185)  made  prior  to  St.  Jerome,  from  the  Greek,  our  translators  did  not  trouble 
themseWes;  nor  need  we,  because  this  first  of  Hebraists  among  the  Fathers  declares — 
**  For  the  most  part,  among  the  Latins,  there  are  as  many  different  Bibles  as  copies  of  the 
Bible ;  for  eyery  man  has  added  or  subtracted,  according  to  his  own  caprice,  as  he  saw  fit." 
To  remedy  this  eyil,  Jerome  completed  a  retranslaUon  of  the  Old  Testament,  directly 
from  the  Hebrew,  between  the  years  885  and  405.  (186)  His  contemporaries  loudly  pro- 
tested against  such  profanity,  lest  it  should  sacrilegiously  disturb  that  bibliolatry  with 
which  Christian  communities  then  regarded  the  Septuagmt ;  but,  about  605,  Fope  Gregory 
inyested  it  with  respectability,  by  adopting  its  lections  along  with  the  old  ItaUc  yersion. 
The  consequence  was  that  the  monastic  scribes,  haying  equal  authority  for  either,  began  to 
correct  the  first  by  the  second  indiscriminately ;  and  succeeded  in  fusing  them  both  so  inex- 
tricably into  one,  that  the  emendations  of  Alcuin  in  the  ninth,  of  Lanfranc  in  the  eleyenth, 
and  of  Nicolaus  in  the  twelfth  centuries,  failed  to  establish  any  uniformity  among  manu" 
Mcr^U  which,  in,  the  words  of  Roger  Bacon,  **  eyery  reader  alters  to  suit  his  own  whim." 
Such  was  the  state  of  the  Latin  yersion  current  until  the  sixteenth  century,  when  Stephens 
undertook  to  castigate  its  errors  in  his  printed  editions :  Clarius,  in  the  meantime,  submit- 
ting a  schedule  of  80,000  mistakes  for  the  edification  of  the  Council  of  Trent.  Howeyer, 
on  the  unlettered  side,  fanciful  substitutions ;  on  that  of  scholarship,  ruthless  expurga- 
tions; impelled  Sixtus  V.  to  yolunteer  the  ofBce  of  "proof-reader:"  and,  in  1589,  a  copy 
of  the  Vulgate  issued  from  the  Vatican,  wherein  *'  eaque  res  quo  magis  incorrupte  perfice- 
retur,  nostra  nos  ijfti  manu  correximus : "  t.  0.,  the  Vicar  of  Bod  corrected  the  press  him- 
self. Alas  I  Such  condescension  only  made  the  innumerable  faults  of  that  edition  **  noto- 
rious as  ludicrous.  Bellarmine  luckily  hit  upon  a  plan  to  correct  the  errors,  and  saye  the 
infallibility  of  the  Pontiff^"  New  recensions  were  executed,  "  quod  yix  incredibile  yide- 
batur,"  in  nmeteen  day$;  and  the  year  1592,  during  the'apostolic  ricarage  of  Clement  VIII., 
Inroug^t  out  a  standard  Papal  copy,  wherein  the  odium  of  all  errors  patent  in  the  former 
Pope's  edition  was  charged  upon  the  <'  printer's  deyiL" 

This  Bomanist  findUiy  al^unds  with  misinterpretations  if  collated  with  the  Hebrew  Text ; 
and  when  placed  before  the  Foriy-Seyen,  some  ten  years  after  its  appearance,  could  only 
hftye  seryed  to  lead  them  more  astray ;  eyen  if  the  fear  of  Papistry  did  not  preyent  adop- 
tion of  such  of  its  readings  as  attracted  rather  their  fancy  thaif  their  septi-quadrigentesimal 
criticisms.  Consequently,  the  DUme  Afflatus  did  not  penetrate  into  king  James's  yersion 
throu^  the  Vulffate;  which  fact  renders  nugatory,  as  regards  the  Latin  language,  any 
inference  deriyable  from  their  Preface  in  fkyor  of  the  peculiar  sanctity  of  this  among  the 
«' Original  Saered  Tongues"  whence  "one  more  exact  translation"  was  by  them  made. 
Perhaps  some  streams  of  the  apostolic  imponderable  reached  our  translators  by  transmis- 
idoa  through  the  Oreekf 

At  least  three,  and  probably  more,  printed  editions  of  the  Greek  8eptuagint(\Z'!)  were 
proourable  by  our  Translators  in  the  year  1608 ;  independentiy  of  such  ntanuscripts  as  they 
mmy  haye  consulted ;  from  the  number  of  which  last  must  be  deducted  the  CodeX'Alexan- 

(184)  Kurmoon;  DiuerL  Gtn.;  p.  i76b  (I^  Ihid. ;  1.  p.  267,  teg. 

(186)  Di  Wim:  L  pp.  183-191.  (137)  Di  Wins:  i.  pp.  81-43. 

/ 

Digitized  by 

Google 

612  ARCH^OLOGICAL    INTRODUCTIOK 

dritttUj  (188)  now  in  the  BritUh  Mnaeinn ;  because  it  did  not  anire  in  England  until  Oe 
year  1628.  (189)  The  prinied  editions  issned  daring  the  sixteenth  eentmy  were  natnafly 
copies  resolting  from  the  collation  of  such  manuMcr^U  as  to  thdr  respectiTe  editors  were 
more  or  less  accessible ;  and  if  the  ori^nals  were  defecti?e  the  trmnseriptions  mnst  be  stiQ 
more  so.  We  can  ntter  no  opinions  on  the  critical  ?alae  of  the  printed  editions,  before 
ascertaining  what  scholarship  may  haye  decided  npon  the  archseologioal  merits  of  the  smsv- 
$cry[^  themselTes ;  nor  is  it  in  onr  power  to  ennmerate  what  c<^ies  of  tiie  latter  nay  or 
may  not  haye  been  consulted  by  onr  translators ;  chiefly  because  oar  own  note-books  do 
not  afford  the  dattt  at  which  many  celebrated  Greek  MSS.  were  known  throaghout  £a- 
rope.  (140)  We  presame  they  osed  copies  of  the  Codex -Fotieamff  (printed  In  1687,  by 
Cardinal  Caraffa),  of  which  the  antiqaity  is  estimated  by  Kennicott  at  a.  n.  887,  while 
others  suppose  << a  few  years  later;  "(141)  among  them  Montfaacon  and  Blanohini,  wlio 
refer  it  to  the  fifth  century.  Nope  of  other  Greek  Codices  extant  can  possibly  antsdate, 
in  any  case,  the  fourth  century ;  for  eren  the  oldest,  the  Codex- ColtoMumtM,  once  coq)e^ 
tared  to  hare  been  Origen's  property,  is  now  preyed  to  haye  been  ealligraphed  towards  die 
end  of  the  fourth  or  the  commenceaient  of  the  fifth  century.  Its  fragments  lie  in  the 
British  Museum.  (142)  This  faHs  within  the  lifetime  of  St  Jerome,  a.  d.  881-422;(14<) 
who  laments  that,  in  his  day,  "  the  common  (Chreek)  edition  is  cUfTlerent  in  diffsrent  plaeea, 
all  the  worid  oyer ;"  and  reiterates,  "  It  is  corrupted  eyeiywhere  to  meet  the  yiews  of  t^ 
place  and  time,  or  the  caprice  of  the  transcribers."  (144) 

"  Thus  it  seems  that,  in  the  time  of  Jerome,  three  different  editions  of  the  LXX  were  te 
■se  under  the  sanction  of  the  seyeral  churches,  and  with  their  authority,  yix. :  ^^■^S^!' 
Hexapla  in  Palestine,  the  text  of  He^chius  in  Egypt,  and  that  of  LuoiaB  in  (^onstaatinopM 
and  its  yicinity.  No  wonder  the  existing  manuteripU  haye  come  down  to  us  with  so  nsDj 
corruptions."  (145) 

Such  asseyerations,  when  once  recognised  to  be  tree  in  fact,  suffice  to  damage  the  accre- 
dited uniformity  of  the  Greek  yersions ;  but  a  littie  f^irther  inquiry  will  eyince  that  it  wts 
impossible,  through  the  yery  nature  of  human  things,  that  any  Hellenic  translation  f)roB 
the  Hebrew  could  be  **  inspired." 

If,  then,  only  four  centuries  after  the  Christian  era,  the  Greek  translation  (finished  tbost 
the  year  180  b.  o.,  at  Alexandria)  no  longer  existed  in  its  <*  editio  princeps,"  but  its  Istsr 
recensions  alone  had  flowed  down  to  St.  Jerome's  time  in  three  turgid  streams,  each  oee 
essentially  corrupt  it  follows  that  all  MSS.  now  extant,  no  less  than  all  prinied  editions 
made  from  such  MSS.,  must  be  still  more  blemished,  owing  to  later  mistakes,  than  eren 
the  best  exemplar  known  to  St  Jerome.  It  is  in  this  yitiated  state  that  the  S^t^*^ 
reached  our  translators  in  the  year^l608 :  — 

"  No  one  of  these  recensions  is  found  pure ;  for  they  haye  flowed  together,  and  ^^p^ 
mixed  also  with  the  other  Greek  yersions.  ...  The  criticism  of  the  Seyen^  has  ^^'^ 
adyanced  no  farther — and  perhaps  it  neyer  can  —  than  to  a  collection  of  the  ^^ 
readings.    The  editions  hitherto  published  do  not  afford  the  tree  and  exact  text  of  » 
manuscripts."  (146) 

Bat,  not  merely  does  the  Greek  yersion  falter  in  its  historical  traditions.  Its  detitu^ 
from  the  Hebrew  original  render  objections  to  its  plenary  authenticity  unanswerable. 

<*  As  a  whole,  this  yersion  is  chargeable  with  want  of  literalness,  and  also  with  an  sn»- 

(138)  Worn  thlkikittii«ttoU»tow«ntetlM«adortheft>iirUi;  batlf  KaiooonMlMtiA.».MhB''V^ 

other  opinkmg  m  low  m  the  ninth  oentnry  (1st  DitMrt,  pp.  30S,  807). 
Q  '9)  Taywr'8  OcdmH  ;  Tooe  «  Blhle."  .^ 

(.40)  PoKfiE  {PHneipUt  t(f  Tuhud  CfriUdtm,  DahUn,  1848)  might  nipply  defldendM ;  hat  vamxn  >>  tiMflD"* 

ooi,  Mid  w«  have  not  DOW  hie  Moot  •zeoDmit  work.*  vtft  OCte,  pp.  lll-Ut. 

(141)  KnnnooR:  nd  IMmriaHm;  p.  407. 

(142)  Hossn :  JMrod  ;  L  pp.  106-107. 

(148)  Author:  Close. Dkt;  -vooe**Bleion7mni'';  p. 685. 

(144)l>BWkm:ip.l81. 

(146)  iML;  p.  180. 

a^)  Di  Wbb;  I  pp.  181-188. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

TO  THE    Xth    chapter    OP    GENESIS.  613 

trary  method,  whereby  something  foreign  to  the  text  is  brought  in.  Jn  general,  it  betrays 
the  want  of  an  aoourate  acquaintance  with  the  Hebrew  language,  thovgh  it  foniishes  many 
good  explanations.  (147) 

**  The  character  of  this  y^rsion  is  different,  according  to  the  different  books.  It  is  easy 
to  distinguish  five  or  six  different  translators.  .  .  .  Indeed,  the  real  yalue  of  the  Septnagint, 
as  a  Tersion,  stands  in  no  sort  of  relation  to  its  reputation.  All  the  translators  engaged  in 
it  appear  to  have  been  wanting  in  a  proper  knowledge  of  the  two  languages,  and  in  a  due 
attention  to  grammar,  etymology  and  orthography.  Hence  they^often  confound  proper 
names,  and  appellations,  kindred  verbs,  similar  words  and  letters,*  &c.,  and  this  in  cases 
where  we  are  not  at  liberty  to  conjecture  Tarious  readings.  The  whole  yersion  is  rather 
free  than  literal,'-  &c.  .  .  .  The  Text  of  the  Septnagint  has  suffered  greatly.  Through  the 
multitude  of  copies,  which  the  yery  general  usage  rendered  necessary,  and  by  means  of 
ignorant  critics,  the  text  of  this  yenion,  in  the  third 'century,  had  faUen_into  the  most 
lamentable  state.''  (148) 

**  Although  we  cannot  say  ft'om  whom  it  (the  LXX^  emanated,  it  is  certain  that  it  is  the 
work  of  one  or  several  Jews  of  Egypt,  of  Greek  eaucation  (if  always  our  version  called 
the  Seomty  be  exaetiy  the  same  as  the  one  that  was  made  at  that  epoch) ;  because  one  may 
discover  in  it  traces  of  that  philosophy  which  afterwards  developed  itself  among  the  Alex- 
andrian Jews,  and  of  which  Philo  is  for  us  the  principal  representative.  It  does  not 
appertain  to  us  to  characterise  here  the  translation  under  its  philological  aspect ;  we  must 
content  oursdves  with  establishing  that,  in  many  places,  it  differa  sensibly  from  our  Hebrew 
text,  and  that  very  often  its  variants  agree  better  with  the  text  of  the  Samaritans.  Never- 
theless, tiie  latter  does  not  sufficientiy  conform  to  the  version  of  the  Seventy,  that  one  could 
imagine  a  common  source  for  both  compilations."  (149) 

It  results  firom  Talmudic  exegesis  that  its  authors,  beyond  vague  impressions  of  errors 
contained  in  the  Greek  version,  not  only  did  not  know,  save  through  hearsay,  the  Septua- 
ffitU  themselves  (although  they  suppose  its  Translatora  to  have  been  seventy-two),  but 
that  it  was  impossible  for  the  Palestinic  Jewish  Rabbis  to  read  it,  owing  to  their  igno- 
rance of  the  Greek  tongue.(160)  Not  a  word  in  the  Mithna  and  the  two  Ouemerat  refera 
to  Aristobulus,  or  Philo,  or  to  the  Apochryphal  books ;  neither  to  the  Eitenet^  nor  to  the 
TherapeutcB,  The  Jews  of  Palestine  wera  separate  people  from  those  of  Alexandria ;  and 
it  was  a  concern  exclusively  interesting  to  the  latter  to  defend  the  many  false  renderings 
of  the  Septnagint,  of  which  remarkable  examples  are  exhibited  in  the  learned  treatise  of 
Franck,  whence  we  condense  some  facts  into  a  foot-note.  (151)    But  hear  Sharpe :  — 

"  It  will  be  enough  to  quote  two  passages  from  this  (LXX)  translation,  to  show  how  the 
Alexandrian  Jews,  by  a  refinement  of  criticism,  often  found  more  meaning  in  their  Scrip- 
tures than  ever  entered  the  minds  of  the  writera.  Thus  when  the  Psalmist,  speaking  of 
tho  power  of  Jehov^i,  says  with  a  truly  Eastern  figure  (Ptalttu  civ.  4,  TexCj^  <  He  maketh 
the  winds  hi*  messenffert,  md  the  Ughtning  hie  tervants,*  (152)  these  translaton  change  the 

(M7)i6«.;p.l47. 

Cltf)  Tatloe's  QOmd;  voce  ''VnOonsJ' 

(148)  Muirx:  PaUtHne;  p. 487.  Ct^iao^AurkaM:  BeAercham^^ypUjAe.,  2de  part;  K«v.  dwD.MoBd60,184«. 

(160)  Fbahck:  La  lUbbaU:  Pttii,  1848;  pp.  278, 829. 

(151)  **  Alreadj  the  Tbalmud  bad  a  vague  knowledge  (Thalm.  Bahyl  Trad,  MeguOah;  C^L  9,  ch.  i.)  of  the 
nnmerona  infldelttiea  of  thte  antique  translation  [tIs.,  of  the  LXX]. . . .  Tbnm  when  the  sacred  Text  says  posi- 
Uftij  (jBbedL  zziv.  9, 10)  that  Moses,  his  brother,  and  the  seventy  ekkrs,  saw  the  <W  of  Israel  npon  a  throne 
of  sapphire;  aeeording  to  the  (Greek)  translation,  it  is  not  God  who  was  seen,  hot  theplaee  which  he  inhabittk 
WlMA  another  prophet,  Isaiah,  sees  the  Lord  seated  on  his  throne  and  lUIing  the  temple  with  the  folds  of  his 
robe  (UUak,  tL  1),  this  too-material  image  is  replaoed  If  ihtgUnyof  God. . . .  When  it  oonoems  Adam  and 
Sve,  (the  Greek  interpreter)  would  carefully  avoid  saying,  with  the  Text,  that  God  created  them  male  and 
ftokale  (jOtHi.  L  27);  but  this  double  character,  these  two  halves  of  humanity,  are  united  in  one  and  the  tame 
^eSmg^*hf9t¥  Kai  M|Xv  hohicep  aZr^v. . . . . '  Who  has  created  all  things ? *  asks  the  Hebrew  prophet  (Uaiah 
Ix.  90)>  'Who  has  rendered  them  iiwisQtUV  says  the  Alexandrian  interpreter"  (iBAifOS:  La  KaXAdU;  Paris, 
1843;  pp.  829-831).  Gar  anthor  ftimidics  scTeral  other  examples  of  downil^t  perversions  eommitted  by  those 
Aluvandrines  called  **  the  LXX** :  of  which  our  space  denies  insertion.  Alter  our  own  conclusions  were  Ibrroed, 
It  was  most  gratifying  to  find  them  all  confirmed  by  Buuhbohic  (**  Origin  and  Structure  of  the  Septnagint"  — 
ChriiMan  Eanminer;  Boston,  March,  1868;  pp.  166-187),  who  truthAilIy  observes— *<  Such  a  version— if  it 
ahould  be  thus  designated  —  is  not  only  oonlbrmable  to  the  tfMt  of  those  times,  but  there  are  many  indlca. 
tSons  that  the  Greek  version  was  originally  intended  only  as  an  auxiliary  bocAc  for  the  use  of  the  Alexandrian 
Jefws." 

(162)  So  also  Gahut,  xiii.  p.  229,  and  note  4  —  «des  flammes  brftlantes,  sea  ministres."  St  Paul  too,  although 
mid  to  have  been  **•.  Hebrew  of  the  Hebrews,"  foUows  the  aeptvagM  in  quoting  this  pasaags  (M^pUt,  to  the  Be 
hrtwt;  L  7)  even  to  Jewel  (SHAap^i  New  TdL;  p.  886)— a  passage  nonrexistent  m  the  JMmo  Ttat. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

614  ARGHJE0L06IGAL    INTRODUCTION 

■cateooe  into  »  pldlofophieal  deseriptioB  of  the  wfmtatl  nature  of  angelie  betagi,  mmd  bmj 
{m  ih9  Qtttk)f  *  He  maketh  hit  angdt  inU>  qfiriUf  and  ku  terva^  AgaiB, 

when  the  Hebrew  text,  in  opposition  to  the  polytheism  with  whioh  the  Jews  were  wmr- 
rounded,  says  (Text,  DeuL  yL  4),  '  Tke  Lord  it  aw  Godj  tht  Lord  aUmt'  [HteraUy,  « Hear, 
O  Israeli  leHOoaH,  oar  Ood,  leHOoaH  (is)  one!*] ;  the  translators  torn  it  to  eontradiflk 
the  Egyptian  doctrine  of  a  plurality  of  persons  in  the  unity  of  the  Godhead,  (153)  fay 
whieh  the  priests  said  that  their  nnmerons  divinities  only  made  one  God ;  and  in  the  Alex- 
andrian Greek  this  text  says,  *  The  Lord  our  Ood  it  one  Lord.' "  (154) 

Shonld  the  reader  now  torn  to  the  aboTO  passages  in  onr  "  authorised  *'  versiony  he  will 
pereei?e  that  iheforty'teven  ha?e  rendered  into  English  the  exact  words  of  the  Oroek;  and 
thus  he  will  behold  a  little  of  the  ^amning  eridence  prodnceable  that  these  worthies  eookl 
not  construe  a  simple  line  of  the  Hebrew  Text ;  but  haye  palmed  off  upon  us,  as  genuine 
*' inspiration,"  language  that,  being  Alexandrian  forgeries,  cannot  be  IHTine ;  confMui  o  us 
of  creed  that,  not  being  in  the  original  Hebrew,  cannot  be  '*  inspired." 

Here,  as  concerns  king  Jimes's  translation  in  its  relations  to  the  Oreek  ▼eraiona,  we 
might  bring  our  inquiries  to  a  close :  the  seal  of  condemnation  has  been  so  legibly  stamped 
upon  it  But,  inasmuch  as  some  data  respecting  the  origin  of  these  Grecian  documents 
may  be  useftd  to  our  researches  into  the  Hebrew  Text,  it  is  desirable  to  reach  that  ^och 
when  the  Sytuagint  had  not  yet  been  manufactured. 

Ascending  from  St  Jerome  in  the  IVth  century  to  the  great  Origen-in  the  lid,  we  t^ 
him  complaining  of  the  corruptions  manifest  in  the  Greek  MSS.  of  his  day  —  '*  But  now 
there  is  obTiously  a  great  diyersity  of  the  copies,  which  has  arisen  either  from  the  neg^ 
gence  of  some  transcribers,  or  the  boldness  of  others— or  from  others  still,  who  added  or 
took  away,  as  they  saw  fit,  in  making  their  corrections."  (156) 

<'From  the  time  of  the  birth  of  Christ  to  that  of  Origen,"  continues  Eiohhom,  *<the 
Text  of  the  Alexandrian  yersion  was  lamentably  disfigured  by  arbitrary  alterations,  inter- 
polations, omissions,  and  mistakes.  Justin  Martyr  had  a  yery  corrupt  Text,  at  least  in  the 
minor  Prophets."  (156)  He  was  decapitated  in  a.  n.  164,  haying  been  co|iyerted  about  the 
year  182 ;  thus  sealing  his  conyictions  with  his  blood. 

The  works  of  Origen's  predecessors  in  the  first  century,  Flayios  Josephus,  born  a.  d.  87,  and 
of  Philo  Judsus,  who  flourished  about  a.  d.  40,  exhibit  through  their  citations,  (both  being 
Hollenized  Jews  writing  in  Greek  rather  for  Grecian  and  Roman  readers  than  for  their  own 
countrymen,)  that  some  alterations  had  already  been  made  in  the  copies  of  the  Septuagint 
respectiyely  used  by  them :  at  the  same  time  that  the  writers  of  the  New  Testament,  by 
quoting  the  Oreek  yersion,  in  lien  of  the  Hebrew,  haye  inyested  the  former  with  a  timdi- 
tionary  sanctity,  fabulous  when  claimed  for  extracts  from  the  Old  Testament  not  dted 
directly  firom  the  Hebrew  Text  (157).  Its  discussion  would  lead  us  astray  from  the  inquiiy 
as  to  when  and  by  whom  the  Original  Ortek  translations  were  made ;  and  the  tt^X  is  noted 
merely  to  establish  the  existence  of  the  latter,  In  what  state  of  literal  preoeryation  no  man 
can  tell,  at  the  Christian  era. 

"All  we  can  deteVmine  with  certainty  is,  —  that  the  whole,  or  the  greater  part  of  the 
Old  Testament,  was  extant  in  the  Greek  language  in  the  time  of  Jesus  the  son  of  Sira^ 
[Siraoh  presupposes  that  'the  Law  and  the  Prophets,  and  the  rest  of  the  books,'  were 
already  extant  in  his  time ;  that  is,  in  the  88th  year,  which  is  probably  the  88Ui  year  of 
Eyergetes  IL,  about  180  b.  o.]  "  (158) 

This  year  before  Christ  180  is  recognized,  nowadays,  by  all  biUical  scholars,  to  be  the 
minimum  epoch  at  which  Greek  yersions  of  certain  books  of  the  Old  Testament  canon  were 
already  in  circulation  at  Alexandria.    Tradition,  itself,  claims  no  date  for  the  existence  of 

(168)  OompM«  BuBJfAP:  EKpotttory  Ltdwrti:  Bottoo,  1846;  p.9;— uid  OnanETiiu:  Sgttim  ThUhglfmdt 
la  TriitiU;  Gentra,  1881;  pastim, 
(164)  Sman:  Bid,qf^inpti  1S46;  p.lM. 

(166)  Da  Wim:  L p.  166.  • 
(166)DiWaRi:ip.lM. 

(167)  StEAOH:  ViedtJmu;  and  Hxinriu,:  Origin^  Ao.;  «iilais« apoa th«M  thtrnm, 
068)  Di  WcRi:  p*146;  —  tiao,  Stuim ;  Crit.  HitL  ond  D^flenu:  pp.  941, 428. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

TO    THE    Xth    chapter    OF    GENESIS.  615 

flame  drcam0t8nces  earlier,  as  the  maximum^  than  the  reign  of  Ptolemy  Philadelphus ;  and  . 
about  260  years  b.  o.  soffice  for  a  chronological  stand-point  that  reconciles  scientific  proba- 
bilities.   The  medium  suits  w^ll  with  the  dispersion  of  some  Hebrew  exemplars  after  the 
iMCcage  of  the  temple  by  AnUochos,  b.  o.  164 ;  and  is  parallel  with  the  literary  restora- 
tions of  the  Maccabees, 

To  read  (as  we  ourselyes  formerly  did  with  confidence)  the  works  of  some  leading  Eng- 
lish Divines  in  quest  of  information  about  the  S^ptuaginty  and  the  chronology  erected  upon  its 
numerations,  one  would  actually  suppose,  from  the  positive  manner  in  which  statements 
are  put  forward,  that  they  had  studied  the  sutject !  Hales,  ( 159X  for  instance,  assures  us  that 
Seventy^  or  Seyenty-two,  elders  of  the  Jewish  congregation,  after  the  reception  by  the  king 
of  a  copy  of  Law  from  Jerusalem  wriUm  in  UtUrs  of  gold,  sat  down  at  Alexandria,  and  did 
the  Hebrew  into  Greek  in  72  days,  '<d 'una  sola  tirata";  with  many  episodes  equally 
romantic.  Half  a  century  has  elapsed  since  any  Continental  critic  of  biblic^  literature 
who  yentunsd  to  giye  further  currency  to  such  wretched  stories  would  haye  been  Jeered 
into  rilence  and  oyerwhelmed  with  literary  obloquy.  The  reader  is  referred  to  De  Wette 
for  facts  and  authorities,(160)  and  to  Bunsen(161)  for  endorsement  of  the  following  sketch ; 
ftfter  remarking  that  whereyer  the  number  «70,"  or  its  cabalistic  equiyalent  <<72,"  occurs 
in  Jewish  connections,  it  carries  with  it  more  cogent  eyidences  of  historical  untruth  than 
eyen  the/or^,  or  **  Erbainftt,"  so  common  in  Hebraical  literature.(162) 

The  origin  of  the  Oreek  yersion,  stripped  of  yerbiage  and  exaggerated  traditions,  was 
the  natural  consequence  of  the  great  influx  of  Jews — a  people  eyer  partial  to  the  fleshpots 
of  Egypt — into  Alexandria,  immediately  upon  the  foundation  of  that  city  by  Alexander 
the  Great,  about  b.  o.  882.  Enjoying  priyileges  under  the  early  Ptolemies,  the  number  of 
Jewish  colonists  constantiy  augmented:  at  the  same  time  that  incipient  intercourse  with 
their  Greek  fellow-citizens  superinduced  first  the  disuse  and  next  the  obliyion  of  that  Syro- 
Chaldee  idiom  the  Israelites  had  brought  back  with  them,from  Babylonish  bondage,  in  lieu 
of  the  Old  Hebrew  orally  forgotten ;  and  led  their  Alexandrine  descendants  to  adopt  the 
Oreek  tongue,  together  with  much  of  Grecian  usages  and  Philosophy.  They  became  ffel- 
ienmng-Jem  (168)  at  Alexandria,  without  ceasing  to  be  Hebrews  in  lineage  or  religion ; 
just  as  their  present  descendants  are  Oermaninng,  ItaUanixing,  or'  Americanizing  Israelites, 
according  to  the  country  of  their  birthplace  or  adoption. 

The  conquests  of  the  Macedonian  are  to  us  the  most  salient  causes  of  the  transmutations 
that  took  place  throughout  the  Leyaat  owing  to  the  wide-spread  of  Grecian  influences ;  but 
Pythagoras,  Plato,  and  Herodotus,  are  earlier  prominent  expressions  of  Greek  infiltration  into 
Babylonia  and  Egypt  during  the  fifth  and  sixth  centuries  b.  c,  which  was  far  more  exten- 

(150)  Anaiiftit  of  ChrondUigy. 

(100)  Op.ciL\\.  pp.  186-144. 

(Id)  ^yvf»  Place  in  Vhiversai  BUL;  1848;  I.  pp.  184, 186. 

(102)  IdEPSius :  Chronologie  der  .XgypUr;  1849 ;  L  p.  865.  Ife  flnd  the  sttl^olneil  to  the  purpose  amoD/<'Tal- 
mvdkal  statements :  —  In  MegiOay  ix.  a,  we  read  the  following  acnonnt :  *  Ptolemy  the  king  called  seTentj-two 
old  and  wise  men  to  Alexandria,  and  oonflned  each  in  a  separate  room,  wlthont  telling  them  the  reason  of  their 
belBg  called.  He  afterwards  risited  each  of  them,  and  directed  them  to  write  down  in  Greek  the  words  of 
Moses.  God  inspired  them  with  a  sameness  of  ideas,  so  that  their  translations  literally  agreed.'  In  Sophrim, 
}  1,  we  read  another  passage:  *FiTe  sages  were  called  to  Alexandria  by  the  king  Ptolemy,  to  translate  the  law 
Into  the  Oreek  language ;  this  day  was  as  oppressire  to  Israel  as  the  one  when  the  golden,  calf  was  made,  for 
they  were  nnaUe  to  do  Jnsttoe  to  the  snljeet  Then  the  king  assemUed  seventy-two  sages,  and  set  them  in 
MTenty'two  cells,'  Ac  ....  In  Taanith  occurs  the  following  passage,  which  also  Dx  Rossi  quotes  (Imrai  Binah, 
}  7>:  *  There  are  certain  days  on  which  we  fost  on  account  of  the  law :  such  a  day  is  the  eighth  day  of  Thebeth, 
because  on  that  day  the  law  was  translated  Into  the  Greek  under  the  second  Ptolemy,  king  of  Egypt,  and  dark- 
ness eorered  the  earth  for  three  days.'^— (**  Cfretk  VertUm*  offht  .Bif&fe— the  passages  extracted  fh>m  LAintAU's 
Vorwari mm  Arueh**—-The  AMvumean ;  New  York,  5  Aug.  1868.)  Little  historical  critidsm  is  required  to  per- 
eelTe  that  the  writers  of  these  Talmudle  legends,  sereral  centuries  after  Josephns,  had  merely  given  another 
Bhape  to  the  same  baseless  tradition  of  tiie  tUse  Aristeas:  and  we  may  class  Jusrcf  Maxttb's  evidence  (Admoni' 
fllfme  ad  Oraeai)  that  ^'he  mow  the  72  cells  into  which  the  translators  were  locked  up";  and  Epxpha^ovs's  (De 
mtfOttHrii  et  ponderibus)  that  these  cells  were  36,  each  for  two  translators;— with  St  Avoustdcz's,  where  he 
aatjs  **  Vidimus  —■  we  have  seen  "  men  with  an  eye  in  the  pit  of  their  stomachs. 

(168)  Aooording  to  Phllo,  the  Jews  exceeded  a  million  at  Alexandria  alone  (Bapapobt'8  Emih  Main;  quoted 
la  Th€Jsmmuan\  New  York,  July  20, 1858). 

Digitized  by 

Google 

616  ABCH-ffiOLOGlCAL   INTROBUCTION 

■Ito  oomm«roiany  than  vnffl  ree^nUj  aecre^ted ;  wbile  Oreek  eonebttien  had  been  employed 
in  Egypt  firom  the  serenth  century  by  Psamettions :  nor  was  Xenophon  the  first  General, 
Bor  Ctedas  the  firrt  Doctor,  who  Tolonteered  their  eerrices  to  the  AchcemenidsB  of  Peniau 
Into  Jemaalem  itself,  Greek  ideas  had  penetrated  ?eiy  soon  after  the  erection  of  the^eeond 
Temple  In  the  fifth  centnry.  These  result  from  the  history,  and  are  stamped  npon  ttte 
proper  namet  of  the  Jews  of  Palestine,  particnlarly  after  Alexander's  era.  Nor  were  ffoeh 
Hellenic  infiltrations  without  a  certain  inflaenoe  npcn  the  canonical  literature  of  Jndidsm ; 
for  the  «polittoal  satire"  (164)  entitled  the  ''Book  of  Barixl  "  betrays,  through  ito  Oreds 
words,  as  much  as  by  its  exegetical  adaptations,  an  author  of  the  age  of  Antiochus  Epi- 
pbanes,  not  earlier  than  the  plunder  of  Jerusalem  by  that  king  about  164  years  b.  6.  Con- 
tinental soholarriiip  long  ago  placed  this  fact  beyond  dispute ;  (166)  and  the  Hebraioal  em- 
dition  of  the  late  Rer.  Moses  Stuart  (166)  induced  him  to  fortify  it  with  his  customary 
■kUftihiess.  I 

So  much  nonsense  still  passes  currently,  in  regard  to  the  yarious  dialects  spoken  by  the 
Jews  after  their  return  from  the  Captiyi^,  that  we  must  here  digress  for  a  moment.  Inde- 
pendently of  books  read  and  others  cited,  we  have  sought  fbr  information  on  these  subjects 
Arom  some  of  the  most  cultirated  Hebrew  dtiiens  of  the  United  States,  and  haye  inyariably 
met  with  the  kindest  readiness  to  enHgfaten  us.  We  possess  not  (merely  because  we  omitted 
to  ask  for  it)  the  sanction,  of  the  many  yery  learned  Israelites  consulted,  to  publish  their 
honored  names ;  but  not  on  that  account  are  the  hints  with  which  all  haye  fkyored  us  the 
less  appreciated  by  ourselyes  nor  the  less  nseftel  to  readers.  No  interdict  bdng  laid  by 
one  of  the  writer's  yalued  friends,  Mr.  J.  C.  Leyy  of  Sayannah,  upon  the  many  indices  to 
knowledge  for  whi^  his  goodness  has  rendered  us  his  debtor,  we  condense  the  substanee 
of  two  recent  communications ;  coupled  with  regrets  that  certain  inexorable  limits  of  typo- 
graphical space  should  compress  what  ought  to  be  in  '<  Brerier  "  into  *<  NonpareH."  (167) 

(164)  New  Toi;k  Jkalg  Tribune;  Feb.  10, 1868.  The  attrllnitloa  to  '^DiMorerlei''  fti  Babjrlon  Is  Ikbokma.  Jot 
that  of  the  Decdoffw^  oonf.  Gubdoit,  Otia,  1849;  p.  19 : —extended  In  Kei^  York  Sun,  "Hiftorioel  Sketdue  of 
Egypt,"  Noe.  0, 7 ;  Jan.  19  end  25,  1860. 

(166)  Muvk:  FlOmttne;  p.420;— Di  Wsm:  U.pp.4SS-S12;— (Unoi:  ybUi en  DemieL 

(166)  BkUi  m  Oe  M&rpniMm  qfPrephteg;  Andoyer,  1842;  pp.  71-406. 

(167)  ExTKACi  I.—**  The  inlbnnetion  I  piomii^  buely  is,  that  the  Bal^lonlaDOaptlTity  lasted  firam  6W-486 
B.  c,  when  Zernhabel,  with  60,000  men,  went  to  Palcetlne  with  the  permission  of  Cjrus. '  A  seeond  ookntj  Al- 
lowed in  the  jeer  468,  led  hj  Esra,  under  the  reign  of  Artazorxee  Longimanus.  He  was,  again,  followed  hf 
Nehemlah,  444.  Daring  the  Oaptiritj,  "hj  good  treatment,  thej  adopted  Bahjlonian  customs  and  rnaanen, 
and  amalgamated  with  their  eominwom  (Enu  y. ;  Jfektmiah  zUL  1-3),  and  forgot  their  natlTe  Hefaraw.  Baddst 
this,  the  Samaritans  speaking  an  Aramaic  (Ohaldaio)  dialee^  as  well  as  the  Syrians  who  ruled  for  a  kmc  Vtm 
in  Palestine,  exercised  great  influence  over  the  Jews ;  so  that  the  Hebrew  soon  disappeared  as  the  TernacBlsf 
(Kehemiah  xiii.  24)  to  yield  to  the  Chaldaic,  and  the  mother^ongue  probably  was  the  language  of  their  real 
mothers.  This  may  be  best  prored  by  the  foot,  that  all  dyil  acts,  oflldal  documents,  and  legal  fiurmulas,  were 
wilttaii  in  that  language,  and  that  the  Talmud  Itself  Is  written,  to  a  great  extent,  in  this  tongue.  F«ra«^ 
more,  numerous  prorerbs  originating  at  this  time,  and  popular  books  of  that  age,  are  all  in  the  same  laagnagt* 
The  chief  prayers  of  the  Jewish  Serrloe,  composed  hj  Esra,  are  in  the  Chaldaic  langnage.  Already  at  the  eoia- 
seoration  of  the  Temple  on  the  Ist  of  the  9th  month  and  in  the  24  days  of  its  duration,  it  was  fimnd  aeoenazy 
to  accompany  the  reading  of  the  Law  with  translationB  and  epefkmatiant  (N^temiah  iliL  8, 12) ;  the  latter  beiaf 
the  beginnings  and  foundation  of  the  Talmud,  or  traditional  oral  law,  which  was  first  prohibited  to  be  written 
down,  in  order  to  preserre  lifo  and  motion  for  the  letter  of  hi^  writ  That  this  prohlUtion  was  afterwaxdf 
tranqgressed  much  to  the  injury  of  the  derelopment  of  Judaism,  and  caused  all  schisms  among  the  Jews^  Is 
well  known.  Had  'these  explanations,  which  are  mostly  contradictory  of  each  other,  not  been  coUeeted  and 
made  a  code  o^  all  strife  might  hare  been  arolded. 

**  TMtttn  Chaldaic  trandations  were  in  existence  in  the  time  of  the  Maccabees— the  first  known  is  tiiat  of 
OszBLoe,  disdple  of  R.  Gamaliel  (68  after  X),  and  ftUow-stadent  of  the  Apostle  PauL  This  translation  Is  parar 
phrastlcal,  especially  in  the  prophetic  and  poetloal  parts  of  the  Bible.  More  explanatory  is  that  of  Joxaxka^ 
BBV-NoooxuL.  A  third  translation  is  the  Ittrgum  JenuKaime  (Jerusalem  translation),  fragmentaiy,  and  exhi- 
biting a  commodtary  in  accordance  with  the  reigning  Ideas  of  the  age.  Macedonian  and  Egyptian  rule  in 
Palestine  produced  among  the  Jews  Oredan  manners,  customs,  ai^  <dea«,  also  lanin>age;  so  that  translatioBf 
of  the  Bible  were  soon  necessary.  The  oldest  mentioned  is  that  of  Akilab,  often  referred  te  in  ancient  writing!^ 
tM  explain  Chaldaic  parts  of  the  BlUe ;  there  you  hare  the  Oreek  translation  of  the  LXX.  Philo,  Joeephns^  and 
other  Jewish  authors  wrote  in  Oreek,  proTlng  their  ignorance  of  Hebrew  by  the  blunders  in  translation  and 
explanation  of  the  Text    Greek  technloel  terms  are  eren  to  be  found  abundantly  in  the  Talmud.** 

BxTmACi  3.  —  ^'I  am  not  satisfied  with  the  meagre  reforence  girenyou  xegarding  the  ignorance  of  the  Jtwt 

Digitized  by 

Google 

TO  THE  THB  Xth  CHAPTER  OP  GENESIS.     617 

Betorning  to  the  LXX.  —  Some  precvnory  eTents  had  prepared  Jewish  Alexandrian 
immigrants  for  the  adoption  "  nolens  yolens"  of  the  Greek  tongue  and  alphabet,  oonseqnent 
upon  the  obliTion  of  the  Aramsan  dialect  which  their  progenitora  had  re-imported  into 
Palestine.  The  children  were  growing  np  in  ignorance  of  a  *<  Law  "  their  Alexandrian  parents 
eonld  no  longer  read  in  Hebrew,  To  have  paraphrased  that  <<  Law  "  into  Syro-Chaldee,  likt 
their  brethren  in  Palestine  and  Babjlonia,  would  at  AlexsBB^hna  hare  been  nseless;  becansa 
the  parents  had  forgotten  £jro-Chaldee,  and  the  children  already  talked  Cheek,  by  the  reign 
of  Ptolemy  Philadelphos^  b.  €.  284-45.  Wkat  more  in  nnison  with  the  instinctiTe  oharao- 
teristics  of  that  *'  Type  of  Mankind"  which,  beyond  all  others  (from  the  days  of  Abraham)^ 
changes  its  language  with  most  faeilify,  while  it  repels  admixtnre  of  alien  blood  and  tena- 
donsly  adheres  to  its  own  religion,  than  that  one  of  its  branehes,  the  Alexandrian  Hebrews, 
should  cause  the  sacred  writings  of  their  forefathers  to  be  translated  into  Greek  T  This 
was  precisely  that  which  they  did,  although  the  exact  year  of  the  commencement  of  suck 
translations  can  no  longer  be  fixed ;  but  the  style  and  idioms  ofihe  sereral  books,  to  which, 
after  collection  into  <me  canon,  the  name  of  Septuagmt  was  subsequently  giTsn,  indicate 
different  times  and  diyers  hands.  (168) 

While  confined  to  Judaism  in  Alexandria,  this  Greek  translation  was  reputed  orthodox 
by  the  Hellenizing  Rabbis  as  much  as  the  Hebrew  Scriptures  themselyes ;  and  more  autho* 
ritative,  because  they  could  read  bo  other.  It  was  read  in  the  Synagogues  of  that  city, 
and  idiereyer  Jewish  congregations  were  planted  under  similar  Greelan  circumstances ;  but 
a  Greek  yereion  was  of  no  use,  and  therefore  of  little  yalne^  to  the  Jews  of  Palestine, 
Syria,  and  Persia;  who  understood  not  the  Greek  tongue,  but  i^oke  ChaUaie  *< patois." 
The  Greeks  themselyes,  regarding  all  languages  but  their  own  as  bavbarous,  Hebrew  indu- 
siye,  neyer  troubled  their  heads  about  the  Sq^tuagmt  until  after  apostolic  missions  had  pro- 
pagated the  Hew  Teetament,  composed  in  Greek  by  Hellenised  Jews  also ;  when  the  recur- 
rence of  quotations  from  the  Old  Testament,  in  the  eyangelical  books,  instigated  its  readers 
to  reference,  to  that  Oode ;  and  as  these  Christianised  readers  were  ignorant  of  Oriental 
idioms,  of  course  the  Septuagint  yerrion  was  the  only  one  accessible  to  them :  while,  to  fpy^ 
it  an  air  of  antiquity  and  of  royal  reqMctability  of  origin,  both  Gnecii ed  Jews  and  Juda- 
iaing  Christians  coincided  in  attributing  its  authorship  to  "  70  "  translators,  appo^ted  (like 
imr  fortif'seven  English  translators  by  king  James)  under  the  hand  and  seal  of  Philadel- 
phus ;  whose  encouragement  of  literature  was  testified  by  munificent  donations  (cost  to 
himself,  nothing)  to  the  Alexandrian  Library.  A  pseudo-Aristeas  *< reported"  a  fable  so 
flattering  to  Alexandrine  pride,  to  Jewish  respectabilities,  land  to  Christian  orthodoxy; 
while  the  real  tradition  seems  to  haye  reached  us  in  an  account  that  the  authors  of  the 
Sipiuagmt  were  but  "five:**  (169)  and  so,  yeneration  for  the  Sq^Utagml  increased  from  day 
to  day  in  the  ratio  that  time  rolled  onward,  and  that  the  remembrance  of  its  natural  origin 
faded  from  the  *' memory  of  the  oldest  inhabitant"  of  Alexandria;  nor  would  the  harm- 
less legend  haye  been  disturbed,  had  not  proselyting  ftiror  on  the  part  of  new  conyerts 
to  Christianity  led  them  to  proyoke  fabbinical  susceptibility  by  appeals  to  the  Oreek  yersion 
of  the  Old  Testament  in  support  of  noyel  doctrines  promulgated  in  the  New :  the  two  texts 

ererywhere  of  Hebrew  after  the  OaptiTltj I  offer  jon  what  your  opponenta  cannot  ol^Jeot  to— that  la,  the 

Xmth  Chapter  of  Nbhdcuh  (the  chronology  of  the  book  yon  know  better  then  I  do).  Jewish  or  Chrlatlan 
chronology  make  It  about  450  before  X.  This  chapter  will  show  you,  that  the  Dragoman  [Arabic^  Turgemditt 
«<  Interpreter"]  waJ  necessary  hi  reading  the  Book  of  the  Law.  Gibbon  (tL  toL  chap.  60,  p.  262)  qnotee,  in  a 
note,  Walton  {ProUffomena  ad  BOL  pd^ifiaUy  pp.  84, 98,97;  abo,  eSmon,  HUL  Criiiqut  du  V,  d  du  N.  Tata- 
vun£),  to  illustrate  that  the  Bible  waa  translated  into  Arabic  at  a  mnch  earlier  period  than  the  time  he  la 
treating  of  (about  650  after  X);  and  he  prores  the  iiMt  'from  the  perpetual  practice  of  the  Synagogue  of 
expounding  the  Hebrew  Lesson  by  a  pan4;>hrase  of  the  rulgar  tongue  of  the  country.' ...  I  think  these  Tory 
reirpecUble  authorities,  if  you  need  them.**  Mr.  Lery's  Tiews  are  amply  supported  \ij  QnBMXUS  (jat$ckidiU  der 
nd>.  Spraehe,  Ac;  p.  198). 

(168)  Dx  Wette.-  i.  p.  145;— TATUm*s  CaJm/d;  Toce  *<  Terslons.'' 

(160)  Ibid.\  p.  150— no(e  flrom  the  7Umt«i,  Tract  Sopherim,  ch.  L  —  *' The  work  of  the^ve  elders,  who  wrote 
the  Law  in  Oreek,  in  the  time  of  King  ^lemy  **:  unless  th^  meant  the  Ptntaieiich,  attributing  one  book  to 
each  elder  f  Conferre,  also^  the  high  Jewish  authority  of  Bapapokt,  In «« Eruk  MOin  » — New  York  Aipnmwan  • 
July  29, 1853. 

78 

Digitized  by 

Google 

618  ABCH-ffiOLOGICAL    INTRODUCTION 

bftTing  been  made  singularly  harmonious ;  owing  to  sompnlons  care  on  the  part  of  tlM 
apostles  to  cite  eath  passage  according  to  its  Oretk  coloring  in  the  8eptuagint ;  for  a  long 
time  held  in  common  to  be  canonical  as  well  bj  Jews  as  by  Greeks. 

Bewildered  for  a  time  by  these  dexterous  sophisms,  and  mystified  through  literary  am- 
buscades which  it  required  a  Grecian  intellect  to  comprehend,  the  worthy  old  Rabbis  (taken 
in  reyerse)  had  no  resource  but  to  proscribe  the  Septuagmt,  and  ostracize  its  readers. 
«  The  law  in  Greek !  Darkness !  Three  dayaf(ut !  **  (170)  Because,  says  the  Talmud^  **  <m 
that  day,  in  the  time  of  King  Ptolemy,  the  Law' was  written  in  Greek,  and  darkness  camo 
upon  the  earth  for  three  days."  (171)  Little  by  little,  howeyer,  their  perceptiye  faculties 
expanded  to  the  true  posture  of  affairs ;  and  by  preying  incontinently  that  many  thingp, 
which  looked  one  way  in  the  Chreekf  looked  quite  another  in  the  Hebrew,  the  Rabbis  soon 
defeated  their  assailants ;  routing  them  so  repeatedly,  that  gradually  the  latter  thought  it 
safer  to  let  such  doughty  controyersialists  alone :  a  method  of  repulsion  continued  with 
neyer-failing  success  by  IsraePs  wide-spread  posterity  eyen  now ;  who,  when  summoned  l^ 
anxious  **  Missionaries  for  the  Contersion  of  the  Jews  "  to  adopt  a  Trinitarian  faith  wfaiA 
Semitic  monotheism  (172)  despises,  haye  merely  to  show  such  well-meaning  persons  that 
king  James's  yersion  does  really  copy  the  Septva^iiU  rather  than  the  Hebrew,  to  see  these 
itinerant  simplicities  pocket  their  English  Bibles  and  slink  off.  Some  day,  perhaps,  when 
the  rules  of  archflBology  through  popular  diffusion  haye  augmented,  all  oyer  An^o- 
Saxondom,  that  mental  element  termed  **  common  sense,"  sundry  excellent  persons,  in  the 
language  of  Letronne,  <'sentiront,  je  pense,  Tinutilit^,  la  yanit^  de  leurs  efforts."  (178) 

The  aboye  conclusions  on  the  S^tuagmt,  long  known  to  scholars,  if  not  preyiously  ex- 
pressed in  print  with  the  same  '^brutale  fhinchise"  habitual  to  writers  who  belieye  they 
speak  the  truth  (so  far  as  ratiocination  can  deduce  logical  results  from  known  premises, — 
humanum  est  errare),  haye  enfeebled  its  yalue— except  for  purposes  of  archsological  restoia- 
tions  of  the  Hebrew  text — to  such  degree  that,  in  this  discussion,  the  ablest  theologians 
haye  adyanced  into  the  pontwitfi  stage  of  philosophy.  No  scientific  exegetist  of  the  present 
generation — saye  for  purposes  aforesaid — perils  his  Continental  reputation  on  the  letter  ef 
any  Greek  yersion,  unless  ehronolo^^ieid  computations  be  the  oljects  of  his  research.  An- 
other Essay  (III.)  of  this  book  giyes  parallel  tables  wherein  tktSqftuaffint  system  is  oompared 
yrith  others ;  but,  to  eyince  the  numerical  discrepancies  between  Text  and  yersions,  it  suf- 
fices here  to  note,  that,  from  the  creation  of  Adam  to  the  *<  Deluge,"  computations  (based 
upon  the  Hebrew  original,  as  now  extant)  generally  yield  1656 ;  upon  the  Samaritan  Pen- 
tateuch, 1807 ;  and  upon  the  Sepiuaffintj  2242  yean. 

The  indefatigable  labors  of  a  profound  Hellenist  and  Egyptological  scholar,  enable  us  to 
sweep  away  any  chronological  superstitions,  yet  in  fashionable  yogue,  built  upon  the  Sep- 
tuagint :  — 

*<  The  chief  disagreement  between  the  [Hebrew]  original  and  the  [Greek]  translation  is 
in  the  chronology,  which  the  translators  yery  improperly  undertook  to  correct,  in  order  to 
make  it  better  agree  with  Egyptian  history  and  the  more  adyanced  state  of  Alexandrian 
science.    They  only  made  the  Exodus  of  Moses  40  years  more  modem ;  but  they  shortened 

(170)  Bu:racr:  Op.ciL;  p.  186. 

(171)  Dk  Wettk:  iVbCe,  p.  150;  — Hkricxll:  Origin  qf  CTtrittianitjf ;  pp.  454, 455,  note. 

(172)  "Bear  witneul  God  is  one.  He  is  the  God  eternal.  He  nerer  bM  b^;otten,  and  was  nerer  bcfot* 
(Kttr'dn;  Suracxil). 

(173)  BecueH  det  Intcriplimu;  Paris,  1843;  Introd.,  L  p.  zllU.  We  clip  the  following  from  the  Lmdon  Ji- 
quirer^  1853 :  ^  The  CM  qf  Converting  a  JtM.—kt\jet  some  twenty  yean  of  labor —  aft^  the  eieetion  of  a  ehnrdi 
on  Mount  Zion,  at  an  enormous  oost— after  the  ezpendltnre  of  hundreds  of  thousands  of  pounds,  the  'Londooi 
Society  for  promoting  Christianity  among  the  Jews '  (a  mission  presided  orer  by  a  bishop  and  endowed  by  the 
Joint  efforts  of  the  kingdoms  of  Prussia  and  England)  produces  as  its  fruits,  according  to  its  own  statistics,  a 
congregation  of  Just  thift^-eeeen  Jewish  oouTerts.  During  the  whole  of  last  year,  the  result  of  Its  labors  was 
the  conrertion  of  one  Jew.  The  coat  of  this  one  oonrert  was  the  annual  outlay  at  Jerusalem  alone^  besides  the 
Ushop*s  stip^d,  of  £1228  expended  on  the  mission,  £445  on  the  church,  £1173  on  the  hospital,  and  £400  (wo 
beg  pardon,  £399  Ids.  lid. ;  see  lUpori,  p.  Ill)  on  the  house  of  industry.  Tlie  Jerusalem  Mission,  then,  if  we 
add  to  its  cost  the  £1200  per  annum  paid  to  Bishop  Gobat,  arising  from  the  endowment,  has  -aetually.  In  the 
paat  year,  baptised  oonrerts  at  the  moderate  rate  of  only  £4443  7t.  Stt.  per  head." 

Digitized  by 

Google 

TO    THE    Xth    chapter   OP    GENESIS.  619 

ibe  residenee  of  the  Jews  in  Egypt  by  275  yean,  allowing  to  it  only  the  more  ptobable 
space  of  155  yean.  But  having  thus  made  the  great  Jewish  epoch,  the  migntion  of  Abra- 
ham out  of  Chaldna,  815  yean  more  modem,  they  thought  it  equally  necessary  to  make 
BQch  a  large  addition  to  the  age  of  the  world  as  the  history  of  science  and  clyilization,  and 
the  state  of  Egypt  at  the  time  of  Abraham,  seemed  to  call  for.  Accordingly,  they  added 
to  the  g«[iealogies  of  the  patriarehs  neither  more  nor  less  than  a  whole  Egyptian  cycle 
rSothk^tnod]  (lH)o{  1460  yean;  or  580  between  Adam  and  Noah,  and  880  between 
Noah  and  Abraham,  though  in  so  doing  they  carelessly  made  Methuselah  outlive  tht 
Flood.  (176) 

This  plain  matter-of-fact  solution  of  the  reasons  why  the  Septuagmt  chronology  diffen  • 
from  that  of  the  Hebrew — between  Adam  and  the  i>c%0  — upon  popular  computations 
only  586  years !  —  relieyes  us  from  the  bootless  trouble  of  attaching  any  importance  to 
opinions  current  at  Alexandria  among  those  successors  of  the  Founder  of  chronology ;  who, 
with  the  original  copies  of  Mahbtbo(176)  before  them,  paid  homage  to  his  accuracy  in 
their  endeavon  to  assimilate  theur  own  foreign  estimates  of  time  to  his. 

Archeologioal  rules  also  permit  two  deductions  to  be  drawn  from  these  premises : — 
1st  That  the  differences  of  numerical  results  among  early  Christian  and  Judaioal  oom« 
putaton  of  the  SepttfOffint  proceed  less  from  wilful  perversions  of  numben  (as  here- 
tofore attributed  to  Josephus  and  othen),  than  from  radical  discrepancies  then  existing 
between  the  manuaer^t  consulted  by  one  computator,  and  those  exemplan  whoee 
numeration  was  followed  by  his  compeen.  This  becomes  obTious  by  comparing  the 
eras  sererally  reached  by  modem  computations  upon  manuscript  and  printed  copies 
now  extant. 

GraatiMi  B.  c^  Ddage  b.  o. 

Halxs's  8q>tuapnU  computation — edition  to  us  unknown —        5586  8246 

Alexandrmut  MSi 5508  

VaticanutUS 5270     '  

JosBPHUS,  on  some  lost  MS. — ^probably  ....  5556  8146 

2d.  That  already  in  the  time  of  Josephus,  during  the  fint  century  after  Christ,  the 
manuscript  he  followed  must  haye  differed  in  numention  from  the  parental  exempUxra 
of  those  tnnscriptions  that,  under  the  modem  names  of  yarious  codices,  Cottonianutf 
AlexandHnus,  Vatieantu,  £ez<B,  &o,  (none  earlier  than  a.  d.  500],  haye  reached  our 
day ;  and  ergo  there  must  haye  been  many  corraptions  and  yariants  among  Septuagint 
MSS.,  about  and  prior  to  the  Christian  era. 
Hence  we  conclude,  that  it  is  as  yain  a  task  for  compntaton,  now-a-days,  to  reooyer  more 
than  a  yague  approximation  of  chronological  notions  (deducible  from  the  SfptuagiaC)  current 
at  Alexandria  before  the  Christian  era,  as,  after  the  foregoing  analysis  of  the  natural  origin, 
history,  and  manifold  corruptions  of  Greek  codices,  it  would  be  to  insist  upon  Diyine 
authenticity  for  king  James's  yersion ;  on  the  plea  that,  in  the  majority  of  cases,  its  forty- 
seyen  translaton  rendered  from  the  Oreek  of  editions,  or  manuscripts,  so  rotten  in  basis  at 
those  of  the  SeptuaginU 

We  proceed  to  the  Hebrew  Text;  with  the  remark  that,  although  we  now  know  that  it 
eonld  haye  had  little  to  do  with  the  formation  of  our  '*  anthorixed  version,"  we  shall  examine 
it  under  the  hypothesis  (customarily  put  forward)  that  it  had  a  great  deal. 

In  the  year  1608,  at  the  time  when  king  James  anthorixed  a  new  English  translation, 
there  were  numerous  printed  editions  of  the  Hebrew  Text  familiar  to  biblical  scholan. 
That  of  Soncino,  1488,  the  lint  printed;  of  Brescia,  1494,  used  by  Luther  for  his  transla- 
tion ;  Bomberg's,  1518-45 ;  Stephens's,  1544-46 ;  Munster's,  1546 ;  are  the  most  promi- 
nent of  the  number.  Whether  the  translaton  consulted  any,  or  what,  Hebrew  manuecrtpts, 
does  not  appear  from  works  within  our  present  reach.  We  have  shown  how  trivial  was  their 
acquaintance  with  the  language  of  the  editions,  and  may  be  penuaded  that  they  did  not 

(174)  Champoluox-Fioxac:  ^gvpte  Andemte;  1840;  pp.  280-240;— Gumon:  Cft«gpkrtm  Eartg  jq^spMoa  JK»- 
(ory;  184S;  pp.  fiO,  51, 52,  61;— LiFsnn:  ChrtmcUtgie;  1849;  L  pp.  105-180. 
a75)  Simtps:  Op.cU.i  p.  106, 
(176)  BunEf :  Op.  eU.;  pp<  56-961 

Digitized  by 

Google 

620  ABCH-fiOLOGICAL   INTRODUCTION 

greatly  difltrets  themselyes  about  the  latter ;  for,  a  oentury  and  a  half  el^»8ed  before  Eesr 
nieott  proclaimed  how — « the  Hebrew  Bible  was  printed  from  the  UUut,  and  conaeqiiffntly 
the  fcorsi  manu8oripts;''(177)  thus  oorroboratiDg  hie  preyious  acknowledgment-—  <*  that  the 
Sacred  Books  haye  not  descended  to  ns,  for  so  many  ages,  wUhout  some  nUttaket  and  enure 
of  tranecribert,"{nS)  He  enlarges  npon  the  certain^  of  cormptions  in  the  printed  Hebrew 
Text,  powerftilly  refuting  those  who  claim  textual  unity ;  and  then  passes  on  to  establish 
the  absurdity  of  attributing  perfection,  either,  to  the  manuieripta^(179) 
Of  all  men  down  to  his  epoch,  1780,  Kennicott  had  the  best  right  to  speak  decisiyely ; 
'  his  conclusions  being  drawn  fh>m  the  collation  of  no  less  than  692  manueeripU  of  the 
Hebrew  text ;  whereof  about  250  were  collated  by  himself  personally,  and  the  remainder 
by  Mr.  Bruns,  under  his  direction.  Of  the  most  ancient  relics,  but  two  were  assigned  by  him 
to  the  tenth  century  after  Christ ;  to  the  eleyenth  or  twelfth  centuries,  only  three;  whOe  afl 
the  rest  ranged  between  the  years  1200  and  1600  a.  d.  (180)  The  bulk  of  his  work,  its 
costliness  and  comparative  rarity,  combine  with  its  Latin  idiom  to  render  it  inaccessible  to 
ordinary  readers,  save  at  second-hand.  But  few  of  the  facts  established  by  this  great  and 
upright  scholar  are  popularly  known ;  or  they  haye  been  misrepresented,  more  or  less,  by 
some  of  the  ecclesiastical  mediums  (181)  through  which  they  haye  reached  the  puUie  eye. 
Cardinal  Wiseman,  (182)  for  example,  would  lead  his  readers  to  infer,  that  the  innumerable 
yariants  and  corruptions  of  the  Hebrew  Text,  yerified  by  Kennicott,  werv  of  small  import- 
ance; and  eyen  the  Bey.  Moses  Stuart  (188)  slurs  lightly  oyer  those  d^reeiatofy  results 
which  it  will  be  areheology's  duty  presently  to  enumerate,  in  saying:  — 

**  Indeed,  one  may  tray  el  through  the  immense  desert  (so  I  can  hardly  help  naming  it) 
of  Kennicott  and  De  Rossi,  and  (if  I  may  yenture  to  speak  in  homely  phraee)  not  find 
game  enough  to  be  worth  the  hunting."  So  again,  **  Haye  they  (the  Jews)  added  to,  or 
diminished  from,  their  Scriptures  during  all  this  period  of  1800 years?  Not  the  least . . . 
Their  Bible  has  remained  inriolate." 

Now,  to  continue  the  sagacious  Professor's  simile,  the  quantity  of  game  to  be  found  in  a 
giyen  wilderness  frequently  depends  upon  the  keenness  of  the  huntsman ;  its  quality  upon 
his  individual  tastes;  some  sportsmen  being  partial  to  tomtitSf  whilst  others  sigh  that 
nothing  fiercer  than  grizzly-heara  encounters  their  ferine  combativeness.  And,  with  respect 
to  the  "  inviolate ''  state  of  the  Text,-  Kennicott  shall  speak  for  himself^  afiter  we  have 
opened  a  volume  of  De  Rossi. 

G.  Bernardo  de  Rossi,  of  Parma,  was  that  august  Italian  critic  who  resumed  inyestiga- 
tion  into  the  actual  condition  of  the  Hebrew  Text  at  the  point  where  his  EngUsh  prede- 
eessor  had  left  off;  recasting  also  (wherever  the  same  MSS.  could  be  reached  by  him)  the 
work  of  die  illustrious  Oxonian.  Written  in  Italian,  and  intended  solely  for  the  lettered, 
his  books  are  not  very  familiar  to  the  general  reader.  A  quotation  or  two,  therefore,  may 
place  matters  in  their  proper  light : 

«  Here  it  suffices  to  observe,  that  the  totality  of  manueeripU  coUated  is  1418,  of  editions 
874;  that  to  the  English  577,  and  16  Samaritan,  I  have  added  825;  of  which  my  cabinet 
alone  ftimished 691,  and  888  editions;  besides  the  ancient  versions,  the  commentaries,  the 
works  of  criticism  and  other  sources  that  are  also  themselves  in  the  greatest  number."  (184) 

In  another  work  he  states:  —  "Of  the  manuscript  codices  most  ancient  of  the  sacred 

•  Text"  ...  the  oldeet^  that  of  Vienna,  dates  in  a.  d.  1019;  the  next  is  Reuohlin's,  of  Carls- 

ruhe ;  its  age  being  a.  d.  1088.    There  is  nothing  in  manuscript  of  the  Hebrew  Old  Testa- 

<177)  ataU  qffh^pHmtei  Hd^rew  Text;  2d  DfMert;  Oxford,  1709;  p.  470. 

(178) /»&;  IfltD^MTt;  1768;  Introd. 

(170)i&»d.;pp.384,263. 

(180)  JHitaiatio  GeturaUM  in  Vetut  TeeUmentwrn  Hebraiam;  Ozfoxd,  1780;  in  folio;  pp.  110-113. 

(181)  **Bj  <eoeleelaitioal  penons*  are  understood  such  m  are  indeed  aulijects,  yet  their  oflloe  and  works  is 
[tiet]  in  matters  of  Religion;  th^  act  between  God  and  moHf  as  messengers,  aqd  mediators  betneen  then. 
They  d^ver  G<n)^a  mind  to  men;  and  offer  men's  prayers  and  ff\fU  to  God";  says  the  R«v.  G«a«  hkiftOM, 
PnUeUmt  Beetor  of  More  {BMUea  aaara  el  OhfOit ;  London,  1060;  p.  280). 

(182)  Omnedion  between  Science  and  Beveekd  BeUgion;  1844;  iL  pp.  188, 109. 
(188)  CHL  HisL  and  DeSenoe  qftheO.T.  Onwm  ;  Andover,  1846 ;  pp.  IM,  239. 
(184)  Oompendio  di  Critiea  Sacra;  Parma,  1811 ;  iL  p.  S7. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

TO    THE    Xth    chapter   OF    GENESIS.  621 

meatnow  ttcUat  of  ab  euiier  ^te  iliia  the  elermth  oentary  alter  Christ.  (186)  And,  "  of 
the  most  aadettt  murascripts  of  the  Greek  Text  ef  the  Kem  Testamebt,"  ...  the  olde$t 
are  the  Alexandrian  and  Vatican,  whioh  maj  ascend  to  the  fourth,  bat  cannot  be  much 
later  than  the,  fifth  century  after  Christ 

Considering  such  cironmstanoee,  our  crednHty  is  not  strained  by  accepting  what  De 
Rossi  asserts,  as  rather  more  aathoritatiye  than  the  fiats  of  some  **  teologini "  ire  mi^t 
name ;  for  he,  at  least,  had  adTanced  by  slodions  disoipHae  to  the  pontive  stage  of  philo- 
sophy. These  are  his  Italian  Tiews  rendered  into  English : — ^onder  the  head  of  *'  Premore 
degli  Ebrei  per  loro  Teste : ''  — 

*<  It  is  known  [  ?  1  with  what  careftdness  Esdras,  the  most  excellent  critic  they  have  had, 
had  reformed  [the  Text]  and  corrected  it,  and  restored  it  to  its  primary  qdendor.  Of  the 
many  rerisions  nndertaken  afler  him  none  are  more  celebrated  than  that  of  the  MauoreUf, 
irho  came  after  the  sixth  century  [anhis  d.]  ;  who,  in  order  that  the  Text  should  not  in 
after  time  become  altered,  and  that  it  mighfbe  presenred  in  its  integrity,  numbered  all  the 
yerses,  the  words,  the  letters  of  each  book,  together  with  their  form  and  place.  But  their 
fatigues  being  well  analysed,  one  perceiyes  that  they  had  more  in  um  to  fix  the  state  of 
their  Text,  than  to  correct  it;  that,  of  infinite  interesting  and  grays  yariants  they  do  not 
speak ;  and  that,  ordinarily,  they  do  not  occupy  themselyes  but  with  minutin  of  orthography 
of  little  or  no  weight :  and  all  the  most  lealous  adorers  and  defenders  of  the  Massora, 
Christians  and  Jews,  while  rendering  justice  to  the  worthiest  intentions  and  to  the  enor- 
mous fatigues  of  its  first  authors,  ingenuously  accord  and  confess  that  it  [the  Massoretio 
Text],  such  as  it  exists,  is  deficient^  impmfeetf  interpolated,  full  of  errort ;  ...  a  most  unsafe 
guide."  (186) 

Why,  <*  the  single  Bible  of  Sonemo  [earliest  printed  Text]  fiunishes  more  than  iwdve  thoU' 
$and  (yariants) ! "  Which  said,  our  authority  continues  through  aboye  eleyen  8yo  pages 
to  deplore  and  make  manifest  **  the  horrible  state  of  the  Text,"  resulting  f^m  his  own  compa- 
risons of  1418  Hebrew  manuscripts,  and  874  printed  editions.  Such  being  the  truth, 
published  a  quarter-century  before  the  Rey.  Dr.  Hales^s  "Analysis  of  Chronology,'' (187) 
the  reader  can  qualify  the  following  attestation  of  an  ecclesiastic  by  what  epithet  he 
pleases:  — 

*<  It  is  not  more  certain  that  there  are  a  tun  and  moon  in  the  heayens,  thaA  it  is,  that  not 
a  single  error  of  the  press,  or  of  a  Jevith  transcriber,  has  crept  into  the  present  copies  of 
thiB  Maeorete  Hebrew  Text,  to  giye  the  least  interruption  to  its  chronological  series  of 
years." 

And  yet,  so  deyoid  of  consistency  is  this  theologer,  that  he  designates  the  ffdtrew  chro- 
nology as  <'  spurious,"  and  actually  follows  that  of  the  Stptua^mt ! 

From  the  loud  denunciations  of  one  of  the  most  learned  (?hurch-of-England  Protestant 
dirines,  and  the  sterner  sorrow  of  an  Italian  Catholic  cenobite,  turn  we  to  the  wild  despair 
of  the  Hebrew  Rabbis :  —  "  Peruit  consilium  t  Computruit  sapientia  nostiV  I  Obliyioni 
traditffi  sunt  leges  nostra !  Mnlt»  etiam  corrupteke,  et  erroree,  ceciderunt  in  Legem  nos- 
trum sanotam  I "  (188) 

But  Kennicott  substantiates  that  the  disorderly  condition  of  tiie  Hebrew  Text,  and  its 
multitudinous  yitiations,  resile  from  the  works,  or  are  lamented  in  the  language,  of  all 
claimants  to  biblical  knowledge  for  1700  years  preyiously  to  the  Rabbis  and  himslf ;  equi- 
yalent  to  1780  prior  to  De  RossL  Here  is  a  skeleton  of  his  list,  omitting  ^citations:  — 
«<  Justin  Martyr,  died  ▲.  d.  165— TertuUian,  220— Clemens  Romanus,  102~0rigen,  254—* 
Eusebius  Csssarienensis,  840 — Eusebius  Emisenus,  flourished  850 — Ephraim  Syrus,  diei 
878 — Hieronymus,  420."    We  pause  to  illustrate. 

1st  King  James's  ycrsion.  —  Paul,  Galatians,  iH.  18:  — "for  it  is  written,  Cursed  is 
eyery  one  that  hangeth  on  a  tree."  [The  English  of  the  Greek  passage  in  Oriesbaeh's 
text  is,  apud  Sharps,  "(for  it  is  written :  cursed  is  every  one  that  is  hanged  on  a  ^m;)"]. 

(185)  IntndMtiom  oUa  Saera  aaittwra  ;  Pftnna,  1817 ;  pp.  84, 47. 

(18S)  ebM|MiM«o;  eh.  It.  p.7;  aiidpp.9-22.  DiRofln  fartbannoraproTW  th«Mpodtlon«inhlf*<8peolmMi 
VarUrom  Lecttonnm  8«erl  Textiu  ";  Boma,  1782. 

(187)  Jnainis;  ^  edit. ;  1880;  i.  p.  277. 

(188)  Htbrew  edttioii  of  1751 ;  the  prtlaoe,  dted  in  Dissert.  GeneraUs;  p.  27. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

622  AR€H.£0L06IGAL    INTRODUCTION 

2d.  Thi8  is  a  qnotatioii  by  the  Apostle  from  DevUrmtomif  xzL  28 ;  whieli,  in  Idag  Jaaet's 
Terdon  stamls  —  ''(for^he  that  is  hanged  if  aconrsed  of  God;)"  [The  Froieh  of 
Cahen  reads  —  <<oar  nn  penda  est  une  msl^ction  de  Dien"  (y.  pp.  98,  94) ;  whidi 
eonforms  bstter  to  the  context,  and  resembles  current  snperstitioiis  STcrsion  to  ^bbeU.] 

Apart  from  illiteral  citation,  the  New  Testament,  in  this  passage,  leayes  ont  the  word 
ELoHIM,  '  God.'  Theologists  who  combat  for  "  plenary  inspiration"  can  doubtless  answer 
the  following  interrogatories.  If  those  words  be  Paol's  (always  proTided  for),  did  he  quote 
from  memory  T  then  his  recollection  was  faulty.  If  he  copied  the  LXX,  then,  in  his  day, 
the  Greek  already  diifered  from  the  Hebrew ;  and  who  can  tell  which  of  the  two  transcripts 
preseryed  the  original  reading  ? 

The  catslogue  continues  with — '<  Epiphanius,  408  —  Augustine,  480" — but  we  abridge 
twenty-two  folio  pages  of  extracts  from  later  Christian  writers,  who  protest  to  the  same 
effect,  into  a  line ;  epitomising  the  series  by  one  name  —  Ludoricns  CapeUus,  founder  of 
sacred  criticinn  in  1650. 

All  the  subjoined  commentators  Touch  for  inaccuracies  in  the  Text :  riz. —  "  Raymond  da 
Pennaforti,  1250— Nio.  Lyranus,  1820— Rudolphus  Armachanus,  1859— Tostatos,  1450— 
Jacob  Peres  de  Yalentia,  1450— Marsilius  Ficinus,  1450  —  Baptista  Mantnanus,  1516— 
Zuinglius,  1528— Martin  Lutiier,  1546 — Bibliander,  1564,"  &c.  The  same  corruptions  are 
certified  through  the  decrees  of  the  Council  of  J^mt,  1546;  through  the  VtUffoie  o/Sixtta 
F.,  1590 ;  and  through  king  James's  version,  1604-1611 :  on  which  the  Oxonian  critic 
remarks  (p.  50,  {  106) :  —  "To  the  Authors  of  the  Englith  vertion  that  which  is  due : 
many  examples  prove  that  they  did  not  always  mind  what  they  found  in  the  Hebrew,  but 
what  they  thought  ought  to  be  read  therein :  tantamount  to  that,  in  their  opinion,  the  He- 
brew Text  was  corrupt  This  the  reader  eyolyes  from  twenty  places : — OeiL  xxy.  8 :  xxxr. 
29:  JSz,  XX.  10:  Deut,  y.  14;  xxyiL  26;  xxxii.  48:  Jot.  xxiL  84:  Jud.  yiL  IS— rid.  com. 
20—1  Sam.  iL  28:  2  Sam.  iii.  7;  y.  8;  xxL  19;  xxiii.  8:  2  Kmffi  xxy.  8:  1  Cfhran,  riL  6; 
ix.  41;  xxiy.  28:  Pt.  xxxiy.  17;  Ixx.  1:  Ita,  xxyiii.  12:  Fzeeh,  xxri.  28." 

After  citing  « Jos.  Bcaliger ;  the  Bnxtorfk,  father  and  son,  defenders  of  the  purity  of  the 
text;  CapeUus;  Glassius;  Joseph  Mede;  Usher,  Morinus,  Beyeridge,  Walton,  Hammond, 
Bochart,  Hottinger,  Huet,  Pococke,  Jablonski,  Clerious,  Opitius,  Yetringa,  Mlchadis, 
Wolfius,  Carpiorius,  Joseph  Hallet,  Francis  Hare "  —  Kennicott  concludes  ({  182) :  — 

*<Id  autem  a  me  maxima  propositum  tait,  nt  ostenderem — produci  posse  testimonia 
multa  et  insignia,  per  interrallum  fere  2000  annorum,  ad  probandas  muUUionet  in  Hebrai- 
cum  Textum  invtetat:  qoanquam  in  contrariam  sententiam,  annis  abhinc  triginta,  docti 
fere  omnes  abierint"(189) 

One  would  haye  thought  (to  return  to  Prof.  Stuart's  metaphor),  that  this  <*  immense 
desert "  contained  "  game  enough,"  in  all  conscience !  but,  in  some  men,  the  love  of  chase 
is  insatiable.  **  Defence,"  as  he  justly  obsenres,  "  would  seem  to  be  needed.  The  contest 
has  become  one  pro  oris  ct  foeU^*  —  ** truly  become  one,  as  I  haye  said,  pro  arit  €l 
/ocM."  (190) 

"  It  has  become  plain,"  frankly  declares  this  lamented  Hebraist,  <*  that  the  battle  which 
has  been  going  on  oyer  most  European  ground  these  forty  or  fifty  years  past,  has  at  last 
come  eyen  iSb  us  [alluding  to  the  exegetioal-works  of  his  learned  and  reyerend  New  England 
colleagues,  Noyes,  Palfr^,  Norton,  Parker,  &c],  and  we  can  no  longer  decline  the  contest. 
Unbelief  in  the  Voltaire  and  the  Thomas  Paine  style  we  haye  coped  with,  and  in  a  measure 
gained  the  rictory.  But  now  it  comes  in  the  shape  of  philosophy,  literature,  criticism,  philo- 
logy, knowledge  of  antiquity,  and  the  like.[!]  Hume's  arguments  against  miracles  haye  been 
txhumidf  clothed  with  a  new  and  splendid  costume,  and  commended  to  the  world  by  many 
among  the  most  Uamod  men  in  Europe.  Before  them,  all  reyelation  falls  alike,  both  Old 
Testament  and  New."  (191) 

And,  considering  who  these  <*  most  learned  men  "  yeritably  are,  it  is  not  for  us  to  ques- 
tion the  uprightness  of  his  outspoken  recognition,  that — 

(189)  Dittertatio  GeneraUs;  1780;  pp.  7,  8, 38-48,  U,  atj, 
(100)  C(p. CO.;  pp. 8^422. 
(191)  Op.ciL:  p.  420. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

TO    THE    Xth    chapter  OP  GENESIS.  623 

^  The  unbelief  that  connBtently  sets  aside  the  whole,  shows  a  more  manly  and  energetic 
attitude  of  mind;  and,  in  my  opinion,  it  is  mnch  more  likely  to  be  connnced  at  last  of  error, 
than  he  is  who  thinks  that  he  is  ahready  a  belioTer  and  is  safe,  while  he  Tirtually  rejects 
from  the  Gospel  all  which  makes  a  Gospel,  in  distinction  from  the  teachings  of  Socrates, 
of  Plato,  of  Plutarch,  of  Cioero,  and  of  Seneca."  (192) 

We  have  quoted  the  highest  contemporary  authority  of  the  Calvinist  school ;  and  impar- 
tiality requires  that  a  member  of  the  <*  Chiesa  Cattolica  Apostolica  Romana''  should  make 
up  for  the  mild  notice  taken  of  Kennicott's  and  De  Rossi's  researches  by  His  Eminence  the 
Cardinal. 

If  the  man  of  science  mourns,  with  as  much  fervor  as  the  most  doTout,  over  the  irre- 
eoTcrable  loss  of  Hebrew  manuteripU  of  the  Bible— of  those  precious  documents  that  would 
haye  linked  the  Bodleian  codex  (about  800  years  old,  said  to  be  the  most  ancient)  (193)  with 
the  transcripts  of  Ezra's  copy;  and  filled  up  the  frightful  chasm  that  now  divides,  in  Hebrew 
paleography,  the  tenth  century  after  Christ  from  the  fifth  century  before  his  advent  —  to 
whose  acts  is  he  indebted,  and  by  whom  are  his  sorrows  caused  ?    Laoour  shall  answer : — 

**  At  the  commencement  of  the  thirteenth  century,  it  was  expressly  forbidden  to  the 
laity  to  possess  the  books  of  the  Old  and  New  Testament  The  Church  permitted  only  the 
Psalter,  the  Breviary,  or  the  Hours  of  the  Sainted  Mary ;  and  these  books  were  required 
not  to  be  translated  into  the  vulgar  tongue.  Decrees  of  Bishops  interdicted  the  use  of 
grammar."  (194)    Other  sources  confirm  this  assertion. 

Gregory  the  Great,  a.  d.  590,  censured  Didier,  Archbishop  of  Vienna,  for  suffering 
grammar  to  be  taught  in  his  diocese-;  **  boasting  that  he  (himself)  scorned  to  conform  his 
latinity  to  grammatical  rules,  lest  thereby  he  should  resemble  the  heathen,"  (195)  In  the 
ninth  century,  Alfred  the  Great  laments  that  there  was  not  a  priest  in  England  who  really 
understood  Latin,  and,  for  ages  after,  English  Bishops  were  termed  "  marksmen,"  because 
they  could  not  sign  their  names  otherwise  than  by  a  er^u  I 

**  In  1490,  the  Inquisition  caused  the  Hebrew  Bibles  to  be  burned,  that  is  to  say,  the 
work  in  default  of  the  author;  in  the  absence  of  Moses,  his  Pentateuch."  At  Salamanca, 
the  fiendish  Dominican,  Torquemada,  reduced  some  6000  Hebrew  volumes  to  ashes ;  and 
besides  such  as  were  ravished  from  libraries  in  Spain  and  Italy,  about  12,000  Talmudio 
rolls  perished,  circd  a,  d.  1559,  in  Inquisitorial  flames  at  Cremona.  (196)  These  un- 
nameable  deeds  were  induced  by  orthodox  doubts  that,  the  Hebrew  Text,  as  represented 
in  the  e^uare-letter  copies,  was  ever  quoted  by  the  Apostles;  (196)  but,  in  those  ages  of 
darkness,  little  respect  could  have  been  paid  to  MSS.  even  of  the  }few  Testament ;  for  such 
ancient  copies  as  had  been  preserved,  down  to  a.  d.  1749,  at  Aloala  in  Spun,  were  sold  to 
one  Toryo,  a  pyrotechnist,  as  materials  for  sky-rockets.  (197)  Quintillian  (IneL  Orat.  i.  I), 
in  the  first  century  after  Christ,  complains  that  writing  was  neglected ;  but  it  was  not  until 
after  the  barbarian  irruptions  of  the  eighth  century  that  <*la  crasse  ignorance  "  prevailed 
in  Western  Europe.  It  is  uneerlain  if  even  Charlemagne  could  write.  The  tenth  to  twelfth 
centuries  exhibit  Bishops,  Abbots,  Clerks,  &c.,  incredibly  ignorant:  as  even  in  earlier  times, 
before  the  seventh  century,  at  the  Episcopal  Conference  of  Carthage,  the  <*  brigandage" 
of  Ephesus,  and  the  Council  of  Chalcedon — at  which  last  there  were  forty  most  incapable 
Bishops  (Labbe,  ConeU^  iv).  Few  Romish  monks  could  read,  in  the  eleventh;  the  laity 
began  about  the  end  of  the  thirteenth;  but  in  the  fourteenth,  the  number  was  small. (198) 

From  these  fearful  destructions  (the  Inquisitorial  agents  having  acted  in  obedience  to 
orders  sent  from  Rome),  Lacour  draws  a  singular  argument  in  behalf  of  his  Own  free  resto- 
rations of  the  Hebrew  Text,  maintaining: — 

(102)  C»p.eie.;p.820. 

(199)  Kunnoorr:  2d  Dimrt.;  p.  317  — "Xoiid,  A,  No.  ie2,»»  in  oatalogiM  Bodleten  Ubrary. 

(104)  JELOiM:  Bordeaux,  1828 ;  i.  p.  28. 

(105)  Mamdsvilli,  apud  Tatloe;  p.  84;  — alM,  Rubbuxi:  Exeaun;  VL  p.  687;  —  and  Tioo:  Seimaa  Nwrnt, 
trad.  MiOBXixT ;  IL  p.  67 ;  for  otiier  examples. 

(196)  LAOoim:  p.  29;  —  and  KxmaooR:  DiuerL  Gten. ;  p.  16 
QXri)  1IAB8H*8  Mkhadii;  iL  p.  44. 

(196)  Oondenaed  ftom  an  exesUent  arttde  on  Alphabetic  in  vol.  tx.  pp.  727-780^  of  the  great  '*lncjQk)p6dit 
CatboUqiw'*;  Parif,  1846 :  eondnoted  bj  tb«  Abb6  Qlusm  and  M.  Waus. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

624  ABGH^OLOGICAL   IKTEODUGTIOK 

«  That  the  Helnreir  Text  of  the  Bihl«,  tried  and  oondenuMd  hj  the  Uol jr  Tribvnal,  boned 
aa  an  act  of  faith  at  SeriUe,  and  in  the  Square  of  8t  Stephen  at  Satamnnffa,  proaeribad 
daring  the  eixteenth  centnry,  prohibited  in  the  pnlpits  <^  Catholic  preachers,  dedaced 
dangerous,  infected  with  Judaism,  and  causing  those  Christians  who  read  it  to  Juduae 
likewise,  finds  itself— owing  to  this  solemn  condemnation  firom  which  it  cannot  be  purged 
saye  through  the  adoption  of  a  new  trantlation  —  finds  itself,  I  repeat,  does  this  Text,  to 
haye  lost  the  character  and  authority  that,  in  the  spirit  of  Christianity,  the  Fathers  [only 
Origen  and  Jerome]  attributed  to  it.  One  may,  therefore,  alter  all,  study  this  TejLt  in  • 
new  point  of  yiew,  purely  philosophical  and  phUdloc^;  and  se^  in  it  a  new  interpretatieii, 
without  being  scar^  at  the  sense  which  such  interpretation  jdbj  produce.  The  anathema 
with  which  it  has  been  stricken  has  abandoned  it  to  criticism  and  to  the  inyestigations  of 
the  world ;  iradidit  ditputaiume :  its  testimony  is  no  longer  anything  but  mere  human  testi- 
ttony,  liable  to  error  like  all  things  that  proceed  from  man."  (199) 

Conceding  his  premises,  and  allowing  for  his  peculiarly  catholic  point  of  yiew,  the  deduc- 
tion is  logical ;  but  they  who  deny  Papal  infallibility  may  continue  to  reyerence  the  Hebrew 
Text  just  as  it  excommunication  had  neyer  been  pronounced  upon  it;  notwithstanding  the 
ayowal  of  those  manifold  corruptions  which,  owing  to  these  Inquisitorial  holocausts  of 
ancient  mamueryfts,  it  seems  now  humanly  impossible  to  expunge.  To  persecutions  and  to 
the  expulsion  of  the  Jews  from  Spain,  after  1491,  the  extinction  of  the  most  predoni 
Hebrew  exemplars  may  be,  in  part,  attributed ;  for  Muslim  intolerance  had  neyer  know- 
ingly laid  the  hand  of  sacrilege  upon  documents  which  Chnatian  charity  has  for  ever 
destroyed.  (200)  Mohammbd  had  built  up  his  Kut'dn  upon  the  monotheistic  foundations 
of  Mosxs;(201)  ^d  his  fiithful  disciples  haye  been  always  too  connstent,  whateyer 
barbarities  they  may  haye  inflicted  upon  the  Jews,  to  iigure  that  chosen  people's  sacred 
looks,  and  thereby  stultify  themselyes.  With  reference  to  textual  corruptions,  says  Ken- 
nioott(202  :  — 

'*  Hoc  denique  sunt  yerba  eruditisslmi  Professoris  J.  A.  Starck  — '  cum  negari  prorsus 
nequeat  (si  quidem  luminibus  uti,  et  antiques  libros  ab  omnibus  prsjudicatis  opinionibus 
Uberi  inter  se  conferre  yelimus)  mtUta  et  ingenUa  wfaXjwn  inhse  saeris  Ubris ;  qualia  sont, 
grayissimi  in  chronologieis  errores;  In  historicia  Banifeste  contxadiotiones ;  numerorMu 
exaggerationes ;  literarum,  nominarum,  sententiarum,  omissiones,  additiones,  transpott- 
tiones:  qusBstio  jure  orietur — Undo  tot  tamque  grayes  immutationes  originem  suam  ha- 
beant?  Et  si  grarissimis  argumentis,  quibus  solis  permota  ita  sentio,  fides  habenda  est; 
prorsus  omni  caret  dubio,  Judeorum  imprimis  fttllaciawi  -et  maleyolem  mentem  aocuaandani 
ease,  post  librariorum  inevtiaa.  et  negUi^tiam.' " 

To  ayoid  mistakes  we  haye  giyen  the  Latin  text,  and  now  offer  its  straiglitfBrwaTd  aigm- 
floation  in  English : — 

«  Since  it  cannot  aUogetiier  be  denied  (If  indeed  we  free  ourselyes  from  aB  pr^acBoed 
opinions,  and  wish  to  oompare  ancient  books  with  each  other  and  to  ayail  onraelyea  of 
the  instructions  of  the  learned,)  that  many  and  enormout  ff^aXfrnra  [U^m,  mistakes]  aitl  m 
the  tacred  books;  such  as,  most  graye  errors  in  chronolo^cal  (matters);  manifest  contra- 
dictions in  historical;  exaggerations  in  numbers;  omissions,  additions,  transpositions  of 
letters,  of  names,  of  sentences: — the  question  will  naturally  arise.  Whence  have  snsh 
and  so  many  serious  mutations  their  origin  ?  And  if  ISuth  is  to  be  i^ed  in  most  weight 
arguments,  by  which  alone  I  am  influenced,  eyery  doubt  is  altogether  wanting,  (that)  first 
one  must  accuse  the  fallacious  and  maleyolent  mind  of  the  Jews,  (and)  afterwards  the 
inertness  and  negligence  of  librarians." 

Such  are  the  published /a«te.  Tet  one  manrels  at  the  ways  of  theology;  on  sedng  the 
Key.  Prof.  Stuart  skip  nimbly  oyer  that  <* immense  desert*'  with  his  "gun,  man,  and  dog," 
{Arma  virumgue  cano,)  and  the  dSgagS  air  of  a  juyenUe  Nimrod,  without  finding  "yosM 
enough  to  be  worth  the  hunting ;"  and  then  asserting  with  equal  friyolity,  that  the  Jewish 
•<  BiBle  has  remained  mviolaU  "  I  How  ca^  the  unlettered  distinguish  truth  ftom  error, 
when  their  Teachers  mystify  the  plainest  results  that  soholarship  the  most  exalted,  hon- 
esty the  most  imbending,  and  science  the  most  profound,  haye  striyen  to  make  public  to 
all  men  for  the  last  hundred  years  T 

(199)  Lacour  :  Op.  eft. ;  1.  p.  88. 

(aoo)  SisMONDi,  not  now  before  me,  giree  manj  other  examplet  of  Utcmy  deetniotions  in  Itnlj,  Pw>inV 
and  Spain. 
(201)  Oonptfe  ^ahs:  Atattpiw;  pp.  188-tS6»  90,  STl. 
(302)  Op.  dL;  p.  83;  note  to  {  70. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

TO    THE    Xth    chapter    OF    GENESIS.  625 

NdTerthelcM,  a  time  has  come  in  which  opinions,  that  ignorance  had  laid  down  as  fiinda- 
aental  prindpUs,  begin  to  compromise  those  institutional  stmctures  beneath  which  they 
were  placed.  Enlightened  manhood  in  a  free  Republic  is  fast  approaching  the  hour  when 
such  opinions  will  be  openly  recogniied  as  nothing  more  than  opiniont  of  ignorance.  To 
attempt  to  impede  reform,  when  it  is  necessary,  is  to  jeopard  the  whole  system.  To 
refuse  to  repair  foundations  whose  Tetustity  perils  an  edifice,  is  to  desire  that  the  downfall 
of  such  edifice  shall  prove  that  its  foundations  are  rotten.  '*  Creeds/*  says  Sharps,  speak- 
ing of  the  decrees  of  the  oecumenic  Councils,  "  composed  in  the  dark  have  now  to  be  de- 
fended in.  the  light,  and  those  who  profess  them  have  the  painful  task  of  employing  leaxn- 
iag  to  justify  ignorance."  (208) 

A  point  has  been  now  attained  in  this  exposition,  when  a  brief  recapittdation  of  the  halts 
made  during  our  journey  will  enable  us  to  dismiss  king  James's  version  ftrom  further  con- 
sideration. We  opine  that  the  foregoing  pages  have  established,  upon  archssologioal  prin- 
ciples and  adequately  for  the  demands  of  positive  philosophy,  — 

1st  —  by  authority  of  the  highest  Biblical  critics ; 

2d  —  by  ezegeticdl  exposure  of  some  of  its  false-translations ; 

3d  —  by  historical  testimony,  that  all  versions  in  English,  (being  mere  popular  accommo* 
dations  of  defective  editions  printed  in  the  "  Original  Sacred  tongues,*')  have  only  per- 
petuated or  increased  whatever  errors  their  antecedent  editions  contain ; 

4th — that  because  the  Latin  Vulgate,  printed  or  manuscript,  abounds  in  mistakes ; 

5th — that  because  the  Greek  Sepiuagini,  if  ever  a  faithful  representative  of  the  Hebrew 
original,  is  so  no  longer,  in  any  printed  editions  or  manuscript  copies  now  known ;  and 
that  tradition,  well  authenticated,  proves  its  ritiated  state  as  far  back  as  the  first  cen- 
tory  of  the  Christian  era ; 

6th  —  that  because  the  only  men, '  Protestant,  Catholic,  or  Rabbinical,  whose  dedsionB 
(owing  to  their  respectively  minute  collation  of  every  printed  edition  or  manuscript 
exemplar  of  the  Hebrew  Text)  can  be  weighty  in  the  premises,  have  pronounced  the 
whole  of  them  to  be  radically,  enormously,  and  irretrievably  corrupt;  — 
in  view  of  all  of  the  above  facts,  we  have  a  right  to  conclude  that,  our  English  **  authorix«d 
Trantlation,"  made  250  years  ago  under  cironmstances  naturally  adverse  upon  dooumentt 
80  faulty,  can  claim,  in  science,  no  higher  respect  than  we  should  aceord  to  a  poor  trans- 
lation of  mutilated  copies  of  Homer ;  and  finally,  that  those  indiriduals  who  are  most  cla- 
morous in  its  praises  only  bear  witness  that  they  possess  the  least  acquaintance  with  its 
origin  and  history,  however  familiar  they  may  be  with  its  contents. 

But,  universal  orthodoxy,  regardless  of  the  collective  researches  of  three  centuries, 
insists  upon  our  credence  that  Moses  wrote  the  Pentateuch  ;  and  still  stigmatizes  those  yi\^ 
respectfully  solicit  some  evidences  of  this  alleged  authorship  (a  littie  more  condusive  than 
ecclesiastical  tradition)  with  terms  intended  to  be  opprobrious ;  of  which,  perhaps,  the  most 
courteous  form  in  vogue  nowadays  is  '*  skeptic."  (204)  K  by  this  harmless  vocable  nothing 
mere  is  implied  than  that  a  "skeptic"  has,  by  laborious  study,  attained  to  the  positive 
stage  of  philosophy,  while  "orthodoxy"  vegetates  in  a  sub-metaphysical  stratum,  it  should 
be  cheerfully  endured ;  if  not  with  Christian  fortitude,  at  least  with  gentiraianly  equa- 
nimity. 

The  real  question,  however,  posited  in  logical  shape,  is  this :  — 

The  Hebrew  Motet  wrote  the  Hebrew  Pentateueh,  Did  the  Hebrew  Motet  write  the  Hebreio 
Pentateuch  f  If  the  Hebrew  Motet  wrote  the  Hebrew  Pentateueh,  where  it  the  Hebrew  Penta- 
teuch the  Hebrew  Motet  wrote  f 

For  ourselves,  we  do  not  perceive  what  essential  difference  it  would  make,  in  positive 
philosophy,  supposing  even  that  he  did:  but,  inasmuch  as  we  have  embarked  in  an  inquiry 

(203)  Hidoryqf  Egypt;  p.  490. 

(20A)  The  Bar.  Dr.  Smtthi  of  OharlMton,  S.  C. :  Uidtg  pffhe  Buman  Raett;  Index,  p.  40L 

79 

Digitized  by 

Google 

626.  ABGH^OLOGIGAL    IKTBODUGTIOK 

for  the  purpose  of  ascertaining  the  importance  ifhich  progresstre  Ethnology  must  asngn  to 
one  document ;  and  this  document  happens  to-be  the  Xth  Cht^ier  of  a  Book  called  "Genesis,'' 
(which  some  yehemently  protest  is  Mosaic,  while  others  as  flatly  contradict  them,)  it  be- 
hooTCS  ns  to  test  certain  points  of  these  disputed  allegations  by  ardueological  criteria;  and, 
authority  against  authority,  the  citation  of  a  few  may  help  us  in  making  ready  for  the 
Toyage. 

*'  And  yet  no  one,  I  beliere,  has  the  pretension  to  understand  perfectly  the  sense  of  ^e- 
netts;  no  one  denies  that  the  text  of  this  book  contains  many  parables,  or  Oriental  alle- 
gories, of  which  the  most  skilftil  and  the  wisest  of  the  Fathers  of  the  Church  baTe  sought 
in  Tain  for  the  meaning.  —  But,  thanks  to  the  massoretic  points  and  to  the  susoeptibiliSes 
of  orthodoxy,  things  haye  come  at  the  present  day  to  such  a  pass,  that  if  Moses  himself 
arose  from  tiie  tomb  to  cause  all  uncertainty  to  cease;  if  he  interpreted  his  own  book  lite- 
rally ;  if  he  expounded  it  as  he  had  conceived  it  and  reflected  upon  it;  Jerusalem,  Borne, 
Constantinople,  and  Geneya,  [Great  Britain,  Germany,  France,  and  the  United  States,] 
would  couToke  their  Doctors  or  Diyinity  from  all  comers  of  the  worid,  to  prove  to  him» 
that  he  knows  nothing  about  the  genius  of  the  Hebrew  tongue — that  his  translaticai  is 
contrary  to  the  grammar  and  dictionary  of  Mr.  This  or  Mr.  That — that  he  does  not  pos- 
sess even  common  sense  —  that  he  is  an  impious  (fellow)  whose  book  they  had  done  per- 
fectly right  IRome^t  orders,  Xlll-XVIth  centuries]  to  bum ;  and  that  it  is  wonderiU  how 
he  had  not  been  serred  so  himself  in  the  other  worid."  (206) 

Haying  now  Ailfllled  my  published  pledges  to  the  reader,  so  fkr  as  rdates  to  the  exhi- 
bition of  a  few  atoms  of  the  vicissitudes  through  which  the  Xth  ChofUrof  Oenesis  has  tra- 
velled to  reach  our  day,  I  am  obliged  to  bring  this  "  Archnological  Introduction "  to  sb 
abmpt  dose  at  this  point    The  reasons  are  these :  — 

When  my  colleague  Dr.  Nott,  at  Mobile  (in  April,  1852),  agreed  with  me  to  erect  a 
literary  cenotaph  **  To  the  xeuobt  of  MORTON,"  it  was  mutually  arranged  that,  in  oor 
division  of  labor,  he  would  undertake  the  anatomical  and  physical  department,  embracing 
those  subjects  that  belong  to  the  Natural  Sciences;  while  the  execution  of  \ke  ardueolo- 
gical and  biblical  portions  was  to  devolve  upon  myself. 

No  two  men  have  ever  worked  together  in  the  same  harness  with  more  perfect  harmony 
of  object  In  the  midst  of  professional  engagements,  whose  onerous  character  none  bat 
the  most  laborious  of  the  medical  faculty  can  adequately  appreciate.  Dr.  Nott^  at  the  sacri- 
fice of  every  instant  of  repose,  succeeded  in  accomplishiog,  not  merely  all  that  appertaiBS 
to  his  part  of  our  enterprise  as  set  forth  in  Part  I.,  but  also  the  revision  of  my  stn<fiee  ss 
exhibited  in  Part  IL :  each  of  us,  notwithstanding,  bdng  wholly  responsible  for  whatever 
naturally  falls  within  the  specialities  severally  assumed,  but  neither  of  us  being  fairiy 
amenable  for  mistakes  in  other  than  our  own  departments  as  above  classified. 

On  the  other  hand  —  independently  of  three  months,  December  1862  to  March  185S, 
spent  by  myself  in  travelling ;  and  aside  from  all  supervisions  of  the  press  dnce  the  25th 
of  August  —  I  devoted  nearly  twelve  months  of  day  and  lught  to  the  perfomianee  of  my 
"  speciality  "  of  our  joint  undertaking ;  some  of  the  fruits  of  which  have  been  already  sub- 
mitted to  the  reader's  criticism. 

Besolved,  in  my  own  mind,  to  pursue  inquiries  into  biblical  questions,  onoe  for  all,  usque 
ad  necem,  my  manuscripts  have,  I  think,  completely  answered  the  Aristotdian  proposition 
above  stated  as  conoems  the  Pentateuch,    Nevertheless,  I  postpone  their  publication :  — 

Ist  Because  they  do  no#  directiy  concern  Ethnology,  and  the  main  sulijeots  of  this  woriL 

2d.  Because  the  printers  assure  me  that  my  *<  copy  "  could  not  be  condensed,  «atis&c- 
V>rily,  within  800  more  of  these  pages :  thereby  rendering  it  impossible  to  keep  "  Types 
of  Mankind  "  within  one  volume. 

Ample,  however,  and  far  more  gratifyinj^  than  a  dry  archnologioal  disquisition  can  be  to 
the  general  reader,  are  the  compensations  which  displace  my  own  performances:  and  it  is 
with  unfeigned  pleasure  that,  in  order  to  make  room  for  the  papers  of  our  coUaborators,  I 

• 
(206)  Laoook:  JBuJSm\  i.p.im. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC 

TO  THE  Xth  chapter  OP  GENESIS.      .  627 

nratilste  my  own  essays  in  sabstitnting  theirs.  Perhaps  it  is  for  the,  best ;  becaose  the 
Batare  of  this  work  may  elicit  some  hostile  comments;  and  he  is  the  pmdent  soldier 
who  **  keeps  his  powder  dry."  In  consequence,  I  suppress  about  800  of  these  pages,  after 
submitting  an  outline  of  the  Peti9d$  of  misfortune  which  the  canonical  Hebrew  Text  has, 
to  a  great  measure,  surviyed,  down  to  Cahbh's  Bible,  a.  D.  1881-1849. 

Walton,  Kennicott,  and  De  Wette  (to  say  nothing  of  other  sources),  the  reader  perceives 
are  tolerably  familiar  to  us.    To  extract  firom  thdr  works  is  merely  mechanical ;  but  the 
fear  of  tedium  warns  us  to  be  eclectic.    In  these  matters  it  is  our  priyate'  opinion  that, 
if  IRtans  were  agid^  to  pile  Ossa  upon  Pelion,  after  rolling  upon  "  Ossa  the  leafy  Olym- 
pus," (206)  they  would  fail  to  startle,  far  less  conyince,  those  who  lie  below  the  metapht/- 
ncal  stratum  of  intellectual  deyelopment ;  for,  <*  as  Jannes  and  Jambres  withstood  Moses, 
80  do  these  men  withstand  the  truth."  (207)    It  will  be  more  interesting  to  the  enlightened 
reader  to  yiew  a  brief  historical  schedule  of  the  changes  which  eighteen  centuries  haye 
entailed  upon  the  Hebrew  Text  —  condensed  principally  fh>m  Eennicott's  results  in  his 
Diiseriatio  Omeralit :  — 
Ist  PBBiOD,  B.  c.  —  ''In  most  ancient  times,  the  Hebrew  Text  was  corrupt;"  and  the 
codex  (say,  **  fragmentary  books  ")  used  by  the  Greek  interpreters  of  the  Old  Testa* 
ment,  at  Alexandria,  was  undoubtedly  Hebrew,  but  a  copy  not  sufficiently  emended. 
Eyen  Buxtorf  is  obliged  to  admit  —  <*  JudsBOs  a  tempore  Esdrss  negligentiores  fuisse 
circa  textum  HebrsBum,  et  non  curiosos  circa  lectionem  yeram." 

The  numerals  were  expressed  by  lettert:  the  fiye'/naZ  letters  {kaf,  mm,  nun,  pay , 
and  iMe)  had  not  then  been  inyented :  the  words  were  still  undivided, 
2d  PBBIOD,  A.  D.  down  to  500.  —  The  texts  were  more  corrupt  in  the  time  of  Philo  and 
Josephus.  Neither  in  their  day,  nor  in  that  of  Origen,  third  century,  were  the  Com- 
mandmente  {Exod,  xx.  8-17)  diyided  into  ten,  in  the  manner  they  are  now.  In  Philo 
the  diyiaon  is  quinary,  after  the  fashion  of  Pythagorseans.  About  the  latter  epoch 
.  conunenoes  the  Talmudie  MUkna;  and,  in  the  fifth  century,  the  Oemara;  each  of 
wluch  books  proyes  the  increase  of  textual  errors.  So  do  the  writings  of  the  Fathers 
during  all  this  age — notably  St.  Jerome ;  while  the  apostolic  books  demonstrate  that 
the  Gkeek  differed,  more  or  less,  from  the  Hebrew  originaL 
8d  PBBIOD,  A.D.  500  to  1000. — Aside  from  the  later  and  less  reliable  Fathers,  two  Hebra- 
ical  works  establish,  that  no  expurgations  of  error  had  been  made  in  the  Text:  yix., 
the  Robboth,  after  a.  d.  700,  and  the  Firke  EUezar,  after  800.  About  the  sixth  century, 
the  Rabbis  of  Tiberias  commenced  the  <*  Masora" :  a  labor  that  would  not  have  been 
undertaken  but  for  the  reasons  aboye  given,  and  the  wretched  condition  of  the  Text 
in  their  time ;  as  proved  by  the  multitudes  of  Keri  veto  Keihtb  (the  read,  but  not  the 
written)  or  Kethih  velo  Keri  (the  written,  but  not  the  read).  (208) 
4th  PBBIOD,  A.  D.  1000  to  1450. — The  Jewish  schools  of  Babylonia  seek  refiige  in  Spain 
about  1040 ;  between  which  era  and  1240  flourished  the  four  great  Rabbis.  Their 
works  prove  not  merely  different  readings,  but  absolute  mistakes  in  copies  of  the  Text : 
things  then  existing  in  manuscripts  of  the  Old  Testament  now  exist  no  longer,  and 
vice  vena;  while  the  "  Masora»"  itself^  already  in  confusion  inextricable,  only  rendered 
matters  worse.  It  is  of  this  age  alone  that  we  possess  those  Hebrew  manuscripts  by 
us  called  onoeiit— not  one  900  years  old  I 
6th  PBBIOD,  A.  D.  1450  to  1750^ — Printing  invented ;,  the  art  was  first  applied  to  Peahns 
in  the  year  1477 ;  and  to  the  whole  Hebrew  Text  in  1488 ;  that  entire  edition^  save 
one-third  of  a  copy,  being  immediately  burnt  by  Neapolitan  Jews.  But  here,  upon 
editions  now  following  each  other  with  rapid  succession,  the  Rabbis  begin  their  restor- 
ations and  their  lamentations.  Continental  scholars  now  set  to  work  upon  Hebrew  in 
earnest,  without  professorships:  whilat,  in  England,  king  James's  version  is  a  splendid 

(SM)TiiaiL:  €hairg.;\,«L  (908)  Ds  Wnn:  L  pp.  84ft,  868-8(8. 

(907)  S  2Vm.  BL  8 — qrad  taAin. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

628  PAL^OGRAPHIC    EXCURSUS 

record  of  Professors  without  Hebraism,  during  the  years  ld03-'ll.  Fiffy  yean  later, 
Walton  redeems  the  shame  of  Oxford;  and  yet,  one  hundred  years  later  stall, Eemucott 
himself  chronicles  —  '*  the  reader  will  be  pleased  to  observe,  that  as  the  stady  of  the 
Hebrew  language  has  only  been  reviving  during  the  last  one  hundred  years :"  (209)  to 
end  which  sentence  logically,  we  ourselves  consider  that  there  could  be  no  ''reriTal** 
where,  in  1600,  there  was  scarcely  %  beginning;  and,  ergo,  that  the  Doctor's  attetta- 
tion  must  refer  to  incipient  efforts,  in  his  century  commencing,  to  resusdtate  the 
Ht^ew  tongue  after  twenty  centuries  of  burial. 
6th  and  present  pxriod,  a.  d.  1750  to  1858. 

Taking  Eichhom  as  the  grand  point  of  departure,  we  find,  after  the  lapse  of  a  centnrj, 
how,  through  the  operations  of  that  ** rational  method"  of  which  he  and  Richard  Simon 
were,  among  Christians,  the  first  qualified  exponents,  the  Hebraical  scholarship  of  our  own 
generation  (proud  of  its  himdred  champions)  has  truly  kept  pace,  on  the  European  conti- 
nent, with  the  universal  progress  of  knowledge. 

Nevertheless,  on  every  side,  we  still  see  and  hear  the  crocodile  whimper  how  *'  nobody 
undertakes  a  new  translation  (into  English)  of  Holy  Scripture"  commensurate  with  the 
imperious  demands  of  all  the  sciences  at  present  advancing — news  of  the  onward  steps 
made  by  each  being  actually  transmitted  through  magnetic  telegraphs  (210)  f— and  yet, 
withal,  few  men  in  America  so  blind  as  not  to  perceive  that,  even  in  evangelized  Enj^and, 
such  pecuniary  superfluities  as  those  said, to  have  been  realized  through  a  "Wobld'i 
JExMbitiony"  are  expended  (God  alone  knows  how  or  why)  upon  anything,  or  everything, 
rather  than  in  behalf  of  a  conscientious  revital  of  our  Enqlish  BIBLE. 
•  0.  B.  G. 

ESSAY   II. 

PALiEOGRAPHIC  EXCURSUS  ON  THE  ART  OP  WRITING.      - 

The  same  imperious  necessity  that  has  constnuned  us  to  suppress  the  contiouation  of 
Part  m..  Essay  I.  (supra,  p.  626),  renders  it  obligatory  to  curtail  our  History  of  the  "Art 
of  Writing,  Arom  the  earliest  antiquity  to  the  present  day."  This  subject,  perhaps  the 
most  vital  in  any  researches  into  the  antiquity  of  the  Hebrew  Pentateuch,  has  never  yei 
publicly  received  adequate  attention  from  modem  scholarship.  With  ourselves  it  has  been 
a  favorite  pursuit  ever  since  1844;  (211)  nor,  did  space  permit  the  insertion  of  whit  we 
had  prepared  in  manuscript  for  the  present  volume,  should  we  not  have  taken  some  pride 
in  the  presentation  of  a  series  of  facts  and  arguments  that  would  entirely  justify  every 
point  set  forth  in  the  accompanying  Tableau  [infra,  pp.  680,  G31]. 

(209)  1st  Dissert;  1763;  p.  907. 

(210)  Bey.  Johk  BAOBMAit,  B.  D.'s  Doctrine  qfthe  UMtjf  qf  the  Buman  Saee;  Ohari«itoii,  S.  G,  1850;  p.  SM— 
«  And  even  telegraphing  to  America,  through  the  cohrenient  wiree  of  Mr.  Oliddon,  the  yet  nnpohlbbed  Ar 
ooveries  of  Lepsius."  These  difoc^eries  hare  idnce  been  publishod,  and  mudi  Jons  Bachxax  knowt  abont 
them  1  MoRiOH's  refotationfl,  in  the  Charleston  Medkai  Jcurrud,  18d0-*61,  render  it  qnlto  mmeeeMaxy  its  ms 
to  waste  more  ink  npon  the  extinguished  author  of  the  abore  **  Doctrine."  —  O.  R.O. 

(211)  Tide  GuDDOir,  in  Lun  Burxb^  Etknddgiaal  Journal,  Na  iz.;  London,  Fek  1849;  pp^  400-416: ->xepol>* 
lished  in  Otia  JBgfptiaon  ;  London,  Madden,  1840;  pp.  90-^15:  —  and,  iriihoat  text,  but  with  some  improve- 
ment of  the  "  Table,'*  in  ffand^Mok  to  the  Punonma  qfihe  Nile  ;  London,  Madden,  1849;  pp.  41-45;  nndtr  the 
headfaig  of  "  Philologj.**  Of  this  pamphlet,  rather  more  than  8000  oopies  hare  been  distifbated  in  the  Unitid 
Statee,  from  Maine  to  Lonisiaaa,  and,  aoeompanied  1^  my  oral  Leotnres,  hare  aomewhat  ftmilllei  ill  AsossksA 
auditora  with  thcmca  but  little  known  in  Europe  beyond  collegiate  i 

Digitized  by 

Google 

ON  THE  ART   OP    WRITING.  629 

As  it  is,  we  can  merely  recommend  the  reader,  after  Yiewing  the  three  distinct  geogra- 
phical origins  and  independent  deyelopments  of  the  art  of  writing,  to  stndy  well  the  place 
which  paleography  now  assigns  to  the  modem  square-Utter  (ASAURI)  Hebrew  alphaft>et  of 
*<  22  letters ;''  while  we  discuss  a  few  general  principles,  to  be  amply  corroborated  in  detail 
on  some  fatnre  occasion. 

BlORSSSIONAL  RbICASKS   ON  THB   BN8UIKO  TaBLE. 

L — Theprmc^le  followed  (probably  for  the  first  ^e  in  paleographical  disquisition)  and 
exhibited  through  the  annexed  table,  is  a  consequence  of  the  work  which  it  accompanies.  \As 
*<  Types  of  Mankind'*  tabulates  the  yarious  species  of  the  "genus  homo"  according  to  their 
sereral  relations  to  the  Flora  and  the  Fauna  of  their  respeotiye  centres  of  creation,  the 
harmonious  unison  of  all  sciences,  (112)  when  directed  to  the  elucidation  of  a  giyen  fact, 
cannot  be  better  exemplified  than  by  deaying  into  three  well-ascertained  masses  the  grand 
enigma  of  graphical  oriffinet. 

We  hold,  without  mental  reseryations,  that  history  does  not  justify,  archeology  permit, 
or  ethnology  warrant,  any,  the  slightest,  intercourse,  between  Egypt  and  China  prior  to  the 
days  of  Ctbus  (as  an  extreme  point) ;  nor  between  either  of  these  two  primordial  nations, 
and  the  Aborigines  of  that  continent  which,  pronounced  by  Agassis  to  be  the  oidett  land, 
was  unknolm  (firom  us  trans-atiantically)  to  inhabitants  of  the  Oriental  hemisphere  before 
Columbus.  Some  of  the  physical  reasons  are  set  forth  in  the  present  yolume :  and  it  is 
pleasing  to  find  ih^i  paUBography  entirely  corroborates  results  deduced  Arom  other  inyesti- 
gations.  To  chiyalrous  opponents,  "  blanched  under  the  harness  "  of  scientific  pursuits, 
we  respectfully  throw  down  our  gauntiet  upon  three  propositions :  — 

A  —  Prior  to  B.  0.  600,  Egypt  had  no  intercourse  with  America  or  China. 

B  —         "  ''        America  had  no  intercourse  with  China  or  Egypt 

C  —         *'  "        China  had  no  intercourse  with  Egypt  or  America. 

Until  some  student,  qualified  through  knowledge  of  the  archeological  actualities  inherent 
in  this  triad  of  problemata  (knowledge  to  be  eyinced  by  the  weight  in  science  of  his 
demurrer),  oyerthrows  iheprineipU  upon  which  our  table  is  erected,  we  shall  not  fear  for  its 
stability :  nay,  we  offer  to  his  use  the  weapons  of  our  armory,  by  indicating  the  shortest 
path  to  yerification  of  bibliothical  accuracy. 

n. — The  researches  of  Qesenius  (218)  and  of  Champollion-Flgeac(214)  haye  been  our 
points  of  departure  in  the  construction  of  the  Table,  We  haye  remodelled  them  by  the 
lights  which,  in  the  former  case  fifteen,  in  the  latter  twelve^  years  of  discoyery  demand ; 
fusing  the  results  of  both  authorities  into  one ;  and  then  separating  the  wholer  into  three 
grand  stems;  Ist,  HAMITIC,  with  its  Semitieh  branches— 2d,  MONGOLIAN,  with  its  off- 
shoots— 8d,  AMERICAN,  whose  slender  twigs  were  cut  short,  for  oyer,  by  Pizabbo  and  by 

COBTBB. 

l8t.  The  HAMITIC  ORIGIN— start  with  Champollion  le  Jeune,(215)  continue  with  Lep- 
du8,(216)  and  close  wiUi  Bunsen,(217)  Birch,(218)  Burgsch,(219)  and  De  Saulcy.(220) 

The  Semitic  streams  haye  been  followed  in  the  subjoined  order. 

Aside  from  personal  yerification  of  the  "old  trayellers"  —  Pietro  deflA  Yalle,  Chardin, 
Com^e  le  Brun,  Eaempfer,  Niebuhr,  &e. ;  and  of  the  later,  Rich,  Ouseley,  Eer  Porter, 
Kinnier,  Morier,  and  Malcolm ;  the  perusal  of  Be  Saoy,  Tychsen,  Miinter,  Grotefend,  Saint 

(21S)  HuxBOUV:  Cbtmot ;  Introdiiotion  to  JPWneA  edition ;  1846;  L  pp.  80-48. 

(218)  Bsrip.  Lhtg.  Phetn,  Mm.;  1887;  pp.  02^  63,  uxd  Table  of  Alphabets,  p.  64. 

(214)  BiUeffrapkU  UntverteOe  ;  1841 ;  L  p.  46  —  <<  TaUeaa  g6n6ral  poor  aerrlr  k  Fhlitolre  de  r^aritoie.** 

(218)  Givtwmtatr§£^fVpUeime;  ViMi^DiitknnafTetffypiemu;  1841. 

(21^  Xettfvdl2owDM---AniieUdeU'IiistitutodiCorrlepoiuL  AnbeoL;  Boiiui,1887;  yoLlz. 

(217)  .Snftau  auOe  «i  dor  WeitpemMehU;  1845;  toI.  L  pert  2d. 

(218)  InBU!fnai'si^71!pr«i%ice;  1848;  L  pp. 448-600;  — and  in  Quddor:  Otia  J^^pUaoa ;  1849;  pp.  118-115. 
<219)  BvBseoB:  Sariplwra  JUffn/tiorvm  demcttea  ex  papjria  et  inaeriptionilras explanata;  Berlin,  1848; —and 

yumenruM apud wierm  JSSffyptiot dematkorym  dodrina;  Berlin,  1848i 

(290)  Bi  Bavlct:  Xetfre  d  M.  CMffniaHt!  VviB,  1848;  — and  AnalyH  fframtnaHoaU  du  TaOe  Dimotique  du 
ZHentdeSMdU;  L, premttee partle,  1845. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

illl  I' 

Digitized  by 

Google 

=1 

i 

"i 

4  * 

!l 

tlf 

•4  I  :i 
'If 

jj 

in 

Digitized  by 

(681) 

Google 

632  PAL^OGBAPHIG    EXCURSUS 

Martin,  Rask,  Burnouf,  Lassen,  and  Westergaard;  the  possession  of  the  migor  portion 
of  the  folio  plates  and  texts  of  Botta,  Flandin  and  Coste,  Layard,  Texier,  &c. ;  a  d  the 
inspection  of  what  of  Assyrian  scnlptures  were  in  London  and  Paris  during  1849 :  (221) 
—  onr  Tiews  opon  Aasyro-Babykmian  writings  take  their  departure  and  are  deriTed  £rom 
the  series  at  foot,  appended  in  the  order  of  our  studies.  (222)    • 

JBgyplian  hieroglyphioal  discoyeries  liad  long  ago  reyealed  the  fact  that,  as  earlj  at  least 
as  Thotmes  III ,  of  the  XYIIIth  dynasty,  about  the  sixteenth  century  b.  c,  the  Phar 
raohs  had  0Terrun''<Naharina,"  or  Mesopotamia,  with  their  armies.  Accepted,  like  all 
new  truths,  with  hesitation,  since  Bosellini's  promulgation  of  the  data  in  1882 ;  or  at  first 
entirely  denied  by  cuneatio  disooTerers,  who  cUumed  a  primeval  epoch  for  the  scnlptoret 
of  Nineyeh  and  Babylon ;  notl^ng  at  this  day  is  more  positively  fixed  in  historical  science 
than  these  EgypUan  conquests  oyer  **  Nineyeh"  and  '* Babel,"  at  least  three  centuries  before 
DercetQ  (the  earliest  monarch  recorded  in  eunetform  inscriptions)  liyed ;  assuming  Layard's 
last  yiew  to  be  correct,  (228)  that  he  flourished  about  b.  o.  1250.  At  foot  we  present  the 
order  in  which  an  inquirer  mayinyestigate  the  discoyeries  that  haye  finally  set  these  qnee- 
tions  atrest ;  (224)  while  the  following  extracts  from  Rawlinson  will  render  further  doubts 
irreleyant :  — 

**  That  the  employment  of  the  Cuneiform  character  originated  in  Assyria,  while  the  jyt- 
tem  of  writing  to  wMch  it  was  adapted  was  borrotped  from  Egypt,  will  hardly  admit  of  qnes- 
tion :  . .  .  the  whole  structure  of  the  Assyrian  gn^hio  system  eridentiy  betrays  an  Egyp- 
tian origin.  .  .  .  The  whole  system,  indeed,  of  homophones  is  uaentially  Egyptian."  (226) 

It  is  upon  such  data  that,  without  adducing  other  reasons  derived  firom  personal  studies^ 
we  haye  made  the  earliest  Semiiie  stream  of  our  Table  flow  outwards  firom  Egypt  into 
ancient  Mesopotamia  —  assigning  the  period  of  its  Eastward  flux,  according  to  weU-known 
conditions  in  Egyptian  history,  as  bounded  by  the  Xllth  and  XYIIIth  dynasties:  that 
is,  between  the  twenty-second  and  sixteenth  century  B.C.;  —  which  age,  placed  parallel 
with  Archbishop  Usher's  scheme  of  biblical  chronology.  Implies  from  a  little  before  Abraham 
down  to  the  birth  of  Moses.  No  Egyptologist  will  contest  this  yiew :  the  opinions  of  those 
who  deny,  without  acquaintance  with  the  works  submitted,  are  <<  yox  et  prseterea  nihlL" 

(221)  Three  ArduBoIoe^lcal  Leoturee,  on  '^Bal^lon,  Ninereb,  and  PenepoUf,"  deUrered  before  the  Ljfoaum  ^ 
<A«  2(1  iAm»c^M2Ay  at  New  Orleans;  Sth,  9th,  ISthAprO,  1862;  b7  O.K.  O. 

(222)  Botta:  Lettre$  d M.  JUMZ;  Pula,  18i5 ;  —  Dk  Lompisisa  and  Dk  Saulct,  in  Beo.  ArehioL ;  1M«-18SS;-^ 
LUwihrkrn;  BtmddeI)4di;{lJFnmeiUdeVArUuir«AHynetme;  Pazia,  1845;— Botta:  SurV£eritimOtine\forme; 
1840;  — Rawukboh:  TdUet  qf  BehUtm ;  1849;— end  Cbmmmktry  on  (^metform  iMcriptions ;  1850;  — Hnrcsi: 
Oh  the  Three  Idndt  qfPieriqMiibm  WHting ;  TnxiB.JLItiaxAm^ 

qfthe  Behi$tmi  JfueriptUm;  and  RAWiiKS0Zf*8  eommnnioatlons ;  in  Jonr.  R.  Aslat  Soo,  1858;  xt.  part  L  Many 
other  works  upon  this  spedality,  no  less  than  npon  the  writings  of  erery  historioal  nation  ci  antiquity,  axe 
cited  in  the  mannsoripts  we  suppress  tat  lack  of  spMe.  But,  Ij  anticipation  bf  their  ftiture  appearance^  tt 
would  be  injustioe  to  an  author  **  qui  a  puis6  k  des  bonnes  sources,"  not  to  recommend  earnestly  to  the  sinesie 
inquirer  after  truth,  a  pwusal  of  the  first  and  only  work  in  the  BngUsh  language  which  has  graqied  this  rasi 
subjset  in  a  manner  commensurate  with  the  progress  of  sdenoe.  It  arrived  at  the  PhOad^BhSa  JUbroff,  and 
was  kindly  pointed  out  to  us  by  our  aoccnnplished  friend  Mr.  Lloyd  P.  Smith,  after  onr  own  ** Table*  was  already 
stereoijfpeaL  We  hare  read  it  with  admiration ;  and  althou^  upon  ihne  points,  the  bieroglyphioal,  the  cnndtm^ 
and  especially  the  Hdrew,  we  might  suggest  a  few  critical— that* is  to  say,  more  rigidly  dmmoliogicaH^m^ 
stitutions ;  yet,  upon  the  whole  performance  we  are  happy  to  offSer  the  warm  commendations  of  a  foUow-ctudant 
The  reader  will  find  it,  In  the  meanwhile,  an  excellent  adjunct  to  our  "  TaUe";  and  the  following  extraeti^ 
with  an  interltaeary  commentary,  suflloe  to  indicate  that  Mr.  Hnmphr^s  riews  and  our  own  differ  upon  bat 
asingle  point: — ''The  world  has  now  possessed  a  purely  oJpAa&eMc  qrstan  of  writiflg  for 8000  years  or  mon 
[say  rather,  about  800  years  Im«J,  and  ioonographic  systems  for  more  than  3000  ynrs  longer  [say,  considerably 
fMrt\  ....  There  can  be  littte  doubt  that  the  art  of  writing  grew  up  independentiy  in  many  countries  haylag 
no  communication  with  each  other  [entirely  agreed]" :  (vide  Hbcet  Noil  Humphxsts:  Th»  Origin  and  Pngrtu 
qfOuAfiqf  TPMOng;  London,  1863;  pp.  1, 3 

(228)  AiMon;  ^d  Jb.;  1858;  p.  623. 

(234)  Lkbohkx:  La  dvHtiation  ^i^jfptimne ;  pp.  1-65;  Eztralt  de  la  Berne  des  Deux  Blondes;  Feb.,  April, 
1846;  — BntCH;  Slatisttaa  HOUt  qf  Kamae ;  —  Obdisk  qf  Thotmu  HI.;  and  on  Two  CMouchei  fotatd at  Iflm> 
raud;  Trans.  R.  Soa  Lit,  1846-'48;— Guddov:  Otia;  p.  103;  — Latasd:  Nineoth;  1848;  IL pp.  153-285 ;« 

Skabpx,  in  BonompM  Nineveh;  pp. ;— Latasd:  Bab^Um;  1853;  pp.  15a-159, 18fr-10«, 280-28^ 680;— 

and,  particularly,  BmoR:  AnnaU  of  Thotmet  UL;  London  ArehaoUgia,  xxxt.,  1853 ;  p.  160,  Ac 

(225)  Ommentary;  1850;  pp.  4-6. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

OP    THE    ART    OP    WRITING.  633 

Seholsrs,  gaided  by  the  books  cited  for  jnstiflcatory  details,  will  find  little  to  alter  in  the 
general  features  of  these  seyeral  alphabetical  streaips  as  their  respectiye  monumental  rocks 
first  pierce  through  the  mists  of  traditionary  history:  except  in  one  direction;  yis. : 
where  we  have  made  a  Semitic  riynlet  (probably  through  Chaldsan  channels)  commingle 
with  <*Abian  elements"  in  Hindostan.  <*Indology"  yrill  protest  against  profaning  the 
sanctified  soil  of  Indra  and  Brahma  with  the  mere  **  tail-race  "  of  a  Semitic  pond,  originally 
filled  by  the  Nile !  Shades  of  Wilford,  Faber,  Hales,  and  spirit  of  Edgar  Quinet !  In  Qer- 
many,  appeal  will  at  once  be  made  to  Von  Bohlen!  In  Wales,  to  Arthifr  James  Johnes, 
Esq.  I  (226)  Does  not  every  body  know,  it  will  be  siud,  that  primordial  civilization  (unce- 
remoniously kicked  out  of  Ethiopic  Mero9  by  Lepsius,)  first  dawned  npon  the  Oanges?  that 
Memphis,  (if  not  also  Palenqnfi,  and  C<^an,)  received  her  holiest  Penates  at  the  hands  of  . 
A'm,  VishnUf  Bhairava,  CrithnOf  or  any  other  Indian  Deity  a  pundit  may  invent  ?  (227) 

With  all  deference,  after  the  first  horrors  excited  by  our  outrage  shall  have  calmed 
down  into  philosophical  contempt,  we  beg  to  offer  a  quotation :  — 

«  The  people  of  Hindostan  and  the  ancient  nations  of  Europe  came  in  contact  at  a  single 
point.  The  expedition  of  Alexander  the  Great  begins,  and  in  some  sort  ends,  their  con- 
nexion. Even  of  this  event,  so  recent  and  remarkable,  the  Bindtu  have  no  record ;  they 
have  not  even  a  tradition  that  can  with  certainty  be  traced  to  it"  (228) 

Our  author,  who  stands  out  in  bold  relief  among  the  Sanscrit  scholars  of  England,  won- 
ders at  the  credulity  of  those  who  reject  Chaldsan  and  Egyptian  antiquity  to  worship  Hin- 
dostanic;  administering  stem  rebukes  to  writers  who  trust  in  the  "  absurdity  o(  Hindu  state- 
ments,"—  a  people  utterly  "  destitute  of  historical  records." 

The  same  historian,  in  Notes  on  the  Mudra  Rdkshana,  says :  — 

<'  It  may  not  here  be  out  of  place  to  offer  a  few  observations  on  the  identification  of 
C^andragnpta  and  Sandracottus.  It  it  the  only  point  on  which  u/e  can  rest  with  anything  like 
confidence  m  the  history  of  the  Hindus,  and  is  therefore  of  vital  Importance  in  all  our  attempts 
to  reduce  the  reigns  of  their  kings  to  a  rational  and  consistent  chronology." 

Tumour,  (229)  sums  up  his  review  of  Hindoo  literature  with  saying,  — 

"  That  there  does  not  now  exist  an  authentie,  connected,  and  ohronologically-correct  Hin- 
doo history ;  and  that  the  absence  of  that  history  proceeds,  not  from  original  deficiency  of 
historical  data,  but  from  the  systematic  perversion  of  those  data  adoptea  to  work  out  the 
monstrous  scheme  upon  which  Hindoo  faith  is  based." 

The  preceding  extracts,  we  hope,  may  serve  to  break  the  fall  of  huge  Indianist  edifices 
from  the  highest  peak  of  the  Himalaya  to  a  level  but  little  expected  by  general  readers. 
That  we  are  not  altogether  freshmen  in  these  Hindoo  demolitions  may  be  inferred  from  a 
passage,  printed  five  years  ago,  which  we  now  take  the  liberty  of  repeating,  with  its  Italian 

preface :  — 

''Oidoiio  U  dtt^  oadono  i  regni, 
B  raom  d'esaer  mortal  par  die  si  idegnit "  (230) 

"That  the  peninsula  of  Hindostan,  thronged  with  varied  populations,  possessed  great 
Empires  and  a  high  state  of  culture,  in  ages  parallel  with  the  earliest  monuments  of  Egypt 
and  China,  upon  whose  civiUzations  India  exerted,  and  from  which  she  experienced  influ- 
ences, in  t^e  flux  and  reflux  of  Humanity's  progressive  development,  no  one,  nisi  imperitus, 

(226)  PMkHogioal  Proofs  of  (he  Original  Unity  and  Recent  Origin  of  the  Human  Race;  London,  184d;  pp.  131- 
183.  For  **Celto-iDaola,*'  this  work  ont-Herbdfl  BrrHAn'sI  We  can  only  observe  with  Champoluon  {VtgypU 
sous  Us  JPharaonSj  1814),  of  a  pkiUogist  who  derived  the  Greek  name  of  Egjrpt  from  the  OaeUe  dialects  of  Lower 
Brittany  —  **  Certainly,  eren  admitting  that  the  Greeks  spoke  Bt»brUon,  there  is  some  distance  from  AiouFros 
to  Jfeow-^nee." 

(227)  Puchakd:  Egyptian  Mythdogy;  1819;  p.  85,  seq.i  —  Uaxa'.  Bid.  Res.,  JnHan  Nations. 

(228)  Wnsoif :  History  <f  BriOA  India;  1840;  <«Chronology  and  History  of  the  Hindus;"  L,  hook  2,  eh.  1, 
pp.  168-100. 

(220)  Author  of  the  «  Buddhist  Pali  Historical  Annals  of  Ceylon,"  called  ifiiAotoamo,  << Royal  Chronicles*' ; 
eompOed  from  earlier  sources  in  A.  n.  802:  if  not  later. 

(230)  Mrastasio:  paraphrase  of  S.  Su^pieiu^s  Letter  to  Cioero;  epist  v.  lib.  4.    The  second  line  has  been 

latterly  rhymed  —  «E  nel  cader  un  c u  par  ehe  si  sSegni.**    The  English  is  —  **GitieB  tail,  kingdoms  ftll ; 

and  (yet)  man  seems  to  scorn  that  he  is  mortalt* 

80 

Digitized  by 

Google 

634  PAL^OGRAPHIO   EXCURSUS 

will  deny :  but  the  hallooiiifttions  about  earlj  Brahmanieal  8oi«iioe  in  Astronoiiiy,  iriiea 
their  Zodiacs  are  Oreekt  their  Eclipses  calculated  baekwardt,  and  their  faboloiis  ehreoologjr' 
is  bnilt  upon  Chaldean  magianism,  leave  the  historical  antiquity  of  India  prostrate  beneath 
the  axe  of  the  <Aor<-chronologist.  <  Un  astronomo  pn6,  se  Tuole,  far  le  tayole  deU'eodiast 
che  avranno  luogo  di  qui  a  cento-mila  anni,  se  il  mondo  esisteril ;  e  pod  ugnalnMote  deter- 
mioare  lo  state,  nel  quale  sarebbesi  troTato  il  delo  centoiuil'anni  fa,  se  il  mondo  enetera : ' 
(Testa,  *  Dissertaiione  sopra  due  Zodiaci,'  &c. ;  Boma,  1808,  p.  28.)  The  Hindoos,  in  eon- 
oocting  their  primeral  cnronology,  merely  added  a  naught  to  BM>ylonish  cyclic  reckon- 
ings ;---4,820,000  years,  instead  of  482,000 1  (De  Brotonne,  *  filiations  dee  Peuples,'  1887 ; 
Tol.  L,  pages  284  to  261,  and  414.)  See  ample  eoniimations  of  the  abore  Tiew  in  the 
critical  work  of  Wilson  (*  Ariana  Antiqua,'  1841 ;  pages  17,  21,  24,  419;  44,  45;  and  par- 
ticularly page  489,  wherein  it  is  shown,  that  numismafic  studies  cease  to  throw  li^t  on 
Indian  antiquities  about  the  middle  of  the  third  century  b.  o."). 

<*  When,  therefore,  the  eontenders  for  the  ante-diluTian  remoteness  of  the  fort^-eighl- 
lettered  Sarucrit  Alphabet  can  produce  any  atone,  or  other  reoord  older  than  the  *  colon 
of  AUakabad  in  honor  of  TcHAin>]LA.-6ovPTA,  Sandraeottua,'  ootemporaiy  with  SBi.svciTt 
NiOATOR,  B.  0.  815,  it  will  be  time  enough  for  Hierologists,  Sinologists,  Hellenists  and  He- 
braists, to  take  into  account  the  pseudo-antiquity  of  SaiuerU  Alphabetkai  literature."  (281) 

Our  profession  of  faith  in  these  matters,  identical  with  the  doctrines  we  hold  at  this  day, 
shocked  some  literary  prejudices.'  Nevertheless,  it  was  based  upon  tcderably  eztensivt 
perusal  of  works  on  Hindoo  antiquities;  and  it  is  supported  by  tiie  outs  and  thmsts  of  a 
swordsman,  whose  trenchant  blade,  notched  on  the  battle-fields  of  Hindoetan,  still  preset  fes 
its  keenness  amid  the  bloodless  strifes  of  archsoological  polemics — lieut  CoL  Syke8.(282) 

From  his  matchless  overthrow  of  European  superstitions,  in  regard  to  Indian  antiquity, 
we  have  already  extracted  two  paragraphs  containing  the  decisions  of  Wilson  and  Tur- 
nour.  We  now  condense  his  own  applications  of  cold  steel  to  some  of  the  vitalitiea  of  Hin- 
dostanic  pretension.  •  ^ 

There  exists  but  am  Sanscrit  composition  that  can  be  called  «  history; "  vis.  the  Baj^ 
Taringini,  compiled  a.  p.  1148.  It  contains  anachronisms  of  796,  and  of  1048  years  I  Prior 
to  the  fifth  century  after  C,  "inscriptions  in  pure  Sanacrit  are  entirely  wanting" — tko 
tarUeat  Sanscrit  inscription  ascends  to  the  fourth  century,  but  it  is  impure  in  langnage  and 
not  orthographic.  Between  the  tenth  and  setenteenth  centuries  of  onr  era,  SaoBorit 
inscriptions  "  roll  in  thousands !"  The  very  Sanscrit  language,  in  the  polished  form  in 
which  its  literature  reaches  us,  can  no  more  be  found  monumentally  in  India,  before  the 
fifth  century  after  C,  than  the  English  of  Byron  could  appear  in  the  days  of  Ctower  er 
Chaucer.  In  consequence,  those  Germanic  writers  who,  in  their  assimilationB  (iHiioh  are 
positive  enough)  of  Greek,  Latin,  German,  or  other  Indo-Eurq»ean  idiom,  forget  that 
Sanaerit  has  undergone  even  greater  transmutations  than  our  Saxon  vernacular  has  suioe 
the  reign  Of  ^Ifred,  often  commit  philolo^cal  oversights  of  sublime  magnitude ! 

**  Why  are  there  not,"  asks  Sykes,  **  the  same  tangible  and  irrefiragable  pro<^  extant  of 
the  Sanscrit  as  of  the  Pali  language :  the  more  particulsrly  so  as  ^ahmanism  and  Sansorit 
have  hitherto  been  believed  to  emanate  from  the  fabled  agest " 

Commencing  his  deep  researches  irith  the  more  recent  Sanscrit  inscriptions,  and  1 
them  backwards  as  far  as  they  recede,  Prinsep  (288)  resolved  tiie  modem  foity-ei^t  a 
Nagari  characters  absolutely  into  the  primitive  letters  of  the  M  inseriptions  written  in  the 
<<  Lat "  character  and  PaU  language — the  rencontre  of  graphical  forms  that  approximnted 
to  the  ancient  PaU  type  Increasing  exactly  in  the  ratio  of  the  antiquity  of  each  Sannoiit 
inscription.  Gf  these  last,  the  most  ancient  known  dates  ▲.  n.  809;  being  just  624  yenra 
posterior  to  the  oldeat  PaU  inscription  discovered  throu^out  the  Hindostanie  peninsnln ! 

Now,  this  oldest  PaU  inscription  is  found  on  the  <<  column  of  Allahabad,*^  whereupon  it 

(331)  Oto  JSg, ;  p.  110»  and  note. 

(882)  "  NotM  on  the  Rellglone,  Mora],  and  PoUtkal  State  of  Ancient  India  before  the  Mohewwedan  ImwOa^ 
^^<mr.  JL  AsiaUe  JSoc:  London,  1841;  rol.  rl  p]».  248-484. 

(288)  Jottrwa  AtiaUe  Soe.  qf  Bengal;  1884-*41.  Gon£  Jour.  X.  Aaiatie  Soc.,  1853;  zr.  part  L  p.  nr;  ftr 
«NaMlkInaorlption8,**^thedateof  the  otM  being  only  ▲.&.  888!  Aleo»  concerninc  Ariam  roperpoeitio—  <ipoa 
a  dark  antocthonous  popnlatloii  of  Hindoetan,  Gen.  BBnxn's  Leetnre  *'0n  the  JLboriginol  JUee  ot  Indi*;* 
reported  fn  LonkOm  Ltteranf  Ckmttt,  July  17, 1852. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

ON    THB    ABT    OP  WRITING.  635 

was  ohiMll«d  in  the  reign  of  Tohandn-Onpta,  who  is  the  Sandraeottut  of  Greek  history, 
eoetaneooi  with  Selenons  Nicstor  in  the  year  b.  o.  815.  All  India  affords  notlung,  wntten 
alphabeHeaUjf,  more  ancient;  and  this  age  is  220  years  later  than  the  alphabetic  cnneiform 
of  Peraepolis ;  or  above  800  years  after  the  Greeks  had  already  adopted  the  AUph  (alpha), 
Beth  (beta),  Oimd  (gamma),  Daleth  (delta),  of  the  anterior  Pkomkian  alphabet!  The 
identification  of  '*  Sandraoottns  "  is  moreovei^  proved  by  the  next  early  inscriptions  known 
in  the  PaK  tongue ;  ris. :  two  edicts  of  PiSAi>ASi-^«oi^  a  king  of  India  in  the  year  b.  o. 
247;  who  refers  to  his  contemporary  Autiocbus  the  Great;  jost  62  years  after  the  oldett 
inscription,  whose  epoch  stands  parallel  with  Sblbucus.  Thus,  paleographically,  the  an- 
tiqidty  of  India  has  fallen,  never  to  rise  again :  and,  inasmuch  as  the  Brahmans  certainly 
stole  their  Zodiac  from  the  post-Macedonian  Greeks ;  and  probably  some  Leritical  ceremo- 
nials of  Manou  from  Jewidi  exiles ;  there  is  no  reason  whatever,  yet  published,  against  our 
theory,  that  d^habetie  writing  also  reached  Hindostan,  through  Arian  channels,  from  those 
Semitic  streams  the  source  of  which  is  now  irrevocably  traced  back  to  Hamitio  mgines  in 
Bgypt 

"  All  those  ancient  systems  of  Persic  writing  with  which  we  are  acquainted,  although 
applied  to  Arian  dialects,  are  obriously  formed  on  a  SemiUe  modeL  I  may  notice,  in  chro- 
nological succession,  the  writing  on  the  Cilioian  Darics ;  the  Arianian  alphabet  (of  which 
the  earliest  certain  specimen  is  the  transcript  of  the  Edicts  of  Asoka),  wiUi  its  derivatives, 
the  numismatic  Bactrian,  and  the  character  of  tiie  Buddhist  topes ;  the  Zend ;  the  Par- 
thian ;  exhibiting  in  the  inscriptions  of  Persia  at  least  three  varieties ;  and  the  Pehlevi, 
lapidwy,  numismatio  and  cursive.  These  several  branches  of  PaUeography  are  all  more 
or  less  connected.  (284) 

Thus  much  to  justify  our  table.  But,  ''Titius  or  Sempronius"  exclaims,  have  we  not 
the  Sament  Vedat,  the  Epics  Mahabharata  and  Sam<^ana,  the  *<  La#s  of  Mavou,"  and  the 
Puranaif  Did  not  Sir  William  Jones  fix  the  age  of  the  Vedas  in  the  fifteenth  century  b.  c; 
that  of  the  <•  Institutes  of  Menu"  in  the  twelfOi  T  (286)  Were  not  similar  opinions  held 
by  Oolebrooke  and  Schlegel ;  and  are  they  not  supported  by  great  Indianists  of  our  own 
time't  Conceded,  gentlemen.  Knowing  nothing  of  Sanscrit  ourselves,  we  are  as  littie  able  to 
■peak  decisively  as  those  UtiSraieure  who  will  be  most  startied  At  our  audacities.  linguisti- 
cally, there  are  not  twenty-five  men  in  the  world  whose  judgment,  matured  by  comparative 
mrch»oh>gy,  is  really  authoritative  in  this  discussion.  In  the  meanwhile,  palmogrc^hieal 
facts  speak  intelligibly  to  all  educated  minds.  We  might  add  that  Professor  Wihion  thinks 
the  Vedat  may,  in  part,  ascend  almost  to  the  sixth  century  b.  c.  :  but  Sykes's  sabre  is  not 
wanting  in  our  defence  ^  so  let  us  continue. 

In  the  first  place,  it  is  historical,  that  the  Brahmans,  in  their  efforts  to  destroy  Buddhism, 
dealt,  by  the  andeiU  texts  of  Hindoo  treatises  on  religion  or  traditions,  precisely  as  the 
InqnisitioB  did  with  Hebrew  Scriptures  that  existed  before  the  tenth  century  of  our  era — 
i  e.,  destroyed  them.  In  the  second,  two  Chinese  trav^ers  in  India— Fa-hian,  in  the  fourth 
century,  and  Hiuan-thsang,  in  the  seventh  after  Christ — have  (unfortunately  for  Brahma- 
nieal  respectability)  chronicled  how,  in  this  interval  of  three  hundred  years,  the  disciples 
of  Brahma  had  expanded,  from  an  incipient  bud,  into  that  detestable  flower  in  which  Saneerit 
literature  portrays  them— ever  noxious  as  Upat  blossoms.  (286)  Their  accounts  are  confirmed 
by  the  Chinese  encyclopedist,  Ma-touan-lin ;  (287)  who  registers  that,  bout  602  ▲.  n.,  the 
Brakmoiu  were  but  a  small  sept  among  the  Buddhists  —  ** first  among  the  tribes  of  5ar- 
biiriatu,**  It  may  also  be  mentioned  that,  in  the  time  of  Buddha,  sixth  cenlnry  b.  o.,  the 
Hindoo  population  was  classed  already  into  those  four  grand  dirisions  which  attest,  as 

(234)  Bawuxboh:  BeMitm;  put  L  pp.  48-44. 

(2S5)  We  hMf  nemtly  n-nad  most  of  Sir  W.  Jomn^s  Papen  with  incnMed  rererenoe:  ibr  hif  imnMBM 
eraditioB  qiulifleB  all  dogmatio  opinloDi  attributed  to  him  with  **i/k**  of  his  own.  Befbre  us  Ue  Pautbbb's 
Livret  SuriideV Orient ;im:  nho  Mjnni:  J^fUxiom  ntr  U  (hdU  dee  Ancknt  BOreux ;  1888;  wherein  the  fifth 
hook  of  Mahov  !■  compared  with  Leoitieut  ,*— and  other  Sanaerit  oommentatora  "  qnoi  reoenaere  superracanenia 
eaaet."  We  have  read  Bubmout  :  BntdhUme,  and  Tapta;  and  nothing  therein  oppoiee,  while  mnoh  Jnsttflaa, 
our  riew. 

(280)  KBMcaiT;  MOaa^ga  Aeiatiqua, 

(237)  Pavtbib:  CMms  p.  881. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

636  PAL^OGRAPHIC    EXCURSUS 

Pauthier  weU  remarks,  (288)  '*  the  dlTersity  of  races  conquering  and  Tanqmshed  at  a  Tcry 
earl/  epoch  ;*'  tIi  :  Brahmans,  priests ;  Kchatriyas,  soldiers ;  Vaiisfoa,  tradesmen ;  mad 
SoudraSf  serriles :  (239)  but  the  Chinese  Fa-hian  shows  how,  e^en  in  the  fourth  eentoiy 
after  C,  these  dlrisions  were  merely  civil,  and  not  yet  reli^ous  ordinances.  In  shorty  it  is 
now  certain  that  the  <*  6(u^e-system/'(240)  which  (it  is  likewise  thoroughly  established)  was 
never  known  in  Egypt,  had  not  been  invented  in  Hindostan  until  Brahmanical  supentitioot 
obtained  predominance  long  after  the  Christian  era.  8o  again  with  respect  to  most  of  those 
prohibitions  of  animal  sustenance^  and  other  **  unclean  things,"  which  some  have  sapposed 
that  Moses  learned  Arom  primeval  gymnosophists.  Forbidden,  for  practical  hygieoio 
motives,  among  Pharaonic  priests,  Pythagorsean  philosophers,  and  among  Israelitish  no  len 
than  Mohammedan  Arabi/ins,  pork  was  equally  proscribed  by  Manou  :  (241)  <*  The  regeDerate 
man  who  knowingly  may  have  eaten  mlishroom,  domestic  Aoy,  garlic,  wild-oock,  on&oii,  or 
leek,  shall  be  degraded.**  Now,  as  Sykes  inquires,  if  the  laws  of  Manou  had  beea  in  < 
tence  prior  to  the  Christian  era,  how  came  it  that  Buddha  died  of  dysentery  from 
pork,  and  that  hoff*8  flesh  should  have  been  the  aliment  of  early  Brahmanical  ascetics? 

When  enthusiastic  Indologists  shall  have  expliuned  away  the  above  paleographicsl  and 
historical  objections,  they  will  be  at  leisure  to  defend  the  alleged  antiquity  of  the  Setnuwit 
beoks  themselves.  Here  is  a  little  thing  calculated,  as  Land  writes,  to  *<soapoiiire  i  gratta- 
capi."  (242) 

The  **  Puranas"  claim  for  Rama  a  date  something  like  867,102  years  before  their  compi- 
lation. Bentley  fixed  the  poem  Ramayana,  by  its  intrinsic  evidettoes,  at  a.  d.  291 :  and 
Wilson,  together  with  the  best  Sanscrit  critics,  determines  the  age  of  the  eariiest  "Psrmnas" 
between  the  eighth  and  ninth  centmry  after  Christ  Such  being  the  facts,  Sykes  educes 
as  follows. 

Sir  W.  Jones  (Preface  to  the  Irittituies  of  Menu),  assumed  *<that  the  VetUu  must  tii«re- 
fore  have  been  written  three  hundred  years  before  the  Institutes  of  Mend,  and  these  Insti- 
tutes three  hundred  years  before  the  Puranas."  Then,  Sykes's  deadly  sword  g^ves  point- 
as  Wilson  has  proved,  from  internal  evidence,  that  the  "  Puranat  were  written  or  compiled 
between  the  eighth  and  fourteenth  centuries  of  the  Christian  era,  it  follows,  according  ts 
Sir  W.  Jones's  hypothesis,  that  the  IrutihUes  of  Menu  date  from  the  fifth  oentury  {Armuff^ 
and  the  Vedas  from  the  second  century/'  Monumental  calligraphy  supports  this  view;  wfails 
the  Vishnu  Purana  (dated  by  Wilson  at  a.  d.  954)  brings  the  polished  Sanscrit  Innguage 
down  as  late  as  the  tenth  century.  Analogy  also,  in  adjacent  countries,  points  to  the  sane 
solution  as  to  how  Lamaism  and  Romanism  present  such  striking  identities.  It  is  snid  by 
Father  Geor^  that  "  Writing,  laws  and  region  were  introduced  into  Thibet  about  Ike 
year  65  after  Christ."(248)  Thus,  we  learn  that  Th^etan  pretensions,  which  hsTe  mere 
afEinity  with  those  of  Hindostan  than  of  China,  lend  no  support  to  Hindoo  antiquity. 

The  geographical  nanus  in  Hindoo  literature  woftdly  invalidate  the  antiqui^  of  soae 
books :  because,  if  the  mention  of  *'  Tavanas  "  {lonians,  lUNlm  in  Hebrew  and  in  Assyrism 
cuneiform,  Tooniin  in  Arabic,  and  TUNIN  in  old  Egyptian),  does  not  podtively  |»ove  a 
writer  posterior  to  Alexandbb,  b.  o.  880;  that  of  ^'Tchinas"  (inasmuch  as  the  Celestial 
Empire  was  not  called  Thsin,  China,  before  the  year  250  B.  o.),  at  <mce  knocks  down  % 
book  to  times  after  that  era. (244)  So  again,  as  Indo-Scy'thians  did  not  penetrate  into  Ib& 
before  b.  o.  125,  allusion  to  the  Sakas  must  proceed  from  an  author  who  Uved  sobss- 
quentiy.  Now,  the  Ramayana  and  the  Makabkarata  both  speak  of  "  Yavanas,  Tchinns,  and 
Sakas ;"  and  ergo,  the  latter  cannot  well  be  older  (asicle  from  other  reasons)  thnn  tlie 

(288)  Lois  de  Manou;  Introd.:  p?22. 

(239)  m. ;  book  i.,  sloka  81. 

(240)  GLmDOs:  OUa:  p.  90. 

(241)  Book  V.  19:  —  The  reason  why  neither  Judaism  nor  Islimnlsm  ever  made  progreaa  in  China  Is  ovlnf  te 
its  inhabitants'  fondness  for  little  p^s.  The  same  tastes  render  either  religion  utterly  impossible  at  i 

(242)  «  Remote  Ou  obstinacy  of  headrScraUihen.'* 

(243)  Alphabdxan  Tibetanum;  apud  Dm  Brotorhs  :  FOiations ;  L  p.  445. 

(244)  The  fleets  of  Hoamo^  first  visited  the  ports  of  Bengal  about  the  year  2S0  b.  c.  (Chine,  p.  1^ 

Digitized  by 

Google 

ON    THE    ART    OF    WRITING.  637 

second  eentnry  after  Christy  nor  the  former  earlier  than  the  fifth ;  in  no  case  can  either 
antedate  b.  o.  250.  Bot,  irildly  shriek  our  Brahmaniste  —  the  grottos  of  EUora,  Elephanta, 
Adjunta,  &c.?  Alas,  gentlemen — Sykes  says,  not  onto  antedates  the  ninth  century  after 
Christ!  Even  Prichard,  following  Prinsep,  does  not  consider  these  caTes  earlier  than 
<(  a  century  or  two  prior  to  the  Christian  era,  when  Buddhism  flourished  in  the  height  of 
its  glory  from  Kashmir  to  Ceylon."  (245) 

We  delude  ourselTes,  probably,  with  the  belief  that  our  opponents  in  biblical  studies  will 
concede  that,  in  our  hands,  the  knife  of  criticism  is  double-edged ;  and  that  we  apply  it 
equally  to  the  notions  of  Hindoo  as  well  as  of  Judsean  commentatars.  In  the  last  century 
it  was  the  fashion  to  exalt  Sanscrit  literature  at  the  expense  of  Jewish ;  greatly  to  the  dis- 
comfort of  orthodoxy.  The  latter  may  now  console  itself  with  the  assurance,  that  its  Hin- 
dostanio  apprehensions  were  puerile  —  for,  beneath  the  most  ruthless  scalpel,  a  '*  Book  of 
the  Law  of  Mosbs  ''  stands  erect  with  vitality,  in  the  sixth  century  b.  o.  ;  that  is,  200  years ' 
before  the  oldest  JPaU  document  of  India  was  inscribed  by  Chandbaoupta. 

With  the  judicious  reflections  of  another  Samerit  authority  we  take  leaye  of  Hindostan ; 
merely  mentioning  that  our  own  analysis  of  Xth  Qenesis  has  entirely  confirmed  the 
doctrine  broached  by  the  learned  CoL  Vans  Kennedy.  (246) 

*' Although  I  do  not  deriye  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  from  Shem,  Ham,  and  Japhei^l 
still  think  that  Babylonia  [we  read,  Ariana]  was  the  original  seat  of  the  Sanscrit  language 
and  of  Sanscrit  literature.  .  .  .  But  this  error  [i.  e.  the  contrary  hypothesis]  necessarily 
proceeds  from  the  assumption,  that  the  first  eleven  chapters  of  Oenesis  giye  an  authentic 
account  of  the  creation  and  of  the  earlier  ages  of  the  world ;  which  renders  it  necessary 
to  insult  common  sense,  and  to  disregard  the  plainest  principles  of  eridence  and  reasoning, 
in  order  to  prove  that  all  the  races  of  mankind  and  all  systems  of  polytheism  were  deriv^ 
from  one  and  the  same  origin.*' 

Those  who  have  leaned  upon  Faber's  broken  reed  would  do  well  to  peruse  our  author's 
Appendix — <' Remarks  on  the  Papers  of  Lieut  Col.  Wilford  contained  in  the  Asiatic  Re- 
searches." To  others  it  may  be  satisfactory  to  know,  that  the  earliest  Greek  mention  of 
India  (Sind)  occurs  in  .^Ischylus,  b.  o.  525-456 :  while,  about  the  same  times  (if  Esra  com- 
piled the  "Book  of  Genesis,"  as  patristic  authority. sustained),  tradition — which,  in 
our  version  {Oen,  iv.  16),  sends  Cain  into  <' the  land  of  Nod,  on  the  east  of  Eden"  —  pro- 
bably consecrated  some  legendary  rumor  that  the  forlorn  outcast  had  escaped  to  the  Bin- 
duB  —  "AtNUD,  towards  the  Eatt  of  Eden,"  itself  located  in  Mesopotamia;  which  Indian 
people  are  still  called  HlfTooB,  by  the  Arabs.  (247)  India  became  known  to  Jews  and 
Greeks  after,  the  former  had  been  captive  in  Babylonia,  and  after  the  Persian  invasions 
had  given  new  ideas  upon  Asiatic  geography  to  the  latter. 

Intending  to  publish  other  justifications  of  the  correct-  .     -^iq,  860. 

ness  of  our  Tableau  [supra,  pp.  680,  631]  on  some  future 
occasion,  we  suspend  further  discussion  of  the  ^*  Semitic 
streams,"  and  merely  submit  specimens  of  that  character 
upon  which  we  have  bestowed  the  name  of  <<  Assyro-Phoeni- 
cian."    If,/as  Dr.  Layard  states,  some  of  these  relics  were 
positively  found  in  the  "  chamber  of  records  "  opened  by  him  at  Kouyun- 
jik,  (248)  and  if,  as  he  declares,  they  are  really  of  the  time  of  Sennacherib, 
B.  0.  708  to  690,  the  reader  beholds  the  very  earliest  known  samples  of 
pttrely-alphabetic  writing  hitherto  discovered.    They  will  become  the  more 
predous  to  his  eyes,  inasmuch  as  (in  the  contingency  that  Dr.  Layard  is 
certain  that  Fig.  860  belongs  to  Sennacherib's  reign)  here  is  the  closest  ap- 
proximation to  that  (unknown)  character  in  which  the  oldest  Rebrew  books 
of  the  Bible  were  originally  written :  which  fact  we  shall  demonstrate  elsewhere.    For 

(246)  Reaearcha;  1844 ;  iv.  pp.  120, 121. 

(246)  Jtaearcha  into  the  Natttrt  and  Jffinity  </  Andtnt  and  Hindu  JfyOioloffjf;  1831;  pp.  808,  808;  alM 
pp.40<M22. 

(247)  Munk:  BOatirie;  p.  428. 

(3i8)  Bab^Um;  M  Ezp«L,  1843;  pp.  849,  591,  eOl,  606. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

638  PAL^OGRAPHIG   EXCURSUS 

Fio.  862.  fear  of  misapprehenBioos,  let  ns  alao  note  tliat  tke  abort 

anderU  oharaoters  are  entirely  distinct  in  age  from  thooe  on  the 
modem  tind  rabbinical  **  Bowls "  (249)  fh>m  Babylonia  wliich 
Mr.  Ellis's  remarks  might  lead  others  than  archeologiste  to 
inTOst  with  the  halo  of  antiquity.  They  cannot  attain  eren  to 
the  third  century  <tfter  G. ;  and,  indeed,  may  descend  to  days 
after  the  Malummiisn  oonqnests.  Until  we  can  resume  the 
subject,  the  reader  will  find  a  place  nwaifneil  to  them  in  ov 
Table  under  the  heading  of  "  Hebrew  BabyUmUk/* 

2d.  MONGOLIAN  ORIGIN.  — We  ^ye  this  dengnadon  to  a  system  of  writings  dSstinet 
organically,  chronolo^cally,  linguistically,'  geographically,  palsographically,  ethnological^ 
—  in  short,  aboriginalbf — firom  any  afiinity  with  Semitic  streams,  or  inth  the  tatter's  com- 
mon Hakitio  source.  To  comprehend  us,  the  reader  need  but  open  the  worln  of  Pan- 1 
thier;(250)  without  perplexing  himself  with  other  definitions,  untQ  he  finds  the  former 
inconsistent  with  science,  history,  reason,  and  probability. 

It  is,  howeVer,  from  his  Stnieth^gyptiaca  that  the  principles  and  ezamplee  of  our  anUuv's 
critical  results  must  be  gathered ;  and,  haying  adyocated  them  on  a  fonner  oocmsion,  (251) 
we  return  to  them  with  pleasure  increased  by  subsequent  yerifications  of  their  accuracy. 

PAUTHisa*s  Thsbb  Aqbs  or  Wamiras. 

« 1st  Aqb. — The  figured  representation  of  objects  and  ideas ;  otherwise  the  j^tclorisJ  age. 

«0f  this  age  we  possess  nothing  that  can  be  safely  referred  to  primeyal  antiqui^.  KSi 
barbarous  nations,  like  the  tribes  of  North  America,  still  striye  to  perpetuate  their  simple 
traditions  hy  pieturee, 

<<To  this  age,  with  a  probable  infrision  of  the  tymhoUced  element  (although,  as  yet, 
whether  of  thSr  lost  languages,  undeciphered  writings,  or  chronology,  it  may  be  said  that 
we  literally  know  nothing),  may  perhaps  be  referred  the  piduree  and  so-called  kiengigpkt 
of  the  ante-Golumbian  monuments  of  Mexico,  Gentral  America,  and  Peru. 

«  2d  Aqb. — The  altered  and  conventional  representation  of  objects ;  otherwise  the  trmuHm- 

period ;  when  the  pictorial  signs  pass  into  the  tymboUc<df  and  thence  gradually  Into  ^ 

tjUMco^honetie, 

«  To  this  age  belong  the  ideographic  writings  of  the  Gldnese  secondary  period,  danifted 
as  follows:  (252)  1st  — High  AnnauiTT;  b.  o.  2687  to  8869 — according  to  the  Ckmme 
annalists,  the  KOU-WEN,  or  antique  writing.  2d.  — Mboium  Ahtiouitt:  b.  c.  820— the 
TA-TCHOUAN,  or  altered  image  of  olfjecU,  8d.  —  Low  Ahtiquttt  ;  b.  o.  227 —  the  8IA0- 
TGHOUAN,  or  image  etill  more  altered  of  ofy'eete.  4th. — Modbrn  TlicBS ;  B.  o.  200  to  a.  d. 
1128,  and  still  in  uso— /our  kinds  of  current  writing  and  typography. 

"  The  aboye  are  formed  upon  principlee  presentiiqg^  some  few  analogies,  but  in  the  maia 
remarkable  differences,  when  compared  with  the  Egyptian  phonetic  sy8tem.(258)  Under  the 
same  age  may  be  classed  the  hieroglyphieal  and  hieratic  system  of  Egypt,  the  latter  being  a 
tachygrabhy  or  ehort-'hand  of  the  former. 

'<  Albeit  that  we  haye  but  very  yagne  data  in  this  respect,  it  is  exceedinkly  probable  that 
all  writings  began  by  bmng  figurative  and  egllabie  before  they  became  pdrely  m^fkabeiied. 
Many  alphabets,  such  as  the  Sanscrit  alphabet,  the  EtkUtpie  alphabet,  the  PeretpoUm 
(without  speaking  of  the  Japantee  and  Corcean  alphabets),  are  still  almost  oompletdy 
eyllabie,  and  bear  eyident  traces  of  t^  figurative  origin.  (254) 

*<  8d  Aqb. — The  purely'^AofM^te  expression  of  the  articulations  of  the  human  y<nce :  other- 
wise the  strictiy  a^habetical  age ;  to  which  belong  all  writings  which  represent  no  more 
than  the  yocal  elements  of  human  articulations,  reduced  to  their  simplest  expression ; 
L  e..  A,  B,  G,  B,  &c. 

(249)  0(p.clt;p^  500^-626;  fl«i.  1, 8, 6,  & 

(3M)  1ft  <SIMo»u^7iapMi(»--BiMararlH>rigiiw«tUroriiMt^ 
rtfisyptieiuM;Paria,1841  ^  a9elima^ATitwruOrieHtxaei0tOoeidefUaaa;1938.  Sd.  CMw.4iie<8MM,d*ipiit 
]M  dooomenti  CMtwtt;  1837.    4th.  dvOUatim  CM^ioiie— oontaining  the  CbhuM  Book%  Gfeoo-Knia,  T-Ion, 
TA*mo,  ToBOUira-Tou9»,  Lvthrv,  and  Mura-rsBu;  1843. 

(261)  OMa/p|».  100-102. 

(262)  Paothub:  SMo^JSf^ifp,;  p.  24. 
(26J)  Op.  eiL:  pp.  98  to  110. 

(864)  Op.  dL:  p.  34;  and  on  CMfa  alpbalMt,  eonraU  hit  "Orig-  <1m  Alphabttty^pctrta. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

ON    THE   ART  OF    WRITING,  639 

<*To  thig  belong  the  Snehorial,  Demotie,  or  JEpiatolograpkic  charaoten  of  Egypt,  detached 
.  from  oeoaaioiMl  fignratiTe  and  Bymbolioal  ngns.*' 

Nothing  to  the  student  of  Panthier's  work  can  be  more  clear  than  that  the  primeval  type 
of  Mongol  man,  whose  centre  of  creation  lies  along  the  banks  of  the  Hoang-ho,  and  that 
other  (organically  disUnct)  Hamitic  ^e  whose  centre  is  the  NiU^  after  each  one  in  its  own 
region  had  passed  through  all  preliminary  phases  of  its  individaal  deyelopment,  reached, 
at  an  age  on  either  side  equally  beyond  tradUiotu,  the  power  of  recording  tlungs  h^jpiebrnt; 
just  as  the  American  Indian  around  us,  spuming  every  inducement  ta  profit  by  our  graphi- 
cal art,  still  traces  on  the  bark  of  trees,  on  rocks,  on  boflalo-robes,  those  rude  designs 
whereby  he  hopes  to  annihilate  space  and  tim*  in  the  tranamiBai<^n  of  his  thoughts. 

If  it  be  granted  that  an  Egyptiaa,  or  a  Chinese,  could  singly  arrive  at  the  discovery  of 
this  the  humblest  stage  of  letters  for  himself,  wbiy  refuse  the  same  capacities  to  the  other? 
One  nation  of  the  two,  at  least,  must  have  discovered  this  pictorial  art  for  itself,  most  ,cer^ 
tainly :  hov  then  attribute  tuition  of  another  world  of  man  to  either,  when  the  graphical 
^aiems  of  both  are  radically  cUjBTerentt 

Nearly  a  century  ago,  after  applying  vigorous  strictures  to  the  theories  of  Needham  and 
De  Guignes  (we  might  add  Kircher,  Be  Pauw,  Paravey,  Wiseman,  indeed  orthodoxy  gene- 
rally), who  claimed  that  either  China  taught  Egypt,  or  Egypt  China,  Bishop  WarbtOrton 
thus  emphatically  placed  the  question  in  its  only  philosophical  light : — 

"  To  conclude,  the  learned  worid  abounds  with  discoveries  of  this  kind.  They  have  all 
one  common  original;  the  old  inveterate  error;  that  a  similitude  of  customs  and  manners, 
amongst  the  various  tribes  of  mankind  the  most  remote  from  one  another,  must  needs  arise 
firom  some  communication.  Whereas  kunutn  nature,  without  any  help,  will,  in  the  same 
circumstances,  always  exhibit  the  same  appearances."  (256) 

How,  it  may  be  asked,  do  we  know  that  ^»pieiorial  was  the  first,  or  rather  the  anterior, 
age  of  writing  in  Egypt,  or  in  China?  Aside  from  aU  arguments  of  analogy  that  pietur€$ 
are  the  mdimental  writings  of  semi-barbarism  at  this  day-— already  a  vast  step  higher  than 
the  savage  Bo^jetman,  Papuan^  or  Patoffimian,  has  ever  attained— it  is  proved,  in  Egyptian 
hieroglyphics  of  the  most  ancient  and  pure  style,(266)  by  their  being,  as  fitr  as  perfection 
of  sculpture  and  vivid  coloring  can  make  each  thing,  the  exact  representatives  of  natural 
and  artificial  objeots,  every  one  indigenous  in  nature  to  the  valley  of  the  NUe:  and  utterly 
foreign  elsewhere.  ^  In  China,  the  piotorial  epoch  is  reached  by  tradng  backwards  each 
mutation  of  characters,  age  by  age,  to  the  primitive  Kou-wih  ;  which  is  a  taohygraph,  or 
abridgement,  of  natural  or  artificial  productions,  all  autocthonous  to  the  region  of  the 
JBoang-ho, 

Ot  course,  copies  however  rude  of  the  same  things  must  present  certain  identities, 
whether  delineated  in  China,  Egypt,  or  America;  but  just  as  a  parent  instinctively  detects 
which  of  his  children  has  scrawled  a  i^ven  form ;  or  that  a  man  betrays  to  others  his  indi- 
viduality by  his  handwriting;  so  arohoological  practice  enables  an  observer  to  point  out 
the  distinctive  peculiarities  of  a  given  people's  designs.  The  latter,  mor^ver,  tell  whence 
they  came  by  the  veiy  suljects  figured.  Thus,  if,  in  a  series  of  characters  called  ''Egyptian 
of  the  IVth  Memphite  dynasty,"  a  eamely  a  horte,  a  eoeh,  were  designed,  the  presence  of 
dther  of  these  animals  would  prove  the  document  to  be  a  forgery;  because  camels,  horses, 
and  cocks,  wete  unknown  in  the  valley  of  the  NUe  for  a  thousand  and  more  years  later. 
In  China,  eoeke  and  Aof«M  (267)  were  indigenous,  like  the  sUkworm,  from  the  commence- 
ment of  creation  in  this  geological  period;  but,  in  her  primitive  pictures, there  are  no  Egyp- 
tian i6Me«,  nor  jiopyriM-plants.    No  rattletnakee,  magnoUae,  or  buone,  can  be  disoovered  in 

(366)  The  DMm  Legatitm  (^MomdemondrtUei;  1766;  6th  ad. ;  UL  p.  W. 

(266)  LBMiin:  JknkwUOer;  fat  Ulortntiooi. 

(267)  Tber*  mods  to  be  MMiie  doabt  ftboat  the  harm  In  CUm  proper  et  an  eerl j  period,  beoaaee,  ftbovt  b.  a 
900,  thle  animal  waa  imported  tnm  Tartar^  (Ckim,  p.  100).  Nerertbelew,  fo-m  la  said  to  hare  tangfat  hia 
people  to  ralw  the  liz  domeatio  animala— Aorac,oas/<N0e»i)^d(y,«ndtike9?  and  under  the  three  mrthical 
•«Hoanga,''hla  anteoedenta,  there  waa  a  period  of  time  eaUed  the  Aorae  (Pauthibi:  nmpe  JntiHatn  au  Cho^ 
ft»iV;IiT.  See;;  pp.  2(^83).    Wedtethe/itfctorictfhorMmeMlylij  way  ofpopnlar  fllaftration. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

640  PALJC06RAPHIC    EXCURSUS 

the  piotores  of  China,  or  of  Egjpt,  becMise  these  things  are  indigenous  to  the  i 
continent  —  until  Columbus,  segregated  from  the  entire  OM  World :  neither  wHl  the 
Grecian  acarUhtu,  the  African  Uatif  or  the  Asiatic  ti^phaiUf  appear  in  the  scnlptoresof 
Yucatan  or  Goatemala ;  simply  becaose,  to  American  man,  these  objects  were  nnknovn. 
Each  centre  of  creation  famished  to  the  human  being  created  for  it  the  models  of  his  inci- 
pient designs.  It  was  materially  impossible  for  him,  without  inUreoww  with  other  centres, 
to  be  acquainted  with  things  alien  to  the  horixon  of  his  nativity.  An  omtMorynctft,  or  s 
kangaroo^  if  found  in  a  picture,  would  establish — 1st,  that  such  picture  could  not  be  Egyp- 
tian, Chinese,  or  American;  and  2d,  that  it  was  made  within  the  last  two  centuries — that 
is,  since  the  discorery  of  Australia  by  European  navigators.  Payne  Knight  laid  down 
the  rules: — 

<*  The  similitude  of  these  allegorical  and  symbolioal  fictions  with  each  other,  in  ereiy 
part  of  the  world,  is  no  proof  of  their  having  been  derived,  any  more  than  the  primitive 
notions  which  they  signify,  fh>m  any  one  particular  people ;  for  as  the  organs  of  sense  end 
principles  of  intelleci  are  the  same  in  all  mankind,  they  would  all  natunlly  fonn  bb^st 
ideas  from  similar  otgects ;  and  employ  similar  signs  to  express  them,  so  long  as  nataml 
and  not  conventional  signs  were  used.  . .  .  The  only  certain  proof  of  pla^^iy  or  borrowing 
is  where  the  animal  or  vegetable  productions  of  one  climate  are  employed  as  symbols  by 
the  inhabitants  of  another.  ...  As  commercial  communication,  however,  became  more  frM 
and  intimate,  particular  symbols  might  have  been  adopted  from  one  people  by  another 
without  any  common  erigia  or  even  connexion  of  general  principles."  (258) 

These  few  remarks  suffice  as  suggestives,  to  the  thoug^tfbl  and  educated,  of  the  ndiosl 
distinctions  which  the  first  glance  perceives  when  comparing  the  ancient  sculptures  of  three 
aboriginsl  worlds  of  art,  Egyptian,  Chinese,  or  American.  But,  just  as  a  physidsn^s 
writings  presuppose  that  his  readers  have  passed  beyond  the  elementary  schoolroom,  ic 
it  is  not  in  <*  Types  of  Bfankind  '*  that  any  one  need  expect  to  find  an  archsologiesl 
"  Primer." 

We  return  to  the  anU-nonummtdl  pictures  of  the  Kile  and  the  Hoang-ho  —  the  former, 
long  anterior  to  b.  o.  8500 ;  the  latter,  to  b.  o.  2800 ;  being  the  minimum  distance  from 
our  generation  at  which  the  graphical  system  of  each  river's  denixens  first  dawns  upon 
our  view. 

Impelled  by  the  same  human  wants,  though  absolutely  without  inter-communicatioB, 
the  Mongol  Chinese  for  his  part,  and  the  Hamitic  Egyptian  for  his,  attained,  at  periods 
unknown,  the  power  of  representing  their  several  thoughts  jEnc^ma%.  Where  they  copied 
the  same  Universal  things  —  the  mn,  a  ttar,  a  goat,  a  pigeon,  a  make,  a  tree  (though  here 
even,  in  Flora  and  Fauna,  already  the  two  countries  exhibit  distinct  **  species  "),— those 
copies  necessarily  resemble  each  other ;  although,  in  each,  art  betrays  the  indiriduslities 
of  a  separate  human  type.  Where  the  Chinaman,  however,  portrays  a  man,  that  man  is  a 
Mongol:  where  the  Egyptian  draws  a  human  being,  that  being  is  an  Egyptiaru 

No  stronger  exemplification  of  human  inability  to  conceive  that  which  is  beyond  the 
circumference  of  local  experiences,  can  be  met  with,  than  in  Squier's  exhumatioos  from 
the  primeval  mounds  of  the  West.  (259)  Not  merely  is  the  tkuU,  divested  by  time  of  its 
animal  matter,  osteologically  identical  with  those  of  American  Aborigines  of  this  day ;  not 
only  does  every  fragmentary  relic  which  accompanies  it  limit  that  antique  man's  boonda- 
ries  of  knowledge  to  a  space  longitudinally  between  Lake  Superior  and  the  Gulf  of  Mexico, 
and  laterally  within  the  Alleghanian  and  the  Rocky  Mountains ;  —  Vut,  every  pq>e-howlj  or 
engraved  article,  that  Wrs  a  human  likeness,  portrays  an  American  Indian,  and  no  other 
type :  because  man  can  imitate  only  what  he  knows.  And  finally,  to  bring  the  case  home 
to  our  biblical  researches,  does  not  every  line  of  the  first  nine  chapters  of  Genesis  prove 
that  Hebrew  writers  never  conceived,  in  speculation  upon  creative  origines,  anything  alien 
to  themselvei  and  to  their  own  restricted  sphere  of  geography  t  At  their  point  of  view,  the 
first  j^otrjDf  human  beings  conversed,  at  once,  in  pure  Hebrew  :^iulj,  the  Talmudic  books 

(258)  R.  Patki  KnoHT:  htqttirif  itdo  the  Symbolictd  Language  qfJndent  Art  ctnd  ifytMogy;  Ttlpy'i  8to  td^ 
1818;  par.  230, 231.  ^ 

(259)  AndaU  MmtmeiUt  qfike  Mttiit^  VcHeg;  IMS :  oonp«re  wtO^tOi,  pp.  194,  SU-S5L 

Digitized  by 

Google 

ON    THE    ART    OF    WRITING.  641 

show,  that  this  diyine  tongue  is  to  be  the  future  language ;  the  speech  in  which  the  <<  ultima 
ratio  "  will  be  meted  out  to  all  humanity  in  heaTen ! 

"Concludam  .  .  .  yerbis  RabbiJehosusB  in  Talmud,  qui  cuidam  curios^  percontantide 
statu  resurgentium  ad  Titam  SBternam  respondat,  Quando  reviviscemtUf  cognoicemus  quaUi 
fiUunu  ait  eorum  status.  Sic  de  futura  lingua  Beatorum  in  coelis,  quando  reviviscemus, 
oognosoemus  illam."  (260) 

Independently  of  one  another,  then,  Mongolian  man  on  the  Hoang-ho,  and  Egyptian  man 
on  the  Nile,  each  arriyed  for  himself  nt  picture-writing:  yet,  after  casting  a  retrospectiye  look 
at  the  relative  epochas  of  both  achieyements,  we  behold  that  the  difference  between  their 
chronological  eras  is  almost  as  immense  as  when  we,  who  in  this  day  actually  "print  by 
lightning,"  see  an  Indian  spend  hours  of  lifetime  in  the  effort  to  adorn  a  deer-skin  with 
the  uncouth  record  of  his  scalping  exploits.  At  the  time  when  Prince  Mer-het(261) 
caused  his  sepulchre  to  be  caryed  and  i>unted  with  those  exquisite  hieroglyphs,  that,  through 
16  pkotielie,  many  figurative^  and  a  few  symbolical  signs,  relate  his  immediate  descent  from 
King  Shoopho  (262)  builder  of  the  mightiest  mausoleum  eyer  raised  by  human  hand,  — 
imder  the  shadows  of  which  great  pyramid  this  (probably)  son  reposed:  at  that  time, 
which,  it  is  far  more  likely,  ascends  rather  beyond  than  falls  within  the  thirty-Qfth  century 
B.  0.,  or  5400  years  backward  from'  our  day  —  what  was  the  state  of  ciyilization  in  China? 
Now,  the  most  exacting  of  natiye  Chinese  archieologists  will  confess  that  their  first  Emperor 
Fo-hi  (whose  name  emblematises  to  the  Chinese  mind  aboye  1000  years  of  meta-history,  as 
that  of  Moses  did  to  the  Hebrew  intellect  in  the  age  of  ffilkiah  the  high-priest), (268)  that 
this  Fo-hi — inventor  of  writing, (264)  through  the  legendary  '*8  koua" — scarcely  floats  upon 
the  foam  of  tradition's  loftiest  surge :  because,  no  Chinese  scholar  claims  for  Fo-hi*s  semi- 
mythical  reign  a  date  earlier  than  b.  o.  8468 ;  while  conceding  that  perhaps  it  may  haye 
begun  600  years  later. 

And,  if  we  compare  monuments^  then  the  oldest  (265)  written  record  of  China  claims  no 
higher  date  than  the  "  Inscription  of  Yv"  estimated  at  b.  o.  2278 — being  aboye  1000  years 
posterior  to  the  Egyptian  tomb  of  Mer-het,  now  in  the  Royal  Museum  of  Berlin.  All  earlier 
Chinese  documents  being  lost,  the  times  anterior  to  Tu  are,  palcRographicaUy^  blanks ;  but 
skepticism  (scientific,  not,  the  most  obdurate,  theological,)  has  no  more  reason  to  reject 
what  of  rational  story  pierces  through  the  gloom  of  generations  preceding,  as  concerns  Chinii, 
than  we  haye  to  consider  fabulous  the  British  periods  of  the  Heptarchy,  although  we  cannot 
now  indiyidualize  many  eyents,  and  possess  no  Saxon  **  Saga  **  coeyal  with  their  occurrence. 

A  moment's  pause  will  illustrate  in  what  respect  Egypfs  monuments  tower  as  loftily 
aboye  Chinese  antiquity,  as  St.  Feter^s  at  Rome  aboye  New  York  "  Trinity  Church."  Our 
remarks  are  not  directed  to  personages  who,  stifled  beneath  ante-metaphysical  strata,  read 
littie  and  know  less ;  but  to  readers  who  haye  perused,,  or  will  examine,  the  writings  of  at 
least  Bunsen,  Lepsius,  Birch,  and  Be  Roug^ ;  without  disparagement  of  these  scholars* 
ardent  colleagues,  too  numerous  for  specification. 

Whilst  the  pyramids  and  tombs  of  the  IVth  Memphite  dynasty  in  Egypt  stand,  about 
B.  0.  8500,  at  the  uppermost  terminus  of  that  lengthy  monumental  .chain  —  the  coils  of 
which,  within  a  range  of  twenty  miles,  may  still  be  unwound  from  Mohammed-Ali's  mosque 
at  Cairo,  link  by  link,  century  by  century,  and  stone  by  stone,  back  through  all  the  yicis- 
ritudes  of  Nilotic  annals,  for  5400  years,  till  we  touch  the  sepulchre  of  Prince  Merhet — 
these  pyramids,  these  tombs,  themseWes  reyeal  infinite  data  upon  ages  to  their  construction 
long  anterior ;  but,  how  long!    Utterly  unknown. 

For  instance,  we  here  present  the  hieroglyphic  for  scribe,  writing,  or  to  write. 
It  is  compounded  of  the  reed,  calamus,  or  pen ;  the  tn^bottie ;  and  the  scribe's 
palette,  with  two  littie  oayities  for  his  black  and  red  inks.     It  may  be  seen 

Ki 

(200)  Walton:  FroUgomena;  tt.  par.  26,  p.  19. 
(261)  LKP8IU8:  DenkmSUr;  and  st^^ra,  p.  238;  fig.  154. 

(902)  Ibid, ;  Brif/t  aus  JEgn^tn,  jEtMopien,  Ac ;  Berlin,  1862;  pp.  87, 88  —  *<  Saptrintendent  of  aU 
ttonfoftheUng." 
(263)  Aboat  b.  c.  626  — 2  Kings  zziL  8;  2  Chrm.  zzxhr.  14. 
(204)  FAVTBoa^  CMne;  pp.  24-20.  (206)  Ibid.;  p.  68. 

81 

Digitized  by 

Google 

642  PALwfiOGRAPHIO    EXCURSUS 

on  aU  monuments  of  the  IVth  Dynasty: (266)  and  its  presenoe  proves  that  leriimg  most  bi?e 
been  common  enough  in  Egypt  daring  ages  antecedent     So  again,  here  is  4»^ 

— a  roll  of /wi/)yrtM-paper,  a  tolnme,  tied  with  strings  —  meaning  a  "  Book."  ^^""^^^^ 
Its  presenoe  upon  the  monuments,  not  merely  of  the  Xllth,  but  of  the  Vlth,  and  eyen  of 
the  same  old  IVth  dynasty,  establishes  that  the  invention  otpaptr,  and  the  nsage  of  written 
«o/tfm«f,  antedate  the  earliest  hieroglyphics  now  extant 

It  would  require  an  espedal  treatise  to  convey  to  readers  any  adequate  idea  of  the  eo]n- 
ousness  of  ancient  Egyptian  docnments  written  on  />«^7yni«-paper  existing  and  deciphered 
at  the  present  day.  There  are  some  of  the  IVth  (d.  o.  8400)  and  succeeding  dynasties 
down  to  the  Xllth  b.  o.  2200)  in  legible  preservation ;  but  the  great  "age  of  the  Papyri" 
belongs  to  the  XVIIth  and  following  dynastiee ;  (267)  that  is,  flrom  the  17th  eentaiyB.c. 
downwards.  Ind^[>endently  of  the  thousands  of  copies  of  the  "  Book  of  the  Dead,"  there  tie 
poemSf  accotmi-books,  eontraett,  decrees,  ehr<moloffieal  Utte,  kittorietj  romaneee,  sdent^  eMsayt, 
—in  short,  it  is  really  more  difficult  now  to  define  what  there  is  not,  than  to  catal<^e  the 
enormous  coUectionB  otPapfpif  some  written  ages  before  Moses's  birth,  existing  in  Europeta 
cabinets.  At  foot  we  indicate  where  the  curious  inquirer  may  satisfy  himself  upon  the 
accuracy  of  this  statement  (268)  And  if  he  wishes  to  behold  the  irantUions  of  Egyptiin 
writing  flrom  the  hieroglyphic  into  the  hieratic,  he  need  only  open  Lepsius*s  Dmkmdler.(2&9) 
We  have  no  space  to  enlarge  upon  these  Dacts  here,  which  the  writer's  Leeiure-roomt  haTe 
exhibited  in  most  of  the  chief  cities  of  the  Union. 

All  which  premised,  as  facts  at  this  day  open  to  everybody's  verification,  the  reader 
comprehends  that,  if  /wetere-writing,  as  well  on  the  Nile  as  on  the  Hoang-ho,  was  the  first 
stage  towards  phonetic  orthography ;  nevertheless,  according  to  monumeatal  evidenoee,  the 
Egyptians  had  already  been  inscribing  their  thoughts  in  perfect  hieroglyphkty  "sacred 
sculptured  characters,"  a  thousand  years  before  the  Chinese  had  perfeoted%a  system  of  ideo- 
graphiett  to  us  represented  by  their  primitive  character  £oit-wek. 

It  is  fW>m  Champollion's  Ch-ammaire  Egyptienne  (270)  that  the  reader  must  draw  deer 
definitions  of  Nilotic  dasufications  into  the  pkonetic,  figurative,  and  eymMicul,  elements  of 
calligraphy :  and  Mr.  Birch's  definition  of  Egypt's  pristine  16  monosyllabic  articulations^ 
<ij  h,  f,  g,  h,  i,  k,  m,  n,  p,  r  X  I,  e,  t,  tk,  kh,  u, — is  the  most  accessible  to  the  English 
reader.  (271)  For  Chmeee  analogies  and  discrepancies,  as  said  before,  there  is  no  satisfiM- 
tory  work  but  the  Smico-JEgyptiaea, 

Through  their  study  the  reader  will  glean  how — starting  both  ftrom  the  same  springs, 
although  chronologically  and  geographically  distinct,  viz.,  PICTURE-WRITING  —  tiie 
Egyptian  rivulet,  gushing  forth  naturally  in  one  direction,  formed  the  hibbooltphics  ; 
whence,  in  due  time,  through  Semitiah  channels,  streamed  those  mighty  rivers  that,  fnm 
Chaldea,  have  watered  Europe,  Hindostan,  Northern  Asia,  Africa,  America,  and  Aus- 
tralia, with  the  refreshing  rills  of  Phomieia't  alphabet :  and  how  the  Chinese  fountain,  its 
waters  taking  an  opposite  direction,  created  the  xdxoqbaphios  ;  which,  cramped  within 
gutters  artificially  if  ingeniously  conceived,  have  enabled  the  Chinamen  to  attain  a  system, 
it  is  true,  essentially  phonetic,  and  which,  originating  in  a  Mongolian  brain,  suffices  for  all 
the  necessities  of  Mongol  articulations :  notwithstanding  that  ABC  are  as  alien  to  its 
complex  construction  as  our  English  language  is  remote  fh>m  the  agglutinations  of  an 
Indian,  or  the  **  gluckings  "  of  a  Hottentot.  The  Chinese  never  have  had  an  alphabet.  It 
is  impossible,  without  organic  changes  which  human  history  does  not  sanction,  that  the 
Sinico-Mongol  ever  can  possess  that,  to  us  the  simplest,  method  of  chronicling  our  thoughts. 

(266)  LiFSivs:  ChnmotoffU;  L  p.  83;  —  Todtaibitch;  1842;  PreC  p.  17;  — Bmnnr:  S^e  PI;  i. p.  8. 

(267)  HnroKS:  Trant.  R.  IrithAcad.;  1846. 

(268)  Sddd  Piipyri;  published  bj  the  British  MaMmn;  — Lipsnm:  Chrondoffie;  i.  pp.  89,  40;  — Pbibbi,  Bi 
BoDai,  and  CHAiiPOLUOM-FiaKic's  papers,  in  the  Bwue  Aroh£6logiq;ue!-~  and  Bbob'b  tn  Tram,  R,  Soc  XiL,  and 
IntbieJrcheKioffia;  kc 

(2eO)  Mith.;  iLbLQ8,M. 

(270)  A  synoptieal  sketch  is  in  Ouin>03i :  Chaptert;  1848. 

(271)  Guddom:  Otia;  pp.  118-115;  bnt  better  in  Lxpsnn:  VorUUnfifftlfa^rida;  1840;  p.  86. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

V 

ON    THE    ART    OF    WRITING.  643 

In  conseqnenoe  of  wliich  reflection^,  fortified  by  the  physical  dedaotions  elseirhere  em- 
bodied in  '*  Types  of  Mankind,"  we  haye  assigned'  to  MovaoL-oriffins  a  distinct  column  in 
our  theoretical  Tableau  of  human  palsographic  history. 

For  the  objects  of  anthropology,  the  aboTO  explanatory  remarks  would  be  sufficient,  were 
not  notions  current  among  those  readers,  who  look  to  theology  for  biblical  criteria,  to 
metaphysics  for  archeological — 1st,  that  the  << Chinese''  are  recorded  in  Scripture;  and 
ergo,  that  Mongolian  races  were  familiar  to  Jewish  writers;  2d.,  that  '* Chinese  vases" 
have  been  found  in  tombs  of  the  XYIIIth  dynasty  at  Thebes ;  and  ergo,  that  Egypt  and 
China  were  in  positiye  communication  about  the  time  of  Moses.  (272)    So  we  digress. 

Once  upon  a  time  an  adage  prcTailed  in  literary  controTcrsies — Cave  hommem  uniw  libri. 
Through  what  impaiving  causes  is  to  us  unknown,  but  certain  it  is,  that  in  proportion  as 
one  ascends  in  JSnglish  theological  literature  to  the  Kennicotts,  Warburtons,  Lowths,  Cud- 
worths,  Stillingfleets,  Waltons,  and  other  intellectual  giants  of  that  deceased  school,  so 
one's  respect  for  divines  and  one's  reverence  for  Scripture  anient  They  had  om  book 
to  study  professionally,  and  that  book  they  knew  well ;  because  they  actually  read  it 

It  would  appear  that  there  are  cycles  of  deterioration,  as  evident  in  theology  as  in  the 
weather,  to  judge  by  what  took  place  in  China  about  a.  d.  1868 ;  and  inasmuch  as  onr 
inquiries  first  concern  the  Chinese,  it  is  but  fair  that  they  should  open  proceedings. 

The  Emperor  Houng-Wou,  appalled  at  the  degradation  of  scholarship  consequent  upon 
the  tragic  events  that  precedeil  him,  one  day  convoked  the  <*  Tribunals  of  Literature " 
(equivalent  to  the  French  Miniature  d'Instxuction  PubliqueX(278)  and  made  to  them  a  com- 
mon sense  speech,  the  pith  of  which  is  here  in  extract : 

•«  The  ancients,"  said  he,  "  the  ancients  used  to  write  but  few  books,  but  they  made  them 
good.  .  .  .  Onr  modem  UtUraH  write  a  great  deal,  and  upon  subjects  that  cannot  be  of  the 
slightest  real  utility.  .  .  .  The  ancients  wrote  with  perspicacity,  and  their  writings  were 
suited  to  the  comprehension  of  everybody. 

...  In  former  times  their  works  were  read  with  pleasure,  and  one  reads  them  at  this 
day  [a.  d.  1868,  in  China!]  with  the  same. 

.  .  .  Tou  [addressing  himself  to  the  Censors  of  the  Press],  you,  who  stand  at  the  head 
of  litetature,  make  all  your  efforts  to  restore  good  9m»e:  you  will  never  succeed  but  by 
imitating  the  Ancients.  (274) 

In  the  days  between  Walton  and  Eennicott,  a  theological  student  who  might  have  ven- 
tured to  opine  that  the  Chinese  are  mentioned  in  the  Bible,  would  have  been  sent  inconti- 
nently to  read  the  Hebrew  text  of  Isaiah.  (276)  When  this  task  was  executed  (and,  for- 
merly, divinity  students  could  read  a  little  Hebrew),  the  young  man  would  have  found  a 
place  on  the  lowest  form,  by  command  of  the  Professor  of  History,  for  ignorance  of  the 
rudiments  of  his  class.  Shame  would  soon  have  impelled  an  ingenuous  youth,  of  those 
days  gone  by,  to  cram  his  head  with  simple  facts  of  which  some  of  his  elders  in  theology 
now  seem  unaware.  (276) 

Chinese  history — in  this  question  the  most  vaHd — proves  that,  until  the  year  102  after 
Christ,  the  Chinese  never  knew  of  the  existence  of  any  countries  situate  north  and  west 
of  Persia.  Between  the  years  89-106  a.  d.,  in  the  reign  of  Ho-Ti,  a  vast  Chinese  army, 
under  General  Ean-Tlng,  detached  by  the  Commander-in-Chief,  Pan-tchao,  halted  on  the 
ahorefl  of  the  Caspian  Sea;  (277)  receiving  the  submission  of  the  Tad-jiks  (Persians)  and 

^2)  Ylte  OuDMii's  lYth  L9dbi$n — xeported  in  **  Daily  Dispatch,''  March  18 ;  and  in  **  Richmond  Examiner,'* 
March  21;  Richmond,  Ya.,  1851.  Alao,  more  extendvely,  in  <*The  Union,"  Washington,  D.  C,  April  25, 1861. 
The  abnatre  writers  alluded  to  in  that  disoonrse,  as 

<*Mere  yonths  in  sdenoe,  and  to  fkme  unknown," 
were  the  reverend  anthors  of  *<  Unity  of  fhe  Buman  Races,"  1850;  of  an  article  in  the  Princdion  ReoUWf 
1851;  and  of  a  third  article,  the  one  prolanded  [nipra,  p.  587],  as  emanating  from  an  Ass.  of  Min.  at  OoL,  S.  0. 

(278)  Sd.  Biot:  JStatU  iur  VhuimetionpubUque  m  Chine;  1840. 

(874)  Paotrdb  :  Cktne  dfaprit  la  Doament$  Chinain  pp.  893, 804. 

(275)  Isaiah;  xlix.12. 

(270)  Rot.  Thomas  SinTHS,  D. D. :  Unity  of  (he  mmum  Raea;  1860;  p.  48 ; — Rer.  Dr.  Hows :  aonOkam  Prtt- 
bftaian  Review;  Columbia,  8.  C,  No.  3,  Jan.  1851 ;  tc 

(2n)  RiMimAT:  Mbn.  tur  V&iUnsion  de  VEmpbrt  CMn,  dupoUde  FOoeAtoU;— PAOTHiza,  CWne;  pp.  25»-300. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

644  PAL^OGBAPHIG    EZGIJBSIJS 

of  the  ^ft  [n^Oj  MaGUG,  p.  471].  A  powerful  interest,  howoTer,  incited  these  last  to 
irithhold  correct  information  on  western  countries  fW>m  the  Chinese  officer ;  yii. :  that, 
hitherto,  they  had  held  the  monopoly  of  the  raw  nlk  trade,  by  caraTan,  between  China  and 
the  West ;  which  silk,  dyed  and  woven  into  then-priceless  raiments  by  the  Parthians,  found 
its  way  occasionally  to  the  grandees  of  Europe ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  one  of  the  prac- 
tical motiyes  which  carried  Roman  eagles  to  the  Tigris,  was  a  hope  to  discorer  the  un- 
known source  whence  the  etude  material  of  these  exquisite  fabrics  had  reached  Persia. 
It  was  during  this,  the  most  distant  military  expedition  ever  undertaken  before  Qengfais- 
Kh&n,  that  the  Chinese  heard,  for  the  first  time,  of  the  existence,  far  west  from  the  Ati, 
of  the  Roman  Empire.  Deterred  from  adtance  for  its  conquest  by  the  discouraging  report 
of  the  Parthians  that  his  commissariat  ought  to  be  supplied  for  three  years,  the  Chinese 
General  renounced  the  ^terprise,  and  returned  to  headquarters  at  Ehotftm 

From  the  opposite  direction,  the  arms  of  Rome  had  not  been  turned  towards  Persia 
until,  about  b.  o.  53,  Pro-Consul  Crassus  perished  by  Parthian  arrows  on  the  western  fron- 
tier of  Persia ;  some  156  years  before  the  Chinese  had  penetrated  to  its  south-eastern  pro- 
Tinces.  Within  four  years  after  the  retrograde  march  of  the  Chinese  armies,  Parthia  was 
iATaded  by  Tngan,  a.  d.  106 ;  and  it  was  about  that  generation,  a  few  years  more  or  less, 
that  the  Romans  first  heard,  through  the  Persians,  of  the  remote  country  wbenoe  the  silk 
came.  (278)  In  a.  d.  166,  Antoninus  sent  the  first  Roman  embassy  to  China ;  the  hospitable  ' 
reception  of  which  is  chronicled,  by  contemporary  Chinese  annalists,  in  the  r^gn  of  thar 
Emperor  Houan-TL 

No  nations,  then,  situated  to  the  north-west  of  Persia,  so  far  as  history  or  monuments 
relate,  had  oyer  heard  of  China ;  nor  had  the  Chinese  known  anything  about  such  nations 
until  after  the  Christian  era.  Surmises  to  the  contrary  reqmre,  nowadays,  to  be  justified 
by  something  more  substantial  than  the  ^e  dixit  of  modems,  howerer  erudite,  whose 
opinions  were  formed  before  geographical  criticism  had  fixed  the  boundaries  of  antique 
intercommunicational  possibilities. 

With  this  historical  basis,  let  us  take  up  the  only  woVd  in  the  mitire  canon  of  Scripture, 
upon  which  liying  theologists  haye  erected  a  fable,  that  the  Chinese  are  mentioned  in  the 
Old  Testament.  £yen  king  James's  yersion  suffices  for  this  discussion :  —  **  Behold  these 
[the  Jewish  Babylonian  exiles]  shall  come  from  far ;  and,  lo,  these  from  the  north  and  fr«m 
the  west ;  and  these  from  the  land  of  Sinim,"  (279)  "  Our  modem  Htieraii,**  says  the  Em- 
peror Houng-Wou,  **  write  a  great  deal ; "  and  sustain  that  SirAm  means  the  Chinese ;  be- 
cause, after  stripping  away  the  Hebrew  plural  IM,  there  remains  the  word  SIN ;  and  the 
natiye  name  of  China  is  THSIN. 

Now,  the  whole  context  of  the  prophet  refers  to  the  return  of  the  Jews  ftx>m  bondage  in 
Babylonia.  It  must,  therefore,  be  in  Mesopotamian  yidnities  that  the  SINt — "  inhabitants 
of  SIN;"  or,  otherwise,  **  cities,  districts,  localities  of"  SIN — should  be  sought  for,  before 
trayersing  Central  Asia,  in  such  impassable  ages,  to  recall  ftx>m  China  unknown  Jewish 
fngitiyes  who  might  haye  escaped  thither  from  Babylonia. 

The  root  SIN  of  Isaiah  is  not  SINI;(280)  snd,  frirthermore,  that  SINiVm  was  a  Ca- 
naanite.  Nor  is  it  either  of  the  "  wildernesses  of  SIN  "  familiar  to  the  Mosaic  Israelites; 
because  the  first,  (281)  spelt  with  the  letter  tameg,  lay  dose  to  Egypt:  and  the  second (282) 
was  T«iN,  near  the  Dead  Sea.  Far  less  could  it  haye  meant  the  Egyptian  city  of  Pelusiitm  ; 
called  Sin,  (288)  or  dial^tically  TAIN,  anciently,  as  Teen  now  by  the  Arabs.  Why  trayel 
to  China,  when  Mesopotamia  itself  offers  to  eyery  eye,  in  an  excellent  map,  (284)  at  the 

(278)  On  **  S^rioa,"  and  the  ftct  that  little  or  nothing  was  known  about  it  bj  writan  antaoedtnt  to  GUmdiiia 
Ptolemj,  in  the  second  century  after  Christ ;  compare  the  excellent  critiqtu  of  Ahtboh,  Cla$$,  Diet,  yooe  **  Sefw.** 

(379)  Ibaiab:  xlix.12. 

(380)  OeiUMii;  z.  IT;  suprot  p.  681. 

(281)  Saoodm;  xri  1;  xrlL  1. 

(282)  Ifumben;  xOmi  —  JkitUrontmy;  zxxiLfil;  Ac 
(288)  Bbkoel:  zxz.  15, 16. 

(284)  FRiLSis:  Mtiopotttmia;  1841;— XnropHOR:  JUuib.;lQk1L^ 

Digitized  by 

Google 

ON  THE  ART    OF    WRITING.  645 

month  of  the  riyer  Lycus,  the  vestiges  of  a  city  termed  Kamai  by  Greeks,  Ccma  by  Ro- 
mans, and  Sam  by  Arabians  ?  Or,  if  it  be  absolutely  necessary  to  obtain  SINIM  (more 
SINs  than  one),  add  to  the  preceding  Senn  the  site  of  Sina^  (285)  about  fifty  miles  north- 
eastward of  Mosul ;  together  with  the  '*  large  mounds ''  called  Sen,  on  the  banks  of  the 
Euphrates,  opposite  Bair. 

One,  or  two,  or  all  of  these  localities,  amply  suffice  for  the  extremest  points  whence  the 
Jews  were  to  be  summoned  from  captivity ;  and,  singly  or  collectively,  they  are  compre- 
hended in  the  LXX  translation ;  where  Sin\m  is  paraphrased  by  ex  yvt  Ilcpffwv  —  «  from  a 
land  of  the  Persians." 

Aside  from  the  obvious  adaptation  of  these  places,  near  the  Euphrates  or  the  Tigris,  to 
the  natural  sway  of  Nebuchadnezxar  who  captured  the  Jews,  no  less  than  of  Cyrus  and 
Artaxerxes  who  released  them;  it  is  physically  impossible,  as  well  as  unhistorical,  that 
ancient  Jews  should  have  been  expatriated  to  China:  a  country  none  of  their  descendants 
ever  reached  until  centuries  after  the  Christian  era.  (286)  It  is  equally  out  of  the  question 
that  the  Beptuagint  translators  could  have  known  anything  of  China  —  a  land  beyond  the 
horizon  of  Alexandrian  knowledge  previously  to  the  time  of  Tngan,  about  a  century  after 
0. ;  or  some  280  years  after  the  various  Hellenistic-Jews,  called  the  LXX  [ubi  nq^ra],  had 
completed  their  labors.  Indeed,  they  pretend  to  nothing  of  the  kind ;  for  they  well  knew 
that  the  SINIM  were  in  the  "  land  of  the  Persians; "  while  Orientalists  of  the  present  day 
always  understand,  with  the  Chaldee  paraphrast,  *'  ftom  the  southern  country"  of  Assyria, 
in  that  passage.  (287) 

We  forbear  from  reagitating  here  the  question  elsewhere  treated,  whether  there  were 
really  '<  twelve  tribes  "  of  Israel  before  the  times  of  Sennacherib ;  nor  what  became  of  the 
ten  said  to  have  remained  —  where?  Some  moderns (288)  claim  that  these  Israelites 
marched  round  by  Behring's  Straits  into  America ;  and,  after  building  the  cities  of  ancient 
Mexico  and  Pern,  have  run  wild  in  our  woods^ — in  short,  unaccountably  become  our  Indians. 
Others  have  sought  for  them  in  Affghanistan;  (289)  although  the  portruts  of  Dost-Moham- 
med,  Shah-Soojah,  and  their  fierce  cavaliers,  are  as  little  Jewish  in  lineaments  as  are  their 
speech,  and  still  more  their  bellicose  habits :  for  the  Bible  shows  that  the  Jews  of  Pales- 
tine, except  under  supernatural  circumstances,  were  beaten  and  enslaved  by  any  adjacent 
tribe  that'happened  ta  covet  their  persons  or  property.  If  ever  supposititious  offshoots  of 
the  "  ten  tribes "  wandered  as  far  as  Cabul,  Bokhara,  Balkh,  or  Samarcand,  they  were 
Jews  at  their  migration,  and  Jews  they  would  have  remained  in  type  and  in  religion,  if  cer- 
tainly not  in  language.  Wolff  found  his  compatriots  everywhere.  Indeed,  we  know,  per- 
sonally and  positively,  that  had  the  reverend  renegade  not  been  a  true  Hebrew,  he  could 
never  have  traversed  Central  Asia  in  1832-'5.  But  he  narrates  that  the  fathers  of  those 
who  kindly  welcomed  him,  on  the  score  of  his  inextinguishable  Judaism,  had  established 
themselves  in  Affghan  provinces  very  long  after  the  fall  of  Jerusalem.  We  also  know  that 
Arabs  (to  the  Abrahamidso  closely  allied)  settled  in  Persia,  Khorassan,  Balkh,  &c.,  ever 
since  the  Muslim  invasion,  one  thousand  years  ago,  having  rarely  intermarried  with  Tartars, 
remain  physiologically  distinct  to  this  day.  Yet  while  they  have  preserved  the  name,  reli- 
gion, and  appearance  of  Arabs,  they  have  lost  their  Arabian  language.  (290)  So  it  is  with 
the  Hebrew  nation  in  every  clime— indelibility  of  physical  type,  coupled  with  a  most  pliant 
faculty  for  change  of  tongue.  If,  then,  exactly  <*ten  tribes"  of  Israel  were  swept  away 
into  Chaldea,  they  did  but  return  to  their  aboriginal  centre  of  creation ;  and  (mixing  volun- 
tarily with  no  type  of  mankind  but  their  own)  they  have  naturally  disappeared  amid  the 

(286)  Lataed:  Stoond  EeptdiHim,  BaJbylon ;  1863;  Map  <tf  Jownejft ;  and  p.  297 

(280)  AboQt  60,000  Jews  we  reputed  to  be  there  now ;  others  reschedtMalaber  ahont  1.0. 480;  —  See  Non : 
Fhyt.  HUL  qfthe  Jewish  Race;  1860;  pp.  12, 13;  and  idpro,  pp.  117-128. 

(287)  Gahkt :  BOM;  iz.  p.  176,  note  12. 

(288)  DKLAnsLD:  Anurican  AnUquUia. 
(280)  DuBEUx:  Afghanistan;  pp.  66,  66. 

(290)  MAiootM!  History  of  PienSa;  1816 ;  p.  277;  —  Houkr  :  Second  Journey  (hrouffh  Ftrtia;  1818;  L  pp.  47, 
48;  — PiouBnra:  Raca;  1848;  p.2i0. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

646  PAL-fiOGBAPHIC    EXCURSUS 

iriTes  of  a  bomogeneons  population.  These  opinions,  long  atowed  by  the  authorSi  are 
confirmed  bj  the  views  and  new  facts  of  Layard.(291)  ■  i 

But  we  finish  with  orthodoxy's  "  Chinese " : —  *  1  ^ 

From  a  prcTionsly  small  food  of  the  Celestial  Gates,  called  Tksm,  given  by  Hiao-Wang, 
about  B.  0.  909,  to  one  of  his  jockeys,  issued  a  line  of  princes  whose  constant  acquiidtiTe- 
ness  had  enabled  them,  by  the  year  b.  o.  249,  to  incorporate  a  fifth  part  of  the  Chinese 
realm,  and  to  extend  oyer  it  their  patronymic  title  of  Thtin.  Out  of  this  stock  sprung  Thsin- 
Ohi-Hoang-Ti,  at  once  the  Augustus  and  the  Napoleon  pf  China— founder  of  the  fourth  or 
TJitm  dynasty,  whose  name  signifies  "  the  first  absolute  soTcreign  of  the  dynasty  of  T^Um." 
About  B.  0.  221,  all  the  principalities  of  China  were  consolidated  under  his  supreme  swaj; 
and,  as  a  consequence,  the  name  Thsm  became,  in  common  parlance,  synonymous  with  the 
whole  empire.  Proud  of  his  mighty  exploits,  although  detesting  the  individual,  the 
Chinese,  from  and  after  his  day,  adopting  the  word  Thsin  as  typical  of  China  itself,  origi- 
nated the  Hindoo  appellat|Te  '*Tchina,"  whence  we  inherit  our  corrupt  designatum 
**  China."  Under  these  circumstances  we  tender  to  future  sustainers  of  Chinese  in  Scrip- 
ture a  many-homed  dilemma :  — 

Either  the  Prophet  Isaiah  (whose  meaning  is  so  naturally  explained  above)  by  the  w(xd 
SINIM  does  not  refer  to  the  Chinese,  or  inasmuch  as  the  Chinese  eifipire  was  not  called 
Thtin  previously  to  b.  c.  221  —  which  is  about  450  years  after  Is^ah  wrote  —  the  verse  12 
of  chapter  xlix  of  the  book  called  '* Isaiah"  cannot  pos8iblj[  have  been  penned  by  Isaish, 
but  is  the  addition  of  some  nameless  interpolator:  who  must  have  lived,  too,  later  than  the 
first  century  after  Christ,  when  the  existence  of  China  first  became  known,  under  its 
recent  name  Thnft,  to  nations  dwelling  west  of  the  Euphrates.  The  writers  called  the 
** Seventy"  knew  nothing  of  this  absurd  Chinese  attribution,  as  their  «  Land  of  the 
Persians  "  attests. 

Were  it  not  for  them  who  thus  had  paraphrased  SINIM  between  b.  o.  260  and  130,  the 
interpolation  of  a  mere  verse,  after  the  year  a.  d.  100,  in  a  prophetic  book  wherein  whole 
chapters  had  been  previously  interpolated,  would  excite  small  surprise  among  biblical  exe- 
getists.  **  If,  for  example,"  writes  the  great  Hebraist  of  the  *«  Bibliothdque  Imp^riale,"  (292) 
<<  in  a  prophetic  book,  bearing  the  name  of  Isaiah,  they  speak  to  you  of  the  return  from 
Babylonish  exile ;  if  they  go  so  fkr  as  even  to  name  Cyrus,  who  is  posterior  to  Isaiah  by 
about  two  centuries,  be  assured  that  it  is  not  Isaiah  who  speaks."  And  if  that  explanation  does 
not  satisfy  theological  exigencies,  then  let  some  people  bear  in  mind  that  tlfe  word  SINIM 
occurs  in  the  forty-ninth  chapter  of  Isaiah ;  and  that,  according  to  the  highest  biblical 
critics  of  Germany,  whose  mouth-piece  is  the  eminent  Professor  of  Theology  at  Basle,(298) 
**  the  whole -of  the  second  part  of  the  collection  of  oracles  under  Isaiah's  name  (xl.  — Ixvl) 
is  spurious."  But  they  say  Chinese  vases  have  been  found  in  tombs  of  the  Mosaic  age  in 
Egypt ;  and,  «ryo,  that  China  was  known  some  8800  years  ago  to  the  ancient  Egyptians. 
The  archoolog^cal  interest  of  this  alleged  fact  has  been  revived  in  the  present  year  by 
two  new  phases : — 

First,  The  presence  at  New  York,  among  a  variety  of  Egyptian  antiquities,  le» 
authentic,  of — 

**  No.  626. — A  Chinese  vase,  with  17  others  of  different  forms.  All  found  in  tombs. 
Some  from  Thebes ;  others  from  Sakharah  and  Ghizeh. 

**  These  vases  are  curious,  inasmuch  as  they  prove  the  early  communication  betireen 
Egypt  and  China.  Vide  Rosoleni  {ne  for  Rosellini] ;  Sir  Garfhier  Wilkinson's  Manners 
and  Customs;  Sir  John  Davis's  Sketches  of  Cliina,  p.  72,  and  Revue  Archoeologique,  by 
Mr.  E.  Prisse. 

**  No.  627.— A  Chinese  padlock,  found  in  the  tombs  at  Sakharah."  (294) 

This  last  bi^  is  a  confirmation  of  ancient  intercourse  between  Pharaonic  Egypt  and 

(201)  Op.  cU.;  pp.  873, 888-388. 

(202)  Muvk:  FtOedim;  p.  420. 

(208)  Db  Wcm:  Parker'i  tnnsl.  U.  p.  836;  and  alw>  Hnnvnx:  Originqf  Charittiimitjf ;  1845;  pp.  354, 858. 
(204)  ^^Oaialogw  qfa  OMtdiontff  ^nP^ioMAtMqttitiet^  the  property  of  Henrj  Abbott,  H  D.,  now  exhibiting  it 

tlie  StoTveMOit  Inatitate,  No.  680,  Broadway,  New  York  ";  1858;  p^M. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

ON   THE  ART    OF    WHITING.  647 

Ghina,  of  which  orihodox  naTigation  may  well  be  proud,  especially  now  that  two  additional 
Tsses  haTe  been  diseoTered  since  Joseph  Bonomi,  in  his  sly  way,  indicated  the  extreme 
ilrity  of  snch  antiqaes  at  Cair6,  1848. 

<<No.  254.— Padlock,'  Chinese,  said  to  be  found  at  Sakhara. 

«*  No.  255. — Thirteen  Chinese  bottles,  of  the  usual  form,  and  with  the  inscription  in  the 
Chinese  characters ;  and  three  bottles  of  different  shape,  found  in  Egyptian  tombs,  both  in 
Upper  Egypt  and  Sakhara.  The  larger  portion  of  itna  collection  was  found  in  Sakhara. 
Bottles  exactly  similar  may  be  purchased  in  the  perfume  bazaar  of  Cairo ;  and  in  1842  the 
Jannissary  of  the  Prussian  Mission  purchased  ten  of  them.''  (295) 

Second.  The  deterration  of  two  similar  Chinese  yases  by  Layard,  one  from  the  mound  of 
Arban,  and  another  fW>m  its  Ticinity.  These  are  the  more  precious  as  they  show  the  ortho- 
dox and  primeval  OTcrland  route  of  Egypto-Chinese  intercourse  by  way  of  Assyria,  in  ages 
preceding  the  discoyery  of  the  monsoons,  about  a.  d.  45,  by  the  Greek  pilot  Hippalu8.(290) 

'*  In  a  trench  on  the  south  side  of  the  ruin,  was  found  a  small  green  and  white  bottle, 
inscribed  with  Chinese  characters.  A  similar  relic  was  brought  to  me  from  a  barrow  in  the 
neighbourhood.  Such  bottles  haye  been  discoyered  in  Egyptian  tombs,  and  considerable 
doubt  [not  the  remotest]  exists  as  to  their  antiquity,  and  as  to  the  date  and  manner  of  their 
importation  into  Egypt  (Note.  — Wilkinson,  in  his  *  Ancient  Egyptians,'  yol.  iii.  p.  107, 
giyes  a  drawing  of  a  bottle  precisely  similar  to  that  described  in  the  text,  and  mentions 
one  which,  according  to  Rosellini,  had  been  discoyered  in  a  preriously  unopened  tomb, 
belieyed  to  be  of  the  eighteenth  dynasty.  But  there  appears  to  be  considerable  doubt  on 
the  subject)  The  best  opinion  now  is,  that  they  are  comparatiyely  modem,  and  that  they 
were  brought  by  the  Arabs,  in  the  eighth  or  ninth  century,  ftom  the  kingdoms  of  the  far 
East,  with  which  they  had  at  that  period  extensiye  commercial  intercourse.  Bottles  pre- 
cisely similar  are  still  offered  for  sale  at  Cairo,  and  are  used  to  hold  the  kohl  or  powder  for 
staining  the  eyes  of  the  ladies."  (297) 

Since  the  conquest  of  Algeria,  Parisian  naturalists  haye  been  constantly  employed  by  the 
French  Goyemment  to  collect  eyery  specimen  of  natural  history  that  region  affords.  One 
of  these  enthusiastic  sayans,  lamenting  that  his  predecessors  had  exhausted  the  resources 
of  the  country,  was  supplied  by  the  Zouayes  with  sundry  liye  examples  of  a  wild  rat,  the 
species  of  which  was  entirely  unknown  at  the  JardinsdesPlaates.  The  soldiers  called  it 
rtU  d  trompe.  On  arriyal  of  theee  noyelties  at  the  Museum,  (298)  it  was  perceiyed  that 
each  rat  was  adorned  by  a  flexible  and  hairy  proboscis.  In  time  these  appendages  hap- 
pening to  drop  off,  some  assistant  ascertained  that  the  malicious  Zouayes  had  inserted  an 
amputated  tail  of  one  species  of  rat  into  the  nasal  cartilage  of  another!  It  behooyes 
arehseologist^  therefore,  to  yiew  any  such  maryels  as  Sinico-Nilotic  ** padlocks"  with  more 
than  caution ;  for,  as  De  Longp^rier,  the  Conseryator  of  the  Louyre  Museum,  writes  to 
Be  Saulcy,  Director  of  the  Mus^e  d'Artillerie,  **  aboya  all  things,  now-a-days,  gardona  notu 
dei  rati  d  trompe,** 

Chinese  ysses,  of  the  genus  mentioned,  haying  been  familiar  things  to  the  writer  oyer 
since  his  boyhood's  risit  to  Cairo  in  1823,  no  less  than  during  his  official  residence  there 
from  1831  to  1841,  it  was  against  his  wishes  (while  aiding  his  reyered  friend  Morton  with 
a  few  hieroglyphical  indices  in  1842-3)  that  the  following  passage  eyer  saw  the  light  without 
some  qualifying  reseryation :  *<  That  the  (Chinese  had  conmiercial  intercourse  with  the  Eg3rp- 
tians  in  yery  early  times,  is  beyond  question ;  for  yessels  of  Chinese  porcelain,  with  inscrip- 
tions in  that  language,  haye  been  repeatedly  found  in  the  Theban  catacombs.  (Wilkin- 
son's Andmt  Efft^pHoM,  y<d.  iii  p.  108.)"  (299)  But  Dr.  Morton  relied  upon  the  accuracy 
of  Wilkinson,  and  the  latter  upon  that  of  BoselHni,  (300)  as  to  the  matters  of  fact ;  at  the 

(295)  Bo50)a:  Oxtakgue  of  ditto:  Oiiro^  1846;  pp.  26, 26^  85.    [Printod  in  London.    We  saw  its  proof«heett 
then.] 
(29(0  Vuxr:  UbwTip.2e. 

(297)  Babylon:  p.  279. 

(298)  Tide  HisMreNatwrdU  de  MM  let  Prqftmatn  am  JardtM  dm  FkmUt:  12mo,  Paris,  1847. 

(299)  Crania  J^^yptiaca :  1844;  p.  08. 

(900)  Compare  CflAMPOUioa-FiasAc:  ^^nnpte  Andame:  1840;  rooe  '^Nechao,"  p.  369;  and  Notice  tar  deuat 
Qrammatrt*  dt  la  Langut  CopU:  Jane,  1842;  pp.  7-10.  The  penual  of  theee  two  aiUqua  might  beneAt  the 
MaXbxx  fiS  Hora  .^gyfUaooB, 

Digitized  by 

Google 

648  PAL^OGBAPHIG    EXCURSUS 

same  time  that,  in  the  United  States,  there  was  no  sinologist  to  whom  we  conld  refor  tlM 
inscriptions  themseWes.  Nor,  indeed,  was  it  until  the  writer  studied  at  Paris,  (801)  in  the 
winter  of  1845-6,  that  appeal  had  ever  been  made  from  the  learned  opinion  of  Daris.  (802) 

In  tho  letter  cited  at  foot,  the  Chinese  scholar  defends  his  riew  against  the  "  Qoarteriy," 
(February,  1885) ;  which  maintained  that  these  yases  conld  not  haye  been  found  in  ancient 
Egyptian  Combs  —  that  the  st^position  of  their  being  so  found  depended  upon  hearsay; 
neither  Lord  Prudboe,  Mr.  Wilkinson,  nor  Mrs.  Bowen  (quondam  Mrs.  Col.  Light),  hayini^ 
seen  those  specimens  they  had  purchased  at  Coptos  and  Thebes,  extracted  firom  any  ancient 
tomb.  To  repel  which  attack,  Daris  exhibits  a  letter  from  RoselUni  to  the  effect,  that  he 
saw  one  withdrawn  from  an  ancient  tomb  daring  the  Tuscan  excavations  at  Thebes,  in 
1828-9.  And  thus,  the  only  archeological  process  of  determining  the  vastly  important  tut 
of  Pharaonic  intercourse  with  China,  so  far  as  depended  upon  these  vases,  stood  over  untO, 
at  the  writer's  suggestion,  and  In  his  presence,  four  specimens  were  submitted  by  his  valued 
colleague,  Prisse,  at  the  latter's  apartments,  to  their  mutual  friend,  the  high  sinologue, 
Pauthier.  It  is  also  desirable  to  note,  that  the  question  of  the  authenticity  of  these  vases 
arose  amongst  us  at  Paris,  in  consequence  of  their  forming  a  prondnent  feature  in  the 
**  Notice  "  which  M.  Prisse  was  at  that  time  preparing  of  the  identical  **  Collection  of  M. 
H.  Abbott  ;*'  (808)  —  a  collection  that,  rejected  by  Europe,  has  *<  fata  proftigus  '*  since  been 
transferred,  with  the  augmentation  of  a  Chinese  padlock,  in  1852,  fW>m  Egypt  to  New  York. 
**  lisdem  in  armis  fui  ;*'  although  M.  Prisse's  own  doubts  first  prompted  him  to  consult  the 
opinion  of  so  old  an  Egyptian  fellow-8q)oumer  as  the  writer. 

M.  Prisse  had  already  projected  the  substance  of  the  following  in  manuscript : 

**  It  is  pretended  that  these  little  flasks  have  been  found  in  Egyptian  tombs ;  but  as  the 
fact  is  contestable,  I  think  it  useftil  to  discuss  it  Whenever  an  error  is  met  wiUi  in  your 
path,  says  Bacon,  fail  not  to  eradicate  it,  as  a  traveller  cuts  down  a  bramble  in  pacing.  I 
ought  to  strun  myself  the  more  to  destroy  this  error  that  I  have  aided  in  its  propagation, 
by  cooperating  in  the  *  Collection  of  Dr.  Abbott,'  and  by  giving  to  N.  L'H6te  two  of  those 
little  nssks  for  the  Royal  Museum  of  the  Loavre,  where  they  figure  under  the  title  of 
<  Vases  Chinois  trouv^s  dans  les  tombeaux  de  TEgypte  par  MM.  Champollion  et  L'Hdte.' 
Champollion  had  bought  one  of  these  little  vases  at  Thebes  {Monuments  de  tEfft/pte  etdelm 
Nubiey  PI.  424,  No.  28.)  N.  L'Hdte  received  from  me  the  two  others;  and  none  of  them, 
to  my  knowledge,  had  been  found  in  an  Egyptian  tomb.  RoselUni,  the  only  one  who  pre- 
tends to  have  found  a  similar  one  himself  (Monumenti  Civili,  vol.  iii.  p.  897),  in  a  tomb  of 
which  he  makes  the  epoch  ascend  to  the  XVIIIth  dynasty,  is  not  an  author  very  worthy 
of  credit.  8ir  G.  Wilkinson  (Man,  and  (huUy  iii.  p.  108)  believes  that  these  little  flasks 
which  held  perfumes,  had  been  brought  into  Egypt  by  the  commerce  of  India,  with  which 
country  the  ancient  Egyptians  appear  to  have  been  in  relation  from  a  very  remote  epooh : 
but  he  does  not  discuss  the  authenticity  of  these  vases.  Upon  the  testimony  of  these  two 
authors,  and  upon  that  of  the  Arabs,  I  had  believed  for  a  long  time  that  these  flasks  issued 
from  the  excavations,  and  I  bought  many  that  I  gave  away.  Soon  after,  a  traveller  having 
assured  me  that  he  had  seen  similar  vases  at  some  ports  of  the  Red  Sea,  (804)  I  began  to 
conceive  doubts.  Pressed  by  questions,  the  Arabs  avowed  to  me  that  the  greater  number 
of  these  vases  came  from  Qous,  from  Qeft  and  from  Qosseyr,  successive  entrepots  of  Indian 
commerce.    This  avowal  seemed  to  me  peremptory.'* 

It  was  here  that  M.  Pauthier*s  call  with  the  writer  led  opportunely  to  the  sequeL 

«  Nevertheless,  the  stability  of  the  arts  in  China  might  have  caused  repetitions  of  the 
forms  of  these  vases  from  early  centuries ;  and  the  nature  of  the  characters  employed  in 
the  inscription  could  alone  remove  all  objection.  I  consulted  at  Paris  two  learned  sinolo- 
gists, MM.  Stanislas  Julien  and  Pauthier,  who  assured  me  that  the  characters  Mmo, 
painted  upon  these  vases,  dated  solely  from  the  second  century  of  our  era.  M.  Pauthier 
has  been  pleased  to  indite  a  note  upon  this  subject,  which  I  hasten  to  publish  in  order  to 
terminate  the  discussion." 

From  Pauthier's  **  Note  upon  the  Chinese  vases  found  in  Egypt,"  we  have  condensed  the 

(801)  PBnss :  Recherehe*  wr  la  Iggendet  de  SCKAI:  Rame  ArofateL,  1845 ;  pp.  457-475,  note. 

(803)  LeOndM.Bimtentm' let  V€ue$CM»ito($tr<mv6t  done d^Aneteni  nmbeaux:  tnnaUtod  from  tbo  EngUdi 
In  JnnaU  ddS  Jnetitulo  di  Oorr.  ArcheoL  di  Soma,  188S;  p.  822,  m^.,  and  pUte  O. 

(809)  Natioe  ew  U  MueU  dm  Kaire,  it  wir  la  OoOadtiom  ifijfpt^^  Bevut 

ArehfoL,  15  Man,  1840;  tiraee  k  part,  pp. 8-28,  and  wood-oats,  pp.  18, 19. 

(904)  OomparoPiCKKUKo:  RamqfMmoe^theSr  QtitgrofhUxilDUtrib^^^    1848;  p.  400. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

ON    THE    ART    OP  WRITING.  649 

Bttbjoined.  In  his  work,  ''The  Chinese,"  under  the  article  "  Porcelain,"  XJov.  J.  F.  BaTis, 
of  Hong-kong,  refers  to  the  exceptions  taken  by  the  Quarterly  Review,  citing  Wilkinson 
and  Rosellinl  for  the  fact  of  the  discoTery  of  such  Tases  in  Egyptian  catacombs. 

**  M.  Letronne,  when  giving  account*  in  the  Journal  des  Savans,  (Nov.  1844,  p.  665,)  of 
the  work  of  Mr.  Wilkinson,  t^us  expresses  himself:  *  The  author  believes  in  the  Chinese 
origin  of  certain  porcelain  vases,  found  in  the  tombs  at  Thebes,  of  which  one  is  of  the 
XVIIIth  dynasty.  He  gives  the  figures  of  four  of  these  vases,  with  Chinese  inscriptions, 
which  Mr.  Davis  flatters  himself  with  having  read.  We  know  that  other  sinologues  doubt 
this  origin.  The  fact  deserves  to  be  cleared  up  by  a  contradictory  discussion.  .  .  .  There 
is  nothing  in  it  impossible,  but  it  seems  Uttle  vmtimUar.  .  .  .  Tet,  if  these  inscriptions  are 
really  Chinese,  the  fact  must  be  accepted.     All  lies  in  that' " 

It  is  merely  justice  to  Morton's  memory  here  to  remark  that  his  '*  Crania  iBgyptiaca" 
had  appeared  in  the  spring  of  1844,  at  Philadelphia.  Nor  is  his  discrimination  amenable, 
on  questions  alien  to  his  special  studies,  to  the  charge  of  hastily  adopting,  in  good  faith, 
that  which  Parisian  science  had  not  begun  to  ventilate  for  six  months  later. 

After  stating  that  no  sinologist  doubted  that  these  vases  «  are  really  and  purely  Chinese,** 
M.  Pauthier  holds  that  all  the  question  does  *f  not  lie  in  that ;"  and  then .  eliminates  the 
facts  as  follows : — 

1.  The  inscriptions  upon  these  vases  are  in  the  cursive  Chinese  character  called  thsao, 

2.  This  cursive  character  was  not  invented  in  China  until  the  second  century  after 
Christ  Hence  "  it  is  materially  impossible  that  vases,  bearing  inscriptions  in  that 
writing,  could  have  been  manufactured  and  transported  to  Egypt  in  the  time  of  the 
XVIIIth  dynasty ;  that  is  to  say,  about  1800  years  before  the  said  epoch ! " 

Gov.  Davis,  "  well  versed  in  the  study  of  the  vulgar  Chinese  (language),  seems,  like 

some  other  sinologues,  to  have  completely  neglected  the  study  of  Chinese  archeeology."* 

Nevertheless,  on  the  vase  published  by  him  (No.  4  of  Wilkinson,  and  of  M.  Prisse), 

one  reads  easily : — 

8.  ** Minff  yotU  eoung  tehoung  tehao:   'the  brilliant  moon  is  resplendent  through  the 

pines.' " 
4.  This  is  a  line  from  a  ''strophe  composed  by  Wang-gan-chi,  who  lived  under  the 
Soung  dynasty,  in  1068  of  our  era;  and  corrected  in  the  last  syllable  by  Sou-toung-po, 
who  flourished  fifty  years  later." 
6.  The  highest  antiquity  of  the  cursive  character  on  these  vases  being  200  years  after 
Christ,  and  the  verse  written  upon  them  being  from  an  author  who  lived  early  in  the 
twelfth  century  of  the  same  era  —  it  follows  that  the  vases  in  question  have  been 
transported  into  Egypt  since  the  year  1100  a.  d.    M.  Pauthier  gives  reasons,  from 
Chinese  history,  why  some  of  them  may  have  been  brought  back  from  China  by  Ara- 
bian embassies  in  the  fifteenth  century  after  Christ ;  to  which  age  probably  belong  the 
two  specimens  recentiy  exhumed  from  the  Ehabour  mounds  by  Dr.  Layard. 
But,  as  the  writer,  and  Mr.  Bonomi,  and  M.  Prisse,  and  others,  have  known  for  these 
twenty  years,  such  vases  abound  in  Egypt ;  especially  after  the  annual  return  of  the  ffa<i{;\ 
or  Mecca  pilgrims,  to  Qoss^yr  and  Cairo.    The  Mosaic  Theban  tombs  are  supplied  through 
the  former ;  the  ante-Abrahamio  catacombs  of  Memphite  Sacc&ra  through  the  latter  mer- 
cantile channels ;  while  the  drug  bazaars  of  Cairo  and  of  Qenneh  have  always  a  stock  on 
hand  —  price  fluctuating,  according  to  the  demands  of  antiquaries,  between  two  and  a  half 
and  three  and  a  half  cents  apiece,  retail.     Arab  curiosity-mongers  are  thus  enabled  to  fur- 
nish imbecilities  travelling  along  the  Nile  with  Sinico-^gyptian  vases  even  of  ante-dilurian 
antiquity,  on  application.    In  the  meahwhile,  archsologists  are  aware  of  the  sort  of  proofs 
of  '*  early  communication  between  Egypt  and  China  "  the  New  Tork  collection  embraces. 

To  close  the  digression.  The  reader  will  duly  take  note  that  the  New  York  catalogue, 
above  cited,  refers  to  the  "  Revue  Arohoeologique,  by  Mr.  E.  Prisse."  The  proprietor  of 
the  invaluable  **  Revue  Archiologique  "  is  M.  Leleux ;  but  while  the  author  of  the  **  cata- 
logue "  aforesaid  mentions  both  the  work  and  the  savant  whose  inquiries,  seven  years  ago, 
demonstrated  a  **  Chinese  vase  with  17  others"  to  be,  as  antiquities,  spurious ;  readers 
of  that  document  need  not  wonder  at  the  appropriate  association,  in  the  same  unique 
cabinet,  of  nmilia  timilibtu. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC 

650  PAL^OGRAPHIC    EZGUBSUS 

AU^obstAcles  to  the  appreciation  of  what  we  mean  by  **  Mongolian  Origin,'*  in  the  theory 
of  human  graphical  deTelopment,  being  now  remoTed,  but  a  few  paragraphs  are  necesearj 
to  elucidate  that  section  of  the  General  Table  deroted  to 

8d.  AMERICAN  ORIGIN.— To  another  department  of  **  Types  of  Mankind"  belongs  the 
argumentative  exhibition  of  those  data,^  whereby  the  aboriginal  groups  of  American  huma- 
nity are  disconnocted  from  other  centres  of  creation  litqfra^  Ch^  IX].  The  purposes  of 
our  tableau  are  serred  by  reference  to  Morton  for  the  awtiolo^fieal,  to  Gallatin  for  the 
philologicaly  and  to  Squier  for  the  arckteolopeal  bases  of  discussion. 

It  is  unnecessary  to  reiterate  the  emphatic  disclaimers  of  Dr.  Morton,  concerning  any 
recognition  by  himself  of  such  notions  as  an  exotic  origin  for  Ameriean  Indiant,  Dr.  Pat- 
terson's Memoir  [tupray  pp.  xlri-xlix]  and  our  various  Chapters  [YII.  p.  282 ;  IX.  p.  275 ; 
X.  pp.  805-307,  824-826]  have  removed  from  Morton's  cherished  memory  any  farther 
attributions  to  him  of  these  philosophical  heresies.  (805) 

The  total  segregation  of  American  aborigines  from  other  types  of  man  throughout  the 
rest  of  our  globe,  deduced  in  the  present  volume  from  the  former's  osteolog^cal  peculiari- 
ties, animal  propensities,  geographical  constitution,  and  what  of  history  has  been  made /or 
Indian  nations  by  post-Columbian  foreigners,  results  equally  frx>m  the  matured  philology 
of  Gallatin. 

**  I  beg  leave  once  more  to  repeat  that,  unless  we  suppose  that  which  we  have  no  right 
to  do,  a  second  miraculous  interposition  of  Providence  in  America,  the  prodigious  number 
of  American  languages,  totally  dissimilar  in  their  vocabularies,  demonstrates  not  only  that 
the  first  peopling  of  America  took  place  at  the  earliest  date  which  we  are  permitted  to 
assume,  but  also  that  the  great  mass  of  existing  Indian  nations  are  the  descendants  of  the 
first  [imaginary]  emigrants ;  since  we  must  otherwise  suppose  that  America  was  peopled 
by  one  hundred  different  tribes,  speaking  languages  totally  dissimilar  in  their  nature. "(806) 

Dr.  Youflg  it  was  who  first  made  languages  the  subject  of  mathematical  calculation :  — 

**  It  appears,  therefore,  that  nothing  could  be  inferred  with  respect  to  the  relation  of  two 
languages,  from  the  coincidence  of  the  sense  of  any  given  word  in  both  of  them ;  and  that 
the  odds  would  be  three  to  cue  against  the  agreement  of  two  words ;  but  if  three  words 
appear  to  be  identical,  it  would  then  be  more  than  ten  to  one  that  they  must  be  derived  in 
both  cases  from  some  parent  language,  or  introduced  in  some  other  manner ;  six  words 
would  give  more  than  seventeen  hundred  chances  to  one,  and  eight  near  one  hundred  thou- 
sand; so  that,  in  these  cases,  the  evidence  would  be  littie  short  of  absolute  cer- 
tainty." (807) 

Comparative  philology  now  recognizes  the  grammatical  structure  of  tongues  as  the  sole 
criterion,  which  point  we  have  explained  in  its  proper  place ;  but  those  whose  minds  have 
been  led  astray  by  the  plausible  application  of  arithmetical  formulas  to  the  chances  of  inter- 
course between  ante-Columbian  American  nations  and  the  aborigines  of  Europe,  Asia, 
Africa  or  Australasia — ^based  upon  vocabularies  said  to  be  coincident  in  about  one  hundred 
and  eighty  words — would  do  well  to  ponder  upon  the  fiat  of  the  greatest  archsDologist  of 
our  generation,  Letronne :  — 

'*  Profound  mathematicians  have  essayed,  principally  since  Condoroet,  to  apply  the  cal- 
culus of  probabilities  to  questions  of  moral  order,  and  above  all  to  the  divers  degrees  of 
certitude  in  historical  facts.  They  have  flattered  tiiemselves  upon  ability  to  calculate  how 
much  might  be  bet  against  one,  that  a  g^ven  event  had  or  had  not  happened.  Unfor- 
tunately, they  have  not  seen  that  such  a  probability  can  yield  but  a  result  chimerical  and 
illusory.  In  no  case  could  it  replace  that  conviction,  intimate,  absolute,  admitting  neither 
more  nor  less,  which  the  examination  of  the  diversified  circumstances  accompanying  a  real 
event  produces.  To  those  who  may  yet  preserve  ady  confidence  in  this  abusive  employ- 
ment of  mathematical  analysis,  I  would  venture  the  counsel  that  they  should  undertake  to 
find  out,  through  calculation,  what  new  chance  of  probability  is  added  by  the  fortuitous 
discovery  of  all  these  contemporaneous  testimonies  [such  as  Squier  has  disinterred  from 
the  primeval  mounds  of  the  West]  which  seem  to  emerge  from  the  earth  expressly  to  con- 

,  (905)  Tfa«  fubttanee  of  our  mnarkt  appeared,  nnder  tbe  beading  of  ''The  ProgreM  of  Knowledge  versus  tha 
IncreoM  of  Crime,"  in  the  New  Orleant  Pieajfune^  June  12  and  19, 1853;  signed  O.  B.  0. 

(806)  American  CiviUntim:  Trani.  Amer.  Amer.  Ethnol.  800. ;  lS4ff;  L  p.  179. 

(807)  Ex^erimenU  on  the  PemMum:  Pbilos.  Trans.;  London,  1819 ;  p.  7. 

Digitized  by 

Google . 

ON    THE    ART    OF    WRITING.  651 

Inn  history.  Tbey  will  feel,  I  think,  the  nselcssness,  the  vanity  of  their  efforts ;  because 
that  which  results  naturally  from  this  unexpected  accord,  is  not  one  of  those  definite  pro- 
babilities  estimable  in  numbers  and  in  ciphers ;  it  is  a  complete  certitude  which,  with  irre* 
sistible  force,  takes  possession  of  every  mind  that  is  honest  and  exempt  from  preju- 
dice." (308) 

Not  a  solitary  point  of  identity  which  cannot,  at  a  glance,  be  eitplained  by  the  rule  — 
that  similar  causes  operating  upon  similar  principles  produce  everywhere  the  same  effects — 
exists  between  the  sculptured  and  architectural  monuments  of  the  Old  World  and  those  of 
the  New,  as  known  in  1853  to  archseologists :  not  a  tongue,  habit,  custom,  my  the  or  idea 
found  among  the  aborigines  of  America  by  Columbus,  can  be  traced  back  to  any  anterior 
communication  with  other  inhabitants  of  our  planet.  The  real  differences,  moreover,  in 
the  geological  constituents,  the  fauna,  the  flora,  and  the  entire  range  of  physical  nature 
whence  American  man  drew  his  artistic  models,  preponderate  infinitely  over  those  partial 
resemblances  which,  when  not  caused  by  the  circumscribed  necessities  of  all  human  things, 
are  simply  accidental — ^if  aceidents  can  occur  in  the  organic  laws  of  creative  power. 

Take  up  the  works  of  Squier.  (309)  What  relic  of  art,  what  natural  object,  what  human 
or  non-human  thing,  unearthed  from  those  forest-clad  mounds,  is  not  solely  and  exclu^sively 
American  ?  Run  your  finger  along  the  map  from  the  sub-polar  limit  of  the  Esquimaux 
down  to  the  Terra  del  Fuego,  and  where,  in  published  designs,  of  respectable  authenticity, 
eon  you  point  out  a  fact,  in  native  human  economy,  anterior  to  the  fifteenth  century  after 
Christ,  that  compels  your  reason  to  travel  off  the  American  continetit  for  its  origin  ?  We 
cannot  find,  at  this  day,  pretensions  to  any  but  one.  There  is  nothing,  earnestly  insists 
Mr.  Squier,  (310)  even  in  the  most  curious  of  all  mythological  coincidences  yet  discovered 
between  the  Old  and  New  Hemispheres,  vii :  the  **  serpent  worship,"  that  necessarily  drives 
an  archflBologist  away  fk-om  this  continent  for  explanation :  the  very  figurative  expression 
of  this  American  my  the  is,  "  ab  ovo,"  a  rattlesnake !  Mr.  Squier's  subsequent  pursuits  in 
Europe  (811)  have  opened,  he  tells  us  personally,  hopefiil  prospects  of  filling  up  some  gaps 
between  tribes  of  Indians  still  extant  and  the  Axteq  and  Tolteq  scribes  of  ancient  Mexico. 
He  is  now  in  Central  America  exploring  untrodden  ground ;  and  may  he  succeed  in  his 
indefatigable  restorations. 

The  possibility  of  Malayan,  Polynesian,  Japanese,  or  other  shipwreck  on  the  American 
Pacific  coasts,  having  been  established  by  such  accident  within  our  generation,  is  not  dis- 
puted ;  but  there  are  three  common- place  reasons  that  militate  against  the  probability  that 
contingencies  of  this  sporadic  nature  had  any  the  slightest  influence  in  stocking  this  conti- 
nent with  its  groups  of  Indian  aborigines:  1st  No  memento  of  any  similar  event  exists  in 
the  speech,  semi-civilization,  art,  or  mythe,  of  the  American  world  ta  induce  such  hypo- 
thesis; which  ori^ates  simply  in  evangelical  cravings  ^  European  fathers  **of  that 
thought"  Nor,  were  it  proven,  could  such  petty  accident  establish  intercourse;  because 
these  ancient  castaways  never  returned  home  again ;  and  (still  stranger  to  relate)  there  are 
no  '*  Indians  "  in  the  countries  whence  originally  they  sailed.  2d.  In  the  ratio  that  anti- 
quity is  claimed  for  such  a  supposititious  chance,  so,  owing  to  proportionate  diminution  of 
human  navigatory  ability,  the  physical  possibilities  of  its  occurrence  become  **  fine  by  de- 
grees, and  beautifully  less."  3d.  As  Morton  long  ago  d^lared,  **  If  the  Egyptians,  Hin- 
doos, or  Gauls  have  ever,  by  accident  or  design,  planted  colonies  in  America,  these  must 
have  been,  sooner  or  later,  dispersed  and  lost  in  the  waves  of  a  vast  indigenous  popula- 
tion ;"  so  that,  Indians  existing  before  the  arrival  of  such  metaphorical  colonists,  the  old 
difficulty  remains. 

Of  Irish  or  Welsh  <* Indians"  it  will  be  time  enough  to  speak,  when  their  "coprolites" 
— ^we  dare  not  say  their  historical  vestiges — are  found,  not  merely  on  this  continent,  but 
west  of  the  European  "  Ultima  Thule  "  of  established  Celto-maniac  migrations. 

(906)  SecueU da  JrucriptimM  Qrecqua  et  Latinta de  V£gypU:  1842;  L,  IntnxL,  p.  <i8. 

(800)  Obtenationi  on  the  Aboriffinal  Mmumentt  of  the  Mit$i$rippi  YaOtg:  New  Tork,  1847;  -^AncAmt  Mm^ 
«i(Rtt  ofiht  MimMsipjri  VaUejfi  1848;  and,  iMsidet  flragmentary  papen,  mearoffua:  1862. 

(310)  American  ArchoBoloffg:  **Tbe  Serpent  Symbol;'*  1861 ;  pp.  170, 171* 

(311)  Sketched  in  the  New  Tork  TrOnme :  24  Nov.  1862. 

Digitized*)y  VjOOQ IC 

652  PAL-ffiOGBAPHIC    EXCURSUS,  ETC. 

Far  be  it  fW>m  as  to  di^Munge  the  Icelandic  researches  of  the  <*  Royal  Sodetj  of  Northern 
Antiqaaries  at  Copenhagen  ;**"  nor  their  **  Bcriptores  Septentrionalee  Remm  Ante-Colombia- 
ram."(8l2)  Most  laudable  are  their  national  resuscitations  of  "Sagas'*  recounting  the 
Toyages  of  Eric-ruftis,  or  of  Thorfinn  Karlsefiie ;  particularly  thoee  affording  Ameriam 
proofs  of  that  genealoey  of  Thorraldsen,  the  great  sculptor,  back  to  the  elerenth  century 
after  Christ.  In  our  humble  opinion,  however,  Thor,  with  his  hammer,  is  much  older ; 
but,  unable  to  seize  the  exact  threads  of  connection  between  the  <*  Fommanna  Sogur  *'  of 
Iceland  and  the  autocthones  of  the  American  continent,  we  are  fain  to  leave  their  unra- 
Veiling  to  the'incredulous  author  of  the  **  Monumental  Evidences  of  the  Discovery  of  Ame> 
rica  by  the  Northmen  critically  examined."  (818) 

We  have  said  that  to  the  evidences  of  non-intercourse  between  Ancient  America  and  the 
other  hemisphere  there  was  but  one  exception.    Here  it  is :  — 

In  the  printed  **  Inquiries  respecting  the  History,  present  Condition  and  future  Prospects 
of  the  Indian  Tribes  of  the  United  States,'*  circulated  gratuitously  by  the  Department  of 
the  Interior,  (314)  contributions  are  solicited  from  **  persons  willing  to  communicate  the 
results  of  their  reading  or  reflecUon."  Applauding  most  heartily  any  Government  action  in 
the  r^ue  of  some  mementoes  of  national  tribes  whose  span  of  life  is  but  short,  we  deem 
it  the  part  of  good  citizenship  to  codperate.    Our  respectful  mite  is  tendered  gratis. 

*^  Appendix  (Inquiries,  p.  560):  —  806.  Is  the  InscripUon  found  on  opening  the  Grave 
Creek  Mound,  in  Western  Virginia,  in  1889,  alphabetic  or  hieroglyphic  ?  " 

Neither  the  one  nor  the  other. 

Originally  a  forgery — its  disappearance  from  the  << Museum"  at  Grave  Creek  is  ao- 
connted  for  in  the  discovery  of  an  imposture ;  its  sempiternal  reappearance,  in  an  unique 
series  of  works,  is  due  to  individual  idiosyncracy. 

An  old  acquaintance  of  ours  is  this  inscription ;  which  was  first  started,  about  a.  d.  1888, 
by  some  **  Grave  Creek  Flat"  (816)  Flat  at  its  origin,  the  Ohio  pebble  has  become  flatter 
through  scholastic  abrasions ;  and  so  terribly  worn  away,  that  the  United  States  Depart- 
ment, at  no  trivial  expense,  is  doomed  to  advertise  perpetually  for  its  recovery  through 
official  inquiries. 

Already,  before  our  sojourn  at  Paris,  1846-'6,  the  vast  palsBographic  erudition  of  this 
inscription's  composer  had  been  exemplified  by  the  reduction  of  its  twenty-two  rudimental 
apices,  into  four  Greek,  four  Etruscan,  five  Runic,  six  Gallic,  seven  Erse,  ten  Phoenician, 
fourteen  British,  and  sixteen  Celtiberic  letters ;  being  no  less  than  sixty-six  chances  drawn 
from  twenty-two,  that  an  Ohio  pebble  had  made,  in  primeval  times,  an  outward  voyage  to 
Europe  and  the  Levant ;  and,  after  receiving  the  engraved  contributions  of  eight  antique 
nations,  had  recrossed  the  Atiantic  to  its  pristine  geological  habitat 

Unhappily,  we  were  too  late.  Our  venerable  friend,  M.  Jomard  (having  accepted  a  copy 
of  this  inscription,  for  the  **Biblioth^ue  Royale,"  in  scientific  good  faith),  had  already 
printed  the  learned  and  skilftil  analogies  deducible  between  the  scratches  on  this  pebble  and 
the  Numidian  alphabet  Other  scholars, .native  and  foreign,  were  misled ;  and  there  really 
seemed  no  prospect  that  the  bewilderments  produced  by  this  contemptible  petroglyph  of  a 
«  Grave  Creek  Flat"  should  not  become  universal,  when  Squier's  sudden  mallet  flattened 
it  out  forever,  in  1848.(816)  The  pebble  vanished  from  the  Grave  Creek  Mound;  and 
while,  at  this  day,  there  is  but  one  man  who  yet  slumbers  in  a  fool's  paradise  concerning 
it,  we  may  echo  its  annihilator's  felicitous  dictum  —  **  sic  transit  gloria  moundL" 

We  have  seen  how  the  fabled  communications  between  the  ancient  denizens  of  the  Nile 
and  those^  of  the  Hoang-ho  have  reposed  upon  Sinieo-iEgyptian  **  vases  "  —  to  which  has 
recently  been  added  a  ** padlock";  and  we  now  know  the  orchieological  worthiness  of  the  on/y 

(312)  AnHqmUda  AmeriooMt:  op«ra  et  ttadlo  Cabou  C  Rapit;  fo])p,  Oopenhagen,  1887. 
(318)  8qciir:  in  Lua  Buru^b  London  BOmoiogieal  Joumal\  Dec  1848;  «0pedaUj  p.  319. 
(814)  OlfUx  of  Indian  Affiotirt:  4to,  Wwhtngton,  1851. 
(316)  Tram.  Amer.  EOmoL  Soe.:  1846;  L  pp.  86(M20. 
(81^  London  ElhnoUiffieal  Journal :  loc  cU, 

Digitized  by 

Google 

mankind's  chronologt-^introductort,       653 

proof  yet  standing  to  sustain  idiocratioal  theories  of  ante-Columbian  intercoorse  between 
the  American  continent  and  any  other  centres  of  human  creation  on  our  terraqueous 
planet.  Until  something  Tery  different  in  calibre  be  discovered  by  future  explorers,  the 
section  of  our  General  Table  deyoted  to  AMERICAN  ORIGINS  ivlll  surviTe,  as  the  plain 
result  of  paleographio  science  in  Anno  Domini  1858. 

G.  R.  G. 

\ 

ESSAY   III. 

mankind's  chronology — INTRODUCTORY. 

Ou&  brief  inquiries  into  a  subject  irhich  possesses  such  manifold  ramificatiolis  may  be 
conveniently  heralded  by  an  extract  or  two  from  the  works  of  some  learned  contempo* 
raries:  — 

'*  We  must  therefore  acquiesce  in  the  conclusion,  that  the  Hebrew  copies  represent  the 
original  and  authentic  text  of  the  book  of  Genesis.  ...  On  historical  grounds,  very  formi- 
dable objectionB  present  themselves  to  the  Hebrew  Chronology.  .  .  .  The  difficulties  are  still 
greater  when  the  Mosaic  chronology  is  applied  as  a  measure  to  t>rofane  history.  ...  It  is 
not,  however,  in  these  difficulties  alone  that  we  find  reason  for  doubting  wheUier  the  gene- 
alogies of  the  book  of  Genesis,  taken  either  according  to  the  Hebrew  or  the  Septuagint, 
furnish  us  with  a  real  chronology  and  history.  ...  No  evidence,  therefore,  remains,  by 
which  we  can  fix  the  interval  which  elapsed  between  the  origin  of  the  human  race  and  the 
commencement  of  the  special  history  of  each  nation.  .  .  .  The  consequence  of  the  method 
which  has  been  commonly  adopted,  of  making  the  Jewish  chronology  the  bed  of  Procrustes, 
to  which  every  other  must  conform  in  length,  has  been,  that  credence  has  been  refused  to 
histories,  such  as  that  of  Egypt,  resting  upon  unquestionable  documents ;  and  we  have 
voluntarily  deprived  ourselves  of  at  least  a  thousand  years,  which  had  been  redeemed  for 
us  from  the  darkness  of  ante-historical  times."  (817) 

«*  From  this,  discrepancy  we  may  infer,  securely  as  it  seems  to  me,  that  the  Biblical 
writers  had  no  revelation  on  the  subject  of  chronology,  but  computed  the  succession  of 
times  Arom  such  data  as  were  accessible  to  them.  The  duration  of  time,  unless  in  so  far 
as  the  knowledge  of  it  was  requisite  for  understanding  the  Divine  Dispensation,  was  not  a 
matter  oniwhich  supernatural  light  was  afforded ;  nor  was  this  more  likely  than  that  the 
facts  connected  wiUi  physical  science  should  have  been  revealed.  . .  .  The  result  of  this 
part  of  our  inquiry  is,  in  the  first  place,  that  a  much  longer  space  of  time  must  have 
elapsed  than  that  allowed  by  modern  chronologers  between  the  age  of  Abraham  and  the 
£xode;(818)  and,  secondly,  that  generations  have  certainly ,  been  omitted  in  the  early 
genealogies.  ...  By  some  it  will  be  objected  to  the  conclusions  at  which  I  have  arrived, 
that  there  exists,  according  to  my  hypothesis,  no  chronology,  properly  so  termed,  of  the 
earliest  ages,  and  that  no  means  are  to  be  found  for  ascertaining  tiie  real  age  of  the  world. 
This  I  am  prepared  to  admit,  and  I  observe  that  the  ancient  Hebrews  seem  to  have  been  of 
the  same  opinion,  since  the  Scriptural  writers  have  always  avoided  the  attempt  to  compute 
the  period  in  question.  They  go  back,  as  we  have  seen  in  the  instance  of  St.  Paul's  com- 
putation, to  the  age  of  Abraham,  at  the  same  time  using  expressions  plainly  denoting  Uiat 
they  make  no  pretension  to  accurate  knowledge,  and  could  only  approximate  to  the  true 
dates  of  events ;  but  they  have  in  no  instance,  as  far  as  I  remember/  attempted  to  carry 
the  computation  of  time  f^irther  back,  nor  has  any  one  writer  alluded  to  the  age  of  the 
world.  .  .  .  Beyond  that  event  (the  arrival  of  Abraham  in  Palestine)  we  eon  never  know  how 
many  eenturiee  nor  even  Iww  many  chiliads  of  yean  may  have  elapsed  since  the  first  man  of 
clay  received  the  image  of  God  and  the  breath  of  life.*' (819) 

(817)  Rev.  JoBSf  Kbxbick  :  Primawd  HitUrry;  London,  1846;  pp.  56,  67, 58,  61,  62. 

^8)  The  contrary  i«  now  held  bj  the  highest  Egyptologiiite :  vis.— there  being  hat  Isaac,  Jacob,  Lin, 
KoHATH,  and  AmtAM  —Jive  generations,  or  about  165  years  —  betHWen  Abraham  and  Moses,  this  Interyal  most 
be  curtailed.    Tide  Lbpsius:  Chronologie  der  .^Sgypter;  and  infra, 

(310)  Prichabd:  Bemarchet  into  the  PkyHeal  Hittory  9f  Mankind;  1847;  ▼.,  **Note  on  the  Biblical  Ohrofr 
Ology,"  pp  557, 660, 569, 670. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

654  mankind's  chronology. 

**  The  Boman  researches  of  Niebuhr  had  proved  to  me  the  uncertainty  of  the  chronolo- 
gical system  of  the  Greeks,  beyond  the  Olympiads ;  and  that  even  Eosebios's  ebronicle,  as 
presenred  in  the  Armenian  translation,  furnishes  merely  isolated,  althoagh  important,  dsta 
for  the  Assyrian  and  Babylonian  chronology  beyond  the  era  of  Nabonaasar.  Agam,  as 
regards  the  Jewish  <jbmpatation  df  time,  the  study  of  Scripture  had  long  oonvbced  me, 
that  there  is  in  the  Old  Testament  no  connected  chronology,  prior  to  Solomon.  All  that  now 
passes  for  a  system  of  ancient  chronology  beyond  that  fixed  point,  is  the  melancholy  legacy 
of  thi  17 th  and  18M  centurie*  ;  a  compound  of  intentional  deceit  and  utter  misconception  of 
^the  principles  of  historical  research."  (820) 

With  Germanic  Tirility  of  diction,  Bunsen  further  insists — 

**  This  fact  must  be  explained.  To  deny  it,  after  iuTestigation  once  incited  and  began, 
would  imply,  on  the  part  of  such  investigator,  small  knowledge  and  still  smaller 
honesty."  (821) 

**  But  ^il  s'en  faut)  much  is  wanting,  we  are  convinced  of  it,  that  religious  truth  should 
be  thus  tied  to  questions  of  literature  or  of  chronology.  Christian  fwth  no  more  reposes 
upon  the  chronology  of  Genesis,  than  upon  its  physics  and  its  tutronomy ;  and  besides,  to 
restrain  ourselves  to  the  subject  that  occupies  us,  the  career  of  examination  hu  been 
largely  opened  to  us  by  men  who  certainly  were  far  from  holding  Christian  orthodoxy 
cheap."  (822) 

Nor  does  our  learned  authority  confine  himself  to  mere  assertion ;  because,  within  a 
year  after  the  publication  of  the  above  passage,  he  illustrates  the  slight  estimation  in  wbieh 
he  holds  Genetiacal  chronology  in  the  following  emphatic  manner :  — 

♦♦  It  must  be  known  that  I  wish  to  make  public  a  monument  of  which  the  interpretation, 
'if  this  be  admitted,  will  push  back  the  bounds  of  historical  certitude  beyond  everything 
that  can  have  been  imagined  up  to  this  day.  .  .  .  Because,  one  must  not  disnmulate, 
Manetho  places  king  Mbmche&ss  in  the  IVth  dynasty ;  and  Uie  most  moderate  calculation, 
if  one  follows  the  ciphers  of  Manetho,  makes  the  author  of  the  tiiird  pyramid  remount 
beyond  the  fortieth  century  before  our  era.  A  monument  of  six  thousand  years !  And 
what  a  monument!  ...  We  obtain  the  sum  of  68  years,  whioh,  joined  to  the  4073  yean, 
result  of  the  preceding  calculations,  would  give,  to  the  end  of  the  reign  of  Myoerinns,  the 
date  of  4186  brfore  J.  C."  (828) 

That  is,  our  author  means,  the  third  Pyramid  was  built  in  Egypt  just  168  years  before 
the  world's  Creation,  and  exactly  1809  years  before  the  Flood;  according  to  the  "  Petayian" 
chronology  of  that  Catholic  Church  in  which  M.  Lenormant  is  a  most  devout  communicant 
We  have  thought  it  expedient  to  preface  our  chronological  inquiries  with  the  above  four 
citations.     Each  of  them  will  protect  us,  like  an  ^gis  raised  on  the  stalwart  arm  of  Jove 
or  of  Pallas.    We  have  selected,out  of  the  multitude  before  us,  the  highest  representatives 
of  distinct  schools;    who,  nevertheless,  perfectly  agree  in  wgecting  Scriptural  chron- 
ology :  — 
1st.  The  Rev.  Dr.  John  Eenrick — author  of  many  standard  classical  works,  and  of 
"Egypt  under  the  Pharaohs,"   I860,— one  of  the  most  brilliant  Protestant  scho- 
lars of  England. 
2d.  James  Cowles  Prichard,  M.  D.,  F.  R.  S.— the  noblest  champion  of  the  "Unity  of  the 

human  species."  , 

8d.  Chev.  Christian  C.  J.  Bunsen  — the  successor  of  Niebuhr  as  Prussiaa  Ambassador  at 
the  court  of  Rome,  and  of  Wilhelm  von  Humboldt  at  that  of  St  James;  the  pupil  of 
Schelling,  and  the  friend  of  Lepsius.  (824) 
4th.  Prof.  Charles  Lenormant  —  the  companion  and  disciple  of  ChampoUion-leJeune; 
alike  famed  for  Hellenic  erudition,  and  for  severe  Catholicity ;  who  now  fills  ^^ 
chair  of  Egyptology,  vacated  by  Letronne's  demise,  at  the  College  de  France.  (826) 
It  will  moreover  be  remarked  that  our  quotations  set  up  no  claim,  as  yet,  for  the  respec 

(320)  BuHSKif :  ElmtpCt  Place  in  Vnivereal  History  ;  Londoii,  1848;  I.,  Prefooe,  pp.  1. 2.  ^^^ 

(821)  Jtrid.:  .Sgyptens  StOLt  in  der  WtUgeschichU;  Hamburg,  1845 ,  L,  Kinleitung,  pp.6,7-w»»«»^**°^ 
omitted  in  HgypPs  Plav.  bjr  the  aooompliahed  EngUflh  translator. 
(322)  LufOBXAKT:  Cawn  ^HiA,  Jncienne;  Pari*,  1838;  p.  122. 

(823)  LaironMA^:  AiMrcissement*  sur  te  Oercuea  du  Roi  MemphiU  Jfycer^ws;  Pirif,  1889;  pp.  8,  ^  »• 

(824)  Read  Dr.  Abxold'8  eulogien  of  this  illnetriooB  (entleman. 
(325)  Quddon:  OUa  ^yptiajca ;  1S49;  pp.)  91,  02. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

INTRODUCTORY.  655 

ability  of  the  chronological  systems  of  other  nations  at  the  expense  of  Judaism.  On  the 
contrary,  they  bear  with  nndlTided  force  upon  Hebrew  oomputatiofts,  Tiewed  for  themselTes 
alone.  , 

Not  less  truthfully  does  the  language  of  a  profound  thinker— expression  of  a  fifth,  and 
far  more  liberal  philosophy, — set  f(^ih  the  effeteness  of  Jewish  chronology.  Luke  Burke's 
writings  are  unmistakeable :  his  <<  Critical  Analysis  of  the  Hebrew  Chronology "  (326)  is 
one  of  the  most  masterly  productions  our  literature  can  boast  Curtailment  is  injustice  to 
its  author :  to  the  reader  garbled  extracts  would  be  unsatisfactory ;  and  the  sincere  inyes- 
tigator  knows  where  to  peruse  the  whole.  We  content  our  present  requirements^  with  one 
specimen :  —  ' 

«  Such,  then,  is  the  character  and  importance  of  '  the  most  brilliant  and  important  of 
Primate  Usher's  improTcments  in  chronology ! '  [as  Br.  Hales  terms  the  fabulous  notion 
that  Abraham  was  not  the  eldest  son  of  Terah!]  It  consists,  first,  of  an  argument  that 
turns  out  to  be  groundless,  in  eyery  one  of  its  elements ;  and,  which,  if  well  founded, 
would  prove  the  Old  Testament  to  be  one  of  the  most  absurdly  written  books  in  existence ; 
and  secondly,  of  an  assumption  which,  apart  from  this  argument,  is  wholly  gratuitous  ahd 
improbable ;  and  which  also,  if  admitted,  would  bear  equally  hard  against  the  character 
of  the  very  writings  for  the  support  of  which  it  was  iuTonted.  And  it  is  by  such  argu- 
ments as  these  that  grave  and  learned  divines  seek  to  ascertain  the  realities  of  ancient  Ms- 
tory,  and  endeavor  to  place  chronology  upon  a  rational  and  sure  foundation  I  And  it  is  to 
such  as  these  that  men  of  science  are  required  to  bow,  at  the  risk  of  being  deemed  scep- 
tical, dangerous,  profane,  &c.,  &c.  For  it  must  not  be  supposed  that  the  present  is  an 
isolated  or  exceptional  instance  of  theolo^cal  argument  On  the  contrary,  it  is  a  rule. 
Volumes  upon  volumes  have  been  written  in  precisely  the  same  spirit — volumes  numerous 
enough,  and  ponderous  enough,  to  fill  vast  libraries.  Until  a  comparatively  late  era,  all 
historical  criticism,  on  which  Scriptural  evidences  could  in  any  manner  be  brought  to  bear, 
was  carried  on  in  this  spirit  Nothing  else  was  thought  of;  nothing  approaching  to  genuine 
independence  would  have  been  tolerated.  And  thus  the  human  world  rolled  round,  century 
after  century ;  the  brave  trampled  upon  by  slaves ;  the  wise  compelled  to  be  silent  in  the 
presence  of  fools ;  the  learned  alternately  serfs  and  tyrants,  deluded  and  deluding,  cheat- 
ing themselves,  and  cheating  others  with  sophistries  which,  upon  any  other  subject,  would 
disgrace  even  the  mimic  contests  of  schoolboys  I  For  ourselves,  we  should  feel  a  humilia- 
tion to  contend  with  such  sophistries  seriously,  and  in  detail,  were  we  not  firmly  convinced 
that  to  do  so  is  not  meirely  the  most  legitimate,  but  also  the  only  mode  by  which  truth  can 
be  rendered  permanentiy  triumphant.  Wit  and  sarcasm  may  obtain  a  temporary  success, 
they  may  awaken  minds  otherwise  prepared  for  freedom,  but  they  are  often  unjust,  usually 
unbenevolent,  and  conseqnentiy,  in  the  migority  of  cases,  they  merely  awaken  antagonism, 
and  cause  men  to  ding  with  increased  fondness  to  their  opinions.  Nothing  but  minute, 
searching,  inexorable  argument  will  ever  obtain  a  speedy,  or  a  permanent  triumph  over 
deep-seated  prejudices."  (827) 

<*  But,  fortunately,"  winds  up  another  and  a  sixth  formidable  adversary  to  Hebrew  com- 
putation—  no  less  an  arch^dlogue  than  the  great  Parisian  architect,  Lesueur — "fortu- 
nately, questions  of  ciphers  have  nothing  in  common  with  reli^on.  What  imports  it  to  us, 
to  us  Christians,  who  date  so  to  say  fh>m  yesterday,  that  man  should  have  been  thrown 
upon  our  globe  at  an  epoch  more  or  less  remote ;  that  the  world  should  have  been  created 
in  six  days,  or  that  its  birth  should  have  consumed  myriads  of  centuries  ?  Can  God, 
through  it,  become  less  grand,  his  work  less  admirable  ?  We  are,  since  the  last  eighteen 
hundred  years,  dupes  of  the  besotted  vanity  of  the  Jews.  It  is  time  that  this  mystification 
should  cease."  (828)  • 

Italian  scholarship  speaks  for  itself  :~(829) 

"  The  Bible  is,  certainly,  as  the  most  to  be  venerated,  so  the  most  authoritative  fount  of 
history ;  but,  in  so  many  varieties  of  chronological  systems,  whith  are  all  palmed  off  by 
their  authors  as  based  upon  indications  of  time  taken  from  the  Bible ;  in  the  very  notable 
difference  of  these  indications  between  the  Hebrew  and  the  Samaritan  text,  and  the  Greek 
version,  and  between  the  books  of  the  Old  and  of  the  New  Testament ;  finally,  in  the  inde- 
cision, in  which  the  Church  has  always  left  such  controversy,  that,  I  do  not  see  any  certain 
standard,  by  which  the  duration  of  the  Egyptian  nation  has  to  be  levelled,  unless  this 

(826)  London  BUmdUtgiad  Jcmrwd;  June,  July,  Norember,  December,  1848. 

(327)  Op.  €0.;  pp.  274,  276. 

(328)  Chrmologie  dee  Reie  cP^Jmfpfe—onmge  oonronn^  par  I'Acad&mio:  PariB,  1848;  pp.  804, 805. 

(829)  BABUOcm,  Director  of  the  Museum  of  Turin;  DUoorti  CrUiei  eopra  la  Onmciogia  ^gitiai  Torino>  18a; 
pp.  29,43, 44, 147. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

656  mankind's  chronology. 

become  determined  through  aa  accurate  examination  of  all  it4  historic  frantains. . . . 
Leaving  therefore  aside  anysooTer  system  of  biblical  chronology ;  becaoseyof  the  quantity 
hitherto  brought  into  the  field  by  the  erudite  none  are  certain,  nor  exempt  from  difficulties 
the  most  graye ;  and,  because  the  Chuboh,  to  whose  supreme  magistracy  belongs  the  deci- 
sion of  controrersies  appertaining  to  dogma  and  to  morals,  has  nerer  intermeddled  in  pro- 
nouncing sentence  upon  any  one  of  the  systems  aforesaid,  of  which  but  one  can  be  true, 
while  all  peradventure  may  be  erroneous.  ...  I  shall  finish  by  repeating  in  this  place  that 
which  already  I  declared  elsewhere,  Tiz.:  it  is  not  my  intention  to  combat  any  systems 
regarding  biblical  chronology ;  but  inasmuch  as,  of  these,  not  one  is  propounded  as  true 
under  the  Ghuboh's  infidlible  authority ;  I  haTO  placed  all  these  (systems)  amde  in  the 
present  examining,  in  order  to  treat  Egyptian  chronology  throuf^  the  sole  data  of  histoid 
and  of  Egyptian  monuments." 

Finally^  we  quote  Lepsius :—  (880) 

**  The  Jewish  chronology  differs  in  a  most  remarkable  manner  from  erery  other;  and 
eyen  in  times  as  modem  as  those  of  the  Persian  kings  the  difference  amounts  to  no  leas 
than  160  years,  from  known  dates.  Its  sereral  sources  present  but  little  difference  among 
themselTCS.  They  count  according  to  years  of  the  world;  a  calculation  which,  as  also  Idxlxb 
(Hand.  d.  Chron.  I,  pp.  669,  678,  680),  considers  most  probable,  wasiuTented,  iojfether  vitk 
the  whole  present  chronology  of  the  Jews,  by  the  Rabbi  Hillel  Haiiassj,  in  the  year  844  after 
Christ :  and  thenceforward  gradually  adopted.  They  fix  the  creation  of  the  world  3671 
B.  0. ;  and  all  agree,  even  Josephus,  in  the  usual  cidculation  of  the  Hebrew  text.  They 
fix  the  deluge  at  1666,  the  birth  of  Abraham  at  1948,  Isaac's  2048,  Jacob's  2108,  Joseph's 
2199,  Jacob's  arriTal  in  Egypt  2288,  Joseph's  death  2309,  years  after  Adam."  ..."  The 
question  is  now,  how  must  we  explain  this  obvious  dislocation  of  facts  as  compared  with 
tiie  true  dates.  Idblsb  has  demonstrated  that  the  introduction  of  the  era  of  the  worlds  and 
consequently  of  the  whole  system  of  chronology,  must  be  ascribed  to  the  author  of  the 
MoUdt,  (or  *  New  Moons,')  and  in  general  of  the  whole  later  Jewish  calendar,  the  Rabbi 
Hillel  who  flourished  in  the  first  half  of  the  IVth  century." 

Resenring  further  extracts  until  we  take  up  the  Hebrew  chronology,  it  here  suffices  to 
notice  that  Mosbs,  who  liyed  about  the  fourteenth  century  b.  c,  is  not  amenable  for  nume- 
rical additions  made,  to  books  that  go  by  his  Tenerable  name,  about  1800  years  after  his 
death,  by  a  modem  Rabbi. 

The  unanimity  of  science  in  the  rejection  of  any  system  of  biblical  computation  mig^ 
be  exemplified  by  many  hundred  citations :  either,  of  sayans  who,  establishing  grander 
systems  more  in  accordance  with  the  present  state  of  knowledge,  pass  over  the  rabbimeal 
ciphers  in  contemptuous  silence ;  or,  of  diyines  who,  like  the  Rer.  Dr.  Hitchcock  (Presi- 
dent of  Amherst  College,  and  Professor  of  Natural  Theology  and  Geology)  striTO,  Tainly  we 
opine,  to  reconcile  the  crude  cosmology  of  the  infantine  Hebrew  mind  with  the  terrestrial 
discoTeries  of  matured  intellects  like  Cuvier,  De  la  Beche,  Murchison,  Owen,  Lyell,  m 
Agassii.  NcTertheless,  Calvinism  in  the  pages  of  Hitchoock.begins  to  affect  a  more  amiable 
disguise  than  was  worn  by  the  magnanimous  slayer  of  Sbeyxtus,  or  by  the  iconoclastie 
John  Knox ;  to  judge  by  the  following  admissions :  — 

**  If  these  positions  be  correct,  it  follows  that,  as  we  ought  not  to  expect  the  doctrines 
of  religion  in  treatises  on  science,  so  it  is  unreasonable  to  look  for  the  principles  of  philo- 
sophy in  the  Bible.  .  .  .  But  a  still  larger  number  of  [clerical]  authors,  although  men  iji 
talents,  and  familiar,  it  mav  be,  with  the  Bible  and  theology,  have  no  accurate  knowledge 
of  geology.  The  results  nave  been,  first,  that,  by  resorting  to  denunciation  and  charges 
of  infidelity,  to  answer  arguments  firom  geology,  which  they  did  not  understand,  they  haye 
excited  unreasonable  prejudices  and  alarm  among  common  Chrittiana  respecting  that  science 
and  its  cultivators;  secondly,  they  have  awakened  disgust,  and  eren  contempt,  among 
scientific  men,  especially  those  of  sceptical  tendencies  [ !  ]  ,  who  have  inferred  that  a  cause 
which  resorts  to  such  defences  must  be  very  weak.  They  have  felt  TCry  much  as  a  good 
Greek  scholar  would,  who  should  read  a  soTere  critique  upon  the  style  of  Isocrates,  or 
Demosthenes,  andj.bdTore  he  had  finished  the  review,  should  discoTer  internal  eridence  that 
the  writer  had  never  learned  the  Greek  alphabet"  (831) 

How  true  the  latter  part  of  this  paragraph  is,  the  reader  has  conTineed  himself  by  the 
perusal  of  our  Essay  I.  [wpra] ;  where  the  Hebndcal  knowledge  of  Calftnistic  divines  in  1 

(390)  OnnOoffieder  .^ifXPter:  *<  Kritik  der  Qnellen,"  L  pp.  350,  SeO,  SO,  SS2. 
(831)  The  SdigienofOmHofn;  Boston,  1852;  p.  8,  and  Praftee^  p.  7. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

INTBODUCTORT.  657 

rica  has  been  oompared  vith  that  of  coetaneoas  Latherans  and  Catholics  in  Europe.  Con- 
tentions between  scramblers  for  the  loares  and  fishes  may,  however,  be  left  to  the  diverted 
contemplation  of  the  gatherers  of  St  Peter^s  pence.  None  of  them  have  real  bearing  upon 
the  science  of  mundane  ehronology^  to  which  our  present  investigations  are  confined. 

Until  very  recent  times,  it  was  customary,  among  chronologers,  to  follow  the  Judaic  and 
post-Christian  system  in  assigning  eras  to  events ;  vis. :  by  assuming  that  a  given  occur- 
rence had  taken  place  in  such  a  year  (Anno  Mundi)  of  the  Creation  of  the  world.  This 
arrangement  would  have  been  absolutely  exact,  if  the  precise  moment  of  Creation,  accord- 
-ing  to  tk*  «  book  of  Genesis,"  had  been  previously  settled,  or  even  Oonventionally  agreed 
upon :  but,  unhappily,  no  two  men  ever  patiently  reckoned  up  its  numerals '  and  exhibited 
the  same  sum  total ;  as  will  be  made  apparent  anon,  in  its  place.  Besides,  this  arrauge- 
ment  was  found  by  experience  to  be  theologically  unsafe ;  because,  on  the  one  hand,  the 
Christian  Fathers,  by  assuming  the  S^iuagint  computation,  demonstrated  that  Jesus,  ap- 
pearing exactly  in  Josephus's  6555th  year  of  the  world,  could  be  no  other  than  the  Xpt9^^s^ 
<<the  anoinUd ;**  {ZZ2)  whilst,  on  the  other  hand,  the  Jewish  Doctors,  proving  through 
computation  of  the  Hthrew  Text  that  the  birth  of  Jesus  had  occurred  in  the  year  of  the 
world  3751,  demonstrated  that  he  could  not  possibly  be  their  MeSAaiaH.  (888) 

"  There  was  an  old  tradition,"  says  the  profound  Kennicott,  (884)  «  alike  common  among 
Jndssans  and  Christians,  sprung  from  the  mystic  interpretation  of  Creation  in  six  days,  that 
the  duration  of  the  world  should  be  6000  years :  that  the  Messianic  advent  should  be  in 
the  sixth  millennium ;  because  he  would  come  in  the  latter  days.  The  ancient  Jews,  there- 
fore, their  chronology  having  been  previously  contracted,  made  use  of  an  argument  suffi- 
ciently specious,  through  which  they  did  not  recognize  Jesus :  for  the  Messiah  was  to  corns 
in  the  sixth  millennium ;  but  Jesus  was  bom  (according  to  the  computation  of  time  by  them 
received)  in  the  latter  part  of  iSti^  fourth  mUUnnium^  about  the  year  of  the  world  8760  {Seder 
Olam,  edit.  Meyer;  pp.  95  ftnd  111).  The  very  celebrated  [Muslim- Arab]  Abul-Pharagius, 
who  lived  in  the  Xlllth  century,  in  his  history  of  Dyuasties,  thus  proffers  a  sentence  worthy 
of  remembrance ;  by  Pococke  so  rendered  into  Latin: — 'A  defective  computation  is  ascribed 
by  Doctors  of  the  Jews— For,  as  it  is  pronounced,  in  the  Law  and  tbfe  Prophets,  about  the 
Messiah,  he  was  to  be  sent  at  the  ultimate  times :  nor  otherwise  is  the  commentary  of  the 
more  antique  Rabbis,  who  reject  Christ ;  as  if  the  ages  of  men,  by  which  the  epoch  of  the 
world  is  made  out,  could  change.  They  subtracted  Arom  the  life  of  Adam,  at  the  birth  of 
8eth,  one  hundred  years,  and  added  them  to  the  rest  of  the  latter's  life ;  and  they  did  the 
same  to  the  lives  of  the  rest  of  the  children  of  Adam,  down  to  Abraham.  And  thus  it  was 
done,  as  their  computation  indicates,  in  oMer  that  Christ  should  be  manifested  in  the  fifth 
[fourth,  K.I  miUennary  through  accident  in  the  middle  of  the  years  of  the  world ;  which  in 
all,  according  to  them,  will  be  7000 :  and  they  said,  We  are  now  in  the  middle  of  this  time, 
and  yet  the  time  designated  for  the  advent  of  the  Messiah  has  not  arrived,*  The  computation  of 
the  LXX  also  indicates,  that  Christ  should  be  manifested  in  the  sixth  millennary,  and  that 
this  would  be  his  time.  .  .  .  The  old  Italic  version,  which,  according  to  St.  Augustine,  was 
*  verborum  tenacior  cum  perflpicuitate  sententisa,'  is  the  foundation  of  the  chronologia  major 
of  the  Latin  Church,  to  this  day  (1780) ;  for,  *  in  the  Roman  Martyrology,  which  is  publicly 
chanted  in  church,  on  the  8th  Jan.,  the  Nativity  of  the  Lord  is  thus  announced  to  the 
people  from  the  ecclesiastical  table :  Year  from  the  creation  5099  (5199  in  Martyrol.  Rom. 
Antwerp.  1678,  p.  888) :  and/rowi  the  deluge  year  2957  (Hon.,  p.  447)." 

A  quotation  from  a  Christian  work  next  to  canonical  will  establish  the  belief  of  those 
eariy  communities  who  lived  nearest  to  the  apostles :  —  the  5500  years,  be  it  noted,  had 
been,  by  Nicodemus,  "  found  in  the  first  of  the  seventy  books,  where  Michael  the  arch- 
angel "  had  mentioned  them  to  "Adam,  the  first  man." 

"13  By  these  flye  cublta  tnd  a  half  far  the  building  of  the  Ark  of  the  Old  Testament,  \re  peroeived  tad 
knew  that  in  flye  thousand  years  and  half  (one  thousand)  years,  Jesus  Christ  was  to  oome  in  tha 
ark  or  tabemade  of  the  body ; 
14  And  so  our  Scriptures  testily  that  he  ia»the  Son  of  Ood,  and  the  Lord  and  King  of  IsraeL 
16  And  because  after  his  suffering,  our  chief  priests  were  surprised  at  the  signs  which  were  wrought  hy 
his  mesns,  we  opened  that  book  to  search  all  the  generations  down  to  the  generation  of  Joseph 
and  Blary  the  mother  of  Jesus,  supposing  him  to  be  the  seed  of  David ; 

(882)  Hbrhkll:  Okrittian  Theism ;  1846;  pp.  82,  83. 

(883)  Sedsr  dam  Sabba,  eompoaed  about  A.  D.  130;  ipui  Haub. 
(834)  Dismiatio  CknamUi:  2  75,  pp.  82, 88, 76. 

83 

Digitized  by 

Google 

658 

MANKINDS    CHRONOLOGY. 

17 

18 

10 

"U   And  wa  Iband  the  aoooimt  of  the  oreatloni  and.ftt  what  tfan* ha  nuda  tha li««raii  aad  tba avtli,  md 

the  first  man  Adam,  and  that  from  thenoe  to  the  flood,  were  two  thousand,  two  hundred,  and 

twelTe  years. 
And  from  the  flood  to  Abraham,  nfaie  hundred  and  twelve.  And  from  Abraham  to  KoeeB,  ftmr  huudred 

and  OMf.    And  from  Moaea  to  DaTid  the  kfaig,  flTe  hundred  and  ten. 
And  fttnn  David  to  the  BfOiylonish  oaptiTity,  flTe  hundred  years.   And  from  tha  Bali7loBU&  capiiilty 

to  tha  incarnation  of  Christ,  four  hundred  years. 
The  sum  of  all  which  amounts  to  fire  thousand  and  a  half  (a  thousand.) 
And  BO  it  appears,  that  Jesus,  whom  we  crucified,  is  Jesus  Christ  the  Son  ofGod,thetruaandAlmig|ity 

God.    Amen."0») 

The  conolusiTO  logic  of  this  passage  deriTes  support  from  another  ancient  Cnristiaii 
document,  wherein  is  giren  the  reason  why  the  end  of  the  world  was  expected  some  time 
ago:  — 

**  Consider,  my  children,  what  that  signifies,  he  [Ood]  finished  [creating]  them  in  six 
days.  The  meaning  of  it  is  this ;  that  in  six  thousand  years  the  Lord  €k>d  will  bring  all 
things  to  an  end."  (886) 

Such  being  the  whole  story,  the  rei^^er  has  now  to  make  choice  of  whichcTer  of  the  fol- 
lowing dates  may  suit  his  Tiews  upon  the 

Epochas  or  Cbbation. 

BibiUeta  TubU  <md  Viniant.  b.  o. 

Septuagint  computation... » 6686 

Beptnagint  Alexandrinus. 6608 

Septuagint  Tatioan « 6270 

Samaritan  computation 4427 

Samaritan  Text. » ^  4806 

Hebrew  Text «... « «  4161 

BngUshBible 40O4 

r  Playftir # „ 666> 

J<«PJ»«    j  Hales «....  640a 

V.  UniTersal  History v-.»  ^^8 

Tahnudlsta. 6844 

Sedar  (Ham  Sutha 4330 

Jewish  oomputation .. 

.  4220 
.  4184 

B.C 

Chinese  Jews 4079 

Some  Talmudists... .«.».. 8761 

Tulgar  Jewish  computation 8700 

Seder  01am  Babba,  great  Chronide  of  the  World, 

A.  ».180 « 8751 

Babbi  L^man... ....» aOf 

Chritlian  JHvimt. 
Clemens  Alexandrinus^  i.9hl04.........».^...»^  5AM 

Hales,  Ber.  Dr. ...  Mil 

Origen, ,  A.  n.  330 ......................... ^,^^  4180 

Kennedy,  Bedford,  fierguaon.. 

Usher,  Lli^d,  Calmet..... 

HelTettua,  ] 
Melauflthon., 

..  4007 

Luther... 
Sqaliger.. 

8001 

These  are  piere  excerpts  of  120  different  opinions,  on  the  date  of  Crtaikmf  tabulated  by 
Hales.  (887)  This  list  can  easfly  be  swelled  to  abore  800  distinot  and  oontradietory  hypo- 
theses. Between  the  highest  epoch,  b.  o.  6984  (the  Alphonsine  tables),  and  the  lowest^ 
B.  0.  8616  (Rabbi  Lipman),  there  is  the  trifling  difference  of  8268  years ! 

It  is  but  fair  to  set  off  Catholic  against  Protestant  authorities,  so  we  cull  a  few  more 
instances  from  the  learned  pages  of  De  Brotonne  (888). — <<  Among  authors  who  deny  the 
eternity  of  the  world,  not  one,  f^om  its  creation  to  the  adrent  of  Jesus  Christ,  counts  more 
than  7000  years,  nor  less  than  8700.*'  He  also  supplies  a  schedule  of  70  more  di^utants, 
ranging  between  b.o.  6984  and  8740,  from  Ricdoli ;  (889)  but  the  subjdned  are  some  of 
his  own,  extra. 

Suldas 

Mieephorus,  Oonstanttnepdlitanus .. 

,  0000 

Si  Jerome,  and  Beds... 
HUarion 

St  Julian,  and  the  liXZ,, 

6600 
.  6200 
.  8062 
.  6476 
.  6206 

HBbre¥f  Ibxi,,. 

B.CL 

.8834 

St  Isidora 

Montanus «. 

Toasius 

PeiftTins  (Bomanist  authority) « 

(336)  Chqfd  qfNieodemm;  chap.  xxiL— Apochryphal  New  Testament,  pp.  61, 61 
(386)  Genera  BpMt  t^Bamaboi;  xiU.  4:  op.  dt;  p.  lOL 
(887)  AnatytU:  L  p.  212. 

838)  FOiaiiMe^iMltfratkmdmPeiirlUt:  Paris,  1827;  428-436^ 
(880)  ChnmoUgia  rtfermata:  p^  200-20%  296. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

INTBODUCTOBT. 

659 

Bieoioli  shows  that  eompntatioiis  upon  different  exemplars  of  the  LXX  oscillate,  also, 
between  a  maximnm  of  6904  years  b.  o.,  and  a  minimnm  of  6054,  for  the  Creation  alone ! 
NoTertheless,  "Gcelam  ipsum  petimos  stultitift."  Not  satisfied  with  human  inability  to 
define,  through  biblical  or  anysoever  methods  of  reckoning,  the  age  when  Creative  Power 
first  whirled  our  incandescent  planet  fh>m  the  sun'«  fire-mist,  some  intelligences,  at  the 
supernatural  stage  of  mental  deyelopment,  haTO  actually  fixed  the  fnonth,  day^  and  hour  ! 

**  And  now  hee  that  desireth  to  know  the  yeere  of  the  world,  which  is  now  passing  oyer 
us  this  yeere  1644,  will  find  it  to  bee  6672  yeeres  just  now  finished  since  the  (>eation ;  and 
the  y^ar  5578  of  the  world's  age,  now  newly  begunne  this  September  at  the  .^qfunox,"  (840) 
Anno  Mundi  I ;  *'  Vlth  day  of  Creation,  ...  his  (Adam's)  wife  the  weaker  yessell :  she  not 
yet  knowing  that  there  were  any  Devils  at  all .  .  .  sinned,  and  drew  her  husband  into  the 
same  transgression  with  her;  this  was  about  high  noone,  the  time  of  eating.  And  in  this 
lost  condition  into  which  Adam  and  Ere  had  now  brought  themselves,  did  they  lie  comfort- 
lesse  till  towards  the  cool  of  the  day,  or  three  o^dock  aftemoone.  .  .  .  (Ck>d)  expeUeth  them 
out  of  Eden,  and  so  fell  Adam  on  the  day  that  he  was  created.''  (841) 

"  We  do  not  speak  of  the  theory  set  forth  in  a  work  entitled  Nouveau  Syetime  dee  Temps, 
by  Gibert  father  and  son.  This  system,  which  is  not  so  new  as  its  title  seems  to  announce, 
gives  to  the  world  only  8600  years  of  duration  down  to  the  1st  July,  1884 ;  and  makes 
Adam's  birth  1797  years  before  J.  C,  on  the  1st  July,'*  (842) 

'<  It  is,  besides,  generally  allowed  by  Chroaologists,  that  the  beginning  of  the  patriarchal 
year  was  computed  from  the  autumnid  equinox,  which  fell  on  OcU)ber  20th,  b.  o.  ^5,  the 
year  of  the  creation."  (848) 

But  the  Promethean  intrepidity  of  orthodoxy  is  not  content  with  mathematical  demon- 
strations of  the  year,  the  month,  the  day,  nor  the  hour  of  Creation.  It  ascends,  in  some 
extatic  casea^  far  beyond !  Thus,  Philomneete  heads  an  especial  chapter  with 
•'  AntigHUtie—WheX  God  was  about  before  the  creation  of  the  world."  (844) 
Albeit,  none  of  these  proftumtions  of  science  eontun  one  solitary  element,  in  regard  to 
Creation,  that  is  strictly  chronotogieaL  **  Passons  au  Deluge  "  (846) — ^let  us  descend  to  the 
Flood;  and  see  what  resting-place  a  "dove"  could  find  amid  these  wastes  of  waters  and 
of  time.     For  the 

Epoohas  or  Tn  Dbluob, 
out  of  rixteen  opimons  published  by  Hales — maximum,  b.  o.  8246 ;  minimum,  2104 ;  differ? 
ence  1142  years^the  following  are  singularly  in  aecordance : — 

^c. 

.3006 
.2S48 

.8146 

Tnlgar  J«w1fh  o(»iipatatloiL... 

HalM 

VOm 

B.C 

2104 
.8166 
.  2848 
.  2344 

ScptaiiKhit  T6nion....M....««..M«........M...M< 

Buuritan  Tejct. 

BngUth  Bible 

Hebrew  Text 

Jofephoi ».. b 

So  are  also  the  intervals  of  time  assigned,  by  the  subjoined  computators,  to  mundane 
existence,  between  the  Creation  and  the  Flood.    We  borrow  them  ttom  De  Brotonne. 

CKBAnoH  TO  Dbluob. 

Joiephiu..... » » 2266 

SoldM,  Nleepbonie,  Sneebliif,  8t  Jnlieii,  8t  Iei> 

doie.........^ M.....» »•  2242 

Caemene  Aleimdrinm. 2148 

mierton...... ~ 2267 

▼oMlaf,  BledoU 2266 

OorneUiu  a  LapUe. ....» 1667 

Later  BabUi,  8t  Jerome,  Beda,  Montanu,  8oi^ 
Ugar,  Qriganm,  Bmmiof,  Petavliu,  Oordonuf, 
fiallaniii,  TomleUiif,  Herrartos,  PhUippi,  Tf- 
rinos,  RtodoU 1666 

8t  AngOBtine— *<riomAdam  to  the  Deloge,  ao> 

oording  to  our  taored  books  (i.e^  the  LXX), 

.    there  have  elapeed  2242  yean,  tm  per  our  ex* 

emplars ;  and  1666^  aooordinc  to  the  Hebrewi.** 

(840)  Rev.  Dr.  LraBTfOor:  Harmonif  qfthe  rfmre  EmmgdUUt}  London,  1644;  let  part,  Prolog^  laet  page. 

(Ml)  iMi:  fiiniMiqr,  Obiimicie,  OMl  Onler^C^  OU 

(842)  Db  Baotomra;  op.  ett. ;  li.  p.  160. 

(848)  Rev.  Dr.  F.  NoLur:  TM  JUnplkm  Oknmokfgy  Jneiyted!  London,  1848;  p.  882. 

(844)  Uvrt  dee  SmgulariU»:  Dyme,  1841. 

(846)  DAnils,in£<tita<ilMn.*  UL  64. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

660 

MANKINDS    CHRONOLOGY. 

But  these  diBorepandes  are  incremeed  by  the  computatioiia  made,  siiioe  1628  a.  d.,  vpon 
liSS.  of  the  Samariian  Pentateuch,  which  generally  yield  an  interral  between  the  Creation 
and  the  Deluge  of  years  1807. 

The  basis  of  all  these  calculations  lies  in  the  hyperbolical  lires  of  the  itn  aniedilmiam 
Patriarch*,  It  will  be  seen,  through  the  skilf^  synopsis  of  a  learned  dirine,  how  admir- 
ably the  numerals  of  the  Hebrew  and  Samaritan  texts  correspond,  not  merely  with  each 
other,  but  with  those  of  the  Septuagint  Tersion,  and  of  Josephus:  — 

"The  following  tabular  schemes  exhibit  the  Tariations;  the  numbers  expreesing  the 
parent's  age  at  the  son's  birth,  except  in  the  cases  of  Noah  and  Shem.(846) 

Aivn-DiLUTUN 
Patriakobs. 

Hete. 

Sunr. 

LXX. 

>0Mp. 

Pon-DnuTUH 
PAnuBom. 

Hebr. 

8amr. 

LXX. 

Jo«^ 

lao 

106 
M 
70 
66 
102 
S6 
187 
182 
flOO 

180 
105 
M 
70 
66 
62 
66 
67 
68 
600 

280 
906 
100 
170 
166 
162 
166 
187 
188 
600 

280 
206 
190 
170 
166 
162 

182 
600 

11.  8hem  (■fed  100  at 
th«  flood) 

2 
86 

iio 

84 

80 
82 
80 
20 
180 

S 
186 

180 
184 
180 
182 
180 
79 
180 

2 
186 
180 
180 
184 
180 
182 
180 
79 
180 

12 
186 

ii! 

184 

180 
180 
182 
120 
180 

2,  Seth 

8.  Eno$ « 

4.  Qdnan....,.^ 

12.  Afphtuoad 

r^inan  cporloiit... 

e.  Jar^l  ..^ 

7   Enoch  

14.  Heber,, ^ 

16.  /Vf»      

it,  juu 

9.  Lameek..,, 

10.  A<nA(«ttbt  Flood) 

17.  Smig 

18.  Nahor 

10.  Terah  (Q^tk.  zL  82, 

•IWIfldoubC) 
lets  the  oorroet  VToU] 
reeling.             J 

1666 

1807 

2962 

2266 

8otoJ6raAam.... 

862 

1002 

1002 

1063 

The  aboTO,  like  all  other  tables  compiled  by  theological  computators  to  illustrate  so- 
called  <*  Biblical  chronology,"  assumes  the  numeral*  of  current  printed  exemplars  to  be 
correct ;  but,  if  we  set  to  work,  archsologically,  to  Terify  the  original  Hebrew,  Qreek,  and 
Samaritan  manwer^U,  we  find  OTen  this  apparent  uniformity  to  be  a  delusion  —  incteed, 
another  orthodox  figment    A  few  instances  pleasingly  exhibit  this  fact  (847) :  — 

*'  In  one  of  the  manuscripts  collated  by  Dr.  Kennioott,  and  which  is  marked  in  his  Kble, 
codex  clrii.,  this  century  [in  the  Hebrew  generation  of  Jabkd]  is  omitted,  and  there  is  mudi 
probability  that  it  was  also  omitted  in  the  copies  used  by  the  eastern  Jews.  According  to 
the  testimony  of  Ismael  Sciahinshia,  an  eastern  writer,  all  these  copies  reckon  only  1556 
years  Arom  Adam  to  the  flood,  instead  of  1656.  .  .  .  According  to  the  numbers  still  existing 
in  the  Tast  minority  of  [Greekl  manuscripts,  Methuselah  dies  14  years  after  the  deluge, 
and  had  not  the  fifty-three,  of  the  generation  of  Lamech,  been  changed  to  ei^ty-eight,  he 
would  hate  died  49  years  after  the  deluge.  .  .  .  The  deluge  occurred,  according  to  the  Sep- 
tuagint, in  the  year  of  the  world  2242,  and  by  adc^g  up  the  generations  prerious  to  his, 
we  shall  find  that  he  was  bom  in  the  year  1287.  He  hted  969  years,  and  therefore  died 
in  2256.  But  this  is  14  year*  after  the  deluge  /  .  .  .  And  had  they  [the  theologers]  not,  by  a 
prcYious  system  of  changes,  added  a  century  [in  Greek  MSS."]  to  all  the  generations,  he 
would  hate  died  249  years  after  it  .  .  .  Origen  appears  to  haye  been  the  first  who  gate 
notoriety  to  the  contradiction ;  and  for  a  long  time,  the  fact  greatly  disturbed  theologians. 
The  reader  will  be  hardly  surprised  to  learn  that  in  a  subsequent  age  some  manuscripts 
"were  found  with  the  error  corrected,  .  .  .  Some  [Greek  MSS,]  make  the  generation  of  Adam 
880  years ;  one  makes  it  240.  Another  gives  180  to  Canaan,  a  third  170  to  Jared,  while 
others  allow  177  or  180  to  Methuselah.  .  .  .  One  [Hebrew]  manuscript,  codex  Irii.  of 
Holmes,  makes  the  age  of  Methuselah  947 :  three  or  four  other  authorities  make  the  gene- 
ration of  Lamech  180 :  the  two  corrections  conjoined,  bring  the  death  of  Methuselah  to 
the  year  of  the  deluge.  We  also  find  three  other  authorities  making  the  generation  of 
Methuselah  180  years;  this  connected  with  the  188  of  Lamech,  places  the  death  of 
Methuselah  only  one  year  after  the  deluge,  even  allowing  him  full  age.  Another  manuscript 
makes  his  generation  177  years,  three  other  authorities  give  the  number  165,  while  one 
manuscript  makes  his  total  age  965.  ...  Dr.  Eennicott  has  given  readings  of  820  Hebrew 
manuscripts  of  the  book  of  Genesis.  97  of  these  have  been  collated  throughout,  22S  in 
part  only.  .  .  .  One  manuscript  (codex  clvii.)  omits  the  hundred  years  in  his  [Jabbd's] 
generation ;  two  others  (codices  cL  and  clxxvi.)  omit  it  in  that  of  Methuselah ;  and  one 
(codex  xviii.)  in  that  of  Lamech.  Codex  clxxvi.  makes  the  generation  of  Lamech  172  and 
his  total  age  772,  and  codex  xviii.  makes  his  total  age  909.  ...  We  also  find  thi^  in  three 

(846)  R«T.  B.  B.  Sluott,  A.  M. :  Bora  Apoddypboa;  London,  1846;  W.  p.  264,  not*.  Oompan  **TalilM  of  the 
disorepanoiM  of  the  three  Tezti  with  ivgard  to  the  Ant»dUaTiaa  Patriarcfaa"  in  Wallaci  :  DiemiaUm  m  Oe 
Tnu  Age  qfthe  WMd;  London,  1844,  pp.  14-16. 

(^1)BjmKM:Ethnokgical  Journal ;l94»i  pp.  27, 28, 82, 88, 84»  87, 78-9L 

Digitized  by 

Google 

INTRODUCTORY. 

661 

or  four  manoBeripts,  some  of  the  numbers  of  Methuselah  are  written  oyer  eroiurei.  This, 
of  course,  looks  suspicious.  One  manuscript  (codex  cW.)  makes  Enoch  life  after  the  birth 
of  Methuselah  *  five  and  sixty  and  three  hundred  years '  [1.  e.,  the  old  866  dayt  of  an  Egyp- 
tian Tague  year !] ,  instead  of  800  years  simply." 

Thus  far  Luke  Burke  in  his  studies  of  the  Hebrew  Tariations  exhibited  by  Eennicott  (848) 
The  annexed  Table^ shows  how  he  found  matters  in  the  Oreek  of  Holmes.  (849) 

"Tabli  III. 

Namo. 

Bvou  QsnaAnoir. 

AvTxa  GBfraunoN. 

ToxALAon. 

1.      2.     8. 

1.       2.      3. 

2.    I  8. 

Smsr 

Srros 

Caxhui  ... 

MAHAT.AI. 
JABXD  .... 
XlOCH...! 

Mkthusblab 

LUBCH.. 

/1S2 

1805 

ri80 
^140 
(06 

180 
06 

170 
06 

186 
177 
180 

187 

fM8S.81,121,AId., 
(     Tiieop.  p.  18. 

MS.  77 

SUr.,  Arm.  Ed 

M&127.. 
Goptio.... 

BIS.  66.... 
MS.76.... 
MS.  127 .. 

M&  loo;.. 

MS.  127.. 

MS.  75.. 
M&X.. 

i MS.  106,107,  Gom- 
tit:!!!:, 

/MS.71,8UT.,Tho. 
op.  p.  188. 
MS.  I,  X,  16,16^6, 
50, 64, 68, 83, 120, 
121,131,136,187, 
Aid.,  Alex.,  Chrj- 
•ot.  IT.,  Arm.  Ed. 
and  ft  few  othenu 

rMS.75,187,Chr7- 

Ik)8.IV. 

f  Armh.  2.    Chron. 
[Orient. 

802 

565 

f706 
[800 

807 

r705 

016 

(800 

800 

880 

782 

505 

M&186 

SlftT.,Ottrog.,127 

MS.  137. 

MS.  186 

«14,78,180488» 
MS  127 

M&  127.... 
MS.  127.... 

rMSJ.,X.,14,16, 
20,26,55,67,50, 
64,68,71,78.75, 
77,78,79,88,121, 
128,130,131,133 
135,  Aid.,  Cat 
Nio^  Arm.  1, 
Arm.EdnArab. 
l,2,Alex.,SlaT., 
A  perhapa  an- 
other ezamin'd 
by  Tosiias. 

Arab.  2... 

960 

753 

1200 

roio 

002 
l772 

915 

796 
847 
465 

/947 
1965 

r73S 
756 
765 

768 
777 

Oorrected  in 
the  margin  to 
080, 800  haying 
beoi  aoddent- 
allT  pat  for  30. 
MS.  18 

MS.  19. 
MS.  18.     ' 
Anb.1, 

M&79. 

fMS.  14,  25, 81, 
M  57,73,77, 

(78,  79. 
MS.  127. 

MS.  71. 

MS.  57. 
MS.  82. 

Arm.  1. 

MS.  19, 107,107. 
MS.  25. 
Arab.  3. 
Arab.  2. 

*  In  this  raae,  nine  hundred  has  been  oorrected  by  another  hand  into  Keren  hundred.    There  are  sereral 
minor  remarks  and  explanations  relatiye  to  this  table,  which  we  should  hare  been  glad  to  have  horded. 

were  we  not  much  pressed  for  time  and  space.    These,  howeyer,  would,  after  all,  be  of  little  interest  to  the 
general  reader,  and  the  learned  reader  wUl 

1  not  need  them. 

.  .  .  The  first  glance  at  this  table  will  show  the  inquirer,  that  he  has  got  into  a  region  of 
yarious  readings,  yery  different  from  that  presented  to  him  by  the  Hebrew  manuscripts. 
Issteapd  of  some  eight  or  tdne  Tariations  found  in  some  three  hundred  manuscripts,  he  has 
about  118,  found  in  a  much  smaller  number  of  manuscripts  I  .  .  .  Are  we  to  say,  then,  that 
the  Qhristian  scribes  were,  in  general,  so  wretchedly  careless,  that  they  made  twenty  errors 
where  a  Jew  made  but  one?  .  .  .  These  things,  therefore,  evince  design,  not  accident.  We 
find  one  variation  followed  by  more  than  82  authorities,  another  by  18,  a  third  by  9. 
There  are  three  which  are  each  copied  by  four  manuscripts,  four  which  are  copied  by 
three  each,  and  two  which  have  each  two  manuscripts  agreeing  in  them :  thirty-one  only 
are  single  variations,  and  some  of  them,  at  least,  are  as  clearly  intentional  as  any  of  the 
others.  As  to  the  variation  which  makes  Methuselah  live  782  years  after  the  birth  of  La- 
mech,  instead  of  802,  no  one  can  doubt  of  its  being  intentional.  788  is  the  Hebrew  date, 
and  it  was  here  copied  from  the  Hebrew  for  the  same  reason  that  the  Hebrew  was  pre- 
yiously  invented,  viz. :  for  the  purpose  of  bringing  the  death  of  Methuselah  within  the 
antediluvian  period,  instead  of  fourteen  years  after  it.  .  .  .  Codex  LVII.  has  the  total  age 

(848)  Vetut  Teslamentum  Bebraifumf  cwn  variis  ketionibus  ;  folio,  Oxon.  1776-^. 

(849)  Vetui  Tulamentum  Chraamf  am  variit  Uetionibui;  foUo^  Oxon.  1798-1827. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

662.  MANKINP'S    CHRONOLOGY. 

of  Methuselah  947,  while  four  aathorities  haye  his  generation  165. ..  .  The  whole  i 
of  Tariations  in  the  case  of  Methuselah  is  60 ;  more  than  half  the  number  in  the  entire 
AntediluTlan  Chronology.  Every  one  of  them  but  four,  or  at  the  utmost  five,  Tit.,  thoae 
making  the  generation  165,  and  oodex  LXXXII.  making  the  total  age  965,  hate  reference  to  the 
error  in  the  age  of  Methuselah.  This  fact  is  of  course  significant ;  and  at  once  reduces^ 
to  nearly  one-half,  the  number  of  Tariations  that  can  be  supposed  accidental.  This  number 
is  easily  reduced  still  farther.  Codex  Arabicus  II.  has  all  the  Hebrew  numbers,  in  the  case 
of  Lam,ech.  The  Clyronioon  Orientalis  has  the  generation  like  the  Hebrew,  and,  for  any- 
thing we  know  to  the  contrary,  may  haye  the  other  periods  in  harmony  with  this  genera- 
tion. Codex  CXXVIL  has  the  Samaritan  numbers  in  fiye  instances.  The  SclaTonic  Ternoa 
gives  QS  both  the  Hebrew  numbers  in  the  case  of  Adam,  the  Armenian  edition  givet  one  of 
them,  and  the  Ostrogoth  Torsion  the  other.  Thus  we  have  18  more  intentional  Taria- 
tions, making  the  whole  number,  thus  far,  78  out  of  1 18.  Nine  manuscripts  make  the  total 
age  of  Mahalaleel  795,  instead  of  895 ;  four  make  the  generation  of  Adam  880  instead  of 
280 ;  four  others  make  the  age  of  Enos  after  generation  915  instead  of  715 ;  and  four  make 
the  generation  of  Lamech  180,  instead  of  188  or  182.  Three  make  the  total  age  of  Lamech 
755,  while  three  others  make  it  respectiTely  788,  765,  and  768.  These  make  27 
other  cases  in  which  the  intention  is  apparent  though  less  obTiously  than  the  former.  So 
that  we  thus  have  99  instances  out  of  118,  which  cannot  be  reasonably  attributed  to  acci- 
dent. And  even  of  the  remaining  nineteen,  there  are  not  more  than  two  ihtX  hare  any 
unequivocal  indications  of  being  accidental.  The  substitution  of  800  for  80  in  Codex  XVIIL, 
in  the  total  age  of  Adam,  is  evidently  accidental,  as  is  the  805  for  205  in  the  Coptic  Tersion, 
of  the  generation  of  Seth.  Accident  may  also  haTe  occasioned  some  of  the  other  changes, 
but  this  is  not  probable.  .  .  .  When  Origen,  in  the  early  part  of  the  Illd  century,  began  to 
collate  these  manuscripts  and  Torsions,  he  was  confounded  at  the  clashings  which  he  dis- 
coTered  in  them.  Whole  passages  existed  in  some  [Greek  biblical  MSS.]  for  which  there 
was  no  counterpart  in  others,  nor  in  the  Hebrew,  nor  in  the  Samaritan.  .  .  . 

**  The  reader  will  here  naturally  ask,  how  is  it  that  the  commentators  hare  managed  to 
oonAront  these  hosts  of  di£Bculties,  and  yet  avoid  the  inevitable  inferences  which  a  clear 
Tiew  of  them  discloses  ?  The  answer  is  simple.  They  neTor  have  fairly  confronted  therm. 
They  never  haTO  classified  them,  or  analyied  them,  in  a  manner  likely  to  lead  to  the  troth. 
They  would  not  admit  that  any  conclusion  could  be  true  which  did  not  harmonixe  with  their 
pre-conceiTod  theory  of  the  entire  inspiration  of  CTery  portion  of  the  Scriptures — of  ereiy 
portion  at  least  which  they  seTerally  regarded  as  canonical.  This  with  them  was  a  settled 
point,  Arom  which  they  neither  wished  to  recede,  nor  dared  to  recede.  Their  works  there- 
fore present  us  with  little  more  than  Tain  attempts  to  reconcile,  to  soften  down,  to  slur 
over  these  contradictions. 

**  Thus,  it  is  evident  that  this  antediluvian  chronology,  as  we  now  have  it,  is  not  the  work 
of  any  one  person,  or  of  any  one  era.  In  its  original  form  [not  earlier  than  b.  c.  130  to 
420]  it  was  not  only  contradictory  to  all  human  experience,  and  to  the  laws  of  organiza- 
tion, but  also  glaringly  self-contradictory.  It  is  plain,  too,  that  it  has  been  repeatedly 
altered,  in  various  ages,  and  by  various  people,  and  that  these  alterations  have  been  made 
in  a  perfectly  arbitrary  manner,  and  without  any  reference  to  facts  or  historical  data  bear- 
ing upon  the  subject.  Who  can  say  by  whom,  or  when  it  was  drawn  up,  or  how  many 
stages  it  has  passed  through  previously  to  the  changes  we  have  spoken  of?  Is  it  not  foUy, 
then,  to  pretend  to  regulate  history  by  a  series  of  numbers  thus  tampered  with,  to  say 
nothing  of  their  scientific  and  historic  impossibility?'' 

Folly!  It  is  worse  than  folly:. it  is  an  absolute  disregard  of  every  principle  of  recti- 
tude ;  an  impudent  mockery  of  educated  reason ;  a  perpetualized  insult  to  honest  under- 
standings; and  a  perdurable  dereliction,  on  the  part  of  interested  and  self-conceited 
supematui'alists,  of  Almighty  truth.  Ignorance,  abject  ignorance,  is  the  only  plea  throni^ 
which  future  sustainers  of  genesiacal  numerals  can  escape  from  the  chai^  of  knavery. 
Let  imbecility  impale  itself,  henceforward,  on  either  horn' of  this  dilemma  for  edification 
of  the  learned ;  and  with  the  derisive  jeers  of  men  of  science,  who  are  now  endeavoring 
to  reconstruct  a  solid  chronology  out  of  the  debris  of  universal  and  primeval  humanity  jet 
traceable,  in  their  various  centres  of  Creation,  upon  our  planet's  superficies. 

The  reader  of  Essay  I.  in  the  present  work  is  aware  of  the  conjectural  hund^eds 
of  thousands  of  variants  proceeding  from  what  Kennioott,  De  Rossi,  and  the  Rabbis,  qualify 
as  the  **  horrible  state  "  of  the  Manutcriptt  of  the  Old  Testament.  H^  also  may  infer  the 
historical  metamorphoses  of  alphabets,  and  the  alterations  of  numbers  which,  to  suit  differ^st 
schools  of  theology,  the  Hebrew  and  Samaritan  Texts,  and  Septuagint  version,  underwent 
between  the  third  century  before  c.  and  the  fourth  century  after.  A  pledge,  too,  has  been 
incidentally  made  to  him,  that  a  future  publication  shall  demonstrate  why  the  <*  ten  patri- 

Digitized  by 

Google 

INTRODUCTORY.  663 

axehs,"  firom  A>DaM  to  NoaEA,  were  no  more  human  hemgs^  in  tbe  idea  of  their  original 
mriters,  than  are  the  ethno-geographical  names  catalogued  in  Xth  Oeneait.  Abler  hands, 
in  another  chapter  [XL]  of  this  Tolnme,  haye  set  forth  what  of  geology  and  palsBontology 
throws  more  or  less  light  upon  Types  of  Mankind. 

Leaving  the  Delude,  its  uniTersaHty  or  its  fabled  reality,  to  professional  reconcilers  ;(850) 
the  chronological  bearings  of  this  hypothetical  OTont  compel  ns  not  to  dodge,  at  the  same 
time  that  it  is  far  from  oar  intention  to  dwell  upon,  its  passing  consideration.  No  Eebraut 
disputes  that,  according  to  the  Eteral  language  of  the  Text,  the  flood  was  universal.  To 
make  the  Hebrew  Text  read  as  if  it  spoke  of  a  partial  or  local  catastrophe  may  be  very 
harmonising,  but  it  is  false  philology,  and  consequently  looks  very  like  an  imposture. 

«  The  waters  swelled  up  (prevailed)  inflnitely  over  the  earth ;  all  the  high  mountains,  be- 
neath all  the  skies,  were  covered :  fifteen  cubits  upward  did  the  waters  rise ;  the  mountains 
were  covered."  (861) 

The  level  of  the  flood  was,  therefore,  22}  feet  above  the  Dhawalaghiri  (28,074  feet)  and 
OTer  the  Sorata  (25,200  feet) ;  according  to  Humboldt.  (852)  Equivalent  to  some  two  milet 
above  the  line  of  perpetual  snow  must,  therefore,  have  been  the  level  whereupon  the  Ark 
would  have  been  frozen  solid  but  for  an  universal  thaw.  This  is  what  the  Hebrew  chronicler 
meant  by  EuL  HaHeRIM,  HaGiBuHIM — all  the  high  mountame;  even  if  Hindostan  and 
America  were  as  alien  to  his  geography,  as  such  an  aqueous  elevation  is  to  the  physicist 

"  If  there  is  any  circumstance,"  declares  Cuvier,  "  thoroughly  established  in  geology, 
it  is,  that  the  crust  of  our  globe  has  been  subjeeted  to  a  great  and  sudden  revolution,  the' 
epoch  of  which  cannot  be  dated  much  ftirther  back  than  five  or  tix  thousand  years  ago ;  that 
this  revolution  had  buried  all  the  countries  which  were  before  inhabited  by  men  and  by  the 
other  animals  that  are  now  best  known."  (858) 

Science  has  found  nothing  to  justify  Cuvier's  hypothesis,  conceived  in  the  infancy  of  geo- 
logical studies ;  whether  in  Egypt,  (854)  in  Assyria,  (855)  or  on  the  Mississippi :{Zb^)  whilst, 
without  delving  into  the  wilderness  of  geological  works  for  flat  contradictions  of  this  oft-quoted 
passage  of  the  great  Naturalist,  here  are  three  extracts  by  way  of  arrest  of  judgment :  — 

«  Of  the  Mosaic  Deluge  I  have  no  hesitation  in  saying,  that  it  has  never  been  proved  to 
liave  produced  a  single  existing  appearance  of  any  kind,  and  that  it  ought  to  be  struck  out 
of  the  list  of  geological  causes."  (857) 

*<'There  is,  I  think  (says  the  President  of  the  London  Geological  Society;  1881),  one 
great  negative  fact  now  incontestably  established ;  that  the  vast  masses  of  Diluvial  Gravel, 
scattered  almost  over  the  surface  of  the  earth,  do  not  belong  to  one  violent  and  transitory 
period,  .  .  .  Our  errors  were,  however,  natural,  and  of  the  same  kind  which  led  many  ex- 
cellent observers  of  a  former  century  to  refer  all  secondary  formations  to  the  NoAomAff 
Dbluoi.  Having  been  myself  a  believer,  and,  to  the  best  of  my  power,  a  propagator  of 
what  I  now  regard  as  philosophic  heresy,  ...  I  think  it  right,  as  one  of  my  last  acts  before 
I  quit  this  chair,  thus  publicly  to  read  my  recantation." 

A  later  President  of  the  same  illustrious  corps,  1884,  uses  similar  language :  — 
**  Some  fourteen  years  ago  I  advanced  an  opinion  .  .  .  that  the  entire  earth  had  .  .  .  been 
covered  by  one  general  but  temporary  deluge  ...  I  also  now  read  my  recantation."  (858) 

Were  it  not  for  such  denials  of  Cuvier*s  six-chiliad  doctrine  (to  which  hundreds  might  be 
added  of  the  whole^hool  of  true  geologists  at  the  present  day),  then,  it  would  be  evident 
to  archiBologpsts  that  ''geology"  must  be  of  necessity  a  false  science:  and  for  the  following 
reason : — It  has  been  shown  [supra,  p.  562],  that  the  first  chapter  of  the  "  book  of  Genesis" 
is  an  ancient  cosmogenical  ode,  with  a  <'  chorus  "  like  the  plays  of  Grecian  dramatists ;  — 
that  its  authorship,  if  entirely  unknown,  is  not  ifotote;  —  that  its  age,  the  style  being 

(860)  Sach  aa,  tlu  Bev.  Dr.  Pn  Smith,  the  Rer.  Dr.  Hroboook,  or  "The  Friend  of  MoBes." 

(851)  GenesU;  tIL  18, 10;  — Oabbi^  Text;  L  p.  21. 

(852)  Oomosi  Otte*i  trant.,  I860,  L  p.  28,  81, 880-832. 

(853)  Eesay  on  the  Theory  oflht  Barih;  1817 ;  p.  171. 
^54)  Oubdon;  OtiaJBgyptiaoa;  pp.  61-60. 

(866)  AnrswoBTH:  Ateyrta,  Babylonia,  and  Chaktaa;  London,  1888;  pp.  101, 104-107. 

(866)  Dowua;  ItiUeaum  <tfNew  Orleans;  1832;  pp.  7-17. 

(357)  MoCulloch:  SyUm^  qf  Geotogy ;  1.  p.  446. 

(858)  Bey.  Dr.  J.  Ptb  Smitb:  R^UOUm,  Aa;  1841;  pp.  138, 180, 141. 

I 

I  Digitized  by 

Google 

664  mankind's  chronology. 

ElohuUc  and  the  writmg  alphabetieal,  cannot  ascend  eten  to  the  tenth  century  before  a  ; 
and  that,  being  based  upon  the  harmonic  scale  of  7  notes,  in  accordance  with  the  erroneontf^ 
planetary  system  of  Ghaldaio  n^agianism  (of  6planett,  and  the  sun  and  moon) ;  it  is  an  aiti- 
trary  human  production,  founded  upon  ignorance  of  the  physical  laws  and  phenomena  <^ 
Nature  —  as  this  Nature  is  unfolded  by  science  in  the  nineteenth  century. 

In  consequencCi  did  gsologisU  pretend  to  arrange  the  dozen,  or  more,  distinct  <a«atioii8 
manifested  in  the  earth's  crust  through  rocky  stratifications  and  different  fossil  remains 
(divided  from  each  other  by  immeasurable  periods  of  inteijected  time),  according  to  tiie 
«  7  musical  notes "  of  Genesis,  they  would  perpetrate  a  caricature  of  God's  works  more 
gross,  and  less  excusable,  than  that  of  Go^v.A.B'IndicopUustes :  at  the  same  time  that  titey 
would  make  parade  of  stolid  ignorance  ot  philology  and  biblical  exegesis  such  as  ereiy  Oii- 
entalist,  yersed  in  archeology,  must  laugh  to  scorn.  On  the  other  hand  (whether  praetieal 
**  geology  "  be  or  be  not  a  fiction),  were  a  philologist  at  the  present  day  to  argue,  that  th« 
writer  of  <*  Oenesis  i>ii.  8"  possessed  more  knowledge  between  the  fifth  and  tenth  oenturiM 
before  o.,  than  Gosmas  did  in  the  sixth  after  that  era,  his  logic  would  establish  two  things: 
1st,  his  absolute  ignorance  of  geology ;  2d,  of  erery  principle  of  historical  critidsm. 

Indifferent,  ourselTCS,  to  the  self-appropriation,  by  either  side,  of  one  or  both  of  these 
branches  of  the  altematiTe,  we  cannot  leave  the  <<  Deluge"  without  one  observation ;  the 
force  of  which  theologers  and  geologists  would  do  well  to  keep  constantly  in  view.  It  is, 
that  this  geneslacal  Flood  is  inseparable  from  NuEA's  Ark,  or  boat  Without  the  buoyant 
•convenience  of  the  latter,  let  ethnographers  remember,  the  entire  human  race  would  have 
been  drowned  in  the  former. 

We  could  quote  a  real  historian,  and  living  divine,  who  seriously  speaks  of  Noah  as  *'  the 
great  navigator."  We  have  seen  a  wondrous  plate  of  the  "Ark,"  (859)  exhibiting  the  No- 
achic  family  pursuing  their  domestic  and  zoological  avocations  with  the  placidity  of  a  Van 
Amburgh,  and  the  luxuriousness  of  a  Lucullus.  We  have  read  abundant  descriptions  of  this 
diluvian  packet-ship,  in  ecclesiastical  and  ponderous  tomes,  *<  usque  ad  nauseam."  But, 
there  is  no  work  that  does  such  pains-taking  justice  to  the  "Ark; "  there  is  no  man  who 
has  exhausted  Noachian  seamanship,  antediluvian  ship-building,  cataclysmal  proprieties, 
human  and  animal  (from  the  "  leopard  lying  down  with  the  kid "  in  their  berth,  to  the 
cheerful  smartness  of  Ham  the  cabin-boy) — than  Father  Eircher,(860)  almost  two  centuries 
ago.  It  is  a  shame  that  some  great  publisher  does  not  reprint  such  a  sterling  good  work, 
abounding  in  plates ;  as  it  might  be  a  most  useful  field-manual  to  the  orthodox  geolo^st^ 
and  pleasing,  at  the  same  time,  to  children.  Unable  to  do  adequate  honor  to  the  Aridte 
researches  of  this  Herculiean  Jesmt,  we  must  be  content  with  the  lucid  description,  in 
plain  English,  of  the  Bev.  Dr.  Lightfoot ;  who,  living  above  two  hundred  years  nearer  to 
the  Deluge  than  ourselves,  no  doubt  knew  considerably  more  than  we  do  about  the  vessel 
that  survived  it.  (861) 

"  The  dimensions  of  the  Arke  were  such,  as  that  it  had  contained  460,000  square  culutB 
within  the  walls  of  it,  if  it  had  risen  in  an  exact  square  unto  the  top ;  but  it  sloping  in  the 
roofe,  like  the  roofe  of  an  house,  till  it  came  to  be  but  a  cubit  broad  in  the  ridge  of  it,  did 
abate  some  good  parcell  of  that  summe,  but  how  much  is  uncertain ;  should  we  allow  50,000 
cubits  in  the  abatement,  yet  will  the  space  be  sufficient  enough  of  capacity,  to  receive  all 
the  creatures,  and  all  their  provisions  that  were  laid  in  there.  The  building  vras  three 
stories  high,  but  of  the  staires  that  rose  from  story  to  story,  tiie  Text  is  silent;  in  every 
story  were  partitions,  not  so  many,  as  to  seclude  one  kinde  of  creature  from  another, 
for  that  was  needlesse,  there  being  no  enmi^  between  them,  while  they  were  there,  and  it 
would  have  been  more  troublesome  to  Noah  to  bring  their  provisions  to  them :  but  there 
were  such  partitions,  as  to  divide  betwixt  beasts  and  their  provisions  in  store :  betwixt 
provisions  and  provisions,  that  by  lying  neer  together  might  receive  dammage.  The  doore 
was  in  the  side  of  the  lowest  story,  and  so  it  was  under  water  all  the  time  of  the  flood ;  but 
God  by  so  speciall  a  providence  had  shut  them  in,  that  it  leaked  not  In  what  story  eveiy 
kinde  of  creature  had  its  lodging  and  habitation,  is  a  matter  undeterminable ;  how  their 
excrements  were  conveyed  out  of  the  Arke,  and  water  conveyed  in,  the  Text  hath  con- 

(869)  TxAxn:  JHsseriaHon  on  the  Antig^uttjf,  Origin,  and  Design  qftheprimoipal  Pjframids  ^  Bgy^:  Londia, 
1883;  pp.  0, 10,  and  pi.  L 
(860)  Dt  Area  Noi;  1  toI.  Ibl.,  Amsterdam,  1875. 
(801)  The  Harmony,  Ckronide,  and  Order  qfthe  Old  Testament;  London,  1647;  ch.  vL  pp.  8, 0. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

INTRODUCTORY. 

GG5 

sealed.  All  the  oreatores  were  so  eionrated  and  of  a  tamed  condition  for  this  time,  that 
they  liTed  together,  and  dieted  together  without  dissention :  The  wolf  dwelie  with  the  lamb, 
and  the  leopard  lay  down  with  the  ktd,  and  the  calf  and  the  young  Hon  together :  and  Noah  or 
any  of  his  family  might  come  among  lions,  dragons,  serpents,  and  they  had  forgot  the 
wildness  and  oraelty  of  their  nature,  and  did  not  meddle  with  him/' 

Chronology,  therefore,  among  men  of  science,  possesses  relation  neither  to  the  nnknown 
'  epoch  of  the  *'  Delnge,"  nor  to  that  of  the  "  Creation."  These  eTents,  scientifically  on- 
seizable,  are  abandoned  by  positiTists  to  tiieological  tenacity. 

Archeologists,  in  efforts  to  re-arrange  the  World's  occurrences  from  the  chaos  into  which 
ecdesiastical  presumption  had  cast  them,  now  pursue  an  altogether  dififerent  process  of 
inquiry.  Beginning  from  to-day,  as  a  fixed  point  in  history  if  not  in  uniTersal  nature,(862) 
they  retrograde,  as  closely  as  possible,  year  by  year  to  the  Christian  era ;  said  to  be  1 S58 
years  backwards  from  the  present  year.  From  that  assumed  point,  chronologers  continue 
to  retrocede,  year  by  year,  so  long  as  history  or  monuments  warrant  such  annual  registra- 
tion of  eyents :  but  when,  owing  to  absence  of  record  or  to  confusion  of  accounts,  the 
impossibility  of  identifying  a  giyen  date  for  a  given  occurrence  becomes  manifest,  they 
endeavor  to  define  it  approximately  within  a  few  years,  more  or  less.  'In  the  ratio  of  their 
recession  into  the  mists  of  antiquity,  so  does  the  possibility  of  fixing  an  approximate  epoch 
diminish ;  and,  therefore,  it  becomes  necessary  to  group  a  given  number  of  events  into 
masses ;  which  conventional  masses  become  larger  and  less  distinctiy  marked  in  proportion 
as  they  are  remote  from  thai  era  we  call  "  the  Christian." 

The  era  of  the  miraculous  birth  of  Jbsus  was  the  stand-point  of  chronologists ;  the 
pivot  upon  which  every  modem  system  turns.  How  minutely  precise  to  the  mathematician 
this  era  is,  may  be  perceived,  by  archeologists,  at  a  glance. 

Epochs  or  thb  Natititt. 

Aooordlng  to  8  authoriUet -^Trnvtaonit  Mann,  Priestley.. 

Yetr  of  Borne. 
747  

7 

4  «  Kepler,  C»peUui,Dodwell,Ptgi.„ 748  •...  6 

6  *<  Ghrysoetom,  PetayiuB,  Prideaux,  Pl^ftir,  Halea  749 6 

2  «  Sulpitiaa  Sererus,  Usher 760 4 

'8  **  Irenasos,  Tertullian,  Clemens  Alex.,  Eosebius, 

Bynoellus,  Baronins,  CalyMos,  Tosdoa 751  ! 8 

7  **  Spiphaalus,  Jerome,  Oroeins,  Bede,  Salian,  Slgo- 

nios,  Scaliger 752 2 

8  **  Altecander  Dionysius,  Lather,  LabtMeos 758 1 

The  moment  of  the  Nativity  is,  oon8eqneatly,«ero 0 

Tear  after  0. 

1 

2 

3 

«  1  «  Herwart 764  . 

*i  I  u        ,  PaulofMlddleburgb « 766. 

tt  I  **  Lydiat 766  . 

85  authorities,  of  the  most  orthodox  schools,  here  differ  among  themselves  ten  year» 
about  the  era  of  the  grandest  prstematural  event  in  human  annals ;  which  event  is  itself 
dependent  in  epoch  upon  the  implied  accuracy  of  a  date — Anno  Urbie  Conditm,  the  **  year 
of  the  building  of  Rome  "  —  that,  in  his  next  pages,  the  Rev.  Br.  Hales  (868)  shows  to  be 
fluctuating,  according  to  eix  dates  established  by  84  chronologists,  between  the  assumed  year 
B.  0.  753  ands.  o.  627! 

And  this  is  what  theologers  term  ''chronology."  In  the  American  edition  of  Calmet,(864) 
the  date  of  the  Nativity  appears  thus  (the  reader  being  free  to  adopt,  in  a  free  country, 
irhichever  date  he  pleases) — the  editor  naively  remarking,  "  It  must,  however,  be  borne  ii| 
mind,  that  the  particularly  of  the  dates  here  assigned  rests  chiefly  on  mere  conjecture": — 

Tear  of  World. 

Beft>reOhrist 

Before  A.  n. 

Year  of  Christ 

Galmbt. 

Oalmzt. 

Gauot. 

4000 

5 

4 

1 

(362)  HuvBOLDT :  Cbmuw;  L  p.  178;  note,  on  "The  Engliah  Sunday ** I 

(863)  New  AnalytU  ofChnm,;  1880;  L  pp.  214,  217;  Quxowh:  Chajpkrt;  1848;  p.  83;  and  Olia;  1840;  p.4X 

(864)  Dictionary i  "Chronological  Table,*"  1882;  pp.  947,  881. 

84 

Digitized  by 

Google 

666  mankind's  chbonologt. 

HoweTer,  ftvera  the  Re?.  Dr.  Horae,(866)  *«  The  trae  date  of  the  birth  of  Christ  k  fmt 
years  before  the  common  era,  or  a.  d."  This  date  we  should  not  be  nniriUing  to  accept 
but  for  the  Rer.  Dr.  Jarris  (866)  —  "  The  date  being  taken  of  December  25,  by  reckoning 
back  thirty  years  from  his  baptism,  we  come  to  his  birth,  a.  j.  p.  4707,  m  years  before  the 
common  oera.*'  It  would  not  be  decorous  in  us  to  hold  fast  to  such  dogmatic  extension  l»y  t 
Churchman  who  sacrilegiously  derides  a  miirt — **Abp.  Newoombe  could  say,  'Jesus  wii 
bom,  says  Lardner,  between  the  middle  of  August  and  the  middle  of  November,  a.  u.  o. 
748  or  749.  (Cred.  I.  796,  9,  8d  ed.)  We  wiU  take  the  mwa  time,  October  l.M  ! ! "  The 
notes  of  admiration  are  the  Rev.  Dr.  Jarris^s. 

We  have  preferred  quoting  the  latest  authorities;  but  it  need  ziot  be  obeerred  to  the 
learned  that  this  discussion  has  been  revived  periodically  during  the  last  ten  centuries  with 
no  better  result,  than  when  agitated  previously  between  the  unbeUering  Rabbis  and  the 
all-believing  Fathers.    Ex^  gr.^  John  of  Spain  (867)  sums  up :  — 

<*  That  there  has  been  sought  in  what  season  of  the  year,  in  what  month,  and  on  whtt 
day  our  Saviour  was  bom :  some  place  this  birth  at  the  winter  solstice ;  others,  at  tiie 
equinox  of  autumn  or  at  the  equinox  of  spring." 

And  again,  Bossuet,  one  of  the  most  enlightened  men  fji  his  age,  winds  up  his  chrono- 
logical investigations  as  follows :  — 

**  Birth  of  Jesus,  son  of  Joseph  and  Mary. — It  is  not  agreed  <u  to  thtprttut  year  wha 
he  came  into  the  worid,  but  it  is  agreed  that  his  tnte  birth  preesdet  by  some  years  lonr  valgar 
era.  Without  disputing  further  upon  the  year  of  the  birth  of  our  Lord,  it  suffices  that  we 
know  it  happened  in  the  year  4000  of  the  world.**  [  I  ]  (868). 

If  we  inquire  the  age  of- Jesus  at  his  death,  Bossuet  tells  us,  that — "  AccordiDg  to 
Matthew,  he  was  88  years  old ;  to  Pagan  legend,  21 ;  to  Luke,  89 ;  to  Bossuet,  40," 

<<  Common  Christians,"  as  the  Rev.  Dr.  Hitchcock  designates  them  (ubi  supra),  nay 
start  back  in  amaiement  at  these  results  upon  the  year  of  the  Savior's  birtk,  which  the  first 
slashes  pf  an  archeologic  scalpel  have  now  laid  bare.  Mystified  by  childlike  or  fraudnlrat 
authorities,  they  may  or  may  not  be  grateful  for  the  truth ;  but  their  conscientiousness  will 
hereafter  whisper  to  their  minds  that  it  is  safest,  perhaps,  to  become  more  charitable  towards 
men  of  science ;  whose  unwearied  struggles  to  arrive  at  a  chronology  are  superinduced  by 
acquaintance  with  these  facts.  In  the  meanwhile,  readers  of  Strauss  and  Hennell  know 
why  the  settlement  of  the  year  of  Jesus's  nativity  is  one  of  those  things  not  to  be  looked 
for ;  because,  as  Scaliger  wrote  —  '*  to  determine  the  day  of  Christ's  birth  belongs  to  Ood 
alone,  not  to  man." 

To  **  uncommon  Christians,"  whose  efifrontery  has  led  them  to  accuse  Egyptologists  of 
dissensions  as  to  the  epoch  of  the  first  Pharaoh,  Menes,  (by  no  thorough  hierologist  dog- 
matically fixed)  we  have  merely  to  advise  their  prior  determination  of  the  year  of  Christ's 
nativity,  before  they  henceforward  venture  into  Egyptian  polemics  wherein  they  themselves 
are  the  only  parties  liable  to  **  get  hurt." 

In  a  recent  bieroglyphidal  work,  to  which  allusion  will  be  briefly  made  in  its  natural 
department,  the  Royal  Astronomer,  Professor  Airy,  (869)  through  profound  mathematical 
calculations,  obtains  a  celestial  coiyunction  which  he  designates  *'  2005  b.  c.  ;  April  Bih." 
**B.  0."  implies  before  Ckriet .  Now,  as  no  human  being  can  determine  the  year  of  Christ's 
advent;  and  inasmuch  as  the  foregoing  table  exhibits  a  difference  of  opinion  oscillating 
between  ten  years  at  least ;  we  would  respectfully  solicit  the  astronomical  era  upon  which 
the  learned  Professor  founds  his  minute  coincidence.  Is  it  upon  the  *<  etar  of  the  east  "(870) 
seen  by  the  Magi  f  Or  does  he  take  the  unknown  moment  of  time  **  c."  to  be  zero  f  Among 
nrchsologists,  to  say  **  b.  c,"  merely  implies  before  an  epoch  coigectural  for  one  or  more 

(366)  httrod.  to  the  OriL  Stttd^  and  KnmeUdfft  qfthe  Hdy  Scrtptem;  8th  ed.,  London,  1839;  UL  pp.  627, 535. 
(360)  CAnmoL  JMrwLto  Me  JaiiM.i/IAeCAtireA;  London  ed^  1844;  PreAne,  p.  vU.,  ftnd  pp.  586, 563. 

(367)  quad.  mar.  dd.  Lit  Arm,;  YeuMU,  1829. 

(368)  B088UR :  Di$eottrt  nir  VHid.  Vtw.;  md  AH  de  virsf.  let  Dates,  ptr  las  B6n5dlctint  de  Saint^Manr. 
(869)  Hora  J^fypUaoa  ;  London,  1851;  pp.  216  217. 

(370)  Matthew;  iL  1, 9, 10;  omitted  by  Habk;  eaUed  an  <<Migel"  inXafa IL  9-15;  and  wunentkoMd I7  JOBL 
?lde  BnuDBs:  Vu  de  Jenu;  1839;  L  pp.  254-292. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

EGYPTIAN.  667 

years ;  but,  without  some  more  mathematical  indication  of  the  astrorumical  date  of  the 
birth  of  Jesns,  those  Egyptian  calculations  made  at  the  Royal  Obseiratory  must  be  pregnant 
with  error ;  and,  at  present,  seem  as  Talueless  to  chronological  science,  as  are  the  hiero- 
glyphic malinterpretations  that  originated  such  a  waste  of  official  labor  and  of  nationally- 
important  time. 

To  us,  however,  the  forms  "  b.  o."  and  **  a.  j>"  are  merely  conTcntional.  No  astrono- 
mical certitude  is  implied  by  their  use.  This  year,  which  is  the  LXXVIIth  of  the  Indeperi' 
denee  of  these  United  States,  may  be,  for  aught  we  know,  «* a.d.  1860"  or  "a.  d.  I860;" 
although  Tulgarly  termed  <'  the  year  1868."  When  we  use  the  customary  era,  chronologi- 
cally, it  simply  means  one  thousand  eight  hundred  and  fifty-three  years  backwards  from  the 
present  day ;  and  **  b.  o."  signifies  whatcTcr  number  of  years  the  necessities  of  illustration 
compel  us  to  place  before  the  1868d  year  thus  specified.   We  leave  Astronomy  to  astronomers. 

With  this  proviso  constantiy  present,  the  reader  will  understand  that  the  only  ancient 
chronological  era,  positively  fixed,  is  the  Nabonassarian — <<  February  26,  b.  o.  747."  All 
other  dates  in  ancient  history  afe  to  this  subordinate ;  although,  for  ordinary  purposes, 
save  when  phenomena  in  the  heavens  can  be  historically  connected  with  human  events 
passing  on  the  earth,  "  b.  o."  is  both  usual  and  adequate  to  the  requirements  of  archeological 
leience ;  still  more  of  ethnological,  wherein  precision  of  specific  eras  is  less  imperative. 

Our  object,  in  this  Essay  (III),  is  to  lay  before  the  reader  a  general  view  of  the  relative 
positions  which  Egypt,  China,  Assyria,  Judcea,  and  India,  now  occupy,  in  the  eye  of  the 
monumental  chronologist,  on  the  tableau  of  different  human  origins.  Like  every  other 
science  that  of  chronology  is  progressive :  in  the  cases  of  Egyptian  and  Assyrian  time- 
registry  essentially  so ;  for,  at  the  present  year,  1868,  the  former  study  is  immature,  the 
latter  scarcely  commenced.  That  of  China  must  be  accepted  upon  the  faith  (which  there 
is  not  the  slightest  reason  to  impugn)  of  what  Chinese  historians  who,  having  no  theological 
motives  for  unfair  curtailment  or  for  preposterous  extension,  have  rebmlt  from  the  arch»- 
ology  of  their  own  country.  There  is  but  one  nation  of  the  five  of  which  the  utmost  limit 
can,  nowadays,  be  absolutely  determined,  and  that  is  the  Judssan ;  whose  chronicles,  in 
lieu  of  the  first  place  still  claimed  for  them  by  ignorance,  now  occupy,  among  archieologists, 
a  fourth  place  in  universal  history.  For  Greece,  Rome,  and  more  recent  populations, 
according  to  the  criteria  of  their  own  annals,  we  refer  the  reader  to  well-known  histories. 

It  will;  be  remembered  that,  in  <*  Types  of  Mankind,"  chronology  is  only  one  element  out 
of  many ;  and  that  we  here  profess  merely  to  present  the  results  of  those  chronological 
laborers  who  are  now  reputed  to  be  the  most  scientific,  and  consequentiy  the  most  accurate. 

^  CHRONOLOGY  — EGYPTIAN. 

:  ^Vn  certain  pubUo,  oe  puUio  qui  tour  4  tour  admat  sant  prenva  oa  qui  eat  alwiirda,  at  rq)«tt8 

f  aana  moUf  oo  qui  eat  oert^n,  satisfait  daoa  lea  deux  caa,  parca  qu'il  ae  donne  le  plaialr  de  traoohar 

lea  qneatlona  en  a'^pargnant  la  peine  de  lea  examiner;  oe  public  qui  cfoit  auz  Oaages  quand  Ua 
Tiennent  da  Saint  Malo,  naia  qui  ne  croit  paa  aux  Chinola,  quand  Ua  yiennant  de  P6kin ;  qui  eat 

I  fermemant  oonvainou  de  rexiatanoe  de  Pharamond,  at  n'eat  paa  Uen  aiir  que  le  latin  at  rallemand 

[  pniment  Itre  de  la  mSme  famille  aue  le  ranaorlt;  ce  public  gobe-moucba  quand  il  fai^tdouter. 

\  aaprit  Ibrt  quand  il  flint  croire,  hoonait  et  hoobe  encore  la  tfite  au  nom  db  Ohampoluon,  trouTant 

plna  commode  et  plua  court  de  nler  aa  dicouTerte  que  d'ouTrlr  aa  fpnoMnaht,"  (871) 

!  **  Quant  aux  hommea  ^minena  qui  ont  oonquia  una  belle  place  dana  la  canidre  dea  «tndea  ^gyp* 

tiannae,  il  ne  pent  0tre  queation  id  d'analyaer  leura  livrea:  il  aufflt  que  Ton  aaoha  bien  qu«-toua 
ont  maTch6  frnnchement  dana  la  roie  ouverte  par  CHAXPOLUOir,  et  que  la  adanoe  qui  a  dd  aa  pre- 
miere illuatration  aux  Toung,  aux  Champollion,  aux  Humboldt,  aux  SalToIini,  auz  Nedtor  I'Hdta^ 
at  dont  la  rteliC6  a  6t6  prodamde  aana  r^tinence  par  lea  Sylreatre  de  Sat^  et  lea  Arago,  oompta 
aujounniui  pour  adeptea  ferrena  et  couTaincua,  dea  hommea  tela  que  MM.  Letronna,  Ampere,  Biot, 
Mlrim6e,  Priaae,  E.  Bnmouf;  Lepniua,  Bunrnn,  Perron,  Gasaera,  Baruodii,  Gliddon,  Leemana, — 
[Abeken,  Birch,  BOckh,  Bonoml,  Brugach,  Brunet  de  Preale,  De  Saulcy,  De  Roug6,  Harris,  Hlnoka, 

i  Kenriok,  Land,  Lenormant,  Leaueur,  Marietta,  Maury,  Morton,  Nott,  Oabum,  Perring,  Plekerinfe 

Baoul-RochettA.  Sbarpe,  Ungarelli,  Wllkinaon,]  fto—On  connait  maintenant  lea  amia  et  lea  rninomfa 
du  ayatdme  de  Champoluon."  (372) 

**  In  short,  the  little  spring  of  pure  water  which  first  bubbled  from  the  Rosetta  Stone, 
has,  in  twenty-three  years,  now  swoln  into  a  mighty  flood ;  OTerwhelming  all  opposition ; 

^  (871)  AMnbix:  Becherehes  en  i^;nfpte  et  en  Nvbie;  lat  art;  Ravue  dea  Deux  Mondea,  Aug.  1846;  pp.  880,881;— 

iM  slao,  lirid, :  Promenade  en  AwUrique  ;  Rer.  dea  D.  Mondea,  June,  1868)  pp.  1226, 1230. 
(872)  Db  Sauxjct :  Dt  v£tude  da  Hiiroglyphes:  Bar.  d.  D.  Mondaa,  Juna^  1846;  p.  868. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

668  mankind's  chronology. 

sweeping  aside,  or  oarrying  in  its  surges,  those  whose  iocUnation  would  induce  them  to  stem 
Its  force ;  and,  at  the  present  hour,  we  know  more  of  positire  Egyptian  history  and  of  the 
ancient  inhabitants  of  Egypt,  ages  previously  to  the  patriarch  Abraham,  than  on  many  sub- 
jects we  can  assert  of  our  acquaintance  with  England  before  Alfred  the  Great,  or  with 
France  before  Charlemagne !"  (878) 

The  work  last  cited,  accessible  to  CTeiy  reader  of  English  at  an  insignificant  cost,  renders 
explanations  on  this  incipient  steps  of  hierological  di8C0Tei7  herein  superfluous.  As  a 
synoptical  report  of  the  progress  of  Egyptian  studies  it  is  correct  enough,  for  general  pur- 
poses, to  the  close  of  the  year  1841.    Our  present  point  of  departure  is  ▲.  d.  1822. 

**  With  Dr.  Young's  key,  and  Champollion's  alphabet  contained  in  his  letter  to  M.  Daeier, 
a  group  of  scientific  Englishmen,  headed  by  Henry  Salt,  and  subsequently  uded  by  A.  C. 
Harris,  commenced  in  Egypt  itself,  about  1822,  tLe  scrutiny  and  examination  of  aQ  the 
monuments  of  antiquity  existing,  from  the  Sea-beach  to  Upper  Nubia,  from  the  Oases  to 
the  peninsula  of  Mount  Sinai,  and  in  every  direction  through  the  l^astem  and  Western  Deserts. 
These  gentlemen,  mutually  aiding  and  co-operating  with  each  other,  were  enabled  to  takb 
instant  advantage  of  the  true  method  of  interpretation.  Egypt  was  then  all  virgin  ground. 
Every  temple,  every  tomb,  contained  something  unknown  before ;  and  which  these  gentie- 
men  were  the  first  to  date,  and  to  describe  with  accurate  details.  A  more  intensely  inter- 
esting field  never  opened  to  the  explorer  —  every  step  being  a  discovery.  Nobly  did  these 
learned  and  indefatigable  travellers  pioneer  the  way,  and  mighty  have  been  the  results  of 
their  arduous  labors.  They  procured  lithographic  presses  from  England;  and,  at  their 
individual  expense,  for  private  circulation,  Messrs.  Felix,  Burton,  and  Wilkinson  printed 
(at  Cairo— 1826  to  1829)  and  circulated  a  mass  of  hieroglyphieal  tablets,  legends,  genealo- 
gical tables,  texts  mythological  and  historical,  with  other  subjects,  which,  under  the  modest 
titles  of  "  Notes,"  (874)  "  Excerpta,"  (876)  and  "  Materia  Hieroglyphica,"  (876)  were  dis- 
seminated to  learned  societies  in  Europe.  Lord  Prudhoe*s  distant  excursions  and  correct 
memoranda  rendered  the  collections  of  antiquities,  with  which  he  enriched  England, 
extremely  valuable;  and  his  labors  were  the  more  appreciated,  as  his  lordship's  liberal 
mind  and  generous  patronage  of  science  were  above  any  sordid  motives  of  acqmsitiveness. 
Mr.  Hay's  own  accurate  pencil,  aided  by  various  talented  artists  whom  his  princely  fortune 
enabled  him  to  employ,  amassed  an  amount  of  drawings  that  rendered  his  portfolios  the 
largest  then  in  the  world.  The  researches  of  all  these  gentiemen  have  been  of  incalculable 
value  to  the  cause.  They  have  preserved  accurate  data  on  8ubiect8,(877)  that  the  destroy- 
ing hand  of  Mohammed  All  has  since  irrevocably  obliterated;  and  as  they  all  pursued 
science  for  itself,  they  deserve  and  eigoy  a  full  measure  of  respect  The  rumor  of  their 
successes  reached  Europe ;  and  ChampolUoq,  with  reason,  apprehended  that,  if  he  delayed 
his  visit  to  Egypt  any  longer,  the  individual  labors  of  English  travellers  would  render  that 
visit  as  unprofitable  as  unnecessary.  National  jealousy  was  excited ;  and,  to  preserve  her 
position  as  the  patroness  of  Egyptian  literature,  France  determined  not  to  be  anticipated. 

**  In  1828,  the  French  government  sent  a  commission,  consisting  of  Champollion  le  Jeune, 
and  four  French  artists,  well  supplied  with  every  necessary  outfit,  to  Egypt,  in  order  that 
the  master  might,  for  his  own  and  his  country's  honor,  and  at  her  expense,  reap  the  harvest 
for  which  his  hand  had  sown  the  seed.  A  similar  design  having  suggested  itself  to  another 
patron  of  arts  and  sciences,  the  Grand  Duke  of  Tuscany,  the  celebrated  archeolo^st  and 
oriental  scholar.  Professor  Ippolito  Rosellini,  of  the  University  of  Pisa,  and  four  Italian 
artists  under  his  direction,  were  appointed  a  commission  to  proceed  to  Egypt,  wiUi  the 
same  intent  as  the  French  mission.  It  was  amicably  arranged  by  the  respective  govern- 
ments, and  between  the  chiefs  of  each  expedition,  that  their  labors  should  be  united ;  and, 
in  consequence,  the  French  and  Tuscan  missions  were  blended  into  one,  and  both  r^uUied 
Alexandria  in  the  same  vessel,  and  prosecuted  their  labors  hand  in  hand  fh>m  Memphis  to 
the  second  Cataract    They  returned  in  1829. 

"  It  was  amicably  arranged,  between  Champollion  and  Rosellini,  that  they  were  to  com- 
bine their  labors  in  the  works  that  were  to  be  issued ;  each,  however,  taking  separate 
branches — Champollion  undertaking  the  illustration  of  the  **  Historical  Monuments,"  and 
the  grammar  of  the  hieroglyphic  language  of  Egypt — to  Rosellini  was  assigned  the  task 
of  elucidating,  by  the  **  Civil  Monuments,"  the  manners  and  customs  of  this  ancient  people,  * 
and  the  formation  of  a  hieroglyphieal  dictionary.  Each  «et  to  work  by  1880 ;  but  Cham- 
pollion, finding  his  end  approaching,  hastened  the  completion  of  his  grammar.  Intense 
application  had  prostrated  the  firagile  frame  which  enveloped  one  of  the  most  gifted  mental 

(378)  Guddok:  Choften  en  EaHy  Egyptian  History;  New  York,  1843;  p.  10:  15th  ed.,  PhUa<L,  1850. 
(374)  Fblix:  republiflbed  in  ItalUo,  at  Pim ;  but  now  out  of  circulation. 
(875)  Jaus  HALUBuafON:  out  of  print,  and  extremely  rare. 
(SI 6)  WiLXXNaoir:  like  the  preceding. 

(877)  Guddom:  Apj^  to  the  JUntitiiiariei  of  Eunpe^on  the  DcstnutioH  qf  the  JfamsKwto  qf  Egypt;  1S41; 
Loadon,  Madden. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

EGYPTIAN.  669 

capacities  ever  Tonchsafed  to  man.  The  goTernment  gave  him,  in  the  College  de 
France,  a  professor'B  chair,  created  for  him  alone ;  and  Ms  address  to  his  pupils,  at  the 
first  and  only  occasion  accorded  to  him  by  Profidence,  is  a  mavrel  of  eloquence,  sublimity 
of  thought,  and  classical  diction. 

**  lie  finished  his  grammar  on  his  death-bed,  and  summoning  his  friends  around  him, 
delivered  the  autograph  into  their  custody,  with  the  injunction  *  to  preserve  it  carefully, 
for  I  hope  it  will  be  my  vmling  card  to  posterity.'  A  few  weeks  lUTter,  ChampoUion  le 
Jeune  was  followed  to  the  grave  by  the  noblest  men  of  France ;  and  the  wreath  of  *  Immor- 
telles'  hong  over  his  sepulchre  (at  his  native  town,  Figeac)^  symbolized  the  imperishable 
fame  of  the  resuscitator  of  the  earliest  records  mankind  has  hitherto  possessed." 

His  posthumous  works  were  put  to  press  at  the  expense  of  the  nation,  nor  is  their  entire 
publication  as  yet  complete.  Death  removed  Rosellini  (1841)  before  the  Monumenti  ddT 
Effitto  e  delta  Nubia  received  his  final  touches :  and  his  worthy  Italian  colleague,  Ungarelli, 
also  died  (1846)  previously  to  the  termination  of  the  latter's  Interpretatio  Ohditeorum  Urbit, 

We  may  now  proceed  with  a  brief  historical  sketch  of  the  steps  through  which  Egyptian 
Chronology  has  become  the 'criterion  whereby  the  annals  of  all  antique  nations  are  now 
measured ;  subjoining  references  sufficient  for  the  educated  inquirer  to  verify  bibliographi- 
cal accuracy. 

When  Fourier,  the  polytechnic  philosopher,  in  that  masterpiece  of  eloquent  erudition  — 
the  Preface  to  the  '*  Description  de  TEgypte'^ — clumed  a  period  of  twenty-five  httndred  years 
^fore  the  Christian  era,  (378)  for  the  monuments  which  he,  and  the  corps  of  illustrious 
Savans  of  whom  Jomard  is  the  surviving  patriarch,  had  beheld  in  the  valley  of  the  Nile, 
his  intuitive  grasp  of  the  amount  of  time  adequate  to  the  construction  of  then-unnumbered 
piles  as  gigantio  in  their  architecture  as  diversified  in  their  sculptures,  obtained  but  little 
favor  with  the  scholars,  and  none  with  the  public  of  Europe,  from  1810  to  1880.  As  when 
the  immortal  Harvey  announced  his  discovery  of  the  circulation  of  the  blood,  no  surgeon, 
over  forty  years  of  age,  but  died  an  unbeliever  in  the  theory ;  so  forty  years  after  the 
utterance  of  this  chronological  estimate  by  Fourier,  and  notwithstanding  the  victorious 
labors  of  the  hierologists,  do  we  still  encounter  cultivated  minds  unwilling  to  accept^  or 
incapable  of  comprehending,  the  general  truth  of  his  proposition. 

Equally  unpalatable  was  this  scale  of  2500  years,  at  the  time  of  its  publication,  to  the 
representatives  of  two  distinct  schools ;  whom,  for  convenience  sake,  we  will  designate  as 
the  lonff  and  the  short  chronologists.  On  the  one  hand  Dupuis  and  those  astronomers  who 
had  claimed  as  much  as  17,000  years  b.  o.  for  the  erection  of  the  temple  of  Dendera,  and 
on  the  other,  the  followers  of  the  Petavian  and  Ueherian  computations  of  the  chronological 
element  in  Scripture,  coincided  in  its  rejection ;  the  former  deeming  it  too  restricted,  the 
latter  too  extensive  for  their  respective  cosmogenical  theories.  And,  in  a  controversy  in 
which  the  first  principles  of  historical  criticism,  and  a  common  basis  of  debate  were  alike 
wanting ;  before  Young  had  deciphered  the  first  letter  in  the  hieroglyphical  name  of  Pto- 
iemy;  before  Champollion-le-jeune's  '*  Precis"  broke  the  spell  in  which  the  antique  vrritings 
of  the  Egyptians  had  been  bound  for  fifteen  centuries :  and  at  a  day  when  absolutely  nothing 
was  known  of  the  respective  ages  of  Nilotic  remains ;  the  dogmatical  assertions  of  the  latter 
were  infinitely  preferable  to  the  hallucinations  of  the  former. 

On  his  death-bed,  in  1880,  Fourier  was  solaced  by  the  glimpse  which  ChampoUion,  then 
just  returned  from  his  triumphant  mission  to  Egypt,  afforded  him  of  the  probable  accuracy 
of  his  prospective  vision :  but,  before  the  founder  of  Egyptological  science  could  arranga 
the  enormous  materials  collected  for  his  ehronologieal  edifice,  the  4th  of  March,  1882,  over- 
took ChampoUion  on  his  own  death-bed,  in  tha  act  of  bequeathing  the  manuscript  of  his 
immortal  Grammar,  as  "my  visiting-card  to  posterity." (879) 

In  the  same  year,  Rosellini  commenced  the  publication  of  the  *'  Monumenti  dell*  Egitto 

(378)  CHAMPOLUOif-Fnuuo:  I^mritr  d  Napdeon—V^gffU  et  la  caUjtmrt;  1844;  p.  61. 

(379)  Orammairt  tgyptSamt;  1836;  lotrodaotlon.  8w  aljo  In  0HAMP0LU05*FiaKAC  {NoHee  tur  la  Mamacritt 
atdoffvapha  de  CkampoOioH  le  Jetme,  penhu  en  I'aonte,  1882,  H  retrouTte  on  1840;  Parii,  18^  tb«  aoooont  of 
that  wretched  larceny  which,  while  it  aocoonta  Ibr  the  non-puhUoation  np  to  this  hoar  of  all  the  Mamucripte 
left  by  thia  indebtigable  echolar,  oompele  the  hlftorian  to  wipe  his  pen  after  writing  the  name— Saltouml 
The  example  had,  however,  been  previoasly  set  I7  the  plagiarist  of  Johh  Huhtke's  MBS. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

670  mankind's  chronology. 

e  della  NabU ;"  in  which,  for  the  first  time,  an  effort  vas  made  to  embrace  in  one  graad 
compendiam  all  Egyptian  documents  in  that  day  deciphered.  Inheritor  of  the  ideaa,  and 
associate  in  the  labors  of  the  great  masteV,  the  Tuscan  Professor's  frame-work  of  chro- 
nology reflects  Champollion's  views  on  Pharaonic  antiquity  down  to  the  close  of  1830.  The 
practical  result  of  the  erudite  Italian's  researches  was  the  monumental  restoration  of  the 
lost  history  of  Egypt,  back  to  the  XVIIIth  Dynasty,  computed  by  him  at  b.  c.  1822, — and 
the  vindication  of  the  general  accuracy  of  Manetho,  back  to  the  XVIth  dynasty,  at  b.  c. 
^  2272 :  (880)  confirmed  by  Champollion-Figeao,(881)  with  many  improTements  and  vahiaUe 
suggestions ;  mainly  drawn  from  *'  les  papiers  de  mon  Fr^re.*' 

In  1885,  Wilkinson's  admirable  work,  **  Topography  of  Thebes,"  presented  a  summary 
of  the  learned  author's  personal  exploration  of  Egyptian  monuments  during  some  twelve 
years  of  travel  in  the  valley  of  the  Nile.  The  epoch  of  Menes,  first  Pharaoh  of  Egypt, 
was  conjecturally  assigned  to  the  year  b.  c.  2201 ;  but  the  accession  of  the  XVIIIth  dynasty 
placed  at  b.o.  1575,  corroborated  by  the  collation  of  hieroglyphical  and  Greek  lists,  evinced 
the  critical  author's  appreciation  of  the  solidity  of  Egypt's  chronological  edifice,  and  of 
Manethonian  authority,  at  least  up  to  the  latter  era. 

We  thus  reach  the  year  I88<S ;  when  b.  c.  1822  as  the  maximum^  and  b.  a  1675  as  the 
mnxmumf  for  the  accession  of  Hanetho's  XVtllth  dynasty  of  DioepoCtaDs^  wwe  already 
recognised  by  the  world  of  science  in  general  principle  as  established  faeU:  and  sixteen 
oentnries  of  lost  monumental  history  became  resuscitated  from  the  sepulchre  of  ages, 
through  hierofflypMeal  researches  that  only  commenced  in  a.  d.  1822.  (382) 

But  there  had  been,  in  Egypt,  times  before !  there  were  still  extant  the  pfpramidt,  with 
the  lengthy  chain  of  tombs  extending  for  above  20  miles  along  the  Memphite  necropolis, 
unexplored; — there  were  the  ** unplaced  Kings"  recorded  in  the  ** Materia  Hieroglyphica" 
^the  "  Excerpta"— and  the  «  Notes"— of  Wilkinson,  Burton,  and  Felix ;— and  there  existed 
in  the  museums  of  Europe,  as  well  as  throughout  the  valley  of  the  Nile,  innumerable  ves- 
tiges, recognised  by  every  qualified  student  of  Egyptology  to  belong  to  ages  long  anterior 
to  the  XVIIIth  dynasty  —  immensely  older  than  the  year  1575^1822  b.  o.  ;  to  say  nothing 
of  many  biblical  and  classical  texts  that  attested  the  necessity  for  more  elbow-room  in  the 
chronology  of  the  ancient  Egyptians.  Every  one  felt  it:  — every  man  who  had  bekdd the 
storied  ruins  in  Egypt  itself  asserted  it,  with  more  or  less  assurance  according  to  the  elas- 
ticity of  the  social  atmosphere  he  breathed :  —  every  hierologist  knew  it 

How  was  the  conscientious  discussion  of  these  overwhelming  questions  avoided  ?  Why 
were  the  countless  monumental  documents,  that  vindicated  the  claims  of  Manetho's  first 
fourteen  human  dynasties  to  historical  acceptance,  left  out  of  sight?  Rosellini,  while  fiith- 
fully  publishing  all  the  materials  in  his  possession,  and  throwing  back  pyramidal  questions 
into  the  category  of  things  anterior  to  the  XVIth  dynasty,  having  the  fear  of  Petavius  be- 
fore his  eyes,  modestly  declares  — "  N^  a  me  occorre  indagare  piii  addentro  in  Utnto  bujo  di 
tempi." (888)  Wilkinson,  —  in  whose  invaluable  "Materia  Hieroglyphica,"  among  a  host 
of  **  unplaced  Kings,"  the  names  of  Shoopho,  Shqfra,  and  Menkera,  builders  of  the  three 
great  pyramids  of  Geezeh,  had  been  published  years  before,  and  two  of  them  at  least  read 
and  identified,— Wilkinson,  appalled  perhaps  at  the  authority  of  Usher,  jumps  at  a  bound, 
in  his  Plate  I.  of  the  **  Dynasties  of  the  Pharaohs,"  from  MENal,  over  SE-NEFER-KE-RA 
and  RA-NEB-NAA,  to  RA-NUB-TER  (which  last  he  places  in  the  XVth  dynasty  at  b.  c. 
1830) ;  omits  every  **  unplaced  King"  published  in  his  prerious  researches;  ignores  some 
fifty  Pharaoht  whose  monumenU  prove  they  lived  between  Menes  and  the  XVIIIth  dynas^ ; 
and  assigns  only  the  year  b.  o.  2201  ( I )  to  Menes,  "  for  fear  of  uUerfaring  with  the  Deluge 
of  Noah,  which  u  2848  b.  o." 

<*  I  am  aware,"  wrote,  in  1835,  the  yet-unknighted  Mr.  Wilkinson,  <<  that  the  era  of 
Menes  might  be  carried  back  to  a  much  more  remote  period  than  the  date  I  have  assigned 

(880)  OuDDon:  CJuxpttrtf  1848;  pp.  48, 49,  and  QeDeral  Tabl«,  pp.  6I» «» M. 

(881)  ibP^B  Andenne;  UniTen  Pittoresque,  1889. 

(882)  CHAMPOLUOir :  LeUre  d  M,  DacAer;  1822. 

(883)  MoiwmaM  Shrid;  1882;  toL  1.  p.  Ill 

Digitized  by 

Google 

EGYPTIAN.  671 

it;  but  as  we  baTe  as  yet  no  autbority  further  than  the  uncertain  acconnts  of  Manetbo*8 
copyists  to  enable  us  to  fix  the  time  and  the  number  of  reigns  intervening  between  bis 
accession  and  that  of  Apappus,  I  hare  not  placed  him  earlier,  for  fear  of  interfering  with 
the  date  of  the  deluge  of  Noah,  which  m  2848  b.  c."  (884) 

The  inconsistencies  inherent  in  this  scheme  of  chronology  were  exposed  in  1848 ;  (885) 
neyertheless,  in  his  most  excellent  later  work,  '*  Modem  Egypt  and  Thebes,"  1848,  as  well 
as  in  his  "  Hand-book,"  1847,  this  erudite  Egyptologist  h%8  left  chronological  disquisitions 
pretty  much  as  he  had  defined  them  in  1835  —  as  if  inquiry  had  been  stationary  in  Europe 
during  twelve  years !  —  although,  when  treating  geologieaUy  on  the  antiquity  of  the  DeZto, 
'*  11  laisse  percer  le  bout  d*oreille  "  in  the  following  scientific  assertions :  — 

<'  We  are  led  to  the  necessity  of  allowing  an  immeasurable  time  for  the  total  formation  of 
that  space,  which,  to  judge  from  the  yery  little  accumulation  of  its  soil,  and  the  small  dis- 
tance it  has  encroached  on  the  sea,  since  the  erection  of  the  ancient  cities  within  it,  would 
require  ages,  and  throw  back  its  origin  far  beyond  the  Deluge^  or  even  the  Motaic  era  of  the 
Creation,^ 

In  consequence,  Shr  J.  0.  Wilkinflon  granted  a  repriere  of  some  few  years  to  poor  Menes ; 
for  (1887)  in  the  same  *'  Manners  and  Customs,"  this  Pharaoh's  accession  is  placed  at 
B.  o.  2820 ;  or  only  28  years  after  the  Flood  I 

It  is  sufficient,  herein,  to  point  out  to  the  reader,  that  the  year  1886  closed  with  a  mighty 
stride,  already  accomplished,  into  the  **  darkness  of  Egypt;"  through  which  a  mau  oftme^ 
exceeding  X/ifctfn  centuriee  in  duration,  was  irrevocably  restored  to  the  worid's  history.  The 
mutilated  annals  of  the  oft-maligned  Priest  of  Sebennytus  were  yindicated  by  an  unan- 
swerable appeal  to  monuments  contemporaneous  with  the  Pharaohs  recorded  by  -him,  back 
to  his  XVIJLIth  Theban  dynasty.  More  than  one-half  of  the  twenty-five  hundred  yean 
clumed  by  Fourier,  and  Napoleon's  "  Institut  d'Egypte,"  was  thenceforward  restored^  to 
positiTO  history  by  the  JlierologieU, 

The  years  1887  to  1889  witnessed  the  munificent  expenditures,  and  fulfilment  of  the 
grand  conception,  of  s  Yyse ;  the  self-qitcrificing  exertions  of  a  Perring,  but  for  whose  for- 
titude, enthuuasm,  and  engineering  skill,  small,  indeed,  would  haye  been  the  scientific 
results  accruing  from  such  immense  undertakings;  and  the  archnological  acumen  of  a 
Birch,  in  deciphering  and  assigning  an  historical  place  to  the  fragmentary  legends  disen- 
terred  among  some  89  pyramidal  mausolea  (887)  of  the  MemphiU  and  Artinotte  nomes.(888) 
Simultaneously  with  these  successes,  the  Tablet  of  Abydoe,  that  most  precious  register  of 
the  genealogy  of  the  Rambssidis,  found  its  way  to  the  British  Museum. (889) 

Lenormant,  (890)  we  believe,  was  the  first  to  apply  the  new  discoveries  to  chronology; 
and  Nestor  L*Hdte  (891)  to  retread  the  Memphite  necropolis,  and  verify  some  of  the  data 
obtained  by  the  English  explorers. 

The  combined  result  of  these  researches,  in  the  year  1840,  was  the  recognition  of  the 
great  principle,  that  the  pyramids,  without  exception,  antedated  the  XYItlth  dynasty, 
already  established  between  the  fifteenth  and  the  eighteenth  centuries  b.  o. :  —  that  a  mass 
of  '*  unplaced  Kings,"  and  a  vast  field  of  unopened  tombs  in  the  burial-ground  of  Memphis ; 
together  with  a  prodigious  variety  of  lesser  monuments,  stretching  from  the  peninsula  of 
Sinai  to  the  temples  of  Samneh  and  8oUb  in  Upper  Nubia ;  still  preserved  authentic  records 
eoetaneous  with  the  first  twelve  dynaadee  of  Mavetho  :  and  that,  frx>m  out  of  the  chaos,  the 

(884)  Topographjf  qf  Thdtet;  1885^  pp.  606  and  609. 

(885)  OunKm:  ChapUrt;  pp.  61,  62. 

(3M)  Maamen  and  Ciutom;  1887-*41 ;  L  pp.  6-11 ;  ii.  pp.  106-121  ;-Hxnnptfe  (Xia  JBgyptfaon;  pp.  Ol-dO. 

^87)  OperatUm»  carried  cnaithe  I^ramida  qf  Oeeuh,  from  1837  to  1889. 

(888)  Sharps:  Cltroiuiogy  and  Ckography  qfAneumt  Egypt;  1840 ;  pi.  11,  Map,  Andmd Egj/pt  under  AnL  Pirn. 

(880)  LiPsnTS:  AutwM;  1842;  pi.  11;— BtsoH:  GaXUry  </  AnUquiUu;  part  U.  pi.  29,  and  pp.  66-71;  —La* 
nunm:  TabU  d^Abydoi,  imprlmte  en  caractdrea  mobUea;  Paris,  1846;  pp.  24-86;  — Bdnsin:  EgyrCt  Plact; 
1848;  pp. 44-61;— Di  Botxii:  ExoMnen  de  VOwaragt  dt  M.Bunten;  1847;  pp.  16, 17,  ExtraU  detAnnaladt 
JWbmpMe  chraUnna:  andiMi:  DeuxUme  Ldtrt  d  M,  Alfred  Mdwy,  iur  U  aesoetriidelaJrUmeDjpuuUe; 
S«W0  Arditelogiqae,  16  Oct  1847 ;  pp.  479, 480;  —  Lnuxua:  Chrcnologie  des  Bait  dftgypU;  ouvrage  oouxonnA; 
Plurla,1848;  pp.  260-263;  — Psiso:  NiMot  sur  la  SaOe  da  Ancitrtt  dt  ThMttMi  ni.\  Rav.  AzchteL;  Pails,  184& 

(890)  Edacbrdttimem  nir  le  Oercmea  de  Mjfcerimu  ;  Paris,  1889. 

0101)  Lettree  Stgn^x  Paris,  1840. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

672  mankind's  chbonologt. 

rVth  Manethonian  dynasty,  ootemporary  with  the  building  of  the  O^ezeh  group  of  pyit- 
mids,  loomed  like  a  meteor  in  the  night  of  time. 

Some  perceptions  were  entertained,  about  thpse  days,  eren  in  America,  of  the  probaUe 
extent  to  which  numumaUal  researches  would  eventually  carry  the  epoch  of  BfsBis.  In 
1845,  Bunsen's  era  for  this  monarch  was  b.  o.  8648 ;  and  in  1849,  Lepsius's  is  b.  ci  8898. 
Our  **Chapter9"  (1848)  assert,  that  «if  1000  more  years  could  be  shown  admissible  by 
Scripture,  there  is  nothing  in  Bgypt  that  would  not  be  fohnd  to  agree  with  the  extenson.'* 
It  is  a  happy  coincidence,  exhibiting  how  different  minds,  in  countries  widely  apart,  rea- 
soning upon  similar  data,  arriTO  at  conclusions  nearly  the  same,  that,  if  the  abore  "  1000 
years  **  be  added  to  our  former  coigectural  and  minimum  estimate,  printed  ten  years  ago,  of 
the  date  of  Mbkbs,  noted  at  abaui  b.  c.  2750,(892)  the  sum  b.  o.  8750  falls,  almost  eqm- 
distantly,  between  the  eras  assigned  to  this  primordial  Pharaoh  by  two  of  the  three  highest 
hierological  chronographers :  —  the  third,  it  need  scarcely  be  obsenred,  being  Mr.  Birch; 
who,  whilst  tabulating  Egyptian  events  in  the  recognised  order  of  Manethonian  t^fusf- 
ties,  (898)  has  neyer  yet  put  forth  an  arithmetical  tyttem  of  hieroc^yphioal  chrcmdogy.  As 
remarked  by  us  (OOa,  p.  45) : — 

*'  We  are  dealing,  in  eyents  so  inconceiyably  remote,  with  ttratified  manet  of  time,  and  not 
with  supposititious  calculaUons  of  the  exact  day,  week,  month,  or  year ;  in  futile  attempts 
to  ascertain  which  so  many  learned  investigators  **  ne  font  qu'un  trou  dans  Teau."  , 

Our  sketch  of  the  progressive  conquests  over  the  past,  commenced  by  Cfai^^pollion  in 
1822,  through  which  a  pathway  has  been  hewn,  inch  by  inch,  by  the  axes  of  the  Hiero- 
legists,  far  into  the  briery  jungle  of  Pharaonic  antiquity,  has  reached  the  year  1843 ;  and 
already  Fourier's  **  twenty-five  hundred  years  b.  o."  for  the  monuments  of  the  Nile,  even 
to  the  uninformed  eye,  began  to  wear  the  garb  of  probability — to  the  hieroglyphical  stu- 
dent, who  had  actually  hehdd  with  hit  own  eyet  these  monuments  th  Egypt  itself,  they  had 
assumed  in  that  year  the  aspect  of  certainty. 

It  is  a  remarkable  fact,  that  with  the  exception  of  Wilkinson,  whose  chronological  con- 
sistency has  been  indicated  (st^a),  not  one  of  those  Egyptologists  of  whom  the  critical  opinion 
is  now  authoritative,  and  who,  at  this  day,  yet  aspires  to  the  name  of  a  ^Aor^-chronologist 
(that  is,  one  to  whom  the  Ueherian  delvge,  at  b.  o.  2848,  is  a  bed  of  Procrustes),  has  tret 
studied  Egyptian  monuments  in  Egypt !  Much  allowance,  therefore,  should  be  made  for 
living  English  scholars  who  still,  like  the  ostrich,  hirj  their  heads  in  sand ;  surrounded  as 
they  are,  essentially,  by  the  "intellectual  ftunkeyism"  for  which  this  age,  in  England,  is 
eminenUy  celebrated  among  scientific  men  on  the  Continent  and  in  the  United  States.  The 
ponderous  weight  of  brains,  congealed  in  the  <' cast-iron  moulds"  of  Oxford  and  Cam- 
bridge, presses  upon  British  intelligence  and  education  with  the  numbing  power  of  an 
incubus.  Among  recent  vindicators  of  the  claims  of  Egypt  to  the  longest  chronology  is 
Ferguson  (^*  True  Pzinciples  of  Beauty  in  Art,"  &c.,  London,  1849),  to  whose  crushing  pam- 
phlet we  must  refer  admirers  of  the  educational  **  standard  of  a  by-gone  and  semi-barba- 
rous age,"  upheld  in  '*  the  Sister  Universities ;"  with  which  standard  the  citizens  of  repub- 
lican America,  of  course,  need  have  nothing  to  do,  physically,  morally,  or  intellectually.  (394) 

The  discovery  made  by  Lepsius,  in  1840  (not  publicly  known  for  some  years  later),  that 
the  TahUt  of  Ahydos,  between  Cartouche  No.  40  and  No.  89,  omits  the  Xmth,  XlVth,  XYUi, 
XVIth,  and  XVIIth  Manethonian  dynasties,  ihxiA  jumping  over  the  entire  ffyksos-period,  (395) 

(302)  I  am  huppj  to  And  that  this  (bj  mjaelf  long  ago  abandoned  —  Otia,  pp.  87-42)  tdieme  of  the  ponitila 
epoch  of  Menee,  approzimataa  so  nearly  to  the  date  adopted  bj  Nolan;  irho  plaees,  aooordlng  to  the  <*OIdChron- 
ide,"  Menee  (whom  he  takes  to  be  Noah  I)  at  B.&  2673;  or  only  im  years  dUferenoe  from  ''my  reduetion 
of  the  Old  Chnmkk,  B.G.  2683,"  Ato  years  preTiounly — (compare  J^QfpMcm  Chromalogif  ana^Mcl;  London,  1848; 
pp.  133,  15fi»  212,  and  899,  with  Chapters,  p.  51).  Still  less  does  St  dtSsr  from  the  point  at  which  a  *'great 
authority,  whose  permission  I  have  not  asked  to  giro  his  name,**  fixes  (oMtromomicalfy  speaking)  the  era  of 
Egypt's  first  Pharaoh :  vis.,  B.&  2714-16— the  veyy  dote  (b.c.2716)  to  which  I  had  reduced  Manetho,  in  1848. 
Compan  Literary  Ocuttte;  London,  1849;  pp.  485,  522,  and  Ml;  with  Chapttn;  p.  51.)— G.  B.  0. 

(393)  **  Relative  Epochs  of  Mummies,**  in  Otia  JEgyptiaoa  ;  pp.  78-87 ;  also,  pp.  11^115. 

(394)  ObtenaJtitms  on  the  British  Museum,  National  GaOery,  amd  National  Sooord  Ctfice;  London,  1S49. 

(395)  Buxsxm:  Jlgypten's  SUOe;  1846;  IL  p.  277;  and  EgypCs  Place;  1848;  pp.42, 49, 52.  Compare  HracKS: 
Oh  the  l^nptian  SteU;  1841;  p.  <»;  and  Bixoocm:  Diacorsi  Oritid  sopra  la  Cronotogia  JS^gina:  Torino,  1846; 
pp.  129-181. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

BGTPTIAN.  678 

hftd  marked  a  new  era  in  the  dutmologieal  oonsideratioii  to  be  awarded  to  some  royal  gm^-  •> 
dU>gkal  Tablets.  This  discovery  was  by  far  the  most  important  feature  of  that  day ;  but 
80  Taried  and  unforeseen  were  the  Tiotorious  achioTements  effected,  in  the  year  1848,  by  the 
Prussian  Scientific  Mission,  among  the  pyramidi,  from  Memphis  to  the  Labyrinth ;  so  com- 
pletely have  they  revolutionized  aU  preceding  judgments  upon  Nilotio  antiquity ;  that  we 
must  pause  to  indicate  how  they  originated,  and  where  they  are  to  be  found. 

Chevalier  Richard  Lepsius,  long  celebrated  as  Corresponding  Seeretavy  of  the  IntUiuU 
o/ Archceoloffieal  Corretpondenct  at  Borne,  directed  his  studies  into  Egyptology  soon  after  the 
publication  of  a  prize-essay,  (896)  that  placed  him  in  the  firont  rank  of  linguistioal  soholar^ 
ship  in  1834.  AZ«/(reaif.2«iVo/.fif9K>tttei2o«eUtmn<r 

next  announced,  to  the  worid  of  science,  that  the  loss  of  the  illustrious  Champollion 
had  but  momentarily  arrested  the  onward  march  of  his  disdples.  The  return  of  Perring 
from  Egypt  after  his  indefatigable  exploration  of  89  pyramids,  (898)  [rendered  the  fact 
generally  known  that,  immense  as  had  been  his  own  successes,  the  necropolis  of  Memj^s 
had,  notwithstanding,  scarcely  begun  to  yield  up  its  historical  treasures.  French  and 
Tuscan  national,  with  English  private  enterprise,  had  been  rewarded,  in  the  vaUey  of  the 
Kile,  by  victories  over  past  time  as  noble  as  they  were  sdentifle.  It  remained  for  Frederic 
William  IVth  of  Prussia  to  ^ve  full  scope  to  the  hitherto  pent-up  yearnings  of  Qermany 
towards  Egyptian  discovery ;  and  upon  Lepsius,  in  1842,  naturally  fell  the  mantles  of  his 
predecessors. 

•  With  eight  coac^utors,  the  Chief  of  the  Prussian  Scientific  Bfission  pitched  his  tents  in 
the  shadow  of  the  great  Pyramid  on  the  9th  of  November,  1842. 

By  May,  1848,  he  was  enaUed  to  annoonce  that  the  Germans  had  gleaned  the  sites  of 
"thirty  other  pyramida,  entirely  unknown  to  him  (Bir.  Perring),  or  to  any  precediDg  travellers. 
Of  these,  not  a  few  are  of  very  considerable  extent,  bearing  evident  traces  of  the  mode 
in  which  they  were  raised,  and  surrounded  by  the  ruins  of  temples,  and  extensive  fields 
of  tombs  or  burial-grounds.  All  these  pyramids^  without  exception,  belong  to  the  ancient 
kmydom  of 'Egypt  be/ore  the  irruption  of  ih»  Hykshos,  who  invaded  Lower  Egypt  about  the 
year  2000  b.  c,  and  the  whole  of  them  were  erected  (those  at  least  between  Abroroo^Lsh  and 
Dashoor)  by  kings  who  reigned  at  Memphis.  To  the  same  period  belong  also  the  minority 
of  the  effaced  tombs,  of  any  importance,  that  surround  them."  (899) 

After  determination  of  the  sites,  and  unfolding  much  of  the  history  of  **nxty-9eoen  pyn^ 
mids,"  sepulchres  of  ancient  EgyptisB  sovereigns ;  together  with  '*  one  hundred  and  thirty 
private  tombs"  of  noble  families,  with  these  sovereigns  coetaneous,  back  to  the  *^ fourth 
thowand year  hefore  Christ,"  the  Prussians  proceeded  up  the  river;  exploring  every  foot 
of  ground,  as  far  as  Soba  on  the  Bine  Nile  (Bahr-el-Airek),  and  Senndr  to  the  18th  degree  of 
N.  latitude ;  returning  to  Thebes  on  the  2d  November,  1844.  WhUe  his  able  assistants  prose- 
cuted the  necessary  labors  amid  Theban  ruins,  Lepsius  crossed  the  Red  Sea  and  eiq;>lored 
the  Sinaic  Peninsula ;  not  only,  thereby,  rescuing  from  perdition  hieroglyphical  records  of 
mining  operations  conducted  between  the  IVth  and  the  XHth  dynasty,  8400 — 2200  b.  o., 
but  also  ascertaining  that,  if  the  Oebel  Serbdl  be  not  the  Mount  of  Mosxs,  of  which  there 
is  little  doubt,  (400)  the  peaks  above  the  Convent  of  St  Catherine  most  assuredly  are  not 
Revisiting  Thebes,  Lepsius  left  it  with  his  party  on  the  16th  May,  1846 :  and  after  exam- 
ining the  land  of  Goshen,  much  of  Palestine,  and  touching  at  Smyrna  and  Constantinople, 
landed  at  Trieste  on  the  6th  January,  1846 :  having  spent  above  thirty-aiz  montht  in  unpar- 
sJleled  monumental  researches  on  the  river,  aUuvium,  and  deserts  of  the  Nile. 

The  reader  will  now  perceive  that  we  are  dealing  in  realities;  that  our  Egyptian  deduc- 
tions are  based  upon  actual  and  positive  researches,  made  by  the  '<  primi  inter  pares  "  of 

(80i)  F^OaograpMe  alt  MittdfUr  die  Sprae^fbrtchung  tunOehd  am  SoaucrU  nachgetoieem;  Berlin,  1886;  8to 

(S07)  AamaU  dOF  ImHtuto  di  Oarriepondenn  Arductoffioa;  toI.  iz.;  Bomi,  1897. 

(896)  Ytb:  The  Pyramids  fmrn  Actual  Surv^;  iUnlToL;  1841. 

(800)  LipnuB;  CU«r  den  Ban  der  PjpxmkUn:  Berlin  Aetdemy,  August,  1848;  pp.  2, 8;— see  the  order  of 
•BnovBeenientofthesediaooTeTleeinOuiiwnr:  OMa;  1840;  pp.  30-42. 

(400)  Timr  from  ThOfa  to  the  FeninmlaqfStnai,  in  March  and  Jpra,im;  truisL  Oorbbx  ;  London,  1840. 
We  possess  the  German  edition;  with  its  VtnU^map,  without  which  Lipoub'8  oertsin  dliooveij  is  not  so  evident 
to  the  fsneral  reader. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 

674  mankind's  chronology. 

liYing  AroheologUts,  preTioaslj  qualified  by  lengthened  difcipline,  and  fiirnished  by  muni- 
ficent goTernments  with  facilities  as  onexampled  as  unbounded.  We  subjoin  a  list  of  the 
works  (401)  since  published  by  Lepsius^  that  hare  been  carefiilly  consulted  in  the  prepara- 
tion of  "  Types  of  Mankind ;"  and  may  mention  that,  while  one  of  its  authors  sojourned 
at  Berlin  in  May,  1849,  both  are  in  ftrequent  epistolary  communication,  on  the  themes  this 
work  discusses,  with  the  esteemed  Cheralier  himself. 

Consequently,  whether  the  deductions  drawn  by  the  authors  of  the  present  Tolume  be 
right  or  wrong,  the  fatU  upon  which  these  are  grounded  are  Touched  for  by  the  highest 
authorities.  No  attention  is  bestowed,  in  '*  Types  of  Mankind,"  to  the  puerilities  of  the 
ephemeral  tourist,  to  the  twaddling  inanities  of  the  unlettered  missionary,  or  to  the  Egyptian 
hallucmations  of  the  theological  riiapsodist  At  the  present  day  (without  disparagement  to 
the  less-known  literary  resources  of  otiier  dtiee  on  our  continent),  (402)  a  qualified  student, 
in  this  year  a.  d.  1858,  can  sit  down  quietly  at  MobUe^  Alabama ;  and  the  books  contained 
in  four  priyate  libraries  will  enlighten  him,  upon  almosli  ^yery  point  our  work  discusses, 
with  smaller  trouble  and  greater  economy  of  time,  labor,  and  money,  than  if  he  resided  for 
fftart,  without  prerious  knowledge  of  these  works,  in  the  Talley  of  the  Nile :  or,  should  such 
student  prefer  Philadelphia,  there,  at  her  library,  his  bibliothecal  aspirations  can  be  satisfied. 

How  utterly  hopeless  it  is  for  any  man  (apart  from  erudition)  unsupported  by  enormous 
pecuniary  means,  to  advance  Egyptian  sciences,  at  the  present  day,  by  a  steam-boat  excur- 
sion up  the  Nile,  may  be  inferred  ftt>m  three  facts.  In  1844-6,  Ampere,  one  of  the  liring 
luminaries  of  aroheologioal  knowledge,  was  sent  out  by  the  French  Goyemment  expressly ' 
to  make  discoTeries.  His  "  Reoherohes  en  Egypte  et  en  Nubie  "  in  literary  excellenoe  are 
unsurpassable;  yet^  withal,  his  predeoessors  bad  left  him  so  litUe  to  do,  without  a  pro- 
tracted sojourn,  that  he  refers  to  Lepeius  for  erery  norelty  discoyerable : — 

**  Je  n'ai  pas  touchy,  sans  un  certain  respect,  ce  litre  det  Roit,  oommeno^  par  Ini  ayani 
son  yoyage  d'Egypte,  et  qui  contient  une  collection  de^noms  royaux  plus  oompllte  qu'aucantt 
autre  ne  pent  I'dtire,  et  un  ensemble  de  chronologie  Egyptienne  depms  Tancien  roi  M^nte 
ju8qu*&  Septime  Sey^re.  Cette  s^rie  ya  plus  loin  enoore,  oar  M.  Lepdus  ne  s'l^te  pas 
i  ce  nom,  le  dernier  qu'eussent  trouy^  ^crit  en  hi^roglyphee  Champollion  et  see  autres  suc- 
cesseurs.  M.  Lepsius  a  6t6  assez  heureux  pour  d^couyrir,  dans  un  petit  temple  de  TbUtea 
oti  Champollion  ayidt  trouy^  le  nom  d^Othon,  les  noms  de  Oalba,  de  PeseenrUus  Niger^  et,  ce 
qui  est  plus  important,  de  Temperenr  Dlu,  Par  cette  d^oouyerte,  M.  Lepsius  prdonge  la 
s^e  hi^roglyphique  d*un  demi-si^e  au  d61a  de  Septime  Sey^,  oil  elle  s'arrdtMt  jusqu* 
id.  On  a  done  une  $mie  de  monument  et  d'tnteriptiont  gtU  $*Stendent  dqtuia  2500  aoant  Abrth' 
ham  jutqu*d  250  ant  aprU  Jetut  Ckritt  H  n'y  a  rien  de  semblable  dans  les  annalea 
humainee."  (408) 

Two  years  preriously,  Prisse  d'Ayennes  had  rescued  the  Aneettral  Chamber  ofKamae^ 
the  TabUt  of  Ramtet  XIV,  (404)  and  other  precious  relics,  from  Turkish  demolition.  A 
residence  of  sixteen  years  in  Egypt,  of  which  about  fiye  fai  tiie  Upper  country  among  tl&e 
monuments,  had  enabled  this  proficient  Orientalist  to  fill  his  portfolios  with  eyery  archaeo- 
logical item  discoyered,  chiefly  too  by  himself,  between  the  departure  of  the  French  and 
Tuscan  Scientific  Commissions  under  Champollion  and  RoseUini,  1830,  and  the  advent  of 
the  Prussians  in  1842.    So  yaluable  were  M.  Prisse's  self-sacrificing  labors  in  Egyptology 

(401)  VifiVU^figt  N<uJiriMia)er  die  Exptiiti^ 
intd  det  Sinai;  Berlin,  1852;  also,  lit  excellent  English  traiuUtion,  hj  Bfr.  KutifBTH  B.  H.  Haourbb:  ^DIs- 
coreriee  in  Bgrpt,"  Ac. ;  London,  1862 ;  —  Bimleltung  twr  Chrondogie  der  .SgifpUr;  Berlin,  184S ;  toL  L ; — tkhet 
der  Enlm  JEg^Haihat,  OStterknit;  Berlin,  1861;—  Z^iber  dm  Jpidenit;  Leipsig,  1863;  — Teber  die  ZwS(fU 
J^ffptitdu  KSmgtdynattte;  Berlin,  1868;  — and,  abore  «U,  tlie  ou^Bifioent  JkHkwUBo'  out  JBnP^m  «mkI 
.SOdopim;  Berlin,  1849;  folio.  Of  thif  Tart  work,  beeidee  a  aeriea  of  the  earlier  ethnological  platee  kindly 
•elected  for  him  by  GhcT.  LiPtius,  and  in  hia  own  poieeerion,  the  writer  has  enjoyed  the  free  nee  of  two  eosles 
at  UobUe,  in  the  prirate  librarlea  of  Bfr.  A.  Stkin  and  of  the  Bey.  Dr.  HAimjioa  —  to  both  of  whom  be  here  bees 
to  reiterate  hie  obligation  —  and  of  another  in  the  Philadelphia  Ubraiy.  Altogether,  he  baa  aeen  the  plate 
down  to  AMi,  m.,  BL  172. 

(402)  I  am  speaking  of  public  libraries.  The  private  library  of  my  honored  fHend,  Mr.  R.  K.  Haiobt  of  lf«w 
Tork,  has  been,  ftom  the  commencement  of  my  studies  in  1842,  the  main  source  whence  my  indiyidual  fkrfflti— 
hare  been  drawn. 

(4(»)  ReAitn^trntgyv^;  TiL;  Thebes,  21Jan.  1846;  — Jimce det  I^eiwJfondes;  1842;  p.  1086. 
(404)  aaXU  det  AwOttnt  de  ThotdmitlH:  Rer.  ArchteL;  1846;  pp.  1-28,  tlrage  It  part; -Bnoa:  ^nfiittm 
Httr^lioninlhtBibtiothiqiMNiaimak!  Trans.  B.  Soo.  Ut,  new  Mrle^  It.;  1861 

Digitized  by 

Google 

EGYPTIAN.  675 

deemed  by  Paridan  science  that,  at  national  expense,  he  was  appointed  to  continue  the 
great  folios  of  ChampoUion ;  (405)  at  the  same  time  that  his  contribntions  to  the  Revue 
ArehSohffique  are  standard  documents  for  posterity. 

Last  though  not  least,  in  Egypt  itself  resides  a  gentleman,  affluent  and  inflnential,  versed 
in  many  branches  of  ancient  lore  as  thoroughly  as  80  years  of  domicile  have  familiarized  him 
with  modem  afRnirs,  who  nerer  allows  an  opportunity  of  advancing  archeological  science 
to  escape  him ;  nor  will  any  Egyptian  student  mistake  our  allusions  to  A.  C.  Harris.  (406) 

No  clap-trap  pretendons  to  acquaintance  with  hieroglyphical  arcana  recently  made  by 
theologers  who  speak  not  any  continental  tongue  through  which  alone  these  subjects  ore 
accessible— no  '*  ad  captandum  "  figments  of  the  possession  of  Oriental  knowledge  when  men 
cannot  spell  a  monosyllable  written  in  the  Hebrew  alphabet —  detract  from  the  Memphite 
exhumations  conducted  at  French  ministerial  expense  by  a  Mariette ;  for  whose  enormous 
discoveries  in  the  Serapeum,  as  yet  confined  to  reports,  we  wait  impatiently.  'T  were  woU 
if,  in  view  of  the  contemptuous  silence  with  which  Egyptologists  treat  their  publications, 
some  writers  on  these  matters  were  to  become  readers. 

Our  part,  however,  is  to  indicate  to  the  reader  those  sources  upon  which  Egyptian  chro- 
nology is  dependent  at  the  present  day,  in  regard  to  the  date  of  the  first  Pharaoh,  Menes : 
a  personage  considered,  in  the  subjoined  works,  to  be  historical;  and  neither  connected 
with  the  mythical  Mettrcearu  invented  by  the  Syncellus  (407)  in  the  seventh  century  after 
o. ;  nor,  except  nationally,  with  the  MT«RIM  (not  Mtzratm)  of  the  Hebrew  Text,  whom,  in 
our  examination  of  Xth  Qenesis,  we  have  proved  to  be  nothing  more  or  less  than  the 
"Egyptians,"  inhabitants  of  MiZR,  Mutter;  the  Semitic  name  of  "Merter,"  Fffypt  [ntpra, 
p.  494]:- 

AvOiorities.                                                                              Dates  of  Metut. 

1880,  Paris Lbhokmaht:  Oareuea  de  Jfyoerinut^  b.^. 

lYth  Dyn.  (p.  24)  ^Myceriniu,  la  d«t«  de  41M  avant  J.  C* 

Addmd    «      4friecmut J «  214        «« 

•*     nd    «  "         "  802        " 

M     lat    "  "         **  288        ** 

4016 

1840,  Paris CHAMPOUioi^Ttai&o:  i^^^xpfe  JiMimiM 5867 

184&,  Berlin »  B0ou:  JkmeOio  wid  dU  Htmdi$Ury^peHode 5702 

1846,  Turin Biauoom :  IHtooni  OriUd  »opra  Ja  OronoHoffia  IlgMa 4890 

1845,  HamlNiTg Buhsbt:  Jinf^mt  ataUintkr  IVU^eaoMcMe 3648 

1840^  Paris Hurt:  I/ljnpU  Ptumwniqiu » 5308 

1848,  PariA liHCBca:  CkronUogUda BoddfMlinfpU 5773 

1840,  Berlin Lepous:  Chrotutoffie  der  .^infP^ ^^ 

1851,  BaUln Hnrcxs:  Turin  Ptipjfnu .'. 3805 

1851,  London Kkhbick:  ^fffpl  under  Ou  Fharaoht ». 8892 

1854,  Philadelphia.  PiaaiDra:  Qngrt^pfdeal  Dittributim  qfMiimdU  and  PUtnti 4400 

The  views  of  the  authors  of  T^a  of  Mankind^  while  with  Humboldt,  (406)  for  reasons  to 
be  given  anon,  they  follow  Lepsius,  incline  to  the  longer  rather  than  to  the  shorter  period. 
Ampere's  opinion  has  been  previously  cited.  The  following  is  that  of  the  first  hierologist 
of  France,  Count  Em.  de  Roug^,  Conservator  at  the  Louvre  ftf  usenm :  — 

'*  Les  efforts  de  M.  de  Bunsen  seruent  la  meilleure  preuve  du  contraire ;  apr^s  avoir, 
sans  €gsrd  pour  I'histoire  et  les  monumens,  suppose  des  rignes  eonttamment  coUatiraux,  trois 
dynasties  i  la  fois  et  huit  ou  dix  rois  nmidtanSt  pendant  la  moiti^  des  12  premii^res  dynas- 
ties,  il  n*en  fixe  pas  moins  le  r^gne  de  Minis  k  Tan  8643  av.  J.  C.  L'obstin^  fils  de  Cha- 
natm,  mutil6  avec  achamement  pendant  3  volumes,  se  relive  enfin  de  ce  lit  de  Procuste  oil 
I'av^t  4tendu  son  critique  impitoyable,  et  Ton  s'appergoit  alors  qu*il  d^passe  encore  de  plu- 

(405)  QmtiimatUmdei  Monument;  lOOplatee;  1848;— i^pyruiJ^^SfpCien;  1849. 

(406)  Mr.  Habbo's  oontribntionB,  in  the  Tram,  qf  the  S.  Soe.  <f  LOeraturty  the  Borne  AreMtiogique,  and  In 
the  pages  of  several  Bgyptologifts,  are  too  nnmerons  Ibr  specifloation  here:  but  we  may  refer  to  his  papyrm, 
"Fragments  of  an  Oration  against  Demosthenes,"  London,  1848;  also  to  the  papjrie  fragments  of  "Books 
of  Homer"  {Aihenaum,  8  Sept  1840),  and  of  the  "Grammarian  Tryphon"  {Athmmm,  7  Dec  1850):  while  of 
the  very  important  work — **  Hieroglyphical  Standards  repreaenting  Places  in  Egypt  supposed  to  be  Nomes  an  d 
Topwehies,  eoUected  l»y  A.  C.  HAaws,"  M.  B.  8.  L.,  1852— his  kindness  allows  ns  to  aeknoyledge  receipt 

(407)  LBTBOsnfx:  in  Biov^s  JtMi^  r<viM  del  i^0«ptfm«;  p.  26 :  —  fitfmh  p.  ^ 

(406)  awMf;iLpp.ll4,115,124:— si«>rayp.245.  ^  t 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 

676  mankind's  chronology. 

sieurs  Blades  lee  mesurei  qa'on  led  ayait  impos^ee  au  jiom  dee  calculs  que  la  cbronoloj^e 
ordinaire  ayalt  fond^  sur  la  gerUalogii  d* Abraham.*^  (409) 

We  moreoYer  coinoide  entirelj  in  the  same  aaUunr's  doctrine,  when,  after  indicating  the 
Tarious  chances  of  miscalonlation  inherent  in  Egyptian  no  less  than  in  aU  other  eknmdo- 
ffiet,  he  declares:  — 

<<  These  causes  of  error,  which  cross  each  other  in  erery  direction,  make  up  a  large  part 
of  uncertainty,  for  any  chronological  sum  that  it  may  be  wished  to  draw  firom  ^e  ade 
addition  of  reigns,  after  a  number  of  oenturies  at  all  considerable.  The  chances  of  inex- 
actitude augment  with  the  number  of  partial  sums ;  and  I  have  always  thought  that  an  un- 
ce*rtitude  of  more  than  200  years  was  yery  admissible,  in  the  ciphers  that  result  from 
monumental  dates  combined  with  the  lists  of  Manetho,  when  one  remounts  to  the  XVlIIth 
dynasty,  after  the  expulsion  of  the  shepherds."  (410) 

Nor  need  any  doubt  be  entertained  upon  Be  Bough's  adoption  of  the  most  lengthy  diro- 
nology,  when  he  declares  elsewhere — <*  Were  we  to  accept  the  data  most  clearly  preserred 
in  Manetho,  the  Xllth  dynasty  must  haye  preceded  the  Christian  era  by  thirttf-four  cenfif- 
nW."(411) 

We  haye  alrctpuly  seen  that,  in  England,  the  profoundest  hieroglyphical  scholar,  Birch  of 
the  British  Museum,  tabulates  Manethonian  dynasties  in  their  serial  order,  but  without 
encumbering  his  monumental  discoyeiies  with  any  arithmetical  chronology.  Eenrick  fol- 
lows Lepsius.  Hinck's  former  depression  of  the  reign  of  Ramses  11.,  in  the  XVUIth 
dynasty,  and  of  Thotmes  III.  to  the  year  1865  b.  c,  on  the  ground  that  Egyptian  armies 
(bom  amidst  solar  calorics)  ayoided  the  heat  of  the  weather, (412)  was  an  argument  too 
feeble  to  be  seriously  combated ;  but  the  matured  judgment  of  this  uniyersal  sayant  fkyon 
eyery  scientifical  extension  demanded  for  Nilotic  annals. 

**  A  statement  has  been  preseryed,  to  which  I  am  now  inclined  to  attach  more  credit  than 
I  did  formerly,  that  the  'Rg^iMXiA  reckoned  all  the  dynasties  ftrom  Menes  to  Ochus  as  occu- 
pying 8555  years.  If  from  this  number  we  subtract  2291,  which  the  Egyptians  reckoned 
from  Menes  to  the  end  of  the  Xllth  dynasty,  we  haye  1264  fh>m  the  end  of  the  Xllth 
dynasty  to  Ochus,  or  to  840  b.  c.  This  would  place  the  Xllth  dynasty  between  the  limits 
1817  and  1604  b.  o.  ;  and  I  am  disposed  to  accept  these  dates  as  the  genuine  Egyptian 
computation.    Nor  indeed  do  I  see  much  reason  to  question  their  correctnesSL" 

Followers  ourselyes  **  of  the  German  and  French  school,"  we  pause  not  to  debate  the 
learned  Irishman's  deductions  as  to  sodi  an  untenably  modem  date  for  the  Xllth  dynasty; 
but,  adding  his  accepted  8555  years  to  the  reign  of  Ochus,  b.  o.  840,  we  are  graced  in 
finding  that  Dr.  Hincks,(418)  with  seyeral  Qermans  and  Frenchmen,  places  Menes  at  8896 
yeart  b^ore  c. ;  and  henceforward,  therefore,  can  enrol,  as  we  haye  already,  his  great  name 
among  the  long  chronologists. 

On  the  opposite  side,  as  representatiye  of  the  shortest  Egyptian  computation,  stands  a 
gentleman,  whose  yast  classical  erudition,  and  keener  criticismt  we  are  always  proud  to 
acknowledge ;  and  it  is  with  pain  that,  haying  so  often  ayailed  ourselyes  of  his  instructiye 
pages,  especially  in  regard  to  biblical  history  and  exegesis,  that,  in  Egyptian  chronology, 
we  must  protest  against  the  \iontracted  system  of  a  great  Hellenist,  Mr.  Samuel  Sharpe. 
With  respectful  deference  we  would,  howeyer,  submit  olgections  to  his  assumed  dates  for 
Osirtesen,  whom  he  arbitrarily  changes  into  an  **  Amunmai  Thor  I. ;"  (414)  still  more  em- 
phatically to  his  yiews  upon  Menes.  Scientific  criticism,  to  be  practically  useful,  must  be 
free ;  and  pupils,  often,  of  Mr.  Sharpe  in  its  application  to  the  Greek  New  TeMiamnU,  and 
to  the  theosophical  notions  of  the  Alexandria  School,  we  feel  persuaded  that  no  writer  of 
the  day  loyes  truth  more  than  himself.     We  may  therefore  utter  our  mode  of  yiewing  it 

(409)  &eamt»  de  TOmragt  dt  M.  Bunam;  p.  82,  Annalet  de  Philosopbie  Chr6tkimee,  1847. 

(410)  Di  Rooo£:  Mimoire  tur  qwlqua  PItmominu  CaesUt;  Ret.  Archtol^  183;  p.  664;  —  Gomp.  Otia,  p.  4L 

(411)  Smr  U  Suo$lri$  de  la  Dountnu  DynaOU;  Rer.  Arcbfol.,  1S47 ;  p.  482. 

(412)  ReT.  Dr.  HorCKt:  OntheJge  qfthe  JCTUUh  Dynou^;  TraoB.  R.  Irish  Acad.,  1846 ;  xxL  pp.  5-0. 
(418)  OtwrvaUons  qfJMr.  B.  Hiwiki,  in  Wilxxk80S*8  *'  Hieratie  PapTrut  of  Kings  at  Turin,"  ISSl ;  pp.  67,  S8. 
(414)  UHUxry  qf  E^ffpi;  new  edition;  London,  1846;  pp.  7,9,  Vi'f  CkrmUogy  and  Geography  if  Andad 

liiypt;  1849;  pp.  4, 14,  pi.  2,  figs.  25,  82. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

EGYPTIAN.  677 

The  eontemporaneoumesa  of  Egyptian  djmasties  (415)  we  hftye  alwaTS  repadiated ;  (416) 
but,  untU  the  appearance  of  Lepsios's  '*  Book  of  Kings,"  when  onr  assent  may  possibly  be 
yielded  (if  monumenU  to  as  now  nnknown  establish  it),  in  respect  to  the  Ist  and  Ud,  Vlth 
and  Tilth  (YUIth),  Xth  and  Xlth,  Xlllth  and  XlVth,  and  XVth  and  XVIth,  Manethonian 
dynasties,  we  shonld  commit  the  same  fallaey,  so  frequently  blamed  in  others,  if  we  spoke 
dogmatically  on  that  point  without  the  new  docnments  of  the  Prussian  Mission.  There  is 
no  more  fonndation,  however,  for  Mr.  Sharpens  dynastic  arrangement  than  were  we  to 
make  Canutes  invasion  of  England  coeval  with  Wiliaam  the  Conqueror  in  the  reign  of 
Jakvs  L,  under  the  synthronic  sway  of  Geobgb  III  and  ,the  Prince  Regent  It  is  a 
favorite  hypothesis  of  his  own ;  in  which  not  an  Egyptologist  coincides.  But  f0t  the  expo- 
8«re  of  a  radical  error  in  BIr.  Sharpens  system — root  of  all  his  deviations  from  hierological 
praotioe^-onr  knife  must  be  applied  to  one  of  its  many  vital  spots.  In  his  immensely- 
Talnable  folie  plaiee,  (417)  thrpogh  inadvertency,  he  bad  read 

f^,  (418)  the  "  lute,"  thiorbe,  in  lien  of    I    ^  (419)  the  «  blade  of  an  oar," 

t    f^, (418)  the  "lute,"  thiorbe,  in  lien  of    I 

as  the  sculpture  stands.    Through  misapprehension  of  the  groups  (in  line  9  compared  with 
Une  2,  of  the  same  inscription),  Mr.  Sharpe  then  deemed  that  this  malcopied  sign  "nfr** 

was  the  homophone  of 

'     b,  (420)  the  «  human  leg  ;" 

J 

and,  in  consequence,  he  always  reads  "nfr  "  as  if  it  were  the  latter  articulation — <'  That 
the  arrow-shaped  character  is  rightly  sounded  B  or  Y  is  proved  by  its  admitting  that  sound 
in  the  above  four  names,  as  also  in  No.  160  and  No.  165."  (421)  The  extraordinary  meta- 
morphoses of  well-known  royal  names  which  this  misconception,  founded  upon  a  mieiake, 
lias  occasioned,  are  too  evident  to  the  hierologist  to  require  comment  Unfortunately, 
through  such  concatenation  of  fallacies,  Mr.  Sharpe  (422)  transmutes  the  prenomen  of 
Queen  AM£NSeT,(428)  and  the  nomen  of  this  queen's  husband  AMENEMHA,  (424)  and 
the  oval  of  MENKERA,(425)  into  a  fabulously  bisexual  <<  Mychera-Amun  Neitchori"— 
rolls  up  the  IVth,  Vlth,  and  XVIIIth  dynasties  into  one — and  thus  makes  the  8d  pyramid 
of  Geezeh  (b.  c.  8300)  contemporary  with  the  majestic  obelisk  (b.  c.  1600)  in  the  temple 
of  Eamac !  It  is  as  if  one  were  to  call  Edwabd  the  Confessor  the  same  personage  as  '*  Vio- 
TOBIA.  and  Albebt  ;"  and  then  to  insist  that  the  former's  tomb  in  Westminster  Abbey  must 
be  coeval  with  the  equestrian  statue  of  Wellikqton  at  Hyde  Park  comer  t  (426) 

Mr.  Sharpe*s  restricted  system  of  Egyptian  chronology,  for  times  anterior  to  Thothhosis 
in.  (placed  by  him  in  the  14th  century  b.  c),  may  now  be  considered  as  "  non-avenu." 
But,  while  compelled  to  shatter  its  superstructures  down  to  his  XVIIIth  dynasty,  let  no  one 
impute  to  us  lack  of  respect  for  the  profound  author  of  the  ''  History  of  Egypt"  —  a  work 
that  (from  page  80  to  592)  ever  has  our  warmest  admiration.  Contenders  for  the  longest 
1 

(416)  BHARn:  Chrcndogy;  pp.14, 16. 

(41(0  Olidson:  Chapten;  p.  67;  —  OHa;  pp.  89, 46. 

(417)  Sraspi  :  hucriptUm*  in  Britith  Muteum  ;  pL  ezTi,  Bae  9,  and  line  2. 

(418)  BuHSBi:  Eiff.  PL,  L  p.  687,  No.  31;— Gbaxpouior:  DMUmnairt;  p.  288,  No.  888  —  « NOFRS.** 

(419)  BuHsnv :  No.  80 ; — CHAMVOUioir :  p.  378,  No.  469  ~  "  TOUW.'* 

(420)  Bukskh:  p.  668,  B,  1 ;  —  Ghampouion :  p.  100,  No.  60  — *'B.'* 

(421)  CharmuAogy ;  "p.  i. 

(422)  Op.dL;  p.  6,  Nos.  60,  81,  80;  and  plate  U.,  ilga.  80,  81,  82. 
(428)  Bosnuin:  Oxriowht No.  103. 

(424)  Ibid.;  'Oarttmche  No.  103/. 

(426)  BuKSiir :  .^Tipeau  <Ste£fe  ;  UL,  pL  L  —  J(im^to4HtL 

(428)  It  is  a  year  ago  since  this  was  written,  and  so  reluctant  do  I  ftel  to  oontradlet  a  respected  ISbIIoi^ 
laborer,  that  I  should  hare  suppressed  these  comments  but  Ibr  a  "  ri&dmento  "  of  the  same  doctrines  reported 
In  the  London  Mhenantm,  Not.  19, 1863.  **  The  third  aim  of  the  paper  was  to  show  that  the  3d  and  4th  pyra^ 
mids  were  both  made  by  Queen  Nitocris,  who  governed  Egypt  during  the  minority  of  Thotmosis  the  Illd.  Tho 
S«ae  of  King  Hycera  has  been  fbbnd  in  both  of  these  pyrfeonids ;  Myoera  is  the  first  name  of  Queen  Nitocris[I^ 
aad  it  was  probably  the  name  used  in  Memphis  Ibr  Thothmosis  the  md.**  ke^S^ro-SgyptSan  SoCj  Not.  8.) 

Digitized  by 

Google 

678  mankind's  chronology. 

human  chronology  onrselTes,  it  is  imperatiTe  upon  us  to  oarry  the  ontworks  of  tnilj- 
erudite  short-chronologists  before  stormiDg  their  last  English  citadel:  a  facile  explnt  new 

to  be  performed. 

•"The  thistle  that  loot  in  Lebuion 
Sent  to  the  oedar  that  wot  in  Lebanon 
Saying,  *  Gire  th j  danghter  to  mj  son  to  wife ' : 
And  there  paaied  hj  a  wild  beaat  that  wu  In  Lebanon, 
And  trode  down  the  thistle.'*    (2  JT^ye  xIt.  9.) 

On  the  part  of  one  of  the  authors  of  '* Types  of  Mankind,"  old  NUotic  associations — on 
^at  of  the  other,  eonTiction|)  of  the  seientifio  worthlessness  of  Hobje  JEamiA€M,(437) 
haTC,  for  two  years,  restrained  both  of  them  from  printed  notice  of  this  production:  and, 
if  now  they  coigoin  to  chant  its  requiem,  the  necessity  is  superinduced,  on  one  hand,  by  a 
desire  to  Tindicate  Bgyptology ;  on  another,  the  deed  has  been  fastened  upon  the  writer 
individually  by  the  incessant  offidousness  of  theologers  in  the  United  States,  in  local  obtra- 
sions  uncalled-for,  and  in  appeals  continual  to  the  illusory  authority  of  an  adolescent  scholar. 

It  has  been  already  shown  [«t(pra,  p,  670]  how  Mr.  Wilkinson,  in  1835,  had  obliterated,  witti 
a  dash  of  his  pen,  all  the  "unplaced  kings"  he  had  preTiously  published;  (428)  and  had 
cut  down  the  era  of  Mbnbs  to  the  year  b.  o.  2201,  **  for  fear  of  inUrfeiing  with  the  deluge.** 
During  twelve  years.  Sir  Qardner  Wilkinson  compassionately  refrained  from  dUuwial  inter- 
ference ;  but,  from  1837  (429)  to  1847,  (430)  he  made  a  retrocession  of  Mikbs,  on  a  slidiof 
scale,  to  the  year  b.  o.  2320 ;  thereby  placing  this  unfortunate  king  amid  the  palodic  mias- 
mata (he  was  killed  by  a  Mppopotamui)  consequent  upon  that  grand  catastrophe — only 
iwmty-eight  years  after  Archbishop  Usher's  cataclysm,  with  which  the  gallant  Kni^t 
scrupled  to  interfere. 

The  consequence  was,  that,  for  twelve  years,  no  hierologist  thought  it  incumbent  upon 
him  to  quote  Wilkinson  in  matters  of  chronology;  even  if  scientific  Justice  toward  the 
latter's  innumerable  Egyptian  discoveries  occasionally  induced  Egyptologists  to  cite  a  most 
erudite  author  notoriously  chary  of  mentioning  the  labors  of  continental  contempora- 
ries. (431) 

Solitude,  however,  in  time  becomes  tiresome  even  to  afi  anchorite.  Between  the  yean 
1836  and  1847,  the  bound  made  by  Egyptian  studies  was  enormous.  Lepsius,  followed  by 
the  whole  school  of  ChampoUionistt,  had  discovered  the  Xllth  dynasty  of  Manetho  ;  (432)  and 
the  XYI — XYIIth  dynastic  arrangement  of  Rosellini,  abandoned  by  every  other  scholar, 
survived,  in  1847,  through  Wilkinson's  Hand-book  alone.  It  became  desirable,  therefore^ 
to  <*  wear  ship"  in  the  smoke  of  Cairo,  and  to  reappear  to  windward  on  the  other  tack;  jost 
as  if  the  gallant  Kmght  had  been  sailing  in  line  with  Manetho^e  Xllth  dynasty  all  the  time! 
A  **  cat's  paw "  of  breeze,  nevertheless,  was  requisite  for  these  nautical  evolutions,  and 
Horcb  Mgyptiac9  kindly  wafted  it  over  seas  to  the  London  «  Literary  Gazette." 

"And  I  think  this  conjecture,"  irrote  the  author  of  Hora,  (488)  « strengthened  by  ^ 
fact,  that  Sir  G.  Wilkinson  has  found  with  the  name  of  Phiops  (Pepi)  a  king's  name,  which 
I  believe  he  agrees  with  me  in  considering  as  that  of  Othoes,  the  first  kmg  of  the  Ylth 
dynasty." — «  And  this  explanation  is  most  strikingly  confirmed  by  a  fact  [known  14  years 
previously  (434)  to  every  reader  of  Rosellini !],  of  which  some  very  remarkable  instances 
are  found  in  some  of  tiie  unpublished  papers  of  Sir  Gardner  Wilkinson,  which  he  has 
kindly  shown  me,  as  well  as  in  some  of  his  published  works ;  that  in  numerous  sculptures 

(427)  Bora  JEgffpUaoa — **or  the  Chronologj  of  Andent  Egypt  diaamrtd  from  Asbonomical  and  Hiero* 
g1  jphical  recony  npon  its  Honnaenta ;  induding  man  j  datea  found  in  cooTal  invcriptiona  from  the  period  of 
the  boOdlng  of  the  Great  Pyramid  to  the  timea  of  the  Peraiani:  and  Dlnatrationa  of  the  History  of  the  fint 
nineteen  Dynaatiea,  showing  the  order  of  their  suooeesion,  from  the  Monuments."    London,  Murray,  8tq»  185L 

(428)  MaUria  HieroglyrMoa;  Cairo,  ISST-'Si;  Sttppiemiaidf  and  TtaeL,  Malta. 

(429)  Manners  and  Cuttam;  1887;  i.  p.  4L 

(430)  Handbook  for  Trwodkn  in  Enpt;  1847;  p.  17. 

(431)  GunDOii:  Chaptxn;  p.  11,  a. 

(432)  'BxsvBa'.J^nfP^f'MSdU;  1846;  L,  Torrede,  pp.  18, 19;  iL  pp.  271-^62;  ilL  pL  3. 

(483)  Literary  GasetU;  1849;  p.  486;  "Cairo,  May,  1849." 

(484)  Compare  alfo  Lipnus—^Cnlte  fr^uent  en  NuUe  de  Sesertusen  m.".  LeUre,  20  Juiu,  184S;  in  Bev. 
Arohtel.,  June,  1844,  p.  208. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

EGYPTIAN.  *  679 

in  Nubia,  we  find  kings  of  the  XVIIIth  drnasty  worshipping  Sesertesen  [Wilkinson  always 
wrote  «*  Osirtasen"]  III.  as  a  god."(486)-— ••  I  was  unable  to  find  it  [Bor-em-baH]  during 
my  last  visit  to  Thebes,  owing  to  its  but  once  occurring,  and  to  the  great  extent  of  the 
tomb;  and  I  have  to  thank  Sir  Gardner  Wilkinson  in  giving  me  a  copy  pf  it'* (486)  —  '*I 
must  express  my  obligations  to  Sir  Gardner  Wilkinson,  for  his  having  greatly  promoted 
these  investigations,  during  his  last  visit  to  Egypt,  in  ditcutting  with  me  every  point  ofim- 
portanee  in  the  first  four  numbers  (all  I  had  then  written),  as  well  as  for  the  kindness  and 
liberality  which  he  showed  me  in  allowing  me  to  examine  and  copy  many  of  his  unpub- 
lished transcripts  from  Egyptian  monuments."  (487) 

These  meritorious  acknowledgments  were  due  to  the  paternal  solicitude  with  which  the 
gallant  Knight  had  watched  at  Cairo  over  Moras.  Nevertheless,  expostulations  were  ad- 
dressed from  London  to  its  author  about  the  suppression  of  the  names  of  so  many  other  fellow- 
laborers  ;  as  well  through  private  channels,  as  also  hinted,  in  public  session,  before  the 
*«  Syro-Egyptian  Society."  (488) 

Years  passed  away.  The  12  articles  entitled  Horob  JEgypHaea,  originally  published  in 
the  "  Literary  Gaxette,"  having  received  unparalleled  aid  ftrom  the  highest  quarters,  reap- 
pear, considerably  altered,  in  a  beautifU  octavo. 

We  read  first  Sir  J.  Gardner  Wilkinson's  endorsement  of  Ilorob :  (489)  — 

*<  It  is  indeed  the  less  necessary  to  enter  into  a  detailed  examination  of  the  chronology, 
and  the  succession  of  the  Pharaohs,  as  Mr.  Stuart  Poole's  work  on  the  subject  will  soon  be 
published ;  and  I  have  much  pleasure  in  stating  how  fuUy  I  agree  with  him  in  the  contempo- 
raneousness of  certain  kings,  and  in  the  order  of  succession  he  gives  to  the  early  Pharaohs." 

Secondly,  we  admire  fforee^t  re-endorsement  of  Sir  Gardner  Wilkinson :  (440)  — 

'*/  have  avoided,  as  much  as  possible,  quoting  or  examining  the  works  of  others,  except' 
mg  Sir  (Gardner  Wilkinson.  My  olject  has  been  to  explain  what  /learned  from  the  monu- 
ments ;  not  to  combat  the  assertions  of  others.  Sir  Gardner  Wilkinson  stands  in  a  position 
different  from  that  of  any  others  who  have  written  on  the  subject ;  he  has  never  written  to 
support  a  chronological  hypothesis  ['  in  order  not  to  interfere  with  the  Deluge,'  tuprd],  and 
is  entitled  to  the  utmost  confidence  on  account  of  his  well-known  accuracy,  the  many  years 
which  he  has  spent  in  the  study  of  the  monuments  in  Egypt,  and  the  caution  which  he  has 
shown  in  refraining  from  putting  forth  any  complete  system  of  Egyptian  chronology :  /am 
aware  how  greatly  /  disagree  with  all  others  who  have  written  on  this  subject ;  but  it  is  a 
sufi&cient  consolation  to  me,  since  all  differ,  that  it  is  little  more  to  differ  from  all  othere 
than  to  differ  from  all  of  them  but  one."  (441) 

Thirdly,  Sir  Gardner  Wilkinson  again  endorses  Jlorce :  (442)  — 

'*  And  the  contemporaneousness  of  others  [kings — entirely  arbitrary!]  have  been  very  inge- 
liiously  and  satisfactorily  explained  by  Mr.  Stuart  Poole,  in  his  Horce  Egyptiacce  ;  where  he 
acknowledges  that  it  was  fint  suggested  to  him  by  Mr.  Lane.  That  arrangement  may  be 
seen  in  the  following  table,  which  he  has  obligingly  eommumeaUd,  and  which  1  have  the  more 
pleasure  in  inserting,  as  /  agree  with  him  in  the  contemporaneousness  of  the  kings,  and  in 
the  general  mode  of  arranging  those  of  the  same  line." 

Fourthly,  Ths  Frumd  or  Mosks  endorses  both :  — 

'*  So  complete  and  satisfactory  is  the  train  of  evidence  adduced  by  Mr.  Poole,  that  Sir 
J.  G.  Wilkinson,  one  of  the  most  learned  of  living  men,  in  all  that  relates  to  Egyptian 
srohseology,  has  openly  published  in  his  last  great  work  on  the  Architecture  of  Egypt,  liis 
entire  concurrence  in  the  views  of  Mr.  Poole,  and  his  conviction  of  the  complete  and  satis- 
ttudotj  character  of  the  evidence  that  gentleman  has  adduced  ftom  the  monuments."  (448) 

Ever  and  anon,  after  reiterating  this  endorsement,  the  same  F&isko  of  Moses  adds 
in  Italics:  — 

**  Egypt,  with  all  her  tpUndid  Momtmentif  it  found  a  witneet  [as  much  as  and  not  less  than 
Spitsbargen]  to  the  truth  of  thi  Bible^  and  to  the  correetnete  [**  credat  JudsBus  Apella !"  ]  of 
the  Moeaie  chronology.  .  .  .  These  concessions  of  the  Chevalier  Bunsen  prepare  us  to  receive 
with  greater  confidence  the  statements  of  Mr.  B.  S.  Poole,  in  his  fform  jEgyptiaca,  claim- 
ing to  adduce  proofs  from  the  monuments  themselves,  that  several  of  the  dynasties  which 

(4t&)  Jbid.;  p.  662;  «Oairo,  JaiM,  184S.«> 
(486)  Ibid.:  p.  622. 

(437)  iM^;  p.  910. 

(438)  London,  lOth  April,  1S40;  LOerary  Ocmtie,  S8th  April,  1849. 

(430)  BanzJEgypOaca;  Pr«fli0t,p.28— dtatfooftoin  Wjumw)!i:  ArOtiUdbwei^  JneAmtEgytL 

(440)  Hanz;  p.  23. 

(441)  Hvra;  p.  28. 

(442)  meratic  Papyrv»i^TwHn;  1861;  p.  20. 

(443)  «MobUo,  Jan. 27,1862"  — AMtiWmiVMbfferJafi;  MlUadgerilk, Ga., Tebi  19, 1862. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

680  KAKEIKD'S    GHR0K0L06T. 

hare  been  genertllj  represented  as  snecessiTe  were  aetoAllj  contemporaneous,  as  e.  ^.  Ibe 
twelfth  and  the  fifth  [  I  ] ;  and  that  thus,  the  monnmental  history  of  Bgypt  corers  not  a 
period  of  duration  beyond  what  may  be  readily  reooneiled  with  [poor  Moses!]  the  Moeaio 
chronology  as  giTon  in  the  Septoagint  A  condnsion,  to  the  aoenracy  of  which,  Sir  J.  G. 
Wilkinson  has  affixed  the  sanction  of  his  great  name  in  these  matters."  (444) 

The  Fbiend  or  Mosks  soon  after  becomes  mystified :  — 

**  I  became  aoqndnted  with  scTeral  gentlemen  of  distinction  in  the  learned  woild. . . . 
Mr.  B.  8.  Poole,  a  bold  writer  on  Egyptian  chrondk^."(4i6) 

He  next  assures  ns:  — 

•*  I  have  earefWy  compared  the  copies  iaknhj  Cham^TBmkiuaU  then  tombs  and  impim^ 
firom  the  second  Cataract  to  Thebes,  and  I  haTe  c<^ted  his  hiero^tphics,  Une  by  Jme  fthis 
is  the  more  miraciUous,  as  it  was  performed  between  Alexandria,  Nor.  12,  and  CairOj  reb. 
14 — after  going  up  the  Nile,  1200  mfles,  to  Samneh;  and  returning,  1060  miles,  to  Cairo!], 
and  eh^aeter  ^  ehoracUr,  with  the  originals.  .  .  .  There  is  a  magnmoent  error  somewhere— 
though  /am  not  prepared  [  1 1  to  prnnt  out  where ;  nor  how  precisely  it  may  be  deleeled 
and  exposed^  Of  one  thing  /am  satisfied — that  Sir  J.  G.  Wilkinson,  and  my  kmdyomg 
friend,  Mr.  B.  S.  Poole,  of  the  British  Museum,  «re  much  nearer  the  truth,  in  their  chro- 
nology, than  is  Dr.  Lepsius,  or  the  CheTalier  Bunsen."  (446) 

The  scientific  reader  now  comprehends  our  local  rituation,  and  will  compassionately  forg^ 
the  inhumanities  which  such  erery-day  offences  compel  us  finally  to  perform.  **  Le  jeu  ne 
Taut  pas  la  chandelle;"  else  we  would  at  once  refute  Mora  EgypUaco^  page  by  page, 
and  hieroglyphic  by  hi«reglyphic ;  in  the  intevpretation  of  which  last  the  juTenDe  a«thar 
(or  Sir  G.  Wilkinson)  has  committed  blnnders  ae  egregious  as  they  are  multiform — alto- 
gether unpardonable  in  the  mctaal  state  of  hierology.  For  the  present,  our  criticiams  shall 
be  chiefly  confined  to  the  publication  of  '^  three  firagments,"  upon  the  principles  of  a  wmU- 
^  renowned  master,  Letronhe.  (447)  They  are  firom  the  hif^eet  Egyptologists  in  Europe ; 
two  of  them  in  epistles  to  the  authors ;  one  already  in  print 

First  Extract  (448) 

'<  I  haye  nothing  to  say  about  the  book  of  Poolb,  if  not  that  I  regard  it  as  a  juTenBe 
and  sufficiently-pretentious  essay,  written  without  consoienuousness,  and  dangerous  rather 
to  the  theologians  than  to  science.*' 

Second  ExtraeL  (449) 

**  Not  one  of  its  followers  can  read  three  lines  of  hieroglyphics  correctly.  The  G.  P. 
.T.  (450)  and  G.  P.  M.  ^151)  are  only  in  the  mind  of  the  author.  Examined  by  the  micro- 
scope of  philology,  all  Tanishes  into  a  few  unimportant  observations — for  example; 

^  is  not  «<  tiie  first  month*'— « the  first  half  month," 

of  the  Oteat  Panegyrical  Tear;  but  merely 

:"  monthly,"  0j^    ^^^^-«  ««half.monthly." 

The  consequence  is  that  this  egression  does  not  fix  the  age  of  Cmmr  [builder  of  the  great 
pyramid].     The  *<  7th    y^^^s^"  (452)    on  the  base  of  the  Kamao  obelisk,  refers  to  tiM 

seren  tmat,  or  periode-montht,  I  believe  that  tiM 
obelisk  was  in  the  quarry.     Hence  the  whole 
_  cyclical  part  is  a  delusion ;  and  all  the  inferences 

are  nil  The  rest  of  the  book  is  a  string  of  hypotheses — where  there  are  not  actoal  mis- 
apprehensions.** 

Third  Extract.  (4SS) 

**  Mr.  PooLB  is  of  the  number  of  those  young  workmen  irho  deserve  that  one  should  tell 
them  the  whole  truth.    Either  he  has  not  rcNid  what  recent  aroheolog^  haTe  written 

(444)  The  Friend  of  Mom;  New  Tork,  1868;  pp.  870, 877, 614. 

(446)  JfoMeAtdy  JdMvi<ier,Oet9,1863~*<C(nTe«poiidMee-Parii,8fl^ 

(44«)  JfoMe  2>ad^  JS^Mer,  Aprfi  1, 1868—  *<  Letter  firam  BgTpt— OUro,  Feb.  14, 1868.* 

(447)  TrOUFratfmmta^^UsauAsm f^Jio^^  Paris,  1649;  pp.lOO-Ua 

(448)  XeOerfo  J&.  GiiMan, 
(Ui)  LetkrtoJh-.JML 

(460)  Bom;  p.  60  —  <<  Ornt  PuiagTriod  Tear.** 

(461)  Do.;  p.  68— « Great  Pane(7ri<»l  Month." 

(462)  Do.;  p. 88. 
(468)I>BBoI»i:PMfMmaNMC«el(a;B•v.Arch6d,UT«b.l868;p^e84»866rand^   . 

Digitized  by 

Google 

BGTPTIAK.  681 

upon  this  subject,  which  woald  be  inexcusable ;  or  he  has  read  them  and  does  not  cite 
them,  which  would  be  still  more  grave.  I  have  not  read  the  name  of  Lepsius  a  single 
time  in  bis  book,  in  respect  to  all  these  questions  so  lengthily  treated  In  the  Introduction  to 
Chronology  [Berlin,  1848-9].  .  .  .  Not  content  with  this  cUscovery  [tIx.,  the  imaginary  Pane- 
gyrical Months]  M.  Poole  thinks  also  to  find  other  new  cycles,  with  the  dates  which  refer 
to  them.  I  confess  that  it  has  been  impossible  for  me  to  comprehend  how,  in  the  presence 
of  pretensions  so  important,  Mr.  Poole  has  not  deemed  himself  obliged  to  proTC  the  truth 
of  his  allegations,  by  minutely  analysing  the  inscriptions  which  he  ^eges.  Far  from  that, 
he  contents  himself  with  indicating  them,  and  sometimes  CTen  without  producing  their  text 
in  his  plates.  One  cannot  lean  upon  an  Egyptian  inscription,  as  upon  a  passage  of  Titus 
LiTius,  without  new  explanation,  and  I  will  frankly  say  that  I  beUere  in  none  of  the  cycles 
and  in  none  of  the  dates  of  Mr.  Poole.  ...  It  is  erident  that  in  thus  handling  the  dphers, 
without  controlling  their  signification  and  the  manner  in  which  they  are  introduced  into 
the  inscriptions,  one  may  end  in  ima^ning  all  the  periods  that  one  wishes,  and  in  giving 
them  a  certain  appearance  of  truth  to  th^  eyes  of  persons  who  can  discuss  but  the  results. 
A  work  thus  based  must  pass  for  non-oventi." 

But,  after  all,  HorcR  has  no  <<  fsar  of  interfering  witii  ^  Deluge  ;**  so  the  work  becomes 
only  another  thorn  in  the  ride  of  orthodoxy.  Mr.  Wilkinson  (1885,  tvpra),  devoutly  fol- 
lowing archbishop  Ushke  and  the  margin  of  king  Jamm*9  twnon,  says  the  date  of  the 
Flood  <*  it  2848  b.  c."    In  its  author's  first  articles,  ffor<B  had  declared^ 

«  The  date  of  the  accession  of  Menes,  the  first  king  of  Egypt,  is  probably  that  of  the 
commencement  of  the  first  great  pi^iegyrical  year  and  first  capitel  year.  Eratosthenes  and 
Josephus  [say,  modem  amjmtaton  on  these  ancient  writers]  place  his  accession  some- 
what later — namely,  about  2800  years  b.  o.,  instead  of  2715.  The  history  of  the  1st,  26^ 
8d,  4th,  and  5th  dynasties  [of  the  IV-Yth  dynasties,  Lbpsius  found  the  amplest  details, 
wUle  the  author  of  Borw  dwelt  only  15  miles  off,  at  Cairo !]  is  but  scantily  Aimished  us  by 
Bfanetho  and  the  monuments,  and  the  latter  give  us  but  one  date  [and  that  fabulous!], 
that  of  the  commencement  of  what  /have  call^  the  second  great  panegyrical  year  in  the 
time  of  Suphis  I.,  the  builder  of  the  great  pyramid,  and  second  king  of  Manetho*s  fourth 
dynasty,  b.  o.  2350."  (454) 

HortB  thus  fixed  the  building  of  the  great  pyramid  two  years  before  Wilkii^son's 
Deluge ;  and  set  Mbhbs  on  the  throne,  in  Egypt,  867  years  before  the  same  authority's 
catastrophe.  But,  it  was  promptiy  shown,  that  fforcg,  in  selecting  the  year  b.  c.  2715  for 
Mxms,  had  merely  stolen  another  man's  thunder  (455) :  wherefore,  when  its  author  came 
to  reprint  those  twelve  articles  in  an  octavo  volume,  he  so  translated  his  hieroglyphics, 
astronomically,  as  to  obtain  two  years'  difference!  —  "The  commencement  of  the  great 
panegyrical  year  which  preceded  .that  of  the  Suphises,  /  have  already  shown  to  be  in  the 
year  b.  o.  2717"  (456) ;  and  then  he  informs  us  that  **  the  Septuagint  chronology  dates  the 
Ditpersion  of  Mankind  about  the  year  b.  o.  2758 ;  that  is,  about  41  years  before  the  era 
of  Menes"! 

Computations  upon  the  different  copies  of  the  LXX,  every  one  of  them  as  rotten  as  the 
MSS.  themselves,  cause  the  Creation  to  fluctuate  between  b.  o.  5904,  and  b.  o.  5054.  (457) 
And  the  above  sentence  merely  shows  its  penman's  incompetency  to  ^iscuss  S^tuagini 
questions.  To  the  reader  of  our  disquisition  on  Xth  Omuit  [PeLeG,  wqfra,  p.  545],  the 
following  specimens  otHora^B  biblical  knowledge  will  be  amusing;  as  much  as,  to  use  iti 
author's  favorite  a<jyective,  the  latter's  credulity  is  *<  remarkable":  — 

«  /therefore  believe  that  the  Vague  year  was  instituted  in  the  time  of  Noah ;  probably 

by  Ham  [!],  not  by  Noah /  have  only  to  notice  one  other  important  MM>ch  of  Bible 

history—  the  dispersion  of  nations.  The  division  [read  '< split"]  of  the  earth  is  indicated 
as  having  occurred  at  the  birth  of  Peleg  [a  "  split"] ;  when  we  are  told,  ((3en.  x,  25), 
<  unto  Eber  were  bom  two  sons ;  the  name  of  the  one  (was)  Peleg  (or  division) ;  for  in  his 
days  was  the  earth  divided.'  [  Vide  tupra^  what  the  ffebrew  writer  meant!]  Now,  it  was  a 
common  custom  of  Hebrews  to  name  their  children  from  circumstances  which  occurred  at 
their  birth  ;  and  the  custom  of  ancient  Arabs  was  precisely  the  same,  and  has  continued 
to  the  present  day.  We  cannot  reckon  as  exceptions  to  this  the  few  cases  where  Ood 
changed  a  name,  or  imposed  a  new  one ;  and  in  the  latter  case  the  old  name  was  retained 
with  the  new  one[!].    The  birth  of  Peleg,  according  to  Dr.  Hales,  h^>pened  b.  o.  2754; 

(4M)  Art,  Xn.;'  Literary  Gcuette,  Dec  16, 1849;  p.  910;  —  oompwe  Jri,  VIL,  p.  6X2. 

(466)  "Bymyredacttonof*M«ii«tho»-2716"iLC.;GLiDi)OH,  CAap.,1843,p.ll:-iiidflilii<^^ 
(460)  Op.  eU.:  p.  63,  and  p.  97. 

(467)  &IOCIOU :  ChromL  nformata;  p.  288. 

86 

Digitized  by 

Google 

6S2 

MANKINDS   CHBONOLOGT. 

bat,  calculated  from  my  hate  of  the  Ex- 
odus. B.C.  2758,"(468)  — «*/8ay  that 
the  Pharaoh  of  the  Exodus  reigned  un- 
doubtedly not  more  than  about  one 
year ;  for,  although  hia  being  drowrud 
in  the  Red  Sea  is  not  expreasly  men- 
tioned by  Mosis,  it  is  so  mentioned 
in  the  186th  Psalm  [what  a  clinching 
argument  I],  and  /  hold  all  the  books 
of  the  Bible  to  be  equally  true.*'(459). 

It  is  to  be  deplored  that,  after  being 
promoted  for  his  Hebraism  to  a  post 
in  the  British  Museum,  <*my  kind 
young  friend,*'  as  the  Friend  <^f  Moeet 
affectionately  terms  him,  should  hare 
expunged  these  delightful  samples  of 
pious  feeling  from  the  republication  of 
Horce  in  its  octaTO  form.  So  imbued, 
we  fear,  is  he  likely  to  become  in  that 
enlightened  institution  with  self-immo- 
lating prinoiples,  that  it  would  not  sur- 
prise us  to  learn  through  newspapers 
that  Harm  likewise— as  Soaliqib  says, 
**  ut  signatius  loquar** — ^for  the  sake 
of  Oriental  literature  were  to  turn 
Mohammedan, 

No  inclination  remains  to  follow 
Iloroe't  farthing-rush-lightany  farther. 
We  leave  the  pupil  for  the  teacher, 
when  we  here  exhibit  on  the  margin 
a  table  printed  by  Wilkuisok  in  the 
pamphlet-text  accompanying  the  lat- 
ter^s  truly -Taluable  contribution  to 
archnolo^cal  science — The  fragmenU 
of  the  Hieratie  Papyrue  at  Turin :  con- 
taming  the  namee  of  BgypOan  Kinge^ 
with  the  Hieratie  inecription  at  the  back. 

Here  is  that  ''magnificent  error" 
which  the  Fbibnd  or  Mosks  could  not 
discoTcr  by  going  to  Egypt :  ^- 

*'  Beepecting  the  construction  of  the 
table,  he  obsenres :  '  The  relatiye  po- 
sitions and  the  lengths  of  most  of 
these  dynasties  are  founded  tipon  some 
kind  of  monumental  authority.  The 
rest  /  haye  placed  within  approxima- 
tive extremes.  There  are  several 
points  of  exact  [t]  contemporaneous- 
ness, as  in  the  2nd  and  4th  and  6th 
dynasties,  again  in  the  5th  and  15th, 
and  in  the  9th  and  11th;  and  these, 
with  other  evidence  ef  the  tame  nature, 
enable  us  to  adjust  the  general  scheme 
of  all  the  dynasties.'  **  (460) 

Reader !  Suppose  a  Chinese  archn- 
ologist,  with  a  little  red  button  on 
his  cap,  were  to  come  aU  the  way 
firom  Pe-kin  to  America,  and  tell  us 
that  good  old  king  Eobbbt  was  a 

1200 

1300 

1400 

1500 

1600 

1700 

1800 

1900 

2000 

2100 

2200 

2300 

2400 

2500 

2600 

2700 

fiu?i*w 

H 

(4^).ir<.Z.:  JM.<3ta«.;p.0AL    (460) jlilT.;  X«.  au.,^432.   (400) ao-.A^yr.; pp. 80^ 81, and laUe, p. Si- 
Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 

EGYPTIAN.  683 

m  jthe — that  the  oonsecntiTe  dynasties  of  oar  oommon  English  father-land  could  fit  no  Hot- 
tentot's estimate  of  the  chronology  of  John-Chinaman's  sacred  book,  the  Chothkmg;  unless, 
after  rejecting  Boudicea  and  Caractacos,  we  were  to  permit  His  reduction  of  Danet,  Saxona, 
Normanat  Planiagenett,  Laneastrians,  TorkiteSy  Tttdora,  Stuartt,  OrangxteSf  ffdnoveriofu,  &c.; 
together  with  all  British,  Scottish,  and  Irish,  periods  of  anarchy ;  not  forgetting  Cromwell 
and  the  Commonwealth ;  into  one  century.  Suppose  that,  after  proYing  why  every  Anglo- 
Saxon  had  erroneously  classified,  as  distinct,  those  personages,  epochas,  and  historical  eyents, 
which  the  "  Tribunals  of  Literature "  of  China  had  pronounced  to  be  identical,  the  said 
mandarin  were  to  show  us  how  beautifully  the  whole  could  be  reduced,  through  electro- 
magnetic typography,  into  one  line  of  a  tables  and  expressed  algebraically  by  an  z,  repre- 
senting an  infinitesimal  fraction  of  a  second  of  CreatiTC  time.  What  should  we  say  to  His 
Excellency  "  Uncle  Joah  **f 

Now,  whaterer  the  American  reader  might  be  pleased  to  hint  to  such  Chinese  mandarin, 
would  be  uttered  in  demotic  tongue  with  <<brutale  /franchise*'  by  old  Manbtho  (could  his 
mummy  arise)  to  Sir  Gardner  Wilkinson,  at  the  first  glance  OTcr  the  aboTC  table :  where, 
in  wilful  disregard  of  Lenormant,  ChampoUion,  Bockh,  Barucchi,  Bunsen,  Henry,  Lesueur, 
Lepsius,  Hincks,  Kenrick,  Pickering,  Ampere,  Be  Boug€,  Birch,  and  of  every  hierologist 
past,  present,  and  to  come,  the  gallant  Knight  has  made  the  Hid,  IVth,  Ylth  (VII),  YlUth 
Egyptian  dynasties  (consecutive  in  Manetho  and,  where  mentioned,  serial  upon  all  monu- 
ments), eontemporaneoua  I — has  actually  jammed  eleven  dynasties,  YI,  YII,  YIII,  IX,  X,  XI, 
XII,  XIII,  XIV,  XV,  XYI,  into  a  space  (2200  a  1700)  of  600  years !  And  perpetrated, 
too,  all  these  inexplicable  vagaries  with  theological  applause,  when,  by  placing  Mines  (1st 
dynasty,  Thmitea)  at  2700  b.  c,  he  shows  that  valiant  knighthood,  in  a.  d.  1851,  no  longer 
creeps  all  over  '*  for  fear  of  interfering  with  the  Deluge  of  Noah ;  which  {waa)  2848  b.  c.'* 
before  an  aspirant  to  ecclesiastical  patronage  had  won  his  gilded  spurs. 

We  dismiss,  therefore,  Horce  JSgyptiaecs  as  beneath  scientific  notice,  reserving  to  our- 
selves the  privilege  of  a  reviewer's  criticism,  whenever  circumstances  may  demand  its 
annihilation.  With  it  we  snap  off  the  last  published  peg  upon  which  short-chronology  can 
suspend  its  clerical  hat ;  because  Mr.  Sharpens  arrangement  of  Egyptian  dynasties  anterior 
to  the  XVIIIth  has  been  respectfully  disposed  of.  When  other  writers,  with  hieroglyphical 
handles  to  their  patronymes,  adventure  into  the  rude  arena  of  archaeology  as  champions 
of  «Aort-chronography,  may  their  armor  be  well  tempered  and  their  lances  tough ! 

The  list  of  2oni^-chronologists,  above  given,  comprehends  the  **  preux  chevaliers "  of 
archseological  science  at  this  day.  The  minimum  of  their  respective  dates  for  Minks  is 
B.  0.  8648  ;  the  maximum  approaches  the  6th  chiliad  b.  o.  By  each  authority  all  biblical 
computations,  Hebrew,  Samaritan,  and  Stptuagint,  are  thrown  aside  among  the  rubbish  of 
the  things  that  were. 

**  The  sum  of  all  the  dynasties  varies  according  to  our  present  sources  from  4686  to  6049 
years  ;  the  number  of  kmgs  from  800  to  850,  and  even  500.  It  is  evidently  impossible  to 
found  a  chronology  on  such  a  basis,  but  Syncellus  tells  us  that  the  number  of  generations 
included  in  the  80  dynasties  was,  according  to  Manetho,  118 ;  and  the  whole  number  of 
years,  3565.  This  number  faljs  much  short  of  what  the  summation  of  the  reigns  would 
furnish  according  to  any  reading  of  the  numbers,  but  is  nearly  the  same  as  118  generations 
would  produce,  at  any  average  of  82  years  each.*'  (461) 

Fifteen  years  ago,  the  learned  ethnographer,  De  Brotonne,  reasoning  upon  this  yerj 
number,  <*8556  de  Manethon,"  obtained  b.  o.  8901  as  <'le  chiffre  le  moins  61ev^*'  for 
Mbnbs.(462) 

To  neither  of  the  present  writers  have  these  results  been  unknown : — 

**  On  my  return  to  Cairo  [April,  1840,  from  a  voyage  with  Mr.  Harris  to  the  second  cata- 
ract], I  devoted  a  twelvemonth's  leisure  to  the  verification  of  the  solidity  of  the  basis  upon 
which  hieroglyphical  revelations  had  placed  Egyptian  monumental  chronology.  The  result 
was  a  conviction  as  profound  then,  as  subsequent  researches, — echoed  by  the  voice  of  uni- 
versal erudition,  and  embodied  in  the  works  of  a  host  of  savans  whose  names  gild  the 

(Ml)  KKfBicK:  Anoient  Sgypt  under  the  Pharooha:  1860;  IL  p.  08. 
(462)  FOdaUima  d  MiffraiUma:  L  p.  208. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

684  mankind's  CHKONOLoar. 

brightest  page  llliimiiiated  by  eeienee  in  the  XlXth  oentory, — ^hare  rioee  demonstrated  its 
aoouraey,  of  the  utter  impossibility  of  reconeiling  Egyptian  factt^  geological,  topographieal* 
ethnological,  hieroglyphical,  and  historical,  with  Archbishop  Usher's  system  of  patriarchal 
chronology, 

**  A  manutcript  compilation,  oTer  which  an  old  and  Taloed  colleagae,  M.  Prisse,  and 
myself  wiled  away  at  Cairo  many  delightfal  weeks  in  reciprocal  exchanges  of  our  sereral 
gleanings,  under  the  title  of  **  Analecta  Hieroglyphica,"  condensed  CTeiy  eartouehe,  with 
references  to  most  of  the  historical  monuments,  known  to  hierolog^ts  up  to  April,  1841 ; 
and,  as  many  personal  friends  are  aware,  this  manuscript  is  still  a  most  important  grwmd" 
text  and  manual  to  those  who,  like  myself,  are  anxious  to  ascertain  the  stability  of  prior 
iuTcstigations,  before  haiarding  the  erection  of  a  theoretical  superstructure."  (463) 

What,  then,  is  the  present  state  of  scientific  opinion  on  the  era  of  Minxs  ?  The  reader 
has  it  before  him  in  the  list  on  p.  682 ;  and,  without  perplexing  himself  with  Tain  speculationa 
founded  upon  ignorance  of  the  stupendous  materials  transferred  from  Egypt  to  Berlin  bj 
the  Prussian  Mission,  let  him  do  as  we  do,  await  patiently  for  the  publication,  hourly  due, 
of  Lepsius's  *<  Book  of  Kings."  The  authors  may  be  pardoned  when  stating  that,  in 
books,  manuscript-notes,  and  epistolary  communications  from  Egypt,  Italy,  France,  Ger- 
many, and  England,  they  probably  possess  as  much  specific  and  detaUed  information  here 
at  Mobile,  on  Egyptian  monumental  chronology,  as  most  men  in  the  world,  less  a  doxm 
European  hierologists  —  with  whom  they  are  in  agreeable  accord.  When,  therefore,  they 
put  forward  no  dogmatical  system  of  their  own,  but  wait  for  the  «  Book  of  Kings,"  they 
act  themseWes  in  accordance  with  the  counsel  offered  to  fellow-inquirers.  Should  Lepsius's 
work  reach  their  hands  before  the  issue  of  the  present  Tolume,  a  synopsis  of  its  ehrom" 
ology  will  be  appended  to  our  essay.  We  may  also  look  forward  to  Biot,  the  scholarlike 
astronomer  of  France,  for  a  profound  inyestigation  of  the  astronomical  data,  rcTcaled  by 
Egyptian  monuments,  in  their  relations  to  mundane  chronology ;  (464)  which  will  supersede 
any  future  recurrence  to  the  cyclic  rcTeries  of  such  youthful  star-gaxers  as  ffor€B. 

Should,  however,  a  qualified  student  desire  to  prepare  himself  for  thorough  masteiy  of 
Lepsius's  **Book  of  Kings,"  he  should  commence  with  Rosellini's  Monument*  Storid;  and, 
that  being  fundamentally  acquired,  his  next  guide  is  Bunsen,  ^gyptens  StdU  in  dtr  Welige- 
sehichte ;  wherein  most  of  the  royal  Egyptian  names,  discorered  up  to  1845,  are  oompared 
with  the  classical  lists,  and  in  which  the  grand  alteration  produced  by  Lepsius's  resuscita- 
tion of  the  Xllth  dynasty  (unknown  to^^e  lamented  Pisan  Professor,  or,  in  1847,  to  Wil- 
kinson), is  ftbundsDtly  set  forth.  *'  There  is  no  royal  road  to  the  mathematics,*'  nor  is 
there  a  straighter  path  to  the  comprehension  of  Egyptian  chronology  than  the  one  we 
indicate;  but,  after  these  two  works,  the  study  of  Lepsius,  ChronologU  der  .£gypter, 
<*  Einleitung,  1849,"  becomes  imperatiTC. 

Such  reader  will  appreciate  the  general  correctness  of  the  following  method  of  verifying, 
archeologically,  the  progressive  layers  in  which  Egyptian  history  stretches  backwards  from 
the  Christian  era,  assumed  at  1858  years  ago ;  until  the  unknown-commencements  of  Nilotic 
humanity  merge  into  an  undated,  but  ante-alluvial,  period  of  geology.  (465) 

We  gladly  borrow  the  first  points  of  departure,  in  our  journey  from  the  Christiaii  era 
backwards,  from  Sharpe  (466) :  — 

*<  The  reigns  of  Ptolemy,  of  Darius,  of  Cambyses,  and  of  Tirhakah  are  fixed  by  the  Baby- 
lonian eclipses.  Hophra  and  Shishank  are  fixed  because  they  are  mentioned  in  the  Old 
Testament,  since  the  length  of  the  Jewish  reigns,  after  Solomon,  is  well  known,  while  those 
Jewish  dates  are  themselves  fixed  by  the  earliest  of  the  Babylonian  eclipses  in  the  reign 
of  Tirhakah.  Thus  are  fixed  [by  Mr.  Sharpe]  in  the  Table  of  Chronology  the  dynasties 
of  Sais,  Ethiopia,  and  Babastis.  Petubastes  uved  in  the  first  Olympiad;  this  fixes  the 
dynasties  of  Tanis." 

Thus,  king  by  king,  and  event  by  event,  we  ascend  with  precision  back  to  Alexander  the 
Great,  b.  p.  882 ;  and  thence,  Uirough  tiie  XXXIst,  XXXtii,  XXIXtii,  XXVnitii,  XXVnth, 

(468)  Quwox:  fiond-teofc;  London,  Madden,  1849;  p.40;— oonC  Non:  BibUad  and  Phytkxd  SIttary  nf 
Man:  1848 ;  pp.  a»-86;  ~  aIm  Chranotog}/,  Ancient  and  Sariptural :  Sonth.  Quart  Bor.,  Nor.  1850. 

(464)  Db  BoDoi:  JUv.^ArtkioL,  FeU  1853;  pp.  656,  686. 

(465)  Gunnoir:  Otia;  pp.  61-66. 

(466)  Chronology  and  Geography ;  1849;  p.  13,  and  table,  pp.  14, 16. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

EOTPTIAN.  686 

XXYIth,  XXVth,  XXIVth,  XXnid  EgyptiAn  oonseentiTe  dyiiMtiee^  baek  to  SAeSAoNK, 
Shishak,  founder  of  the  XXIId  dynasty;  who,  conquering  Jertualem  "in  the  Vth  year  of 
king  Rehoboam,"  (467)  as  is  hieroglyphically  recorded  in  Kamac,  (468)  enables  ns  to  estab- 
lish a  perfect  synchronism,  between  Egyptian  and  Jndaio  history  at  b.  o.  971-8. 

Prior  to  this  date,  Egyptian  monnments  never  once  refer  to  the  Bebrewt,  throw  not  a 
glimmer  of  light  upon  Jewish  annals ;  and  with  Sheshonk  also  ceases  the  possibility  of  fixing 
any  Pharaoh,  to  him  anterior,  within  5  or  10  years.  Chronology,  year  by  year,  stops  in 
fact  at  B.  0.  972;  as  well  in  Israelitish  as  in  Nilotic  chronicles:  although  the  foundation 
of  Solomon's  iempU  cannot  be  far  remored  ft^m  b.  o.  1000. 

Learing  Hebrew  computation  to  ascend  along  its  own  stream,  innumerable  Egyptian  doc- 
uments—  iahUtif  papyri,  genealoyieal  lisit,  public  and  private,  together  with  an  astounding 
mass  of  collateral  and  circumstantial  eridence, -Scarry  us  upward,  through  the  XXIst, 
XXth,  XlXth,  and  XVIIIth  dynasties,  reign  by  reign,  and  monument  by  monument,  to 
Bamsis  I.  (Bamesu) ;  whose  epoch  belongs  to  the century  16th-16th  b.  o. 

Here  interrenee  a  period,  though  for  a  few  years  only,  of  anarchy ;  represented  in  the 
Disk  heresy,  and  by  sundry  royal  claimants ;  at  the  head  of  whom  stands  ATunuL-BAKHAK, 
or  ^^en-a^;  (469)  called  by  Lepsius  *<  Amenophis  IV."  But  upward  from  his  father^ $ 
reign,  Amenoph  III,  every  king  is  known,  with  many  events  of  their  respective  reigns, 
through  hieroglyphical  sculptures  and  papyri,  back  to  the  beginning  of  the  XYIIth  Theban 
dynasty,  in  the  reign  of  AAHMES,  Amoeie,  I ;  computed,  by  Lepsius,  to  be  about  the  year 
1671  B.  0.  At  this  point,  which  begins  the  '*  Restoration,"  or  **  New  Empire,"  after  the 
expulsion  of  the  Syksot,  we  lose  the  thread  of  annual  chronology,  for  times  anterior  to  the 
17th  century,  before  o. 

We  refrain  from  discussion  of  the  EyJceoe,  or  shepherd  kings,  (470)  They  are  supposed  to 
occupy  the  XVIth  and  XYth  dynasties ;  and,  according  to  Manetho,  their  duration  covered 
511  years  of  .time.  The  XI Vth  dynasty  has  not  been  disentangled  clearly  from  the  muti- 
lated lists ;  and  the  hieroglyphical  records  have  not  yet  spoken  intelligibly,  although  they 
are  numerous.  We  pause  for  Lepsius ;  and  in  the  meanwhile  refer  the  reader  for  a  sum- 
mary of  the  monumental  edifices  of  the  Old  and  the  New  Empires  to  his  published  travels.(471) 
To  us  at  present  this  <'  middle  Empire"  is  chaos ;  but,  even  supposing  the  XIYth,  XYth,  and 
XYIth  dynasties  could,  by  a«Aor/-chronologist,  be  expunged  from  Egyptian  records,  it  must 
be  remembered,  by  ^^-chronologists,  that  the  XYIIth  dynasty  stands  erect  in  the  17th 
century  b.  o.  We  leave  the  *'  middle  Empire's"  duration  to  be  acljusted  along  a  sliding  scale 
from  zero  upward ;  and  next  proceed  to  show  that  we  possess  above  1500  years  of  positive 
monuments,  behind  this  **  middle  Empire,"  by  which  all  Septuagint  computations  of  the 
Deluge,  at  b.  o.  8246,  or  8146,  or  8155,  encounter  a  "  reductio  ad  absurdum." 

The  mists  begin  to  clear  off  as  we  commence  ascending  to  the  latest  representatives  of  the 
<<01d  Empire  "  in  the  land  of  KAaM,  Ham,  Chemmia:  vii.,  the  Sebakhetps  and  Nepherhetps 
of  the  Xlllth  dynasty  (472) :  but,  at  the  Xllth  dynasty,  the  glories  of  the  olden  time  blaze 
forth  again  effulgently ;  (478)  thanks  to  Lepsius's  investigations  of  the  Oenealogieal  Papyrut 
0/  Turin.  (474) 

(407)  1  KimgM  zSr.  25;  2  Ckrm.  zU.  2. 

(468)  OusDoa:  Chegplan;  ]».  9. 

(460)  P|U88b:  Legendu de  Sekai;  Her.  Arch«oI^  1846;  pp.  472-474;  also  hif  amngtmant  of  thMe  kingi,  In 
WnJuiraoR,  Hand4)ook,  p.  803;  — Lkpsiui:  OSUerkreis ;  1861;  pp.  40-48;— Di  Bouoi:  Ldtre d  M.  Alfred Mmtry ; 
Ber.  Arohtel.,  1840;  120-124. 

(470)  GUDDOX:  OOa;  pp.  44, 46. 

(471)  Bri^t  out  ^WPtm^i  PP-  864-860. 

(472)  BmcB,  in  CMa  J^/yp<^aca;  p.  82;  and  hla  HUiuriood  TaUet^Samea  IL;  1862;  p.10;— Db  Bouoi: 
B^Oitrt  de  Semni;  Bar.  AxufaAoL,  1848;  pp.  812,  818. 

(473)  BuvsBV :  j^g^pthu  StdU;  U.  p.  271,  wg. ;  —  Di  "Rami :  AnnaUt  de  PhMoeopMe  Chr0ienne$;  xlv.,  xr.,  zrl.; 
and  Hx5cxa:  ntrin  Book  qfKinge;  R.  Soo.  of  Lit;  iiL,  part  i.,  pp.  128-150;  bat  oonidderably  emended  in  Wn<> 
Kmox's  Fbqt^riu  qf  Kings;  1850;  " Obaerrationa  of  Dr.  E.  Hmcu";  p.  56:  — Di  Rooai:  Le  Sksostris  de  la 
Doudime  DynaMie;  Her.  Arcbtol.,  1847  ;  pp.  481-480. 

(474)  Ams*9<M;  Ta£  iiL,  ir.,  t.,  tL  :— most  roperblj  reoopled  bj  Sir  J.  0.  WUklnion:  Fragwienls  (ff  the  Bie- 
ratie  Bipyrus  at  Turin!  1861 :  but  oonsnlt  aim  tbe  critical  history  of  this  document  aa  displayed  hj  Ciuvpol- 
uoH-WiatAC  (Bev.  Azditel.),  with  the  eaveat  that  the  luckleas  diipoa^  of  theie  fragments  is  doe  to  SnvAxn  alon^. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

*J    ]|  }43AiiiJn[Afr.  8.  »«.4a]4(l)"     «-.....  O.     — 

07*n8in.27d 

686  mankind's  chronology. 

The  hieroglyphieftl  namet  of  bohm  of  these  kxngs  may  be  consulted  in  Bonsen ;  but  we 
borrow  fh>m  Lepeiiie  thii  table  of  the  Xllth  dynasty ;  which  cannot  beoome  more  than 
slightly  modified  in  his  **  Book  of  Kings.''  (475) 

"The  XIIth  Manethokian  Dynasty. 

Aocordingto  Aeearding  to  €h€       Bighettjfearon 

JMifuMo.  J^trim  Ayym*.      the  Mktmumatta, 

1.  ABflDeBlM I  ftloM 9ff     OAnkl    [Afr.l6   Saiul6J   ifn 

2.  SesnrtMen  I  and  Ameiiemhe  L    7    *<  1  8.  of  Am.  and  get.  I. 

Serartoaen  I  alone 86    «   V46  8eB.I     [Afr.46    £iia.46J  45    « 44.ofSesJ— 2<rfAni.U. 

Besurtesen  I  and  Amenemhe  n    4    **  j 

8.  Amenemhe  H  alone S8    **  i 

'a^    iw  |88Am.n  [Afl-.88    Eua.88]8Cy)"     .«^....  86.  Am.  n-8.8ea.n. 

4.  Seavrteaen  n  *  Anenembe  n.lO<'i  *-  ^^' 

SmutmrnTlMUmm^ 28  **     28 Baa. n   [Afr.48    Eiia.48](^«<     IL     ~  — 

6.  Seanrteaen  m. — 88  «     88  Sea.  in  [ Afr.  8    Ena.  8]8(7)  «     » 28.     —  -^ 

6.  Amenemhe  m  alone ~ 41 

Amenemhe  in  *  Amenemhe  IT 

7.  Amenemhe  It  alone 8  «  8  Am.  IT  [Afr.  8  )^                07*n8m.27d.    8. 

8.  Rik^beknafrn 4  **  4  8ebek.  [Afr. 

Total    218  «    1 «  24  «  » 

The  XIIth  dynasty  ends,  according  to  Lepsius,  about  b.  o.  2124. 

What  relics  are  extant  of  Xlth  dynasty  belong  to  the  Enuantefs,  (476)  inclnding  perhaps 
Ba-nnb-Cheper,  discoTered  lately  by  Mr.  Harris. 

Little  can  here  be  related  about  the  Xth,  IXth,  Vlllth,  and  Yllth  dynasties,  to  be  intel- 
ligible without  a  lengthy  argument ;  but  the  duration  of  this  last  is  felicitously  suggested 
by  Maury.  (477)  Solid  as  a  rock,  howerer,  is  the  Ylth  dynasty ;  (478)  so  is  the  Yth  on  the 
Turin  PapyruB  and  through  the  recoTcry  of  all  its  kings  (but  one  t)  firom  the  tombs  opened 
by  the  Prussian  Commission  at  Memphis.  (479)  Of  the  IVth  the  yestiges  surpass  belief^ 
to  persons  who  haTC  not  opened  the  folio  plates  of  Lepsius's  DenkmSUr;  wherein  the 
petroglyphs  of  these  three  dynasties,  earliest  and  grandest  relics  of  antique  humanity, 
are  now  preserred  for  posterity,  so  long  as  the  pyramids  of  Oeezeh  shall  endure. 

With  the  ind  dynasty  Egyptian  monuments  cease.  There  is  nothing  extant  of  the  lid, 
nor  coeyal  with  the  Ist  dynasty.  Their  existence  is  deduced  fh>m  the  high  state  of  the  arts, 
and  the  extensiTe  knowledge^possessed  by  the  denizens  of  the  Nile,  as  demonstrated  by  the 
pyramidt,  sejmkhrei,  and  hieroglyphed  records^  of  the  IVth  dynasty,  compared  with  the  frag- 
mentary catalogues  of  Manetho  and  Eratosthenes,  and  supported  by  Gmco-Boman  tradition. 

MENES — Egypt's  first  Pharaoh — is  recorded,  in  hieroglyphics  carred,  during  the  14th 
century  b.  o.  at  the  Theban  Ramesium,  by  Ramses  H.  as  his  earliest  ancestor ;  and,  in 
hieratic,  on  the  Turin  Papyrut,  a  document  written  in  the  twelftii — fourteenth  century  b.  c, 
*'  king  MeNat,  of  a  firm  life,"  is  twice  chronicled.  (480) 

By  Lepsius,  whose  computations  we  adopt,  Menes  is  estimated  to  haye  founded  the  Ist 
dynasty  of  Thinites  about  the  year b.  o.  '8898. 

**  There  is  nothing  incredible  in  such  an  antiquity  of  the  Egyptian  monarchy."(481)  Indeed, 
long  before  hieroglyphical  discoTcries  had  den^onstrated  its  natural  adaptation  to  all  the 
circumstances  of  Egypt  (when  due  allowance  is  made  for  pre-Menaie  chiUads  of  years  for 
aUuTial  existence),  the  researches  of  mathematicians  had  pointed  to  similar  results. 

**  On  supposing  the  11840  years  of  Herodotus,  taken  for  the  Egyptian  seasons  of  three 
months,  we  should  haTO  2794  solar  years,  according  to  Freret,  and  2885  years,  according 

(476)  UAer  dU  Zw8{fU  .a^ypti$Ae  KOnigtdyncatk ;  1868;  p.  28. 

(476)  LmcAm:  LeUrt  d  SalvdUni:  1838;  No.  22;  — and  Ldtrt  d  M.  DtTWitU:  Ber.  ArehAol.,  1848,  pp.  718- 
720;  — BmoH,  in  Otia  JSIgypUaea;  pp.  80, 81;  and  Tablet  qf  Ranua  H ;  p.  18. 

(477)^  CkrondU^  da  DymMa  igyptienna:  Ber.  Archfiol.,  1861 ;  pp.  166, 167.  . 

(478)  BimsBr:  JEg^pt/tni  SUOe:  ii.  p.  101,  aeg.;— MABism :  Fragmmt  du  Papynu  SofcH  de  Turin  etlaVle 
DynoMtU  de  Memdhon;  BeT.  Archfol.,  1840;  pp.  306-816;— Hnrcn:  Tnna.R.  SocUt,  Mar.  IS;  1846;  p.  137; 
and  ^'Ohaarrationa'*  in  WnjcmsoN'a  Fapgrut;  pp.  68,  64. 

(470)  QuDDOR :  Otia ;  p.  38.    For  all  detaila  aep  autboritiea  in  the  prvoeding  note. 

(480)  Cblconn  1^  fragment  1,  Una  11  and  12 ;  Sir  G.  WnxDraoif'B  copy. 

(481)  Kxnicx:  Op.  dL;  p.  110. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

EGYPTIAN.  687 

to  B«iU  J.  Theee  fimshed  at  the  r^gn  of  Sethos  and  ir^  the  war  of  S^naoherib,  in  the 
year  710  before  J.  o.  Following  this  hypothesis,  the  commencement  of  Menes  fell  about 
the  year  8504  b.  c,  according  to  Freret;  and  in  3545  b.  c,  according  to  Bailly."  (482) 

HaTing  thos  indicated  to  jonior  students  of  Egyptian  chronology  the  order  in  which  they 
should  read  the  works  of  onr  common  seniors  in  this  technical  speciality  of  science,  we  will 
now  reyerse  the  process,  and  exhibit,  firom  MENES  downward,  the  stratifications  in  which 
Time's  hour-glass  has  marked,  historically,  the  consecutire  OTents  witne^ed,  during  above 
forty-three  centuries,  by  the  Egyptian  **  Type  of  Mankind"  down  to  the  4th  century  after 
Che  Christian  era ;  assumed  at  1858  years  ago. 

It  is  a  conyenient  plan  to  group  seyeral  portions  of  Egypt's  history  into  the  following 
separate  masses,  Uke  the  primary,  seoondary,  and  tertiary  formations  of  onr  earth's  crust; 
and  to  yiew  the  dynasties,  in  those  masses  included,  as  if  they  were  so  many  distinct  strata 
contained  in  such  formations.  We  thereby  divest  the  sulgeet  of  the  perplezities  and*  du- 
biousness of  arithmetieal  ehronology ;  because,  the  firil  existence  of  Menes,  as  an  historical 
entity,  is  no  more  dependent  vpon  e^ktrt,  than  Owen's  Dmamia  gigankm  (in  pal»ontology) 
hangs  upon  a  **b.  o.  2820"  of  a  Knighfs,  or  upon  a  «b.  o.  2848"  of  an  Arohbishop's 
diluTian  phantasms. 

L — The  AHTB-MommnvTAL  period.    This  of  course  is  an  utter  hlank  in  chronology.    Sci- 
ence knows  not  where  geology  ends,  nor  when  humanity  begins ;  and  the  definitiye,  or 
artificial  systems,  eurrent  on  the  subject,  are  of  modem  adoption  and  spurious  deri-* 
▼ation. 
At  what  era  of  the  W(»dd'8  geological  history  the  Biyer  NiUy  the  Bdkr*tlrabiad  in  par- 
ticular, first  descended  fktmi  paluatrine  localities  in  Central  Africa,  along  the  sueoessiye 
levels  of  Nubian  plateaux,  through  its  Egyptian  channel  to  the  Mediterranean  (beyond  the 
indisputable  fact  that  its  descent  took  effect  after  the  deposition  of  the  so-termed  diluyial 
PBiFT  upon  the  subjacent  UmMtone)  is  a  problem  yet  unsoWed.    But  were  proper  investiga- 
tions, such  as  those  commenced  in  1799  by  Girard,  (488)  and  cut  short  by  European  belli- 
gerent interference,  entered  upon,  in  the  valley  of  the  Nile  itself;  by  competent  geologists, 
the  alluvial  antiquity  of  the  **  Land  of  Khem"  could  be  approximately  reached.  (484)    The 
very  rough  estimates  heretofore  made  by  geologists  yield  a  minimum  of  7000  years  for  the 
depositions  of  the  present  alluvium  hj  the  river  Nile.    The  maximum  remains  utterly  inde- 
finite ;  but,  nevertheless,  we  are  enabled  to  draw,  from  the  data  already  known,  the  fol- 
lowing among  other  deductions,  of  primary  importance  to  Nilotic  chronology :  — 

Ist— Previously  to  the  advent  of  the '"Sacred  River"  no  deposition  of  aUimum  having 
taken  place  upon  the  limestone,  Egypt  was  uninhabitable  by  man. 

2d.— dince  the  deposition  of  this  alluvium,  there  has  been  no  Deluge^  in  the  literal  Hebrew 
and  genesiacal  sense  of  the  term,  whether  in  Egypt,  or  in  Asiatic  and  African  countries 
to  the  Nile  adjacent 

8d. — Humanity  must  have  commenced  in  the  valley  of  the  Nile,  under  conditions  such  as  exist 
at  this  day,  after  a  sufficiency  of  alluvium  had  been  deposited  for  the  production  of  vege- 
table aliment,  but  at  a  time  when  the  depth  of  this  alluvium  was  at  least  twenty  (fifty, 
or  more,  for  aught  we  can  assert  to  the  contrary)  feet  below  the  level  of  the  highest 
portion  of  the  Nile's  "bed  at  this  hour ;  but  how  much  soil  had  been  previously  depo- 
sited—  that  is,  what  its  thickness  was  over  the  limestone  when  humanity  first  developed 
itself  in  Egypt  —  it  is  yet  impossible  to  define. 

4th. — Many  centuries  (in  number  utterly  unknown)  must  be  allowed  for  the  multiplication 
of  a  human  Type  in  Egypt,  from  a  handful  of  rovers  to  a  mighty  nation ;  and  for  the 
acquirement,  by  self-tuition,  of  arts  and  sciences  adequate  to  the  conception  and  exe- 
cution of  a  pyramid:  thus  yielding  us  a  blank  amount  of  chronological  interval; 
bounded  on  the  one  hand  by  the  unknown  depth  and  surface  of  the  Nilotic  alluvial, 

{4!^li%9Mimaii  FOiatkmMtiMigrottom;^  . 

(488)  DaariptUm  tU  figyfU:  torn.  xx.  p.  88,  mq, 

(484)  Qussoir:  Otia;  pp.  03-09;  and  "GMlogtad  Beetkmi."    lor  the  Montoil  argUDent,  vMt  PlOEBnra. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

688  MANKIND^S   CHROKOLOGT. 

fofScient  fbr  the  growth  of  hmnMi  food,  at  the  time  of  man's  introdoctioii ;  and  om 
the  other  (after  this  nomad  had  been  transmntai  by  time  and  droiimstance  into  m 
farmer  and  then  into  a  monnment-boilding  citizen)  by  the  pyramids  and  iombt  of  the 
rVth  Memphite  dynasty;  plaoed  by  Lepsins's  diseoTeries  in  the  thirty-fifth  oentorj  b.o. 

IL — The  PTBAMiDAL  poriod,  or  02i  Empire. — Occupying,  according  to  late  scientific  liews, 
abont  fifteen  centuries;  probably  beginning  with  Manetho's  firtt  dynasty  (king 
OuKNiPHis) ;  and  ending  with  the  Xllth  or  Xlllth,  about  twenty-two  centuries  prior 
to  the  Christian  era.  The  Xllth  dynasty  is  marked  architecturally  by  the  employment 
of  obeUtkt, 

nL— The  period  of  the  Utxsos,  or  MddU  Emphre.— There  being  few  mommmU  tor  this 
period  extanty  we  tie  dependent,  apart  tmm  Qreek  lista^  vpon  the  Titrm  Pt^pynu^  and 
on  the  names  dinmkled  long  after  on  the  <<Ghamber  of  Kasnae''  ^  H«re  is  the 
grand  difficulty  in  Egyptian  chronology ;  it  hating  been  hitherto  impossible  to  deter- 
mine its  dnration;  whieh  is  now  generally  considered  to  be  &r  shorter  than  is  esti- 
mated in  Bunsen*s  <*  iBgyptens  Sttile  in  der  Wel^eschichte,"  and  perhaps  to  eoabrmoe 
all  Scnptural  connexions  with  Egypt  ftom  Abraham  to  the  Exodut  indusiTe;  on  evecy 
one  of  which  the  hiaroglyphkt  are  utterly  silent  It  indudee,  howeyer,  the  XlVth, 
XVUi,  and  XYIth  dynasties. 

IV.  —  The  positiTe  histouqal  period,  or  Ntm  Empire.  —  Cswmfmrnng  about  1600  to  1 800 
years  b.  o.,  with  the  Butoraiion  (after  the  expulsion  of  the  Hyksos  tribes),  under 
Aahmss,  the.fbneder  of  the  XVUth  dynasty.  It  maybe  edled  the  Tefitpi&^modi 
because,  although  temples  existed  in  the  Old  Empire,  all  the  grand  sanotttaiieB 
standing  at  present  upon  the  alluTia  bdong  to  the  XVUth  dynasty  downward. 

Dated  hieroglyphkal  records  descend  to  the  third  century  after  Christ,  with  the  name  of 
the  Emperor  Dicius :  (485)  but  demotic  papyri  and  mummiet  are  extant  as  recent  as  the  4th 
century  of  the  same  era.  (486)  Greek  inscriptions  at  Phlle  corroborate  Priscianns,  who 
relates  how,  about  a.  d.  451,  a  treaty,  between  the  Christian  Emperor  of  Constantinople 
and  the  heathen  Blemmyes,  stipulated  that  —  **  etery  year,  according  to  ancient  customs, 
the  Ethiopians  were  to  take  the  statue  of  Im  ftrom  Phile  to  Ethiopia  ;*'(487)  and  a  Gredaa 
trayeller  bears  witness,  in  an  inscription,  that  he  was  once  present  at  the  temple  when  the 
goddess  returned.  In  fact,  history  proTCS  that  ISIS  was  yet  worshipped  at  Phils,  if  not 
•  throughout  Egypt,  CTcn  in  the  year  a.  d.  486 :  and  the  pagan  emblem  of  <*  eternal  life," 
Ankh^  continued  still  to  be  inscribed,  in  lieu  of  the  Christian  eroit^  OTor  orthodox  diurches; 
as  in  the  following  instance  discoTored  by  the  accurate  Sir  J.  Gardner  Wilkinson  (488) : — 

"  KAeoJf  AIKH  +  £e:kah^ia  ** 

Oaiho^lic  +  Chu^Tch. 

Finally,  to  enable  the  reader  to  classify,  chronologically,  the  Egyptian  data  comprised 
in  '*  Types  of  Mankind,''  a  table  is  subjoined  which  the  forthcoming  *<  Book  of  Kings  "  will 
show  to  be  in  the  main  correct  It  is  made  up,  in  part  from  the  first  volume  of  the  Chrth' 
nologie  dtr  JSgypter^  and  in  part  Arom  Cheralier  Lepsius's  oral  communications  to  the 
writer  at  Berlin,  in  May,  1849.(489)  To  it  are  added  such  excerpts  of  the  (}heTalier'a 
subsequent  epistolary  correspondence  with  the  authors  as  may  give  a  general  idea  of  his 
HTstem,  and  a  precise  one  of  his  scientific  liberality. 

(486)  Uatng}  r<frUh^Nadiriehtyl949i  pp.17,29. 

(486)  Bouv,  in  (Mia  JSgyptUun,  p.  87. 

(487)  LnaoRiR:  MaUriamm ptmr  mrtir  d  FBUhire  du  Okrmminimt, 

(488)  LiTBOinn:  EwammArcMdUigique,*'Cto^Aw»Uigjptkmn»,**li4»;  p,tL 
(4l»)Qum>im:aBmdtocktoVuIiae:  Lond<m,]faAikD,  1840;  pp.  90-1^0. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

CHINESE.  689 

Manktho's  Ststbm  or  Eotptian  Chbonologt,  as  bbbtored  bt  Lspsiub. 

Bpooku  anterior  to  Mum— Qydlo  Forioda :  — 

JHfrine  djnaities :—     10  godt rdgned  18,870  JuUan  jt$n  « 19  Bothic  <2«m<-period8. 

BOdemy^cd*       **      3,650  "  —  30<ioe{/Z^offtSothio-periocL 

17,620  **  — 12  Sothio-periods  of  1460  jean. 

JnU'hiMiorioal  djn. :  10  Mama,  Thlnitef,       8fi0  <<  —  oonunenoemant  of  a  new  Sothio>iMiriod. 

XpoCB  or  MxNKS  —  oommencement  of  %tftor»oa<  period ;  thMy  dynas^ei,:  — 

Otd  Smpire:—      Irt  dynaity — Aocetaionof  Menee 8898  B.a 

Oommenoenient  of  manuntentdl  period ;  third  dynastj. 
4th  dynaity  —  Fyramlds  and  tomba  extant — befan 8426   ^ 

&th  dynaaty— Began  ahoat^ „ 8100  « 

7th       *«  M      2000  « 

10th       «  «      « ^ 2500  « 

12th       «*  Bndf  about ^ 2124  « 

13th       «  ** 2100  " 

Jmuion  qfthe  Hyktot  —  eompriaing  the 

14th,  16th,  and  leth  dynaatiee — from  about  b.  a  SlOl  to  about 1600  « 

Nem  EH^^-^JUMtoraUoni— 

17th  dynaaty— Began « «« 1671  « 

30th       **  Ending  on  the  Moond  Peraian  Invasion 840  <* 

Conqueat  of  Egypt  by  Alexander  the  Great i 882  ** 

PloUmaie  dynasty  bepms.  0.828— anda. 44  « 

Soman  dominion  ^begux 80  ** 

S^n^yjMad  recorda  of  the  Emperor  Dedua 250  A.  D. 

Thus,  from  an  indefinite  period  prior  to  the  year  b.  o.  8898,  down  to  250  years  after  the 
Christian  era,  the  hieroglyphioal  character  is  proTed  to  haTe  been  in  uninterrupted  use ; 
iHiile,  from  the  year  b.  o.  8898,  modem  hierology  has  determined  the  chronologic  order  of 
Egyptian  dynasties,  through  present  archnological  re-constmction  of  the  Nile's  monuments. 

The  Romans  held  Egypt  firom  the  27th  year  b.  o.  until  896  a.  d.  ;  when  the  sons  of 
Theodosius  diyided  the  Empire.  Egypt  lingered  under  the  soTereignty  of  the  Eastern 
Emperors  until  a.  d.  640-1 ;  when,  subjected  by  Aameb-bbn-bl-As,  she  became  a  prorince 
of  Omar's  Saracenic  caliphate.  In  the  year  a.  d.  1517 — JBecffra  958~her  valley  was  oyer- 
run  by  the  Ottoman  hordes  of  Sooltan  Sblekm  ;  and  has  erer  since  been  the  spoil  of  the 
Turk: — 

0!  Egypte,  EgypU!  .  .  .  Sola  ntpererunt  fahtUa  et  ague  mendibikt  posterii  .  .  .  sola  tupe^ 
nrunt  verba  lapidibut  tndta,  Et  MabUabU  ^gyptum  Scythut  out  (AKQLO-)  Indutf  ami 
dUguit  taUa.  {490)  • 

CHEONOLOGY  — CHINESE. 

**  The  Pliilosopher  said :  Sah  I  (name  of  hia  disdple  THSBMO-mu)  my  dodrim  U  simple  and  eoijf 
to  be  understood.  Thaeng-taeu  replied:  *  that  ia  certain.'  The  Philoeopher  having  gone  out,  hia 
diadples  aaked  what  tbdr  maater  had  meant  to  aay.  Tb0eng>t8eu  responded :  *  The  doctrine  of  our 
maater  consiatB  uniquely  in  poaaeailng  rectitude  of  heart,  and  in  loring  one'a  neighbor  aa 
one8eU:"*(491) 

Such  were  the  ethics  put  forth  in  China  by  that  *^  pure  Sage  "  whom  three  hundred  and 
serenty  millions  of  humanity  still  commemorate,  after  the  lapse  of  2830  years,  as  the 
<*most  saintly,  the  mo^t  wise,  and  the  most  yirtuous  of  human  legislators:"  this  was 
Chinese  <*positiTe  philosophy"  in  the  Vlth  century  before  Christ;  already  at  the  second 
period  of  its  historical  deyelopment  (492) 

About  a  century  later,  in  a  distinct  Asiatic  world,  the  school  of  Ezba  at  Jerusalem  embo- 
died a  similar  conception  in  the  compilation  termed  Deuteronomy ^  or  ^*  secondary  law:"  (498) 

(400)  Books  qf  Hermes ^MxBcmam  THUMBomua'a  dialogue  with  Asdq>^;—QuDVOK :  Appeal  to  the  JsM' 
ftuaria:  London,  Madden,  1841,  posi^m. 

(401)  The  LUN-TU,  or  The  FhOosopMetd  Omeersations,  of  Kbouimi^sbu  (Oonftidua);  eh.  It.  t.  16;  lirrea 
Saorts  de  I'Orient,  p.  183. 

(402)  PAUTinzai:  Histoire  de  la  FhUoeopkle  Chinoiss;  Rerue  Indipendante,  Aug.  1844;  tirage  k  part,  p,  0. 

(403)  N.  B.  My  Justiflcation  of  thia  date  ia  contained  in  the  auppreeaed  portlona  of  our  toL;  «i^>ra,  pp.  028-^. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC 

690  mankind's  chronology. 

"  But  if  tny  man  hate  his  neighbor.  &c.  .  .  .  then  shall  ye  do  unto  him,  as  he  had  thought 
to  haye  done  unto  his  brother.'*  (494)  At  on  epoch  approximate,  this  idea  became  aimi^- 
fied  into  a  maxim:  <* Better  is  a  neighbor  that  is  near,  than  a  brother  far  off:"(4d5) 
and  it  is  still  more  concisely  expressed  in  Levilietu:  **  Then  shalt  lore  thy  neighbor  as 
thyself."  (496) 

During  the  same  fifth  century  b.  c,  the  simultaneousness  of  moral  as  well  as  of  other 
deTelopments  among  Types  of  Mitikind  radically  distinct,  and  remote  fh)m  each  other's 
influences,  encounters  a  parallelism  in  the  beautiful  dictum  of  a  Grecian  Isocrates  —  **  Do 
unto  others  as  ye  would  they  should  do  unto  you." 

About  three  generations  earlier  there  flourished  in  Persia  the  philosopher  Zoroaster ; 
some  of  whose  eleyated  doctrines  hare  reached  our  day,  although  through  turgid  Greeiaa, 
Jewish,  and  Persic  streams.     **  Oate  the  71st "  of  his  Sadder  contains  the  following: 

*'  Offer  up  thy  grateful  prayers  to  the  Lord,  the  most  just  and  pureORHuzn,  the  supreme 
and  adorable  God,  who  thus  declared  to  his  prophet  Zardusht  (Zoroaster) :  *  Hold  it  not 
meet  to  do  unto  others  vhai  thou  tdouldst  not  have  done  to  thyHif:  do  that  unto  the  people 
which,  when  done  to  thyself,  proTes  not  disagreeable  to  tiiyielf.* "  (497) 

Fiye  hundred  years  afterwards,  the  writer  of  Matthew  (498)  reported  —  <*  Ye  hare  heard 
that  it  was  said :  Thou  $haU  love  thy  neighbor  and  hate  thine  enemy  ;  but  I  say  unto  you,  lore 
your  enemies."  The  writer  of  XiiA:e(499)  considerably  extenda  the  idea  in  language  and 
contextual  circumstances — "And  he  answering  said:  *  Thou  ehalt  hve  the  Lord  thy  Qod 
[Hebraic^,  leHOuaH  ELoHeK]  with  all  thy  heart,  and  with  all  thy  eoul,  and  with  all  thy 
etrength,  and  with  all  thy  mind,  and  thy  neighbor  ae  thyeelf:**  thus  combining,  into  one  dis- 
course, two  citations  from  the  Old  Testament  (500)  slightly  Taried;  owing  probably  to  the 
OTang^lista'  habit  of  following  the  Greek  LXX  in  lieu  of  the  Hebrew  Text. 

But,  among  the  more  exalted  of  the  Hebrew  nation,  in  the  schools  of  Babylon  and  Jeru- 
salem, such  pure  ethics  had  been  taught  long  prerionsly.  Thus  (as  our  learned  friend. 
Dr.  J.  J.  Cohen  of  Baltimore,  opportunely  reminds  us  while  writing) : — 

**  Let  us  recall  the  celebrated  reply  made  by  the  Pharisee  Hillel  to  a  pagan  who  came 
declaring  to  him  that  he  was  ready  to  embrace  Judaism,  if  the  Doctor  could  make  known 
to  him  in  a  few  words  the  rieumi  of  all  the  law  of  Moses :  —  *  That  which  thou  likeat  not 
[done]  to  thyself,*  said  Hillel,  '  do  it  not  unto  thy  neighbor  ;  therein  is  all  the  law,  the  rest  is 
nothing  but  the  commentary  upon  it' "  (501) 

These  comparisons  made,  we  can  reyert  with  more  pleasure  to  China  and  to  Coimrcixss. 

**  The  lessons  of  KHOUHO-rsiir  were  often  less  indirect  His  moral  [doctrine]  is  summed 
up  in  the  following  lines :  '  Nothing  more  natural,  nothing  more  simple,  than  the  prindplee 
of  .that  morality  which  I  endeator  to  inculcate  in  you  through  salutary  maxims.  .  .  .  1st — 
It  is  humanity  ;  whicA  is  to  say,  that  uniTcrsal  charity  amongst  all  of  our  species,  wiUioat 
distinction.* " 

Father  Amiot,  the  great  Sinicized  Jesuit,  commenting  upon  this  passage,  obsenred  — 
**  Because  it  is  humanityt  and  that  humanity  is  nothing  else  than  man  himselfl"  Which 
Pauthier  explains : — 

** In  Chinese,  JIN  TCHE:  JIN  T£ :  word  for  word;  humamtae  quesy  homo  quidem,  .  .  . 
To  render  comprehensible  how  much  humanity,  or  benevolenoe,  unirersal  charity,  was 
recommended  by  Khouno-tsev,  it  suffices  to  say  that  the  word  which  expresses  it  is 
repeated  above  a  hundred  times  in  one  of  his  works,  the  Lttn-yu,  And  it  is  pretended, 
with  as  much  lerity  as  ignorance,  that  this  grand  principle  of  universal  charity  for  mankind 
had  only  been  revealed  to  the  world  five  hundred  years  after  the  Chinese  philosopher,  in  a 
Uttle  comer  of  Asia !     QueUepUiS!  "  (502) 

We  have  deemed  it  expedient  to  preface  an  inquiry  into  the  archseological  bases  of 

(4M)  Jkutermomy,  ziz.  11, 19. 

(405)  Proverb,  xxvii.  10. 

(406)  LeoUieHi,  zlz.  18. 

(407)  Dabidan,  i.  338 :  aad  Mt  the  Mm«  quotation  in  Htdi,  De  Sdtg,  TtL  Anomm,  p.  47L 

(408)  Good  Tidings,  t.  48.  Sbabpi'b  N.  T.,  p.  0. 
(400)  Good  Tidings,  x.  27,  V-^Jbid^  p.  132. 
(MO)  Deutenmamy,  tL  6,  with  LeoiUau,  xix.  18. 

(601)  MuKX:  Palestine;  p.  665;  from  Bal^lonian  Ttlmod  (Shabbaih,  ch.  S).  Jbid.:  BifUxions  ta  Apptadfar 
tA  OahbCs  BibUi  1633;  W.  p.  20. 

(602)  Okine;  pp.  146, 147,  and  not*. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

CHINESE.  691 

Chinese  chronology  with  the  aboTe  extracts.  They  will  famish  at  once  to  the  reader  a  Terjr 
Afferent  idea  of  the  teachings  of  Confticins  (five  hundred  years  before  any  Greco- Judte an 
writers  of  the  Gospels  lived)  than  he  can  gather  from  Macao  supercargoes,  Hong-kong 
opium-smugglers,  or  Canton  missionaries.  Whatever  practical  developments  the  latter 
may  diumally  give  to  the  sublime  principle  o^<* universal  charity;"  whatever  merit  may 
be  due  to  the  first  human  being  who  enunciated  this  exalted  sentiment;  or  whatever 
thorough  knowledge  of  humanity's  best  and  loftiest  interests  such  sentiments  may  imply ; 
all  these  ascriptions,  history  attests,  equally  belong  to  a  Sinico-mongol,  Confucius ;  who 
died  B.  C.479,  or  about  2882  years  ago.     [See  his  portrait;  mproy  Fig.  880,  p.  449.] 

Whether  among  the  Hong  merchants  '*  universal  charity"  (and  there  are  noble  instances) 
be  unexceptionably  practised,  any  more  than  in  WaU  street,  Lombard  street,  or  in  the 
Place  de  la  Bourse,  concerns  us  not  These  commercial  princes  are  taught  to  reverence  its 
principles  as  much  as  the  Dobias  or  the  Medicis  of  Christendom ;  and  they  are  exposed 
to  infinitely  greater  temptations  toward  its  violation,  than  are  those  Chinese  archsologists, 
who,  scattered  throughout  the  empire,  pursue,  at  national  expense,  their  historical  studies 
of  their  own  monuments;  in  lettered  seclusion,  but  with  every  honorable  recompense 
scholarship  may  aspire  to.  (508)  For  above  twenty-three  centuries,  moreover,  the  4th  and 
6th  maxims  of  Ehoung-tseu  have  been  instilled  into  each  generation  of  them  from  earliest 
infancy. 

**  It  is  uprightnete  ;  that  is,  that  rectitude  of  spirit  and  of  heart,  which  makts  one  seek 
for  truth  in  everything  and  to  desire  it,  without  deceiving  oneself  or  deceiving  others :  it  is 
finally  sincerity  or  good  faith  ;  which  is  to  say,  that  .frankness,  that  openness  of  heart,  tem- 
pered by  self-reliance,  which  excludes  all  feints  and  all  disguising,  as  much  in  speech  as  in 
action." 

That  the  moral  influence  of  such  principles  has  not  perished,  even  through  the  transitory 
irruption  of  the  present  and  expiring  dynasty  of  Mantchou  Tartars,  is  testified  by  Sir 
Henry  Pottinger  in  the  eulof^ums  pronounced  by  him,  at  London,  upon  the  high  Chinese 
diplomatists  with  whom  he  concluded  the  Treaty  of  1844.  Nor  should  Americans  forget 
the  excellent  conduct  which  such  principles  have  already  exhibited  among  thousands  of  our 
Chinese  fellow-citizens  in  the  State  of  California. 

We  have  not  the  slightest  right  to  doubt,  therefore,  whatever  reasonable  account  Chinese 
scholars  may  famish  us  of  their  nation's  indigenous  history ;  of  which,  otherwise,  not  a  syl- 
lable is  known  to  us  prior  to  the  fourteenth  century  after  Christ ;  and,  where  not  irrational, 
such  annals,  from  such  sources,  may  be  received  in  the  more  good  faith,  that  the  Chinese 
arch^ologue,  having  none  of  our  hagiographers'  motives  for  chronological  curtailment  or 
extension,  cares  nothing  about  <*  outside  barbarians,"  their  alien  history  or  superstitions, 
and  did  not  compose  his  national  chronicles  with  a  view  to  such  foreigners'  edification. 

The  day  is  evermore  passed  that  modem  science  should  strive  to  reduce  Chinese  chro- 
nology, for  the  mere  whim  of  adapting  it  to  the  spurious  computations  on  a  Hebrew  Text, 
and  Samaritan,  Septuagint,  or  Vulgate  version ;  as  was  the  case  before  Egyptian  monumental 
annals  were  proved  to  ascend,  at  least,  to  the  thirty-fifth  century  b.  o.  (504)  And  we  shall 
presently  show  (sketched  also  in  our  table  of  Alphabetical  origint,  supra,  p.  688),  how  the 
highest  point  clumed  by  Chinese  historians,  for  their  nation's  antiquity,  falls  centuries 
below  that  which  hlerologists  now  insist  upon  for  Egypt :  so  that,  if  Egypt  and  Egyptians 
were  a  civilized  country  and  populous  people  in  the  thirty-fifth  century,  b.  c,  it  would  be 
preposterous  not  to  feel  assured  that  Sinico-mongols  (indeed  every  human  type  of  Mongolia) 
were  already  in  existence,  in  and  around  China,  their  own  centre  of  creation,  during  the 
same  pi^rallel  ages.  What  is  the  objection  to  believing  that  China  was  popuUted,  by  her 
Mongolian  autocthones,  chiliads  6f  years  previously?  Reader!  ''one  blushes"  redder 
than  St.  Jerome  to  mention,  that,  now-a-days,  the  acceptance  of  this  fact  is  questioned  by 
the  Rev.  Dr.  This,  or  the  Rev.  Mr.  That:  neither  of  whom,  perhaps,  has  ever  studied 
Sinology  —  never  even  opened  a  Sinological  work ! 

(503)  Chine;  pp.  194,  218,  238,  236,  248,  286^  808,  880,  862, 869,  388,  397,  Ac :  alao,  BiOT,  Sur  la  OonstOukm  Bh 
mique  de  la  Chine  au  V2iwu  tUde  aoant  notre  ire;  1845;  pp.  8, 9,  *o. 

(504)  Dx  BaoTomn:  Faiatkns  et  Migrations  des  ftu^;  IL  pp.  1-43. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

692  mankind's  ghbonologt. 

The  rereries  of  Fortit  D'UrlMui  (506)  are  now  saperuinQated ;  the  monstrous  eztraT»- 
ganzas  of  a  Parayey  are  preserred  as  ceaseless  sources  of  merriment  (606)  To  refute 
either,  seriously,  would  be  sheer  waste  of  time.  The  inundations  of  the  riyer  Hoang-kot 
OTeroome  by  the  engineer  Tu,  (607)  lie  parallel  with  the  Egyptian  Xllth  dynasty ;  when, 
in  the  28d  century  b.  o.,  similar  causes  induced  smaller  constructions  along  the  Nubian 
Nile :  (608)  and  a  reader  of  Pauthler  will  as  soon  associate  those  local  dikings,  buttresses, 
dams,  and  sluices,  in  China  or  Egypt,  with  Usher's  universal  Flood,  as  by  anybody  else  the 
Noachian  deluge  might  be  proposed  in  explanation  of  the  leveet  along  our  Louisianian 
Mississippi.  It  would  be  an  equal  outlay  of  labor  to  discuss  Hales*s  yiews  upon  Chinese 
subjects ;  (609)  after  his  Hebraical  knowledge  has  been  so  repeatedly  shaken  throughout 
these  pages :  nor  need  we  perplex  the  reader  with  other  works  whose  authors,  b'ke  our- 
sehes,  are  not  Sinologists;  but  who,  in  this  respect  unlike  ourseWes,  do  not  seek  for  infor- 
mation at  its  only  clear  fountains. 

It  will  be  now  plain  that  '*  Types  of  Mankind"  recognises  for  Chinese  history  none  but 
Chinese  historians.  The  chances  of  error  lie  uniquely  in  the  channels  through  which  its 
authors  receive  their  accounts :  and  these,  to  our  view,  are  completely  guarded  ag^nst 
when  we  accept  R^musat  and  Pauthier,  as,  above  all  Europeans  at  this  day,  qualified  to 
be  their  interpreters.  Furthermore,  every  relevant  passage  from  the  Jesuit  missionaries 
is  embraced  within  Pauthier's  volumes. 

Under  the  caption  of  Mongolian  Origin  and  ideographic  wrlUngs,  we  have  displayed  the 
argumentative  process  through  which  it  becomes  certain,  that  Europe  knew  naught  about 
China,  nor  China  aught  about  Europe,  until  the  end  of  the  1st  century  after  C. :  but  modem 
acquaintance  with  Cathay  dates  from  the  Venetian  Marco  Polo,  who  resided  in  China  about 
A.  D.  1276 ;  followed  by  the  first  Jesuit  missionary.  Father  Michel  Bogerius,  who 
penetrated  thither  about  a.  d.  1681 ;  and  the  second.  Father  Matthceus  Riccius,  in  1601. 
From  that  time,  during  more  than  a  century,  many  accomplished  Europeans  d  Sodeiate  Jetu 
flocked  into  the  Celestial  Empire ;  and  to  their  vast  labors  are  we  indebted  for  complete 
reports  upon  China,  derived  by  them  from  the  highest  scholastic  and  official  sources  of  the 
realm  —  which  narratives,  now  collated  by  Sinologists  in  Europe  with  the  immense  literary 
treasures  accessible,  in  Chinese,  to  students  at  Paris  and  Rome,  prove  to  have  been  con- 
scientiously executed.  No  Europeans,  before  or  since,  have  possessed  such  opportunities 
for  acquiring  thorough  knowledge  of  everything  Chinese  as  these  lowly  preachers  of  the 
GospeL  Indeed,  the  official  report  made,  in  1692,  by  the  *<  President  of  the  Supreme  Court 
of  Rites "  to  the  Emperor  Khang-hi,  and  by  him  approved,  alone  suffices  to  show  their 
powerful  claims  upon  Mantehou' Tartar  affections:  — 

<*We  have  found  that  these  Europeans  have  traversed  vast  seas,  and  have  come  from  the 
extremities  of  the  earth.  .  .  .  They  have  at  present  the  supervision  of  astronomy  and  of 
the  board  of  mathematics.  They  have  applied  themselves  with  great  pains  to  making  war- 
like machines,  and  to  casting  cannon ;  of  which  use  has  been  made  in  the  last  civil  trou- 
bles [that  is,  the  missionary  ordnance  had  been  found  effective  in  quelling  Chineae  revolts 
against  the  Tartar  dynasty].  When  sent  to  Nip-chou  with  our  ambassadors  [the  reverend 
Fathers  Pereyra  and  Gerbillon,  i  Sac.  «/e<u,]  to  treat  about  peace  with  the  Muscovites,  they 
caused  those  negotiations  to  succeed :  in  short,  they  have  rendered  great  services  to  the 
[Mantchou]  empire.  .  .' .  The  doctrine  which  they  teach  is  not  bad,  nor  capable  of  seducing 
the  [Chinese]  people,  or  of  causing  any  troubles.  It  is  permitted  to  every  body  to  go  into 
the  temples  of  the  Lamat,  of  the  Ho-chang,  of  the  Tao-ssi;  and  it  is  forbidden  to  go  into 
the  churches  of  these  Europeans,  who  do  nothing  contrary  to  the  laws :  this  does  not  seem 
reasonable."  (610) 

The  emperor  himself  had  been  previously  instructed  by  the  scientific  Father  Yerbiest, 
"  chief  of  the  bureau  of  astronomers  " ;  whose  evangelical  virtues  comprised  gnomonics, 

(506)  BiatmrtJMt^diUmmmedtla  CMne, 

(606)  Docmmentt  iwr  k  D€m^  dt  N<fi:  Parii,  1838. 

(507)  PAVTBiEa:  Chim;  pp.  13-4;  and  hi«  Chottking;  pp.  49-56. 

/&08)  Ltmcs:  Nackricht;  p.  11:  — Bri^  aux  .XgypUn\  pp.  260,  S80:  — IteRouaf :  FMwm.  COtttiu;  Bev. 
Aroh4ol.,  Feb.  1853. 
(500)  Anaiytit:  i.  pp.  10O-903. 
(610)  Chim:  pp.  486, 440, 446-440. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

CHINESE.  693 

geometry,  land-sunrejing,  and  masio.  The  reyerend  Fathers  Bonyet,  "Regis,  Jartoux,  Fri- 
delli,  Cardoso,  de  Tartre,  de  Mailla,  and  Bonjoar,  at  goYemment  expense,  made  official 
maps  of  the  different  provinces  of  China,  after  European  methods ;  and,  at  the  same  time 
that  such  labors  familiarized  the  -whole  of  these  Propagandic  missionaries  with  Chinese 
literature.  Fathers  Amiot,  Gaubil,  and  Du  Halde,  devoted  their  leisure  more  especially  to 
minute  study  of  Chinese  archoeology.  In  one  word,  the  admiration  avowed  by  the  Jesuits 
for  Chinese  civilization  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  influence  which  Chinese  philosophy  pos- 
sessed over  their  intellects  on  the  other,  had  led  to  such  a  fusion  at  Pe-kin,  during  the  17th 
century,  that  one  is  at  a  loss  to  decide  whether  the  Chinese  were  becoming  converts  to  spi- 
ritual Christianity,  or  whether  the  disciples  of  Loyola  were  adopting  the  materialistio  *'  doc- 
trine of  the  Lettered." 

Unhappily  for  our  desires  to  solve  this  curious  problem,  certain  puritanic  Dominicans 
arrived  from  Rome ;  and.  Pandora-like,  let  loose  fanatic  ills  heretofore  preserved  hermeti- 
cally. It  was  they  who  started  that  everlasting  question  whether  the  Chinese  word  chang-U 
be  a  synonyme  for  " God"  or  the  " sky."  Pig- tailed  converts  to  Christianity  A  la  JintiU 
were  incontinently  bambooed  by  hog-tails  H  la  Dominicain ;  for  heretical  notions  upon  an 
equivocal  point  by  aliens  indicated  for  Mongol  ^alvatory  «  credo."  Ehoung-tseu's  **  uni- 
versal charity"  being  interrupted  by  swinish  brawls  at  which  the  writers  ot Lemticiu{b\V) 
would  have  shuddered,  policemen  duly  reported  their  real  causes  to  mandarin  magistracy : 
which  reports,  in  official  course,  reached  a  new  embodiment  of  the  Sun  upon  earth,  Toung- 
tching.  This  unsophisticated  Tartar  at  once  relieved  himself,  and  his  successors  for  more 
than  a  century,  of  these  foreign  theologers,  by  shipment  of  a  live  cargo,  including  mission- 
aries Jesuit  and  Dominican,  consigned  to  Macao  under  judiciary  **  bill  of  lading,"  about 
the  years  a.  d.  1721-'26. 

It  is  to  the  Jesuittf  nevertheless,  that  impartial  science  looks  back,  gratefully,  for  throw- 
ing the  portals  of  Chinese  history  widely  open  to  European  Sinology :  and  it  is  especially 
to  the  late  R^musat,  Klaproth,  and  Ed.  Biot,  as  to  MM.  Stanislas  Julien  and  Pauthier,  that 
our  generation  owes  the  reappearance  of  Chinese  studies  on  the  continent,  since  the  demise 
of  the  famed  historian  of  the  ffuns,  Deguignes.  At  Paris,  the  Chinese  department  of  the 
Biblioth^que  Imp^riale  comprehends  quantities  stupendous  of  that  country's  literature. 

Every  element  for  our  purposes  being  in  consequence  accessible,  we  proceed,  Pauthier's 
works  in  hand,  to  sketch  1st,  —  the  mode  through  which  archaeologists  in  China  have  defi- 
nitely tabulated,  in  precise  stratifications,  the  relative  order  of  national  events ;  and  2d,  — 
to  present  a  chronological  table  of  Chinese  dynasties,  from  such  tabulations  accruing. 

It  is  as  certain  as  any  other  fact  in  history  (512)  that  about  1000  years  b.  c,  parallel  with 
the  reign  of  Solomon,  books  existed  in  China  with  such  titles  as  these:  —  '*Laws  of  the 
administration  of  ancient  kings;"  and  that  recurrence  was  common  to  "ancient  docu- 
ments." It  is  also  certain  that  arts  and  sciences  continued  to  prosper  down  to  the  year 
484  B.  0.,  (518)  when  Confucius  compiled  the  Chou-king,  sacred  book  of  the  Chinese,  fVom 
anterior  documents.  Literature  was  immensely  diffused  among  the  "  Lettered  "  in  China ; 
when,  B.  0.  218,  Chi-hoang-ti  burned  all  the  books  which  torture  could  extort,  together 
with  multitudes  of  their  readers ;  (514)  because  the  latter  quoted  the  former  against  his 
imperial  innovations.  Nevertheless,'  this  splendid  miscreant  served  practical  objects,  not 
altogether  indefensible,  when  he  relieved  the  empire  of  its  **old-fogiedom;"  to  judge  by 
the  withering  oration  of  his  prime-minister,  li-sse:  — 

<*  Prejudiced  in  favor  of  antiquity,  of  which  they  admire  even  the  stupidities,  they  are 
ftdl  of  disdain  for  eveiy  thing  wl\ich  is  not  exactly  chalked  after  models  that  time  has 
nearly  effaced  from  the  memory  of  man.  Incessantly  they  have  in  their  mouths,  or  at 
the  tips  of  their  pencils,  the  three  Ho-ang  [the  Chinese  august  triad],  and  ihefive  Ti  [the 
Chinese  pentateuoh]." 

Neariy  2000  years  previously,  disputes  among  religious  sects  in  China  had  risen  to  such 

(611)  XL  7. 

(613)  Ckine  ;  pp.  60, 194, 900. 

(513)  Chovhkingt  Prifaot  du  Pin  Oauba;  Payitidb^  «  Liv.  Sac  de  rOrient,*  Ptrif,  1843;  pp.  1, 2. 

(614)  Chine!  pp.  222-228. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

694  mankind's  chronologt. 

an  intolerable  pitch,  that  the  pions  Emperor  Mou-wang,  about  b.  c.  960,  records  how  Tao, 
in  B.  0.  2887,  in-order  to  suppress  false  prophecies,  miracles,  magic,  and  reT^tions,  — 

*<  Commanded  the  two  Ministers  of  Astronomy  and  Religion  to  cut  asunder  all  commu- 
nication between  *sky'  and  earth;  and  thus  (says  Mou-wang)  there  was  no  more  of 
what  is  called  this  ItfUng-up  and  cominff-down" 

And,  so  iuTCterate,  in  sporadic  instances  of  the  Chinese  mind,  was  this  chil<Ush  reliance 
upon  invisible  powers,  that  fifteen  centuries  after  the  burning  of  the  books,  the  Minfeter 
Tchang-kouei,  about  a.  d.  1821,  during  a  period  of  great  physical  calamities,  pestilence, 
inundations,  &c.,  felt  it  incumbent  upon  his  office  to  include  the  subjoined  remarks  in  a 
long  and  manly  expostulation :  — 

**A  prince  must  not  think  to  goTem  his  country  save  as  the  father  of  his  subjects;  and 
it  is  not  through  Bonza  [Budhist  priests]  that  he  must  seek  felicity.  Ever  since  the  JSonset, 
the  Lamas,  and  the  Tao-uS,  make  so  many  prayers  and  sacrifices  to  their  idol,  *  Hea?en' 
has  given  constant  signs  of  its  indignation ;  and  until  such  time  as  one  sees  the  worship  of 
Fo  [Budha]  abolished,  and  all  ihtsepriesU  driTen  away,  one  muqt  expect  to  be  unhappy." 

Such  political  necessities  may  palliate  some  of  Chi-Hoang-ti's  deeds ;  which  •obliterated 
so  much  of  earlier  literature  extant  down  to  the  Chinese  "era  of  the  martyrs"  for 
science,  b.  o.  218. 

Upon  accession  of  the  famous  Han  dynasty,  b.  o.  202,  a  reaction  in  faTor  of  letters  im- 
mediately commenced ;  and  fh>m  this  period  of  "  renaissance  **  downwards  no  nation  upon 
earth  possessed,  till  recently,  annals  comparable  to  the  Chinese.  About  b.  c.  176,  the 
Ckou-kmg  of  Khoung-tseu  was  recovered,  partly,  by  taking  down  the  recitations  of  a 
nonogenarian  savant,  Fou-cheng,  who  had  been  {^resident  of  literature  prior  to  the  con- 
flagration of  libraries.  Through  this  venerable  scholar  (who  is  to  the  Chinese  what  Enra 
was  to  the  Jews)  and  the  fortuitous  discovery,  b.  o.  140,  of  a  copy  of  the  Chcu-hmg  with 
other  books  in  the  ruined  house  of  Confbcius,  the  more  important  documents  of  Chinese 
antiquarian  lore  were  restored. 

European  authors,  who  claim  that  we  possess  the  plenary  words  if  not  the  autograph  of 
Moses,  have  doubted  this  account  We  accept  it,  notwithstanding,  in  good  faith ;  because 
neither  the  books  themselves  nor  their  transcribers  pretend  to  supematuralism  in  any 
shape ;  whilst  the  nature  of  the  local  researches  subsequently  undertaken  renders  nuga- 
tory such  unwarrantable  European  objections. 

'*  But  the  man  who  has  thrown  the  grandest  ^clat  over  the  reign  of  the  Emperor  Won-ti, 
is  Sse-ma-thsian,  whom  M.  Abel  R^musat  has  called  the  Htrodotus  of  CkmaJ"{b\b)  His 
portrait  is  given  under  our  Fig.  831  [wproj  p.  849].  About  b.  o.  104  he  commenced  his 
Historical  Mtmoin;  which,  in  180  books  (extant  in  European  libraries,  and  consulted  by 
the  Sinologists  we  quote),  ftimish  a  Tast  encydopiedia  of  Chinese  annals,  of  eveiy  kind, 
from  the  reign  of  the  old  Hoang-ti,  2697  years  before  c,  down  to  b.  c.  140. 

'*  Sse-ma-thsian  made  good  use  of  all  that  remained  of  the  CUuieaLBook* ;  of  those  of 
the  Ancestral  TempU  of  the  Tcheou-dynasty ;  the  Secret  Memcir$  of  the  Eouae  of  Stone,  and 
of  the  Golden  Coffer ;  and  of  the  registers  called  PUUet  of  Jasper,  It  is  added  that  he 
stript  the  Lm-kng,  for  what  eonowns  the  laws ;  the  Taetiet  of  ffait-^m,  for  what  regards 
military  affairs ;  the  Tckai^^4ekmg,  for  what  rdatee  tor  geiiffinl  literature ;  and  tha  Zt-yi  for* 
every  thing  that  is  relative  to  usages  and  oeremoniee." 

There  are  no  further  breaks  in  Chinese  archeological  labors  down  to  our  time ;  which 
researches,  for  care  and  magnitude,  may  challenge  the  universe.  We  mention,  however, 
only  the  Bmettrthet  profound  of  the  MommtmU  Irfl  by  SatmUj  published  at  royal  expense,  in 
848  books,  by  Matouan-lin,  in  a.  d.  1821 ;  which  covers  liistory  firom  the  twenty-fourth 
century  b.  c.  down  to  the  twelfth  after  c.  Copies  exist  in  European  libraries.  After  thfi 
death  of  Chi-Hoang-ti :  — 

**The  tombs,  the  ruins  of  cities,  the  canals  and  rivers,  saTod  sobm  moneys,  some 
bTt>nie  vases,  some  urns  and  other  objects  of  his  proeeriptiML  A  certain  number  oi 
these  h^s  been  found  since  the  fall  of  the  Thsin-dynasty.  They  have  been  carefully 
collected  and  preserved  in  museums  or  in  private  cabinets ;  deaeriptiona  have  been  made 

(514)  Ckim;  ^ 

Digitized  by 

Google 

•      CHINESE.  695 

of  them,  accompanied  by  figured  deeigne  that  faithfully  reproduce  them  with  their  ancient 
inscriptioDS.  The  emperor  Kien-lonng,  who  reigned  from  a.  d.  1786  to  1796,  caused  to  be 
published,  in  42  CMneM  foUo  volumes,  a  description  and  engraving  of  all  the  antique  Tases 
deposited  at  the  Imperial  Mnaeom.  An  exemplar  of  this  magnificent  work,  which  has  no 
riTal  in  Europe,  being  at  the  Biblioth^que  Royale  of  Paris.'* 

Pauthier  has  selected,  out  of  1444  vtues  of  different  species  contained  in  these  '<  Memoirs 
of  the  Antiquities  of  Occidental  Purity,"  those  beautiful  specimens  we  behold,  reduced 
in  size,  in  his  work.  (616) 

The  earliest  originals,  now  extant  in  China,  go  back  in  date  to  the  CAany-dynasty,  b.  o. 
1766:  —  an  epoch  when  Abraham,  according  to  Lepsius's  computation  of  biblical  chro- 
nology, was  yet  unborn.  One  more  ancient  inscription,  upon  a  rock  of  Mount  Heng-chan, 
yet  remains  to  yindicate  the  en^eering  ability  of  Tu.  It  dates  about  the  year  b.  o.  2278 ;  (517) 
and  is  therefore  parallel  in  age  with  the  thousand  records  we  possess  of  Egypt's  XUth 
dynasty.  Its  translation,  given  by  Pauthier,  disconnects  it  from  any  diluvial  hypotheses  • 
with  which,  moreover,  no  geologist  or  archceologist  need  distress  himself  further. 

We  trust  the  reader  has  now  attained  to  our  point  of  view,  and  perhaps  perceives  three 
things  —  1st,  the  historical  meritoriousness  of  Chinese  literature;  2d,  the  nature  of  the 
matoials  examined  by  Jesuits  whose  evangelical  prepossessions  were  essentially  hostile  to 
tbe  literature  they  land ;  and  8d,  that  there  are  Sinologists  living  in  the  world  competent 
to  liberate  historical  truth  fjrom  chances  of  error.  We  now  proceed  to  lay  before  him  a 
brief  summary  of  Chinese  time-registry ;  commending  to  his  perusal  the  '*  Researches  upon 
times  anterior  to  those  of  which  the  Chou-kmg  speaks,  and  upon  Chinese  mythology,"  by 
Father  de  Pr^mare,  together  with  an  old  rule  of  Vico's.(618) 

«  We  have  heard  Diodorus  Siculus  declare,  in  respect  to  i\i^  pride  of  natione,  that  these, 
<  whether  they  may  have  been  Greek  or  barbarian,  have  pretended,  each  one,  to  have  been 
the  first  to  discover  all  the  comforts  of  life,  and  to  have  preserved  their  own  history  since 
the  commencement  of  the  world.' "  (519) 

Greece,  Rome,  and  Judtea,  possess  first  their  fabulous  and  then  their  semi-historical 
-  periods.  Tradition  alone  pierces  through  the  gloom  of  the  latter,  in  the  ratio  of  approxi- 
mation to  the  several  epochal  at  which  given  nations  first  began  to  chronicle  their  events. 
In  later  days,  progressive  science  invests  such  fables  and  faintly-shadowed  incidents  of  a 
nation's  childhood  with  the  garb  of  mythico-astronomical  sanctity.  Thus  does  the  founder 
of  chronology,  Manetho,  preface  his  historical  dynasties  with  cycles  of  Gode,  Demigods,  and 
Manes;  thus  do  the  compilers  of  Genesis  antecede  Abraham  with  symbolical  names  of 
mythic  patriarchs  gifted  with  impossible  longevity ;  and  so  do  the  Chinese  place  mythology 
before  history.  The  sole  difference  being  that  neither  did  Manetho  nor  the  Chinese  arch6- 
ologues  ever  believe  their  respective  mythologies  to  be  otherwise  than  unhistorical :  at  the 
same  time  that  the  whole  of  these  antique  systems  represent  that  instinctive  consciousness 
of  nations  who  feel  that  an  unrecorded  national  in£uioy  must  have  preceded  a  recorded 
national  adolescence. 

f 

Chinbsb  Ahtb-histobioal  Pbbiods.  (620) 

Pah-kou  —  first  symbolical  man  —  followed  by  the  three  Hoanq,  vis. :  — 

1st— Reign  of  the  Sky, 

2d.—        "        "    Earth. 

8d.—        "        "   Man. 
They  are  comprehended  in  a  grand  cyclic  period  of  129,600  years ;  composed  of  ti^elve 
parts  called  conjunctions,  each  of  10,800  years. 
'  I  '  11 

(616)  Ckku;  p.  201;  PlatM8S-44. 

(617)  Ibid.;  pp.  63-M. 

(618)  Lio.aae.de  r Orient;  pp.  13-42. 

(619)  Yioo:  Sdeiua  Nwva ;  Prindplcf,  axiom  UL 

(620)  CMw;  pp.  22-24 ;  —  Uvrtt  Sauris,  pp.  1%  19. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

696  mankind's  chbonoLogt. 

MiTA-HISTOBlOAL  PkBIOD. 

Fou-m— first  Emperor — estimated  at b.  c.  8468 

Sereral  of  his  descendants  are  named,  with  traditionary  disooTeries  in  arts 
affixed  to  each  personage. 
Foii-hi,  howcTer,  is  a  colleotiTe  name  nnder  which  the  Chinese  figure  many  centuries  of 
national  existence  coupled  with  progressive  dcTelopments  in  civilization,  marked  by  con- 
seoatiTe  artistic  inventions :  Just  as  the  Hebrews  ascribe  all  legislation  to  their  noun  of 
multitude,  Moses.  This  traditionary  and  semi-mythical  ;Srt/  Emperor  stands  parallel  with 
the  Egyptian  IVth  dynasty,  during  the  thirty-fifth  century  b.  a  The  latter  is  poaitivdy 
historical:  to  reject  the  former,  on  the  imaginary  ground  of  recent  mundane  antifuity,  is 
rendered  f  utQe  by  existing  pyramids  at  Memphis.  Fou-hi,  Menes,  and  Abraham,  to  us 
appear  equally  historical,  as  human  individuals  who  once  lived ;  although  of  none  of  the 
three  are  contemporaneous  monuments,  carved  by  their  respective  people,  now  extant 

Historical  Pibiod. 

Chronologieal  Table, — We  condense  into  dynasties  that  chronology  of  all  the  Soverei^ 
who  have  reigned  in  China,  (from  b.  o.  2687  down  to  ▲.  d.  1821),  which  Father  Amiot  trans- 
mitted fh>m  Pe-kin  to  Paris  in  1769 ;  and  which  is  printed  *<  in  extenso  "  at  the  end  of 
Pauthier's  Chine,  after  collation  with  the  learned  Jesuit's  manuscript  notes,  and  with  parti 
of  the  100  volumes  of  the  Chinese  chronographic  work  Li-tm-ki-ete. 

The  6l8t  year  of  the  Chinese  emperor  Hoang-ti,  corresponding  to  our  b.  o.  2687,  falls, 
according  to  Lepsius's  computation,  within  Egypt's  **  Old  Empire,"  and  between  the  YHtb 
and  Xth  dynasties  of  Manetho,  in  any  case  during  the  pyramidal  period. 

lit  X^ynoity— Irt  King,  HoAiro-fi,  *<  Yellow  Emperor,"  Slrt  year 28S7  B.a 

Five  snoeeason  down  to  Yao,  b.  o.  2387. 

«  «th     «     YAO,«l«tyeikr .«  2277  « 

«  8th     «     Cams, 0th  of  his  ^Tnthnmlfla 8277"  I 

[Jfontonetdt  oommenoe  —  **  Interlption  of  YU,"  b.  a  2278.]  I 

nd        •*  «*HI^»*— 1ft  King,  Yu,  10th  year  of  hiBiyBthrontem 2205  « 

«  «         4th    «    ToBOimo-KATO  Sthyear  ofhitidgo,«cI%Me(/AeAOT, 

B. a 2165(621) ....« «....  2165  « 

md        **  "ChMif ».. ~ « .;.....  178S  «  I 

[Oontemponzy«a«e«ezist,dati]igfix«iB.al70()w]  j 

ITth        «  ««T«ieou» « - « « —  1134  « 

Tth        •*  «Thrfn"  [whence  the  Mune  of "Chtoa"]... - «    265  « 

Yith        *  **  Han "»..........»..» ^m.^....................^........^........    208  * 

King  YovAV-fi,  of  the  *<  Wei,"  a.  s.  282. 

THth        «  «T5in"...«.« «.. — ......«« «    266  !.» 

Tmth        «  "Northern  Bonng" « « 420  " 

nth        «  «*TW" « «. .«. « 478  « 

Xth       «  "liang" « :....«....«... — 1.«. . 601  « 

nth        «  "Tdhln» , «.. .,    667  «  i 

Xnth        «  «SonI» «^ « 661  »  / 

Xmth        ••  "Thang" «....    618  « 

The  1«M  JUMe  ryiMuMM. 

XIYth       **  1st,  **^)aterior£uiiv''- • «...«....«^«.......««...„.. «« 907  « 

XVth        «*  2d,  '^'PosbBtiot  Thatiff^ 928  « 

XVIth        «  8d,  «*Poeterlor3W»» « 988  « 

xmth        «•  4th,«PoiterlorJ3lm».. « „ 947  « 

XVmth       "  6th,«FOiterior2V:Aeou*' •«....    961  « 

XlXth       "  "Soung" « „.    900  « 

XXth       «  "JTi^iimQltaneonalywithiSiwiv*. ».....»» »... ..1123  « 

XXIat        <*  Goinmaioementof*<Yotian,'*  Jfon^ob ..1260  ** 

XXnd        "  MomgoU « 1296  « 

XXmd        «*  «Mtog"....- « « 1368  «  I 

XXIVth        -  "Tal-thsing,"  ifinitc*0N-Tartara.» 1616  <^  I 

Now  reigning --and  down  to 1821  " 

24  DjfHotUet,  whom  conaeeatlTe  role  oorere  yean  4468. 

(581)  Ckku,  p.  68;  and  Chaitkdiff,  p.  47 :— bat,  oompare  Bior,  a^ftiglet,  1848,  for  astronomical  dooMa. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 

ASSYRIAN.  -  697 

Egyptian  priests  had  told  Herodotus,  (522)  that  lengthened  experience  and  observation 
of  their  own  history  enabled  them  to  predicate  the  future  through  the  cyclic  recurrence  of 
the  past  In  no  chromcles  do  similar  causes  oftener  reproduce  similar  eyents,  through 
perpetual  cycles,  than  the  reader  of  Pauthier  will  recognize  among  the  Chinese.  No 
political  acumen  is  required  by  historians  to  foretell  the  ineritable  downfall  of  the  present 
alien  JfanteAoti-Tartar  dynasty.  Its  doom  is  sealed ;  its  knell  Ib  ringing.  One  fact  will 
iUostrate  its  Tartarian  despotism,  and  explain  the  repugnance  to  prolongation  of  its  hateful 
rule  nurtured  in  the  bosom  of  every  true  Ckmaman;  precisely  paralleled  by  Arab  hatred 
to  the  cognate  Tartar- 7V<rikf. 

In  the  same  manner  that  the  radical  poierty  of  the  Ottoman  speech  compels  the  Turk  to 
draw  all  his  polite  terms  firom  the  Pertian,  his  scientific  from  the  Arabic,  so,  in  China,  the 
uncouth  and  slender  vocabulary  of  the  JtfonteAou-Tartars  became  enriched,  after  their 
conquest,  with  Chinese  words  of  civilization.  This  gave  offence  to  the  Tartar  emperor, 
Eien-loung;  who,  anxious  to  preserve  the  Mantchou  idiom  in  its  natural  if  barbaric 
*'  purity,''  appointed  an  Imperial  Commission,  to  compose,  from  Mantchou  radicals,  6000 
new  words,  to  stand  in  place  of  those  which  his  courtiers  had  borrowed  from  the  Chinese 
tongue.  This  new  nomenclature,  printed  and  proclaimed,  was  imposed  upon  all  high 
government  functionaries ;  who  had  thus  to  learn  5000  unknown  words  by  heart,  under 
severe  penalties  I  Truly,  as  Champollion-Figeac  remarks  — ''  H  n'y  a  qu'un  Tartar e  regnant 
Bur  des  Chinois  qui  soit  assez  puissant  pour  introduire  d'embl^e  et  par  ordonnance  cinq 
mille  mots  dans  one  langue  I "  (523) 

CHRONOLOGY— ASSYRIAN. 

**  The  fplder  weavM  his  web  in  th«  paUoe  of  Gnsar ; 
The  owl  stands  sentinel  upon  the  wfttch-tower  of  Afirasiabl  * 

9         (FnuxKWU  ~  Shah  Nameh,) 

Thk  eighteenth  century,  fecund  precursor  of  those  conquests  in  historical  science  that 
have  immortalized  the  nineteenth,  passed  away,  without  permitting  its  contemporaries  to 
Ulnmine  the  gloom  which,  mnce  the  decline  of  the  Alexandria  School  at  the  Christian  era, 
for  2000  years  had  enveloped  with  equal  obscurity  the  pyramids  and  temples  of  the  Nile, 
the  lightning-fbsed  towers  and  crumbling  brick  mounds  on  the  Euphrates  and  Tigris,  or  the 
rock-hewn  sepulchres  and  thousand-pillared  fanes  of  **  lorn  Persepolis." 

In  the  year  1800,  abM^atdy  nothing  was  known  about  these  huge  colossi  of  the  past 
beyond  the  fact  of  their  existence  I 

A  wondrous  change  has  been  wrought,  by  half  a  century  of  research,  in  historical 
knowledge :  almost  inconceivable  when  we  reflect  that,  upon  the  Assyrian  theme  before  us, 
modem  science  knew  nothing  in  1848  —  only  ten  years  ago.  **  Palpitants  d'actualit^," 
Lamartine  would  say,  are  these  glorious  discoveries  —  still  damp  from  the  press  are  the 
volumes  that  unfold  them. 

Antithesis  serves  to  place  past  ignorance  and  present  information  in  the  strongest  light. 
Persepolis  and  her  arrow-headed  inscriptions  suffice  by  way  of  illustraticKi. 

The  German  Witte  ascribed  these  ruins,  not  to  human  agency,  but  to  an  <'  eruption  of 
the  earth."  De  Roesch  deemed  them  the  work  of  an  antediluvian~Xam0eA,  **  whose  exploits 
are  exhibited  in  these  sculptures."  Discarding  Homer's  Iliad  in  the  sense  vulgarly  under- 
stood of  its  flowing  heroics,  De  Roesch  believes  Persia  to  be  figured  by  Troy,  Media  by 
Europe,  and  Assyria  by  Asia.  According  to  th^  logopoeist,  or  compiler  of  invented  facts, 
the  Grecian  siege  of  Ilinm  was  but  a  war  between  Modes  and  Persians:  and  the  cuneatio 
letters  of  Persepolis  **  record  a  series  of  kings  from  Cain  to  Lamech." 

Chardin,  in  1678,  pronounced  these  remains  to  be  about  "  4000  years  old ;"  a  limit  too 
restricted  for  the  astronomer  Bailly :  who  attributes  the  foundation  of  Persepolis  to  the 

(622)  Aptly  dted  by  Hihbt,  Vigyptt  Pharatmique,  iL  pp.  27, 28. 
(523)  POiograpkU  UntoeneOe;  1S41;  Introdoottov  p.  4B. 

^^  Digitized  by  Google 

698  mankind's  chronology. 

Persian  hero,  Djemthid^  (524)  whose  faboloas  because  mythic  epoch  he  fixed  at  8209  b.  c. 
To  the  same  Iranian  demigod  are  these  edifices  assigned  by  Sir  W.  Jones,  estimating  their 
age  at  about  800  years  before  Christ. 

Semitic  historians  without  exception,  as  Sheridan  neatly  obeerred,  **  draw  upon  memory 
for  their  wit,  and  upon  imagination  for  their  facts:"  wherefore  elim  clews  to  a  reality 
could  be  obtained  through  them.  Like  the  libraries  of  Alexandria,  of  Jerusalem,  of  China, 
of  Budhio  Hindostan,  and  of  Hebraical  Christendon^  those  of  ante-Mohammedan  Perd* 
perished,  from  similar  fanatical  causes,  in  Saracenic  flames  with  the  dynasty  of  Chosroes, 
about  A.  D.  637.  Siich  fitful  traditions  as  sunriTed  the  wreck  of  Penio  literature  became 
invested  (after  B^dawee  destructlTeness  had  become  altered  into  caliphate  reetoratioBs) 
with  the  hyperbolic  extrayagancies  of  Eastern  poetry  and  romaooe. 

One  immortal  epic,  Firdoosee's  Shah  Nameh,  or  <*  Book  of  Cngs,"  composed  in  the 
eleventh  century,  purports,  indeed,  to  cover  8600  years  of  his  country's  annals,  fh>m  the 
taurokephalic  Kaiomurs  down  to  the  Arab  invasion.  Persepolis,  under  its  local  name  of 
IsteJehdr^  is  mentioned  in  twenty-eight  passages,  and  its  existence  is  referred  to  as  coeval 
with  Kai-kobad ;  whose  apochryphal  era,  under  Sir  W.  Jones's  hypothesis,  falls  about  b.  o. 
610 :  but,  neither  from  the  "  History  of  the  early  kings  of  Persia"  by  Mirkavend,  in  the 
fifteenth  century,  nor  from  the  *'  Dabistin,"  was  archeological  acumen  able  to  disentangle 
a  solitary  thread  indicative  of  the  age,  the  builders,  or  the  wriUngs,  of  Persepolis. 

As  in  Egypt  the  present  felldh,  or  peasant,  ascribes  the  pyramids  to  *<  Phara5on  "  (625) 
or  Pharaoh  —  a  name  to  him  the  synonyme  for  Satan  —  so  in  Persia,  the  illiterate  native  is 
content  that  an  ancient  edifice  should  be  the  work  of  Suleym&n';  at  once  the  archimagus 
of  Oriental  necromancy  and  the  sage  monarch  of  Israel :  for  at  Murgh&b,  PoMargadm^  the 
mausoleum  whence  we  have  drawn  the  portrait  of  that  great  man  [tupra^  p.  138,  Fig.  48] 
whose  sculptured  epitaph  is  simply  <*  I  am  Cyrus,  the  king,  the  Achemenian,"  is  called 
TakkH  Suleymdrif  or  <*  Solomon's  throne."  Like  Jephtha's,  who  was  buried  **in  the  eitiet 
of  Qilead,"  (526)  Solomon's  tomb  is  8ho%n  at  Shirikx  and  again  on  the  road  to  Kashg&r! 
Nimrod  is  even  still  more  ubiquitous. 

Equally  futile  were  attempts  to  rescue  history  applicable  to  Persia's  monuments  firom  tlM 
Zend-Avetta  of  Zoroastric  attribution,  or  Arom  the  later  Boundehsih-Pehlci :  saored  books 
containing  the  rituals  and  theosophy  of  the  Guebres,  or  Persian  expatriated  ignieolists  of 
Guxerat,  now  called  Parsees.  From  Greek  writers  alone  (Herodotus,  Xenophon,  Ctesias, 
&o.)  were  such  elements  of  early  Persian  history  derived  as  have  stood  the  test  of  monu- 
mental investigation :  but  the  sdenee  of  the  last  century  had  ransacked  all  these  sources 
without  obtaining  a  glimmer  of  light  as  to  the  nature  of  PersepoHtan  wedge-shaped  cha- 
racters. Like  the  once-mysterious  hieroglyphs  of  Egypt,  as  interpreted  by  Father  Kiroher, 
the  inscriptions  of  Persia  were  supposed  to  veil  occult  and  awfiil  things,  black  arts  of 
magic,  or  diabolic  talismans.  With  naught  to  guide  them  but  the  more  or  less  faithless 
copies  printed  by  De  la  Yalle,  Le  Brun,  Kaenifer,  and  other  old  travellers,  how  could  the 
opinion  of  a  student  be  other  than  a  conjecture  more  or  less  rational  according  to  the 
mental  calibre  of  each  critic  t 

Thus,  by  Leibnitx  and  by  Cuper,  these  inscriptions  were  reasonably  coigectured  to  con- 
tain the  letters  and  elements  of  **  some  Tery  ancient  writing."  Lacroie,  the  great  Copto- 
logist,  conceived  them  to  be  hieroglyphical  inscriptions  similar  to  those  of  Egypt  (at  that 
day  undeoiphered)  and  of  China,  which  last  are  not  <'  sacred  sculptured  characters  "  at  alL 

(524)  Djxmuid  if  the  Pttnk^  u  Sajcson  !■  the  Hebrew,  BermUt.  The  ft>nner  we  optae  to  be  DJoM,  the 
EcTpUan  BeradeM,  eanpled  with  SAaOI,  the  9tron0:  the  Utter  is  dmply  SAeM&on,  the  Am,  with  ite  Arabiaa 
eaphoDizing  lafllz.  H&cuiUi  Is  bat  HaR-OoU  **reTolation  of  heet**  Gompare  Laxo,  Bsartlipommi;  end  Eaocl* 
BocHRTB,  Archidogie  Oomparie;  with  Dupun  in  AnOunCt  CUus.  Die.,  "Herculee." 

(525)  *<  Yd  J^aradon  dn  Fharaoon"  Is  generally  rendered  "Thou  Pharaoh  eon  of  a  Pharaoh"!  Why  not 
**  Thon  crooodUe  eon  of  a  enoodOe  "  f    Gont  Roenannxnu  InstU.  Ling.  Arabiem;  1818;  p.  211. 

(520)  Text  Jwiga  zlL  7.  The  Mer(^  of  Jephtha's  daughter  la  beautlAiIly  told  by  Eubipidb  ;  fi>r  fykigeaitia^ 
in  ita  Oreek  aenae  of  l^tyhm,  ia  only  a  ** daughter  of  Jephtha." 

Digitized  by 

Google 

ASSYRIAN.  699 

Chardin  opined  them  to  be  a  '*Teritable  writing  like  our  own;''  and  Le  Bran  happily  de- 
scribes these  ruins  as  covered  with  **  ancient  Persian  characters." 

In  the  face  o£  sensible  speculations  on  matters  then  entirely  inexplicable,  the  intrepidity 
of  ignorance  is  exemplified  from  a  quarter  whence  it  would  have  been  least  expected ;  viz., 
in  Hyde's  History  of  the  Rdigion  of  the  Old  Pernana  (Oxon.  1760).  Not  only  does  he  deny 
that  these  Persepolitan  inscriptions  are  "  old  Persian  writings,"  but  the  author  backs  asser- 
tion with  professions  of  faith : — *<  I  am  of  opinion  that  they  are  neither  letters  nor  intended 
for  letters ;  but  a  mere  playful  jeu  d^etprit  of  the  chief  architect ;  who,  to  adorn  the  walls 
of  Persepolis,  imagined  a  trial  of  how  many  divers  forms  a  single  elementary  stroke  (the 
toedge)  could  be  produced  combined  with  itself" !  This  is  as  pitiable  for  sueh  a  scholar,  as 
the  unfortunate  Seetzen's  mistake,  when  he  took  the  nmkm  epacee  between  each  Himyaritic 
letter  for  the  characters  themselves.  In  the  same  manner,  one  of  Hyde's  contemporaries 
(the  Abb^  Tandeau,  1762)  stoutly  maintained  that  Egyptian  **  hieroglyphics  were  mere  arbi- 
trary signs,  only  employed  to  serve  as  ornaments  to  the  edifices  on  which  they  were  en- 
graven, and  that  they  were  never  inven'ted  to  picture  ideas." 

These  arrow-headed  sculptures,  lik^  the  still-unintelligible  earrings  on  aboriginal  monu- 
ments of  Mexico,  Central  America,  and  Peru,  seemed  so  enigmatical  even  to  the  great 
explorer  of  Babylon  in  1816,  that  J.  Claudius  Rich  disconsolately  embodies  the  sum  total 
of  knowledge  in  these  words :  — 

**  Their  real  meaning,  or  that  of  the  Persepolitan  obelisoal  character,  and  the  still  more 
complicated  hieroglyphics  of  Egypt,  however  partially  deciphered  by  the  labors  of  the 
learned,  will  now,  perhaps,  never  be  fathomed,  to  their  full  extent,  by  the  utmost  inge- 
nuity of  man." 

By  strange  coincidence  (serving  to  add  another  example  of  the  simultaneousness  of  dis- 
covery, at  every  age  of  human  development),  while  Rich  penned  the  above  lament,  Qrote- 
fend  in  Qermany  communicated  to  Heeren,  1815,  those  successM  decipherings  of  Perse- 
politan cuneiform  inscriptions  he  had  commenced  in  1802;  which  is  the  identical  year  of  the 
arrival  in  England  of  that  Rotetta Stone;  whence,  about  1816,  Young's  deduction  of  the  letter 
L  in  the  name  **  Ptolemy  "  originated  those  astounding  revelations  Arom  Egyptian  sculp- 
tures which  are  now  so  familiar  in  the  archsological  world  as  no  longer  to  risquire  notes 
of  admiration. 

Egyptologists,  by  rough  and  ready  processes,  have  so  completely  vanquished  opposition, 
that,  at  this  day,  disbelievers  in  Champollion  confine  their  lugubrious  chants  to  hearers 
illiterate  and  inarticulate :  but,  to  judge  by  the  pertinacity  with  which  one,  who  is  no  mean 
scholar,  (527)  insists  that  Moses  wrote—  *< The  Tigris  flows  to  the  east  of  Assyria;  "  (528) 
and,  therefore,  that  Botta  and  Layard  have  discovered  Nineveh  on  the  wrong  side  of  the 
river — the  battles  of  cuneiformists  have  only  commenced  I  Happily,  the  Louvre  boasts  of 
an  Orientalist  (529)  who  can  always  quote  to  M.  Hoefer  the  Muslim  poet's  mnemonic  to  St 
Louis:  — 

"(0  king  of  the  Franks!)  if  thou  preservest  the  hope  of  avenging  thy  defeat,  if  any 
temerarious  design  should  bring  thee  back  to  our  country,  forget  not  that  the  house  of  Ebn- 
LokmlUi,  that  served  thee  for  a  prison,  is  still  ready  to  receive  thee.  Remember  that  the 
chains  which  thou  hast  worn,  and  the  eunuch  Sab^eh  who  guarded  thee,  are  ever  there  and 
waiting  for  thee."  (580) 

Such  was  the  picture  on  the  obverse  page  of  Assyrian  archaeology  in  the  year  1848.  Be- 
fore contrasting  which  with  its  illuminated  face  in  1858,  it  is  due  to  the  memory  of  that 
master,  whose  teaching  of  the  methods  for  deciphering  the  meaning  of  all  antique  records 
has  been  the  true  cause  as  well  of  Champollion's  as  of  Grotefend's  successes — and  hence 
of  the  whole  of  our  present  Egyptian  and  Assyrian  knowledge  —  to  name  Siltbstei  di 
Sacy. 

(527)  Hoifek:  La  ChaUUe,  Ac;  1862;  p.  146. 

(528)  Genesis;  U.  14. 

(529)  Dk  Lomop£riir:  AntiquiUs  Atsyriennes ;  Bev.  ArchteL,  1860;  pp.  429-482:  who  retdf,  mott  iTlaaph- 
aotly,  **  Le  Tigre  ooule  en  avani  vert  Assour." 

(680)  Miohavd:  Hi$L  da  Oroisadu;  iv.  p.  274. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

700  mankind's  chronology. 

In  that  ptrt  of  onr  work  djscossiiig  Alphabetic  OrigifM^  the  student  will  find  a  enffieiency 
of  authorities  cited  to  verif  j  the  accuracy  of  those  results  to  which  this  Tolume  is  confined. 
Recapitulation  here  is  needless :  but,  should  ever  such  inquirer  follow  the  dcTelopments  of 
palseographical  discovery,  book  by  book,  backwards  from  to-day,  his  bark  will  not  ground 
until  he  reaches  the  year  a.  d.  1797,  and  touches^ the  M^moire  tur  lea  antiguiU*  dc  la  Ferse, 
el  tur  lee  nUdtUUet  dee  Rote  Saeeanidee,  Its  author,  De  Sacy,  is  to  paleography  that  which 
hb  colleague  Cuvier  is  to  palaeontology :  each  being  the  inventor  of  the  only  true  method 
of  ratiocination  in  either  science.  From  the  former's  Memoir  we  have  borrowed  many  of 
the  citations  above  presented ;  and,  our  remarks  being  but  introductory  to  Assyrian  chro- 
nology, a  reference  to  the  excellent  compendium  of  Vaux  (631)  indicates  the  shortest  road 
to  summary  annals  of  cuneiform  investigation ;  no  less  than  corroborates  our  assertion  that 
monumental  Assyria  was  a  blank  down  to  1848. 

Paul-Emile  Botta  (whose  surname  is  dear  to  all  American  readers  of  his  uncle's  Storut 
deW  Indqmidema),  appointed  French  Consul  at  Mosul  in  1842,  was  the  first  to  resuscitate 
Nineveh  since  her  fall  in  b.  c.  606.  Proficient  as  an  Orientalist  and  Eaaterm  traveller, 
through  residence  in  Syria,  Egypt,  Ethiopia,  and  Arabia,  since  1829-80,  none  possessed 
higher  qualifications  for  the  task ;  yet,  with  rare  modesty,  he  attributes  his  own  discoveries 
(as  Newton  to  an  apple  his  finding  the  laws  of  gravitation)  to  an  accident ;  viz.,  to  a  couple  of 
bricks,  brought  to  him  by  a  Nestorian  dyer,  who  unearthed  them  whilst  digging  a  founda- 
tion for  stoves  and  boilers  on  the  mound  of  Khoreahdd.  (532)  But,  these  two  forlorn  bricks 
were  impressed  with  arrow-heads  —  things  which  Botta's  education  at  once  permitted  him 
to  appreciate.  Ten  years  have  since  elapsed.  The  Louvre  proudly  displays  his  sculptured 
deterrations  —  national  typography  splendidly  perpetuates  his  unaffected  narratlTe — and, 
those  who  weigh  science  by  **  dollars  and  cents  '*  may  sneer  at  legislative  munificence  on 
learning  that  France,  in  1849,  had  already  voted  $160,000  to  etemaliie  Botta's  Assyrian 
deeds ;  without  either  forgetting  an  individuars  future,  or  considering  the  balance  of  an 
account-current  between  a  man  and  his  country  thereby  stricken.  EUs  consulate  is  now  at 
Jerusalem. 

An  intimate  friend,  and  enthusiastic  spectator  of  the  French  Consul's  achievements,  com- 
menced operations  where  the  latter  relinquished  them.  Henry  Austen  Layard  —  of  noble 
Huguenot  extraction — bom  at  Ceylon,  and  brought  up  at  Florence,  is  essentially  a  man 
of  the  East.  Leaving  England  in  1889,  he  reached  Mosul,  1842,  by  way  of  Germany, 
Russia,  Dalmatia,  the  Bosphorus,  Asia  Minor,  Persia,  and  Kusist&n.  His  performances  are 
familiar  to  all  readers  of  Nineveh  and  ite  Remaine,  1849 ;  and  Babylon  andNmeoehy  2d  Exped., 
1868.  The  letters  LL.D.  and  M.P.,  and  the  office  of  Under  Secretary  of  Foreign  Affairs, 
tell  how  a  nation  can  reward  liring  merit :  at  the  same  time  that  <*  Eastern  questions  " 
point  to  eventualities  not  less  nationally  important  The  British  Museum  consecrates  for 
science  the  innumerable  exhumations  of  Layard. 

Great  as  have  been,  however,  the  exploits  of  these  discoverers,  they  must  not  dazzle  our 
vision  firom  beholding  the  less  ostentatious  if  arohssologically  superior  researches  of  Raw- 
linson  and  of  Hincks ;  but  for  whom,  the  cuneiform  records  of  Nineveh  and  Babylon  might 
have  yet  remained  sealed  books :  although,  so  closely  followed  have  these  savants  been  by 
a  Ldwenstem,  a  De  Longp^rier  and  a  De  Saulcy ;  so  materially  aided  by  Birch,  Norris, 
and  other  skilful  palssographers ;  that  by  grouping  them  all  into  a  *< Cuneiform  School" 
the  invidious  task  of  assigning  a  place  to  any  one  is  cheerfully  avoided.  Our  inquiry 
simply  is,  what  have  they  all  done  in  Assyrian  chronology  f 

Let  it  first  be  observed  **  en  passant,"  that  the  long  lists  of  Chaldean,  Arab,  Assyrian, 
and  Babylonish  sovereigns,  preserved  by  Ctesias,  Ptolemy,  and  the  Hebrews ;  (633)  coupled 
with  the  pseudo-antiquity  popularly  assigned  to  the  Xth  Chapter  of  Oeneeie;  had  occasioned 
the  most  exaggerated  notions,  about  1844-60,  of  the  epochas  to  which  these  sculptures  of 

(681)  NineoA  and  Pm^dit;  London,  od.,  1852. 

(682)  LMra  d  M.  MM;  Dteoavertes  i^  Kbonabad,  1846,  p.  2 :  —  Monument  de  Ninivey  chap.  U.,  p.  23. 

(633)  Fra8kr*8  excellent  Metopotavnia,  pp.  47-60;  and  Oobt*8  AndaU  Fragmentt;  supplj  the  dankal 
authorities. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

ASSYRIAN.  701 

Assyria  should  be  attributed.  Nowhere  was  this  sentimentality  exhibited  more  strongly 
than  at  the  British  Museum.  Ninevite  bas-reliefs  of  the  7th  century  b.  o.  were  reverenced 
by  pious  crowds  who  looked  upon  them  as  if  their  carving  had  actually  been  coeval  with 
the  **  Tower  of  Babel " ;  at  the  same  time  that  Egyptian  relics  of  the  lYth  Memphite 
dynasty,  belonging  to  the  4th  chiliad  before  o.,  and  those  stupendous  granites  of  the  XYIIth- 
XYIIIth  dynasties,  positively  dating  in  the  16th-18th  centuries  prior  to  the  same  era,  were 
passed  over  in  contemptuous  silence ;  although  displayed  in  gigantic  halls,  whilst  Assyria 
(for  want  of  room)  lay  in  an  underground  cellar  I  And  yet,  withal,  the  only  monumental 
proof  of  the  existence  of  either  BaBeL,  or  NINWE,  1500  years  b.  c,  depended  then,  as  it 
does  now,  upon  Thotmes  Illd's  ** Statistical  Tablet"  of  Eamac!(584)  Nor,  excited  by 
the  magnificence  of  their  monumental  resurrections,  can  we  be  surprised  that  the  two 
explorers  somewhat  participated,  at  that  time,  in  the  general  feeling. 

But,  the  habit  of  dispassionate  comparison  of  art  (upon  itself  alone)  among  sculptured 
antiquities  of  every  period  and  re^on  collected  in  European  Museums,  had  instinctivlly 
led  thorough  archieologists  to  pronounce  the  word  "  modem,"  over  every  fragment  brought 
to  London  and  Paris  from  Nimroud  or  Ehorsab&d ;  and  this  before  a  single  Assyro-cuneatio 
inscription  had  been  deciphered.  First  to  undertake  this  thankless  office  was  De  Longp^ 
rier ;  (535)  who  proclaimed,  to  shocked  orthodoxy,  that  nothing  found  or  published  of  As- 
syrian bas-reliefs  could  possibly  ascend  beyond  the  9th  century ;  at  the  same  time  that 
Ehorsabikd  had  then  not  yielded  anything  older  than  the  7th -8th  century  b.  o. 

Nevertheless,  it  was  published  — 

**  On  the  most  moderate  calculation,  we  may  assign  a  date  of  1100  or  1200  before  Christ, 
to  the  erection  of  the  most  ancient  [palace] ;  but  the  probability  is,  that  it  is  much  more 
ancient :"  (586)  and  maintained  —  **  There  is  no  reason  why  we  should  not  assign  to  Assyria 
the  same  remote  antiquity  we  claim  for  Egypt "  [b.  o.  8500  ?]. 

Col.  Bawlinson  too,  whilst  conceding  that  '*  the  whole  structure  of  the  Assyrian  graphio 
system  evidently  betrays  an  Egyptian  origin :  first  organized  upon  an  Egyptian  model,"(587) 
formerly  considered  the  Obdisk  of  Nimroud  to  date  about  the  12tfa-18th  century  b.  o. 

Now,  this  age  for  Assyrian  monumental  commencements  harmonizes  perfeotiy  with  Egyp- 
tian conquests  and  dominion  over  much  of  that  country,  during  the  XVIIth  dynasty,  15tli^ 
16th  centuries  b.  o.  It  is  merely  the  arohnological  attribution  of  any  sculptures,  yet  found 
and  published,  to  such  an  epoch  that  we  contest  We  are  the  hist  to  curtail  any  nation's 
chronography ;  but,  misled  so  often  by  hypotheses,  we  cease  to  depend  any  further  upon 
arithmetic  where  not  supported  by  positively  archssological  stratifications.  Lepsins,  it  seems 
to  us,  has  fiurly  stated  the  possibilities  of  Chaldaic  chronology ;  (588)  and  future  researches 
by  cuneiform  scholars  will  doubtiess  determine  the  relative  position  of  each  historical  stra- 
tum as  firmly  for  Assyria  as  has  been  ahready  done  for  Egypt 

With  these  provisoes,  we  may  safely  present  a  synopsis  of  the  last  chronological  results 
put  forth  by  Layard.  Possessing  all  the  resources  at  present  attainable,  and  profoimdly 
-versed  himself  in  Assyrian  studies,  his  tabulation  of  the  monumental  series  of  reigns 
inspires  full  confidence,  at  the  same  time  that  his  results  accord  naturally  with  the  histories 
of  adjacent  countries  and  people.  (589) 

Amtb-mohumbntal  Pbbiod. 
Into  this  category  are  oast  the  vague  and  semi-mythical  traditions  of  Nimrod,  Ninus, 
Belus,  and  their  several  lines ;  which,  according  to  classical  writers,  may  ascend  to  1908 
years  before  Alexander,  equivalent  to  2284  b.  o.  (540) 

(534)  BnoB:  Op,  ciL;  1846;  p.  37:  — 3\oo  Egyptian  OarUmtht*  famd  at  Nimroud;  1848;  pp.  161-177 :•* 
QuDvos :  Otia;  p  103.    Tide  also  Bircb,  Annali  of  ThUme*  III. ;  ArcluBoI<^«,  1853,  xzzr.  p.  160. 

(585)  Revue  ArckMogiqMj  Oct  1847 :  —  Galerit  AssyrUnne,  Mas6e  da  Louvre,  1849;  p.  16;  —  Bmie  ArOUoL 
Oet.1850. 

(536)  Latabd:  Nineveh  and  iU  Remain*;  Am.  ed.,  1849;  pp.  176, 179, 185. 

(537)  Qmmentary  on  the  Cune^orm  Inscriptiont,  4kc. ;  1850;  pp.  4, 7,  21, 71,  73, 74. 
(638)  Chrondogie  der  JEgypter ;  1.  pp.  6-12. 

(530)  Babyhm ;  pp.  611-625:— already  Rawldcsoh  extends  Assyrian  antiquity  to  the  14th  century  B.  a;  Jomr. 
B,  AsiaL  Soc,  1853,  p.  xrUL,  note. 
(540)  Lxpsius:  Lp.lO. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

702  mankind's  chronologt. 

Genealogical  Period. 
This  class  embraces  those  Assyrian  Kings,  of  whose  reigns  no  contemporaneous  monnmeots 
have  been  discovered,  but  who  are  recorded  in  the  pedigrees  or  archives  of  their  snccct- 
sors :  distinguishing  Rawlinson's  reading  by  R,  and  Hincks'  by  H. 

King  (ooiOectand  reading).  Aho^  n  c 

I.    DiECiTO(R.) .....«....-«.    1250 

n.    DirAicvKHA  (R,),  Di7Ainnu8H  (H.) ........................    UOO 

nL     IWAOABrBKfH-HDU  (B.),  SHDaSB-BAL-BlTHKHIBi.  (H.) ............................w.....^^     1130 

IV.     IfABDOUafPADf  I 

V.    MmsaiifORDAcuB?     /     ^     *""** ** "** ^••..•— ••    — ^ 

VL    Adraxmklech  I.  (E.) „ „ lOOO 

TIL    Akaxu  HvBODAX  (K.),  Shdosb  Bak  (H.) MO 

MOKVIIENTAL  PeBIOD. 

*    TUL  SAiDiVAPAU78L(R.XAaHinLAKHBAL(H.)— North-west  Pa]afO«,Nimn>iid..... 090 

IX.  DiT^ifUBA&i(R.),I>iTAKX7BAB(H.)— Obelisk;  ootemporsiy  with JXHU 900 

X.  Bhaxab  Adas  (R.),  Shaxsitat  (H.) 870 

XL  AsmAMXXLiCH  n.  (R.) ........ 840 

xn.  BALDAsr  (H.) ^ , — 

XHL     ASHTJEKUBr  (H.) « 

XIV.    7  PuL,  or  TiauTH*Pu8B ». T&O 

XV.   Saboov « — .«.„ 722 

XVI.    Sdihachiiib « .^ ....„ . T08 

XVIL     E88A&HADSOV„ „ SM 

XVm.     SaIDAHAPALUS  nL  (B.),  ASHVRAKHBAL  (H.) ...     

XIX.    (Son  of  preceding) » 

XX.     SHAlOBHAKHAlMm?  (H.) » — . .... 

FallofliiBeTdi f» 

The  chronological  approximations  of  onr  sketch  hinge  upon  the  name  of  Jehu,  king  of 
Israel,  who,  on  the  Obelisk  of  Nimroud,  is  made  tributary  to  Divannbar ;  thus  establiduBg 
a  synchronism  abont  the  year  886  b.  o. 

Everything  yet  discovered  on  the  site  of  Babel  seems  to  belong  to  the  ragn  of  "Nairn- 
kndnrmchor  (L  e.,  NebtiehadnegMor),  king  of  Babylon,  son  of  Nalmbolaehim,  king  of  Baby- 
lon " — not  earlier  than  about  b.  o.  604. 

Time,  the  performer  of  so  many  marvels  in  archsBology,  will  assoredly  enable  ns  soon  to 
attain  greater  Assyrian  precision ;  already  foreshadowed  through  the  pending  ezcavatloM 
of  M.  Place,  and  the  personal  stadies  of  M.  Fnlgenoe  Fresnel  and  of  Col.  Rawlinson,  on 
the  ntes  of  Mesopotamian  antiquity. 

CHRONOLOGY—HEBREW. 

«  Vor  a  thonfand  yecm  in  thy  right  are  bat  as  yesterday  when  it  is  pasi,"— {JFVotet  xc  4.) 
**  One  day  ia  with  the  Lotd  [leHOoaH]  aa  a  thonaand  years,  and  a  thousand  yean  aa  one  day.* 

It  would  be  affectation  if  not  duplicity,  on  the  part  of  the  authors  of  **  Types  of  Man- 
kind," after  the  variety  of  shocks  which  the  plenary  exactitude  of  Hebrew  chronicles  has 
received  at  their  hands,  not  to  place  everytiiing  Israelitish  on  precis^y  the  same  human 
footing  as  has  been  assigned  to  the  more  ancient  time-registers  of  Egypt  and  of  China,  and 
to  the  more  solid  restorations  of  Assyria. 

The  reader  of  our  Essay  I,  in  the  present  volume,  can  form  his  own  estimate  of  the  histo- 
rical weight  tiiat  Hebraical  literature  may  possess  hereafter  in  scientific  ethnography. 

Monumenial  history  the  Hebrews  have  none.  Even  their  so-called  "  Tombs  of  kings," 
owing  to  the  absence  of  inscriptions,  have  recently  occasioned  a  discussion  among  such 
deep  archaeologists  as  De  Saulcy,  Quatrem^re,  and  Raoul-Rochette,  (541)  that  shows  upon 
how  tremulous  a  foundation  their  attribution  rests.  The  **arch''  and  massive  basements 
of  Jerusalem's  temples  (discovered  by  Catherwood,  Arundale,  and  Bonomi,  1882-3)  may 

(641)  JSevue  ArOUUogique;  1851-*52.    Also,  Da  Saulct:  Jowmesf  rotmd  tfu  Dead  Sea:  1863 ;  iL  p.  181. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC 

HEBREW.  703 

belong  to  ZerubbabeFs  or  to  Solomon's  edifices;  or,  in  part,  to  the  anterior  «7e&t<nto,  for  any- 
thing by  tourists  imagined  to  the  contrary.  In  the  absence  of  monufflental  criteria,  we  are 
compelled  to  give  the  Hebrews  but  &  fourth  place  in  the  world's  history ;  at  the  same  time 
that  justice  to  a  people  whose  strenuous  efforts  to  preserve  their  records  has  encountered 
more  terrible  obstacles  and  more  frequent  effacements  than  any  other  nationality,  demands 
the  amplest  recognition. 

The  numerous  citations  and  tables  with  which  the  subject  of  chronology  has  been  already 
ushered,  spare  us  from  recapitulation  of  the  manifold  instances  whereby  the  Text  con- 
tradicts the  yersions;  the  numerical  designations  of  a  giren  manuscript,  those  of  another; 
and  the  modem  computations  of  one  indiridual,  the  estimates  of  almost  every  other  indi- 
vidual; whensoever  the  date  of  any  Jewish  event,  anterior  to  Solomon's  semi-pagan 
temple,  is  the  object  sought  after. 

In  fact,  we  may  now  realize  with  Lepsius,  that  the  strictly-chronological  element  was 
wanting  in  the  organism  of  Hebrew,  as  of  other  Semitish,  minds;  until  Manbtho  the 
Sebennytey  about  b.  o.  260,  first  established  the  principles  of  chronology  thi^ugh  Egyptian 
indigenous  records ;  and,  by  publishing  his  results,  in  Greek,  for  the  instruction  of  the 
Alexandria  School,  first  planted  the  idea  of  human  *<  chronology  "  upon  a  scientific  basis. 
An  systems  of  computation  (heretofore  followed  by  Christendom)  take  their  departure,  his- 
torically, from  Manetho. 

It  is  deeply  to  be  lamented,  for  the  sake  of  education,  that  no  qualified  translator  has* 
yet  honored  Anglo-Saxon  literature  with  an  English  version  of  Lepshu's  <<  Introduction  " 
to  his  Chronology  of  the  Egyptians;  of  which  the  writers,  through  the  Chevalier's  complai- 
sance, have  possessed  the  ^«(-Aa(^  since  December,  1848,  and  the  second  since  May,  1849. 
Impossible,  we  fear,  until  such  translation  be  accessible,  is  it  to  convey  to  the  m^ority  of 
our  readers,  the  enUrel^^-new  principles  of  chronological  investigation  this  wonderftd  grasp 
(of  a  mind  at  the  pinnade  of  the  culture  of  our  time)  has  eondensed  into  654  pages  quarto. 
Erudition  stands  humbled  at  the  aspect  of  this  volume's  conscientious  and  universal  probity 
of  citation ;  at  the  same  time  that  its  perspicacity  of  arrangement  is  such,  that  those  who, 
like  ourselves,  possess  no  acquaintance  with  German,  can  track  the  fbotsteps  of  its  author 
almost  paragraph' by  paragraph.  Through  the  kindness  of  many  Allefaianic  friends,  the 
writers  have  been  enabled  to  annotate  their  copies  of  the  Ohronohgi$  der  JBgypter  with  mar- 
ginal and  other  notes  that  justify  whatever  assertions  they  respectively  make  upon  an 
authority  otherwise  to  them  Germanioally  concealed :  and,  in  consequence,  with  reference 
to  Babbi  Hillel  and  many  of  the  facts  subjoined,  they  may  confidently  refer  the  reader  of 
«  Types  of  Mankind"  to  Lepsius's  compendium ;  (542)  as  a  ground-text  which  the  writers' 
comparative  studies  of  works  in  other  tongues,  more  or  less  familiar,  have  resulted  in 
deeming  the  highest,  in  these  peculiar  branches,  of  our  common  generation.  In  any  case, 
a  German  scholar  can  easily  verify  our  desired  accuracy  by  opening  a  prinied  book ;  four 
oopies,  at  least,  of  which  are  now  even  at  Mobile,  Alabama. 

We  have  said  that  Manetho  is  the  founder  of  the  science  called  '<  chronology."  We 
mean  that  he  is  the  first  writer  who  developed  through  the  Greek  tongue,  at  his  era  the 
lang^uage  of  Occidental  science,  those  methods  of  computation  in  vogue  from  very  ancient 
times  among  the  sacerdotal  colleges  of  the  Egyptians.  He  is  the  exponent,  not  the  inventor 
of  his  country's  system :  Eratosthenes,  ApoUodorus,  &c.,  are  his  successors ;  together  with 
Josephus,  Africanus,  Eusebius,  and  the  Syncellus ;  whose  Judaico-christian  theories  have 
been  the  sources  of  that  fabric  of  superstition  heretofore  reputed  to  inform  us  concerning 
the  epoch  of  God's  Creation, 

No  doubt  remains  any  longer  that,  centuries  prior  to  Manetho,  the  Egyptian  priesthood 
did  possess  chronological  registers;  because,  aside  from  inferences  patent  in  his  prede- 
cessor Herodotus's  **  Euterpe,"  we  have  before  our  eyes  in  the  Turin  hieraiie  papyrus  (dating 
in  the  12th-14th  century  b.  c.,  or  1000  years  before  Manetho)  the  same  system,  often  with 
the  same  numerals,  of  reigns  of  Oodt,  Demi-Oods,  and  ifcn,  that  this  chronographer  sub- 
sequently   expounded  to  the  Alexandrian  schools.    Alas  I  Manetho's  mutilators,  not  his 

(542)  EinUUung;  1849;  pp.  14-20,  350-404,  406-410. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

704  mankind's  chronology. 

own  imaginary  inaoonraoies,  are  the  oaase  of  that  oonfiitioB  of  personages  and  dates,  from  ott 
of  which  modem  archeology  is  now  beginning,  thron|^  hierog^yphioal  ooUationB,  to  emerge. 

Of  coarse,  Ckmae  computations  are  distinot :  being  the  prodnction  of  other  lands,  oUier 
races,  other  histmes,  other  worlds  of  thought  and  action.  So,  likewise,  may  be  the  lost 
Chaldean  systems,  of  which  Aragments  surriye  through  scanty  extracts  of  Sanconiatho 
and  of  Berosus ;  or,  as  we  shall  see,  through  the  more  recent  Samorit  astrologico-cyc^e 
fables  of  the  Hindoos :  but,  with  the  abore  exceptions,  and  (if  you  please)  of  Mexico  and 
Peru,  there  is  no  system  of  what  we  call  **  chronology  **  but  is  historically  posterior  to  Ma- 
netho,  whose  era  stands  at  the  middle  of  the  8d  century  b.  o. 

This  is  fadle  of  comprehension  to  the  reader  of  our  Essay  I.  He  therein  peroMres 
that  the  oldest  computatory  data  based  upon  Judaic  traditions  are  found  in  the  Greek  S^ 
tuagint ;  being  itself  a  collection  of  translations  manufactured  at  Alexandria  after  b.  a  250^ 
and  before  b.  o.  180;  in  which,  Alexandrian  Greek  dialects  and  Alexattdro-£gyptian  ''sothic 
periods "  of  1460  years,  betray  a  people,  an  age,  and  a  fusion  of  philosophical  notions, 
such  as  could  hare  been  produced,  through  natural  causes,  in  no  locality  upon  earth  but 
Alexandria ;  and  that  too  during  Ptolemaic  generations  subsequent  to  Manetho. 

The  next  in  order  is  the  Hebrew  Text  Its  canonical  antiquity,  in  its  oldest  and  last 
fbrm,  cannot  reach  up  to  Esra  in  the  5th  century,  and  deseends  unto  tiie  Maceabee  princes 
in  the  2d  century^B.  o.,  i.  e.  after  the  writer  of  the  book  called  "  DanieL*'  But,  our  Iniroductofjf 
has  effaced  the  Talidity  of  textual  numeration  in  any  Hebrew  codex  (no  MSS.  being  900 
years  old) ;  because,  while  on  the  one  hand  its  radically  discordant  numbers  show  that,  when 
the  Sqttuagmt  was  translated,  the  original  Hebrew  exemplar  in  its  patriarchal  enum^mtion 
either  did  not  then  exist,  or  must  have  been  identical  With  its  oopied  Greek  Tersion ;  on  the 
other,  the  fftbrew  squar&4eUer  character,  of  this  Text* s  present  form,  not  haring  been 
inrented  until  the  Zd  emtwry  afUt  o.,  the  chronological  elements  now  in  the  Text  must 
originate  from  manipulations  made  aboTO  400  years  after  Manetho. 

Thirdly,  and  lastly,  there  is  the  SamarUan  P^tateuoh.  Its  numerical  system  altogether 
departs,  for  patriarchal  ages,  trmm  both  the  Septuagint  and  the  Hebrew  Text  The  age  of 
its  compilation  is  utteriy  unknown;  but  the  palcographio  thmpe  of  its  alphabetic  letters 
bring  such  MSS.  as  exist  now  to  an  epoch  below  that  of  our  Hebrew  Text  itself.  Sup- 
posing the  rumored  estimate  of  one  NtMoomtm  codex  did  make  that  unique  copy  attain  to 
the  6th  century  after  o.,  such  fact  would  merely  proTO  our  riew  to  be  oorrect ;  but,  in  Eu- 
rope, no  Samaritan  MS.  is  older  than  the  18th  century.  In  consequence,  we  cannot  accept, 
in  scientific  chronology,  any  more  than  Siracides,  the  modem  hypotheses  of  that  <*Btultu8 
populns  qui  habitat  in  Sidmis.'' 

These  facts  being  posited,  one  can  understand  the  apparatus  and  the  efforts  made  upon 
them  by  the  learned  Babbi  HiUel,  about  the  year  844  after  o.,  to  place  Jewish  chronology 
upon  a  scientific  basis  that  it  nerer  possessed  before  his  labors.  He  was  acquainted  with 
Grecian  calendrical  computations ;  probably  with  the  cycles  of  Meton  and  CalKppus,  the 
mathematical  formuln  of  Theon  of  Alexandria,  and  with  the  chronography  of  Africuius, 
perpetuator  of  Manetho. 

A  quotation  twm  Lepsius  has  been  submitted  on  a  preceding  page.  Another  extract 
will  illustrate  his  riews(648) :  — 

"  But  then  it  is  Tery  improbable  that  Hillel  went  to  work  in  the  manner  that  Idelerbelieyes. 
•Evidently/  says  Ideler,  «he  started  from  the  then-still-generally  used  (by  the  Jews)  Seirtt^ 
ddan  era,  riz. :  the  autumn  of  the  year  812  B.  c.  Calculating  backwards,  his  next  epoch 
was  the  destruction  of  the  second  Temple.  This  epoch  he  fixed  at  only  112  years  (before) ; 
thus  counting  more  than  150  years  too  littie,  and  making  Nebuchadnezxar  contemporary 
with  Artaxerxes  I.  Going  back  to  the  Building  of  the  first  Temple,  the  Exodus,  the  Deluge 
and  the  Creation,  partly  according  to  the  express  dates  of  the  Bible,  parUj  according  to 
his  explanation  of  those  dates,  he  found,  as  the  epoch  of  the  IHn^  Shtaroth  beginning  of 
the  year.  8450  of  the  World.*  So  gross  and  inconsistent  an  error  of  160  years  in  so  modem 
a  time  was  impoetihU  to  a  eavant  of  the  4th  century.  But  there  is  not  much  difficulty  in 
explaining  it,  if  we  suppose,  that  the  Rabbis,  after  the  great  kiatue  in  Jewish  literature 

MS)  C»fwwfcv<e— "KritttdarQu^kn";  Lpp. 88^864. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 

HEBREW.  705 

(wUdi  began  with  the  eonclasloB  of  the  Talmiid,  600  a.  d.  to  the  8th  century,  i  did  re- 
oeiTe  the  few  general  points,  which  Hillel  had  connected  with  his  nniTersai  calendar,  Arom 
him,  and  that  then,  only  then,  they  began  to  fill  np  their  universal  history  of  6000  years 
according  to  the  records  of  the  Old  Testament  Indeed,  we  find  neither  in  the  Talmnd  nor 
•Tin  in  the  ante-Talmndic  writings, — ex.  gr.  in  the  Seder  Olam  RabbOy  one  of  the  most 
Ancient  of  these  writings— the  whole  chronological  fillings  np.  Tliis  seems  to  have  taken 
place  in  the  12th  centnry ;  consequently  at  the  epoch  of  a  long-prcTiously  commenced 
sdentifico-literary  barbarism.  From  the  Creation  to  the  Deluge,  and  the  Exodbs,  they  had 
only  to  fbllow  the  numbers  of  the  Pentateuch  to  attain  the  given  date  (a.  m.)  2448  =  1814 
(B.  0.).  But  thenceforward  they  based  themseWes  upon  the  convenient  number  of  480  years 
lo  the  Building  of  the  Temple  (in  the  let  Book  of  Kmge)^  and  according  to  this  they  arranged 
the  chronology  of  the  time  of  the  Judges.  Bt  this,  then,  was  the  real  link  of  chronology 
^located  for  160-170  years,  which  occasioned  the  displacement  of  all  the  succeeding  mem- 
bers. Only  when  arriTcd  at  the  next  fixed  point,  in  the  year  (a,  m.)  6460  =  812  Cb,  o.), 
was  it  found,  that  the  chain  of  events,  for  the  given  space  from  tne  Building  of  the  first  to 
that  of  the  second  Temple,  was  much  too  long.  The  history  of  the  second  Temple,  built 
under  Darius  Hystaspi^  down  to  Alexander,  Arom  whom  the  Greek  era  took  its  name, 
shrunk  then  at  once  from  184  to  84  years.  At  first  this  created  little  sensation,  but  after- 
wards the  difficulties  becoming  greater,  thev  were  removed  by  the  simple  means  of  adopt* 
ing  Darius  IL  and  (Darius)  III,,  as  one  and  the  same  person.  In  this  manner  alone  can 
we  explain  the  singular  phenomenon  of  an  entirely  dislocated  and  mutilated  chronology, 
which  notwithstanding  possesses  two  firm  and  only-sure  points ;  and  at  the  same  time  offers 
us  the  most  important  and  ]^obably  most  accurate  determination  of  the  epoch  of  the  Exodus 
by  a  really  learned  chronologist*' 

It  is  fh>m  the  oripnal  that  the  reader  must  gather,  what  our  space  and  objects  permit 
us  not  to  transcribe,  the  citations,  &c,  through  which  the  author  establishes  his  view  con- 
clusively. To  us  the  important  facts  are  theee — 1st,  that  the  Jews  had  made  no  attempts 
at  scientific  chronology  prior  to  the  4th  century  after  o. ;  nor  did  they  complete  8u6h  as 
their  later  schools  adopt  until  the  12th. — 2dly,  that,  through  their  childlike  prepossessions, 
and  owing  to  their  superstitious  notions  that  the  era  of  "  Oeation "  could  be  humanly 
attained,  they  ciphered  out  a  fabulous  numberv  equivalent  to  **  b.  o.  8762,"  for  a  divine  act, 
which  their  ignorance  of  the  phenomena  of  astronomical  and  geological  unceasing  progres- 
sion, led  them  to  imagine  wstoHUmeoui — *' Fiat  lux  I" — and  8dly,  that,  having  blundered 
by  160-170  years,  on^  between  the  Exodtu  and  Solomon's  temple,  they  sank  deeper  into 
the  mud  when,  in  efforts  to  account  for  their  own  imbecilities,  they  made  one  man  of  two 
Dariuses  in  order  to  rob  the  world's  history  (184  mmiM  84)  of  150  years !  And  it  is  such 
wretched  stuff  as  this  rabbinical  arithmetic  which  is  to  be  set  up,  forsooth,  against  the 
etone-hooke  of  Egypt  and  Assyria,  the  records  of  China,  the  annals  of  Chreece  and  Bome  at 
the  age  of  Alexander  th^ Great,  and  every  fact  in  terrestrial  history!  Well  might  Lft- 
sueur  indite  the  passage  above  quoted—'*  Nous  sommes,  depuis  dix-huits  cents  ans,  dupea 
de  la  sotte  vanity  des  Juifs : "  and  justifiably  may  archaological  science  hold  cheaply 
the  acumen  of  the  whole  series  of  those  who,  amid  other  conceits,  have  adopted  480  year* 
between  Solomon's  temple  and  the  Exodus, 

Before  examining  which  fact,  it  may  be  expedient  that  we  should  set  forth  our  own  point 
of  view,  founded  upon  the  same  principles  hitherto  pursued,  vis.,  that  our  process  is  always 
retrogressive;  ever  starting  Arom  to-ifoy,  as  the  known,  and  going  backwards,  in  all  ques- 
tions of  human  registration  of  events. 

The  era  of  Nabanauar,  if  astronomy  be  certainty,  is  a  point  fixed,  by  eclipses,  &c.,  in  the 
year  b.  o.  747.  Thence,  backwards  to  the  "  5th  year  of  Rehoboam,"  when  Jerusalem  was 
plundered  by  the  Egyptian  Sheshoi^  (of  which  event  the  hieroglyphical  register  stands  at 
Thebes),  we  have  a  positive  synchronism  about  the  years  071-8,  **  b.  o. ;"  for,  in  ancient 
chronology,  asserted  precision  to  a  year  or  so  is  next  to  imposition.  Thence,  taking  Solo- 
mon with  his  *<  chariots  dedicated  to  the  sun,"  and  his  Mosonico-zodiacal  Temple^  ioft 
granted,  we  accept  the  era  "1000  years  b.  o.,"  as  an  assumed  fixed  point  when  that  temple 
was  already  completed.  We  say  «« assumed,"  because  Calmet's  date  for  the  completion  of 
this  edifice  is  b.  o.  1000;  whilst  Hales's  is  b.  o.  1020:  and,  rather  than  trouble  ourselves 
with  ascertaining  which  of  these  computations  may  be  the  least  wrong,  we  would  greatly 
prefer  discussing  whether  Solomon  ever  built  a  TempU  at  all.    Why,  if  for  the  second,  or 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC 

7M 

MANKIND^S    GHR0N0L06T. 

Zonibbabers  Tmnpl«,  we  haye  to  choose  unong  19  biUioal  ohronologera,  irlM>eo  maximum  ii 
B.  0.  741,  and  mimmum  479 — it,  for  a  Jewish  erent  of  scareely  2400  yean  ago,  we  eaimot 
through  Judaic  books  get  nearer  the  truth,  according  to  '*chronolo^cal'*  arithmetic,  than 
262  years,  np  or  down — how  mnoh  nearer  are  we  likely  to  get  to  another  Jewish  CTeat 
(itself  ftraoght  with  preternatural  dnemmas),  snpposed  to  haTe  happened  somewhere  abosi 
2858  years  ago,  when  the  epoch  of  the  building  -of  the  first  Temple  depends  upon  what 
computation  we  may  elect  to  adopt  out  of  19  different  orthodox  authorities  for  the  age 
of  the  second? 

Thus  much  for  the  sake  of  famishing  our  coDeaguea  with  praetical  means  of  rendering 
ecclesiastical  opposers  of  **  Types  of  Mankind,"  if  not  less  supercilious,  at  least  more  mal* 
leable;  whenever  these  maybe  pleased  to  obtrude  Jewish- ''chronography'*  —  or,  as  it  is 
fSsshionably  termed,  <*  the  recelTcd  chronology"— into  the  rugged  amphitheatre  of  Egyptian 
time-measurement 

Archnologically  speaking  (not  **  chronologically"),  tibere  is  no  material  objection  to  such 
assumption  as  Solomon's  Temple  at  (drea)  b.  o.  1000 ;  a  fei^  years  more  or  less.  Under 
this  historical  riew,  apart  from  episodic  circumstances  (to  be  discussed  hereafter),  «rch»< 
ology  may  rationally  concede  that  Hebrew  tradition,  throu^  alphabetic  fsdlitieB  dersloped 
not  much  less  than  three  centuries  posterior,  does  really  eoBtain  chronokgioal  elements 
back  to  about  2858  years  ago  —  say  to  b.  o.  1000;^ 

We  continue  with  Leprius — 

«  The  question  is  now  whether  we  must  gire  up,  fbr  lost,  the  number  480  (to  which  we 
cannot  attach  greater  importance  than  to  the  numerous  simple  **ArbaSnit(f*'  or  forties  [40i], 
in  the  same  piarts  of  Israelitish  historr) ;  and  with  it,  also,  ereiy  chronologiMd  helm  for 
OTents  anterior  to  the  Exode  T  But  such  is  not  the  case,  because  we  find,  in  the  [so-called] 
Mosuc  writings  themselves,  a  true  chronological  standard,  by  which  we  can  compute  [the 
chronological  weight  of]  the  views  hitherto  held,  and  con&m  anew  the  truthfulness  of 
Egyptian  record.    Such  a  standard  I  conoeiTe  to  be  the  Regieiere  of  generatione" 

Allusion  has  been  made,  in  other  parts  of  this  volume,  to  the  Nos.  7,  12,  70  or  72,  as 
mystic  in  original  association ;  and  how  the  latter  always,  the  former  two  firequently,  sie 
unhistorioal  wherever  found.  To  these  numbers  (of  cabalistic  employment  since  the  d^ys 
of  Jeremiah),  we  may  now  add,  as  etiually  vague  in  Hebrew  chronography,  all  tha  ^^orbaMT 
or  "forties."  By  opening  Ouden's  Concordance  the  reader  can  see  a  list  of  above  50,  out 
of  many  more  instances,  where  the  presence  of  *<  forty"  renders  the  narrative,  in  this 
respect  at  least,  unsafe.  Here  is  a  schedule  of  some  that  are  podtively  apocryphal; 
especially  when,  through  a  conventional  Ifo,  40,  an  event,  in  itself  prsetematural,  is  ren- 
dered Btffl  more  itapoBsible  by  the  numerals  that  accompany  it  ' 

Apocbtphal  FoBTns, 

OK 

1.  fi^viL4..». *<40<Ujta]id40Bi|^ti.*' 

5.  2>od.zziT.18 «40<Ujtuid40Bi|^ti.'' 

8.  Numb.  xiU.  2& —  **  40  daji." 

4.  Daa.  ix.  25 **  40  dayB." 

6.  JcitL  V.  6 •<  40  jMurt." 

0.  /iid.iU.n «40y«m.'' 

7.  1  Am.  iT.  18». «  40  jmxC* 

8.  2  Sotm,  T.  4 «*40  ye»rt.'» 

9.  1  Kingi  xlx.  8 "  40  days  and  40  nightt." 

10.  2  Kimgt  zIL  1 *<40  yaan." 

U.  1  a»rm.  xxTi  SI.  «  40th  j-x» 

12.  2  Cknn,  zxIt.  1...  **  40  yaan.** 

13.  Egra  iL  24 «  40  and  two."* 

lLjr*kem,v,lt^.^.,  "401 

15.  /o6  zliL  IS «  ktmtbred  and  40y«n.» 

16.  PMmt  zer.  10.....  «  40  yMn." 

17.  Aefc.  tr.  6 «40  daya." 

18.  JMMILIO «40y«an.>' 

18.  JbikU.4... *<40  4aya.'» 

20.  Jfiitf.iv.2 «40daytand4DBl^ta.* 

21.  Ma*llZ «40day«." 

22.  J<*m  U.  80 "  40  «£«  yean." 

28^  MttlZ «40day».'» 

24.  Ab.  lii.  • **  40  yam." 

2&.  Jte>.viL4»zlT.l,8  *^hwiidni  and  40  fmr 
thonnnd." 

<*  It  is  erident  from  the  narratives  in  the  Pentateuch,  as  well  as  in  other  books  of  the 
Holy  Scriptures,  that  in  ancient  times  the  number  40  was  considered  not  merely  as  a  round 
number,  but  even  as  one  totally  vague  and  undetermined,  designating  an  uncertain  quan- 
tity. The  Israelites  remained  in  the  desert  during  40  years ;  the  judges,  Athnlel,  Ehud 
(Septuag,),  Bebora  and  Oideon,  governed  each  40  years.  The  same  did  Eli,  after  the  Phi- 
^tines  had  ravaged  the  country  during  40  years.  The  40  days  of  the  increasing  and  the 
40  days  of  decreasing  of  the  waters  of  the  Deluge  are  well  known.    But  one  of  the  i 

Digitized  by 

Google 

HEBREW.  707 

strildog  instanoes  of  this  use  of  the  number  40  is  2  Sam.  zv.  7,  where,  during  the  40  years 
of  David's  reign  it  is  said :  <  And  after  40  years  it  happened  that  Absalom  went  to  the  king 
and  said,  Let  me  go  to  Hebron,  that  I  may  falfil  the  tow  which  I  have  made  to  Jehoyah.* 

**  The  Apocryphic  books  go  still  farther.  According  to  them,  Adam  entered  the  Para- 
dise when  he  was  40  days  old— Eve  40  days  later.  Seth  was  carried  away  by  angels  at  the 
age  of  40  years,  and  was  not  seen  during  the  same  number  of  days.  Joseph  was  40  years 
old  when  Jacob  came  to  Egypt ;  Moses  had  the  same  age  when  he  went  to  Midian,  where 
he  remained  daring  40  years.  The  same  use  of  this  number  is  also  made  by  the  Phoeni- 
cians and  Arabs.  [See  DUurtatio  BredovU  de  Oeorgii  SynceUi  Chronographia  (second  part 
of  the  ediUon  of  Bonn)  Syncellns,  p.  88,  teq.l  We  must  not  forget  hereby  the  Arbaindt 
(the  forties)  in  Arabian  literature;  a  sort  of  books  which  relate  none  but  stories 
of  40  years,  or  give  a  series  of  40,  or  4  times  40  traditions.  They  haye  a  similar  kind  of 
books,  which  they  call  SebayHi  (seyens).  Their  calendar  has  40  rainy  and  40  windy  days. 
Also  in  their  laws  the  numbers  of  4,  40,  44,  occur  yery  often.  In  Syria  the  grayes  of  Seth, 
Noah  and  Abel  are  still  shown.  They  are  built  in  the  usual  Arabian  style.  Their  leng& 
is  recorded  to  be  40  ells,  and  thus  I  haye  found  them  by  my  own  measuring.  This  may 
also  account  for  the  tradition  that  the  antediluyian  men  were  40  ells  high,  that  is,  not 
<  about  40  ells,'  but  ^very  talV  Only  afterwards  was  this  expression  so  naiyely  misunder- 
stood. The  Arabs  giye,  in  the  conyersational  language,  the,  same  sense  to  Ht^n,  60,  and 
ifileA,  100.  I  haye  already  obseryed,  in  an  earUer  writing  TZwd  Sprachergleiehende  Ah- 
kandUmgm  rTwo  lectures  upon  the  Analogy  of  Languages),  SerUn,  1886,  pp.  104,  189], 
that  of  all  the  Semitic  numerical  words,  arML,  4,  is  the  sole  one  which  has  no  connexion 
whatever  with  the  Indo-Gennanie,  and  seems  rather  to  be  derived  from  rob,  2\  *  much,' 
T\21H^  *  the  locust'    This  would  account  for  its  undetermined  use.' (644) 

The  historical  spuriousness  of  the  numeral  40,  in  its  applicaticm  to  human  chronology, 
may  be  illustrated  by  another  example  out  of  many.  It  is  said,  '*  Israel  walked  40  peart  in 
the  wilderness,"  (545)  after  the  Exode.    On  which  Cahen :  — 

**It  is  probable, that  this  itinerary  contains  but  the  principal  stations:  they  are  in 
number  42.  In  the  first  year  they  count  l4  stations ;  in  the  last,  or  40th,  they  count  8 
stations ;  thus  the  20  other  stations  occupied  88  years  (Jar' At,  in  tiie  name  of  Moses  the 
preacher).  According  to  the  ingenious  remark  of  St.  Jerome,  the  number  40  seems  to  be 
consecrated  to  tribulation:  the  Hebrew  people  sojourned  in  Egypt  10  times  40  years; 
Moses,  Elias,  and  Jesus,  fasted  40  days ;  the  Hebrew  people  remained  40  years  in  the 
desert ;  the  prophet  Ezeldel  lay  for  40  days  on  his  right  side.  This  accordance  shows  us 
that  Goethe  had  some  reasons  for  coigecturing  that  the  40  years  in  the  desert  might  very 
well  possess  no  historical  certitude."  (546) 

Again  —  ''Thus,  'during  these  40  years,  notwithstanding  the  miserable  life  which 
the  Israelites  had  led  in  the  desert,  maugre  the  plagues,  the  n^adies,  and  the  wars,  there 
was  but  a  diminution  of  1820  Israelites  and  an  augmentation  of  [just I]  1000  Lerites. 
Such  results  exist  not  within  the  domain  of  natural  things,  and  consequently  possess 
nothing  historical."  .  .  .  '<  Savage  tribes  sing  of  their  petty  quarrels,  their  conquests  and 
their  disasters,  upon  the  lofty  tone  of,  and  even  loftier  tone  than,  the  greatest  nations. 
Thus  the  septs  along  the  river  Jordan  had  their  poets,  their  national  ballads ;  these  songs, 
there,  as  eveiywhere  else,  have  preceded  history.  We  have  just  read  extracts  from  these 
productions,  perhaps  the  most  ancient  that  have  reached  us.  It  is  probable  that  to  them 
irere  afterwards  added  some  events  of  a  date  much  later  than  the  political  existence  of 
Moabites,  Edomites,  ftc."  (547) 

j^nally,  speaking  of  the  "  40  years  "  in  the  Sinaio  desert,  Cahen  observes :  — 

<'One  finds  in  the  Pentateuch  only  those  events  that  occurred  during  the  first  ttoo  and 
the  last  or  fortieth  year.  The  history  of  the  intermediary  87  years  is  totally  unknown 
to  us."  (548) 

All  theological  coi^ectures  about  this  unhistoric  interval  are  merely  coi^ectures  theo- 
logical; because  the  Jews  used  the  expression  ''forty,"  as  we  do  "  a  bvndred,"  for  a  vague 
nmnber  of  anything  uncoxmted.  To  Lepsius's  numerous  illustrations  of  the  utter  impos- 
Bihflity  that  uneducated  nations  or  individuals  can  possess  any  clear  ideas  about  dates  for 
circumstances  that  may  have  happened  during  their  respective  lifetimes,  we  might  add  two 
parallels — the  first  (or  Oriental)  is  that,  in  Egypt,  if  y6u  ask  an  intelligent  but  illiterate 

(144)  Lipsicb:  Chronoloffk  der  JEgypUt:  i.  pp.  15, 16^  note. 

(545)  JoOu  T. «. 

(546)  Gahbi  :  It.  p.  168;  note  on  Nm^  jddiL  1. 

(547)  Gahih:  Op.dL;  p.  134;  note  on  the  two  censiuee  in  the  Deeert:  and  p.  124,  on  Bslax  and  Balax. 
^48)  Cip.ca.;^96w 

Digitized  by 

Google 

/ 

/ 

708  mankind's  ghbonologt. 

natiTe  kb  age,  be  eumot  express  it  by  yean;  but  replies,  tbat  bis  stature  was  about  se 
bigb  (hoUliiig  oat  bis  band  at  tbe  eleratloii  required),  fee  aydm  en-Ifmeira  —  <*  in  tbe  dajs 
of  tbe  Cbristians ;"  aUading  to  Napoleon's  conqaest  of  Egypt,  1798-1802 :  or  else  USU  jom 
tbat  be  bad  not  a  wbite  bair  in  bis  beard,  /m  kwrUkut  d-QMa^  ••  at  tbe  fire  of  tbe  cita- 
del" of  Cairo,  1825.  Tbe  seoond  (or  Ooeidental)  is,  tbat  no /ii^Mm,  or  J^iyro,  in  tbe  United 
States  (saTO  among  tbe  paucity  tbat  baTe  been  edncated),  can  tell  yon  bis  own  age,  by 

yeare;  bat  tbe  one  dates  eitber  firom  sacb  a  time  wben  <<  be  and  CoL riiot  tbat  bar  ;" 

or  tbe  otber  from  wben  be  batted  for  cbeeses  against  anotber  negro-kepbalas  at  sacb  a 
local  election. 

Tbis  introdoces  a  qaestion  apon  wbicb  Earopean  biblical  commentators,  ignorant  of 
lifing  Oriental  costoms,  baTe  gone  sadly  astray.  Wbene?er  tbe  number  of  personages,  in 
a  giTcn  Hebrew  pedigree,  bas  been  foond  insaffident  to  occapy  (tbat  is,  to  iUl  op  natorally^ 
without  improbable  longerity),  tbe  lengtb  of  time  required  to  suit  tbe  cbronological  scale  a 
given  commentator  may  bare  elected  to  iuTent  or  follow,  it  bas  been  incontinently  assumed, 
tbat  tbe  Hebrew  mtmerdU  were  rij^t ;  and  tbat  tbe  anomaly  proceeds  firom  tbe  aoddental 
loss  of  one,  or  more,  intermediary  ancestors,  in  tbe  genealogical  list  Tbus,  says  tbe 
learned  Dr.  Pricbard,  (649)  adopting  tbe  suggestions  of  tbe  great  Bficbnlis : — 

**  Tbe  result  is  tbat  tbe  difficulty  wbicb  seems  to  bave  induced  some  of  tbe  ancients  to 
alter  tbe  text  requires  a  different  explanation.    It  can  only  be  soWed,  as  it  would  seem, 
by  allowinff  an  tmiemon  of  sereral  generations  in  tbe  genealogies  of  tbe  Israelites.    At  - 
present  oidy  two  generations  are  interpoeed  between  Leri  and  Iffoses.    It  is  prdMble 
tbat  sereral  are  amiiied," 

So  again  tiie  AIM  Olaire,  (650)  in  respect  to  tbe  two  genealogies  of  JoeqA: — 

"  Tbe  first  (metbod)  is  to  suppose  tbat  tbese  names  {Oehomai,  Jo<u,  Anumas)  were  wanting 
in  tbe  geneiJogical  tables  tbe  CTsngelist  made  use  of ;  an  bypotbesis  the  more  probable  tbat 
tbe  names  of  intermediary  persons  are  often  missing  in  many  genealogies  of  the  Old  Testa- 
ment .  .  .  Esdras,  in  bis  genealogy,  omits  seren  of  bis  ancestors,  by  jumping  from  Amarias 
to  Aebitob  II,  father  of  Sadoc  IL  .  .  .  Tbe  senealogy  of  Saul,  for  a  space  of  800  years, 
names  but  seven  persons.  .  .  .  From  Mardocbeus  to  Jemini  or  Betjamin,  who  Hred  1200 
years  before,  but  four  are  named.  .  . .  From  Beuben  to  Beera,  who  was  carried  captiTe  by 
Tiglath-pilesar,  they  giTC  us  but  12  generations  to  fill  a  space  of  more  than  1000  years. 
In  the  genealogy  of  Judith,  for  a  space  nearly  equal,  there  are  but  16  generations.  By 
fixing,  as  is  commonly  done,  tbe  generation  at  88  years,  one  percdTcs  that  there  are  a  good 
many  degrees  omitted  in  tbese  genealogies.  .  . .  Grotius,  upon  whose  acquirements  one 
may  confide  wiU&out  difficulty,  assumes  tbat  tbis  happens  frequently,  as  may  be  seen  in 
genealogical  trees.  Sape  eodem  Un^eria  tpath  familiat  inter  ee  comparatae  yeneraUoneM  habere 
unam  aut  alteram  pluree  etpaucioree;  quod  tn  ommbut  elemmatibue  videre  eet.  ^Yeut-OD  on 
example  d'une  grande  in^galit^  de  generations  dans  les  diff(§rentes  branches  d'une  mAme 
souche  T  Scripture  affords  one  yerj  striking.  The  children  of  Jacob  {Numb.  L  8)  each 
formed  a  brutdi  or  tribe.  When,  a  year  after  their  issue  Arom  Egypt,  Moees,  by  tbe  order 
of  God,  caused  the  numbering  of  tbese  tribes,  there  was  found  among  them  a  prodigious 
inequality ;  but  tbe  most  surprising  is  tbat  wbicb  was  bebeld  between  tbe  tribe  of  Levi 
and  that  of  Judab:  the  latter  comprised  74,000  males  above  the  age  of  20  years,  and  tbe 
former  22,800  counting  (even)  those  above  one  month.'  *' 

One  would  suppose,  so  naively  does  tbe  Abbe  accept  all  tbese  numerale  as  historical,  tbat 
be  was  actually  present !  But  these  violent  statistics  are  susceptible  of  more  rational  solu- 
tion. Such  attempts  at  reconcilement  have  their  unique  origin  in  the  uncritical  ideas  of 
eminent  scholars  upon  tbe  true  ages  of  the  composition  of  the  fragments  extant  of  Jeru- 
salem literature;  wbicb  the  perusal  of  our  tuppreseed pages  might  supersede:  and  similar 
weak  explanations  would  not  have  been  thought  of  by  any  Orientalist  (Fresnel,  Lane,  or 
Layard,  for  instance)  who  bad  actually  resided  among  Semitic  populations.  Lepsius  (551) 
is  the  first,  tbat  we  are  aware  of,  to  have  placed  tbe  matter  in  its  true  light 

We  know  tbat  unlettered  Arabian  Bedawees  do  preserve,  for  centuries,  orally  fh>m  father 
to  son,  their  individual  and  dannisb  genealogies ;  and  this  too  for  an  almost  infinite  number 
of  generations.      They  even  thus  consecrate,  legally,   tbe   pedigrees  of  tbeir^  Uood- 

(540)  Rmtrcha;  1847;  v.  p.  669. 

(560)  Livm  aainit  YtrngiM;  IL  pp.  284-286, 801-202;  quoted  ohieflj  Arom  Buuir:  R^pmm  Crt^^im. 

(661)  Op.<i(.;pp.S06,80«. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

HEBREW.  709  ; 

hones.  (662)  Bat,  u  for  defining  the  kt^th  of  time  eaeh  tribe,  man,  or  horse,  may  haye 
lived,  that  the  BMawee  has  no  means  of  doing  beyond  his  own  grandfather's  lifetime ;  and 
for  which  he  has  no  annual  calendar.  Thns,  in  ante-Mohammedan  history,  **  the  battle  of  , 
Khniai,"  fonght  by  the  Mdadd  tribes  nnder  Koolayb-Wail  against  the  Yemenite  oonfede- 
raoy,  is  the  earliest  stand-point  of  Arabian  historical  tradition ;  (668)  bnt  the  era  before 
Itidm — 260 — to  which  snoh  battle  is  assigned,  has  been  compnted,  for  these  wild  children 
of  the  desert,  by  later  and  highly-cnltiTated  Arab  historians,  and  at  best  conjectnrally. 

It  wonld  be  foolish  to  deny  to  the  sedentary  and  somewhat  ednoated  Hebrews,  of  days 
anfterior  to  the  Captirity,  eqnal  faculties  of  preserving  their  own  gtneaJogieMy  that  we  recog- 
nize among  cognate  Semitish  and  still  more  barbarons  tribes  of  Arabia :  nor  is  there  any 
remson  to  donbt  the  existence  of  genealogkal  Uttt,  stretching  backwards  for  many  genera- 
tions, Arom  the  days  of  Exra.  (664)  These  may  even  have  ascended,  ancestor  by  ancestor, 
to  the  times  of  Abraham.  (666)  Bnt.it  was  one  thing  to  preserve,  through  saga,  rythme, 
Bong,  or  oral  legend,  the  namet  of  predecessors  in  their  natural  order ;  and  quite  another 
to  guess  at  the  duration  of  these  ancestors'  respective  lifetimes,  or  to  infer,  through  tradi- 
tionary events  with  any  of  the  earlier  ancestors  coetaneous,  the  chronological  remoteness 
of  the  age  during  which  they  lived,  excepting  approximately.  In  consequence,  Lepsius 
(and  we  entirely  agree  with  him)  sustains,  .that  the  gmoaXogieM  of  the  Hebrews  are  probably 
right;  but  that  the  chronological  computations  accompanying  these  lists  are  certainly 
wrong.  Indeed,  of  this  last  fact  there  can  be  no  doubt,  when  we  remember  that  Babbi 
HiUel,  in  the  fourth  century  after  Christ,  was  the  first  to  regulate  Jewish  chronology  by 
the  verbal  literalness  of  the  Hebrew  Text ;  independently  of  fabulous  numeration  such  as 
that  borrowed  by  Josephus  from  an  Alexandrian  Greek  system  adopted  by  the  writers  of 
the  SqftHagmt.  The  manifest  interpolation  of  an  Egyptian  "Sothic-period"  of  1460-'61 
years  (so  felicitously  discovered  Mr.  Bharpe,  mpra^  pp.  618,  619),  obviates  farther  neces- 
sity for  recurrence  to  the  spurious  chronology  of  the  Oreek  version. 

These  numerical  estimates,  we  now  see,  are  both  modem  and  erroneous.  But,  to 
oonvince  the  reader  of  the  fitct ;  and  to  prove  that  the  480  years  between  the  first  Temple 
and  the  Exodus  are  erroneous ;  we  copy  Lepsius's  synopsis,  after  remarking  that,  just  as 
in  an  ancient  pictures  the  arUst  gave  colossal  proportions  to  the  figures  of  gods,  or  heroes, 
while  the  plebeian  classes  receive  pigmaic  stature,  so  among  the  antique  Israelites,  in  their 
organic  absenee  of  "  art,"  it  was  customary  to  assign  to  the  royal  line,  or  High-Priest 
pedigree,  the  attributes  of  longerity  together  with  extensively-procreating  capabilities; 
and  to  measure  such  exalted  patricians  by  generations  of  40  ywrt ;  at  the  same  time  that 
to  the  vulgar  herd  were  ascribed  generations  of  only  80 1 

*'  I  give  here  a  Table  of  the  principal  genealogies,  in  which  the  Levitish  generations 
follow  m  the  same  order  as  they  are  recorded  in  1  Ohron.  .chap.  7  (according  to  the  LXX ; 
in  the  Hebreiw  Text,  ch.  v.  and  vL).  These  are  preceded  by  the  gencalogi^  chain  frofll 
Levi  to  Zadok  according  to  Josephus,  and  also  his  list  of  the  ffigh^FrietU  from  Aaron  to 
Zadok.  Lastly  comes  a  senealogical  table  of  JudalL  Albeit  I  have  excluded  some  other 
geoMlogies,  esa  gr,y  the  three  of  Ephraim  {Nwmb,  xxvi.  86  —  1  €knm,  viii  20;  xxL24-27), 
because  they  were  in  evident  concision  ana  led  to  no  result  * 

«The  first  column,"  says  Lxpsn7S,(666)  « contains  the  patriarchs  from  Abraham  to 
Amram ;  next,  12  leaders  (chiefs)  of  Uie  people,  beginning  with  Moses,  who  seem  to  have 
bees  regarded  as  represehtatlves  of  the  12  generatunu  of  40  yeart  each ;  and  thus  to  have 
occasioned  the  calculation  of  480  years  [as  the  chronological  interval  between  the  Temple 
and  the  Exode"],  Avald  and  also  Bibthiau  give  another  list— for  the  subject,  in  general, 
admits  of  no  predsion ;  albeit,  for  us,  the  recognition  of  the  dimeUm  into  12  parte  of  this 
period  is  important  But  one,  likewise,  (VIII.)  of  the  aforesaid  cenealogies  (1  Ckron,  vii. 
89^-48)  contains  12  generatione  of  one  and  the  eame  family.  It  mif^t  therefore  be  possible 
that  this  Uist  list,  and  not  the  other,  had  originated  the  calculation  of  480  years.  This  list 
has  the  peculiarity  of  beginning  with  GiftsoM,  the  firet-bom  of  Livi.  But  the  most  noble 
line  of  the  Levites  was  that  of  the  Higk-Prieetet  who  descended  firom  Aabon  and  Kahath  (I.): 
this  list,  as  well  as  that  of  Must  (IX.),  contains  only  11  generaHone.  This  may  be  the 
reason  why  the  LXX  count  but  440  geare," 

(562)  Lataid:  Baifim:  pp.  S90, 821,  260, 820-881. 

(668)  FtmoL:  JrabieaoantraUmUeme:  1st  Letter;  1886;  p.l<L 

(664)  Erras  U.  6e-e2;  Nehem.  viL  61-81 

(^)  JVtMi».L6-18,26.  (66V)  Chrmthgk;  gp^m-^n. 

Digitized  by  VjOO^ IC 

710 

MANKINDS    CHRONOLOGY. 

THE   JUDAIC    LINSA0B8 

L  n.  m. 

teiflfOf  ZA90K% 

from  I      JSfi^JFVMt  Puvnteft. 

A«A»ait  I       to  Zamk.  [JoMphvi^  a.  J^  1  Cftron.  Tfl.  1-^  lC9krofi.TlL90ySL  ICftrakTiLfi-tt. 

to  |[JoMphiii»  A.J^  8,1,8].  60-«8;AniTfl.         (— Ym.)  (-TL) 

LX«fl 

2.KMtkot 

8.J 

S.Gtnoi 
8.1 

l.[Ufq 
S.] 

LMoMt  40 

2.Jodia«  40 

S-Othniel  40 

4.  Ehud  40 

6.  Sungar  40 

<t.Barak  40 

T.OIdMii  40 

8.  J«phtte  40 

O.SiiDMn  40 

10.su  40 

II.  Samuel,  -i 

Saul  / 

llDarid  40 

"480 

LAaion 
S.El6aiam 
8.PhixieeiM 
4.  Abieserea 
6.Bonkl 
«.Osia 
7.  Dai 

8.(PliluaMM) 
O.Ioka]Ma         80 
lO-Aklmalakoa 

880 

LAammt  80 
a.  BiJitiW  80 

8.Pinfam  80 
4.Ioaepoa  80 
6.Bokklaa  80 
6.IothaiDoa  80 
7.  ManloCboiSO 
8.Azoplkaioa  80 

8.Menaot]i    80 

O.Amaija      80 

O.A]dtol>oa    80  icAhltub       80 

80 

11.  Ablatbaroa 

withZadoki^  10.Zadokoa     80  IL Zadck 

800 

^  The  pnctletl  result  of  which  ia,  that  aU  ohronologen,  by  not  peroeiTing  the  surplitsage 
due  to  these  alNmrd  generations  of  40  peart,  haye  assigned  about  160-170  years  too  mneh 
between  Boumom  and  Mosm  ;  and  eryo,  the  Bxodos  must  desoend  from  b.  o.  1491,  its  date 
in  the  En^ish  yersion,  to  B.  o.  1314-'22,  eirea. 

After  studying  the  aboye  Table,  the  reader  may  pethapt  peroeiye  with  ns  seyvral 
things  not  generally  known :  — 
Ist.  —  That  the  whole  of  this  Jewish  chronology  is  unhistorical;  becante  it  is  not  baaed 
upon  positiye  records  of  the  number  of  years  each  personage  liyed,  but  it  was  fiabri- 
cated,  long  after  their  times,  by  semi-sdentific,  semi-titerary,  computators;  wboee 
process  was  to  assign  impossible  generations  of  40  yean  to  their  country's  pre-historic 
heroes ;  and  then,  having  obtained  a  maximum-period  in  which  the  liyes  of  such  wor- 
thies were  thereby  inclosed,  these  modem  computators  (probably  about  the  8d  cen- 
tury after  o.,  when  the  Boohs  were  re-transcribed  into  the  #^tiartf-letter  alphabet) 
apportioned  to  each  hero,  in  the  anew-manipulated  Hebrew  Text,  those  irrecon- 
cileable  numerale  that  haye  come  down  to  our  time. 
2d. — That,  whether  the  ffenealo^ical  catal<^es  be  right  or  not,  the  chronology  is  a  later 
intercalation. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

HEBRBW. 

711 

FBOM   ABBAHAM   TO   DAVID. 

rv.  V. 

a«n«ratti»t 

lCknH,yVL2&'     Mabbi, 
28.  lChrm,iiL 

(—TIL)  20,  SO. 

VL  YIL 

HmAX'j  Firentage 

to  Jhhub.  toAmsAL 

lC%ron.TiL         l€9iron.iiL 

8«4».  88-30. 

(-in,)  (-IV.) 

TUL  IZ. 

AmAFB^B  Parent*  Sehak's  Parent* 

age  to  Jahath.       age  to  MnsL 

1  Chron.  tIL         1  Oiron.  tU. 

80-48.  44-47. 

Datid^s  Pamt* 
agatoJQSAH. 
JBMAir.18; 

lC%r(»i.U.4-18; 

Xiilc8m.82,88. 

LUL^ 

LLoTi 

LLoTi 

i.[i«n]: 

LLoTi 

LLeri 

LJndah 

2.Klkaiia 

2.M«iari 

2.Kaha«h 

2.Xlkan» 

2.ee»Nm 

ZMeraci 

^ 

aJUIBAB 

8.(Jahaxh) 

a  Mm 

2.Perei 

LAbinoth 

aOLUIiQl 

l.Xonh 

80  LMahath 

80 

1.8imel 

80 

LMaheU 

80  LflMTon 

80 

2.Blkana 

80&8imei 

2.[Airir] 

80  S-Blkana 

80 

2.Slina 

80 

2.Saitter 

80  2.Baia 

80 

8.Sl]LZopliai80  8.Ufa 

8.CBk«»a] 

3,8.Zaph 
i.Thoob 

80 

8.Baian 
4.Adia» 

80 
80 

&BaBi 

^  8.Aminadab  80 

i.Nahath 

80  4.SImeft 

^        CThohn) 

6.  Berah 

80 

4.Amal 

^  i.Naheflwn 

80 

6.1Uab 

80  5.Hag|}a 

O.ABfir 

80  6.Bliel 

}» 

aBthnl 

80 

6.Hnkla 

80   _  -  , 
6.  Balsa 

80 

6LJdtam 

80«.Aai^ 

^.Thahath 

80          (■"!»«) 

T.MalehUa 

80 

6.AinasU 

80 

T.SUcana 

80       

T.Zephai^a 

j^j«.J«roh«n 

80 

8.BaMi0a 

80 

T.Hasal^ 

80  ^BoM 

80 

T.Elkana 

80 

9.  Michael 

80 

8.M^aoh 

«>  T.Obed 
80 

80 

8.8aaiMl 

80       

8.AMija 

^  8.8amael 

80 10.  Simea 

80 

O.Abdi 

OiTani 

80       

O.Joel 

»  O.Joel 

aOlLBerediJa 

80 10.  Kill 

80«-" 

80 

10. — 

80       

8010.HkiCAN 

3012.AmAPH 

80 11.  Ethan 

80    0.DATXD 

80 

800 

800 

800 

800 

880 

270 

8d. —  That»  as  said  before,  there  are  no  recorded  dattt  in  the  Jewish  Scriptures  that  are 
trustworthy ;  that,  it  is  we  modems  who  must  make  Hebrew  chronology  for  the  antiqae 
Jews  — who,  until  Babbi  Hillel,  had  not  thought  of  doing  it  themselTes; — and  that, 
in  these  restorations,  we  oease  to  tread  upon  historical  ground  so  soon  as  we  retrograde 
to  Solomon's  era,  said  to  correspond  to  a.  o.  1000.    Beyond  that  cipher,  Jewish  chron- 
ology is  all  cozgecture,  within  a  few  approximate  limitations. 
Moses,  or  the  ffebrewt,  being  unmentioned  upon  Egyptian  monuments  of  the  12tli-17th 
centuries  b.  o.,  and  neyer  alluded  to  by  any  extant  writer  who  liyed  prior  to  the  Septuagint 
translation  at  Alexandria  (commencing  in  the  8d  eentuiy  b.  o.),  there  are  no  extraneous 
uds,  from  sources  alien  to  the  Jewish  boohs,  through  which  any  information,  worthy  of 
historical  acceptance,  can  be  gatiiered  elsewhere  about  him  or  them.  * 

With  these  emphatic  reserrations,  we  are  quite  willing  to  consider  Lepsius's  computa- 
tiTe  synchronisms  as  not  merely  the  most  scientific  but  the  only  probable.  His  estimates 
place  the  Jewish  Exodua  in  the  reign  of  Pharaoh  Menephthes,  of  the  XlXth  dynasty,  about 
the  year  1818  b.  o.  ;  (557)  or  rather  hetwtm  the  years  1814  and  1822  b.  o. :  if  we  hare 
understood  our  authority  correctly :  (658)  to  which  we  add  the  following  comparatire  lUm 

(667)  ChnmxHoght;  p.  370,  eoMpaied  with  pp.  886-887. 

(668)  YideGuniNV:  Hmdi^mki  2810;  p. 44 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 

. —  aw7  ^-. 

...    atevtlMO 

1868    

...       «      1100 

1818 

...  rl8M~18t8 
...  Iia8-1880 

712  mankind's    CHB0N0L06T. 

of  daie$  for  the  Mosaic  Exodus,  as  oompvtod  by  Usher  from  the  JBtbrew  TaU^  tad  generallj 
impended  to  the  English  translstioii  aathorised  since  the  reign  of  king  James,  a.  d.  1611 ; 
end  bj  Hales  from  the  Chrtek  SeptMogmt  venion.  The  new  synchronisms  between  Hebrew 
and  Egyptian  erents,  put  forward  by  Lepsins,  may  assist  the  hierologieal  stadent  in  anthen- 
ticating  monumental  history  throQ|^  what  are  still  oalled  the  eiUMuhed  dates  of  Seripture. 
It  will  be  remarked  that,  wf^le  Hales  extends,  Leprins  redaces  the  antiquity  assigned  to 
each  Israelitish  era  by  archbishop  Usher. 

BiBLIOAL  StHOBBOHISMS. 

A.II.1880.  A.B.18M.  A.B.18MI 

l^pMh^  PkaramUe  CbHiemperariti, 

AwtHiM .„.«......  Ammon  m.  ( JftauMfi) ■.&  1090 

iotBK .»...  sm.(AMM) «   1708 

Mom  — .».«......  Ramus  n.  (Jcfwkh  opprtMloa ^    ^ 

JhR»li(r(B.al8SSr)  Mbrrha . ...J         *** 

Jewish  compntatioB  by  **  fordes"  ceases  so  soon  as  we  asocad  beyond  Mosee;  who  wm 
40  yMr«  old  when  he  fled  from  Egypt;  40  yMrt  oUUr  when,  after  dwelling  with  Jethro,  ha 
returned  to  liberate  his  people;  and  oUmT  £y  40  more  years  when  he  died  at  the  age  of  120 
—  <*  bat  no  man  knoweth  of  his  sepulchre  wUo  thit  ddy."(569)    Yioo  snpplies  a  fermnlary : 

I.  —  The  ind^fimU  natun  of  lAe  human  mmd  Is  the  cause  that  man,  plunged  in  ignorance, 
maket  of  himself  the  rale  of  the  Uniyerse. 

It  is  from  this  truth  that  are  derired  the  two  human  teadeades  tiius  expressed :  Fama 
ereteU  eundo  et  mmmi  fmomtim  famam.  Fame  has  traTelled,  siace  the  world's  OretOkm,  % 
Tcryloag  road;  and  it  is  during  the  voyage  that  she  has  eollected  o^mmwu  «o  nur^ii^Ceaii; 
aad  so  exaggerated,  upon  tpocha$  which  to  us  are  but  imperfectly  kaowa.  This  disposition 
of  the  humaa  intellect  is  ladicated  to  us  by  Tadtus,  in  his  <  Lift  of  Agrioola,'  where  he 
tells  us :  —  Omne  i^tiotumpro  magn^fico  uL**  (660) 

From  Moses  backwards  to  Abraham,  post-Christiaa  Jewish  computation  assumed  100 
years  for  each  generatioa;  but  erery  dosea  MSS.  of  the  Text  or  Tenions  differ;  aad  the 
geaeral  priadple  followed  seems  to  haTC  beea,  to  make  geaeratioas  the  loager,  ia  the  nUio 
that  the  lifetime  of  a  giTca  hero  was  more  aad  more  distaat  from  each  Judteaa  writer's  day. 
The  model  copied  was  a  Gredaa  theogoaio  idea,  because  the  Esdraic  Jews  proceeded  by 
the  foyr  Hmodic  agtt ;  ooasideriag  their  own  period  to  be  the  Iron  ;  the  Daridic  the  Brazm  ; 
the  Mosaic  the  Sihtr  ;  and  that  from  the  Abrahamic  to  the  Adamlc*  to  haye  been  the  CMdtn 
age  of  Hebrew  humaaity.  To  Moses,  ia  coasequeace,  they  assigaed  oaly  120  years  of 
loageyity ;  but  his  worthier  aatecedeats  had  their  holier  Utcs  exteaded  along  a  slidiag  scale, 
of  which  the  aumbers  240,  480,  aad  900,  are  the  simple  arithmetical  proportioa:  their 
di?isorbeiag<«40.'* 

Here,  thea,  we  haye  fiaally  arriyed  at  the  great  ftct;  which,  ia  dlffereat  or  less  out- 
•pokea  words,  all  the  scimitiflc  authors  we  haye  quoted  are  at  this  day  agreed  upoa :  yis. : 
that  the  •/tw  knew  not  an  atom  more  o/«Humaai(y'sOrigias"  than  we  do  now;  aad  that,  as 
they  really  had  no  humaa  historical  aacestor  before  Abraham  (whose  epoch  floats  between 
Lepsius*s  paraOd  at  1600,  aad  Hales's  at  2077,  ».  c),  there  is  ao  chronology,  strictiy  ac 
called,  ia  the  Bible,  aateriorly  to  the  Mosaic  age ;  itself  yague  for  oae  or  more  geaeratiiAis. 

This  posited,  we  shaU  dose  further  argumeatwith  a  TaUeof  JERiftrcw  Ot^mu;  ooafom- 
ably  to  the  same  priadples  apoa  which  we  haye  already  Ubalated  the  distiact  histories  of 
Egypt,  Chiaa,  aad  Assyria.  Each  of  these  aatioaalities  possesses  its  hittorieal,  eemi^hiito' 
rkaly  aad  migthkal  times.  Aad,  iaasmueh  as  it' is  coaceded  by  eyery  true  historiaa 
that  the  Israelites  ^nader  the  literary  aspect  ia  which  they  flrst  preseat  themsehes  to  the 
geatile  worid),  had  beea  preyioudy  educated  ia  Chaldtea;  H  will  be  iaterestiag  to  place  the 
aate-diluyiaa  « patriarchs'*  Of  the  preceptors  alongdde  those  of  the  pupihi.  Ben>sQ8, 
^hilo  ByUius,  Julius  Africaaus,  Alexaader  Pdyhistor,  Eusebius,  and  the  fifyacdltts,  haye 
preeeryed  for  us  traascripts  of  the  origiaal  Chaldaaa  catalogues :  the  whole  texts  of  which 
are  accesdble  ia  Cory's  Andent  Fragments,  or  ia  Buasea.  (661) 

(fiUf)lkaLiaatf,t.     (58(0  Tkoo:fttfm»iffM«a;  1790;  <<MeiBMtolmo.*'    (Ml)  Jta>ft  Pfaoc;  i  ».  704-n«L 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  ^  _ 

HEBREW.  713 

MtTROLOOIOAL   PlBIODS. 

SymboUeal  Ante-DiltiviaH  Pairiarchi. 

GnKO^:!kaUlaan  Dtoade.      BAnBO-ChaUuoM  Zkoads.  Ptonieo-dhaUam  IhomU, 

1.  Akmu.. TMn  90,000  ADaM  Pvotogonoi  l.r:nnM)oni. 

2.  AUpums "  10,800  E«Tt  Ommm,  Qmim              8.  =  Geaiiii,  ftttUj. 

8.  Almekm «  40,800  ANoSA  Phot,  pur,  phlox        &=  Fire,  light,  flame. 

i.  Ammeium ......  **  48,200  KINeN  Oaiilof,  Ltbeaoe          4.  =OM8liis,Llbeniis(moimf«). 

&  Ameleganu.....  **  04,800  M>HeT^T<tT«  MemzouiUM,  oniooe    6.  =Od«iu^  "perooelo,**  woqi. 

0.  Dmhiu "  86^000  IRaB  Agrioe,  eUeua             0.  =:  PeiMiit,  himter,  fliher. 

7.  SdmraBehiu....  «  01800  KJkeNUK  Obnieor,  hephatoto^  v  ~  /  ^i>]«»)  Ant  tftifloer, 

•  =  {' 

8.  Amempriniu...     **    80^000         M^XfUBeUKA  artifez,  gelnoe  I    earth-worker. 

O.0tiartee «     28,800  LaMeK  Agtoe,  agrooeroa]        8.  =  Rufltle,  agrlealtoriit 

lOl  Zlfathma ......     **     04,800  KuKA  Amanoe,  magoi  0.  =  Warrior,  maglolan. 

'  Miaor (SydyefBadao)  10.  =  Egypt,  and  tbe.«Jiift** 

Tean  483^000  king,  ICxLOBiaiDKK. 

OHALDiEAN    DBLUGB. 

lat  JVbte.— The  80  Dteam  of  the  Zodiae,(502)  midtlplSed  hj  the  12  monthi  of  the  year,  glre  the  myitSo 
namher  482L  The  *<graiMl  year  **  of  Aatronomy— or  the  time  aadently  atippoeed  to  he 
required  t>r  the  aun,  planets,  and  fixed  atar^  to  retnm  to  the  aame  oeleatial  itarting-point-- 
was  at  first  25,000,  then  80,000,  and  lastly  432,000  years;  being  the  supposed  doratioa  of  the 
im  OrsBCoOmMnian  geDerattons.    A  Ddtigt  terminated  the  ejtie.  (60S) 

2SiKaU,—Tb»Fhamiak€h$Umm  Ust,  derlred  ftom  8Aif00iiUTHO»  presents  vs  wKh  the  Greek  tranOaUont, 
not  with  the  real  names  of  its  lost  Oriental  ovifl^nal.  The  PbosnUans  had  originally  erossed 
from  the  PersiaB  Qolf  to  the  Ueditanranean,  and  their  Intcsooorse  with  OhaldaBa  was  inoea> 
sent;  while  the  two  people  spoke  $SemiNe  dialects.  More  saliently  than  the  other  two  fi>rms 
of  the  same  theogony,  this  Phoenician  stream  exhibits  the  rationale  of  its  <*ex  post  ftoto  "oon- 
stmotion.  Aooofdlng  to  tt»  we  ha.Te  the  stages  of /anAy,  Atmfer,  jUfterman,  orttsan,  htaXfcmd- 
man,  »oldam',pri4tt,  and  JetHff,  thioogh  which  antique  humanity  developed  itselt  A  paralMism 
seems  to  be  presensd  In  the  oAhoots  of  the  Adamie  stem  In  a$ite$it,  where  Am.  flW  wmderiiig 
Mkqpherd  is  hateftil  to  Gmr  the  ttiaiUuy  peatanL 

Chaldaio  Etrholooioal  DmsiON  —  [contained  in  Xth  QenoBis.] 
Theortdeai  Fott-  DUuvian  dmrntncimmU, 

NaKA. 
(Obaenrlty.) 

Babylorish  Thbobt  fob  DiTXBfliTT  or  TOVOVBS. 
«OUiy  and  Tower  of  BaBy L"-ott  =  fumfudm  =  "BaBeL-baUOIiiik* 

Hbbbiw  Gboobaphioal  Obioiho. 

ARPAft-KaSD  =  OaFA-the^^AoUoaii  (Dlstrkt). 
BaLaKA  r=  Balacha  (City). 

A08A  =  the-yo*iderer  ^rlbe). 

P^Lee  =a^rfa(Barthqiiaker). 

EaBLIXOT  LbOBHDABT  AxOBSTOBfi. 

Bin. 

SeBUa. 

NaKAUB. 

TtoBaKA. 

(602)  Ldoub:  ChrcmdogU;  L  pp.  00-78.  (688)  ^  Bboiomhi:  <y.«ttL;  pp.  284-240. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 

'714  mankind's  chronology. 

JUDAIO  MlTA-HUTOBIOAi;  VmBIOB. 

«  Thou  iliAlt  BO  more  be  oilkd  AB-BsM  (FAgna  of  the  HW-lMid  =  Aramtm) 
Tbj  name  ahall  be AB-BaHftM''  (FAnm of  » manruDi).  (50C) 

AhrahamitUB, 

JTiSMK  =  «lsa^t«r.* 
lAKoB,  snrnamed  InuiL 
(IS  Ogna  of  tbe  Zediae,  13  iSbni,  12  Iiibef  of  ImeL) 
LotL 
Kobath. 

JUDAIO  HiSTOBIOAIi  PlBIOD. 

—  aMorned  epodi  »»....^...........^ « m.^....  14th  ontiny  &a 

[Intecral  between  XBodau  and  tbe  JirU  nmpU,  about  814-^22  yeaca.] 
SoLOMOir— (Chronological  timee  begin)  .»......»....m.»......^»...»^.....m. ^....  ahoot  b.o.1000 

I^rd  monumental  lyncbronism,  Bsbobouc  and  SnsBoiiK...^........^.^^....  **  9n-t 

[  J4»ta6e(Jo«>r«£iV  doea  not  begin  untU  the  Mb-8tti  onitnry  B.  0.] 

Hnxus— «  ftund  a  book  of  the  Lav  **  » ^ :. «  6» 

JenuaUm  bant,  and  Qiptivitjf  eommenced  ....^^^ ^...».  **  686 

EnuL— Aoond  Aaipte  ~  «  Tilth  year  of  Artaxerxea"  .».^....^ ..^.......^.^.^  <*  467 

Adhiif;  iSbAoo(^*«  Benalnanoe  »  begins . — ,»»^^.,. .«».....  «  400 

AuounDiE— Tbdta  Jenualem........^.^........»..»M^..».....^....^..,.^.^.....»^..  *<  SS 

JUmandria  aohool: 

MuntTBO  —  the  earUeet  known  chronoiogitl m...m...»........m.^.m...m  *  900 

Sq^tMiOffM  tranalationf  commence ^« ^....  <*  250 

AanocBm-JBp^haim — plunders  Jerusalem,  and  bums  the  books  ^-^......^..^^  **  164 

DAMm,  the  Satirist,  wrote « — ...... «.... *  160 

JunAs,  the  Hammerer  ~  lestoras  the  books......... ..^................^.^.....^  «  IM 

Mauodbm  wfnOttten  extant  ~  Snooir «  148 

Sqtuagkd  translations  linishedMM m*...m*m...»...m....mm...m...«m.mm.m«.  *  180 

Bhaoidm^  Omm  eloses .m.....................^....^.........^.  *<  180 

(Boman  dominion  ~  B.  a  40.)  1 

Chbistiax  Sea. 

BirwKnr  B. a  7  and  A. n.  8 ;  bntttiwiwedatl868yeariiya. 

HnoD— dasocatei  the  ThM  nm§iU  with  pagan  HeUenio  axchitaoture ...... ....»..»»»...^..»  iulb  16 

JU  qfJtruioUm: 

Tmm  raaes  the  T«n|de  to  its  foundations  ...........m m *     T4 

JoiVHUB— teoiiTeB  the  7^mgpHar<opj  of  the  Hebrew  Tezt^  as  a  pitsent  from  Tmfabav 

at  Bome,  about -* mm...m........m..    **     T6 

(Earliest  dtatton  of  «  Qoapels  **  — JDami  Mabrb,  died  about  166i) 
OontroTersies  between  the  Fathers  and  the  Babbit  here  commence.  * 

The  OHditalJews  transcribe  the  Test  Into  the  sgnoraWcr  ^phabet,  during  the  ad 
century  after  a 

Hiu&HAiiAsn—eQmpntes  J4N0aAeAf«fMl(vy-**~*»»»******»»»"»***«^*-^»*«»^ — •••-    *  ^ 

The  MtuonHepoMt  began  by  Babbis  of  Tiberias «   606 

OUat  McmtucripU  of  Greek  LXX  extant,  6th  century  after  a 
Oldett  MatmrnaripU  oi  Hebrew  T^xt  extant,  10th  century  after  a 
King  Jame^t  BngUsh  rer$ioH,pri9UedA,it.  1011. 

(664)  Gesnetit;  XTiL6;  — GAmr:  l.p.42,note6. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

HINDOO.  715 

CHECK  OLOOT  — HINDOO. 

**  Originally  this  [UniTene]  was  naught  bnt  Soul  :  nothing  else  existed  aetlre  [or  pasdre].  Hii 
bad  this  thought — J  wiS  ereaU  woiitU.  It  is  thus  that  He  created  these  [dirers]  worlds,  the  watei| 
the  U^t»  the  mortals,  and  the  waters.  This  water  is  the  [ngion]  above  the  sk7,(3M)  which  the 
sfcy  supports;  the  ataaosphera  contains  the  light;  the  earth  is  mortal;  and  tha  regions  beneath 
are  the  wattn/*  —  ( Vedas, "  Aitar^  A'ran'ya  **  —  Paothuk  :  Xtv.  Sae^  p.  818.) 

AlihoQgh,  IB  our  Table  of  Alphabetieal  or^^,  we  hare  dealt  as  sternly  with  nnhistorioal 
Indian  documents,  as  with  the  metaphysical  fables  of  all  other  nations,  it  may  be  well  to 
saj  a  few  passing  words  upon  Hindoo  ehronolosrw ;  lest  it  be  supposed  that  we  are  not  pre- 
pared to  reagitate  that  which,  to  ns,  is  no  longer  a  <*Tezata  qusstio."  Referring  the 
reader  to  the  citations  from  WHson,  Tnraonr,  and  Sykes,  therein  adduced,  we  repeat,  that 
there  is  no  connected  chronology,  to  be  settled  archsologicaUy  by  existing  monuments, 
throughout  the  wliole  Peninsula  of  Hindostan,  of  a  date  anterior  to  the  fifth  centuiy  b.  o. 

That  Tast  centre  of  creation  swarmed  with  Taried  indigenous  and  exotic  populations, 
from  epoohas  ooeral  with  the  earliest  historical  nations ;  but,  if  any  of  these  Indian  phi- 
losophers CTcr  composed  a  rigidly-chronological  list  of  erents,  we  hare  lost  the  record ;  <Nr, 
what  is  more  probable,  the  chronological  element  was  wanting  in  the  organism  of  Hindoo 
minds,  until  the  latter  receiied  instruction  (from  ChaldsDan  magi  scattered  by  Darius) 
through  the  PersiaBS ;  — tuition  greatly  improTcd  after  contact  with  the  Bactrian  Greeks 
during  the  third  century  b.  o. 

In  any  case,  the  extract  subjoined  will  show  that  the  antiquarian  dreams  of  Sir  W.  Jonea 
and  of  Colebrooke  are  now  fleeting  away. 

**  Whether  safe  historic  ground  is  to  be  found  in  IncKa  earlier  than  1200  b.  0.,  according 
to  the  chronicles  of  Kashmere  (Ra^jiorangim^  trad,  par  Troyer),  is  a  question  inrolTed  in 
obscurity ;  while  Megasthenes  {Indiea,  ed.  Schwanbeok,  1846,  p.  50)  reckons  for  168  kings 
of  the  dynasty  of  Magadha,  from  Manu  to  Kandragupta,  from  60  to  64  centuries ;  and  the 
astronomer  Aryababhatta  places  the  beginning  of  his  chronology  8102  b.  o.  (Lassen,  Ind, 
Alterihumtk.,  bd.  L,  s.  478-606,  607,  and  610)." 

From  Humboldt  (666)  we  pass  on  to  Prichard;  whose  Hindoo  prepossessions  of  1819(667) 
have  not  only  been  nullified  by  Egyptian  discoreries,  but,  with  the  learned  ethnographer's 
usual  candor,  have  become  greatly  modified  by  his  own  later  reflections.  (668)  The  inquirer 
can  judge  from  the  perusal  of  the  passages  referred  to  whether  he  can  make  out  a  fixed 
chronological  idea,  in  India,  prior  to  the  age  of  Budha  in  the  sixth  century  b.  o. 

Lepsins  (669)  o<mteiit8  his  objects  (confined  to  a  general  reriew  of  the  worid's  chronolo- 
^al  elements)  by  mentioning,  that  the  Hindoo  astronomical  cycle  kaii  yuga  falls  on  the 
18th  Feb.  8102  b.  o.  ;  that  the  Oashmeerian  king  Qonarda  L  is  supposed  to  haTC  reigned 
about  B.  0.  2448 ;  and  tiiat  king  Yikramaditya's  era  is  fixed  at  b.  o.  68.  But  he  also 
shows  that  the  4th-6th  centuries  b.  a  comprise  all  we  can  depend  upon,  arohflsologicaUy, 
in  Hindoo  history. 

Howerer,  by  opening  the  excellent  work  of  De  Brotonne,  (670)  the  reader  will  easily 
perceire  how  the  Chaldsean  astrological  cycle  of  482,000  years  became  extended  by  later 
Brahmanical  pundits  to  one,  equally  fabulous,  of  4,820,000  years :  and  inasmuch  as  this 
fact  merely  invalidates  SantcrU  hallucinations  the  more,  we  are  fain  to  leaTC  Hindoo  chro- 
nology in  the  same  "  slough  of  despond*'  in  which  we  found  it 

Reader  r — the  task  proposed  to  myself  in  the  preparation  of  these  three  tuppUmmUary 
Essays  here  ends.    It  was  assumed  under  the  following  circumstances : — 

(566)  This  is  the  same  ooamogony  as  that  of  Oosius-IndiooplenstfS,  herein-belbre  described.  Indeed,  the  notfcn 
was  nnlTersal ;  and,  in  theography,  is  so  still. 
(566)  Cbmot;  transl.Ott^;  1850;  iLp.115. 
(507)  An<ay9it  ^fMyOuAof^^ 

(568)  Remxnhu  into  the  Phyttcal  Biftory  o/Mankit^;  1844:  It.  pp.  M-IM. 
(968)  Chmmtogie;  L  pp.  4-6. 
(670)  FSttatUmii  L  pp.  888, 289, 414-438. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

716         ,  mankind's   CHBONOLOGr. 

Within  the  past  fire  yean,  Tarious  MOtaries  (momentarily  suspending  polemics  amongst 
one  another)  had  entered  into  a  sort  of  taeit  combination  to  assail  those  who,  like  Mofton,, 
Kott,  Van  Amringe,  Agassis,  and  others,  were  deToting  themselTes  to  anthropological 
researches.  ^  Each  of  the  aboTC-named  gentlemen  has  snocessftilly  repelled  the  intronons 
of  dogmatism  into  his  especial  scientiftc  domain.  , 

In  these  literary  '<  mdl^,"  it  has  so  happened  that  my  surname  has  been  frequently 
made  the  target  for  indiscreet  allusions  on  the  part  of  certain  teologattri;  without  any  proTO- 
cation  hating  been  giren  on  my  side,  through  a  single  personality,  in  the  course  of  ten 
years'  lectureship  upon  Oriental  archeology  in  the  United  States.  To  treat  such  in  any 
other  manner  than  with  silent  indifference  would  hate  been  unbecoming,  as  well  as,  at  the 
moment  of  each  offence,  unaTailing.  I  preferred  abiding  my  own  conTcnience ;  and,  in 
the  foregoing  Part  UL,  hate  indicated  an  easy  method  of  carrying  « the  war  into  AfHea." 

I  beliere  that,  thereby,  good  serrice  is  done  in  the  general  cause  of  the  adTancement  of 
knowledge,  and  in  the  special  one  of  my  faTorite  study,  Archosohgy,  Geelogists,  Natural- 
ists, and  Ethnologists  (absorbed  in  the  promotion  of  positiTO  science  throu|^  the  disooyeiy 
of  new  facts),  haye  rarely  dcToted  time  adequate  to  the  mastery  of  Hebraical  literature ; 
and,  in  consequence,  they  are  continually  laying  themseWes  open  to  chagrin  and  defeat  in 
the  arena  of  theological  wranglingfi.  Hy  former  pursuits  (in  Muslim  lands)  were  remote 
Arom  Natural  Science,  and  as  they  disqualify  me  fh>m  sharing  the  labors  of  its  Totaries,  I 
hate  thought  that  a  contribution  like  the  present,  to  the  biblical  armory  of  scientific  men, 
might  be  of  utility ;  eren  if  it  should  merely  spare  them  the  trouble  of  ransacking  for 
authorities  generally  beyond  the  circumference  of  their  higher  sphere  of  research :  at  the 
same  time  that  a  work  such  as  « Types  of  Mankind"  would  be  deficient  unless  the  Hdbrew 
department  of  its  themes  were  to  some  extent  complete.  To  ftiture  publication  [fi^^ro, 
'pp.  626, 627],  I  reserfe  further  analyses  which,  without  these  preliminary  Essays,  would  be 
unintelligible  to  ordinary  scriptural  readers.  Confident  of  her  own  strength,  Archeology 
(let  one  of  this  science's  thousand  followers  hint  to  her  opponents)  neither  courts  nor  depre- 
cates biblical  or  any  other  agitation,  and  will  prosecute  her  inrestigations  peaceably  while 
she  can,  otherwise  when  she  must 

Repeating  the  direct  and  manly  language  of  Luke  Burke  —  to  whose  conception  of  a  reel 
*' Ethnological  Journal"  scientific  minds  will  some  day  accord  the  homage  that  is  its  due:— 

*<  For  all  our  arguments,  there  is  the  ready  answer  that  our  statements  directly  contra- 
dict the  express  words  of  Scripture,  and  must  therefore  be  false,  howcTcr  plausible  Uiey 
may  appear.  We  may  reply  that  the  word  of  Ood  cannot  be  in  opposition  to  genuine  his- 
tory, any  more  than  it  can  oppose  any  other  truth,  and  that  thsrefore  the  passages  in 
question  cannot  be  a  portion  of  this  word,  or  if  so,  that  they  cannot  hate  hitherto  been 
properly  understood.  But  experience  has  abundantly  proTcd  that  such  answers  as  these 
giTC  satisfacUon  to  Tery  few,  until  facts  hate  become  so  numerous  and  unequirocal  that 
nirther  opposition  is  madness.  In  the  meantime,  a  war  of  opinion  rages,  embittered  by 
all  the  Tirulence  of  sectarian  partisanship,  and  the  credulous  and  simple-minded  are  taught 
to  look  upon  the  advocates  of  the  new  doctrines  as  the  enemies  of  morality,  religion,  and 
the  best  interests  of  man.  For  ourselres,  we  hare  no  ambition  ta  appear  in  any  such 
light,  nor  shall  we  quietly  submit  to  be  placed  in  such  a  position."  (671) 

And  for  myself-—  whilst  thoroughly  endorsing  the  sentim*ents  of  a  Talued  friend  and 
^lleague  —  I  cannot  better  express  the  feelings  with  which  I  close  my  indiridual  portion 
of  an  undertaking  that  has  occupied  the  thoughts  and  hands  of  some  men  not  unknown 
in  the  world  of  science,  than  by  applying  to  our  antagonists  the  last  words  CTcr  written  by 
me  at  the  dictation  of  him  to  whom,  with  being  itself,  I  owe  all  that  mind  and  heart  still 
hold  to  be  priceless  after  more  than  forty  years*  experience  of  a  wanderer's  life :  — 

«  La  mddiema  divmta  amara,    Spero  ehe  9ard  %alut\f€ra.    Intanio,  riprenderd  "(572) 

Q.  B.  G. 
(HowABi/f — M<«u  Bat,  90th  July,  1863.) 

(571)  -'Critical  AntijOa  of  the  Hebnw  Chronolocjr "—  EOm.  Jour.:  LMMion;  No.  L,  Jane,  184S;  pp.  9, 10. 
(672)  Jon  GuMwir,  United  Statee*  Conral  Ibr  Egypt  X1832.*44) :  Ldkr  toH.E»,  Booww  TousMirp  Ay  <-  Ho* 
■AmoD  Axi^  iVAM  ittiiilo— «  Cairo,  U  6  Febbn^jo,  1841." 

Digitized  by 

Google 

APPENDIX  I. 

BBFEBENGES   AND  NOTES. 

1  Ethnological  Journal,  London,  1848 ;  June 

1,  No.  I. 

2  Op.  cit.,  pp.  1,  2.   An  excellent  pr^cii  of 

the  meaning  and  scientific  attnbutes  of 
"Ethnology"  has  long  been  published 
by  the  Tenerable  Jomard,  in  Mengin, 
Histoire  d*Egypte,  1839,  iii.  p.  403. 
.    3  Nat.  Hist,  of  Man,  London,  1848.  p.  6. 

4  Varieties  of  Man,  London,  1851. 

5  North  British  Review,  Aug.,  1849. 

6  Op.  cit.,  p.  6. 

7.  £noz,  Races  of  Man,  Philadelphia  ed., 
1850. 

8  Bnrke,  op.  cit.,  p.  30. 

9  Researches,  v.  p.  564. 

10  Jacouinot,  Considerations  g^n^rales  sur 

r Anthropologic  (Voyage  an  Pole  Sud), 
Zoologie,  1846,  ii.  p.  36. 

11  Nott,  Two  Lectures  on  the  Biblical  and 

Physical  Hist,  of  Man;   New  York, 

1849,  p.  64. 

12  The  Friend  of  Moses,  New  York.  1852; 

Preface  viii,  and  Text,  pp.  442,  446, 
449-51,  492-7. 

13  Briefe  aus  ^gypten  nnd  iBthiopien,  Ber- 

lio,  1852,  p.  35. 

14  Genesis,  Vii.,  19-83.    We  quote  the  He- 

brew Text;  referringthe  reader  to  Cahen, 
La  Bible,  Traduction  NouToUe,  Paris, 
1831 ;  Tom.  i.  p.  21. 

15  Cf.  Jacquinot,  op.  cit.,  chap.  i.     From 

this  remarkably  scientific  work  we  have 
borrowed  freely  in  this  chapter,  and 
elsewhere. 

16  We  ought  to  mention  that  Dr.  Pickering 

favored  us  with  the  sight  of  his  pages 
while  they  were  yet  in  •*  proofs." 

17  Op.  cit.,  pp.  161,  163. 

18  Op.  cit.,  p.  41. 

19  Rades  of  Men,  pp.  75-99. 

20  Des  Races  Humaines,  p.  169. 

21  Christian  Examiner,  Boston,  July,  1850. 

22  Nott,  Two  Lectures,  1849. 

23  Researches,  ii.  p.  105. 

24  Proceed.  Acad.  Nat.  Sciences ;  Philadel- 

phia, 10  Sept.,  1850,  p.  82— Additional 
Observations  on  Hybridity  in  Animals, 
*'  Replv  to  the  Rev.  John  Bachman, 
D.D.,'*   Charleston   Medical  Journal, 

1850,  p.  8. 

25  Bodichon,  Etudes  sur  TAlg^rie,  Alger, 

1847,  p.  135. 

26  Jacquinot,  op.  cit.,  p.  VjX 

27  Wood-cut,  fig.  1.    L*£gypte  Ancienne, 

1840,  Pf.  I.,  and  ChampoUion-le-Jenne's 
descripiion  in  pp.  29-31. 

28  Rosellini,  Mon.  dell'Egitto.  M.  R.  clvii., 

clvi.,  Iz.,  &c.    Mon.  Stor.,  iv.  pp.  238- 

No,  (qfNcUif  do.) 

44 ;  iii.  pp.  1, 433,  seq.  Lepshis,  Dank* 
mSler,  Abth.  iii,  Bl.  136. 

29  See  the  discussion  in  Bishop  Warbnrton't 

Divine  Legation  of  Moses;  and  in 
Munk,  Palestine,  pp.  146-150. 

30  Hennell,   Origin   of  Christianity,  1845, 

pp.  8-21. 

31  AmM6e  Thierry,  Histoire  des  Gaulois, 

Paris,  1844. 

32  Strebo,  Kb.  iv.  p.  176— Fr.  ed. 

33  Thierry,  p.  xixv.,  Intiod.    W.  de  Hum- 

boldt held  the  same  opinion. 

34  Hist,  de  la  Filiation  et  aes  Migrations  det 

Peuples,  Paris,  1837 ;  I  pp.  294-336. 

35  British  Association  for  the  advancement 

of  Science,  1850;  reported  in  London 
Literarv  Gaiette. 

36  Anti^uites  Celtiques  Ant^iluviennes. 

37  Retiius,  cited  in  Morton*8  MSS. 

38  Schmerling,  Recherches  sur  les  Ossement 

Fossiles,  Liege,  1833,  L  pp.  59-66:  re- 
ferred to  in  our  Chapter  Al. 

39  Vide  infra,  Part  II.,  pp.  469,  470. 

40  Edwards,  Des  Caracteres  Physiologiques 

des  Races  Humaines,  &c.,  Paris,  1839. 

41  Op.  cit.,  p.  22. 

42  Paulmief,    Apergus    g^n^logiques    sur 

les  desoendanta  de  Guillaume,  Rev. 
Archil.,  1845,  p.  794,  seq. 

43  Virey,  Hist.  NaL  du   Genre   Htmiain, 

Disc.  Prelim.,  i.  pp.  14, 15. 

44  On  the  question  of  hair,  consult  the  mi- 

croscopic experiments  of  Mr.  Peter  A. 
Browne,  in  rroceed.  Academy  Natural 
Scienees,  Philadelphia,  Jan.  and  Feb., 
1851 ;  also  Ibid.,  in  Morton's  Notes  on 
Hybridity,  second  Letter  to  Editors 
*<  Charleaton  Med.  Jour.,"  1851,  p.  6. 

45  Wood-cut,  fig.  2.   Itaiie,  Didot's  Univers 

Pittoresque. 
46.  August,  1849 ;  American  ed. 

47  Edwards,  op.  cit. 

48  Wood-cut,  fig.  3.    Pouqueville,  Grece, 

PI.  9. 

49  Wood-cut,  fiff.  4.    Op.  cit.,  PI.  84. 

50  Wood-cut,  ng.  5.     Bunsen,  .Sgyptent 

.  Stelle,  ii.,  frontispiece. 

51  Wood-cut,  fig.  6.    rouqueville,  op.  cit., 

PI.  85. 

52  Wood-cut,  fig.  7.  Rosellii»i,M.R.,Pl.xx., 

fig.  66. 

53  Wood-cut.  fig.  8.    Ibid.,  PI.  xxii,  fig.  82. 

N.B.  The  profiles  are  reduced  with 
ecactitude;  but  we  have  altered  the 
eyes  from  the  Egyptian  canon  of  art  to 
ours. 

54  Edwards,  op.  cit.     Mr.  Gliddon's   two 

yean*  residence  in  various   parts   of 

Digitized  by  <S80Qle 

718 

REFERENCES    AND    NOTES. 

Greece  led  bim,  he  tells  me,  to  obeerre 
the  same  fact :  perticaltrlj  aroong  the 
Speiioiee ;  whence  also  sprans  Canarisi 
the  bravest  Greek  Admirai  of  the  Re- 
volution.—J.  C.  N. 

55  Etudes,  pp.  153,  seq. 

56  Wood-cut,  fig.  9.   Crania  JEg.  p.  54 ;  from 

Rosellini,  M.R.161 ;  M.%.  iv.  53,  62, 
250.  Compare  Wilkinson,  Mannera  and 
Cust.,  L  pi.  62,  fig.  2,  a,  fr ;  and  p.  367 ; 
with  Osbum,  Testimony,  p.  137. 

57  Morton's  inedited  Letter  to  myself,  **Phi- 

ladelphia,  23  Not.  1842."  — G.  R.  G. 

58  Layard,  Babvlon,  1853,  pp.  144, 231.   We 

attribute  dififerences  of  physiognomy 
chiefljr  to  the  ethnographic  imeriority  of 
Assyrian  artists. 

59  Phys.  HUt,  1841,  Hi.  pp.  24-5. 

60  Varieties  of  Man,  1851,  pp.  551-2. 

61  De  Brotonne,  Filiations  et  Migretiones  des 

Peaples,  Paris,  1837. 

62  In  order  that  we  may  not  be  suspected  of 

consideriDg  Plato's  ethical  romance 
about  the  **Atalantic  Isles"  to  be 
historical,  we  refer  the  reader  to  Martin, 
£tudes  sur  le  Tiro^e  de  Platon,  cited 
hereinafter. 

63  The  Archeology  and  Pre-historic  Annals 

of  Scotland,  Edinburgh,  1851,  pp.  700-1. 

64  Genesis  zi  31 ;  ziL  1,  2,  5— Cahen,  i. 

p.  31. 

65  Genesis  xrii.  5 ;  lb.,  p.  42. 

66  Genesis  xriL  15 ;  —  Lanci,  Paralipomeni, 

1845.  Travellere  have  not  only  hunted 
for,  but  narrate  how  they  have  actually 
found  the  **  double  cave"  they  call 
Machphelah!  (Vide  report  of  Syro- 
Egypt.  Soc,  Nov.  8 — in  LfOndon  Athe- 
nsum,  Nov.  19,  1853 ;  p.  1391.) 

67  Genesis  ixiv.  3,  4 ;  —  Cahen,  pp.  65-6. 

68  Genesis  xli.  45 ;— Lanci,  Paral.,  L  p.  26. 

69  Genesis  zzzviii.  2. 

70  Ezodus  li.  19. 

71  Ezodus  ii.  21. 

72  Ezodus  zii.  38 ;— Cahen,  Text,  ii.  p.  50. 

73  Leviticus  zziv.  10. 

74  1  Kings  zi.   1,2. 

75  Crania  JEg„  pi.  zi.  fig.  2 ;  p.  47. 

76  Birch,  Criteria,  in  Otia,  p.  84. 

77  Layard,  Babylon,  p.  610. 

78  History  of  the  Jews. 

79  The  Asmonean,  New  York,  27  Mareh, 

1850,  contains  a  confirmatory  article  on 
the  Jews  of  Malabar,  translated  from  the 
Parisian  "  Archives  Iraelitee." 

80  Missionary  Researches,  p.  308. 

81  Remarks  on  the  Mats' Hafar  Toroar,  or 

*'Book  of  the  Letter,"  an  Ethiopic 
Manuscript:  Syro-Egypt.  Soc,  Lon- 
don, 1848. 

82  Encyclopedia  Britannica. 

83  Phys.  Hist.,  1844,  iv.  pp.  82,  83. 

84  Wood-cut,  fi^.  13— Dnbeuz,  Tartaric. 

85  Borrow,  Gipsies  in  Spain.' 

86  Lest  our  positions  should  be  questioned, 

we  refer  to  Prichard  for  Continental  in- 
stances, to  Wilson  for  the  Pre-Celtic  in 
Scotland  and  Scandinavia,  to  Logan, 
Crawfurd,  and  Earl,  for  those  among 
islandera  of  the  Indian  Archipelago. 

87  Races  of  Men ;  vol  ix.    U.  S.  £!zpIoring 

Ezped.,  1848,  p.  305. 

88  Wood-cut,  fig.  14 — Layard,  Babylon,  pp. 

152,  153. 

No.  iqfJMm,  de.) 

89  Wood-cat,  fig.  15— op.  eit.,  pp.  562-581. 

90  Wood-cut,  fig  16 — op.  cit.,  p.  105. 

91  Wood-cut,  fig.  17— op.  cit.,  p.  583. 

92  Wood-cut,  fig.  18— op.  cit.,  p.  538. 

93  Wood-cut,  fig.  19— Wilkinson,  Man.  and 

Cust.,  L  p.  384.  pi.  69,  fijg;.  a 

94  Lepsius,  Auswani,  Leipaig,  1840,  "Ca- 

non der  Proportiooen'* ;  — ibid.,  Briele 
aus.£ffypten,  Berlin,  1852,  pp.  105, 106 ; 
— and  Birch,  Gallery  of  Antiquities,  Br. 
Museum.  pL  33,  fig.  147. 

95  Rev.Arch^L,  1844,  p.  213,  seq.;  1847, 

p.  296,  seq. : — Commentary  on  the  Cu- 
neiform Inscrip.,  1850,  pp.  4-7. 

96  Wood-cut,  fig.  20— Botta,  Mon.  de  Ninive, 

W)1.36. 
ood-cut,  (ig.  21— ibid.,  pL  68  bia. 

98  Polyhym.,  luvii. ;  Bonoini,  Ninereh,  pp. 

182.  301. 

99  Wood-cuts,  figs.  22,  23  —  Botta,  op.  eit., 

W)L  14. 
ood-cut,  fig.  24  —  Lettres  de  M.  Botta 
sur  ses  d^couvertes  a  Khorsabad,  1845, 
pi.  zzii.,  and  p.  28. 

101  Essai  de  d^chittreroeot  de  TEcritufe  As- 

syrienne,  1845,  pp.  22-^. 

102  De  Longp^er,  Galerie  Aasyrie&oe,  1850, 

p.  16;  andNos.1,  12,27,33. 

103  Gliddon,  '*Hist.Sketch68of  Egypt."  No. 

5,  New  York  Sun,  Jan.  14.  1850. 

104  Wood-cut,  fig.  25— Botta,  Mon.  de  Ni- 

nive, pL  45. 

105  Wood-cut,  fig.  26  —  Layard,  Monuments 

of  Nineveh,  folio  pL  42. 

106  Wood-cut,  fig.  27— Layard,  Babylon,  pp. 

150,  143-4. 

107  2  Kings  zviiL ;  Isaiah  zzzvu 

108  Wood-cut,  &g.  28— Layard,  Babylon,  pp. 

617-9. 

109  2  Kings  zv.  19-21. 

110  Wood-cut,  fig.  29— Layard,  op.ciL,  p.  361. 

111  Vide  iqfra.  Part  IIL,  p.  714. 

112  Deuteron.  zziii.  8,  9;  Cahen,  v.  p.  99. 

113  Egyptian  Cartouches  found  at  Nimrood, 

R.  Soc  Lit.,  Jan.  1848,  p.  pp.  164-71 

114  Mr.  Birch's  translation— Private  letter  to 

G.  R.  G. 

115  Wood-cut,  fig.  31  —  Rosellini,  M.  R.,  pi. 

zii.  fig.  46 ;  —  Conf.  Bunsen,  .£gyptens 
Stelle,  iii.  p.  133. 

116  Bonomi,  Nineveh  and  its  Palaces,  1852, 

pp.  77,  7a 

117  Babylon,  pp.  153-9,  280-2,  630-1. 

118  Egypt.  Inscrip.  inBibliotheque  Nationals, 

1852,  p.  17. 

119  Wood-cut^  fig.  32  —  Layard,  Babylon,  p. 

630 :  — Lepsius,  Denkmaler,  Abih.'iii. 
B1.88. 

120  Babylon,  623. 

121  Birch,  Stat.  Tablet  of  Kamac,  1846,  pp. 

29,  37 :  ~  Gliddon,  Otia  .£gyptiaca,  p. 
103. 

122  Birch,  in  Layard's  Babvlon,  p.  630:  — or 

Lepsius,  Auswahl,  Taf.  zii.  line  21. 

123  Wood-cut,  fig.  33— Rosellini,  M.  R.,  pI.L 

fig.  2 :  —  Conferre  LetMsius,  Denkmaler, 
Abth.  iiL  Bl.  i.,  at  Berlin.  Lepsius  (Let- 
tera,  pp.  278,  381)  calls  her  Amunoph's 
"rootner,  Aahmes-nufre-Ari"— "Ame- 
nophis  I.  and  the  black  Queen  Aahmes- 
nefruari."  That  she  Is  painted  black, 
as  well  as  red,  no  one  diftpuies ;  but  did 
the  Negro-black  pigment  ever  accom- 
I>any  such  osteological  structure  ? 

124  Crania  iBgypt.  p.  47. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

EEFEBENCES   AND  KOTBS. 

719 

125  Wood-cutfl,  figs.  34,  35^Lepeiui,  Denk- 

mliler.  Altes  Reich,  Dyn.  IV.,  Grab  75, 
Abth.  u.  BI.  8,  la 

126  Wood-cut,  fig.  36— Bnosen,  op.  cit.  iL 

Frontispiece. 

127  Wood-cut,  fiff.  37  —  Afrique  Ancienne, 

Carthage,  univ.  Fitter.,  from  a  ooin. 

128  Wood-cut,  fiff.  38  — idem. 

129  Wood-cut,  ^.  39  — Rosellini,  M.  R.  pL 

157 ;  M.  S.  IT.  p.  237 :— Osbum,  Egypt's 
TestirooDy,  pp.  114-6,  fig.  1. 

130  Wood-cut,  fii.  40  — M.  R.  151,  M.  S.  iv. 

p.  82 :  —  Wilkinson.  Man.  and  Oust.  i. 
pi.  69,  fig.  7:— Birch,  Stat.  Tablet, 

W).  34. 
ood-cut,  fig.  41— M.  R.  161,  fig.  1 ;  159, 
fig.  3 ;  M.  o.  iy.  p.  IC^ :  —  Morton,  pL 
XIV.  fig.  20.  p.  48. 

132  Rawlinson,  Persian  Cuneiform  Inscrip.  of 

Behistnn,  1847,  p.  27a 

133  Wood-out,  fig.  43  —  Vauz,  NineTeh  and 

Persepolis,  1851,  pp.  §50-1. 

134  Letroiroe,  Civilisation  Egirptienne,  1845, 

pp.  30-43. 

135  Rawlinson,  op.  cit.  p.  xzriiL 

136  Wood-cut,   fig..44  — Coete  pi  Flandin, 

Perse  Ancienne,  pL  18. 

137  Rawlinson,  op.  cit.  p.  323. 

138  Wood-cut,  fig.  45  —  Perse  Aneienne,  pL 

154. 

139  J)e  Saev,  Antiquity  de  la  Perse,  et  m6- 

daillA  des  rois  Sassanides,  Paris,  1793 ; 
pp.  12, 64 ;  A,  No.  3— recopied  in  Perse 
Ancienne. 

140  Woodcut,  fig.  46  —  Perse  Ancienne,  pL 

185 

141  Perse  Ancienne,  pi.  49,  bas-relief  A. 

142  Woodcut^  fiff.  47— Perse  Ancienne,  pL  51, 

bas-relief  D. 

143  Lavard,  Monuments  of  Nineveh,  1849, 

folio  plate ;  Nineveh  and  its  Remains, 
ii.  pp.  329-31 :  —  well  described  by  Bo- 
nomi,  op.  cit.  pp.  287-95. 

144  Wood-cut,  fig.  50  — Roeellini,  M.  R.  pL 

103,  and  87 ;  M.  S.  iii.  part  2,  p.  157:— 
Morton,  Crania  .£gypt.  p.  63. 

145  Pauthier,  Chine,  pp.  417,  427,  429.    Ac- 

cording to  Callery  and  Yvan  (L*  Insur- 
rection en  Chine,  depuis  son  origine 
jnsqu'a  la  prise  de  Nankin,  Paris, 
1853)  the  present  Chinese  insurgems  let. 
all  their  hair  grow,  as  their  ancestry  did 
under  the  Mings,  to  distinguish  them- 
selves from  the  Tartar  usurpers. 

146  Lepsius,  Chronoloffie,  i.  p.  379.     Ibid., 

Discoveries,  transl.  Mackenzie,  p.  381. 

147  De  Sola,  Lindemhal,  and  Raphall ;  New 

TransL'of  the  Scriptures,  London,  pp. 
46-7 :  —  Genesis  xi.  10-26. 

148  Monumenti  Storici,  ii.  p.  461,  seq. 

149  Apochrypha,  xiv.  17. 

150  Wood-cuts.  figs. 44  to71— Rosellini,  Mon- 

umenti Reali,  pi.  i.  to  xziiL ;  and  Mon. 
Storici,  ii.,  **Iconografia  de*  Faraoni" 
Our  selections  are  arranged  in  accord- 
ance with  the  more  recent  improvements 
of  Egyptian  chronology. 

151  Prisse,  Suite  des  Monumens  de  Cham- 

poUion,  1848,  pi.  x. :  —  but  compare 
Lepsius.  Denkmaler,  Abth.  iiL  fil.  100. 
Ibid.,  ^gyptischen  Gotterkreis,  1851, 
pp.  40-5.  Ibid.,  Briefe  aus  iBgypten, 
1852,  pp.  89,  362. 

152  Morton,  Cr.  JEg,  p.  44,  pi.  xiv.  3 ;  from 

Rosellini. 

iro.(qfN4iUi,dk.) 

153  Colossus  at  Aboosimbel ;  M.  B.  pL  vi.  fig. 

22. 

154  Chron.  der  iBgypter,  i.  pp.  321-2,  358, 

379. 

155  Notes  upon  an  Inscription  in  the  Biblio- 

theque  Nationale  of  Paris,  Trans.  R. 
Soc  Lit.  1852,  iv.  pp.  16,  17,  21. 

156  Gliddon,  Chapters,  p.  22;  and  Otia,  p. 

134. 

157  Wood-cuts,  fig.  71,  bis— Rosellini,  M.  R. 

pi.  79. 

158  Ibid.,  M.  R.  pt  elx.  hxx. ;  M.  S.  iii  pp.  2, 

95.  seq. ;  iv.  pp.  245-9 :  —  Morton,  Cr. 
^g.  p.  55 :  —  Osbum,'  Test.,  p.  121  :— 
Birch,  Tabl.  of  Kamac,  pp.  14,  15-35. 

159  Morton's  inedited  MSS.  —  Letter  to  Mr. 

Gliddon.  entitled,  *'  Reflections  on  Mr. 
G.*s  Ethnological  Charts,"  1842;  cor- 
rected by  I^.  Morton's  autographic 
notes.  Philadelphia,  23d  March,  1843. 
We  shall  refer  to  it  as  *'  Morton's  MS. 
Letter." 

160  Wood-cut,  fig.  74~Rese11ini,  M.  R.  clvi. 

and  Ix;  M.  S.  iii.  pp.  1,  433,  sea. :  iv. 
PIK  228-44 :— Lenormam,  Cours  a'His- 

ChampoUion-le- Jeune,Lettr.  d'Egypte, 
p.  250,  seq. : — ChampoUion-Figeab,  Eg. 
Anc  pp.  29-31,  pi.  i ;  —  Wilkinson, 
Topog.  Thebes,  1835,  pp.  106-7:  — 
Man.  and  Cust.  i.  pn.  364,  371,  pi.  62, 
No.  4,  fig.  a :  —  Mocl.  Egypt,  ii.  p.  105 : 

—  Osbum,  Testimony,  pp.  22-7,  114, 
143 :— Birch,  Slat.  Tab.  Kar.  p.  20. 

161  Wood-cut,  fig.  75  — Lepsius,  Denkmaler, 

Abth.  iu.  Bl.  136,  fig.  37  a. 

162  Woodcut,  fig.  76  — Rosellini,  M.  R.  cbd. 

fiff.  1 ;  clix.  fijr.  3;  M.  S.  iv.  p.  150:  — 
Morton,  Cr.  Mg,  p.  48,  pi.  xiv.  20. 

163  Denkmaler.  Abth.  in.  Bl.  136,  fig.  <f. 

164  Woodcut,  fig.  78— Rosellini,  M.  R.  clxi ; 

M.  S.  iv.  pp.  91,  251 :— De  Saulcy,  Re- 
cherches,  inscrip.  da  Van,  1848,  p.  26. 

165  Wood-cut.  fig.  80— Rosellini,  M.  R.  bdx. ; 

M.  S.  iii.  part.  2,  p.  29 :  —  Birch,  Gal- 
lery, pp.  93,  97,  pL  38:— Morton,  p.  46, 
pi.  xiv.  24.  It  is  moulded  in  colors  at  the 
British  Museum. 

166  Wood-cut,  fig.  81  —  M.  R.  chV;  M.  S.  iv. 

p.  82,  seq. :  —  Wilkinson,  M.  and  C.  i. 
p.  384,  pL  69,  fig.  7 ;  —  Osbum,  p.  53 ; 
-Birch,  Stat.  Tab.  p.  34. 

167  Wood-cut,  fig.  82— Rosellini,  M.  R.  clix. : 

—  Champollion-Fiffeac,  pp.  208-9,  pi. 
«    62 :  —  Hoskins,  Ethiopia,  p.  329,  pL  i. 

ii.:  — Morton,  p.  41,  pi.  xiv.  22;  — 
Wilkinson,  M.  and  C.  i.  pi.  iv.  p.  379 : 
—Birch,  Gallery,  p.  80;  and  Stat.  Tab. 
p.  61 :— Prisse,  Salle  des  Ancdtres,  Rev. 
Arch^L  1845,  p.  11,  and  note.  N.  B. 
After  this  page  was  stereotyped,  we 
received  Mr.  Birch's  fireshest  paper  (An- 
nals of  Thotmes  III.,  1853)  wherein  he 
assigns  these  KeFa  to  the  Island  of 
Cyprus.  Vide  infra,  pp.  479-480,  voce 
"KTflM." 

168  Wood-cut,  fig.  83— Rosellini,  M.  R.  clix , 

M.  S.  iii.  p.  435 ;  iv.  p.  234  :  —  Birch, 
Gallery,  pp.  88-9,  97,  pi.  88:  — Stat. 
Tab.  pp.  13-14. 

169  Woodcuts,  figs.  84,  85  —  Roeellini,  M.  C. 

xxii. :  —  Wilkinson,  i.  pi.  iv. :  —  Cham- 
pollion-Figeac,  pp.  376-8 :  — Morton, 
p.  50 ;  pi.  XIV.  21 :— Osburn,  Testimony, 
p.  52 :— Hoskins,  Ethiopi^lates,  part 

^,^...,  Google 

720 

BEFEBENCES   AND   KOTES. 

iii  first  line,  p.  332 :— Birch,  Stat.  Tab., 
pp.  18-9 :  —  PickeriDg,  Races,  p.  372 ; 
auo,  Geog.  Distribution,  1854. 

170  References  as  above. 

171  Wood-cut,  fig.  86— Roeellim,  M.  C.,xlix; 

M.  C,  ii.  pp.  254-70 :  —  Wilkinson,  M. 
and  C.  U.  p.  99:  —Mod.  %7pt,  1843, 
ii.  p.  237 :— Osbnrn,  AntiquitMs,  Relig. 
Tract  Soc.,  1841,  pp.  220-1  :  —  Keitfi, 
Demonstrations  of  Cnristianity :— Tay- 
lor, Illastrations  of  the  Bible,  1838,  pp. 
79-84 :— Kitto,  Cyclopedia,  i.  pp.  353-4: 
—Morton,  Cr.  .fig.,  p.  47 :  —  Lepsius, 
Denkmaler,  Abth.  iii.  BI.  40 1  compare 
ibid.,  Djrn.  IV.,  Grab  I.,  Abth.  ii.  Bl.  96 
for  *' chin  sprouts." 

172  See  references  under  Noe.  144, 145. 

173  Wood-cut,  fig.  88— RoeeUini,M.R.,lxiii.; 

M.  S.,  iiL  part  ii.  p.  12 :— Monon,  p.  48, 
pi.  ivr,  19. 

174  Wood-cut,  fig.  89— Rosellini,M.R.,clTii.; 

M.  S.,  iv.  p.  237 ;  —  Osbnrn,  Test.,  pp. 
114-6,  plate,  fig.  1. 

175  Wood-cut,  fig.  90— Lepsius,  Denkmaler, 

Abth.  iii.  Bl  116,  fig.  a. 

176  Wood-cut,  fig.  91  —  Rosellini,  M.  R., 

Izzziii;   M.  S.,  iii.  part  ii.  p.  103:  — 
ChampoUion-Figeac,  pi.  79 :— Morton's 
MS.  letter. 
.  177  Wood-cut,  fig.  92  —  RoselUni.  M.  R., 
cxlzxx.  ng.  7 ;  M.  S.,  iv.  pp.  91-4. 

178  Wood-cut,  fig.93  — Rosellmi,  clviii;  M. 

S.,  pp.  234,  239:  — Birch,  Gallery,  pp. 
89,  104 :— Osburn,  p.  27 :— Morton,  p. 
46,  pi.  xiv.  23 :— Layard,  Babylon,  pp. 
142.  146.  628. 

179  Lepsius,  Denkmiiler,  Dyn.  XIX.  a.  Abth. 

iii.  Bl.  136;  compared  with  Rosellini,  M. 
R.,  pi.  civ. ;  M.  S.,  iv.  pt.  L  pp.  228-43. 
In  common  with  Morton  we  were  always 
at  a  loss  to  account  for  the  presence  of 
two  white  races  in  Rosellinrs  copy  of 
this  tabloai^  It  turns  out  that  an  error  of 
coloring  on  the  part  of  the  Tuscan  artists 
was  the  unique  cause  of  such  perplexi- 
ties ;  because  they  have  tinted  this  fisure 
light  Jleik'nolor,  instead  of  tawny  yellow. 

180  Wood-cuts.  figs.  97, 98— Rosellini,  M.R., 

Ixvii. ;  M.  8.,  iii.  part  ii.  p.  126 :— Birch, 
Gallery,  p.  99,  pi.  38 :  —  Osburn,  pp. 
77,  124. 

181  Wood-cuts.  figs.  99.  100—  Rosellini,  M. 

R.,  clz.;  mTS.,  IV.  p.  235:  — Cham- 
poUion-Figeac,  pp.  30-1,  pi.  L  fig.  4  :— 
Osburn,  pp.  114,  142-3. 

182  Wood-cut,  fig.  101  — Roeellini,  M.  R., 

cxliii.  fig.  9. 

183  Wood-cut,  fig.  102  — Roeellini,  M.  R., 

cxliii.  fig.  5. 

184  Wood-cut,  fig.  103  —  RoselUni,  M.  R., 

cxIiiL  fig.  10. 

185  Wood-cut,  fig.  104  —  Roeellini,  M.  R., 

cxliii.  fig.  3. 

186  Wood-cut,  fig.  105  —  Roeellini,  M.  R., 

cxliii.  fig.  8. 

187  Wood-cut,  fiff.  106  —  Rosellini,  M.  R.. 

Ixv. ;  and  Morton,  p.  47.  Compare  with 
these  heads,  and  with  that  one  in  M.R., 
cxliii.  fiff.  11 ;  M.  S.,  iv.  p.  96  (also  Wil- 
kinson, M.  and  C,  L  pp.  370-1 ;  pi.  62, 
fig.  3.  a.  6,  e .-)  what  Layard  (Babylon, 
p.  355)  has  written  about  the  Shairetana 
of  hieroglyphics  contrasted  with  the 
Sharutintan  in  the  cuneiform  sculptures. 
88  Researches,  ii.,  chap,  z.,  xi.,  pp.  193-205. 

Jfb,(qfJfckt,dc) 

189  Ibid.,  op.  dt.,  p.  290.    How  is  it  possible 

that  Dr.  Prichard,  in  1837,  oovld  Jiave 
known  nothing  of  the  triumphant  mis- 
sions of  France  and  Tuscany  to  Egjrpc 
of  1828-30— when  all  Europe  rang  with 
applause  t 

190  Appendix  to  first  edition  to  the  Natural 

History  of  Man,  London,  1845,  pp.  57IK 
583 :  quoted  in  Dr.  Fattersoo's  JSemQir 
of  Morton,  ubi  supra. 

191  Sopn  i  Popoli  Stranieri  introdotti  nelle 

Rappresentanie  Storiche  de'  Monumenti 
Egixiani  —  Annali  dell'  Instit.  di  Cocr. 
Archeol.,  Ronia,  1836,  pp.  333-5a 

192  £gypte  Pharaoniqne,  Pans,  1646,  tL  pp. 

352-4. 

193  Prisee,  Trans.  R.  Soc  Lit.,  1841 :— Glid- 

don.  Appeal  to  the  Antiquaries, London, 
1841,  p.  53:— Wilkinson,  Materia  Hie- 
roglyphica.  1824,  part  ii.  pi.  2 ;  and  Text, 

L118;— Top.  of  Thebes,  1835,  p.  420, 
J. :— Mod.  Eg.,  1843,  ii.  pp.  223-6  :— 
Hand-book,  1857,  pp.  306-7,  392-3 :  — 
Leemans,  Lettre  a  M.  Salvolini,  1840, 
pp.  149-51 :  —  L'Hote,  Lettres,  1840, 
pp.  27,  93,  99, 131, 185,  198:  — Perring, 
Trans.  R.  Soc.  Lit. ;  followed  by  Mor- 
ton, Cr.  Mg„  p.  54 :— Hincks,  On  the 
Egyptian  Stele,  1842,  pp.  1, 18-9;  Age 
of  the  XVIlIth  Dynasty,  1843.  p.  5:- 
Bunsen,  JEffyptens  Stelle,  iii  p.  56. 
The  Revue  Arch^logiqut  contains  the 
following— 1845,  Prisse,  Legendes  Roy- 
ales,  pp.  457-74;  Lettre  a  M.  Cham- 
M>llion*Figeac,  p.  730;  1847,  Antiquit^s 
Egyptiennes,  pp.  693-723 :— Leemans, 
Lettre  i  M.  Witte,  pp.  531-41 :— 1849, 
De  Rouge,  Lettre  a  M.  A.  Maury,  pp. 
120-3 ;— 1851,  Maury,  Dvnasties  Egrp- 
tiennes,  pp.  180-2 :  — Rosellini,  Car- 
touches, Noe.  69, 69  bis :  —  For.  Quart. 
Review,  **Effyptian  Hieroglyplucs," 
Jan.  1842,  p.  157 :  —  Pauthier,  Sinioo- 
•^igTP^M  18*2,  Frontispiece :  —  Prisse, 
Smte  des  Monumens,  1847,  Preface  :— 
Bhroh,  Tablet  of  Ramses  IL.  p.  24 :  — 
Ampere,  Recherchee,  Rev.  des  Dsax 
Mondes,  1846-7 :  — Lepsius,  JEgypti- 
schen  Gotterkreis,  1851,  pp.  37-46:  — 
Briefe,  1852,  p.  368 :  —  Denkmaler,  iii 
111. 

194  Denkmaler,  Abth.  iu.Bl.  HI.  EvenLep- 

sius's  copies  slightly  difier  among  them- 
selves—compare Bl.  99  with  100,  108. 
and  109. 

195  Crania  .£gyptiaca,  p.  54— from  Perring*s 

paper  |n  Trans.  R.  Soc  Lit.,  London, 

1843,  L  p.  140. 

196  Letters,  transL  Mackenzie,  p.  297.  Con£ 

Denkmiler,  Abth.  iii.  Bl.  113. 

197  Rosellini,  M.  R.,  xv.  fig.  63. 

198  Lepsius,  Auswahl;  and  WUkinson's  Tu- 

nn  Papyrus. 

199  Wood-cut,  fig.  110— Dyn.  XIL,  Abth.  il 

BL  141. 

200  Wood-cut,  &g.  108  — Roeellini,  M.  R., 

xxvi.  xxvii.  xxviiL ;  M.  S.,  i.  p.  189;  iii 
p.  48,  seq.;  M.  C,  I  p.  56:  — Denk- 
maler, Altes  Reich,  Dyn.  XII.,  Abth. 
il  Bl  31. 

201  Stat.  Tab.  Kamac,  p.  5. 

202  Hist.  Tab.  of  Ramses  IL,  p.  28. 

203  Letter  to  M.  Humboldt,  <*Korusko,  Nov. 

20, 1843,"  London  Athenaeum,  2  March. 

1844.  Compare  Briefe,  1858,  p.  97-1001 

Digitized  by 

Google 

REFERENCES    AND    NOTES. 

721 

204  Discoveries  in  E^ypt,  Ethiopia,  and  the 

Peninsula  of  Sinai,  in  the  years  1842- 
1845 ;  London,  1852,  pp.  108-10. 

205  Denkmaler,  Abth.  ii.  Bl.  123-33. 

206  Geognostische  Karte  von  JEgypten, Wien, 

1842. 

207  Wood-cut,  fig.  Ill— Abth.  ii.  BL  107, 

Grab  2. 
206  Wood-cut,  fig.  112  — Abth.  ii.  BL  109, 

Grab  2. 
209  and  210  Wood-cuts,  figs.  113,  114— Abth. 

ii.  BL  73,  Grab  26. 
211  and  212  Wood-cuts,  figs.  115, 116— Abth. 

ii.  BL  10,  *•  Pyr.  v.  Giseh,"  Grab  78. 

213  Wood-cut,  fig.  117— Abth.  iL  BL  8,  "Pyr. 

V.  Giseh,"  Grab  75. 

214  Woodcut,  fiff.  118  — Abth.  iL  BL  20,  22, 

"  Pyr.  V.  Giseh,"  Grab  24;  Briefe,  pp. 
36-8. 

215  Wood-cut,  fig.  119— Abth. iL  BL2,  "Wa- 

di  Maghara." 

216  Abth.  iL  BL  39/;  and  Briefe,  p.  336. 

217  Researches,  ii.  p.  44.    Where  not  referred 

to  others,  our  citations  are  also  taken 
from  Prichard. 

218  Beke,  JournaL  R.  Geog.  Soc,  xviL ;  and 

in'Gliddon,  Hand-book,  1849,  pp.  26-33. 

219  Riiter,  Geoe.,  transL  Buret,  1836,  L;  and 

Jomard,  Notes  pour  un  Voyage  dans 
TAfriqueCentrale,  1849,  pp.  19-20. 

220  This  fact  is  established  by  D'Eichthal 

(Hist,  et  Origine  des  Foulahs),  by  Hodg- 
son (Notes  on  the  Sahara  and  Soudan), 
by  Perron  ^TransL  of  Voyage  du  Cheykh 
Mohammed  -  el  -  Tounsy),  by  Jomard 
(Observations  sur  le Voyage  au  Darfour, 
&c.),  and  by  Ritter,  i.  pp.  432-7. 

221  Gliddon,  Hand-book,  p.  35. 

222  Beke,  Sections,  in  Map  of  Journey ;  Jour. 

R.  Geog.  Soc,  xviL 

223  See  all  authorities  in  D'Eichlhal. 

224  Researches,  ii.  p.  97. 

225  Op.  cit.,  iL  p.  343. 

226  Op.  cit. 

227  Prichard,  ii.  p.  129:— Beke,   Jour.  R. 

Geog.  Soc. 

228  Op.  cit.,  ii.  p.  132:— Harris,  Highlands  of 

Ethiopia,  1843 : — Fresnel,  Mem.  sur  le 
Waday,  1848: — Beke,  Essay  on  the 
Sources  of  the  Nile,  J  848 :  —  Origin  of 
the  Gallas,  1848 :— Observations  sur  la 
communication  supposee  entre  le  Niger 
et  le  Nil,  1850: — Jomard,  Sur  la  pente 
du  Nil  Sup^rieur,  1848. 

229  Beke ;  and  Newman  ;  Trans.  Philological 

Soc,  London,  1843-5,  L  and  iL 

230  Larrey,  Notice  sur  la  conformation  phy- 

sique  des  Egyptiens ;  Descrip.  de  !'£• 
gypte,  ii. 

231  Essai  sur  les  Mceurs  des  habitants  mo- 

dernes  de  l'  Egypte — id.,  ii.  part  2,  p.  361. 
242  Prisse,   Oriental  Album,  Madden,  Lon- 
don, 184G,  pi.  28, 29:— Pickering,  Races, 
pi.  xiL  pp.  221-4. 

233  Cherubini,  Nubie,  pp.  50,  51. 

234  Gliddon,    "Excursus  on  the  Berbers," 

Otia,  pp.  117-46. 

235  "Et-TuUak  b^et  tellateh,"  or  "triple 

divorce."— G.  R.  G. 

236  Cr.  ^g.,  pp.  58-9 :  Giiddon,  Otia,  p.  119. 

237  Tablet  of  Ramses  IL,  1852,  p.  21. 

238  Prichard,  ii.  p.  135. 

239  Travels  in  Nubia,  p.  439. 

240  2  Chron.  xii.  3. 

241  Wiseman,  Lectures,  p.  136. 

01 

No.  (qf  Notes,  rfc.) 

242  Nott,  Unity  of  the  Human  Race  (Reply 

to  "C"),  Southern  Quart.  Rev.,  Jan. 
1846,  p.  24. 

243  ChampoIlion,L'Egypte  sous  les  Pharaons, 

1814,  L  p.  255—"  Coptic  MS."  :— Wil- 
kinson,  Mod.  Eg.  and  Thebes,  1843,  ii. 
p.  312--"  Inscription  of  King  Silco." 

244  Tribus  des  Ababdeh  et  des  Bicharis,  Ma- 

gazin  Piitoresque,  Paris,  Nov.  1845, 
pp.  371-3. 

245  Gliddon,  Otia,  pp.  134-5. 

246  Compare  Briefe  aus  j^gypten,  pp.  220, 

251,  263. 

247  Graberg  de  Hemso,  Specchio  geografico 

e  statistico  dell'  Impero  di  Marocco, 
Genova,  1834,  pp.  251-6. 

248  Notes  on  Northern  Africa,  the  Sahara, 

and  Soudan,  New  York,  1844,  pp.  22- 
82 :  —  also,  Daumas,  "  Les  Tuireg  du 
Saharah,"  Revue  d' Orient,  Paris,  Fev. 
1846,  pp.  168-171. 

250  A  Series  of  Chapters  on  Early  Egyptian 

History,  Archaeology,  and  other  subjects 
connected  with  Hieroglyphical  Litera- 
ture;  New  York,  1843,  p.  58.  Conf. 
Jomard,  fitudes  sur  1' Arable,  in  Men-* 
gin's  Hist.  d'Egypte  sous  Mohammed 
Ali;  voL  iiL,  Paris,  1839:  —  Champol- 
lion-Figeac,  Egypte  Ancienne,  Paris, 
1840,  pp.  28,  34,  417 :  —  ChampoUion, 
Graramaire  Egyptienne,  p.  xix. 

251  Burke's  Ethnological  Jour.,  Lon3on,1848, 

pp.  367,  368 ;  and  Otia  -ffigyptiaca,  1849, 
pp.  77-79. 

252  Pettigrew,  Encyc.  -Slgyp.,  1841,  pp.  2,  3. 

253  Filiations,  &c,  1837,  L  pp.  210-17. 

254  Asie  Moyenne,  1839,  L  p.  155. 

255  Voyage  en  Syrie,  i.  p.  75. 

256  Reflexions  sur  l'  Origme,  &c.,  des  Anciens 

Peuples,  1747,  pp.  303,  383. 

257  Herodotus,  lib.  ii.  i  105. 

258  Trans.  R.  Soc.  Lit.,  iiL  part  L;  1836,  pp. 

345-6. 

259  Gen.  xUL  23,  30,  33. 

260  Deul.  xxiii,  7,  8. 

261  Gen.  xlL  50-2. 

262  Crania  -^gyp.,  pp.  28-9 :— Young,  Dis- 

coveries in  Hieroglyphical  Literature, 
1823,  p.  63,  &.C.:— ChampoUion-Figeac, 
Conirat  de  Ptolemais,  p.  43: — and 
John  Pickering,  Egyptian  Jurispru- 
dence, Boston,  1840,  p.  313. 

263  Wood-cuts,  fi^s.  121,  122— ChampoUion, 

Monumens,  iL  pi.  160,  fig.  3. 

264  Wood-cut,  fig.  123— Rosellini,  M.  C,  pi. 

133.  fig.  3. 

265  Wood-cut,  fig.  125  — Hoskins,  Ethiopia, 

pL  xi. 

266  Cailliaud,  Mcroe,  pis.  xvi-xx. 

267  Wood-cut,  fig.  126  —  Rosellini,    M.  C, 

pi.  133. 

268  Champollion-Figeac,  Eeypte  Anc,  p. 356 

269  Wood-cut,  fig.   128r-Ro8ellmi,  M.  C, 

nl.  97. 

270  Wood-cuts,  figs.  129, 130,131,  132— ibid., 

M.  C,  12C.       , 

271  Wood-cut,  fig.  133— ibid.,  M.  C,  pi.  37. 

272  Wood-cut,  fig.  131-i^id.,  vol.  i.  pi.  4. 

273  Wood-cut,  fig.  135— ibid.,  M.  C,  pL  86. 

274  Wood-cut,  fig.  136— ibid.,  M.  C,  pL  41. 

275  Wood-cut,  fig.  137— ibid.,  M.  C,  pL  29. 

276  Wood-cuts,  figs.  138,  139  — ibid.,  M.  C, 

pi.  132. 

277  Morton,  p.  37:  —  Trans.  R.  Soc.  Lit., 

1794,  pL  \6,  fig.  4:— Gliddon,Ch8.,  p. 23. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

722 

REFERENCES    AND    NOTES. 

.Vo.(rt/iVWe«,<fc.) 

273  Rosellini,  M.  S.,  parte  Ima.  ii.  1833,  pp. 
476-521  ;  Portraits,  M.  R..  pi.  i.-vii. 

279  Vide  infra,  p.  6.^^,  "Chronolo^." 

2tO  These  drawings  were  our  •*  stamps"  ;  li- 
thographed, infra,  pis.  i.-iv. 

281  Humboldt,  Cosmos,  French  ed.  1846,  i.  pp. 

430,  579 :  on  which  see  Dr.  Patterson's 
commentary,  supra,  '*  Memoir."  The 
heretical  author  of  Vestices  of  Creation 
(first  Amer.  ed.,  New  York,  1845,  pp. 
209-242),  however  inaccurate  in  other 
theories -^and  the  very  orthodox  Guvol 
(Earth  and  Man,  Boston,  1851,  p.  253, 
seq.),  however  exact  in  other  aata  — 
owing  to  similar  philanthropic  senti- 
mentalities, also  break  down  when  they 
discuss  the  Natural  History  of  mankind. 

282  Vansleb.  in  Quatremcre,  Recherches  sur 

la  langue  Copie. 

283  Manetho,  apud  Syncell.  Chron.,  p.  40: — 

Lepsius,  '•  Leitre  a  M.  le  Prof.  Hippo- 
lyte  Rosellini,"  Annali  dell'  Institute  di 
CorrispondenzaArcheologica,  Roma,  ix. 
1837.  p.  18. 

284  Kenrick,  Ancient  Egypt  under  Pharaohs, 

London,  1850,  i.  p. '99. 
2«55  Op.  cit.,  pp.  107-8. 

286  Op.  cit.,  p.  131. 

287  Wood-cut,  fig.  152— Rosellini,  M.R.,  155; 

M.  S.,   iv.  pp.  230,  241-2  :~Osbum, 
Testimony,  pp.  23-4. 
2.^8  Lepsius,  Denkmaler,  Abth.  ii.  Bl.  19. 

289  Rosellini,  M.  R.,  101,  and  87. 

290  Wilkinson.  Man.  and  Cus  .,  i.  p.  285;  iii. 

pp.  141,  346:— Henry,  Eijypte  Pharao- 
nique,  ii.  pp.  274-89 :  —  Birch,  Lettre  a 
Letronne,  Kev.  Arch^ol. ;  and  De  Saul- 
cy.  Note,  Rev.  Archcol.,  1847,  p.  430. 

291  Testimony,  pp.  23-4. 

292  Wood.cut,fig.  156— Rosell.,  M.R.,pl.96. 

293  Wood-cut,  fig.  157— ibid., 

294  Wood-cut,  fig.  158— ibid. 

K.,pl. 
.,  pl.  ] 

295  Wood -cuts,  figs.  159,160— Morton's  MSS. 

for  2d  ed  ot  Cr.  -^gyp. 

296  Wood-cut,  fig.  161— ibid. 

297  Ampere,  Revue  des  Deux  Mondes,  Aug. 

1846,  p.  391. 

298  Gliddon,  Hand-book,  pp.  20—22. 

299  Denkm.,  Dyn.  IV.-VI.,  Tombs  at  Berlin. 

300  Crania  ^gypiiaca,  pp.  26,  27. 

301  I  was  present  in  Dr.  M's  office  when  he 

opened  it ;  and  so  vivid  is  my  remem- 
brance of  the  conversation  its  joint  pe- 
rusal superinduced,  that,  although  I  had 
never  seen  the  letter  from  1844  to  this 
Sept.  1853,  I  sought  for  and  found  it 
among  my  deccabcd  friend's  papers. — 
G.  R.  G. 

302  Pickerin]^,  K^nces  of  Men,  1S48,  p.  10. 

303  Grammairc  Egyptienne,  Introd.,  p.  xix. 

304  Cosmos,  ii.  p.  147,  French  ed. 

305  Jerem.  xiii.  23 :— Morton's  notes  for  2d  ed. 

Crania  iEg. ;  but  vide  infra,  pp.  487-8. 

306  Institutiones  ad  Fundamenta  Linguae  Ara- 

bicffi,  Lipsiffi,  1818,  pp.  3H-9. 

307  Dubois.  Voyage  autour  du  Caucase,  &c. ; 

cited  hereinafter. 

308  Wood-cut,  fig.  166— Rosellini,  M.  R., 

142;  M.S.,  iv.  i^  292. 

309  Wood-cut,  fig.  J67— Nubie,  p.  8:— Ros., 

M.  R.,  85  ;  M.  .S.,  iii.  part  ii.  p.  114  :  — 
Osburn,  Testimony,  p.  32: — Champol- 
lion.  Monuments,  pl.  xvi. 
3)0  Wood-cuts,  figs.  168-170— Rosellini,  M. 
R.,  pl.  \xxxv. 

Xo.  {of  Kates,  dc) 

311  Birch,  Gallery,  pp.  68, 86, 104:— GliddoD, 

Otia,  p.  119. 

312  Maddcn's  Oriental  Album,  pl.  25;    **Nu 

bian  Females,  Kenoosee  Tribe,  Philap.^' 

313  Wood-cut,  fig.   171  —  Rosellini,  M.  R.. 

156.  160;  M.  S.,  iv.  pp.  231,  250. 

314  Wood-cut,  fig.  172— Rosellini,  M.  R.,  60 ; 

M.  S.,  iii.  part  i.  p.  407. 

315  Wood-cut,  fig.  173— Wilkinson,  Man.  and 

Cust.,  p.  404,  No.  73. 

316  Olia,  pp.  147-8. 

317  Nott,  Bibl.  and  Phys.  Hist.,  pp.  138-146: 

—  Gliddon,  Otia,  p.  147.  James  Cam, 
14 '^O,  was  the  first  who  sailed  along 
Africa  to  a  little  beyond  the  river  Congo. 
Hottentot  tribes  were  altogether  un- 
known until  after  the  voyage  of  Bar- 
tholomew Diaz  in  a.d.  1486  (Church- 
ill's Collection  of  Voyages). 

318  Anthon,  Class.  Diet.,  voce  *Hanno."   We 

have  re-examined  Heeren  (Reflections 
on  the  Ancient  Nations  of  Africa,  i., 
chaps,  ii.,  v.,  vi.  —  particularly  pp.  214- 
241),  and  can  find  nothing  but  hypotheses 
to  support  Carthaginian  possession  of 
Negro  slaves.  The  account  of  Hanno's 
voyage,  &c.,  is  given  (op.  cit.,  pp.  492- 
501). 

319  L*Armenie,  la  Perse,  et  la  Mesopotamia, 

Paris,  folio,  1842,  pl.  113:  —  compare 
pl.  126. 

320  Botta  et  Flandin,  Mon.  de  Ninive,  folio, 

1847-50,  pl.  es. 

321  Vircile.Moreium,  *'The  Salad,"  Nisard's 

ed.,  Paris,  1843,  p.  463. 

322  Wood-cuts,  figs.  177.  178— Rosellini,  M. 

R.,  xliv.  bis,  quater. 
343  Ablh.  iii.  BI.  120. 

324  Archaiologia,  xxxiv.  pp.  18-22. 

325  Compare  Gliddon's  assertions  of  the  same 

fact  in  1843,  Chapters,  pp.  47,  59;  in 
1849,  Otia,  pp.  16-81 ;  and  Hand-book. 
.  p.  35. 

326  Hist.  Tablet  of  Ramses  IL,  London,  1852, 

pp.  1822. 

327  Hincks,  Hieroglyphical  Alphabet,  p.  16; 

pl.  i.  figs.  23,  26,  27:  —  Gliddon,  Olia, 
p.  133. 

328  Wood-cut,  fig.  181— Mon.  Civ.,  pl.  xxii. 

329  Travels,  plate,  part  i.  line  3. 

330  Man.  and  Cust.,  i.  pl.  iv.  line  3. 

331  Egypte  Ancienne,  pl.  .55. 

332  Wood-cut,  fig.  182  —  Rosellini,  Hoskins. 

Wilkinson,  and  Champollion- Figeac, 
supra  No.  331. 

333  Races,  1848,  p.  224  —  compare  •*  Abyssi- 

nian," in  plate  xii. 

334  Gallery,  pp.  94,  97 ;  pl.  38 

335  Topog.  of  Thebes,  1835,  pp.  135,  seq.:  — 

Man.  and  Cust.,  i.  pp.  58,  404 ;  iii.  179: 
— Champollion,  Monuments,  pl.  158. 

336  Gliddqn,  Otia,  p.  148. 

337  Gliddon's  MS.  Diary,  "Thebes, February, 

1840": — Wilk.,  Materia  Hieroglyphica, 
"Amuntuonch"  :  —  Rosc^ilini,  Appen- 
dice,  Oval  No.  13:  —  Leemans,  Leitre 
a  Salvolini,  p.  75.  Compare  Birch,  Ta- 
blet of  Ramses  II. ,  'fomb  of  Hui, 
p.  24. 

338  Wood-cuts,  figs,  183,  184  — Denkmaler, 

'•Neues  Reich,"  Dvn.  XVIII.,  Abth.  iii. 
Bl.  117.  —  N.  B.  The  children  some- 
times  are  red  —  see  the  same  paternity 
exemplified  in  Hoskins,£tbiop.,  "Grand 
Procession,"  lowest  line. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

REFERENCES    AND    NOTES. 

723 

Ko.  (of  Notes,  <£c.) 

339  As  amon^  the  **  wre.stlers**  at  Benihas- 

san  (Cailleaud,  Arts  et  Metiers,  pi.  39) : 
— the  "wine-pressers"  at  Thebes  (ibid, 
pi.  34) — and  other  scenes. 

340  Wilkinson,    Man.    and    Customs,  ii.  p. 

265. 

341  Chev.  Lepsius's  private  letters  to  Morton 

and  to  Gliddon. — Vide  Chapters,  15th 
ed.,  Peterson,  Phila.,  1850,  p.  68. 

342  Crania  iEgyptiaca,  p.  41. 

343  Wood-cut,  fig.  187— Hoskins,  pi.  x. 

344  Wood-cut,  fig.  188— ibid. 

345  Hanbury  and    \yaddington,   Travels    in 

Ethiopia,  pi.  xiv.  —  compare  Cailleaud, 
Voyage  d  Meroe ;  ana  Hoskins,  pi. 
xxix. 

346  Syncell.  Chronograph.,  p.  120,  ed.  Venet. 

347  Crania  iEgyptiacd,  pp.  49-50 : — Rosellini, 

M.  S.,  ii.  pp.  174.  238. 

348  Wood-cut,   fig.  193,  Crania  iEgyptiaca, 

pi.  xii.,  fig.  7;  and  p.  18  :  — Catalogue, 
1849,  No.  823. 

349  Leironne,     Materiaux     pour     eervir     a 

rhistoire  du  Christianisme  en  Kgyple. 

350  Crania  iEgyp.  p.  44: — Champ.  Mons.,  I., 

pi.  1 ;  Rosellini,  pi.  xxv.  (eye  wantmg) 
— Cherubini,  Nubie,  pi.  10.  p.  33. 

351  Gliddon's  Otia,  p.  144. 

352  Lepsius,  Denkmiiler,  Part  II.,  pi.  136;  t, 

Imes  1  and  2. 

353  Memoirs  sur  quelques  Phenomenes  Ce- 

lestes; Revue  Archeol.,  1853,  p.  674, 
note  34. 

354  Arundale,  Bonomi  and  Birch's  Gallery  of 

Antiquities,  selected  fi*om  Brit.  Mus. — 
before  cited. 

355  Champ.  Mons.  I.,  pi.  Ixxi,  Ixxii ;  Rosellini, 

M.  K.,  Ixxv. 

356  Crania  jEgyptiaca,  pp.  61-2:  corrected 

by  •* standing,"  for  **  seated,"  in  MSS. 
for  2d  ed. 

357  "Parable"— It  is  well  known  that  the 

earlier  colonists  of  Barbadoes,  Montser- 
rat,  and  some  other  W.  Indian  islands, 
were  Irish  exiles.  Odd  to  relate,  while  a 
few  of  their  Negro  slaves  actually  speak 
Gaelic  t  many  have  acquired  the 
*•  brogue  !"  An  Hibernian,  fresh  from 
the  green  isle,  arrived  one  day  at  the 
port  of  Bridgetown,  and  was  hailed  by 
two  Negro  boatmen  who  offered  to 
take  him  ashore.  Observing  that  their 
names  were  "Pat"  and  "Murphy," 
and  that  their  brogue  was  uncommonly 
rich,  the  stranger  (taking  tiiem  to  be 
Irishmen)  asked — "  and  how  long  have 
ye  been  from  the  ould  counthree?" 
Misunderstanding  him,  one  of  the  dar- 
kies replied,  "sex  months,  y're  honor." 

"  Sex  months ! onlv  sex  months, 

and  turned  as  black  as  me  hat !  !  J — ! ! ! 
what  a  climate  !  Row  me  back  to  the 
ship.  I'm  from  Cork  last  —  and  I'll 
soon  be  from  here  !" 

Every  one  laughs  at  the  verdant 
ignorance  which  believed  that  a  Celt 
could  be  transmuted  by  climate  into  a 
Negro  in  6  months.  All  would  smile 
at  the  notion  of  such  a  possibility  within 
6,  or  even  60  years.  Most  readers 
will  hesitate  over  600  years.  Anatomy, 
history,  and  the  monuments  prove  that 
COOO  years  have  never  metamorphosed 
one  type  of  man  into  another. 

No,  (of  Notes,  cfr.) 

358  Second  Visit  to  the  United  States,  Part 

II.,  p.  188. 

359  Tableaux  of  New  Orleans,  1852,  pp.  8- 

17: — also.  Dickeson  and  Brown,  CypreiJs 
Timber  of  the  Mississippi,  1848,  p.  3. 

360  Scottish  Archaeologists.  Dr.  Wilson  tells 

me,  have  found  similar  indications  of 
early  human  existence  in  the  Shellaiul 
Isles ;  and  he  considers  this  criterion 
very  valuable.— G.  R.  G. 

361  Morton,  Crania  Americana,  p.  260. 

362  "Information  respecting  the  History, Con- 

dition and  Prospects  of  the  Indian 
Tribes  of  the  United  States,"  vol.  I. 

363  As  Morton  happily  wrote — "The  works 

of  giants  and  the  stature  of  pigmies" — 
MSS.  for  2d  ed.  Cr.  ^gyp. 

364  The  Serpent  Svmbol,  &c.,  in  America, 

1851,  pp.  26-7. 

365  Westminster  Review — "The   Greek  of 

Homer  a  Living  Language."  So  true 
is  this,  that  one  word  wilfillustrate  the 
fact:  e.  p.,  vtpo  is  now  the  name  for 
water  in  ordinary  Grecian  parlance,  just 
as  it  was  in  Homeric  days,  to  the  ex- 
clusion of  viup  which  belongs  to  the 
classical  ages  intervening.  —  G.  R.  G. 

366  Christian  Examiner,  Boston,  July,  1850, 

p.  31. 

367  Trans.  Am.  Eihnol.  Soc,  II. 

368  Bunsen,  Life  and  Letters  of  B.  S.  Niebuhr, 

New  York  ed.,  1852. 

369  Connection  between  Science  and  Revealed 

Religion. 

370  Ancient   Monuments  of  the   Mississippi 

Valley,  1818,  p.  304.  , 

371  Wilson,  Archa;ology  of  Scotland. 

372  Op.  cit..  p.  168. 

373  Lavard's  Babylon  abundantly  establishes 

this  fact ;  but  vide  infra,  p.  427,  figs. 
263,  264. 

374  Morton,  Cr.  iEgyp.  pp.  5,  7,  pi.  i. 

375  Wood-cut,   fig.  200 — Martin,    Man  and 

Monkeys,  p.  298,  "Bushman." 

376  Wood-cuts,    figs.    201,     202  — Wilson  .-i 

ArchiBology  —  vide  infra,  pp.  369-70. 

377  Hamilton  Smith,  Natural  History  of  the 

Human  Species,  Edinb.  ed.,  1848,  p.  93. 

378  Trans.  Am.  EUhnol.  Soc,  New  York,  i. 

p.  192. 

379  Rev.  Dr.  John  Bachman,  of  Charleston, 

S.  C,  in  .a  book  on  the  Unity  of  the 
Races,  did  raise  a  question  as  to  the 
American  origin  of  maize,  but  Hum- 
boldt, Parmentier,  LinnEeds,  and  the 
best  botanists  are  against  him. 

380  Gallatin,  Notes,  op.  cit.,  p.  57. 

381  Chronologie  der  jEgypter,  i.  pp.  131-3. 

382  Pauthier,  Chine,  p.  180. 

383  Gallatin,  p.  58. 

384  Vetruvius.  lib.  vi.,  cap.  1. 

385  Kaimes,  Sketches  of  the  History  o'"Ma... 

2d  ed.,  Edinb.,  1778;  i.  pp.  50,  75-7. 

386  Layard,  2d  Exped.  Babylon,  pp.  531-2. 

387  Morton  was  here  somewhat  misled  by  a 

hastily  written  passage  in  my  Otia. 
(Burke's  Eihnol.  Journal,  p.  310.)  — 
G.  R.  G. 

388  This  is  by  far  too  high  a  dale  for  "castes" 

—  sec  further  on,  pp.  635-6. 

389  Also,  and   more   probably,    Petubastes 

but  the  hieroglyphics  reveal  noihiiig  for 
or  against  eiiner  supposition. — G.  K.  G. 

390  They  came  from  the  old  Jewish  burial 

Digitized  by 

Google 

724 

KEFEKENCES    AND    NOTES. 

No.  (qfyUa,  dc.) 

ground,  behind  Muss*r-el-Ateeka,  on 
the  desert  toward  Bussateen:  and  no 
Muslim  is  interred  near  a  Jew. — G.R.G. 

391  Travels  in  Kordofan,  London,  1844. 

392  Proceed.  Acad.  Nat.  Sciences,  Philada., 

September,  1850,  p.  82. 

393  Canidae,  i.  p.  104. 

394  Want  of  space  alone  prevents  the  apposite 

citation  of  the  corroborative  statements 
of  M.  Hombron,  ''De  T  Homme  dans 
ses  rapports  avec  la  Creation;**  Voyage 
au  Pole  Sud;  Zoologie,  i.  pp.  80-92, 
110-7. 

395  This  is  what  the  Halicarnassian  states  — 

••I  am  surprised  (for  my  narrative  has 
from  the  commencement  sought  for 
digressions),  that  in  the  whole  territory 
of  £lis  no  mules  are  able  to  breed, 
though  neither  is  the  climate  cold,  nor 
is  there  any  other  visible  cause.  The 
Eleans  themselves  say,  that  mules  do 
not  breed  with  them  in  consequence 
of  a  curse ;  therefore,  when  the  mares' 
breeding  approaches,  they  lead  them  to 
the  neighboring  districts,  and  there  put 
the  he-asses  with  them  until  they  are  in 
foal :  then  they  drive  them  home  again." 
(Melpomene,  iv.  30  —  **A  new  and 
Literal  Version,  from  the  Text  of 
Baehr"— by  Henry  Gary,  M.A.,  Ox- 
ford—London. 1849,  p.  247.) 

396  Columella,  p.  135. 

397  Ham.  Smith  — Nat.  Hist,  of  the  Equidae, 

p.  154. 

398  Leidy ;  in  Proceed.  Acad.  Nat.  Sciences, 

Phila.,  Sept.,  1847. 

399  Eauidae,  p.  183. 

400  Ibid.,  p.  120. 

401  Morton's  posthumous  papers. 

402  Ibid.  — Replies  to  the  Rev.  J.  Bachman, 

&c.,  1850-51. 

403  Buffon,  Quadrupedes,  xxii.  p.  400;  xxx. 

p.  230. 

404  Chevreul,  in  Journal  des  Savans,  Juin, 

1846;  p.  357.  It  was  my  good  fortune 
to  have  marked,  for  Dr.  Morton,  that 
passage  in  Chevreul's  skilful  paper 
which  Dr.Bachman  so  queerly  ascribed  to 
*'  old  and  musty'*  authorities.— G.  R.  G. 

405  Karl  Riiter's  Geography  of  Asia ;  viii. 

Division  1st. — pp.  655,  659.     Compare 
Frazer,     Mesopotamia    and    Assyria, 
pp.  366-7 ;  for  '•  Turkoman  Camel." 
400  CanidcB,  p.  19. 

407  Sonnini's  Buffon,    Quad,  xxxiii.  p.  321, 

supp. 

408  Pennant's  Arctic  Zoology,  i.  p.  42. 

409  Fauna  Boreale- Americana,  Mamm.,  p.  61. 

410  First  Voyage,  Supp.,  p.  186. 

411  Fauna,  p.  65. 

412  Idem,  pp.  74,  79. 

413  American  Edition,  p.  365. 

414  Martin,  Nat.  Hist,  of  the  Dog,  p.  30. 

415  Harnjlton  Smith,  Canidae,  ii.  p.  123. 

416  Nat.  Hist,  of  Paraguay,  p.  151. 

417  Rural  Sports,  p.  16. 

418  Lyell,  Principles,  ch.  38. 

419  Wood-cut.  fig.  235— Champollion,  Gram- 

maire,  pp.  51,  173;  Diciionnaire,  pp. 
117,  127:— Bunsen,  Egypt's  Place,  i.  p. 
514,  figs.  248,  249:— Wilkinson  M.  and 
C,  iii.  p.  32  :  —  Lepsius,  Denkmaler, 
IVth,  Vth,  and  Vlth,  dynasty,  passim. 

420  Wood-cut,  fig.  237— Denkmaler,  Abth.  ii. 

Bl.  9. 

No.  (o/NbUs,  dc.) 

421  Wood-cut,  fig.  238— Denkmaler,  Abth.  iL 

B1.96. 

422  Wood-cut,  fig.  239— Denkmaler,  Abth.  ii. 

Bl.   11:  —  See  varieties  in  Caillcaud, 
Arts  et  Metiers  des  Anc,  £g.,  pi.  37. 

423  Wood-cut,  fig.  240— Denkmaler,  Abth.  it 

Bl.  20. 

424  Wood-cut,  fig.   241  — Roselliui,   M.  C, 

xvii.,  fig.  3. 

425  Wood-cut,  fig.  242— Martin,  Nat.  Hist,  of 

the  Dog,  p.  138. 

426  Oriental  Album,  pi.  41. 

427  Martin,  op.  cit.,  p.  53. 

428  Wood-cut,  fig.  243— Ibid.,  p.  50:— Denk- 

maler,  Abth.  ii.  Bl.  132. 
439  Wood-cut,  fig.  244— Denkmaler,  Abth.  ii. 
Bl.  131. 

430  Wood-cut,   fig.  245  —  Rosellini,   M.  C, 

No.  5. 

431  Wood-cut,  fig.  246  — Wilkinson,  .M.  and 

C.  iii.  p.  13. 

432  Wood- cut,  fi^.  247— Ibid.,  op.  cit.,  p.  32. 

433  Hoskins,  Ethiopia.  Plate  i.,  line  3. 

434  Bennett,  Tower  Menagerie,  p.  83. 

435  Wood-cut,  fig.  248  — Wilkinson.  M.  and 

C.  iii.  p.  12 :  —  Lepsius,  Denkmaler,  ii. 
131. 

436  Wood-cut,  fig.  249— Denkmaler,  ii.  134. 

437  The  head  resembles  the  skulls  of  Egyp- 

tian mummied-dogs  now  in  the  Acade- 
my, Philadelphia. 

438  WoOd-cut,  fig.  250— Denkmaler,  ii.  96. 
439,  and  440  Wood-cut,   fig.  251  — Lavard, 

Babylon,  p.  526: — Vaux,  Nineveh,  p. 
198 ;  discovered  by  Rawlinson.  **Cte- 
sias  (says  Photius  in  his  Excerpta),  in 
his  description  of  India,  speaks  of  the 
gigantic  dogs  of  that  country."— Indica, 
cap.  5 ;  apud  Heeren,  Hist.  Res.;  Lon- 
don, 1846  ;  i.  p.  35. 

441  Morton,  Additional  Observations  on  Hy- 

bridity,  Oct.,  1850,  p.  26. 

442  Lepsius,   Denkmaler,  Abth.  ii.  61.  131 , 

and  Passalacqua,  Catalogue,  1826,  pp. 
231-3. 

443  Zoologie,  ii.  p.  79:  —  Another,  not  less 

curious,  arrived  too  late  for  us  to  use  in 
our  studies;  viz:  Courtet  do  I'lsle, 
•'Tableau  Ethnographique  du  Genre 
Humain,"  Paris,  1849.  Wc  shall  revert 
to  it  elsewhere. 

444  October,  1849:  — Amer.  Jour,  of  Med. 

Sciences,  Jan.,  1850. 

445  Thoughts  on  the  Original  Unity  of  the 

Human  Races,  New  York,  1830. 

446  Zoolo|B;ie,  ii.  p.  109. 

447  Op.  cit.,  p.  107. 

448  Lyell,  Principles,  chap,  xxxvii. 

449  South.    Quar.   Rev..   Charleston,   S.  C, 

Jan.,  1846. 

450  Second  Visit  to  the  United  States,  i.  p.  105. 

451  Hist,  of  Napoleon  Buonaparte. 

452  Notes  to  Azara's  Quadrupeds,  i.  p.  24. 

453  Amcr.  ed..  No.  ccciv,  July,  1853.  p.  55. 

454  Genesis  v.  4. 

4.'>5  Eludes  sur  I'Alglrie,  p.  148. 

456  Cahen's  Hebrew  Text,  i.  p.  8 :  Genesis 

ii.  20. 

457  Layard,  Babylon,  p.  623. 

458  Paulhier,  Chine,  P- 24  :  —  Livres  Sacr^ 

de  r Orient,  "Temps  anterieures  au 
Chou-king,"  p.  33. 

459  De  la  Domestication  du  Llama  et  de  la 

Vigogne ;  *•  Projfit  d'une  Menagerie 
Naiionale  d'AccfimatationJ*  1848. 

.,  vjoogle 

REFERENCES    AND    NOTES. 

725 

JVb.  {ofXaUM,  A.) 

460  The  Black  Man,  *' Comparative  Anatomy 

and  Psychology  of  the  African  Negro** 
—transl.  Friedlander  and  Tomes,  New 
York,  1853,  pp.  11-12. 

461  Crania  iEgyptiaca,  1844.  p.  1. 

462  Observations    on    a    Second    Series   of 

Ancient  Egyptian  Crania;  Proceed. 
Acad.  Nat.  Sc,  Phila.,  Oct.  1844,  pp. 

463  Catalogue  of  Skulls,   3d  ed.,   1849:    to 

which  ought  to  be  added  those  crania 
presented  to  him  in  1851  by  Mr.  Glid- 
don;  and,  in  1851-2,  the  two  shipments 
received  from  Mr.  A.  C.  Harris  of 
Alexandria,  Effypt. 

464  Cr.  iEgyp.,  p.  3. 

465  Gliddon^s  Otia,  pp.  74-5,  80. 

466  iEgryptens  Stelle  in  der  Weltgeschichte, 

ii.  pp.  166-70. 

467  Crania  -^gyp.,  p.  19. 

468  Observations,  &c.    Proceed.  Acad.  Nat. 

Sciences,  Phila.,  Oct.  1844  :— Lepsius. 
Briefe,  p.  33. 

469  Crania  .^^ypt.,  p.  20. 

470  Exodus  xii.  38;   Cahen's  Hebrew  Text, 

ii.  p.  50. 

471  ChampoUion,  L*j6gypte  sous  les  Pharaons, 

1814,  ii.  p.  5.  seq. :  and  Quatremere, 
Recherches  sur  la  Langue  et  la  Litiera- 
ture  des  Coptes. 

472  Abeken,  Rapport  a  la  Soci^t6  6gypticnne 

du  Kaire ;   in  Bulletin  de  la  Soc.  de 

A^  T  ^®^^*»  ^*"^'  '^®P'-  ^Q^^J  PP-  171-2. 

473  Lepsms,  Auswahl,  pi.  xx. ;  as  well  as  in 

Briefe,  pp.  105-6. 

IZf  S^'  ^^yp-'  p'-  "•  fifif- 1- 

4/5  Cr.  iEgyp.,  pi.  ii.  fig.  2. 

476  Cr.  ^gyp.,  pi.  ii.  fig.  3. 

477  Cr.  iEgyp.,  pi.  x.  fig.  8. 

478  Cr.  iEgyp.,  pi.  viii.fig.  1. 

479  Cr.  jEgyp.,  pi.  xi.fig.  1 

480  Cr.iEgyp.,  pl.x.fig.  J. 

481  Cr.^gyp.,pl.x.fil4. 

482  Cr.  uEgyp.,  p|.  x.  fip.  5.     Note  to  Wood- 

cuts, figs.  263.  264;  "Ancient  Assyri- 
an" (supra,  pp.  426-7).  After  my  re- 
marks were  stereotyped,  I  had  the 
pleasure  to  receive  another  letter  from 
Mr.  J.  B.  Davis  (dated,  Shelron,  Nov. 
15,  1853),  which  affords  the  following, 
among  other  particulars,  corroborative 
of  the  authi^nticity  of  this  cranium  :  — 
*  *  **The  skull  is  the  veritable 
skull  of  an  ancient  Assyrian.  It  was 
found  with  the  fragments  of  others,  and 
a  great  many  other  bones  and  armor, 
in  a  chamber  of  the  North-west  palace 
at  Nimroud,  to  which  there  was  an  en- 
trance but  no  exit.  This  is  marked  in 
Mr.  Layard's  Nineveh,  Vol.  I.,  p.  62 ; 
Plan  III.,  Chamber  I.  It  was  supposed 
to  be  the  one  to  which  the  defenders  of 
the  palace  had  retreated.  ♦  •  •  ♦  ♦ 
The  skull  is  undoubtedly  allied  to  Mor- 
ton's Pelasgic  group,  but,  yet,  I  think 
possesses  a  distinct  character  which  at 
once  strikes  my  eye,  as  belonging  to  the 
people  of  the  sculptures.  Ttie  full, 
rounded,  equable  form  like  the  ancient 
Greek,  only  decidedly  larger  and  fuller, 
-isstriking.*^'— J.  C.  N. 

483  Egypto  Ancienne,  pi.  2.  p.  261. 

484  Gliddon,  Appeal  to  the   Antiquaries  of 

Europe  on  the  destruction  of  the  Monu- 
ments of  Egypt,  1841 ;  pp.  125-129. 

No.  (oflfbUt,  dc.) 

485  Proceed.  Acad.  Nat.  Sciences,  Philadel., 

Dec.  24, 1850.  On  the  * 'leathern  straps," 
cf.  Birch  in  Gliddon's  Otia,  p.  85 ;  and 
Osburn's  paper  on  the  Leed's  Mummy, 
1828,  pp.  4,  33-4,  pi.  ii. 

486  Promenade    en    Am^rique,    Revue    des 

Deux  Mondes,  Juin,  1853. 

487  Martin,  Main  and  Monks.,  p.  298,  fig.  233. 

488  Op.  cit.,  p.  298. 

489  Prichard,  Phys.  Hist.  i.  p.  297. 

490  Ibid.,  op.  cit.  p.  290.     "  Fulah"   means 

"white:"  Ct.  Beecham,  Ashantee,  or 
the  Gold  Coast;  p.  161,  note. 
.  491  Ibid.,  op.  cit. ;  and  Latham,  Varieties  of 
Man,  p.  6. 

492  Morton,  Cr.  JEg.,  pi.  xii.  fig.  7. 

493  Virejr,  Hisioire  Naturelle  du  Genre  Hu- 

main,  i,  p.  240;  pi.  2  :  drawn  in  colors, 
on  a  folio  scale,  by  Geoffroy  and  Cuvier, 
Mammiferes,  1829:  i.  pi.  1  and  2;  and 
described  in  pp.  1-7. 

494  Morton,  Cr.  JEg.,  p.  16. 

495  Prichard,    Researches,   v.    p.  3.      Thus 

amply  confirmed  by  Crawfurd— "  There 
are  15  varieties  of  Oriental  Negroes. 
*  *  *  •  There  is  no  evidence,  there- 
fore, to  justify  the  conclusion  that  the 
Oriental  Negro,  wherever  found,  is  of 
one  and  the  same  race."  (Edin.  New 
Philos.  Jour.,  1853.  p.  78.— "Negroes 
of  the  Ind.  Archip.") 

496  Churchill's   Collection   of  Voyages,   i. ; 

"History  of  Navigation,  supposed  to 
have  been  written  by  the  celebrated 
Locke."  This  information  may  be 
relied  on,  as  it  was  furnished  me  by  Dr. 
Charles  Pickering.— G.  R.  G. 

497  Anthropologie,  p.  348. 

498  Op.  cit.;  from  "Voyage  de  TUranie." 

499  Morion,  Catalogue,  1849,  No.  1327. 

500  Prichard,  Researches,  i.  p.  298,  fig.  7. 

501  Dumoutier,  Atlas,  pi.  35,  fig.  6. 
50^  Ibid.,  pi.  37,  fig.  2. 

503  Martin,  Man  and  Monkeys,  p.  310,  fig. 

227. 

504  Dumoutier,   Atlas,  pi.  36,  fig.  4—"  Van 

Diemen." 

505  Prichard,  Researches,  i.  p.  297,  fig.  6. 

506  Dumoutier.  Atlas,  pi.  36,  fig.  2  — "Van 

Diemen." 

507  Op.  cit.,  pi.  34. 

508  Martin,  Man  and  Monkeys,  p.  312,  fig. 

229.  There  is  nothing  herein  stated 
about,  the  almost  inconceivable  animal- 
ity  of  Papuans,  Ahetas  (Ajetas)  or 
Negritos,  Arruans,  Al  Foers,  which  the 
reader  cannot  find  in  a  new  work — 
"Ethnographical  Library,  Conducted 
by  Edwm  Norris,  Esq.,  Vol.  I.  The 
Native  Races  of  the  Indian  Archipelago, 
by  George  Windsor  Earl,"  London, 
1853. 

509  Observations  faites  pendant  le  2me  voy- 

age de  Cook,  p.  208. 

510  McBrenhout, ,  ii.  p.  248 ;  cited  by 

D*Eichthal,  "  Races  Oc^aniennes  et 
Americaines,"  1845. 

511  Polynesian  Researches,  ii.  p.  i3. 

512  Dumoutier,    pi.  26,   fig.  6  —  "  Cavernca 

sepulchralea-  Teneriffe."- 

513  Ibid.,  pi.  29,  iiQ.  -,-  "Marquesas." 

514  Ibid.,  pi.  30,  fig.  4— "Caverne  ossuaire— 

Taiti." 

515  Ibid.,  pi.  31.  fig.  4  — "Sepultures  aban- 

donn6es— Isle  Vavao.'*     r^OOolp 

O 

726 

REFERENCES    AND    NOTES. 

JTo.  (qfNotf*,  dt.) 

516  Martin,  Man  and  Monkeys,  p.  310. 

517  Dumoutier,  pi.  32,  fig.  2— •'Isle  Mawi." 
/»18  Philadelphia,  2d  ed.,  1844  ;  pp.  4,  5. 

519  Mr.  Strain's  letter  to  Dr.  Morton,  *•  Rio 

Janeiro.  7th  Decern.,  1843" — Proceed. 
Acad.  Nat.  Sciences.,  Phila.,  Dec,  1844. 

520  Putnam's  American  edition,  New  York, 

1853,  p.  36. 

521  Ethnography  and  Archaeology;  American 

Journ.  of  Science  and  Art,  ii.  2d  series; 
New  Haven,  1846;  tirage  a  part,  pp. 
67,  117-9. 

522  Crania  Americana,  p.  145. 

523  Rivero  and  Tschudi  (pp.  39-40)  doubt  the 

possession  by  Dr.  Morion  of  crania  of 
the  royal  Inca  family:  but  the  note  of 
the  translator  (p.  41)  may  be  passed 
over  as  inconsequent. 

524  The  Creole  Negro;  supra,  No.  491. 

525  Cr.  Americana,  p.  130;  pi.  xi.  C. 

526  Op.  cit.,  p.  131 ;  xi.  D. 

527  Peruvian  Antiquities,  pp.  39-40. 

528  Cr.  Americana,  p.  152  ;  pi.  xvi. 

529  Op.  cit.,  p.  155;  pi.  xviii. 

530  Op.  cit.,  p.  166;  pi.  xxii. 
.531  Op.  cit.,  p.  19S;  pi.  xxxix. 

532  Op.  cit.,  p.  220 ;  pi.  lii. 

533  Op.  cit.,  p.  224  ;  pi.  Iv. 

534  Op.  cit..  p.  259. 

535  Op.  cit.,  p.  257. 

53ti  Anthropologic,  pp.  229-30,  232. 
537  Martin,  Man  and  Monkeys,  p.  273. 
53?^  Ibid.,  p.  273.^ 

539  Chine,  d'aprt^s  les  documents  Chinois,  p.l. 

540  Wood-cut,  fig.  329 — Paravey,  Documents, 

&c.,  sur  le  Deluge  de  Noe,  Paris.  \S'^8^ 
pp.  11,  56:— Pnuthier,  Chou-king,  Part 
II..  chap.  i.  p.  62  ;  Part  IV.,  chap,  xxvii., 
p.  131 : — Ibid.,  Chine,  pp.  55^7. 

541  Pauthier,  Chine,  pi.  22;  pp.  120-1. 
.')42  Ibid.,  pi.  51,  fig.  4;  pp.  216-8. 

543  Ibid.,  pi.  12;  pp.  57-8. 
r^H  Ibid.,  pp.  4:2-4. 

545  Revolutions  des  Peuplcs  de  I'Asie  Moy- 

enne,  Paris,  1839  ;  ii.  p.  432. 

546  Catalogue,  3d  ed.,  1849;  Intro.,  pp.  1-2. 

547  Nat.  Hist,  of  Human  Species;   Edinb., 

1848,  p.  157. 

548  Bremer,  Homes  of  the  New  World,  Am. 

ed.,  1853,  ii.  pp.  162-3.    [Note,  24  Jan.. 

1854.  Let  me  confirm  my  colleague's 
accuracy  by  two  additional  extracts  — 
Isi,  as  regards  crosses  between  Ameri- 
can Indians  and  white  men.  All  readers 
arc  aware  with  what  gusto  a  superior 
civilization  has  been  attributed  to  the 
Mandans ;  and  how  sundry  instances 
of  fair  complexion,  light  hair  and  blue 
eyes,  among  individuals  of  that  tribe, 
have  also  led  to  surmises  that  they 
might  even  be  of  Welsh  descent ! 
Major  John  Le  Conte  pointed  out  to 
me  a  solution  in  the  fact  that  Lewis  and 
Clark  wintered  amonp  them  with  a 
party  of  43  able-bodied  men.  As  a 
specimen,  read  the  following  account 
of  one  orgie.  on  Saturday  night,  Jan. 
5,  1805 — ''Unus  nostrum  sodalium 
multum  alacrior  et  potenticr  juventute, 
hac  nocte  honorem  quatuor  maritorum 
custoflivit."  (Lewis  and  Clark,  Travels 
to  the  source  of  the  Missouri  river; 
1804-6;  London  ed.,  1814;  ch.  vi.,  pp. 
109-111.) — 2d.  As  respects  crosses  be- 

JVb.  (qfXoUs,  rfc) 

tween  Negroes,  Indians,  and  white 
persons,  on  the  Panama  Isthmus;  a 
passage  which  was  indicated  to  me  by 
Mr.  Conrad : — 

**  The  character  of  the  half-castes  is, 
if  possible,  worse  than  that  of  the 
Negroes.  These  people  have  all  the 
vices  and  none  of  the  virtues  of  their 
parents.  They  are  weak  in  body,  and 
are  more  liable  to  disease  than  either 
the  whites  or  other  races.  It  seems 
that  as  long  as  pure  blood  is  added  to 
the  half-castes  proper,  when  they  inter- 
marry only  with  their  own  colour, 
they  have  many  children,  but  these  do 
not  live  to  grow  up;  while  in  families 
of  unmixed  blood  the  offspring  are 
fewer,  but  of  longer  lives.  As  the 
physical  circumstances  under  which 
both  are  placed  are  the  same,  there 
must  really  be  a  specific  distinction 
between  the  races,  and  their  intermix- 
ture be  considered  as  an  infringement 
of  the  law  of  Nature." — Berthoid  See- 
mann,  F.L.S. — Narrative  of  the  Voyage 
of  H.  M.  S.  Herald,  1845-51 :  London, 
1853,1.,  p.  302.  — G.  R.  G.] 

549  Martin,  Man  and  Monkeys,  p.  210,  fig. 

180. 

550  Ibid.  — fig.  181. 

551  Ibid.  — fig.  182. 

552  Savage  and  Wyman,  Troglodytes  GonlloB; 

Boston,  Jour,  of  Nat.  Hist.,  1847,  p.  27. 

553  Martin,  op.  cit.,  p.  228. 

554  Ibid.,  p.  280. 

555  Ibid.,  p.  384. 

556  Ibid.,  p.  223. 

5^7  Prichard,  Researches,  i.  p.  290,  fig.  3. 

558  Martin,  op.  cit.,  p.  367. 

5.VJ  Virey,  Hist.  Nat.,  ii.  p.  42. 

560  Martin,  op.  cit.,  p.  254. 

561-562  Wood-cuts,  figs.  346,  348  —  Illus- 
trated London  News,  1851  —  "drawn 
by  an  English  officer  at  the  Cape." 

563  Amaryllidaceffi,  pp.  338,  339. 

564  Races  of  Men,  p.  12. 

565  American  Jour,  of  Science  and  Art,  Vol. 

xxxviii.,  No.  2. 

566  Anatomie  comparce,  tome  ii. 

PART  II. 

567  GeographifiB  Sacne  Pars  prior;  Cadomi, 

fol.,  1651 — (Loganian  Library,  Phila.) 

568  Spicilegium  Geographise  Hebraeor.  extera;, 

post  Bochart.,  vol.  ii.,  1769-80. 

569  Gliddon,  Otia,  London,  1849,  pp.  16,  124. 

570  Rev.  Dr.  Eadie,  Early  Oriental  History — 

Encycloptedia  Metropolitana,  London, 
1852,  p.  2. 

571  Rev.  Dr.  Hales,  Analysis  of  Chronology ; 

2d  ed.,  1830;  Preface,  p.  21,  and  i.  p. 
352. 

572  Pauthier,  Livres  Sacres  de  1'  Orient,  Paris, 

Intro.,  p.  1. 

573  Cahen,  La  Bible,  Traduction  Nouvelle, 

Paris,  1831 ;  i.  pp.  26-8. 

574  Avecun  Atlas  gcogrnphique,  pittoresque, 

archcologique,  goologique,  &.c. — "  Ou- 
vrage  qui  a  remporte  It'  prix  de  la  Societe 
de   Geographic  de    Paris,    en    1838;'*- 
Paris,  6  vol.  Text,  8vo.,  1839-43. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

REFEEENCES    AND    NOTES. 

727 

No.  {qfNoUt,  dc) 

575  Bulletins  de  TAcad^mie  rovale  de  Brux- 

elles,  vi. ;  and  Notions  ^letnentaires  de 
Siatistique,  Paris,  1840. 

576  Voyage  dans  les  steps  d' Astrakhan  et  du 

Caucase ;  and  Histoire  Primitive  des 
Peuples  ^ui  ont  habil6  anciennement 
ces  conirees. 

577  GoMeR.    Bochart,  pp.  194-6.  —  Homer, 

Odyss.  xi.  14. — Diodor.,  v.  32.— Herod., 
iv.  100. — Josephus,  Antiq.  i.  6. — Raw- 
linson,  Commentary,  1850,  p.  68. — Du- 
bois ;  i.  61,  iv.  321,  327,  350,  391;  v. 
22   35   44. 

578  MaGUG.     Bochart,  pp.  212-19.  — Rev. 

Moses  Stuart,  Interpretation  of  Pro- 
phecy, Andover,  1842,  p.  123.  —  De 
Weite.  transl.,  Parker,  i.  p.  95-7,  dtc. 

—  Kur'an,  Ch.  xviii.,  v.  93,  3Q\  xxi.  95, 
&c.  —  Pauihier.  Liv.  Sac.  de  l' Orient, 
p.  495 :  Lane,  Selections,  p.  140. — Bar- 
thelemy,  Anciennes  Religions  des 
Gaules;  Rev.  Arch^ol.,  1851,  p.  338, 
note.— Dubois,  iv.  321,  345;  363-407.— 
Joscphus,  Ant.,  i.  6.  —  Hieronyraus, 
Comm.  in  Ezek.  xxxviii,  2.  —  Lenor- 
mant,  Cours  d'Hist.  Ancien.,  Paris, 
1837,  p.  289.— Emelin,  1774,  and  Porter 
(Travels,  ii.  520),  1819  — •*  virall  of  Gog 
and  Maojog  at  Derbend." — Anlhon, 
Classic.  Diet.,  1813;  voce  "  Asi,"  p. 
218.  "  Scyihic"  is  here  used  in  the 
sense  proposed  by  Rawlinson  (Com- 
mentary, pp.  68,  75:  and  Cuneiform 
Inscriptions,  1817,  pp.  20,  34-7,)  and 
adopted  by  Norris,  (Memoir  on  the 
Scyihic  Version  of  the  Behisliin  inscrip- 
tion ;  Jour.  R.  Asiat.  Soc,  1853;  xv.. 
Part  1,  p.  2.  — Sir  W.  Jones,  6ih  Dis- 
course,  on  Persians;  Asiatic  Researches, 
1799,  ii.  p.  64.  — Gliddon,  Otia,  p.  124. 

—  VVestcrcaard,  xMedian  Species  of 
Arrowhcadcd  writing:  Antia. du  Nord, 
1844  ;  pp.  273-8,  289.— Hincks,  Perse- 
poliian  Writing,  1846,  p.  18.  — D'Oraa- 
lius  d'Halloy,  Races  Humaines,  ou 
Elements  d'eihnographie,  1845,  **  Osse- 
tes."  p.  79. 

579  MeDI.   Bochart.  pp.  219-25.— Herod.,  vii. 

— Dc  Saulcy,  Recherches  sur  TEcriture 
cun^iforme   Assyrienne ;    Paris,   1848, 

£26.-^Layard,  Babylon,  p.  628.  — De 
ongperier,  Leitre  a  M.  Lowenstern; 
Rev.  Arch^ol.,  1847,  p.  505.  — Rawlin- 
son, TabletofBehistun.— Birch,  Tablet 
of  Karnac,  pp.  14-5.  — Dubois,  iv.  321, 
339. 

580  lUN.  Bochart,  pp.  174-6.— Aristophanes, 

In  Acharnum  ;  Act  i.,  scene  3.— Homer., 
Iliad,  xiii,  685. — Pausanias,  Achaic,  p. 
397.  —  Herodotus,  viii.  44.  —  Rosetta 
Stone,  in  Lepsius's  Auswahl ;  or  in 
Birch's  Gallery,  pp.  114-17,  pi.  49 :  — 
also,  Lenormant  ,E8sai  sur  leTexte  Grec, 
1810;  pi>.  10,  11;  lines  No.  54;  and  p. 
45. — Hincks  (True  date  of  the  Rosetta 
Stone,  Dublin,  1842,  pp.  6,  8,)  claims 
**  March,  197,  B.C.,"  as  date  of  this 
decree ;  but  a  Letronne  would  first 
have  determined  the  year  of  "C.  :*'  vide 
infra,  pn.  G6.5-7.  —  Champollion,  Gram- 
maire  Egyptienne,  pp.  151,  175;  Diet., 
p.  66.  —  **  Ouinin,"  in  conque.«»t8  of 
Seti-Mencptha.  and  of  Ramses  II. — De 
Saulcy,  Recherches,  p.  26 ;  Inscriptions 

No,  (qf  Notes,  ttc.) 

trouv6es  a  Khorsabad,  Rev.  ArcheoL, 
1850,  pp.  769-70. —  Rawlinson,  Behis- 
tun,  pp.  1,  xxvii. — Layard,  Babylon,  p. 
628.  rauthier*s  Manou,  lib.  x.,  v.  44. 
— Wilford,  Asiatic  Rci^earches,  1799; 
iii.  p.  358. — Syke.^,  Jour.  R.  Asiai.  Soc, 
1841.,  vol.  vi. ;  Art.  xiv.  pp.  434-6.— 
••J.  P.  S."  (in  Kitto,  Biblical  Encyclo- 
psedia,  ii.,  p.  393-400)  otniis  any  expla- 
nation of  Tubal,  Mcshech,  and  Tiras, 
in  his  "sons  of  Japheih"  (p.  397)! 
There  are  numerous  snnilar  oversights 
in  Kitto,  no  less  than  in  Robinson*8 
Calmet.  — Dubois,  iv.  321.  334.  ' 

581  T/uBaL.    Bochart.  pp.  204-13.  — Munk, 

Palestine,  p.  420. —De  Wette,  ii.  366. 
seq.  —  Strabo,  ii.  129.  —  Herod.,  vii.  78. 
Rawlinson,  Commentary,  pp.  63-4. — 
Layard,  Babylon,  p.  628.  —  Dubois,  iv. 
32  K  388. 

582  MeSAeK.    Bochart,  pp.  204-13.— Herod., 

iii.,  94 ;  vii.  78.  —  Rawlinson,  Com- 
mentary, pp.  63-4. — Birch,  Stat.  Tablet 
of  Karnac,  pp.  14-5.  —  Hincks.  Report 
of  Syro--(Egyptian  Soc,  1846. — Dubois, 
ii.  17;  iv.  321,  336,  347. 

583  THRaS.    Bochart,  p.  172-3.    For  hiero- 

glyphical  mention  of  "  Thraces,"  in 
Egyptian  conouests,  pee  Champollion 
(Lettres)  and  Rostllini  (MS.,  iv.  288): 
for  classical,  the  "Inscrip.  of  Adulis" 
— Champoliion-P'igeac,  Eg.  Anc,  p.  67. 
—Dubois,  iv.  321,  324. 

584  ASAKeNaZ.   Bochart,  pp.  196-8.— Pliny, 

iv.  24. — Kitto,  ii.  p.  397.— Rawlinson, 
Commentary,  p.  46;  *' Nimroud  Obe- 
lisk.**—  Ibid..  London  Lit.  Gazette, 
Aug.,  1851.— Dubois,  iv.  321,  330,  391. 

585  RIPaTt.    Bochart,  pp.  198-9.  — Strabo, 

vii.  341.  —  Pliny,  iv.  24.  —  Dubois,  iv. 
321    330. 

586  TfoGaRMaH.      Bochart,    pp.    200-4.— 

Moses  Choren.,  Hist,  of  Arm.,  p.  24. — 
St.  Martin,  Menioires  sur  TArmenie, 
1818;  i.  pp.  205,  271-8.— Strabo,  xii.— 
Josephus,  Ant.,  i.  1,  6.  —  Lowenstern, 
Lettre  a  M.  de  Saulcy,  Rev.  Archeol., 
1849,  p.  494.  — Dubois,  ii.,  p.  9;  iv.  pp. 
332-3.— Jardot,  Revolutions,  ii.  p.  6. 

587  ALISaH.    Bochart,  pp.  176-8.— Homer, 

II.,  ii.  617.  — Grote,  Hist,  of  Greece,  i. 
p.  487.— Herod,  i.  ^  146,  &c. 

588  Wood-cut,  fie.  355— Layard,  folio  Monu- 

ments; and  Babylon,  pp.  343,  350. — De 
Longpcrier,  Rev.  Archeol.,  1844,  pp. 
224-5;  1847,  p.  297.  — Stuart,  Cm. 
Hist,  and  Def.,  pp.  113,  114,  120.  — De 
Wette,  ii.  pp.  452-6. — Cahen,  Notes  on 
.  Jonah,  vol.  xii. — "  Berosiana,'*  in  Bun- 
8en*8  Eg.  PI.,  i.  pp.  704-19.  — Munk, 
Palestine,  pp.  451-2.  — On  "Sibylline 
verses"  sec  Letronne,  Examen  Archd- 
ologique,  Croix  An^re,  1846,  pp.  33-4. 

589  TtaRSlS.   Acts,  .\xii.  3.  — Lanci,  Parali- 

pomeni,  i.  pp.  l.VK').  —  (iesenius,  in 
Parker's  De  Wette,  i.  p.  455,  note. — 
Munk.  Pal.,  p.  29.  — Gliddon,  Otia,  p. 
50.  —  Pickerincr.  Races,  p.  373.  —  Pau- 
thier,  Sinico-ji^ijypiiaca,  p.  10.  —  Bo- 
chart, pp.  188-91.  —  London  Lit.  Gaz., 
May,  1852. 

590  KiTnM.     Bochart,  pp.  178-83.  — Birch, 

Ivory  ornaments  found  at  Nimroud,  pp. 
174-5 ;  and  Annals  of  Thotmes  IIL,  pp. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

728 

REFERENCES    AND    NOTES. 

IfiK  {fffNdU*,  cic) 

157-60.  —  Boeckh,  Corpus  Inscrip. 
Graec,  i.  p.  523.— Ptolemy,  lib.  v.  14.— 
Jo8ephu8,Antiq.,  i.6. 1. — Rev.Archeol., 
1846,  pp.  114-15  ;  and  1847,  p.  448. 

591  DoDaNlM.    Bocharl,  pp.  183-8.— Wise- 

man, Connection  between  Sci.  and  Rev. 
ReL,  1836  :  ii.  pp.  168-9. — ChampolUon- 
Figeac,  Dissert,  s.  TEtymoIogie,  p.  8. 
— ffcrod.,  ii.,  %  52. 

592  Wood-cut,  fig.  356.— Champollion,  Gram- 

maire,  pp.  150,  151,  195,  407;  Dic- 
lionnaire,  p.  409. — Hincks,  Hierog.  Al- 
phabet, p.  16 ;  pi.  i.,  figs.  23,  26,  27. 

593  Letronne,  OpinK)n8  cosniographiques'des 

Peres  de  TEglise ;  Rev.  des  deux 
Mondes,  1837,  pp.  601-33 :  and  Recueil 
des  Inscrip.,  ii.  p.  37,  seq.  — Raoul- 
Rochette,  Archeologie  comparee,  1848; 
Part  ii.  p.  190,  seq. — Lenormant,  Cours 
d'Hist.  Anc,  p.  228. 

^94  KUSA.  Bochart,  p.  238,  and  241.— Mar- 
tin, Etudes  sur  le  Tim^  de  Flaton, 
Paris,  1841 ;  **  Atlantide,'*  i.  p.  332.— 
Walton,  Bibl.  Polygl. ;  Proleg.,  xv.  pp. 
97-9.— De  Wette,  i.  pp.  228-31.— Wells, 
Hist.  Geog.  of  O.  and  N.  Test.,  1804, 
pp.  103-105.  —  Lanci,  Paralip.,  ii.  p.  45. 
Nott,  Bibl.  and  Phvs.  Hist.,  p.  143.— 
Forster,  Geog.  of  Arabia,  1844,  i.  pp. 
26-7,  28,  29.  — Burckhardt,  Travels  m 
Arab.,  ii.  p.  385. — Rosellini,  Monuraenti 
Civili,  ii.Jpp,  394-403.— Gliddon,  Otia, 
p.  133. — Forster,  op.  cit.,  i.  14-6. — Le- 
tronne,  Mem.  et  Docum.,  Rev.  Archil., 
1849,  p.  85.  — Cahen,  Bible,  v.;  avant 
propos,  p.  13.  —  Quatremere,  Recher., 
Coptes.- De  Welte,  i.  pp.  202-6.— Pey- 
ron,  Coptic  Lexicon,  voce  Ethosh. — Par- 
thev,  Vocabularium  Copticum,  p.  549. 
Wilkinson,  Tojpog.  of  Thebes,  p.  487 ; 
Mod.  Eg.  and  Theb.,  ii.  p.  317.— Birch, 
Stat.  Tabl.  Karnac,  p.  47.  — Anthon, 
Class,  Diet. ;  and  Syst.  of  Anc.  Geog. ; 
voce  **  Asia.*' — R^musat,  in  Pauthier's 
Chine,  p.  259.— Kitto,  Bibl.  Cyclop.,  i. 
p.  238. 

595  Volney,  Recherches  Nouvelles,  Paris, 
1822,  iv.  —  Lenormant,  Cours  d'Hist. 
Anc,  1838,  pp.  24,  129.  — Jomard, 
Arable;  in  Mengin,  1839,  iii.  p.  327-9, 
and  passim.  —  Fresnel,  **Hi8toire  des 
Arabes  avant  Tlslanisme,"  in  Jour. 
Asiat.,  *'4me  Lettre"  Djeddah,  Jan., 
1838.  — Sale's  Introd.  to  the  Kur'an, 
Liv.  Sac.  d'Or.,  p.  467.  —  Lane,  Selec- 
tions, p.  17.  —  Forster,  Geog.,  i.  p.  20. 

—  Gesenius,  in  De  Wette,  i.  pp.  433-4. 

—  Hyde,  Hisi.  rel.  veter.  Persarum,  p. 
37.-7Kiito,  •♦Cush,"i.  p.  503.— Asse- 
mani,  Bibliotheca  Orientalis,  iii.,  part 
2,  p.  568,  seq.  —  Turner,  '•Himyarite 

,  Inscriptions,"  Trans.  Amer.  Ethnol. 
Soc,  New  York,  1845,  art.  iv. — Fresnel, 
Recherches  sur  les  Inscrip.  Himya- 
riques,  1845;  Jour.  Asiatique,  No.  11 ; 
also,  Lettres,  Feb.,  March,  April,  May, 
1845.  —  Gesenius,  Geschichte  der  Heb. 
Sprache  und  Schrift,  1815.  —  Forster, 
Geog.  of  Arabia,  i.  pp.  24-76,  94-102. 
696  SynceUii  **Chronographeion,"  p.  51. — 
Letronne,  in  Biot's  Recherches  sur 
I'Annee  vague  des  Egyptiens,  1831,  pp. 
25-7. — Biot,  M^moire  sur  divers  points 
de  TAstron.  Anc,  1846,  p.  37. — Matter, 

?Po, 

Hist,  de  r^cole  d'Alexandrie,  1844;  tL 
I.  190-1. — Barucchi,  Discorsi  Cntici, 
Wino,  1844;  pp.  14,  15.  — Bockh, 
Manetho  und  die  Hundstern-periode, 
Berlin,  1848;  p.  40.  — Bunsen,  ^yp- 
tens  Stelle,  1845;  i.  pp.  256-63.— 
Raoul-Rocbette,  Jour,  des  Savans,1846; 
pp.  141,  241-2.  —  Lepsius,  Chron.  dcr 
Agypter,  i.  p.  446.  —  Kenrick,  Egypt 
under  the  Pharaohs,  1851.  —  Maury,  in 
Rev.  Archeol.,  Juin,  1851 ;  pp.  160-3. 

597  MiT«RIM.     Groiefend's    "Analyse   de 

Sanconiathon,"  trad.  Lebas,  Pans,  1839; 
Introduction,  pp.  79-85. — Champollioo, 
L'Egypte  sous  les  Pharaons,  1814;  i. 
Chap.  2.  —  Parthey,  Vocab.  Copt.,  pp. 
511-2. — Rawlinson,  Behislun,  1846,  pp. 

I,  27.— Commentary,  1850.  pp.  60-7.— 
De  Saulcy,  Rev.  Archeol.,  1850,  pp. 
768-9,  771;  pL  133,  No.  19;  and  Re- 
cherches, Inscrip.  de  Van,  1848,  p.  27. 
Nash,  on  the  term  Copt,  and  the  name 
of  Egypt ;  Burke's  Ethnol.  Jour.,  Na 

II,  1849,  p.  496.  — Hincks,  Hierog. 
Alph.;  p.  28,  pi.  i.  fig.  78.  — Gliddon, 
Chapters,  p.  41. — Rosellini,  Mon- Sior., 
i.  p.  58.  —  Portal,  Symboles  des  Ej^yp- 
tiens,  pp.  51,  73.  —  Lanci,  Lettre  a  M. 
Prisse,  1847,  pp.  99-103.  —  Lenormant, 
Cours,  p.  233.  — Birch.  •*  Merter,"  in 
Annals  of  Thoimes  III.,  p.  138 ;  Eg. 
Inscrip.  in  Bibliothcque  Nat.,  p.  12;  also, 
on  "  iLam,  the  black  country,"  as  foaod 
in  the  Ritual,  in  Cheremon  on  Hiero- 
glyphics, p.  11. — Bochart.  p.  292. 

598  PAUT.    Bochart.  pp.  333-9.  —  Gliddon, 

Otia,  p.  127.— D'Eichihal,  Foulahs,  pp. 
1,  8,  150.  —  Jerome,  Commentary  oo 
Isaiah,  Ixvi.  19. — Ptolemy,  lib.  iiL  1.- 
Pliny,  Hist.  Nat.,  v. — ^Josephus,  Anti^., 
i.  6,  2. — Griiberg  de  Hemso.  Specchio, 
p.  291,  seq. —  Cervantes  de  Mannol, 
Descripcion  general  de  Africa.  Grenada, 
1573;  i.  fol.  31,  seA  —  Champollion, 
Diet.,  pp.  339-40.  — D^  A vezac,  Afrique 
Anc,  p.  31.  —  Lenormant,  Cours,  pp. 
233-6.- Hengstenberg,  Eg.  and  Books 
of  Moses ;  transl.  Robbms,  p  211.— Dc 
Saulcy,  Rev.  Archil.,  1850,  pp.  769, 
772.— Birch,  Eg.  Inscrip.,  p.  13. 

599  KNAiSN.    Cahen,   Genese.   i.  p.  25.— 

Procopius,  De  bello  Vandalico,  ii.  cap. 
20. — St.  Augustin,  Expos.  Epist.  Rom. ; 
cited  in  De  Wette,  i.  p.  431.  —  Land, 
Bassorilievo  Fenicio  di  Carpentrasso ; 
Roma,  1824,  p.  126.  —  Munk,  Inscrip. 
Phoenicienne  de  Marseilles;  Journal 
Asiat.,  1847,  pp.  473,  483,  526;  and 
Palestine,  pp.  87-8,  192.  — Gesenius, 
Geschichte  der  Heb.  Sprache,  1815,  pp. 
8,  9. — De  Saulcy,  Mem.  sur  une  Inscrip. 
Phcenicienne,  1847.  passim.— Josephus, 
Com.  Apion.,  i,  22.  —  Kitto,  i.  p.  8^, 
* 'Hebrew  Language." — Eusebius,  Pra- 
par.  Evang..  i.  cap.  10.  —  Lenormant, 
Cours.  p.  236.— Bochart,  pp.  339-42. 

600  SoBA.     Volney,  Recherches,  iv.  p.  232. 

— Josephus,  Antiq.  viii.  6.  5. — Ludolph. 
Hist.  Althiopica,  ii.  cap.  3.  —  Forster, 
Geo|5.,  i.  p.  157,  seq.  —  Waihen,  Arts, 
Antiq.  and  Chron.  of  Egypt,  1842,  pp. 
69-70.  — Hoskins,  Ethiopia,  p.  339  [not 
directly,  I  find,  but  inferentially.  —  G. 
R.  G.J. — Fresnel,  4rae  Lettre,  Jan., 

Digitized  by 

Google 

REFERENCES    AND    NOTES. 

729 

2^0.  (fifNdUi,  dc.) 

1838,  pp.  71-7;  and  Inscriptions  Him- 
yariques,  pp.  34,  67-9. —  Pauthier, 
Chine,  pp.  94-100,  notes.— D'Herbelot, 
Bibliotheque  Orientale,  voce  "Salo- 
mon," and  "  Thahamuraih. "  —  De 
Wette.  ii.  pp.  248-65.— Forster,  Geog., 
L  pp.  33-8,  and  Maps.  —  Bochart,  pp. 
146-56. 

601  KAUILaH.  Bochart,  pp.  161-3.— Forster, 

i.  pp.  9.  38,  54. 

602  SaBT/aH.   Lenormant,  Cours,  pp.  237-8. 

—  Strabo,  xvi.  p.  771,  Fr.  Transl.— 
Jomard,  Arabic,  pp.  373,  389-90. — 
Pliny,  vi.  32.  — Volney,  iv.  p.  232.— 
Fresnel,  Inscrip.  Himyar.,  pp.  51-2.  — 
Forster,  Geog.,  i.  pp.  57-8.  —  Bochart, 
pp.  252-4. 

603  RAaMaH.    Volney,  iv.  p.  235.— Forster, 

i.  pp.  59-76;  ii.  223-7.  — Fresnel,  4me 
et  5me  Leltres,  1838.— Wellsted,  Trav. 
in  Arabia,  1838,  ii.  p.  430.  —  Burck- 
hardt,  Arabia,  ii.  p.  385.  —  Bochart,  p. 
247. 

604  SaBTfeKA.     References  as  above.  No. 

603. 

605  S«eBA.     Munk,    Palestine,   p.  438,   on 

"Ezra."  — De  Wette,  ii.  pp.  47-8.— 
Forster,  ii.  pp.  323-4 ;  and  i.  pp.  71-3. 

—  Bochart,  pp.  249-51. 

606  DeDaN.   Bochart,  p.  248.— Forster,  i.  38 ; 

and  Maps.  —  Letronne,  •*  V^nus  Ang6- 
rone,"  Mem.  et  Doc,  Rev.  Archil., 
1849,  p.  277.— Glaire,  Les  Livres  Saints 
venges,  Paris,  1845,  passim.  — Rev. 
Sidney  Smith,  Elementary  Sketches  of 
Moral  Philos.,  New  York  ed.,  18.50;  p. 
254. — Strauss.  Vie  de  Jesus,  trad.  Littr^, 
Paris,  1839;  Preface,  p.  8. 

607  NiM  RoD.  Vide  W.  W.'s  profound  articles 

"Scripture,"  and  "Verse,"  in  Kitto, 
ii.  pp.  717,  910.  — [For  hallucinations 
on  "  Nimrod,"  see  Anc.  Univ.  Hist., 
i.  p.  275,  seq. ;  Faber,  Origin  of  Pagan 
Idolatry,  and  Bryant,  Anc.  Mythology, 
passim  ;  Hales,  Analysis  of  Chron.,  i. 
pp.  358-9,  and  ii.]  "Nimrod,  a  Dis- 
course on  certain  passagres  of  History 
and  Fable."  London,  1829,  printed  for 
Richard  Priestley.  —  Higgins,  ^  Anaca- 
lypsis,  London,  1836.  i.  p.  6.— Wiseman, 
Lectures,  i.  p.  37.— Birch,  Two  Egypt. 
Cartouches,  1846,  pp.  168-70.— Lepsius, 

— Rawlinson,  Commentary,  pp.  4,  6,  7, 
22.— Layard,  Babylon,  pp.  33,  123.- De 
Saulcy,  Dead  Sea.  ii.  p.  544.— D'Herbe- 
lot,  voce  "Nimrod;"  and  Ouseley, 
Oriental  Collections,  ii.  p.  375.  —  Jose- 
phus,  Antiq.  i.  4,  21. 

608-609  De  Sola,  Lindenthal,  and  Raphall, 
Scriptures  in  HeU  and  English;  Lon- 
don, 1846;  p.  40,  notes.  — Glaire,  Liv. 
Sis.  vengea,  i.  pp.  313-20.— Rawlinson, 
Commentary,  p.  14.  — Lanci,  Paralipo- 
meni,  ii.  parte  8va.  —  Gesenius,  in  De 
Wette,  i.  p.  435.— Meyer,  HebraTsches 
Wurzel- Wortcrbuch  ;  cited  by  Bunsen, 
Disc,  on  Eihnol.,1847,  p.  273.— D* Olivet, 
Langue  Hebraique  restituee,  1815;  pp. 
281,  343.  — Bochart,  256-60. 

1.10  Gliddon,  MS.  "Remarks  on  the  Intro- 
duction of  Camels  and  Dromedaries, 

92 

Xo.(qfNcU8,dc.) 

for  Army-Transportation,  Carriage  of 
Mails,  and  Military  Field-service,  into 
the  States  and  Territories  lying  south 
and  west  of  the  Mississippi,  between 
the  Atlantic  and  Pacific  coasts  —  pre- 
sented to  the  War-department,  Wash- 
ington, Oct.  1851."  As  I  intend  to  pub- 
lish an  entire  account  of  this  affair  for 
public  edification  ere  long,  it  is  sufficient 
now  to  determine  the  very  recent  intro- 
duction of  the  Arabian  camel  into 
Africa  by  quoting  Humboldt  (Aspects 
of  Nature,  p.  71) ;  Ritter  (Das  Kameel, 
in  Asien,  viii.  pp.  755-9) ;  Procopius 
(Bello  Vandalico,  i.  8;  ii.  11);  Corippus 
(iv.  598-9);  and  Bodichon,  j&tudes  sur 
I'Algerie,  pp.  62-3.— G.  R.  G. 

611  LUDIM.    Bochart,  pp.  299-310.  — Gra- 

berg  de  Hemso,  Marocco,  pp.  69,  246, 
251,  seq. — Castiglione,  Recherches  sur 
les  Berbcres  Atlantiques,  Milan,  1846 ; 
pp.  89,  100-1. — Lacroiz,  Numidie,  p.  4. 

—  D'Avezac,  Afrique  Anc,  p.  28.— 
Yanoski,  L' Afrique  Byzantine,  pp.  93, 
99.  — Ebn-Khaledoon,  "Fee  ahbar  el- 
Berber,"  3d  book;  transl.  Schulz,  in 
Jour.  Asiat.,  1828;  pp.  140-1. — Asiatic 
Miscellany,  p.  148.  —  Marmol,  op.  cit., 
trad.  Perrot,  1667,  i.  p.  68.  — Leo  Afri- 
canus  (Hassan  ebn  Mohammed  el 
Ghamatee)  Africs  Descriptione,  1556,  p. 
5.  —  Bertholet,  Guanches,  Mem.  Soc. 
Ethnol.,  Paris,  1841 ;  Part  i.,  pp.  130-46. 
Agassiz,  Diversity  of  Origin  of  Human 
Races;  Christian  Examiner,  Boston, 
July,  1850,  p.  16.— Dureau  de  la  Malle, 
Carthage,  pp.  1-3,  13.  — Gibbon,  Mi!- 
man's,  viii.,  pp.  227-8.  —  Bodichon, 
Etudes,  pp.  32,  64,  103,  109.  — Quatre- 
mere,  Ist  art.  on  Hitzig*s  Philistaer; 
Jour,  des  Savans,  1846, iVlay ;  pp.  260, 
266: — [That  these  views  upon  the 
"  Ludim"  are  new,  the  reader  can  per- 
ceive oy  opening  Munk  (Palestine,  p. 
432) ;  Lenormant  (Cours,  p.  244);  Cahen 
(Genese  i.  pp.  27,  184);  Kitto  (Cyclop., 
pp.  397-8);  and  all  English  commen- 
tators.] 

612  A<JNaMIM.    Forster,  i.  pp.  56-9.  — De 

Saulcy,  Dead  Sea,  1853 ;  i.  p.  64 ;  ii.  p. 
837. — Birch,  Hieratic  Canon  of  Turin, 

g.6.  — Anthon,  Class.  Diet.,  p.  872.— 
ochart,  p.  322. 

613  LeHaBIM.    Bochart,  p.  316.  — Anthon, 

Anc.  and  Mod.  Geog.,  pp.  708,  749.— 
D'Avezac,  Afrjque.  pp.  4,  28,  64-9. — 
Champollion,  Eg.  s.  1.  Phar.,  ii.  p.  363. 

—  Parihey,  Vocab.  Copt.,  pp.  497,  530, 

—  Gliddon,  Otia,  p.  131. 

614  NiP^aiaTtuKAIM.    Bochart,  pp.  317-21. 

Otia,  pp.  9.  16,  133.  136.— Nott,  Bibl. 
and  Pnys.  Hist.,  pp.  144-5. —  Champol- 
lion, op.  cit.,  i.  p.  55;  ii.  pp.  5,  31,  144, 
seq.  —  Part  hey,  pp.  110,  506,  530.— 
Herod.,  ii.,  ^  18. — (!jhampollion,Lettres, 
p.  124 ;  and  the  hieroglyphics  in  Gram., 
pp.  169,  363,  406;  Diet.,  pp.  339,  341. 

—  Peyron,  Gram.  Ling.  Uopticce,  pp. 
30,  36-8.  —  Hengstenberg,  p.  211  ;  and 
Gliddon,  Chapters,  p.  41. — Lenormant, 
Cours,  pp.  235,  244-5.— Brugsch,  Scrip- 
tura  .ffigyptiorum  Demotica,  p  25. — De 
Saulcy,  Lettre  i  M.  Guigniaut,  p.  18.— 
Lepsius,  Lettre  a  M.  Rosellini,  p.  66.- 

Digitized  by 

Google 

730 

REFERENCES    AND    NOTES. 

Ab.  {of  XokSy  dc) 

Bunscn,  E?.  PI.,  i.  pp.  285,  471.— 
Schulz'a  Ebii  Khaledoon,  p.  122. — 
Castiglione,  Berberes,  p.  101. — Quatre- 
mr-re.  Mem.  Geog.  sur  I'Egypte,  i.  p. 
37;  and  in  Jour,  des  Savans,  1846,  p. 

2(;r>. 

015  P/ieTmRiSIM.  Mo8t  of  the  above  refer- 
ences here  apply.  These  are  special— 
Peyron,  Papyr.  Gnec.,  Pari  ii.  p.  27. — 
Parfhey,  pp.  56,  291,  500,  539.— Wil- 
kinson, Mod.  E^.  and  Theb.,  ii.  p.  137. 
D'Avezac,  Afrique,  p.  27.  —  Champ., 
Gram.  pp.  98,  169,  327;  Diet.,  p.  81.— 
De  Hcmso,  p.  296,  seq. — Lacroix,  Nu- 
midie,  p.  6.  —  Anthon,  Anc.  Geog.,  p. 
749.  —  Quatremore,  loc.  cit.,  p.  266. 

316  KSAiLuKAlM.  Bochart,  pp.  323-9.— De 
Sola,  Genesis,  p.  42.  —  Cahen,  i.  p.  27. 
Glnire  and  Franck's  Bible,  i.  p.  50. — 
Munk,  Palestine,  pp.  82.  432.— Kitto,  i. 
pp.  399,  388 ;  ii.  398.— Hales,  Analysis, 
i.  p.  355.  —  Riiter,  Vorhalle,  p.  35,  seq. 
—  Morton,  Cr.  Mg.,  pp.  23-27,  on 
••Herodotus." — Eadie,  Early  Orient. 
Hist.  —  Mignot,  *♦  3me  Mem.  sur  les 
Phrpniciens;"  Acad.  R.  d.  Tnscrip., 
Paris,  xxxiv.  1770,  p.  146.  —  Marmol, 
Ira  parte,  fol.  31.  —  Lepsius,  Lettre,  pp. 
14,  18,  41:  PI.  A.  No.  I,  12.— Birch,  m 
Otia.  p.  115. —  De  Longpericr,  Rev. 
Archf'o!.,  1850,  p.  450.— Botta,  6crit. 
cuiu'itbrnie  Assyr.,  pp.  6,  93,  192. — 
Rawlinfson,  Commentary,  pp.  10-14. — 
De  Heinso,p.  2J6. — Hitzig.Urijeschichte 
und  .Mythologie  der  Philistaer,  1845; 
reviewed  by  Quatremcro,  loc.  cit,  p. 
'ZC^G. — Koouig,  apud  Jomard,  Rccueil 
dc9  Voyages,  1829;  iv.  p.  130,  seq. — 
Hodpson.  Sahara,  pp.  33-5  :  —  and,  for 
•*  Oases,"  Wilkinson,  Mod.  Eg.,  ii.  pp. 
353-79. 

617  P/i»LiS'niM.    Wilford.  Asint.  Res.;  iii. 

1T99,  pp.  317-20,  322.  —  Hales,  i.  pp. 
368,  380;  after  a  disclaimer,  p.  198.— 
[On  ••  Col.  Wilford,"  who  is  the  cause 
of  all  those  Hindostanic  stupidities  still 
current  among  English  hagtographers, 
conf.  Klaproth ;  in  the  Journal  Asiat., 
Paris,  XXV.  p.  13,  note ;  and  Vans  Ken- 
nedy, Hindu  Mythology,  London,  1831; 
Appendix  A,  pp.  406-22.]  Champollion, 
Gram.,  p.  180.— Osbum,  Testimony, 
pp.  137-41, 155.— Mignot,  op.  cit,  p.  148, 
Bcq.  —  Quntremere  fop.  cit.,  pp.  258-69, 
411-24,  497-510,)  dispenses  with  more 
than  reference  to  Kitto,  ii.  pp.  521-4. — 
Raoul-Rochette,  Archeolocie  compar^e, 
i.  pp.  190-2.  373-4.  — De  Saulcy,  Dead 
Sea,  i.  pp.  27-9,  55-6. 

618  KaP^TfoRIM.     Bochart,   pp.   329-33.— 

Volney,  iv.  p.  229.— Quatremere,  loc.  cit. 

619  T«IDoN.     Bochart,  p.  342.  — Homer.  II. 

xxiii.  743;  Odys.,  xv.  435. —Justin, 
Ixviii.  3.  —  De  Saulcy,  Dead  Sea,  i.  52, 
57-9. — Quatremere,  on  Mover's  ••  Pho- 
nizier."  op.  cit.,  p.  .503.— Gliddon,  Otia, 
p.  136.  — Eadie,  Early  Or.  Hist.,  pp. 
425-6.— Layard,  Babvlon,  p.  627. 

6?0  KAeT/.  Bochart,  p.  344-8,  for  this  and 
the  following  names. — Lanci,  Paralipo- 
meni,  i.  pp.  13,  144.— Munk,  Palestine, 
o.  78. — Birch,  Archaeologia,  xxxv.  1853. 
—Layard,  Babylon,  pp.  142,  354,  633. 

G21  IBUSL    Osburn,  Testimony,  pp.  37-43, 

!  No.  (qfNoUsj  <fc.) 

123-5,  154.— CharopolliD.i,  Lettrcs.  pp. 
76-7.^De  Saulcy,  Inscriptions  de  Van, 
p.  26. 

622  AMoRL    On  ••  Nephinm,"  cf.  the  Para- 

lipomeni. — Talmud,  apud  Rabbi  Ben- 
Ouziel;  Cahen,  iv.  p.  107,  note.— 
Gliddon,  Otia,  p.  137.-^Rose]lini,  Moo. 
Sior.,  iii.  part  1,  pp.  368-70  ;  iv.  pp.  94, 
237-9.— Birch,  Gallery,  pan  i.  p.  86.— 
Hincks,  Hierog.  Alph.,  p.  13  ;  pi-  i.  fig- 
17.— Oiburn,  Test.,  65,  128-9,  154.— 
Birch,  Stat.  Tab.  Kar.,  pp.  20-3.  — De 
Saulcy,  Dead  Sea,  i.  p.  347. 

623  GiRGaSL    Munk,  Palestine,  pp.  69,  79. 

624  KhVl.  Hieronymus,  Epist.  ad  Dardanam, 

129. — ^Kilto,  Cyclop.,  voce  **  Hiviie."— 
Vico,  Scienza  Nuova,  transL  Paris, 
1844,  p.  288. 

625  AflRKI.    Vaux,  Nineveh,  pp.  459,  463, 

478.  — Gliddon,  Otia,  pp.  137-S,— An- 
thon, Class.  Diet.,  pp.  1049-53. 

626  SINL     Otia,   p.   130.  — Munk,  p.  78.— 

Osburn's  error  of  ••Sinim"  for  SIN- 
KAR  (Test.,  p.  158,  No.  30),  was  cor- 
rected by  Birch,  Stat.  Tab.  Kar.,  p.  37. 

627  ARUaDl.     Osburn,  pp.  52,   58,  69,  SO, 

118,  156.  — Vaux,  Nineveh,  pp.  453, 
468,  478.  — Layard,  Babylon,  p.  627. 

628  TaiMRI.     Otia,  p.  137.— Bochart,  p.  347. 

629  KAaMaTrL    Rawlinson,  in  Vaux,  p.  462, 

seq.  —  De  Saulcy,  Rev.  ArchcoL,  1S50, 
pp.  767-8. — Layard,  Babylon,  p.  627. — 
Osburn,  pp.  98,  101,  142,  155.— **  Vico, 
et  ses  CEuvres,"  Introd.,  p.  1. 

630  AfllLaM.    Ainsworth.  Assyria,  &c,  pp* 

108,  196-216.— Rawlinson,  March  from 
Zohab  to  Khusistan,  1836;  R.  Geog. 
Soc.  ix.  p.  47. — Dubeux,  Perse,  pp.  1. 
9,  13,  31. — Frazer,  Mesopotamia,  p.  22. 
— Polybius,  v.  44. — Sirabo,  xvi.  p.  744. 
—  Layard,  Khuzist an  ;  R.  Geog.  Soc., 
xvi.  pp.  61-84.— Tychsen,  De  Cuncatis 
Inscrip.,  1798,  pp.  10,  13.  — Ouseley, 
Travels,  1819,  p.  325.  —  Lowenstem, 
R^marques;  Rev.  Arch^ol.,  1850,  pp- 
687-723.— De  Saulcy,  Inscrip.  trouvees 
a  Khorsabad ;  Rev.  Arch^ol.,  1850,  pp. 
767-70.— Layard,  Babylon,  pp.  212, 353, 
628. 
631-632  ASUR.  De  Sola,  Genesis,  notcP. 
41.  —  De  Longperier,  Rev.  Archeoi., 
1850,  pp.  429-32.— Rich's  Narrative  of 
a  Journey  to  Nineveh;  London,  1839; 
Introd.,  note,  p.  xvii.  —  The  Friend  of 
Moses.  New  York,  1852;  pp.  181,  185, 
200,  215-6,  220.— Rawlinson,  Commen- 
tary, pp.  26-7.  —  Birch,  in  Layard's 
Nineveh  and  its  Remains,  ii.,  p.  340, 
note.  —  Layard,  Babylon,  pp.  212,  530, 
629. 

633  ARPAa-KaSD.    Kitto,  Cyclop.,  i.  p.  229; 

but  see  ii,  p.  398. — Volney,  iv.  pp.  249- 
50.  —  Lcnormant,  Cours,  p.  203.  —  Bo- 
chart,  p.  83. — Michaelis,  Spicileg.  Geog. 
Heb.,  li.,  p.  75.  — Dubois,  Caucase,  in. 
pp.  421,  434,  488;  iv.  p.  342-3.  — St. 
Martin,  Memoires,  i.  p.  205.  —  Ritter, 
Asien,  vii.  p.  320,  seq.  —  Ainsworth, 
Assyria,  pp.  152-156;  and  "  An  Even- 
ing at  Diarbekir,"  Ainsworih's  .Mag,, 
1843,  iv.  pp.  221-6.  —  Lofius,  in  Rev. 
Arch^ol.,  1850,  p.  126.— Layard,  Baby- 
lon, p.  628. 

634  LUD.    Herod.,   i.  7;    vii.  74.  —  Grole, 

Digitized  by 

Goog„ 

REFERENCES    AND    NOTES. 

731 

Greece,  i.  pp.  127-30,  206,  320,  462, 
618.  —  Raoul-Rochette,  Archpologie 
Compnr^e,  i.  pp.  38.  206-227,  271-277, 
284. — ChampoIlion,Dict..p.  80. — Prisse, 
Salle  des  Ancerres  de  Thotmes  III.,  pp. 
11-12.  — Osburn,  Test.,  pp.  27.  30,  44. 
—  Tnciius,  Annal.  ii.  60,  4.  —  Birch, 
Annals  of  Thotmes  III.,  pp.  158-60. 

635  ARaM.     Quatremere,    Jour,  des  Sav., 

1846,  pp.  503-4.— Bochart,  pp.  83-5.— 
Volney,  iv.  pp.  246-8.  —  Munk,  Pales- 
tine, p.  435. — Champoilion,  Gram.,  pp. 
500-1. — De  Rouge,  on  Statue  of  Out*a- 
horsoun,  Rev.  Archeol.,  7me  Annee,  p. 
15.  —  Judas,  in-  op.  cit.,  1847,  p.  622.— 
Layard,  Babylon,  p.  628. 

636  aUT«.  DeWette.  ii.  pp.  554-70.— Bochart, 

pp.  90,  91.  —  Forster,  *»Sinaic  Inscrip- 
tions,"  1851,  pp.  12-68;  compared  with 
Kircher,  (Edipus  iEgypiiacus,  Amster- 
.  dam,  1652;  ii.  pp.  103-13. — Hunt,  Him- 
yaric  Inscriptions,  1848;  pp.  46. — Fres- 
nel.  Recherches,  p.  23.  —  See  also  the 
"  Asmonean,"  New  York,  1852,  March 
and  April. 

637  KAUL.      Bochart,    pp.  91-2.  —  Grotius, 

Annot.,  lib.  i.  de  V.  R.  C. 

638  GeTteR.    Bochart,  pp.  92-3.— Paul hier, 

Liv.  Sac.  de  1' Orient,  p.  465 ;  and  Kasi- 
micski's  "Koran,"  xxv.  40,  h. —  Lane, 
Selections,  p.  12-15.  —  Volney,  iv.  pp. 
235,  249.— Pliny,  iv.  36.— Solinus,  c.  23. 

639  MaS/i.    De  Wette,  ii.  pp.  253-316.— Bo- 

chart,  pp.  93-4.  Forster,  Geog.,  i.  p. 
2S4-5. 

640  SaLaKA.     Bochart,  pp.  100-4. 

641  eiBeR.    Gliddon,  Chapters,  pp.  18,  19.— 

Lane,  Modern  Egyptians,  Pref. — Gese- 
nius,  in  De  Wette,  i.  pp.  433-4. — Munk, 
Palestine,  p.  102.  —  Lenormant,  Cours, 
p.  203.— Fresnel,  "  Lettre  a  M.  Mohl," 
Jour.  Asiat.,  1845,  pp.  63-65. 

642  PeLeG.    "Hebrew  Language;'*  see  Ge- 

senius,  in  De  Wette,  i.  p.  459;  and 
Bunsen,  Eg.  PI.,  i.  p.  270.— Athenaeum 
Fran9ais,  No.  1 ;  Juillet,  1852,  p.  7.  — 
Lonormant,  Cours,  p.  214. 

643  loKTaN.      Bochart,    109-12.  — Fresnel, 

Arabes  avant  i'lslamisme,  1836, 1838. — 
Jomard,  Arabie,  in  Mengin,  iii.  pp.  330, 
346,  389-91.  Forster,  Geog.,  i.  pp. 
77-107. 

644  ALMUDaD.    Bochart,  p.  112.  — Volney, 

iv.  p.  252.  —  Forster,  i.  pp.  107-11. 

645  SeLePA.    Same  references. 

646  KAaTsRaMUT^    Add  to  the  above,— 

Plate.  Province  of  Hadramaut,  Syro- 
Eg.  Soc,  1815,  pp.  112-23;  and  Jomard, 
op.  cit.,  p.  349. 

647  leRaKA.    Bochart,  124-7.  — Forster,  i.  p. 

115,  137-43.  — Fresnel,  4me  Lettre, 
"Djeddnh,  Jan.  1838." 
6JS  HnDURaM.  Bochart,  pp.  128-30.— Sale's 
Intro!,  to  Koran,  Liv.  Sac.  d*Or.,  pp. 
4^»'J-^  -Pococke,  Specimen  Hist.  Ara- 
bum.  |).  41. — Volney,  iv.  p.  252. 

649  AUZaL.     Bochart,   p.    130-4.  —  Rosen- 

mfiller,  Bib).  Geog.,  iii.  p.  171.  —  Lane, 
Selections,  p.  3.  —  Volney,  iv.  p.  253.  — 
Forster,  i.  p.  145-7. 

650  DiKLeH.    Bochart,  pp.  134-9.— Forster, 
^  i.  pp.  147-8. 

651  flUBaL.    References  as  above. 
fi52  ABIMAL.    Idem. 

No,  (qfNoUs,  dk.) 

653  SeBA.    Bochart,  pp.  146-56.— Forster,  i. 

pp.  154-7. 

654  AVFhiR.    Munk,   Palestine,   p.  294,— 

Volney,  iv.  pp.  255-76.  —  Bochart,  pp.* 

'  156-61.  —  Michaelis,  Quaestiones,  No. 

39.  — Forster,  i.  pp.  165-71. 

655  KAUILaH.' 

656  lUBaB. 

>  Same  authorities. 

657  Prichard,  Researches,  iii.  p.  348. 

658  Die  Deutschen  und  die  Nachbarstamme ; 

Ibid. 

659  Strauss,  Vie  de  Jesus ;«  LittrS's  trans!., 

Paris,  1839;  i.  pp.  434,  436-7. 

660  Oxlee,  Letters  to  Atchbishop  of  Cam., 

2d  series,  London,  1845,  p.  37. 

661  Hennell,  Origin  of  Christ.,  p.  299. 

662  Vide  Fresnel  (Arabes  avant  I'lslamisme, 

1836,  p.  61),  for  a  marvellous  effort  in 
Arabic  by  the  Shcykh  Abbas-el-Ya- 
maneetee. 

663  So  read  De  Sola,  Lindenthal,  and  Raphall, 

Genesis,  p.  44. 

664  Birch,  Stat.  Tabl.  of  Karnac,  pp.  36-7.— 

Gliddon,  Otia,  p.  "5. 

665  Layard,  Babylon,  pp.  496,  506,  529,  543. 

666  Lacour,  iELo'iM,  i.  pp.  1 15,  129,  144-6. 

667  De  Sola's  Bible,  Genesis,  p.  44. 

668  Josephus,  Antiq.  Jud.,  lib.  x.  11,  7 

669,  670  N.  B.    These  numbers  are  inadver- 
tently omitted. 

671  Cahen,  Genese,  i.  p.  188. 

672  Ethnological  Journal,  London,  1848,  pp. 

197-226. 

673  Introd.  to  the  Canon.  Scrip,  of  the  Old 

Test. ;  Parker's  transl.,  Boston,  1843 ; 
ii.  pp.  78-82. 

674  Account  of  the  worship  of  Priapus,  at 

Isermia,  Naples;  London,  1786. 

675  Siromata,  v.  ^  42. 

676  ApuleiuSjMetamorph.;  apud  R.  P.  Knight, 

Symbolical  Language  of  Anc.  Art,  &c. ; 
Soc.  of  Dilettanti,  1835. 

677  Humboldt,  Cosmos,  III.,  pp.  122-6. 

678  See  remains  of  Orpheus,  Hesiod,  Aristo- 

phanes, Damascius,  &c.,  in  Cory's 
Ancient  Fragments,  pp.  291-300;  and 
Gliddon,  Oiia,  pp.  55-6,  on  *'  Ereb." 

679  Civilisation  Primitive,  1845,  p.  45— *' Quia 

non  supplices  humi  Muiino  procumbi- 
mus  atque  Tutuno,  ad  interitum  res 
lapsas,  atque  ipsum  diciiis  mundum 
leges  suas  et  constituta  muiasse?" 
(Arnobius,  lib.  iv.  p.  133.) 

680  SamaVeda,  Kena-Oupanishad;  Pauthier, 

Liv.  Sac,  Introd.  p.  18. 

681  Academical  Lecturep,  Boston,  1840;  iL 

pp.  18-30. 

682  Cahen,  Genese,  i.  p.  5,  note. —  Munk, 

Palestine,  pp.  423,  445. 

683  Peri-Archon,  lib.  iv.  c.  2;  Huet,  Orige- 

niana,  p.  167. 

684  Homil.  viL  in  Levit.  —  Franck,  Kabbale, 

p.  166. 

685  Strom.,  iii.  42 ;  Righellini,  Franc- Ma^on- 

nerie,  i.  p.  33. 

686  Recognit.,    x.   30;    Ibid.,  MosaTsme   et 

Christianisme,  iii.  p.  499. 

687  Ibid.,  i.  p.  29. 

68S  De   Gen.  contr.  Manich^os,   L  1 ;  Ibid., 
Ma^onnerie,  i.  p.  33. 

689  Epist.  ad  Helvet.,  iii. ;  Lenormant,  Coun, 

p.  122. 

690  Cf.  Mosheim,  i.  p.  186. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

732 

REFERENCES    AND    NOTES. 

No.  (of  NaUty  de.) 

691  Hist,  of  Egypt,  p.  574. 

692  Hist,  de  l*EcoIe  d*Alexandrie,  ii.  p.  69, 

seq.;  and  Biot,  Astronomie  Ancienne, 
p.  87,  seq. 

693  Chron.  der  iEgypter,  i.  pp.  125-48.  — De 

Roug^,  Rev.  Archeol.,  1853.  pp.  671-86. 

694  Co8mas-.£gyptius,  Alexandrinus,  Indico- 

pleustes,  wrote  under  Justinian,  about 
535.  A.  D.  His  *'Topographia  Christi- 
ana'* was  printed  from  MSS.  by  Mont- 
faucon,  in  the  **  Collectio  Nova  Patrum 
et  Scriptonim  GraBCorum;"  Paris,  1706.; 
fol.,  Tom.  II. — Montfaucon's  Latin  ver- 
sion, pp.  190-1 ;  PI.  ii.  fig.  2. 

695  Pnefaiio  in  Cosmae,  p.  4 :  with  extracts 

from  St.  Augustine,  Lactantius,  Chry- 
sostom,  Severianus,  "Beda;  multique 
alii,  ouos  recensere  supervacaneum 
esset." 
•  696,  697.  and  698  Franck,  Kabbale,  pp.  102, 
136-7. 

699  Montfaucon*8  translation. 

700  Cahen,  xv.  p.  172. — Noyes*s  Job,  pp.  71, 

194,  note  18. 

701  Harwood,  German  Anii-Supematuralism, 

London,  1841. 

No.  (o/NoUSy  «fe.) 

702  Mankind  in  Europe  during  the  Xlllth 

century. 

703  Lanci,    La   Sagra    Scrittura   lUustrata; 

Roma,  1827;  cap.  ix.  5;  xi.  7.  — Ibid. 
Paralipomeni  airillustrazione  della  Sa 
gra  Scrittura;  Parigi,  1845;  "Aleph- 
tau,"  parts  ii.  iii.  and  viii. 

P.  5.  Ist  Feb.,  1854.  To-day's  mail  has 
brought  me  the  first  number  (Jan.  1,) 
of  a  **  New  Series"  of  the  Ethnological 
Journal,  edited  by  Luke  Burke,  Esq. 
(John  Chapman,  publisher,  London). 
I  have  only  space  to  express  my  hearty 
satisfaction  at  the  re-appearance  of  this 
much-needed  vehicle  ior  free  and  manly 
thought;  and  to  state  that  my  colleagues, 
Dr.  J.  C.  Nott,  Dr.  Henry  S.  Patterson, 
and  the  Hon.  £.  Geo.  Squier,  while 
vouching  with  myself  for  the  great 
erudition,  clear  intellect,  and  high  moral 
worth  of  its  editor,  have  no  hesitation 
in  recommending  it  as  an  exponent 
of,  as  well  as  an  admirable  medium  for, 
the  most  advanced  views  in  Ethnology. 
—  G.  R.  G, 

Digitized  by 

Google 

APPENDIX  11. 

ALPHABETICAL  LIST  OF  SUBSCRIBERS  TO  TYPES  OP  MANKIND. 

£.  S.  Adrieh,  M.  D.,  San  Frandaoo,  Calt. 

Prof.  Louis  Agassis,  Cambridge,  Mass* 

John  G.  Aikin,  Esq.,  Mobile,  Ala. 

J.  II.  Alexander,  £«).,  Baltimore,  Md. 

Thomas  S.  Alexander,  Esq.,    <* 

Chilton  Allan,  Esq'.,  Lexington,  K7. 

Mrs.  S.  0.  Allan,  Richmond,  Ya. 

Hon.  Philip  Allen,  Proridence,  R.  L 

Philip  Allen,  Jr.,  Esq.,       « 

S.  Austin  AUibone,  Esq.,  Philadelphia,  Pa. 

Col.  J.  S.  Allison,  Lexington,  Ky. 

S.  Ames,  M.  D.,  Montgomery,  Ala. 

Thomas  C  Amory,  Jr.,  Esq.,  Boston,  Mass. 

C.  O.  Anderson,  Esq.,  New  Orleans,  La. 

L.  IL  Anderson,  M.  D.,  Mobile,  Ala. 

8.  n.  Anderson,  M.  D.,  Somtenrille,  Ala. 

Alfred  A.  Andrews,  Esq.,  Boston,  Mass. 

C.  G.  Andrews,  Esq.,  New  Orleans,  La. 

Rich'd  AngeU,  M.D.,  Huntsville,  Ala. 

Hon.  H.  B.  Anthony,  Providence,  R.  L 

Nathan  Appleton,  Esq.,  Boston,  Mass. 

Samuel  Appleton,  Esq.,  **  (2  copies.; 

RoVt  B.  Armlstead,  Esq.,  MobUe,  Ala. 

Capt  Jos.  J.  Armstrong,  " 

Hon.  Samuel  G.  Arnold,  Proridence,  R.  L 

Richard  D.  Arnold,  M.  D.,  Savannah,  Ga. 

J.  H.  Ashbridge,  Esq.,  New  Orleans,  La. 

Athenaeum  Library,  Philadelphia,  Pa. 

Washington  L.  Atloe,  M.  D.    « 

W.  P.  Aubrey,  Esq.,  Mobile,  Ala. 

C.  Auz6,  Esq.,  himself  and  friends.  Mobile,  Ala.  (22.) 

Franklin  Bache,  M.D.,  Philadelphia,  Pa. 

G.  Bailey,  Esq.,  Charleston,  S.  C. 

Munro  Banister,  M.  D.,  Richmond,  Ya. 

Geo.  C.  Barber,  Esq.,  Philadelphia,  Pa. 

Milton  Barlow,  Esq.,  Lexington,  Ky. 

Edward  Bamctt,  Esq.,  New  Orleans,  La. 

Henry  Bamewall,  Esq.,  Mobile,  Ala. 

Godfrey  Bamslcy,  Esq.,  New  Orleans,  La.,  (2  copiq^) 

Dr.  Berry,  U.  S.  N.,  Washington,  D.  C. 

Hon.  J.  R.  Bartlett,  Providence,  R.  I. 

E.  H.  Barton,  M.  D.,  New  Orleans,  La. 

Judge  Bates,  San  Francisoo,  Cala. 

Hon.  James  A.  Bayard,  Wilmington,  Del. 

R.  Benn,  M.  D.,  Now  Orleans,  La. 

C.  Beard,  M.  D.,  « 

E.  Begouen,  Esq.,  Slobile,  Ala. 

I.««aac  Boll,  Esq.,  « 

N.  B.  Benedict,  SI.  D.,  New  Orleans,  La. 

Henry  C.  Borrio,  M.  D.,  Philadelphia,  Pa. 

Tho?.  F.  Bctton,  M.  D.,  Gcrmantown,  Pa. 

J.  G.  Btibby,  Esq.,  New  Orleans,  La. 

Clement  C.  Biddle,  Esq.,  Philadelphia,  Pa. 

Henry  J.  Bigelow,  M.  D.,  Boston,  Mass. 

Samuel  Birch,  Esq.,  British  Museum,  London. 

James  Bimey,  Esq.,  Mobile,  Ala. 

Geo.  S.  Blancbard,  Esq.,  for  Merc  Lib.,  Boston,  Maaa. 

Col.  W.  W.  S.  Bliss,  U.  S.  A.,  New  Orleans,  La. 

G.  W.  Blunt,  Esq.,  New  Tort. 

Henry  S.  Boardman,  Esq.,  Philadelphia,  Pa. 

Geo.  Boldin,  Esq.,  « 

S.  M.  Bond,  Esq.,  Savannah,  Ga. 

James  Bordley,  M.  D.,  Baltimore,  Md. 

Henry  I.  Bowditch,  M.D.,  Boston,  Mass. 

W.  B.  Bowman,  Esq.,  Mansfield,  0. 

M.  Boullemet,  Bookseller,  Mobile,  Ala.,  (10  oopiei.) 

Thos.  J.  Bouve,  Esq.,  Boston,  Mass. 

BurwcU  Boykin,  Esq.,  Mobile,  Ala. 

£.  9L  Boykin,  M.D.,  Camden,  8. 0. 

J.  F.  Boynton,  Esq.,  Syracuse,  N.  Y. 

A.  P.  Bradbury,  Esq.,  Bangor,  Me. 

Charles  F.  Bradford,  Esq.,  Roxbury,  Maw. 

Dr.  Brierly,  San  Frandsoo,  Gala. 

M.  Bright,  Jr.,  Esq.,  Mobile,  Ala. 

Geo.  Brinley,  Esq.,  Hartford,  Conn. 

Jno.  M.  Broomal,  Jr.,  Esq.,  Ohmter,  Pa. 

A.  Brother,  Esq.,  New  Orleans,  La. 

Goo.  L.  Brown,  Esq.,  Mobile^  Ala. 

N.  H.  Brown,  Esq.  « 

Jno.  Brown,  Esq,,  " 

Peter  A.  Browne,  Esq.,  Philadelphia,  Pa. 

Jos.  Bryan,  Esq.,  Savannah,  Ga. 

George  S.  Bryant,  M.  D.,  Aberdeen,  Mi. 

G.  S.  Bryant,  Newborn,  Ala. 

Jos.  Brummel,  Esq.,  Richmond,  Ya. 

Sam.  D.  Buck,  Bookseller,  Hopkinsville,  Ey.,  (10  cop.) 

Thos.  C.  Buckley,  Esq.,  N.  Y. 

W.  Gaston  Bullock,  Esq.,  Sarannah,  Ga. 

Capt  Owen  Bums,  Wilmington,  N.  0. 

M.  Burton,  Esq.,  Richmond,  Ya. 

W.  M.  Burwell,  Esq.,  Lynchburg,  Ya. 

Dr.  Geo.  Bush,  New  York. 

W.  A.  Butters,  Esq.,  Richmond,  Ya. 

H.  L.  Byrd,  M.  D.,  Savannah,  Ga. 

D.  J.  Cain,  M.  D.,  Charleston,  S.a 

James  Campbell,  Esq.,  Mobile,  Ala. 

Edwin  Canter,  M.  D.,  New  Orleans,  La. 

Geo.  W.  Carpenter,  Esq.,  Gcrmantown,  Pa. 

Jesse  Carter,  M.  D.,  Mobile,  Ala. 

A.  II.  Conns,  JI.  D.,  New  Orleans,  La. 

Paul  Chaudron,  Esq.,  Mobile,  Ala.,  (16  copies.) 

Chas.  31.  Cheves,  Esq.,  Charleston,  8.  C 

i?,8GoogIe 

784 

ALPHABETICAL    LIST    OP    SUBSCKIBEKS. 

Langdon  Chores,  Jr^  Esq.,  Charleston,  S.  C 

Julian  J.  Chliolm,  M.  D.,         « 

Somuol  Cboppln,  M.  D.,  New  Orleans,  La. 

N.  T.  Christian,  Eaq.,  Georgetown,  Oa. 

BeT.  Dr.  J.  D.  Choulea,  Newport,  R.  I. 

Jno.  C.  Claiborne,  Esq.,  New  Orleans,  La. 

A.  Clapp,  M.  D.,  New  Albany,  la. 

W.  R.  Clapp,  Esq.,  PhUadelphia,  Pa^  (2  coplea.) 

Jas.  M,  Clark,  Esq.,  Providence,  R,  I, 

Major  H.  Lewi«  Clark,  St  Louis,  Mo.,  (2  copies.) 

C.  Cleavelond,  Eaq.,  Yaxoo  City,  Miss. 

J.  Breokenridge  Clcmena,  M.  D.,  Easton,  Pa. 

O.  B.  B.  Clitherall,  Esq.,  Mobile,  Ala. 

Stephen  Colwell,  Esq.,  Philadelphia,  Pa. 

Col.  M.  I.  Cohen,  Baltimore,  Md. 

Octavus  Cohen,  Esq.,  Savannah,  Ga.v 

Henry  A.  Coit,  Esq.,  New  York. 

A.  Comstock,  Esq.,  " 

A.  Comstock,  M.  D.,  Philadelphia,  Pa. 

Timothy  Conrad,  Esq.,         " 

3Iiss  Anna  S.  Cooltdge,  Boston,  Mass. 

W.  C.  Cooper,  Esq.,  Savannah,  Oa. 

Corbet,  Esq.,  Brit  Legation,  Washington*  D.  C. 

W.  W.  Corcoran,  Esq.,  Washington,  D.  C. 

Chas.  8.  Coxe,  Esq.,  Philadelphia,  Pa. 

Jno.  C.  Creason,  Esq.,  ^ 

John  Crickard,  Esq.,  New  Orleans,  La. 

Charles  P.  Curtis,  Esq.,  Boston,  Mass.,  (2  copies). 

Thos.  B.  Curtis,  Esq.,  »* 

Hermann  Curtlus,  Esq.,  New  Orleans,  La. 

Theod.  Cuyler,  Esq.,  Philadelphia,  Pa. 

BIrs.  R.  P.  Dana,  New  York. 

W.  H.  Dandridgo,  Esq.,  Gainesville,  Ala. 

Hon.  John  M.  Daniel,  Richmond,  Va. 

W.  C.  DanioU,  M.  D.,  Savannah,  Oa. 

John  Darrington,  Esq.,  Mobile,  Alk. 

Isaac  Davenport,  Esq.,  Richmond,  \%. 

Chaj?.  DavLs  Esq.,  New  York. 

Jos  Barnard  Davis,  F.  8.  A.,  Shelton,  England. 

Mi\jor  Geo.  Dcas,  C.  S.  A.,  Mobile,  Ala. 

Henry  Dcas,  Esq.,  " 

W.  C.  Deas,  Esq.,  " 

Zach.  Dcas,  Esq.,  " 

0.  P.  Delaplaine,  Esq.,  Madison,  Wis. 

A.  B.  Deloach,  M.D.,  Livingston,  Ala. 
John  Deverenx,  Esq.,  Raleigh,  N.  0. 
Joseph  Dovilin,  Esq.,  Mobile,  Ala. 
Rev.  Henry  M.  Dexter,  Boston,  Mass, 
Thos.  Dexter,  Ejiq.,  Mobile,  Ala.,  (4  copies.) 
Chas  D.  Dickey,  Esq.,     " 

Prof.  S.  Henry  Dickson,  Charleston,  S.  C. 

L.  PouIbou  Dobson,  Esq.,  Philadelphia,  Pa. 

Goo.  W.  Dorr,  Esq.,  New  York. 

Jas.  Auj^ustus  Dorr,  Esq.,  " 

Geo.  Douislass,  Esq.,  Goshen  Hill,  S.  C. 

Sam'l  R.  Dubbs,  Esq.,  Philadelphia,  Pa. 

B.  F.  Duncan,  Esq.,  Jackson,  Ala. 
W.  B.  Duncan,  Esq.,  New  Yofk. 
Hon.  James  Dunlop,  Pittburg,  Pa. 
£.  Durand,  Esq.,  Philadelphia,  Pa. 

A.  M.  Eastman,  Esq.,  New  York. 

Chas.  J.  M.  Eaton,  Esq.,  Baltimore,  Md. 

Geo.  N.  Eaton,  Eeq.j  " 

Jno.  H.  Ecky,  Esq.,  Philadelphia,  Pa. 

Dr.  Ege,  San  Frandsoo,  Cala. 

Jno.  A.  Elkinton,  M.D.,  Philadelphia,  Pa. 

Albert  T.  Elliott,  Esq.,  Providence,  R,  I. 

W.  N.  Ellis,  P.  M.,  Llppican,  Mass. 

David  F.  Emery,  Esq.,  West  Newbury,  Mass. 

Moses  H.  Emery,  Esq.,  Philadelphia,  Pa. 

Robert  D.  England,  M.  D.,  Mobile,  Ala. 

T.  C.  English,  Esq.,  MobUe,  Ala. 

Richard  Esterbrook,  Esq.,  New  Orleans,  La.,  (2  oop.) 

F.  A.  Eustis,  Esq.,  Milton,  Conn. 

Alexander  Erereit,  Esq.,  Mobile,  Ala. 

C.  C.  Everett,  Esq.,  Brunswick,  Me. 

Hon.  E.  Everett,  for  Lib.  State  Dep.,  Washlnfton. 

Hon.  Edward  Everett,  Boston,  Mass. 

John  Fagan,  Esq.,  Philadelphia,  Pa. 
Prof.  J.  £.  Farman,  Georgetown,  Ky. 

C.  C.  S.  Farrar,  Esq.,  New  Orleans,  La. 
J.  Farrell,  M.  D,  « 

Daniel  Fearing,  Esq.,  New  York. 

E.  D.  Fenner,  M.  D.,  New  Orleans,  La. 

Chas.  W.  Fisher,  Esq.,  Philadelphia,  Pa. 

Redwood  Fisher,  Esq.,  " 

Dr.  Fonerden,  for  Md.  Hospital,  Baltimore,  Md. 

£.  G.  Forshey,  Esq.,  New  Orleans,  L& 

Geo.  Fort,  31.  D.,  Milledgevme,  Ga. 

B.  W.  Foadick,  Esq.,  Savannah,  Ga. 
Wm.  B.  Foedick,  Esq^' Boston,  Mass. 
Hillary  Foster,  Esq.,  Mobile,  Ala. 

W.  Parker  Foulke,  Esq.,  Philadelphia,  Pa. 
Prof.  Jno.  F.  Fraxer,  " 

J.  B.  Futch,  Esq.,  New  Orleans,  La. 

Charles  Ganahl,  M.  D.,  Savannah,  Ga. 
P.  C.  Gaillard,  M.  D.,  Charleston,  S.  C. 
A.  Gaines,  M.  D.,  MobUe,  Ala. 

E.  B.  Gardette,  M.  D.,  Philadelphia,  Pa. 
James  Gardiner,  Esq,,  San  Franeiseo,  (^itu 
John  L.  Gardiner,  Esq.,  Boston,  Mass. 

J.  R.  Gardner,  Esq.,  New  Orleans,  La. 

L.  M.  Gaylord,  M.  D.,  Sodns,  N.  Y. 

David  Qeigor,  M.D.,  Charleston,  S.  0. 

R.  W.  Gibbes,  M.  D.,  Columbia,  S.  a 

Mrs.  M.  A.  E.  Gibson,  Richmond,  Va. 

Jno.  Gibson,  Esq.,  Mobile,  Ala. 

David  GUbert,  M.  D.,  Philadelphia,  Pa. 

Hon.  Henry  D.  Gilpin,  "  (2  copies.) 

Thomas  Gilpin,  Esq.  << 

F.  E.  Gordon,  Esq.,  Mobile,  Ala. 
Theo.  Gordon,  Esq.,        " 

W.  M.  Guilford,  M.  D.,  Lebanon,Pa. 

Wm.  Graddy,  Esq.,  Georgetown,  Ga. 

Calvin  Graddy,  Esq.,  " 

Edmund  A.  Grattan,  Esq.,  H.  B.  M.  Cons.,  Boston. 

Jno.  Gravely,  Esq.,  Charleston,  S.  C. 

Hon.  John  C.  Gray,  Boston,  Mass. 

Charles  Green,  Esq.,  Savannah,  Ga. 

A.  J.  Gr«en,  M.  D.,  Columbia,  S.  C. 

J.  Green,  M.  D.,  Washington,  D.  C 

J.  Green,  Esq.,  for  Merc  Lib.  Co.,  Baltimore,  Md. 

D.  S.  Oreenough,  Esq.,  Boston,  Mass. 
W.  W.  Greenough,  Esq.,       " 
John  Grigg,  Esq.,  Philadelphia,  Pa. 

James  Grignon,  Esq.,  H.  B.  M.  Cons.,  Portland,  Me. 
Edmund  Grundy,  Esq.,  Philadelphia,  Pa. 

John  Haig,  Esq.,  Mobile,  Ala. 

R.  K.  Halght,  Esq.,  New  York,  (5  copies.) 

Jno.  S.  Haines,  Esq.,  Germantown,  Pa. 

C.  S.  Hale,  Esq.,  Burlington,  N.  J. 
Rev.  A.  0.  Halsf^,  Rlchborough,  Pa. 
John  Halscy,  Esq.,  Now  York,  (fi  copies.) 
Hon.  J.  H.  Hammoud,  Charleston,  S.  C 
M.  C.  51.  Hammond,  Esq.,        " 

P.  T.  Hammond,  Lancaster,  S.  G. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

ALPHABETICAL    LIST    OF    SUBSCRIBEBS. 

735 

C.  F.  nampton,  Esq.,  Colombia,  S.  C. 

W.  Hampton,  Esq ,  " 

W.  Hampton,  Jr.,  Eaq^        " 

Geo.  S.  Harding,  Esq.,  Savamuih,  Oa. 

General  Jos.  Harlan,  Philadelphia,  Pa. 

S.  N.  Harris,  M.  D.,  Savannah,  Oa. 

Jas.  B.  Harrison,  Esq.,  Georgetown,  Ga. 

Samuel  T.  Harrison,  Esq.,  Washington,  D.  0. 

Thos.  Willis  Hartley,  Esq.,  Philadelphia,  Pa. 

John  Htstings,  M.  D.,  San  Frandsoo,  Cala. 

Jud^  Hastings,  " 

Eliaa  S.  Hawlcy,  Esq.,  Buffalo,  N.  Y. 

W.  G.  Hay,  Esq.,  Philadelphia,  Pa. 

Geo.  Hayward,  M.  D.,  Boston,  Mass. 

£.  H.  Hazard,  Esq.,  Providence,  R.  I. 

Isaac  P.  Hazard,  Esq,  " 

Thos.  R.  Hazard,  P:8q.,  « 

Rev.  G.  W.  Heacock,  Buffalo,  N.  Y. 

Dr.  G.  C.  Hebbe,  Washington,  D.  C. 

Alfred  Henncn,  E^q.,  New  Orleans,  La. 

Geo.  M.  Hcroman,  Bookseller,  Baton  Rouge,  La.  (4) 

W.  C.  Henzey,  Esq.,  Philadelphia,  Pa. 

T.  Higham,  Jr.,  Esq.,  S.  C. 

C.  W.  mil,  M.  D.,  Mobile,  Ala, 

Geo.  S.  Hilliard,  Esq.,  Boston,  Mass. 

W.  L.  Hodge,  Esq.,  for  Lib.  Trs.  Dep.,  Washington. 

W.  B.  Hodgson,  Esq.,  Savannah,  Ga. 

Judge  Ogden  Hoffman,  San  Frandsoo,  Cala. 

J.  £.  Holbrook,  M.  B.,  Charleston,  S.C. 

Geo.  Holly,  Esq.,  Mobile,  Ala. 

Prof!  Frauds  S.  Holmes,  Charleston,  S.  C. 

0.  W.  Holmes,  M.D.,  Boston,  Mass. 

Thos.  P.  Hoppin,  Esq.,  Providence,  R.  I.,  (2  copies.) 

Daniel  Horlbeck,  Esq.,  Charleston,  S.  C. 

Henry  Horlbeck,  Esq.,  " 

Mrs.  Lavinia  E.  A.  Howard,  Daphne,  Mobile  Bay,  Ala. 

Bev.  Geo.  Howe,  D.  D.,  ColumWa,  8.  0. 

Dudley  Hubbard,  Esq.,  Mobile,  Ala. 

Benj.  F.  Huddy,  Esq.,  Philadelphia,  Pa.     % 

J.  A.  Huger^  Esq.  Charleston,  S.  C. 

R.  W.  Hughes,  Esq.  Richmond,  Va. 

Thos.  Hunt,  M.  D.,  New  Orleans,  La. 

A.  J.  Huntiftgton,  Esq.,    « 

Albert  Hurd,  Esq.,  Galesburg,  111. 

Henry  J.  Hyams,  Esq.,  New  Orleans,  La. 

Col.  Irving,  San  Frandsoo,  Cala. 

Sam'l  Jackson^  M.  D.,Philadelphia,  Pa. 

Henry  Jacobs,  Esq.,  I*rovidence,  R.  I. 

Robert  James,  Esq.,  Mobile,  Ala. 

N.  R.  Jennings,  Esq.,  New  Orleans,  La. 

W.  E.  Jennings,  Esq.,  Jlobile,  Ala. 

Dr.  J.  C.  Jennings,  Bonn,  Prussia. 

Jas.  P.  Jervey,  M.  D.,  Charleston,  8.  C. 

Gen.  Thos.  S.  Jcsup,  U.  S.  A.,  Washington,  D  C. 

Gov.  David  Johnson,  Limestone  brings,  S.  C. 

W.  E.  Johnson,  Esq.,  Camden,  S.  0. 

T.  A.  Johnston,  Esq.,  Livingston,  Ala. 

R.  F.  Johnstone,  Esq.,  Detroit,  Mich. 

Allen  C.  Jones,  Esq.,  Mobile,  Ala.,  (2  copies.) 

Edw'd  E.  Jones,  Es^i,  Philadelphia,  Pa. 

James  Joues,  Eso.y  «* 

James  Jones,  Jf.  D.,  Now  Orleans,  La. 

W.  Gary  Jone.i,  Esq.,  San  Francisco,  Cala. 

Wm.  Jones,  M.  D.,  Mobile,  Ala. 

Wm.  Jones,  Jr.,  Esq.,    " 

Blessrs.  Jonlan  A  Bro.,  Philadelphia,  Pa. 

W.  J.  Joynes,  Esq.,  Petersburg,  Va. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Kennedy,  for  Lib.  Navy  Dep.,  Vf  aahingtou. 

Hon.  John  P.  Kennedy,  Baltimore,  Md. 

James  Kennedy,  M.  D.,  Now  York. 

L.  0.  Kennedy,  Esq.,  Charleston,  S.  0: 

P.  M.  Kent,  Esq.,  New  Albany,  Ind. 

Edward  M.  Kem,  Esq.,  Philadelphia,  Pa. 

Geo.  Kem,  Esq.,  « 

Jno.  Kern,  Jr.,  Esq.,  " 

Richard  H.  Kern,  Esq.,         " 

Elisha  W.  KeyoB,  Esq.,  .Aladison,-Wia. 

E.  H.Kimbark,  M.D.,  New  York. 

A.  C.  Kingsland,  Esq.,        <* 

Robert  L.  Kirk,  Esq.,  Mobile,  Ala. 

S.  D.  Kirk,  Esq.,  Charleston,  S.  C. 

James  Kitchen,  M.  D.,  Philadelphia,  Pa. 

Jno.  Kitchenmann,  Esq.,        '   " 

W.  H.  Klapp,  M.  D.,  "  '     * 

Sam'l  Knoeland,  M.  D.,  for  Boston  Soc.  Nat  Hist 

S.  Kneeland,  Jr.,  M.  D.,  Boston,  Mass. 

E.  0.  Knight  &  Co.,  Booksellers,  Cleveland,  0.,  (10  c.) 

G.  Kursheedt,  Esq.,  New  Orleans,  La. 

John  De  Lacey,  M.  D.,  Philadelphia,  Pa. 

John  Lambert,  Esq.,  " 

I.  A.  Lapham,  Esq.,  Milwaukic,  Wis. 

Prof.  C.  W.  Lane,  Milledgeville,  Ga. 

W.  Langermann,  Esq.,  San  Frandsco,  Cala. 

Henry  Laurence,  Esq.,  Yazoo  City,  Miss. 

Hon.  Abbott  Lawrence,  Boston,  Mtiss. 

James  Lawrence,  Esq.,         " 

Wm.  Beach  Lawrence,  Esq.,  Newport,  R.  L 

Jno.  Laurence,  Esq.,  Mt  Upton,  Chenango  Co.,  N.  Y 

Edw'd  Lawton,  M.  D.,  Boonville,  Mo. 

D.  Leadbetter,  Esq.,  Mobile,  Ala. 

Vr.  Leoesne,  Esq.,         « 

Robert  Lebby,  M.  D.,  Charleston,  S.  0. 

Joseph  Leidy,  M.  D.,  Philadelphia,  Pa. 

Col.  Opt  H.  L^a,  Mobile,  Ala. 

J.  C.  Levy,  Esq.,  Savannah,  Ga. 

S.  Yates  Levy,  Esq.,  Savannah,  Ga. 

K.  H.  Lewis,  Esq.,  Tarboro,  N.  0. 

Levi  Lewis,  Spread  Eagle,  Pa. 

Mifflin  Lewis,  Esq.,  Spread  Eagle,  Pa. 

Richard  H.  Lewis,  Esq.,  Mobile,  Ala. 

Saunders  Lewis,  Esq.,  Philadelphia,  Pa. 

Winslow  Lewis,  M.  D.  Boston,  Mass. 

Library  of  South  Carolina  College,  Columbia,  S.  C. 

Library  Company  of  Easton,  Pa. 

Library  of  Young  Men's  Assodation,  Buffalo,  N.  T. 

Jacob  Little,  Esq.,  New  York. 

Jack  Littlejohn,  Esq.,  Spartanburg,  S.  C. 

Wm.  Littl^'ohn,  Esq.,  « 

Chas.  A.  Locke,  Esq.,  Boston,  Mass. 

J.  L,  Locke,  Esq.,  Savannah,  Ga. 

Rev.  S.  K.  Lothrop,  D.  D.,  Boston,  Mass. 

Robert  Lovett,  Jr.,  Esq.,  Philadelphia,  Pa. 

Andrew  Low,  Esq.,  Savannah,  Ga. 

Henry  A.  Lowe,  Esq.,  Mobile,  Ala.,  (2  copies.) 

Francis  C.  Lowell,  Esq.,  Boston,  Mass.,  (6  copies.) 

John  A.  Lowell,  Esq.,         « 

E,  H.  Ludlow,  Esq.,  New  York. 

R.  M.  Lusher,  Esq.,  New  Orleans,  La, 

Rev.  Geo.  Macaulay,  Milledgeville,  Ga. 
Wm.  Mackay,  Esq.,  Savannah,  Ga. 
Charles  Magargo,  Esq.,  Germantown,  Pa, 
Jas.  Magoo,  Esq.  New  Orleans,  La, 
C.  T.  Mann,  Esq.,  Yazoo  City,  Miss. 
Peter  Marcy,  Esq.,  Mobile,  Ala- 
James  B.  Markham,  Esq.,  Mobile,  Ala, 
J.  H.  Markland,  Esq.,  Philadelphia.  Pa. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC 

736 

ALPHABETICAL    LIST    OF    SUBSCRIBERS. 

FnindB  Markoe,  Eaq^  Washington,  B.  0. 

B.  F.  Marshall,  E8q.,Mohile,  Ala. 
Chafl.  H,  Marshall^  Esq.,  New  Tork. 
E.  Mason,  M.  B.,  Wetamka,  Ala. 

C.  H.  Mastin,  M.  B.,  MobUe,  Ala. 

H.  B.  Mattison,  Esq., Washington,  B.  0. 

Joseph  Mauran,  M.  B.,  Proridenoe,  R.  I. 

B.  Mayer,  Esq.,  for  Md.  Hist.  Soc.,  Baltimore^  Md. 

W.  £.  Mayhew,  Esq.,  Baltimore,  Md. 

Hon.  Theo.  H.  MoCalel)^  New  Orleans,  La. 

Jos.  McCIean,  Esq.,  Philadelphia,  Pa. 

J.  H.  B.  McClellan,  M.  B.,    *« 

Thos.  MoConnell,  Esq.,  MoUIe,  Ala. 

J.  H.  McCulloh,  Esq.,  Baltimore,  Md. 

E.  H.  McBonald,  Esq.,  Philadelphia,  Pa. 

T.  F.  McBow,M.B., Liberty  Hill,  8.  C. 

Wm.  MoGuigan,  Esq.,  Philadelphia,  Pa. 

Messrs.  MoKee  &  Robertson,  Hagerstown,  Md. 

P.  B.  McKelTey,  M.  B.,  New  Orleans,  La. 

Andrew  McLaughlin,  Esq.,  Baltimore^  Md. 

Mrs.  McPherson,  Baltimore,  Md. 

M.  Megonegal,  Esq.,  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  (2  copies.) 

Charles  B.  Meigs,  M.  B.,  Philadelphia,  Pa. 

J.  Aitken  Meigs,  M.  B.,  " 

J.  Forsyth  Meigs,  M.  B.,  « 

Thos.  Mellon,  Esq.,  " 

N.  L.  Merriweather,  Esq.,  Montgomery,  Ala.,  (5  cop.) 

BI.  H.  Messchert,  Esq.,  Philadelphia,  Pa. 

John  O.  Michener,  Esq.,  " 

Francis  T.  Miles,  M.  B.,  Charleston,  S.  C. 

Clark  Mills,  Esq.,  Washington,  B.  C. 

Charles  MUlspaugh,  M.  B.,  Richmond,  Ta. 

J.  F.  G.  filittag,  Esq.,  Lancaster,  S.  0. 

E.  J.  Mollet,  Esq.,  New  York, 

James  Moncreif,  Esq.,  New  York. 

Cyms  C.  Moore,  M.  B.,  Philadelphia,  Pa. 

Comm.  £.  W-  Moore,  Texan  N.,  Washington,  B.  C. 

S.  Mordecai,  Esq.,  Richmond,  Ya. 

James  W.  Morgan,  Esq.,  Lynchburg,  Va. 

Israel  Morris,  Esq.,  Philadelphia,  Pa. 

Jacob  O.  Morris,  Esq.,        " 

John  S.  Morris,  Esq.,  Phoenixrille,  Pa. 

T.  H.  Moiris,  Esq.,  Baltimore,  Md. 

B.  M.  Moss,  M.  p.,  Now  Orleans,  La. 

E.  T«  Slosfl,  Esq.,  Philadelphia,  Pa. 

Valentine  Mott,  M.  B.,  Now  York.         * 

Jamos  Moultrie,  M.  B.,  Charleston,  S.  C. 

John  Munro,  Esq.,  San  Frandsco,  Gala. 

Wm.  BI.  Murray,  Esq.,  Charleston,  S.  C. 

G.  A.  Myors,  Richmond,  Va. 

M.  H.  Nace,  Esq.,  Richmond,  Va. 

T.  C.  Newbold,  Esq.,  Philadelphia,  Pa. 

Thos.  A.  Newhall,  Esq.,  Germantown,  Pa. 

IL  Newman,  Esq.,  Boston,  Mass. 

J.  B.  Newman,  Esq.,  Washington,  B.  C. 

J09.  Newton,  Esq.,  Philadelphia,  Pa. 

Now  York  Sodety  Library,  N.  Y. 

W.  M.  Nicbolls,  Esq.,  ChesterTille,  S.  C 

B.  M.  Norman,  Bookseller,  New  Orleans,  La.,  (25  cop.) 

Gustavus  A.  Nott,  M.  B.,  New  Orleans,  La. 

James  Nott,  M.  B.  San  Francisco,  Cala. 

Jno.  R.  Nunomacher,  Esq.,  New  Albany,  Ind.  (2  oop.) 

Rob't  W.  Ogden,  Esq.,  New  Orleans,  La. 
J.  W.  Osgood,  Esq.,  Saxonville,  Mass. 
J.  W.  Orr,  Esq.,  Now  York,  (5  copies.) 
Rot.  S.  Oswald,  York,  Pa. 

Edward  Padelford,  Esq.,  Savannah,  Ga. 
B.  R.  Palm'^r,  yi.  B.,  Pittsburg,  Pa. 

John  S.  Palmer,  M.  B.,  Charleston,  S.  C 

Alexander  Pantoleon,  A.  M.  Smyrna,  Turkej. 

Comm.  F.  A.  Parker,  U.  S.  N.,  Philadelphia,  Pa. 

Henry  T.  Parker,  Esq.,  Boston,  Maw. 

Capt  Jamos  Porker,  MoUle,^Ala. 

Socratos  Parker,  Esq.,  Livfaigston,  Ala, 

S.  Parkman,  M.  B.,  Boston,  Mass. 

Henry  S.  Patterson,   M.  B.,  Pfailaddphia,  Pa. 

Morris  Patterson,  Esq.,  « 

Joseph  Patterson,  Esq.,  "  (5  eofkH.) 

Louis  L.  Panly,  Esq.,  « 

Abraham  Payne,  Esq.,  ProTidence,  R.  L 

W.  L  Peale,  Esq.,  Philadelphia,  Pa. 

Miss  Mary  Pearsall,  ** 

Bavis  Pearson,  Esq.,  ^ 

John  Penington,  Esq.        ** 

Amos  Pcnnebaker,  M.  B.,  ** 

J.  A.  Pennypacker,  M.  B.,  ** 

OranTille  J.  Penn,  Esq^  Peon  Castle,  England. 

L  Pennington,  Esq.,  Ba]timore,Md.,  (2  copies.) 

Mrs.  C.  W.  Pennock,  PhUadelphia,  Pa. 

J.  W.  Perard,  Jr.,  Esq.,  New  York. 

Chas.  T.  PerdTal,  M.  B.,  MohOe,  Ala. 

0.  H.  Perry,  Esq.,  for  Vig.  Lib.  Assoc,  Baltimore,  Hd. 

RoVt  E.  Peterson,  Esq.,  Philadelphhi,  Pa. 

Jesse  B.  Peyton,  Esq.,  « 

Philadelphia  Library  Company,  Philadelphia,  Pa. 

Jona.  Phillips,  Esq.,  Boston,  Mass. 

John  Phillips,  M.  B.,  Bristol,  Pa. 

Hon.  P.  Phillips,  Mobile,  Ala. 

Charles  Pickering,  M.  B.,  Boston,  Mass. 

J.  C.  Pickett,  Esq.,  Washington,  B.  C. 

E.  B.  Pierson,  M.  B.,  Salem,  Mass. 

Henry  L.  Pierson,  Esq.,  New  York. 

Hon.  Albert  Pike,  Little  Rock,  Arkansas. 

Wm.  M.  Plppen,  Esq.,  Tarboro,  N.  C. 

J.  N.  Piatt,  Esq.,  New  York. 

George  Poe,  Esq.,  Washington,  B.  C. 

J.  G.  Poinddlter,  Esq.,  New  Orleans,  Le. 

Prof.  F.  A.  Porcher,  Charleston,  S.C. 

George  Porteus,  Esq.,  Mobile,  Ala. 

/ohn  Potts,  Esq.,  Chihuahua,  Mexico. 

L  Pratt)  M.  B.,  Philadelphia,  Pa. 

Wm.  Pratt,  Esq.,  Baltimore,  Md. 

Wm.  H.  Pratt,  Esq.,  MobUe,  Ala. 

J.  H.  Prentice,  Esq.,  New  York. 

J.  S.  Preston,  Columbia,  S.  C. 

H.  C.  Price,  Esq.,  Chester,  Pa. 

Isaac  Pngh,  Esq.,  Philadelphia,  Pa. 

Jno.  M.  Pugh,  M.  B.,  West  Philadelphia,  Pa. 

G.  P.  Putnam  &  Co.,  Publishers,  New  York,  (10  oop^ 

B.  Howard  Rand,  M.  B.,  Philadelphia,  Pa. 

Jno.  Randall,  Esq.,  New  York. 

R  C.  Randolph,  M.  B.,  Greensboro,  Ala. 

Edmund  Rarenal,  M.  B.,  Charleston,  8.  C. 

Edward  Rawle,  Esq.,  New  Orleans,  La. 

Baniel  T.  Rea,  Esq.,  Mobile,  Ala. 

J.  B.  Read,  Esq.,  Savannah,  Ga. 

Wm.  Reed,  Esq.,  Now  Orleans,  La. 

J.  J.  Reese,  M.  B.,  PhUadelphia,  Pa. 

John  R.  Reid,  Esq.,  New  Orleans,  La. 

B.  Elliott  ReynoldiB,  M.  B.,  New  Orleans,  La. 

Col.  James  Rice,  San  Francisco,  Cala. 

W.  Bordman  ^chards,  Esq.,  Boston,  Mass. 

W.  W.  Richards,  Esq.,  Philadelphia,  Pa. 

Maurice  Richardson,  Esq.,  Great  Talloy,  Pa. 

J.  L.  Riddell,  M.  B.,  Now  Orleans,  La. 

Mrs.  G.  W.  Rip:g8,  Baltimore,  Md. 

J.  H.  Riley  St  Co»  Booksellers,  Columbus,  C,  (5  cap4 

Thomas  Ritchie,  Esq.,  Washington,  B,^. 

Digitized  by' 

/Google 

ALPHABETICAL    LIST    OF    SUBSCRIBERS. 

737 

CoL  G«org«  Biren,  Proridmioey  B.I 

J.  A.  Boberts^  OreensrUle,  Pa. 

W.  Lea  Robots,  Esq^  New  York. 

F.  M.  Bobertson,  M.  D^  Charleeton,  8.  0 

John  Blount  Bobertaon,  Esq.,  New  OrleanSy  La. 

GoL  W.  &  BoekweU,  MiUedgerille,  Oa. 

Prof.  Henry  B.  Bogers,  Boston^  Man. 

Ohas.  H.  Bogers,  Talley  Forge,  Pa. 

Hon.  Molton  J.  Bogera,  Philadelphia^  Pa. 

Jno.  S.  Bohrer,  M.  T>^  ** 

0.  A.  Roorback,  BookaeUer,  New  York,  (10  ooplei.) 

Wm.  Bopes,  Saq.,  Boeton,  Ifais. 

A.  H.  Boaenhelm,  Eiq.,  Phfladelphia,  Pa. 
Jamea  8.  Bowe»  Saq.,  Bangor,  Me. 
Samnel  Bollln,  Biq.,  MoUle,  Ala. 

£.  H.  Bngbee,  Eaq.,  ProTidenoe,B.  L 

Jamee  Bnah,  M.  D.,  Philadelphia,  Pa. 

Mra.Bnsh,  *' 

John  BoaaeU,  Bookseller,  Oharleaton,  &  0.,  (8  ooplei.) 

Charles  Byan,  Bsq^  Philadelphia,  Pa. 

Ber.  Dr.  Byerson,  Ibnmto,  Canada,  (2  oojdea.) 

B.  J.  Sage,  Esq.,  New  Orleans,  La. 
Biohard  O.  Sager,  Esq^  Moba^  Ala. 
Hon.  James  Sarage,  Boston,  Mass. 
W.  H.  De  Sanssnre,  Charleston,  8.  C 
J.  P.  ScriTen,  M.  D.,  Sarannah,  Qa. 
Ohas.  BcotI,  Esq.,  PhUadelphia,  Pa. 
John  BooTiOe,  Esq.,  Salisbary,  Couu 
B.  M.  Seatarook,  Esq^  Charleston,  8. 0. 
Hon.  Bei^amln  Bearer,  Boston,  Mass. 
P.  T.  Seibel,  M.  D.,  Sarannah,  Q% 

8.  B.  Bewail,  Esq.,  Boston,  Mass. 

George  C.  ShattodE,  Esq.,  Boston,  Mass.,  (2  copies.) 

Lemuel  Shattuok,  Esq.,  ** 

Qulnoy  A.  Shaw,  Esq.,  << 

Bobert  O.  Shaw,  Esq.,  "  (2  copies.) 

B.  0.  Shaw,  M.  D.,  MobOe,  Ala. 

W.  W.  Shearer,  Esq.,  Liringston,  Ala. 

«—  Shepherd,  Esq.,  Cairo,  Egypt 

John  H.  Sharsfd,  Esq.,  liringston,  Ala. 

W.  Sherman,  Esq.,  New  York. 

Naih.  B.  ShurClel^  M.  D.,  Boston,  Man. 

Origan  Sibley,  Esq.,  Mobile^  Ala. 

Hon.  Chas.  Sitgrearea,  New  Jexa^. 

H.  N.  Skinner,  Esq.,  New  York. 

J.  B.  Slack  A  Co.,  Booksellers,  StoubenrUle^  0.,  (8  &) 

Jno.  Sloan,  M.  D.,  New  Altmny,  Ind. 

A.  A.  Smets,  Esq.,  Sarannah,  Oa. 

F.  Gum^  Smith,  Jr.,  M.  D.,  Philadelphia,  Pa. 

Howard  Smith,  M.  D.,  New  Orleans,  La. 

Jacob  Smith,  Esq.,  Georgetown,  Ga. 

J.  Broom  Smith,  Esq.,  San  Francisco,  Cala. 

Jno.  Jay  Smith,  Esq.,  Germantown  Pa. 

Joseph  P.  Smith,  Esq.,  Philadelphia,  Pa. 

J.  E.  J.  Smith,  Esq.,  Georgetown,  Ga. 

John  T.  Smith,  Esq.,  Liringston,  Ala. 

Samuel  Smith,  Esq.,  New  York. 

J.  A.  Spencer,  Esq.,  Philadelphia,  Pa. 

Tmstfn  A  Spofford,  Booksellers,  Cincinnati,  0.,  (5  &) 

Hon.  E.  Geo.  Squler,  New  York. 

Wm.  H.  Squire,  M.  D.,  Germantown,  Pa. 

W.  E.  Stacke,  Esq.,  New  Orleans,  La. 

W.  H.  Stark,  Esq.,  MobOe,  Ala. 

Albert  Stein,  Baq.,  Mobile,  Ala. 

Jacob  Steiner,  Esq.,  Philadelphia,  Pa. 

J.  p!  Steiner,  Esq.,  ** 

Claudius  C.  Stewart,  Esq.,  Florida. 

Wm.  Storenson,  Esq.,  Baltimore,  Md. 

D.  D.  Stewart,  M.  IX,  *< 

f .  Stewart,  Esq.,  Mobile^  Ala. 

98 

Scott  Stewart,  M.  B,  Phnadelphia,  Pa. 

Wm.  Stewart,  Esq.,  Hagerstown,  Md.,  (2  copies.) 

John  Stoddard,  Esq.,  Sarimnah,  Ga. 

Pro£  L  M.  Stone,  Hanorer,  Ind. 

Warren  Stone,  M.  D.,  New  Orleans,  La. 

Lt  Isaac  G.  Strain,  V.  S.  N.,  PhUadelphia,  Pa. 

Wm.  Strickland,  Bookseller,  Mobile,  Ala.,  (10  copies.) 

CoL  C.  B.  Strode,  San  Frandsco,  Cala.,  (10  copies.) 

Hon.  A.  H.  H.  Stuart,  ibr  Lib.  Dep.  Int,  Washington. 

Albert  Sumner,  Esq.,  Newport,  B.  L 

Hon.  Charles  Sumner,  Washingtcm,  J>.  C. 

Chas.  G.  Swarti,  Esq.,  Philadelphia,  Pa. 

Jos.  Swift,  Esq.,  « 

Samnel  Swett,  Esq.,  Boston,  Mass. 

Mrs.  T.  A.  Swett,         *< 

T.  A.  Tankualey,  Esq.,  Mobile,  Ala. 

BeiiO<>Biln  Tanner,  Esq.,  Baltimore^  Md. 

Ber.  8.  K.  Talmage,  LL.  B.,  MilledgertUe,  Ga. 

Henry  W.  Taylor,  Esq.,  Mobile,  Ala. 

Wm.  Taylor,  Esq.,  Bichmond,  Ta. 

J.  K.  Tdit,  Esq.,  Sarannah,  Ga. 

J.  8.  Teft,  Bookseller,  Houston,  Texas,  (10  cdptes> 

Carlisle  Terry,  M.  B.,  Georgetown,  Ga. 

Charles  L.  Tew,  Esq.,  New  Orleans,  La. 

Bldurd  H.  Thomas,  M.  B.,  Baltimore,  Md. 

Edwin  Thompson,  Esq.,  Philadelphia,  Pa. 

John  Thorny  Esq.,  Baltimore,  Md. 

Col.  James  J.  Thornton,  Mobile,  Ala. 

B.  C.  Tioknor,  Esq.,  Mansfield,  0. 

Osmond  TifGuiy,  Esq.,  Baltimore,  Md. 

Howard  Tllden,  Esq.,  Philadelphia,  Pa. 

J.  Tisdale,  Esq.,  Boston,  Mass. 

Br.  Toland,  San  Francisco^  Cala. 

Gen.  Joseph  Totten,  U.  8.  A.,  Washington,  B.  01 

Henry  Toulmin,  Esq.,  Mobile,  Ala. 

Morton  Toulmin,  Esq.,       ** 

Elisha  Townsend,  Esq.,  Philadelphia,  Pa. 

Bobert  Trueman,  Esq.,  Boston,  Mass. 

Barld  H.  Tucker,  M.  B.,  Bichmond,  Ta. 

J.  W.  TuckAr,  Esq.,  Spartanburg,  8.  a 

Wm.  E.  Tucker,  Esq.,  Philadelphia,  Pa. 

Fred^  Tudor,  Esq.,  Boston,  Mass. 

Alexander  Tumbull,  Esq.,  Baltimore^  Md. 

T.  L  Turner,  M.  B.,  U.  &  N.,  Philadelphia,  Pa. 

Plot  M.  Tuomey,  Tuscaloosa,  Ala. 

J.  W.  Tuthill,  Esq.,  New  Orleans,  La. 

J.  A.  Tyler,  Esq.,  Boston,  Mass. 

J.  B.  Uhlhom,  Esq.,  New  Orleans,  La. 

Aaron  Tall,  Esq.,  Kew  York. 

Jacob  B.  Tanderer,  Esq.,  Wilmington,  Bd. 

CoL  Henry  Taughik^,  Yasoo  City,  ML 

W.  &  Taux,  Esq.,  Philadelphia,  Pa. 

A.  L.  Tegus,  Mobile,  Ala. 

Henry  Tdlmer,  Esq.,  Philadelphia,  Pa. 

Heniy  Wadsworth,  M.  B.,  Philadelphia,  Pa. 

George  H.  Walker,  Esq.,  New  Orleans,  La. 

Isaac  B.  Walker,  M.  B.,  Spread  Eagle^  Pa. 

Ber.  J.  B.  Walker,  Mansfield,  a 

J.  J.  Walker,  Esq.,  Philadelphia,  Pa. 

S.  J.  Walker,  Esq.,  Mobile,  Ala. 

James  P.  Walker,  Esq.,  Lowell,  Mass. 

John  N.  Walthall,  Esq.,  MobUe,  Ala. 

J.  J.  T.  Wanroy,  Esq.,  «* 

J.  0.  Warren,  M.  B.,  Boston,  Mass. 

J.  Mason  Warren,  M.  B.,  ** 

Jaa.  &  Waters,  Esq.,  Baltimore,  Md. 

Google 

738 

ALFHABETIGAL    LIST   OF    SUBSCBIBEBS. 

Cot  Jdia  O.  WntmoiiEbp  04Jtim.ii  town,  P*. 

Tbomv  Ek  Wfvblv  M,  D^  ProTl4«ic%  E.  L 

Klcbcklu  Wtiefcjt,  Biq^  Mobile^  Ki^ 

A.  J,  W«diltrlJum,  M.  D^  Nuw  OrleanB,  La. 

Plowdflti  C.  J*  Wwton,  Kia-,  Mftgloj,  8. 0. 

T.  M.  WM.btiriUp  Eiq,,  LkureJ  flU),  Lft. 

Wtn.  Wct^irriU,  M.  D^,  Fhiltd^iphli,  Pa. 

W,  Wmtf  TS0CI*,  PbUndDlpblftT  Fa- 

Chu.  U.  Whdtky,  £»q.i  FhfiFnUvLlle,  Pa^  (4  OOplM.) 

VTtn.  Aapiitiu  Wbilc,  Ifq.,  N.  Yotk.  .^z 

Hii^JvniD  A.  Wblte,  »L  D.,  UUIo^J^viUa,  Oa. 

i;U  WbH«»  Bni^  New  Y^rk. 

Hon,  W-  U.  Witto,  FblkdfilpbiM,  Pt^  (2  ooplM.) 

RiS¥.  R.  a,  WlilLehal^  Kew  Orloatifi,  La. 

K.  D  Wblt4ibeiMl,  Esq,,  HbTuina,  a»e&  Co.,  Ala. 

W.  C.  WUde,  Maq.,  N>w  Orlciui*,  I*. 

Gapi  Cliu-10  WUkM,  tJ.  S.  N^  Wuhfngton,  D.  0 

Jobn  WQJUmi^  Bki.*  Laticurt«ri  ^^  C, 

W.  C.  WUliftiBJ,  M.  I>^  PbilidclphI*,  Pa. 

Hon.  W.  n>on»  WUUmm,  SaTimimh,  Oa. 

If,  Wimmmon,  M.  D.,  PbUadeipbia,  Pa. 

A^  P.  WIllK  Esq.,  New  Orteaiu,  I^ 

€lW4  Wilnn,  Ksq^  B4viDtiilL,  Hl 

T.  McK,  Wilwa,  K*i.,  CaananHbuiii  Pa. 

B«¥ ,  W.  D,  Wllwn,  D,  D.,  Goae?*,  N.  T. 

Jcbn  ViUbttuk,  ».  X^^  Pblkddpbla,  Pa. 

FhJIlp  WlnfVex^  Jt^  IBk^^  Kevr  OrinoB,  La. 

JuDH  W.  Winter,  En-i  ^«*  Ti>rk, 

C.  J.  WUli?r,  Emi^  OvrmantdiriL,  Fk, 

JuDf?4  U.  l^'Ltb^npooa,  B«q^  Ltntiiitery  8. 0. 

Tboraad  R.  Wolfe,  J!l^.,  Nu*  Orkati*,  La. 

Wtn.  B.  Wolft,  :E»ri  >  Philadplphb^  Fa. 

A.  Wolle,  Eh].,  Rtiiblehvia,  Pm. 

¥,  WolgMniftJii  E^,,  Pbtfkil&lptiU^  Pa. 

MttBi.  Wood  ft  OD&tuir,  CBrli^le,  Ph. 

Ah^  T.  Wood,  £iq,^  Kew  Orle&n.*,  La. 

OdOTgt  0.  Wpod,  M.  K,  Pbiltdcipbla,  Pa. 

Her.  W*  D.  Wqod,  B.  B^  QiHiirra,  N*  T. 

Sin.  WoodbuSr.  New  York. 

n.  A.  Wrifbt,  Eflq.,  MKllnati,  WLtf. 

TVm.  Wdjebt,  M.  D.,  PhlladolpklB,  Pfl. 

Jacob  Wyand,  Esq.,  FhiladelphJa,  Pa. 

Wm.  W.  Wyatty  Esq.,        " 

M«aan.  Wylie,  MoU^  ft  Strait,  Laneaal«,  8.  a 

Bamael  G.  Wyman,  Esq.,  Baltimore,  Md. 

Thoaaa  K.  WTune,  Esq,  BiduDODd,  Ta. 

Oregocy  Tala,  Eaq^  San  Traseifoo,  Gala. 
Jno.  0.  Yeag«r,  Esq.,  Philadalphiaj  Pa. 
PhiUp  Telser,  M.  D.,  New  Orlaana,  La. 
Harry  M.  Toang,  Baltimore^  Ud. 
J.  A.  Young,  Esq.,  Camden,  &  G. 
John  B.  Toang,  Esq.,  Rirhmond,  Ta. 

ADDITIONAL  NAMX8, 

4 

O.  W.  Ban,  Baq^PhlladfllpUa,  Pa. 

A.  BilUnga,  Esq.,  NaahvUlO)  Tten. 

Beriah  Brown,  Esq.,  Madtaoo,  WIil 

Wm.  H.  Tan  Boren,  M.  D^  New  Totk. 

StaqrB.  Collins,  Esq.,  « 

John  La  Conte,  Esq.,  PhfTadalphia,  Plk 

Jno.  La  Conte,  Jr,  Esq.,       ** 

T.  J.  Crowen,  Bookseller,  New  Totk,  (2  eafisa.} 

Got.  Nelson  Dewey,  Lancaster,  Wis. 

John  Erans,  Esq.,  West  HaTerford,  Pa. 

W.  Wayne  Erans,  Esq.,  Paoli,  Pa. 

Felix  B.  Gaudet,  Esq.,  Philadelphia,  Pa. 

A.  T.  Gray,  Esq.,  Madison,  Wis. 

ProC  8.  8.  Haldeman,  Columbia,  Pa. 

Charles  H.  Hall,  Esq.,  Philadelphia,  Pa. 

E.  H.  Janssen,  Esq.,  Madison,  Wis. 

Jno.  McBride,  M.  D.,  Philadelphia,  Pa. 

a  Meyer,  Esq.,  BaltiflMwe,  Md. 

Joshna  Moss,  Esq.,  Birmingham,  **b*"»^.  (t  eoplm.) 

J.  West  Nerlns,  Esq.,  Philadelphia,  Pa. 

Jo.  S.  Pender,  Esq.,  Tarboro^  N.  C 

Library  of  PenasylTsnia  Hospital,  PlilIaAalphia»  Pa. 

J),  T.  Pratt,  Esq.,  Philadalphia,  Pa. 

THl  END. 

t 

Digitized  by 

Google 

Digitized  by 

Google 

Digitized  by 

Google 

Digitized  by 

Google 

Digitized  by 

Google 

Digitized  by 

Google 

Digitized  by 

Google 

Digitized  by 

Google 

Digitized  by 

Google 

The  borrower  must  return  this  item  on  or  before 
the  last  date  stamped  below.  If  another  user 
places  a  recall  for  this  item>  the  boirower  will 
be  notified  of  the  neol  for  an  earlier  return. 

Non-receipt  of  overdue  notices  does  nai  exempt 
the  borrower  from  overdue  fines. 

Harvard  College  Widener  Librarv 
Cambridge,  MA  02138        617-495-2413 

Please  handle  with  care. 

Thank  you  for  helping  to  preserve 
library  collections  at  Harvard. 

,    V .     ^  r-  ^>T  Han/ard.
