The Disciples at Saïs and Other Fragments (Novalis, Una Birch (1903), 1802)
========================================================================
Novalis's nature-philosophy romance-fragment and the famous fragments — the Romantic theory of poetry in its purest form. Birch's 1903 Methuen translation.

Public domain. Scan via the Internet Archive (archive.org/details/disciplesatsais00nova).
========================================================================

Gp  DISCIPLES  AT  Sa.


<  A

A


1  A

CSC

111

o

— —  '—  1

o

0


^^^S  m  1

9


0


1  2

^^S  °°  1

!auy

:RSITY  OF

ealifornia
»SAN  DIEGO


THE  DISCIPLES  AT  SAIS
AND  OTHER  FRAGMENTS


THE  DISCIPLES  AT  SAIS
AND   OTHER   FRAGMENTS

BY

NOVALIS


TRANSLATED    FROM    THE    GERMAN    BY

F.  V.  M.  T.  and  U.  C.  B.

WITH    AN    INTRODUCTION    BY

UNA  BIRCH


METHUEN   &    CO.

36    ESSEX    STREET   W.C.

LONDON

1903


CONTENTS


PACE


Preface        .....  3

Friederich  von  Hardenberg  :  the  Man       .  13

Novalis  :  the  Author  .  .  .34

Selections  from  the  Works  of  Novalis —

Spiritual  Hymns  .  .  -53

Thoughts    on    Philosophy,     Love    and

Religion   .  .  .  .68

The  Disciples  at  Sais  .  .  91

Flower   Pollen  .  .  .144

Bibliography  .  .  .  .174

Index  .  .  .  .  .175


PREFACE

TN  the  last  years  of  the  eighteenth  century
between  two  and  three  thousand  students
worked  and  fought  and  made  love  at  Jena,  as
the  manner  of  students  is.  As  an  apple  encloses
a  core,  so  did  this  large  academic  circle  enclose
an  inner  ring  of  men  who  had  taken  it  upon
themselves  to  reform  thought  and  taste  in
Germany,  and  these  men  possessed  by  the  idea
of  Unity,  whose  passion,  whose  dream,  and
whose  ideal  was  the  realisation  of  the  Unity
of  the  Universe,  were  called  by  the  world
Romantics.  They  lived  among  the  students
and  yet  were  not  of  them,  existing  in  a
fairy  world  of  their  own  apart  from  life's  ugly
realities,  lotus  eaters  feeding  on  flowers  of
poetry,  art,  music  and  philosophy,  and  dis-
tributing to  the  outside  world,  as  a  result  of
their  eclectic  culture,  a  new  criticism,  a  new
aesthetic  and  a  new  philosophy  of  life.  The
very  air  in  the  streets  of  Jena  was  charged
by  them  with  an  idealistic  intellectualism,  and
the    town    seems    to    have    become    for    a   few


4  PREFACE

years  a  Parnassus  of  Romance,  and  the  meeting-
ground  for  all  spirits  touched  by  the  mystic
yearning.  The  more  important  of  the  would-
be  reformers  were  Novalis,  Schelling,  Schleier-
macher,  the  two  Schlegels,  Tieck  and  Wacken-
roder ;  with  these  were  associated  Caroline,
the  wife  of  A.  W.  Schlegel,  and  Dorothea
Veit,  a  Jewess.  Fichte,  who  had  no  great
sympathy  with  Romanticism,  even  during  the
time  he  lived  at  Jena,  greatly  influenced  its
apostles,  and  determined  most  of  their  thought.
Schiller,  through  his  afFection  for  Novalis,  came
into  contact  with  the  movement,  but  he,  like
Goethe,  disapproved  of  its  tendency  towards
obscurantism.  His  friend  Novalis  would  seem
to  have  been  the  typical  Romanticist,  possessing
as  he  did  a  genius  for  unification,  a  passion  for
religion,  a  highly  poetic  imagination  and  energy
without  will.  Typical,  too,  in  so  far  that  his
mature  life  began  and  ended  with  the  move-
ment, typical  in  that  his  outer  life  did  not  cor-
respond with  his  thought,  and  typical  because
his  writings  embodied  the  highest  aspiration  of
the  movement.

He  and  his  Romantic  friends  wrote  and  read
and  translated  and  talked  and  did  everything
but  act ;  they  were  still  vague  as  to  their
ultimate  goal.  "Christianity  is  the  order  of
the    day — the    men    are    rather    mad.    ...    I


THE  ROMANTICS  AT  JENA      5

wager  they  do  not  understand  themselves  or
each  other,"  wrote  Dorothea  Veit,  commenting
on  the  prevailing  uncertainty.  Catholicism,
antique  symbolic  art,  mediaeval  romance,  strange
legends  and  Indian  Sagas — everything  that
seemed  to  offer  by  its  mystery  an  outlet  for  the
soul  attracted  them.  A  desire  for  freedom  in
love,  freedom  from  social  restrictions, annihilation
of  limitations,  all  parts  of  the  desire  for  unity,
led  them,  uncorrected  by  action,  to  a  species  of
mystic  voluptuousness  which  proved  the  de-
struction of  their  circle.

The  town  of  Jena  is  not  many  miles  from
Weimar,  and  at  this  time  Goethe  and  Schiller
were  fast  friends,  and  their  opinion  of  the
Romantics  is  to  be  seen  in  the  letters  they
exchanged.  Goethe  laughs  at  them  half-
scornfully  and  straightforward  Schiller  is
vexed  at  their  posturing.  The  former  was
so  greatly  admired  by  the  inner  ring  that  the
latter  was  in  danger  of  being  undervalued.

Goethe  occasionally  came  to  Jena  to  visit
Schiller,  but  generally  when  the  Romantics
wished  to  see  the  object  of  their  devotion
they  pilgrimaged  along  the  avenue  of  plum
trees  that  led  to  Weimar  and  there  offered
him  the  incense  of  their  adulation.  "  Frederick
the  divine,"  writes  Dorothea  Veit  of  F.
Schlegel    one    day,     "  went    this    morning    to


6  PREFACE

see  Father  Goethe  or  God  the  Father  at
Weimar  ! "

Goethe  was  not  long  destined  to  be  the
Romantics'  god  ;  as  they  became  ever  more
Catholic  in  tendency  their  attitude  towards  the
great  Pagan  gradually  changed.  Not  that  they
doubted  his  art,  but  they  were  religionists  and
he  was  not.  Their  apprehension  of  the  world
differed  from  his,  and  moreover  they  said  that
they  did  not  desire  to  see  poetry  subordinated  to
economy.  Novalis  probably  voiced  the  Roman-
tic's opinion  when  he  said,  "  Goethe  is  altogether
a  practical  poet,  he  is  in  his  work  what  the
English  are  in  their  wares :  highly  simple,  neat,
convenient  and  durable,  he  has  done  for  German
Literature  what  Wedgewood  did  for  English
manufacture."  Their  adoration  turned  to  an
opposition  which  was  confirmed  when  Goethe
published  a  statement  of  his  disapproval  of  the
Romantic  School.

All  the  Romantics  philosophised  about  life,
and  yet  Philosophy  seemed  to  be  the  one  thing
these  new  philosophers  needed,  for  their  genius
was  rather  to  feel  than  to  think,  to  perceive  by
intuition  rather  than  by  reason.  Fichte,  how-
ever, supplied  them  with  a  philosophic  system,
which  they  adopted,  though  it  is  open  to  question
whether  they  ever  apprehended  it  according  to
the  intention  of  the  Master.


THE  ROMANTICS  AT  JENA      7

In  1794  F'cnte  had  published  his  "  Doctrine
of  Knowledge "  ;  at  first  he  laid  claim  to  no
originality,  but  only  sought  to  explain  Kant,
and  infuse  into  his  philosophy  a  little  emotional
warmth  that  should  make  him  more  acceptable
to  the  general  public.  The  austere  young  pro-
fessor seems  to  have  been  misunderstood  all
his  life,  and  it  is  doubtful  whether  anyone  of
his  own  time  grasped  the  central  point  of  his
doctrine  ;  the  catch- word,  "  the  Ego  makes  the
world,"  seems  to  have  been  the  only  aspect
that  was  seized  on  and  bandied  about.  The
Romantics  in  their  worship  of  the  imagination
took  the  thought  of  a  world-creating  ego  as  the
foundation  of  their  philosophy,  for  was  not  the
idea,  as  they  apprehended  it,  an  enthronement
of  the  creative  imagination  ?

Fichte  posited  that  the  Ego  limited  by  the
non-Ego,  and  the  non-Ego  limited  by  the  Ego,
were  reconciled  as  Holy  Will,  and  explains  the
world  as  the  act  of  the  free  yet  at  the  same
time  limited  Ego  or  Holy  Will — as  the  Incon-
ceivable assuming  consciousness  or  the  condition
of  Existence.  The  very  condition  of  Existence
is  separation  from  God — God  throwing  off  the
world  of  consciousness  that  it  may  yield  itself  to
Him.  This  supposes  two  spheres — Being  and
Existence,  or  Reality  and  Appearance,  beyond
which  the  mind  of  man  cannot  pass,  but  these


8  PREFACE

two  spheres  united  form  the  Absolute  Ego,
"  a  God  of  whose  nature  the  ultimate  fact  is
Love."

The  Romantics  seized  on  the  phrase,  "  the
Ego  makes  the  world,"  taking  it  not  as  the
Absolute  Ego,  the  Divine,  but  as  a  thinking
human  being,  thus  making  the  philosophy  of
Fichte  into  a  method  for  establishing  the
autocracy  of  the  imagination.  Novalis  went
so  far  as  to  suggest  that  the  world  was  but  a
precipitation  of  human  nature,  and  the  gods  but
a  sublimation  of  the  same.

In  1796  Fichtism  was  supposed  to  be  pro-
gressive Kantism,  but  in  Fichte,  Schelling,
Schleiermacher,  and  all  the  philosophers  touched
by  the  Romantic  Movement,  there  was  a  certain
emotional  strain  of  the  sort  so  much  distrusted
by  the  unemotional  Kant,  and  it  was  not  un-
natural that  after  a  little  while  the  Kantians  and
the  self-styled  progressive  Kantians  should  split
into  rival  camps.  The  disciples  of  Kant  became
discontented  with  the  results  of  Fichte's  work
as  developing  Kantism  towards  a  completeness
foreign  to  Kant's  original  notion.

Gradually  the  two  masters  disagreed,  and  in
1799  Kant  published  a  formal  disclaimer  deny-
ing any  connection  between  his  system  and  that
of  Fichte,  and  resenting  the  description  of  his
critical  work,  as  "  mere  propaedeutic  to  a  system


THE  ROMANTICS  AT  JENA      9

of  reasoned  philosophy."  Kant's  disclaimer  did
not  weaken  the  allegiance  of  the  Romantics,  and
Fichte  carried  with  him  Reinhold,  Schelling,
Jacobi,  F.  Schlegel,  Tieck  and  Novalis.

Fichte  was  the  strong  man  of  the  Romantic
circle.  Exhaling  independence,  strength  and
purity,  he  was  the  one  thinker  in  a  world  of
"  feelers,"  and  to  some  extent  he  kept  the  circle
together,  and  soon  after  he  disappeared  from
Jena  the  Romantics  dispersed.  The  ring  of
friendship  was  broken,  and  Steffens,  who
earlier  had  said  of  Romanticism,  "  What  is  it
but  a  yearning  after  the  Eternal  that  irre-
sistibly drives  us  forward  and  breaks  down
every  self-erected  limitation  ? "  is  able  but  a
short  time  after  to  write  as  follows  to  Tieck :
"Certain  as  it  is  that  the  time  in  which  Goethe,
Fichte,  Schelling,  the  Schlegels,  thou,  Novalis
Richter,  and  I  dreamt  in  unison  was  rich  in
seeds  of  all  kinds,  yet  there  was  something
pointless  about  it  all.  A  spiritual  tower  of
Babel  was  to  be  erected  to  which  all  spirits
should  come  from  afar.  But  the  confusion  of
speech  buried  this  ambitious  work  in  its  own
debris.  •  Are  you  he  with  whom  I  thought
myself  one  ? '  each  asked  of  the  other.  '  I  no
longer  know  the  fashion  of  your  face,  your
words  are  incomprehensible  to  me,'  and  each
separated   to   the   opposite  parts  of  the   Earth,


io  PREFACE

most  of  them  to  erect,  out  of  madness,  a  tower
of  Babel  of  their  own  !  "

Thus  the  friends  separated.  F.  Schlegel  went
to  Vienna  with  Dorothea  Veit  whom  he  had
married,  where  "  he  attended  Mass  daily,  and
eat  boiled  fowl!"1  His  brother  "withdrew
into  the  Pagoda  of  Brahma," x  and  became  the
companion  of  Mme.  de  Stael.  Heine  met  him
years  afterwards  in  Paris,  a  pathetic,  shrunken
little  figure  dressed  in  the  fashion  of  the  year
in  which  his  illustrious  patroness  died.  Schelling,
Caroline  Schlegel  and  Schleiermacher  and  Fichte
worked  out  their  destinies  in  Berlin,  and  Novalis
died.  The  movement  practically  ended  with
the  century,  the  throbbing  desire  for  Unity,
which  had  pulsed  in  the  veins  of  each  Romantic
became  quiet,  and  except  in  the  writings  of
Novalis,  their  chief  yearning  and  their  most
important  dream  remained  unrealised.  As  a
movement  it  is  more  interesting  historically  than
intellectually,  for  it  was  the  inevitable  revolt
of  the  imagination  that  had  been  so  long  con-
fined in  the  prison-house  of  Voltairean  thought;
it  was  Psyche  emerging  from  the  grave  to  which
Reason  had  consigned  her.  As  a  movement  it
accomplished  little  ;  its  ideals  were  too  vague,
and  the  struggle  to  restore  the  old  balance
between   Reason   and  Imagination   seems   more

1  "  Die  Romantische  Schule  "  (Heine).


THE  ROMANTICS  AT  JENA     1 1

like  the  instinctive  working  of  some  blind  force
than  the  conscious  and  purposeful  strivings  of
individual  intellects.

Speaking  broadly,  Romanticism  was  the
Revolt  of  the  Imagination,  but  it  was  also,
in  its  return  to  Gothic  standards  of  taste,  the
reaction  from  the  pseudo-classicism  that  had  so
long  prevailed,  and  however  unsuccessful  its
gospel  may  appear,  however  inappreciable  the
personal  influence  of  each  Romantic,  yet  the
garland  of  Jena  friendships  was  destined
through  its  literature  to  influence  not  only
the  German  sentiment  of  that  day,  but  the  senti-
ment of  future  generations.


FRIEDERICH  VON  HARDENBERG

THE  MAN

TN  a  letter  to  Kreisammtmann  Just,  Friederich
von  Hardenberg  wrote,  "  authorship  is  a
secondary  thing,  you  can  judge  me  more
equitably  by  the  chief  thing  — ■  practical  life."
These  words,  instead  of  being  penned  in  all
seriousness  by  a  maladive  youth  of  twenty-
five,  might  have  been  written  by  some  illustrious
general  who,  in  the  interval  of  conquering
continents,  had  thrown  off  a  book  of  verses
or  a  novel.  Friederich  von  Hardenberg  was
a  frail  figure  dragging  about  a  great  soul,  and
the  practical  life  of  which  he  makes  mention
was  emphatically  the  least  essential  part  of  him.
Its  sphere  of  action  was  a  province  of  Germany,
its  events  were  short  journeyings  to  and  fro  on
matters  of  education  or  business ;  its  culmina-
tion a  small  Government  appointment.  Judged
as  a  man,  he  was  as  unimportant  as  Werther  or
Obermann,  and  except  in  the  Mutual  Admiration
Society  of  the  Romantics,   he  was  during   his


14FRIEDERICH  VON  HARDENBERG

life  -  time  unknown.  He  won  a  measure  of
fame  after  death  not  because  of  his  practical
life  which  resembled  that  of  a  thousand  other
men,  but  because  of  his  soul  life  which  is
both  arresting  and  unique.  Friederich  von
Hardenberg,  for  whom  the  Assessorship  of
the  Weissenfels  Salt  Mines  was  outlet  enough,
is  indeed  another  individual  to  Novalis,  the
spiritual  king,  for  whom  the  world  was  too
cabined  a  province.  Therefore  it  is  only  pos-
sible to  get  an  idea  of  the  man  as  he  existed  by
looking  at  him  from  both  the  outer  and  inner
points  of  view.

Friederich  von  Hardenberg  was  born  in  1 772
at  an  old  convent  at  Wiederstedt  that  had  been
acquired  by  the  von  Hardenbergs  during  the
Thirty  Years'  War.  The  atmosphere  of  his
home  was  unusually  sombre,  and  from  the
first  he  was  subjected,  not  only  through  his
parents  but  through  his  surroundings,  to  re-
ligious and  supernatural  influences.  The  place
was  said  to  be  haunted,  for  the  bride  of  some
ancestor  had  been  killed  by  lightning  as
she  was  about  to  enter  the  house,  and  strange
sounds  were  sometimes  heard.  Intercourse  with
the  outer  world  was  shut  out,  and  rarely  did
any  stranger  arrive  by  the  avenue  of  ancient
trees  that  led  to  the  von  Hardenbergs'  home,
or  any  new-comer's  voice  break  in  on  the  con-


THE  MAN  15

ventual  monotony  of  their  life.  Down  the
echoing  passages  and  wide  stairs  of  the  long
building  Friederich  and  the  other  children
quietly  played,  for  neither  noise  nor  amuse-
ment were  approved  by  their  father.  Freiherr
von  Hardenberg  kept  stern  rule  in  his  own
house ;  he  had  led  a  wild  life  as  a  soldier  and
man  of  affairs,  and  had  come  to  pause  on  the
death  of  his  first  wife.  Shocked  at  the  state
of  his  soul,  he  turned  very  earnestly  to  re-
ligion, studied  Doddridge,  and  made  a  written
covenant  with  God  every  time  he  went  to  the
Lord's  Supper.  He  conquered  himself,  became
a  severe,  self-contained  man  and  found  peace  in
the  Moravian  fold.  During  an  epidemic  of  the
falling-sickness,  of  which  illness  his  wife  had
died,  when  everyone  else  held  aloof,  he  went
fearlessly  into  the  houses  of  the  stricken  to  help
and  to  console.  At  thirty-two  he  married  an
orphan  who  had  found  shelter  with  his  mother.
She  worshipped  him,  served  him  devotedly,
and  bore  him  eleven  children.  His  children
stood  in  awe  of  him,  and  there  was  little  or  no
sympathy  in  after  years  between  the  stern
Puritan  father  and  his  emotional  poetic  son
Friederich.  It  would  have  been  unnatural  indeed
if  the  hardy  old  soldier,  with  his  strict  moral
code,  should  have  understood  either  the  con-
sumptive    and     undisciplined     genius     or     the


1 6  FRIEDERICH  VON  HARDENBERG

romantic  morality  of  the  youth.  A  story  that
is  told  of  him  is  hardly  surprising ;  some
while  after  Friederich's  death  he  went  to  a
Moravian  chapel,  and  being  much  moved  by
some  unknown  hymns  of  singular  beauty,  he
asked  by  whom  they  were  and  the  answer  was
"  by  your  own  son."

Friederich  was  the  second  of  the  eleven  chil-
dren and  up  to  the  age  of  ten  was  stupider  than
the  others,  but  an  illness  suddenly  brought  his
faculties  into  play,  thenceforward  he  developed
rapidly  and  found  food  to  satisfy  his  new  and
startling  appetite  for  knowledge  in  the  library
of  his  uncle  in  Brunswick  with  whom  he  spent
a  good  part  of  his  boyhood.  At  sixteen  he
went  to  the  Gymnasium  at  Eisleben,  where  he
took  a  first  class  and  in  1 791  he  went  to  Jena
to  study  Law.

At  Jena  he  came  in  contact  with  the  first
strong  influence  of  his  life,  Schiller,  who  was
at  that  time  a  professor  at  the  University.
Young  Hardenberg  wrote  home  enchanted  at
meeting  the  embodiment  of  his  youthful  ideals  :
"  I  know  him,  he  is  my  friend,  his  look  cast  me
to  the  dust  and  raised  me  up  again."  In  his  hero
worship  he  forgot  Jurisprudence  and  following
the  great  "  Inspirer  of  Youth  "  diligently  pursued
the  poet  life.  He  broke  out  of  the  Moravian
fold  in  which  his  childish  years  had  been  spent


THE  MAN  17

and  took  up  moral  idealism,  for  philosophy  was
in  the  air  and  was  not  Schiller  himself  overcome
by  the  influence  of  Kantian  thought  ?  Harden-
berg  raved  about  the  ethical  ideal  and  moralised
in  his  letters  to  his  mother,  "  Patience  must  be
the  lot  of  each  educator  of  youth,  of  each
mother,  for  without  it  what  would  become  of
us  whom  the  slightest  puff  of  wind  shatters  and
sways  to  our  foundations  ? "  He  finishes  with  a
quotation  to  the  effect  that  all  great  men  have
to  thank  their  mothers.  His  new-found  free-
dom and  emancipation  from  moral  restraint  led
him  to  entangle  himself  in  gallant  adventures,
intrigues  and  duels,  which  doings  highly  dis-
pleased his  father,  who  straightway  desired  to
remove  him  from  such  evil  company.  Schiller
in  his  affection  for  the  boy  offered  to  conduct
him  back  into  the  paths  of  law  from  which  he
had  himself  lured  him,  but  in  spite  of  the  poet's
offer  Friederich  and  his  brother  Erasmus  were
hurried  off  to  Leipzig  and  there  he  began  a
friendship  with  F.  Schlegel.

Friederich  SchlegePs  letters  of  this  date  give
an  interesting  picture  of  young  Hardenberg  as
he  came  into  his  life  "  talking  three  times  more
and  three  times  faster  than  others,"  declaring
in  fiery  speech  that  there  was  no  evil  in  the
world  and  that  all  things  were  once  again  ap-
proaching   the    golden    age.       "Such   hilarious


18  FRIEDERICH  VON  HARDENBERG

youth,"  writes  Schlegel,  "I  never  saw;  he
does  not  go  for  the  true  but  for  the  beauti-
ful ...  his  favourite  books  are  Plato  and
Hemsterhuys  ...  he  may  become  every-
thing .  .  .  but  again  he  may  become  noth-
ing." Hardenberg  excited  both  the  affection
and  the  admiration  of  Schlegel,  but  the  friend-
ship that  had  begun  so  brightly  was  for  a
while  dimmed  as  the  younger  nr.n  became  con-
ceited and  required  flattery,  and  in  a  petulant
mood  Schlegel  writes,  "  I  saw  plainly  that  he
was  not  capable  of  friendship  and  that  there  was
naught  in  his  soul  but  self-interest  and  phan-
tasy ...  in  vain  I  hoped  to  illuminate  the
weakness  of  his  heart — it  will  ever  be  thus,
he  will  always  play  with  beautiful  talents  as  a
child  with  cards.  I  said  to  him  at  last  you
see  the  world  double,  on  the  one  hand  like  a
good  little  man  of  fifteen  and  on  the  other  like  a
ne'er  do  weel  of  thirty  !  "  Schlegel's  simile  was
wonderfully  felicitous  for  Hardenberg  played
with  his  beautiful  talents  all  his  life  and  like  a
wayward  child  with  cards  he  scarcely  finished
any  game  that  he  began.

F.  Schlegel  was  at  this  time  going  through
the  disquieting  process  of  trying  to  find  himself.
Hardenberg  did  not  in  the  least  share  his  senti-
ment of  world-weariness,  hence  the  temporary
want  of  sympathy  between  them.     Schlegel  was


THE  MAN  19

emptying  the  treasures  of  his  mind  before  Har-
denberg,  and  Hardenberg  was  lazy  and  indiffer-
ent ;  moreover  he  was  seeing  life,  and  some  dire
folly  he  must  have  tumbled  into,  for  Schlegel
says  in  a  letter,  "  I  am  dreadfully  sorry  about
poor  Hardenberg,  he  has  a  stain  on  his  honour
and  ...  he  has  behaved  childishly  about  it."
Hardenberg  about  this  time  wrote  to  his  father
pleading  to  be  allowed  to  become  a  soldier,
"  as  he  needs  discipline  "  and  the  unromantic
duties  of  everyday  life  to  consolidate  his  un-
stable nature  ;  he  continues,  "  I  have  an  indiffer-
ence to  life  which  will  seem  paradoxical.  I  am
convinced  that  many  other  losses  are  far  more
grievous.  Life  is  not  a  goal,  only  a  means —
and  when  one  passes  from  this  planet  one  leaves
little  behind  that  one  can  regret."  His  military
ambitions  faded  away  after  his  father's  consent
had  been  secured,  and  just  then  Erasmus  became
ill.  Friederich,  who  till  then  had  experienced
no  intimate  griefs,  writes  him  a  note  of  cold
comfort:  "Dear  Brother,  when  one  begins  to
long  for  illness  and  death,  and  is  not  even
frightened  of  Madness  —  then  —  it  becomes
serious."  Such  words  could  not  have  been  of
much  avail  to  Erasmus  in  his  struggle  against
the  disease  which  so  soon  cut  short  his  life,
though  Friederich  himself  always  seemed  to
find  consolation  in  vapoury  philosophising,  and


20  FRIEDERTCH  VON  HARDENBERG

to    be    able    to    endure    so    long    as    he    could
theorise.

He  went  in  1793  to  Wittenberg,  a  drowsy
university  town,  no  longer  thrilling  with  life  or
original  thought — another  place,  indeed,  from
that  in  which  Melancthon  had  once  been  Greek
professor  and  had  discussed  with  Luther  plans  of
Reformation.  The  town  was  so  quiet  and  free
from  distraction  that  Hardenberg  was  able  to
work  and  pass  his  examination  in  Jurisprudence  a
year  later,  but  it  was  only  from  a  sense  of  duty
that  he  did  so,  for  the  Law  did  not  attract  him,
the  mutiny  of  youth  was  bubbling  in  his  veins,
a  great  yearning  for  real  life  possessed  him,  and
he  returned  to  his  home  at  Weissenfels,  where
together  with  his  brothers  he  gave  himself
up  to  pleasure,  and  involved  himself  in  many
escapades.  He  was  sent  after  a  while  by  his
father  to  work  with  Kreisammtmann  Just  at
Tennstadt.  Just  wrote  a  slight  account  of  his
intercourse  with  the  youth,  evidently  dazzled
by  his  facile  brilliancy.  He  says :  "  I  was
chosen  to  be  his  teacher,  but  in  reality  he  was
my  teacher  ...  he  never  rested  satisfied  with
any  half-knowledge  .  .  .  was  never  superficial
but  completely  thorough  in  his  work.  .  .  .  He
would  read  a  book  in  quarter  of  the  time  re-
quired by  others,  and  would  be  able  to  discuss
its  points  months  afterwards."


THE  MAN  11

On  the  17th  of  November  1794,  Hardenberg
rode  out  on  business  to  Griiningen,  a  few  miles
from  Tennstadt,  and  on  that  day  began  the
romance  of  his  life — a  love  story  which  has
been  compared  to  that  of  Dante  and  Beatrice.
One  quarter  of  an  hour  inside  the  old  castle  of
the  von  Kiihns  decided  his  fate ;  he  had  met
Sophie,  a  fair  child  with  black  eyes,  of  barely
thirteen  years,  and  he  rode  away  from  the  golden
castle  a  victim  of  passionless  love.  The  story
is  mediaeval  in  its  simplicity  and  directness  ;  he
and  his  brothers  go  again  and  again  to  Griin-
ingen ;  it  is  a  Paradise  on  earth.  Erasmus  goes
so  far  as  to  say  that  from  brothers  they  may
become  brothers-in-law,  for  there  is  also  Caro-
line, her  sister.  Just,  whose  discrimination  may
be  doubted,  says  that  Sophie  possessed  "  the
judgment  of  a  grown-up  person,  joined  to  the
attraction  of  youth,  beauty,  wit  and  excellence."

Friederich  describes  the  girl  in  his  note-book
as  follows  : —

KLARISSE

{Sketch  of  Sophie  von  Kiihn,  at  at.  1 3)

Her  early  maturity.  She  wishes  to  please
everyone.  Her  obedience  to,  and  fear  of,  her
father.  Her  modesty  and  her  blameless  fidelity.
Her  stiffness  and  her  flattery  of  people  whom


22  FRIEDERICH  VON  HARDENBERG

she  appreciates  or  whom  she  fears.  Her  be-
haviour in  illness.  Her  whims.  What  does
she  care  to  talk  about  ?  Kindness  towards
strangers.  Benevolence.  Her  clinging  to
childish  games.  Dependence  on  women.  Her
judgments  —  disposition.  Dress.  Dancing.
Business  in  the  house.  Love  for  her  sisters.
Musical  ear.  Her  favourites.  Taste.  Piety.
Enjoyment  of  life.  Is  she  fond  of  reading  ?
Fondness  for  women's  work.  She  does  not  desire
to  be  anything — she  is  something.  Her  face,  her
figure,  her  life,  her  health.  Her  movements,
her  speech,  her  hand.  She  does  not  care  for
poetry.  Her  behaviour  to  others  —  to  me.
Frankness.  She  does  not  seem  to  have  arrived
yet  at  independent  reflection.  I  also  arrived  at
that  point  at  a  particular  period.  With  whom
has  she  conversed  all  her  life  ?  Where  has  she
been  ?  What  does  she  like  to  eat  ?  Her  be-
haviour to  me.  Her  awe  of  marriage.  I  must
question  her  about  her  peculiarities — also  her
brother.  Her  manner  of  enjoying  herself — of
being  grieved.  What  pleases  her  most  in  the
way  of  men  and  things  ?  Is  her  temperament
aroused  ?  .  .  .  Her  tobacco-smoking.  Her
dependence  on  her  mother  as  a  child.  Her
audacity  to  her  father.  Her  confirmation.  .  .  .
Her  terror  of  ghosts.  Her  hospitality.  .  .  .
Her    talent    for    imitation.       Her    benevolence.


THE  MAN  23

Opinions  concerning  her.  She  is  moderate.
Kind.  She  is  irritable.  Sensible.  Her  impulse
toward  culture.  Her  horror  of  vexation  and
chatter.  Her  attention  to  strange  opinions.
Her  power  of  observation.  Child-love.  Spirit
of  order.  Wish  for  mastery.  Her  care  and
craving  for  what  is  fitting.  She  wants  me  to
please — everywhere.  She  took  it  badly  that  I
asked  her  parents  for  her  so  soon,  and  she  let
me  see  it  quickly.  She  likes  listening  to  stories.
She  does  not  allow  herself  to  be  bored  by  my
love.  My  love  often  oppresses  her.  She  is
cold  generally.  Wonderful  power  of  make-
believe  :  power  of  concealment.  Great  power
of  women  to  conceal.  Her  keen  observation.
Her  real  tact.  All  women  have  what  Schlegel
blames  in  the  beautiful  soul.  They  are  more
perfect  than  we.  Freer  than  we.  Generally
we  are  better.  They  recognise  better  than  we.
Their  nature  seems  to  be  our  art — our  nature
their  art.  They  are  born  actresses.  They
individualise — we  universalise.  She  believes  in
no  future  life,  but  in  the  wandering  of  the  soul.
Schlegel  interests  her.  She  cannot  stand  too
much  attention,  but  yet  she  resents  neglect.
She  is  afraid  of  spiders  and  mice.  She  wants
me  to  be  always  pleased.  She  does  not  let
herself  be  gloomy.

Favourite   food. — Cabbage   soup.     Beef   and


24  FRIEDERICH  VON  HARDENBERG

beans.  Oil.  Does  not  care  for  wine.  Likes
seeing  things  —  loves  comedy.  She  reflects
more  over  others  than  over  herself.

Sophie  wrote  Hardenberg's  name  ten  times
on  one  page  of  her  diary,  and  in  January  1795
we  find  the  following  entries  : —

"  Jan.  %rd.  This  morning  I  wrote  to  my  aunts.
There  was  no  school.

"Jan.  4M.  We  were  alone.  In  the  afternoon
we  went  to  Fahnwerg.  In  the  evening  we
wanted  to  go  to  Magister,  but  nothing  came
of  it.

"Jan.  $th.  Early  to-day  father  and  George
went  to  Segafstadt.  The  day  was  spoiled  for
me  by  George  leaving.

11  Jan.  6th.  This  morning  Hardenberg  rode
away  again.     Nothing  else  happened.

"Jan.  8th.  To-day  we  were  alone.  Nothing
happened.

"Jan.  yth.  To-day  we  were  again  alone,  and
nothing  happened."

One  day  she  writes  to  him,  having  lost  the
curl  he  gave  :  "  Figure  to  yourself  that  when
you  gave  me  the  hair  I  wrapped  it  cleanly  in  a
twist  of  paper  and  laid  it  on  Hanssen's  table.
The  other  day  I  wanted  to  take  it  away,  and
there  was  neither  hair  nor  bit  of  paper.  Now  I
beg  you  again  to  have  your  hair  cut."  And
another  day   she   says:  "I   have   a  cough  and


THE  MAN  25

cold  in  the  head,  .  .  .  and  yet  I  think  when  it
occurs  to  me  of  you."

In  March  1795  they  became  secretly  en-
gaged. Erasmus,  when  his  brother  wrote  to
inform  him  of  his  intentions,  warned  him  to  be
careful,  as  he  had  so  often  fallen  in  love  before.
"  Fritz  the  Flatterer  "  had  paid  court  to  many
and  many  a  maiden  and  it  seems  that  even  during
the  engagement  Sophie  was  not  all  to  him,  for
he  could  not  help  making  love  to  every  girl
he  met.  Some  of  the  gossip  came  to  the  ears
of  Fraulein  von  Kuhn,  and  one  day  she  warned
him  to  be  "  careful  in  the  society  of  Jette  and
behave  more  sensibly."  Hardenberg  told  "  the
thirteen  year  old  thing "  to  hold  her  tongue.
With  regard  to  his  fiancee  he  apparently  had  no
illusions  ;  for,  writing  after  a  stay  at  Griiningen,
he  says :  "  In  as  long  a  stay  as  I  made  there  the
dirtier  (schmutzigere)  reverse  could  certainly  not
escape  me.  ...  I  was  not  surprised,  and  my
feelings  were  not  demented.  I  shall  always  love
Griiningen,  even  if  I  do  not  attain  my  present
hope."

It  was  her  illness  in  the  autumn  of  1795  that
devoted  him  to  her,  and  then  it  was  that  he,
like  so  many  a  poet  before  him,  began  to
pour  the  oil  of  sentiment  on  his  faint  flame
of  love.  Sophie  von  Kuhn  became  seriously
ill,  and,   after   suffering    for   some   while,   was


26  FRIED  ERICH  VON  HARDEN  BERG

taken  to  Jena  for  an  operation ;  and  though
Hardenberg  was  by  way  of  being  busy  at  the
Salt  Works,  he  managed  to  get  over  to  Jena  fre-
quently and  spend  his  time  between  the  sick  child
and  the  members  of  the  Romantic-circle  which
had  its  headquarters  there.  The  great  Goethe
had  an  affection  for  the  child,  and  came  to  see
her  as  she  lay  sick  unto  death,  it  was  feared,
as  the  Jena  surgeons  could  do  nothing  to  save
her.  She  was  taken  back  to  Griiningen,  Eras-
mus accompanying  her,  and  once  she  wrote  to
her  lover  from  the  "  golden  castle,"  "  Hardly,
dear  Hardenberg,  am  I  able  to  write  you  a
line,  but  only  do  me  a  pleasure  and  do  not
be  anxious,  this  is  begged  by  your  affectionate
Sophie."

Hardenberg  for  some  reason  was  unable  to
be  much  with  Sophie  in  the  two  months  before
her  death  ;  but  he  saw  her  for  the  last  time  a
short  while  before  the  end.

The  little  girl  suffered  much  pain  with  wonder-
ful fortitude  ;  what  she  really  felt  for  Harden-
berg we  do  not  know,  but  there  seems  to  have
been  a  tenderer  and  more  human  sympathy
existing  between  Sophie  and  Erasmus  than  be-
tween Sophie  and  her  accredited  lover  ;  it  is
Erasmus  who  accompanies  her  on  her  last  jour-
ney from  Jena  to  Griiningen  ;  it  is  Erasmus
who  stays  by  her  till  the  end ;  and  it  is  Erasmus


THE  MAN  27

who  barely  a  month  after  follows  her  into  the
Unseen.

Friederich  wrote  a  few  days  after  Erasmus
had  died  to  his  brother  Karl  in  that  wonderful
certitude  of  immortality  which  never  deserted
him  :  "  Be  comforted,  Erasmus  has  overcome.
The  blossoms  of  the  dearly  loved  garland  are
being  separated  here  to  bloom  together  in
Eternity."

And  later  there  is  an  entry  in  his  diary  for
April  14th,  Erasmus'  birthday.


Erasmus1  Birthday.

"  Three-and-twenty  years  ago,  oh,  blessed
Erasmus,  didst  thou  first  begin  to  tread  the
rough  path  that  hitherto  has  been  thy  lot.  To-
day, for  the  first  time  during  those  years,  this
date  goes  by  without  rejoicing,  and  instead  of
the  congratulations  of  former  days  a  drear  sigh
escapes  me.  Thou  art  parted  from  us,  and  we
have  nothing  left  of  thee  but  the  memory  of
thy  sufferings.

"  One  would  surely  choose  plants  from  a  step-
motherly soil  for  transplanting  into  a  better
land.

"  Bitter  did  thy  pilgrimage  become.  Difficult
were   the   last  steps.     Now  it  is  over.     Thou


28  FRIEDERICH  VON  HARDENBERG

flowerest  under  a  more  kindly  Heaven,  and  we
still  run  and  yearn  after  the  old  comradeship  and
oppressively  chafe  at  the  lead  on  our  feet."

Hardenberg  kept  an  account  of  the  emotions
which  the  death  of  Sophie  had  roused  in
him  : —

%2fid  day  after. — "  I  showed  Sophiechen's  pic-
ture to  Kriesammtmannin  Just ;  we  spoke  much
of  her  ;  on  the  whole  a  serene,  glad  day.

^rd  day  after. — "Thought  much  of  Sophie
to-day.

^qtb  day  after. — "  Thought  often  of  Sophie,
but  not  intently  ;  coldly  about  Erasmus.  To-
day I  have  eaten  too  much.

30//6  day  after. — "  On  the  whole  I  may  be  con-
tent, though,  indeed,  I  have  not  thought  of  her
with  emotion ;  I  was  almost  uneasy,  but  cer-
tainly not  in  a  manner  unworthy  of  her.  I
thought  of  her  at  times  in  a  manly  way.  .  .  .
This  morning  I  had  that  fatal,  oppressive,  fear-
some feeling  of  an  approaching  cold  in  my
head.

4pth  day  after. — "  I  slept  badly  ...  it  rained
steadily.  I  cried  a  good  deal  early,  also  after
dinner.  The  whole  day  I  was  consecrated  to
contemplation  of  Her.  ...  I  seem  to  be  too
much  in  harmony  with  everyday  life  .  .  .  how
short  a  time  I  am  able  to  remain  in  the
heights.


THE  MAN  29

$7,rd  day  after. — "  I  went  for  a  walk  and  picked
flowers  and  threw  them  on  her  grave.  I  was
happy,  but  I  was  cold  (in  emotion),  and  yet  I
cried — a  beautiful  evening.  I  sat  awhile  on  her
grave.

$6th  day  after. — "  In  the  evening  I  went  to
Sophie ;  there  I  was  unutterably  joyful — kind-
ling moment  of  enthusiasm — I  blew  the  grave
as  it  had  been  dust  before  me.  Centuries  were
as  moments — I  could  feel  her  near.

6 1 st  day  after. — "I  was  not  moved  at  her
graveside.  ...  I  must  live  ever  more  and
more  for  her  sake.  ...  I  am  for  her  and  for
no  others.  .  .  .  She  is  the  Highest — the  only
One.  ...  If  I  could  only  be  worthy  of  her
in  every  moment.  My  principal  exercise  should
be  to  bring  everything  in  relation  to  the  idea  of
her.

65th  day  after. — "The  world  becomes  ever
more  alien — the  things  around  me  more  in-
different— but  it  becomes  brighter  round  me
and  in  me.

80th  day  after. — "  He  from  whom  pain  flies  will
not  love  more.  The  lover  must  ever  feel  the
gap — must  ever  hold  apart  the  wounds.  May
God  keep  me  ever  in  this  indescribably  sweet
pain.  Without  my  Sophie  I  am  nothing  ;  with
her  everything.

S^rdday  after. — "  The  only  good  thing  I  found


t


3o  FRIEDERICH  VON  HARDENBERG

to-day  is  the  idea  of  unutterable  isolation  which
surrounds  me  since  Sophie's  death — with  her
the  whole  world  died  for  me.

8$thday  after. — "  Joyfully  as  a  young  poet  will
I  die.   .  .   .

8jth  day  after. — "  She  is  dead,  so  I  will  die —
the  world  is  desert.  ...  In  deep  joyous  Peace
I  will  await  the  moment  that  calls  me.  .  .   .

88th  day  after. — "The  engagement  was  not
for  this  world."

There  are  many  griefs  and  emotions  too
sacred  to  be  uttered,  and  this  catalogued  experi-
ence strikes  chill  into  the  heart  as  bald  self-
revelation  alone  can  do.  Beyond  praying  God  that
this  indescribably  dear  pain  may  not  pass  away,
that  the  wound  may  never  heal,  he  thinks,  like
every  tortured  lover,  of  his  time  of  suicide ;  he
dallies  with  the  thought,  talks  it  over  with
friends,  wonders  whether  vegetable  poisons
kill,  and  finally  he  experiences  once  more  the
desire  to  live.  Consumption  had  been  doing  its
work ;  after  getting  a  hold  on  his  system
quietly,  it  appeared  and  filled  him  with  eager-
ness for  work  and  life.  Yet  not  altogether  for
earthly  life,  but  for  death  and  life  in  perfect
sympathy.

It  has  been  thought  that  the  struggle  to  feel,
the  Ringen  um  den  Schmerz,  was  a  characteristic
of  the  eighteenth  century,  and  E.  Heilborn  says


THE  MAN  31

of  Hardenberg  that  he  sought  pain,  and  "  it  with-
drew itself;  he  wished  to  throw  himself,  another
Tantalus,  into  the  river  of  pain,  and  it  dried
up  under  him."  Intensity  of  feeling  was  to
Hardenberg  and  all  the  Romantics  the  goal  of
material  existence,  and  they  delivered  them-
selves up  when  it  was  possible  to  the  most
turbulent  and  conflicting  emotions,  destroying,
in  their;  very  anxiety  for  sensation,  their  ability
to  distinguish  between  true  and  false  emotion.

One  thing  at  least  is  sure,  that  Hardenberg's
love  for  Sophie,  and  his  grief  over  her  death,
served  to  awake  the  poet  in  him,  and  that  his
affections  were  not  for  purely  human  use  ;  they
became  the  key  to  higher  secrets — "my  love
has  become  a  flame  that  consumes  the  things  of
earth."

In  1798  Hardenberg  left  Tennstadt  and  went
to  Leipzig  where  he  studied  mineralogy  under
Werner.  While  there  he  lodged  in  the  house  of
the  von  Charpentiers  and  thus  became  intimate
with  Julie,  daughter  of  his  host.  A  year  and  a
half  after  Sophie's  death  he  became  once  more
secretly  engaged,  and  is  able  to  write  enthusiasti-
cally of  his  new  love.

Hardenberg's  family  did  not  welcome  the  girl
with  much  pleasure,  and  it  seems  that  Julie
could  not  have  cared  much  for  her  lover,  for
she    began    an    endeavour    to    marry    Karl    his


32  FRIEDERICH  VON  HARDENBERG

brother  during  Friederich's  last  illness,  and  in
a  letter  written  by  Freiherr  von  Hardenberg
after  Friederich's  death,  we  read  "  the  delight
of  being  rid  of  Julchen  makes  it  bearable.  .  .  .
I  wish  her  a  prince  if  it  can  make  her  happy."

Schleiermacher  comments  on  Hardenberg's
two  fiancees,  "  Sophie  had  little  wit  or  culture,
Julie  no  heart.  I  do  not  think  he  chose  his
loves  rightly,  or  rather  that  he  ever  had  a  real
beloved.  I  am  convinced  that  either  of  these
would  have  been  but  little  to  him  had  they
remained  with  him."

Hardenberg  spent  the  last  summer  of  his  life
at  Dresden,  where  the  latter  phases  of  phthisis
manifested  themselves,  "  a  shadow  of  himself
.  .  .  unable  to  take  part  in  conversation,  and
often  falling  asleep  in  company,  where  he  lay
as  if  dead  among  the  living."  Before  the  end
he  went  home  to  Weissenfels  and  when  death
came  to  him  he  was  cheerful,  even  gay,  as  we
see  from  one  or  two  of  F.  Schlegel's  letters
written  in  March  1801  :  "Yesterday  I  returned
from  Weissenfels,  where  at  mid-day  the  day
before  I  saw  Hardenberg  die.  .  .  .  One  could
hardly  think  it  possible  to  die  so  gently,  so
beautifully,  for  the  time  I  was  with  him  he
was  unutterably  serene.  ...  It  is  beyond  all
things  precious  to  me  to  have  seen  him  once
more."


THE  MAN  33

The  twenty  -  nine  years  of  Hardenberg's
practical  life  ended  on  Lady  Day  1801,  a  life
unchequered  by  great  adventures,  uncrowned
by  accomplishment,  dragging  out  its  little
length  in  study,  dreams  and  sickness,  un-
cherished  by  its  owner,  unvalued  by  the
world.

We  must  draw  aside  the  curtain  of  practical
life  in  order  to  see  that  Novalis  whose  capacity
for  feeling  was  such  that  he  would  fain  draw
the  "  universe  into  his  own  consciousness."


NOVALIS

THE    AUTHOR

'  I  HHE  pseudonym  Novalis  was  chosen  by  Frie-
derich  v.  Hardenberg  when  he  began  to
publish  his  work,  as  having  been  the  name  of
a  branch  of  his  family  known  in  the  sixteenth
century  as  de  Novali.  His  assumption  of  a  nom
de  plume  seems  natural  enough,  a  mere  indication
of  the  gap  that  existed  between  the  practical
life  of  Friederich  v.  Hardenberg  and  the  soul-
life  of  Novalis,  and  moreover  the  arrangement
makes  it  possible  to  talk  of  that  soul-life  as  the
supreme  element  of  the  duality.

Novalis  was  neither  philosopher  nor  thinker
in  the  exact  sense  of  either  word,  but  he  was
both  religionist  and  poet.  He  was  the  true
weaver  of  thoughts,  who  saw  unity  in  the  most
divergent  speculation,  who  detected  analogies
in  contraries,  who  heard  harmony  in  apparent
dissonance,  whose  life  seems  to  have  been  not
so  much  an  origination  of  thought  as  an
attempt  at  the  reconciliation  of  results,  the
resolution  of  antinomies,  arrived  at  by  a  divine
penetration.       If    one     could     use     the     word

34


THE  AUTHOR  35

"Feeler"  or  "  Intuitionist  "  it  would  serve  to
indicate  his  mode  of  apprehending  the  under-
lying unities.  Both  Schiller  and  the  Schlegels
influenced  Novalis  in  youth,  but  it  was  Fichte
"  the  Great  Ego,"  who  was  the  determinator
of  his  thought,  and  he  remained  inside  the
Fichtean  philosophy  all  his  life  though  at
times  he  thought  himself  outside  it.  The
influence  of  Hemsterhuys  may  be  traced  in  his
writings  in  various  phrases  such  as  these  :  "  the
soul  has  endless  organs  of  which  so  far  we  have
only  discovered  the  senses,"  "  if  the  other
organs  could  be  brought  into  play  how  open
Nature  would  be,"  "  men  ought  to  have  the
power  of  mingling  with  Divinity,"  "  Death
accelerates  our  way  to  perfection,"  and  in  other
instances  as  well.  He  seems  to  have  helped
Novalis  to  get  away  from  the  despotism  of
fact,  away  into  the  rarer  transcendental  ether,
where  the  idealistic  spirit  roams  untrammelled
by  convention  or  exact  science.  The  works
of  Jacob  Bbhme  were  read  with  enthusiasm
by  Novalis,  and  they  entranced  him,  as  they
did  most  of  the  Romantics.  Heine  says
the  name  of  Jacob  Bbhme  was  the  Shibbo-
leth of  their  school  and  laughs  at  their  lunacy,
though  at  the  same  time  confessing  that  he  has
never  read  a  line.  Novalis  once  wrote  to
Tieck  of  Bbhme,   "  one  sees  above  all  in   him


36  NOVALIS

the  Power  of  Spring  with  its  bursting,  com-
pelling, mingling  forces  that  clothe  the  world
from  within."  The  Power  of  Spring  did  not
awake  in  Novalis'  own  mind  till  the  pathetic
death  of  Sophie  had  taken  place,  but  then  all
the  poetry  that  had  been  maturing  in  the  sub-
consciousness of  youthful  years  sprang  forth
into  being.  The  Hymn  to  Night  appeared,  a
tribute  to  the  Death  that  had  enveloped  his
well-beloved.  "  Sacred  Night  with  its  untold
mysteries  allures  me ;  the  world  is  far,  far
away  buried  in  a  deep  and  lonely  grave.  .  .  .
Light  has  its  own  fixed  limits,  but  Night  has  a
boundless  unfathomable  Dominion — the  Reign
of  Sleep  has  no  End."  Besides  this  paean  of
Death  he  wrote  other  hymns  of  a  rare  abandon-
ment of  faith  and  of  some  beauty.  For  him
Marien-liebe  and  Jesu-liebe  were  two  sides  of
the  same  affection,  he  thought  of  God  as  Priest,
Wife,  Friend,  he  apprehended  Christ  as  the
Lover  of  His  Soul,  whose  light  made  earth
heaven,  and  who  had  rolled  away  the  grave
stone  from  his  own  deeper  inner  Life.  He  had
a  stalwart  love  and  trust  in  the  truth  that  made
him  free,  he  had  liberated  himself  from  sec-
tarianism, and  finally  was  able  to  be  in  a  sect  and
not  of  it.  The  early  religious  influence  of  his
life  was  Moravian,  and  he  was  given  to  reading
the  works  of  Count  Zinzendorf  who,  some  sixty


THE  AUTHOR  37

years  earlier,  had  been  John  Wesley's  friend.
Somewhat  of  Novalis'  clearness  of  vision  in
spiritual  things  must  be  attributed  to  the  sect
in  which  he  was  brought  up.  He  had  learnt
among  the  graves  of  the  Moravian  cemetery
that  Death  was  no  grim  Fate  from  which  to
flee  •,  he  had  read  the  inscription  on  each  of  the
equal  tombstones — "he  was  born  on  such  a
day,  and  on  such  other  day  he  returned  home."
He  had  heard  the  Resurrection  proclaimed
amidst  the  tombs  on  Easter  Morn.  Death  was
to  him  but  the  Gate  of  Life.  An  essential
spirituality  pervaded  his  being,  which  freed  him
from  the  limitations  of  dogma  and  doctrine,
and  which  enabled  him  to  sympathise  with  and
appreciate  Catholicism  as  well  as  Dissent  from
Catholicism.  Heine  says  that  he  became  a
Catholic,  but  he  did  not ;  and  it  is  enough  to
know  that  he  possessed  the  key  of  all  religions,
that  which  is  common  to  all,  trust  in  God  and
in  a  future  Life.  No  hymns  can  excel  in  piety
those  which  he  wrote,  full  of  a  tender  deep
realisation  of  the  place  of  the  Mystic  Christ,  of
the  Ideal  of  Manhood  in  his  own  deepest  life,
who  both  made  him  man  and  illuminated
Destiny.  In  Christ  he  feels  that  Death  and
Life  are  made  one,  that  the  everlasting  enmity
between  the  Ending  and  the  Unending  is
neutralised,  he  finds  love,   peace,  joy,  and  the


38  NOVALIS

sun  that  will  make  him  fruitful  to  all  perfection.
Christ  was  to  Novalis  what  the  Holy  Will  was
to  Fichte,  and  both  learnt  in  their  own  way  the
meaning  of  the  Love  that  moves  the  sun  and
all  the  stars.

It  has  been  said  that  the  true  test  of  a  hymn
is  that  it  would  make  a  love  poem,  and  the
test  of  a  real  love  poem  is  that  it  would  make
a  hymn.  Whether  this  was  the  standard  aimed
at  by  Novalis  or  no  he  often  clothes  his  spiritu-
ality in  materialistic  phraseology  as  in  his  vision
of  the  true  and  universal  Agape.  "Few  know
the  secret  of  Love,  feel  for  ever  unsatisfied,  for
ever  athirst.  The  divine  significance  of  the
Supper  is  a  riddle  to  earthly  sense.  But  he
who  once  has  drunk  in  the  breath  of  Life  from
warm  beloved  lips,  whose  heart  has  melted  in
the  quivering  waves  of  holy  fire,  whose  eyes
have  been  opened  to  measure  the  unfathomable
depths  of  heaven — he  will  eat  of  His  Body  and
drink  of  His  Blood  for  ever  more.  Who  has
yet  guessed  the  transcendent  meaning  of  this
earthly  Life  ?  Who  can  say  that  he  under-
stands the  Blood  ?  One  day  all  bodies  shall
be  one  Body,  then  the  holy  pair  will  float  in
heavenly  blood.  Oh !  that  the  ocean  were
already  reddening ;  that  the  rocks  were  soften-
ing into  fragrant  flesh  !  The  sweet  repast
never  ends ;    love    is    never    satisfied.       Never


THE  AUTHOR  39

can  it  have  the  beloved  near  enough,  close
enough  to  its  inmost  self.  By  ever  tenderer
lips  the  heavenly  food  is  ever  more  eagerly
enjoyed.  More  fiercely  burns  the  passion  of  the
soul ;  thirstier,  ever  thirstier  grows  the  heart,
and  so  the  feast  of  Love  endures  from  ever-
lasting to  everlasting.  Had  those  who  abstain
but  once  tasted  of  it,  they  would  forsake
everything  and  seat  themselves  beside  us  at  the
table  of  longing,  which  is  ever  furnished  with
guests.  They  would  comprehend  the  infinite
feelings  of  Love,  and  extol  our  Feast  of  the
Body  and  the  Blood."

In  this  mystic  rhapsody  we  see  the  manner  in
which  the  Christian  Mysteries  were  treated  by
the  Romantics,  that  in  their  more  rapturous
moments  Christianity  became  for  them  not  only
the  Gospel  of  the  Spirit,  but  also  the  inner
Gospel  of  the  Flesh.

For  Novalis,  as  for  Bohme,  the  road  led  ever
inwards.  He  sought  the  true  religious  life,  the
life  of  the  ages  ;  he  saw  the  shortness  of  the
earthly  tenure  and  the  greatness  of  the  soul.
Religion  is  "  sense  and  taste  for  the  Unending,"
and  Novalis  in  his  tireless  search  seemed  most
truly  to  be  the  incarnation  of  an  eternal  soul.
"  Religion  arises  when  a  holy  soul  is  thrilled
by  the  Universum" — it  is  in  Each  to  find  All,
in  the  Ending  to  find  the  Unending.     Formulae


4o  NOVAL1S

are  unimportant ;  each  man  contains  his  own
salvation.  "It  is  not  thou  who  believest  in  a
sacred  book  that  hast  religion,  but  the  man  who
needs  none — who  could  ever  make  one  himself,"
and  hence  everything  human  is  holy,  for  every-
thing is  divine.  Death,  too,  is  but  an  incident
to  both  these  mystics.  There  is  no  death,  "Who
knows  whither  we  shoot  forth  when  we  dis-
appear from  hence  ?  Perhaps  over  there  there
may  be  a  death,  the  result  of  which  is  earthly  life."

An  essay,  "Christianity  or  Europe,"  was
written  by  Novalis  about  1796.  He  looked  in
vain  for  the  sweet,  soul-uniting  belief  in  the
government  of  God  on  earth,  for  that  divine
confidence  between  man  and  man,  for  that  sweet
devotion  at  the  outpouring  of  the  God-inspired
spirit,  that  all-embracing  Love.  For  reasons
best  known  to  themselves,  Goethe  and  Dorothea
Veit  kept  this  essay  out  of  the  Athenaeum.
"  Flower  Pollen"  was  published  in  1797,  the
year  of  Sophie's  death.  "  It  is  a  duty  to  think
of  the  dead ;  it  is  the  only  way  to  remain  in
fellowship  with  them."  It  consists  of  ejaculated
thought,  and  contains  no  consecutive  theme.

"  Heinrich  von  Osterdingen,"  his  latest  work,
and  his  most  sustained  effort,  a  singularly  beau-
tiful romance,  remains  unfinished.  The  "Dis-
ciples at  Sais  "  is  unfinished,  the  "  Encyclopaedia  "
and  "Thought  Exercises"  are  fragments;  but


THE  AUTHOR  41

it  must  be  always  kept  in  mind  that  Novalis  did
not  write  primarily  for  publication,  and  that  may
account  for  the  hoard  of  unfinished  dramas,
translations  and  varied  endeavour  that  he  left
behind.  He  had  such  a  sense  of  the  Eternal
that  the  Finite  seemed  to  him  but  of  little
account,  and  the  mere  finishing  and  perfecting
of  a  production  was  a  matter  of  sincere  indiffer-
ence to  him  in  his  earnest  curiosity  for  new
knowledge.  The  literature  of  his  time,  with
the  exception  of  "  Wilhelm  Meister,"  influenced
him  peculiarly  little.  Of  course,  like  Napoleon,
he  wept  over  the  sorrows  of  Werther,  of  course
he  read  Ossian,  who  had  just  then  become  the
ideal  poet  of  Romance,  and  he  was  to  a  great
extent  tinged  by  the  curious  and  widespread
sentimentality  of  his  time.  His  style,  such  as
it  was,  was  his  own,  and  is  characterised  by
the  strangest  inequality,  ranging  from  inspired
poetry  to  commonplace  expression.  He  reached
the  highest  in  "  Sais,"  and  its  few  pages  contain
the  sum  of  his  Thought  and  reveal  that  new,
inner,  half-guessed  understanding  of  Nature  of
which  Novalis  alone  amongst  his  contemporaries
deeply  realised  the  meaning.

Truly  Novalis  had  come  into  the  world  at
a  critical  moment.  The  years  between  I772
and  1 801,  the  term  of  his  natural  life,  were
some  of  the  most  vital  in  European  history,  for


42  NOVALIS

they   witnessed   the   culmination   of  that   great
struggle  of  the  Rights  of  the  Individual,  that
mighty   egoistic   wave    that    enveloped   Europe
and  even  America  in  its  advance  towards  Social
Reconstruction.     Surveying  the  world,  we  see
England  losing  America,  France  emergent  from
the  Feudal  system,  and  men  everywhere   sys-
tematising  all  things.     In  spite  of  social  anarchy
there  was  a  deep,  strong  undercurrent  of  Order,
a  genius  for  investigation  was  abroad,  all  branches
of  knowledge  were  being  classified  and  syste-
matised  into  sciences.     In  the  realm  of  Natural
Philosophy  there   were   many   eager   searchers,
and  it  is  not  surprising  that  Novalis,  with  his
fervid  imagination,  was  captivated  by  their  quest.
Joseph  Priestly  was  discovering   that  air  parts
with  its  oxygen  to  the  blood  as  it  passes  through
the    lungs ;    Aloysius    Galvani,   who   gave    his
name   to   the  Force  which  he  discovered,  was
working    along    the   same   lines    as   Ritter  and
Volta.       Novalis    was    absorbed    by    the    new
galvanic  theories,  and  said  that  "  Thought  must
be  galvanisation,"   while   Schelling  waxed   en-
thusiastic   about    oxygen,    and    thought    it    the
Philosopher's    Stone.       It    was    necessary    for
Novalis   to   know  something  of  Mineralogy  in
his    profession,    and    so    he    went    to    learn    of
Werner,  the   professor  at   Freyberg.     Werner
was  a  man  of  note  who  had  first  applied  the


THE  AUTHOR  43

term  "Formations"  to  the  groups  of  strata
which  are  usually  found  associated,  and  the
term  "Transition"  to  the  rocks  lying  between
those  called  primitive  and  secondary,  and  he  it  was
who  led  Novalis  into  the  secrets  of  Nature  and
who  greatly  inspired  him.  "  The  Disciples  at
Sa'i's"  was  the  natural  outcome  of  the  tumultuous
yet  ordered  activity  around  him,  that  great
Nature- Revelation  which,  with  its  strange
analogies  and  nascent  harmonies,  is  one  of  the
greatest  poems  in  the  possession  of  men.
Werner,  the  Mineralogist  and  Collector,  must
have  been,  it  seems,  the  "Master"  in  Sa'i's,
and  the  Pupil  who  is  not  so  ready  as  the  others
is  probably  Novalis  himself,  who  says  "every-
thing leads  me  back  into  myself,"  and  "our
Master  wishes  that  we  should  all  travel  by
different  paths,  as  all  eventually  lead  to  Sa'i's "
— Sa'i's,  the  ancient  Egyptian  city  in  which  the
temple  of  Isis  stood,  and  whose  priests  tradi-
tionally held  the  profound  lore  of  the  unriddled
Universe.  In  this  remarkable  work  we  may
learn  that  he  conceived  Nature  as  a  vast  self-
existent  universally  related  Whole,  and  his  idea
of  the  sciences  was  "  that  they  should  mutually
elucidate,  confirm  and  enforce  each  other."
Here  we  find  expressed  the  idea  of  Unity  that
possessed  all  the  Romantics,  the  idea  that  made
even  the  great  Goethe  rejoice  more  in  the  dis-


44  NOVALIS

covery  of  the  "  os  intermaxillare"  in  man  than
in  any  other  of  his  work.

There  is  no  question  but  that  the  genius  of
Novalis  lay  in  his  capacity  for  Unification ;  and
it  is  for  this  reason  that  he  seems  to  be  the
embodiment  of  the  aspiration  of  his  age,  though
he  had  neither  real  mathematical  nor  philo-
sophical training  ;  yet  an  extraordinary  intuition
combined  with  a  strong  poetic  faculty  enabled
him,  like  Emerson,  whose  mind  more  nearly
resembles  his  than  any  other,  to  be  a  weaver  of
thoughts,  a  writer  of  theories,  a  mingler  of  dis-
coveries. Like  Coleridge  he  was  fragmentary
and  unconsecutive  in  his  work,  and  it  is  difficult
to  give  in  a  few  words  an  idea  of  the  philosophy
that  is  scattered  up  and  down  in  the  thought
exercises  and  encyclopaedic  fragments.  He
says  :  "  Philosophy  is  the  science  of  self-
analysis,  through  philosophising  we  begin  to
perceive  that  Nature  or  the  outer  world  is
similar  to  a  human  being,  we  find  out  that  we
can  only  begin  to  comprehend  things  in  the
same  way  in  which  we  know  ourselves  and
those  dearest  to  us.  At  last  we  realise  the  true
bond  of  union  between  subject  and  object,  and
discover  that  even  in  our  own  selves  there  is  an
outer  world,  which  stands  in  the  same  relation
to  our  inner  selves  that  our  outer  life  bears  to
the  outer  world,  that  the  latter  are  as  closely


THE  AUTHOR  45

connected  as  our  outer  and  inner  life,  and,
therefore,  we  can  only  comprehend  the  inner
life  and  soul  of  Nature  by  reflection,  even  as  it
is  only  by  sensation  that  our  outer  life  comes
in  contact  with  material  forces."  "  The  road
leads  inwards,  inwards  to  the  depths  of  the
Ego  ;  the  highest  task  of  culture  is  self  mastery
of  the  inner  life,  so  that  it  may  become  indeed
the  true  Ego."  "  We  are  called  to  the  culti-
vation of  the  Earth,"  he  says,  "  she  takes  man's
impression.  Humanity  is  the  higher  sense  of
our  planet,  the  nerve  that  connects  this  portion
(of  the  Universe)  with  a  higher  world,  the  Eye
that  it  lifts  to  Heaven."  For  Novalis  Man  is
Mediator  between  God  and  Nature.  "  Nature
shall  become  moral,  we  are  her  teachers,  her
moral  tangents,  her  moral  attraction."  Novalis,
in  spite  of  his  deep-seated  monistic  tendency,
becomes  a  dualist  in  his  view  of  Nature.  Instead
of  making  God  and  Nature  the  same,  he  places
her  in  opposition  to  Him  as  her  goal ;  God,
endless  Activity  ;  Nature,  endless  object  (theme
or  matter)  ;  /  the  Endless  condition.  God  and
Nature  must  be  separated,  God  is  the  Goal  of
Nature,  that  with  which  she  shall  one  day
harmonise.  He  seems  to  represent  God  not  as
the  moving  Spirit  with  the  cosmos,  but  as  over
against  the  world  that  He  had  thrown  ofF  in
order  that  it  might  yield  itself  to  Him.    The  Ego


46  NOVALIS

is  that  which  binds  the  subjective  and  objective
world,  and  it  must  be  in  its  very  essence  Love,
for  the  Ego  is  forever  two  who  are  yet  one,  and
thus  it  is  that  the  conception  of  an  extra  mundane
God  and  of  a  temporal  creation  is  evaded.  For
Novalis  as  for  Fichte  if  there  is  Man  there  must
be  God,  if  there  is  God  there  must  be  Man.

There  is  no  occasion  to  dwell  much  on  the
philosophy  of  Novalis ;  his  system,  if  it  can  be
called  a  system,  was  made  up  of  monistic  and
dualistic  ingredients  on  Fichtean  lines.  He  was
in  reality  a  born  Poet  and  Religionist,  and  it
is  as  such,  and  not  as  a  Philosopher,  that  he
must  live ;  and  though  his  intense  realisation  of
that  dream  of  the  ages,  the  Unity  of  the  Uni-
verse, may  appear  philosophic,  yet  he  was  in
truth  no  thinker  but  a  dreamer,  whose  innate
tendency  was  to  regard  phenomena  as  the  ever-
lasting breaking  of  waves  on  some  shore,  each
wave  disappearing  only  to  reappear  in  some
other,  all  alike  being  manifestations  of  the
hidden  Unity.  He  arrived  at  the  same  results
as  the  thinker,  but,  as  he  said  himself  in  Sais,
there  are  many  roads  that  lead  to  the  Temple  of
the  veiled  Goddess,  of  Isis  the  Mystery.

During  the  last  year  of  his  life,  the  work
of  John  Brown,  the  Scotch  doctor,  interested
Novalis  much ;  he  was  the  inventor  of  the
Brunonian  system  of  dividing  disease  into  two


THE  AUTHOR  47

classes,  sthenic  and  asthenic,  a  man  who  tried
to  combine  the  healing  of  soul  and  body,  the
true  mystic  hidden  by  the  physician's  garb.
Novalis  ever  turned  in  upon  himself,  revelled  in
the  new  theory,  and  even  fell  in  love  with  sick-
ness, for  it  became  to  him  valuable  as  a  process  of
individualisation,  a  school  for  the  cultivation  of
the  disposition.  From  early  years  Novalis  had
learnt  to  look  on  death  as  the  home-going.  There
are  some  people  in  this  world  whose  faces  are
always  set  towards  home,  who  suffer  the  same
divine  nostalgia  that  Perugino  painted  into  the
countenances  of  his  saints.  For  every  illumin-
ated soul,  death  is  but  the  greater  Transubstan-
tiation,  a  more  mighty  Sacrament  than  any  of
which  the  Churches  teach.  It  is  the  Gate  of  the
Holy  of  Holies,  for  ever  shut  in  this  world,
because  on  its  lintel  is  inscribed  the  word  that
slays.  Before  he  was  twenty  -  nine,  Novalis
had  surrendered  his  life  into  that  Night  which
is  the  inner  Day,  into  that  great  Song  of  Night
which  he  had  said  is  the  sublime  Song  of  Death
or  of  New  Life.

On  account  of  his  long  brown  hair,  his  white
semi-transparent  forehead,  his  glowing  eyes  and
his  face  irradiate  with  spirituality,  he  was
likened  by  his  friends  to  the  picture  of  St  John
Baptist  in  the  Munich  Gallery.  So  great  was
his    preoccupation    with    the    Unseen    that    he


48  NOVALIS

would  wander  through  the  grass-lands,  when
in  springtime  they  were  studded  with  flowers,
and  see  not  the  green  grass  beneath  his  feet
nor  the  blue  sky  above,  but  the  yet  broader
meadows,  the  yet  more  enchanting  flowers  of
the  Eternal  Country.  Landscape  for  him,  as
for  every  true  Romantic,  was  but  a  state  of  the
soul,  Nature  but  the  accompaniment  to  the  motif
of  man's  mood.  India  for  him,  as  for  F.  Schlegel,
was  the  Homestead  of  the  Soul,  the  Source  of  all
Religion,  and  the  blue  waves  of  Heaven  as  they
flowed  gently  overhead  imaged  the  mysterious
Sea  of  Death.  A  sweet,  all-pervading  unity
emanated  from  his  soul  making  distant  things
familiar.

Novalis  is  such  a  beautiful  dreamer  that  when
we  come  to  analyse  his  work  we  feel  as  if  we
were  bruising  the  wings  of  some  glorious  blue
butterfly,  whose  life  has  been  a  series  of  flights
from  mystery  to  mystery,  and  whose  true  home
is  the  empyrean,  the  real  Bird  of  Paradise,  of
which  it  is  said  that  it  has  no  feet,  and  so  must
hang  hovering  for  ever.  If  we  are  going  to
brush  the  dust  from  the  blue  wings  we  must
tell  first  what  he  said  of  himself:  "Spinoza
climbed  to  Nature,  Fichte  to  the  Ego  or  Person-
ality, I  to  the  thesis,  God,"  and  yet,  in  spite  of
his  vaunt,  as  far  as  thought  went,  he  remained
in  a  far  smaller  circle  than  either.     And  why  ?


THE  AUTHOR  49

Because  he  lacked  the  power  of  consecutive,
concentrated  thought,  the  really  trained  faculties;
he  was  full  of  intuitions,  enthusiasms,  interests,
originality  ;  with  a  wide  vision  and  a  small  grasp.
But  after  all,  perhaps  the  lustre  of  the  blue
wings  is  really  enhanced  by  the  removal  of  the
philosophic  dust ;  their  true  colour  is  shown
to  be  the  diviner  cobalt  of  Poetry,  and  their
owner  as  a  magic  Intuitionist  in  the  Spiritual
Kingdom.


SELECTIONS  FROM  THE  WORKS
OF  NOVALIS


SPIRITUAL  HYMNS


Without  Thee  where  should  I  have  ended,
Without  Thee  what  should  I  have  done  ?
Delivered  o'er  to  anxious  terror
I  should  have  stood  on  earth  alone.
I  knew  not  what  I  loved  with  surety,
The  Future  yawned  a  gulf  below.
And  whom  could  I,  my  heart  revealing,
Make  a  partaker  of  my  woe  ?

Lonely,  consumed  by  Love  and  Longing,
Each  day  appeared  to  me  a  night.
I  coursed  through  life  with  headlong  hurry,
And  bitter  tears  did  blind  my  sight.
I  found  no  rest  amid  the  tumult,
And  hopeless  grief  e'en  in  my  home.
Who  would  on  Earth  remain  a  moment
Without  a  friend  'neath  heaven's  dome  ?

But  if  Christ  once  to  me  has  beckoned,
And  I  of  Him  am  really  sure,
Oh  !  but  how  soon  a  life  illumined
Maketh  the  darkness  to  pass  o'er  !

53


54  NOVALIS

Through  Him  I  manhood  first  attained,
By  Him  my  fate  untangled  is,
And  India's  sun  in  regions  polar,
Resembleth  much  that  Love  of  His.

Thus  life  becomes  a  joy  supernal,
Love  and  delight  spring  everywhere,
For  each  wound  grows  a  herb  of  healing,
And  each  heart  burns  to  do  and  dare.
For  all  His  various  gifts  most  grateful
Respectfully  I  bend  the  knee,
Convinced  of  having  Him  among  us
Where  gathered  are  but  two  or  three.

Oh  !  go  out  into  every  highway

And  fetch  the  erring  ones  within,

Stretch  out  thine  hand,  with  love  receive  them,

And  bid  them  join  us  here  within.

To  Earth  has  Heaven  now  descended,

By  Faith  we  see  Him  verily,

And  those  in  One  Love  with  us  joined

The  Revelation  also  see.

Of  sins  an  old  persistent  burden
Was  bound  on  us,  our  hearts  were  low,
We  wandered  in  the  night  all  blindly,
Aliens  alike  from  joy  and  woe  ;
Each  action  seemed  to  us  a  trespass,
And  Man  the  enemy  of  God  ;


HYMNS  55

And  if  we  heard  the  voice  of  Heaven
It  spoke  of  Death  or  chast'ning  rod.

The  heart,  the  spring  of  life's  rich  fountain,

Seemed  habited  by  wicked  elves,

If  our  poor  spirits  ever  lightened

It  was  no  gain  to  our  sad  selves.

An  iron  rivet  held  us  fastened  ;

We,  muttering  prisoners  to  the  earth,

And  fear  of  Death's  great  sword  of  justice

Extinguished  hope,  and  left  us  dearth.

But  a  Deliverer — a  Saviour,
A  Son  of  Man  with  love  and  might,
Within  us  fire  immortal  kindled
To  love-flame  clear,  eternal,  bright.
For  once  we  saw  the  heavens  opened
As  if  they  were  our  Fatherland,
We  could  again  be  faithful,  hopeful
And  feel  that  God  was  near  at  hand.

Since  then  did  sin  amongst  us  dwindle
And  each  man's  joy  rang  in  his  pace,
To  children  was  the  Faith  then  tendered,
As  richest  dower  of  our  Race.
Through  Him  Life  glided  by  enhanced,
As  if  some  hallowed  dream  it  were,
And  given  o'er  to  Love  and  Longing,
Our  farewells  did  not  touch  welfare.


56  NOVALIS

And  still  there  stands  in  glorious  splendour

The  Holy  Lover  ever  here,

Touched  are  we  by  His  crown  so  thorny,

And  by  His  faithfulness  so  dear.

And  every  man  to  us  is  welcome

Who  grips  His  Hand  with  us  and  lies

With  us  together  in  His  heart-core,

To  ripen  Fruit  of  Paradise.


II

Eastward  Dawn  is  slowly  breaking,

Antique  times  their  youth  renew,

I  shall  drink  my  deep  thirst  slaking

At  the  fount  of  rainbow  hue ;

Drink  fulfilment  of  life's  old  desire  ;

Drink  Love  sweet,  transfigured,  reft  of  fire.

Lastly,  to  the  earth  there  cometh
The  Sacred  Child  of  all  the  skies,
Round  the  earth  the  life-wind  hummeth
In  creative  songs  that  rise,
Kindling  newly  from  extinguished  ashes
Brilliant,  everlasting  lightning  flashes.

Everywhere  from  graves  upwelling
See  new  lives,  and  quickened  blood
In  the  Life  Stream  laves  He,  telling
Of  our  peace  amidst  the  flood  ;


HYMNS  $7

With  outstretched  hands  for  ever  standing,
Ready  to  fulfil  all  man's  demanding.

Let  His  Countenance  so  tender

Deep  impress  thy  human  soul,

By  His  glance  He  thee  will  render

Joyous  and  most  surely  whole,

Then  would  all  men's  hearts  and  souls  and  senses

Mingle  in  the  dance  that  first  commences.

Grip  His  Hands  with  utmost  rigour,

Print  His  Face  thy  heart  upon,

Turn  to  Him  in  all  thy  vigour,

As  a  flower  turns  to  the  sun  ;

So  thou  only  show  Him  thy  heart's  treasure

He  will  be  thine,  and  loving  without  measure.

Ours  has  now  become  for  ever

The  Divine  which  we  did  fear,

South  and  North  in  one  endeavour

Seek  the  heavenly  seed  to  rear.

In  God's  garden  hopeful  leave  them  sleeping,

Bud  and  blossom  in  His  tender  keeping.

Ill

Who  sitteth  in  his  chamber  lonely,
And  weepeth  salt  and  bitter  tears,

To  whom  all  Life's  experience  only
In  garb  of  sorrow  drear  appears.


5  8  NOVALIS

Who,  on  the  picture  of  past  ages,
Looks  deep  as  if  down  some  abyss,

Towards  which  a  yearning  that  assuages
Seems  drawing  him  to  deeper  bliss.

It  seems  as  though  mysterious  treasures
Were  heaped  and  stored  for  him  below ;

He  seeks  the  key  in  haste,  nor  measures
What  breath  or  strength  he  should  bestow.

In  barrenness  the  Future  dreary

Lies  stretched  ahead  at  fearful  length,

He  wanders  round  alone  and  weary,
Seeking  himself  with  ardent  strength.

I  fell  into  his  arms  in  crying

Ah  !  once  I  was  as  thou  art  now,

Yet  I've  got  better  of  my  dying,
For  everlasting  peace  I  know.

Thou  need'st,  as  I  did,  a  Consoler
Who  inly  struggled,  loved  and  died,

That  e'en  for  those  who  wreaked  their  choler
On  Him,  with  joyfulness  He  died.

And  thou  canst  daily,  through  His  dying,
Appropriate  His  Love  and  Him,

And  in  all  states,  however  trying,

Canst  with  thine  arms  reach  unto  Him.


HYMNS  59

From  Him  does  blood  and  life  flow  newly

Into  thy  dusty,  brittle  frame,
If  thou  thy  heart  give  to  Him  truly

He  will  love  back  in  manner  same.

What  thou  hast  lost,  with  Him  thou  findeth,
In  Him  thou  meetest  all  thy  love,

And  to  thee  He  ever  bindeth

What  His  Hand  restores  in  Love.


IV

'Midst  a  thousand  hours  of  gladness,
Which  I  knew  amidst  life's  sadness,

One  alone  remains  with  me  •,
One  in  which  'mid  pain  unhealed
To  my  sad  heart  was  revealed

Who  it  was  that  died  for  me.

All  my  world  for  me  was  shattered,
Just  as  if  by  storm-wind  battered,

Withered  all  my  heart's  delight,
All  my  life's  most  dear  possession
Lay  engulfed  in  deep  depression,

And  I  but  bewailed  my  plight.

As  I  thus  in  silence  ailed,
Inly  pining — deeply  wailed,
Only  living  on  through  fear ;


60  NOVALIS

Suddenly,  as  if  by  magic,
Rolled  away  my  grave-stone  tragic,
And  my  inmost  soul  was  clear.

Whom  I  saw,  and  whom  beside  Him,
Let  none  ask,  lest  woe  betide  him,

Ever  shall  I  see  but  this,
And  of  all  Life's  hours  named  vital
This  alone  deserves  that  title,

Like  my  griefs  still  vivid  is.


If  only  Him  I  have,

If  He  be  but  mine,
If  my  heart  hence  to  the  grave

Ne'er  forget  His  troth  divine,
Nought  know  I  of  sadness,
Only  worship,  joyfulness  and  gladness.

If  only  Him  I  have,

Gladly  leave  I  all,
Follow  on  my  pilgrim's  stave

Right  loyally  His  call,
Letting  all  the  others
Tread  the  bright  and  crowded  way  as  brothers.

If  only  Him  I  have,
I  lay  down  in  peace,


HYMNS  6 i

Refreshed  by  the  dear  wave

Of  Love  that  ne'er  shall  cease,
Which  with  sweet  compelling,
Melts  and  penetrates  by  strange  indwelling.

If  only  Him  I  have,

I  possess  the  world,
Blessed  as  an  angel-knave

Holding  Mary's  veil  unfurled.
Sunk  in  adoration,
I  do  fear  no  earthly  isolation.

Where  only  Him  I  have,

Is  my  Fatherland,
And  the  heritage  I  crave

A  free  gift  in  my  hand,
Friends  I  had  lamented
Find  I  now  amongst  his  sons  presented.


VI

If  all  are  faithless  to  Thee,

Yet  true  to  Thee  stay  I,
That  gratitude  among  us

Should  not  entirely  die.
For  me  Thou  barest  sorrow,

And  sufferest  death's  keen  dart,
Therefore  with  joy  I  give  Thee

For  evermore  this  heart.


62  NOVALIS

Oft  must  I  bitter  weeping

Lament  Thy  Death,  and  yet  !
How  many  of  Thy  children

Thee  all  their  lives  forget.
By  Love  alone  constrained

Hast  Thou  such  great  things  done,
And  yet  Thou  art  gone  down  to  death,

And  no  one  thinks  thereon.

Thou  stand'st  a  steadfast  Lover

For  ever  by  each  one,
And  if  all  men  forsake  Thee,

Art  still  the  Faithful  One.
The  truest  Love  shall  conquer,

We  feel  it,  in  the  end,
Convinced  by  Thee  we,  weeping,

Like  children  'fore  Thee  bend.

I  have  indeed  received  Thee,

Oh,  let  me  never  go,
And  let  me  sweet  communion

For  ever  with  Thee  know.
One  day  my  brethren  also

Shall  turn  from  worldly  marts,
In  love  they'll  bow  before  Thee,

Surrendering  their  hearts.


HYMNS  63

AVE  MARIA

In  countless  pictures  I  behold  thee,

Oh  !   Mary  Mother,  sweet  expressed,
Yet  none  of  these  can  e'er  unfold  thee

As  I  have  graved  thee,  in  my  breast.
I  only  know  that  the  world's  madness

Seems  to  slip  by  me  like  some  dream,
And  that  an  infinite  sweet  gladness

Steeps  all  my  soul  in  its  clear  stream.


HYMN  TO  NIGHT

What  living  man,

Endowed  with  senses,

Does  not  love

Before  all  the  other  Marvels,

Of  the  vast  space  that  encircles  him,

The  all-gladdening  Light,

With  its  rays  and  its  waves,

Its  colours

And  its  gentle  omnipresence

During  the  Day  ?

As  the  inmost  soul

Of  Life,

The  giant-world

Of  Restless  Stars


64  NOVALIS

That  swim  in  its  blue  sea,  breathes  it,
The  sparkling  stone  breathes  it,

The  quiet  Plants,

And  the  Animals

In  all  their  varied  forms,

In  all  their  mobile  strength.

The  many-coloured

Clouds  and  Airs  breathe  it.

And  above  all

The  Magnificent  Strangers

"With  their  meditative  eyes

And  stately  gait

And  resounding  voices.

As  the  Sovran

Of  Earthly  Nature

It  calls  every  power

To  innumerable  transformations,

And  its  presence  alone

Manifests  the  wonders

Of  the  Terrestrial  Kingdom.
V  Backward  I  turn
)  To  Thee,  oh  !   Sacred,  Unspeakable  Night !

Far  away  the  World

Lies  buried  as  if  in  some  deep  grave.

How  deserted  and  lonely  are  her  high  places  !

Deep  Sorrow  moans  through  the  Chords  of  the
Breast !

The  Memory  of  distant  ones,

The  wishes  of  Youth,


HYMNS  65

The  Dreams  of  childhood,

The  short  Joys

Of  all  a  long  life,

Its  vain  hopes,

Come  in  drab  garments

Like  evening  mists

After  the  Sun's

Setting.

Far  off  lies  the  World

With  its  gaudy  delights.

In  other  spaces

Light  establishes

Its  airy  habitation.

Suppose  it  never  returned

To  its  faithful  children,

Its  garden,

Its  splendid  home  ?

But  what  is  it  that  flows

So  cool  and  refreshing,

So  full  of  presentiment,

Into  one's  heart,

And  that  absorbs

Sorrow's  soft  breath  ?

fHast  thou,  too,  a  human  heart.
Dark  Night  ?
What  dost  thou  hold
Under  thy  Mantle
That  pierces  my  soul
With  invisible  strength  ?

E


66  NOVALIS

Thou  only  appearest  awful.
A  costly  Balsam
Drips  from  thy  hand
From  out  a  bundle  of  Poppies.
In  sweet  intoxication
Thou  foldest  the  wings
Of  the  Spirit,
And  givest  us  Joys
Dark  and  inexpressible,
Secret  as  thou  thyself  art,
Joys  that  allow  us
To  guess  at  Heaven.
I  How  poor  and  childish
Light  appears  to  me
With  its  coloured  things,
How  joyful  and  sacred
The  Departure  of  Day.
And  only  because  Night
Turns  those  who  serve  away  from  thee
Thou  sowest  in  the  vaults  of  space
Glittering  Balls,
In  memory  of  thy  Omnipotence,
Of  thy  return,
In  the  times  of  thy  Absence.
More  celestial  than  the  glimmering  stars
Of  those  spaces
Seem  the  infinite  eyes
That  Night
Opens  within  us.


HYMNS  67

These  see  further

Than  the  palest

Of  those  uncountable  hosts.

Unneeding  of  Light

They  penetrate  the  depths

Of  a  loving  spirit

And  so  fill  the  higher  spaces

With  unspeakable  satisfaction.

Praise  to  the  World-Queen,

To  the  High  Herald  of  the  Sacred  World,

The  Cherisher

Of  Holy  Love

Thou  comest  Beloved  !

Night  is  here.

Delighted  is  my  soul,

The  earthly  road  is  passed

And  Thou  once  more  art  mine.

I  gaze  into  thy  deep  dark  eyes,

I  see  nought  but  love  and  blessedness.

We  sink  on  the  Altar  of  Night,

On  the  soft  couch.

The  mantle  descends,

And  kindled  by  the  warm  embrace

The  sweet  sacrifice

Is  illumined  in  clear

Flame.


THOUGHTS

ON  PHILOSOPHY,  LOVE  AND

RELIGION

TJYPOTHESES  are  nets ;  only  he  will  catch
who  casts  his  net.

Was  not  America  discovered  through  Hypo-
thesis.    Long  live  Hypothesis  !

Precisely  because  we  are  philosophers  we
need  not  bother  ourselves  about  issues.  We
have  the  principle,  that  is  enough  ;  the  rest  can
be  left  for  commoner  brains  !

The  philosopher  subsists  on  problems,  as  a
man  on  food.  An  insoluble  problem  is  an  in-
digestible food.  What  seasoning  is  to  food,
paradox  is  to  problem.  A  problem  is  truly
solved  when  it  ceases  to  exist  as  such.  It  is
the  same  with  food.  The  gain  in  both  is  the
activity  to  which  they  both  give  rise.  More-
over there  are  nourishing  problems  as  well  as
nourishing  foods,  whose  elements  become  a
growth  of  my  intelligence.  Through  philo-
sophy,  in   so   far   as   it   is    an    absolute    opera-


SELECTED  THOUGHTS         69

tioQ  my  intelligence,  besides  being  ceaselessly
nourished,  continually  improves,  which  is  only
the  case  with  food  up  to  a  certain  point.  A
sudden  improvement  of  our  intelligence  is  as
thinkable  as  a  sudden  access  of  strength.  The
true  step  of  health  and  improvement  is  slow.
Just  as  little  as  we  eat  to  gain  strength  and
new  material,  just  so  little  do  we  philosophise
in  order  to  find  strange  new  truths.  We
philosophise  for  the  same  reason  that  we  live.
Should  we  ever  arrive  at  living  without  the
accustomed  means  of  nourishment  we  should
be  far  on  the  road  to  philosophise  without  given
problems,  if  some  have  not  already  attained  to
this.

To  philosophise  is  to  dephlegmatise,  to  make
alive.

Whoever  knows   what  it  is  to    philosophise
knows  what  it  is  to  live  and  vice  versa.

Metaphysic  is  the  true  Dynamic  of  Thought.

Activity  is  the  only  Reality.

Light  is  in   all  cases   Action.     Light  is  like
Life,  active  Activity.

All  Happening  is  wonderful,  the  activity  of  a
higher  Being,  a  Problem.


70  NOVALIS

What  is  Nature  ?  An  encyclopaedic  syste-
matic index  or  plan  of  our  Soul.  Why  should
we  content  ourselves  with  a  mere  catalogue  of
our  treasures  ?  Let  us  examine  them,  work  at
them,  and  make  varied  use  of  them.  The  Fate
which  oppresses  us  is  indolence  of  Soul.  By
the  extension  and  cultivation  of  our  activities
we  shall  transform  ourselves  into  Fate.

All  seems  to  flow  into  us,  because  we  do  not
flow  out.  We  are  negative,  because  we  choose
to  be.  The  more  positive  we  become,  the  more
negative  will  the  World  around  us  become,  till
in  the  end  Negation  will  be  no  more,  but  we
shall  be  all  in  all.

God  desires  gods.

We  must  hereafter  separate  God  and  Nature.
God  has  nothing  to  do  with  Nature.  He  is  the
goal  of  Nature,  with  whom  she  will  one  day  be
harmonised.  Nature  must  become  moral,  and
thus  of  course  the  Kantian  moral  God  and
morality  appear  in  quite  a  different  light.  The
moral  God  is  something  much  higher  than  the
magic  God.

We  must  try  to  be  magicians  in  order  to  be
properly   moral.        The  more  moral,  the  more


SELECTED    THOUGHTS        71

harmonised  with  God,  the  more  godly,  the  more
united  to  God.

God  may  become  intelligible  to  us  through
the  moral  sense.

The  moral  sense  is  the  sense  of  existence
without  external  affects,  the  sense  of  solidarity,
the  sense  of  the  highest,  the  sense  of  harmony,
the  sense  of  freely  chosen  yet  associated  life  and
being,  the  sense  of  the  thing-in-itself,  the  real
divination  sense  (to  divine  is  to  perceive  some-
thing without  reason,  without  contact).  The
word  sense  which  denotes  mediate  cognition,
contact,  mingling,  is  not  altogether  apt  here
though  it  is  an  infinite  expression,  as  it  has  an
infinite  extension.  The  proper  meaning  can
only  be  approximately  expressed.  It  is  nonsense
or  sense  as  against  that  non-sense.

Shall  I  set  God  or  the  World-Soul  in  Heaven  ?
It  were  better  if  I  explained  Heaven  as  a  moral
Universe  and  found  room  for  the  World-Soul  in
the  Universum.

To  act  morally  and  to  act  religiously  are
consequently  closely  united.  One  must  aim  at
a  complete  inward  and  outward  harmony  ;  to
fulfil  of  one's  own  will  both  the  law  and  the
will  of  God.  Thus  there  is  a  one-sided  moral
and  a  one-sided  religious  activity.

When  our  intelligence  and  our  world  are  in
harmony  then  are  we  like  unto  God.


72  NOVALIS

We  naturally  only  understand  what  is  strange
by  becoming  self-alienated,  self-altered,  self-
observant.  Then  we  see  the  true  bond  of
the  connexion  between  subject  and  object ;
see,  that  in  us  too,  there  is  an  outer  world
which  stands  in  the  same  relation  to  our
inner  selves  that  our  outer  life  bears  to  the
outer  world,  and  that  these  two  are  as  closely
united  as  our  inner  and  outer  selves.  There-
fore we  can  only  perceive  the  inward  being  and
the  soul  of  Nature  through  thought,  even  as  we
only  perceive  the  external  being  and  body  of
Nature  through  sensation.

It  is  dogmatic  if  I  should  say  there  is  no  God,
there  is  no  science,  there  is  no  thing-in-itself ;
I  can  only  say  as  a  critic :  For  me  there  is  no
such  person,  except  one  devised.  All  Illusion
is  as  essential  to  Truth  as  the  body  to  the  soul.
Error  is  the  necessary  instrument  of  Truth.  I
make  Truth  with  Error  ;  the  accomplished  use
of  Error,  accomplished  possession  of  Truth.

All  synthesis,  all  progression  or  transition
begins  with  Illusion.  I  see  without  me  what
is  within  me,  I  think  that  just  what  I  do  is  that
which  happens  and  so  on.  This  is  the  Error  of
Space  and  Time.

Faith  is  the  operation  of  Illusion,  the  basis
of   Illusion.      All  knowledge  at  a   distance    is


SELECTED  THOUGHTS        73

Faith.  The  idea  external  to  me  is  a  Thing.
All  knowledge  begins  and  ends  in  Faith.
Previous  and  subsequent  amplification  of  know-
ledge is  extension,  or  amplification  of  the  pro-
vince of  Faith.  The  Ego  imagines  a  strange
being ;  by  approximation  to  it  there  arises
another  mediate  being,  the  product  which
belongs  to  the  Ego  and  which  at  the  same
time  does  not  belong  to  the  Ego.  The  mediate
results  of  the  process  are  the  chief  matter.
The  fortuitously  become  or  made  Thing  is  the
Thing  aimed  at  inverted.

If  a  man  suddenly  veraciously  believes  that
he  is  moral,  he  will  be  so.

The  supposition  of  the  ideal  of  what  is  sought
is  the  method  of  finding  it.

Faith  is  a  miraculous  power.  All  Faith  is
miraculous  and  miracle  working.  God  is  in  the
moment  that  I  believe  in  Him.  Faith  is  an
indirect  miracle,  a  working  force.  By  Faith  we
can  at  any  moment  work  miracles  for  ourselves,
and  often  for  others  too  if  they  believe  in  us.

The  immortal  Sense  of  the  Unseen  cannot  be
annihilated,  but  it  may  be  clouded,  mutilated,
smothered  by  other  senses.  A  measure  of  loneli-
ness seems  necessary  to  those  devoted  to  the
higher  Sense,  and  therefore  a  too  frequent  com-
munion with  men  must  stifle  many  sacred  germs.


74  NOVALIS

Is  Speculation  naturally  and  designedly  poetic  ?
Possibly.  Otherwise  we  should  be  forced  to
set  ourselves  a  goal  in  order  that  we  should  not
wander  dementedly  in  this  same  Speculation  as
in  a  labyrinth.  For  here  is  the  abode  of  that
so  notorious  Speculation,  of  that  decried  false
Mysticism,  of  belief  in  the  fathoming  of  the
thing-in-itself.

Criticism  but  shows  the  necessity  of  Limita-
tion, Determination.  Restraint  points  to  a  deter-
mined goal,  and  transforms  Speculation  into  a
useful  and  even  a  poetic  Instrument.

The  endless  continuation  of  activity  is  charac-
teristic of  psychic  or  spiritual  inertia.

Everything  excellent  deserves  ostracism.  It
is  a  good  thing  when  it  ostracises  itself.  Every-
thing absolute  must  be  ostracised  from  the
world.  In  the  world  we  must  live  with  the
world.  We  only  live  when  we  are  living  in
the  sense  of  the  people  with  whom  we  live.
All  good  that  there  is  in  the  world  comes  from
within,  but  it  only  twinkles  through.

The  Excellent  causes  the  world  to  advance,
but  it  must  quickly  be  suppressed.

The  most  wonderful,  the  eternal  phenomenon


SELECTED    THOUGHTS        75

is  our  own  existence.  The  greatest  secret  is
man  himself.  The  solving  of  this  endless
problem  is  in  very  deed  the  History  of  the
World.  We  seek  the  purpose  of  the  world  !
We  ourselves  are  this  purpose.

We  must  seek  God  among  men.  The  Spirit
of  Heaven  is  most  clearly  manifest  in  human
events,  human  thoughts  and  sensations.

There  is  but  one  Temple  in  the  world — the
human  body.  Nothing  is  holier  than  this
sublime  form.  (The  bowing  before  men  is  a
homage  to  this  revelation  in  the  flesh.)  We
touch  Heaven  when  we  touch  the  human  body.

What  is  mysticism  ?  What  things  can  be
treated  mystically  ?  Religion,  Love,  Nature,  the
State,  everything  elect  is  related  to  mysticism.
If  all  men  were  like  a  pair  of  lovers,  the  differ-
ence between  mysticism  and  non-mysticism
would  disappear.

^  If  God  can  become  man  He  can  also  become
a  stone,  a  plant,  an  animal,  an  element,  and
perhaps  there  is  in  this  way  a  progressive
redemption  of  Nature.

Properly  understood  Morality  is  the  real  life
element  of  man.     It  is  intimately  connected  with


y6  NOVALIS

the  fear  of  God.  Our  pure  moral  will  is  God's
will.  When  we  fulfil  His  will  we  gladden  and
extend  our  own  existence,  and  it  is  really  as
though  we  did  it  for  our  own  good,  from  within
our  own  nature.  Sin  is  of  course  the  real  evil
of  the  world.  All  calamity  proceeds  from  it.
Whoso  understands  sin  understands  virtue  and
Christianity,  his  own  self  and  the  world.  With-
out this  understanding  we  cannot  make  the
merit  of  Christ  our  own,  we  have  no  part  in
that  second  higher  Creation.

Our  whole  life  is  service  of  God.

The  Catholic  Religion  is  far  more  visible,
intimate  and  familiar,  than  the  Protestant  Re-
ligion. In  the  latter  one  sees  nothing  but
Church  towers  and  vestments,  which  are  in
themselves  a  temporisation.

With  the  Ancients  Religion  certainly  was  what
it  should  be  with  us — practical  Poetry.

The  higher  knowledge  of  the  East  which  is
attained  through  inactivity  and  intuition,  is  a
species  of  intellectual  quietism.  Their  System
of  knowledge  resembles  our  System  of  grace.

A  passive  System  is  indirectly  an  active
System.


SELECTED  THOUGHTS        77

Axiom  :  We  can  know  nothing  of  ourselves.
All  true  knowledge  must  be  given  to  us.

All  absolute  perception  is  religious.

God  is  Love.  Love  is  the  highest  Reality,
the  First  Cause.

Thou  hast  so  much  Love  around  thee,  and
rejoicest  so  little  in  it.  Love  should  be  the
true  comfort  and  life-joy  of  the  genuine
Christian.

Love  is  the  ultimate  goal  of  the  World's
History,  the  Amen  of  the  Universe.

With  Love  it  is  the  same  as  with  conviction.
How  many  believe  they  are  convinced  and  are
not  convinced.  Only  by  Truth  can  we  be
truly  convinced,  only  through  Love  can  we
truly  love.

The  Heart  is  the  key  of  the  world  and  of  life.
We  live  in  our  present  helpless  condition  in
order  to  love  one  another,  and  be  obliged  to
help  one  another.  Through  imperfection  we
become  open  to  the  influence  of  others.

In  illness  others  can  and  may  help  us.  From
this  point  of  view,  Christ  is  surely  the  Key  of
the^world.


78  NOVALIS

Much  of  Scepticism  is  only  unripe  Idealism.

A  Realist  is  an  Idealist  who  knows  nothing
of  himself.

Crude  Idealism,  Idealism  at  first  hand  is
Realism.

We  shall  not  miss  the  way  if  we  regard  the
Universal  in  us  and  about  us.

It  is  only  because  of  the  feebleness  of  our
perceptions  and  activity  that  we  do  not  perceive
ourselves  to  be  in  a  fairy  world.

The  first  man  was  the  first  spiritual  Seer ;
everything  seemed  to  him  spirit.  How  are
children  other  than  first  men  ?  The  first  glance
of  a  child  is  more  convincing  than  the  premoni-
tion of  the  most  gifted  Seer.

Humanity  is  the  higher  sense  of  our  planet,
the  nerve  that  binds  this  planet  to  the  upper
world,  the  eye  that  it  raises  to  Heaven.

The  Bible  opens  splendidly  with  Paradise,  the
symbol  of  youth,  and  closes  with  the  eternal
Kingdom,  with  the  Holy  City.  These  two
chief  features    are    also    quite    historic.       The


SELECTED  THOUGHTS        79

beginning  of  the  New  Testament  is  the  second,
the  higher  fall  (a  sin,  that  had  to  be  sinned),  and
the  beginning  of  a  new  period.  The  history
of  every  man  should  be  a  Bible  ;  will  be  a  Bible.
Christ  is  the  new  Adam.


Man  began  in  instinct  and  will  end  in  instinct.
Instinct  is  genius  in  Paradise,  before  the  period
of  self-abstraction  (self-knowledge).  Shall  man
duplicate  himself,  and  not  only  duplicate,  but
triplicate  himself?

The  spirit  world  is  in  fact  revealed  to  us;  it
is  always  open.  Could  we  suddenly  become  as
sensitive  as  is  necessary,  we  should  perceive
ourselves  to  be  in  its  midst.  What  are  the
methods  for  the  healing  of  our  present  deficient
condition  ?  Formerly  they  were  fasts  and  moral
purification  ;  now  maybe  by  invigoration.

In  the  Spiritual  Nature-Kingdom,  each  man
must  everywhere  seek  his  peculiar  territory  and
climate,  his  best  occupation,  his  particular  neigh-
bourhood, in  order  to  cultivate  a  Paradise  in
Idea ;  this  is  the  right  system.  Paradise  is  the
ideal  of  earthly  lands,  the  resting-place  of  the
soul.  An  instructed  man  should  be,  with
regard    to  nature's   forces,  what  a  botanic   and


80  NOVALIS

English  garden  (aspiration  after  Paradise)  is  in
regard  to  the  ground  and  its  products — a  more
youthful,  concentrated,  potent  soil.

Paradise  is  scattered  over  the  whole  earth,
and  that  is  why  it  has  become  so  unrecognisable.
Its  scattered  features  shall  be  reunited,  its
skeleton  shall  be  filled  out.  This  would  be
the  Regeneration  of  Paradise.

It  is  strange  that  the  Hebrews  did  not
represent  their  vowels.  The  consonant  forms
perhaps  arose  from  the  configuration  of  the
producing  organs.

The  soul  is  a  consonant  body.  Vowels  are
called  by  the  Hebrews  Alphabet-souls.

All  Realities  created  out  of  nothing,  as  for
instance,  Numbers  and  Abstract  Expressions,  are
mysteriously  connected  with  things  of  another
World  with  unending  lines  of  wondrous  com-
binations and  relationships,  likewise  with  an,  in
itself,  Mathematic  and  Abstract  World.

Everywhere,  it  seems  to  me,  there  is  an
underlying  grammatic  mysticism  which  might
very  easily  excite  the  first  wonder  at  speech  and
script.  (Savage  people  still  hold  script  to  be
witchcraft.)

Inclination  to  the  marvellous  and  mysterious
is    nothing    but    effort    towards    unsensational,


SELECTED   THOUGHTS        81

spiritual  stimulus.  Mysteries  are  means  of
nourishment,  inciting  potentialities.  Explana-
tions are  comprehended  mysteries.

Seasons  and  times,  Life  and  Fate — all  are
remarkable,  rhythmic,  metric,  regular  through-
out. In  all  crafts  and  arts,  in  all  machines,  in
organic  bodies,  in  our  daily  occupations,  every-
where, there  is  rhythm,  metre,  accent,  melody.
All  that  we  do  with  a  certain  skill  unnoticed,  we
do  rhythmically.  There  is  rhythm  everywhere  ;
it  insinuates  itself  everywhere.  All  mechanism
is  metric,  rhythmic.  There  must  be  more  in  it
than  this.     Is  it  merely  the  influence  of  inertia  ?

To  seek  after  originality  is  literary  egoism,
gross  egoism.  Whoever  cannot  treat  an  alien
thought  as  his  own,  and  his  personal  thought  as
alien,  is  no  real  scholar.

The  production  of  new  ideas  can  be  to  me  a
useless  luxury  ;  it  is  an  active  accumulation ;
working  to  accumulate  is  already  a  high
degree  of  activity.  To  the  real  scholar  nothing
is  alien,  nothing  is  personal.  Everything  is  both
to  him.  (To  the  philosophic  body,  the  body
itself  is  strange  and  peculiar,  at  once  stimulus
and  sensibility.)

There  should  be  higher  effort  toward  higher


82  NOVALIS

originality.  In  the  world  of  learning  too,  one
must  love  and  select  in  order  to  be  self  existing
and  self  satisfying.

The  more  vast  and  varied  the  horizon  of  con-
sciousness the  more  the  personal  magnitude  of
man  is  diminished,  the  more  the  spiritual,  the
intellectual  magnitude  of  the  man  waxes  and
becomes  apparent.  The  capacity  for  limitation
grows  with  boundlessness.  Freedom  grows
with  the  culture  and  ability  of  the**  thinker.
(Freedom  and  love  are  one.)  The  multiplicity
of  methods  is  increased.  Finally,  the  thinker
knows  how  to  make  everything  of  each  thing.
The  philosopher  becomes  the  poet.  The  poet
is  only  the  highest  type  of  thinker.

The  more  humbly  and  slowly  we  begin,  the
more  prone  are  we  to  perfection ;  and  this  is
the  case  in  everything.  The  more  we  can  do
with  little,  the  more  we  can  do  with  much.
When  we  know  how  to  love  one,  we  know  how
best  to  love  all.

Out  of  indolence  man  desires  simple  mechan-
ism or  simple  magic.  He  does  not  wish  to  be
active,  to  use  his  productive  imagination.

We  should  take  no  notice  of  what  is  un-
pleasant.

We  disdain  mud — why  ?     Are  we  not  come


SELECTED   THOUGHTS        83

from  mud  ?  Everywhere  mud,  and  nothing
but  mud ;  and  yet  we  are  surprised  mud  has
not  changed  its  nature.

\y     Strange    that    the    real    cause    of    cruelty    is
sensuality.


V


The  keynote  of  man  is  intellect,  of  woman
feeling.  The  morality  of  woman  is  based
upon  feeling,  as  that  of  man  is  based  upon
the  intellect.

The  sexes  are  differently  entertained.  Man
demands  the  sensational  in  intellectual  form,
the  woman  the  intellectual  in  sensational  form.
What  is  secondary  to  the  man  is  paramount  to
the  woman.

Is  there  a  woman  in  the  world  who  out  of
sheer  love  of  adornment  would  deck  herself
out  for  her  own  pleasure  ?

Coal  and  diamonds  are  one  substance,  and
yet  with  how  great  a  difference.  Should  it
not  be  the  same  with  man  and  woman  ?  We
are  clay,  and  women  are  opals  and  sapphires,
which  also  originate  as  clay.

Is  not  the  superiority  of  women  demonstrated
by  the  fact  that  the  extremes  among  them  are


84  NOVALIS

more  remarkable  than  amongst  us  ?  The
most  depraved  fellow  does  not  differ  so  much
from  the  most  excellent  man  as  the  miserable
slut  from  the  noble  woman.  Is  not  this
demonstrated  by  the  fact  that  we  find  much
good  said  of  men  but  no  good  said  of  women  ?
Do  they  not  resemble  the  Infinite,  since  it  is
impossible  to  square  (quadriren)  them,  and  they
can  only  be  approached  through  approximation  ?
The  highest  amongst  them  are  absolutely  near
to  us,  and  yet  are  ever  sought ;  they  are  abso-
lutely comprehensible  and  yet  are  never  com-
prehended ;  they  are  absolutely  indispensable,
yet  most  are  dispensed  with.

So  long  as  there  are  valiant  men  and  cowards
there  must  be  a  nobility.

In  this  world  there  are  so  many  flowers  that
are  of  supernatural  origin,  that  do  not  flourish
in  this  climate.  They  are  really  the  heralds,
the  announcing  envoys  of  a  better  existence.
Pre-eminent  among  such  flowers  are  Religion
and  Love.

When  it  has  become  clear  to  us  that  the
world  is  God's  kingdom,  when  this  great  con-
viction has  once  penetrated  our  minds  in  its
infinite    fulness,  then    we  go   comforted    along


SELECTED  THOUGHTS        85

Life's  dark  path,  and  contemplate  its  storm  and
dangers  with  a  deep  divine  peace.

There  are  an  infinite  number  of  unknown
sorrows,  but  there  also  assuredly  are  an  infinite
number  of  God's  benefits  that  are  unknown.

Outer  circumstances  do  not  entirely  make  up
the  sum  of  our  own  happiness  or  woe,  they  are
but  the  curious  language  of  an  unknown  im-
manent Spirit.  The  truly  happy  or  unhappy
condition  is  simply  undetermined  and  individual.
Each  hour  in  which  we  hear  talk  of  unhappi-
ness,  is  an  hour  of  edification.  If  we  diligently
consider  the  uncertainty  of  men's  possession  of
happiness,  we  must  become  more  equable  and
courageous.

All  anxiety  is  of  the  devil.  Courage  and
joy  are  of  God.

Anxiety  is  a  wavering,  an  uncertainty,  and
is  chiefly  physical.  The  healthy  man  is  always
peaceful  even  in  the  most  desperate  circumstances.

Have  I  not  chosen  my  fate  since  the  eterni-
ties ?  Each  drear  thought  is  an  earthly  tem-
porary thought  of  anxiety.

There  is  nothing  harder  than  to  have  patience
with  one's  self  to  bear  one's  own  weakness.


86  NOVALIS

It  is  best,  if  one  has  the  sense,  to  receive
everything  that  happens  with  a  prayerful  heart
as  a  benefit  from  God.  Through  Prayer  we
can  attain  all.

All  that  we  call  accident  is  of  God.

Blame  nothing  human.  All  is  good,  only
not  everywhere,  only  not  always,  not  for  all.

The  Future  is  not  for  the  sick,  only  the
gaze  of  the  healthful  can  audaciously  lose
itself  in  its  wonderful  waves.  Misfortune  is
the  summons  to  God.  We  can  only  become
holy  through  Misfortune,  that  is  why  the  old
saints  hurled  themselves  upon  Misfortune.

If  only  bodily  disquiet  did  not  always  become
disquiet  of  soul !  It  is  not  always  possible  to
work  upon  the  body,  but  we  should  seek,  with
God's  help,  to  gain  the  mastery  of  the  soul,  in
order  to  be  really  peaceful.  If  the  soul  is
quiet,  the  body  will  soon  be  quieted.

We  should  be  ashamed  if  we  are  not  able  to
make  our  thoughts  think  what  we  will.  Pray
God  for  His  assistance  that  He  may  help  thee
to  chase  away  anxious  thoughts.  But  first
learn  to  recognise  an  anxious  thought  as  such
at  once.  With  inward  prayer  and  firm  resolu-
tion   much    is    possible.        As    soon    as    thou


SELECTED  THOUGHTS        87

becomest  anxious  and  sad,  and  fearful  ideas
weigh  thee  down,  begin  most  heartily  to  pray.
If  it  does  not  succeed  the  first  time,  it  will
certainly  succeed  in  time.

If  we  have  God  in  our  hearts  we  do  not
grumble.  We  have  only  one  great  uplifting
experience  of  the  soul.  From  the  divine  point
of  view  clouds  do  not  exist ;  there  is  but  one
Radiance,  but  one  Splendour.  Man  is  different
to  a  child.  Man's  being  comes  from  God.
The  ancients  were  always  joyous.  That  which
does  not  help  at  once,  helps  after  a  while.
Only  lose  not  courage  and  faith.  Imagine  that
thou  art  a  stranger,  that  thou  must  comfort
thyself.  Wouldst  thou  then  not  often  say —
Sir,  be  not  childish  !  Fear  passes  away.  A
man  and  Christ  must  bear  fear  with  patience.
Is  it  Christianity  to  be  so  timid  ?  Have  you
not  a  spark  of  pride  or  shame  in  your  hearts  ?
Big  men,  you  should  be  ashamed  of  yourselves  !
Has  the  dear  God  sent  you  such  hard  trials
that  you  must  be  at  once  disheartened  ?

What  really  is  age  ?  is  youth  ?  Youth  is
where  the  Future  prevails ;  age  where  the  Past
has  the  ascendancy.

Only  an  artist  can  divine  the  meaning  of
Life.


88  NOVALIS

^  To  become  man  is  an  art.

Who  brings  with  him  a  character  into  life
will  learn  to  understand  himself  with  difficulty.

Pure  analysis,  pure  experiment  and  observa-
tion lead  into  the  Invisible  Spaces,  quite  simply
into  Eternity.

Infinite  thoughts,  ideal  thoughts,  ideals  with
two  or  three  dimensions.  How  can  we  make
use  of  infinite  thoughts  for  the  solution  of
finite  problems  of  thought  ?

Thinking  is  speaking.  Speaking  and  doing
or  making  are  one,  are  but  one  modified
operation.  God  said  "  Let  there  be  Light,  and
there  was  Light."

sj  All  passions  end  alike  in  Tragedy.  Every-
thing one-sided  ends  in  Death  ;  thus  the
philosophy  of  sensation,  the  philosophy  of
phantasy,  the  philosophy  of  purpose.  All  Life
ends  in  age  and  Death.  All  poetry  has  a
tragical  strain.  Something  serious  underlies
every  jest,  hence  the  tragic  effect  of  farce,  of
marionettes,  of  the  gayest  life,  of  the  common,
of  the  trivial.

\,»    We     are    shadowed     from    our    cradle    by


SELECTED  THOUGHTS        89

prejudices,  weaknesses,  needs,  which  make  us
feel  the  oppression  of  life  in  all  its  dire
heaviness.  Our  wishes  remain  unfulfilled,  our
plans  are  shattered,  our  most  beautiful  hopes
and  our  most  blooming  outlook  fade  away.  I
often  feel  alone  in  the  world.

Exaltation  is  the  most  excellent  means  I
know  of  escaping  fatal  encounters.  For  in-
stance, the  common  exaltation  of  nobility,  the
exaltation  of  all  men  of  genius,  the  exaltation
of  all  phenomena  in  Magic,  of  the  material  to
the  spiritual,  of  men  to  God,  of  all  ages  to  the
Golden  Age.

Eternity — unconditioned    Life  !       What  have     v
we    to   do  with  Time  whose  aim    lies    in    the
realisation  of  Eternity  ?

Beloved,  let  us  embrace  at  the  Pillars  of
Hercules  in  the  delight  of  the  conviction  that  it
remains  with  us  to  observe  Life  as  a  beautiful,
pleasing  Illusion,  and  that  we  may  be  in  spirit
in  the  Absolute  and  in  Eternity,  and  that  it  is
precisely  the  old  lament  that  all  is  transitory
that  shall  be  to  us  the  most  joyous  of  all
thoughts.

Sy     To  view  Life  as  a  temporal  Illusion — a  Drama
may    become   to   us   a   second    Nature.       How


9o  NOVALIS

quickly  then  would  the  sorrowful  hours  fly
past,  and  how  different  and  enthralling  would
that  which  is  transitory  appear  to  us.

Do  not  forget  that  we  expire  from  shortness
as  much  as  from  length  of  Life.


THE  DISCIPLES  AT  SAIS

A/TEN  travel  by  many  different  paths.  Who-
ever tracks  and  compares  their  ways  will  see
wonderful  figures  arising  ;  figures  that  seem  to
belong  to  the  great  Manuscript  of  Design  which
we  descry  everywhere,  on  wings  of  birds,  on  the
shells  of  eggs,  in  clouds,  in  snow,  in  crystals,
in  rock  formations,  in  frozen  water,  within  and
upon  mountains,  in  plants,  in  beasts,  in  men,  in
the  light  of  day,  in  slabs  of  pitch  and  glass
when  they  are  jarred  or  struck,  in  filings  around
a  magnet,  and  in  the  singular  Coincidences  of
Chance.  In  these  things  we  seem  to  catch  an
idea  of  the  key,  the  grammar  to  this  Manuscript,
but  this  idea  will  not  fix  itself  into  any  abiding
conception,  and  seems  as  if  it  were  unwilling  to
become  in  its  turn  the  key  to  higher  things.  It
seems  as  though  an  Alcahest  had  been  poured
over  the  mind  of  man.  Only  momentarily  do
his  wishes,  his  thoughts,  incorporate  themselves.
On  such  wise  do  his  ideas  arise,  but,  after  a
short  while,  all  swims  once  more  vaguely  before
his  eyes.

From  afar  I  heard  one  say  :  "  Unintelligibility
originates  in  Unintelligence.     This  seeks  what


9  2  NOVALIS

it  already  has,  and  therefore  attains  to  nothing
further.  Speech  is  not  understood,  because
speech  does  not  understand  itself,  and  will  not
be  understood.  Genuine  Sanscrit  speaks  for
the  sake  of  speaking,  because  speech  is  its
pleasure  and  its  essence."

Not  long  after  this  another  said  :  "Holy  Writ
needs  no  commentary.  Whoso  speaks  truly  is
full  of  everlasting  life,  and  his  Evangel  seems
to  us  wonderfully  linked  with  Genuine  Secrets,
for  it  is  a  harmony  out  of  the  Universal
Symphony."

The  Voice  must  certainly  have  spoken  of  our
Master,  for  he  knows  how  to  collect  the  indica-
tions that  are  scattered  on  all  sides.  A  singular
light  kindles  in  his  glance  when  the  sublime
Rune  is  unrolled  before  us,  and  he  looks  dis-
cerningly into  our  eyes  to  find  out  whether  for
us  too  the  Star  has  arisen  that  shall  render  the
Figure  visible  and  comprehensible.  If  he  see
us  sad,  that  our  night  is  not  breaking,  he  com-
forts us  and  promises  future  joy  to  the  faithful
and  assiduous  seer.  Often  he  has  told  us  how,
as  a  child,  the  impulse  to  exercise  the  faculties,
to  occupy  and  satisfy  them,  left  him  no  peace.
He  looked  up  to  the  stars  and  imitated  in  the
sands  their  positions  and  their  courses.  He
gazed  into  the  aerial  sea  without  pause  and  was
never  weary  of  contemplating  its  transparency,


THE  DISCIPLES  AT  SAIS       93

its  agitations,  its  clouds,  its  lights.  He  col-
lected stones,  flowers  and  every  sort  of  insect,
and  set  them  out  in  many-fashioned  lines.  He
watched  men  and  animals  ;  he  sat  by  the  sea-
shore gathering  shells.  He  listened  heedfully
to  his  own  heart  and  to  his  thoughts.  He  knew
not  whither  his  longing  was  driving  him.  When
he  was  older  he  wandered,  beholding  other
countries,  other  seas,  new  skies,  strange  stars,
unknown  plants,  animals  and  men  ;  he  descended
into  caves  and  marked  how  in  courses  and
coloured  strata  the  Edifice  of  the  Earth  had
been  built  up.  He  manipulated  clay  into  won-
derful rock  forms.  At  this  time  he  found
everywhere  objects  already  known  to  him  but
marvellously  mingled  and  mated,  and  strange
vicissitudes  often  arose  within  him.  Soon  he
became  aware  of  the  inter-relation  of  all  things,
of  conjunctions,  of  coincidences.  Ere  long  he
saw  nothing  singly.  The  perceptions  of  his
senses  thronged  together  in  great  variegated
Pictures ;  he  heard,  saw,  felt  and  thought
simultaneously.  He  took  pleasure  in  bringing
strangers  together.  Sometimes  the  stars  be-
came men  to  him,  men  as  stars  ;  stones  were  as
animals,  clouds  as  plants ;  he  sported  with
forces  and  phenomena ;  he  knew  where  and
how  he  could  find  and  bring  to  light  this  or
that,  and  thus  himself  plucked  at  the  strings  in


94  NOVALIS

his  search  for  tones  and  sequences.  What  came
to  him  after  this  he  does  not  make  known  to
us.  He  tells  us  that  we  ourselves,  led  on  by
him  and  by  our  own  desire,  may  discover  what
happened  to  him.  Many  of  us  forsook  him.
They  returned  to  their  parents  and  learnt  to
follow  a  trade.  Some  have  been  sent  forth  by
him  we  know  not  whither ;  he  chose  them  out.
Of  these  some  had  been  there  but  a  short  time,
others  longer.  One  was  still  a  child.  Scarcely
was  he  there  but  the  Master  wished  to  resign
the  teaching  into  his  hands.  This  child  had
great  dark  eyes  with  blue  depths ;  his  skin
shone  like  lilies,  and  his  locks  like  lustrous
cloudlets  at  eventide.  His  voice  thrilled  through
our  hearts ;  we  would  have  gladly  given  him
our  flowers,  stones,  feathers,  all  that  we  had.
He  smiled  with  an  infinite  gravity  ;  we  felt
strangely  happy  to  be  beside  him.  One  day
he  will  return,  said  the  Master,  and  live  among
us.  Then  the  lessons  will  cease.  He  sent
another  pupil  with  him  whb  often  made  us
impatient.  He  seemed  ever  sorrowful.  Long
years  he  was  here  ;  nothing  prospered  with  him.
When  we  searched  for  crystals  or  flowers  he
did  not  find  them  easily.  With  difficulty,  too,
he  saw  from  a  distance ;  he  knew  not  how  to
arrange  the  motley  lines  in  order.  He  broke
everything  so  easily.     Yet  no  other  had  such


THE  DISCIPLES  AT  SAIS       95

craving  and  ardour  to  see  and  hear.  Some  time
back — before  the  Child  was  come  into  our
circle — he  suddenly  became  both  ready  and  gay.
One  day  he  went  out  sorrowful.  He  did  not
return.  Night  advanced.  We  were  very  anxious
on  his  account.  Suddenly,  when  the  glimmer
of  morning  came,  we  heard  his  voice  in  a  coppice
near.  He  sang  a  noble,  joyous  song.  We  all
marvelled.  The  Master  gazed  with  rapture
towards  the  dawn  as  I  shall  never  see  him
gaze  again.  After  a  while  the  singer  came
among  us,  bringing  with  an  expression  of  in-
effable bliss  upon  his  countenance,  a  dull  little
Stone  of  curious  shape.  The  Master  took  it
in  his  hand  and  kissed  his  disciple  long  ;  then
he  looked  at  us  with  moist  eyes  and  laid  the
Stone  in  an  empty  place  among  the  other
pebbles,  just  at  the  point  where  many  lines
converged.  Never  shall  I  forget  that  moment.
It  was  as  though  we  had  transitorily  caught
into  our  souls  a  clear  vision  of  this  wondrous
world.

I  too  am  less  ready  than  the  others,  and
Nature  seems  little  disposed  to  have  her
treasures  found  by  me.  Yet  the  Master  is
indulgent  to  me,  and  allows  me  to  sit  in
meditation  while  the  others  sally  out  in  re-
search. But  it  has  never  been  with  me  as  with
the   Master.     All    things   lead    me    back    upon


96  NOVALIS

myself.  I  well  understood  what  the  second
Voice  said  once.  I  rejoice  in  the  wonderful
collections  and  figures  in  the  study  halls ;  it
seems  to  me  as  though  they  were  only  symbols,
veils,  decorations  enshrouding  a  Divine  Being  ;
and  this  is  ever  in  my  thoughts.  I  do  not
seek  for  them,  but  I  often  seek  in  them.  It  is
as  though  they  might  show  me  the  path  to
a  place  where,  slumbering,  lies  the  Virgin  for
whom  my  spirit  yearns.  The  Master  has  never
spoken  of  this,  and  I  can  confide  nothing  of  it
to  him ;  it  seems  to  me  an  inviolable  secret.
Gladly  would  I  have  questioned  that  child ;
there  was  affinity  in  his  bearing,  and  everything
within  me  seemed  illumined  by  his  presence.
Had  he  stayed  longer  I  should  certainly  have
had  further  experiences.  And  perhaps  even
at  last  my  breast  might  have  been  unburdened
and  my  tongue  freed.  Willingly  would  I  have
gone  with  him.  But  it  was  not  to  be.  How
much  longer  I  shall  stay  here  I  know  not.  It
seems  as  though  I  should  remain  for  ever.  I
scarcely  dare  to  admit  it  to  myself,  but  the  con-
viction forces  itself  only  too  deeply  upon  me.
One  day  I  shall  find  here  that  which  incessantly
agitates  me ;  she  is  immanent.  When  I  go
about  here  in  this  belief  everything  indues  a
higher  semblance,  a  new  order,  and  all  is  directed
toward  One  Goal.     Each  object  then  becomes


THE  DISCIPLES  AT  SAIS       97

to  me  so  intimate,  so  dear,  and  what  yet  appears
to  me  as  curious  and  strange  suddenly  becomes
like  a  household  word.  Just  this  strangeness
is  strange  to  me,  and  therefore  this  Synthesis
has  always  both  attracted  and  repelled  me.  I
cannot  and  may  not  understand  the  Master.
He  is  so  incomprehensibly  dear  to  me.  He
understands  me,  I  know  it.  He  has  never
spoken  against  my  feelings  and  my  wish.
Rather  does  he  desire  that  each  shall  follow  his
own  path,  because  each  new  path  passes  through
new  lands  and  each  eventually  leads  us  back
to  these  Dwellings  and  to  this  blessed  Hearth.
So  I  too  will  describe  my  Figure,  and  though  no
mortal  lift  the  veil  according  to  that  Inscription,
we  must  seek  to  become  immortal.  He  who
will  not  lift  the  veil  is  no  true  Disciple  at  Sais.

Nature

It  must  have  been  long  before  it  occurred
to  men  to  describe  the  manifold  objects  of
their  consciousness  by  a  common  name,  and  to
set  themselves  in  antithesis  thereto.  Develop-
ment is  promoted  by  exercise,  and  in  all  de-
velopment there  are  divisions,  dismemberments
that  may  fitly  be  compared  with  the  refraction
of  light  rays.  Thus  it  is  only  gradually  that
our    inner    Being    has    split    up    into    manifold


98  NOVALIS

activities,  and  these  divisions  may  be  multiplied
through  continual  exercise.  Maybe  it  is  but
the  morbid  disposition  of  modern  men  that
causes  them  to  lose  the  power  of  mingling  once
more  the  scattered  colours  of  their  soul,  and  of
renewing  at  will  the  old  simple  Nature-con-
dition, and  of  bringing  into  effect  new  and  varied
combinations.  The  more  united  men  are  in
themselves,  the  more  unitedly,  the  more  fully
does  each  phenomenon  of  Nature  strike  them.
For  the  nature  of  the  Thought  corresponds  to
the  nature  of  the  Impression.  And,  therefore,
to  those  earlier  men  everything  must  have  ap-
peared human,  familiar  and  genial.  The  newest
form  of  Differentiation  must  have  been  reflected
in  their  faces  ;  their  outward  aspect  was  a  true
rendering  of  Nature,  and  their  notions  of  things
must  have  corresponded  with  the  surrounding
world,  and  have  represented  a  true  outlook
upon  it.  Hence  it  is  possible  for  us  to  accurately
record  the  thoughts  of  our  ancestors  concerning
the  Universe,  and  to  treat  them  as  important
contributions  towards  a  presentation  of  the
terrestrial  Nature  of  that  time  ;  particularly
from  them,  as  from  instruments  most  proper  for
the  observation  of  the  Universe,  we  may  win
a  precise  account  of  its  Capital  Relations,  of  its
relations  to  its  inhabitants  and  of  its  inhabitants
to  it.     We  find  it  is  just   the  loftiest  questions


THE  DISCIPLES  AT  SAIS       99

that  first  occupied  their  attention,  and  that  they
sought  the  key  to  this  marvellous  Construction
either  in  a  Conglomeration  of  Realities  or  in  the
fabled  Objectivity  of  their  own  unexplained
intelligences.  It  is  remarkable  that  the  common
foreshadowing  of  their  ideas  is  to  be  detected
in  fluidity,  subtleties,  formlessness.  Well  might
the  inertness  and  impotence  of  Matter  induce
the  not  insignificant  belief  in  its  dependence  and
inferiority.  Early  enough  some  brooding  head
struck  the  difficulty  of  elucidating  Form  from
the  formless  Forces  and  Seas.  He  sought  to
unravel  the  tangle  by  a  species  of  amalga-
mation, in  which  process  he  conceived  of  the
Beginning  of  Things  as  minute  definitely  formed
bodies  which  he  apprehended  as  beyond  all
imagination  small.  And  he  thought  it  possible
to  achieve,  though  not  without  the  help  of  co-
operating intelligences,  of  attractive  and  repellent
forces,  the  construction  of  this  monstrous  Edifice
out  of  this  Sea  of  Atoms.  Still  earlier,  instead
of  scientific  explanations,  we  find  fairy  tales  and
poems  full  of  amazing  picturesque  traits  in
which  men,  gods  and  animals  are  described  as
co-workers,  and  we  hear  the  Origin  of  the
World  described  in  the  most  natural  manner.
One  gains  at  least  the  certainty  of  its  fortuitous
mechanical  Origin,  and  this  presentation  of  it  is
significant  even  to  those  who  scorn  the  lawless


ioo  NOVALIS

creations  of  the  imagination.  To  treat  the
History  of  the  World  as  the  history  of  Man-
kind, and  to  discover  only  human  concerns  and
relations  at  every  turn  is  a  continuous  idea
salient  through  the  most  different  ages  and  under
the  most  diverse  guises,  seeming  invariably  to
have  held  pre-eminence  by  reason  of  its  pro-
digious efficacy  and  its  force  of  easy  persuasion.
Haphazard  Nature  herself  seems  to  foster  the
idea  of  human  personality,  and  is  thus  most
readily  comprehensible  as  a  human  being.  Hence
it  is  that  Poesy  is  the  favourite  instrument  of
the  true  friend  of  Nature,  and  in  Poesy  the
Soul  of  Nature  has  ever  shone  forth  most  clearly.
When  one  reads  and  hears  true  poetry  one  feels
an  intimate  knowledge  of  Nature  stirring  within
one,  and  one  floats  in  it  and  over  it  like  its  own
ethereal  body.  Natural  Philosophers  and  Poets
by  force  of  their  identical  speech  have  always
seemed  to  be  of  one  race.  What  the  former
collected  and  presented  in  great  ordered  masses,
the  latter  kneaded  into  a  daily  nourishment  for
human  hearts,  splitting  up  vast  Nature  and  giving
it  to  us  in  many  small  convenient  portions.
While  the  latter  deliriously  pursued  the  Fluent
and  Fleeting,  the  former  sought  with  keen
knives  to  detect  the  inner  construction  and  the
inter-relatedness  of  sinew  and  muscle.  Nature
the  Friend  died  under  their  hands,  and  left  but


THE  DISCIPLES  AT  SAIS     101

dead  or  palpitating  remains.  While  through
the  Poet,  as  though  moved  by  generous  wine
yet  still  more  inspired,  she  gave  forth  the  most
divine  and  joyous  utterances.  Uplifted  above
her  quotidian  toil  she  rose  to  Heaven,  danced
and  prophesied,  hailed  every  guest  welcome,
and  squandered  her  treasures  of  glad  courage.
On  this  wise  she  enjoyed  heavenly  hours  with
the  Poet,  and  welcomed  the  Philosopher  only
when  she  felt  ill  or  conscience-stricken.  Then
she  gave  answer  to  every  question  and  willingly
respected  the  grave,  strong  man.  Whosoever
wills  to  be  well  acquainted  with  her  Soul
must  seek  her  company  with  the  Poet,  for  to
him  she  is  expansive  and  pours  out  her  miracu-
lous heart.  But  whosoever  loves  her  not  from
the  bottom  of  his  heart,  and  only  strives  to
admire  and  know  her  in  this  or  that  particular,
must  go  to  her  sick-room  and  diligently  visit
her  charnel-house.

We  stand  in  as  many  incomprehensibly  diverse
relations  towards  Nature  as  towards  Man,  and
as  she  shows  herself  childlike  to  the  child,  and
graciously  nestles  in  his  childish  heart,  so  she
shows  herself  to  the  Gods  as  divine  and  in
harmony  with  their  great  spirits.  We  cannot
assert  that  Nature  exists  without  asserting  some-
thing transcendent,  and  all  effort  towards  the
truth  in  discussion  and  talk  of  Nature  only  leads


102  NOVALIS

us  further  and  further  from  Naturalness.  Much
is  already  gained  when  the  endeavour  thoroughly
to  understand  Nature  rises  to  a  yearning,  a
tender  discreet  yearning  pleasing  to  that  strange
cold  Being,  if  only  she  be  assured  of  intimate
communion.  It  is  a  mysterious  impulse  of  our
inner  being  to  expand  towards  all  sides  from
an  infinitely  deep  central  point.  We  believe,
when  wonderful  conscious  and  unconscious
Nature  surrounds  us,  that  this  impulse  is  the
attraction  of  Nature,  an  externalisation  of  our
sympathy  with  her.  But  still  we  seek  behind
these  distant  azure  forms  for  home,  for  the
beloved  of  our  youth,  parents  and  brethren,
old  friends,  dear  bygone  days.  Some  think
that  on  the  Far  Side  unknown  splendours  await
them,  they  believe  that  a  vital  future  is  hidden
there,  and  they  stretch  out  their  hands  in  longing
towards  a  New  World.  Few  remain  tranquilly
among  these  august  surroundings  seeking  to
apprehend  them  only  in  their  integrity  and
aggregation.  Few  there  are  who  in  the  dis-
unity of  the  parts  do  not  forget  the  scintillating
filament  that  connects  those  parts  successively
and  forms  the  sacred  Lustre,  and  few  there  are
who  feel  themselves  inspired  in  the  contempla-
tion of  this  Living  Treasure  that  floats  over  the
Abysses  of  Night.

Thus   originate   many   and    various   views   of


THE  DISCIPLES  AT  SAIS     103

Nature.  And  if  to  any  the  aim  in  exploring
Nature  is  a  merry  raid,  a  feast,  yet  we  see
that  she  changes  to  a  devout  religion,  imparting
to  a  whole  life,  guidance,  stability,  meaning.
Already  among  the  primitive  nations  there  were
serious  spirits  for  whom  Nature  was  the  Face
of  Divinity ;  while  others,  jovial  hearts,  only
invited  her  to  feast.  The  air  was  to  them  as
a  refreshing  draught,  the  stars  were  but  as
torches  for  the  nocturnal  dance,  and  plants  and
animals  nought  but  costly  viands.  And  so
Nature  seemed  to  them  not  a  silent  wondrous
Temple,  but  a  cheery  kitchen  and  dining-hall.
Among  these  were  other  and  more  contempla-
tive souls,  who  only  saw  in  existing  Nature  vast
unreclaimed  alluvion,  and  they  were  busy  day
and  night  in  creating  representations  of  a  nobler
Nature.  They  shared  the  great  work  sociably.
Some  sought  to  awaken  the  mute  lost  notes  of
the  wind  and  the  woods ;  others  expressed
their  ideas  of  a  more  beauteous  race  in  metals
and  stones ;  re-arranged  the  more  handsome
stones  into  dwellings  ;  brought  to  light  the
treasures  hidden  in  the  caverns  of  the  earth  ;
tamed  the  raging  streams,  peopled  the  inhos-
pitable Sea,  brought  back  to  the  barren  zones
the  old  select  plants  and  animals,  stemmed  the
overgrowth  of  forests  and  cultivated  the  finest
sorts  of  flowers  and  herbs  :  laid  the  earth  open


io4  NOVALIS

to  the  vitalising  action  of  the  engendering  air
and  the  quickening  light ;  taught  the  colours
how  to  mingle  and  arrange  themselves  in  en-
trancing pictures,  and  the  woods  and  meadows,
springs,  and  rocks  to  group  themselves  once
more  into  lovely  gardens ;  breathed  melodies
into  living  limbs  in  order  to  awaken  them  and
move  them  to  joyous  rhythms ;  adopted  all  such
poor  neglected  animals  as  were  susceptible  of
their  control,  and  purged  the  woods  of  noisome
monsters,  abortions  of  a  degenerate  phantasy.
Nature  soon  resumed  her  more  friendly  habits,
she  became  more  kind  and  more  comfortable,
and  showed  herself  willing  to  be  used  for  the
furthering  of  human  ends.  Little  by  little  her
heart  inclined  to  human  ways,  her  phantasies
became  more  gay,  she  became  more  accessible,
and  willingly  answered  friendly  interrogations.
And  thus  little  by  little  the  antique  Golden
Age  seemed  to  come  again,  in  which  she  was
the  Friend,  Consoler,  Priestess,  and  Miracle-
worker  to  Humanity,  when  she  lived  among
them,  and  Man  through  heavenly  communion
became  Immortal.

Then  will  the  Stars  again  visit  the  Earth
with  whom  they  were  wroth  in  the  days  of
Her  darkening ;  then  the  Sun  will  lay  down
his  mighty  sway  and  become  again  a  star  among
other  stars,  and  all  the  Nations  of  the  World  will


THE  DISCIPLES  AT  SAIS     105

meet  together  once  more  after  long  separation.
Then  the  old  alienated  families  will  find  each
other  and  every  day  shall  witness  new  greetings,
new  embraces ;  then  will  the  ancient  inhabitants
of  the  Earth  return  to  her,  on  every  hill  the
ashes  will  kindle  anew,  everywhere  the  flames
of  life  will  blaze  high,  old  habitations  will  be
rebuilt,  ancient  times  will  be  renewed,  and
history  will  become  the  dream  of  an  infinite
everlasting   Now.

Whoever  is  of  this  stock,  of  this  Faith,  and
whoever  will  participate  in  this  civilising  of
Nature  should  go  into  the  studio  of  the  artist,
should  hearken  everywhere  to  the  unguessed
ever-emergent  poetry.  He  must  never  be  tired
of  observing  Nature  or  of  accompanying  her  ;
he  must  follow  the  indications  of  her  finger,
and  spare  himself  no  tedious  journey  if  she
beckon  him.  He  must  spurn  no  wearisome
course.  Even  were  he  to  go  through  dark
caverns  he  will  certainly  find  fabulous  treasure ;
the  miner's  little  lamp  burns  steady  at  the  far
end,  and  who  knows  to  what  Divine  Mysteries
an  enchanting  inhabitant  of  the  Kingdoms  of
the  Under  World  may  not  initiate  him.

None,  surely,  wanders  further  from  the  goal
than  he  who  imagines  that  he  already  knows
the  marvellous  Kingdom  and  that  he  can  in
a  few  words   fathom  its   constitution  and    find


106  NOVALIS

the  right  path  everywhere.  To  no  one  who
has  torn  himself  loose  and  made  himself  into
an  island  does  insight  come  of  itself  nor  yet
without  pain.  This  can  only  happen  to  children
or  to  men  who  are  childlike  and  know  not  what
they  do.  Long  unremitting  intercourse,  free
and  curious  contemplation,  attention  to  faint
tokens  and  indications,  an  inward  poet  life,
practised  senses,  a  simple  God-fearing  spirit,
these  are  the  essential  requisites  of  a  true  friend
of  Nature,  without  which  none  will  attain  his
wish.  It  does  not  seem  sensible  to  attempt  to
comprehend  and  understand  a  human  World
without  ourself  possessing  a  fully  developed
Humanity.  Not  one  of  the  senses  may  slumber,
and  if  all  are  not  equally  awake,  each  one  must
be  excited  and  not  allowed  to  languish  or  be
stifled.  Just  as  we  discern  the  future  painter
in  the  boy  who  covers  all  the  walls  and  every
flat  space  with  drawings,  and  variedly  combines
colour  with  design,  so  we  see  an  incipient  Philo-
sopher in  him  who  without  pause  investigates
all  natural  objects,  questions,  takes  heed  to  all,
brings  together  whatever  is  remarkable,  and
rejoices  if  he  become  Master  and  Possessor  of  a
new  phenomenon, a  new  strength  and  knowledge.
To  some,  it  seems  not  worth  while  to  pursue
the  endless  subdivisions  of  Nature  and  that  more-
over it  is  a  dangerous  undertaking,  unproductive


THE  DISCIPLES  AT  SAIS     107

of  fruit  or  result.  As  we  can  never  find  the
ultimate  atom  of  material  bodies,  never  find  their
simplest  cell  because  magnitudes  lose  themselves
forwards  and  backwards  in  infinity,  so  likewise  is
it  with  the  species  of  bodies  and  forces.  Among
them  we  chance  everlastingly  on  new  species,  new
combinations,  new  phenomena.  These  only
seem  to  be  arrested  when  our  zeal  slackens.
And  so  we  waste  our  precious  time  in  vapid
contemplation  and  tedious  enumeration,  till  this
becomes  at  last  a  real  delirium,  a  confirmed
vertigo  in  face  of  the  appalling  abyss.  For  so
far  as  Man  has  come  Nature  remains  always  the
awful  Mill  of  Death.  Everywhere  monstrous
Revolution,  unaccountable  Vortices.  It  is  a
sovereignty  of  Rapine,  of  maddest  Wantonness,
an  Immensity  pregnant  with  Woe.  The  few
luminous  points  only  reveal  a  yet  more  horrid
Night,  and  terrors  of  all  sorts  paralyse  each
observer.  Death  stands  like  a  Saviour  beside
piteous  Humanity  ;  for  without  Death  the  Mad-
dest were  the  Happiest.  And  it  is  just  the
effort  to  fathom  this  gigantic  Mechanism  that
is  in  itself  an  impulse  toward  the  Abyss,  a
commencing  vertigo.  For  every  enticement  is  a
growing  whorl  which  soon  overpowers  the  un-
happy one,  and  at  last  whirls  him  away  through
a  terrific  Night.  Here  are  the  pitfalls  deep  laid
against    human    understanding     that    Nature    is


108  NOVALIS

ever  seeking  to  annihilate  everywhere  as  her
greatest  enemy.  Blessed  are  the  childlike  inno-
cence and  ignorance  of  men  which  have  kept
them  unaware  of  the  gruesome  dangers  which
hang  like  fearful  thunderclouds  over  their
peaceful  abodes  and  are  prepared  to  break  upon
them  at  any  moment.  Only  the  dissension  of
the  forces  of  Nature  has  so  far  preserved  man.
Nevertheless  the  great  moment  cannot  tarry  in
which  the  assembled  races  of  man  by  a  great
common  resolve  will  tear  themselves  from  this
sorrowful  plight,  from  this  galling  bondage,
and  when  by  a  voluntary  renunciation  of  their
present  possessions  they  will  emancipate  their
kind  for  ever  from  this  Woe,  and  will  lead  them
in  a  happier  world  back  to  their  ancient  Father.

So  might  they  end  worthily  and  prevent
their  necessary  and  violent  annihilation  or  a
still  more  atrocious  degeneration  into  beasts  by
progressive  deterioration  of  their  mental  faculties,
through  insanity.

Association  with  the  forces  of  Nature,  with
animals,  plants,  rocks,  stones  and  waves  must  of
necessity  mould  man  to  a  resemblance  to  these
objects.  And  this  resemblance,  this  metamor-
phosis, this  flux  of  divine  and  human  in  indomi-
table forces  is  the  very  Spirit  of  Nature,  that
terrible  engulphing  power.  And  is  not  all
that   we  see   already  plunder  from  Heaven,  the


THE  DISCIPLES  AT  SAIS     109

immense  Ruin  of  former  Glories,  the  Remains
of  an  abominable  Repast  ?

Good  !  say  the  more  courageous  !  Let  our
race  maintain  a  lengthy  well-pondered  war  of
destruction  with  this  Nature.  With  slow  in-
sidious poisons  we  must  seek  to  overcome  her.
The  Natural  Philosopher  may  be  a  noble  hero
who  hurls  himself  into  the  yawning  abyss  to  save
his  fellow-men.  The  artists  have  played  her
many  a  secret  prank.  Go  on  in  the  same  way,
get  possession  of  the  mystic  threads  and  make
her  to  war  against  her  own  members.  Make
use  of  every  discord  that  you  may  lead  her
according  to  your  pleasure  like  that  fire-breath-
ing Bull.  She  must  be  in  subjection  to  you.
Patience  and  Faith  become  the  Children  of  Men.
Distant  brothers  are  united  with  us  in  one
Endeavour.  The  Wheel  of  the  Stars  will  be-
come the  Spinning  Wheel  of  our  Life  Thread
and  then  our  slaves  shall  build  us  a  new  Land.
Let  us  gaze  on  her  tumult  and  her  devastations
with  inward  triumph.  She  shall  sell  herself  to
us  and  for  every  deed  of  violence  she  shall
pay  a  heavy  penalty.  Let  us  live  and  die  in  the
inspiring  sentiment  of  our  Freedom,  for  herein
the  stream  rises  that  shall  one  day  submerge
and  tame  her.  In  it  let  us  bathe  and  refresh
ourselves  to  new  deeds  of  heroism.  The
Monster's   rage   reaches   not  hither  ;    one   little


no  NOVALIS

drop  of  Freedom  is  enough  to  cripple  her
forever  and  to  set  a  limit  and  a  term  to  her
ravages."

"  They  are  right,"  cry  several.  "  Here  or
nowhere  lies  the  Talisman.  We  sit  at  the  Source
of  Freedom  and  look  out  from  thence.  This  is
the  great  Magic  Mirror  in  which  all  creation
wholly  and  clearly  images  itself,  in  it  do  the
tender  spirits  and  forms  of  all  natures  bathe.
Here  every  chamber  is  unlocked.  What  does
it  profit  wearily  to  plod  round  the  grim  world
of  visible  objects  ?  The  veritable  world  lies
within  us,  in  this  source.  Here  is  revealed  the
true  meaning  of  this  great  motley  crazy  Show,
and  if  full  of  this  revelation  we  traverse  Nature
again,  everything  appears  familiar  and  with  assur-
ance we  distinguish  every  form.  We  do  not  need
to  investigate  at  length  ;  a  slight  resemblance,
a  few  indications  in  the  sand  are  enough  to
inform  us.  Everything  becomes  a  great  Script
to  which  we  have  the  key ;  nothing  is  un-
expected because  we  anticipate  the  evolution
of  the  great  Time  Machine.  We  only  enjoy
Nature  in  the  plenitude  of  our  senses  because
she  does  not  divide  us  from  them,  because  no
fever  dreams  oppress  us  and  a  clear  recollection
renders  us  serene  and  confident."

"  The  others  rave,"  said  a  serious  man  to  these
last.      "  Do  they  not  recognise  in  Nature  a  true


THE  DISCIPLES  AT  SAIS     in

image  of  themselves  ?  They  consume  them-
selves in  a  savage  nescience.  They  do  not
know  that  their  Nature  is  a  conjuration  of
their  thought,  a  barren  phantasy  of  their  dream.
Of  course  to  them  she  is  a  hideous  beast,  a
strange  extravagant  masque  of  their  own  greed.
The  awakened  Man  sees  this  spawn  of  his  dis-
ordered imagination  without  a  shudder,  for  he
knows  it  is  but  the  futile  spectre  of  his  own
weakness.  He  feels  himself  Master  of  the
World,  his  Ego  soars  mightily  over  the  Abyss
and  will  soar  through  eternities  of  endless
vicissitude.  His  inward  spirit  strives  to  pro-
claim and  promote  unison.  Through  the  end-
less ages  he  will  be  ever  more  and  more  united
with  himself  and  the  creation  that  surrounds
him,  and  he  will  see  standing  out  more  clearly
his  higher  Ego,  the  eternal  All  Efficiency  of  a
high  moral  World-Order.

"  Reason  is  the  meaning  of  the  World.  The
World  exists  because  of  it,  and  if  at  first  it  is
the  battle-ground  of  a  child -like  budding
Reason  it  will  one  day  become  the  divine  image
of  its  activity,  the  theatre  of  a  true  Church.
Until  such  time  let  man  honour  it  as  the
emblem  of  his  spirit,  the  emblem  that  will
ennoble  itself  together  with  him  by  indeter-
minate degrees.  Whosoever  wills  to  attain  to  a
knowledge  of  Nature  must  exercise  his  moral


ii2  NOVALIS

sense,  must  fashion  and  mould  the  noble  core  of
his  inmost  Being  to  the  measure  of  moral  order,
and  Nature  will,  as  if  of  her  own  choice,  lay
herself  bare  before  him.  Moral  action  is  the
only  and  great  experiment  in  which  are  solved
all  the  riddles  of  manifold  phenomena.  Who-
ever grasps  this  Moral  Order  and  is  able  to
analyse  it  in  strict  logical  sequence  is  forever
Master  of  Nature."

The  Disciple  listens  to  these  conflicting  voices
with  dismay.  Each  one  seems  to  him  to  be
right,  and  a  strange  perplexity  takes  possession
of  his  soul.  Gradually  the  inward  commotion
subsides,  and  over  the  murky  internecine  waves
a  Spirit  of  Peace  seems  to  hover,  whose  ap-
proach is  heralded  in  the  youth's  soul  by  a  new
courage  and  a  convincing  joy.

A  merry  playfellow,  his  temples  decked  with
roses  and  convolvulus  came  running  by  and  saw
him  sitting  absorbed  in  himself.  "  Dreamer  !  "
he  cried,  "  thou  art  quite  on  the  wrong  road.  In
such  a  way  thou  wilt  make  no  great  progress.
The  mood's  the  best  of  all  things.  Is  that
indeed  a  mood  of  Nature  ?  Thou  art  still
young,  and  dost  thou  not  feel  the  dictates  of
youth  in  every  vein  ?  Do  not  Love  and  Long-
ing fill  thy  breast  ?  How  canst  thou  sit  in
solitude  ?  Does  Nature  sit  solitary  ?  Joy  and
desire  flee  from  the  solitary ;  and  what  use  is


THE  DISCIPLES  AT  SAIS     113

Nature  to  thee  without  desire  ?  Only  with
men  is  she  at  home,  this  Spirit  who  crowds  all
the  senses  with  a  thousand  different  colours,
who  surrounds  thee  like  an  invisible  Lover.  At
our  Feasts  her  tongue  is  loosed  ;  she  sits  aloft
and  carols  songs  of  gladdest  life.  Thou  hast
never  yet  loved,  poor  fellow ;  at  the  first  kiss
a  new  world  will  open  to  thee  and  life  will
penetrate  thy  ravished  heart  with  its  thousand
rays.  I  will  tell  thee  a  tale.  Listen  !  There
lived  once  upon  a  time  in  the  land  of  the
setting  sun  a  young  man.  He  was  very
good,  but  above  the  ordinary  extraordinary.
He  fretted  himself  incessantly  about  nothing
and  yet  again  nothing,  went  quietly  about  on
his  own  account  when  others  played  together
and  were  merry,  and  indulged  in  strange  things.
Caves  and  woods  were  his  favourite  haunts  ;
he  talked  continually  with  quadrupeds  and
birds,  with  trees  and  rocks  ;  of  course  in  no
sensible  words,  but  only  in  such  foolish  twaddle
as  would  make  one  die  of  laughing.  But  he
ever  remained  morose  and  solemn  notwithstand-
ing that  the  squirrels  and  monkeys,  the  parrots
and  bullfinches  gave  themselves  all  the  trouble
in  the  world  to  distract  him  and  put  him  in  the
right  path  again.  The  goose  told  him  tales,
the  stream  rippled  a  roundelay,  a  great  heavy
stone  made  comic  leaps  and  a  rose  crept  round

H


ii4  NOVALIS

him  amicably  and  twined  herself  in  his  locks,
while  the  ivy  caressed  his  thoughtful  brow.
But  his  solemnity  and  depression  were  stub-
born. His  parents  were  very  grieved ;  they
knew  not  what  they  ought  to  do.  He  was
healthy  and  eat  well ;  they  had  never  crossed
him.  Only  a  few  years  back  he  was  cheerful
and  blithe  as  anyone,  first  in  all  games,  and
approved  by  every  maiden.  He  was  really
beautiful,  looked  like  a  picture  and  danced  like
an  angel.  Amongst  the  maidens  there  was  one,
a  precious,  exquisite  child  ;  she  seemed  to  be  of
wax,  her  hair  was  like  gold  silk,  her  lips  were
cherry  red  like  a  doll's,  her  eyes  burning  black.
Who  saw  her  might  have  thought  to  perish
of  it,  so  lovely  was  she.  At  that  time  Rosen-
bllitchen,  for  so  she  was  called,  was  dear  to
the  beautiful  Hyacinth,  for  that  was  his  name,
and  in  fact  he  loved  her  to  the  point  of  death.
The  other  children  knew  nothing  about  it.
The  violet  had  whispered  it  to  them  first.
The  house  kittens  had  noticed  it,  for  the  houses
of  their  parents  lay  close  together.  When  at
night  Hyacinth  stood  at  his  window  and  Rosen-
bliitchen  at  hers,  and  the  little  cats  passed  by
on  their  mouse-hunt  and  saw  the  two  there  they
laughed  and  giggled  so  loud  that  it  made  the
lovers  quite  cross.  The  violet  had  told  it  in
confidence  to  the  strawberry,   who  told    it    to


THE  DISCIPLES  AT  SAIS     115

her  friend  the  gooseberry,  who  did  not  omit
to  scratch  Hyacinth  as  he  came  along.  So  very
soon  the  whole  garden  and  wood  knew  all
about  it,  and  when  Hyacinth  went  out  there
rang  from  all  sides  :  "  Little  Rosenblutchen  is
my  darling  ! "  Then  Hyacinth  was  annoyed,
but  he  had  to  laugh  with  all  his  heart  when
a  little  lizard  came  gliding  past,  sat  himself
on  a  warm  stone,  and  waving  his  little  tail,
sang  : —

Rosenbliitchen,  little  pet,

Once  upon  a  time  went  blind,

So  when  Hyacinth  she  met

She  embraced  him.      Being  blind

She  just  thought  he  was  her  mother,

When  she  found  it  was  another

Did  she  mind  ?   no  not  a  bit,

Only  kissed  him  as  before.

Was  she  frightened?   not  a  whit,

Merely  kissed  him  more  and  more.

Alas,  how  soon  this  glorious  time  was  over.
There  came  a  man  from  foreign  parts  who  had
travelled  astonishingly  far,  who  had  a  long
beard,  deep  eyes,  fearsome  eyebrows,  and  who
wore  a  marvellous  robe  of  many  folds  with
strange  figures  woven  into  it.  He  sat  himself
down  before  the  house  belonging  to  Hyacinth's
parents.  Hyacinth  was  filled  with  curiosity,
and  went  out  to  him  and  brought  him  bread
and  wine.  He  parted  his  white  beard,  and  told
his  story  far  on  into  the  night.     Hyacinth  kept


n6  NOVALIS

awake  and   did   not   fidget   nor  grow   tired  of
listening.      From  what  transpired  afterwards  he
told  a  great  deal  about  strange  lands,  of  un-
explored    regions,    of    amazing    extraordinary
things.     He  stayed  there   three   days  and   de-
scended with  Hyacinth   into   profound  depths.
Rosenbliitchen  heartily  cursed  the  old  warlock,
for  Hyacinth    became    quite    possessed    by   his
discourse,  and  concerned  himself  with  nothing
else.     He  would    scarcely  take   his   food.     At
last  the  old  man  went  away,  but  he  left  with
Hyacinth  a  little  book  in  which  no  one  could  read.
Hyacinth  gave  him  more  fruit,  bread  and  wine,
and  accompanied  him  far  upon   his  way.      He
returned  pensive  and  from  thenceforward  began
a  new  way  of  life.    Rosenbliitchen  certainly  had  a
right  to  be  pitied  for  from  that  time  he  made  little
enough  of  her,  and  was  always  self-engrossed.
Now  it  happened  that  one  day  he  came  home,
and  was  as  though  new  born.     He  fell  on  the
necks  of  his  parents  and  wept.   "  I  must  away  into
strange  lands,"  he  said ;   "  the  old  Sibyl  in  the
forest  has  told  me  how  I  am  to  become  whole  ;
she  threw  the  book  into  the  fire,  and  bade  me
come  to  you  and  ask  your  blessing.     Perhaps
I  may  return  soon,  perhaps  never.     Greet  little
Rosenbliitchen  ;  I  would  willingly  have  spoken
with  her.     I  know    not    how   it    is   with    me;
something  urges  me  away.     If  I  try  to  think  of


THE  DISCIPLES  AT  SAIS     117

the  old  days,  mightier  thoughts  intervene.
Peace  is  fled  together  with  heart  and  love.  I
must  go  seek  them.  I  would  like  to  tell  you
whither,  but  I  do  not  know.  Thither  where
the  Mother  of  All  Things  lives,  the  Veiled  Virgin.
My  desire  is  aflame  for  Her.  Farewell."  He
tore  himself  away  from  them  and  departed.
His  parents  lamented  and  shed  tears.  Rosen-
bliitchen  stayed  in  her  chamber  and  wept
bitterly.  Hyacinth  hastened  through  valleys
and  deserts,  over  mountains  and  streams,  towards
the  Mysterious  Land.  He  questioned  men  and
animals,  rocks  and  trees  concerning  Isis,  the
sacred  Goddess.  Many  laughed,  many  kept
silence,  from  none  did  he  receive  the  informa-
tion he  sought.  At  first  he  passed  through  a
rude  wild  country  ;  mists  and  clouds  intercepted
his  passage  and  never-ceasing  storms.  Then  he
passed  through  interminable  deserts  of  sand  and
fiery  dust,  and  as  he  wandered  his  humour  also
was  changed.  The  time  seemed  long  to  him  ;
the  inward  tumult  was  appeased,  he  grew  more
gentle  and  the  mighty  urgence  was  gradually
reduced  to  a  quiet  but  intense  aspiration  in
which  his  whole  spirit  was  melted.  It  was  as
though  many  years  had  passed  over  him.  The
country  became  at  the  same  time  richer  and
more  varied,  the  air  warm  and  azure,  the  road
more   level.     Green    bushes   allured  him   with


xi8  NOVALIS

pleasant  shade.  But  he  did  not  understand
their  speech.  Besides  they  did  not  seem  to
speak  while  yet  they  filled  his  heart  with  green
colours  and  a  cool  still  perfume.  That  sweet
longing  waxed  higher  and  higher  in  him,  and
the  leaves  expanded  with  sap  ;  birds  and  beasts
were  noisier  and  more  joyous,  the  fruits  more
aromatic,  the  heavens  a  deeper  blue,  the  air
milder,  his  love  warmer,  time  went  faster  as  if
it  saw  itself  nearing  the  goal.  One  day  he
lighted  on  a  crystal  brook,  and  on  a  cloud  of
flowers  that  came  tripping  down  the  valley
between  black  mountain  peaks  as  high  as
heaven.  They  greeted  him  kindly,  with  familiar
words.  "  Dear  country  folk,"  he  said,  "  where
can  I  really  find  the  sacred  dwelling-place  of  Isis?
It  must  needs  be  somewhere  near  here,  and  you
are  perhaps  more  at  home  than  I."  "We  are
only  passing  through,"  answered  the  flowers  ;
"  a  family  of  spirits  is  travelling  abroad,  and
we  prepare  their  way  and  resting-place.  Yet  we
have  but  just  come  through  a  place  where  we
heard  your  name.  Only  go  upwards  whence  we
came,  and  you  will  learn  more."  The  flowers  and
the  brook  laughed  as  they  said  this,  offered  him
a  refreshing  draught,  and  went  on  their  way.
He  followed  their  advice,  asked  again  and  again,
and  finally  came  to  that  long-sought  dwelling
that  lay  hidden  beneath  palms  and   other   rare


THE  DISCIPLES  AT  SAIS     119

trees.  His  heart  beat  with  an  infinite  yearning,
and  the  sweetest  shyness  overcame  him  in  this
habitation  of  the  eternal  centuries.  He  slum-
bered enveloped  by  heavenly  perfumes,  for  it
was  only  a  dream  that  could  lead  him  to  the
Holy  of  Holies.  Mysteriously  his  dream  led
him  to  the  sound  of  loud,  delicious  music  and
alternating  harmonies  through  endless  halls  full
of  curious  things.  It  all  seemed  to  him  so
familiar,  and  yet  of  an  hitherto  unrecognised
splendour.  Then  the  last  vestiges  of  earth-
liness  disappeared  as  though  consumed  in  air,
and  he  stood  before  the  Celestial  Virgin.  He
raised  the  diaphanous  glistening  veil,  and  Rosen-
bliitchen  sank  into  his  arms.  A  distant  music
encompassed  the  secrets  of  the  lovers'  meeting,
and  the  effusions  of  their  love,  and  shut  away
everything  inharmonious  from  this  abode  of
rapture.  Hyacinth  lived  ever  after  with  Rosen-
bliitchen,  among  his  glad  parents  and  his  play-
fellows, and  innumerable  grandchildren  thanked
the  old  Sibyl  for  her  counsel  and  her  fire,  for  at
that  time  people  had  as  many  children  as  they
wished  for.

The  Disciples  embraced  each  other  and
separated.  The  wide  echoing  Halls  stood
empty  and  deserted,  and  the  marvellous  Con-
versation between  the  thousand  natural  objects
collected  together  in  these  halls  and  set  out  in


i2o  NOVALIS

many  fashioned  orders,  proceeded  in  countless
accents.  The  different  Forces  sported  together.
They  strove  once  more  in  their  freedom,  in  their
former  relationship.  A  few  kept  to  their  proper
places,  and  looked  on  at  the  varied  movement
around  them  undisturbed.  The  others  com-
plained of  their  dreadful  pains  and  sufferings,
and  lamented  the  old  splendid  life  in  the  lap  of
Nature,  where  a  common  liberty  united  them,
and  each  found  in  himself  whatever  he  needed.
"  Oh,  that  man,"  said  they,  "  understood  the
hidden  music  of  Nature,  and  had  the  sense  of  ex-
ternal harmonies  !  But  he  hardly  is  aware  that
we  belong  together  and  that  no  one  of  us  can  exist
without  the  other.  He  can  never  let  anything
be.  Tyrannically  he  separates  us  and  gropes
about  in  loud  dissonances.  How  happy  could
he  be  if  he  communed  with  us  kindly,  if  he
entered  our  great  Bond  as  once  he  did  in  the
Golden  Age,  as  he  so  justly  terms  it.  In  that
Age  he  understood  us  as  we  understood  him.
His  desire  to  be  a  god  it  is  that  has  divided  us ;
he  seeks  what  we  can  never  know  nor  imagine,
and  now  he  is  neither  a  voice  accompanying  nor
a  cadence  completing  us.  He  anticipates  the
infinite  satisfaction,  the  everlasting  delight  there
is  in  us,  and  that  is  why  he  has  such  an  extra-
ordinary love  for  some  among  us.  The  magic
of    gold,    the    mystery    of  colour,    the  joy    of


THE  DISCIPLES  AT  SAIS     121

water,  are  not  unknown  to  him ;  through  the
antiques  he  has  a  glimpse  of  the  marvels  of
stone.  And  yet  the  sweet  passion  for  the  work
of  Nature  is  lacking  in  him,  and  the  eye  to  see
our  entrancing  mysteries.  Could  he  but  learn
to  feel !  Of  this  divinest,  this  most  natural  of
all  faculties  he  knows  as  yet  but  little  ;  through
this  faculty  the  ancient  desired  Time  will  come
again ;  the  element  of  this  faculty  is  an  inner
light  that  breaks  into  strong  beautiful  colours.
Then  will  the  stars  arise  in  him ;  he  will  learn
to  feel  the  whole  world  more  clearly  and  more
variously,  while  as  yet  his  eyes  disclose  only
lines  and  surfaces  to  him.  He  will  be  Leader  in
an  endless  play  of  Forces,  and  will  forget  all  his
foolish  strivings  in  an  eternal  self-subsisting
and  ever-waxing  felicity.  Thought  is  but  a
dream  of  sensation,  merely  dead  sensation,  pulse-
less feeble  life.

As  they  spoke  thus  the  sun  streamed  through
the  lofty  windows,  and  the  noise  of  the  conver-
sation was  lost  in  a  soft  murmuring.  A  limit-
less anticipation  thrilled  through  all  those  forms,
a  caressing  warmth  was  diffused  over  them,  and
the  most  marvellous  of  Nature's  songs  soared
up  out  of  the  stillest  silence.  Voices  of  men
were  heard  in  the  vicinity,  the  great  doors  on
to  the  garden  were  flung  back,  and  several  way-
farers sat  themselves  on  the  steps  of  the  wide


i22  NOVALIS

stairway  in  the  shadow  of  the  building.  In
beauteous  light  before  them  lay  the  entranc-
ing landscape,  and  in  the  distance  sight  lost
itself  among  the  blue  hills.  Friendly  children
brought  a  variety  of  viands  and  drinks,  and  soon
a  lively  conversation  sprang  up  among  them.

"  To  everything  that  a  man  does  he  must  give
his  undivided  attention  or  his  Ego,"  said  one  at
last.  "When  he  has  done  this,  thoughts  soon
arise  in  him,  or  else  a  new  method  of  apprehen-
sion miraculously  appears,  which  seems  to  be
nothing  else  than  gentle  oscillations  of  a  some-
thing that  colours  or  resounds,  or  the  mar-
vellous contractions  and  figurations  of  an  elastic
fluid.  They  radiate  with  a  lively  mobility  from
the  side  where  the  impression  left  its  sting,  and
carry  his  Ego  away.  He  can  often  immediately
annul  this  play  of  Forces  if  he  divide  his  atten-
tion again,  or  let  it  ramble  capriciously  around.
For  it  seems  to  be  nothing  but  the  rays  and
effects  which  every  Ego  sets  in  motion  in  all
directions  through  the  elastic  medium,  or  it  is
the  diffraction  of  this  very  medium,  or  speaking
generally,  it  is  the  irregular  play  of  the  waves
of  this  sea  on  the  inflexible  attention.  Very
remarkable  it  is  that  through  this  play  of  his
personality  man  first  becomes  aware  of  his
specific  freedom,  and  that  it  seems  to  him  as
though   he    awaked    out    of   a   deep    sleep,    as


THE  DISCIPLES  AT  SAIS     123

though  he  were  only  now  at  home  in  the  world
and  as  if  the  light  of  day  were  breaking  now
over  his  interior  life  for  the  first  time.  He
seems  to  have  brought  it  to  the  highest  perfec-
tion when  he  is  able,  without  disturbing  this
same  play  of  Forces,  to  occupy  himself  with  the
ordinary  business  of  the  senses,  and  feel  and
think  at  the  same  time.  Both  methods  of
apprehension  profit  by  this.  The  external
world  becomes  transparent,  the  interior  world
multiform  and  significant.  And  thus  a  man
finds  himself  in  a  condition  of  relationship
between  two  worlds  in  completest  freedom,
plenitude  and  power.  It  is  natural  that  a  man
should  seek  to  eternalise  this  condition,  and  to
extend  it  over  the  whole  sum  of  his  impressions,
that  he  should  never  tire  of  tracing  these  asso-
ciations in  both  worlds,  and  of  investigating
their  laws,  their  sympathies  and  antipathies.
The  substance  of  these  impressions  which  affect
us  we  call  Nature,  and  thus  Nature  stands  in  an
immediate  relationship  to  those  functions  of  our
bodies  which  we  call  senses.  Unknown  and
mysterious  relations  of  our  body  allow  us  to  sur-
mise unknown  and  mysterious  correlations  with
Nature,  and  therefore  Nature  is  that  wondrous
fellowship  into  which  our  bodies  introduce  us,
and  which  we  learn  to  know  through  the  mode
of  its  constitution  and  abilities.


i24  NOVALIS

It  is  open  to  question  whether  we  can  really
learn  to  know  the  Nature  of  Natures  through
differentiated  Nature,  and  to  what  degree  our
thoughts  and  the  intensity  of  our  attention  are  de-
termined by  her  or  determine  her,  and  whether
we  in  this  way  break  away  from  Nature,  and
perhaps  pervert  her  tender  compliancy.  We
see  that  these  inner  relationships  and  constitu-
tions of  our  body  must  be  examined  before
all  else,  before  we  can  hope  to  answer  these
questions,  or  penetrate  to  the  Nature  of  things.
It  might  also  be  thought  that  we  ought  to  be
expert  reasoners  before  we  attempt  to  seek  the
hidden  cohesions  of  our  body,  or  endeavour  to
employ  its  intelligence  for  the  understanding
of  Nature.  And  then  assuredly  nothing  could
be  more  natural  than  to  practise  all  possible
exercise  of  thought,  and  to  acquire  a  proficiency,
an  ease  at  this  business  so  as  to  pass  from  one
subject  to  another,  and  to  unite  and  resolve
them  in  diverse  ways.  To  that  end  we  should
attentively  observe  all  impressions  and  likewise
note  the  play  of  thought  thence  issuing,  and  we
ought  occasionally  in  this  way  to  experience
new  thoughts  which  should  also  be  attended
to,  so  that  we  may,  through  frequent  practice,
learn  to  distinguish  and  keep  separate  the  im-
pression from  the  movements  bound  up  with
them.     If  we   had    thus    obtained    only    a  few


THE  DISCIPLES  AT  SAIS     125

movements,  as  it  were  an  alphabet  of  Nature,  the
deciphering  would  have  sped  more  easily,  and
the  power  over  thought-creation  and  activity
would  set  the  observer  in  a  position,  even
without  previous  true  experience,  to  delineate
Nature  compositions,  and  to  devise  Nature
thoughts.     And  then  the  Goal  were  reached.

"It  is  very  hazardous,"  said  another,  "to
reconstruct  Nature  from  external  forces  and  phe-
nomena, and  to  declare  her  now  a  monstrous  Fire,
now  a  wonderfully  contrived  Accident,  now  a
Duality  or  Trinity,  or  some  other  portentous
Force.  It  were  more  conceivable  she  proved
the  creation  of  an  incomprehensible  co-under-
standing of  infinitely  different  beings,  the
miraculous  link  with  the  world  of  souls,  the
point  of  union  and  point  of  contact  of  number-
less worlds."

"  It  may  be  hazardous,"  said  a  third,  "  but  the
more  ingeniously  woven  is  the  net  flung  out  by
the  bold  fisherman,  the  luckier  is  the  catch.
Only  encourage  a  man  to  pursue  his  road  as  far
as  possible,  and  let  everyone  be  welcome  who
weaves  a  new  phantasy  over  realities.  Thinkest
thou  not  'twill  be  from  the  well  worked  out
systems  that  the  future  Geographer  of  Nature
will  select  the  data  for  his  great  map  of  Nature  ?
He  will  compare  them,  and  the  comparison  will
first  inform  us  concerning  the  singular  country.


126  NOVALIS

But  the  cognition  of  Nature  will  differ  immensely
from  our  exposition  of  her.  The  interpreter
proper  will  perhaps  arrive  at  being  able  to
induce  several  natural  forces  to  a  simultaneous
production  of  more  beautiful  and  more  useful
phenomena,  he  will  improvise  on  Nature  as  on
some  great  instrument,  and  yet  he  will  not
understand  Nature.  This  is  the  gift  of  the
Historian  of  Nature,  of  the  Time  Seer,  who
entrusted  with  the  history  of  Nature,  and
acquainted  with  the  World,  heralds  the  trans-
cendent scene  of  Nature-history,  apprehending
and  prophesying  her  significance.

"  This  territory  is  still  unexplored,  a  Holy
Land.  Celestial  ambassadors  alone  have  let  a
few  syllables  of  this  sublime  science  fall,  and
it  is  only  surprising  that  the  prescient  spirits
have  neglected  these  premonitions,  and  have
degraded  Nature  to  the  level  of  a  uniform
machine  without  Past  or  Future.  Everything
divine  has  a  history,  and  shall  not  Nature,  the
only  Unity  with  which  man  may  compare
himself,  be,  just  as  well  as  man,  comprised  in  a
history,  or,  which  is  the  same  thing,  have  a
soul  ?  Nature  would  not  be  Nature  had  she  no
soul,  she  would  not  be  that  unique  counterpart
of  Humanity,  not  the  indispensable  Answer  to
that  mystic  Question,  or  the  Question  to  that
infinite  Answer."


THE  DISCIPLES  AT  SAIS     127

"  Only  the  poets  have  felt  what  Nature  can  be
to  man,"  began  a  lovely  youth,  "  and  one  may
well  say  that  in  them  Humanity  finds  its  most
complete  expression,  and  therefore  each  im-
pression is  transmitted  unsullied  in  all  its  endless
modifications,  towards  all  sides,  through  the
crystal  clearness  and  activity  of  their  spirits.
They  find  everything  in  Nature.  To  them
alone  her  soul  is  not  alien,  and  not  vainly
do  they  search  in  this  communion,  for  all  the
Beatitudes  of  the  Golden  Age.  For  them
Nature  has  all  the  variability  of  a  limitless
soul,  she  surprises  them  more  than  the  most
ready  and  clever  man  by  her  ingenious  turns
and  incidents,  by  her  meetings  (confluences)
and  her  deviations,  by  her  great  ideas  and
vagaries.  Such  are  the  inexhaustible  riches  of
her  fancy  that  no  one  seeks  her  companion-
ship in  vain.  She  beautifies  everything,  she
animates  and  confirms  everything,  and  if
occasionally  nothing  but  a  senseless  unmeaning
Machine  seems  to  govern  everything,  still  may
the  deep  seeing  eye  discern  a  wondrous  sym-
pathy with  human  hearts  in  Coincidences,  and
in  the  results  of  simple  fortuitous  Occurrences.
The  Wind  is  a  movement  of  the  air  which  may
be  the  effect  of  several  causes,  but  is  it  not
something  more  to  the  lonely  yearning  heart
when   it    soughs    overhead,    wafted    from   dear


128  NOVALIS

lands,  does  it  not  seem  to  transform  his  silent
pain  into  a  deep  melodious  sigh  of  Nature  ?
Does  not  the  tender  green  of  a  Spring  meadow
express  with  charming  fidelity  the  whole  flower-
decked  soul  of  the  young  lover,  and  is  the
exaltation  of  any  joyous  soul  steeped  in  golden
wine  more  precious  and  exciting  than  the
view  of  the  ripe  gleaming  cluster  of  grapes
that  half  conceals  itself  beneath  broad  leaves  ?
We  accuse  poets  of  exaggeration  ;  we  only
approve  of  their  unusual  language  when  we
can  enjoy  their  fancies  about  marvellous  Nature
without  deep  research.  They  see  and  hear
many  things  that  others  neither  see  nor  hear,
and  in  a  sweet  frenzy  dispose  of  and  make
free  with  the  Real  World  according  to  their
pleasure.  But  to  me  it  seems  the  poets  do  not
exaggerate  enough  by  half,  that  they  only
guess  darkly  at  the  magic  of  that  Speech,  and
only  play  with  Phantasy  as  a  child  plays  with
his  father's  divining-rod.  They  do  not  know
what  Forces  are  subject  to  them,  what  words
must  obey  them.  For  is  it  not  true  that  stones
and  forest  trees  obey  music,  and,  tamed  by  it,
are  docile  as  house  dogs  ?  Do  not  verily  the
loveliest  flowers  spring  up  around  the  beloved,
and  do  they  not  rejoice  to  engarland  her?
Does  not  the  sky  become  glad  for  her,  and  the
sea  more  tranquil  ?     Does  not  all  Nature,  even


THE  DISCIPLES  AT  SAIS     129

as  the  countenance  and  the  gestures,  the  pulse
and  the  colour  express  the  condition  of  that
superior  wonderful  Being  we  call  Man  ?  Does
not  the  rock  become  individual  when  I  address
it  ?  And  what  else  am  I  than  the  river  when
I  gaze  with  melancholy  in  its  waves,  and  my
thoughts  are  lost  in  its  course  ?  Only  a  serene
exuberant  spirit  can  understand  the  plant
world,  and  animals  are  only  to  be  known  by  a
merry  child  or  a  savage.  Whether  any  one  has
yet  understood  the  stones  or  the  stars  I  know
not,  but  such  an  one  must  certainly  have  been
a  gifted  being.  In  those  statues  which  remain
from  a  bygone  time  to  testify  to  the  beauty
of  man  so  profound  a  spirit  shines,  so
strange  an  understanding  of  the  stone  world,
that  the  contemplative  observer  seems  enclosed
in  a  contracting  stony  rind.  The  Sublime
petrifies,  and  therefore  we  ought  not  to  marvel
at  the  Sublime  in  Nature  and  at  its  effects,  or
be  ignorant  of  where  to  seek  it.  Might  not
Nature  have  turned  to  stone  before  the  glance
of  God  ?  Or  from  terror  at  the  advent  of
Man  ? "

He  who  had  just  spoken  was  plunged  in
meditation  during  this  discourse.  The  distant
mountains  were  dyed  in  the  after-glow,  and
evening  descended  over  the  landscape  with
sweet  trustfulness.     After  a  long  pause  he  was


i3o  NOVALIS

heard  to  say  :  "  To  understand  Nature  we  must
let  Nature  evolve  herself  to  the  fullest  in  us.
For  this  enterprise  we  must  make  up  our  mind
to  be  determined  solely  by  divine  aspirations
towards  beings  that  resemble  us,  and  to  dis-
tinguish their  essential  characteristics.  For
verily  all  Nature  is  only  comprehensible  as  the
instrument  and  medium  of  the  intelligence  of  a
reasonable  Being.  A  thoughtful  man  turns  to
the  primary  functions  of  his  being,  to  the
creative  speculation,  back  to  the  point  where
production  and  knowledge  exist  together  in  the
most  wonderful  state  of  flux,  to  that  generative
moment  of  peculiar  bliss,  of  inward  auto-con-
ception. If  he  be  absolutely  sunk  in  the  con-
templation of  this  original  phenomenon  there
spreads  out  before  him,  like  some  unlimited
pageant  of  rising  seasons  and  places,  a  history
of  Nature's  evolution,  and  each  point  that
establishes  itself  in  the  boundless  fluidity  will
be  a  new  revelation  to  him  of  the  Genius  of
Love,  a  new  volume  of  the  Thou  and  the  I.
The  punctilious  description  of  this  inner  world
history  is  the  true  theory  of  Nature.  Through
the  inter-coherence  of  his  own  world  of  thought
and  its  harmony  with  the  universe,  a  system  of
thought  arises  spontaneously  as  the  true  image
and  formula  of  the  Universe.  But  the  art  of
peaceful  Meditation,  of  generative  cosmic  specu-


THE  DISCIPLES  AT  SAIS     131

lation  is  difficult.  The  undertaking  is  furthered
by  incessant  reflection,  by  a  severe  austerity,
and  its  satisfaction  will  be  not  the  applause  of
contemporaries  who  shrink  from  fatigue,  but
only  the  joy  of  knowledge  and  growth,  an
inner  rhythm  with  the  Universe."

"  Yes,"  answered  the  second,  "  nothing  is  so
remarkable  as  the  great  simultaneity  of  Nature.
She  seems  to  be  present  in  her  fulness  through-
out. All  the  forces  of  Nature  are  active  in  the
flame  of  a  light ;  she  represents  and  transforms
herself  perpetually  everywhere.  She  drives
leaves,  flowers  and  fruits  together,  and  in  the
midst  of  Time  is  at  once  Past,  Present  and
Future.  And  who  knows  in  what  singular  sort
she  may  be  also  working  from  the  distance,  or
whether  our  system  of  Nature  be  only  a  sun  in
the  Universe,  linked  to  it  by  bonds  through
one  light,  one  attraction  and  one  influence,
which  things  will  presently  reveal  themselves
to  our  spirit,  out  of  which  we  shall  then  pour
the  spirit  of  the  Universe  over  this  very  Nature,
and  shall  participate  the  spirit  of  this  Nature
with  further  Nature  systems.  When  the
Thinker,  said  a  third,  treads  the  strenuous
path  as  Adept,  and  seeks  by  a  skilful  applica-
tion of  his  spiritual  activities  to  reduce  the
Sum  of  Things  to  a  simple  enigmatic  Figure,
one  might  say   '  Nature  dances,'  and  when   he


1 32  NOVALIS

describes  in  words  the  curves  of  her  movements
the  Lover  of  Nature  must  admire  this  audacious
undertaking,  and  rejoice  too  at  the  success  of
this  human  enterprise.  The  Adept  reasonably
esteems  action  highly.  His  existence  is  Action
and  Production  by  Knowledge  and  "Will,  and
his  Art  consists  in  applying  his  tools  to  every-
thing, in  representing  the  world  in  his  fashion.
Hence  the  principle  of  his  world  is  Action,  and
his  world  is  his  Art.  Here  again  Nature  is
manifest  in  a  new  splendour,  and  only  the
thoughtless  man  throws  aside  the  indecipherable
wonderful  chaotic  Words  with  scorn.  Thank-
fully the  Priest  lays  this  new  sublime  Geometry
on  the  altar  by  the  side  of  the  magnetic  needle
that  has  never  erred,  and  that  has  brought  back
numberless  ships  over  the  pathless  ocean  to  the
inhabited  shores  and  the  harbours  of  the  Father-
land. Beside  the  thinkers  there  are  yet  other
friends  to  Knowledge  who  do  not  succeed  in
bringing  forth  their  thoughts,  and  who,  though
without  vocation  for  this  Art,  become  beloved
pupils  of  Nature,  their  joy  being  found  in
learning,  not  in  teaching  ;  in  experience,  not  in
action ;  in  receiving,  not  in  giving.  Some  are
diligent  and  confident  of  the  omnipresence  and
intimate  interrelationship  of  Nature,  and  con-
vinced in  advance  of  the  defectiveness  and  per-
sistence   of    the    individual    phenomena,    select


THE  DISCIPLES  AT  SAIS     133

some  one  phenomenon  with  care,  and  fix  fast
its  principle  under  its  thousand  changing  forms
with  steady  gaze ;  and  holding  to  this  clue  they
explore  every  cranny  of  the  secret  laboratory  in
order  to  trace  a  complete  plan  of  its  labyrinthine
passages.  When  they  have  done  with  this
fatiguing  work,  all  unnoticed  a  loftier  spirit
possesses  them,  and  it  is  easy  to  them  to  speak
of  the  Chart  that  lies  before  them,  and  to  point
out  the  path  to  every  inquirer.  Invaluable
utility  hallows  their  arduous  work,  and  the
grand  plan  of  their  Chart  will  accord  with  the
System  of  the  Thinker  in  a  quite  surprising
manner ;  and  to  their  consolation  they  will  have
led  him  to  the  living  Demonstration  of  his
abstract  Theories.  Like  children,  the  idlest
among  them  await  the  benevolent  communication
of  the  science  of  Nature  which  is  necessary  to
them  from  some  nobler  Being  who  is  fervently
adored  by  them.  In  this  so  short  life  they  had
rather  not  devote  time  and  attention  to  business
cut  off  from  the  service  of  Love.  By  pious
behaviour  they  but  seek  to  win  Love,  to  share
Love  untroubled  by  the  great  display  of  Forces,
tranquilly  to  surrender  their  destinies  to  this
Realm  of  Power  because  they  are  filled  with
the  inward  conviction  of  their  inseparability
from  the  Beloved  Being,  and  Nature  only
moves  them  as  Her  image  and  Her  possession.


i34  NOVALIS

Why  do  their  happy  souls  seek  to  know  ?
They  have  chosen  the  better  part,  and  only
glow  like  pure  flames  of  Love  in  this  ter-
restrial world  on  the  pinnacles  of  Temples
and  on  the  masts  of  the  wandering  ships,
witnessing  to  the  overflowing  celestial  Fire.
Often,  in  sacred  hours,  these  loving  children
learn  beautiful  things  from  out  the  secrets
of  Nature,  and  in  their  ignorant  simplicity
are  bold  with  her.  The  investigator  follows
in  their  footsteps  in  order  to  collect  every
bauble  which  they  in  their  innocence  and  joy
have  let  drop.  Their  love  graces  the  sym-
pathising Poet  who  seeks  to  propagate  in  other
times  and  other  lands  this  very  Love,  this  Seed
from  the  Golden  Altar."  "  Oh  !  whose  heart  is
not  stirred  with  tumultuous  joy  when  the  inti-
mate Life  of  Nature  enters  into  his  soul  in  all
its  plenitude,"  cried  a  youth  with  flashing  eyes,
"  when  that  mighty  sentiment  for  which  language
has  no  other  name  than  Love  is  diffused  in  him,
like  some  powerful  all-dissolving  vapour,  when
he,  shivering  with  sweet  terror,  sinks  into  the
dusky,  enticing  bosom  of  Nature,  when  the
meagre  personality  loses  itself  in  the  over-
powering waves  of  passion,  and  nothing  re-
mains but  the  focal  point  of  the  incommensurable
generative  Force,  an  engulphing  vortex  in  the
ocean  ?      What    is    this    universally    emergent


THE  DISCIPLES  AT  SAIS     135

flame  ?  A  mystic  embrace  whose  sweet  fruit
sheds  itself  in  precious  drops  as  dew.  Water,
that  first-born  child  of  aerial  Fusion,  cannot
deny  his  voluptuous  origin,  and  with  celestial
dominance  shows  himself  the  element  of  Love's
union  on  the  earth.  Not  without  truth  have
the  Ancient  Sages  sought  the  origin  of  things
in  Water ;  and,  in  truth,  they  have  spoken  of  a
more  imperishable  Water  than  seas  and  springs.
In  that  is  revealed  the  original  Flux,  such  as
is  manifest  in  fused  metals,  and  therefore  men
should  ever  honour  it  as  divine.  How  few  as
yet  have  steeped  themselves  in  the  secrets  of
Fluidity,  and  in  the  intoxicated  soul  of  many
this  anticipation  of  highest  bliss  and  life  has
never  arisen.  The  Soul  of  the  world  reveals
itself  in  this  mighty  yearning  toward  Liquefac-
tion. The  drunken  feel  only  too  well  this
supernatural  rapture  of  Fluidity,  and  finally  all
our  pleasant  sensations  are  different  liquefactions,
movements  of  this  original  fluid  in  us.  Sleep
itself  is  nothing  but  the  Flowing  of  the  invisible
Sea,  and  awakening  but  the  Turn  of  the  Tide.
How  many  men  stand  by  the  brink  of  the  in-
toxicating floods  and  do  not  hear  the  lullaby
of  the  maternal  waters,  and  do  not  enjoy  the
entrancing  play  of  their  infinite  waves.  In  the
Golden  Age  we  lived  like  these  waves,  in  multi-
coloured clouds,  in  shimmering  seas,  and  living


136  NOVALIS

waters  of  earth  loved  and  revealed  themselves
to  the  races  of  mankind  in  eternal  play.  They
were  visited  by  the  Children  of  Heaven,  and
it  was  only  in  that  great  catastrophe  called  by
Holy  Writ  the  Flood  that  this  flourishing  world
was  submerged.  A  hostile  Being  cast  down
the  Earth,  and  but  a  few  men  remained  floating
on  the  summits  of  the  mountains  of  an  alien
world.  How  strange  that  just  the  most  sacred
and  most  adorable  phenomena  of  Nature  are  in
the  hands  of  such  moribund  men  as  the  chemists
seem  to  be  !  they  who  puissantly  awaken  the
generative  consciousness  of  Nature,  which  should
be  only  the  secret  of  Lovers,  mysteries  of  the
higher  Humanity.  These  things  are  thought-
lessly and  shamelessly  provoked  by  coarse
natures,  who  will  never  know  what  marvels
surround  their  lens.  Only  Poets  should  com-
mune with  fluidity,  and  only  ardent  youth  shall
tell  of  it.  Laboratories  would  become  Temples,
and  Mankind  would  honour  and  celebrate  their
flames  and  their  liquids  with  a  new  love.
How  happy,  then,  would  those  cities  esteem
themselves  which  are  watered  by  the  sea  or  by
a  great  river  !  And  each  spring  would  become
again  the  commonwealth  of  Love  and  the  abode
of  learned  and  spiritual  men.  It  is  because  of
this  nothing  so  entices  children  as  fire  and
water ;    every    stream    promises    to   lead    them


THE  DISCIPLES  AT  SAIS     137

to  the  iridescent  horizon,  to  lovelier  regions.
It  is  not  only  a  reflection  of  Heaven  that  lies
in  the  water,  it  is  a  tender  befriending,  a  sym-
bol of  neighbourliness  ;  and  if  the  unappeased
desire  strives  after  the  illimitable  heights,  then
Love  content  sinks  to  the  bottomless  deep.
But  it  is  vain  to  attempt  to  teach  and  preach
Nature.  One  born  blind  does  not  learn  to  see
though  we  tell  him  for  ever  about  colours,  lights,
and  distant  forms.  Just  so  no  one  will  under-
stand Nature  who  has  not  the  necessary  organ,
the  inward  instrument,  the  specific  creating
instrument,  no  one  who  does  not  as  if  spon-
taneously recognise  and  distinguish  Nature  every-
where in  all  things,  nor  one  who  does  not  with
an  inherent  lust  of  Creation  mingle  himself  by
means  of  Sensation  in  manifold  relationship  with
all  bodies,  and  feel  his  way  into  them  simul-
taneously. Whosoever  has  a  proper  and  prac-
tised sense  of  Nature  enjoys  Nature,  while
as  he  studies  her  and  rejoices  in  her  infinite
complexity,  in  the  inexhaustibility  of  her
delights,  desires  that  we  trouble  him  not
with  unnecessary  words.  Rather  it  seems  to
him  Nature  cannot  be  treated  with  too  much
secrecy,  cannot  be  too  tenderly  spoken  of,
cannot  be  observed  too  calmly  or  too  atten-
tively. With  her  he  feels  as  in  the  bosom  of
a  chaste  bride,  and  even  such  an  one  he  trusts


138  NOVALIS

only  in  the  sweetest  most  confidential  moments
with  the  knowledge  he  has  attained.  Happy
I  esteem  this  Son,  this  Favourite  of  Nature,
to  whom  she  permits  a  vision  of  herself  in  her
Duality  as  an  engendering  and  a  conceiving
Force,  and  in  her  Unity  as  an  infinite  everlast-
ing Hymen.  His  life  will  be  the  fulness  of  all
joys,  a  chain  of  well-being,  and  his  religion  will
be  the  one  real  Naturalism."

During  this  conversation  the  Master  and  his
Disciples  had  approached  the  company.  The
travellers  stood  up  and  greeted  him  respectfully.
A  refreshing  coolness  was  exhaled  from  the
dark  shrubberies  over  the  terrace  and  stairway.
The  Master  commanded  a  rare  glowing  Stone
should  be  brought,  the  one  that  is  called  car-
buncle, and  a  potent  ruddy  light  streamed  over
the  different  faces  and  costumes.  Soon  a  friendly
sympathy  was  established  among  them.  While
a  distant  music  sounded,  the  strangers  recounted
the  remarkable  reminiscences  of  their  wide
travels,  and  a  cool  flame  from  crystal  vessels
flowed  into  the  mouths  of  the  speakers.  They
had  set  out  full  of  yearning  and  curiosity  to
seek  traces  of  the  bygone  antique  peoples  of
whom  existing  men  seem  but  the  degenerate
and  brutalised  descendants,  and  whose  high
civilisation  we  have  to  thank  for  the  most
momentous   and   indispensable    knowledge    and


THE  DISCIPLES  AT  SAIS     139

instruments.  Especially  had  the  sacred  tongue
attracted  them,  which  was  once  the  resplendent
link  between  the  Royal  Men  and  the  Supernatural
Regions  and  their  inhabitants,  and  of  which  some
few  Words  had  remained,  according  to  the
report  of  many  legends  in  the  possession  of
some  happy  sages  among  our  ancestors.  Its
enunciation  was  a  miraculous  chant  whose
sounds  penetrated  deep  into  the  core  of  each
Nature  and  analysed  it.  Each  of  its  names
seems  the  word  of  deliverance  for  the  Soul  of
each  natural  Body.  These  vibrations  evoked
with  generative  force  images  of  world  pheno-
mena, and  one  could  say  of  them  with  truth
that  the  life  of  the  Universe  was  an  eternal
thousand-tongued  discourse.  For  in  these  words
all  energies,  all  species  of  Activity,  seemed  to
be  united  most  incomprehensibly.  To  search
for  fragments  of  this  language,  or  at  least  for
some  information  concerning  it  had  been  the
main  object  of  their  journey,  and  the  call  of
Antiquity  had  led  them  to  Sais.  Here  they
hoped  to  obtain  important  information  from  the
learned  Guardians  of  the  Temple  archives,  and
perhaps  to  find  an  elucidation  in  the  large
collections  of  every  kind.  They  begged  per-
mission of  the  Master  to  sleep  one  night  in  the
Temple,  and  to  attend  his  lectures  for  a  few
days.     They  were  accorded  what  they  asked,


i4o  NOVALIS

and  they  rejoiced  inwardly  to  see  how  the
Master  accompanied  their  stories  with  many
comments  drawn  from  the  treasures  of  his  ex-
perience, and  how  he  unfolded  to  them  a  wealth
of  instructive  and  agreeable  anecdote  and  de-
scription. He  spoke  at  last  of  the  business  of
his  age  in  awakening  the  different  senses  of
Nature  in  youthful  minds,  of  practising  and
sharpening  them,  and  of  joining  them  to  other
aptitudes  so  as  to  bring  forth  flowers  and  fruit.
To  be  Herald  of  Nature  is  a  beautiful  and
holy  Mission,  said  the  Master.  But  it  is  not
enough  to  possess  the  totality  and  continuity
of  information,  not  enough  the  gift  of  knitting
this  information  easily  and  clearly  to  things
already  known  and  experienced,  or  to  inter-
change peculiar-sounding  words  with  commonly-
used  expressions,  not  enough  the  agility  of  a
rich  imagination  to  arrange  the  phenomena  of
Nature  in  easily  intelligible  and  strikingly
illuminated  pictures  that  either  by  the  charm  of
composition  or  the  riches  of  their  contents  in-
vigorate and  satisfy  the  senses  or  ravish  the
spirit  by  their  profound  significance.  None  of
these  things  are  the  true  requisites  of  a  Herald
of  Nature.  For  those  for  whom  there  is  some-
thing else  to  do  than  to  associate  with  Nature
these  things  are  perhaps  enough,  but  whoso
detects  in  himself  an  inward  yearning  towards


THE  DISCIPLES  AT  SAIS     141

Nature,  whoso  seeks  for  all  satisfaction  in  her,
and  is  as  it  were  a  sentient  instrument  of  her
secret  activities,  he  will  only  recognise  as  Master
and  as  Confidant  of  Nature  him  who  speaks  of
her  with  gravity  and  faith,  whose  speech  has  the
marvellous,  inimitable  impressiveness  and  in-
dividuality that  announces  true  gospel,  true
inspiration.  The  favourable  original  disposi-
tions of  such  a  natural  intelligence  must  be
fostered  with  untiring  zeal  from  earliest  days
by  silence  and  solitude  because  much  talking  is
incompatible  with  the  fixed  attention  that  such
an  one  must  exercise ;  it  must  also  be  built  up
and  strengthened  by  a  simple  and  discreet  life
and  unwearying  patience.  It  is  impossible  to
predetermine  the  length  of  time  in  which  her
secrets  are  communicated.  Some  lucky  ones
succeed  in  obtaining  them  early,  others  only  at
an  advanced  age.  A  true  seeker  never  becomes
old,  every  Eternal  Quest  is  outside  the  bonds  of
Life,  and  the  more  the  outer  husk  withers,  the
clearer,  the  brighter,  the  more  potently  glows
the  kernel.  And  this  gift  does  not  depend
upon  outward  beauty  or  strength  or  insight,  or
any  other  human  prerogative.  In  all  conditions,
among  all  ages  and  races,  in  every  epoch,  under
all  latitudes,  there  have  been  men  whom  Nature
has  chosen  as  her  favourites,  and  who  have  been
gladdened  by  an  inner  receptivity.     Often  these


1 42  NOVALIS

men  have  seemed  more  artless  and  unskilful
than  others,  and  remain  all  their  lives  in  the
obscurity  of  the  great  multitude.  It  should
be  regarded  as  a  rare  occurrence  to  find  a  true
understanding  of  Nature  united  to  great  elo-
quence, prudence  and  a  splendid  bearing,  for
it  usually  accompanies  or  produces  a  simple
speech,  wisdom  and  an  unpretentious  life.
In  the  workshop  of  the  artist  and  the  artizan,
and  wherever  man  is  in  complex  relations
and  in  strife  with  Nature,  as  in  agriculture,  in
navigation,  in  cattle-breeding,  in  mining  and
in  many  other  industries,  the  development  of
this  sense  seems  to  take  place  most  easily  and
often.  If  all  art  consists  in  acquaintance  with
the  means  of  attaining  a  desired  goal,  of  pro-
ducing a  predetermined  effect  or  phenomenon,
in  the  ability  to  choose  and  employ  these  means,
then,  those  who  feel  the  inward  call  to  make
the  understanding  of  Nature  shared  by  a  greater
number  of  men,  and  to  develop  and  cultivate
those  aptitudes  assiduously  in  men,  must  first
carefully  regard  the  natural  occasions  of  this
development,  and  seek  to  learn  the  fundamental
principles  of  this  art  of  Nature.  With  the  help
of  this  acquired  insight  a  system  for  the  em-
ployment of  these  means  will  be  formed  on
experiment,  comparison  and  analysis  for  each
several  individual   who  will  familiarise  himself


THE  DISCIPLES  AT  SAIS     143

with  this  system  until  it  is  like  a  second  nature
to  him,  and  then  he  will  begin  with  enthusiasm
the  business  that  will  recompense  him.  Only
such  an  one  may  truly  be  called  a  Master  of
Nature,  for  any  other  mere  naturalist  will  only
awaken  the  sense  of  Nature  fortuitously  and
sympathetically  as  being  himself  a  manifestation
of  Nature.


FLOWER  POLLEN

A  LL  ashes  are  flower  pollen — Heaven  is  the
calyx.

Friends,  the  soil  is  poor,  we  must  sow  potent
seeds  in  order  that  we  may  reap  mighty  har-
vests.

We  seek  everywhere  the  Unconditioned  and
always  find  the  Conditioned.

Expression  by  means  of  sounds  and  strokes
is  a  wonderful  abstraction.  Three  letters  ex-
press God  to  me — a  few  strokes  a  thousand
things.  How  easy  becomes  the  administration
of  the  Universe,  how  intelligible  the  concen-
tricity of  the  Spirit- World.  Grammar  is  the
dynamic  of  the  Spirit-Kingdom.  A  word  of
command  moves  Armies — the  word  Freedom —
Nations.

Apprentice  years  are  for  the  poetic  youth —
academic  years  for  the  philosophic.  An  Academy
should  be  an  entirely  philosophic  Institution
with  but  one  Faculty ;  the  whole  establishment
organised  for  the  incitement  and  the  purposed


FLOWER  POLLEN  145

exercise  of  the  Thinking  Powers.  Apprentice-
years  in  a  transcendent  sense  are  an  apprentice-
ship to  the  Art  of  Life.  By  systematic  and
regulated  experiment  we  learn  to  know  its
fundamental  laws,  and  attain  proficiency  in
conducting  Life  in  accordance  with  them.

The  Soul  is  in  command  of  an  eternal  self-
consciousness.

Comprehend  ourselves  wholly  we  never  shall,
but  we  shall  and  will  be  able  to  do  far  more
than  comprehend  ourselves.

The  difference  between  Error  and  Truth  lies
in  their  life-functions.  Error  lives  on  Truth,
Truth  subsists  on  herself.  We  annul  Error
as  we  annul  Disease,  and  Error  is  therefore
nothing  but  logical  extinction.

Our  collective  powers  of  apprehension  re-
semble the  eye.  The  objects  must  emerge
from  contrasting  media  in  order  to  be  rightly
visible  to  the  pupil.

Experience  is  the  test  of  the  Rational  and
vice  versa.  The  insufficiency  in  application  of
bare  Theory,  upon  which  the  practical  man
often  comments,  is  found  reciprocated  in  the
rationalist  application  of  bare  Experience,  and


146  NOVALIS

is  perceived  clearly  enough  by  the  genuine
philosopher  though  with  inward  conviction  of
the  necessity  of  this  result.  The  practical
man,  therefore,  wholly  rejects  bare  Theory,
without  suspecting  how  problematic  must  be
the  answer  to  the  question — whether  Theory
exists  for  the  sake  of  Application,  or  Application
for  the  sake  of  Theory.

Death  is  a  self-conquest  that  like  all  over-
coming of  self  secures  a  new  and  easier
existence.

Do  we  not  therefore  need  so  much  strength
and  endeavour  for  the  Habitual  and  the  Com-
mon, because  to  ordinary  men  nothing  is  more
uncommon  or  unhabitual  than  miserable  Habit.
The  highest  is  the  most  comprehensible,  the
nearest  the  most  indispensable.

Only  through  lack  of  acquaintance  with  our-
selves, exile  from  ourselves,  does  incompre-
hensibility arise  in  us  which  itself  is  incompre-
hensible. Miracles  alternate  with  the  workings
of  Natural  Law,  they  mutually  limit  each  other
and  together  constitute  a  whole  ;  they  are  united
when  they  mutually  negate  each  other.  No
miracle  without  a  natural  occurrence  and  vice
versa.

Nature  is  the  enemy  of  eternal   possessions.


FLOWER  POLLEN  147

She  destroys  according  to  fixed  laws  all  signs
of  property,  and  erases  all  vestiges  of  forma-
tion. The  Earth  belongs  to  all  Races :  each
has  a  claim  to  all.  The  earlier  Races  should
not  attribute  advantage  to  the  accident  of  their
primogeniture.  The  rights  of  property  expire
at  certain  times.  Amelioration  and  Deteriora-
tion are  among  the  immutable  conditions.  But
if  the  body  be  a  property  through  which  alone
I  can  win  the  right  of  being  an  active  citizen  of
earth,  then  I  cannot  through  the  forfeiture  of
this  property  be  myself  the  loser.  I  lose
nothing  but  my  place  in  this  School  for  Princes
and  enter  into  a  Higher  Corporation,  whither
all  my  beloved  fellow-pupils  must  follow  me.

Life  is  the  beginning  of  Death.  Life  exists
for  the  sake  of  Death.  Death  is  at  once  the
End  and  the  Beginning,  at  the  same  time
a  severance  and  a  more  intimate  self-  union.
Through  Death  the  Grand  Reduction  will  be
accomplished.

We  are  near  to  waking  when  we  dream
that  we  dream.

Phantasy  sets  the  Future  World  either  in  the
heights  or  in  the  depths  or  in  metempsychosis.
We  dream  of  journeys  through  the  Universe ;


148  NOVALIS

is  the  Universe  then  not  within  us  ?  We  do
not  know  the  depths  of  our  own  souls — the
secret  path  leads  inwards.  Within  us  or  no-
where lies  Eternity  and  its  worlds,  the  Past  and
Future.  The  external  world  is  the  world  of
shadows ;  it  projects  its  shadows  into  the  king-
dom of  light.  Now  indeed  it  seems  to  us  dark,
lonely  and  formless.  But  how  different  will  it
seem  when  the  darkness  is  over-past,  and  the
body  of  shadows  is  withdrawn.  We  shall  en-
joy more  than  ever  for  our  spirit  has  hungered.

Darwin  makes  the  remark  that  we  are  less
blinded  by  light  in  awaking  if  we  have  been
dreaming  of  visible  objects.  Happy  are  they
who,  while  here,  have  dreamed  of  seeing.
They  will  the  sooner  be  able  to  endure  the
glories  of  that  World.

How  can  a  man  understand  anything  of  which
he  has  not  the  germ  within  him  ?  What  I  am
to  understand  must  develop  itself  organically
within  me,  and  what  I  appear  to  learn  is  merely
a  nourishing,  an  incitement  of  the  organism.

The  throne  of  the  Soul  is  there,  where
interior  and  exterior  worlds  fuse.  There  is
fusion  at  every  point  at  which  they  inter-
penetrate.


FLOWER  POLLEN  149

The  life  of  a  truly  Apostolic  Man  must  be
throughout  symbolic.  With  this  explanation
might  not  each  death  be  an  expiatory  death,
more  or  less  be  it  understood ;  and  might  not
several  most  remarkable  conclusions  be  drawn
from  this  ?

Who  searches,  doubts.  Genius  declares
boldly  and  securely  what  it  sees  happening
within  itself,  because  it  is  not  comprehended
in  its  representation  nor  its  representation  com-
prehended in  it,  but  the  observation  and  the
thing  observed  agree  together  and  seem  to
unite  themselves  freely  in  one  effect.

When  we  speak  of  the  exterior  world,
when  we  picture  real  objects  then  we  act
like  the  Genius.

Genius  then  is  the  power  of  treating  imagined
objects  as  real  and  of  treating  the  real  as  though
they  were  imagined.  The  talent  to  represent,
accurately  to  observe,  judiciously  to  describe  the
observation,  is  thus  distinct  from  Genius.  With-
out this  talent  we  only  see  the  half,  and  are  but
half  of  genius  :  we  may  have  traits  of  genius
which  in  default  of  such  talent  may  never  come
to  development.

Generally  speaking  without  Genius  we  should
not  exist  at  all,  Genius  is  necessary  for  every-


150  NOVALIS

thing,  but  what  we  usually  term  genius  is  the
genius  of  Genius.

The  most  absolute  prejudice  is  that  which
denies  to  a  man  the  power  of  being  beside  him-
self with  the  simultaneous  consciousness  of  being
in  his  senses.  Every  instant  man  has  the  power
of  being  a  supernatural  being.  Without  this
power  he  were  no  citizen  of  the  World,  but
only  an  animal.  Recollection,  the  Finding  of
Our  Selves,  is  in  this  condition  certainly  very
difficult,  because  it  is  so  incessantly  and  of
necessity  bound  up  with  the  instability  of  our
other  conditions.  The  more  we  endeavour  to
realise  this  condition  the  more  vital,  powerful
and  constraining  is  the  conviction  thence  arising
— the  faith  in  the  real  revelations  of  Spirit.  It
is  no  seeing,  hearing,  feeling ;  it  is  composed  of
all  three  •,  it  is  more  than  all  three — an  intuition
of  indisputable  certainty,  an  insight  into  my
truest  and  most  individual  life.  Thoughts  turn
themselves  into  laws,  wishes  into  fulfilment.
To  the  feeble  the  reality  of  this  moment  is  an
article  of  faith.

The  phenomenon  will  be  specially  striking  in
the  appearance  of  many  human  forms  and  faces,
pre-eminently  in  the  glance  of  some  eyes,  in
some  miens,  in  some  movements,  at  the  learning
of    certain    words,    at    the    reading    of   certain


FLOWER  POLLEN  151

phrases,  in  certain  views  on  Life,  the  World
and  Fate.  Very  many  chances,  some  natural
occurrences,  particular  times  in  days  and  years
give  us  such  experiences.  Certain  moods  are
particularly  favourable  to  such  revelations.
Most  are  momentary,  a  few  linger,  fewer  still
abide.  There  is  much  difference  in  this  respect
between  men.  One  has  more  aptitude  than
another  for  revelation.  One  has  more  feeling,
another  more  understanding  for  it.  The  latter
will  ever  dwell  in  its  tender  light,  while  the
former  experiences  changes  and  has  but  in-
constant though  brighter  and  more  varied
illuminations.  This  power  is  at  the  same  time
provocative  of  disease,  for  it  implies  either  an
overflow  of  feeling  and  lack  of  understanding,
or  an  overflow  of  understanding  and  lack  of
feeling.

When  a  man  can  do  no  more,  he  saves  him-
self with  a  strong  word  or  a  strong  action — a
quick  resolve.

Shame  is  assuredly  a  feeling  of  profanation.
Friendship,  Love  and  Piety  should  be  treated
with  reticence.  We  should  only  speak  of  them
in  rare  confidential  moments,  keeping  silence  in
mutual  understanding.  Much  is  too  tender  to
be  thought,  much  more  cannot  be  uttered.


152  NOVALIS

Self  Alienation  is  the  source  of  all  degrada-
tion, as  well  as  being  the  foundation  of  all  true
elevation.  The  first  step  is  a  gaze  inwards,  an
abstract  contemplation  of  our  self.  Whoso
remains  at  this  stage  only  guesses  half.  The
second  step  must  be  an  effective  gaze  outward
— a  spontaneous  sustained  observation  of  the
external  world.

The  highest  exercise  of  culture  is  to  strengthen
the  transcendental  self  to  enable  it  to  be  the
Ego  of  its  Ego.

How  little  surprising  is  the  lack  of  perfect
feeling  for  and  understanding  of  others  !  With-
out a  perfected  self-understanding  we  shall  never
learn  to  understand  others  truly.

Only  then  can  I  show  that  I  have  understood
a  writer  when  I  can  act  in  his  spirit  and  without
detracting  from  his  individuality  translate  and
variedly  transpose  him.

Humour  is  a  capriciously  assumed  pose.  Its
caprice  is  its  piquancy.  Humour  is  the  result
of  the  free  fusion  of  the  Conditioned  and  Un-
conditioned. Through  humour  the  Conditioned,
properly  speaking,  becomes  interesting  to  all,
and  receives  objective  value.  Where  fancy  and
judgment   meet  wit   arises  ;   where  reason  and


FLOWER  POLLEN  153

caprice  mate,  humour.  Persiflage  pertains  to
humour,  but  is  a  degree  meaner;  it  is  not  truly
artistic,  and  is  much  more  limited.

In  serene  souls  there  is  no  wit.  Wit  indicates
a  disturbed  equilibrium.  It  is  the  result  of
perturbation,  and  at  the  same  time  the  means
of  readjustment.  Passion  has  the  finest  wit;
genuine  social  wit  is  not  explosive.  There  is  a
species  that  is  only  the  magic  colour-play  of
higher  spheres.  The  condition  of  the  dissolu-
tion of  all  relations,  Despair  or  Spiritual  Death
is  witty  in  the  most  terrific  way.

The  insignificant,  the  common,  the  crude,  the
hideous,  the  ill-bred  is  rendered  acceptable  by
wit  alone.  They  exist  for  the  sake  of  wit.
They  are  the  destined  butts  of  wit.

That  is  spiritual  in  which  the  spirit  inces-
santly expands,  or  at  least  often  reappears  in
new  and  altered  forms.  Not  only  once  in  the
Beginning,  as  it  is  according  to  so  many  philo-
sophic systems.

We  are  on  a  mission.  We  are  called  for  the
fashioning  of  the  earth.  If  a  spirit  appeared  to
us  we  should  at  once  take  possession  of  our
own  spirituality.  We  should  be  inspired  both
through  ourselves  and  the  spirit.  Without
Inspiration  there  is  no  Revelation  of  Spirit.


154  NOVALIS

Inspiration  is  Revelation  and  counter  Revela-
tion, at  the  same  time  Appropriation  and  Par-
ticipation.

Man  lives  and  labours  only  in  the  idea — in
the  memory  of  his  There-Being ;  there  are  no
other  means  to  hand  for  spiritual  activity.
Therefore  it  is  a  duty  to  think  of  the  dead ;  it
is  the  only  way  to  remain  in  fellowship  with
them.  God  does  not  work  in  us  in  any  other
way  than  by  Faith.

Interest  is  a  participation  in  the  sufferings  and
activity  of  a  being.  A  thing  interests  me  when
it  excites  me  to  participation.  No  interest  is
more  interesting  than  that  which  a  man  takes  in
himself,  just  as  the  foundation  of  a  remarkable
friendship  and  love  is  a  participation  to  the
which  a  man  entices  me  who  is  occupied  with
himself,  and  who  as  it  were  invites  me  by  his
communication  to  take  part  in  his  concerns.

Who  can  have  discovered  wit  ?  Each  attri-
bute realised,  each  manipulation  of  our  spirit  is
in  the  most  exact  sense  a  newly-discovered
world.

What  Schlegel  so  acutely  characterises  as
Irony  is  according  to  my  thinking  nothing  more
than  the  effect,  the  quality  of  genuine  presence
of  mind,  the  true  presence  of  the  Spirit.

The  Spirit  ever  appears  in   stranger,  loftier


FLOWER  POLLEN  155

forms.  Schlegel's  Irony  seems  to  me  true
humour.  Many  names  are  advantageous  to  an
idea,  only  here  and  there  the  spirit  moves.  When
will  the  spirit  move  everywhere  ?  When  will
mankind  as  a  mass  begin  to  be  conscious  of  itself  ?

Man  stands  in  Truth.  If  he  value  Truth,  he
values  himself.  Whoever  betrays  Truth  betrays
himself.  There  is  no  question  here  of  lying,
but  of  acting  against  conviction.

We  can  never  hear  enough  and  speak  enough
of  a  congenial  subject,  we  rejoice  over  each  new,
appropriate,  qualifying  word.  It  is  not  our  fault
that  it  does  not  become  the  Subject  of  Subjects.

We  hold  on  to  a  lifeless  thing  because  of  its
association,  its  form.  We  love  the  material
thing  in  so  far  as  it  belongs  to  a  beloved  person
or  bears  his  traces  or  has  any  likeness  to  him.

To  withdraw  into  oneself  means  with  us  to
abstract  oneself  from  the  outer  world.  Among
spirits  earthly  life  is  analogically  called  an  inward
contemplation,  a  retreat  into  self,  an  immanent
working.  Earthly  life  then  springs  from  an
original  reflection,  a  primal  withdrawing  self-
recollection  which  is  as  free  as  our  reflection.
Inversely,  spiritual  life  in  this  world  arises  from
a  piercing  of  this  primal  reflection.  The  spirit
unshrouds  itself  once  more,  the  spirit  goes  out
to  itself  once  more,  partly  cancels  this  reflection,


156  NOVALIS

and  in  this  moment  says  for  the  first  time  "  I."
One  sees  here  how  relative  is  the  Out-going  and
In-going — what  we  call  In-going  is  really  Out-
going ;  a  re-adoption  of  the  initial  form.

Is  there  nothing  to  be  said  for  the  wayfaring
man,  so  much  abused  of  late  ?  Does  not  most
power  belong  to  the  persistent  mediocrity,  and
must  a  man  be  more  than  one  of  the  "  popolo  "  ?

Where  a  true  inclination  to  reflect  prevails —
not  merely  to  think  this  or  that  thought — there
also  is  the  power  of  progression.  So  many
learned  men  do  not  possess  the  inclination ;  they
have  learnt  to  deduct  and  to  reason  as  a  cobbler
learns  shoe  making,  without  guessing  the  Idea  or
making  an  effort  tofind  the  foundation  of  thought.

Salvation,  moreover,  lies  on  no  other  road.
In  some  this  inclination  only  lasts  a  short  while  ;
it  waxes,  and  takes  flight,  often  with  the  years,
often  in  the  founding  of  a  system  which  was
only  sought  as  exemption  from  the  fatigue  of
meditation.

Error  and  prejudice  are  burdens,  indirectly
stimulating  to  a  self-activity  inured  to  every
burden,  but  for  the  weak  a  positively  enervating
medium.

A  people  is  an  idea.  We  must  become  a
people.  A  perfect  man  is  a  little  people.
True  popularity  is  the  highest  aim  of  man.


FLOWER  POLLEN  157

Each  stage  of  culture  begins  with  childhood.
That  is  why  the  most  cultured  earthly  man  is
so  like  a  child.

The  transcendental  point  of  view  of  this  life
awaits  us.  Then  we  shall  be  for  the  first  time
really  interested.

Each  beloved  object  is  the  centre  of  a
Paradise.

The  thing  of  interest  is  what  moves  us  to
activity,  not  of  our  own  will,  but  only  as  a
means,  a  term.  The  Classic  does  not  move  me
at  all  j  it  affects  me  only  indirectly  through
myself.  It  is  not  classical  for  me  unless  I
admit  it  to  be  so,  and  would  not  affect  me  if
I  did  not  incite  myself  determinately  to  be
affected  ;  if  I  did  not  strip  away  a  fragment  of
myself  and  let  this  germ  develop  itself  in  a
particular  way  before  my  eyes ;  a  develop-
ment that  often  needs  but  a  moment,  and
which  coincides  with  the  conscious  apprehen-
sion of  the  object,  so  that  I  see  an  object
before  me  in  which  the  common  object  and  the
ideal  interpenetrated  represent  one  marvellous
individual.

To  supply  formulae  for  individual  Arts,  by
means  of  which  they  may  be  understood  in
their  most  intimate  sense,  is  the  business  of  an


158  NOVALIS

art  critic,  whose  labour  prepares  the  way  for  the
History  of  Art.

The  more  confused  a  man  is  (one  calls  the
confused  blockheads)  the  more  he  can  make  of
himself  through  industrious  self-study :  con-
trariwise, trained  heads  must  endeavour  to
become  truly  learned  men,  profound  Encyclo-
paedists. The  confused  have  to  fight  in
the  beginning  with  mighty  hindrances ;  they
penetrate  slowly,  they  learn  to  work  with
difficulty,  but  then  they  become  masters  and
teachers  for  ever.  The  trained  Mind  enters
quickly  but  also  exits  quickly.  It  soon
reaches  the  second  stage,  but  there  it  generally
remains ;  to  it  the  last  steps  are  difficult,  and
seldom  can  it  persuade  itself  at  any  stage
of  mastery  to  put  itself  again  in  the  attitude
of  a  beginner.  Confusedness  indicates  super-
fluity of  strength  and  powers,  but  lack  the
sense  of  proportion.  Precision — a  true  sense  of
proportion,  but  scanty  strength  and  power.
That  is  why  the  confused  man  is  so  perfectable
compared  with  the  trained  man  who  so  soon
finishes  as  a  Pedagogue.

Order  and  Precision  alone  do  not  make
lucidity.  Through  self  manipulation  the  con-
fused man  arrives  at  a  heavenly  transparency,
to  a  self  illumination  such  as  the  trained  seldom


FLOWER  POLLEN  159

attains.  True  genius  invites  these  extremes.
It  shares  the  facility  of  the  last  and  the  feelings
of  the  first.

That  which  is  individual  alone  interests.
Therefore  the  Classic  is  not  individual.

Courts  of  Justice,  Theatres,  Court,  Church,
Government,  open  meetings  of  Crafts,  Academies,
Colleges,  are  all  specialised  internal  organs  of
the  mystic  state-individuum.

All  the  incidents  of  our  life  are  material  out
of  which  we  can  make  what  we  will.  Who-
ever has  much  spirit  makes  much  of  his  life.
Each  acquaintance,  each  event  would  be,  for  the
thoroughly  spiritual,  the  first  number  of  an  end-
less series,  the  beginning  of  an  endless  romance.

A  translation  is  either  grammatical,  trans-
forming or  mythical.  Mythical  translations  are
translations  in  the  highest  style.  They  present
the  clear,  perfected  character  of  the  individual
work  of  Art.  They  do  not  give  us  the  actual
work  of  Art,  but  the  ideal  of  the  same.  There
exist  as  yet  no  perfect  examples  I  believe  of
such  work.  We  meet  evident  traces  of  it  in
the  spirit  of  several  critiques  and  descriptions  of
works  of  art.  It  is  a  task  for  some  brains  to
which  the  poetic  spirit  and  the  philosophic  have


160  NOVALIS

penetrated  in  their  entire  fulness.  Greek
Mythology  is  in  part  such  a  translation  of  a
National  Religion.  The  modern  Madonna  is
also  such  a  myth.  Grammatical  translations  are
translations  in  the  ordinary  sense  ;  they  require
much  learning,  but  only  dialectical  abilities.  In
transforming  translations,  if  they  be  truthful,
we  have  the  highest  and  most  poetic  spirit,  but
they  easily  fall  into  travesty.  The  true  trans-
lator must  be  himself  an  artist,  and  give  the
idea  of  the  whole  in  this  or  that  manner  as  he
pleases.  He  must  be  the  Poet  of  the  Poet,  and
must  speak  at  the  same  time  according  to  his
own  and  the  Poet's  idea.

The  Genius  of  Humanity  stands  in  a  like
relationship  to  each  single  man.  Not  only
books  but  everything  may  be  translated  in
these  three  manners.

In  the  severest  pain  there  is  a  paralysis  of
sensibility.  The  Soul  disintegrates,  hence  the
deadly  apathy,  the  uncontrolled  thought-faculty,
the  clashing  ceaseless  jesting  of  this  form  of
despair.  No  personal  inclination  exists  any
longer.  Man  stands  like  a  despoiled  power,
alone.  Unconnected  with  the  remaining  world,
he  consumes  himself  gradually,  and  according
to  the  principle  of  his  being  he  becomes  either
Misanthrope  or  Misantheist.


FLOWER  POLLEN  161

Nothing  is  more  indispensable  to  true  piety
than  a  Means  that  links  us  to  Divinity.  With-
out Means  Man  unfortunately  is  unable  to  stand
in  any  relationship  to  Divinity.  Man  should  be
entirely  free  in  this  choice  of  Means.  The
slightest  compulsion  in  this  respect  does  violence
to  his  religion.  Choice  is  characteristic,  and
whereas  men  of  culture  choose  almost  identical
Means,  uncultured  men  are  determined  in  this
regard  usually  by  chance.  And  moreover  it  is
because  so  few  men  are  capable  of  free  choice
that  so  many  Means  become  common,  be  it
through  accident,  through  association  or  be-
cause of  the  peculiar  fitness  of  the  Means  to
the  end.  National  religions  originate  in  this
way.  The  more  independent  Man  becomes,
the  more  the  quantity  of  the  Means  decreases,
the  quality  becomes  refined  and  Man's  relations
to  the  Means  become  more  manifold  and
cultured.

Fetishes,  Constellations,  Animals,  Heroes,
Idols,  Gods,  a  God-Man — one  at  once  sees
how  relative  these  choices  are,  and  one  is
imperceptibly  driven  to  the  idea  that  the
essence  of  Religion  does  not  depend  on  the
nature  of  the  Means,  but  consists  solely  in  our
opinion  of  it  and  in  our  own  relation  to  the
Means.

It   is   Idolatry   in   a  wide   sense,  if  indeed  I

L


1 62  NOVALIS

take  these  Means  for  God  Himself,  and  it  is
Irreligion  if  I  use  no  Means  at  all ;  and  in  so
far  Superstition  or  Idolatry  and  Unbelief  or
Theism  (which  also  may  be  called  the  older
Judaism)  are  all  Irreligion.  On  the  other
hand,  Atheism  is  only  Negation  of  all  Religions
whatever,  and  therefore  has  nothing  to  do  with
Religion.  True  Religion  is  that  which  accepts
Means  as  Means  and  takes  them  to  be  at  once
the  organ  of  Divinity  and  Its  sensible  Manifesta-
tion. From  this  point  of  view  the  Jews  at  the
time  of  the  Babylonian  Captivity  acquired  a
genuine  religious  tendency,  a  religious  hope,  a
belief  in  a  future  Religion,  which  fundament-
ally converted  them,  and  which  still  maintains
them  in  a  marvellous  constancy.

True  Religion,  however,  seems,  on  nearer
observation,  to  be  divided  by  nature  into
Pantheism  and  Monotheism.  I  avail  myself
here  of  a  license  in  that  I  do  not  take  Pantheism
in  the  usual  sense,  but  understand  by  it  the
underlying  idea:  that  all  things  may  be  (instru-
ments of  Divinity — Means,  so  long  as  I  esteem
them  so.  While,  on  the  other  hand,  Mono-
theism denotes  the  belief  that  there  exists  only
one  such  instrument  for  us  in  the  world,  that
the  idea  of  one  Means  only  is  admissible,
through  which  alone  God  allows  Himself  to
be  apprehended,  which  I  then  should  be  self-


FLOWER  POLLEN  163

constrained  to  choose,  for  without  that  Mono-
theism were  not  true  Religion.

Incongruous  as  these  ideas  seem  to  be,  yet
their  congruity  may  be  effected  if  we  make  the
monotheistic  Means  into  the  Means  of  the
Middle-World  of  Pantheism,  and  make  this
the  centre  of  that  in  order  that  both,  though
in  different  ways,  may  necessitate   each  other.

Prayer  or  Religious  Thought  arises  then  out
of  a  threefold,  ascending  indivisible  Abstraction
or  Proposition.  Each  object  may  be — in  the
sense  of  the  Augurs — a  Temple  to  the  Religious
Man.  The  Spirit  of  this  Temple  is  the  omni-
present High  Priest,  the  Monotheistic  Means,
who  alone  without  Means  stands  in  relation  to
the  All-Father.

The  basis  of  all  eternal  fellowship  is
an  absolute  tendency  towards  all  directions.
Thereon  rests  the  power  of  Hierarchy,  of
genuine  Masonry  and  the  invisible  tie  between
true  thinkers.  Herein  lies  the  potentiality  of
a  Universal  Republic  of  which  the  Romans  up
to  the  time  of  the  Emperors  had  an  idea.
Augustus  first  deserted  this  basis,  Hadrian
destroyed  it  altogether.

Brute  selfishness  is  the  necessary  outcome  of
paltry  narrowness.     The  actual  sensation  is  the


1 64  NOVALIS

most  vital,  the  most  exalted  to  a  wretched  man.
He  knows  nothing  greater.  It  is  no  wonder  that
his  intellect,  forcibly  shaped  by  circumstances,
should  be  only  the  cunning  slave  of  such  a  dull
master,  and  should  only  think  and  care  for
pleasure.

A  law  is  operative  according  to  its  contents.

An  inoperative  law  is  no  law.  Law  is  a
causal  content,  a  mixture  of  force  and  thought,
therefore  we  are  never  conscious  of  a  law  as
such.  In  so  far  as  we  think  of  a  law  it  is  only
as  a  proposition,  i.e.  a  thought  united  with
power.  A  resistant  tenacious  thought  is  a
striving  thought,  and  mediates  between  law
and  power.

Escape  from  the  common  Soul  is  Death.

In  most  religious  systems  we  are  considered
as  members  of  the  God-Head  which,  if  they  do
not  obey  the  impulse  of  the  Whole,  do  not
intentionally  agitate  against  the  laws  of  the
Whole,  yet  go  their  own  way  unwilling  to  be
members  treated  physician-like  by  God  and
either  painfully  healed  or  else  cut  off.

The  most  intimate  association  of  all  Sciences
— a  scientific  Republic — is  the  noble  aim  of  the
Learned.


FLOWER  POLLEN  165

Should  not  the  range  of  a  certain  science  and
the  precedence  of  the  sciences  amongst  each
other  be  reckoned  according  to  the  number  of
their  principles  ?  The  fewer  principles  the
higher  the  science.

We  understand  the  artificial  better  than  the
natural.  More  soul  but  less  talent  is  contained
in  the  simple  than  in  the  complex.

Tools  arm  men.  One  may  well  say,  man
understands  how  to  create  a  world,  he  only
needs  suitable  apparatus  for  the  proportionate
equipment  of  the  creations  of  his  sense.  The
beginning  is  there.  So  the  principle  of  the
man-of-war  lies  in  the  idea  of  the  shipbuilder,
who  by  the  aid  of  masses  of  men  and  suitable
tools  and  materials  embodies  his  thoughts  by
means  of  which  he  makes  himself  like  unto  a
prodigious  machine.  So  the  idea  of  a  moment
often  requires  prodigious  instruments,  prodigious
masses  of  material ;  thus  man  is,  if  not  the
actual,  still  the  potential  creator.

The  more  ignorant  a  man  is  by  nature  the
more  capacity  exists  in  him  for  knowledge  ;
each  new  perception  makes  a  much  deeper  and
more  vital  impression.  We  notice  this  distinctly
on  entering  into  a  new  Science.  That  is  also
why  we  lose  in  capacity  through  over-much  study.


1 66  NOVALIS

We  are  not  in  a  position  to  penetrate  the
Whole  or  to  ensoul  it  with  a  definite  conception.
Plastic  power  may  not  attain  it.

Thus  is  the  inventive  spirit  of  young  heads  and
visionaries,  as  well  as  the  easy  grasp  of  spiritual
beginners  or  laymen,  to  be  explained.

The  Building  of  Worlds  does  not  satisfy  our
yearning  Soul.

Yet  a  loving  Heart  satisfies  the  striving
Spirit.

We  stand  in  relationship  with  all  parts  of  the
Universe,  as  well  with  the  Future  as  with  the
Past.  It  only  depends  on  the  direction  and
duration  of  our  attention,  which  relationship
we  are  to  cultivate  especially,  which  relation-
ship is  to  be  for  us  especially  important  and
vital.  The  true  method  ought  to  prove
nothing  less  than  that  long  wished  for  Art
of  Divination.  It  should  be  even  more.  Man
proceeds  daily  according  to  its  Laws,  and
the  possibility  of  discovering  these  same  laws
through  intelligent  self-observation  is  indubi-
table. The  historian  organises  historic  beings.
The  data  of  History  is  a  conglomeration  to
which  the  historian  gives  form  by  animation.
Therefore  History  above  all  stands  on  the
fundamental  principles  of  animation  and  organi-


FLOWER  POLLEN  167

sation,  and  before  these  principles  come  to  view
there  is  no  true  historic  Presentation,  and
nothing  except  occasional  traces  of  haphazard
animation  in  the  place  where  untutored  genius
has  stirred.

Nearly  all  genius  has  been  hitherto  one-
sided, the  result  of  a  sickly  constitution.
One  class  had  too  much  outward,  the  other
too  much  inward  perception.  It  was  very
seldom  that  Nature  attained  an  equipoise  be-
tween the  two,  a  perfect  constitution  com-
bined with  genius.  A  perfect  proportion  often
ensued  but  it  could  never  endure,  for  it  was
neither  perceived  nor  determined  by  the  soul ;
fortuitously  it  lasted  during  some  happy
moments.

Previous  to  the  mental  act  of  Abstraction
All  is  One,  but  one  even  as  Chaos  ;  subsequent
to  the  mental  act  of  Abstraction  everything  is
once  more  united  ;  but  this  union  is  a  free
bond  of  independent  self-determined  beings.

Out  of  the  crowd  there  has  grown  a  society,
Chaos  is  transformed  into  a  manifold  world.

If  the  world  be  a  Precipitation  of  Human
Nature,  then  the  world  of  the  Gods  must  be
a  Sublimation  of  the  same.     Both   happen  uno


168  NOVALIS

actu.      No    Precipitation    without    Sublimation.
What  is  lost  there  in  activity  is  gained  here.

Where  there  are  children,  there  is  the  golden
age.

Security  for  self  and  for  invisible  Powers  has
been  the  basis  of  previous  spiritual  states.

The  path  of  approximation  is  composed
of  argumentative  progressions  and  regressions.
Both  delay,  both  hasten,  both  lead  to  the  goal.
So  in  the  novel  the  poet  appears  now  to  approach
the  goal,  now  to  recede  ;  and  never  is  it  nearer
than  when  it  seems  to  be  farthest.

A  criminal  can  never  complain  of  injustice
though  he  be  treated  harshly  or  inhumanly.
His  crime  was  an  entry  into  the  Kingdom  of
Might,  of  Tyranny.  Proportion  and  moderation
do  not  exist  in  that  world,  therefore  the  dis-
proportion of  the  reaction  should  not  surprise
him.

Mythology  contains  the  history  of  the  arche-
typal world.  It  comprehends  Past,  Present  and
Future.

Simply  inert  appears  that  which  in  regard  to
the  outer   world    is    simply  motionless.     Many


FLOWER  POLLEN  169

times  as  it  may  transform  itself,  it  remains,  as
far  as  the  outer  world  is  concerned,  always  at
rest.  This  proposition  applies  to  all  self-modi-
fications. That  is  why  the  Beautiful  appears
so  peaceful.  All  Beauty  is  a  self-illumined
perfected  Individuum.

Each  human  shape  gives  life  to  an  individual
germ  in  the  Contemplator.  Because  of  this,
observation  is  endless,  it  is  bound  up  with  the
feeling  of  an  inexhaustible  power,  and  is  there-
fore absolutely  vitalising.  While  we  contem-
plate ourselves  we  vitalise  ourselves,  without
this  visible  and  sensible  immortality  sit  venia
verbis — we  should  not  think  truly.

The  perceptible  inadequacy  of  our  earthly
frame  as  the  expression  and  organ  of  the  in-
dwelling Spirit,  is  the  undetermined  urgent
thought  underlying  all  true  thought,  the  cause
of  the  Evolution  of  the  Intelligence  that  which
obliges  us  to  the  acceptance  of  an  intelligible
world  and  of  an  endless  range  of  expression,
and  organs  of  that  Spirit  whose  exponent  or
root  is  its  individuality.

When  the  spirit  sanctifies  every  true  book
becomes  a  Bible.

Each  individuum  is  the  centre-point  of  a
system  of  emanation.


i;o  NOVALIS

A  book  is  very  seldom  written  for  the  book's
sake.

It  is  the  case  with  many  true  books  as  with
gold  ingots  in  Ireland,  they  serve  for  long  years
only  as  weights.

Our  books  are  formless  paper  money  which
the  learned  bring  into  currency.  The  love
the  modern  world  has  of  possessing  paper  money
is  the  ground  out  of  which  in  one  night  they
often  shoot  up.

Many  books  are  longer  than  they  seem
They  have  indeed  no  end.  The  tedium  they
provoke  is  truly  absolute  and  endless.

True  policy  is  not  only  a  defensive  polemic
against  existing  ill,  but  it  seeks  also  to  improve
sickly  dispositions.

Many  anti-revolutionary  books  were  written
in  favour  of  the  Revolution,  but  Burke  wrote  a
revolutionary  book  against  the  Revolution.

Is  it  not  desirable  to  be  the  contemporary  of
a  really  great  man  ?  The  majority  of  cultivated
Germans  of  the  present  day  are  not  of  this
opinion.  They  are  sharp  enough  to  deny  all
greatness  and  adopt  a  levelling  policy.     If  the


FLOWER  POLLEN  171

Copernican  system  were  not  so  firmly  estab-
lished it  would  suit  them  very  well  to  turn  sun
and  stars  once  more  into  will  o'  the  wisps,  and
to  make  the  earth  into  the  Universe.

It  has  been  impossible  till  now  to  describe
men,  because  we  did  not  know  what  a  man
was.  When  once  we  know  what  a  man  is,
then  will  it  be  possible  to  describe  individuals
genetically.

Whosoever  takes  fragments  of  this  sort
literally  may  be  an  honourable  man,  but  he  must
not  give  himself  out  as  a  poet.  Must  we  then
always  be  circumspect  ?  Whosoever  is  too  old
to  be  enthusiastic  should  shun  youthful  assem-
blies. There  are  literary  saturnalia  nowadays.
The  more  motley  life  is  the  better.

The  geognostics  believe  the  physical  centre
of  gravity  lies  between  Fez  and  Morocco.
Goethe  as  anthropognostic  thinks  in  Wilhelm
Meister  that  the  intellectual  centre  of  gravity
lies  in  the  German  nation.

Where  the  Majoritydetermine,  Force  triumphs
over  Form.  This  is  inverted  where  the  Minority
has  the  upper  hand.  We  cannot  reproach
theoretical  politicians  with  over-boldness.  It
has  not  occurred  to  any  of  them  whether
Monarchy  and  Democracy  should  and  could  not


172  NOVALIS

be   absolutely  united   as   elements  of  a  States-
Universal.

A  true  Democracy  is  an  absolute  minus  State.
A  true  Monarchy  is  an  absolute  plus  State.  The
constitution  of  the  Monarchy  is  the  character
of  the  Regent.  Its  guarantee  is  his  will.
Democracy  in  the  ordinary  sense  does  not
fundamentally  differ  from  Monarchy,  only  that
in  this  latter  case  the  monarch  consists  of  a
crowd  of  heads.

The  presentations  of  the  Past  draw  us  towards
Death,  towards  the  transitory;  the  Presenta-
tions of  the  Future  drive  us  to  new  animation,
to  edification,  and  to  an  assimilating  activity.

Therefore  all  Remembrance  is  dismal,  all
Anticipation  joyful.


BIBLIOGRAPHY


Novalis  Schriften  (  Kritische  Neuaus-

gabe,  1901)       .  .  .  Ernst  Heiljborn


Novalis  der  Romantiher

Novalis

Novalis  .

Nova/is

Die  Romantische  Schule


Correspondent,  zivischen  F,
und  A.  IV.  Schlegel


Ernst  Heilborn

Just

schubart

Maeterlinck

Heine


R.  Schlegel
Einleitung  %u  den  Novalis  Schriften


Tieck


INDEX


Abstraction,  Act  of,  167
Academies,  On,  144
Accident,  86
Anticipation,  172
Anxiety,  On,  85,  86
Application  and  Theory,  146
Arts,  The,  157
Arts,  Works  of,  159

Beauty,  169
Bible,  78,  79
Bohme,  J.,  35,  39
Books,  170
Brown,  John,  46

Catholic  Religion,  76
Charpentier,  J.  v.,  31
Christ,  76,  77
Christianity,  Essay  on,  40
Classic,  The,  157,  159
Coleridge,  44
Confusedness,  158
Courage,  85,  87
Crime,  168

Death,  147

Death  or  Self-conquest,  146

Democracy    and    Monarchy,

171
Despair,  153
Disciples  at  Sai's,  40,  43,  92-

Divination,  Art  of,  166
Divinity,  161
Dreams,  147-8

ElSLEBEN,    l6

Emerson,  44
Encyclopaedia,  40
Error  and  Prejudice,  156


Error  and  Truth,  145
Exaltation,  On,  89
Exercises,  Thought,  40
Experience,  On,  146

Faith,  On,  73
Fear,  On,  87
Fellowship,  True,  163
Fichte,  4,  6-10,  35,  46,  48
Flower  Pollen,  40
Force  and  Form,  171
Freyberg,  42
Future,  The,  147,  148,  172

Galvani,  A. ,  42

Genius,  149

Germany,  3

Goethe,  4,  5,  6,  40,  43,  171

Griiningen,  21,  25

Hardenberg,   Erasmus  v.,  17,

19,  21
Hardenberg,  Freiherrv.,  15
Hardenberg,  Karl  v.,  31
Hebrew  Alphabet,  80
Heilborn,  31
Heine,  35

Heinrich  ▼.  Osterdingen,  40
History,  166
Humour,  152
Hunsterhuys,  18,  35
Hymns,  36,  37,  53-67

Idealism,  78
Idolatry,  161
Illusion,  72
Individuum,  The,  169
Inspiration,  159
Instinct,  79


176


INDEX


Jacobi,  9
Jena,  4,  5,  16
Just,  13,  20

Kant,  I.,  7,  9

Klarisse,  21

Kiihn,  Sophie  v>.,  21-31

Law,  164

Life,  89

Light  and  Action,  69

Love,  77

Luther,  20

Means    linking    to   Divinity,

161
Meister,  W.,  41,  171
Melancthon,  20
Misfortunes,  86
Monarchy    and     Democracy,

171-2
Monotheism,  162
Moral  Sense,  71
Moravians,  15,  36,  37
Mysticism,  75
Mythology,  161,  168

Napoleon,  41
Nature,  43,  70,  75
Night,  Hymn  to,  36

Obermann,  13
Originality  and  Egoism,  81
Ossian,  41
Osterdingen,  H.  v.,  40

Pantheism,  162
Paradise,  78,  79
Passion  and  Tragedy,  88
Philosophy,  Natural,  42
Philosopher  and  Problem,  68
Plato,  18
Prayer,  86
Priestley,  J.,  42
Protestant  Religion,  76
Purpose  of  the  World,  75

Realism,  78


Reinhold,  9
Religion,  True,  162
Retreat  into  Self,  155
Revolution,  190
Rhythm  of  Life,  81
Richter,  J.  P.,  9
Ritter,  92
Romanticism,  4-n

SaIs,  Disciples  at,  40,  41,  43,

46,  92-143
Scepticism,  78
Schelling,  4,  9,  42
Schiller,  4,  5,  16,  17,  35
Schlegel,  A.  W.,  4
Schlegel,   F.,   9,    10,    17,    19,

32,  35,48,  154
Schleiermacher,  4,  10,  32
Sciences,  The,  164-5
Selfishness,  163
Sin,  76
Sophie,  21-27
Soul,  Theories  of,
Speculation,  79
Spinoza,  98

Tennstadt,  20,  31

Thoughts,  Selected,  68-90

Tieck,  9,  35

Tragedy  and  Passion,  88

Translation,  On,  159

Truth,  155

Truth  and  Illusion,  72

Unification,  44

Unity,  Idea  of,  3,  43,  46

Universe,  166,  171

Veit,  D.,  4,  io,  40
Volta,  42

Wackenkoder,  4
Weimar,  5

Weissenfels,  14,  20,  32
Wittenberg,  20
Women,  On,  83


TURNBULL   AND  SPEARS,    PRINTERS,  EDINBURGH.


V


University  of  California

SOUTHERN  REGIONAL  LIBRARY  FACILITY

305  De  Neve  Drive  -  Parking  Lot  17  .  Box  951388

LOS  ANGELES,  CALIFORNIA  90095-1388

Return  this  material  to  the  library  from  which  it  was  borrowed.


UC  SOUTHERN  REGIONAL  LIBRARY  FACILITY


'


