On the Jewish Meats (Novatian)
Ante-Nicene Fathers, 1885. Public domain.
Source: Christian Classics Ethereal Library (https://ccel.org/ccel/schaff/anf05.vi.iv.html).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

======================================================================

  On the Jewish Meats

 On the Jewish Meats. [5302]

 ------------------------

 Chapter I.  Argument.--Novatian, a Roman Presbyter, During His
 Retirement at the Time of the Decian Persecution, Being Urged by
 Various Letters from His Brethren, Had Written Two Earlier Epistles
 Against the Jews on the Subjects of Circumcision and the Sabbath, and
 Now Writes the Present One on the Jewish Meats.

 Although, most holy brethren, the day in which I receive your letters
 and writings is most ardently longed for by me, and to be reckoned
 among the chief and happiest--for what else is there now to make me
 more joyous? [5303] --still I think that the day is to be deemed not
 less notable, and among special days, wherein I return to you similar
 communications, with the affection of love that I owe you, and write
 you letters with a corresponding interest. For nothing, most holy
 brethren, holds me bound with such bonds, nothing stirs and arouses me
 with such a stimulus of care and anxiety, as the fear lest you should
 think that any disadvantage is suffered by you by reason of my absence;
 and this I strive to remedy, in labouring to show myself present with
 you by frequent letters. Although, therefore, the duty which I owe, and
 the charge I have undertaken, and the very ministerial office imposed
 upon me, require of me this necessity of writing letters, yet you still
 further enhance it, by stirring me up to write through means of your
 continual communications. And inclined although I am to those
 periodical expressions of love, you urge me the more by showing that
 you stand fast continually in the Gospel: whence it results, that by my
 letters I am not so much instructing you who are already informed, as
 inciting you who are already prepared. For you, who not only hold the
 Gospel pure and purged from all stain of perverse doctrine, but also
 energetically teach the same, seek not man for a master, since you show
 yourselves by these very things to be teachers. Therefore as you run, I
 exhort you; and as you watch, I stir you up; and as you contend against
 "the spiritual things of wickedness," [5304] I address you; and as you
 press "in your course to the prize of your calling in Christ," [5305] I
 urge you on,--that, treading under foot and rejecting as well the
 sacrilegious calumnies of heretics as also the idle fables of Jews, you
 may hold the sole word [5306] and teaching of Christ, so as worthily to
 claim for yourselves the authority of His name. But how perverse are
 the Jews, and remote from the understanding of their law, I have fully
 shown, as I believe, in two former letters, [5307] wherein it was
 absolutely proved that they are ignorant of what is the true
 circumcision, and what the true Sabbath; and their ever increasing
 blindness is confuted in this present epistle, wherein I have briefly
 discoursed concerning their meats, because that in them they consider
 that they only are holy, and that all others are defiled. [5308]

 [5302] Entitled "A Letter of Novatian, the Roman Presbyter."

 [5303] "Liberiorem," translated, according to a plausible emendation,
 as "hilariorem."

 [5304] Eph. vi. 12.

 [5305] Phil. iii. 14.

 [5306] Traditionem.

 [5307] These letters are not extant, but they are mentioned by Jerome,
 De vir. Illustr., ch. lxx.

 [5308] [1 Cor. vi. 13. A passage probably connected with the Jewish
 superstition. But see the Peshito-Syriac version on Mark vii. 19.
 Compare Murdock's version ad loc., ed. 1855.]

 Chapter II.  Argument.--He First of All Asserts that the Law is
 Spiritual; And Thence, Man's First Food Was Only the Fruit Trees, and
 the Use of Flesh Was Added, that the Law that Followed Subsequently
 [5309] Was to Be Understood Spiritually. [5310]

 Therefore, first of all, we must avail ourselves of that passage, "that
 the law is spiritual;" [5311] and if they deny it to be spiritual, they
 assuredly blaspheme; if, avoiding blasphemy, they confess it to be
 spiritual, let them read it spiritually. For divine things must be
 divinely received, and must assuredly be maintained as holy. But a
 grave fault is branded on those who attach earthly and human doctrine
 to sacred and spiritual words; and this we must beware of doing.
 Moreover, we may beware, if any things enjoined by God be so treated as
 if they were assumed to diminish His authority, lest, in calling some
 things impure and unclean, their institution should dishonour their
 ordainer. For in reprobating what He has made, He will appear to have
 condemned His own works, which He had approved as good; and He will be
 designated as seeming capricious in both cases, as the heretics indeed
 would have it; either in having blessed things which were not clean, or
 in subsequently reprobating as not good, creatures which He had blessed
 as both clean and good. And of this the enormity and contradiction will
 remain for ever if that Jewish doctrine is persisted in, which must be
 got rid of with all our ability; so that whatever is irregularly
 delivered by them, may be taken away by us, and a suitable arrangement
 of His works, and an appropriate and spiritual application of the
 divine law, may be restored. But to begin from the beginning of things,
 whence it behoves me to begin; the only food for the first men was
 fruit and the produce of the trees. For afterwards, man's sin
 transferred his need from the fruit-trees to the produce of the earth,
 when the very attitude of his body attested the condition of his
 conscience. For although innocency raised men up towards the heavens to
 pluck their food from the trees so long as they had a good conscience,
 yet sin, when committed, bent men down to the earth and to the ground
 to gather its grain.  Moreover, afterwards the use of flesh was added,
 the divine favour supplying for human necessities the kinds of meats
 generally fitting for suitable occasions. For while a more tender meat
 was needed to nourish men who were both tender and unskilled, it was
 still a food not prepared without toil, doubtless for their advantage,
 lest they should again find a pleasure in sinning, if the labour
 imposed upon sin did not exhort innocence. And since now it was no more
 a paradise to be tended, but a whole world to be cultivated, the more
 robust food of flesh is offered to men, that for the advantage of
 culture something more might be added to the vigour of the human body.
 All these things, as I have said, were by grace and by divine
 arrangement:  so that either the most vigorous food should not be given
 in too small quantity for men's support, and they should be enfeebled
 for labour; or that the more tender meat should not be too abundant, so
 that, oppressed beyond the measure of their strength, they should not
 be able to bear it. [5312] But the law which followed subsequently
 ordained [5313] the flesh foods with distinction: for some animals it
 gave and granted for use, [5314] as being clean; some it interdicted as
 not clean, and conveying pollution to those that eat them. Moreover, it
 gave this character to those that were clean, that those which chew the
 cud and divide the hoofs are clean; those are unclean which do neither
 one nor other of these things. So, in fishes also, the law said that
 those indeed were clean which were covered with scales and supplied
 with fins, but that those which were otherwise were not clean.
 Moreover, it established a distinction among the fowls, and laid down
 what was to be judged either an abomination, or clean. Thus the law
 ordained the exercise of very great subtlety in making a separation
 among those animals which the ancient appointment had gathered together
 into one form of blessing. What, then, are we to say? Are the animals
 therefore unclean? But what else is it to say that they are not clean,
 than that the law has separated them from the uses of food? And what,
 moreover, is that that we have just now said? Then God is the ordainer
 of things which are not clean; and the blame attached to things which
 are made will recoil upon their Maker, who did not produce them clean;
 to say which is certainly characteristic of extreme and excessive
 folly: it is to accuse God as having created unclean things, and to
 charge upon the divine majesty the guilt of having made things which
 are abomination, especially when they were both pronounced "very good,"
 [5315] and as being good have obtained the blessing from God Himself
 "that they should increase and multiply." Moreover also they were
 reserved by the command of the Creator in Noah's ark for the sake of
 their offspring, that so being kept they might be proved to be needful;
 and being needful, they might be proved to be good, although even in
 that case also there is a distinction appended. But still, even then,
 the creation of those very creatures that were not clean might have
 been utterly abolished, if it had needed to be abolished on account of
 its own pollution.

 [5309] Which, distinguishing between meats, granted certain animals as
 clean, and interdicted certain others as not clean, especially as all
 animals were declared "very good," and even unclean animals were
 reserved for offspring in Noah's ark, although they otherwise might
 have been got rid of, if they ought to have been destroyed on account
 of their uncleanness.

 [5310] [The divers animals are also parables illustrating human
 passions and appetites. See Jones of Nayland, vol. xi. p. 1.]

 [5311] Rom. vii. 14.

 [5312] This sentence is very unintelligible, but it is the nearest
 approach to a meaning that can be gathered from the original.

 [5313] [Gen. ix. 3. The Noachic covenant was Catholic, and foreshadowed
 Acts x. 15, although clean and unclean beasts were recognised as by
 natural classification. Gen. vii. 2. Argue as in Gal. iii. 17.]

 [5314] Or, as some read, "for eating," substituting "esum" for "usum."

 [5315] Gen. i. 31.

 Chapter III.  Argument.--And Thus Unclean Animals are Not to Be
 Reproached, Lest the Reproach Be Thrown Upon Their Author; But When an
 Irrational Animal is Rejected on Any Account, It is Rather that that
 Very Thing Should Be Condemned in Man Who is Rational; And Therefore
 that in Animals the Character, the Doings, and the Wills of Men are
 Depicted.

 How far, then, must that law, which--as I have shown by the authority
 of the apostle--is spiritual, be spiritually received in order that the
 divine and sure idea of the law may be carried out? Firstly, we must
 believe that whatever was ordained by God is clean and purified by the
 very authority of His creation; neither must it be reproached, lest the
 reproach should be thrown back upon its Author. Then too that the law
 was given to the children of Israel for this purpose, that they might
 profit by it, and return to those virtuous manners which, although they
 had received them from their fathers, they had corrupted in Egypt by
 reason of their intercourse with a barbarous people. Finally, also,
 those ten commandments on the tables teach nothing new, but remind them
 of what had been obliterated--that righteousness in them, which had
 been put to sleep, might revive again as it were by the afflatus of the
 law, after the manner of a smothered fire. But they could profit by the
 perception that those vices were especially to be avoided in men which
 the law had condemned even in beasts. [5316] For when an irrational
 animal is rejected on any account, it is rather that very thing which
 is condemned in the man, who is rational. And if in it anything which
 it has by nature is characterized as a defilement, that same thing is
 most to be blamed when it is found in man opposed to his nature.
 Therefore, in order that men might be purified, the cattle were
 censured--to wit, that men also who had the same vices might be
 esteemed on a level with the brutes. Whence it results, that not only
 were the animals not condemned by their Creator because of His agency;
 [5317] but that men might be instructed in the brutes to return to the
 unspotted nature of their own creation. For we must consider how the
 Lord distinguishes clean and not clean. The creatures that are clean,
 it says, both chew the cud and divide the hoof; the unclean do neither,
 or only one of the two. All these things were made by one Workman, and
 He who made them Himself blessed them. Therefore I regard the creation
 of both as clean, because both He who created them is holy, and those
 things which were created are not in fault in being that which they
 were made. For it has never been customary for nature, but for a
 perverted will, to bear the blame of guilt.  What, then, is the case?
 In the animals it is the characters, and doings, and wills of men that
 are depicted. [5318] They are clean if they chew the cud; that is, if
 they ever have in their mouth as food the divine precepts. They divide
 the hoof, if with the firm step of innocency they tread the ways of
 righteousness, and of every virtue of life. For of those creatures
 which divide the foot into two hoofs the walk is always vigorous; the
 tendency to slip of one part of the hoof being sustained by the
 firmness of the other, and so retained in the substantial footstep.
 Thus they who do neither are unclean, whose walk is neither firm in
 virtues; nor do they digest the food of the divine precepts after the
 manner of that chewing of the cud.  And they, too, who do one of these
 things are not themselves clean either, inasmuch as they are maimed of
 the other, and not perfect in both. And these are they who do both, as
 believers, and are clean; or one of the two, as Jews and heretics, and
 are blemished; or neither, as the Gentiles, and are consequently
 unclean. Thus in the animals, by the law, as it were, a certain mirror
 of human life is established, wherein men may consider the images of
 penalties; so that everything which is vicious in men, as committed
 against nature, may be the more condemned, when even those things,
 although naturally ordained in brutes, are in them blamed. [5319] For
 that in fishes the roughness of scales is regarded as constituting
 their cleanness; rough, and rugged, and unpolished, and substantial,
 and grave manners are approved in men; while those that are without
 scales are unclean; because trifling, and fickle, and faithless, and
 effeminate manners are disapproved. Moreover, what does the law mean
 when it says, "Thou shalt not eat the camel?" [5320] --except that by
 the example of that animal it condemns a life nerveless [5321] and
 crooked with crimes. Or when it forbids the swine to be taken for food?
 It assuredly reproves a life filthy and dirty, and delighting in the
 garbage of vice, placing its supreme good not in generosity of mind,
 but in the flesh alone. Or when it forbids the hare? It rebukes men
 deformed into women. And who would use the body of the weasel for food?
 But in this case it reproves theft. Who would eat the lizard? But it
 hates an aimless waywardness of life. Who the eft? But it execrates
 mental stains. Who would eat the hawk, who the kite, who the eagle? But
 it hates plunderers and violent people who live by crime. Who the
 vulture? But it holds accursed those who seek for booty by the death of
 others.  Or who the raven? But it holds accused crafty wills.
 Moreover, when it forbids the sparrow, it condemns intemperance; when
 the owl, it hates those who fly from the light of truth; when the swan,
 the proud with high neck; when the sea-mew, too talkative an
 intemperance of tongue; when the bat, those who seek the darkness of
 night as well as of error. These things, then, and the like to these,
 the law holds accursed in animals, which in them indeed are not
 blameworthy, because they are born in this condition; in man they are
 blamed, because they are sought for contrary to his nature, not by his
 creation, but by his error.

 [5316] [See chap. ii. p. 645, supra, note 9.]

 [5317] Sui culpa.

 [5318] [The moral uses of the animal creation are recognised in all
 languages; as when we say of men, a serpent, a fox, a hog, an ass,
 etc.; so otherwise, a lion, a lamb, an eagle, a dove, etc.]

 [5319] [Novatian was a keen analyst, and his allegorial renderings are
 logical generally, though sometimes fanciful.]

 [5320] Lev. xi. 4. [Jones of Nayland, vol. iii., Disquisition, ed.
 1801.]

 [5321] "Enervem," but more probably "informem."

 Chapter IV.  Argument.--To These Things Also Was Added Another Reason
 for Prohibiting Many Kinds of Meats to the Jews; To Wit, for the
 Restraint of the Intemperance of the People, and that They Might Serve
 the One God.

 To these considerations, then, thus enumerated, were added also other
 reasons for which many kinds of meats were withheld from the Jews; and
 that this might be so, many things were called unclean, not as being
 condemned in themselves, but that the Jews might be restrained to the
 service of one God; because frugality and moderation in appetite were
 becoming to those who were chosen for this purpose. And such moderation
 is always found to be approximate to religion, nay, so to speak, rather
 related and akin to it; for luxury is inimical to holiness. For how
 shall religion be spared by it, when modesty is not spared? Luxury does
 not entertain the fear of God; since while pleasures hurry it on, it is
 carried forward to the sole daring of its desires: for the reins being
 loosened, it increases in the application of expense without measure,
 as if it were its food, exceeding its patrimony with its modesty; or as
 a torrent rushing from the mountain-peaks not only overleaps what is
 opposed to it, but carries with it those very hindrances for the
 destruction of other things. Therefore these remedies were sought for
 to restrain the intemperance of the people, that in proportion as
 luxury was diminished, virtuous manners might be increased. For what
 else did they deserve, than that they should be restrained from using
 all the pictures of divers meats, who dared to prefer the vilest meats
 of the Egyptians to the divine banquets of manna, preferring the juicy
 meats of their enemies and masters to their liberty? They were truly
 worthy that the slavery which they had coveted should pamper them, if
 the food that was more desirable and free was so ill pleasing to them.

 Chapter V. Argument.--But There Was a Limit to the Use of These Shadows
 or Figures; For Afterwards, When the End of the Law, Christ, Came, All
 Things Were Said by the Apostle to Be Pure to the Pure, and the True
 and Holy Meat Was a Right Faith and an Unspotted Conscience.

 And thus there was a certain ancient time, wherein those shadows or
 figures were to be used, that meats should be abstained from which had
 indeed been commended by their creation, but had been prohibited by the
 law. But now Christ, the end of the law, has come, disclosing all the
 obscurities of the law--all those things which antiquity had covered
 with the clouds of sacraments. For the illustrious Master, and the
 heavenly Teacher, and the ordainer of the perfected truth, has come,
 under whom at length it is rightly said: "To the pure all things are
 pure; but unto them that are defiled and unbelieving is nothing pure,
 but even their mind and conscience is defiled." [5322] Moreover, in
 another place: "For every creature of God is good, and nothing to be
 refused which is received with thanksgiving; for it is sanctified by
 the Word of God and prayer." [5323] Again, in another place:  "The
 Spirit expressly says that in the last days some shall depart from the
 faith, giving heed to seducing spirits, doctrines of demons, speaking
 lies in hypocrisy, having their conscience seared with a hot iron,
 forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain from meats which God
 hath created to be received with thanksgiving by them which believe and
 those who know God." [5324] Moreover, in another passage: "Everything
 that is sold in the market-place eat, asking nothing." [5325] From
 these things it is plain that all those things are returned to their
 original blessedness now that the law is finished, and that we must not
 revert to the special observances of meats, which observances were
 ordained for a certain reason, but which evangelical liberty has now
 taken away, their discharge being given. The apostle cries out: "The
 kingdom of God is not meat and drink, but righteousness, and peace, and
 joy." [5326] Also elsewhere: "Meats for the belly, and the belly for
 meats: but God shall destroy both it and them. Now the body is not for
 fornication, but for the Lord; and the Lord for the body." [5327] God
 is not worshipped by the belly nor by meats, which the Lord says will
 perish, and are "purged" by natural law in the draught. [5328] For he
 who worships the Lord by meats, is merely as one who has his belly for
 his Lord. The meat, I say, true, and holy, and pure, is a true faith,
 an unspotted conscience, and an innocent soul.  Whosoever is thus fed,
 feeds also with Christ. Such a banqueter is God's guest: these are the
 feasts that feed the angels, these are the tables which the martyrs
 make. Hence is that word of the law: "Man doth not live by bread alone,
 but by every word which proceedeth out of the mouth of God." [5329]
 Hence, too, that saying of Christ: "My meat is to do the will of Him
 that sent me, and to finish His work." [5330] Hence, "Ye seek me not
 because ye saw the miracles, but because ye did eat of my loaves and
 were filled.  But labour not for the meat which perisheth, but for the
 meat which endureth to life eternal, which the Son of man will give
 you; for Him hath the Father sealed." [5331] By righteousness, I say,
 and by continency, and by the rest of the virtues, God is worshipped.
 For Zecharias also tells us, saying: "If ye eat or drink, is it not ye
 that eat or drink?" [5332] --declaring thereby that meat or drink
 attain not unto God, but unto man: for neither is God fleshly, so as to
 be pleased with flesh; nor is He careful [5333] for these pleasures, so
 as to rejoice in our food. [5334] God rejoices in our faith alone, in
 our innocency alone, in our truth alone, in our virtues alone. And
 these dwell not in our belly, but in our soul; and these are acquired
 for us by divine awe and heavenly fear, and not by earthly food. And
 such the apostle fitly rebuked, as "obeying the superstitions of
 angels, puffed up by their fleshly mind; not holding Christ the head,
 from whom all the body, joined together by links, and inwoven and grown
 together by mutual members in the bond of charity, increaseth to God;"
 [5335] but observing those things:  "Touch not, taste not, handle not;
 which indeed seem to have a form of religion, in that the body is not
 spared." [5336] Yet there is no advantage at all of righteousness,
 while we are recalled by a voluntary slavery to those elements to which
 by baptism we have died.

 [5322] Tit. i. 15.

 [5323] 1 Tim. iv. 4, 5.

 [5324] 1 Tim. iv. 1, 2, 3.

 [5325] 1 Cor. x. 25.

 [5326] Rom. xiv. 17.

 [5327] 1 Cor. vi. 13.

 [5328] [Or lower bowel, Mark vii. 19; Matt. xv. 17. See cap. i. note 7,
 p. 645, supra. It throws off refuse, leaving food only to the system.]

 [5329] Deut. viii. 3.

 [5330] John iv. 34.

 [5331] John vi. 26, 27.

 [5332] Zech. vii. 6, LXX.

 [5333] "Attonitus" is assumed to be rightly read "attentus."

 [5334] [1 Tim. iv. 4; vi. 17. Against the Encratites (vol. i. p. 353),
 but not against moderation (vol. ii. p. 237, this series).]

 [5335] Col. ii. 18, 19.

 [5336] Col. ii. 21, 23.

 Chapter VI.  Argument.--But, on the Ground that Liberty in Meats is
 Granted to Us, There is No Permission of Luxury, There is No Taking
 Away of Continence and Fasting: for These Things Greatly Become the
 Faithful,--To Wit, that They Should Pray to God, and Give Him Thanks,
 Not Only by Day, But by Night.

 But from the fact that liberty of meats is granted to us, it does not
 of necessity follow that luxury is allowed us; nor because the Gospel
 has dealt with us very liberally, has it taken away continency. By
 this, I say, the belly is not provided for, but the form of meats was
 shown: it was made manifest what was right, not that we might go into
 the gulf of desire, but to give a reason for the law. But nothing has
 so restrained intemperance as the Gospel; nor has any one given such
 strict laws against gluttony as Christ, who is said to have pronounced
 even the poor blessed, and the hungering and thirsting happy, the rich
 miserable; to whom, obeying the government of their belly and their
 palate, the material of their lusts could never be wanting, so that
 their servitude could not cease; who think it an argument of their
 happiness to desire as much as they can, except that they are thus able
 to attain less than they desire.  For, moreover, preferring Lazarus in
 his very hunger and in his sores themselves, and with the rich man's
 dogs, He restrained the destroyers of salvation, the belly and the
 palate, by examples.  The apostle also, when he said, "Having food and
 raiment, we are therewith content," [5337] laid down the law of
 frugality and continency; and thinking that it would be of little
 advantage that he had written, he also gave himself as an example of
 what he had written, adding not without reason, that "avarice is the
 root of all evils;" [5338] for it follows in the footsteps of luxury.
 Whatever the latter has wasted by vice, the former restores by crime;
 the circle of crimes being re-trodden, that luxury may again take away
 whatever avarice had heaped together. Nor yet are there wanting, among
 such things, those who, although they have claimed to themselves the
 sound of the Christian name, afford instances and teachings of
 intemperance; whose vices have come even to that pitch, that while
 fasting they drink in the early morning, not thinking it Christian to
 drink after meat, unless the wine poured into their empty and
 unoccupied veins should have gone down directly after sleep: for they
 seem to have less relish of what they drink if food be mingled with the
 wine. Thus you may see such in a new kind, still fasting and already
 drunk, not running to the tavern, but carrying the tavern about with
 them; and if any one of them offers a salute, he gives not a kiss, but
 drinks a health. What can they do after meat, whom meat finds
 intoxicated? Or in what kind of state does the sun at his setting leave
 them, whom at his rising he looks upon as already stupid with wine? But
 things which are detestable are not to be taken as our examples. For
 those things only are to be taken by which our soul may be made better;
 and although in the Gospel the use of meats is universally given to us,
 yet it is understood to be given to us only with the law of frugality
 and continence. For these things are even greatly becoming to the
 faithful,--to wit, those who are about to pray to God and to give Him
 thanks, not only by day, but by night also; which cannot be if the
 mind, stupefied by meat and wine, should not prevail to shake off heavy
 sleep and the load heaped upon the breast.

 [5337] 1 Tim. vi. 8.

 [5338] 1 Tim. vi. 10.

 Chapter VII. Argument.--Moreover, We Must Be Careful that No One Should
 Think that This Licence May Be Carried to Such an Extent as that He May
 Approach to Things Offered to Idols.

 But it must be very greatly guarded against in the use of food, and we
 must be warned lest any should think that liberty is permitted to that
 degree that even he may approach to what has been offered to idols.
 For, as far as pertains to God's creation, every creature is clean. But
 when it has been offered to demons, it is polluted so long as it is
 offered to the idols; and as soon as this is done, it belongs no longer
 to God, but to the idol. And when this creature is taken for food, it
 nourishes the person who so takes it for the demon, not for God, by
 making him a fellow-guest with the idol, not with Christ, as rightly do
 the Jews also. [5339] And the meaning of these meats being perceived,
 and the counsel of the law being considered, and the kindness of the
 Gospel grace being known, and the rigour of temperance being observed,
 and the pollution of things offered to idols being rejected, we who
 keep the rule of truth throughout all things, ought to give thanks to
 God through Jesus Christ, His Son, our Lord, to whom be praise, and
 honour, and glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

 ------------------------

 A letter written to Cyprian by Novatian the Roman presbyter, in the
 name of the Roman clergy, will be found translated (Ep. xxx.) at p.
 308, this volume.

 [5339] Scil. abstain. [But see 1 Cor. viii. 4, etc.]

 Appendix.

 Acts and Records of the Famous Controversy About the Baptism of
 Heretics.

 ------------------------

 A Roman Council Celebrated Under Stephen.

 From the Synodal Roll.

 A divine and sacred provincial synod, gathered together at Rome by
 Stephen, the blessed martyr and father [5340] which excommunicated
 those who in an African synod had, without reason, conceded that they
 who came to the Catholic Church from any heresy should be re-baptized.
 [5341]

 Carthaginian Councils.

 The Third Carthaginian Council Under Cyprian, on the Baptism of
 Infants; Held Anno Domini 253.

 This document is translated at p. 353, Ep. lviii.

 The Fourth Carthaginian Council Under Cyprian; Held Anno Domini 254.
 About Basilides and Martial, Bishops of Spain, Who Had Received
 Certificates.

 This document is translated at p. 369, Ep. lxvii.

 The Fifth Carthaginian Council Under Cyprian, the First About Baptism;
 Held Anno Domini 255, the Third Year of St. Stephen's Episcopate.

 This will be found translated at p. 375, Ep. lxix.

 The Sixth Carthaginian Council Under Cyprian, the Second About Baptism,
 from a Province of Africa and Numidia; Held Anno Domini 256, in the
 Third Year of Stephen's Episcopate.

 This will be found translated at p. 378, Ep. lxxi.

 The Seventh Carthaginian Council Under Cyprian, the Third About
 Baptism, from Three Provinces of Africa; Held Anno Domini 256, in the
 Third Year of Stephen's Episcopate.

 This will be found translated and given in full on p. 565 of the
 present volume.

 [5340] "Papa" [as applied to all bishops. See p. 154, supra.]

 [5341] Reference is made to this council in Epistles of Cyprian, No.
 lxxiii., and at large in Epistles lxix. to lxxiv., pp. 375-396, supra.

 Introductory Notice [5342]

 to an

 Anonymous Treatise Against the Heretic Novatian.

 ------------------------

 The writer of the following treatise was undoubtedly a contemporary of
 Cyprian, and wrote in the early part of the reign of Valerian
 (254-256), during an interval of peace to the Church. This much may be
 collected from the fact that he names one, and only one, persecution
 after that of Decius--namely, that of Gallus and Volusianus--and speaks
 of those who had lapsed under the former, as having been stedfast and
 victorious in the latter. [5343] He is generally believed to have been
 an African, and Tillemont is only withheld from attributing the work to
 Cyprian himself by what he judges to be a difference of style. But
 although from the exordium it may be concluded that the writer was a
 bishop, yet, from his manifest uncertainty as to the fitting way to
 treat those who had lapsed, it is evident that Cyprian cannot have been
 the author; for that prelate, when the persecution of Gallus and
 Volusianus was just threatening, had already decided upon receiving to
 communion the penitents who had yielded to temptation under Decius.
 [5344]

 Ceillier [5345] says that this treatise was written about the year 255,
 while Novatian was still alive, [5346] and when the schism of
 Felicissimus was all but extinct.

 Erasmus first published it among the known works of Cyprian in the year
 1520.

 ------------------------

 Note.

 The American editor subjoins as follows: Cyprian, and Cornelius
 afterward, had decided, with their councils, that the lapsed should be
 classed, and dealt with accordingly, as (1) Libellatici, those who had
 compounded with the heathen, and bought off from offering sacrifice;
 and (2) Sacrificati, those who had actually offered sacrifice to idols.
 Different degrees of discipline were awarded, but all were admitted to
 pardon finally.

 [5342] [By Dr. Wallis, editor of vol. xiii., Edinb. series.]

 [5343] Ch. (or sec.) 6, p. 659, infra.

 [5344] Epistles, liii. p. 336, supra.

 [5345] Hist. Gén. des Auteurs, tom. iii. ch. i. art. 4, sec. 2, note 4.

 [5346] Ch. (or sec.) 1, p. 657, infra.

 A Treatise Against the Heretic Novatian by an Anonymous Bishop.

 ------------------------

 That the Hope of Pardon Should Not Be Denied to the Lapsed.

 1. While I was meditating and impatiently tossing in my mind what I
 ought to do concerning those pitiable brethren who, wounded, not of
 their own will, but by the onset of a raging devil, have lived until
 now, that is, through a long course of time, in the endurance of their
 punishment; lo, there appeared opposed to me another enemy, and the
 adversary of his own paternal affection--the heretic Novatian--who not
 only, as it is signified in the Gospel, passed by the prostrate wounded
 man, as did the priest or the Levite, but by an ingenious and novel
 cruelty rather would slay the wounded man, by taking away the hope of
 salvation, by denying the mercy of his Father, by rejecting the
 repentance of his brother. Marvellous, how bitter, how harsh, how
 perverse are many things! But one more easily perceives the straw in
 another's eye than the beam in one's own. Let not the abrupt madness of
 that perfidious heretic move or disturb us however, beloved brethren,
 who, although he is placed in such great guilt of dissension and
 schism, and is separated from the Church, with sacrilegious temerity
 does not shrink from hurling back his charges upon us: for although he
 is now by himself made unclean, defiled with the filth of sacrilege, he
 contends that we are so. And although it is written that the dogs
 should remain without, and the apostle has taught that these same dogs
 must be shunned, as we read, for he says, "Beware of dogs, beware of
 evil workers," [5347] he does not cease stirring up his frenzy with
 barkings, after the manner of wolves seeking the gloomy darkness, where
 with his brutal cruelty he may easily rend in his dark caves the sheep
 snatched away from the Shepherd. Certainly he declares that he and his
 friends whom he collects are gold. Nor do we doubt but that deserters
 of the Church who have become apostates could now easily be converted
 into gold, but it must be that gold in which the first sins of the
 people of Israel were designated. But the gold and silver vessels which
 were wrested from the Egyptians continue in the Lord's power, that is,
 in Christ's Church; in which house if thou hadst continued, Novatian,
 thou hadst perchance been also a precious vessel; but now thou neither
 perceivest nor complainest that thou art changed into chaff and straw.

 2. Why, therefore, shouldst thou be lifted up with vain things? Thou
 wilt gain loss rather than profit. Why, from the very fact that thou
 art become poorer, believest thou thyself rich? Hear in the Apocalypse
 the Lord's voice rebuking thee with righteous reproaches:  "Thou
 sayest," says He, "I am rich, and increased with goods, and have need
 of nothing; and knowest not that thou art wretched, and miserable, and
 blind, and poor, and naked." [5348] Let him think for certain that he
 possesses these riches of poverty, whoever he may be, that, forsaking
 the Church of Christ, with his darkened reason does not shrink from
 being turned to those rash leaders of schisms and authors of
 dissension, whom John calls antichrists, whom the Evangelist likens to
 chaff, whom the Lord Christ characterizes as thieves and robbers, as He
 Himself declares in the Gospel, saying that "he who entereth not by the
 door into the sheep-fold, but goeth down by some other way, the same is
 a thief and a robber." [5349] Moreover, in the same He also says,
 "All who have come are thieves and robbers." [5350] Who are such but
 the deserters of the faith, and the transgressors of God's Church, who
 strive against God's ordinance; whom the Holy Spirit rightly rebukes by
 the prophet, saying, "Ye have taken counsel, but not by me; and have
 made a confederacy, but not by my Spirit, to add sin to sin." [5351]
 What now can those most perverse friends of Novatian, even now the most
 unhappy [5352] few, reply to these things, who have broken forth to
 such a folly of madness as to have no reverence either for God or man?
 Among them, shamelessly, and without any law of ordination, the
 episcopate is sought after; but among us in its own Sees, and in those
 of the throne delivered to it by God, it is renounced. [5353] There the
 Truth says, "They reject me, that they may sacrifice to me; nor do they
 offer the holy oblations of the children of Israel, nor do they
 approach to offer the holy of holies, but they shall receive their
 ignominy in the error wherein they have erred." [5354] Let it be enough
 in a few words to have proved what they are. Hear, therefore, O
 Novatians, among whom the heavenly Scriptures are read rather than
 understood; well, if they are not interpolated. [5355] For your ears
 are closed, and your hearts darkened, seeing that ye admit no light
 from spiritual and saving warnings; as Isaiah says, "The servants of
 God are blinded." [5356] And deservedly blinded, because the desire of
 schismatics is not in the law; which law points out to us the one and
 only Church in that ark to wit, which was fashioned, by the providence
 of God, under Noah before the deluge, in which--to answer you quickly,
 O Novatian--we find that there were shut up not only clean animals, but
 also unclean; which ark was saved alone, with those who were in it,
 whereas the other things which were not found therein perished in the
 deluge. From that ark there were loosed two birds, a raven and a dove;
 and this raven truly bore the figure or type of impure men, and men who
 would be in perpetual darkness through the world's broad road, and of
 apostates who should arise, feeding on unclean things, and not turning
 themselves eventually to the Church; and as we read, we find that it
 was sent forth, and returned no more. Whoever should be found to
 resemble this bird, then, that is, the impure spirit, will no more be
 able to return to the Church, seeing that the Lord will forbid them,
 even if they should wish it, as He commanded Moses, saying, "Everything
 leprous [5357] and impure, cast abroad outside the camp." [5358] But
 the dove sent forth that returned, is signified by the man who does not
 delay, because he would have no rest for his feet. And Noah received it
 into the ark; and when it was sent forth again on the seventh day,
 received it, bearing in its mouth an olive leaf.

 3. And I, beloved brethren,--as I not heedlessly meditate these things,
 and not in harmony with human wisdom, but as it is permitted to our
 minds by the condescension of the heavenly Lord, needfully and
 pertinently to conceive,--say that that dove signifies to us of itself
 a double type. Formerly, that is, from the beginning of the divine
 administration, it suggests its own figure, the first indeed and
 chief--that is, the figure of the Spirit. And by its mouth the
 sacrament of baptism which is provided for the salvation of the human
 race, and that by the heavenly plan it is celebrated in the Church
 only. [5359] Moreover, three times sent forth from the ark, flying
 about through the air over the water, it already signified the
 sacraments of our Church. Whence also the Lord Christ charges upon
 Peter, and moreover also upon the rest of His disciples, "Go ye and
 preach the Gospel to the nations, baptizing them in the name of the
 Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost." [5360] That is, that
 that same Trinity which operated figuratively in Noah's days through
 the dove, now operates in the Church spiritually through the disciples.

 4. Let us now take the second character also of the dove sent forth
 from the ark, that is to say, in the time of the deluge, when all the
 abysses broke forth; when the cataracts of heaven were opened upon the
 earth, on account of the wickedness of men which they daily practised
 before the Lord; as said Moses, "And the Lord God saw that the
 wickednesses of men were overflowing upon the earth, and that all of
 them were remembering for evil from the beginning of their days; and He
 said, I will destroy man whom I have made from off the face of the
 earth, from man even unto cattle, and from the creeping thing even unto
 the fowls of the air." [5361] Therefore in the time of the flood the
 dove is sent forth from the ark, when the waters were violently rushing
 with all their force upon the earth.

 5. That ark bore the figure of the Church, as we have said above, which
 was stricken hither and thither to such a degree by the tumultuous
 waters. Therefore that deluge which happened under Noah showed forth
 the figure of the persecution which now lately was poured forth over
 the whole world. Moreover, by the waters, the cataracts broken forth
 meeting together on all sides, and growing, were signified the peoples
 which grew up for the desolation of the Church; as the Apocalypse
 teaches, saying, "The waters which thou sawest are peoples, and
 nations, and kingdoms." [5362] Moreover, the dove which could not
 find rest for its feet, bore the likeness of the lapsed, who fell
 forgetful of the divine announcements, either ignorant in simplicity,
 or feigning in audacity. Of whom the Lord had intimated the future
 destruction in the Gospel in these words, saying, "He who heareth my
 words and doeth them not, I will liken him to a foolish man, who built
 his house upon the sand: the tempests came and beat upon that house,
 and it fell; and great was its destruction." [5363] And lest we should
 seem to have made the comparison inconsiderately of that dove bearing
 the image of the lapsed, the prophet rebukes the city as a dove, that
 is, the character of the lapsed, saying, "The dove hearkens not to the
 voice; that is, the illustrious and redeemed city receives not
 teaching, and trusted not in the Lord." [5364]

 6. Moreover, that that dove could not find rest for her feet, as we
 have said above, this signified the footsteps of those who deny; that
 is, those, wounded by the poison of the shining serpent, who sacrifice,
 turned towards their fall; which could not any further step upon the
 asp and the basilisk, and tread upon the dragon and the lion. For this
 power the Lord gave to His disciples, as He says in the Gospel: "Lo, I
 give unto you power to tread on all the power of the enemy, and upon
 serpents and scorpions; and they shall not harm you." [5365] When,
 therefore, these so many and such malignant spirits are attacking and
 bestirring themselves for the destruction of the lapsed, a way of
 salvation is provided for the wounded, that with whatever strength they
 have they may drag themselves with their whole body, and betake
 themselves to their camp, wherein being received, they may heal their
 wounds with spiritual medicaments. Thus the dove received, after the
 intervention of a few days, is again sent forth from the ark; and
 returning, not only shows its firm footsteps, but moreover the signs of
 its peace and victory, in those olive leaves which it bore in its
 mouth.  Therefore that twofold sending forth shows to us a twofold
 trial of persecution: the first, in which they who have lapsed have
 fallen conquered; the second, in which they who have fallen have come
 out conquerors. For to none of us is it doubtful or uncertain, beloved
 brethren, that they who in the first struggle--that is, in the Decian
 persecution--were wounded; afterwards, that is in the second encounter,
 persevered so bravely, that, despising the edicts of the princes of the
 world, [5366] they maintained that unconquered; in that they did not
 fear, after the example of the good Shepherd, to give up their life,
 and to shed their blood, and not to shrink from any barbarity of the
 raging tyrant.

 7. Behold how glorious, how dear to the Lord, are the people whom these
 schismatics do not shrink from calling "wood, hay, stubble;" [5367] the
 equals of whom, that is, those who are even still placed in the same
 guilt of their lapse, they presume must not be admitted to repentance.
 This they judge from that utterance of the Lord, where He says,
 "Whosoever shall deny me before men, him will I deny before my Father
 which is in heaven." [5368] Oh grief! why do they strive against the
 Lord's precepts, that this offspring of Novatian, following the example
 of his father the devil, should now endeavour to put in force those
 things which Christ will do in the time of His judgment? that is, when
 Scripture says, "Vengeance is mine; and I will repay, saith the Lord."
 [5369]

 8. We will answer them as to that utterance of the Lord, which they ill
 understand, and ill explain to themselves. For that He says, "Whosoever
 shall deny me before men, him will I also deny before my Father which
 is in heaven," its meaning is assuredly with respect to future time--to
 the time at which the Lord shall begin to judge the secrets of men--to
 the time at which we must all stand before the judgment-seat of
 Christ--to the time at which many shall begin to say, "Lord, Lord, have
 we not prophesied in Thy name, and in Thy name cast out devils, and in
 Thy name done many wonderful works?" [5370] And yet they shall hear the
 voice of the Lord saying, "Depart from me, all ye that have worked
 iniquity: I know you not." [5371] Then shall it be fulfilled that He
 says, "I also will deny them." But whom will the Lord Christ chiefly
 deny, if not all of you heretics, and schismatics, and strangers to His
 name?  For ye who were some time Christians, but now are Novatians, no
 longer Christians, have changed your first faith by a subsequent
 perfidy in the calling of your name. I should wish you to reply to your
 own proposition. Read and teach: whom of those who had failed or denied
 Him, while He was still with them, did our Lord deny?  Yet also to the
 others of the disciples who had remained with Him He saith, "Will ye
 also go away?" [5372] Even Peter, whom He had previously foretold as
 about to deny Him, when he had denied Him, He did not deny, but
 sustained; and He Himself soothed him when subsequently bitterly
 bewailing his denial.

 9. What sort of folly is thine, Novatian, only to read what tends to
 the destruction of salvation, and to pass by what tends to mercy, when
 Scripture cries, and says, "Repent, ye who err: be converted in heart;"
 [5373] and when the same prophet also exhorts, and says, "Be converted
 unto me with all your heart, in fasting, and weeping, and mourning; and
 rend your hearts, and not your garments; be ye converted to the Lord
 your God: for He is merciful, and one who pities with great
 compassion?" [5374]

 10. Thus we have heard that the Lord is of great compassion. Let us
 hear what the Holy Spirit testifies by David: "If his children forsake
 my law, and walk not in my commandments; if they should profane my
 righteousness, and should not keep my precepts; I will visit their
 crimes with a rod, and their sins with stripes. But my mercy will I not
 utterly disperse from them." [5375] Words like to these we read that
 the Lord said also by Ezekiel:  "Son of man, the house of Israel has
 dwelt on its own land, and they have defiled it by their crimes: their
 uncleanness has become like that of a menstruous woman before my face.
 I have poured out my anger upon them, and I have scattered them among
 the nations; and I have judged them according to their sins, because
 they have defiled my holy name; and because it was said of them, "This
 is the people of the Lord, I have spared them, because of my holy name,
 which the house of Israel despised among the nations." [5376] And in
 conjunction with this he says, "Therefore say to the people of Israel,
 Thus saith the Lord, I spare you not, O house of Israel; but I will
 spare you on account of my holy name, which ye have defiled among they
 nations: and ye shall know that I am the Lord, when I shall be
 sanctified in you." Also the Lord to the same:  "Son of man, say unto
 the people of Israel, Wherefore have ye spoken, saying, We are pining
 away in our sins, and how shall we be able to be saved? Say unto them,
 I live, saith the Lord:  for I do not desire the death of the sinner;
 but I desire that the sinner should turn from his evil way, and live:
 therefore return ye from your evil way: why do ye give yourselves over
 to death, O house of Israel?" [5377] So, too, by Isaiah the prophet: "I
 will not be angry with you for ever, nor will I abstain from defending
 you always." [5378] And because Jeremiah the prophet, in the person of
 the sinful people, prays to the Lord, saying, "Amend us, O Lord, but in
 judgment, and not in anger, lest Thou make us few;" [5379] Isaiah also
 added, and said, "For his sin I have slightly afflicted him; and I have
 stricken him, and have turned away my face from him: and he was
 afflicted, and went away sadly in his ways." [5380] And because he
 labours, he added and said, "I have seen his ways, and I have healed
 him; and I have given him a true exhortation, peace upon peace;" [5381]
 that to those who repent, and pray, and labour, restoration is
 possible, because they would miserably perish, and because they would
 decline from Christ.

 11. Moreover, this is proved in the Gospel, where is described that
 woman who was a sinner, who came to the house of a certain Pharisee
 whither the Lord had been bidden with His disciples, and she brought a
 vessel of ointment, and stood at the Lord's feet, and washed His feet
 with her tears, and wiped them with her hair, and pressed kisses upon
 them; so that that Pharisee was provoked, and said, "If this man were a
 prophet, he would know who and what sort of a woman this is who touches
 him; for she is a sinner." [5382] Whence immediately the Lord, the
 remitter of sins and the receiver of the penitent, says, "Simon, I have
 somewhat to say unto thee. And he answered, saying, Master, say on. And
 the Lord, There was a certain creditor which had two debtors; one who
 had [5383] five hundred pence, and the other fifty. When they had
 nothing to pay, he forgave both. And He asked, Which of these loved
 most?  And Simon answered, Assuredly he to whom he forgave most. And He
 added, saying, Seest thou that woman? I entered into thy house, thou
 gavest me no kiss; but she hath not ceased to kiss my feet; thou
 washedst not my feet, but she has washed them with her tears, and wiped
 them with her hair; thou didst not anoint my feet with oil, but she
 hath anointed them. Wherefore I say unto thee, Simon, that her sins are
 forgiven her." Behold, the Lord grants the debt with His liberal
 kindness to both debtors; behold Him who pardons sins; behold the woman
 who was a sinner, penitent, weeping, praying, and receiving remission
 of her sins!

 12. And now blush if thou canst, Novatian; cease to deceive the unwary
 with thy impious arguments; cease to frighten them with the subtlety of
 one particular. We read, and adore, and do not pass over the heavenly
 judgment of the Lord, where he says that He will deny him who denies
 Him. But does this mean the penitent? And why should I be taking pains
 so long to prove individual cases of mercies? since the mercy of God is
 not indeed denied to the Ninevites, although strangers, and placed
 apart from the law of the Lord, when they beseech it on account of the
 overthrow announced to their city. Nor to Pharaoh himself, resisting
 with sacrilegious boldness, when formerly he was stricken with plagues
 from heaven, and, turning to Moses and to his brother, said, "Pray to
 the Lord for me, for I have sinned." [5384] At once the anger of God
 was suspended from him. And yet thou, O Novatian, judgest and declarest
 that the lapsed have no hope of peace and mercy, nor inclinest thine
 ear to the rebuke of the apostle, when he says, "Who art thou, who
 judgest another man's servant? To his own master he standeth or
 falleth. Yea, he shall stand.  God is mighty to establish him." [5385]
 Whence pertinently and needfully the Holy Spirit, in the person of
 those same lapsed people, rebukes you when He says, "Rejoice not over
 me, O mine enemy: because if I have fallen, I shall also rise again;
 and if I shall walk in darkness, the Lord is my light. I will bear the
 indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against Him, until He
 justify my cause, and execute judgment and justice, and bring me forth
 to the light. I shall behold His righteousness; and she that is mine
 enemy shall see me, and shall cover herself with confusion." [5386]

 13. I beseech thee, hast thou not read, "Boast not, and speak not
 loftily, and let not arrogancy proceed out of your mouth: for the Lord
 lifteth the poor from the earth; He raiseth up the beggar from the
 dunghill, and maketh him to sit with the mighty ones of the people?"
 [5387] Hast thou not read, that "the Lord resisteth the proud, and
 giveth grace to the humble?" [5388] Hast thou not read, "Whoso
 exalteth himself shall be humbled?" [5389] Hast thou not read, that
 "God destroys the remembrance of the proud, and does not forsake the
 memory of the lowly?" Hast thou not read, that "with what judgment a
 man shall judge he must be judged?" [5390] Hast thou not read, that
 "he who hateth his brother is in darkness, and walketh in darkness, and
 knoweth not whither he goeth, because the darkness hath blinded his
 eyes?" [5391] Whence, then, this Novatian has become both so wicked and
 so lost, so mad with rage of discord, I cannot discover, since he
 always in one household--that is, the Church of Christ--would have
 bewailed the sins of his neighbours as his own; [5392] would have borne
 the burthens of his brethren, as the apostle exhorts; would have
 strengthened the faltering in the faith with heavenly counsel.  But
 now, from the time when he began to practise that heresy of Cain which
 only delights in slaying, he does not even of late spare himself. But
 if he had read that "the righteousness of the righteous shall not
 deliver him in the day on which he shall have erred, and the wickedness
 of the wicked shall not harm him from the day in which he shall have
 been converted," [5393] he would long ago have repented in ashes, who
 is always opposed to penitents; who labours more readily in the
 destruction of those things which are built and standing, than in the
 building up of those which are prostrate; who has once more made
 heathens of many most wretched brethren of ours, terrified by his false
 oppositions, by saying that the repentance of the lapsed is vain, and
 cannot avail them for salvation, although the Scripture cries aloud and
 says, "Remember whence thou hast fallen, and repent, or else I will
 come to thee except thou repent." [5394] And indeed, writing to the
 seven churches, rebuking each one of them with its own crimes and sins,
 it said, Repent. To whom but to them, doubtless, whom He had redeemed
 at the great price of His blood?

 14. O impious and wicked as thou art, thou heretic Novatian! who after
 so many and great crimes which in past times thou hadst known to be
 voluntarily committed in the Church, and before thou thyself wast an
 apostate in the family of God, hadst certainly taught that these might
 be abolished from memory if well-doing followed; according to the faith
 of the Scripture which says, "But if the wicked will turn from all his
 sins which he hath committed, and will do righteousness, he shall live
 in eternal life, and shall not die in his wickedness." [5395] For the
 sins which he has committed shall be abolished from memory by the good
 deeds which succeed. Thou reconsiderest now, whether the wounds of the
 lapsed who have fallen, stripped bare by the devil, ought to be cured;
 dashed down, as they are, by the "violence of the flood which the
 serpent sent forth from his mouth after the woman." [5396] But "What
 shall I say?" says the apostle. "Do I praise you? In this I praise you
 not; that ye come together not for the better, but for the worse."
 [5397] For where there are "rivalries and dissensions among you, are ye
 not carnal, and walk according to man?" [5398] Nor indeed ought we to
 wonder why this Novatian should dare now to practise such wicked, such
 severe things against the person of the lapsed, since we have previous
 examples of this kind of prevarication. Saul, that once good [5399]
 man, besides other things, is subsequently overthrown by envy, and
 strives to do everything that is harsh and hostile against David. That
 Judas, who was chosen among the apostles, who was always of one mind
 and faithful in the house of God, himself subsequently betrayed God.
 [5400]

 And indeed the Lord had foretold that many should come as ravening
 wolves in the skins of sheep. Who are those ravening wolves but such as
 conspire with treacherous intent to waste the flock of Christ? As we
 read it written in Zechariah: "Lo, I raise up a shepherd in the land,
 who shall not visit that which is turned away, and will eat the flesh
 of the chosen, and tear their claws in pieces." [5401] Similarly also
 in Ezekiel he rebukes shepherds of this kind, to wit, robbers and
 butchers (I will speak as he had thought [5402] ), saying, "O
 shepherds, wherefore do ye drink the milk, and eat up the curdled milk,
 and have brought that which is strong to nothing, and have not visited
 the weak, have not healed the halting, and have not recalled the
 wandering, and have permitted my people to wander among thorns and
 briers? For these things, says the Lord, lo, I will come against the
 shepherds, and I will require my sheep of their hands; and I will drive
 them away, that they may not feed my sheep; and my sheep shall no more
 be for them to devour, and I will seek them out as a shepherd his flock
 in the day in which there shall be darkness and cloud. Thus I will seek
 out my sheep, and I will seek them out in every place wherever they are
 scattered; and I will seek out what had perished, and I will recall
 what had wandered, and what had halted I will heal, and what is weak I
 will watch over; and I will feed my sheep with judgment." [5403]

 15. Who is it that says these things?  Certainly He who, having left
 the ninety and nine sheep, went to seek that one which had wandered
 from His flock; as David says, "I have gone astray like a sheep which
 was lost," [5404] which being found Christ brings back, bearing on His
 shoulder the tender sinful one; and He, rejoicing and exulting, having
 called His friends and domestics, says, "Rejoice with me; for my sheep
 which was lost is found. I say," says He, "unto you, that there will be
 such joy in heaven over one sinner that repenteth." [5405] And in
 continuation, He says: "Or what woman, having ten denarii, if she
 should lose one of the denarii, does not light a lamp, and all the day
 long clean out her house, seeking till she finds it? And when she has
 found it, she calls together her friends and neighbours, saying,
 Rejoice with me; for I have found the denarius that I had lost. I say
 unto you, that such joy shall be in the sight of the angels of God over
 one sinner that repenteth." [5406] But, on the other hand, they who do
 not repent of their wickedness, let them know from the answer of the
 Lord Himself what remaineth for them; for we read in the Gospel, that
 "certain men came from the Galileans to the Lord, telling Him of those
 whose blood Pilate mingled with their sacrifices; to whom the Lord
 answered, saying, Think ye that those Galileans had been sinners above
 other Galileans, because they suffered such things? No; for I say unto
 you, unless ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish.  Or those eighteen
 upon whom the tower in Siloam fell, think ye that they were debtors to
 death above all men who dwell in Jerusalem?  No; I say unto you," said
 He, "that unless ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish." [5407]

 16. Let us then arouse ourselves as much as we can, beloved brethren;
 and breaking away from the slumber of indolence and security, let us be
 watchful for the observance of the Lord's precepts. Let us with all our
 hearts seek for what we have lost, that we may be able to find; because
 "to him that seeketh," says the Scripture, "it shall be given, and to
 him that knocketh it shall be opened." [5408] Let us cleanse our house
 with spiritual cleanliness, that every secret and hidden place of our
 breast, truly enlightened by the light of the Gospel, may say, "Against
 Thee only have I sinned, and done this great evil in Thy sight." [5409]
 Because the death of sinners is evil, and in hell there is no
 repentance. Let us have in contemplation especially the day of judgment
 and retribution, and what must be believed by all of us, and firmly
 maintained, that "there is no acceptance of persons with God;" [5410]
 since He commanded in Deuteronomy, that the person must not be accepted
 in judgment: "Thou shalt not accept," says He, "the person, neither
 shalt thou judge according to the least nor according to the greatest."
 [5411] Like words to these He also said by Ezekiel: "All souls," said
 He, "are mine; as the soul of the father, so is the soul of the son:
 the soul that hath sinned, it shall die." [5412] It is then He who must
 be revered by us; He must be held fast; He must be propitiated by our
 full and worthy confession, "who has the power of sending soul and body
 to the Gehenna of fire," [5413] --as it is written, "Behold, He cometh
 with many thousands of His messengers, to execute judgment upon all,
 and to destroy all the wicked, and to condemn all flesh, for all the
 deeds of the wicked which they have wickedly done, and for all the
 impious words which sinners have spoken about God." [5414]

 17. Like things to these also says Daniel:  "I beheld a throne placed,
 and the Ancient of days sat upon it, and His clothing was as it were
 snow, and the hairs of His head as it were white wool: His throne was a
 flame of fire, its wheels were burning fire. A river of fire came forth
 before Him:  thousand thousands ministered to Him, and thousand
 thousands stood before Him: He sat to judgment, and the books were
 opened." [5415] And John still more plainly declares, both about the
 day of judgment and the consummation of the world, saying, "And when,"
 said he, "He had opened the sixth seal, lo, there was a great
 earthquake; and the sun became black as sackcloth of hair, and the
 whole moon became as of blood; and the stars fell to the earth, even as
 a fig-tree, shaken by a mighty wind, casteth her unripe figs. And the
 heaven departed as a book when it is rolled up, and every mountain and
 island were moved from their places. And the kings of the earth, and
 all the great men, and the tribunes, and the rich men, and the strong
 men, and every slave, and every free man, hid themselves in the caves
 and in the caverns of the mountains; saying to the mountains and to the
 rocks, Fall upon us, and hide us from the sight of the Father that
 sitteth upon the throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb: because the
 day of destruction cometh; and who shall be able to stand?" [5416]
 Also in the same Apocalypse John says that this too was revealed to
 him. "I saw," says he, "a great throne, and one in white who sat upon
 it, from whose face the heaven and the earth fled away; and their place
 was not found. And I saw the dead, great and small, standing before the
 sight of the Lord's throne: and the books were opened; and another book
 was opened, which is (the book) of life: and every one was judged
 according to those things that were written in the book, according to
 their own works." [5417] Moreover, too, the apostle, giving good
 advice, thus exhorts us, saying, "Let no one deceive you with vain
 words: for because of these things the wrath of God cometh upon the
 children of disobedience. Be not partakers with them." [5418]

 18. Let us, then, with the whole strength of our faith, give praise to
 God; let us give our full confession, since the powers of heaven
 rejoice over our repentance, all the angels rejoice, and Christ also
 rejoices, who once again with full and merciful moderation exhorts us,
 laden with sins, overwhelmed with crimes, to cease from wickedness,
 saying, "Turn ye, and return from your impieties, and your iniquities
 shall not be to you for a punishment. Cast away from you all your
 impieties which ye have committed against me; and make to yourselves a
 new heart and a new spirit. And why do ye deliver yourselves over to
 death, O house of Israel? For I do not desire the death of the sinner."
 [5419] "I am He, I am He who blot out thy crimes, and I will not
 remember them. But do thou have in mind, and let us judge; tell thou
 thy wickednesses first, that thou mayest be justified." [5420] While
 the way of mercy, brethren, is open, [5421] let us entreat God with
 full atonements; let us humble ourselves, that we may be exalted; let
 us acquiesce in the divine exhortation, whereby we may escape the day
 of the Lord and His anger. For thus He says: "Look, my son, upon the
 nations of men, and know who hath hoped in the Lord, and has been
 confounded; or has remained in His commandments, and has been forsaken;
 or has called upon Him, and He has despised him. For the Lord is loving
 and merciful, and forgiving in time of tribulation their sins to all
 those that seek after Him in truth." [5422] Therefore He says, "First
 tell thou thy sins, that thou mayest be justified." Let there be first
 in your hand that prayer full of confession. [5423]

 [5347] Phil. iii. 2.

 [5348] Rev. iii. 17.

 [5349] John x. 1.

 [5350] John x. 8.

 [5351] Isa. xxx. 1.

 [5352] Infelicissimi. This is supposed to be a play upon the name of
 Felicissimus, referred to in Cyprian's letter, [xlviii. p. 325, supra].

 [5353] [Ep. xl. p. 319, supra: et alibi.]

 [5354] Ezek. xliv. 10-13.

 [5355] [See p. 602, note 12, supra.]

 [5356] Isa. xlii. 19.

 [5357] Varium.

 [5358] Num. v. 2.

 [5359] This passage is altogether corrupt and unintelligible: some
 force is necessary even to give it an appearance of meaning.

 [5360] Matt. xxviii. 19. [For the next sentence see Acts ii. 33.]

 [5361] Gen. vi. 5-7.

 [5362] Rev. xvii. 15.

 [5363] Matt. vii. 26, 27.

 [5364] Zeph. iii. 1, 2, 3, LXX.

 [5365] Luke x. 19.

 [5366] Scil. Gallus and Volusianus (Pamel.).

 [5367] 1 Cor. iii. 12.

 [5368] Matt. x. 33.

 [5369] Heb. x. 30.

 [5370] Matt. vii. 22, 23.

 [5371] Matt. vii. 22, 23.

 [5372] John vi. 67.

 [5373] Ezek. xviii. 30.

 [5374] Joel ii. 12, 13.

 [5375] Ps. lxxxix. 30 et seq.

 [5376] Ezek. xxxvi. 17-23.

 [5377] Ezek. xxxiii. 10, 11.

 [5378] Isa. lvii. 16.

 [5379] Jer. x. 24.

 [5380] Isa. lvii. 17.

 [5381] Isa. lvii. 19.

 [5382] Luke vii. 39 et seq.

 [5383] "Habebat," but probably "debebat"--owed.

 [5384] Ex. ix. 28.

 [5385] Rom. xiv. 4.

 [5386] Mic. vii. 8-10.

 [5387] 1 Sam. ii. 3-8.

 [5388] Jas. iv. 6.

 [5389] Matt. xxiii. 12.

 [5390] Matt. vii. 2.

 [5391] 1 John ii. 11.

 [5392] This refers to Novatian's letter in the name of the Roman
 people. (See p. 308. Compare p. 320, note 6.]

 [5393] Ezek. xxxiii. 12.

 [5394] Rev. ii. 5.

 [5395] Ezek. xviii. 21.

 [5396] Rev. xii. 15.

 [5397] 1 Cor. xi. 17.

 [5398] 1 Cor. iii. 3.

 [5399] 1 Sam. ix. 2.

 [5400] [A misconception of Judas, who seems to have been hypocritical
 from the first. John vi. 64.]

 [5401] Zech. xi. 16.

 [5402] This parenthesis is unintelligible. [i.e., not shepherds, but
 "butchers," in the prophet's thought, who speaks as follows, etc.]

 [5403] Ezek. xxxiv.

 [5404] Ps. cxix. 176.

 [5405] Luke xv. 6-10.

 [5406] Luke xv. 6-10.

 [5407] Luke xiii. 1-5.

 [5408] Luke xi. 10.

 [5409] Ps. li. 4.

 [5410] Rom. ii. 11.

 [5411] Deut. i. 17.

 [5412] Ezek. xviii. 4.

 [5413] Matt. x. 28.

 [5414] Jude 14, 15.

 [5415] Dan. vii. 9, 10.

 [5416] Rev. vi. 12-17.

 [5417] Rev. xx. 11-13.

 [5418] Eph. v. 6, 7.

 [5419] Ezek. xviii. 30-32.

 [5420] Isa. xliii. 25, 26.

 [5421] [A virtual refutation of the dogma of purgatory, and all the
 trading in Masses which it involves. The pious Hirscher, in his
 Kirchlichen Zustände der Gegenwart (Tübingen, 1849; a translation of
 which, by the American editor of this series, was published, Oxford,
 1852), bewails the corrupting influences of this system, though he died
 in the Papal communion.]

 [5422] Ecclus. ii. 10, 11.

 [5423] [The Lord's prayer; p. 454, note 1, supra.]

 Introductory Notice. [5424]

 to

 Anonymous Treatise on Re-baptism.

 ------------------------

 The following treatise on Re-baptism has been attributed by some
 authorities to the pen of one Ursinus, [5425] a monk, who is said to
 have written in the fourth century.  But internal evidence seems to
 point to a bishop as having been the writer; [5426] and it seems very
 probable that it was written while the baptismal controversy was still
 agitating the Church, from the manner in which he refers to it.
 Moreover, the bitter attack contained in the first chapter was probably
 levelled against Cyprian, as the leader of the party in favour of the
 re-baptism of heretics. And this would hardly have been the case, at
 least the attack would not have been characterized by the same rancour,
 if Cyprian had already suffered martyrdom, and the controversy had lost
 its acrimony and intensity.

 Rigaltius, who first edited the treatise, among his notes to the works
 of Cyprian, judged that it was written about the time of that Father.
 And Fell, Cave, Tillemont, and Galland, are of the same opinion. The
 two latter, indeed, conjecture that it was actually intended against
 Cyprian.

 The difficulty arising to the translator from a loose and rambling
 style, and very involved argument, has been enhanced by a text
 singularly uncertain; but he ventures to think that there are points in
 the treatment of the subject which will not be without interest to the
 theological student of the present day, although its immediate purpose
 has passed away.

 [5424] [By Dr. Wallis, as before, p. 655.]

 [5425] Gennadius, de Script. Eccles., cap. xxvii.

 [5426] Sec. x.

 A Treatise on Re-Baptism by an Anonymous Writer.

 ------------------------

 Argument.--That They Who Have Once Been Washed in the Name of the Lord
 Jesus Christ, Ought Not to Be Re-Baptized.

 1. I observe that it has been asked among the brethren what course
 ought specially to be adopted towards the persons of those who,
 although baptized in heresy, have yet been baptized in the name of our
 Lord Jesus Christ, [5427] and subsequently departing from their heresy,
 and fleeing as supplicants to the Church of God, should repent with
 their whole hearts, and only now perceiving the condemnation of their
 error, implore from the Church the help of salvation. The point is
 whether, according to the most ancient custom and ecclesiastical
 tradition, it would suffice, after that baptism which they have
 received outside the Church indeed, but still in the name of Jesus
 Christ our Lord, that only hands should be laid upon them by the bishop
 for their reception of the Holy Spirit, and this imposition of hands
 would afford them the renewed and perfected seal of faith; or whether,
 indeed, a repetition of baptism would be necessary for them, as if they
 should receive nothing if they had not obtained baptism afresh, just as
 if they were never baptized in the name of Jesus Christ. And therefore
 some things were talked about as having been written and replied on
 this new question, wherein both sides endeavoured with the greatest
 eagerness to demolish what had been written by their antagonists. In
 which kind of debate, as it appears to me, no controversy or discussion
 could have arisen at all if each one of us had been content with the
 venerable authority of all the churches, [5428] and with becoming
 humility had desired to innovate nothing, as observing no kind of room
 for contradiction. For everything which is both doubtful and ambiguous,
 and is established in opinions differing among those of prudent and
 faithful men, if it is judged to be against the ancient and memorable
 and most solemn observance of all those holy and faithful men who have
 deserved well, ought assuredly to be condemned; since in a matter once
 arranged and ordained, whatever that is which is brought forward
 against the quiet and peace of the Church, will result in nothing but
 discords, and strifes, and schisms.  And in this no other fruit can be
 found but this alone; that one man, whoever he is, should be
 vain-gloriously declared among certain fickle men to be of great
 prudence and constancy: and, being gifted with the arrogance of
 heretics, whose only consolation in destruction is the not appearing to
 sin alone, should be renowned among those that are most similar and
 agreeable to himself, as having corrected the errors and vices of all
 the churches. For this is the desire and purpose of all heretics, to
 frame as many calumnies of this kind as possible against our most holy
 mother the Church, and to deem it a great glory to have discovered
 anything that can be imputed to her as a crime, or even as a folly. And
 since it becomes no faithful man of sound mind to dare to hold such a
 view, especially no one who is ordained in any clerical office at all,
 and much more in the episcopal order, it is like a prodigy for bishops
 themselves to devise such scandals, and not to fear to unfold too
 irreverently against the precept of the law and of all the Scriptures,
 with their own disgrace and risk, the disgrace of their mother the
 Church--if they think that there is any disgrace in this matter;
 although the Church has no disgrace in this instance, save in the error
 of such men as these themselves.  Therefore it is the more grievous sin
 in men of this kind, if that which is blamed by them in the most
 ancient observance, as if it were not rightly done, is manifestly and
 forcibly shown as well to have been rightly observed by those who were
 before us, as to be rightly observed also by us; so that even if we
 should engage in the controversy with equal arguments on both sides,
 yet, since that which was innovated could not be established without
 dissension among the brethren and mischief to the Church, assuredly it
 ought not,--right or wrong, as they say, that is, contrary to what is
 good and proper--rashly to be flung like a stain upon our mother the
 Church; and the ignominy of this audacity and impiety ought with reason
 to be attached to those who should attempt this. But since it is not in
 our power, according to the apostle's precept, "to speak the same
 thing, that there be not schisms among us;" [5429] yet, as far as we
 can, we strive to demonstrate the true condition of this argument, and
 to persuade turbulent men, even now, to mind their own business, as we
 shall even attain a great deal if they will at length acquiesce in this
 sound advice. [5430] And therefore we shall, as is needful, collect
 into one mass whatever passages of the Holy Scriptures are pertinent to
 this subject. And we shall manifestly harmonize, as far as possible,
 those which seem to be differing or of various meaning; and we shall to
 the extent of our poor ability examine both the utility and advantage
 of each method, that we may recommend to all the brethren, that the
 most wholesome form and peaceful custom be adopted in the Church.

 2. To such, then, as approach to a discussion of saving and modern,
 that is, of spiritual and evangelical baptism, there occurs first of
 all the announcement universally well known, made and begun by John the
 Baptist, who, somewhat departing from the law, that is, from the most
 ancient baptism of Moses, and preparing the way of the new and true
 grace, both preoccupied the ears of the Jews gradually by the baptism
 of water and of repentance which for the time he practised, and took
 possession of them with the announcement of a spiritual baptism that
 was to come, exhorting them, and saying, "He that cometh after me is
 mightier than I, whose shoe's latchet I am not worthy to unloose: He
 shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost, and with fire;" [5431] and for
 this reason we also ought to make a beginning of this discourse from
 this point. For in the Acts of the Apostles, the Lord after His
 resurrection, confirming this same word of John, "commanded them that
 they should not depart from Jerusalem, but wait for that promise of the
 Father which, saith He, ye have heard from me; for John truly baptized
 with water, but ye shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost not many days
 hence." [5432] And Peter also related these same words of the Lord,
 when he gave an account of himself to the apostles, saying: "And as I
 began to speak, the Holy Ghost fell upon them as on us at the
 beginning; and I remembered the word of the Lord, how that He said,
 John indeed baptized with water, but ye shall be baptized with the Holy
 Ghost. If, therefore, He gave them a like gift as to us, who believe on
 the Lord Jesus Christ, who was I, that I could withstand the Lord?"
 [5433] And again: "Men and brethren, ye know how from ancient days God
 made choice among us, that the Gentiles by my mouth should hear the
 word of the Gospel, and believe. And God, who knoweth the hearts, bare
 them witness, giving them the Holy Spirit, even as He did unto us."
 [5434] And on this account we ought to consider what is the force and
 power of this saying. For the Lord says to them who would have to be
 subsequently baptized because they should believe, that they must be
 baptized not in like manner as by Him in water, unto repentance, but in
 the Holy Ghost. And of this announcement, as assuredly none of us can
 doubt it, it is plain on what principle men were baptized in the Holy
 Spirit. For it was peculiarly in the Holy Spirit Himself alone that
 they who believed were baptized. For John distinguished, and said that
 he indeed baptized in water, but that one should come who would baptize
 in the Holy Ghost, by the grace and power of God; and they are so by
 the Spirit's bestowal and operation of hidden results. Moreover, they
 are so no less in the baptism of the Spirit and of water. They are so,
 besides, also in the baptism of every one in his own proper blood.
 [5435] Even as the Holy Scriptures declare to us, from which we shall
 adduce evident proofs throughout each individual instance of those
 things which we shall narrate.

 3. And to these things thou perchance, who art bringing in some
 novelty, mayest immediately and impatiently reply, as thou art wont,
 that the Lord said in the Gospel: "Except a man be born again of water
 and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven." [5436]
 Whence it manifestly appears that that baptism alone is profitable
 wherein also the Holy Spirit can dwell; for that upon the Lord Himself,
 when He was baptized, the Holy Spirit descended, and that His deed and
 word are quite in harmony, and that such a mystery can consist with no
 other principle. To which reply none of us is found either so senseless
 or so stubborn as to dare, contrary to right or contrary to truth, to
 object, for instance, so to the doing of things in their integrity, and
 by all means in the Church, and the observation of them according to
 the order of discipline perpetually by us. But if, in the same New
 Testament, those things which in that matter we come upon as
 associated, be sometimes found in some sort divided, and separated, and
 arranged, and ordered just as if they were by themselves; let us see
 whether these solitary instances by themselves may not sometimes be
 such as are not imperfect, but, as it were, entire and complete. For
 when by imposition of the bishop's hands the Holy Spirit is given to
 every one that believes, as in the case of the Samaritans, after
 Philip's baptism, the apostles did to them by laying on of hands; in
 this manner also they conferred on them the Holy Spirit. And that this
 might be the case, they themselves prayed for them, for as yet the Holy
 Spirit had not descended upon any of them, but they had only been
 baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus. Moreover, our Lord after His
 resurrection, when He had breathed upon His apostles, and had said to
 them, "Receive ye the Holy Ghost," [5437] thus and thus only bestowed
 upon them the Spirit.

 4. And this being found to be so, what thinkest thou, my brother? If a
 man be not baptized by a bishop, so as even at once to have the
 imposition of hands, and should yet die before having received the Holy
 Spirit, should you judge him to have received salvation or not?
 Because, indeed, both the apostles themselves and the disciples, who
 also baptized others, and were themselves baptized by the Lord, did not
 at once receive the Holy Spirit, for He had not as yet been given,
 because that Jesus had not as yet been glorified. And after His
 resurrection no small interval of time elapsed before that took
 place,--even as also the Samaritans, when they were baptized by Philip,
 did not receive the gift until the apostles invited from Jerusalem to
 Samaria went down to them to lay hands upon them, and conferred on them
 the Holy Spirit by the imposition of hands. Because in that interval of
 time any one of them who had not attained the Holy Spirit, might have
 been cut off by death, and die defrauded of the grace of the Holy
 Spirit.  And it cannot be doubted also, that in the present day this
 sort of thing is usual, and happens frequently, that many after baptism
 depart from this life without imposition of the bishop's hands, and yet
 are esteemed perfected believers. Just as the Ethiopian eunuch, when he
 was returning from Jerusalem and reading the prophet Isaiah, and was in
 doubt, having at the Spirit's suggestion heard the truth from Philip
 the deacon, believed and was baptized; and when he had gone up out of
 the water, the Spirit of the Lord took away Philip, and the eunuch saw
 him no more. For he went on his way rejoicing, although, as thou
 observest, hands were not laid on him by the bishop, that he might
 receive the Holy Spirit. But if thou admittest this, and believest it
 to be saving, and dost not gainsay the opinion of all the faithful,
 thou must needs confess this, that even as this principle proceeds to
 be more largely discussed, that other also can be more broadly
 established; that is, that by the imposition of hands alone of the
 bishop--because baptism in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ has gone
 before it--may the Holy Spirit also be given to another man who repents
 and believes. Because the Holy Scripture has affirmed that they who
 should believe in Christ, must needs be baptized in the Spirit; so that
 these also may not seem to have anything less than those who are
 perfectly Christians; lest it should be needful to ask what sort of a
 thing was that baptism which they have attained in the name of Jesus
 Christ. Unless, perchance, in that former discussion also, about those
 who should only have been baptized in the name of Jesus Christ, thou
 shouldst decide that they can be saved even without the Holy Spirit, or
 that the Holy Spirit is not accustomed to be bestowed in this manner
 only, but by the imposition of the bishop's hands; or even shouldst say
 that it is not the bishop alone who can bestow the Holy Spirit.

 5. And if this be so, and the occurrence of any of these things cannot
 deprive a man who believes, of salvation, thou thyself also affirmest
 that the fact of the mystery of the faith being divided in a manner,
 and its not being, as thou contendest, consummated, where necessity
 intervenes, cannot take away salvation from a believing and penitent
 man. Or if thou sayest that a man of this kind cannot be saved, we
 deprive all bishops of salvation, whom thou thus engagest, under risks
 as assured as possible, to be bound themselves to afford help to all
 those who live under their care, and are in weak health, in their
 districts, scattered up and down, because other men of less degree
 among the clerics who venture cannot confer the same benefit; so that
 the blood of those who shall appear to have departed from this life
 without the benefit would have, of necessity, to be required at the
 hands of the bishops. And further, as you are not ignorant, the Holy
 Spirit is found to have been given to men who believe, by the Lord
 without baptism of water, as is contained in the Acts of the Apostles
 after this manner: "While Peter was still speaking these words, the
 Holy Ghost fell upon all them who heard the word. And they who were of
 the circumcision which believed were astonished, as many as came with
 Peter, because that on the Gentiles also was poured out the gift of the
 Holy Spirit. For they heard them speak with their tongues, and they
 magnified God.  Then answered Peter, Can any man forbid water, that
 these should not be baptized, who have received the Holy Ghost as well
 as we?  And he commanded them to be baptized in the name of Jesus
 Christ." [5438] Even as Peter also subsequently most abundantly taught
 us about the same Gentiles, saying: "And He put no difference between
 us and them, their hearts being purified by faith." [5439] And there
 will be no doubt that men may be baptized with the Holy Ghost without
 water,--as thou observest that these were baptized before they were
 baptized with water; that the announcements of both John and of our
 Lord Himself were satisfied,--forasmuch as they received the grace of
 the promise both without the imposition of the apostle's hands and
 without the laver, which they attained afterwards. And their hearts
 being purified, God bestowed upon them at the same time, in virtue of
 their faith, remission of sins; so that the subsequent baptism
 conferred upon them this benefit alone, that they received also the
 invocation of the name of Jesus Christ, that nothing might appear to be
 wanting to the integrity of their service and faith. [5440]

 6. And this also,--looking at it from the opposite side of this
 discussion,--those disciples of our Lord themselves attained, upon
 whom, being previously baptized, the Holy Spirit at length came down on
 the day of Pentecost, descending from heaven indeed by the will of God,
 not of His own accord, but effused for this very office, and moreover
 upon each one of them.  Although these were already righteous, and, as
 we have said, had been baptized by the Lord's baptism even as the
 apostles themselves, who nevertheless are found on the night on which
 He was apprehended to have all deserted Him. And even Peter himself,
 who boasted that he would persevere in his faith, and most obstinately
 resisted the prediction of the Lord Himself, yet at last denied Him,
 that by this means it might be shown to us, that whatever sins they had
 contracted in the meantime and in any manner, these same sins, by the
 faith in them subsequently attested as sincere, were without doubt put
 away by the baptism of the Holy Spirit. Nor, as I think, was it for any
 other reason that the apostles had charged those whom they addressed in
 the Holy Spirit, that they should be baptized in the name of Christ
 Jesus, except that the power of the name of Jesus invoked upon any man
 by baptism might afford to him who should be baptized no slight
 advantage for the attainment of salvation, as Peter relates in the Acts
 of the Apostles, saying: "For there is none other name under heaven
 given among men whereby we must be saved." [5441] As also the Apostle
 Paul unfolds, showing that God hath exalted our Lord Jesus, and "given
 Him a name, that it may be above every name, that in the name of Jesus
 all should bow the knee, of things heavenly and earthly, and under the
 earth, and every tongue should confess that Jesus is Lord in the glory
 of God the Father." And he on whom, when he should be baptized,
 invocation should be made in the name of Jesus, although he might
 obtain baptism under some error, still would not be hindered from
 knowing the truth at some time or another, and correcting his error,
 and coming to the Church and to the bishop, and sincerely confessing
 our Jesus before men; so that then, when hands were laid upon him by
 the bishop, he might also receive the Holy Spirit, and he would not
 lose that former invocation of the name of Jesus. Which none of us may
 disallow, although this invocation, if it be standing bare and by
 itself, could not suffice for affording salvation, lest on this
 principle we should believe that even Gentiles and heretics, who abuse
 the name of Jesus, could attain unto salvation without the true and
 entire thing. Yet it is extremely useful to believe that this
 invocation of the name of Jesus, together with the correction of error
 and the acknowledgment of the belief of the truth, and with the putting
 away of all stain of past conversation, if rightly performed with the
 mystery of God among men of this kind, obtains a place which it would
 not have had, and finally, in the true faith and for the maintenance of
 the integrity of the sign, is no hindrance, when its supplement which
 had been wanting is added; and that it is consistent with good reason,
 with the authority of so many years, and so many churches and apostles
 and bishops; even as it is the very greatest disadvantage and damage to
 our most holy mother Church, now for the first time suddenly and
 without reason to rebel against former decisions after so long a series
 of so many ages. For not for any other reason Peter--who had already
 been baptized and had been asked what he thought of the Lord by the
 Lord Himself, and the truth of the revelation of the Father in heaven
 being bestowed on him had confessed that Christ was not only our Lord,
 but was the Son of the living God--was shown subsequently to have
 withstood the same Christ when He made announcement of His passion, and
 therefore was set forth as being called Satan. For no other reason
 except because it would come to pass that some, although varying in
 their own judgment, and somewhat halting in faith and doctrine,
 although they were baptized in the name of Jesus, yet, if they had been
 able to rescind their error in some interval of time, were not on that
 account cut off from salvation; but at any time that they had come to
 the right mind, obtained by repentance a sound hope of salvation,
 especially when they received the Holy Spirit, to be baptized by Whom
 is the duty of every man, they would have intended some such thing.
 Even as we do not apprehend that Peter in the Gospel suffered this
 alone, but all the disciples, to whom, though already baptized, the
 Lord afterwards says, that "all ye shall be offended in me," [5442] all
 of whom, as we observe, having amended their faith, were baptized after
 the Lord's resurrection with the Holy Spirit. So that not without
 reason we also in the present day may believe that men, amended from
 their former error, may be baptized in the Holy Spirit, who, although
 they were baptized with water in the name of the Lord, might have had a
 faith somewhat imperfect. Because it is of great importance whether a
 man is not baptized at all in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, or
 indeed whether in some respect he halts when he is baptized with the
 baptism of water, which is of less account provided that afterwards a
 sincere faith in the truth is evident in the baptism of the Spirit,
 which undoubtedly is of greater account.

 7. Neither must you esteem what our Lord said as being contrary to this
 treatment: "Go ye, teach the nations; baptize them in the name of the
 Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost." [5443] Because,
 although this is true and right, and to be observed by all means in the
 Church, and moreover has been used to be observed, yet it behoves us to
 consider that invocation of the name of Jesus ought not to be thought
 futile by us on account of the veneration and power of that very name,
 in which name all kinds of power are accustomed to be exercised, and
 occasionally some even by men outside the Church. But to what effect
 are those words of Christ, who said that He would deny, and not know,
 those who should say to Him in the day of judgment, "Lord, Lord, have
 we not prophesied in Thy name, and in Thy name cast out demons, and in
 Thy name done many wonderful works," when He answered them, even with
 emphasis, [5444] "I never knew you; depart from me, ye who work
 iniquity," [5445] unless that it should be shown to us, that even by
 those who work iniquity might these good works also be done, by the
 superfluous [5446] energy of the name of Christ?  Therefore ought this
 invocation of the name of Jesus to be received as a certain beginning
 of the mystery of the Lord common to us and to all others, which may
 afterwards be filled up with the remaining things. Otherwise such an
 invocation would not avail if it should remain alone, because after the
 death of a man in this position there cannot be added to him anything
 at all, nor supplemented, nor can, in anything, avail him in the day of
 judgment, when they shall begin to be reproached by our Lord with those
 things which we have above mentioned, none of whom notwithstanding in
 this present time may by any man be so hardly and cruelly prohibited
 from aiding themselves in those ways which we have above shown.

 8. But these things thou wilt, as thou art wont, contradict, by
 objecting to us, that when they baptized, the disciples were baptized
 perfectly, and rightly, and not as these heretics; and this thou must
 needs assume from their condition, and His who baptized them. And
 therefore we reply to this proposition of thine, not as accusers of the
 Lord's disciples, but as we are constrained, because it is necessary
 that we should investigate by reasons where and when, and in what
 measure, salvation has been bestowed on each of us. For that our Lord
 was born, and that He was the Christ, appeared by many reasons to be
 believed, not unjustly, by His disciples, because He had been born of
 the tribe of Judah, of the family of David, and in the city of
 Bethlehem; and because He had been announced to the shepherds by the
 angels at the same moment that there was born to them a Saviour;
 because His star being seen in the east, He had been most anxiously
 sought for and adored by the Magi, and honoured with illustrious
 presents and distinguished offerings; because while still a youth,
 sitting in the temple with the doctors of the law, He wisely, and with
 the admiration of all, had disputed; because when He was baptized He
 had been glorified, as had happened to none others, by the descent of
 the Holy Spirit from the opened heavens, and by its abode upon Him; and
 moreover by the testimony of His Father, and also of John the Baptist;
 because, beyond the inferior capacity of man, He understood the hearts
 and thoughts of all men; because He cured and healed weaknesses, and
 vices, and diseases, with very great power; because He bestowed
 remissions of sins, with manifest attestation; because He expelled
 demons at His bidding; because He purified lepers with a word; because,
 by converting water into wine, He enlarged the nuptial festivity with
 marvellous joyfulness; because He restored or granted sight to the
 blind; because He maintained the doctrine of the Father with all
 confidence; because in a desert place He satisfied five thousand men
 with five loaves; because the remains and the fragments filled more
 than twelve baskets; because He everywhere raised up the dead,
 according to His mercy; because He commanded the winds and the sea to
 be still; because He walked with His feet upon the sea; because He
 absolutely performed all miracles.

 9. By which things, and by many deeds of this kind tending to His
 glory, it appeared to follow as a consequence, that in whatever manner
 the Jews think about Christ, and although they do not believe
 concerning Jesus Christ our Lord, that even they themselves thought
 that such and so great a one would without any death endure to
 eternity, and would possess the kingdom of Israel, and of the whole
 world for ever; and that it should not be destroyed. Whence, moreover,
 the Jews dared to seize Him by force, and anoint Him for the kingdom,
 which indeed He was compelled to evade; and therefore His disciples
 thought that in no other way would He bestow upon them eternal life,
 except He Himself had first continued this temporal life into that
 eternal one in His own experience. In fine, when they were passing
 through Galilee, Jesus said to them, "The Son of man is to be delivered
 into the hands of men, and they will kill Him; and after three days He
 shall rise again." [5447] and they were greatly grieved, because, as we
 have said, they had formed a very different notion previously in their
 minds and hearts. And again, this also was the speech of the Jews, in
 contradiction against Him, when He taught them of Himself, and
 announced future things to them, and they said, "We have heard out of
 the law that Christ abideth for ever:  and how sayest thou that the Son
 of man must be lifted up?" [5448] And so there was this same
 presumption concerning Christ in the mind of the disciples, even as
 Peter himself, the leader and chief of the apostles, broke forth into
 that expression of his own incredulity. For when he, together with the
 others, had been asked by the Lord what he thought about Him, that is,
 whom he thought Him to be, and had first of all confessed the truth,
 saying that He was the Christ the Son of the living God, and therefore
 was judged blessed by Him because he had arrived at this truth, not
 after the flesh, but by the revelation of the heavenly Father; yet this
 same Peter, when Jesus began to show His disciples that He must go to
 Jerusalem, and suffer many things from the elders, and priests, and
 scribes, and be killed, and after the third day rise again from the
 dead; nevertheless that true confessor of Christ, after a few days,
 taking Him aside, began to rebuke Him, saying, "Be propitious to
 Thyself: this shall not be;" [5449] so that on that account he deserved
 to hear from the Lord, "Get thee behind me, Satan; [5450] thou art an
 offence unto me, because he savoured not the things which are of God,
 but those things which are of men." Which rebuke against Peter became
 more and more apparent when the Lord was apprehended, and, frightened
 by the damsel, he said, "I know not what thou sayest, neither know I
 thee;" [5451] and again when, using an oath, he said this same thing;
 and for the third time, cursing and swearing, he affirmed that he knew
 not the man, and not once, but frequently, denied Him. [5452] And this
 disposition, because it was to continue to him even to the Lord's
 passion, was long before made manifest by the Lord, that we also might
 not be ignorant of it. Again, after the Lord's resurrection, one of His
 disciples, Cleopas, when he was, according to the error of all his
 fellow-disciples, sorrowfully telling what had happened to the Lord
 Himself, as if to some unknown person, spoke thus, saying of Jesus the
 Nazarene, "who was a prophet mighty in deed and in word before God and
 all the people; how the chief priests and our rulers delivered Him to
 be condemned to death, and fastened Him to the cross. But we trusted
 that it had been He which should have redeemed Israel." [5453] And in
 addition to these things, all the disciples also judged the declaration
 of the women who had seen the Lord after the resurrection to be idle
 tales; and some of themselves, when they had seen Him, believed not,
 but doubted; and they who were not then present believed not at all
 until they had been subsequently by the Lord Himself in all ways
 rebuked and reproached; because His death had so offended them that
 they thought that He had not risen again, who they had believed ought
 not to have died, because contrary to their belief He had died once.
 And thus, as far as concerns the disciples themselves, they are found
 to have had a faith neither sound nor perfect in such matters as we
 have referred to; and what is much more serious, they moreover baptized
 others, as it is written in the Gospel according to John.

 10. Besides, what wilt thou say of those who are in many cases baptized
 by bishops of very bad character, who yet at length, when God so wills
 it, convicted of their crimes, are even deprived of their office
 itself, or absolutely of communion? Or what wilt thou decide of those
 who may have been baptized by bishops, whose opinions are unsound, or
 who are very ignorant--when they may not have spoken clearly and
 honestly, or even have spoken otherwise than is fit in the tradition of
 the sacrament, or at least may have asked anything, or asking, have
 heard from those who answered what ought by no means to be so asked or
 answered? And still this does not greatly injure that true faith of
 ours, although, moreover, these more simple men may deliver the mystery
 of the faith without the elegance and order that thou wouldst use. And
 thou wilt assuredly say, with that marvellous carefulness of thine,
 that these too should be baptized again, since this is especially the
 thing which is wanting to them, or hinders their being able to receive,
 uncorrupted, that divine and inviolable mystery of the faith. And yet,
 O excellent man, let us attribute and allow to the heavenly agencies
 their power, and let us concede to the condescension of the divine
 majesty its appropriate operations; and understanding how great is the
 advantage therein, let us gladly acquiesce in it. And thus, as our
 salvation is founded in the baptism of the Spirit, which for the most
 part is associated with the baptism of water, if indeed baptism shall
 be given by us, let it be conferred in its integrity and with
 solemnity, and with all those means which are written; and let it be
 administered without any disconnection of anything. Or if, by the
 necessity of the case, it should be administered by an inferior cleric,
 let us wait for the result, that it may either be supplied by us,
 [5454] or reserved to be supplied by the Lord. If, however, it should
 have been administered by strangers, let this matter be amended as it
 can and as it allows. Because outside the Church there is no Holy
 Spirit, sound faith moreover cannot exist, not alone among heretics,
 but even among those who are established in schism. And for that
 reason, they who repent and are amended by the doctrine of the truth,
 and by their own faith, which subsequently has been improved by the
 purification of their heart, ought to be aided only by spiritual
 baptism, that is, by the imposition of the bishop's hands, and by the
 ministration of the Holy Spirit. Moreover, the perfect seal of faith
 has been rightly accustomed to be given in this manner and on this
 principle in the Church. So that the invocation of the name of Jesus,
 which cannot be done away, may not seem to be held in disesteem by us;
 which assuredly is not fitting; although such an invocation, if none of
 those things of which we have spoken should follow it, may fail and be
 deprived of the effect of salvation. For when the apostle said that
 there was "one baptism," [5455] it must needs have been by the
 continued effect of the invocation of the name of Jesus, because, once
 invoked, it cannot be taken away by any man, even although we might
 venture, against the decision of the apostles, to repeat it by giving
 too much, yea, by the desire of superadding baptism. If he who returns
 to the Church be unwilling again to be baptized, the result will be
 that we may defraud him of the baptism of the Spirit, whom we think we
 must not defraud of the baptism of water.

 11. And what wilt thou determine against the person of him who hears
 the word, [5456] and haply taken up in the name of Christ, has at once
 confessed, and has been punished before it has been granted him to be
 baptized with water? Wilt thou declare him to have perished because he
 has not been baptized with water? Or, indeed, wilt thou think that
 there may be something from without that helps him to salvation,
 although he is not baptized with water?  Thy thinking him to have
 perished will be opposed by the sentence of the Lord, who says,
 "Whosoever shall confess me before men, him will I also confess before
 my Father which is in heaven;" [5457] because it is no matter whether
 he who confesses for the Lord is a hearer of the word or a believer, so
 long as he confesses that same Christ whom he ought to confess; because
 the Lord, by confessing him, in turn Himself graces His confessor
 before his Father with the glory of his martyrdom, as He promised. But
 this assuredly ought not to be taken too liberally, as if it could be
 stretched to such a point as that any heretic can confess the name of
 Christ who notwithstanding denies Christ Himself; that he believes on
 another Christ, when Christ avows that it cannot avail him at all;
 forasmuch as the Lord said that He [5458] must needs be brought to
 confession by us before men, which cannot be done without Him, and
 without veneration of His name. And therefore both [5459] ought to
 stand by the confessor, sound, and sincere, and uncontaminated, and
 inviolated, without any choice being made of the confessor himself,
 whether he is righteous or a sinner, and a perfect Christian or an
 imperfect one, who has not feared to confess the Lord at his own
 greatest peril. And this is not contrary to the former discussion,
 because there is left therein time for the correction of many things
 which are bad, and because certain things are conceded to the very name
 only of our Lord; while martyrdom cannot be consummated except in the
 Lord and by the Lord Himself, and therefore nobody can confess Christ
 without His name, nor can the name of Christ avail any one for
 confession without Christ Himself.

 12. Wherefore the whole of this discussion must be considered, that it
 may be made clearer. For the invocation of the name of Jesus can only
 be an advantage if it shall be subsequently properly supplemented,
 because both prophets and apostles have so declared. For James says in
 the Acts of the Apostles: "Men and brethren, hearken: Simon hath
 declared how God at the first visited the Gentiles, to take out of them
 a people for His name. And to this agree the words of the prophets; as
 it is written, After this I will return, and will build again the
 tabernacle of David, which has fallen down; and I will build again the
 ruins thereof, and I will raise it up anew; that the residue of men may
 seek the Lord, and all the Gentiles, upon whom my name is called upon
 them, saith the Lord, who doeth these things." [5460] Therefore also
 the residue of men, that is, some of the Jews and all the Gentiles upon
 whom the name of the Lord is called, may and of necessity must seek the
 Lord, because that very invocation of the name affords them the
 opportunity, or even imposes on them the necessity, of seeking the
 Lord. And with these they prescribe the Holy Scriptures--whether all or
 only some of them--to discuss still more boldly concerning the truth
 than with the Gentiles upon whom the name of the Lord Jesus, the Son of
 the living God, has not been invoked, as it likewise has not upon the
 Jews who only receive the Old Testament Scriptures. And thus men of
 both of these kinds, that is, Jews and Gentiles, fully believing as
 they ought, are in like manner baptized. But heretics who are already
 baptized in water in the name of Jesus Christ must only be baptized
 with the Holy Spirit; and in Jesus, which is "the only name given under
 heaven whereby we must be saved," death is reasonably despised,
 although, if they continue as they are, they cannot be saved, because
 they have not sought the Lord after the invocation of His name upon
 them,--even as those who, on account of false Christs, perchance have
 refused to believe, of whom the Lord says, "Take heed that no man lead
 you into error.  For many shall come in my name, saying, I am Christ,
 and shall lead many into error." [5461] And again He says:  "Then if
 any man shall say unto you, Lo here is Christ, or lo there; believe it
 not. For there shall arise false Christs, and false prophets, and shall
 show great signs and wonders; so that, if it were possible, even the
 very elect shall be deceived." [5462] And these miracles, without
 doubt, they shall then do under the name of Christ; in which name some
 even now appear to do certain miracles, and to prophesy falsely. But it
 is certain that those, because they are themselves not of Christ,
 therefore do not belong to Christ, in like manner as if one should
 depart from Christ, abiding only in His name, he would not be much
 advantaged; nay, rather, he is even burdened by that name, although he
 may have been previously very faithful, or very righteous, or honoured
 with some clerical office, or endowed with the dignity of confession.
 For all those, by denying the true Christ, and by introducing or
 following another--although there is no other at all--leave themselves
 no hope or salvation; not otherwise than they who have denied Christ
 before men, who must needs be denied by Christ; no consideration for
 them being made from their previous conversation, or feeling, or
 dignity, equally as they themselves have dared to do away with Christ,
 that is, their own salvation, they are condemned by the short sentence
 of this kind, because it was manifestly said by the Lord, "Whosoever
 shall deny me before men, I also will deny him before my Father which
 is in heaven." As this word "whosoever," also in the sentence of
 confession, most fully shows us that no condition of the confessor
 himself can stand in the way, although he may have been before a
 denier, or a heretic, or a hearer, or one who is beginning to hear, who
 has not yet been baptized or converted from heresy to the truth of the
 faith, or one who has departed from the Church and has afterwards
 returned, and then when he returned, before the bishop's hands could be
 laid upon him, being apprehended, should be compelled to confess Christ
 before men; even as to one who again denies Christ, no special ancient
 dignity can be effectual to him for salvation.

 13. For any one of us will hold it necessary, that whatever is the last
 thing to be found in a man in this respect, is that whereby he must be
 judged, all those things which he has previously done being wiped away
 and obliterated. [5463] And therefore, although in martyrdom there is
 so great a change of things in a moment of time, that in a very rapid
 case all things may be changed; let nobody flatter himself who has lost
 the occasion of a glorious salvation, if by chance he has excluded
 himself therefrom by his own fault; even as that wife of Lot, [5464]
 who in a similar manner in time of trouble only, contrary to the
 angel's command, looked behind her, and she became a pillar of salt. On
 which principle also, that heretic who, by confessing Christ's name, is
 put to death, can subsequently correct nothing, if he should have
 thought anything erroneously of God or of Christ, although by believing
 on another God or on another Christ he has deceived himself: he is not
 a confessor of Christ, but in the name only of Christ; since also the
 apostle goes on to say, "And if I shall give up my body so that I may
 be burnt up with fire, but have not love, I profit nothing." [5465]
 Because by this deed he profits nothing who has not the love of that
 God and Christ who is announced by the law and the prophets and in the
 Gospel in this manner:  "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God, with all thy
 heart, and with all thy mind, and with all thy thought; and thou shalt
 love thy neighbour as thyself. For on these two commandments hang all
 the law and the prophets;" [5466] --even as John the evangelist said,
 "And every one that loveth is born of God, and knoweth God; for God is
 love;" [5467] even as God also says, "For God so loved the world, that
 He gave His only-begotten Son, that every one that believeth on Him
 should not perish, but have everlasting life," [5468] --as it
 manifestly appears that he who has not in him this love, of loving us
 and of being loved by us, profits nothing by an empty confession and
 passion, except that thereby it appears and is plain that he is a
 heretic who believes on another God, or receives another Christ than
 Him whom the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament manifestly
 declare, which announce without any obscurity the Father omnipotent,
 Creator of all things, and His Son. For it shall happen to them as to
 one who expects salvation from another God. Then, finally, contrary to
 their notion, they are condemned to eternal punishment by Christ, the
 Son of God the Father omnipotent, the Creator whom they have
 blasphemed, when God shall begin to judge the hidden things of men
 according to the Gospel by Christ Jesus, because they did not believe
 in Him, although they were washed in His name.

 14. And even to this point the whole of that heretical baptism may be
 amended, after the intervention of some space of time, if a man should
 survive and amend his faith, as our God, in the Gospel according to
 Luke, spoke to His disciples, saying, "But I have another baptism to be
 baptized with." [5469] Also according to Mark He said, with the same
 purpose, to the sons of Zebedee: "Are ye able to drink of the cup which
 I drink of, or to be baptized with the baptism wherewith I am
 baptized?" [5470] Because He knew that those men had to be baptized
 not only with water, but also in their own blood; so that, as well
 baptized in this baptism only, they might attain the sound faith and
 the simple love of the laver, and, baptized in both ways, they might in
 like manner to the same extent attain the baptism of salvation and
 glory. For what was said by the Lord, "I have another baptism to be
 baptized with," signifies in this place not a second baptism, as if
 there were two baptisms, but demonstrates that there is moreover a
 baptism of another kind given to us, concurring to the same salvation.
 And it was fitting that both these kinds should first of all be
 initiated and sanctified by our Lord Himself, so that either one of the
 two or both kinds might afford to us this one twofold saving and
 glorifying baptism; and certain ways of the one baptism might so be
 laid open to us, that at times some one of them might be wanting
 without mischief, even as in the case of martyrs that hear the word,
 the baptism of water is wanting without evil; and yet we are certain
 that these, if they had any indulgence, would also be used to be
 baptized with water. And also to those who are made lawful believers,
 the baptism of their own blood is wanting without mischief, because,
 being baptized in the name of Christ, they have been redeemed with the
 most precious blood of the Lord; since both of these rivers of the
 baptism of the Lord proceed out of one and the same fountain, that
 every one who thirsts may come and drink, as says the Scripture, "From
 his belly flowed rivers of living water;" [5471] which rivers were
 manifested first of all in the Lord's passion, when from His side,
 pierced by the soldier's spear, flowed blood and water, so that the one
 side of the same person emitted two rivers of a different kind, that
 whosoever should believe and drink of both rivers might be filled with
 the Holy Spirit. For, speaking of these rivers, the Lord set this
 forth, signifying the Holy Spirit whom they should receive who should
 believe on Him: "But the Spirit was not yet given, because Jesus was
 not yet glorified." [5472] And when He thus said how baptism might be
 produced, which the apostle declares to be one, it is assuredly
 manifest on that principle that there are different kinds of one and
 the same baptism that flow from one wound into water and blood; since
 there are there two baptisms of water of which we have spoken, that is,
 of one and the same kind, [5473] although the baptism of each kind
 ought to be one, as we have more fully spoken.

 15. And since we seem to have divided all spiritual baptism in a
 threefold manner, let us come also to the proof of the statement
 proposed, that we may not appear to have done this of our own judgment,
 and with rashness. For John says of our Lord in his epistle, teaching
 us: "This is He who came by water and blood, Jesus Christ; not by water
 only, but by water and blood:  and it is the Spirit that beareth
 witness, because the Spirit is truth. For three bear witness, the
 Spirit, and the water, and the blood: and these three are one;" [5474]
 --that we may gather from these words both that water is wont to confer
 the Spirit, and that men's own blood is wont to confer the Spirit, and
 that the Spirit Himself also is wont to confer the Spirit. For since
 water is poured forth even as blood, the Spirit also was poured out by
 the Lord upon all who believed. Assuredly both in water, and none the
 less in their own blood, and then especially in the Holy Spirit, men
 may be baptized. For Peter says: "But this is that which was spoken by
 the prophet; It shall come to pass in the last days, saith the Lord, I
 will pour out my Spirit upon all flesh: and their sons and their
 daughters shall prophesy, and their young men shall see visions, and
 their old men shall dream dreams: and upon my servants, and upon my
 handmaidens, will I pour out of my Spirit;" [5475] --which Spirit we
 discover to have been communicated in the Old Testament, not indeed
 everywhere nor at large, but with other gifts; or, moreover, to have
 sprung of His own will into certain men, or to have invested them, or
 to have been upon them, even as we observe that it was said by the Lord
 to Moses, about the seventy elders, "And I will take of the Spirit
 which is upon thee, and will put it upon them." [5476] For which reason
 also, according to His promise, God put upon them from another of the
 Spirit which had been upon Moses, and they prophesied in the camp. And
 Moses, as a spiritual man, rejoiced that this had so happened, although
 he was unwillingly persuaded by Jesus the son of Nave to oppose this
 thing, and was not thereby induced. Further, also in the book of
 Judges, and in the books of Kings too, we observe that upon several,
 there either was the Spirit of the Lord, or that He came unto them, as
 upon Gothoniel, Gideon, Jephthah, Samson, Saul, David, and many others.
 Which comes to this result, that the Lord has taught us most plainly by
 them the liberty and power of the Holy Spirit, approaching of His own
 will, saying, "The Spirit breathes where He will; and thou hearest His
 voice, and knowest not whence He cometh or whither He goeth." [5477] So
 that the same Spirit is, moreover, sometimes found to be upon those who
 are unworthy of Him; not certainly in vain or without reason, but for
 the sake of some needful operation; as He was upon Saul, upon whom came
 the Spirit of God, and he prophesied. However, in later days, after the
 Spirit of the Lord departed from him, and after a malign spirit from
 the Lord vexed him, because then he had come, after the messengers whom
 he had previously sent before with care, with intent to kill David; and
 they therefore fell into the chorus of the prophets, and they
 prophesied, so that they neither were able nor willing to do what they
 had been bidden. And we believe that the Spirit which was upon them all
 effected this with an admirable wisdom, by the will of God. Which
 Spirit also filled John the Baptist even from his mother's womb; and it
 fell upon those who were with Cornelius the centurion before they were
 baptized with water. Thus, cleaving to the baptism of men, the Holy
 Spirit either goes before or follows it; or failing the baptism of
 water, it falls upon those who believe. We are counselled that either
 we ought duly to maintain the integrity of baptism, or if by chance
 baptism is given by any one in the name of Jesus Christ, we ought to
 supplement it, guarding the most holy invocation of the name of Jesus
 Christ, as we have most abundantly set forth; guarding, moreover, the
 custom and authority which so much claim our veneration for so long a
 time and for such great men.

 16. But since the first part of this argument seems to be unfolded, we
 ought to touch on its subsequent part, on account of the heretics;
 because it is very necessary not to pass over that discussion which
 once falls into our hands, lest perchance some heretic should dare, of
 his subtlety, to assail those of our brethren who are more simple. For
 because John said that we must be baptized in the Holy Ghost and in
 fire, from the fact that he went on to say and fire, some desperate men
 have dared to such an extent to carry their depravity, and therefore
 very crafty men seek how they can thus corrupt and violate, and even
 neutralize the baptism of holiness. Who derive the origin of their
 notion from Simon Magus, practising it with manifold perversity through
 various errors; to whom Simon Peter, in the Acts of the Apostles, said,
 "Thy money perish with thee, because thou hast thought that the grace
 of God could be possessed by money; thou hast neither part nor lot in
 this work; for thy heart is not right with God." [5478] And such men as
 these do all these things in the desire to deceive those who are more
 simple or more inquisitive. And some of them try to argue that they
 only administer a sound and perfect, not as we, a mutilated and
 curtailed baptism, which they are in such wise said to designate, that
 immediately they have descended into the water, fire at once appears
 upon the water. Which if it can be effected by any trick, as several
 tricks of this kind are affirmed to be--of Anaxilaus--whether it is
 anything natural, by means of which this may happen, or whether they
 think that they behold this, or whether the work and magical poison of
 some malignant being can force fire from the water; still they declare
 such a deceit and artifice to be a perfect baptism, which if faithful
 men have been forced to receive, there will assuredly be no doubt but
 that they have lost that which they had. Just as, if a soldier after
 taking an oath should desert his camp, and in the very different camp
 of the enemy should wish to take an oath of a far other kind, it is
 plain that in this way he is discharged from his old oath.

 17. Moreover, if a man of this sort should again return to thee, thou
 wilt assuredly hesitate whether he may have baptism or no; and yet it
 will behove thee, in whatever way thou canst, to aid even this man if
 he repent. For of this adulterous, yea, murderous baptism, if there is
 any other author, it is then certainly a book devised by these same
 heretics on behalf of this same error, which is inscribed The Preaching
 of Paul; [5479] in which book, contrary to all Scriptures, thou wilt
 find both Christ confessing His own sin--although He alone did no sin
 at all--and almost compelled by His mother Mary unwillingly to receive
 John's baptism. Also, that when He was baptized, fire was seen to be
 upon the water, which is written in neither of the Gospels. And that
 after such long time, Peter and Paul, after the collation of the Gospel
 in Jerusalem, and the mutual consideration and altercation and
 arrangement of things to be done finally, were known to one another, as
 if then for the first time; and certain other things devised of this
 kind disgracefully and absurdly;--all which things thou wilt find
 gathered together into that book. But they who are not ignorant of the
 nature of the Holy Spirit, understand that what is said of fire is said
 of the Spirit Himself. For in the Acts of the Apostles, according to
 that same promise of our Lord, on the very day of Pentecost, when the
 Holy Spirit had descended upon the disciples, that they might be
 baptized in Him, there were seen sitting upon each one tongues as if of
 fire, that it might be manifest that they were baptized with the Holy
 Ghost and with fire--that is, with that Spirit which was, whether fire,
 or as fire, such as was the fire which burned in the bush, and did not
 consume the bush; and such as is that fire which is the Spirit of the
 Angel, as saith the Scripture, "Who maketh His angels spirits, and His
 ministers a burning fire;" [5480] whom if thou shouldst resemble, or be
 a companion or sharer with, thou shalt be able to dread no fire, not
 even that which, going before the Lord in the day of judgment, shall
 burn up the whole world, save those who are baptized in the Holy Spirit
 and in fire.

 18. And the Spirit, indeed, continues to this day invisible to men, as
 the Lord says, "The Spirit breathes where He will; and thou knowest not
 whence He cometh, or whither He goeth." [5481] But in the beginning of
 the mystery of the faith and of spiritual baptism, the same Spirit was
 manifestly seen to have sat upon the disciples as it had been fire.
 Moreover, the heavens being opened, to have descended upon the Lord
 like a dove; because many things, yea, almost all things which were to
 be, are manifest--which, however, were only invisible
 nevertheless,--now also are shown to the eyes and to the incredulity of
 men, either partially, or at times, or in figure, for the strengthening
 and confirming of our faith. But neither should I omit that which the
 Gospel well announces. For our Lord says to the paralytic man, "Be of
 good cheer, my son, thy sins are forgiven thee," [5482] that He might
 show that hearts were purified by faith for the forgiveness of sins
 that should follow.  And this remission of sins that woman also which
 was a sinner in the city obtained, to whom the Lord said, "Thy sins are
 forgiven thee." [5483] And when they who were reclining around began to
 say among themselves, "Who is this that forgiveth sins?" [5484]
 --because concerning the paralytic the scribes and Pharisees had
 murmured crossly--the Lord says to the woman, "Thy faith hath made thee
 whole; go in peace." [5485] From all which things it is shown that
 hearts are purified by faith, but that souls are washed by the Spirit;
 further, also, that bodies are washed by water, and moreover that by
 blood we may more readily attain at once to the rewards of salvation.

 19. I think that we have fully followed out the announcement of John
 the Baptist, whence we began our discourse, when he said to the Jews,
 "I indeed baptize you with water unto repentance; but He who cometh
 after me is greater than I, whose shoe's latchet I am not worthy to
 unloose: He shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost, and with fire."
 [5486] Moreover, I think also that we have not unsuitably set in order
 the teaching of the Apostle John, who says that "three bear witness,
 the Spirit, and the water, and the blood; and these three are one."
 [5487] And, unless I am mistaken, we have also explained what our Lord
 says: "John indeed baptized with water, but ye shall be baptized with
 the Holy Ghost." [5488] Moreover, I think that we have given no weak
 reason as the cause of the custom. Let us have a care, although we do
 that in a subsequent place, that none may think that we are stirring up
 the present debate on a single article; although this custom even alone
 ought, among men who have the fear of God, and are lowly, to maintain a
 chief place.

 [5427] ["In the name," etc., implies as Jesus Christ commanded, St.
 Matt. xxviii. 19.]

 [5428] [This was assumed by the Westerns to be the general rule,
 whereas it was only local. See p. 408, note 7, supra.]

 [5429] 1 Cor. i. 10.

 [5430] [The bitterness with which Vincent follows up the assumption,
 that there was a general custom of all the churches, shows how sadly
 this controversy became envenomed in the West. Cap. vi. is a blemish on
 his Commonitory.]

 [5431] Matt. iii. 11.

 [5432] Acts i. 4, 5.

 [5433] Acts xi. 15-17.

 [5434] Acts xv. 7, 8.

 [5435] There is something needed to make the connection of this passage
 complete.

 [5436] John iii. 3, 5.

 [5437] John xx. 22.

 [5438] Acts x. 44-48.

 [5439] Acts xv. 9.

 [5440] [It was a notable compliance with the example of Christ, Matt.
 iii. 15. "They had received," etc., yet that was no reason why the
 ordinance of Christ should be slighted.]

 [5441] Acts iv. 12.

 [5442] Mark xiv. 27.

 [5443] Matt. xxviii. 19.

 [5444] "Jurejurando."

 [5445] Mark xiv. 27.

 [5446] [Query, superabounding?]

 [5447] Mark ix. 30.

 [5448] John xii. 34.

 [5449] Matt. xvi. 22.

 [5450] [Isa. xiv. 12. The sin of Lucifer had, very possibly, been this
 of rebelling against the Incarnation and the introduction thereby of an
 order of beings higher than himself.  Hence our Lord recognised in
 Peter's words the voice of the old adversary, and called him "Satan." A
 premonition of his lapse.]

 [5451] Matt. xxvi. 70.

 [5452] [It has been profoundly felt, that, as the Church of Rome in her
 early rectitude (Rom. i. 8) reflected Peter's confession, so in her
 lapse (Rom. xi. 20, 21) she reflects this terrible rebuke. If she was
 once identified with Peter's Rock, so now, alas! with Peter's Satan.]

 [5453] Luke xxiv. 20, 21.

 [5454] Scil. the bishop. [The plural of "solidarity." See p. 128, note
 5, supra, and Elucidation XI. p. 159.]

 [5455] Eph. iv. 5.

 [5456] By him who hears the word is meant a catechumen (Rigaltius).
 [Bunsen, vol. ii. p. 317. He quotes the Apostolical Constitutions
 (Alexandria), "Let the catechumens be three years hearing the word,"
 etc.]

 [5457] Matt. x. 32.

 [5458] The original interpolates "non."

 [5459] [Scil. baptisms (?) i.e., of water and of blood.]

 [5460] Acts xv. 13-17.

 [5461] Matt. xxiv. 4, etc.

 [5462] Matt. xxiv. 23, 24.

 [5463] [Ezek. xxxiii. 12. On the principle that what is deepest in
 man's heart proves, finally, the character; Phil. ii. 12. A very solemn
 consideration in human accountability (1 Pet. i. 17), but not to be
 disjoined from 2 Cor. vi. 10.]

 [5464] [Vol. i. p. 505, note 12, this series.]

 [5465] 1 Cor. xiii. 3.

 [5466] Matt. xxii. 37.

 [5467] John iv. 7, 8.

 [5468] John iii. 16.

 [5469] Luke xii. 50.

 [5470] Mark x. 38.

 [5471] John vii. 38.

 [5472] John vii. 39.

 [5473] Unius atque ejusdem species.

 [5474] 1 John v. 6.

 [5475] Acts ii. 17, 18.

 [5476] Num. xi. 17.

 [5477] John iii. 5. [Greek, pneuma.  Syriac as here rendered.]

 [5478] Acts viii. 20, 21.

 [5479] Rigaltius says that Jerome mentions this document, and regards
 it as apocryphal. And Eusebius refers to the Periodoi Petrou, which,
 according to the common reading of Peter for Paul in the text, may
 point to the same document. [Vol. ii. 341, note 10; and vol. iv. p.
 246.]

 [5480] Ps. civ. 4.

 [5481] John iii. 8.

 [5482] Matt. ix. 2.

 [5483] Luke vii. 48.

 [5484] Luke vii. 50.

 [5485] Luke vii. 50.

 [5486] Luke iii. 16.

 [5487] 1 John v. 8. [It is noteworthy that he quotes the Latin formula,
 and not that (eis to hen eisin) of the Greek. Now, the Latin, repeating
 (in verse 8) the formula (hi tres unum sunt) which belongs to the
 dubious protasis, is so far evidence that such a verse existed in the
 old Greek. It is important that the Latin is not conformed to the
 received formula of the apodosis, "the three agree in one."]

 [5488] Acts i. 5.

 Note by the Edinburgh Translator.

 ------------------------

 Letters of Cyprian to Quintus, to Jubaianus, to Pompey, on "the baptism
 of heretics;" and to Magnus on "baptizing the Novatians, and those who
 obtain grace on a sick-bed," may be found translated in Ep. lxx. (p.
 377, supra), Ep. lxxii. (p. 379, supra), Ep. lxxiii. (p. 386, supra),
 and Ep. lxxv. (p. 397, supra), respectively; and the Letter of
 Firmilian to Cyprian against the Letter of Stephen, at p. 390, supra,
 Ep. lxxiv. All these letters are repeated, in extenso, in the Monumenta
 Veterum.

 Eusebius says, by way of introduction to the fragment of a letter
 written to Stephen by Dionysius of Alexandria, as follows: "Dionysius
 indited to Stephen the first of those letters which were written on the
 subject of baptism, when no small controversy had arisen whether they
 who are converted from any kind of heresy ought to be purged by baptism
 (because an ancient custom had prevailed, that in receiving such there
 should only be hands laid upon them, with prayers). Cyprian, who then
 ruled the Church of Carthage, was the first who judged that they must
 not be admitted to communion unless they were first purified from error
 by baptism.  But Stephen, thinking that nothing should be innovated
 contrary to the tradition which had already obtained in that matter
 from the beginning, was indignant at this. And as Dionysius had already
 written many letters to him on this argument, he intimates to him
 finally, that all the churches everywhere, now that the fury of
 persecution was abated, detesting the turbulent novelty of Novatian,
 [5489] had established peace with one another." [5490]

 [5489] Eusebius calls him Novatus.

 [5490] See H. E., book viii. chaps. ii., iii, and iv.; and vol. vi.,
 this series.

 Indexes

Index of Scripture References

 Genesis

 [1]1:1 [2]1:2 [3]1:2 [4]1:2 [5]1:3 [6]1:3 [7]1:4
 [8]1:4-5 [9]1:5 [10]1:6 [11]1:6-7 [12]1:6-7 [13]1:7
 [14]1:7 [15]1:9 [16]1:9 [17]1:26 [18]1:26 [19]1:26
 [20]1:26 [21]1:27 [22]1:28 [23]1:31 [24]1:31 [25]2:2
 [26]2:2 [27]2:7 [28]2:7 [29]2:7 [30]2:8 [31]2:10 [32]2:10
 [33]2:11-14 [34]2:16-17 [35]2:16-17 [36]2:24 [37]3:1
 [38]3:5 [39]3:5 [40]3:8 [41]3:14-15 [42]3:15 [43]3:15
 [44]3:16 [45]3:16 [46]3:17-19 [47]3:17-19 [48]3:19 [49]3:24
 [50]4:5 [51]4:15 [52]5:24 [53]5:24 [54]6:3 [55]6:5-7
 [56]7:2 [57]7:6 [58]8 [59]8:21 [60]9:3 [61]10:9 [62]10:25
 [63]11:1-3 [64]11:7 [65]11:16 [66]11:26 [67]12:1 [68]12:7
 [69]14:18 [70]14:18 [71]15:6 [72]15:6 [73]17:8 [74]19:24
 [75]19:24 [76]19:24 [77]19:26 [78]19:37-38 [79]21:17
 [80]21:18 [81]21:20 [82]22:1-2 [83]22:11-12 [84]22:11-12
 [85]25:23 [86]25:23 [87]25:31 [88]26:7 [89]26:10 [90]27
 [91]27:1 [92]27:9 [93]27:20 [94]27:27-29 [95]27:41 [96]28:7
 [97]28:17 [98]30:37-39 [99]31:11-13 [100]31:13 [101]32:24
 [102]32:24-27 [103]32:30-31 [104]33:10 [105]35:1
 [106]37:19-20 [107]38:14-15 [108]44:2-5 [109]46:11
 [110]48:3-4 [111]48:14-15 [112]48:17-19 [113]49:3 [114]49:4
 [115]49:5 [116]49:5 [117]49:7 [118]49:8 [119]49:8-10
 [120]49:8-12 [121]49:8-12 [122]49:10 [123]49:11 [124]49:11
 [125]49:11 [126]49:12-15 [127]49:16 [128]49:16 [129]49:16-20
 [130]49:17 [131]49:17 [132]49:18 [133]49:21-26 [134]49:24
 [135]49:27

 Exodus

 [136]1:12 [137]3 [138]3:2 [139]3:2 [140]3:2 [141]3:2-6
 [142]3:6 [143]3:14 [144]3:16 [145]4:2-4 [146]4:13 [147]4:17
 [148]4:24-26 [149]6:2-3 [150]6:2-3 [151]6:11-12 [152]7
 [153]7:1 [154]7:1 [155]7:9-13 [156]8 [157]9:28 [158]12:3-12
 [159]12:4 [160]12:6 [161]12:11 [162]12:13 [163]12:13
 [164]12:17 [165]12:46 [166]12:46 [167]13:21 [168]14:11-14
 [169]14:19 [170]15:27 [171]17:9-14 [172]17:11-14
 [173]19:10-11 [174]19:15 [175]19:18 [176]19:22 [177]19:22
 [178]19:22 [179]20:3 [180]20:3 [181]20:4 [182]20:4
 [183]20:7 [184]20:12 [185]20:13-15 [186]20:23 [187]22:20
 [188]22:20 [189]22:20 [190]22:20 [191]22:20 [192]22:22-24
 [193]22:28 [194]23:2 [195]23:7 [196]23:20 [197]23:20-21
 [198]25:10 [199]28:43 [200]28:43 [201]28:43 [202]29:3
 [203]31:18 [204]32:1 [205]32:4 [206]32:6 [207]32:31
 [208]32:31-33 [209]32:31-33 [210]33:3 [211]33:20 [212]34:19

 Leviticus

 [213]7:20 [214]7:20 [215]11:4 [216]19:2 [217]19:13
 [218]19:18 [219]19:18 [220]19:27 [221]19:27 [222]19:27
 [223]19:32 [224]20:7 [225]20:10 [226]21:17 [227]21:17
 [228]21:21 [229]24:13-14

 Numbers

 [230]5:2 [231]5:22 [232]8:5-7 [233]8:16 [234]11:17
 [235]12:3 [236]16:9-10 [237]16:26 [238]16:26 [239]17:5
 [240]17:10 [241]17:10 [242]18 [243]19:2 [244]19:8 [245]19:9
 [246]19:12 [247]19:13 [248]20:25-26 [249]22:21 [250]23:14
 [251]23:19 [252]24:7 [253]24:7-9 [254]24:17 [255]193

 Deuteronomy

 [256]1:17 [257]4:10 [258]4:24 [259]4:24 [260]4:35 [261]4:39
 [262]5:17-19 [263]5:22 [264]6:4 [265]6:4 [266]6:5 [267]6:13
 [268]6:13 [269]6:13 [270]6:13 [271]8:2 [272]8:3 [273]9:3
 [274]10:20 [275]13:3 [276]13:3 [277]13:3 [278]13:5
 [279]13:6-10 [280]13:12-18 [281]13:19 [282]17:12
 [283]17:12-13 [284]17:12-13 [285]17:12-13 [286]17:12-13
 [287]18:10 [288]18:15 [289]18:18-19 [290]23:13 [291]23:19
 [292]23:21-23 [293]24:26 [294]27:8 [295]27:15 [296]28:44
 [297]28:66 [298]28:66 [299]28:66-67 [300]30:6 [301]31:20
 [302]32:8 [303]32:17 [304]32:17 [305]32:33 [306]32:34-35
 [307]32:35 [308]32:39 [309]33 [310]33:8 [311]33:9 [312]33:9
 [313]33:9 [314]33:17 [315]33:18 [316]33:22 [317]33:22

 Joshua

 [318]1:8 [319]2:18-19 [320]2:19 [321]3:7-17 [322]3:15
 [323]5:2 [324]5:10-11 [325]5:13 [326]5:13-15 [327]10:12
 [328]24:26-27

 Judges

 [329]2:11-13 [330]4:1 [331]18

 1 Samuel

 [332]1:13 [333]2:3-4 [334]2:3-4 [335]2:3-8 [336]2:5
 [337]2:25 [338]2:25 [339]2:30 [340]2:30 [341]2:35
 [342]2:35-36 [343]8:7 [344]8:7 [345]8:7 [346]9:2 [347]9:9
 [348]10:1 [349]16:7 [350]16:7 [351]16:13 [352]16:14
 [353]21:4 [354]28

 2 Samuel

 [355]7:4-5 [356]7:5 [357]7:12-16 [358]7:12-16

 1 Kings

 [359]1:36 [360]3:12 [361]4:32 [362]10:22 [363]11:4
 [364]11:14 [365]11:23 [366]11:31 [367]12:14 [368]17:1
 [369]17:14 [370]18:21 [371]19:7-8 [372]19:10 [373]28:11

 2 Kings

 [374]6:5 [375]17:20-21 [376]22:8 [377]24:10 [378]24:11
 [379]25:27

 1 Chronicles

 [380]1:19 [381]3:15 [382]16:36 [383]29:11

 2 Chronicles

 [384]3:1 [385]3:3 [386]3:4 [387]15:2 [388]15:2 [389]19:16
 [390]24:20

 Nehemiah

 [391]9:26

 Job

 [392]1:5 [393]1:7 [394]1:8 [395]1:8 [396]1:12 [397]1:21
 [398]1:21-22 [399]2:9-10 [400]2:10 [401]9:7 [402]14:4-5
 [403]29:12-13 [404]29:12-13 [405]29:15 [406]29:16 [407]31:1
 [408]31:27 [409]41:8

 Psalms

 [410]1 [411]1:2 [412]1:5 [413]2:1-3 [414]2:1-3 [415]2:2
 [416]2:5 [417]2:6 [418]2:7-8 [419]2:7-8 [420]2:8 [421]2:9
 [422]2:10 [423]2:11 [424]2:12 [425]2:12 [426]2:12 [427]3
 [428]3:5 [429]3:5 [430]4:4 [431]4:5 [432]5:2 [433]5:2-3
 [434]6:5 [435]6:5 [436]8:2 [437]13 [438]14 [439]15
 [440]15:6 [441]16:10 [442]16:10 [443]18:25-26 [444]18:43-44
 [445]19:1 [446]19:3 [447]19:4-5 [448]19:5-6 [449]19:6
 [450]19:6-7 [451]19:9 [452]19:12 [453]20:4 [454]20:7-8
 [455]22:5 [456]22:6 [457]22:6-8 [458]22:15 [459]22:16-22
 [460]22:17 [461]22:18 [462]22:20-21 [463]22:27-28 [464]23
 [465]23 [466]23:5 [467]24 [468]24:3-4 [469]24:3-6 [470]24:7
 [471]24:7 [472]24:7-9 [473]24:7-10 [474]24:8 [475]25:4-5
 [476]27:3-4 [477]28:4-5 [478]29:3 [479]29:3 [480]29:3
 [481]29:3 [482]29:10 [483]30:3 [484]30:9 [485]31:22
 [486]32:5 [487]32:9 [488]33:6 [489]33:6 [490]34:1
 [491]34:8-10 [492]34:9 [493]34:12-13 [494]34:12-13 [495]34:13
 [496]34:15 [497]34:18 [498]34:18 [499]34:19 [500]35:17
 [501]36:6 [502]37:7 [503]37:12-13 [504]37:25 [505]37:25-26
 [506]37:25-26 [507]38:5 [508]38:6 [509]38:35-36 [510]41:1
 [511]41:1 [512]44:2 [513]45 [514]45:1 [515]45:1 [516]45:1
 [517]45:1 [518]45:1 [519]45:1 [520]45:1-4 [521]45:6-7
 [522]45:7 [523]45:9-11 [524]45:10 [525]45:11 [526]45:11
 [527]45:16 [528]46:4 [529]50:1-6 [530]50:3 [531]50:3
 [532]50:3-6 [533]50:13-15 [534]50:14-15 [535]50:16
 [536]50:16-18 [537]50:17 [538]50:17-18 [539]50:19-20
 [540]50:20 [541]50:23 [542]50:28 [543]51:3 [544]51:4
 [545]51:5 [546]51:10 [547]51:17 [548]51:17 [549]51:18
 [550]51:19 [551]53:5 [552]53:5 [553]55:15 [554]56:11
 [555]58:11 [556]59:11 [557]59:11 [558]62:1 [559]62:6
 [560]64:3 [561]68:1-7 [562]68:4 [563]68:5 [564]68:6
 [565]68:6 [566]68:6 [567]68:6 [568]68:6 [569]68:6
 [570]68:18 [571]68:18 [572]69:1 [573]69:21 [574]72:1
 [575]72:1-2 [576]72:1-2 [577]73:27 [578]74:12 [579]77:16
 [580]78 [581]78:54 [582]82:1 [583]82:1-2 [584]82:3
 [585]82:5 [586]82:5 [587]82:6 [588]82:6-7 [589]82:8
 [590]84:1 [591]84:1-2 [592]88:9 [593]89:4 [594]89:19
 [595]89:19 [596]89:27-33 [597]89:30 [598]89:30 [599]89:30
 [600]89:30-32 [601]89:32-33 [602]89:32-33 [603]89:33 [604]90
 [605]90:4 [606]93:11 [607]96:5 [608]96:11 [609]97:1
 [610]97:7 [611]103:24 [612]103:32 [613]104:2 [614]104:4
 [615]106:30-31 [616]107:20 [617]110 [618]110:1 [619]110:1
 [620]110:1 [621]110:1 [622]110:1-2 [623]110:1-2 [624]110:3
 [625]110:3 [626]110:3 [627]110:4 [628]110:4 [629]110:4
 [630]111:10 [631]111:10 [632]112:9 [633]113:13 [634]114:5
 [635]115:4-8 [636]116 [637]116:5 [638]116:12-13 [639]116:13
 [640]116:15 [641]116:15 [642]116:15 [643]116:15 [644]117:19
 [645]118:6 [646]118:6 [647]118:8 [648]118:18 [649]118:20
 [650]118:21-26 [651]118:22 [652]118:22 [653]118:26 [654]119
 [655]119:1-2 [656]119:1-2 [657]119:30-32 [658]119:120
 [659]119:137 [660]119:176 [661]126:5-6 [662]126:5-6
 [663]127:7 [664]131:1 [665]132:11 [666]133:1 [667]133:1
 [668]133:2 [669]135:15-18 [670]135:16-18 [671]136:12
 [672]139:8-10 [673]139:15 [674]139:16 [675]141:2 [676]141:2
 [677]141:5 [678]147 [679]148:4 [680]148:5

 Proverbs

 [681]1:3 [682]1:7 [683]1:7 [684]1:11 [685]1:19 [686]1:28-29
 [687]1:32 [688]3:11 [689]3:11-12 [690]3:28 [691]3:35
 [692]4:2 [693]4:8 [694]4:14 [695]4:25 [696]4:27 [697]5:19
 [698]6:27 [699]7:22 [700]7:26 [701]8 [702]8 [703]8:22-24
 [704]8:22-31 [705]9:1 [706]9:1 [707]9:1-5 [708]9:1-6
 [709]9:8 [710]9:10 [711]9:12 [712]9:12 [713]9:19 [714]9:19
 [715]9:19 [716]10:3 [717]10:3 [718]10:9 [719]10:19
 [720]11:24 [721]11:26 [722]11:30 [723]12:2 [724]12:16
 [725]12:22 [726]13:24 [727]14:9 [728]14:25 [729]15:1
 [730]15:3 [731]15:3 [732]15:10 [733]15:12 [734]16:6
 [735]16:6 [736]16:27 [737]16:32 [738]17:4 [739]17:4
 [740]17:27 [741]18:19 [742]19:5 [743]19:17 [744]19:18
 [745]20:7 [746]20:7 [747]20:9 [748]20:13 [749]20:22
 [750]21:1 [751]21:13 [752]21:13 [753]23:9 [754]23:9
 [755]24:15 [756]24:16 [757]25:1 [758]25:21 [759]26:4
 [760]26:27 [761]26:27 [762]27:16 [763]27:22 [764]27:22
 [765]28:14 [766]28:27 [767]28:27 [768]28:28 [769]29:22
 [770]30:15 [771]30:17 [772]30:18-19 [773]30:19 [774]30:20
 [775]30:21 [776]30:21-23 [777]30:24-28 [778]30:29 [779]30:29

 Ecclesiastes

 [780]1:14 [781]3:21 [782]5:4 [783]5:6 [784]5:10 [785]10:9
 [786]11:3 [787]11:5

 Song of Solomon

 [788]4:6 [789]4:6 [790]4:8 [791]4:12 [792]4:12-13
 [793]4:12-13 [794]4:16 [795]5:1 [796]5:2 [797]6:9 [798]6:9

 Isaiah

 [799]1:2 [800]1:2-4 [801]1:3 [802]1:7 [803]1:7-8 [804]1:7-9
 [805]1:8 [806]1:11-12 [807]1:15-20 [808]1:16-19 [809]1:17-18
 [810]1:19 [811]1:20 [812]1:21 [813]1:26 [814]2:2 [815]2:2-4
 [816]2:3-4 [817]2:4 [818]2:5-6 [819]2:8 [820]2:8-9
 [821]2:8-9 [822]2:8-9 [823]2:12 [824]3:1-2 [825]3:12
 [826]3:12 [827]3:12 [828]3:16 [829]5:8 [830]5:25-26
 [831]5:26-27 [832]6:3 [833]6:9-10 [834]6:10 [835]6:10
 [836]7:9 [837]7:9 [838]7:10-15 [839]7:13 [840]7:13
 [841]7:14 [842]7:14 [843]7:14 [844]8:3 [845]8:6-7
 [846]8:16-17 [847]9:1-2 [848]9:6 [849]9:6 [850]9:6 [851]9:6
 [852]9:6 [853]9:6 [854]10:12-17 [855]10:22 [856]10:23
 [857]11:1 [858]11:1 [859]11:1-3 [860]11:2 [861]11:2-3
 [862]11:2-3 [863]11:10 [864]11:10 [865]11:14 [866]11:14
 [867]13:2-3 [868]13:6-9 [869]13:13-14 [870]14:4-21 [871]14:12
 [872]14:13-14 [873]14:13-15 [874]14:15-16 [875]14:16
 [876]18:1-2 [877]19:1 [878]22:13-14 [879]23:4-5 [880]25:11
 [881]26:10 [882]26:11 [883]26:19 [884]26:19 [885]26:20
 [886]28:10 [887]28:13 [888]28:16 [889]28:16 [890]29:10
 [891]29:10 [892]29:11 [893]29:11-18 [894]29:13 [895]29:13
 [896]29:13 [897]29:14 [898]29:15 [899]30:1 [900]30:1
 [901]30:1 [902]30:15 [903]30:15 [904]30:51 [905]31:6
 [906]33:10-11 [907]33:14-17 [908]33:17 [909]33:17 [910]35:3
 [911]35:3-6 [912]35:3-6 [913]37:20 [914]38:5 [915]38:7
 [916]38:8 [917]40:3-5 [918]40:6 [919]40:6 [920]40:6-7
 [921]40:12 [922]40:12 [923]40:15 [924]40:22 [925]41:8
 [926]41:15-20 [927]42:1 [928]42:2-4 [929]42:6-8 [930]42:8
 [931]42:13-14 [932]42:19 [933]42:24 [934]42:24 [935]43:1-2
 [936]43:1-3 [937]43:11 [938]43:18-21 [939]43:18-21 [940]43:25
 [941]43:25-26 [942]44:6 [943]44:6-7 [944]44:21-22 [945]45:1
 [946]45:1 [947]45:5 [948]45:7 [949]45:7 [950]45:11-15
 [951]45:14 [952]45:14 [953]45:14-16 [954]45:18 [955]45:21
 [956]45:22 [957]45:22 [958]46:1-2 [959]46:5 [960]46:6-7
 [961]46:8 [962]47:1-15 [963]48:21 [964]48:21 [965]49:9
 [966]49:15 [967]50:5-6 [968]50:5-7 [969]52:10 [970]52:11
 [971]52:11 [972]52:15 [973]53:1 [974]53:1 [975]53:1-7
 [976]53:2 [977]53:2-5 [978]53:4 [979]53:5 [980]53:7
 [981]53:7 [982]53:7 [983]53:7-9 [984]53:8 [985]53:9
 [986]53:12 [987]54:1 [988]54:1-4 [989]54:7-8 [990]55:1
 [991]55:3 [992]55:4 [993]55:4-5 [994]55:5 [995]55:6-7
 [996]55:6-7 [997]56:3-4 [998]57:1-2 [999]57:6 [1000]57:6
 [1001]57:6 [1002]57:15 [1003]57:16 [1004]57:17 [1005]57:19
 [1006]58:1 [1007]58:1-9 [1008]58:1-9 [1009]58:6-9 [1010]58:7
 [1011]58:9 [1012]59:1 [1013]59:1 [1014]59:1-4 [1015]59:1-4
 [1016]60:1 [1017]61:1 [1018]61:1 [1019]61:1-2 [1020]63:2
 [1021]63:9 [1022]64:4 [1023]64:4 [1024]64:4 [1025]65:1
 [1026]65:1 [1027]65:2 [1028]65:2 [1029]65:2 [1030]65:13-15
 [1031]66:1 [1032]66:1 [1033]66:1-2 [1034]66:1-2 [1035]66:2
 [1036]66:2 [1037]66:2 [1038]66:2 [1039]66:15-16
 [1040]66:18-19 [1041]66:21 [1042]66:24 [1043]66:24

 Jeremiah

 [1044]1:5 [1045]1:5 [1046]1:5 [1047]1:5 [1048]2:12-13
 [1049]2:13 [1050]2:13 [1051]2:13 [1052]2:19 [1053]2:20
 [1054]2:25 [1055]2:27 [1056]2:30 [1057]2:32 [1058]3:6
 [1059]3:9-10 [1060]3:12 [1061]3:14 [1062]3:15 [1063]3:15
 [1064]3:15 [1065]3:15 [1066]3:22 [1067]4:3-4 [1068]4:11
 [1069]4:14 [1070]5:3 [1071]5:22 [1072]6:10 [1073]6:18
 [1074]7:6 [1075]7:16 [1076]7:16 [1077]7:25 [1078]8:4
 [1079]8:4 [1080]8:6 [1081]8:7-9 [1082]8:16 [1083]8:16
 [1084]9:23-24 [1085]10:2 [1086]10:2-5 [1087]10:9 [1088]10:11
 [1089]10:24 [1090]11:18-19 [1091]11:19 [1092]15:9 [1093]15:18
 [1094]16:9 [1095]17:5 [1096]17:5-7 [1097]17:9 [1098]17:9
 [1099]17:11 [1100]17:11 [1101]18:7 [1102]18:12 [1103]22:24
 [1104]23:16-17 [1105]23:16-21 [1106]23:18 [1107]23:20
 [1108]23:23 [1109]23:23-24 [1110]23:23-24 [1111]23:28
 [1112]23:30 [1113]23:32 [1114]25:4 [1115]25:6 [1116]25:6-7
 [1117]25:11 [1118]25:11 [1119]28:6 [1120]30:8-9
 [1121]31:10-11 [1122]31:15 [1123]31:31-34 [1124]31:31-41
 [1125]43:8 [1126]48:10 [1127]49:14 [1128]49:19 [1129]51:15-18
 [1130]51:16-19

 Lamentations

 [1131]2:18 [1132]3:26 [1133]3:31 [1134]3:40

 Ezekiel

 [1135]1:10 [1136]4:6 [1137]8:13-14 [1138]9:4 [1139]9:4
 [1140]9:4 [1141]9:4-6 [1142]9:5 [1143]14:12-14 [1144]14:13
 [1145]17:24 [1146]18:4 [1147]18:7-8 [1148]18:20 [1149]18:21
 [1150]18:21 [1151]18:30 [1152]18:30 [1153]18:30-32
 [1154]18:32 [1155]28:2 [1156]28:2-10 [1157]28:9 [1158]32:12
 [1159]33:10 [1160]33:10-11 [1161]33:11 [1162]33:11
 [1163]33:12 [1164]33:12 [1165]33:12 [1166]33:12 [1167]34
 [1168]34:3-4 [1169]34:3-6 [1170]34:4 [1171]34:4-6 [1172]34:10
 [1173]34:10-16 [1174]34:10-16 [1175]34:16 [1176]36:17-23
 [1177]36:25-26 [1178]36:25-26 [1179]36:36 [1180]37:11-14
 [1181]44:10-13

 Daniel

 [1182]1:1 [1183]2:3 [1184]2:31-35 [1185]2:31-35 [1186]2:31-35
 [1187]2:34 [1188]2:43 [1189]2:45 [1190]2:45 [1191]3:1
 [1192]3:16-18 [1193]3:16-18 [1194]3:16-18 [1195]3:16-18
 [1196]4:10-12 [1197]4:27 [1198]4:34 [1199]6:24-28 [1200]7
 [1201]7:1 [1202]7:2-8 [1203]7:2-8 [1204]7:4 [1205]7:4
 [1206]7:6 [1207]7:8-9 [1208]7:9 [1209]7:9-10 [1210]7:9-12
 [1211]7:11 [1212]7:13 [1213]7:13 [1214]7:13 [1215]7:13-14
 [1216]7:13-14 [1217]7:13-14 [1218]7:13-14 [1219]7:21
 [1220]7:22 [1221]8:2-8 [1222]8:13 [1223]9:4 [1224]9:21
 [1225]9:24 [1226]9:27 [1227]9:27 [1228]9:27 [1229]10:6
 [1230]10:6 [1231]11:31 [1232]11:33 [1233]11:41 [1234]12:1
 [1235]12:2 [1236]12:2 [1237]12:4 [1238]12:4-7 [1239]12:11-12

 Hosea

 [1240]1:2 [1241]1:7 [1242]1:10 [1243]2:23 [1244]4:1-4
 [1245]4:1-4 [1246]6:1 [1247]6:2 [1248]6:3 [1249]6:3
 [1250]6:6 [1251]8:4 [1252]8:4 [1253]9:4 [1254]9:4 [1255]9:4
 [1256]11:9-10 [1257]13:15 [1258]14:2 [1259]14:9

 Joel

 [1260]2:12 [1261]2:12-13 [1262]2:12-13 [1263]2:13 [1264]2:13
 [1265]2:15-16 [1266]2:28 [1267]3:14

 Amos

 [1268]4:7 [1269]4:11 [1270]5:6 [1271]5:11-13 [1272]8:9-10

 Micah

 [1273]2:7-8 [1274]3:5-7 [1275]4:2-3 [1276]5:2 [1277]5:5
 [1278]6:6-9 [1279]7:1-3 [1280]7:8 [1281]7:8-10 [1282]7:14-18

 Nahum

 [1283]1:5-7

 Habakkuk

 [1284]1:16 [1285]2:4 [1286]2:4 [1287]2:5 [1288]3:3-5
 [1289]3:17

 Zephaniah

 [1290]1:2-3 [1291]1:7 [1292]1:13-14 [1293]2:1 [1294]3:1-3
 [1295]3:8 [1296]3:8

 Haggai

 [1297]1:9 [1298]1:12

 Zechariah

 [1299]1:3 [1300]3:1 [1301]3:3 [1302]3:5 [1303]3:8-9
 [1304]6:12 [1305]7:6 [1306]9:9 [1307]10:11-12 [1308]11:16
 [1309]12:10 [1310]12:10

 Malachi

 [1311]1:10-11 [1312]1:11 [1313]1:11 [1314]1:11 [1315]1:14
 [1316]2:1-2 [1317]2:1-2 [1318]2:5 [1319]2:5-7 [1320]2:10
 [1321]2:11 [1322]3:1 [1323]3:3 [1324]3:6 [1325]3:7
 [1326]4:1 [1327]4:1 [1328]4:1 [1329]4:2 [1330]4:2 [1331]4:5-6

 Matthew

 [1332]1:20-21 [1333]1:23 [1334]1:23 [1335]2:1-2 [1336]2:1-2
 [1337]2:1-2 [1338]2:9 [1339]2:18 [1340]2:20 [1341]2:23
 [1342]3:7 [1343]3:9 [1344]3:10 [1345]3:10 [1346]3:10
 [1347]3:10 [1348]3:10 [1349]3:11 [1350]3:11 [1351]3:11
 [1352]3:12 [1353]3:13 [1354]3:14 [1355]3:15 [1356]3:15
 [1357]3:15 [1358]3:16 [1359]3:16-17 [1360]4:3 [1361]4:15
 [1362]4:15-16 [1363]4:17 [1364]5:4 [1365]5:4 [1366]5:5
 [1367]5:6 [1368]5:6 [1369]5:7 [1370]5:8 [1371]5:8 [1372]5:8
 [1373]5:9 [1374]5:9 [1375]5:10 [1376]5:10 [1377]5:10-12
 [1378]5:13 [1379]5:13 [1380]5:13 [1381]5:15 [1382]5:16
 [1383]5:16 [1384]5:17 [1385]5:18 [1386]5:18 [1387]5:19
 [1388]5:19 [1389]5:19 [1390]5:19 [1391]5:21-22 [1392]5:22
 [1393]5:22 [1394]5:23-24 [1395]5:23-24 [1396]5:26 [1397]5:26
 [1398]5:34-37 [1399]5:36 [1400]5:37 [1401]5:42 [1402]5:43-45
 [1403]5:43-48 [1404]5:44-45 [1405]5:45 [1406]6:2 [1407]6:3-4
 [1408]6:8 [1409]6:9 [1410]6:10 [1411]6:11 [1412]6:12
 [1413]6:15 [1414]6:19-21 [1415]6:20-21 [1416]6:24 [1417]6:26
 [1418]6:31 [1419]6:31-33 [1420]6:31-33 [1421]6:34 [1422]6:34
 [1423]7:2 [1424]7:2 [1425]7:3-4 [1426]7:6 [1427]7:6
 [1428]7:6 [1429]7:6 [1430]7:9-11 [1431]7:11 [1432]7:12
 [1433]7:13 [1434]7:13-14 [1435]7:13-14 [1436]7:13-14
 [1437]7:14 [1438]7:18 [1439]7:21 [1440]7:21 [1441]7:21
 [1442]7:22 [1443]7:22-23 [1444]7:22-23 [1445]7:22-23
 [1446]7:23 [1447]7:24 [1448]7:24-27 [1449]7:26-27 [1450]8:4
 [1451]8:4 [1452]8:11 [1453]8:11-12 [1454]8:20 [1455]8:22
 [1456]8:29 [1457]9:2 [1458]9:4 [1459]9:12 [1460]9:12
 [1461]9:13 [1462]10:5 [1463]10:5 [1464]10:8 [1465]10:10
 [1466]10:16 [1467]10:18 [1468]10:19 [1469]10:19-20
 [1470]10:19-20 [1471]10:19-20 [1472]10:19-20 [1473]10:19-20
 [1474]10:19-20 [1475]10:22 [1476]10:22 [1477]10:22
 [1478]10:22 [1479]10:22 [1480]10:25 [1481]10:27 [1482]10:27
 [1483]10:28 [1484]10:28 [1485]10:28 [1486]10:28 [1487]10:28
 [1488]10:28 [1489]10:29 [1490]10:29 [1491]10:29-30
 [1492]10:32 [1493]10:32 [1494]10:32-33 [1495]10:32-33
 [1496]10:32-33 [1497]10:33 [1498]10:33 [1499]10:33
 [1500]10:34 [1501]10:37 [1502]10:37-38 [1503]10:37-38
 [1504]10:37-38 [1505]10:39 [1506]10:39 [1507]10:42
 [1508]11:13 [1509]11:14-15 [1510]11:25-26 [1511]11:27
 [1512]11:27 [1513]11:28 [1514]11:28-30 [1515]11:28-30
 [1516]12:7 [1517]12:18 [1518]12:29-31 [1519]12:30 [1520]12:30
 [1521]12:30 [1522]12:30 [1523]12:32 [1524]12:32
 [1525]12:34-35 [1526]12:36-37 [1527]12:39-40 [1528]13:3-8
 [1529]13:3-9 [1530]13:13 [1531]13:17 [1532]13:27 [1533]13:30
 [1534]13:31-32 [1535]13:33-34 [1536]13:43 [1537]13:43
 [1538]13:45-46 [1539]13:45-46 [1540]14:19 [1541]14:31
 [1542]15:4 [1543]15:13 [1544]15:13 [1545]15:13 [1546]15:14
 [1547]15:14 [1548]15:17 [1549]15:26 [1550]16:16 [1551]16:16
 [1552]16:17 [1553]16:18 [1554]16:18 [1555]16:18
 [1556]16:18-19 [1557]16:18-19 [1558]16:19 [1559]16:19
 [1560]16:22 [1561]17:1 [1562]17:5 [1563]17:5 [1564]17:5
 [1565]17:5 [1566]17:20 [1567]18 [1568]18:7 [1569]18:17
 [1570]18:17 [1571]18:17 [1572]18:19 [1573]18:19
 [1574]18:19-20 [1575]18:19-20 [1576]18:20 [1577]18:32
 [1578]18:32 [1579]19:5 [1580]19:8 [1581]19:11 [1582]19:11
 [1583]19:11-12 [1584]19:17 [1585]19:17 [1586]19:17
 [1587]19:17 [1588]19:17-21 [1589]19:21 [1590]19:21
 [1591]20:16 [1592]21:13 [1593]21:15-16 [1594]21:19-20
 [1595]21:22 [1596]21:31 [1597]21:31 [1598]22:20 [1599]22:29
 [1600]22:30 [1601]22:32 [1602]22:37 [1603]22:37-40
 [1604]22:39 [1605]22:40 [1606]23 [1607]23:6-8 [1608]23:8-10
 [1609]23:9 [1610]23:9 [1611]23:12 [1612]23:27 [1613]23:37-38
 [1614]23:38 [1615]23:42 [1616]24:2 [1617]24:4 [1618]24:4-31
 [1619]24:5 [1620]24:12 [1621]24:12 [1622]24:15-22
 [1623]24:23-24 [1624]24:24 [1625]24:25 [1626]24:27-28
 [1627]24:27-28 [1628]24:29 [1629]24:29 [1630]24:31
 [1631]25:21 [1632]25:21 [1633]25:23 [1634]25:23
 [1635]25:31-34 [1636]25:31-46 [1637]25:31-46 [1638]25:31-46
 [1639]25:34 [1640]25:34 [1641]25:34 [1642]25:34 [1643]25:36
 [1644]25:36 [1645]25:36 [1646]25:37 [1647]25:46 [1648]26
 [1649]26:18 [1650]26:28-29 [1651]26:39 [1652]26:39
 [1653]26:41 [1654]26:41 [1655]26:67 [1656]26:70 [1657]27:3-4
 [1658]27:25 [1659]27:29 [1660]27:45 [1661]27:52-53
 [1662]28:18 [1663]28:18 [1664]28:18-19 [1665]28:18-19
 [1666]28:18-20 [1667]28:18-20 [1668]28:18-20 [1669]28:19
 [1670]28:19 [1671]28:19 [1672]28:19 [1673]28:19 [1674]28:19
 [1675]28:20 [1676]28:20

 Mark

 [1677]2:8 [1678]3:28-29 [1679]3:28-29 [1680]4:3-8 [1681]4:3-9
 [1682]4:24 [1683]4:31-32 [1684]6:13 [1685]7:9 [1686]7:9
 [1687]7:9 [1688]7:13 [1689]7:13 [1690]7:13 [1691]7:19
 [1692]7:19 [1693]8:36 [1694]8:38 [1695]8:83 [1696]9:2
 [1697]9:22 [1698]9:30 [1699]10:18 [1700]10:18 [1701]10:29
 [1702]10:38 [1703]10:38 [1704]11:13-14 [1705]11:20
 [1706]11:21 [1707]11:24 [1708]11:25 [1709]11:25
 [1710]12:29-31 [1711]12:29-31 [1712]13:6 [1713]13:6
 [1714]13:11 [1715]13:14-20 [1716]13:23 [1717]14:27
 [1718]14:27 [1719]14:38 [1720]14:58 [1721]16:17-18

 Luke

 [1722]1:4 [1723]1:17 [1724]1:20 [1725]1:26-38 [1726]1:30-33
 [1727]1:35 [1728]1:35 [1729]1:35 [1730]1:35 [1731]1:35
 [1732]1:41-43 [1733]1:43 [1734]1:67-69 [1735]2:2 [1736]2:7
 [1737]2:10-11 [1738]2:23 [1739]2:25 [1740]2:29 [1741]2:29-30
 [1742]2:34 [1743]2:37 [1744]3:9 [1745]3:9 [1746]3:14
 [1747]3:16 [1748]3:17 [1749]4:18 [1750]5:16 [1751]6:5
 [1752]6:12 [1753]6:12 [1754]6:22 [1755]6:22-23 [1756]6:22-23
 [1757]6:22-23 [1758]6:32 [1759]6:35 [1760]6:36 [1761]6:37
 [1762]6:41-42 [1763]7:39 [1764]7:41 [1765]7:47 [1766]7:48
 [1767]7:50 [1768]7:50 [1769]7:50 [1770]8:5-8 [1771]8:5-8
 [1772]9:5 [1773]9:24 [1774]9:25 [1775]9:48 [1776]9:48
 [1777]9:48 [1778]9:50 [1779]9:56 [1780]9:62 [1781]9:62
 [1782]9:62 [1783]10:16 [1784]10:16 [1785]10:19 [1786]10:22
 [1787]11:10 [1788]11:10 [1789]11:20 [1790]11:20 [1791]11:23
 [1792]11:23 [1793]11:23 [1794]11:40-41 [1795]11:41 [1796]12:8
 [1797]12:9 [1798]12:20 [1799]12:20 [1800]12:20 [1801]12:33
 [1802]12:33 [1803]12:35 [1804]12:35-37 [1805]12:35-37
 [1806]12:35-37 [1807]12:47 [1808]12:47 [1809]12:48
 [1810]12:50 [1811]12:50 [1812]13:1-5 [1813]13:7 [1814]13:9
 [1815]13:15-16 [1816]13:19 [1817]14:11 [1818]14:11
 [1819]14:12-14 [1820]14:33 [1821]14:33 [1822]14:33
 [1823]15:4-10 [1824]15:6-10 [1825]15:6-10 [1826]15:7
 [1827]15:7 [1828]16:8 [1829]16:9 [1830]16:10-12
 [1831]16:11-12 [1832]16:14 [1833]16:15 [1834]16:24
 [1835]16:25 [1836]17:1 [1837]17:4 [1838]17:7-10 [1839]17:10
 [1840]17:21 [1841]17:21 [1842]17:21 [1843]17:31-32
 [1844]18:2-5 [1845]18:3 [1846]18:8 [1847]18:8 [1848]18:10-14
 [1849]18:14 [1850]18:19 [1851]18:19 [1852]18:29-30
 [1853]18:29-30 [1854]18:29-30 [1855]19:8-9 [1856]19:8-9
 [1857]19:9 [1858]19:40 [1859]20:34-38 [1860]20:35 [1861]20:35
 [1862]20:35-36 [1863]20:38 [1864]21:3-4 [1865]21:8
 [1866]21:8-9 [1867]21:14-15 [1868]21:14-15 [1869]21:17
 [1870]21:18 [1871]21:20-23 [1872]21:28 [1873]21:31
 [1874]21:36 [1875]22:8 [1876]22:15 [1877]22:16 [1878]22:31
 [1879]22:31-32 [1880]22:32 [1881]22:42 [1882]22:42 [1883]23
 [1884]24:20-21 [1885]24:39 [1886]24:44-47

 John

 [1887]1:1 [1888]1:1 [1889]1:1 [1890]1:1-2 [1891]1:1-3
 [1892]1:1-4 [1893]1:1-5 [1894]1:3 [1895]1:3 [1896]1:3
 [1897]1:3 [1898]1:3 [1899]1:3-4 [1900]1:9 [1901]1:9
 [1902]1:9 [1903]1:9-10 [1904]1:10-11 [1905]1:10-11 [1906]1:11
 [1907]1:11-12 [1908]1:13 [1909]1:14 [1910]1:14 [1911]1:14
 [1912]1:14 [1913]1:14 [1914]1:15 [1915]1:16 [1916]1:18
 [1917]1:20 [1918]1:26-27 [1919]1:27 [1920]1:29 [1921]1:29
 [1922]1:29 [1923]1:29 [1924]1:36-37 [1925]2:1-11 [1926]2:4
 [1927]2:19 [1928]2:19 [1929]2:19 [1930]3 [1931]3:3
 [1932]3:5 [1933]3:5 [1934]3:5 [1935]3:5 [1936]3:5
 [1937]3:5-6 [1938]3:5-6 [1939]3:5-6 [1940]3:6 [1941]3:6
 [1942]3:6 [1943]3:8 [1944]3:11 [1945]3:13 [1946]3:13
 [1947]3:13 [1948]3:13 [1949]3:13 [1950]3:14-15 [1951]3:14-15
 [1952]3:16 [1953]3:18-19 [1954]3:18-19 [1955]3:27 [1956]3:27
 [1957]3:28-29 [1958]3:31 [1959]3:31 [1960]3:31-32
 [1961]3:34-35 [1962]3:36 [1963]4:7-8 [1964]4:7-14 [1965]4:10
 [1966]4:13-14 [1967]4:14 [1968]4:14 [1969]4:19 [1970]4:21
 [1971]4:21 [1972]4:23 [1973]4:24 [1974]4:32 [1975]4:34
 [1976]4:34 [1977]4:38 [1978]5:14 [1979]5:14 [1980]5:14
 [1981]5:14 [1982]5:17 [1983]5:19 [1984]5:19 [1985]5:22
 [1986]5:22-23 [1987]5:22-23 [1988]5:25 [1989]5:25 [1990]5:26
 [1991]5:30 [1992]5:31-32 [1993]5:37 [1994]5:39-40 [1995]5:43
 [1996]5:45-47 [1997]6:26-27 [1998]6:27 [1999]6:29 [2000]6:35
 [2001]6:35 [2002]6:37-38 [2003]6:38 [2004]6:38 [2005]6:38
 [2006]6:38 [2007]6:44 [2008]6:46 [2009]6:51 [2010]6:53
 [2011]6:53 [2012]6:53 [2013]6:53 [2014]6:53 [2015]6:58
 [2016]6:62 [2017]6:64 [2018]6:65 [2019]6:66 [2020]6:67
 [2021]6:67 [2022]6:67-69 [2023]7:37-38 [2024]7:37-39
 [2025]7:38 [2026]7:38 [2027]7:39 [2028]8:12 [2029]8:12
 [2030]8:12 [2031]8:14-15 [2032]8:16 [2033]8:17-18 [2034]8:18
 [2035]8:23 [2036]8:24 [2037]8:31-32 [2038]8:31-32 [2039]8:34
 [2040]8:42 [2041]8:44 [2042]8:44 [2043]8:51 [2044]8:58
 [2045]9:1 [2046]9:31 [2047]9:31 [2048]9:31 [2049]9:31
 [2050]10:1 [2051]10:7 [2052]10:8 [2053]10:8 [2054]10:9
 [2055]10:9 [2056]10:9 [2057]10:11-12 [2058]10:16 [2059]10:16
 [2060]10:17-18 [2061]10:18 [2062]10:18 [2063]10:18
 [2064]10:18 [2065]10:18 [2066]10:27-28 [2067]10:30
 [2068]10:30 [2069]10:30 [2070]10:30 [2071]10:30 [2072]10:30
 [2073]10:33 [2074]10:34 [2075]10:34 [2076]10:34-38
 [2077]10:35-36 [2078]10:36 [2079]10:36 [2080]11:12
 [2081]11:25 [2082]11:26 [2083]11:51-52 [2084]11:52
 [2085]12:20 [2086]12:25 [2087]12:25 [2088]12:25 [2089]12:25
 [2090]12:34 [2091]12:35 [2092]13:1 [2093]13:14-15
 [2094]13:14-15 [2095]13:16 [2096]13:16-17 [2097]13:27
 [2098]14:6 [2099]14:6 [2100]14:6 [2101]14:6 [2102]14:6
 [2103]14:6 [2104]14:6 [2105]14:6 [2106]14:7 [2107]14:8
 [2108]14:8-9 [2109]14:9 [2110]14:11 [2111]14:12 [2112]14:12
 [2113]14:15 [2114]14:15-16 [2115]14:16-17 [2116]14:16-17
 [2117]14:18 [2118]14:23 [2119]14:26 [2120]14:27 [2121]14:27
 [2122]14:28 [2123]14:28 [2124]14:28 [2125]14:30 [2126]15:1
 [2127]15:1 [2128]15:1 [2129]15:9-10 [2130]15:12 [2131]15:12
 [2132]15:12-13 [2133]15:14-15 [2134]15:15 [2135]15:18-20
 [2136]15:18-20 [2137]15:18-20 [2138]15:20 [2139]15:21
 [2140]16:2-3 [2141]16:2-4 [2142]16:2-4 [2143]16:7 [2144]16:13
 [2145]16:14 [2146]16:20 [2147]16:20 [2148]16:22 [2149]16:23
 [2150]16:23-24 [2151]16:26 [2152]16:28 [2153]16:28
 [2154]16:33 [2155]16:33 [2156]16:33 [2157]16:33 [2158]17:3
 [2159]17:3 [2160]17:3 [2161]17:3 [2162]17:3 [2163]17:3-4
 [2164]17:3-5 [2165]17:5 [2166]17:5 [2167]17:5 [2168]17:5
 [2169]17:8 [2170]17:20 [2171]17:21 [2172]17:22-23
 [2173]17:22-23 [2174]17:24 [2175]17:24 [2176]18:22
 [2177]18:23 [2178]18:23 [2179]18:23 [2180]18:37 [2181]19:11
 [2182]19:11 [2183]19:14 [2184]19:23-24 [2185]19:26
 [2186]19:37 [2187]20:17 [2188]20:17 [2189]20:21
 [2190]20:21-23 [2191]20:21-23 [2192]20:22 [2193]20:22-23
 [2194]20:22-23 [2195]20:22-23 [2196]20:23 [2197]20:26-29
 [2198]20:27 [2199]20:27-29 [2200]20:28 [2201]20:28
 [2202]21:15 [2203]21:17 [2204]21:22

 Acts

 [2205]1:4-5 [2206]1:5 [2207]1:7 [2208]1:14 [2209]1:14
 [2210]1:15 [2211]2:2-4 [2212]2:3 [2213]2:17 [2214]2:17-18
 [2215]2:20 [2216]2:24 [2217]2:33 [2218]2:34 [2219]2:38-39
 [2220]3:1 [2221]3:6 [2222]3:14 [2223]3:24 [2224]4:2
 [2225]4:6 [2226]4:8-12 [2227]4:12 [2228]4:19 [2229]4:32
 [2230]4:32 [2231]4:32 [2232]4:32 [2233]4:36 [2234]5:3-4
 [2235]5:13 [2236]5:29 [2237]6:5 [2238]6:7 [2239]7:52
 [2240]7:60 [2241]8:9-24 [2242]8:14 [2243]8:17 [2244]8:20
 [2245]8:20 [2246]8:20-21 [2247]8:36-37 [2248]8:37 [2249]9:5
 [2250]9:40 [2251]10:2 [2252]10:4 [2253]10:15 [2254]10:26
 [2255]10:28 [2256]10:36 [2257]10:44-48 [2258]10:47
 [2259]11:15-17 [2260]13:2 [2261]13:7-9 [2262]13:28
 [2263]13:33 [2264]13:46-47 [2265]14:14-15 [2266]15:4-6
 [2267]15:7 [2268]15:7-8 [2269]15:9 [2270]15:13 [2271]15:13
 [2272]15:13-17 [2273]15:19 [2274]15:21 [2275]15:22
 [2276]15:22 [2277]15:23 [2278]15:28-29 [2279]16:16
 [2280]16:25 [2281]17:11 [2282]17:23 [2283]19:6 [2284]19:15
 [2285]20:28-31 [2286]20:29-31 [2287]21:9 [2288]22:14
 [2289]22:16 [2290]23:4 [2291]23:4-5 [2292]23:4-5 [2293]23:5
 [2294]27:40 [2295]28:22 [2296]28:25

 Romans

 [2297]1:8 [2298]1:8 [2299]1:17 [2300]1:20 [2301]1:20-27
 [2302]1:21 [2303]1:23 [2304]1:25-26 [2305]1:26-27
 [2306]1:30-32 [2307]2:1-3 [2308]2:4-6 [2309]2:4-6 [2310]2:11
 [2311]2:12 [2312]2:13 [2313]2:24 [2314]3:3 [2315]3:3-4
 [2316]3:3-4 [2317]3:3-4 [2318]3:3-4 [2319]3:8 [2320]3:13-18
 [2321]3:23-24 [2322]3:25 [2323]5:2-5 [2324]5:2-5 [2325]5:8-9
 [2326]5:14 [2327]7:14 [2328]8:7 [2329]8:9 [2330]8:11
 [2331]8:11-12 [2332]8:12-14 [2333]8:16-17 [2334]8:16-17
 [2335]8:16-17 [2336]8:16-17 [2337]8:17 [2338]8:18 [2339]8:18
 [2340]8:18 [2341]8:18 [2342]8:18 [2343]8:18 [2344]8:19
 [2345]8:19-22 [2346]8:22 [2347]8:24-25 [2348]8:24-25
 [2349]8:35 [2350]8:35 [2351]8:35-37 [2352]8:35-37 [2353]8:36
 [2354]9:3-5 [2355]9:5 [2356]9:5 [2357]9:5 [2358]9:5
 [2359]10:4 [2360]10:18 [2361]11:17-21 [2362]11:20-21
 [2363]11:20-21 [2364]11:20-21 [2365]11:33 [2366]11:33
 [2367]11:33-36 [2368]12:1-2 [2369]12:1-2 [2370]12:13
 [2371]12:14 [2372]12:17 [2373]12:19 [2374]12:21 [2375]13:3
 [2376]13:7-8 [2377]13:12-13 [2378]14:1 [2379]14:4 [2380]14:4
 [2381]14:4 [2382]14:4 [2383]14:12-13 [2384]14:17 [2385]14:17
 [2386]15:16 [2387]15:16 [2388]16:14 [2389]16:20

 1 Corinthians

 [2390]1:10 [2391]1:10 [2392]1:10 [2393]1:17-24 [2394]1:22-24
 [2395]1:26 [2396]2:8 [2397]2:9 [2398]2:9 [2399]2:9
 [2400]2:9 [2401]2:9 [2402]2:9 [2403]2:12 [2404]2:13
 [2405]2:13-14 [2406]2:14 [2407]3:1-3 [2408]3:1-3 [2409]3:3
 [2410]3:6-8 [2411]3:12 [2412]3:13 [2413]3:16 [2414]3:16-17
 [2415]3:18-20 [2416]3:18-20 [2417]4:7 [2418]4:15 [2419]4:20
 [2420]5:4 [2421]5:7 [2422]5:7 [2423]5:7 [2424]5:7
 [2425]5:7-8 [2426]5:7-8 [2427]5:8 [2428]6:1-2 [2429]6:4
 [2430]6:7-9 [2431]6:9 [2432]6:9-11 [2433]6:10 [2434]6:13
 [2435]6:13 [2436]6:15 [2437]6:15-17 [2438]6:18 [2439]6:18-20
 [2440]6:19 [2441]6:19-20 [2442]6:20 [2443]6:20 [2444]7:1-7
 [2445]7:7 [2446]7:10-11 [2447]7:29-31 [2448]7:30-31
 [2449]7:32 [2450]7:32-34 [2451]7:39-40 [2452]7:40 [2453]8:2
 [2454]8:4 [2455]8:6 [2456]8:8 [2457]8:13 [2458]9:22
 [2459]9:24 [2460]9:24-25 [2461]9:24-25 [2462]9:24-25
 [2463]10:1 [2464]10:1-2 [2465]10:6 [2466]10:11 [2467]10:11
 [2468]10:12 [2469]10:12 [2470]10:13 [2471]10:21 [2472]10:21
 [2473]10:21 [2474]10:23 [2475]10:23 [2476]10:25 [2477]10:33
 [2478]11:1 [2479]11:2 [2480]11:2 [2481]11:4 [2482]11:16
 [2483]11:16 [2484]11:16 [2485]11:17 [2486]11:19 [2487]11:19
 [2488]11:19 [2489]11:23-26 [2490]11:26 [2491]11:27
 [2492]11:27 [2493]11:27 [2494]11:27 [2495]11:27
 [2496]11:29-34 [2497]11:32 [2498]11:33 [2499]12:3
 [2500]12:12-30 [2501]12:26 [2502]12:26 [2503]12:26
 [2504]12:28 [2505]13:2-5 [2506]13:2-8 [2507]13:3 [2508]13:3
 [2509]13:4 [2510]13:4-7 [2511]13:7 [2512]13:8 [2513]13:12
 [2514]14:16 [2515]14:29-30 [2516]14:30 [2517]14:32
 [2518]14:34-35 [2519]14:36 [2520]15:20 [2521]15:23-28
 [2522]15:31 [2523]15:33 [2524]15:33 [2525]15:33 [2526]15:36
 [2527]15:41-44 [2528]15:47 [2529]15:47 [2530]15:47-49
 [2531]15:47-49 [2532]15:47-49 [2533]15:52 [2534]15:53-55
 [2535]15:54-55 [2536]16:50

 2 Corinthians

 [2537]1:20 [2538]2:10 [2539]2:10 [2540]2:10 [2541]2:11
 [2542]3:14-16 [2543]3:17 [2544]4:13 [2545]5:10 [2546]5:10
 [2547]5:15 [2548]5:17 [2549]5:17 [2550]6:10 [2551]6:14
 [2552]6:14 [2553]7:10 [2554]8:12-13 [2555]8:14-15 [2556]9:6-7
 [2557]9:9 [2558]9:10 [2559]9:10-11 [2560]9:12 [2561]9:12
 [2562]10:13-14 [2563]11:2 [2564]11:29 [2565]11:29 [2566]12:2
 [2567]12:4 [2568]12:7-9 [2569]12:7-9 [2570]12:21 [2571]12:21
 [2572]13:2 [2573]13:4

 Galatians

 [2574]1:1 [2575]1:6-9 [2576]1:6-9 [2577]1:10 [2578]1:10
 [2579]1:10 [2580]1:10 [2581]1:10 [2582]2:4 [2583]2:5
 [2584]2:5 [2585]2:9 [2586]2:11-14 [2587]3:6-9 [2588]3:6-9
 [2589]3:17 [2590]3:19 [2591]3:20 [2592]3:20 [2593]3:20
 [2594]3:27 [2595]3:27 [2596]3:27 [2597]3:28 [2598]4:3
 [2599]4:4 [2600]4:4 [2601]4:9 [2602]4:16 [2603]4:21
 [2604]4:26 [2605]4:27 [2606]5:3 [2607]5:12 [2608]5:14-15
 [2609]5:15 [2610]5:17 [2611]5:17 [2612]5:17-22 [2613]5:17-24
 [2614]5:19-21 [2615]5:22 [2616]5:24 [2617]6:1-2 [2618]6:1-2
 [2619]6:7 [2620]6:7 [2621]6:9 [2622]6:9 [2623]6:10
 [2624]6:10 [2625]6:14 [2626]6:14 [2627]6:14 [2628]6:15
 [2629]6:15 [2630]6:17

 Ephesians

 [2631]1:10 [2632]1:21 [2633]2:6 [2634]2:14 [2635]2:17
 [2636]2:17-18 [2637]2:20 [2638]3:3-5 [2639]3:14-18 [2640]3:15
 [2641]3:15 [2642]4:1 [2643]4:2-3 [2644]4:2-3 [2645]4:3
 [2646]4:3-6 [2647]4:4 [2648]4:5 [2649]4:5 [2650]4:5
 [2651]4:5-6 [2652]4:6 [2653]4:6 [2654]4:10 [2655]4:13
 [2656]4:15-16 [2657]4:16 [2658]4:22-24 [2659]4:26 [2660]4:27
 [2661]4:29 [2662]4:29 [2663]4:30-31 [2664]4:30-31 [2665]5:4
 [2666]5:5 [2667]5:6 [2668]5:6-7 [2669]5:6-7 [2670]5:6-7
 [2671]5:14 [2672]5:14 [2673]5:15-16 [2674]5:19 [2675]5:25-26
 [2676]5:25-26 [2677]5:28-29 [2678]5:31-32 [2679]6:1-3
 [2680]6:4 [2681]6:5-6 [2682]6:9 [2683]6:12 [2684]6:12-17
 [2685]6:12-17

 Philippians

 [2686]1:18 [2687]1:18 [2688]1:21 [2689]1:21 [2690]1:21
 [2691]1:24 [2692]1:26 [2693]2:6-7 [2694]2:6-11 [2695]2:6-11
 [2696]2:6-11 [2697]2:7 [2698]2:7 [2699]2:7 [2700]2:7-9
 [2701]2:9-10 [2702]2:10 [2703]2:11 [2704]2:12 [2705]2:14-15
 [2706]2:15 [2707]2:15 [2708]2:21 [2709]2:25 [2710]3:2
 [2711]3:2 [2712]3:2 [2713]3:14 [2714]3:15 [2715]3:15
 [2716]3:19-21 [2717]3:21 [2718]3:21 [2719]4:8 [2720]4:18

 Colossians

 [2721]1:2 [2722]1:15 [2723]1:15 [2724]1:15 [2725]1:16
 [2726]1:16 [2727]1:16 [2728]1:18 [2729]1:18 [2730]1:19
 [2731]1:19 [2732]1:26 [2733]2:8 [2734]2:8 [2735]2:8
 [2736]2:8 [2737]2:9 [2738]2:9 [2739]2:10 [2740]2:11
 [2741]2:11 [2742]2:14 [2743]2:14 [2744]2:15 [2745]2:15
 [2746]2:18 [2747]2:18-19 [2748]2:20 [2749]2:20 [2750]2:20
 [2751]2:21 [2752]2:23 [2753]3:1-4 [2754]3:1-4 [2755]3:5-6
 [2756]3:16 [2757]3:16 [2758]4:2 [2759]4:2

 1 Thessalonians

 [2760]2:12 [2761]4:3 [2762]4:6 [2763]4:12 [2764]4:13
 [2765]4:13-14 [2766]4:16 [2767]5:2-3

 2 Thessalonians

 [2768]2:1-11 [2769]2:8 [2770]2:10 [2771]2:10-12 [2772]2:11
 [2773]3:2 [2774]3:6 [2775]3:6 [2776]3:6 [2777]3:8
 [2778]3:14-15

 1 Timothy

 [2779]1:3 [2780]1:13 [2781]1:17 [2782]2:5 [2783]2:5
 [2784]2:9-10 [2785]2:9-10 [2786]2:11-14 [2787]3:6 [2788]4:1
 [2789]4:1-3 [2790]4:1-5 [2791]4:3 [2792]4:3-5 [2793]4:4
 [2794]4:4-5 [2795]4:12 [2796]4:17 [2797]5:3 [2798]5:6
 [2799]5:8 [2800]5:11-12 [2801]5:19 [2802]5:20 [2803]5:22
 [2804]5:30 [2805]6:3-5 [2806]6:3-5 [2807]6:6 [2808]6:7
 [2809]6:7-10 [2810]6:7-10 [2811]6:8 [2812]6:9 [2813]6:10
 [2814]6:16 [2815]6:16 [2816]6:16 [2817]6:17 [2818]6:20
 [2819]6:20-21

 2 Timothy

 [2820]2:1-2 [2821]2:4 [2822]2:4-5 [2823]2:4-5 [2824]2:11-12
 [2825]2:16 [2826]2:17 [2827]2:17 [2828]2:17 [2829]2:20
 [2830]2:20 [2831]2:23-24 [2832]2:24 [2833]3:1-3 [2834]3:1-9
 [2835]3:12 [2836]3:13 [2837]4:3-4 [2838]4:6-8 [2839]4:6-8
 [2840]4:8

 Titus

 [2841]1:7 [2842]1:15 [2843]1:15 [2844]2:13 [2845]3:2
 [2846]3:5 [2847]3:10-11 [2848]3:10-11 [2849]3:11

 Hebrews

 [2850]1:3 [2851]1:3 [2852]1:9 [2853]2:5 [2854]2:11
 [2855]3:3 [2856]5:1 [2857]5:7 [2858]6:2 [2859]6:2
 [2860]7:21 [2861]7:21 [2862]9:27 [2863]10:30 [2864]11:35
 [2865]11:35 [2866]11:36-37 [2867]12:6 [2868]12:29 [2869]12:29
 [2870]13:10

 James

 [2871]2:13 [2872]2:13 [2873]4:6 [2874]5:14

 1 Peter

 [2875]1:17 [2876]1:24 [2877]2:5 [2878]2:5 [2879]2:11-12
 [2880]2:21 [2881]2:21-23 [2882]2:21-23 [2883]3:3-4 [2884]3:4
 [2885]3:18 [2886]3:19 [2887]3:20-21 [2888]3:20-21 [2889]3:21
 [2890]4:6 [2891]4:12 [2892]4:12-14 [2893]4:12-14 [2894]4:15
 [2895]4:15-16 [2896]5:1 [2897]5:1-3 [2898]5:3 [2899]5:5
 [2900]5:5 [2901]5:8 [2902]10:11

 2 Peter

 [2903]1:4 [2904]1:4 [2905]1:4 [2906]1:4 [2907]1:18-19
 [2908]1:21 [2909]2:1 [2910]2:4 [2911]2:4 [2912]2:4
 [2913]2:4 [2914]2:11-12 [2915]2:13-15 [2916]2:16 [2917]2:22
 [2918]3:3 [2919]3:9 [2920]3:12

 1 John

 [2921]1:1 [2922]1:8 [2923]1:8 [2924]1:8-9 [2925]2:1-2
 [2926]2:3-4 [2927]2:6 [2928]2:6 [2929]2:6 [2930]2:6
 [2931]2:9 [2932]2:9-11 [2933]2:11 [2934]2:15 [2935]2:15-17
 [2936]2:15-17 [2937]2:15-17 [2938]2:17 [2939]2:17 [2940]2:18
 [2941]2:18-19 [2942]2:18-19 [2943]2:19 [2944]2:19 [2945]2:19
 [2946]2:21-22 [2947]2:23 [2948]2:23 [2949]2:27 [2950]3:10
 [2951]3:10 [2952]3:15 [2953]3:15 [2954]3:15 [2955]3:17
 [2956]3:17 [2957]4:1 [2958]4:2-3 [2959]4:3 [2960]4:4
 [2961]4:4 [2962]4:4 [2963]4:12 [2964]4:16 [2965]4:16
 [2966]4:20 [2967]5:6 [2968]5:7 [2969]5:7 [2970]5:8
 [2971]5:16 [2972]5:16

 2 John

 [2973]1:10 [2974]1:11

 Jude

 [2975]1:11 [2976]1:11 [2977]1:14 [2978]1:15 [2979]1:18
 [2980]1:19 [2981]1:19 [2982]1:22

 Revelation

 [2983]1:6 [2984]1:8 [2985]1:8 [2986]1:12-18 [2987]1:14
 [2988]2:5 [2989]2:5 [2990]2:5 [2991]2:5 [2992]2:5 [2993]2:5
 [2994]2:6 [2995]2:7 [2996]2:10 [2997]2:10 [2998]2:10
 [2999]2:10 [3000]2:10 [3001]2:20-22 [3002]2:23 [3003]2:23
 [3004]2:23 [3005]2:23 [3006]2:23 [3007]2:24 [3008]3:7
 [3009]3:11 [3010]3:11 [3011]3:11 [3012]3:14 [3013]3:14
 [3014]3:14 [3015]3:17 [3016]3:17-18 [3017]3:19 [3018]3:21
 [3019]3:21 [3020]3:21 [3021]4:7 [3022]5 [3023]5:1-5
 [3024]5:5 [3025]5:6-10 [3026]5:8 [3027]5:10 [3028]5:10
 [3029]5:13-14 [3030]6:9 [3031]6:9-11 [3032]6:9-11 [3033]6:10
 [3034]6:12-17 [3035]6:14 [3036]7 [3037]7:3 [3038]7:9-15
 [3039]7:9-17 [3040]7:14 [3041]8:3-4 [3042]9:1 [3043]9:4
 [3044]9:13-21 [3045]11:3 [3046]11:3 [3047]11:3 [3048]11:3
 [3049]11:3 [3050]11:4-6 [3051]11:6 [3052]11:15 [3053]11:16-17
 [3054]12:1-6 [3055]12:15 [3056]13:11-18 [3057]13:18
 [3058]14:1 [3059]14:4 [3060]14:4 [3061]14:6-7 [3062]14:9-11
 [3063]14:9-11 [3064]14:9-11 [3065]14:9-11 [3066]14:16-17
 [3067]15:2-4 [3068]16:15 [3069]17 [3070]17:1 [3071]17:1-4
 [3072]17:9 [3073]17:10 [3074]17:15 [3075]17:15 [3076]18
 [3077]18:4 [3078]18:4-9 [3079]19:6 [3080]19:6-7 [3081]19:10
 [3082]19:11-13 [3083]19:11-13 [3084]19:11-16 [3085]19:13
 [3086]20:4-5 [3087]20:6 [3088]20:11 [3089]20:11-13 [3090]21:1
 [3091]21:6 [3092]21:6-7 [3093]21:6-7 [3094]21:9-11
 [3095]21:14 [3096]22:9 [3097]22:10-12 [3098]22:10-12
 [3099]22:13-14 [3100]22:15

 Tobit

 [3101]2:2 [3102]2:14 [3103]2:14 [3104]3:17 [3105]4:5-11
 [3106]4:5-11 [3107]4:10 [3108]4:12 [3109]12:8-9
 [3110]12:11-15 [3111]12:12-15 [3112]13:6 [3113]14:10-11
 [3114]20:8

 Wisdom of Solomon

 [3115]1:1 [3116]1:13 [3117]2:1 [3118]2:12 [3119]2:12-22
 [3120]2:13 [3121]2:14 [3122]2:15-16 [3123]2:16 [3124]2:17
 [3125]2:20 [3126]2:24 [3127]3:4 [3128]3:4-8 [3129]3:4-8
 [3130]3:4-8 [3131]3:7 [3132]3:11 [3133]3:11 [3134]3:11
 [3135]4:11 [3136]4:11 [3137]4:14 [3138]5:1-9 [3139]5:1-9
 [3140]5:1-9 [3141]5:8 [3142]5:13 [3143]6:6 [3144]13:1-4
 [3145]13:1-4 [3146]15:15-17 [3147]15:15-17

 Baruch

 [3148]3:35-37 [3149]3:35-38 [3150]3:36 [3151]6:6

 1 Maccabees

 [3152]2:33 [3153]2:52 [3154]2:60 [3155]2:62-63 [3156]2:62-63
 [3157]10

 2 Maccabees

 [3158]6:30 [3159]6:30 [3160]7:9 [3161]7:9 [3162]7:14
 [3163]7:14 [3164]7:16 [3165]7:16-17 [3166]7:18 [3167]7:18-19
 [3168]7:27 [3169]9:12

 Sirach

 [3170]1:14 [3171]1:26 [3172]2:1 [3173]2:1 [3174]2:4
 [3175]2:4 [3176]2:4-5 [3177]2:5 [3178]2:10-11 [3179]3:30
 [3180]3:30 [3181]4:10 [3182]4:29 [3183]5:4 [3184]5:7
 [3185]6:16 [3186]7:17 [3187]7:29 [3188]7:31 [3189]7:39
 [3190]9:13 [3191]9:16 [3192]10:26 [3193]11:28 [3194]14:11
 [3195]16:1-2 [3196]17:26 [3197]20:3 [3198]23:11 [3199]24:3-7
 [3200]25:9 [3201]27:5 [3202]27:5 [3203]27:5 [3204]28:15
 [3205]28:24 [3206]28:24 [3207]28:24 [3208]28:24 [3209]29:12
 [3210]29:12 [3211]34:19 [3212]34:25 [3213]34:25 [3214]48:3

Index of Greek Words and Phrases

 * doxan: [3215]1
 * 'Angelou: [3216]1
 * abasileutos: [3217]1
 * abouleutos: [3218]1
 * abouletos: [3219]1
 * agnomon: [3220]1
 * agorazei: [3221]1
 * agorasei: [3222]1
 * adunatos: [3223]1
 * adelphotheos: [3224]1
 * adiakritoi: [3225]1
 * adiaphoroi: [3226]1
 * adiaphoron: [3227]1
 * aei: [3228]1
 * aeiparthenou: [3229]1
 * aekousa: [3230]1
 * athanate: [3231]1
 * akolouthos: [3232]1
 * akathartotetos: [3233]1
 * akanonista dogmatizeis: [3234]1
 * akatallelon: [3235]1
 * akataskeuastos: [3236]1
 * akindunon: [3237]1
 * akribos: [3238]1
 * alalo: [3239]1
 * alalon: [3240]1
 * all' allos allegorei: [3241]1
 * amaran: [3242]1
 * amelei: [3243]1
 * anaduomenou: [3244]1
 * anakalupsai: [3245]1
 * analuomenou: [3246]1
 * anaxio: [3247]1
 * anaxiou: [3248]1
 * anaxurison: [3249]1
 * anapleontas: [3250]1
 * anapleou: [3251]1
 * anapterountas: [3252]1
 * anatole: [3253]1
 * anaphanen: [3254]1
 * anaphuen: [3255]1
 * andreia: [3256]1
 * anthropois pasin.  'Elthon: [3257]1
 * anthropois.  Palin elthon: [3258]1
 * anthropon: [3259]1 [3260]2
 * anomia: [3261]1
 * anomias: [3262]1
 * anosios: [3263]1
 * anoche paschon theotetos: [3264]1
 * antidikos: [3265]1
 * antilepseis: [3266]1
 * antiparatheseis: [3267]1
 * anupotakton diathesin: [3268]1
 * axiopistian: [3269]1
 * apo: [3270]1
 * apo anthropon: [3271]1
 * apo tes eulubeias: [3272]1
 * apo psuchon kai apoleias anthropon: [3273]1
 * aporrhoian: [3274]1
 * apodemos: [3275]1
 * apoleto: [3276]1
 * ap' aionon: [3277]1
 * apelthen: [3278]1
 * apaustos: [3279]1
 * apagoge: [3280]1
 * apathes: [3281]1
 * apathes: [3282]1
 * aparatropon: [3283]1
 * apekrinato: [3284]1
 * aperizugon: [3285]1
 * aperizugos: [3286]1
 * apetelei to areskon: [3287]1
 * apeteleito arekon Theo: [3288]1
 * apephenato: [3289]1
 * apertismenos: [3290]1
 * apodedokasi ta presbeia: [3291]1
 * apokalupsas: [3292]1 [3293]2
 * aporian: [3294]1
 * apotaxeos: [3295]1
 * apotexeos: [3296]1
 * apotetagmenou: [3297]1
 * apotetamenou: [3298]1
 * apousian: [3299]1
 * apopsuchonton kat' apoleias anthropon: [3300]1
 * aprostateutos: [3301]1
 * apoleias: [3302]1
 * areusia: [3303]1
 * arithmos: [3304]1
 * arnoumai: [3305]1 [3306]2
 * arnoume: [3307]1
 * arche: [3308]1
 * archaia ethe: [3309]1 [3310]2
 * archegon: [3311]1
 * archimageiros: [3312]1
 * asunchutos: [3313]1 [3314]2
 * askalabotes: [3315]1
 * astrapiken: [3316]1
 * asumpatheia: [3317]1
 * asunetheis: [3318]1
 * ataxian: [3319]1
 * atuchousa: [3320]1
 * aphietai: [3321]1 [3322]2
 * aphietai eike: [3323]1
 * apheles: [3324]1
 * aphiei eike: [3325]1
 * aphiei: [3326]1
 * hagiasas: [3327]1
 * hadromesteron: [3328]1
 * hadromeros: [3329]1
 * harmonia: [3330]1
 * akra: [3331]1
 * allo: [3332]1
 * alogos: [3333]1
 * ametroi: [3334]1
 * amoiron drasas theotetos: [3335]1
 * amomon: [3336]1
 * anemoi: [3337]1
 * anthropos nikon dunamin: [3338]1
 * apeiron: [3339]1
 * arsis: [3340]1
 * archaia ethe: [3341]1 [3342]2
 * archon: [3343]1
 * asophos: [3344]1
 * atreptos: [3345]1
 * halas ton genomenon: [3346]1
 * hatina: [3347]1
 * ego kai ho pater: [3348]1
 * engramaton: [3349]1
 * ek blastou: [3350]1 [3351]2
 * ek tes koilias: [3352]1
 * ek ton meron: [3353]1
 * ek tou pantos: [3354]1
 * ekbrassomene: [3355]1
 * ekkathare: [3356]1
 * ekklesiastikos aner: [3357]1
 * ekkritheie: [3358]1
 * ekollethesan: [3359]1
 * ekretheie: [3360]1
 * ekritheie: [3361]1
 * ektesato: [3362]1
 * elate: [3363]1
 * elakede: [3364]1
 * elakede elonchiasthe: [3365]1
 * empeiria: [3366]1
 * emplaston: [3367]1
 * emporia: [3368]1
 * en axia: [3369]1
 * en arche: [3370]1
 * en ischui: [3371]1
 * en aute: [3372]1
 * en mesoteti: [3373]1
 * en plane: [3374]1
 * en te homilia: [3375]1
 * en te hupostasei: [3376]1
 * en te graphe: [3377]1
 * en to onomati: [3378]1
 * en to grapheio: [3379]1
 * enotetos: [3380]1
 * enanthropeseos: [3381]1
 * enaxia: [3382]1
 * energon: [3383]1
 * energeias: [3384]1
 * energeias monadi: [3385]1
 * enthumeitai: [3386]1
 * enthumethei te: [3387]1
 * enousiosas: [3388]1
 * enteuthen: [3389]1 [3390]2
 * entuchon: [3391]1
 * ex hes: [3392]1
 * ex horaseos: [3393]1
 * exelthon: [3394]1
 * exaireseos auton: [3395]1
 * exelthon: [3396]1
 * exelthon: [3397]1
 * exelthon: [3398]1
 * exegesato: [3399]1
 * epi duo ousai: [3400]1
 * epi trophen: [3401]1
 * epi chleuasma: [3402]1
 * epi: [3403]1
 * epipleon: [3404]1
 * epipleon bolou: [3405]1
 * ep' alousia: [3406]1
 * ep' auton: [3407]1
 * ep' autes: [3408]1
 * ep' ousian: [3409]1
 * epagoge: [3410]1
 * epeide kai proen dia ton hupereton autou ho antidikos echthros, e
 goun ton eidololatron, tois martusi tou Christou proetrepon hoi
 anomoi: [3411]1
 * epephane ouk ephane: [3412]1
 * epigelontes: [3413]1
 * epiousion: [3414]1 [3415]2
 * epiousios: [3416]1
 * epispoudastes: [3417]1
 * epistrephon: [3418]1
 * epistrephomenon: [3419]1
 * epistrophen: [3420]1
 * epiphaneia: [3421]1
 * epiphoiteseos: [3422]1
 * epoiese: [3423]1
 * eranisamenoi: [3424]1
 * esmen: [3425]1
 * etumologikes: [3426]1
 * echthrou: [3427]1
 * hekousios: [3428]1
 * hexes: [3429]1
 * heterophanous ousias: [3430]1
 * eklaie: [3431]1
 * ekraxan: [3432]1
 * ektise,: [3433]1
 * elabe: [3434]1
 * enanchos: [3435]1
 * entha theon dei: [3436]1
 * eranos: [3437]1
 * ergo: [3438]1
 * estai kai Theos: [3439]1
 * estesen oria ethnon kata arithmon allelon Theou: [3440]1
 * eschatos: [3441]1
 * eti holoklerou: [3442]1
 * hen: [3443]1 [3444]2
 * hen esmen: [3445]1
 * hen eimi: [3446]1
 * henosin: [3447]1
 * herkos odonton:--: [3448]1
 * heteron ti: [3449]1
 * heterai bibloi: [3450]1
 * heos: [3451]1
 * heos an ouch: [3452]1
 * ekolouthesan: [3453]1
 * eoroumenoi: [3454]1
 * hegiasan: [3455]1
 * hegoumenos: [3456]1
 * helikia: [3457]1 [3458]2
 * helikiote: [3459]1
 * ete dunamei kai te diathesei tes homophronias hen ginometha:
 [3460]1
 * engisan: [3461]1
 * egeiran: [3462]1
 * en: [3463]1
 * idioma: [3464]1
 * idikou: [3465]1
 * isopsepha: [3466]1
 * ischura: [3467]1
 * hidiomaton: [3468]1
 * hierateuomenos: [3469]1
 * hierourgounta to euangelion: [3470]1
 * histos: [3471]1
 * hina dia touton genesthe theias koinonoi phuseos: [3472]1
 * hison heauto kai tauton: [3473]1
 * odunes: [3474]1
 * omphalos: [3475]1
 * organon diken henomenon echontes en heautois: [3476]1
 * orophen: [3477]1
 * ouphalos: [3478]1
 * ophthalmophanos: [3479]1
 * ophioeide: [3480]1
 * ophioeide,: [3481]1
 * ho antikeimenos ,: [3482]1
 * ho anomos: [3483]1
 * ho eschatos: [3484]1
 * ho Kananites: [3485]1
 * ho kolobodaktulos: [3486]1
 * ho logos: [3487]1
 * hoi neoteroi: [3488]1
 * homoios: [3489]1
 * homoerge: [3490]1
 * homophuon gar monon he tautourgos esti kinesis semainousa ten
 ousian, hes phusike kathesteke dunamis, heterophuous idiotetos
 ousias einai kat' oudena logon, e genesthai dicha tropes dunamenen:
 [3491]1
 * hoperi daimonon topos: [3492]1
 * horon Theon: [3493]1
 * horatikos aner kai theoretikos: [3494]1
 * ho nomizetai: [3495]1
 * onton psalmon, kai ouson odon, kai psalmon odes, kai odon psalmou:
 [3496]1
 * organon: [3497]1
 * ore: [3498]1
 * oros: [3499]1
 * ophis: [3500]1
 * hothen kai: [3501]1
 * holos: [3502]1 [3503]2
 * homos: [3504]1 [3505]2
 * hon Huion prosegoreue dia to mellein auton genesthai: [3506]1
 * hoson monon huponoesai: [3507]1
 * hote: [3508]1
 * ulikou: [3509]1
 * upo: [3510]1
 * hualodesi topois: [3511]1
 * hualourgikes: [3512]1
 * huparxeos: [3513]1
 * hupenerthen: [3514]1
 * huper auten: [3515]1
 * hupo: [3516]1
 * hupo allois: [3517]1
 * hupo laon: [3518]1
 * hupo pollon: [3519]1
 * hup' auta: [3520]1
 * huperapeiros: [3521]1
 * hupostasei: [3522]1
 * hupostatous: [3523]1
 * hupostemati: [3524]1
 * hupostatikas: [3525]1
 * hudor memigmenon ainodia krene: [3526]1
 * hudor memigmenon oino diakrinei: [3527]1
 * hule: [3528]1
 * huparxin: [3529]1
 * omos: [3530]1
 * hos allotrioepiskopos: [3531]1
 * hos histon: [3532]1
 * hos autozoe: [3533]1
 * hos mete: [3534]1
 * hos pioni kathara ge: [3535]1
 * hos pion kathara ge: [3536]1
 * hos planoi: [3537]1
 * hos puron: [3538]1
 * hos ton: [3539]1
 * hosper oun kathara ge: [3540]1
 * on: [3541]1
 * hora skopos: [3542]1
 * alla gar: [3543]1
 * hades: [3544]1
 * 'Angaiou: [3545]1
 * 'Athenon: [3546]1
 * 'Antitheseis: [3547]1
 * 'Apraxia: [3548]1
 * 'Asunchutos: [3549]1
 * 'Asianon tes 'Ephesou poleos: [3550]1
 * 'Ek ton Theodotou kai tes anatolikes kaloumenes didaskalias, kata
 tous Oualentinou chronous epitomai: [3551]1
 * 'Enthade eontas: [3552]1
 * 'Eruthas: [3553]1
 * Agios, hagios, hagios, kurie Sabaoth, k.t.l: [3554]1
 * Elikionos: [3555]1
 * Alle gar: [3556]1
 * Ariston men hudor: [3557]1
 * Elikos: [3558]1
 * rhizes: [3559]1
 * rhapizomenos: [3560]1
 * O Skoteinos: [3561]1
 * Aidesinois: [3562]1
 * Basikanon: [3563]1
 * Bouzuges: [3564]1
 * Boullaminsa: [3565]1
 * Boullaria: [3566]1
 * Gazophula: [3567]1
 * Gausaphna: [3568]1
 * Gnapheon: [3569]1
 * Euanthas: [3570]1
 * Thalasses: [3571]1
 * Tharsis: [3572]1
 * Tharseis: [3573]1
 * Theos huparchon ek Theou: [3574]1
 * Theo: [3575]1
 * Koren: [3576]1
 * Kuro: [3577]1
 * Kurion de ton Logon, nephelen de kouphen to katharotaton skenos:
 [3578]1
 * Kalamene: [3579]1
 * Karamene: [3580]1
 * Kata sullepsin panta perigraphousan noun: [3581]1
 * Keimelia: [3582]1
 * Kobisthe: [3583]1
 * Kurio: [3584]1
 * Leptis mikra: [3585]1
 * Logos: [3586]1
 * Margois: [3587]1
 * Mardois: [3588]1
 * Manne: [3589]1
 * Megaleiotetos: [3590]1
 * Metalabontes: [3591]1
 * Mugdone: [3592]1
 * Mugdone: [3593]1
 * Mursine.: [3594]1
 * Noetos me noon: [3595]1
 * Nephele: [3596]1
 * Hoi Peratai heos aitheros: [3597]1
 * Hoi proasteioi heos aitheros: [3598]1
 * Hoi proasteioi heos aitheros: [3599]1
 * Ouaton: [3600]1
 * Outhina: [3601]1
 * Palintonos: [3602]1
 * Pater hemon ho en ade: [3603]1
 * Patrobas: [3604]1
 * Patrodora: [3605]1
 * Peratai heos aitheros: [3606]1
 * Peri arch: [3607]1
 * Peri 'Archon: [3608]1 [3609]2
 * Peri Paid.  'Agog: [3610]1
 * Periodoi Petrou: [3611]1
 * Peratike: [3612]1
 * Pege tis aenaou phuseos rhizomat' echousa: [3613]1
 * Plasten: [3614]1 [3615]2
 * Proechestera: [3616]1
 * Propatora: [3617]1
 * Prostates: [3618]1
 * Saron: [3619]1
 * Sustasis: [3620]1
 * Sigen: [3621]1
 * Skaleue: [3622]1
 * Schedia: [3623]1
 * Ta archaia ethe krateito.: [3624]1
 * Ta archaia ethe krateito: [3625]1
 * To asphales: [3626]1
 * Ton holon: [3627]1
 * Teitan: [3628]1
 * Trias: [3629]1
 * Triados: [3630]1
 * Phlegon: [3631]1
 * a: [3632]1 [3633]2
 * ainoumenoi: [3634]1
 * aisthetikou: [3635]1
 * aioron: [3636]1
 * hairoumenoi: [3637]1
 * autos palin ho tou theou pais: [3638]1
 * auton: [3639]1
 * aute: [3640]1
 * auto to: [3641]1
 * autexousios: [3642]1
 * autous: [3643]1
 * autou genous: [3644]1
 * autogenous: [3645]1
 * autosthenes: [3646]1
 * autourgon: [3647]1
 * haute: [3648]1
 * analoi: [3649]1
 * anon: [3650]1
 * aphietai eike: [3651]1
 * baddin: [3652]1
 * blepontes: [3653]1
 * blastou: [3654]1
 * boulesis: [3655]1
 * bouttis: [3656]1 [3657]2
 * bromo: [3658]1
 * broseos: [3659]1
 * brasmo: [3660]1
 * butine: [3661]1
 * gegraptai: [3662]1
 * geenna: [3663]1
 * ge rhuon: [3664]1
 * gegennemenon: [3665]1
 * gegennemenon: [3666]1
 * gegonota: [3667]1
 * genesei, epigenesei: [3668]1
 * genesthai tautourgon te theoteti: [3669]1
 * genomenos: [3670]1
 * gennatai: [3671]1
 * gennosa ek kardias: [3672]1
 * gennetos kai agennetos: [3673]1
 * ginomenon: [3674]1
 * glukutatos kai eunoustatos: [3675]1
 * gnapho: [3676]1
 * gnomen isen: [3677]1
 * gnosis: [3678]1
 * gnapheio: [3679]1
 * gramma: [3680]1
 * grammata: [3681]1
 * grapheon: [3682]1
 * gumnon somatos: [3683]1
 * gumnos: [3684]1
 * despota: [3685]1
 * diaulon: [3686]1
 * dignomos: [3687]1
 * dikaion: [3688]1
 * diskou: [3689]1
 * dicha sarkos: [3690]1
 * dolon: [3691]1
 * doxes: [3692]1
 * dunamin: [3693]1
 * dunamis: [3694]1
 * doron: [3695]1
 * daimonon: [3696]1
 * dedokekenai: [3697]1
 * demiourgesas: [3698]1
 * demiourgon: [3699]1
 * dia tes sarkos: [3700]1
 * dia ton anomoion men uparchonta: [3701]1
 * diabolos: [3702]1
 * diaphoroi: [3703]1
 * diapsalma: [3704]1 [3705]2
 * diephtheiran: [3706]1
 * diorophon: [3707]1
 * diairesin prosopiken: [3708]1
 * diabolou: [3709]1
 * diagraphe: [3710]1
 * diathesei: [3711]1
 * diakosia triakonta: [3712]1
 * diastrophen kai phthoran: [3713]1
 * diapherei: [3714]1
 * didaskalos: [3715]1
 * diegesato: [3716]1
 * ditten kai diaphoran echon diegnostai ten en pasi phusiken
 theorian: [3717]1
 * doran: [3718]1
 * dron: [3719]1
 * duas: [3720]1
 * dunameis ...logizestho: [3721]1
 * dunameos: [3722]1
 * dunatai: [3723]1
 * dunamosei: [3724]1
 * e: [3725]1 [3726]2
 * ei: [3727]1
 * ei ouk edothe: [3728]1
 * eidikou: [3729]1
 * eikonas: [3730]1
 * eikaion: [3731]1
 * eikonikas: [3732]1
 * eis pistosin: [3733]1
 * eis ten polin: [3734]1
 * eis to hen eisin: [3735]1
 * eis to einai me leitourgon: [3736]1
 * eis tous doulous apanthropoi authentesontai: [3737]1
 * eisodou: [3738]1
 * eidos: [3739]1
 * euangelizesthai: [3740]1
 * eutheos meden.: [3741]1
 * eutheos meden: [3742]1
 * eunen: [3743]1
 * eutuchon: [3744]1
 * euches: [3745]1
 * heurekota: [3746]1
 * eunoian: [3747]1
 * eis: [3748]1
 * zainontes: [3749]1
 * zelotos: [3750]1
 * zugon: [3751]1
 * elikioto hairetikon: [3752]1
 * thelei: [3753]1
 * thelein: [3754]1
 * thelema: [3755]1
 * theoktiston ,: [3756]1
 * theegoroi: [3757]1
 * theologoi: [3758]1
 * theologos: [3759]1
 * theotokos: [3760]1 [3761]2
 * theotokou: [3762]1
 * theikos: [3763]1
 * theriou: [3764]1
 * i: [3765]1 [3766]2
 * karpou: [3767]1
 * kato: [3768]1 [3769]2
 * kentro: [3770]1
 * kentrois: [3771]1
 * kentron: [3772]1
 * kentron: [3773]1
 * kenosin: [3774]1 [3775]2
 * kepphos: [3776]1
 * kinesis: [3777]1
 * kuklon: [3778]1
 * kutos: [3779]1
 * kebos: [3780]1
 * kai ademos: [3781]1
 * kai anthropos: [3782]1
 * kai ego planetis kai latris topon ek topou perierchomene kai oikian
 ex oikias: [3783]1
 * kai ethnon episkopon: [3784]1
 * kai ergaten: [3785]1
 * kai heothinon: [3786]1
 * kai rhiza: [3787]1
 * kai Proarchen: [3788]1
 * kai autos prosdokia: [3789]1
 * kai auton te kai ton met' auton: [3790]1
 * kai autois monokola chromenoi: [3791]1
 * kai goneis ta tekna misesousi , kai tekna tois goneusin
 epiballontai cheiras: [3792]1
 * kai hoi angeloi: [3793]1
 * kai hoi onuches autou chalkoi: [3794]1
 * kai hou: [3795]1
 * kai houtoi: [3796]1
 * kai pasi gen: [3797]1
 * kai parestai: [3798]1
 * kai peri hamartias: [3799]1
 * kai sumboulon: [3800]1
 * kai ton met' auton: [3801]1
 * kai tous dikaious: [3802]1
 * kai tragous: [3803]1
 * kai: [3804]1
 * kaiper esti: [3805]1
 * kathistasthai: [3806]1
 * kath' hedian: [3807]1
 * katharoi: [3808]1
 * kai agnostos: [3809]1
 * kainoprepe tropon: [3810]1
 * kalesas: [3811]1
 * kalo gegennemenon: [3812]1
 * kalo tetennemenon: [3813]1
 * kalon logon didaskalos: [3814]1
 * kamariou: [3815]1
 * karchesia: [3816]1
 * kata hen grammaton: [3817]1
 * kata podas: [3818]1
 * kata sunkrisin: [3819]1
 * kata stoicheion: [3820]1
 * kata ten dia tou hagiou: [3821]1
 * kata teleiosin ton chronon: [3822]1
 * kata phantasian e tropen: [3823]1
 * kataleimma: [3824]1
 * katechthe: [3825]1
 * katogaios: [3826]1
 * katoge: [3827]1
 * kat' exochen: [3828]1
 * kat' exochen: [3829]1
 * kat' epos: [3830]1
 * kat' autous: [3831]1
 * kat' idian: [3832]1
 * katakalumma: [3833]1
 * katatome: [3834]1 [3835]2
 * katekondulisate: [3836]1
 * katenkondulisete: [3837]1
 * katechethe: [3838]1
 * katopheres: [3839]1
 * keimai: [3840]1
 * keitai: [3841]1
 * kekallopistai: [3842]1
 * kelanon: [3843]1
 * kepphotheis: [3844]1
 * kerkis: [3845]1 [3846]2 [3847]3 [3848]4
 * kinoumenon: [3849]1
 * klepsilogos: [3850]1
 * klethenai: [3851]1
 * klerothenai: [3852]1
 * koinonia: [3853]1
 * kolumbethras: [3854]1
 * kratoumenon: [3855]1
 * ktema es aei: [3856]1
 * kuanoeide: [3857]1
 * kunoeide: [3858]1
 * kuria: [3859]1
 * latris: [3860]1
 * legei: [3861]1
 * linon: [3862]1
 * logon hapanta tois ton propheton rhemasi: [3863]1
 * logos: [3864]1 [3865]2
 * luchnon ek luchnou: [3866]1
 * legomenon: [3867]1
 * legomene megalegoria: [3868]1
 * leptomeres: [3869]1
 * limous: [3870]1
 * logizesthai: [3871]1
 * logon: [3872]1
 * loutron: [3873]1
 * malthe: [3874]1 [3875]2
 * mellei: [3876]1
 * men: [3877]1
 * menei anekptotos: [3878]1
 * menein: [3879]1
 * merous: [3880]1
 * mesou: [3881]1
 * metoikoi: [3882]1
 * me: [3883]1
 * me ekzeses: [3884]1
 * me perisseues .: [3885]1
 * me plano: [3886]1
 * mixas: [3887]1
 * mones tes ton homophuon prosopon homophuous tautotetos: [3888]1
 * monos: [3889]1
 * makarioi: [3890]1
 * makariou: [3891]1
 * marturon: [3892]1
 * meiosin: [3893]1
 * megale heorte: [3894]1
 * megales: [3895]1
 * meta ta: [3896]1
 * metaptosis: [3897]1
 * meteora: [3898]1
 * meteoron: [3899]1
 * met' autou: [3900]1
 * metanastai: [3901]1
 * metaschontes: [3902]1
 * metapherei: [3903]1
 * metensomaton: [3904]1
 * meteorismous: [3905]1
 * metron tou kanonos: [3906]1
 * meden echouses phaulotetos: [3907]1
 * med' heni pantelos ho tauton esti to Patri genomenos tauton te
 sarki dia ten kenosin: [3908]1
 * metera tou Theou: [3909]1
 * miaros: [3910]1
 * monokolos: [3911]1
 * monokola: [3912]1
 * monotupos: [3913]1
 * morphen: [3914]1
 * mou: [3915]1
 * musterion: [3916]1
 * musteriodos: [3917]1
 * mustikos: [3918]1
 * nomatos aisan: [3919]1
 * neotetos: [3920]1
 * noun: [3921]1
 * nous horon Theon: [3922]1
 * nomizei: [3923]1
 * noountes: [3924]1
 * nosountes: [3925]1
 * nuchthemeron: [3926]1
 * xanthen: [3927]1
 * o gegonen: [3928]1
 * oikonomia: [3929]1
 * oikonomia sumphonias sunagetai eis hena Theon: [3930]1
 * oikonomikos: [3931]1 [3932]2
 * hoi apodiorizontes heautous: [3933]1
 * hoi aphobos heautous poimainontes: [3934]1
 * hoi doruphoroi: [3935]1
 * hoi nekroi: [3936]1
 * hoi sukophantai: [3937]1
 * hoimoios: [3938]1
 * ou men oudamos: [3939]1
 * ou parthenian esteirosa: [3940]1
 * ou pro eton pleionon all' hos pro chronou ton touton hekaton
 triakonta, pleio e elasso: [3941]1
 * ou to me thelein: [3942]1
 * ouai ges ploion pteruges: [3943]1
 * oude en: [3944]1
 * oud' hosper tes autou theotetos houto kai autes phusikos
 ekphuomenen: [3945]1
 * oudeis: [3946]1
 * ouk ese perissoteros: [3947]1
 * ousiai: [3948]1
 * ousian: [3949]1 [3950]2 [3951]3
 * ouch: [3952]1
 * hou neosti ton nomon: [3953]1
 * oute men eis t' auton auto pheresthai phuseos pote kai phusikes
 energeias , heos an hekateron tes idias entos menei phusikes
 atrepsias.  To pheresthai: [3954]1
 * houtos: [3955]1
 * oun: [3956]1
 * ousai: [3957]1
 * outoi hoi B' ton o tunchanonton diaskorpisthenton: [3958]1
 * houtos: [3959]1
 * oikountos: [3960]1
 * ouutos: [3961]1
 * p: [3962]1
 * pathos: [3963]1
 * panta pasi: [3964]1
 * papas: [3965]1
 * peran: [3966]1
 * pephuke: [3967]1
 * porrho tethen: [3968]1
 * porrhothen: [3969]1
 * pasi tois perasin: [3970]1
 * pasin epititheimenen: [3971]1
 * pais: [3972]1
 * pagidon: [3973]1
 * pathon: [3974]1
 * palintonos: [3975]1
 * palintropos: [3976]1
 * pantapasi: [3977]1
 * papas: [3978]1
 * para ton auton logon: [3979]1
 * para to agatho: [3980]1
 * para tou diabolou: [3981]1
 * parapto: [3982]1
 * paron: [3983]1
 * paretemenos :: [3984]1
 * paradoxous: [3985]1
 * paradoseis: [3986]1
 * paradotheis: [3987]1
 * parakleseon: [3988]1
 * paraleipsas: [3989]1 [3990]2
 * paroxeon: [3991]1
 * patera ton auton Logon: [3992]1
 * patera to auto logo: [3993]1
 * peri anthropon: [3994]1
 * peri hierosunes: [3995]1
 * peri theologias: [3996]1 [3997]2
 * perizux arithmos: [3998]1
 * peristera: [3999]1
 * perasai: [4000]1
 * peridesmeisthai: [4001]1
 * perimenei ton zonta: [4002]1
 * peritton: [4003]1
 * petrodes: [4004]1
 * petrotos: [4005]1
 * pephorekota: [4006]1
 * pephurakota: [4007]1
 * pephurekota: [4008]1
 * piotetos: [4009]1
 * piein: [4010]1
 * piprasketai: [4011]1
 * planos: [4012]1
 * plasas: [4013]1
 * plethos: [4014]1
 * planetis: [4015]1
 * planethenai: [4016]1
 * platunthenai: [4017]1
 * pleiosi: [4018]1
 * plerothe: [4019]1
 * ploion: [4020]1
 * ploutesantes: [4021]1
 * ploutisantes: [4022]1
 * pneuma: [4023]1
 * pneuma: [4024]1
 * poiesei: [4025]1
 * poiein: [4026]1
 * polus en: [4027]1
 * polloi: [4028]1
 * polupegetou ton astron mousiou: [4029]1
 * porpothen: [4030]1
 * pragmata: [4031]1
 * pro tes: [4032]1
 * pros: [4033]1 [4034]2
 * pros autois ede tois termasi genomenon tou biou: [4035]1
 * pros gnostikous: [4036]1
 * pros tous doulous apanthropian ktesontai: [4037]1
 * protes: [4038]1
 * protos: [4039]1
 * proephemen: [4040]1
 * proephthemen: [4041]1
 * prognostikous: [4042]1
 * proeiremena: [4043]1
 * proerchomenon: [4044]1
 * proerchomenou: [4045]1
 * proechestera: [4046]1
 * prokeimena: [4047]1
 * prosopon: [4048]1
 * prosechestera: [4049]1
 * proskaroius: [4050]1
 * prostatai: [4051]1
 * prostetheisan: [4052]1
 * prostithemenon, nomisteon: [4053]1
 * prosphora: [4054]1
 * prototokeia: [4055]1
 * ptoma: [4056]1
 * pternisas: [4057]1 [4058]2
 * pteroto; hos apo: [4059]1
 * ptocheuei: [4060]1
 * puleosi: [4061]1
 * pureia: [4062]1
 * r: [4063]1 [4064]2
 * s: [4065]1
 * saron: [4066]1
 * su ei phos alethinon ek photos alethinou Theos alethinos ek Theou
 alethinou: [4067]1
 * sunkrisis: [4068]1
 * sunchusin: [4069]1
 * sarkophoron aplanos: [4070]1
 * satrapiken: [4071]1
 * seirais zophou tartarosas: [4072]1
 * seleniakou stoicheiou: [4073]1
 * skumnos: [4074]1
 * skolo: [4075]1
 * skoteino: [4076]1
 * skotiotero: [4077]1
 * smurne: [4078]1
 * spouden: [4079]1
 * stelechos aneimenon: [4080]1
 * stauroumenon: [4081]1
 * stephanoutai kata diabolou: [4082]1
 * stoicheio n: [4083]1
 * stoicheia: [4084]1
 * stoicheion: [4085]1
 * sunkechumenon: [4086]1
 * sumpatheia: [4087]1
 * sumperasma: [4088]1
 * sunagei: [4089]1
 * sunagei eis hen: [4090]1
 * sunanarchos: [4091]1
 * sunetizon: [4092]1
 * sunephu: [4093]1
 * suntrechein: [4094]1
 * schedios: [4095]1
 * schediazousi: [4096]1
 * somatoseos: [4097]1 [4098]2
 * somatikos: [4099]1
 * soterion sarkosin: [4100]1
 * t: [4101]1
 * ta akatharta: [4102]1
 * ta apokeimena: [4103]1
 * ta archaia ethe: [4104]1 [4105]2 [4106]3
 * ta isa presbeia: [4107]1
 * ta di eikonon: [4108]1
 * ta mechri nun sozomena hapanta: [4109]1
 * ta musteria: [4110]1
 * tas eikositessaras apekusan morphas: [4111]1
 * tade diakonei: [4112]1
 * tekno,: [4113]1
 * teknon: [4114]1
 * teleios: [4115]1
 * tele: [4116]1
 * telos: [4117]1
 * ten theotokon egnomen sarkikos kai aplanos: [4118]1
 * ten pros allelous anastrophen: [4119]1
 * ten sustasin: [4120]1
 * ten tou hagiou: [4121]1
 * ten tou demiourgesantos empeiron kai anekdiegetou technen: [4122]1
 * to haima: [4123]1
 * to thelema: [4124]1
 * to kat' ampho phusikos analloioton: [4125]1
 * to nun: [4126]1
 * ton aoraton: [4127]1
 * ton Logon ton Patroon: [4128]1
 * ton Peripaton: [4129]1
 * ton kato eis ta ano: [4130]1
 * ton noun: [4131]1
 * ton topon: [4132]1
 * ton kosmon: [4133]1
 * topos: [4134]1
 * topon: [4135]1
 * tupon te ideas: [4136]1
 * te heliki: [4137]1
 * tes idias phuseos ousiode logon: [4138]1
 * tes holes theotetos: [4139]1
 * ton ethnon: [4140]1
 * ton okto: [4141]1
 * ton onton: [4142]1
 * ton onion: [4143]1
 * ton oton: [4144]1
 * ton de loipon: [4145]1
 * to noi: [4146]1
 * to noeto: [4147]1
 * to surmati ophei paraplesios pterotos: [4148]1
 * tameia: [4149]1
 * tapeinon: [4150]1 [4151]2
 * tapeinon ,: [4152]1
 * tartarosas: [4153]1
 * tautopathe te sarki: [4154]1
 * tautourgian: [4155]1 [4156]2
 * teleioteros: [4157]1
 * tetras: [4158]1
 * ten peri touton oikonomian: [4159]1
 * timiotetos: [4160]1
 * tina: [4161]1
 * tina: [4162]1
 * toutou: [4163]1
 * tois hekasta phusikois diexagomena nomois: [4164]1
 * tois spermasi: [4165]1
 * tou hexakuklou hulikou: [4166]1
 * tou ouk ontos: [4167]1
 * tou tote episkopou: [4168]1
 * tou uiou tou Theou: [4169]1
 * touto: [4170]1
 * touto pantos katagetai orthos echein hupeilemmenon: [4171]1
 * tornothen: [4172]1
 * tribolos: [4173]1
 * tropon: [4174]1
 * treptou kai proairetou: [4175]1
 * trimenion: [4176]1
 * trope gar tou kata phusin apeirou, kineisthai me pephukotos , he
 kinesis: [4177]1
 * tupountes ideas: [4178]1
 * upostasin: [4179]1
 * phuseos: [4180]1
 * phusin: [4181]1
 * phos aprositon: [4182]1
 * phos aulon genna phos aprositon: [4183]1
 * phos ek photos: [4184]1
 * phainetai: [4185]1
 * phaeines: [4186]1
 * phallos: [4187]1 [4188]2 [4189]3
 * phaneron: [4190]1
 * phanerosesi: [4191]1
 * phaneros: [4192]1
 * phanerothe: [4193]1
 * phantastiken tes sarkos autou ousian: [4194]1
 * phthengetai: [4195]1
 * phthonos: [4196]1
 * philanthrope: [4197]1
 * philias: [4198]1
 * philosophoumena: [4199]1
 * philosophoumena: [4200]1
 * phobere: [4201]1
 * phorologon: [4202]1
 * phoruktes: [4203]1
 * phorutes: [4204]1
 * phriktes: [4205]1
 * phrikodestate: [4206]1
 * phruktes: [4207]1
 * phurao: [4208]1
 * phusikes exo gegonos isotetos kai tautoetos: [4209]1
 * phusikes idiotetos: [4210]1
 * phusikotera: [4211]1
 * phone: [4212]1
 * phonen: [4213]1
 * phonen oxutetos: [4214]1
 * phones: [4215]1
 * phos ek photos: [4216]1
 * photeino: [4217]1
 * chorion: [4218]1
 * choran: [4219]1
 * charopoioi: [4220]1
 * choirogrulloi: [4221]1
 * choros: [4222]1
 * chremetismou: [4223]1
 * chorion: [4224]1
 * psammites: [4225]1
 * psaphon: [4226]1
 * pseudochristos: [4227]1
 * psepharoi: [4228]1
 * psilon: [4229]1
 * psudros: [4230]1
 * psuches: [4231]1
 * psuchros: [4232]1 [4233]2
 * o: [4234]1
 * 12: [4235]1

Index of Hebrew Words and Phrases

 * 'ys v'h 'l: [4236]1
 * dvr mvv: [4237]1
 * mtrph: [4238]1
 * mrph: [4239]1
 * mnsh: [4240]1
 * nchs: [4241]1 [4242]2
 * sphr thls: [4243]1
 * yn: [4244]1
 * sms'r: [4245]1
 * trsys: [4246]1

Index of French Words and Phrases

 * Études sur de Nouveaux Documents Historiques empruntés à L'Ouvrage
 des: [4247]1
 * Bon Dieu, bon diable: [4248]1
 * Hist. Gén. des Auteurs: [4249]1
 * Les Nicolaites donnaient une infinité de noms barbares aux princes
 et aux puissances qu'ils mettaient en chaque ciel. Ils en nommaient
 un caulaucauch: [4250]1
 * Les coeurs pervers n'ont jamais de belles nuits ni de beaux jours:
 [4251]1
 * Notre St. Père, le Pape: [4252]1
 * Qui illic apud confessores offerunt: [4253]1
 * par M. l'Abbé Guettée: [4254]1
 * par M. l'Abbé Jager: [4255]1
 * pasce oves meas: [4256]1

Index of Pages of the Print Edition

 [4257]i  [4258]iii  [4259]v  [4260]vi  [4261]1  [4262]3  [4263]4
 [4264]5  [4265]6  [4266]7  [4267]9  [4268]10  [4269]11  [4270]12
 [4271]13  [4272]14  [4273]15  [4274]16  [4275]17  [4276]18  [4277]19
 [4278]20  [4279]21  [4280]22  [4281]23  [4282]24  [4283]25  [4284]26
 [4285]27  [4286]28  [4287]29  [4288]30  [4289]31  [4290]32  [4291]33
 [4292]34  [4293]35  [4294]36  [4295]37  [4296]38  [4297]39  [4298]40
 [4299]41  [4300]42  [4301]43  [4302]44  [4303]45  [4304]46  [4305]47
 [4306]48  [4307]49  [4308]50  [4309]51  [4310]52  [4311]53  [4312]54
 [4313]55  [4314]56  [4315]57  [4316]58  [4317]59  [4318]60  [4319]61
 [4320]62  [4321]63  [4322]64  [4323]65  [4324]66  [4325]67  [4326]68
 [4327]69  [4328]70  [4329]71  [4330]72  [4331]73  [4332]74  [4333]75
 [4334]76  [4335]77  [4336]78  [4337]79  [4338]80  [4339]81  [4340]82
 [4341]83  [4342]84  [4343]85  [4344]86  [4345]87  [4346]88  [4347]89
 [4348]90  [4349]91  [4350]92  [4351]93  [4352]94  [4353]95  [4354]96
 [4355]97  [4356]98  [4357]99  [4358]100  [4359]101  [4360]102
 [4361]103  [4362]104  [4363]105  [4364]106  [4365]107  [4366]108
 [4367]109  [4368]110  [4369]111  [4370]112  [4371]113  [4372]114
 [4373]115  [4374]116  [4375]117  [4376]118  [4377]119  [4378]120
 [4379]121  [4380]122  [4381]123  [4382]124  [4383]125  [4384]126
 [4385]127  [4386]128  [4387]129  [4388]130  [4389]131  [4390]132
 [4391]133  [4392]134  [4393]135  [4394]136  [4395]137  [4396]138
 [4397]139  [4398]140  [4399]141  [4400]142  [4401]143  [4402]144
 [4403]145  [4404]146  [4405]147  [4406]148  [4407]149  [4408]150
 [4409]151  [4410]152  [4411]153  [4412]154  [4413]155  [4414]156
 [4415]157  [4416]158  [4417]159  [4418]160  [4419]161  [4420]162
 [4421]163  [4422]164  [4423]165  [4424]166  [4425]167  [4426]168
 [4427]169  [4428]170  [4429]171  [4430]172  [4431]173  [4432]174
 [4433]175  [4434]176  [4435]177  [4436]178  [4437]179  [4438]180
 [4439]181  [4440]182  [4441]183  [4442]184  [4443]185  [4444]186
 [4445]187  [4446]188  [4447]189  [4448]190  [4449]191  [4450]192
 [4451]193  [4452]194  [4453]195  [4454]196  [4455]197  [4456]198
 [4457]199  [4458]200  [4459]201  [4460]202  [4461]203  [4462]204
 [4463]205  [4464]206  [4465]207  [4466]208  [4467]209  [4468]210
 [4469]211  [4470]212  [4471]213  [4472]214  [4473]215  [4474]216
 [4475]217  [4476]218  [4477]219  [4478]220  [4479]221  [4480]222
 [4481]223  [4482]224  [4483]225  [4484]226  [4485]227  [4486]228
 [4487]229  [4488]230  [4489]231  [4490]232  [4491]233  [4492]234
 [4493]235  [4494]236  [4495]237  [4496]238  [4497]239  [4498]240
 [4499]241  [4500]242  [4501]243  [4502]244  [4503]245  [4504]246
 [4505]247  [4506]248  [4507]249  [4508]250  [4509]251  [4510]252
 [4511]253  [4512]254  [4513]255  [4514]256  [4515]257  [4516]258
 [4517]259  [4518]261  [4519]263  [4520]264  [4521]265  [4522]266
 [4523]267  [4524]268  [4525]269  [4526]270  [4527]271  [4528]272
 [4529]273  [4530]274  [4531]275  [4532]276  [4533]277  [4534]278
 [4535]279  [4536]280  [4537]281  [4538]282  [4539]283  [4540]284
 [4541]285  [4542]286  [4543]287  [4544]288  [4545]289  [4546]290
 [4547]291  [4548]292  [4549]293  [4550]294  [4551]295  [4552]296
 [4553]297  [4554]298  [4555]299  [4556]300  [4557]301  [4558]302
 [4559]303  [4560]304  [4561]305  [4562]306  [4563]307  [4564]308
 [4565]309  [4566]310  [4567]311  [4568]312  [4569]313  [4570]314
 [4571]315  [4572]316  [4573]317  [4574]318  [4575]319  [4576]320
 [4577]321  [4578]322  [4579]323  [4580]324  [4581]325  [4582]326
 [4583]327  [4584]328  [4585]329  [4586]330  [4587]331  [4588]332
 [4589]333  [4590]334  [4591]335  [4592]336  [4593]337  [4594]338
 [4595]339  [4596]340  [4597]341  [4598]342  [4599]343  [4600]344
 [4601]345  [4602]346  [4603]347  [4604]348  [4605]349  [4606]350
 [4607]351  [4608]352  [4609]353  [4610]354  [4611]355  [4612]356
 [4613]357  [4614]358  [4615]359  [4616]360  [4617]361  [4618]362
 [4619]363  [4620]364  [4621]365  [4622]366  [4623]367  [4624]368
 [4625]369  [4626]370  [4627]371  [4628]372  [4629]373  [4630]374
 [4631]375  [4632]376  [4633]377  [4634]378  [4635]379  [4636]380
 [4637]381  [4638]382  [4639]383  [4640]384  [4641]385  [4642]386
 [4643]387  [4644]388  [4645]389  [4646]390  [4647]391  [4648]392
 [4649]393  [4650]394  [4651]395  [4652]396  [4653]397  [4654]398
 [4655]399  [4656]400  [4657]401  [4658]402  [4659]403  [4660]404
 [4661]405  [4662]406  [4663]407  [4664]408  [4665]409  [4666]410
 [4667]411  [4668]412  [4669]413  [4670]414  [4671]415  [4672]416
 [4673]417  [4674]418  [4675]419  [4676]420  [4677]421  [4678]422
 [4679]423  [4680]424  [4681]425  [4682]426  [4683]427  [4684]428
 [4685]429  [4686]430  [4687]431  [4688]432  [4689]433  [4690]434
 [4691]435  [4692]436  [4693]437  [4694]438  [4695]439  [4696]440
 [4697]441  [4698]442  [4699]443  [4700]444  [4701]445  [4702]446
 [4703]447  [4704]448  [4705]449  [4706]450  [4707]451  [4708]452
 [4709]453  [4710]454  [4711]455  [4712]456  [4713]457  [4714]458
 [4715]459  [4716]460  [4717]461  [4718]462  [4719]463  [4720]464
 [4721]465  [4722]466  [4723]467  [4724]468  [4725]469  [4726]470
 [4727]471  [4728]472  [4729]473  [4730]474  [4731]475  [4732]476
 [4733]477  [4734]478  [4735]479  [4736]480  [4737]481  [4738]482
 [4739]483  [4740]484  [4741]485  [4742]486  [4743]487  [4744]488
 [4745]489  [4746]490  [4747]491  [4748]492  [4749]493  [4750]494
 [4751]495  [4752]496  [4753]497  [4754]498  [4755]499  [4756]500
 [4757]501  [4758]502  [4759]503  [4760]504  [4761]505  [4762]506
 [4763]507  [4764]508  [4765]509  [4766]510  [4767]511  [4768]512
 [4769]513  [4770]514  [4771]515  [4772]516  [4773]517  [4774]518
 [4775]519  [4776]520  [4777]521  [4778]522  [4779]523  [4780]524
 [4781]525  [4782]526  [4783]527  [4784]528  [4785]529  [4786]530
 [4787]531  [4788]532  [4789]533  [4790]534  [4791]535  [4792]536
 [4793]537  [4794]538  [4795]539  [4796]540  [4797]541  [4798]542
 [4799]543  [4800]544  [4801]545  [4802]546  [4803]547  [4804]548
 [4805]549  [4806]550  [4807]551  [4808]552  [4809]553  [4810]554
 [4811]555  [4812]556  [4813]557  [4814]558  [4815]559  [4816]560
 [4817]561  [4818]562  [4819]563  [4820]564  [4821]565  [4822]566
 [4823]567  [4824]568  [4825]569  [4826]570  [4827]571  [4828]572
 [4829]573  [4830]575  [4831]576  [4832]577  [4833]578  [4834]579
 [4835]580  [4836]581  [4837]582  [4838]583  [4839]584  [4840]585
 [4841]586  [4842]587  [4843]588  [4844]589  [4845]590  [4846]591
 [4847]592  [4848]593  [4849]594  [4850]595  [4851]596  [4852]597
 [4853]599  [4854]600  [4855]601  [4856]602  [4857]603  [4858]604
 [4859]605  [4860]607  [4861]608  [4862]609  [4863]611  [4864]612
 [4865]613  [4866]614  [4867]615  [4868]616  [4869]617  [4870]618
 [4871]619  [4872]620  [4873]621  [4874]622  [4875]623  [4876]624
 [4877]625  [4878]626  [4879]627  [4880]628  [4881]629  [4882]630
 [4883]631  [4884]632  [4885]633  [4886]634  [4887]635  [4888]636
 [4889]637  [4890]638  [4891]639  [4892]640  [4893]641  [4894]642
 [4895]643  [4896]644  [4897]645  [4898]646  [4899]647  [4900]648
 [4901]649  [4902]650  [4903]651  [4904]653  [4905]655  [4906]657
 [4907]658  [4908]659  [4909]660  [4910]661  [4911]662  [4912]663
 [4913]665  [4914]667  [4915]668  [4916]669  [4917]670  [4918]671
 [4919]672  [4920]673  [4921]674  [4922]675  [4923]676  [4924]677
 [4925]678

 This document is from the Christian Classics Ethereal
 Library at Calvin College, http://www.ccel.org,
 generated on demand from ThML source.

References
