UFO Hypothesis and Survival Questions (National Security Agency, 1968)
National Security Agency (author name redacted; attributed to Lambros D. Callimahos), 1968

US Government work — public domain. Declassified 7-page NSA monograph weighing five UFO hypotheses and their human-survival implications, ending with the “Tale of the Rattler.” Complete; cleaned from release scan.
Transcription source: media.defense.gov NSA release (via NARA RG-615 UAP collection)

================================================================

UFO HYPOTHESIS AND SURVIVAL QUESTIONS

It is the purpose of this monograph to consider briefly some of the
human survival implications suggested by the various principal hypotheses
concerning the nature of the phenomena loosely categorized as UFO.

1. ALL UFOs ARE HOAXES: From the time when hoaxes were first
noted in history, they were characterized by infrequency of occurrence
and usually by a considerable restriction of their geographical extent.
Rarely have men of science, while acting within their professional
capacities, perpetrated hoaxes. The fact that UFO phenomena have been witnessed
all over the world from ancient times, and by considerable
numbers of reputable scientists in recent times, indicates rather
strongly that they are not all hoaxes. If anything, the modern trend
is toward increased reporting from all sources. In one three month period
in 1953 (June, July, and August) Air Force records show 35 sightings
whose nature could not be determined.

2. ALL UFOs ARE HALLUCINATIONS: People, of course, do hallucinate.
Although groups of people hallucinating is rare, it has been known to
happen. Machines have their own form of hallucination; the radar, in
particular, sees temperature inversions. But a considerable number
of instances exist in which there are groups of people and a radar or
radars seeing the same thing at the same time; sometimes a person and a
gun camera confirm each other's testimony. On occasion, physical
evidence of a circumstantial nature was reported to have been found to
support witnessed sightings. A continuing high percentage of reports
of unusual aerial objects are being reported by people in responsible
positions in science, government, and industry. The sum of such
evidence seems to argue strongly against all UFOs being hallucinations.

In spite of all the evidence to the contrary, if UFOs should turn out to
be largely illusionary, the psychological implications for man would be
considerable, suggesting a growing impairment of the human capacity for rational
judgment. It would seem imperative that such a growing impairment be subjected
to immediate and thorough scientific study, so that the illness could be
controlled before it reaches epidemic proportions.

3. ALL UFOs ARE NATURAL PHENOMENA: If this hypothesis is correct,
the capability of air warning systems to correctly diagnose an attack
situation is open to serious question. Many UFOs have been reported by trained military
observers to behave like high speed, high performance, high altitude rockets or
aircraft. The apparent solidity and craft-like shape of the objects has often been subject
to radar confirmation. If such objects can appear to trained military men as rockets
or aircraft and if such objects can defy radar detection and cause massive
electromagnetic interference, it is very important to discover the nature of these
objects or plasmas before any prospective enemy can use their properties to build
a device or system to circumvent or jam our air and space detection systems. Any nation
certainly could use a system or device to penetrate enemy defenses.

4. SOME UFOs ARE SECRET EARTH PROJECTS: The above referenced
U.S. Air Force reentry vehicle and an often publicized Canadian "saucer" project
leave little doubt as to the validity of this hypothesis. Undoubtedly, all UFOs
should be carefully scrutinized to ferret out such a nation. One faces the very strong
possibility of being intimidated by a new secret doomsday weapon.

5. SOME UFOs ARE RELATED TO EXTRA-TERRESTRIAL INTELLIGENCE:
a. If "they" discover you, it is an old but hardly invalid
rule of thumb: "they" are your technological superiors. Human history has
shown us time and again the tragic results of a confrontation between a technologically
superior civilization and a technologically inferior people. The
"inferior" is usually subject to physical conquest.
b. Often in the past, a technologically superior people are
also possessors of a more virile or aggressive culture. In a confrontation,
those nations that have survived have maintained their identity
have equalized the differences between them and their adversaries. The
Japanese people have given us an excellent example of the methods required
to achieve such survival:
(1) full and honest acceptance of the nature of the inferiorities separating you
from the advantages of the other peoples,
(2) complete national solidarity in all positions taken in
dealing with the other culture,
(3) highly controlled and limited intercourse with the other
side -- doing only those actions advantageous to the foreigner which you are
absolutely forced to do by circumstances,
(4) a correct but friendly attitude toward the other people,
(5) a national eagerness to learn everything possible about the other culture --
its technological and cultural strengths and weaknesses. This often involves
sending selected groups and individuals to the other's country to become one of
his kind, or even to help him in his wars against other adversaries,
(6) adopting as many of the advantages of the opposing
people as you can, and doing it as fast as possible -- while still protecting your
own identity by molding each new knowledge increment into
your own cultural cast.

6. COMMENT: Although this paper has hardly exhausted the possible
hypotheses related to the UFO phenomena, those mentioned above are the principal
ones presently put forward. All of them have serious survival
implications. The final answer to this mystery will probably include
more than one of the above hypotheses.

Up until this time, the leisurely scientific approach has too often
taken precedence in dealing with UFO questions. If you are walking along a forest
path and someone yells "rattler," your reaction would be
immediate and defensive. You would not take time to speculate before you act. You
would have to treat the alarm as if it were a real and immediate threat to
your survival. Investigation would become an intensive emergency action to isolate
the threat and to determine its precise nature. It would be geared to developing
adequate defensive measures in a minimum amount of time. It would seem a little
more of this survival attitude is called for in dealing with the UFO problem.
