The Ocean of Story (Kathasaritsagara), Vol. 3 (Somadeva; C. H. Tawney (trans.); N. M. Penzer (ed.), 1924)
==========================================================
Vol. 3 of the complete Kathasaritsagara — Somadeva's 11th-century Ocean of Story, the great Sanskrit story-cycle — in C. H. Tawney's translation (1880-84), edited with introduction and notes by N. M. Penzer (1924-28, 10 vols.). Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/oceanofstorybein03somauoft).

u  w^Mf^mmsm^mMM^m^^mm^m^smm  m

li                                        il

i^^^HnH^HSB^^Hi

1  ^^^^HH^H^raBHIH  1

i^^^HHHHni


i^^l^^^H^Hi

IHHHHHH&HMBHHi

1  HB^»Kia|^iilis  Hip : :        11

1  ^HHIHPim^HlH  1

1 1                  Rdjfi£?ll  IP             11

il^^H^K4Vjnk3HHBHi


1                     Eil  KS^Stfl                   11

i  I^Kym^IH  1

1                 fc  ml  Wm               11

i  IHHHI^Bi^^^HHH^lHB  V

s  iillliiii^^                                             1  si

I  HHHHhbI^^1  1 .  "L ' ,;1 1 ;' "            1 1


IIHH^HIHHHHHHi

IHHHHHHHhHI^HhI

1  WtKtHKmW^M^^^^^^-  i     1 1



1  11™                                  1 1

11 111^^                                  * l "-  '                              1 P

Hfl^Bn^^HI^H^fll^Hi

i^n^HH^Hii

I  HHRH^flHi^^^^K

1  ^^^^^n^B^^l^l^^^li^^^^^HH  il

I  I^^^^^^^Bwft;?lfls>it5:                                         1  [1

Bi^rai^EsafaMigipeia^i^iaiai^iMi^iasraiBieira

A


r  '


fefe


THE
OCEAN  OF  STORY


56*3  3> -4  H


THE


OCEAN  OF  STORY

BEING

G.  H.  TAWNEY'S  TRANSLATION


SOMADEVA'S  KATHA  SARIT  SAGARA

(or  ocean  op  streams  op  story)


NOW    EDITED    WITH    INTRODUCTION,    FRESH

EXPLANATORY  NOTES  AND  TERMINAL  ESSAY

BY

N.   M.   PENZER,   M.A.,   F.R.G.S.,    F.G.S.


MEMBKR   OF   THE  FOLK-LORE   SOCIETY  J   FELLOW   OF   THE

ROYAL  ANTHROPOLOGICAL  INSTITUTE  ;   MEMBER

OF  THE  ROYAL  ASIATIC  SOCIETY,   ETC.

AUTHOR  OF

!AN   ANNOTATED   BIBLIOGRAPHY  OF  SIR   RICHARD  FRANCIS

BURTON,"   ETC.


IN  TEN  VOLUMES


\   I  /   /,


VOL.  Ill


WITH  A  FOREWORD   BY

Dr  M.   G ASTER,   Ph.D.


-£s.->-


LONDON:      PRIVATELY     PRINTED      FOR      SUBSCRIBERS      ONLY
BY  CHAS.  J.   SAWYER   LTD.,   GRAFTON  HOUSE,    W.I.      MCMXXV


Made  and  Printed  in  Great  Britain


FOREWORD

IT  is  with  great  diffidence  that  I  venture  to  step  in  where
the  great  masters  of  Indian  scholarship  found  some  diffi-
culty to  tread.  It  is  a  heavy  task  to  follow  in  the  wake
of  men  like  Sir  Richard  Temple  and  Sir  George  Grierson,
to  whom  Sanskrit  literature  is  an  open  book,  but  turning
the  leaves  I  found  they  had  left  some  blank  pages,  and  on
these  I  shall  endeavour  to  put  down  some  of  the  thoughts
which  this  new  edition  of  Tawney's  translation  of  Somadeva's
great  work  has  suggested  to  me.  I  am  encouraged  to  under-
take this  work  owing  to  the  kind  invitation  with  which
Mr  Penzer  has  honoured  me,  and  by  whom  I  have  been
granted  the  privilege  of  appreciating  to  the  full  the  excellent
work  which  he  is  performing  in  producing  his  magnum  opus.
By  his  illuminating  notes,  and  by  the  extensive  treatment
of  some  motifs  found  in  this  collection,  he  has  carried  his
investigations  far  beyond  the  narrow  borders  of  the  original
home  of  the  Kathci  Sarit  S  agar  a.  With  immense  industry
and  keen  insight  he  has  been  able  to  accumulate  a  mass  of
literary  parallels  from  all  parts  of  the  world  which  gives  to
this  edition  a  value  of  its  own,  and  places  it  in  the  forefront
of  modern  studies  in  comparative  literature.

It  is  from  this  point  of  view  that  I  will  address  myself  to
the  task  thus  placed  before  me.  Many  a  problem  arises  from
the  contemplation  of  this  Indian  literature  in  its  relation
to  the  other  literatures  of  a  similar  kind.  In  the  first
place,  the  students  of  folk-lore  are  returning  again  to  the
question  as  to  whether  the  inland  lake  of  Indian  tales
was  the  ocean  which  overflowed  its  banks  and  carried
these  tales  on  the  crest  of  its  waves  to  distant  lands  and
many  nations.  Ever  since  Benfey  published  his  famous
introduction  to  the  German  translation  of  the  Panchatantra
— and  here  I  fully  re-echo  Mr  Penzer 's  desideratum  for  an
English  translation  brought  up  to  date — this  question  has
never  ceased  to  agitate  the  mind  of  scholars.  True,  he  was
vii


viii  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

the  first  to  show  how  great  has  been  the  influence  of  Indian
literature  upon  mediaeval  fiction,  but  he  also  drew  within
the  circle  of  his  investigations  a  number  of  modern  fairy-
tales. His  researches  centred  to  a  large  extent  round  the
literary  products  of  India,  notably  those  books  which  were
unquestionably  of  Indian  origin,  and  which  had  reached
the  West  through  manifold  translations.  Kalila  wa  Dimna,
Syntipas  and,  to  a  certain  extent,  Barlaam  and  Josaphat
are  the  typical  representatives  of  this  book-literature.  It
is  now  a  fact  that  none  of  these  books  could  have  reached
the  West  before  the  sixth  century,  the  time  when  the  first
translation,  at  any  rate,  of  the  Kalila  wa  Dimna  was
made  into  Pahlavi  by  Barzoe  at  the  Court  of  the  Sassanian
kings.

None  of  these  books,  then,  reached  Europe  before  the
tenth  or  eleventh  century  at  the  earliest.  Thus  he  merely
touched  the  fringe  of  the  greater  problem  as  to  the  relation
between  the  Indian  and  the  European  folk-tales  and  legends.
Benfey's  theory  stimulated  the  question  rather  than  answered
it,  and  a  reaction  set  in  which  put  folk-lorists  on  a  different
scent.  The  question  had  not  been  rightly  put.  It  was  not
to  be  reduced  merely  to  the  relation  of  the  Indian  tales  to
European  folk-lore  in  connection  only  with  these  books,  for
Benfey  endeavoured  to  trace  it  back  as  well  to  other  Indian
collections  of  tales,  and  among  them  he  drew  very  often  upon
Somadeva's  Ocean.

Mr  Penzer  has  happily  been  able  to  fix  the  date  of
Somadeva's  literary  activity  c.  1070.  This  is  at  least  five
hundred  years  later  than  the  date  of  the  translation  of  the
Paikhatantra ,  and  creates  a  new  problem  as  to  the  antiquity
of  the  tales  so  sedulously  collected,  and  also  to  a  large  extent
copied  by  him.

How  old  are  these  tales,  and  whence  did  he  derive  them  ?
As  Mr  Penzer  rightly  remarks  in  his  Introduction,  many  a
river  has  flowed  into  this  ocean  and  has  swelled  its  size.
Can  we  trace  these  rivers  to  their  ultimate  source,  or  tell  how
long  it  has  taken  them  to  cut  through  the  gorges  of  the
mountains  until  they  reached  the  lake  or  the  ocean  ?  What
elements  did  they  carry  in  their  course,  and  how  long  was  it


FOREWORD  ix

before  these  turgid  waters  mingled  together  and  allowed
their  sediments  to  settle  at  the  bottom  of  the  ocean,  so  that
the  waters,  clear  and  transparent,  should  be  able  to  reflect
the  blue  sky  and  the  radiant  light  of  the  sun  during  the  day,
and  the  silvery  rays  of  the  moon  should  play  gently  upon
the  waves,  slightly  moved  by  lover  or  tossed  heaven-high
by  the  storm  of  human  passion  ?  I  do  not  feel  competent
to  touch  upon  the  question  raised  with  such  consummate
knowledge  by  Sir  Richard  Temple  as  to  the  Dra vidian  or
Aryan  elements  in  this  ocean.  I  wish  we  knew  more  of
anything  that  is  purely  Dravidian  or  purely  Aryan  in  legend
and  tales,  and  even  in  customs  and  beliefs.  There  is  no  pure
race  in  the  world,  and  I  believe  nowhere  has  such  a  blending
and  mixing  of  races  taken  place  as  in  Central  Asia  and
also  in  India.  Who  to-day  can  disentangle  the  skein  and
separate  every  strand  ?  If  anywhere,  it  is  in  the  world  of
spirit  and  fiction  that  this  blending  goes  on  so  continuously
and  so  profoundly,  that  I  for  one  fear  me  to  approach  this
problem  with  the  hope  of  arriving  at  a  definite  and  satis-
factory result.

Beyond  the  limited  border  of  known  facts  there  lies  the
wide  world  of  hypotheses.  There  the  goblins  of  fancy  dis-
port themselves,  and  that  is  the  land  where  the  spirit  roams
freely.  Happily  there  are  no  geographical  or  religious  or
national  boundaries  in  that  land  of  imagination  and  fancy.
The  whole  of  mankind  dwells  therein.  There  is  that  higher
unity  after  which  man  is  yearning,  and  only  there  is  that
bliss  which  gives  to  the  tales  their  peculiar  charm.

But  now  let  us  return  to  sober  facts,  lest  we  are  carried
away  too  far  into  dreamland  and  lose  the  ground  under  our
feet.  At  the  time  when  Somadeva  made  his  collection,  not
far  from  Kashmir  Firdusi  wrote  his  great  poem  Shahnameh,
the  mighty  epic  of  the  Persian  kings,  embodying  the  ancient
legends  of  Iran  ;  and  in  the  West  we  witness  the  rise  of  epic
poems  and  the  romances  of  chivalry,  not  to  speak  of  the
great  Arabic  poem  of  Antar,  all  dealing  with  the  great  heroes
of  the  past.  What  epic  poems  may  have  been  lost  with
the  Pahlavi  literature,  at  which  Firdusi  hints,  none  can
tell,  save  for  those  remnants  that  are  found  in  Georgian


x  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

and  other  late  translations.  One  point  which  they  have  in
common  is  that  they  are  all  written  in  verse,  just  as  Soma-
deva's  Ocean.  In  looking  for  origins  here  we  have  a  certain
clue.  They  were  all  intended  to  be  sung  or  recited  with
accompaniment  to  music.  They  formed  from  the  beginning
a  written  literature.  The  minstrels  and  troubadours  in  the
West,  the  wandering  Kaleki  in  Russia,  did  not  read  as  prose
those  poems  or  ballads,  but  they  sang  them  at  the  banqueting-
tables  of  the  great,  or  on  the  roadside  to  the  poor,  and  on
their  pilgrimages  to  hallowed  spots.  The  unwritten  literature
and  the  oral  recital  may  have  preceded  the  written  poem.
But  it  would  not  be  easy  to  determine  whether  the  oral  tale
preceded  these  poetic  versifications,  and  what  influence  they
may  have  exercised  upon  the  imagination  of  the  poet ;  but
here  they  have  become  fixed  and  no  longer  float  about,
and  form,  as  it  will  be  seen,  the  starting-point  of  further
development.

That  Somadeva  had  used  to  a  very  large  extent  written
literature  there  can  be  no  doubt.  Many  of  the  Jatakas  and
tales  from  the  Panchatantra,  which  had  been  written  down
centuries  before  Somadeva,  have  indeed  found  their  place  in
his  Ocean.  He  may  have  used  some  oral  traditions  too,  but,
as  just  now  mentioned,  it  would  be  very  difficult  to  trace  them.
Thus  far  we  would,  then,  have  two  sets  of  popular  literature,
but  the  process  did  not  end  by  the  writing  down  of  the  oral
tale.  The  written  book  became  in  time  the  starting-point
of  a  new  set  of  oral  lore.  I  shall  return  to  these  phases  in
the  development  of  the  popular  literature  when  discussing
the  modern  fairy-tale.  For  the  time  being  it  must  suffice
to  have  raised  this  question,  and  to  hint  at  the  possibility  of
Somadeva  and  of  his  immediate  predecessors  having  made
use  also  of  some  of  the  ballads  and  legends  floating  about
only.  But  these  may  have  been  developed  out  of  more
ancient  writings,  thus  forming  a  cycle  which,  however,  did
not  lead  to  Nirvana.

If  Indian  tales  and  legends,  Indian  teachings,  beliefs  and
customs  have  really  spread  Westwards  at  a  time  anterior
to  the  translation  of  the  writings  mentioned  before,  it  may
have  been  done  by  word  of  mouth.     Buddhist  missionaries,


FOREWORD  xi

as  is  well  known,  carried  the  teachings  of  the  Master  far  and
wide.  Their  presence  in  Alexandria  in  the  second  century
B.C.  is  a  well-established  fact,  and  so  one  may  mention
parenthetically  the  presence  of  Buddhist  monks  in  the  north
of  Europe.  What  kind  of  seed  did  they  carry  in  their  bosom
or  their  knapsack  ?  Did  they  bring  written  Jdtakas — if  they
were  already  then  written  down — or  did  they,  as  the  story-
teller to-day  in  the  East,  tell  to  a  spellbound  audience  the
miraculous  life  and  adventures  of  the  Great  One  ?

Here  Somadeva's  Ocean,  on  the  one  side,  which  contains
not  a  few  of  these  Jdtakas,  and  shows  us  how  in  the  course
of  time  they  were  adapted  to  changed  circumstances,  and  Mr
Penzer's  scholarly  notes  on  the  other,  help  us  to  approach
this  problem  with  some  hope  of  solution.  Two  remarkable
beliefs  suddenly  come  to  light  about  that  period.

Firstly,  in  the  Hellenistic  as  well  as  Jewish  Apocryphal
literature  we  hear  suddenly  of  a  belief  that,  attracted  by
the  beauty  of  women,  angels  fell  from  heaven.  The  love  for
women  had  overcome  them  and  they  lost  their  angelic  status.
Or,  one  of  the  angels,  moved  by  insensate  pride,  lost  his
station  in  heaven  and  was  cast  down  to  earth,  and  henceforth
acts  as  the  inspirer  of  all  evil.  It  is  not  here  the  place  to  do
more  than  briefly  refer  to  this  extraordinary  conception,  and
to  the  remarkable  consequences  to  which  it  led,  through  the
evolution  of  the  idea  of  redemption  and  salvation.  What-
ever form  this  latter  theory  may  have  assumed  in  the  religious
system  of  Iran,  the  story  of  the  fall  of  angels  does  not  occur
anywhere  else  except  among  the  nations  living  in  Egypt
and  Palestine,  and  in  the  tales  of  Somadeva,  where  we  find
it  over  and  over  again.

Many  an  Apsaras  or  Vidyadhara  has  lost  his  station  as
a  divine  being  and  has  been  cursed  for  his  love  of  men  and
women  exactly  as  in  the  Henochic  literature.  Is  this  of
Indian  origin  ?

Secondly,  we  have  in  Egypt,  the  home  of  aberrations  of
the  mind  and  of  morbid  introspection  and  consciousness  of
human  frailty,  that  peculiar  development  of  extreme  asceti-
cism. The  monks  in  the  desert  of  Egypt  mortify  their  flesh,
and  shun  the  pleasures  of  the  world  as  so  many  temptations  of


xii  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

the  Evil  One,  giving  their  life  up  to  the  same  morbid  intro-
spection to  gain  thereby  heavenly  bliss.  There  may  have
been  some  sects  of  an  ascetic  turn  of  mind  along  the  banks
of  the  Jordan  and  the  banks  of  the  Nile,  like  the  Essenes
and  the  Therapeuts — and  who  knows  whether  these  also  have
not  been  influenced  by  Buddhist  missionaries  preaching  the
gospel  of  asceticism  as  the  means  of  salvation — but  they
flourish  nowhere  so  strongly  as  in  Egypt,  where  the  people
were  surrounded  by  tombs,  by  books  and  by  monuments
of  the  dead.  Did  they  bring  some  of  the  parables  found
in  the  New  Testament  ?  To  these  questions  Somadeva's
Ocean  gives  the  answer.  If  they  can  be  shown  to  be  as
old  as  the  Jdtakas,  those  tales  would  carry  us  back  at  least
one  thousand  years  before  they  were  written  down  in  their
actual  form.

On  the  other  hand,  did  not  India  receive  from  the  West  ?
Those  who  travelled  Westwards  returned  also  to  the  East ;
they  carried  and  fetched  ;  just  as  easily  as  they  could  bring
tales  and  legends,  so  could  they  also  carry  back  some  of
the  rich  stores  accumulated  in  other  lands.  Either  way  it
is  very  difficult  to  discover  the  hall-mark  of  origin.  Each
nation  quarrying  in  the  same  way  the  same  mine  of  the
spirit,  and  even  one  nation  borrowing  the  gold  from  the
other,  puts  its  own  seal  on  the  coins  which  it  mints.  A  river
or  rivulet  flowing  from  Egypt  or  Palestine  towards  India
will  mingle  its  waters  with  the  mighty  ocean  and  become
so  profoundly  assimilated  as  not  to  be  easily  recognised.

The  farther  back  we  go  the  more  difficult  it  gets,  no
doubt,  to  settle  the  question  of  the  priority,  especially  when
the  chronological  dates  are  missing.  Difficult  as  it  is  in  the
case  of  the  pre-Christian  period  and  of  Greek  myths,  carried
in  ail  probability  along  by  the  armies  of  Alexander,  it  be-
comes still  more  difficult  if  we  are  turning  to  old  Babylonian
and  Assyrian  traditions,  customs  and  beliefs.  One  country
borders  practically  on  the  other,  and  the  recent  discoveries
of  Babylonian  or  Sumerian  tablets  (inscriptions)  in  India
more  than  countenanced  the  belief  in  direct  intercourse
between  India  and  Babylon.  What  may  have  flowed  from
one  country  into  the  other  must  for  the  time  being  remain


FOREWORD  xiii

an  object  of  speculation,  which,  however,  in  this  case,  rests
on  a  solid  basis  of  facts.

Again,  if  we  remember  the  activity  of  Christian  mission-
aries, some  of  whom,  like  St  Thomas,  have  been  directly
connected  with  India,  and  others,  especially  the  Nestorians,
how  many  legends  could  they  not  have  carried  with  them
and  contributed  to  increase  the  amount  of  the  popular  lore
in  India  ?  Besides,  there  is  a  rich  material  in  the  innumer-
able legends  of  the  saints,  which  waits  for  the  sifting  hand
and  scholarly  insight  of  men  fully  prepared  for  the  task  to
examine  the  possible  relations  between  Indian  legends  and
Christian  hagiology.  Everywhere  a  strong  assimilation  has
taken  place.  This  is  a  regular  process  through  which  all  the
tales  and  legends  are  passing.  One  need  not  go  farther
than  to  remember  the  legend  of  Barlaam  and  Josaphat,  who
have  become  saints  of  the  Church.  Centuries  have  passed
since  their  story  was  first  circulated  throughout  Europe,  and
many  a  parable  has  become  the  property  of  the  Western
world,  influencing  even  the  genius  of  Shakespeare  in  the
story  of  the  Three  Caskets,  and  it  was  only  by  the  middle
of  the  last  century  that  Liebrecht  recognised  in  them  a
Christianised  form  of  the  life  and  legends  of  Buddha,  so
thoroughly  had  their  character  been  changed,  and  yet  in
essence  they  remain  the  same.

There  is  a  profound  psychological  element  in  all  these
tales  and  legends,  which  appeals  to  the  human  heart  and
tends  to  explain  to  some  extent  the  ready  admission  of  such
tales,  quite  indifferent  as  to  their  origin  and  the  primitive
meaning  attached  to  them.  The  contemplation  of  the  world
and  its  miseries  leads  to  two  extremes — the  asceticism  of
Buddha  or  the  unbounded  frivolity  of  the  rich  and  the  power-
ful. One,  no  doubt,  produces  the  other.  The  contemplation
of  the  Hedonism  among  the  Greeks  of  Alexandria  could
create  a  reaction  which  culminated  in  that  mortification  of
the  flesh,  and  vice  versa ;  the  morbid  turning  away  from  all
pleasure  and  joy  as  well  as  from  duty  and  responsibility  may
have  created  a  revulsion  in  the  opposite  direction.  Thus
the  Decameron  was  written  at  a  time  when  the  plague
decimated  the  city  of  Florence,  and  Somadeva's  Ocean  was


xiv  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

written,  as  Mr  Penzer  shows,  at  a  time  of  murder  and  blood-
shed, horror  and  despair.  It  is  at  such  times  that  the  soul
takes  refuge  in  a  better  and  happier  world  as  a  consolation
for  the  miseries  of  this  world.  Men  wish  to  dream  them-
selves away  from  the  sore  trials  with  which  they  are  beset,
and  they  grope  instinctively  for  a  world  in  which  justice  and
mercy  hold  sway,  righteousness  triumphs  over  wickedness,
and  love  finds  its  reward.

This  is  the  general  character  of  the  fairy-tale  to  which  I
am  now  turning,  and  Mr  Penzer  has  taken  special  pains  to
discover  as  many  parallels  as  possible  in  the  fairy- lore  of
the  world.  Here,  again,  we  are  confronted  with  a  problem
which  is  beginning  practically  to  divide  the  two  schools  of
thought.  What  has  been  the  fate  of  these  old  stories  and
tales,  and  how  have  they  become  disseminated  and  known
to  the  people  ?  Nature  abhors  a  vacuum  and  the  spirit
partakes  of  the  same  character.  Everything  is  in  constant
flux,  ebb  and  flow  alternate.  A  literature  that  has  reached
the  high- water  mark  does  not  keep  it  for  long,  and  who  can
discover  the  water- sheds  of  literature,  when  they  are  running
down  from  the  heights  of  the  palace  and  the  cloister  to
mingle  with  the  masses,  and  thus  to  become  the  real  popular
literature.

Leaving  the  ancient  sources  as  a  mere  matter  of  specula-
tion, we  are  more  concerned  with  those  facts  which  are  easily
discernible  and  can  be  followed  up  with  greater  accuracy
and  reliability.  As  hinted,  many  of  these  tales  and  stories
deal  either  with  the  prowess  of  the  hero  on  the  battle-field,
or  with  the  spiritual  wrestling  of  the  saint.  They  have,  one
may  surmise,  in  many  cases  a  local  origin ;  they  can  be
localised  geographically  and  connected  with  some  outstand-
ing personality,  either  a  king  or  a  Bodhisattva,  with  the  former
in  epic  poem  tales,  and  with  the  latter  in  a  pious  legend.
Here  we  have,  then,  indications  as  to  the  possible  origin  and
date  of  some  of  these  ancient  tales  at  the  time  when  they
reached  Somadeva,  and  also  the  way  shown  by  which  their
dissemination  may  have  been  carried  out.  One  outstanding
characteristic  of  this  literature  is  that  a  legend  or  tale  after  a
time  can  be,  and  is,  either  slightly  changed  or  entirely  readapted


FOREWORD  xv

in  its  further  transmission.  Yet  in  all  this  work  of  change
and  transmission  I  insist  one  must  bear  in  mind  that  the
written  word  remains  the  primary  source  for  the  later  develop-
ment. Those  who  were  present  at  the  recital  by  the  bard
at  the  court  of  the  baron  or  king  may  then  repeat  the
story  by  word  of  mouth,  and  those  who  join  in  pilgrimage
to  a  holy  place  will  listen  with  deep  reverence  and  joy  to  the
tales  of  miracles  and  wonders  which  have  been  performed
by  the  saints  in  that  special  spot.  Then  these,  scattering  far
and  wide,  and  still  following  the  great  routes  of  pilgrimage,  will
at  every  halting-place  and  stage  of  their  journey  repeat  and
simplify,  change  and  alter,  the  stories  which  they  have  heard.

Still  another  element  assists  in  this  development  from
the  written  to  the  oral — the  picture  and  the  sculpture.  The
stories  are  written  in  stones  as  well  as  on  paper,  and  they
in  turn  become  the  material  upon  which  the  imaginative
power  of  the  spirit  feeds.  At  a  certain  period,  almost  con-
temporary with  Somadeva,  a  rich  store  of  Indian  tales  had
been  poured  into  Europe.  A  kind  of  levelling  had  been
accomplished  from  East  to  West.  We  are  in  a  better  position
to  study  here  the  gulf  stream  flowing  from  one  part  of  the
world  to  the  other,  and  carrying  with  it  some  of  the  exotic
trees  and  fruits  of  distant  lands.  They  became  quickly
naturalised ;  they  found  everywhere  a  fertile  soil  and  pro-
duced an  unexpected  crop,  rich  and  luxuriant.  Thus  a  vast
amount  of  fiction  has  been  accumulated,  and  as  in  the  East
so  in  the  West  it  slowly  glided  down  from  the  high  places
which  it  originally  occupied  to  the  lowly  places  in  which  men
dwell.  There  the  written  book  rules  paramount,  and  the  pic-
tures which  accompany  it  tend  to  make  its  contents  familiar
to  larger  circles.

The  invention  of  the  printing-press  marks  a  turning-point
and  carries  the  written  word  far  and  wide  among  those  who
have  now  learned  to  master  the  mystery  of  the  alphabet.
Chaucer's  Canterbury  Tales  give  us  the  best  example  of  this
literary  migration  and  dissemination.  The  tales  are  told  on
a  pilgrimage,  just  as  in  centuries  before,  but  these  are  all  of
a  literary  origin,  mostly  from  Boccaccio,  and  one,  at  least,
from  the  cloisters.


xvi  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

Thus  the  oral  literature  develops  step  by  step,  East  and
West  alike,  drawing  its  inspiration  ultimately  from  the
written  book.  I  know  it  is  a  view  which  is  shared  by  very
few,  if  by  any.  But  a  careful  study  of  the  history  of  the  chap-
books,  or  "La  Litterature  du  Colportage,"  as  Nisard  called
it,  must  lead  to  the  same  conclusion.  The  ancient  romances
slowly  dwindle  down  to  such  small  story-books  as  carried  by
the  chapmen  on  their  backs,  and  cheapened  in  the  markets
of  the  world,  and  are  even  still  more  reduced  to  illustrated
broadsides.  They  show  thus  the  slow  decay  which  has  over-
taken the  old  written  literature  and  has  transformed  it  into
the  oral  one.

We  have  now  to  go  only  one  step  farther,  and  in  many
cases  the  fairy-tale  collected  from  the  mouth  of  the  people
turns  out  to  be  a  mere  repetition  of  a  printed  chap-book.
This  brings  me  now  to  touch,  as  briefly  as  I  can  within
the  limited  space  afforded  to  me,  upon  that  part  in  Mr
Penzer's  work  in  which  he  refers  to  the  fairy-tales.  There
is  no  better  guide  than  he  in  following  up  the  parallels  for
modern  fairy-tales  so  richly  adduced  by  him.

A  gap  of  close  upon  a  thousand  years  separates  Soma-
deva's  Ocean  from  the  small  rivulets  flowing  out  of  it.  The
process  of  transformation  has  been  the  same  in  the  East  as
in  the  West,  and  given  the  same  motives  the  result  must  be
similar.  Here  also  there  have  been  literary  intermediaries
at  various  stages  between  past  and  present,  and  in  all  prob-
ability the  poetic  imagination  has  ripened  the  fruit  in  the
East  much  more  quickly  than  in  the  West,  and  has  produced
what  we  call  now  the  fairy-tale,  with  its  glowing  richness  of
fancy,  some  time  before  it  assumed  the  shape  in  which  we  know
it  in  Europe.  Still  one  important  fact  must  be  retained —
namely,  that  for  a  large  number  of  incidents  literary  parallels
can  be  adduced  to  prove  irrefutably  some  connection  between
the  written  and  the  oral.  The  fairy-tale  often  turns  out  to
be  a  replica  of  the  old  tale  stripped  of  its  geographical  limita-
tions and  historical  personages.  It  has  freed  itself  from
these  trammels,  it  has  broken  down  the  barriers,  and  it  is
roaming  freely  over  many  countries.

The  fact  of  the  similarity  of  folk- tales  in  many  parts  of


FOREWORD  xvii

the  world,  discovered  since  Grimm  started  his  collection,  has
given  rise  to  many  interpretations.  Grimm's  mythological
theory,  which  recognises  in  the  persons  and  incidents  found
in  the  fairy-tales  remnants  of  ancient  Teutonic  mythology,
has  developed  into  a  much  wider  anthropological  theory.
According  to  this  latter  the  popular  tales  are  nothing  else
but  the  depositories  of  primeval  culture  and  primitive
civilisation.  These  incidents  are  nothing  else  but  survivals
carried  unconsciously  by  the  people,  who  have  lost  every
knowledge  of  their  origin  and  character.  But  I  see  in  these
alleged  "  survivals  "  nothing  else  but  some  of  the  archaic
details  found  in  the  written  literature.  The  anthropological
interpretation  must  fail  when  we  find  the  very  same  story
among  nations  that  are  almost  of  yesterday  and  are  divided
from  one  another  by  race,  faith  and  tradition — e.g.  Rumanians,
Hungarians,  Bulgarians  and  Turks — yet  have  practically  the
same  tales  in  common.  Still  more  curious  is  the  fact  that
such  tales  as  are  found  in  the  east  of  Europe  among  the  vary-
ing races  are  also  found  in  England,  in  which  the  greatest
mixture  of  races  has  taken  place.  Picts  and  Celts,  Romans
and  Angles,  Saxons  and  Danes,  no  less  than  Normans,  have
all  contributed  towards  the  formation  of  the  British  nation.
How  could  they  bring  their  own  traditions  and  blend  them
together  in  such  a  manner  that  out  of  that  melting-pot
should  arise  the  modern  fairy-tale,  unlike  any  of  them,  and
yet  like  the  rest  of  the  fairy-tales  of  the  world  ?  Not  so,
however,  if  we  believe  them  to  be  of  a  somewhat  more  modern
origin,  carried  to  a  large  extent  by  word  of  mouth  in  this
their  latest  shape  of  development.  They  are  neither  the
most  ancient  property  of  the  people  nor  are  they  of  such
permanent  character  as  the  followers  of  the  anthropological
school  would  postulate.  One  has  only  to  compare  the
stories  collected  in  the  East  and  in  the  eastern  parts  of
Europe  with  those  collected  in  the  West,  and  then  those
collected  a  century  ago  with  those  collected  in  our  own
times,  to  realise  that  when  they  reached  the  West  they  were
shorn  of  most  of  their  poetic  beauty  and  that  they  are  fast
disappearing.  If  this  could  happen  within  a  century,  how
could  they  have  persisted  for  thousands  of  years  ?     To  these

VOL.  III.  b


xviii  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

theories,  therefore,  I  oppose  what  I  may  call  the  historical,
an  investigation  which,  instead  of  roaming  far  and  wide  and
losing  itself  in  the  mists  of  the  past,  traces  every  tale  and
legend  step  by  step  from  the  modern  type  to  a  possibly  more
ancient  written  source,  but  directly  and  immediately  con-
nected with  it  in  historical  sequence.  It  is  thus  a  question
of  tracing  the  literary  influence  upon  popular  lore  and  the
possible  reaction  of  the  latter  upon  the  former.

A  careful  examination  of  the  tales  from  the  stock  of  the
European  literature,  and  in  fact  of  all  the  oral  popular  lore,
reveals  the  surprising  fact  that  they  can  all  be  reduced  to  a
very  limited  number  of  types,  not  exceeding  a  hundred,  and
in  all  probability  very  much  less.  They  are  the  elements  out
of  which,  through  various  combinations,  the  vast  number  of
tales  has  been  evolved.  A  rich  material  had  already  been
accumulating  in  Europe  during  the  previous  centuries  and
a  slight  impetus  and  a%  few  examples  from  the  East  would
suffice  to  set  the  world  of  fancy  in  motion  and  to  produce
the  new  popular  literature.  The  same  shading  down  from
the  most  perfect  works  of  literary  art  has  been  taking  place
in  the  East  as  well  as  in  the  West,  and  this  Mr  Penzer  shows
by  the  parallels  from  Indian  literature  with  the  same  results.

I  now  turn  again  to  the  present  edition  of  the  Kaiha  Sarit
Sdgara.  Not  for  their  sins  but  for  their  virtues  the  tales
are  reborn  over  and  over  again,  sometimes  in  a  divine  shape,
sometimes  in  a  human  shape,  for,  travelling  along  the  borders
of  this  limitless  ocean  of  poetry,  the  panorama  changes  and
yet  it  remains  the  same.  In  the  Ocean  we  do  not  find  the
modern  novel  with  its  psychological  problem  describing  in
detail  the  torture  of  the  soul,  but  pictures  of  a  life  in  which
God  and  men  play  their  parts  often  to  bring  happiness,  but
just  as  often  telling  us  life  as  it  is,  with  its  ups  and  downs,
with  its  hopes  and  disappointments,  such  as  it  has  been  lived
in  ancient  India,  and  has  always  been  lived  throughout  the
world,  and  throughout  all  time.

To  Mr  Penzer  the  deepest  thanks  are  due  from  all  those
who  are  interested  in  these  entrancing  studies.

M.  Gaster.

London,  3rd  February  1925.


CONTENTS

BOOK  VI:   MADANAMANCHUKA

CHAPTER  XXVII


PAGE


Author's  Preface  .....     xxv

Invocation        ......  1

M(ain  story)     ......  1

30.  Story  of  King  Dharmadatta  and  his  Wife  Nagasri  7
M.    Cont          ......         8

31.  Story  of  the  Seven  Brahmans  who  devoured  a  Cow

in  time  of  Famine  ....  9

M.    Cont  .  .  .  .  .  .10

32.  Story  of  the  Two  Ascetics,   one  a  Brahman,  the

other  a  Chandala  .  .  .  .10

M.    Cont  .  .  .  .  .  .11

33.  Story  of  King  Vikramasinha  and  the  Two  Brah-

mans     .  .  .  .  .  .11

33a.  The  Double  Elopement  .  .       13

33.  Story  of  King  Vikramasinha  and  the  Two  Brah-

mans     .  .  .  .  .  .16

M.    Cont  .  .  .  .  .  .17

CHAPTER  XXVIII

M.    Cont  .  .  .  .  .  .18

34.  Story  of  the  Seven  Princesses         .  .  .19

34a.   The  Prince  who  tore  out  his  own  Eye       19
34aa.  The     Ascetic     who     conquered

Anger  .  .  .22

34a.  The  Prince  who  tore  out  his  own  Eye       23

xix


XX


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


CHAPTER  XXVIII— continued

34.  Story  of  the  Seven  Princesses
M.    Cont.  .

35.  Story  of  Sulochana  and  Sushena     .
M.    Cont  ....

36.  Story  of  the  Prince  and  the  Merchants

saved  his  Life

M.    Cont  ....

37.  Story  of  the  Brahman  and  the  Pisacha
M.    Cont  ....
37.  Story  of  the  Brahman  and  the  Pisacha
M.    Cont           ....


Son  who


23
23
24

27

28
32
32
34
34
35


CHAPTER  XXIX

M.    Cont  .  .  .  .  .  .39

38.  Story  of  Kirtisena  and  her  Cruel  Mother-in-Law  .       44

M.    Cont  .  .  .  .  .  .54


CHAPTER  XXX

M.    Cont  ....

39.  Story  of  TejasvatI

39a.  The  Brahman  HariSarman
39.  Story  of  TejasvatI
M.    Cont


64

69
70

74

74


CHAPTER  XXXI
M.    Cont  .

40.  Story  of  Usha  and  Aniruddha
M.    Cont


81
81
84


CONTENTS  xxi

CHAPTER  XXXII

PAGK

M.    Cont.  .  .  .  .  .  .90


41.  Story  of  the  Brahman's  Son  Vishnudatta  and  his

Seven  Foolish  Companions
M.   Cont.  .....

42.  Story  of  Kadaligarbha

42a.  The  King  and  the  Barber's  Wife

42.  Story  of  Kadaligarbha
M.    Cont  .....

CHAPTER  XXXIII
M.    Cont  .....

43.  Story  of  Srutasena

43a.  The  Three  Brahman  Brothers    .
43.  Story  of  Srutasena

43b.  Devasena  and  Unmadim

43.  Story  of  Srutasena
M.    Cont  .....

44.  Story  of  the  Ichneumon,  the  Owl,  the  Cat  and  the

Mouse     .....
M.    Cont  .....

45.  Story  of  King  Prasenajit  and  the  Brahman  who

lost  his  Treasure
M.    Cont  .  .  .  .


CHAPTER  XXXIV
M.    Cont

46.  Story  of  King  Indradatta  .
M.    Cont

47.  Story  of  the  Yaksha  Virupaksha
M.    Cont

48.  Story  of  Satrughna  and  his  Wicked  Wife
M.    Cont  ....


93

96

97

102

103

106

107
108
109
110
111
112
112

115
117

118
120


128
128
129
133
135
141
141.


xxii  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

BOOK  VII:    RATNAPRABHA
CHAPTER  XXXV


Invocation        .....

PAOR

.      155

M.    Cont.           .....

.      155

49.  Story  of  Ratnaprabha

.      156

49a.  Sattvasila  and  the  Two  Treasures

.      157

49.  Story  of  Ratnaprabha

.      158

49b.  The  Brave  King  Vikramatunga

.      159

49.  Story  of  Ratnaprabha

.      163

M.    Cant.          .....

.      166

CHAPTER  XXXVI
M.    Cont.  .  .  .  .  .  .169

50.  Story     of    King    Ratnadhipati    and    the     White

Elephant  Svetarasmi      ....     169

M.    Cont.  .  .  .  .  .  .178


CHAPTER  XXXVII

M.

Cont.           ......

183

51.

Story  of  Nischayadatta      .

51a.  Somasvamin  and  Bandhudatta

183
190

51.

Story  of  Nischayadatta

51b.  Bhavasarman  and  the  Two  Witches

193
.      193

51.
M.

Story  of  Nischayadatta

Cont           .....

195
.      200

CHAPTER  XXXVIII

M.    Cont.  .  .  .  .  .206

52.  Story  of  King  Vikramaditya  and  the  Courtesan  .     206
52a.   King  Vikramaditya  and  the  Treacher-
ous Mendicant             .              .  .     209
52.  Story  of  King  Vikramaditya  and  the  Courtesan  .     211
M.    Cont.          .              .              .              .              .  .217


CONTENTS  xxiii


CHAPTER  XXXIX


M.    Cont.  .  .  .  .  .  .218

53.  Story   of  Sringabhuja  and  the  Daughter   of  the

Rakshasa  .....     218

M.    Cont.  .  .  .  .  .  .235


CHAPTER  XL

M.

Cont.           .               .               .               .               .               .240

54.

Story  of  Tapodatta              .              .              .              .241

M.

Cont.           .              .              .              .              .              .241

55.

Story  of  Virupasarman       ....     242

M.

Cont.           .              .              .               .               .               .242

56.

Story  of  King  Vilasasila  and  the  Physician  Taruna-

chandra                .....     243

M.

Cont           .              .              .              .              .              .249

CHAPTER  XLI
M.    Cont.  .  .  .  .  .  .252

57.  Story  of  King  Chirayus  and  his  Minister  Nagarjuna     252
M.    Cont.  .  .  .  .  .  .256

CHAPTER  XLII

M.    Cont.  .  .  .  .  .  .259

58.  Story  of  King  Parity agasena,  his  Wicked  Wife  and

his  Two  Sons      .  .  .  .  .263

M.    Cont.  .  .  .  .  .  .275

CHAPTER  XLIII

M.    Cont.  .  .  .  .  .  .281

59.  Story  of  the  Two  Brothers  Pranadhara  and  Rajya-

dhara      .  .  .  .  .  .282

M.    Cont.  .  .  .  .  .  .285


xxiv  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

CHAPTER  XLIII— continued

PAGK

60.  Story  of  Arthalobha  and  his  Beautiful  Wife  .     286
M.    Cmt.           .              .              .              .              .              .290

61.  Story  of  the  Princess  Karpurika  in  her  Birth  as  a

Swan      .  .  .  .  .  .291

M.    Cont.  .  .  .  .  .  .292

APPENDIX  1
Sneezing  Salutations     .....     303

APPENDIX  II
Indian  Eunuchs  .....     319

Index  I —Sanskrit  Words  and  Proper  Names  .     331

Index  II— General       .....     345


PREFACE

THE  present  volume  contains  more  text  than  either
of  the  two  preceding  ones,  and  Vol.  IV  will  carry
us  to  the  end  of  Mr  Tawney's  first  volume.
Dr  Barnett  continues  his  proof-reading  and  has  given
invaluable  advice  on  a  number  of  points.  In  the  absence
of  Mr  Fenton,  who  is  pursuing  his  archaeological  studies  in
Central  America,  my  old  friend,  Mr  Douglas  Marshall,  has
kindly  read  through  the  proofs,  making  many  valuable
suggestions.

Any  fresh  acknowledgments  are  duly  made  in  the  notes
themselves.

N.  M.  P.

St  John's  Wood,
bth  February  1925.


xxv


THE
OCEAN  OF  STORY


BOOK  VI :  MADANAMANGHUKA
CHAPTER  XXVII

INVOCATION

MAY  the  god  with  the  face  of  an  elephant,  who
appears,  with  his  head  bowed  down  and  then  raised,
to  be  continually  threatening  the  hosts  of  obstacles,
protect  you.

I  adore  the  God  of  Love,  pierced  with  the  showers  of
whose  arrows  even  the  body  of  Siva  seems  to  bristle  with
dense  thorns,  when  embraced  by  Uma.

Now  hear  the  heavenly  adventures  which  Naravahana-
datta,  speaking  of  himself  in  the  third  person,  told  from
the  very  beginning,  after  he  had  obtained  the  sovereignty
of  the  Vidyadharas,  and  had  been  questioned  about  the
story  of  his  life  on  some  occasion  or  other  by  the  seven  Rishis
and  their  wives.


[M]  Then  that  Naravahanadatta,  being  carefully  brought
up  by  his  father,  passed  his  eighth  year.  The  prince  lived
at  that  time  with  the  sons  of  the  ministers,  being  instructed
in  sciences  and  sporting  in  gardens.  And  the  Queen  Vasa-
vadatta  and  Padmavati  also,  on  account  of  their  exceeding
affection,  were  devoted  to  him  day  and  night.  He  was
distinguished  by  a  body  which  was  sprung  from  a  noble
stock,  and  bent  under  the  weight  of  his  growing  virtues,
and  gradually  filled  out,  as  also  by  a  bow  which  was  made  of
a  good  bamboo,  which  bent  as  the  string  rose,  and  slowly
arched  itself  into  a  crescent.1    And  his  father,  the  King  of

1  This  is  an  elaborate  pun  in  the  original.  Guna  =  "  string "  and
■"  virtue  "  ;  vansa  =  "  race  "  and  u  bamboo."

VOL.   III.  1  A


2  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

Vatsa,  spent  his  time  in  wishes  for  his  marriage  and  other
happiness,  delightful  because  so  soon  to  bear  fruit.

Now  hear  what  happened  at  this  point  of  the  story.

There  was  once  a  city  named  Taksha&la1  on  the  banks
of  the  Vitasta,  the  reflection  of  whose  long  line  of  palaces
gleamed  in  the  waters  of  the  river,  as  if  it  were  the  capital
of  the  lower  regions  come  to  gaze  at  its  splendour.
Merchant's  In  it  there  dwelt  a  king  named  Kalingadatta,  a
-Son  in  distinguished  Buddhist,  all  whose  subjects  were

Takshafila  devoted  to  the  great  Buddha,  the  bridegroom  of
Tara.2  His  city  shone  with  splendid  Buddhist  temples  densely
crowded  together,  as  if  with  the  horns  of  pride  elevated
because  it  had  no  rival  upon  earth.  He  not  only  cherished
his  subjects  like  a  father,  but  also  himself  taught  them  know-
ledge like  a  spiritual  guide.  Moreover,  there  was  in  that
city  a  certain  rich  Buddhist  merchant  called  Vitastadatta,
who  was  exclusively  devoted  to  the  honouring  of  Buddhist
mendicants.  And  he  had  a  son,  a  young  man  named  Ratna-
datta.  And  he  was  always  expressing  his  detestation  of  his
father,  calling  him  an  impious  man.  And  when  his  father
said  to  him,  "  Son,  why  do  you  blame  me?"  the  merchant's
son  answered  with  bitter  scorn  :  "  My  father,  you  abandon
the  religion  of  the  three  Vedas  and  cultivate  irreligion.  For
you  neglect  the  Brahmans  and  are  always  honouring
Sramanas.3  What  have  you  to  do  with  that  Buddhist
discipline,  which  all  kinds  of  low- caste  men  resort  to,  to
gratify  their  desire  to  have  a  convent  to  dwell  in,  released
from  bathing  and  other  strict  ordinances,  loving  to  feed
whenever  it  is  convenient,4  rejecting  the  Brahmanical  lock

1  The  Taxila  of  the  Greek  writers.  The  Vitasta  is  the  Hydaspes  of  the
Greeks,  now  called  Jhelum.

2  Monier  Williams  says  that  Tara  was  the  wife  of  the  Buddha  Amo-
ghasiddha.  Benfey  {Orient  u.  Occident,  vol.  i,  p.  373)  says  she  was  a  well-
known  Buddhist  saint.  The  passage  might  perhaps  mean,  "The  Buddha
adorned  with  most  brilliant  stars."  It  has  been  suggested  to  me  that
Taravara  may  mean  Siva,  and  that  the  passage  means  that  the  Saiva  and
Buddha  religions  were  both  professed  in  the  city  of  Takshafila.

3  I.e.  Buddhist  ascetics.

4  A  MS.  in  the  Sanskrit  College  reads  sukala  for  svakdla :  the  meaning
is  much  the  same.


THE  FEAR  OF  DEATH  3

and  other  prescribed  methods  of  doing  the  hair,  quite  at
ease  with  only  a  rag  round  their  loins  ?  "

When  the  merchant  heard  that,  he  said  :  "  Religion  is  not
confined  to  one  form  ;  a  transcendent  religion  is  a  different
thing  from  a  religion  that  embraces  the  whole  world.
People  say  that  Brahmanism  too  consists  in  avoiding
passion  and  other  sins,  in  truth,  and  compassion  to  creatures,
not  in  quarrelling  causelessly  with  one's  relations.1  More-
over, you  ought  not  to  blame  generally  that  school  which
I  follow,  which  extends  security  to  all  creatures,  on  account
of  the  fault  of  an  individual.  Nobody  questions  the  pro-
priety of  conferring  benefits,  and  my  beneficence  consists
simply  in  giving  security  to  creatures.  So,  if  I  take  exceed-
ing pleasure  in  this  system,  the  principal  characteristic  of
which  is  abstinence  from  injuring  any  creature,  and  which
brings  liberation,  wherein  am  I  irreligious  in  doing  so  ?  "

When  his  father  said  this  to  him,  that  merchant's  son
obstinately  refused  to  admit  it,  and  only  blamed  his  father
the  more.  Then  his  father,  in  disgust,  went  and  reported
the  whole  matter  to  the  King  Kalingadatta,  who  superin-
tended the  religion  of  his  people.  The  king,  for  his  part,
summoned  on  some  pretext  the  merchant's  son  into  his
judgment-hall,  and  feigning  an  anger  he  did  not  feel,  said  to
the  executioner  :  "I  have  heard  that  this  merchant's  son  is
wicked  and  addicted  to  horrible  crimes,  so  slay  him  without
mercy  as  a  corrupter  of  the  realm."  When  the  king  had
said  this,  the  father  interceded,  and  then  the  king  appointed
that  the  execution  should  be  put  off  for  two  months,  in
order  that  he  might  learn  virtue,  and  entrusted  the  merchant's
son  to  the  custody  of  his  father,  to  be  brought  again  into
his  presence  at  the  end  of  that  time.  The  merchant's  son,
when  he  had  been  taken  home  to  his  father's  house,  was
distracted  with  fear,  and  kept  thinking,  "  What  crime  can
I  have  committed  against  the  king  ?  "  and  pondering  over
his  causeless  execution  which  was  to  take  place  at  the  end  of
two  months :  and  so  he  could  get  no  sleep  day  or  night,  and
was  exhausted  by  taking  less  than  his  usual  food  at  all  times.

1  A  MS.  in  the  Sanskrit  College  reads  nigrahah,  "  blaming  one's  relations
without  cause."


4  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

Then,  the  reprieve  of  two  months  having  expired,  that
merchant's  son  was  again  taken,  thin  and  pale,  into  the
presence  of  the  king.  And  the  king,  seeing  him  in  such  a
depressed  state,  said  to  him  :  "  Why  have  you  become  so
thin  ?  Did  I  order  you  not  to  eat  ?  "  When  the  merchant's
son  heard  that,  he  said  to  the  king :  "I  forgot  myself  for
fear,  much  more  my  food.  Ever  since  I  heard  your  Majesty
order  my  execution  I  have  been  thinking  every  day  of  death
slowly  advancing."  When  the  merchant's  son  said  this,
the  king  said  to  him  :  "I  have  by  an  artifice  made  you
teach  yourself  what  the  fear  of  death  is.1  Such  must  be
the  fear  which  every  living  creature  entertains  of  death,  and
tell  me  what  higher  piety  can  there  be  than  the  benefit
of  preserving  creatures  from  that  ?  So  I  showed  you  this
in  order  that  you  might  acquire  religion  and  the  desire  of
salvation,2  for  a  wise  man  being  afraid  of  death  strives  to
attain  salvation.  Therefore  you  must  not  blame  your
father,  who  follows  this  religion."  When  the  merchant's
son  heard  this,  he  bowed  and  said  to  the  king :  "  Your
Majesty  has  made  me  a  blessed  man  by  teaching  me  religion,
and  now  a  desire  for  salvation  has  arisen  in  me  ;  teach  me
that  also,  my  lord."  When  the  king  heard  that,  as  it  was  a
feast  in  the  city,  he  gave  a  vessel  full  of  oil  into  the  hand  of
the  merchant's  son  and  said  to  him  :  "  Take  this  vessel  in
your  hand  and  walk  all  round  this  city,  and  you  must  avoid
spilling  a  single  drop  of  it,  my  son  ;  if  you  spill  one  drop  of
it  these  men  will  immediately  cut  you  down."  3  Having  said
this,  the  king  dismissed  the  merchant's  son  to  walk  round
the  city,  ordering  men  with  drawn  swords  to  follow  him.

The  merchant's  son,  in  his  fear,  took  care  to  avoid  spilling
a  drop  of  oil,  and  having  perambulated  that  city  with  much
difficulty,  returned  into  the  presence  of  the  king.  The  king,
when  he  saw  that  he  had  brought  the  oil  without  spilling  it,

1  Cf.  Ralston's  Russian  Folk-Tales,  p.   122,  and  Bartsch's  Sagcn,  Mtirchcn

u.  Gebr'duche  aus  Meklcnburg,  vol.  i,  p.  90. See  also  Chauvin,  Bibliographie  des

Ouvrages  Arabes,  viii,  p.  181. — n.m.p.

2  Moksha  is  the  soul's  final  release  from  further  transmigrations.

8  Cf.  Gesta  Romanorum,  cxliii  (Bohn's  edit.).  This  idea  is  found  in  the
Telapatta-Jataka,  Fausboll,  vol.  i,  p.  393.


THE  ABSENT  APSARAS  5

said  to  him  :  "  Did  you  see  anyone  to-day  as  you  went
along  in  your  perambulation  of  the  city  ?  "  When  the
merchant's  son  heard  that,  he  clasped  his  hands  and  said
to  the  king  :  "In  truth,  my  lord,  I  neither  saw  nor  heard
anything,  for  at  the  time  when  I  was  perambulating  the  city
I  had  my  undivided  attention  fixed  on  avoiding  spilling  a
drop  of  oil,  lest  the  swords  should  descend  upon  me."  When
the  merchant's  son  said  this,  the  king  said  to  him :  "  Because
your  whole  soul  was  intent  on  looking  at  the  oil  you  saw
nothing.  So  practise  religious  contemplation  with  the  same
undivided  attention.  For  a  man  who  with  intent  concen-
tration averts  his  attention  from  all  outward  operations
has  intuition  of  the  truth,  and  after  that  intuition  he  is  not
entangled  again  in  the  meshes  of  works.  Thus  I  have  given
you  in  a  compendious  form  instruction  in  the  doctrine  of
salvation."  Thus  the  king  spoke,  and  dismissed  him,  and
the  merchant's  son  fell  at  his  feet  and  went  home  rejoicing
to  his  father's  house,  having  attained  all  his  objects.

This  Kalingadatta,  who  superintended  in  this  way  the
religion  of  his  subjects,  had  a  wife  named  Taradatta,  of  equal
birth  with  the  king,  who,  being  politic  and  well-conducted,
was  such  an  ornament  to  the  king  as  language  is  to  a  poet,
who  delights  in  numerous  illustrations.  She  was  meritorious
for  her  bright  qualities  and  was  inseparable  from  that  beloved
king,  being  to  him  what  the  moonlight  is  to  the  moon,  the
receptacle  of  nectar.  The  king  lived  happily  there  with  that
queen,  and  passed  his  days  like  Indra  with  Sachi  in  heaven.

At  this  point  of  my  tale  Indra,  for  some  cause  or  other,
had  a  great  feast  in  heaven.  All  the  Apsarases  assembled
there  to  dance,  except  one  beautiful  Apsaras  named  Sura-
The  Apsaras  bhidatta,  who  was  not  to  be  seen  there.  Then
Surabhidatta  Indra,  by  his  divine  power  of  insight,  perceived
her  associating  in  secret  with  a  certain  Vidyadhara  in
Nandana.  When  Indra  saw  it  wrath  arose  in  his  bosom,
and  he  thought :  "  Ah  !  these  two,  blinded  with  love,
are  both  wicked  :  the  Apsaras  because,  forgetting  us,  she
acts  in  a  wilful  manner ;  the  Vidyadhara  because  he
enters  the  domain  of  the  gods  and  commits  improprieties.
Or  rather,  what  fault  is  that  miserable  Vidyadhara  guilty


6  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

of  ?  For  she  has  enticed  him  here,  ensnaring  him  with  her
beauty.  A  lovely  one  will  sweep  away  with  the  sea  of  her
beauty,  flowing  between  the  lofty  banks  of  her  breasts,  even
one  who  can  restrain  his  passions.  Was  not  even  Siva
disturbed  long  ago  when  he  beheld  Tilottama,  whom  the
Creator  made  by  taking  an  atom  from  all  the  noblest
beings  ?  "  *  And  did  not  Visvamitra  leave  his  asceticism
when  he  beheld  Menaka  ?  And  did  not  Yayati  come  to
old  age  for  love  of  Sarmishtha  ?  So  this  young  Vidyadhara
has  committed  no  crime  in  allowing  himself  to  be  allured  by
an  Apsaras  with  her  beauty,  which  is  able  to  bewilder  the
three  worlds.2  But  this  heavenly  nymph  is  in  fault,  wicked
creature,  void  of  virtue,  who  has  deserted  the  gods  and
introduced  this  fellow  into  Nandana."  Thus  reflecting,  the
lover  of  Ahalya  3  spared  the  Vidyadhara  youth,  but  cursed
that  Apsaras  in  the  following  words  : — "  Wicked  one,  take
upon  thyself  a  mortal  nature ;  but  after  thou  hast  obtained  a
daughter  not  sprung  from  the  womb,  and  hast  accomplished
the  object  of  the  gods,  thou  shalt  return  to  this  heaven."

In  the  meanwhile  Taradatta,  the  consort  of  that  king
in  the  city  of  Taksha&la,  reached  the  period  favourable  for
procreation.  And  Surabhidatta,  the  Apsaras  who  had  been
degraded  from  heaven  by  the  curse  of  Indra,  was  conceived
in  her,  giving  beauty  to  her  whole  body.  Then  Taradatta
beheld  in  a  dream  a  flame  descending  from  heaven  and
entering  into  her  womb  ;  and  in  the  morning  she  described
with  astonishment  her  dream  to  her  husband,  the  King
Kalingadatta  ;  and  he,  being  pleased,  said  to  her  :  "  Queen,
heavenly  beings  owing  to  a  curse  fall  into  human  births,  so
I  am  persuaded  that  this  is  some  divine  being  conceived  in
you.  For  beings,  bound  by  various  works,  good  and  evil,
are  ever  revolving  in  the  state  of  mundane  existence  in  these
three  worlds,  to  receive  fruits  blessed  and  miserable."  When
the  queen  was  thus  addressed  by  the  king,  she  took  the

1  A  kind  of  Pandora.

2  Cf  the  argument  in  the  Eunuchus  of  Terence  (Act  III,  sc.  6)  which
shocked  St  Augustine  so  much  {Confessions,  i,  16).

a  Et  tonantcm  Jovem  et  adulter antem. See  Vol.  II,  pp.  45,  46,  of  the  Ocean

of  Story. — n.m.p.


LIFE  IN  A  FORMER  BIRTH  7

opportunity  of  saying  to  him  :  "  It  is  true,  actions,  good
and  bad,  have  a  wonderful  power,  producing  the  perception
of  joy  and  sorrow,1  and  in  proof  of  it  I  will  give  you  this
illustration.     Listen  to  me.


30.  Story  of  King  Bharmadatta  and  his  Wife  Nagasri

There  once  lived  a  king  named  Dharmadatta,  the  lord  of
Kosala  ;  he  had  a  queen  named  Nagasri,  who  was  devoted
to  her  husband  and  was  called  Arundhati  on  the  earth,  as,
like  her,  she  was  the  chief  of  virtuous  women.  And  in
course  of  time,  O  slayer  of  your  enemies,  I  was  born  as  the
daughter  of  that  king  by  that  queen  ;  then,  while  I  was  a
mere  child,  that  mother  of  mine  suddenly  remembered  her
former  birth,  and  said  to  her  husband:  "O  King,  I  have
suddenly  to-day  remembered  my  former  birth  ;  it  is  dis-
agreeable to  me  not  to  tell  it,  but  if  I  do  tell  it  it  will  cause
my  death,  because  they  say  that  if  a  person  suddenly  re-
members his  or  her  former  birth,  and  tells  it,  it  surely  brings
death.  Therefore,  King,  I  feel  excessively  despondent."
When  his  queen  said  this  to  him,  the  king  answered  her :  "  My
beloved,  I,  like  you,  have  suddenly  remembered  my  former
birth  ;  therefore  tell  me  yours,  and  I  will  tell  you  mine ;  let
what  will  be,  be;  for  who  can  alter  the  decree  of  fate?"
When  thus  urged  by  her  husband,  the  queen  said  to  him  :
"  If  you  press  the  matter,  King,  then  I  will  tell  you.    Listen.

"  In  my  former  birth  I  was  a  well-conducted  female  slave
in  this  very  land,  in  the  house  of  a  certain  Brahman  named
Madhava.  And  in  that  birth  I  had  a  husband  named  Deva-
dasa,  an  excellent  hired  servant  in  the  house  of  a  certain
merchant.  And  so  we  two  dwelled  there,  having  built  a
house  that  suited  us,  living  on  the  cooked  rice  brought  from
the  houses  of  our  respective  masters.  A  water  vessel  and
a  pitcher,  a  broom  and  a  brazier,  and  I  and  my  husband
formed  three  couples.  We  lived  happy  and  contented  in  our
house,  into  which  the  demon  of  quarrelling  never  entered,
eating  the  little  food  that  remained  over  after  we  had  made
offerings   to  the  gods,   the  manes   and  guests.     And   any

1  I  separate  balavad  from  bhogadayi.


8  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

clothes  which  either  of  us  had  we  gave  to  some  poor  person
or  other.  Then  there  arose  a  grievous  famine  in  our  country,
and  owing  to  that  the  allowance  of  food,  which  we  had  to
receive  every  day,  began  to  come  to  us  in  small  quantities.
Then  our  bodies  became  attenuated  by  hunger,  and  we
began  to  despond  in  mind,  when  once  on  a  time  at  meal-
time there  arrived  a  weary  Brahman  guest.  To  him  we
both  gave  all  our  own  food,  as  much  as  we  had,  though  we
were  in  danger  of  our  lives.  When  the  Brahman  had  eaten
and  departed,  my  husband's  breath  left  him,  as  if  angry  that
he  respected  a  guest  more  than  it.  And  then  I  heaped  up
in  honour  of  my  husband  a  suitable  pyre,  and  ascended  it,
and  so  laid  down  the  load  of  my  own  calamity.  Then  I  was
born  in  a  royal  family,  and  I  became  your  queen ;  for  the
tree  of  good  deeds  produces  to  the  righteous  inconceivably
glorious  fruit."

When  his  queen  said  this  to  him,  the  King  Dharmadatta
said:  "Come,  my  beloved,  I  am  that  husband  of  thine  in
a  former  birth  ;  I  was  that  very  Devadasa,  the  merchant's
servant,  for  I  have  remembered  this  moment  this  former
existence  of  mine."  Having  said  this,  and  mentioned
the  tokens  of  his  own  identity,  the  king,  despondent  and
yet  glad,  suddenly  went  with  his  queen  to  heaven.

In  this  way  my  parents  went  to  another  world,  and
my  mother's  sister  brought  me  to  her  own  house  to  rear  me,
and  while  I  was  unmarried  there  came  a  certain  Brahman
guest,  and  my  mother's  sister  ordered  me  to  wait  on  him.
And  I  diligently  strove  to  please  him  as  Kunti 1  to  please
Durvasas,  and  owing  to  a  boon  conferred  by  him  I  obtained
you,  a  virtuous  husband.  Thus  good  fortune  is  the  result
of  virtue,  owing  to  which  my  parents  were  both  born  at
the  same  time  in  royal  families,  and  also  remembered  their
former  birth.


[M]  Having  heard  this  speech  of  the  Queen  Taradatta,
the    King  Kalingadatta,   who  was   exclusively  devoted    to

1  See  Vol.  II,  pp.  23,  24.— n.m.p.


THE  COW  IS  SACRIFICED  9

righteousness,  answered  her:  "It  is  true,  a  trifling  act  of
righteousness  duly  performed  will  bring  much  fruit,  and  in
proof  of  this,  O  Queen,  hear  the  ancient  tale  of  the  seven
Brahmans.


31.  Story  of  the  Seven  Brahmans  who  devoured  a  Cow
in  time  of  Famine 1

Long  ago,  in  a  city  called  Kundina,  a  certain  Brahman
teacher  had  for  pupils  seven  sons  of  Brahmans.  Then  that
teacher,  under  pressure  of  famine,  sent  those  pupils  to  ask
his  father-in-law,  who  was  rich  in  cows,  to  give  him  one.
And  those  pupils  of  his  went,  with  their  bellies  pinched  by
hunger,  to  his  father-in-law,  who  dwelt  in  another  land,  and
asked  him,  as  their  teacher  had  ordered  them,  for  a  cow.
He  gave  them  one  cow  to  support  them,  but  the  miserly
fellow  did  not  give  them  food,  though  they  were  hungry.
Then  they  took  the  cow,  and  as  they  were  returning  and  had
accomplished  half  the  journey,  being  excessively  pained  by
hunger,  they  fell  exhausted  on  the  earth.  They  said  :  "  Our
teacher's  house  is  far  off,  and  we  are  afflicted  by  calamity
far  from  home,  and  food  is  hard  to  obtain  everywhere,  so  it
is  all  over  with  our  lives.  And  in  the  same  way  this  cow
is  certain  to  die  in  this  wilderness  without  water,  wood,  or
human  beings,  and  our  teacher  will  not  derive  even  the
smallest  advantage  from  it.  So  let  us  support  our  lives  with
its  flesh,  and  quickly  restore  our  teacher  and  his  family
with  what  remains  over,  for  it  is  a  time  of  sore  distress."

Having  thus  deliberated,  those  seven  students  treated
that  cow  as  a  victim,  and  sacrificed  it  on  the  spot
according  to  the  system  prescribed  in  the  sacred  treatises.2
After  sacrificing  to  the  gods  and  manes,  and  eating  its
flesh  according  to  the  prescribed  method,  they  went  and
took  what  remained  of  it  to  their  teacher.  They  bowed
before  him  and  told  him  all  that  they  had  done,  to  the

1  This  appears  to  be  found  in  a  slightly  different  form  in  the  Harivansa
(Leveque,  Mythes  et  Legendes  de  VInde  et  de  la  Perse,  p.  220).

2  For  a  note  on  the  sacred  cow  of  the  Hindus  see  Vol.  II,  pp.  240-
242. — n.m.p.


10  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

letter,  and  he  was  pleased  with  them  because  they  told
the  truth,  though  they  had  committed  a  fault.  And  after
seven  days  they  died  of  famine,  but  because  they  told  the
truth  on  that  occasion  they  were  born  again  with  the  power
of  remembering  their  former  birth.


[M]  "  Thus  even  a  small  germ  of  merit,  watered  with
the  water  of  holy  aspiration,  bears  fruit  to  men  in  general,
as  a  seed  to  cultivators,  but  the  same  corrupted  by  the  water
of  impure  aspiration  bears  fruit  in  the  form  of  misfortune,
and  a  propos  of  this  I  will  tell  you  another  tale.     Listen.


32.  Story  of  the  Two  Ascetics,  one  a  Brahman,  the
other  a  Chandala

Once  on  a  time  two  men  remained  for  the  same  length
of  time  fasting  on  the  banks  of  the  Ganges,  one  a  Brahman
and  the  other  a  Chandala.  Of  those  two,  the  Brahman
being  overpowered  with  hunger,  and  seeing  some  Nishadas 1
come  that  way  bringing  fish  and  eating  them,  thus  reflected
in  his  folly  :  "  O  happy  in  the  world  are  these  fishermen,
sons  of  female  slaves  though  they  be,  for  they  eat  to  their
fill  of  the  fresh  meat  of  fish  !  "  But  the  other,  who  was  a
Chandala,  thought,  the  moment  he  saw  those  fishermen :
"  Out  on  these  destroyers  of  life,  and  devourers  of  raw
flesh  !  So  why  should  I  stand  here  and  behold  their  faces  ?  "
Saying  this  to  himself,  he  closed  his  eyes  and  remained
buried  in  his  own  thoughts.  And  in  course  of  time  those
two,  the  Brahman  and  the  Chandala,  died  of  starvation  ;
the  Brahman  was  eaten  by  dogs  on  the  bank,  the  Chandala
rotted  in  the  water  of  the  Ganges.  So  that  Brahman,  not
having  disciplined  his  spirit,  was  born  in  the  family  of  a
fisherman,  but  owing  to  the  virtue  of  the  holy  place  he  re-
membered his  former  existence.  As  for  that  Chandala,  who
possessed  self-control,  and  whose  mind  was  not  marred  by

1  The  name  of  certain  aboriginal  tribes  described  as  hunters,  fishermen,
robbers,  etc.


KING  VIKRAMASINHA  11

passion,  he  was  born  as  a  king  in  a  palace  on  that  very
bank  of  the  Ganges,  and  recollected  his  former  birth.  And
of  those  two,  who  were  born  with  a  remembrance  of  their
former  existence,  the  one  suffered  misery,  being  a  fisherman,
the  other  being  a  king  enjoyed  happiness.


[M]  "  Such  is  the  root  of  the  tree  of  virtue  ;  according
to  the  purity  or  impurity  of  a  man's  heart  is  without  doubt
the  fruit  which  he  receives."  Having  said  this  to  the  Queen
Taradatta,  King  Kalingadatta  again  said  to  her  in  the
course  of  conversation :  "  Moreover,  actions  which  are  really
distinguished  by  great  courage  produce  fruit,  since  prosperity
follows  on  courage ;  and  to  illustrate  this  I  will  tell  the
following  wonderful  tale.     Listen.

33.  Story  of  King  Vikramasinha  and  the  Two  Brdhmans

There  is  in  Avanti  a  city  named  Ujjayini,  famous  in  the
world,  which  is  the  dwelling-place  of  Siva,1  and  which  gleams
with  its  white  palaces  as  if  with  the  peaks  of  Kailasa,  come
thither  in  the  ardour  of  their  devotion  to  the  god.  This
vast  city,  profound  as  the  sea,  having  a  splendid  emperor
for  its  water,  had  hundreds  of  armies  entering  it,  as  hundreds
of  rivers  flow  into  the  sea,  and  was  the  refuge  of  allied  kings,
as  the  sea  is  of  mountains  that  retain  their  wings.2  In  that
city  there  was  a  king  who  had  the  name  of  Vikramasinha,3
a  name  that  thoroughly  expressed  his  character,  for  his
enemies  were  like  deer  and  never  met  him  in  fight.  And  he,
because  he  could  never  find  any  enemy  to  face  him,  became
disgusted  with  weapons  and  the  might  of  his  arm,  and  was
inwardly  grieved,  as  he  never  obtained  the  joy  of  battle.

1  In  the  original  Mahakala,  an  epithet  of  Siva  in  his  character  as  the
destroying  deity.

2  Generally  only  one  mountain  named  Mainaka  is  said  to  have  fled  into
the  sea,  and  retained  its  wings  when  Indra  clipped  those  of  the  others.  The
passage  is,  of  course,  an  elaborate  pun.

3  I.e.  lion  of  valour.


12  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

Then  his  minister  Amaragupta,  who  discovered  his  longing,
said  to  him  incidentally  in  the  course  of  conversation :
"  King,  it  is  not  hard  for  kings  to  incur  guilt,  if  through
pride  in  their  strong  arms,  and  confidence  in  their  skill  in
the  use  of  weapons,  they  even  long  for  enemies  ;  in  this
way  Bana,  in  old  time,  through  pride  in  his  thousand  arms,
propitiated  Siva  and  asked  for  an  enemy  that  was  a  match
for  him  in  fight,  until  at  last  his  prayer  was  actually  granted,
and  Vishnu  became  his  enemy,  and  cut  off  his  innumerable
arms  in  battle.  So  you  must  not  show  dissatisfaction  be-
cause you  do  not  obtain  an  opportunity  of  fighting,  and  a
terrible  enemy  must  never  be  desired.  If  you  want  to  show
here  your  skill  in  weapons  and  your  strength,  show  it  in  the
forest,  an  appropriate  field  for  it,  and  in  hunting.  And
since  kings  are  not  generally  exposed  to  fatigue,  hunting
is  approved  to  give  them  exercise  and  excitement,  but
warlike  expeditions  are  not  recommended.1  Moreover,  the
malignant  wild  animals  desire  that  the  earth  should  be
depopulated  ;  for  this  reason  the  king  should  slay  them  ;
on  this  ground,  too,  hunting  is  approved.  But  wild  animals
should  not  be  too  unremittingly  pursued,  for  it  was  owing
to  the  vice  of  exclusive  devotion  to  hunting  that  former
kings,  Pandu  and  others,  met  destruction."

When  the  wise  minister  Amaragupta  said  this  to  him,  the
King  Vikramasinha  approved  the  advice,  saying  :  "  I  will  do
so."  And  the  next  day  the  king  went  out  of  the  city  to  hunt,
to  a  district  beset  with  horses,  footmen  and  dogs,  and  where
all  the  quarters  were  filled  with  the  pitching  of  various  nets,
and  he  made  the  heaven  resound  with  the  shouts  of  joyous
huntsmen.  And  as  he  was  going  out  on  the  back  of  an
elephant  he  saw  two  men  sitting  together  in  private  in  an
empty  temple  outside  the  walls.  And  the  king,  as  he  beheld
them  from  afar,  supposed  that  they  were  only  deliberating
together  over  something  at  their  leisure,  and  passed  on  to
the  forest  where  his  hunting  was  to  be.  There  he  was
delighted  with  the  drawn  swords,  and  with  the  old  tigers,

1  The  last  part  of  this  sentence  seems  strange ;  the  D.  text  differs,  and
means,  "  for  kings  who  have  not  exercised  themselves  in  the  way  of  fighting
are  disapproved."     See  Speyer,  op.  cit.,  p.  108.— n.m.p.


THE  TALE  OF  THE  TWO  BRAHMANS  13

and  the  roaring  of  lions,  and  the  scenery,  and  the  elephants.
He  strewed  that  ground  with  pearls  fallen  from  the  nails  of
elephant-slaying  lions  whom  he  killed,  resembling  the  seeds
of  his  prowess.  The  deer  leaping  sideways,  being  oblique-
goers,1  went  obliquely  across  his  path  ;  his  straight-flying
arrows  easily  transfixing  them  first,  reached  afterwards  the
mark  of  delight.

And  after  the  king  had  long  enjoyed  the  sport  of
hunting,  he  returned,  as  his  servants  were  weary,  with
slackened  bowstring  to  the  city  of  Ujjayini.  There  he  saw
those  two  men  whom  he  had  seen  as  he  was  going  out,  who
had  remained  the  whole  time  in  the  temple  occupied  in  the
same  way.  He  thought  to  himself :  "  Who  are  these,  and
why  do  they  deliberate  so  long  ?  Surely  they  must  be  spies,
having  a  long  talk  over  secrets."  So  he  sent  his  warder  and
had  those  men  captured  and  brought  into  his  presence,  and
then  thrown  into  prison.  And  the  next  day  he  had  them
brought  into  his  judgment-hall,  and  asked  them:  "Who
are  you,  and  why  did  you  deliberate  together  so  long?"
When  the  king  in  person  asked  them  this,  they  entreated
him  to  spare  their  lives,  and  one  of  these  young  men  began
to  say  :  "  Hear,  O  King ;  I  will  now  tell  the  whole  story  as  it
happened.

33a.  The  Double  Elopement

There  lived  a  Brahman,  of  the  name  of  Karabhaka,
in  this  very  city  of  yours.  I,  whom  you  see  here,  am  the
son  of  that  learned  student  of  the  Vedas,  born  by  his  pro-
pitiating the  God  of  Fire  in  order  to  obtain  a  heroic  son.
And  when  my  father  went  to  heaven,  and  his  wife  followed
him,2 1,  being  a  mere  boy,  though  I  had  learned  the  sciences,
abandoned  the  course  of  life  suited  to  my  caste,  because  I
was  friendless.  And  I  set  myself  to  practise  gaming  and
the  use  of  arms.  What  boy  does  not  become  self-willed
if  he  is  not  kept  in  order  by  some  superior  ?  And,  having
passed  my  childhood  in  this  way,  I  acquired  overweening

1  I.e.  animals,  horizontal-goers.  The  pun  defies  translation ;  the  word
I  have  translated  "arrow"  is  literally  "the  not  sideways-goer."

2  I.e.  by  burning  herself  upon  the  funeral  pyre.


14  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

confidence  in  my  prowess,  and  went  one  day  to  the  forest  to
practise  archery.  And  while  I  was  thus  engaged  a  bride
came  out  of  the  city  in  a  covered  palankeen,1  surrounded
by  many  attendants  of  the  bridegroom.  And  suddenly  an
elephant,  that  had  broken  its  chain,  came  from  some  quarter
or  other  at  that  very  moment  and  attacked  that  bride  in  its
fury.  And  through  fear  of  that  elephant  all  those  cowardly
attendants,  and  her  husband  with  them,  deserted  the  bride,
and  fled  in  all  directions.  When  I  saw  that,  I  immediately
said  to  myself  in  my  excitement:  "What!  have  these
miserable  wretches  left  this  unfortunate  woman  alone  ?
So  I  must  defend  this  unprotected  lady  from  this  elephant.
For  what  is  the  use  of  life  or  courage  unless  employed  to
succour  the  unfortunate  ?  "

Thus  reflecting,  I  raised  a  shout  and  ran  towards  that
huge  elephant,  and  the  elephant,  abandoning  the  woman,
charged  down  upon  me.  Then  I,  before  the  eyes  of  that
terrified  woman,  shouted  and  ran,  and  so  drew  off  that
elephant  to  a  distance.  At  last  I  got  hold  of  a  bough  of  a
tree  thickly  covered  with  leaves,  which  had  been  broken  off,
and  covering  myself  with  it  I  went  into  the  middle  of  the
tree,  and  placing  the  bough  in  front  of  me  I  escaped  by  a
dexterous  oblique  movement,  while  the  elephant  trampled
the  bough  to  pieces.  Then  I  quickly  went  to  that  lady,  who
remained  terrified  there,  and  asked  her  whether  she  had
escaped  without  injury.  She,  when  she  saw  me,  said  with
afflicted  and  yet  joyful  manner :  "  How  can  I  be  said  to  be
uninjured,  now  that  I  have  been  bestowed  on  this  coward,
who  has  deserted  me  in  such  straits,  and  fled  somewhere
or  other  ?    But  so  far,  at  any  rate,  am  I  uninjured,  in  that  I

1  This  word  is  sometimes  spelt  palanquin,  although  it  should  always  be
pronounced  as  spelt  in  the  present  text.  The  origin  of  the  word  is  doubtful.
It  came  to  England  through  the  Portuguese  palanquim,  which  was  derived
from  the  East  Indian  forms — Malay  and  Javanese  palangki,  Pali  pallanko,
Hindustani  palki.  All  these  words  are  based  on  the  Sanskrit  paryafika,  "  a
bed,"  from  pari,  "round,"  and  aftka,  "a  hook."  The  Spanish  word  palanca
is  used  for  a  pole  to  carry  loads  on,  and  may  have  influenced  the  form  of
the  word  taken  by  the  Portuguese.  For  fuller  details  see  Yule's  Hobson
Jobson  under  "  Palankeen "  ;  and  Russell,  Tribes  and  Castes  of  the  Central
Provinces,  vol.  iii,  pp.  292-294. — n.m.p.


I


THE  VENGEANCE  OF  A  PASSIONATE  WOMAN  15

again  behold  you  unharmed.  So  my  husband  is  nothing  to
me  ;  you  henceforth  are  my  husband,  by  whom,  regard-
less of  your  life,  I  have  been  delivered  from  the  jaws  of
death.  And  here  I  see  my  husband  coming  with  his  servants,
so  follow  us  slowly  ;  for  when  we  get  an  opportunity  you
and  I  will  elope  somewhere  together."

When  she  said  this,  I  consented.  I  ought  to  have
thought:  "Though  this  woman  is  beautiful,  and  flings
herself  at  my  head,  yet  she  is  the  wife  of  another ;  what
have  I  to  do  with  her  ?  "  But  this  is  the  course  of  calm
self-restraint,  not  of  ardent  youth.  And  in  a  moment  her
husband  came  up  and  greeted  her,  and  she  proceeded  to
continue  her  journey  with  him  and  his  servants.  And  I,
without  being  detected,  followed  her  through  her  long
journey,  being  secretly  supplied  with  provisions  for  the
journey  by  her,  though  I  passed  for  someone  unconnected
with  her.1  And  she,  throughout  the  journey,  falsely  asserted
that  she  suffered  pain  in  her  limbs,  from  a  strain  produced
by  falling  in  her  terror  at  the  elephant,  and  so  avoided  even
touching  her  husband.  A  passionate  woman,  like  a  female
snake,  terrible  from  the  condensed  venom  she  accumulates
within,  will  never,  if  injured,  neglect  to  wreak  her  vengeance.

And  in  course  of  time  we  reached  the  city  of  Lohana-
gara,  where  was  the  house  of  the  husband  of  that  woman,
who  lived  by  trading.  And  we  all  remained  during  that  day
in  a  temple  outside  the  walls.  And  there  I  met  my  friend,
this  second  Brahman.  And  though  we  had  never  met
before,  we  felt  a  confidence  in  one  another  at  first  sight ;
the  heart  of  creatures  recognises  friendships  formed  in  a
previous  birth.  Then  I  told  him  all  my  secret.  When
he  heard  it,  he  said  to  me  of  his  own  accord :  "  Keep
the  matter  quiet ;  I  know  of  a  device  by  which  you
can  attain  the  object  for  which  you  came  here.  I  know
here  the  sister  of  this  lady's  husband.  She  is  ready  to  fly
from  this  place  with  me  and  take  her  wealth  with  her.
So  with  her  help  I  will  accomplish  your  object  for  you."

1  Brockhaus  reads  paravat  sada,  and  Tawney  makes  the  best  sense  he
can  by  ignoring  sada.  The  D.  text  has  paravartmana,  "by  another  way,"
which  gets  rid  of  the  difficulty. — n.m.p.


16  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

When  the  Brahman  had  said  this  to  me  he  departed,
and  secretly  informed  the  merchant's  wife's  sister-in-law  of
the  whole  matter.  And  on  the  next  day  the  sister-in-law,
according  to  arrangement,  came  with  her  brother's  wife
and  introduced  her  into  the  temple.  And  while  we  were
there  she  made  my  friend  at  that  very  time,  which  was  the
middle  of  the  day,1  put  on  the  dress  of  her  brother's  wife.
And  she  took  him  so  disguised  into  the  city,  and  went  into
the  house  in  which  her  brother  lived,  after  arranging  what
we  were  to  do.  But  I  left  the  temple,  and  fleeing  with  the
merchant's  wife  dressed  as  a  man,  reached  at  last  this  city  of
Ujjayinl.  And  her  sister-in-law  at  night  fled  with  my  friend
from  that  house,  in  which  there  had  been  a  feast,  and  so  the
people  were  in  a  drunken  sleep.

And  then  he  came  with  her  by  stealthy  journeys  to
this  city  ;  so  we  met  here.  In  this  way  we  two  have  obtained
our  two  wives  in  the  bloom  of  youth,  the  sister-in-law  and
her  brother's  wife,  who  bestowed  themselves  on  us  out  of
affection.  Consequently,  King,  we  are  afraid  to  dwell  any-
where ;  for  whose  mind  is  at  ease  after  performing  deeds  of
reckless  temerity  ?  So  the  king  saw  us  yesterday  from  a
distance,  while  we  were  debating  about  a  place  to  dwell  in,
and  how  we  should  subsist.  And  your  Majesty,  seeing  us,
had  us  brought  and  thrown  into  prison  on  the  suspicion
of  being  thieves,  and  to-day  we  have  been  questioned
about  our  history,  and  I  have  just  told  it ;  now  it  is  for  your
Highness  to  dispose  of  us  at  pleasure.

33.  Story  of  King  Vikramasinha  and  the
Two  Brdhmans

When  one  of  them  had  said  this,  the  King  Vikramasinha
said  to  those  two  Brahmans  :  "I  am  satisfied ;  do  not  be
afraid,  remain  in  this  city,  and  I  will  give  you  abundance
of  wealth."  When  the  king  had  said  this,  he  gave  them  as
much  to  live  on  as  they  wished,  and  they  lived  happily  in
his  court,  accompanied  by  their  wives.

1  This  seems  rather  unnecessary  here.  There  is  probably  a  corrupted
reading.     See  Speyer,  op.  cit.}  pp.  108,  109. — n.m.p.


AS  YOU  SOW,  SO  SHALL  YOU  REAP     17

[M]  "Thus  prosperity  dwells  for  men  even  in  question-
able deeds,  if  they  are  the  outcome  of  great  courage,  and
thus  kings,  being  satisfied,  take  pleasure  in  giving  to  discreet
men  who  are  rich  in  daring.  And  thus  this  whole  created
world  with  the  gods  and  demons  will  always  reap  various
fruits,  corresponding  exactly  to  their  own  stock  of  deeds,
good  or  bad,  performed  in  this  or  in  a  former  birth.  So
rest  assured,  Queen,  that  the  flame  which  was  seen  by  you
falling  from  heaven  in  your  dream,  and  apparently  entering
your  womb,  is  some  creature  of  divine  origin  that,  owing  to
some  influence  of  its  works,  has  been  conceived  in  you."
The  pregnant  Queen  Taradatta,  when  she  heard  this  from
the  mouth  of  her  own  husband  Kalingadatta,  was  exceedingly
delighted.


VOL.  III.


CHAPTER  XXVIII

THEN  the  Queen  Taradatta,  the  consort  of  King
[M]  Kalingadatta  in  Takshaslla,  slowly  became  op-
pressed with  the  burden  of  her  unborn  child.  And
she,  now  that  her  delivery  was  near,  being  pale  of  counte-
nance, with  tremulous  eyeballs,1  resembled  the  East  in  which
the  pale  streak  of  the  young  moon  is  about  to  rise.  And
there  was  soon  born  from  her  a  daughter  excelling  all  others,
like  a  specimen  of  the  Creator's  power  to  produce  all  beauty.
The  lights  kept  burning  to  protect  the  child  against  evil
spirits,  blazing  with  oil,2  were  eclipsed  by  her  beauty,  and
darkened,  as  if  through  grief  that  a  son  of  equal  beauty  had
not  been  born  instead.  And  her  father,  Kalingadatta,  when
he  saw  her  born,  beautiful  though  she  was,  was  filled  with
despondency  at  the  disappointment  of  his  hope  to  obtain  a
son  like  her.  Though  he  divined  that  she  was  of  heavenly
origin,  he  was  grieved  because  he  longed  for  a  son.  For  a
son,  being  embodied  joy,  is  far  superior  to  a  daughter,  that
is  but  a  lump  of  grief.3  Then  in  his  affliction  the  king  went
out  of  his  palace  to  divert  his  mind,  and  he  entered  a
monastery  full  of  many  images  of  Buddha.  In  a  certain
part  of  the  monastery  he  heard  this  speech  being  uttered  by
a  begging  hermit,  who  was  a  religious  preacher,  as  he  sat  in
the  midst  of  his  hearers  :

'  They  say  that  the  bestowal  of  wealth  in  this  world  is
great  asceticism ;  a  man  who  gives  wealth  is  said  to  give
life,  for  life  depends  on  wealth.  And  Buddha,  with  mind
full  of  pity,  offered  up  himself  for  another,  as  if  he  were
worthless  straw,  much  more  should  one  offer  up  sordid  pelf.

1  The  word  taraka  means  also  "a  star."  So  here  we  have  one  of  those
puns  in  which  our  author  delights.

2  Also   "full   of  affection."      This  is  a   common  pun. See   Vol.   II,

pp.  166-169. — n.m.p.

3  Because  she  cannot  perform  the  sraddha,  etc.  Mohammedans  describe
a  daughter  by  exactly  similar  expressions — viz.  "a  domestic  calamity,"  etc.

— N.M.P.

18


.


THE  WORLD  IS  UNREAL  19


And  it  was  by  such  resolute  asceticism  that  Buddha,  having
got  rid  of  desire  and  obtained  heavenly  insight,  attained  the
rank  of  a  Buddha.  Therefore  a  wise  man  should  do  what  is
beneficial  to  other  beings,  by  abstaining  from  selfish  aspira-
tions even  so  far  as  to  sacrifice  his  own  body,  in  order  that
he  may  obtain  perfect  insight."


34.  Story  of  the  Seven  Princesses

Thus,  long  ago,  there  were  born  in  succession  to  a  certain
king  named  Krita  seven  very  beautiful  princesses,  and  even
while  they  were  still  youthful  they  abandoned,  in  disgust
with  life,  the  house  of  their  father,  and  went  to  the  cemetery,
and  when  they  were  asked  why  they  did  it  they  said  to  their
retinue  :  "  This  world  is  unreal,  and  in  it  this  body  and
such  delights  as  union  with  the  beloved  are  the  baseless
fabric  of  a  dream ;  only  the  good  of  others  in  this  revolving
world  is  pronounced  to  be  real ;  so  let  us  with  these  bodies
of  ours  do  good  to  our  fellow- creatures,  let  us  fling  these
bodies,  while  they  are  alive,  to  the  eaters  of  raw  flesh  *  in
the  cemetery  ;  what  is  the  use  of  them,  lovely  though  they
be?"

34a.  The  Prince  who  tore  out  his  own  Eye

For  there  lived  in  old  time  a  certain  prince  who  was
disgusted  with  the  world,  and  he,  though  young  and  hand-
some, adopted  the  life  of  a  wandering  hermit.  Once  on  a
time  that  beggar  entered  the  house  of  a  certain  merchant,
and  was  beheld  by  his  young  wife  with  his  eyes  long  as  the
leaf  of  a  lotus.  She,  with  heart  captivated  by  the  beauty
of  his  eyes,  said  to  him  :  "  How  came  such  a  handsome  man
as  you  to  undertake  such  a  severe  vow  as  this  ?  Happy  is
the  woman  who  is  gazed  upon  with  this  eye  of  yours  !  "
When  the  begging  hermit  was  thus  addressed  by  the  lady,
he  tore  out  one  eye  and,  holding  it  in  his  hand,  said  :
"  Mother,  behold  this  eye,  such  as  it  is  ;   take  the  loathsome

1  Beasts  of  prey,  or  possibly  Rakshasas.


20  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

mass  of  flesh  and  blood,  if  it  pleases  you.1  And  the  other  is
like  it ;  say,  what  is  there  attractive  in  these  ?  "  When  he
said  this  to  the  merchant's  wife,  and  she  saw  the  eye,  she

1  Cf.  the  translation  of  the  Life  of  St  Brigit  by  Whitley  Stokes  {Three
Middle  Irish  Homilies,  p.  65) :

"  Shortly  after  that  came  a  certain  nobleman  unto  Dubthach  to  ask  for
his  daughter  in  marriage.  Dubthach  and  his  sons  were  willing,  but  Brigit
refused.  Said  a  brother  of  her  brethren  named  Beccan  unto  her  :  •  Idle  is  the
fair  eve  that  is  in  thy  head  not  to  be  on  a  pillow  near  a  husband.'  'The  son
of  the  Virgin  knoweth,'  said  Brigit,  '  it  is  not  lively  for  us  if  it  brings  harm
upon  us.'  Then  Brigit  put  her  finger  under  her  eye  and  drew  it  out  of  her
head  till  it  was  on  her  cheek,  and  she  said :  (  Lo,  here  is  thy  delightful  eye,
O  Beccan.'  Then  his  eye  burst  forthwith.  When  Dubthach  and  his  brethren
saw  that,  they  promised  that  she  should  never  be  told  to  go  to  a  husband.
Then  she  put  her  palm  to  her  eye  and  it  was  whole  at  once.  But  Beccan's
eye  was  not  whole  till  his  death."

That  the  biographers  of  Christian  saints  were  largely  indebted  to
Buddhist  hagiology  has  been  shown  by  Liebrecht  in  his  "Essay  on  the
Sources  of  Barlaam  and  Josaphat "  (Zur  Volkskunde,  p.  441).  In  Mr  Stokes'
book,  p.  34,  will  also  be  found  a  reference  to  the  practice  of  showing  reverence
by  walking  round  persons  or  things  keeping  the  right  hand  towards  them.
This  is  pointed  out  by  Mr  Stokes  in  his  Preface  as  an  interesting  link  between
Ireland  and  India.  He  has  sent  me  the  following  quotation,  in  the  Revue
Celtique,  vol.  v,  p.  130,  from  P.  Cahier,  Characteristiques  des  Saints,  i,  105  : —

"A  certain  virgin  Lucia  (doubtful  whether  of  Bologna  or  of  Alexandria),
se  voyant  frequemment  suivie  par  un  jeune  homme  qui  affectait  de  I accompagner
partout  des  q'elle  quittait  sa  maison,  lid  demanda  enfin  ce  qui  Vattachait  si  fort  d  ses
pas.  Celui-ci  ay  ant  repondu  que  c'etait  le  beaute  de  ses  yeux,  la  jeune \fille  se  servit
de  son  fuseau  pour  faire  sortir  ses  yeux  de  leur  orbile,  et  dit  a  son  poursuivant  quil
pouvait  les  prendre  et  la  laisser  desormais  en  repos.  On  ajoute  que  cette  generosite
effrayante  changea  si  fort  le  cceur  du  jeune  homme  quil  embrassa  la  profession
religieuse."  The  story  of  the  ascetic  who  conquered  anger  resembles  closely
the  Khantivadi- Jataka,  No.  313  in  Fausboll's  edition,  vol.  iii,  p.  39.  It  is  also
found  in  the  Bodhisattva  Avadana,  under  the  title  "  Kshanti  Jataka,"  and  in  the
Mahavastu  Avadana  in  a  form  closely  resembling  that  of  the  Pali  Jataka  book.
See  Dr  Rajendra  Lai  Mitra's  Account  of  the  Buddhist  Literature  of  Nepal,
pp.  55,  159,  160.

In  the  seventeenth  vezir's  story  of  The  History  of  the  Forty  Vczirs
(E.  J.  W.  Gibb,  1886,  p.  191  et  seq.)  and  Die  Vierzig  Veziere  oder  weisen
Meister  (W.  F.  A.  Behrnauer,  1851,  p.  212),  we  read  of  a  woman  in  Mecca  who
had  a  store  of  wheat.  She  fell  in  love  with  a  youth  and  promised  to  give  him
some  if  he  would  lie  with  her.  He  feigned  to  consent,  and  going  alone  into
a  room  of  the  house  prepared  to  castrate  himself,  when  he  was  miraculously
saved  from  his  dilemma.  In  the  story  of  "  Penta  the  Handless"  in  the
Pentamerone,  third  day,  second  diversion  (Burton,  vol.  i,  p.  249  et  seq.),  the  King


OUT  OF  EVIL  COMES  GOOD  21

was  despondent,  and  said :  "  Alas  !  I,  unhappy  wretch  that
I  am,  have  done  an  evil  deed,  in  that  I  have  become  the  cause
of  the  tearing  out  of  your  eye  !  "  When  the  beggar  heard
that,  he  said  :  "  Mother,  do  not  be  grieved,  for  you  have
done  me  a  benefit ;  hear  the  following  example,  to  prove  the
truth  of  what  I  say  : —

of  Preta-secca  wishes  to  commit  incest  with  his  sister.  She  can  hardly  believe
he  is  really  in  earnest,  but  he  makes  this  quite  clear,  declaring  that  her
beautiful  hands  have  especially  fascinated  him.  She  retires  and  gets  a  slave
to  cut  off  her  hands.  "  Then  she  laid  them  in  a  faenza  basin  and  sent  them
covered  with  a  silken  napkin  to  her  brother,  with  a  message  that  she  hoped
he  would  enjoy  what  he  coveted  most,  and  desiring  him  good  health  and
twins,  she  saluted  him."

As  is  well  known,  self-mutilation  has  entered  largely  into  religion  from
very  early  times,  and  even  exists  to-day,  though  it  is  now  chiefly  found  only
among  the  practices  of  modern  savagery.  The  connection  between  the
religious  rite  and  savage  practice  is  one  of  considerable  interest  and  difficulty.
An  examination  of  examples  of  the  two  varieties  will  show  a  closer  relation-
ship than  may  be  at  first  expected,  for  the  crudest  savage  practice  may  be
based  on  a  religious  foundation,  and  is,  in  fact,  merely  a  form  of  asceticism.
The  subject  has  been  fully  discussed  by  Herbert  Spencer,  Ceremonial  Institu-
tions {Principles  of  Sociology,  part  iv),  London,  1879,  pp-  52-80.  He  would
reduce  both  classes  to  a  common  denomination  by  the  theory  that  the  practices
were  for  the  purpose  of  securing  and  indicating  the  marks  of  subjugation  of
the  conquered  to  his  conqueror,  and  that  they  were  repeated  as  religious  rites
for  the  same  reason — the  subjugation  of  the  worshipper  to  the  god.

Evidence,  however,  shows  that  this  view  cannot  be  accepted.  See
Lawrence  Gomme,  "  Mutilations,"  Hastings'  Ency.  Eel.  Eth.,  vol.  ix,  pp.  62,  63.
Among  other  points  Gomme  notes  that  religious  mutilations  are  personal  and
voluntary,  in  contradiction  to  savage  practice,  where  mutilations  are  imposed
by  compulsion  upon  conquered  enemies  or  enslaved  peoples  or  persons.
This  contrast  is  illustrated  by  two  independent  pieces  of  evidence.  Arnobius
Orestes  (adv.  Gentes,  v,  7)  relates  that  the  daughter  of  a  Gallus  cut  off  her
breasts  out  of  devotion  to  Aphrodite  the  mother.  A  curious  passage  in  the
Old  Irish  Treatise  on  the  Law  of  Adamnan  (ed.  and  trans.  Kuno  Meyer,  Oxford,
1905,  p.  3)  says  that  before  Adamnan's  time  "it  was  the  head  of  a  woman  or
her  two  breasts  which  were  taken  as  trophies."     The  trophy  and  the  sacrifice

in  those  two  cases  do  not  seem  to  belong  to  the  same  plane  of  thought,  and

yet  they  belong  to  the  same  range  of  civilisation.

The  list  of  mutilations  is  long  and  gruesome.      It  includes  hair,  scalp,

eyes,  nose,  lips,  cheeks,  ears,  jaws,  fingers,  circumcision,  infibulation,  excision,

castration,  blood-letting,  etc.

For  further   details   reference   should   be   made    to   J.    A.    Macculloch,

"  Austerities,"  Hastings'  Ency.  Bel.  Eth.3  vol.  ii,  pp.  232-234 ;  and  V.  Chauvin,

op.  cit.j  viii,  p.  136,  under  "  Moyens  pour  echapper  au  danger." — n.m.p.


22  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

34 aa.  The  Ascetic  who  conquered  Anger

There  lived  long  ago,  in  a  certain  beautiful  garden  on
the  banks  of  the  Ganges,  a  hermit  animated  by  the  desire
of  experiencing  all  asceticism.  And  while  he  was  engaged
in  mortifying  the  flesh  it  happened  that  a  certain  king  came
there  to  amuse  himself  with  the  women  of  his  harem.  And
after  he  had  amused  himself  he  fell  asleep  under  the  influence
of  his  potations,  and  while  he  was  in  this  state  his  queens
left  him  out  of  thoughtlessness  and  roamed  about  in  the
garden.  And  beholding  in  a  corner  of  the  garden  that
hermit  engaged  in  meditation,  they  stood  round  him  out  of
curiosity,  wondering  what  on  earth  he  could  be.  And  as
they  remained  there  a  long  time,  that  king  woke  up,  and  not
seeing  his  wives  at  his  side,  wandered  all  round  the  garden.
And  then  he  saw  the  queens  standing  all  round  the  hermit,
and  being  enraged  he  slashed  the  hermit  with  his  sword  out
of  jealousy.  What  crime  will  not  sovereign  power,  jealousy,
cruelty,  drunkenness  and  indiscretion  cause  separately ;  much
more  deadly  are  they  when  combined,  like  five  fires.1  Then
the  king  departed,  and  though  the  hermit's  limbs  were
gashed,  he  remained  free  from  wrath  ;  whereupon  a  certain
deity  appeared  and  said  to  him  :  "  Great- souled  one,  if  you
approve,  I  will  slay  by  my  power  that  wicked  man  who  did
this  to  you  in  a  passion."  When  the  hermit  heard  that,  he
said  :  "  O  goddess,  say  not  so,  for  he  is  my  helper  in  virtue,
not  a  harmer  of  me.  For  by  his  favour  I  have  attained  the
grace  of  patience.  To  whom  could  I  have  shown  patience,
O  goddess,  if  he  had  not  acted  thus  towards  me  ?  What
anger  does  the  wise  man  show  for  the  sake  of  this  perishing
body  ?  To  show  patience  equally  with  regard  to  what  is
agreeable  and  disagreeable  is  to  have  attained  the  rank  of
Brahma."  When  the  hermit  said  this  to  the  deity,  she
was  pleased,  and  after  healing  the  wounds  in  his  limbs  she
disappeared.


1  They  are  compared  to  the  five  sacred  fires for  which  see  p.  I6O711  of

this  volume. — n.m.p.


THE  VALUE  OF  A  DAUGHTER  23

34a.  The  Prince  who  tore  out  his  own  Eye

"In  the  same  way  as  that  king  was  considered  a  bene-
factor by  the  hermit,  you,  my  mother,  have  increased  my
asceticism  by  causing  me  to  tear  out  my  eye."  Thus  spake
the  self- subduing  hermit  to  the  merchant's  wife,  who  bowed
before  him,  and  being  regardless  of  his  body,  lovely  though
it  was,  he  passed  on  to  perfection.


34.  Story  of  the  Seven  Princesses

"  Therefore,  though  our  youth  be  very  charming,  why
should  we  cling  to  this  perishable  body  ?  But  the  only
thing  which,  in  the  eye  of  the  wise  man,  it  is  good  for  is
to  benefit  one's  fellow- creatures.  So  we  will  lay  down  our
bodies  to  benefit  living  creatures  in  this  cemetery,  the
natural  home  of  happiness."  Having  said  this  to  their
attendants,  those  seven  princesses  did  so,  and  obtained
therefrom  the  highest  beatitude.


[M]  "  Thus  you  see  that  the  wise  have  no  selfish  affection
even  for  their  own  bodies,  much  less  for  such  worthless
things  1  as  son,  wife  and  servants."

When  the  King  Kalingadatta  had  heard  these  and  other
such  things  from  the  religious  teacher  in  the  monastery,
having  spent  the  day  there,  he  returned  to  his  palace.  And
when  he  was  there  he  was  again  afflicted  with  grief  on  account
of  the  birth  of  a  daughter  to  him,  and  a  certain  Brahman,
who  had  grown  old  in  his  house,  said  to  him  :  "  King,  why
do  you  despond  on  account  of  the  birth  of  a  pearl  of  maidens  ?
Daughters  are  better  even  than  sons,  and  produce  happiness
in  this  world  and  the  next.  Why  do  kings  care  so  much
about  those  sons  that  hanker  after  their  kingdom  and  eat
up  their  fathers  like  crabs  ?  But  kings  like  Kuntibhoja
and  others,  by  the  virtue  of  daughters  like  Kunti  and  others,
have  escaped  harm  from  sages  like  the  terrible  Durvasas.

1  Literally,  "  the  worthless  straw-heap  of,"  etc.


24  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

And  how  can  one  obtain  from  a  son  the  same  fruit  in  the
next  world  as  one  obtains  from  the  marriage  of  a  daughter  ?
Moreover,  I  now  proceed  to  tell  the  tale  of  Sulochana.  Listen
to  it.

35.  Story  of  Sulochana  and  Sushena

There  was  a  young  king  named  Sushena  on  the  mountain
of  Chitrakuta,  who  was  created  like  another  God  of  Love
by  the  Creator  to  spite  Siva.  He  made  at  the  foot  of  that
great  mountain  a  heavenly  garden,  which  was  calculated  to
make  the  gods  averse  to  dwelling  in  the  garden  of  Nandana.
And  in  the  middle  of  it  he  made  a  lake  with  full-blown
lotuses,  like  a  new  productive  bed  for  the  lotuses  with  which
the  Goddess  of  Fortune  plays.  This  lake  had  steps  leading
down  into  it  made  of  splendid  gems,  and  the  king  used  to
linger  on  its  banks  without  a  bride,  because  there  were  no
eligible  matches  for  him.

Once  on  a  time  Rambha,  a  fair  one  of  heaven,  came
that  way,  wandering  at  will  through  the  air  from  the  palace
of  Indra.  She  beheld  the  king  roaming  in  that  garden  like
an  incarnation  of  the  Spring  in  the  midst  of  a  garden  of  full-
blown flowers.  She  said  :  "  Can  this  be  the  moon  that  has
swooped  down  from  heaven  in  pursuit  of  the  Goddess  of
Fortune  fallen  into  a  cluster  of  lotuses  of  the  lake  ?  But
that  cannot  be,  for  this  hero's  fortune  in  the  shape  of  beauty
never  passes  away.1  Surely  this  must  be  the  god  of  the
flowery  arrows  come  to  the  garden  in  quest  of  flowers.  But
where  has  Rati,  his  companion,  gone  ?  "  Thus  Rambha
described  him  in  her  eagerness,  and  descending  from  heaven
in  human  form  she  approached  that  king.  And  when  the
king  suddenly  beheld  her  advancing  towards  him  he  was
astonished,  and  reflected  :  "  Who  can  this  be  of  incredible
beauty  ?  She  cannot  surely  be  a  human  being,  since  her
feet  do  not  touch  the  dust,  and  her  eye  does  not  wink ;  there-
fore she  must  be  some  divine  person.  But  I  must  not  ask
her  who  she  is,  for  she  might  fly  from  me.  Divine  beings  who
visit  men  for  some  cause  or  other  are  generally  impatient
of  having   their   secrets   revealed."     While   such   thoughts

1  Here  there  is  a  pun  on  the  two  meanings  of  Sri.


RAMBHA  LEAVES  THE  KING  25

were  passing  in  the  monarch's  mind  she  began  a  conversation
with  him,  which  led  in  due  course  to  his  throwing  his  arms
round  her  neck  then  and  there.  And  he  sported  long  there
with  this  Apsaras,  so  that  she  forgot  heaven.  Love  is  more
charming  than  one's  native  home.  And  the  land  of  that
king  was  filled  with  heaps  of  gold,  by  means  of  the  Yakshinis,
friends  of  hers,  who  transformed  themselves  into  trees,1  as
the  heaven  is  filled  with  the  peaks  of  Meru.  And  in  the
course  of  time  that  excellent  Apsaras  became  pregnant,  and
bore  to  King  Sushena  an  incomparably  beautiful  daughter,
and  no  sooner  had  she  given  her  birth  than  she  said  to  the
king :  "  O  King,  such  has  been  my  curse,  and  it  is  now  at  an
end  ;  for  I  am  Rambha,  a  heavenly  nymph  that  fell  in  love
with  you  on  beholding  you  ;  and  as  I  have  given  birth  to  a
child  I  must  immediately  leave  you  and  depart.2  For  such
is  the  law  that  governs  us  heavenly  beings  ;  therefore  take
care  of  this  daughter ;  when  she  is  married  we  shall  again
be  united  in  heaven."  When  the  Apsaras  Rambha  had  said
this  she  departed,  sorely  against  her  will,  and  through  grief
at  it  the  king  was  bent  on  abandoning  life.  But  his  ministers
said  to  him  :  "  Did  Visvamitra,  though  despondent,  abandon
life  when  Menaka  had  departed  after  giving  birth  to
Sakuntala  ?  "  When  the  king  had  been  plied  by  them  with
such  arguments,  he  took  the  right  view  of  the  matter,  and
slowly  recovered  his  self-command,  taking  to  his  heart  the
daughter  who  was  destined  to  be  the  cause  of  their  reunion.
And  that  daughter,  lovely  in  all  her  limbs,  her  father,  who
was  devoted  to  her,  named  Sulochana,  on  account  of  the
exceeding  beauty  of  her  eyes.

In  time  she  grew  up  to  womanhood,  and  a  young  hermit,
named  Vatsa,  the  descendant  of  Kasyapa,  as  he  was  roam-
ing about  at  will,  beheld  her  in  a  garden.  He,  though  he
was  all  compact  of  asceticism,  the  moment  he  beheld  that

1  It  is  hard  to  understand  why  they  had  to  turn  themselves  into  trees.
The  explanation  must  be  that  Brockhaus  misread  vrishtair  for  vrikshair.  Thus
the  meaning  would  be  that  the  Yakshinis  poured  down  the  gold  as  rain  from
heaven,  a  much  more  likely  interpretation.      See  Speyer,  op.   cit.}  p.    109.

— N.M.P.

2  This  reminds  us  of  a  similar  incident  in  Kalidasa's  Vikramorvail.  See
Vol.  II,  p.  257.— n.m.p.


26  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

princess,  felt  the  emotion  of  love,  and  he  said  to  himself
then  and  there  :  "  Oh  !  exceedingly  wonderful  is  the  beauty
of  this  maiden.  If  I  do  not  obtain  her  as  a  wife,  what
The  Hermit  °tner  fruit  of  my  asceticism  can  I  obtain  ?  ';
marries  While  thinking  thus,  the  young  hermit  was  beheld

Sulochana  fry  Sulochana,  and  he  seemed  to  her  all  glorious
with  brightness,  like  fire  free  from  smoke.  When  she  saw
him  with  his  rosary  and  water  vessel  she  fell  in  love  also,
and  thought :  "  Who  can  this  be  that  looks  so  self-restrained
and  yet  so  lovely  ?  "  And  coming  towards  him,  as  if  to
select  him  for  her  husband,  she  threw  over  his  body  the
garland  *  of  the  blue  lotuses  of  her  eyes,  and  bowed  before
that  hermit.  And  he,  with  mind  overpowered  by  the  decree
of  Kama,  hard  for  gods  and  Asuras  to  evade,  pronounced
on  her  the  following  blessing : — "  Obtain  a  husband."  Then
the  excellent  hermit  was  thus  addressed  by  that  lady,  whose
modesty  was  stolen  away  by  love  for  his  exceeding  beauty,
and  who  spoke  with  downcast  face  :  "If  this  is  your  desire,
and  if  this  is  not  jesting  talk,  then,  Brahman,  ask  the  king,
my  father,  who  has  power  to  dispose  of  me."

Then  the  hermit,  after  hearing  of  her  descent  from  her  at-
tendants, went  and  asked  the  King  Sushena,  her  father,  for  her
hand.  He,  for  his  part,  when  he  saw  that  the  young  hermit
was  eminent  both  in  beauty  and  asceticism,  entertained  him,
and  said  to  him  :  "  Reverend  sir,  this  daughter  is  mine  by
the  nymph  Rambha,  and  by  my  daughter's  marriage  I  am
to  be  reunited  with  her  in  heaven  ;  so  Rambha  told  me  when
she  was  returning  to  the  sky.  Consider,  auspicious  sir,  how
that  is  to  be  accomplished."  When  the  hermit  heard  that,
he  thought  for  a  moment :  "  Did  not  the  hermit  Ruru,  when
Pramadvara,  the  daughter  of  Menaka,  was  bitten  by  a  snake,
give  her  the  half  of  his  life,  and  make  her  his  wife  ? 2  Was  not
the  Chandala  Trisanku  carried  to  heaven  by  VisVamitra  ?  So
why  should  not  I  do  the  same  by  expending  my  asceticism
upon  it  ?  "     Having  thus  reflected,  the  hermit  said :   "  There

1  In  the  svayamvara  the  maiden  threw  a  garland  over  the  neck  of  the
favoured  suitor as  in  the  case  of  Draupadl  (Vol.  II,  p.  16). — n.m.p.

2  See  Vol.  I,  pp.  188-189,  where  the  form  of  the  name  is  Prisha^varii.

— N.M.P.


KALINGASENA  AND  SOMAPRABHA  27


is  no  difficulty  in  it  " ;  and  exclaimed  :  "  Hearken,  ye  gods  !
May  this  king  mount  with  his  body  to  heaven  to  obtain
possession  of  Rambha  by  virtue  of  part  of  my  asceticism."
Thus  the  hermit  spoke  in  the  hearing  of  the  court,  and  a
distinct  answer  was  heard  from  heaven  :  "So  be  it."  Then
the  king  gave  his  daughter  Sulochana  to  the  hermit  Vatsa,
the  descendant  of  Kasyapa,  and  ascended  to  heaven.  There
he  obtained  a  divine  nature,  and  lived  happily  with  that
Rambha  of  god-like  dignity,  appointed  his  wife  by  Indra.


[M]  "  Thus,  O  King,  Sushena  obtained  all  his  ends  by
means  of  a  daughter.  For  such  daughters  become  incarnate
in  the  houses  of  such  as  you.  And  this  daughter  is  surely
some  heavenly  nymph,  fallen  from  her  high  estate  owing  to
a  curse,  and  born  in  your  house  ;  so  do  not  grieve,  monarch,
on  account  of  her  birth."

When  King  Kalingadatta  had  heard  this  tale  from  the
Brahman  who  had  grown  old  in  his  house,  he  left  off  being
distressed,  and  was  comforted.  And  he  gave  to  his  dear
young  daughter,  who  gave  pleasure  to  his  eyes,  as  if  she
had  been  a  digit  of  the  moon,  the  name  of  Kalingasena.
And  the  Princess  Kalingasena  grew  up  in  the  house  of
her  father  amongst  her  companions.  And  she  sported  in
the  palaces,  and  in  the  palace  gardens,  like  a  wave  of  the
sea  of  infancy  that  is  full  of  the  passion l  for  amusement.

Once  on  a  time  the  daughter  of  the  Asura  Maya,  named
Somaprabha,  as  she  was  journeying  through  the  sky,  saw
her  on  the  roof  of  a  palace  engaged  in  play.  And  Soma-
prabha, while  in  the  sky,  beheld  her  lovely  enough  to  bewilder
with  her  beauty  the  mind  even  of  a  hermit,  and  feeling
affection  for  her,  reflected  :  "  Who  is  this  ?  Can  she  be  the
form  of  the  moon  ?  If  so,  how  is  it  that  she  gleams  in  the
day  ?  But  if  she  is  Rati,  where  is  Kama  ?  Therefore  I
conclude  that  she  is  a  mortal  maiden.  She  must  be  some
celestial  nymph  that  has  descended  into  a  king's  palace  in
consequence  of  a  curse  ;   and  I  am  persuaded  I  was  certainly

1  Rasa  also  means  "water."


28  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

a  friend  of  hers  in  a  former  life.  For  my  mind's  being  full
of  exceeding  affection  for  her  tells  me  so.  Therefore  it  is
fitting  that  I  should  again  select  her  as  my  chosen  friend."
Thus  reflecting,  Somaprabha  descended  invisible  from  heaven,
in  order  not  to  frighten  that  maiden  ;  and  she  assumed  the
appearance  of  a  mortal  maiden  to  inspire  confidence,  and
slowly  approached  that  Kalingasena.  Then  Kalingasena,
on  beholding  her,  reflected  :  "  Bravo  !  Here  is  a  princess
of  wonderful  beauty  come  to  visit  me  of  her  own  accord.
She  is  a  suitable  friend  for  me."  So  she  rose  up  politely
and  embraced  that  Somaprabha.  And  making  her  take  a
seat,  she  asked  her  immediately  her  descent  and  name.  And
Somaprabha  said  to  her:  "Be  patient,  I  will  tell  you  all."
Then  in  the  course  of  their  conversation  they  swore  friend-
ship to  each  other  with  plighted  hands.  Then  Somaprabha
said  :  "  My  friend,  you  are  a  king's  daughter,  and  it  is  hard
to  keep  up  friendship  with  the  children  of  kings.  For  they
fly  into  an  immoderate  passion  on  account  of  a  small  fault.
Hear,  with  regard  to  this  point,  the  story  of  the  prince  and
the  merchant's  son  which  I  am  about  to  tell  you."

36.  Story  of  the  Prince  and  the  Merchant's  Son  who
saved  his  Life  l

In  the  city  of  PushkaravatI  there  was  a  king  named
Gudhasena,   and   to   him   there   was   born   one   son.     That

1  This  story  is  compared  by  Benfey  (Orient  und  Occident,  vol.  i,  p.  374)
with  that  of  the  faithful  servant  Viravara  in  the  Hitopadesa,  which  is  also
found  in  the  Vetalapanchavinsati  (see  Chapters  LI  1 1  and  LXXVIII  of  this
work).  Viravara,  according  to  the  latter  version,  hears  the  weeping  of  a
woman.  He  finds  it  is  the  king's  fortune  deserting  him.  He  accordingly
offers  up  his  son,  and  finally  slays  himself.  The  king  is  about  to  do  the
same  when  the  goddess  Durga  restores  the  dead  to  life.

The  story  of  "  Der  treue  Johannes"  will  at  once  occur  to  readers  of
Grimm's  tales  (No.  6,  vol.  iii,  pp.  16,  17).  It  also  appears  in  the  Pentamcrone,
ninth  diversion  of  the  fourth  day,  as  "The  Crow"  (Burton's  trans.,  vol.  ii,
p.  4-4.9).  See  also  Benfey,  Panchatanlra,  vol.  i,  p.  41 6.  Sir  G.  Cox  {Mythology
of  the  Aryan  Nations)  compares  the  German  story  with  one  in  Miss  Frere's
Old  Deccan  Days  (No.  5,  p.  66).  Other  parallels  will  be  found  in  Grimm's
third  volume.  A  very  striking  one  occurs  in  Bernhard  Schmidt's  Griechische
Marchen,  story  No.  3,  p.  68.  In  this  story  the  three  Moirai  predict  evil.
The  young  prince  is  saved  by  his  sister  from  being  burned,  and  from  falling


THE  SPOILT  PRINCE  29

prince  was  overbearing,  and  whatever  he  did,  right  or  wrong,
his  father  acquiesced  in,  because  he  was  an  only  son.  And
once  upon  a  time,  as  he  was  roaming  about  in  a  garden,  he
saw  the  son  of  a  merchant,  named  Brahmadatta,  who  re-
sembled himself  in  wealth  and  beauty.  And  the  moment
he  saw  him  he  selected  him  for  his  special  friend,  and  those
two,  the  prince  and  the  merchant's  son,  immediately  became
like  one  another  in  all  things.1  And  soon  they  were  not  able
to  live  without  seeing  one  another ;  for  intimacy  in  a  former
birth  quickly  knits  friendship.  The  prince  never  tasted  food
that  was  not  first  prepared  for  that  merchant's  son.

Once  on  a  time  the  prince  set  out  for  Ahichchhatra  in
order  to  be  married,  having  first  decided  on  his  friend's
marriage.  And,  as  he  was  journeying  with  his  troops,  in
the  society  of  that  friend,  mounted  on  an  elephant,  he
reached  the  bank  of  the  Ikshuvati,  and  encamped  there.
There  he  had  a  wine-party  when  the  moon  arose  ;  and  after
he  had  gone  to  bed  he  began  to  tell  a  story  at  the  solicitation
of  his  nurse.     When  he  had  begun  his  story,  being  tired

over  a  precipice  when  a  child,  and  from  a  snake  on  his  wedding  day.  See
also  De  Gubernatis,  Zoological  Mythology,  vol.  ii,  pp.  301-302. Cf.  the  con-
clusion of  Natesa  Sastrl's  Dravidian  Nights  where  the  faithful  minister's  son
overhears  two  owls  conversing.  The  male  bird  says :  "  My  dear,  the  prince
who  is  encamped  under  our  tree  is  to  die  shortly  by  the  falling  on  him  of  a  big
branch  which  is  about  to  break."  "And  if  he  should  escape  this  calamity?"
quoth  the  female.  "He  will  die  to-morrow,  then,"  replied  the  other,  "in
a  river,  in  the  bed  of  which  he  is  to  pitch  his  tent :  the  river  will  be  dry  at
the  time,  but  when  midnight  comes  a  heavy  flood  will  rush  down  and  carry
him  away."  "And  should  he  escape  this  second  calamity  also?"  said  the
female.  "Then,"  answered  her  mate,  "he  will  surely  die  by  the  hands
of  his  wife  when  he  reaches  his  own  city."  "And  should  he  escape  this
third  calamity  also?"  "My  dear  love,"  said  the  male  bird,  "he  cannot
escape  it.  But  if  he  does,  he  will  reign  as  a  king  of  kings  for  hundreds  of
years  "  ;  adding  that  if  anyone  happened  to  know  this  secret  and  revealed
it,  his  head  should  burst  instantly  into  a  thousand  pieces.

The  incident  occurs  again  in  Day's  Folk-Tales  of  Bengal,  p.  40  et  seq.,
where  the  conversation  between  the  two  immortal  birds,  Bihangama  and
Bihangami,  is  overheard ;  cf.  also  Pedroso's  Portuguese  Folk-Tales,  Folk-Lore
Society,  1882,  p.  26.  For  the  "overhearing"  motif  see  Note  2  at  the  end  of
the  next  chapter. — n.m.p.

1  The  same  idea  is  found  in  Midsummer  Night's  Dream,  Act  III,  sc.  2,
beginning:  "We,  Hermia,  like  two  artificial  gods,  etc."


30  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

and  intoxicated,  he  was  overcome  with  sleep,  and  his  nurse
also,  but  the  merchant's  son  kept  awake  out  of  love  for  him.
And  when  the  others  were  asleep,  the  merchant's  son,  who
was  awake,  heard  in  the  air  what  seemed  to  be  the  voices
of  women  engaged  in  conversation.  The  first  said :  "  This
wretch  has  gone  to  sleep  without  telling  his  tale,  therefore
I  pronounce  this  curse  on  him.  To-morrow  he  shall  see  a
necklace,  and  if  he  take  hold  of  it,  it  shall  cling  to  his  neck,
and  that  moment  cause  his  death."  Then  the  first  voice
ceased  and  the  second  went  on  :  "  And  if  he  escape  that
peril,  he  shall  see  a  mango-tree,  and  if  he  eat  the  fruit  of  it  he
shall  then  and  there  lose  his  life."  Having  uttered  this,  that
voice  also  ceased,  and  then  the  third  said  :  "  If  he  escape
this  also,  then,  if  he  enter  a  house  to  be  married,  it  shall  fall
on  him  and  slay  him."  Having  said  so  much,  that  voice
also  ceased,  and  the  fourth  said  :  "  If  he  escape  this  also,
when  he  enters  that  night  into  his  private  apartments  he
shall  sneeze  a  hundred  times  ;  and  if  someone  there  does
not  a  hundred  times  say  to  him,  '  God  bless  you,'  he  shall
fall  into  the  grasp  of  death.  And  if  the  person  who  has
heard  all  this,  shall  inform  him  of  it  in  order  to  save  his  life,
he  also  shall  die."     Having  said  this,  the  voice  ceased.1

And  the  merchant's  son  having  heard  all  this,  terrible
as  a  thunderstroke,  being  agitated  on  account  of  his  affec-
tion for  the  prince,  reflected  :  "  Beshrew  this  tale  that  was
begun  and  not  finished,  for  divinities  have  come  invisible
to  hear  it,  and  are  cursing  him  out  of  disappointed  curiosity.
And  if  this  prince  dies,  what  good  will  my  life  do  to  me  ?

1  Cf.  Ralston's  Russian  Folk-Tales,  pp.  69,  71,  for  the  three  dangers.
The  custom  of  saying  "God  bless  you,"  or  equivalent  words,  when  a  man
sneezes  is  shown  by  Tylor  (Primitive  Culture,  vol.  i,  pp.  88-94)  to  exist  in
many  parts  of  the  world.  He  quotes  many  passages  from  classical  literature
relating  to  it.  "  Even  the  Emperor  Tiberius,  that  saddest  of  men,  exacted
this  observance."  See  also  Sir  Thomas  Browne's  Vulgar  Errors,  Book  IV,
chap,  ix,  "  Of  Saluting  upon  Sneezing."  Cf.  also  Coelho's  Contos  Populares
Portuguezes,  No.  51,  "Pedro  e  Pedrito,"  p.  118,  and  Grimm's  Irische  Mdrchen,
pp.    106,  107.     Zimmer  in  his  Alt-Indisches  Lehen,   p.    60,    quotes   from   the

Atharva-Veda,    "  vor     UngUick-bedeutendem    Niesen." This    curious    custom

merits  more  than  this  short  note,  so  I  have  discussed  it  at  greater  length
in  Appendix  I  (pp.  303-315). — n.m.p.


GOD  BLESS  YOU  !  31

So  I  must  by  some  artifice  deliver  my  friend,  whom  I
value  as  my  life.  And  I  must  not  tell  him  what  has  taken
place,  lest  I  too  should  suffer."  Having  thus  reflected,  the
merchant's  son  got  through  the  night  with  difficulty

And  in  the  morning  the  prince  set  out  with  him  on  his
journey,  and  he  saw  a  necklace  in  front  of  him  and  wished  to
lay  hold  of  it.  Then  the  merchant's  son  said  :  "  Do  not  take
the  necklace,  my  friend ;  it  is  an  illusion,  else  why  do  not
these  soldiers  see  it  ?  "  When  the  prince  heard  that,  he  let
the  necklace  alone,  but  going  on  further  he  saw  a  mango-
tree,  and  he  felt  a  desire  to  eat  its  fruit.  But  he  was  dis-
suaded by  the  merchant's  son,  as  before.  He  felt  much
annoyed  in  his  heart,  and  travelling  on  slowly,  he  reached
his  father-in-law's  palace.  And  he  was  about  to  enter  a
building  there  for  the  purpose  of  being  married,  but  just  as
his  friend  had  persuaded  him  not  to  do  so,  the  house  fell
down.  So  he  escaped  this  danger  by  a  hair's-breadth,  and
then  he  felt  some  confidence  in  his  friend's  prescience.

Then  the  prince  and  his  wife  entered  at  night  another  build-
ing. But  the  merchant's  son  slipped  in  there  unobserved.
And  the  prince,  when  he  went  to  bed,  sneezed  a  hundred
times,  but  the  merchant's  son,  underneath  it,  said  a  hundred
times,  "  God  bless  you  "  ;  and  then  the  merchant's  son,  having
accomplished  his  object,  of  his  own  accord  left  the  house  in
high  spirits.  But  the  prince,  who  was  with  his  wife,  saw  him
going  out,  and  through  jealousy,  forgetting  his  love  for  him,
he  flew  into  a  passion,  and  said  to  the  sentinels  at  his  gate  :
44  This  designing  wretch  has  entered  my  private  apartments
when  I  wished  to  be  alone,  so  keep  him  in  durance  for  the
present,  and  he  shall  be  executed  in  the  morning."  When
the  guards  heard  that,  they  put  him  under  arrest,  and  he
spent  the  night  in  confinement ;  but  as  he  was  being  led  off
to  execution  in  the  morning  he  said  to  them  :  44  First  take
me  into  the  presence  of  the  prince,  in  order  that  I  may  tell
him  a  certain  reason  which  I  had  for  my  conduct,  and  then
put  me  to  death."  When  he  said  this  to  the  guards,  they
went  and  informed  the  prince,  and  on  their  information
and  the  advice  of  his  ministers  the  prince  ordered  him  to
be  brought  before  him.     When  he  was  brought,  he  told  the


32  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

prince  the  whole  story,  and  he  believed  it  to  be  true,  for
the  fall  of  the  house  carried  conviction  to  his  mind.  So  the
prince  was  satisfied,  and  countermanded  the  order  for  his
friend's  execution,  and  he  returned  with  him  to  his  own  city,
a  married  man.  And  there  his  friend,  the  merchant's  son,
married  and  lived  in  happiness,  his  virtues  being  praised  by
all  men.


[M]  "  Thus  the  children  of  kings  break  loose  from  restraint
and,  slaying  their  guides,  disregard  benefits,  like  infuriated
elephants.  And  what  friendship  can  there  be  with  those
Vetalas,  who  take  people's  lives  by  way  of  a  joke  ?  There-
fore, my  princess,  never  abandon  your  friendship  with  me."

When  Kalingasena  heard  this  story  in  the  palace  from
the  mouth  of  Somaprabha,  she  answered  her  affectionate
friend  :  u  Those  of  whom  you  speak  are  considered  PiSachas,
not  the  children  of  kings,  and  I  will  tell  you  a  story  of  the
evil  importunity  of  Pisachas.1    Listen.

37.  Story  of  the  Brahman  and  the  Pisdcha

Long  ago  there  was  a  Brahman  dwelling  on  a  royal  grant,
which  was  called  Yajnasthala.  He  once  upon  a  time,  being
poor,  went  to  the  forest  to  bring  home  wood.  There  a  piece
of  wood,  being  cleft  with  the  axe,  fell,  as  chance  would  have
it,  upon  his  leg,  and  piercing  it,  entered  deep  into  it.  And
as  the  blood  flowed  from  him  he  fainted,  and  he  was  beheld
in  that  condition  by  a  man  who  recognised  him  and,  taking
him  up,  carried  him  home.  There  his  distracted  wife  washed
off  the  blood  and,  consoling  him,  placed  a  plaster  upon  the
wound.  And  then  his  wound,  though  tended  day  by  day,
not  only  did  not  heal,  but  formed  an  ulcer.  Then  the  man,
afflicted  with  his  ulcerated  wound,  poverty-stricken,  and  at
the  point  of  death,  was  thus  advised  in  secret  by  a  Brahman
friend  who  came  to  him  :   "A  friend  of  mine,  named  Yajna-

1  There  is  a  story  illustrating  the  "pertinacity"  of  goblins  in  Wirt
Sikes's  British  Goblins,  p.  191.


THE  PISACHA  HEALS  THE  WOUND  33

datta,  was  long  very  poor,  but  he  gained  the  aid  of  a  Pisacha
by  a  charm,  and  so,  having  obtained  wealth,  lived  in  happi-
ness. And  he  told  me  that  charm;  so  do  you  gain,  my
friend,  by  means  of  it,  the  aid  of  a  Pisacha  ;  he  will  heal
your  wound."

Having  said  this,  he  told  him  the  form  of  words,  and
described  to  him  the  ceremony  as  follows : — "  Rise  up  in
the  last  watch  of  the  night,  and  with  dishevelled  hair  and
naked,1  and  without  rinsing  your  mouth,  take  two  handfuls
of  rice  as  large  as  you  can  grasp  with  your  two  hands,  and
muttering  the  form  of  words  go  to  a  place  where  four  roads
meet,2  and  there  place  the  two  handfuls  of  rice  and  return
in  silence  without  looking  behind  you.  Do  so  always  until
that  Pisacha  appears  and  himself  says  to  you  :  '  I  will  put
an  end  to  your  ailment.'  Then  receive  his  aid  gladly,  and
he  will  remove  your  complaint."

When  his  friend  had  said  this  to  him,  the  Brahman  did
as  he  had  been  directed.  Then  the  Pisacha,  being  concili-
ated, brought  heavenly  herbs  from  a  lofty  peak  of  the
Himalayas  and  healed  his  wound.  And  then  he  became
obstinately  persistent,  and  said  to  the  Brahman,  who  was
delighted  at  being  healed :  "  Give  me  a  second  wound  to
cure,  but  if  you  will  not  I  will  do  you  an  injury  or  destroy
your  body."

When  the  Brahman  heard  that,  he  was  terrified,  and
immediately  said  to  him,  to  get  rid  of  him  :  "I  will  give  you
another  wound  within  seven  days."  Whereupon  the  Pisacha
left  him,  but  the  Brahman  felt  hopeless  about  his  life.3

1  See  note  on  "Nudity  in  Magic  Ritual/'  in  Vol.  II,  p.  117  et  seq. — n.m.p.

2  See  note  at  the  end  of  this  chapter. — n.m.p.

3  Tawney  omitted  the  rest  of  the  story  from  this  point,  but,  following
the  D.  text,  I  have  restored  the  missing  portion,  to  make  this  edition  of  the
Kathd  Sarit  Sdgara  complete  and  unabridged  in  every  detail.

Tawney  remarked  in  a  note  that  Wilson  stated  the  story  in  our  text  to
be  precisely  the  same  as  that  of  Le  petit  diable  de  Papefiguiere  of  La  Fontaine.
I  think,  however,  it  would  be  more  correct  to  say  that  it  resembles  the  French
version.  La  Fontaine  has  rather  missed  the  humour  and  harmless  fun  of
Somadeva's  tale,  and,  by  his  omission  of  the  latter  part  of  the  story,  his  lines
seem  pointless.

In  the  little  Dutch  edition  of  1700  they  read  :
VOL.  in.  n


84  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

[M]  Having  reached  this  point  in  her  story,  Kalingasena
broke  off  in  the  middle  from  shame  at  its  immodest  ending,
but  presently  she  spoke  again  to  Somaprabha  as  follows  : —


37.  Story  of  the  Brahman  and  the  Pisacha

Hereupon  his  cunning  daughter,  a  widow,  seeing  her
Brahman  father  downcast  at  being  unable  to  find  another
wound,  having  questioned  him,  said  :  "I  will  delude  this
Pisacha.  Go  back  to  him  and  say  :  c  Will  you  please  heal
my  daughter's  wound?'  [Then  leave  the  rest  to  me.]"
Hearing  this,  and  joyfully  consenting,  the  Brahman  went  off
and  brought  the  Pisacha  to  his  daughter.  Thereupon  she
displayed  to  him  her  yoni,  saying  privily  :  "  Gentle  sir,  pray
heal  this  wound  of  mine."     The  stupid  Pisacha  repeatedly

"  A  ces  mots  au  folet,
Elle  fait  voir.  .  .  .  Et  quoy  ?     Chof  e  terrible.
Le  (liable  en  eut  une  peur  taut  horrible,
Qu'il  fe  figna,  penfa  prefque  tomber,
One  n'avoit  vu,  ne  hi,  n'oiii  conter,
Que  coups  de  grife  euffe  femblable  forme,
Bref  auffi-tot  qu'il  appe^ut  l'enorme,
Solution  de  continuity,
II  demeura  fi  fort  epouvent6,
Qu'il  prit  la  fuite  &  laiffa  la  Perrette,
Tous  les  voifins  chommerent  la  defaite,
De  ce  demon  :  le  Clerge  ne  fut  pas,
Des  plus  tardifs  a  prendre  part  au  cas."

A  version  rather  more  closely  resembling  that  of  the  original  Sanskrit
had  already  appeared,  however,  in  Rabelais,  Book  IV,  chap,  lxvii.  Tales  of
outwitting  the  devil  occur  in  practically  every  large  collection  of  stories
throughout  the  world,  while  an  incident  similar  to  that  in  our  text  is  found
in  quite  a  considerable  number.  See,  for  instance,  O.  Kallas,  "Achtzig
Miirchen  der  Ljutziner  Esten,"  V erhandlungen  der  Gelehrten  Estnischen  Gcscll-
schaft,  vol.  xx,  pt.  ii,  p.  192,  No.  67;  L.  Lambert,  "Contes  populaires  du
Languedoc,"  Revue  des  Langues  Romanes,  June  1885,  3rd  series,  vol.  xiii.
(vol.  xxviii  of  the  whole  collection),  pp.  47-48 ;  Ernst  Wolgemuth,  Der
Tr'dumende  Musen-Freund,  1670,  p.  83,  No.  95;  L.  Foulet,  "  Le  Roman  de
Renard,"  Bibliothcquc  de  Creole  des  Hautes  Etudes,  Paris,  1914,  p.  486;
Nicolaides,  Contes  Licencieux  de  Constantinople  et  de  P Asie  mineure,  Paris,  1906,
pp.  77  and  93;  and  Ant hropophy tela,  vol.  i,  pp.  129,  154,  364  and  494.  These
two  latter  I  have  not  personally  verified. — n.m.p.


THE  PISACHA  IS  DECEIVED  35

applied  an  ointment  to  the  fissure,  but  was  unable  to  heal
it.  As  time  passed  he  began  to  grow  tired,  and,  raising
her  slightly,  examined  her  to  see  whether  the  wound  was
healing  or  not.

But  as  soon  as  he  beheld  beneath  it  another  wound,
he  became  greatly  alarmed,  and  reflected :  "  Before  the
one  wound  is  healed,  lo !  here  is  another  one  that  has
arisen.  It  is  indeed  a  true  adage  that  says :  '  When
cracks  appear,  misfortunes  multiply.'  Who  is  capable  of
closing  the  opened  path  of  life  whence  people  arise  and
by  which  they  perish  ?  "

Musing  thus,  the  silly  Pisacha,  from  fear  of  imprisonment
at  having  obtained  an  opposite  end  [to  that  which  he  had
been  trying  to  reach],  fled  away  and  disappeared.  And
thus  the  Brahman  was  released  by  his  daughter  deceiving
the  Pisacha,  and  remained  in  happiness,  having  surmounted
his  disease  [of  body  and  soul].


[M]  "  Such  are  Pisachas ;  and  some  young  princes  are
just  like  them,  and,  though  conciliated,  produce  misfortune,
my  friend;  but  they  can  be  guarded  against  by  counsel.
But  princesses  of  good  family  have  never  been  heard  to  be
such.  So  you  must  not  expect  any  injury  from  associating
with  me."

When  Somaprabha  heard  from  the  mouth  of  Kalinga-
sena  in  due  course  this  sweet,  entertaining  and  amusing  tale,
she  was  delighted.  And  she  said  to  her  :  "  My  house  is
sixty  yojanas l  distant  hence,  and  the  day  is  passing  away ;
I  have  remained  long,  so  now  I  must  depart,  fair  one."
Then,  as  the  lord  of  day  was  slowly  sinking  to  the  western
mountain,  she  took  leave  of  her  friend,  who  was  eager  for
a  second  interview,  and  in  a  moment  flew  up  into  the  air,
exciting  the  wonder  of  the  spectators,  and  rapidly  returned
to  her  own  house.  And  after  beholding  that  wonderful
sight  Kalingasena  entered  into  her  house  with  much  per-
plexity, and  reflected  :   "  I  do  not  know,  indeed,  whether  my

1  See  Vol.  I,  p.  3n\ — n.m.p.


36  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

friend  is  a  Siddha  female,  or  an  Apsaras,  or  a  Vidyadhari.
She  is  certainly  a  heavenly  female  that  travels  through  the
upper  air.  And  heavenly  females  associate  with  mortal  ones
led  by  excessive  love.  Did  not  ArundhatI  live  in  friend-
ship with  the  daughter  of  King  Prithu  ?  Did  not  Prithu
by  means  of  her  friendship  bring  Surabhi  from  heaven  to
earth  ?  And  did  not  he,  by  consuming  its  milk,  return  to
heaven  though  he  had  fallen  from  it  ?  And  were  not  thence-
forth perfect  cows  born  upon  earth  ?  *  So  I  am  fortunate  ;
it  is  by  good  luck  that  I  have  obtained  this  heavenly  creature
as  a  friend  ;  and  when  she  comes  to-morrow  I  will  dexter-
ously ask  her  her  descent  and  name."  Thinking  such
thoughts  in  her  heart,  Kalingasena  spent  that  night  there,
and  Somaprabha  spent  the  night  in  her  own  house,  being
eager  to  behold  her  again.

1  See  Vol.  II,  p.  241.— n.m.p.


'


CROSS-ROADS  37


NOTE  ON  CROSS-ROADS

In  nearly  all  countries,  and  at  all  times,  special  significance  has  been
attached  to  the  place  where  roads  cross  one  another.  In  Christian  times  it
was  the  spot  chosen  for  the  burial  of  suicides  and  condemned  criminals.  This
practice  seems  to  have  arisen,  not  merely  because  the  roads  form  the  sign
of  the  cross  and  so  make  the  ground  the  next  best  burial-place  to  a  properly
consecrated  churchyard,  but  because  the  ancient  Teutons  erected  altars  at
cross-roads  on  which  they  sacrificed  criminals.  Thus  cross-roads  were  of  old
regarded  as  execution-grounds.  The  chief  fact  prompting  the  choice  of  the
special  locality  must  be,  I  think,  that  just  as  a  circle  commands  every
direction,  so  cross-roads,  pointing  north,  south,  east  and  west,  command
every  main  direction,  and  the  actual  point  of  crossing  is  the  only  point
where  people  coming  from  every  direction  must  pass.

From  a  study  of  customs  connected  with  cross-roads  in  different  parts
of  the  world,  we  find  that  the  spot  was  particularly  efficient  in  unburdening
oneself  of  diseases,  and,  owing  probably  to  its  connection  with  illness  and
death,  was  a  fit  place  to  conjure  up  evil  spirits.  A  few  illustrations  will
explain  these  points.

I  will  take  India  first.  At  the  funeral  of  a  Brahman,  five  balls  of  wheat-
flour  and  water  are  offered  to  various  spirits.  The  third  ball  is  offered  to  the
spirit  of  the  cross-roads  of  the  village  through  which  the  corpse  will  be
carried  (Stevenson,  Rites  of  the  Twice-born,  1920,  p.  146).  Lamps  are  also
placed  at  cross-roads  (Colebrooke,  Essays,  1858,  p.  102).  Crooke  tells  us
("  Indian  Charms  and  Amulets,"  Hastings'  Ency.  Rel.  Eth.,  vol.  iii,  pp.  446-
447)  that  at  the  marriage  rite  among  the  Bharvads  in  Gujarat  a  eunuch
flings  balls  of  wheat-flour  towards  the  four  quarters  of  the  heavens,  as  a
charm  to  scare  evil  spirits ;  and  in  the  same  province,  at  the  Holi  festival,
the  fire  is  lighted  at  a  quadrivium  (JBombay  Gazetteer,  vol.  ix,  pt.  i,  pp.  280,
357).  In  Bombay  seven  pebbles,  picked  up  from  a  place  where  three  roads
meet,  are  used  as  a  charm  against  the  evil  eye.  Some  of  the  Gujarat  tribes,
apparently  with  the  intention  of  dispersing  the  evil  or  passing  it  on  to  some
traveller,  sweep  their  houses  on  the  first  day  of  the  month  Karttik  (November),
and  lay  the  refuse  in  a  pot  at  the  cross-roads  (Campbell,  Notes  on  the  Spirit
Basis  of  Belief  and  Custom,  Bombay,  1885,  pp.  208,  329).

On  the  same  principle,  a  common  form  of  smallpox- transference  is  to  lay
the  scabs  or  scales  from  the  body  of  the  patient  at  cross-roads,  in  the  hope
that  some  passer-by  may  take  the  disease  with  him.  See  W.  Crooke,  Popular
Religion  and  Folk-Lore  of  Northern  India,  vol.  i,  p.  164  et  seq.  ;  and  ditto, "  Burial
of  Suicides  at  Cross-roads,"  Folk-Lore,  vol.  xx,  pp.  88-89.

The  consecration  of  idols  is  naturally  an  elaborate  and  very  important
affair,  and  one  to  which  much  ceremony  is  attached.  One  of  the  final  rites
is  particularly  interesting.  A  procession  is  formed  in  which  one  of  the
Brahmans  carries  a  pot  containing  black  pulse,  rice,  areca  nut,  a  copper  coin,
and  a  lamp  filled  with  clarified  butter.     On  arriving  at  the  cross-roads,  they


38  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

sprinkle  the  junction  with  water  for  the  purposes  of  purification,  and  leave
the  pot  there  as  an  offering  to  pacify  any  evil  spirit  that  may  happen  to
dwell  at  the  cross-roads.  When  returning  great  care  is  taken  never  to  look
backwards  (Stevenson,,  op.  cit.,  pp.  414,  415).

We  will  now  consider  the  custom  in  places  other  than  India.
In  the  ancient  world  we  find  the  expression  suk  irbitti,  "cross-roads,"  in
Assyrian  texts  as  the  place  where  "atonement"  is  to  be  made  (Campbell
Thompson,  Semitic  Magic,  pp.  200,  201,  where  numerous  interesting  references
are  given).  In  Hebrew  medicine,  in  order  to  heal  an  issue  of  blood,  the
patient  must  sit  at  the  parting  of  the  ways  with  a  cup  of  wine  in  her  hand,
and  someone  coming  up  behind  her  has  to  cry  out  suddenly :  "  Be  healed  of
thine  issue  of  blood"  (Creighton,  Ency.  Bib/.,  3006).  This  is,  of  course,  an
instance  of  sympathetic  magic,  the  cup  of  wine  resembling  the  blood,  and  the
sudden  start,  which  causes  it  to  spill,  typifying  what  will  happen  to  the  issue.

In  Africa  cross-roads  are  largely  used  to  effect  cures.  Thus  among  the
Baganda  there  exists  great  fear  of  the  ghosts  of  suicides,  consequently  their
bodies  were  burned  and  removed  to  waste  lands  or  cross-roads.  Here,  it  was
thought,  the  ghost  would  be  incapable  of  doing  harm,  but  in  case  it  had
survived  the  burning,  grass  and  sticks  were  thrown  on  the  spot  by  passers-by
to  prevent  the  ghost  from  catching  them.  The  same  precaution  was  taken
with  children  born  feet  first.  They  were  strangled  and  buried  at  cross-roads.
(See  J.  Roscoe,  The  Baganda,  pp.  20  et  seq.,  46*  et  seq.,  and  124  el  seq.)

In  Tanganyika  Territory  the  cross-roads  play  an  important  part  in  disease
transference.  Thus  among  the  Wagogo  when  a  man  is  ill  the  native  doctor
takes  him  to  a  cross-road,  where  he  prepares  a  medicine,  part  of  which  is
given  to  the  patient  and  part  buried  under  an  inverted  pot  at  the  juncture
of  the  roads.  It  is  hoped  that  someone  will  step  over  the  pot,  catch  the
disease,  and  so  relieve  the  original  sufferer  (J.  Cole,  "  Notes  on  the  Wagogo
of  German  East  Africa,"  Journ.  Anth.  Inst.,  vol.  xxxiii,  1902,  p.  313).

The  magical  rites  connected  with  cross-roads  are  fully  appreciated  by
the  Hausas  of  Tripoli  and  Tunis.  Some  of  their  games  and  contests  have  a
magical  connection,  thus  in  the  Koraiya  contest  if  a  youth  wished  to  become
invincible  he  first  had  to  drink  medicine  for  ten  days  and  then  undergo  a
test  of  courage.  He  was  sent  to  cross-roads  at  midnight  with  orders  to  stay
there,  and  after  a  time  a  bori  (spirit)  would  come  along  with  a  short,  heavy
stick,  with  which  he  would  poke  at  the  boy.  He  must,  however,  take  no
notice.  After  other  boris  had  likewise  failed  to  produce  any  effect,  a  half-
man  would  appear.  Him  the  boy  would  catch  hold  of  and  demand  what  he
wanted.  While  returning  home  he  must  not  look  behind  him  or  speak  to
anyone  until  he  has  entered  his  own  hut  (H.  J.  N.  Tremearne,  The  Ban  of
the  Bon  [19 14],  pp.  208,  209).

The  use  of  cross-roads  as  a  place  for  disease-transference  is  widespread  :
examples  of  the  custom  from  Japan,  Bali  (Indian  Archipelago),  Guatemala,
Cochin-China,  Bohemia  and  England  are  given  by  Frazer  {Golden  Bough,
vol.  hi,  p.  59;  vol.  ix,  pp.  10,  49,  68,  144).

Other  useful  references  will  be  found  in  Westermarck,  The  Origin  and
Development  of  the  Moral  Ideas,  vol.  ii,  pp.  256,  257. — n.m.p.


CHAPTER  XXIX

THEN  in  the  morning  Somaprabha  took  with  her  a
[M]  basket,  in  which  she  had  placed  many  excellent
mechanical  dolls  of  wood *  with  magic  properties  in
order  to  amuse  her  friend,  and  travelling  through  the  air
she  came  again  to  Kalingasena.  And  when  Kalingasena  saw
her  she  was  full  of  tears  of  joy,  and  rising  up  she  threw  her
arms  round  her  neck,  and  said  to  her,  as  she  sat  by  her  side  :
"  The  dark  night  of  three  watches  has  this  time  seemed
to  me  to  be  of  a  hundred  watches  without  the  sight  of  the
full  moon  of  your  countenance.2  So,  if  you  know,  my  friend,
tell  me  of  what  kind  may  have  been  my  union  with  you  in  a
former  birth,  of  which  this  present  friendship  is  the  result."
When  Somaprabha  heard  this,  she  said  to  that  princess :
"  Such  knowledge  I  do  not  possess,  for  I  do  not  remember
my  former  birth  ;  and  hermits  are  not  acquainted  with  this,
but  if  any  know,  they  are  perfectly  acquainted  with  the
highest  truth,  and  they  are  the  original  founders  of  the
science  by  which  it  is  attained."  When  she  had  spoken
thus,  Kalingasena,  being  full  of  curiosity,  again  asked  her
in  private  in  a  voice  tender  from  love  and  confidence :
"  Tell  me,  friend,  of  what  divine  father  you  have  adorned  the
race  by  your  birth,  since  you  are  completely  virtuous  like
a  beautifully  rounded  pearl.3  And  what,  auspicious  one,  is
your  name,  that  is  nectar  to  the  ears  of  the  world  ?  What
is  the  object  of  this  basket  ?  And  what  thing  is  there  in
it  ?  "  On  hearing  this  affectionate  speech  from  Kalingasena,
Somaprabha  began  to  tell  the  whole  story  in  due  course.
"  There  is  a  mighty  Asura  of  the  name  of  Maya,4  famous

1  See  Note  1  at  the  end  of  this  chapter. — n.m.p.

2  See  Vol.  I,  p.  30,  30n\— n.m.p.

3  Suvrittaya  means  "virtuous/'  and  "beautifully  rounded."

4  We  have  already  (Vol.  I,  p.  22)  met  his  two  sons  and  his  younger
daughter  (p.  27  et  seq.  of  this  volume).  We  shall  hear  much  more  about  him
in  Vol.  IV. — n.m.p.

39


40  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

in  the  three  worlds.  And  he,  abandoning  the  condition  of
an  Asura,  fled  to  Siva  as  his  protector.  And  Siva  having
promised  him  security,  he  built  the  palace  of  Indra.  But
The  Story  of  the  Daityas  were  angry  with  him,  affirming  that
Sojnaprdbha  he  had  become  a  partisan  of  the  gods.  Through
fear  of  them  he  made  in  the  Vindhya  mountains  a  very
wonderful  magic  subterranean  palace,  which  the  Asuras
could  not  reach.  My  sister  and  I  are  the  two  daughters
of  that  Maya.  My  elder  sister,  named  Svayamprabha,
follows  a  vow  of  virginity,  and  lives  as  a  maiden  in  my
father's  house.  But  I,  the  younger  daughter,  named
Somaprabha,  have  been  bestowed  in  marriage  on  a  son
of  Kuvera,  named  Nadakuvara,  and  my  father  has  taught
me  innumerable  magic  artifices,  and  as  for  this  basket,  I
have  brought  it  here  to  please  you."

Having  said  this,  Somaprabha  opened  the  basket  and
showed  to  her  some  very  interesting  mechanical  dolls  con-
structed by  her  magic,  made  of  wood.  One  of  them,  on  a  pin
in  it  being  touched,1  went  through  the  air  at  her  orders  and
fetched  a  garland  of  flowers  and  quickly  returned.  Another
in  the  same  way  brought  water  at  will 2 ;  another  danced,
and  another  then  conversed.  With  such  very  wonderful  con-
trivances Somaprabha  amused  Kalingasena  for  some  time,
and  then  she  put  that  magic  basket  in  a  place  of  security,
and  taking  leave  of  her  regretful  friend,  she  went,  being
obedient  to  her  husband,  through  the  air  to  her  own  palace.
But  Kalingasena  was  so  delighted  that  the  sight  of  these
wonders  took  away  her  appetite,  and  she  remained  averse  to
all  food.  And  when  her  mother  perceived  that,  she  feared
she  was  ill.     However,  a  physician  named  Ananda,  having

1  Cf.  Chaucer's  Squires  Tale,  line  31 6:  "Ye  moten  trille  a  pin,  stant  in
his  ere." See  Note  1  at  the  end  of  this  chapter. — n.m.p.

2  This  may  remind  the  reader  of  the  story  of  the  pestle  in  Lucian's
Philopseudes  that  was  sent  to  fetch  water.  When  the  Egyptian  sorcerer  was
away  his  pupil  tried  to  perform  the  trick.  But  he  did  not  know  the  charm
for  stopping  the  water-carrying  process.  Accordingly  the  house  was  flooded.
In  despair  he  chopped  the  pestle  in  two  with  an  axe.  That  made  matters
worse,  for   both    halves   set   to  work   to   bring  water.     The  story  has  been

versified  by  Goethe,  and  the  author  of  the  lngoldsby  Legends. See  Crooke,

Popular  Religion  and  Folk-Lore  of  Northern  India,  vol.  i,  p.  50. — N.M.P.


THE  TWO  FRIENDS  41

examined  the  child,  told  her  mother  that  there  was  nothing
the  matter  with  her.  He  said  :  "  She  has  lost  her  appetite
through  delight  at  something,  not  from  disease  ;  for  her
countenance,  which  appears  to  be  laughing,  with  eyes  wide
open,  indicates  this."  When  she  heard  this  report  from
the  physician,  the  girl's  mother  asked  her  the  real  cause  of
her  joy,  and  the  girl  told  her.  Then  her  mother  believed
that  she  was  delighted  with  the  society  of  an  eligible
friend,  and  congratulated  her,  and  made  her  take  her
proper  food.

Then  the  next  day  Somaprabha  arrived,  and  having
found  out  what  had  taken  place,  she  proceeded  to  say  to
Kalingasena  in  secret :  "I  told  my  husband,  who  possesses
supernatural  knowledge,  that  I  had  formed  a  friendship
with  you,  and  obtained  from  him,  when  he  knew  the  facts,
permission  to  visit  you  every  day.  So  you  must  now  obtain
permission  from  your  parents,  in  order  that  you  may  amuse
yourself  with  me  at  will  without  fear."  When  she  had  said
this,  Kalingasena  took  her  by  the  hand  and  immediately
went  to  her  father  and  mother,  and  there  introduced  her
friend  to  her  father,  King  Kalingadatta,  proclaiming  her
descent  and  name,  and  in  the  same  way  she  introduced
her  to  her  mother,  Taradatta,  and  they,  on  beholding  her,
received  her  politely  in  accordance  with  their  daughter's
account  of  her.  And  both  those  two,  pleased  with  her
appearance,  hospitably  received  that  beautiful  wife  of  the
distinguished  Asura  out  of  love  for  their  daughter,  and
said  to  her  :  "  Dear  girl,  we  entrust  this  Kalingasena  to
your  care,  so  amuse  yourselves  together  as  much  as  you
please."

And  Kalingasena  and  Somaprabha,  having  gladly  welcomed
this  speech  of  theirs,  went  out  together.  And  they  went,  in
order  to  amuse  themselves,  to  a  temple  of  Buddha  built  by
the  king.  And  they  took  there  that  basket  of  magic  toys.
Then  Somaprabha  took  a  magic  Yaksha,  and  sent  it  on  a  com-
mission from  herself  to  bring  the  requisites  for  the  worship
of  Buddha.  That  Yaksha  went  a  long  distance  through
the  sky,  and  brought  a  multitude  of  pearls,  beautiful  gems
and  golden  lotuses.     Having  performed  worship  with  these,


42  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

Somaprabha,  exhibiting  all  kinds  of  wonders,  displayed  the
various  Buddhas  with  their  abodes.

When  the  King  Kalingadatta  heard  of  that,  he  came
with  the  queen  and  beheld  it,  and  then  asked  Somaprabha
about  the  magic  performance.

Then  Somaprabha  said  :  "  King,  these  contrivances  of
magic  machines,  and  so  on,  were  created  in  various  ways
by  my  father  in  old  time.  And  even  as  this  vast  machine,
called  the  world,  consists  of  five  elements,  so  do  all  these
machines.  I  will  describe  them  one  by  one.  That  machine,
in  which  earth  predominates,  shuts  doors  and  things  of  the
kind.  Not  even  Indra  would  be  able  to  open  what  had  been
shut  with  it.  The  shapes  produced  by  the  water-machine
appear  to  be  alive.  But  the  machine  in  which  fire  pre-
dominates pours  forth  flames.  And  the  wind  machine
performs  actions,  such  as  coming  and  going.  And  the
machine  produced  from  ether  utters  distinct  language.  All
these  I  obtained  from  my  father;  but  the  wheel-machine,
which  guards  the  water  of  immortality,  my  father  knows
and  no  one  else."  While  she  was  saying  this  there  arose
the  sound  of  conchs  being  blown  in  the  middle  of  the  day,
that  seemed  to  confirm  her  words.

Then  she  entreated  the  king  to  give  her  the  food  that
suited  her,  and  taking  Kalingasena  as  a  companion,  by  per-
mission of  the  king,  she  set  out  through  the  air  for  her
father's  house  in  a  magic  chariot,  to  return  to  her  elder  sister.
And  quickly  reaching  that  palace,  which  was  situated  in
the  Vindhya  mountains,  she  conducted  her  to  her  sister
Svayamprabha.

There  Kalingasena  saw  that  Svayamprabha,  with  her
head  encircled  with  matted  locks,  with  a  long  rosary,  a
nun  clothed  in  a  white  garment,  smiling  like  Parvati,  in
whom  love,  the  highest  joy  of  earth,  had  undertaken  a
severe  vow  of  mortification.  And  Svayamprabha,  when
the  princess,  introduced  by  Somaprabha,  kneeled  before  her,
received  her  hospitably,  and  entertained  her  with  a  meal
of  fruits.  And  Somaprabha  said  to  the  princess :  "  My
friend,  by  eating  these  fruits  you  will  escape  old  age,
which  otherwise  would  destroy  this  beauty,  as  the  nipping


THE  WONDERFUL  CITY  43

cold  does  the  lotus  ;  and  it  was  with  this  object  that  I
brought  you  here  out  of  affection."

Then  that  Kalingasena  ate  those  fruits,  and  immediately
her  limbs  seemed  to  be  bathed  in  the  Water  of  Life.  And
roaming  about  there  to  amuse  herself,  she  saw  the  garden
of  the  city,  with  tanks  filled  with  golden  lotuses,  and  trees
bearing  fruit  as  sweet  as  nectar  :  the  garden  was  full  of
birds  of  golden  and  variegated  plumage,  and  seemed  to  have
pillars  of  bright  gems  ;  it  conveyed  the  idea  of  walls  where
there  was  no  partition,  and  where  there  were  partitions,  of
unobstructed  space.  Where  there  was  water  it  presented
the  appearance  of  dry  land,  and  where  there  was  dry  land
it  bore  the  semblance  of  water.  It  resembled  another  and
a  wonderful  world,  created  by  the  delusive  power  of  the
Asura  Maya.  It  had  been  entered  formerly  by  the  monkeys
searching  for  Sita,  which,  after  a  long  time,  were  allowed  to
come  out  by  the  favour  of  Svayamprabha.  So  Svayam-
prabha bade  her  adieu,1  after  she  had  been  astonished
with  a  full  sight  of  her  wonderful  city,  and  had  obtained
immunity  from  old  age  ;  and  Somaprabha,  making  Kalinga-
sena ascend  the  chariot  again,  took  her  through  the  air  to  her
own  palace  in  Takshasila.  There  Kalingasena  told  the  whole
story  faithfully  to  her  parents,  and  they  were  exceedingly
pleased.

And  while  those  two  friends  spent  their  days  in  this  way,
Somaprabha  once  upon  a  time  said  to  Kalingasena  :  "As
long  as  you  are  not  married  I  can  continue  to  be  your  friend,
but  after  your  marriage  how  could  I  enter  the  house  of  your
husband  ?  For  a  friend's  husband  ought  never  to  be  seen
or  recognised.2  ...  As  for  a  mother-in-law,  she  eats  the
flesh  of  a  daughter-in-law  as  a  she- wolf  does  of  a  sheep.  And
a  propos  of  this  hear  the  story  of  Kirtisena,  which  I  am  about
to  tell  you.

1  This  is  obviously  wrong,  as  it  was  Somaprabha  who  had  called  on
Svayamprabha.  It  is,  however,  quite  clear  in  the  D.  text,  where  we  find  it
is  Kalingasena  who  takes  her  leave. — n.m.p.

2  Here  Dr  Brockhaus  supposes  a  line  to  be  omitted.     The  transition  is

somewhat  abrupt. The  D.  text  marks  the  hiatus  of  a  line  after  the  next

paragraph,  not  before  it. — n.m.p.


44  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

38.  Story  of  Kirtisend  and  her  Cruel  Mother-in-Law1

Long  ago  there  lived  in  the  city  of  Pataliputra 2  a
merchant  named,  not  without  cause,  Dhanapalita,3  for  he
was  the  richest  of  the  rich.  And  there  was  born  to  him  a
daughter,  named  Kirtisena,  who  was  incomparably  beautiful,
and  dearer  to  him  than  life.  And  he  took  his  daughter  to
Magadha  and  married  her  to  a  rich  merchant  named  Deva-
sena.  And  though  Devasena  was  himself  very  virtuous,  he
had  a  wicked  mother  as  mistress  in  his  house,  for  his  father
was  dead.  She,  when  she  saw  that  her  daughter-in-law
Kirtisena  was  beloved  by  her  husband,  being  inflamed  with
anger,  ill-treated  her  in  her  husband's  absence.  But  Kirti-
sena was  afraid  to  let  her  husband  know  it,  for  the  position
of  a  bride  in  the  power  of  a  treacherous  mother-in-law  is  a
difficult  one.

Once  upon  a  time  her  husband  Devasena,  instigated  by
his  relations,  was  preparing  to  go  to  the  city  of  Valabhi  for
the  sake  of  trade.  Then  that  Kirtisena  said  to  her  husband  :
"  I  have  not  told  you  for  this  long  time  what  I  am  now  going
to  say  :  your  mother  ill-treats  me  though  you  are  here,  but  I
do  not  know  what  she  will  do  to  me  when  you  are  in  a  foreign
country."  When  Devasena  heard  that,  he  was  perplexed,
and  being  alarmed  on  account  of  his  affection  for  his  wife
he  went  and  humbly  said  to  his  mother  :  "  Kirtisena  is
committed  to  your  care,  mother,  now  that  I  am  going  to  a
foreign  land  ;  you  must  not  treat  her  unkindly,  for  she  is
the  daughter  of  a  man  of  good  family."

When  Devasena's  mother  heard  that,  she  summoned
Kirtisena  and,  elevating  her  eyes,  said  to  him  then  and
there  :  "  What  have  I  done  ?  Ask  her.  This  is  the  way
in  which  she  eggs  you  on,  my  son,  trying  to  make  mischief
in  the  house,  but  both  of  you  are  the  same  in  my  eyes."

1  Cj.  with  the  story  of  Kirtisena   the  substance  of  two  modern  Greek

songs    given    in    Liebrecht,  Zur   Volkskunde,  p.    187. There   is   a   certain

similarity  to  the  first  part  of  the  third  day,  nov.  ix,  of  the  Decameron.     See
A.  C.  Lee,  The  Decameron,  its  Sources  and  Analogues,  190.9,  p.  105. — n.m.p.

2  See  Vol.  II,  p.  S9»i.— n.m.p,

3  I.e.  wealth-preserved.


THE  CRUEL  MOTHER-IN-LAW  45

When  the  good  merchant  heard  that,  he  departed  with  his
mind  easy  on  her  account.  For  who  is  not  deceived  by  the
hypocritically  affectionate  speeches  of  a  mother  ?

But  Kirtisena  stood  there  silent,  smiling  in  bewilderment ;
and  the  next  day  the  merchant  set  out  for  Valabhi.  Then,
when  Kirtisena  began  to  suffer  torture  at  being  separated
from  her  husband,  the  merchant's  mother  gradually  forbade
the  female  slaves  to  attend  on  her.  And  making  an  agree-
ment with  a  handmaid  of  her  own,  who  worked  in  the  house,
she  took  Kirtisena  inside  and  secretly  stripped  her.  And
saying  to  her,  "  Wicked  woman,  you  rob  me  of  my  son,"
she  pulled  her  hair  and,  with  the  help  of  her  servant,  mangled
her  with  kicks,  bites  and  scratches.  And  she  threw  her  into
a  cellar  that  was  closed  with  a  trap-door  and  strongly
fastened,  after  first  taking  out  all  the  things  that  were  in
it  previously.  And  the  wretch  put  in  it  every  day  half-a-
plate  of  rice,  in  the  evening,  for  the  girl  who  was  in  such  a
state.  And  she  thought :  "I  will  say  in  a  few  days,  c  She
died  of  herself  during  her  husband's  absence  in  a  distant
land;  take  her  corpse  away.'"1  Thus  Kirtisena,  who  de-
served all  happiness,  was  thrown  into  a  cellar  by  that  cruel
mother-in-law,  and  while  there  she  reflected  with  tears  :
"  My  husband  is  rich,  I  was  born  in  a  good  family,  I  am
fortunately  endowed  and  virtuous,  nevertheless  I  suffer
such  calamity,  thanks  to  my  mother-in-law.  And  this  is
why  relations  lament  the  birth  of  a  daughter,  exposed  to
the  terrors  of  mother-in-law  and  sister-in-law,  marred  with
inauspiciousness  of  every  kind."

While  thus  lamenting,  Kirtisena  suddenly  found  a  small
shovel  in  that  cellar,  like  a  thorn  extracted  from  her  heart
by  the  Creator.  So  she  dug  a  passage  underground  with
Kirtisena  tnat  iron  instrument,  until  by  good  luck  she
makes  her  rose  up  in  her  private  apartment.  And  she  was
escape  ^le  to  see  that  room  by  the  light  of  a  lamp  that

had  been  left  there  before,  as  if  she  were  lighted  by  her  own
undiminished  virtue.  And  she  took  out  of  it  her  clothes
and  her  gold,  and  leaving  it  secretly  at  the  close  of  the  night

1  Bohtlingk  and  Roth  in  their  Dictionary  explain  the  passage  as  follows : —
imam  (i.e.  patini)  vyutthapya  yatd  iti}  "  she  was  unfaithful  to  her  husband."


46  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

she  went  out  of  the  city.  She  reflected  :  "  It  is  not  fitting
that  I  should  go  to  my  father's  house  after  acting  thus;
what  should  I  say  there,  and  how  would  people  believe  me  ?
So  I  must  manage  to  repair  to  my  husband  by  means  of  my
own  ingenuity  ;  for  a  husband  is  the  only  refuge  of  virtuous
women  in  this  world  and  the  next."  Reflecting  thus,  she
bathed  in  the  water  of  a  tank,  and  put  on  the  splendid  dress
of  a  prince.  Then  she  went  into  the  bazaar,  and,  after
exchanging  some  gold  for  money,  she  sojourned  that  day  in
the  house  of  a  certain  merchant.

The  next  day  she  struck  up  a  friendship  with  a  merchant
named  Samudrasena,  who  wished  to  go  to  Valabhi.  And,
wearing  the  splendid  dress  of  a  prince,  she  set  out  for  Valabhi
with  the  merchant  and  his  servants  in  order  to  catch  up  her
husband,  who  had  set  out  beforehand.  And  she  said  to  that
merchant :  "I  am  oppressed  by  my  clansmen,1  so  I  will  go
with  you  to  my  friends  in  Valabhi."

Having  heard  that,  the  merchant's  son  waited  upon  her
on  the  journey,  out  of  respect,  thinking  to  himself  that  she
was  some  distinguished  prince  or  other  ;  and  that  caravan
preferred  for  its  march  the  forest  road,  which  was  much
frequented  by  travellers,  who  avoided  the  other  routes
because  of  the  heavy  duties  they  had  to  pay.

In  a  few  days  they  reached  the  entrance  of  the  forest,
and  while  the  caravan  was  encamped  in  the  evening  a  female
jackal,  like  a  messenger  of  death,  uttered  a  terrific  howl.
Thereupon  the  merchants,  who  understood  what  that  meant,2
became  apprehensive  of  an  attack  by  bandits,  and  the  guards
on  every  side  took  their  arms  in  hand  ;  and  the  darkness
began  to  advance  like  the  vanguard  of  the  bandits  ;    then

1  Gotraja,  nearly  equivalent  to  the  Gentile  of  Roman  law,  and  applied  to
kindred  of  the  same  general  family  connected  by  offerings  of  food  and  water ;
hence  opposed  to  the  Bandhu  or  cognate  kindred.  She  represented  that  she
was  a  prince  whose  clansmen  were  trying  to  disinherit  him.

2  Other  unfavourable  omens  include  a  widow,  lightning,  fuel,  smoky
fire,  pot  of  oil,  leather,  dog  barking  on  a  house-top,  hare,  crow  flying  from
right  to  left,  snake,  new  pot,  blind  man,  lame  man,  sick  man,  salt,  tiger,
bundle  of  sticks,  buttermilk,  empty  vessel,  a  quarrel,  man  with  dishevelled
hair,  oil-man,  leper  and  a  mendicant.  See  Thurston,  Ethnographic  Notes  in
Southern  India,  pp.  242,  243. — N.M.p.


THE  ATTACK  OF  THE  BANDITS  47

Kirtisena,  in  man's  dress,  beholding  that,  reflected  :  "  Alas  !
the  deeds  of  those  who  have  sinned  in  a  former  life  seem
to  propagate  themselves  with  a  brood  of  evils !  Lo !  the
calamity  which  my  mother-in-law  brought  upon  me  has
borne  fruit  here  also  !  First  I  was  engulfed  by  the  wrath  of
my  mother-in-law  as  if  by  the  mouth  of  death,  then  I  entered
the  cellar  like  a  second  prison  of  the  womb.  By  good
fortune  I  escaped  thence,  being,  as  it  were,  born  a  second
time,  and  having  come  here  I  have  again  run  a  risk  of  my
life.  If  I  am  slain  here  by  bandits,  my  mother-in-law,  who
hates  me,  will  surely  say  to  my  husband  :  '  She  ran  off
somewhere,  being  attached  to  another  man.'  But  if  some-
one tears  off  my  clothes  and  recognises  me  for  a  woman,
then  again  I  run  a  risk  of  outrage,  and  death  is  better  than
that.  So  I  must  deliver  myself,  and  disregard  this  merchant,
my  friend.  For  good  women  must  regard  the  duty  of
virtuous  wives,  not  friends  and  things  of  that  kind."  Thus
she  determined,  and,  searching  about,  found  a  hollow  like  a
house  in  the  middle  of  a  tree,  as  it  were  an  opening  made
for  her  by  the  earth  out  of  pity.  There  she  entered  and
covered  her  body  with  leaves  and  suchlike  things,  and  re-
mained supported  by  the  hope  of  reunion  with  her  husband.
Then,  in  the  dead  of  night,  a  large  force  of  bandits  suddenly
fell  upon  the  caravan  with  uplifted  weapons,  and  surrounded
it  on  all  sides.  And  there  followed  a  storm  of  fight,  with
howling  bandits  for  thunder-clouds,  and  the  gleam  of  weapons
for  long- continued  lightning-flashes,  and  a  rain  of  blood.
At  last  the  bandits,  being  more  powerful,  slew  the  merchant-
prince  Samudrasena  and  his  followers,  and  went  off  with  all
his  wealth.

In  the  meanwhile  Kirtisena  was  listening  to  the  tumult,
and  that  she  was  not  forcibly  robbed  of  breath  is  to  be
ascribed  to  fate  only.  Then  the  night  departed,  and  the
keen-rayed  sun  arose,  and  she  went  out  from  that  hollow  in
the  middle  of  the  tree.  Surely  the  gods  themselves  preserve
in  misfortune  good  women  exclusively  devoted  to  their
husbands,  and  of  unfailing  virtue ;  for  not  only  did  a  lion
beholding  her  in  the  lonely  wood  spare  her,  but  a  hermit
who  had  come  from  somewhere  or  other,  when  she  asked


48  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

him  for  information,  comforted  her  and  gave  her  a  drink  of
water  from  his  vessel,  and  then  disappeared  in  some  direction
or  other,  after  telling  her  the  road  to  take.  Then,  satisfied
as  if  with  nectar,  free  from  hunger  and  thirst,  that  woman,
devoted  to  her  husband,  set  out  by  the  road  indicated  by  the
hermit.

Then  she  saw  the  sun  mounted  on  the  western  mountain,
stretching  forth  his  rays  like  fingers,  as  if  saying :  "  Wait
patiently  one  night  "  ;  and  so  she  entered  an  opening  in  the
The  Rakshasi  root  of  a  forest  tree  which  looked  like  a  house,
and  her  Sons  an(j  closed  its  mouth  with  another  tree.  And  in
the  evening  she  saw  through  the  opening  of  a  chink  in  the
door  of  her  retreat  a  terrible  Rakshasi  approaching,  ac-
companied by  her  young  sons.  She  was  terrified,  thinking
to  herself :  "  Lo  !  I  shall  be  devoured  by  this  Rakshasi
after  escaping  all  my  other  misfortunes."  And  in  the
meanwhile  the  Rakshasi  ascended  that  tree.  And  her  sons
ascended  after  her,  and  immediately  said  to  that  Rak-
shasi l :  "  Mother,  give  us  something  to  eat."  Then  the
Rakshasi  said  to  her  children  :  "  To-day,  my  children,  I
went  to  a  great  cemetery,  but  I  did  not  obtain  any  food,

1  Cf  Thorpe's  Yule-tide  Stories,  p.  341,  cited  before  in  Vol.  I,  p.  48n2,
also  Sagas  from  the  Far  East,  p.  162.  The  Mongolian  version  supplies  the
connecting  link  between  India  and  Europe.  In  the  Sagas  from  the  Far  East
the  Rakshasas  are  replaced  by  crows.  Cf  also  the  way  in  which  the  gardener
in  "Das  Rosmarinstrauchlein  "  (Kaden,  Unter  den  Olivenbaumen,  p.  12)  acquires
some  useful  information.  The  story  of  Kirtisena  from  this  point  to  the  cure
of  the  king  closely  resembles  the  latter  half  of  "Die  Zauberkugeln  "  in  the
same  collection.  See  also  Waldau's  Bohmische  Marchen,  p.  272  ;  Gaal,  Marchen
der  Magyaren,  p.  178;  Coelho,  Contos  Populares  Portugueses,  p.  47.  In
Waldau's  story  there  is  a  strange  similarity  in  the  behaviour  of  the  king,  on

first  seeing  the  young  physician,  to  that  of  Vasudatta. A  striking  parallel

appears  in  the  Pentamerone,  second  diversion  of  the  second  day  (Burton,
vol.  i,  p.  1/52),  where  Nella,  hidden  in  a  tree,  overhears  the  ghul  being  per-
suaded by  the  ghula  to  tell  her  how  the  wounded  prince  can  be  healed.
"Now  you  must  know,"  said  the  ghul,  "that  there  is  nought  upon  the  face
of  the  earth  nor  in  the  heavens  that  can  save  the  prince  from  death,  but  by
anointing  the  wounds  with  our  own  fat :  that  would  detain  the  soul  and
hinder  it  from  taking  flight,  and  prevent  it  from  forsaking  its  home,  the
body."  By  a  clever  trick  Nella  succeeds  in  making  the  necessary  ointment.
For  a  few  specimens  of  the  "overhearing"  motif  in  Indian  folk-tales  see
Note  2  at  the  end  of  this  chapter. — n.m.p.


THE  CENTIPEDES  49

and  though  I  entreated  the  congregation  of  witches,  they
gave  me  no  portion  ;  then  grieved  thereat  I  appealed  to
Siva  in  his  terrific  form,  and  asked  him  for  food.  And  the
god  asked  me  my  name  and  lineage,  and  then  said  to  me :
•  Terrible  one,  thou  art  of  high  birth  as  belonging  to  the  race
of  Khara  and  Dushana x ;  so  go  to  the  city  of  Vasudatta,
not  far  from  here.  In  that  city  there  lives  a  great  king
named  Vasudatta  addicted  to  virtue  ;  he  defends  this  whole
forest,  dwelling  on  its  border,  and  himself  takes  duties  and
chastises  robbers.  Now  one  day,  while  the  king  was  sleeping
in  the  forest,  fatigued  with  hunting,  a  centipede  quickly
entered  his  ear  unobserved.  And  in  course  of  time  it  gave
birth  to  many  others  inside  his  head.  That  produced  an
illness  which  now  dries  up  all  his  sinews.  And  the  physicians
do  not  know  what  is  the  cause  of  his  disease,  but  if  someone
does  not  find  out  he  will  die  in  a  few  days.  When  he  is  dead,
eat  his  flesh  ;  for  by  eating  it  you  will,  thanks  to  your  magic
power,  remain  satiated  for  six  months.'  In  these  words  Siva
promised  me  a  meal  that  is  attended  with  uncertainty,  and
cannot  be  obtained  for  a  long  time,  so  what  must  I  do,  my
children?"

When  the  Rakshasi  said  this  to  her  children,  they
asked  her :  "If  the  disease  is  discovered  and  removed,
will  that  king  live,  mother  ?  And  tell  us  how  such  a  disease
can  be  cured  in  him."  When  the  children  said  this,  the
Rakshasi  solemnly  said  to  them  :  "If  the  disease  is  dis-
covered and  removed,  the  king  will  certainly  live.  And  hear
how  his  great  disease  may  be  taken  away.  First  his  head
must  be  anointed  by  rubbing  warm  butter  on  it,  and  then  it
must  be  placed  for  a  long  time  in  the  heat  of  the  sun  intensi-
fied by  noonday.  And  a  hollow  cane  tube  must  be  inserted
into  the  aperture  of  his  ear,  which  must  communicate  with
a  hole  in  a  plate,  and  this  plate  must  be  placed  above  a
pitcher  of  cool  water.  Accordingly  the  centipedes  will  be
annoyed  by  heat  and  perspiration,  and  will  come  out  of  his
head,  and  will  enter  that  cane  tube  from  the  aperture  of
the  ear,  and  desiring  coolness  will  fall  into  the  pitcher.  In
this  way  the  king  may  be  freed  from  that  great  disease."

1  Names  of  Rakshasas  mentioned  in  the  llamayana.
VOL.  III.  D


50  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

Thus  spake  the  RakshasI  to  her  sons  on  the  tree,  and
then  ceased  ;  and  Kirtisena,  who  was  in  the  trunk  of  the  tree,
heard  it.  And  hearing  it,  she  said  to  herself :  "  If  ever  I
get  safe  away  from  here  I  will  go  and  employ  this  artifice  to
save  the  life  of  that  king.  For  he  takes  but  small  duties,1
and  dwells  on  the  outskirts  of  this  forest ;  and  so  all  the
merchants  come  this  way  because  it  is  more  convenient.
This  is  what  the  merchant  Samudrasena,  who  is  gone  to
heaven,  told  me  ;  accordingly  that  husband  of  mine  will  be
sure  to  return  by  this  very  path.  So  I  will  go  to  the  city  of
Vasudatta,  which  is  on  the  borders  of  the  forest,  and  I  will
deliver  the  king  from  his  sickness,  and  there  await  the  arrival
of  my  husband."  Thus  reflecting,  she  managed,  though
with  difficulty,  to  get  through  the  night;  in  the  morning,
the  Rakshasas  having  disappeared,  she  went  out  from  the
trunk  of  the  tree.2

1  The  sense  seems  obscure.  The  D.  text  reads  'rati  after  prmitasthito,
instead  of  vahih,  thus  meaning,  "  by  the  small  duties  he  takes  he  is  a  bliss
for  this  forest  region."     See  Speyer,  op.  cit.,  p.  109. — n.m.p.

2  The  extraordinary  cure  mentioned  above  is  the  outcome  of  ancient
Indian  medical  beliefs  which  still  exist  to-day  amongst  certain  castes.  The
earliest  views  on  medicine  are  found  in  the  Atharva-Feda,  where  most  diseases
are  attributed  to  the  influence  of  demons,  but  a  large  number  are  ascribed  to
the  presence  of  worms  (practically  a  form  of  demon)  located  in  various  parts
of  the  body.  They  are  most  fantastically  described  (see,  for  instance,  Atharva-
Veda,  ii,  31  and  32;  v,  23).  Headache  and  ear  and  eye  diseases,  as  well  as
intestinal  illnesses,  were  attributed  to  worms.  The  belief  received  impetus
by  the  teachings  of  the  great  Buddhist  physician  Jivaka  Komarabhachcha,  a
contemporary  of  the  Buddha  himself,  whose  cures  included  opening  the  skull
and  removing  from  the  brain  headache-producing  centipedes.  His  treatises
were  translated  into  Tibetan,  and  stories  of  his  cures  appear  in  the  Kah-Gyur.
Thus  in  Schiefner  and  Ralston's  Tibetan  Tales,  p.  103,  we  read:  "At  Vai^ali
there  lived  a  man  into  whose  ear  a  centipede  had  crept,  and  had  therein
given  birth  to  seven  hundred  young  ones.  Tormented  by  his  pains  in  the
ear,  this  man  went  to  Jivaka  and  entreated  him  to  cure  him.  Jivaka  said  to
himself,  '  Hitherto  I  have  acted  in  accordance  with  my  teacher's  instructions,
but  now  I  will  act  according  to  my  own  intelligence.'  He  said  to  the  man,
1  Go  and  make  a  hut  out  of  foliage,  carpet  it  with  blue  stuff,  place  a  drum
underneath,  and  make  the  ground  warm.'  The  man  provided  everything  as
he  was  told.  Then  Jivaka  made  the  man  lie  down,  sprinkled  the  ground  with
water,  and  beat  the  drum.  Thereupon  the  centipede,  thinking  that  the
summer  was  come,  crept  out.  Then  Jivaka  placed  a  piece  of  meat  on  the
ear.     The  reptile  turned  back,  but  presently  came  out  again  with  its  young


THE  CITY  OF  VASUDATTA  51

Then  she  travelled  along  slowly  in  the  dress  of  a  man,
and  in  the  afternoon  she  saw  a  good  cowherd.  He  was
moved  to  compassion  by  seeing  her  delicate  beauty,  and
Kirtisena  tnat  sne  na(*  accomplished  a  long  journey,  and
arrives  at  then  she  approached  him,  and  said  :  "  What
Vasudatta  country  is  this,  please  tell  me?"  The  cowherd
said  :  "  This  city  in  front  of  you  is  the  city  of  Vasudatta,
belonging  to  the  King  Vasudatta  :  as  for  the  king,  he  lies
there  at  the  point  of  death  with  illness."  When  Kirtisena
heard  that,  she  said  to  the  cowherd :  "If  anyone  will
conduct  me  into  the  presence  of  that  king,  I  know  how

ones,  and  they  all  laid  hold  of  the  piece  of  meat.  Whereupon  Jivaka  flung  it
into  the  flesh-pot,  and  the  man  recovered  his  health."

In  the  great  medical  work  of  Susruta,  produced  about  the  commencement
of  the  Christian  era,  we  find  remedies  which  "  should  be  particularly  employed
in  destroying  the  different  classes  of  vermin  which  infest  the  regions  of  the
head,  heart,  mouth  and  the  nostrils.  The  liquid  expressed  out  of  horse-dung
should  be  dried  and  then  successively  soaked  several  times  in  the  decoction
of  Vidanga.  The  preparation  should  be  blown  into  the  nostrils."  Similar
treatment,  we  are  told,  should  be  used  in  cases  of  Dantada  worms — i.e.  vermin
that  have  taken  lodgment  in  the  teeth  (see  Susruta  Samhiid,  Bhishagratna's
trans.,  Calcutta,  vol.  iii,  1916,  pp.  342,  343).

In  modern  India  practically  the  same  cure  for  carious  teeth  as  that
described  in  our  text  is  still  employed  by  the  Bediya,  Beriya  (Beria  or  Bedia)
caste.  In  an  article  on  "The  Gypsies  of  Bengal"  (Memoirs  read  before
the  Anth.  Soc.  Ldn.,  vol.  iii,  1870,  p.  127)  Babu  Rajendralala  Mitra  describes
the  different  tricks  employed  by  the  Bediyani :  "  Palmistry  is  her  special
vocation  ;  and  cupping  with  buffalo-horns,  and  administering  moxas  and  drugs
for  spleen  and  rheumatism,  take  a  great  portion  of  her  time.  She  has  a
peculiar  charm  for  extracting  maggots  from  the  root  of  carious  teeth.  When
a  boy,  the  writer  of  this  note  was  subject  to  irritation  and  swelling  of  the
gums  from  carious  teeth,  and  for  it  the  affection  of  a  fond  mother,  and  the
general  ignorance  of  the  healing  art  at  that  time,  suggested  no  better  remedy
than  the  mantra  of  the  village  Bediyani.  On  three  different  occasions  we
had  to  submit  to  her,  and  thrice  she  charmed  out  small  communities  of  little
maggots  by  dint  of  repeating  a  variety  of  most  indecent  verses.  She  used  to
apply  a  tube  of  straw  to  the  root  of  the  carious  tooth,  and  every  now  and
then  bring  out  a  maggot  in  its  barrel.  Once  spun  cotton  was  used  instead  of
straw,  but  with  no  diminution  of  success.  The  operation  was,  no  doubt,  a
deception,  but  the  relief  felt  was  unmistakable  and  permanent."

For  further  details  about  this  caste  see  Russell's  Tribes  and  Castes  of  the
Central  Provinces,  vol.  ii,  p.  220  et  seq.  I  can  find  no  exact  analogues  to  the
above  in  European  folk-lore.  Schiefner  and  Ralston  (op.  cit.y  p.  Ii)  mention
a  modern  Greek  story  in  which  a  girl   is   relieved  from  the  presence  of  a


52  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

to  remove  his  disease."  When  the  cowherd  heard  that,  he
said  :  "I  am  going  to  that  very  city,  so  come  with  me,  that
I  may  point  it  out  to  you."  Kirtisena  answered,  "So  be
it,"  and  immediately  that  herdsman  conducted  her  to  the
city  of  Vasudatta,  wearing  her  male  dress.  And  telling
the  circumstances  exactly  as  they  were,  he  immediately
commended  that  lady  with  auspicious  marks  to  the  afflicted
warder.  And  the  warder,  having  informed  the  king,  by  his
orders  introduced  the  blameless  lady  into  his  presence.

The  King  Vasudatta,  though  tortured  with  his  disease,
was  comforted  the  moment  he  beheld  that  lady  of  wonderful
beauty.  The  soul  is  able  to  distinguish  friends  from  enemies.
And  he  said  to  the  lady  who  was  disguised  as  a  man  :
"  Auspicious  sir,  if  you  remove  this  disease  I  will  give  you  half
my  kingdom.  I  remember  a  lady  stripped  off  from  me  in  my
dream  a  black  blanket,  so  you  will  certainly  remove  this  my
disease."  When  Kirtisena  heard  that,  she  said  :  "  This  day  is
at  an  end,  O  King ;  to-morrow  I  will  take  away  your  disease ;
do  not  be  impatient."  Having  said  this,  she  rubbed  cow's
butter  on  the  king's  head ;  that  made  sleep  come  to  him,
and  the  excessive  pain  disappeared.  And  then  all  there
praised  Kirtisena,  saying  :  "  This  is  some  god  come  to  us  in
the  disguise  of  a  physician,  thanks  to  our  merits  in  a  previous
state  of  existence."

And  the  queen  waited  on  her  with  various  attentions,
and  appointed  for  her  a  house  in  which  to  rest  at  night,  with
female  attendants.  Then  on  the  next  day,  at  noon,  before
And  aires  the  eyes  of  the  ministers  and  ladies  of  the  harem,
the  King  Kirtisena  extracted  from  the  head  of  that  king,
through  the  aperture  of  the  ear,  one  hundred  and  fifty
centipedes,  by  employing  the  wonderful  artifice  previously
described  by  the  Rakshasi.    And  after  getting  the  centipedes

number  of  snakes  which  had  taken  up  their  abode  within  her,  by  being
suspended  from  a  branch  of  a  tree  above  a  cauldron  of  boiling  milk,  the  vapour
arising  from  which  induced  the  reptiles  to  come  forth.  A  cobra  story,  similar
to  that  in  our  text,  appears  in  Frere's  Old  Deccan  Days  (see  p.  62).

For  details  and  further  references  on  Indian  medicine  see  J.  Jolly,
"  Disease  and  Medicine  (Hindu),"  Hastings'  Ency.  Rel.  Eth.,  vol.  iv,  pp.  753-
755;  and  G.  M.  Boiling,  "Disease  and  Medicine  (Vedic),"  idem,  pp.  762-772.

— N.M.P.


'


THE  KING  IS  CURED  53

into  the  pitcher  she  comforted  the  king  by  fomenting  him
with  milk  and  melted  butter.

The  king  having  gradually  recovered,  and  being  free
from  disease,  everybody  there  was  astonished  at  beholding
those  creatures  in  the  pitcher.  And  the  king,  on  seeing
these  harmful  insects  that  had  been  extracted  from  his
head,  was  terrified,  puzzled  and  delighted,  and  considered
himself  born  again.  And  he  made  high  feast,  and  honoured
Kirtisena,  who  did  not  care  for  half  the  kingdom,  with
villages,  elephants,  horses  and  gold.  And  the  queens  and
the  ministers  loaded  her  with  gold  and  garments,  saying  that
they  ought  to  honour  the  physician  who  had  saved  the  life
of  their  sovereign.  But  she  deposited  for  the  present  that
wealth  in  the  hand  of  the  king,  waiting  for  her  husband,  and
saying  :   "  I  am  under  a  vow  for  a  certain  time."

So  Kirtisena  remained  there  some  days  in  man's  clothes,
honoured  by  all  men,  and  in  the  meanwhile  she  heard  from
the  people  that  her  own  husband,  the  great  merchant  Deva-
sena,  had  come  that  way  from  Valabhi.  Then,  as  soon  as
she  knew  that  that  caravan  had  arrived  in  the  city,  she
went  to  it,  and  saw  that  husband  of  hers  as  a  peahen  beholds
the  new  cloud.  And  she  fell  at  his  feet,  and  her  heart,  weep-
ing from  the  pain  of  long  separation,  made  her  bestow  on
him  the  argha  1  with  her  tears  of  joy.  Her  husband,  for
his  part,  after  he  had  examined  her,  who  was  concealed  by
her  disguise,  like  the  form  of  the  moon  invisible  in  the
day  on  account  of  the  rays  of  the  sun,  recognised  her.  It
was  wonderful  that  the  heart  of  Devasena,  who  was  hand-
some as  the  moon,  did  not  dissolve  like  the  moonstone  2  on
beholding  the  moon  of  her  countenance.

Then,  Kirtisena  having  thus  revealed  herself,  and  her
husband  remaining  in  a  state  of  wonder,  marvelling  what
it  could  mean,  and  the  company  of  merchants  being
astonished,  the  King  Vasudatta,  hearing  of  it,  came  there
full   of  amazement.     And   Kirtisena,   being  questioned  by

1  Water  is  the  principal  ingredient  of  the  offering  called  argha  or  arghya.

2  This  gem  is  formed  from  the  congelation  of  the  rays  of  the  moon,  and
dissolves  under  the  influence  of  its  light.  There  is,  of  course,  an  elaborate
pun  in  chandrakdnta.


54  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

him,  told  in  the  presence  of  her  husband  her  whole  adventure,
that  was  due  to  the  wickedness  of  her  mother-in-law.  And
her  husband  Devasena,  hearing  it,  conceived  an  aversion  to
his  mother,  and  was  affected  at  the  same  time  by  anger,
forbearance,  astonishment  and  joy.

And  all  the  people  present  there,  having  heard  that
wonderful  adventure  of  Kirtisena,  exclaimed  joyfully  :
44  Chaste  women,  mounted  on  the  chariot  of  conjugal  affec-
tion, protected  by  the  armour  of  modesty,  and  armed  with
the  weapon  of  intellect,  are  victorious  in  the  struggle."
The  king  too  said  :  "  This  lady,  who  has  endured  affliction
for  the  sake  of  her  husband,  has  surpassed  even  Queen  Sita,
who  shared  the  hardships  of  Rama.  So  she  is  henceforth
my  sister  in  the  faith,  as  well  as  the  saviour  of  my  life."
When  the  king  said  that,  Kirtisena  answered  him  :  "  O  King,
let  your  gift  of  affection,  which  I  deposited  in  your  care,
consisting  of  villages,  elephants  and  horses,  be  made  over  to
my  husband."  When  she  said  this  to  the  king,  he  bestowed
on  her  husband  Devasena  the  villages  and  other  presents,
and,  being  pleased,  gave  him  a  turban  of  honour.  Then
Devasena,  having  his  purse  suddenly  filled  with  stores  of
wealth,  part  of  which  was  given  by  the  king,  and  part
acquired  by  his  own  trading,  avoiding  his  mother  and
praising  Kirtisena,  remained  dwelling  in  that  town.  And
Kirtisena,  having  found  a  happy  lot,  from  which  her  wicked
mother-in-law  was  removed,  and  having  obtained  glory  by
her  unparalleled  adventures,  dwelt  there  in  the  enjoyment  of
all  luxury  and  power,  like  all  the  rich  fruit  of  her  husband's
good  deeds  incarnate  in  a  body.


[M]  u  Thus  chaste  women,  enduring  the  dispensation  of
hostile  fate,  but  preserving  in  misfortune  the  treasure  of
their  virtue,  and  protected  by  the  great  power  of  their  good-
ness, procure  good  fortune  for  their  husbands  and  themselves.
And  thus,  O  daughter  of  a  king,  many  misfortunes  befall
wives,  inflicted  by  mothers-in-law  and  sisters-in-law,  there-
fore I  desire  for  vou  a  husband's  house  of  such  a  kind  that


THE  END  OF  THE  TALE  55

in  it  there  shall  be  no  mother-in-law  and  no  cruel  sister-
in-law."

Hearing  this  delightful  and  marvellous  story  from  the
mouth  of  the  Asura  princess  Somaprabha,  the  mortal  prin-
cess Kalingasena  was  highly  delighted.  Then  the  sun,  seeing
that  these  tales,  the  matter  of  which  was  so  various,  had
come  to  an  end,  proceeded  to  set,1  and  Somaprabha,  having
embraced  the  regretful  Kalingasena,  went  to  her  own  palace.

1  A  really  beautiful  exaggeration,  showing  how,  in  the  East,  everything
must  give  way  to  the  telling  of  a  tale. — n.m.p.


56  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


NOTE  1.— AUTOMATA

The  mechanical  dolls  of  wood  and  "contrivances  of  magic  machines"
mentioned  in  this  chapter,  as  well  as  the  city  peopled  by  wooden  automata
which  we  shall  come  across  in  Chapter  XLIII,  give  rise  to  the  question  as  to
when  and  where  such  objects  originated.  As  is  the  case  with  nearly  all  such
inquiries,  we  have  very  largely  to  be  content  with  bringing  together  what
fragmentary  evidence  we  can  find,  in  the  hope  that  it  may  give  rise  to  further
research  or  attract  to  it  fresh  references  from  unexpected  quarters.

The  earliest  legends  about  moving  figures,  flying  machines  and  so  forth
are  connected  with  the  mythical  Greek  architect  and  sculptor  Dsedalus.  He
it  was  who  built  the  hollow  wooden  cow,  covered  with  hide,  into  which
Pasiphae  crept  in  order  to  satisfy  her  passion  for  the  bull.  He  also  constructed
the  famous  Cretan  labyrinth  for  King  Minos,  in  which  the  Minotaur  was
confined,  and  made  the  wonderful  bronze  figure  of  a  man  which  drove  back
the  Argonauts.  Incurring  the  anger  of  Minos,  he  built  a  pair  of  wings,  by  the
help  of  which  he  fled,  with  his  son  Icarus,  from  Crete  across  the  JEgean
Sea  to  Sicily.  He  is  regarded  as  the  inventor  of  carpentry  and  of  most  of  its
tools.

The  magic  tripods,  bellows,  and  golden  handmaids  of  Hephaistos,  the
magic  car  of  Medea  drawn  by  dragons,  the  flying  sandals  of  Hermes,  and
Pegasus,  the  famous  winged  horse  which  sprang  from  the  headless  trunk  of
Medusa,  are  all  too  legendary  to  have  any  place  in  this  note.  At  the  same
time  it  is  interesting  to  notice  these  early  devices  of  Greek  mythology,  which,
to  a  certain  extent,  correspond  with  the  magic  car,  flying  throne,  Garuda
bird,  etc.,  of  Hindu  fiction.  (See  Burton,  Nights,  vol.  v,  p.  2w2,  and  Clouston,
Popular  Tales  and  Fictions,  vol.  i,  pp.  373-380.)  In  a  Mongolian  story  (Julg,
Die  Mdrchen  des  Siddhi-K'ur,  1866,  first  tale,  p.  57  et  seq.)  the  plot  centres
round  a  wooden  Garuda  bird  made  by  a  carpenter's  son  to  help  a  friend  of
his  to  rescue  his  stolen  wife.  When  inside  it  if  the  top  is  knocked  the  bird
flies  upwards,  and  if  the  bottom  is  struck  it  descends.  We  are,  however,
given  no  further  details  as  to  its  mechanism.

The  first  scientific  inventor  of  such  objects  as  are  mentioned  in  our  text
was  probably  Archytas  (c.  428-347  B.C.),  the  Greek  philosopher  of  Tarentum.
Apart  from  his  mathematical  inventions,  he  constructed  a  kind  of  flying
machine,  consisting  of  a  wooden  figure  balanced  by  a  weight  suspended  from
a  pulley,  and  set  in  motion  by  "hidden  and  enclosed  air"  (Aul.  Gell.,  Noctes
Attica?,  X,  xii,  9).  This  was  apparently  air  escaping  from  a  valve — in  fact,
an  anticipation  of  the  hot-air  balloon.  Archytas  is  also  regarded  as  the
inventor  of  the  kite.

In  the  Middle  Ages  numerous  attempts  at  inventing  automata  are
recorded.  In  Europe  the  names  of  Ctesibius,  Vitruvius,  Hero  of  Alexandria,
Regiomontanus,  Roger  Bacon  and  Albertus  Magnus  may  be  mentioned ;  while
those  of  Wilkins,  Leonardo  da  Vinci,  Fleyder,  Borelli,  etc.,  are  all  connected
with  early  attempts  at  flying.


AUTOMATA  57

Vitruvius  was  a  Roman  architect  and  engineer  of  the  time  of  Julius  Caesar.
The  tenth  book  of  his  famous  De  Architectura  Decern  is  entirely  devoted  to
mechanical  inventions  of  all  kinds.  It  is  particularly  interesting  to  note  that,
like  Somaprabha  in  our  text,  he  states  that  the  influence  of  astrology  on
machines  is  of  considerable  importance  and  that  all  machinery  is  derived  from
nature,  and  is  founded  on  the  teaching  and  instruction  of  the  revolution  of
the  firmament  (X,  i,  4).  He  claims  to  have  constructed  the  first  water
organs,  that  he  "discovered  the  natural  pressure  of  the  air  and  pneumatic
principles  .  .  .  devised  methods  of  raising  water,  automatic  contrivances,  and
amusing  things  of  many  kinds  .  .  .  blackbirds  singing  by  means  of  waterworks,
and  angobatce,  and  figures  that  drink  and  move,  and  other  things  that  have
been  found  to  be  pleasing  to  the  eye  and  the  ear."

Hero  of  Alexandria,  now  considered  to  have  flourished  in  the  second
century  a.d.,  invented  numerous  complicated  magic  jugs  and  drinking
animals.  He  wrote  many  works  on  his  inventions,  including  Catoptrica,
Pneumatica,  and  Automatopoietica.  Several  inventions  mentioned  in  the
Pneumatica  bear  a  certain  resemblance  to  those  in  our  text.  There  are
mechanical  birds  made  to  sing  by  driving  air  through  a  pipe  by  the  pressure
of  flowing  water.  In  other  chapters  a  dragon  is  made  to  hiss  and  a  thyrsus
to  whistle  by  similar  methods.  By  the  force  of  compressed  air  water  is  made
to  spurt  forth  and  automatons  to  sound  trumpets.  The  heat  of  the  sun's  rays
is  used  to  warm  air  which  expands  and  causes  water  to  trickle  out.  In  a
number  of  cases  as  long  as  a  fire  burns  on  an  altar  the  expansion  of  enclosed
air  caused  thereby  opens  temple  doors  by  the  aid  of  pulleys,  or  causes  statues
to  pour  libations,  dancing  figures  to  revolve,  and  a  serpent  to  hiss.  The  force
of  steam  is  used  to  support  a  ball  in  mid-air,  revolve  a  sphere,  and  make  a
bird  sing  or  a  statue  blow  a  horn.  Inexhaustible  lamps  are  described  as  well
as  inexhaustible  goblets,  and  a  self-trimmed  lamp  in  which  a  float  resting
on  the  oil  turns  a  cog-wheel  which  pushes  up  the  wick  as  it  and  the  oil  are
consumed.  Floats  and  cog-wheels  are  also  used  in  some  of  the  tricks  already
mentioned.  In  another  the  flow  of  a  liquid  from  a  vessel  is  regulated  by  a
float  and  a  lever.  Cog-wheels  are  also  employed  in  constructing  the  neck  of
an  automaton  so  that  it  can  be  cut  completely  through  with  a  knife  and  yet
the  head  not  be  severed  from  the  body.  A  cupping  glass,  a  syringe,  a  fire-
engine  pump  with  valves  and  pistons,  a  hydraulic  organ  and  one  worked  by
wind  include  the  chief  devices  mentioned  (Lynn  Thorndike,  A  History  of
Magic  and  Experimental  Science,  vol.  i,  p.  ]  92).

In  both  the  Middle  and  Far  East  the  manufacture  of  automata  of  one
sort  or  another  was  quite  common  at  the  royal  courts,  as  we  can  judge  by
the  casual  mention  of  such  articles  by  early  travellers.

Friar  Odoric  (1286-1331),  in  describing  the  palace  of  the  Great  Khan,
says  (Yule  and  Cordier,  Cathay  and  the  Way  Thither,  vol.  ii,  p.  222,  Hakluyt
Society,  1913):  "In  the  hall  of  the  palace  also  are  many  peacocks  of  gold.
And  when  any  of  the  Tartars  wish  to  amuse  their  lord  then  they  go  one
after  the  other  and  clap  their  hands ;  upon  which  the  peacocks  flap  their  wings
and  make  as  if  they  would  dance.  Now  this  must  be  done  either  by  diabolic
art,  or  by  some  engine  underground."


58  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

Then  there  is  the  work  of  Al-Jazarl  to  be  considered.  He  was  in  the
service  of  the  Sultan  Mahmud  al-Malik  as-Salih  at  Amida,  and  it  was  at  his
orders  that  in  1206  he  wrote  his  Kitab  ft  ma'rifat  al-hiyal  al-handaslya  ("Book
of  the  Knowledge  of  Ingenious  Contrivances  ").     The  work  is  in  six  sections :

1.  On  the  construction  of  clocks  from  which  can  be  told  the  passage  of
the  regular  secular  hours  (10  chapters).

2.  On  the  construction  of  vessels  and  figures  suitable  for  use  at  carousals
(10  chapters).

:>.  On  the  construction  of  ewers  and  cups  for  bloodletting  and  washing
(10  chapters).

4.  On  the  construction  of  fountains  in  tanks  which  change  their  form,
and  on  perpetual  flutes  (10  chapters).

5.  On  the  construction  of  instruments  for  raising  water  from  shallow
bodies  of  water,  and  from  running  water  (5  chapters).

6.  On  the  construction  of  various  things  of  different  sorts  (5  chapters).
Eight  of  the  plates  accompanying  the  work  have  been  recently  published

by  the  Museum  of  Fine  Arts,  Boston  (The  Treatise  of  Al-Jazarl  oji  Automata,
Ananda  K.  Coomaraswamy,  No.  6,  1924).  It  will  suffice  to  give  the  descrip-
tion of  one  of  them  (pp.  15,  16).  It  is  a  peacock  apparatus  for  washing
the  hands,  and  occurs  in  the  ninth  chapter  of  the  third  section  of  Al-Jazari's
treatise.

The  body  of  the  peacock  is  filled  with  water;  the  ring  at  the  tip  of  the
tail  is  attached  to  a  plug  which  closes  the  body  chamber,  preventing  the  entry
of  air,  so  that  no  water  can  flow  out  until  the  plug  is  lifted  by  pulling  the
ring.  The  peacock  stands  on  a  "castle,"  consisting  of  a  chamber  which  rests
on  four  columns  standing  in  a  basin  which  rests  on  a  hollow  base.  The  dirty
water  flows  into  the  hollow  base  and  can  afterwards  be  drawn  off  by  the  faucet.

The  chamber  ("castle")  below  the  peacock  has  two  doors  side  by  side,
each  with  two  swinging  wings  opening  very  easily.  Behind  the  first  door
stands  a  servant  holding  a  bowl  of  alkaline  vegetable  ashes,  used  as  soap.
When  the  water  enters  the  base  of  the  apparatus  it  pushes  up  the  lower  float,
and  this  raises  the  rod  attached  to  it  and  pushes  up  the  board  on  which  the
servant  stands,  so  that  the  door  opens  and  he  emerges  offering  the  "soap"
for  the  king's  use.  Behind  the  second  door  stands  another  servant  with  a
towel.  When  still  more  water  has  entered  the  lower  chamber  (and  by  this
time  most  of  the  water  in  the  peacock  has  been  used,  and  the  king  will  have
completed  his  ablutions)  the  second  float,  which  is  attached  to  a  shorter  rod,
will  also  be  raised,  and  in  the  same  way  as  before  the  second  figure  with  the
towel  will  emerge.  When  the  dirty  water  is  drawn  off,  the  two  floats  fall  and
the  figures  retire.     The  total  height  of  the  apparatus  would  be  about  six  spans.

The  above  examples  of  early  mechanical  inventing  are  almost  entirely
confined  to  what  we  might  describe  as  clever  toys.  They  are,  in  fact,
analogous  to  those  which  Somaprabha  produced  from  her  basket  in  order  to
amuse  her  friend  Kalingasena.

In  Chapter  XLIII,  p.  281,  Naravahanadatta  comes  across  a  city  entirely
populated  by  wooden  automata  that  move  as  if  they  are  alive.  They  had
been  made  by  one  Rajyadhara,  a  carpenter,  to  compensate  for  his  loneliness


AUTOMATA  59

in  the  empty  city  which  he  had  discovered.  We  are  at  once  reminded  of  the
Golem  of  Jewish  legend,  about  which  I  am  able  to  give  a  short  account  owing
to  the  assistance  of  Dr  Gaster.

The  first  reference  to  a  man  created  from  clay  in  Rabbinical  literature  is
found  in  the  Talmud  (Sanhedrin,  f.  65b),  where  Rabba  made  a  man  of  clay
by  means  of  the  "Book  of  Creation"  and  sent  him  to  the  son  of  Rabbi
Zira.  The  latter  spoke  to  him,  but  received  no  reply,  so  he  caused  the
automaton  to  return  to  its  origin.

There  is  no  similar  legend  until  the  time  of  Aben  Gabirol  of  the  eleventh
century.  It  is  related  that  by  means  of  the  mystical  name  of  God  he  was
able  to  create  a  servant  who  did  his  bidding.  He  was  denounced  to  the
sultan,  but  was  able  to  prove  that  it  was  only  of  a  mechanical  nature  which
derived  its  strength  from  the  Divine  Name  placed  either  in  the  forehead  or
else  in  the  mouth  of  the  automaton.

There  was  a  certain  Rabbi  Elijah  of  Chelm,  in  Poland,  who  was  credited
with  having  the  knowledge  of  the  mystic  creative  name  of  God,  and  to  have
applied  it  for  the  purpose  of  making  an  automaton.  The  figure  grew  to  such
an  extent  that  the  people  became  frightened  and  he  was  forced  to  destroy  it.

The  most  famous  of  these  automatons,  however,  is  the  one  that  lives  in
the  legend  connected  with  the  name  of  the  "  Exalted  Rabbi  Low  of  Prague."
He  flourished  at  the  end  of  the  sixteenth  century  and  fashioned  a  figure
known  as  a  Golem — that  is  to  say,  "something  rolled  together,"  a  "lump."
This  automaton  worked  on  all  days  of  the  week,  and  was  able  to  carry  out
the  work  by  means  of  a  plate  placed  under  its  tongue  on  which  was  in-
scribed the  Divine  Name.  Every  Friday  evening  the  plate  was  removed  so
that  the  Golem  should  not  desecrate  the  Sabbath.  On  one  occasion,  however,
Rabbi  Low  forgot  to  do  this,  and  on  that  evening  he  stopped  the  service
before  intoning  the  introductory  psalm  to  the  Sabbath  service  in  order  to  get
hold  of  the  Golem  and  remove  the  plate  in  time.  But  the  Golem  fell  to  bits,
and  legend  has  it  that  to  this  day  the  pieces  are  still  preserved  in  the  attic
of  the  synagogue  (A.  M.  Tendlau,  "  Der  Golem  des  Hoch-Rabbi-Lbb,"  Das
Buck  der  Sagen  und  Legenden  Judischer  Vorzeit,  184-5,  2nd  edit.,  p.  16  et  seq.).

Rabbi  H.  B.  Fassel  in  his  Neun  Derusch  Vortr'dge,  Gross  Kanizsa,  1867,
p.  93,  refers  to  a  similar  legend  where  such  a  Golem  is  used  and  works  by
means  of  the  Divine  Name  placed  under  his  tongue  all  day,  being  removed
at  night.

The  most  modern  idea  of  the  mechanical  figure  is,  of  course,  the  Robot
invented  by  Karel  Kapek.  Robot  is  the  Czech  word  to  express  a  being  with
capacity  for  work,  but  not  for  thinking.  It  is  interesting  to  note  that  it  was
also  at  Prague  that  Kapek  first  conceived  the  idea,  for  as  he  watched  the
crowds  of  men  and  women  being  herded  in  and  out  of  the  suburban  trains,  he
began  to  think  of  them,  not  as  individuals,  or  even  animals,  but  as  machines
—and  so  the  idea  of  the  Robot  originated  in  the  very  town  where,  according
to  legend,  the  broken  pieces  of  the  Golem  still  repose. — n.m.p.


60  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


NOTE  2.— THE  "OVERHEARING"  MOTIF

I  have  already  given  notes  on  this  motif  of  overhearing  in  Vol.  I,  p.  4S/»l,
and  Vol.  II,  p.  107wl  et  seq.  It  also  occurred  in  the  "Story  of  the  Golden
City"  (Vol.  II,  p.  219),  and  in  Vol.  Ill,  pp.  48,  49.

Several  good  examples  of  the  motif  are  found  in  the  Jatakas.  In  the
Siri-Jataka,  No.  284  (Cambridge  edition,  vol.  ii,  p.  280),  two  cocks  are
overheard  talking  on  a  tree,  their  indiscretion  being  their  undoing.  They
abuse  one  another,  and  one  says :  "  What  power  have  you  ?  "  The  other  replies  :
"  Anybody  who  kills  me,  and  eats  my  flesh  roasted  on  the  coals,  gets  a  thousand
pieces  of  money  in  the  morning !  "  But  the  first  cock  continues  :  "  Pooh,  pooh,
don't  boast  about  a  little  thing  like  that !  Anybody  who  eats  my  fleshy  parts
will  become  king ;  if  he  eats  my  outside,  he'll  become  commander-in-chief  or
chief  queen,  according  as  he's  a  man  or  woman ;  if  he  eats  the  flesh  by  my
bones  he'll  get  the  post  of  royal  treasurer,  if  he  be  a  householder;  or,  if  a
holy  man,  will  become  the  king's  favourite  ! "

In  the  Kharaputta-Jataka,  No.  386  (Cambridge  edition,  vol.  iii,  p.  175),
which  I  consider  to  be  the  original  of  the  well-known  "Tale  of  the  Bull  and
the  Ass"  in  the  Nights  (Burton,  vol.  i,  p.  16  et  seq.),  four  young  Naga
youths  enter  a  king's  room  to  "destroy  him  like  chaff  by  the  breath  of
their  nostrils  "  and  are  luckily  persuaded  to  desist  from  their  intention  by
overhearing  a  conversation  between  the  king  and  his  consort.

An  ordinary  case  of  human  overhearing  occurs  in  the  Takkala-Jataka,
No.  446  (Cambridge  edition,  vol.  iv,  p.  29).

In  Tawney's  Kathakoqa  (Oriental  Translation  Fund,  New  Series,  ii,
1895,  Royal  Asiatic  Society)  there  are  several  examples  of  the  motif  under
discussion.  In  the  "Story  of  the  Couple  of  Parrots"  (p.  42  et  seq.),  which
begins  with  the  Dohada  motif  (see  Vol.  I,  p.  224),  the  soul  of  the  hen-parrot
is  troubled  by  discovering  that  her  Vidyadhara  brother  has  unwittingly
carried  off  his  own  mother  with  the  intention  of  marrying  her.  She  wishes
to  save  the  situation  in  as  tactful  a  manner  as  possible,  and  considers  the  best
way  is  for  them  to  overhear  a  conversation.  They  are  sitting  under  a  tree  and
so  the  hen-parrot  assumes  two  forms,  that  of  a  male  and  that  of  a  female  ape,
and  comes  to  the  tree.

Then  the  male  ape  said  to  the  female  ape :  "  My  dear,  this  is  called  the
bathing-place  of  the  aspirant :  animals  that  plunge  in  this  water  attain  the
condition  of  humanity ;  men  that  plunge  in  here  acquire,  owing  to  the  virtue
of  this  bathing-place  of  the  aspirant,  the  condition  of  gods ;  about  this  there
is  no  doubt.  Now  there  are  two  human  beings  sitting  here  in  the  shade  of
this  fragrant  mango-tree."  The  female  ape  said:  "Think  intently  of  their
form,  and  leap  into  this  well,  that  you  may  become  a  woman,  and  I  will  become
a  man."  Then  the  monkey  said :  "  Fie !  fie !  who  would  mention  the  name
of  this  man  who  has  carried  off  his  mother  with  the  idea  of  marrying  her?
What  desire  have  we  for  the  form  of  that  villain  ?  "  When  they  heard  this
speech  of  the  monkey,  both  the  Vidyadhara  and  his  mother  were  astonished.


THE  "OVERHEARING"  MOTIF  61

The  Vidyadhara  said  to  himself:  "  How  can  I  be  her  son  ?  "  The  queen  said
to  herself:  "How  can  this  Vidyadhara  be  my  son?"  While  they  were  both
engaged  in  these  reflections,  the  Vidyadhara  said  to  the  male  monkey  :
"Great  sir,  how  can  this  be  true?"  The  monkey  replied:  "It  is  indeed
true ;  about  this  matter  there  can  be  no  doubt ;  if  you  do  not  believe  it,  in
this  mountain-thicket  there  is  a  hermit,  who  possesses  absolute  knowledge,
now  performing  austerities  in  the  statuesque  posture  ;  go  and  ask  him."  When
the  two  monkeys  had  finished  this  conversation  they  disappeared.  Thereupon
the  Vidyadhara  prince,  accompanied  by  his  mother,  went  into  the  mountain-
thicket,  and  said  to  the  hermit  that  possessed  absolute  knowledge  :  "  Reverend
sir,  is  the  thing  asserted  by  the  monkey  true  ?  "  The  hermit  replied  :  "  It  is
indeed  true.  .  .  ."

The  ingenious  introduction  of  the  motif  in  the  above  extract  is  a  fine
example  of  the  story-teller's  art.

In  the  next  story  in  the  same  collection  Queen  Madanavall  is  confined  to
a  lonely  palace  in  the  middle  of  the  forest  owing  to  an  evil  bodily  smell  that
nothing  can  eradicate.  The  queen  bears  her  exile  with  fortitude,  consoling
herself  with  the  thought  that  her  fate  must  be  due  to  evil  actions  in  a  former
life.     Here  is  an  excellent  opportunity  for  the  "overhearing"  motif.

A  hen-parrot  and  her  mate  are  chatting  in  a  fragrant  mango-tree.  The
queen  listens  and  is  surprised  to  hear  a  recital  of  her  present  and  former  lives.
The  evil  smell  is  discussed.  "My  lord,"  asks  the  hen-parrot,  "is  there  any
remedy  for  her  complaint?"  The  cock-parrot  said:  "This  evil  smell  has
attached  to  her  in  this  life  because  in  a  former  birth  she  showed  disgust  at
a  hermit ;  if  for  seven  days  she  worships  the  mighty  Jina  three  times  with
sweet-smelling  substances,  she  will  be  relieved  from  this  affliction  in  the
form  of  an  evil  smell."  Then  Madanavall,  hearing  this,  threw  down  all  her
ornaments  as  a  present  in  front  of  the  parrot  couple  ;  but  they,  after  holding
this  conversation,  instantly  disappeared.

To  quote  a  final  tale  from  the  Kathakoqa  (p.  164),  we  find  in  the
"  Story  of  Lalitiinga"  (already  mentioned  in  Vol.  I,  p.  48»2,  and  Vol.  II,
pp.  113m1  and  220«)  that  a  blind  prince  is  sitting  under  a  banyan-tree  when
some  bharnnda  birds  begin  to  converse.  An  old  bird  is  relating  to  a  young
one  the  happenings  in  the  neighbouring  city,  where  the  princess  is  also  blind.
"Father,"  says  the  young  bird,  "is  there  any  means  by  which  her  eyes  may
be  restored  afresh  ? "     The  old  bird  said  :

"  My  child,  I  will  tell  you  in  the  day,  after  looking  round,  and  not  at  night ;
Very  cunning  people  wander  about  under  the  banyan-tree,  like  Vararuchi.

For  that  reason  do  not  ask  now ;  at  the  time  of  dawn  I  will  tell  you  of  a
means."  The  young  bird  would  not  desist  from  its  importunity,  but  asked
very  persistently,  saying :  "  I  will  not  let  you  off  without  telling  me."  The
old  bird  said :  "  A  creeper  embraces  the  root  of  this  banyan-tree,  and  extends
over  it.  If  her  eyes  are  sprinkled  with  the  juice  of  that  plant  they  will  be
restored  again  immediately."  When  the  prince,  who  was  under  the  banyan-
tree,  heard  this  speech  of  the  bird,  he  first  sprinkled  that  juice  into  the
sockets  of  his  own  eyes.     His  eyes  became  clear  as  before.


62  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

The  prince  then  proceeds  to  the  city,  and  cures  the  princess,  receiving
her  arid  half  the  kingdom  as  a  reward.  Cf.  Suvabahuttar'ikalhu ,  72  (J.  Hertel,
"  Ueber  die  Suvabahuttarikatha,"  Festschrift  fur  Ernst  Windisch,  pp.  150-151).

Similar  tales  occur  in  Frere's  Old  Deccan  Days ;  thus  in  the  seventh  story
we  read  (p.  121)  of  a  king  who  suffered  agony  owing  to  a  cobra  which
had  become  lodged  in  his  throat  and  could  not  be  extracted.  His  bride
happens  to  overhear  two  cobras  talking  about  her  affairs.  "  Can  no  one  get
it  out?"  asked  the  first  cobra,  referring  to  the  snake  in  the  king's  throat
"  No,"  replied  the  other ;  "  because  they  do  not  know  the  secret."  "  What
secret  ?  "  asked  the  first  cobra.  "  Don't  you  know  ?  "  said  the  second.  "  Why,
if  his  wife  only  took  a  few  marking-nuts  and  pounded  them  well,  and  mixed
them  in  coco-nut  oil,  and  set  the  whole  on  fire,  and  hung  the  Rajah,  her
husband,  head  downwards  up  in  a  tree  above  it,  the  smoke,  rising  upwards,
would  instantly  kill  the  cobra  in  his  mouth,  which  would  tumble  down  dead."
"  I  never  heard  of  that  before,"  said  the  first  cobra.  "  Didn't  you  ! "  ex-
claimed the  second.  "Why,  if  they  did  the  same  thing  at  the  mouth  of
your  hole  they'd  kill  you  in  no  time,  and  then,  perhaps,  they  might  find  all
the  fine  treasure  you  have  there  ! "  "  Don't  joke  in  that  way,"  said  the  first
cobra,  "  I  don't  like  it,"  and  he  crawled  away  quite  offended,  and  the  second
cobra  followed  him.

Needless  to  say  the  princess  cures  the  king  and  gets  the  cobra's  jewels.
The  cure  somewhat  resembles  that  in  our  present  text  (p.  49).  Cf.  with
this  story  that  in  the  Panchatantra  (Benfey,  vol.  ii,  pp.  257,  258)  in  which
the  princess  learns,  from  overhearing  the  conversation  of  two  snakes,  secrets
which  bring  about  their  own  death.

In  story  No.  9  of  the  same  collection  the  Panch-Phul  Ranee  learns  from
two  jackals  how  to  restore  her  dead  husband's  life.  The  juice  of  the  leaves
of  a  tree  is  the  medium  of  the  miracle  (p.  139).

The  fifth  tale  also  contains  the  "overhearing"  motif,  where  the  owl  tells
Luxman's  future  adventures  as  he  listens  below  the  tree  (p.  75).

Very  similar  is  an  incident  in  the  tale  of  Phakir  Chand  in  Lai  Behari
Day's  Folk-Tales  of  Bengal,  p.  40  et  seq.  Both  these  latter  references  have
already  been  given  (p.  29»)  as  analogues  to  the  story  of  "The  Prince  and
the  Merchant's  Son  "  (p.  28  et  seq.).  See  also  Day  (op.  cit.,  pp.  106,  107),  where
the  Brahman  overhears  a  conversation  between  two  calves  in  the  cow-house.
As  will  be  seen,  this  story  is  similar  to  that  of  the  "Two  Parrots"  in  the
Kathdkoca  already  mentioned.

In  the  story  of  Prince  Sobur  in  the  same  collection  (pp.  135,  136)
the  princess  overhears  from  two  divine  birds,  whom  she  has  just  saved  from
being  devoured  by  a  serpent,  how  she  can  bring  back  to  health  Prince  Sobur,
who  is  dying  through  a  trick  played  on  him  by  his  sisters-in-law.

To  conclude,  I  would  give  one  final  example  of  this  motif.  It  is  found
in  Bernhard  Jiilg's  Mongolische  Marchen  Sammlung,  Die  Neun  Marchen  des
Siddhi-Kiir  und  die  Geschichte  des  Ardschi-Bordschi  Chan,  Innsbruck,  1868,
tale  15,  p.  147  et  seq.

Long  ago  there  lived,  in  Western  India,  a  king  who  had  a  very  clever
son.     This  son  he  sent  with  the  minister's  son  into  the  Diamond  Kingdom  of


THE  "OVERHEARING"  MOTIF  63

Central  India  to  learn  every  kind  of  wisdom.  Here  they  stayed  for  many
years  as  pupils  of  two  wise  lamas.  Finally  they  started  on  their  homeward
journey.  While  they  travelled  along  the  minister's  son  thought  to  himself:
"The  king  has  been  equally  generous  to  us  both,  but  his  son  has  profited
far  more  than  I  have/'  and  in  this  manner  he  plotted  against  the  prince.

One  night  they  halted  on  the  top  of  a  mountain  and  there  the  minister's
son  killed  the  prince,  who  with  his  last  breath  cried  out:  "  Abaraschika."
Then  the  son  of  the  minister  returned  to  his  country,  where  he  reported  that
the  prince  had  died  suddenly  of  a  fatal  disease,  and  had  only  been  able  to
utter  the  word  "Abaraschika."  Then  the  king  commanded  all  the  wise
men  of  the  land  to  come  before  him,  and  he  asked  them  what  that  word
meant,  but  no  one  could  tell  him.  Thereupon  they  were  given  seven  days
in  which  to  find  out  the  meaning,  after  which,  if  they  failed,  they  were  all
to  be  executed.

Six  days  went  by  and  the  wise  men  were  prepared  to  die.  In  the  mean-
time one  of  their  number,  a  priest  of  little  significance,  had  crept  away  and
taken  flight.  He  hid  himself  at  the  foot  of  a  tree  in  the  forest,  and  while
he  sat  there  a  child  began  to  cry  in  the  top  of  the  tree.  His  father  cried  :
"  Do  not  cry,  my  son  ;  to-morrow  the  king  is  to  have  a  thousand  men  executed ;
if  we  do  not  eat  their  flesh,  who  will  do  so?"  After  a  time  the  child  cried
again:  "I  am  hungry."  Then  his  mother  comforted  him,  saying :  "Do  not
cry,  my  son ;  to-morrow  the  king  is  to  have  a  thousand  men  executed ;  who
but  we  will  eat  their  flesh  and  blood  ?  "  When  the  boy  asked  them  why  the
thousand  men  were  to  be  executed,  the  father  answered :  "  Because  they  do
not  know  the  meaning  of  the  word  e  Abaraschika.'  "  "  What  is  the  meaning  ?  "
asked  the  boy.  "  The  meaning,"  answered  the  father,  "  is  easy.  It  is  :  '  This,
my  bosom  friend,  led  me  into  a  dense  wood.  There  he  wounded  me  and  trod
on  my  neck  and  beat  me  and  cut  off  my  head.'  "

Hardly  had  the  priest  heard  that  than  he  ran  off  and  told  the  other  wise
men  what  he  had  heard.  Thus  the  wicked  minister's  son  was  found  out  and
duly  punished  for  his  crime.

Other  references  to  examples  of  the  motif  will  be  found  in  Bloomfield,
Life  and  Stories  of  Pdrgvanatka,  p.  185.  For  ancient  Jewish  legends  con-
taining the  "Overhearing"  motif  see  Gaster,  Exempla  of  the  Rabbis,  Nos.  110,
447  and  449  (pp.  79,  180  and  181),  and  the  variants  on  p.  269. — n.m.p.


CHAPTER  XXX

THEN  Kalingasena  out  of  love  went  to  the  top  of  a
[M]     palace  on  the  highroad,  to  follow  with  her  eyes
the  course  of  Somaprabha,  who  had  set  out  for  her
own  home,  and  by  chance  a  young  king  of  the  Vidyadharas,
named  Madanavega,  travelling  through  the  air,  had  a  near
view  of  her.     The  youth,   beholding  her,   bewildering  the
three  worlds  with  her  beauty,  like  the  bunch  of  peacock
feathers  of  the  juggler  Kama,  was  much  troubled.     He  re-
flected :  "  Away  with  the  Vidyadhara  beauties  !     Not  even
the  Apsarases  deserve  to  be  mentioned  in  presence  of  the
surpassing  loveliness  of  this  mortal  lady.     So  if  she  will  not
consent  to  become  my  wife,  what  is  the  profit  of  my  life  ?
But  how  can  I  associate  with  a  mortal  lady,  being  a  Vidya-
dhara?"    Thereupon  he  called  to  mind  the  science  named
Prajfiapti,1  and  that  science,  appearing  in  bodily  form,  thus
addressed  him  :    "  She  is  not  really  a  mortal  woman ;    she
is  an  Apsaras,  degraded  in  consequence  of  a  curse,  and  born
in  the  house  of  the  august  King  Kalingadatta."     When  the
Vidyadhara  had  been  thus  informed  by  the  science,  he  went
off  delighted  and  distracted  with  love;  and,  averse  from  all
other  things,  reflected  in  his  palace :    "  It  is  not  fitting  for
me  to  carry  her  off  by  force  ;  for  the  possession  of  women
by  force  is,  according  to  a  curse,  fated  to  bring  me  death.
So,  in  order  to  obtain  her,  I  must  propitiate  Siva  by  asceti-
cism, for  happiness  is  procurable  by  asceticism,  and  no  other
expedient  presents  itself."

Thus  he  resolved,  and  the  next  day  he  went  to  the
Rishabha  mountain,  and  standing  on  one  foot  performed
penance  without  taking  food.2  Then  the  husband  of
Ambika  was  soon  won  over  by  Madanavega 's  severe
asceticism,  and  appearing  to  him,  thus  enjoined  him  :
'  This  maiden,  named  Kalingasena,  is  famous  for  beauty
on  the  earth,  and  she  cannot   find  any  husband  equal   to

1  See  Vol.  II,  p.  212/11.— n.m.p.  2  See  Vol.  I,  p.  79n\— n.m.p.

64


KALINGASENA'S  APPROACHING  MARRIAGE    65

her  in  the  gift  of  loveliness.  Only  the  King  of  Vatsa  is  a
fitting  match  for  her,  and  he  longs  to  possess  her,  but,  through
fear  of  Vasavadatta,  does  not  dare  to  court  her  openly.  And
this  princess,  who  is  longing  for  a  handsome  husband,  will
hear  of  the  King  of  Vatsa  from  the  mouth  of  Somaprabha,
and  repair  to  him  to  choose  him  as  her  husband.  So,  before
her  marriage  takes  place,  assume  the  form  of  the  impatient
King  of  Vatsa  and  go  and  make  her  your  wife  by  the
gdndharva  ceremony.1  In  this  way,  fair  sir,  you  will  obtain
Kalingasena."  Having  received  this  command  from  Siva,
Madanavega  prostrated  himself  before  him,  and  returned  to
his  home  on  the  slope  of  the  Kalakuta  mountain.

Then  Kalingasena  went  on  enjoying  herself  in  the  city
of  Takshasila,  in  the  society  of  Somaprabha,  who  went  every
night  to  her  own  home,  and  came  back  every  morning  to  her
friend,  in  her  chariot  that  travelled  through  the  air ;  and
one  day  she  said  to  Somaprabha  in  private  :  "  My  friend,
you  must  not  tell  anyone  what  I  tell  you.  Listen,  and  I
will  give  you  a  reason  that  makes  me  think  the  time  of
my  marriage  has  arrived.  Ambassadors  have  been  sent  here
by  many  kings  to  ask  me  in  marriage.  And  they,  after  an
interview  with  my  father,  have  always  hitherto  been  dis-
missed by  him  as  they  came.  But  now  the  king  of  the  name
of  Prasenajit,  who  lives  in  Sravasti,  has  sent  a  messenger,
and  he  alone  has  been  received  with  honourable  distinction
by  my  father.  And  that  course  has  been  recommended  by
my  mother,  so  I  conjecture  the  king,  my  suitor,  has  been
approved  of  by  my  father  and  mother  as  of  sufficiently  noble
lineage.  For  he  is  born  in  that  family  in  which  were  born
Amba  and  Ambalika,  the  paternal  grandmothers  of  the  Kurus
and  Pandus.  So,  my  friend,  it  is  clear  that  they  have  now
determined  to  bestow  me  in  marriage  on  this  King  Prasenajit,
in  the  city  of  Sravasti."

When  Somaprabha  heard  this  from  Kalingasena,  she
suddenly  shed  from  grief  a  copious  shower  of  tears,  creat-
ing, as  it  were,  a  second  necklace.  And  when  her  friend
asked  her  the  cause  of  her  tears,  that  daughter  of  the
Asura  Maya,  who  had  seen  all  the  terrestrial  world,  said  to

1  See  Vol.  I,  pp.  87-88.— n.m.p.
vol.  in.  E


66  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

her  :  "  Of  the  desirable  requisites  in  a  suitor,  youth,  good
looks,  noble  birth,  good  disposition  and  wealth,  youth  is
of  the  greatest  importance  ;  high  birth,  and  so  on,  are  of
subordinate  importance.  But  I  have  seen  that  King  Pra-
senajit,  and  he  is  an  old  man :  who  cares  about  his  high
lineage,  as  he  is  old,  any  more  than  about  the  birth  of  the
jasmine  flower  ?  You  will  be  to  be  pitied  when  linked  to
him,  who  is  white  as  snow,  as  the  lotus-bed  when  linked
to  the  winter,  and  your  face  will  be  a  withered  lotus.  For
this  reason  despondency  has  arisen  in  me,  but  I  should  be
delighted  if  Udayana,  the  King  of  Vatsa,  were  to  become
your  husband,  O  auspicious  lady.  For  there  is  no  king
upon  the  earth  equal  to  him  in  form,  beauty,  lineage,
daring  and  riches.  If,  fair  one,  you  should  be  married  to
that  fitting  mate,  the  display  which  the  Creator  has  made  in
your  case  of  his  power  to  create  beauty  would  have  brought
forth  fruit."

By  means  of  these  speeches,  artfully  framed  by  Soma-
prabha,  the  mind  of  Kalingasena  was  impelled  as  if  by
engines,  and  flew  towards  the  King  of  Vatsa.  And  then
the  princess  asked  the  daughter  of  Maya :  "  Friend,  how  is
it  that  he  is  called  the  King  of  Vatsa  ?  In  what  race  was  he
born  ?  And  whence  was  he  named  Udayana  ?  Tell  me."
Then  Somaprabha  said  :  "  Listen,  friend,  I  will  tell  you  that.

"  There  is  a  land,  the  ornament  of  the  earth,  named  Vatsa.
In  it  there  is  a  city  named  Kaugambi,  like  a  second  Amara-
vati ;  and  he  is  called  the  King  of  Vatsa  because  he  rules
The  History  tnere-  And  hear  his  lineage,  my  friend,  related
of  the  King  by  me.  Arjuna  of  the  Pandava  race  had  a  son
of  Vatsa  named  Abhimanyu,  and  he,  skilled  in  breaking  the
close  rings  of  the  hostile  army,  destroyed  the  force  of  the
Kauravas.  From  him  there  sprang  a  king  named  Parikshit,
the  head  of  the  race  of  Bharata,  and  from  him  sprang
Janamejaya,  who  performed  the  snake-sacrifice.  His  son
was  Satanika,  who  settled  in  KauiSambi,  and  he  was  slain
in  a  war  between  the  gods  and  Asuras  after  slaying  many
giants.  His  son  was  King  Sahasranika,  an  object  of  praise
to  the  world,  to  whom  Indra  sent  his  chariot,  and  he  went
to   heaven   and   returned   thence.     To   him   was   born   this


THE  MOUNTAIN  OF  THE  SUNRISE  67

Udayana  by  the  Queen  Mrigavati,  the  ornament  of  the  race
of  the  Moon,  a  king  that  is  a  feast  to  the  eyes  of  the  world.
Hear,  too,  the  reason  of  his  name.  That  Mrigavati,  the
mother  of  this  high-born  king,  being  pregnant,  felt  a  desire  to
bathe  in  a  lake  of  blood,  and  her  husband,  afraid  of  commit-
ting sin,  had  a  lake  made  of  liquid  lac  and  other  coloured
fluids,  in  which  she  plunged.  Then  a  bird  of  the  race  of
Garuda  pounced  upon  her,  thinking  she  was  raw  flesh,  and
carried  her  off,  and,  as  fate  would  have  it,  left  her  alive  on  the
mountain  of  the  sunrise.  And  there  the  hermit  Jamadagni
saw  her,  and  comforted  her,  promising  her  reunion  with  her
husband,  and  she  remained  there  in  his  hermitage.  For  such
was  the  curse  inflicted  upon  her  husband  by  Tilottama,
jealous  on  account  of  his  neglecting  her,  which  caused  him
separation  from  his  wife  for  a  season.  And  in  some  days
she  brought  forth  a  son  in  the  hermitage  of  Jamadagni,  on
that  very  mountain  of  the  sunrise,  as  the  sky  brings  forth
the  new  moon.  And  because  he  was  born  on  the  mountain
of  the  sunrise  the  gods  then  and  there  gave  him  the  name
of  Udayana,  uttering  from  heaven  this  bodiless  voice :
6  This  Udayana,  who  is  now  born,  shall  be  sovereign  of  the
whole  earth ;  and  there  shall  be  born  to  him  a  son,  who  shall
be  emperor  of  all  the  Vidyadharas.' *

"  Sahasranika,  for  his  part,  who  had  been  informed  of
the  real  state  of  the  case  by  Matali,  and  had  fixed  his  hope
on  the  termination  of  his  curse,  with  difficulty  got  through
the  time  without  that  Mrigavati.  But  when  the  curse  had
expired  the  king  obtained  his  token  from  a  Savara  who,  as
fate  would  have  it,  had  come  from  the  mountain  of  the  sun-
rise. And  then  he  was  informed  of  the  truth  by  a  voice
from  heaven,  and  making  that  Savara  his  guide,  he  went
to  the  mountain  of  the  sunrise.  There  he  found  his  wife
Mrigavati  like  the  success  of  his  wishes,  and  her  son  Uda-
yana like  the  realm  of  fancy.  With  them  he  returned  to
Kausambi,  and  appointed  his  son  crown  prince,  pleased  with
the  excellence  of  his  qualities  ;  and  he  gave  him  the  sons
of  his  ministers,  Yaugandharayana  and  others.     When  his

1  This  has  already  been  described  in  greater  detail  in  Vol.  I,  pp.  97-100.

— N.M.P.


68  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

son  took  the  burden  of  the  kingdom  off  his  shoulders  he
enjoyed  pleasures  for  a  long  time  in  the  society  of  Mrigavati.
And  in  time  the  king  established  his  son,  that  very  Udayana,
on  the  throne,  and  being  old  went  with  his  wife  and  ministers
on  the  long  journey.  So  Udayana  has  obtained  that  kingdom
that  belonged  to  his  father,  and  having  conquered  all  his
enemies,  rules  the  earth  with  the  help  of  Yaugandharayana."
Having  in  these  words  quickly  told  her  in  confidence  the
story  of  Udayana,  she  again  said  to  her  friend  Kalingasena  :
"  Thus  that  king  is  called  the  King  of  Vatsa,  fair  one,  because
he  rules  in  Vatsa,  and  since  he  comes  of  the  Pandava  lineage,
he  is  also  descended  from  the  race  of  the  sun.  And  the  gods
gave  him  the  name  of  Udayana  because  he  was  born  on  the
mountain  of  the  sunrise,  and  in  this  world  even  the  God  of
Love  is  not  a  match  for  him  in  beauty.  He  alone  is  a  husband
fit  for  you,  most  beautiful  lady  of  the  three  worlds,  and  he,
being  a  lover  of  beauty,  no  doubt  longs  for  you,  who  are
famous  for  it.  But,  my  friend,  his  head  wife  is  Vasavadatta,
the  daughter  of  Chandamahasena.  And  she  selected  him
herself,  deserting  her  relations  in  the  ardour  of  her  passion,
and  so  sparing  the  blushes  of  Usha,  Sakuntala  and  other
maidens.  And  a  son  has  been  born  to  him  by  her,  called
Naravahanadatta,  who  is  appointed  by  the  gods  as  the
future  emperor  of  the  Vidyadharas.  So  it  is  through  fear
of  her  that  the  King  of  Vatsa  does  not  send  here  to  ask  for
your  hand,  but  she  has  been  seen  by  me,  and  she  does  not
vie  with  you  in  the  gift  of  beauty."  When  her  friend  Soma-
prabha  said  this,  Kalingasena,  being  in  love  with  the  King
of  Vatsa,1  answered  her:  "I  know  all  this;  but  what  can
I  do,  as  I  am  under  the  power  of  my  parents  ?  But  in
this  you,  who  know  all  things  and  possess  magic  power,  are
my  refuge."  Somaprabha  then  said  to  her  :  "  The  whole
matter  depends  on  destiny ;  in  proof  of  it  hear  the
following  tale : —

1  For  examples  of  falling  in  love  by  mere  description  see  Chauvin,
Bibliographic  des  Outrages  Arabes,  v,  p.  132.  The  ten  stages  of  Hindu  love-
sickness  have  already  been  described  in  Vol.  II,  p.  9n2.  Cf.  also  the  humorous
story  of  "The  Unwise  Schoolmaster  who  fell  in  Love  by  Report,"  Nights,
Burton,  vol.  v,  pp.  117,  118  ;  and  ditto,  vol.  ix,  p.  222,  "Ibrahim  and  Jamilah."
— n.m.p.


TEJASVATI  AND  SOMADATTA  69


39.  Story  of  Tejasvati1

Once  on  a  time  there  lived  in  Ujjayini  a  king  named
Vikramasena,  and  he  had  a  daughter  named  Tejasvati,
matchless  in  beauty.  And  she  disapproved  of  every  king
who  sued  for  her  hand.  But  one  day,  while  she  was  on  the
roof  of  her  palace,  she  saw  a  man,  and,  as  fate  would  have
it,  she  felt  a  desire  to  meet  him  as  he  was  very  handsome,
and  she  sent  her  confidante  to  him  to  communicate  to  him
her  desire.  The  confidante  went  and  entreated  the  man,
who  shrank  from  such  an  audacious  step,  and  at  last,  with
much  difficulty,  she  made  him,  against  his  will,  agree  to  an
assignation,  saying  :  "  Await,  good  sir,  the  arrival  of  the
princess  at  night  in  this  retired  temple  which  you  see  here."
After  saying  this,  she  took  leave  of  him,  and  went  and  told
the  Princess  Tejasvati,  who  for  her  part  remained  watching
the  sun.  But  that  man,  though  he  had  consented,  fled  some-
where else  out  of  fear :  a  frog  is  not  capable  of  relishing  the
fibres  of  a  bed  of  red  lotuses.

In  the  meanwhile  a  certain  prince  of  high  lineage  came,
as  his  father  was  dead,  to  visit  the  king,  who  had  been  his
father's  friend.  And  that  handsome  young  prince,  named
Somadatta,  whose  kingdom  and  wealth  had  been  taken  by
pretenders,  arriving  at  night,  entered  by  accident,  to  pass
the  night  there,  that  very  temple  in  which  the  confidante  of
the  princess  had  arranged  a  meeting  with  the  man.  While
he  was  there  the  princess,  blind  with  passion,  approached
him,  without  distinguishing  who  he  was,  and  made  him  her
self- chosen  husband.  The  wise  prince  gladly  received  in
silence  the  bride  offered  him  by  fate,  who  foreshadowed  his
union  with  the  future  Fortune  of  Royalty.     And  the  princess

1  Cf.  the  Panchatantra,  Benfey,  vol.  ii,  p.  183  (first  part  of  the  fourth
book),  where  the  merchant's  son  becomes  the  lover  of  the  princess  in  mistake
for  someone  else.  When  she  discovers  her  error  she  lets  him  go  on  his
uttering  a  maxim  about  predestination  being  the  lot  of  man.  This  resembles
the  saying  of  Somadatta  in  the  "Story  of  Phalabhuti "  (No.  24  of  this  work,
Vol.  II,  p.  97).

There  is  a  very  slight  resemblance  to  the  Decameron,  day  2,  nov.  2,
where  Rinaldo  takes  the  place  of  the  Marquis  Azzo,  but  in  this  case  the  fair
lady  is  merely  using  Rinaldo  as  a  "second  best." — n.m.p.


70  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

soon  perceived  that  he  was  very  charming,  and  considered
that  she  had  not  been  deceived  by  the  Creator.  Immedi-
ately they  conversed  together,  and  the  two  separated  accord-
ing to  agreement ;  the  princess  to  her  own  palace,  while  the
king  spent  the  rest  of  the  night  there.

In  the  morning  the  prince  went  and  announced  his  name
by  the  mouth  of  the  warder,  and,  being  recognised,  entered
into  the  presence  of  the  king.  There  he  told  his  sorrow  on
account  of  his  kingdom  having  been  taken  away,  and  other
insults,  and  the  king  agreed  to  assist  him  in  overthrowing
his  enemies.  And  he  determined  to  give  him  the  daughter
he  had  long  desired  to  give  away,  and  then  and  there  told
his  intention  to  the  ministers.  Then  the  queen  told  the  king
his  daughter's  adventure,  having  been  informed  of  it  before
by  herself,  through  the  mouths  of  trusty  confidantes.  Then
the  king  was  astonished  at  finding  that  calamity  had  been
averted  and  his  desire  attained  by  mere  chance,  as  in  the
fable  of  the  crow  and  the  palm,1  and  thereupon  one  of
the  ministers  said  to  the  king  :  "  Fate  watches  to  ensure
the  objects  of  auspicious  persons,  as  good  servants  of  their
masters,  when  the  latter  are  not  on  the  look-out.  And  to
illustrate  this  I  will  tell  you  the  following  tale.     Listen.

39a.  The  Brahman  Harisarman

There  was  a  certain  Brahman  in  a  certain  village,  named
Harisarman.2  He  was  poor  and  foolish  and  in  evil  case  for
want  of  employment,  and  he  had  very  many  children,  that
he  might  reap  the  fruit  of  his  misdeeds  in  a  former  life.
He  wandered  about  begging  with  his  family,  and  at  last
he  reached  a  certain  city,  and  entered  the  service  of  a  rich
householder  called  Sthuladatta.  He  made  his  sons  keepers
of  this  householder's  cows  and  other  possessions,  and  his

1  This  is  well  known  in  India  now.  A  crow  alighted  on  a  palm-tree  when
just  about  to  fall,  and  so  it  appeared  that  his  weight  made  it  fall.  For  this
and  many  other  hints  I  am  indebted  to  Pandit  S.  C.  Mookerjea,  of  the
Hindu  School.

2  Benfey  considers  that  this,  as  well  as  "  Haripriya,"  means  "blockhead  "
(Orient  und  Occident,  vol.  i,  p.  374).


wi


HARISARMAN  RESORTS  TO  STRATEGY        71


wife  a  servant  to  him,  and  he  himself  lived  near  his  house,
performing  the  duty  of  an  attendant.

One  day  there  was  a  feast  on  account  of  the  marriage
of  the  daughter  of  Sthuladatta,  largely  attended  by  many
friends  of  the  bridegroom,  and  merry-makers.  And  then
Harisarman  entertained  a  hope  that  he  would  be  able  to
fill  himself  up  to  the  throat  with  ghee  and  flesh  and  other
dainties,  together  with  his  family,  in  the  house  of  his  patron.
While  he  was  anxiously  expecting  that  occasion,  no  one
thought  of  him.  Then  he  was  distressed  at  getting  nothing
to  eat,  and  he  said  to  his  wife  at  night :  "  It  is  owing  to
my  poverty  and  stupidity  that  I  am  treated  with  such  dis-
respect here  ;  so  I  will  display,  by  means  of  an  artifice,  an
assumed  knowledge,  in  order  that  I  may  become  an  object
of  respect  to  this  Sthuladatta,  and  when  you  get  an  oppor-
tunity, tell  him  that  I  possess  supernatural  knowledge."
He  said  this  to  her,  and  after  turning  the  matter  over  in
his  mind,  while  people  were  asleep  he  took  away  from  the
house  of  Sthuladatta  a  horse  on  which  his  son-in-law  rode.
He  placed  it  in  concealment  at  some  distance,  and  in  the
morning  the  friends  of  the  bridegroom  could  not  find  the
horse,  though  they  searched  in  every  direction.

Then,  while  Sthuladatta  was  distressed  at  the  evil  omen,
and  searching  for  the  thieves  who  had  carried  off  the  horse,
the  wife  of  Harisarman  came  and  said  to  him  :  "  My  husband
is  a  wise  man,  skilled  in  astrology  and  sciences  of  that  kind,
and  he  will  procure  for  you  the  horse  ;  why  do  you  not
ask  him  ?  "  When  Sthuladatta  heard  that,  he  called  that
Harisarman,  who  said  :  "  Yesterday  I  was  forgotten,  but
to-day,  now  the  horse  is  stolen,  I  am  called  to  mind."  And
Sthuladatta  then  propitiated  the  Brahman  with  these
words  :  "I  forgot  you,  forgive  me,"  and  asked  him  to  tell
him  who  had  taken  away  their  horse.  Then  Harisarman
drew  all  kinds  of  pretended  diagrams,  and  said :  "  The  horse
has  been  placed  by  thieves  on  the  boundary  line  south  from
this  place.  It  is  concealed  there,  and  before  it  is  carried  off
to  a  distance,  as  it  will  be  at  close  of  day,  quickly  go  and
bring  it."  When  they  heard  that,  many  men  ran  and  brought
the  horse  quickly,  praising  the  discernment  of  Harisarman.


72  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

Then  HariSarman  was  honoured  by  all  men  as  a  sage,  and
dwelt  there  in  happiness,  honoured  by  Sthuladatta.

Then,  as  days  went  on,  much  wealth,  consisting  of  gold
and  jewels,  was  carried  off  by  a  thief  from  the  palace  of
the  king.  As  the  thief  was  not  known,  the  king  quickly
jr    .,        ,     summoned  HariSarman  on  account  of  his  reputa-

Hansarman  s  ■  »      •       i

Supernatural  tion  for  supernatural  knowledge.  And  he,  when
Knowledge  is  summoned,  tried  to  gain  time,  and  said  :  "I  will
p"  tell  you  to-morrow,"  and  then  he  was  placed  in

a  chamber  by  the  king  and  carefully  guarded.  And  he  was
despondent  about  his  pretended  knowledge.1  Now  in  that
palace  there  was  a  maid  named  Jihva,2  who,  with  the  assist-
ance of  her  brother,  had  carried  off  that  wealth  from  the
interior  of  the  palace  ;  she,  being  alarmed  at  Harisarman's
knowledge,  went  at  night  and  applied  her  ear  to  the  door
of  that  chamber  in  order  to  find  out  what  he  was  about.
And  Harisarman,  who  was  alone  inside,  was  at  that  very
moment  blaming  his  own  tongue,  that  had  made  a  vain
assumption  of  his  knowledge.  He  said  :  "  O  tongue,  what
is  this  that  you  have  done,  through  desire  of  enjoyment  ?
Ill- conducted  one,  endure  now  punishment  in  this  place."
When  Jihva  heard  this,  she  thought  in  her  terror  that  she
had  been  discovered  by  this  wise  man,  and  by  an  artifice
she  managed  to  get  in  where  he  was,  and  falling  at  his  feet,
she  said  to  that  supposed  sage  :  "  Brahman,  here  I  am,  that
Jihva  whom  you  have  discovered  to  be  the  thief  of  the
wealth,  and  after  I  took  it  I  buried  it  in  the  earth  in  a  garden
behind  the  palace,  under  a  pomegranate-tree.  So  spare  me,
and  receive  the  small  quantity  of  gold  which  is  in  my  posses-
sion." When  Harisarman  heard  that,  he  said  to  her  proudly  :
"  Depart,  I  know  all  this  ;  I  know  the  past,  present  and
future  ;  but  I  will  not  denounce  you,  being  a  miserable
creature  that  has  implored  my  protection.  But  whatever
gold  is  in  your  possession  you  must  give  back  to  me."  When
he  said  this  to  the  maid,  she  consented,  and  departed  quickly.
But  Harisarman  reflected  in  his  astonishment :    "  Fate,  if

1  A  MS.  in  the  Sanskrit  College  reads  jnanavijna — i.e.  "the  knowing
one,"  "  the  astrologer."

2  This  word  means  "tongue."


SUPERNATURAL  KNOWLEDGE  !  73

propitious,  brings  about,  as  if  in  sport,  a  thing  that  cannot
be  accomplished,  for  in  this  matter,  when  calamity  was  near,
success  has  unexpectedly  been  attained  by  me.  While  I  was
blaming  my  tongue  [jihvd]  the  thief  Jihva  flung  herself  at
my  feet.  Secret  crimes,  I  see,  manifest  themselves  by  means
of  fear."

In  these  reflections  he  passed  the  night  happily  in  the
chamber.  And  in  the  morning  he  brought  the  king  by
some  skilful  parade  of  pretended  knowledge  into  the  garden,
and  led  him  up  to  the  treasure,  which  was  buried  there,  and
he  said  that  the  thief  had  escaped  with  a  part  of  it.  Then
the  king  was  pleased,  and  proceeded  to  give  him  villages.  But
the  minister,  named  Devajnanin,  whispered  in  the  king's
ear :  "  How  can  a  man  possess  such  knowledge  unattainable
by  men  without  having  studied  treatises  ?  So  you  may
be  certain  that  this  is  a  specimen  of  the  way  he  makes  a
dishonest  livelihood,  by  having  a  secret  intelligence  with
thieves.  So  it  will  be  better  to  test  him  by  some  new  artifice."
Then  the  king  of  his  own  accord  brought  a  new- covered
pitcher,  into  which  he  had  thrown  a  frog,  and  said  to  that
Harisarman  :  "  Brahman,  if  you  can  guess  what  there  is  in
this  pitcher  I  will  do  you  great  honour  to-day."  When  the
Brahman  Harisarman  heard  that,  he  thought  that  his  last
hour  had  come,  and  he  called  to  mind  the  pet  name  of  "frog "
which  his  father  had  given  him  in  his  childhood  in  sport,
and  impelled  by  the  deity  he  apostrophised  himself  by  it,
lamenting  his  hard  fate,  and  suddenly  exclaimed  there  :
"  This  is  a  fine  pitcher  for  you,  frog,  since  suddenly  it  has
become  the  swift  destroyer  of  your  helpless  self  in  this  place."
The  people  there,  when  they  heard  that,  made  a  tumult  of
applause,  because  his  speech  chimed  in  so  well  with  the
object  presented  to  him,  and  murmured  :  "  Ah  !  a  great
sage  ;  he  knows  even  about  the  frog  !  "  Then  the  king,
thinking  that  this  was  all  due  to  knowledge  of  divination,
was  highly  delighted,  and  gave  Harisarman  villages,  with
gold,  umbrella,1  and  vehicles  of  all  kinds.  And  immediately
Harisarman  became  like  a  feudal  chief.

1  See  Vol.  II,  p.  263  et  seq. — n.m.p.


74  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

39.  Story  of  Tejasvati

"  Thus  good  objects  are  brought  about  by  fate  for  those
whose  actions  in  a  former  life  have  been  good.  Accordingly
Fate  made  that  daughter  of  yours,  Tejasvati,  approach
Somadatta,  a  man  of  equal  birth,  and  kept  away  one  who
was  unsuited  to  her."  Hearing  this  from  the  mouth  of
his  minister,  the  King  Vikramasena  gave  his  daughter  to
that  prince  as  if  she  were  the  Goddess  of  Fortune.  Then  the
prince  went  and  overcame  his  enemies  by  the  help  of  his
father-in-law's  host,  and  being  established  in  his  own  kingdom,
lived  happily  in  the  company  of  his  wife.


[M]  "So  true  is  it  that  all  this  happens  by  the  special
favour  of  Fate;  who  on  earth  would  be  able  to  join  you,
lovely  as  you  are,  with  the  King  of  Vatsa,  though  a  suitable
match  for  you,  without  the  help  of  Fate  ?  What  can  I  do
in  this  matter,  friend  Kalingasena  ?  "  Kalingasena,  hearing
this  story  in  private  from  the  mouth  of  Somaprabha,  became
eager  in  her  soul  for  union  with  the  King  of  Vatsa,  and,  in
her  aspirations  after  him,  began  to  feel  in  a  less  degree  the
fear  of  her  relations  and  the  warnings  of  modesty.  Then
the  sun,  the  great  lamp  of  the  three  worlds,  being  about  to
set,  Somaprabha,  the  daughter  of  the  Asura  Maya,  having
with  difficulty  taken  leave,  until  her  morning  return,  of  her
friend,  whose  mind  was  fixed  upon  her  proposed  attempt,
went  through  the  air  to  her  own  home.


THE  "DOCTOR  KNOWALL"  MOTIF  75


1.  NOTE  ON  THE  "DOCTOR  KNOWALL"  MOTIF

The  story  of  Harisarman  resembles  closely  that  of  "  Doctor  Allwissend  "
in  Grimm's  Tales.  It  is  shown  by  Benfey  to  exist  in  various  forms  in  many
countries.  It  is  found  in  the  Siddhi-Kur  (Jiilg,  No.  4,  p.  73  et  seq.),  the
Mongolian  form  of  the  Sanskrit  Vetalapanchavinsati.  In  this  form  of  the  story
the  incident  of  the  frog  in  the  pot  is  omitted,  and  the  other  incidents  are
considerably  altered.  Instead  of  the  king's  treasure  we  find  a  magic  gem,  on
which  the  prosperity  of  the  country  depends ;  it  is  not  stolen,  but  lost  by  the
king's  daughter.  Instead  of  the  horse  we  have  the  cure  of  a  sick  Khan  who
had  been  driven  mad  by  evil  spirits.  The  folly  of  the  man  who  represents
the  Brahman  consists  in  his  choosing  worthless  presents  for  his  reward.  (The
story  is  the  fourth  in  Sagas  from  the  Far  East.)  Benfey  considers  the  fullest
form  of  the  story  to  be  that  in  Schleicher's  Lithuanian  Legends.  In  this  form
of  the  story  we  have  the  stealing  of  the  horse,  but  in  other  points  it  resembles
the  Mongolian  version.  The  Brahman  is  represented  by  a  poor  cottager,  who
puts  up  over  his  door  a  notice  saying  that  he  is  a  doctor,  who  knows  every-
thing and  can  do  everything.  The  third  exploit  of  the  cottager  is  the  finding
of  a  stolen  treasure  which  is  the  second  in  the  Indian  story,  but  his  second  is
a  miraculous  cure  which  is  in  accordance  with  the  Siddhl-Kiir.  The  latter
is  probably  a  late  work;  and  we  may  presume  that  the  Mongols  brought
the  Indian  story  to  Europe,  in  a  form  more  nearly  resembling  that  in  the
Kathd  Sarit  Sdgara  than  that  in  the  Siddhl-Kiir.  In  the  third  exploit  of
the  cottager  in  the  Lithuanian  tale,  which  corresponds  to  the  second  in  the
Indian,  the  treasure  has  been  stolen  by  three  servants.  They  listen  outside
while  the  doctor  is  alone  in  his  room.  When  the  clock  strikes  one,  he  says :
"We  have  one."  When  it  strikes  two,  he  says:  "We  have  two."  When  it
strikes  three,  he  says  :  "  We  have  now  three."  In  their  terror  they  go  to  the
doctor  and  beg  him  not  to  betray  them.     He  is  richly  rewarded.

But,  after  all,  Grimm's  form  of  the  tale  is  nearest  to  the  Sanskrit.  The
dish  with  crabs  in  it,  the  contents  of  which  the  doctor  has  to  guess,  makes
him  exclaim :  "  Ach  ich  armer  Krebs  !  "  This  might  almost  have  been  translated
from  the  Sanskrit,  it  is  so  similar  in  form.  The  guilty  servants  who  stole
the  gold  are  detected  by  the  doctor's  saying  to  his  wife,  "  Margaret,  that  is
the  first,"  meaning  the  first  who  waited  at  table,  and  so  on.

The  story  is  also  found  in  the  Facetiae  of  Henricus  Bebelius,  1506.  Here
a  poor  charcoal-burner  represents  the  Brahman.  He  asks  for  three  days  to
consider.  The  king  gives  him  a  good  dinner,  and  while  the  first  thief  is
standing  at  the  window  he  exclaims  :  "  Jam  unus  accessit !  " — meaning, "  one  day
is  at  an  end."  The  next  day  the  second  thief  comes  to  listen.  The  charcoal-
burner  exclaims :  "  Secundus  accessit !  " — and  so  with  the  third  ;  whereupon  they
all  confess.

Benfey  conceives  himself  to  have  found  the  incident  of  the  horse  in
Poggii  Facetiae  (86th  edit.,  Cracov,  1592,  p.  59).  Here  a  doctor  boasts
a  wonder-working  pill.     A  man  who  has  lost  his  ass  takes  one  of  these  pills.


76  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

It  conducts  him  to  a  bed  of  reeds  where  he  finds  his  ass.  (The  article  from
which  I  have  taken  these  parallels  is  found  in  Benfey's  Orient  und  Occident,
vol.  i,  p.  371  et  seq.)

The  story  in  Grimm  is  No.  98,  and  in    Margaret    Hunt's  Grimm's

Household  Tales  (Bohn  Library,  2  vols.,  1884)  it  appears  in  vol.  ii,  pp.  56,
57,  as  "Doctor  Knowall."  Grimm's  notes  to  this  tale  will  be  found  on
p.  401  of  the  same  volume.  See  also  J.  Bolte,  Anmerkungen  zu  den  Kinder-und
Hausm'drchen  der  Briider  Grimm,  vol.  ii,  p.  401  et  seq.

Apart  from  the  Benfey  reference  already  given,  see  also  his  Panchatantra ,
vol.  i,  p.  374.

Cf.  "  The  Tale  of  the  Weaver  who  became  a  Leech  by  order  of  his  Wife  "
in  the  Nights  (Burton,  Supp.,  vol.  i,  pp.  282-287).  In  this  tale  the  weaver  learns
the  jargon  of  an  itinerant  quack,  copies  his  methods,  and  makes  quite  a  good
living.  This  is  as  far  as  the  "impostor"  part  goes,  for  the  various  clever
deductions  he  makes  are  not  guess-work  or  luck,  so  that  this  latter  part  of
the  story  really  belongs  to  the  "quintessence"  motif,  which  I  shall  discuss  in
a  long  note  to  Chapter  LXXXII.  In  the  Nights  (Burton,  Supp.,  vol.  ii,  pp.
341-343),  W.  A.  Clouston  refers  to  the  tale  of  the  charcoal-burner  in  Dasent's
Tales  from  the  Fjeld,  and  to  the  amusing  story  of  Ahmed  the  Cobbler  in
Sir  John  Malcolm's  Sketches  of  Persia,  chap.  xx.  He  gives  a  long  extract  from
this  latter  story,  which  is  supplementary  to  that  already  given  in  his  Popular
Tales  and  Fictions,  vol.  ii,  pp.  413-421.  Here  will  be  found  several  other
references,  including  one  to  Crane's  Italian  Popular  Tales,  pp.  293,  314;  and
to  a  Sinhalese  variant  translated  by  W.  Goonetilleke  in  the  Orientalist  for
February  1884.

See  also  Cosquin,  Contes  populaires  de  Lorraine,  vol.  ii,  pp.  187-193;
Sebillot,  Folk-Lore  de  France,  vol.  iii,  p.  335  ;  Montaiglon,  Fabliaux,  iii,  p.  370 ;
Kennedy,  Fireside  Stories,  p.  1 16 ;  Green,  Modern  Arabic  Stories,  p.  52;
Lidzbarski,  Geschichten  und  Lieder  aus  den  neuaram'dischen  Handschriften  zu
Berlin,  1 896,  p.  65  ;  Bompas,  Folklore  of  the  Santal  Parganas,  No.  68,  p.  206 ;
and  Parker,  Village  Folk-Tales  of  Ceylon,  No.  23,  p.  179.

Cf.  the  sixth  fable  of  night  1 3  of  Straparola  (trans.  W.  G.  Waters,  London,
1894,  vol.  ii,  pp.  277-279),  in  which  the  widow's  foolish  son  Lucilio,  mis-
understanding his  mother's  meaning,  goes  to  the  city  to  look  for  "  the  good
day."  Three  men,  on  their  way  to  dig  up  a  treasure  they  have  found,  wish
him,  in  turn,  a  good  day.  Each  time  Lucilio  says  ;  "  Aha !  I  have  one  of
them  !  " — meaning  one  of  the  good  days.  The  men  become  frightened,  and
Lucilio  gets  a  good  share  of  the  treasure.  Several  analogues  to  the  tale  are
given  on  p.  322  of  the  same  volume.  Those  which  have  not  already  been
mentioned  are  as  follows  : —

Morlini,  Novellce  fabulce  et  comedies,  nov.  29,  "  De  matre  quae  desidiosum
filium  ut  repetiret  bonum  diem  misit";  Visentini,  Fiabe  Mantovani,  No.  41,
"  Gambara " ;  Gonzenbach,  Sicilianische  Mdrchen,  No.  57 ;  and  Irubriani,
Novellaja  Milanese,  nov.  10.

Chauvin,  Bibliographic  des  Ouvrages  Arabes,  viii,  pp.  105,  106,  gives  a  few
further  references. — n.m.p.


THE  STORY  OF  HARISARMAN  77


2.  METRICAL  VERSION  OF  THE  STORY  OF  HARISARMAN


The  following  metrical  version  of  the  Story  of  Harisarman  was  translated
by  the  Rev.  B.  Hale  Wortham  and  printed  in  the  Journ.  Roy.  As.  Soc,
vol.  xviii,  N.S.,  1886,  pp.  16-20.  It  is  reproduced  here  in  full  by  kind
permission  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society.

Once  on  a  time  within  a  certain  town

There  lived  a  Brahman ;  he  was  very  poor,

And  foolish  too.     Moreover,  he  had  naught

Wherewith  to  earn  a  livelihood  ;  his  case

Was  altogether  very  bad.     Besides  he  had

No  end  of  children  ;  thus  the  deity

Would  punish  him  for  all  the  wicked  deeds

Committed  in  some  former  life.     So  then

The  Brahman  (Harisarman  was  his  name)

Wandered  about,  with  all  his  family,

To  beg  for  alms  :  and  in  his  wanderings

He  chanced  upon  a  village.     There  he  stayed,

And  in  a  rich  householder's  family

He  entered  into  service.     While  his  sons

Tended  the  cows,  and  kept  their  master's  goods,

His  wife  served  him,  and  in  a  dwelling  near

He  lived  himself,  performing  day  by  day

The  tasks  appointed  in  his  master's  house.

One  day  the  daughter  of  the  householder

Was  married,  and  a  mighty  feast  was  made,

And  friends  from  far  and  near  invited  came.

Then  was  the  Brahman  pleased,  because  he  thought

That  he  would  cram  himself  up  to  the  throat

With  dainties ;  but  no  one  remembered  him

Nor  asked  him  to  the  feast.     When  night  had  come,

Filled  with  distress  because  his  hopes  had  failed,

He  called  his  wife  to  him  : — "  Stupid,"  he  said,

"  And  poor  am  I  :  men  therefore  with  disdain

Put  me  aside :  now  by  an  artifice

Will  I  deceive  them,  and  I  shall  appear

Wise  and  discerning.     This  must  be  your  part

To  tell  my  master,  when  you  have  the  chance,

That  I  am  learned  in  magic  art.     Respect

Shall  then  be  paid  me."     So  a  plan  he  formed

And  secretly  by  night  he  stole  the  horse

On  which  the  bridegroom  rode.     When  morning  came,

The  bridegroom's  men  searched  far  and  near,  but  found

Him  not,  for  Harisarman  had  concealed


78  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

The  horse  in  some  far-distant  place.     Then  came

The  Brahman's  wife  and  said :  "  Why  not  consult

My  husband  ?  for  he  knows  astrology

And  all  the  sciences.     Lo  !  he  will  find

The  horse  for  you."     Therefore  the  householder

Sent  messengers  to  ask  the  Brahman's  help.

Then  Hari^arman  said  :  "  To-day  the  horse

Is  stolen,  and  you  call  me  to  your  house,

'Twas  only  yesterday  I  was  ignored."

"  I  pray  thee  pardon,"  said  the  householder ;

"  Indeed  we  did  forget " — with  such-like  words

He  turned  aside  the  Brahman's  wrath,  and  said  :

"  Tell  me,  where  is  the  horse  ?  "     The  Brahman  drew

Elaborate  diagrams,  and  feigned  to  make

Deep  calculations.     "  You  will  find  the  horse

(At  last  he  said)  in  such  and  such  a  place,

Be  quick  and  fetch  him  home,  before  the  thieves

Convey  him  further."     Then  they  went  and  found

The  horse  and  brought  him  back,  praising  the  skill

Of  Hari^arman.     All  men  honoured  him

And  took  him  for  a  sage.     It  came  to  pass

After  some  time  the  palace  of  the  king

Was  entered  by  a  thief,  who  carried  off

Jewels  and  gold.     Now  HariSarman's  fame

Had  reached  the  royal  ears,  therefore  the  king

Sent  for  the  Brahman.     He,  when  summoned,  came,

But  gave  no  answer,  trying  to  evade

The  question.     "  When  to-morrow  comes,"  he  said,

"  An  answer  I  will  give  you."     Then  the  king

Locked  Hari£arman  up  within  a  room

And  placed  a  watch.     Filled  with  despondency,

The  Brahman  thought  but  little  would  avail

All  his  pretended  wisdom.     In  that  place

There  was  a  maid  called  Jihva ;  it  so  chanced

That  she,  helped  by  her  brother,  was  the  thief.

This  maid,  o'ercome  with  terror  at  the  skill

Of  Hari^arman,  listened  at  the  door

By  night,  intent  on  finding  out,  if  possible,

What  he  might  be  about.     Just  at  that  time

The  Brahman,  who  was  in  the  room  alone,

Taking  to  task  his  tongue,  which  had  assumed

To  know  that  which  it  knew  not,  said  : — "Alas!

O  Jihva,  what  is  this  that  thou  hast  done

Through  lust  of  pleasure  ?     Evil  one  !  endure

Thy  punishment."     The  servant,  terrified,

Thought  that  her  crime  was  known,  and  entering  in,

Fell  at  the  Brahman's  feet,  whom  she  supposed


THE  STORY  OF  HARISARMAN  79

To  have  all  knowledge,  and  she  said  :  "  O  sir,

'Tis  true  !     I  am  the  thief!     I  Jihva  stole

The  gold  and  jewels,  and  I  buried  them

Under  the  roots  of  a  pomegranate-tree

Behind  the  palace.     Take  the  gold,  I  pray,

Which  I  have  left,  and  spare  me ;  I  confess

My  crime."     When  Harisarman  heard  these  words,

He  said  with  haughtiness  :  "  I  know  all  this  !

Depart !     The  future,  past  and  present  lie

Within  my  ken ;  but  I  will  not  denounce

You  as  the  thief,  because  you  are  a  wretch

Who  have  implored  my  mercy.     Bring  to  me

Whatever  gold  you  have."     Without  delay

The  maid  departed.     Then  the  Brahman  thought

In  wonder :  "  That  which  seemed  impossible

Fate  has  accomplished,  as  it  were  in  sport —

Fate  well  disposed  to  me.     Calamity

Seemed  close  at  hand,  but  yet  I  have  attained

Success  beyond  my  hopes.     I  blamed  my  tongue,

The  cause  of  all  my  ills,  when  suddenly

Before  my  very  feet  Jihva  the  thief

Falls  prostrate.     Secret  crimes  are  brought  to  light

(This  I  perceive)  by  fear."     With  thoughts  like  these

He  passed  the  night  rejoicing.     Morning  dawned,

And  then  he  led  the  king,  with  much  pretence

Of  wisdom,  to  the  garden  where  the  gold

Had  been  concealed.     Showing  him  what  remained,

He  said  the  thief  had  carried  part  away.

Then  was  the  king  delighted,  and  he  gave

To  Harisarman  honours  and  rewards.

But  Devajnanin,  the  chief  minister,

Said  to  the  king  in  private,  whispering

Into  his  ear :  "  How  should  a  man  possess

Knowledge  like  this,  which  ordinary  men

May  not  attain,  seeing  his  ignorance.

He  knows  naught  of  the  Sastras — of  the  books

Treating  of  science.     So  you  may  be  sure

He  has  a  secret  partnership  with  thieves,

And  makes  his  living  by  dishonest  means.

Try  him  again  by  some  new  artifice —

And  test  his  wisdom."     To  this  scheme  the  king

Gladly  assented,  and  he  placed  a  frog

Within  a  covered  pitcher,  newly  bought,

And  said  to  Harisarman  :  "  Tell  me  now,

What  is  within  this  pitcher  ?     If  you  guess

Aright,  then  will  I  honour  you  indeed."

The  Brahman  heard  these  words,  and  thought  his  end


80  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

Had  come  at  length  :  then  rose  within  his  mind

The  name  of  "  frog,"  by  which  in  sportiveness

His  father  used  to  call  him  ;  suddenly,

Impelled  by  some  divinity,  he  spoke,

Lamenting  his  untimely  fate,  and  said,

Addressing  thus  himself:  "  Poor  little  frog  !

Surely  this  pitcher  is  the  overthrow

Of  all  your  hopes,  for  on  you  in  this  place

Destruction  swiftly  falls."     Then  all  who  heard

The  Brahman's  words,  with  loud  applause  exclaimed

"  Indeed,  a  mighty  sage  !  he  even  saw

Within  the  pitcher."     Then,  indeed,  the  king,

Thinking  that  HariSarman's  skill  was  due

To  magic  art,  gave  to  him  villages

And  wealth,  and  outward  marks  of  royal  state.

The  humble  Brahman  thus  became  a  prince.


CHAPTER  XXXI

THE  next  morning  Somaprabha  arrived,  and  Kalinga-
[M]  sena  said  to  her  friend  in  her  confidential  con-
versation :  "  My  father  certainly  wishes  to  give  me
to  Prasenajit ;  I  heard  this  from  my  mother ;  and  you  have
seen  that  he  is  an  old  man.  But  you  have  described  the
King  of  Vatsa  in  such  a  way  in  the  course  of  conversation  1
that  my  mind  has  been  captivated  by  him  entering  in  through
the  gate  of  my  ear.  So  first  show  me  Prasenajit,  and  then
take  me  there,  where  the  King  of  Vatsa  is.  What  do  I  care
for  my  father  or  my  mother  ?  "  When  the  impatient  girl
said  this,  Somaprabha  answered  her  :  "If  you  must  go,  then
let  us  go  in  the  chariot  that  travels  through  the  air.  But
you  must  take  with  you  all  your  retinue,  for  as  soon  as  you
have  seen  the  King  of  Vatsa  you  will  find  it  impossible  to
return.  And  you  will  never  see  or  think  of  your  parents,
and  when  you  have  obtained  your  beloved  you  will  forget
even  me,  as  I  shall  be  at  a  distance  from  you.  For  I  shall
never  enter  your  husband's  house,  my  friend."  When  the
princess  heard  that  she  wept,  and  said  to  her  :  "  Then  bring
that  King  of  Vatsa  here,  my  friend,  for  I  shall  not  be  able
to  exist  there  a  moment  without  you.  Was  not  Aniruddha
brought  to  Usha  by  Chitralekha  ?  And  though  you  know
it,  hear  from  my  mouth  that  story.


40.  Story  of  Usha  and  Aniruddha

The  Asura  Bana  had  a  daughter,  famous  under  the  name
of  Usha.  And  she  propitiated  Gauri,  who  granted  her  a
boon  in  order  that  she  might  obtain  a  husband,  saying  to

1  Tawney  obviously  found  some  difficulty  in  katharupe.  In  the  D.  text
we  read  yatha  rupe,  which  makes   the   sense  much  better:    "but  you  have

described  the  beauty  of  the  King  of  Vatsa  in  such  a  way  that "     See

Speyer,  op.  cit.}  pp.  109,  HO. — n.m.p.

vol.  in.  81  F


82  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

her:  "He  to  whom  you  shall  be  united  in  a  dream  shall
be  your  husband/'  Then  she  saw  in  a  dream  a  certain
man  looking  like  a  divine  prince.  She  was  married  to  him
according  to  the  gandharva  form  of  marriage,1  and  after
obtaining  the  joy  of  union  with  him  she  woke  up  at  the
close  of  night.  When  she  did  not  see  the  husband  she  had
seen  in  her  dream,  but  beheld  the  traces  of  his  presence,  she
remembered  the  boon  of  Gauri,  and  was  full  of  disquietude,
fear  and  astonishment.  And  being  miserable  without  the
husband  whom  she  had  seen  in  her  dream,  she  confessed
all  to  her  friend  Chitralekha,  who  questioned  her.  And
Chitralekha,  being  acquainted  with  magic,  thus  addressed
that  Usha,  who  knew  not  the  name  of  her  lover  nor  any
sign  whereby  to  recognise  him  :  "  My  friend,  this  is  the
result  of  the  boon  of  the  goddess  Gauri.  What  doubt  can
we  allege  in  this  matter  ?  But  how  are  you  to  search
for  your  lover,  as  he  is  not  to  be  recognised  by  any  token  ?
I  will  sketch  for  you  the  whole  world,  gods,  Asuras  and
men,  in  case  you  may  be  able  to  recognise  him  2  ;  and
point  him  out  to  me  among  them  in  order  that  I  may
bring  him."

Thus  spoke  Chitralekha,  and  when  Usha  answered,  "  By
all  means  !  "  she  painted  for  her  with  coloured  pencils  the
whole  world  in  order.  Thereupon  Usha  exclaimed  joy-
fully :  "  There  he  is ! "  and  pointed  out  with  trembling
finger  Aniruddha,  in  Dvaravati,  of  the  race  of  Yadu.  Then
Chitralekha  said  :  "  My  friend,  you  are  fortunate,  in  that
you  have  obtained  for  a  husband  Aniruddha,  the  grand-
son of  the  adorable  Vishnu.  But  he  lives  sixty  thousand
yojanas3  from  here."     When  Usha  heard  that,  she  said  to

1  See  Vol.  I,  pp.  87,  88.— n.m.p.

2  Cf  Ralston's  Russian  Folk-Tales,  p.  240.  So  Arthur  in  the  Romance  of
Artus  de  la  Bretagne  (Liebrecht's  Dunlop,  p.  107)  falls  in  love  with  a  lady  he
sees  in  a  dream.  Liebrecht  in  his  note  at  the  end  of  the  book  tells  us  that
this  is  a  common  occurrence  in  romances,  being  found  in  Amadis  of  Greece,
Palmerin  of  Oliva,  the  Romans  dcs  Sept  Sages,  the  Fabliau  of  the  Chevalier  a  la
Trappe,  the  Nibelungenlied,  etc.,  and  ridiculed  by  Chaucer  in  his  Rime  of
Sir  Topas.  He  also  refers  to  Athenasus,  p.  575,  and  the  Hermolimus  of  Lucian^
See  also  Chauvin,  op.  cit.,  v,  p.  132. — n.m.p.

3  See  Vol.  I,  p.  3»l. — n.m.p.


THE  BLISS  OF  UNION  83

her,  overpowered  by  excessive  longing :  "  Friend,  if  I  cannot
to-day  repair  to  his  bosom  cool  as  sandal- wood,1  know  that
I  am  already  dead,  being  burned  up  with  the  uncontrollable
fire  of  love."  When  Chitralekha  heard  this,  she  consoled  her
dear  friend,  and  immediately  flew  up  and  went  through  the
air  to  the  city  of  Dvaravati ;  and  she  beheld  it  in  the  middle
of  the  sea,  producing  with  its  vast  and  lofty  palaces  an  ap-
pearance as  if  the  peaks  of  the  Churning  Mountain  2  had  again
been  flung  into  the  ocean.  She  found  Aniruddha  asleep  in
that  city  at  night,  and  woke  him  up,  and  told  him  that
Usha  had  fallen  in  love  with  him  on  account  of  having  seen
him  in  a  dream.  And  she  took  the  prince,  who  was  eager
for  the  interview,  looking  exactly  as  he  had  before  appeared
in  Usha's  dream,3  and  returned  from  Dvaravati  in  a  moment
by  the  might  of  her  magic.  And  flying  with  him  through
the  air,  she  introduced  that  lover  secretly  into  the  private
apartments  of  Usha,  who  was  awaiting  him.

When  Usha  beheld  that  Aniruddha  arrived  in  bodily
form,  resembling  the  moon,  there  was  a  movement  in  her
limbs  resembling  the  tide  of  the  sea.4  Then  she  remained
there  with  that  sweetheart  who  had  been  given  her  by  her
friend,  in  perfect  happiness,  as  if  with  Life  embodied  in
visible  form.  But  her  father  Bana,  when  he  heard  it,  was
angry  ;  however,  Aniruddha  conquered  him  by  his  own
valour  and  the  might  of  his  grandfather.  Then  Usha  and
Aniruddha  returned  to  Dvaravati  and  became  inseparable,
like  Siva  and  Parvati.5

1  Cf.  Kamalavatl's  outburst  of  grief  when  she  thinks  the  parrot  (Vikrama)
is  dead.  Bloomfield,  "  On  the  Art  of  Entering  Another's  Body,"  Proc.  Amer.
Phil.  Soc,  vol.  lvi,  1917,  p.  40.— n.m.p.

2  I.e.  Mandara.     See  Vol.  I,  p.  3rc2.— n.m.p.

3  The  B.  text  is  obscure.  The  D.  text  reads  asvapnavrittantam  for
svapnavatara ;  thus  the  meaning  is :  "  took  him,  having  made  him  know  the
story  of  her  dream,  just  as  it  was."     See  Speyer,  op.  cit.,  p.  1 10.— n.m.p.

4  Velata  is  evidently  corrupt. It  is  indeed.     The  sloka  in  the  D.  text

ends  nangeshv  avartata,  the  whole  sense  being :  "  When  U.  beheld  A.  arrived
in  bodily  form,  her  limbs  could  not  contain  the  emotion  within  her,  as  little  as
the  sea-tide  can  do  so  under  the  influence  of  the  moon."  See  Speyer,  op.  cit.,
p.  1 10. — N.M.P.

5  This  is  to  be  understood  literally  of  Siva  and  Parvati,  but  metaphorically
of  Usha  and  Aniruddha.


84  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

[M]  "  Thus  Chitralekha  united  Usha  with  her  lover  in
one  day,  but  I  consider  you,  my  friend,  far  more  powerful
than  her.  So  bring  me  the  King  of  Vatsa  here  ;  do  not
delay."  When  Somaprabha  heard  this  from  Kalingasena,
she  said  :  "  Chitralekha,  a  nymph  of  heaven,  might  take  up
a  strange  man  and  bring  him,  but  what  can  one  like  myself
do  in  the  matter,  who  never  touch  any  man  but  my  husband  ?
So  I  will  take  you,  my  friend,  to  the  place  where  the  King
of  Vatsa  is,  having  first  shown  you  your  suitor  Prasenajit."
When  Somaprabha  made  this  proposal  to  Kalingasena,  she
consented,  and  immediately  ascended  with  her  the  magic
chariot  prepared  by  her,  and  setting  out  through  the  air
with  her  treasures  and  her  retinue,  she  went  off  unknown  to
her  parents.  For  women  impelled  by  love  regard  neither
height  nor  depth  in  front  of  them,  as  a  horse  urged  on  by  his
rider  does  not  fear  the  keenest  sword-edge.

First  she  came  to  Sravasti,  and  beheld  from  a  distance
the  King  Prasenajit  white  with  age,  who  had  gone  out  to
hunt,  distinguished  by  a  chowrie1  frequently  waved,  which

1  The  chowrie  or  chowry  (Skt.  cluimara)  is  the  fly-whisk  made  from  the
bushy  tail  of  the  Tibetan  yak  (Bos  grunniens).  It  has  already  been  mentioned
several  times  in  Vol.  II  (pp.  80,  90,  111  and  162).  The  chowrie  has  been  an
emblem  of  royalty  in  Asia  from  a  very  early  date,  where,  with  the  umbrella,
it  forms  part  of  the  regalia.  We  noticed  (Vol.  II,  p.  264)  that  it  figured  in
the  regalia  of  the  Burmese  kings.  We  also  saw  (Vol.  II,  p.  162)  that  the
auspicious  marks  of  Naravahanadatta  at  his  birth  were  those  on  his  feet  which
resembled  umbrellas  and  chowries,  at  once  showing  his  fitness  to  become  a
great  king.

As  a  fly-whisk  it  was  often  set  in  a  costly  gold,  silver  or  ivory  handle.
Thus  Mas'udI  says :  "  They  export  from  this  country  the  hair  named  al-zamar
(or  al-chamar)  of  which  those  fly-flaps  are  made,  with  handles  of  silver  or
ivory,  which  attendants  held  over  the  heads  of  kings  when  giving  audience  "
(I,  385).  It  was  also  used  like  a  plume  in  the  horse-trappings.  Thus,  in
describing  the  great  speed  at  which  a  horse  is  moving,  Kfilidasa  says  in  his
Vikramorvasi  (Act  I) :

"The  waving  chowrie  on  the  steed's  broad  brow
Points  backward,  motionless  as  in  a  picture."

(Wilson,  Theatre  of  the  Hindus t  vol.  ii,  1827,  pp.  17,  18.)

Cosmas  of  Alexandria,  the  merchant  and  traveller  who  turned  monk
about  a.d.  545,  gives  an  amusing  description  of  the  yak  in  his  Topographia
Christiana  (Book  XI):


LOVE  AT  FIRST  SIGHT!  85

seemed  at  a  distance  to  repel  her,  as  if  saying :  "  Leave
this  old  man."  And  Somaprabha  pointed  him  out  with
a  scornful  laugh,  saying :  "  Look !  this  is  the  man  to
whom  your  father  wishes  to  give  you."  Then  she  said
to  Somaprabha:  "  Old  age  has  chosen  him  for  her  own,
what  other  female  will  choose  him?  So  take  me  away
from  here  quickly,  my  friend,  to  the  King  of  Vatsa."
Immediately  Kalingasena  went  with  her  to  the  city  of
Kausambi  through  the  air.  Then  she  beheld  from  a  dis-
tance with  eagerness  that  King  of  Vatsa,  pointed  out  by
her  friend,  in  a  garden,  as  the  female  partridge  beholds  the
nectar-rayed  moon.

With  dilated  eye  and  hand  placed  on  the  heart,  she  seemed
to  say  :  "  He  has  entered  my  soul  by  this  path."  Then  she
exclaimed  :  "  Friend,  procure  me  a  meeting  here  with  the
King  of  Vatsa  this  very  day ;  for  having  seen  him  I  am
not  able  to  wait  a  moment."  But  when  she  said  this  her
friend  Somaprabha  answered  her :   "  I  have  seen  to-day  an

"This  Wild  Ox  is  a  great  beast  of  India,  and  from  it  is  got  the  thing
called  Tupha,  with  which  officers  in  the  field  adorn  their  horses  and  pennons.
They  tell  of  this  beast  that  if  his  tail  catches  in  a  tree  he  will  not  budge,
but  stands  stock-still,  being  horribly  vexed  at  losing  a  single  hair  of  his  tail ;
so  the  natives  come  and  cut  his  tail  off,  and  then  when  he  has  lost  it
altogether  he  makes  his  escape  !  Such  is  the  nature  of  the  animal."  (See
Yule  and  Cordier,  Cathay  and  the  Way  Thither,  Hakluyt  Society,  vol.  i,  p.  223.)
See  also  Yule  and  Cordier's  interesting  note  on  the  wild  and  tame  yak  in
their  edition  of  Marco  Polo,  vol.  i,  pp.  277-279-

In  Book  III,  chap,  xviii,  Polo  writes:  "They  have  such  faith  in  the
ox,  and  hold  it  for  a  thing  so  holy,  that  when  they  go  to  the  wars  they
take  of  the  hair  of  the  wild  ox,  whereof  I  have  elsewhere  spoken,  and
wear  it  tied  to  the  necks  of  their  horses ;  or,  if  serving  on  foot,  they  hang
this  hair  to  their  shields,  or  attach  it  to  their  own  hair.  And  so  this  hair
bears  a  high  price,  since  without  it  nobody  goes  to  the  wars  in  any  good
heart.  For  they  believe  that  anyone  who  has  it  shall  come  scatheless  out
of  battle."  In  a  note  on  this  passage,  Yule,  op.  cit.,  vol.  ii,  p.  359^6,  says :
"  The  use  of  the  Yak's  tail  as  a  military  ornament  had  nothing  to  do  with
the  sanctity  of  the  Brahmani  ox,  but  is  one  of  the  Pan-Asiatic  usages,  of
which  there  are  so  many.  A  vivid  account  of  the  extravagant  profusion
with  which  swaggering  heroes  in  South  India  used  those  ornaments  will  be
found  in  P.  delta  Valle,  ii,  662."

For  further  references  see  Yule's  Hobson  Jobson,  under  "Chowry"
and  "  Yak." — n.m.p.


86  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

unfavourable  omen,1  so  remain,  my  friend,  this  day  quiet
and  unobserved  in  this  garden  ;  do  not,  my  friend,  send  go-
betweens  backwards  and  forwards.  To-morrow  I  will  come
v  j.         .     and  devise   some  expedient  for  your  meeting ;

Kalmgasena  *  /    .  °

is  impatient  to  at  present,  O  thou  whose  home  is  in  my  heart,
meet  the  King  \  desire  to  return  to  the  home  of  my  husband."
Having  said  this,  Somaprabha  departed  thence,
after  leaving  her  there ;  and  the  King  of  Vatsa,  leaving  the
garden,  entered  his  palace.  Then  Kalingasena,  remaining
there,  sent  her  chamberlain,  giving  him  her  message  ex-
plicitly, to  the  King  of  Vatsa  ;   and  this  she  did,  though

1  On  p.  4-6n2  I  gave  a  list  of  unfavourable  omens  from  Southern  India.  I
now  add  a  few  from  various  castes  of  Central  India,  taken  from  Russell's
Tribes  and  Castes  of  the  Central  Provinces,  191 6.

If  a  Gond,  when  starting  on  a  journey  in  the  morning,  should  meet  a
tiger,  cat,  hare,  or  a  four-horned  deer,  he  will  return  and  postpone  his  journey
(vol.  iii,  p.  105).  Among  the  Korkus  it  is  inauspicious  when  starting  out  on
any  business  to  see  a  black-faced  monkey  or  a  hare  passing  either  on  the
left  or  right,  or  a  snake  crossing  in  front.  It  is  also  a  bad  omen  for  a  hen  to
cackle  or  lay  eggs  at  night  (vol.  iii,  p.  564).  The  Parjas  consider  a  snake,
jackal,  hare,  or  a  dog  wagging  its  ears  are  unlucky  objects  to  see  when
starting  a  journey — also  a  "dust  devil"  blowing  along  in  front  (vol.  iv,
p.  377).

The  following  is  a  list  of  unfavourable  omens  given  by  a  member  of  the
Sansia  caste  of  wandering  criminals  : —

"  If  we  see  a  cat  when  we  are  near  the  place  where  we  intend  to  commit
a  dacoity,  or  we  hear  the  relations  of  a  dead  person  lamenting,  or  hear  a
person  sneeze  while  cooking  his  meal,  or  see  a  dog  run  away  with  a  portion
of  any  person's  food,  or  a  kite  screams  while  sitting  on  a  tree,  or  a  woman
breaks  the  earthen  vessel  in  which  she  may  have  been  drawing  water,  we
consider  the  omen  unfavourable.  If  a  person  drops  his  turban,  or  we  meet  a
corpse,  or  the  Jemadar  has  forgotten  to  put  some  bread  into  his  waistbelt,  or
any  dacoit  forgets  his  axe  or  spear,  or  sees  a  snake  whether  dead  or  alive ;
these  omens  are  also  considered  unfavourable  and  we  do  not  commit  the
dacoity"  (vol.  iv,  p.  493).

Another  interesting  list  of  unfavourable  omens  is  given  by  Krishnaji,
the  author  of  Ratan-mala.  In  describing  the  reasons  for  the  defeat  of  an  army
he  says  that  on  its  way  to  the  field,  u  First  ...  a  man  sneezed  when  he  met
them,  a  dog  howled — an  omen  not  good — a  cat  passed  them  on  the  right  hand,
a  donkey  brayed,  and  a  kite  cried  terribly.  Meeting  them,  came  a  widow
and  a  Sunyasee,  a  Brahmin  without  a  teeluk  on  his  forehead,  a  person  dressed
in  mourning  garments,  one  who  carried  a  plate  of  flour,  and  a  woman  with
her  hair  dishevelled."  (See  Forbes,  Rds  Mala,  edited  by  H.  G.  Rawlinson,
vol.  ii,  1924,  p.  316.)— n.m.p.


YAUGANDHARAYANA  EXERCISES  TACT        87

previously  forbidden  by  her  friend,  who  understood  omens.
Love,  when  recently  enthroned  in  the  breasts  of  young
women,  is  impatient  of  all  restraint.  And  the  chamberlain
went  and  announced  himself  by  the  mouth  of  the  warder,
and  immediately  entering,  thus  addressed  the  King  of  Vatsa  :
"  O  King,  the  daughter  of  Kalingadatta,  the  king  who  rules
over  Takshasila,  Kalingasena  by  name,  having  heard  that
you  are  most  handsome,  has  come  here  to  choose  you  for  a
husband,  abandoning  her  relatives,  having  accomplished  the
journey  in  a  magic  car  that  travels  through  the  air,  together
with  her  attendants  ;  and  she  has  been  conducted  here  by
her  confidante,  named  Somaprabha,  who  travels  invisible,
the  daughter  of  the  Asura  Maya,  the  wife  of  Nadakuvara.
I  have  been  sent  by  her  to  inform  you  ;  do  you  receive  her  ;
let  there  be  union  of  you  two  as  of  the  moonlight  and  the
moon."  When  the  king  heard  this  from  the  chamberlain,
he  welcomed  him,  saying :  "I  consent,"  and,  being  delighted,
he  honoured  him  with  gold  and  garments.  And  summoning
his  chief  minister,  Yaugandharayana,  he  said  to  him  :  "  The
daughter  of  King  Kalingadatta,  who  is  called  Kalingasena,
has  come  of  her  own  accord  to  choose  me  as  a  husband  ;  so
tell  me  quickly,  when  shall  I  marry  her  ?  for  she  is  not  to  be
rejected."

The  minister  Yaugandharayana,  when  the  King  of  Vatsa
said  this  to  him,  regarding  what  would  be  best  for  his
master  in  the  long  run,  reflected  for  a  moment  as  follows  x  :
"  Kalingasena  is  certainly  famed  for  beauty  in  the  three
worlds  ;  there  is  no  other  like  her  ;  even  the  gods  are  in
love  with  her.  If  this  King  of  Vatsa  obtain  her,  he  will
abandon  everything  else,  and  then  the  Queen  Vasavadatta
will  lose  her  life,  and  then  the  Prince  Naravahanadatta  will
perish,  and  Padmavati  out  of  love  for  him  will  find  life
hard  to  retain ;  and  then  Chandamahasena  and  Pradyota,
the  fathers  of  the  two  queens,  will  lose  their  lives  or  become
hostile  ;  and  thus  utter  ruin  will  follow.  On  the  other  hand,
it  will  not  do  to  forbid  the  match,  since  the  vicious  passion  of
this  king  will  increase  if  he  is  thwarted.  So  I  will  put  off  the
time  of  his  marriage  in  order  to  attain  a  favourable  issue."

1  I  read  evam  for  eva.


88  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

Having  thus  reflected,  Yaugandharayana  said  to  the  King
of  Vatsa  :  "  O  King,  you  are  fortunate  in  that  this  Kalinga-
sena has  of  her  own  accord  come  to  your  house,  and  the
king,  her  father,  has  become  your  servant.  So  you  must
consult  the  astrologers,  and  marry  her  in  accordance  with
good  custom  at  an  auspicious  time,  for  she  is  the  daughter
of  a  great  king.  To-day  give  her  a  suitable  palace  to  dwell
in  by  herself,  and  send  her  male  and  female  slaves,  and  robes
and  ornaments. "  When  his  chief  minister  gave  him  this
advice,  the  King  of  Vatsa  approved  it,  and  with  glad  heart
performed  it  all  with  special  attention.  Then  Kalingasena
entered  the  palace  assigned  her  for  residence,  a*nd  considering
her  desire  attained,  was  exceedingly  delighted.

The  wise  Yaugandharayana,  for  his  part,  immediately
left  the  king's  court,  went  to  his  own  house,  and  reflected  :
"  Often  procrastination  serves  to  avert  an  inauspicious
Yaugandham-  measure.  For  long  ago,  when  Indra  had  fled
yana  tries  to  on  account  of  having  caused  the  death  of  a
gam  time  Brahman,  and  Nahusha  obtained  the  sovereignty
over  the  gods,  he  fell  in  love  with  Sachi,1  and  she  was
saved  by  the  preceptor  of  the  gods,2  to  whom  she  had
fled  for  refuge.  For  in  order  to  gain  time  he  kept  saying,
'  She  will  come  to  you  to-day  or  to-morrow,'  until  Nahusha
was  destroyed  by  the  curse  of  a  Brahman,  uttered  with  an
angry  roar,  and  Indra  regained  the  sovereignty  of  the  gods.
In  the  same  way  I  must  keep  putting  off  my  master."  Having
thus  reflected,  the  minister  secretlv  made  an  arrangement
with  the  astrologers  that  they  were  to  fix  a  distant  date.

Then  the  Queen  Vasavadatta  found  out  what  had  taken
place,  and  summoned  the  prime  minister  to  her  palace.
When  he  entered  and  bowed  before  her,  the  queen  said  to
him,  weeping  :  "  Noble  sir,  you  said  to  me  long  ago  :  '  Queen,
as  long  as  I  remain  where  I  am  you  shall  have  no  other  rival
but  Padmavati,'  and  observe  now,  this  Kalingasena  is  about
to  be  married  here  ;  and  she  is  beautiful,  and  my  husband
is  attached  to  her,  so  you  have  proved  a  prophet  of  false-
hood and  I  am  now  a  dead  woman."  When  the  minister
Yaugandharayana  heard  this,  he  said  to  her  :  "  Be  composed,

1  The  wife  of  Indra.  -  I.e.  Brihaspati.


THE  NECESSITY  FOR  ACQUIESCENCE  89

for  how  could  this  happen,  Queen,  while  I  am  alive  ?  How-
ever, you  must  not  oppose  the  king  in  this  matter,  but  must,
on  the  contrary,  take  refuge  in  self-restraint,  and  show  him
all  complaisance.  The  sick  man  is  not  induced  to  place
himself  in  the  physician's  hands  by  disagreeable  speeches,
but  he  is  by  agreeable  speeches,  if  the  physician  does  his
work  by  a  conciliatory  method.  If  a  man  is  dragged  against
the  current  he  will  never  escape  from  the  stream  of  a  river,
or  from  a  vicious  tendency,  but  if  he  is  carried  with  the
current  he  will  escape  from  both.  So  when  the  king  comes
into  your  presence,  receive  him  with  all  attentions,  without
anger,  concealing  your  real  feelings.  Approve  at  present  of
his  marrying  Kalingasena,  saying  that  his  kingdom  will  be
made  more  powerful  by  her  father  also  becoming  his  ally.
And  if  you  do  this  the  king  will  perceive  that  you  possess
in  a  high  degree  the  virtue  of  magnanimity,  and  his  love
and  courtesy  towards  you  will  increase,  and  thinking  that
Kalingasena  is  within  his  reach,  he  will  not  be  impatient,  for
the  desire  of  a  man  for  any  object  increases  if  he  is  restrained.
And  you  must  teach  this  lesson  to  Padmavati  also,  O  blame-
less one,  and  so  that  king  may  submit  to  our  putting  him
off  in  this  matter.  And  after  this,  I  ween,  you  will  behold
my  skill  in  stratagem.  For  the  wise  are  tested  in  difficulty,
even  as  heroes  are  tested  in  fight.  So,  Queen,  do  not  be  de-
spondent." In  these  words  Yaugandharayana  admonished
the  queen,  and,  as  she  received  his  counsels  with  respect,  he
departed  thence.1  But  the  King  of  Vatsa,  throughout  that
day,  neither  in  light  nor  darkness  entered  the  private  apart-
ments of  either  of  the  two  queens,  for  his  mind  was  eager
for  a  new  well- matched  union  with  Kalingasena,  who  had
approached  him  in  such  an  ardour  of  spontaneous  choice.
And  then  the  queen  and  the  prime  minister  and  the  king  and
Kalingasena  spent  the  night  in  wakefulness  like  that  of  a
great  feast,  apart  in  their  respective  houses,  the  second  couple
through  impatience  for  a  rare  delight,  and  the  first  through
very  profound  anxiety.

1  For  san  I  should  prefer  sa,  which  is  read  in  a  MS.  lent  me  by  the  Principal
of  the  Sanskrit  College.


CHAPTER  XXXII

THEN  the  artful  minister  Yaugandharayana  came  the
[M]  next  morning  to  the  King  of  Vatsa,  who  was
expecting  him,  and  made  the  following  representa-
tion : — "  O  King,  why  do  you  not  immediately  inquire  about
an  auspicious  moment  for  celebrating  the  happy  marriage
of  your  Highness  with  Kalingasena,  the  daughter  of  Kalinga-
datta,  the  King  of  Takshasila  ?  "  *  When  the  king  heard
that,  he  said  :  "  The  same  desire  is  fixed  in  my  heart,  for
my  mind  cannot  endure  to  remain  a  moment  without  her."

Having  said  this,  the  simple-minded  monarch  gave  orders
to  a  warder,  who  stood  before  him,  and  summoned  the
astrologers.  When  he  questioned  them,  they,  having  had
their  cue  previously  given  them  by  the  prime  minister,  said  :
"  For  the  king  there  will  be  a  favourable  moment  in  six
months  from  this  time."

When  Yaugandharayana  heard  this,  he  pretended  to  be
angry,  and  the  cunning  fellow  said  to  the  king  :    "  Out  on

1  Takshasila  has  been  identified  by  General  Cunningham  with  the  ruins
of  an  ancient  city  near  Shah-deri,  one  mile  to  the  north-east  of  Kala-ka-serai.
Mr  Growse  has  pointed  out  to  me  that  I  made  a  mistake  in  stating  (after
Wilson),  in  a  note,  that  the  precise  site  of  KausambI,  the  capital  of  the  King
of  Vatsa,  which  Kalingasena  reached  in  one  day  in  the  magic  chariot,  has  not
been  ascertained.  He  says  :  "  It  has  been  discovered  by  General  Cunningham.
The  place  is  still  called  Kosam,  and  is  on  the  Yamuna,  about  thirty  miles
above  Allahabad.  The  ruins  consist  of  an  immense  fortress,  with  earthen
ramparts  from  30  to  35  feet  high,  and  bastions  considerably  higher,  forming
a  circuit  of  23,100  feet,  or  exactly  4  miles  and  3  furlongs.  The  parapets  were
of  brick  and  stone,  some  of  the  bricks  measuring  If)  by  12|  by  2|  inches,  which
is  a  proof  of  their  great  antiquity.  In  the  midst  of  these  ruins  is  a  large
stone  monolith,  similar  to  those  at  Allahabad  and  Delhi,  but  without  any
inscription.  The  portion  of  the  shaft  above-ground  is  14  feet  in  length,  and
an  excavation  at  the  base  for  a  depth  of  20  feet  did  not  come  to  the  end  of
it.  Its  total  length  probably  exceeds  40  feet.  There  was,  I  believe,  some
talk  of  removing  it  to  Allahabad  and  setting  it  up  there,  but  it  was  found  to
be  too  expensive  an  undertaking."  SravastI,  which  Kalingasena  passed  on
the  way  from  Takshasila,  has  been  identified  by  General  Cunningham  with
Sahet-Mahet,  on  the  south  bank  of  the  Rapti,  in  Oudh.

90


THE  VERDICT  OF  THE  ASTROLOGERS         91

these  blockheads  !  That  astrologer  whom  your  Highness
previously  honoured  on  the  ground  of  his  cleverness  has  not
come  to-day,  ask  him,  and  then  do  what  is  proper."  When
he  heard  this  speech  of  his  minister's,  the  King  of  Vatsa
immediately  summoned  that  very  astrologer,  with  mind  in
an  agony  of  suspense.  He  also  stuck  to  his  agreement,  and
in  order  to  put  off  the  day  of  the  marriage  he  named,  when
asked,  after  some  reflection,  a  moment  six  months  off.  Then
Yaugandharayana,  pretending  to  be  distracted,  said  to  the
king  :  "  Let  your  Majesty  command  what  is  to  be  done  in
this  matter  !  "

The  king,  being  impatient  and  longing  for  a  favourable
moment,  said,  after  reflecting  :  "  You  must  ask  Kalingasena,
and  see  what  she  says."  When  Yaugandharayana  heard
this,  he  took  with  him  two  astrologers  and  went  into  the
presence  of  Kalingasena.  She  received  him  politely,  and,
beholding  her  beauty,  he  reflected  :  "If  the  king  were  to
obtain  her  he  would  abandon  the  whole  kingdom  in  his
reckless  passion."  And  he  said  to  her  :  "I  am  come  with
these  astrologers  to  fix  the  moment  of  your  marriage  ;  so
let  these  servants  inform  me  of  the  particular  star  in  the
lunar  mansions  under  which  you  were  born."

When  the  astrologers  heard  the  lunar  mansion  stated
by  her  attendants,  they  pretended  to  investigate  the  matter,
and  kept  saying  in  the  course  of  their  calculations  :  "  It  is
not  on  this  side  ;  it  must  be  after  that."  At  last,  in  accord-
ance with  their  agreement  with  the  minister,  they  named
again  that  very  moment  at  the  end  of  six  months.  When
Kalingasena  heard  that  distant  date  fixed  she  was  cast  down
in  spirit,  but  her  chamberlain  said  :  "  You  must  first  fix  a
favourable  moment,  so  that  this  couple  may  be  happy  all
their  lives ;  what  matters  it  whether  it  be  near  or  far  off  ?  ,:

When  they  heard  this  speech  of  the  chamberlain's,  all
there  immediately  exclaimed  :  "  Well  said !  "  And  Yaugan-
dharayana said:  "Yes;  and  if  an  inauspicious  moment
is  appointed  for  us  the  King  Kalingadatta,  our  proposed
connection,  will  be  grieved."  Then  Kalingasena,  being  help-
less, said  to  them  all :  "  Let  it  be  as  you  appoint  in  your
wisdom,"  and  remained  silent.     And  at  once  accepting  that


92  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

speech  of  hers,  Yaugandharayana  took  leave  of  her,  and
went  with  the  astrologers  into  the  presence  of  the  king.
Then  he  told  the  proceedings  to  the  King  of  Vatsa,  exactly
as  they  had  happened,  and  so,  having  settled  his  mind  by  an
artifice,  he  went  to  his  own  house.

So  having  attained  his  object  of  putting  off  the  marriage,
in  order  to  complete  the  scheme  he  had  in  view,  he  called
to  mind  his  friend,  the  Brahman-Rakshasa,  named  Yoge3-
The  Marriage  vara-1  He,  according  to  his  previous  promise,
is  successfully  when  thought  of,  readily  came  to  the  minister
postponed  and  bowed  before  him  and  said  :  "  Why  am  I
called  to  mind  ?  "  Then  Yaugandharayana  told  him  the
whole  incident  of  Kalingasena  which  was  tempting  his
master  to  vice,  and  again  said  to  him  :  "I  have  managed
to  gain  time,  my  friend ;  in  that  interval  do  you,  remaining
concealed,  observe  by  your  skill  the  behaviour  of  Kalinga-
sena. For  the  Vidyadharas  and  other  spirits  are  without
doubt  secretly  in  love  with  her,  since  there  is  no  other  woman
in  the  three  worlds  equal  to  her  in  beauty.  So,  if  she  were
to  have  an  intrigue  with  some  Siddha  or  Vidyadhara,  and
you  were  to  see  it,  it  would  be  a  fortunate  thing.  And  you
must  observe  the  divine  lover,  though  he  come  disguised,
when  he  is  asleep,  for  divine  beings  when  asleep  assume
their  own  form.2  If  in  this  way  we  are  able  to  discover
any  offence  in  her  by  means  of  your  eyes,  the  king  will  be
disgusted  with  her,  and  will  accomplish  that  object  of  ours."

When  the  minister  said  this  to  him  the  Brahman-Rakshasa
answered  :  "  Why  should  I  not  by  some  artifice  cause  her
to  fall,  or  slay  her  ?  "  When  the  great  minister  Yaugan-
dharayana heard  that,  he  said  to  him  :  "  This  must  not  be
done,  for  it  would  be  a  very  wicked  deed.  And  whoever
goes  his  own  way  without  offending  against  the  God  of
Justice  finds  that  that  god  comes  to  his  assistance  to  enable
him  to  attain  his  objects.     So  you  must  discover  in  her,  my

1  We  met  this  gentleman  in  Vol.  I,  p.  13(>,  when  Yaugandharayana
learned  a  charm  to  alter  his  shape.     He  appears  again  in  the  next  chapter.

— N.M.P.

2  An  idea  made  familiar  in  Europe  by  the  "Cupid  and  Psyche"  and
"  Beauty  and  the  Beast"  cycles  of  stories. — n.m.p.


BE  GUIDED  BY  THE  OMENS !  93

friend,  a  fault  self- caused,  in  order  that  through  your
friendship  the  king's  objects  may  be  accomplished  by  me."
Having  received  this  order  from  the  excellent  minister,  the
Brahman  -  Rakshasa  departed,  and,  disguised  by  magic,
entered  the  house  of  Kalingasena.

In  the  meanwhile  Somaprabha,  her  friend,  the  daughter
of  the  Asura  Maya,  went  again  into  the  presence  of  Kalinga-
sena. And  the  daughter  of  Maya,  after  asking  her  friend
what  had  happened  in  the  night,  said  to  her  who  had
abandoned  her  relations,  in  the  hearing  of  that  Rakshasa  :
"  I  came  here  in  the  forenoon  after  searching  for  you,  but  I
remained  concealed  at  your  side,  seeing  Yaugandharayana.
However,  I  heard  your  conversation,  and  I  understood  the
whole  state  of  affairs.  So  why  did  you  make  this  attempt
yesterday  though  you  were  forbidden  to  do  so  by  me  ?
For  any  business  which  is  undertaken,  my  friend,  without
first  counteracting  the  evil  omen  will  end  in  calamity.  As
a  proof  of  this  hear  the  following  tale  : —

41.  Story  of  the  Brahman's  Son  Vishnudatta  and  his  Seven
Foolish  Companions

Long  ago  there  lived  in  Antarvedi  a  Brahman  named
Vasudatta,  and  he  had  a  son  born  to  him  named  Vishnudatta.
That  Vishnudatta,  after  he  reached  the  age  of  sixteen  years,
set  out  for  the  city  of  Valabhi  in  order  to  acquire  learning.
And  there  joined  him  seven  other  young  Brahmans  his
fellows;  but  those  seven  were  fools,  while  he  was  wise  and
sprung  from  a  good  family.  After  they  had  taken  an  oath
not  to  desert  one  another,  Vishnudatta  set  out  with  them  at
night  without  the  knowledge  of  his  parents.  And  after  he
had  set  forth  he  saw  an  evil  omen  *  presenting  itself  in  front
of  him,  and  he  said  to  those  friends  of  his  who  were  travelling
with  him  :  "  Ha  !  Here  is  a  bad  omen  !  It  is  advisable  to
turn  back  now.  We  will  set  out  again  with  good  hope  of
success  when  we  have  auspicious  omens  with  us."

When  those  seven  foolish  companions  heard  that,  they
said  :    "  Do  not  entertain   groundless  fear,    for  we  are  not

1  See  notes  on  pp.  46n2  and  86ft1. — n.m.p.


94  THE  OCEAX  OF  STORY

afraid  of  the  omen.  If  you  are  afraid,  do  not  go,  but  we  will
start  this  moment ;  to-morrow  morning  our  relations  will
abandon  us  when  they  hear  of  our  proceedings."  When
those  ignorant  creatures  said  that,  Vishnudatta  set  out  with
them,  urged  on  by  his  oath,  but  he  first  called  to  mind  Hari,
the  dispeller  of  sin.  And  at  the  end  of  the  night  he  saw
another  evil  omen,  and  again  mentioned  it,  and  he  was
rebuked  by  all  those  foolish  friends  of  his  in  the  following
words  : — "  This  is  our  evil  omen,  you  coward  afraid  to  travel,
that  you  have  been  brought  by  us,  since  you  shudder  at  a  crow
at  every  step  you  take ;  we  require  no  other  evil  omen."

Having  reviled  him  in  these  words,  they  continued  their
journey,  and  Vishnudatta  went  with  them,  as  he  could  not
help  it,  but  kept  silence,  reflecting  :  "  One  ought  not  to  give
advice  to  a  fool  bent  on  going  his  own  crooked  way,  for  it
only  entails  ridicule,  being  like  the  beautifying  of  ordure.
A  single  wise  man  fallen  among  many  fools,  like  a  lotus  in
the  path  of  the  waves,  is  surely  overwhelmed.1  So  I  must
not  henceforth  give  these  men  either  good  or  bad  advice,  but
I  must  go  on  in  silence ;  destiny  will  educe  prosperity."

Engaged  in  these  reflections,  Vishnudatta  proceeded  on
the  way  with  those  fools,  and  at  the  end  of  the  day  he  reached
a  Savara  village.  There  he  wandered  about  in  the  night
and  reached  a  certain  house  inhabited  by  a  young  woman,
and  asked  the  woman  for  a  lodging  there.  She  gave  him  a
room,  and  he  entered  it  with  his  friends,  and  those  seven
in  a  moment  went  to  sleep.  He  alone  remained  awake,  as
he  had  entered  a  house  belonging  to  a  savage.  For  the
stupid  sleep  resolutely  ;    how  can  the  understanding  sleep  ?

And  in  the  meanwhile  a  certain  young  man  secretly
entered  the  inner  apartment  of  the  house,  and  went  into
the  presence  of  that  woman.  And  she  remained  in  con-
fidential conversation  with  him,  and,  as  fate  would  have
it,  they  both  fell  asleep.  And  Vishnudatta,  perceiving  it
all  through  the  half- open  door  by  the  light  of  a  candle,
reflected    despondently :     "  Alas !     have    we    entered    the

1  In  the  D.  text  the  simile  is  better  brought  out:  "The  one  wise  man
fallen  among  many  fools  is  like  a  lotus  fallen  on  the  waves."  See  Speyer,
op.  cit.,  p.  111. — n.m.p.


THE  TRAVELLERS  ARE  ACCUSED  OF  MURDER  95

house  of  a  profligate  woman  ?  Surely  this  is  her  paramour,
and  not  the  husband  of  her  youth,  for  otherwise  we  should
not  have  this  timid  secret  proceeding;   I  saw  at  the  first

Vishnudatta  that  she  was  of  a  flighty  disposition;  but  we
ivitn'esses  have  entered  here  as  mutual  witnesses,  for  lack
Strange  0f    others."     While  he   was   thinking   he   heard

appemngs  outside  a  noise  0f  men,  and  he  saw  entering  a
young  chief  of  the  Savaras  with  a  sword,  looking  about
him,  while  his  attendants  remained  in  the  sleeping  apartment.

When  the  chief  said  :  "  Who  are  you  ?  "  Vishnudatta,
supposing  him  to  be  the  master  of  the  house,  said  in  his
terror  :  "  We  are  travellers."  But  the  Savara  entered,  and
seeing  his  wife  in  such  a  position,  he  cut  off  with  his  sword
the  head  of  her  sleeping  paramour.  But  he  did  not  punish
or  even  wake  his  wife ;  but  placing  his  sword  on  the
ground  he  went  to  sleep  on  another  couch.  Seeing  that
by  the  light  of  the  candle,  Vishnudatta  reflected  :  "  He  did
right  not  to  kill  his  wife,  but  to  kill  the  adulterer  ;  but
that  he  should  sleep  here  in  confidence,  after  performing
such  a  deed,  is  an  act  of  surprising  courage,  characteristic
of  men  of  mighty  minds."

While  Vishnudatta  was  thus  reflecting,  that  wicked
woman  awoke  and  beheld  her  paramour  slain 1  and  that
husband  of  hers  asleep.  So  she  rose  up,  and  took  on  her
shoulder  the  body  of  her  lover,  and  carrying  his  head  in  one
hand,  she  went  out.  And  going  outside  quickly,  she  threw
into  an  ash-heap  the  trunk  with  the  head,  and  came  secretly
back.  And  Vishnudatta  going  out  beheld  it  all  from  a
distance,  and  again  entering,  remained  as  he  was,  in  the
midst  of  his  sleeping  companions.  But  the  wicked  woman
came  back  and,  entering  the  room,  cut  off  with  that  very
sword  the  head  of  her  sleeping  husband.  And  going  out  she
raised  a  cry  so  as  to  make  all  the  servants  hear  :  "  Alas  !
I  am  ruined  ;  my  husband  has  been  slain  by  these  travellers."

Then  the  servants,  hearing  the  cry,  rushed  forward,  and
beholding  their  master  slain,  ran  upon  Vishnudatta  and  his
friends  with  uplifted  weapons.     And  when  those  others,  his

1  Cf.  the  "Tale  of  the  Jewish  Doctor/'  Nights,  Burton,  vol.  i,  p.  294.


96  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

companions,  rose  up  in  terror,  as  they  were  about  to  be
slain,  Vishnudatta  said  quickly  :  "  Cease  your  attempt  to
slay  Brahmans  !  We  did  not  do  this  deed  ;  this  wicked
woman  herself  did  it,  being  in  love  with  another  man.  But
I  saw  the  whole  affair  from  the  very  beginning  through  a
half- open  door,  and  I  went  out  and  observed  what  she  did,
and  if  you  will  have  patience  with  me  I  will  tell  you."

Vishnudatta  with  these  words  restrained  the  Savaras,
and  told  them  the  whole  affair  from  the  beginning,  and  took
them  out  and  showed  them  the  trunk  with  the  head  freshly
severed,  and  thrown  by  the  woman  on  that  heap  of  refuse.
Then  the  woman  confessed  the  truth  by  the  paleness  of  her
face,  and  all  there  reviled  the  wanton,  and  said  :  "  Whom
will  not  a  wicked  woman  kill,  when  won  over  by  another
man,  like  a  sword  in  an  enemy's  hand,  since  enticed  by
love  she  commits  reckless  crime  without  being  taught  ?  "  *
Having  said  this,  they  thereupon  let  Vishnudatta  and  his
companions  go;  and  then  the  seven  companions  praised
Vishnudatta,  saying :  "  You  became  to  us,  while  we  were
asleep  at  night,  a  protecting  jewel-lamp  2  ;  through  your
kindness  we  escaped  to-day  from  death  produced  by  an  evil
omen."  In  these  words  they  praised  Vishnudatta,  and
ceased  henceforth  their  reviling,  and  after  bowing  before
him  they  set  out  in  the  morning  on  their  errand,  accompanied
by  him.


[M]  Having  told  this  story  to  Kalingasena  in  their
mutual  conversation,  Somaprabha  again  said  to  that  friend
of  hers  in  Kausambi :  "  Thus,  my  friend,  an  evil  omen
presenting  itself  to  people  engaged  in  any  undertaking,  if
not  counteracted  by  delay  and  other  methods,  produces
misfortune.  And  so  people  of  dull  intelligence,  neglecting
the  advice  of  the  wise,  and  acting  impetuously,  are  afflicted

1  The  words  "without  being  taught"  seem  strange  here.  The  word  in
the  B.  text  is  asikshita,  but  in  the  D.  text  it  is  asankita,  "  without  any  scruple,"
which  seems  much  more  likely. — n.m.p.

2  See  Vol.  II,  p.  169.— n.m.p.


THE  HERMIT  MANKANAKA  97

in  the  end.  Accordingly  you  did  not  act  wisely  in  sending
a  messenger  to  the  King  of  Vatsa,  asking  him  to  receive
you,  when  there  was  an  inauspicious  omen.  May  Fate  grant
you  to  be  married  without  any  impediment,  but  you  came
from  your  house  in  an  unlucky  moment,  therefore  your
marriage  is  far  off.  And  the  gods  too  are  in  love  with  you,
so  you  must  be  on  your  guard  against  this.  And  you  must
think  of  the  minister  Yaugandharayana,  who  is  expert  in
politic  wiles ;  he,  fearing  that  the  king  may  become  engrossed
in  pleasure,  may  throw  impediments  in  your  way  in  this
business  ;  or  he  may  even  bring  a  charge  against  you  after
your  marriage  is  celebrated  :  but  no,  being  virtuous,  he  will
not  bring  a  false  accusation  ;  nevertheless,  my  friend,  you
must  at  all  events  be  on  your  guard  against  your  rival  wife.
I  will  tell  you  a  story  illustrative  of  this.     Listen.

42.  Story  of  Kadaligarbha

There  is  in  this  land  a  city  named  Ikshumati,  and  by  the
side  of  it  there  runs  a  river  called  by  the  same  name  ;  both
were  created  by  Visvamitra.  And  near  it  there  is  a  great
forest,  and  in  it  a  hermit  of  the  name  of  Mankanaka  had
made  himself  a  hermitage  and  performed  penance  with  his
heels  upwards.  And  while  he  was  performing  austerities
he  saw  an  Apsaras  of  the  name  of  Menaka  coming  through
the  air,  with  her  clothes  floating  on  the  breeze.

Then  his  mind  was  bewildered  by  Kama,  who  had  found
his  opportunity  ;  the  holy  man's  seed  fell  upon  a  fresh
plantain- flower,  and  there  was  born  to  him  a  daughter
named  Kadaligarbha,  beautiful  in  every  limb.  And  since
she  was  born  in  the  interior  of  a  plantain,  her  father,  the
hermit  Mankanaka,  gave  her  the  name  of  Kadaligarbha.
She  grew  up  in  his  hermitage  like  Kripi,  the  wife  of  Drona,
who  was  born  to  Gautama  on  his  beholding  Rambha.  And
once  on  a  time  Dridhavarman,  a  king  born  in  Madhyadesa,1
who  in  the  excitement  of  the  chase  was  carried  away  by
his  horse,  entered  that  hermitage.     He  beheld  Kadaligarbha

1  The  country  lying  between  the  Himalayas  on  the  north,  the  Vindhya  moun-
tains on  the  south,  Vinasana  on  the  west  and  Prayaga  (Allahabad)  on  the  east.
VOL.  III.  G


98  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

clothed  in  garments  of  bark,  having  her  beauty  exceedingly
set  off  by  the  dress  appropriate  to  the  daughter  of  an  ascetic.
And  she,  when  seen,  captivated  the  heart  of  that  king  so
completely  that  she  left  no  room  in  it  for  the  women  of  his
harem.

While  thinking  to  himself,  "  Shall  I  be  able  to  obtain  as
a  wife  this  daughter  of  some  hermit  or  other,  as  Dushyanta
obtained  Sakuntala,  the  daughter  of  the  hermit  Kanva  ?  "
the  king  beheld  that  hermit  Mankanaka  coming  with  fuel
and  kusa  grass.  And  leaving  his  horse,  he  approached  him
and  worshipped  at  his  feet,  and  when  questioned,  discovered
himself  to  that  hermit.  Then  the  hermit  gave  the  following
order  to  Kadaligarbha  :  "  My  dear  child,  prepare  the  argha  l
for  this  king  our  guest."  She  said,  "  I  will  do  so,"  and  bow-
ing, prepared  the  hospitable  offering,  and  then  the  king  said
to  the  hermit  :  "  Whence  did  you  obtain  this  maiden  who  is
so  beautiful  ?  "

Then  the  hermit  told  the  king  the  story  of  her  birth,  and
her  name,  Kadaligarbha,  which  indicated  the  manner  of  it.
Then  the  king,  considering  the  maiden  born  from  the  hermit's
thinking  on  Menaka  to  be  an  Apsaras,  earnestly  craved  her
hand  of  her  father.  And  the  sage  gave  him  that  daughter
named  Kadaligarbha,  for  the  actions  of  the  sages  of  old  time,
guided  by  divine  insight,  were  without  hesitation.

And  the  nymphs  of  heaven,  discovering  the  fact  by  their
divine  power,  came  there  out  of  love  for  Menaka,  and  adorned
her  for  the  wedding.  And  on  that  very  occasion  they  put
mustard-seeds  into  her  hand  and  said  to  her  :  "  As  you  are
going  along  the  path,  sow  them,  in  order  that  you  may  know
it  again.2  If,  daughter,  at  any  time  your  husband  should
scorn  you,  and  you  should  wish  to  return  here,  then  you  will
be  able,  as  you  come  along,  to  recognise  the  path  by  these,
which  will  have  sprung  up."  When  they  had  said  this  to
her,  and  her  marriage  had  been  celebrated,  the  King  Dridha-
varman  placed  Kadaligarbha  on  his  horse  and  departed
thence.  His  army  came  up  and  escorted  him,  and  in  com-
pany with  that  bride  of  his,  who  sowed  the  mustard-seeds  all
along  the  path,  he  reached  his  own  palace.     There  he  became

1  See  Vol.  II,  p.  77m1. — n.m.p.  2  See  note  on  p.  104n2. — n.m.p.


f


THE  FEMALE  ASCETIC  99

averse  to  the  society  of  his  other  wives  and  dwelt  with  that
Kadaligarbha,  after  telling  her  story  to  his  ministers.

Then  his  principal  wife,  being  exceedingly  afflicted,  said
to  his  minister  in  secret,  after  reminding  him  of  the  benefits
she  had  conferred  upon  him  :  "  The  king  is  now  exclusively
The  Queen  attached  to  his  new  wife  and  has  deserted  me,
becomes jealom so  take  steps  to  make  this  rival  of  mine  depart."
When  that  minister  heard  that  he  said :  "  Queen,  it  is
not  appropriate  for  people  like  me  to  destroy  or  banish
their  masters'  wives.  This  is  the  business  of  the  wives  of
wandering  religious  mendicants,  addicted  to  jugglery  and
such  practices,  associating  with  men  like  themselves.  For
those  hypocritical  female  ascetics,  creeping  unforbidden  into
houses,  skilled  in  deception,  will  stick  at  no  deed  whatever."

When  he  said  this  to  her,  the  queen,  as  if  abashed,  said
to  him  in  affected  shame  :  "  Then  I  will  have  nothing  to  do
with  this  proceeding  disapproved  of  by  the  virtuous."  But
she  laid  up  his  speech  in  her  heart,  and,  dismissing  that
minister,  she  summoned  by  the  mouth  of  her  maid  a  certain
wandering  female  ascetic.  And  she  told  her  all  that  desire
of  hers  from  the  beginning,  and  promised  to  give  her  great
wealth  if  the  business  were  successfully  accomplished.  And
the  wicked  female  ascetic,  from  desire  of  gain,  said  to  the
afflicted  queen  :  "  Queen,  this  is  an  easy  matter  ;  I  will
accomplish  it  for  you,  for  I  know  very  many  expedients  of
various  kinds."

Having  thus  consoled  the  queen,  that  female  ascetic
departed  ;  and  after  reaching  her  house  she  reflected,  as  one
afraid:  "Alas!  whom  will  not  excessive  desire  of  gain  de-
lude, since  I  rashly  made  such  a  promise  before  the  queen?
But  the  fact  is,  I  know  no  device  of  the  kind,  and  it  is  not
possible  to  carry  on  any  deception  in  the  palace,  as  I  do  in
other  places,  for  the  authorities  might  perhaps  find  it  out
and  punish  me.  There  may  be  one  resource  in  this  difficulty,
for  I  have  a  friend,  a  barber,  and  as  he  is  skilled  in  devices
of  the  kind  all  may  yet  go  well,  if  he  exert  himself  in  the
matter."

After  thus  reflecting,  she  went  to  the  barber  and  told
liim  all  her  plan  that  was  to  bring  her  prosperity.     Then  the


100  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

barber,  who  was  old  and  cunning,1  reflected  :  "  This  is  good
luck,  that  an  opportunity  of  making  something  has  now
presented  itself  to  me.  So  we  must  not  kill  the  king's  new
wife,  but  we  must  preserve  her  alive,  for  her  father  has

1  The  barber  caste  in  India  is  known  by  several  names — e.g.  Nai,  Nao,
Mhali,  Hajjam,  Bhandari,  Mangala.  He  is  an  important  personage,  and
combines  with  his  duties  as  barber  those  of  surgeon,  masseur  and  matrimonial
agent.  His  wife  also  assists  at  weddings,  and  usually  acts  as  midwife,  some-
times in  a  barbarous  and  criminal  fashion.

The  barber  is,  moreover,  a  great  gossip  and  scandalmonger,  and  many
proverbs  have  arisen  about  him  in  the  East.  The  ordinary  village  barber  has
a  leather  bag  containing  a  small  mirror  (arsi),  a  pair  of  iron  pincers  (chimta),  a
leather  strap,  a  comb  (kanghi),  a  piece  of  cloth  about  a  yard  square  and  some
oil  in  a  phial.  Speaking  of  his  duties  at  weddings,  Russell  (op.  cif.,  vol.  iv,
p.  265  et  seq.,  quoting  from  Nesfield's  Brief  View  of  the  Caste  System,  pp.  42,
4.'3)  says,  that  besides  acting  as  the  Brahman's  assistant  on  festival  occasions,
he  is  actually  the  matrimonial  priest  himself  to  the  lower  castes,  who  cannot
employ  a  Brahman.  The  important  part  which  he  plays  in  marriage
ceremonies  has  led  to  his  becoming  the  match-maker  among  all  respectable
castes.  He  searches  for  a  suitable  bride  or  bridegroom,  and  is  often  sent  to
inspect  the  other  party  to  a  match  and  report  his  or  her  defects  to  his  clients.
He  may  arrange  the  price  or  dowry,  distribute  the  invitations  and  carry  the
presents  from  one  house  to  the  other.  He  supplies  the  leaf  plates  and  cups
which  are  used  at  weddings,  as  the  family's  stock  of  metal  vessels  is  usually
quite  inadequate  for  the  number  of  guests.  The  price  of  these  is  about
four  annas  (4d.)  a  hundred.  He  also  provides  the  toraiis  or  strings  of  leaves
which  are  hung  over  the  door  of  the  house  and  round  the  marriage-shed.
At  the  feast  the  barber  is  present  to  hand  to  the  guests  water,  betel-leaf  and
pipes  as  they  may  desire.  He  also  partakes  of  the  food,  seated  at  a  short
distance  from  the  guests,  in  the  intervals  of  his  service.  He  lights  the  lamps
and  carries  the  torches  during  the  ceremony.  Hence  he  was  known  as
Masalchi,  or  torch-bearer,  a  name  now  applied  by  Europeans  to  a  menial
servant  who  lights  and  cleans  the  lamps  and  washes  the  plates  after  meals.
The  barber  and  his  wife  act  as  prompters  to  the  bride  and  bridegroom,  and
guide  them  through  the  complicated  ritual  of  the  wedding  ceremony,  taking
the  couple  on  their  knees  if  they  are  children,  and  otherwise  sitting  behind
them.  The  barber  has  a  prescriptive  right  to  receive  the  clothes  in  which
the  bridegroom  goes  to  the  bride's  house,  as  on  the  latter's  arrival  he  is  always
presented  with  new  clothes  by  the  bride's  father.  As  the  bridegroom's
clothes  may  be  an  ancestral  heirloom,  a  compact  is  often  made  to  buy  them
back  from  the  barber,  and  he  may  receive  as  much  as  fifty  rupees  in  lieu  of
them.  When  the  first  son  is  born  in  a  family  the  barber  takes  a  long  bamboo
stick,  wraps  it  round  with  cloth  and  puts  an  earthen  pot  over  it  and  carries
this  round  to  the  relatives,  telling  them  the  good  news.  He  receives  a  small
present  from  each  household.

Russell   also   quotes  (op.    cit.,  p.  268)  some   interesting   proverbs  about


f


THE  CRAFTY  BARBER  101

divine  insight,  and  would  reveal  the  whole  transaction.  But
by  separating  her  from  the  king  we  will  now  batten  upon  the
queen,  for  great  people  become  servants  to  a  servant  who
shares  their  criminal  secrets.  And  in  due  time  I  will  reunite
her  to  the  king,  and  tell  him  the  whole  story,  in  order  that  he
and  the  sage's  daughter  may  become  a  source  of  subsistence
to  me.  And  thus  I  shall  not  have  done  anything  very  wrong,
and  I  shall  have  a  livelihood  for  a  long  time."

Having  thus  reflected,  the  barber  said  to  the  hypocritical
female  ascetic  :  "  Mother,  I  will  do  all  this ;  but  it  would  not
be  proper  to  slay  that  new  wife  of  the  king's  by  means  of
magic,  for  the  king  might  some  day  find  it  out,  and  then  he
would  destroy  us  all :    besides,  we  should  incur  the  sin  of

barbers,  collected  by  Mr  Low  in  the  Balaghat  District  Gazetteer.  As  illus-
trating his  cunning  is  the  saying :  "  A  barber  has  thirty-six  talents  by  which
he  eats  at  the  expense  of  others."  His  loquacity  is  shown  in  the  proverb :
"  As  the  crow  among  birds  so  the  barber  among  men."  The  barber  and  the
professional  Brahman  are  considered  to  be  jealous  of  their  perquisites  and
unwilling  to  share  with  their  caste-fellows,  and  this  is  exemplified  in  the
proverb :  "  The  barber,  the  dog,  and  the  Brahman,  these  three  snarl  at
meeting  one  of  their  own  kind."  The  joint  association  of  the  Brahman  priest
and  the  barber  with  marriages  and  other  ceremonies  has  led  to  the  saying :
"As  there  are  always  reeds  in  a  river  so  there  is  always  a  barber  with  a
Brahman."  The  barber's  astuteness  is  alluded  to  in  the  saying:  "Nine
barbers  are  equal  to  seventy-two  tailors."  The  fact  that  it  is  the  barber's
duty  to  carry  the  lights  in  the  marriage  processions  has  led  to  the  proverb :
"  At  the  barber's  wedding  all  are  gentlemen  and  it  is  awkward  to  have  to  ask
somebody  to  carry  the  torch."  The  point  of  this  is  clear,  though  no  English
equivalent  occurs  to  the  mind.  And  a  similar  idea  is  expressed  by :  "  The
barber  washes  the  feet  of  others  but  is  ashamed  to  wash  his  own."  It  would
appear  from  these  proverbs  that  the  Nai  is  considered  to  enjoy  a  social  position
somewhat  above  his  deserts.

Although  his  intimate  connection  with  high-caste  clients  makes  him
considered  of  pure  caste,  yet  on  the  other  hand  his  duties  connected  with
blood-letting,  cutting  the  nails  and  hair  of  corpses,  etc.,  make  him  to  a  certain
extent  impure.

The  Eastern  barber  is  familiar  to  European  readers  of  the  Thousand  Nights
and  a  Night,  where  he  appears  in  all  his  glory  in  the  "  Tale  of  the  Tailor,"  a
sub-story  of  "The  Hunchback's  Tale."  See  Burton's  Nights,  vol.  i,  p.  304
et  seq.  He  gives  interesting  notes  on  depilatories,  the  removal  of  bodily  hair,
etc.,  in  vol.  ii,  p.  ]60ra3,  vol.  iv,  p.  256m1,  and  vol.  ix,  pp.  139«\  157ft1.  Apart
from  the  article  by  Russell  already  quoted,  see  Crooke,  Tribes  and  Castes  of  the
North  Western  Provinces,  under  "  Nai,"  and  Thurston,  Castes  and  Tribes  of
Southern  India,  under  "  Mangala"  (vol.  iv,  p.  448  et  seq.). — n.m.p.


102  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

woman-murder,  and  her  father  the  sage  would  curse  us.
Therefore  it  is  far  better  that  she  should  be  separated  from
the  king  by  means  of  our  ingenuity,  in  order  that  the  queen
may  be  happy  and  we  may  obtain  wealth.  And  this  is  an
easy  matter  to  me,  for  what  can  I  not  accomplish  by  force  of
intellect  ?  Hear  my  ingenuity.  I  will  relate  a  story  which
illustrates  it.


42a.  The  King  and  the  Barber's  Wife

This  King  Dridhavarman  had  an  immoral  father.  And
I  was  then  his  servant,  being  engaged  in  the  duties  which
belong  to  me.  He  one  day,  as  he  was  roaming  about  here,
cast  eyes  on  my  wife,  and  as  she  was  young  and  beautiful
his  mind  became  attached  to  her.  And  when  he  asked  his
attendants  who  she  was,  they  said  :  "  The  barber's  wife."
He  thought :  "  What  can  the  barber  do  ?  "  So  the  wicked
king  entered  my  house,  and  after  enjoying  my  wife  at  will,
departed.  But,  as  it  happened,  I  was  away  from  my  house
that  day,  being  absent  somewhere  or  other.

And  the  next  day,  when  I  entered,  I  saw  that  my  wife's
manner  had  altered,  and  when  I  asked  her  the  reason  she
told  me  the  whole  story,  being  full  of  pride  at  what  had
occurred.  And  in  that  way  the  king  went  on  puffing  up  my
wife  by  continual  visits,  which  I  was  powerless  to  prevent.
A  prince  distracted  by  unholy  passion  makes  no  distinction
between  what  is  lawful  and  what  is  illicit.  The  forest  is  like
straw  to  a  sylvan  fire  fanned  by  the  wind.  So,  not  being
in  possession  of  any  other  expedient  for  restraining  my
sovereign,  I  reduced  myself  with  spare  diet,  and  took  refuge
in  feigned  sickness.  And  in  this  state  I  went  into  the
presence  of  that  king  to  perform  my  duties,  sighing  deeply,
pale  and  emaciated.

Then  the  king,  seeing  that  I  seemed  to  be  ill,  asked  me
meaningly  the  following  question  : — "  Holla  !  tell  me  why
you  have  become  thus  ?  "  And  after  he  had  questioned  me
persistently  I  answered  the  king  in  private,  after  imploring
immunity  from  punishment :  "  King,  my  wife  is  a  witch.
And  when  I  am  asleep  she  extracts  my  entrails  and  sucks


THE  CONCEALED  TEETH  103

them,  and  then  replaces  them  as  before.  This  is  how  I  have
become  lean.  So  how  can  continual  refreshment  and  eating
nourish  me?"  When  I  said  this  to  the  king  he  became
anxious,  and  reflected  :  "  Can  she  really  be  a  witch  ?  Why
was  I  captivated  by  her  ?  I  wonder  whether  she  will  suck
my  entrails  also,  since  I  am  well  nourished  with  food.  So
I  will  contrive  to  test  her  this  very  night."  Having  thus
reflected,  the  king  caused  food  to  be  given  me  on  the  spot.

Then  I  went  home  and  shed  tears  in  the  presence  of  my
wife,  and  when  she  questioned  me  I  said  to  her  :  "  My  be-
loved, you  must  not  reveal  to  anyone  what  I  am  about  to
tell  you.  Listen  !  That  king  has  teeth  as  sharp  as  the  edge
of  a  thunderbolt,  where  teeth  are  not  usually  found,  and
they  broke  my  razor  to-day  while  I  was  performing  my
duties.  And  in  this  way  I  shall  break  a  razor  every  time.
So  how  am  I  to  be  continually  procuring  fresh  razors  ?  This
is  why  I  weep,  for  the  means  of  supporting  myself  in  my
home  are  destroyed."  When  I  had  said  this  to  my  wife  she
made  up  her  mind  to  investigate  the  marvel  of  the  concealed
teeth  while  the  king  was  asleep,  since  he  was  to  visit  her  at
night.  But  she  did  not  perceive  that  such  a  thing  had  never
been  seen  since  the  world  was  and  could  not  be  true.  Even
clever  women  are  deceived  by  the  tales  of  an  impostor.

So  the  king  came  at  night  and  visited  my  wife  at  will,
and,  as  if  fatigued,  pretended  to  go  to  sleep,  remembering
what  I  had  said.  Then  my  wife,  thinking  he  was  asleep,
slowly  stretched  out  her  hand  to  find  his  concealed  teeth.
And  as  soon  as  her  hand  reached  him  the  king  exclaimed  :
"  A  witch  !  A  witch  !  "  and  left  the  house  in  terror.  Hence-
forth my  wife,  having  been  abandoned  by  the  king  out  of
fear,  became  satisfied  with  me  and  devoted  to  me  exclusively.
In  this  way  I  saved  my  wife  on  a  former  occasion  from  the
king  by  my  intelligence.

42.  Story  of  Kadaligarbhd

Having  told  this  story  to  the  female  ascetic,  the  barber
went  on  to  say  :  "  So,  my  good  lady,  this  desire  of  yours
must  be  accomplished  by  wisdom ;     and  I  will  tell  you,


104  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

mother,  how  it  is  to  be  done.  Listen  to  me.  Some  old
servant  of  the  harem  must  be  won  over  to  say  to  this  king
in  secret  every  day  :  4  Your  wife  Kadallgarbha  is  a  witch.'
For  she,  being  a  forest  maiden,  has  no  attendants  of  her  own,
and  what  will  not  all  alien  servants  do  for  gain,  being  easily
corrupted  ?  Accordingly,  when  the  king  becomes  appre-
hensive on  hearing  what  the  old  servant  says,  you  must
contrive  to  place  at  night  hands  and  feet  and  other  limbs  in
the  chamber  of  Kadallgarbha.1  Then  the  king  will  see  them
in  the  morning,  and,  concluding  that  what  the  old  man  says
is  true,  will  be  afraid  of  Kadallgarbha  and  desert  her  of  his
own  accord.  So  the  queen  will  be  delighted  at  getting  rid
of  a  rival  wife,  and  entertain  a  favourable  opinion  of  you,
and  we  shall  gain  some  advantage."

When  the  barber  said  this  to  the  female  ascetic  she  con-
sented, and  went  and  told  the  whole  matter  to  the  king's
head  queen.  And  the  queen  carried  out  her  suggestions,
and  the  king,  who  had  been  warned,  saw  the  hands  and  feet
in  the  morning  with  his  own  eyes,  and  abandoned  Kadall-
garbha, thinking  her  to  be  wicked.  So  the  female  ascetic,
together  with  the  barber,  enjoyed  to  the  full  the  presents
which  the  queen  secretly  gave  to  her,  being  pleased  with
her  aid.

So  Kadallgarbha,  being  abandoned  by  Dridhavarman,
went  out  from  the  palace,  grieved  because  the  king  would
be  cursed.  And  she  returned  to  the  hermitage  of  her  father
by  the  same  path  by  which  she  came,  which  she  was  able
to  recognise  by  the  mustard- seeds  she  had  sown,  which  had
sprung  up.2

1  Cf.,  for  the  artifice  used  to  ruin  Kadallgarbha,  Dasent's  Popular  Tales
from  the  Norse,  pp.  65,  66.

2  Cf.  the  fortieth  story  in  Grimm's  Kinder-und  Hausmdrchen,  where  the
girl  finds  her  way  by  the  peas  and  lentils  which  had  sprung  up.  See  also  the
second  story  in  Gonzenbach's  Sicilianiscke  Mdrchen,  where  the  girl  scatters
bran ;  and  the  forty-ninth  story  in  the  same  collection.  See  also  Bartsch's
Sagen,  Mdrchen  und  Gebrauche  aus  Meklenburg,  vol.  i,  pp.  265,  313,  441-444  and
447,  where  peas  are  used  for  the  same  purpose.     See  also  De  Gubernatis,

Zoological  Mythology,  p.   165. The  tale  from  Grimm  referred  to  above  is

No.  40,  "The  Robber  Bridegroom,"  and  in  the  English  edition  by  Margaret
Hunt  a  note  in  vol.  i,  p.  389,  states  it  is  derived  from  two  stories  heard  in


H,


THE  PLOT  REVEALED  105


Her  father,  the  hermit  Mankanaka,  when  he  saw  her
suddenly  arrived  there,  remained  for  some  time  suspecting
immorality  on  her  part.  And  then  he  perceived  the  whole
occurrence  by  the  power  of  contemplation,  and  after  lovingly
comforting  her,  departed  thence  with  her.  And  he  went  and
told  the  king,  who  bowed  before  him,  the  whole  treacherous
drama,  which  the  head  queen  had  got  up  out  of  hatred
for  her  rival.  At  that  moment  the  barber  himself  arrived,
and  related  the  whole  occurrence  to  the  king,  and  then  pro-
ceeded to  say  to  him  :  "In  this  way,  my  sovereign,  I  sent
away  the  lady  Kadallgarbha,  and  so  delivered  her  from  the
danger  of  the  incantations  which  would  have  been  practised
against  her,  since  I  satisfied  the  head  queen  by  an  artifice."

When  the  king  heard  that,  he  saw  that  the  speech  of  the
great  hermit  was  certainly  true,  and  he  took  back  Kadall-
garbha, recovering  his  confidence  in  her.  And  after  respect-
fully accompanying  the  departing  hermit  he  rewarded  the
barber  with  wealth,  thinking  that  he  was  attached  to  his

Lower  Hesse :  in  one,  ashes  are  strewn  on  the  road  to  mark  it  instead
of  peas  and  lentils.  A  third  and  less  perfect  version  comes  from  the  dis-
trict of  the  Main.  In  this  it  is  a  king's  daughter  to  whom  the  bridegroom
shows  the  way  by  means  of  ribbons  which  he  ties  to  every  tree.  See  also
J.  Bolte,  Anmerkungen  zu  den  Kinder-und  Hausm'drchen  der  Briider  Grimm,  vol.  i,
p.  370.

The  motif  also  occurs  in  Perrault's  Le  Petit  Poucet,  in  which  Hop-o'-my
Thumb  marks  his  way  by  the  help  of  little  white  stones.  In  his  Les  Contes
de  Perrault,  Paris,  1923,  p.  306  et  seq.,  Saintyves  gives  several  analogues  to
the  incident  of  the  track.  See,  for  instance,  Le  Pere  H.  Trilles,  Proverbes,
Legendes  et  Contes  Fangs,  Neuchatel,  1905,  pp.  254-257,  for  a  West  African
variant.  Here  the  method  is  laying  twigs  at  all  places  where  paths  cross.
Ashes  are  found  in  numerous  tales,  while  in  a  Gascon  version  (J.  Blade,
Contes  de  Gascogtie,  vol.  iii,  pp.  41,  42)  it  is  linseed;  dried  peas  in  a  Picardy
story  (E.  Cabnoy,  Litterature  Oralc  de  la  Picardie,  p.  254) ;  bran  and  salt  in  a
Breton  version  (Melusine,  vol.  iii,  p.  309).  In  the  Pentamerone,  eighth  diversion
of  the  fifth  day  (Burton,  vol.  ii,  pp.  541,  542),  we  have  a  rather  unusual  addition.
First  of  all  a  track  of  ashes  is  made,  and  later  one  of  bran.  As  chance  would
have  it,  an  ass  comes  along  and  eats  it  all  up,  so  that,  in  spite  of  their  pre-
cautions, the  children  are  lost.  In  the  tale  of  the  "  Fellah  and  his  Wicked
Wife"  in  the  Nights  (Burton,  Supp.,  vol.  v,  pp.  349,  350)  we  find  bran  again
used  as  a  track.  See  Chauvin,  op.  cit,  vi,  p.  1 79»x,  where  a  few  further
references  will  be  found.  Finally,  in  an  Assamese  version  husks  are  used  to
mark  the  way  (see  J.  H.  Hutton,  "Folk-Tales  of  the  Angami  Nagas  of
Assam,"  Folk-Lore,  vol.  xxvi,  1915,  p.  87). — n.m.p.


106  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

person :  kings  are  the  appointed  prey  of  rogues.  Then  the
king,  being  averse  to  the  society  of  his  queen,  lived  in  great
comfort  with  Kadaligarbha.


[M]  "  Many  false  accusations  of  this  kind  do  rival  wives
bring,  O  Kalingasena  of  irreproachable  beauty.  And  you
are  a  maiden,  the  auspicious  moment  of  whose  marriage  is
fixed  at  a  distant  date,  and  even  the  gods,  whose  goings
transcend  our  thought,  are  in  love  with  you.  So  do  you
yourself  preserve  yourself  now,  as  the  one  jewel  of  the  world,
dedicated  to  the  King  of  Vatsa  only,  from  all  assaults,  for
your  own  excellence  brings  you  enmity.  I,  indeed,  my
friend,  shall  never  return  to  you,  since  you  are  now  estab-
lished in  the  palace  of  your  husband  :  good  women  do  not
visit  the  house  of  a  friend's  husband,  O  fair  one  !  Besides,
I  have  been  forbidden  by  my  own  lord.  And  it  is  not  pos-
sible for  me  to  come  here  secretly,  induced  by  my  affection
for  you,  inasmuch  as  my  husband  possesses  divine  insight
and  would  find  it  out ;  with  difficulty,  in  truth,  did  I  obtain
his  permission  to  come  here  to-day.  And  since  I  can  be  of
no  use  to  you  now,  my  friend,  I  will  return  home ;  but  if  my
husband  should  give  me  permission  I  will  come  here  again,
disregarding  modesty. ' '

Thus  Somaprabha,  the  daughter  of  the  Asura  king,  spake,
weeping,  to  Kalingasena,  the  daughter  of  the  mortal  king,
whose  face  also  was  washed  with  tears,  and  after  embracing
her,  departed  swiftly  to  her  own  palace,  as  the  day  was
passing  away.


CHAPTER  XXXIII

THEN  the  Princess  Kalingasena,  who  had  deserted
[M]  her  own  country  and  relations,  remembering
her  dear  friend  Somaprabha,  who  had  left  her,  and
finding  the  great  festival  of  her  marriage  with  the  King  of
Vatsa  delayed,  remained  in  Kausambi  like  a  doe  that  had
strayed  from  the  forest.

And  the  King  of  Vatsa,  feeling  a  little  bitter  against  the
astrologers,  who  were  so  dexterous  in  deferring  the  marriage
of  Kalingasena,  being  despondent  with  love-longing,  went
that  day,  to  divert  his  mind,  to  the  private  apartments
of  Vasavadatta.  There  the  queen,  who  had  been  tutored
beforehand  by  the  excellent  minister,  let  fall  no  sign  of  anger,
but  showed  especial  sedulity  in  honouring  her  husband  with
her  usual  attentions.

And  the  king,  wondering  how  it  was  that,  even  though
she  knew  the  episode  of  Kalingasena,  the  queen  was  not
angry,  being  desirous  of  knowing  the  cause,  said  to  her  :
"  Do  you  know,  queen,  that  a  princess  named  Kalingasena
has  come  here  to  choose  me  for  her  husband  ?  "  The
moment  she  heard  it  she  answered,  without  changing  the
hue  of  her  countenance  :  "I  know  it ;  I  am  exceedingly
delighted,  for  in  her  the  Goddess  of  Fortune  has  come  to
our  house  ;  for  by  gaining  her  you  will  also  get  her  father,
Kalingadatta,  under  your  influence,  and  the  earth  will  be
more  completely  in  your  power.  Now  I  am  delighted  on
account  of  his  great  power  and  your  pleasure,  and  long  ago
did  I  know  this  circumstance  with  regard  to  you.  So  am  I
not  fortunate,  since  I  have  such  a  husband  as  you,  whom
princesses  fall  in  love  with,  that  are  themselves  sought  by
other  kings  ?  "

When  thus  addressed  by  Queen  Vasavadatta,  who  had

been   previously    tutored    by    Yaugandharayana,    the    king

rejoiced  in  his  heart.     And  after  enjoying  a  drinking-bout

with  her  he  slept  that  night  in  her  apartments,  and  waking

107


108  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

up  in  the  morning  he  reflected  :  "  What,  does  the  mag-
nanimous queen  obey  me  so  implicitly  as  even  to  acquiesce
in  having  Kalingasena  for  a  rival  ?  But  how  could  this
same  proud  woman  endure  her,  since  it  was  owing  to  the
special  favour  of  destiny  that  she  did  not  yield  her  breath
even  when  I  married  Padmavati  ?  So  if  anything  were
to  happen  to  her,  it  would  be  utter  ruin  ;  upon  her  hang
the  lives  of  my  son,  my  brother-in-law,  my  father-in-law
and  Padmavati,  and  the  welfare  of  the  kingdom.  What
higher  tribute  can  I  pay  her  ?  So  how  can  I  marry  that
Kalingasena  ?  "

Thus  reflecting,  the  King  of  Vatsa  left  her  chamber  at
the  close  of  night  and  the  next  day  went  to  the  palace  of  the
Queen  Padmavati.  She  too,  having  been  taught  her  lesson
by  Vasavadatta,  showed  him  attentions  after  the  very
same  fashion,  and  when  questioned  by  him  gave  a  similar
answer.

The  next  day  the  king,  thinking  over  the  sentiments  and
speeches  of  the  queens,  which  were  completely  in  unison,
commended  them  to  Yaugandharayana.  And  the  minister
Yaugandharayana,  who  knew  how  to  seize  the  right  moment,
seeing  that  the  king  was  plunged  in  doubt,  spake  slowly  to
him  as  follows  :  "I  know  well  the  matter  does  not  end  where
you  think  ;  there  is  a  terrible  resolve  here.  For  the  queens
spoke  thus  because  they  are  steadfastly  bent  on  surrendering
their  lives.  Chaste  women,  when  their  beloved  is  attached
to  another,  or  has  gone  to  heaven,  become  careless  about  all
enjoyments  and  determined  to  die,  though  their  intentions
are  inscrutable  on  account  of  the  haughtiness  of  their  char-
acter. For  matrons  cannot  endure  the  interruption  of  a
deep  affection,  and  in  proof  of  this  hear  now,  O  King,  this
story  of  Srutasena.

43.  Story  of  Srutasena

There  lived  long  ago  in  the  Deccan,  in  a  city  called
Gokarna,  a  king  named  Srutasena,  who  was  the  ornament
of  his  race  and  possessed  of  learning.  And  this  king,  though
his  prosperity  was  complete,  had  yet  one  source  of  sorrow,


THE  HIGHEST  ESSENCE  OF  VIRTUE  109

that  he  had  not  as  yet  obtained  a  wife  who  was  a  suitable
match  for  him.  And  once  on  a  time  the  king,  while  brood-
ing over  that  sorrow,  began  to  talk  about  it,  and  was  thus
addressed  by  a  Brahman,  named  Agnisarman  :  "  I  have
seen  two  wonders,  O  King.  I  will  describe  them  to  you.
Listen  !  Having  gone  on  a  pilgrimage  to  all  the  sacred
bathing-places,  I  reached  that  Panchatirthi,  in  which  five
Apsarases  were  reduced  to  the  condition  of  crocodiles  by
the  curse  of  a  holy  sage,  and  were  rescued  from  it  by  Arjuna,
who  had  come  there  while  going  round  the  holy  spots.  There
I  bathed  in  the  blessed  water,  which  possesses  the  power  of
enabling  those  men  who  bathe  in  it,  and  fast  for  five  nights,
to  become  followers  of  Narayana.  And  while  I  was  depart-
ing I  beheld  a  cultivator  in  the  middle  of  a  field,  who  had
furrowed  the  earth  with  his  plough,  singing.  That  cultivator
was  asked  about  the  road  by  a  certain  wandering  hermit
who  had  come  that  way,  but  did  not  hear  what  he  said,  being
wholly  occupied  with  his  song.  Then  the  hermit  was  angry
with  that  cultivator,  and  began  to  talk  in  a  distracted  manner ;
and  the  cultivator,  Stopping  his  song,  said  to  him  :  c  Alas  !
though  you  are  a  hermit  you  will  not  learn  even  a  fraction
of  virtue ;  even  I,  though  a  fool,  have  discovered  what  is  the
highest  essence  of  virtue.'  When  he  heard  that,  the  hermit
asked  him  out  of  curiosity  :  '  What  have  you  discovered  ?  '
And  the  cultivator  answered  him  :  '  Sit  here  in  the  shade
and  listen  while  I  tell  you  a  tale.

43a.  The  Three  Brahman  Brothers

In  this  land  there  were  three  Brahman  brothers,  Brah-
madatta,  Somadatta  and  Visvadatta,  of  holy  deeds.  Of
these  two,  the  eldest,  possessed  wives,  but  the  youngest  was
unmarried  ;  he  remained  as  their  servant  without  being
angry,  obeying  their  orders  along  with  me  ;  for  I  was  their
ploughman.  And  those  elder  brothers  thought  that  he  was
soft,  and  devoid  of  intellect,  good,  not  swerving  from  the
right  path,  simple  and  unenterprising.  Then,  once  on  a  time,
the  youngest  brother,  Visvadatta,  was  solicited  by  his  two
brothers'  wives,  who  fell  in  love  with  him,  but  he  rejected


110  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

their  advances  as  if  each  of  them  had  been  his  mother.
Then  they  both  of  them  went  and  said  falsely  to  their  own
husbands  :  "  This  younger  brother  of  yours  makes  love  to
us  in  secret."  x  This  speech  made  those  two  elder  brothers
cherish  anger  against  him  in  their  hearts,  for  men  bewildered
by  the  speeches  of  wicked  women  do  not  know  the  difference
between  truth  and  falsehood.

Then  those  brothers  said,  once  on  a  time,  to  Visvadatta  :
"  Go  and  level  that  ant-hill  in  the  middle  of  the  field  !  "
He  said,  "  I  will,"  and  went  and  proceeded  to  dig  up
the  ant-hill  with  his  spade,  though  I  said  to  him  :  "  Do
not  do  it ;  a  venomous  snake  lives  there."  Though  he
heard  what  I  said,  he  continued  to  dig  at  the  ant-hill,
exclaiming,  "Let  what  will  happen!"  for  he  would  not
disobey  the  order  of  his  two  elder  brothers,  though  they
wished  him  ill.

Then,  while  he  was  digging  it  up,  he  got  out  of  it  a  pitcher
filled  with  gold,  and  not  a  venomous  snake ;  for  virtue  is  an
auxiliary  to  the  good.  So  he  took  that  pitcher  and  gave  it
all  to  his  elder  brothers  out  of  his  constant  affection  for  them,
though  I  tried  to  dissuade  him.  But  they  sent  assassins,
hiring  them  with  a  portion  of  that  gold,  and  had  his  hands
and  feet  cut  off,  in  their  desire  to  seize  his  wealth.  But  he
was  free  from  anger,  and  in  spite  of  that  treatment  did  not
wax  wroth  with  his  brothers,  and  on  account  of  that  virtue
of  his,  his  hands  and  feet  grew  again.

43.  Story  of  Srutasena

" '  After  beholding  that  I  renounced  from  that  time  all
anger,  but  you,  though  you  are  a  hermit,  have  not  even
now  renounced  anger.  The  man  who  is  free  from  anger  has
gained  heaven.  Behold  now  a  proof  of  this.'  After  saying
this,  the  husbandman  left  his  body  and  ascended  to  heaven.
This  is  one  wonder  which  I  have  seen.  Hear  a  second,  O
King."

After  saying  this  to  King  Srutasena  the  Brahman  con-

1  For  a  note  on  women  whose  love  is  scorned  see  Vol.  II,  pp.  120-124.

— N.M.P.


THE  PRINCESS  VIDYUDDYOTA  111

tinued  :  "  Then,  as  I  was  roaming  about  on  the  shore  of  the
sea  to  visit  sacred  places,  I  reached  the  realm  of  King  Vasan-
tasena.  There,  as  I  was  about  to  enter  an  almshouse  where
cooked  food  is  distributed  by  the  king,  the  Brahmans  said
to  me :  c  Brahman,  advance  not  in  that  direction,  for  there
the  king's  daughter  is  present ;  she  is  called  Vidyuddyota,
and  if  even  a  hermit  beholds  her  he  is  pierced  by  the  arrow
of  love  and,  becoming  distracted,  ceases  to  live.'  Then  I
answered  them  :  *  This  is  not  wonderful  to  me,  for  I  con-
tinually behold  King  Srutasena,  who  is  a  second  God  of  Love.
When  he  leaves  his  palace  on  an  expedition,  or  for  some  other
purpose,  women  of  good  family  are  removed  by  guards  from
any  place  whence  they  may  possibly  see  him,  for  fear  they
should  infringe  chastity.'  When  I  said  this,  they  knew  I
was  a  subject  of  your  Majesty's,  and  the  superintendent  of
the  house  of  entertainment  and  the  king's  chaplain  took  me
into  the  presence  of  the  king,  that  I  might  share  the  feast.
There  I  saw  that  Princess  Vidyuddyota,  looking  like  the
incarnation  of  the  magic  art  with  which  the  God  of  Love
bewilders  the  world.  After  a  long  time  I  mastered  my
confusion  at  beholding  her,  and  reflected :  '  If  this  lady
were  to  become  the  wife  of  our  sovereign,  he  would  forget  his
kingdom.  Nevertheless  I  must  tell  this  tale  to  my  master,
otherwise  there  might  take  place  the  incident  of  Devasena
and  Unmadini.'

43b.  Devasena  and  Unmadini

Once  on  a  time,  in  the  realm  of  King  Devasena,  there  was
a  merchant's  daughter,  a  maiden  that  bewildered  the  world
with  her  beauty.  Her  father  told  the  king  about  her,  but
the  king  did  not  take  her  in  marriage,  for  the  Brahmans,  who
wished  to  prevent  him  neglecting  his  duties,  told  him  she
had  inauspicious  marks.  So  she  was  married  to  his  prime
minister.1  And  once  on  a  time  she  showed  herself  to  the
king  at  a  window.  And  the  king,  struck  by  her  with  a
poisonous  look  from  a  distance,  as  if  she  had  been  a  female

1  This  is  a  repetition  of  the  story  of  Devasena  and  Unmadini  in
Book  III. See  Vol.  II,  pp.  6-8.— n.m.p.


112  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

snake,1  fainted  again  and  again,  enjoyed  no  pleasure,  and
took  no  food.  And  the  righteous  king,  though  entreated
over  and  over  again  to  marry  her  by  the  ministers,  with  her
husband  at  their  head,  refused  to  do  so,  and,  devoted  to  her,
yielded  up  his  breath.

43.  Story  of  Srutasena

"  Accordingly  I  have  come  to-day  and  told  you  this
wonderful  tale,  thinking  that  if  a  similar  distraction  were  to
come  upon  you  I  should  be  guilty  of  conspiring  against  your
life."

When  King  Srutasena  heard  from  that  Brahman  this
speech,  which  was  like  the  command  of  the  God  of  Love,  he
became  ardently  attached  to  Vidyuddyota,  so  he  immediately
sent  off  the  Brahman  and  took  steps  to  have  her  brought
quickly,  and  married  her.  Then  the  Princess  Vidyuddyota
became  inseparable  from  the  person  of  that  king,  as  the
daylight  from  the  orb  of  the  sun.

Then  a  maiden  of  the  name  of  Matridatta,  the  daughter
of  a  very  rich  merchant,  intoxicated  with  the  pride  of  her
beauty,  came  to  select  that  king  for  her  husband.  Through
fear  of  committing  unrighteousness,  the  king  married  that
merchant's  daughter  ;  then  Vidyuddyota,  coming  to  hear  of
it,  died  of  a  broken  heart.  And  the  king  came  and  beheld
that  dearly  loved  wife  lying  dead,  and  took  her  up  in  his
arms  and,  lamenting,  died  on  the  spot.  Thereupon  Matri-
datta, the  merchant's  daughter,  entered  the  fire.  And  so
the  whole  kingdom  perished  with  the  king.


[M]  "So  you  see,  King,  that  the  breaking  off  of  long  love
is  difficult  to  bear  ;    especially  would  it  be  so  to  the  proud

1  Cf.  the  "  death-darting  eye  of  cockatrice "  in  Romeo  and  Juliet.     See

also  Schmidt's  Shakespeare  Dictionary,  under  the  word  "basilisk." Accounts

of  the  basilisk  are  found  in  Pliny,  XXIX,  xix,  and  Heliodorus,  Mthiopica,  iii,  8.
It  is  described  as  a  serpent  with  a  cock's  head,  whose  look  is  fatal.  See  the
section  "The  Fatal  Look"  in  Appendix  III  on  "  Poison-Damsels"  in  Vol.  II
of  this  work,  p.  298  et  seq. — n.m.p.


THE  KING  SHOWS  DISCRIMINATION         113

Queen  Vasavadatta.  Accordingly,  if  you  were  to  marry
this  Kalingasena,  the  Queen  Vasavadatta  would  indubitably
quit  her  life,  and  the  Queen  Padmavati  would  do  the  same,
for  their  life  is  one.  And  then  how  would  your  son  Narava-
hanadatta  live  ?  And,  I  know,  the  king's  heart  would  not
be  able  to  bear  any  misfortune  happening  to  him.  And  so
all  this  happiness  would  perish  in  a  moment,  O  King.  But
as  for  the  dignified  reserve  which  the  queens  displayed  in
their  speeches,  that  sufficiently  shows  that  their  hearts  are
indifferent  to  all  things,  being  firmly  resolved  on  suicide.
So  you  must  guard  your  own  interests,  for  even  animals
understand  self-protection,  much  more  wise  men  like  yourself,
O  King."

The  King  of  Vatsa,  when  he  heard  this  at  length  from
the  excellent  minister  Yaugandharayana,  having  now  become
quite  capable  of  wise  discrimination,  said  :  "It  is  so  ;  there
can  be  no  doubt  about  it ;  all  this  fabric  of  my  happiness
would  be  overthrown.  So  what  is  the  use  of  my  marry-
ing Kalingasena  ?  Accordingly  the  astrologers  did  well  in
mentioning  a  distant  hour  as  auspicious  for  the  marriage;
and  there  cannot,  after  all,  be  much  sin  in  abandoning  one
who  had  come  to  select  me  as  her  husband."

When  Yaugandharayana  heard  this,  he  reflected  with
joy  :  "  Our  business  has  almost  turned  out  according  to  our
wishes.  Will  not  that  same  great  plant  of  policy,  watered
with  the  streams  of  expediency  and  nourished  with  due  time
and  place,  truly  bring  forth  fruit  ?  "  Thus  reflecting,  and
meditating  upon  fitting  time  and  place,  the  minister  Yau-
gandharayana went  to  his  house,  after  taking  a  ceremonious
farewell  of  the  king.

The  king  too  went  to  the  Queen  Vasavadatta,  who  had
assumed  to  welcome  him  a  manner  which  concealed  her
real  feelings,  and  thus  spoke  to  her  to  console  her  :  "  Why
do  I  speak  ?  You  know  well,  O  gazelle- eyed  one,  that  your
love  is  my  life,  even  as  the  water  is  of  the  lotus.  Could  I
bear  even  to  mention  the  name  of  another  woman  ?  But
Kalingasena  came  to  my  house  of  her  own  impetuous  motion.
And  this  is  well  known,  that  Rambha,  who  came  to  visit
Arjuna  of  her  own  impetuous  will,  having  been  rejected  by

VOL.   III.  H


114  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

him,  as  he  was  engaged  in  austerities,  inflicted  on  him  a
curse  which  made  him  a  eunuch.  That  curse  was  endured
by  him  to  the  end,  living  in  the  house  of  the  King  of  Virata
in  woman's  garb  for  a  year,  though  he  displayed  miraculous
valour.1  So  I  did  not  reject  this  Kalingasena  when  she
came,  but  I  cannot  bring  myself  to  do  anything  without
your  wish."

Having  comforted  her  in  these  words,  and  having  per-
ceived by  the  flush  of  wine  which  rose  to  her  cheek,  as  if
it  were  her  glowing,  passionate  heart,  that  her  cruel  design
was  a  reality,  the  King  of  Vatsa  spent  that  night  with  the
Queen  Vasavadatta,  delighted  at  the  transcendent  ability  of
his  prime  minister.

And  in  the  meanwhile  that  Brahman-Rakshasa  named
Yogesvara,  who  was  a  friend  of  Yaugandharayana's,  and
whom  he  had  commissioned  beforehand  to  watch  day  and
night  the  proceedings  of  Kalingasena,  came  that  very  night
of  his  own  accord  and  said  to  the  prime  minister  :  "I  remain
ever  at  Kalingasena 's  house,  either  without  it  or  within  it,
and  I  have  never  seen  man  or  god  come  there.  But  to-day
I  suddenly  heard  an  indistinct  noise  in  the  air,  at  the  com-
mencement of  the  night,  as  I  was  lying  hid  near  the  roof  of
the  palace.  Then  my  magic  science  was  set  in  motion  to
ascertain  the  cause  of  the  sound,  but  prevailed  not ;  so  I
pondered  over  it  and  came  to  this  conclusion  :  '  This  must
certainly  be  the  voice  of  some  being  of  divine  power,
enamoured  of  Kalingasena,  who  is  roaming  in  the  sky.
Since  my  science  does  not  succeed,  I  must  look  for  some
opening,  for  clever  people  who  remain  vigilant  find  little
difficulty  in  discovering  holes  in  their  opponent's  armour.
And  I  know  that  the  prime  minister  said  :  "  Divine  beings
are  in  love  with  her."  Moreover,  I  overheard  her  friend
Somaprabha  saying  the  same.'  After  arriving  at  this  con-
clusion I  came  here  to  make  my  report  to  you.  This  I  have
to  ask  you  by  the  way,  so  tell  me  so  much,  I  pray  you.  By
my  magic  power  I  heard,  without  being  seen,  what  you  said
to  the  king:  'Even  animals  understand  self-protection.'
Now  tell  me,  sagacious  man,  if  there  is  any  instance  of  this."

1  For  details  of  Indian  eunuchs  see  Appendix  II  of  this  volume. — n.m.p.


THE  ICHNEUMON  115

When  Yogesvara  asked  him  this  question  Yaugan-
dharayana  answered  :  "  There  is,  my  friend ;  and  to  prove
it  I  will  tell  you  this  tale.     Listen.


44.  Story  of  the  Ichneumon,  the  Owl,  the  Cat  and  the  Mouse

Once  on  a  time  there  was  a  large  banyan-tree  outside  the
city  of  Vidisa.  In  that  vast  tree  dwelt  four  creatures,  an
ichneumon,1  an  owl,  a  cat  and  a  mouse,  and  their  habitations

1  Benfey  found  this  story  in  the  Arabic  version  of  the  Panchatantra  and
in  all  the  translations  and  reproductions  of  it.  He  finds  it  also  in  the
Mahabharata,  xii  (iii,  589),  si.  4930  et  seq.  He  expresses  his  opinion  that  it
formed  a  portion  of  the  original  Panchatantra.  See  Benfey's  Panchatantra,
pp.  544-56'0 ;  Orient  una1  Occident,  vol.  i,  p.  383.  The  account  in  the
Mahabharata  is  very  prolix.

The  ichneumon  is  found  in  several  animal  stories  in  Eastern  collec-
tions, often  in  company  with  a  mouse.  See,  for  instance,  Schiefner  and
Ralston's  Tibetan  Tales,  p.  308,  where  there  is  a  pathetic  little  story  about
an  ichneumon,  a  mouse  and  a  snake.  The  cunning  of  the  former  is  shown
in  the  tale  of  the  "  Mouse  and  the  Ichneumon  "  in  the  Nights,  Burton,  vol.  iii,
pp.  147-148.  (See  Burton's  note  on  p.  147.)  It  is  unnecessary  to  speak  of
Kipling's  Rikki-Tikki-Tavi.

It  would  be  more  correct  in  our  text  to  call  the  animal  by  the  Indian
name  "  mongoose "  {Herpestes  mungd),  the  Indian  being  smaller  than  the
Egyptian  variety  (H.  ichneumoii).  The  type  genus  has  numerous  species
found  all  over  Africa  and  throughout  Southern  Asia.  In  India  the  mongoose
is  especially  famous  as  a  serpent-killer,  and  owing  to  its  successful  encounters
with  even  the  deadliest  snakes  has  been  credited  with  immunity  from  snake-
bites. The  Hindus  also  say  that,  if  bitten,  the  animal  has  recourse  to  a
certain  root  which  it  uses  as  an  antidote.  It  has  been  found,  however,  that
the  mongoose  is  affected  by  venom  just  like  other  animals,  but  owing  to  its
extraordinary  quickness,  and  the  thickness  of  its  skin  and  the  protection
afforded  by  its  long  stiff  hair,  which  it  erects  in  anger,  it  is  a  very  formidable
enemy  to  the  snake.

A  spectator  of  a  fight  between  a  mongoose  and  a  snake  thus  writes
{Ency.  Brit.,  vol.  xiv,  p.  242):  "His  whole  nature  appears  to  be  changed.
His  fur  stands  on  end,  and  he  presents  the  incarnation  of  intense  rage.  The
snake  invariably  attempts  to  escape,  but,  finding  it  impossible  to  evade  the
rapid  onslaught  of  the  mongoose,  raises  his  crest  and  lashes  out  fiercely  at
his  little  persecutor,  who  seems  to  delight  in  dodging  out  of  the  way  just
in  time.  This  goes  on  until  the  mongoose  sees  his  opportunity,  when  like
lightning  he  rushes  in  and  seizes  the  snake  with  his  teeth  by  the  back  of  the
neck  close  to  the  head,  shaking  him  as  a  terrier  does  a  rat.  These  tactics
are  repeated  until  the  snake  is  killed."

It  was,  however,  in  ancient  Egypt  that  the  ichneumon  was  most  venerated,


116  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

were  apart.  The  ichneumon  and  the  mouse  dwelt  in  separate
holes  in  the  root,  the  cat  in  a  great  hollow  in  the  middle  of
the  tree ;  but  the  owl  dwelt  in  a  bower  of  creepers  on  the
top  of  it,  which  was  inaccessible  to  the  others.  Among  these
the  mouse  was  the  natural  prey  of  all  three,  three  out  of  the
four  of  the  cat.  The  mouse,  the  ichneumon  and  the  owl
ranged  for  food  during  the  night,  the  first  two  through  fear
of  the  cat  only,  the  owl  partly  because  it  was  his  nature  to
do  so.  But  the  cat  fearlessly  wandered  night  and  day
through  the  neighbouring  barley- field,  in  order  to  catch  the
mouse,  while  the  others  went  there  by  stealth  at  a  suitable
time  out  of  desire  for  food.

One  day  a  certain  hunter  of  the  Chandala  caste  came
there.  He  saw  the  track  of  the  cat  entering  that  field,  and
having  set  nooses  all  round  the  field  in  order  to  compass
its  death,  departed.  So  the  cat  came  there  at  night  to
slay  the  mouse,  and  entering  the  field  was  caught  in  one  of
the  hunter's  nooses.  The  mouse,  for  his  part,  came  there
secretly  in  search  of  food,  and  seeing  the  cat  caught  in  the
noose,  danced  for  joy.

While  it  was  entering  the  field  the  owl  and  ichneumon
came  from  afar  by  the  same  path,  and  seeing  the  cat  fast  in

the  centre  of  the  worship  being  at  Heracleopolis.  The  principal  cause  of  the
respect  paid  to  the  animal  is  said  to  be  on  account  of  its  great  hostility  to
the  crocodile,  an  animal  especially  feared  and  hated  by  the  Heracleopolites.
Living  among  the  reeds  on  the  banks  of  the  Nile,  it  takes  the  eggs  of  young
crocodiles  which  have  been  hidden  in  the  sand.  Diodorus  (i,  87,  etc.)  tells  us
that  it  even  kills  full-grown  crocodiles  in  a  wonderful  and  almost  incredible
manner.  Covering  itself  with  a  coat  of  mud,  the  ichneumon  watches  the
moment  when  the  crocodile,  coming  out  of  the  river,  sleeps  (as  is  its  custom)
upon  a  sand-bank,  with  its  mouth  open  (turned  towards  the  wind),  and,
adroitly  gliding  down  its  throat,  penetrates  to  its  entrails.  It  then  gnaws
through  its  stomach,  and,  having  killed  its  enemy,  escapes  without  receiv-
ing any  injury  (quoted  by  Wilkinson,  Manners  and  Customs  of  the  Ancient
Egyptians,  vol.  iii,  p.  280).

Several  other  classical  writers,  Pliny,  Strabo,  Herodotus,  Aelian,  etc.,
have  described  the  mode  of  attack  of  the  ichneumon  against  the  snake.

The  animal  is  often  kept  as  a  pet  and  becomes  very  tame,  and  usually
has  a  wonderful  temper,  but  its  partiality  for  eggs  and  poultry  makes  it  a  bad
substitute  for  the  cat.  It  is  the  cat  that  is  afraid  of  the  mongoose  rather
than  the  opposite,  as  mentioned  in  our  text.  For  further  details  see  Wilkinson,
op.  cit.,  pp.  279-285,  and  Yule,  Hobson  Jobson,  under  "Mungoose." — n.m.p.


THE  SAGACIOUS  MOUSE  117

the  noose,  desired  to  capture  the  mouse.  And  the  mouse,
beholding  them  afar  off,  was  terrified,  and  reflected  :  "  If  I
fly  to  the  cat,  which  the  owl  and  the  ichneumon  are  afraid  of,
that  enemy,  though  fast  in  the  noose,  may  slay  me  with  one
blow,  but  if  I  keep  at  a  distance  from  the  cat  the  owl  and
the  ichneumon  will  be  the  death  of  me.  So  being  compassed
about  with  enemies,  where  shall  I  go,  what  shall  I  do  ?  Ah  !
I  will  take  refuge  with  the  cat  here,  for  it  is  in  trouble  and
may  serve  me  to  preserve  its  own  life,  as  I  shall  be  of  use
to  gnaw  through  the  noose."

Thus  reflecting,  the  mouse  slowly  approached  the  cat  and
said  to  it  :  "I  am  exceedingly  grieved  at  your  being  caught,
so  I  will  gnaw  through  your  noose  ;  the  upright  come  to
love  even  their  enemies  by  dwelling  in  their  neighbourhood.
But  I  do  not  feel  confidence  in  you,  as  I  do  not  know  your
intentions."  When  the  cat  heard  that,  he  said  :  "  Worthy
mouse,  be  at  rest ;  from  this  day  forth  you  are  my  friend,  as
giving  me  life."  The  moment  he  heard  this  from  the  cat
he  crept  into  his  bosom  ;  when  the  owl  and  the  ichneumon
saw  that,  they  went  away  hopeless.  Then  the  cat,  galled
with  the  noose,  said  to  the  mouse  :  "  My  friend,  the  night
is  almost  gone,  so  quickly  gnaw  through  my  bonds."  The
mouse  for  its  part,  waiting  for  the  arrival  of  the  hunter,
slowly  nibbled  the  noose  and  protracted  the  business,  making
a  continual  munching  with  its  teeth,  which  was  all  pretence.

Soon  the  night  came  to  an  end  and  the  hunter  came  near  ;
then  the  mouse,  at  the  request  of  the  cat,  quickly  gnawed
through  the  noose  which  held  it.  So  the  cat's  noose  was
severed  and  it  ran  away,  afraid  of  the  hunter  ;  and  the
mouse,  delivered  from  death,  fled  into  its  hole.  But  when
called  again  by  the  cat  it  reposed  no  confidence  in  him,  but
remarked  :  "  The  truth  is,  an  enemy  is  occasionally  made  a
friend  by  circumstances,  but  does  not  remain  such  for  ever."


[M]  "  Thus  the  mouse,  though  an  animal,  saved  its  life
from  many  foes ;  much  more  ought  the  same  thing  to  take
place  among  men.     You  heard  that  speech  which  I  uttered


118  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

to  the  king  on  that  occasion,  to  the  effect  that  by  wisdom
he  should  guard  his  own  interests  by  preserving  the  life
of  the  queen.  And  wisdom  is  in  every  exigency  the  best
friend,  not  valour,  Yogesvara.  In  illustration  of  this  hear
the  following  story  : —


45.  Story  of  King  Prasenajit  and  the  Brahman  who  lost  his

Treasure  1

There  is  a  city  named  Sravasti,  and  in  it  there  lived  in  old
time  a  king  of  the  name  of  Prasenajit,  and  one  day  a  strange
Brahman  arrived  in  that  city.  A  merchant,  thinking  he  was
virtuous  because  he  lived  on  rice  in  the  husk,  provided  him

1  This  story  found  its  way  into  a  Persian  work,  MahbFtb  ul-Qulftb.  It  was
translated  by  Edward  Rehatsek,  and  appears  in  his  Amusing  Stories,  Bombay,
1871.  It  was  reprinted  as  "The  Hidden  Treasure,"  by  Clouston,  in  A  Group
of  Eastern  Romances  and  Stories,  1  88,0,  p.  442  et  seq.,  who  gives  some  analogues
(including  the  original  story  from  our  text)  on  pp.  558-561.  There  is  also  a
similar  tale  in  the  Nights,  "  The  Melancholist  and  the  Sharper  "  (Burton,  Supp.,
vol.  i,  pp.  264-266),  in  which  the  loser,  suspecting  a  certain  man  of  the  theft,
arranges  to  mutter  to  himself  within  his  hearing  :  "  In  the  pot  are  sixty  ducats,
and  1  have  with  me  other  twenty  in  such  a  place,  and  to-day  I  will  unite  the
whole  in  the  pot."  The  other  returns  what  he  has  taken,  thinking  to  get
more  in  the  end — and  so  the  lost  property  is  recovered.  In  Burton's  next
volume  (Supp.,  vol.  ii,  pp.  333-340)  Clouston  adds  several  analogues  besides
those  already  mentioned.  There  is  one  from  Gladwin's  Persian  Moonshee,  and
a  good  Italian  version  from  Sacchetti's  Novelle  (No.  198).  His  tales  are  not
very  well  known  in  England,  but  are  especially  interesting  as  they  are  largely
based  on  real  incidents  in  domestic  and  public  life  in  Florence  in  the  fourteenth
century.  The  tale  in  question,  however,  was  taken  from  the  Cento  Novelle
Antiche  (No.  74).  The  motif  is  well  represented  in  Jewish  literature,  as  has
recently  been  shown  by  Gaster,  The  Exempla  of  the  Rabbis,  1924.  In  story
No.  324  (p.  117)  of  this  collection  a  man  hides  his  money  in  a  garden.  It  is
stolen  by  a  neighbour.  He  pretends  not  to  know  of  the  theft  and  asks  the
neighbour  whether  it  would  be  wise  to  hide  the  other  money  in  the  same
secret  spot.  The  stolen  money  is  then  replaced  by  the  neighbour  so  as  not
to  arouse  suspicion,  and  thus  the  owner  recovers  it.  Numerous  analogues  are
given  on  pp.  220  and  240.  Similar  stories  also  occur  in  the  Discip/bia  Clericalis
of  Alphonsus,  chap,  xvi ;  the  Gesta  Romanorum  (chap,  cxviii  —  i.e.  tale  38,
"  Of  Deceit,"  in  vol.  ii  of  Thomas  Wright's  edition  of  Swan's  translation) ;
and  in  the  Decameron,  day  8,  nov.  10.  Numerous  analogues  to  this  latter
are  given  by  Lee,  The  Decameron,  its  Sources  and  Analogues,  pp.  266-270.  On
p.  26*8  he  mentions  the  tale  of  Ali  Cogia  in  the  Milte  et  une  Nuits,  but  did
not  know  it  appeared  in  Burton's  Nights,  Supp.,  vol.  in,  p.  405  et  seq.,  as  "  Ali


.


DEATH  IS  PREFERABLE  TO  POVERTY   119


a  lodging  there  in  the  house  of  a  Brahman.  There  he  was
loaded  by  him  every  day  with  presents  of  unhusked  rice
and  other  gifts,  and  gradually  by  other  great  merchants  also,
who  came  to  hear  his  story.  In  this  way  the  miserly  fellow
gradually  accumulated  a  thousand  dinars,  and,  going  to  the
forest,  he  dug  a  hole  and  buried  it  in  the  ground,1  and  he
went  every  day  and  examined  the  spot.

Now  one  day  he  saw  that  the  hole,  in  which  he  had  hidden
his  gold,  had  been  reopened,  and  that  all  the  gold  had  gone.
When  he  saw  that  hole  empty  his  soul  was  smitten,  and  not
only  was  there  a  void  in  his  heart,  but  the  whole  universe
seemed  to  him  to  be  void  also.  And  then  he  came  crying  to
the  Brahman  in  whose  house  he  lived,  and  when  questioned
he  told  him  his  whole  story  ;  and  he  made  up  his  mind  to  go
to  a  holy  bathing-place  and  starve  himself  to  death.  Then
the  merchant  who  supplied  him  with  food,  hearing  of  it,
came  there  with  others  and  said  to  him  :  "  Brahman,  why
do  you  long  to  die  for  the  loss  of  your  wealth  ?  Wealth,  like
an  unseasonable  cloud,  suddenly  comes  and  goes."

Though  plied  by  him  with  these  and  similar  arguments,
he  would  not  abandon  his  fixed  determination  to  commit
suicide,  for  wealth  is  dearer  to  the  miser  than  life  itself.  But
when  the  Brahman  was  going  to  the  holy  place  to  commit
suicide  the  King  Prasenajit  himself,  having  heard  of  it,
came  to  him  and  asked  him :  "  Brahman,  do  you  know  of
any  marks  by  which  you  can  recognise  the  place  where  you
buried  your  dinar  si"  When  the  Brahman  heard  that,  he
said  :  "  There  is  a  small  tree  in  the  wood  there.  I  buried
that  wealth  at  its  foot."  When  the  king  heard  that,  he  said  :
"  I  will  find  that  wealth  and  give  it  back  to  you,  or  I  will
give  it  you  from  my  own  treasury.  Do  not  commit  suicide,
Brahman."

After  saying  this,  and  so  diverting  the  Brahman  from  his

Khwajah  and  the  Merchant  of  Baghdad."  Although  it  contains  the  incident
of  recovering  stolen  gold  by  a  clever  trick,  the  leading  motif  is  that  of
"precocious  children."  Clouston  gives  several  analogues  on  pp.  596-600  of
the  same  volume  of  the  Nights.  These  references  should  be  added  to  those  I
have  already  given  on  "precocious  children"  in  Vol.  I,  p.  186ft1. — n.m.p.
1  For  nihatya  I  conjecture  nikhanya.


120  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

intention  of  committing  suicide,  the  king  entrusted  him  to
the  care  of  the  merchant,  and  retired  to  his  palace.  There
he  pretended  to  have  a  headache,  and  sending  out  the  door-
keeper, he  summoned  all  the  physicians  in  the  city  by
proclamation  with  beat  of  drum.  And  he  took  aside  every
single  one  of  them  and  questioned  him  privately  in  the
following  words : — "  What  patients  have  you  here,  and  how
many,  and  what  medicine  have  you  prescribed  for  each  ?  "
And  they  thereupon,  one  by  one,  answered  all  the  king's
questions.  Then  one  among  the  physicians,  when  his  turn
came  to  be  questioned,  said  this  :  "  The  merchant  Matri-
datta  has  been  out  of  sorts,  O  King,  and  this  is  the  second
day  that  I  have  prescribed  for  him  ndgabald."  1

When  the  king  heard  that,  he  sent  for  the  merchant  and
said  to  him  :  "  Tell  me,  who  fetched  you  the  ndgabald  ?  "
The  merchant  said  :  "My  servant,  your  Highness."  When
the  king  got  this  answer  from  the  merchant,  he  quickly
summoned  the  servant  and  said  to  him  :  "  Give  up  that
treasure  belonging  to  a  Brahman,  consisting  of  a  store  of
dinars,  which  you  found  when  you  were  digging  at  the  foot
of  a  tree  for  ndgabald.'"  When  the  king  said  this  to  him,
the  servant  was  frightened,  and  confessed  immediately,  and
bringing  those  dinars  left  them  there.  So  the  king  for  his
part  summoned  the  Brahman  and  gave  him,  who  had  been
fasting  in  the  meanwhile,  his  dinars,  lost  and  found  again,
like  a  second  soul  external  to  his  body.


[M]  ' '  Thus  that  king  by  his  wisdom  recovered  for  the
Brahman  his  wealth,  which  had  been  taken  away  from  the
root  of  the  tree,  knowing  that  that  simple  grew  in  such  spots.
So  true  is  it,  that  intellect  always  obtains  the  supremacy,
triumphing  over  valour ;  indeed  in  such  cases  what  could
courage  accomplish?  Accordingly,  Yogesvara,  you  ought
to  bring  it  to  pass  by  your  wisdom  that  some  peccadillo
be  discovered  in  Kalingasena.  And  it  is  true  that  the
gods  and  Asuras  are  in  love  with  her.     This  explains  your

1  The  plant  Uraria  Lagopodioides  (Monier  Williams).


THE  PRETENDED  HUSBAND  121

hearing  at  night  the  sound  of  someone  being  in  the  air.
And  if  we  could  only  obtain  some  pretext,  calamity  would  fall
upon  her,  not  on  us  ;  the  king  would  not  marry  her,  and  yet
we  should  not  have  dealt  unrighteously  with  her."

When  the  Brahman-Rakshasa  Yogesvara  heard  all  this
from  the  sagacious  Yaugandharayana  he  was  delighted,  and
said  to  him  :  "  Who  except  the  god  Vrihaspati  can  match
thee  in  policy  ?  This  counsel  of  thine  waters  with  ambrosia
the  tree  of  empire.  I,  even  I,  will  investigate  with  wisdom
and  might  the  proceedings  of  Kalingasena."  Having  said
this,  Yogesvara  departed  thence.

And  at  this  time  Kalingasena,  while  in  her  palace,  was
continually  afflicted  by  beholding  the  King  of  Vatsa  roaming
about  in  his  palace  and  its  grounds.  Thinking  on  him,  she
was  inflamed  with  love,  and  though  she  wore  a  bracelet  and
necklace  of  lotus  fibres  *  she  never  obtained  relief  thereby,
nor  from  sandal- ointment  or  other  remedies.

In  the  meanwhile  the  King  of  the  Vidyadharas,  named
Madanavega,  who  had  seen  her  before,  remained  wounded  by
the  arrow  of  ardent  love.  Though  he  had  performed  a  vow
to  obtain  her  and  had  been  granted  a  boon  by  Siva,  still
she  was  not  easy  to  gain,  because  she  was  living  in  the  land
of  another,  and  attached  to  another,  so  the  Vidyadhara
prince  was  wandering  about  at  night  in  the  air  over  her
palace,  in  order  to  obtain  an  opportunity.  But,  remember-
ing the  order  of  Siva,  pleased  with  his  asceticism,  he  assumed
one  night  by  his  skill  the  form  of  the  King  of  Vatsa.  And
in  this  shape  he  entered  her  palace,  saluted  with  praises  by
the  doorkeepers,  who  said :  "  Unable  to  bear  delay,  the
king  has  come  here  without  the  knowledge  of  his  ministers."
And  Kalingasena,  on  beholding  him,  rose  up  bewildered
with  agitation,  though  she  was,  so  to  speak,  warned  by  her
ornaments,  which  jingled  out  the  sounds  :  "  This  is  not  the
man."  Then  she  by  degrees  gained  confidence  in  him,  and
Madanavega,  wearing  the  form  of  the  King  of  Vatsa,  made
her  his  wife  by  the  gdndharva  rite.2

1  See  Crooke,  Popular  Religion  and  Folk-Lore  of  Northern  India,  vol.  ii,
pp.  44,  45. — n.m.p.

2  See  Vol.  I,  pp.  87-88.— n.m.p.


122  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

At  that  moment  Yogesvara  entered,  invisible  by  his
magic,  and,  beholding  the  incident,  was  cast  down,  supposing
that  he  saw  the  King  of  Vatsa  before  him.  He  went  and
told  Yaugandharayana,  who,  on  receiving  his  report,  saw  by
his  skill  that  the  king  was  in  the  society  of  Vasavadatta.
So  by  the  order  of  the  prime  minister  he  returned  delighted,
to  observe  the  shape  of  that  secret  paramour  of  Kalingasena
when  asleep.  And  so  he  went  and  beheld  that  Madanavega
asleep  in  his  own  form  on  the  bed  of  the  sleeping  Kalinga-
sena, a  heavenly  being,  the  dustless  lotus  of  whose  foot  was
marked  with  the  umbrella  and  the  banner  ;  and  who  had
lost  his  power  of  changing  his  form,  because  his  science  was
suspended  during  sleep.1

Then  Yogesvara,  full  of  delight,  went  and  told  what  he
had  seen,  in  a  joyful  mood,  to  Yaugandharayana.  He  said  :
"  One  like  me  knows  nothing ;  you  know  everything  by  the
eye  of  policy  ;  by  your  counsel  this  difficult  result  has  been
attained  for  your  king.  What  is  the  sky  without  the  sun  ?
What  is  a  tank  without  water  ?  What  is  a  realm  without
counsel  ?     What  is  speech  without  truth  ?  "

When  Yogesvara  said  this,  Yaugandharayana  took  leave
of  him,  much  pleased,  and  went  in  the  morning  to  visit  the
King  of  Vatsa.  He  approached  him  with  the  usual  rever-
ence, and  in  course  of  conversation  said  to  the  king,  who
asked  him  what  was  to  be  done  about  Kalingasena  :  "  She
is  unchaste,  O  King,  and  does  not  deserve  to  touch  your
hand.  For  she  went  of  her  own  accord  to  visit  Prasenajit.
When  she  saw  that  he  was  old,  she  was  disgusted,  and  came
to  visit  you  out  of  desire  for  your  beauty,  and  now  she  even
enjoys  at  her  pleasure  the  society  of  another  person."

When  the  king  heard  this,  he  said  :  "  How  could  a  lady
of  birth  and  rank  do  such  a  deed  ?  Or  who  has  the  power
to  enter  my  harem  ?  "

When  the  king  said  this,  the  wise  Yaugandharayana
answered  him  :  "I  will  prove  it  to  you  by  ocular  testimony
this  very  night,  my  sovereign.  For  the  divine  Siddhas  and
other  beings  of  the  kind  are  in  love  with  her.  What  can  a
man  do  against  them  ?     And  who  here  can  interfere  with

1  See  note  on  pp.  126-127  of  this  volume. — n.m.p.


THE  DISCOVERY  123

the  movements  of  gods  ?  So  come  and  see  it  with  your  own
eyes."

When  the  minister  said  this,  the  king  determined  to  go
there  with  him  at  night.

Then  Yaugandharayana  came  to  the  queen,  and  said :
"  To-day,  O  Queen,  I  have  carried  out  what  I  promised,  that
the  king  should  marry  no  other  wife  except  Padmavati,"
and  thereupon  he  told  her  the  whole  story  of  Kalingasena.
And  the  Queen  Vasavadatta  congratulated  him,  bowing  low
and  saying  :  "  This  is  the  fruit  which  I  have  reaped  from
following  your  instructions."

Then  at  night,  when  folk  were  asleep,  the  King  of  Vatsa
went  with  Yaugandharayana  to  the  palace  of  Kalingasena.
And,  entering  unperceived,  he  beheld  Madanavega  in  his
f  proper  form,  sleeping  by  the  side  of  the  sleeping
Vatsajinds  Kalingasena.  And  when  the  king  was  minded
Madanavega     to    slay    that    audacious    one,    the    Vidyadhara

hp7rst7ti^)iimPTince  was  roused  *V  his  own  maSic  knowledge,
and  when  awake  he  went  out,  and  immediately
flew  up  into  the  heaven.  And  then  Kalingasena  awoke
immediately.  And  seeing  the  bed  empty,  she  said :  "  How
is  this,  that  the  King  of  Vatsa  wakes  up  before  me  and
departs,  leaving  me  asleep  ?  "

When  Yaugandharayana  heard  that,  he  said  to  the
King  of  Vatsa  :  "  Listen.  She  has  been  beguiled  by  that
Vidyadhara  wearing  your  form.  He  was  found  out  by  me
by  means  of  my  magic  power,  and  now  I  have  exhibited
him  before  your  eyes,  but  you  cannot  kill  him  on  account  of
his  heavenly  might."  After  saying  this,  he  and  the  king
approached  her,  and  Kalingasena,  for  her  part,  seeing  them,
stood  in  a  respectful  attitude.  But  when  she  began  to  say
to  the  king,  "  Where,  O  King,  did  you  go  only  a  moment  ago,
so  as  to  return  with  your  minister  ?  " — Yaugandharayana
said  to  her  :  "  Kalingasena,  you  have  been  married  by  some
being,  who  beguiled  you  by  assuming  the  shape  of  the  King
of  Vatsa,  and  not  by  this  lord  of  mine."  x

When  Kalingasena  heard  this  she  was  bewildered,  and  as

1  For  a  note  on  the  "  Pretended  Husband "  motif  see  the  end  of  this
chapter. — n.m.p.


124  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

if  pierced  through  the  heart  by  an  arrow  she  said  to  the  King
of  Vatsa,  with  tear- streaming  eyes  :  "  Have  you  forgotten
me,  O  King,  after  marrying  me  by  the  gdndharva  rite,  as
Sakuntala  long  ago  was  forgotten  by  Dushyanta  ?  "  *  When
the  king  was  thus  addressed  by  her,  he  said  with  downcast
face  :  "In  truth  you  were  not  married  by  me,  for  I  never
came  here  till  this  moment."  When  the  King  of  Vatsa
had  said  this,  the  minister  said  to  him,  "  Come  along,"  and
conducted  him  at  will  to  the  palace.

When  the  king  had  departed  thence  with  his  minister,
that  lady  Kalingasena,  sojourning  in  a  foreign  country,  like
a  doe  that  had  strayed  from  the  herd,  having  deserted  her
relations,  with  her  face  robbed  of  its  painting  by  kissing,  as
a  lotus  is  robbed  of  its  leaves  by  cropping,  having  her  braided
tresses  disordered,  even  as  a  bed  of  lotuses  trampled  by  an
elephant  has  its  cluster  of  black  bees  dispersed,  now  that  her
maidenhood  was  gone  for  ever,  not  knowing  what  expedient
to  adopt  or  what  course  to  pursue,  looked  up  to  heaven
and  spake  as  follows  : — "  Whoever  that  was  that  assumed
the  shape  of  the  King  of  Vatsa  and  married  me,  let  him
appear,  for  he  is  the  husband  of  my  youth."

When  invoked  in  these  words,  that  King  of  the  Vidya-
dharas  descended  from  heaven,  of  divine  shape,  adorned
with  necklace  and  bracelet.  And  when  she  asked  him  who
he  was,  he  answered  her  :  "I,  fair  one,  am  a  prince  of  the
Vidyadharas,  named  Madanavega.  And  long  ago  I  beheld
you  in  your  father's  house,  and  by  performing  penance
obtained  a  boon  from  Siva,  which  conferred  on  me  the
attainment  of  you.  So,  as  you  were  in  love  with  the  King
of  Vatsa,  I  assumed  his  form,  and  quickly  married  you  by
stealth,  before  your  contract  with  him  had  been  celebrated."
By  the  nectar  of  this  speech  of  his,  entering  her  ears,  the
lotus  of  her  heart  was  a  little  revived.

Then  Madanavega  comforted  that  fair  one,  and  made
her  recover  her  composure,  and  bestowed  on  her  a  heap  of
gold,  and  when  she  had  conceived  in  her  heart  affection  for

1  For  similar  instances  of  forgetting  in  European  stories,  see  Nos.  IS,  14,
54,  55  in  the  Sicilianische  Mdrchen,  with  Kohler's  notes,  and  his  article  in
Orient  und  Occident,  vol.  ii,  p.  103.


THE  PENALTY  OF  MORTALITY  125

her  excellent  husband,  as  being  well  suited  to  her,  he  flew
up  into  the  heaven,  to  return  again.  And  Kalingasena,
after  obtaining  permission  from  Madanavega,  consented  to
dwell  patiently  where  she  was,  reflecting  that  the  heavenly
home,  the  abode  of  her  husband,  could  not  be  approached
by  a  mortal,  and  that  through  passion  she  had  left  her
father's  house.


126  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


NOTE  ON  THE  "PRETENDED  HUSBAND"  MOTIF

The  readiness  with  which  no  less  a  person  than  Siva  himself  becomes  a
party  to  the  trick  played  upon  Kalingasena  may  seem  surprising,  but  perhaps
we  are  to  understand  that,  after  such  a  penance  as  that  performed  by
Madanavega  on  the  Rishabha  mountain,  Siva  was  almost  bound  to  grant  a
boon  of  whatever  nature  it  might  be.  Yet,  as  we  have  already  seen  (Vol.  II,
pp.  45,  46),  Indra  did  not  scruple  to  enjoy  Ahalya  by  disguising  himself  as
her  husband,  Gautama.

The  motif  found  its  way  into  Sanskrit  literature  at  a  very  early  date,
and  Benfey,  Panckatantra  (i,  p.  299  et  seq.\  traces  the  different  versions  found
in  Kalila  and  Dimna,  John  of  Capua,  Suka  Saptati,  Anvar-i-Suhaili,  Bahar-i-
Danish,  etc.,  besides  in  well-known  European  collections,  such  as  Le  Livre  des
Lumieres,  Cabinet  des  Fees  and  the  Decameron.

In  nearly  all  these  versions  the  wife  is  perfectly  innocent  of  the  cheat
played  upon  her,  and,  on  the  return  of  the  real  husband,  makes  a  similar
remark  to  that  in  our  text,  such  as :  "  Wherefore  have  you  returned  ?  Did
I  not  serve  your  wishes  at  the  beginning  of  the  night?"  Similarly  in  the
Decameron  (day  3,  nov.  2)  the  queen  confronts  her  husband  with :  "  My  lord,
what  a  surprise  is  this  to-night!  'Twas  but  now  you  left  me  after  an  un-
wonted measure  of  enjoyment,  and  do  you  now  return  so  soon  ?  "  The  king
behaves  in  a  most  diplomatic  manner  and  pretends  he  had  been  with  his  wife
earlier  in  the  evening.  He  then  attempts  to  find  out  the  culprit,  and  although
he  is  unsuccessful  in  this,  he  makes  any  repetition  of  the  offence  unlikely.

In  the  version  found  in  the  Heptameron,  however,  the  unhappy  husband
is  unable  to  conceal  his  curiosity  and  resentment :  "  What  do  these  words
mean  ?  I  know  of  a  truth  that  I  have  not  lain  with  you  for  three  weeks,  and
yet  you  rebuke  me  for  coming  too  often."  Suddenly  the  terrible  truth  dawns
upon  the  chaste  lady.  The  husband  rushes  in  pursuit  of  the  wicked  friar
who  has  done  the  deed,  but  meanwhile  his  wife  hangs  herself  and  kills  her
child  through  shame  and  misery.  Her  brother  hears  the  news,  and,  mis-
understanding the  details,  runs  his  sword  through  the  returning  husband
(see  vol.  iii,  p.  97  et  seq.,  of  the  English  translation  printed  for  the  Society  of
English  Bibliophilists,  1894).

In  all  the  above  versions  we  notice  that  the  cheat  played  upon  the
innocent  wife  is  done  by  an  ordinary  human  being,  and  not  by  a  god  or
supernatural  being,  as  in  our  text.  We  find,  however,  a  closer  analogue  in
Herodotus  (vi,  69).  Demaratus  was  deposed  from  the  sovereignty  and  made
a  magistrate  of  Sparta,  owing  to  the  charge  of  bastardy  made  by  Leutychides.
He  is  later  insulted  by  Leutychides  at  the  Gymnopaediae,  and,  intending  to
get  to  the  bottom  of  the  whole  matter,  calls  upon  his  mother  with  a  mighty
oath  to  tell  the  truth.  She  then  explains:  "When  Ariston  [her  husband]
had  taken  me  to  his  own  house,  on  the  third  night  from  the  first,  a  spectre
resembling  Ariston  came  to  me ;  and  having  lain  with  me,  put  on  me  a  crown
that  it  had :  it  departed,  and  afterwards  Ariston  came ;  but  when  he  saw  me


with  the


THE  "  PRETENDED  HUSBAND  "  MOTIF      127


the  crown,  he  asked  who  it  was  that  gave  it  me.  I  said  he  did,  but  he
would  not  admit  it ;  whereupon  I  took  an  oath,  and  said  that  he  did  not  well
to  deny  it,  for  that  having  come  shortly  before  and  lain  with  me,  he  had
given  me  the  crown.  Ariston,  seeing  that  I  affirmed  with  an  oath,  discovered
that  the  event  was  superhuman :  and,  in  the  first  place,  the  crown  proved  to
have  come  from  the  shrine  situate  near  the  palace  gates,  which  they  call
Astrabacus's ;  and,  in  the  next  place,  the  seers  pronounced  that  it  was  the
hero  himself.  Thus,  then,  my  son,  you  have  all  that  you  wish  to  know :  for
you  are  sprung  either  from  that  hero,  and  the  hero  Astrabacus  is  your  father,
or  Ariston ;  for  I  conceived  you  in  that  night  ..."  (Cary's  trans.  Bohn's
edition,  1877,  p.  379).

There  is  also  the  legend  of  Amphitryon,  son  of  Alcaeus,  whose  wife,
Alcmene,  gave  birth  to  twin  sons,  Iphicles  being  that  of  Amphitryon,  and
Heracles  that  of  Zeus,  who  had  visited  her  in  the  guise  of  her  husband  while
he  was  away  fighting.

The  incident  forms  Plautus'  comedy  Amphitruo,  whence  Moliere  adapted
his  Amphitryon.

Lee,  op.  cit,  pp.  62-67,  gives  several  other  analogues  of  the  motif.  See
also  Chauvin,  op.  cit.,  ii,  p.  92. — n.m.p.


CHAPTER  XXXIV

THEN  the  King  of  Vatsa,  thinking  on  the  peerless
[M]  beauty  of  Kalingasena,  was  one  night  seized
with  love,  so  he  rose  up  and  went,  sword  in  hand,  and
entered  her  palace  alone  ;  and  she  welcomed  him  and  received
him  politely.  Then  the  king  asked  her  to  become  his  wife,
but  she  rejected  his  addresses,  saying  :  "  You  should  regard
me  as  the  wife  of  another."  Whereupon  he  answered  :
"  Since  you  are  unchaste  as  having  resorted  to  three  men,  I
shall  not,  by  approaching  you,  incur  the  guilt  of  adultery."

When  the  king  said  this  to  Kalingasena,  she  answered
him :  "  I  came  to  marry  you,  O  King,  but  I  was  married  by
the  Vidyadhara  Madanavega  at  his  will,  for  he  assumed  your
shape.  And  he  is  my  only  husband,  so  why  am  I  unchaste  ?
But  such  are  the  misfortunes  even  of  ordinary  women  who
desert  their  relations,  having  their  minds  bewildered  with
the  love  of  lawless  roaming,  much  more  of  princesses.  And
this  is  the  fruit  of  my  own  folly  in  sending  a  messenger  to
you,  though  I  had  been  warned  not  to  do  so  by  my  friend,
who  had  seen  an  evil  omen.  So  if  you  touch  me  by  force
I  will  abandon  life;  for  what  woman  of  good  family  will
injure  her  husband  ?  And  to  prove  this  I  will  tell  you  a
tale.     Listen,  O  King.

46.  Story  of  King  Indradatta

There  lived  in  old  time  in  the  land  of  Chedi  a  great  king
called  Indradatta.  He  founded  for  his  glory  a  great  temple
at  the  holy  bathing-place  of  Papasodhana,  desiring  the  body
of  good  reputation,  as  he  saw  that  our  mortal  body  is
perishable.  And  the  king  in  the  ardour  of  his  devotion  was
continually  going  to  visit  it,  and  all  kinds  of  people  were
continually  coming  there  to  bathe  in  the  holy  water.

Now  one  day  the  king  saw  a  merchant's  wife,  whose
husband  was  travelling  in  foreign  parts,  who  had  come  there

128


BETTER  DEATH  THAN  INFIDELITY  129

to  bathe  in  the  holy  water  ;  she  was  steeped  in  the  nectar  of
pure  beauty,  and  adorned  with  various  charms,  like  a  splendid
moving  palace  of  the  God  of  Love.  She  was  embraced  on
both  her  feet  by  the  radiance  of  the  two  quivers  of  the  five-
arrowed  god,  as  if  out  of  love,  believing  that  with  her  he
would  conquer  the  world.1  The  moment  the  king  saw  her
she  captivated  his  soul  so  entirely  that,  unable  to  restrain
himself,  he  found  out  her  house  and  went  there  at  night.
And  when  he  solicited  her,  she  said  to  him :  "  You  are  a
protector  of  the  helpless  ;  you  ought  not  to  touch  another
man's  wife.  And  if  you  lay  violent  hands  on  me  you  will
commit  a  great  sin ;  and  I  will  die  immediately ;  I  will
not  endure  disgrace."  Though  she  said  this  to  him,  the  king
still  endeavoured  to  use  force  to  her,  whereupon  her  heart
broke  in  a  moment  through  fear  of  losing  her  chastity.
When  the  king  saw  that,  he  was  at  once  abashed,  and
went  back  by  the  way  that  he  came,  and  in  a  few  days
died,  out  of  remorse  for  that  crime.


[M]  Having  told  this  tale,  Kalingasena  bowed  in  timid
modesty  and  again  said  to  the  King  of  Vatsa  :  "  Therefore,
King,  set  not  your  heart  on  wickedness  that  would  rob  me
of  breath ;  since  I  have  come  here,  allow  me  to  dwell  here ;
if  not,  I  will  depart  to  some  other  place."  Then  the  King  of
Vatsa,  who  knew  what  was  right,  hearing  this  from  Kalinga-
sena, after  reflecting,  desisted  from  his  intention,  and  said
to  her  :  "  Princess,  dwell  here  at  will  with  this  husband  of
yours  ;  I  will  not  say  anything  to  you ;  henceforth  fear  not."

When  the  king  had  said  this,  he  returned  of  his  own
accord  to  his  house,  and  Madanavega,  having  heard  the  con-
versation, descended  from  heaven,  and  said :  "  My  beloved,
you  have  done  well ;  if  you  had  not  acted  thus,  O  fortunate
one,  good  fortune  would  not  have  resulted,  for  I  should  not
have  tolerated  your  conduct."  When  the  Vidyadhara  had
said  this,  he  comforted  her,  and  passed  the  night  there,  and
continued  going  to   her   house  and  returning   again.     And

1  This  probably  means  in  plain  English  that  she  wore  glittering  anklets.
VOL.  III.  1


130  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

Kalingasena,  having  a  King  of  the  Vidyadharas  for  her
husband,  remained  there,  blessed  even  in  her  mortal  state
with  the  enjoyment  of  heavenly  pleasures.  As  for  the  King
of  Vatsa,  he  ceased  to  think  about  her,  and  remembering  the
speech  of  his  minister,  he  rejoiced,  considering  that  he  had
saved  his  queens  and  kingdom  and  also  his  son.  And  the
Queen  Vasavadatta,  and  the  minister  Yaugandharayana  were
at  ease,  having  reaped  the  fruit  of  the  wishing-tree  of  policy.

Then,  as  days  went  on,  Kalingasena  had  the  lotus  of  her
face  a  little  pale,  and  was  pregnant,  having  longing  produced
in  her.  Her  lofty  breasts,  with  extremities  a  little  dark,
appeared  like  the  treasure- vessels  of  Love,  marked  with  his
seal  of  joy.  Then  her  husband  Madanavega  came  to  her
and  said  *  :  "  Kalingasena,  we  heavenly  beings  are  subject
to  this  law,  that  when  a  mortal  child  is  conceived  we  must
abandon  it  and  go  afar.  Did  not  Menaka  leave  Sakuntala
in  the  hermitage  of  Kanva  ?  And  though  you  were  formerly
an  Apsaras,  you  have  now,  goddess,  become  a  mortal  by  the
curse  of  Siva,  inflicted  on  account  of  your  disobedience.  Thus
it  has  come  to  pass  that,  though  chaste,  you  have  incurred
the  reproach  of  unchastity  ;  so  guard  your  offspring ;  I  will
go  to  my  own  place.  And  whenever  you  think  upon  me  I
will  appear  to  you."

Thus  the  prince  of  the  Vidyadharas  spake  to  the  weep-
ing Kalingasena,  and  consoled  her,  and  gave  her  a  heap
of  valuable  jewels,  and  departed  with  his  mind  fixed  on
her,  drawn  away  by  the  law.  Kalingasena,  for  her  part,
remained  there,  supported  by  the  hope  of  offspring  as  by
a  friend,  protected  by  the  shade  of  the  King  of  Vatsa's
arm.

In  the  meanwhile  the  husband  of  Ambika2  gave  the
following  order  to  Rati,  the  wife  of  the  God  of  Love,  who
had  performed  penance  in  order  to  get  back  her  husband
with  his  body  restored  :  "  That  husband  of  thine,  who  was
formerly  consumed,  has  been  born  in  the  palace  of  the  King
of  Vatsa,  under  the  name  of  Naravahanadatta,  conceived
in  a  mortal  womb  on  account  of  disrespect  shown  to  me.

1  Cf.  the  conduct  of  the  Meerweib  in  Hagen's  Helden-Sagcn,  vol.  i,  p.  55.

2  I.e.  Siva.


THE  SUBSTITUTED  CHILD  131

But  because  thou  hast  propitiated  me  thou  shalt  also  be  born
in  the  world  of  mortals,  without  being  conceived  in  a  mortal
womb  ;  and  then  thou  shalt  be  reunited  to  thy  husband,  once
more  possessing  a  body."

Having  said  this  to  Rati,  Siva  then  gave  this  command
to  the  Creator1  :  "  Kalingasena  shall  give  birth  to  a  son  of
divine  origin.  By  thy  power  of  illusion  thou  shalt  remove
Rati  is  her  son  and  substitute  in  his  place  this  very  Rati,

substituted  as    who    shall   abandon   her   heavenly  body  and  be

Child8™6™  *  moulded  by  thee  in  the  form  of  a  mortal  maiden."
The  Creator,  in  obedience  to  the  order  of  Siva,2
went  down  to  earth,  and  when  the  appointed  time  came
Kalingasena  gave  birth  to  a  son.  The  Creator  abstracted,
by  his  divine  power  of  illusion,  her  son,  the  moment  he  was
born,  and  substituted  Rati,  whom  he  had  turned  into  a  girl,
in  his  place,  without  the  change  being  detected.  And  all
present  there  saw  that  girl  born,  and  she  seemed  like  the
streak  of  the  new  moon  suddenly  rising  in  broad  daylight,
for  she  illuminated  with  her  splendour  the  lying-in  chamber,
and   eclipsing  the  long  row  of  flames  of  the  jewel- lamps 3

1  Prajapati.

2  Literally,  "placing  it  upon  his  head."

3  The  superstitious  custom  of  lighting  fires,  lamps,  etc.,  to  protect
children  against  evil  spirits  is  found  in  many  countries.  Liebrecht  (Zur
Volkskunde,  p.  31)  refers  us  to  Brand's  Popular  Antiquities,  edited  by  Hazlitt,
vol.  ii,  p.  144,  for  the  prevalence  of  the  practice  in  England.  "Gregory
mentions  ( an  ordinary  superstition  of  the  old  wives  who  dare  not  trust  a  child
in  a  cradle  by  itself  alone  without  a  candle.'  This  he  attributes  to  their  fear
of  the  night-hag"  (cf.  Milton,  Paradise  Lost,  ii,  662-665).  He  cites  authorities
to  prove  that  it  exists  in  Germany,  Scotland  and  Sweden.  In  the  latter
country  it  is  considered  dangerous  to  let  the  fire  go  out  until  the  child  is
baptized,  for  fear  that  the  trolls  may  substitute  a  changeling  in  its  place.
The  custom  exists  also  in  the  Malay  Peninsula,  and  among  the  Tajiks  in
Bokhara.  The  Roman  custom  of  lighting  a  candle  in  the  room  of  a  lying-in
woman,  from  which  the  goddess  Candelifera  derived  her  name  (Tertullian,
Adv.  Nation.,  2,  11),  is  to  be  accounted  for  in  the  same  way.  See  also
Veckenstedt,  Wendische  Sagen,  p.  446.  The  same  notion  will  be  found  in
Bartsch's  Sagen,  M'drchen  nnd  Gebrauche  mis  Meklenburg,  vol.  i,  pp.  17,  64,  89,
91  ;  vol.  ii,  p.  43.  Cf.  also  the  following  passage  from  Brand's  Popular
Antiquities,  vol.  ii,  p.  78 :  "  Borlase  quotes  from  Martin's  Western  Islands.
'  The  same  lustration  by  carrying  of  fire  is  performed  round  about  women
after  child-bearing,  and  round  about  children  before  they  are  christened,  as


132  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

robbed  them  of  lustre,  and  made  them,  as  it  were,  abashed.
Kalingasena,  when  she  saw  that  incomparable  daughter  born,
in  her  delight  made  greater  rejoicing  than  she  would  have
made  at  the  birth  of  a  son.

Then  the  King  of  Vatsa,  with  his  queen  and  his  ministers,
heard  that  such  a  lovely  daughter  had  been  born  to  Kalinga-
sena. And  when  the  king  heard  of  it  he  suddenly,  under  the
impulsion  of  the  god  Siva,  said  to  the  Queen  Vasavadatta,  in
the  presence  of  Yaugandharayana  :  "I  know  this  Kalinga-
sena is  a  heavenly  nymph,  who  has  fallen  to  earth  in  con-
sequence of  a  curse,  and  this  daughter  born  to  her  will
also  be  heavenly  and  of  wonderful  beauty.  So  this  girl,
being  equal  in  beauty  to  my  son  Naravahanadatta,  ought
to  be  his  head  queen."

When  the  Queen  Vasavadatta  heard  that,  she  said  to  the
king  :  "  Great  King,  why  do  you  suddenly  say  this  now  ?
What  similarity  can  there  possibly  be  between  this  son  of
yours,  of  pure  descent  by  both  lines,  and  the  daughter  of
Kalingasena,  a  girl  whose  mother  is  unchaste  ?  "

When  the  king  heard  that  he  reflected,  and  said  :  "  Truly,
I  do  not  say  this  of  myself,  but  some  god  seems  to  have
entered  into  me  and  to  be  forcing  me  to  speak.  And  I  seem
to  hear  a  voice  uttering  these  words  from  heaven  :  c  This
daughter  of  Kalingasena  is  the  appointed  wife  of  Narava-
hanadatta.' Moreover,  that  Kalingasena  is  a  faithful  wife,
of  good  family,  and  her  reproach  of  unchastity  has  arisen
from  the  influence  of  her  actions  in  a  former  birth."

When  the  king  had  said  this,  the  minister  Yaugandhara-
yana spoke  :  "  We  hear,  King,  that  when  the  God  of  Love
was  consumed  Rati  performed  asceticism.  And  Siva  granted
to  Rati,  who  wished  to  recover  her  husband,  the  following
boon:  'Thou  shalt  assume  the  condition  of  a  mortal,  and
be  reunited  to  thy  husband,  who  has  been  born  with  a  body
in  the  world  of  mortals.5     Now  your  son  has  long  ago  been

an  effectual  means  to  preserve  both  the  mother  and  the  infant  from  the  power
of  evil  spirits.'  "  Brand  compares  the  Amphidromia  at  Athens.  See  Kuhn's
Westftilische  Mdrchen,  vol.  i,  pp.  125  and  28.9;  vol.  ii,  pp.  17,  33-34.

For  fuller   details   see  my  note    on   "  Precautions  observed  in  the

Birth-Chamber,"  Vol.  II,  pp.  1 66-1 6*9.—  n.m.p.


THE  DECEPTION  DETECTED  133

declared  by  a  heavenly  voice  to  be  an  incarnation  of  Kama,
and  Rati,  by  the  order  of  Siva,  has  to  become  incarnate  in
mortal  form.  And  the  midwife  said  to  me  to-day :  '  I
inspected  previously  the  fetus  when  contained  in  the  uterus,
and  then  I  saw  one  quite  different  from  what  has  now
appeared.  Having  beheld  this  marvel,  I  have  come  here  to
tell  you.'  This  is  what  that  woman  told  me,  and  now  this
inspiration  has  come  to  you.  So  I  am  persuaded  that  the
gods  have  stolen  the  real  child  of  Kalingasena  and  substituted
this  daughter  not  born  in  the  ordinary  way,  who  is  no  other
than  Rati,  ordained  beforehand  to  be  the  wife  of  your  son,
who  is  an  incarnation  of  Kama,  O  King.  To  illustrate  this,
hear  the  following  story  concerning  a  Yaksha : —

47.  Story  of  the  Yaksha  Virupdksha

The  God  of  Wealth  had  for  servant  a  Yaksha  named
Virupaksha,  who  had  been  appointed  chief  guardian  of  lacs
of  treasure.1  And  he  delegated  a  certain  Yaksha  to  guard
a  treasure  lying  outside  the  town  of  Mathura,  posted  there
like  an  immovable  pillar  of  marble.  And  once  on  a  time
a  certain  Brahman,  a  votary  of  Pasupati,  who  made  it  his
business  to  exhume  treasures,  went  there  in  search  of  hidden
wealth.  While  he  was  examining  that  place,  with  a  candle
made  of  human  fat  in  his  hand,  the  candle  fell  from  his
grasp.2  By  that  sign  he  knew  that  treasure  was  concealed
there,  and  he  attempted  to  dig  it  up  with  the  help  of  some
other  Brahmans,  his  friends.

1  For  treasures  and  their  guardians  see  Veckenstedt's  Wendische  Sagen,
pp.  356-374-  and  p.  394 ;  also  JBartsch's  Sagen,  Mdrchen  und  Gebrauche  aus
Meklenburg,  vol.  i,  p.  243  et  seq.  Preller,  in  his  Rbmiscke  Mythologie,  p.  488,
has  a  note  on  incubones  or  treasure-guarding  spirits.  Treasures  can  often  be
acquired  by  stealing  the  caps  worn  by  these  incubones  as  a  symbol  of  their
secret  and  mysterious  character.  See  also  Grohmann,  Sagen  aus  Bohmen,
p.  29  et  seq.,  and  Bernhard  Schmidt's  Griechische  Mdrchen,  p.  28.  The  bug-
bears were  no  doubt  much  of  the  kind  found  in  Schoppner's  Sagenbuch  der

Bayerischen  Lande,  vol.  i,  p.  87. The  most  usual  guardians  of  treasures  in

Eastern  tales  are  serpents  and  dragons,  the  latter  being  also  found  extensively
in  Greek  legends.     See  Clouston,  Popular  Tales  and  Fictions,  vol.  i,  p.  126w2.

— N.M.P.

2  See  note  at  the  end  of  this  chapter. — n.m.p.


134  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

Then  the  Yaksha  who  was  told  off  to  guard  that  treasure,
beholding  that,  came  and  related  the  whole  circumstance
to  Virupaksha.  And  Virupaksha,  in  his  wrath,  gave  the
following  command  to  the  Yaksha  : — "  Go  and  slay  im-
mediately those  mean  treasure-hunters."  Then  the  Yaksha
went  and  slew  by  his  power  those  Brahmans,  who  were
digging  for  treasure,  before  they  had  attained  their  object.

Then  the  God  of  Wealth  came  to  hear  of  it,  and  being
angry,  he  said  to  Virupaksha  :  "  Why  did  you,  evil  one,
recklessly  order  the  slaughter  of  a  Brahman  ?  What  will
not  poor  people,  who  are  struggling  for  a  livelihood,1  do  out
of  desire  for  gain  ?  But  they  must  be  prevented  by  being
terrified  with  various  bugbears  ;   they  must  not  be  slain."

When  the  God  of  Wealth  had  said  this,  he  cursed  that
Virupaksha  as  follows  : — "  Be  born  as  a  mortal  on  account
of  your  wicked  conduct."  Then  that  Virupaksha,  smitten
with  the  curse,  was  born  on  the  earth  as  the  son  of  a  certain
Brahman,  who  lived  on  a  royal  grant.  Then  the  Yakshini,
his  wife,  implored  the  Lord  of  Wealth :  "  0  god,  send  me
whither  my  husband  has  gone ;  be  merciful  to  me,  for  I
cannot  live  without  him."  When  the  virtuous  lady  addressed
this  prayer  to  him,  Vaisravana  said  :  "  Thou  shalt  descend,
without  being  born,  into  the  house  of  a  female  slave  of  that
very  Brahman  in  whose  house  thy  husband  is  born.  There
thou  shalt  be  united  to  that  husband  of  thine,  and  by  thy
power  he  shall  surmount  his  curse  and  return  to  my  service."

In  accordance  with  this  decree  of  Vaisravana  that  virtuous
wife  became  a  mortal  maiden,  and  fell  at  the  door  of  that
Brahman's  female  slave's  house.  And  the  slave  suddenly
saw  that  maiden  of  marvellous  beauty,  and  took  her  and  ex-
hibited her  to  her  master,  the  Brahman.  And  the  Brahman
rejoiced,  and  said  to  the  female  slave  :  "  This  is  without
doubt  some  heavenly  maiden  not  born  in  the  ordinary  way  ;
so  my  soul  tells  me.  Bring  here  this  girl  who  has  entered
your  house,  for,  I  think,  she  deserves  to  be  my  son's  wife."
Then  in  course  of  time  that  girl  and  the  son  of  the  Brahman,
having  grown  up,  were  smitten  with  ardent  reciprocal
affection    at    the   sight   of  one   another.     Then   they   were

1  There  is  probably  a  pun  too  on  varti,  "the  wick  of  a  lamp."


MADANAMANCHUKA  135

married  by  the  Brahman  ;  and  the  couple,  though  they  did
not  remember  their  previous  birth,  felt  as  if  a  long  separation
had  been  brought  to  an  end.  Then  at  last  the  Yaksha  died,
and  as  his  wife  burnt  herself  with  his  mortal  body  his  sins
were  wiped  away  by  her  sufferings  and  he  regained  his  former
rank.


[M]  "  Thus,  you  see,  heavenly  beings,  on  account  of
certain  causes,  descend  from  heaven  to  the  earth,  by  the
appointment  of  fate,  and,  because  they  are  free  from  sin,
they  are  not  born  in  the  usual  way.  What  does  this  girl's
family  matter  to  you  ?  So  this  daughter  of  Kalingasena  is,
as  I  said,  the  wife  appointed  for  your  son  by  destiny."

When  Yaugandharayana  had  said  this  to  the  King  of
Vatsa  and  the  Queen  Vasavadatta,  they  both  consented  in
their  hearts  that  it  should  be  so.  Then  the  prime  minister
returned  to  his  house,  and  the  king,  in  the  company  of
his  wife,  spent  the  day  happily,  in  drinking  and  other
amusements.

Then,  as  time  went  on,  that  daughter  of  Kalingasena,
who  had  lost  her  recollection  of  her  former  state  through
illusion,  gradually  grew  up,  and  her  dower  of  beauty  grew
with  her  ;  and  her  mother  and  her  attendants  gave  her  the
name  of  Madanamanchuka,  because  she  was  the  daughter
of  Madanavega,  saying  :  "  Surely  the  beauty  of  all  other
lovely  women  has  fled  to  her,  else  how  could  they  have
become  ugly  before  her  ?  "

And  the  Queen  Vasavadatta,  hearing  she  was  beautiful,
one  day  had  her  brought  into  her  presence  out  of  curiosity.
Then  the  king  and  Yaugandharayana  and  his  fellows  beheld
her  clinging  to  the  face  of  her  nurse,  as  the  candle-flame  clings
to  the  wick.  And  there  was  no  one  present  who  did  not  think
that  she  was  an  incarnation  of  Rati  when  they  beheld  her
matchless  body,  which  was  like  nectar  to  their  eyes.  And
then  the  Queen  Vasavadatta  brought  there  her  son  Narava-
hanadatta,  who  was  a  feast  to  the  eyes  of  the  world.  He
beheld,  with  the  lotus  of  his  face  expanded,  the  gleaming
Madanamanchuka,   as   the  bed  of  water-lilies   beholds  the


136  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

young  splendour  of  the  sun.  The  girl  gazed  with  dilated
countenance  upon  that  gladdener  of  the  eyes,  and  could  not
gaze  enough,  as  the  female  partridge  can  never  be  sated  with
gazing  on  the  moon.  Henceforth  these  two  children  could
not  remain  apart  even  for  a  moment,  being,  as  it  were,
fastened  together  with  the  nooses  of  glances.

But  in  the  course  of  time  the  King  of  Vatsa  came  to
the  conclusion  that  that  marriage  was  made  in  heaven,1  and
turned  his  mind  to  the  solemnisation  of  the  nuptials.  When
Kalingasena  heard  that  she  rejoiced,  and  fixed  her  affection
upon  Naravahanadatta  out  of  love  for  her  daughter's  future
husband.  And  then  the  King  of  Vatsa,  after  deliberating
with  his  ministers,  had  made  for  his  son  a  separate  palace
like  his  own.  Then  that  king,  who  could  discern  times  and
seasons,  collected  the  necessary  utensils  and  anointed  his
son  as  Crown  Prince,  since  it  was  apparent  that  he  possessed
all  praiseworthy  qualities.  First  there  fell  on  his  head  the
water  of  his  father's  tears,  and  then  the  water  of  holy  bathing-
places,  purified  by  Vaidik  spells  of  mickle  might.  When
the  lotus  of  his  face  was  washed  with  the  water  of  inaugura-
tion, wonderful  to  say,  the  faces  of  the  cardinal  points
became  also  clear.  When  his  mother  threw  on  him  flowers
of  the  auspicious  garlands,  the  heaven  immediately  shed  a
rain  of  many  celestial  wreaths.  As  if  in  emulation  of  the
thunder  of  the  drums  of  the  gods,  the  echoes  of  the  sound
of  the  cymbals  floated  in  the  air.  Everyone  there  bowed
before  him  as  soon  as  he  was  inaugurated  as  Crown  Prince ;
then  by  that  alone  he  was  exalted,  without  his  own  power.

Then  the  King  of  Vatsa  summoned  the  good  sons  of  the
ministers,  who  were  the  playfellows  of  his  son,  and  appointed
them  to  their  offices  as  servants  to  the  Crown  Prince.  He
The  Princes  appointed  to  the  office  of  the  prime  minister
Servants  are  Marubhuti,  the  son  of  Yaugandharayana,  and
appointed  then  Harislkha,  the  son  of  Rumanvat,'to  the
office  of  commander-in-chief,  and  he  appointed  Tapantaka,
the  son  of  Vasantaka,  as  the  companion  of  his  lighter  hours,
and  Gomukha,  the  son  of  Ityaka,  to  the  duty  of  chamberlain
and  warder,  and  to  the  office  of  domestic  chaplains  the  two

1  Literally,  "made  by  the  gods."


THE  FEAST  OF  INAUGURATION  137

sons  of  Pingalika,  Vaisvanara  and  Santisoma,  the  nephews  of
the  king's  family  priest.

When  these  men  had  been  appointed  by  the  king  as
servants  to  his  son,  there  was  heard  from  heaven  a  voice,
preceded  by  a  rain  of  flowers  :  "  These  ministers  shall
accomplish  all  things  prosperously  for  the  prince,  and
Gomukha  shall  be  his  inseparable  companion."  When  the
heavenly  voice  had  said  this,  the  delighted  King  of  Vatsa
honoured  them  all  with  clothes  and  ornaments  ;  and  while
that  king  was  showering  wealth  upon  his  dependents,  none
of  them  could  claim  the  title  of  poor  on  account  of  the  ac-
cumulation of  riches.  And  the  city  was  filled  with  dancing-
girls  and  minstrels,  who  seemed  to  be  invited  by  the  rows  of
silken  streamers  fanned  and  agitated  by  the  wind.

Then  Kalingasena  came  to  the  feast  of  her  future  son-in-
law,  looking  like  the  Fortune  of  the  Vidyadhara  race  which
was  to  attend  him,  present  in  bodily  form.  Then  Vasava-
datta  and  Padmavati  and  she  danced,  all  three  of  them,  for
joy,  like  the  three  powers  1  of  a  king  united  together.  And
all  the  trees  there  seemed  to  dance,  as  their  creepers  waved
in  the  wind;  much  more  did  the  creatures  possessing  sense.

Then  the  Crown  Prince  Naravahanadatta,  having  been
inaugurated  in  his  office,  ascended  an  elephant  of  victory
and  went  forth.  And  he  was  sprinkled  by  the  city  wives
with  their  upcast  eyes,  blue,  white  and  red,  resembling
offerings  of  blue  lotuses,  parched  grain  and  water-lilies.
And  after  visiting  the  gods  worshipped  in  that  city,  being
praised  by  heralds  and  minstrels,  he  entered  his  palace  with
his  ministers.  Then  Kalingasena  gave  him,  to  begin  with,
celestial  viands  and  drinks  far  exceeding  what  his  own
magnificence  could  supply,  and  she  presented  to  him  and  his
ministers,  friends  and  servants,  beautiful  robes  and  heavenly
ornaments,  for  she  was  overpowered  with  love  for  her  son-
in-law.  So  the  day  passed  in  high  festivity  for  all  these,
the  King  of  Vatsa  and  the  others,  charming  as  the  taste  of
nectar.

Then  the  night  arrived,  and  Kalingasena,  pondering  over

1  I.e.  prabhutva,  "the  majesty  or  pre-eminence  of  the  king  himself";
mantra,  "the  power  of  good  counsel";  utsaha,  "energy."


138  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

her  daughter's  marriage,  called  to  mind  her  friend  Soma-
prabha. No  sooner  had  she  called  to  mind  the  daughter
of  the  Asura  Maya  than  her  husband,  the  much-knowing
Nadakiivara,  thus  addressed  that  noble  lady,  his  wife :
"  Dear  one,  Kalingasena  is  now  thinking  on  thee  with  long-
ing ;  therefore  go  and  make  a  heavenly  garden  for  her
daughter."  Having  said  this,  and  revealed  the  future  and
past  history  of  that  maiden,  her  husband  dismissed  that
instant  his  wife  Somaprabha.

And  when  she  arrived  her  friend  Kalingasena  threw  her
arms  round  her  neck,  having  missed  her  so  long,  and  Soma-
prabha, after  asking  after  her  health,  said  to  her  :  "  You
have  been  married  by  a  Vidyadhara  of  great  power,  and  your
daughter  is  an  incarnation  of  Rati  by  the  favour  of  Siva,
and  she  has  been  brought  into  the  world  as  the  wife,  in  a
previous  state  of  existence,  of  an  incarnation  of  Love,  that
has  taken  his  birth  from  the  King  of  Vatsa.  He  shall  be
Emperor  of  the  Vidyadharas  for  a  Kalpa  of  the  gods  ;  and
she  shall  be  honoured  above  his  other  wives.  But  you  have
descended  into  this  world,  being  an  Apsaras  degraded  by
the  curse  of  Indra,  and  after  you  have  brought  your  duties
to  completion  you  shall  obtain  deliverance  from  your  curse.
All  this  was  told  me,  my  friend,  by  my  wise  husband,  so  you
must  not  be  anxious  ;  you  will  enjoy  every  prosperity.  And
The  Heavenly  I  will  now  make  here  for  your  daughter  a  heavenly
Garden  garden,  the  like  of  which  does  not  exist  on  earth,

in  heaven,  or  in  the  nether  regions."  Having  said  this,
Somaprabha  made  a  heavenly  garden  by  her  magic  power,
and  taking  leave  of  the  regretful  Kalingasena,  she  departed.
Then,  at  the  dawn  of  day,  people  beheld  that  garden,  look-
ing like  the  garden  of  Nandana  suddenly  fallen  down  from
heaven  to  earth.

Then  the  King  of  Vatsa  heard  of  it,  and  came  there  with
his  wives  and  his  ministers,  and  Naravahanadatta  with  his
companions.  And  they  beheld  that  garden,  the  trees  of
which  bore  both  flowers  and  fruits  all  the  year  round,1  with
many  jewelled  pillars,  walls,  lawns  and  tanks ;  with  birds
of  the  colour  of  gold,  with  heavenly  perfumed  breezes,  like

1  Cf.  Odyssey,  vii,  1 1 6 ;  Spenser's  Faerie  Queene,  iii,  6,  42.


THE  SCIENCES  AND  THE  ACCOMPLISHMENTS    139

a  second  Svarga  descended  to  earth  from  the  region  of  the
gods.

The  Lord  of  Vatsa,  when  he  saw  that  wonderful  sight,
asked  Kalingasena,  who  was  intent  on  hospitality,  what  it
was.  And  she  thus  answered  the  king  in  the  hearing  of  all :
"  There  is  a  great  Asura,  Maya  by  name,  an  incarnation  of
Visvakarman,  who  made  the  assembly  hall  of  Yudhishthira
and  the  city  of  Indra  ;  he  has  a  daughter,  Somaprabha  by
name,  who  is  a  friend  of  mine.  She  came  here  at  night  to
visit  me,  and  out  of  love  made  this  heavenly  garden  by  her
magic  power,  for  the  sake  of  my  daughter."

After  saying  this,  she  told  all  the  past  and  future  fortunes
of  her  daughter,  which  Somaprabha  had  revealed  to  her,  let-
ting the  king  know  that  she  had  heard  them  from  her  friend.
Then  all  there,  perceiving  that  the  speech  of  Kalingasena
tallied  with  what  they  previously  knew,  dismissed  their
doubts  and  were  exceedingly  delighted.  And  the  King  of
Vatsa,  with  his  wives  and  his  son,  spent  that  day  in  the
garden,  being  hospitably  entertained  by  Kalingasena.

The  next  day  the  king  went  to  visit  a  god  in  a  temple,
and  he  saw  many  women  well  clothed  and  with  beautiful
ornaments.  And  when  he  asked  them  who  they  were  they
said  to  him  :  "  We  are  the  sciences  and  these  are  the  accom-
plishments ;  and  we  are  come  here  on  account  of  your  son  :
we  shall  now  go  and  enter  into  him."  Having  said  this,
they  disappeared,  and  the  King  of  Vatsa  entered  his  house
astonished.  There  he  told  it  to  the  Queen  Vasavadatta
and  to  the  circle  of  his  ministers,  and  they  rejoiced  at  that
favour  of  the  deity.

Then  Vasavadatta,  by  the  direction  of  the  king,  took  up
a  lyre  as  soon  as  Naravahanadatta  entered  the  room.  And
while  his  mother  was  playing,  Naravahanadatta  said  modestly
to  her:  "  This  lyre  is  out  of  tune."  His  father  said  :  "Take
it  and  play  on  it."  Whereupon  he  played  upon  the  lyre  so
as  to  astonish  even  the  Gandharvas.  When  he  was  thus
tested  by  his  father  in  all  the  sciences  and  the  accomplish-
ments, he  became  endowed  with  them  all,  and  of  himself
knew  all  knowledge.

When  the  King  of  Vatsa  beheld  his  son  endowed  with


140  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

all  talents,  he  taught  Madanamanchuka,  the  daughter  of
Kalingasena,  dancing.  As  fast  as  she  became  perfect  in
accomplishments  x  the  heart  of  the  Prince  Naravahanadatta
was  disturbed.  So  the  sea  is  disturbed,  as  fast  as  the  orb
of  the  moon  rounds  off  its  digits.  And  he  delighted  in  be-
holding her  singing  and  dancing,  accomplished  in  all  the
gestures  of  the  body,  so  that  she  seemed  to  be  reciting  the
decrees  of  love.  As  for  her,  if  she  did  not  see  for  a  moment
that  nectar-like  lover,  the  tears  rose  to  her  eyes  and  she  was
like  a  bed  of  white  lotuses,  wet  with  dew  at  the  hour  of
dawn.2

And  Naravahanadatta,  being  unable  to  live  without  con-
tinually beholding  her  face,  came  to  that  garden  of  hers.
There  he  remained,  and  Kalingasena,  out  of  affection,  did  all
she  could  to  please  him,  bringing  her  daughter  to  him.  And
Gomukha,  who  saw  into  his  master's  heart,  and  wished  to
bring  about  his  long  stay  there,  used  to  tell  various  tales
to  Kalingasena.  The  prince  was  delighted  by  his  friend's
penetrating  his  intentions,  for  seeing  into  one's  lord's  soul
is  the  surest  way  of  winning  him.

And  Naravahanadatta  himself  perfected  Madanaman-
chuka in  dancing  and  other  accomplishments,  giving  her
lessons  in  a  concert  hall  that  stood  in  the  garden,  and  while
his  beloved  danced  he  played  on  all  instruments,  so  as  to  put
to  the  blush  the  most  skilful  minstrels.  And  he  conquered
also  various  professors  that  came  from  all  quarters  and  were
skilful  in  managing  elephants,  horses  and  chariots,  in  the
use  of  hand-to-hand  and  missile  weapons,  in  painting  and
modelling.3  In  these  amusements  passed  during  childhood
the  days  of  Naravahanadatta,  who  was  the  chosen  bridegroom
of  Science.

Now  once  on  a  time  the  prince,  with  his  ministers,  and
accompanied  by  his  beloved,  went  on  a  pilgrimage  to  a
garden  called  Nagavana.  There  a  certain  merchant's  wife
fell  in  love  with  Gomukha,  and  being  repulsed,  tried  to  kill

1  The  pun  lies  in  the  word  kalTi,  which  means  "accomplishment,"  and
also  "a  sixteenth  of  the  moon's  diameter."

2  This  lotus  is  a  friend  of  the  moon's  and  bewails  its  absence.

3  Or  perhaps  books.


,


BEWARE  THE  WICKEDNESS  OF  WOMEN!     141

him  by  offering  to  him  a  poisoned  drink.1  But  Gomukha
came  to  hear  of  it  from  the  lips  of  her  confidante,  and  did
not  take  that  drink,  but  broke  out  into  the  following  de-
nunciation of  women: — "Alas!  the  Creator  first  created
recklessness^  and  then  women  in  imitation  of  it ;  by  nature
nothing  is  too  bad  for  them  to  do.  Surely  this  being  they
call  woman  is  created  of  nectar  and  poison,  for  when  she
is  attached  to  one  she  is  nectar,  and  when  estranged  she  is
indeed  poison.  Who  can  see  through  a  woman  with  loving
face  secretly  planning  crime  ?  A  wicked  woman  is  like  a
lotus-bed  with  its  flowers  expanded  and  an  alligator  concealed
in  it.  But  now  and  then  there  falls  from  heaven,  urging  on
a  host  of  virtues,  a  good  woman  that  brings  praise  to  her
husband,  like  the  pure  light  of  the  sun.  But  another,  of
evil  augury,  attached  to  strangers,  not  free  from  inordinate
desires,  wicked,  bearing  the  poison  of  aversion,2  slays  her
husband  like  a  female  snake.

48.  Story  of  Satrughna  and  his  Wicked  Wife

For  instance,  in  a  certain  village  there  was  a  man  named
Satrughna,  and  his  wife  was  unchaste.  He  once  saw  in  the
evening  his  wife  in  the  society  of  her  lover,  and  he  slew  that
lover  of  hers,  when  he  was  in  the  house,  with  his  sword.
And  he  remained  at  the  door  waiting  for  the  night,  keeping
his  wife  inside,  and  at  nightfall  a  traveller  came  there  to  ask
for  a  lodging.  He  gave  him  refuge,  and  artfully  carried  away
with  his  help  the  corpse  of  that  adulterer  at  night,  and  went
with  it  to  the  forest.  And  there,  while  he  was  throwing  that
corpse  into  a  well,  the  mouth  of  which  was  overgrown  with
plants,  his  wife  came  behind  him  and  pushed  him  in  also.


[M]  "  What  reckless  crime  of  this  kind  will  not  a  wicked
wife  commit  ?  "  In  these  words  Gomukha,  though  still  a
boy,  denounced  the  conduct  of  women.

1  For  a  note  on  the  motif,  "  Women  whose  Love  is  Scorned,"  see  Vol.  II,
pp.  120-124. — n.m.p,

2  I  read  viraga-vishabhrid.


142  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

Then  Naravahanadatta  himself  worshipped  the  snakes
in  that  grove  of  snakes,1  and  went  back  to  his  palace  with
his  retinue.

While  he  was  there  he  desired  one  day  to  prove  his
ministers,  Gomukha  and  the  others,  so  he  asked  them,
though  he  himself  knew  it  well,  for  a  summary  of  the  policy
of  princes.  They  consulted  among  themselves,  and  said :
"  You  know  all  things ;  nevertheless  we  will  tell  you  this,
now  that  you  ask  us,"  and  so  they  proceeded  to  relate  the
cream  of  political  science  2  :

"  A  king  should  first  tame  and  mount  the  horses  of  the
senses,  and  should  conquer  those  internal  foes,  love,  anger,
avarice  and  delusion,  and  should  subdue  himself  as  a  prep-
aration for  subduing  other  enemies,  for  how  can  a  man  who
has  not  conquered  himself,  being  helpless,  conquer  others  ?
Then  he  should  procure  ministers  who,  among  other  good
qualities,  possess  that  of  being  natives  of  his  own  country,
and  a  skilful  family  priest,  knowing  the  Atharva-Veda,  gifted
with  asceticism.     He  should  test  his  ministers  with  respect

1  I.e.  Nagavana.  For  serpent-worship  see  Tylor's  Primitive  Culture,
vol.  ii,  pp.  2 1 7-220.  The  author  of  Sagas  from  the  Far  East  remarks  :  "  Serpent-
cultus  was  of  very  ancient  observance,  and  is  practised  by  both  followers  of
Brahmanism  and  Buddhism.  The  Brahmans  seem  to  have  desired  to  show
their  disapproval  of  it  by  placing  the  serpent-gods  in  the  lower  ranks  of
their  mythology  (Lassen,  i,  544w2  and  707).  This  cultus,  however,  seems  to
have  received  a  fresh  development  about  the  time  of  A3oka,  circa  250  b.c.
(vol.  ii,  p.  467).  When  Madhyantika  went  into  Kashmir  and  Gandhara  to
teach  Buddhism  after  the  holding  of  the  third  synod,  it  is  mentioned  that  he
found  sacrifices  to  serpents  practised  there  (ii,  234,  235).  There  is  a  passage
in  Plutarch  from  which  it  appears  to  have  been  the  custom  to  sacrifice  an  old
woman  (previously  condemned  to  death  for  some  crime)  to  the  serpent-gods
by  burying  her  alive  on  the  banks  of  the  Indus  (ii,  467n4).  Ktesias  also
mentions  the  serpent-worship  (ii,  642).  In  Buddhist  legends  serpents  are
often  mentioned  as  protecting  patrons  of  certain  towns"  [Sagas  front  the  Far
East,  p.  355).     See  also  Mr  F.  S.  Growse's  Mat  hum:  A  District  Memoir,  p.  71.

See  also  the  references  already  given  in  Vol.  I,  pp.  144/*1,  203,  204 ;  and

Vol.  II,  p.  307w2,  to  which  I  would  add  Crooke,  Popular  Religion  and  Folk-Lore,
vol.  ii,  pp.  125-145;  C.  Staniland  Wake,  Serpent -Worship  and  other  Essays,
London,  1888;  Anonymous,  Ophiolatreia,  privately  printed,  London,  188<).
See  also  the  Index  Volume  of  Frazer's  Golden  Bough  under  "Serpent"  and
"  Serpents,"  p.  455. — n.m.p.

2  For  the  duties  of  kings  see  Kautilya's  Arthasastra  (trans.  Shamasastry,
1915),  Book  I,  chaps,  xix,  xx,  xxi,  pp.  42-50. — n.m.p.


THE  DUTIES  OF  A  KING  143

to  fear,  avarice,  virtue  and  passion,  by  ingenious  artifices,
and  then  he  should  appoint  them  to  appropriate  duties,
discerning  their  hearts.  He  should  try  their  speech,  when
they  are  deliberating  with  one  another  on  affairs,  to  see  if  it
is  truthful,  or  inspired  by  malice,  spoken  out  of  affection,  or
connected  with  selfish  objects.

"  He  should  be  pleased  with  truth,  but  should  punish
untruth  as  it  deserves,  and  he  should  continually  inquire  into
the  conduct  of  each  of  them  by  means  of  spies.  Thus  he
should  look  at  business  with  unhooded  eye,  and  by  rooting
up  opponents,1  and  acquiring  a  treasure,  a  force  and  the
other  means  of  success,  should  establish  himself  firmly
on  the  throne.  Then,  equipped  with  the  three  powers  of
courage,  kingly  authority  and  counsel,  he  should  be  eager
to  conquer  the  territory  of  others,  considering  the  difference
between  the  power  of  himself  and  his  foe.  He  should  con-
tinually take  counsel  with  advisers,  who  should  be  trusty,
learned  and  wise,  and  should  correct  with  his  own  intellect
the  policy  determined  on  by  them  in  all  its  details.  Being
versed  in  the  means  of  success  2  (conciliation,  bribery  and
the  others),  he  should  attain  for  himself  security,  and  he
should  then  employ  the  six  proper  courses,  of  which  alliance
and  war  are  the  chief.3

"  Thus  a  king  acquires  prosperity,  and  as  long  as  he
carefully  considers  his  own  realm,  and  that  of  his  rival,  he  is
victorious  but  never  vanquished.  But  an  ignorant  monarch,
blind  with  passion  and  avarice,  is  plundered  by  wicked
servants,  who  show  him  the  wrong  path  and,  leading  him
astray,  fling  him  into  pits.  On  account  of  these  rogues  a
servant  of  another  kind  is  never  admitted  into  the  presence
of  the  king,  as  a  husbandman  cannot  get  at  a  crop  of  rice
enclosed  with  a  palisade.  For  he  is  enslaved  by  those
faithless  servants,  who  penetrate  into  his  secrets  ;  and  con-
sequently Fortune  in  disgust  flies  from  him,  because  he  does

1  Literally,  "  thorns."

2  The  upayas  which  are  usually  enumerated  are  four — viz.  sowing
dissension,  negotiation,  bribery  and  open  attack.

3  The  six  gunas — peace,  war,  march,  halt,  stratagem  and  recourse  to  the
protection  of  a  mightier  king.


144  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

not  know  the  difference  between  man  and  man.  Therefore
a  king  should  conquer  himself,  should  inflict  due  chastise-
ment, and  know  the  difference  of  men's  characters,  for  in
this  way  he  will  acquire  his  subjects'  love  and  become  thereby
a  vessel  of  prosperity.

"  In  old  time  a  king  named  Surasena,  who  relied  implicitly
upon  his  servants,  was  enslaved  and  plundered  by  his
ministers,  who  had  formed  a  coalition.  Whoever  was  a
Kin*  Surasena  faithful  servant  to  the  king  the  ministers  would
and  his  not  give  even  a  straw  to,  though  the  king  wished

Ministers  ^Q  Destow  a  reward  upon  him  ;  but  if  any  man
was  a  faithful  servant  to  them,  they  themselves  gave  him
presents,  and  by  their  representations  induced  the  king  to
give  to  him,  though  he  was  undeserving.  When  the  king
saw  that,  he  gradually  came  to  be  aware  of  that  coalition  of
rogues,  and  set  those  ministers  at  variance  with  one  another
by  a  clever  artifice.  When  they  were  estranged,  and  the
clique  was  broken  up,  and  they  began  to  inform  against  one
another,  the  king  ruled  the  realm  successfully,  without  being
deceived  by  others.

"  And  there  was  a  king  named  Harisinha,  of  ordinary
power,  but  versed  in  the  true  science  of  policy,  who  had
surrounded  himself  with  devoted  and  wise  ministers,  pos-
King  sessed  forts  and  stores  of  wealth  ;   he  made  his

Harisinha  subjects  devoted  to  him,  and  conducted  him-
self in  such  a  way  that,  though  attacked  by  an  emperor,
he  was  not  defeated.  Thus  discernment  and  reflection  are
the  main  things  in  governing  a  kingdom  :  what  is  of  more
importance  ?  "

Having  said  this,  each  taking  his  part,  Gomukha  and
his  fellows  ceased.  Naravahanadatta,  approving  that  speech
of  theirs,  though  he  knew  that  heroic  action  is  to  be  thought
upon,1  still  placed  his  reliance  upon  destiny,  whose  power
surpasses  all  thought.

Then  he  rose  up,  and  his  ardour  being  kindled  by  delay,
he  went  with  them  to  visit  his  beloved  Madanamanchuka  ;
when  he  had  reached  her  palace,  and  was  seated  on  a  throne,
Kalingasena,  after  performing  the  usual  courtesies,  said  with

1  I  read  abhuagat  with  a  MS.  in  the  Sanskrit  College.


PTHE  VIDYADHARAS  BECOME  HOSTILE  145
astonishment *  to  Gomukha  :  "  Before  the  Prince  Narava-
hanadatta  arrived,  Madanamanchuka,  being  impatient,  went
to  the  top  of  the  palace  to  watch  him  coming,  accompanied
by  me,  and  while  we  were  there  a  man  descended  from
heaven  upon  it.  He  was  of  divine  appearance,  wore  a  tiara
and  a  sword,  and  said  to  me :  c  I  am  a  king,  a  lord  of  the
Vidyadharas  named  Manasavega,  and  you  are  a  heavenly
nymph  named  Surabhidatta,  who  by  a  curse  have  fallen
down  to  earth,  and  this  your  daughter  is  of  heavenly  origin ;
this  is  known  to  me  well.  So  give  me  this  daughter  of  yours
in  marriage,  for  the  connection  is  a  suitable  one.'  When
he  said  this,  I  suddenly  burst  out  laughing,  and  said  to  him :
*  Naravahanadatta  has  been  appointed  her  husband  by  the
gods,  and  he  is  to  be  the  Emperor  of  all  you  Vidyadharas.'
When  I  said  this  to  him  the  Vidyadhara  flew  up  into  the
sky,  like  a  sudden  streak  of  lightning  dazzling  the  eyes  of
my  daughter."

When  Gomukha  heard  that,  he  said  :  "  The  Vidyadharas
found  out  that  the  prince  was  to  be  their  future  lord  from  a
speech  in  the  air,  by  which  the  future  birth  of  the  prince  was
made  known  to  the  king  in  private,  and  they  immediately
desired  to  do  him  a  mischief.  What  self-willed  one  would
desire  a  mighty  lord  as  his  ruler  and  restrainer  ?  For  which
reason  Siva  has  made  arrangements  to  ensure  the  safety
of  this  prince  by  commissioning  his  attendants  to  wait  on
him  in  actual  presence.  I  heard  this  speech  of  Narada's
being  related  by  my  father.  So  it  comes  to  pass  that  the
Vidyadharas  are  now  hostile  to  us."

When  Kalingasena  heard  this,  she  was  terrified  at  the
thought  of  what  had  happened  to  herself,  and  said :  "  Why
does  not  the  prince  marry  Madanamanchuka  now,  before
she  is  deceived,  like  me,  by  delusion  ?  "  When  Gomukha
and  the  others  heard  this  from  Kalingasena,  they  said  :
"Do  you  stir  up  the  King  of  Vatsa  to  this  business."

Then  Naravahanadatta,  with  his  heart  fixed  on  Madana-
manchuka only,  amused  himself  by  looking  at  her  in  the
garden  all  that  day,  with  her  face  like  a  full-blown  lotus,  with
her  eyes  like  opening  blue  water-lilies,  with  lips  lovely  as  the

1  I  read  vismita  with  a  MS.  in  the  Sanskrit  College.
VOL.  III.  K


146  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

bandhuka,  with  breasts  like  clusters  of  ma?iddras9  with  body-
delicate  as  the  sirtsha,  like  a  matchless  arrow,  composed  of
five  flowers,  appointed  by  the  God  of  Love  for  the  conquest
of  the  world.

The  next  day  Kalingasena  went  in  person  and  preferred
her  petition  to  the  king  for  the  marriage  of  her  daughter.
The  King  of  Vatsa  dismissed  her,  and,  summoning  his
ministers,  said  to  them  in  the  presence  of  the  Queen  Vasava-
datta  :  "  Kalingasena  is  impatient  for  the  marriage  of  her
daughter :  so  how  are  we  to  manage  it  ?  for  the  people
think  that  that  excellent  woman  is  unchaste.  And  we
must  certainly  consider  the  people  ;  did  not  Ramabhadra
long  ago  desert  Queen  Sita,  though  she  was  chaste,  on
account  of  the  slander  of  the  multitude  ?  Was  not  Amba,
though  carried  off  with  great  effort  by  Bhishma  for  the
sake  of  his  brother,  reluctantly  abandoned  because  she
had  previously  chosen  another  husband  ?  In  the  same  way
this  Kalingasena,  after  spontaneously  choosing  me,  was
married  by  Madanavega  ;  for  this  reason  the  people  blame
her.  Therefore  let  this  Naravahanadatta  himself  marry  by
the  gdndharva  ceremony  her  daughter,  who  will  be  a  suitable
wife  for  him."

When  the  King  of  Vatsa  said  this,  Yaugandharayana
answered  :  "  My  lord,  how  could  Kalingasena  consent  to
this  impropriety  ?  For  I  have  often  observed  that  she,  as
well  as  her  daughter,  is  a  divine  being,  no  ordinary  woman,
and  this  was  told  me  by  my  wise  friend  the  Brahman-
Rakshasa."

While  they  were  debating  with  one  another  in  this  style
the  voice  of  Siva  was  heard  from  heaven  to  the  following
effect : — "  The  God  of  Love,  after  having  been  consumed  by
the  fire  of  my  eye,  has  been  created  again  in  the  form
of  Naravahanadatta,  and  having  been  pleased  with  the
asceticism  of  Rati,  I  have  created  her  as  his  wife  in  the  form
of  Madanamanchuka.  And  dwelling  with  her  as  his  head  wife
he  shall  exercise  supreme  sovereignty  over  the  Vidyadharas
for  a  Kalpa  of  the  gods,  after  conquering  his  enemies  by
my  favour."     After  saying  this  the  voice  ceased.

When  he  heard  this  speech  of  the  adorable  Siva,  the  King


THE  MAGNIFICENT  WEDDING  147

of  Vatsa,  with  his  retinue,  worshipped  him,  and  joyfully
made  up  his  mind  to  celebrate  the  marriage  of  his  son.
Then  the  king  congratulated  his  prime  minister,  who  had
before  discerned  the  truth,  and  summoned  the  astrologers
and  asked  them  what  would  be  a  favourable  moment,  and
they,  after  being  honoured  with  presents,  told  him  that
a  favourable  moment  would  arrive  within  a  few  days.
Again  those  astrologers  said  to  him :  "  Your  son  will  have
to  endure  some  separation  for  a  short  season  from  this  wife
of  his  ;  this  we  know,  O  Lord  of  Vatsa,  by  our  own  scientific
foresight."

Then  the  king  proceeded  to  make  the  requisite  prepara-
tions for  the  marriage  of  his  son,  in  a  style  suited  to  his  own
magnificence,  so  that  not  only  his  own  city  but  the  whole
The  Marriage  earth  was  made  to  tremble  with  the  effort  of
Preparations  fta  Then,  the  day  of  marriage  having  arrived,
Kalingasena  adorned  her  daughter,  to  whom  her  father  had
sent  his  own  heavenly  ornaments,  and  Somaprabha  came  in
obedience  to  her  husband's  order.  Then  Madanamanchuka,
adorned  with  a  heavenly  marriage-thread,  looked  still  more
lovely :  is  not  the  moon  truly  beautiful  when  accompanied
by  Kartika  ?  And  heavenly  nymphs,  by  the  order  of  Siva,
sang  auspicious  strains  in  her  honour  :  they  were  eclipsed
by  her  beauty  and  remained  hidden  as  if  ashamed,  but  the
sound  of  their  songs  was  heard.  They  sang  the  following
hymn  in  honour  of  Gauri,  blended  with  the  minstrelsy  of
the  matchless  musicians  of  heaven,  so  as  to  make  unequalled
harmony  :  "  Victory  to  thee,  O  daughter  of  the  mountain,
that  hast  mercy  on  thy  faithful  votaries,  for  thou  hast
thyself  come  to-day  and  blessed  with  success  the  asceticism
of  Rati."

Then  Naravahanadatta,  resplendent  with  excellent
marriage- thread,  entered  the  wedding  pavilion  full  of  various
musical  instruments.  And  the  bride  and  bridegroom,  after
accomplishing  the  auspicious  ceremony  of  marriage,  with
intent  care,  so  that  no  rite  was  left  out,  ascended  the  altar-
platform,  where  a  fire  was  burning,  as  if  ascending  the  pure
flame  of  jewels  on  the  heads  of  kings.  If  the  moon  and  the
sun  were  to  revolve  at  the  same  time  round  the  mountain


148  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

of  gold  *  there  would  be  an  exact  representation  in  the  world
of  the  appearance  of  those  two,  the  bride  and  the  bride-
groom, when  circumambulating  the  fire,  keeping  it  on  their
right.2  Not  only  did  the  drums  of  the  gods  in  the  air
drown  the  cymbal- clang  in  honour  of  the  marriage  festival,
but  the  rain  of  flowers  sent  down  by  the  gods  overwhelmed
the  gilt  grain 3  thrown  by  the  women.

Then  also  the  generous  Kalingasena  honoured  her  son-
in-law  with  heaps  of  gold  studded  with  jewels,  so  that  the
lord  of  Alaka  was  considered  very  poor  compared  with
him,  and  much  more  so  all  miserable  earthly  monarchs.
And  then  the  bride  and  bridegroom,  now  that  the  delightful
ceremony  of  marriage  was  accomplished  in  accordance  with
their  long- cherished  wishes,  entered  the  inner  apartments
crowded  with  women,  adorned  with  pure  and  variegated
decoration,  even  as  they  penetrated  the  heart  of  the  people
full  of  pure  and  various  loyalty.  Moreover,  the  city  of
the  King  of  Vatsa  was  quickly  filled  with  kings,  surrounded
with  splendid  armies,  who,  though  their  valour  was  worthy
of  the  world's  admiration,  had  bent  in  submission,  bringing
in  their  hands  valuable  jewels  by  way  of  presents,  as  if  with
subject  seas.4

On  that  high  day  of  festival  the  king  distributed  gold
with  such  magnificence  to  his  dependents  that  the  children
in  their  mothers'  wombs  were  at  any  rate  the  only  beings
in  his  kingdom  not  made  of  gold.5  Then,  on  account  of  the
troops  of  excellent  minstrels  and  dancing-girls,  that  came
from  all  quarters  of  the  world,  with  hymns,  music,  dances
and  songs  on  all  sides,  the  world  seemed  full  of  harmony.

1  I.e.  Mount  Sumeru.  The  moon  being  masculine  in  Sanskrit,  the  words
"  form  of  the  moon "  are  used  in  the  original,  to  satisfy  the  requirements
of  classical  Hindu  rhetoric,  according  to  which  feminine  things  cannot  be
compared  to  masculine.

2  See  Vol.  I,  pp.  190-193.— n.m.p.

3  The  D.  text  reads  homa-laja,  "  sacrificial  grain." — n.m.p.

*  The  sea  is  always  spoken  of  as  full  of  "inestimable  stones,  unvalued
jewels."  There  is  a  double  meaning  throughout.  Sadvdhini,  when  applied  to
the  sea,  may  mean  "beautiful  rivers."

5  Jdtarupa  also  means  "having  assumed  a  form,"  so  that  there  is  another
pun  here.  I  read  abhavan  for  abhavad,  in  accordance  with  a  MS.  lent  me  from
the  Sanskrit  College.


GENERAL  REJOICINGS  149

And  at  that  festival  the  city  of  Kausambi  seemed  itself  to  be
dancing,  for  the  pennons,  agitated  by  the  wind,  seemed  like
twining  arms,  and  it  was  beautiful  with  the  toilettes  of  the
city  matrons,  as  if  with  ornaments.

And  thus  waxing  in  mirth  every  day,  that  great  festival
continued  for  a  long  time,  and  all  friends  and  relations,  and
people  generally,  were  delighted  by  it,  and  had  their  wishes
marvellously  fulfilled.  And  that  Crown  Prince  Naravahana-
datta,  accompanied  by  Madanamanchuka,  enjoyed,  though
intent  on  glory,  the  long-desired  pleasures  of  this  world.


150  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


NOTE  ON  THE  "HAND  OF  GLORY"

For  the  candle  of  human  fat  see  Benfey,  Orient  und  Occident,  vol.  i,  p.  383,
and  Bartsch,  Sagen,  M'drchen  und  Gebrduche  aus  Meklenburg,  vol.  ii,  pp.  333
and  335.  Cf  also  Birlinger,  Aus  Schwaben,  pp.  251,  262-270.  It  appears
from  Henderson's  FoUc-Lore  of  the  Northern  Counties  that  in  Europe  a  candle
of  human  fat  is  used  with  the  "  Hand  of  Glory  "  by  robbers  for  the  purpose
of  preventing  the  inmates  of  a  house  from  awaking.  He  gives  several  in-
stances of  its  use.  The  following  will  serve  as  a  specimen  : — "  On  the  night  of
the  3rd  of  January  1831  some  Irish  thieves  attempted  to  commit  a  robbery  on
the  estate  of  Mr  Napier  of  Loughcrew,  Co.  Meath.  They  entered  the  house
armed  with  a  dead  man's  hand  with  a  lighted  candle  in  it,  believing  in  the
superstitious  notion  that  a  candle  placed  in  a  dead  man's  hand  will  not  be
seen  by  any  but  those  by  whom  it  is  used,  and  also  that  if  a  candle  in  a  dead
hand  be  introduced  into  a  house,  it  will  prevent  those  who  may  be  asleep  from
awaking.  The  inmates,  however,  were  alarmed,  and  the  robbers  fled,  leaving
the  hand  behind  them."  The  composition  of  the  candle  is  evident  from  the
following  extract  from  the  Dictionnaire  Infernal  of  Colin  de  Planey : — "  The
1  Hand  of  Glory '  is  the  hand  of  a  man  who  has  been  hanged,  and  is  prepared
in  the  following  manner.  Wrap  the  hand  in  a  piece  of  winding-sheet,  drawing
it  tight  to  squeeze  out  the  little  blood  which  may  remain ;  then  place  it  in
an  earthenware  vessel  with  saltpetre,  salt  and  long  pepper  all  carefully  and
thoroughly  powdered.  Let  it  remain  a  fortnight  in  this  pickle,  till  it  is  well
dried,  then  expose  it  to  the  sun  in  the  dog-days  till  it  is  completely  parched,
or  if  the  sun  be  not  powerful  enough,  dry  it  in  an  oven  heated  with  vervain
and  fern.  Next  make  a  candle  with  the  fat  of  a  hanged  man,  virgin  wax,  and
Lapland  sesame.  The  '  Hand  of  Glory '  is  used  to  hold  this  candle  when  it  is
lighted.  Wherever  one  goes  with  this  contrivance,  those  it  approaches  are
rendered  as  incapable  of  motion  as  though  they  were  dead."  Southey  in
Book  V  of  his  Thalaba  the  Destroyer  represents  a  hand  and  taper  of  this  kind
as  used  to  lull  to  sleep  Zohak,  the  giant  keeper  of  the  caves  of  Babylon
(see  the  extracts  from  Grose  and  Torquemada  in  the  notes  to  Southey's  poem).
Dousterswivel  in  Sir  Walter  Scott's  Antiquary  tells  us  that  the  monks  used  the
"  Hand  of  Glory  "  to  conceal  their  treasures  (Henderson's  Folk-Lore  of  the
Northern  Counties  of  England  and  the  Borders,  p.  200  et  seq.\

The  extracts  from  Grose  and  Torquemada  mentioned  in  Tawney's

note  above  need  further  comment.  Francis  Grose's  work  referred  to  is  his
Provincial  Glossary,  with  a  Collection  of  Local  Proverbs  and  Popular  Superstitions,
London,  1811.  Here  we  are  told  of  the  magical  powers  of  the  dried  and
pickled  hand  of  a  dead  man,  especially  that  of  a  criminal,  and  how  everyone
in  the  house  continued  sleeping,  but,  it  is  added,  if  anyone  was  awake  in  the
house,  it  would  at  once  be  discovered  by  the  fact  that  it  would  be  impossible
to  light  the  thumb.  Thus  we  see  that  in  this  case  the  fingers  themselves
were  lit  and  not  a  candle  held  in  the  hand.

F.  Juan  de  Torquemada,  in  his  Monarquia  Indiana,  mentions  a  similar


THE  "  HAND  OF  GLORY  "  151

superstition  in  Mexico  regarding  the  left  hand  and  arm  of  a  woman  who  had
died  in  her  first  child-bed.

The  subject  is  interesting,  and  warrants  more  attention  than  appears  to
have  been  given  to  it  hitherto.

There  seem  to  be  two  distinct  ideas  connected  with  the  use  of  the  dead
man's  hand  and  the  candle  of  human  fat.  The  first,  and  much  older,  idea
is  that  of  homoeopathic  magic  of  the  dead,  as  practised  in  so  many  parts  of
the  world ;  and  the  second  is  the  outcome  of  the  various  magical  properties
attributed  to  the  mandrake,  beginning  in  the  Mediterranean  region  and
gradually  percolating  through  to  the  British  Isles.

Let  us  look  at  the  homoeopathic  magic  of  the  dead  first.  We  have
already  seen  (Vol.  I,  p.  130)  that  the  "external  soul"  motif  is  derived  from
the  doctrine  of  sympathetic  magic,  according  to  which  any  portion  of  a  living
being,  though  severed,  remains  in  mystic  union  with  the  bulk,  and  is  affected
by  whatever  affects  the  bulk.

Again,  in  discussing  the  "overhearing"  motif  (Vol.  II,  pp.  In1,  8n),  I
pointed  out  that  the  origin  of  acquiring  the  power  of  a  victim  could  possibly
be  traced  to  a  similar  source.  The  eating  of  a  portion  of  the  animal  or  man
would  convey  the  required  quality  of  the  dead  to  the  eater.  Thus  warriors
of  the  Theddora  and  Ngarigo  tribes  in  South-Eastern  Australia  used  to  eat
the  hands  and  feet  of  their  slain  enemies,  believing  that  in  this  way  they
acquired  some  of  the  qualities  and  courage  of  the  dead  (A.  W.  Howitt,  Native
Tribes  of  South-East  Australia,  p.  573,  quoted  by  Frazer,  Golden  Bough,  vol.  viii,
p.  151,  who  gives  several  other  examples).  Working  upon  this  idea,  it  is
considered  possible  to  use  a  portion  of  a  dead  person  for  nefarious  ends.
Frazer  (op.  cit.,  vol.  i,  pp.  147-14-9)  explains  this  clearly :  just  as  the  dead  can
neither  see  nor  hear  nor  speak,  so  you  may  on  homoeopathic  principles  render
people  blind,  deaf  and  dumb  by  the  use  of  dead  men's  bones  or  anything  else
that  is  tainted  by  the  infection  of  death.

Among  the  examples  quoted  I  would  mention  one  from  Java  where  a
burglar  takes  earth  from  a  grave  and  sprinkles  it  round  the  house  which
he  intends  to  rob;  this  throws  the  inmates  into  a  deep  sleep  (J.  Knebel,
"Amulettes  javanaises,"  Tijdschrift  voor  Indische  Taal-Land  en  Volkenkunde,
xl,  1898,  p.  506).

Similarly,  in  Northern  India,  Crooke  (op.  cit.,  vol.  i,  p.  26l)  states  that
it  is  believed  when  thieves  enter  a  house  that  they  throw  over  the  inmates
some  Masan,  or  ashes,  from  a  pyre,  and  make  them  unconscious  while  the
robbery  is  going  on.

In  Europe  we  find  numerous  similar  beliefs  (see  Frazer,  op.  cit.,  p.  148
et  seq.).  In  a  certain  Ruthenian  custom  we  get  rather  nearer  our  candle  of
human  fat.  Ruthenian  burglars  remove  the  marrow  from  a  human  shin-bone,
pour  tallow  into  it,  and  having  kindled  the  tallow,  march  thrice  round  the
house,  with  this  candle  burning,  which  causes  the  inmates  to  sleep  a  death-
like sleep.  Sometimes  they  will  make  a  flute  out  of  a  human  legbone  and
play  upon  it,  whereupon  all  persons  within  hearing  are  overcome  with
drowsiness  (R.  F.  Kaindl,  "  Zauberglaube  bei  den  Rutenen,"  Globus,  lxi,  1892,
p.  282).


152  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

All  kinds  of  powers  are  attributed  to  fat  or  juices  from  the  human
body.  In  India  a  most  potent  charm,  known  as  Momiai,  can  be  obtained  as
follows  :  a  boy,  as  fat  and  black  as  possible,  is  caught,  a  small  hole  is  bored
in  the  top  of  his  head,  and  he  is  hung  up  by  the  heels  over  a  slow  fire.  The
juice  or  essence  of  his  body  is  in  this  way  distilled  into  seven  drops  of  what
is  then  called  Momiai.  This  substance  possesses  healing  properties  of  a
supernatural  kind.  Sword-cuts,  spear-thrusts,  wounds  from  arrows  and  other
weapons  of  warfare  are  instantly  cured  by  its  use,  and  he  who  possesses  it
is  practically  invulnerable.  In  Kumaun  this  substance  is  known  as  Narayan
Tel,  or  Ram  Tel,  the  "oil  of  Vishnu  or  llama  "  (Crooke,  op.  cit.,  vol.  ii,  p.  177).

For  numerous  customs  connected  with  the  hand  in  homoeopathic  magic
see  J.  A.  Macculloch,  in  Hastings'  Ency,  Rel.  Eth.,  article  "  Hand,"  vol.  vi,
p.  496.

In  Europe  there  were  many  strange  uses  to  which  the  hands,  fingers,
finger-joints,  etc.,  of  the  dead  could  be  put,  to  the  benefit  of  the  possessors.
In  the  north  of  England  it  was  believed  that  the  only  thing  which  could  put
out  the  "  Hand  of  Glory "  was  milk.  Thus,  in  the  first  of  a  collection  of
Yorkshire  stories  (collected  by  R.  Blakeborough,  and  edited  by  J.  Fairfax-
Blakeborough,  in  1924,  entitled  The  Hand  of  Glory),  we  read  of  the  servant
girl's  efforts  to  pour  milk  on  the  candle :  "She  straightway  poured  the  whole
of  the  contents  of  her  jug  over  the  hand  and  candle,  the  flame  turned  scarlet,
the  fingers  twitched,  then  released  their  hold,  and  the  taper  fell  with  the
light  out."

A  somewhat  similar  legend  is  told,  says  the  editor,  of  the  Spital  Inn,
Stainmoor,  a  posting-house  on  the  York-Carlisle  Road.  In  this  case  the
highwayman's  incantation  was  overheard  :

"  Let  those  who  rest  more  deeply  sleep ;
Let  those  awake  their  vigils  keep.
O  Hand  of  Glory,  shed  thy  light,
Direct  us  to  our  spoil  to-night.
Flash  out  thy  light,  O  skeleton  hand,
And  guide  the  feet  of  our  trusty  band."

It  is  also  stated  that  the  "  Hand  of  Glory  "  would  cease  to  take  effect,
and  thieves  could  not  make  use  of  it,  if  the  threshold  of  the  door  of  the  house,
and  other  places  by  which  they  might  enter,  were  anointed  with  an  unguent
composed  of  the  gall  of  a  black  cat,  the  fat  of  a  white  hen  and  the  blood  of
a  screech-owl ;  which  mixture  must  necessarily  be  prepared  during  the  dog-
days  (quoted  by  Brand,  Popular  Antiquities  of  Great  Britain,  189S,  vol.  iii,
p.  279)-  See  also  Baring-Gould,  Curious  Myths  of  the  Middle  Ages,  pp.  405-
409;  Waldau,  Bohmische  Marchen,  p.  360 ;  and  Kuhn,  Westjalische  Mdrchen,
vol.  i,  p.  146.

In  the  Middle  Ages  it  appears  that  the  most  potent  form  of  candle  was
that  of  a  newly  born  child,  which,  anointed  with  grease  and  ignited,  would
make  the  thief  invisible,  and  cause  everyone  in  the  house  to  fall  fast  asleep.
In  the  seventeenth  century  it  is  recorded  that,  in  order  to  get  the  most


THE  "  HAND  OF  GLORY  "  153

efficient  candle  possible,  thieves  were  known  to  have  murdered  pregnant
women  in  order  to  extract  the  unborn  child's  finger  (see  A.  Wuttke,  Der
deutsche  Volksaberglaube  der  Gegenwart,  Berlin,  1900,  p.  134;  and  references
in  Frazer,  op.  cit.,  vol.  i,  p.  149w3).

It  seems  very  probable  that  all  these  modern  survivals  are  partly  the
outcome  of  primitive  ideas  of  homoeopathic  magic,  but  there  is  also  the  second
point  to  be  considered — the  connection  of  the  custom  with  the  mandrake.
That  it  has  a  very  close  connection  is  obvious  on  etymological  grounds.
The  expression  "  Hand  of  Glory "  is  merely  the  translation  of  the  French
"  Main  de  Gloire,"  which  is  a  corruption  of  the  old  French  Mandegloire
— i.e.  mandragore,  mandragora,  the  mandrake.

A  glance  at  the  curious  customs  connected  with  this  plant  will  show
how  closely  they  are  allied  to  those  of  the  "  Hand  of  Glory  "  in  North  Britain.

The  plant  itself  is  a  native  of  the  Levant,  and  is  found  in  the  Greek
Islands  of  the  Mediterranean.  In  a  most  interesting  and  important  paper  on
"The  Origin  of  the  Cult  of  Aphrodite,"  Bidl.  John  Rylands  Library,  October  to
December  191 6  (and  reprinted  in  his  Ascent  of  Olympus),  Dr  J.  Rendel  Harris
shows  Aphrodite  to  be  a  personification  of  the  mandrake  or  love-apple.  It
was,  however,  the  root,  and  not  the  fruit,  of  the  herb  which  entered  so  largely
into  European  superstition  and  witchcraft.

The  most  familiar  mention  of  the  mandrake  is  probably  that  in  Genesis
xxx,  14,  where  Rachel,  having  obtained  Reuben's  mandrakes,  conceived  and
bore  a  son,  Joseph.  This  is  according  to  the  original  Hebrew  tradition,  and
similar  superstitions  still  linger  in  the  Holy  Land  to-day.

In  Folk-Lore  of  the  Old  Testament,  vol.  ii,  chap,  vii,  p.  372  et  seq.,  Frazer
has  collected  much  useful  material  on  mandrakes,  so  that  there  is  no  necessity
to  cover  the  ground  again.  It  will  suffice  merely  to  say  that  owing  to  the
peculiar  shape  of  the  root  of  the  mandrake,  in  that  it  resembled  the  lower
portion  of  the  human  body,  all  kinds  of  human  attributes  became  attached  to
it.  It  gave  forth  terrible  groans  and  yells  when  pulled  up,  usually  causing
death  to  the  would-be  possessor ;  hence  it  was  considered  best  to  tie  the  tail
of  a  dog  to  the  root  and  entice  the  animal  towards  you — the  dog  would  be
killed,  but  the  herb  would  be  yours.  It  was  closely  connected  with  death,
and  usually  with  that  of  a  criminal,  and  originated  in  the  juices  from  the
hanged  man's  body.  Hence  it  was  always  to  be  found  under  a  gallows.
This  curious  connection  seems  to  have  originated  in  mediaeval  magical  beliefs
which  saw  in  the  strangely  shaped  root  a  diminutive  replica  of  a  human  body
— the  seed  which  germinated  it  being  dropped  on  the  ground  from  the  hanged
man.  The  powers  attributed  to  the  herb  were  many  and  varied.  Some  were
particularly  efficient  in  curing  barrenness  in  women,  and  acted  as  love-charms  ;
others  made  the  wearer  invulnerable  or  inviolable,  and  most  were  capable  of
revealing  the  hidden  treasures  of  the  earth.

It  is  very  interesting  to  find  the  human-fat  candle  mentioned  in
Somadeva's  tales,  especially  as  it  is  connected  with  thieving ;  but,  as  Bloom-
field  has  shown  ("Art  of  Stealing  in  Hindu  Fiction,"  Amer.  Journ.  Phil.,
vol.  xliv,  1923,  pp.  118,  119),  magical  precautions  enter  largely  into  thieving
practices  of  the  East.


154  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

Apart  from  the  mandrake  references  given  by  Frazer,  the  following  from
Notes  and  Queries,  8th  series,  vol.  iii,  24th  June  1893,  p.  498,  will  be  found
useful:  Gerarde's  Herbal,  1597;  A.  Dyce,  Glossary  to  Shakespeare's  Works;
T.  F.  Thiselton-Dyer,  Folk-Lore  of  Plants;  A.  S.  Palmer,  Folk  Etymology;
M.  D.  Conway,  Mystic  Trees  and  Flowers;  Frazer  s  Magazine,  1870,  vol.  ii,
p.  705 ;  All  the  Year  Round,  2nd  series,  vol.  x,  p.  520;  vol.  xxxvi,  pp.  371,
413  ;  Dr  Harris,  Dictionary  of  the  Natural  History  of  the  Bible  ;  Nares's  Glossary,
and  Josephus's  Wars  of  the  Jews,  cap.  xxv,  under  "  Baaras-root."

There  is  a  good  collection  of  mandrakes  at  the  Wellcome  Historical  and
Medical  Museum,  Wigmore  Street,  W.  The  exhibit  includes  dried  mandrakes,
a  specimen  preserved  in  spirit,  and  numerous  reproductions  from  old  MSS.
representing  the  "  male  "  and  "  female  "  mandrakes,  and  showing  the  plant
being  uprooted  by  a  dog  as  described  above. — n.m.p.


BOOK  VII:  RATNAPRABHA
CHAPTER  XXXV

INVOCATION

MAY  the  head  of  Siva,   studded  with  the  nails  of
Gauri  engaged  in  playfully  pulling  his   hair,  and
so  appearing  rich  in  many  moons,1  procure  you
prosperity.

May  the  God  of  the  Elephant  Face,2  who,  stretching
forth  his  trunk  wet  with  streaming  ichor,  curved  at  the
extremity,  seems  to  be  bestowing  successes,  protect  you.


[M]  Thus  the  young  son  of  the  King  of  Vatsa,  having
married  in  Kausambi  Madanamanchuka,  whom  he  loved
as  his  life,  remained  living  as  he  chose,  with  his  ministers
Gomukha  and  others,  having  obtained  his  wish.

And  once  on  a  time,  when  the  feast  of  spring  had  arrived,
adorned  with  the  gushing  notes  of  love- intoxicated  cuckoos,
in  which  the  wind  from  the  Malaya  mountain  set  in  motion
by  force  the  dance  of  the  creepers,  the  feast  of  spring  delight-
ful with  the  hum  of  bees,  the  prince  went  to  the  garden  with
his  ministers  to  amuse  himself.  After  roaming  about  there,
his  friend  Tapantaka  suddenly  came,  with  his  eyes  expanded
with  delight,  and  stepping  up  to  him  said  :  "  Prince,  I  have
seen  not  far  from  here  a  wonderful  maiden,  who  has  de-
scended from  heaven  and  is  standing  under  an  asoka-tree,
and  that  very  maiden,  who  illumines  the  regions  with  her
beauty,  advancing  towards  me  with  her  friends,  sent  me  here
to  summon  you."

1  The  cedille  under  the  c  of  candra  should  be  erased  in  Dr  Brockhaus's
text.

2  Ganesa,  who  bestows  success  or  the  reverse,  and  is  invoked  in  all
undertakings.     I  read  karan  danambhasa.

155


156  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

When  Naravahanadatta  heard  that,  being  eager  to  see
her,  he  went  quickly  with  his  ministers  to  the  foot  of  the  tree.
He  beheld  there  that  fair  one,  with  her  rolling  eyes  like  bees,
with  her  lips  red  like  shoots,  beautiful  with  breasts  firm  as
clusters,  having  her  body  yellow  with  the  dust  of  flowers,
removing  fatigue  by  her  loveliness,1  like  the  goddess  of  the
garden  appearing  in  a  visible  shape  suited  to  her  deity.
And  the  prince  approached  the  heavenly  maiden,  who  bowed
before  him,  and  welcomed  her,  for  his  eyes  were  ravished
with  her  beauty.

Then  his  minister  Gomukha,  after  all  had  sat  down,  asked
her  :  "  Who  are  you,  auspicious  one,  and  for  what  reason
have  you  come  here  ?  "  When  she  heard  that,  she  laid
aside  her  modesty  in  obedience  to  the  irresistible  decree  of
Love,  and  frequently  stealing  sidelong  glances  at  the  lotus
of  Naravahanadatta 's  face,  with  an  eye  that  shed  matchless
affection,  she  began  thus  at  length  to  relate  her  own  history.

49.  Story  of  Ratnaprabhd

There  is  a  mountain- chain  called  Himavat,  famous  in
the  three  worlds  ;  it  has  many  peaks,  but  one  of  its  peaks
is  the  mount  of  Siva,  which  is  garlanded  with  the  brightness
of  glittering  jewels,  and  flashes  with  gleaming  snow,  and,  like
the  expanse  of  the  heaven,  cannot  be  measured.  Its  plateaux
are  the  home  of  magic  powers  and  of  magic  herbs,  which
dispel  old  age,  death  and  fear,  and  are  to  be  obtained  by  the
favour  of  Siva.  With  its  peaks  yellow  with  the  brightness
of  the  bodies  of  many  Vidyadharas,  it  transcends  the  glory  of
the  peaks  of  Sumeru  itself,  the  mighty  hill  of  the  immortals.

On  it  there  is  a  golden  city  called  Kanchanasringa,  which
gleams  refulgent  with  brightness,  like  the  palace  of  the  Sun.
It  extends  many  yojanas,2  and  in  it  there  lives  a  king  of  the
Vidyadharas  named  Hemaprabha,  who  is  a  firm  votary  of
the  husband  of  Uma.  And  though  he  has  many  wives  he
has  only  one  queen,  whom  he  loves  dearly,  named  Alankara-
prabha,  as  dear  to  him  as  Rohini  to  the  moon.  With  her
the  virtuous  king  used  to  rise  up  in  the  morning  and  bathe,

1  The  word  also  means  "shade."  2  See  Vol.  I,  p.  Sn1.— n.m.p:


THE  CURSE  OF  CHILDLESSNESS  157

and  worship  duly  Siva  and  his  wife  Gauri,  and  then  he  would
descend  to  the  world  of  men,  and  give  to  poor  Brahmans
every  day  a  thousand  gold  pieces  mixed  with  jewels.  And
then  he  returned  from  earth  and  attended  to  his  kingly
duties  justly,  and  then  he  ate  and  drank,  abiding  by  his  vow
like  a  hermit.

While  days  elapsed  in  this  way,  melancholy  arose  once
in  the  bosom  of  the  king,  caused  by  his  childlessness,  but
suggested  by  a  passing  occasion.  And  his  beloved  Queen
Alankaraprabha,  seeing  that  he  was  in  very  low  spirits,  asked
him  the  cause  of  his  sadness.  Then  the  king  said  to  her  :
"  I  have  all  prosperity,  but  the  one  grief  of  childlessness
afflicts  me,  O  Queen.  And  this  melancholy  has  arisen  in
my  breast  on  the  occasion  of  calling  to  mind  a  tale,  which  I
heard  long  ago,  of  a  virtuous  man  who  had  no  son."

Then  the  queen  said  to  him  :  "Of  what  nature  was  that
tale  ?  "  When  asked  this  question,  the  king  told  her  the
tale  briefly  in  the  following  words  : —

49a.  Sattvasila  and  the  Two  Treasures

In  the  town  of  Chitrakiita  there  was  a  king  named
Brahmanavara,  rightly  named,  for  he  was  devoted  to
honouring  Brahmans.  He  had  a  victorious  servant  named
Sattvasila,  who  devoted  himself  exclusively  to  war,  and
every  month  Sattvasila  received  a  hundred  gold  pieces  from
that  king.  But,  as  he  was  munificent,  that  gold  was  not
enough  for  him,  especially  as  his  childlessness  made  the
pleasure  of  giving  the  sole  pleasure  to  which  he  was  addicted.
Sattvasila  was  continually  reflecting :  "  The  Disposer  has
not  given  me  a  son  to  gladden  me,  but  he  has  given  me  the
vice  of  generosity,  and  that  too  without  wealth.  It  is  better
to  be  produced  in  the  world  as  an  old  barren  tree  or  a  stone
than  as  a  poor  man  altogether  abandoned  to  the  vice  of
giving  away  money."

But  once  on  a  time  Sattvasila,  while  wandering  in  a
garden,  happened  by  luck  to  find  a  treasure  ;  and  with  the
help  of  his  servants  he  quickly  brought  home  that  hoard,
which  gleamed  with  much  gold  and  glittered  with  priceless


158  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

stones.  Out  of  that  he  provided  himself  with  pleasures,
and  gave  wealth  to  Brahmans,  slaves  and  friends,  and  thus
the  virtuous  man  spent  his  life.

Meanwhile  his  relations,  beholding  this,  guessed  the
secret,  and  went  to  the  king's  palace,  and  of  their  own  accord
informed  the  king  that  Sattvasila  had  found  a  treasure.
Then  Sattvasila  was  summoned  by  the  king,  and  by  order
of  the  doorkeeper  remained  standing  for  a  moment  in  a
lonely  part  of  the  king's  courtyard.  There,  as  he  was
scratching  the  earth  with  the  hilt  of  a  lildvajra1  that  was
in  his  hand,  he  found  another  large  treasure  in  a  copper
vessel.  It  appeared  like  his  own  heart,  displayed  openly
for  him  by  Destiny,  pleased  with  his  virtue,  in  order  that
he  might  propitiate  the  king  with  it.  So  he  covered  it  up
again  with  earth  as  it  was  before,  and  when  summoned  by
the  doorkeeper  entered  the  king's  presence.

When  he  had  made  his  bow  there,  the  king  himself
said  :  "I  have  come  to  learn  that  you  have  obtained  a
treasure,  so  surrender  it  to  me."  And  Sattvasila  for  his  part
answered  him  then  and  there  :  "  O  King,  tell  me  :  shall  I
give  you  the  first  treasure  I  found,  or  the  one  I  found  to-
day ?  "  The  king  said  to  him  :  "  Give  the  one  recently
found."  And  thereupon  Sattvasila  went  to  a  corner  of  the
king's  courtyard  and  gave  him  up  the  treasure.

Then  the  king,  being  pleased  with  the  treasure,  dismissed
Sattvasila  with  these  words  :  "  Enjoy  the  first- found  treasure
as  you  please."  So  Sattvasila  returned  to  his  house.  There
he  remained,  increasing  the  propriety  of  his  name  with  gifts
and  enjoyments,  and  so  managing  to  dispel  somehow  or
other  the  melancholy  caused  by  the  affliction  of  childlessness.

49.  Story  of  Ratnaprabhd

"  Such  is  the  story  of  Sattvasila,  which  I  heard  long  ago,
and  because  I  have  recalled  it  to  mind  I  remain  sorrowful
through  thinking  over  the  fact  that  I  have  no  son."  When
the    Queen    Alankaraprabha    was    thus    addressed    by    her

1  I  have  no  idea  what  this  word  tllavajra  means.  It  is  translated  by
Bohtlingk  and  Roth  :  ein  wie  ein  Donnerkeil  aussehendes  fVerkzeug.


THE  OFFERING  OF  VILVA  FRUITS  159

husband  Hemaprabha,  the  King  of  the  Vidyadharas,  she
answered  him  :  "  It  is  true.  Fortune  does  assist  the  brave
in  this  way.  Did  not  Sattvasila,  when  in  difficulties,  obtain
a  second  treasure  ?  So  you  too  will  obtain  your  desire  by
the  power  of  your  courage.  As  an  example  of  the  truth  of
this,  hear  the  story  of  Vikramatunga.


49b.  The  Brave  King  Vikramatunga

There  is  a  city  called  Pataliputra,  the  ornament  of  the
earth,  filled  with  various  beautiful  jewels,  the  colours  of  which
are  so  disposed  as  to  form  a  perfect  scale  of  colour.  In  that
city  there  dwelt  long  ago  a  brave  king  named  Vikrama-
tunga, who  in  giving  1  never  turned  his  back  on  a  suppliant,
nor  in  fighting  on  an  enemy.  That  king  one  day  entered
the  forest  to  hunt  and  saw  there  a  Brahman  offering  a
sacrifice  with  vilva 2  fruits.  When  he  saw  him  he  was
desirous  to  question  him,  but  avoided  going  near  him,  and
went  off  to  a  great  distance  with  his  army  in  his  ardour  for
the  chase.  For  a  long  time  he  sported  with  deer  and  lions,
that  rose  up  and  fell  slain  by  his  hand,  as  if  with  foes,3  and
then  he  returned  and  beheld  the  Brahman  still  intent  on
his  sacrifice  as  before,  and  going  up  to  him  he  bowed  before
him,  and  asked  him  his  name  and  the  advantage  he  hoped
to  derive  from  offering  the  vilva  fruits.

Then  the  Brahman  blessed  the  king  and  said  to  him  :
"  I  am  a  Brahman  named  Nagasarman,  and  hear  the
fruit  I  hope  from  my  sacrifice.  When  the  God  of  Fire  is
pleased  with  this  vilva  sacrifice,  then  vilva  fruits  of  gold  will
come  out  of  the  fire- cavity.  Then  the  God  of  Fire  will
appear  in  bodily  form  and  grant  me  a  boon ;  and  so
I  have  spent  much  time  in  offering  vilva  fruits.     But  so

1  Possibly  there  is  a  pun  here  ;  dana,  "giving/'  also  means  "cutting."

2  The  fruit  of  the  Bel,  well  known  to  Anglo-Indians.

3  B.  reads  kanthakaih  for  kandukaih.  Thus  in  the  D.  text  the  simile  is
one  of  playing  with  the  ball.  As  the  king  kills  in  the  sport  of  the  chase  so
he  gives  the  impression  of  playing  with  balls;  utpatati  denotes  the  "rising
up  "  of  the  wounded  or  hunted  deer  and  at  the  same  time  the  jumping  of  the
ball ;  both  patanti,  the  animals  when  hit  and  unable  to  arise  from  the  ground,
the  balls  when  coming  down.     See  Speyer,  op.  cit.,  p.  111. — n.m.p.


160  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

little  is  my  merit  that  even  now  the  God  of  Fire  is  not
propitiated."  1

When  he  said  this,  that  king  of  resolute  valour  answered
him  :  "  Then  give  me  one  vilva  fruit  that  I  may  offer  it,  and
I  will  to-day,  O  Brahman,  render  the  God  of  Fire  propitious
to  you."  Then  the  Brahman  said  to  the  king  :  "  How  will
you,  unchastened  and  impure,  propitiate  that  God  of  Fire,
who  is  not  satisfied  with  me,  who  remain  thus  faithful  to  my
vow  and  am  chastened  ?  "

When  the  Brahman  said  this  to  him,  the  king  said  to  him
again  :  "  Never  mind ;  give  me  a  vilva  fruit  and  in  a  moment
you  shall  behold  a  wonder."  Then  the  Brahman,  full  of
curiosity,  gave  a  vilva  fruit  to  the  king,  and  he  then  and
there  meditated  with  soul  of  firm  valour  :  "If  thou  art  not
satisfied  with  this  vilva  fruit,  O  God  of  Fire,  then  I  will  offer
thee  my  own  head,"  and  thereupon  offered  the  fruit.  And
the  seven-rayed  god  appeared  from  the  sacrificial  cavity,
bringing  the  king  a  golden  vilva  fruit  as  the  fruit  of  his  tree
of  valour.  And  the  Fire  God,  present  in  visible  form,  said
to  that  king  :  "I  am  pleased  with  thy  courage,  so  receive  a
boon,  O  King."

When  the  magnanimous  king  heard  that,  he  bowed  be-
fore him,  and  said  :  "  Grant  this  Brahman  his  wish.  What
other  boon  do  I  require  ?  "  On  hearing  this  speech  of  the
king's  the  Fire  God  was  much  pleased,  and  said  to  him  :
"  O  King,  this  Brahman  shall  become  a  great  lord  of  wealth,
and  thou  also  by  my  favour  shalt  have  the  prosperity  of  thy
treasury  ever  undiminished."

When  the  Fire  God  had,  in  these  words,  bestowed  the
boon,  the  Brahman  asked  him  this  question  :  "  Thou  hast
appeared  swiftly  to  a  king  that  acts  according  to  his  own
will,  but  not  to  me  that  am  under  vows  :  why  is  this,  O
revered  one  ?  ':     Then  the   Fire  God,  the  giver  of  boons,

1  For  references  to  fire-worship  see  Vol.  II,  pp.  256,  257.  On  p.  256
I  described  the  three  fires  as  vadavagni,  laukikagni  and  vrika.  These  are,
however,  the  three  fires  of  modern  Brahman  ritual.  The  Vedic  fires  which
I  should  have  mentioned  are :  garhapatya,  dakshina  and  the  ahavanlya.
In  Manu  (iii,  100,  185)  two  additional  fires  are  also  given:  sabhya  and
tlvasalhya;  but  the  first  three,  collectively  known  as  tretd,  are  the  most
important. — n.m.p.


THE  BRAHMAN  LAD  161

answered  :  "  If  I  had  not  granted  him  an  interview  this
king  of  fierce  courage  would  have  offered  his  head  in  sacrifice
to  me.  In  this  world  successes  quickly  befall  those  of  fierce
spirit,  but  they  come  slowly,  O  Brahman,  to  those  of  dull
spirit  like  thee."

Thus  spake  the  God  of  Fire,  and  vanished,  and  the  Brah-
man Nagasarman  took  leave  of  the  king,  and  in  course  of
time  became  very  rich.  But  the  King  Vikramatunga,  whose
courage  had  been  thus  seen  by  his  dependents,  returned
amid  their  plaudits  to  his  town  of  Pataliputra.

When  the  king  was  dwelling  there,  the  warder  Satrunjaya
entered  suddenly  one  day  and  said  secretly  to  him  :  "  There
is  standing  at  the  door,  O  King,  a  Brahman  lad,  who  says
The  his  name  is  Dattasarman  ;   he  wishes  to  make

Philosopher's  a  representation  to  you  in  private."  The  king
Stone  gave  foe  order  to  introduce  him,  and  the  lad  was

introduced,  and  after  blessing  the  king  he  bowed  before  him
and  sat  down.  And  he  made  this  representation  :  "  King,
by  a  certain  device  of  powder  I  know  how  to  make  always
excellent  gold  out  of  copper.1     For  that  device  was  shown

1  The  history  of  alchemy,  or  the  pretended  art  of  transmuting  the  base
metals  into  noble  ones,  has  occupied  sages  from  the  time  of  the  Alexandrian
Greeks  in  the  early  centuries  of  the  Christian  era.  This  eternal  longing
after  wealth  through  the  medium  of  so-called  scientific  research  gave  rise  to
the  term  "philosopher's  stone,"  which  possessed  the  wonderful  property  of
^converting  everything  into  solid  gold.  It  was  in  searching  for  this  treasure
that  Botticher  stumbled  on  the  invention  of  Dresden  porcelain  manufacture  ;
Roger  Bacon  on  the  composition  of  gunpowder;  Geber  on  the  properties
of  acids ;  Van  Helmont  on  the  nature  of  gas ;  and  Dr  Glauber  on  the
" salts"  which  bear  his  name  (Brewer's  Dictionary  of  Phrase  and  Fable,
p.  971).

In  India  the  legends  connected  with  the  "  philosopher's  stone  "  are  many
and  varied.  Crooke  (op.  cit.,  vol.  ii,  p.  15)  tells  one  of  the  great  Chandra
Varma,  who  was  born  of  the  embraces  of  Chandrama,  the  moon-god,  who
possessed  the  power  of  converting  iron  into  gold.  Laliya,  a  blacksmith  of
Ahmadabad,  made  an  axe  for  a  Bhil,  who  returned  and  complained  that  it
would  not  cut.  Laliya,  on  looking  at  it,  found  that  the  blade  had  been  turned
into  gold.  On  questioning  the  Bhil,  he  ascertained  that  he  had  tried  to
sharpen  it  on  what  turned  out  to  be  the  philosopher's  stone.  Laliya,  by
possession  of  the  stone,  acquired  great  wealth,  and  was  finally  attacked  by
the  king's  troops.  At  last  he  was  obliged  to  throw  the  stone  into  the
Bhadra  river,  where  it  still  lies,  but  once  some  iron  chains  were  let
VOL.  III.  L


162  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

me  by  my  spiritual  teacher,  and  I  saw  with  my  own  eyes
that  he  made  gold  by  that  device."

When  the  lad  said  this,  the  king  ordered  copper  to  be
brought,  and  when  it  was  melted  the  lad  threw  the  powder
upon  it.  But  while  the  powder  was  being  thrown  an  in-
visible Yaksha  carried  it  off,  and  the  king  alone  saw  him,
having  propitiated  the  God  of  Fire.  And  that  copper  did
not  turn  into  gold,  as  the  powder  did  not  reach  it ;  thrice
did  the  lad  make  the  attempt  and  thrice  his  labour  was  in
vain.  Then  the  king,  first  of  brave  men,  took  the  powder
from  the  desponding  lad  and  himself  threw  it  on  the  melted
copper ;  when  he  threw  the  powder  the  Yaksha  did  not
intercept  it,  but  went  away  smiling.  Accordingly  the
copper  became  gold  by  contact  with  that  powder.  Then
the  boy,  astonished,  asked  the  king  for  an  explanation,  and
the  king  told  him  the  incident  of  the  Yaksha,  just  as  he  had
seen  it.  And  having  learned  in  this  way  the  device  of  the
powder  from  that  lad,  the  king  made  him  marry  a  wife,  and

down  into  the  water,  and  when  they  touched  it  the  links  were  converted
into  gold.

For  another  legend  see  Jarrett,  A'ln-i-Akbari,  vol.  ii,  p.  197.

The  literature  and  bibliographies  on  alchemy  are,  of  course,  very  great,
and  cannot  be  given  here.  It  will  suffice  merely  to  draw  attention  to  a  few
general  articles  and  the  chief  of  the  bibliographies.

A  useful  introductory  article  is  that  by  H.  M.  Ross  in  the  Ency.  Brit.,.
vol.  i,  pp.  519-522,  while  fuller  articles  are  those  by  E.  Riess,  Carra  de  Vaux,.
and  T.  Barnes  in  Hastings'  Ency.  Rel.  Eth.,  vol.  i,  pp.  287-298.  Reference
should  also  be  made  to  Thorndike,  History  of  Magic  and  Experimental  Science
(see  Indices  in  each  volume  under  "Alchemy"  and  "  Philosopher's  Stone");
and  Lewis  Spence,  Encyclopaedia  of  Occultism,  1920,  pp.  232-233.  For
bibliographies  of  works  on  alchemy  see  Lenglet  du  Fresnoy,  Histoire  de  In
Philosophic  Hermetique.  Accompagnee  d'un  catalogue  raisonne  des  icrivains  de  cette
science,  Paris  et  La  Haye,  1740  (see  particularly  vol.  iii) ;  Hermann  Kopp,.
Die  Alchemie  in  alterer  und  neuerer  Zeit.  Ein  Beitrag  zur  Culturgeschichte,
2  Thle,  Heidelberg,  1886;  H.  C.  Bolton,  Catalogue  of  Works  on  Alchemy  and
Chemistry  exhibited  at  the  Grolier  Club,  New  York,  1891  ;  J.  Ferguson,  Bibliolheca
Chemica,  Glasgow,  1906;  and  A.  E.  Waite,  The  Hermetic  and  Alchemical
Writings  of  Philippus  Aureolus  Theophrastus  Bombast,  of  Hohenheim,  2  vols.,
London,  1894.  To  this  latter  author  I  am  indebted  for  several  of  the  above
references.

We  shall  meet  with  the  "philosopher's  stone"  again  in  the  Ocean  of
Story,  Chapter  XLIII. — n.m.p.


SIVA  IS  PROPITIATED  163

gave  him  all  he  wished,  and  having  his  treasury  prosperously
filled  by  means  of  the  gold  produced  by  that  device,  he
himself  enjoyed  great  happiness,  together  with  his  wives,  and
made  Brahmans  rich.

49.  Story  of  Ratnaprabhd

"  Thus  you  see  that  the  Lord  grants  their  desires  to  men
of  fierce  courage,  seeming  to  be  either  terrified  or  pleased  by
them.  And  who,  O  King,  is  of  more  firm  valour  or  more
generous  than  you  ?  So  Siva,  when  propitiated  by  you,
will  certainly  give  you  a  son  ;   do  not  sorrow."

The  King  Hemaprabha,  when  he  heard  this  noble  speech
from  the  mouth  of  Queen  Alankaraprabha,  believed  it  and
was  pleased.  And  he  considered  that  his  own  heart,  radiant
with  cheerfulness,  indicated  that  he  would  certainly  obtain
a  son  by  propitiating  Siva.

The  next  day  after  this  he  and  his  wife  bathed  and  wor-
shipped Siva,  and  he  gave  ninety  millions  of  gold  pieces  to
the  Brahmans,  and  without  taking  food  he  went  through
ascetic  practices  in  front  of  Siva,  determined  that  he  would
either  leave  the  body  or  propitiate  the  god,  and  continuing
in  asceticism  he  praised  the  giver  of  boons,  the  husband  of
the  daughter  of  the  mountain,1  that  lightly  gave  away  the
sea  of  milk  to  his  votary  Upamanyu,  saying  :  "  Honour  to
thee,  O  husband  of  Gauri,  who  art  the  cause  of  the  creation,
preservation  and  destruction  of  the  world,  who  dost  assume
the  eight  special  forms  of  ether  and  the  rest.2  Honour  to
thee,  who  sleepest  on  the  ever- expanded  lotus  of  the  heart,
that  art  Sambhu,  the  swan  dwelling  in  the  pure  Manasa
lake.3  Honour  to  thee,  the  exceeding  marvellous  Moon,  of
divine  brightness,  pure,  of  watery  substance,  to  be  beheld  by
those  whose  sins  are  put  away  ;  to  thee  whose  beloved  is
half  thy  body,4  and  who  nevertheless  art  supremely  chaste.

1  ParvatI  or  Durga,  the  wife  of  Siva.

2  The  others  are  the  Sun,  Fire,  Water,  Earth,  Air,  the  Moon  and  the
officiating  Brahman.  For  the  latter  is  sometimes  substituted  pasupati,  or  lord
of  animals.

3  Possibly  it  also  means  "the  swan  of  the  temple  of  the  mind."

4  An  allusion  to  the  Ardha-narisvara  form  of  Siva.


164  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

Honour  to  thee,  who  didst  create  the  world  by  a  wish,  and
art  thyself  the  world."

When  the  king  had  praised  Siva  in  these  words,  and  fasted
for  three  nights,  the  god  appeared  to  him  in  a  dream  and
spake  as  follows  :  "  Rise  up,  O  King.  There  shall  be  born
to  thee  a  heroic  son  that  shall  uphold  thy  race.  And  thou
shalt  also  obtain  by  the  favour  of  Gauri  a  glorious  daughter,
who  is  destined  to  be  the  queen  of  that  treasure-house  of
glory,  Naravahanadatta,  your  future  emperor."  When  Siva
had  said  this  he  disappeared,  and  Hemaprabha  woke  up,
delighted,  at  the  close  of  night.  And  by  telling  his  dream
he  gladdened  his  wife  Alankaraprabha,  who  had  been  told
the  same  by  Garni  in  a  dream,  and  dwelt  on  the  agreement
of  the  two  visions.  And  then  the  king  rose  up  and  bathed
and  worshipped  Siva,  and  after  giving  gifts,  broke  his  fast,
and  kept  high  festival.

Then,  after  some  days  had  passed,  the  Queen  Alankara-
prabha became  pregnant  by  that  king,  and  delighted  her
beloved  by  her  face  redolent  of  honey,  with  wildly  rolling
The  Birth  of  eyes,  so  that  it  resembled  a  pale  lotus  with  bees
Vajraprabha  hovering  round  it.  Then  she  gave  birth  in  due
time  to  a  son  (whose  noble  lineage  was  proclaimed  by
the  elevated  longings  of  her  pregnancy),  as  the  sky  gives
birth  to  the  orb  of  day.  As  soon  as  he  was  born  the
lying-in  chamber  was  illuminated  by  his  might,  and  so
was  made  red  as  vermilion.  And  his  father  gave  to  that
infant,  that  brought  terror  to  the  families  of  his  enemies,
the  name  of  Vajraprabha,  that  had  been  appointed  for  him
by  a  divine  voice.  Then  the  boy  grew  by  degrees,  being
filled  with  accomplishments,  and  causing  the  exultation  of
his  family,  as  the  new  moon  fills  out  with  digits  l  and  causes
the  sea  to  rise.

Then,  not  long  after,  the  queen  of  that  King  Hema-
prabha again  became  pregnant.  And  when  she  was  pregnant
she  sat  upon  a  golden  throne  and  became  truly  the  jewel  of
the  harem,  adding  special  lustre  to  her  settings.  And  in  a
chariot,  in  the  shape  of  a  beautiful  lotus,  manufactured  by
help  of  magic  science,  she  roamed  about  in  the  sky,  since  her

1  Kala,  "digit  of  the  moon"  and  also  "accomplishment."


THE  BIRTH  OF  RATNAPRABHA  165

pregnant  longings  assumed  that  form.1  But  when  the  due
time  came  a  daughter  was  born  to  that  queen,  whose  birth
by  the  favour  of  Gauri  was  a  sufficient  guarantee  of  her
loveliness.  And  this  voice  was  then  heard  from  heaven  :
"  She  shall  be  the  wife  of  Naravahanadatta,"  which  agreed
with  the  words  of  Siva's  revelation.  And  the  king  was  just
as  much  delighted  at  her  birth  as  he  was  at  that  of  his  son,
and  gave  her  the  name  of  Ratnaprabha.

And  Ratnaprabha,  adorned  with  her  own  science,  grew
up  in  the  house  of  her  father,  producing  illumination  in  all
the  quarters  of  the  sky.  Then  the  king  made  his  son  Vajra-
prabha,  who  had  begun  to  wear  armour,  take  a  wife,  and
appointed  him  Crown  Prince.  And  he  devolved  on  him  the
burden  of  the  kingdom,  and  remained  at  ease  ;  but  still  one
anxiety  lingered  in  his  heart,  anxiety  about  the  marriage  of
his  daughter.

One  day  the  king  beheld  that  daughter,  who  was  fit  to
be  given  away  in  marriage,  sitting  near  him,  and  said  to  the
Queen  Alankaraprabha,  who  was  in  his  presence  :  "  Observe,
Queen,  a  daughter  is  a  great  misery  in  the  three  worlds,  even
though  she  is  the  ornament  of  her  family — a  misery,  alas  !
even  to  the  great.  For  this  Ratnaprabha,  though  modest,
learned,  young  and  beautiful,  afflicts  me  because  she  has  not
obtained  a  husband."  The  queen  said  to  him  :  "  She  was
proclaimed  by  the  gods  as  the  destined  wife  of  Narava-
hanadatta, our  future  emperor ;  why  is  she  not  given
to  him  ?  "  When  the  queen  said  this  to  him,  the  king
answered  :  "In  truth  the  maiden  is  fortunate  that  shall
obtain  him  for  a  bridegroom.  For  he  is  an  incarnation  of
Kama  upon  earth.  But  he  has  not  as  yet  attained  his  divine
nature  ;  therefore  I  am  now  waiting  for  his  attainment  of
superhuman  knowledge."  2

While  he  was  thus  speaking,  Ratnaprabha,  by  means  of
those  accents  of  her  father,  which  entered  her  ear  like  the
words  of  the  bewildering  spell  of  the  God  of  Love,  became  as
if  bewildered,  as  if  possessed,  as  if  asleep,  as  if  in  a  picture,

1  For  the  dohada  motif  or  "  Longings  of  the  Pregnant  Woman "  see
Vol.  I,  Appendix  III,  pp.  221-228.— n.m.p.

2  The  vidya  of  the  Vidyadharas.     I  read  pratikshyate.


166  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

and  her  heart  was  captivated  by  that  bridegroom.  Then
with  difficulty  she  took  a  respectful  leave  of  her  parents,  and
went  to  her  own  private  apartments,  and  managed  at  length
to  get  to  sleep  at  the  end  of  the  night.

Then  the  goddess  Gauri,  being  full  of  pity  for  her,  gave
her  this  command  in  a  dream  :  "  To-morrow,  my  daughter,
is  an  auspicious  day ;  so  thou  must  go  to  the  city  of  Kau-
sambl  and  see  thy  future  husband ;  and  thence  thy  father,
O  auspicious  one,  will  himself  bring  thee  and  him  into  this
his  city,  and  celebrate  your  marriage."  So  in  the  morning,
when  she  woke  up,  she  told  that  dream  to  her  mother.  Then
her  mother  gave  her  leave  to  go,  and  she,  knowing  by
her  superhuman  knowledge  that  her  bridegroom  was  in  the
garden,  set  out  from  her  own  city  to  visit  him.


[M]  "  Thou  knowest,  O  my  husband,  that  I  am  that
Ratnaprabha,  arrived  to-day  in  a  moment,  full  of  impatience,
and  you  all  know  the  sequel."  When  he  heard  this  speech
of  hers,  that  in  sweetness  exceeded  nectar,  and  beheld  the
body  of  the  Vidyadhari  that  was  ambrosia  to  the  eyes,
Naravahanadatta  in  his  heart  blamed  the  Creator,  saying  to
himself :  "  Why  did  he  not  make  me  all  eye  and  ear  ?  M
And  he  said  to  her  :  "  Fortunate  am  I ;  my  birth  and  life
has  obtained  its  fruit,  in  that  I,  O  beautiful  one,  have  been
thus  visited  by  thee  out  of  affection  !  "

When  they  had  thus  exchanged  the  protestations  of
new  love,  suddenly  the  army  of  the  Vidyadharas  was  be-
held there  in  the  heaven.  Ratnaprabha  said  immediately  :
"  Here  is  my  father  come."  And  the  King  Hemaprabha
descended  from  heaven  with  his  son.  And  with  his  son
Vajraprabha  he  approached  that  Naravahanadatta,  who
gave  him  a  courteous  welcome.  And  while  they  stood  for  a
moment  paying  one  another  the  customary  compliments,  the
King  of  Vatsa,  who  had  heard  of  it,  came  with  his  ministers.
And  then  that  Hemaprabha  told  the  king,  after  he  had  per-
formed towards  him  the  rites  of  hospitality,  the  whole  story
exactly  as  it  had  been  related  by  Ratnaprabha,  and  said  :


MARRIAGE  FESTIVITIES  167


"  I  knew  by  the  power  of  my  supernatural  knowledge  that
my  daughter  had  come  here,  and  I  am  aware  of  all  that  has
happened  in  this  place.1  .....

For  he  will  afterwards  possess  such  an  imperial  chariot.
Pray  consent,  and  then  thou  shalt  behold  in  a  short  time
thy  son,  the  prince  returned  here,  united  to  his  wife
Ratnaprabha."

After  he  had  addressed  this  prayer  to  the  King  of
Vatsa,  and  he  had  consented  to  his  wish,  that  Hemaprabha,
with  his  son,  prepared  that  chariot  by  his  own  magic  skill
and  made  Naravahanadatta  ascend  it,  together  with  Ratna-
prabha, whose  face  was  cast  down  from  modesty,  followed
by  Gomukha  and  the  others,  and  Yaugandharayana,  who
was  also  deputed  to  accompany  him  by  his  father,  and  thus
Hemaprabha  took  him  to  his  own  capital,  Kanchanasringaka.

And  Naravahanadatta,  when  he  reached  that  city  of  his
father-in-law,  saw  that  it  was  all  of  gold,  gleaming  with
golden  ramparts,  embraced,  as  it  were,  on  all  sides  with  rays
Namvahana-  issuing  out  like  shoots,  and  so  stretching  forth
datta  marries  innumerable  arms  in  eagerness  of  love  for  that
Ratnaprabha  son-in-law.  There  the  King  Hemaprabha,  of
high  enterprise,  gave  Ratnaprabha  with  due  ceremonies  to
him,  as  the  sea  gave  Lakshmi  to  Vishnu.  And  he  gave  him
glittering  heaps  of  jewels,  gleaming  like  innumerable  wed-
ding fires  lighted.2     And  in  the  city  of  that  festive  prince,

1  Here  Professor  Brockhaus  suspects  a  hiatus.

2  Cf  this  with  the  "jewel-lamps"  in  Vol.  II,  pp.  161-169,  and  on  pp.
131w3,  132w  of  this  volume,  and  with  the  luminous  carbuncle  in  Gesta  Romano-
rum,  cvii.  Sir  Thomas  Browne,  in  his  Vulgar  Errors,  Book  II,  chap,  v,  says :
"Whether  a  carbuncle  doth  flame  in  the  dark,  or  shine  like  a  coal  in  the
night,  though  generally  agreed  on  by  common  believers,  is  very  much
questioned  by  many."  See  also  Simrock's  Deutsche  Volksbucher,  vol.  i,  p.  301  ;
vol.  iii,  p.  12 ;  vol.  vi,  p.  289.  Lucian  in  his  De  Dea  Syria,  chap,  xxxii,  speaks
of  a  precious  stone  of  the  name  of  Xvxvis,  which  was  bright  enough  to  light
up  a  whole  temple  at  night.  We  read  in  the  history  of  the  Pseudo-Callisthenes,
Book  II,  chap,  xlii,  that  Alexander  found  in  the  belly  of  a  fish  a  precious
stone  which  he  had  set  in  gold  and  used  at  night  as  a  lamp.  See  also
Baring-Gould's  Cfirimts  Myths  of  the  Middle  Ages,  p.  42 ;  Gaal,  Marchen  der

Magyaren,  p.    155;    Ariosto,  Orlando  Furioso,  iii,  14. To   the   references

given  above  I  would  add  Clouston,  Flotvers  from  a  Persian  Garden,  1894,
pp.  196-197  ;  and  Chauvin,  op.  cit.,  v,  p.  4rcJ. — n.m.p.


168  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

who  was  showering  wealth,  even  the  houses,  being  draped
with  flags,  appeared  as  if  they  had  received  changes  of
raiment.  And  Naravahanadatta,  having  performed  the
auspicious  ceremony  of  marriage,  remained  there  enjoying
heavenly  pleasures  with  Ratnaprabha.  And  he  amused
himself  by  looking  in  her  company  at  beautiful  temples  of
the  gods  in  gardens  and  lakes,  having  ascended  with  her  the
heaven  by  the  might  of  her  science.

So,  after  he  had  lived  some  days  with  his  wife  in  the  city
of  the  King  of  the  Vidyadharas,  the  son  of  the  King  of  Vatsa
determined,  in  accordance  with  the  advice  of  Yaugandhara-
yana,  to  return  to  his  own  city.  Then  his  mother-in-law
performed  for  him  the  auspicious  ceremonies  previous  to
starting,  and  his  father-in-law  again  honoured  him  and  his
minister,  and  then  he  set  out  with  Hemaprabha  and  his
son,  accompanied  by  his  beloved,  having  again  ascended  that
chariot.  He  soon  arrived,  like  a  stream  of  nectar  to  the
eyes  of  his  mother,  and  entered  his  city  with  Hemaprabha
and  his  son  and  his  own  followers,  bringing  with  him  his
wife,  who  made  the  King  of  Vatsa  rejoice  exceedingly  with
delight  at  beholding  her.  The  King  of  Vatsa,  of  exalted
fortune,  with  Vasavadatta,  welcomed  that  son,  who  bowed
at  his  feet  with  his  wife,  and  honoured  Hemaprabha  his  new
connection,  as  well  as  his  son,  in  a  manner  conformable  to
his  own  dignity.  Then,  after  that  King  of  the  Vidyadharas,
Hemaprabha,  had  taken  leave  of  the  lord  of  Vatsa  and  his
family,  and  had  flown  up  into  the  heaven  and  gone  to  his  own
city,  that  Naravahanadatta,  together  with  Ratnaprabha  and
Madanamanchuka,  spent  that  day  in  happiness  surrounded
by  his  friends.


CHAPTER  XXXVI

WHEN  that  Naravahanadatta  had  thus  obtained  a
[M]  new  and  lovely  bride  of  the  Vidyadhara  race,
and  was  the  next  day  with  her  in  her  house,  there
came  in  the  morning  to  the  door,  to  visit  him,  his  ministers
Gomukha  and  others.  They  were  stopped  for  a  moment  at
the  door  by  the  female  warder  and  announced  within  ;  then
they  entered  and  were  courteously  received,  and  Ratna-
prabha  said  to  the  warder  :  "  The  door  must  not  again  be
closed  against  the  entrance  of  my  husband's  friends,  for
they  are  as  dear  to  me  as  my  own  body.  And  I  do  not  think
that  this  is  the  way  to  guard  female  apartments."

After  she  had  addressed  the  female  warder  in  these  words,
she  said  in  turn  to  her  husband  :  "  My  husband,  I  am  going
to  say  something  which  occurs  to  me,  so  listen.  I  consider
that  the  strict  seclusion  of  women  is  a  mere  social  custom,
or  rather  folly  produced  by  jealousy.  It  is  of  no  use  what-
ever. Women  of  good  family  are  guarded  by  their  own
virtue  as  their  only  chamberlain.  But  even  God  Himself
can  scarcely  guard  the  unchaste.  Who  can  restrain  a  furious
river  and  a  passionate  woman  ?  And  now  listen,  I  will  tell
you  a  story.

50.  Story  of  King  Ratnddhipati  and  the  White  Elephant

&vetarasmi

There  is  here  a  great  island  in  the  midst  of  the  sea,  named
Ratnakuta.  In  it  there  lived  in  old  times  a  king  of  great
courage,  a  devoted  worshipper  of  Vishnu,  rightly  named
Ratnadhipati.1  That  king,  in  order  to  obtain  the  conquest
of  the  earth,  and  all  kings'  daughters  as  his  wives,  went
through  a  severe  penance,  to  propitiate  Vishnu.  The  ador-
able one,  pleased  with  his  penance,  appeared  in  bodily  form
and  thus  commanded  him  :    "  Rise  up,  King  ;   I  am  pleased

1  I.e.  supreme  lord  of  jewels.
169


170  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

with  thee,  so  I  tell  thee  this.  Listen  !  There  is  in  the  land
of  Kalinga  a  Gandharva,  who  has  become  a  white  elephant ■
by  the  curse  of  a  hermit,  and  is  known  by  the  name  of
Svetarasmi.  On  account  of  the  asceticism  he  performed  in
a  former  life,  and  on  account  of  his  devotion  to  me,  that
elephant  is  supernaturally  wise,  and  possesses  the  power  of
flying  through  the  sky,  and  of  remembering  his  former  birth.
And  I  have  given  an  order  to  that  great  elephant,  in  accord-
ance with  which  he  will  come  of  himself  through  the  air  and
become  thy  beast  of  burden.  That  white  elephant  thou
must  mount,  as  the  wielder  of  the  thunderbolt  mounts  the
elephant  of  the  gods,2  and  whatever  king  thou  shalt  travel
through  the  air  to  visit,  in  fear  shall  bestow  on  thee,  who  art
of  god-like  presence,  tribute  in  the  form  of  a  daughter,  for  I
will  myself  command  him  to  do  so  in  a  dream.  Thus  thou
shalt  conquer  the  whole  earth,  and  all  zenanas,*  and  thou
shalt  obtain  eighty  thousand  princesses."

When  Vishnu  had  said  this  he  disappeared,  and  the  king
broke  his  fast,  and  the  next  day  he  beheld  that  elephant,
which  had  come  to  him  through  the  air.  And  when  the
elephant  had  thus  placed  himself  at  the  king's  disposal  he
mounted  him,  as  he  had  been  bidden  to  do  by  Vishnu,  and
in  this  manner  he  conquered  the  earth  and  carried  off  the
daughters  of  kings.  And  then  the  king  dwelt  there  in
Ratnakuta  with  those  wives,  eighty  thousand  in  number,
amusing  himself  as  he  pleased.  And  in  order  to  propitiate
Svetarasmi,  that  celestial  elephant,  he  fed  every  day  five
hundred  Brahmans.

Now  once  on  a  time  the  King  Ratnadhipati  mounted
that  elephant,  and,  after  roaming  through  the  other  islands,
returned  to  his  own  island.  And  as  he  was  descending  from
The  Elephant  the  sky  it  came  to  pass  that  a  bird  of  the  race  of
is  wounded  Garuda  struck  that  excellent  elephant  with  his
beak.  And  the  bird  fled  when  the  king  struck  him  with
the  sharp  elephant-hook,  but  the  elephant  fell  on  the
ground  stunned  by  the  blow  of  the  bird's  beak.     The  king

1  For  the  great  importance  attached  to  the  white  elephant  in  the  East
see  N.  W.  Thomas,  "  Animals,"  Hastings'  Ency.  ReL  Eth.,  vol.  i,  p.  .514. — n.m.p.

2  I.e.  as  Indra  mounts  Airfivata.  3  See  Vol.  II,  p.  l62». — n.m.p.


THE  FALLEN  ELEPHANT  171

got  off  his  back,  but  the  elephant,  though  he  recovered  his
senses,  was  not  able  to  rise  up,  in  spite  of  the  efforts  made
to  raise  him,  and  ceased  eating.  For  five  days  the  elephant
remained  in  the  same  place  where  it  had  fallen,  and  the
king  was  grieved  and  took  no  food,  and  prayed  as  follows  :
"  0  guardians  of  the  world,  teach  me  some  remedy  in  this
difficulty  ;  otherwise  I  will  cut  off  my  own  head  and  offer
it  to  you."

When  he  had  said  this,  he  drew  his  sword,  and  was  pre-
paring to  cut  off  his  head,  when  immediately  a  bodiless  voice
thus  addressed  him  from  the  sky  :  "  O  King,  do  nothing
rash  ;  if  some  chaste  woman  touches  this  elephant  with  her
hand  it  will  rise  up,  but  not  otherwise."  When  the  king
heard  that  he  was  glad,  and  summoned  his  own  carefully
guarded  chief  wife,  Amritalata.  When  the  elephant  did
not  rise  up,  though  she  touched  it  with  her  hand,  the  king
had  all  his  other  wives  summoned.  But  though  they  all
touched  the  elephant  in  succession  he  did  not  rise  up  :  the
fact  was,  not  one  among  them  was  chaste.

Then  the  king,  having  beheld  all  those  eighty  thousand
wives  openly  humiliated  in  the  presence  of  men,  being  himself
abashed,  summoned  all  the  women  of  his  capital  and  made
them  touch  the  elephant  one  after  another.  And  when  in
spite  of  it  the  elephant  did  not  rise  up,  the  king  was  ashamed,
because  there  was  not  a  single  chaste  woman  in  his  city.1

1  This  reminds  us  of  the  curious  story  in  Herodotus  (II,  iii),  in  which
a  certain  Pharaoh  was  cursed  with  blindness  for  ten  years  owing  to  an  act
of  arrogance  on  his  part.  An  oracle  declared  that  in  the  eleventh  year  he
would  recover  his  sight  by  washing  his  eyes  with  the  urine  of  a  woman  who
had  had  intercourse  with  her  own  husband  only,  and  had  known  no  other
man.  He,  therefore,  made  trial  of  his  own  wife  first,  and  afterwards,  when  he
did  not  recover  his  sight,  he  made  trial  of  others  indifferently ;  and  at  length
having  recovered  his  sight,  he  collected  the  women  of  whom  he  had  made
trial,  except  the  one  by  washing  in  whose  urine  he  had  recovered  his  sight,
into  one  city,  which  is  now  called  Erythrebolus,  and  when  he  had  assembled
them  together  he  had  them  all  burned,  together  with  the  city ;  but  the
woman  by  washing  in  whose  urine  he  recovered  his  sight  he  took  to  himself
to  wife.

There  is  also  a  curious  legend  in  Hebrew  literature,  in  which  King
Solomon  is  upbraided  by  his  mother  for  saying :  "One  man  out  of  a  thousand
have  I  found,  but  a  woman  have  I  not  found  "  (Eccles.  vii,  28).     A  priest  and


172  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

And  in  the  meanwhile  a  merchant  named  Harshagupta,
who  had  arrived  from  Tamralipti,1  having  heard  of  that
event,  came  there  full  of  curiosity.  And  in  his  train  there
came  a  servant  of  the  name  of  Silavati,  who  was  devoted  to
her  husband  ;  when  she  saw  what  had  taken  place,  she  said
to  him  :  "I  will  touch  this  elephant  with  my  hand  :  and  if
I  have  not  even  thought  in  my  mind  of  any  other  man  than
my  husband,  may  it  rise  up."  No  sooner  had  she  said  this
than  she  came  up  and  touched  the  elephant  with  her  hand,
whereupon  it  rose  up  in  sound  health  and  began  to  eat.2
But  when  the  people  saw  the  elephant  Svetarasmi  rise  up,
they  raised  a  shout  and  praised  Silavati,  saying  :  "  Such  are
these  chaste  women,  few  and  far  between,  who,  like  Siva,  are
able  to  create,  preserve  and  destroy  this  world."  The  King
Ratnadhipati  also  was  pleased,  and  congratulated  the  chaste
Silavati,  and  loaded  her  with  innumerable  jewels,  and  he  also
honoured  her  master,  the  merchant  Harshagupta,  and  gave
him  a  house  near  his  own  palace.  And  he  determined  to
avoid  all  communication  with  his  own  wives,  and  ordered  that
henceforth  they  should  have  nothing  but  food  and  raiment.

a  woman  get  their  hands  stuck  to  a  flask  sealed  with  the  Ineffable  Name.
They  finally  go  to  Solomon  for  help.  Then  he  says:  "Whichever  woman  has
not  sinned,  let  her  place  her  hand  upon  the  flask  and  the  hands  will  be
loosened."  Not  one  came  forward.  He  then  asked  his  mother,  and  she
shrank  back,  remembering  her  sin  with  David.  He  then  asked  the  men,
and  only  his  faithful  servant  came  forward  and  put  his  hand  upon  the  flask.
They  were  then  released.  King  Solomon  thus  proved  the  truth  of  his
statement.  (See  Gaster,  The  Exempla  of  the  Rabbis,  p.  1 29,  and  variants  on
p.  248  under  the  heading  "  Solomon  and  Worthless  Woman.") — n.m.p.

1  The  modern  Tamluk.  The  district  probably  comprised  the  small  but
fertile  tract  of  country  lying  to  the  westward  of  the  Hughli  river,  from
Bardwan  and  Kalna  on  the  north  to  the  banks  of  the  Kosai  river  on  the
south  (Cunningham's  Ancient  Geography  of  India,  p.  504).

2  In  the  11.5th  tale  of  the  Gesta  Romanorum  we  read  that  two  chaste
virgins  were  able  to  lull  to  sleep  and    kill  an  elephant  that  no  one  else

could  approach. As  already  explained  (Vol.   I,  p.    166),  the  incident  in

our  text  is  an  example  of  both  a  "test  of  chastity  "  and  "act  of  truth"  motif.
The  powers  attributed  to  chastity  have  been  fully  enumerated  by  many
writers  and  need  not  be  detailed  here.  See,  for  instance,  the  various  articles
on  "  Chastity  "  by  Crawley,  Rhys  Davids,  Walshe,  Maclean,  etc.,  in  Hastings'
Ency.  Rel.  Eth.,  vol.  iii,  pp.  474-503.  For  a  note  on  the  "  Act  of  Truth  "  motif
see  that  at  the  end  of  this  chapter. — n.m.p.


SILAVATI'S  SISTER  RAJADATTA  173

Then  the  king,  after  he  had  taken  his  food,  sent  for  the
chaste  Silavati,  and  said  to  her  at  a  private  interview  in  the
presence  of  Harshagupta  :  "  Silavati,  if  you  have  any  maiden
The  Kin*  °^  Your  father's  family,  give  her  to  me,  for  I
disregards  know  she  will  certainly  be  like  you."  When
the  Omens  ftie  king  said  this  to  her,  Silavati  answered  :  "I
have  a  sister  in  Tamralipti  named  Rajadatta  ;    marry  her,

0  King,  if  you  wish,  for  she  is  of  distinguished  beauty."
When  she  said  this  to  the  king,  he  consented,  and  said  :
"  So  be  it."

And  having  determined  on  taking  this  step,  he  mounted,
with  Silavati  and  Harshagupta,  the  elephant  Svetarasmi,
that  could  fly  through  the  air,  and  going  in  person  to  Tamra-
lipti, entered  the  house  of  that  merchant  Harshagupta.
There  he  asked  the  astrologers  that  very  day  what  would
be  a  favourable  time  for  him  to  be  married  to  Rajadatta,
the  sister  of  Silavati.  And  the  astrologers,  having  inquired
under  what  stars  both  of  them  were  born,  said  :  "A  favour-
able conjuncture  will  come  for  you,  O  King,  in  three  months
from  this  time.  But  if  you  marry  Rajadatta  in  the  present
position  of  the  constellations  she  will  without  fail  prove
unchaste."

Though  the  astrologers  gave  him  this  response,  the  king,
being  eager  for  a  charming  wife,  and  impatient  of  dwelling
long  alone,  thus  reflected  :  "  Away  with  scruples  !  I  will
marry  Rajadatta  here  this  very  day.  For  she  is  the  sister  of
the  blameless  Silavati  and  will  never  prove  unchaste.     And

1  will  place  her  in  that  uninhabited  island  in  the  middle
of  the  sea,  where  there  is  one  empty  palace,  and  that  in-
accessible spot  I  will  surround  with  a  guard  of  women ;  so
how  can  she  become  unchaste,  as  she  can  never  see  men  ?  "

Having  formed  this  determination,  the  king  that  very
day  rashly  married  that  Rajadatta,  whom  Silavati  bestowed
upon  him.  And  after  he  had  married  her,  and  had  been
received  with  the  customary  rites  by  Harshagupta,  he  took
that  wife  and,  with  her  and  Silavati,  he  mounted  Svetarasmi,
and  then  in  a  moment  went  through  the  air  to  the  land  of
Ratnakuta,  where  the  people  were  anxiously  expecting  him.
And  he  rewarded  Silavati  again  so  munificently  that  she


174  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

attained  all  her  wishes,  having  reaped  the  fruit  of  her  vow
of  chastity.  Then  he  mounted  his  new  wife  Rajadatta  on
that  same  air-travelling  elephant  Svetarasmi,  and  conveyed
her  carefully,  and  placed  her  in  the  empty  palace  in  the  island
in  the  midst  of  the  sea,  inaccessible  to  man,  with  a  retinue
of  women  only.  And  whatever  article  she  required,  he  con-
veyed there  through  the  air  on  that  elephant,  so  great  was
his  distrust.  And  being  devotedly  attached  to  her,  he  always
spent  the  night  there,  but  came  to  Ratnakuta  in  the  day  to
transact  his  regal  duties.

Now  one  morning  the  king,  in  order  to  counteract  an
inauspicious  dream,  indulged  with  that  Rajadatta  in  a
drinking-bout  for  good  luck.  And  though  his  wife,  being
intoxicated  with  that  banquet,  did  not  wish  to  let  him  go,
he  left  her,  and  departed  to  Ratnakuta  to  transact  his  busi-
ness, for  the  royal  dignity  is  an  ever-exacting  wife.  There
he  remained  performing  his  duties  with  anxious  mind,  which
seemed  ever  to  ask  him  why  he  left  his  wife  there  in  a  state
of  intoxication.

And  in  the  meanwhile  Rajadatta,  remaining  alone  in
that  inaccessible  place,  the  female  servants  being  occupied
in  culinary  and  other  duties,  saw  a  certain  man  come  in  at
the  door,  like  Fate  determined  to  baffle  all  expedients  for
guarding  her,  and  his  arrival  filled  her  with  astonishment.
And  that  intoxicated  woman  asked  him  when  he  approached
her  :  "  Who  are  you,  and  how  have  you  come  to  this  in-
accessible place  ?  "

Then  that  man,  who  had  endured  many  hardships,
answered  her  :  "  Fair  one,  I  am  a  merchant's  son  of  Mathura
named  Yavanasena.  And  when  my  father  died  I  was  left
Yavanasenas  helpless,  and  my  relations  took  from  me  my
Adventures  property  ;  so  I  went  to  a  foreign  country  and
resorted  to  the  miserable  condition  of  being  servant  to
another  man.  Then  I  with  difficulty  scraped  together  a
little  wealth  by  trading,  and  as  I  was  going  to  another
land  I  was  plundered  by  robbers  who  met  me  on  the
way.  Then  I  wandered  about  as  a  beggar,  and,  with  some
other  men  like  myself,  I  went  to  a  mine  of  jewels  called
Kanakakshetra.     There  I  engaged  to  pay  the  king  his  share,


and  al


RAJADATTA  AND  THE  CASTAWAY  175


and  after  digging  up  the  earth  in  a  trench  for  a  whole  year
I  did  not  find  a  single  jewel.  So,  while  the  other  men,
my  fellows,  were  rejoicing  over  the  jewels  they  had  found,
smitten  with  grief  I  retired  to  the  shore  of  the  sea  and
began  to  collect  fuel.

"  And  while  I  was  constructing  with  the  fuel  a  funeral
pyre,  in  order  that  I  might  enter  the  flame,  a  certain  merchant
named  Jivadatta  happened  to  come  there ;  that  merciful  man
dissuaded  me  from  suicide,  and  gave  me  food,  and  as  he
was  preparing  to  go  in  a  ship  to  Svarnadvipa  he  took  me
on  board  with  him.  Then,  as  we  were  sailing  along  in  the
midst  of  the  ocean,  after  five  days  had  passed,  we  suddenly
beheld  a  cloud.  The  cloud  discharged  its  rain  in  large  drops,
and  that  vessel  was  whirled  round  by  the  wind  like  the  head
of  a  mast  elephant.  Immediately  the  ship  sank,  but  as  fate
would  have  it  I  caught  hold  of  a  plank  just  as  I  was  sinking.
I  mounted  on  it,  and  thereupon  the  thunder-cloud  relaxed
its  fury,  and,  conducted  by  destiny,  I  reached  this  country,
and  have  just  landed  in  the  forest.  And  seeing  this  palace
I  entered,  and  I  beheld  here  thee,  0  auspicious  one,  a  rain
of  nectar  to  my  eyes,  dispelling  pain."

When  he  had  said  this,  Rajadatta,  maddened  with  love
and  wine,  placed  him  on  a  couch  and  embraced  him.  Where
there  are  these  five  fires,  feminine  nature,  intoxication,
privacy,  the  obtaining  of  a  man,  and  absence  of  restraint,
what  chance  for  the  stubble  of  character  ?  So  true  is  it,
that  a  woman  maddened  by  the  God  of  Love  is  incapable  of
discrimination  ;  since  this  queen  became  enamoured  of  that
loathsome  castaway.

In  the  meanwhile  the  King  Ratnadhipati,  being  anxious,
came  swiftly  from  Ratnakuta,  borne  along  on  the  sky-going
elephant ;  and  entering  his  palace  he  beheld  his  wife  Raja-
datta in  the  arms  of  that  creature.  When  the  king  saw  the
man,  though  he  felt  tempted  to  slay  him,  he  slew  him  not,
because  he  fell  at  his  feet  and  uttered  piteous  supplications.
And  beholding  his  wife  terrified,  and  at  the  same  time  in-
toxicated, he  reflected  :  "  How  can  a  woman  that  is  addicted
to  wine,  the  chief  ally  of  lust,  be  chaste  ?  A  lascivious
woman  cannot  be  restrained  even  by  being  guarded.     Can


176  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

one  fetter  a  whirlwind  with  one's  arms  ?  This  is  the  fruit
of  my  not  heeding  the  prediction  of  the  astrologers.  To
whom  is  not  the  scorning  of  wise  words  bitter  in  its  after-
taste ?  When  I  thought  that  she  was  the  sister  of  Silavati
I  forgot  that  the  Kalaktita  poison  was  twin-born  with  the
Amrita.1  Or  rather  who  is  able,  even  by  doing  the  utmost
of  a  man,  to  overcome  the  incalculable  freaks  of  marvellously
working  Destiny  ?  "

Thus  reflecting,  the  king  was  not  wroth  with  anyone,  and
spared  the  merchant's  son,  her  paramour,  after  asking  him
the  story  of  his  life.  The  merchant's  son,  when  dismissed
thence,  seeing  no  other  expedient,  went  out  and  beheld  a
ship  coming,  far  off  in  the  sea.  Then  he  again  mounted
that  plank,  and,  drifting  about  in  the  sea,  cried  out,  puffing
and  blowing  :  "  Save  me  !  Save  me  !  "  So  a  merchant,
of  the  name  of  Krodhavarman,  who  was  on  that  ship,  drew
that  merchant's  son  out  of  the  water  and  made  him  his
companion.  Whatever  deed  is  appointed  by  the  Disposer
to  be  the  destruction  of  any  man  dogs  his  steps  whitherso-
ever he  runneth.  For  this  fool,  when  on  the  ship,  was
discovered  by  his  deliverer  secretly  associating  with  his
wife,  and  thereupon  was  cast  by  him  into  the  sea  and
perished.

In  the  meanwhile  the  King  Ratnadhipati  caused  the
Queen  Rajadatta  with  her  retinue  to  mount  Svetarasmi,
without  allowing  himself  to  be  angry,  and  he  carried  her  to
Ratnakiita,  and  delivered  her  to  Silavati,  and  related  that
occurrence  to  her  and  his  ministers.  And  he  exclaimed  :
"  Alas,  how  much  pain  have  I  endured,  whose  mind  has
been  devoted  to  these  unsubstantial,  insipid  enjoyments !
Therefore  I  will  go  to  the  forest,  and  take  Hari  as  my
refuge,  in  order  that  I  may  never  again  be  a  vessel  of  such
woes."

Thus  he  spake,  and  though  his  sorrowing  ministers  and
Silavati  endeavoured  to  prevent  him,  he,  being  disgusted
with  the  world,  would  not  abandon  his  intention.  Then,
being  indifferent  to  enjoyments,  he  first  gave  half  of  his
treasure  to  the  virtuous  Silavati,  and  the  other  half  to  the

1  Both  were  produced  at  the  Churning  of  the  Ocean.


SOMAPRABHA'S  STRANGE  STORY  177

Brahmans,  and  then  that  king  made  over  in  the  prescribed
form  his  kingdom  to  a  Brahman  of  great  excellence,  named
Papabhanjana.  And  after  he  had  given  away  his  kingdom
The  Unhappy  he  ordered  Svetarasmi  to  be  brought,  with  the
King  gives  '  object  of  retiring  to  a  grove  of  asceticism,  his
away  his  subjects  looking  on  with  tearful  eyes.  No  sooner
mg  om  was  the  eiepha^  brought  than  it  left  the  body
and  became  a  man  of  god-like  appearance,  adorned  with
necklace  and  bracelet.  When  the  king  asked  him  who  he
was,  and  what  was  the  meaning  of  all  this,  he  answered  :

"  We  were  two  Gandharva  brothers,  living  on  the  Malaya
mountain;  I  was  called  Somaprabha,  and  the  elder  was
Devaprabha.  And  my  brother  had  but  one  wife,  but  she
The  Two  was  very  dear  to  him.  Her  name  was  Rajavati.
Brothers  Qne  day  he  was  wandering  about  with  her  in

his  arms,  and  happened  to  arrive,  with  me  in  his  company,
at  a  place  called  the  dwelling  of  the  Siddhas.  There  we
both  worshipped  Vishnu  in  his  temple,  and  began  all  of
us  to  sing  before  the  adorable  one.  In  the  meanwhile  a
Siddha  came  there,  and  stood  regarding  with  fixed  gaze
Rajavati,  who  was  singing  songs  well  worth  hearing.  And
my  brother,  who  was  jealous,  said,  in  his  wrath,  to  that
Siddha  :  c  Why  dost  thou,  although  a  Siddha,  cast  a  longing
look  at  another's  wife  ?  '

"  Then  the  Siddha  was  moved  with  anger,  and  said  to  him
by  way  of  a  curse  :  '  Fool,  I  was  looking  at  her  out  of  interest
in  her  song,  not  out  of  desire.  So  fall  thou,  jealous  one,  into
a  mortal  womb,  together  with  her  ;  and  then  behold  with
thine  own  eyes  thy  wife  in  the  embraces  of  another.'  WThen
he  had  said  this,  I,  being  enraged  at  the  curse,  struck  him,
out  of  childish  recklessness,  with  a  white  toy  elephant  of
clay,  that  I  had  in  my  hand.  Then  he  cursed  me  in  the
following  words  :  '  Be  born  again  on  the  earth  as  an  elephant,
like  that  with  which  you  have  just  struck  me.'

"  Then,  being  merciful,  that  Siddha  allowed  himself
to  be  propitiated  by  that  brother  of  mine,  Devaprabha,  and
appointed  for  us  both  the  following  termination  of  the
curse :  '  Though  a  mortal,  thou  shalt  become,  by  the  favour
of  Vishnu,  the  lord  of  an  island,  and  shalt  obtain  as  thy

VOL.   III.  M


178  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

servant  this  thy  younger  brother,  who  will  have  become  an
elephant,  a  beast  of  burden  fit  for  gods.  Thou  shalt  obtain
eighty  thousand  wives,  and  thou  shalt  come  to  learn  the
unchastity  of  them  all  in  the  presence  of  men.  Then  thou
shalt  marry  this  thy  present  wife,  who  will  have  become  a
woman,  and  shalt  see  her  with  thine  own  eyes  embracing
another.  Then  thou  shalt  become  sick  in  thy  heart  of  the
world,  and  shalt  bestow  thy  realm  on  a  Brahman,  but  when
after  doing  this  thou  shalt  set  out  to  go  to  a  forest  of  ascetics,
thy  younger  brother  shall  first  be  released  from  his  elephant
nature,  and  thou  also  with  thy  wife  shalt  be  delivered  from
thy  curse.'  This  was  the  termination  of  the  curse  appointed
for  us  by  the  Siddha,  and  we  were  accordingly  born  with
different  lots,  on  account  of  the  difference  of  our  actions  in
that  previous  state,  and  lo  !  the  end  of  our  curse  has  now
arrived."

When  Somaprabha  had  said  this,  that  King  Ratnadhi-
pati  remembered  his  former  birth,  and  said  :  "  True  !  I  am
that  very  Devaprabha  ;  and  this  Rajadatta  is  my  former
wife  Rajavati."  Having  said  this,  he,  together  with  his  wife,
abandoned  the  body.  In  a  moment  they  all  became  Gan-
dharvas  and,  in  the  sight  of  men,  flew  up  into  the  air  and
went  to  their  own  home,  the  Malaya  mountain.  Silavati
too,  through  the  nobleness  of  her  character,  obtained  pros-
perity and,  going  to  the  city  of  Tamralipti,  remained  in  the
practice  of  virtue.


[M]  "So  true  is  it,  that  in  no  case  can  anyone  guard  a
woman  by  force  in  this  world,  but  the  young  woman  of  good
family  is  ever  protected  by  the  pure  restraint  of  her  own
chastity.  And  thus  the  passion  of  jealousy  is  merely  a
purposeless  cause  of  suffering,  annoying  others,  and  so  far
from  being  a  protection  to  women,  it  rather  excites  in  them
excessive  longing."  When  Naravahanadatta  had  heard  this
tale  full  of  good  sense  related  by  his  wife,  he  and  his  ministers
were  highly  pleased.


THE  "  ACT  OF  TRUTH  "  MOTIF  179


NOTE  ON  THE  "ACT  OF  TRUTH"  MOTIF  IN  FOLK-LORE

We  have  already  referred  to  this  motif  in  Vol.  I,  pp.  166,  167  ;  and
discussed  its  meaning  and  religious  significance  in  Vol.  II,  pp.  31-33.  We
shall  here  look  at  a  few  actual  examples  of  the  motif,  chiefly  taken  from  the
numerous  references  collected  by  E.  W.  Burlingame  ("  The  Act  of  Truth,"
Journ.  Roy.  As.  Soc,  July  1917,  pp.  429-467).

Its  occurrence  in  the  Jatakas  is  common,  and  the  uses  to  which  it  is  put
are  varied.  Thus  in  No.  7  it  is  used  to  prove  the  paternity  of  a  child ;  in
No.  20  to  obtain  water  to  drink ;  in  No.  35  to  cause  a  forest-fire  to  turn  back  ;
in  No.  62  to  obtain  safety  in  a  fire-test ;  in  No.  75  as  a  rain-charm  ;  in  No.  444
to  counteract  poison ;  in  No.  463  to  get  a  ship  back  to  harbour ;  in  No.  489
to  obtain  a  son ;  in  No.  491  to  free  all  captive  animals ;  in  No.  513  to  deliver
a  man  from  captivity;  in  No.  518  to  ascertain  the  truth;  in  No.  519  to  cure
leprosy ;  in  No.  537  to  heal  wounds ;  in  No.  538  to  obtain  a  son ;  and  in
No.  450  to  counteract  poison.

The  actual  declaration  also  differs  widely,  but  it  is  usually  some  well-
known  religious  truth  or  quotation,  or  else  merely  a  true  statement  about
the  speaker's  life  or  morals.  Two  examples  from  the  above  will  be  sufficient
to  explain  this.

In  No.  463,  Supparaka-Jataka  (Cambridge  edition,  vol.  iv,  p.  90),  when
the  ship  is  in  danger  of  being  lost,  the  Great  Being,  after  purifying  himself,
repeated  this  stanza :

"  Since  I  can  myself  remember,  since  intelligence  first  grew,
Not  one  life  of  living  creature  have  I  taken,  that  I  knew :
May  this  ship  return  to  safety  if  my  solemn  words  are  true  ! "

Four  months  the  vessel  had  been  voyaging  in  far-distant  regions ;  and
now,  as  though  endued  with  supernatural  power,  it  returned  in  one  single
day  to  the  seaport  town  of  Bharukaccha,  and  even  upon  the  dry  land  it  went,
till  it  rested  before  the  mariner's  door,  having  sprung  over  a  space  of  eleven
hundred  cubits.

In  No.  518,  Pandara-Jataka  (Cambridge  edition,  vol.  v,  pp.  47,  48),  the
snake-king  accuses  an  ascetic  of  being  a  traitor  with  evil  designs  on  an
innocent  friend,  and  causes  due  retribution  to  fall  on  the  ascetic  by  turning
the  accusation  into  an  "  Act  of  Truth  "  ;  he  says  :

"  Informer,  traitor,  that  wouldst  slay
A  guileless  friend,  be  thy  head  riven
By  this  my  Act  of  Truth,  I  pay,
Piecemeal,  all  into  fragments  seven."
So,  before  the  very  eyes  of  the  snake-king,  the  head  of  the  ascetic  was
split  into  seven  pieces,  and  at  the  very  spot  where  he  was  sitting  the  ground
was  cleft  asunder.

There  is  a  curious  trick  "  Act  of  Truth  "  in  Jataka  No.  63  (Cambridge
edition,  vol.  i,  p.  155),  where  a  faithless  wife  offers  to  prove  her  innocence  by


180  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

undergoing  the  ordeal  of  fire  and  making  an  "Act  of  Truth."  She  instructs
her  paramour  to  seize  her  hand  just  as  she  is  about  to  step  into  the  fire.
Then,  standing  before  all  the  people,  she  says  to  her  husband :  "  No  man's
hand  but  thine,  Brahman,  has  ever  touched  me ;  and,  by  the  truth  of  my
asseveration  I  call  on  this  fire  to  harm  me  not."  So  saying,  she  advanced  to
the  burning  pile — when  up  dashed  her  paramour,  who  seized  her  by  the  hand,
crying  shame  on  the  Brahman  who  could  force  so  fair  a  maid  to  enter  the
flames !  Shaking  her  hand  free,  the  girl  exclaimed  to  the  Brahman  that  what
she  had  asserted  was  now  undone,  and  that  she  could  not  now  brave  the
ordeal  of  fire,  as  another  man's  hand  had  touched  her.  The  husband,  knowing
himself  tricked,  drove  her  away  with  blows.

Other  trick  "  Acts  of  Truth  "  will  be  found  in  Hemachandra's  Parisishta-
parvan,  ii,  533-545  (Hertel's  translation,  pp.  102,  103);  Tantrakhyayika,  i,  3  c;
Hertel,  "Ueber  die  Suvabahuttarlkatha,"  Festschrift  fur  Ernst  Windisch,  1914,
p.  144.

A  few  further  examples  will  show  other  cases  of  the  motif  under
consideration.

In  a  Tibetan  tale,  "The  Two  Brothers"  (Schiefner  and  Ralston,  p.  284),
a  princess  says  to  her  blind  lover  :

"  If  it  be  true,  and  my  asseveration  is  righteous,  that  I  have  been  in  love
only  with  Prince  Kshemankara  and  with  you,  but  with  none  else,  then
through  the  power  of  this  truth  and  my  asseveration  shall  one  of  your  two
eyes  become  sound  as  before."

So  soon  as  this  asseveration  was  uttered,  one  of  his  eyes  came  again  just
as  it  was  before.  Then  he  said :  u  I  am  Kshemankara.  My  brother  Papan-
kara  reduced  me  to  the  state  I  was  in."  She  said:  "What  proof  is  there
that  you  are  Prince  Kshemankara  ?  "

Then  he  too  began  to  asseverate,  saying :  "If  it  be  true,  and  my
asseveration  righteous,  that  although  Papankara  put  out  my  eyes,  I  do  not
in  the  least  bear  him  malice,  then  in  consequence  of  the  truth  and  affirmation
may  my  other  eye  become  sound  as  before."

So  soon  as  he  had  pronounced  this  asseveration,  his  other  eye  became  as  it
had  been  originally.

For  another  similar  cure  by  the  "Act  of  Truth"  see  Divyavadana,
pp.  407-417.  In  this  latter  work  (p.  472)  is  a  curious  story  of  the  future
Buddha  when,  in  a  previous  existence,  he  was  a  woman  named  Rupavati.
One  day  Rupavati  comes  upon  a  starving  woman  who  is  about  to  devour  her
new-born  child,  whereupon  she  cuts  off  her  own  breasts  and  gives  them  to
the  woman  for  food.  When  her  husband  learns  of  her  act,  he  performs  the
following  Act  of  Truth  :  "  If  it  be  true  that  so  wonderful  and  marvellous  a
thing  has  never  been  seen  before,  or  heard  of  before,  then  may  your  breasts
be  restored."     Straightway  her  breasts  are  restored.

The  "  Act  of  Truth  "  which  most  closely  resembles  that  in  our  text  is
found  in  Schiefner  and  Ralston's  Tibetan  Tales,  pp.  227-228.  Here  the  king's
elephant,  which  was  parturient,  was  unable  to  bring  forth  its  young.  The
ministers  advised  that  it  should  be  led  into  the  zenana,  in  order  that  it  might
be  relieved  of  its  pains  by  the  asseverations  of  the  king's  wives.     But  although


THE  "  ACT  OF  TRUTH  "  MOTIF  181

the  elephant  was  introduced  there,  and  the  wives  pronounced  their  assevera-
tions, the  pains  did  not  come  to  an  end,  and  the  elephant  uttered  the  most
fearful  cries.  They  were  heard  by  a  woman  who  was  looking  after  some  oxen
near  the  palace,  and  who  declared  that  by  means  of  her  asseveration  the  pains
would  be  brought  to  an  end.  When  the  ministers  had  told  this  to  the  king,
and  he  had  ordered  her  to  be  brought  into  the  zenana,  she  said :  "  If  it  is
true  that  one  husband  is  sufficient  for  me,  and  I  have  not  two  husbands,  then
as  the  result  of  this  truth  let  the  elephant  be  eased  of  its  pains."  Immediately
after  this  utterance  the  elephant  brought  forth.  When  the  king  was  informed
of  this,  he  declared  that  all  his  wives  were  of  vicious  habits,  and  ordered  the
herdswoman  to  be  summoned.  When  she  had  replied  in  the  affirmative  to
his  question  as  to  whether  the  elephant  had  been  relieved  of  its  pains  in
consequence  of  her  asseveration,  the  king  came  to  the  conclusion  that  she
must  have  a  daughter  like  unto  herself.  This  daughter,  named  Susroni,  he
took  as  his  wife ;  but  fearing  that,  if  he  left  her  in  the  company  of  the  other
women  of  his  court,  she  would  undoubtedly  contract  bad  habits,  he  begged
the  bird-king,  Suparna  (his  younger  brother),  to  convey  her  every  day  to
Kaserudvipa,  but  to  bring  her  back  to  him  every  night.  Suparna  agreed  to
this,  and  sent  him  every  day  wreaths  of  the  odorous  flower  Timira,  which
grew  at  Kaserudvipa.

A  little  later  in  the  story  a  certain  Brahman  youth,  Asuga,  is  driven  by
a  storm  to  Kaserudvipa,  clinging  to  a  plank,  just  like  Yavanasena  in  our  text.
Susroni  does  not  follow  after  her  chaste  mother,  and  gladly  welcomes  to  her
embraces  Asuga  by  day  and  King  Brahmadatta  by  night.  After  various
strange  adventures,  including  being  deprived  of  all  her  clothes  and  jewels,
Susroni  does  penance  in  the  water  and  is  finally  restored  to  her  former
position.

The  "  Act  of  Truth  "  plays  an  important  part  in  the  best-known  tale  of
the  Mahabharata,  that  of  Nala  and  Damayantl.  When  Damayanti  is  holding
her  svayamvara  (marriage  by  choice)  she  finds  her  five  suitors  appear  exactly
alike,  and  she  is  unable  to  tell  which  of  them  is  Nala.  In  despair  she  decides
to  appeal  to  the  gods  themselves  by  employing  an  "  Act  of  Truth  "  :

"As  on  hearing  the  speech  of  the  swans  I  chose  the  King  of  the  Nishadhas
as  my  lord,  for  the  sake  of  that  truth,  oh,  let  the  gods  reveal  him  to  me.  And
as  in  thought  or  word  I  have  never  swerved  from  him,  oh,  let  the  gods,  for
the  sake  of  that  truth,  reveal  him  to  me.  And  as  the  gods  themselves  have
destined  the  ruler  of  the  Nishadhas  to  be  my  lord,  oh,  let  them,  for  the  sake
of  that  truth,  reveal  him  to  me.  And  as  it  is  for  the  sake  of  winning  Nala
that  I  have  adopted  this  vow,  for  the  sake  of  that  truth,  oh,  let  the  gods  reveal
him  unto  me.  Oh,  let  the  exalted  guardians  of  the  worlds  assume  their  own
proper  forms,  so  that  I  may  know  the  King  Punyasloka."

Immediately  Nala  is  revealed  in  his  true  mortal  guise  and  Damayanti
places  the  garland  round  his  neck  to  show  her  choice.

Later  in  the  story,  when  Nala  has  deserted  her  and  she  is  wandering
distracted  through  the  forest,  a  hunter  meets  her  and,  overcome  by  her
beauty,  tries  to  force  her.  She  saves  herself  by  having  recourse  to  an  "Act
of  Truth,"  asserting  that  if  it  is  true  that  she  loves  Nala  alone  may  the  hunter


182  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

fall  down  dead.  He  immediately  falls  lifeless  to  the  ground — "  like  a  tree
consumed  by  fire."  In  the  new  edition  of  Roy's  Mahdbhdrata  (Calcutta,  1919)
the  full  story  of  Nala  and  DamayantI  appears  in  vol.  ii,  pp.  120-16*9 — i.e.
Vana-parva,  sections  liii-lxxix.  The  above  incident  occurs  in  Chapter  LVI  of
the  Ocean  of  Story,  but  here  the  number  of  suitors  is  six,  and  the  hunter  is
reduced  to  ashes.

Although  many  other  examples  of  this  motif  in  Sanskrit  fiction  could
be  given,  the  above  are  sufficient  to  show  the  importance  of  the  motif  and
the  numerous  uses  to  which  it  can  be  put.

At  the  conclusion  of  this  article  on  the  motif,  Burlingame  (op.  cit.,
pp.  466-467)  gives  the  following  additional  references  :  —  Dhammapada  Com-
mentary, xvii,  3;  iii,  310;  Jiilg's  Kalm'ukischc  Mdrchen,  p.  20,  and  Mongolische
Mdrchen,  last  story  ;  Bompas,  Folklore  of  the  Santal  Parganas,  p.  118;  Melanges
asiatiques,  1876,  p.  739;  Busk,  Sagas  Jrom  the  Far  East,  p.  47;  Steel  and
Temple,  Wide-Awake  Stories,  p.  429;  Dames,  "  Balochi  Tales,"  Folk-Lore,  iv,
219;  H.  L.  Haughton,  Sport  and  Folk-Lore  in  the  Himalaya,  p.  101  ct  seq.;
Ind.  Ant.,  iv,  262;  vi,  224-225;  xxxv,  148;  "  Maha  Bodhi  and  the  United
Buddhist  World,"  Journal  of  the  Maha  Bodhi  Society,  Colombo,  vol.  xix,
p.   7. — N.M.P.


CHAPTER  XXXYII

THEN  Naravahanadatta's  minister  Gomukha  said  to
[M]  him,  by  way  of  capping  the  tale  which  had  been
told  by  Ratnaprabha  :  "  It  is  true  that  chaste  women
are  few  and  far  between,  but  unchaste  women  are  never  to
be  trusted  ;    in  illustration  of  this,  hear  the  following  story  :

51.  Story  of  Nischayadatta

There  is  in  this  land  a  town  of  the  name  of  Ujjayini,
famous  throughout  the  world  :  in  it  there  lived  of  old  time
a  merchant's  son,  named  Nischayadatta.  He  was  a  gambler
and  had  acquired  money  by  gambling,  and  every  day  the
generous  man  used  to  bathe  in  the  water  of  the  Sipra  and
worship  Mahakala x  :  his  custom  was  first  to  give  money
to  the  Brahmans,  the  poor  and  the  helpless,  and  then  to
anoint  himself  and  indulge  in  food  and  betel.

Every  day,  when  he  had  finished  his  bathing  and  his
worship,  he  used  to  go  and  anoint  himself,  in  a  cemetery
near  the  temple  of  Mahakala,  with  sandalwood  and  other
things.  And  the  young  man  placed  the  unguent  on  a  stone
pillar  that  stood  there,  and  so  anointed  himself  every  day
alone,  rubbing  his  back  against  it.  In  that  way  the  pillar
eventually  became  very  smooth  and  polished.  Then  there
came  that  way  a  draughtsman  with  a  sculptor ;  the  first,
seeing  that  the  pillar  was  very  smooth,  drew  on  it  a  figure  of
Gauri,  and  the  sculptor  with  his  chisel,  in  pure  sport,  carved
it  on  the  stone.  Then,  after  they  had  departed,  a  certain
daughter  of  the  Vidyadharas  came  there  to  worship  Maha-
kala, and  saw  that  image  of  Garni  on  the  stone.  From
the  clearness  of  the  image  she  inferred  the  proximity  of
the  goddess,  and,  after  worshipping,  she  entered  that  stone
pillar  to  rest.

In   the   meanwhile    Nischayadatta,   the  merchant's  son,

1  A  famous  linga  of  Siva  in  Ujjayini.
183


184  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

came  there,  and  to  his  astonishment  beheld  that  figure  of
Uma  carved  on  the  stone.  He  first  anointed  his  limbs,  and
then,  placing  the  unguent  on  another  part  of  the  stone,  began
to  anoint  his  back  by  rubbing  it  against  the  stone.  When
the  rolling-eyed  Vidyadhara  maiden  inside  the  pillar  saw-
that,  her  heart  being  captivated  by  his  beauty,  she  reflected  :
"  What !  has  this  handsome  man  no  one  to  anoint  his  back  ?
Then  I  will  now  rub  his  back  for  him."

Thus  the  Vidyadhari  reflected,  and,  stretching  forth  her
hand  from  inside  the  pillar,  she  anointed  his  back  then  and
there  out  of  affection.  Immediately  the  merchant's  son
felt  the  touch,  and  heard  the  jingling  of  the  bracelet,  and
caught  hold  of  her  hand  with  his.  And  the  Vidyadhari,
invisible  as  she  was,  said  to  him  from  the  pillar  :  "  Noble
sir,  what  harm  have  I  done  you  ?  Let  go  my  hand."  Then
Nischayadatta  answered  her :  "  Appear  before  me,  and  say
who  you  are,  then  I  will  let  go  your  hand."  Then  the
Vidyadhari  affirmed  with  an  oath  :  "I  will  appear  before
your  eyes  and  tell  you  all."     So  he  let  go  her  hand.

Then  she  came  out  visibly  from  the  pillar,  beautiful  in
every  limb,  and  sitting  down,  with  her  eyes  fixed  on  his  face,
said  to  him  :  "  There  is  a  city  called  PushkaravatI *  on  a
peak  of  the  Himalayas  ;  in  it  there  lives  a  king  named
Vindhyapara.  I  am  his  maiden  daughter,  named  Anuraga-
para.  I  came  to  worship  Mahakala,  and  rested  here  to-day.
And  thereupon  you  came  here  and  were  beheld  by  me
anointing  your  back  on  this  pillar,  resembling  the  stupe-
fying weapon  of  the  God  of  Love.  Then  first  my  heart  was
charmed  with  affection  for  you,  and  afterwards  my  hand  was
smeared  with  your  unguent,  as  I  rubbed  your  back.2  The
sequel  you  know.     So  I  will  now  go  to  my  father's  house."

When  she  said  this  to  the  merchant's  son,  he  answered:
"  Fair  one,  I  have  not  recovered  my  soul  which  you  have

1  Perhaps  the  PushkalavatI  described  by  General  Cunningham  in  his
Ancient  Geography  of  India,  p.  49.

2  There  is  a  studied  ambiguity  in  all  these  words,  the  usual  play  on
affection  and  oil  being  kept  up.  A  marginal  correction  in  a  Sanskrit  College
MS.  lent  to  me  gives  hridayam.  The  text  has  ranjitam  sthathavan.  The  latter
is  a  vox  nihili.  Brockhaus'  text  may  be  explained :  "  My  hand  full  of  my
heart  was  steeped  in  affection  for  you."


ANURAGAPARA  DEPARTS  185

taken  captive  ;  how  can  you  thus  depart,  without  letting
go  the  soul  which  you  have  taken  possession  of  ?  "  When
he  said  this  to  her,  she  was  immediately  overcome  with
love,  and  said :  "I  will  marry  you,  if  you  come  to  my  city.
It  is  not  hard  for  you  to  reach  ;  your  endeavour  will  be
sure  to  succeed.  For  nothing  in  this  world  is  difficult  to  the
enterprising."

Having  said  this,  Anuragapara  flew  up  into  the  air  and
departed ;  and  Nischayadatta  returned  home  with  mind
fixed  upon  her.  Recollecting  the  hand  that  was  protruded
from  the  pillar,  like  a  shoot  from  the  trunk  of  a  tree,  he
thought :  "  Alas  !  though  I  seized  her  hand  I  did  not  win
it  for  my  own.  Therefore  I  will  go  to  the  city  of  Pushkara-
vati  to  visit  her,  and  either  I  shall  lose  my  life  or  Fate  will
come  to  my  aid."

So  musing,  he  passed  that  day  there  in  an  agony  of
love,  and  he  set  out  from  that  place  early  the  next  morn-
ing, making  for  the  north.  As  he  journeyed,  three  other
Nischayadatta  merchants'  sons,  who  were  travelling  towards
starts  on  his  the  north,  associated  themselves  with  him  as  com-
Adventures  panions.  In  company  with  them  he  travelled
through  cities,  villages,  forests  and  rivers,  and  at  last
reached  the  northern  region,  abounding  in  barbarians.

There  he  and  his  companions  were  found  on  the  way  by
some  Tajikas,  who  took  them  and  sold  them  to  another
Tajika.  He  sent  them  in  the  care  of  his  servants  as  a
present  to  a  Turushka,  named  Muravara.  Then  those
servants  took  him  and  the  other  three,  and  hearing  that
Muravara  was  dead,  they  delivered  them  to  his  son.  The
son  of  Muravara  thought :  "  These  men  have  been  sent  me
as  a  present  by  my  father's  friend,  so  I  must  send  them  to
him  to-morrow  by  throwing  them  into  his  grave."  1  Accord-
ingly the  Turushka  fettered  Nischayadatta  and  his  three
friends  with  strong  chains,  that  they  might  be  kept  till  the
morning.    Then,  while  they  were  remaining  in  chains  at  night,

1  For  "funeral  human  sacrifice  for  the  service  of  the  dead"  see  Tylor's
Primitive  Culture,  pp.  413-422.      Cf.   Hagen's  Helden-Sage?i,  vol.  iii,  pp.    165,

166. See  Crooke,  Popular  Religion  and  Folk-Lore  of  Northern  India,  vol.  ii,

p.  167  el  seq.,  and  the  references  in  this  work,  Vol.  I,  p.  lien1. — n.m.p.


186  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

Nischayadatta  said  to  his  three  friends,  the  merchants'  sons,
who  were  afflicted  with  dread  of  death  :  "  What  will  you
gain  by  despondency  ?  Maintain  steadfast  resolution.  For
calamities  depart  far  away  from  the  resolute,  as  if  terrified
at  them.  Think  on  the  peerless,  adorable  Durga,  that
deliverer  from  calamity."

Thus  encouraging  them,  he  devoutly  worshipped  that
goddess  Durga  :  "  Hail  to  thee,  O  Goddess  !  I  worship  thy
feet  that  are  stained  with  a  red  dye,  as  if  it  were  the  clotted
gore  of  the  trampled  Asura  clinging  to  them.  Thou,  as  the
all-ruling  power  of  Siva,  dost  govern  the  three  worlds,  and
inspired  by  thee  they  live  and  move.  Thou  didst  deliver
the  worlds,  O  slayer  of  the  Asura  Mahisha !  Deliver  me  that
crave  thy  protection,  O  thou  cherisher  of  thy  votaries  !  "

In  these  and  similar  words  he  and  his  companions  duly
worshipped  the  goddess,  and  then  they  all  fell  asleep,  being
weary.  And  the  goddess  Durga  in  a  dream  commanded
Nischayadatta  and  his  companions  :  "  Rise  up,  my  children,
depart,  for  your  fetters  are  loosed."  Then  they  woke  up  at
night  and  saw  that  their  fetters  had  fallen  off  of  themselves,
and  after  relating  to  one  another  their  dream  they  departed
thence,  delighted.

And  after  they  had  gone  a  long  journey  the  night  came
to  an  end,  and  then  those  merchants'  sons,  who  had  gone
through  such  terrors,  said  to  Nischayadatta :  "  Enough  of
this  quarter  of  the  world  infested  with  barbarians !  We
will  go  to  the  Deccan,  friend,  but  do  you  do  as  you  desire."
When  they  said  this  to  him,  he  dismissed  them  to  go  where
they  would,  and  set  out  alone  vigorously  on  his  journey,
making  towards  that  very  northern  quarter,  drawn  by  the
noose  of  love  for  Anuragapara,  flinging  aside  fear.

As  he  went  along,  he  fell  in,  in  course  of  time,  with  four
Pasupata  ascetics,  and  reached  and  crossed  the  River  Vitasta.
And  after  crossing  it  he  took  food,  and  as  the  sun  was  kissing
the  western  mountain  he  entered  with  them  a  forest  that  lay
in  their  path.  And  there  some  woodmen,  that  met  them,
said  to  them  :  "  Whither  are  you  going,  now  that  the  day  is
over  ?  There  is  no  village  in  front  of  you  ;  but  there  is  an
empty  temple  of  Siva  in  this  wood.     Whoever  remains  there


THE  HORN-PRODUCING  CHARM  187

during  the  night,  inside  or  outside,  falls  a  prey  to  a  Yakshini,
who  bewilders  him,  making  horns  grow  on  his  forehead,  and
then  treats  him  as  a  victim  and  devours  him."

Those  four  Pasupata  ascetics,  who  were  travelling
together,  though  they  heard  this,  said  to  Nischayadatta  :
"  Come  along  !  What  can  that  miserable  Yakshini  do  to
us  ?  For  we  have  remained  many  nights  in  various
cemeteries."  When  they  said  this,  he  went  with  them,  and
finding  an  empty  temple  of  Siva  he  entered  it  with  them  to
pass  the  night  there.  In  the  court  of  that  temple  the  bold
Nischayadatta  and  the  Pasupata  ascetics  quickly  made  a
great  circle  with  ashes,  and  entering  into  it,  they  lighted  a
fire  with  fuel,  and  all  remained  there,  muttering  a  charm  to
protect  themselves.1

Then  at  night  there  came  there  dancing  the  Yakshini
Sringotpadini,2  playing  from  afar  on  her  lute  of  bones,  and
when  she  came  near  she  fixed  her  eye  on  one  of  the  four
Pasupata  ascetics,  and  recited  a  charm,  as  she  danced  out-
side the  circle.     That  charm  produced  horns  on  him,3  and

1  See  Note  1  at  the  end  of  this  chapter. — n.m.p.

2  I.e.  producer  of  horns.

3  Cf.  the  thirty-first  tale  in  Gonzenbach's  SiciUanische  Marchen  (p.  209),
where  the  black  figs  produce  horns.  There  is  also  in  the  same  story  a
pipe  that  compels  all  that  hear  its  sound  to  dance.  See  Dr  Reinhold
Kohler's  notes  on  the  tale;  also  Grimm's  No.  110,  and  his  notes  in  his  third
volume.  Cf.  also  Veckenstedt's  Wendische  Sagen,  p.  65;  Ralston's  Russia?i
Folk-Tales,  p.  283;  Bernhard  Schmidt's  Griechischc  Marchen,  No.  20,  and
Liebrecht,  Zur  Volkskunde,  p.  484.  The  incident  in  SiciUanische  Marchen
closely  resembles  one  in  the  story  of  Fortunatus  as  told  in  Simrock's
Deutsche  Volksbucher,  vol.  iii,  p.  175.  There  is  a  pipe  that  compels  all  the
hearers  to  dance  in  Huon  of  Bordeaux,  and  a  very  similar  fairy  harp  in
Wirt  Sikes'  British  Goblins,  p.  97;  and  a  magic  fiddle  in  "  Das  Goldene
Schachspiel,"  a  story  in  Kaden's  Unter  den  Olivenbdumen,  p.  l6'0.  A  fiddler  in
Bartsch's  Sagen,  Marchen  und  Gebrauche  aus  Meklenburg  (vol.  i,  p.  130)  makes
a  girl  spin  round  like  a  top.  From  that  day  she  was  lame.  See  also  De
Gubernatis,  Zoological  Mythology,  vol.  i,  pp.  182,  288,  and  Baring-Gould,
Curious  Myths  of  the  Middle  Ages,  2nd  series,  p.  152.  Kuhn,  in  his  Westfdlischc
Marchen,  vol.  i,  p.  183,  mentions  a  belief  that  horns  grew  on  the  head  of
one  who  looked  at  the  Wild  Huntsman.  It  is  just  possible  that  this  notion
may  be  derived  from  the  story  of  Action.  A  statue  found  in  the  ruins  of
the  villa  of  Antoninus  Pius  near  Lavinium  represents  him  with  his  human
form  and  with  the  horns  just  sprouting  {Engravings  from  Ancient  Marbles  in


188  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

bewildered  he  rose  up,  and  danced  till  he  fell  into  the  blaz-
ing fire.  And  when  he  had  fallen  the  Yakshini  dragged  him
half- burnt  out  of  the  fire,  and  devoured  him  with  delight.
Then  she  fixed  her  eye  on  the  second  Pasupata  ascetic,
and  in  the  same  way  recited  the  horn-producing  charm  and
danced.  The  second  one  also  had  horns  produced  by  that
charm,  and  was  made  to  dance,  and  falling  into  the  fire  was
dragged  out  and  devoured  before  the  eyes  of  the  others.

In  this  way  the  Yakshini  maddened  one  after  another
at  night  the  four  ascetics,  and,  after  horns  had  been  produced
on  them,  devoured  them.  But  while  she  was  devouring  the
fourth  it  came  to  pass  that,  being  intoxicated  with  flesh  and
blood,  she  laid  her  lute  down  on  the  ground.  Thereupon
the  bold  Nigchayadatta  rose  up  quickly,  and  seized  the  lute,
and  began  to  play  on  it,  and,  dancing  round  with  a  laugh,
to  recite  that  horn-producing  charm,  which  he  had  learned
from  hearing  it  often,  fixing  at  the  same  time  his  eye  on  the
face  of  the  Yakshini.  By  the  operation  of  the  charm  she
was  confused,  and  dreading  death,  as  horns  were  just  about
to  sprout  on  her  forehead,  she  flung  herself  prostrate  and
thus  entreated  him  :  "  Valiant  man,  do  not  slay  me,  a  help-
less woman.  I  now  implore  your  protection ;  stop  the  recital
of  the  charm  and  the  accompanying  movements.  Spare
me  !  I  know  all  your  story,  and  will  bring  about  your  wish  ;
I  will  carry  you  to  the  place  where  Anuragapara  is."

The  bold  Nischayadatta,  when  thus  confidingly  addressed
by  her,  consented,  and  stopped  the  recital  of  the  charm  and
the  accompanying  movements.     Then,  at  the  request  of  the

the  British  Museum,  plate  xlv).  Cf.  also  the  story  of  Cipus  in  Ovid's  Meta-
morphoses, xv,  552-621.  For  the  magic  pipe  see  Grimm's  Irische  M'drchen  t
Einleitung,  p.  lxxxiii ;  Rohde,  Der  Gricchische  Roman,  p.  264.  Remarks  on
the  pipe  and  horns  will    be    found  in  Ralston's   Tibetan   Tales,  introduction,

pp.  liv-lvi. For  further  analogues  to  Grimm's  tale  110  see  Bolte,  op.  cit.,

vol.  ii,  p.  490  ct  seq.,  and  for  the  significance  of  horns  in  mythology  and
folk-lore  see  Elworthy's  Horns  of  Honour,  and  J.  A.  Macculloch,  "  Horns,"
Hastings'  Ency.  Rel.  Eth.,  vol.  vi,  pp.  791-796.  For  an  extraordinary  story
about  a  wonderful  reed  flute,  and  a  sultan  who  had  horns  on  his  head,  see
Stumme,  M'drchen  der  Schluh  von  Tdzerwalt,  p.  138.  It  is  quoted  by  Crooke
in  "King  Midas  and  his  Ass's  Ears,"  Folk-Lore,  vol.  xxii,  1911,  pp.  189,
190.— N.M.P.


THE  BURIED  MONKEY  189

Yakshini,  he  mounted  on  her  back,  and  being  carried  by  her
through  the  air,  he  went  to  find  his  beloved.1

And  when  the  night  came  to  an  end  they  had  reached  a
mountain  wood  ;  there  the  Guhyaki,  bowing,  thus  addressed
Nischayadatta  :  "  Now  that  the  sun  has  risen,  I  have  no
power  to  go  upwards,2  so  spend  this  day  in  this  charming
wood,  my  lord ;  eat  sweet  fruits  and  drink  the  clear  water
of  the  brooks.  I  go  to  my  own  place,  and  I  will  return  at
the  approach  of  night ;  and  then  I  will  take  you  to  the  city
of  Pushkaravati,  the  crown  of  the  Himalayas,  and  into  the
presence  of  Anuragapara."  Having  said  this,  the  Yakshini
with  his  permission  set  him  down  from  her  shoulder,  and
departed,  to  return  again  according  to  her  promise.

When  she  had  gone,  Nischayadatta  beheld  a  deep  lake,
transparent  and  cool,  but  tainted  with  poison,  lit  up  by
the  sun,  that,  stretching  forth  the  fingers  of  its  rays,
revealed  it  as  an  example  illustrative  of  the  nature  of  the
heart  of  a  passionate  woman.  He  knew  by  the  smell  that
it  was  tainted  with  poison,  and  left  it,  after  necessary
ablutions,  and  being  afflicted  with  thirst  he  roamed  all  over
that  heavenly  mountain  in  search  of  water.  And  as  he  was
wandering  about  he  saw  on  a  lofty  place  what  seemed  to  be
two  rubies  glittering,  and  he  dug  up  the  ground  there.

And  after  he  had  removed  the  earth  he  saw  there  the
head  of  a  living  monkey,  and  his  eyes  like  two  rubies.  While
he  was  indulging  his  wonder,  thinking  what  this  could  be,
that  monkey  thus  addressed  him  with  human  voice  :  "I
am  a  man,  a  Brahman  transformed  into  a  monkey ;  release
me,  and  then  I  will  tell  you  all  my  story,  excellent  sir."  As
soon  as  he  heard  this  he  removed  the  earth,  marvelling,  and
drew  the  ape  out  of  the  ground.  When  Nischayadatta  had
drawn  out  the  ape,  it  fell  at  his  feet,  and  continued  :  "  You
have  given  me  life  by  rescuing  me  from  calamity.  So  come,
since  you  are  weary,  take  fruit  and  water,  and  by  your
favour  I  also  will  break  my  long  fast."  Having  said  this,
the  liberated  monkey  took  him  to  the  bank  of  a  mountain

1  Cf.  Grimm's  Marchen,  No.  193.  The  parallel  between  Grimm's  story
and  that  of  Vidushaka  in  Chapter  XVI 1 1  of  this  work  is  still  more  striking.

2  All  demons  become  powerless  at  cock-crow.     See  Vol.  I,  p.  77n\ — n.m.p.


190  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

torrent  some  distance  off,  where  there  were  delicious  fruits
and  shady  trees.  There  he  bathed  and  took  fruit  and  water,
and  coming  back  he  said  to  the  monkey,  who  had  broken  his
fast :  "  Tell  me  how  you  have  become  a  monkey,  being
really  a  man."  Then  that  monkey  said  :  "  Listen,  I  will  tell
you  now.

51a.  Somasvamin  and  Bandhudatta

In  the  city  of  Varanasi  there  is  an  excellent  Brahman
named  Chandrasvamin.  I  am  his  son  by  his  virtuous  wife,
my  friend.  And  my  father  gave  me  the  name  of  Somasvamin.
In  course  of  time  it  came  to  pass  that  I  mounted  the  fierce
elephant  of  love,  which  infatuation  makes  uncontrollable.
When  I  was  at  this  stage  of  my  life  the  youthful  Bandhu-
datta, the  daughter  of  the  merchant  Srigarbha,  an  inhabitant
of  that  city,  and  the  wife  of  the  great  merchant  of  Mathura,
Varahadatta,  who  was  dwelling  in  her  father's  house,  beheld
me  one  day  as  she  was  looking  out  of  the  window.  She  was
enamoured  of  me  on  beholding  me,  and  after  inquiring  my
name  she  sent  a  confidential  female  friend  to  me,  desiring
an  interview.  Her  friend  came  up  secretly  to  me,  who  was
blind  with  love,  and,  after  telling  her  friend's  desire,  took
me  to  her  house.  There  she  placed  me,  and  then  went
and  brought  secretly  Bandhudatta,  whose  eagerness  made  her
disregard  shame.  And  no  sooner  was  she  brought  than  she
threw  her  arms  round  my  neck ;  for  excessive  love  in  women
is  your  only  hero  for  daring.  Thus  every  day  Bandhudatta
came  at  will  from  her  father's  house  and  sported  with  me  in
the  house  of  her  female  friend.

Now  one  day  the  great  merchant,  her  husband,  came
from  Mathura  to  take  her  back  to  his  own  house,  as  she  had
been  long  absent.  Then  Bandhudatta,  as  her  father  ordered
her  to  go,  and  her  husband  was  eager  to  take  her  away,
secretly  made  a  second  request  to  her  friend.  She  said  :
"  I  am  certainly  going  to  be  taken  by  my  husband  to  the
city  of  Mathura,  and  I  cannot  live  there  separated  from
Somasvamin.  So  tell  me  what  resource  there  is  left  to  me
in  this  matter  ?  "

When  she  said  this,  her  friend  Sukhasaya,  who  was  a


WOMAN'S  GUILE  IS  LIMITLESS  191

witch,  answered  her  :  "I  know  two  spells  1  :  by  reciting
one  of  them  a  man  can  be  in  a  moment  made  an  ape,  if  a
string  is  fastened  round  his  neck,  and  by  the  second,  if  the
string  is  loosed,  he  will  immediately  become  a  man  again ;
and  while  he  is  an  ape  his  intelligence  is  not  diminished.  So
if  you  like,  fair  one,  you  can  keep  your  lover  Somasvamin ;
for  I  will  turn  him  into  an  ape  on  the  spot ;  then  take  him
with  you  to  Mathura  as  a  pet  animal.  And  I  will  show  you
how  to  use  the  two  spells,  so  that  you  can  turn  him,  when
near  you,  into  the  shape  of  a  monkey,  and  when  you  are
in  a  secret  place,  make  him  once  more  a  beloved  man."

When  her  friend  had  told  her  this,  Bandhudatta  con-
sented, and  sending  for  me  in  secret,  told  me  that  matter
in  the  most  loving  tone.  I  consented,  and  immediately
Sukhasaya  fastened  a  thread  on  my  neck  and  recited  the
spell,  and  made  me  a  young  monkey.  And  in  that  shape
Bandhudatta  brought  and  showed  me  to  her  husband,  and
she  said  :  "A  friend  of  mine  gave  me  this  animal  to  play
with."  And  he  was  delighted  when  he  saw  me  in  her  arms
as  a  plaything,  and  I,  though  a  monkey,  retained  my
intelligence  and  the  power  of  articulate  speech.  And  I
remained  there,  saying  to  myself  with  inward  laughter  :
"  Wonderful  are  the  actions  of  women."  For  whom  does
not  love  beguile  ?

The  next  day  Bandhudatta,  having  been  taught  that
spell  by  her  friend,  set  out  from  her  father's  house  to  go  to
Mathura  with  her  husband.  And  the  husband  of  Bandhu-
datta, wishing  to  please  her,  had  me  carried  on  the  back  of
one  of  his  servants  during  the  journey.     So  the  servant  and

1  Cf  Veckenstedt's  Wendische  Sageti,  pp.  256,  394.  See  also  No.  129
in  Giles'  Strange  Stories  from  a  Chinese  Studio,  vol.  ii,  p.  265,  the  title  of
which  is  "Making  of  Animals."  Cf.  with  the  string  the  gold  rings  in  the
"Volsunga  Saga,"  Hagen's  Helden-Sage?i,  vol.  iii,  p.  30.  In  Ovid's  Meta-
morphoses, viii,  850  et  seq.,  there  is  an  account  of  Mestra's  transformation.
Neptune  gave  her  the  power  of  transforming  herself  whenever  she  was  sold
by  her  father.  See  also  the  story  of  Achelous  and  Hercules  in  Book  IX  of
the  Metamorphoses ;  Prym  and  Socin's  Syrische  Marchen,  p.  229,  where  we  have
the  incident  of  the  selling;  Waldau,  Bohmische  Marchen,  p.  125;  Coelho,
Contos  Populares  Portugueses,  p.  32. For  references  to  animal  meta-
morphoses in  folk-lore  see  Chauvin,  op.  cit.,  vi,  p.  199.  The  references  to
the  Nights  are  numerous. — n.m.p.


192  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

I  and  the  rest  went  along,  and  in  two  or  three  days  reached
a  wood,  that  lay  in  our  way,  which  was  perilous  from  abound-
ing in  monkeys.  Then  the  monkeys,  beholding  me,  attacked
me  in  troops  on  all  sides,  quickly  calling  to  one  another  with
shrill  cries.  And  the  irresponsible  apes  came  and  began  to
bite  that  merchant's  servant,  on  whose  back  I  was  sitting.
He  was  terrified  at  that,  and  flung  me  off  his  back  on  to
the  ground,  and  fled  for  fear,  so  the  monkeys  got  hold  of
me  then  and  there.  And  Bandhudatta,  out  of  love  for  me,
and  her  husband  and  his  servants,  attacked  the  apes  with
stones  and  sticks,  but  were  not  able  to  get  the  better  of
them.  Then  those  monkeys,  as  if  enraged  with  my  evil
actions,  pulled  off  with  their  teeth  and  nails  every  hair  from
every  one  of  my  limbs  as  I  lay  there  bewildered.

At  last,  by  the  virtue  of  the  string  on  my  neck,  and  by
thinking  on  Siva,  I  managed  to  recover  my  strength,  and
getting  loose  from  them  I  ran  away.  And  entering  into  the
depths  of  the  wood,  I  got  out  of  their  sight,  and  gradually,
roaming  from  forest  to  forest,  I  reached  this  wood.  And
while  I  was  wandering  about  here  in  the  rainy  season,  blind
with  the  darkness  of  grief,  saying  to  myself :  "  How  is  it
that  even  in  this  life  adultery  has  produced  for  thee  the  fruit
of  transformation  into  the  shape  of  a  monkey,  and  thou  hast
lost  Bandhudatta  ?  " — Destiny,  not  yet  sated  with  torment-
ing me,  inflicted  on  me  another  woe,  for  a  female  elephant
suddenly  came  upon  me  and,  seizing  me  with  her  trunk,
flung  me  into  the  mud  of  an  ant-hill  that  had  been  saturated
with  rain.  I  know  it  must  have  been  some  divinity  in-
stigated by  Destiny,  for,  though  I  exerted  myself  to  the
utmost,  I  could  not  get  out  of  that  mud.

And  while  it  was  drying  up,1  not  only  did  I  not  die,  but
knowledge  was  produced  in  me,  while  I  thought  continually
upon  Siva.  And  all  the  while  I  never  felt  hunger  nor  thirst,
my  friend,  until  to-day  you  drew  me  out  of  this  trap  of  dry
mud.  And  though  I  have  gained  knowledge,  I  do  not  even
now  possess  power  sufficient  to  set  myself  free  from  this
monkey  nature.     But  when  some  witch  unties  the  thread

1  Pandit  Syama  Charana  Mukhopadhyaya  conjectures  hsoshyamane.  This
I  adopt  unhesitatingly.


THE  DISADVANTAGES  OF  THE  MERE  MORTAL    193

on  my  neck,  reciting  at  the  same  time  the  appropriate  spell,
then  I  shall  once  more  become  a  man.


51.  Story  of  Nischayadatta

"  This  is  my  story ;  but  tell  me  now,  my  friend,  how  you
came  to  this  inaccessible  wood,  and  why."  When  Nischaya-
datta was  thus  requested  by  the  Brahman  Somasvamin,  he
told  him  his  story,  how  he  came  from  Ujjayini  on  account
of  a  Vidyadhari,  and  how  he  was  conveyed  at  night  by  a
Yakshini,  whom  he  had  subdued  by  his  presence  of  mind.
Then  the  wise  Somasvamin,  who  wore  the  form  of  a  monkey,
having  heard  that  wonderful  story,  went  on  to  say  :  "  You,
like  myself,  have  suffered  great  woe  for  the  sake  of  a  female.
But  females,  like  prosperous  circumstances,  are  never  faithful
to  anyone  in  this  world.  Like  the  evening,  they  display  a
short-lived  passion,  their  hearts  are  crooked  like  the  channels
of  rivers,  like  snakes  they  are  not  to  be  relied  on,  like  lightning
they  are  fickle.  So  that  Anuragapara,  though  she  may  be
enamoured  of  you  for  a  time,  when  she  finds  a  paramour
of  her  own  race,  will  be  disgusted  with  you,  who  are  only  a
mortal.  So  desist  now  from  this  effort  for  the  sake  of  a
female,  which  you  will  find  like  the  fruit  of  the  colocynth,
bitter  in  its  after-taste.  Do  not  go,  my  friend,  to  Push-
karavati,  the  city  of  the  Vidyadharas,  but  ascend  the  back
of  the  Yakshini  and  return  to  your  own  Ujjayini.  Do  what
I  tell  you,  my  friend  ;  formerly  in  my  passion  I  did  not
heed  the  voice  of  a  friend,  and  I  am  suffering  for  it  at  this
very  moment.  For  when  I  was  in  love  with  Bandhudatta,
a  Brahman  friend  named  Bhavasarman  said  this  to  me  in
order  to  dissuade  me  :  c  Do  not  put  yourself  in  the  power
of  a  female  ;  the  heart  of  a  female  is  a  tangled  maze ;  in
proof  of  it  I  will  tell  you  what  happened  to  me.     Listen  !

51b.  Bhavasarman  and  the  Two  Witches

In  this  very  country,  in  the  city  of  Varanasi,  there  lived
.a  young  and  beautiful  Brahman  woman    named    Somada,
who  was  unchaste  and  secretly  a  witch.     And  as  Destiny
vol.  in.  n


194  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

would  have  it,  I  had  secret  interviews  with  her,  and  in  the
course  of  our  intimacy  my  love  for  her  increased.  One
day  I  wilfully  struck  her  in  the  fury  of  jealousy,  and  the
cruel  woman  bore  it  patiently,  concealing  her  anger  for  the
time.  The  next  day  she  fastened  a  string  round  my  neck,
as  if  in  loving  sport,  and  I  was  immediately  turned  into  a
domesticated  ox.  Then  I,  thus  transformed  into  an  ox,  was
sold  by  her,  on  receiving  the  required  price,  to  a  man  who
lived  by  keeping  domesticated  camels.  When  he  placed
a  load  upon  me,  a  witch  there,  named  Bandhamochini,  be-
holding me  sore  burdened,  was  filled  with  pity.  She  knew
by  her  supernatural  knowledge  that  I  had  been  made  an
animal  by  Somada,  and  when  my  proprietor  was  not  looking
she  loosed  the  string  from  my  neck.1

So  I  returned  to  the  form  of  a  man,  and  that  master  of
mine  immediately  looked  round,  and  thinking  that  I  had
escaped,  wandered  all  about  the  country  in  search  of  me.
And  as  I  was  going  away  from  that  place  with  Bandhamo-
chini it  happened  that  Somada  came  that  way  and  beheld
me  at  a  distance.  She,  burning  with  rage,  said  to  Ban-
dhamochini, who  possessed  supernatural  knowledge :  "  Why
did  you  deliver  this  villain  from  his  bestial  transformation  ?
Curses  on  you!  wicked  woman,  you  shall  reap  the  fruit  of
this  evil  deed.  To-morrow  morning  I  will  slay  you,  together
with  this  villain."

When  she  had  gone,  after  saying  this,  that  skilful  sorceress
Bandhamochini,  in  order  to  repel  her  assault,  gave  me  the
following  instructions  :  "  She  will  come  to-morrow  morning
in  the  form  of  a  black  mare  to  slay  me,  and  I  shall  then
assume  the  form  of  a  bay  mare.  And  when  we  have  begun
to  fight  you  must  come  behind  this  Somada,  sword  in  hand,
and  resolutely  strike  her.  In  this  way  we  will  slay  her ;  so
come  to-morrow  morning  to  my  house."  After  saying  this,
she  pointed  out  to  me  her  house.

When  she  had  entered  it  I  went  home,  having  endured
more  than  one  birth  in  this  very  life.     And  in  the  morning

1  Cf.  Sagas  from  the  Far  East,  p.  35.  This  story  very  closely  resembles
that  of  Sidi  Nu'uman  in  the  Nights  (Burton,  Supp.,  vol.  iii,  p.  325  et  seq.),  and
The  Golden  Ass  of  Apuleius.


SOUND  ADVICE  SCORNED  195

I  went  to  the  house  of  Bandhamochini,  sword  in  hand.
Then  Somada  came  there  in  the  form  of  a  black  mare.1
And  Bandhamochini,  for  her  part,  assumed  the  form  of  a
bay  mare  ;  and  then  they  fought  with  their  teeth  and  heels,
biting  and  kicking.  Then  I  struck  that  vile  witch  Somada
a  blow  with  my  sword,  and  she  was  slain  by  Bandhamochini.
Then  I  was  freed  from  fear,  and  having  escaped  the  calamity
of  bestial  transformation,  I  never  again  allowed  my  mind  to
entertain  the  idea  of  associating  with  wicked  women.  Women
generally  have  these  three  faults,  terrible  to  the  three  worlds,
flightiness,  recklessness,  and  a  love  for  the  congregation  of
witches.2  So  why  do  you  run  after  Bandhudatta,  who  is  a
friend  of  witches  ?  Since  she  does  not  love  her  husband,
how  is  it  possible  that  she  can  love  you  ?

51.  Story  of  Nischayadatta

"Though  my  friend  Bhavasarman  gave  me  this  advice,
I  did  not  do  what  he  told  me,  and  so  I  am  reduced  to  this
state.  So  I  give  you  this  counsel :  do  not  suffer  hardship
to  win  Anuragapara,  for  when  she  obtains  a  lover  of  her
own  race  she  will,  of  a  surety,  desert  you.  A  woman  ever
desires  fresh  men,  as  a  female  humble  bee  wanders  from
flower  to  flower ;  so  you  will  suffer  regret  some  day,  like
me,  my  friend."  This  speech  of  Somasvamin,  who  had  been
transformed  into  a  monkey,  did  not  penetrate  the  heart  of
Nischayadatta,  for  it  was  full  of  passion.  And  he  said  to
that  monkey:  "She  will  not  be  unfaithful  to  me,  for  she
is  born  of  the  pure  race  of  the  Vidyadharas."

Whilst  they  were  thus  conversing,  the  sun,  red  with  the
hues  of  evening,  went  to  the  mountain  of  setting,  as  if
wishing  to  please  Nischayadatta.    Then  the  night  arrived,  as

1  Cf.  Campbell's  Tales  from  the  West  Highlands,  vol.  ii,  p.  422,  and
Sagas  from  the  Far  East,  p.  4>.  This  part  of  the  story  comes  under  Mr  Baring-
Gould's  "Magical  Conflict"  root  (see  his  "Story  Radicals"  in  the  appendix

to  Henderson's  Folk-Lore  of  the  Northern    Counties). For  details  of  the

"Magical  Conflict"  or  "Transformation  Combat"  motif  see  Note  2  at  the
end  of  this  chapter. — n.m.p.

2  The  word  samvara,  which  I  have  translated  "congregation,"  probably
means  "sorcery  "  ;  see  Bohtlingk  and  Roth  s.v.


196  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

the  harbinger  of  the  Yakshini  SringotpadinI,  and  she  herself
came  soon  afterwards.  And  Nischayadatta  mounted  on  her
back,  and  went  off  to  go  to  his  beloved,  taking  leave  of  the
ape,  who  begged  that  he  might  ever  be  remembered  by  him.
And  at  midnight  he  reached  that  city  of  Pushkaravati,
which  was  situated  on  the  Himalayas,  and  belonged  to  the
King  of  the  Vidyadharas,  the  father  of  Anuragapara.  At  that
very  moment  Anuragapara,  having  known  by  her  power  of
his  arrival,  came  out  from  that  city  to  meet  him.

Then  the  Yakshini  put  down  Nischayadatta  from  her
shoulder,  and  pointing  out  to  him  Anuragapara,  said  :  "  Here
comes  your  beloved,  like  a  second  moon  giving  a  feast  to
your  eyes  in  the  night,  so  now  I  will  depart."  And  bowing
before  him,  she  went  her  way.  Then  Anuragapara,  full  of
the  excitement  produced  by  expectation,  went  up  to  her  be-
loved, and  welcomed  him  with  embraces  and  other  signs  of
love.  He  too  embraced  her,  and  now  that  he  had  obtained
the  joy  of  meeting  her  after  enduring  many  hardships,  he
could  not  be  contained  in  his  own  body,  and  as  it  were
entered  hers.  So  Anuragapara  was  made  his  wife  by  the
gdndharva  ceremony  of  marriage,  and  she  immediately  by
her  magic  skill  created  a  city.  In  that  city,  which  was  out-
side the  metropolis,  he  dwelt  with  her,  without  her  parents
suspecting  it,  as  their  eyes  were  blinded  by  her  skill.  And
when,  on  her  questioning  him,  he  told  her  those  strange
and  painful  adventures  of  his  journey,  she  respected  him
much  and  bestowed  on  him  all  the  enjoyments  that  heart
could  wish.

Then  Nischayadatta  told  that  Vidyadhari  the  strange
story  of  Somasvamin,  who  had  been  transformed  into  a
monkey,  and  said  to  her  :  "If  this  friend  of  mine  could  by
any  endeavour  on  your  part  be  freed  from  his  monkey  con-
dition, then,  my  beloved,  you  would  have  done  a  good  deed."
When  he  told  her  this,  Anuragapara  said  to  him :  "  This  is
in  the  way  of  witches'  spells,  but  it  is  not  our  province.
Nevertheless  I  will  accomplish  this  desire  of  yours,  by  asking
a  friend  of  mine,  a  skilful  witch  named  Bhadrarupa."

When  the  merchant's  son  heard  that,  he  was  delighted,
and  said  to  that  beloved  of  his  :    "  So  come  and  see  my


THE  ARRIVAL  OF  RAGABHANJANA  197

friend  ;  let  us  go  to  visit  him."  She  consented,  and  the
next  day,  carried  in  her  lap,  Nischayadatta  went  through
the  air  to  the  wood,  which  was  the  residence  of  his  friend.
When  he  saw  his  friend  there  in  monkey  form  he  went  up
to  him  with  his  wife,  who  bowed  before  him,  and  asked  after
his  welfare.  And  the  monkey  Somasvamin  welcomed  him,
saying  :  "  It  is  well  with  me  to-day,  in  that  I  have  beheld
you  united  to  Anuragapara."  And  he  gave  his  blessing  to
Nischayadatta's  wife.  Then  all  three  sat  down  on  a  charming
slab  of  rock  there  and  held  a  conversation  *  about  his  story,
the  various  adventures  of  that  ape,  previously  discussed  by
Nischayadatta  with  his  beloved.  Then  Nischayadatta  took
leave  of  that  monkey  and  went  to  the  house  of  his  beloved,
flying  up  into  the  air,  carried  by  her  in  her  arms.

And  the  next  day  he  again  said  to  that  Anuragapara  :
"  Come,  let  us  go  for  a  moment  to  visit  that  ape  our  friend."
Then  she  said  to  him  :  "  Go  to-day  yourself;  receive  from
me  the  science  of  flying  up,  and  also  that  of  descending."
When  she  had  said  this  to  him,  he  took  those  two  sciences
and  flew  through  the  air  to  his  friend  the  ape.  And  as  he
remained  long  conversing  with  him,  Anuragapara  went  out
of  the  house  into  the  garden.  While  she  was  seated  there
a  certain  Vidyadhara  youth,  who  was  wandering  at  will
through  the  air,  came  there.  The  Vidyadhara,  knowing
by  his  art  that  she  was  a  Vidyadhari  who  had  a  mortal
husband,  the  moment  he  beheld  her,  was  overpowered  with  a
paroxysm  of  love,  and  approached  her.  And  she,  with  face
bent  on  the  ground,  beheld  that  he  was  handsome  and
attractive,  and  slowly  asked  him  out  of  curiosity  who  he  was
and  whence  he  came.

Then  he  answered  her  :  "  Know,  fair  one,  that  I  am  a
Vidyadhara,  by  name  Ragabhanjana,  distinguished  for  my
knowledge  of  the  sciences  of  the  Vidyadharas.  The  moment
I  beheld  you,  O  gazelle- eyed  one,  I  was  suddenly  overpowered
by  love,  and  made  your  slave,  so  cease  to  honour,  O  Goddess,
a  mortal,  whose  abode  is  the  earth,  and  favour  me,  your
equal,  before  your  father  finds  out  your  intrigue."     When

1  I  adopt  kritam,  the  reading  of  a  MS.  lent  me  from  the  Sanskrit  College,
should  put  a  comma  after  alapam,  as  that  word  is  used  in  the  masculine.


198  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

he  said  this,  the  fickle-hearted  one,  looking  timidly  at  him
with  a  sidelong  glance,  thought :  "  Here  is  a  fit  match  for
me."  When  he  had  thus  ascertained  her  wishes,  he  made
her  his  wife  :  when  two  are  of  one  mind  what  more  does
secret  love  require  ?

Then  Nis'chayadatta  arrived  from  the  presence  of
Somasvamin,  after  that  Vidyadhara  had  departed.  And
when  he  came,  Anuragapara,  having  lost  her  love  for  him,
Anuragapam  did  n°t  embrace  him,  giving  as  an  excuse  that
tires  of  her  she  had  a  headache.  But  the  simple-minded
Mortal  Lover  man>  bewildered  by  love,  not  seeing  through  her
excuse,  thought  that  her  pain  was  due  to  illness  and  spent
the  day  in  that  belief.  But  the  next  day  he  again  went  in
low  spirits  to  see  his  friend  the  ape,  flying  through  the  air
by  the  force  of  the  two  sciences  he  possessed.

When  he  had  gone,  Anuragapara's  Vidyadhara  lover
returned  to  her,  having  spent  a  sleepless  night  without  her.
And  embracing  round  the  neck  her  who  was  eager  for  his
arrival,  owing  to  having  been  separated  during  the  night,
he  was  at  length  overcome  by  sleep.  She  by  the  power  of
her  science  concealed  her  lover,  who  lay  asleep  in  her  lap,
and  weary  with  having  kept  awake  all  night,  went  to  sleep
herself.  In  the  meanwhile  Nis'chayadatta  came  to  the  ape,
and  his  friend,  welcoming  him,  asked  him  :  "  Why  do  I
seem  to  see  you  in  low  spirits  to-day  ?     Tell  me."

Then  Nischayadatta  said  to  that  ape  :  "  Anuragapara
is  exceedingly  ill,  my  friend ;  for  that  reason  I  am  grieved,
for  she  is  dearer  to  me  than  life."  Then  that  ape,  who
possessed  supernatural  knowledge,  said  to  him  :  "  Go,  take
her  in  your  arms,  asleep  as  she  is,  and  flying  through  the  air
by  the  help  of  the  science  she  bestowed,  bring  her  to  me,  in
order  that  I  may  this  very  day  show  you  a  great  marvel."
When  Nis'chayadatta  heard  this,  he  went  through  the  air
and  lightly  took  up  that  sleeping  fair  one,  but  he  did  not  see
that  Vidyadhara,  who  was  asleep  in  her  lap,  and  had  been
previously  made  invisible  by  the  power  of  her  science.  And
flying  up  into  the  air,  he  quickly  brought  Anuragapara  to
that  ape.  That  ape,  who  possessed  divine  insight,  immedi-
ately showed  him  a  charm,  by  which  he  was  able  to  behold


THE  APE'S  FEARS  JUSTIFIED  199

the  Vidyadhara  clinging  to  her  neck.  When  he  saw  this,
he  exclaimed  :  "  Alas  !  what  does  this  mean  ?  "  And  the
ape,  who  was  able  to  discern  the  truth,  told  him  the  whole
story.

Then  Nischayadatta  fell  into  a  passion,  and  the  Vidya-
dhara, who  was  the  lover  of  his  wife,  woke  up,  and  flying  up
into  the  air,  disappeared.  Then  Anuragapara  woke  up,  and
seeing  that  her  secret  was  revealed,  stood  with  face  cast  down
through  shame.  Then  Nischayadatta  said  to  her,  with  eyes
gushing  with  tears  :  "  Wicked  female,  how  could  you  thus
deceive  me  who  reposed  confidence  in  you  ?  Although  a
device  is  known  in  this  world  for  fixing  that  exceedingly
fickle  metal  quicksilver,  no  expedient  is  known  for  fixing  the
heart  of  a  woman."  While  he  was  saying  this,  Anuragapara,
at  a  loss  for  an  answer,  and  weeping,  slowly  soared  up  into
the  air,  and  went  to  her  own  home.

Then  Nischayadatta's  friend,  the  ape,  said  to  him :
"  That  you  are  grieved  is  the  fruit  of  the  fierce  fire  of  passion,
in  that  you  ran  after  this  fair  one,  though  I  tried  to  dissuade
you.  For  what  reliance  can  be  placed  on  fickle  fortunes
and  fickle  women  ?  So  cease  your  regret.  Be  patient  now.
For  even  the  Disposer  himself  cannot  o'erstep  Destiny."
When  Nischayadatta  heard  this  speech  from  the  ape  he
flung  aside  that  delusion  of  grief  and,  abandoning  passion,
fled  to  Siva  as  his  refuge.  Then,  as  he  was  remaining  in
that  wood  with  his  friend  the  ape,  it  happened  that  a  female
hermit  of  the  name  of  Mokshada  came  near  him.  She,  see-
ing him  bowing  before  her,  proceeded  to  ask  him:  "How
comes  this  strange  thing  to  pass  that,  though  a  man,  you
have  struck  up  a  friendship  with  this  ape  ?  "

Then  he  related  to  her  his  own  melancholy  story,  and
afterwards  the  sad  tale  of  his  friend,  and  thereupon  thus
said  to  her  :  "If  you,  reverend  lady,  know  any  incantation
or  spell  by  which  it  can  be  done,  immediately  release  this
excellent  Brahman,  my  friend,  from  his  ape- transformation."
When  she  heard  that,  she  consented,  and  employing  a  spell,
she  loosed  the  string  from  his  neck,  and  Somas vamin
abandoned  that  monkey  form  and  became  a  man  as  before.
Then  she  disappeared  like  lightning,  clothed  with  celestial


200  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

brightness,  and  in  time  Ni3chayadatta  and  the  Brahman
Somasvamin,  having  performed  many  austerities,  attained
final  beatitude.


[M]  "  Thus  fair  ones,  naturally  fickle,  bring  about  a
series  of  evil  actions  which  produce  true  discernment,  and
aversion  to  the  world.  But  here  and  there  you  will  find  a
virtuous  one  among  them,  who  adorns  a  glorious  family,  as
the  streak  of  the  moon  the  broad  sky."

When  Naravahanadatta,  accompanied  by  Ratnaprabha,
heard  this  wonderful  tale  from  the  mouth  of  Gomukha,  he
was  highly  pleased.


THE  MAGIC  CIRCLE  201


NOTE  1.— THE  MAGIC  CIRCLE

Some  idea  of  the  religious  significance  attached  to  the  circle  has  already
been  given  in  my  note  on  deisul,  or  the  circumambulation  of  sacred  shrines,
mountains,  etc.  (Vol.  I,  pp.  190-193),  while  its  uses  in  magical  practices  were
briefly  mentioned  in  Vol.  II,  pp.  98-100//..

I  shall,  therefore,  confine  myself  here  to  describing  some  of  the  more
uncommon  uses  to  which  it  is  put.

In  the  Panjab,  about  1885,  there  was  a  severe  attack  of  cattle  disease.
The  Government  took  what  steps  it  could  to  mitigate  the  calamity,  and  the
disease  soon  disappeared.  When,  however,  some  time  later  the  District
Officer  was  in  the  locality  it  was  explained  that  the  natives  could  do  nothing
till  the  veterinary  surgeons  had  left.  Then  they  procured  the  services  of  a
holy  man,  who  drew  a  line  on  the  ground  right  round  the  herd.  He  got  on
horseback  and  rode  round  the  circle,  sprinkling  water  and  repeating  mantras.
It  was  this  that  had  cured  the  cattle  !  See  Panjab  Notes  and  Queries,  vol.  ii,
1885,  p.  148.  In  the  note  given  on  this  page  by  the  editor,  the  reference  to
"vol.  xii,  p.  36,"  of  the  Ind.  Ant.  should  read,  "vol.  xi,  pp.  35-36."

Mention  should  also  be  made  of  the  kar,  the  charmed  circle  of  Hindu
astrologers.  There  appears  to  be  some  doubt  as  to  the  etymology  of  this
Panjabi  word.  In  the  Ind,  Ant.,  vol.  xi,  1 882,  pp.  35-36,  Sir  Richard  Temple
would  derive  it  from  the  Sanskrit  kara,  "a  prison."  The  root  kat  means
"to  surround,"  whence  kataka,  "a  zone";  Hindi,  kara  and  karl,  "ring,"
"bracelet";  thus  the  word  may  be  of  Prakrit  origin.  In  Panjab  Notes  and
Queries,  vol.  ii,  1885  (No.  758,  p.  136),  however,  it  was  suggested  that  kar
should  be  connected  with  karsha,  "a  scratch,"  "furrow,"  "trench,"  from  the
root  krish,  "  to  draw."

The  term  kar  is  frequently  employed  to  invoke  protection  (in  much
the  same  way  as  the  Roman  Catholic  crosses  himself  when  apprehensive  of
danger),  and  is  in  everyday  use.  It  constantly  occurs  in  charms  and  mantras.
We  also  find  it  in  the  Ananda-ramayana  ("  Sara-Kanda,"  Sarga  7,  verse  98  et  seq.),
a  mediaeval  composition,  where  Lakshmana  draws  a  protective  circle  round
Sita  with  the  tip  of  his  bow.

Then  there  is  the  mandali,  or  debtor's  circle,  to  be  considered.  It  has
been  described  by  several  early  travellers  in  the  East.  See,  for  instance,
Marco  Polo,  Book  III,  chap,  xvii  (Yule,  vol.  ii,  p.  343),  and  note  14  on  p.  350 ;
G.  P.  Badger,  Travels  of  Ludovico  di  Varthema,  Hakluyt  Society,  1863,  p.  147  ;
Hamilton,  Journey  throiigh  Mysore,  Canara  and  Malabar,  1807,  vol.  i,  318;
Pere  Bouchet,  Lettres  iZdijicantes,  vol.  xiv,  p.  370 ;  R.  H.  Major,  India  in  the
Fifteenth  Century,  Hakluyt  Society,  1858,  p.  14.

Quotations  from  one  or  two  of  the  above  will  make  the  use  of  the
debtor's  circle  quite  clear.

Varthema  (op.  cit,  p.  147)  says:  "And  when  anyone  ought  to  receive
money  from  another  merchant,  there  appearing  any  writing  of  the  scribes  of
the  king  (who  has  at  least  a  hundred  of  them),  they  observe  this  practice :


202  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

Let  us  suppose  the  case  that  someone  has  to  pay  me  twenty-five  ducats,  and
the  debtor  promises  me  to  pay  them  many  times,  and  does  not  pay  them ;  I,
not  being  willing  to  wait  any  longer,  nor  to  give  him  any  indulgence,  shall
take  a  green  branch  in  my  hand,  shall  go  softly  behind  the  debtor,  and  with
the  said  hand  shall  draw  a  circle  on  the  ground  surrounding  him,  and  if  I
can  enclose  him  in  the  circle,  I  shall  say  to  him  these  words  three  times :
'  Bramini  raza  pertha  polle ' — that  is,  '  I  command  you,  by  the  head  of  the
Brahmins  and  of  the  king,  that  you  do  not  depart  hence  until  you  have  paid
me  and  satisfied  me  as  much  as  I  ought  to  have  from  thee.'  And  he  will
satisfy  me,  or  truly  he  will  die  there  without  any  other  guard.  And  should
he  quit  the  said  circle  and  not  pay  me,  the  king  would  put  him  to  death."

The  following  account  is  given  by  Marco  Polo  (pp.  cit,  vol.  ii,  p.  343) : —
"They  have  the  following  rale  about  debts.  If  a  debtor  shall  have  been
several  times  asked  by  his  creditor  for  payment,  and  shall  have  put  him  off
from  day  to  day  with  promises,  then  if  the  creditor  can  once  meet  the  debtor
and  succeed  in  drawing  a  circle  round  him,  the  latter  must  not  pass  out  of
this  circle  until  he  shall  have  satisfied  the  claim,  or  given  security  for  its
discharge.  If  he  in  any  other  case  presume  to  pass  the  circle  he  is  punished
with  death  as  a  transgressor  against  right  and  justice.  And  the  said  Messer
Marco,  when  in  this  kingdom  on  his  return  home,  did  witness  a  case  of  this.
It  was  the  King,  who  owed  a  foreign  merchant  a  certain  sum  of  money,  and
though  the  claim  had  often  been  presented,  he  always  put  it  off  with  promises.
Now  one  day  the  merchant  found  his  opportunity,  and  drew  a  circle  round
both  the  King  and  his  horse.  The  King,  on  seeing  this,  halted,  and  would
ride  no  farther ;  nor  did  he  stir  from  the  spot  until  the  merchant  was  satisfied.
And  when  the  bystanders  saw  this  they  marvelled  greatly,  saying  that  the
King  was  a  most  just  King  indeed,  having  thus  submitted  to  justice."

These  customs  explain  the  gambler's  ring  mentioned  in  the  second  act
of  the  Mrichchhakatika,  or  Clay  Cart,  where  a  shampooer  having  got  into  debt
is  vainly  called  upon  to  pay.  As  a  last  resource  the  other  draws  a  circle
round  him,  saying  triumphantly :  "There,  now  you're  bound  by  the  gambler's
ring."  The  shampooer  replies:  "What!  Bound  by  the  gambler's  ring?
Confound  it !     There  is  a  limit  which  we  gamblers  can't  pass."

Although  a  protective  circle  is  usually  made  on  the  ground,  this  is  not
always  the  case.  Thus  among  the  negroes  of  Jamaica  a  circle  in  chalk
marked  on  the  door  of  the  house  acts  as  a  protective  charm  to  those  within,
and  no  duppy  can  enter.  A  duppy  is  a  very  curious  kind  of  spirit  with  super-
natural powers,  and  is  said  to  be  formed  from  a  cloud  of  smoke  which  arises
from  the  grave  of  a  person  who  has  been  dead  for  three  days  (Folk-Lore,
vol.  xv,  1904,  pp.  90  and  207).

The  circle  is  also  used  for  practical  purposes  by  means  of  homoeopathic
magic.  Thus  in  his  Magie  ct  Religion  dans  VAfrique  dtt  Nord  (Algiers,  1908,
p.  244  el  seq.)  E.  Doutte  describes  how,  in  order  to  bring  back  a  runaway
slave,  an  Arab  of  North  Africa  will  trace  a  magic  circle  on  the  ground,  stick
a  nail  in  the  middle  of  it,  and  attach  a  beetle  by  a  thread  to  the  nail,  taking
care  that  the  sex  of  the  beetle  is  that  of  the  fugitive.  As  the  beetle  crawls
round  and  round  it  will  coil  the  thread  about  the  nail,  thus  shortening  its


f


THE  "  MAGICAL  CONFLICT  "  MOTIF  203


tether  and  drawing  nearer  to  the  centre  at  every  circuit.  So  by  virtue  of
homoeopathic  magic  the  runaway  slave  will  be  drawn  back  to  his  master.

This  is  quoted  by  Frazer,  Golden  Bough,  vol.  i,  p.  1 52  et  seq.

In  conclusion  I  would  again  (see  Vol.  II,  p.  99)  refer  readers  to  Crawley's
article  in  Hastings'  Ency.  Rel.  Eth.,  where  so  many  useful  references  are  given.
To  those  given  by  A.  E.  Waite  I  would  add  his  The  Book  of  Black  Magict
London,  1898,  where  numerous  rites  of  conjuration  are  given. — n.m.p.


NOTE  2.— THE  "MAGICAL  CONFLICT"  MOTIF

The  "Magical  Conflict"  or  "Transformation  Combat"  motif  dates  from
very  early  times,  and  in  an  ancient  Egyptian  tale,  "  The  Veritable  History  of
Satni-Khamois "  (Maspero,  Popular  Stories  of  Ancient  Egypt,  p.  166  et  seq.),
we  find  a  long  series  of  amazing  transformations  closely  resembling  those
occurring  in  subsequent  collections.

In  most  examples  of  the  motif  there  are  two  distinct  transformation
incidents.  Firstly,  someone  is  turned — or  learns  how  to  turn  himself — into
some  kind  of  animal,  and  as  such  is  sold  to  the  highest  bidder.  The  seller,
usually  the  man's  father,  must  on  no  account  sell  the  halter  or  string  round
the  animal's  neck.  It  is  a  kind  of  "External  Soul"  and  its  surrender
condemns  the  man  to  remain  in  his  animal  shape.  And  secondly,  events  lead
to  a  "  Magical  Conflict "  either  between  the  hero  and  a  magician  (in  many
tales  his  former  teacher),  or  the  hero's  rescuer  and  the  magician.

It  will  be  seen  that  in  our  present  text  the  string  turned  Bhavasarman  into
an  ox  which  it  was  necessary  to  remove  before  he  could  recover  his  pristine
shape.  The  conflict  is  only  very  short,  but  in  most  versions  becomes  long
and  complicated.  In  several  cases  one  of  the  combatants  takes  the  form  of  a
pomegranate,  a  heap  of  grain,  or  a  rose,  and  in  each  case  the  object  becomes
divided  into  a  large  number  of  separate  parts,  and  it  is  not  until  each  seed,
stone,  grain,  leaf,  or  whatever  it  is,  has  been  devoured  by  the  adversary
(usually  in  the  form  of  a  cock  at  this  stage  of  the  proceedings)  that  the  other
can  be  destroyed.

One  good  example  of  this  will  suffice.  1  choose  "  The  Second  Kalendar's
Tale"  from  the  Nights  (Burton,  vol.  i,  pp.  134-135)  :

" .  .  .  whereupon  he  changed  to  the  form  of  a  lion,  and  said, '  O  traitress,
how  is  it  thou  hast  broken  the  oath  we  sware  that  neither  should  contraire
other ! '  '  O  accursed  one,'  answered  she,  '  how  could  there  be  a  compact
between  me  and  the  like  of  thee  ? '  Then  said  he,  f  Take  what  thou  hast
brought  on  thyself  ;  and  the  lion  opened  his  jaws  and  rushed  upon  her;  but
she  was  too  quick  for  him ;  and,  plucking  a  hair  from  her  head,  waved  it  in
the  air  muttering  over  it  the  while ;  and  the  hair  straightway  became  a
trenchant  sword-blade,  wherewith  she  smote  the  lion  and  cut  him  in  twain.
Then  the  two  halves  flew  away  in  air  and  the  head  changed  to  a  scorpion  and
the  Princess  became  a  huge  serpent  and  set  upon  the  accursed  scorpion,
and  the  two  fought,  coiling  and  uncoiling,  a  stiff  fight  for  an  hour  at  least.


204  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

Then  the  scorpion  changed  to  a  vulture,  and  the  serpent  became  an  eagle
which  set  upon  the  vulture,  and  hunted  him  for  an  hour's  time,  till  he  became
a  black  tom-cat,  which  miauled  and  grinned  and  spat.  Thereupon  the  eagle
changed  into  a  piebald  wolf,  and  these  two  battled  in  the  palace  for  a  long
time,  when  the  cat,  seeing  himself  overcome,  changed  into  a  worm  and  crept
into  a  huge  red  pomegranate,  which  lay  beside  the  jetting  fountain  in  the
midst  of  the  palace  hall.  Whereupon  the  pomegranate  swelled  to  the  size
of  a  water-melon  in  air;  and,  falling  upon  the  marble  pavement  of  the  palace,
broke  to  pieces,  and  all  the  grains  fell  out  and  were  scattered  about  till  they
covered  the  whole  floor.  Then  the  wolf  shook  himself  and  became  a  snow-
white  cock,  which  fell  to  picking  up  the  grains,  purposing  not  to  leave  one ;
but  by  doom  of  destiny  one  seed  rolled  to  the  fountain-edge  and  there  lay
hid.  The  cock  fell  to  crowing  and  clapping  his  wings  and  signing  to  us  with
his  beak  as  if  to  ask,  '  Are  any  grains  left  ? '  But  we  understood  not  what  he
meant,  and  he  cried  to  us  with  so  loud  a  cry  that  we  thought  the  palace  would
fall  upon  us.  Then  he  ran  over  all  the  floor  till  he  saw  the  grain  which  had
rolled  to  the  fountain-edge,  and  rushed  eagerly  to  pick  it  up,  when  behold,
it  sprang  into  the  midst  of  the  water  and  became  a  fish  and  dived  to  the
bottom  of  the  basin.  Thereupon  the  cock  changed  to  a  big  fish  and  plunged
in  after  the  other,  and  the  two  disappeared  for  a  while,  and  lo !  we  heard  loud
shrieks  and  cries  of  pain  which  made  us  tremble.  After  this  the  Ifrit  rose
out  of  the  water,  and  he  was  as  a  burning  flame ;  casting  fire  and  smoke  from
his  mouth  and  eyes  and  nostrils.  And  immediately  the  Princess  likewise
came  forth  from  the  basin  and  she  was  one  live  coal  of  flaming  lowe ;  and
these  two,  she  and  he,  battled  for  the  space  of  an  hour,  until  their  fires
entirely  compassed  them  about  and  their  thick  smoke  filled  the  palace."

After  a  final  terrific  struggle  the  Ifrit  is  killed,  but  his  adversary
succumbs  to  her  wounds.

The  motif  has  been  discussed  by  several  writers.  See,  for  instance,
Hartland,  Legend  of  Perseus,  vol.  ii,  pp.  56,  57  ;  Crooke,  "  Some  Notes  on
Homeric  Folk-Lore,"  Folk-Lore,  vol.  xix,  1908,  p.  167  ;  Clouston,  Popular
Tales  and  Fictions,  vol.  i,  p.  413  et  seq. ;  W.  R.  Halliday,  "The  Force  of
Initiative  in  Magical  Conflict,"  Folk-Lore,  vol.  xxi,  1910,  p.  147  et  seq.;
Keightley,  Tales  and  Popular  Fictions,  1834,  p.  123;  Macculloch,  Childhood  oj
Fiction,  pp.  164-166;  Chauvin,  op.  cit.,  v,  p.  199;  viii,  p.  149;  Bolte,  op.  cit.,
vol.  ii,  p.  60  et  seq. ;  and  Cosquin,  "  Les  Mongols  et  leur  Pretendu  R6le  dans
la  Transmission  des  contes  Indiens  vers  L'Occident  Europeen,"  Etudes
Folkloriques,  pp.   497-612.

The  following  references  will  show  how  widely  diffused  is  the  motif
under  consideration,  both  in  Europe  and  the  East : —

N.  Sastri,  Dravidian  Nights,  pp.  8-18;  Oesterley,  Baital  Pachisi,  174-175;
Swynnerton,  Indian  Nights'  Entertainments,  No.  57 ;  Juig,  Die  Marchen  des
Siddhi-Kiir,  p.  51  et  seq. ;  Gibb,  The  History  of  the  Forty  Vezirs,  pp.  253-256;
Busk,  Sagas  from  the  Far  East,  p.  4 ;  Spitta-Bey,  Contes  Arabes  Modemes,
pp.  1-11;  A.  Dozon,  Contes  Albanais,  1881,  p.  135;  Hahn,  Griechische  und
Alhanesische  Marchen,  1864,  No.  68;  Mijatovic,  Serbian  Folk-Lore,  1874,  p.  211
et   seq. ;    Wardrop,   Georgian   Folk-Tales,   p.    1  ;    Ralston,    Russian  Folk-Tales,


THE  "  MAGICAL  CONFLICT  "  MOTIF  205

p.  229;  A.  and  W.  Schott,  Wallachian  Stories,  No.  18,  p.  198;  Straparola,  The
Nights,  trans.  Waters,  vol.  ii,  p.  109  ;  Lady  Charlotte  Guest,  "  The  Mabinogion,"
from  the  Welsh  of  Llyfr  Cock  0  Hergest  {The  Red  Book  of  Hergest),  1877,
pp.  471-473;  Campbeil,  Tales  of  the  West  Highlands,  vol.  ii,  p.  423;  Thorpe,
Yule-tide  Stories,  1853,  p.  364;  Dasent,  Popular  Tales  from  the  Norse,  1859,
pp.  335-339;  Grundtvig,  Ddnische  Volksm'drchen,  1878-1879,  vol.  i,  p.  248;
Petitot,  Traditions  Indiennes  du  Canada  Nord-Ouest,  1886,  p.  223. — n.m.p.


CHAPTER  XXXVIII

THEN  Marubhuti,  perceiving  that  Naravahanadatta
[M]  was  pleased  with  the  tale  of  Gomukha,  in  order
to  rival  him,  said :  "  Women  are  generally  fickle,  but
not  always,  for  even  courtesans  are  seen  to  be  rich  in  good
qualities,  much  more  others.  In  proof  of  this,  King,  hear
this  famous  tale.


52.  Story  of  King  Vikramdditya  and  the  Courtesan

There  was  in  Pataliputra  a  king  named  Vikramaditya ;  he
had  two  cherished  friends,  the  King  Hayapati,1  and  the  King
Gajapati,2  who  had  large  armies  of  horses  and  elephants.
And  that  proud  sovereign  had  a  mighty  enemy  named
Narasinha,3  the  lord  of  Pratishthana,  a  king  who  had  a  large
force  of  infantry.  Being  angry  with  that  enemy,  and  puffed
up  on  account  of  the  power  of  his  allies,  Vikramaditya  rashly
made  this  vow  :  "I  will  so  completely  conquer  that  king,
the  lord  of  men,  that  the  heralds  and  bards  shall  proclaim
him  at  the  door  as  my  slave."  Having  made  this  vow,  he
summoned  those  allies,  Hayapati  and  Gajapati,  and,  accom-
panied with  a  large  force,  shaking  the  earth  with  elephants
and  horses,  marched  with  them  to  make  a  fierce  attack  on
the  lord  of  men,  Narasinha.

When  he  arrived  near  Pratishthana,  Narasinha,  the  lord
of  men,  put  on  his  armour  and  went  out  to  meet  him.  Then
there  took  place  between  the  two  kings  a  battle  that  excited
wonder,  in  which  footmen  fought  with  elephants  and  horses.
And  at  last  the  army  of  Vikramaditya  was  routed  by  the  forces
of  Narasinha,  the  lord  of  men,  which  contained  many  scores
of  footmen.  And  Vikramaditya,  being  routed,  fled  to  his  city
Pataliputra,  and  his  two  allies  fled  to  their  own  countries.
And  Narasinha,  the  lord  of  men,  entered  his  own  city
Pratishthana,  accompanied  by  heralds  who  praised  his  might.

1  I.e.  lord  of  horses.  2  I.e.  lord  of  elephants.  3  I.e.  man-lion.

206


THE  BEAUTIFUL  COURTESAN  207


Then  Vikramaditya,  not  having  gained  his  end,  thought  :
'  Well,  as  that  enemy  is  not  to  be  conquered  by  arms,  I  will
conquer  him  by  policy  ;  let  some  blame  me  if  I  they  like,  but
let  not  my  oath  be  made  void."  Thus  reflecting,  he  entrusted
his  kingdom  to  suitable  ministers,  and  secretly  went  out  of
the  city  with  one  chief  minister,  named  Buddhivara,  and
with  five  hundred  well-born  and  brave  Rajputs,  and  in  the
disguise  of  a  candidate  for  service  x  went  to  Pratishthana,
the  city  of  his  enemy.  There  he  entered  the  splendid
mansion 2  of  a  beautiful  courtesan  named  Madanamala,  that
resembled  the  palace  of  a  king.  It  seemed  to  invite  him  with
the  silk  of  its  banners,  hoisted  on  the  pinnacles  of  high
ramparts,  the  points  of  which  waved  to  and  fro  in  the  soft
breeze.

It  was  guarded  at  the  principal  entrance,  the  east  door,
day  and  night,  by  twenty  thousand  footmen,  equipped  with
all  kinds  of  weapons.  At  each  of  the  other  three  doors,
looking  towards  the  other  cardinal  points,  it  was  defended
by  ten  thousand  warriors  ever  on  the  qui  vive.  In  such
guise  the   king   entered,   proclaimed   by   the   warders,   the

1  Karpatika :  for  the  use  of  this  word  see  Chapters  XXIV,  LXIII  and
LXXXI  of  this  work.

2  As  we  have  already  seen  (Vol.  I,  pp.  233,  234,  249),  Indian  prostitutes
often  acquired  great  power  and  wealth,  and  were  at  certain  periods  held  in
high  esteem.  Many  are  the  temples  that  have  been  enriched  by  their  gifts,
and  the  stone  inscriptions  that  have  been  raised  to  their  memory.  See,
for  instance,  Bombay  Gazetteer,  vol.  i,  Part  II,  1896,  pp.  372,  394;  also
L.  D.  Barnett,  Epigraphia  Indica,  vol.  xv,  p.  81,  where  many  references  are
given.

Madanamala  was  obviously  a  ganika,  the  highest  class  of  courtesan,
corresponding  to  the  Hetaerae  of  the  Greeks  (see  Athenaeus,  Book  XIII).  In
fiction  they  hold  an  important  place,  and  are  often  represented  as  highly
intellectual,  generous,  and  of  noble  character.  Cf.,  for  instance,  the  character
of  Vasantasena  in  the  Mrichchhakatika ;  Vasantatilaka,  a  great  friend  of
Princess  Ratnamanjari  in  the  Kathakoga,  p.  151  ;  the  maternal  Kuberasena
in  the  Parisishtaparvan,  ii,  225  et  seq. ;  and  the  prostitute  in  the  Prabandha-
cintamani  who  was  "a  storehouse  of  intellect,"  and  for  whom  the  king  con-
sidered "a  kingdom  would  be  too  small  a  present."  In  the  same  collection
we  read  (p.  11 6)  of  Cauladevi,  who  is  described  as  "a  famous  vessel  of  beauty
and  merit,  excelling  even  matrons  of  good  family."  See  further  Bloomfield,
"  The  Character  and  Adventures  of  Muladeva,"  Proc.  Amer.  Phil.  Soc,  vol.  Hi,
1913,  pp.  630,  631.—  n.m.p.


208  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

enclosure  of  the  palace,  which,  was  divided  into  seven
zones.  In  one  zone  it  was  adorned  with  many  long  lines  of
horses.  In  another  the  path  was  impeded  by  dense  troops
The  Wealthy  of  elephants.  In  another  it  was  surrounded
Courtesan  with  an  imposing  array  of  dense  weapons.  In
another  it  was  resplendent  with  many  treasure-houses,
that  gleamed  with  the  flash  of  jewels.  In  another  a  circle
was  always  formed  by  a  dense  crowd  of  attendants.  In
another  it  was  full  of  the  noise  of  many  bards  reciting
aloud,  and  in  another  resounding  with  the  sound  of  drums
beaten  in  concert.  Beholding  all  these  sights,  the  king  at
last  reached,  with  his  retinue,  the  splendid  edifice  in  which
Madanamala  dwelt.

She  having  heard  with  great  interest  from  her  attendants
that,  as  he  passed  through  the  zones,  the  horses  and  other
creatures  were  cured  of  their  wounds,1  thought  that  he  must
be  some  great  one  in  disguise,  and  so  she  went  to  meet  him,
and  bowed  before  him  with  love  and  curiosity,  and  bringing
him  in,  seated  him  on  a  throne  fit  for  a  king.  The  king's
heart  was  ravished  by  her  beauty,  gracefulness  and  courtesy,
and  he  saluted  her  without  revealing  who  he  was.

Then  Madanamala  honoured  that  king  with  costly  baths,
flowers,  perfumes,  garments  and  ornaments.  And  she  gave
daily  subsistence  to  those  followers  of  his,  and  feasted  him
and  his  minister  with  all  kinds  of  viands.  And  she  spent
the  day  with  him  in  drinking  and  other  diversions,  and  sur-
rendered herself  to  him,  having  fallen  in  love  with  him  at
first  sight.     Vikramaditya,  being  thus  entertained  by  her,

1  I  follow  sakutam,  the  reading  of  the  MS.  in  the  Sanskrit  College.  So
the  wounds  of  Sir  Urre  of  Hungary  were  healed,  as  soon  as  they  were  handled

by  the  valiant  Sir  Launcelot  {La  Mori  d'Arthure,  vol.  Hi,  p.  270). Cf.  also

Odyssey,  xix,  457,  and  see  Crooke,  "Some  Notes  on  Homeric  Folk-Lore,"
Folk-Lore,  vol.  xix,  1908,  p.  73.  The  B.  text  was  faulty  in  this  passage  and
Tawney  made  the  best  of  it  by  following  the  MS.  in  the  Sanskrit  College,
but,  as  Speyer  (op.  cit.,  p.  112)  points  out,  the  animal  cures  in  the  text  seem
quite  out  of  place  here,  and  the  king  was  never  represented  as  possessing
any  supernatural  powers.  The  D.  text  shows  that  B.'s  nirvrani(a  is  a  misread
nirvarnita.  Thus  the  amended  translation  would  be:  "She  having  heard
from  her  attendants  that,  as  he  passed  through  the  zones,  he  contemplated
with  interest  the  horses  and  other  animals." — n.m.p.


THE  QUESTION  OF  RECOMPENSE  209

day  by  day,  continued,  though  in  disguise,  to  live  in  a  style
suited  to  an  emperor.  And  whatever  and  howmuchsoever
wealth  he  was  in  the  habit  of  giving  to  suppliants,  Madana-
mala gladly  furnished  him  with  from  her  own  store.  And
she  thought  her  body  and  wealth  well  employed  while  enjoyed
by  him,  and  she  remained  averse  to  gain  and  to  other  men.
For  out  of  love  to  him  she  even  kept  off,  by  stratagems,
Narasinha,  the  king  of  that  land,  who  came  there,  being
enamoured  of  her.

While  the  king  was  being  waited  on  in  this  fashion  by
Madanamala  he  one  day  said  in  secret  to  his  minister  Buddhi-
vara,  who  accompanied  him  :  "A  courtesan  desires  wealth,
and  not  even  if  she  feels  love  does  she  become  attached  with-
out it,  for  when  Providence  framed  suitors  he  bestowed
greed  on  these  women.  But  this  Madanamala,  though  her
wealth  is  being  consumed  by  me,  through  her  great  love  is
not  estranged  from  me  ;  on  the  contrary,  she  delights  in  me.
So  how  can  I  now  make  her  a  recompense,  in  order  that  my
vow  may  in  course  of  time  be  fully  accomplished  ?  "  When
the  minister  Buddhivara  heard  this,  he  said  to  the  king :
"  If  this  be  so,  give  her  some  of  those  priceless  jewels  which
the  mendicant  Prapanchabuddhi  gave  you."  When  the  king
heard  that,  he  answered  him  :  "  If  I  were  to  give  them  all  to
her  I  should  not  have  made  her  a  recompense  worth  speaking
of ;  but  I  can  free  myself  from  obligation  in  another  way,
which  is  connected  also  with  the  story  of  that  mendicant."
When  the  minister  heard  this,  he  said  :  "  King,  why  did
that  mendicant  court  you  ?  Tell  me  his  story."  When  his
minister  Buddhivara  preferred  this  request,  the  king  said  :
"  Listen  ;    I  will  tell  you  his  story.

52a.  King  Vikramdditya  and  the  Treacherous  Mendicant

Long  ago  a  mendicant  named  Prapanchabuddhi  used  to
enter  my  hall  of  audience  in  Pataliputra  every  day  and  give
me  a  box.  For  a  whole  year  I  gave  these  boxes,  just  as
they  were,  unopened,  into  the  hand  of  my  treasurer.  One  day
one  of  these  boxes  presented  by  the  mendicant  by  chance  fell
from  my  hand  on  to  the  ground  and  burst  open.     And  a  great

VOL.  III.  o


210  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

jewel  fell  out  of  it,  glittering  like  fire,  and  it  appeared  as  if
it  were  the  mendicant's  heart,  which  I  had  not  discerned
before,  revealed  by  him.  When  I  saw  that,  I  took  it,  and  I
had  those  other  boxes  brought  which  he  had  presented  to  me,
and  opened  them,  and  took  a  jewel  out  of  every  one  of  them.
Then  in  astonishment  I  asked  Prapanchabuddhi :  "  Why
do  you  court  me  with  such  splendid  jewels  ?  "  Then  the
mendicant  took  me  aside  and  said  to  me  :  "On  the  fourteenth
day  of  the  black  fortnight  now  approaching  I  have  to  per-
form a  certain  incantation  at  nightfall,  in  a  cemetery  outside
this  town.  I  desire  you,  my  hero,  to  come  and  take  part
in  that  enterprise,  for  success  is  easily  obtained  when  the
obstacles  to  it  are  swept  away  by  the  aid  of  a  hero."

When  the  mendicant  said  this  to  me  I  agreed.  So  he
went  off  delighted,  and  in  a  few  days  the  fourteenth  night
of  the  black  fortnight  came  and  I  remembered  the  speech
of  that  ascetic.1  Then  I  performed  my  daily  observances
and  waited  for  the  night,  and  after  I  had  recited  the
evening  prayer  it  happened  that  I  rapidly  fell  asleep.
Then  the  adorable  Hari,  who  is  compassionate  to  his
votaries,  appeared  to  me  in  a  dream,  mounted  on  Garuda,
with  his  breast  marked  with  a  lotus,  and  thus  commended
me  :  "  My  son,  this  Prapanchabuddhi 2  is  rightly  named,
for  he  will  inveigle  you  into  the  cemetery  to  take  part  in
the  incantation  of  the  circle8  and  will  offer  you  up  as  a
victim.  So  do  not  do  what  he  tells  you  to  do  with  the
object  of  slaying  you,  but  say  to  him :  '  You  do  it  first,  and
when  I  have  learned  the  way  I  will  do  it.'  Then,  as  he  is
showing  you  the  way,  take  advantage  of  the  opportunity
and  slay  him  immediately,  and  you  will  acquire  the  power
that  he  desires  to  obtain."

When  Vishnu  had  said  this  he  disappeared,  and  I  woke
up  and  thought :   "  By  the  favour  of  Hari  I  have  detected

1  Here  the  word  Sramana  is  used,  which  generally  means  "  Buddhist
ascetic."

2  I.e.  deceitful-minded.

8  Cf.  the  story  of  Phalabhuti  in  the  twentieth  Taranga.  I  may  here
mention  that  Liebrecht  points  out  a  striking  parallel  to  the  story  of  Fulgentius
(with  which  I  have  compared  that  of  Phalabhuti)  in  the  Nugce  Curialium  of
Gualterus  Mapes  {Zur  Volkskunde,  p.  38).


THE  POWER  OF  FLYING  THROUGH  THE  AIR  211

that  magician,  and  this  day  I  must  slay  him."  Having  thus
reflected,  when  the  first  watch  of  the  night  was  gone,  I  went,
sword  in  hand,  alone  to  that  cemetery.  There  I  beheld  that
mendicant,  who  had  performed  the  ceremony  of  the  circle
incantation,  and  when  the  treacherous  fellow  saw  me  he
welcomed  me,  and  said:  "  King,  close  your  eyes  and  fall  at
full  length  on  the  ground  with  your  face  downwards,  and  in
this  way  both  of  us  will  attain  our  ends."  Then  I  answered
him  :  "  Do  it  yourself  first.  Show  me  how  to  do  it,  and
after  I  have  learned  I  will  do  precisely  as  you  do."  *  When
the  mendicant  heard  that,  like  a  fool  he  fell  on  the  earth,
and  I  cut  off  his  head  with  a  stroke  of  my  sword.

Then  a  voice  was  heard  from  the  air :  "  Bravo,  King !
By  offering  up  to-day  this  rascally  mendicant  thou  hast  ob-
tained the  power  of  going  through  the  air,  which  he  wished
to  obtain.  I,  the  God  of  Wealth,  that  move  about  at  will,
am  pleased  with  thy  courage.  So  ask  me  for  another  boon,
whatever  thou  mayest  desire."  After  saying  this  he  mani-
fested himself,  and  I,  bowing  before  him,  said  :  "  When  I
shall  supplicate  thee,  adorable  one,  thou  shalt  appear  on  my
thinking  of  thee,  and  grant  me  a  suitable  boon."  The  God
of  Wealth  said  :  "  So  be  it,"  and  disappeared.  And  having
obtained  magic  power,  I  went  back  quickly  to  my  own  palace.

52.  Story  of  King  Vikramdditya  and  the  Courtesan

"  Thus  I  have  told  you  my  adventure,  so  by  means  of  that
boon  of  Kuvera  I  must  now  recompense  Madanamala.  So
you  must  now  go  back  to  Pataliputra,  taking  with  you  my
disguised  Rajput  retinue,  and  I,  as  soon  as  I  have  in  a  novel
way  recompensed  my  beloved,  will  immediately  go  there,
with  the  intention  of  returning  here."

Having  said  this,  and  having  performed  his  daily  duties,

1  Cf.  Sicilianische  M'drchen,  vol.  ii,  p.  46,  where  the  giant  treacherously
lets  fall  his  gauntlet,  and  asks  his  adversary  to  pick  it  up.  His  adversary,
the  hero  of  the  story,  tells  him  to  pick  it  up  himself,  and  when  the  giant
bends  down  for  the  purpose,  cuts  off  his  head  with  one  blow  of  his  sword.

Cf  the  incident  of  the  Domba  in  the  story  of  the  cunning  Siddhikari,

Vol.  I,  p.  157  ;  and  see  Bloomfield,  "  On  False  Ascetics  and  Nuns,"  Journ.  Amer.
Orient.  Soc,  vol.  xliv,  No.  3,  p.  215. — n.m.p.


212  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

the  king  dismissed  his  minister  with  his  retinue.  He  said,
"So  be  it,"  and  departed;  and  the  king  spent  that  night
with  Madanamala,  anxious  about  his  approaching  separation.
She  too,  embracing  him  frequently,  because  her  heart  seemed
to  tell  her  that  he  was  going  to  a  distance,  did  not  sleep  all
that  night.

In  the  morning  the  king,  having  performed  all  his  neces-
sary duties,  entered  a  chapel  for  the  daily  worship  of  the
gods,  on  the  pretence  of  repeating  prayers.  And  there  the
God  of  Wealth  appeared  before  him  on  his  thinking  of  him,
and  bowing  before  him  the  king  craved  that  boon  formerly
promised,  in  the  following  words  :  "  O  god,  give  me  here
to-day,  in  accordance  with  that  boon  which  you  promised
me,  five  great  indestructible  golden  figures  of  men,1  such
that,  though  their  limbs  may  be  continually  cut  off  for  any
desired  use,  those  limbs  will  grow  again,  exactly  as  before."
The  God  of  Wealth  said  :  "  Even  so ;  be  there  unto  thee
five  such  figures  as  thou  desirest !  "  Having  said  this,  he
immediately  disappeared.  And  the  king  immediately  beheld
those  five  great  golden  figures  of  men  suddenly  standing  in
the  chapel ;  then  he  went  out  delighted,  and,  not  forgetting
his  promise,  he  flew  up  into  the  air  and  went  to  his  city  of
Pataliputra.  There  he  was  welcomed  by  his  ministers  and
the  citizens  and  his  wives,  and  he  remained  engaged  in  his
kingly  duties,  while  his  heart  was  far  away  in  Pratishthana.

In  the  meanwhile,  in  Pratishthana,  that  beloved  of  his
entered  that  chapel  to  see  her  love,  who  had  entered  it  long
before.  And  when  she  entered  she  did  not  perceive  that
beloved  king  anywhere,  but  she  beheld  five  gigantic  golden
figures  of  men.  When  she  saw  them,  and  did  not  find  him,
she  reflected  in  her  grief :  "  Surely  that  love  of  mine  was
some  Vidyadhara  or  Gandharva,  who  bestowed  upon  me
these  men  and  flew  away  up  to  heaven.  So  what  am  I  to
do  with  these  figures,  which  are  all  a  mere  burden,  now  that
I  am  deprived  of  him  ?  "  Thus  reflecting,  she  asked  her
servants  over  and  over  again  for  news  of  him,  and  went  out
and  roamed  about  her  domain.    And  she  found  no  satisfaction

1  See  the  note  on  automata  on  pp.  56-59  of  this  volume,  and  Cosquin,  Etudes
Folkloriques,  p.  609. — N.M.P.


THE  GOLDEN  FIGURES  213

anywhere,  either  in  the  palaces,  the  gardens,  the  chambers
or  other  places;  but  she  kept  lamenting,  grieved  at  being
separated  from  her  lover,  ready  to  abandon  the  body.

Her  attendants  tried  to  comfort  her,  saying  :  "  Do  not
despair,  mistress,  for  he  is  some  god  roaming  about  at  will,
and  when  he  pleases  he  will  return  to  you,  fair  one."  With
such  hope-inspiring  words  did  they  at  length  so  far  console
her  that  she  made  this  vow :  "If  in  six  months  he  does  not
grant  me  to  behold  him  I  will  give  away  all  my  property
and  enter  the  fire."  With  this  promise  she  fortified  herself,
and  remained  every  day  giving  alms,  thinking  on  that
beloved  of  hers.  And  one  day  she  cut  off  both  the  arms
The  °f  one  °f  those  golden  men  and  gave  them  to

Indestructible  the  Brahmans,  being  intent  on  charity  only.  And
figures  ftie  next   day  she  perceived  with   astonishment

that  both  arms  had  grown  again,  exactly  as  they  were  before.
Then  she  proceeded  to  cut  off  the  arms  of  the  others,  to  give
them  away  ;  and  the  arms  of  all  of  them  grew  again  as  they
were  before.  Then  she  saw  that  they  were  indestructible,
and  every  day  she  cut  off  the  arms  of  the  figures  and  gave
them  to  studious  Brahmans,  according  to  the  number  of
Vedas  they  had  read.

And  in  a  few  days  a  Brahman,  named  Sangramadatta,
having  heard  the  fame  of  her  bounty,  which  was  spread
abroad  in  every  direction,  came  from  Pataliputra.  He,
being  poor,  but  acquainted  with  four  Vedas,  and  endowed
with  virtues,  entered  into  her  presence  desiring  a  gift,  being
announced  by  the  doorkeepers.  She  gave  him  as  many
arms  of  the  golden  figures  as  he  knew  Vedas,  after  bowing
before  him  with  limbs  emaciated  with  her  vow  and  pale  with
separation  from  her  beloved.  Then  the  Brahman,  having
heard  from  her  sorrow- stricken  attendants  the  whole  of  her
story,  ending  in  that  very  terrible  vow,  was  delighted,  but
at  the  same  time  despondent,  and  loading  two  camels  with
those  golden  arms  went  to  his  native  city,  Pataliputra.

Then  that  Brahman,  thinking  that  his  gold  would  not
be  safe  there  unless  guarded  by  the  king,  entered  the  king's
presence  and  said  to  him,  while  he  was  sitting  in  the  hall  of
judgment :  "  Here  I  am,  0  great  King,  a  Brahman  who  am


214  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

an  inhabitant  of  thy  town.  I,  being  poor,  and  desiring
wealth,  went  to  the  southern  clime,  and  arrived  at  a  city
named  Pratishthana,  belonging  to  King  Narasinha.  There,
being  desirous  of  a  donation,  I  went  to  the  house  of
Madanamala,  a  courtesan  of  distinguished  fame.  For  with
her  there  lived  long  some  divine  being,  who  departed  some-
where or  other,  after  giving  her  five  indestructible  figures  of
men.  Then  the  high-spirited  woman  became  afflicted  at  his
departure,  and  considering  life  to  be  poison- agony,  and  the
body,  that  fruitless  accumulation  of  delusion,  to  be  merely
a  punishment  for  thieving,  lost  her  patience,  and  being
with  difficulty  consoled  by  her  attendants,  made  this  vow  :
'  If  in  the  space  of  six  months  he  does  not  visit  me,  I  must
enter  the  fire,  my  soul  being  smitten  by  adversity.'

u  Having  made  this  vow,  she,  being  resolved  on  death,
and  desiring  to  perform  good  actions,  gives  away  every  day
very  large  gifts.  And  I  beheld  her,  King,  with  tottering
feet,  conspicuous  for  the  beauty  of  her  person,  though  it  was
thin  from  fasting;  with  hand  moistened  with  the  water  of
giving,  surrounded  with  maids  like  clustering  bees,  sorely
afflicted,  looking  like  the  incarnation  of  the  mast  condition
of  the  elephant  of  love.1  And  I  think  that  lover  who  deserts
her,  and  causes  by  his  absence  that  fair  one  to  abandon  the
body,  deserves  blame,  indeed  deserves  death.  She  to-day
gave  to  me,  who  know  the  four  Vedas,  four  golden  arms  of
human  figures,  according  to  right  usage,  proportioning  her
gift  to  the  number  of  my  Vedas.  So  I  wish  to  purify  my
house  with  sacrifice  and  to  follow  a  life  of  religion  here ;
therefore  let  the  king  grant  me  protection."

The  King  Vikramaditya,  hearing  these  tidings  of  his
beloved  from  the  mouth  of  the  Brahman,  had  his  mind
suddenly  turned  towards  her.  And  he  commanded  his
doorkeeper  to  do  what  the  Brahman  wished,  and  thinking
how  constant  was  the  affection  of  his  mistress,  who  valued
her  life  as  stubble,  and  in  his  impatience  supposing  that  she

1  Here  there  is  an  elaborate  pun :  kara  means  "  hand "  and  also
"proboscis'';  dana,  "giving"  and  "the  ichor  that  exudes  from  the  temples
of  a  mast  elephant."  "Surrounded  with  clustering  bees"  may  also  mean,
"  surrounded  with  handmaids  whose  consolations  worried  her."


THE  RETURN  OF  KING  VIKRAMADITYA      215

would  be  able  to  assist  him  in  accomplishing  his  vow,  and
remembering  that  the  time  fixed  for  her  abandoning  the
body  had  almost  arrived,  he  quickly  committed  his  kingdom
to  the  care  of  his  ministers,  and  flying  through  the  air  reached
Pratishthana,  and  entered  the  house  of  his  beloved.  There
he  beheld  his  beloved,  with  raiment  pellucid  like  the  moon-
light, having  given  her  wealth  away  to  Pandits,1  attenuated
like  a  digit  of  the  moon  at  the  time  of  its  change.

Madanamala,  for  her  part,  on  beholding  him  arrived
unexpectedly,  the  quintessence  of  nectar  to  her  eyes,  was
for  a  moment  like  one  amazed.  Then  she  embraced  him,  and
threw  round  his  neck  the  noose  of  her  arms,  as  if  fearing
that  he  would  escape  again.  And  she  said  to  him  with  a
voice  the  accents  of  which  were  choked  with  tears  :  "  Cruel
one,  why  did  you  depart  and  forsake  my  innocent  self?  "

The  king  said  :  "  Come,  I  will  tell  you  in  private,"  and
went  inside  with  her,  welcomed  by  her  attendants.  There
he  revealed  to  her  who  he  was,  and  described  his  circum-
stances, how  he  came  there  to  conquer  King  Narasinha  by
an  artifice,  and  how,  after  slaying  Prapanchabuddhi,  he
acquired  the  power  of  flying  through  the  air,  and  how  he
was  enabled  to  reward  her  by  a  boon  that  he  obtained  from
the  Lord  of  Wealth,  and  how,  hearing  tidings  of  her  from
a  Brahman,  he  had  returned  there.

Having  told  the  whole  story,  beginning  with  the  subject
of  his  vow,  he  again  said  to  her  :  "So,  my  beloved,  that
King  Narasinha,  being  very  mighty,  is  not  to  be  conquered
by  armies,  and  he  contended  with  me  in  single  combat,  but
I  did  not  slay  him,  for  I  possess  the  power  of  flying  in  the
air,  and  he  can  only  go  on  the  earth ;  for  who  that  is  a  true
Kshatriya  would  desire  to  conquer  in  an  unfair  combat  ?
The  object  of  my  vow  is,  that  that  king  may  be  announced
by  the  heralds  as  waiting  at  the  door ;  do  you  assist  me  in
that."

When  the  courtesan  heard  this  she  said  :  "  I  am  honoured
by  your  request."  And  summoning  her  heralds  she  said  to
them  :  "  When  the  King  Narasinha  shall  come  to  my  house,
you  must  stand  near  the  door  with  attentive  eyes,  and

1  The  word  vibudha  also  means  "gods" — and  the  gods  feed  on  the  moon.


216  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

while  he  is  entering  you  must  say  again  and  again  :  '  King,
Prince  Narasinha  is  loyal  and  devoted  to  thee.'  And  when
he  looks  up  and  asks  :  *  Who  is  here  ?  '  you  must  immedi-
ately say  to  him:  'Vikramaditya  is  here.'"  After  giving
them  these  orders  she  dismissed  them,  and  then  she  said  to
the  female  warder :  "  You  must  not  prevent  King  Narasinha
from  entering  here."

After  issuing  these  orders  Madanamala  remained  in  a
state  of  supreme  felicity,  having  regained  the  lord  of  her
life,  and  gave  away  her  wealth  fearlessly.

Then  King  Narasinha,  having  heard  of  that  profuse
liberality  of  hers,  which  was  due  to  her  possession  of  the
golden  figures,  though  he  had  given  her  up,  came  to  visit
Th  Ob'  t  f  ^er  nouse-  And  while  he  entered,  not  being
King  Vikrama-  forbidden  by  the  warder,  all  the  heralds  shouted
ditya's  Vow  m  a  \o\xd  voice,  beginning  at  the  outer  door :
"  King,  Prince  Narasinha  is  submissive  and
devoted."  When  that  sovereign  heard  that,  he  was  angry
and  alarmed,  and  when  he  asked  who  was  there,  and  found
out  that  King  Vikramaditya  was  there,  he  waited  a  moment
and  went  through  the  following  reflections  :  "So  this  king
has  forced  his  way  into  my  kingdom  and  carried  out  the  vow
he  made  long  ago,  that  I  should  be  announced  at  his  door.
In  truth  this  king  is  a  man  of  might,  since  he  has  thus  beaten
me  to-day.  And  I  must  not  slay  him  by  force,  since  he  has
come  alone  to  a  house  in  my  dominions.  So  I  had  better
enter  now."  Having  thus  reflected,  King  Narasinha  entered,
announced  by  all  the  heralds.  And  King  Vikramaditya,  on
beholding  him  enter  with  a  smile  on  his  face,  rose  up  also
with  smiling  countenance  and  embraced  him.  Then  those
two  kings  sat  down  and  inquired  after  one  another's  welfare,
while  Madanamala  stood  by  their  side.

And  in  the  course  of  conversation  Narasinha  asked
Vikramaditya  where  he  had  obtained  those  golden  figures.
Then  Vikramaditya  told  him  the  whole  of  that  strange
adventure  of  his,  how  he  had  slain  the  base  ascetic  and
acquired  the  power  of  flying  through  the  air,  and  how,  by
virtue  of  the  boon  of  the  God  of  Wealth,  he  had  obtained
five    indestructible    gigantic    golden    figures.      Then    King


EVEN  COURTESANS  CAN  BE  NOBLE     217

Narasinha  chose  that  king  for  his  friend,  discovering  that
he  was  of  great  might,  that  he  possessed  the  power  of  flying,
and  that  he  had  a  good  heart.  And  having  made  him  his
friend,  he  welcomed  him  with  the  prescribed  rites  of  hospi-
tality, and  taking  him  to  his  own  palace,  he  entertained  him
with  all  the  attentions  paid  to  himself.  And  King  Vikrama-
ditya,  after  having  been  thus  honoured,  was  dismissed  by  him
and  returned  to  the  house  of  Madanamala.

Then  Vikramaditya,  having  accomplished  his  difficult  vow
by  his  courage  and  intelligence,  determined  to  go  to  his  own
city.  And  Madanamala,  being  unable  to  remain  separated
from  him,  was  eager  to  accompany  him,  and  with  the  inten-
tion of  abandoning  her  native  land  she  bestowed  her  dwelling
upon  the  Brahmans.  Then  Vikramaditya,  the  moon  of  kings,
went  with  her,  whose  mind  was  exclusively  fixed  on  him,  to
his  own  city  of  Pataliputra,  followed  by  her  elephants,  horses
and  footmen.  There  he  remained  in  happiness  (accompanied
by  Madanamala,  who  had  abandoned  her  own  country  for
his  love),  having  formed  an  alliance  with  King  Narasinha.


[M]  "  Thus,  King,  even  courtesans  are  occasionally  of
noble  character  and  as  faithful  to  kings  as  their  own  wives,
much  more  than  matrons  of  high  birth."

On  hearing  this  noble  tale  from  the  mouth  of  Marubhuti,
the  King  Naravahanadatta  and  his  new  wife  Ratnaprabha,
sprung  from  the  glorious  race  of  the  Vidyadharas,  were  much
delighted.


CHAPTER  XXXIX

WHEN  Marubhuti  had  told  this  story  there,  the
[M]  commander-in-chief,  Harislkha,  said  in  the
presence  of  Naravahanadatta  :  "  It  is  true,  good
women  value  nothing  more  than  their  husbands,  and  in
proof  of  it  listen  now  to  this  still  more  wonderful  tale.

53.  Story  of  firingabhuja  and  the  Daughter  of  the  Rdkshasa

There  is  a  city  on  the  earth  named  Vardhamana,  and  in
it  there  dwelt  a  king  named  Virabhuja,  chief  of  righteous
men.  And  though  he  had  a  hundred  wives,  one  queen,  of
the  name  of  Gunavara,  was  dearer  to  him  than  his  life.  And,
in  spite  of  his  hundred  wives,  it  happened,  as  Fate  would
have  it,  that  not  one  of  them  bore  him  a  son.  So  he  asked
a  physician  named  Srutavardhana  :  "Is  there  any  medicine
able  to  bring  about  the  birth  of  a  son  ?  "  When  the  physician
heard  that,  he  said :  "  King,  I  can  prepare  such  a  medicine,1
but  the  king  must  procure  for  me  a  wild  goat."  When  he
heard  this  speech  of  the  physician's,  the  king  gave  an  order
to  the  warder  and  had  a  goat  brought  for  him  from  the  forest.
The  physician  handed  over  the  goat  to  the  king's  cooks  and
with  its  flesh  prepared  a  sovereign  elixir  for  the  queens.

The  king  went  off  to  worship  his  god,  after  ordering  the
queens  to  assemble  in  one  place.  And  ninety-nine  of  those
queens  did  assemble  in  one  place,  but  the  Queen  Gunavara
alone  was  not  present  there,  for  she  was  at  that  time  near

1  Cf.  the  lichi  in  the  fifteenth  of  Miss  Stokes's  Indian  Fairy  Tales,  and
the  payasa  in  the  sixteenth  Sarga  of  the  Ramayana.  See  also  Gonzenbach,
Sicilianische  Mdrchen,  p.  269,  and  Bernhard  Schmidt's  Griechische  Mdrchen,
pp.  104,  117,  120.  The  beginning  of  this  tale  belongs  to  Mr  Baring-Gould's
"Gold-child"  root.  Another  parallel  is  to  be  found  in  Kaden's  Unter  den
Olivenh'dumen,  p.  168.  See  also  Sagas  from  the  Far  East,  p.  268;  Birlinger,
Aus   Schwaben,    p.    105;    and    "  Volsunga    Saga"    in    Hagen's    Helden-Sagen,

vol.  iii,  pp.  8-9. See  Vol.  II,  p.  i36nl,  to  which  I  would  add  Crooke,  op.  cit.t

vol.  i,  pp.  227-228. — n.m.p.

218


THE  BIRTH  OF  SRINGABHUJA  219

the  king,  who  was  engaged  in  praying  to  his  god.  And  when
they  had  assembled  the  physician  gave  them  the  whole  of
the  elixir  to  drink,  mixed  with  powder,  not  perceiving  the
absence  of  Gunavara.

Immediately  the  king  returned  with  his  beloved,  having
performed  his  devotions,  and  perceiving  that  that  drug  was
completely  finished,  he  said  to  the  physician :  "  What  !
Did  you  not  keep  any  for  Gunavara?  You  have  forgotten
the  principal  object  with  which  this  was  undertaken."
After  saying  this  to  the  abashed  physician,  the  king  said  to
the  cooks :  "Is  there  any  of  the  flesh  of  that  goat  left  ?  "
The  cooks  said :  "  The  horns  only  remain."  Then  the
physician  said  :  "  Bravo  !  I  can  make  an  admirable  elixir
out  of  the  centre  of  the  horns."  After  saying  this,  the
physician  had  an  elixir  prepared  from  the  fleshy  part  of  the
horns,  and  gave  it  to  Queen  Gunavara  mixed  with  powder.

Then  the  ninety- nine  wives  of  the  king  became  pregnant,
and  all  in  time  brought  forth  sons.  But  the  head  Queen
Gunavara  conceived  last  of  all,  and  afterwards  gave  birth  to
a  son  with  more  auspicious  marks  than  the  sons  of  all  the
others.  And  as  he  was  sprung  from  the  juice  of  the  fleshy
part  of  the  horns,  his  father,  the  king,  gave  him  the  name  of
Sringabhuja,  and  rejoiced  greatly  at  his  birth.  He  grew  up
with  those  other  brothers,  and  though  in  age  he  was  the
youngest  of  all,  he  was  superior  to  all  in  good  qualities.  And
in  course  of  time  that  prince  became  like  the  God  of  Love
in  beauty,  and  like  Arjuna  in  his  skill  in  archery,  and  like
Bhima  in  strength.  Accordingly  the  other  queens,  seeing
that  Queen  Gunavara,  now  that  she  had  this  son,  was  more
than  ever  dear  to  King  Virabhuja,  became  jealous  of  her.

Then  an  evil-minded  queen  among  them,  named  Ayaso-
lekha,  deliberated  with  all  the  others  and  entered  into  a
conspiracy  ;  and  when  the  king  came  home  one  day  she
exhibited  an  assumed  sadness  in  her  face.  The  king  asked
her  the  reason,  and  she  said,  with  apparent  reluctance  :  "  My
husband,  why  do  you  endure  patiently  the  disgrace  of  your
house  ?  You  avert  disgrace  from  others,  why  do  you  not
avert  it  from  yourself  ?  You  know  the  young  superintendent
of  the  women's  apartments  named  Surakshita  ;    your  Queen


220  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

Gunavara  is  secretly  devoted  to  him.  Since  no  man  but  he
can  penetrate  into  the  women's  apartments,  which  are  strictly
watched  by  guards,  she  associates  with  him.  And  this  is  a
well-known  subject  of  gossip  in  the  whole  harem."  When
she  said  this  to  the  king,  he  pondered  and  reflected,  and  went
and  asked  the  other  queens  one  after  another  in  private,  and
they  were  faithful  to  their  treacherous  plot,  and  told  him  the
same  story.

Then  that  wise  king  conquered  his  anger,  and  reflected  :
"  This  accusation  against  these  two  is  improbable,  and  yet
such  is  the  gossip.  So  I  must  not  without  reflecting  reveal
the  matter  to  anyone  .  but  they  must  by  an  artifice  be
separated  now,  to  enable  me  to  see  the  termination  of  the
whole  matter."

Having  determined  on  this,  next  day  he  summoned
Surakshita,  the  superintendent  of  the  women's  apartments,
into  his  judgment-hall  and,  with  assumed  anger,  said  to  him  :
"  I  have  learned,  villain,  that  you  have  slain  a  Brahman,  so
I  cannot  endure  to  see  your  face  until  you  have  made  a
pilgrimage  to  holy  places."  When  he  heard  that,  he  was
amazed,  and  began  to  murmur  :  "  How  can  I  have  slain  a
Brahman,  my  sovereign  ?  "  But  the  king  went  on  to  say  :
"Do  not  attempt  to  brazen  it  out,  but  go  to  Kashmir  to  wash
away  your  sin  (where  are  those  holy  fields,  Vijayakshetra,
and  Nandikshetra  the  purifying,  and  the  kshetra  l  of  the
boar),  the  land  which  was  hallowed  by  Vishnu,  the  bow-
handed  god,  where  the  stream  of  the  Ganges  bears  the  name
of  Vitasta,  where  is  the  famous  Mandapakshetra,  and  where
is  Uttaramanasa  ;  when  your  sin  has  been  washed  away  by
a  pilgrimage  to  these  holy  places  you  shall  behold  my  face
again,  but  not  till  then."

With  this  speech  the  King  Virabhuja  dismissed  the
helpless  Surakshita,  sending  him  to  a  distance  on  the  pre-
tence of  a  pilgrimage  to  holy  places.  Then  the  king  went
into  the  presence  of  that  Queen  Gunavara,  full  of  love  and
anger  and  sober  reflection.  Then  she,  seeing  that  his  mind
was  troubled,  asked  him  anxiously :  "  My  husband,  why
are  you  seized  to-day  with  a  sudden  fit  of  despondency  ?  ':

1  Kshetra  here  means  "  a  holy  field  "  or  sacred  spot.


THE  PLOT  SUCCEEDS  221

When  the  king  heard  that,  he  gave  her  this  feigned  answer :
"  To-day,  Queen,  a  great  astrologer  came  to  me  and  said  :
'  King,  you  must  place  the  Queen  Gunavara  for  some  time
in  a  dungeon,  and  you  must  yourself  live  a  life  of  chastity,
otherwise  your  kingdom  will  certainly  be  overthrown,  and
she  will  surely  die.'  Having  said  this,  the  astrologer  de-
parted ;  hence  my  present  despondency."  When  the  king
said  this,  the  Queen  Gunavara,  who  was  devoted  to  her
husband,  distracted  with  fear  and  love,  said  to  him  :
"  Why  do  you  not  cast  me  this  very  day  into  a  dungeon,
my  husband  ?  I  am  highly  favoured  if  I  can  benefit  you
even  at  the  sacrifice  of  my  life.  Let  me  die,  but  let  not  my
lord  have  misfortune.  For  a  husband  is  the  chief  refuge
of  wives  in  this  world  and  in  the  next."  Having  heard
this  speech  of  hers,  the  king  said  to  himself,  with  tears  in
his  eyes  :  "I  think  there  is  no  guilt  in  her,  nor  in  that
Surakshita,  for  I  saw  that  the  colour  of  his  face  did  not
change  and  he  seemed  without  fear.  Alas  !  nevertheless  I
must  ascertain  the  truth  of  that  rumour."

After  reflecting  thus,  the  king  in  his  grief  said  to  the
queen  :  "  Then  it  is  best  that  a  dungeon  should  be  made
here,  Queen !  "  She  replied :  "  Very  good."  So  the  king  had
The  Queen  a  dungeon  easy  of  access  made  in  the  women's
is  disgraced  apartments  and  placed  the  queen  in  it.  And  he
comforted  her  son  Sringabhuja  (who  was  in  despair  and  asked
the  reason)  by  telling  him  exactly  what  he  told  the  queen.
And  she,  for  her  part,  thought  the  dungeon  heaven,  because
it  was  all  for  the  king's  good.  For  good  women  have  no
pleasure  of  their  own ;  to  them  their  husbands'  pleasure  is
pleasure.1

When  this  had  been  done,  that  other  wife  of  the  king's,
named  Ayasolekha,  said  of  her  own  accord  to  her  son,  who
was  named  Nirvasabhuja  :  "So  our  enemy  Gunavara  has
been  thrown  into  a  dungeon,  and  it  would  be  a  good  thing
if  her  son  were  banished  from  this  country.  So,  my  boy,
devise  a  scheme  with  the  help  of  your  brothers  by  which
Sringabhuja  may  be  quickly  banished  from  the  country."

1  This  part  of  the  story  reminds  one  of  the  "Clerk's  Tale  "  in  Chaucer's
Canterbury  Tales.


222  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

Having  been  addressed  in  this  language  by  his  mother,  the
jealous  Nirvasabhuja  told  his  other  brothers  and  continued
to  ponder  over  a  scheme.

And  one  day,  as  the  king's  sons  were  practising  with
their  weapons  of  war,  they  all  saw  an  enormous  crane  in
front  of  the  palace.  And  while  they  were  looking  with
The  Rakshasa  astonishment  at  that  misshapen  bird  a  Buddhist
and  the  Golden  mendicant,  who  possessed  supernatural  know-
Arrow  ledge,  came  that  way  and  said  to  them :  "  Princes,

this  is  not  a  crane ;  it  is  a  Rakshasa  named  Agnisikha,
who  wanders  about  in  an  assumed  shape  destroying  towns.
So  pierce  him  with  an  arrow,  that  being  smitten  he  may
depart  hence."  When  they  heard  this  speech  of  the  mendi-
cant's the  ninety- nine  elder  brothers  shot  their  arrows,  but
not  one  struck  the  crane.

Then  that  naked  mendicant  again  said  to  them  :  "  This
younger  brother  of  yours,  named  Sringabhuja,  is  able  to
strike  this  crane,  so  let  him  take  a  bow  suitable  for  the
purpose."

When  Nirvasabhuja  heard  that,  the  treacherous  one
remembered  the  injunction  of  his  mother,  an  opportunity
for  carrying  out  which  had  now  arrived,  and  reflected :
"  This  will  be  a  means  of  getting  Sringabhuja  out  of  the
country.1  So  let  us  give  him  the  bow  and  arrow  belonging
to  our  father.  If  the  crane  is  pierced  and  goes  off  with  our
father's  golden  arrow  sticking  in  it,  Sringabhuja  will  follow
it,  while  we  are  searching  for  the  arrow.  And  when  he  does
not  find,  in  spite  of  his  search,  that  Rakshasa  transformed
into  a  crane,  he  will  continue  to  roam  about  hither  and
thither;  he  will  not  come  back  without  the  arrow."

Thus  reflecting,  the  treacherous  one  gave  to  Sringabhuja
his  father's  bow  with  the  arrow,  in  order  that  he  might  smite
the  crane.  The  mighty  prince  took  it  and  drew  it  and
pierced  that  crane  with  the  golden  arrow,  the  notch  of  which
was  made  of  a  jewel.  The  crane,  as  soon  as  it  was  pierced,
went  off  with  the  arrow  sticking  in  its  body,  and  flying  away,
departed  with  drops  of  blood  falling  from  the  wound.

1  See  Ralston's  Russian  Folk-Tales,  p.  80,  where  numerous  parallels  are
adduced.     CJ.  also  Gonzenbach's  Sicilianische  Marchen,  vol.  i,  p.  199-


THE  GOLDEN  ARROW  223

Then  the  treacherous  Nirvasabhuja,  and  the  other
brothers,  instigated  by  his  hints,  said  to  the  brave  Sringa-
bhuja:  "Give  us  back  the  golden  arrow  that  belongs  to
our  father,  otherwise  we  will  abandon  our  bodies  before
your  eyes.  For  unless  we  produce  it  our  father  will  banish
us  from  this  country,  and  its  fellow  is  not  to  be  made  or
obtained."  When  Sringabhuja  heard  that,  he  said  to  those
crafty  ones :  "Be  of  good  cheer !  Do  not  be  afraid.
Abandon  your  terror  !  I  will  go  and  slay  that  miserable
Rakshasa  and  bring  back  the  arrow."  Having  said  this,
Sringabhuja  took  his  own  bow  and  arrows  and  went  in  the
same  direction  in  which  the  Rakshasa  had  gone,  quickly
following  up  the  track  of  the  drops  of  blood  that  had  fallen
on  the  ground.

The  other  sons  returned  delighted  to  their  mothers,  and
Sringabhuja,  as  he  went  on  step  by  step,  at  last  reached  a
distant  forest.  Seeking  about  in  it,  he  found  in  the  wood
a  great  city,  like  the  fruit  of  his  own  tree  of  merit  fallen  to
him  in  due  time  for  enjoyment.  There  he  sat  down  at  the
root  of  a  tree  to  rest,  and  as  if  in  a  moment  beheld  a  maiden
of  wonderful  beauty  coming  there,  appearing  to  have  been
made  by  the  Creator  in  some  strange  way  of  ambrosia  and
poison ;  since  by  her  absence  she  deprived  of  life,  and  by
her  presence  she  bestowed  it.

And  when  the  maiden  slowly  approached  him,  and
looked  at  him  with  an  eye  raining  love,  the  prince  fell  in  love
with  her,  and  said  to  her:  " Gazelle- eyed  one,  what  is  the
name  of  this  city,  and  to  whom  does  it  belong  ?  Who  are
you,  and  why  have  you  come  here?  Tell  me."  Then  the
pearly -toothed  maid  turned  her  face  sideways,  and  fixed  her
eyes  on  the  ground,  and  spake  to  him  with  sweet  and  loving
voice  :  "  This  city  is  Dhumapura,  the  home  of  all  felicity  ;
in  it  lives  a  mighty  Rakshasa,  by  name  Agnisikha ;  know
that  I  am  his  matchless  daughter,  Rupasikha  by  name,  who
have  come  here  with  mind  captivated  by  your  unparalleled
beauty.  Now  you  must  tell  me  who  you  are  and  why  you
have  come  here."  When  she  said  this,  he  told  her  who  he
was,  and  of  what  king  he  was  the  son,  and  how  he  had  come
to  Dhumapura  for  the  sake  of  an  arrow.


224  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

Then  Rupasikha,  having  heard  the  whole  story,  said  :
"  There  is  no  archer  like  you  in  the  three  worlds,  since  you
pierced  even  my  father  with  a  great  arrow  when  he  was  in
the  form  of  a  crane.  But  I  took  that  golden  arrow  for  my
own,  by  way  of  a  plaything.  But  my  father's  wound  was  at
once  healed  by  the  minister  Mahadanshtra,  who  excels  all  men
in  knowledge  of  potent  drugs  for  curing  wounds.  So  I  will
go  to  my  father,  and  after  I  have  explained  the  whole  matter
I  will  quickly  introduce  you  into  his  presence,  my  husband.
So  I  call  you,  for  my  heart  is  now  fully  set  upon  you."

Having  said  this,  Rupasikha  left  Sringabhuja  there  and
immediately  went  into  the  presence  of  her  father,  Agni&kha,
and  said :  "  Father,  there  has  come  here  a  wonderful  prince
named  Sringabhuja,  matchless  for  gifts  of  beauty,  birth,
character  and  age.  I  feel  certain  that  he  is  not  a  man ;  he
is  some  portion  of  a  god  incarnate  here  below ;  so  if  he  does
not  become  my  husband  I  will  certainly  abandon  my  life."

When  she  said  this  to  him,  her  father,  the  Rakshasa,
said  to  her  :  "  My  daughter,  men  are  our  appropriate  food.
Nevertheless,  if  your  heart  is  set  upon  it,  let  it  be  so  ;  bring
your  prince  here  and  show  him  to  me."  When  Rupasikha
heard  that,  she  went  to  Sringabhuja,  and  after  telling  him
what  she  had  done  she  took  him  into  the  presence  of  her
father.  He  prostrated  himself,  and  Agnisikha,  the  father
of  the  maiden,  after  saluting  him  courteously,  said  to  him :
"  Prince,  I  will  give  you  my  daughter  Rupasikha  if  you
never  disobey  my  orders."  When  he  said  this,  Sringabhuja,
bending  low,  answered  him  :  "  Good  !  I  will  never  disobey
your  orders."  When  Sringabhuja  said  this  to  him,  Agnisikha
was  pleased,  and  answered  :  "  Rise  up  !  Go  and  bathe,  and
return  here  from  the  bathroom."  After  saying  this  to
him,  he  said  to  his  daughter :  "  Go  and  bring  all  your  sisters
here  quickly."  When  Agnisikha  had  given  these  orders  to
Sringabhuja  and  Rupasikha  they  both  of  them  went  out,
after  promising  to  obey  them.

Then  the  wise  Rupasikha  said  to  Sringabhuja  :  "  My
husband,  I  have  a  hundred  sisters,  who  are  princesses,  and
we  are  all  exactly  alike,  with  similar  ornaments  and  dresses,
and  all  of  us  have  similar  necklaces  upon  our  necks.     So


THE  SIGN  OF  RECOGNITION  225

our  father  will  assemble  x  us  in  one  place  and,  in  order  to
bewilder  you,  will  say  :  '  Choose  your  own  love  out  of  the
midst  of  these.'  For  I  know  that  such  is  his  treacherous
intention ;  otherwise  why  is  he  assembling  all  of  us  here  ?
So  when  we  are  assembled  I  will  put  my  necklace  on  my
head  instead  of  my  neck ;  by  that  sign  you  will  recognise
me  ;  then  throw  over  my  neck  the  garland  of  forest  flowers.
And  this  father  of  mine  is  somewhat  silly  ;  he  has  not  a
discerning  intellect ;  besides,  what  is  the  use  against  me
of  those  powers  which  he  possesses  by  being  a  Rakshasa  ?
So,  whatever  he  says  to  entrap  you,  you  must  agree  to,  and
must  tell  it  to  me,  and  I  shall  know  well  enough  what  further
steps  to  take."

Having  said  this,  Rupasikha  went  to  her  sisters,  and
Sringabhuja,  having  agreed  to  what  she  said,  went  to  bathe.
Then  Rupasikha  came  with  her  sisters  into  the  presence  of
her  father,  and  Sringabhuja  returned,  after  he
had  been  washed  by  a  female  servant.  Then
Agnisikha  gave  a  garland  of  forest  flowers  to  Sringabhuja,
saying :  "  Give  this  to  that  one  of  these  ladies  who  is
your  own  love."  He  took  the  garland  and  threw  it  round
the  neck  of  Rupasikha,2  who  had  previously  placed  the
necklace  on  her  head  by  way  of  token.  Then  Agnisikha
said  to  Rupasikha  and  Sringabhuja  :  "I  will  celebrate  your
marriage  ceremony  to-morrow  morning."

1  The  D.  text  reads  samghatayati  instead  of  samghattayati. — n.m.p.

2  Cf  the  story  of  "The  Golden  Lion"  in  Gonzenbach's  Sicilianische
Mdrchen,  vol.  ii,  p.  76,  where  the  lady  places  a  white  cloth  round  her  waist.
See  Dr  Kohler's  note  on  the  passage.  Cf  also  the  hint  which  Messeria  gives
to  her  lover  in  "The  Mermaid,"  Thorpe's  Yule-tide  Stories,  p.  198,  and  the
behaviour  of  Singorra  on  p.  214.  See  also  "The  Hasty  Word,"  Ralston's
Russian  Folk-Tales,  p.  368,  and  "The  Water  King  and  Vasilissa  the  Wise,"
p.  128;  Veckenstedt's  Wendische  Sagen,  pp.  256,258;  and  Liebrecht's  Zur
Volkskunde,  p.  408,  and  Wirt  Sikes'  British  Goblins,  p.  39.  The  washing  of
the  hero  by  a  cheti  is  quite  Homeric  {Odyssey,  xix,  386).  In  a  Welsh  story
(Professor  Rhys,  Welsh  Tales,  p.  8)  a  young  man  discovers  his  lady-love  by
the  way  in  which  her  sandals  are  tied.     There  are  only  two  to  choose  from,

and  he  seems  to  have  depended  solely  upon  his  own  observation. Cf  also

the  Svayamvara  of  Damayanti,  where  she  has  to  resort  to  an  "  Act  of  Truth  "
in  order  to  discover  which  of  her  numerous  suitors  is  Nala.  See  p.  181  of
this  volume. — n.m.p.

vol.  in.  P


226  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

Having  said  this,  he  dismissed  those  two  lovers  and  his
other  daughters  to  their  apartments,  and  in  a  short  time  he
summoned  Sringabhuja  and  said  this  to  him  :  "  Take  this
yoke  of  oxen  and  go  outside  this  town  and  sow  in  the  earth
the  hundred  khdris  1  of  sesame -seed  which  are  piled  there  in
a  heap."

When  Sringabhuja  heard  that  he  was  troubled,  and  he
went  and  told  it  to  Riipaslkha,  and  she  answered  him  as
follows  :  "  My  husband,  you  need  not  be  in  the  least  despond-
ent about  this  ;  go  there  at  once ;  I  will  easily  perform  this
by  my  magic  power."  When  he  heard  this,  the  prince  went
there  and,  seeing  the  sesame-seeds  in  a  heap,  despondently
began  to  plough  the  land  and  sow  them,  but  while  he  was
beginning  he  saw  the  land  ploughed  and  all  the  seeds  sown
in  due  course  by  the  might  of  his  lady-love's  magic  power,
and  he  was  much  astonished.

So  he  went  to  Agnisikha  and  told  him  that  this  task  was
accomplished.  Then  that  treacherous  Rakshasa  again  said
to  him  :  "  I  do  not  want  the  seeds  sown  ;  go  and  pile  them
up  again  in  a  heap."  When  he  heard  that,  he  again  went
and  told  Riipasikha.  She  sent  him  to  that  field,  and  created
innumerable  ants,2   and    by  her  magic  power  made  them

1  A  khari  =  about  three  bushels.

2  Cf.  the  way  in  which  Psyche  separated  the  seeds  in  The  Golden  Ass  of
Apuleius,  Lib.  VI,  cap.  x,  and  the  tasks  in  Grimm's  Mdrchen,  Nos.  62,  186
and  1 93.  A  similar  incident  is  found  in  a  Danish  tale,  w  Svend's  Exploits,"
p.  353  of  Thorpe's  Yule-tide  Stories.  Before  the  king  will  allow  Svend  to
marry  the  princess,  he  gives  him  a  task  exactly  resembling  the  one  in  our
text.  He  is  told  to  separate  seven  barrels  of  wheat  and  seven  barrels  of  rye
which  are  lying  in  one  heap.  The  ants  do  it  for  him  because  he  had  on  a
former  occasion  crumbled  his  bread  for  them.  So  in  No.  83  of  the  Sicilianische
Mdrchen  the  ants  help  Carnfedda  because  he  once  crumbled  his  bread  for
them.  See  also  the  story  of  the  beautiful  Cardia,  in  the  same  collection,
p.  188.  The  hero  has  first  to  eat  a  cellarful  of  beans;  this  he  accomplishes
by  means  of  the  king  of  ravens,  his  brother-in-law.  He  next  disposes  of  a
multitude  of  corpses  by  means  of  another  brother-in-law,  the  king  of  the  wild
beasts ;  he  then  stuffs  a  large  number  of  mattresses  with  feathers  by  the
help  of  a  third  brother-in-law,  the  king  of  the  birds.  See  also  Stokes'
Indian  Fairy  Tales,  tale  xxii,  and  the  note  at  the  end  of  this  chapter.  The
tasks  are  also  found  in  the  Peniamerone  of  Basile  (Burton,  vol.  i,  p.  196
et  seq.  ;  vol.  ii,  pp.  305  el  seq.  and  511  et  seq.);  in  Gaal,  Mdrchen  der  Magyaren,
p.  182  (the  title  of  the  tale  is  "  Die  dankbaren  Thiere  "  :  some  grateful  ants


AGNISIKHA'S  BROTHER,  DHUMASIKHA      227

gather  together  the  sesame- seeds.  When  Sringabhuja  saw
that,  he  went  and  told  Agnisikha  that  the  seeds  had  been
piled  up  again  in  a  heap.

Then  the  cunning  but  stupid  Agnisikha  said  to  him  :
"  Only  two  yojanas  from  this  place,  in  a  southerly  direction,
there  is  an  empty  temple  of  Siva  in  a  wood.  In  it  lives
my  dear  brother  Dhumasikha.  Go  there  at  once,  and  say
this  in  front  of  the  temple  :  '  Dhumasikha,  I  am  sent  by
Agnisikha  as  a  messenger  to  invite  you  and  your  retinue  :
come  quickly,  for  to-morrow  the  ceremony  of  Rupasikha's
marriage  is  to  take  place.'  Having  said  this,  come  back
here  to-day  with  speed,  and  to-morrow  marry  my  daughter
Rupasikha."  When  Sringabhuja  was  thus  addressed  by
the  rascal  he  said,  "So  be  it,"  and  went  and  recounted  the
whole  to  Rupasikha*

The  good  girl  gave  him  some  earth,  some  water,  some
thorns  and  some  fire,  and  her  own  fleet  horse,  and  said  to
him  :  "  Mount  this  horse  and  go  to  that  temple  and  quickly
repeat  that  invitation  to  Dhumasikha  as  it  was  told  to  you,
and  then  you  must  at  once  return  on  this  horse  at  full  gallop,
and  you  must  often  turn  your  head  and  look  round  ;  and  if
you  see  Dhumasikha  coming  after  you,  you  must  throw  this
earth  behind  you  in  his  way.  If  in  spite  of  that  Dhuma-
sikha pursues  you,  you  must  in  the  same  manner  fling  the
water  behind  you  in  his  path.  If  in  spite  of  that  he  comes
on,  you  must  in  like  manner  throw  these  thorns  in  his  way.
If  in  spite  of  them  he  pursues,  throw  this  fire  in  his  way  ;

are  found  at  p.  339);  in  Grossler's  Sagen  aus  der  Grafschaft  Mansfeld,
pp.  60,  6l  ;  in  Waldau's  Bohmische  Mdrchen,  pp.  18,  142,  262;  and  in  Kuhn's
Westfdlische  Mdrchen,  vol.  ii,  p.  249,  where  frogs,  ants  and  wasps  help  the
hero.

Cf   also   Macculloch,    Childhood  of  Fiction,  pp.    17,   205,  240,  392;

Nights  (Burton,  Supp.,  vol.  v,  p.  5);  Crooke,  "Some  Notes  on  Homeric  Folk-
Lore,"  Folk-Lore,  vol.  xix,  1908,  p.  158;  Hartland,  Legend  of  Perseus,  vol.  i,
p.  49,  and  vol.  iii,  p.  102;  Clouston,  Popular  Tales  and  Fictions,  vol.  i,  p.  237
et  seq. ;  Chauvin,  op.  cit.,  vi,  p.  200  ;  Cosquin,  Contes  Populaires  de  Lorraine,
vol.  ii,  p.  242  ;  and  Bolte,  op.  cit.,  vol.  ii,  p.  19  et  seq.,  and  vol.  iii,  pp.  338-339
and  406  et  seq.  Cf.  also  Grimm  No.  165  and  its  numerous  analogues  in  Bolte,
op.  cit,  vol.  iii,  p.  276  et  seq.  Some  further  examples  of  the  "Tasks"  motif
will  be  found  in  the  note  on  the  "  Magic  Obstacles  "  motif  at  the  end  of  this
chapter,  with  which  they  are  inseparably  linked. — n.m.p.


228  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

and  if  you  do  this  you  will  return  here  without  the  Daitya  ;
so  do  not  hesitate — go,  you  shall  to-day  behold  the  power
of  my  magic."

When  she  said  this  to  him,  Sringabhuja  took  the  earth
and  the  other  things,  and  said,  "  I  will  do  so,"  and  mounting
her  horse  went  to  the  temple  in  the  wood.  There  he  saw  an
image  of  Siva,  with  one  of  Parvati  on  his  left  and  one  of
Ganes*a  on  his  right,  and,  after  bowing  before  the  Lord  of
the  Universe,1  he  quickly  addressed  to  Dhumaslkha  the  form
of  invitation  told  him  by  Agnisikha,  and  fled  from  the  place
at  full  speed,  urging  on  his  horse.  And  he  soon  turned  his
head  and  looked  round,  and  he  beheld  Dhuma-
sikha  coming  after  him.  And  he  quickly  threw
that  earth  behind  him  in  his  way,  and  the  earth,  so  flung,
immediately  produced  a  great  mountain.  When  he  saw
that  the  Rakshasa  had,  though  with  difficulty,  climbed  over
that  mountain  and  was  coming  on,  the  prince  in  the  same
way  threw  the  water  behind  him.  That  produced  a  great
river  in  his  path,  with  rolling  waves.  The  Rakshasa  with
difficulty  got  across  it  and  was  coming  on  when  Sringa-
bhuja quickly  strewed  those  thorns  behind  him.  They  pro-
duced a  dense,  thorny  wood  in  Dhumasikha's  path.  When
the  Rakshasa  emerged  from  it  the  prince  threw  the  fire  be-
hind him,  which  set  on  fire  the  path  with  the  herbs  and
the  trees.  When  Dhuma&kha  saw  that  the  fire  was  hard
to  cross,  like  Khandava,2  he  returned  home,  tired  and
terrified.  For  on  that  occasion  the  Rakshasa  was  so  be-
wildered by  the  magic  of  Rupa&kha  that  he  went  and
returned  on  his  feet,  and  he  did  not  think  of  flying  through
the  air.

Then  Sringabhuja  returned  to  Dhumapura,  free  from
fear,  commending  in  his  heart  that  display  of  his  love's
magic  power.  He  gave  up  the  horse  to  the  delighted  Rupa-
sikha,  and  related  his  adventure,  and  then  went  in  to  the
presence  of  Agnisikha.  He  said  :  "  I  went  and  invited
your  brother  Dhumaslkha."     When  he  said  this,  Agnisikha,

1  I.e.  Siva.

a  A  forest  in  Kurukshetra  sacred  to  Indra  and  burnt  by  Agni  the  God
of  Fire  with  the  help  of  Arjuna  and  Krishna.


THE  MARRIAGE  TAKES  PLACE  229

being  perplexed,  said  to  him  :  "  If  you  really  went  there,
mention  some  peculiarity  of  the  place."

When  the  crafty  Rakshasa  said  this  to  Sringabhuja,  he
answered  him :  "  Listen,  I  will  tell  you  a  token.  In  that
temple  there  is  a  figure  of  Parvati  on  the  left  side  of  Siva,
and  of  Ganesa  on  his  right."  When  Agnisikha  heard  that
he  was  astonished,  and  thought  for  a  moment :  "  What !
Did  he  go  there,  and  was  my  brother  not  able  to  devour
him  ?  Then  he  cannot  be  a  mere  man ;  he  must  be  a
god ;  so  let  him  marry  my  daughter,  as  he  is  a  fitting  match
for  her."  After  thus  reflecting  he  sent  Sringabhuja  as  a
successful  suitor  to  Rupasikha,  but  he  never  suspected  that
there  was  a  traitor  in  his  own  family.  So  Sringabhuja  went,
eager  for  his  marriage,  and  after  eating  and  drinking  with
her  managed  somehow  to  get  through  the  night.

And  the  next  morning  Agnisikha  gave  to  him  Rupasikha
with  all  the  magnificence  appropriate  to  his  magic  power,
according  to  due  form,  in  the  presence  of  the  fire.  Little
in  common  have  Rakshasas'  daughters  and  princes,  and
strange  the  union  of  such !  Wonderful  indeed  are  the
results  of  our  deeds  in  a  previous  state  of  existence  !

The  prince,  after  he  had  obtained  that  beloved  daughter
of  the  Rakshasa,  seemed  like  a  swan  who  had  got  hold  of  a
soft  lotus,  sprung  from  mud.  And  he  remained  there. with
her,  who  was  devoted  to  him  alone,  enjoying  various  dainty
delights  provided  by  the  magic  power  of  the  Rakshasa.

When  some  days  had  passed  there,  he  said  in  secret
to  the  Rakshasa's  daughter  :  "  Come,  my  beloved,  let  us
return  to  the  city  of  Vardhamana.  For  that  is  my  capital
city,  and  I  cannot  endure  to  be  banished  from  my  capital
city  by  my  enemies,  for  people  like  myself  hold  honour  dear
as  life.  So  leave  for  my  sake  the  land  of  your  birth,  though
it  is  hard  to  leave ;  inform  your  father,  and  bring  that  golden
arrow  in  your  hand."  When  Sringabhuja  said  this  to
Rupasikha  she  answered  :  "I  must  immediately  obey  your
command.  I  care  not  for  the  land  of  my  birth,  nor  for  my
relatives  ;    you  are  all  those  to  me.1     Good  women  have  no

1  ""JLktop,  drap  (tv  fiot  ecrcrt  irarrip  kol  iroTVia  prjTrjp  rjSe  KaviyvrjTos,  <rv  8e  (ooi
OaXepbs  TrapaKoiT-qs." — Iliad,  Book  VI.


230  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

other  refuge  than  their  husbands.  But  it  will  never  do  to
communicate  our  intention  to  my  father,  for  he  would  not
let  us  go.  So  we  must  depart  without  that  hot-tempered
father  of  mine  knowing  of  it.  And  if  he  hears  from  the
attendants  and  comes  after  us,  I  will  bewilder  him  by  my
knowledge,  for  he  is  senseless  and  like  an  idiot."

When  he  heard  this  speech  of  hers,  he  set  out  delighted
on  the  next  day  with  her,  who  gave  him  the  half  of  her  king-
dom, and  filled  a  casket  with  priceless  jewels,  and  brought
that  golden  arrow  ;  and  they  both  mounted  her  splendid
horse  Saravega,1  having  deceived  the  attendants  by  repre-
senting that  they  were  going  for  a  pleasure  excursion  in  the
park,  and  journeyed  towards  Vardhamana.

When  the  couple  had  gone  a  long  distance  the  Rakshasa
Agni&kha  found  it  out,  and  in  wrath  pursued  after  them
through  the  air.  And  hearing  afar  off  the  noise  produced
by  the  speed  of  his  flight,  Riipasikha  said  to  Sringabhuja  on
the  road  :  "  My  husband,  my  father  has  come  to  make  us
turn  back,  so  remain  here  without  fear  ;  see  how  I  will
deceive  him.  For  he  shall  neither  see  you  nor  the  horse,
since  I  shall  conceal  both  by  my  deluding  power."  After
saying  this,  she  got  down  from  the  horse  and  assumed  by
her  deluding  power  the  form  of  a  man.2  And  she  said
to  a  woodcutter  who  had  come  to  the  forest  to  cut  wood :
"A  great  Rakshasa  is  coming  here,  so  remain  quiet  for  a
moment."  Then  she  continued  to  cut  wood  with  his  axe.
And  Sringabhuja  looked  on  with  a  smile  on  his  face.

In  the  meanwhile  that  foolish  Rakshasa  arrived  there,
and  lighted  down  from  the  air  on  beholding  his  daughter  in
the  shape  of  a  woodcutter,  and  asked  her  whether  she  had
seen  a  man  and  woman  pass  that  way.3  Then  his  daughter,
who  had  assumed  the  form  of  a  man,  said  with  great  effort,
as  if  tired  :  "  We  two  have  not  seen  any  couple,  as  our  eyes
are  fatigued  with  toil,  for  we  two  woodcutters  have  been

1  I.e.  "  like  an  arrow  in  speed."

2  For  this  part  of  the  story  see  Sicilianische  M'drchen,  No.  14,  with
Dr  Kohler's  note.

3  In  Ovid's  Metamorphoses,  viii,  355,  the  dominns  asks  Mestra,  who  has
been  transformed  into  a  fisherman,  if  she  has  seen  herself  pass  that  way.


RAKSHASAS  ARE  NOODLES        231

occupied  here  in  cutting  a  great  quantity  of  wood  to  burn
Agnisikha,  the  King  of  the  Rakshasas,  who  is  dead."

When  that  silly  Rakshasa  heard  that,  he  thought :
"  What !  Am  I  dead  ?  What  does  that  daughter  matter
to  me?  I  will  go  and  ask  my  own  attendants  at  home
whether  I  am  dead  or  not."  1

Thus  reflecting,  Agnisikha  went  quickly  home,  and  his
daughter  set  out  with  her  husband  as  before,  laughing  as
she  went.

And  soon  the  Rakshasa  returned  in  high  spirits,  for  he
had  asked  his  attendants,  who  could  not  help  laughing  in
their  sleeves,  whether  he  was  alive,  and  had  learnt  that
he  was.  Then  Rupasikha,  knowing  from  the  terrible  noise
that  he  was  coming  again,  though  as  yet  far  off,  got  down
from  the  horse  and  concealed  her  husband  as  before  by  her
deluding  power,  and  taking  letters  from  the  hand  of  a  letter-
carrier  who  was  coming  along  the  road,  she  again  assumed
the  form  of  a  man.

And  so  the  Rakshasa  arrived  as  before,  and  asked  his
daughter,  who  was  disguised  as  a  man  :  "  Did  you  see  a
man  and  a  woman  on  the  road  ?  "  Then  she,  disguised  as
a  man,  answered  him  with  a  sigh  :  "I  beheld  no  such  person,
for  my  mind  was  absorbed  with  my  haste,  for  Agnisikha,
who  was  to-day  mortally  wounded  in  battle,  and  has  only  a
little  breath  left  in  his  body,  and  is  in  his  capital  desiring  to
make  over  his  kingdom,  has  dispatched  me  as  a  messenger
to  summon  to  his  presence  his  brother  Dhumasikha,  who  is
living  an  independent  life."  When  Agnisikha  heard  that  he
said  :   "  What  !     Am  I  mortally  wounded  by  my  enemies  ?  "

1  Cf.  the  story  of  "  Die  kluge  Else,"  the  thirty-fourth  in  Grimm's  Kinder-
und  Hausmarchen,  where  the  heroine  has  a  doubt  about  her  own  identity  and
goes  home  to  ask  her  husband ;  and  No.  59  in  the  same  collection.  Cf.  also
Campbell's  Tales  from  the  West  Highlands,  vol.  ii,  p.  375,  where  one  man  is
persuaded  that  he  is  dead,  another  that  he  is  not  himself,  and  a  third  that
he  is  dressed  when  he  is  naked.  See  also  the  numerous  parallels  given
in  Ralston's  Russian  Folk-Tales,  p.  54.  Liebrecht  (Zur  Volkskunde),  p.  128,
mentions  a  story  in  which  a  woman  persuades  her  husband  that  he  is  dead.
See  also  Bartsch's  Sagen,  Marchen  und  Gebrauche  aus  Meklenburg,  vol.  i,  p.  508.
In   Prym    and    Socin's   Syrische   Marchen,    No.    62,    p.  250,  the    flea    believes

himself  to  be  dead,  and  tells  everyone  so. See  also  Clouston,  The  Book  of

Noodles,  1888,  p.  157  et  seq. — n.m.p.


232  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

And  in  his  perplexity  he  returned  home  again  to  get  informa-
tion on  the  point.  But  it  never  occurred  to  him  to  say  to
himself:  "  Who  is  mortally  wounded  ?  Here  I  am,  safe  and
sound."  Strange  are  the  fools  that  the  Creator  produces
and  wonderfully  obscured  with  the  quality  of  darkness !
And  when  he  arrived  at  home  and  found  that  the  tale  was
false  he  would  not  expose  himself  again  to  the  laughter  of
the  people,  tired  of  being  imposed  upon,  and  forgetting  his
daughter.

And  Rupasikha,  after  deluding  him,  returned  to  her
husband  as  before ;  for  virtuous  women  know  of  no  other
good  than  the  good  of  their  husbands.  Then  Sringabhuja,
a  .     ,,  .       mounted  on  the  wonderful  horse,  again  proceeded

Sringabhuja  .  ,  °      .    r

and  his  '  rapidly  with  his  wife  towards  the  city  of  Var-
Beloved  arrive  dhamana.  Then  his  father  Virabhuja,  having
heard  that  he  was  returning  in  company  with
her,  went  out  much  pleased  to  meet  him.  The  king,  when
he  saw  him  adorned  with  that  wife,  like  Krishna  with
Bhama,  considered  that  he  had  gained  afresh  the  bliss  of
sovereign  sway.

And  when  his  son  got  down  from  his  horse  and  clung  to
his  feet  with  his  beloved,  he  raised  him  up  and  embraced
him,  and  with  his  eyes,  in  which  stood  the  water  of  joyful
tears,  performed  in  noble  wise  the  auspicious  ceremony  that
put  an  end  to  his  own  despondency,  and  then  conducted  him
into  his  palace,  making  high  festival.  And  when  he  asked
his  son  where  he  had  been,  Sringabhuja  told  him  his  whole
history  from  the  beginning.  And  after  summoning  his
brothers,  Nirvasabhuja  and  all,  into  his  father's  presence
he  gave  them  the  golden  arrow.  Then  the  King  Virabhuja,
after  what  he  had  heard  and  seen,  was  displeased  with  those
other  sons,  and  considered  Sringabhuja  his  only  true  son.

Then  that  wise  king  drew  this  true  conclusion  :  "I  sus-
pect that,  as  this  son  of  mine  out  of  spite  was  banished
by  these  enemies,  brothers  only  in  name,  though  he  was  all
the  while  innocent,  so  his  mother  Gunavara,  whom  I  love
so  well,  was  falsely  accused  by  their  mothers,  and  was  all
the  while  innocent.  So  what  is  the  use  of  delay  ?  I  will
find  out  the  truth  of  it  immediately."


THE  TRUTH  IS  DISCOVERED  233


After  these  reflections  the  king  spent  that  day  in  per-
forming his  duties,  and  went  at  night  to  sift  his  other  wife
Ayasolekha.  She  was  delighted  to  see  him,  and  he  made
her  drink  a  great  quantity  of  wine,1  and  she  in  her  sleep
murmured  out,  while  the  king  was  awake  :  "  If  we  had  not
falsely  slandered  Gunavara,  would  the  king  ever  have  visited
me  here  ?  "  2

When  the  king  heard  this  speech  of  the  wicked  queen,
uttered  in  her  sleep,  he  felt  he  had  attained  certainty,  and
rose  up  in  wrath  and  went  out ;  and  going  to  his  own  chamber
he  had  the  eunuchs  summoned,  and  said  to  them :  "  Take
that  Gunavara  out  of  the  dungeon,  and  after  she  has  bathed
bring  her  quickly  ;  for  the  present  moment  was  appointed
by  the  astrologer  as  the  limit  of  her  stay  in  the  dungeon  for
the  purpose  of  averting  the  evil  omens."  When  they  heard
that,  they  said:  "So  be  it."  And  they  went  and  quickly
brought  the  Queen  Gunavara  into  the  presence  of  the  king,
bathed  and  adorned.  Then  that  wedded  pair,  happy  in
having  crossed  the  sea  of  separation,  spent  that  night  un-
sated  with  mutual  embraces.  Then  the  king  related  to  the
queen  with  delight  that  adventure  of  Sringabhuja,  and  told
his  son  the  circumstances  of  his  mother's  imprisonment  and
release.

In  the  meanwhile  Ayasolekha,  waking  up,  found  out
that  the  king  was  gone,  and  guessing  that  he  had  entrapped
her  with  his  conversation,  fell  into  deep  despondency.  And
in  the  morning  the  King  Virabhuja  conducted  his  son
Sringabhuja,  with  his  wife  Rupasikha,  into  the  presence  of
Gunavara.  He  came,  and  was  delighted  to  behold  his
mother  emerged  from  the  dungeon,  and  with  his  new  wife
he  worshipped  the  feet  of  his  parents.  Gunavara,  embrac-
ing her  son,  who  had  returned  from  his  journey,  and  her
daughter-in-law,  obtained  in  the  way  above  related,  went
from  joy  to  joy.

Then,  by  the  order  of  his  father,  Sringabhuja  related  to

1  Cf.  Hagen's  Helden-Sagen,  vol.  ii,  p.  167,  where  Ake  makes  his  wife
Wolfriana  intoxicated  with  the  object  of  discovering  her  secret.

2  Reading  avadishyama.  I  find  that  this  is  the  reading  of  a  MS.  in  the
Sanskrit  College.


234  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

her  at  length  his  own  adventure,  and  what  Rupasikha  did.
Then  Queen  Gunavara,  delighted,  said  to  him :  "  My  son,
what  has  not  that  Rupasikha  done  for  you  ?  For  she,  a
heroine  of  wonderful  exploits,  has  given  up  and  sacrificed  for
you  her  life,  her  family,  her  native  land — these  three.  She
must  be  some  goddess,  become  incarnate  for  your  sake  by  the
appointment  of  Destiny.  For  she  has  placed  her  foot  on
the  head  of  all  women  that  are  devoted  to  their  husbands."
When  the  queen  had  said  this,  the  king  applauded  her
speech,  and  so  did  Rupasikha,  with  head  modestly  bent.

Just  at  that  moment  the  superintendent  of  the  women's
apartments,  Surakshita,  who  had  been  long  ago  slandered
by  that  Ayagolekha,  returned  home  from  visiting  all  the  holy
bathing-places.  He  was  announced  by  the  doorkeeper,  and
bowed  delighted  at  the  king's  feet,  and  then  the  king,  who
now  knew  the  facts,  honoured  him  exceedingly.  And  by  his
mouth  he  summoned  the  other  queens  who  were  wicked,  and
said  to  him  :  "  Go !  fling  all  these  into  the  dungeon."  When
the  Queen  Gunavara  heard  that,  and  the  terrified  women  were
thrown  into  the  dungeon,  she  said,  out  of  compassion  to  the
king,  clinging  to  his  feet :  "  King,  do  not  keep  them  for  a
long  time  in  the  dungeon  !  Have  mercy,  for  I  cannot  bear
to  see  them  terrified."  By  thus  entreating  the  king  she
prevented  their  imprisonment,  for  the  only  vengeance  that
the  great  make  use  of  against  their  enemies  is  compassion.
Then  those  queens,  dismissed  by  the  king,  went  ashamed
to  their  houses,  and  would  even  have  preferred  to  have  been
in  the  embrace  of  death.  And  the  king  thought  highly  of
the  great-hearted  Gunavara,  and  considered,  because  he  pos-
sessed that  wife,  that  he  must  have  accomplished  virtuous
acts  in  a  former  state  of  existence.

Then  the  king,  determined  to  banish  his  other  sons  by  an
artifice,  had  them  summoned,  and  spake  to  them  this  feigned
speech :  "I  have  heard  that  you  villains  have  slain  a
Brahman  traveller,  so  go  and  visit  all  the  holy  bathing-places
in  succession.  Do  not  remain  here."  When  the  sons  heard
that,  they  were  not  able  to  persuade  the  king  of  the  truth,
for  when  a  ruler  is  bent  on  violence  who  can  convince  him  ?
Then  Sringabhuja,  beholding  those  brothers  departing,  with


SRINGABHUJA  BECOMES  CROWN  PRINCE      235


his  eyes  full  of  tears  produced  by  pity,  thus  addressed  his
father  :  "  Father,  pity  their  one  fault ;  have  mercy  upon
them."  Having  said  this,  he  fell  at  the  feet  of  that  king.
And  the  king,  thinking  that  that  son  was  able  to  bear  the
burden  of  sovereignty,  being  even  in  his  youth  like  an  incar-
nation of  Vishnu,  full  of  glory  and  compassion,  hiding  his  real
sentiments  and  cherishing  his  anger  against  them,  nevertheless
did  what  Sringabhuja  asked.  And  all  those  brothers  con-
sidered their  younger  brother  as  the  saviour  of  their  lives.
And  all  the  subjects,  beholding  the  exceeding  virtue  of
Sringabhuja,  became  attached  to  him.

Then  the  next  day  his  father,  King  Virabhuja,  anointed
as  crown  prince  Sringabhuja,  who  was  the  oldest  in  virtue
of  them  all,  though  he  had  elder  brothers.  And  then
Sringabhuja,  having  been  anointed,  and  having  obtained  the
leave  of  his  father,  went  with  all  his  forces  to  conquer  the
world.  And  having  brought  back  the  wealth  of  numerous
kings,  whom  he  overcame  by  the  might  of  his  arm,  he
returned,  having  diffused  the  splendour  of  his  glory  through
the  earth.  Then,  bearing  the  weight  of  the  realm  with  his
submissive  brothers,  the  successful  Prince  Sringabhuja,
giving  pleasure  to  his  parents,  who  remained  in  the  enjoy-
ment of  comfort,  free  from  anxiety,  and  bestowing  gifts
on  Brahmans,  dwelt  at  ease  with  Rupasikha,  as  if  with
incarnate  success.


[M]  "  Thus  virtuous  women  serve  their  husbands  in
every  way,  devoted  to  them  alone,  like  Gunavara.  and
Rupasikha,  the  mother-in-law  and  daughter-in-law."

When  Naravahanadatta,  in  the  society  of  Ratnaprabha,
heard  this  story  from  the  lips  of  Harisikha  he  was  much
delighted,  and  exclaimed :  "  Bravo  !  "  Then  he  rose  up
and  quickly  performed  the  religious  ceremony  for  the  day,
and  went  with  his  wife  into  the  presence  of  his  father,  the
King  of  Vatsa,  and  after  eating,  and  whiling  away  the  after-
noon with  singing  and  playing,  he  spent  the  night  with  his
beloved  in  his  own  private  apartments.


236  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


NOTE  ON  THE  "MAGIC  OBSTACLES"  MOTIF

In  a  Norwegian  tale,  called  "The  Widow's  Son,"  p.  295  of  Thorpe's
Yule-tide  Stories,  will  be  found  an  incident  closely  resembling  the  pursuit
of  Sringabhuja  by  Dhumasikha.  The  widow's  son  has,  contrary  to  the  orders
of  a  Troll,  in  whose  house  he  found  himself,  entered  several  chambers,  in  one
of  which  he  found  a  thorn-whip,  in  another  a  huge  stone,  and  a  water-bottle.
In  the  third  he  found  a  boiling  copper  kettle,  with  which  he  scalded  his
finger,  but  the  Troll  cured  it  with  a  pot  of  ointment.  In  the  fourth  room  he
found  a  black  horse  in  a  stall,  with  a  trough  of  burning  embers  at  its  head,
and  a  basket  of  hay  at  its  tail.  The  youth  thought  this  cruel,  so  he  changed
their  position.  The  horse,  to  reward  him,  informed  him  that  the  Troll  on
his  return  would  certainly  kill  him,  and  then  continued :  "  Lay  the  saddle
on  me,  put  on  the  armour,  and  take  the  whip  of  thorn,  the  stone,  and  the
water-flask  and  the  pot  of  ointment,  and  then  we  will  set  out."  When
the  youth  mounted  the  horse  it  set  off  at  a  rapid  rate.  After  riding  some
time,  the  horse  said :  "  I  think  I  hear  a  noise  ;  look  round,  can  you  see
anything?  "  "  A  great  many  are  coming  after  us,  certainly  a  score  at  least,"
answered  the  youth.  "  Ah  !  that  is  the  Troll,"  said  the  horse,  •'  he  is  coming
with  all  his  companions."  They  travelled  for  a  time  until  their  pursuers
were  gaining  on  them.  "  Throw  now  the  thorn-whip  over  your  shoulder,"
said  the  horse,  "  but  throw  it  far  away  from  me."  The  youth  did  so,
and  at  the  same  moment  there  sprang  up  a  large  thick  wood  of  briers.

The  youth  now  rode  on  a  long  way,  while  the  Troll  had  to  go  home  to
fetch  something  wherewith  to  hew  a  road  through  the  wood.  After  some
time  the  horse  again  said:  "Look  back,  can  you  see  anything  now?"
"Yes,  a  whole  multitude  of  people,"  said  the  youth,  "like  a  church
congregation."  "That  is  the  Troll;  now  he  has  got  more  with  him;  throw
out  now  the  large  stone,  but  throw  it  far  from  me."

When  the  youth  had  done  what  the  horse  desired,  there  arose  a  large
stone  mountain  behind  them.  So  the  Troll  was  obliged  to  go  home  after
something  with  which  to  bore  through  the  mountain  ;  and  while  he  was  thus
employed,  the  youth  rode  on  a  considerable  way.  But  now  the  horse  bade
him  again  look  back.  He  then  saw  a  multitude  like  a  whole  army,  they  were
so  bright  that  they  glittered  in  the  sun.  "  Well,  that  is  the  Troll  with  all  his
friends,"  said  the  horse.  "  Now  throw  the  water-bottle  behind  you,  but  take
good  care  to  spill  none  on  me."  The  youth  did  so,  but  notwithstanding  his
caution  he  happened  to  spill  a  drop  on  the  horse's  loins.  Immediately  there
arose  a  vast  lake,  and  the  spilling  of  a  few  drops  caused  the  horse  to  stand
far  out  in  the  water ;  nevertheless  he  at  last  swam  to  the  shore.  When  the
Trolls  came  to  the  water,  they  lay  down  to  drink  it  all  up,  and  they  gulped
and  gulped  it  down  till  they  burst.  (Folk-lore  demons  experience  great
difficulty  in  crossing  water.)     "  Now  we  are  quit  of  them,"  said  the  horse.

In  Laura  von  Gonzenbach's  Sicilianische  Marchen,  vol.  ii,  p.  57,  we  find  a
similar  incident.     In   the  story  of  Fata   Morgana,  a  prince,  who  carries  off


THE  "  MAGIC  OBSTACLES  "  MOTIF  237

a  bottle  filled  with  her  perspiration,  but  imprudently  wakes  her  by  kissing
her,  is  pursued  by  her  with  two  lions.  He  throws  three  pomegranates  behind
him :  the  first  produces  a  river  of  blood,  the  second  a  thorny  mountain,  the
third  a  volcano.  This  he  does  by  the  advice  of  his  horse,  who  is  really
Fata  Morgana's  brother  transformed  by  magic.  See  also  vol.  i,  p.  343.
Cf.  also  the  seventy-ninth  tale  in  Grimm's  Kinder-und  Hausmarchen  (l6th
edition  in  one  volume),  "  Die  Wassernixe."

In  Orient  und  Occident,  vol.  ii,  p.  113,  Dr  Kohler,  in  his  remarks  on  the
Tales  from  the  West  Highlands,  collected  by  J.  F.  Campbell,  compares  the
story  of  Agnisikha  with  the  second  story  in  Campbell's  collection,  entitled
"  The  Battle  of  the  Birds."  In  this  a  king's  son  wishes  to  marry  the  youngest
daughter  of  a  giant.  The  giant  sets  him  three  tasks  to  do :  to  clean  out  a
stable,  to  thatch  it  with  feathers,  and  to  fetch  eggs  from  a  magpie's  nest  in
the  top  of  a  tree  more  than  five  hundred  feet  high.  All  these  tasks  he
accomplishes  by  the  help  of  the  young  lady  herself.  In  the  last  task  she
makes  a  ladder  of  her  fingers  for  him  to  ascend  the  tree  by,  but  in  so  doing
she  loses  her  little  finger.  The  giant  requires  the  prince  to  choose  his  wife
from  among  three  sisters  similarly  dressed  (see  p.  225).  He  recognises  her
by  the  loss  of  the  little  finger.

When  bedtime  came  the  giant's  daughter  told  the  prince  that  they
must  fly  or  the  giant  would  kill  him.  They  mounted  on  the  grey  filly  in
the  stable.  But  before  starting  the  daughter  cut  an  apple  into  nine  shares ;
she  put  two  at  the  head  of  the  bed,  two  at  the  foot,  two  at  the  door  of  the
kitchen,  two  at  the  house  door,  and  one  outside  the  house.  The  giant  awoke
and  called,  "  Are  you  asleep  ? "  several  times,  and  the  shares  answered  :
"  No."  At  last  he  went  and  found  the  bed  empty  and  cold,  and  pursued  the
fugitive  couple.

At  the  break  of  day  the  giant's  daughter  felt  her  father's  breath  burning
her  back.  She  told  the  prince  to  put  his  hand  in  the  horse's  ear  and  fling
what  he  found  behind  him.  He  found  a  sprig  of  sloe,  flung  it  behind  him,
and  produced  a  wood  twenty  miles  long.  The  giant  had  to  go  back  for  his
axe  and  wood-knife.

In  the  middle  of  the  day  the  prince  finds  in  the  ear  of  the  filly  a  piece
of  grey  stone.  This  produces  twenty  miles  of  rock  behind  them.  The  giant
has  to  go  back  for  his  lever  and  mattock.  The  next  thing  that  the  prince
finds  and  flings  behind  him  is  a  bladder  of  water.  This  produces  a  fresh-
water loch  twenty  miles  broad.  In  it  the  giant  is  happily  drowned.  The
rest  of  the  story  has  no  bearing  upon  the  tale  of  Sringabhuja.  Kohler
compares  a  story  in  William  Carleton's  stories  of  the  Irish  peasantry.  Here
there  is  a  sprig,  a  pebble  and  a  drop  of  water  producing  a  wood,  a  rock  and  a
lake.  He  compares  also  a  Norwegian  story,  Ashbjornsen,  No.  46,  and  some
Swedish  stories  collected  by  Hylten  Cavallius  and  G.  Stephens.  The  three
tasks  are  very  different  in  the  various  forms  of  the  tale.  The  ladder  of  fingers
is  only  found  in  the  Celtic  form.

It  is  only  in  the  Gaelic  and  Irish  forms  that  the  objects  thrown  behind
to  check  pursuit  are  found  in  the  ear  of  the  horse.

In  another  variant  of  the  story,  "The  Mermaid,"  Thorpe's  Yule-tide  Stories,


238  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

p.  205,  we  have  the  pursuit  with  much  the  same  incidents  as  in  our  text.
See  also  Ralston's  remarks  on  the  story  in  our  text,  at  pp.  132  and  143  of
his  Russian  Folk-Tales.  Cf  also  Veckenstedt's  Wendische  Sagen,  p.  21 6.  An
Indian  parallel  will  be  found  in  Miss  Frere's  Old  Deccan  Days,  pp.  62,  63.
A  modern  Greek  one  in  Bernhard  Schmidt's  Giiechische  Marchen,  pp.  76-7.9.
Cf.  also  for  the  tasks  the  story  of  Bisara,  K  ad  en's  Unter  den  Olivenbdumen,
and  that  of  "  Die  schone  Fiorita."  Herr  Kaden  aptly  compares  the  story  of
Jason  and  Medea.  Another  excellent  parallel  is  furnished  by  the  story  of
"  Schneeweiss-Feuerroth  "  in  the  same  collection,  where  we  have  the  pursuit
much  as  in  our  text.  The  pursuit  and  tasks  are  found  in  the  tale  called
"  La  Montagne  Noire,"  on  p.  448  of  Melusine,  a  periodical  which  appeared
in  the  year  1878,  and  in  "  Branca-flor,"  No.  14  in  Coelho's  Contos  Populares
Portugueses,  and  in  Gaal's  Marchen  der  Magyaren,  p.  60.  The  pursuit  also
occurs  in  the  Pentamerone  of  Basile  (Burton,  vol.  i,  p.  52  et  seq.,  and
pp.   145-146).

The  motif  of  the  Magic  Obstacles  has  appealed  to  story-tellers  in  all

parts  of  the  world,  and  examples  of  it  are  found  in  nearly  every  collection  of
stories  extant.

It  would  be  superfluous  to  detail  these  variants,  for  not  only  would
the  list  occupy  too  much  space,  but  the  ground  has  already  been  suffi-
ciently covered.  I  would,  therefore,  merely  give  the  chief  references  where
variants  are  to  be  found,  and  a  few  remarks  on  the  possible  origin  of  the  motif
itself.

An  important  list  of  variants  is  that  in  Bolte  and  Polivka,  Anmerkungen  zu
den  Kinder-und  Hausmdrchen  der  Briider  Grimm,  vol.  ii,  p.  140  et  seq.,  while
special  reference  should  be  made  to  V.  Chauvin,  "  Les  Obstacles  Magiques,"
Revue  des  Trad.  Pop.,  vol.  xvi,  1901,  p.  538  et  seq.  (see  also  p.  223  et  seq.  of
the  same  volume).  See  also  Cosquin,  Contes  Poptdaires  de  Lorraine,  vol.  i,
story  3,  p.  32  et  seq.,  and  p.  152  el  seq.;  ditto,  Etudes  Folkloriques,  p.  591
et  seq. ;  Clouston,  Popular  Tales  and  Fictions,  vol.  i,  pp.  439-443  ;  Ralston,
Russian  Folk-Tales,  p.  143;  and  Saintyves,  Les  Contes  de  Perrault,  pp.
383-387.

Some  very  interesting  variants — Basuto,  Kafir,  Aino,  Siamese,  Samoan,
etc.  —  are  to  be  found  in  Macculloch's  Childhood  of  Fiction,  p.  171  et  seq.
On  p.  177  the  author  suggests  that  perhaps  in  the  earliest  form  of  the  incident
of  the  transformed  objects  there  was  no  transformation  at  all,  only  some
object  thrown  down  delayed  the  pursuer,  as  Atalanta  was  delayed  by  the
golden  apples  of  Hippomenes.

I  feel,  however,  it  would  be  better  merely  to  recognise  the  early
existence  of  this  variety  of  the  motif  and  not  to  take  it  as  the  original  form
of  the  motif.  That  it  was  not  so  is  surely  proved  by  the  ancient  Egyptian
story  of  the  "Two  Brothers"  (Maspero,  Stories  of  Ancient  Egypt,  p.  8),  which
dates  from  the  nineteenth  dynasty.  Here  we  read  that  when  Baiti  was
pursued  by  his  elder  brother,  Phra-Harmakhis  caused  a  large  piece  of  water
full  of  crocodiles  to  appear  as  an  obstacle  to  check  the  pursuit.

The  idea  of  hindering  a  pursuer,  whether  animal  or  human,  is,  I  think,
one  of  those  motifs  which  would  naturally  occur  to  all  peoples,  both  primitive


THE  "  MAGIC  OBSTACLES  "  MOTIF  239

and  civilised.  So  natural,  indeed,  does  the  motif  appear  that  it  seems  quite
useless  to  attempt  to  attach  any  particular  origin  to  it.

Among  primitive  tribes  the  doctrines  of  totemism,  the  external  soul,
the  belief  in  transformations,  and,  above  all,  sympathetic  magic,  can  all  be
detected  in  the  "Magic  Obstacles"  motif.

In  many  of  the  variants  we  notice  that  the  object  resembles  that  into
which  it  is  transformed  —  e.g.  in  the  story  of  the  "Flea,"  Pentamerone,  fifth
diversion  of  the  first  day  (Burton,  vol.  i,  p.  47  et  seq.),  a  twig  becomes  a
forest,  a  drop  of  water  a  river,  a  stone  a  fortress.  In  other  variants  a  comb
becomes  a  range  of  mountains,  a  mirror  a  lake,  and  so  on.  This  is,  of  course,
the  outcome  of  the  belief  in  sympathetic  magic,  and  without  doubt  is  a  very
important  factor  in  this  motif  although  it  does  not  account  for  all  the  variants.
Local  environment  and  the  individuality  of  the  story-teller,  adaptor,  or  scribe
are  probably  responsible  for  variants  where  the  objects  bear  no  resemblance
at  all  to  what  they  produce.

This  motif,  then,  appears  to  be  one  which  has  not  migrated,  but  is  the
spontaneous  production  of  many  different  lands  and  of  varying  stages  of
civilisation.  Variants  may  have  travelled  from  country  to  country,  but  the
basic  idea  of  hindering  a  pursuer  is  universal. — n.m.p.


CHAPTER  XL

THEN,  the  next  morning,  when  Naravahanadatta
[M]  was  in  Ratnaprabha's  house,  Gomukha  and  the
others  came  to  him.  But  Marubhuti,  being  a  little
sluggish  with  intoxication  produced  by  drinking  spirits,
approached  slowly,  decorated  with  flowers  and  anointed
with  unguents.  Then  Gomukha,  with  face  amused  at  his
novel  conception  of  statesman-like  behaviour,  out  of  fun
ridiculed  him  by  imitating  his  stammering  utterance  and
staggering  gait,  and  said  to  him  :  "  How  comes  it  that
you,  though  the  son  of  Yaugandharayana,  do  not  know  policy,
that  you  drink  spirits  in  the  morning  and  come  drunk  into
the  presence  of  the  prince  ?  "

When  the  intoxicated  Marubhuti  heard  this,  he  said  to
him  in  his  anger  :  "  This  should  be  said  to  me  by  the  prince
or  some  superior.  But  tell  me,  who  are  you  that  you  take
upon  you  to  instruct  me,  you  son  of  Ityaka?  "  When  he
said  this,  Gomukha  replied  to  him,  smiling  :  "  Do  princes
reprove  with  their  own  mouths  an  ill-behaved  servant  ?
Undoubtedly  their  attendants  must  remind  him  of  what  is
proper.  And  it  is  true  that  I  am  the  son  of  Ityaka,  but
you  are  an  ox  of  ministers l ;  your  sluggishness  alone  would
show  it.     The  only  fault  is  that  you  have  no  horns."

When  Gomukha  said  this  to  him,  Marubhuti  answered  :
"  You  too,  Gomukha,  have  much  of  the  ox  nature  about
you  ;  but  you  are  clearly  of  mixed  breed,  for  you  are  not
properly  domesticated."  When  all  laughed  at  hearing  this,
Gomukha  said  :  "  This  Marubhuti  is  literally  a  jewel,  for  who
can  introduce  the  thread  of  virtue  2  into  that  which  cannot  be
pierced  even  by  a  thousand  efforts  ?  But  a  jewel  of  a  man
is  a  different  kind  of  thing,  for  that  is  easily  penetrated.  As
an  illustration,  listen  to  the  story  of  the  bridge  of  sand.

1  I.e.  a  great  or  distinguished  minister.  "  Bull  "  is  more  literal  than
"ox,"  but  does  not  suit  the  English  idiom  so  well.   Gomukha  means  "ox-face."

2  Guna  means  "virtue"  and  also  "a  thread." Cf.  Raghuvamsa,  i.  4.

— N.M.P.

240


TRYING  TO  ACHIEVE  THE  IMPOSSIBLE      241

54.  Story  of  Tapodatta

There  lived  in  Pratishthana  a  Brahman  of  the  name
of  Tapodatta.  He,  though  his  father  kept  worrying  him;
would  not  learn  the  sciences  in  his  boyhood.  Subsequently
he  found  himself  censured  by  all,  and,  being  filled  with
regret,  he  went  to  the  bank  of  the  Ganges,  in  order  to  per-
form asceticism  for  the  acquisition  of  knowledge.  There
he  betook  himself  to  severe  mortification  of  the  flesh,  and
while  he  was  thus  engaged  Indra,  who  had  beheld  him  with
astonishment,  came  to  him  to  prevent  him,  disguised  as  a
Brahman.  And  when  he  had  come  near  him  he  kept  taking
grains  of  sand  from  the  bank  and  throwing  them  into  the
billowy  water  of  the  Ganges.  When  Tapodatta  saw  that,  he
broke  his  silence,  and  asked  him  out  of  curiosity  :  "  Brahman,
why  do  you  do  this  unceasingly  ?  "

And  Indra,  disguised  as  a  Brahman,  when  he  had  been
persistently  questioned  by  him,  said  :  "I  am  making  a
bridge  over  the  Ganges  for  man  and  beast  to  cross  by."
Then  Tapodatta  said  :  "  You  fool,  is  it  possible  to  make
a  bridge  over  the  Ganges  with  sand,  which  will  be  carried
away  at  some  future  time  by  the  current  ?  "

When  Indra,  disguised  as  a  Brahman,  heard  that  he  said
to  him  :  "If  you  know  this  truth,  why  do  you  attempt  to
acquire  knowledge  by  vows  and  fasting,  without  reading  or
hearing  lectures  ?  x  The  horn  of  a  hare  *  may  really  exist,
and  the  sky  may  be  adorned  with  painting,  and  writing  may
be  performed  without  letters,  if  learning  may  be  acquired
without  study.  If  it  could  be  so  acquired,  no  one  in  this
world  would  study  at  all."  When  Indra,  disguised  as  a
Brahman,  had  said  this  to  Tapodatta,  Tapodatta  reflected,
and  thinking  that  he  had  spoken  truth,  put  a  stop  to  his
self- mortification  and  went  home.


[M]  "  So,  you  see,  a  wise  man  is  easily  made  to  listen
to  reason,  but  the  foolish  Marubhuti  cannot  be  induced  to

1  For  examples  of  this  "Impossibilities"  motif  see  the  note  at  the  end
of  this  chapter. — n.m.p.  2  I  read  rupam  for  rupyam.

VOL.  ill.  Q


242  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

listen  to  reason,  but  when  you  admonish  him  he  flies  into  a
passion."  When  Gomukha  said  this,  Hari&kha  said  before
the  company  :  "  It  is  true,  O  King,  that  the  wise  are  easily
induced  to  listen  to  reason.


55.  Story  of  Virupasarman

For  instance,  there  lived  of  old  time  in  Benares  a
certain  excellent  Brahman  named  Virupasarman,  who  was
deformed  and  poor.  And  he,  being  despondent  about  his  mis-
shapen form  and  his  poverty,  went  to  the  grove  of  ascetics
there,  and  began  to  practise  severe  mortification  of  the  flesh,
through  desire  for  beauty  and  wealth.

Then  the  king  of  the  gods  1  assumed  the  vile  shape  of  a
deformed  jackal  with  a  diseased  body  and  went  and  stood
in  front  of  him.  When  he  saw  that  unfortunate  2  creature
with  its  body  covered  with  flies,  Virupasarman  slowly
reflected  in  his  mind  :  "  Such  creatures  are  born  into  the
world  on  account  of  actions  done  in  a  former  life,  so  is  it  a
small  thing  for  me  that  I  was  made  thus  by  the  Creator  ?
Who  can  overstep  the  lot  prescribed  by  Destiny  ?  "  When
Virupasarman  perceived  this,  he  brought  self-mortification
to  an  end  and  went  home.


[M]  "  So  true  is  it,  O  King,  that  a  wise  man  is  instructed
with  little  effort,  but  one  whose  mind  is  void  of  discernment
is  not  instructed  even  with  great  exertion."

Thus  spoke  Harisikha,  and  Gomukha  assented,  but  Maru-
bhuti,  who  was  drunk  and  did  not  understand  a  joke,  said  in
great  anger :  "  There  is  power  in  the  speech  of  Gomukha,  but
there  is  no  might  in  the  arms  of  men  like  you.  A  garrulous,
quarrelsome,  effeminate  person  makes  heroes  blush."8  When
Marubhuti  said  this,  being  eager  for  a  fight,  Prince  Narava-

1  I.e.  Indra.  2  Literally,  "having  no  auspicious  marks."

8  In  the  D.  text  we  read  vacalaih  kalahah  klibaih,  and  B.'s  compound
Gomukhavaci  is  written  as  two  separate  words.  We  thus  get  a  much  better
rendering :  "  Men  like  you,  Gomukha,  have  only  strength  in  their  tongue,
not  in  their  arms.  It  is  blameful  for  heroes  to  quarrel  with  effeminate
braggarts."     See  Speyer,  op.  cit.f  p.  113. — n.m.p.


OLD  AGE,  THE  THIEF  OF  BEAUTY  243

hanadatta,  with  a  smile  on  his  face,  himself  tried  to  appease
him,  and  after  dismissing  him  to  his  house,  the  prince,  who
loved  the  friends  of  his  youth,  performed  the  duties  of  the
day,  and  so  spent  it  in  great  comfort.

And  the  next  day,  when  all  these  ministers  came,  and
among  them  Marubhuti  bowed  down  with  shame,  his  be-
loved Ratnaprabha  spake  thus  to  the  prince  :  "  You,  my
husband,  are  very  fortunate  in  that  you  have  these  pure-
hearted  ministers  bound  to  you  by  the  fetters  of  a  love
dating  from  early  childhood,  and  they  are  happy  in  possess-
ing such  an  affectionate  master ;  you  have  been  gained  by
one  another  through  actions  in  a  former  state  of  existence ;
of  that  there  can  be  no  doubt."

When  the  queen  said  this,  Tapantaka,  the  son  of  Vasan-
taka,  the  companion  in  amusements  of  Naravahanadatta,
remarked  :  "It  is  true  ;  our  master  has  been  gained  by  our
actions  in  a  former  life.  For  everything  depends  upon  the
power  of  actions  in  a  former  life.  Hear  in  illustration  of
it  the  following  tale  : —


56.  Story  of  King  Vildsasila  and  the  Physician  Tarunachandra

There  dwelt  in  a  city  named  Vilasapura,  the  home  of
Siva,  a  king  rightly  named  Vilasasila.1  He  had  a  queen
named  Kamalaprabha,  whom  he  valued  as  his  life,  and  he
long  remained  with  her,  addicted  to  pleasure  only.  Then
in  course  of  time  there  came  upon  the  king  old  age,  the  thief
of  beauty,  and  when  he  beheld  it  he  was  sorely  grieved.  He
thought  to  himself :  "  How  can  I  show  to  the  queen  my  face
marred  with  grey  hairs,  like  a  snow- smitten  lotus  ?  2  Alas  !
it  is  better  that  I  should  die."  Busied  with  reflections
like  these,  the  king  summoned  into  his  hall  of  audience  a
physician  named  Tarunachandra3  and  thus  spake  to  him
respectfully:  "My  good  man,  because  you  are  clever  and
devoted  to  me,  I  ask  you  whether  there  is  any  artifice  by
which  this  old  age  can  be  averted."

1  I.e.  fond  of  enjoyment.

2  For  a  note  on  the  "Grey  Hair"  motif  see  Vol.  I,  p.  121m1. — n.m.p.

3  I.e.  new  moon.


244  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

When  Tarunachandra,  who  was  rightly  named  as  being
only  of  the  magnitude  of  one  digit,  and  desiring  to  become  a
full  moon,  heard  that,  the  cunning  fellow  reflected  :  "I  must
make  my  profit  out  of  this  blockhead  of  a  king,  and  I  shall
soon  discover  the  means  of  doing  it."

Having  thus  reflected,  the  physician  said  to  the  king :  "  If
you  will  remain  in  an  underground  chamber  alone,  O  King,
for  eight  months,  and  take  this  medicine,  I  engage  to  re-
move your  old  age."  *  When  the  king  heard  this,  he  had
such  an  underground  chamber  prepared ;  for  fools  intent  on
objects  of  sense  cannot  endure  reflection.  But  the  ministers
used  arguments  like  the  following  with  him :  "  O  King,  by
the  goodness  and  asceticism  and  self-denial  of  men  of  old
time,  and  by  the  virtue  of  the  age,  elixirs  were  produced.
But  these  forest  remedies,2  which  we  hear  of  now,  O  King,
owing  to  the  want  of  proper  materials,  produce  the  opposite
effect  to  that  which  is  intended,  and  this  is  quite  in  accord-
ance with  the  treatises  3 ;  for  rogues  do  in  this  way  make
sport  with  fools.     Does  time  past  ever  return,  O  king  ?  "

Still  these  arguments  did  not  penetrate  into  his  soul,  for
it  was  encased  in  the  thick  armour  of  violent  sensual  desire.
And,  in  accordance  with  the  advice  of  that  physician,  he
entered  that  underground  chamber  alone,  excluding  the
numerous  retinue  that  usually  waits  upon  a  king.  And
alone,  with  one  servant  belonging  to  that  physician,  he  made
himself  a  slave  to  the  taking  of  drugs  and  the  rest  of  the
treatment.  And  the  king  remained  there  in  that  dark  sub-
terranean den,  which  seemed  as  if  it  were  the  overflowing,
through  abundance,  of  the  ignorance  of  his  heart.

And    after    the    king    had    spent    six    months    in    that

1  In  the  Mahavastu  Avadana  (in  Dr  R.  L.  Mitra's  Sanskrit  Buddhist
Literature  of  Nepal,  p.  123)  a  girl  named  Amita  is  cured  of  leprosy  by  being
shut  up  in  an  underground  chamber.

2  I  suppose  this  must  mean  "prepared  of  the  flesh  of  wild  goats."  A
MS.  in  the  Sanskrit  College  reads  ramyani,  "  pleasant."

3  In  the  D.  text  we  have  a  slightly  different  reading,  and  Speyer  (op.  cit.,
p.  114)  would  translate  :  "But  in  the  present  time,  0  King,  these  elixirs  are  only  heard
of  [  =  they  do  not  exist  in  reality],  and  owing  to  the  want  of  proper  materials,
produce  the  opposite  effect  to  that  which  is  intended.  For  this  reason  it  is  not
fit  [to  do]  so  [as  the  physician  advises]." — n.m.p.


unde


THE  POWER  OF  DRUGS  !  245


underground  chamber  that  wicked  physician,  seeing  that  his
senility  had  increased,  brought  a  certain  young  man  who
resembled  him  in  appearance,  with  whom  he  had  agreed
that  he  would  make  him  king.  Then  he  dug  a  tunnel  into
that  underground  chamber  from  a  distance,  and  after  killing
the  king  in  his  sleep  he  brought  his  corpse  out  by  the  under-
ground passage  and  threw  it  into  a  dark  well.  All  this  was
done  at  night.  And  by  the  same  tunnel  he  introduced  that
young  man  into  the  underground  chamber  and  closed  that
tunnel.

What  audacious  wickedness  will  not  a  low  fellow,  who
is  held  in  check  by  no  restraints,  commit  when  he  gets  a
favourable  chance  of  practising  upon  fools  ?

Then  the  next  day  the  physician  said  to  all  the  subjects  :
"  This  king  has  been  made  young  again  by  me  in  six  months,
and  in  two  months  his  form  will  be  changed  again.  So  show
yourselves  to  him  now  at  a  little  distance."  Thus  he  spake,
and  brought  them  all  to  the  door  of  the  underground  chamber,
and  showed  them  to  the  young  man,  telling  him  at  the  same
time  their  names  and  occupations.  By  this  artifice  he  kept
instructing  that  young  man  in  the  underground  chamber  in
the  names  of  all  the  subjects  every  day  for  two  months,  not
excepting  even  the  inhabitants  of  the  harem.

And  when  a  fitting  time  came  he  brought  the  young  man,
after  he  had  been  well  fed,1  out  of  the  subterranean  chamber,
saying :  "  This  king  has  become  young  again."  And  the
The  False  young  man  was  surrounded  by  the  delighted
Rejuvenation  subjects,  who  exclaimed :  "  This  is  our  own
king  restored  by  drugs."  Then  the  young  man,  having  thus
obtained  the  kingdom,  bathed;  and  performed  with  much
pleasure,  by  the  help  of  his  ministers,  the  kingly  duties.
And  from  that  time  forth  he  lived  in  much  felicity,  trans-
acting regal  business  and  sporting  with  the  ladies  of  the
harem,  having  obtained  the  name  of  Ajara.2  And  all  the
subjects  considered  that  he  was  their  former  king  trans-
formed by  drugs,  not  guessing  the  truth,  and  not  suspecting
the  proceedings  of  the  physician.

1  Plushta  is  a  mistake  for  pushta ;  see  Bohtlingk  and  Roth  v.s.

2  I.e.  free  from  old  age.


246  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

And  King  Ajara,  having  gained  over  the  subjects  and  the
Queen  Kamalaprabha  by  kind  treatment,  enjoyed  the  royal
fortune  together  with  his  friends.  Then  he  summoned  a
friend  called  Bheshajachandra  and  another  called  Padma-
darsana  and  made  both  of  them  like  himself,  satisfying  them
with  gifts  of  elephants,  horses  and  villages.  And  he  honoured
the  physician  Tarunachandra  on  account  of  the  advancement
he  had  conferred  on  him,  but  he  did  not  repose  confidence  in
him  because  his  soul  had  fallen  from  truth  and  virtue.

And  once  on  a  time  the  physician  of  his  own  motion  said
to  the  king  :  "  Why  do  you  make  me  of  no  account  and  act
independently  ?  Have  you  forgotten  the  occasion  on  which
I  made  you  king?  "  When  King  Ajara  heard  that,  he  said
to  the  physician  :  "  Ha  !  you  are  a  fool.  What  man  does
anything  for  anyone,  or  gives  anything  to  anyone  ?  My
friend,  it  is  our  deeds  in  a  former  state  of  existence  that  give
and  do.  Therefore  do  not  boast  yourself,  for  this  elevation
I  attained  by  asceticism,  and  I  will  soon  show  you  this  by
ocular  proof."

When  he  said  this  to  the  physician,  the  latter  reflected
as  one  terrified  :  "  This  man  is  not  to  be  intimidated  and
speaks  like  a  resolute  sage.  It  is  better  to  overawe  that
master,  the  secret  of  whose  character  is  instability,1  but  that
cannot  be  done  with  this  man,  so  I  must  submit  to  him.  In
the  meanwhile  let  me  wait  and  see  what  he  will  show  me
so  manifestly."  Thus  reflecting,  the  physician  said,  "  It  is
true,"  and  held  his  peace.

And  the  next  day  King  Ajara  went  out  to  roam  about
and  amuse  himself  with  his  friends,  waited  on  by  Taruna-
chandra and  others.  And  as  he  was  strolling  he  reached  the
bank  of  a  river,  and  in  it  he  saw  five  golden  lotuses  come
floating  down  the  current.  And  he  made  his  servants  bring
them,  and  taking  them  and  looking  at  them,  he  said  to
the  physician  Tarunachandra,  who  was  standing  near  him  :

1  This  clause  seems  unmeaning.  Instead  of  yad  rahasyam  taraiigatvam  of
the  B.  text,  we  find  in  the  D.  text  yad  raha.syantarangatvam  svamisaimanatiani,
etc.,  "Even  the  most  excellent  means  to  gain  one's  master's  favour,  the
possessing  a  secret  in  common,  is  useless  with  this  man ;  so  I  must  submit
to  him."     See  Speyer,  op.  cit.,  p.  114. — n.m.p.


THE  MYSTERY  OF  THE  LOTUSES  247

"  Go  up  along  the  bank  of  this  river  and  look  for  the  place
where  these  lotuses  are  produced  ;  and  when  you  have  seen
it,  return,  for  I  feel  great  curiosity  about  these  wonderful
lotuses,  and  you  are  my  skilful  friend."

When  he  was  thus  commissioned  by  the  king  the
physician,  not  being  able  to  help  himself,  said,  "So  be  it,"
and  went  the  way  he  was  ordered.  And  the  king  returned
to  his  capital ;  but  the  physician  travelled  on,  and  in  course
of  time  reached  a  temple  of  Siva  that  stood  on  the  bank
of  that  river.  And  in  front  of  it,  on  the  shore  of  a  holy
bathing- place  in  that  stream,  he  beheld  a  great  banyan-
tree,  and  a  man's  skeleton  suspended  on  it.  And  while,
fatigued  with  his  journey,  he  was  resting  after  bathing
and  worshipping  the  god,  a  cloud  came  there  and  rained.
And  from  that  human  skeleton  hanging  on  the  branches
of  the  banyan-tree,  when  rained  upon  by  the  cloud,  there
fell  drops  of  water.1  And  when  they  fell  into  the  water
of  the  bathing-place  in  that  river  the  physician  observed

1  This  reminds  one  of  the  thirteenth  story  in  the  Gesta  Romanorum. In

this  tale  a  man  is  walking  through  a  meadow  and  on  becoming  thirsty  seeks
to  quench  his  thirst  in  a  rivulet  of  pure  water,  but  the  more  he  drinks  the
more  thirsty  he  becomes.  Amazed  at  this,  he  determines  to  trace  the  water
to  its  source  to  see  if  he  can  satisfy  his  thirst  there,  and  on  his  way  he  meets
an  old  man  to  whom  he  explains  his  predicament.  The  old  man  points  out
the  source  of  the  stream  and  looking  in  the  direction  the  other  beholds  a
putrid  dog,  with  its  mouth  wide  open  and  its  teeth  black  and  decayed,  through
which  the  whole  fountain  gushes  in  a  surprising  manner.  The  man  regards
the  stream  with  terror  and  confusion,  and  being  apprehensive  of  poison  is
afraid  to  drink  again.  He  is,  however,  encouraged  to  do  so  by  the  old  man
and  finds  to  his  surprise  that  the  water  immediately  slakes  his  thirst.  By
this  the  old  man  explains  that,  in  the  same  way,  you  should  not  abstain  from
going  to  Mass  merely  because  you  disapprove  of  the  priest.

In  the  Mahabharata  (I,  cxcix)  we  read  of  golden  lotuses  floating  along
the  current,  whereupon  Indra,  desirous  of  ascertaining  whence  they  come,
proceeds  along  the  course  of  the  stream  and  discovers  that  they  emanate
from  a  woman  whose  tear-drops,  as  they  fall  on  the  stream,  are  being
transformed  into  golden  lotuses.

In  one  of  Steel  and  Temple's  Wide-Awake  Stories,  "  Prince  Lionheart  and
his  Three  Friends,"  the  hero  sees  a  stream  down  which  rubies  are  floating.
He  follows  the  stream  and  finds  a  golden  basket  hanging  from  a  tree  in  which
lies  the  head  of  a  beautiful  maiden.  The  blood  dropping  from  her  throat
turns  into  rubies  and  floats  with  the  current.  See  also  Crooke,  Popular  Religion
and  Folk-Lore  of  Northern  India,  vol.  i,  pp.  40-41. — n.m.p.


248  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

that  those  golden  lotuses  were  immediately  produced  from
them.

The  physician  said  to  himself :  "  Ha !  what  is  this
wonder  ?  Whom  can  I  ask  in  the  uninhabited  wood  ?  Or,
rather,  who  knows  the  creation  of  Destiny  that  is  full  of  so
many  marvels  ?  I  have  beheld  this  mine  of  golden  lotuses^
so  I  will  throw  this  human  skeleton  into  the  sacred  water.
Let  right  be  done,  and  let  golden  lotuses  grow  from  its
back."  After  these  reflections  he  flung  the  skeleton  down
from  the  top  of  that  tree  ;  and  after  spending  the  day
there  the  physician  set  out  the  next  day  for  his  own
country,  having  accomplished  the  object  for  which  he  was
sent.

And  in  a  few  days  he  reached  Vilasapura,  and  went,
emaciated  and  soiled  with  his  journey,  to  the  court  of  King
Ajara.  The  doorkeeper  announced  him,  and  he  went  in  and
prostrated  himself  at  the  feet  of  the  king.  The  king  asked
him  how  he  was,  and  while  he  was  relating  his  adventure  the
king  put  everyone  else  out  of  the  hall  and  himself  said  :
"  So  you  have  seen,  my  friend,  the  place  where  the  golden
lotuses  are  produced,  that  most  holy  sanctuary  of  Siva  ;  and
you  saw  there  a  skeleton  on  a  banyan-tree ;  know  that  that
is  my  former  body.  I  hung  there  in  old  time  by  my  feet,
and  in  that  way  performed  asceticism,  until  I  dried  up  my
body  and  abandoned  it.  And,  owing  to  the  nobility  of  my
penance,  from  the  drops  of  rain-water  that  fall  from  that
skeleton  of  mine  are  produced  golden  lotuses.  And  in  that
you  threw  my  skeleton  into  the  water  of  that  holy  bathing-
place  you  did  what  was  right,  for  you  were  my  friend  in  a
former  birth.  And  this  Bheshajachandra  and  this  Padma-
dar^ana,  they  also  were  friends,  who  associated  with  me  in  a
former  birth.  So  it  is  owing  to  the  might  of  that  asceticism,
my  friend,  that  recollection  of  my  former  birth  and  know-
ledge and  empire  have  been  bestowed  on  me.  By  an  artifice
I  have  given  you  ocular  proof  of  this,  and  you  have  described
it  with  a  token,  telling  how  you  flung  down  the  skeleton ;
so  you  must  not  boast  to  me,  saying  that  you  gave  me  the
kingdom ;  and  you  must  not  allow  your  mind  to  be  discon-
tented, for  no  one  gives  anything  to  anyone  without  the


THE  POWER  OF  ACTIONS  IN  A  FORMER  LIFE  249

help  of  actions  in  a  former  life.     From  his  birth  a  man  eats
the  fruit  of  the  tree  of  his  former  actions."

When  the  king  said  this  to  the  physician  he  saw  that  it
was  true,  and  he  remained  satisfied  with  the  king's  service,
and  was  never  afterwards  discontented.  And  that  noble-
minded  King  Ajara,  who  remembered  his  former  birth,
honoured  the  physician  becomingly  with  gifts  of  wealth,  and
lived  comfortably  with  his  wives  and  friends,  enjoying  the
earth  conquered  by  his  policy,  and  originally  obtained  by
his  good  actions,  without  an  opponent.


[M]  "  Thus  in  this  world  all  the  good  and  bad  fortune
that  befalls  all  men  at  all  times  is  earned  by  actions  in  a
former  life.  For  this  reason  I  think  we  must  have  earned
you  for  our  lord  in  a  former  birth,  otherwise  how  could  you
be  so  kind  to  us  while  there  are  other  men  in  existence  ?  ':

Then  Naravahanadatta,  having  heard  in  the  company  of
his  beloved,  from  the  mouth  of  Tapantaka,  this  strangely
pleasing  and  entertaining  tale,  rose  up  to  bathe.  And  after
he  had  bathed  he  went  into  the  presence  of  his  father,  the
King  of  Vatsa,  frequently  raining  nectar  into  the  eyes  of  his
mother,  and  after  taking  food  he  spent  that  day  and  night
in  drinking  and  other  pleasures  with  his  parents  and  his
wife  and  his  ministers.


250  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


NOTE  ON  THE  "IMPOSSIBILITIES"  MOTIF

This  incident  is  found  in  the  story  of  Yavakrita  in  the  135th  chapter  of
the  Mahabharata.

The  motif  of  proving  the  impossibility  of  one  thing  by  showing  the

impossibility  of  another  thing  is  not  uncommon  in  folk-lore.  Perhaps  the
most  famous  example  is  that  of  the  iron-eating  mice  in  Jdtaka  No.  218.  As
this  story  occurs  in  the  Ocean  of  Story  (Chapter  LX)  I  will  reserve  my  remarks
on  it  until  we  come  to  it.  There  are,  however,  several  other  analogues  of
the  motif  in  our  present  text.

First  of  all  I  should  mention  the  legend  of  St  Augustine.  He  tells  us
that  one  day  he  was  wandering  along  the  seashore  deep  in  his  meditations
on  the  mystery  of  the  Trinity.  Suddenly  he  beheld  a  child  who  had  dug
a  hole  in  the  sand  and  was  trying  to  fill  it  with  sea-water.  St  Augustine
asked  the  object  of  his  task.  "  I  am  going  to  empty  into  the  hole/'  replied
the  boy,  "all  the  water  of  the  great  deep."  "Impossible,"  exclaimed
St  Augustine.  "  Not  more  impossible  than  for  thee,  O  Augustine,  to  explain
the  mystery  on  which  thou  art  now  meditating."

La  Fontaine  (Fables  de  la  Fontaine,  edit.  Lemerre,  vol.  i,  pp.  41-42,  45)
in  his  translation  of  La  Vie  d'Esope  le  Phrygien  related  how  the  Pharaoh
Nectanebo  sent  an  ambassador  to  Lycerus,  King  of  Babylon,  and  to  his  minister
iEsop.  "  I  have  mares  in  Egypt  that  conceive  by  the  neighing  of  the  horses
that  are  about  Babylon  :  what  have  you  to  answer  as  to  this?  "  The  Phrygian
took  back  his  reply  the  next  day,  and  when  he  arrived  at  his  lodging  he
ordered  children  to  take  a  cat  and  to  whip  it  along  the  streets.  The
Egyptians,  who  adore  that  animal,  were  extremely  scandalised  at  the  treat-
ment it  received ;  they  rescued  it  from  the  hands  of  the  children,  and  went
to  complain  to  the  king.  The  Phrygian  was  brought  into  his  presence.  "  Do
you  not  know,"  said  the  king  to  him,  "  that  this  animal  is  one  of  our  gods  ?
Why  then  have  you  caused  it  to  be  treated  in  this  manner  ? "  "  It  is  by
reason  of  the  crime  that  it  has  committed  against  Lycerus,  for  last  night  it
strangled  a  cock  of  his  that  was  very  industrious,  and  crowed  at  all  hours."
"You  are  a  liar,"  replied  the  king;  "how  is  it  possible  for  a  cat  to  make
so  long  a  journey  in  so  short  a  time?"  "And  how  is  it  possible,"  said
.Ssop,  "  for  your  mares  to  hear  our  horses  neigh  at  so  great  a  distance,  and
to  conceive   by  hearing  them  ? "     (See   Maspero,  Popular  Stories  of  Ancient

Egypt>  P-  xxix0

In  a  Bihari  tale  translated  by  S.  C.  Mitra  {Journ.  Anth.  Soc.  Bomb.,  vol.  vi,
1902,  pp.  140,  l4l)  we  read  of  a  dispute  about  a  horse  which,  according  to
popular  rumour,  had  been  produced  from  an  oilman's  press.  A  jackal  is  elected
to  decide  the  case.  All  are  assembled  to  hear  the  evidence.  The  jackal  is
late  in  arriving,  and  explains  that  on  the  way  he  came  across  a  tank  full  offish,
and  he  set  fire  to  the  water  so  as  to  roast  the  fish,  and  the  time  passed  as  he
stopped  to  eat  them.  The  people  exclaim  that  water  could  not  take  fire
and  roast  fish.     "Just  as  easily  as  an  oil-press  can  give  birth  to  a  horse."


THE  "IMPOSSIBILITIES"  MOTIF  251

Among  the  exempla  of  the  Rabbis  we  find  various  similar  legends.
The  following  precis  are  found  in  Gaster's  Exempla  of  the  Rabbis,  1924,  at  the
pages  indicated.

No.  12,  p.  54. — The  Emperor  in  speaking  to  the  Rabbi  Gamliel  expresses
his  doubt  as  to  the  existence  of  God.  His  answer,  however,  does  not
satisfy  the  Emperor,  so  on  the  next  morning  Gamliel  slaps  the  face  of  his
servant  in  his  presence.  The  Emperor  is  wroth  and  thinks  the  Rabbi  deserves
punishment  for  acting  so  in  his  presence.  Gamliel  replies  :  "  He  brought  me
some  extraordinary  news ;  a  ship  of  mine,  lost  for  seven  years,  has  suddenly
returned  fully  laden  without  sailors  and  without  sails."  The  Emperor
declares  that  it  is  impossible,  and  the  Rabbi  replies  :  "  If  so,  how  can  a  world
created  by  God  govern  and  feed  itself  alone,  without  the  One  who  looks
after  it?"

No.  329,  p.  118. — David's  servants  were  eating  eggs.  One  had  eaten  his,
and  was  ashamed  to  sit  with  the  others.  So  he  borrowed  an  egg  and  promised
to  return,  when  asked,  all  that  might  come  from  one  egg.  After  a  time  the
man  was  brought  by  his  creditor  before  King  David,  who  condemned  him  to
pay  an  enormous  amount,  as  it  was  claimed  that  from  the  egg  a  chicken  could
be  hatched  which  would  lay  eighteen  eggs,  from  which  eighteen  chickens
would  be  hatched  and  again  eighteen.  The  man  is  met  by  Solomon,  who,
being  told  of  the  judgment,  advised  him  to  sow  boiled  peas  in  the  field.
When  seen  by  David  and  asked  how  he  could  expect  these  to  grow,  he
was  to  reply:  "  How  can  a  boiled  egg  be  hatched  and  produce  chickens?"

A  similar  legend  is  found  on  p.  124.  See  also  the  analogues  given  by
Gaster  on  p.  246. — n.m.p.


CHAPTER  XLI

AND  the  next  day,  as  Naravahanadatta  was  in  the
[M]  apartments  of  Ratnaprabha,  talking  over  vari-
ous subjects  with  his  ministers,  he  suddenly  heard
a  sound,  which  appeared  to  be  like  that  of  a  man  weeping
outside  in  the  courtyard  of  the  palace.  And  when  someone
asked,  "  What  is  that  ?  "  the  female  attendants  came  and
said  :  "  My  lord,  the  chamberlain  Dharmagiri  is  weeping
here.  For  a  foolish  friend  of  his  came  here  just  now  and
said  that  his  brother,  who  went  on  a  pilgrimage  to  holy
places,  was  dead  in  a  foreign  land.  He,  bewildered  with
grief,  forgot  that  he  was  in  the  court  and  began  to  lament,
but  he  has  been  just  now  taken  outside  by  the  servants
and  conducted  to  his  own  house."  When  the  prince  heard
this  he  was  grieved,  and  Ratnaprabha,  moved  with  pity,  said
in  a  despondent  tone  :  "  Alas  !  the  grief  which  is  produced
by  the  loss  of  dear  relatives  is  hard  to  bear  !  Why  did  not
the  Creator  make  men  exempt  from  old  age  and  death  ?  ,:
When  Marubhuti  heard  this  speech  of  the  queen's  he  said  :
"  Queen,  how  can  mortals  ever  attain  this  good  fortune  ?
For  listen  to  the  following  story,  which  I  will  tell  you,  bearing
on  this  question.

57.  Story  of  King  Chirdyus  and  his  Minister  Ndgdrjuna

In  the  city  of  Chirayus  there  was  in  old  time  a  king,
named  Chirayus,1  who  was  indeed  long-lived,  and  the  home
of  all  good  fortune.  He  had  a  compassionate,  generous  and
gifted  minister,  named  Nagarjuna,  who  was  sprung  from  a
portion  of  a  Bodhisattva,2  who  knew  the  use  of  all  drugs,

1  I.e.  long-lived.

2  I.e.  "one  whose  essence  is  perfect  knowledge"  (sattva  =  " essence,"
"own  nature,"  svabhava).  Although  this  is  probably  the  original  meaning  of
the  word,  historically  a  bodhisattva  =  "  one  who  is  on  the  way  to  the  attainment
of  perfect  knowledge  " — i.e.  a  future  Buddha.     For  a  full  authoritative  article

252


THE  ELIXIR  OF  IMMORTALITY  253

and  by  making  an  elixir  he  rendered  himself  and  that  king
free  from  old  age,  and  long-lived.

One  day  an  infant  son  of  that  minister  Nagarjuna,  whom
he  loved  more  than  any  of  his  other  children,  died.  He  felt
grief  on  that  account,  and  by  the  force  of  his  asceticism  and
knowledge  proceeded  to  prepare  out  of  certain  ingredients
the  Water  of  Immortality,1  in  order  to  prevent  mortals
from  dying.  But  while  he  was  waiting  for  the  auspicious
moment  in  which  to  infuse  a  particular  drug  Indra  found
out  what  was  going  on.

And  Indra,  having  consulted  with  the  gods,  said  to  the
two  Asvins  2  :  "Go  and  give  this  message  to  Nagarjuna  on
the  earth  from  me  :  '  Why  have  you,  though  a  minister,
begun  this  revolutionary  proceeding  of  making  the  Water
of  Life  ?  Are  you  determined  now  to  conquer  the  Creator,
who  indeed  created  men  subject  to  the  law  of  death,  since
you  propose  to  make  men  immortal  by  preparing  the  Water
of  Life  ?  If  this  takes  place,  what  difference  will  there  be
between  gods  and  men  ?  And  the  constitution  of  the  uni-
verse will  be  broken  up,  because  there  will  be  no  sacrificer
and  no  recipient  of  sacrifice.  So,  by  my  advice,  discontinue
this  preparation  of  the  Water  of  Life,  otherwise  the  gods
will  be  angry  and  will  certainly  curse  you.  And  your  son,
through  grief  for  whom  you  are  engaged  in  this  attempt,  is
now  in  Svarga.'  "  With  this  message  Indra  dispatched  the
two  Asvins.     And  they  arrived  at  the  house  of  Nagarjuna,

on  the  subject  see  "  Bodhisattva,"  by  L.  de  la  Vallee  Poussin,  in  Hastings'
Ency.  Rel.  Eth.,  vol.  ii,  pp.  739-753.— n.m.p.

1  See  chap.  iv.  of  Ralston's  Russian  Folk-Tales;  Veckenstedt's  Wendische

Sagen,   p.    221  ;    Bernhard   Schmidt's    Griechische   M'drchen,   p.    125. This

is,  of  course,  the  Amrita  which  was  produced  at  the  Churning  of  the  Ocean
(see  Vol.  I,  pp.  Sn1,  55nx).  As  is  only  natural,  the  "  Water  of  Life "  motif
dates  back  from  the  very  earliest  ages,  and  was  closely  connected  with
the  early  Babylonian  worship  of  Ishtar.  For  an  interesting  chapter  on  the
Water  of  Life  see  Macculloch,  Childhood  of  Fiction,  p.  52  et.  seq.  Sir  George
Grierson  tells  us  (Folk-Lore,  vol.  xi,  1900,  pp.  433-434)  that  in  Eastern
Hindustan  there  is  a  universal  belief  that  the  Water  of  Life  actually  exists
in  everyone's  little  finger,  and  if  he  only  knew  how  to  do  the  trick  he
would  be  able  to  put  it,  so  to  speak,  on  tap.  Bihari  folk-lore  is  full  of
references  to  this. — n.m.p.

2  See  the  note  at  the  end  of  this  chapter.— n.m.p.


254  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

and,  after  receiving  the  argha,1  told  Nagarjuna,  who  was
pleased  with  their  visit,  the  message  of  Indra,  and  informed
him  that  his  son  was  with  the  gods  in  heaven.

Then  Nagarjuna,  being  despondent,  thought :  "  Never
mind  the  gods ;  but  if  I  do  not  obey  the  command  of  Indra
these  Asvins  will  inflict  a  curse  on  me.  So  let  this  Water
of  Life  go ;  I  have  not  accomplished  my  desire ;  however,
my  son,  on  account  of  my  good  deeds  in  a  former  life,  has
gone  to  the  abode  of  bliss."

Having  thus  reflected,  Nagarjuna  said  to  these  two  gods,
the  Asvins  :  "I  obey  the  command  of  Indra.  I  will  desist
from  making  the  Water  of  Life.  If  you  two  had  not  come
I  should  have  completed  the  preparation  of  the  Water  of
Life  in  five  days  and  freed  this  whole  earth  from  old  age  and
death."  When  Nagarjuna  had  said  this  he  buried,  by  their
advice,  the  Water  of  Life,  which  was  almost  completed,  in
the  earth  before  their  eyes.  Then  the  Asvins  took  leave  of
him  and  went  and  told  Indra  in  heaven  that  their  errand
was  accomplished,  and  the  king  of  gods  rejoiced.

And  in  the  meanwhile  Nagarjuna's  master,  the  King
Chirayus,  anointed  his  son  Jivahara  crown  prince.  And
when  he  was  anointed,  his  mother,  the  Queen  Dhanapara,
The  Queen  on  n*s  commg  m  great  delight  to  salute  her,  said
schemes  on  her  to  him  as  soon  as  she  saw  him  :  "  Why  do  you
Sons  behalf  rej0ice  without  cause,  my  son,  at  having  obtained
this  dignity  of  crown  prince,  for  this  is  not  a  step  to  the
attainment  of  the  kingly  dignity,  not  even  by  the  help  of
asceticism  ?  For  many  crown  princes,  sons  of  your  father,
have  died,  and  not  one  of  them  has  obtained  the  throne;
they  have  all  inherited  disappointment.  For  Nagarjuna
has  given  this  king  an  elixir,  by  the  help  of  which  he  is
now  in  the  eighth  century  of  his  age.  And  who  knows
how  many  more  centuries  will  pass  over  the  head  of  this
king,  who  makes  his  short-lived  sons  crown  princes."

When  her  son  heard  that  he  was  despondent,  and  she
went  on  to  say  to  him  :  "If  you  desire  the  throne,  adopt
this  expedient.  This  minister  Nagarjuna  every  day,  after
he  has  performed  the  day's  devotions,  gives  gifts  at  the  time

1  Water,  rice,  durva  grass,  etc.,  offered  to  guests.


THE  HEAD  OF  NAGARJUNA  255

of  taking  food,  and  makes  this  proclamation  :  '  Who  is  a
suppliant  ?  Who  wants  anything  ?  To  whom  can  I  give
anything,  and  what  ?  '  At  that  moment  go  to  him  and  say  :
'  Give  me  your  head.'  Then  he,  being  a  truthful  man,  will
have  his  head  cut  off ;  and  out  of  sorrow  for  his  death  this
king  will  die,  or  retire  to  the  forest ;  then  you  will  obtain  the
crown.   There  is  no  other  expedient  available  in  this  matter."

When  he  heard  this  speech  from  his  mother  the  prince
was  delighted,  and  he  consented,  and  determined  to  carry
her  advice  into  effect ;  for  the  lust  of  sovereign  sway  is  cruel
and  overcomes  one's  affection  for  one's  friends.

Then  that  prince  went,  the  next  day,  of  his  own  accord
to  the  house  of  that  Nagarjuna,  at  the  time  when  he  took
his  food.  And  when  the  minister  cried  out,  "  Who  requires
anything,  and  what  does  he  require  ?  "  he  entered  and  asked
him  for  his  head.

The  minister  said :  "  This  is  strange,  my  son.  What  can
you  do  with  this  head  of  mine  ?  For  it  is  only  an  agglomera-
tion of  flesh,  bone  and  hair.  To  what  use  can  you  put  it  ?
Nevertheless,  if  it  is  of  any  use  to  you,  cut  it  off  and  take  it."
With  these  words  he  offered  his  neck  to  him.  But  it  had
been  so  hardened  by  the  elixir  that,  though  he  struck  at  it
for  a  long  time,  he  could  not  cut  it,  but  broke  many  swords
over  it.

In  the  meanwhile  the  king,  hearing  of  it,  arrived,  and
asked  him  not  to  give  away  his  head ;  but  Nagarjuna  said  to
him :  "I  can  remember  my  former  births,  and  I  have  given
away  my  head  ninety- nine  times  in  my  various  births.  This,
my  lord,  will  be  the  hundredth  time  of  my  giving  away  my
head.  So  do  not  say  anything  against  it,  for  no  suppliant
ever  leaves  my  presence  disappointed.  So  I  will  now  present
your  son  with  my  head  ;  for  this  delay  was  made  by  me  only
in  order  to  behold  your  face."  Thus  he  spoke,  and  embraced
that  king,  and  brought  a  powder  out  of  his  closet,  with  which
he  smeared  the  sword  of  that  prince.  Then  the  prince  cut
off  the  head  of  the  minister  Nagarjuna  with  a  blow  of  that
sword,  as  a  man  cuts  a  lotus  from  its  stalk.  Then  a  great
cry  of  wailing  was  raised,  and  the  king  was  on  the  point  of
giving  up  his  own  life  when  a  bodiless  voice  sounded  from


256  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

the  heaven  in  these  words  :  "  Do  not  do  what  you  ought  not,
King.  You  should  not  lament  your  friend  Nagarjuna,  for
he  will  not  be  born  again,  but  has  attained  the  condition  of  a
Buddha."

When  King  Chirayus  heard  this,  he  gave  up  the  idea  of
suicide,  but  bestowed  great  gifts,  and  out  of  grief  left  his
throne  and  went  to  the  forest.  There  in  time  he  obtained
by  asceticism  eternal  bliss.

Then  his  son  Jivahara  obtained  his  kingdom ;  and  soon
after  his  accession  he  allowed  dissension  to  arise  in  his  realm,
and  was  slain  by  the  sons  of  Nagarjuna,  remembering  their
father's  murder.  Then  through  sorrow  for  him  his  mother's
heart  broke.  How  can  prosperity  befall  those  who  walk  in
the  path  trodden  by  the  ignoble  ?

And  a  son  of  that  King  Chirayus,  born  to  him  by  another
wife,  named  Satayus,  was  placed  on  his  throne  by  his  chief
ministers.


[M]  "  Thus,  as  the  gods  would  not  permit  Nagarjuna  to
carry  out  the  task  of  destroying  death,  which  he  had  under-
taken, he  became  subject  to  death.  Therefore  it  is  true  that
this  world  of  living  beings  was  appointed  by  the  Creator
unstable,  and  full  of  grief  hard  to  ward  off,  and  even  with
hundreds  of  efforts  it  is  impossible  for  anyone  to  do  anything
here  which  the  Creator  does  not  wish  him  to  do."

When  Marubhuti  had  told  this  story  he  ceased  speak-
ing, and  Naravahanadatta  rose  up  with  his  ministers  and
performed  his  daily  duties.


THE  ASVINS  257


NOTE  ON   THE   ASVINS

The  Asvins  are,  perhaps,  best  described  as  twin  deities  of  light.  Both
their  origin  and  the  reason  for  their  various  attributes  are  obscure.  In
Vedic  mythology  they  are  described  as  the  sons  of  Dyaus,  the  Sky  Father
or  Heaven  (cf.  the  Greek  Zeus),  and  also  as  the  sons  of  Surya,  the  sun,  or
Savitri,  the  quickening  activity  of  the  sun.  According  to  this  latter  version
the  sun  married  Saiijna,  who,  after  bearing  her  husband  two  children,  fled
from  him  owing  to  his  overpowering  splendour.  After  numerous  vicissitudes
he  reduced  his  splendour,  disguised  himself  as  a  horse,  and  sought  out  his
lost  wife.  Saiijna,  not  allowing  him  to  approach  her  from  behind,  turned
her  head  in  his  direction,  and  from  the  united  breath  of  their  nostrils  were
produced  the  two  Asvins,  who  were  hence  called  Nasatya.

The  meaning  of  this  name  is  unknown,  but  in  Yaska's  Nirukta,  a  kind
of  Vedic  etymological  commentary,  the  word  is  said  (vi,  13)  to  mean  "true,
not  false,"  while  Yaska  himself  suggests  it  may  mean  "  nose-born "  (nasika-
prabhavas).  The  antiquity  of  the  epithet  was  shown  by  Professor  Winckler's
discovery  in  1907  of  cuneiform  tablets  at  Boghaz-Koi  containing  records  of
treaties  between  the  Hittites  and  the  kings  of  Mitani  (c.  1400  B.C.).  Among
the  gods  called  upon  as  witnesses  was  Na-§a-at-ti-ia — i.e.  Nasatya.  For  a
list  of  the  numerous  papers  on  this  important  discovery  see  the  Cambridge
History  of  India,  vol.  i,  p.  320»2.

The  question  as  to  who  the  Asvins  were  is  asked  in  Nirukta  (xii,  1),
but  no  definite  answer  is  given,  only  various  opinions  can  be  quoted.  They
are  said  to  be  "Heaven  and  Earth,"  "Day  and  Night,"  "Sun  and  Moon,"
"  two  kings  who  perform  holy  acts,"  etc.  They  have  also  been  described  as
the  personification  of  two  luminous  points  or  rays  imagined  to  precede  the
break  of  day.  Modern  scholars,  however,  see  in  them  either  the  morning
and  evening  stars,  or  twilight  (one  half  light  and  one  half  dark).

Although  no  less  than  fifty  hymns  are  addressed  to  them  in  the  Rig-
Veda,  there  is  little  that  is  definite  about  them.  They  are  described  as
riding  in  a  golden  chariot,  which  in  most  accounts  is  drawn  by  horses  (the
name  Asvina  means  "the  two  horsemen"),  but  poets  often  say  it  was  drawn
by  some  kind  of  bird,  a  buffalo,  or  an  ass.  They  are  the  precursors  of  the
Dawn  (Ushas),  who  appears  at  the  yoking  of  their  car.  She  is  sometimes
described  as  the  sister  and  sometimes  as  the  wife  of  the  Asvins.  More
commonly,  however,  their  joint  wife  is  Surya,  who  rides  with  them  in  the
car.  In  still  other  hymns  (Rig-Veda,  x,  85)  Soma,  the  moon,  is  the  husband
of  Surya,  and  the  Asvins  are  only  the  groomsmen,  who  help  to  get  her
for  Soma  from  her  father  Savitri.  They  lost  one  of  the  wheels  of  their
chariot  at  this  wedding  and  consequently  we  find  references  to  their  three-
wheeled  car.

In  different  hymns  of  the  Rig-Veda  they  are  referred  to  as  "Sons  of  the
Sun,"  "Children  of  the  Sky,"  "Bright  Lords  of  Lustre,"  "Offspring  of  the
Ocean,"  "  Honey-hued,"  and  so  on.  Thus  it  is  obvious  that  they  originally
VOL.  III.  R


258  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

represented  some  twin  phenomenon  in  cosmical  mythology,  but  exactly  what
is  hard  to  say.

But  there  is  another  aspect  of  the  Asvins  to  be  considered.  They  are
described  as  healers  of  disease,  deliverers  from  distress  (especially  on  the  sea),
lifters-up  of  the  downtrodden,  and  friends  of  lovers.  Such  an  office  was
considered  rather  infra  dig.  among  the  gods,  and  consequently  they  lost  a
certain  amount  of  prestige.

In  Brahmanical  mythology  the  cosmical  element  of  the  ASvins  has  dis-
appeared and  they  remain  as  physicians  of  great  kindness  and  personal  beauty.
Their  names  are  now  Nasatya  and  Dasra.  The  best-known  story,  found
differently  in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana  and  the  Mahabhdrata,  is  that  of
Chyavana,  the  old  husband  of  the  beautiful  Sukanya.  The  Asvins  fell  in
love  with  her  and  tried  in  vain  to  seduce  her.  They  finally  consented  to
rejuvenate  her  husband,  and  in  return  were  given  a  share  of  the  Soma.
Again  in  Mahabhdrata  (i,  111 ),  on  being  invoked,  they  restore  the  eyesight
of  Upamanyu,  who,  becoming  blind  through  eating  certain  forest  leaves,  had
fallen  into  a  pit.  There  are  many  other  stories  of  their  good  deeds.  They
rescued  Bhujyu  from  drowning  and  Atri  from  a  fiery  pit.  When  ViSpala  lost
her  leg  they  furnished  her  with  an  iron  one.

It  will  be  seen  from  the  above  varying  scraps  of  mythology  connected
with  the  Asvins  that  it  is  very  hard,  if  not  quite  impossible,  to  state  their
origin,  or  to  say  what  is  the  connecting  link  which  joins  the  cosmical  and
more  human  sides  of  their  character.  The  one  may  have  evolved  from  the
other,  the  healing  and  vivifying  power  of  the  sun  and  light  being  the  medium,
or  perhaps  the  healing  attributes  may  have  been  added  in  the  effort  to
preserve  the  memory  of  some  real  historical  mortal  physicians,  or  "kings
who  performed  holy  acts,"  whose  deeds  would  otherwise  have  been  lost  in
the  oblivion  of  the  ages.

We  cannot  help  seeing  a  certain  likeness  with  the  Aids  nopo)  of  the
Greeks,  Castor  and  Pollux,  who  are  also  twin  horsemen  and  act  as  saviour-
gods  to  mankind.  Dual  gods  or  heroes  are  found  in  many  mythologies  and
their  association  may  possibly  point  to  the  syncretism  of  allied  cults,  or  to
the  development  of  new  cults  out  of  a  primitive  cult  epithet.  (See  further
Crooke,  "Some  Notes  on  Homeric  Folk-Lore,"  Folk-Lore,  vol.  xix,  1908,
p.  163.  For  notes  and  references  on  the  Castor  and  Pollux  myth  see  Frazer's
translation  of  Apollodorus,  Loeb  Classical  Library,  vol.  ii,  pp.  30,  31.)

It  is  interesting  to  compare  the  post-Homeric  attributes  of  Apollo  as  a
god  of  healing  and  as  a  marine  deity.  The  former  side  of  his  character  is
shown  in  such  titles  as  Iatromantis  and  Oulios,  and  the  latter  in  such  names
as  Delphinius,  Epibaterius,  Euryalus,  etc. — n.m.p.


CHAPTER  XLII

THEN  early  the  next  day  Naravahanadatta  went  off
[M]  to  the  forest  for  the  purpose  of  hunting,  sur-
rounded with  elephants,  in  the  company  of  his  father
and  his  friends  ;  but  before  going  he  comforted  his  beloved
Ratnaprabha,  who  was  anxious  about  him,  by  saying  that
he  would  quickly  return.

Then  the  scene  of  the  chase  became  like  a  garden  adorned
with  lovely  creepers  for  his  delight,  for  in  it  the  pearls  that
dropped  from  the  claws  of  the  lions,  that  had  cleft  the  fore-
heads of  elephants,  and  now  fell  asleep  in  death,  were  sown
like  seeds  ;  and  the  teeth  of  the  tigers  that  were  cut  out  by
the  crescent-headed  arrows  were  like  buds,  and  the  flowing
blood  of  the  deer  seemed  like  shoots,  and  the  wild  boars,  in
which  stuck  the  arrows  adorned  with  heron  feathers,  seemed
like  clusters,  and  the  fallen  bodies  of  Sarabhas  1  showed  like
fruit,  and  the  arrows  falling  with  deep  hum  appeared  like
bees.

Gradually  the  prince  became  wearied,  and  desisted  from
the  chase,  and  went  on  horseback  to  another  wood  with
Gomukha,  who  was  also  riding.  There  he  began  to  play  at
ball,  and  while  he  was  thus  engaged  a  certain  female  ascetic
came  that  way.  Then  the  ball  slipped  from  his  hand  and
fell  on  her  head ;  whereupon  the  female  ascetic  laughed
a  little,  and  said  to  him :  "If  your  insolence  is  so  great
now,  what  will  it  be  if  you  ever  obtain  Karpiirika  for  a
wife  ?  "  2

When  Naravahanadatta  heard  this,  he  dismounted  from
his  horse,  and  prostrating  himself  at  the  feet  of  that  female
ascetic,  said  to  her :  "I  did  not  see  you,  and  my  ball  fell
on  your  head  by  chance.  Reverend  one,  be  propitiated,  and
pardon  that  fault  of  mine."  When  the  female  ascetic  heard
this  she  said :  "  My  son,  I  am  not  angry  with  you  " ;  and

1  Fabulous  animals  with  eight  feet.

2  Cf.  Sicilianische  M'drchen,  vol.  i,  p.  74.
259


260  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

being  victorious  over  her  wrath  she  comforted  him  with
blessings.

And  then,  thinking  that  the  wise,  truthful  ascetic  was
well  disposed  to  him,  Naravahanadatta  respectfully  asked
her  :  "  Who,  reverend  lady,  is  this  Karptirika  spoken  of  by
you  ?  Condescend  to  inform  me,  if  you  are  pleased  with
me,  for  I  am  curious  on  this  head."

When  he  said  this,  bending  before  her,  the  female  ascetic
said  to  him  :  "  There  is  on  the  other  side  of  the  sea  a
city  named  Karpurasambhava l ;  in  it  there  is  a  king  rightly
named  Karpuraka;  he  has  a  daughter,  a  lovely  maiden,
named  Karptirika,  who  appears  like  a  second  Lakshmi,
deposited  in  security  there  by  the  ocean,  having  seen  that
the  first  Lakshmi  had  been  carried  away  by  the  gods  after
the  Churning.  And  she,  as  she  hates  men,2  does  not  desire
to  be  married ;  but  she  will  desire  it,  if  at  all,  when  she  sees
you.  So  go  there,  my  son,  and  you  shall  win  that  fair  one  ;
nevertheless,  while  you  are  going  there,  you  will  suffer  great
hardship  in  the  forest.  But  you  must  not  be  perplexed  at
that,  for  all  shall  end  well."  When  the  ascetic  had  said  this
she  flew  up  into  the  air  and  disappeared.

Then  Naravahanadatta,  drawn  on  by  the  command  of
Love  uttered  through  her  voice,  said  to  his  attendant
Gomukha  :  "  Come,  let  us  go  to  Karptirika  in  the  city  of
Karpurasambhava,  for  I  cannot  remain  a  moment  without
beholding  her."  When  Gomukha  heard  that,  he  said :
44  King,  desist  from  your  rashness.  Consider  how  far  off
you  are  from  the  sea  and  from  that  city,  and  whether  the

1  I.e.  camphor-produced. Mysterious  Lands  of  Camphor  and  Camphor

Islands  are  often  mentioned  in  Eastern  legend.  In  the  tale  of  "  Hasan  of
Bassorah"  (Burton,  Nights,  vol.  viii,  p.  81),  while  searching  for  the  Islands
of  Wak,  Hasan  calls  upon  the  Lord  of  the  Land  of  Camphor  (see  Chauvin,
vii,  p.  lln2),  and  Arabian  writers  speak  of  the  white  city  of  al-Barraqa,  in
which  cries  and  songs  were  heard  but  no  inhabitants  seen.  Sailors  who
landed  there  for  water  found  it  clear  and  sweet  with  an  odour  of  camphor,
but  the  houses  receded  as  fast  as  approached  and  finally  faded  from  view.
See  G.  Ferrand,  Relations  de  Voyage  et  Textes  Gtographiques  Arabes,  Paris,
1913,  vol.  i,  pp.  145,  157,  and  vol.  ii,  pp.  570-573.  For  an  interesting
article  on  camphor  see  W.  H.  Schoff,  Journ.  Amer.  Orient.  Soc.,  vol.  xlii,  1922,
pp.  355-370.— n.m. p.

2  Cf.  Nights,  Burton,  vol.  iii,  p.  31,  and  vol.  vii,  pp.  209,  243.— n.m.p.


THE  JOURNEY  TO  KARPtJRASAMBHAVA     261

journey  is  worth  taking  for  the  sake  of  that  maiden.  Why,
on  merely  hearing  her  name,1  do  you  abandon  celestial
wives  and  alone  run  after  a  mere  woman  who  is  enveloped  in
doubt,  owing  to  your  not  knowing  what  her  intention  is  ?  "

When  Gomukha  said  this  to  him,  the  son  of  the  King
of  Vatsa  said  :  "  The  speech  of  that  holy  ascetic  cannot  be
false.  So  I  must  certainly  go  to  find  that  princess."  Having
said  this,  he  set  out  thence  on  horseback  that  very  moment.
And  Gomukha  followed  him;  silently,  though  it  was  against
his  wish.  When  a  lord  does  not  act  on  the  advice  of  his
servants  their  only  course  is  to  follow  him.

In  the  meanwhile  the  King  of  Vatsa,  having  finished  his
hunting,  returned  to  his  city  thinking  that  that  son  of  his  was
returning  among  his  own  armed  followers.  And  the  prince's
The  PHnce  followers  returned  with  Marubhuti  and  the  others
is  lost  to  the  city,  supposing  that  the  prince  was  with

the  armed  followers  of  his  father.  When  they  arrived  the
King  of  Vatsa  and  the  others  searched  for  him,  and  finding
that  he  had  not  returned,  they  all  went  to  the  house  of
Ratnaprabha.  She  at  first  was  grieved  at  that  news,  but
she  called  up  a  supernatural  science  and  was  told  by  it
tidings  of  her  husband,  and  said  to  her  distressed  father-
in-law  :  "  My  husband  heard  the  Princess  Karpurika  men-
tioned by  a  female  ascetic  in  the  forest,  and  in  order  to
obtain  her  he  has  gone  to  the  city  of  Karpurasambhava.
And  he  will  soon  have  accomplished  his  object,  and  will
return  here  with  Gomukha.  So  dismiss  anxiety,  for  this
I  have  learned  from  a  science."  By  these  words  she
comforted  the  King  of  Vatsa  and  his  retinue.  And  she
dispatched  another  science  to  wait  on  her  husband  during
his  journey  and  dispel  his  fatigue :  for  good  women  who
desire  their  husband's  happiness  do  not  nourish  jealousy.

In  the  meanwhile  Naravahanadatta  performed  a  long
journey  on  horseback  in  that  forest,  accompanied  by
Gomukha.  Then  a  maiden  suddenly  came  up  to  him  in
his    path    and   said   to   him :    "I   am   a   science,2  sent   by

1  For  falling  in  love  on  mere  mention  see  Vol.  I,  p.  128,  128ft1,  and
Vol.  II,  pp.  143,  144.— n.m.p.

2  See  Vol.  II,  pp.  211,  211ft1,  and  212,  212ft1.— n.m.p.


262  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

Ratnaprabha,  named  Mayavati ;  I  will  guard  you  on  the
path  without  being  seen,  so  proceed  now  without  fear."
Having  said  this,  the  incarnate  science  disappeared  as  he
gazed  at  it.

By  virtue  of  it  Naravahanadatta  continued  his  journey
with  his  thirst  and  hunger  appeased,  praising  his  beloved
Ratnaprabha.  And  in  the  evening  he  reached  a  wood  with
a  pure  lake  in  it,  and  with  Gomukha  he  bathed  and  took
a  meal  of  delicious  fruit  and  water.  And  at  night  he  tied
up  the  two  horses  underneath  a  large  tree,  after  supply-
ing them  with  grass,  and  he  and  his  minister  climbed  up
into  it  to  sleep.  While  reposing  on  a  broad  bough  of  the
tree  he  was  wakened  by  the  neighings  of  the  terrified
horses,  and  saw  a  lion  that  had  come  close  underneath.
When  he  saw  it  he  wished  *  to  get  down  for  the  sake
of  the  horses,  but  Gomukha  said  to  him :  "  Alas !  you
are  neglecting  the  safety  of  your  person  and  acting
without  counsel ;  for  kings  the  first  duty  is  the  preserva-
tion of  their  persons,  and  counsel  is  the  foundation  of
rule.  How  can  you  desire  to  contend  with  wild  beasts
armed  with  teeth  and  claws  ?  For  it  was  to  avoid  these
that  we  just  now  got  up  into  this  tree."

When  the  king  had  been  restrained  from  descending  by
these  words  of  Gomukha 's,  seeing  the  lion  killing  the  horse,
he  immediately  threw  his  sword  at  it  from  the  tree,  and
succeeded  in  wounding  it  with  the  weapon,  which  was  buried
in  its  body.  The  mighty  lion,  though  pierced  with  the
sword,  after  killing  that  horse,  slew  the  other  also.  Then
the  son  of  the  King  of  Vatsa  took  Gomukha's  sword
from  him  and,  throwing  it,  cut  the  lion  in  half  in  the
middle.  And  descending  he  recovered  his  sword  from  the
body  of  the  lion,  and  ascending  again  to  his  sleeping-place
he  passed  the  night  there  in  the  tree.

In  the  morning  Naravahanahatta  got  down  and  set
out  to  find  Karpiirika,  accompanied  by  Gomukha.  Then
Gomukha,  beholding  him  travelling  on  foot,  as  the  lion  had
slain  his  horse,  in  order  to  amuse  him  on  the  way,  said  :

1  I  find  that  a  MS.  in  the  Sanskrit  College  reads  avatiflrshum .  This  is
obviously  the  right  reading.


THE  TWO  HEAVENLY  FRUITS  263

"  Listen,    King ;    I    will    relate    you    this    story,    which    is
particularly  appropriate  on  the  present  occasion.

58.  Story  of  King  Parity  dgasena,  his  Wicked  Wife  and  his

Two  Sons

There  is  in  this  world  a  city  named  Iravati,  which
surpasses  Alaka * ;  in  it  there  dwelt  a  king  named  Paritya-
gasena.  And  he  had  two  beloved  queens,  whom  he  valued
as  his  life.  One  was  the  daughter  of  his  own  minister,  and
her  name  was  Adhikasangama ;  and  the  other  was  of  royal
race,  and  was  called  Kavyalankara.  And  with  those  two
the  king  propitiated  Durga  to  obtain  a  son,  and  performed
penance  without  food,  sleeping  on  darbha  grass.

Then  Bhavani,  who  is  kind  to  her  votaries,,  pleased  with
his  penance,  appeared  to  him  in  a  dream  and  gave  him  two
heavenly  fruits,  and  thus  commanded  him  :  "  Rise  up  and
give  your  two  wives  these  two  fruits  to  eat,  and  then,  King,
you  will  have  born  to  you  two  heroic  sons."  2

Having  said  this,  Gaurl  disappeared,  and  the  king  woke
up  in  the  morning  and  rose  delighted  at  beholding  those
fruits  in  his  hand.  And  by  describing  that  dream  of  his  he
delighted  his  wives,  and  bathed  and  worshipped  the  consort
of  Siva,  and  broke  his  fast.  And  at  night  he  first  visited
that  wife  of  his  Adhikasangama,  and  gave  her  one  of  the
fruits,  and  she  immediately  ate  it.  Then  the  king  spent  the
night  in  her  pavilion,  out  of  respect  for  her  father,  who  was
his  own  prime  minister.  And  he  placed  near  the  head  of
his  bed  the  second  fruit,  which  was  intended  for  the  other
queen.

While  the  king  was  asleep  the  Queen  Adhikasangama
rose  up,  and  desiring  for  herself  two  similar  sons,  she  took
from  his  head  and  ate  that  second  fruit  also.  For  women
are  naturally  envious  of  their  rivals.     And  in  the  morning,

1  The  city  of  Kuvera,  the  God  of  Wealth.

2  Readers  will  remember  that  Vasavadatta  received  a  fruit  from  Siva
which  brought  about  the  birth  of  Naravahanadatta.  See  Vol.  II,  p.  136,
136/I1,  where  several  references  to  analogues  are  given.  See  also  Hartland,
Legend  of  Perseus,  vol.  i,  p.  41,  and  Crooke,  op.  cit.,  vol.  i,  p.  228. — n.m.p.


264  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

when  the  king  rose  up  and  was  looking  for  that  fruit,  she
said :  "  I  ate  that  second  fruit  also."

Then  the  king  went  away  despondent,  and  after  spend-
ing the  day  he  went  at  night  to  the  apartments  of  the  second
queen.  And  when  she  asked  for  that  other  fruit  he  said
to  her  :  "  While  I  was  asleep  your  fellow- wife  treacherously
devoured  it."  Then  the  Queen  Kavyalankara,  not  having
obtained  that  fruit  which  was  to  enable  her  to  give  birth
to  a  son,  remained  silently  grieved.

In  the  course  of  some  days  that  Queen  Adhikasangama
became  pregnant,  and  in  due  time  gave  birth  to  twin  sons.
And  the  King  Parity agasena  rejoiced,  and  made  a  great
feast,  since  his  desire  was  fulfilled  by  their  birth.  And  the
king  gave  the  name  of  Indivarasena  to  the  elder  of  the  two,
who  was  of  wonderful  beauty  and  had  eyes  like  a  blue  lotus.
And  he  gave  to  the  younger  the  name  of  Anichchhasena,
because  his  mother  ate  the  second  fruit  against  his  wish.

Then  Kavyalankara,  the  second  wife  of  that  king,  on  be-
holding this,  was  angry,  and  reflected  :  "  Alas  !  I  have  been
cheated  by  this  rival  wife  out  of  having  children ;  so  I  must
without  fail  revenge  myself  on  her.  I  must  destroy  these  sons
of  hers  by  my  cunning."  Having  thus  reflected,  she  remained
thinking  over  a  means  of  doing  this.  And  as  fast  as  those
two  princes  grew,  the  tree  of  enmity  grew  in  her  heart.

And  in  course  of  time  those  two  princes,  having  attained
manhood,  and  being  mighty  of  arm,  and  desirous  of  con-
quest, said  to  their  father :  "  We  have  attained  manhood,
The  T  o  anc*  we  have  Deen  trained  in  the  use  of  weapons,
Princes  start  so  how  can  we  remain  here  endowed  to  no  profit
on  their  with   these    mighty   arms  ?      Out   on   the  arms

and  the  youth  of  a  Kshatriya  that  longs  not  for
victory !  So  let  us  go  now,  father,  and  conquer  the  regions."
When  the  King  Parityagasena  heard  this  request  of  his
sons  he  was  pleased,  and  consented,  and  made  arrangements
for  their  expedition.  And  he  said  to  them  :  "If  ever  you
are  in  difficulties  you  must  think  upon  the  goddess  Durga,
the  remover  of  sorrows,  for  she  gave  you  to  me."  Then  the
king  sent  forth  those  two  sons  on  their  expedition,  accom-
panied by  his  troops  and  feudal  chiefs,  after  their  mother


THE  LETTER  OF  DEATH  265

had  performed  the  auspicious  ceremonies  to  ensure  them
success.  And  he  sent  after  them  his  own  sagacious  prime
minister,  their  maternal  grandfather,  whose  name  was
Prathamasangama.

Then  those  two  mighty  princely  brothers,  with  their
army,  first  marched  in  due  order  to  the  eastern  quarter  and
subdued  it.  Then  these  two  irresistible  heroes  of  approved
might,  to  whom  many  kings  had  joined  themselves,  went
to  the  southern  quarter  to  conquer  it.  And  their  parents
rejoiced  on  hearing  these  tidings  of  them,  but  their  second
mother  was  consumed  with  the  fire  of  concealed  hate.

The  treacherous  queen  then  got  the  following  false
dispatch  written  in  the  king's  name  to  the  chiefs  in  the
princes'  camp,  by  means  of  the  Secretary  for  Foreign  Affairs,
whom  she  had  bribed  with  heaps  of  treasure  :  "  My  two
sons,  having  subdued  the  earth  by  the  might  of  their  arms,
have  formed  the  intention  of  killing  me  and  seizing  my
kingdom  ;  so  if  you  are  loyal  to  me  you  must  without
hesitation  put  to  death  both  those  sons  of  mine."  This
letter  Kavyalankara  sent  off  secretly  by  a  courier.1  And
the  courier  went  secretly  to  the  camp  of  those  two  princes
and  gave  that  letter  to  the  chiefs.  And  they  all,  after
reading  it,  reflecting  that  the  policy  of  kings  is  very  cruel,
and  considering  that  that  command  of  their  master  must
not  be  disobeyed,  met  and  deliberated  in  the  night,  and,  as
they  saw  no  way  out  of  the  difficulty,  determined  to  kill
those  two  princes,  though  they  had  been  fascinated  by  their
virtues.  But  their  maternal  grandfather,  the  minister,  who
was  with  them,  heard  of  it  from  a  friend  that  he  had  among
the  chiefs,  and  after  informing  the  princes  of  the  state  of
affairs  he  thereupon  mounted  them  on  swift  horses  and
conveyed  them  safely  out  of  the  camp.

The  two  princes,  when  conveyed  away  by  the  minister
at  night,  travelled  along  with  him,  and  entered  the  Vindhya
forest  out  of  ignorance  of  the  true  road.  Then,  after  the
night  had  passed,  as  they  slowly  proceeded  on  their  way,
about  noon  their  horses  died,  overcome  with  excessive  thirst,

1  For  a  note  on  the  "  Letter  of  Death  "  see  the  end  of  this  chapter.

— N.M.P.


266  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

And  that  aged  maternal  grandfather  of  theirs,  whose  palate
was  dry  with  hunger  and  thirst,  died  exhausted  with  the
heat  before  the  eyes  of  those  two,  who  were  also  weary.
Then  those  afflicted  brothers  exclaimed  in  their  sorrow  :
"  Why  has  our  father  reduced  to  this  state  us  who  are
innocent,  and  fulfilled  the  desire  of  that  wicked  second
mother  of  ours  ?  "  In  the  midst  of  their  lamentation  they
thought  upon  the  goddess  Ambika,1  whom  their  father  had
long  ago  pointed  out  to  them  as  their  natural  protectress.
That  moment,  by  force  of  thinking  on  that  kind  protectress,
their  hunger,  thirst  and  fatigue  left  them,  and  they  were
strong.  Then  they  were  comforted  by  faith  in  her,  and
without  feeling  the  fatigue  of  the  journey  they  went  to  visit
that  goddess  who  dwells  in  the  Vindhya  forest.  And  when
those  two  brothers  had  arrived  there,  they  began  a  course
of  fasting  and  asceticism  to  propitiate  her.

In  the  meanwhile  those  chiefs  in  the  camp  assembled
together  in  a  band,  and  went  with  the  intention  of  doing
the  princes  a  mischief;  but  they  could  not  find  them,
though  they  searched  everywhere.  They  said  :  "  The  princes
have  escaped  somewhere  with  their  maternal  grandfather  " ;
and  fearing  that  the  whole  thing  would  come  out,  they
went  in  a  fright  to  the  King  Parityagasena,  and,  showing
him  the  letter,  they  told  him  the  whole  story.  He,
when  he  heard  it,  was  agitated,  and  said  to  them  in  his
anger:  "  I  did  not  send  this  letter;  this  is  some  deception.
And  how  comes  it  that  you  did  not  know,  you  foolish
creatures,  that  I  should  not  be  likely  to  put  to  death
two  sons  obtained  by  severe  austerities  ?  They  have  been
put  to  death  as  far  as  you  are  concerned,  but  they  were
saved  by  their  own  merits,  and  their  maternal  grandfather
has  exhibited  a  specimen  of  his  statesmanship."  He  said
this  to  the  chiefs,  and  though  the  Secretary  who  wrote  the
treacherous  letter  fled,  the  king  quickly  had  him  brought
back  by  his  royal  power,  and  after  thoroughly  investigating
the  whole  matter,  punished  him  as  he  deserved.  And  he
threw  into  a  dungeon  his  wicked  wife  Kavyalankara,  who
was  guilty  of  such  a  crime  as  trying  to  slay  his  sons.     For

1  The  mother — i.e.  Durgu.


THE  KING  OF  THE  RAKSHASAS  267

how  can  an  evil  deed  audaciously  done,  the  end  of  which
is  not  considered  through  the  mind  being  blinded  with  ex-
cessive hate,  help  bringing  ruin  ?  And  as  for  those  chiefs
who  had  set  out  with  his  two  sons  and  returned,  the  king
dismissed  them  and  appointed  others  in  their  place.  And
with  their  mother  he  continued  to  seek  for  tidings  of  those
sons,  plunged  in  grief,  devoted  to  righteousness,  thinking
upon  Durga.

In  the  meanwhile  that  goddess,  who  has  her  shrine  in
the  Vindhya  mountains,  was  pleased  with  the  asceticism  of
the  Prince  Indivarasena  and  his  younger  brother.  And  she
The  Magic  gave  Indivarasena  a  sword  in  a  dream,  and  ap-
Sword  pearing  to  him,  thus  addressed  him:    "By  the

power  of  this  sword  thou  shalt  conquer  enemies  hard  to
overcome,  and  whatever  thou  shalt  think  of  thou  shalt
obtain,  and  by  means  of  it  you  shall  both  gain  the  success
you  desire."

When  the  goddess  had  said  that  she  disappeared,  and
Indivarasena,  waking  up,  beheld  that  sword  in  his  hand.
Then  he  comforted  his  younger  brother  by  showing  him  that
sword  and  describing  to  him  his  dream,  and  in  the  morning
he  and  his  brother  broke  their  fast  on  wild  fruits.  Then
he  worshipped  that  goddess,  and  having  his  fatigue  removed
by  her  favour,  he  departed  rejoicing,  with  the  sword  in  his
hand,  in  the  company  of  his  brother.

And  after  he  had  travelled  a  long  distance  he  found  a
great  and  splendid  city,  looking  like  the  peak  of  Meru  on
account  of  its  golden  houses.  There  he  beheld  a  terrible
Rakshasa  standing  at  the  gate  of  the  high  street,  and  the
hero  asked  him  what  was  the  name  of  the  town,  and  who
was  its  king.  That  Rakshasa  said  :  "  This  city  is  called
Sailapura,  and  it  is  possessed  by  our  lord  Yamadanshtra,
the  slayer  of  his  foes,  King  of  the  Rakshasas."

When  the  Rakshasa  said  this,  Indivarasena  attempted
to  enter,  in  order  to  slay  Yamadanshtra,  but  the  Rakshasa
at  the  door  tried  to  prevent  him,  upon  which  the  mighty
Indivarasena  killed  him,  cutting  off  his  head  with  one
stroke  of  his  sword.  After  slaying  him  the  hero  entered
the    royal    palace,    and    beheld    inside    it    the    Rakshasa


268  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

Yamadanshtra  sitting  on  his  throne,  having  a  mouth  terrible
with  tusks,  with  a  lovely  woman  at  his  left  hand,  and  a
virgin  of  heavenly  beauty  on  his  right  hand.  And  when
Indivarasena  saw  him  he  went  with  the  sword  given  him
by  Durga*  in  his  hand  and  challenged  him  to  fight,  and  the
Rakshasa  drew  his  sword  and  stood  up  to  resist  him.  And
in  the  course  of  the  fight  Indivarasena  frequently  cut  off
the  Rakshasa's  head,  but  it  grew  again.1     Seeing  that  magic

1  See  Ralston's  remarks  on  this  story  in  his  Russian  Folk-Tales,  p.  71.
In  Hagen's  Helden-Sagen,  vol.  i,  p.  44,  Hilda  reunites  as  fast  as  she  is  cut
in  two,  but  at  last  Dietrich,  by  the  advice  of  Hildebrand,  steps  between  the
two  pieces  and  interferes  with  the  vis  medicatrix.  Baring-Gould  seems  to
identify  this  story  of  Indivarasena  with  that  of  St  George.  In  his  essay  on
that  hero-saint  (Curious  Myths  of  the  Middle  Ages,  p.  305)  he  observes :  "  In
the  Katha  Sarit  Sagara  a  hero  fights  a  demon  monster  and  releases  a  beautiful
woman  from  his  thraldom."  The  story,  as  told  by  Somadeva,  has  already
progressed,  and  assumed  a  form  similar  to  that  of  Perseus  and  Andromeda.

The  idea  of  the  hero  finding  the  person  or  animal  he  has  killed  coming

to  life  again  is  one  of  the  oldest  motifs  in  fiction.  It  first  appears  on  an
Egyptian  papyrus  of  Ptolemaic  times,  in  the  "  Adventure  of  Satni-Khamois
with  the  Mummies."  Here  we  read  (Maspero,  Popular  Stories  of  Ancient
Egypt,  p.  127):  "He  came  to  the  place  where  the  eternal  serpent  was;
he  attacked  him,  he  slew  him.  The  serpent  came  to  life,  and  took  his  form
again.  He  attacked  the  serpent  a  second  time ;  he  slew  him.  The  serpent
came  to  life  again.  He  attacked  the  serpent  a  third  time ;  he  cut  him  in
two  pieces,  he  put  sand  between  piece  and  piece ;  the  serpent  died,  and  he
did  not  again  take  his  previous  form."

There  is  a  curious  variant  in  the  Nights  (Burton,  vol.  vii,  p.  36l),  where,
in  the  story  of  "  Sayf  al-Muluk  and  Badi'a  al-Jamal,"  the  hero  cuts  the  ghul
in  half  by  a  single  stroke  across  his  waist.  Whereupon  the  ghul  screams
out:  "O  man,  an  thou  desire  to  slay  me,  strike  me  a  second  stroke."  He  is
just  about  to  make  the  second  stroke  when  a  certain  blind  man  who  has
befriended  him  calls  out :  "  Smite  him  not  a  second  time,  for  then  he  will
not  die,  but  will  live  and  destroy  us."  He  accordingly  holds  his  hand,  and
the  ghul  dies.

I  notice  another  variant  in  a  recent  number  of  Folk-Lore  (Dec.  1923,
p.  302),  which,  although  again  different  from  that  in  our  text,  seems  to  have
the  same  basic  idea — that  in  the  case  of  supernatural  beings  or  animals  there
is  a  kind  of  magical  power  making  their  life  hard  to  destroy,  but  once  the
secret  is  discovered,  and  the  magical  properties  annulled,  they  are  slain  like
an  ordinary  human  being  or  animal.

The  variant  referred  to  appears  in  Buxton's  "Some  Navajo  Folk-Tales
and  Customs,"  and  is  as  follows: — "Then  the  man  used  the  lightning  and
killed  the  giant.  The  blood  started  to  run  out  of  his  mouth,  and  flowed
back  in  two  streams  behind  his  head.     Nayezesegoni  stuck  his  club  into  the


THE  VIRGIN'S  STORY  269

power  of  his,  and  having  had  a  sign  made  to  him  by  the
virgin  at  the  Rakshasa's  side,  who  had  fallen  in  love  with
him  at  first  sight,  the  prince,  after  cutting  off  the  head  of
the  Rakshasa,  being  quick  of  hand,  again  cut  it  in  two  with
a  stroke  of  his  sword.  Then  the  Rakshasa's  magic  was
baffled  by  contrary  magic,  and  his  head  did  not  grow  again,
and  the  Rakshasa  died  of  the  wound.

When  he  was  slain  the  lovely  woman  and  the  princess
were  delighted,  and  the  prince  with  his  younger  brother  sat
down  and  asked  them  the  following  questions  :  "  Why  did
this  Rakshasa  live  in  such  a  city  as  this,  guarded  by  one
warder  only,  and  who  are  you  two,  and  why  do  you  rejoice
at  his  being  slain?  "  When  they  heard  this,  the  virgin  was
the  one  that  answered,  and  she  spoke  as  follows  :  "In  this
city  of  Sailpura  there  lived  a  king  of  the  name  of  Virabhuja,
and  this  is  his  wife  Madanadanshtra,  and  this  Rakshasa  came
and  devoured  him  by  the  help  of  his  magic  power.  And
he  ate  up  his  attendants,  but  he  did  not  eat  this  Madana-
danshtra, whom  alone  he  spared  because  she  was  beautiful,
but  he  made  her  his  wife.  Then  he  became  disgusted  with
this  city  though  beautiful,  and  building  in  it  houses  of  gold
he  remained  here  sporting  with  Madanadanshtra,  having
dismissed  his  retinue.  And  I  am  the  younger  sister  of  this
Rakshasa,  and  unmarried,  but  the  moment  I  saw  you  I  fell
in  love  with  you.  Accordingly  she  is  glad  at  his  having  been
slain,  and  so  also  am  I ;  so  marry  me  here  now,  my  husband,
since  love  makes  me  offer  myself  to  you."

When  Khadgadanshtra  said  this,  Indivarasena  married
her  then  and  there  by  the  gdndharva  form  of  marriage.  And
he  remained  in  that  very  city,  having  everything  brought
The  Macric  to  him  on  his  thinking  of  it,  by  the  virtue  of  the
Chariot  sword  of  Durga,   married  and  accompanied  by

his  younger  brother.  And  once  on  a  time  he  made  a  chariot
that  would  fly  through  the  air,  produced  by  thought  through

ground  to  prevent  the  two  streams  of  blood  joining,  as  if  they  had  the  giant
would  have  come  to  life  again."

In  some  cases  the  head  of  the  giant  repeatedly  flies  on  again  until  the
secret  of  his  "life-index"  is  discovered.  See,  for  instance,  R.  B.  Shaw,
"  On  the  Shighni  (Ghalchah)  Dialect,"  Journ.  As.  Soc.  Bengal,  vol.  xlvi,  pt.  i,
No.  2,  1877,  pp.  115-117.— n.m.p.


270  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

the  virtue  of  his  sword,  that  resembled  in  its  powers  the
philosopher's  stone,  and  placed  in  it  his  heroic  brother
Anichchhasena,  and  sent  him  off  from  his  retreat  to  bear
tidings  of  him  to  his  parents.  Anichchhasena,  for  his  part,
travelled  quickly  through  the  air  in  that  chariot  and  reached
Iravati,  that  city  of  his  father.  There  he  refreshed  his  grief-
worn  parents  with  the  sight  of  him,  as  the  moon  refreshes
the  partridges  when  exhausted  with  severe  heat.  And  he
approached  them  and  fell  at  their  feet,  and  was  embraced
by  them ;  and  when  they  questioned  him  he  dispelled  their
apprehensions  with  good  news  of  his  brother.  And  he  told
in  their  presence  the  whole  adventure  of  himself  and  his
brother,  which  in  the  beginning  was  sad,  but  in  the  end  was
happy.  And  there  he  heard  the  treacherous  device  which
his  wicked  second  mother  had,  out  of  enmity,  contrived  for
his  destruction.

Then  Anichchhasena  remained  there  in  tranquillity,  in
the  company  of  his  delighted  father  and  his  mother,  honoured
by  the  subjects.  But  after  some  days  had  passed  his  fears
were  aroused  by  a  threatening  dream,  and  he  yearned  to
see  his  brother  again,  and  said  to  his  father :  "I  will
depart,  and  by  telling  my  brother  Indivarasena  that  you
are  anxiously  awaiting  him  I  will  bring  him  back.  Give
me  leave  to  depart,  my  father."

When  his  father  heard  that,  being  anxious  for  the  sight
of  his  son,  he  and  his  wife  gave  Anichchhasena  leave  to
depart,  and  he  immediately  mounted  his  chariot  and  reached
through  the  air  that  city  of  Sailapura.  And  when  he  arrived
there  he  entered  the  palace  of  that  brother  of  his.  He  saw
there  his  elder  brother  lying  senseless  in  the  presence  of
Khadgadanshtra  and  Madanadanshtra,  who  were  weeping.
In  his  perplexity  he  asked  :  "  What  does  this  mean  ? "
And  then  Khadgadanshtra  said,  with  her  eyes  fixed  on
the  ground,  though  the  other  blamed  her  for  it :  "  When
you  were  away  your  brother  one  day,  on  my  going  to  bathe,
had  a  secret  intrigue  with  this  Madanadanshtra,  and  I,  on
returning  from  bathing,  found  him  with  her,  and  abused
him.  Then  he  tried  to  propitiate  me,  but  I,  being  exceed-
ingly bewildered  by  unforgiving  jealousy,   that  seemed  to


ha


DURGA  IS  PROPITIATED  271


have  possessed  me,  thought  thus  with  myself :  6  Ah  !  with-
out taking  me  into  account,  he  favours  another.  I  believe
he  shows  this  insolence  confiding  in  the  magic  properties  of
his  sword,  so  I  will  hide  this  weapon  of  his.'  After  thus  re-
flecting, in  my  folly  I  thrust  his  sword  into  the  fire  at  night
while  he  was  asleep.  The  consequence  was  that  his  sword
was  dimmed  and  he  was  reduced  to  this  state.  And  I  am
grieved  for  this  myself  and  upbraided  by  Madanadanshtra.
So  you  have  come  here  now  when  both  our  minds  are
blinded  with  grief  and  we  have  resolved  on  death.  So  take
this  sword  and  kill  me  with  it,  since  I  have  proved  true  to
the  customs  of  my  race  and  acted  cruelly."

When  Anichchhasena  was  thus  entreated  by  his  brother's
wife,  he  thought  that  he  ought  not  to  slay  her  on  account
of  her  repentance,  but  prepared  to  cut  off  his  own  head.
But  at  that  moment  he  heard  the  following  voice  from
the  air :  "  Do  not  act  thus,  prince ;  your  brother  is  not
dead,  but  he  has  been  struck  senseless  by  Durga,  who  is
angry  at  his  not  having  taken  sufficient  care  of  the  sword,
and  you  must  not  impute  guilt  to  Khadgadanshtra,  for  this
circumstance  is  the  consequence  of  your  all  having  been
born  into  this  world  on  account  of  a  curse.  And  they  were
both  of  them  your  brother's  wives  in  a  former  life.  So
propitiate  Durga  in  order  to  gain  your  object."

Accordingly  Anichchhasena  gave  up  his  intention  of  slaying
himself.  But  he  mounted  that  chariot,  and  took  that  fire-
dimmed  sword,  and  went  to  propitiate  the  soles  of  the  feet  of
Durga,  the  dweller  in  the  Vindhya  range.  There  he  fasted,  and
was  about  to  propitiate  the  goddess  with  the  offering  of  his
head  when  he  heard  this  voice  from  heaven :  "  Do  not  be  rash,
my  son.  Go ;  thy  elder  brother  shall  live,  and  the  sword  shall
become  pure  from  stain,  for  I  am  pleased  with  thy  devotion."

When  Anichchhasena  heard  this  speech  of  the  goddess  he
immediately  saw  that  the  sword  in  his  hand  had  recovered
its  brightness,  and  he  walked  round  the  goddess,  keeping  his
right  hand  towards  her,  and  ascending  his  swift  magic  car,
as  if  it  were  his  own  desire,1  he  returned  in  a  state  of  anxious
expectation  to  that  Sailapura.     There  he  saw  that  his  elder

1  The  word  literally  means  "  chariot  of  the  mind."     There  is  a  pun  here.


272  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

brother  had  just  risen  up,  having  suddenly  regained  con-
sciousness, and,  weeping,  he  seized  his  feet,  and  his  elder
brother  threw  his  arms  round  his  neck.  And  both  the  wives
of  Indivarasena  fell  at  the  feet  of  Anichchhasena  and  said  :
"  You  have  saved  the  life  of  our  husband."  Then  he  told
the  whole  story  to  his  brother  Indivarasena;  who  ques-
tioned him,  and  he,  when  he  heard  it,  was  not  angry  with
Khadgadanshtra,  but  was  pleased  with  his  brother.1

1  This  resembles  the  German  story  of  the  two  brothers  as  given  in
Cox's  Mythology  of  the  Aryan  Nations,  vol.  i,  p.  162.  See  also  Gonzenbach's
Sicilianische  Mdrchen,  Nos.  39  and  40,  with  Dr  Kohler's  note.  He  there
refers  us  to  his  own  remarks  on  the  fourth  of  Campbell's  West  Highland  Tales
in  Orient  und  Occident,  vol.  ii,  p.  118,  and  to  Grimm,  Nos.  60  and  85,  Hahn,
No.  22,  Widter- Wolf,  No.  8,  Vernaleken,  No.  35,  etc.  In  Grimm's  No.  60
we  have  a  magic  sword,  and  the  temporary  death  of  one  of  the  brothers  is
indicated  by  the  dimming  of  one  side  of  a  knife.  This  story  resembles
Grimm's  more  closely  than  that  of  A£okadatta  and  Vijayadatta  in  Chapter  XXV.
See  also  Bartsch's  Sagen,  M'drchen  und  Gebrauche  aus  Meklenburg,  vol.  i,  p.  474,
and  De  Gubernatis,  Zoological  Mythology,  vol.  i,  p.  328;  vol.  ii,  p.  317.  The
story  of  Amys  and  Amylion,  in  Ellis's  Metrical  Romances,  resembles  closely
the  tale  as  given  by  Grimm  and  Gonzenbach.  So  too  do  the  seventh  and
ninth  stories  of  the  first  day  in  the  Pentamerone  of  Basile,  and  the  fifty-second
in  Coelho's  Contos  Populares  Portuguezes,  p.  120.  Perhaps  the  oldest  pair  of
mythological  brothers  are  the  A3vins,  who  have  their  counterpart  in  the
Dioscuri  and  in  Heracles  and  Iphiclus.

For   further   analogues  to  Grimm   Nos.   60  and   85  see   Bolte  and

Polivka,  op.  cit,,  vol.  i,  p.  528,  and  vol.  ii,  p.  204.

The  "  External  Soul "  motif  has  already  been  discussed  (Vol.  I,  pp.  1 29-1 32)
and  numerous  references  have  been  given.  In  many  of  the  examples  found
on  those  pages  we  saw  that  the  "life"  of  the  person  was  dependent  on  a
bird,  although  in  some  cases  it  is  an  inanimate  object  like  a  ring,  stone,
necklace  or  sword  (as  in  our  present  text).

In  Steel  and  Temple's  Wide-Awake  Stories,  p.  47,  the  prince's  life
depends  upon  a  sword,  which  the  witch  manages  to  get  hold  of.  As  soon
as  the  sword  is  heated  the  prince  becomes  feverish,  and  tries  to  get  his
sword  back.  A  rivet  falls  from  the  hilt,  and  as  the  hilt  drops  so  does  the
prince's  head.  Barley  plants  which  he  had  left  behind  as  a  "health  (i.e.
passive)  index"  show  his  unhappy  condition  to  his  friends.  A  new  rivet  is
forged,  the  sword  is  polished  and  the  prince  is  restored  to  life.  Other
examples  of  the  sword  as  a  "  life-index  "  will  be  found  in  Shaikh  Chilli,  FoUc-
Tales  of  Hindustan,  p.  51  ;  Parker,  Village  Folk-Tales  of  Ceylon,  vol.  i,  p.  165  ;
vol.  ii,  p.  162  et  seq. ;  vol.  iii,  p.  35  et  seq.  These  are  discussed  by  Norton,
"The  Life-Index,"  Studies  in  Honour  of  Maurice  Bloomfield,  1920,  pp.  214,  215.
See  also  Crooke,  op.  cit.,  vol.  ii,  p.  13,  and  Chauvin,  Bibliographic  Arabe,  v,
p.  87m1. — N.M.P.


THE  POWER  OF  THE  MAGIC  SWORD        273

And  when  he  heard  from  the  lips  of  his  brother  that  his
parents  were  eager  to  see  him,  and  of  the  fraud  of  his  second
mother,  that  had  brought  about  his  separation  from  them,
Indivarasena  ne  to°k  tne  sword  which  his  brother  handed  to
returns  to  his  him,  and  mounted  a  large  chariot,  which  came
Native  City  to  fcm  tjie  moment  he  thought  of  it,  owing  to
the  virtue  of  the  sword,  and  with  his  golden  palaces,  and
his  two  wives,  and  his  younger  brother,  Indivarasena  re-
turned to  his  own  city,  Iravati.  There  he  alighted  from
the  air,  beheld  with  wonder  by  the  subjects,  and  entered  the
palace,  and  went  with  his  attendants  into  the  presence  of
the  king.  And  in  that  condition  he  beheld  his  father  and
his  mother,  and  fell  at  their  feet  with  his  eyes  bathed  in
streaming  tears.  And  they,  the  moment  they  beheld  their
son,  embraced  him  and  his  younger  brother,  and  having  their
bodies,  as  it  were,  bathed  in  nectar,  they  were  relieved  from
their  sorrow.

And  when  their  daughters-in-law,  those  two  wives  of
Indivarasena,  of  heavenly  beauty,  fell  at  their  feet,  they
looked  on  them  with  delight  and  welcomed  them.  And
the  parents,  learning  in  course  of  conversation  that  they
were  said  by  a  divine  voice  to  have  been  appointed  in  a
previous  life  as  his  wives,  were  exceedingly  delighted.  And
they  rejoiced  with  astonishment  at  the  power  of  their  son,
which  enabled  him  to  travel  through  the  air,  and  bring
golden  palaces,  and  do  other  things  of  this  kind.

Then  Indivarasena  remained,  with  those  two  wives  and
his  attendants,  in  the  society  of  his  parents,  causing  delight
to  the  subjects.  And  once  on  a  time  he  took  leave  of  his
father,  King  Parityagasena,  and  went  forth  again  to  conquer
the  four  quarters,  accompanied  by  his  younger  brother.
And  the  mighty-armed  hero  conquered  the  whole  earth  by
the  virtue  of  his  sword,  and  came  back,  bringing  with  him
gold,  elephants,  horses  and  jewels  of  conquered  kings.
And  he  reached  his  capital,  followed  out  of  fear  by  the
conquered  earth  in  the  form  of  the  army  of  dust,  that  his
forces  raised.  And  he  entered  the  palace,  where  his  father
advanced  to  meet  him,  and  he  and  his  brother  delighted
their  mother  Adhikasangama  by  their  return.  And  after
vol.  in.  s


274  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

he  had  honoured  the  kings,  Indivarasena  spent  that  day  in
pleasure,  accompanied  by  his  wives  and  followers.

And  on  the  next  day  the  prince  made  over  the  earth  to
his  father  by  way  of  tribute  from  the  kings,  and  suddenly
recollected  his  former  birth.  Then,  like  one  waking  up  from
sleep,  he  said  to  his  father  :  "  Father,  I  remember  my  former
birth  ;  listen,  I  will  tell  you  all  about  it.  There  is  a  city
on  the  plateau  of  the  Himalayas  named  Muktapura  ;  in  it
there  lives  a  king  named  Muktasena,  a  king  of  the  Vidya-
dharas.  And  by  a  queen  named  Kambuvati  he  had  born
to  him  in  course  of  time  two  virtuous  sons,  Padmasena
and  Rupasena.  Then  a  maiden,  named  Adityaprabha,  the
daughter  of  a  chief  of  the  Vidyadharas,  of  her  own  accord,
out  of  love,  chose  Padmasena  for  her  husband.  Hearing
of  that,  a  Vidyadhara  maiden,  of  the  name  of  Chandravati,
became  love- sick  also,  and  came  and  chose  him  for  her
husband.

"Then  Padmasena,  having  two  wives,  was  continually
worried  by  that  wife  Adityaprabha,  who  was  jealous  of
her  rival.  And  so  Padmasena  over  and  over  again  impor-
tuned his  father  Muktasena  to  the  following  effect :  '  I
cannot  endure  every  day  the  ill  temper  of  my  wife,  who
is  blind  with  jealousy ;  let  me  retire  to  a  wood  of  ascetics
to  put  an  end  to  this  misery.  Therefore,  father,  give  me
permission.'

"His  father,  annoyed  at  his  persistence,  cursed  him  and
his  wives,  saying :  '  What  need  is  there  of  your  going  to  a
wood  of  ascetics  ?  Fall  into  the  world  of  mortals.  There
this  quarrelsome  wife  of  yours,  Adityaprabha,  shall  be  born
in  the  race  of  Rakshasas,  and  become  your  wife  again.  And
this  second,  Chandravati,  who  is  virtuous  and  attached  to
you,  her  husband,  shall  be  the  wife  of  a  king,  and  the  para-
mour of  a  Rakshasa,  and  shall  obtain  you  as  her  beloved.
And  since  this  Rupasena  has  been  observed  by  me  to  follow
you,  his  elder  brother,  with  affection,  he  shall  be  your  brother
also  in  that  world.  There,  too,  you  shall  endure  some
affliction  caused  by  your  wives.'  Thus  he  spoke  and  ceased,
and  appointed  this  as  the  termination  of  the  curse  :  *  When
you,  being  a  prince,  shall  conquer  the  earth  and  give  it  to


THE  END  OF  THE  CURSE  275

your  father,  then  you  and  they  shall  remember  your  former
birth,  and  be  freed  from  your  curse.'

"  When  Padmasena  had  been  thus  addressed  by  his  own
father,  he  went  with  those  others  to  the  world  of  mortals.  I
am  that  very  Padmasena,  born  here  as  your  son,  Indivarasena
by  name,  and  I  have  done  what  I  was  appointed  to  do.
And  the  other  Vidyadhara  prince,  Rupasena,  has  been  born
as  Anichchhasena,  my  younger  brother.  And  as  for  my
wives  Adityaprabha *  and  Chandra  vati,  know  that  they  have
been  born  here  as  these  two,  Khadgadanshtra  and  Madana-
danshtra.  And  now  we  have  reached  that  appointed  end
of  our  curse.  So  let  us  go,  father,  to  our  own  Vidyadhara
home."

Having  said  this,  he,  together  with  his  brother  and  his
wives,  who  remembered  their  former  existence,  abandoned
the  human  and  assumed  the  Vidyadhara  form.  And  having
worshipped  the  feet  of  his  father,  and  taken  his  two  wives
in  his  arms,  he  went  with  his  younger  brother  through  the
air  to  his  own  city,  Muktapura.  There  the  wise  prince,
gladly  welcomed  by  his  father  Muktasena,  a  joy  to  the  eyes
of  his  mother,  accompanied  by  his  brother  Rupasena,  lived
with  his  Adityaprabha,  who  did  not  again  display  jealousy,
and  with  Chandra  vati  in  happiness.


[M]  The  minister  Gomukha,  having  told  this  delightful
tale  on  the  road,  again  said  to  Naravahanadatta  :  "  Thus
the  great  must  endure  great  pains  and  gain  great  glory,  but
others  have  little  pain  and  little  glory.  But  you,  protected
by  the  might  of  the  science  of  Queen  Ratnaprabha,  shall
without  difficulty  gain  that  Princess  Karpurika."

When  Naravahanadatta  heard  this  from  the  lips  of  the
eloquent  Gomukha,  he  set  out  on  the  path  with  him,  in-
sensible to  fatigue.  And  as  he  travelled  he  came  in  the
evening  to  a  pellucid  lake,  the  lotuses  on  which  were  in  full
bloom,  and  which  was  full  of  an  abundant  supply  of  cold
water,  delicious  as  nectar.      Its  banks  were  adorned  with

1  I.e.  brightness  of  the  sun.     Chandravati  means  moon-like.


276  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

pomegranate-trees,  bread-fruit  trees,  and  rows  of  mango- trees,
and  on  it  the  swans  sang  sweetly.  They  bathed  in  it,  and
devoutly  worshipped  the  beloved  '  of  the  daughter  of  Hima-
laya, and  refreshed  themselves  with  various  fragrant,  sweet-
tasting,  delightful  fruits,  and  then  the  son  of  the  King  of
Vatsa  and  his  friend  spent  the  night  on  the  bank  of  the  lake,
sleeping  on  a  bed  strewn  with  soft  young  shoots.

1  I.e.  Siva,  the  beloved  of  Parvati.


THE  "  LETTER  OF  DEATH  "  MOTIF         277


NOTE  ON  THE  "LETTER  OF  DEATH"  MOTIF

The  well-known  "  Letter  of  Death  "  motif  has  already  appeared  twice  in
the  present  work — firstly  in  the  story  of  Sivavarman  (1c),  Vol.  I,  pp.  51,  52 ;
and  secondly  in  that  of  Phalabhuti  (24),  Vol.  II,  p.  114,  where  I  added  a
short  note  on  the  titles  given  to  the  motif.

They  are  :  "  Uriah  letter,"  "  Bellerophon  letter  "  and  "  Mutalammis  letter."
As  each  of  these  has  from  time  to  time  been  considered  the  standard  example
of  the  motif  it  will,  perhaps,  be  as  well  to  describe  them  briefly.

The  familiar  story  of  Uriah  is  told  in  2  Sam.  11.  After  Uriah's  wife,
Bath-sheba,  had  become  pregnant  by  David,  he  got  Joab  to  send  Uriah  to
him,  on  the  pretence  of  asking  details  of  the  siege  of  Balbah.

"  And  it  came  to  pass  in  the  morning,  that  David  wrote  a  letter  to  Joab,
and  sent  it  by  the  hand  of  Uriah.

"  And  he  wrote  in  the  letter,  saying,  Set  ye  Uriah  in  the  forefront  of  the
hottest  battle,  and  retire  ye  from  him,  that  he  may  be  smitten,  and  die.

"And  it  came  to  pass,  when  Joab  observed  the  city,  that  he  assigned
Uriah  unto  a  place  where  he  knew  that  valiant  men  were.

"  And  the  men  of  the  city  went  out,  and  fought  with  Joab  :  and  there  fell
some  of  the  people  of  the  servants  of  David  ;  and  Uriah  the  Hittite  died  also."

The  well-known  story  of  Bellerophon  occurs  in  the  Iliad,  vi,  155  et  seq.

Anteia,  the  wife  of  Proitos,  became  enamoured  of  Bellerophon,  but  her
love  was  not  reciprocated  (see  Vol.  II,  p.  1 20).

"  Then  spake  she  lyingly  to  King  Proitos :  '  Die,  Proitos,  or  else  slay
Bellerophon,  that  would  have  converse  in  love  with  me  against  my  will.'
So  spake  she,  and  anger  gat  hold  upon  the  king  at  that  he  heard.  To  slay
him  he  forbare,  for  his  soul  had  shame  of  that ;  but  he  sent  him  to  Lykia,
and  gave  him  tokens  of  woe,  graving  in  a  folded  tablet  many  deadly  things,
and  bade  him  show  these  to  Anteia's  father,  that  he  might  be  slain.  So  fared
he  to  Lykia  by  the  blameless  convoy  of  the  gods"  (trans,  by  Lang,  Leaf  and
Myers,  1912).

On  his  arrival  at  Lykia,  Anteia's  father,  in  accordance  with  instructions
given  in  the  letter,  considered  the  best  way  of  getting  rid  of  Bellerophon
was  to  give  him  seemingly  impossible  tasks.  Thus  at  this  point  the  "  Letter
of  Death"  motif  is  blended  with  the  "Tasks"  motif  After  he  had  slain
Chimaira  and  conquered  the  Solymi  and  the  Amazons,  the  king  realised  that
he  was  the  brave  offspring  of  a  god,  and  so  far  from  putting  him  to  death,
married  him  to  his  daughter.

The  title  by  which  the  motif  is  known  in  the  Moslem  East  is,  however,
"  Mutalammis  letter."  This  phrase  had  its  origin  in  one  of  the  most  cele-
brated incidents  of  early  Arab  history.  Al-Mutalammis,  whose  real  name  was
Jarir,  son  of ' Abd  al-Masih,  was  an  eminent  poet  of  the  middle  of  the  sixth
century  a.d.  His  name  is  inseparably  linked  with  that  of  his  nephew  Tarafa,
who  has  been  described  as  the  greatest  poet  of  the  Arabs  after  Imr  al-Kais.
From  early  youth  his  genius  for  poetry,  and  especially  for  satirical  verse,  was


278  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

remarkable.  As  time  went  on  he  surpassed  all  his  contemporary  poets  in  a
life  of  debauchery  and  gambling,  and  after  many  vicissitudes  in  Bahrayn,  on
the  Persian  Gulf,  he  set  out  with  his  uncle  Mutalammis  to  fAmr  ibn  Hind,
King  of  al-Hira  (a.d.  554-570).  This  king  was  a  warlike  ruler  and  specially
noted  for  his  great  cruelty.  (For  a  bibliography  of  his  life  and  times  see  the
Encyclopedia  of  Islam,  vol.  i,  1913,  p.  335.)

'Arar  appointed  them  to  attend  on  his  brother  Kabus,  who,  however,
treated  the  two  poets  with  great  indignity,  which,  as  can  be  imagined,  gave
rise  to  some  verses  about  him.     They  began  :

"  Would  that  we  had  instead  of  'Amr
A  milch-ewe  bleating  round  our  tent !  "

Tarafa's  brother-in-law  was  a  very  fat  man,  of  whom  he  mockingly  said :
"  There  is  naught  good  about  him  but  his  money,  and  that  waist  which  is  so
slender  when  he  stands."  fAmr  joked  the  brother-in-law  about  this  and  in
return  was  informed  of  the  verse  that  had  been  written  about  him.  It  was
these  incidents  that  started  the  trouble  at  the  court.  On  another  occasion
Tarafa  was  seated  at  table  opposite  the  king's  sister.  Struck  with  her  beauty,
he  exclaimed  :

"  Behold,  she  has  come  back  to  me,
My  fair  gazelle  whose  earrings  shine ;
Had  not  the  king  been  sitting  here,
I  would  have  pressed  her  lips  to  mine."
This  further  insult  decided   the  king  to  take  action.     He  summoned
the  two  poets  and  gave  them  each  a  letter  sealed  with  the  royal  seal  and
addressed  to  Abu  Karib,  governor  of  Hajar  or  Bahrayn.

Taking  the  letters,  the  two  men  set  out,  but  when  they  had  passed
outside  the  city  and  were  proceeding  along  the  banks  of  the  Euphrates  the
suspicions  of  Mutalammis  were  aroused.  He  decided  to  open  his  letter  and
find  out  the  contents.  As  neither  of  them  could  read  he  asked  a  boy  of
al-Hira  to  read  it  for  him.  It  was  a  request  to  the  governor  to  put  the
bearer  to  death — some  say  by  maiming  and  burying  alive.  Mutalammis
immediately  threw  the  letter  into  the  river,  and  implored  his  nephew  to  do
likewise,  but  the  latter  refused,  disbelieving  what  the  boy  had  read,  fearing
to  break  the  royal  seal,  and  thinking  that  fArar  would  never  offend  the  great
tribe  of  Bakr  by  encompassing  his  death.  All  entreaties  on  the  part  of
Mutalammis  were  unavailing,  so  they  parted.  Tarafa,  continuing  his  journey,
was  immediately  put  to  death,  and  Mutalammis,  turning  his  camel  westwards,
escaped  to  Syria  to  the  court  of  Ghassan.

For  various  accounts  of  the  life  and  works  of  Tarafa  and  Mutalammis
see  "Lettre  sur  les  poetes  Tarafah  et  al-Moutalammis,  par  M.  A.  Perron
a  M.  Caussin  de  Perceval,"  Journal  Asiatique,  3rd  series,  vol.  xi,  pp.  46-69
and  215-257;  Hammer-Purgstall,  Literaturgeschichie  der  Araber,  Part  I,  vol.  i,
Vienna,  1850,  pp.  163-1 67;  T.  Chenery,  The  Assemblies  of  A  I- Hariri,  vol.  i
(1869),  Oriental  Translation  Fund,  Royal  Asiatic  Society,  1898,  pp.  358-362
(see  also  p.  162);  C.  J.  Lyall,  Translations  of  Ancient  Arabic  Poetry,  1885,
pp.  79-80;  R.  A.  Nicholson,  A  Literary  History  of  the  Arabs,  1907,  pp.  107-109;


THE  "  LETTER  OF  DEATH  "  MOTIF  279

G.  Freytag,  Arabian  Proverbia,  Bonn,  1838,  i,  721  ;  and  Vullers,  Tarafoe
Moallaca  cum  Zuzenii  Scholiis,  Paris,  1 829.  For  the  two  latter  references  I  am
indebted  to  Professor  D.  S.  Margoliouth.  A  short  story  about  Mutalammis
and  his  wife  Umaymah  occurs  in  the  Nights  (Burton,  vol.  v,  pp.  74,  75),  and
Burton  gives  a  note  on  the  poet  in  Supp.,  vol.  vi,  p.  94,  where  an  example  of
our  motif  occurs.

None  of  the  above  three  titles  seems  to  be  sufficiently  explanatory  to
embrace  the  numerous  varieties  of  the  motif  as  they  occur  in  folk-lore.  In
the  Uriah  story,  the  scheme  succeeds  and  the  victim  is  killed.  In  the  Greek
story  of  Bellerophon,  the  letter  is  delivered  untouched  and  he  only  escapes
because  of  his  divine  birth  and  consequent  supernatural  powers.  In  the
Arabic  story,  Mutalammis,  who  appears  only  to  have  been  drawn  into  the
trouble  owing  to  his  relationship  to  Tarafa,  never  delivers  the  letter  at  all,
but  destroys  it.  Thus  in  each  of  the  three  stories  the  incidents  vary  con-
siderably, and  there  appears  to  be  no  reason  why  any  particular  one  should
give  its  name  to  the  motif  But  if  we  call  it  by  a  comprehensive  name  such
as  "  Letter  of  Death  "  we  can  take  all  the  above  examples  as  different  variants
of  the  motif.

In  fiction  the  theme  of  tales  introducing  the  "  Letter  of  Death "  is
usually  as  follows.  For  some  reason  or  other  the  hero  is  considered  best
out  of  the  way.  He  is  accordingly  dispatched  with  a  letter  ordering  the
bearer  to  be  killed.  On  his  way  he  either  meets  his  rival,  who  unknowingly
delivers  the  letter  for  him,  or  else  he  falls  asleep  and  the  contents  of  the
letter  are  altered  either  in  ignorance  or  on  purpose,  and  so  the  hero  escapes
his  fate.

In  the  Kathakoca  (Tawney,  p.  168  et  seq.)  is  the  "  Story  of  Damannaka,"
which  contains  an  interesting  version  which  appears  in  several  other
collections.  The  merchant  Sagarapota  overhears  certain  hermits  saying
that  the  boy  Damannaka,  a  penniless  orphan,  will  be  master  of  his  house.
He  tries  various  means  to  get  rid  of  the  boy,  all  of  which  fail.  On  one
occasion  he  sends  the  boy  home  to  his  wife  with  a  letter.  The  story  then
proceeds  as  follows  : —

Damannaka  started  on  his  journey.  When  he  reached  the  garden  of
Rajagriha  he  was  tired,  and  he  lay  down  in  the  temple  of  the  God  of  Love
to  refresh  himself.  Sleep  fell  upon  him.  In  the  meanwhile  the  daughter
of  that  very  merchant,  Visha  by  name,  came  there  to  worship  the  God  of
Love.  She  saw  Damannaka,  with  his  broad  eyes  and  broad  chest ;  and  while
she  was  looking  at  him  her  eye  fell  on  her  father's  letter,  so  she  took  it  from
the  end  of  his  stick  and  read  it.  It  ran  as  follows  :  "  Health  and  prosperity  !
Sagarapota  from  the  cattle  farm  lovingly  embraces  Samudradatta,  and  tells
him  what  is  to  be  done  :

'  Before  he  has  time  to  wash  his  feet,  you  must  immediately  bestow
on  this  man
Visha  (poison)  and  so  make  my  heart  free  from  the  thorn  of  pain.'  "

She  thought:  "No  doubt  my  father  has  found  here  a  bridegroom  fit
for  me ;  as  for  the  marriage  having  to  be  performed  this  very  day,  it  means


280  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

that  to-day  is  an  auspicious  day,  so  the  marriage  must  take  place  to-day.  As
for  the  order  that  Visha  is  to  be  given,  in  his  eagerness  he  has  written  an
anusvara  instead  of  the  long  a,  so  I  will  put  it  right."  Having  thus  reflected,
she  took  some  collyrium  from  her  eyes  and  made  the  letter  a  instead  of  a
dot ;  and  sealing  the  letter  up  again,  she  left  it  as  it  was,  and  went  home.
After  a  short  time  Damannaka  reached  the  house.  He  gave  the  letter  to
Samudradatta.  Samudradatta  took  the  letter  and  read  it  and  considered  it.
He  said  :  "  My  father's  order  is  law  to  me  "  ;  so  he  collected  all  the  necessary
preparations  for  the  marriage,  and  all  the  host  of  his  relations  assembled.
On  that  very  day,  as  soon  as  an  auspicious  moment  arrived,  Damannaka
was  married.

The  story  appears  in  the  Bhakta-mala  of  Nabhadasa,  a  work  on  the
history  of  the  saints  of  the  Bhagavata  reformation  started  chiefly  by  RamAnuja
and  Madhva  about  the  same  time  as  Somadeva  wrote  the  Kathd  Sarit  Sdgara.
See  G.  A.  Grierson,  "  Gleanings  from  the  Bhakta-Mala,"  Journ.  Roy.  As.  Soc,
April  1910,  p.  295.  (For  the  other  two  parts  of  the  article  see  ditto,  July
1909,  p.  6'07  et  seq.,  and  Jan.  1910,  p.  87  et  seq.)  It  was  briefly  related  in
Stein  and  Grierson's  Hatim's  Talcs,  p.  xlvi.  Cf.  also  N.  B.  Godabole,  "  The
Story  of  Chandrahasya,"  Ind.  Ant,  vol.  xi,  1882,  pp.  84-86.

The  story  is  also  found  in  Bloomfield,  Life  and  Stories  of  Parcvanalha,
p.  160,  where  a  useful  note  is  given;  in  Hertel,  "Die  Erziihlung  von
Kaufmann  Campaka,"  Zeit.  d.  d.  Morg.  GeselL,  vol.  lxv,  1911,  pp.  458,  459;
and  ditto  in  vol.  vii  of  Indische  Erzdhler,  p.  38  et  seq.

For  other  Eastern  variants  see  Velten,  Mdrchen  und  Erzdhlungen  der
Suaheli,  1898,  p.  198;  Lidzbarski,  Geschichten  und  Lieder  aus  den  neuara-
m'dischen  Handschriften  der  K.  Bibliothek  zu  Berlin,  1 896,  p.  267  et  seq. ;  Steel
and  Temple,  Wide- Awake  Stories,  p.  410;  Day,  Folk-Tales  of  Bengal,  p.  120;
Stokes,  Indian  Fairy  Tales,  pp.  53  et  seq.,  and  1 84  et  seq. ;  Ind.  Ant.,  vol.  iii,
p.  321.

For  variants  from  all  parts  of  the  world  see  Bolte,  op.  cit.,  vol.  i,
p.  276  el  seq.

The  most  comprehensive  article,  however,  is  that  by  Cosquin,  "  La
Legende  du  Page  de  Sainte  Elisabeth  de  Portugal,"  Etudes  Folkloriques,  p.  73
et  seq. — n.m.p.


CHAPTER  XLIII

THE  next  morning  Naravahanadatta  rose  up  from
[M]  the  bank  of  that  lake,1  and  setting  out  on  his
journey,  said  to  his  minister  Gomukha  :  "  My  friend,
I  remember  a  certain  princess  of  heavenly  beauty,  dressed
in  white  garments,  came  to  me  towards  the  end  of  last  night
in  a  dream  and  said  this  to  me  :  '  Lay  aside  your  anxiety,
dear  one,  for  you  will  quickly  reach  a  large  and  wonderful
town  situated  in  a  forest,  on  the  shore  of  the  sea.  And  after
resting  there  you  shall  with  ease  find  that  town  Karpura-
sambhava,  and  then  win  that  Princess  Karpurika.'  Having
said  this,  she  disappeared,  and  I  immediately  woke  up."
When  he  said  that,  Gomukha  was  delighted  and  said  to
him  :  "  King,  you  are  favoured  by  the  gods ;  what  is  difficult
to  you  ?  So  your  enterprise  will  certainly  succeed  without
difficulty."

When  Gomukha  had  said  this,  Naravahanadatta  hastened
along  the  path  with  him.  And  in  course  of  time  he  reached
a  city  of  vast  extent  on  the  shore  of  the  sea,  furnished  with
lofty  mansions  resembling  the  peaks  of  mountains,  with
streets  and  arches,  adorned  with  a  palace  all  golden  like
Mount  Meru,  looking  like  a  second  Earth.  He  entered  that
city  by  the  market  street,  and  beheld  that  all  the  population,
merchants,  women  and  citizens,  were  wooden  automata,2  that
moved  as  if  they  were  alive,  but  were  recognised  as  lifeless
by  their  want  of  speech.  This  aroused  astonishment  in  his
mind.  And  in  due  course  he  arrived  with  Gomukha  near
the  king's  palace,  and  saw  that  all  the  horses  and  elephants
there  were  of  the  same  material ;  and  with  his  minister  he
entered,  full  of  wonder,  that  palace,  which  was  resplendent
with  seven  ranges  of  golden  buildings.  There  he  saw  a
majestic  man  sitting  on  a  jewelled  throne,  surrounded  by

1  I  read  sarastirat  for  sarittirat.

2  See  note  on  pp.  55-59  of  this  volume. — n.m.p.
281


282  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

warders  and  women  who  were  also  wooden  automata,  the
only  living  being  there,  who  produced  motion  in  those  dull
material  things,  like  the  soul  presiding  over  the  senses.
He,  for  his  part,  seeing  that  that  hero  Naravahanadatta
was  of  noble  form,  rose  up  and  welcomed  him,  and  made
him  sit  down  on  his  own  seat,  and  sitting  in  front  of
him  he  thus  questioned  him  :  "  Who  are  you  ?  How  and
why  have  you  come  to  this  uninhabited  land  with  one
companion  ?  "

Then  Naravahanadatta  told  his  own  story  from  the
beginning,  and  asked  that  hero,  who  was  prostrating  himself
before  him  :  "  Who  are  you,  my  good  sir,  and  what  is  this
wonderful  city  of  yours  ?  Tell  me."  That  man,  when  he
heard  that,  began  to  tell  his  own  story.

59.  Story  of  the  Two  Brothers  Prdnadliara  and  Rajyadhara

There  is  a  city  named  KanchI  possessed  of  great  excel-
lences,1 which,  like  a  girdle,  well  adorns  the  earth-bride.  In
it  there  was  a  famous  king  of  the  name  of  Bahubala,  who
won  Fortune  by  the  might  of  his  arm,  and  imprisoned  her
in  his  treasury,  though  she  is  a  gadding  dame.  We  were
two  brothers  in  his  kingdom,  carpenters  by  trade,  skilful
in  making  ingenious  automata  of  wood  and  other  materials,
such  as  Maya  2  first  invented.  My  elder  brother  was  by
name  Pranadhara,  and  he  was  infatuated  with  love  for  a
fickle  dame,  and  I,  my  lord,  am  named  Rajyadhara,  and  I
was  ever  devoted  to  him.  That  brother  of  mine  consumed
all  my  father's  property  and  his  own,  and  some  portion  of
what  I  had  acquired,  which,  melted  by  affection,  I  made
over  to  him.

Then  he,  being  much  infatuated  about  the  lady,  out  of
desire  to  steal  wealth  for  her  sake,  made  a  couple  of  swans
of  wood  with  mechanism  and  strings  attached  to  them.
That  pair  of  swans  was  sent  out  at  night  by  pulling  strings,

1  Here  there  is  a  pun,  as  the  words  may  also  be  construed  "woven  of
excellent  threads."

2  Maya  was  the  architect  of  the  Daityas.     According  to  some  Maya  =
Ptolemaios. This  latter  theory  is  very  unlikely. — n.m.p.


THE  MECHANICAL  SWANS  283

and  entering  by  means  of  the  mechanical  contrivance  into
the  king's  treasury  through  a  window;  they  took  from  it  with
their  beaks  jewels  placed  in  a  basket,  and  returned  to  the
house  of  my  brother.  And  my  elder  brother  sold  the  jewels
and  spent  the  money  so  acquired  with  his  paramour,  and  in
that  way  he  robbed  the  king's  treasury  every  night,  and
though  I  tried  to  prevent  him  he  would  not  give  up  that
improper  proceeding;  for  who,  when  blinded  by  passion,
distinguishes  between  right  and  wrong  ?

And  then  the  keeper  of  the  treasury,  as  the  king's  treasure-
house  was  plundered  night  after  night  without  the  bolt  being
moved,  though  there  were  no  mice  in  it,  for  several  days  in
succession  inquired  into  the  matter,  without  saying  anything,
out  of  fear,  and  then,  being  exceedingly  vexed,  went  and  told
the  matter  plainly  to  the  king.

Then  the  king  posted  him  and  some  other  guards  in  the
treasure-house  at  night,  with  orders  to  keep  awake  in  order
to  find  out  the  truth  of  it.  Those  guards  went  into  the
treasure-house  at  midnight,  and  while  there  saw  my  brother's
two  swans  entering  in  by  the  window,  impelled  by  strings.
The  swans  moved  round  by  means  of  their  mechanism  and
took  the  jewels ;  then  the  guards  cut  the  strings  and  took
the  swans  to  show  the  king  in  the  morning.  And  then  my
elder  brother  said  in  a  state  of  bewilderment :  "  Brother,  my
two  swans  have  been  seized  by  the  guards  of  the  treasury,
for  the  strings  have  become  slack  and  the  pin  of  the  mechan-
ism has  dropped.  So  we  must  both  of  us  leave  this  place
immediately,  for  the  king,  when  he  hears  of  it  in  the  morn-
ing, will  punish  us  as  thieves.  For  we  are  both  known  to
be  skilled  in  mechanical  contrivances.  And  I  have  here  a
chariot  with  a  pneumatic  contrivance,  which  quickly  goes
eight  hundred  yojanas,  if  you  press  a  spring.  Let  us  go  by
means  of  it  to-day  to  a  distant  foreign  land,  though  exile
may  be  disagreeable ;  for  how  can  an  evil  deed,  that  is
done  in  despite  of  good  advice,  bring  pleasure  to  anyone  ?
This  is  the  mature  fruit  of  my  wickedness  in  not  obeying
your  advice,  which  has  extended  to  innocent  you  as  well
as  to  me."

After  saying  this  my  brother  Pranadhara  immediately


284  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

mounted  with  his  family  that  chariot  that  flew  through  the
air.  But  though  he  urged  me  I  would  not  mount  it,  as  it
was  laden  with  many  people,  so  he  flew  up  in  it  to  the  sky
and  went  off  to  some  distant  place.

When  that  Pranadhara,1  who  was  rightly  named,  had
gone  off  somewhere,  I,  expecting  that  in  the  morning  I  singly
should  be  exposed  to  danger  at  the  hands  of  the  king,
Rajvadhara  mounted  another  chariot  with  a  pneumatic
flies  to  the  mechanism,  which  I  had  myself  made,  and
empty  City  quickly  travelled  two  hundred  yojanas  from  that
place.  Then  I  again  started  that  air-travelling  chariot  and
went  another  two  hundred  yojanas.  Then  I  left  my  chariot,
terrified  at  finding  that  I  was  near  the  sea,  and  travelling  on
my  feet  reached  in  course  of  time  this  city,  which  was  empty.
And  out  of  curiosity  I  entered  this  palace,  which  was  filled
with  garments,  ornaments  and  couches,  and  all  the  other
conveniences  for  a  king.

And  in  the  evening  I  bathed  in  the  water  of  the  garden
lake,  and  ate  fruits,  and  going  to  the  royal  bed  reflected  alone
at  night :  "  What  am  I  to  do  in  this  uninhabited  spot  ?  So
to-morrow  I  will  go  hence  to  some  place  or  other,  for  I  no
longer  need  fear  danger  from  King  Bahubala."  When  I
had  thus  reflected  I  went  to  sleep,  and  towards  the  end  of
night  a  hero  of  divine  appearance,  mounted  on  a  peacock,
thus  addressed  me  in  a  dream  :  "  You  must  live  here,  good
sir,  you  must  not  depart  elsewhere,  and  at  the  time  of
meals  you  must  go  up  to  the  middle  court  of  the  palace  and
wait  there."  Thus  he  spoke  and  disappeared,  and  I  woke
up  and  reflected  :  "  Undoubtedly  this  heavenly  place  has
been  made  by  Karttikeya,  and  he  has  favoured  me  with  this
dream  on  account  of  my  merits  in  a  former  life.  I  have
turned  up  here  because  I  am  to  be  happy  dwelling  in  this
town."

I  conceived  this  hope  and  rose  up,  and  said  the  prayer
for  the  day,  and  at  the  time  of  eating  I  went  up  to  the  middle
court,  and  while  I  was  waiting  there  golden  dishes  were
placed  in  front  of  me,  and  there  fell  into  them  from  heaven
food  consisting  of  ghee,   milk,   rice,   boiled  rice  and  other

1  I.e.  holding  life.


RAJYADHARA  ENTERTAINS  THE  PRINCE      285

things  1  ;  and  any  other  kinds  of  food  that  I  thought  of  came
to  me  as  fast  as  I  thought  of  them.  After  eating  all  this  I
felt  comforted  by  the  favour  of  the  god.  So,  my  lord,  I  took
up  my  abode  in  this  city,  with  kingly  luxuries  coming  to  me
every  day  as  fast  as  I  wished  for  them.  But  I  do  not  obtain
wives  and  retinue  by  thinking  of  them,  so  I  made  all  these
people  of  wood.  Though  I  am  a  carpenter,  since  I  have
come  here  I  enjoy  alone  all  the  pleasures  of  a  king  by  the
power  of  Destiny,  and  my  name  is  Rajyadhara.2


[M]  "  So  repose,  now,  a  day  in  this  god-built  town,  and
I  will  attend  upon  you  to  the  best  of  my  ability."  After
saying  this,  Rajyadhara  led  off  with  him  Naravahanadatta
and  Gomukha  to  the  city  garden.  There  the  prince  bathed
in  the  water  of  the  lake  and  offered  lotuses  to  Siva,  and
was  conducted  to  the  feasting-place  in  the  middle  court,  and
there  he  and  his  minister  enjoyed  viands  which  were  placed
before  them  by  Rajyadhara,  who  stood  in  front  of  them,  to
whom  they  came  as  soon  as  he  thought  of  them.  Then  the
eating-ground  was  swept  by  some  unseen  hand,  and  after
they  had  taken  betel  they  drank  wine  and  remained  in  great
felicity.

And  after  Rajyadhara  had  eaten,  the  prince  retired  to  a
gorgeous  couch,  astonished  at  the  wonderful  nature  of  the
town,  which  resembled  the  philosopher's  stone.3  And  when
he  could  not  sleep,  on  account  of  his  recently  conceived
longing  for  Karpiirika,  Rajyadhara,  who  was  also  in  bed,
asked  her  story,  and  then  said  to  him  :  "  Why  do  you  not
sleep,  auspicious  sir  ?     You  will  obtain  your  desired  love.

1  Cf.  the  Metamorphoses  (Golden  Ass)  of  Apuleius,  Lib.  V,  cap.  iii  :
"  Visoquestatim  semirotundo  suggestu  propter  instrumentum  ccenatorum,  rata  refectui
suo  commodum,  libens  accumbit.  Et  illico  vifii  nectarei  eduliumque  variorum  fercula
copiosa,  nullo  serviente,  sed  tantum  spiritu  quodam  impulsa,  subministrantur."  See
also  the  romance  of  Parthenopex  of  Blois  in  Dunlop's  History  of  Fiction
(Liebrecht's  translation,  p.  175).  See  the  Pentamerone  of  Basile  (Burton,
vol.  i,  p.  39,  third  diversion  of  the  first  day).

2  I.e.  holding  or  possessing  a  kingdom.

3  For  a  short  note  on  this  subject  see  p.  161m1. — n.m.p.


286  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

For  a  fair  woman,  like  Fortune,  of  her  own  accord  chooses
a  man  of  high  courage.  I  have  had  ocular  proof  of  this,  so
hear  the  story  ;  I  will  relate  it  to  you.

60.  Story  of  Arthalobha  and  his  Beautiful  Wife

That  King  of  Kanchi,  Bahubala,  whom  I  mentioned  to
you,  had  a  rich  doorkeeper,  rightly  named  Arthalobha.1  He
had  a  beautiful  wife  named  Manapara.  That  Arthalobha,
being  by  profession  a  merchant,  and  on  account  of  his
avarice  distrusting  his  servants,  appointed  that  wife  of  his
to  look  after  his  business  in  preference  to  them.  She,  though
she  did  not  like  it,  being  obedient  to  him,  made  bargains
with  merchants  and  captivated  all  men  by  her  sweet  form
and  speech.  And  Arthalobha,  seeing  that  all  the  sales  of
elephants,  horses,  jewels  and  garments  that  she  made  brought
in  a  profit,  rejoiced  exceedingly.

And  once  on  a  time  there  came  there  from  a  distant
foreign  land  a  merchant,  named  Sukhadhana,  having  a
large  stock  of  horses  and  other  commodities.  The  moment
Arthalobha  heard  that  he  had  come,  he  said  to  his  wife  :
"  My  dear,  a  merchant  named  Sukhadhana  has  arrived  from
a  foreign  land ;  he  has  brought  twenty  thousand  horses,  and
innumerable  pairs  of  excellent  garments  made  in  China,  so
please  go  and  purchase  from  him  five  thousand  horses
and  ten  thousand  pairs  of  garments,  in  order  that  with  the
thousands  of  horses  I  already  possess  and  those  other  five,
I  may  pay  a  visit  to  the  king,  and  carry  on  my  commerce."

When  commissioned  in  these  words  by  that  villain
Arthalobha,  Manapara  went  to  Sukhadhana,  whose  eyes
were  captivated  by  her  beauty,  and  who  welcomed  her
gladly.  And  she  demanded  from  him  for  a  price  those
horses  and  garments.

The  merchant,  overpowered  with  love,  took  her  aside
and  said  to  her  :  "I  will  not  give  you  one  horse  or  garment
for  money,  but  if  you  will  remain  one  night  with  me  I  will
give  you  five  hundred  horses  and  five  thousand  garments."
After  saying  this  he  solicited  that  fair  one  with  even  a  larger

1  I.e.  greed  of  wealth.


THE  MEAN-SPIRITED  HUSBAND  287

amount.  Who  does  not  fall  in  love  with  women  who  are
allowed  to  go  about  without  restraint  ?  Then  she  answered
him  :  "I  will  ask  my  husband  about  this,  for  I  know  he
will  send  me  here  out  of  excessive  cupidity."  1

After  saying  this  she  went  home,  and  told  her  husband
what  the  merchant  Sukhadhana  had  said  to  her  secretly.
And  that  wicked,  covetous  husband  Arthalobha  said  to
her  :  "  My  dear,  if  you  obtain  five  hundred  horses  and  five
thousand  pairs  of  garments  for  one  night,  what  is  the  harm
in  it  ?  So  go  to  him  now ;  you  shall  return  quickly  in  the
morning."

When  Manapara  heard  this  speech  of  her  mean-spirited
husband's,  she  began  to  debate  in  her  heart,  and  thus
reflected  :  "  Out  on  this  base,  spiritless  husband  of  mine
that  sells  his  honour!  By  continually  meditating  on  gain
he  has  become  all  made  up  of  the  desire  of  gain.  It  is
better  that  the  generous  man,  who  buys  me  for  one  night
with  hundreds  of  horses  and  thousands  of  pieces  of  China  silk,
should  be  my  husband."  Thus  reflecting,  she  took  leave  of
her  base  husband,  saying,  "  It  is  not  my  fault,"  and  went
to  the  house  of  that  Sukhadhana.  And  he,  when  he  saw
that  she  had  come,  after  questioning  her  and  hearing  the
whole  story  from  her,  was  astonished,  and  considered  himself
fortunate  in  obtaining  her.  And  he  sent  off  immediately
to  her  husband  Arthalobha  the  horses  and  garments  that
were  to  purchase  her,  as  agreed  upon.  And  he  remained  that
night  with  her,  having  all  his  wishes  attained,  for  she  seemed
like  the  fortune  which  was  the  fruit  of  his  own  wealth,
incarnate  in  bodily  form,  at  last  obtained  by  him.

And  in  the  morning  the  base  Arthalobha  sent,  in  his
shamelessness,  servants  to  summon  her,  whereupon  Manapara
said  to  them  :    "  How  can  I  return  to  be  the  wife  of  that

1  Cf.  "  Die  Sieben  Weisen  Meister,"  c.  18  (Simrock's  Deutsche  Volksb'iicher,

vol.   xii,  p.  185). A  close  variant  of  this  story  forms  the  fifteenth   novel

of  Masuccio's  Novellino.  (See  Waters'  translation,  1895,  vol.  i,  pp.  227-237.)
Here  a  cardinal  falls  in  love  with  the  fair  Giacomina,  who,  however,  remains
true  to  her  husband.  The  cardinal  offers  the  husband  a  large  sum  for  his
wife's  honour,  and  he,  greedy  for  the  money,  finally  persuades  her  to  go  to
the  cardinal  for  one  night.  When  he  tries  to  get  her  back  in  the  morning
she  acts  as  does  the  lady  in  our  text. — n.m.p.


288  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

man  who  sold  me  to  another  ?  I  am  not  as  shameless  as  he
is.  Tell  me  yourselves  if  this  would  be  becoming  now.  So
depart ;  the  man  that  bought  me  is  my  husband."

When  the  servants  were  thus  addressed  by  her  they  went
and  repeated  her  words  to  Arthalobha  with  downcast  faces.
The  mean  fellow,  when  he  heard  it,  wanted  to  recover  her
by  force.  Then  a  friend  of  the  name  of  Harabala  said  to
him  :  "  You  cannot  recover  her  from  that  Sukhadhana,  for
he  is  a  hero,  and  I  do  not  behold  in  you  manliness  corre-
sponding to  his.  For  he  is  moved  to  heroism  by  a  woman
that  loves  him  on  account  of  his  generosity,  and  he  is  mighty,
and  surrounded  with  other  mighty  men  that  have  come
with  him.  But  you  have  been  deserted  by  your  wife,  who
separated  from  you  because  you  sold  her  out  of  meanness,
and  scorn  makes  you  timid,  and  being  reproached  you
have  become  effeminate.  Moreover,  you  are  not  mighty,
and  you  are  not  surrounded  by  mighty  friends,  so  how  can
you  possibly  be  capable  of  vanquishing  that  rival  ?  And  the
king  will  be  angry  with  you  when  he  hears  of  your  crime
of  selling  your  wife  ;  so  keep  quiet,  and  do  not  make  a
ridiculous  blunder."

Though  his  friend  tried  to  dissuade  him  with  these
words,  Arthalobha  went  and  beset,  in  his  anger,  the  house
of  Sukhadhana  with  his  retainers.  While  he  was  thus  en-
gaged, Sukhadhana  sallied  out  with  his  friends  and  retainers,
and  in  a  moment  easily  defeated  the  whole  of  Arthalobha's
force.

And  Arthalobha  fled,  and  went  into  the  presence  of  the
king.  And  concealing  his  own  wicked  conduct,  he  said  to
the  king :  "  O  King,  the  merchant  Sukhadhana  has  carried
Arthalobha  off  mY  wife  bY  force."  And  the  king  in  his
appeals  to  rage  wished  to  arrest  that  Sukhadhana.  Then
the  Kwg  a  minister  of  the  name  of  Sandhana  said  to  the

king  :  "  In  any  case,  my  lord,  you  cannot  arrest  him,  for
when  his  force  is  increased  by  that  of  the  eleven  friends
who  have  come  with  him  he  will  be  found  to  have  more
than  a  hundred  thousand  excellent  horses.  And  you  have  not
discovered  the  truth  about  the  matter ;  for  his  conduct  will
turn  out  to  be  not  altogether  without  cause.     So  you  had


THE  DUEL  289

better  send  a  messenger  and  ask  what  it  is  that  this  fellow
here  is  chattering  about."

When  King  Bahubala  heard  this  he  sent  a  messenger
to  Sukhadhana  to  ask  about  the  matter.  The  messenger
went  and  asked  about  the  matter  by  the  king's  order,  and
thereupon  Manapara  told  him  her  story.

When  Bahubala  heard  that  wonderful  tale  he  came  to
the  house  of  Sukhadhana  to  behold  the  beauty  of  Mana-
para, being  filled  with  excessive  curiosity.  There  he  beheld,
while  Sukhadhana  bent  before  him,  Manapara,  who  with  the
wealth  of  her  beauty  would  astonish  even  the  Creator.  She
prostrated  herself  at  his  feet,  and  he  questioned  her,  and
heard  from  her  own  mouth  how  the  whole  thing  happened,
Arthalobha  being  present  and  listening.  When  he  heard  it
he  thought  it  was  true,  because  Arthalobha  was  speechless,
and  he  asked  that  fair  one  what  was  to  be  done  now.  Then
she  said  decidedly  :  "  How  can  I  return  to  that  spiritless,
avaricious  man,  who  sold  me  to  another  man  without  the
excuse  of  distress  ?  "  When  the  king  heard  this,  he  said  :
"  Well  said."

And  then  Arthalobha,  bewildered  with  desire,  wrath  and
shame,  exclaimed  :  "  King,  let  him  and  me  fight  with  our
own  retainers,  without  any  auxiliary  forces ;  then  let  it  be
seen  who  is  spirited  and  who  is  spiritless."  When  Sukha-
dhana heard  this  he  said :  "  Then  let  us  fight  in  single
combat ;  what  need  is  there  of  retainers  ?  Manapara  shall  be
the  prize  of  the  victor."  When  the  king  heard  this  he  said  :
"  Good !  So  let  it  be  !  "  Then,  before  the  eyes  of  Manapara
and  the  king,  they  both  entered  the  lists  mounted.  And
in  the  course  of  the  combat  Sukhadhana  laid  Arthalobha
on  the  plain,  by  his  horse's  rearing  on  account  of  a  lance-
wound.  Then  Arthalobha  fell  three  times  more  on  the
earth,  on  account  of  his  horse  being  killed,  but  Sukha-
dhana, who  was  a  fair  fighter,  restrained  himself  and  would
not  slay  him.  But  the  fifth  time  Arthalobha's  horse  fell
upon  him,  and  bruised  him,  and  he  was  carried  off  by  his
servants  motionless.

Then  Sukhadhana  was  cheered  by  all  the  spectators  with
shouts  of  applause,  and  the  King  Bahubala  honoured  him
vol.  in.  t


290  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

as  he  deserved.  And  he  immediately  bestowed  a  gift  of
honour  upon  the  lady,  and  he  confiscated  the  property  of
Arthalobha,  which  had  been  acquired  by  unlawful  means  ;
and  appointing  another  to  his  office,  he  departed  pleased  to
his  palace.  For  good  men  derive  satisfaction  from  breaking
off  their  connection  with  the  bad.  And  Sukhadhana,  having
maintained  his  claim  by  force,  remained  enjoying  himself  in
the  society  of  Manapara,  his  loving  wife.


[M]  "  Thus  wives  and  wealth  leave  the  mean-spirited
man  and  of  their  own  accord  come  to  the  high-spirited
man  from  every  quarter.  So  dismiss  anxiety.  Go  to  sleep.
In  a  short  time,  my  lord,  you  will  obtain  that  Princess  Kar-
purika."  When  Naravahanadatta  heard  that  sound  advice
of  Rajyadhara's  he  and  Gomukha  went  off  to  sleep.

And  in  the  morning,  while  the  prince  was  waiting  awhile
after  his  meal,  the  wise  Gomukha  addressed  Rajyadhara  as
follows  :  "  Make  such  an  ingenious  chariot  for  my  master
as  that  he  shall  be  able  by  means  of  it  to  reach  the  city  of
Karpurasambhava  and  obtain  his  beloved."  When  thus
supplicated,  that  carpenter  offered  Naravahanadatta  the
chariot  with  a  pneumatic  contrivance  that  he  had  made
before.  He  ascended  that  sky-travelling  chariot,  swift  as
thought,  together  with  Gomukha,  and  crossed  the  deep,  the
home  of  monsters,  that  agitated  its  waves  as  if  exulting  to
behold  his  valour,  and  reached  the  city  of  Karpurasambhava
on  its  shore.  There  the  chariot  descended  from  the  sky,
and  he  and  Gomukha  left  it,  and  out  of  curiosity  wandered
about  inside  the  town.  And  by  questioning  the  people  he
found  out  that  he  had  indeed  without  doubt  reached  the
desired  city,  and,  delighted,  he  went  to  the  neighbourhood
of  the  palace.  There  he  found  a  splendid  house  occupied
by  an  old  woman,  and  he  entered  it  to  stay  there,  and  she
received  him  with  respect.  And  eager  to  hit  upon  an  artifice,
he  immediately  asked  that  woman  :  "  Noble  lady,  what  is
the  name  of  the  king  here,  and  what  children  has  he  ?  And
tell  us  of  their  appearance,  for  we  are  foreigners."


THE  BIRTH  OF  KARPftRIKA  291

When  he  said  this  to  the  old  woman,  she,  seeing  that  he
was  of  excessively  noble  form,  answered :  "  Listen,  illustrious
sir,  I  will  tell  you  all.  In  this  city  of  Karpurasambhava  there
is  a  king  named  Karpuraka  ;  and  he,  having  no  children,  per-
formed penance,  with  his  wife  Buddhikari,  fasting,  in  honour
of  Siva,  in  order  to  obtain  offspring.  After  he  had  fasted
for  three  nights  the  god  Siva  commanded  him  in  a  dream  :
'  Rise  up !  A  daughter  shall  be  born  to  you  who  shall  be
superior  to  a  son,  and  whose  husband  shall  obtain  the
sovereignty  of  the  Vidyadharas.'  After  receiving  this  order
from  Siva  the  king  woke  up  in  the  morning ;  and  after
communicating  this  dream  to  his  wife  Buddhikari  he  rose
up  and  went  off  delighted,  and  with  his  queen  broke  his
fast.  And  then  in  a  short  time  that  queen  conceived  by  the
king,  and  when  the  period  was  completed  she  brought  forth
a  daughter  beautiful  in  all  her  limbs.  She  surpassed  in
splendour  the  lights  in  the  lying-in  chamber,1  and  they,  as
it  were,  heaved  sighs  by  discharging  lamp-black.  And  her
father  made  great  rejoicings,  and  gave  her  the  name  of
Karpurika,  which  is  his  own  name  made  feminine.  And
gradually  that  moonlight  of  the  eyes  of  the  people,  the
Princess  Karpurika,  has  grown  up,  and  is  now  in  the  full
bloom  of  youth.  And  her  father,  the  king  here,  desires  to
have  her  married,  but  the  haughty  girl  detests  men  and  will
not  consent.  And  when  my  daughter,  who  is  her  friend,
put  this  question  to  her,  '  My  dear,  why  do  you  not  desire
marriage,  the  only  fruit  of  a  daughter's  birth  ?  '  she
answered  :  ;  My  dear,  I  remember  my  former  birth,  and
the  cause  is  something  which  happened  then.     Hear  it.


61.  Story  of  the  Princess  Karpurika  in  her  Birth  as  a  Swan

On  the  shore  of  the  ocean  there  is  a  great  sandalwood-
tree.  Near  it  here  is  a  lake  adorned  with  full-blown  lotuses.
I  was  a  female  swan  on  that  lake  on  account  of  my  actions
in  a  previous  birth.  Once  on  a  time,  out  of  fear  of  the  sea,
I  made  a  nest  in  that  sandalwood-tree,  with  my  husband,
who  was  a  male  swan.     When  I  was  dwelling  in  that  nest  I

1  See  Vol.  II,  pp.  166-169,  and  pp.  131rc3,  132w  of  this  volume.— n.m.p.


292  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

had  male  offspring  born  to  me,  and  suddenly  a  great  wave  of
the  sea  came  and  carried  them  off.  When  the  flood  carried
away  my  children,  out  of  grief  I  wept  and  took  no  food,  and
remained  in  front  of  a  linga  of  Siva  on  the  shore  of  the  sea.
Then  that  male  swan,  my  husband,  came  to  me  and  said  :
"  Rise  up  !  Why  do  you  lament  your  children  that  are  dead  ?
We  shall  get  other  ones.1  As  long  as  life  is  preserved  every-
thing can  be  obtained."  His  speech  pierced  my  heart  like
an  arrow;  and  I  reflected:  "Alas!  males  are  thus  wickedly
regardless  of  their  youthful  offspring,  and  show  no  affection
to,  or  compassion  for,  their  females,  though  they  are  attached
to  them.  So  of  what  comfort  is  this  husband  to  me  ?  Of
what  use  is  this  body  that  brings  only  pain  ?  "  Thus  reflect-
ing, I  prostrated  myself  before  Siva,  and  devoutly  placed  him
in  my  heart,  and  then  in  front  of  his  symbol,  before  the  eyes
of  the  swan,  my  husband,  I  uttered  this  prayer,  "  May  I
become  in  the  next  birth  a  princess  remembering  my  former
state,"  and  thereupon  I  flung  myself  into  the  sea.  Conse-
quently I  have  been  born  in  this  life  such  as  you  see.  And
because  I  remember  the  cruelty  of  that  husband  in  a  former
birth  my  mind  does  not  feel  inclined  to  any  suitor.  So  I
do  not  desire  to  be  married.  The  rest  is  in  the  hands  of
Destiny.


[M]  "  This  is  what  the  princess  said  then  in  private  to
my  daughter,  and  that  daughter  of  mine  came  and  told  it  to
me.  So,  my  son,  I  have  told  you  what  you  asked  me.  And
that  princess  is  undoubtedly  destined  to  be  your  wife.  For
she  was  long  ago  designated  by  the  god  Siva  as  the  wife  of
the  future  Emperor  of  the  Vidyadharas.  And  I  see  that  you
are  marked  with  all  the  distinguishing  signs  of  an  emperor,
such  as  the  peculiar  freckle,2  and  other  marks.  Perhaps  you
are  some  distinguished  person  brought  here  by  Providence  for

1  Cf.  Herodotus,  iii,  119;  Sophocles,  Antigone,  11.  909-912.  See  also  the
Pcntamerone  of  Basile  (Burton,  vol.  ii,  ninth  diversion  of  the  fourth  day,
p.  454),  and  the  Ucchanga-Jataka,  No.  67  in  Dr  Fausboll's  edition.

2  See  Vol.  I,  p.  49,  49nT,  and  Vol.  II,  pp.  4,  7,  7n\— n.m.p.


AH,  MY  FEMALE  SWAN  !  293

that  very  purpose.  Rise  up ;  for  the  present  we  will  see
what  there  is  in  my  house  in  the  way  of  provision."

After  the  old  lady  had  told  him  this  she  brought  him
food,  and  he  and  Gomukha  spent  the  night  there.  And  in  the
morning  the  prince  deliberated  in  private  with  Gomukha  as
to  the  steps  to  be  taken,  and  then  he  assumed  the  dress  of  a
Pasupata  ascetic,  and,  accompanied  by  Gomukha,  he  went  to
the  king's  gate  and  roamed  about  in  front  of  it,  crying  out
again  and  again  :  "  Ah,  my  female  swan !  Ah,  my  female
swan  !  "  And  the  people  gazed  at  him.  And  when  the
maids  beheld  him  thus  employed  they  went  in  astonishment
and  said  to  the  Princess  Karpiirika  :  "  Your  Highness,  we
have  seen  at  the  royal  gate  a  Pasupata  ascetic  who,  though
he  has  a  fellow,  is  unfellowed  in  beauty,1  and  he  continually
utters  these  words,  '  Ah,  my  female  swan  !  Ah,  my  female
swan  !  '  which  bewilders  the  minds  of  the  women."

When  the  princess  heard  this  she,  as  having  been  a  swan
in  a  former  birth,  was  filled  with  curiosity,  and  had  him,  just
as  he  was,  conducted  by  her  maids  into  her  presence.  And
she  saw  that  he  was  adorned  with  infinite  beauty,  like  a  new
God  of  Love  that  had  taken  a  vow  to  propitiate  Siva.  And
she  said  to  him,  when  he  looked  at  her  with  an  eye  expanded
by  curiosity  :  "  What  is  this  that  you  are  continually  say-
ing :  '  Ah,  my  female  swan  !  Ah,  my  female  swan  !  '  ?  "
Though  she  said  this  to  him,  he  went  on  to  say :  "  Ah,  my
female  swan  !  "

Then  his  companion  Gomukha  answered  her :  "I  will
explain  this  in  a  few  words.  Listen,  your  Highness.  In
a  former  birth  he  was  a  swan  on  account  of  his  actions
in  an  anterior  state  of  existence.  Then  he  built  himself
a  nest  in  a  sandalwood-tree,  on  the  bank  of  a  great  lake
near  the  shore  of  the  sea,  and  lived  there  with  his  female.
And  as  it  happened  their  offspring  in  that  nest  were  swept
away  by  a  wave,  and  his  female,  distracted  with  grief,  threw
herself  into  the  sea.  Then  he,  being  grieved  at  separation
from  her,  and  disgusted  with  his  bird- nature,  desirous  of
leaving  that  body,  made  a  pious  wish  in  his  heart :  '  May  I
be  in  a  future  life  a  prince  remembering  my  former  state,  and

1  A  mere  pun.


294  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

may  this  virtuous  female  swan  be  my  wife,  remembering
her  former  existence  also.'  Then  he  thought  on  Siva,  and,
scorched  with  the  fire  of  grief,  flung  that  body  into  the
water  of  the  sea.  So  he  has  been  now  born,  my  fair  lady,
as  Naravahanadatta,  the  son  of  the  King  of  Vatsa  in  Kau-
sambi,  with  the  power  of  recollecting  his  former  existence.
When  he  was  born  a  voice  said  distinctly  from  heaven  :
'  This  prince  shall  be  the  emperor  of  all  the  kings  of  the
Vidyadharas.'

"  In  course  of  time,  when  he  had  become  Crown  Prince,
he  was  married  by  his  father  to  the  goddess  Madanaman-
chuka  of  heavenly  appearance,  who  had  been  born  for  a
certain  reason  as  a  woman.  And  then  the  daughter  of  a
king  of  the  Vidyadharas  named  Hemaprabha,  the  maiden
Ratnaprabha,  came  of  her  own  accord  and  chose  him  for
a  husband.  Nevertheless,  thinking  on  that  female  swan,  he
does  not  enjoy  tranquillity  ;  and  he  told  this  to  me,  who
have  been  his  servant  from  my  childhood.

"  Then,  while  he  was  out  hunting,  it  happened  that  he
and  I  had  a  meeting  in  the  forest  with  a  holy  female
hermit.  And  in  the  course  of  conversation  she  said  to  him,
with  favourable  condescension  :  c  Owing  to  the  effect  of  his
actions  the  God  of  Love,  my  son,  became  a  swan.  And  a
heavenly  female,  that  had  fallen  through  a  curse,  became
his  dear  wife,  when  he  was  dwelling,  as  a  swan,  in  a
sandalwood-tree  on  the  bank  of  the  sea.  But  she  threw  her-
self into  the  sea,  through  grief  at  her  offspring  having  been
carried  away  by  the  tide,  and  then  the  male  swan  flung
himself  into  the  sea  also.  He  has  now  by  the  favour  of
Siva  been  born  as  yourself,  the  son  of  the  King  of  Vatsa,
and  you  know  of  that  former  birth  of  yours,  my  son,  for
you  remember  your  former  existence.  And  that  female  swan
has  been  now  born  in  Karpurasambhava,  a  city  on  the  shore
of  the  sea,  as  a  princess,  Karpurika  by  name.  Therefore  go
there,  my  son,  and  win  her  to  wife.'

"  When  the  holy  female  hermit  had  said  this  she  flew  up
into  the  sky  and  disappeared.  And  this  lord  of  mine,  hav-
ing heard  this  information,  immediately  set  out  with  me  to
come  here.     And  being  attracted  by  love  for  you,  he  risked


THE  TRICK  SUCCEEDS  295

his  life,  and  after  traversing  a  hundred  difficulties  he  reached
the  shore  of  the  sea.  There  we  had  an  interview  with  the
carpenter,  named  Rajyadhara,  who  dwells  in  Hemapura,
and  who  gave  us  an  ingenious  chariot.  We  have  mounted
on  this  terrible  machine,  as  if  it  were  our  courage  having
taken  shape,1  and  have  crossed  the  perilous  gulf  of  the  sea
and  arrived  at  this  town.  For  this  reason,  Queen,  my  master
wandered  about,  exclaiming,  '  Ah,  my  female  swan  !  '  until
he  came  into  your  presence.  Now,  from  the  pleasing  sight
of  the  noble  moon  of  your  countenance,  he  enjoys  the  re-
moval of  the  darkness  caused  by  the  presence  of  innumer-
able woes.  Now  honour  your  noble  guest  with  the  blue  lotus
garland  of  your  look."

When  Karpiirika  heard  this  feigned  speech  of  Gomukha's
she  thought  it  was  true,  relying  on  the  fact  that  it  harmonised
with  her  own  recollections.  And  she  melted  in  her  soul  with
love,  and  she  thought :  "  After  all,  this  husband  of  mine
was  attached  to  me,  and  my  despondency  was  causeless."
And  she  said  :  "I  am  in  truth  that  very  female  swan,  and  I
am  fortunate  in  that  my  husband  has  for  my  sake  endured
suffering  in  two  births.  So  now  I  am  your  slave,  overcome
by  love."  And  saying  this,  she  honoured  Naravahanadatta
with  baths  and  other  hospitalities.  Then  she  informed  her
father  of  all  this  by  the  mouth  of  her  attendants,  and  he
the  moment  he  heard  it  came  to  her.

Then  the  king  thought  himself  fortunate,  having  seen
that  his  daughter  had  conceived  a  desire  to  be  married,  and
that  an  appropriate  suitor  for  her  had  at  length  arrived  in
Naravahanadatta,  who  was  marked  with  all  the  signs  of
a  great  emperor.  And  he  gave,  with  all  due  honour,  his
daughter  Karpiirika  to  Naravahanadatta  according  to  the
prescribed  form.  And  he  gave  to  that  son-in-law  of  his,  at
every  circumambulation  from  left  to  right 2  of  the  sacred
fire,  thirty  millions  of  gold  pieces,  and  as  many  lumps  of

1  I  read  with  a  MS.  in  the  Sanskrit  College :  bhayade  ha  murta  iva
sahase.

2  This  subject  has  already  been  dealt  with  in  Vol.  I,  pp.  190-193.  See
also  E.  Peacock,  "Sunwise  Processions,"  Folk-Lore,  vol.  xi,  1900,  p.  220;
and  W.  H.  R.  Rivers,  "Primitive  Orientation,"  ditto,  vol.  xii,  1901,  pp.  210-
212. — N.M.P.


296  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

camphor,  the  heaps  of  which  appeared  like  the  peaks  of
Meru  and  Kailasa,  that  had  witnessed  the  marriage  of
Parvati,  come  to  behold  his  magnificence.

Moreover,  the  King  Karpuraka,  who  had  attained  his
wish,  gave  Naravahanadatta  a  hundred  millions  of  excellent
garments  and  three  hundred  female  slaves  well  adorned.
And  Naravahanadatta,  after  his  marriage,  remained  with
that  Karpurika,  as  if  with  affection  incarnate  in  bodily  form.
Whose  mind  was  not  delighted  at  the  union  of  that  couple,
which  resembled  the  marriage  of  the  spring  creeper  and  the
spring  festival  ?

And  on  the  next  day  Naravahanadatta,  who  had  attained
his  object,  said  to  his  beloved  Karpurika  :  "  Come,  let  us
go  to  Kausambi."  Then  she  answered  him  :  "  If  it  is  to
Karavahana-  De  so>  wnY  should  we  not  go  there  immediately
datta  meets       in  this  chariot  of  yours  that  flies  through  the

Pranadhara       air  ?        jf   ft    jg    toQ    smaU    j    wiU    funnsh    another

large  one,  for  there  is  living  here  a  mechanic  who  makes
ingenious  chariots,  who  has  come  from  a  foreign  land,
Pranadhara  by  name  ;  I  will  cause  him  quickly  to  make
such  a  chariot."  After  saying  this  she  called  the  warder
that  kept  the  door  and  said  to  him  :  "  Go  and  order  that
chariot- maker  Pranadhara  to  prepare  a  large  chariot,  that
will  travel  through  the  air,  for  us  to  start  in."

Then  the  Queen  Karpurika,  having  dismissed  the  warder,
informed  her  father  by  the  mouth  of  a  slave  of  her  desire
to  depart.  And  while  the  king,  on  hearing  it,  was  coming
thither,  Naravahanadatta  thus  reflected  :  "  This  Pranadhara
is  certainly  the  brother  of  Rajyadhara,  whom  he  described
as  having  run  away  from  his  native  land  through  fear  of  his
king."

While  he  was  thus  thinking,  the  king  quickly  arrived,
and  that  mechanic  Pranadhara  came  with  the  warder,  and
said  :  "I  have  ready-made  a  very  large  chariot,  which  will
easily  carry  at  this  instant  thousands  of  men."  When  the
mechanic  said  this,  Naravahanadatta  said,  "  Bravo !  "  and
asked  him  courteously :  "  Are  you  the  elder  brother  of
Rajyadhara,  skilled  in  various  very  great  mechanical  con-
trivances ?  '      And  Pranadhara  answered  him,  bowing  before


THE  MEETING  OF  THE  TWO  BROTHERS      297

him  :    "I  am  that  very  brother  of  his,  but  how  does  your
Highness  know  about  us  ?  "

Then  Naravahanadatta  told  him  what  Rajyadhara  had
told  him,  and  how  he  had  seen  him.  Then  Pranadhara
joyfully  brought  him  the  chariot,  and  he  mounted  it  with
Gomukha,  after  having  been  politely  dismissed  by  his  father-
in-law  the  king,  and  after  bidding  farewell  to  him  ;  but  first
he  placed  in  it  the  slaves,  camphor  and  gold.  And  he  took
with  him  Pranadhara,  whom  the  king  permitted  to  depart,
and  that  head  warder,  and  his  recently  married  wife  Kar-
purika ;  and  his  mother-in-law  uttered  a  solemn  prayer  for
a  blessing  on  his  journey,  and  from  those  stores  of  splendid
garments  he  bestowed  gifts  on  the  Brahmans  ;  and  he  said
to  Pranadhara  :  "  First  let  us  go  to  Rajyadhara  on  the  shore
of  the  sea,  and  then  home."

Then  the  chariot  was  driven  on  by  Pranadhara,  and  the
prince  and  his  wife  flew  up  into  the  air  quickly  by  means  of
it,  as  if  by  his  accomplished  wish.1  In  a  moment  he  crossed
the  sea,  and  reached  again  that  city  of  Hemapura  on  its
shore,  the  abode  of  that  Rajyadhara.  There  Rajyadhara
bowed  before  him,  delighted  at  beholding  his  brother,  and
as  he  had  no  female  slaves  the  prince  honoured  him  with
the  gift  of  some,  at  which  he  greatly  rejoiced.

And  after  taking  leave  of  Rajyadhara,  whose  tears
flowed  fast,  as  he  could  hardly  bear  to  part  from  his  elder
brother,  the  prince  reached  Kausambi  in  that  same  chariot.
The  Prince  Then  the  people,  on  beholding  the  prince  un-
retumsHome  expectedly  descend  from  heaven,  riding  in  that
splendid  chariot,  followed  by  his  retainers,  and  accompanied
by  his  new  bride,  were  much  astonished.  And  his  father,
the  King  of  Vatsa,  having  gathered  from  the  exultations
of  the  citizens  that  his  son  had  arrived,  was  delighted,  and
went  out  to  meet  him,  accompanied  by  the  queen,  the
ministers,  his  daughter-in-law,  and  other  persons.  And  the
king,  beholding  that  son  prostrate  at  his  feet  with  his  wife,
received  him  gladly,  and  thought  that  the  fact  that  he  was
to  be  the  future  emperor  of  the  aerial  spirits  was  clearly
revealed  by  his  coming  in  a  flying  chariot.

1  "  Wish  "  is  literally  "  chariot  of  the  mind/'  so  here  there  is  a  pun.


298  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

His  mother  Vasavadatta,  with  Padmavati,  embraced  him,
and  she  shed  a  tear,  which  dropped  like  the  knot  of  pain
loosened  by  seeing  him.  And  his  wife  Ratnaprabha,  and
Madanamanchuka  also,  and  their  jealousy  being  overcome
by  love  for  him,  they  embraced  his  feet,  and  won  his  heart
at  the  same  time.  And  the  prince  delighted  his  father's
ministers,  headed  by  Yaugandharayana,  and  his  own,  headed
by  Marubhuti,  when  they  bowed  before  him,  by  rewarding
them  as  they  severally  deserved.

And  they  all,  with  the  King  of  Vatsa  at  their  head,
welcomed  that  new  wife  Karpurika,  who  bowed  becomingly
before  them,  like  the  Goddess  of  Fortune  arrived  surrounded
by  a  hundred  immortal  nymphs,  even  the  sister- shape
Amrita,1  openly  brought  by  her  husband,  having  crossed  the
sea  adorned  with  its  shore  as  a  garment  with  a  beautiful
fringe.  And  the  King  of  Vatsa  honoured  that  warder  of  her
father's,  giving  him  many  crores  of  gold  pieces,  garments
and  lumps  of  camphor,  which  had  been  brought  in  the
chariot.  And  the  king  then  honoured  Pranadhara  as  the
benefactor  of  his  son  Naravahanadatta,  who  had  pointed
him  out  as  the  maker  of  the  chariot.  And  then  the  king
honoured  Gomukha,  and  asked  him  joyfully  :  "  How  did
you  obtain  this  princess  ?  And  how  did  you  start  from  this
place  ?  "

And  then  Gomukha  deftly  told  the  King  of  Vatsa,  with
his  wives  and  ministers,  in  private,  the  whole  adventure  as
it  took  place,  beginning  with  their  going  to  the  forest  to  hunt
— how  they  met  the  female  hermit,  and  how  they  crossed
the  sea  by  means  of  the  chariot  provided  by  Rajyadhara,
and  how  Karpurika  was  obtained  with  her  female  attendants,
though  she  was  averse  to  marriage,  and  how  they  returned
by  the  way  by  which  they  went,  in  a  chariot  which  they  had
obtained  by  finding  Pranadhara.

1  Both  Sri  and  the  Amrita  came  out  of  the  sea  when  it  was  churned.

Sudasarha  kftlena  seems  to  be  corrupt. All  is,  however,  clear  in  the  D.  text ;

see  Speyer,  op.  cit.,  p.  115,  who  translates:  "and  they  all  welcomed  her,
arrived  with  her  husband,  the  ornament  of  the  illustrious  family  of  the
Dasarhas,  who  had  brought  her  over  sea,  as  a  manifestation  of  the  very  sister
of  the  Amrita,  yea  as  if  she  were  Sri  accompanied  by  a  hundred  of  ever-young
nymphs." — n.M.p.


THE  LETTER  TO  KING  KARPtJRAKA         299


Then  all  of  them,  shaking  their  heads  in  astonishment
and  joy,  said  :  "To  think  of  the  concurrence  of  all  these
circumstances,  the  chase,  and  the  female  ascetic,  the  car-
penter Rajyadhara  skilled  in  mechanical  contrivances  found
on  the  shore  of  the  sea,  the  crossing  the  ocean  in  the  chariot
that  he  made,  and  that  another  maker  of  these  chariots
should  have  previously  reached  the  other  side  of  the  ocean  !
The  truth  is,  Destiny  takes  trouble  to  provide  the  fortunate
with  the  means  of  obtaining  prosperous  success."

Then  all  respectfully  commended  Gomukha  for  his  de-
votion to  his  lord.  And  they  praised  Queen  Ratnaprabha,
who  by  her  knowledge  protected  her  lord  on  his  journey,
for  she  produced  general  satisfaction  by  acting  like  a  woman
devoted  to  her  husband.

Then  Naravahanadatta,  having  made  his  party  of  air-
travellers  forget  the  fatigues  of  their  journey,  entered  his
palace  with  his  father  and  mother,  his  wives  and  other  re-
lations. Then  his  treasury  was  filled  with  heaps  of  gold  by
the  friends  and  relations  who  came  to  see  him,  and  whom  he
honoured,  and  he  loaded  Pranadhara  and  his  father-in-law's
warder  with  wealth.

And  Pranadhara,  immediately  after  he  had  taken  food,
respectfully  addressed  this  petition  to  him :  "  Prince,  King
Karpuraka  gave  us  the  following  order  :  '  You  must  come
back  quickly  as  soon  as  my  daughter  has  reached  her  hus-
band's palace,  in  order  that  I  may  have  early  news  of  her
arrival.'  So  we  must  certainly  go  there  quickly  this  very
moment.  Give  us  a  letter  from  Karpfirika  to  the  king  written
with  her  own  hand.  For  otherwise  the  heart  of  the  king,
which  is  attached  to  his  daughter,  will  not  take  comfort.
For  he,  never  having  mounted  an  air  chariot,  fears  that  we
may  have  fallen  from  it.  So  give  me  the  letter,  and  permit
this  head  warder,  who  is  desirous  of  ascending  the  chariot,
to  depart  with  me.  But  I  will  return  here,  Crown  Prince,
and  will  bring  my  family,  for  I  cannot  abandon  the  two
ambrosial  lotuses  of  your  feet."

When  Pranadhara  said  this  firmly,  the  son  of  the  King  of
Vatsa  immediately  made  Karpurika  sit  down  to  write  that
letter.      It  ran  as  follows  :    "  My  father,  you  must  not  feel


300  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

anxious  about  me,  since  I  share  the  happiness  and  possess
the  love  of  a  good  husband.  Was  the  goddess  Lakshmi  an
object  of  anxiety  to  the  ocean  after  she  had  betaken  herself
to  the  Supreme  Bridegroom?  "  When  she  had  written  the
above  letter  with  her  own  hand,  and  given  it,  the  son  of  the
King  of  Vatsa  dismissed  the  warder  and  Pranadhara  with
honour.  And  they  ascended  the  chariot,  and  produced
astonishment  in  the  minds  of  all,  as  they  were  seen  going
through  the  air,  and  crossing  the  sea  they  went  to  the
city  of  Karpurasambhava.  There  they  delighted  the  King
Karpuraka  by  reading  out  his  daughter's  letter,  which  told
that  she  had  reached  her  husband's  palace.

The  next  day  Pranadhara  took  leave  of  the  king,  and
after  visiting  Rajyadhara  repaired  with  his  family  into  the
presence  of  Naravahanadatta.  Naravahanadatta,  when  he
had  returned  thus  quickly  after  accomplishing  his  mission,
gave  him  a  dwelling  near  his  palace  and  an  ample  allow-
ance. And  he  amused  himself  and  his  wives  by  going  about
in  the  flying  chariots  made  by  him,  as  if  rehearsing  future
journeyings  in  the  skies  as  Emperor  of  the  Vidyadharas.

Thus,  having  delighted  his  friends,  followers  and  wives,
and  obtained  a  third  wife,  Karpurika,  in  addition  to  Ratna-
prabha  and  Madanamanchuka,  the  son  of  the  King  of  Vatsa
spent  those  days  in  happiness.


APPENDIX    I


APPENDIX   I

SNEEZING  SALUTATIONS

On  page  30  we  saw  that  when  the  prince  went  to  sleep  with-
out telling  his  tale,  the  merchant's  son  overheard  in  the  air
what  seemed  to  be  voices  of  women  engaged  in  conversation.
Disappointed  at  not  hearing  the  tale,  they  each  pronounced
a  curse  on  him  in  turn  ;  that  of  the  fourth  was :  "If  he
escape  this  also,  when  he  enters  that  night  into  his  private
apartments  he  shall  sneeze  a  hundred  times ;  and  if  someone
there  does  not  a  hundred  times  say  to  him,  '  God  bless  you ! '
he  shall  fall  into  the  grasp  of  death.  ..."

It  is  this  familiar  benediction  after  sneezing  which  I  am
going  to  discuss  in  this  appendix.

The  most  usual  form  the  benediction  takes  either  is  as  in
our  text,  or  else  is  a  wish  for  long  life.  As  we  shall  see  later,
among  some  peoples  no  benediction  is  given  at  all,  the  sneeze
being  simply  regarded  as  either  a  good  or  bad  omen  according
to  special  circumstances.

It  is,  I  think,  not  at  all  surprising  to  find  curious  customs
connected  with  sneezing  in  all  parts  of  the  world.  We  have
already  seen  (Vol.  II,  p.  144W1)  that  the  twitching  or  itching
of  various  parts  of  the  body  is  regarded  as  ominous  ;  how
much  more,  therefore,  would  such  a  violent  and  sudden
thing  as  a  sneeze  be  looked  upon  as  caused  by  some  unknown
power,  or  as  an  omen  to  be  most  carefully  regarded  ?

Halliday  1  has  put  this  clearly  :  "  It  is  per  se  a  startling
phenomenon  to  find  the  body,  which  in  normal  action  is
the  slave  and  instrument  of  its  owner's  will  and  intention,
behaving  in  a  way  independent  of  his  desire  or  volition.
Simply  because  it  is  involuntary,  the  twitching  of  the  eyelid
or  the  tingling  of  the  ear  must  be  miraculous.  And  primitive
man  finds  a  significance  in  everything  which  attracts  his
notice,  particularly  in  cases  where  there  is  no  obvious  cause."

I  do  not  think  we  need  look  further  for  the  explanation
of  sneezing  customs,  but  the  varying  practices  found  in
different   countries   and    the    strange    myths    invented    to

.     x  W.  R.  Halliday,  Greek  Divination,  London,  1913,  p.  175.
303


304  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

explain  these  practices  afford  an  interesting  anthropological
study.

To  begin  with  ancient  India :  the  Buddha  is  described  in
the  Gagga-J dtaka  (No.  155)  as  reprimanding  his  disciples  for
crying  "  Long  life!  "  after  a  sneeze.  The  Brethren  then  ask  :
"  Sir,  when  did  people  begin  to  answer  '  Long  life ! '  by  '  The
same  to  you  '  ?  "  Said  the  Master  :  "  That  was  long,  long
ago  "  ;   and  he  told  them  a  tale  of  the  olden  time  1  :

"Once  upon  a  time,  when  Brahmadatta  was  King  of
Benares,  the  Bodhisatta  came  into  the  world  as  a  brahmin's
son  of  the  kingdom  of  Kasi ;  and  his  father  was  a  lawyer  by
calling.  When  the  lad  was  sixteen  years  old  or  so,  his  father
gave  a  fine  jewel  into  his  charge,  and  they  both  travelled
through  town  after  town,  village  after  village,  until  they
came  to  Benares.  There  the  man  had  a  meal  cooked  in  the
gatekeeper's  house ;  and  as  he  could  find  nowhere  to  put  up
he  asked  where  there  was  lodging  to  be  had  for  wayfarers
who  came  too  late.  The  people  told  him  that  there  was
a  building  outside  the  city,  but  that  it  was  haunted  ;  but,
however,  he  might  lodge  there  if  he  liked.  Says  the  lad  to
his  father  :  '  Have  no  fear  of  any  Goblin,  father  !  I  will
subdue  him  and  bring  him  to  your  feet.'

"So  he  persuaded  his  father,  and  they  went  to  the  place
together.  The  father  lay  down  upon  a  bench  and  his  son
sat  beside  him,  chafing  his  feet.

"Now  the  Goblin  that  haunted  the  place  had  received
it  for  twelve  years'  service  of  Vessavana,2  on  these  terms  :
that  if  any  man  who  entered  it  should  sneeze,  and  when
long  life  was  wished  him  should  answer :  '  Long  life  to
you ! '  or  '  The  same  to  you !  ' — all  except  these  the  Goblin
had  a  right  to  eat.  The  Goblin  lived  upon  the  central  rafter
of  the  hut.

"He  determined  to  make  the  father  of  the  Bodhisatta
sneeze.  Accordingly  by  his  magic  power  he  raised  a  cloud
of  fine  dust,  which  entered  the  man's  nostrils,  and  as  he  lay
on  the  bench  he  sneezed.  The  son  did  not  cry  '  Long  life  !  '
and  down  came  the  Goblin  from  his  perch,  ready  to  devour
his  victim.  But  the  Bodhisatta  saw  him  descend,  and  then
these  thoughts  passed  through  his  mind  :    '  Doubtless  it  is

1  W.  H.  D.  Rouse,  The  Jataka,  Cambridge,  1895,  vol.  ii,  pp.  11-13.

2  A  monster  with  white  skin,  three  legs  and  eight  teeth,  guardian  of
jewels  and  the  precious  metals,  and  a  kind  of  Indian  Pluto.


APPENDIX  I— SNEEZING  SALUTATIONS       305

he  who  made  my  father  sneeze.  This  must  be  a  Goblin  that
eats  all  who  do  not  say  "  Long  life  to  you."  '  And  addressing
his  father  he  repeated  the  first  verse  as  follows  : —

1  Gagga,  live  an  hundred  years — aye,  and  twenty  more,  I
pray!
May  no  goblin  eat  you  up ;  live  an  hundred  years,  I  say ! '

"The  Goblin  thought:  'This  one  I  cannot  eat,  because
he  said  "Long  life  to  you."  But  I  shall  eat  his  father';
and  he  came  close  to  the  father.  But  the  man  divined  the
truth  of  the  matter.  '  This  must  be  a  Goblin,'  thought  he,
6  who  eats  all  who  do  not  reply,  "  Long  life  to  you  too  !  "  '
and  so  addressing  his  son  he  repeated  the  second  verse  :

5  You  too  live  an  hundred  years — aye,  and  twenty  more,  I
pray ;
Poison  be  the  goblin's  food ;  live  an  hundred  years,  I  say ! '

"The  Goblin,  hearing  these  words,  turned  away,  thinking:
'  Neither  of  these  is  for  me  to  eat. '  But  the  Bodhisatta
put  a  question  to  him  :  '  Come,  Goblin,  how  is  it  you  eat
the  people  who  enter  this  building  ?  '

I  earned  the  right  for  twelve  years'  service  of  Vessa-


vana.


What !     Are  you  allowed  to  eat  everybody  ?  '
"'All  except  those  who  say  "The  same  to  you"   when
another  wishes  them  long  life.'

"  '  Goblin,'  said  the  lad,  '  you  have  done  some  wickedness
in  former  lives,  which  has  caused  you  to  be  born  now  fierce
and  cruel,  and  a  bane  to  others.  If  you  do  the  same  kind  of
thing  now  you  will  pass  from  darkness  to  darkness.  There-
fore from  this  time  forth  abstain  from  such  things  as  taking
life.'  With  these  words  he  humbled  the  Goblin,  scared  him
with  fear  of  hell,  established  him  in  the  Five  Precepts,  and
made  him  as  obedient  as  an  errand-boy.

"Next  day,  when  the  people  came  and  saw  the  Goblin
and  learned  how  that  the  Bodhisatta  had  subdued  him,  they
went  and  told  the  king :  '  My  lord,  some  man  has  subdued
the  Goblin,  and  made  him  as  obedient  as  an  errand-boy.'
So  the  king  sent  for  him  and  raised  him  to  be  Commander-
in-Chief,  while  he  heaped  honours  upon  the  father.  Having
made  the  Goblin  a  tax-gatherer,  and  established  him  in  the
Bodhisatta's  precepts,  after  giving  alms  and  doing  good  he
departed  to  swell  the  hosts  of  heaven."
vol.  in.  u


306  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

The  Hindus  of  the  North- West  Provinces  will  still  say
"May  you  live  a  hundred  years  I "  on  hearing  anyone  sneeze.
(See  North  Indian  Notes  and  Queries,  vol.  iv,  p.  388.)  For
other  references  to  sneezing  in  the  Jdtakas  see  vol.  i,  p.  279,
and  vol.  v,  p.  228.

In  more  modern  days  we  still  find  the  belief  that  sneezing
is  due  to  demoniacal  influence,  although  opinions  differ  as  to
whether  it  is  caused  by  a  Bhuta  1  entering  or  leaving  the  nose.
The  latter  view  is  generally  taken  by  Mohammedans  because
it  is  one  of  the  traditions  of  the  Prophet  that  the  nose  should
be  washed  out  with  water,  as  the  devil  resides  in  it  during
the  night.2  Sneezing  once  is  a  good  sign  ;  twice  a  bad  sign.
More  than  twice  is  not  regarded.  When  a  child  sneezes
those  near  it  usually  say  "dirghdyus"  ("long  life"),  or
"  satayus "  ("a  hundred  years ").  Adults  who  sneeze
pronounce  the  name  of  some  god,  the  common  expression
being  "  Srimad-rangam."  When  a  Badaga  baby  is  born  it
is  a  good  omen  if  the  father  sneezes  before  the  umbilical  cord
has  been  cut,  and  an  evil  one  if  he  sneezes  after  its  severance.

In  the  Telugu  country  it  is  believed  that  a  child  who
sneezes  on  a  winnowing-fan  or  on  the  door-frame  will  meet
misfortune  unless  balls  of  boiled  rice  are  thrown  over  it ;
and  a  man  who  sneezes  during  his  meals,  especially  at  night,
will  also  be  unlucky  unless  water  is  sprinkled  over  his  face
and  he  is  made  to  pronounce  his  own  name  and  that  of  his
birthplace  and  his  patron  deity.3

The  name  of  a  deity  is  often  uttered  by  the  sneezer.
Dubois 4  says  that  after  sneezing  a  Hindu  never  fails  to
exclaim  :  "  Rama  !  Rama  !  "  Among  the  Chitari  caste
(painters  of  the  Central  Provinces)  when  a  man  sneezes  he
will  say  "Chhatrapati,"  which  is  said  to  be  a  name  of  Devi,
but  is  used  only  on  this  occasion.  When  about  to  start  on
an  expedition  or  to  begin  some  new  enterprise  a  sneeze  is
almost  always  considered  an  evil  omen.6

1  See  Vol.  I,  Appendix  I,  p.  206.

2  W.  Crooke,  Popular  Religion  and  Folk-Lore  of  Northern  India,  vol.  i,
p.  240.

3  Thurston,  Ethnographic  Notes  in  Southern  India,  1906,  p.  248;  ditto,
Omens  and  Superstitions  of  Southern  India,  1912,  pp.  25,  26.

4  Hindu  Manners,  Customs  and  Ceremonies,  3rd  edit.,  by  Beauehamp,
Oxford,  1906,  p.  329  (vol.  i,  p.  465  of  the  1825  Paris  edition).

5  Russell,  Tribes  and  Castes  of  the  Central  Provinces,  vol.  ii,  p.  435 ;
vol.  iii,  pp.  401,  564,  and  vol.  iv,  p.  362.


APPENDIX  I— SNEEZING  SALUTATIONS       307

The  same  idea  is  prevalent  in  many  parts  of  the  world.
Thus  in  describing  the  Province  of  Lar  (Gujarat  and  the
northern  Konkan)  Marco  Polo  says  1  :

"  Moreover,  if  in  going  out  he  hears  anyone  sneeze,  if  it
seems  to  him  a  good  omen  he  will  go  on,  but  if  the  reverse
he  will  sit  down  on  the  spot  where  he  is,  as  long  as  he  thinks
that  he  ought  to  tarry  before  going  on  again."

In  Persia  2  to  sneeze  once  when  starting  on  any  expedition
is  an  evil  omen,  apparently  whether  the  traveller  himself  or
anyone  else  perpetrates  the  sneeze.  Persians  in  such  a  case
will  stare  hard  at  the  sun3  in  order  to  induce  a  second  or
third  sneeze.  If  they  are  unsuccessful  in  doing  this  they
betake  themselves  to  repeating  a  certain  invocation  to  Allah,
but  most  Persians  will  give  up  the  expedition,  believing
firmly  that  it  can  end  only  in  disaster.  On  the  other  hand,
they  believe  that  if  they  desire  anything  ardently  and  some-
one sneezes  at  that  moment,  then  their  wish  is  sure  to  be
granted.  The  demoniacal  influence  connected  with  sneezing
is  clearly  shown  by  the  Persian  belief  that  accidents  are
often  due  to  someone  sneezing  at  the  critical  moment;  thus
Sir  Percy  Sykes'  Persian  secretary  always  attributed  a  bad
accident  he  had  while  riding  to  the  fact  that  someone  had
sneezed  just  as  he  was  mounting  his  horse.

In  ancient  Persia  we  read  in  the  Sad  Dar 4  that  on  sneez-
ing it  is  requisite  to  recite  one  Yathd-ahu-vairyo  and  one
Ashem-vohu  (formulae  in  praise  of  righteousness),  because
there  is  a  fiend  in  our  bodies  endeavouring  to  make  mis-
fortune and  sickness.  There  is  also  a  fire  there  too,  called  a
disposition  and  the  sneezing  instinct.  It  is  connected  with
the  fiend.  "  Then,  as  the  fire  becomes  successful  over  that
fiend,  and  puts  her  to  flight,  a  sneeze  comes  because  that
fiend  comes  out.  Afterwards,  because  it  is  necessary,  they
recite  these  inward  prayers  and  perform  the  benediction
of  the  fire,  so  that  it  may  remain  for  a  long  period  while
thou  art  keeping  this  fiend  defeated.  When  another  person
hears  the  sneeze  it  is  likewise  requisite  for  him  to  utter
the  said  prayers  and  to  accomplish  the  benediction  of  that
spirit."

1  Yule,  The  Book  of  Ser  Marco  Polo,  1903,  vol.  ii,  pp.  364,  365.

2  Ella  C.  Sykes,  "Persian  Folk-Lore,"  Folk-Lore,  vol.  xii,  1901,  pp.  266,
267.

3  Cf  the  Prometheus  myth  given  on  p.  309.

4  E.  W.  West,  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  vol.  xxiv,  pp.  265,  266.


308  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

According  to  Father  Tachard x  the  Siamese,  "  se  persuad-
ent  que  le  premier  juge  des  enfers,  qu'ils  appellent  Prayamp-
paban,  a  un  livre  ou  la  vie  de  chaque  homme  en  particulier
est  ecrite,  qu'il  le  relit  continuellement  et  que,  lorsqu'il  est
arrive  a  la  page  qui  contient  l'histoire  de  telle  personne,  elle
ne  manque  jamais  d'eternuer.  C'est  pour  cela,  disent-ils,  que
nous  eternuons  sur  la  terre;  et  de  la  est  venue  la  coutume
qu'ils  ont  de  souhaiter  une  heureuse  et  longue  vie  a  tous  ceux
qui  eternuent."

In  Islam  we  find  that  Mohammed  did  not  object  to  the
custom  of  blessing  the  sneezer,  as  did  many  of  the  Christian
teachers.  Lane 2  tells  us  that  on  sneezing  a  man  says :
"  Praise  be  to  God !  "  Each  person  present  (servants
generally  excepted)  then  says  to  him  :  "  God  have  mercy
upon  you  " — to  which  the  former  generally  replies  :  "  God
guide  us  and  guide  you."

Moslems  believe  that  when  Allah  placed  the  Soul  (life  ?)
in  Adam,  the  dry  clay  became  flesh  and  bone,  and  the  First
Man,  waking  to  life,8  sneezed  and  ejaculated  "Al-hamdu
li'llah  !  "  —  whereto  Gabriel  replied  :  "  Allah  have  mercy
upon  thee,  O  Adam  !  "  The  reason  given  for  Mohammed's
liking  sneezing  is  that  he  realised  that  the  act  was  accom-
panied by  lightness  of  body  and  openness  of  pores,  and  said
of  it :  "  If  a  man  sneeze  or  eructate  and  say  '  Al-hamdu  li'llah '
he  averts  seventy  diseases,  of  which  the  least  is  leprosy  "
(Juzam).4

Among  the  Hebrews  the  benedictions  used  are  :  "  Your
health  !  "  "  May  you  live  !  "  "  For  life  !  "  "  For  a  happy
life  !  "  and  "  God  bless  you  !  "  The  origin  given  for  this
custom  is  found  in  the  Pirqe  Rabbi  Eliezer  (chap,  lii.),
a  fanciful  history  of  creation  and  the  patriarchs  selected
from  the  Pentateuch,  composed  in  the  eighth  or  ninth
century.

Briefly  the  account  is  as  follows :  — At  the  creation  of  the
world  God  made  seven  wonderful  things,  one  of  which  was  a
law  that  a  man  should  sneeze  only  once  and  then  die,  the
sneeze  signifying  the  rendering  of  the  soul  to  God.   Naturally

1  Voyage  de  Siam  des  Peres  Jesuit  es  envoy  es  par  le  Roy  aux  Indes  et  a  la
Chine,  Amsterdam,  1688,  p.  287,  quoted  by  Saintyves  (p.  29,  see  below).

2  Manners  and  Customs  of  the  Modern  Egyptians,  5th  edit.,  I860,  p.  205.

3  Cj.  Elisha  raising  the  dead  child  to  life  (2  Kings  iv,  35),  "and  the
child  sneezed  seven  times,  and  the  child  opened  his  eyes."

4  R.  F.  Burton,  Nights,  vol.  ix,  p.  220m1.


APPENDIX  I— SNEEZING  SALUTATIONS       309

everyone  went  in  fear  of  the  fatal  sneeze.  Matters  remained
unchanged  till  the  time  of  Jacob.  He  immediately  saw  the
great  disadvantages  of  such  a  law  and,  humbling  himself
before  God,  begged  for  a  brief  space  to  live  after  his  sneeze
so  as  to  put  his  affairs  in  order.  His  wish  was  granted.
Time  passed  and  the  day  of  his  death  drew  nigh.  He
sneezed  and  did  not  die.  The  world  was  amazed  at  this
phenomenon,  which  seemed  to  be  changing  the  law  of
nature.  Accordingly  the  princes  of  the  earth  ordained  that
in  future  when  anyone  sneezed  he  should  immediately  be
wished  "Long  life,"  in  the  hope  that  the  favour  would  be
further  extended.1

The  Jews  also  believed  in  a  pseudo- Greek  myth  told  about
Prometheus.     Roughly  the  story  is  as  follows  2 :  —

When  Prometheus  had  put  the  finishing  touches  to  his
clay  figure  he  wished  to  give  it  life.  To  achieve  this  he  had
need  of  aid  from  heaven.  He  made  a  journey  to  the  sky,
conducted  by  Minerva.  Having  traversed  various  planets,
where  he  collected  certain  influences  which  he  deemed
necessary  for  his  object,  he  arrived  at  the  sun.  Then,  and
long  before,  this  planet  was  regarded  as  the  soul  of  the  world,
as  the  author  of  life  and  as  the  father  of  nature.  He
approached  this  sphere  under  the  mantle  of  his  patroness
with  a  bottle  of  crystal.  He  quickly  filled  this  with  a  portion
of  the  sun's  rays,  and  having  hermetically  sealed  it  he
descended  to  his  work.  Without  losing  a  moment  he  held
his  bottle  to  the  nose  of  the  statue,  opened  it  and  the  rays
of  the  sun,  having  lost  none  of  their  potency,  entered  by  the
respiratory  organs  into  the  spongy  tissues  with  such  speed
that  it  produced  the  same  effect  as  it  does  to-day  when  we
look  at  the  sun.  It  made  the  statue  sneeze,  after  which  it
animated  the  whole  figure.  Prometheus,  charmed  with  his
success,  began  to  pray  ;  he  prayed  for  the  work  of  his  hands
and  for  its  preservation  ;  his  pupil  heard  this  and  remembered
it  all.  First  impressions  have  a  deep  and  lasting  effect.
During  the  rest  of  his  life  he  repeated  these  same  wishes  on

1  See  R.  Means-Lawrence,  The  Magic  of  the  Horseshoe,  London,  1898,
p.  227,  and  P.  Saintyves,  U Eternnement  et  le  Bdillement  da?is  la  Magie,
I' Ethnographic  et  le  Folklore  Medical,  Paris,   1921,  p.  32.

2  Henri  Morin,  "Sur  les  souhaits  en  faveur  de  ceux  qui  eternuent,"
Mem.  de  I' Acad,  des  Ins.,  1746,  vol.  iv,  pp.  326,  327,  reproduced  in  Leber,
Collection  des  meilleures  Dissertations,  Paris,  1838,  vol.  viii,  pp.  372-374
(quoted  by  Saintyves,  op.  cit.,  p.  33).


310  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

similar  occasions,  and  this  custom  has  descended  from  father
to  son  to  this  day.

The  variants  of  this  tale  are  many  and  need  not  be
detailed  here.

With  the  Greeks  sneezing  was  usually  looked  upon  as
a  good  omen  and  of  heavenly  origin.1  Thus  in  Theocritus
(vii,  96  ;  Bohn  trans.,  p.  42)  we  read  :  "  On  Simichidas  indeed
the  Loves  have  sneezed."  Again,  in  Idyll  xviii,  16,  it  is  said
of  Menelaus,  the  lucky  bridegroom :  "  Blest  husband,  some
lucky  person  sneezed  on  thee,  as  thou  wentest  to  Sparta,  that
thou  mightest  accomplish  thine  object."  Homer2  makes
Penelope  say  :  "  My  son  has  sneezed  a  blessing  on  all  my
words."  The  usual  saluation  was  igjOi,  Zed  o-waovl  While
Xenophon  was  addressing  the  assembly  of  the  Ten  Thousand
someone  sneezed,  and  the  men  immediately  paid  homage  to
Zeus,  whereupon  Xenophon  continued :  "  Since,  O  soldiers,
while  we  were  discussing  means  of  escape,  an  omen  from  Zeus
the  Preserver  has  manifested  itself  .  .  ."  3

According  to  Abbott  *  the  formula  of  salutation  in  Mace-
donia to-day  varies  according  to  the  occasion,  the  act  of
sneezing  being  interpreted  in  three  different  ways  :

First,  sneezing  is  regarded  as  a  confirmation  of  what  the
person  speaking  has  just  said.  In  that  case  he  interrupts
himself  in  order  to  address  the  sneezer  as  follows  :  "  Health
be  to  thee,  for  [thou  hast  proved  that]  I  am  speaking  the

truth  !  "    (Tern  gov  Ktj  aXyOeia  Aeyco).

Secondly,  it  is  taken  as  a  sign  that  absent  enemies  are
speaking  ill  of  the  sneezer,  and  the  bystanders  express  the
pious  wish  that  those  individuals,  whoever  they  be,  "  may

Split       (va  (tko.<tovv\.

Thirdly,  it  is  considered  as  an  indication  of  health,
especially  if  the  sneezer  is  just  recovering  from  an  illness.
The  formula  appropriate  in  this  instance  is,  "  Health  to  thee,
and  joy  to  thee  !  "  (Teid  a-ov  kou  xaP<*  °"0l/)>  to  which  some,
facetiously  inclined,  add  by  way  of  a  crowning  happiness  —
"  and  may  thy  mother-in-law  burst !  "  (kcu  va  aicd*  ^ireOepd  a-ov).

He  shows  the  salutation  after  sneezing  to  be  common
amongst  the  Turks,  as  well  as  among  savage  tribes  in  many
parts  of  the  world.

1  Arist.,  Probl.,  xxxviii,  7.

2  Odyssey,  xvii,  541.

3  Xenophon,  Anab.,  Ill,  ii,  9.

4  G.  F.  Abbott,  Macedonian  Folk-Lore,  Cambridge,  1903,  pp.  113-116.


APPENDIX  I— SNEEZING  SALUTATIONS       311

The  Roman  salutation  was  "  Salve  !  "  1  and  sneezing  was
considered  auspicious.  Thus  in  Catullus  2  we  read  :  "  When
he  said  this,  Love,  who  had  looked  upon  him  before  from
the  left,  now  sneezed  approvingly  from  the  right."  Likewise
in  Propertius  3 :  "In  thy  new-born  days,  my  life,  did  golden
love  sneeze,  loud  and  clear,  a  favouring  omen  ?  "

In  early  Christian  times  the  sign  of  the  cross  was  made
at  a  sneeze,  thus  ensuring  protection  against  any  evil  influ-
ences which  might  be  at  work.  Later,  however,  the  pagan
origin  of  such  beliefs  was  condemned,  and  St  Augustine
declared  that  any  attention  paid  to  sneezing  was  not  only
sacrilegious,  but  ridiculous.

The  custom  of  saying  "  God  bless  you  !  "  after  sneezing
received  fresh  impetus  during  the  plague  at  Rome  in  589-590.
As  is  the  case  with  many  other  diseases,  the  plague  started
with  sneezing,  whereupon  anyone  who  heard  it  would  flee,
calling  out  "  God  bless  you  !  "  or  "  God  help  you  !  "  The
same  applies  to  the  plagues  at  Florence  (1340-1349)  ;  France
and  England  (1361-1362)  ;  and  the  Plague  of  London  in
1664-1666.

The  formulae  used  in  different  parts  of  Europe  are  all
very  similar  —  e.g.  "  Helfiu  Got!"  "Christ  in  helfe !  "
"  Got  helfe  dir  !  "  "  Deus  te  adjuvet !  "  "  Gesundheit !  "
"  God  bless  you  !  "     "  Bless  you  !  "     "  Felicita  !  "  etc.*

As  is  only  to  be  expected,  in  many  parts  of  Europe  the
peasants  have  invented  tales  to  account  for  the  custom.
It  will  suffice  here  to  give  a  translation  of  one  current  in
Picardy.5

Near  the  road  of  Englebelmer  (Somme)  there  lived  long
ago  a  man  who  passed  every  night  in  sneezing  continually.
At  any  hour  at  which  one  might  pass  in  this  neighbourhood
one  heard  nothing  but  "  Atchi !  Atchi !  "  repeated  without
ceasing,  until  passers-by  would  merely  comment :  "  It  is
the  sneezer."  Several  times  the  young  men  of  the  neigh-
bouring villages  assembled  to  take  him  by  surprise,  but
when  they  arrived  on  the  spot,  instead  of  hearing  the  usual
"  Atchi !  "  they  heard  nothing  at  all,  and  the  noise  did  not

1  Pliny,  Nat.  Hist.,  xxviii,  2  ;  Apuleius,  Golden  Ass,  ii,  211.

2  Carmina,  xlv.

3  Eleg.,  ii,  3,  23.

4  See  J.  Grimm,  Teutonic  Mythology ,  trans.  J.  S.  Stallybrass,  London,
1882-1888,  vol.  iii,  p.  1116;  vol.  iv,  p.  1637.

5  E.  H.  Carnoy,  Litterature  orale  de  Picardie,  Paris,  1883,  pp.  42-44.


312  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

start  again  until  they  were  well  on  their  way  home.  The  man
or  the  goblin  took  pleasure  in  making  the  young  peasants
run  along  the  long  road,  and  remained  inaccessible.  Finally
everyone  grew  accustomed  to  the  sneezer,  and  since  he  had
never  harmed  anyone  they  lost  their  fear  of  passing  along
the  road  and  contented  themselves  with  making  the  sign  of
the  cross  on  hearing  the  noise.

One  summer  moonlight  night  a  peasant  was  returning
from  the  neighbouring  market.  Soon  he  heard  the  "  Atchi !  "
of  the  sneezer,  but  it  did  not  alarm  him.  Doubtless  the
goblin  had  nothing  else  to  do,  since  it  pleased  him  to  follow
the  peasant  about  a  quarter  of  a  league,  with  his  incessant
"  Atchi  !  ':  At  last  the  peasant  cried  out,  annoyed  :  "  Will
you  never  finish  sneezing  thus  ?  May  God  bless  you,  you
and  your  cold  !  "  He  had  hardly  said  these  words  when  a
phantom,  garbed  in  a  big  white  robe,  appeared  before  his
eyes  ;  it  was  the  sneezer.  "  Thank  you,  friend  ;  you  have
delivered  me  from  great  suffering.  As  a  result  of  my  sins
God  condemned  me  to  wander  round  this  village,  sneezing
without  rest  from  evening  to  morning,  until  a  charitable
living  man  should  deliver  me  by  saying  *  God  bless  you.'
Many  years  have  passed  since  that  time,  and  for  at  least
five  hundred  years  I  have  come  here,  sneezing  when  I  see  a
traveller.  No  one  has  said  to  me,  '  God  bless  you.'  Happily,
this  evening  I  had  the  good  idea  of  following  you,  and  you
have  delivered  me  for  all  time.  Once  again,  thank  you  and
good-bye."  The  ghost  disappeared  at  once,  and  the  man
reached  Englebelmer,  while  the  sneezer,  freed  from  his  misery,
doubtless  took  the  road  to  heaven.  From  that  day  onwards
the  "  Atchi  !  "  of  the  goblin  was  heard  no  more.

Before  closing  this  appendix  I  would  add  a  few  sneezing
customs  from  primitive  races  in  different  parts  of  the  world.

In  Africa  salutations  of  some  kind  or  other  are  found
from  Tunis  to  Zululand,  and  from  Gambia  to  Somaliland.
In  his  works  on  the  Hausas  of  North  Africa,  Tremearne 1  says
that  after  sneezing  a  man  will  say  "  Thanks  be  to  God  !  "  for
he  considers  that  by  that  act  one  expels  some  bori  which  has
entered  without  his  knowing  it.  In  the  bori  dance,  however,
the  expression  is  avoided,  as  it  is  necessary  for  the  bori  to
enter  the  dancer's  body.

1  A.  J.  N.  Tremearne,  The  Ban  of  the  Bori  [1914],  pp.  79,  288;  Hausa
Superstitions  and  Customs,  1913,  pp.  141,  532.


APPENDIX  I— SNEEZING  SALUTATIONS       313

Among  the  Bakongo 1  it  is,  as  opposed  to  the  Hausa  tribes,
considered  unlucky  for  the  spirit  to  depart  as  it  does  when
one  sneezes,  so  they  say  "  Sazuka  !  "  ("Come  quickly!")
When  a  baby  sneezes  the  mother  calls  out :  "  Come  back
quickly !  "

A  newly  born  Bantu  baby  is  held  in  the  smoke  of  a  slow
fire  of  aromatic  woods  till  it  sneezes  and  coughs,  so  that  the
mother  may  know  it  is  not  bewitched.2

In  West  Africa  a  sneeze  of  a  child  is  of  evil  omen ;  thus
in  old  Calabar3  the  mother  says  :  " Nsa,  nsa,fu  !  "—["May
danger  or  guilt  be]  far  from  you  !  "

The  Zulus  approve  of  sneezing.  It  shows  that  the
idhlozhi  (manes)  are  with  the  sneezer,  and  accordingly
thanks  are  returned.  If  a  child  sneezes  people  say  "  Grow !  "
as  it  is  a  sign  of  health.  Christian  Zulus  say  :  "  Preserve,  look
upon  me  !  "  or  "  Creator  of  Heaven  and  Earth !  " 4

Among  the  Indonesians 5  (i.e.  the  non-Malays  of  the
Eastern  Archipelago)  sneezing  denotes  that  the  "  soul-
substance,"  or  the  vital  force  animating  nature  during  life
on  this  earth,  is  leaving  or  returning  to  the  body.  If  a  child
sneezes  the  mother  utters  a  prayer  lest  a  spirit  take  away
the  "  soul- substance  "  which  has  now  been  removed  from
the  child.  If  a  sick  man  sneezes  it  is  good  luck,  because  it
shows  the  return  of  the  "  soul- substance."  For  the  ordinary
adult  sneezing  is  a  sign  either  that  friends  are  thinking  of
them,  or  that  enemies  want  to  harm  their  "  soul- substance."
In  order,  however,  to  be  on  the  safe  side,  it  is  usual  to  utter
imprecations.

Among  the  Melanesians  and  Polynesians  when  a  man
sneezed  they  thought  that  someone  had  spoken  his  name.
If  he  wished  to  sneeze  and  could  not  do  so,  he  thought  that
someone  meant  to  call  him,  but  was  unable  to  do  so.  If  a
man  was  sick  and  sneezed  they  said  at  once  :  "  Oh,  he  will
live.     The  spirit  [niono]  has  returned  to  him."

The  New  Britain  people  say  "Lalaun!"  ("May  you
live !  ").

1  John  H.  Weeks,  Among  the  Primitive  Bakongo,  1914,  p.  277  ;  Folk-Lore,
vol.  xx,  1909,  p-  59.

2  M.  L.  Hewat,  quoted  in  Folk-Lore,  vol.  xvii,  1906,  p.  250.

3  R.  F.  Burton,  Wit  and  Wisdom  from  West  Africa,  1 865,  p.  373.

4  H.  Callaway,  The  Religious  System  of  the  Amazulu,  p.  222  et  seq.  Natal,
1870.

5  J.  G.  Frazer,  "  Indonesians,"  Hastings'  Ency.  Rel.  Eth.,  vol.  vii,  p.  236.


314  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

The  Samoans  say  " Soifua!  "  ("May  you  live  !  ")  and  the
answer  given  by  the  person  who  sneezes  is  "  ola"  the  common
word  for  life.

The  Fijians  say  "  Bula  !  "  ("  Mav  you  live  !  ")  and  the
answer  given  is  "  Mole!  "  ("  Thanks'"  ).»

In  British  New  Guinea  we  find,  once  again,  that  sneezing
is  a  sign  that  the  soul  is  returning  to  the  body,  and  if  a  man
does  not  sneeze  for  many  weeks  together  his  friends  look  on
it  as  a  grave  symptom.  His  soul,  they  imagine,  must  be  a
very  long  way  off.2

The  Hervey  Islanders  have  the  same  beliefs,  and  in
Rarotonga  when  a  person  sneezes  the  bystanders  exclaim,  as
though  addressing  his  spirit :   "  Ha,  you  have  come  back  !  "  3

Macculloch  4  remarks  that,  in  connection  with  the  idea
that  the  soul  is  entering  or  leaving  the  body  at  sneezing,  it  is
noticeable  that  some  savages  believe  that  it  may  find  an  exit
by  the  nose,  just  as  it  does  by  the  mouth.  Hence  the  nostrils
of  a  dead  or  dying  man  are  sometimes  held  or  closed  (along
with  the  mouth)  to  keep  his  soul  in,  either  to  benefit  the  man
or  to  prevent  its  issuing  forth  and  carrying  off  the  souls  of
others.5  In  Celebes  fish-hooks  are  attached  to  a  sick  man's
nose  to  catch  the  issuing  soul.6  Eskimo  mourners,  or  those
who  prepare  the  body  for  burial,  plug  the  nostrils,  lest  the
soul  should  find  an  exit  and  follow  the  dead.7  Instances
of  a  savage  sleeping  with  nose  and  mouth  covered  to  prevent
the  soul  leaving  are  known.  Again,  as  the  breath  from  the
mouth  may  contaminate  sacred  objects,  so  also  may  the
breath  from  the  nose.  Hence  both  are  covered  in  certain
rites.

1  George  Brown,  Mela?iesians  and  Polynesians,  1910,  p.  240.

2  J.  G.  Frazer,  The  Belief  in  Immortality,  vol.  i,  1913,  p.  194,  quoting
C.  G.  Seligmann,  The  Melanesians  of  British  New  Guinea,  pp.  189-191-

3  W.  W.  Gill,  Myths  and  Songs  from  the  South  Pacific,  p.  177.

4  See  his  article  "  Nose,"  Hastings'  Ency.  Bel.  Eth.,  vol.  ix,  pp.  398,  399,
to  which  I  am  indebted  for  several  useful  references.

5  E.  Modigliani,  Un  viaggio  a  Nias,  Milan,  1890,  p.  283;  M.  Radriguet,
Jjes  derniers  Sauvages,  Paris,  1882,  p.  245  (Marquesans) ;  Annates  de  la
Prop,  de  la  Foi,  xxxii  [i860],  439  (New  Caledonians);  A.  d'Orbigny,  L Homme
Americain,  Strassburg,  1840,  ii,  241,  257  (Itonamas,  Cayuvavas).

r>  Frazer,  Golden  Bough,  vol.  iii,  p.  30.

7  Bulletin  of  American  Museum  of  Nat.  Hist.,  xv  [1901],  part  i,  144;
Rpts.  Bur.  Ethn.,  Washington  (6)  [1888],  p.  613  et  seq.\  Rpls.  Bur.  Ethn.t
Washington  (9)  [1892],  p.  425.


APPENDIX  I— SNEEZING  SALUTATIONS       315

Apart  from  references  already  given,  the  following  are
worthy  of  attention  :  —

Charles  Brisard,  U  titer  nuement,  Lyon  [1896]  ;  Cabanes,
"  Dieu  vous  benisse  !  —  Origine  d'un  dicton,"  Mceurs  intimes
du  passe,  1st  series,  Paris  [1898]  ;  J.  Knott,  "  Origin  of  the
Custom  of  Salutation  after  Sneezing,"  St  Louis  Medical
Review,  1906,  vol.  liv,  pp.  382-384  ;  R.  G.  Haliburton,  New
Materials  for  the  History  of  Man,  Halifax,  Nova  Scotia,  1863.
(The  article  on  sneezing  contained  in  the  latter  reference
originally  appeared  in  the  Nova  Scotia  Inst  Nat.  Sci.,
4th  May  1863.)

R.  E.  Enthoven  gives  interesting  details  of  sneezing
superstitions  in  the  Bombay  Presidency  in  his  Folklore  of
Bombay,  pp.  332-335,  1924.


APPENDIX    II


APPENDIX  II

INDIAN  EUNUCHS

In  order  to  discover  the  different  methods  of  castration
employed  on  the  human  male  in  the  East  from  the  earliest
times,  it  is  necessary  to  examine  the  etymology  of  the  words
used  to  express  the  state  itself  and  the  means  by  which  the
subject  is  reduced  to  that  state.

The  method  of  crushing  (mentioned  in  the  Atharva-Veda,
VI,  cxxxviii,  2)  is  apparent  in  such  words  as  —  Latin,
capo,  "  capon,"  from  Greek,  kotttco,  "  strike  " ;  Greek,
OXaOla?,  OXifBlas,  "  eunuch,"  from  OXdco,  "  crush  " ;  and
Sanskrit,  vadhri,  "  eunuch,"  from  Sanskrit,  vadh,  "  strike."

Cutting  is  shown  in — Latin,  castro,  "castrate,"  from  root
kes,  Sanskrit,  sas,  "cut";  Greek,  to/j.lcl$,  "eunuch,"  from
T€fjLvw,  "cut";  and  Sanskrit,  nirasta,  "castrated,"  from  am,
"  edge  "  or  "  knife."

Finally,  the  operation  of  dragging  appears  to  be  implied
in  such  words  as — Greek,  o-irdScov,  "  eunuch,"  from  cnrdw,
"  drag."

There  still  remains  the  Greek  euvovxps,  from  which  the
best- known  English  term  "  eunuch  "  is  derived.  The  old
etymology  by  which  the  word  means  "  one  who  is  warder
of  the  bed,"  from  euvrj  and  ex^v,  cannot  now  be  accepted.

Jensen  (Zeit.  f.  Assyr.,  i,  20)  regards  ewoi^o?  as  a  loan-
word from  the  Semitic,  the  Hebrew  being  borrowed  from
the  Assyrian  &a  rHi  (rUi),  "  he  who  is  the  head  or  chief."
Campbell  Thompson  tells  me,  however,  that  he  has  recently
come  across  a  word  for  "eunuch"  in  cuneiform  (Cun.  Texts,
xxiii,  10),  su-ut  ri-e-H  (ea  alidi),  "one  who  does  not  beget,"
which  certainly  conveys  what  we  mean  by  "  eunuch."

For  fuller  details  on  the  etymological  side  of  the  subject
see  Schrader,  Reallex.  der  indogerm.  Altertumskunde,  Strass-
burg,  1901,  p.  919  ;  Hirt,  Indogermanen,  Strassburg,  1905-
1907,  pp.  291,  658 ;  and  Louis  H.  Gray,  "Eunuch,"  Hastings'
Ency.  Eel,  Eth.,  vol.  v,  p.  579.

The  derivations  of  the  terms  connected  with  castration
clearly  show  their  Oriental  origin,  but  where  in  the  East  the
319


320  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

practice  actually  started  is  unknown,  although  Mesopotamia
is  usually  considered  to  have  been  its  first  home.  It  was
known  in  Assyria,  Israel,  Ethiopia,  Egypt,  Persia,  India,
China,  Greece  and  Rome.  (See  the  list  of  references  at  the
end  of  this  appendix.)

In  ancient  India  the  social  status  of  the  eunuch  was  of
the  very  lowest.  Thus  we  read  in  the  Mahdbhdrata  (VIII,
xlv,  25)  :

"  Mlechchhas  [barbarians,  non- Aryans]  are  the  dirt  of
humanity ;  oil-men  are  the  dirt  of  Mlechchhas ;  eunuchs  are
the  dirt  of  oil-men  ;  and  they  who  appoint  Kshatriyas  as
priests  in  their  sacrifices  are  the  dirt  of  eunuchs."

The  following  references  to  eunuchs  are  taken  from  the
article  by  Gray  (op.  cit.,  pp.  582-583).

A  eunuch,  or  "long-haired  man,"  is  neither  man  nor
woman  (Satapatha  Brdhmana,  V,  i,  2,  14 ;  IV,  1,  1/. ;
XII,  vii,  2,  12 ;  cf.  Mahdbhdrata,  v,  clx,  115  ;  and  the
references  given  by  Bloomfield,  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,
xlii,  538  et  seq.),  and  there  is  reason  to  believe  that  they
ministered  to  unnatural  sensuality  (R.  Schmidt,  Beitrdge
zur  indischen  Erotik,  Leipzig,  1902,  p.  211).  They  could  not
inherit  property  (Apastamba  Dharma  Sdstra,  II,  vi,  14,  1  ;
Gautama  D.  S.,  xxviii,  43 ;  Vdsishtha  D.  S.,  xvii,  53
et  seq.),  and  were  to  be  maintained  by  the  king,  who  was
to  take  what  would  have  been  their  inheritance  if  they
had  been  normal  men  (Vdsishtha  D.  8.,  xix,  35  et  seq.).
They  were  excluded  from  the  srdddha,  or  sacrifice  to  the
manes  (Manu,  hi,  165),  of  which  they  were  unworthy  (ib.,  hi,
150),  even  as  they  were  unfit  for  the  ordeal  by  sacred  libation
(Ndrada  D.  S.9  i,  332).  No  Brahman  might  eat  of  a  sacrifice
performed  by  eunuchs  (Manu,  iv,  205  et  seq.),  nor  might  he
consume  any  food  prepared  by  them  (ib.,  iv,  211  ;  Vdsishtha
D.  S.9  xiv,  2  ;  Apastamba  D.  S.9  I,  vi,  18,  27 ;  19,  15),  nor
accept  alms  offered  by  them  (Vdsishtha  D.  S.9  xiv,  19).
They  were  forbidden  to  serve  as  witnesses  (Ndrada  D.  S.9
i,  179)  and  were  deemed  incapable  of  keeping  a  secret
(Milindapanhd,  IV,  i,  6).  In  contempt  for  their  effeminacy
they  might  not  be  struck  in  battle  (Manu,  vii,  19),  a  special
penalty  being  imposed  for  killing  them  (ib.,  xi,  134  ;  Gautama
D.  8.9  xxii,  23).  Being  sterile,  and  so  essentially  ill-omened,
the  very  sight  of  them  was  defiling  (Manu,  hi,  239  et  seq.)9
and  they  were  forbidden  to  be  near  the  king  during  his
consultations    (Mahdbhdrata,    xii,     lxxxiii,    55),    while    the


APPENDIX  II— INDIAN  EUNUCHS  321

neat-herd  Ganja  laments  (Temple,  Legends  of  the  Panjdb,
Bombay,  1884-1900,  ii,  396) :  "  When  I  was  in  my  mother's
womb  eunuchs  danced  at  the  door ;  and  so  I  am  lame,  and
have  no  hair  on  my  head."

A  eunuch  might  not  be  converted  (Milindapanhd,  IV,
vii,  53),  nor  might  he  be  ordained  (Mahdvagga,  i,  61),  and
a  bhikkhu  was  forbidden  to  castrate  himself  (Chullavagga,
v,  7).  Eunuchs  were  permitted  to  marry  (Manu,  ix,  79,  204).
Dancers,  who  are  of  low  caste  in  India,  were  castrated
(Mahdbhdrata,  iii,  xlvi,  50),  and  the  dancing  of  eunuchs  is
already  referred  to  in  Atharva-Veda,  viii,  vi,  11.  In  the
purushamedha,  or  human  sacrifice  of  the  Vedic  period,  a
eunuch  was  the  victim  offered  to  Misfortune  [Papman]  and
— in  this  case  the  victim  being  neither  of  Brahman  nor  of
Siidra  caste — to  Prajapati  (Vdjasaneya  Samh.,  xxx,  5,  22).


In  modern  India,  although  dwindling  in  numbers,  there
still  exist  classes  of  eunuchs  forming  separate  communities.
The  most  widely  known  name  under  which  they  go  is  Hijra
or  Hijda,  but  numerous  other  names  are  found  in  different
parts  of  India.  Thus  in  the  North- West  Provinces  they  are
also  known  as  Mukhannas  ;  in  the  Bombay  Presidency  as
Pavayas  or  Fatadas  ;  in  the  Central  Provinces  as  Khasua  ;
and  in  Madras  as  Khoja.  In  some  states  where  two  distinct
names  are  in  use  it  has  been  suggested  that  one  of  them
applies  to  natural  and  the  other  to  artificially  created  eunuchs,
but  such  a  division  seems  arbitrary  to  a  great  extent.  For
instance,  in  Saugor  it  is  said  that  the  Hijras  are  artificial
eunuchs,  while  in  Madras  it  is  they  who  are  the  natural  ones.
The  point  is,  however,  not  an  important  one.

The  origin  of  the  eunuch  class  in  India  is  wrapped  up  in
legend,  as  is  the  case  with  so  many  tribes  and  castes.  In
Gujarat  tradition  has  it  that  they  are  the  castrated  votaries
of  the  goddess  Bouchera,  Behechra,  or  Bahuchara,  who  was  a
sister  of  Devi.  She  is  supposed  to  be  the  spirit  of  a  martyred
Charan  or  Bhat  woman.  Some  Charan  women  were  once
travelling  from  Sulkhanpur  to  a  neighbouring  village  when
they  were  attacked  and  plundered  by  Kolis.  One  of  the
women,  whose  name  was  Bahuchara,  snatched  a  sword  from  a
boy  who  attended  her  and  with  it  cut  off  both  her  breasts.  She
immediately  perished  and  her  two  sisters  committed  suicide.
vol.  in.  x


322  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

All  three  became  Devis  and  were  worshipped  in  different
places.

Bahuchara  was  chiefly  venerated  at  Chunval,  and  as
she  became  deified  through  self- mutilation,  so  her  votaries
emasculate  themselves,  and  by  wearing  female  clothes  and
adopting  feminine  manners  try  to  make  themselves  as  near
as  they  can  to  their  goddess,  not  only  in  dress,  but  also
sexually.

For  a  short  account  of  the  Pavaya  eunuchs  see  A.  K.
Forbes,  Rds  Mala  (new  edition  by  Rawlinson,  1924),  vol.  ii,
pp.  95-99.

We  get  further  details  of  the  origin  and  initiation  rites
of  the  Pavayas  in  Enthoven's  Tribes  and  Castes  of  Bombay,
vol.  iii,  1922,  p.  226  et  seq.  (largely  taken  from  the  Bombay
Gazetteer,  vol.  ix,  pt.  i,  pp.  506-507).

In  Al^medabad,  Panch  Mahals,  Kathiawar,  Cutch  and
Khandesh  the  Pavaya  caste  is  found  in  small  numbers.
They  are  recruited  from  both  Hindus  and  Musalmans,  who
consider  themselves  the  creatures,  or  rather  the  temples
or  houses,  of  the  goddess  Bahucharaji.  Except  that  they
do  not  dine  together,  Pavayas  from  Hindu  and  Musalman
families  bear  a  close  resemblance.  According  to  their
traditions  a  king  of  Champaner  named  Baria  was  unhappy
because  he  had  no  son.  He  was  a  devout  worshipper  of  the
goddess  Bahucharaji,  and  through  her  favour  a  son  was  born
to  him  and  named  Jeto.  This  Jeto  was  born  impotent,  and
Baria,  out  of  respect  to  the  goddess  through  whose  favour
the  son  was  obtained,  set  him  apart  for  her  service.
Bahucharaji  appeared  to  Jeto  in  a  dream  and  told  him  to
cut  off  his  private  parts  and  dress  himself  as  a  woman.
Jeto  obeyed  the  goddess,  and  this  practice  has  since  been
followed  by  all  who  join  the  caste.

Impotence  is  an  indispensable  qualification  for  admis-
sion into  the  caste.  When  an  impotent  man  desires  to  be
admitted  he  applies  to  one  of  the  Pavayas,  who  breathes  into
his  right  ear,  bores  both  ears  with  the  point  of  a  needle,
and  administers  to  him  a  solemn  oath  never  to  steal  and
never  to  act  as  a  procurator  to  any  woman.  The  novice  is
then  admitted  on  probation.  He  eats  coarse  sugar,  puts
on  women's  clothes,  receives  a  new  name,  generally  ending
in  "de,"  such  as  Dhanade,  Jhinide,  Ladude  and  Khimde.
The  probationary  period  lasts  from  six  to  twelve  months,
during  which  the  conduct  of  the  novice  is  carefully  watched


APPENDIX  II— INDIAN  EUNUCHS  323

and  the  fact  of  his  impotence  thoroughly  tested.  When
impotence  is  established  the  next  ceremony  is  emasculation.
For  this  purpose  the  novice  bathes,  dresses  himself  in  clean
clothes  and  worships  the  image  of  the  goddess.  He  prays  to
her  to  grant  a  propitious  day  for  the  operation.  It  is  believed
that  if  the  operation  is  performed  on  a  day  approved  by  the
goddess  the  result  is  seldom  fatal.  Behind  a  screen  set  up
for  the  purpose  the  cutting  is  performed  with  a  razor  by
the  person  himself,  without  any  assistance.  This  is  held  to
correspond  to  a  birth- ceremony,  which  makes  the  patient  a
member  of  the  caste.  After  the  operation  the  patient  lies
for  three  days  on  a  cot  on  his  back  without  moving.  During
that  time  thirty  pounds  of  sesame  oil  is  continuously  poured
on  the  parts  affected.  For  ten  days  more,  or  till  the  wound
is  healed,  it  is  washed  with  a  decoction  of  the  bor  (Zizyphus
jujuba)  and  babul  {Acacia  arabica)  bark.  On  the  sixth  day
after  the  operation  coarse  flour  mixed  with  molasses  and
clarified  butter  is  distributed  among  the  caste  people.  The
patient  remains  screened  for  forty  days,  during  which  he
eats  light  food.  Clarified  butter  is  his  chief  nourishment,
and  he  is  forbidden  the  use  of  red  pepper,  oil  and  asafcetida.

In  1880  the  Gaikwar  of  Baroda  forbade  castration  in  his
state,  to  the  great  sorrow  of  the  Pavayas,  who  say  that
by  thus  remaining  in  their  natural  condition  they  displease
the  goddess,  and  that  during  seven  lives  they  will  remain
impotent  as  a  punishment  for  failing  to  sacrifice  the  useless
member.

The  Pavayas  keep  images  of  Bahucharaji  in  their  homes
and  worship  them  daily,  and  when  on  begging  tours  are
careful  to  visit  her  shrines  in  the  Chunval.  They  keep  both
Hindu  and  Musalman  holidays.

They  bury  their  dead.  After  death  the  body  is  washed
and  laid  on  a  cot  covered  with  a  sheet  and  perfumed.  The
body  is  shrouded  in  a  clean  coverlet  for  burial.  As  they  are
neither  males  nor  females  they  do  not  touch  the  coffin,  which
is  carried,  and  the  burying  performed,  by  Musalmans,  the
companions  of  the  dead  standing  by  mourning.  On  the
dasa  or  tenth  day  and  on  the  chdlisa  or  fortieth  day  after  a
death  the  dearest  companion  of  the  deceased  is  bound,  on
pain  of  expulsion,  to  feed  the  caste-people  and  the  Musalman
bier-bearers.     A  tomb  is  raised  over  the  dead.

Pavayas  live  as  beggars,  singing  the  praise  of  their  patron
goddess  Bahucharaji.      In  begging  they  stand  in   front   of


324  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

some  villager,  clap  their  hands  and  offer  the  usual  blessing  :
"  May  mother  Bahucharaji  do  you  and  your  children  good,"
or  "A.do  Bhavani "— that  is,  "Rise,  goddess  Bhavani."
If  anyone  fails  to  give  them  alms  they  abuse  him,  and  if
abuse  fails  they  strip  themselves  naked,  a  result  which  is
greatly  dreaded,  as  it  is  believed  to  bring  dire  calamity.
They  beg  in  bands  on  certain  beats  and  receive  fixed  yearly
dues  in  kind  or  in  cash  from  shopkeepers,  carpenters,  tailors,
shoemakers,  goldsmiths,  Lohars,  etc.  They  also  receive  fees
from  every  Kunbi  on  the  birth  of  a  son,  and  in  most  parts  of
Gujarat  when  a  son  is  born  to  a  barren  woman,  or  to  a  woman
who  has  had  no  male  issue,  Pavayas  are  called  in  and  made
to  dance  in  front  of  the  house.

In  the  Bombay  Gazetteer,  vol.  ix,  1899,  pt.  ii,  pp.  21-22,
we  get  a  rather  different  and  more  detailed  account  of  the
initiation  ceremony.

It  takes  place  at  the  temple  of  the  goddess  Behechra,
about  sixty  miles  north-east  of  A^medabad,  in  the  village  of
Sulkhanpur,  where  the  neophyte  repairs  under  the  guardian-
ship or  adoption  of  some  older  member  of  the  brotherhood.
The  lad  is  called  the  daughter  of  the  old  Hijda,  his  guardian.
The  emasculation  takes  place  under  the  direction  of  the  chief
Hijda  priest  of  Behechra.  The  rites  are  secret.  It  is  said
that  the  operation  and  initiation  are  held  in  a  house  with
closed  doors,  where  all  the  Hijdas  meet  in  holiday  dress.
The  fireplace  is  cleaned  and  the  fire  is  lighted  to  cook  a  special
dish  of  fried  pastry  called  talan.  While  the  oil  in  which  the
pastry  is  to  be  fried  is  boiling,  some  of  the  fraternity,  after
having  bathed  the  neophyte,  dress  him  in  red  female  attire,
deck  him  with  flower-garlands,  and,  seating  him  on  a  stool
in  the  middle  of  the  room,  sing  to  the  accompaniment  of
a  dhol  or  small  drum  and  small  copper  cymbals.  Others
prepare  the  operating-room.  In  the  centre  of  this  room
soft  ashes  are  spread  on  the  floor  and  piled  in  a  heap.  The
operator  approaches  chewing  betel-leaf.  The  hands  and  legs
of  the  neophyte  are  firmly  held  by  some  one  of  the  fraternity,
and  the  operator,  carelessly  standing  near  with  an  uncon-
cerned air,  when  he  finds  the  attention  of  his  patient  other-
wise occupied,  with  great  dexterity  and  with  one  stroke
completely  cuts  off  the  entire  genital  organs.  He  spits
betel  nut  and  leaf  juice  on  the  wound  and  stanches  the
bleeding  with  a  handful  of  babul  (Acacia  arabica)  ashes.
The  operation  is  dangerous  and  is  not  uncommonly  fatal.


APPENDIX  II— INDIAN  EUNUCHS  325

Some  North  Gujarat  Hijdas,  though  they  hold  themselves
devotees  of  Behechra,  neither  suffer  emasculation  nor  wear
women's  dress.  They  affect  only  the  mincing  talk  and
manners  of  lewd  women.  They  marry  and  beget  children,
and  are  Hijdas  only  in  name.  They  also  perform  plays  at
the  birth  of  sons  among  the  poorer  Musalmans.  Hijdas  of
the  play-acting  class  are  to  be  found  in  and  about  Ahmeda-
bad.  As  a  class  Gujarat  Hijdas  enjoying  independent  means
of  livelihood  have  not  to  engage  in  sodomy  to  any  active
extent.  As  votaries  of  Behechra  they  hold  fields  and
lands,  and  rights  on  lands  awarded  to  them  from  of  old
by  native  chiefs,  village  communities  and  private  persons.
They  have  rights  on  communities  also,  receiving  yearly
payments  from  them.  Woe  betide  the  wight  who  opposes
the  demands  of  a  Hljda  !  The  whole  rank  and  file  of  the
local  fraternity  besiege  his  house  with  indecent  clamour  and
gesture.

A  few  extra  details  will  be  found  in  Russell,  Tribes  and
Castes  of  the  Central  Provinces,  vol.  hi,  pp.  206-209  ;  Crooke,
Tribes  and  Castes  of  the  North- Western  Provinces  and  Oudh,
vol.  ii,  p.  495  ;  and  H.  Ebden,  "  A  Few  Notes,  with  refer-
ence to  '  The  Eunuchs  '  to  be  found  in  the  large  Households
of  the  State  of  Rajpootana,"  The  Indian  Annals  of  Medical
Science,  April  1856,  No.  vi,  p.  520  et  seq.

In  Southern  India  the  eunuch  caste  is  practically  non-
existent, and  even  in  1870  the  numbers  were  only  small.

There  is  an  interesting  article  by  J.  Shortt  on  the  "  Kojahs
[sic]  of  Southern  India  "  in  the  Journ.  Anth.  Inst.,  vol.  ii,
1873,  pp.  402-407.  It  was  largely  used  by  Thurston  in  his
"  Kh5ja  "  article,  Castes  and  Tribes  of  Southern  India,
vol.  hi,  p.  288  et  seq.,  the  medical  details  being,  however,
mostly  omitted.

A  few  extracts  from  Shortt 's  article  will  serve  as  an
interesting  comparison  "to  the  description  already  given  in
this  appendix  :

"  The  true  Kojahs,  or  eunuchs,  are  chiefly  seen  in  the
houses  of  wealthy  Mussulman  nobles,  by  whom  they  are
placed  at  the  head  of  their  zenanas  or  harems.  Sometimes
they  hold  important  charges  with  a  considerable  amount  of
general  control.  The  ladies  of  the  harem  look  upon  them
as  their  confidential  advisers  in  all  matters  relating  to  their
personal  concerns,  whilst  to  them  is  left  the  entire  manage-


326  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

ment,  arrangement,  and  supplies,  etc.,  of  the  interior.  In
fact,  all  that  concerns  the  female  apartment  is  confided  to
their  care."

The  description  of  the  initiatory  rites  is  very  similar  to
that  practised  in  Gujarat,  but  we  get  fresh  details  of  their
clothing  and  behaviour:

"  The  hair  of  the  head  is  put  up  like  women,  well  oiled,
combed,  and  thrown  back,  tied  into  a  knot,  and  shelved  to
the  left  side,  sometimes  plaited,  ornamented,  and  allowed
to  hang  down  the  back ;  the  whiskers,  moustache  and  beard
closely  shaven.  They  wear  the  cholee  or  short  jacket,  the
saree  or  petticoat,  with  an  apron  or  scarf  which  they  wrap
around  the  shoulders  and  waist,  and  put  on  an  abundance  of
nose,  ear,  finger  and  toe  rings.  They  cultivate  singing,  play
the  dhole,  a  country  drum  of  an  oblong  shape,  and  attitudinize.
They  go  about  the  bazaars  in  groups  of  half-a-dozen  or  more,
singing  songs  with  the  hope  of  receiving  a  trifle.  They  are
not  only  persistent  but  impudent  beggars,  rude  and  vulgar
in  the  extreme,  singing  filthy,  obscene,  and  abusive  songs
to  compel  the  bazaarmen  to  give  them  something.  Should
they  not  succeed  they  would  create  a  fire  and  throw  in  a  lot
of  chillies,  the  suffocating  and  irritative  smoke  producing
violent  coughing,  etc.,  so  that  the  bazaarmen  are  compelled
to  yield  to  their  importunity  and  give  them  a  trifle  to  get
rid  of  their  annoyance,  as  they  are  not  only  unable  to  retain
their  seats  in  the  bazaars,  but  customers  are  prevented  from
coming  to  them  in  consequence.  With  the  douceur  they
get  they  will  move  off  to  the  next  bazaar  to  resume  the
trick.  While  such  were  the  pursuits  in  the  day,  at  nightfall
they  resorted  to  debauchery  and  low  practices  by  hiring
themselves  out  to  a  dissipated  set  of  Moslems,  who  are
in  the  habit  of  resorting  to  these  people  for  the  purpose,
whilst  they  intoxicate  themselves  with  a  preparation  termed
majoon,  being  a  confection  of  opium  and  a  kind  of  drink
termed  boja,  a  species  of  country  beer  manufactured  from
raji,  which  also  contains  bang  ;  in  addition  to  this  they
smoke  bang.  The  Higras  are  met  with  in  most  of  the  towns
of  southern  India,  more  especially  where  a  large  proportion
of  Mussulmans  is  found."

In  Vol.  I,  p.  255  et  seq.9  we  read  some  account  of  the
dedication  of  basivis,  who  through  their  dedication  to  a
deity  assume  masculine  privileges.  There  is  one  goddess,
Huligamma,  to  whom  are  dedicated   not  only  basivis,  but


APPENDIX  II— INDIAN  EUNUCHS  327

also  men  who  are  born  as  eunuchs  or  are  in  some  way
malformed.  They  dress  exactly  as  women  and  might  easily
be  mistaken  for  women.  Fawcett  (Journ.  Anth.  Soc.  Bomb.,
1890-1892,  p.  343),  writing  in  1891,  says  that  numbers  of
them  may  be  seen  at  the  goddess'  temple  on  the  left  bank
of  the  Tungabhadra  river,  Raichur,  in  the  Nizam's  territory.
They  carry  on  the  head  a  circular  basket,  in  the  centre  of
which  is  a  kind  of  kalisam,  representing  the  goddess,  and
hung  about  it  and  in  it  are  various  feminine  ornaments
and  toilet  gear.

Men  who  believe  themselves  temporarily  or  permanently
impotent,  as  a  form  of  vow  assume  female  attire  in  the  name
of  the  goddess  in  the  hope  of  restoration  of  virile  power,  and
in  many  cases,  as  is  only  natural,  this  manifests  itself  sooner
or  later.


After  reading  the  above  account  of  Indian  eunuchs  the
reader  will  at  once  be  struck  with  the  similarity  to  the  Galli,
the  eunuch  priests  of  Artemis  of  Ephesus  and  the  Syrian
Astarte  of  Hierapolis.

They  too  attempted  to  make  themselves  as  much  like
their  goddess  as  they  could.  The  account  given  by  Lucian
(De  Dea  Syria,  50,  51)  is  very  curious.

"  On  certain  days,"  says  Lucian,  "  a  multitude  flocks
into  the  temple,  and  the  Galli  in  great  numbers,  sacred  as
they  are,  perform  the  ceremonies  of  the  men  and  gash  their
arms  and  turn  their  backs  to  be  lashed.  Many  bystanders
play  on  the  pipes  the  while  many  beat  drums  ;  others  sing
divine  and  sacred  songs.  All  this  performance  takes  place
outside  the  temple,  and  those  engaged  in  the  ceremony  enter
not  into  the  temple.

"During  these  days  they  are  made  Galli.  As  the  Galli
sing  and  celebrate  their  orgies,  frenzy  falls  on  many  of  them,
and  many  who  had  come  as  mere  spectators  afterwards  are
found  to  have  committed  the  great  act.  I  will  narrate  what
they  do.  Any  young  man  who  has  resolved  on  this  action
strips  off  his  clothes,  and  with  a  loud  shout  bursts  into  the
midst  of  the  crowd,  and  picks  up  a  sword  from  a  number  of
swords  which  I  suppose  have  been  kept  ready  for  many  years
for  this  purpose.  He  takes  it  and  castrates  himself  and  then
runs  wild  through  the  city,  bearing  in  his  hands  what  he  has


328  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

cut  off.  He  casts  it  into  any  house  at  will,  and  from  this
house  he  receives  women's  raiment  and  ornaments.  Thus
they  act  during  their  ceremonies  of  castration."  (See  Strong
and  Garstang's  The  Syrian  Goddess,  1913,  pp.  84-85,  and
Frazer,  Golden  Bough,  vol.  v,  p.  269  et  seq.)

Louis  Gray  (op.  cit.,  p.  582)  gives  the  various  theories  as
to  the  explanation  of  the  self- mutilation  of  Attis,  but  con-
siders that  the  only  one  which  seems  to  fit  the  facts  is  that  of
Farnell,  Cult  of  the  Greek  States,  vol.  iii,  p.  300  et  seq.  :

"  Even  the  self- mutilation  necessary  for  the  attainment
of  the  status  of  the  eunuch- priest  may  have  arisen  from  the
ecstatic  craving  to  assimilate  oneself  to  the  goddess  and
to  charge  oneself  with  her  power,  the  female  dress  being
therefore  assumed  to  complete  the  transformation."

Although  space  will  not  permit  my  discussing  the  amazing
history  of  Chinese  and  African  eunuchs,  I  herewith  append  a
bibliography  on  the  subject  which  may  be  of  use  to  those
wishing  to  pursue  it  further.

General. — [Ancillon,  C]  Traite  des  Euneuques,  dans
leqnel  on  explique  toutes  les  differ 'entes  sortes  d' euneuques,  etc.,
1707 ;  P[ierre]  P[ierrugues],  Glossarium  Eroticum  Linguae
Latince,  Parisiis,  1826,  under  "  Eunuchus,"  etc.,  pp.  198-201  ;
"  Outidanos  "  [Sir  R.  F.  Burton]  and  "  Neaniskos  "  [L.  S.
Smithers],  Priapeia,  1890,  pp.  16,  54 ;  R.  F.  Burton,
Thousand  Nights  and  a  Night,  vol.  i,  pp.  132ft5,  283ft2 ;  vol.  ii,
p.  50n3 ;  vol.  v,  p.  46ft1  ;  Supp.,  vol.  i,  pp.  70ft1,  71ft,  72ft ;
E.  B.  Tylor,  "  Eunuch,"  Ency.  Brit,  vol.  ix,  p.  890  ;  Have-
lock  Ellis,  Studies  in  the  Psychology  of  Sex,  vol.  ii,  pp.  327-
328  ;  vol.  iii,  pp.  9-10,  237-238  ;  vol.  v,  pp.  183-184 ;
vol.  vi,  pp.  612-614  ;  Remondino,  History  of  Circumcision,
1891,  pp.  82-104  ;  Westermarck,  Origin  and  Development  of
the  Moral  Ideas,  vol.  ii,  pp.  408,  414,  488ft6 ;  Frazer,  Golden
Bough,  vol.  i,  p.  38  ;  vol.  ii,  pp.  144-145  ;  vol.  v,  pp.  206,
269,  270ft2,  278,  283  ;  vol.  vi,  pp.  258,  272  ;  vol.  x,  p.  430  ;
H.  H.  Ploss,  Das  Kind,  Leipzig,  1884,  vol.  i,  p.  340;
vol.  ii,  p.  418 ;  C.  Rieger,  Kastration  in  rechtlicher,%  socialer
und  vitaler  Hinsicht,  Jena,  1911  ;  P.  J.  Mobius,  Vbw  die
Wirkungen  der  Kastration,  Halle,  1903.

Classical.  —Herodotus,  iii,  48  ;  viii,  105 ;  Xenophon,
Cyrop.,  VII,  v,  60-65 ;  Martial,  iii,  24,  58,  81 ;  vi,  2,  67 ;  xi,
81 ;  Juvenal,  i,  22 ;  vi,  365-366 ;  Seneca,  De  Matrimonio,
ed.  Hase,  p.  429 ;  Ammianus  Marcellinus,  XIV,  vi,  17.

Biblical.  —  Deut.    xxiii,    1;    2    Kings  ix,    32;    xx,   18;


APPENDIX  II— INDIAN  EUNUCHS  329

Isaiah  lvi,  3 ;  xxxix,  7 ;  Jerem.  Hi,  25  ;  xxix,  2  ;   Dan.  i,  3  ;
Matt,  xix,  12  ;  Acts  viii,  27.

Various.  — Assyria :  Jensen,  Zeitschrift  fur  Assyriologie,
vol.  xxiv,  1910,  p.  109ft1  ;  Klauber,  "  Assyr.  Beamtentum,"
Leipziger  sent.  Studien,  vol.  v,  3,  1910,  p.  117.  Persia  :
Brisson,  De  Regio  Persarum  Principatu,  ed.  Lederlin,  Strass-
burg,  1710.  Egypt :  Rawlinson,  History  of  Ancient  Egypt,
1881,  chap,  xxii  ;  A.  von  Kremer,  JEgypten,  1863,  vol.  u,
pp.  87-89 ;  Quatremere,  Hist,  des  sultans  mamlouks  de
VEgypte,  Paris,  1837,  vol.  i,  2,  p.  132.  Rome:  Gibbon,
chaps,  vii,  xix,  xxxii,  xxxiii.  China :  Yule  and  Cordier,
The  Book  of  Ser  Marco  Polo,  vol.  ii,  pp.  115-116  ;  ditto,
Cathay  and  the  Way  Thither,  vol.  iv,  p.  82  ;  Dames,  Book  of
Duarte  Barbosa,  vol.  ii,  p.  147  ;  Stent,  "  Chinese  Eunuchs,"
Journ.  North  China  Branch  Boy.  As.  Soc,  N.S.,  xi,  1877,
pp.  143-184  ;  J.  J.  Matignon,  Superstition,  Crime,  et  Misere
en  Chine,  "Les  Eunuques  du  Palais  Imperial  de  Pekin,"
1901;  "Eunuchs  of  the  Imperial  Palace,"  T(u  Shu  Chi
Ch'Sng  (The  Chinese  Encyclopaedia),  x,  121-140;  Muslim:
Muradja  d'Ohsson,  Tableau  gen.  de  V Empire  othoman,
Paris,  1820,  iii,  302-304 ;  C.  Snouck  Hurgronje,  Mekka,  1889,
vol.  ii,  p.  24.


INDEX  I

SANSKRIT  WORDS  AND  PROPER  NAMES


The  n  stands  for  "  note"  and  the  index  number  refers  to  the  number  of  the  note.     If  there
is  no  index  number  to  the  n  it  refers  to  a  note  carried  over  from  a  previous  page.


"  Abaraschika,"     ejaculation

of,  63
Abbott,    G.    F.,    Macedonian

Folk-Lore,  310,  310ft4
A  ben  Gabirol,  59
Abhavad,  148ft5
Abhavan,  148n5
A.bhimanyu,      brother      of

Arjuna,  66
Abhyagat,  144ft1
Abu     Karib,      Governor     of

Hajar  or  Bahrayn,  278
Acacia  arabica  (babul),  323,  324
Achelous  and  Hercules,  191ft1
Adhikasangama,  Queen,  263,

264
Adityaprabha,  274,  275
Aelian,  116ft
.Esop,  250

Africa,  cross-roads  in,  38
Agni  (God  of  Fire),  13,  228ft2
Agnisikha,  Rakshasa  named,

222-231
Ahalya,  126
Ahavariiya,    one    of   the   five

Vedic  fires,  160ft1
Ahichchhatra,  29
Ahmedabad,       161ft1,       324;

Pavayas  in,  322
Airavata,  170ft2
Ajara,  King,  145, 146, 148, 149
Al-Barraqa,    white    city    of,

260ft1
Al-Hira,     'Anir     ibn     Hind,

King  of,  278
Al-Jazari,   Kitab  f*i   ma'rifat

al-hiyal  al-handasiya  ( ' '  Book

of  the   Knowledge  of  In-
genious Contrivances  "),  58
Al-Mutalammis,  277-279
Al-zamar  (al-chamar),  hair  of

which  fly-whisks  are  made,

84ft1
Alaka  (the  city  of  Kuvera),

148,  263,  263ft1
Alankaraprabha,  156-158, 163-

165

331


Albertus  Magnus,  56
Alcams,  127
Alcmenes,  127
Alexandria,  Cosmas  of,  Topo-

graphia  Christiana,  84ft1,  85ft
Alexandria,  virgin    Lucia    of

Bologna  or,  20ft1
Allahabad     (Prayaga),     90ft1,

97ft1
Alphonsus,    Disciplina    Cleri-

calis,  118ft1
Amaragupta,      minister      of

Vikramasinha,  12
Amaravati,  66

Amba  and  Ambalika,  grand-
mothers of  the  Kurus  and

Pandus,  65
Ambika      (Durga,      Parvatl,

Gauri,  etc.),  64,  130, 130ft2,

266,  266ft1
Ammianus  Marcellinus,  328
Amoghasiddha,  Tara,  wife  of

the  Buddha,  2ft2
Amphidromia  at  Athens,  132ft
Amphitryon,  legend  of,  127
'Amr  ibn  Hind,  King  of  al-

Hira,  278
Am'rita  (nectar),   176,    176ft1,

253ft1,  298,  298ft1
Amritalata,  171
Ananda,     physician     named,
_  40,  41
Ananda-ramdyana,  the  "  Sara-

Kanda,"  201*
Ancillon,     C,     Traite    des

Euneuques,    dans    lequel    on

explique  toutes  les  differentes

sortes  d'euneuques,  328
Andromeda,      Perseus     and,

268ft1
Anichchhasena,  264,  270-272,

275
Aniruddha,  story  of  Ushaand,

81-83
Anita  (a  hook),  14ft1
Anonymous,       Ophiolatreia,

142ft1


Antarvedi,  93

Anteia      and      Bellerophon,

story  of,  277
Antoninus  Pius,  287ft3
Anuragapara,   184,    185,   186,

188,  189,  193,  195-199
Anvar-i-Suhaiti,  the,  126^
Apastamba     Dharma     Sastra,

the,  320
Aphrodite,     breasts    cut    off

out  of  devotion  to,  21ft ;  a

personification  of  the  man-
drake or  love-apple,  153
Apsaras,  36,   138;  conceived

by  Taradatta,  6  ;  king  falls

in  love  with  a,  25;  Menaka,

97,  98;  Surabhidatta,  5-6
Apsarases,  5,  64
Apuleius,  Golden  Ass,  226ft2,

285ft1,  311ft1
Ardha-narisvara,  form  of  Siva,

163ft*
Argha  or  arghya,  an  oblation

called,   53,    53ft1,  98,  254,

254ft1
Argonauts,  the,  56
Ariosto,       Orlando      Furioso,

167ft2
Ariston,  126,  127
Aristotle,  Problemata,  310ft1
Arjuna  of  the  Pandava  race,

66,  113,  228ft2
Arnobius    Orestes,     Adversus
_  Gentes.  21ft

Arsi  (small  mirror),  100ft1
Artemis  of  Ephesus,  327
Arthalobha  and  his  beautiful

wife,  story  of,  286-290
Arthasdstra,      the,      Kautilya

(trans.  Shamasastry),  142ft2
Arundhati,  7,  36
Asanhita     ("without     any

scruple"),  96ft1
Ashbjornsen,        Norwegian

tales,  237
Ashem-vohu  (formula  in  praise

of  righteousness),  307


332


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


Asoka,  142m1

Asoka-tree,  155

Asri  (edge  or  knife),  319

Astarte  of  Hierapolis,  327

Astrabacus,  127

Asura    Bana,    the,    81,    83;

Mahisha,  186;    Maya,    27,

39,  40,  43,  65,  74,  87,  93,

138,  139,  282,  282na
Asuras    (usually    enemies    of

the  gods),  26,  40,  66,  82,

120
Asvins.    the    two,    253.    254,

257-258,  272m1
Atalanta     and     the     golden

apples      of      Hippomenes,

238
Atharva-Feda,  the,  30m1,  50m1,

142,  319,  321
Athenseus,  82m2,  207m2
Athens,  the  Amphidromia  at,

132m
Attis,  self-mutilation  of,  328
Australia,  Ngarigo  and  Thed-

dora  tribes  of  S.E.,  151
Avanti,  11
Avasathija,   one    of    the    five

Vedic  fires,  160m1
Ayasolekha,    219,    221,    233,

234

Babul   {Acacia    arabica),    323,

324
Babylon,  Zohak  giant  keeper

of  the  caves  of,  150
Bacon,  Roger,  56;  invention

of  gunpowder  by,  161m1
Badger,    G.     P.,    Travels    of

Ludovico  di  Varthcma,  201,

202
Baganda,      fear      of     ghosts

among  the,  38
Bahdr-i-Danish,  the,  126
Bahrayn,  278
Bahubala,    King,    282,    284,

286,  289
Bahuchara,  the  goddess,  321
Bahucharajl,     the     goddess,

322-324
Bakonga,    sneezing    customs

among  the,  313
Bali,  disease-transference  in,

38
Bana,  12

Bana,  the  Asura,  81,  83
BandhamochinI    the     witch,

194-195
Bandhu,  or  cognate  kindred,

46m1
Bandhudatta      and      Somas-

vamin,  190-195


Bandhuka,  lips  like  the,  146

Bantu  s,  sneezing  customs
among  the,  313

Bardwan,  172m1

[Barham]  lnaoldsby  Legends,
40m2

Baring-Gould,  218m1;  Curious
Myths  of  the  Middle  Ages,
152,  167m2,  187m3,  268m1;
"Story  Radicals,"  Hender-
son's Folk  -  Lore  of  the
Northern  Counties,  195m1

Barnes,  T.,  "Alchemy,"
Hastings'  Ency.  Rel.  Eth.,
162m

Barnett,  L.  D.,  Ejrigraphia
Indica,  207m2

Baroda  forbids  castration,
Giiikwar  of,  323

Barraqa,  white  city  of  al-,
260m1

Bartsch,  Sagen,  Marchen  und
Gebr'duche  aus  Mcklenburg,
4m1,  104m2,  131m3,  133m1,
150,  187m3,  231m1,  272m1

Basile,  Pentamerone  (Burton's
trans.),  20ft1,  21m,  28m1,
48m\  105m,  226m2,  238,  239,
272m1,  285m1,  292m1

Basivis,  women  dedicated  to
a  deity,  326

Bath-sheba,  story  of  David
and,  277

Bebelius,  Henricus,  Facetiae,
75

Beccan  and  Brigit,  20m1

Bedia  caste,  51m

Bediya  caste,  51m

Bediyani,  tricks  employed  by
the,  51m

Behechra,  the  goddess,  321,
324,  325

Behrnauer,  W.  F.  A.,  Die
Vierzig  Veziere  oder  weisen
Meister,  20m1

Benares,  Brahmadatta,  King
of,  304

Benfey,  75 ;  Orient  und  Occi-
dent, 2m2,  28m1,  70m2,  76,
115m1,  150;  Paiichalantra,
28n\  62,  69m1,  76,  115m1,
126

Beria  caste,  51m

Beriya  caste,  51m

Bhadra  river,  philosopher's
stone  thrown  into  the,
161m1,  162m

Bhadrarupa,  a  witch,  196

Bhagavata  reformation,  a
history  of  the  saints  of
the,  280


Bhukta-mala,  Nabhadasa,  280

Bhama,  wife  of  Krishna,  232

Bhandari  (barber  caste),  lOOn1

Bharata,  race  of,  66

Bharunda  birds,  61

Bharvads  in  Gujarat,  marriage
rites  among  the,  37

Bhat  woman,  Bahucharajl  the
spirit  of  a  martyred,  321

BhavanI  (Durga,  ParvatI,
Gaurl,  etc.),  263,  324

Bhavasarman  and  the  two
witches,  193-195

Bheshajachandra,  friend  of
Ajara,  246,  248

Bhikkhu,  321

Bhil  (one  of  a  wild  tribe),
161m1

Bhishagratna  trans,  of  the
Susruta  Samhitd,  51m

Bhuta  (goblin),  306,  306m1

Bihangama  and  Bihangami,
the  two  immortal  birds,  29n

Birlinger,  Aus  Schivaben,  150,
218m1

Blade,  J.,  Contes  de  Gascog?ie,
105m

Blakeborough,  R.,  The  Hand
of  Glory  (ed.  J.  Fairfax-
Blakeborough),  152

Bloomfield,  "On  the  Art  of
Entering  Another's  Body,"
Proc.  Amer.  Philos.  Soc.t
83m1;  "Art  of  Stealing
in  Hindu  Fiction,"  Amer.
Journ.  Phil.,  153;  "The
Character  and  Adventures
of  Muladeva,"  Proc.  Amer.
Philos.  Soc,  207m2;  "On
False  Ascetics  and  Nuns,"
Journ.  Amer.  Orient.  Soc.,
211m1  ;  Life  and  Stoi'ies  of
Pdrcvanatha,  63,  280 ;  Sacred
Books  of  the  East,  320

Boccaccio,  Decameron,  44m1,
69m1,  118m1,  126

Bodhisatta,  the,  304,  305

B  odhis  attva  Avadana,
Kshanti  Jataka,"  20m1

Bodhisattva  (a  future  Buddha),
252m2

Bodhisattva,  a  (one  whose
essence  is  perfect  know-
ledge), 252,  252m2

Boghaz-Koi,  257

Bohemia,  disease  -  transfer-
ence in,  38

Bonn's  edition  of  Herodotus,
127

Bohn's  edition  of  Theocritus,
310


INDEX  I -SANSKRIT  WORDS,  ETC.


333


B'  htlingk  and  Roth,  Diction-
-iry,  45ft1,  158ft1,  195ft2,
245ft1

B  }a  (country  beer),  326

B  khara,  fire  customs  among
the  Tajiks  of,  131ft3

B  »lling,  G.  M.,  "  Disease  and
Medicine  (Vedic),"  Hast-
ings' Ency.  Rel.  Eth.,  52ft

E  )logna  or  Alexandria,  a
virgin  Lucia  of,  20ft1

I  )lte,  J.,  and  G.  Polivka,
Anmerkungen  zu  den  Kinder-
und  Hausmdrchen  der  Bruder
Grimm,  76,  105ft,  188ft,  204,
227ft,  238,  272ft1,  280

Folton,  H.  C,  Catalogue  of
Works  on  Alchemy  and  Chem-
istry exhibited  at  the  Grolier
Club,  New  York,  162ft

Bompas,  Folklore  of  the  Sanial
Parganas,  76,  182

Bor  (zizyphus  jujnba),  323

Borelli,'56

Bori  (spirit),  38

Bos  grunniens  (Tibetan  yak),
84ft1,  85ft

Botticher's  invention  of
Dresden  porcelain,  161ft1

Eouchera,  the  goddess,  321

Bouchet,  Pere,  Lettres  £difi-
cantes,  201

Brahma,  22

Brahmadatta,  109 ;  King  of
Benares,  304  ;  a  merchant's
son,  29-32

Brahmanavara,  157

Brand,  Popular  Antiquities,
131ft3,  152

Brewer,  Dictionary  of  Phrase
and  Fable,  161ft1

Brihaspati,  preceptor  of  the
'gods,  88,  88ft2

Brisard,  Charles,  L '  Eternue-
ment,  315

Brisson,  De  Regio  Persarum
Principatu,  329

Brockhaus  text,  15ft1,  43ft2,
25ft1,  83ft3,  96ft1,  155ft1,
159ft3,  167ft1,  184ft1,  208ft1,
241ft3,  246ft1

Brown,  George,  Melanesians
and  Polynesians,  314,  314ft1

Browne,  Sir  Thomas,  Vulgar
Errors,  30ft1,  167ft2

Buddha,  18,  19,  50ft1,  304;
Amoghasiddha,  Tara,  wife
of  the,  2ft2;  (bridegroom
of  Tara),  2,  2ft2  ;  a  future
{bodhisattva),  252ft2

Buddhivara,  209


Burlingame,  E.  W.,  "The
Act  of  Truth,"  Journ.  Boy.
As.  Soc,  179,  182

Burton,  R.  F.,  Nights,  56,  60,
68ft1,  76,  95ft1,  101ft,  105ft,
115ft1,  118ft1,  203,  227ft,
260ft1-2,  268ft1,  279,  308,
308ft4,  328;  "Outidanos,"
Priapeia,  328 ;  translation
of  Basile's  Pentamerone,
20ft1,  21ft,  28ft1,  48ft1,  105ft,
226ft2,  238, 239, 272ft1, 285ft1,
292ft1;  Wit  and  Wisdom
from  West  Africa,  313,
313ft3

Busk,  Sagas  from  the  Far
East,  48ft1,  75,  142ft1,  182,
195ft1,  204,  218ft1

Buxton,  "  Some  Navajo  Folk-
Tales,"  Folk-Lore,  268ft1

Cabanes,  "Dieu  vous  benisse!

— Origine     d'un    dicton,"

Moeurs  intimes  du  passe,  315
Cahier,    P.,    Characteristiques

des  Saints,  20ft1
Callaway,   H.,    The  Religious

System  of  the  Amazulu,  313,

313ft*
Campbell,  Notes  on  the  Spirit

Basis  of  Belief  and  Custom,

37
Campbell,     Tales    from     the

West  Highlands,  195ft1,  205,

231ft1,  237,  272ft1
Campbell     Thompson,     319 ;

Semitic  Magic,  38
Camphor  Islands,  260ft1
Candelifera,      the      goddess,

131ft3
Capo  (capon),  319
Carnoy,  E.,   Litterature   Orale

de  la  Picardie,  105ft,  311ft5
[Carpenter,  G.  H.,  "Ichneu-
mon"] Ency.  Brit.,  115ft1
Castor  and  Pollux,  258
Castro  (castrate),  319
Catullus,  Carmina,  311,  311ft2
Chalisa  (fortieth  day),  323
Chamara  (chowrie),  84ft1
Chandala      ascetic,       10-11 ;

caste,  116;  Trisanku,  the,

26
Chandamahasena,    father    of

Vasavadatta,  68,  87
Chandrakanta  (moonstone),  53,

53ft2
Chandrama,   the  moon  -  god,

161ft1
Chandrasvamin,  190
Chandra  Varma,  161ft1


ChandravatI,  274,  275

Charan  woman,  Bahucharajl
the  spirit  of  a  martyred,
321

Chaucer,  Canterbury  Tales,
221ft1 ;  Rime  of  Sir  Topas,
82ft2;  Squire's  'Tale,  40ft1

Chauvin,  V.,  Bibliographic  des
Ouvrages  Arabes,  in1,  21n,
68ft1,  76,  82ft2,  105ft,  127,
167ft2,  191ft1,  204,  227ft,
260ft1,  272ft1;  "Les  Ob-
stacles Magiques,"  Revue
des  Trad.  Pop.,  238

Chedi,  the  land  of,  128

Chelm,  Rabbi  Elijah  of,  59

Chenery,  T.,  The  Assemblies
ofAl-Hariri,  278

Cheti,  225ft2

Chevalier  a  la  Trappe,
Fabliau,  82ft2

Chhatrapati,  a  name  of  Devi,
306

Chilli,  Shaikh,  Folk-Tales  of
Hindustan,  272ft1

Chimta  (iron  pincers),  100ft1

Chirayus  and  his  minister,
story  of  King,  252-256

Chitari  caste  (painters),  306

Chitrakuta,  24,  257

Chitralekha,  81-84

Choice  (short  jacket),  326

Chowrie,  84,  84ft1,  85ft

Chowry,  84ft1

Chullavagga,  the,  321

Chunval,  Bahuchara  vener-
ated at,  322,  323

Clouston,  Book  of  Noodles,
231ft1  ;  Flowers  from  a
Persian  Garden,  167ft2 ;  A
Group  of  Eastern  Romances
and  Stories,  118ft1 ;  Popular
Tales  and  Fictions,  56,  76,
133ft1,  204,  227ft,  238

Cochin-China,  disease-trans-
ference in,  38

Coelho,  Contos  Popular  es
Portuguezes,  30ft1,  48ft1,
191ftl,  238,  272ft1

Cole,  J.,  "Notes  on  the
Wagogo  of  German  East
Africa,"  Journ.  Anth.  Inst.,
38

Colebrooke,  Essays,  37

Conway.  M.  D.,  Mystic  Trees
and  Flowers,  154

Coomaraswamy,  A.  K.,
Treatise  of  Al-Jazari  on
Automata,  58

Cordier,  Yule  and,  The  Book
ofSer  Marco  Polo,  85ft,  201,


334


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


Cordier  and  Yule — continued
202,  307,  307m1,  329;  Cathay
and   the    Way    Thither,   57,
85m,  329

Cosmas  of  Alexandria,  Topo-
graphia  Christiana,  84m1,  85m

Cosquin,  E.,  Conies  Populaires
de  Lorraine,  76,  227m,  238;
Etudes  Fo/kloriques,  212m1,
238;  "La  Legende  du
Page  de  Sainte  Elisabeth,"
Etudes  Folkloriques,  280 ;
"  Les  Mongols  et  leur
Pretendu  Role,"  Etudes
Folkloriques,  204

Cox,  Mythology  of  the  Aryan
Nations,  28m1,  272m1

Crane,  Italian  Popular  Tales,
76

Crawley,  A.  E.,  "Chastity,"
Hastings'  Ency.  Eel.  Eth.,
172m2  ;  ["  Magical  Circle  "]
Hastings'  Ency.  Rel.  Eth.,
203

Creighton,  Ency.  Bibl.,  38

Crooke,  W.,  *  "Burial  of
Suicides  at  Cross-roads,"
Folk-Lore,  37;  "Charms
and  Amulets  (Indian),"
Hastings'  Ency.  Rel.  Eth.,
37;  "King  Midas  and  his
Ass's  Ears,"  Folk-Lore,
188/1 ;  Popular  Religion  and
Folk-Lore  of  Northern  India,
37,  40m2,  121m1,  142m1,  151,
152,  161m1,  185m1,  218m1,
247m1,  263m2,  272m1,  306m2;
"Some  Notes  on  Homeric
Folk-Lore,"  Folk-Lore,  204,
208m1,  227m,  258;  Tribes
and  Castes  of  the  North-
western Provinces  and  Oudh,
101m,  325

Crores  of  gold,  298

Ctesibius,  56

Cunningham,  General,  90m1  ;
Ancient  Geography  of  India,
172m1,  184m1

Catch,  Pavayas  in,  322

Daedalus,  the  Greek  archi-
tect, 56

Daityas,  enemies  of  the  gods,
40

Dakshina,  one  of  the  five
Vedic  fires,  160m1

DamayantI,  225m2

Dames,  M.  Longworth,
"  Balochi  Tales,"  Folk-
Lore,  182;  The  Book  of
Duartc  Barbosa,  329


Dana   ("giving"    and   "cut-
ting''), 159m1,  214m1
Dantada  worms,  51m
Darbha  grass,  263
Dasa  (tenth  day),  323
Dasent,  Tales  from  the  Fjeld,

76  ;  Popular  Tales  from  the

Norse,  104m1,  205
David,  King,  172m,  251,  277
Day,     L.    B.,    Folk-Talcs    of

Bengal,  29m,  62,  280
Delhi,  90m1
Delphinius  (form  of  Apollo),

258
Demaratus,  126
Devadasa,  7,  8
Devajnanin,  73,  79
Devaprabha,  177,  178
Devasena,  44,  53,  54
Devasena     and      Unmadini,

story  of,  111-112
Devi  (Durga,  Parvati,  Gaurl,

etc.),  306,  321
Dhanapalita         (wealth  -  pre-
served), 44,  44m3
Dhanapara,  Queen,  254
Dharmadatta   and    his    wife

Nagas>i,  story  of,  7-8.
Dhol  or  dhole  (small  drum),

324,  326
Dhumapara,  223,  228
Dhuma^ikha,       brother       of

Agni&kha,  227,  228,  231
Dinars,  119,  120
Diodorus,  116m
Dioscuri,  the,  272m1
Dirghayus  ("  long  life  "),  306
Divyavadana,  the,  180
Dohada  motif,  60
Domba,  211m1
t)onnerkeil   aussehendes    Werk-

zeug,  Ein  wie  ein  (lilavajra),

158m1
Doutte,  E.,  Magie  et  Religion

dans  CAfrique  du  Nord,  202
Dozon,    A.,    Contes   Albanais,

204
Draupadi,  26m1
Dridhavarman,  King,  97,  98,

102,  104
Drona,  Kripi,  wife  of,  97
Dubois,       Hindu       Manners,

Customs     and      Ceremonies,

306,  306m*
Dunlop,     History    of   Fictioti

(Liebrecht's   trans.),    82m2,

285m1
Duppy  (a  Jamaican  spirit),  202
Durga  (Parvati,  Gaurl,  etc.),

28m1,  186,  263,  264,  266m1,

267,  268,  269,  271


Durgaprasad  text,  12m1,  15m1,
43m2,  50m1,  81m1,  83m3- «
94m1,  96m1,  148m3,  159m*,
208m1,  225m1,  241m3,  244m3,
246m1,  298m1

Durva  grass,  254m1

Durvasas  and  Kunti,  8,  8m1,
23

Dushana  and  Khara,  race  of,
49,  49m1

Dushyanta,  98,  124

DvaravatI,  82,  83

Dyaus,  the  Sky  Father  or
Heaven,  257

Dyce,  A.,  Glossary  to  Shake-
speares  Works,  154

Dyer,  T.  F.  Thiselton-,  Folk-
Lore  of  Plants,  154

Ebden,  H.,  "A  Few  Notes,
with  reference  to  '  The
Eunuchs'  to  be  found  in
the  large  Households  of
the  State  of  Rajpootana,"
The  Indian  Annals  of  Medical
Science,  325

Egypt,  ichneumon  venerated
in  ancient,  115m1,  116m

Elisha  and  the  dead  child,
308m3

Ellis,  Havelock,  Studies  in  the
Psychology  of  Sex,  328

Ellis,  Metrical  Romances,  272m1

Elworthy,  Horns  of  Honour,
188m

England,  disease  -  transfer-
ence in,  38

Englebelmer  (Somme),  311,
312

Enthoven,  R.  E.,  Folk-Lore  of
Bombay,  315 ;  Tribes  and
Castes  of  Bombay,  322

Ephesus,  Artemis  of,  327

Epibaterius,  258

Erythrebolus,  171m1

Evvovxos  (eunuch),  319

Euphrates,  278

Euryalus  (form  of  Apollo),
258


Fairfax-Blakeborough,  J.,  ed.
of  R.  Blakeborough's  The
Hand  of  Glory,  152

Farnell,  Cult  of  the  Greek-
States,  328

Fassel,  Rabbi  H.  B.,  New*
Derusch  Vortrdge,  59

Fatada  class  of  eunuchs,  321

Fausboll  ed.  of  the  Jatakas,
4m3,  292m1


INDEX  I -SANSKRIT  WORDS,  ETC.


335


F  wcett  ["  Basivis  :  Women
who  through  Dedication  to
a  Deity  assume  Masculine
Privileges"],  Journ.  Anth.
Soc.  Bomb.,  327

p  jrguson,  J.,  Bibliotheca
Chemica,  162ft

I  errand,  G.,  Relations  de
Voyages  et  Textes  Geo-
graphiques  Arabes,  260ft1

I  ijians,  sneezing  customs
among  the,  314

1  leyder,  56

]  lorence,  plague  of,  311

1  ontaine,  La,  Fables  de  la
Fontaine,  250;  Le  Petite
Diable  de  Papefiguiere,33n3 ;
La  Vie  d'Esope  le  Phrygien,
250

Forbes,  Ras  Mala  (ed.  H.  G.
Rawlinson),  86ft1,  322

Foulet,  L.,  "Le  Roman  de
Renard,"  Bibliotheque  de
I'icole  des  Hautes  Etudes,
ten

Frazer,  J.  G.,  trans,  of  Apollo-
dorus,  258;  The  Belief  in
Immortality,  314,  314ft2 ;
Folk-Lore  of  the  Old  Testa-
ment, 153;  Golden  Bough,
38,  142W1,  151,  153,  203,
314,  314ft6,  328;  "Indo-
nesians," Hastings'  Ency.
Rel.  Eth.,  313,  313ft5
Frere,  Old  Deccan  Days,  28ft1,

52ft,  62,  238
Fresnoy,  Lenglet  du,  Histoire
de  la  Philosophic  Hermetique,
162ft
Freytag,    G.,    Arabum    Pro-
verbia,  279

Gaal,  M'drchen  der  Magyaren,

48ft1,  167ft2,  226ft2,  238
Gagga-Jataka,  the,  304,  304ft1
Gaikwar   of    Baroda    forbids

castration,  323
Galli,  eunuch- priests,  327,328
Gallus,  daughter  of,  21ft
Gandhara,  142ft1
Gandharva,    170,    177,    178,

212
Gandharva  form  of  marriage,

65,  82,  121,  124,  146,  196,

269
Gandharvas,  139
Ganesa     (son    of    Siva    and

Parvati),    155,    155ft2,   228,

229
Ganges    river,     10,    11,     22,

220,  241


Ganika  (prostitute),  207ft2

Gafija,  321

Garhapatya,  one  of  the  five

Vedic  fires,  160ft1
Garstang,    Strong    and,    The

Syrian  Goddess,  328
Gar'uda  bird,  56,  67,  170,  210
Gaster,  Dr,  59 ;   Exempla  of
the  Rabbis,  63,  118ft1,  172ft,
251
Gaurl  (Durga,  Parvati,  etc.),
81,  82,  147,  155,  157,  163,
163ft1,  164,  165,   166,   183,
263
Gautama,  97,  126
Gautama  Dharma  Sastra,  the,

320
Geber's    researches    on    the

properties  of  acids,  161ft1
Gellius,  Aul.,   Noctes  Attica;,

56
Gerarde,  Herbal,  154
Germany,  fear  of  the  night-
hag  in,  131ft3
Ghassan,  278
Gibb,  E.  J.  W.,  The  History  of

the  Forty  Vezirs,  20ft1,  204
Gibbon,  Decline  and  Fall  of

the  Roman  Empire,  329
Giles,  Strange  Stories  from  a

Chinese  Studio,  191ft1
Gill,  W.  W.,  Myths  and  Songs
from  the  South  Pacific,  314,
314ft3
Gladwin,    Persian    Moonshee,

118ft1
Glauber,  Dr,  161ft1
Godabole,  N.  B.,  "The  Story
of      Chandranasya,"      Ind.
Ant.,  280
Goethe,  40ft2
Gokarna,  108

Golem  (something  rolled  to-
gether,   a    lump),    59;    of
Jewish  legend,  the,  59
Gomme,  Lawrence,  "  Mutila-
tions," Hastings'  Ency.  Rel.
Eth.,  21ft
Gomukha,  son  of  Ityaka,  136,
137,  140-142,  144,  145, 155,
156,    167,    169,    183,    200,
259-262,  275,  281,  285,  290,
293,  295,  297-299
Gomukha  ("ox-face"),  240ft1
Gonds,    unfavourable    omens

among  the,  86ft1
Gonzenbach,  Sicilianische
M'drchen,  76,  104ft2,  124ft1,
187ft3,  211ft1,  218ft1,  222ft1,
225ft2,  226ft2,  230ft2,  236,
259ft2,  272ft1


Goonetilleke,  W.  ["Sinhalese
Folk- Lore"],  The  Oriental-
ist, 76
Gotraja  (Gentile),  46ft1
Gould,  Baring-.     See  Baring-
Gould
Gray,  Louis  H.,   "Eunuch,"
Hastings'  Ency.  Rel.  Eth.,
319,  320,  328
Green,  Modern  Arabic  Stories,

76
Grierson,  G.  A.,  "Gleanings
from    the    Bhakta  -  Mala,"
Journ.  Roy.  As.  Soc,  280;
"The  Water  of  Life,"  Folk-
Lore,    253ft1 ;    Stein    and,
Hatims  Tales,  280
Grimm,  Irische  M'drchen,  30ft1,
188ft ;     Kinder-und     Haus-
mdrchen,    28ft1,    75,    104ft2,
187ft3,  188ft,  189ft1,  226ft2,
227ft,   231ft1,    237,    272ft1;
Teutonic  Mythology,  311ft4
Grohmann,  Sagen  aus  Bohmen,

133ft1
Grose,      Francis,      Provincial
Glossary,    with   a  Collection
of  Local  Proverbs  and  Popu-
lar Superstitions,  150
Grossler,  Sagen  aus  der  Graf-

schaft  Mansfeld,  227ft
Growse,  F.  S.,  90ft1;  Mathurd:

A  District  Memoir,  142ft1
Grundtvig,    D'dnische    Volks-

mdrchen,  205
Guatemala,    disease-transfer-
ence in,  38
Gubernatis,     De,     Zoological
Mythology,     92ft,       104ft2,
187ft3,  272ft1
Gudhasena,  King,  28
Guest,  Lady  Charlotte,  "The
Mabinogion,"  Llyfr  Coch  O
Hergest,  205
Guhyaki  (yakshim),  189
Gujarat,  eunuchs  in,  321.  325;
marriage  rites  among  the
Bharvads  of,  37 ;  sneezing
superstitions  in,  307
Guna  (string  and  virtue),  1ft1,

240ft2
Gunas,   the   six  measures   of

security,  143,  143ft3
Gunavara,    Queen,    218-221,

232-234
Gymnopaediae,  the,  126


Hagen,  Helden-Sagen,  130ft1,
185ft1,  191ft1,  218ft1,  233ft1,
268ft1


336


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


Hahn,  Griechische  u.  Albanes-

ische  Mdrchen,  204
Hajar,  278

Hajjam  (barber  caste),  100m1
Hale     Wortham,     Rev.     B.,

"Metrical  Version  of  the

Story      of      Harisarman,"

Journ.  Rot/.  As.  Soc,  77-80
Haliburton,      R.      G.,      New

Materials  for  the  History  oj

Man,  315
Halliday,  W.  R.,  "The  Force

of    Initiative    in    Magical

Conflict,"    Folk-Lore,   204;

Greek  Divination,  303,  303 m1
Hamilton,     Journey     through

Mysore,  Canara  and  Mala-
bar, 201
Hammer- Purgstall,  Literatur-

geschichte  der  Araber,  278
Hari  (Vishnu),  176,  210
Haripriya  (blockhead),  70m2
Harisarman  (blockhead),  70n2
Harisarman,     the    Brahman,

70-73,  75-80
Harisinha,  King,  144
HariSkha,  son  of  Rumanvat,

136,  218,  235,  242
Harivansa,  the,  9m1
Harris,      Dictionary     of     the

Natural  History  of  the  Bible,

154
Harris,  J.  Rendel,  Ascent  of

Olympus,  153;  "The  Origin

of  the  Cult  of  Aphrodite,"

Bull.  John  Rylands  Library,

153
Harshagupta,  172,  173
Hartland,    E.    S.,    Legend   of

Perseus,  204,  227n,  263m2
Hastings'     Encyclopaedia     of

Religion    and    Ethics,    2 In,

37,  52m,  152,  162n,  170m1,

172m2,    188^,    203,    253m,

313m5,  314,  319,  320,  328
Haughton,  H.  L.,  Sport  and

Folk-Lore  in  the  Himalaya,

182
Hausas,     sneezing     customs

among  the,  312
Havelock  Ellis,  Studies  in  the

Psychology  of  Sea:,  328
Heliodorus,  JFAhiopica,  112m1
Helmont,  Van,  researches  on

the  nature  of  gas,  161m1
Hemachandra,    Parisish tapar-

van     (ed.      Hertel),      180,

207m2
Hemaprabha,  King,  156,  159,

163,  164,  166-168,  294
Hemapura,  297


Henderson,  Folk-Lore  of  the
Northern  Counties,  150,  195m1

Henricus  Bebelius,  Facetiae,  75

Hephaistos,  tripods,  bellows
and  golden  handmaids  of,
56

Heracleopolis,  centre  of  the
worship  of  the  ichneumon,
116m

Heracles  and  Iphiclus,  127,
272m1

Hermes,  the  flying  sandals  of,
56

Hero  of  Alexandria,  Auto-
matopoietica,  56,  57 ;  Catop-
trica,  56,  57 ;  Piieumatica,
56,57

Herodotus,  116m,  126,  127,
171m1,  292m1,  328

Herpestes  ichneumon  (ichneu-
mon), 115m1,  116m

Herpestes  mungo  (mongoose),
115m1,  116m

Hertel,  J.,  "Die  Erziihlung
vom  Kaufmann  Campaka,"
Zeit.  d.d.  morg.  Gesell.,  and
Indische  Erzahler,28Q ;  trans,
of  Hemachandra's  Parisis-
htaparvan,  180,  207m2;
"  Ueber  die  Suvabahut-
tarlkatha,"  Festschrift  fur
Ernst  Windisch,  62,  180

Hetaerai  (prostitutes),  207n2

Hewat,  M.  L.  ["  Bantu  Folk-
Lore"],  Folk-Lore,  313,  313m2

Hierapolis,  Astarte  of,  327

Hljda,  eunuch  class,  321,  324,
325

Hijra,  eunuch  class,  321

Himalavas,  33,  97m1,  184,  189,
196,  274,  276

Himavat,  156

Hippomenes,  the  golden
apples  of,  238

Hirt,  Indogermanen,  319

Hitopadesa,  the,  28m1

Holl  festival,  37

Homa-lajd  (sacrificial  grain),
148m3

Homer,  Iliad,  229m1,  277;
Odyssey,  138m1,  208m1,  225m2,
310,  310m2

Howitt,  A.  W.,  Native  Tribes
of  South-East  Australia,  151

Hughli  river,  172m1

Huligamma,.the  goddess,  326,
327

Hunt,  M..  Grimm  s  Household
Tales,  76,  104m2,  105m

Hurgronje,  C.  Snouck, Mekka,


Hutton,  J.  H.,  "  Folk-Tales
of  the  AngamI  N\;<jas  of
Assam,"  Folk-Lore,  105m    ]

Hydaspes  river  (Vitasta  or
Jhelum),  2,  2a1

Iatromantis  (form  of  Apollo),!

258
Icarus,  son  of  Daedalus,  56
Idhlozhi  [manes),  313
Ikshumati,  97
Ikshuvati  river,  29
Imra-al-Kais,  277
Incubones  or  treasure-guarding]

spirits,  133m1
India,   diamond  kingdom  ofj

Central,  62,  63
Indlvarasena,    264,     267-270,  j

272-274
Indra,  the  king  of  the  gods,]

5,  6,  11m2,  24,  40,  42,  66, !

88,  126,  170m2,  228m2,  241,1

242m1,  253,  254
Indradatta,    story    of    King,?

128-129
Indus  river,  142m1
Iphiclus,  Heracles  and,  127, 1

272m1
IravatI,  263,  273
Irubriani,  Novellaja  Milanese,]

76
Ishtar,    Babylonian    worship

of,  253m1
Ityaka,  136,  240

Jarlr,  son  of  'Abd  al-Masih

(Mutalammis),  277
Jarrett,  A'in-i-Akbari,  162m
Jason  and   Medea,  story  of,

238
Jatakas,    the,    60,    179,    250,

304m1,  306
Jdtarupa    ("having    assume!

a  form  "),  148m5
Java,  burglar's  custom  in,  151
Jensen,  Zeitschrifl  fur  Assyriol

logic,  319,  329
Jeto,  the  first  Pavaya,  322
Jhelum   river   (Hydaspes   or

Vitasta),  2,  2m1
Jihvii,  maid  called,  72,  72m2,

73
Jihva  (tongue),  72,  72m2,  73
Jlvadatta,  175
Jivahara,  254,  256
Jlvaka  Komarabhachcha,  the

Buddhist  physician,  50m1
Jjlavavijna     ("the     knowing

one,"    "the    astrologer"),

72m1
Joab,  277


INDEX  I -SANSKRIT  WORDS,  ETC.


337


J<  lly,  J.,  "  Disease  and
Medicine  (Hindu),"  Hast-
ings' Ency.  Rel.  Eth.,  59ft

J>  seph,  153

J<  seph  us,  Wars  of  the  Jews,
154

J  lg,  B.,Kal?niikische  M'drchen,
1 82 ;  Die  M'drchen  des  Siddhi-
Kiir,  56,  62,  63,  75,  204;
Mongolische  M'drchen,  182

J  ivenal  on  eunuchs,  328

B  abus,  brother  of  'Amr  ibn
Hind,  278

K  adallgarbha,  story  of,  97-
102,  103-106

Kaden,  Unter  den  Oliven-
bdumen,  48ft1,  187ft3,  218ft1,
238

Kah-Gyur,  the,  50?t

Kailasa,  11,  296

Kaindle,  R.  F.,  "Zauber-
glaube  bei  den  Rutenen,"
Globus,  151

Kala  (accomplishment,  and  a
sixteenth  of  the  moon's
diameter),  140,  140ft1,
164ft1

Kala-ka-serai,  90ft1

Kalakuta  mountain,  65

Kalakuta  poison,  176,  176ft1

Kalidasa,  Vikramorvasi,  25ft2,
84ft1

Katila  and  Dimna,  126

Kalinga,  land  of,  170

Kalingadatta,  King,  2,  3,  5,
6,  8,  11,  17,  18,  23,  27,  41,
42,  64,  87,  90

Kalingasena,  daughter  of
Kalingadatta,  18, 27,  28,  32,
34-36,  39-43,  55,  58,  64-66,
68,  74,  81,  84-93,  96,  106-
108,  113-114,  120-125,  128-
133,  135-140,  145-148

Kallas,  O.,  "  Achtzig  Mar-
chen der  Ljutziner  Esten,"
Verhandlungen  d.  Gelehrten
Estnischen  Gesellschaft,  34ft

Kalna,  172ft1

Kalpa  (measure  of  time),  138,
147

Kama,  the  God  of  Love,  26,
27,  64,  97,  133

KamalavatI,  83ft1

KambuvatI,  274

Kanchanasringa,  156,  167

Kanchl,  282,  286

Kanghi  (comb),  100ft1

Kanva,  the  hermitage  of,
130

Kapek,  Karel,  59

VOL.   III.


Kar  (charmed  circle  of  Hindu

astrologers),  201
Kara    (hand   and    proboscis).

214ft1
Kara  and  Karl  (ring,  bracelet),

201
Kara  (prison),  201
Karabhaka,  13
Karpatika    [dependent    of   a

king],  207ft1
Karpuraka,    King,   260,   291,

296,  299,  300
Karpurasambhava    (camphor-
produced),  260,  260ft1,  261,

290,  291,  294,  300
Karpurika,  daughter  of  Kar-
puraka, 259-262,  275,  281,

285,    291,     293-296,    298-

300
Karsha   (scratch,    furrow,    or

trench),  201
Kartika,  147
Karttik  (November),  37
Karttikeya,  son  of  Siva  and

Parvati,  284
Kaserudvipa,  181
Kashmir,  142ft1,  220
Kasi,  304
Kasyapa,  25,  27
Kat  (to  surround),  201
Kataka  (a  zone),  201
Kathakoga,  the,   Tawney,  60,

61,  62,  207ft2,  279
Katharupe,  81ft1
Hatha  SaritSagara,  the,  Soma-

deva,  33ft3,  268ft1,  280
Kathiawar,  Pavayas  in,  322
Kauravas,  66
Kausambi,   66,   67,   85,  90ft1,

96,    107,    149,    155,    166,

296,  297
Kautilya,    Arthasastra  (trans.

Shamasastry),  142ft2
Kavyalankara,    Queen,    263-

266
Keightley,    Tales  of  Popular

Fictions,  204
[Keller]     Romans     des     Sept

Sages,  82ft2
Kennedy,  Fireside  Stones,  76
Khadgadanshtra,  269-272,  275
Khan,  palace  of  the   Great,

57
Khandesh,  Pavayas  in,  322
Khantivadi-Jataka,  the,  20ft1
Khara  and  Dushana,  race  of,

49,  49ft1
Kharaputta-Jataka,  the,  60
Khari    (three    bushels),    226,

226ft1
Khasua  class  of  eunuchs,  321


Khoja  class  of  eunuchs,  321,

325-326
Kipling,      Rikki  -  Tikki  -  Tavi,

115ft1
Kirtisena,  story  of,  44-54
Klauber,    "Assyr.   Beamten-

tum,"  Leipzigersem.Studien,

329
Knebel,     J.,     "Amulettes

javanaises,"      Tijdschrift

voor  Indische  Taal-Land  en

Volkenkunde,  151
Knott,    J.,    "Origin   of   the

Custom  of  Salutation  after

Sneezing,"  St  Louis  Medical

Review,  315
Kohler,  Dr,  187ft3;  Orient  und

Occident,  124ft1,  237,  272ft1
Kopp,  Hermann,  Die  A Ichemie

in  alter er  und  neuerer  Zeit,

162ft
Kotttw  (strike),  319
Koraiya  contest,  38
Korkus,  unfavourable  omens

among  the,  86ft1
Kosai  river,  172ft1
Kosala,  7

Kosam  (Kausambi),  90ft1
Kremer,    A.    von,    JEgypten,

329
Kripi,  wife  of  Drona,  97
Krish  (to  draw),  201
Krishna,  228ft2,  232
Krishnaji,7?«/tfrc-?rca/<2,  86ft1
Krita,'King,  19
Krodhavarman,  176
' '  Kshanti  Jataka,"  Bodhisattva

Avadana,  20ft1
Kshemankara,  Prince,  180
Kshetra  (holy  field,  or  sacred

spot),  220,  220ft1
Kuhn,   Westfdlische  M'drchen,

132ft,  152,  187ft3,  227ft
Kundina,  9
Kunti,  8,  8ft1,  23
Kuntibhoja,  23
Kurukshetra,  228ft2
Kurus,  65
Kusa  grass,  98
Kuvera,  the  God  of  Wealth,

40,  211


La  Fontaine.  See  Fontaine,
La

Lakshmana,  201

Lakshmi,  Goddess  of  Pros-
perity, 167,  260,  300

Lalaun  ("May  you  live!"),
313

Laliya,  161ft1

Y


888


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


Lambert,  L.,  "Contes  Popu-
lates   du    Languedoc,"

Revue  des  Langues  Romanes,

34ft
Lane,    Manners    and    Customs

of  the   Modem   Egyptians,

308,  308/»2
Lang,  Leaf  and  Myers,  trans.

of  Homer's  Iliad,  277
iMukikagni,  one  of  the  three

fires,  160ft1
Lavinium,  187»3
Leaf  and  Myers,  Lang,  trans.

of  Homer's  Iliad,  277
Leber,  Collection  des  meilleures

Dissertations,  309ft2
Lee,  A.  C,    The  Decameron,

its  Sources   and   Analogues,

44a1,  118nl,  127
Leonardo  da  Vinci,  56
Leutychides,  126
Levant,   mandrake   a   native

of  the,  153
Lev£que,  Mythes  et  Lcgendes

de    r  I  tide    et    de   la   Perse,

IJchi,  218ft1

Lidzbarski,  Geschichten  und
Lieder  aus  den  neuara-
mdischen  Handschriften  zu
Berlin,  76,  280

Liebrecht,  "  Essay  on  the
Sources  of  Barlaam  and
Josaphat,"  Zur  Volkskunde,
20k1  ;  trans,  of  Dunlop's
History  of  Fiction,  82n2,
286ft1 ;  Zur  Volkskunde,
44n\  131ft3,  187ft3,  210ft3,
225ft2,  231m1

Llliivajra  (ein  wie  ein  Donner-
keil  aussehendes  Werkzeug),
158,  158a1

IJnga  of  Siva,  Mahakala  a
famous,  183,  183ft1,  184

Lohanagara,  15

London,  Plague  of,  311

Low,  Udlaghat  I>istrict  Gazet-
teer, 10bil

Low,  the  Rabbi,  59

Lucia  of  Bologna  or  Alex-
andria, the  virgin,  20ft1

Lurian.  I)r  Dea  Syria,  167a2,
327,  328;  Hermotimus,  82«2;
Philopsrudes,  40ft2

Lucilio,  the  widow's  foolish
son.  76

Lyall.  C  J  .  Translations  of
Ancient  Arabic  Poetry,  278

Lycerus,  King  of  Babylon,
280

Lykia,  277


Macculloch,  J.  A.,  "Austeri-
ties," Hastings'  Ency.  Rel.
Kth.,  21/*:  Childhood  of
Fiction,  204,  221  n,  238,
253ft1;  "Hand,"  Hastings'
Ency.  Rel.  Eth.,  152ft;
"  Horns,"  Hastings'  Ency.
Rel.  Eth.,  188»;  "Nose,"
Hastings'  Ency.  Rel.  Eth.,
314,  314ft*

Maclean,  "Chastity,"  Hast-
ings' Ency.  Rel.  Eth.,  172n2

Madanadaiishtra,  269-271,275

Madanamala,  207,  208,  209,
211,  212,  214-217

Madanamanchuka,  Book  VI,
1-154

Madanamanchuka,  daughter
of  Kalingasena,  135,  140,
144,  145,  146,  147,  149,
155,  168,  294,  298,  300

Madanavali,  Queen,  61

Madanavega,  King  of  the
Vidyadharas,  64,  65,  121-
125,  128-130,  146

Madhava,  7

Madhyadesa,  97,  97ft1

Madhyantika,  142ft1

Madva,  280

Magadha,  44

Magnus,  Albertus,  56

Mahabhdrata,  the,  115ft1,  181,

182,  247ft1,  250,  258,  320,
321

Mahakala  (an  epithet,  and  a
famous  linga  of  Siva),  lift1,

183,  183ft1,  184
Mahdvagga,  the,  321
Mahdvastu  Avaddna,  the,  20ft1,

244ft1
Mahisha,  the  Asura,  186
Mainaka,  the  mountain,  lln2
Majoon     (a     confection     of

opium),  326
Major,    R.    H.,    India   in   the

Fifteenth  Century,  201
Malay  Peninsula,  ifire  customs

in  the,  131ft3
Malaya  mountain,  155,  178
Malcolm,  Sir  J.,  Sketches  of

Persia,  76
Manapara,     286,     287,     289,

290
Manasa  lake,  163
Manasavega,  145
Mandati,  or   debtor's   circle,

201,  202
Man^apakshetra,    holy    field

named,  220
Mandara,  the  Churning  moun-
tain, 83,  83n2


Manddras,  breasts  like  clusters

of,  146
Manes  (idhlozhi),  313
Mangala  (barber  caste),  100ft1,

101ft
Mankanaka  (the  hermit),  97,

98,  105
Mantra  (the  power  of  good

counsel),  137ft1
Mantras,  201
Manu,  160ft1,  320
Mapes,      Gualterus,      Nugtt

Curialium,  210ft3
[Margaret  of  Navarre],  Hep-

tameron,  126
Margoliouth,  Prof.  D.  S.,  179
Martial,  328

Martin,  Western  Islands,  131ft3
Marubhuti,    son   of  Yaugan-

dharayana,   136,   217,   218,

240-243,  252,  258,  261,  298
Masalchi  (torch-bearer),  100ft1
Masan,  or  ashes  from  a  pyre,

151
Maspero,    Popular  Stories  of

Ancient    Egypt,    203,    238,

250,  268ft1
Mast    elephant,    175;    ichor

from    the    temples    of    a

(dana),  214ft1
Masuccio,  Novellino  (Waters'

trans.),  287ft1
Masudi,  84ft1

Matali,  charioteer  of  Indra,  67
Mathura,  133,  174,  190,  191
Matignon,  J.  J.,  Superstition,

Crime,   et  Misere  en  Chine,

329
Matridatta,  112,  120
Maya,  the  Asura,  27,  39,  40,

43,  65,  74,  87,  93,  138,  139,

282,  282ft2
Mayavati,    a   science   called,

262
Means-Lawrence,     R.,     The

Magic  of  the  Horseshoe,  309ft1
Medea,  magic  car  of,  56
Medusa,  Pegasus  sprung  from

the  headless  trunk  of,  56
Menaka,  the  nymph,  6,   25,

26,  97,  98,  130
Menelaus,  sneezing  legend  of,

310
Meru,  the  mountain,  25,  267,

281,  296
Mesopotamia  considered  first

home  of  castration,  320
Mestra's     transformation,

191ft1
Mexico,  hand  superstition  in„

151


INDEX  I— SANSKRIT  WORDS,  ETC.


M<  yer,  Kuno,  ed.  of  Old  Irish
"realise  on  the  Law  of
Idamnan,  21ft

MI  ali  (barber  caste),  100ft1

Mi  atovic,  Serbian  Folk-Lore,
104

M,  'indapanha,  the,  320,  321

Mi  ton,  Paradise  Lost,  131ft3

Mi  lerva  and  Prometheus,  309

M  ios,  King,  56

M  lotaur,  the,  56

M  tra,  B.  R.,  "The  Gypsies
)f  Bengal,"  Memoirs  read
tefore  the  Anth.  Soc.  Ldn.,
)lft

Mitra,  R.  L.,  Account  of  the
Buddhist  Literature  of
Nepal,  20ft1;  Sanskrit
Literature  of  Nepal,  244ft1

Mitra,  S.  C.  ["Bihari  Tales"],
Tourn.  Anth.  Soc.  Bomb.,  250

Mlechchhas  (barbarians,  non-
Aryans),  320

iMobius,  P.  J.,  Ueber  die
Wirkungen  der  Kastration,
328

Modigliani,  E.,  Un  viaggio  a
Nias,  314,  314ft5

Mohammed,  308
jMoirai,  the  three,  28ft1
fMoksha,    the    soul's    release
from    further    transmigra-
tion, 4ft2

Mokshada,  a  female  hermit,
199

oliere,  Amphitryon,  127
omiai,  charm  named,  152
onier  Williams,  2ft2
ontaiglon,  Fabliaux,  76
orin,      Henri,      "Sur      les
Souhaits  en  faveur  de  ceux
qui   eternuent,"    Mem.    de
VAcad.  des  Ins.,  309ft2
orlini,    Novellce   fabulce    et
comedian,  76

rrichchhakatika,  or  Clay  Cart,
the,  202,  207ft2

MrigavatI,  mother  of  the
King  of  Vatsa,  67,  68

Mukhannas,  class  of  eunuchs,
321

[Mukhopadhyaya.        Syama

Charana,  192ft1
IMuktapura,  274,  275

Muktasena,  274,  275

Muradja  d'Ohsson,  Tableau
gen.  de  I'Empire  othoman,
329

Muravara,  a  Turushka  named,
185

Mutalammis,  al-,  277-279


Myers,  Lang,  Leaf  and,  trans,
of  Homer's  Iliad,  211

Nabhadasa,  Bhakta-mala,  280

Nadakuvara,  son  of  Kuvera,
40,  87,  138

Nagabala  ( Uraria  Lago-
podioides),  120,  120ft1

Nagarjuna,  252-256

Nagasarman,  159.  161

Nagasri,  7,  8

Nagavana  (grove  of  snakes),
garden  called,  140,  142,
142ft1

Nahusha,  88

Nai  (barber  caste),  100ft1,  101ft

Nala  and  Damayanti,  225ft2

Nandana,  the  garden  of  the
gods,  5,  6,  24,  138

Nandikshetra,  a  holy  field
named,  220

Nao  (barber  caste),  100ft1

Ndrada  Dharma  Sastra,  the,
320

Narada  the  hermit,  145

Narasinha,  King,  209,  215-217

Naravahanadatta,  son  of  the
King  of  Vatsa,  58,  68,  84ft1,
87,  130,  132,  135-140,  142,
144-147,  149,  156,  164-169,
178,  183,  200,  217,  218,
235,  240,  243,  244,  252,
256,  259-262,  275,  281,  282,
285,  290,  294-300

Narayan  Tel  ("the  oil  of
Vishnu  "),  152

Narayana  (Vishnu),  109

Nare,  Glossary,  154

Na-sa-at-ti-ia  (Nasatya),  257

Nasatya  (the  A3vins),  257,
258

Nasikdprabhavas  ("nose-
born"),  257

[Navarre,  Margaret  of]  Hep-
tameron,  126

Neptune  and  Mestra,  191ft1

Nesfield,  Brief  View  of  the
Caste  System,  100ft1

Ngarigo  tribe  of  S.E.  Aus-
tralia, 151

Nicholson,  R.  A.,  A  Literary
History  of  the  Arabs,  278

Nicolaides,  Contes  Licencieux
de  Constantinople  et  de  VAsie
mineure,  34ft

Nigrahah  (blaming  one's  re-
lations without  cause),  3ft1

Niono  (spirit),  313

Nirasta  (castrated),  319

Nirukta,  the,  Yaska,  257

Nirvasabhuja,  221-223,  232


339

Nischayadatta,  story  of,  183-
190,  193,  195-200

Nishadas  (aboriginal  tribes),
10,  10ft1

North-West  Provinces,  sneez-
ing customs  in,  306

Norton,  "The  Life-Index,"
Studies  in  Honour  of  Maurice
Bloomfield,  272ft1

November  (Karttik),  37

Odoric,  Friar,  57

Oesterley,  Baital  Pachisi,  204

Ohsson,  Muradja  d',   Tableau

gen.    de    I'Empire    othoman,

329
Orbigny,     A.     d',    L'Homme

Amercain,  314,  314ft5
Orestes,    Arnobius,    Adversus

Gentes,  21ft
Oudh,  90/11

Oulios,  title  of  Apollo,  258
Ovid,    Metamorphoses,     188ft,

191ft1,  230rc3

Padmadarsana,  246,  248
Padmasena,  274,  275
PadmavatI,  wife  of  the  King

of  Vatsa,  87,  88,  89,   108,

113,  123,  137,  298
Palanca     (Spanish    pole    for

carrying  loads),  14ft1
Palangki  (Malay  and  Javanese

palanquin),  14ft1
Palanquin     {palankeen),      14,

14ft1
Palkl  (Hindustani  palanquin),

Un1
Pallanko  (Pali  palanquin),  14ft1
Palmer,  A.  S.,  Folk  Etymology ,

154
Panch    Mahals,    Pavayas    in,

322
Panchatantra,     the,     Benfey,

28ft1,  62,   69ft1,   76,   115ft1,

126
Panch- Phul  Ranee,  62
Pandara-Jataka,  179
Pandava  race,  66,  68
Pandora,  Tilottama  a  kind  of,

6,  6ft1
Pandu,  12,  65
Papankara,  180
Papasodhana,   holy   bathing-
place  of,  128
Papman  (Misfortune),  eunuch

offered  as  victim  to,  321
Paravartmana      (by      another

way),  15ft1
Pari  (round),  14ft1
Parikshit,  King,  66


340


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


Parisishtaparvan,      Hema-

chandra  (Hertel's   trans.),

180,  2U7na
Parityagasena,     his     wicked

wife    and    his    two    sons,

story  of  King,  263-275
Parjas,    unfavourable    omens

among  the,  86nl
Parker,  tillage  Folk-Tales  of

Ceylon,  76,  272m1
Parvati  (Durga,  Gaurl,  etc.),

wife  of  Siva,  42.  83,  83ft5,

228,  229,  276/11
ParyaHka  (a  bed),  14ft1
Pasiphae,  56
Pa.su  pat  a   ascetics,    186-188,


Pasupati,  a  votary  of,  133

Pataliputra,  44,  159,  161,  209,
211-213,  217,  206

Pavaya  class  of  eunuchs,  321-
324

Payasa,  21 Sn1

Peacock,  K.,  "Sunwise  Pro-
cessions," Folk-Lore,  295ft2

Pedroso,  Portuguese  Folk-
Tales,  29/i

Pegasus,  origin  of.  56

Penelope,  saying  of,  310

Perrault,  Le  Petit  Poucet,  105«

Perseus  and  Andromeda,
268a1

Petit  At,  Traditions  Indiennes
du  Canada  Xord-Ouest,  205

Phakir  Chand,  tale  of  the,
62

Phalabhuti,  210n3,  277

Pharaoh  Nectanebo,  250

Pierrugues,  Pierre,  Glossarium
Eroticum  Lingua  La  tin  a', 328

Retro  della  Valle  [Travels],
85ft

Pingalika,  137

lia,  story  of  the   Brah-
man and  the,  32-35

Pisachai  (demons),  32

Planey,  Colin  de,  Dictionaire
Infernal,  150

Plautus,  Amphitruo,  127

Pliny,  Nat.  Ilist.,  112nl,  116/i,
.••,11  »>

Plow,  H.  H.,  Das  Kind,  328

Plutarch.  142a1

Pluto,  a  kind  of  Indian,
Vessavana,  304,  3<H-  -

Poland.  Chelm  in.  59

Polivka,  G.,  J.  Bolte  and,
Anmrrkungm  zu  Kindcr-und
HausmUrcken  der  Bru'der
Grimm  76,  I05n,  188»,  204,
227m,  238,  272»!,  280


Pollux,  Castor  and,  258
Prabandhavintdmini,  the,  207ft2
Prahhutva    (the     majesty    or

pre-eminence  of  the  king

himself),  137ft1
Pradyota,   father  of   Padma-

vati,  87
Prague,  the  Golem  in,  59
Prajapati,   the   Creator,    131,

131ft1,  321
Prajfiapti,     science     named,

64,  64ft1
Pramadvara,     daughter    of

Menaka,  26,  26/i2
Pranadhara,  282-284,  296-300
Pranadhara  and  Rajyadhara,

story  of  the  two  brothers,

282-285
Prapanchabuddhi  the  mendi-
cant, 209,  210
Prasenajit,  King,  65,  81,  84,

122,  118-120
Pratishthana,  206,  207,  241
Prayaga  (Allahabad),  97ft1
Preller,  Romischc  Mythologie,

133ft1
Preta-secca,  King  of,  21ft
Prithu,  King,  36
Proitos  and  Bellerephon,  277
Prometheus      myth,     307ft3,

309,  310
Propertius,  Elegies,  31  In3
Prym     and     Socin,     Surische

Marchen,  191ft1,  231ft1
Psyche's  tasks,  226ft2
Purushamedha  (human    sacri-
fice), 321
Pushkalavati    (Pushkaravati),

184  ft1
Pushkaravati,    28,    184,   185,

189,  193,  196

Quatremere,  Hist,  des  sultans
mamlouks  de  VEgypte,  329

Rabba,  59

Rabelais  [Gargantua],  34ft

Rachel  and   the  mandrakes,

153
Radriguet,  M.,    Lcs  Dertiiers

Sauvages,  314,  314ft5
Ragabhanjana,  197
Raghuvamsa,  the,  240ft2
Raichur,  327
Rajadatta,  sister  of  Silavati,

173-176,  178
Rajagriha,  279
RajavaH,  177,  178
Rajyadhara,       a       carpenter

named,  58,   282-285,    290,

295-300


Rakshasa,  267-269,  274:  dis-
guised as  a  crane,  222 ;
story  of  Sringabhujaand  the
daughter  of  "the,  218-2

Rakshasas  (goblins),  19/t1,
49/11,  50,  267,  268

RakshasI  (female  Rakshasa),
48-50,  52

Ralston,  Russian  Folk-Tales,
4ft1,  30ft1,  82ft2,  187ft3,  20l
222ft1,  225n2,  231ft1.  238,
253/i1,  268ft1 ;  Schiefner
and,  Tibetan  Tales,  50ll
51ft,  115ft1,  180,  181,  188n

Ram  Tel  ("Oil  of  Rama"),
152

Rama,  54,  152

Ramabhadra,  146

Raman uja,  280

Ramdyana,  the,  49ft1,  218ft1

Rambha,  a  nymph,  24-27,  97,
113

Rainy  dni  (pleasant),  244ft2

Rapti  river,  90ft1

Ras  Mdla,  A.  K.  Forbes  (ed.
H.  G.  Rawlinson),  86ft1,™

Rasa  (passion,  and  water),  27,
27ft1

Ratan-mdld,  Krishnajl,  86ft1

Rati,  wife  of  the  God  of  Love,
24,  27,  130,  131,  132,  133,
135,  138,  146,  147

Ratnadatta,  2

Ratnadhipati  and  the  white
elephant  Svetarasmi,  story
of  King,  169-178

Ratnakuta,  169,  170,  173
174-176

Ratnaprabha,  Book  VII.  155-
300

Ratnaprabha,  wife  of  Naravft-
hanadatta,  156,  157,  159
163-169,  183,  200,  217,  236
240,243,252,259.201,262
294,  298,  299,  300

Rawlinson,     H.    G.,     e<
Forbes'    Ras   Mala,    86ft1,
322 ;     History    of    Anciern
Egypt,  329

Regiomontanus,  56

Rehatsek,  E.,  Amusing  S
118ft1

Remondino,  History  of  Cir
cutneision,  328

Rendel     Harris,     J.,     Ascen,
of   Olympus,     153;     "Til*
Origin     of     the     Cul
Aphrodite,"  Bull.  Join
Ry  lands  Library,  153

Reuben, 153

Rhys,  Welsh  Tales,  225ft2


INDEX  I -SANSKRIT  WORDS,  ETC.


341


R'ys  Davids,  "Chastity,"
Hastings'  Ency.  Ret.  Eth.,
1 72ft2

R  eger,  C„  Kastration  in
rechtlicher  socialer  und  vitaler
Hinsicht,  328

R  ess,  E.,  "Alchemy,"  Hast-
ings' Ency.  Rel.  Eth.,  162ft

R  g-Veda,  the,  257

R  shaba  mountain,  64,  126

B  shis  (holy  sages),  1

J  vers,  W.  H,  R.,  "  Primitive
Orientation,"  Folk-Lore,
295ft2

hobot  (a  being  with  capacity
for  work,  but  not  for  think-
ing), 59

Roger  Bacon,  56;  invention
of  gunpowder  by,  161m1

Rohde,  Der Griechische  Roman,
188w

Eohini,  156

Eoscoe,  J.,  The  Baganda,  38

Ross,  H.  M.,  "Alchemy,"
Ency.  Brit.,  162ft

Roth,  Bbhtlingk  and,  Dic-
tionary, 45-w1,  158m1,  195ft2,
245m1

Rouse,  W.  H.  D.,  The  Jataka,
304711

Rumanvat,  136

Rupasena,  274,  275

Rupasikha,  daughter  of  Agni-
sikna,  223-235

Ruru,  the  hermit,  26,  26n2

Russell,  Tribes  and  Castes  of
the  Central  Provinces,  14ft1,
51n,  86ft1,  100ft1,  101ft,
306ft5,  325

Sabhya,  one  of  the  five  Vedic

fires,  160ft1
Sacchetti,  Novelle,  118ft1
Sachl,  wife  of  Indra,  5,  88
Sad  Dar,  the,  307,  307ft4
Sadvahinl    (beautiful    rivers),

148ft4
Sagarapota,  279
Sahasranlka,    father    of    the

King  of  Vatsa,  66,  67
Sahet-Mahet  (Sravastl),  90ft1
Sailapura,  267,  269-271
St     Augustine,     Confessions,

6n2  ;  legend  of,  250
Saintyves,  Les  Conies  de  Per-

rault,  105ft,  238  ;  L'Eternue-

ment  et  le  Battlement  dans  la

magie   V  Ethnographic    et    le
t   Folk-Lore  Medical,  309ft1
Saiva  religion,  2ft2
Sakuntala,25,68,98,124, 130


Sambhu,  163,  163ft3
Samoans,    sneezing    customs

among  the,  314
Samudradatta,  279-280
Samudrasena,  46,  47
Sam  vara     (congregation     or

sorcery),  195ft2
Sangramadatta,  213
Sanjna,  257
Sansia    caste    of    wandering

criminals,         unfavourable

omens  among  the,   86ft1
Santisoma,  137
Sarabhas    (fabulous     animals

with     eight     feet),      259,

259ft1
Saravega,  horse  named,  230
Saree  (petticoat),  326
Sa  resi  (riSi)  ("he  who  is  head

or  chief"),  319
Sarmishtha,  6
Sas  (cut),  319
Sastri,       Natesa,       Dravidian

Nights,  29ft,  204
Satanlka,  66

Satapatha  Brahmana,  the,  258,
,  320

Satdyus    (a    hundred    years),
,   306
Satrughna    and    his    wicked

wife,  story  of,  141
Sattva  (essence),  252ft2
Sattvaslla     and     the     two

treasures,  157-158
Savara  (one  of  a  wild  tribe),

67,  94,  95,  96
Savitri,  257
Saznka     ("come     quickly"),

313
Schiefner  and  Ralston,  Tibetan

Tales,    50ft1,    51ft,     115ft1,

180,  181,  188ft
Schleicher,  Lithuanian,

Legends,  75
Schmidt,    Bernhard,    Griech-
ische Marchen,  28ft1,  133ft1,

187ft3,  218ft1,  238,  253ft1
Schmidt,     R.,     Beitrage     zur

indischen  Erotik,  320
Schmidt,  Shakespeare  Diction-
ary, 1121I1
Schoff,  W.   H.,   "Camphor,"

Journ.    Amer.   Orient.    Soc,

260ft1
Schoppner,      Sagenbuch      [or

Geschichte]    der  Bayerischen

Lande,  133ft1
Schott,  A.  and  W..  Wallachian

Stories,  205
Schrader,    Real  lex.    der  indo-

germ.  Altertumskunde ,  319


Scotland,  fear  of  the  night-
hag  in,  131ft3

Scott,  Sir  Walter,  Antiquary,
150

Sebillot,  Folk-Lore  de  France,
76

Seligmann,  C.  G.,  The  Melan-
esians  of  British  New  Guinea,
314ft2

Seneca,  De  Matrimonio,  328

Shah-deri,  90ft1

Shaikh,  Chilli,  Folk-Tales  oj
Hindustan,  272ft1

Shakespeare,  Midsummer
Night's  Dream,  29ft1;  Romeo
and  Jidiet,  112ft1

Shamasastry,  trans,  of  Kau-
tilya's  Arthasastra,  142ft2

Shaw,  R.  B.,  "On  the  Shighni
(Ghalchah)  Dialect,"
Joum.  As.  Soc.  Bengal,  269ft

Shortt,  J.,  "  Kojahs  of  South-
ern India,"  Journ  Anth.
Inst.,  325

Siddha  (independent  super-
human), 36,  92,  177,  178

Siddhikarl,  the  cunning,
211ft1

Sikes,  Wirt,  British  Goblins,

t  32ft1,  187ft3,  225ft2

Silavati,  servant  called,  172,
173,  176,  178

Simichidas,  310

Simrock,  Deutsche  Volksbiicher,
167ft2,  187ft3,  287ft1

Sipra  river,  183

Siri- Jataka,  the,  60

Sirisha,  body  like  the,  146

Slta,  wife  of  Rama,  43,  54,
146,  201

Siva,  1,  2ft2,  6,  11,  12,  24,  40,
49,  64,  83,  83ft5,  121,  124,
126,  131,  132,  133,  138,
145,  146,  147,  155,  156,
157,  163,  164,  165,  183ft1,
186,  187,  192,  199,  228,
228ft1,  229,  243,  247,  248,
263,  276ft1,  285,  292

Sivavarman,  277

Smithers,  L.  S.,  "  Nean-
iskos,"  Priapeia,  328

Sobur,  Prince,  62

Socin,  Prym  and,  Syrische
Marchen,  191ft1,  231ft1

Solomon,  King,  171ft1,  172ft,
251

Soma  (the  moon),  257

Somada,  the  witch,  193-195

Somadatta,  Prince,  69,  74, 109

Somadeva,  153;  Katha  Sarit
Sagara,  33ft3,  268ft1,  280


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


Somaprabha,  177,  178

Somaprabha,  daughter  of  the
Asura  Maya,  27,  28,  32,
34-36,  39-43,  55,  57,  58,
64,  65,  66,  68,  74,  81,  84-
87,  93,  96,  106,  107,  114,
138-139,  147

Somasvamin  and  Bandhu-
dattf,  190-193,  195-200

Sophocles,  Antigone,  292nl

Southey,  Thalaba  the  De-
stroyer, 150

ordowv  (eunuch),  319

hrram  (drag),  319

Spence,   Lewis,   Encyclopaedia

of  Occultism,   162/t

Spencer,  Herbert,  Ceremonial
Institution*  (Principles  of
Sociology),  21m

Spenser,  Faerie  Queene,  138/t1

>\ye\er, Studies  about  the  Kathd-

saritsdgara,       12m1,       16m1,

25m1,    50m1,   81m1,    83h34,

94m1,  159m3,  208m1,  241m3,

\  246m1,  298m1

Spital  Inn,  Stainmoor,  152

Spitta  -  Bey,  Contes  Arabes
,  Modernes,  204

Sraddha,  18m3;  eunuchs  ex-
cluded from  the,  320

Sramanas  (Buddhist  ascetics),
2,  2m3,  210m1

>r  ivasti,  65,  84,  90m1,  118

Sri  (Goddess  of  Prosperity),

.   24,  298m1

Srimad-rangam,  306

Sringabhuja  and  the  daughter
of  the  Itakshasa,  story  of,
218-235

SringotpadinI,  the  Yakshini,
187,  187m*,  196

Srutasena,  story  of,    108-112

Stainmoor,  Spital  Inn,  152

Stall y  brass,  trans,  of  Grimm's
Teutonic  Mythology,  311m*

Steel  and  Temple,  Wide-
Axeake  Stories,  182,  272m1,
274  h1,  280

Stein  and  Grierson,  Hatim's
Tales,  280

Stent,  "Chinese  Eunuchs,"
Journ.  North  China  Branch
Hoy.  As.  Noc.,  329

Stevenson,  Rites  of  the  Twice-
born.  37,  38

SthuIadatU.  70-72

Stokes.  Indian  Fairy  Tales,
218a1,  226n*,  280

Strabo,  116a

Straparola,    The    Sights,    76,

206  *


Strong    and    Garstang,    The

Syrian  Goddess,  328
Strutavardhana,  218,  219
Stumme,  Marchen  der  Schluh

von  Tazerwalt,  188m
Suk  irbitti  (cross-roads),  38
Suka  Saptati,  the,  126
Sukhadhana,  286-290
Sukhasaya,  190,  191
Sulkhanpur,  321,  324
Sulochanaand  Sushena,  story

of,  24-27
Sumeru     (the     mountain     of

gold),  148,  148m1,  156
Sunyasee,  a,  86m1
Suparna,  the  bird-king,  181
Suppdraka- Jdtaka,  the,  179
Surabhi,  36
Surabhidatta,     the     Apsaras,

5-6,  145
Surakshita,  219,  220,  234
Surasena,  King,  144
Surya  (the  sun),  257
Sushena     and     Sulochana,

story  of,  24-27
Susruta  Samhitd,  the,  51n
Su-ut   ri-e-Si  (ea  alidi)  ("one

who  does  not  beget"),  319
Suvdbahuttarikathd,  the,  62, 180
Suvrittayd     (virtuous    and

beautifully  rounded),  39m3
Svabhdva  (own  nature),  252n2
Svarga    (the    abode    of    the

blessed),  139,  253
Svayamprabha,    daughter    of

the    Asura    Maya,   40,   42,

43,  43m1
Svayamvara      (marriage      by

choice),     26,     26m1,     181,
,  225m2
Svetarasmi,   story  of   Ratna-

dhipati     and     the     white

elephant,  169-178
Sweden,   fear  of  the  night-
hag  in,  131m1
Swynnerton,    Indian    Nights'

Entertainments,  204
Sykes,     Ella    C,     "Persian

Folk -Lore,"      Folk -Lore,

307,  307m2
Sykes,  Sir  Percy,  307     ,

Tachard,  Father,  Voyage  de
Siatn  des  Peres  Jesuites
envoyes  par  le  Roy  aux
hides  ei  a  la  Chine,  308,
308/11

Ta j  i  k as,  N  i  s  c  h  a  v a  d  a  t ta
captured  by,  185

Tajiks  in  Bokhara,  fire  cus-
toms among  the,  131m3


Takkala- Jdtaka,  the.  60
Takshasila    (Taxila).    2,

2m2,    6,    43,    65,    87,    90,

91m1
Talan  (fried  pastry),  324
Tamluk      (Tamralipti,      172,

172m1
Tamralipti,   172,    172m1,  173,

178
Tanganyika,    cross-roads    in,

38
Tantrdkhydyika,  the,  180
Tapantaka,  son  of  Vasantaka,

136,  155,  243
Tapodatta,  story  of,  241
Tara,  Buddha  bridegroom  of,

2,  2n2
Taradatta,   wife    of  Kalinga-

datta,  5,  6,  8,  11,  17,  18
Tarafa,  the  poet,  277-279
Tdrakd  (star),  18m1
Tariivara  (Siva  ?),  2n2
Tarentum,  56

Tarunachandra,  243,  244,  246
Tawney,   C.   H.,  15m1,  33m3,

81m1,  208m1  ;  Kathdkoca,  60,

61,  62,  207n2,  279
Taxila  (Takshasila),  2,  2m12
Tejasvati,  story  of,  69-70,  74
Telapatta- Jdtaka,  the,  4n3
Te/mo  (cut),  319
Temple,    Sir    Richard,    201 ;

Legends  of  the  Pan  jab,  321 ;

Steel     and,     Wide -Awake

Stories,   182,  247m1,  272m1,

280
Tendlau,  A.  M.,  "  Der  Golem

des      Hoch  -  Rabbi  -  Lob,"

Das   Buch    der    Sagen    und

Legenden  Jiidischer  forfeit,

59
Terence,  Eunuchus,  6n2
Tertullian,  Adv.  Nation.  131a*
Theddora  tribe  of  South-  East

Australia,  151
Theocritus,  310
Thiselton-Dyer,  T.  F.,  Folk'

Lore  oj  Plants,  154
0A.a#tas  (eunuch),  319
0Aaa>  (crush),  319
Thomas,  N.  W.,  "Animals,"

Hastings'  Ency.  Rel.  Eth.t

170m1
Thompson,    Campbell,    319;

Semitic  Magic,  38
Thorndike,  History  of  Magic

and    Experimental    Science,

57,  162m
Thorpe,  Yule-tide  Stories,  48m1,

205,  225m2,  226m2,  236.  237
Thurston,    Castes  and    Tribtt


INDEX  I -SANSKRIT  WORDS,  ETC.


343


hurston — continued
of  Southern  India,  101  ft,
325 ;  Ethnographic  Notes
in  Soidhem  India,  46  ft2,
306ft3 ;  Omens  and  Super-
stitions in  Southern  India,
306w3

'  'iberius,  the  Emperor,  30ft1

'  'ilottama,  a  kind  of  Pandora,

6,  6n\  67
.\>/u'as  (eunuch),  319
rorans    (strings    of    leaves),

100ft1
forquemada,     F.    Juan    de,
Monarquia     Indiana,     150,
151

Trappe,  Chevalier  a  la,
Fabliau,  82ft2

Tremearne,  H.  J.  N.,  The
Ban  of  the  Bori,  38,  312,
312ft1 ;  Hausa  Superstitions
and  Customs,  312,  312ft1

Treta,  name  of  the  first  three
Vedic  fires,  160ft1

Trilles,  Pere  H.,  Proverbes,
Legendes  et  Contes  Fangs,
105ft

Tripoli  and  Tunis,  cross-roads
among  the  Hausas  of,  38

Trisanku  the  Chandala,  26

Tungabhadra  river,  327

Tunis  and  Tripoli,  cross-roads
among  the  Hausas  of,  38

Tupha  (yak),  85ft

Turushka  named  Muravara,
185

Tylor,  E.  B.,  "Eunuch,"
Encij.  Brit.,  328;  Primitive
Culture,  30ft1,  185ft1

Ucchanga-Jataka,  the,  292ft1
Udayana,  the  King  of  Vatsa,

1,  2,  65-68,  74,  81,  84-92,

97,  107,  128-130,  132,  135-

139,  145-148,  155,  166-168,

235,  249,  261,  276,  297-300
UjjayinI,  11,  13,  16,  69,  183,

193
Uma  (ParvatI,  Durga,  Gaurl,

etc.),  1,  156,  184
Umaymah,  wife  of  Mutalam-

mis,  279
Unmadini,  story  of  Devasena

and,  111,  112
Upamanyu,  163
U pay  as,    or    four    means    of

success,  143,  143ft2
Uraria     lagopodioides     (naga-

bald),  120,  120ft1
Uriah  the  Hittite,  277
Usha,  68


Usha   and   Aniruddha,   story

of,  81-83
Ushas  (the  dawn),  257
Utpatati  (rising  up),  159ft3
Utsaha  (energy),  137ft1
Uttaramanasa,       holy      field

named,  220

Vadavagni,  one  of  the  three

fires,  160ft1
Vadh  (strike),  319
Vadhri  (eunuch),  319
Vaidik  spells,  136
Vaisall,  50ft1

Vaisravana  or  Kuvera,  134
Vaisvanara,  137
Vajraprabha,  164-166
Valabhi,  44-46,  53,  93
Vallee    Poussin,    L.    de    la,

"  Bodhisattva,"    Hastings'

Ency.  Rel.  Eth.,  253ft
Vansa  (race  and  bamboo),  1ft1
VaranasI,  190,  193
Vararuchi,  61
Vardhamana,   218,   229,  230,

232
Varti  ("  the  wick  of  a  lamp  "),

134ft1
Vasantaka,  136,  243
Vasavadatta,     wife     of     the

King  of  Vatsa,  1,   65,   68,

87,  88,  107,   108,  113-114,

122,    123,    130,    132,    135,

137,  139,  146,  168,  263ft2,

298
Vasishtha  Dharma  Sdstra,  the,

320'
Vasudatta,  49-53,  93
Vasudatta,  city  called,  49-51
Vatsa,  hermit  called,  25,  27
Vatsa,  Udayana,  King  of,  1-2,

65-68,  74,  81,  84-92,  97,  107,

128-130,  132,  135-139,  145-

148,  155,  166-168,  235,  249,

261,  276,  297-300
Vaux,  Carra  de,  "  Alchemy,"

Hastings'  Ency.  Rel.  Eth.,

162ft
Veckenstedt,         Wendische

Sagen,  131ft3,  133ft1,  187ft3,

191ft1,  225ft2,  238,  253ft1
Vedas,  the,  2,  13
Velten,   Marchen  und  Erzah-

lungen  der  Suaheli,  280
Vernaleken     [Oesterreichische

Kinder  -  und   Hausmarchen] ,

272ft1
Vessavana  (a  kind  of  Indian

Pluto),  304,  304ft2
Vetalapanchavinsati,  the,  28 n1,

75


Vibudha  (" gods"),  215ft1

Vidanga,  decoction  of,  51ft

Vidisa,  115

Vidya  (superhuman  know-
ledge), 165,  165ft2

Vidyadhara  (independent
superhuman),  5,  6,  60,  61,
64,  92,  121,  123,  128,  129,
137,  138,  145,  197-199,  212

Vidyadharas,  1,  64,  67,  68,
92,  121,  130,  145,  156,  159,
166,  168,  193,  195-197,  217,
274,  275,  294

Vidyadhari,  36,  166,  184,  193,
196,  197

Vidyuddyota,  Princess,  111,
112

Vijayakshetra,  a  holy  field
named,  220

Vikrama,  83

Vikramaditya  and  the  courte-
san, story  of,  206-209,  211-
217 ;  and  the  mendicant,
209-211

Vikramasena,  King,  69,  74

Vikramasinha  (i.e.  lion  of
valour),  11,  lift3,  13,  16

Vikramatunga,  the  brave
king,  159-163

Vikramorvasl,  Kalidasa,  25ft2,
84ft1

Vilasapura,  243

Vilasasila  and  the  physician,
story  of  King,  243-249

Vilva  fruits  (fruit  of  the  Bel),
159,  159ft2,  160

Vinasana,  97ft1

Vindhya  forest,  266 ;  moun-
tains, 40,  42,  97ft1,  267;
range,  271

Virabhuja,  King,  218-220,
232,  235,  269

Virata,  King,  114

Viravara.  the  faithful  servant,
28ft1

Virupaksha,  story  of  the
Yaksha,  133-135

Virupasarman,  242

Visentini,  Fiabe  Mantovani,  76

Visha,  279,  280

Visha  (poison),  279

Vishnu,  12,  82,  152,  167,  169,
170,  177,  210,  220

Vishnudatta,  story  of  the
Brahman's  son,  93-96

Visvadatta,  109,  110

Visvakarman,  the  architect  of
the  gods,  139

Visvamitra,  6,  25,  26,  97

Vitasta  river  (Hydaspes,  or
Jhelum),  2,  2ft1,  186,  220


344


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


Vitastadatta,  2

Yitruvius,    De    Architectura

Decern,  56,  57
I'rika,  one  of  the  three  fires,

160n*
Yullers,  Tarafce  Moallaca  cum

Zuzenii  Scholiu,  279

Wagogo,   cross-roads   among

the,  38
Waite,   A.   E.,    The  Book  of

Black     Magic,     203;     The

Hermetic      and      Alchemical

Writings  of  Philippus  Aure-

olus     Theophratus    Bombast

of  Hohenheim,  162h
Wak,  the  Islands  of,  260/11
Wake,  C.  Staniland,  Serpent-

Worship  and   Other  Essays,

U2n»
Waldau,   Bohmische  Mdrchen,

48/»»,  152,  191  n1,  227n
Walshe,    "Chastity,"    Hast-

tings'      Kncy.      Bel.      Eth.,

172
Wardrop,  Georgian  Folk-Tales,

204
Waters,    W.     G.,    trans,    of

Masuccio's  Xorellino,287nl ;

trans.      of     Straparola's

Sights,  76,  205
Weeks,    J.     H.,    Among    the

Primitive      Bakongo,      313,

313/11;  ["Customs  of  the

Lower     Congo     People "]

Folk-Lore,  313,  313/11
Wellcome      Historical      and

Medical  Museum,  154
West.  K.  W  .  Sacred  Books  of

the  East,  307/i«
Westcrmarck,       Origin      and

Development  of  the   Moral

Ideas,  38,  328'


Whitley  Stokes,  "  Life  of  St

Brigit,"  Three  Middle  Irish

Homilies,  20/11
Widter,    G.,    and    A.    Wolf

[Volksmdrchen  aits  Venetieii],

272nl
Wilkins,  56
Wilkinson,      Manners     and

Customs     of     the     Ancient

Egyptians,  116u
Williams,  Monier,  2/t2
Wilson,   H.   H.,  33n3,   90W1  ;

Select     Specimens     of     the

Theatre  of  the  Hindus,  84m1
Winckler,  discovery  of  cunei-
form tablets  by  Prof.,  257
Wirt    Sikes,    British    Goblins,

32W1,  187n3,  225n2
Wolf,    A.,    G.    Widter    and

[Volksmdrchen  aus  Venetien'],

272?!1
Wolgemuth,    E.,    Der    Trdu-

niende  Muscn-Freund,  34n
Wortham,  B.   Hale,  metrical

version  of  the   "  Story  of

Harisarman,"    Journ.    Roy.

As.  Soc,  77-80
Wuttke,     A.,     Der     deutsche

Volksaberglaube  der  Gegen-

wart,  153


Xenophon,    Anabasis,   310?i4 ;
Cyropa'dia,  328

Yadu,  the  race  of,  82
Yajnadatta,  32,  33
Yajnasthala,       royal       grant

named,  32
Yaksha    (a    servant    of    the

gods),  133-135,   162
Yakshini. female  Yaksha,  134,

187-189,  193,  196


YakshinTs  turned  into  trees,
25,  25m1

Yamadanshtra,  King  of  the
Rakshasas,  267,  268

Yamuna  river,  90ft1

Yaska,  Nirukta,  257

Yatha-ahu-vairyo  (formula  in
praise  of  righteousness),  307

Yaugandharayana,  minister
of  the  King  of  Vatsa,  67,
68,  87,  88-93,  97,  107,  108,
113-115,  121-123,  130,  132,
135,  136,  146,  167,  168,
240,  298

Yavanasena,  the  castaway]
174-176

Yayati,  6

YogesVara,  the  Brahman-
Rakshasa,  92,  92^,  93,  114,
115,  118,  120-122,  146

Yojanas  (measures  of  dis-
tance, 35,  82,  156,  227,
283,  284

Yudhishthira,  the  assembly-
hall  of,  139

Yule,  Hobson-Jobson,  14m1,
85 n,   HQn

Y'ule  and  Cordier,  The  Book
of  Ser  Marco  Polo,  85n,
201,  202,  307,  307n*,  329;
Cathay  and  the  Way  Thither,
57,  85»,  329


Zenana,  170,  180,  181
Zeus,  127,  257,  310
Zimmer,   Alt-Indisches  Leben,

30ft1
Zizyphtu  jujuba  (bor),  323
Zohak,   the  giant  keeper  of

the  caves  of  Babylon,  150
Zulus,     sneezing    customs

among  the,  313


INDEX  II


GENERAL


Abode  of  the  blessed  (Svarga),

139,  253
Aboriginal    tribes,   Nishadas,

10,  10ft1
Accomplishment  (kala),    140,

140ft1,  164ft1
Account  of  the  Buddhist  Liter-
ature of  Nepal,  R.  L.  Mitra,

20W1
"  Achtzig  Miirchen  der  Ljut-

ziner    Esten,"    O.    Kallas,

Verhandl.  d.  Gelehrten  Est-

nischen  Gesell.,  34ft
Acids,  Geber's  researches  on

the  properties  of,  161ft1
Acquiring    qualities    of    the

dead,    151 ;    the  power  of

a  victim,  151
"  Act  of  Truth  "  motif,  172ft2,

179-182
"Act  of  Truth,  The,"  E.  W.

Burlingame,  Journ.  Roy.  As.

Soc,  179,  182
Acts,  329
"Adventure  of  Satni-Kham-

ois    with    the    Mummies,"

Maspero,     Popular    Stories

of  Ancient  Egypt,  268m1
Ad  Nationes,  Tertullian,  131ft3
Adversus      Gentes,      Arnobius

Orestes,  21ft
JEgypten,  A.  von  Kremer,  329
JEthiopica,  Heliodorus,  112ft1
African  sneezing  salutations,

312,  313
Age,  fruits  which  prevent  old,

42,  43  ;  the  thief  of  beauty,

old,  243
"Ahmed  the  Cobbler,"    Sir

J.     Malcolm,    Sketches    of

Persia,  76
A'ln-i-AkbarJ,  Jarrett,  162ft
Air,   doll  flies   through    the,

40,    40ft1 ;    flying    through

the,  27,  35
Alchemie  in  alter er  und  neuerer

Zeit,  Die,  Hermann  Kopp,

163ft
Alchemy,  161ft1,  162ft
"Alchemy,"  T.  Barnes;  ditto,

Carra  de  Vaux ;   E.   Riess,

345


"  Alchemy  " — continued

Hastings'  Ency.  Pel.   Eth.,

162ft;  ditto,   H.   M.    Ross,

Ency.  Brit.,  162ft
"Ali'Cogia,  Tale  of,"  Mille

et  Une  Nuits,  118ft]
"  Ali      Khwajah      and      the

Merchant     of     Baghdad,"

Burton,  Nights,  118ft1,  119ft
All  the  Year  Round,  154
Altars  erected  by  Teutons  at

cross-roads,  37
Alt- Indisches   Leben,   Zimmer,

30ft1
Amadis  of  Greece,  82ft2
Amazulu,  The  Religious  System

of  the,   H.    Callawav,  313,

313ft4
Amer.   Journ.   Phil.,  "Art  of

Stealing  in  Hindu  Fiction,"

Bloomfield,  153
Among  the  Primitive  Bakongo,

J.  H.  Weeks,  313,  313ft1
Amphitruo,  Plautus,  127
Amphitrrjon,  Moliere,  127
"  Amulettes    javanaises,"    J.

Knebel,      Tijdschrift     voor

Indische     Taal-  Land    en

Volkenkunde,  151
Amusing  Stories,  E.  Rehatsek,

118ft1
Anabasis,  Xenophon,  310ft4
Ananda  -  ramayana,     "  S  a  r  a-

Kanda,"  201  '
Ancient    Geography   of  India,

Cunningham,  172ft1,  184ft1
Ancient    India,    eunuchs    in,

320,   321;   medical  beliefs

in,  50ft2,  51ft,  52ft
Anger,     the    ascetic     who

conquered,  22
"Animals,"  N.  W.  Thomas,

Hastings'  Ency.  Rel.  Eth.,

170ft1
Animals  with  eight  feet,  fabu-
lous (Sarabhas),  259,  259ft
Anmerkungen    zu   den   Kinder-

und Hausm'drchen  der  Bruder

Grimm,  Bolte  and  Polivka,

76,  105ft,  188ft,  204,  227ft,

238,  272ft1   280


Annales  de  la  Prop,  de  la  Foi

314ft5
Anointing     Naravahanadatta

as  Crown  Prince,  136
Anthropophyteia,  34ft
Antigone,  Sophocles,  292ft1
Antiquary,   Sir  Walter  Scott,

150
Ants  help  Sringabhuja,  226
Anvar-i-Suhaill,  the.^  126
Apastamba  Dharma  Sastra,  the,

320
Apollodorus,     trans.      Frazer,

258
Apparatus    for   washing    the

hands,  peacock,  58
Apples   of   Hippomenes,  the

golden,  238
Arabum  Proverbia,  G.  Freytag,

279
Architect  Daedalus,  the  Greek,

56
Architectur a  Decern,    De,

Vitruvius,  56,  57
Arrow,  the  golden,  222,  223
Arrows,    god  of  the  flowery

(Kama),  24
"Art  of  Entering  Another's

Body,  On  the,"  Bloomfield,

Proc.    Amer.    Philos.    Soc,

83ft1
"Art  of  Stealing  in  Hindu

Fiction,  On  the,"  Bloom-
field,   Amer.    Journ.    Phil.,

153
Art     of     transmuting     base

metals    into    gold,    161ft1,

162ft
Arthasastra,    Kautilya   (trans.

Shamasastry),  142ft2
Artus  de  la  Bretagne,  Romance

of,  82ft2
Aryan  Nations,  Mythology  of

the,  Cox,  28ft1,  272ft1
Ascent  of  Olympus,  J.  Rendel

Harris,  153
Ascetic,  Buddhist  (Sramana),

2,   2ft3,   210ft1;    who    con-
quered anger,  22  ;  a  Pasu-

pata,    293;    the    wicked

female,  99-101,  104


34G


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


Ascetics,  Pasupata,  186-188;

Story  of  the  Two,  10-11
Ashes,  a  circle  of,  187,  l&ln1 ;

from  a  pyre,  151  ;  strewn

on  the  road,  105n
Assemblies  of  Al-IJariri,  The,

T.  Chenery,  278

mbly-hall      of     Yudhi-

shthira,  139
Assistant,       barber      the

H rah  man's,  lOOn1
Assumed     a     form,     having

(jdtarnjxi),  148/16

tssyr.       Beamtentum,"

Klauber,      Isipziger      sent.

Studien,  329
Astrologer  (jildvavijua).  72nJ
Astrologers,  kdr  the  charmed

circle  of  Hindu,  201
Atharta-l'eda,  the,  30/t1,  50/t1,

142,  319,321
Attack    of    the     ichneumon

against      crocodiles      and

snakes,  115/t1,  116u
Aiis  Sehwaben,  Birlinger,  150,

218n»
Auspicious    marks   of    Nara-

vahanadatta,  84nl
"Austerities,"      J.      A.

Macculloch,        Hastings'

Encif.  ltel.  Eth.,  21  n
Automata,   212n' ;    note  on,

56-59;    wooden,  281,   282,

285

Automatojxnctica,  Hero  of
Alexandria,  56,  57

Axe  sharpened  on  the  phil-
osopher's stone,  161 n1;
wounds  the  Brahman's  leg,
32

Babylonian  worship  of  Ishtar,

253n*
Haganda,  The,  J.  Roscoe,  38
Hahdr-i- Danish,  the,  126
BttUiU  PactoH,  Oesterley,  204
Hakongo.  Atmmg  I  he  Primitive,

J    H.  Weeks,  313,  313n*
Hdldghdt    District    Gazetteer,

iw,   loin
"Balochi     Tales,"      Dames,

Folk-Lore,  182
Bamboo  {vans'a),  !/>'
Han  of  the  lion.  The.  II .  J.  \.

Tremean  12,  312nl

Bantu   Folklore"],   M.   L.

Hewat,     Folk-Ixfre,    313,

313
Banyan* tree,  61,  115
Baptised,    fire    must    not    go

out  till  child  is.  131  n3


Barbarians  (Mlechchhas),  320

Barber  caste,  notes  on  the,

lOOn1,  lOln;  the  cunning,

99-105

Barber's  wife,  the  king  and

the,  102-103
Barbosa,  The  Book  of  Duarte,

M.  L.  Dames,  329
Barrenness,    mandrake    used

to  cure,  153
Basilisk,  112/t1
["  Basivis :       Women        who

through    Dedication    to    a

Deity    assume     Masculine
Privileges"]         Fawcett,

Journ.    Anth.    Soc.    Bomb.,

327
Bathing  -  place     of     Papaso-

dhana,  holy,  128
"Battle      of      the      Birds,"

Campbell,    Tales    from  the
West  Highlands,  237
Beautifully    rounded    (suvrit-

taya),  39ns
"Beauty    and    the     Beast"

cycle  of  stories,  92n2
Beauty,  old  age  the  thief  of,

243
Bed  (paryanka),  14nx
Beer,  country  (boja),  326
"Beget,  one  who  does  not"

(Su-ut  ri-e-Si)  (ea  alidi),  319
Beggars,     Pavayas     live    as,

323
Being  with  capacity  for  work

but  not  for  th\v\Vmg{Robof),

59
Beitrdge  zur  indischen  Erotik,

R.  Schmidt,  320
Bel,  fruit  of  the  (vilva),  159,

159n2,  160
Belief    in    Immortality,     The,

J.  G.  Frazer,  314,  314n2
Beliefs,       Ancient       Indian

medical,  50/t1,  bin,  52n
"  Bellerophon    letter,"   277,

279
Bellows   of  Hephaistos,   the

magic,  56
Benedictions  after  sneezing,

303-315
Benefits  obtained  by  marriage

of  a  daughter,  24,  26
Bhakta-mhla,  Nabh&dasa,  280
Bibliographic      des      Outrages

A  robes,  Chauvin,  in1,  21n,

68/11,  76,  82n2,  105;i,  127,

167n*.    LQln1,   204,    227n,

26W,  272/11
Bibliography     on     alchemy,


Bibliophilists       Society      of
English,  126

Bibliotheca      C  hemic  a,    J.

Ferguson,  162n
Bibliotheque    de    VEcole     des

Hautes  Etudes,  "  Le  Roman

de     Renard,"    L.    Foulet,

34n
["Bihari      Tales"]      S.      I

Mitra,    Journ.    Anth.    Soc.

Bomb.,  250
Biographers      of      Christian

saints,  20nl
Bird,    Garuda,    56,    67,    170,

210
Bird-king,  Suparna,  181
Birds,    bharunda,  61 ;    Bihan-

gama  and  Bihangami,  the

two  immortal,  29;i
Birth     of     a     daughter     to

Kalingadatta,     18 ;     of    a

daughter  to  Sushena,  25 ;

of  the  King  of  Vatsa,  67 ;

of  Madanamanchuka,  131 ;

of  Sringabhuja,    219;   life

in   a   former,    7,    8;    as    a

swan,  story  of  the  Princess

Karpurika  in  her,  292-293
Birth  -  chamber,    precautions

observed    in     the,     131  n3,

132n
Black   Magic,    The   Book   of,

A.  E.  Waite,  203
Blaming  one's  relations  with-
out cause  {nigrahah),  3/t1
Blessed,       abode       of      the

(Svarga),  139
Blind   prince,    cure    of    the,

61
Blindness  cured  by  "Act  of

Truth,"     180;    cured     by

chaste  woman,  171  n1
Blockhead  ("  Haripriya  "  or

Harisarman  "),  70n2
Blood  of  a  screech-owl,   un-
guent of  the,  152
"  Bodhisattva,"     L.     de     la

Vallee    Poussin,   Hastings'

Ency.  Rel.  Eth.,  253h
Bodhisattva  Avadana  "  Kshanti

Jataka,"  20ft1
Body  like  the  sirisha,  146
Bohmische  Mdrchen,   Waldau,

48ni,  152,  191n\  221n
Bombay  Gazetteer,  37,   207rt2,

322,  324,  325
Bones,  the  lute  of,  187,  188
Book  VI,  Madanamanchuka,

1-154
Book  VII,  Ratnaprabha,  155-

300


INDEX  II -GENERAL


347


Book   of  Black   Magic,    The,

A.  E.  Waite,  203
"  Book  of  Creation,"  the,  59
Book  of  Duarte  Barbosa,  The,

M.  L.  Dames,  329
"Book  of  the  Knowledge  of

Ingenious     Contrivances,"

Kitab  ft  ma'rifat  al-hiyal

al-handaslya,  Al-Jazari,  58
Book   of  Noodles,    Clouston,

231ft1
Book  of  Ser  Marco  Polo,  The,

Yule    and     Cordier,    85ft,

201,  202,  307,  307m1,  329
Boon  of  Gaurl,  the,  81,  82;

golden  fruits  as,  159,  160
Born    in    the    interior    of   a

plantain,     97;     with    feet

first,  children,  38
Boxes  containing  jewels,  209,

210
Boy's  juices  as  charm,  152
Bracelet  (kara,  kari),  201 ;  of

lotus  fibres,  121*  121ft1
Brahman  Brothers,  The  Three,

109-110
Brahman     Hari^arman,    the,

70-73,  75-80
Brahman    and    the    Pi£acha,

Story  of  the,  32-35
Brahman  -  Rakshasa      Yoge£-

vura,    the,    92,    92ft1,    93,

114,  115,  118,  120-122,  146
Brahman    Somasvamin,    the,

193,  195-200
Brahmanical  lock,  the,  2
Brahman's       assistant       the

barber,  100ft1
Brahman's  son   Vishnudatta,

Story  of  the,  93-96'
Brahmans  who  devoured  the

Cow,  Story  of  the  Seven,

9-10
Brahmans     slain      by     the

Yaksha,  134
"  Branca-nor,"  Coelho,  Contos

Populares  Portuguezes,  238
Brave     king     Vikramatunga,

159-163
Breasts  cut  off  by  Bahuchara,

321 ;  cut  off  out  of  devotion

to  Aphrodite,  21ft ;  cut  off

to   feed    starving    woman,

180;       like      clusters      of

manddras,   146
Breath  of  nostrils,  Asvins  pro-
duced by  the,  257
Bribe,  the  mendicant's,  210
Bride,     choosing    the,     225,

225ft2 ;  the  forgotten,  124,

124ft1


Bridegroom  of  Tara  (Buddha),
2,  2ft2

Brief  View  of  the  Caste
System,  Nesfield,  100ft1

British  Goblins,  Wirt  Sikes,
32ft1,  187ft3,  225  ft2

"Brothers,  The  Two,"
Maspero,  Popular  Stories
of  Ancient  Egypt,  238

Brothers  in  folk-lore,  272ft1 ;
the  Gandharva,  177,  178;
Pranadhara  and  Rajya-
dhara,  282-285 ;  the  three
Brahmans,  109,  110

Buch  der  Sagen  und  Legenden
Judischer  Vorzeit,  Das,
"Der  Golem  der  Hoch-
Rabbi  Lob,"  A.  M .  Tendlau,
59

Buddhist  ascetics  (Sramanas),
2,  2ft3,  210ft1;  hagiology,
20ft1 ;  King  Kalingadatta
a  distinguished,  2;
physician  Jivaka  Komara-
bhachcha,  50ft1

Bugbears  and  treasure-
guardians,  133ft1

"Bull  and  the  Ass,  Tale  of
the,"  Burton,  Nights,  60

Bulletin  of  American  Museum
of  Nat.  Hist.,  314,  314?i7

Bull.  John  Ry lands  Library,
"The  Origin  of  the  Cult
of  Aphrodite,"  J.  Rendel
Harris,  153

Burglar's  custom  in  Java,  151

Burial  of  criminals  at  cross-
roads, 37 ;  of  suicides  at
cross-roads,  37

"  Burial  of  Suicides  at  Cross-
roads," W.  Crooke,  Folk-
Lore,  37

Buried  monkey,  the,  189,
190

Burying  women  alive,  142ft1

Bushels,  three  (a  khari),  226,
226ft1

Cabinet  des  Fees,  126
Calamities  escaped,  28-32
Calamity    brought    when

Pavaya,       strips       himself

naked,  324
"  Calamity,       a      domestic,"

daughter,  18ft3
Cambridge  History   of  India,

257
"  Campaka,    Die    Erzahlung

vom    Kaufmann."    Hertel,

Zeit.  d.  d.  morg.  Gesell.,  and

Indische  Erzdhler,  280


Camphor-produced  (Karpura-

sambhava),  260ft1
"Camphor,"  W.  H.   Schoff,

J  own.    Amer.    Orient.   Soc,

260ft1
Candle    of  human   fat,    133,

150-154 ;    lit    in    lying  -  in

chamber,   131ft3  ;  made   of

newly  born  child,  152,  153
Canterbury     Tales,     Chaucer,

221ft1
Capacity  for  work  but  not  for

thinking  (Robot),  59
Capon  (capo),  319
Capua,  John  of,  126
Carbuncle,      the      luminous,

167ft2
Carious     teeth     in     modern

India,  cure  for,  51ft
Carmina,  Catullus,  311,  311ft2
Carpentry      and     its     tools,

Daedalus  inventor  of.  56
Castaway,    Yavanasena    the,

174-176
Caste,    the    Bediya,    Beriya,

Beria  or  Bedia,  51ft ;  the

Chandala,    116;    notes    on

the  'barber,    100ft1,    101ft;

of     wandering     criminals,

unfavourable  omens  among

the    Sansia,     86ft1;     the

Chitari  (painters),  306
Castes  and  Tribes  of  Southern

India,  Thurston ,  101ft,  325
Castrate  (castro),  319
Castrates  (nirasta),  319
Castration  forbidden   by  the

Gaikwar   of  Baroda,    323;

Oriental    origin     of,     319,

320 ;    widespread    in    the

East,  320
Cat,  unguent  of  the  gall  of  a

black,  152
Catalogue  of  Works  on  Alchemy

and    Chemistry    exhibited    at

the  Grolier  Club,  New  York,

H.  C.  Bolton,  162ft
Cathay  and  the  Way  Thither,

Yule  and  Cordier.  57,  85ft,

329
Catoptrica,     Hero     of    Alex-
andria, 56,  57
Cattle  disease  cured  by  magic

circle,  201
Caves  of  Babylon,  Zohak  the

giant  keeper  of  the,  150
Celler,    Kirtisena,    locked    in

the,  45
Cento  Novelle  Antiche,  118ft1
Centipedes     in     the     king's

head,  49,  52


348


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


Central  India,  diamond  king-
dom of,  62,  63

Ceremonial  Institutions  {Prin-
ciples of  Sociology),  21n

Ceremony  of  emasculation
of  Hijdis,  324,  325;  of
initiation  of  Pavayas,  323

"Character  and  Adventures
Vluladeva,  The,"  Bloom-
field,  Proc.  Amer.  Phil.  Sac.,
207

( 'harmteristiques  des  Saints,
P.  Cahier,  20/j1

Chariot,  a  magic,  42;  with  a
pn<  umaticcontrivance,the,
284,  290,  296,  297,
300

Charioteer  of  Indra,  Matali
the.  67

(harm  against  the  evil  eye,
37  ;  for  extracting  maggots
from  teeth,  51/i ;  mandrake
used  as  love-,  153;  named
Momiai,  152  ;  to  scare  away
evil  spirits,  37

Charmed  circle  of  Hindu
astrologers,  kar  the,  201

'•Charms  and  Amulets
(Indian),"  W.  Crooke,
Hastings'  Emy.  Itel.  Eth.,
37

Chaste  woman,  blindness
cured  by,  171ft1;  fallen
elephant  raised  by  a,
171-172;  servant  called
Silavati,  172,  173,  176,  178

M  Chastity, *'  Hastings'  Ency.
Rel.  Eth.,  172n2

Chastity  of  Kalingasena,  128,

"Chastity,  Test  of,"  motif,
I72«a  "

Cheating  the  innocent  wife,
126,  127

Chief,  he  who  is  head  or
(sa  reft  {risi)),  319

Child,  candle  made  of  newly
born,  152,  153

Child  bed,  superstition  re-
garding left  hand  of  a
woman  who  has  died  in
her  first.    151

Childhotxl  of  Fiction,  Mac-
colloch,  201,  227»,  238,
U  '

Childlessness,  the  curseof,  157

Children  horn  with  feet  first,
.  precocious,  1 19n

"Chinese  Eunuchs,"  Stent,
m.  North  China  Branch
liny.  As    \


Choice,  marriage  by  {svai/am-

vara),  26,  26n',  181,  225»2
Choosing  the  bride,225,225n2
Christian  saints,  biographers

of,  20m1
Chullavagga,  the,  321
Churning     Mountain     (Man-

dara),  83,  83m2
Churning  of  the  Ocean,  176m1,

253m1,  260
Circle  of  ashes,   187,   187m1 ;

cattle     disease    cured    by

magic,   201 ;    the   debtor's

or   mandati,    201-202;    the

gambler's,  202  ;  the  magic,

201-203 ;  a  protective,  201 ;

used  in  homoeopathic  magic,

202,  203
Circumambulating    the    fire,

148,  148h2
Circumambulation,  295,295m2
Circ  u  m  ci  si  on,  History  of,

Remondino,  328
Citizens   of  wood,  the,  281,

282,  285
City  of  Indra  (Svarga),   139  ;

populated       by       wooden

automata,     58,     59 ;      the

wonderful,  43
Classes  of  eunuchs,  321
Clay  Cart  or  Mrichchhakatika,

the,  202
Clay   figure    of   Prometheus,

the,  309,  310  ;  man  created

from,  59
"  Clerk's      Tale,"      Chaucer,

Canterbury  Tales,  22 lw1
Cobra  lodged  in  throat,  62
Cockatrice,  death-darting  eye

of,  112m1
Cognate  kindred  or  Bandhu,

46m1
Collection    des  meilleures    Dis-
sertations, Leber,  309n2
Collection    of  mandrakes    at

the    Wellcome     Historical

and  Medical  Museum,  154
Comb  (kanghi),  100/11
"  Combat,     Transformation,"

motif  195,  195m1,  203-205
11  Come  quickly"  (sazuka),  313
Concealed  treasure,  the,  133,

134
Condemnation     of    eunuchs,

320,  321
Confection    of  opium,   a

[mqjoon),  326
Confessions,      St     Augustine,

6h2
"Conflict,     Magical,"    motif,

195,  195m1,  203-205


Connection  between  religious
rite  and  savage  practice,
21n

Conquered  enemies  or  en-
slaved persons,  mutilations
forced  on,  21  n

Consecration  of  idols,  37,  38

Contes  Albanais,  A.  Dozon,  204

Contes  Arabes  Mod  ernes, Spitta.-
Bey,  204

Contes  de  Gascogne,  J.  Blade,
105m

Contes  Licencieux  de  Constanti-
nople et  de  VAsie  rmneure,
Nicolaides,  34m

Contes  de  Perrault,  Les,  Saint-
yves,  105n,  238

"Contes  Populaires  du
Languedoc,"  L.  Lambert,
Revue  des  Latigues  Romanes,
34n

Contes  Populaires  de  Lorraine.
Cosquin,  76,  227n,  238

Contes  Populares  Portugueses,
Coelho,  30m1,  48?i1,  191?*1,
238,  272nl

Contest,  the  Koraiya,  38

Copper,  gold  out  of,  161,
161ft1,  162m

Counsel,  power  of  good
{mantra),  137nx

Country  beer  {boja),  326

Courage,  test  of,  38

Courtesan,  the  faithful,  212-
215;  story  of  King  Vikra-
maditya  and  the,  206-209,
211-217

Cow,  Story  of  the  Seven
Brahmans  who  devoured
a,  9,  10 ;  the  wooden,  56

Cows  born  upon  earth,
perfect,  36

Crane,  Rakshasa  disguised  as
a,  222

Cream  of  political  science,
the,  142-144

Creator,  Prajapati  the,  131,
131fti

Cretan  labyrinth,  56

Criminals,  buried  at  cross-
roads, 37 ;  unfavourable
omens  among  the  Sansia
caste  of  wandering,  86n1

Crocodile,  ichneumon's
hostility  to  the,  116n

Crossing  water,  demon's
difficulty  in,  236

Cross-roads,  burials  at,  37;
note  on,  37-38;  {.suk  irbitti),
38  ;  transference  of  disease
connected  with,  37,  38


INDEX  II -GENERAL


349


"Crow,    The,"    Basile,    Pen-
tamerone  (Burton's  trans.),

Crow  and  the  palm,  fable  of

the,  70,  70ft1
Crown    Prince,   anointing  of

Naravahanadatta  as.  136
Cruel  mother-in-law,  the,  44,

45
Crush  (0A<£o>),  319
Cult    of     the     Greek     States,

Farnell,  328
Cuneiform  tablets  discovered

by  Prof.  Winckler,  257
Cun.  Texts,  319
Cunning     barber,     99-104;

daughter  of  the  Brahman,

34-35 ;     lost    treasure    re-

covered     by,      118-120;

Siddhikarl,  the,  211ft1
"Cupid   and  Psyche"   cycle

of  tales,  92ft2
Cure  of  the  blind  prince,  61 ;

for  carious  teeth  in  modern

India,   51ft;    of  the   king,

52,53
Curious  Myths  of  the  Middle

Ages,    Baring-Gould,    152,

167w2,  187ft3,  268ft1
Curse  of  childlessness,   157 ;

of  the  God  of  Wealth,  134;

of  Indra,   6 ;    of  Rambha,

25;ofTilottania,  67;  which

made  Arjuna  a  eunuch,  114
Custom    of    salutation    after

sneezing,  30,  30ft1,  303-315
Customs      connected      with

cross-roads,  37-38
["Customs     of    the    Lower

Congo     People"]     J.     H.

Weeks,     Folk -Lore,     313,

313ft1
Cut  {sas),  319

Cut   (t€[AV(i>),   319

Cutting  (dana),  159ft1
Cyropcedia,  Xenophon,  328

"  Damannaka,      Story      of,"

Tawney,    Kathdkoqa,    279-

280
Damsels,  poison-,  112ft1
Dance,     pipe    that    compels

all  to,  187ft3
Dancers,  castrated,  321
Dangers,  the  three,  30-31
Daniel,  329
D'dnische       V  oiks  march  en,

Grundtvig,  205
"Dankbaren    Thiere,    Die,"

Gaal,      Mdrchen      der

Magyar  en,  226  ft2


Daughter  of  the  Brahman,
the  cunning,  34-35 ;  a
"domestic  calamity,"  and
a  "lump  of  grief,"  18ft3;
of  Gallus,  21ft  ;  of  Kalinga-
datta,  Kalingasena,  18,
27,  28,  32,  34,  35,  36,  39-
43,  55,  58,  64,  65,  66,  68,
74,  81,  84-93,  96,  106-108,
113,  114,  120-125,  128-
133,  135-140,  145-148;
substituted  for  a  son,  131

Dawn,  the  (Ushas),  257

"Day  and  Night"  (the
AsVins),  257

Dea  Syria,  De,  Lucian,  167ft2,
327',  328

Dead,  acquiring  qualities  of
the,  151  ;  man's  hand,
homoeopathic  magic  con-
nected with  a,  151  ;  not
knowing  if  one  is,  231,
231ft1

Death,  the  fear  of,  3-5;  the
letter  of,  265,  277-280;
preferable  to  poverty,  119;
of  Tarafa,  278

Death-darting  eye  of
Cockatrice,  112ft1

Debtor's  circle  or  mandati,
201-202

Decameron,  Boccaccio,  44ft1,
69ft1,  118ft1,  126

Decameron,  its  Sources  and
Analogues,  The,  A.  C.  Lee,
44ft1,  118ft1,  127

Decline  and  Fall  of  the  Roman
Empire,  Gibbon,  329

Decoction  of  vidanga,  51ft

Deities  of  light,  twin  (the
ASvins),  257

Deity  uttered  by  sneezer,
name  of  a,  306

Demoniacal  influence,
sneezing  due  to,  306

Demons,  diseases  attributed
to,  50ft1;  difficulty  in
crossing  water,  236

Dependent  of  a  king  (karpa-
tika),  207ft1

Depilatories,  101ft

Derniers  Sauvages,  Les,  M.
Radriguet,  314,  314ft5

Description,  love  by  mere,
68,  68ft1  ;  of  machines  by
Somaprabha,  42

Deserted  city,  the,  284

Despondency  of  the  king  at
the  birth  of  a  daughter,  23

Destiny,  176

Deuteronomy,  329


Deutsche    Volksaberglaube   der

Gcgenwart,  Der,  A.  Wuttke,

153
Deutsche  Volksbucher,  Simrock,

167ft2,  187ft3,  287ft1
Devil,  tales  of  outwitting  the,

33ft3,  34ft
Devotion    to    Aphrodite,

breasts  cut  off  out  of,  21ft
Dhammapada  Commentary,  182
Diamond  kingdom  of  Central

India,  62,  63
Dictionnaire  Infernal,  Colin  de

Planey,  150
Dictionary,    Bohtlingk    and

Roth,  45ft1,   158ft1,   195>i2,

245ft1
Dictionary     of     the     Natural

History  of  the  Bible,  Harris,

154
Dictionary     of     Phrase     and

Fable,  Brewer,  161ft1
"Dieuvous  benisse! — Origine

d'un     dicton,"      Cabanes,

Mceurs  intimes  du  passe,  315
Digit    of    the    moon    (kala),

164ft1
Discipline  Clericalis,  Alphon-

sus,  118ft1
Disease  cured  by  magic  circle,

cattle,  201
Disease,  healers  of  (the  A&-

vins),    258 ;    transference,

cross-roads  in,  37,  38
"Disease       and       Medicine

(Hindu),"  J.  Jolly,  "  Dis-
ease and  Medicine  (Vredic),"

G.    M.    Boiling,    Hastings'

Ency.  Rel.  Eth.,  52  ft
Diseases      attributed      to

demons,  50ft1
Disguise  of  Indra  as  Ahalya's

husband, 126
Distance,       measure      of

(yojanas),     35,     82,     82ft3,

227,  283,  284
Divine  beings  assume    their

own  -shape    in    sleep,    92,

92ft2 ;  Name  placed  in  the

mouth     or    forehead     of

automaton,  59
Divydvadana,  the,  180
' '  Doctor  All  wissend, ' '  Grimm ,

Kinder-u.  Hausm'drchen,  75
"Doctor  Knowall."  Grimms

Household  Tales,  M.  Hunt,

76
"Doctor  Knowall  "  motif,  75-

76
Dog  used  to  uproot  the  man-
drake, 153


350


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


Doll  fetches  water,  40,  40n* ;
flies    through    the  air,  40,

Dolls   of  wood,   mechanical,

39,  00

Domestic         calamity,"

daughter  a,  18m3
Double  elopement,  the,  13-16
Doubt    about   own    identity,

I,  i
Drag     —"<•>),  319
Dragons    and   serpents   most

usual  guardians  of  treasure,

133»l
Dravidian    Xights,    Natesa

-  >tri,  29/i,  204
Draw,  to  (krish),  204
Dream,  married  in  a,  82,  83
Dresden   porcelain   manufac-
ture. 161nl
Dressed  as   a    prince,   Kirti-

40
Drum  (dhol  or  dhole),  324,  326
Dual  gods.  257,  258
Duarte     Barbosa,     Book     of,

M.  L.  Dames,  329
Dungeon,  king  confined  in  a,

244,  245
[••Duppy,  The"]   Folk-Lore,

202
Duties  of  the  barber,  100ft1 ;

of  kings,  142,  142n2,  143,

144

Earlv  attempts  at  flying,  56

Kart'h.  magic.  227,  228;  taken
from  a  grave  throws  inmates
of  a  house  into  sleep.  151

Eastern  Romances,  A  Group  of,
Clouston.  118/11

Rating  hands  and  feet  of
dead  enemy,  151

Eccles.,  1T1,'1

Edge  (asri)f  319

rer,  40n2

Eight  special  forms  of  ether,
;    I63n*

Righty  thousand  princesses
married  by  Ratnadhipati,
170

Kjaculation  of' '  Abaraschika,"
63

Elegies.  Propertius.  31  In3

Elephant  Fare.  God  with  the
(Ganeia),  155,  loon*

Elephant,  iehor  from  the
temples  of  a  mast  (dana),
214a1 ;  raised  by  chaste
woman.  171-172*;  Sveta-
rasmi.  Story  of  King
Ratnadhipai      and      the


Elephant — c'onti

White,   169-178;  wounded
by  Garuda  bird,  170

Elixir  of  immortality,  253,
254;  to  procure  sons,  218,
219

Elopement,  the  double,  13-
16

Emasculation  of  Hijdas,
ceremony  of,  324,  325 ;  of
the  votaries  of  Bahuchara,
322-324

Emblem  of  royalty,  the
chowrie  an,  84ft1

Emperor  Tiberius,  the,  30nl

Empty  city,  the,  284

Enchanted  mango-tree,  the,
30,  31 ;  necklace,  the,  30,
31

Ency.  Biblio.,  38

Enajclopcedia  Britannic  a,
"Alchemy,"  H.  M.  Ross,
162ft ;  "Eunuch,"  E.  B.
Ty lor,  328;  ["  Ichneumon,"
G.  H.  Carpenter],  115ft1

Encyclopaedia  of  Islam,  278

Encyclopaedia  of  Occultism,
Lewis  Spence,  162ft

Encyclopaedia  of  Religion  and
Ethics,  Hastings'  "  Al-
chemy," T.  Barnes ;  ditto,
Carra  de  Vaux ;  ditto,  E.
Reiss,  162ft;  "Animals,"
N.  W.  Thomas,  HOn1 ;
"Austerities,"  J.  A.  Mac-
culloch,  21ft;  "Bodhi-
sattva,"  L.  de  la  Vallee
Poussin,  253ft  ;  "  Charms
and  Amulets  (Indian),"
W.  Crooke, 37;  "Chastity,"
172ft2  ;  "  Disease  and  Medi-
cine (Hindu),"  J.  Jolly;
ditto(Vedic),  G.M.  Boiling,
52ft;  "Eunuch,"  Louis  H.
Gray,  319,  320,  328;
"  Hand,"  J.  A.  Macculloch,
152;  -Horns,"  J.  A.
Macculloch,  188ft;  "Indo-
nesians," J.  G.  Frazer,  313,
313h5;  ["  Magical  Circle  "]
A.  E.  Crawley,  203;
"Mutilations,"  Lawrence
Gomme,  21ft;  "Nose,"
J.  A.  Macculloch,  314,
314n*

Endowed  with  sciences,
Naravahanadatta,  139

Energy  {utsaha),  137ft1
Engravings    from      Ancient
Marbles      in      the      British
Museum,   187n3,   188ft


Epigraphia     Indica,      L.      D.

Barnett,  207ft2
Epithet  of  Siva,  Mahakalaan,

lift1
Enslaved  persons,  mutilations

forced  on,  21ft
"Entering  Another's    Body,

Art  of,"  Bloomfield,  Proc.

Amer.  Philos.  Soc.,  83ft1
Erotik,  Beitr'dge  zur  indischen,

R.  Schmidt,  320
"  Erzahlung  vom    Kaufmann

Campaka,"     Hertel,     Zeit.

d.  d.     morg.     GeselL,     and

Indische  Erzdhler,  280
Escaping  calamities,  28-32
"Essay   on    the    Sources    of

Barlaam     and    Josaphat,"

Liebrecht,  Zur  Volkskunde,

20ft1
Essays,  Colebrooke,  37
Essence  (sattva),  252ft2
Essence  is  perfect  knowledge,

one  whose  (a  Bodhisattva),

252ft2
Eternuement,       U,       Charles

Brisard,  315
Eternuement    et    le   Baillement

dans     la     Magie,     I'Ethno-


et      le      Folklore
V,   P.   Saintyves,


graphie
midical
309ft1

Ether,  eight  special  forms  of,
163,  163ft2

Ethnographic  Notes  in  Southern
India,  46ft2,  306w3

Etudes  Folkloriques,  E.
Cosquin,  204,  212ft1,  238,
280

Etymology  of  the  word
"eunuch,"  319

Eunuch  (tvvovxos,  orraoW,
6Xa6ia<s,  d\i/3ta<s,  TOfitas)
(vadhri),  319  ;  class  small  in
Southern  India,  325;  curse
which  made  Arjuna  a,  114  ;
flings  balls  of  wheat  flour
towards  the  four  quarters
of  the  heavens,  37  ;  offered
as  victim  to  Misfortune
(Papman),  321  ;  priests,
Galli,  327,  328

"Eunuch,"  Louis  H.  Gray,
Hastings'  Ency.  Rel.  Eth.,
319,  320,  328 ;  ditto,  E.  B.
Tylor,  Ency.  Brit.,  328

Eunuchs,  classes  of,  321 ;
condemnation  of,  320,  321  ;
excluded  from  the  sraddha,
320 ;  forbidden  to  serve  as
witnesses,  320 ;  ill-omened..


INDEX  II -GENERAL


351


iunuchs — continued

320,  321;  Indian,  Appen-
dix II,  319-329;  in  ancient
India,  320-321  ;  in  Gujarat,

321,  325  ;  in  modern  India,
321  -  327  ;  permitted  to
marry,  321

'"Eunuchs'  to  be  found  in
the  large  Households  of
the  State  of  Rajpootana,
A  Few  Notes  with  refer-
ence to  the,"  H.  Ebden,
The  Indian  Annals  of
Medical  Science,  325

"Eunuchs  of  the  Imperial
Palace,"  Tu  Shu  Chi  Cheng
{The  Chinese  Encyclopaedia),
329

Eunuchus,  Terence,  6ft2

"Eunuques  du  Palais  Im-
perial de  Pekin,"  J.  J.
Matignon,  Superstition,
Crime  et  Misere  en  Chine,
329

European  sneezing  saluta-
tions, 311-312;  supersti-
tion and  witchcraft,  153

Evil  bodily  smell,  61  ;  eye,
charm  against  the,  37 ;
omen,  93,  94  ;  omen,  sneeze
an,  306 ;  spirits,  charm  to
scare  away,  37 ;  spirits,  fires
to  protect  from,  131ft3

"Exalted  Rabbi  Low  of
Prague,"  59

Excluded  from  the  sraddha,
eunuchs,  320

Execution  -  grounds,  cross-
roads as,  37

Exempla  of  the  Rabbis,  The,
M.  Gaster,  63,  118ft1,  172ft,
251

"External  soul"  motif,  151,
203,  272ft1

Extracting  maggots  from
teeth,  charm  for,  51ft

Eye,  charms  against  the  evil,
37 ;  the  Prince  who  tore
out  his  own,  19-21,  23;
torn  out  by  St  Brigit,  20ft1 ;
torn  out  when  admired,  19,
20,  20ft1

Eyesight  restored  by  the
Asvins,  258

Fable  of  the  crow  and    the

palm,  70,  70ft1
Fables    de     la     Fontaine,    La

Fontaine,  250
Fabliau,  Chevalier  a  laTrappe,

82ft2


Fabliaux,  Montaiglon,  76
Fabulous  animals  with  eight

feet  (Sarabhas),  259,  259ft1
Facetice,  Henricus  Bebelius,75
Faerie  Queene,  Spenser,  138ft1
Fairy  harp,  187ft3
Faithful  courtesan,  the,  212-

215  ;  servant  Viravara,  the,

28ft1
Faithless  females,  193
Fallen     elephant    raised    by

chaste  woman,  171,  172
Falling    in     love     by     mere

mention,  261,  261ft1
"  False   Ascetics   and   Nuns,

On,"     Bloomfield,     Journ.

Amer.  Orient.  Soc.t  211ft1
False    rejuvenation     of    the

king,  245
Famine,  cow  eaten  in  time

of,  9
Fat,  a  candle  of  human,  133,

150-153;  powers  attributed

to  human,  152 ;  of  a  white

hen,  unguent  of,  152
Fatal  look,  the,  11 2?*1
Fear  of  death,  the,  3-5;   of

ghosts  among  the  Baganda,

38;  of  the  night-hag,  131ft3
Feet  first,  children  born  with,

38
Feet     and     hands     of    dead

enemy  eaten,  151
"  Fellah  and  his  Wicked  Wife,

The,"  Burton,  Nights,  105ft
Female  ascetic,  the  wicked,

99-101,  104
Female     clothes     worn     by

eunuchs,  322,  325,  326,  328
Female  mandrake,  154
Females,  faithless,  193
Festival,  the  Holi,  37
Festschrift  fur  Ernst  Windisch,

J.     Hertel,     "  Ueber    die

Suvabahuttarikatha,"      62,

180
Fiabe  Mantovani,  Visentini,  76
Fiction,  theme  of  "Letter  of

Death  "  motif  in,  279
Fiddle,  magic,  187ft3
Fields,   holy    (kshetras),   220,

220ft1
Fight   between   a   mongoose

and   a    snake,    description

of  a,  115ft1
Figures,    the    indestructible

golden,  212-214,  216
Finger,    Water    of    Life    in

little,  253ft1
Fire,  circumambulating  the,

148,  148ft2


Fire,  God  of  (Agni),  13,  159-
162,  228ft2;  magic,  227,
228;  worship,  160ft1

Fires, thefive  sacred,  22,22ft1;
of  modern  ritual,  the  three,
160ft1

Fireside  Stories,  Kennedy,  76

First  child-bed,  superstition
regarding  the  left  hand  of
a  woman  who  has  died  in
her,  151

Five  sacred  fires,  22,  22ft1  ;
Vedic  fires,  160ft1

"Flea,  The,"  Basile,  Pen-
tamerone,  239

Floating  down-stream,  the
golden  lotuses,  246-248 ;
rubies,  247ft1

Flowers  and  fruits  that  grow
all  the  year  round,  138

Flowers  from  a  Persian  Garden,
Clouston,  167ft2

Flowery  arrows,  god  of  the
(Kama),  24

Flute  out  of  human  leg-bone,
151

Flying,  early  attempts  at,  56  ;
sandals  of  Hermes,  56 ;
through  the  air,  27,  35

Fly- whisk  (chowrie),  84ft1,  85ft

Folk  Etymology,  A.  S.  Palmer,
154  '

Folk-Lore,  "  Balochi  Tales,"
Dames,  182;  ["Bantu  Folk-
lore "]  M.  L.  Hewat,  313,
313ft2;  "  Burial  of  Suicides
at  Cross-roads,"  W.  Crooke,
37;  ["Customs  of  the
Lower  Congo  People "
J.  H.  Weeks,  313,  313ft1;
["The  Duppy"]  202;
"Folk-Tales  of  the  An-
gami  Nagas  of  Assam,"
J.  H.  Hutton,  105ft ;  "The
Force  of  Initiative  in
Magical  Combat,"  W.  R.
Halliday,  204;  "King
Midas  and  his  Ass's  Ears,"
W.  Crooke,  188ft  ;  "Persian
Folk-Lore,"  Ella  C.  Sykes,
307,  307ft2;  "Primitive
Orientation,"  W.  H.  R.
Rivers,  295ft2;  "Some
Navajo  Folktales,"  Buxton,
268ft1;  "Some  Notes  on
Homeric  Folk-Lore,"  W.
Crooke,  204,  208ft1,  227ft,
258;  "Sunwise  Proces-
sions," E.  Peacock,  295«2 ;
["The  Water  of  Life"]
G.  A.  Grierson,  253ft1


i


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


Folklore  of  Bombay,   R.    E.

Knthoven,  315
Folk-Lore  de  France,  S^billot,

76
Folk  -  Lore    of    the     Xorlhern

Counties,    Henderson,    150,

I95n*
Folk-L)re   of  the    Old    Testa-
ment, Fraser,  153
Folk-ljtre    of    Plants,   T.    F.

Thiselton-Dyer,  154
Folklore    of   the   Santal    Par-

H/iuas,  Bom  pas,  76,  182
Folk- Lore  Society,  29a
"Folk-Tales  of  the  Angami
u'as    of  Assam,"   J.    H.

Hatton,  Folk-Lore,  105a
Folk-Tales  of  Bengal,  L.  B.,

Day.  29n,  62,  280
Fo Ik •  Ta let  of  Hindustan,

Shaikh  Chilli,  272m1
Followers     of    N  a  ray  an  a,

109
Foolish  Piiacha,  the,  34-35
•  I  orceof  Initiativein  Magical

Conflict.    The."    W.     R.

Halliday.  Folk-Lore,  204
Forehead  or  mouth  of  autom-
aton, divine   name    placed

in  the.  59
Forest,  the  Vindhya,  266
Forgotten    bride,    the,    124,

Form,     having     assumed     a

(jatarupa) ,  1 48a5
Formation  of  the  moonstone,

53a2
Former  birth,  life  in  a,  7,  8
Forms    of   ether,    the    eight

special,    163,   163u2

Formula'  in  praise  of  right-
eousness, 307

Fortieth  day  (rhalisa),  323

Fortune,  the  Goddess  of,  24,
74,  298

Fortune  of  Royalty,  69 ;  of
the  Vidyftdhara  race,  137

Four  means  of  success.  Cpd-
>/as  the,  1  13    143n2

lour  quarters  of  the  heavens,
eunueh  flings  balls  of  wheat
flour  towards  the.  37

Frager's  Magazine,  154

Friar  Odoric,  57

Fried  pastry  (falan),  324

Friend  of  the  moon,  the  white
lotus.  140,  140a2

Friends  of  lovers  (the  A.4vins),
258

Friendship    of    Kalinga
and  Somaprabha.  27,  28


Frog  in  a  pot,  73,  75

Fruits  and  flowers  that  grow

all  the  year  round,  138
Fruits,  the  two  heavenly,  263  ;

which  prevent  old  age,  42,

43
Funeral      human      sacrifice,

185a1
Furrow  (karsha),  201
Future     Buddha,     a     (bodhi-

taltva),  252a-

Gagga-Jdtaka,  the,  304,  304a1
Gall  of  a  black  cat,  unguent

of,  152
Gambler's  circle,  202
Garden    of    the    gods,    Nan-

dana,  5,  6,  24,  138
Garden,  the   heavenly,   138;

called  Nagavana,  140,  142,

142a1
[Gargantua]  Rabelais,  34a
Gas,     Van     Helmont's     re-
searches on  the  nature  of,

161  a1
Gautama  Dharma  Sastra,  320
Genesis,  153
Gentile  (got  raj  a),  46  a1
Georgian  Folk- Tales,  Wardrop,

204
Geschichte  [or  Sagenbuch]

der    Bayerischen    Lande,

Schoppner,  133m1
Geschichten  und  Lieder  aus  den

neuaramdischen      Hand-

schrijien    zu    Berlin,    Lidz-

barski,  76,  280
Gesta  Romanorum,  4a3,  118m1,

167a2,  172a2,  247a1
Ghosts  among  the  Baganda,

fear  of,  38
Giant   keeper    of   the   caves

of    Babylon,    Zohak    the,

150
Giving  [dana),  159m1,  214m1
"  Gleanings  from  the  Bhakta-

Mala,"    G.     A.     Grierson,

Journ.  Rot/.  As.  Soc,  280
Globus,     "Zauberglaube     bei

den      Rutenen,"      R.      F.

Kaindl,  151
Glossarium    Eroticum    Lingua;

Lathiaj,  Pierre  Pierrugues,

328
Glossary,  Nare,  154
Glossary   to    Shakespeare's

Works',  A.  Dyce,  154
Goblin  in   the    rafters,    304,

305
Goblins,  pertinacity  of,  32a1
"God  bless  you!"  30,  31


God,  Chandrama,  the  moon-,
161m1  ;  with  the  Elephant
Face  (Ganesa),  155.  1"
of  Fire  (Agni),  13,  159-162,
228a2;  of  the  flowery
arrows  (Kama),  24;  of  Jus-
tice, 92;  of  Love  (Kama),
1,  24,  68,  111,  112,  129,
130,  132,  146.  165.  175,
184,  279,  294;  mutilations
to  indicate  subjugation  to
the,  21a ;  servant  created
through  the  mystical  name
of,  59;  of  Wealth  (Kuvera),
133,  134,  211,  212,  216

Goddess  Candelifera.  131n3;
Bahucharaji,  322-324;
Behechra,  321,  324,  325;
Bouchera,321 ;  of  Fortune,
24,  74,  298;  Huligamma,
326,  327

Gods  and  Asuras,  war  between
the,  66

Gods,  Brihaspati  preceptor  of
the,  88,  88a2  ;  King  of  the
(Indraffl.r.]);  Nandana  the
garden  of  the,  5,  6,  24,  138;
serpent-,  142a1;  (ribudha),
215a1

"Gold -child"  root.  the
218a1

Gold  out  of  copper,  161,
161a1,  162  a

Gold,  peacocks  of,  57

Golden  arrow,  the,  222,  223

Golden  Ass,  Apuleius,  226a2,
285a1,  31  In1

Golden  Bough,  Frazer,  38,
142a1,  151,  153,  203,  314,
314a6,  328

Golden  figures,  the  indestruct-
ible, 212-214,  216;  fruits
as  boon,  160;  handmaid  of
Hephaistos,  56 ;  lotuses
floating  down-stream,  246-
248

"  Golden  Lion,  The,"  Gonzen-
bach,  Sicilianische  Mdrchen,
225a2

"Goldene  Schachspiel,  Das,"
Kaden,  Unter  den  Olimi-
haumen,  187a3

"Golem    des    Hoch  -  Rabbi-
Lob,  Der,"  A.  M.  Tendlau,
Das    Buck    der   Sagen    und
Legenden  J'udischer  Vol
59

Good  omen,  sneezing  in
Greece  a,  310

Grain,  sacrificial  (homa  faja),
148a3


C  -andmothers  of  the   Kurus

and     Pandus,     Amba    and

Ambalika,  65
C  randson  of  Vishnu,  82,  83
C  rant    named     Yajnasthala,

royal,  32
C  rass,     darbha,    263 ;    durva,

254ft1 ;  kusa,  98
(  rave    throws   inmates  of  a

house    into    sleep,     earth

taken  from  a,  151
(  reat  Khan,  palace  of  the,

57
<  rreek     architect     Daedalus,

the,  56
( Week      Divination,      W.      R.

Halliday,  303,  303ft1
'  Grey  Hair  "  motif,  243ft2
Griechische     und    Albanesische

M'drchen,  Hahn,  204
Griechische     M'drchen,     B.

Schmidt,      28ft1,      133ft1,

187ft3,  218ft1,  238,  253ft1
Griechische  Roman,  Der,  Rohde,

188w
Grief,   daughter  a    lump   of,

18,  18ft3
Grimms    Household     Tales,

M.  Hunt,  76
Group   of   Eastern    Romances

and    Stories,    A,    Clouston,

118ft1
Grove  of  snakes  (Nagavana),

140,  142,  142ft1
Guardian      of     jewels      and

precious  metals,  Vessavana

a,  304,  304ft2
Guardians   of  treasure,    133,

133ft1
Gunpowder,    Roger    Bacon's

invention  of,  161ft1
"Gypsies  of  Bengal,"  B.  R.

Mitra,  Memoirs  read  before

the  Anth.  Soc.  Ldn.,  51ft

Hagiology,  Buddhist,  20ft1
Hair  of  which  fly-whisks  are

made     {al-zamar     or      al-

chamar),  84ft1
Hakluyt  Society,  57,  85ft,  201
Hand  (kara),  214ft1
"Hand,"  J.  A.   Macculloch,

Hastings'  Ency.  Rel.   Eth.,

152
Hand  of  a  dead  man,  magical

power  of  dried  and  pickled,

150;     in     homoeopathic

magic,  152
"Hand  of  Glory,"   note  on

the,  150-154 ;  extinguished

by  milk,  152

VOL.    III.


INDEX  II -GENERAL

Hand     of     Glory,     The,     R.

Blakeborough  (ed.  J.  Fair-

fax-Blakeborough),  152
Hands  cut  off  when  admired,

21ft ;     and    feet    of    dead

enemy  eaten,  151 ;  peacock

apparatus  for  washing  the,

58
Hanged    man,    candle    made

from    the    fat    of    a,    150;

man's  body,  origin  of  the

mandrake  from  juices  from

a,  153
Harivansa,  the,  9nx
Harp,  a  fairy,  187ft3
"  Hasan  of  Bassorah,"  Burton,

Nights,  260ft1
"  Hasty  Word,  The,"  Ralston,

Russian  Folk-Tales,  225ft2
Hates  men,  woman  who,  260,

260ft2
Hatims     Tales,     Stein     and

Grierson,  280
Hausa        Superstitions        and

Customs,    A.    J.    N.     Tre-

mearne,  312,  312ft1
Hausas  of  Tripoli  and  Tunis,

cross-roads  among  the,  38
Head,     centipedes     in     the

king's,  49,  52
Head    or   chief,    he   who    is

(Sa  reSi  (risi)),  319
Head  grows  again  on  being

cut  off,  268,  268ft1,  269
Healers      of      disease      (the

Asvins),  258
Healing    the     Brahman's

wound,  32;    properties  of

boy's  juices,  152
"Health-index,"  272ft1
Heaven,     Dyaus     the     Sky

Father  or,  257
"Heaven  and    Earth"    (the

ASvins),  257
Heavenly  garden,  the,  138
Heavens,  eunuch  flings  balls

of     wheat     flour     towards

the  four  quarters    of  the,

37
Hebrew  medicine,  cross-roads

in,  38
Helden-Sagen,  Hagen,  130ft1,

185ft1,  191ft1,  218ft1,  233ft1,

268ft1
Hen,  unguent  of  the  fat  of  a

white,  152
Heptameron      [Margaret      of

Navarre],  126
Herbal,  Gerard  e,  154
Hermetic  and  Alchemical  Writ-

ings  of  Philippus  Aureolus


353

Hermetic — continued

Theophrastus     Bombast     of

Hohenheim,    A.    E.    Waite,

162ft
Hermit     wounded     out     of

jealousy,  22
Hermitage  of  Kanva,  the,  130
Hermotimus,  Lucian,  82ft2
"  Hidden    Treasure,     The,"

Clouston,  A  Group  of  East-
ern  Romances    and   Stories,

118ft1
Hidden  treasures,  mandrake

reveals,  153
Highwayman's     incantation,

152
Hindu   love-sickness,    stages

of,  68ft1
Hindu  Manners,   Customs  and

Ceremonies,     Dubois,     306,

306ft*
Hindu  Pavayas,  322
Hindustani  palki  (palanquin),

14ft1
Histoire    de    la    Philosophic

Hermetique,     Lenglet     du

Fresnoy,  162ft
Histoire  des  sultans  mamlouks  de

I'Egypte,  Quatremere,  329
History   of  Ancient    Egypt,

Rawlinson,  329
History    of    Circumcision,

Remondico,  328
History    of   Fiction,    Dunlop

(Liebrecht's  trans.),   82ft2,

285ft1
History  of  the   Forty    Vezirs,

E.  J.  W.  Gibb,  20ft1,  204
History  of  Magic  and  Experi-
mental Science,  Thorndike,

57,  162ft
History  of  the  King  of  Vatsa,

66-68
History  of  the  Saints  of  the

Bhagavata  reformation,  280
Hitopadesa,  the,  28ft1
Hobson    Jobson,    Yule,    14ft1,

85ft,  116ft
Holy  bathing-place  of  Papa-

sodhana,  128
Holy    fields    (kshetras),    220,

220ft1
Holy  Land,  mandrake  super-
stitions in  the,  153
Holy  sages  (Rishis),  1
"  Homeric  Folk  Lore,  Some
Notes    on,"    W.    Crooke,
Folk-Lore,  204, 208ft1,  227ft,
258
Homme     Americain,     U,     A.
d'Orbigny,  314,  314ft5


354


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


Homoeopathic  magic,  con-
nected with  the  dead
man's  hand,  151  ;  hand  in,
152;  circle  used  in,  202,
2U3
Hook  (a,Ma),  Unl
Hop-o -my  Thumb,  105/i

•  Horns,"  J.  A.  Macculloch,

Hastings'  Ency.  Rel.  Etk.,
188»

Horns  growing  on  the  head,
187,  187«M88.  188»;  pro-
duced by  figs,  187/j3  ;  pro-
ducer of  (Sringotpadini),
187,  187n»

Horns  of'  Honour,  Rlworthy,
188»*

Horse,  named  Saravega,  230;
the  stolen,  71,  75;  trap-
pings, chowrie  used  as  a
plume  in,  Sin1,  85n

Hostility  to  the  crocodile,
ichneumon's,  l\Qn;  of  the
Vidyadharas,  145

Human  body,  resemblance  of
the  mandrake  to  the,  153;
fat,  a  candle  of,  133,  150-
154;  fat,  powers  attributed
to,  152;  leg-bone  flute  out
of  a,  151  ;  sacrifice,  funeral,
185H1 ;  sacrifice  (purusha-
medha),  321

'•Hunchback's  Tale,  The,"
Burton,  Nights,  101  n

"  Hundred  years, a  "  (satayus),
306

Huon  of  Bordeaux,  187n8

Husband,  disguise  of  Indra
as  Ahalyas,  126;  the
mean-spirited,  287

•Husband,  the  Pretended,"
motif,  126-127

Ibrahim      and      Jamilah,"
Burton,  Sights,  68nl
Ichneumon,     note    on    the,
115n».  116n

•  Ichneumon,"  G.  H.  Car-
penter] Ency.  lirit..  115nl

Ichneumon  (Ilerpestes  ichneu-
mon), 115n»,  116n

Ichneumon,  the  Owl,  the  Cat
and  the  Mouse,  Story  of
the.  115-117

Ichor  from  the  temples  of  a
mast  elephant  (dana),  214»l

Identification  of  Takshasila,
90n*

Identity,  doubt  about  own,
251 »'

Idols,  consecration  of,  37,  38


Iliad,  Homer,  229n\  277
Ill-omened  eunuchs,  320,  321
Immortal   birds,   Bihangama,

and    Bihangami,  the   two,

29n
Immortality,    elixir    of,    253,

254
Immunity  of  mongoose  from

snake-bite,  115nx
Impersonation  of  Madanavega

as  the  King  of  Vatsa,  121-

123
"Impossibilities"      motif,

24b*1,  250-251
Impotence  a  qualification  for

admission  to  Pavaya  caste,

322
Incantation,     the     highway-
man's, 152
Incarnation  of  Rati,  the,  131,

135,  138
Indestructible  golden  figures,

the,  212-214,  216
India  in  the  Fifteenth  Century,

R.  H.  Major,  201
Indian     Annals     of    Medical

Science,      The,     "A     Few

Notes,  with   reference   to

1  The  Eunuchs '  to  be  found

in  the  large  Households  of

the  State  of  Rajpootana,"

H.  Ebden,  325
Indian   Antiquary,    182,    201 ;

"The    Story    of   Chandra-

hasya,"    N.    B.    Godabole,

280
Indian  Eunuchs,  Appendix  II,

319-329
Indian    Fain/    Tales,   Stokes,

218n*,  226n2,  280
Indian        medical        beliefs,

ancient,  50/i1,  51n,  52n
Indian  Nights'  Entertainments,

Swynnerton,  204
Indian    Pluto,    Vessavana    a

kind  of,  304,  304n2
Indian  prostitutes,  207n2
Indische       Erz'dhler,        "Die

Erziihlung  vom  Kaufmann

Campaka,"  Hertel,  280
Indogermanen,  Hirt,  319
"  Indonesians,"  J.  G.  Frazer,

Hastings'  Ency.  Rel.   Eth.,

313,  313n*
Ingoldsbu    Legends   [Barhaml,

40n*  '
Initiation    of   Pavayas,   cere-
mony of,  323
Initiatory  rites  of  the  Galli,

327,  328;   of  the    Kojahs,

326


Innocent  wife,  cheating  the

126-127
Inventor,        Archytas        the

scientific,  56  ;  of  carpentry

and  its  tools,  Daedalus,  56
Invulnerable,      mandrake

renders  wearer,  153
Irische  Mdrchen,  Grimm,  30/i1,

188n
Iron-eating  mice,  the.  250
Iron  pincers  {chinita),  100x *
Isaiah,  329
Island,  queen  confined  to  an.

174
Islands,  Camphor,   260n! ;  of

Wak,  260wl
Italian  Popular  Tales, Crane,  76

Jacket,  short  (cholee),  326

Jamaican  spirit  or  duppy,  202

Jatalca  book,  the  Pali,  20k1

Jatakas,  the,  60,  179,  250,
304ft1,  306

Javanese  and  M&\&y  palatujuin,
Palangki,  lin1

Jealousy,  hermit  wounded  out
of,  22  ;  punishment  for,
177,  178;  of  rival  wives,  99

Jeremiah,  329

Jewel-lamps,  131?i3,  132n,
167n2

Jewels,  boxes  containing,
209,  210;  and  precious
stones,  Vessavana  a  guar-
dian of,  304,  304n2

"Jewish  Doctor,  Tale  of
the,"  Burton,  Nights,  95nx

Jewish  legend,  the  Golem  of,
59

John  oj  Capita,  126

Journ.  Amer.  Orient.  Sue,
"  Camphor,"  W.  H.  Schoff,
260nx ;  "  On  False  Ascetics
and  Nuns,"  Bloomfield,
211ft1

Journ.  Anth.  Inst.,  "  Kojahs
of  Southern  India,"  J.
Shortt,  325;  "Notes  on
the  Wagogo  of  German
E.  Africa,"  J.  Cole,  38

Journ.  Anth.  Soc.  Bomb.
["Basivis:  Women  who
through  Dedication  to  a
Deity  assume  Masculine
Privileges  "],  Fawcett,  327  ;
["Bihari  Tales"],  S.  C.
Mitra,  250

Journ.  As.  Soc.  Bengal,  "On
the  Shighni  (Ghalchah)
Dialect,"  R.  B.  Shaw,
269n


INDEX  II -GENERAL


355


,  ournal  Asiatique,  "  Lettre  sur
les  poetes  Tarafah  et  al-
Moutalammis,  par  M.  A.
Perron  a  M.  Caussin  de
Perceval,  278
ourn.  MahaBodiSoc,  "Mahii
Bodhi  and  the  United
Buddhist  World,"  182

,  rourn.  North  China  Branch
Roy.  As.  Soc,  "Chinese
Eunuchs,"  Stent,  329
rourn.  Roy.  As.  Soc,  "The
Act  of  Truth,"  E.  W.
Burlingame,  179,  182 ;
"Gleanings  from  the
Bhakta  -  Mala,"  G.  A.
Grierson,  280;  "Metrical
Version  of  the  Story  of
Harisarman,"  B.  Hale
Wortham,  77-80

Journey  through  Mysore,
Canara  and  Malabar,  Hamil-
ton, 201

Juices  from  a  hanged  man's
body,  origin  of  the  man-
drake in,  153  ;  powers  attri-
buted to  human,  152

Justice,  God  of,  92

Kah-Gyur,  the,  50ft1
Kalila  and  Dimna,  126
Kalmiikische  Marchen,  B.  Jiilg,

182
Kastration  in   rechtlicher,

socialer,  und  vitaler  Hinsicht,

C.  Rieger,  328
Katha  Sarit  Sagara,  Somadeva,

33ft3,  268ft1,  280
Kathakoca,    Tawney,     60-62,

207ft2,  279
Keeper  of  the  caves  of  Baby-
lon, Zohak  the  giant,  150
Khantivadi-Jataka,  the,  20ft1
Kharapidta-Jataka,  the,  60
"  Killed    person    coming    to

life  "  motif,  268ft1
Kind,  Das,  H.  H.  Ploss,  328
Kinder-und       Hausm'drchen,

Grimm,    28ft1,    75,    104ft2,

187ft3,  188^,  189ft1,  226ft2,

227ft,  231ft1,  237,  272ft1
Kindred,  Bandhu  or  cognate,

46ft1
[King,      dependent      of     a]

(karpatika),  207ft1
King    of    the    Gods.       See

Indra
"  King  Midas  and  his  Ass's

Ears,"    Crooke,  Folk-Lore,

188ft
Kingdom  given  away,  177


Kings,  308ft3,  329 ;  duties  of,
142-144

Kitab  fi  maWifat  al-hiyal  at
handaslya  (Book  of  the
Knowledge  of  Ingenious
Contrivances),  Al-Jazari,  58

Kite,  inventor  of  the,  56

"Kluge  Else,  Die,"  Grimm,
Kinder-und  Hausm'drchen,
231ft1

Knife  (asri),  319

"Knowall,  Dr,"  motif,  75-76

"  Knowing  one,  the"  (jnava-
vijna),  72ft1

Knowledge,  one  whose  es-
sence is  perfect  (a  Bodhi-
sattva),  252ft2

Knowledge,  pretended,  71-
73 ;  superhuman  {vidya),
165,  165ft2;  the  test  of,
73

"  Kojahs  of  Southern  India,"
J.  Shortt,  Journ.  Anth.  Inst.,
325

"  Kshanti  Jataka,"  Bodhi-
sattva  Avadana,  20ft1

Labyrinth,  the  Cretan,  56
Lac,  lake  made  of  liquid,  67
Lake  with  full-blown  lotuses,

24;  the  Manasa,  163
"Lalitanga,       Story      of,"

Tawney,  Kathakoca,  61
Lament  of  Kalingasena,  124
Lamp,  wick  of  a  (varli),  134ft1
Lamps,  jewel-,   131ft3,  132ft,

167ft2
Land  of  Camphor,  260ft1 ;  of

Chedi,  128
Leaves,    strings    of    (torans),

100ft1
"Leech,  Tale  of  the  Weaver

who    became    a,"    Burton,

Nights,  76
Leg- bone,    flute    out    of    a

human,  151
Legend,  the  Golem  of  Jewish,

59
Legend  of  Perseus,  Hartland,

204,  227ft,  263ft2
Legend    of    St     Augustine,

250
'  •  Legende  du  Page  de  Sainte

Elisabeth,    La,"    Cosquin,

Etudes  Folkloriques,  280
Legends  connected  with  the

"philosopher's         stone,"

161ft1,    162ft ;    of    moving

figures,  56-59
Legends  of  the  Panjab,  Temple ,

321


Leipziger  sem.  Studien,  "Assyr.

Beamtentum,"       Klauber,

329
Lentils,  track  of  peas  or,  104,

104ft2,  105ft
Letter  of  Death,   the,   265,

277-280
Letters,  the  "Bellerophon,"

"  Mutalammis,"         and

"  Uriah,"  277-279
"Lettre  sur  les  poetes  Tara-
fah et  al-Moutalammis,  par

M.A.  Perron  a  M.  Caussin

de  Perceval,  Journal  Asia-
tique, 278
Le  tires     Edificantes,     Pere

Bouchet,  201
"Life -index"  motif,   269ft,

272ft1
"Life-Index,  The,"  Norton,

Studies  in  Honour  of  Maurice

Bloomjield,  272ft1
Life  in  a  former  birth,  7,  8
"Life  of  St  Brigit,"  Whitley

Stokes,  Three  Middle  Irish

Homilies,  20ft1
Life    and    Stories    of    Parg-

vanatha,     Bloomfield,     63,

280
"  Life,  the  Water  of,"  motif,

43,  253,  253ft1,  254
Light,   the    twin    deities   of

(the  Asvins),  267
Lion  of  valour(  Vikramasinha),

11,  lift3
Lips  like  the  bandhuka,  146
List  of  mutilations,  21ft
Literary  History  of  the  Arabs,

A.,  R.  A.  Nicholson,  278
Literature  on  alchemy,  162ft,
Literaturgeschichte  der  Araber,

Hammer-Purgstall,  278
LithuanianLegends, Schleicher,

75
Litterature  Orale  de  la  Picardie,

E.  Carnoy,  105ft,  311ft*
"Live,    May   you"    (lalaun),

313
Livre  des  Lumieres,  Le,  126
Llyfr  Cock  0  Hergest,  "The

Mabinogion,"      Lady      C.

Guest,  205
Lock,  the  Brahmanical,  2
Loeb  Classical  Library,  258
Long-haired    man    (eunuch),

320
"  Long  life  "  (dlrghdyus),  306
Look,  the  fatal,  112ft1;    the

poisonous,  111,  112ft1
Lord  of  Wealth  (Kuvera,  q.v.),

215


856


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


Lost  treasure  recovered  by
cunning,  118-120

Lotus  fibres,  necklace  and
bracelet  of,  121,  121ft1;  a
friend  of  the  moon,  the
white,  140,  140n2

Lotuses  floating  down-stream,
the  golden,  246-248;  formed
from  drops  from  a  skeleton,
247,  248;  lake  with  full-
blown, 24

Love,  the  God  of  (Kama),  1,
24,  68,  111,  112,  129,  130,
132, 146,  165, 175,  184,  279,
294  ;  of  Kalingasena  for  the
KingofVatsa,85;  by  mere
mention,  68,  68m1,  261,
261ft1;  scorned,  109-110

Love-apple,  Aphrodite  a  per-
sonification of  the  man-
drake or,  153

Love-charm,  mandrake  used
as,  153

Love  -  sickness,  stages  of
Hindu,  68/11

Lover  revealed  by  "Act  of
Truth,"  181

Lovers,  friends  of  (the
Asvins),  258

Luminous  carbuncle,  the,
167»«

Lump  (Golem),  59

"Lump  of  grief,"  daughter
a,  18,  18ft3

Lute  of  bones,  the,  187,  188

Lying-in  room,  candle  lit  in,
131»»

\1  ibinogion,  The,"  Lady  C.
Guest,  Lh/fr  Cock   0  Her-

Ionian  Folk- Lore,  G.  F.
Abbott,  310,  310«4

M.ichines  described  by  Soma-
prabha.  42

Maggots  from  teeth,  charm
for  extracting,  51

Magic  car  of  Medea,  56 ;
chariot,  42;  circle,  201-203;
circle  used  for  curing  cattle
disease,  201  ;  earth,  water,
thorns  and  fire,  227,  228;
fiddle.  187«3;  the  hand
in  homoeopathic,  152 ;  in
Obstacles"  motif,  sym-
pathetic. 239;  ritual. nudity
in.  33.  33n>  ;  sword,  the,
271  ;  sympathetic,  38;
tripods,  bellows  and  golden
handmaids  of  Hephaistos,


Magic  of  the  Horseshoe,  The,

R.  Means-Lawrence,  309ft1
"Magic     Obstacles"     motif,

227ft,  228,  236-239
["Magical    Circle"]    A.    E.

Crawley,    Hastings'    Ency.

Rel.  Eth.,  203
"Magical     Conflict"     motif,

195,  195ft1,  203-205
Magical  power  of  dried  and

pickled   hand    of    a    dead

man,     150;    properties    of

the  mandrake,   151 ;    rites

connected  with  cross-roads,

38
Magie  et  Religion  dans  V Afrique

du  Word,  E.  Doutte,  202
"  Maha  Bodhi  and  the  United

Buddhist    World,"    Journ.

Maha  Bodhi  Soc,  182
Mahdbhdrata,  the,  115ft1,  181,

182,  247ft1,  250,  258,  320,

321
Mahdvagga,  the,  321
Mahdvastu  Avaddna,  the,  20m1,

244  ft1
Maid  called  Jihva,  72,  72n2,  73
"Main   de  Gloire  "  (Mande-

gloire,   mandragore,    man-

dragora),     the     mandrake,

153,  154
Majesty  or  pre-eminence  of

the  king  (prabhutva),  137m1
Malay  and  Javanese  palangki

{palanquin),  14m1
"  Male  "  mandrake,  154
Man  created   from   clay,  59  j

turned  into  monkey,  191
Mandragore    ("Main   de

Gloire,"    mandrake),    153,

154
Mandrake,  Aphrodite  a  per-
sonification   of    the,    153 ;

connection  of  the  "Hand

of  Glory"  with   the,    153,

164;  magical  properties  of

the,  151
Mango-tree,  the    enchanted,

30,31
Manners   and    Customs   of  the

Ancient   Egyptians,   Wilkin-
son, 116ft
Manner  a    and    Customs   of  the

Modern     Egyptians,     Lane,

308,  308ft2
Man's  clothes,  woman  in,  46,

47
Manufacture  of  automata,  56,

57
Mdrchen  der  Magyaren,  Gaal,

48ft1,  167ft*,  226ft«,  238


MdrcJien  der  Schluh  con  7
wait,  Stumme,  188ft

Mdrchen  des  Siddhi-k'ur  Die,
B.  Jiilg,  56,  62.  03,  75,
204

Mdrchen  und  Ersdhlungen  der
Suaheli,  Velten,  280

Marco  Polo,  The  Book  of  Ser,
Yule  and  Cordier.  85ft,  201,
202,  307,  307ft1,  329

Marks  of  Naravahanadatta,
auspicious,  84ft1

Marriage  by  choice  (.nw/am-
vara),  26,  26ft1,  181,221
gdndharva  form  of.  65,  82,
121,  124,  146,  196,  269;  of
a  daughter,  benefits  ob-
tained by  the,  24,  26;  of
Kalingasena  to  Madana-
vega,  121  ;  of  Naravahana-
datta to  Mandanaman-
chuka,  147,  148 ;  of  Nara-
vahanadatta to  R  a  t  n  a-
prabha,  167,  168;  rites
among  the  Bharvads  in
Gujarat,  37

Married  in  a  dream,  82,  83

Marry,  eunuchs  permitted  to,
321

Martyred  Charan  woman,
Bahucharaji  the  spirit  of  a,
321

Masseur,  barber  as,  100ft1

Mathurd :  A  District  Memoir,
F.  S.  Growse,  142ft1

Matrimonial  agent,  barber  as,
100ft1 ;  priest,  barber  as
the,   100ft1

Matrimonii),  De,  Seneca,  329

Matthew,  329

"May  you  live  !  "  (lalaun),  313

Mean-spirited  husband,  the,
287

Measure  of  time  (Kalpa),  138

Measures  of  distance  (yojanas),
35,  82,  156,  227,  283,  284

Mechanical  dolls  of  wood  .'^9.
56 ;  swans,  the,  282,  283

Medical  beliefs,  ancient
Indian,  50ft1,  51n,  52ft

Medicine,  cross-roads  in
Hebrew,  38;  to  procure
sons,  218,  219

Mckka,  C.  Snouck  Hurgronje,
329

"  Melancholist  and  the
Sharper,  The,"  Burton,
Nights,  118ft1

Melanesian    and    Polynesia
sneezing   salutations,  313-
314


.  lelanesians    of   British    New

Guinea,   The,  C.  G.   Selig-

mann,  314ft2
.  lelanesians    and    Polynesians,

George  Brown,  314,  314ft1
.  lelusine,  105ft,  238
.  lent,  de  V Acad,  des  Ins.,  "  Sur

les  Souhaits  en  faveur  de

ceux  qui  eternuent,"  Henri

Morin,  309ft2
VLemoirs  read  before  the  Anth.

Soc.  Ldn.,  "The  Gypsies  of

Bengal,"  S.  C.  Mitra,  bin
vlendicant  Prapanchabuddhi,

209,  210
'Mermaid,    The,"    Thorpe,

Yule-tide  Stories,  225ft2,  237
Metals,  Vessavana  a  guardian

of  jewels  and  precious,  304,

304?i2
Metamorphoses    (Golden   Ass),

Apuleius,      226ft2,     285ft1,

311ft1
Metamorphoses,    Ovid,     188ft,

191ft1,  230ft3
Method  of  preparing  a  "Hand

of  Glory,"  150
Metrical  Romances,  Ellis,l272ft1
"Metrical     Version     of    the

Story  of  Harisarman,"   B.

Hale  Wortham,  Journ.  Boy.

As.  Soc,  77-80
Mice,  the  iron-eating,  250
Midsummer     Night's     Dream,

Shakespeare,  29ft1
Milindapanha,  the,  320,  321
Milk  extinguishes  the  "Hand

of  Glory,"  152
Mille  et  une  Nuits,  Les,  118ft1
Mirror,  a  small  (arsi),  100ft1
Misfortune  (Papman),  eunuch

offered  as  victim  to,  321
Modern  Arabic  Stories,  Green,

76
Modern     India,      cures     for

carious     teeth     in,     51ft ;

eunuchs  in,  321-327
Moeurs  intimes  du  passe,  "  Dieu

vous    benisse  !  —  Origine

d'un  dicton,"  Cabanes,  315
Mohammedans,  sneezing

superstitions    among    the,

306,  308
Monarquia    Indiana,   F.    Juan

de  Torquemada,  150,  151
Mongolian  form  of  "Doctor

Knowall "  story,  75;  version

of   "Overhearing"    motif,

48ft1
Mongolische  Miirchen,  B.  Jiilg,

182


INDEX  II -GENERAL

"Mongols,  et  leur  pretendu
Role  dans  la  Transmission
des  Contes,"  Cosquin,
Etudes  Folkloriques,  204

Mongoose  (Herpestes  mungo),
115ft1,  116ft

Monkey,  the  buried,  189,
190;  man  turned  into  a,
191

"Montagne  Noire,  La,"
Melusine,  238

Moon  (Soma),  257;  digit  of
the  (Jcala),  164ft1 ;  white
lotus  a  friend  of  the,  140,
140ft2

Moon-god,  Chandrama,  161ft1

Moon's  diameter,  a  sixteenth
of  the  (kala),  140ft1

Moonstone  (chandrakanta),  53,
53ft2

Mort  d'Arthure,  La,  208ft1

Mother-in-law,  the  cruel,  44,
45

Motif  "Act  of  Truth,"
172ft2,  279-182;  "Doctor
Knowall,"  75-76;  "  Do-
hada,"  60;  "External
Soul,"  151,  272ft1;  "Grey
hair,"  243ft2;  "Impossibil-
ities," 241ft1,  250-251 ;
"Killed  person  coming  to
life,"  268ft1;  "Letter  of
Death,"  277-280;  "Life-
index,"  272ft1;  "Magic
Obstacles,"  227ft,  228,
236-239;  "Magical  Con-
flict," 195,  195ft1,  203-205;
"Overhearing,"  29ft,  48,
48ft1,  49,  60-63,  151 ;  "Pre-
tended Husband,"  126-
127;  "Quintessence,"  76;
"Tasks,"  226ft2,  227ft,  277;
"Test  of  Chastity,"  172ft2;
"Transformation  Combat,"
195,  195ft1,  203  -  205 ;
"Water  of  Life,"  253,
253ft1,  254

Mountain,  the  Churning
(Mandara),  83,  83ft2;
Kalakuta,  65 ;  Mainaka,
lift2;  Malaya,  155,  178;
Meru,  281;  Rishaba,  64,
126  ;  Sumeru  (the  mountain
of  gold),  148,  148ft1;  of  the
sunrise,  67

Mountains,  the  Vindhya,  40,
42,  97ft1,  267

"  Mouse  and  the  Ichneumon,
Tale  of  the,"  Burton,
Nights,  115ft1

Mouse,  the  sagacious,  117


357

Mouth  or  forehead  of  autom-
aton, Divine  Name  placed
in  the,  59

Moving  figures,  legends  of,
56-59

Mrichchhakatika,  or  Clay  Cart,
202,  207ft2

Musalman  Pavayas,  322

Museum  of  Fine  Arts,  Boston,
58

Mustard  seeds  sown  along
the  path,  98

"Mutalammis  letter,"  277-
279

Mutilation  in  religion,  self-,
21ft

Mutilations  forced  on  con-
quered enemies  or  en-
slaved persons,  21ft ;  to
indicate  the  subjugation  to
the  god,  21ft ;  list  of,  21ft

"Mutilations,"  Lawrence
Gomme,  Hastings'  Ency.
Rel.  Eth.,  21ft

Mystic  Trees  and  Flowers,
M.  D.  Conway,  154

Mystical  name  of  God,  servant
created  through  the,  59

Myth,  the  Prometheus,  307ft3,
309,  310

Mythes  et  Legendes  de  V  Inde  et
de  la  Perse,  Lev&que,  9ft1

Mythology  of  the  Aryan
Nations,  Cox,  28ft1,  272ft1

Myths  and  Songs  from  the
South  Pacific,  W.  W.  Gill,
314,  314ft3

"  Nala      and       DamayantI,"

Mahabharata,  181
Name  of  a  deity  uttered  by

sneezer,  306
Narada  Dharma  Sastra,  320
Native    Tribes   of  South-East

Australia,    A.    W.    Howitt,

151
Nature,  own  (svabhava),  252ft2
Nat.  Hist.,  Pliny,  311ft1
"Navajo    Folktales,    Some,"

Buxton,  Folk-Lore,  268ft1
"Neaniskos,"  L.  S.  Smithers,

Priapeia,  328
Necklace,  the  enchanted,  30,

31;    of  lotus    fibres,    121,

121ft1
Nectar  (Amrita),  176,  176ft1
Neun  Derusch  Vortr'dge,  Rabbi

H.  B.  Fassel,  59
New  Materials  for  the  History

of  Man,  R.  G.  Haliburton,

315


358


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


Newly  -  born  child,  candle
made  of  a,  152,  153

Sibelungenlied,  82m1

Night-hag,  fear  of  the,  131  m3

Sights,  Straparola,  76,  205

Sights,  The  Thousand  and  One,
Burton,  56,  60,  68m1,  76,
95m1,  101m1,  105m,  115/*1,
118a1,  203,  227m,  260m1-2,
268m»,  279,  308,  308m*,
328

Sirukta,  Yaska,  257

Socles  Atticce,  Aul.  Gellius,  56

Non  -  Aryans  (Mlechchhas),
320

Sorth  Indian  Sotes  and  Queries,
306

Norwegian  stories,  Ashbjorn-
sen.  237

••  Nose,"  J.  A.  Macculloch,
Hastings'  Ency.  Rel.  Eth.,
314,  314m«

e  -  bo  rn  "     (ndsikapra-
bhavas),  257

Nostrils,  Asvins  produced  by
the  breath  of,  257

Note  on  the  "  Act  of  Truth,"
motif,  179-182;  on  the
Asvins,  257-258;  on  Au-
tomata, 56-57;  on  Cross-
roads, 37-38  ;  on  the  "  Doc-
tor Knowall  "  motif,  75-76;
on  the  "  Hand  of  Glory,"
150-154;  on  theichneumon,
115m1,  116m;  on  the  "Im-
possibilities" motif,  250-
251;  on  the  "Letter  of
Death"  motif,  277-280;  on
the  «'  Magic  Circle,"  201-
203;  on  the  "Magical
Obstacles  "  motif,  236-239  ;
on  the  "  Magical  Conflict,"
203-205;  on  the  "Pre-
tended Husband  "  motif,
126-127

Soles  and  Queries,  154

Sotes  on  the  Spirit  Basis  of
Belief'  and  Custom.  Camp-
bell. 37

Notes    on    the   Wagogo    of

man    East    Africa,"  J.

Cole,  Journ.  Anth.  Inst.,  38

'<v    f'atmla;    et    corned iw ,

Morlini,  76

Sovellaja  Milanese,  Irubriani,

Soirllr.  Sachetti,  118m1

.    Masuccio  (Waters'

trans.),  287m1
Nudity  in  magic   ritual,  33,

33m1


Sugce     Curialium,     Gualterus

Mapes,  210m3
Nymph  Rarabhii,  the,  24-27  ;

Surabhidatta,  145

Objects  of  reverence,  walking

round,  20m1
Oblation   offered    to   guests,

argha  an,  98,  254,  254m1
"Obstacles,    Magic,"    motif,

227«,  228,  236-239
"Obstacles  Magiques,  Les,"

Chauvin,  Rente  des    Trad.

Pop.,  238
Ocean,  Churningof  the, 176m1,

253m1,  260
Ocean  of  Story,  The,  6m3,  162n,

182/250
Odyssey,  Homer,  138m1,  208m1,

225m2,  310,  310m2
[Oesterreichische  Kinder-und

Hausmarchen]       Verna-

leken,  272m1
Offering     called     argha     or

arghya,  53,  53m1  ;  of  eunuch

as    victim    to    Misfortune

(Papman),     321;      to    the

Fire  God,  159,  160;  to  the

spirit   of    the   cross-roads,

37
Oil,  perambulating  the  city

with  a  vessel  of,  4,  5 ;  of

Rama  ( Ram  Tel);  of  Vishnu

(Nariiyan  Tel),  152
Old  age,  the  thief  of  beauty,

243 ;  fruits  which  prevent,

42,43
Old  Deccan  Days,  Frere,  28m1,

52m,  62,  238'
Old  Irish  Treatise  on  the  Law

of    Adamnan,    Ed.     Kuno

Meyer,  21n
Omen,  an  evil,  93,  94
Omens  connected  with  sneez-
ing,  303,   306,    307,    308;

disregarded,    173;    unfav-
ourable, 46,  46m2,  86,  86m1
Omens    and    Superstitions     in

Southern    India,    Thurston,

306m3
"One  who  does  not  beget"

(su-ut  ri-e-si  (ea  alidi)),  319
Operation  of  Pavayas,  323
Ophiolatreia,  Anon.,  142m1
Opium,     a    confection     of

(viajoon),  326
Orient  uvd  Occident,   Benfey,

2m2,  28m1,  70m2,  76,  115m1,
150
Orient   und   Occident,    Kohler,
124m1,  237,  272m1


Oriental  origin  of  castration,

319,  320
Oriental    Translation    Fund,

Roy.  As.  Soc.,  60,  278
Orientalist,    The    ["Sinhalese

Folklore"],  W.  Goonetil-

leke,  76
Origin  of  castration,  319,  320;

of  the  mandrake  in  juices

from  hanged  man's  body,

153  ;  of  the  word  palanquin,

14m1
"Origin     of     the     Cult     of

Aphrodite,  The,"  J.  Rendel

Harris,  Bull.  John  Ry  lands

Library,  153
"Origin    of  the    Custom   of

Salutation  after  Sneezing,"

J.  Knott,  St    Louis  Medical

Review,  315
Origin  and  Development  of  the

Moral  Ideas,  Westermarck,

38,  328
Orlando  Furioso,  Ariosto,  167  m2
"  Outidanos,"  R.  F.  Burton,

Priapeia,  328
Outwitting  the  devil,  tales  of,

33m3,  34m
"Overhearing"    motif,    29m,

48,48m1,  49,60-63/151
Owl,  unguent  of  the   blood

of  a  screech-,  152
Own  nature  (svabhava),  252n2
Ox,   transformation  into  an,

194
Ox-face  (Gomukha),  240m1

Pains    cured     by     "Act     of

Truth,"  180,  181
Painter  caste  (Chitari),  306
Palace  of  the  Great  Khan,  57
Palankeen    (palanquin,    palan-

owM,  etc.),  14,  14m1
Pall  Jataka  book,  the,  20m1
Pali  pallanko  (palanquin),  14m1
Palm,  fable  of  the  crow  and

the,  70,  70m1
Palmerin  of  Oliva,  82m2
Panchatantra,     the,     Benfey,

28m1,  62,  69m1,  76,   115m1,

126
Pandara- Jataka,  the,  179
Punjab  Sotes  and  Queries,  201
Paradise  Lost,  Milton,  131  a1
Parisishfaparvan,      Hiina-

chandra  (Hertel's    trans.),

180,  207n2
"Parrots,  Story  of  the  Couple

of,"    Tawney,     Kathakoca,

60,  62
Passion  (rasa),  27,  27m1


INDEX  II -GENERAL


359


5astry,  fried  {talan),  324
3ath,    mustard    seeds    sown

along  the,  98
3atrons    of   towns,    serpents

protecting,  142m1
Peacock  apparatus  for  wash-
ing the  hands,  58
Peacocks  of  gold,  57
Peas  or  lentils,  track  of,  104,

104ft2,  105tt
"Penta     the      Handless,"

Basile,   Pentamerone,    20ft1,

21n
Pentamerone,     Basile     (trans.

Burton),   20ft1,   21ft,   28ft1,

48ft1,    105ft,     226ft2,     238,

239,  272ft1,  285ft1,  292ft1
Pentateuch,  the,  308
Perambulating  the  city  with

a  vessel  of  oil,  4,  5
Perfect      cows     born      upon

earth,  36
"Persian    Folk-Lore, "    Ella

C.    Sykes,   Folk-Lore,  307,

307ft2
Persian    Moonshee,    Gladwin,

118ft1
Pertinacity  of  goblins,  32ft1
Pestle  that  fetched  water,  40ft2
Petit   Diable   de   Papefiguiere ,

Le,  La  Fontaine,  33n3
Petit  Poucet,  Le,  Perrault,  105ft
Petticoat  (saree),  326
Philopseudes,  Lucian,  40ft2
Philosopher's      stone,      the,

161ft1,  162ft
Physician,     Jivaka     Komara-

bhachcha,    the     Buddhist,

50ft1
Pill,    a  wonder-working,    75,

76
Pincers,  iron  (chimta),  100ft1
Pipe     that    compels    all    to

dance,  187ft3
Pirqe  Rabbi  Eliezer,  308
Place  where  four  roads  meet,

33,  37-38
Plague  of  Florence ;  ditto  of

London,  311
Plantain,  born  in  the  interior

of  a,  97
Pleasant  {ramyani),  244ft2
Plume     in     horse-trappings,

chowrie  used  as,  84ft1,  85ft
Pneumatic      contrivance ,

chariot   with  a,    283,   284,

290,  296,  297,  300
Pneumatica,    Hero    of    Alex-
andria, 56,  57
Poet  Tarafa,  the,  277-279
Poggii  Facetiae,  75


Poison,  the  Kalakuta,  175ft1 ;

(visha),  279
Poison-damsels,  112ft1
Poisoned     drink     offered     to

Gomukha,  141
Poisonous     look,     the,     111,

112ft1
Pole  to  carry  loads  on,  Spanish

palanca,  14ft1
Political   science,  the  cream

of,  142-144
Popular     Antiquities,      Brand,

131ft3,  152
Popular    Religion    and    Folk-
Lore     of    Northern     India,

W.  Crooke,  37,  40ft2,  121ft1,

142ft1,     151,     152,     161ft1,

185ft1,  218ft1,  247ft1,  263ft2,

272ft1,  306ft2
Popular     Stories     of    Ancient

Egypt,   Maspero,  203,  238,

250,  268ft1
Popular     Tales    and    Fiction,

Clouston,    56,    76,     133ft1,

204,  227ft,  238
Popular  Tales  from  the  Norse,

Dasent,  104ft1,  205
Porcelain      manufacture,

Dresden,  161ft1
Portuguese    Folk-Tales,     Ped-

roso,  29ft
Portuguese  palaquim,  14ft1
Pot,  frog  in  the,  73,  75
Poverty,  death  preferable  to,

119
Power  of  dried  and  pickled

hand     of    a     dead     man,

magical,      150;     of     good

counsel  {mantra),  137ft1 ;  of

a  victim,  acquiring  the,  151
Powers  attributed  to  human

fat   or  juices,    152;    of  a

king,  the  three,  137,  137ft1
Prabandhacintdmani,  the,

207ft2
Praise       of       righteousness,

formulae  in,  307
Precautions  observed  in  the

birth-chamber,  131ft3, 132ft
Preceptor      of      the      gods,

Brihaspati,  88,  88ft2
Precious  stone,  temple  lit  by

one,  167ft2
Precocious  children,  119ft
Pre-eminence   or  majesty  of

the  king  (prabhutva),  137ft1
Pregnant    women    murdered

to  obtain  child's  finger  for

candle,  153
Preparing  a  "  Hand  of  Glory,"

method  of,  150


"  Pretended  Husband  "

motif,  126-127

Pretended  knowledge,  71-
73

Preventing  inmates  of  house
from  waking,  "Hand  of
Glory"  used  for,  150

Priapeia,  "Neaniskos,"  L.  S.
Smithers ;  "Outidanos,"
R.  F.  Burton,  328

Priest,  barber  as  the  matri-
monial, 100ft1

Primitive  Culture,  Tylor,  30ft1,
185ft1

"Primitive  Orientation,"
W.  H.  R.  Rivers,  Folk-Lore,
295ft2

Primitive  races,  sneezing
customs  of,  312-314

Prince,  cure  of  the  blind,  61 ;
saved  by  his  sister,  28ft1,
29ft  ;  who  tore  out  his  own
eye,  19-21,  23

"Prince  Lionheart  and  his
Three  Friends."  Steel  and
Temple,  Wide-Awake
Stories,  247ft1

Princesses,  Story  of  the  Seven,
19,23

{Principles  of  Sociology),  Cere-
monial Institutions,  Spencer,
21ft

Prison  {kara),  201

Probationary  period  of
Pavaya,  322,  323

Problemata,  Aristotle,  310ft1

Proboscis  {kara),  214ft1

Proc.  Amer.  Philos.  Soc,  "On
the  Art  of  Entering
Another's  Body,"  Bloom-
field,  83ft1;  "The  Character
and  Adventures  of  Mula-
deva,"  Bloomfield,  207ft2

Producer  of  horns  (Sringot-
padinl),  187,  187ft2

Prostitute  {ganikd),  207 'ft2

Prostitutes.  Indian,  207ft2

Protecting  patrons  of  towns,
serpents,  142ft1

Protection  invoked  by  term
kar,  201

Protective  circle,  201

Proverbes,  Legendes  et  Conies
Fangs,  Pere  H.  Trill  es,
105ft

Proverbs  about  barbers,
100ft1,  101ft

Provincial  Glossary  with  a
Collection  of  Local  Proverbs
and  Popular  Superstitio?is,
Francis  Grose,  150


360

Proving  one  impossibility  by

another,  241,  250-251
Pseudo-Callisthenes,  167n2
Pseudo-Greek  myth,  a,  309,

310
Psychology  of  Sex,  Studies  in

the,  Havelock  Ellis,  328^
Punishment  for  jealousy,  177,

178
Pursuit  of  Sringabhuja,  228,

230
Pyre,  ashes  from  a,  151

Qualification  for  admittance
to  Pavaya  caste,  322

Qualities  of  the  dead,  acquir-
ing the,  151

"Quintessence"  motif,  76

Rabbi  Elijah  of  Chelm;  Rabbi

Low  ;  Rabbi  Zira,  59
Rabbinical  literature,  59
Rabbis,  Exampla  of  the,  Gaster,

63.  118m1,  172m1,  251
Race    of    Bharata,     66;     of

I'.mdava,  66,  68;  of  Yadu,

82'
Race  (vansa),  In1
Rafters,   the   goblin    in    the,

304-305
Ragkuvamsa,  the,  240n2
Ramduana,  the,  49nl,  218m1
Range,  the  Vindhya,  271
Rds  .Wild,  Forbes  (ed.  H.  G.

Rawlinson),  86m1,  322
Ratan-mdld,  Krishnajl,  68 n1
Real  I  ex.   Her   indogerm.    Alter-

tumskunde,  Schrader,  319
Red  Book  of  Hergest  {Llyfr

Cod,  0  Hergest),  205
Regio  Persarum  Principatu,  De,

ion,  329
Rejuvenation  of  the  king,  the

false.  245
Relations  de  Voyage  et   Textes
grapMque*    Arabes,    G.

Ferrand,  260m1
Release   from    further   trans-
migration.      Moksha      the

soul's.  4><2
Religion,    self-mutilation    in,

Religious  mutilations  personal
•mil  voluntary,  2b);  rite
and  savage  practice,  21/?

Religious  System  of  the
Amazulu,  The.  H.  Callaway,
313.  313»*

Reports  of  the  Bureau  of
Ethnology,  314,  314n7

Requisites  of  a  suitor.  66


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


Reveals      hidden      treasure,

mandrake,  153
Revue  Celtique,  20m1
Revue   des   Langues   Romanes,

"Contes    populaires    du

Languedoc,"  L.   Lambert,

34n
Revue  des   Trad.  Pop.,  "  Les

Obstacles     Magiques,"

Chauvin,  238
Right    hand    towards    them,

walking  round  objects  with

the,  20/j1
Righteousness,     formulae     in

praise  of,  307
Rig- Veda,  the,  257
Riklci-  Tikki-  Tavi,     Kipling,

115m1

Rime  oj  Sir  Topas,  Chaucer,

82m2
Ring  (/card,  kari),  201
Rising  up  (utpatati),  159w3
Rites  connected  with   cross-
roads, magical,  38
Rites      of      the      Twice-born,

Stevenson,  37,  38
Ritual,  nudity  in  magic,  33,

33m1;  three  fires  of  modern,

160m1
Rival  wives,  jealousy  of,  99
Rivers,   beautiful    (sadvdhini),

148m4
Roads,  cross-,  33,  37-38;  meet,

place  where  four,  33
"Robber  Bridegroom,  The,"

Grimm,     M'drchen,     104m2,

105m
Robbers,  "Hand  of  Glory"

used  by,  150
Rolled     together,     a     lump

(Golem),  59
Roman    Empire,    The    Decline

and  Fall  of  the,  Gibbon,  329
"Roman    de    Renard,    Le,"

L.    Foulet,    Bibliotheque   de

VEcole  des  Haute*    Etudes,

347i
Romance      of     Artus     de     la

Bretagne,  82m2
Romanes      des      Sept       Sages

[Keller],  82n2
Romeo  and  Juliet,  Shakespeare,

112/ii
R'dmisc/ie  Muthologie,    Preller,

133m1
"  Rosmarinstrauchlein,  Das,"

Kaden.    Unter   den    Oliven-

bdumen.  48m1
Round  (pari),  Ik1
Royal  Asiatic  Society,  60,  77,

278


Royal    grant   named   Yajnas-

thala,  32
Royalty,  chowrie  an   emblei

of,  84m1 ;  Fortune  of,  69
Rubies  floating  down-stream,

247ft1
Ruse  of  Gomukha,  293-295
Russian   Folk-  Tales,    Ral s  t  o ■ .

4m1,  30m1,  82m2,  187n3.  21

222ft1,  225m2,  231m1,

253m1,  268m1
Ruthenian  custom  of  candle

of  human  fat,  151

Sabbath,    Golem    desecrates

the,  59
Sacred    Books    of    the    East,

Bloomfield,  320;  ditto.    K.

W.  West,  307ft4
Sacred  fires,  the  five,  22,  22ft1,

160ft1
Sacred    spot    or    holy    field

(kshetra),  220,  220ft1
Sacrifice,     funeral    human,

185m1  ;      human      (puru-

shamedha),  321 ;  of  an  old

woman,  142ft1 ;  the  snake,

66
Sacrifices  to  serpents,  142ft1
Sacrificial    grain    (homa-ldja),

148ft3
Sad  Dar,  the,  307,  307m4
Sagacious  mouse,  the,  117
Sagas  from  the  Far  East,  Busk,

48ft1,  75,  142ft1,  182,  195m1,

204,  218m1
Sagen  aus  B'ohmen,  Grohmann,

133ft1
Sage?i  aus  der  Grafscha

Mansfeld,  Grossler,  227ft*
Sagenbuch     [or     Geschich

der    Bayerischen    La  fide

Schbppner,  133ft1
Sagen,  M'drchen  und  Gebr'duck

aus    Meklenburg,     Bartsch,

4ft1,    104n2,    131ft3,    133m1,

150,  187ft3,  231ft1,  272ft1
Sages,  holy  (Rishis),  1
St     Louis     Medical      Review,

"Origin  of  the  Custom  of

Salutation  after  Sneezing,"

J.  Knott,  315
Saints     of    the     Bhagavata

reformation,    a    history    of

the,  280
Saints,  biographers  of  Chris-
tian, 20m1
Salts,  Dr  Glauber's,  161ft1
Salutation  after  sneezing,  30,

31,  303-315
Samuel,  277


in,
he


INDEX  II -GENERAL


361


Sandals  of  Hermes,  the  flying,

56
Sanskrit  Literature  of  Nepal,

R.  L.  Mitra,  244ft1
"  Sara-Kanda,"  Ananda  rama-
^  yana,  201
Satapatha  Brdhmana,  the,  258,

320
"Satni-Khamois,  The  Veri-
table History  of,"  Maspero,

Popular  Stories    of  Ancient

Egypt,  203
"Satni-Khamois    with    the

Mummies,  Adventure  of,"

Maspero,  Popular  Stories  of

Ancient  Egypt,  268ft1
Savage  practice  and  religious

rite,   connection  between,

21n
Saved  by  his  sister,  the  prince,

28ft1,  29ft
"Sayf  al-Muluk  and  Badi'a

al-Jamal,"  Burton,  Nights,

268n*
"  Schneeweiss-Feuerroth,"

Kaden,    Unter   den    Oliven-

b'dumen,  238
'  'Schone  Fiorita,  Die,  "Kaden,

Unter  den  Olivenb'dumen,  238
Science  bestowed  on  Narava-

hanadatta,  261,  262,
Science,  the  cream  of  politi-
cal, 142-144;  named  Praj-

napti,  64,  64ft1
Sciences  enter  into   Narava-

hanadatta,  139
Scientific  inventor  Archytas,

56
Scorned  love  of  women,  109,

110
Scratch  (karska),  201
"Scruple,    without    any"

(as'ankita),  96ft1
"Second    Kalendar's   Tale,"

Burton,  Nights,  203,  204
Second  wound  demanded  by

Pisacha,  33
Security,    the   six   means   of

(gunas),  143,  143ft3
Seeds  sown  along  the  path,

mustard,  98
Select  Specimens  of  the  Theatre
of  the  Hindus,  H.  H.  Wilson,

84ft1
Self-mutilation  of  Attis,  328  ;

in  religion,  21ft
Semitic   Magic,    R.    Campbell

Thompson,  38
Serbian  Folk-Lore ,  Mijatovic,

204
Serpent-gods,  142m1


Serpent-killer,  mongoose
famous  as  a,  115ft1

Serpent-worship,  142ft1

Serpent  -  Worship  and  other
Essays,  C.  Staniland  Wake,
142ft1

Serpents  and  dragons  most
usual  guardians  of  treasure,
133ft1

Servant  called  Silavati,  172,
176,  178;  created  by  the
mystical  name  of  God,
59 ;  Viravara  the  faithful,
28ft1

Servants  of  the  prince  ap-
pointed, 136,  137

Seven  Princesses,  Story  of
the,  19,  23

Shakespeare  Dictionary,
Schmidt,  112ft1

Shape  in  sleep,  divine  beings
assume  their  own,  92,  92ft2

"  Shighni  (Ghalchah)  Dia-
lect, On  the,"  R.  B.  Shaw,
Journ.  As.  Soc.  Bengal,  269ft

Short  jacket  (cholee),  326

Siamese  sneezing  supersti-
tion, 308

Sicilianische  Marchen,  Gonzen-
bach,  76,  104ft2,  124ft1,
187ft3,  211ft1,  218ft1,  222ft1,
225ft2,  226ft2,  230ft2,  236,
259ft2,  272ft1

Siddhi-Kiir,  Die  Marchen  des,
B.  Jiilg,  56,  62,  63,  75,  204

"Sieben  Weisen  Meister,
Die,"  Simrock,  Deidsche
Volksbucher,  287ft1

Significance  of  cross  -  roads,
37-38

Silly  Pisacha,  the,  33-35

["Sinhalese  Folklore"]  W.
Goonetilleke,  The  Oriental-
ist, 76

Siri-Jataka,  the,  60

Sister,  prince  saved  by  his,
28ft1,  29ft

Site  of  Kausambi,  Sravasti
and  Takshasila,  90ft1

Six  means  of  security,  the
{gunas),  143,  143ft3

Skeleton,  lotuses  formed  from
drops  from  a,  247,  248

Sketched  by  Chitralekha,  the
world,  82

Sketches  of  Persia,  Sir  J.
Malcolm,  76

Skill  in  stratagem,  Yaugan-
dharayana's,  89-91

Sky  Father  or  Heaven,  Dyaus
the,  257


Slain  by  the  Yaksha,
Brahmans,  134

Slave  caught  by  magic,  202,
203

Small  mirror  (arsi),  100ft1

Smallpox  -  transference  at
cross-roads,  37

Smell,  evil  bodily,  61

Snake  -  bite,  immunity  of
mongoose  from,  115ft1

Snake-sacrifice,  66

Snakes,  grove  of  (Nagavana),
140,  142,  142ft1

Sneezer,  name  of  a  deity
uttered  by,  306

Sneezing  customs  among  the
Bantus,  Bakongos,  Hausas
and  Zulus,  312,  313;  of
primitive  races,  312-314

Sneezing  Salutations,  Ap-
pendix I,  303-315

Sneezing  salutations  among
the  Hebrews,  Greeks,
Romans  and  Early
Christians,  308-311 ;  in
Africa,  Melanesia  and
Polynesia,  312-314 ;  in
India,  Persia  and  Islam,
305-308

Society  of  English  Biblio-
philists,  126

"Some  Navajo  Folktales,"
Buxton,  Folk-Lore,  268?!1

"Some  Notes  on  Homeric
Folk-Lore,"  W.  Crooke,
Folk-  Lore, "  204,  208ft1,
227ft,  258

Son  of  Kalingasena  substi-
tuted for  a  daughter,  131 ;
of  Kuvera,  40 ;  elixir  to
procure  a,  218,  219

Sorcerer,  the  Egyptian,  40ft2

Sorcery  (samvara),  195ft2

"  Souhaits  en  faveur  de  ceux
qui  eternuent,  Sur  les,"
Henri  Morin,  Mem.  de
V Acad,  des  Ins.,  309ft2

Soul's  release  from  further
transmigration,  Moksha,  4ft2

Spanish  pole  to  carry  load,
palanca,  14ft1

Spells,  Vaidik,  136

Spirit  (bori),  38  ;  ditto  (niono),
313 ;  of  the  cross-roads,
offering  to,  37  ;  of  martyred
Charan  or  Bhat  woman,
Bahucharaji  a,  321

Spirits,  charm  to  scare  away
evil,  37 ;  fires  to  protect
from  evil,  131ft3;  incubones
or  treasure-guarding,  133ft


362


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


Spoilt  prince,  the,  28-32
Sport    and    Folk-Lore    in    the

Himalaya,  H .  L.  Haughton,

182
Sj»\     set    ujwn    Kalingasena,

114
Squire's  Tale,  Chaucer,  40W1
Stagesof  Hindulove-sickness,

68n*
Star  {tarakd),  18/t1
Starving  woman,  breasts  cut

off  to  feed,  180
Status    of    eunuch     low     in

ancient  India.  320
"Stealing  in  Hindu  Fiction,

Art  of,"  Bloomfield,  Amer.

J  num.  Phil.,  153
Stolen  horse,  the,  71,  75
Stone,      the      philosopher's,

161 n\  162n
Story  of  Arthalobha  and  his
Beautiful  Wife,  286-290;
of  the  Brahman  and  the
.cha,  32-35;  of  the
Brahman's  Son  Vishnu-
datta,  93-96;  of  Devasena
and  LJnmadini,  111-112;  of
the  Ichneumon,  the  Owl,
the  Cat  and  the  Mouse,
115-117;  of  Kadaligarbha,
97-102,  103-106;  of  King
Dharmadatta  and  his  Wife
7-8;  of  King
Indradatta,  128-129;  of
King  Chirayus  and  his
Minister,  252-256;  of  King
Paritvagasena,  his  Wicked
Wife  and  his  Two  Sons,
263-276  ;  of  King  Prasenajit
and  the  Brahman,  118-120;
of  King  Ratnadhipati  and
the  White  Elephant  Sveta-
r.  mi,  169-178;  of  King
Vikramaditya  and  the
Courtesan,  206-209,  211-
217;  of  King  Vikramasinha
and  the  Two  Brahman s,  11-
13,  16;  of  King  Vilaaailla
and  the  Physician,  243-249  ;
of  KirtisenA,  44-54;  of
Nidchayadatta,  183-190;
193,  196-200;  of  Phala-
blititi,  69m1  ;  of  the  Prince
and  the  Merchant's  Son,
28-32;  of  the  Princess
Karpurikn  iti  her  Birth  as
a  Swan,  291-292;  oflUtna-
prabha,  166-169,  163-166;
of  Satruahna  and  his
Wicked  Wife,  111  ;  of  the
Seven   Brahmans  who  de-


voured a  Cow,  9-10;  of
the  Seven  Princesses,  19,
23  ;  of  Somaprabha,  39-40 ;
of  Sringabhuja  and  the
Daughter  of  the  Riikshasa,
218-235 ;  of  Srutasena,
108-109,  110-111,  112;  of
Sulochana  and  Sushena,
24-27 ;  of  Tapodatta,  241  ;
of  TejasvatI,  69-70,  74 ;  of
the  Two  Ascetics,  10-11  ;
of  the  Two  Brothers  Prana-
dhara  and  Rajyadhara,
282-285;  of  Usha  and
Aniruddha,  81-83;  of
Virupa^arman,  242  ;  of  the
Yaksha  Virupaksha,  133-
135

"Story  of  Chandrahasya,
The,"  N.  B.  Godabole,
Ind.  Ant.,  280

"Story  of  the  Couple  of
Parrots,"  Tawney,

Kathakoca,  60,  62

"Story  of  Damannaka,"
Tawney,  Kathakoca,  279-280

' '  Story  of  Lalitanga, ' '  Tawney,
Kathakoca,  61

"Story  Radicals,"  Baring-
Gould,  Henderson's  Folk-
Lore  of  the  Northeim  Comities,
195nl

Strange  Stories  from  a  Chinese
Studio,  Giles,  191ft1

Stratagem,  Yaugandhara-
yana's  skill  in,  89-91

Strike  (kotttw),  319;  (vadh),
319

String  (guna),  1ft1 ;  round  the
neck,  transformation  by  a,
194

Strings  of  leaves  (torans),  lOOn1

Studies  about  the  Kathdsarit-
sdgara,  Speyer,  12ft1,  16ft1,
25ft1,  50/11,  81ft1,  83>i3*,
94H1,  159n3,  208H1,  241ft»,
244/i»,  246ft1,  298ft1

Studies  in  Honour  of  Maurice
Bloomfield,  "The  Life-
Index,"  Norton,  272ft1

Studies  in  the  Psycliology  of
Sex,  Havelock  Ellis,  328

Subjugation  to  the  god,
mutilations  to  indicate,  21ft

Substitution  of  a  daughter
for  a  son,  131

Success,  updifas  or  four  means
of,  143,  143>i2

Suicides  buried  at  cross-roads,
37

Suitor,  requisites  of  a,  66


Suka  Saptati,  the,  126

Sun,  the  (Surya),   257;   and

Moon  (the  ASvins),  257
Sunrise,  mountain  of  the,  67
"Sunwise    Processions."    E.

Peacock,  Folk-Lore,  295/t2
Superhuman    knowledge

(vidya),  165,  165w2
Superstition,    Crime   et    Misere

en  Chine,  J.  J.   Matignon,

329
Superstition,     root     of     the

mandrake  in  European,  153
Suppdraka-Jdtaka,  the,  179
Surgeon,  barber  as,  lOOn1
Surround,  to  {ka(),  201
Susruta  Samhita,  the,  51  n
Suvabahuttarikatha,  the,  62
"  Suvabahuttarikatha,  Ueber

die,"     Hertel,    Festschrift

fur  Ernst  Windisch,  62,  180
"  Svend's  Exploits,"  Thorpe,

Yule-tide  Stories,  226n2
Swan,  Story  of  the  Princess

Karpurika  in  her  Birth  as  a,

291-292
Swans,  the  mechanical,  282,

283
Swedish  stories  of  Cavallius

and  Stephens,  237
Sword,  the  magic,  267,  271
Sympathetic    magic.    38;    in

"Obstacles"  motif  239
Syrian  Goddess,    The.    Strong

and  Garstang,  328
Syrische  Marchen,    Prym  and

Socin,  191,  231

Tableau     gen.      de     /'  Empire

othoman,  Muradjad'Ohsson,

329
"Tailor,  Tale  of  a,"  Burton,

Nights,  101  n
Takkala-Jataka,  the,  60
Tale,  the  unfinished,  29-30
"  Tale  of  AH  Cogia,"   Milk

et  une  Nuits,  118ft1
"Tale  of  the   Bull  and  the

Ass,"  Burton,  Nights,  60
"Tale  of  the  Jewish  Doctor,"

Burton,  Nights,  95ft1
"  Tale  of  the  Mouse  and  the

Ichneumon,"     Burton,

Nights,  115ft1
Tale   of  the   Phakir   Chand,

62
"Tale   of  the    Weaver   who

became  a  Leech,"  Burton,

Nights,  76
Tales  from  the  Field,  Dasent,

76


INDEX  II -GENERAL


363


Tales   and    Popular    Fictions,

Keightley,  204
Tales  from  the  West  Highands,

Campbell,  195,  205,  231ft1,

237,  272ft1
Talmud,  the,  59
Tantrakhydyika,  the,  180
Tarafoe  Moallaca  cum  Zuzenii

Scholiis,  Vullers,  279
Tasks    assigned    to    Sringa-

bhuja,       224-228;      'motif,

226ft2,  227ft,  277
Tearing  an  eye  out,  20ft1
Teeth  in  modern  India,  cure

for  carious,  51  ft
Telapatta-Jdtaka,  the,  4ft3
Temple  lit   by  one   precious

stone,  167ft2
Temples   of  the   Goddess

Bahucharaji,    Pavayas  the,

322
Tenth  day  (dasa),  323
"Test    of    Chastity"    motif,

172ft2
Test  of  courage,  38;  of  know-
ledge, 73
Teutonic    Mythology,    Grimm,

31  In4
Teutons,  altars  built  at  cross-
roads by,  37
Thalaba    the    Destroyer,

Southey,  150
Theme  of  "  Letter  of  Death  "

motif  in  fiction,  279
Thief    of    beauty,    old    age,

243
Thieving    practices    of    the

East,  153
Thorns,  magic,  227,  228
Thousand  Nights  and  a  Night.

See  Nights
Thread  (guna),  240ft2
Three  Brahman  Brothers,  The,

109-110
Three    dangers,    the,    30-31;

fires     of     modern     ritual,

160ft1;  Moirai,  the,  28ft1 ;

powers    of    a    king,     137,

137ft1
Three  Middle  Irish  Homilies,

"Life     of    St     Brigit,"

Whitley  Stokes,  20ft1
Throat,  cobra  lodged  in,  62
Thumb  of  "  Hand  of  Glory  "

will  not  light  if  anyone  is
awake,  150
Tibetan  Tales,  Schiefner  and
Ralston,  50ft1,  51ft,  115ft1,
180,  181,  188ft
Tibetan  yak  (bos  grunniens),
84ft1,  85ft


Tijdschrift  voor  Indische  Taal-

Land     en     Volkenkunde,

"  Amulettes     javanaises,"

J.  Knebel,  151
Time,    measure    of    (Kalpa),

138
Titles  of  "  Letter  of  Death  "

motif,  277-279
Tongue     (jihvd),     72,     72n2,

73
Torch-bearer  (Masalchi),

100ft1
Track  of  peas  or  lentils,  104,

104ft2,  105ft
Traditions  Indiennes  du  Canada

Nord-Ouest,  Petitot,  205
Traite    des    Euneuques,    dans

lequel  on  explique  toutes  les

differentes  sortes  d' eunueques ,

C.  Ancillon,  328
Transference,     disease-,     37,

38
u  Transformation       combat  "

motif,  195,  195ft1,  203-205
Transformation    into    an   ox,

194
Translations  of  Ancient  Arabic

Poetry,  C.  J.  Lyall,  278
Transmigration,  Moksha   the

soul's  release  from  further,

4ft2
TrdumendeMusen-Freund,  Der,

E.  Wolgemuth,  34ft
Travels  of  Ludovico  di   Var-

thema,  G.  P.  Badger,  201,

202
[Travels]  Pietro  della  Valle,

85ft
Treasure,  the  concealed,  133,

134 ;    recovered     by    cun-
ning, 118-120
Treasure-guarding   spirits  or

incubones,  133ft1
Treasures,  mandrake  reveals

hidden,  153;  Sattvasila  and

the  Two,  157-158
Treaties  of  Al-Jazari  on  Auto-
mata, A.  K.  Coomaraswamy,

58
Tree,  Asoka,  155
Trees,  Yakshinis  turned  into,

25,  25ft1
Trench  (karsha),  201
"Treue     Johannes,     Der,"

Grimm,  Marchen,  28ft1
Tribes  and  Castes  oj  Bombay,

Enthoven,  322
Tribes  and  Castes  of  the  Cen-
tral Provinces,  Russell,  14ft1,
51ft,  86ft1, 100ft1,  101ft,  225,
306ft5,  325


Tribes  and  Castes  of  the  North-
Western  Provinces  and  Oudh,
W.  Crooke,  101ft,  325

Trick  of  Gomukha,  293-295

Tricks  employed  by  the
Bediyani,  51ft

Tripods  of  Hephaistos,  the
magic,  56

Trolls,  131ft3

"Truth,  Act  of,"  motif,  172ft2,
179-182,  225ft2

Tu  Shu  Chi  Ch'tng  (The
Chinese  Encyclopaedia),
"  Eunuchs  of  the  Imperial
Palace,"  329

Twin  deities  of  light  (the
Asvins),  257

Two  Asvins,  the,  253,  254,
257-258

"Two  Brothers,  The,"  Mas-
pero,  Popular  Stories  of
Ancient  Egypt,  238

"Two  Brothers,  The,"  Schief-
ner and  Ralston,  Tibetan
Tales,  180

Ucchanga-Jdtaka,  the,  292ft1
"  Ueber    die    Suvabahuttarl-

katha,"   Hertel,  Festschrift
fur     Ernst     Windisch,     62,

180
Unfavourable  omens,  46, 46n2,

86,  86ft1
Unfinished  tale,  the,  29,  30
Unguent  of  gall  of  a  black

cat,  fat  of  a  white  hen  and

blood   of    a    screech  -  owl,

152
Unter    den    Olivenb'dumen,

Kaden,  48ft1,  187ft3,  218ft1,

238
"Unwise  Schoolmaster  who

fell    in    Love    by    Report,

The,"       Burton,       Nights,

68ft1
"Uriah    letter,"    the,     277,

279
Uses   of    "Act    of    Truth,"

179

Valour,  Lion  of  (Vikrama-
sinha),  11,  lift3

Variants  of  "Magic  Ob-
stacles "  motif,  238

Varieties  of  "Letter  of
Death  "  motif,  279

Varthema,  Travels  of
Ludovico  di,  G.  P.  Badger,
201,  202

Vdsishtha  Dharma  Sastra,  320


364


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


Vedas,  the,  2,  13

Vedic  fires,  the  five,  160/11

\'eneration  of  ichneumon  in
ancient  Kgypt,  115ft1,  116ft

Vengeance  of  a  passionate
woman,  15

Verhandlungen  der  Gelehrten
Estnischen  Gesell. ,  • '  Achtzig
Marchen  d.  Ljutziner
Esten,"  O.  Kallas,  34n
\  <  ritable  History  of  Satni-
Khamois,  The,"  Maspero,
Popular  Stories  of  Ancient
Bpt,  203

\  ermin  infesting  the  body,
51m

Vessel  of  oil,  perambulating
the  city  with  a,  4,  5

I'etalapanchavinsati,  the,  28ft1,
75

I'iaggio  a  Sias,  Un,  E.
Modigliani,  314,  314n5

Victim,  acquiring  the  power
of  a.  151

Fie  d'Esope  ie  Phrygien  La,
La  Fontaine,  250

t'irrzig  Veziere  oder  Weisen
Meister,  Die,  W.  F.  A.
Behrnauer,  20nl

Vikramorvasi  Kalidasa,  25?l2,
84nl

Village  Eolk-Talcs  of  Ceylon,
Parker,  76,  272ft1

Virgin  Lucia  of  Bologna  or
Alexandria.  20/i1

Virginity,  a  vow  of,  40

Virtue  (guna),  In1,  240«2

Virtuous  (surrittayd),  39ft3

\  oicei  overheard  by  mer-
chant's son.  30

f'olksahrrglauhe  der  Gegenwart,
drutsche,    A.    VVuttke,

[FoUumHrchen  aut  Venetien]
G  Widtcr  and  A.  Wolf,
J72/»>

"Volsunga  Saga,"  Hagen,
Hrldcn-Sagen,  191ft1,  218m1

Voluntary  religious  mutila-
tions. 21n

Votaries  of  Bahuchara  etnas-
culatc  themselves.  322

Votary  of  Pasupati.  1  '■'> '■'>

Vow  of  virginity.  40

r  dr  Siam  des  Peres
Jtnates  entoyes  par  lr  Roy
tuu  hides  ct  a  In  Chine,
Father  Tachard.  308,
308n»

Vulgar  Errors,  Sir  Thomas
Browne.  30nl.  167na


Waking,     -Hand  of  Glory"

prevents  inmates  of  a  house

from,  150
Walking  round  objects  with

right  hand  towards  them,

20m1
IVallachian  Stories,  A.  and  W\

Schott,  205
War  between  the  gods  and

Asuras,  66
Wars  of  the  Jews,  Joseph  us,

154
Washing  the  hands,  peacock

apparatus  for,  58
"  Wassernixe,  Die,"  Grimm,

M'drchen,  237
Water      (rasa),      27,      27ft1;

demon's  difficulty  in  cross-
ing,   236;    fetched    by    a

doll,  40,  40n2;  magic,  227,

228;   pestle  that  fetched,

40n2
"Water  King   and  Vasilissa

the  WTise,  The,"  Ralston,

Russian  Folk- Tales,  225n2
"Water  of  Life,"  motif,  43,

253,  253ft1,  254
["Water    of     Life,     The"]

G.  A.  Grierson,  Folk-Lore,

253ft1
Wealth,    God    of    (Kuvera),

133,   134,   211,    212,    215,

216
Wealth -preserved      (Dhana-

pjilita),  44,  44ft3
"Weaver     who     became     a

Leech,      Tale     of     the,"

Burton,  Nights,  76
Weddings,  barber's  duties  at,

lOOn1
Weekdays,      Golem      works

only  on,  59
Welsh  Tales,  Rhys,  225ft2
Wendische     Sagen,      Vecken-

stedt,  131ft3,  133ft1,  187ft3,

191ft1,  225ft2,  238,  253ft1
Western      Islands,      Martin,

131ft3
Westfalische  M'drchen,  Kuhn,

132ft,  152,  187ft3,  227ft
White    city    of    al  -  Barraqa,

260U1  ;     F:iephant     Sveta-

rasmi,  Story  of  King  Ratna-

dhipati  and  the,  169-178;

lotus  a  friend  of  the  moon,

140.  140n2
Wick     of     a     lamp     (varli),

134ft1
Wicked  female  ascetic,  the,

99-101,     104;    wife,    the,

141


f  V id e- Awake  Stories,  Steel  and
Temple,  182,  247ft1,  280

Widow's  foolish  son  Lucilio,
76

"Widow'sSon, The, "Thorpe,
Yule-tide  Stories,  236

Wife,  cheating  the  inno-
cent, 126-127 ;  the  wicked,
141

Wine  -  party,  the  prince's,
29-30

Wings  of  Daedalus,  56

JVirkungen  der  Kastration,
Ueber  die,  P.  J.  Mobius,
328

Wit  and  Wisdom  from  West
Africa,  R.  F.  Burton,  313,
313?i3

Witch,  Kadallgarbha  accused
of  being  a,  104

Witchcraft,  root  of  the  man-
drake in  European,  153

Witches,  Bhava£arman  and
the  Two,  193-195

"Without  any  scruple,"
(asankita),  96ft1

Witnesses,  eunuchs  forbidden
to  serve  as,  320

Wives,  jealousy  of  rival,  99

Woman  who  hates  men,  260,
260ft2 ;  in  man's  clothes,
46,  47;  sacrifice  of  an  old,
142ft1 ;  vengeance  of  a
passionate,  15

Women  murdered  to  obtain
child's  finger  for  candle,
pregnant,  153 ;  whose  love
is  scorned,  109-110

Wonderful  city,  the,  43

Wonder-working  pill,  75,  76

Wood,  the  citizens  of,  281,
282,  285  ;  mechanical  dolls
of,  39,  56

Wooden  automata,  city  popu-
lated by,  58,  59,  281,  282,
285 ;  cow,  the,  56 ;  Garuda
bird  that  flies,  56

Work,  but  not  for  thinking,
being  with  a  capacity  for
(Golem),  59

World  sketched  by  Chitra-
lekha,  82

Worms,  Dantada,  51ft

Worship,  fire-,  160ft1 ;  of  the
ichneumon,  Heracleopolis
the  centre  of  the,  116n;
of  Ishtar,  Babylonian,
253ft1;  serpent-,  142ft1

Wound,  the  Brahman's,  32 ;
of  the  Brahman's  daughter,
34-35


INDEX  II -GENERAL


365


Yak,  fly- whisk  from  the  tail

of  the,  ten1,  85ft
Yule-tide  Stories,  Thorpe,  48m1,

205,     225ft2,    226ft2,    236,

237

Zauberglaube  bei  den  Rutenen,
R.  F.  Kaindl,  Globus,  151


"Zauberkugeln,  Die,"
Kaden,  Unter  den  Oliven-
b'dumen,  48ft1

Zeit  d.d.  morg.  Gesell.,  "Die
Erzahlung  vom  Kaufmann
Campaka,"  Hertel,  280

Zeitschrift  fur  Assyrologie,
Jensen,  319,  329


Zone  (kataka),  201
Zoological     Mythology,     De

Gubernatis,     29ft.      104ft2,

187ft3,  272ft1
Zur    Volkskunde,     Liebrecht,

20ft1,    44ft1,   131ft3,    187ft3,

210ft3,  225ft2,  231ft1


Printed  in  Great  Britain

by  The  Riverside  Press  Limited

Edinburgh


L


o
o


*4§.;t


University  of  Toronto
Library  .


DO  NOT

REMOVE

THE

CARD

FROM

THIS

POCKET


Acme  Library  Card  Pocket
LOWE-MARTIN  CO.  limited
