The Ocean of Story (Kathasaritsagara), Vol. 2 (Somadeva; C. H. Tawney (trans.); N. M. Penzer (ed.), 1924)
==========================================================
Vol. 2 of the complete Kathasaritsagara — Somadeva's 11th-century Ocean of Story, the great Sanskrit story-cycle — in C. H. Tawney's translation (1880-84), edited with introduction and notes by N. M. Penzer (1924-28, 10 vols.). Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/oceanofstorybein02somauoft).

&i^^

.W"-'


1:4'"


^'^ifc-


y^f^^^-.


/


THE
OCEAN  OF  STORY


THE

OCEAN  OF  STORY

BEING

G.  H.  TAWNEY'S  TRANSLATION

OF

SOMADEVA'S  KATHA  SARIT  SAGARA

(or  ocean  of  streams  op  story)


NOW    EDITED    WITH    INTRODUCTION,    FRESH

EXPLANATORY  NOTES  AND  TERMINAL  ESSAY

BY

N.   M.   PENZER,   M.A.,   F.R.G.S.,    F.G.S.

MBMBKR  OF   THE  FOLK-LORE  SOCIKTV  ;   FELLOW  OF  THK

ROYAL  ANTHROPOLOGICAL  INSTITUTK  ;  MEMBER

OF  THE  ROTAL  ASIATIC   SOCIKTT,    ETC.

AUTHOR  OF

•'an  ANNOTATED   BIBLIOGRAPHY  OF  SIR  RICHARD  FRANCIS

BURTON,"   ETC.


IN  TEN  VOLUMES  ^V

(


VOL,  II


WITH  A  foreword  BY

SIR  GEORGE  A.  GRIERSON,  K.C.LE.,  Ph.D.,  D.Litt.,  LL.D.


LONDON:      PRIVATELY     PRINTED      FOR      SUBSCRIBERS     ONLY
BY  CHAS.  J.  SAWYER  LTD,,   GRAFTON  HOUSE,    W.l.      MCMXXIV


Made  and  Printed  in  Oreat  Britain


FOREWORD

IT  is  a  source  of  great  pleasure  to  me  that,  by  being
invited  to  write  the  Foreword  to  this  volume,  I  have
been  given  an  opportunity  of  paying  tribute  to  the
memory  of  an  old  friend  and  a  great  scholar.  If,  here,  I
confine  myself  to  the  latter  aspect  of  his  character,  it  is  at
the  same  time  impossible  to  abstain  from  associating  with
it  recollections  of  a  cordial  friendship  extending  over  more
than  forty  years.  It  was  in  Calcutta,  in  1880,  that  I  first
met  Charles  Henry  Tawney,  who  was  then  Principal  of  the
Sanskrit  College  and  had  already  achieved  a  high  reputation
for  Sanskrit  learning.  A  warm  friendship,  fostered  on  both
sides  by  similarity  of  tastes,  and  on  my  part  by  his  ever-
ready  kindness  and  help,  then  sprang  up,  and  continued
unchecked  from  that  time  till  his  lamented  death  two  years
ago  in  Camberley.  A  master  of  the  Sanskrit  language,  and
widely  read  in  other  branches  of  knowledge,  he  was  an  ideal
translator  of  Somadeva's  famous  work,  into  the  spirit  of
which  he  readily  allowed  himself  to  enter.  The  Attic  salt
of  his  fancy — a  perpetual  source  of  joy  to  those  who  were
intimate  with  him — enabled  him  to  reproduce  the  dry
humour  of  the  Sanskrit  author  in  a  sympathetic  phraseology
that  few  could  equal.  Whether  it  was  such  sophisms  as
those  with  which  Yaugandharayana  won  over  the  simple
straightforward  soldier,  Rumanvat,  or  such  mock  solemnity
as  that  with  which  he  tells  the  exploits  of  the  two  scapegrace
rogues,  Siva  and  Madhava,  in  this  translation  we  seem  to
hear  the  original  author's  very  voice.  But  it  was  not  only
as  a  capable  translator  that  Tawney  shone.  A  remarkably
wide  range  of  reading  enabled  him  to  adorn  his  work  with
numerous  parallels  taken  from  the  legends  of  other  countries^
and  that  at  a  time  when  little  had  been  done  in  the  scientific
examination  of  folk-lore.  Since  the  first  volume  appeared  in
1880  there  has  been  a  great  advance  in  that  science,  and
throughout  the  quest,  up  to  the  present  day,  his  version  of


vi  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

the  Kathd  Sarit  Sdgara  has  been  an  indispensable  tool  in
the  hands  of  inquirers,  without  which  much  that  has  been
discovered  would  still  remain  unknown.  Now,  with  Mr
Penzer's  edition,  the  seed  then  sown  by  him  has  borne — too
late,  alas,  to  rejoice  the  original  sower — rich  and  ample  fruit,
and,  as  Tawney  himself  would  have  done,  we  can  welcome  his
admirable  additions  to  the  original  notes,  bringing  Tawney 's
information  up  to  date  and  making  correction  of  such  few
mistakes  as  the  advance  of  science  has  rendered  inevitable.
Besides  these  notes  Mr  Penzer  has  added  several  appendixes
of  really  absorbing  interest,  in  which  he  has  summarised
all  the  information  that  has  up  to  the  present  time  been
collected  regarding  certain  important  questions  connected
with  folk-lore  and  anthropology  that  arise  in  the  course  of
editing  the  work.  I  shall  refer  to  some  of  these  later  on,  but
here  a  general  expression  of  appreciation  cannot  be  omitted.

My  knowledge  of  the  subject  is  not  sufficient  to  justify
me  in  attempting  to  emulate  Sir  Richard  Temple's  example
by  giving  notes  on  the  origin  and  history  of  the  many  stories
contained  in  this  volume.  That  is  a  thing  that  I  must  leave
to  other  and  more  capable  hands  ;  but  a  good  part  of  my
life  was  spent  in  fairly  intimate  relations  with  the  peoples  of
the  Ganges  Valley,  and  I  may,  perhaps,  be  pardoned  if  I  jot
down  a  few  disjointed  reminiscences  that  may  illuminate
passages  which  struck  me  as  I  read  through  the  tales  and
Mr  Penzer's  notes.

On  the  very  first  page  of  this  volume  we  are  told  how
the  amorous  king,  Udayana  of  Vatsa,  absorbed  in  the  delights
of  his  harem,  neglected  the  responsibilities  of  his  rule,  and
again,  on  page  55,  a  similar  story  is  told  of  King  Adityasena
of  Ujjayini.  For  India  such  stories  are  only  too  true  to  life.
Over  and  over  again  does  history  tell  us  how  kings  have  been
destroyed,  and  how  India  has  been  lost,  through  the  love  of
women.  Somadeva  tells  us  how,  in  each  of  the  two  cases  men-
tioned by  liim  his  ministers  succeeded  in  arousing  the  royal
voluptuary  to  a  sense  of  his  kingly  duties,  and  we  have  a
pretty  version  of  the  same  idea  for  modern  times  in  the  well-
known  story  of  the  poet  Vihari  and  King  Jai  Singh  Mirza  of
Amber,  who  reigned  in  the  seventeenth  century.     Jai  Singh


FOREWORD


Vll


had  been  a  mighty  warrior,  serving  the  emperor  with  high
renown,  but,  in  an  evil  moment,  he  wedded  a  girl  wife  of
surpassing  beauty.  He  retired  with  her  into  his  inner
apartments,  and  gave  orders  that  any  person  disturbing
him  with  official  business  should  be  blown  from  a  gun.  So
matters  went  on  for  a  year,  and  ended  in  dire  confusion,  but
none  of  the  ministers  dared  acquaint  the  king.  At  last  the
poet  solved  the  problem  by  composing  a  verse  that,  while
ostensibly  praising  the  beauty  of  the  young  queen,  gave  no
uncertain  hint  as  to  the  state  of  affairs.^  This  he  concealed
among  the  flower  petals  that  each  day  were  sent  into  the
inner  apartments  of  the  palace  to  form  the  bed  of  the  happy
couple.  In  the  morning  the  paper  remained  stiff  among
the  withered  petals  and  bruised  the  king's  body.  He  drew
it  out,  read  it,  and  at  once  returned  to  a  sense  of  his  responsi-
bilities. He  came  forth,  held  a  public  court,  summoned,  the
ingenious  poet  and  promised  him  a  gold  coin  for  every  verse
that  he  might  bring  him.  As  a  result  the  kingdom  was
saved,  and  Vihari  became  a  rich  man;  for  he  wrote  seven
hundred  more  verses  that  were  later  put  together  by  his
admirers  and  form  that  inimitable  collection  of  miniature
picture-poems  known  all  over  Northern  India  as  the  Bihdri
Satsai  or  the  "  Seven  Centuries  of  Vihari."

A  sadder  instance  is  that  of  the  gallant  Prithiraj,  the
Chauhan  monarch  of  Delhi.  He  wooed  and  carried  off  by
force  the  fair  Sanjogin,  daughter  of  Jaichand  of  Kanauj.
In  the  ensuing  war  Jaichand,  hard  pressed  by  Prithiraj,
called  to  his  assistance  the  Musalmans,  who  had  already  in-
vaded India,  and  who  had  established  themselves  at  Lahore.
Lulled  in  the  arms  of  Sanjogin,  Prithiraj  paid  little  heed  to
the  threatening  storm.  When  he  awoke  it  was  too  late.  The
storm  had  burst  in  all  its  fury,  and  Prithiraj  was  defeated
and  slain  in  "  The  Great  Battle  "  of  a.d.  1192  at  Thanesar.
Sanjogin  ended  her  life  upon  his  funeral  pyre,  and  Delhi
became,  and  remained  until  it  was  captured  by  the  English
in  the  Mutiny,  a  Moslem  capital.

The  long  story  of  Vidushaka  (p.  54  ff.)  suggests  more
than  one  parallel  with  the  beliefs  of  the  Indian  peasant  of

^  Bihdri  Satsai,  630.


viii  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

to-day.  On  page  57  Mr  Penzer  supplies  an  interesting  note
on  horses  in  folk-lore  and  their  devotion  to  their  masters.
The  Rajput  Lay  of  Alhd  is  full  of  this.  Each  of  the
heroes  possesses  a  horse  of  fairy  breed  that  saves  him  in
many  a  difficult  situation.  For  instance,  Malklian's  mare,
Kabutri,  or  "the  Pigeon,"  is  ridden  by  her  master  in  a
furious  battle   charge.     I  quote  Waterfield's   translation  ^  :

"  As  the  lion  the  kine,  as  the  wolf  the  sheep,
As  the  schoolboy  drives  the  ball.
So  trench  by  trench  did  Malkhan  leap
With  his  Rajputs  following  all.

'  If  I  gave  thee  barley  in  winter,

And  oil  in  time  of  rain,
If  Parmal  stinted  thee  not  of  milk

In  thy  foalhood  lightsome  and  vain,

'  Kabutri,  my  mare,  my  Pigeon,

Mine  honour  save  this  day,
And  let  not  thy  foot  take  a  backward  step

Whilst  foes  uphold  the  fray  !  '

Kabutri  arched  her  brown  neck  free.
And  they  rushed  on  the  Chauhan  men  ;

But,  where  her  master  dealt  with  three.
The  mare  she  smote  down  ten.

For  with  teeth  she  tore  and  her  heels  she  flang

That  she  made  a  passage  wide,
And  each  howda  she  passed,  in  air  she  sprang.

That  her  lord  might  reach  the  side."

In  India  it  is  natural  that  elephants  should  play  a  role
similar  to  that  of  horses.  In  folk-lore  they  betray,  or  serve,
their  masters  like  human  beings,  and  even  converse  with
them  in  human  voice.  We  have  a  striking  example  of  this
in  the  same  Lay  of  Alhd,  Dasraj's  elephant,  Pachsawad,
has  been  carried  off  by  his  enemy,   Karingha,   and  years

1  The  Lay  of  Alha  (Oxford  University  Press,  1923),  p.  234.


I


FOREWORD  ix

later,  when  Dasraj's  sons,  Alha  and  Udan,  with  their  cousin,
Malkhan,  wage  a  war  of  vengeance  on  their  father's  murderer,
we  find  Pachsawad  faithfully  serving  his  new  masters,
Jambay  and  his  son  Karingha,  and  aiding  in  the  capture  of
Udan.  On  hearing  the  news,  Devi,  Dasraj's  widow,  hastens
to  the  battle-field  and  accosts  the  elephant  ^  :

"  A  mother's  yearning  filled  her  breast,
For  fear  she  nothing  shrunk  ;
As  it  were  a  cow  her  calf  caressed.
She  clasped  Pachsawad's  trunk.

'  I  reared  thee  up  in  my  house  from  youth,
And  gave  thee  milk  good  store  ;

0  little  of  grace,  was  this  thy  truth.
My  tJdan  to  bind  so  sore  ?  '

At  her  words  a  shame  o'er  Pachsawad  came,
'  I  was  pledged  to  the  king  Jambay  ;

1  have  eaten  his  salt,  'twas  in  me  no  fault
I  should  bind  thine  Udan  Ray.

'  Were  Malkhan  now  to  the  battle  seat.
He  would  soon  set  Udan  free.'  "

Following  Pachsawad's  advice,  she  dispatches  Malkhan
to  the  field,  and  he  challenges  Karingha,  mounted  on
Pachsawad,  with  Udan  as  his  prisoner,  to  mortal  combat.
Karingha  orders  his  Mahout  to  charge  upon  Malkhan  :

"  The  driver  laid  on  strokes  well  told.
Not  a  step  Pachsawad  went ;
His  trunk  between  his  tusks  he  rolled,
And  down  on  his  knees  he  bent.

And  Alha  then  with  all  his  men

Came  charging  o'er  the  plain  ;
With  a  battle  shout  their  swords  flashed  out.

Like  the  sweep  of  the  hurricane.
1  P.  120.


X  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

'  Pachsawad  doth  play  me  false  to-day  ;

He  quits  the  foremost  line  ' ;
Karingha's  soul  was  troubled  sore,

And  round  he  turned  his  eyne.

Then  straight  he  bade  Papiha  ^  bring,

And  lighted  down  to  ride  ;
From  his  courser's  back  did  Malkhan  spring,

And  sat  by  Cdan's  side.

Odan  unbound  he  laid  on  the  ground.

And  Rupna  Bendula  ^  led  ;
Queen  Devi  down  from  her  litter  came,

And  worshipped  Pachsawad's  head.

With  sandal  free,  so  fair  to  see.

She  painted  his  frontal  wide  ;
'  Behold  I  entrust  my  sons  to  thee.

Now  help  in  this  perilous  tide.

'  Lo,  Alha,  here  thy  father's  beast,

Mount  up,  my  son,  and  ride  '  :
He  climbed,  and  stood  on  the  painted  wood

And  sat  as  he  grasped  the  side."

In  this  way,  Pachsawad  having  returned  to  his  former
allegiance,  the  battle  is  resumed,  and  ends  with  the  villain
Karingha's  satisfactory  death  at  the  hands  of  Malkhan.

Again,  the  fatal  brides  of  the  same  story  of  Vidushaka
(pp.  69  and  74),  whose  husbands  die  one  after  the  other
on  the  wedding  night,  have  their  counterpart  in  Kashmiri
legend  of  the  present  day.®  Here,  however,  it  is  a  python,
issuing  from  the  princess's  mouth,  not  a  visiting  Rakshasa,
who  kills  the  bridegroom.  He  is  duly  slain  by  the  hero,
who,  like  Vidushaka,  wins  the  lady  for  his  wife,  and,  we
hope,  lives  happy  with  her  ever  after.

On  page  81  ff.,  in  his  note  on  Rahu,  the  demon  of  eclipse,

^   Papiha  was  the  name  of  Karingha's  horse.

*  Bendula  was  the  name  of  Odan's  horse,  and  Rupna  here  acts  as  squire.
'  See  Hatims  Tales  (London,  1923),  p.  69  yf!     For  numerous  other  variants
of  the  Tobit  legend  see  Groome,  Folk-Lore,  vol.  ix,  p.  226.


r


FOREWORD  xi


Mr  Penzer  tells  us  how,  in  the  Indian  Central  Provinces,  he
is  the  deity  of  the  sweeper  caste.  There  can  be  no  doubt
about  Rahu  being  an  aboriginal  god,  who  has  been  borrowed
by  the  Indo- Aryans  as  a  demon,  but  who  still  retains  his
divine  character  among  the  non-Aryan,  or  semi-Aryan,
lowest  classes.  In  Northern  India  he  is  the  god  of  the
Dusadhs,  a  degraded  caste,  and  is  the  object  of  a  remark-
able ceremony  of  fire-worship.  On  certain  festal  days  a  long
trench  is  filled  with  burning  coals,  on  which  the  devotees
walk  barefoot  without  apparently  receiving  any  harm.^

Cutting  off  the  nose  of  an  unfaithful  wife,  as  narrated  on
page  88,  is  still  practised  in  India.  An  old  friend,  a  Civil
surgeon  in  Bihar,  told  me  that  he  had  more  than  once  sewed
on  the  nose  of  an  erring  spouse.  There  is  a  well- authenticated
story  that  a  woman  once  came  to  a  surgeon  with  her  severed
nose.  There  was  no  time  to  be  lost,  so  there  and  then,  in
the  bungalow  verandah,  he  set  her  on  a  table,  and  laid  down
beside  her  the  severed  portion  while  he  prepared  the  surface
of  the  wound.  A  watchful  crow  interfered  with  the  opera-
tion, flew  down  and  carried  off  the  tasty  piece  of  flesh,  so
that  the  unfortunate  patient  had  to  go  noseless  for  the  rest  of
her  days.  The  moral,  of  course,  is  that  spouses  should  remain
faithful,  or  else,  if  this  is  impossible,  that  crows  should  not
be  encouraged  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Indian  hospitals.

In  the  story  of  Karttikeya  (p.  101)  we  are  told  how  Kama
— the  Indian  God  of  Love — was  consumed  by  a  glance  of
the  irate  Siva,  but  was  allowed  to  be  born  again — without  a
body — in  the  minds  of  animate  creatures.  We  shall  see  later
on  how  the  curse  was  removed,  and  how  Kama  received
bodily  form  in  the  shape  of  Krishna's  son,  Pradyumna ;  but
here  I  may  mention  that  this  story  of  his  having  no  body
seems  to  be  an  interesting  example  of  false  folk-etymology.
One  of  his  names  was  "  Anariga,"  which  was  popularly
explained  as  an-ariga,  or  "  in-corporeal  "  ;  but,  as  Professor
Konow  has  pointed  out,^  the  word  has  probably  an  altogether

^  See  Risley,  The  Tribes  and  Castes  of  Bengal,  i,  254,  and  also  page  169  of
this  work.

2  In  the  Wackemagel  Festschrift,  p.  1  ff.  The  word  is  probably  merely
an  intensive  form  derived  from  the  root  anj,  "anoint."


xii  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

different  meaning,  which  can  hardly  be  given  in  these  pages.
Popular  etymology  has  divided  it  wrongly,  and  has  thus
given  birth  to  a  pretty  legend  that  has  inspired  some  of  the
most  famous  poetry  of  India.

Mr  Penzer,  on  p.  117  jgT.,  has  given  an  important  note  on
nudity  in  magic.  In  India  the  ceremonial  use  of  nudity  is
especially  prevalent  in  the  north-east,  where  the  population  is
largely  of  Tibeto-Burman  origin.  For  instance,  in  Rangpur
— a  Bengal  district  bordering  on  Assam — in  time  of  drought,
the  women  set  up  by  night  a  plantain- tree  in  honour  of  a  non-
Aryan  god  named  Hudum  Deo,  and  dance  round  it  naked,
singing  obscene  songs. ^  Mr  Penzer  refers  to  a  similar  custom
among  the  Meithei  women  of  Manipur,  who  also  are  not  of
Aryan  stock  ;  and  in  Assam  and  parts  of  Bengal,  when  one
person  wishes  to  insult  another,  he  makes  himself  naked
before  him.  When  I  was  a  magistrate  in  Murshidabad  a
complainant  who  was  angry  at  having  failed  to  prove  his
case,  met  his  enemies  on  the  way  home  and  insulted  them  in
this  manner.  I  shall  never  forget  the  speechless  fury  of  these
men  when  they  came  to  me  about  it,  although  they  had
previously  borne  the  abuse  and  perjury  in  the  witness-box
with  unmoved  faces.  Perjury  was  a  thing  to  be  expected,
and  could  be  met  in  the  orthodox  manner  by  counter-perjury,
— but  this  conduct  was  breaking  the  rules  of  the  game.  In
an  Assam  bazaar,  when  two  old  crones  fall  out  there  is  a
race  between  them  as  to  who  can  disrobe  first,  in  order  to
win  a  battle  that  had  begun  with  only  wordy  warfare.

The  use  of  iron  in  the  birth- chamber  to  scare  away  evil
spirits,  described  by  Mr  Penzer  (p.  166  j^f.),  is,  I  believe,
universal  in  India.  I  have  come  across  it  as  far  north  as
Kashmir,  where,  as  elsewhere,  not  only  is  iron  found  in  the
lying-in  room,  but  the  woman's  drink  is  water  in  which  a
piece  of  red-hot  iron  has  been  quenched.^  This  might  be
supposed  to  be  a  kind  of  rude  tonic,  but  the  superstition
regarding  the  metal  as  a  demon-scarer  shows  its  true
nature.

On  page  192  we  are  told  how  Saktideva  was  swallowed

*  See  the  present  writer  in  Jouni.  As.  Soc.  Bengal,  \o\.  xlvi,  Pt.  I,  p.  188.
^  Cf.  hldm  in  India,  p.  23.


FOREWORD  xiii

by  an  enormous  fish  and  afterwards  rescued.  This,  as  Mr
Penzer  shows,  is  a  common  feature  in  Indian  stories,  but  the
locus  classicus  is  the  tale  of  Krishna's  son,  Pradyumna.  We
have  seen  above  how  Kama  had  been  consumed  by  Siva
and  condemned  for  ever  to  be  bodiless.  The  curse  being  re-
mitted, he  was  born  again  as  Pradyumna.  His  wife  Rati,  who
all  these  ages  had  been  searching  for  him  without  success,
was  shortly  before  this  born  as  Mayavati,  and  became  the
wife  of  a  demon  named  Sambara.  Sambara,  hating  Krishna,
stole  Pradyumna  while  yet  a  babe  and  cast  him  into  the  sea.
There  he  was  swallowed  by  a  great  fish,  which  was  afterwards
caught  and  came  into  Sambara 's  kitchen.  The  child  was
found  inside  it  and  was  taken  care  of  and  reared  by  Mayavati.
When  he  grew  up  the  pair  learnt  from  Narada  that  they
were  respectively  Kama  and  Rati,  and  so  Pradyumna  killed
Sambara,  and,  taking  Mayavati  with  him,  returned  to  his
parents.  The  whole  story  is  told  in  detail  in  the  Bhdgavata
Pur  ana  .^

Mr  Penzer  has  a  most  interesting  note  on  the  sacred  cow
of  the  Hindus.  He  is  inclined  to  look  upon  the  Hindu
veneration  of  this  animal  as  dating  from  prehistoric  times.
Now  it  is  a  curious  fact  that,  north  of  Kashmir,  there  is  the
important  Dard  tribe  of  Shins,  the  members  of  which  loathe
cows.  They  inhabit  the  country  round  Gilgit,  and  once
extended  far  to  the  east,  into  Tibet.  These  people  are
certainly  of  Aryan  stock,  but,  in  my  opinion,  are  not  Indo-
Aryans.  They  probably  came,  independently  of  the  great
Indo-Aryan  migration,  into  their  present  seat  from  the
north,  over  the  Pamirs.  To  these  people  the  cow,  so  far
from  being  sacred,  is  abhorrent.  This  has  been  noted  by
more  than  one  observer.-     For  instance.  Drew  says  :

"  They  hold  the  cow  in  abhorrence  ;  they  look  on  it
much  in  the  same  way  that  the  ordinary  Muhammadan
regards  the  pig.     They  will  not  drink  cow's  milk,  nor  do

^  X,  Iv.     See  also  Vishnu  Purdna,  Wilson-Hall  trans.,  v,  12>ff.

2  E.g.  Drew,  Jummoo  and  Kashmir,  428  ;  Biddulph,  Tribes  of  the  Hindoo
Koosh,  37  ;  Shaw,  "  Stray  Arians  in  Tibet,"  Journ.  As.  Soc.  Bengal,  xlvii,
Pt.  I.  29.


xiv  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

they  eat  or  make  butter  from  it.  Nor  even  will  they  burn
cowdung,  the  fuel  that  is  so  commonly  used  in  the  East.
Some  cattle  they  are  obliged  to  keep  for  ploughing,  but  they
have  as  little  as  possible  to  do  with  them  ;  when  the  cow
calves  they  will  put  the  calf  to  the  udder  by  pushing  it  with
a  forked  stick,  and  will  not  touch  it  with  their  hands."

Here  we  have  apparently  an  ancient  taboo  among  non-
Indian  Aryans,  contrasted  with  the  sacredness  attributed  to
the  same  animal  by  their  Indian  cousins  ;  and  this  leads
us  to  the  consideration  that  in  prehistoric  times,  before  the
Indo-Aryan  invasion,  the  still  united  Aryans  looked  upon
the  cow  as  subject  to  certain  taboos,  which  developed  in-
dependently on  two  separate  lines,  into  the  complete  taboo
of  the  Shins,  and  into  the  reverence  of  a  sacred  animal  among
the  Indo- Aryans.

I  have  much  more  that  I  could  write  about  this  interest-
ing volume,  but  considerations  of  space  compel  me  to  restrict
myself  to  Mr  Penzer's  very  full  treatment  of  the  legends
about  poison-damsels  in  his  important  Appendix  III.  It
is  curious  how  the  different  versions  of  the  story  current
in  widely  distant  parts  of  India  agree  even  in  small  details.
Mr  Penzer  (p.  301)  quotes  Barbosa's  account  of  Mahmud  of
Gujarat,  who  was  so  poisonous  that  "  when  a  fly  touched
him,  as  soon  as  it  reached  his  flesh  it  forthwith  died  and
swelled  up."  We  have  also  read  on  page  284  how  Chanakya
saved  Chandragupta  from  a  poison- damsel  who  had  been
sent  to  him  by  Rakshasa,  but  we  are  not  told  how  he
detected  her  poisonous  character.  We  learn  this,  how-
ever, from  another  work  written  in  Bihar— the  Purusha-
parlksha  of  the  poet  Vidyapati  Thakkura,  who  flourished
in  the  fourteenth  century.  He  too,  in  chapter  xx  of
his  work,  tells  the  story  of  Chanakya,  and  describes  how
he  recognised  the  dangerous  nature  of  the  girl  by  noting
that  when  flies  settled  on  her  to  sip  her  perspiration  they  fell
down  dead.

Perhaps  I  may  add  a  few  instances  of  my  personal
experience  regarding  the  effects  of  opium  to  the  very  inter-
esting account  given  by  Mr  Penzer  in  the  same  appendix.


FOREWORD  XV

Most  of  my  Indian  service  was  in  the  poppy-growing  districts
of  Bihar,  and  for  part  of  the  time  I  was  in  charge  of  the
Opium  Department.  I  found  ample  evidence  that  among
the  miUions  of  people  with  whom  I  was  brought  into  contact
the  number  of  confirmed  opium- sots  was  very  small  indeed.
As  for  the  educated  classes,  I  have  often  been  told  that  a  man,
after  he  has  passed  his  fortieth  year,  should  eat  opium  in
moderation,  merely  to  keep  him  in  good  health ;  and,  though
I  have  had  hundreds  of  officials  under  me,  I  can  remember
only  two  of  them  who  were  slaves  to  the  habit.  One  of
these  managed  to  do  his  work,  if  not  brilliantly,  at  least
efficiently,  and  lived  to  retire  on  a  pension,  when  I  lost  sight
of  him.  The  other  was  once  found  asleep  in  his  office  and
was  threatened  with  dismissal.  He  was  able  to  pull  him-
self together  and  the  offence  was  not  repeated.  As  for
the  peasantry,  every  little  cultivator  in  the  opium  districts
kept  back  a  small  quantity  of  the  drug,  which  he  had  to
hand  over  to  Government.  This  he  stored  at  home  as  a
family  medicine,  and  took  a  little  of  it  when  he  felt  out
of  sorts.  It  may  in  fact  be  said  that  the  people  of
Bihar,  owing  to  generations  of  use,  have  as  a  body  be-
come immune  to  the  evil  effects  of  the  drug.  The  evils
that  do  arise  from  its  use  are  seen  in  the  case  of  its  intro-
duction among  a  population  hitherto  unaccustomed  to  it
and,  hence,  not  immune.  Here  its  ravages  are  terrible,
and  total  prohibition,  as  is  the  case  in  Burma,  is  the  only
remedy.

It  will  be  seen,  therefore,  that  in  the  case  of  opium  there
is  evidence  that  its  use  through  many  generations  makes
consumers  immune  to  its  evil  effects,  and  that  the  power  of
restricting  its  use  within  the  limits  of  moderation  appears
to  be  an  hereditary  habit  acquirable  by  an  entire  nationality.
That  this  immunity,  as  in  the  case  of  snake-charmers'
traditional  immunity  to  cobra  poison,  was  an  observed  fact
familiar  to  the  Indian  mind  can  easily  be  conceived,  which
strengthens  Mr  Penzer's  explanation  of  the  origin  of  the
legend  of  his  poison-damsels.

I  have  now  trespassed  more  than  enough  on  Mr  Penzer's
kindness  and  on  the  space  allotted  for  this  Foreword.     I


xvi  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

therefore  conclude  with  again  congratulating  him  on  his
success  in  honouring  my  old  friend's  magnum  opus  by  the
preparation  of  this  edition  with  such  competent  and,  at  the
same  time,  such  reverent  hands.

George  A.  Grierson.

Camberley,  Sept.  2,  1924.


CONTENTS


BOOK  III:   LAVANAKA


CHAPTER  XV


Author's  Preface
Invocation
M(ain  story)     .

11.  Story  of  the  Clever  Physician
M.  Cont

12.  Story  of  the  Hypocritical  Ascetic
M.  Cont.

13.  Story  of  Unmadini
M.  Cont

14.  Story  of  the  Loving  Couple  who

tion
M.  Cont

15.  Story  of  Punyasena
M.  Cont

16.  Story  of  Sunda  and  Upasunda
M.  Cont


died  of


Separa-


XXI

1
1
2
2

4


8


9
10
10
11
13
14


M.  Cont

17.  Story  of  Kunti

M.  Cont


CHAPTER  XVI


20
23

24


M.  Cont

18.  Story  of  Urvasi


VOL.  II.


CHAPTER  XVII


XVII


34

34


XVllI


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY
CHAPTER  X\U—c(mtintied


M.  Cont

19.  Story  of  Vihitasena
M.  Cont.

20.  Story  of  Somaprabha
M.  Cont

21.  Story  of  Ahalya     .
M.  Cont.


86
86
87
89

44
45
46


CHAPTER  XVIII

M.  Cont.  ....

22.  Story  of  Vidushaka

M.  Cont.  .  .  .  .


49
54
80


CHAPTER  XIX


M.  Cont.

23.  Story  of  Devadasa

M.  Cont.


84
86
88


CHAPTER  XX
M.  Co7it.  .  .  .  .  .  .95

24.  Story  of  Phalabhuti  .  .  .  .95

24a.  Kuvalayavali  and  the  Witch  Kalaratri       99
24AA.  The  Birth  of  Karttikeya  .     100

24a.  Kuvalayavali  and  the  Witch  Kalaratri     103
24b.  Sundaraka  and  the  Witches       .  .     105

24a.  Kuvalayavali  and  the  Witch  Kalaratri     111
24.  Story  of  Phalabhuti  .  .  .  .112

M.  Cont.  .  .  .  .  .  .115


CONTENTS


XIX


BOOK  IV:   NARAVAHANADATTAJANANA
CHAPTER  XXI


Invocation       .             .

.     125

M.  Cont           .             .             .             .

.     125

25.  Story  of  Devadatta

.      129

M.  Cont

.      132

26.  Story  of  Pingalika

.      133

M.  Cont.

.      134

CHAPTER  XXII

M.  Cont            .              .              .              .              .              .  137

27.  Story  of  Jimutavahana      ....  138

27a.  Jimutavahana 's  Adventures  in  a  former

Birth              .             .             .             .  141

27.  Story  of  Jimutavahana      ....  150

27b.  The  Dispute  about  the  Colour  of  the

Sun's  Horses             .              .              .  150

27.  Story  of  Jimutavahana      ....  153

M.  Cont  .  .  .  .  .  .156


CHAPTER  XXIII
M.  Cont  ....

28.  Story  of  Sinhaparakrama  .
M.  Cont  ....


157
159
160


BOOK  V:   CHATURDARIKA

CHAPTER  XXIV
Invocation       .....
M.  Cont  .....

29.  Story  of  the  Golden  City    .

29a.  Siva  and  Madhava


170
170
171
175


XX  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

CHAPTER   XXIV— continued

PAGE

29.  Story  of  the  Golden  City    .  .  .  .184

29b.  The  Iniquity  of  Scandal  .  .     185

29.  Story  of  the  Golden  City  .  .  .  .186

CHAPTER  XXV

29.  Story  of  the  Golden  City    .  .  .  .188

29c.  A^okadatta  and  Vijayadatta      .  .     196

29,  Story  of  the  Golden  City    .  .  .  .218

CHAPTER  XXVI

29.  Story  of  the  Golden  City    .  .  .  .217

29d.  Devadatta  the  Gambler  .  .     281

29.  Story  of  the  Golden  City    .  .  .  .286

M.  Cont.  ......     288

APPENDIX  I
The  Story  of  Urva^i  and  Pururavas      .  .  .     243

APPENDIX  II
Umbrellas         ......     261

APPENDIX  III
Poison- damsels  .....     278


Index  I— Sanskrit  Words  and  Proper  Names    .  .     815

Index  II— General        .....     887


PREFACE

WITH  the  issue  of  this  second  volume  of  the  Ocean
of  Story  I  would  like  to  take  the  opportunity  of
thanking  my  many  subscribers  for  their  kind
support.  The  appreciative  and  sympathetic  manner  in
which  the  reviewers  have  received  the  first  volume  of  the
work  has  also  been  most  encouraging.

Subscribers  will  be  pleased  to  hear  that  great  progress
is  being  made  with  the  subsequent  volumes.  Volume  III  is
now  in  the  press  and  Volume  IV  is  well  in  hand.

It  remains  but  to  acknowledge  the  kind  help  I  have
received  from  so  many  quarters.

To  Sir  George  Grierson  is  due  special  thanks  for  his
most  interesting  and  relevant  Foreword.  I  was  particularly
gratified  when  Sir  George  so  kindly  consented  to  write  this,
as  I  know  how  pleased  Mr  Tawney  would  have  been  to  have
seen  the  name  of  his  old  friend  connected  with  the  present
edition  of  his  magnum  opus.

Dr  L.  D.  Barnett  has  again  read  through  all  my  proofs,
and  has  not  only  given  me  the  advantage  of  his  inexhaustible
store  of  Sanskrit  knowledge,  but  has  translated  afresh  those
passages  which  needed  revision,  owing  either  to  improved
readings  in  the  D.  text  or  to  omissions  made  by  Mr  Tawney
himself.

Mr  C.  Fenton  has  also  been  through  the  proofs  from  the
general  point  of  view,  and  his  microscopic  eye  has  detected
many  errors  which  I  had  passed  unnoticed.  In  addition  to
which  his  knowledge  of  Central  American  ancient  history
and  mythology  has  been  particularly  helpful,  especially  in
portions  of  the  "  Poison- damsel  "  appendix.


xxii  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

To  the  list  of  names  already  given  in  my  Introduction
to  Volume  I,  I  would  add  those  of  Mr  H.  Balfour,  Professor
Henri  Cordier,  Dr  M.  Gaster,  Rev.  A.  S.  Geden,  Mr  J.  D.
Gimlette,  Lady  Gomme,  Mr  R.  Grant  Brown,  Mr  F.  H.
Hudleston,  Mr  Edward  Hutton,  Professor  Julius  Jolly,
Dr  A.  B.  Keith,  Dr  D.  B.  Macdonald,  Professor  D.  S.
Margoliouth,  Miss  Joan  Procter,  Professor  C.  G.  Seligman,
and  Mr  P.  G.  Trendell.

N.  M.  P.

12  CuFTON  Hill,

St  John's  Wood,  N.W.8,

30th  September  1924.


F


THE
OCEAN  OF  STORY


BOOK  III:  LAVANAKA
CHAPTER  XV

INVOCATION

HONOUR  to  the  Conqueror  of  Obstacles  whose  favour,
I  ween,  even  the  creator  ^  implored,  in  order  that  he
might  accompUsh  the  creation  of  the  world  without
let  or  hindrance.

That  five-arrowed  God  of  Love  conquers  the  world,  at
whose  command  even  Siva  trembles,  when  he  is  being
embraced  by  his  beloved.


[M]  Thus  having  obtained  Vasavadatta,  that  King  of
Vatsa  gradually  became  most  exclusively  devoted  to  the
pleasure  of  her  society.  But  his  prime  minister  Yaugan-
dharayana,  and  his  general  Rumanvat,  upheld  day  and  night
the  burden  of  his  empire.  And  once  upon  a  time  the  minister
Yaugandharayana,  full  of  anxiety,  brought  Rumanvat  to
his  house  at  night  and  said  to  him  as  follows  :  — "  This  lord  of
Vatsa  is  sprung  from  the  Pandava  race,  and  the  whole  earth
is  his  by  hereditary  descent,  as  also  the  city  named  of  the
elephant. 2  All  these  this  king  has  abandoned,  not  being  de-
sirous of  making  conquests,  and  his  kingdom  has  so  become
confined  to  this  one  small  corner  of  the  earth.  For  he  cer-
tainly remains  devoted  to  women,  wine  and  hunting,  and  he
has  delegated  to  us  all  the  duty  of  thinking  about  his  kingdom.
So  we  by  our  own  intelligence  must  take  such  steps  as  that
he  shall  obtain  the  empire  of  the  whole  earth,  which  is  his  by
hereditary  right.  For,  if  we  do  this,  we  shall  have  exhibited
devotion  to  his  cause,  and  performed  our  duty  as  ministers ;
for  everything  is  accomplished  by  intellect,  and  in  proof  of
this  listen  to  the  following  tale  :  —

^  I  read  dhald  for  dhatrd.  ^  I.e.  Hastinapura.

VOL.  II.  1  A


2  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

11.  Story  of  the  Clever  Physician

Once  on  a  time  there  was  a  king  named  Mahasena,  and  he
was  attacked  by  another  king  far  superior  to  him  in  power.
Then  the  king's  ministers  met  together,  and  in  order  to  pre-
vent the  ruin  of  his  interests  Mahasena  was  persuaded  by
them  to  pay  tribute  to  that  enemy.  And  after  he  had  paid
tribute  that  haughty  king  was  exceedingly  afflicted,  thinking
to  himself:  "  Why  have  I  made  submission  to  my  enemy  ?  "
And  his  sorrow  on  that  account  caused  an  abscess  to  form
in  his  vitals,  and  he  was  so  pulled  down  by  the  abscess  that
at  last  he  was  at  the  point  of  death.  Then  a  certain  wise
physician,  considering  that  that  case  could  not  be  cured  by
medicine,  said  falsely  to  that  king  :  "  O  King,  your  wife  is
dead."  When  he  heard  that,  the  king  fell  on  the  ground,  and
owing  to  the  excessive  violence  of  his  grief  the  abscess  burst
of  itself.  And  so  the  king  recovered  from  his  disease,  and
long  enjoyed  in  the  society  of  that  queen  the  pleasures  he
desired,  and  conquered  his  enemies  in  his  turn.^


[M]  '*  So,  as  that  physician  did  his  king  a  good  turn  by
his  wisdom,  let  us  also  do  our  king  a  good  turn  ;  let  us  gain
for  him  the  empire  of  the  earth.     And  in  this  undertaking  our

*  Here  Wilson  observes :  "  The  circumstances  here  related  are  not  with-
out analogies  in  fact.  It  is  not  marvellous,  therefore,  that  we  may  trace  them
in  fiction.  The  point  of  the  story  is  the  same  as  that  of  the  '  Deux  Anglais  A
Paris/  a  Fabliau.''     Webster,  Duchess  of  Malji,  Act  IV,  sc.  2,  tells  a  similar  story  ;

"  A  great  physician,  when  the  Pope  was  sick
Of  a  deep  melancholy,  presented  him
With  several  sorts  of  madmen,  which  wild  object,
Being  full  of  change  and  sport,  freed  him  to  laugh,
And  so  the  imposthume  broke."

Cf.    Henderson's    Folk-Lore  of  the   Northern  Counties,  p.    131. Reference

should  also  be  made  to  the  Heptameron,  Margaret  of  Navarre,  nouvelle  Ixxi,
which  treats  of  "  Une  femme  k  I'extremit^  qui  se  mit  en  si  grosse  colore,
voyant  son  mari  qui  baisait  sa  servante,  qu'elle  recouvra  la  sant^."  For  the
English  translation  see  the  five-volume  edition  printed  in  1894  for  the  Society
of  English  Bibliophilists,  vol.  v,  p.  219  et  seq.  The  story  was  imitated  by
Noel  du  Fail  de  la  H^rissaye  in  his  Contes  d'Eutrapel  (ch.  v,  "  De  la  Goutte  "),


YAUGANDHARAYANA'S   DIPLOMACY  3

only  adversary  is  Pradyota,  the  King  of  Magadha  ^  ;  for  he
is  a  foe  in  the  rear  that  is  always  attacking  us  behind.  So
we  must  ask  for  our  sovereign  that  pearl  of  princesses,  his
daughter,  2  named  Padmavati.  And  by  our  cleverness  we
will  conceal  Vasavadatta  somewhere,  and  setting  fire  to  her
house,  we  will  give  out  everywhere  that  the  queen
is  burnt.  For  in  no  other  case  will  the  King  of
Magadha  give  his  daughter  to  our  sovereign,  for  when  I
requested  him  to  do  so  on  a  former  occasion  he  answered  :
'  I  will  not  give  my  daughter,  whom  I  love  more  than  myself,
to  the  King  of  Vatsa,  for  he  is  passionately  attached  to  his
wife  Vasavadatta.'  Moreover,  as  long  as  the  queen  is  alive,
the  King  of  Vatsa  will  not  marry  anyone  else  ;  but  if  a  report
is  once  spread  that  the  queen  is  burnt,  all  will  succeed.  And
when  Padmavati  is  secured,  the  King  of  Magadha  will  be  our
marriage  connection,  and  will  not  attack  us  in  the  rear,  but
will  become  our  ally.  Then  we  will  march  to  conquer  the
eastern  quarter,  and  the  others  in  due  succession,  so  we  shall
obtain  for  the  King  of  Vatsa  all  this  earth.  And  if  we  only
exert  ourselves,  this  king  will  obtain  the  dominion  of  the
earth,  for  long  ago  a  divine  voice  predicted  this."

When  Rumanvat  heard  this  speech  from  the  great  minister

where  the  hero  is  called  Glaume  Esnaut  de  Tremeril.  In  Frere's  Old  Deccan
Days,  p.  217,  we  read  of  a  quarrel  between  a  blind  man  and  a  deaf  man,
which  got  so  serious  that  the  blind  man  gave  the  deaf  man  a  tremendous
box  on  the  ear,  so  violent  indeed  that  it  made  the  deaf  man  hear.  The  deaf
man  returned  the  blow  so  hard  on  the  blind  man's  face  that  his  eyesight
was  immediately  restored.  It  is  unnecessary  to  give  examples  of  the  extra-
ordinary cases  of  restoration  of  sight  and  hearing  which  constantly  occurred
in  the  Great  War.  A  similar  story  to  that  in  our  text  also  occurs  on  p.  36
of  this  volume. — n.m.p.

^  This  ancient  kingdom  corresponds  to  the  modern  districts  of  Patna,
Gaya  and  Shahabad  in  South  Bihar.  Its  great  importance  in  Indian  history
will  be  realised  when  we  remember  that  it  was  not  only  the  home  of
Buddhism  and  Jainism,  but  also  the  nucleus  of  two  of  the  greatest  of  the
Indian  empires,  the  Maurya  and  the  Gupta.  Until  the  sixth  century  b.c.
its  capital  was  Girivraja,  when  its  place  was  taken  by  Rajagriha,  the  modern
Rajglr.  Further  information  will  be  found  in  Rhys  Davids'  Buddhist  India,
1905;  Cunningham's  Ancient  Geography  of  India,  1871;  and  the  Cambridge
History  of  India,  vol.  i,  1922. — n.m.p.

2  In  the  dramatic  version  (see  note  1,  p.  21)  of  this  incident  Padmavati
is  described  as  sister  of  King  Praydota. — n.m.p.


4  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

Yaugandharayana,  he  feared  that  the  plan  would  cover  them
with  ridicule,  and  so  he  said  to  him  :  "  Deception  practised
for  the  sake  of  PadmavatI  might  some  day  be  the  ruin  of  us
both  ;   in  proof  of  this  listen  to  the  following  tale  :  —


12.  Story  of  the  Hypocritical  Ascetic

On  the  bank  of  the  Ganges  there  is  a  city  named  Ma-
kandika  ;  in  that  city  long  ago  there  was  a  certain  ascetic
who  observed  a  vow  of  silence,  and  he  lived  on  alms,  and,
surrounded  by  numerous  other  holy  beggars,  dwelt  in  a
monastery  within  the  precincts  of  a  god's  temple  where  he
had  taken  up  his  abode.  Once,  when  he  entered  a  certain
merchant's  house  to  beg,  he  saw  a  beautiful  maiden
coming  out  with  alms  in  her  hand,  and  the  rascal,  seeing
that  she  was  wonderfully  beautiful,  was  smitten  with  love,
and  exclaimed  :  "  Ah  !  Ah  !  Alas  !  "  And  that  merchant
overheard  him.  Then,  taking  the  alms  he  had  received,  he
departed  to  his  own  house  ;  and  then  the  merchant  went
there  and  said  to  him  in  his  astonishment :  "  Why  did  you
to-day  suddenly  break  your  vow  of  silence  ^  and  say  what
you  did  ?  "  When  he  heard  that,  the  ascetic  said  to  the
merchant :  "  This  daughter  of  yours  has  inauspicious
marks  ^ ;  when  she  marries,  you  will  undoubtedly  perish,
wife,  sons  and  all.  So,  when  I  saw  her,  I  was  afflicted,  for
you  are  my  devoted  adherent ;  and  thus  it  was  on  your
account  that  I  broke  silence  and  said  what  I  did.  So  place
this  daughter  of  yours  by  night  in  a  basket,  on  the  top  of
which  there  must  be  a  light,  and  set  her  adrift  on  the  Ganges.'*
The  merchant  said,  "  So  I  will,"  and  went  away ;  and  at
night  he  did  all  he  had  been  directed  to  do,  out  of  pure  fear.
The  timid  are  ever  unreflecting.

The  hermit  for  his  part  said  at  that  time  to  his  own
pupils  :  "  Go  to  the  Ganges,  and  when  you  see  a  basket
floating  along  with  a  light  on  the  top  of  it,  bring  it  here
secretly,  but  you  must  not  open  it,  even  if  you  hear  a  noise
inside."     They  said,  "  We  will  do  so,"  and  off  they  went ;

*  For  the  amazing  austerities  of  ascetics  sec  Vol.  I,  p.  79,  note  1.— n.m.p.

*  See  note  on  p.  7. — n.m.p.


THE  MAID  AND  THE  MONKEY  5

but  before  they  reached  the  Ganges,  strange  to  say,  a  certain
prince  went  into  the  river  to  bathe.  He,  seeing  that  basket,
which  the  merchant  had  thrown  in,  by  the  help  of  the  Ught
on  it,  got  his  servants  to  fetch  it  for  him,  and  immediately
opened  it  out  of  curiosity.  And  in  it  he  saw  that  heart-
enchanting  girl,  and  he  married  her  on  the  spot  by  the  gdn-
dharva  ceremony  of  marriage.  And  he  set  the  basket  adrift
on  the  Ganges,  exactly  as  it  was  before,  putting  a  lamp  on
the  top  of  it,  and  placing  a  fierce  monkey  inside  it.

The  prince  having  departed  with  that  pearl  of  maidens,
the  pupils  of  the  hermit  came  there  in  the  course  of  their
search,  and  saw  that  basket,  and  took  it  up  and  carried  it  to
the  hermit.  Then  he,  being  delighted,  said  to  them  :  "I
will  take  this  upstairs  and  perform  incantations  with  it  alone,
but  you  must  lie  in  silence  this  night."  Wlien  he  had  said
this,  the  ascetic  took  the  basket  to  the  top  of  the  monastery
and  opened  it,  eager  to  behold  the  merchant's  daughter.
And  then  a  monkey  of  terrible  appearance  sprang  out  of  it,^
and  rushed  upon  the  ascetic,  like  his  own  immoral  conduct
incarnate  in  bodily  form.  The  monkey  in  its  fury  immedi-
ately tore  off  with  its  teeth  the  nose  of  the  wicked  ascetic,  and
his  ears  with  its  claws,  as  if  it  had  been  a  skilful  executioner  ;
and  in  that  state  the  ascetic  ran  downstairs,  and  when  his
pupils  beheld  him  they  could  with  difficulty  suppress  their
laughter.  And  early  next  morning  everybody  heard  the
story,  and  laughed  heartily ;  but  the  merchant  was  delighted,
and  his  daughter  also,  as  she  had  obtained  a  good  husband.


[M]  "  And  even  as  the  ascetic  made  himself  ridiculous,  so
too  rnay  we  possibly  become  a  laughing-stock,  if  we  employ

1  Cf.  Sagas  from  the  Far  East,  tale  xi,  pp.  123,  124.  Here  the  crime
contemplated  is  murder,  and  the  ape  is  represented  by  a  tiger.  This  story
bears  a  certain  resemblance  to  the  termination  of  "Alles  aus  einer  Erbse/'
Kaden's  Unter  den  Olivenh'dumenj  p.  22.     See  also  pp.  75  and  220  of  the  same

collection. In  the  Pentamerone  of  Basile  (Burton,  vol.  i,  second  diversion  of

the  third  day,  p.  149  et  seq.)  a  princess  is  set  afloat  in  a  box  and  found  by  a
king,  whose  wife  she  eventually  becomes.  See  also  Tawney's  Katkakoga,
pp.  131-134.— N.M.p.


6  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

deceit,  and  fail  after  all.  For  the  separation  of  the  king  from
Vasavadatta  involves  many  disadvantages."

When  Rumanvat  had  said  this  to  Yaugandharayana,  the
latter  answered  :  "In  no  other  way  can  we  conduct  our
enterprise  successfully,  and  if  we  do  not  undertake  the  enter-
prise, it  is  certain  that  with  this  self-indulgent  king  we  shall
lose  even  what  territory  we  have  got ;  and  the  reputation
which  we  have  acquired  for  statesmanship  will  be  tarnished,
and  we  shall  cease  to  be  spoken  of  as  men  who  show  loyalty
to  their  sovereign.  For  when  a  king  is  one  who  depends  on
himself  for  success,  his  ministers  are  considered  merely  the
instruments  of  his  wisdom  ;  and  in  the  case  of  such  monarchs
you  would  not  have  much  to  do  with  their  success  or  failures.
But  when  a  king  depends  on  his  ministers  for  success,  it  is
their  wisdom  that  achieves  his  ends,  and  if  they  are  wanting
in  enterprise  he  must  bid  a  long  farewell  to  all  hope  of  great-
ness.* But  if  you  fear  the  queen's  father  Chandamahasena,
I  must  tell  you  that  he  and  his  son  and  the  queen  also  will  do
whatever  I  bid  them."

When  Yaugandharayana,  most  resolute  among  the  reso-
lute, had  said  this,  Rumanvat,  whose  heart  dreaded  some
fatal  blunder,  again  said  to  him  :  "  Even  a  discerning  prince
is  afflicted  by  the  pain  of  being  separated  from  a  beloved
woman,  much  more  will  this  King  of  Vatsa  be.  In  proof  of
what  I  say,  listen  to  the  following  tale  :—

13.  Story  of  JJnmddinl  ^

Once  on  a  time  there  was  a  king  named  Devasena,  best
of  wise  men,  and  the  city  of  Sravasti  was  his  capital.     And  in

*  Literally,  a  handful  of  water,  such  as  is  offered  to  the  Manes,  is  offered
to  Fortune.     It  is  all  over  with  his  chance  of  attaining  glory.

*  Cf.  SiciUanische  M'drchen,  Gonzenbach,  vol.  i,  p.  220.  Liebrecht,  in  note
48.5  to  page  413  of  his  translation  of  Dunlop's  History  of  Fiction,  compares
this  story  with  one  in  The  Thousand  and  One  Days  of  a  princess  of  Kashmir,
who  was  so  beautiful  that  everyone  who  saw  her  went  mad,  or  pined  away.
He  also  mentions  an  Arabian  tradition  with  respect  to  the  Thracian  sorceress
Rhodope:  "The  Arabs  believe  that  one  of  the  pyramids  is  haunted  by  a
guardian  spirit  in  the  shape  of  a  beautiful  woman,  the  mere  sight  of  whom
drives  men  mad."  He  refers  also  to  Thomas  Moore,  The  Epicurean,  note  6  to
ch.  vi,  and  The  Adventures  of  Hativi  Tai,  translated  by  Duncan  Forbes,  p.  18.


BEAUTY  THAT  MADDENS  7

that  city  there  was  a  wealthy  merchant,  and  to  him  there
was  born  a  daughter  of  unparalleled  beauty.  And  that
daughter  became  known  by  the  name  of  Unmadini,  because
everyone  who  beheld  her  beauty  became  mad.  Her  father,
the  merchant,  thought :  "I  must  not  give  this  daughter  of
mine  to  anyone  without  telling  the  king,  or  he  may  be  angry."
So  he  went  and  said  to  the  king  Devasena  :  "  King,  I  have  a
daughter  who  is  a  very  pearl ;  take  her  if  she  finds  favour  in
your  eyes."

When  he  heard  that,  the  king  sent  some  Brahmans,  his
confidential  ministers,  saying  to  them :  "  Go  and  see  if
that  maiden  possesses  the  auspicious  marks  ^  or  not."     The

^  The  interpreting  of  bodily  marks  is  known  as  sdmudrika,  and  there  are
several  works  on  the  art.  Buddha  was  said  to  have  possessed  thirty-two  hicky
marks  {mahdpurushalakshand)  and  eighty  minor  marks.  Thurston  tells  us
(^Ethnographic  Notes  in  Southern  India,  p.  84)  that  among  the  Kurubas  the
bridegroom's  father  observes  certain  marks,  or  "curls,"  on  the  head  of  the
proposed  bride.  If  she  has  one  on  her  forehead  it  is  considered  lucky ;  but
the  opposite  is  the  case  if  one  is  found  at  the  back  of  the  head,  or  near  the
right  temple.

Among  the  Pallis  (Tamil  agriculturists)  a  "  curl "  on  the  forehead  is  con-
sidered as  an  indication  that  the  girl  will  become  a  widow ;  and  one  on  the
back  of  the  head  portends  the  death  of  the  eldest  brother  of  her  husband.

The  following  notes  on  sdmudrika  were  kindly  obtained  for  me  from  Rai
Bahadur  B.  A.  Gupta  by  Mr  Enthoven  : —

The  number  of  horizontal  lines  on  the  forehead  indicate  years  of  longevity.
If  a  man  has  two  lines,  he  will  live  for  forty  years  or  so ;  if  three,  he  will  live
for  seventy-five  years  or  so;  if  four,  for  full  hundred  years.  If  while  smiling
he  gets  a  dimple  or  depression  in  his  cheeks,  he  will  be  a  loose  character.
If  his  chin  is  double  and  broad,  he  will  be  strong-willed.  If  his  chin  be  thin
and  rounded,  he  would  like  to  be  loved  by  a  woman.  If  he  has  very  long  ears,
he  will  be  licentious.  If  there  be  a  deep  horizontal  line  at  the  top  of  the
nose,  he  would  like  to  be  authoritative.  If  he  has  five  whorls  at  the  five  tips
of  his  fingers,  he  will  be  a  princeling ;  if  all  the  ten  fingers  have  that  mark,  he
will  become  a  sovereign.  If  a  man  has  a  line  on  the  sole  of  his  foot  running
between  his  big  toe  and  the  second  toe,  he  will  get  a  palanquin.  A  woman
with  the  little  toe  overlapping  the  next  one,  or  if  it  does  not  reach  the  earth,
will  be  morally  bad-charactered  and  will  seek  many  men.  If  the  four  fingers
of  a  man  when  held  up  against  the  sun  show  light  through  interstices,  he  is
an  extravagant  person.  On  the  other  hand,  if  he  has  fat  fingers  and  no
interstices,  he  is  a  close-fisted  man,  and  likely  to  be  a  miser.

As  we  shall  see  in  a  later  volume  (Chapter  XLIII),  Naravahanadatta  is
recognised  as  a  future  emperor  by  special  distinguishing  signs  "  such  as  the
peculiar  freckle  and  other  marks." — n.m.p.


8  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

ministers  said,  *'  We  will  do  so,"  and  went.  But  when  they
beheld  that  merchant's  daughter,  Unmadini,  love  was  sud-
denly produced  in  their  souls,  and  they  became  utterly  be-
wildered. When  they  recovered  their  senses,  the  Brahmans
said  to  one  another  :  "If  the  king  marries  this  maiden,
he  will  think  only  of  her,  and  will  neglect  the  affairs  of  the
state,  and  everything  will  go  to  rack  and  ruin;  so  what  is
the  good  of  her  ?  "  Accordingly  they  went  and  told  the  king,
what  was  not  true,  that  the  maiden  had  inauspicious  marks.
Then  the  merchant  gave  that  Unmadini,  whom  the  king
had  refused,  and  who  in  her  heart  felt  a  proud  resentment
at  it,  to  the  king's  commander-in-chief.  When  she  was  in
the  house  of  her  husband,  she  ascended  one  day  to  the
roof,  and  exhibited  herself  to  the  king,  who  she  knew  would
pass  that  way.  And  the  moment  the  king  beheld  her,
resembling  a  world- bewildering  drug  employed  by  the  God
of  Love,  distraction  seemed  to  be  produced  within  him.
When  he  returned  to  his  palace,  and  discovered  that  it  was
the  same  lady  he  had  previously  rejected,  he  was  full  of
regret,  and  fell  violently  ill  with  fever.  The  commander-in-
chief,  the  husband  of  the  lady,  came  to  him  and  earnestly
entreated  him  to  take  her,  saying :  "  She  is  a  slave ;  she  is  not
the  lawful  wife  of  another ;  or,  if  it  seem  fit,  I  will  repudi-
ate her  in  the  temple,  then  my  lord  can  take  her  for  his
own."  But  the  king  said  to  him  :  "I  will  not  take  unto
myself  another  man's  wife,  and  if  you  repudiate  her,  your
righteousness  will  be  at  an  end,  and  you  will  deserve  punish-
ment at  my  hands."  When  they  heard  that,  the  other
ministers  remained  silent,  and  the  king  was  gradually  con-
sumed by  love's  burning,  and  so  died.^


[M]  *'  So  that  king  perished,  though  of  firm  soul,  being
deprived  of  Unmadini ;  but  what  will  become  of  the  lord
of  Vatsa  without  Vasavadatta  ?  "  When  Yaugandharayana
heard  this  from  Rumanvat,  he  answered  :  "  Affliction  is
bravely  endured  by  kings  who  have  their  eyes  firmly  fixed

^  See  note  to  next  story. — n.m.p.


THE  OVERWHELMING  POWER  OF  LOVE        9

on  their  duty.  Did  not  Rama,  when  commissioned  by  the
gods,  who  were  obliged  to  resort  to  that  contrivance  to  kill
Ravana,  endure  the  pain  of  separation  from  Queen  Sita  ?  "
When  he  heard  this,  Rumanvat  said  in  answer :  "  Such  as
Rama  are  gods ;  their  souls  can  endure  all  things.  But  the
thing  is  intolerable  to  men  ;  in  proof  whereof  listen  to  the
following  tale  :  —

14.  Story  of  the  Loving  Couple  who  died  of  Separation

There  is  on  this  earth  a  great  city  rich  in  jewels,  named
Mathura.  In  it  there  lived  a  certain  young  merchant  called
lUaka.  And  he  had  a  dear  wife  whose  mind  was  devoted  to
him  alone.  Once  on  a  time,  while  he  was  dwelling  with  her,
the  young  merchant  determined  to  go  to  another  country  on
account  of  the  exigencies  of  his  affairs.  And  that  wife  of  his
wished  to  go  with  him.  For  when  a  woman  is  passionately
attached  to  anyone  she  cannot  endure  to  be  separated  from
him.  And  then  that  young  merchant  set  out,  having  offered
the  usual  preliminary  prayer  for  success  in  his  undertaking,  and
did  not  take  with  him  that  wife  of  his,  though  she  had  dressed
herself  for  the  journey.  She,  looking  after  him  when  he  had
started,  with  tears  in  her  eyes,  stood  supporting  herself
against  the  panel  of  the  door  of  the  courtyard.  Then,  he
being  out  of  sight,  she  was  no  longer  able  to  endure  her  grief ;
but  she  was  too  timid  to  follow  him.  So  her  breath  left  her
body.  And  as  soon  as  the  young  merchant  came  to  know
of  that,  he  returned,  and  to  his  horror  found  that  dear  wife
of  his  a  corpse,  with  pale  though  lovely  complexion,  set  off
by  her  waving  locks,  like  the  spirit  of  beauty  that  tenants
the  moon  fallen  down  to  earth  in  the  day  during  her  sleep. ^
So  he  took  her  in  his  arms  and  wept  over  her,  and  immedi-
ately the  vital  spirits  left  his  body,  which  was  on  fire  with
the  flame  of  grief,  as  if  they  were  afraid  to  remain. ^     So  that

^  In  the  original  it  is  intended  to  compare  the  locks  to  the  spots  in  the
moon.

2  Among  the  Hindus  death  was  the  tenth,  and  final,  stage  of  love-sickness.
Vatsyayana  in  his  Kama  Sutra  (circa  a.d.  250)  gives  the  ten  stages  as  follows : —
(l)  love  of  the  eyes — i.e.  pleasure  in  seeing  the  beloved  one;  (2)  attraction
and  dwelling  of  the  mind ;  (3)  the  birth  of  desire  for  union  ;  (4)  loss  of  sleep  ;


10  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

married  couple  perished  by  mutual  separation,  and  therefore  we
must  take  care  that  the  king  is  not  separated  from  the  queen.


[M]  When  he  had  said  this,  Rumanvat  ceased,  with  his
mind  full  of  apprehension,  but  the  wise  Yaugandharayana,  that
ocean  of  calm  resolution,  answered  him  :  "I  have  arranged
the  whole  plan,  and  the  affairs  of  kings  often  require  such
steps  to  be  taken  ;  in  proof  of  it  hear  the  following  tale  :  —

15.  Story  of  Punyasena

There  lived  long  ago  in  Ujjayini  a  king  named  Punyasena,
and  once  on  a  time  a  powerful  sovereign  came  and  attacked
him.  Then  his  resolute  ministers,  seeing  that  that  king  was
hard  to  conquer,  spread  everywhere  a  false  report  that  their
own  sovereign  Punyasena  was  dead  ;  and  they  placed  him  in
concealment,  and  burnt  some  other  man's  corpse  with  all  the
ceremonies  appropriate  to  a  king,  and  they  proposed  to  the
hostile  king  through  an  ambassador  that,  as  they  had  now
no  king,  he  should  come  and  be  their  king.  The  hostile
monarch  was  pleased  and  consented,  and  then  the  ministers

(5)  emaciation ;  (6)  total  indifference  to  other  objects ;  (7)  loss  of  shame ;
(8)  distraction  and  madness;  (9)  fainting,  and  (JO)  death.

This  list  was  repeated  in  rather  more  detail  in  the  Ananga-Ranga ;  see  the
Kama  Shastra  Society  edition,  1885,  pp.  87,  88,  and  my  Annotated  Bibliography
of  Sir  Richard  Burton,  pp.  l6l-l73.

In  Arabian  fiction  the  favourite  stage  appears  to  be  the  ninth,  and  nearly
every  hero  faints  for  love  on  the  slightest  provocation.  There  are,  however,
cases  of  death.  See  the  Nights  (Burton,  vol.  v,  p.  134),  where  three  unhappy
people  die  through  love  of  each  other.  Cf.  also  the  story  of  "The  Mad
Lover"  on  p.  138  of  the  same  volume.  In  Europe  the  favourite  form  of  the
motif  was  for  one  of  the  lovers  to  die  naturally  or  unintentionally,  whereupon
the  other  would  either  commit  suicide  or  die  of  grief — the  consequence  being
that  they  were  buried  together  in  the  same  tomb.  See,  for  example,  Decameron,
day  4,  novs.  1,  5,  7,  8  and  9 ;  Straparola,  night  9,  nov.  2  ;  Bandello,  part  i,  nov.
33 ;  Ileptameron,  day  7,  nov.  70.  Cf.  also  the  ballad  of  "  Fair  Margaret  and
Sweet  William"  (Percy,  lieliques,  iii,  p.  125)  and  "Lord  Thomas  and  Fair
Annet"  (op.  cip.,  iii,  p.  234).  For  numerous  imitations  of  the  tale  in  the
Decameron,  day  4,  nov.  8,  reference  should  be  made  to  Lee,  The  Decatneron,  its
Sources  and  Analogues,  pp.  140-143. — n.m.p.


THE  PLOT  THICKENS  11

assembled,  accompanied  by  soldiers,  and  proceeded  to  storm
his  camp.  And  the  enemy's  army  being  destroyed,  Punya-
sena's  ministers  brought  him  out  of  concealment,  and  having
recovered  their  power  put  that  hostile  king  to  death.


[M]  "  Such  necessities  will  arise  in  monarchs'  affairs,
therefore  let  us  resolutely  accomplish  this  business  of  the
king's  by  spreading  a  report  of  the  queen's  having  been
burnt."  When  he  heard  this  from  Yaugandharayana,  who
had  made  up  his  mind,  Rumanvat  said  :  "If  this  is  resolved
upon,  let  us  send  for  Gopalaka,  the  queen's  respected  brother,
and  let  us  take  all  our  measures  duly,  after  consultation
with  him."  Then  Yaugandharayana  said,  "So  be  it,"  and
Rumanvat  allowed  himself  to  be  guided,  in  determining
what  was  to  be  done,  by  the  confidence  which  he  placed  in
his  colleague.

The  next  day  these  dexterous  ministers  sent  off  a
messenger  of  their  own  to  bring  Gopalaka,  on  the  pretext
that  his  relations  longed  to  see  him.  And  as  he  had  only
departed  before  on  account  of  urgent  business,  Gopalaka
came  at  the  request  of  the  messenger,  seeming  like  an  in-
carnate festival.  And  the  very  day  he  came  Yaugandhara-
yana took  him  by  night  to  his  own  house,  together  with
Rumanvat,  and  there  he  told  him  of  that  daring  scheme
which  he  wished  to  undertake,  all  of  which  he  had  before
Gopalaka  is  deliberated  about  together  with  that  Rumanvat  ;
let  into  the  and  Gopalaka,  desiring  the  good  of  the  King  of
Secret  Vatsa,  Consented  to  the  scheme,  though  he  knew

it  would  bring  sorrow  to  his  sister ;  for  the  mind  of  good  men
is  ever  fixed  upon  duty.

Then  Rumanvat  again  said  :  "  All  this  is  well  planned ;
but  when  the  King  of  Vatsa  hears  that  his  wife  is  burnt  he
will  be  inclined  to  yield  up  his  breath,  and  how  is  he  to  be
prevented  from  doing  so  ?  This  is  a  matter  which  ought  to
be  considered.  For  though  all  the  usual  politic  expedients
may  advantageously  be  employed,  the  principal  element  of
sound  statecraft  is  the  averting  of  misfortune."


12  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

Then  Yaugandharayana,  who  had  reflected  on  every-
thing that  was  to  be  done,  said  :  "  There  need  be  no  anxiety
about  this,  for  the  queen  is  a  princess,  the  younger  sister  of
Gopalaka,  and  dearer  to  him  than  his  Hfe,  and  when  the  King
of  Vatsa  sees  how  Httle  afflicted  Gopalaka  is,  he  will  think  to
himself,  '  Perhaps  the  queen  may  be  alive  after  all,'  and  so
^vill  be  able  to  control  his  feelings.  Moreover,  he  is  of  heroic
disposition,  and  the  marriage  of  Padmavati  will  be  quickly
got  through,  and  then  we  can  soon  bring  the  queen  out  of
concealment."

Then  Yaugandharayana  and  Gopalaka  and  Rumanvat,
having  made  up  their  minds  to  this,  deliberated  as  follows  :  —
"  Let  us  adopt  the  artifice  of  going  to  Lavanaka  with  the
king  and  queen,  for  that  district  is  a  border  district  near  the
kingdom  of  Magadha.  And  because  it  contains  admirable
hunting-grounds,  it  will  tempt  the  king  to  absent  himself
from  the  palace,  so  we  can  set  the  women's  apartments  there
on  fire  and  carry  out  the  plan  ^  on  which  we  have  determined.
And  by  an  artifice  we  will  take  the  queen  and  leave  her  in  the
palace  of  Padmavati,  in  order  that  Padmavati  herself  may
be  a  witness  to  the  queen's  virtuous  behaviour  in  a  state  of
concealment."

Having  thus  deliberated  together  during  the  night,  they
all,  with  Yaugandharayana  at  their  head,  entered  the  king's
palace  on  the  next  day.  Then  Rumanvat  made  the  following
representation  to  the  king  : — "  O  King,  it  is  a  long  time  since
we  have  gone  to  Lavanaka,  and  it  is  a  very  delightful  place  ;
moreover,  you  will  find  capital  hunting-grounds  there,  and
grass  for  the  horses  can  easily  be  obtained.  And  the  King
of  Magadha,  being  so  near,  afflicts  all  that  district.  So  let
us  go  there  for  the  sake  of  defending  it,  as  well  as  for  our
own  enjoyment."  And  the  king,  when  he  heard  this,  hav-
ing his  mind  always  set  on  enjoyment,  determined  to  go  to
Lavanaka  together  with  Vasavadatta.

The  next  day,  the  journey  having  been  decided  on,  and
the  auspicious  hour  having  been  fixed  by  the  astrologers,
suddenly  the  hermit  Narada  came  to  visit  the  monarch.

He    illuminated    the    region   with    his    splendour   as    he

^   Reading  yad  hi.


NARADA  VISITS  THE  KING  18

descended  from  the  midst  of  heaven,  and  gave  a  feast  to  the
eyes  of  all  spectators,  seeming  as  if  he  were  the  moon  come
down  out  of  affection  towards  his  own  descendants.^  After
accepting  the  usual  hospitable  attentions,  the  hermit
graciously  gave  to  the  king,  who  bowed  humbly  before  him,
a  garland  from  the  Parijata  ^  tree.  And  he  congratulated
the  queen,  by  whom  he  was  politely  received,  promising  her
that  she  should  have  a  son,  who  should  be  a  portion  of  Kama
and  king  of  all  the  Vidyadharas.  And  then  he  said  to  the
King  of  Vatsa,  while  Yaugandharayana  was  standing  by :
"  O  King,  the  sight  of  your  wife,  Vasavadatta,  has  strangely
brought  something  to  my  recollection.  In  old  time  you  had
for  ancestors  Yudhishthira  and  his  brothers.  And  those  five
had  one  wife  between  them,^  Draupadi  by  name.  And  she,
like  Vasavadatta,  was  matchless  in  beauty.  Then,  fearing
that  her  beauty  would  do  mischief,  I  said  to  them  :  '  You
must  avoid  jealousy,  for  that  is  the  seed  of  calamities  ;  in
proof  of  it  listen  to  the  following  tale,  which  I  will  relate  to
you  :—

16.  Story  of  Sunda  and  Upasunda  *

There  were  two  brothers,  Asuras  by  race,  Sunda  and
Upasunda,  hard  to  overcome,  inasmuch  as  they  surpassed

^  The  moon  was  the  progenitor  of  the  Panda va  race.

^  One  of  the  five  trees  of  Paradise.

3  See  note  at  the  end  of  the  chapter. — n.m.p.

*  There  is  a  certain  resemblance  in  this  story  to  that  of  Otus  and  Ephialtes.
See  Preller's  Griechische  Mythologie,  vol.  i,  p.  81.     Cf.  also  Grohmann's  Sagen

aus   B'dhmen,  p.    S5. The  story  of  Sunda  and  Upasunda  is  found  in  the

Mahdbhdrata,  Book  I,  sections  ccxi-ccxiv  (see  Roy's  new  edition,  1920,  vol.  i,
part  iv,  pp.  407-413).  Here  we  have  the  tale  in  full,  and  learn  how  the  two
brothers  went  to  the  Vindhya  hills  to  practise  the  severest  austerities,  until
their  power  became  so  great  that  the  gods  grew  alarmed.  All  their  schemes
to  tempt  the  brothers  from  their  asceticism  failed.  Finally  Brahma  asks  the
brothers  what  boon  it  is  they  want.  They  demand  knowledge  of  all  weapons
and  powers  of  illusion,  to  be  endued  with  great  strength,  to  assume  any  form
at  will,  and  finally  to  be  immortal.  All  these  demands  are  granted  except
the  latter,  which  was  denied  them  because  they  had  performed  their  great
penances  only  to  subdue  the  three  worlds.  They  are,  however,  allowed  to
name  some  form  of  death  which  would  practically  amount  to  their  being
immortal.     Thinking  it  an  absolute  impossibility  for  two  such  loving  brothers


14  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

the  three  worlds  in  valour.  And  Brahma,  wishing  to  destroy
them,  gave  an  order  to  Vi^vakarman,^  and  had  constructed
a  heavenly  woman  named  Tilottama,  in  order  to  behold
whose  beauty  even  Siva  truly  became  four- faced,  so  as  to
look  four  ways  at  once,  while  she  was  devoutly  circumam-
bulating him.  She,  by  the  order  of  Brahma,  went  to  Sunda
and  Upasunda,  while  they  were  in  the  garden  of  Kailasa,  in
order  to  seduce  them.  And  both  those  two  Asuras,  dis-
tracted with  love,  seized  the  fair  one  at  the  same  time  by
both  her  arms  the  moment  they  saw  her  near  them.  And
as  they  were  dragging  her  off  in  mutual  opposition,  they
soon  came  to  blows,  and  both  of  them  were  destroyed.  To
whom  is  not  the  attractive  object  called  woman  the  cause  of
misfortune  ?


[M]  *' '  And  you,  though  many,  have  one  love,  Draupadi,
therefore  you  must  without  fail  avoid  quarrelling  about  her.
And  by  my  advice  always  observe  this  rule  with  respect  to
her.  When  she  is  with  the  eldest,  she  must  be  considered  a
mother  by  the  youngest ;  and  when  she  is  with  the  youngest,
she  must   be  considered  a   daughter-in-law   by  the  eldest.'

to  quarrel  with  each  other,  they  say :  "  Let  us  have  no  fear  [of  death]  then
from  any  created  thing,  mobile  or  immobile,  in  the  three  worlds,  except  only
from  each  other."  At  first  all  goes  well — from  the  brothers'  point  of  view.
They  subdue  the  gods,  extirpate  the  Brahman  caste,  and  lead  a  life  of  luxury
and  voluptuousness.

In  their  misery  the  Rishis  and  Siddhas  implore  Brahma  to  aid  them.  It  is
at  this  point  that  he  calls  upon  the  divine  architect,  ViiSvakarman,  to  construct
the  celestial  maiden,  as  related  in  the  Ocean  of  Story.  The  story  is  repeated
in  chapter  cxxi,  where  the  two  brothers  are  called  Ghanta  and  Nighanta.
Here  they  are  described  as  Danavas  who  were  trying  to  impede  Prajapati  in
his  work  of  creation.  The  denouement  of  this  version  is  weakened  by  the
fact  that  there  are  two  beautiful  things  created.

Stories  of  hostile  brothers  are  of  quite  common  occurrence  in  Sanskrit  litera-
ture. See  Par^vanatha,  iv,  53  et  xeq.,  and  vi,  280  et  seq.\  Dharmakalpadruma,  ii,
and  the  story  of  The  Two  Brothers"  in  Schiefner  and  Ralston's  Tibetan  Tales,
p.  279-  Bloomfield  {Life  and  Stories  of  Pdr(^'anatha,  pp.  15,  l6)  gives  short
extracts  from  the  above. — n.m.p.

1  The  architect  or  artist  of  the  gods.


NARADA'S  ADVICE  15

Your  ancestors,  O  King,  accepted  that  speech  of  mine  with
unanimous  consent,  having  their  minds  fixed  on  salutary
counsels.  And  they  were  my  friends,  and  it  is  through  love
for  them  that  I  have  come  to  visit  you  here.  King  of  Vatsa  ;
therefore  I  give  you  this  advice.  Do  you  follow  the  counsel
of  your  ministers,  as  they  followed  mine,  and  in  a  short  time
you  will  gain  great  success.  For  some  time  you  will  suffer
grief,  but  you  must  not  be  too  much  distressed  about  it,  for
it  will  end  in  happiness."

After  the  hermit  Narada,  so  clever  in  indirectly  intimat-
ing future  prosperity,  had  said  this  duly  to  the  King  of  Vatsa,
he  immediately  disappeared.  And  then  Yaugandharayana
and  all  the  other  ministers,  auguring  from  the  speech  of  that
great  hermit  that  the  scheme  they  had  in  view  was  about  to
succeed,  became  exceedingly  zealous  about  carrying  it  into
effect.


16  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


NOTE   ON    POLYANDRY

For  the  sake  of  readers  who  are  unacquainted  with  the  plot  of  the  world's
greatest  epic  I  may,  perhaps,  be  excused  for  beginning  this  note  with  a  very
brief  outline  of  the  events  in  the  first  book  of  the  Mahdbhdrata,  which  has
already  been  so  often  quoted  in  Volume  I.

The  Mahabharata,  meaning  "  great  poem  relating  to  the  Bharatas,"  con-
sists of  eighteen  parvans,  or  books,  made  up  of  about  400,000  verses  of  eight
and  eleven  syllables  each.

The  outline  of  the  story  up  to  the  polyandrous  marriage  of  Draupadi,
mentioned  in  our  text,  is  as  follows  : —

There  once  lived  in  the  country  of  the  Bharatas,  in  the  city  of  Hastinapura
(about  sixty  miles  north-east  of  the  modern  Delhi),  two  princes  named  Dhrita-
rashtra  and  Pandu.  Their  uncle,  Bhishma,  governed  the  kingdom  until  they
came  of  age.  Legally  the  eldest  brother,  Dhritarashtra,  should  have  ruled,
but  he  was  born  blind  and  so  his  younger  brother  took  his  place.  There  was
also  a  third  brother  named  Vidura,  but  as  his  mother  was  only  a  Sudra  woman
he  could  not  succeed.  Dhritarashtra  married  Gandhari,  the  daughter  of  King
Subala  of  Gandhara.

Pan^u  had  two  wives,  Pritha,  or  KuntT,  and  Madri,  daughter  of  the  King
of  Madra.  After  a  series  of  most  successful  campaigns  Pandu  retired  with  his
wives  to  the  Himalayas,  leaving  the  reins  of  government  in  the  hands  of  his
blind  brother,  and  his  uncle  Bhishma  as  regent.

Both  brothers  had  sons  by  supernatural  birth.  Dhritarashtra  had  a  hundred
sons,  called  Kauravas,  or  Kuru  princes,  while  Pandu  had  but  five — three  from
KuntI,  named  Yudhishthira,  Bhima  and  Arjuna,  and  two  from  Madri,  who  were
twins,  Nakula  and  Sahadeva.

While  the  five  princes  were  still  but  children,  their  father  Pan^u  died  as  the
result  of  the  fulfilment  of  a  curse.  On  hearing  of  this  misfortune  Dhritarashtra
took  his  brother's  wives  and  children  under  his  care,  and  brought  up  the  latter
with  his  own  hundred  sons.  Owing  to  the  general  superiority  in  all  feats  of
strength  of  the  Pandu  princes,  inordinate  jealousy  of  their  cousins  finally  led
to  Arjuna  and  his  brothers  leaving  Hastinapura.  They  lived  at  Ekacakra,  dis-
guised as  mendicant  Brahmans.  From  there  they  went  to  the  Court  of  King
Drupada,  whose  beautiful  daughter  Draupadi  was  about  to  hold  her  svayamvara
(marriage  by  choice).  Only  the  man  who  could  perform  a  certain  great  feat  in
archery  could  win  her.  All  Dhritariishtra's  sons  tried  and  failed,  and  Arjuna
alone  succeeded  in  filling  the  conditions  of  the  contest.

We  now  come  to  the  incident  which  is  supposed  to  have  caused  the
polyandrous  marriage  of  Draupadi.

The  five  Pan(^us  returned  to  their  mother  with  Draupadi,  and  she,  think-
ing they  had  merely  brought  back  alms,  called  out  from  within  the  house :
"Share  the  gift  between  you."  This  command  of  a  parent  was  law,  and
accordingly  Arjuna  informed  Drupada  that  he  and  his  four  brothers  were  going
to  have  his  daughter  in  common      The  king  was  taken  aback,  and  begged  the


POLYANDRY  17

brothers  not  to  commit  an  act  that  was  sinful  and  opposed  both  to  usage  and
the  Vedas.  At  this  juncture  the  illustrious  Rishi  Vyasa  appears  and,  by  relat-
ing the  supernatural  history  of  both  the  Pandus  and  Draupadi  herself,  shows
that  in  reality  the  five  Pandus  originated  in  a  single  divine  being.  Thus  the
proposed  marriage  was  not  really  polyandrous,  and  so  could  be  consummated
without  breach  of  propriety  or  transgression  against  the  sacred  Vedas.  Ex-
amples of  similar  marriages  in  the  past  are  quoted,  and  finally  the  marriage
takes  place.

This  brings  us  to  the  consideration  of  the  practice  of  polyandry,  which  is
the  subject  of  this  note.

From  the  above  story  it  is  clear  that  the  practice  was  regarded  with  dis-
favour by  the  Aryans.  If  it  did  occur,  it  was  necessary  to  explain  it  away,  or
to  prove  that  it  was  not  a  ir7ie  case  of  polyandry.  In  fact  the  practice  can  be
described  as  non-Aryan.  It  was  certainly  non-Vedic,  and  was  strongly  opposed
by  the  Brahmans.

On  the  other  hand,  it  was  not  denounced  in  the  Sutras,  though  we  must
not  infer  from  this  that  the  Pandus  lived  before  they  were  composed.

Polyandry  was  practised  by  both  the  Tibetans  and  Dravidians,  and  this
fact  has  often  been  brought  forward  to  explain  the  reference  to  the  polyandrous
marriage  in  the  Mahdbharala.  It  has  been  suggested  that,  as  the  Pandus  were
themselves  a  northern  hill  tribe  or  family,  probably  they  were  really  poly-
androus, and  needed  no  excuse.  The  Pandavas  were  of  the  Kshatriya  caste
and  enjoyed  the  lowest  forms  of  marriage  sanctioned  by  Manu ;  thus  they
would  have  little  scruple  in  imitating  the  practices  of  the  peoples  they  con-
quered, especially  as  the  number  of  their  own  women  was  bound  to  be  very
limited.  The  subject  is  an  interesting  one,  especially  when  we  remember
that  in  modern  times  the  practice  is  almost  entirely  confined  to  the  Indian
Empire  and  Tibet.

In  speaking  of  any  form  of  human  marriage  it  is  as  well  to  explain  the
exact  scope  of  the  terms  employed.  For  instance,  the  word  polygamy  is
now  used  as  a  generic  term  to  include  all  forms  of  marriage  which  are  non-
monogamic,  and  not  merely  that  form  in  which  a  single  husband  has  more
than  one  wife.

There  are  three  distinct  forms  of  polygamy  :

1.  Polygyny,  where  one  man  has  more  than  one  wife.

2.  Polyandry,  where  one  woman  has  more  than  one  husband.

3.  Communal-  or  group-marriage,  in  which  there  is  more  than  one  husband
and  more  than  one  wife  in  a  single  household.

In  a  true  case  of  polyandry,  therefore,  the  woman  must  be  married  to
more  than  one  husband,  and  not  merely  have  one  husband  and  several  lovers.
In  India  it  is  not  so  easy  as  it  may  appear  to  ascertain  whether  a  woman  is
properly  married  or  not.  We  have  already  seen  that  in  various  localities  deva-
ddsis  are  married  (Vol.  I,  App.  IV)  to  idols,  knives,  drums,  etc.,  and  in  making
up  their  statistical  tables,  reporters  of  the  Census  of  India  were  in  considerable
doubt  as  to  how  to  classify  them.

Among  the  Nairs  or  Nayars  of  Travancore,  Cochin  and  Malabar,  marriage
may  mean  either  the  formal  ceremony  of  tying  a  tali  round  the  neck  of  a
VOL.  II.  B


18  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

girl,  known  as  ldUka((u ;  or  the  ceremony  of  actual  alliance  as  husband  and
Mrife,  known  as  sambandham.

For  an  interesting  account  of  polyandry  in  Malabar,  reference  should  be
made  to  M.  Long  worth  Dames'  translation  of  the  Book  of  Duarte  Barbosa^
published  for  the  Hakluyt  Society,  1918,  1921,  vol.  ii,  pp.  40,  40n2,  42,  42ni,
43,  59,  59n^  60,  Glri^.  The  passages  are  most  ably  annotated  by  Dames,  and
many  useful  references  are  given.

Although  polyandry  can  be  described  as  non-existent  among  the  Nayars
of  to-day  (except  perhaps  in  certain  remote  country  parts),  its  prevalence  has
been  repeatedly  testified  by  travellers  and  missionaries  from  the  fifteenth
century  onwards.  The  two  distinct  marriage  ceremonies  have  always  existed,
but  the  significance  of  the  second  has  apparently  greatly  changed.  The
idlikaitu  took  place  (and  still  does)  before  the  girl  attains  puberty,  and  the
tali  is  tied  by  a  mock  bridegroom.  The  second  ceremony  was  a  kind  of
official  leave  for  the  girl  to  cohabit  with  any  Brahman  or  Nayar  she  chose.
Such  men  were  in  no  way  related ;  consequently  this  system  of  polyandry,
if  so  it  can  be  called,  is  known  as  non-fraternal.

The  more  usual  variety  of  polyandry  is  that  in  which  the  woman  marries
the  head  of  a  family  of  brothers,  the  younger  ones  sharing  the  marital  rights.
This  "fraternal  polyandry"  is  still  found  widely  disseminated  in  Tibet  and
the  neighbouring  Himalayan  regions,  as  well  as  among  the  Todas  of  the
Nilgiri  hills.  Full  references  and  adequate  accounts  of  polyandry  in  these
regions,  as  well  as  evidence  from  the  Pacific  Islands,  and  isolated  cases  in
Africa  and  elsewhere,  have  been  collected  and  admirably  presented  by
Westermarck  in  his  History  of  Human  Marriage,  fifth  edition,  1921,  vol.  iii,
chapters  xxix  and  xxx.

Thus  there  is  no  need  for  repetition  here.  It  will  suffice  to  enumerate
briefly  the  different  suggestions  put  forward  to  explain  polyandry  and  to  add
any  fresh  reference  of  importance.

We  will  take  fraternal  polyandry  first.  The  most  usual  explanation  given
is  excess  of  males  over  females.  This  has  been  found  to  exist  in  most  localities
where  polyandry  occurs — viz.  Siberia,  Turkestan,  Tibet,  Mongolia,  North  and
Central  Bhutan,  on  the  Sikkim-Bengal  frontier,  among  the  Todas  and  in
Coorg  in  South  India.  It  has  also  been  noticed  in  the  New  Hebrides,  the
Bismarck  Archipelago,  the  Hawaian  Islands  and  New  Caledonia.

Some  of  the  other  possible  causes  of  polyandry  may  be  looked  for  in  the
factors  which  have  produced  this  shortage  of  women.

For  the  1921  Census  of  India  the  following  causes  of  the  low  proportion  of
females  to  males  in  the  Indian  Empire  were  suggested  as  a  basis  for  inquiry  ;

1.  Infanticide.

2.  Neglect  of  female  children.

3.  Evil  effects  of  early  marriage  and  premature  child-bearing.

4.  High  birth-rate  and  primitive  methods  of  midwifery.

5.  Hard  treatment  accorded  to  women,  especially  widows.

6.  Hard  work  done  by  women.

The  reports  showed  that  the  two  commonest  causes  of  paucity  of  females
were  Nos.  3  and  4.     Infanticide  was  rare,  although  its  practice  in  former  times


POLYANDRY  19

in  such  provinces  as  the  Panjab  and  Bombay  may  still  have  effect  in  the  low
female  birth-rate.

In  Eastern  Bengal  and  the  Central  India  Agency  the  hard  life  of  the
women  has  also  to  be  taken  into  account,  while  in  Travancore,  where  the
women  are  well  cared  for  both  before  and  after  marriage,  the  sole  cause  of
the  excess  of  males  is  that  their  mortality  is  increasingly  small.

There  are,  however,  other  reasons  for  a  general  scarcity  of  women,  which
are  not  at  first  apparent.  For  instance,  polygyny  of  the  richer  classes  may
lead  to  polyandry  among  the  poorer  families.  In  many  countries  a  wife  is  an
expensive  luxury,  and  consequently  the  brothers  club  together  to  meet  the  cost.

There  are  still  other  factors  to  be  considered.  Polyandry  of  the  fraternal
variety  strengthens  family  ties,  and  keeps  the  property  intact.

Among  the  pastoral  tribes  of  Tibet  and  Southern  India  a  man  will
wander  for  months  on  end  with  his  flocks,  leaving  his  brothers  and  co-
husbands  in  charge  of  their  common  wife.

When  considering  non-fraternal  polyandry  none  of  these  factors  applies,
and  we  have  to  look  for  other  reasons  to  explain  the  practice  as  formerly
found  among  the  Nayars.

It  cannot  be  said  that  they  are  in  a  stage  of  development  only  a
little  further  advanced  than  promiscuity,  because,  on  the  contrary,  they  are
considerably  more  highly  civilised  than  the  neighbouring  castes  who  do  not
practise  polyandry.

The  explanation  probably  lies  in  the  history  of  the  Nayars.  They  were
originally  a  military  caste,  and  as  such  adhered  to  a  system  of  polity  incom-
patible with  the  then  existing  marriage  state.  The  men  never  lived  in  the
same  houses  as  the  women  with  whom  they  consorted,  and  inheritance  ran
through  the  mother.  Burton,  in  his  first  published  work,  Goa  and  the  Blue
MouTitains,  1851,  p.  218  et  seq.,  drew  attention  to  this  very  point:  "The
domestic  ties,  always  inconvenient  to  a  strictly  military  population,  were
thereby  [the  Brahmaic  adoption  of  the  Matriarchal  inheritance]  conveniently
weakened,  and  the  wealth,  dignity  and  unbroken  unity  of  interests  were
preserved  for  generations  unimpaired  in  great  and  powerful  families,  which,
had  the  property  been  divided  among  the  several  branches,  according  to  the
general  practice  of  Hinduism,  would  soon  have  lost  their  weight  and  influence.
As  it  was  unnecessary  that  a  woman  should  be  removed  from  her  home,  or
introduced  into  a  strange  family,  the  eldest  nephew  on  the  sister's  side,  when
he  became  the  senior  male  member  of  the  household,  succeeded,  as  a  matter  of
course,  to  the  rights,  property  and  dignity  of  Karnovun  [head  of  the  house]."

For  other  suggested  origins  of  the  non-fraternal  polyandry  reference
rshould  be  made  to  Westermarck,  op.  cit.^  vol.  iii,  pp.  198-206.

In  conclusion,  I  would  quote  a  short  passage  from  his  summary  on  p.  206  ;

"To  explain  in  full  why  certain  factors  in  some  cases  give  rise  to
polyandry  and  in  other  cases  not  is  as  impossible  as  it  often  is  to  say
exactly  why  one  people  is  monogamous  and  another  people  polygynous.
But,  generally  speaking,  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  the  main  reason  why
polyandry  is  not  more  commonly  practised  is  the  natural  desire  in  most  men
to  be  in  exclusive  possession  of  their  wives." — n.m.p.


CHAPTER  XVI

THEN  Yaugandharayana  and  the  other  ministers
[M]  managed  to  conduct  the  King  of  Vatsa  with
his  beloved,  by  the  above-mentioned  stratagem,  to
Lavanaka.  The  king  arrived  at  that  place,  which,  by  the
roar  of  the  host  echoing  through  it,  seemed,  as  it  were,
to  proclaim  that  the  ministers'  object  would  be  successfully
attained.  And  the  King  of  Magadha,  when  he  heard  that
the  lord  of  Vatsa  had  arrived  there  with  a  large  following,
trembled,  anticipating  attack.  But  he,  being  wise,  sent
an  ambassador  to  Yaugandharayana,  and  that  excellent
minister,  well  versed  in  his  duties,  received  him  gladly.  The
King  of  Vatsa,  for  his  part,  while  staying  in  that  place,  ranged
every  day  the  wide- extended  forest  for  the  sake  of  sport.

One  day,  the  king  having  gone  to  hunt,  the  wise  Yaugan-
dharayana, accompanied  by  Gopalaka,  having  arranged  what
was  to  be  done,  and  taking  with  him  also  Rumanvat  and  Vas-
antaka,  went  secretly  to  the  Queen  Vasavadatta,  who  bowed
at  their  approach.  There  he  used  various  representations
to  persuade  her  to  assist  in  furthering  the  king's  interests,
though  she  had  been  previously  informed  of  the  whole
affair  by  her  brother.  And  she  agreed  to  the  proposal,
Vcuavadattd  though  it  inflicted  on  her  the  pain  of  separation.
plays  her  part  What,  indeed,  is  there  which  women  of  good
in  the  Scheme  family,  who  are  attached  to  their  husbands,  will
not  endure  ?  Thereupon  the  skilful  Yaugandharayana
made  her  assume  the  appearance  of  a  Brahman  woman,
having  given  her  a  charm  which  enabled  her  to  change
her  shape.  And  he  made  Vasantaka  one-eyed,  and  like  a
Brahman  boy,  and  as  for  himself,  he  in  the  same  way
assumed  the  appearance  of  an  old  Brahman.  Then  that
mighty- minded  one  took  the  queen,  after  she  had  assumed
that  appearance,  and,  accompanied  by  Vasantaka,  set  out
leisurely  for  the  town  of  Magadha.     And  so  Vasavadatta

20


r


VASAVADATTA  AND  PADMAVATi  21


left  her  house  and  went  in  bodily  presence  along  the  road,
though  she  wandered  in  spirit  to  her  husband.  Then
Rumanvat  burned  her  pavilion  with  fire,  and  exclaimed
aloud  :  "  Alas  !  alas  !  the  queen  and  Vasantaka  are  burnt."  ^
And  so  in  that  place  there  arose  to  heaven  at  the  same  time
flames  and  lamentation ;  the  flames  gradually  subsided  ;  not
so  the  sound  of  weeping.

Then  Yaugandharayana,  with  Vasavadatta  and  Vasan-
taka, reached  the  city  of  the  King  of  Magadha,  and  seeing
the  Princess  Padmavati  in  the  garden  he  went  up  to  her  with
those  two,  though  the  guards  tried  to  prevent  him.  And
Padmavati,  when  she  saw  the  Queen  Vasavadatta  in  the  dress
of  a  Brahman  woman,  fell  in  love  with  her  at  first  sight.  The
princess  ordered  the  guards  to  desist  from  their  opposition,
and  had  Yaugandharayana,  who  was  disguised  as  a  Brahman,
conducted  into  her  presence.  And  she  addressed  to  him
The  two  this  question:   "Great  Brahman,  who  is  this  girl

Queens  meet  you  have  with  you,  and  why  are  you  come  ?  "
And  he  answered  her :  "  Princess,  this  is  my  daughter,
Avantika  by  name,  and  her  husband,  being  addicted  to
vice,^  has  deserted  her  and  fled  somewhere  or  other.  So  I
will  leave  her  in  your  care,  illustrious  lady,  while  I  go  and
find  her  husband  and  bring  him  back,  which  will  be  in  a  short

^  The  story  of  the  stratagem  of  Yaugandharayana  forms  the  plot  of  a
drama  known  as  Svapna-vdsavadatta,  attributed  to  the  poet  Bhasa,  although
this  authorship  is  uncertain.  Its  date  is  given  by  scholars  at  widely  differing
periods,  varying  from  the  fourth  century  b.c.  to  the  seventh  century  a.d.  The
latest  discussions  on  the  subject  will  be  found  in  the  Joum.  Roy.  As.  Soc,
as  follows  :—Banerji-Sastri,  "The  Plays  of  Bhasa,"  July  1921,  pp.  ;267-282 ;
Barnett,  "Bhasa,"  Oct.  1921,  pp.  587-589;  Thomas,  "The  Plays  of  Bhasa,"
Jan.  1922,  pp.  79-83.  See  also  A.  K.  and  K.  R.  Pisharoti,  "  Bhasa's  Works,
are  they  Genuine  .>" — Bull.  Sch.  Orient.  Stud.,  vol.  iii,  1923,  pp.  107-117.

Translations  of  the  Svapna-vasavadattd  have  been  made  into  several
European  languages.  For  the  English  renderings  reference  should  be  made
to  those  by  K.  Rama  Pisharoti,  Quart.  Joum.  Mythic.  Soc,  Bangalore,  Jan.,
Apr.,  July,  1920,  and  Jan.  1921 ;  and  V.  S.  Sukthankar,  Oxford,  1923.  A  full
bibliography  of  texts,  translations  and  critical  articles  appears  in  Sukthankar's
"Studies  in  Bhasa,"  Joum.  Bom.  Br.  Roy.  As.  Soc,  vol.  xxvi.  No.  2,  1923,
pp.  230-249.— N.M.p.

2  This  is  literally  true.  The  king  was  addicted  to  the  vyasana,  or  vice,  of
hunting.


22  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

time.  And  let  this  one-eyed  boy,  her  brother,  remain  here
near  her,  in  order  that  she  may  not  be  grieved  at  having  to
remain  alone."  He  said  this  to  the  princess,  and  she  granted
his  request,  and,  taking  leave  of  the  queen,  the  good  minister
quickly  returned  to  Lavanaka.

Then  Padmavati  took  with  her  Vasavadatta,  who  was
passing  under  the  name  of  Avantika,  and  Vasantaka,  who
accompanied  her  in  the  form  of  a  one-eyed  boy  ;  and  showing
her  excellent  disposition  by  her  kind  reception  and  affection-
ate treatment  of  them,  entered  her  splendidly  adorned  palace  ;
and  there  Vasavadatta,  seeing  Sita  in  the  history  of  Rama
represented  upon  the  painted  walls,  was  enabled  to  bear  her
own  sorrow.^  And  Padmavati  perceived  that  Vasavadatta
was  a  person  of  very  high  rank,  by  her  shape,  her  delicate
softness,  the  graceful  manner  in  which  she  sat  down  and  ate,
and  also  by  the  smell  of  her  body,^  which  was  fragrant  as  the
blue  lotus,  and  so  she  entertained  her  with  luxurious  comfort
to  her  heart's  content,  even  such  as  she  enjoyed  herself.
And  she  thought  to  herself :  "  Surely  she  is  some  distin-
guished person  remaining  here  in  concealment ;  did  not
Draupadi  remain  concealed  in  the  palace  of  the  King  of
Virata  ?  "  Then  Vasavadatta,  out  of  regard  to  the  princess,
made  for  her  unfading  garlands  and  forehead- streaks,^  as  the

*  The  painting  would  represent  Sita  in  a  cave  in  Lanka  guarded  by  female
demons.  She  had  been  abducted  by  Havana,  and,  on  her  refusing  to  become
his  wife,  had  been  confined  in  the  cave,  where  she  was  patiently  waiting  for
Rama  to  rescue  her.     See  Book  III  of  the  Rdmdyana. — n.m.p.

2  The  seclusion  of  ladies  of  high  rank  and  the  continual  use  of  cosmetics
after  the  bath  would  doubtless  give  a  perfume  to  the  skin  which  would  require
continued  disuse  to  entirely  eradicate.  At  a  Brahman  wedding  the  bride  is  only
allowed  to  use  scented  soaps  provided  they  contain  no  animal  fats. — n.m.p.

3  We  are  told  in  the  text  that  Vasavadatta  had  learned  this  art  from  the
King  of  Vatsa.  It  will  be  remembered  that  he,  in  his  turn,  had  acquired  the
art  from  the  snake  Vasunemi,  whom  he  had  rescued  from  a  Savara  (see  Vol.  I,
p.  100).  The  reference,  therefore,  must  be  to  the  {ikh,  or  spangles  worn  by
Hindu  women  of  good  caste,  and  not  merely  to  the  tilaka,  or  caste  marks,
already  mentioned  in  Vol.  I,  p.  69  and  69n\

The  name  i'lkti  is  derived  from  tika,  which  means  a  mark  on  the  forehead
made  in  an  initiation  ceremony.  The  basis  of  the  tikli  is  vermilion,  which  is
smeared  on  lac-clay,  while  above  it  a  piece  of  mica  or  glass  is  attached  as  an
additional  ornament.

Russell  describes  them,  and  gives  a  plate  of  twenty-four  specimens  in


FOREHEAD-STREAKS  23

King  of  Vatsa  had  previously  taught  her  ;  and  Padmavati's
mother,  seeing  her  adorned  with  them,  asked  her  privately
who  had  made  those  garlands  and  streaks.  Then  Padmavati
said  to  her  :  "  There  is  dwelUng  here  in  my  house  a  certain
lady  of  the  name  of  Avantika;  she  made  all  these  for  me."
When  her  mother  heard  that  she  said  to  her :  "  Then,  my
daughter,  she  is  not  a  woman :  she  is  some  goddess,  since  she
possesses  such  knowledge  ;  gods  and  also  hermits  remain
in  the  houses  of  good  people  for  the  sake  of  deluding  them,
and  in  proof  of  this  listen  to  the  following  anecdote  :  —

17.  Story  of  Kuntl

There  was  once  a  king  named  Kuntibhoja;  and  a  her-
mit of  the  name  of  Durvasas,  who  was  exceedingly  fond
of  deluding  people,    came  and   stayed  in   his   palace.     He

colour  in  his  Tribes  and  Castes  of  the  Central  Provinces  (vol.  iv,  pp.  1 06-110).
He  says  that  the  tikti  is  worn  in  the  Hindustani  districts  and  not  in  the  south.
Women  from  Rajputana,  such  as  the  Marwari  Banias  and  Banjaras,  wear  large
spangles  set  in  gold,  with  a  border  of  jewels  as  well,  if  they  can  afford  it.
Thus  it  will  be  seen  that  considerable  art  in  making  and  designing  tiklis  can
be  achieved.

The  tikh  forms  part  of  the  sohdg  or  lucky  trousseau.  It  is  made  chiefly  by
the  Lakheras  and  Patwas  in  the  Jubbulpore,  Betul,  Raipur  and  Saugor  districts
of  the  Central  Provinces.  It  is  affixed  to  the  girl's  forehead  at  her  marriage
and  is  worn  until  her  husband's  death.  It  appears  that  sometimes  unmarried
girls  also  wear  small  ornamental  spangles.  Another  constituent  of  the  sohdg
is  sindur,  or  vermilion,  which  is  not  usually  worn  if  a  tikli  has  already  been
affixed.  The  reason  for  this  is  that,  as  we  have  seen  above,  the  basis  of  the
tikti  is  vermilion.  Thus  we  can  look  upon  the  tikti  as  a  later  development  of
the  smear  of  vermilion.  In  some  cases  the  bride  and  bridegroom  mark  each
other  with  red  lead,  while  the  custom  of  mixing  or  exchanging  blood  prevails
among  certain  Bengal  tribes.  It  is  interesting  to  note  that  in  Brittany  the
bridegroom  sucks  a  drop  of  blood  from  an  incision  made  below  the  bride's
left  breast  (see  F.  C.  Conybeare,  "A  Brittany  Marriage  Custom,"  Folk-Lore,
vol.  xviii,  p.  448,  1 907).

Evidence  seems  to  point  to  the  fact  that  all  these  uses  of  vermilion  or
red  lead  are  later  survivals  of  the  original  blood  rite  by  which  a  woman  was
received  into  her  husband's  clan.  This  explanation  has  not,  however,  found
universal  acceptance,  and  Westermarck  {History  of  Human  Marriage,  vol.  iii,
pp.  446-448)  considers  that  the  colour  red  is  used  in  marriage  rites  in  circum-
stances which  do  not  allow  us  to  presume  that  the  use  of  it  is  the  survival
of  an  earlier  practice  of  using  human  blood.  Although  he  does  not  advance
proof  to  the  contrary,  he  gives  a  large  number  of  useful  references  to  articles


24  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

commissioned  his  own  daughter  Kunti  to  attend  upon  the
hermit,  and  she  diligently  waited  upon  him.  And  one  day  he,
wishing  to  prove  her,  said  to  her  :  "  Cook  boiled  rice  with
milk  and  sugar  quickly  while  I  bathe,  and  then  I  will  come  and
eat  it."  The  sage  said  this  and  bathed  quickly,  and  then  he
came  to  eat  it,  and  Kunti  brought  him  the  vessel  full  of  that
food  ;  and  then  the  hermit,  knowing  that  it  was  almost  red-
hot  with  the  heated  rice,  and  seeing  that  she  could  not  hold
it  in  her  hands, ^  cast  a  look  at  the  back  of  Kunti,  and  she,
perceiving  what  was  passing  in  the  hermit's  mind,  placed  the
vessel  on  her  back  ;  then  he  ate  to  his  heart's  content,  while
Kunti 's  back  was  being  burned,  and  because,  though  she  was
terribly  burnt,  she  stood  without  being  at  all  discomposed,
the  hermit  was  much  pleased  with  her  conduct,  and  after  he
had  eaten  granted  her  a  boon.


[M]  "  So  the  hermit  remained  there,  and  in  the  same  way
this  Avantika,  who  is  now  staying  in  your  palace,  is  some

on  the  use  of  red  in  wedding  rites.     I  hope  to  include  a  note  on  the  colour
red  in  a  later  volume.

In  conclusion  I  would  quote  from  the  writings  of  W.  Crooke.  In  a  paper
on  the  "Hill  Tribes  of  the  Central  Indian  Hills"  (Joum.  Anth.  Inst,  1899,
p.  240  et  seq.\  he  mentions  a  case  of  marriage  by  capture  in  which  a  Bhuiyar
girl  wrestles  with  a  youth  as  he  applies  vermilion  to  her  hair.  After  discussing
other  modes  of  marriage  he  says  :  "  More  obvious  still  is  the  motive  of  the
blood  covenant.  Here  we  can  observe  the  stages  of  the  degradation  of  custom
from  the  use  of  blood  drawn  from  the  little  finger  of  the  husband  which  is
mixed  with  betel  and  eaten  by  the  bride  among  some  of  the  Bengal  tribes
(Risley,  Tribes  and  Castes  of  Bengal,  \\,  pp.  189,  201).  The  next  stage  comes
among  the  Kurmis,  where  the  blood  is  mixed  with  lac  dye.  Lastly  come  the
rites,  common  to  all  these  tribes,  by  which  the  bridegroom,  often  in  secrecy,
covered  by  a  sheet,  rubs  vermilion  on  the  parting  of  the  girl's  hair,  and  the
women  relations  smear  their  toes  with  lac  dye — all  palpable  degradations  of
the  original  blood  rite.  That  the  rite  is  sacramental  is  clearly  shown  by  the
fact  that  the  widow  after  her  husband's  death  solemnly  washes  off  the  red
from  her  hair  or  flings  the  little  box  in  which  she  keeps  the  colouring  matter
into  running  water."

The  whole  subject  is  very  interesting,  and  opens  up  a  field  for  much
anthropological  research. — n.m.p.

*  1  read  hastagraJiatfogyam  for  the  ahastagrahayogydm  of  Dr  Brockhaus.


THE  KING  IS  BROKEN-HEARTED  25

distinguished  person ;  therefore  endeavour  to  conciHate
her."  When  she  heard  this  from  the  mouth  of  her  mother,
Padmavati  showed  the  utmost  consideration  for  Vasavadatta,
who  was  living  disguised  in  her  palace.  And  Vasavadatta
for  her  part,  being  separated  from  her  lord,  remained  there
pale  with  bereavement,  like  a  lotus  in  the  night/  But  the
various  boyish  grimaces  which  Vasantaka  exhibited,^  again
and  again  called  a  smile  into  her  face.

In  the  meanwhile  the  King  of  Vatsa,  who  had  wandered
away  into  very  distant  hunting-grounds,  returned  late  in  the
evening  to  Lavanaka.  And  there  he  saw  the  women's  apart-
ments reduced  to  ashes  by  fire,  and  heard  from  his  ministers
that  the  queen  was  burnt,  with  Vasantaka.  And  when  he
heard  it,  he  fell  on  the  ground,  and  he  was  robbed  of  his
senses  by  unconsciousness,  that  seemed  to  desire  to  remove
the  painful  sense  of  grief.  But  in  a  moment  he  came  to  him-
self, and  was  burnt  with  sorrow  in  his  heart,  as  if  penetrated
with  the  fire  that  strove  to  consume  ®  the  image  of  the  queen
imprinted  there.

Then  overpowered  with  sorrow  he  lamented,  and  thought
of  nothing  but  suicide  ;  but  a  moment  after  he  began  to
reflect,  calling  to  mind  the  following  prediction  :— "  From
this  queen  shall  be  born  a  son  who  shall  reign  over  all  the
Vidyadharas.  This  is  what  the  hermit  Narada  told  me,  and
it  cannot  be  false.  Moreover,  that  same  hermit  warned  me
that  I  should  have  sorrow  for  some  time.  And  the  affliction
of  Gopalaka  seems  to  be  but  light.  Besides,  I  cannot  detect
any  excessive  grief  in  Yaugandharayana  and  the  other
ministers,  therefore  I  suspect  the  queen  may  possibly  be
alive.  But  the  ministers  may  in  this  matter  have  employed
a  certain  amount  of  politic  artifice,  therefore  I  may  some
day  be  reunited  with  the  queen.  So  I  see  an  end  to  this
affliction."  *

^  The  flower  closes  when  the  sun  sets.

2  To  keep  up  his  character  as  a  Brahman  boy.

3  I  read  ddkaishind.

*  This  suspicion  of  Udayana  seems  to  rather  weaken  the  plot.  In  the
Svapna-vdsavadatta  the  king  is  made  to  believe  that  not  only  Vasavadatta  but
also  Yaugandharayana  have  been  burnt  to  death.  Thus  the  denouement  is
considerably  strengthened. — n.m.p.


26  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

Thus  reflecting,  and  being  exhorted  by  his  ministers,  the
king  established  in  his  heart  self-control.  And  Gopalaka
sent  off  a  private  messenger  immediately,  without  anyone's
knowing  of  it,  to  his  sister,  to  comfort  her,  with  an  exact
report  of  the  state  of  affairs.  Such  being  the  situation  in
Lavanaka,  the  spies  of  the  King  of  Magadha,  who  were  there,
went  off  to  him  and  told  him  all.  The  king,  who  was  ever
ready  to  seize  the  opportune  moment,  when  he  heard  this,
was  once  more  anxious  to  give  to  the  King  of  Vatsa  his
daughter  Padmavati,  who  had  before  been  asked  in  marriage
Ti.   1^-  by   his   ministers.     Then    he   communicated   his

ihe  Ktng  .  i  •  i  i  .  i        tt-

agrees  to  his  wishcs  With  rcspcct  to  this  matter  to  the  Kmg
Marriage  with  of  Vatsa,  and  also  to  Yaugandharayana.  And
a  mavai  y^^  ^j^^  advicc  of  Yaugandharayana  the  King  of
Vatsa  accepted  the  proposal,  thinking  to  himself  that  perhaps
this  was  the  very  reason  why  the  queen  had  been  concealed.

Then  Yaugandharayana  quickly  ascertained  an  auspicious
moment,  and  sent  to  the  sovereign  of  Magadha  an  ambassador,
with  an  answer  to  his  proposal,  which  ran  as  follows  :— "  Thy
desire  is  approved  by  us,  so  on  the  seventh  day  from  this  the
King  of  Vatsa  will  arrive  at  thy  court  to  marry  Padmavati,
in  order  that  he  may  quickly  forget  Vasavadatta."  This  was
the  message  which  the  great  minister  sent  to  that  king.
And  that  ambassador  conveyed  it  to  the  King  of  Magadha,
who  received  him  joyfully.

Then  the  lord  of  Magadha  made  such  preparations  for
the  joyful  occasion  of  the  marriage  as  were  in  accordance  with
his  love  for  his  daughter,  his  own  desire  and  his  wealth  ;  and
Padmavati  was  delighted  at  hearing  that  she  had  obtained
the  bridegroom  she  desired ;  but  when  Vasavadatta  heard  that
news  she  was  depressed  in  spirit.  That  intelligence,  when  it
reached  her  ear,  changed  the  colour  of  her  face,  and  assisted
the  transformation  effected  by  her  disguise.  But  Vasantaka
said  :  "In  this  way  an  enemy  will  be  turned  into  a  friend,
and  your  husband  will  not  be  alienated  from  you."  This
speech  of  Vasantaka's  consoled  her  like  a  confidante,  and
enabled  her  to  bear  up.

Then  the  discreet  lady  again  prepared  for  Padmavati
unfading  garlands   and  forehead-streaks,  both  of  heavenly


THE  KING  MARRIES  PADMAVATi  27

beauty,  as  her  marriage  was  now  nigh  at  hand ;  and  when
the  seventh  day  from  that  arrived,  the  monarch  of  Vatsa
actually  came  there  with  his  troops,  accompanied  by  his
ministers,  to  marry  her.  How  could  he,  in  his  state  of  be-
reavement, have  ever  thought  of  undertaking  such  a  thing,
if  he  had  not  hoped  in  that  way  to  recover  the  queen  ?  And
the  King  of  Magadha  immediately  came  with  great  delight
to  meet  him  (who  was  a  feast  to  the  eyes  of  the  king's
subjects),  as  the  sea  advances  to  meet  the  rising  moon.

Then  the  monarch  of  Vatsa  entered  that  city  of  the
King  of  Magadha,  and  at  the  same  time  great  joy  entered
the  minds  of  the  citizens  on  every  side.  There  the  women
beheld  him  fascinating  the  mind,^  though  his  frame  was
attenuated  from  bereavement,  looking  like  the  God  of  Love
deprived  of  his  wife  Rati.

Then  the  King  of  Vatsa  entered  the  palace  of  the  lord
of  Magadha,  and  proceeded  to  the  chamber  prepared  for  the
marriage  ceremony,  which  was  full  of  women  whose  husbands
The  Marriage  Were  still  alivc.  In  that  chamber  he  beheld  Padma-
Ceremony  yati  adomcd  for  the  wedding,  surpassing  with  the
full  moon  of  her  face  the  circle  of  the  full  moon.  And  seeing
that  she  had  garlands  and  forehead- streaks  such  as  he  himself
only  could  make,  the  king  could  not  help  wondering  where
she  got  them.  Then  he  ascended  the  raised  platform  of  the
altar,  and  his  taking  her  hand  there  was  a  commencement
of  his  taking  the  tribute  ^  of  the  whole  earth.  The  smoke
of  the  altar  dimmed  his  eyes  with  tears,  as  supposing  that
he  could  not  bear  to  witness  the  ceremony,  since  he  loved
Vasavadatta  so  much.  Then  the  face  of  Padmavati,  red-
dened with  circumambulating  the  fire,  appeared  as  if  full  of
anger  on  account  of  her  perceiving  what  was  passing  in  her
husband's  mind.

When  the  ceremony  of  marriage  was  completed,  the  King
of  Vatsa  let  the  hand  of  Padmavati  quit  his,  but  he  never
even  for  a  moment  allowed  the  image  of  Vasavadatta  to  be
absent  from  his  heart.  Then  the  King  of  Magadha  gave  him
jewels  in  such  abundance  that  the  earth  seemed  to  be  deprived

^  This  applies  also  to  the  God  of  Love,  who  bewilders  the  mind.
2  Kara  means  "  hand,"  and  also  "  tribute."


28  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

of  her  gems,  they  all  having  been  extracted.  And  Yaugan-
dharayana,  calling  the  fire  to  witness  on  that  occasion,  made
the  King  of  Magadha  undertake  never  to  injure  his  master.
So  that  festive  scene  proceeded,  with  the  distribution  of
garments  and  ornaments,  with  the  songs  of  excellent  minstrels
and  the  dancing  of  dancing-girls.  In  the  meanwhile  Vasa-
vadatta  remained  unobserved,  hoping  for  the  glory  of  her
husband,  appearing  ^  to  be  asleep,  like  the  beauty  of  the
moon  in  the  day.

Then  the  King  of  Vatsa  went  to  the  women's  apartments,
and  the  skilful  Yaugandharayana,  being  afraid  that  he  would
see  the  queen,  and  that  so  the  whole  secret  would  be  divulged,
said  to  the  sovereign  of  Magadha  :  "  Prince,  this  very  day
the  King  of  Vatsa  will  set  forth  from  thy  house."  The  King
of  Magadha  consented  to  it,  and  then  the  minister  made  the
very  same  announcement  to  the  King  of  Vatsa,  and  he  also
approved  of  it.

Then  the  King  of  Vatsa  set  out  from  that  place,  after  his
attendants  had  eaten  and  drunk,  together  with  his  ministers,
escorting  his  bride  Padmavati.  And  Vasavadatta,  ascending
a  comfortable  carriage  send  by  Padmavati,  with  its  great
horses  ^  also  put  at  her  disposal  by  her,  went  secretly  in  the
rear  of  the  army,  making  the  transformed  Vasantaka  pre-
cede her.  At  last  the  King  of  Vatsa  reached  Lavanaka,  and
entered  his  own  house,  together  with  his  bride,  but  thought
all  the  time  only  of  the  Queen  Vasavadatta.  The  queen  also
arrived,  and  entered  the  house  of  Gopalaka  at  night,  making
the  chamberlains  wait  round  it.  There  she  saw  her  brother
Gopalaka,  who  showed  her  great  attention,  and  she  embraced
his  neck,  weeping,  while  his  eyes  filled  with  tears  ;  and  at
that  moment  arrived  Yaugandharayana,  true  to  his  previous
agreement,  together  with  Rumanvat,  and  the  queen  showed
him  all  due  courtesy.

*  I  read  iva  for  et^a.

*  It  seems  unnecessary  to  add  "with  its  great  horses,"  and  this  is  ex-
plained by  the  reading  of  the  Durgaprasad  text,  where  we  find  tan  mahattara-
kaih  instead  of  tanmahdluragaih,  thus  meaning  that  attendants  of  high  rank
were  put  at  her  disposal.  See  Speyer,  "  Studies  about  the  Kathdsaritsagara,'*
Verh.  Kon.  Akad.  Weten.  Amst.,  viii,  No.  5,  1908,  p.  97.


THE  REUNION  29

And  while  he  was  engaged  in  dispeUing  the  queen's  grief,
caused  by  the  great  effort  she  had  made  and  her  separation
from  her  husband,  those  chamberlains  repaired  to  Padmavati
and  said  :  "  Queen,  Avantika  has  arrived,  but  she  has  in  a
strange  way  dismissed  us,  and  gone  to  the  house  of  Prince
Gopalaka."  When  Padmavati  heard  that  representation
from  her  chamberlains  she  was  alarmed,  and  in  the  presence
of  the  King  of  Vatsa  answered  them  :  "Go  and  say  to
Avantika  :  '  The  queen  says  :  "  You  are  a  deposit  in  my
hands,  so  what  business  have  you  where  you  are  ?  Come
where  I  am."  '  "

When  they  heard  that  they  departed,  and  the  king  asked
Padmavati  in  private  who  made  for  her  the  unfading  garlands
and  forehead- streaks.  Then  she  said  :  "It  is  all  the  product
of  the  great  artistic  skill  of  the  lady  named  Avantika,  who
was  deposited  in  my  house  by  a  certain  Brahman."

No  sooner  did  the  king  hear  that  than  he  went  off  to
the  house  of  Gopalaka,  thinking  that  surely  Vasavadatta
would  be  there.  And  he  entered  the  house,  at  the  door  of
The  Reunion  which  cunuchs  wcrc  standing,  ^  and  within  which
with  were   the   queen,    Gopalaka,    the   two    ministers

Vdsavadatm  ^^^  Vasantaka.  There  he  saw  Vasavadatta  re-
turned from  banishment,  like  the  orb  of  the  moon  freed
from  its  eclipse.  Then  he  fell  on  the  earth  delirious  with  the
poison  of  grief,  and  trembling  was  produced  in  the  heart
of  Vasavadatta.  Then  she  too  fell  on  the  earth  with  limbs
pale  from  separation,  and  lamented  aloud,  blaming  her  own
conduct.  And  that  couple,  afflicted  with  grief,  lamented
so  that  even  the  face  of  Yaugandharayana  was  washed  with
tears.

And  then  Padmavati  too  heard  that  wailing,  which
seemed  so  Httle  suited  to  the  occasion,  and  came  in  a  state  of
bewilderment  to  the  place  whence  it  proceeded.  And  gradu-
ally finding  out  the  truth  with  respect  to  the  king  and  Vasa-
vadatta, she  was  reduced  to  the  same  state ;  for  good  women
are  affectionate  and  tender-hearted.  And  Vasavadatta  fre-
quently exclaimed  with  tears  :    "  What  profit  is  there  in  my

1  Reading  taddvarasthitamahattaram  as  one  word. 1  shall  give  a  long

note  on  Indian  eunuchs  in  a  later  volume  (Chapter  XXXIII). — n.m.p.


30  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

life  that  causes  only  sorrow  to  my  husband  ?  "  Then  the
calm  Yaugandharayana  said  to  the  King  of  Vatsa  :  "  King,
I  have  done  all  this  in  order  to  make  you  universal  emperor,
by  marrying  you  to  the  daughter  of  the  sovereign  of  Magadha,
and  the  queen  is  not  in  the  shghtest  degree  to  blame  ;  more-
over this,  her  rival  wife,  is  witness  to  her  good  behaviour
during  her  absence  from  you."

Thereupon  Padmavati,  whose  mind  was  free  from  jealousy,
said  :  "I  am  ready  to  enter  the  fire  on  the  spot  to  prove  her
innocence."  And  the  king  said  :  "I  am  in  fault,  as  it  was
for  my  sake  that  the  queen  endured  this  great  affliction."
And  Vasavadatta,  having  firmly  resolved,  said  :  "I  must
enter  the  fire  to  clear  from  suspicion  the  mind  of  the  king."

Then  the  wise  Yaugandharayana,  best  of  right- acting
men,  rinsed  his  mouth,  with  his  face  towards  the  east,  and
spoke  a  blameless  speech  :  "  If  I  have  been  a  benefactor  to
this  king,  and  if  the  queen  is  free  from  stain,  speak,  ye
guardians  of  the  world  ;  if  it  is  not  so,  I  will  part  from  my
body."  ^  Thus  he  spoke  and  ceased,  and  this  heavenly
utterance  was  heard  :  "  Happy  art  thou,  O  King,  that  hast
for  minister  Yaugandharayana,  and  for  wife  Vasavadatta,
who  in  a  former  birth  was  a  goddess  ;  not  the  shghtest  blame
attaches  to  her."     Having  uttered  this  the  Voice  ceased.

All  who  were  present,  when  they  heard  that  sound,  which
resounded  through  all  the  regions,  delightful  as  the  deep
thunder  roar  at  the  first  coming  of  the  rain-clouds,  having
endured  affliction  for  a  long  time,  lifted  up  their  hands  ^
and  plainly  imitated  peafowl  in  their  joy.  Moreover,  the  King
of  Vatsa  and  Gopalaka  praised  that  proceeding  of  Yaugan-
dharayana's,  and  the  former  already  considered  that  the
whole  earth  was  subject  to  him.  Then  that  king,  possessing
those  two  wives,  whose  affection  was  every  day  increased  by
living  with  him,  like  joy  and  tranquillity  come  to  visit  him  in
bodily  form,  was  in  a  state  of  supreme  felicity.

^  See  note  at  the  end  of  this  chapter. — n.m.p.

*  Here  the  Durgaprasiid  text  reads  utkandharaq  ca  suciram,  etc.,  meaning
"with  uplifted  necks,"  which  is  more  in  keeping  with  the  rest  of  the  simile
than  "with  uplifted  hands." — n.m.p.


(


THE  "  ACT  OF  TRUTH  "  MOTIF  31


NOTES  ON  THE  "ACT  OF  TRUTH"  MOTIF  IN  FOLK-LORE

"  If  I  have  been  a  benefactor  to  this  king,  and  if  the  queen  is  free  from
stain,  speak,  ye  guardians  of  the  world ;  if  it  is  not  so,  I  will  part  from  my
body  "  (p.  30).

This  is  a  good  example  of  the  "act  of  truth"  motif,  to  which  reference
has  already  be  made  in  Vol.  I,  pp.  166,  l67.  As  I  stated  on  p.  l66,  I  intend
(in  a  note  to  Chapter  XXXVI)  giving  examples  of  the  various  uses  to  which
the  motif  can  be  put,  and  the  numerous  ways  in  which  it  can  be  introduced.
I  shall,  therefore,  confine  myself  here  to  explaining  the  meaning  of  the  motif
and  the  religious  significance  attached  to  the  act.

Truth  has  been  regarded  all  over  the  world  and  in  all  ages  as  irresistible,
as  something  possessing  a  power  which  even  gods  cannot  spurn,  and  from
which  the  wicked  shrink  in  terror.  The  deities  of  the  Jew,  the  Christian
and  the  Mohammedan  are  regarded  as  acting  in  accordance  with  truth — one
might  almost  say  as  being  the  personification  of  truth  in  its  widest  sense.  No
wonder,  then,  that  the  utterance  of  a  simple  truth  was  considered  sufficiently
powerful  to  cause  miracles  to  take  place.  For  instance,  we  read  in  2  Kings  i,
10-12:  "And  Elijah  answered  and  said  to  the  captain  of  fifty.  If  I  be  a  man
of  God,  then  let  fire  come  down  from  heaven,  and  consume  thee  and  thy  fifty.
And  there  came  down  fire  from  heaven,  and  consumed  him  and  his  fifty."

It  lies  at  the  background  of  the  magic  art  of  primitive  peoples  and  is  still
used  in  some  form  or  other  among  the  most  civilised  countries.  We  have  all
heard  a  man  in  expressing  surprise,  or  in  making  a  resolution,  begin  with  the
words  "as  sure  as  my  name's  so-and-so  .  .  ."  This  is  a  form  of  oath  intro-
duced by  a  statement  of  absolute  truth,  thus  lending  power  to  what  follows.

It  is  obvious  what  a  useful  motif  the  ''act  of  truth"  can  become  in
the  hands  of  the  story-teller.  The  hero  or  heroine  is  in  a  tight  corner  and
suddenly,  as  a  deus  ex  machina,  an  "act  of  truth  "  saves  the  situation.  It  is  as
sudden  and  unexpected  as  the  use  of  the  dohada  motif  (see  Vol.  I,  pp.  221-
228)  when  a  woman  suddenly  demands  some  jewel,  fruit  or  animal,  which
at  once  starts  an  entirely  fresh  series  of  adventures,  when  the  dutiful  husband
sets  out  on  his  journeys  to  procure  the  desired  article.

The  word  sachchakiriyd,  or  simply  kiriyd,  is  used  to  express  an  "  act  of  truth  "
in  Pali,  but  satyddhishthdnam  ("truth-command")  and  satyavddya  ("truth-
utterance")  are  also  found.  For  fuller  details  see  Burlingame,  Journ.  Roy.
Asiat.  Soc.j  July  1917,  p.  429  et  seq.,  to  whose  article  I  am  indebted  for  much
of  the  information  contained  in  my  notes  on  this  motif.

Owing  to  the  omnipotence  of  truth  we  are  not  surprised  to  find  that
a  direct  appeal  to  its  great  power  is  not  a  casual  action,  but  a  formality  of
considerable  religious  importance.  In  the  present  text  of  the  Ocean  of  Story
we  read  that  Yaugandharayana  "  rinsed  his  mouth,  with  his  face  towards  the
east,  and  spoke  a  blameless  speech."  Thus  before  making  his  sachchakiriyd  he
performed  distinct  religious  acts — firstly  he  turns  in  the  direction  in  which  all
Brahmans  turn  at  sunrise,  read  the  Vedas  and  make  their  daily  off'erings,  and


82  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

secondly  he  undergoes  a  form  of  purification.     He  is  then  in  a  fit  state  to
invoke  the  great  power  of  truth  to  his  aid.

The  actual  form  of  the  act  differs  considerably — thus  in  one  instance,  when
the  Buddha  was  in  a  previous  existence  as  a  quail^  before  making  his  "  act  of
truth,"  he  jwnders  deeply  on  the  Buddhas  of  the  past  and  their  great  powers
and  achievements.  In  another  instance  a  king  and  queen,  wishing  to  cross
rivers  dryshod,  meditate  on  the  virtues  of  the  Buddha,  the  Law  and  the  Order.
Numerous  other  examples  could  be  given.  There  is  no  necessity  for  the  truth
to  refer  to  good  actions,  qualities  or  resolutions.  It  can,  on  the  contrary,  have
reference  to  the  very  opposite.  A  man  may  affirm  he  is  a  liar  and  a  scoundrel
of  the  deepest  dye,  a  woman  may  state  she  is  the  lowest  kind  of  prostitute —
it  matters  not,  as  long  as  it  is  the  absolute  truth — and  as  a  result  their  .power
will  be  temporarily  as  great  as  the  mightiest  king  or  most  righteous  Brahman.
The  locus  classicus  of  the  "act  of  truth  "  is  one  of  the  dialogues  of  King
Milinda  and  the  Buddhist  sage  Nagasena  (Milindapanhd,  119-123).  The  king
inquires  whether  Nagasena's  statement  that  Sivi  received  Heavenly  Eyes  is
not  inconsistent  with  the  Scriptural  statement  that  the  Heavenly  Eye  cannot
be  produced  after  the  destruction  of  the  physical  cause.  Nagasena  explains
that  it  was  the  power  of  truth  that  caused  the  restoration  of  Sivi's  eyesight,
and  continues  as  follows  : —

"  But,  your  Majesty,  is  there  such  a  thing  in  the  world  as  Truth,  by  which
truth-speakers  perform  an  Act  of  Truth  > — Yes,  reverend  sir,  there  is  in  the
world  such  a  thing  as  Truth.  By  Truth,  reverend  Nagasena,  truth-speakers
perform  an  Act  of  Truth,  and  by  this  means  cause  rain,  extinguish  fire,  counter-
act poison,  and  do  all  manner  of  other  things  besides  that  have  to  be  done.
— Well  then,  your  Majesty,  the  two  statements  are  perfectly  consistent  and
harmonious.  King  Sivi  received  Heavenly  Eyes  by  the  power  of  Youth :  by
the  power  of  Truth,  your  Majesty,  on  no  other  basis,  is  the  Heavenly  Eye
produced  ;  the  Truth  alone  was  in  this  case  the  basis  for  the  production  of  the
Heavenly  Eye.

"  The  case  was  precisely  the  same,  your  Majesty,  as  when  accomplished
persons  recite  a  Truth,  saying,  '  Let  a  mighty  cloud  send  down  rain ' ;  and
immediately  upon  their  recitation  of  the  Truth,  a  mighty  cloud  sends  down
rain.  Your  Majesty,  is  there  stored  up  in  the  sky  any  cause  of  rain,  by  which
the  mighty  cloud  sends  down  rain  } — Of  course  not,  reverend  sir ;  the  Truth
alone  is  in  this  case  the  cause  whereby  the  mighty  cloud  sends  down  rain.
—  In  precisely  the  same  manner,  your  Majesty,  no  ordinary  cause  operated
in  the  case  in  question ;  the  Truth  alone  was  in  that  case  the  basis  for  the
production  of  the  Heavenly  Eye.

**  It  was  precisely  the  same,  your  Majesty,  as  when  accomplished  persons
recite  a  Truth,  saying,  'Let  the  mighty  mass  of  flaring,  flaming  fire  turn
back ' ;  and  immediately  upon  their  recitation  of  the  Truth,  the  mighty  mass
of  flaring,  flaming  fire  turns  back.  ...  It  was  precisely  the  same  as  when
accomplished  persons  recite  a  Truth,  saying,  '  Let  the  deadly  poison  become
an  antidote ' ;  and  immediately  upon  their  recitation  of  the  Truth  the  deadly
poison  becomes  an  antidote.  Your  Majesty,  is  there  stored  up  in  this  deadly
poison  any  cause  whereby  it  immediately  becomes  an  antidote  ? — Of  course


►


THE  "ACT  OF  TRUTH"  MOTIF


33


not,  reverend  sir ;  the  Truth  alone  is  in  this  case  the  cause  of  the  immediate
counteraction  of  the  deadly  poison. — In  precisely  the  same  manner,  your
Majesty,  in  the  case  of  King  Sivi,  the  Truth  alone,  to  the  exclusion  of  any
ordinary  cause,  was  the  basis  for  the  production  of  the  Heavenly  Eye "
(Burlingame's  translation,  pp.  437,  438  of  Journ.  Hoy.  As.  Soc,  op.  cit.).

In   conclusion  Nagasena  gives  instances  of  the  "  act  of  truth  "  causing
the  ocean  to  roll  back,  and  a  river  to  flow  backwards. — n.m.p.


VOL.  II.


CHAPTER  XVII

THE  next  day  the  King  of  Vatsa,  sitting  in  private
[M]  with  Vasavadatta  and  Padmavati,  engaged  in  a
festive  banquet,  sent  for  Yaugandharayana,  Gopalaka,
Rumanvat  and  Vasantaka,  and  had  much  confidential  con-
versation with  them.  Then  the  king,  in  the  hearing  of  them
all,  told  the  following  tale,  with  reference  to  the  subject  of
his  separation  from  his  beloved  :—

18.  Story  of  Urvasl  ^

Once  on  a  time  there  was  a  king  of  the  name  of  Puru-
ravas,  who  was  a  devoted  worshipper  of  Vishnu ;  he  traversed
heaven  as  well  as  earth  without  opposition,  and  one  day,  as
he  was  sauntering  in  Nandana,  the  garden  of  the  gods,  a
certain  Apsaras  of  the  name  of  Urva^i,  who  was  a  second
stupefying  weapon  ^  in  the  hands  of  Love,  cast  an  eye  upon
him.  The  moment  she  beheld  him,  the  sight  so  completely
robbed  her  of  her  senses  that  she  alarmed  the  timid  minds
of  Rambha  and  her  other  friends.  The  king  too,  when  he
saw  that  torrent  of  the  nectar  of  beauty,  was  quite  faint  with
thirst,  because  he  could  not  obtain  possession  of  her.  Then
Vishnu,  who  knoweth  all,  dwelling  in  the  sea  of  milk,  gave
the  following  command  to  Narada,  an  excellent  hermit,  who
came  to  visit  him  :  "  O  divine  sage,^  the  King  Pururavas,  at
present  abiding  in  the  garden  of  Nandana,  having  had  his
mind  captivated  by  Urva^i,  remains  incapable  of  bearing  the
pain  of  separation  from  his  love.  Therefore  go,  O  hermit,
and,  informing  Indra  as  from  me,  cause  that  Urva^i  to  be

^  This  interesting  story,  dating  back  to  Rig-Veda  days,  is  fully  treated
in  Appendix  I  of  this  volume,  see  pp.  24>5-259. — n.m.p.

*  This,  with  the  water  weapon,  and  that  of  whirlwind,  is  mentioned  in
the  Ilamayana  and  the  Utlara  Rama  Charita.

*  Or  Devarshi,  belonging  to  the  highest  class  of  Rishis  or  patriarchal
saints.

34


URVASI  AND  PURURAVAS  35

quickly  given  to  the  king."  Having  received  this  order
from  Vishnu,  Narada  undertook  to  execute  it,  and  going  to
Pururavas,  who  was  in  the  state  described,  roused  him  from
his  lethargy  and  said  to  him  :  "  Rise  up,  O  King ;  for  thy
sake  I  am  sent  here  by  Vishnu,  for  that  god  does  not  neglect
the  sufferings  of  those  who  are  unfeignedly  devoted  to  him."
With  these  words,  the  hermit  Narada  cheered  up  Pururavas,
and  then  went  with  him  into  the  presence  of  the  king  of
the  gods.

Then  he  communicated  the  order  of  Vishnu  to  Indra,  who
received  it  with  reverent  mind,  and  so  the  hermit  caused
Urvasi  to  be  given  to  Pururavas.  That  gift  of  Urvasi
deprived  the  inhabitants  of  heaven  of  life,  but  it  was  to
Urvasi  herself  an  elixir  to  restore  her  to  life.  Then  Pururavas
returned  with  her  to  the  earth,  exhibiting  to  the  eyes  of
mortals  the  wonderful  spectacle  of  a  heavenly  bride.  Thence-
forth those  two,  Urvasi  and  that  king,  remained,  so  to  speak,
fastened  together  by  the  leash  of  gazing  on  one  another,  so
that  they  were  unable  to  separate.  One  day  Pururavas  went
to  heaven,  invited  by  Indra  to  assist  him,  as  a  war  had  arisen
between  him  and  the  Danavas.  In  that  war  the  King  of  the
Asuras,  named  Mayadhara,  was  slain,  and  accordingly  Indra
held  a  great  feast,  at  which  all  the  nymphs  of  heaven  dis-
played their  skill.^  And  on  that  occasion  Pururavas,  when
he  saw  the  nymph  Rambha  performing  a  dramatic  dance
called  chalita,^  with  the  teacher  Tumburu  standing  by  her,
laughed.  Then  Rambha  said  to  him  sarcastically  :  "I  sup-
pose, mortal,  you  know  this  heavenly  dance,  do  you  not  ?  "
Pururavas  answered :  "  From  associating  with  Urvasi,  I
know  dances  which  even  your  teacher  Tumburu  does  not
know."  When  Tumburu  heard  that,  he  laid  this  curse  on
him  in  his  wrath  :  "  May  est  thou  be  separated  from  Urvasi
until  thou  propitiate  Krishna."  When  he  heard  that  curse,
Pururavas  went  and  told  Urvasi  what  had  happened  to
him,  which  was  terrible  as  "  a  thunderbolt  from  the  blue."
Immediately  some  Gandharvas  swooped  down,  without  the

^  Durgaprasiid    reads  pranrtta   instead    of  pravrtta,  thus   the  translation
^would  be  :  "where  the  Apsarases  executed  their  dances." — n.m.p.
2  This  dance  is  mentioned  in  Act  I  of  the  Malavikdsnimitra.


36  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

king  seeing  them,  and  carried  off  Urva^i,  whither  he  knew
not.  Then  Pururavas,  knowing  that  the  calamity  was  due
to  that  curse,  went  and  performed  penance  to  appease  Vishnu
in  the  hermitage  of  Badarika.

But  Urva^i,  remaining  in  the  country  of  the  Gandharvas,
afflicted  at  her  separation,  was  as  void  of  sense  as  if  she  had
been  dead,  asleep,  or  a  mere  picture.  She  kept  herself  alive
with  hoping  for  the  end  of  the  curse,  but  it  is  wonderful
that  she  did  not  lose  her  hold  on  life,  while  she  remained
like  the  female  chakravaka  during  the  night,  the  appointed
time  of  her  separation  from  the  male  bird.  And  Pururavas
propitiated  Vishnu  by  that  penance,  and,  owing  to  Vishnu
having  been  gratified,  the  Gandharvas  surrendered  Urva^i
to  him.  So  that  king,  reunited  to  the  nymph  whom  he  had
recovered  at  the  termination  of  the  curse,  enjoyed  heavenly
pleasures,  though  living  upon  earth.


[M]  The  king  stopped  speaking,  and  Vasavadatta  felt  an
emotion  of  shame  at  having  endured  separation,  when  she
heard  of  the  attachment  of  Urva^i  to  her  husband.

Then  Yaugandharayana,  seeing  that  the  queen  was
abashed  at  having  been  indirectly  reproved  by  her  husband,
said,  in  order  to  make  him  feel  in  his  turn  ^  :  "  King,  listen
to  this  tale,  if  you  have  not  already  heard  it :


19.  Story  of  Vihitasena

There  is  on  this  earth  a  city  of  the  name  of  Timira,  the
dwelling  of  the  Goddess  of  Prosperity ;  in  it  there  was  a
famous  king  named  Vihitasena ;  he  had  a  wife  named
Tejovati,  a  very  goddess  upon  earth.  That  king  was  ever
hanging  on  her  neck,  devoted  to  her  embraces,  and  could  not
even  bear  that  his  body  should  be  for  a  short  time  scratched
with  the  coat  of  mail.     And  once  there  came  upon  the  king

1  The  Durgaprasad  text  makes  better  sense :  "  in  order  to  dispel  that
thought  from  her  mind  .  .  ."     See  Speyer,  op.  cit.,  pp.  97-98. — n.m.p.


SAVED  BY  SHOCK  37

a  lingering  fever  with  diminishing  intensity ;  and  the  physi-
cians forbade  him  to  continue  in  the  queen's  society.  But
when  he  was  excluded  from  the  society  of  the  queen,  there
was  engendered  in  his  heart  a  disease  not  to  be  reached  by
medicine  or  treatment.  The  physicians  told  the  ministers
in  private  that  the  disease  might  relieve  itself  by  fear  or  the
stroke  of  some  affliction.  The  ministers  reflected  :  "  How
can  we  produce  fear  in  that  brave  king,  who  did  not  tremble
when  an  enormous  snake  once  fell  on  his  back,  who  was  not
confused  when  a  hostile  army  penetrated  into  his  harem  ?
It  is  useless  thinking  of  devices  to  produce  fear;  what  are
we  ministers  to  do  with  the  king  ?  "  Thus  the  ministers
reflected,  and  after  deliberating  with  the  queen,  concealed
her,  and  said  to  the  king  :  "  The  queen  is  dead."  While  the
king  was  tortured  with  that  exceeding  grief,  in  his  agitation
that  disease  in  his  heart  relieved  itself.^  When  the  king  had
got  over  the  pain  of  the  illness,  the  ministers  restored  to  him
that  great  queen,  who  seemed  like  a  second  gift  of  ease,  and
the  king  valued  her  highly  as  the  saviour  of  his  life,  and  as
too  wise  to  bear  anger  against  her  afterwards  for  concealing
herself.


[M]  "  For  it  is  care  for  a  husband's  interests  that  entitles
a  king's  wife  to  the  name  of  queen ;  by  mere  compliance
with  a  husband's  whims  the  name  of  queen  is  not  obtained.
And  discharging  the  duty  of  minister  means  undivided
attention  to  the  burden  of  the  king's  affairs,  but  the  com-
pliance with  a  king's  passing  fancies  is  the  characteristic  of
a  mere  courtier.  Accordingly  we  made  this  effort  in  order
to  come  to  terms  with  your  enemy,  the  King  of  Magadha,
and  with  a  view  to  your  conquering  the  whole  earth.  So  it
is  not  the  case  that  the  queen,  who,  through  love  for  you,
endured  intolerable  separation,  has  done  you  a  wrong  ;  on
the  contrary  she  has  conferred  on  you  a  great  benefit."

When  the  King  of  Vatsa  heard  this  true  speech  of  his  prime

1  Literals,  "  broke."  The  vyddhi  or  disease  must  have  been  of  the  nature
of  an  abscess.


88  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

minister,  he  thought  that  he  himself  was  in  the  wrong,  and  was
quite  satisfied.  And  he  said  :  *'  I  know  this  well  enough,  that
the  queen,  like  Policy  incarnate  in  bodily  form,  acting  under
your  inspiration,  has  bestowed  upon  me  the  dominion  of
the  earth.  But  that  unbecoming  speech  which  I  uttered  was
due  to  excessive  affection.  How  can  people  whose  minds  are
bhnded  with  love  bring  themselves  to  deliberate  calmly  ?  "  ^
With  such  conversation  that  King  of  Vatsa  brought  the  day
and  the  queen's  eclipse  of  shame  to  an  end.

On  the  next  day  a  messenger  sent  by  the  King  of  Magadha,
who  had  discovered  the  real  state  of  the  case,  came  to  the
sovereign  of  Vatsa,  and  said  to  him  as  from  his  master:
*'  We  have  been  deceived  by  thy  ministers,  therefore  take  such
steps  as  that  the  world  may  not  henceforth  be  to  us  a  place
of  misery."

When  he  heard  that,  the  king  showed  all  honour  to  the
messenger,  and  sent  him  to  Padmavati  to  take  his  answer
from  her.  She,  for  her  part,  being  altogether  devoted  to
Vasavadatta,  had  an  interview  with  the  ambassador  in  her
presence.  For  humility  is  an  unfailing  characteristic  of
good  women.  The  ambassador  delivered  her  father's  message  :
"  My  daughter,  you  have  been  married  by  an  artifice,  and
your  husband  is  attached  to  another,  thus  it  has  come  to
pass  that  I  reap  in  misery  the  fruit  of  being  the  father  of
a  daughter."  But  Padmavati  thus  answered  him  :  "  Say
to  my  father  from  me  here  :  '  What  need  of  grief  ?  For  my
husband  is  very  indulgent  to  me,  and  the  Queen  Vasavadatta
is  my  affectionate  sister,  so  my  father  must  not  be  angry  with
my  husband,  unless  he  wishes  to  break  his  own  plighted
faith  and  my  heart  at  the  same  time.'  "

When  this  becoming  answer  had  been  given  by  Padma-
vati, the  Queen  Vasavadatta  hospitably  entertained  the  am-
bassador and  then  sent  him  away.  When  the  ambassador
had  departed,  Padmavati  remained  somewhat  depressed  with
regret,  calling  to  mind  her  father's  house.  Then  Vasava-
datta ordered  Vasantaka  to  amuse  her,  and  he  came
near,  and  with  that  object  proceeded  to  tell  the  following
tale  :  —

^  "  Amare  et  sapere  vix  deo  conceditur"  (Publius  Syrus).


r


THE  BIRTH  OF  SOMAPRABHA  39


20.  Story  of  Somaprabhd

There  is  a  city,  the  ornament  of  the  earth,  called  PataU-
putra,^  and  in  it  there  was  a  great  merchant  named  Dhar-
magupta.  He  had  a  wife  named  Chandraprabha,  and  she
once  on  a  time  became  pregnant,  and  brought  forth  a  daughter
beautiful  in  all  her  limbs.  That  girl,  the  moment  she  was
born,  illuminated  the  chamber  with  her  beauty,  spoke  dis-
tinctly,^ and  got  up   and   sat  down.     Then  Dharmagupta,

1  This  great  city  (the  modern  Patna)  was  built  about  482  B.C.,  and
became  the  capital  of  Asoka,  the  first  emperor  of  India  (274-236  b.c).  It
was  known  at  this  time  as  Pataliputta,  which  the  Greek  ambassador,
Megasthenes,  corrupted  to  Palibothra.  As  the  great  Buddhist  centre,
Ai^oka  enriched  the  city  with  magnificent  temples  and  works  of  art  of
every  kind.  Its  foundation  is  ascribed  by  Buddhists  to  Kaliisoka,  although
nothing  definite  can  be  said  on  this  point.

The  most  curious  fact  connected  with  Pataliputra  is  that  from  the  seventh
to  eighteenth  centuries  a.d.  its  site  seems  to  have  been  entirely  lost,  and
many  fantastic  tales  arose  about  its  early  history.  One  of  these  crept  into
the  pages  of  Somadeva,  as  we  have  already  seen  (Vol.  I,  p.  18  et  seq.).

In  1878  the  Government  Archaeological  Survey  of  India  reported  that
Pataliputra  must  have  stood  near  the  modern  Patna,  but  have  been  long
since  swept  away  by  the  Ganges.  This  theory,  however,  was  disproved  in
1893  by  the  discovery  of  extensive  ruins  at  Patna  by  Waddell  and  Spooner.
The  meaning  of  Pataliputra  is  still  uncertain.  It  is  said  to  signify  the
"city  of  flowers,"  but  this  is  the  meaning  of  Kusumapura,  another  name
for  Pataliputra.  (See  the  story  of  Harasvamin  in  Book  V,  Chapter  XXIV,
and  the  twenty-second  vampire  story  in  Chapter  XCVI  of  the  Ocean  of
Stoiy.)  Waddell  considers  it  to  mean  simply  the  *^^son  of  Patali,"  from  the
old  seaport  at  the  mouth  of  the  Indus.  See  D.  B.  Spooner,  "  The  Zoroastrian
Period  of  Indian  History,"  Journ.  Roy.  As.  Soc,  1915,  p.  63  et  seq.;  L.  A.
Waddell,  Discovery  of  the  Lost  Site  of  Pataliputra,  1 892 ;  and  Report  on  the
Excavations  of  Pataliputra  (Patna),  1903. — n.m.p.

2  Liebrecht  in  an  essay  on  some  modern  Greek  songs  (Zw;-  Volkskunde,
p.  211)  gives  numerous  stories  of  children  who  spoke  shortly  after  birth.  It
appears  to  have  been  generally  considered  an  evil  omen.  Cf.  the  "  Romance
of  Merlin"  (Dunlop's  History  of  Fiction,  p.  146).  See  also  Baring  Gould's
Curious  Myths  of  the  Middle  Ages  (new  edition,  1869),  p.  170.  In  a  startling
announcement  of  the  birth  of  Antichrist  which  appeared  in  1623,  purporting
to  come  from  the  brothers  of  the  Order  of  St  John,  the  following  passage
occurs: — "The  child  is  dusky,  has  pleasant  mouth  and  eyes,  teeth  pointed
like  those  of  a  cat,  ears  large,  stature  by  no  means  exceeding  that  of  other
children ;  the  said  child,  incontinent  on  his  birth,  walked  and  talked  perfectly  well."
See  Crooke,  "The  Legends  of  Krishna,"  Folk-Lore,  Vol.  xi,  1900,  p.  10.—


N.M.P.


40  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

seeing  that  the  women  in  the  lying-in  chamber  were  astonished
and  terrified,  went  there  himself  in  a  state  of  alarm.  And
immediately  he  asked  that  girl  in  secret,  bowing  before  her
humbly  :  "  Adorable  one,  who  art  thou  that  art  thus  become
incarnate  in  my  family  ?  "  She  answered  him  :  "  Thou  must
not  give  me  in  marriage  to  anyone  ;  as  long  as  I  remain  in
thy  house,  father,  I  am  a  blessing  to  thee  ;  what  profit  is
there  in  inquiring  further?"  When  she  said  this  to  him,
Dharmagupta  was  frightened,  and  he  concealed  her  in  his
house,  giving  out  abroad  that  she  was  dead.

Then  that  girl,  whose  name  was  Somaprabha,  gradually
grew  up  with  human  body,  but  celestial  splendour  of  beauty.
And  one  day  a  young  merchant,  of  the  name  of  Guhachandra,
beheld  her,  as  she  was  standing  upon  the  top  of  her  palace,
looking  on  with  delight  at  the  celebration  of  the  spring
festival ;  she  clung  like  a  creeper  of  love  round  his  heart,  so
that  he  was,  as  it  were,  faint,^  and  with  difficulty  got  home
to  his  house.  There  he  was  tortured  with  the  pain  of  love,
and  when  his  parents  persistently  importuned  him  to  tell
them  the  cause  of  his  distress,  he  informed  them  by  the
mouth  of  a  friend.

Then  his  father,  whose  name  was  Guhasena,  out  of  love
for  his  son,  went  to  the  house  of  Dharmagupta  to  ask  him
to  give  his  daughter  in  marriage  to  Guhachandra.  Then
Dharmagupta  put  off  Guhasena  when  he  made  the  request,
desiring  to  obtain  a  daughter-in-law,  and  said  to  him  :  "  The
fact  is,  my  daughter  is  out  of  her  mind."  ^  Considering  that
he  meant  by  that  to  refuse  to  give  his  daughter,  Guhasena
returned  home,  and  there  he  beheld  his  son  prostrate  by  the
fever  of  love,  and  thus  reflected  :  "I  will  persuade  the  king
to  move  in  this  matter,  for  I  have  before  this  conferred  an
obligation  on  him,  and  he  will  cause  that  maiden  to  be  given
to  my  son,  who  is  at  the  point  of  death."     Having  thus  deter-

1  In  the  Durgaprasjid  text  we  find  that  he  was  faint  "because  his  heart
was  hit,  as  it  were,  by  love's  arrow." — n.m.p.

^  It  seems  curious  that,  after  publicly  declaring  that  his  daughter  died
at  birth,  he  should  now  say  she  was  alive,  but  mad.  The  Durgaprasad
text  reads  kttto  and  mudheli  instead  of  'artkato  and  mudha  'iti,  making  the
meaning,  "  Whence  can  I  have  a  daughter,  fool ! "  which  makes  much  better
sense,  and  is,  moreover,  more  in  accordance  with  the  rest  of  the  tale.— n.m.p.


THE  FORCED  MARRIAGE  41

mined,  the  merchant  went  and  presented  to  the  king  a  splendid
jewel,  and  made  known  to  him  his  desire.  The  king,  for
his  part,  being  well  disposed  towards  him,  commissioned  the
head  of  the  police  to  assist  him,  with  whom  he  went  to  the
house  of  Dharmagupta,  and  surrounded  it  on  all  sides  with
troops,^  so  that  Dharmagupta's  throat  was  choked  with  tears,
as  he  expected  utter  ruin.

Then  Somaprabha  said  to  Dharmagupta  :  "  Give  me  in
marriage,  my  father ;  let  not  calamity  befall  you  on  my
account ;  but  I  must  never  be  treated  as  a  wife  ^  by  my
husband,  and  this  agreement  you  must  make  in  express  terms
with  my  future  father-in-law."  When  his  daughter  had  said
this  to  him,  Dharmagupta  agreed  to  give  her  in  marriage,
after  stipulating  that  she  should  not  be  treated  as  a  wife  ^ ;
and  Guhasena,  with  inward  laughter,  agreed  to  the  condition,
thinking  to  himself:  "Only  let  my  son  be  once  married."
Then  Guhachandra,  the  son  of  Guhasena,  went  to  his  own
house,  taking  with  him  his  bride  Somaprabha.  And  in  the
evening  his  father  said  to  him  :  "  My  son,  treat  her  as  a  wife,
for  who  abstains  from  the  society  of  his  own  wife  ?  "  *

When  she  heard  that,  the  bride  Somaprabha  looked  angrily
at  her  father-in-law,  and  whirled  round  her  threatening  fore-
finger, as  it  were  the  decree  of  death.  When  he  saw  that
finger  of  his  daughter-in-law,  the  breath  of  that  merchant
immediately  left  him,  and  fear  came  upon  all  besides.  But
Guhachandra,  when  his  father  was  dead,  thought  to  himself  :
"  The  goddess  of  death  has  entered  into  my  house  as  a  wife."
And  thenceforth  he  avoided  the  society  of  that  wife,  though
she  remained  in  his  house,  and  so  observed  a  vow  difficult  as
that  of  standing  on  the  edge  of  a  sword.  And  being  inly
consumed  by  that  grief,  losing  his  taste  for  all  enjoyment,
he  made  a  vow  and  feasted  Brahmans  every  day.  And  that
wife  of  his,  of  heavenly  beauty,  observing  strict  silence,  used
always  to  give  a  fee  to  those  Brahmans  after  they  had  eaten.

^  More  literally,  "  blockaded  his  house  with  troops  and  his  throat  with
tears." The  Durgaprasad  text  reads  asubhih,  "with  his  breath." — n.m.p.

2  Literally,  "I  must  never  be  bedded  by  my  husband." — n.m.p.

3  Literally,  "bedded." — n.m.p.

^  Literally,  "put  this  bride  to  bed,  for  who  will  not  lie  with  his  wife." — n.m.p.


42  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

One  day  an  aged  Brahman,  who  had  come  to  be  fed,  be-
held her  exciting  the  wonder  of  the  world  by  her  dower  of
beauty  ;  then  the  Brahman,  full  of  curiosity,  secretly  asked
Guhachandra  :  "  Tell  me  who  this  young  wife  of  yours  is."
Then  Guhachandra,  being  importuned  by  that  Brahman,
told  him  with  afflicted  mind  her  whole  story.  When  he
heard  it,  the  excellent  Brahman,  full  of  compassion,  gave  him
a  charm  for  appeasing  the  fire,  in  order  that  he  might  obtain
his  desire.  Accordingly,  while  Guhachandra  was  in  secret
muttering  that  charm,  there  appeared  to  him  a  Brahman
from  the  midst  of  the  fire.  And  that  god  of  fire  in  the
shape  of  a  Brahman  said  to  him,  as  he  lay  prostrate  at  his
feet :  "  To-day  I  will  eat  in  thy  house,  and  I  will  remain
there  during  the  night.  And  after  I  have  shown  thee  the
truth  with  respect  to  thy  wife,  I  will  accomplish  thy  de-
sire." When  he  had  said  this  to  Guhachandra,  the  Brahman
entered  his  house.  There  he  ate  like  the  other  Brahmans,
and  lay  down  at  night  near  Guhachandra  for  one  watch  of
the  night  only,  such  was  his  unwearying  zeal.  And  at  this
period  of  the  night  Somaprabha,  the  wife  of  Guhachandra,
went  out  of  the  house  of  her  husband,  all  the  inmates  of
which  were  asleep.  At  that  moment  the  Brahman  woke  up
Guhachandra,  and  said  to  him  :  "  Come,  see  what  thy  wife
is  doing."

And  by  magic  power  he  gave  Guhachandra  and  himself
the  shape  of  bees,^  and  going  out  he  showed  him  that  wife
of  his,  who  had  issued  from  the  house.  And  that  fair  one
Guhachandra  ^^^^  ^  ^^^S  distance  outsidc  the  city,  and  the
discovers  his  Brahman  with  Guhachandra  followed  her.  There-
H^ife  is  a  upon  Guliachandra  saw  before  him  a  Nyagrodha  ^
°  tree  of  wide  extent,  beautiful  with  its  shady
stem,  and  under  it  he  heard  a  heavenly  sound  of  singing,
sweet  with  strains  floating  on  the  air,  accompanied  with
the  music  of  the  lyre  and  the  flute.      And  on  the  trunk

*  So  in  the  twenty-first  of  Miss  Stokes'  Indian  Fairij  Tales  the  fakir
changes  the  king's  son  into  a  fly.  Cf,  also  Veckenstedt's  Wendische  Sagen,
p.  127.

*  Ficus  Indica.  Such  a  tree  is  said  to  have  sheltered  an  army.  Its
branches  take  root  and  form  a  natural  cloister.  Cf.  Milton's  Paradise  Lost,
Book  IX,  line  1000  ei  seq.


THE  TWO  HEAVENLY  MAIDENS  43

of  the  tree  he  saw  a  heavenly  maiden/  like  his  wife  in
appearance,  seated  on  a  splendid  throne,  eclipsing  by  her
beauty  the  moonbeam,  fanned  with  white  chowries,  like  the
goddess  presiding  over  the  treasure  of  all  the  moon's  beauty.
And  then  Guhachandra  saw  his  wife  ascend  that  very  tree
and  sit  down  beside  that  lady,  occupying  half  of  her  throne.
While  he  was  contemplating  those  two  heavenly  maidens  of
equal  beauty  sitting  together,  it  seemed  to  him  as  if  that
night  were  lighted  by  three  moons.^

Then  he,  full  of  curiosity,  thought  for  a  moment  :  "  Can
this  be  sleep  or  delusion  ?  But  away  with  both  these  sup-
positions !  This  is  the  expanding  of  the  blossom  from  the
bud  of  association  with  the  wise,  which  springs  on  the  tree  of
right  conduct,  and  this  blossom  gives  promise  of  the  appropri-
ate fruit."  While  he  was  thus  reflecting  at  his  leisure,  those
two  celestial  maidens,  after  eating  food  suited  for  such  as
they  were,  drank  heavenly  wine.  Then  the  wife  of  Guha-
chandra said  to  the  second  heavenly  maiden  :  "  To-day
some  glorious  Brahman  has  arrived  in  our  house,  for  which
reason,  my  sister,  my  heart  is  alarmed  and  I  must  go."  In
these  words  she  took  leave  of  that  other  heavenly  maiden
and  descended  from  the  tree.  When  Guhachandra  and  the
Brahman  saw  that,  they  returned  in  front  of  her,  still  pre-
serving the  form  of  bees,  and  arrived  in  the  house  by  night
before  she  did.  And  afterwards  arrived  that  heavenly
maiden,  the  wife  of  Guhachandra,  and  she  entered  the  house
without  being  observed.  Then  that  Brahman  of  his  own
accord  said  to  Guhachandra  :  "  You  have  had  ocular  proof
that  your  wife  is  divine  and  not  human,  and  you  have  to-day
seen  her  sister,  who  is  also  divine  ;  and  how  do  you  suppose
that  a  heavenly  nymph  can  desire  the  society  of  a  man  ?  So
I  will  give  you  a  charm  to  be  written  up  over  her  door,  and
I  will  also  teach  you  an  artifice  to  be  employed  outside  the

1  Grimm  in  his  Teutonic  Mythology  (translation  by  Stally brass,  p.  121,
note)  connects  the  description  of  wonderful  maidens  sitting  inside  hollow
trees,  or  perched  on  the  boughs,  with  tree-worship.  See  also  Grohmann's
Sagen  aus  B'dhmen,  p.  41.

2  For  the  illuminating  power  of  female  beauty  see  note  3  to  the  first
tale  in  Miss  Stokes'  collection,  where  parallels  are  cited  from  the  folk-lore
of  Europe  and  Asia.


44  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

house,  which  must  increase  the  force  of  the  charm.  A  fire
burns  even  without  being  fanned,  but  much  more  when  a
strong  current  of  air  is  brought  to  bear  on  it ;  in  the  same
way  a  charm  will  produce  the  desired  effect  unaided,  but
much  more  readily  when  assisted  by  an  artifice."

When  he  had  said  this,  the  excellent  Brahman  gave  a
charm  to  Guhachandra,  and  instructed  him  in  the  artifice,
and  then  vanished  in  the  dawn.  Guhachandra  for  his  part
But  by  Macric  ^vTote  it  up  ovcr  the  door  of  his  wife's  apartment,
Aid  gains  her  and  in  the  evening  had  recourse  to  the  following
Love  stratagem  calculated  to  excite  her  affection.     He

dressed  himself  splendidly  and  went  and  conversed  with
a  certain  courtesan  before  her  eyes.  When  she  saw  this,
the  heavenly  maiden,  being  jealous,  called  to  him  with
voice  set  free  by  the  charm,  and  asked  him  who  that  woman
was.  He  answered  her  falsely  :  "  She  is  a  courtesan  who
has  taken  a  fancy  to  me,  and  I  shall  go  and  pay  her
a  visit  ^  to-day."  Then  she  looked  at  him  askance  with
wrinkled  brows,  and,  lifting  up  her  veil  with  her  left  hand,*
said  to  him  :  "  Ah  !  I  see  :  this  is  why  you  are  dressed  up  so
grandly  ;  do  not  go  to  her,  what  have  you  to  do  with  her  ?
Lie  with  me,  for  I  am  your  wife."  When  he  had  thus  been
implored  by  her,  agitated  with  excitement,  as  if  she  were
possessed,  though  that  evil  demon  which  held  her  had  been
expelled  by  the  charm,  he  was  in  a  state  of  ecstatic  joy,  and
he  immediately  entered  into  her  chamber  with  her,  and  en-
joyed, though  a  mortal,  celestial  happiness  not  conceived  of
in  imagination.  Having  thus  obtained  her  as  a  loving  wife,
conciliated  by  the  magic  power  of  the  charm,  who  abandoned
for  him  her  celestial  rank,  Guhachandra  lived  happily  ever
after.


[M]  "  Thus  heavenly  nymphs,  who  have  been  cast  down
by  some  curse,  live  as  wives  in  the  houses  of  righteous  men,

^  Literally,  "  I  go  to  her  house." — n.m.p.

2  Reading  nivdrya  (as  in  the  Durgaprasad  text)  instead  of  viddrya  we
get  much  better  sense — "retaining  him  with  her  left  hand." — n.m.p.


r


THE  SIN  OF  INDRA  45


as  a  reward  for  their  good  deeds,  such  as  acts  of  devotion
and  charity.^  For  the  honouring  of  gods  and  Brahmans  is
considered  the  wishing- cow  ^  of  the  good.  For  what  is  not
obtained  by  that  ?  All  the  other  politic  expedients,  known
as  conciliation  and  so  on,  are  mere  adjuncts.^  But  evil
actions  are  the  chief  cause  of  even  heavenly  beings,  born  in  a
very  lofty  station,  falling  from  their  high  estate,  as  a  hurricane
is  the  cause  of  the  falling  of  blossoms."  When  he  had  said
this  to  the  princess,  Vasantaka  continued  :  "  Hear  moreover
what  happened  to  Ahalya:

21.  Story  of  Ahalya''

Once  upon  a  time  there  was  a  great  hermit  named  Gau-
tama, who  knew  the  past,  the  present  and  the  future.  And
he  had  a  wife  named  Ahalya,  who  in  beauty  surpassed  the
nymphs  of  heaven.  One  day  Indra,  in  love  with  her  beauty,
tempted  her  in  secret ;  for  the  mind  of  rulers,  blinded  with
power,  runs  towards  unlawful  objects.

And  she  in  her  folly  encouraged  that  husband  of  Sachi,
being  the  slave  of  her  passions  ;    but  the  hermit  Gautama

1  The  Durgaprasad  reading  differs  slightly  and  means  "sacrifices^  acts
of  charity  and  the  like."     See  Speyer,  op.  cit.,  p.  99- — n.m.p.

2  Kamadhenu  means  a  cow  granting  all  desires ;  such  a  cow  is  said  to
have  belonged  to  the  sage  Vasishta.

3  Conciliation,  bribery,  sowing  dissension,  and  war.

*  There  are  several  versions  of  this  tale.  One  of  them  in  the  Rdmdyana
(see  Griffith's  metrical  translation,  vol.  i,  1870,  pp.  211-216)  describes  Ahalya
as  being  herself  deceived,  as  Indra  takes  the  form  of  her  husband.  Another
story  is  that  Indra  was  assisted  in  his  designs  by  Soma  (the  moon),  who,
disguised  as  a  cock,  crowed  at  midnight.  The  unsuspecting  Gautama  left
his  bed  and  started  his  early  morning  devotions,  while  Indra  immediately
took  his  place.  The  morals  of  Indra  were  never  above  suspicion,  but  by  the
time  of  the  Epics  he  had  degenerated  into  nothing  more  than  a  "debonair
debauchee."  In  the  Vedic  age  he  is  a  god  of  the  people,  the  champion
of  the  fighting  man,  a  kind  of  Hindu  Zeus.  For  the  gradual  changing
and  explanation  of  the  attributes  of  Indra  see  L.  D.  Barnett,  Hindu  Gods
and  Heroes,  "Wisdom  of  the  East"  Series,  1922,  pp.  26-34,  74,  etc.  See
also  Bloomfield,  Fedic  Concordance,  under  "  Ahalyayai,"  p.  150;  ditto,  Proc.
Am.  Phil.  Soc,  vol.  Ivi,  p.  7  ;  V.  Fausboll,  Indian  Mythology  accordi7ig  to  the
Mahdhhdrata,  1903,  pp.  88-92;  and  A.  A.  Macdonell,  A  History  of  Sanskrit
Literature,  1909,  pp.  84-87,  etc. — n.m.p.


46  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

found  out  the  intrigue  by  his  superhuman  power,  and  arrived
upon  the  scene.  And  Indra  immediately  assumed,  out  of  fear,
the  form  of  a  eat.  Then  Gautama  said  to  Ahalya  :  "  Who
is  here  ?  "  She  answered  her  husband  ambiguously  in  the
Prakrit  dialect:  "Here  forsooth  is  a  cat" — so  managing
to  preserve  verba)  truth.^  Then  Gautama  said,  laughing :
"It  is  quite  true  that  your  lover  is  here  " — and  he  inflicted
on  her  a  curse,  but  ordained  that  it  should  terminate,  because
she  had  showed  some  regard  for  truth.  The  curse  ran  as
follows  : — "  Harlot,^  take  for  a  long  time  the  nature  of  a
stone,  until  thou  behold  Rama  wandering  in  the  forest."
And  Gautama  at  the  same  time  inflicted  on  the  god  Indra
the  following  curse  : — "  A  thousand  pictures  of  that  which
thou  has  desired  shall  be  upon  thy  body,  but  when  thou
shalt  behold  Tilottama,  a  heavenly  nymph,  whom  Vi^va-
karman  shall  make,  they  shall  turn  into  a  thousand  eyes."
When  he  had  pronounced  this  curse,  the  hermit  returned  to
his  austerities  according  to  his  desire,  but  Ahalya  for  her
part  assumed  the  awful  condition  of  a  stone. ^  And  Indra
immediately  had  his  body  covered  with  representations  of  the
female  pudenda  * ;  for  to  whom  is  not  immorality  a  cause  of
humiliation  ?


[M]  "  So  true  is  it  that  every  man's  evil  actions  always
bear  fruit  in  himself,  for  whatever  seed  a  man  sows,  of  that
he  reaps  the  fruit.  Therefore  persons  of  noble  character
never  desire  that  which  is  disagreeable  to  their  neighbours,
for  this  is  the  invariable  observance  of  the  good,  prescribed

^  The  Prakrit  word  majjao  means  "a  cat"  and  also  "my  lover."

2  Literally,  "woman  of  bad  character." — n.m.p.

3  For  numerous  references  to  stone  metamorphoses  see  Chauvin,  Biblio-
graphic des  Ouvrages  Arabex,  vi,  58. — n.m.p.

*  In  some  accounts  Gautama  repented  of  his  curse  and  himself  turned
the  marks  into  a  thousand  eyes.  Another  legend  states  that  Indra  obtained
his  numerous  eyes  in  his  eagerness  to  see  as  much  as  possible  of  the
wonderful  Tilottama.  We  have  already  seen  how  Siva  became  four-faced
owing  to  the  same  cause  (p.  14).  Here  the  two  stories  seem  rather
muddled. — n.m.p.


THE  KING  OF  MAGADHA  BECOMES  RECONCILED  47

by  divine  law.  And  you  two  were  sister  goddesses  in  a  former
birth,  but  you  have  been  degraded  in  consequence  of  a  curse,
and  accordingly  your  hearts  are  free  from  strife  and  bent  on
doing  one  another  good  turns."

When  they  heard  this  from  Vasantaka,  Vasavadatta  and
Padmavati  dismissed  from  their  hearts  even  the  smallest
remnants  of  mutual  jealousy.  But  the  Queen  Vasavadatta
made  her  husband  equally  the  property  of  both,  and  acted
as  kindly  to  Padmavati  as  if  she  were  herself,  desiring  her
welfare.

When  the  King  of  Magadha  heard  of  that  so  great  gener-
osity of  hers  from  the  messengers  sent  by  Padmavati,  he  was
much  pleased.  So  on  the  next  day  the  minister  Yaugan-
dharayana  came  up  to  the  King  of  Vatsa  in  the  presence  of
the  queen,  the  others  also  standing  by,  and  said :  "  Why  do
we  not  go  now  to  Kausambi,  my  prince,  in  order  to  begin
our  enterprise,  for  we  know  that  there  is  nothing  to  be  feared
from  the  King  of  Magadha,  even  though  he  has  been  de-
ceived ?  For  he  has  been  completely  gained  over  by  means
of  the  negotiation  termed  '  Giving  of  a  daughter  '  :  and  how
could  he  make  war  and  so  abandon  his  daughter,  whom  he
loves  more  than  life  ?  He  must  keep  his  word ;  moreover
he  has  not  been  deceived  by  you  ;  I  did  it  all  myself ;  and  it
does  not  displease  him  ;  indeed  I  have  learned  from  my  spies
that  he  will  not  act  in  a  hostile  way,  and  it  was  for  this  very
purpose  that  we  remained  here  for  these  days."

While  Yaugandharayana,  who  had  accomplished  the  task
he  had  in  hand,  was  speaking  thus,  a  messenger  belonging  to
the  King  of  Magadha  arrived  there,  and  entered  into  the
palace  immediately,  being  announced  by  the  warder,  and
after  he  had  done  obeisance  he  sat  down,  and  said  to  the
King  of  Vatsa  :  "  The  King  of  Magadha  is  delighted  with
the  intelligence  sent  by  the  Queen  Padmavati,  and  he  now
sends  this  message  to  your  Highness  :  '  What  need  is  there
of  many  words  ?  I  have  heard  all,  and  I  am  pleased  with
thee.  Therefore  do  the  thing  for  the  sake  of  which  this
beginning  has  been  made  ;  we  submit  ourselves.'  "  The
King  of  Vatsa  jojrfuUy  received  this  clear  speech  of  the  mes-
senger, resembling  the  blossom  of  the  tree  of  poHcy  planted


48  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

by  Yaugandharayana.  Then  he  brought  Padmavati  with
the  queen  and,  after  he  had  bestowed  a  present  upon  the
messenger,  he  dismissed  him  with  honour.

Then  a  messenger  from  Chandamahasena  also  arrived,
and,  after  entering,  he  bowed  before  the  king,  according  to
custom,  and  said  to  him  :  "  O  King,  his  Majesty  Chanda-
mahasena, who  understands  the  secrets  of  poUcy,  has  learnt
the  state  of  thy  affairs  and  dehghted  sends  this  message  :
'  Your  Majesty's  excellence  is  plainly  declared  by  this  one
fact,  that  you  have  Yaugandharayana  for  your  minister;
what  need  of  further  speeches  ?  Blessed  too  is  Vasavadatta,
who,  through  devotion  to  you,  has  done  a  deed  which  makes
us  exalt  our  head  for  ever  among  the  good  ;  moreover  Pad-
mavati is  not  separated  from  Vasavadatta  in  my  regard,  for
the  two  have  one  heart ;   therefore  quickly  exert  yourself.'  "

When  the  King  of  Vatsa  heard  this  speech  of  his  father-
in-law's  messenger,  joy  suddenly  arose  in  his  heart,  and  his
exceeding  warmth  of  affection  for  the  queen  was  increased,
and  also  the  great  respect  which  he  felt  for  his  excellent
minister.  Then  the  king,  together  with  the  queens,  enter-
tained the  messenger  according  to  the  laws  of  hospitality,
in  joyful  excitement  of  mind,  and  sent  him  away  pleased ;
and  as  he  was  bent  on  commencing  his  enterprise,  he  deter-
mined, after  deliberating  with  his  ministers,  on  returning  to
Kau^ambi.


CHAPTER  XYIII

SO  on  the  next  day  the  King  of  Vatsa  set  out  from
[M]  Lavanaka  for  Kausambi,  accompanied  by  his
wives  and  his  ministers,  and  as  he  advanced  shouts
broke  forth  from  his  forces,  that  filled  the  plains  like  the
waters  of  the  ocean  overflowing  out  of  due  time.  An  image
would  be  furnished  of  that  king  advancing  on  his  mighty
elephant,  if  the  sun  were  to  journey  in  the  heaven  ac-
companied by  the  eastern  mountain.  That  king,  shaded
with  his  white  umbrella,^  showed  as  if  waited  upon  by  the
moon,  delighted  at  having  outdone  the  splendour  of  the
sun.  While  he  towered  resplendent  above  them  all,  the  chiefs
circled  around  him,  like  the  planets  ^  in  their  orbits  around
the  polar  star.  And  those  queens,  mounted  on  a  female
elephant  that  followed  his,  shone  like  the  Earth  Goddess  and
the  Goddess  of  Fortune  accompanying  him  out  of  affection
in  visible  shape.  The  earth,  that  lay  in  his  path,  dinted  with
the  edges  of  the  hoofs  of  the  troops  of  his  prancing  steeds,
seemed  to  bear  the  prints  of  loving  nails ,^  as  if  it  had  been
enjoyed  by  the  king.

In  this  style  progressing,  the  King  of  Vatsa,  being  con-
tinually praised  by  his  minstrels,  reached  in  a  few  days  the
city  of  Kausambi,  in  which  the  people  kept  holiday.  The
city  was  resplendent  on  that  occasion,  her  lord*  having
returned  from  sojourning  abroad.  She  was  clothed  in  the
red  silk  of  banners,  round  windows  were  her  expanded  eyes,

^  For  full  details  of  the  history  and  significance  of  the  umbrella  see
Appendix  II,  pp.  263-272 — n.m.p.

2  Cf.  Schiller's  Gedichte,  "  Der  Graf  von  Habsburg,"  lines  8,  9.

3  Vatsyayana  devotes  a  whole  chapter  in  his  Kama  Sutra  (Book  II,  ch.  iv)
to  love-scratching  with  the  finger-nails.  He  describes  eight  distinct  varieties
of  scratches,  and  lists  the  desirable  qualities  in  finger-nails.  As  this  work  is
hard  to  obtain  I  shall  give  certain  extracts  in  a  note  to  the  "Story  of  King
Sinhaksha"  in  Book  X,  Chapter  LXVI. — n.m.p.

*  The  word  pati  here  means  king  and  husband.
VOL.  II.  49  D


50  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

the  full  pitchers  in  the  space  in  front  of  the  gates  were  her
two  swelling  breasts,  the  joyous  shouts  of  the  crowd  were
her  cheerful  conversation,  and  white  palaces  her  smile.^  So,
^,  accompanied  by  his  two  wives,  the  king  entered

rHumphant  the  city,  and  the  ladies  of  the  town  were  much
Entry  into  delighted  at  beholding  him.  The  heaven  was
Kau^dmbt  ^y^^  ^^^^  hundreds  of  faces  of  fair  ones  stand-
ing on  charming  palaces,  as  if  with  the  soldiers  of  the  moon  ^
that  was  surpassed  in  beauty  by  the  faces  of  the  queens,
having  come  to  pay  their  respects.  And  other  women,  estab-
lished at  the  windows,  looking  with  unwinking  eyes,^  seemed
like  heavenly  nymphs  in  aerial  chariots,  that  had  come
there  out  of  curiosity.  Other  women,  with  their  long-lashed
eyes  closely  applied  to  the  lattice  of  the  windows,  made,  so  to
speak,  cages  of  arrows  to  confine  love.  The  eager  eye  of  one
woman,  expanded  with  desire  to  behold  the  king,  came,  so  to
speak,  to  the  side  of  her  ear,*  that  did  not  perceive  him,  in
order  to  inform  it.  The  rapidly  heaving  breasts  of  another,
who  had  run  up  hastily,  seemed  to  want  to  leap  out  of  her
bodice  **  with  ardour  to  behold  him.  The  necklace  of  another
lady  was  broken  with  her  excitement,  and  the  pearl  beads
seemed  like  teardrops  of  joy  falling  from  her  heart.  Some
women,  beholding  Vasavadatta  and  remembering  the  former

^  A  smile  is  always  white  according  to  the  Hindu  poetic  canons.

^  Tlie  countenances  of  the  fair  ones  were  like  moons.

3  There  should  be  a  mark  of  elision  before  nimishekshanah.

*  The  eyes  of  Hindu  ladies  are  said  to  reach  to  their  ears.  I  read
taddkhydtum  for  iaddkhydtim  with  a  MS.  in  the  Sanskrit  College,  kindly  lent  me

by  the  Librarian  with  the  consent  of  the  Principal. See  the  introductory

part  of  Appendix  H  (" Colly rium  and  Kohl")  to  the  Ocean  of  Story,  Vol.  I,
p.  211  e.t  seq. — n.m.p.

^  This  is  the  an^a  or  angiyd  worn  by  the  Hindu  and  Mohammedan  women
of  the  north.  It  is  really  nothing  more  than  a  breast-cloth,  being  short,  tight
and  usually  sleeveless.  It  is  tied  behind  with  strings  or  ribbons.  In  Western
India  it  is  known  as  a  chott,  and  differs  from  the  angiyd  in  that  it  buttons  up
in  front.  In  Kashmir  the  kurtd,  a  kind  of  blouse  open  at  the  front,  is  worn
instead  of  the  angiyd.  Young  married  women  sometimes  wear  both  the  kurid
and  angiyd.  The  Pathan  women  have  two  varieties  of  kurtds :  a  coloured  and
decorated  one  worn  by  unmarried  girls,  and  a  more  sombre  one  adopted  by
married  women.

Other  terms  for  this  bodice  are  mahram  and  slnahand  (breast-cover). — n.m.p.


THE  TRIUMPHANT  PROCESSION  51

report  of  her  having  been  burned,  said  as  if  with  anxiety  :
"  If  the  fire  were  to  do  her  an  injury  at  Lavanaka,  then  the
sun  might  as  well  diffuse  over  the  world  darkness,  which  is
alien  to  his  nature."  Another  lady,  beholding  Padmavati,
said  to  her  companions  :  "I  am  glad  to  see  that  the  queen
is  not  put  to  shame  by  her  fellow-wife,  who  seems  like  her
friend."  And  others  beholding  those  two  queens,  and  throw-
ing over  them  garlands  of  eyes  expanded  with  joy  so  as  to
resemble  blue  lotuses,  said  to  one  another  :  "  Surely  Siva
and  Vishnu  have  not  beheld  the  beauty  of  these  two,  other-
wise how  could  they  regard  with  much  respect  their  consorts
Uma  and  Sri  ?  "

In  this  way  feasting  the  eyes  of  the  population,  the  King
of  Vatsa  with  the  queens  entered  his  own  palace,  after  per-
forming auspicious  ceremonies.  Such  as  is  the  splendour  of
a  lotus-pool  in  windy  weather,^  or  of  the  sea  when  the  moon
is  rising,  such  was  at  that  period  the  wonderful  splendour  of
the  king's  palace.  And  in  a  moment  it  was  filled  with  the
presents  which  the  feudatories  offered  to  procure  good  luck,
and  which  foreshadowed  the  coming  in  of  offerings  from  in-
numerable kings.  And  so  the  King  of  Vatsa,  after  honouring
the  chiefs,  entered  with  great  festivity  the  inner  apartments,
at  the  same  time  finding  his  way  to  the  heart  of  everyone
present.  And  there  he  remained  between  the  two  queens,
like  the  God  of  Love  between  Rati  and  Priti,^  and  spent  the
rest  of  the  day  in  drinking  and  other  enjoyments.

The  next  day,  when  he  was  sitting  in  the  hall  of  assembly
accompanied  by  his  ministers,  a  certain  Brahman  came  and
cried  out  at  the  door  :  "  Protection  for  the  Brahmans,  O
King  !  Certain  wicked  herdsmen  have  cut  off  my  son's  foot
in  the  forest  without  any  reason."  When  he  heard  that,
the  king  immediately  had  two  or  three  herdsmen  seized  and
brought  before  him,  and  proceeded  to  question  them.  Then
they  gave  the  following  answer ;— "  O  King,  being  herdsmen
we  roam  in  the  wilderness,  and  there  we  have  among  us  a
herdsman  named  Devasena,  and  he  sits  in  a  certain  place  in

^  The  Durgaprasad  text  (in  future  this  will  be  referred  to  as  the  D.  text)
reads prabhdte,  "at  daybreak,"  instead  oi pravdte,  "in  windy  weather." — n.m.p.
2  Love  and  Affection,  the  wives  of  Kamadeva,  the  Hindu  Cupid.


52  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

the  forest  on  a  stone  seat,  and  says  to  us,  '  I  am  your  king,'
and  gives  us  orders.  And  not  a  man  among  us  disobeys  his
orders.  Thus,  O  King,  that  herdsman  rules  supreme  in  the
wood.  Now  to-day  the  son  of  this  Brahman  came  that  way,
and  did  not  do  obeisance  to  the  herdsman  king,  and  when  we,
by  the  order  of  the  king,  said  to  him,  '  Depart  not  without
doing  thy  reverence,'  the  young  fellow  pushed  us  aside,  and
went  off  laughing,  in  spite  of  the  admonition.  Then  the
herdsman  king  commanded  us  to  punish  the  contumacious
boy  by  cutting  off  his  foot.  So  we,  O  King,  ran  after  him,
and  cut  off  his  foot ;  what  man  of  our  humble  degree  is  able
to  disobey  the  command  of  a  ruler  ?  "  When  the  herdsmen
had  made  this  representation  to  the  king,  the  wise  Yaugan-
dharayana,  after  thinking  it  over,  said  to  him  in  private  :
"  Certainly  that  place  must  contain  treasure,  on  the  strength
of  which  a  mere  herdsman  has  such  influence.^  So  let  us  go
there."  When  his  minister  had  said  this  to  him,  the  king
made  those  herdsmen  show  him  the  way,  and  went  to  that
place  in  the  forest  with  his  soldiers  and  his  attendants.

And  while,  after  the  ground  had  been  examined,  peasants
were  digging  there,  a  Yaksha,  in  stature  like  a  mountain,
rose  up  from  beneath  it,  and  said  :  "  O  King,  this  treasure.
The  Findin  ^hich  I  have  SO  loug  guarded,  belongs  to  thee,  as
of  the  having  been  buried  by  thy  forefathers,  therefore

Jewelled  take  posscssion  of  it."  After  he  had  said  this  to
the  king,  and  accepted  his  worship,  the  Yaksha
disappeared,  and  a  great  treasure  was  displayed  in  the  ex-
cavation. And  from  it  was  extracted  a  valuable  throne
studded  with  jewels,^  for  in  the  time  of  prosperity  a  long
series  of  happy  and  fortunate  events  takes  place.  The  lord
of  Vatsa  took  away  the  whole  treasure  from  the  spot  in
high  glee,  and  after  chastising  those  herdsmen  returned  to  his
own  city.     There  the  people  saw  that  golden  throne  brought

^  So  the  mouse  in  the  Panchatantra  possesses  power  by  means  of  a  treasure
(Benfey's  PaHchatantra,  vol.  i,  p.  320 ;  vol.  ii,  p.  178).  The  story  is  found  also
in  Chapter  LXI  of  this  work.  Cf.  also  Sagas  from  the  Far  East,  pp.  257,  263.
The  same  idea  is  found  in  Jataka,  No.  39,  p.  322,  of  Rhys  Davids'  translation,
and  in  Jataka,  No.  257,  vol.  ii,  p.  297,  of  Fausboll's  edition.

2  Cf.  Sagas  from  the  Far  East,  p.  263.


THE  KING  PREPARES  FOR  CONQUEST    53

by  the  king,  which  seemed,  with  the  streams  of  rays  issuing
from  its  blood-red  jewels,  to  foretell  ^  the  king's  forceful
conquest  of  all  the  regions,  and  which,  with  its  pearls  fixed
on  the  end  of  projecting  silver  spikes,  seemed  to  show  its
teeth  as  if  laughing  again  and  again  when  it  considered  the
astonishing  intellect  of  the  king's  ministers  ^ ;  and  they  ex-
pressed their  joy  in  a  charming  manner,  by  striking  drums
of  rejoicing,  so  that  they  sent  forth  their  glad  sounds.  The
ministers  too  rejoiced  exceedingly,  making  certain  of  the
king's  triumph  ;  for  prosperous  events  happening  at  the  very
commencement  of  an  enterprise  portend  its  final  success.
Then  the  sky  was  filled  with  flags  resembling  flashes  of
lightning,  and  the  king  like  a  cloud  rained  gold  on  his
dependents.

And  this  day  having  been  spent  in  feasting,  on  the  morrow
Yaugandharayana,  wishing  to  know  the  mind  of  the  king  of
Vatsa,  said  to  him  :  "  O  King,  ascend  and  adorn  that  great
throne,  which  thou  hast  obtained  by  inheritance  from  thy
ancestors."  But  the  king  said  :  "  Surely  it  is  only  after
conquering  all  the  regions  that  I  can  gain  glory  by  ascending
that  throne,  which  those  famous  ancestors  of  mine  mounted
after  conquering  the  earth.  Not  till  I  have  subdued  this
widely  gemmed  earth,  bounded  by  the  main,  will  I  ascend
the  great  jewelled  throne  of  my  ancestors."  ^  Saying  this,
the  king  did  not  mount  the  throne  as  yet.  For  men  of  high
birth  possess  genuine  loftiness  of  spirit.

Thereupon  Yaugandharayana  being  delighted  said  to
him  in  private  :  "  Bravo,  my  King  !  So  make  first  an  attempt
to  conquer  the  eastern  region."  When  he  heard  that,  the
king  eagerly  asked  his  minister  :  "  When  there  are  other
cardinal  points,  why  do  kings  first  march  towards  the  East  ?  "
When  Yaugandharayana  heard  this,  he  said  to  him  again  :
"  The  North,  O  King,  though  rich,  is  defiled  by  intercourse
with  barbarians ;  and  the  West  is  not  honoured  as  being  the
cause  of  the  setting  of  the  sun  and  other  heavenly  bodies  ;

^  I  read  darsayat.

2  Sati  is  a  misprint  for  mati — Bohtlingk  and  Roth,  s.v.

3  In  the  D.  text  the  dialogue  of  si.  52-54  is  divided  somewhat  differently.
See  Speyer,  op.  cit.,  p.  99. — n.m.p.


54  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

and  the  South  is  seen  to  be  neighboured  by  Rakshasas  and
inhabited  by  the  God  of  Death  ;  but  in  the  eastern  quarter
the  sun  rises,  over  the  East  presides  Indra,  and  towards  the
East  flows  the  Ganges,  therefore  the  East  is  preferred.^
Moreover  among  the  countries  situated  between  the  Vindhya
and  Himalaya  mountains,  the  country  laved  by  the  waters
of  the  Ganges  is  considered  most  excellent.  Therefore
monarchs  who  desire  success  march  first  towards  the  East,
and  dwell,  moreover,  in  the  land  visited  by  the  river  of  the
gods.*  For  your  ancestors  also  conquered  the  regions  by
beginning  with  the  East,  and  made  their  dwelling  in  Hastina-
pura  on  the  banks  of  the  Ganges  ;  but  Satanika  repaired  to
Kau^ambi  on  account  of  its  delightful  situation,  seeing  that
empire  depended  upon  valour,  and  situation  had  nothing  to
do  with  it."

When  he  had  said  this,  Yaugandharayana  stopped  speak-
ing ;  and  the  king  out  of  his  great  regard  for  heroic  exploits
said  :  "  It  is  true  that  dwelling  in  any  prescribed  country  is
not  the  cause  of  empire  in  this  world,  for  to  men  of  brave
disposition  their  own  valour  is  the  only  cause  of  success.  For
a  brave  man  by  himself  without  any  support  obtains  pros-
perity. Have  you  never  heard,  a  propos  of  this,  the  tale  of
the  brave  man  ?  "  Having  said  this,  the  lord  of  Vatsa,  on
the  entreaty  of  his  ministers,  again  began  to  speak,  and
related  in  the  presence  of  the  queens  the  following  wonderful
story  :—

22.  Story  of  Vidushaka

In  the  city  of  Ujjayini,  which  is  celebrated  throughout  the
earth,  there  was  in  former  days  a  king  named  Adityasena.
He  was  a  treasure-house  of  valour,  and  on  account  of  his  sole
supremacy  his  war  chariot,  like  that  of  the  sun,^  was  not  im-

^  For  a  good  general  article  on  orientation  see  T.  D.  Atkinson,  "  Points  of
the  Compass,"  Hastings'  Ency.  Rel.  Eth.,  vol.  x,  pp.  73-88.  For  the  extent  to
which  the  subject  enters  into  the  life  of  a  Brahman  see  Mrs  Stevenson's  The
Rites  of  the  Twice-born,  Oxford,  1920.— n.m.p.

*  I.e.  the  Ganges.

'  In  Sanskrit  pratdpa  the  word  translated  "valour"  also  means  "heat,"
and  chakra  may  refer  to  the  wheels  of  the  chariot  and  the  orb  of  the  sun,  so
that  there  is  a  pun  all  through.


KING  ADITYASENA  MARRIES  TEJASVATI      55


peded  anywhere.  When  his  lofty  umbrella,^  gleaming  white
like  snow,  illuminated  the  firmament,  other  kings  free  from
heat  depressed  theirs.  He  was  the  receptacle  of  the  jewels
produced  over  the  surface  of  the  whole  earth,  as  the  sea  is  the
receptacle  of  waters.  Once  on  a  time  he  was  encamped  with
his  army  on  the  banks  of  the  Ganges,  where  he  had  come  for
some  reason  or  other.  There  a  certain  rich  merchant  of  the
country,  named  Gunavartman,  came  to  the  king,  bringing  a
gem  of  maidens  as  a  present,  and  sent  this  message  by  the
mouth  of  the  warder  :  "  This  maiden,  though  the  gem  of
the  three  worlds,  has  been  born  in  my  house,  and  I  cannot
give  her  to  anyone  else  ;  only  your  Highness  is  fit  to  be
the  husband  of  such  a  girl."  Then  Gunavartman  entered
and  showed  his  daughter  to  the  king.  The  king,  when  he
beheld  that  maiden,  Tejasvati  by  name,  illuminating  with  her
brightness  the  quarters  of  the  heavens,  like  the  flame  of  the
rays  from  the  jewels  in  the  temple  of  the  God  of  Love,  was
all  enveloped  with  the  radiance  of  her  beauty  and  fell  in  love
with  her,  and,  as  if  heated  with  the  fire  of  passion,  began  to
dissolve  in  drops  of  sweat.  So  he  at  once  accepted  her,  who
was  fit  for  the  rank  of  head  queen,  and,  being  highly  delighted,
made  Gunavartman  equal  to  himself  in  honour.

Then,  having  married  his  dear  Tejasvati,  the  king  thought
all  his  objects  in  life  accomplished,  and  went  with  her  to
Ujjayini.  There  the  king  fixed  his  gaze  so  exclusively  on  her
face  that  he  could  not  see  the  affairs  of  his  kingdom,  though
they  were  of  great  importance.  And  his  ear  being,  so  to
speak,  riveted  on  her  musical  discourse,  could  not  be  attracted
by  the  cries  of  his  distressed  subjects.  The  king  entered  into
his  harem  for  a  long  time  and  never  left  it,  but  the  fever  of
fear  left  the  hearts  of  his  enemies.  And  after  some  time
there  was  born  to  the  king,  by  the  Queen  Tejasvati,  a  girl,
welcomed  by  all.  And  there  arose  in  his  heart  the  desire  of
conquest,  which  was  equally  welcome  to  his  subjects.  That
girl  of  exceeding  beauty,  who  made  the  three  worlds  seem
worthless  as  stubble,  excited  him  in  joy,  and  desire  of  con-
quest excited  his  valour.  Then  that  King  Adityasena  set
out  one  day  from  Ujjayini  to  attack  a  certain  contumacious

1  See  Appendix  11,  pp.  263-272. — n.m.p.


56  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

chieftain ;  and  he  made  that  Queen  Tejasvati  go  with  him
mounted  on  an  elephant,  as  if  she  were  the  protecting  goddess
of  the  host.  And  he  mounted  an  admirable  horse,  that  in
spirit  and  fury  resembled  a  torrent,^  tall  like  a  moving  moun-
tain, with  a  curl  on  its  breast,  and  a  girth.  It  seemed  to
imitate,  with  its  feet  raised  as  high  as  its  mouth,  the  going  of
Garuda,2  which  it  had  seen  in  the  heaven,  rivalling  its  own
swiftness ;  and  it  lifted  up  its  head  and  seemed  with  fearless
eye  to  measure  the  earth,  as  if  thinking  :  "  What  shall  be  the
limit  of  my  speed  ?  "

And  after  the  king  had  gone  a  little  way  he  came  to  a  level
piece  of  ground,  and  put  his  horse  to  its  utmost  speed  to  show
it  off  to  Tejasvati.  That  horse,  on  being  struck  with  his  heel,
jr.  went  off  rapidly,  like  an  arrow  impelled  from  a

Aditt/asena's  catapult,  in  somc  unknown  direction,  so  that  it
Horse  runs  bccamc  invisible  to  the  eyes  of  men.  The  soldiers,
awayw  im  ^^j^^j^  they  saw  that  take  place,  were  bewildered,
and  horsemen  galloped  in  a  thousand  directions  after  the
king,  who  was  run  away  with  by  his  horse,  but  could  not
overtake  him.  Thereupon  the  ministers  with  the  soldiers,
fearing  some  calamity,  in  their  anxiety  took  with  them  the
weeping  queen  and  returned  to  Ujjayini ;  there  they  remained
with  gates  closed  and  ramparts  guarded,  seeking  for  news  of
the  king,  having  cheered  up  the  citizens.

In  the  meanwhile  the  king  was  carried  by  the  horse  in  an
instant  to  the  impassable  forest  of  the  Vindhya  hills,  haunted
by  horrible  lions .^  Then  the  horse  happened  to  stand  still,  and
the  king  was  immediately  distracted  with  bewilderment,  as
the  great  forest  made  it  impossible  for  him  to  know  where-
abouts he  was.  Seeing  no  other  way  out  of  his  difficulties,
who  knew  what  the  horse  had  been  in  a  former  birth,  he
got  down  from  his  saddle  and,  prostrating  himself  before  the
excellent  horse,  said  to  him :  "  Thou  art  a  god ;  a  creature
like  thee  should  not  commit  treason  against  his  lord;  so  I
look  upon  thee  as  my  protector  ;    take  me  by  a  pleasant

1  More  literally,  "a  torrent  of  pride  and  kicking." The  D.  text  differs,

and  can  be  translated,  "sweating  from  (ardour  and)  pride." — n.m.I'.
*  See  note  in  Ocean  of  Story  ^  Vol.  I,  pp.  103-105. — n.m.p.
3  See  Ocean  of  Story,  Vol.  I,  p.  67n.— n.m.p.


r


THE  BRAHMAN  MONASTERY  57


path."  When  the  horse  heard  that,  he  was  full  of  regret,
remembering  his  former  birth,  and  mentally  acceded  to  the
king's  request ;  for  excellent  horses  are  divine  beings.^  Then
the  king  mounted  again,  and  the  horse  set  out  by  a  road
bordered  with  clear  cool  lakes,  that  took  away  the  fatigue  of
the  journey;  and  by  evening  the  splendid  horse  had  taken  the
king  another  hundred  yojanas^  and  brought  him  near  Ujjayini.
As  the  Sun,  beholding  his  horses,  though  seven  in  number,
excelled  by  this  courser's  speed,  had  sunk,  as  it  were  through
shame,  into  the  ravines  of  the  western  mountain,  and  as  the
darkness  was  diffused  abroad,  the  wise  horse,  seeing  that  the
gates  of  Ujjayini  were  closed,  and  that  the  burning- place
outside  the  gates  was  terrible  at  that  time,  carried  the  king
for  shelter  to  a  concealed  monastery  of  Brahmans,  that  was
situated  in  a  lonely  place  outside  the  walls.  And  the  King
Adityasena,  seeing  that  that  monastery  was  a  fit  place  to
spend  the  night  in,  as  his  horse  was  tired,  attempted  to  enter
it.  But  the  Brahmans  who  dwelt  there  opposed  his  entrance,
saying  that  he  must  be  some  keeper  of  a  cemetery  ^  or  some
thief.  And  out  they  poured  in  quarrelsome  mood,  with
savage  gestures,  for  Brahmans  who  live  by  chanting  the  Sama
Veda  are  the  home  of  timidity,  boorishness  and  ill  temper.

1  Grimm  in  his  Teutonic  Mythology  (translation  by  Stallybrass,  p.  392)
remarks ;  "  One  principal  mark  to  know  heroes  by  is  their  possessing  intelligent
horses,  and  conversing  with  them.  The  touching  conversation  of  Achilles
with  his  Xanthos  and  Balios  finds  a  complete  parallel  in  the  beautiful  Karling
legend  of  Bayard."  (This  is  most  pathetically  told  in  Simrock's  Deutsche
Volksb'ucher,  vol.  ii,  "  Die  Heimonskinder,"  see  especially  p.  54.)  Grimm
proceeds  to  cite  many  other  instances  from  European  literature.  See  also
note  3  to  the  twentieth  story  in  Miss  Stokes'  collection,  and  the  remarks  in

Bernhard  Schmidt's  Griechische  Mdrchen,  p.  237. Owing  to  the  great  value

of  war  horses  among  the  early  Aryans  we  find  them  an  object  of  worship  from
Vedic  days.  See  Rig-  Veda,  iv,  S3.  For  notes  on  horse- worship  and  horse-sacrifice
see  Crooke,  Folk-Lore  of  Northern  India,  vol.  ii,  pp.  204-208  and  the  numerous
references  given  on  those  pages.  When  horses  were  first  introduced  to  the
Central  American  Indians  by  the  Spaniards,  they  were  regarded  as  super-
natural beings  and  worshipped  as  such.  For  the  horse  in  mythology  see
Negelein  in  Teutonia,  ii ;  de  Gubernatis,  Zoological  Mythology,  vol.  i,  pp.  290-
296  and  330-355;  Pauly-Wissowa,  under  **  Aberglaube,"  p.  76;  and  Crooke,
"Some  Notes  on  Homeric  Folk-Lore,"  Folk-Lore,  vol.  xix,  19O8,  p.  65.— n.m.p.

2  See  Ocean  of  Story,  Vol.  I,  p.  Sn^. — n.m.p.

3  The  keeper  of  a  burning  or  burial  ground  would  be  impure.


58  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

While  they  were  clamouring,  a  virtuous  Brahman  named
Vidushaka,  the  bravest  of  the  brave,  came  out  from  that
monastery.  He  was  a  young  man  distinguished  for  strength
of  arm,  who  had  propitiated  the  Fire  by  his  austerities,  and
obtained  a  splendid  sword  from  that  divinity,  which  he  had
only  to  think  of  and  it  came  to  him.^  That  resolute  youth
Vidushaka,  seeing  that  king  of  distinguished  bearing,  who
had  arrived  by  night,  thought  to  himself  that  he  was  some
god  in  disguise.  And  the  well-disposed  youth  pushed  away
all  those  other  Brahmans,  and  bowing  humbly  before  the
king,  caused  him  to  enter  the  monastery.  And  when  he  had
rested,  and  had  the  dust  of  the  journey  washed  off  by  female
slaves,  Vidushaka  prepared  for  him  suitable  food.  And  he
took  the  saddle  off  that  excellent  horse  of  his,  and  relieved  its
fatigue  by  giving  it  grass  and  other  fodder.  And  after  he  had
made  a  bed  for  the  wearied  king,  he  said  to  him  :  "  My  lord,
I  will  guard  your  person,  so  sleep  in  peace."  And  while  the
king  slept  that  Brahman  kept  watch  the  whole  night  at  the
door  with  the  sword  of  the  Fire  God  in  his  hand,  that  came
to  him  on  his  thinking  of  it.

And  on  the  morrow  early  Vidushaka,  without  receiving
any  orders,  of  his  own  accord  saddled  the  horse  for  the  king
as  soon  as  he  awoke.  The  king  for  his  part  took  leave  of
him,  and  mounting  his  horse  entered  the  city  of  Ujjayini,
beheld  afar  off  by  the  people  bewildered  with  joy.  And  the
moment  he  entered,  his  subjects  approached  him  with  a  con-
fused hum  of  delight  at  his  return.  The  king  accompanied
by  his  ministers  entered  the  palace,  and  great  anxiety  left
the  breast  of  the  Queen  Tejasvati.  Immediately  grief
seemed  to  be  swept  away  from  the  city  by  the  rows  of  silken
flags  displayed  out  of  joy,  which  waved  in  the  wind  ;  and
the  queen  made  high  festival  until  the  end  of  the  day,  until
such  time  as  the  people  of  the  city  and  the  sun  were  red  as

^  This  summoning  by  thought  is  found  many  times  in  the  Ocean  of  Story.
It  is,  however,  a  supernatural  being  who  is  usually  thus  summoned.  Readers
will  remember  that  Vararuchi  had  made  a  friend  of  a  Rakshasa  who  appeared
on  thought  (Vol.  I,  p.  50).  In  the  Nights  the  jinn  is  summoned  by  the
rubbing  of  a  magic  article,  such  as  a  lamp,  ring,  etc.,  or  less  frequently  by
burning  hair  (contagious  magic).  See  Chauvin,  Bibliographie  des  Ouvrages
Arahes,  v,  .5. — n.m.p.


II


THE  EVIL  RESULTS  OF  SUDDEN  WEALTH    59

vermilion.^  And  the  next  day  the  King  Adityasena  had
Vidtishaka  summoned  from  the  monastery,  with  all  the
other  Brahmans.  And  as  soon  as  he  had  made  known  what
Vidushaka  *^^^  place  in  the  night,  he  gave  his  benefactor
wins  the  Vidushaka  a  thousand  villages.     And  the  grate-

Kings  Favour  f^j  ]^jj^g  ^\^^  ^^^^  ^y^^^  Brahman  an  umbrella  ^

and  an  elephant  and  appointed  him  his  domestic  chaplain,
so  that  he  was  beheld  with  great  interest  by  the  people.
So  Vidushaka  then  became  equal  to  a  chieftain;  for  how
can  a  benefit  conferred  on  great  persons  fail  of  bearing
fruit?

And  the  noble-minded  Vidushaka  shared  all  those  villages
which  he  had  received  from  the  king  with  the  Brahmans  who
lived  in  the  monastery.  And  he  remained  in  the  court  of
the  king  in  attendance  upon  him,  enjoying,  together  with  the
other  Brahmans,  the  income  of  those  villages.  But  as  time
went  on  those  other  Brahmans  began  striving  each  of  them
to  be  chief,  and  made  no  account  of  Vidushaka,  being  intoxi-
cated with  the  pride  of  wealth.  Dwelling  in  separate  parties,
seven  in  one  place,  with  their  mutual  rivalries  they  oppressed
the  villages  like  malignant  planets.  Vidushaka  regarded
their  excesses  with  scornful  indifference;  for  men  of  firm
mind  rightly  treat  with  contempt  men  of  little  soul.

Once  upon  a  time  a  Brahman  of  the  name  of  Chakradhara,
who  was  naturally  stern,  seeing  them  engaged  in  wrangling,
came  up  to  them.  Chakradhara,  though  he  was  one-eyed,
was  keen- sighted  enough  in  deciding  what  was  right  in  other
men's  affairs,  and  though  a  hunchback,  was  straightforward
enough  in  speech.  He  said  to  them  :  "  While  you  were
living  by  begging  you  obtained  this  windfall,  you  rascals  ;
then  why  do  you  ruin  the  villages  with  your  mutual  intoler-
ance ?  It  is  all  the  fault  of  Vidushaka,  who  has  permitted
you  to  act  thus  ;  so  you  may  be  certain  that  in  a  short  time
you  will  again  have  to  roam  about  begging.  For  a  situation
in  which  there  is  no  head,  and  everyone  has  to  shift  for

1  Probably  the  people  sprinkled  one  another  with  red  powder,  as  at  the

Holl  festival. For  a  description  of  this  see  Crooke,  "The  Holl:  A  Vernal

Festival  of  the  Hindus,"  Folk-Lore,  vol.  xxv,  1914,  pp.  55-83.— n.m.p.

2  See  Appendix  II,  pp.  263-272.— n.m.p.


60  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

himself  by  his  own  wits  as  chance  directs,^  is  better  than  one
of  disunion  under  many  heads,  in  which  all  affairs  go  to  rack
and  ruin.  So  take  my  advice  and  appoint  one  firm  man  as
your  head,  if  you  desire  unshaken  prosperity,  which  can  only
be  ensured  by  a  capable  governor."  On  hearing  that,  every
one  of  them  desired  the  headship  for  himself ;  thereupon  Cha-
kradhara  after  reflection  again  said  to  those  fools :  "As  you
are  so  addicted  to  mutual  rivalry  I  propose  to  you  a  basis  of
agreement.  In  the  neighbouring  cemetery  three  robbers  have
been  executed  by  impalement ;  whoever  is  daring  enough  to
cut  off  the  noses  of  those  three  by  night,  and  to  bring  them
here,  he  shall  be  your  head;  for  courage  merits  command."*
When  Chakradhara  made  this  proposal  to  the  Brahmans,
Vidushaka,  who  was  standing  near,  said  to  them  ;  "  Do  this  ;
what  is  there  to  be  afraid  of  ?  "     Then  the  Brahmans  said

Vidushaka  ^^  ^™  •  "  ^^  ^^^  ^^^  ^^^^  cuough  to  do  it ;  let
undertakes  a  whocvcr  is  able  do  it,  and  we  will  abide  by  the
daring  Task  agreement."  Then  Vidushaka  said:  "Well,  I
will  do  it.  I  will  cut  off  the  noses  of  those  robbers  by
night  and  bring  them  from  the  cemetery."  Then  those
fools,  thinking  the  task  a  difficult  one,  said  to  him  :  "If  you
do  this  you  shall  be  our  lord  ;  we  make  this  agreement."  ®
When  they  had  pronounced  this  agreement,  and  night  had
set  in,  Vidushaka  took  leave  of  those  Brahmans  and  went  to
the  cemetery.  So  the  hero  entered  the  cemetery,  awful  as
his  own  undertaking,  with  the  sword  of  the  Fire  God,  that
came  with  a  thought,  as  his  only  companion.  And  in  the
middle  of  that  cemetery,  where  the  cries  of  vultures  and
jackals  were  swelled  by  the  screams  of  witches  and  the  flames

^  The  D.  text  perhaps  makes  better  sense:  "better,  indeed,  is  a  state
without  a  ruler,  so  that  their  prosperity  merely  depends  on  Fate,  than  one
with  many  discordant  rulers,  which  entails  the  scattering  of  all  their  wealth."
See  Speyer,  op,  ciL,  p.  100. — n.m.p.

2  So  in  Grimm's  Marchen,  "  Von  einem  der  auszog  das  Fiirchten  zu  lernen,"
the  youth  is  recommended  to  sit  under  the  gallows  where  seven  men  have  been
executed.  Cf.  also  the  story  of  "The  Shroud"  in  Ralston's  Russian  Folk-
Tales,  p.  307. Cf.  also  the  extraordinary  tale  of  Bellephoron  in  Apuleius'

Golden  Ass,  eh.  xi. — n.m.p.

3  Literally,  "  we  consider  ourselves  bound  by  this  word."     See  Speyer,

op.  cit.,  p.   100. — N.M.P.


THE  IMPALED  ROBBERS  61

of  the  funeral  pyres  were  reinforced  by  the  fires  in  the  mouths
of  the  fire-breathing  demons,  he  beheld  those  impaled  men
with  their  faces  turned  up,  as  if  through  fear  of  having  their
noses  cut  off.  And  when  he  approached  them  those  three,
being  tenanted  by  demons,  struck  him  with  their  fists  ^ ;
and  he  for  his  part  slashed  them  in  return  with  his  sword,
for  Fear  has  not  learned  to  bestir  herself  in  the  breast  of
the  resolute.    Accordingly  the  corpses  ceased  to  be  convulsed

^  Cf.  Ralston's  account  of  the  vampire  as  represented  in  the  Skazkas :
"It  is  as  a  vitalised  corpse  that  the  visitor  from  the  other  world  comes  to
trouble  mankind,  often  subject  to  human  appetites,  constantly  endowed  with
more  than  human  strength  and  malignity"  (Ralston's  Russian  Folk-Tales,
p.  306).  The  belief  that  the  dead  rose  from  the  tomb  in  the  form  of  vampires
appears  to  have  existed  in  Chaldaea  and  Babylon.  Lenormant  observes  in  his
Chaldosan  Magic  and  Sorcery  (English  translation,  p.  37) :  "  In  a  fragment  of
the  Mythological  epopee  which  is  traced  upon  a  tablet  in  the  British  Museum,
and  relates  the  descent  of  Ishtar  into  Hades,  we  are  told  that  the  goddess,
when  she  arrived  at  the  doors  of  the  infernal  regions,  called  to  the  porter
whose  duty  it  was  to  open  them,  saying  ;

'  Porter,  open  thy  door  ;
Open  thy  door  that  I  may  enter.

If  thou  dost  not  open  the  door,  and  if  I  cannot  enter,
I  will  attack  the  door,  I  will  break  down  its  bars,
I  will  attack  the  enclosure,  I  will  leap  over  its  fences  by  force ;
I  will  cause  the  dead  to  rise  and  devour  the  living,
I  will  give  the  dead  power  over  the  living.'  "

The  same  belief  appears  also  to  have  existed  in  Egypt.  The  same  author
observes  (p.  92) :  "  These  formulae  also  kept  the  body  from  becoming,  during
its  separation  from  the  soul,  the  prey  of  some  wicked  spirit  which  would  enter,
reanimate,  and  cause  it  to  rise  again  in  the  form  of  a  vampire.  For,  according
to  the  Egyptian  belief,  the  possessing  spirits,  and  the  spectres  which  frightened
or  tormented  the  living,  were  but  the  souls  of  the  condemned  returning  to

earth,  before  undergoing  the  annihilation  of  the  '  second  death.'  " Another

version  of  the  above  translation  of  the  attempt  of  Ishtar  to  get  into  Aralu
(Sheol  or  Hades)  is  to  be  found  in  Morris  Jastrow's  The  Religion  of  Babylonia
and  Assyria,  1898,  pp.  568-569.  There  are  seven  doors,  and  at  each  Ishtar  is
forced  to  abandon  some  portion  of  her  clothing  and  ornaments,  until  finally
she  is  entirely  naked.  This  is  symbolic  of  the  gradual  decay  of  vegetation
(see  Jastrow,  op.  cit.,  p.  570).  The  whole  reference,  however,  although  very
interesting,  has  little  to  do  with  vampires.  For  these  see  R.  Campbell
Thompson,  The  Devils  and  Evil  Spirits  of  Babylonia,  1903-1904,  which  contains
numerous  Babylonian  and  Assyrian  incantations  against  vampires ;  while  for
Indian  vampires  and  other  evil  spirits  see  W.  Crooke,  "  Demons  and  Spirits
(Indian),"  Hastings'  Ency.  Rel.  Eth.,\o\.  iv,  pp.  6OI-6O8. — n.m.p.


62  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

with  demons,  and  then  the  successful  hero  cut  off  their  noses
and  brought  them  away,  binding  them  up  in  his  garment.

And  as  he  was  returning  he  beheld  in  that  cemetery  a
religious  mendicant  sitting  on  a  corpse  muttering  charms,
and  through  curiosity  to  have  the  amusement  of  seeing  what
he  was  doing  he  stood  concealed  behind  that  mendicant.  In
a  moment  the  corpse  under  the  mendicant  gave  forth  a  hissing
sound,  and  flames  issued  from  its  mouth,  and  from  its  navel
mustard-seeds.  And  then  the  mendicant  took  the  mustard-
seeds,  and  rising  up  struck  the  corpse  with  the  fiat  of  his
hand,  and  the  corpse,  which  was  tenanted  by  a  mighty
demon,  stood  up,  and  then  that  mendicant  mounted  ^  on  its
shoulder  and  began  to  depart  at  a  rapid  rate,  and  Vidushaka
silently  followed  him  unobserved,  and  after  he  had  gone  a
short  distance  Vidushaka  saw  an  empty  temple  with  an
image  of  Durga  in  it.  Then  the  mendicant  got  down  from
the  shoulder  of  the  demon,  and  entered  the  inner  shrine  of  the
temple,  while  the  demon  fell  fiat  on  the  earth.  But  Vidu-
shaka was  present  also,  contriving  to  watch  the  mendicant,
unperceived  by  him.  The  mendicant  worshipped  the  goddess
there  and  offered  the  following  prayer : — "If  thou  art  pleased
with  me,  O  Goddess,  grant  me  the  desired  boon.  If  not,  I
will  propitiate  thee  with  the  sacrifice  of  myself."  When
the  mendicant,  intoxicated  with  the  success  of  his  powerful
spells,  said  this,  a  voice  coming  from  the  inner  shrine  thus
addressed  the  mendicant :  "  Bring  here  the  maiden  daughter
of  King  Adityasena,  and  offer  her  as  a  sacrifice,  then  thou
shaft  obtain  thy  desire."  When  the  mendicant  heard  this  he
went  out,  and  striking  once  more  with  his  hand  the  demon,^
who  hissed  at  the  blow,  made  him  stand  upright.  And,
mounting  on  the  shoulder  of  the  demon,  from  whose  mouth
issued  flames  of  fire,  he  flew  away  through  the  air  to  bring
the  princess.

Vidushaka  seeing  all  this  from  his  place  of  concealment

^  Cf.  the  way  in  which  the  witch  treats  the  corpse  of  her  son  in  the
sixth  book  of  the  jEthiopica  of  Heliodonis,  ch.  xiv,  and  Lucan's  Pharsalia,
Book  VI,  11.  754-757.

^  I.e.  the   corpse  tenanted  by  the  Vetala   or  demon. See   Ocean  of

Story,  Appendix  I,  Vol.  I,  p.  206;   and  Sir  Richard  Temple's  Foreword  to

Vol.   I,  p.  XXV. N.M.P.


THE  ABDUCTION  OF  THE  PRINCESS  63

thought  to  himself :  "  What !  shall  he  slay  the  king's
daughter  while  I  am  alive  ?  I  will  remain  here  until  the
scoundrel  returns."  Having  formed  this  resolve,  Vidushaka
remained  there  in  concealment.  But  the  mendicant  entered
the  female  apartments  of  the  palace  through  the  window,
and  found  the  king's  daughter  asleep,  as  it  was  night.  And
he  returned,  all  clothed  in  darkness,  through  the  air,  bringing
with  him  the  princess,  who  illuminated  with  her  beauty  the
region,  as  Rahu  ^  carries  off  a  digit  of  the  moon.  And  bearing
along  with  him  that  princess,  who  exclaimed  in  her  grief,
"  Alas  !  my  father  !  Alas  !  my  mother !  "  he  descended  from
the  sky  into  that  very  temple  of  the  goddess.  And  then,
dismissing  the  demon,  he  entered  with  that  pearl  of  maidens
into  the  inner  shrine  of  the  goddess,  and  while  he  was  prepar-
And  saves  ^^S  ^o  slay  the  princess  there  Vidushaka  came  in
the  Life  of  with  his  sword  drawn.  He  said  to  the  mendi-
the  Princess      ^^^^  .  cc  yin^jj^  f     j)q  y^^  ^jg]^  ^^  smitc  a  jasmiuc

flower  with  a  thunderbolt,  in  that  you  desire  to  employ  a
weapon  against  this  tender  form  ?  "  And  then  he  seized
the  trembling  mendicant  by  the  hair,  and  cut  off  his  head.
And  he  consoled  the  princess,  distracted  by  fear,  who  clung
to  him  closely  as  she  began  to  recognise  him.

And  then  the  hero  thought :  "  How  can  I  manage  during
the  night  to  convey  this  princess  from  this  place  to  the
harem  ?  "  Then  a  voice  from  the  air  addressed  him  :  "  Hear
this,  O  Vidushaka  !  The  mendicant  whom  thou  hast  slain
had  in  his  power  a  great  demon  and  some  grains  of  mustard-
seed.  Thence  arose  his  desire  to  be  ruler  of  the  earth  and
marry  the  daughters  of  kings,  and  so  the  fool  has  this  day
been  baffled.  Therefore,  thou  hero,  take  those  mustard-
seeds,  in  order  that  for  this  night  only  thou  may  est  be  enabled
to  travel  through  the  air."  Thus  the  aerial  voice  addressed
the  delighted  Vidushaka  ;  for  even  the  gods  often  take  such  a
hero  under  their  protection.  Then  he  took  in  his  hand  those
grains  of  mustard-seed  from  the  corner  of  the  mendicant's
robe,  and  the  princess  in  his  arms.

And  while  he  was  setting  out  from  that  temple  of  the
goddess  another  voice  sounded  in  the  air  :    "  Thou  must

^  See  note  at  the  end  of  this  chapter. — n.m.p.


64  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

return  to  this  very  temple  of  the  goddess  at  the  end  of  a
month  ;  thou  must  not  forget  this,  O  hero  1  "  When  he
heard  this,  Vidushaka  said  :  "  I  will  do  so  " — and  by  the
favour  of  the  goddess  he  immediately  flew  up  into  the  air,*
bearing  with  him  the  princess.  And  flying  through  the  air
he  quickly  placed  that  princess  in  her  private  apartments,
and  said  to  her  after  she  had  recovered  her  spirits  :  "  To-
morrow morning  I  shall  not  be  able  to  fly  through  the  air,
and  so  all  men  will  see  me  going  out,  so  I  must  depart  now."
When  he  said  this  to  her,  the  maiden,  being  alarmed,  answered
him  ;  *'  When  you  are  gone,  this  breath  of  mine  will  leave  my
body,  overcome  with  fear.  Therefore  do  not  depart,  great-
souled  hero  ;  once  more  save  my  life  ;  for  the  good  make  it
their  business  from  their  birth  to  carry  out  every  task  they
have  undertaken."

When  the  brave  Vidushaka  heard  that  he  reflected  :  "If
I  go  and  leave  this  maiden  she  may  possibly  die  of  fear  ;  and
then  what  kind  of  loyalty  to  my  sovereign  shall  I  have
exhibited  ?  "  Thinking  thus  he  remained  all  night  in  those
female  apartments,  and  he  gradually  dropped  off  to  sleep,
wearied  with  toil  and  watching.  But  the  princess  in  her
terror  passed  the  night  without  sleeping ;  and  even  when  the
morning  came  she  did  not  wake  up  the  sleeping  Vidushaka,*
as  her  mind  was  made  tender  by  love,  and  she  said  to  herself  :
"  Let  him  rest  a  little  longer."  Then  the  servants  of  the
harem  came  in  and  saw  him,  and  in  a  state  of  consternation
they  went  and  told  the  king.  The  king  for  his  part  sent  the
warder  to  discover  the  truth,  and  he  entering  beheld  Vidu-
shaka there.  And  he  heard  the  whole  story  from  the  mouth
of  the  princess,  and  went  and  repeated  it  all  to  the  king.
And  the  king,  knowing  the  excellent  character  of  Vidushaka,
was  immediately  bewildered,  wondering  what  it  could  mean.
And  he  had  Vidushaka  brought  from  his  daughter's  apart-
ment, escorted  all  the  way  by  her  soul,  which  followed  him
out  of  affection.

*  This  art  has  always  been  regarded  in  Hindu  mythology  as  the  mark
of  dignity  and  a  necessary  adjunct  to  kingship.  See  A.  M.  Hocart,  "  Flying^
through  the  Air,"  Ind.  Ant.,  vol.  lii,  1923,  pp.  80-82. — n.m.p.

*  Cf.  Simrock's  Deutsche  Volkshiicher,  vol.  iii,  p.  SQ^.


THE  FORGOTTEN  APPOINTMENT  65

And  when  he  arrived,  the  king  asked  him  what  had
taken  place,  and  Vidushaka  told  him  the  whole  story  from
the  beginning,  and  showed  him  the  noses  of  the  robbers
His  Conduct  fastened  up  in  the  end  of  his  garment,  and  the
satisfactorily  mustard-seeds  which  had  been  in  the  possession
explaiiied  ^^  ^^^  mendicant,  different  from  those  found  on
earth.  The  high-minded  monarch  suspected  that  Vidu-
shaka's  story  was  true  from  these  circumstances,  so  he  had
all  the  Brahmans  of  the  monastery  brought  before  him,
together  with  Chakradhara,  and  asked  about  the  original
cause  of  the  whole  matter.  And  he  went  in  person  to  the
cemetery  and  saw  those  men  with  their  noses  cut  off,  and
that  base  mendicant  with  his  neck  severed,  and  then  he
reposed  complete  confidence  in,  and  was  much  pleased  with,
the  skilful  and  successful  Vidushaka,  who  had  saved  his
daughter's  life.  And  he  gave  him  his  own  daughter  on  the
spot.  What  do  generous  men  withhold  when  pleased  with
their  benefactors  ?  Surely  the  Goddess  of  Prosperity,^  out
of  love  for  the  lotus,  dwelt  in  the  hand  of  the  princess,  since
Vidushaka  obtained  great  good  fortune  after  he  had  received
it  in  the  marriage  ceremony.

Then  Vidushaka,  enjoying  a  distinguished  reputation,
and  engaged  in  attending  upon  the  sovereign,  lived  with  that
beloved  wife  in  the  palace  of  King  Adityasena.  Then  as
the  days  went  on,  once  upon  a  time  the  princess,  impelled  by
some  supernatural  power,  said  at  night  to  Vidushaka  :  "  My
lord,  you  remember  that  when  you  were  in  the  temple  of  the
goddess  a  divine  voice  said  to  you  :  '  Come  here  at  the  end
of  a  month.'  To-day  is  the  last  day  of  the  month  and  you
have  forgotten  it."  When  his  beloved  said  this  to  him,
Vidushaka  was  delighted,  and  recalled  it  to  mind,  and  said
to  his  wife  :  "  Well  remembered  on  thy  part,  fair  one  !  But
I  had  forgotten  it."  And  then  he  embraced  her  by  way  of
reward.

And   then,  while   she  was   asleep,  he   left   the  women's

1  Lakshml  or  Sri,  the  Goddess  of  Prosperity,  appeared  after  the  Churning
of  the  Ocean  with  a  lotus  in  her  hand.  According  to  another  story  she  is
said  to  have  appeared  at  the  Creation  floating  on  the  expanded  leaves  ot
a  lotus-flower.     The  hand  of  a  lady  is  often  compared  to  a  lotus,

VOL.   II.  E


66  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

apartments  by  night,  and  in  high  spirits  he  went  armed
with  his  sword  to  the  temple  of  the  goddess ;  then  he
exclaimed  outside :  "  I,  Vidushaka,  am  arrived."  And  he
His  reiuni  to  heard  this  speech  uttered  by  someone  inside :
the  Temple  ''  Come  in,  Vidushaka."  Thereupon  he  entered
and  beheld  a  heavenly  palace,  and  inside  it  a  lady  of
heavenly  beauty  with  a  heavenly  retinue,  dispelling  with  her
brightness  the  darkness,  like  a  night  set  on  fire,  looking  as
if  she  were  the  medicine  to  restore  to  life  the  God  of  Love
consumed  with  the  fire  of  the  wrath  of  Siva.  He,  wondering
what  it  could  all  mean,  was  joyfully  received  by  her  in  person,
with  a  welcome  full  of  affection  and  great  respect.  And  when
he  had  sat  down  and  had  gained  confidence  from  seeing  her
affection,  he  became  eager  to  understand  the  real  nature  of
the  adventure,  and  she  said  to  him  :  "  I  am  a  maiden  of  the
Vidyadhara  race,  of  high  descent,  and  my  name  is  Bhadra,
and  as  I  was  roaming  about  at  my  will  I  saw  you  here  on  that
occasion.  And  as  my  mind  was  attracted  by  your  virtues,  I
uttered  at  that  time  that  voice  which  seemed  to  come  from
someone  invisible,  in  order  that  you  might  return.  And
to-day  I  bewildered  the  princess  by  employing  my  magic
skill,  so  that  under  my  impulse  she  revived  your  remembrance
of  this  matter,  and  for  your  sake  I  am  here,  and  so,  handsome
hero,  I  surrender  myself  to  you ;  marry  me."  The  noble
Vidushaka,  when  the  Vidyadhari  Bhadra  addressed  him  in
this  style,  agreed  that  moment,  and  married  her  by  the
gdndharva  ceremony.  Then  he  remained  in  that  very  place,
having  obtained  celestial  joys,  the  fruits  of  his  own  valour,
living  with  that  beloved  wife.

Meanwhile  the  princess  woke  up  when  the  night  came  to
an  end,  and  not  seeing  her  husband,  was  immediately  plunged
in  despair.  So  she  got  up  and  went  with  tottering  steps  to
her  mother,  all  trembling,  with  her  eyes  flooded  with  gushing
tears.  And  she  told  her  mother  that  her  husband  had  gone
away  somewhere  in  the  night,  and  was  full  of  self-reproach,
fearing  that  she  had  been  guilty  of  some  fault.  Then  her
mother  was  distracted  owing  to  her  love  for  her  daughter,
and  so  in  course  of  time  the  king  heard  of  it,  and  came
there,  and  fell  into  a  state  of  the  utmost  anxiety.     When  his


THE  FRUITLESS  SEARCH  67

daughter  said  to  him,  "  I  know  my  husband  has  gone  to  the
temple  of  the  goddess  outside  the  cemetery,"  the  king  went
there  in  person.  But  he  was  not  able  to  find  Vidtishaka
there,  in  spite  of  all  his  searching,  for  he  was  concealed  by
virtue  of  the  magic  science  of  the  Vidyadhari.  Then  the
king  returned,  and  his  daughter  in  despair  determined  to
leave  the  body,  but  while  she  was  thus  minded  some  wise
man  came  to  her  and  said  this  to  her  :  "  Do  not  fear  any
misfortune,  for  that  husband  of  thine  is  living  in  the  enjoy-
ment of  heavenly  felicity,  and  will  return  to  thee  shortly."
When  she  heard  that,  the  princess  retained  her  life,  which
was  kept  in  her  by  the  hope  of  her  husband's  return,  that
had  taken  deep  root  in  her  heart.

Then,  while  Vidushaka  was  living  there,  a  certain  friend
of  his  beloved,  named  Yogesvari,  came  to  Bhadra,  and  said
to  her  in  secret  :  "  My  friend,  the  Vidyadharas  are  angry
with  you  because  you  live  with  a  man,  and  they  seek  to  do
you  an  injury  ;  therefore  leave  this  place.  There  is  a  city
called  Karkotaka  on  the  shore  of  the  eastern  sea,  and  beyond
that  there  is  a  sanctifying  stream  named  Sitoda,  and  after
you  cross  that,  there  is  a  great  mountain  named  Udaya,^  the
land  of  the  Siddhas,^  which  the  Vidyadharas  may  not  invade  ;
go  there  immediately,  and  do  not  be  anxious  about  the  be-
loved mortal  whom  you  leave  here,  for  before  you  start  you
can  tell  all  this  to  him,  so  that  he  shall  be  able  afterwards
to  journey  there  with  speed."  When  her  friend  said  this  to
her,  Bhadra  was  overcome  with  fear,  and  though  attached

^  Udaya  is  a  Sanskrit  word  meaning  "rising,"  "appearance,"  and  then
as  the  eastern  mountain  behind  which  tlie  sun  was  supposed  to  rise.  Writing
to  me  on  the  subject  the  Rev.  A.  S.  Geden  says  that  in  this  sense  compounded
words  like  udayagiri,  udaijaparvata,  "  eastern  mountain,"  were  probably  more
common  than  the  simple  term  udaya,  and  he  does  not  remember  the
word  being  found  with  this  meaning  in  the  Vedas.  It  does  not  play  a
conspicuous  part  in  Hindu  classical  mythology,  and  is,  of  course,  distinct
from  Meru,  the  world  mountain,  and  Mandara,  the  mountain  used  at  the
Churning  of  the  Ocean.  The  myth  would  seem  to  have  arisen  in  the
Himalayan  country,  or  behind  the  Hindu  Kush,  where  the  sun  did  actually
appear  behind  a  mountain  in  the  east.  It  could  hardly  have  suggested
itself  on  a  dead  plain  like  that  of  the  Ganges.    See  Bohtlingk  and  Roth. — n.m.p.

2  I.e.  semi-divine  beings  supposed  to  be  of  great  purity  and  holiness.

See  Vol.  I,  Appendix  1,  p.  204. — n.m.p.


68  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

to  Vidushaka,  she  consented  to  do  as  her  friend  advised.
So  she  told  her  scheme  to  Vidushaka,  and  providently  gave
him  her  ring,  and  then  disappeared  at  the  close  of  the  night.
And  Vidushaka  immediately  found  himself  in  the  empty
temple  of  the  goddess,  in  which  he  had  been  before,  and
no  Bhadra  and  no  palace.  Remembering  the  delusion  pro-
duced by  Bhadra's  magic  skill,  and  beholding  the  ring,
Vidushaka  was  overpowered  by  a  paroxysm  of  despair  and
wonder.  And  remembering  her  speech  as  if  it  were  a  dream,
he  reflected  :  *'  Before  she  left,  she  assigned  as  a  place  of
meeting  the  mountain  of  the  sun-rising;  so  I  must  quickly
go  there  to  find  her  ;  but  if  I  am  seen  by  the  people  in  this
state,  the  king  will  not  let  me  go  :  so  I  will  employ  a  strata-
gem in  this  matter,  in  order  that  I  may  accomplish  my
object."

So  reflecting,  the  wise  man  assumed  another  appearance,
and  went  out  from  that  temple  with  tattered  clothes,  be-
grimed with  dust,  exclaiming :  "  Ah,  Bhadra  !  Ah,  Bhadra  !  "
And  immediately  the  people  who  lived  in  that  place,  behold-
ing him,  raised  a  shout :  "  Here  is  Vidushaka  found  !  "  And
the  king  hearing  of  it  came  out  from  his  palace  in  person,
and  seeing  Vidushaka  in  such  a  state,  conducting  himself
like  a  madman,  he  laid  hold  on  him  and  took  him  back  to
his  palace.  When  he  was  there,  whatever  his  servants  and
connections,  who  were  full  of  affection,  said  to  him  he
answered  only  by  exclaiming  :  "  Ah,  Bhadra  !  Ah,  Bhadra  !  "
And  when  he  was  anointed  with  unguents  prescribed  by
the  physicians,  he  immediately  defiled  his  body  with  much
cinder- dust ;  and  the  food  which  the  princess  out  of  love
offered  to  him  with  her  own  hands  he  instantly  threw  down
and  trampled  underfoot.  And  in  this  condition  Vidushaka
remained  there  some  days,  without  taking  interest  in  any-
thing, tearing  his  own  clothes,  and  playing  the  madman.
And  Adityasena  thought  to  himself :  "  His  condition  is  past
cure,  so  what  is  the  use  of  torturing  him  ?  He  may  perhaps
die,  and  then  I  shall  be  guilty  of  the  death  of  a  Brahman,
whereas  if  he  roams  about  at  his  will  he  may  possibly  recover
in  course  of  time."     So  he  let  him  go.

Then  the  hero  Vidushaka,  being  allowed  to  roam  where


VIDtTSHAKA  ARRIVES  AT  PAUNDRAVARDHANA    69

he  liked,  set  out  the  next  day  at  his  leisure  to  find  Bhadra,
taking  with  him  the  ring.  And  as  he  journeyed  on  day  by
day  towards  the  East,  he  at  last  reached  a  city  named
rr         .         Paundravardhana,^    which    lay    in    his    way    as

He  goes  in  •  •  '  *'  •^

search  of  he  travelled  on  ;  there  he  entered  the  house  of
Bhadra  ^  certain  aged  Brahman  woman,  saying  to  her  :

"  Mother,  I  wish  to  stop  here  one  night."  And  she  gave
him  a  lodging  and  entertained  him,  and  shortly  after  she
approached  him,  full  of  inward  sorrow,  and  said  to  him  :
"  My  son,  I  hereby  give  thee  all  this  house,  therefore  receive
it,  since  I  cannot  now  live  any  longer."  He,  astonished,  said
to  her  :  "  Why  do  you  speak  thus  ?  "  Then  she  said  :
"  Listen,  I  will  tell  you  the  whole  story,"  and  so  continued
as  follows  :  —

"My  son,  in  this  city  there  is  a  king  named  Devasena,
and  to  him  there  was  born  a  daughter,  the  ornament  of  the
earth.  The  affectionate  king  said,  '  I  have  with  difficulty
Bnkkhalah-  obtained  this  one  daughter,'  so  he  gave  her  the
dki'ka  and  the  name  of  Duhkhalabdhika.  In  course  of  time,
Rdkshasa  when  shc  had  grown  up,  the  king  gave  her  in
marriage  to  the  King  of  Kachchhapa,  whom  he  had  brought
to  his  own  palace.^  The  King  of  Kachchhapa  entered
at  night  the  private  apartments  of  his  bride,  and  died
the  very  first  time  he  entered  them.  Then  the  king,
much  distressed,  again  gave  his  daughter  in  marriage  to
another  king  ;  he  also  perished  in  the  same  way  ^ :  and  when
through  fear  of  the  same  fate  other  kings  did  not  wish  to
marry  her,  the  king  gave  this  order  to  his  general  :  '  You
must  bring  a  man  in  turn  from  every  single  house  in  this
country,  so  that  one  shall  be  supplied  every  day,  and  he
must  be  a  Brahman  or  a  Kshatriya.  And  after  you  have
brought  the  man,  you  must  cause  him  to  enter  by  night  into

1  General  Cunningham  identifies  Paundravardhana  with  the  modern
Pubna.

^  There  is  a  curious  parallel  to  this  story  in  Taranatha's  History  of
Buddhism,  translated  into  German  by  Schiefner,  p.  203.  Here  a  Rakshasi
assumes  the  form  of  a  former  king's  wife,  and  kills  all  the  subjects,  one
after  another,  as  fast  as  they  are  elected  to  the  royal  dignity.

3  Compare  the  apocryphal  Book  of  Tobit.  See  p.  30  of  Lenormant's
Chaldcean  Magic  and  Sorcery,  English  translation.


70  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

the  apartment  of  my  daughter  ;  let  us  see  how  many  will
perish  in  this  way,  and  how  long  it  will  go  on.  Whoever
escapes  shall  afterwards  ^  become  her  husband  ;  for  it  is  im-
possible to  bar  the  course  of  Fate,  whose  dispensations  are
mysterious.'  The  general  having  received  this  order  from
the  king,  brings  a  man  every  day  in  turn  from  every  house
in  this  city,  and  in  this  way  hundreds  of  men  have  met  their
death  in  the  apartment  of  the  princess. ^  Now  I,  whose
merits  in  a  former  life  must  have  been  deficient,  have  one
son  here  ;  his  turn  has  to-day  arrived  to  go  to  the  palace  to
meet  his  death  ;  and  I  being  deprived  of  him  must  to-morrow
enter  the  fire.  Therefore,  while  I  am  still  alive,  I  give  to
you,  a  worthy  object,  all  my  house  with  my  own  hand,  in
order  that  my  lot  may  not  again  be  unfortunate  in  my  next
birth."

When  she  had  said  this,  the  resolute  Vidushaka  answered  :
"  If  this  is  the  whole  matter,  do  not  be  despondent,  mother.
I  will  go  there  to-day  :  let  your  only  son  live.  And  do  not
feel  any  commiseration  with  regard  to  me,  so  as  to  say  to
yourself,  '  Why  should  I  be  the  cause  of  this  man's  death  ?  '
for  owing  to  the  magical  power  which  I  possess  I  run  no
risk  by  going  there."  When  Vidushaka  had  said  this,  that
Brahman  woman  said  to  him  :  "  Then  you  must  be  some
god  come  here  as  a  reward  for  my  virtue,  so  cause  me,  my
son,  to  recover  life,  and  yourself  to  gain  felicity."  When  she
had  expressed  her  approval  of  his  project  in  these  words,
he  went  in  the  evening  to  the  apartment  of  the  princess,
together  with  a  servant  appointed  by  the  general  to  conduct
him.  There  he  beheld  the  princess  flushed  with  the  pride
of  youth,  like  a  creeper  weighed  down  with  the  burden  of  its
abundant  flowers  that  had  not  yet  been  gathered.     Accord-

^  As  the  word  hhavlyyati  is  future,  the  addition  of  pascal  (afterwards)
seems  unnecessary.  It  is,  moreover,  not  found  in  the  D.  text,  which  is
rendered  by  Speyer :  "who  survives  in  this  (trial)  shall  become  her  husband."

N.M.P.

2  For  reference  to  such  tales  of  the  Perseus  and  Andromeda  type  see
Frazer,  Pausanias,  vol.  ix,  26,  27  ;  I.  V.  Zingerle,  Kinder-  und  Hammarchen  aus
Tirol,  Nos.  8,  21,  35,  pp.  35  et  seq.,  100  et  seq.,  and  178  et  seq. ;  G.  F.  Abbott,
Macedonian  Folk-Lore,  p.  270  et  seq. ;  and  especially  E.  S.  Hartland,  The  Legend
of  Perseus,  1894-1896.— n.m.p.


THE  MYSTERY  SOLVED  71

ingly,  when  night  came,  the  princess  went  to  her  bed,  and
Vidushaka  remained  awake  in  her  apartment,  holding  in  his
hand  the  sword  of  the  Fire  God,  which  came  to  him  with  a
thought,  saying  to  himself ;  "I  will  find  out  who  it  is  that
slays  men  here."  And  when  people  were  all  asleep,  he  saw
a  terrible  Rakshasa  coming  from  the  side  of  the  apartment
where  the  entrance  was,  having  first  opened  the  door ;  and
the  Rakshasa,  standing  at  the  entrance,  stretched  forward
into  the  room  an  arm,  which  had  been  the  swift  wand  of
Death  to  hundreds  of  men.  But  Vidushaka,  in  wrath
springing  forward,  cut  off  suddenly  the  arm  of  the  Rakshasa
with  one  stroke  of  his  sword.^  And  the  Rakshasa  immedi-
ately fled  away  through  fear  of  his  exceeding  valour,  with
the  loss  of  one  arm,  never  again  to  return.  When  the
princess  awoke,  she  saw  the  severed  arm  lying  there,  and
she  was  terrified,  delighted,  and  astonished  at  the  same  time.
And  in  the  morning  the  King  Devasena  saw  the  arm  of
the  Rakshasa,  which  had  fallen  down  after  it  was  cut  off,
lying  at  the  door  of  his  daughter's  apartments  ;  in  this  way
Vidushaka — as  if  to  say,  "  Henceforth  no  other  men  must
enter  here  " — fastened  the  door  as  it  were  with  a  long  bar.^
Accordingly  the  delighted  king  gave  to  Vidushaka,  who
possessed  this  divine  power,  his  daughter  and  much  wealth  ;
and  Vidushaka  dwelt  there  some  days  with  this  fair  one,  as
if  with  prosperity  incarnate  in  bodily  form.

But  one  day  he  left  the  princess  while  asleep,  and  set
out  at  night  in  haste  to  find  his  Bhadra.  And  the  princess
in  the  morning  was  afflicted  at  not  seeing  him,  but  she  was
He  continues  co^iforted  by  her  father  with  the  hope  of  his
his  search  for  return.  Vidushaka,  journeying  on  day  by  day,
Bhadra  ^^  j^^^  reached   the  city  of  Tamralipta,  not  far

from  the  eastern  sea.  There  he  joined  himself  to  a
certain  merchant,  named  Skandhadasa,^  who  desired  to
cross  the  sea.     In  his  company,  embarking  on  a  ship  laden

1  Ralston  in  his  Russian  Folk-Tales,  p.  270,  compares  this  incident  with
one  in  a  Polish  story,  and  in  the  Russian  story  of  "  The  Witch  Girl."  In
both  the  arm  of  the  destroyer  is  cut  off.

^  I  read  iva ;  the  arm  was  the  long  bar,  and  the  whole  passage  is  an
instance  of  the  rhetorical  figure  called  utprekshd.

3  A  better  reading  is  Skandadasa,  with  the  D.  text. — n.m.p.


72  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

with  much  wealth  belonging  to  the  merchant,  he  set  out
on  the  ocean  path.  Then  that  ship  was  stopped  suddenly
when  it  had  reached  the  middle  of  the  ocean,  as  if  it  were
held  by  something.  And  when  it  did  not  move,  though  the
sea  was  propitiated  with  jewels,^  that  merchant  Skandhadasa
being  grieved,  said  this  :  "  Whosoever  releases  this  ship  of
mine  which  is  detained,  to  him  I  will  give  half  my  own
wealth  and  my  daughter."  The  resolute-souled  Vidushaka,
when  he  heard  that,  said  :  "I  will  descend  into  the  water
of  the  sea  and  search  it,  and  I  will  set  free  in  a  moment  this
ship  of  yours  which  is  stopped  :  but  you  must  support  me
by  ropes  fastened  round  my  body.  And  the  moment  the
ship  is  set  free,  you  must  draw  me  up  out  of  the  midst  of
the  sea  by  the  supporting  ropes."

The  merchant  welcomed  this  speech  with  a  promise  to
do  what  he  asked,  and  the  steersmen  bound  ropes  under  his
armpits.  Supported  in  that  way,  Vidushaka  descended  in
the  sea  ;  a  brave  man  never  desponds  when  the  moment
for  action  has  arrived.  So  taking  in  his  hand  the  sword  of
the  Fire  God,  that  came  to  him  with  a  thought,  the  hero  de-
scended into  the  midst  of  the  sea  under  the  ship.  And  there
he  saw  a  giant  asleep,  and  he  saw  that  the  ship  was  stopped
by  his  leg.  So  he  immediately  cut  off  his  leg  with  his  sword,
and  at  once  the  ship  moved  on  freed  from  its  impediment.^
When  the  wicked  merchant  saw  that,  he  cut  the  ropes
by  which  Vidushaka  was  supported,  through  desire  to  save
the  wealth  he  had  promised  him,  and  went  swiftly  to  the
other  shore  of  the  ocean,  vast  as  his  own  avarice,  in
the  ship  which  had  thus  been  set  free.  Vidushaka  for  his
part,  being  in  the  midst  of  the  sea  with  the  supporting
ropes  cut,  rose  to  the  surface,  and  seeing  how  matters
stood  he  calmly  reflected  for  a  moment  :  "  Why  did  the
merchant  do  this  ?  Surely  in  this  case  the  proverb  is
applicable :  '  Ungrateful  men  blinded  by  desire  of  gain
cannot  see  a  benefit.'     Well,  it  is  now  high  time  for  me  to

^  For  collected  evidence  of  sacrifices  to  water-spirits  see  Frazer,  Golden
Bough,  vol.  ii,  pp.  1.55-170. — n.m.p.

2  Cf.  the  freeing  of  Argo  by  Hercules  cutting  off  Pallair's  arm  in  the
Togail  Trot,  ed.  Stokes,  p.  67.


VIDtrSHAKA  ESCAPES  DROWNING  73

display  intrepidity,  for  if  courage  fails,  even  a  small  calamity
cannot  be  overcome."

Thus  he  reflected  on  that  occasion,  and  then  he  got  astride
on  the  leg  which  he  had  cut  off  from  the  giant  sleeping  in  the
water,  and  by  its  help  he  crossed  the  sea,  as  if  with  a  boat,
paddling  with  his  hands ;  for  even  destiny  takes  the  part
of  men  of  distinguished  valour.  Then  a  voice  from  heaven
addressed  that  mighty  hero  who  had  come  across  the  ocean,
as  Hanuman  did  for  the  sake  of  Rama  ^  :  "  Bravo,  Vidu-
shaka  !  Bravo  !  Who  except  thee  is  a  man  of  valour  ?  I
am  pleased  with  this  courage  of  thine  :  therefore  hear  this.
Thou  hast  reached  a  desolate  coast  here,  but  from  this  thou
shalt  arrive  in  seven  days  at  the  city  of  Karkotaka  ;  then
thou  shalt  pluck  up  fresh  spirits,  and  journeying  quickly
from  that  place,  thou  shalt  obtain  thy  desire.  But  I  am  the
Fire,  the  consumer  of  the  oblations  to  gods  and  the  spirits  of
deceased  ancestors,  whom  thou  didst  before  propitiate  :  and
owing  to  my  favour  thou  shalt  feel  neither  hunger  nor  thirst
— therefore  go  prosperously  and  confidently."  Having  thus
spoken,  the  voice  ceased.

And  Vidushaka,  when  he  heard  that,  bowed,  adoring  the
Fire  God,  and  set  forth  in  high  spirits,  and  on  the  seventh
day  he  reached  the  city  of  Karkotaka.  And  there  he
entered  a  monastery,  inhabited  by  many  noble  Brahmans
from  various  lands,  who  were  noted  for  hospitality.  It  was
a  wealthy  foundation  of  the  king  of  that  place,  Aryavarman,
and  had  annexed  to  it  beautiful  temples  all  made  of  gold.
There  all  of  the  Brahmans  welcomed  him,  and  one  Brahman
took  the  guest  to  his  chamber,  and  provided  him  with  a  bath,
with  food  and  with  clothing.  And  while  he  was  living  in  the
monastery,  he  heard  this  proclamation  being  made  by  beat
of  drum  ^  in  the  evening  :  "  Whatever  Brahman  or  Kshatriya
wishes  to-morrow  morning  to  marry  the  king's  daughter,  let
him  spend  a  night  in  her  chamber."

When  he  heard  that,  he  suspected  the  real  reason,  and  being
always  fond  of  daring  adventures,  he  desired  immediately

^  There  is  probably  a  pun  here.  Rdmartham  may  mean  "for  the  sake
of  a  fair  one."

^  See  the  note  on  the  uses  of  the  drum.  Vol.  I,  p.  11  Sn^. — n.m.p.


74  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

to  go  to  the  apartment  of  the  princess.  Thereupon  the
Brahmans  of  the  monastery  said  to  him  :  "  Brahman,  do  not
be  guilty  of  rashness.  The  apartment  of  the  princess  is  not
rightly  so  called,  rather  is  it  the  open  mouth  of  death/  for
whoever  enters  it  at  night  does  not  escape  alive,  and  many
daring  men  have  thus  met  their  death  there."  In  spite  of
what  these  Brahmans  told  him,  Vidushaka  would  not  take  their
advice,'^  but  went  to  the  palace  of  the  king  with  his  servants.
There  the  King  Aryavarman,  when  he  saw  him,  welcomed
him  in  person,  and  at  night  he  entered  the  apartment  of  the
king's  daughter,  looking  like  the  sun  entering  the  fire.  And
he  beheld  that  princess,  who  seemed  by  her  appearance  to  be
attached  to  him,  for  she  looked  at  him  with  tearful  eye,  and
a  sad  look  expressive  of  the  grief  produced  by  utter  despair.
And  he  remained  awake  there  all  night  gazing  intently,
holding  in  his  hand  the  sword  of  the  Fire  God,  that  came
to  him  with  a  thought.  And  suddenly  he  beheld  at  the
Aud  a 'rain  entrance  a  very  terrible  Rakshasa,  extending  his
encounters  left  hand  becausc  his  right  had  been  cut  off.  And
the  Rakshasa  ^Yievi  he  saw  him,  he  said  to  himself :  "  Here  is
that  very  Rakshasa  whose  arm  I  cut  off  in  the  city  of
Paundravardhana.  So  I  will  not  strike  at  his  arm  again,
lest  he  should  escape  me  and  depart  as  before,  and  for  this
reason  it  is  better  for  me  to  kill  him."  Thus  reflecting,
Vidushaka  ran  forward  and  seized  his  hair,  and  was  preparing
to  cut  off  his  head  when  suddenly  the  Rakshasa  in  extreme
terror  said  to  him  .  "  Do  not  slay  me  ;  you  are  brave,  there-
fore show  mercy."  Vidushaka  let  him  go,  and  said  :  "  Who
are  you,  and  what  are  you  about  here  ?  "  Then  the  Rak-
shasa, being  thus  questioned  by  the  hero,  continued  :  ''  My
name  is  Yamadanshtra,  and  I  had  two  daughters — this  is  one,
and  she  who  lives  in  Paundravardhana  is  another.  And
Siva  favoured  me  by  laying  on  me  this  command  :  '  Thou
must  save  the  two  princesses  from  marrying  anyone  who  is
not  a  hero.'  While  thus  engaged  I  first  had  an  arm  cut  off
at  Paundravardhana,  and  now  I  have  been  conquered  by  you
here,  so  this  duty  of  mine  is  accompHshed."

^   I  read  na  tad  for  tatra  with  a  MS.  in  the  Sanskrit  College.

2  Here  there  is  a  pun  on  Ananga,  a  name  of  Kama,  the  Hindu  Cupid.


p


THE  LAND  OF  THE  SIDDHAS  75


When  Vidushaka  heard  this  he  laughed,  and  said  to  him
in  reply :  "It  was  I  that  cut  off  your  arm  in  Paundravar-
dhana."  The  Rakshasa  answered:  "Then  you  must  be  a
portion  of  some  divinity,  not  a  mere  man.  I  think  it  was  for
your  sake  that  Siva  did  me  the  honour  of  laying  that  command
upon  me.  So  henceforth  I  consider  you  my  friend,  and  when
you  call  me  to  mind  I  will  appear  to  you  to  ensure  your  success
even  in  difficulties."  In  these  words  the  Rakshasa  Yama-
danshtra  out  of  friendship  chose  him  as  a  sworn  brother,  and
when  Vidushaka  accepted  his  proposal,  disappeared.  Vidu-
shaka, for  his  part,  was  commended  for  his  valour  by  the
princess,  and  spent  the  night  there  in  high  spirits  ;  and  in  the
morning  the  king,  hearing  of  the  incident  and  highly  pleased,
gave  him  his  daughter  as  the  conspicuous  banner  of  his
valour,  together  with  much  wealth.  Vidushaka  lived  there
some  nights  with  her,  as  if  with  the  Goddess  of  Prosperity,
bound  so  firmly  by  his  virtue  ^  that  she  could  not  move  a
step.  But  one  night  he  went  off  of  his  own  accord  from  that
place,  longing  for  his  beloved  Bhadra ;  for  who  that  has
tasted  heavenly  joys  can  take  pleasure  in  any  other  ?

And  after  he  had  left  the  town  he  called  to  mind  that
Rakshasa,  and  said  to  him,  who  appeared  the  moment  he
called  him  to  mind,  and  made  him  a  bow  :  "  My  friend,  I
must  go  to  the  land  of  the  Siddhas  on  the  eastern  mountain
for  the  sake  of  the  Vidyadhari  named  Bhadra,  so  do  you
take  me  there."  The  Rakshasa  said  :  "  Very  good."  So  he
ascended  his  shoulder,  and  travelled  in  that  night  over  sixty
yojanas  of  difficult  country  ^ ;  and  in  the  morning  he  crossed
the  Sitoda,  a  river  that  cannot  be  crossed  by  mortals,  and
without  effort  reached  the  border  of  the  land  of  the  Siddhas.^
The  Rakshasa  said  to  him  :  "  Here  is  the  blessed  mountain,
called  the  mountain  of  the  rising  sun,  in  front  of  you,  but  I
cannot  set  foot  upon  it,  as  it  is  the  home  of  the  Siddhas."

Then  the  Rakshasa,  being  dismissed  by  him,  departed,  and
there  Vidushaka  beheld  a  delightful  lake ;  and  he  sat  down

1  Here  there  is  a  pun.     The  word  guna  also  means  "  rope."
■^  For  stories  of  transportation  through  the  air  see  Wirt  Sikes,  British
Goblins,  p.  157  et  seq.

3  See  Vol.  I,  Appendix  I,  p.  204. — n.m.p.


76  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

on  the  bank  of  that  lake,  beautiful  with  the  faces  of  full-
blown lotuses,  which,  as  it  were,  uttered  a  welcome  to  him
with  the  hum  of  roaming  bees.  And  there  he  saw  unmistak-
able footsteps  as  of  women,  seeming  to  say  to  him  :  "  This  is
the  path  to  the  house  of  your  beloved."  While  he  was  think-
ing to  himself,  "  Mortals  cannot  set  foot  on  this  mountain,
therefore  I  had  better  stop  here  a  moment  and  see  whose
footsteps  these  are,"  there  came  to  the  lake  to  draw  water
many  beautiful  women  with  golden  pitchers  in  their  hands.
So  he  asked  the  women,  after  they  had  filled  their  pitchers
with  water,  in  a  courteous  manner  .  "  For  whom  are  you
taking  this  water?"  And  those  women  said  to  him  i  "Ex-
cellent sir,  a  Vidyadhari  of  the  name  of  Bhadra  is  dwelling
on  this  mountain  ;   this  water  is  for  her  to  bathe  in."

Wonderful  to  say.  Providence,  seeming  to  be  pleased  with
resolute  men  who  attempt  mighty  enterprises,  makes  all
things  subserve  their  ends.  For  one  of  these  women  suddenly
said  to  Vidushaka  :  "  Noble  sir,  please  lift  this  pitcher  on  to
my  shoulder."  He  consented,  and  when  he  lifted  the  pitcher
on  to  her  shoulder  the  discreet  man  put  into  it  the  jewelled
ring  he  had  before  received  from  Bhadra,^  and  then  he  sat

^  Cf.  the  way  in  which  Torello  informs  his  wife  of  his  presence  in
Boccaccio's  Decameron,  tenth  day,  nov.  ix.  The  novels  of  the  tenth  day  must
be  derived  from  Indian,  and  probably  Buddhistic,  sources.  There  is  a  Bud-
dhistic vein  in  all  of  them.  A  striking  parallel  to  the  fifth  novel  of  the  tenth
day  will  be  found  farther  on  in  this  work.  Cf.  also  for  the  incident  of  the
ring  Thorpe's  Yule-tide  Stories,  p.  l67.  See  also  the  story  of  **  Heinrich  der
Lowe,"  Simrock's  Deutsche  Volksb'iicher,  vol.  i,  pp.  21,  22;  Waldau's  Bohtnuiche
Marchen,  pp.  365,  432;  Coelho's  Contos  Populares  Portugueses,  p.  76;  Prym
and  Socin's  Si/rische  Marchen,  p.  72,  and  Ralston's  Tibetan  Tales,  Introduction,
pp.  xlix  and  1.

In  his  Decameron,  its  Sources  and  Analogues,  p.  343  et  seq.,  A.  C.  Lee  gives
several  examples  of  recognition  by  a  ring  or  portion  of  a  ring  in  folk-tales.
It  is  usually  dropped  in  a  cup  of  wine,  as  in  the  old  French  poem, "  Horn  and
Rimenhild,"  and  the  old  English  version,  "  Geste  of  King  Horn."  For  full
bibliographical  details  see  H.  Schofield,  "The  Story  of  Horn  and  Rimenhild,"
Mod.  Lang.  Ass.  Amer.,  vol.  xviii,  No.  1,  1903.  A  similar  tale  occurs  in  the
French  romance  of"  Pontus  and  the  Fair  Sidone,"  for  which  see  E.  J.  Matter,
Mod.  Lang.  A.^s.  Amer.,  vol.  xii  (N.S.,  vol.  v),  1895.  In  many  European  collec-
tions of  poems  and  ballads  we  read  of  parting  couples  breaking  a  ring  in  half
for  future  recognition.  For  full  particulars  see  Child,  English  and  Scotch
Popular   Ballads,   10    parts,  Boston,   1882  [1898].     Cf.  also  W.  E.  A.  Axon,


pTo


THE  RING  OF  RECOGNITION  77


down  again  on  the  bank  of  that  lake,  while  those  women  went
with  the  water  to  the  house  of  Bhadra.  And  while  they  were
pouring  over  Bhadra  the  water  of  ablution,  her  ring  fell  into
her  lap.  When  Bhadra  saw  it  she  recognised  it,  and  asked
those  friends  of  hers  whether  they  had  seen  any  stranger
about.  And  they  gave  her  this  answer  :  "  We  saw  a  young
mortal  on  the  banks  of  the  lake,  and  he  lifted  this  pitcher
for  us."  Then  Bhadra  said  :  "Go  and  make  him  bathe  and
adorn  himself,  and  quickly  bring  him  here,  for  he  is  my
husband,  who  has  arrived  in  this  country."

When  Bhadra  had  said  this,  her  companions  went  and  told
Vidushaka  the  state  of  the  case,  and  after  he  had  bathed,
brought  him  into  her  presence.  And  when  he  arrived
Vidushaka  at  ^^  ^^^'  ^^^cr  long  Separation,  Bhadra,  who  was
last  meets  eagerly  expecting  him,  like  the  ripe  blooming
Bhadra  fruit  of  the   tree   of  his    own   valour  in  visible

form  :  she  for  her  part  rose  up  when  she  saw  him,  and
offering  him  the  argha,^  so  to  speak,  by  sprinkling  him  with
her  tears  of  joy,  she  fastened  her  twining  arms  round  his
neck  like  a  garland.  When  they  embraced  one  another  the
long-accumulated  affection  ^  seemed  to  ooze  from  their  limbs
in  the  form  of  sweat,  owing  to  excessive  pressure.  Then  they
sat  down,  and  never  satisfied  with  gazing  at  one  another,
they  both,  as  it  were,  endured  the  agony  of  longing  multiplied
a  hundredfold.  Bhadra  then  said  to  Vidushaka  :  "  How  did
you  come  to  this  land  ?  "  And  he  thereupon  gave  her  this
answer  :  "  Supported  by  affection  for  thee,  I  came  here  endur-
ing many  risks  to  my  life  ;  what  else  can  I  say,  fair  one  ?  "
When  she  heard  that,  seeing  that  his  love  was  excessive,  as  it

Lancashire  Gleanings,  1883,  p.  343;  Trans.  Roy  Soc.  Lit.,  2nd  series,  vol.  ix,
p.  440,  and  Antiqiiary,  vol.  xxxviii,  1902,  p.  24.

This  '^declaring  presence"  motif,  as  it  might  be  called,  is  sometimes
mixed  up  with  other  motifs ;  thus  it  appears  in  the  well-known  cycle  of  tales
where  the  hero  is  given  various  tasks  to  perform  before  he  can  gain  his  bride,
and  must  pick  out  the  girl  from  a  number  exactly  alike.  It  is  sometimes  an
animal  that  helps,  or  the  girl  herself  makes  some  sign.  Readers  will  remember
the  well-known  story  of  "  Nala  and  DamayantI "  in  the  Mahabhdrata ;  but  of
this  more  later. — n.m.p.

^  An  oblation  to  gods,  or  venerable  men,  of  rice,  durva  grass,  flowers,  etc.,
with  water,  or  of  water  only  in  a  small  boat-shaped  vessel.

2  S7ieha  means  "oil,"  and  also  "affection."


78  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

caused  him  to  disregard  his  own  life,  Bhadra  said  to  him  who
through  affection  had  endured  the  utmost  ^ :  "  My  husband,
I  care  not  for  my  friends,  nor  my  magic  powers  ;  you  are  my
Hfe,  and  I  am  your  slave,  my  lord,  bought  by  you  with  your
virtues."  Then  Vidushaka  said  :  *'  Then  come  with  me  to
live  in  Ujjayini,  my  beloved,  leaving  all  this  heavenly  joy."
Bhadra  immediately  accepted  his  proposal,  and  gave  up  all
her  magic  gifts  (which  departed  from  her  the  moment  she
formed  that  resolution)  with  no  more  regret  than  if  they  had
been  straw.  Then  Vidushaka  rested  with  her  there  during
that  night,  being  waited  on  by  her  friend  Yogesvari,  and  in
the  morning  the  successful  hero  descended  with  her  from  the
mountain  of  the  sunrise,  and  again  called  to  mind  the  Rak-
shasa  Yamadanshtra  ;  the  Rakshasa  came  the  moment  he
was  thought  of,  and  Vidushaka  told  him  the  direction  of
the  journey  he  had  to  take,  and  then  ascended  his  shoulder,
having  previously  placed  Bhadra  there.  She  too  endured
patiently  to  be  placed  on  the  shoulder  of  a  very  loathsome
Rakshasa.  What  will  not  women  do  when  mastered  by
affection  ?

So  Vidushaka,  mounted  on  the  Rakshasa,  set  out  with  his
beloved,  and  again  reached  the  city  of  Karkotaka ;  and  there
men  beheld  him  with  fear,  inspired  by  the  sight  of  the  Ra-
And  collecting  ^shasa  ;  and  when  he  saw  King  Aryavarman  he
his  numerous  demanded  from  him  his  daughter  ;  and  after  re-
iVives  ceiving  that  princess  surrendered  by  her  father,

whom  he  had  won  with  his  arm,  he  set  forth  from  that  city
in  the  same  style,  mounted  on  the  Rakshasa.  And  after  he
had  gone  some  distance  he  found  that  wicked  merchant  on
the  shore  of  the  sea  who  long  ago  cut  the  ropes  when  he  had
been  thrown  into  the  sea.  And  he  took,  together  with  his
wealth,  his  daughter,  whom  he  had  before  won  as  a  reward
for  setting  free  the  ship  in  the  sea.  And  he  considered  the
depriving  that  villain  of  his  wealth  as  equivalent  to  putting
him  to  death ;  for  grovelling  souls  often  value  their  hoards
more  than  their  life.  Then  mounted  on  the  Rakshasa  as  on  a
chariot,  taking  with  him  that  daughter  of  the  merchant,  he

^  The  D.  text  edits  kasthagatasnehdl,  thus  meaning  "at  hearing  this,
her  affection  came  to  its  highest  pitch." — n.m.p.


THE  TRIUMPHANT  RETURN  79

flew  up  into  the  heaven  with  the  princess  and  Bhadra,  and
journeying  through  the  air  he  crossed  the  ocean,  which  Uke
his  valour  was  full  of  boisterous  impetuosity,  exhibiting  it
to  his  fair  ones.^  And  he  again  reached  the  city  of  Paun-
dravardhana,  beheld  with  astonishment  by  all  as  he  rode  on
a  Rakshasa.  There  he  greeted  his  wife,  the  daughter  of
Devasena,  who  had  long  desired  his  arrival,  whom  he  had  won
by  the  defeat  of  the  Rakshasa  ;  and  though  her  father  tried
to  detain  him,  yet  longing  for  his  native  land,  he  took  her
also  with  him  and  set  out  for  Ujjayini.  And  owing  to  the
speed  of  the  Rakshasa  he  soon  reached  that  city,  which
Returns  safely  appeared  like  his  satisfaction  at  beholding  his
to  Vjjayim  homc,  exhibited  in  visible  form.  There  Vidushaka
was  seen  by  the  people,  perched  on  the  top  of  that  huge
Rakshasa,  whose  vast  frame  was  illuminated  by  the  beauty
of  his  wives  seated  on  his  shoulder,  as  the  moon  ^  rising  over
the  eastern  mountain  with  gleaming  herbs  on  its  summit.
The  people  being  astonished  and  terrified,  his  father-in-law
the  King  Adityasena  came  to  hear  of  it,  and  went  out
from  the  city.  But  Vidushaka,  when  he  saw  him,  quickly
descended  from  the  Rakshasa,  and  after  prostrating  himself
approached  the  king  ;  the  king  too  welcomed  him.  Then
Vidushaka  caused  all  his  wives  to  come  down  from  the
shoulder  of  the  Rakshasa,  and  released  him  to  wander  where
he  would.  And  after  that  Rakshasa  had  departed,  Vidu-
shaka, accompanied  by  his  wives,  entered  the  king's  palace
together  with  the  king  his  father-in-law.  There  he  de-
lighted by  his  arrival  that  first  wife  of  his,  the  daughter  of
that  king,  who  suffered  a  long  regret  for  his  absence.  And
when  the  king  said  to  him,  "  How  did  you  obtain  these
wives,  and  who  is  that  Rakshasa  ?  "  he  told  him  the  whole
story.

Then  that  king,  pleased  with  his  son-in-law's  valour,  and
knowing  what  it  was  expedient  to  do,  gave  him  half  his

^  Sattva  when  applied  to  the  ocean  probably  means  "monsters."  So
the  whole  compound  would  mean  "in  which  was  conspicuous  the  fury  of
gambling  monsters,"     The  pun  defies  translation,

2  I  read  aushadheh.  The  Rakshasa  is  compared  to  the  mountain,  Vidushaka
to  the  moon,  his  wives  to  the  gleaming  herbs.


80  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

kingdom  ;  and  immediately  Vidushaka,  though  a  Brahman,
became  a  monarch,  with  a  lofty  white  umbrella  and  chowries
waving  on  both  sides  of  him.  And  then  the  city  of  Ujjayini
was  joyful,  full  of  the  sound  of  festive  drums  and  music,
uttering  shouts  of  delight.  Thus  he  obtained  the  mighty
rank  of  a  king,  and  gradually  conquered  the  whole  earth,  so
that  his  foot  was  worshipped  by  all  kings,  and  with  Bhadra
for  his  consort  he  long  lived  in  happiness  with  those  wives
of  his,  who  were  content,  having  abandoned  jealousy.  Thus
resolute  men,  when  Fortune  favours  them,  find  their  own
valour  a  great  and  successful  stupefying  charm  that  forcibly
draws  towards  them  prosperity.


[M]  When  they  heard  from  the  mouth  of  the  King  of
Vatsa  this  varied  tale  ^  full  of  marvellous  incident,  all  his
ministers  sitting  by  his  side  and  his  two  wives  experienced
excessive  delight.

^  Thorpe  in  his  Yule-tide  Stories  remarks  that  the  story  of  Vidushaka
somewhat  resembles  in  its  ground-plot  the  tale  of  the  "  Beautiful  Palace
East  of  the  Sun  and  North  of  the  Earth."  With  the  latter  he  also  compares
the  story  of  Saktivega  in  the  fifth  book  of  the  Kathd  Sarit  Sdgara.  (See  the
Table  of  Contents  of  Thorpe's   Yule-tide  Stories,  p.  xi.)     Cf.  also  Sicilianische

Marchen,  vol.  ii,  p.  1,  and  for  the  cutting  off  of  the  giant's  arm,  p.  50.

Numerous  stories  from  all  parts  of  Europe  bearing  a  certain  similarity  to
that  in  our  text  will  be  found  in  G.  H.  Gerould's  The  Grateful  Dead,  Folk-Lore
Society,  1908,  pp.  44-75.

For  some  inexplicable  reason  Gerould  heads  the  chapter  "  The  Grateful
Dead  and  the  Poison  Maiden,"  when  not  one  of  the  stories  have  anything  to
do  with  poison  maidens.  The  women  in  question  merely  have  snakes,  dragons,
etc.  (which  have  caused  the  death  of  many  husbands),  extracted  by  magic  or
divine  aid.  He  should  have  called  this  suh-7notif  "  Possessed  Women,"  as  he
originally  did  on  page  26  of  the  same  volume,  or  else  some  such  title  as  "The
Fatal  Bride,"  "The  Wedding  of  Death."

For  the  connection  of  snakes  and  poisoned  women,  see  Appendix  III,
pp.  306,  307  of  this  volume. — n.m.p.


I


THE  ORIGIN  OF  ECLIPSES  81


NOTE   ON    RAHU   AND   ECLIPSES

Rahu  was  the  Asura  (see  Vol.  I,  pp.  197-200)  who,  disguised  as  a  god  at
the  Churning  of  the  Ocean  (see  Vol.  I,  pp.  In^,  3n^,  55n^  and  202),  obtained
possession  of  some  of  the  Amrita  and  proceeded  to  drink  it  in  order  to  become
immortal.  Surya  and  Soma  (the  sun  and  moon),  however,  noticed  what
was  going  on,  and  immediately  told  Narayana  (Vishnu),  who  instantly  cut
off  Rahu's  head  with  his  discus.  As  the  head  contained  Amrita  it  became
immortal  and  came  to  represent  the  ascending  nodes  of  the  moon's  orbit.
The  body  of  Rahu,  according  to  the  Puranic  notion,  was  called  Ketu,  and
represented  the  descending  nodes.  It  also  became  the  progenitor  of  the
whole  tribe  of  meteors  and  comets.  Not  having  obtained  his  wish  to  become
completely  immortal,  Rahu  naturally  bore  a  grudge  against  Surya  and  Soma,
and,  whenever  he  gets  the  opportunity,  he  tries  to  swallow  them.  His  shadow
is  thus  thrown  on  the  intended  victim,  and  so  are  caused  what  we  call  the
eclipses !

The  interesting  point  about  this  myth  is  that  the  origin  appears  to  be
unknown.  As  E.  J.  Thomas  has  mentioned  (Hastings'  Enci/.  Rel.  Eth.,  "  Sun,
Moon  and  Stars  (Buddhist),"  vol.  xii,  p.  72),  the  story  is  not  early  Buddhist,
nor  even  ancient  Hindu.  Although  it  occurs  in  the  Mahdbhdrata  (I,  xix),  it  is
not  found  in  the  account  of  the  Churning  of  the  Ocean  in  the  Vishnu  Purana.
Is  it,  then,  Aryan  or  non-Aryan  }  An  eclipse  of  the  sun  or  moon  has  every-
where been  regarded  with  dread,  and  in  many  parts  of  the  world  its  advent
still  gives  rise  to  a  variety  of  rites,  some  of  a  threatening  and  others  of  a
propitiatory  nature.  The  usual  explanatory  myth  resembles  that  described
above,  at  least  as  far  as  the  idea  of  the  sun  or  moon  being  devoured  is
concerned.  It  is  an  animal  or  demon  who  is  trying  to  eat  up  the  sun  or
moon,  hence  it  is  necessary  to  frighten  it  away  by  terrifying  noises.

In  China  and  Assam  gongs  are  sounded  for  this  purpose,  while  more
primitive  peoples  scream,  hit  their  cooking  utensils  and  fire  pistols,  and
among  the  Sencis  of  Eastern  Peru  lighted  arrows  are  shot  at  the  intruder.
It  is  interesting  to  notice  that  in  the  Confucian  classic  Tsun  Tsiu  ("Springs
and  Autumns  ")  the  word  for  "  eclipse  "  is  the  same  as  that  for  "  eat."  Among
the  Tlaxcalans  of  Mexico  matters  became  very  serious  during  an  eclipse.  The
phenomenon  was  thought  to  be  caused  by  a  fight  between  the  sun  and  moon,
and  in  order  to  appease  them  red-skinned  people  were  sacrificed  to  the  sun
and  albinos  to  the  moon.

The  Peruvians  (and  at  one  period  the  Mexicans  also)  considered  that,
owing  to  a  former  kindness  rendered  it,  dogs  were  held  in  high  esteem  by
the  moon.  Accordingly  when  an  eclipse  of  the  moon  occurred,  they  beat
all  the  dogs,  so  that  the  moon,  angry  at  this  treatment  of  her  friends,  would
immediately  uncover  her  face.

Another  primitive  idea  is  that  the  light  of  the  sun  and  moon  has  gone
out,  and  consequently  a  fire  or  torches  lit  during  the  eclipse  will  persuade  the
luminary  to  smile  upon  the  world  once  more.

VOL.  II.  F


82  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

As  in  China,  the  Hindus  see  a  hare  in  the  moon  in  place  of  our  ''man"
(see  Ocean  of  Story,  Vol.  I,  p.  109«^).  The  Todas  of  the  Nilgiri  Hills  imagine
that  during  an  eclipse  of  the  moon  a  snake  is  devouring  the  hare.  They  fast
until  the  eclipse  is  over  and  shout  out  to  frighten  away  the  snake  (see
Rivers,  The  Todas,  p.  593).

In  the  Central  Provinces  it  is  believed  that  Rahu  was  either  a  sweeper  or
the  deity  of  the  sweepers ;  thus  the  Mehtar  caste  of  scavengers  collect  alms
during  an  eclipse,  as  it  is  thought  that  Rahu  will  be  thus  appeased  and  loose
his  hold  on  the  luminaries.  Similarly  the  Teli,  or  oil-pressers  caste  of  the
Chhattlsgarh  and  Nagpur  divisions,  believe  that  the  sun  owes  the  sweeper  a
debt  which  he  refuses  to  pay.  The  sweeper,  however,  is  not  to  be  put  off
easily  and  sits  dhamd  at  the  sun's  door.  This  is  obvious,  for  his  dark  shadow
can  be  seen  quite  clearly.     In  time  the  debt  is  paid  and  the  sweeper  departs.

In  Bombay,  J.  J.  Modi  (see  reference  below)  was  told  the  following  as  the
usual  explanation  of  an  eclipse.

Rama,  on  his  return  from  the  defeat  of  Ravana  in  Lanka,  gave  a  feast  to
his  victorious  army.  Mahadeva  (Siva)  and  Parvati  were  serving  the  meals.
Presently  Mahadeva  drew  the  attention  of  Parvati  to  the  presence  of  a
low-caste  Mang  boy  (a  caste  who  act  as  village  musicians  and  castrate
bullocks,  the  women  serving  as  midwives)  in  the  assembly,  and  asked  her
to  be  careful,  and  to  serve  him  the  meals  from  a  distance.  But  as  soon  as
Rama  saw  the  Mang  he  slew  him  for  daring  to  mar  the  sacredness  of  the
feast  by  his  impure  presence.  The  mother  of  the  slain  boy  took  up  the  head,
placed  it  in  a  basket  and  tried  in  vain  to  resuscitate  it  with  fresh  water.
With  the  basket  containing  the  head  of  her  lost  son,  she  went  to  the  gods
and  goddesses  begging  for  her  meals.  In  turn  she  still  goes  to  the  sun  and
moon,  threatening  to  touch  them  if  her  request  is  not  granted,  thus  desecrating
their  sacred  character.  It  is  the  shadow  of  her  basket  that  causes  the  eclipse,
and  so  it  is  to  remove  this  Mang  woman,  this  importunate  creditor,  that  people
are  asked  to  give  offerings  to  the  luminaries  and  alms  to  the  Mang  caste.

An  eclipse  is  always  of  evil  omen,  and  is  regarded  rather  like  an  evil
eye  from  whose  influence  everything  should  be  protected.  The  wise  house-
wife (says  Crooke,  op.  cit.,  vol.  i,  pp.  21,  22),  when  an  eclipse  is  announced,
takes  a  leaf  of  the  Tulasi  or  sacred  basil,  and  sprinkling  Ganges  water  on
it,  puts  the  leaf  in  the  jars  containing  the  drinking  water  for  the  use  of
the  family  and  the  cooked  food,  and  thus  keeps  them  pure  while  the  eclipse
is  going  on.  Confectioners,  who  are  obliged  to  keep  large  quantities  of
cooked  food  ready,  relieve  themselves  and  their  customers  from  the  taboo
by  keeping  some  of  the  sacred  kusa  or  dub  grass  in  their  vessels  when  an
eclipse  is  expected.  A  pregnant  woman  will  do  no  work  during  an  eclipse,
as  otherwise  she  believes  that  her  child  would  be  deformed,  and  the  deformity
is  supposed  to  bear  some  relation  to  the  work  which  is  being  done  by  her
at  the  time.  Thus,  if  she  were  to  sew  anything,  the  baby  would  have  a
hole  in  its  flesh,  generally  near  the  ear ;  if  she  cut  anything,  the  child  would
have  a  hare-lip.  On  the  same  principle  the  horns  of  pregnant  cattle  are
smeared  with  red  paint  during  an  eclipse,  because  red  is  a  colour  abhorred
by  demons.     While  the  eclipse   is  going  on,  drinking   water,  eating   food.


THE  ORIGIN  OF  ECLIPSES  88

and  all  household  business,  as  well  as  the  worship  of  the  gods,  are  all  pro-
hibited. No  respectable  Hindu  will  at  such  a  time  sleep  on  a  bedstead
or  lie  down  to  rest,  and  he  will  give  alms  in  barley  or  copper  coins  to
relieve  the  pain  of  the  suffering  luminaries.

An  eclipse  is  an  important  event  among  modem  Hindus,  and  considerable
ritual  is  carried  out  in  every  Brahman  household  (see  Mrs  Stevenson,  The
Rites  of  the  Twice-horn,  p.  352).  For  further  information  on  the  superstitions
of  eclipses  reference  should  be  made  to  E.  B.  Tylor,  Primitive  Culture,  vol.  i,
pp.  288,  328  et  seq.,  and  S56 ;  W.  Crooke,  Folk-Lore  of  Northern  India,  vol.  i,
pp.  18-23;  Jivanji  Jamshedji  Modi,  "A  few  Ancient  Beliefs  about  the  Eclipse
and  a  few  Superstitions  based  on  these  Beliefs,"  Joiirn.  Anth.  Soc.  Bomb.,
vol.  iii,  1894,  pp.  346-360;  Frazer,  Golden  Bough,  vol.  i,  pp.  311,  312;  vol.  x,
pp.  70,  l62n;  Russell,  Tribes  and  Castes  of  the  Central  Provinces,  \o\.  iv,  pp.  232,
550 ;  W.  D.  Wallis,  "  Prodigies  and  Portents,"  Hastings'  Ency.  Pel.  Eth.,  vol.  x,
pp.  368,  SQQ,  and  the  numerous  authors  on  "Sun,  Moon  and  Stars"  in  ditto
vol.  xii,  pp.  48-103. — n.m.p.


CHAPTER  XIX

THEN  Yaugandliarayana  said  to  the  King  of  Vatsa  :
[M]  "  King,  it  is  known  that  you  possess  the  favour
of  destiny,  as  well  as  courage  ;  and  I  also  have  taken
some  trouble  about  the  right  course  of  policy  to  be  piu-sued
in  this  matter  :  therefore  carry  out  as  soon  as  possible  your
plan  of  conquering  the  regions."  When  his  chief  minister
had  said  this  to  him,  the  King  of  Vatsa  answered  :  "  Admit-
ting that  this  is  true,  nevertheless  the  accomplishment  of
auspicious  undertakings  is  always  attended  with  difficulties,
accordingly  I  will  with  this  object  propitiate  Siva  by
austerities,  for  without  his  favour  how  can  I  obtain  what  I
desire  ?  "  When  they  heard  that,  his  ministers  approved  of
his  performing  austerities,  as  the  chiefs  of  the  monkeys  did
in  the  case  of  Rama,  when  he  was  intent  upon  building  a
bridge  over  the  ocean. ^

^  This  well-known  incident  occurs  in  the  sixth  book  of  the  Ramayana,
known  as  the  Yuddha-kdnda  ("  Battle  Section  ").  Rama,  having  concluded  an
alliance  with  Sugriva,  king  of  the  monkeys,  is  advised  by  him  to  build  a  bridge
from  the  mainland  to  Lanka  (Ceylon),  where  the  Rakshasa,  Ravana,  is  holding
Sita  (Rama's  wife)  captive.

Accordingly  a  huge  army  of  monkeys  assembles  on  the  seashore.
Vibhishana,  Ravana's  brother,  advises  the  surrender  of  Sita,  but  is  insulted
by  Ravana.  He  thereupon  joins  Rama  and  advises  him  to  propitiate  the  God
of  the  Sea,  before  starting  building  the  bridge.  This  is  done,  and  then,
tearing  up  rocks  and  trees,  the  multitude  of  monkeys  construct  a  bridge  across
the  straits.  A  fearful  battle  ensues,  Ravana  is  killed,  and  after  Sita  has  proved
her  purity  she  is  joyfully  received  back  by  Rama.

Thus  the  Hindus  have  given  the  name  Rama's  Bridge  (Ramasetu)  to  the
row  of  islands  and  sandbanks  stretching  from  the  island  of  Manaar,  near  the
north-west  coast  of  Ceylon,  to  the  island  of  Rame^varman,  just  off  the  Indian
mainland.  It  is  a  famous  place  of  pilgrimage,  and  contains  a  wonderful  carved
temple,  700  ft.  long,  with  pillared  corridors.

The  English  name  Adam's  Bridge  is  in  all  probability  adopted  from  the
Arabs,  who  regard  Ceylon  as  the  place  of  Adam's  exile  after  he  had  been
driven  from  Eden.  The  well-known  depression  on  Adam's  Peak,  the  most
prominent,  though  not   the   largest,  mountain  in  Ceylon,  is  considered  to

84


r


THE  POWER  OBTAINED  BY  AUSTERITIES     85


And  after  the  king  had  fasted  for  three  nights,  engaged
in  austerities  with  the  queens  and  the  ministers,  Siva  said  to
him  in  a  dream  :  "I  am  satisfied  with  thee,  therefore  rise  up  ;
thou  shalt  obtain  an  unimpeded  triumph,  and  thou  shalt
soon  have  a  son  who  shall  be  king  of  all  the  Vidyadharas."
Then  the  king  woke  up,  with  all  his  fatigue  removed  by  the
favour  of  Siva,  like  the  new  moon  increased  by  the  rays  of
the  sun.  And  in  the  morning  he  delighted  his  ministers
by  telling  them  that  dream,  and  the  two  queens,  tender  as
flowers,  who  were  worn  out  by  the  fasting  they  had  endured
to  fulfil  the  vow.  And  they  were  refreshed  by  the  descrip-
tion of  his  dream,  well  worthy  of  being  drunk  in  with  the
ears,  and  its  effect  was  like  that  of  medicine,^  for  it  restored
their  strength.

The  king  obtained  by  his  austerities  a  power  equal  to
that  of  his  ancestors,  and  his  wives  obtained  the  saintly  re-
nown of  matrons  devoted  to  their  husband.  But  on  the
morrow,  when  the  feast  at  the  end  of  the  fast  was  celebrated,
and  the  citizens  were  beside  themselves  with  joy,  Yaugan-
dharayana  thus  addressed  the  king  :  "  You  are  fortunate,
O  King,  in  that  the  holy  Siva  is  so  well  disposed  towards
you,  so  proceed  now  to  conquer  your  enemies,  and  then  enjoy
the  prosperity  won  by  your  arm.  For  when  prosperity  is
acquired  by  a  king's  own  virtues  it  remains  fixed  in  his
family,  for  blessings  acquired  by  the  virtues  of  the  owners
are  never  lost.  And  for  this  reason  it  was  that  that
treasure  long  buried  in  the  ground,  which  had  been  ac-
cumulated by  your  ancestors  and  then  lost,  was  recovered
by  you.  Moreover  with  reference  to  this  matter  hear  the
following  tale  : —

be  Adam's  footprint  by  the  Mohammedans,  Buddha's  footprint  by  the
Buddhists,  Siva's  by  the  Brahmans,  while  the  claims  of  the  Portuguese
Christians  are  divided  between  St  Thomas  and  the  eunuch  of  Candace,
Queen  of  Ethiopia.

For  further  information  on  this  subject  reference  should  be  made  to
T.  W.  Rhys  Davids'  "Adam's  Peak,"  Hastings'  Ency.  Rel.  Etk.,  vol,  i,  pp.  87,
88,  with  the  references  given;  Yule  and  Cordier,  Marco  Polo  (1903),  vol.  ii,
pp.  321,  322,  328w,  and  Cathay  and  the  Way  Thither,  vol.  i,  pp.  171,  172,
vol.  iii,  pp.  233,  242. — n.m.p.

^  Perhaps  we  should  read  svddvaushadha,  "  sweet  medicine."


86  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

23.  Story  of  Devaddsa

Long  ago  there  was  in  the  city  of  Pataliputra  a  certain
merchant's  son,  sprung  from  a  rich  family,  and  his  name  was
Devadasa.  And  he  married  a  wife  from  the  city  of  Paun-
dravardhana,  the  daughter  of  some  rich  merchant.  When  his
father  died,  Devadasa  became,  in  course  of  time,  addicted  to
vice,  and  lost  all  his  wealth  at  play.  And  then  his  wife's
father  came  and  took  away  to  his  own  house  in  Paundravar-
dhana  his  daughter,  who  was  distressed  by  poverty  and  the
other  hardships  of  her  lot.^  Gradually  the  husband  began  to
be  afflicted  by  his  misfortunes,  and  wishing  to  be  set  up  in  his
business,  he  came  to  Paundravardhana  to  ask  his  father-in-
law  to  lend  him  the  capital  which  he  required.  And  having
arrived  in  the  evening  at  the  city  of  Paundravardhana,  see-
ing that  he  was  begrimed  with  dust  and  in  tattered  garments,
he  thought  to  himself  :  "  How  can  I  enter  my  father-in-law's
house  in  this  state  ?  In  truth  for  a  proud  man  death  is  pre-
ferable to  exhibiting  poverty  before  one's  relations."  Thus
reflecting,  he  went  into  the  market-place,  and  remained  outside
a  certain  shop  during  the  night,  crouching  with  contracted
body,  like  the  lotus  which  is  folded  at  night.  And  immedi-
ately he  saw  a  certain  young  merchant  open  the  door  of  that
shop  and  enter  it.  And  a  moment  after  he  saw  a  woman
come  with  noiseless  step  to  that  same  place,  and  rapidly
enter.  And  while  he  fixed  his  eyes  on  the  interior  of  the
shop,  in  which  a  light  was  burning,  he  recognised  in  that
woman  his  own  wife.  Then  Devadasa  seeing  that  wife  of
his  repairing  to  another  man,  and  bolting  the  door,  being
smitten  with  the  thunderbolt  of  grief,  thought  to  himself:
"  A  man  deprived  of  wealth  loses  even  his  own  body,  how
then  can  he  hope  to  retain  the  affections  of  a  woman  ?  For
women  have  fickleness  implanted  in  their  nature  by  an  in-
variable law,  like  the  flashes  of  lightning.  So  here  I  have  an
instance  of  the  misfortunes  which  befall  men  who  fall  into  the
sea  of  vice,  and  of  the  behaviour  of  an  independent  woman
who  lives  in  her  father's  house."

^  As  we  shall  see  in  the  note  on  p.  SSn},  this  was  considered  in  the  Rig-
Veda  quite  sufficient  for  the  wife  to  turn  to  another  man. — n.m.p.


r


THE  SECRET  OVERHEARD  87

Thus  he  reflected  as  he  stood  outside,  and  he  seemed  to
himself  to  hear  his  wife  confidentially  conversing  with  her
lover.  So  he  applied  his  ear  to  the  door,  and  that  wicked
woman  was  at  that  moment  saying  in  secret  to  the  merchant,
her  paramour  :  "  Listen  ;  as  I  am  so  fond  of  you,  I  will  to-
day tell  you  a  secret :  my  husband  long  ago  had  a  great-
grandfather named  Viravarman ;  in  the  courtyard  of  his
house  he  secretly  buried  in  the  ground  four  jars  of  gold,  one
jar  in  each  of  the  four  corners.  And  he  then  informed  one
of  his  wives  of  that  fact,  and  his  wife  at  the  time  of  her  death
told  her  daughter-in-law,  she  told  it  to  her  daughter-in-law,
who  was  my  mother-in-law,  and  my  mother-in-law  told  it  to
me.  So  this  is  an  oral  tradition  in  my  husband's  family,
descending  through  the  mothers-in-law.  But  I  did  not  tell
it  to  my  husband  though  he  is  poor,  for  he  is  odious  to  me  as
being  addicted  to  gambling,  but  you  are  above  all  dear  to  me.
So  go  to  my  husband's  town  and  buy  the  house  from  him  with
money,  and  after  you  have  obtained  that  gold  come  here  and
live  happily  with  me."

When  the  merchant,  her  paramour,  heard  this  from  that
treacherous  woman,  he  was  much  pleased  with  her,  thinking
that  he  had  obtained  a  treasure  without  any  trouble.  Deva-
dasa,  for  his  part,  who  was  outside,  bore  henceforth  the  hope
of  wealth,  so  to  speak,  riveted  in  his  heart  with  those  pierc-
ing words  of  his  wicked  wife.  So  he  went  thence  quickly  to
the  city  of  Pataliputra,  and  after  reaching  his  house  he  took
that  treasure  and  appropriated  it.  Then  that  merchant,
who  was  in  secret  the  paramour  of  his  wife,  arrived  in  that
country  on  pretence  of  trading,  but  in  reality  eager  to  obtain
the  treasure.  So  he  bought  that  house  from  Devadasa,  who
made  it  over  to  him  for  a  large  sum  of  money.  Then  Deva-
dasa set  up  another  home,  and  cunningly  brought  back  that
wife  of  his  from  the  house  of  his  father-in-law.  When  this
had  been  done,  that  wicked  merchant,  who  was  the  lover  of
his  wife,  not  having  obtained  the  treasure,  came  and  said  to
him  :  "  This  house  of  yours  is  old  and  I  do  not  like  it ;  so
give  me  back  my  money  and  take  back  your  own  house."

Thus  he  demanded,  and  Devadasa  refused,  and  being
engaged  in  a  violent  altercation,  they  both  went  before  the


88  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

king.  In  his  presence  Devadasa  poured  forth  the  whole
story  of  his  wife,  painful  to  him  as  venom  concealed  in  his
breast.  Then  the  king  had  his  wife  summoned,  and  after
ascertaining  the  truth  of  the  case  he  punished  that  adulterous
merchant  with  the  loss  of  all  his  property.  Devadasa  for
his  part  cut  off  the  nose  ^  of  that  wicked  wife,  and  married
another,  and  then  lived  happily  in  his  native  city  on  the
treasure  he  had  obtained.


[M]  "  Thus  treasure  obtained  by  virtuous  methods  is
continued  to  a  man's  posterity,  but  treasure  of  another
kind  is  as  easily  melted  away  as  a  flake  of  snow  when  the  rain
begins  to  fall.  Therefore  a  man  should  endeavour  to  obtain
wealth  by  lawful  methods,  but  a  king  especially,  since  wealth
is  the  root  of  the  tree  of  empire.  So  honour  all  your  ministers
according  to  custom,  in  order  that  you  may  obtain  success,
and  then  accomplish  the  conquest  of  the  regions,  so  as  to  gain
opulence  in  addition  to  virtue.  For  out  of  regard  to  the
fact  that  you  are  allied  by  marriage  with  your  two  power-
ful fathers-in-law,  few  kings  will  oppose  you  ;  most  will  join
you.  However,  this  King  of  Benares  named  Brahmadatta  is
always  your  enemy,  therefore  conquer  him  first ;   when  he  is

^  In  the  oldest  historical  period  of  India  there  was  no  word  for  "  adultery  ";
yet  its  occurrence  is  distinctly  proved,  if  proof  be  needed  among  a  highly
developed  culture  like  the  Aryan,  by  various  passages  in  the  Rig-Veda.  One
in  particular  is  of  special  interest  here  as  it  shows  that  the  adultery  of  a
woman  whose  husband  gambled  was  of  quite  ordinary  occurrence.  The
passage  is  in  verse  4  of  the  didactic  poem  Rig-Veda,  x,  34:  "Others  lay
hands  on  the  wife  of  the  man  who  abandons  himself  to  the  dice."

The  method  of  punishment  mentioned  in  our  text  is  found  in  other  places
besides  India ;  thus  in  Mexico  the  woman  had  her  nose  and  ears  cut  off,  and
was  stoned  to  death  (see  A.  de  Herrera,  West  Indies,  vol.  iv,  p.  338,  and
W.  Prescott,  Peru,  p.  21).  Every  conceivable  form  of  punishment  imaginable
has  been  employed  in  different  parts  of  the  world.  For  full  details  reference
should  be  made  to  the  numerous  articles  on  "  Adultery  "  in  Hastings'  Ency.
Rel.  Eth.,  vol.  i,  pp.  122-137.  Among  the  Pardhi  caste  of  Central  India,  the
punishment  for  adultery  in  either  sex  consists  in  cutting  off  a  piece  of  the  left
ear  with  a  razor.  See  Russell,  Tribes  and  Castes  of  the  Central  Provinces,  vol.  iv,
p.  364  ;  Ronaldshay,  India,  a  Bird's-Et/e  View,  1924,  p.  48,  and  cf.  Flinders  Petrie,
"Assyrian  and  Hittite  Society,"  Ancient  Egi/pt,  M&rch  1924,  p.  23  e/  seq. — n.m.p.


THE  EXPEDITION  STARTS  FAVOURABLY      89

conquered,  conquer  the  eastern  quarter  and  gradually  all  the
quarters,  and  exalt  the  glory  of  the  race  of  Pandu  gleaming
white  like  a  lotus."

When  his  chief  minister  said  this  to  him,  the  King  of
Vatsa  consented,  eager  for  conquest,  and  ordered  his  sub-
jects to  prepare  for  the  expedition ;  and  he  gave  the
The  Kins:  Sovereignty  of  the  country  of  Videha  to  his
prepares  for  brother- iu-law  Gopalaka,  by  way  of  reward  for
Conquest  j^jg  assistance,  thereby  showing  his  knowledge  of
policy  ;  and  he  gave  to  Sinhavarman,  the  brother  of  Padma-
vati,  who  came  to  his  assistance  with  his  forces,  the  land  of
Chedi,  treating  him  with  great  respect ;  and  the  monarch
summoned  Pulindaka,  the  friendly  King  of  the  Bhillas,^  who
filled  the  quarters  with  his  hordes,  as  the  rainy  season  fills
them  with  clouds  ;  and  while  the  preparation  for  the  expedi-
tion was  going  on  in  the  great  king's  territories  a  strange
anxiety  was  produced  in  the  heart  of  his  enemies  ;  but
Yaugandharayana  first  sent  spies  to  Benares  to  find  out  the
proceedings  of  King  Brahmadatta  ;  then  on  an  auspicious
day,  being  cheered  with  omens  portending  victory,  the  King
of  Vatsa  first  marched  against  Brahmadatta  in  the  eastern
quarter,  having  mounted^  a  tall  victorious  elephant,  with
a  lofty  umbrella  on  its  back,  as  a  furious  lion  ascends  a
mountain  with  one  tree  in  full  bloom  on  it.

And  his  expedition  was  facilitated^  by  the  autumn,
which  arrived  as  a  harbinger  of  good  fortune,  and  showed
him  an  easy  path,  across  rivers  flowing  with  diminished
volume,  and  he  filled  the  face  of  the  land  with  his  shouting
forces,  so  as  to  produce  the  appearance  of  a  sudden  rainy
season  without  clouds  ;  and  then  the  cardinal  points,  re-
sounding with  the  echoes  of  the  roaring  of  his  host,  seemed
to  be  telling  one  another  their  fears  of  his  coming,  and  his
horses,  collecting  the  brightness  of  the  sun  on  their  golden
trappings,  moved  along,  followed,  as  it  were,  by  the  fire
pleased  with  the  purification  of  his  army.*

1  Le.  Bheels. See  Vol.  I,  p.  152«i. — n.m.p.  ^  j  ^ead  drvdhah.

3  A  MS.  in  the  Sanskrit  College  reads  sambhavah  for  the  sampadah  of
Dr  Brockhaus'  text.

*  Lustratio  exercitus ;  waving  lights  formed  part  of  the  ceremony.


90  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

And  his  elephants  with  their  ears  like  white  chowries,  and
with  streams  of  ichor  flowing  from  their  temples  reddened
by  being  mixed  with  vermilion,  appeared,  as  he  marched
along,  like  the  sons  of  the  mountains,  streaked  with  the
white  clouds  of  autumn,  and  pouring  down  streams  of  water
coloured  with  red  mineral,  sent  by  the  parent  hills,  in  their
fear,  to  join  his  expedition.  And  the  dust  from  the  earth
concealed  the  brightness  of  the  sun,  as  if  thinking  that  the
king  could  not  endure  the  effulgent  splendour  of  rivals.
And  the  two  queens  followed  the  king  step  by  step  on  the
way,  like  the  Goddess  of  Fame,  and  the  Fortune  of  Victory,
attracted  by  his  politic  virtues.^  The  silk  of  his  host's
banners,  tossed  to  and  fro  in  the  wind,  seemed  to  say  to  his
enemies  :  "  Bend  in  submission,  or  flee."  Thus  he  marched,
beholding  the  districts  full  of  blown  white  lotuses,  like  the
uplifted  hoods  of  the  serpent  Sesha  ^  terrified  with  fear  of
the  destruction  of  the  world.

In  the  meanwhile  those  spies,  commissioned  by  Yaugan-
dharayana,  assuming  the  vows  of  skull-bearing  worshippers
of  Siva,^  reached  the  city  of  Benares.  And  one  of  them,  who
was  acquainted  with  the  art  of  juggling,  exhibiting  his  skill,
assumed  the  part  of  teacher,  and  the  others  passed  them-
selves off  as  his  pupils.  And  they  celebrated  that  pretended
teacher,  who  subsisted  on  alms,  from  place  to  place,  saying  :
"  This  master  of  ours  is  acquainted  with  past,  present  and
future."  Whatever  that  sage  predicted,  in  the  way  of  fires
and  so  on,  to  those  who  came  to  consult  him  about  the
future,  his  pupils  took  care  to  bring  about  secretly ;    so  he

^  It  also  means  "  drawing  cords."

2  He  is  sometimes  represented  as  bearing  the  entire  world  on  one  of  his
heads. See  Vol.  I,  p.  logn^.— n.m.p.

*  The  Saiva  mendicants  have  ten  classes,  known  collectively  as  Da^namis,
"ten  names."  Among  other  more  respectable  orders  are  included  the  Aghorl,
a  sect  of  ascetics  who  follow  the  most  vile  practices  imaginable.  They  are
also  known  by  the  name  of  Kapalika  or  Kapaladharin  (Skr.  kdpala,  "a  skull,"
dhdrin,  "carrying").  For  fuller  details  see  H.  W.  I3arrow,  "Aghoris  and
Aghorapanthis,"  Jouni.  Aiith.  Soc.  Bomb.,  vol.  iii.  No.  4,  1893,  pp.  197-251  ;
W.  Crooke,  "Aghorl,"  Hastings'  Ency.  Rel.  Eih.,  vol.  i,  pp.  210-213.  The
connection  of  skulls  with  the  worship  of  Siva  has  already  occurred  in  the
Ocean  of  Story  (Vol.  I,  p.  5,  5n^).— n.m.p.


m         heoa


THE  ENEMY'S  STRATAGEMS  FAIL  91


became  famous.  He  gained  complete  ascendancy  over  the
mind  of  a  certain  Rajput  courtier  there,  a  favourite  of
the  king,  who  was  won  over  by  this  mean  skill  of  the
teacher.  And  when  the  war  with  the  King  of  Vatsa  came
on,  the  King  Brahmadatta  began  to  consult  him  by  the
agency  of  the  Rajput,  so  that  he  learnt  the  secrets  of  the
government.

Then  the  minister  of  Brahmadatta,  Yogakarandaka,  laid
snares  in  the  path  of  the  King  of  Vatsa  as  he  advanced.
He  tainted,  by  means  of  poison  and  other  deleterious  sub-
stances, the  trees,  flowering  creepers,  water  and  grass  all
along  the  line  of  march.  And  he  sent  poison  damsels  ^  as
dancing- girls  among  the  enemy's  host,  and  he  also  dispatched
nocturnal  assassins  into  their  midst.  But  that  spy,  who  had
assumed  the  character  of  a  prophet,  found  all  this  out,  and
then  quickly  informed  Yaugandharayana  of  it  by  means  of
his  companions.  Yaugandharayana  for  his  part,  when  he
found  it  out,  purified  at  every  step  along  the  line  of  march
the  poisoned  grass,  water,  and  so  on,  by  means  of  corrective
antidotes,  and  forbade  in  the  camp  the  society  of  strange
women,  and  with  the  help  of  Rumanvat  he  captured  and  put
to  death  those  assassins.  When  he  heard  of  that,  Brahma-
datta, having  found  all  his  stratagems  fail,  came  to  the  con-
clusion that  the  King  of  Vatsa,  who  filled  with  his  forces
the  whole  country,  was  hard  to  overcome.  After  deliberating
and  sending  an  ambassador,  he  came  in  person  to  the  King  of
Vatsa,  who  was  encamped  near,  placing  his  clasped  hands
upon  his  head  in  token  of  submission.

The  King  of  Vatsa  for  his  part,  when  the  King  of  Benares
came  to  him,  bringing  a  present,  received  him  with  respect
and  kindness  ;  for  heroes  love  submission.  He  being  thus
And  after  subducd,  that  mighty  king  went  on  pacifying
subduing  all  the  East,  making  the  yielding  bend,  but  extirpat-
hts  Enemies  jj^g  ^^le  obstinate,  as  the  wind  treats  the  trees,
until  he  reached  the  eastern  ocean,  rolling  with  quivering
waves,  as  it  were,  trembling  with  terror  on  account  of  the
Ganges  having  been  conquered.     On  its  extreme  shore  he

^  For  a  detailed  account  of  poison  damsels,  etc.,  see  Appendix  III  at  the
end  of  this  volume. — n.m.p.


92  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

set  up  a  pillar  of  victory,^  looking  like  the  king  of  the
serpents  emerging  from  the  world  below  to  crave  immunity
for  Patala.  Then  the  people  of  Kalinga  ^  submitted  and
paid  tribute,  and  acted  as  the  king's  guides,  so  that  the
renown  of  that  renowned  one  ascended  the  mountain  of
Mahendra.  Having  conquered  a  forest  of  kings  by  means
of  his  elephants,  which  seemed  like  the  peaks  of  the  Vindhya
come  to  him  terrified  at  the  conquest  of  Mahendra,  he  went
to  the  southern  quarter.  There  he  made  his  enemies  cease
their  threatening  murmurs  and  take  to  the  mountains,
strengthless  '  and  pale,  treating  them  as  the  season  of  autumn
treats  the  clouds.

The  Kaveri  being  crossed  by  him  in  his  victorious  onset,
and  the  glory  of  the  king  of  the  Chola  *  race  being  surpassed,
were  befouled  at  the  same  time.  He  no  longer  allowed  the
Muralas  ^  to  exalt  their  heads,  for  they  were  completely
beaten  down  by  tributes  imposed  on  them.®  Though  his
elephants  drank  the  waters  of  the  Godavari  divided  into

^  Jayasiamhha.  Wilson  remarks  that  the  erection  of  these  columns  is
often  alluded  to  by  Hindu  writers,  and  explains  the  characters  of  the  solitary
columns  which  are  sometimes  met  with,  as  the  Lat  at  Delhi,  the  pillars  at
Allahabad,  Bubbal,  etc.

^  Kalinga  is  usually  described  as  extending  from  Orissa  to  Dravi^a  or
below  Madras,  the  coast  of  the  Northern  Circars.  It  appears,  however,  to  be
sometimes  the  Delta  of  the  Ganges.  It  was  known  to  the  ancients  as  Regio
Calingarum,  and  is  familiar  to  the  natives  of  the  Eastern  Archipelago  by  the
name  of  Kling  (Wilson).

3  The  clouds  are  nihsdra,  void  of  substance,  as  being  no  longer  heavy  with
rain.     The  thunder  ceases  in  the  autumn.

*  Chola  was  the  sovereignty  of  the  western  part  of  the  peninsula  on  the
Carnatic,  extending  southwards  to  Tanjore,  where  it  was  bounded  by  the
Pan^yan  kingdom.  It  appears  to  have  been  the  Regio  Soretanum  of  Ptolemy,
and  the  Chola  mandala,  or  district,  furnishes  the  modern  appellation  of  the
Coromandel  coast  (Wilson,  Essays,  p.  24 17^).

*  Murala   is   another   name    for    Kerala,    now    Malabar   (Hall).      Wilson

identifies  it  with  the  Curula  of  Ptolemy. Bamett,  however,  considers  this

very  dubious — n.m.p.

*  By  kdnta  and  kuccsu  being  separated  in  the  Brockhaus  text,  Tawney
misunderstood  the  whole  phrase.  The  D.  text  reads  it  as  one  word,  the
translation  being :  "  Not  only  did  he  not  allow  the  Muralas  to  keep  their
heads  high,  he  abated  also  the  elevation  of  the  women's  breasts  beaten  down
by  their  own  hands  (in  mourning  over  their  killed  relations)."  See  Speyer,
op.  cit.y  p.  102. — N.M.P.


THE  KING  IS  EVERYWHERE  VICTORIOUS     93

seven  streams,  they  seemed  to  discharge  them  again  seven-
fold in  the  form  of  ichor.  Then  the  king  crossed  the  Reva
and  reached  Ujjayini,  and  entered  the  city,  being  made  by
King  Chandamahasena  to  precede  him.  And  there  he  be-
came the  target  of  the  amorous  sidelong  glances  of  the  ladies
of  Malava,  who  shine  with  twofold  beauty  by  loosening  their
braided  hair  and  wearing  garlands ;  and  he  remained  there
in  great  comfort,  hospitably  entertained  by  his  father-in-law,
so  that  he  even  forgot  the  long- regretted  enjoyments  of  his
native  land.  And  Vasavadatta  was  continually  at  her  parent's
side,  remembering  her  childhood,  seeming  despondent  even
in  her  happiness.

The  King  Chandamahasena  was  as  much  delighted  at
meeting  Padmavati  as  he  was  at  meeting  again  his  own
daughter.  But  after  he  had  rested  some  days,  the  delighted
King  of  Vatsa,  reinforced  by  the  troops  of  his  father-in-law,
marched  towards  the  western  region ;  his  curved  sword  ^  was
surely  the  smoke  of  the  fire  of  his  valour,  since  it  dimmed
with  gushing  tears  the  eyes  of  the  women  of  Lata  ;  the
mountain  of  Mandara,  when  its  woods  were  broken  through
by  his  elephants,  seemed  to  tremble  lest  he  should  root  it
up  to  churn  the  sea.^  Surely  he  was  a  splendid  luminary  ex-
celling the  sun  and  other  orbs,  since  in  his  victorious  career
he  enjoyed  a  glorious  rising  even  in  the  western  quarter.
Then  he  went  to  Alaka,  distinguished  by  the  presence  of
Kuvera,  displaying  its  beauties  before  him — that  is  to  say,
to  the  quarter  made  lovely  by  the  smile  of  Kailasa — and
having  subdued  the  King  of  Sindh,  at  the  head  of  his  cavalry
he  destroyed  the  Mlechchhas  as  Rama  destroyed  the  Ra-
kshasas  at  the  head  of  the  army  of  monkeys  ;  the  cavalry
squadrons  of  the  Turushkas  ^  were  broken  on  the  masses  of
his  elephants,  as  the  waves  of  the  agitated  sea  on  the  woods
that  line  the  seashore.     The  august  hero  received  the  tribute

^  Or  perhaps  more  literally  "creeper-like  sword."  Probably  the  ex-
pression means  "  flexible,  well-tempered  sword,"  as  Professor  Nilmani
Mukhopadhyaya  has  suggested  to  me.

2  It  has  been  employed  for  this  purpose  by  the  gods  and  Asuras.    Lata=

the  Larice  of  Ptolemy  (Wilson). i.e.  Gujarat.     See  Cambridge  History  oj

India,  vol.  i,  p.  606.

3  Turks,  the  Indo-scythae  of  the  ancients  (Wilson).


94  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

of  his  foes,  and  cut  off  the  head  of  the  wicked  King  of  the
Parasikas  ^  as  Vishnu  did  that  of  Rahu.^  His  glory,  after  he
had  inflicted  a  defeat  on  the  Hunas,^  made  the  four  quarters
resound,  and  poured  down  the  Himalaya  like  a  second  Ganges.
When  the  hosts  of  the  monarch,  whose  enemies  were  still
from  fear,  were  shouting,  a  hostile  answer  was  heard  only  in
the  hollows  of  the  rocks.  It  is  not  strange  that  then  the
King  of  Kamarupa,*  bending  before  him  with  head  deprived
of  the  umbrella,**  was  without  shade  and  also  without  bright-
ness. Then  that  sovereign  returned,  followed  by  elephants
presented  by  the  King  of  Kamarupa,  resembling  moving
rocks  made  over  to  him  by  the  mountains  by  way  of  tribute.

Having  thus  conquered  the  earth,  the  King  of  Vatsa  with
his  attendants  reached  the  city  of  Magadha,  the  father  of
Padmavati.  But  the  King  of  Magadha,  when  he  arrived
Returns  to  ^^^^  ^^^  quecus,  was  as  joyous  as  the  God  of  Love
Lavanaka  whcu  the  moou  iUumiuatcs  the  night.  Vasava-
victorious  datta,  who  had  lived  with  him  before  without  being
recognised,  was  now  made  known  to  him,  and  he  considered
her  deserving  of  the  highest  regard.

Then  that  victorious  King  of  Vatsa,  having  been  honoured
by  the  King  of  Magadha  with  his  whole  city,  followed  by  the
minds  of  all  the  people  which  pursued  him  out  of  affection,
having  swallowed  the  surface  of  the  earth  with  his  mighty
army,  returned  to  Lavanaka  in  his  own  dominions.

^  Persians.

2  See  note  on  p.  81. — n.m.p.

3  Perhaps  the  Huns.

■*  The  western  portion  of  Assam  (Wilson).
*  See  Appendix  II,  pp.  263-272.— n.m.p.


CHAPTER  XX

THEN  the  King  of  Vatsa,  while  encamped  in  Lavanaka
[M]  to  rest  his  army,  said  in  secret  to  Yaugandhara-
yana  :  "  Through  your  sagacity  I  have  conquered  all
the  kings  upon  the  earth,  and  they  being  won  over  by  politic
devices  will  not  conspire  against  me.  But  this  King  of
Benares,  Brahmadatta,  is  an  ill-conditioned  fellow,  and  he
alone,  I  think,  will  plot  against  me  ;  what  confidence  can  be
reposed  in  the  wicked- minded  ?  "  Then  Yaugandharayana,
being  spoken  to  in  this  strain  by  the  king,  answered  :  "  O
King,  Brahmadatta  will  not  plot  against  you  again,  for  when
he  was  conquered  and  submitted,  you  showed  him  great
consideration  ;  and  what  sensible  man  will  injure  one  who
treats  him  well  ?  Whoever  does,  will  find  that  it  turns  out
unfortunately  for  himself,  and  on  this  point  listen  to  what  I
am  going  to  say  ;  I  will  tell  you  a  tale.


24.  Story  of  Phalabhuti

There  was  once  on  a  time  in  the  land  of  Padma  an
excellent  Brahman  of  high  renown,  named  Agnidatta,  who
lived  on  a  grant  of  land  given  by  the  king.  He  had  born
to  him  two  sons,  the  elder  named  Somadatta,  and  the  second
Vaisvanaradatta.  The  elder  of  them  was  of  fine  person,  but
ignorant,  and  ill- conducted,  but  the  second  was  sagacious,
well-conducted,  and  fond  of  study.  And  those  two  after
they  were  married,  and  their  father  had  died,  divided  that
royal  grant  and  the  rest  of  his  possessions  between  them,
each  taking  half ;  and  the  younger  of  the  two  was  honoured
by  the  king,  but  the  elder,  Somadatta,  who  was  of  unsteady
character,  remained  a  husbandman.

One  day  a  Brahman,  who  had  been  a  friend  of  his  father's,
seeing  him  engaged  in  conversation  with  some  Stidras,  thus
addressed  him  :  "  Though  you  are  the  son  of  Agnidatta,
95


96  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

you  behave  like  a  Sudra,  you  blockhead,  and  you  are  not
ashamed,  though  you  see  your  own  brother  in  favour  with  the
king."  Somadatta,  when  he  heard  that,  flew  into  a  passion,
and,  forgetting  the  respect  due  to  the  old  man,  ran  upon
him,  and  gave  him  a  kick.  Then  the  Brahman,  enraged
on  account  of  the  kick,  immediately  called  on  some  other
Brahmans  to  bear  witness  to  it,  and  went  and  complained
to  the  king.  The  king  sent  out  soldiers  to  take  Somadatta
prisoner,  but  they,  when  they  went  out,  were  slain  by  his
friends,  who  had  taken  up  arms.  Then  the  king  sent  out  a
second  force,  and  captured  Somadatta,  and  blinded  by  wrath
ordered  him  to  be  impaled.  Then  that  Brahman,  as  he  was
being  lifted  on  to  the  stake,  suddenly  fell  to  the  ground,  as  if
he  were  flung  down  by  somebody.  And  those  executioners,
when  preparing  to  lift  him  on  again,  became  blind,  for  the
Fates  protect  one  who  is  destined  to  be  prosperous.

The  king,  as  soon  as  he  heard  of  the  occurrence,  was
pleased,  and  being  entreated  by  the  younger  brother,  spared
the  life  of  Somadatta ;  then  Somadatta,  having  escaped
death,  desired  to  go  to  another  land  with  his  wife  on  account
of  the  insulting  treatment  of  the  king,  and  when  his  relations
in  a  body  disapproved  of  his  departure,  he  determined  to  live
without  the  half  of  the  king's  grant,  which  he  resigned ;  then,
finding  no  other  means  of  support,  he  desired  to  practise
husbandry,  and  went  to  the  forest  on  a  lucky  day  to  find  a
piece  of  ground  suitable  for  it.  There  he  found  a  promising
piece  of  ground,  from  which  it  seemed  likely  that  an  abundant
crop  could  be  produced,  and  in  the  middle  of  it  he  saw  an
A^vattha  tree  of  great  size.  Desiring  ground  fit  for  cultiva-
tion, and  seeing  that  tree  to  be  cool  like  the  rainy  season,  as  it
kept  off  the  rays  of  the  sun  with  its  auspicious  thick  shade,
he  was  much  delighted.  He  said  :  "I  am  a  faithful  votary
of  that  being,  whoever  he  may  be,  that  presides  over  this
tree,"  ^  and  walking  round  the  tree  so  as  to  keep  it  on  his

^  For  the  worship  of  trees  and  tree-spirits,  see  Grimm's  Teutonic  Mythology,

p.  75  et  scq.,  and  Tylor's  Primitive  Culture,  vol.  ii,  p.   I96  et  seq. Besides

the  references  already  given  in  Vol.  I,  p.  144ni,  see  also  Sidney  Hartland,
legend  of  Perseus,  1895,  vol.  ii,  pp.  175-231;  Crooke,  Popular  Religion  of
Northern  India,  vol.  ii,  pp.  83-121  ;   Westermarck,  Origin  and  Development  of


THE  YAKSHA  HELPS  SOMADATTA      97

right,^  he  bowed  before  it.  Then  he  yoked  a  pair  of  bullocks,
and  recited  a  prayer  for  success,  and  after  making  an  oblation
to  that  tree,  he  began  to  plough  there.  And  he  remained
under  that  tree  night  and  day,  and  his  wife  always  brought
him  his  meals  there.  And  in  course  of  time,  when  the  corn
was  ripe,  that  piece  of  ground  was,  as  fate  would  have  it,
unexpectedly  plundered  by  the  troops  of  a  hostile  kingdom.
Then  the  hostile  force  having  departed,  the  courageous  man,
though  his  corn  was  destroyed,  comforted  his  weeping  wife,
gave  her  the  little  that  remained,  and  after  making  an  offer-
ing as  before,  remained  in  the  same  place,  under  the  same
tree.  For  that  is  the  character  of  resolute  men,  that  their
perseverance  is  increased  by  misfortune.

Then  one  night,  when  he  was  sleepless  from  anxiety
and  alone,  a  voice  came  out  from  that  Asvattha  tree  :  "  O
Somadatta,  I  am  pleased  with  thee,  therefore  go  to  the
rj^j^^  kingdom  of  a  king  named  Adityaprabha  in  the

Reward  of  land  of  Srikantha ;  continually  repeat  at  the  door
Perseverance  q£  ^j^^^^  hivig  (after  reciting  the  form  of  words  used
at  the  evening  oblation  to  Agni)  the  following  sentence : —
'  I  am  Phalabhuti  by  name,  a  Brahman,  hear  what  I  say  :
he  who  does  good  will  obtain  good,  and  he  who  does  evil  will
obtain  evil  ' ;  by  repeating  this  thou  shalt  obtain  great
prosperity ;  and  now  learn  from  me  the  form  of  words  used
at  the  evening  oblation  to  Agni ;  I  am  a  Yaksha."  Having
said  this,  and  having  immediately  taught  him  by  his  power
the  form  of  words  used  in  the  evening  oblation,  the  voice
in  the  tree  ceased.

And  the  next  morning  the  wise  Somadatta  set  out  with
his  wife,  having  received  the  name  of  Phalabhuti  by  im-
position of  the  Yaksha,  and  after  crossing  various  forests,
uneven  and  labyrinthine  as  his  own  calamities, ^  he  reached
the  land  of  Srikantha.  There  he  recited  at  the  king's  door
the  form  of  words  used  at  the  evening  oblation,  and  then  he

the  Moral  Idea  (2nd  edit.),  1919,  vol.  ii,  p.  5l6;  T.  C.  Hodson,  "Primitive
Culture  of  India,"  Roy.  As.  Soc,  1922,  p.  104. — n.m.p.

1  See  Vol.  I,  pp.  190-193.— N.M.P.

2  I  here  read  durdasdh  for  the  durdarsdh  of  Dr  Brockhaus'  text.  It  must
be  a  misprint.     A  MS.  in  the  Sanskrit  College  reads  durdasdh.

VOL.  II.  O


98  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

announced,  as  he  had  been  directed,  his  name  as  Phalabhuti,
and  uttered  the  following  speech,  which  excited  the  curiosity
of  the  people  : — "  The  doer  of  good  will  obtain  good,  but  the
doer  of  evil,  evil."  And  after  he  had  said  this  frequently,
the  King  Adityaprabha,  being  full  of  curiosity,  caused  Phala-
bhuti to  be  brought  into  the  palace,  and  he  entered,  and
over  and  over  again  repeated  that  same  speech  in  the  pres-
ence of  the  king.  That  made  the  king  and  all  his  courtiers
laugh.  And  the  king  and  his  chiefs  gave  him  garments  and
ornaments,  and  also  villages,  for  the  amusement  of  great
men  is  not  without  fruit ;  and  so  Phalabhuti,  having  been
originally  poor,  immediately  obtained  by  the  favour  of  the
Guhyaka  ^  wealth  bestowed  by  the  king  ;  and  by  continually
reciting  the  words  mentioned  above  he  became  a  special
favourite  of  the  monarch ;  for  the  regal  mind  loves  diversion.
And  gradually  he  attained  to  a  position  of  love  and  respect
in  the  palace,  in  the  kingdom,  and  in  the  female  apartments,
as  being  beloved  by  the  king.

One  day  that  King  Adityaprabha  returned  from  hunting
in  the  forest,  and  quickly  entered  his  harem  ^ ;  his  suspicions
were  aroused  by  the  confusion  of  the  warders,  and  when  he
The  King's  entered,  he  saw  the  queen  named  Kuvalayavali
amazing  engaged  in  worshipping  the   gods,  stark  naked  ^

Discovery  ^-^j^  j^^j.  j^g^-j,  standing  on  end,  and  her  eyes  half
closed,  with  a  large  patch  of  red  lead  upon  her  forehead,
with  her  lips  trembling  in  muttering  charms,  in  the  midst
of  a  great  circle  *  strewed  with  various  coloiured  powders,

^  The  Guhyakas  are  demigods,  attendants  upon  Kuvera  and  guardians
of  his  wealth. See  Vol.  I,  Appendix  I,  p.  203. — n.m.p.

2  See  note,  p.  l62. — n.m.p.

3  Literally,  "  having  the  cardinal  points  as  her  only  garment." For

nudity  in  ritual  and  magic  see  Note  1  at  the  end  of  this  chapter. — n.m.p.

*  For  the  circle  see  Henry  FI,  Part  II,  Act  i,  sc.  4,  line  25,  and  Henry  V,
Act  V,  sc.  2,  line  420  :  "  If  you  would  conjure  .  .  .  you  must  make  a  circle."
See  also  Ralston's  Russian  Folk-Tales^  p.  272  ;  Veckenstedt's  Wendische  Sagen,
pp.  292,  302, 303.  See  also  Wirt  Sikes,  British  Goblins,  pp.  200,  20 1  ;  Henderson's
Northern  FoUc-Lore,  p.  19  ;  Bartsch's  Sagen,  Marchen  und  Gehr'duche  aus  Meklen-
burg,  vol.  i,  pp.  128,  213.  Prof.  Jebb,  in  his  notes  on  Theophrastus'
"Superstitious  Man,"  observes:  "The  object  of  all  those  ceremonies,  in
which  the  offerings  were  carried  round  the  person  or  place  to  be  purified,
was  to  trace  a  charmed  circle  within  which  the  powers  of  evil  should  not


THE  MAGIC  CIRCLE  99

after  offering  a  horrible  oblation  of  blood,  spirits  and  human
flesh.  She  for  her  part,  when  the  king  entered,  in  her
confusion  seized  her  garments,  and  when  questioned  by  him
immediately  answered,  after  craving  pardon  for  what  she
had  done  :  "I  have  gone  through  this  ceremony  in  order
that  you  might  obtain  prosperity,  and  now,  my  lord,  listen
to  the  way  in  which  I  learnt  these  rites,  and  the  secret  of  my
magic  skill.

24a.  Kuvalay avail  and  the  Witch  Kalardtri

Long  ago,  when  I  was  living  in  my  father's  house,  I  was
thus  addressed,  while  enjoying  myself  in  the  garden  during
the  spring  festival,  by  my  friends  who  met  me  there  :  "  There
is  in  this  pleasure-garden  an  image  of  Ganesa,  the  god  of  gods,
in  the  middle  of  an  arbour  made  of  trees,  and  that  image
grants  boons,  and  its  power  has  been  tested.  Approach  with
devout  faith  that  granter  of  petitions,  and  worship  him,  in
order  that  you  may  soon  obtain  without  difficulty  a  suit-
able husband."  When  I  heard  that,  I  asked  my  friends  in
my  ignorance  :    "  What  !    do   maidens  obtain  husbands  by

<;ome."     Cf.  also  Grossler's  Sagen  ausder  Grafschaft  Mansfeld,  p.  217  ;  Brand's

Popular  Antiquities,  vol.  iii,  p.  5Q\  Grohmann's  Sagen  aus  Bohmen,  p.  226.

In  his  Popular  Religion  and  Folk-Lore  of  Northern  India  (vol.  i,  pp.  103,  142;
vol.  ii,  p.  4<1)  W.  Crooke  gives  details  of  the  circle  among  the  Hindus.  For
the  magic  circle  in  Babylonia,  Assyria  and  adjacent  countries  see  R.  Campbell
Thompson,  Semitic  Magic,  1908,  pp.  Ix  et.  seq.,  102,  123,  l65,  204  and  207.
The  numerous  mediaeval  references  in  the  works  of  William  of  Auvergne,
Roger  Bacon,  Raymond  Lull,  Peter  of  Abano,  etc.,  are  all  to  be  found  in
Thorndike,  A  History  of  Magic  and  Experimental  Science,  1923.  (See  the  General
Index  in  each  volume  under  "  Circle,  magic")  For  a  comprehensive  article
on  the  whole  subject  reference  should  be  made  to  A.  E.  Crawley,  "  Magical
Circle,"  Hastings'  Ewcy.  Rel.  Eih.,  vol.  viii,  pp.  321-324.  I  would  also  draw
the  attention  of  readers  to  the  exhaustive  series  of  articles  on  "  Magic "  by
a  large  number  of  eminent  scholars  in  the  same  volume  (pp.  245-321).

It  appears  that  the  use  of  the  magical  circle  is  really  twofold.  Firstly
it  serves  as  a  protective  barrier  to  the  dead  and  dying,  and  also  round  a  house,
subsequently  giving  rise  to  the  superstitions  connected  with  wedding  rings,
bangles,  etc.  Secondly  it  appears  in  black  magic  as  a  kind  of  magical  vantage
ground  in  which  the  "operator"  is  himself  safe  and  to  which  he  can  compel
the  presence  of  evil  spirits.  The  circle  also  denotes  finality  and  continuity.
It  commands  every  point  of  the  compass  and  can  be  regarded  as  an  inner
■concentric  circle  of  the  horizon  itself.     All  these  points  are  made  quite  clear


100  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

worshipping  Gane^a  ?  "  Then  they  answered  me  :  "  Wliy  do
you  ask  such  a  question  ?  Without  worshipping  him  no  one
obtains  any  success  in  this  world ;  and  in  proof  of  it  we  will
give  you  an  instance  of  his  power.  Listen."  Saying  this,  my
friends  told  me  the  following  tale  :  —

24aa.  The  Birth  of  Kdrttikeya

Long  ago,  when  Indra,  oppressed  by  Taraka,  was  desirous
of  obtaining  a  son  from  Siva  to  act  as  general  of  the  gods,
and  the  God  of  Love  had  been  consumed,^  Gauri  by  perform-
ing austerities  sought  and  gained  as  a  husband  the  three- eyed
god,  who  was  engaged  in  a  very  long  and  terrible  course  of
mortification.  Then  she  desired  the  obtaining  of  a  son,  and
the  return  to  life  of  the  God  of  Love,  but  she  did  not  remember
to  worship  Ganei^a  in  order  to  gain  her  end.  So,  when  his
beloved  asked  that  her  desire  should  be  granted,  Siva  said
to  her  :  "  My  dear  goddess,  the  God  of  Love  was  born  long
ago  from  the  mind  of  Brahma,  and  no  sooner  was  he  born
than  he  said  in  his  insolence  :  '  Whom  shall  I  make  mad
{kan  darpaydmi)  ?  '  So  Brahma  called  him  Kandarpa,  and
said  to  him  :  '  Since  thou  art  very  confident,  my  son,  avoid
attacking  Siva  only,  lest  thou  receive  death  from  him.*
Though  the  creator  gave  him  this  warning,  the  ill-disposed
god  came  to  trouble  my  austerities,  therefore  he  was  burned
up  by  me,  and  he  cannot  be  created  again  with  his  body.^

if  we  look  through  the  voluminous  literature  on  the  subject.  There  is>
however,  one  further  point  I  would  mention.  The  circle  is  not  only  a  safe
place  to  be  in  when  "conjuring,"  but  often  acts  as  a  prison  from  which
escape  is  impossible.  Thus  in  J.  H.  Bridges,  Opus  Mains  of  Roger  Bacon^
vol.  ii,  p.  208,  we  read  :  "  Moreover,  there  are  numerous  things  which  kill
every  venomous  animal  by  the  slightest  contact ;  and  if  a  circle  is  drawn  about
such  animals  with  objects  of  this  sort  [herbs,  stones,  metals,  etc.]  they  cannot
get  out,  but  die  without  having  been  touched."  Cf.  with  this  the  curious
story  of  the  magic  circle  made  of  dittany  juice  as  told  in  Appendix  III  of
this  volume,  p.  295.  In  Chapter  XXXVII  we  shall  come  across  a  great  circle
made  of  ashes,  where  I  shall  add  a  further  note. — n.m.p.

^  I.e.  by  the  fire  of  Siva's  eye.

*  Perhaps  we  ought  to  read  sadehasya.  I  find  this  reading  in  a  MS.  lent
to  me  by  the  Librarian  of  the  Sanskrit  College  with  the  kind  permission  of
the  Principal.


p


AGNI  IS  ENTRUSTED  WITH  A  DELICATE  MISSION  101

But  I  will  create  by  my  power  a  son  from  you,  for  I  do
not  require  the  might  of  love  in  order  to  have  offspring  as
mortals  do."

While  the  god,  whose  ensign  is  a  buU,^  was  saying  this
to  Parvati,  Brahma  accompanied  by  Indra  appeared  before
him  ;  and  when  he  had  been  praised  by  them,  and  entreated
to  bring  about  the  destruction  of  the  Asura  Taraka,  Siva
consented  to  beget  on  the  goddess  a  son  of  his  body.  And,
at  their  entreaty,  he  consented  that  the  God  of  Love  should
be  born  without  body  in  the  minds  of  animate  creatures,
to  prevent  the  destruction  of  created  beings.  And  he  gave
permission  to  love  to  inflame  his  own  mind  ;  pleased  with
that,  the  creator  went  away  and  Parvati  was  delighted.

Some  days  after  this,  Siva  in  privacy  pursued  the  sport
of  love  with  Uma.  When  there  was  no  end  to  his  amorous
play,  though  centuries  passed  by,  the  triple  world  trembled
at  the  friction  thereof.  Then  from  fear  of  the  world  perish-
ing, the  gods,  by  order  of  Brahma,  called  to  mind  Agni  in
order  to  stop  Siva's  amorous  play.  Agni,  for  his  part,  the
moment  they  called  him  to  mind,  thinking  that  the  foe  of
the  God  of  Love  was  irresistible,  and  afraid  to  interfere,  fled
from  the  gods  and  entered  the  water  ;  but  the  frogs,  being
burned  by  his  heat,  told  the  gods,  who  were  searching  for
him,  that  he  was  in  the  water  ;  then  Agni  by  his  curse  im-
mediately made  the  speech  of  the  frogs  thenceforth  inarticu-
late, and  again  disappearing  fled  to  a  paradise  tree.^  There
the  gods  found  him,  concealed  in  the  trunk  of  the  tree,  in  the
form  of  a  snail,  for  he  was  betrayed  by  the  elephants  and
parrots,  and  he  appeared  to  them.  And  after  making  by  a
curse  the  tongues  of  the  parrots  and  the  elephants  incapable
of  clear  utterance,  he  promised  to  do  what  the  gods  requested,
having  been  praised  by  them.  So  he  went  to  Siva  and  by
his  heat  stopped  Siva  from  his  amorous  play,  and  after  in-
clining humbly  before  him,  through  fear  of  being  cursed,  he
informed  him  of  the  commission  the  gods  had  given  him.
Siva,  in  his  turn,  as  the  impulse  arose  in  him,  deposited  his

1  I.e.  Siva.

2  The  correct  reading  here  is  mandara, "  paradise  "  tree  ;  Tawney  originally
had  "place  of  refuge." — n.m.p.


102  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

seed  in  the  fire.  Neither  the  Fire  nor  Uma  was  able  to  bear
this.  The  goddess,  distracted  with  anger  and  grief,  said  :
"  I  have  not  obtained  a  son  from  you  after  all  "  ;  and  Siva
said  to  her  ;  "  An  obstacle  has  arisen  in  this  matter,  because
you  neglected  to  worship  Gane^a,  the  Lord  of  Obstacles  ;
therefore  adore  him  now  in  order  that  a  son  may  speedily  be
born  to  us  in  the  fire."

When  thus  addressed  by  Siva,  the  goddess  worshipped
Ganei^a,  and  the  fire  became  pregnant  with  that  germ  of  Siva.
Then,  bearing  that  embryo  of  Siva,  the  fire  shone  even  in  the
day  as  if  the  sun  had  entered  into  it.  And  then  it  discharged
into  the  Ganges  the  germ  difficult  to  bear,  and  the  Ganas,
by  the  order  of  Siva,  placed  it  in  a  sacrificial  cavity  on  Mount
Meru.  There  that  germ  was  watched  by  the  Ganas,  Siva's
attendants,  and  after  a  thousand  years  had  developed  it,  it
became  a  boy  with  six  faces.^  Then,  drinking  milk  with  his
six  mouths  from  the  breasts  of  the  six  Krittikas  ^  appointed
by  Gauri  to  nurse  him,  the  boy  grew  big  in  a  few  days.  In
the  meanwhile,  the  king  of  the  gods,  overcome  by  the  Asura
Taraka,  fled  to  the  difficult  peaks  of  Mount  Meru,  abandoning
the  field  of  battle.  And  the  gods,  together  with  the  Rishis,
went  to  the  six-mouthed  Karttikeya  for  protection,  and  he,
defending  the  god,  remained  surrounded  by  them.  When
Indra  heard  that,  he  was  troubled,  considering  that  his  king-
dom was  taken  from  him,  and  being  jealous  he  went  and  made
war  upon  Karttikeya.  But  from  the  body  of  Karttikeya,
when  struck  by  the  thunderbolt  of  Indra,  there  sprang  two
sons  called  Sakha  and  Vi^akha,  both  of  incomparable  might.

Then  Siva  came  to  his  offspring  Karttikeya,  who  ex-
ceeded Indra  in  might,  and  forbade  him  and  his  two  sons  to
fight,  and  rebuked  him  in  the  following  words  : — "  Thou  wast
born  in  order  that  thou  mightest  slay  Taraka  and  protect
the  realm  of  Indra,  therefore  do  thy  own  duty."  Then
Indra  was  delighted,  and  immediately  bowed  before  him,
and  commenced  the  ceremony  of  consecrating  by  ablutions

^  Cf.  with  this  wild  legend  a  similar  one  in  the  first  book  of  the  Rdmdyana.
Tawney  omitted  some  details  here  in  the  translation.  They  have  now  been
added  from  the  D.  text  by  Dr  Barnett. — n.m.p.

^  I.e.  the  six  Pleiades.


THE  POWER  OF  FLYING  THROUGH  THE  AIR    103

Karttikeya  as  general  of  his  forces.  But  when  he  himself
lifted  the  pitcher  for  that  purpose,  his  arm  became  stiff,
wherefore  he  was  despondent,  but  Siva  said  to  him  :  "  Thou
didst  not  worship  the  elephant-faced  god  when  thou  desiredst
a  general ;  it  was  for  this  reason  that  thou  hast  met  with  this
obstacle,  therefore  adore  him  now."  Indra,  when  he  heard
that,  did  so,  and  his  arm  was  set  free,  and  he  duly  performed
the  joyful  ceremony  of  consecrating  the  general.  And,  not
long  after,  the  general  slew  the  Asura  Taraka,  and  the  gods
rejoiced  at  having  accomplished  their  object,  and  Gauri  at
having  obtained  a  son.  So,  princess,  you  see  even  the  gods
are  not  successful  without  honouring  Ganesa,  therefore  adore
him  when  you  desire  a  blessing.

24a.  Kuvalay avail  and  the  Witch  Kdlardtri

After  hearing  this  from  my  companions,  I  went,  my
husband,  and  worshipped  an  image  of  Ganesa  that  stood  in
a  lonely  part  of  the  garden,  and  after  I  had  finished  the
worship  I  suddenly  saw  that  those  companions  of  mine  had
flown  up  by  their  own  power  and  were  disporting  themselves
in  the  fields  of  the  air  ;  when  I  saw  that,  out  of  curiosity  I
called  them  and  made  them  come  down  from  the  heaven,
and  when  I  asked  them  about  the  nature  of  their  magic
power,  they  immediately  gave  me  this  answer :  "  These  are
the  magic  powers  of  witches'  spells,  and  they  are  due  to  the
eating  of  human  flesh,  and  our  teacher  in  this  is  a  Brahman
woman  known  by  the  name  of  Kalaratri."  When  my  com-
panions said  this  to  me,  I,  being  desirous  of  acquiring  the
power  of  a  woman  that  can  fly  in  the  air,  but  afraid  of  eating
human  flesh,  was  for  a  time  in  a  state  of  hesitation  ;  then,
eager  to  possess  that  power,  I  said  to  those  friends  of  mine  :
"  Cause  me  also  to  be  instructed  in  this  science."  And
immediately  they  went  and  brought,  in  accordance  with  my
request,  Kalaratri,  who  was  of  repulsive  appearance.  Her
eyebrows  met,^  she  had   dull    eyes,  a  depressed  flat  nose,

^  Mr  Tylor  (in  his  Primitive  Culture,  vol.  ii,  p.  1 76),  speaking  of  Slavonian
superstition,  says :  "  A  man  whose  eyebrows  meet  as  if  his  soul  were  taking
flight  to  enter  some  other  body,  may  be  marked  by  this  sign  either  as  a
werewolf  or  a  vampire."     In  Icelandic  Sagas  a  man  with  meeting  eyebrows


104  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

large  cheeks,  widely  parted  lips,  projecting  teeth,  a  long
neck,  pendulous  breasts,  a  large  belly,  and  broad  expanded
feet.  She  appeared  as  if  the  creator  had  made  her  as  a
specimen  of  his  skill  in  producing  ugliness.^  When  I  fell  at
her  feet,  after  bathing  and  worshipping  Gane^a,  she  made  me
take  off  my  clothes  and  perform,  standing  in  a  circle,  a  horrible
ceremony  in  honour  of  Siva  in  his  terrific  form,  and  after  she
had  sprinkled  me  with  water  she  gave  me  various  spells
known  to  her,  and  human  flesh  to  eat  that  had  been  offered
in  sacrifice  to  the  gods ;  so,  after  I  had  eaten  man's  flesh
and  had  received  the  various  spells,  I  immediately  flew  up,
naked  as  I  was,  into  the  heaven  with  my  friends,  and  after
I  had  amused  myself,  I  descended  from  the  heaven  by  com-
mand of  my  teacher,  and  I,  the  princess,  went  to  my  own
apartments.  Thus  even  in  my  girlhood  I  became  one  of  the
society  of  witches,'^  and  in  our  meetings  we  devoured  the

is  said  to  be  a  werewolf.  The  same  idea  holds  in  Denmark,  also  in  Germany,
whilst  in  Greece  it  is  a  si^n  that  a  man  is  a  Brukolak  or  vampire  (note  by
Baring-Gould  in  Henderson's  Folk-Lore  of  the  Northern  Counties).  The  same
idea  is  found  in  Bohemia,  see  Grohmann's  Sagen  aus  Bohmen,  p.  210.     Cf.

Grimm's    IrLsche  M'drchen,  p.   cviii. See   Tawney's   original   note   on   this

subject  in  Ind.  Ant.,  vol.  vii,  1878,  p.  87.  We  have  already  seen  (Vol.  I,
p.  214)  that  the  Persians  considered  joined  eyebrows  beautiful.  The  Arabs
held  the  same  views,  and  we  read  in  the  Nights  (Burton,  vol.  i,  p.  227  ;  vol.  iii,
p.  164 ;  vol.  viii,  p.  206)  of  "high-bosomed  maids  and  of  an  equal  age,  with
black  eyes  and  cheeks  like  the  rose,  joined  eyebrows  and  looks  languorous"
and  "she  had  eyes  kohtd  with  nature's  dye  and  joined  eyebrows,  a  mouth
as  it  were  Solomon's  seal  and  lips  and  teeth  bright  with  pearls'  and  coral's
ight." — N.M.p.

^  The  D.  text  reads  nayanananavantolkd  as  one  of  the  epithets,  "  casting
forth  flames  out  of  her  eyes  and  mouth."  The  Arab  story-tellers  have  equally
lucid  descriptions  of  old  hags  and  witches.  Thus  in  the  Nights  (Burton,
vol.  ii,  p.  233)  we  read :  "  Now  this  accursed  old  woman  was  a  witch  of
the  witches,  past  mistress  in  sorcery  and  deception ;  wanton  and  wily,
deboshed  and  deceptious ;  with  foul  breath,  red  eyelids,  yellow  cheeks,
dull-brown  face,  eyes  bleared,  mangy  body,  hair  grizzled,  back  humped,  skin
withered  and  wan,  and  nostrils  which  ever  ran."  Similarly  in  vol.  viii,  p.  86,
Hasan  meets  a  "  grizzled  old  woman,  blue-eyed  [unlucky]  and  big-nosed,  a
calamity  of  calamities,  the  foulest  of  all  created  things,  with  face  pock-
marked and  eyebrows  bald,  gap-toothed  and  chap-fallen,  with  hair  hoary,
nose  running  and  mouth  slavering  .  .  ." — n.m.p.

2  These  magical  rides  in  the  air  remind  us  of  the  orgies  held  by  witches
on  the  Brockcn  mountain  in  the  Harz  on  Walpurgis  night  (1st  May).     Readers


r

W      bodie


REJECTED  LOVE  OF  WOMEN  105


bodies  of  many  men.     But  listen,  King,  to  a  story  which  is  a
digression  from  my  main  tale.

24b.  Sundaraka  and  the  Witches

That  Kalaratri  had  for  husband  a  Brahman  of  the  name
of  Vishnusvamin,  and  he,  being  an  instructor  in  that  country,
taught  many  pupils  who  came  from  different  lands,  as  he
was  skilful  in  the  exposition  of  the  Vedas.  And  among  his
pupils  he  had  one  young  man  of  the  name  of  Sundaraka,  the
beauty  of  whose  person  was  set  off  by  his  excellent  character.
One  day  the  teacher's  wife  Kalaratri  being  love-sick  secretly
courted  him,  her  husband  having  gone  away  to  some  place
or  other.  Truly  Kama  makes  great  sport  with  ugly  people
as  his  laughing-stocks,  in  that  she,  not  considering  her  own
appearance,  fell  in  love  with  Sundaraka.  But  he,  though
tempted,  detested  with  his  whole  soul  the  crime  ;  however
women  may  misbehave,  the  mind  of  the  good  is  not  to  be
shaken.

Then,  he  having  departed,  Kalaratri  in  a  rage  tore  her  own
body  with  bites  and  scratches,  and  she  remained  weeping,^
with  dress  and  locks  disordered,  until  the  teacher  Vishnus-
vamin entered  the  house.  And  when  he  had  entered  she  said
to  him  :  "  Look,  my  lord,  to  this  state  has  Sundaraka  reduced
me,  endeavouring  to  gain  possession  of  me  by  force.  "^  As
soon  as  the  teacher  heard  that,  he  was  inflamed  with  anger  ;
for  confidence  in  women  robs  even  wise  men  of  their  power  of
reflection ;  and  when  Sundaraka  returned  home  at  night  he
ran  upon  him,  and  he  and  his  pupils  kicked  him,  and  struck
him  with  fists  and  sticks  ;    moreover,  when  he  was  senseless

will,  naturally,  think  of  the  famous  "  Brocken  scene  "  in  Goethe's  Faust,  See
the  Index  volume  to  Frazer's  Golden  Bough,  p.  517.  A  similar  night  was
31st  October,  known  as  Hallowe'en  or  All-Hallows  day,  which  was  the  one
night  in  all  the  year  that  ghosts  and  witches  were  sure  to  be  found  wandering
about.  See  Brand's  Popular  Antiquities  of  Great  Britain,  1882-1883;  Grimm's
Deutsche  Mythologie,  ch.  xx  (Elemente)  and  ch.  xxxiv ;  and  the  references
given  in  Frazer,  Golden  Bough,  vol.  x,  p.  266  et  seq.,  and  vol.  xi,  pp.  184n*,
185. — N.M.P.

^  I  read  dsta  for  asu.

2  See  Note  2  at  the  end  of  this  chapter. — n.m.p.


106  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

with  the  blows,  he  ordered  his  pupils  to  fling  him  out  in
the  road  by  night,  without  regard  to  his  safety  ;  and  they
did  so.

Then  Sundaraka  was  gradually  restored  to  consciousness
by  the  cool  night  breeze,  and  seeing  himself  thus  outraged
he  reflected  :  "  Alas  !  the  instigation  of  a  woman  troubles
the  minds  even  of  those  men  whose  souls  are  not  under  the
dominion  of  passion,  as  a  storm  disturbs  the  repose  of  lakes
which  are  not  reached  by  dust/  This  is  why  that  teacher
of  mine,  in  the  excess  of  his  anger,  though  old  and  wise,  was
so  inconsiderate  as  to  treat  me  so  cruelly.  But  the  fact  is,
lust  and  wrath  are  appointed  in  the  dispensation  of  fate,
from  the  very  birth  even  of  wise  Brahmans,  to  be  the  two
bolts  on  the  door  of  their  salvation.  ^  For  were  not  the  sages
long  ago  angry  with  Siva  in  the  devaddru  wood,  being  afraid
that  their  wives  would  go  astray  ?  And  they  did  not  know
that  he  was  a  god,  as  he  had  assumed  the  appearance  of  a
Buddhist  mendicant,  with  the  intention  of  showing  Uma
that  even  Rishis  do  not  possess  self-restraint.  But  after
they  had  cursed  him,  they  discovered  that  he  was  the  ruling
god  that  shakes  the  three  worlds,  and  they  fled  to  him  for
protection.  So  it  appears  that  even  hermits  injure  others
when  beguiled  by  the  six  faults  that  are  enemies  of  man,*
lust,  wrath  and  their  crew,  much  more  so  Brahmans  learned
in  the  Vedas."

Thinking  thus,  Sundaraka,  from  fear  of  robbers  during
the  night,  climbed  up  and  took  shelter  in  a  neighbouring
cow-house.  And  while  he  was  crouching  unobserved  in  a
corner  of  that  cow-house,  Kalaratri  came  into  it  with  a  drawn
sword  in  her  hand,*  terrible  from  the  hissing  she  uttered,  with
wind  and  flames  issuing  from  her  mouth  and  eyes,  accom-
panied by  a  crowd  of  witches.  Then  the  terrified  Sundaraka,
beholding  Kalaratri  arriving  in  such  a  guise,  called  to  mind
the  spells  that  drive   away  Rakshasas,  and  bewildered  by

*  Rajas  in  Sanskrit  means  "dust"  and  also  "passion."

*  I.e.  immunity  from  future  births.

2  I.e.  desire,  wratli,  covetousness,  bewilderment,  pride  and  envy.

*  Cf.  the  j^thiopica  of  Heliodorus,  Book  VII,  eh.  xv,  where  the  witch  is
armed  with  a  sword  during  her  incantations ;  and  Homer's  Odyssey,  xi,  48.
See  also  for  the  magic  virtues  of  steel,  Liebrecht,  Zur  Volkskunde,  pp.  312,  313.


SUNDARAKA  OVERHEARS  THE  WITCHES'  SPELL  107

these  spells  Kalaratri  did  not  see  him  crouching  secretly  in  a
corner,  with  his  limbs  drawn  together  from  fear.   Then  Kala-
ratri with  her  friends  recited  the  spells  that  enable  witches
to  fly,  and  they  flew  up  into  the  air,  cow-house  and  all.
And   Sundaraka   heard  the   spell  and  remembered  it  ^  ;

^  See  Veekenstedt's  Wendische  Sagen,  p.  289,  where  a  young  man  over-
hears a  spell  with    similar    results.     See    also  Bartsch's    Sagen,  Marchen  und

Gebrauche  aus  Meklenburg,  vol.  i,  p.  115. This  well-known  motif  h^s  already

occurred  in  the  Ocean  of  Story  (Vol.  I,  p.  48),  where  Vararuchi  discovers  why
the  fish  laughed  by  overhearing  the  conversation  of  a  female  Rakshasa.  I
gave  a  few  analogues  in  a  short  note  (p.  487?^)  and  will  add  some  more  in  a
note  in  Vol.  Ill,  Chapter  XXIX.  I  shall,  therefore,  chiefly  confine  myself
here  to  a  brief  discussion  of  the  origin  of  the  motif  with  special  reference  to
the  art  of  learning  the  languages  of  animals.

That  birds  and  beasts  have  a  language  of  their  own  which  can  sometimes
be  understood  by  human  beings  is  a  most  natural  and  universal  motif  of  folk-
tales. All  manner  of  ways  in  which  this  great  gift  can  be  obtained  have
suggested  themselves  to  the  story-teller.  It  is  sometimes  given  as  a  reward
for  some  kind  service  rendered  to  an  animal,  it  may  be  acquired  by  the  aid  of
magic,  it  can  be  a  boon  from  a  god,  or  the  hero  may  be  actually  born  with  the
power.  Primitive  minds  have  always  credited  animals  with  great  wisdom  and
understanding,  and  as  possessing  important  secrets  which  can  only  be  dis-
covered if  the  language  is  understood.  Stories  have,  therefore,  naturally
arisen  to  explain  how  the  hero  acquired  this  most  useful  gift.

The  language  of  birds  enters  into  folk-lore  much  more  than  the  language
of  beasts.  This  is  not  to  be  wondered  at,  owing,  I  think,  to  the  simple  fact
that  a  bird  can  get  to  inaccessible  places  much  more  easily  than  a  beast.  Thus
the  bird  can  fly  to  a  magic  island,  to  an  enchanted  tree  or  a  hidden  cave — it
can  perch  on  the  window-sill  of  a  room  and  see  and  hear  what  goes  on  inside.
In  fact  it  becomes  a  most  useful  Deus  ex  machina  to  the  story-teller.  The
English  expression  "a  little  bird  told  me  "  contains  the  same  idea.  Cf,  Eccles.
X,  20.

But  to  return  to  the  7«o^i/' of  overhearing.  A  bird  or  beast  meets  his  mate
and  proceeds  to  tell  his  most  recent  adventures — what  strange  place  he  has
visited,  what  rare  jewel  he  has  found,  or  the  latest  scandal  from  the  palace  in
the  neighbouring  city.  The  hero  in  nearly  all  cases  happens  to  be  hiding  or
sleeping  in  the  tree  on  which  the  birds  perch  or  under  which  the  animals  are
resting.

In  other  cases  it  is  supernatural  beings  who  converse — Rakshasas,  giants,
vampires,  etc.  Sometimes  they  give  away  a  secret  which  is  fatal  to  them-
selves— a  snake  will  tell  his  companion  what  is  the  only  way  he  could  be
killed,  and,  of  course,  the  hero  takes  the  tip  at  the  earliest  opportunity,
usually  securing  some  hidden  jewel  or  gold.

The  above  gives,  roughly,  the  usual  uses  to  which  this  motif  is  put.  The
origin  of  the  idea  can  perhaps  be  traced  to  homoeopathic  or  imitative  magic.    Thus


108  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

but  Kalaratri  with  the  cow-house  quickly  flew  through  the
air  to  Ujjayini  :  there  she  made  it  descend  by  a  spell  in  a
garden  of  herbs,  and  went  and  sported  in  the  cemetery
among  the  witches  :  and  immediately  Sundaraka,  being
hungry,  went  down  into  the  garden  of  herbs  and  made  a  meal
on  some  roots  which  he  dug  up,  and  after  he  had  allayed
the  pangs  of  hunger,  and  returned  to  the  cow-house,  Kalaratri
came  back  in  the  middle  of  the  night  from  her  meeting.
Then  she  got  up  into  the  cow-house,  and,  just  as  before,
she  flew  through  the  air  with  her  pupils  by  the  power  of  her
magic,  and  returned  home  in  the  night.  And  after  she  had
replaced  the  cow-house,  which  she  made  use  of  as  a  vehicle,
in  its  original  situation,  and  had  dismissed  those  followers  of

if  you  wish  to  acquire  a  certain  quality  of  an  animal  all  you  have  to  do  is  to
kill  it  and  eat  it,  and,  ipso  facto,  the  particular  quality  of  your  victim  becomes
yours.  In  a  widely  distributed  number  of  stories  the  eating  of  a  snake  imparts
the  power  of  understanding  the  language  of  birds  and  beasts.  The  exact
reason  for  this  is  not  clear  unless  it  is  because  the  snake  (or  dragon)  is  often
considered  as  half-way  between  a  beast  and  a  bird.  It  is  interesting  to  note
that  Pliny  (//w/.  Nat,,  x,  137;  xxix,  72)  reports  Democritus  to  have  said  that
serpents  were  generated  from  the  mixed  blood  of  certain  birds,  and  that  in
consequence  anyone  who  ate  a  serpent  would  acquire  the  power  to  understand
the  bird  language.  In  describing  the  "  Dragons  of  India,"  Apollonius  of  Tyana
(iii,  9)  says  that  the  Indians  eat  the  dragon's  heart  and  liver  in  order  to  be
able  to  understand  the  language  and  thoughts  of  animals.  During  his  sojourn
among  the  Arab  tribes  he  is  said  to  have  mastered  this  great  art  and  to  have
listened  to  the  birds,  as  these  predict  the  future  (i,  20).  See  Thorndike,  A
History  of  Magic  and  Experimental  Science,  vol.  i,  p.  26 1.  For  other  examples
of  the  use  of  the  snake  to  give  the  power  of  understanding  the  language  of
birds  see  J.  A.  Macculloch,  The  Childhood  of  Fiction,  p.  41  ;  Frazer,  Golden
Bough,  vol.  viii,  p.  146.

At  times  (see  for  instance  Tawney's  Prahandhacintdmani,  p.  174)  it  is  an
ordinary  human  conversation  that  is  overheard,  but  I  would  not  include  these
examples  under  this  motif  (as  does  Bloomfield,  Life  and  Stories  of  Pargvandtha,
p.  18.5),  as  such  an  ordinary  and  commonplace  occurrence  ceases  to  have  the
same  degree  of  interest  and  importance  as  the  overheard  conversation  of  the
animal  world.  As  we  shall  see  in  my  note  in  Chapter  XXIX,  the  motif  of
overhearing  is  found  in  the  Mahdbhdrata,  the  Jdtakas,  PaJichat antra,  Kathdkoqa,
Parisixhtapanmn  and  numerous  collections  of  Indian  tales — such  as  those  by
Temple,  Frere,  Steel,  Day,  etc.  For  further  references  see  Clouston,  Popular
Tales  aiid  Fictional,  vol.  i,  pp.  242-248  ;  ditto,  A  Group  of  Eastern  Romances  and
Stories,  pp.  505,  510  ;  Chauvin,  Bihliographie  des  Ouvrages  Arahes,  v,  p.  180,  and
G.  Nicasi,  "  Le  credenze  religiose  delle  popolazioni  rurali  dell'alte  valle  del
Taveri,"  in  Lares,  vol.  i  (1912),  p.  169.— n.m.p.


KALARATRI  IS  AGAIN  REPULSED  109

hers,  she  entered  her  sleeping  apartment.  And  Sundaraka,
having  thus  passed  through  that  night,  astonished  at  the
troubles  he  had  undergone,  in  the  morning  left  the  cow-house
and  went  to  his  friends ;  there  he  related  what  had  happened
to  him,  and,  though  desirous  of  going  to  some  other  country,
he  was  comforted  by  those  friends  and  took  up  his  abode
among  them,  and  leaving  the  dwelling  of  his  teacher,  and
taking  his  meals  in  the  almshouse  for  Brahmans,  he  lived
there,  enjoying  himself  at  will  in  the  society  of  his  friends.

One  day  Kalaratri,  having  gone  out  to  buy  some  neces-
saries for  her  house,  saw  Sundaraka  in  the  market.  And
being  once  more  love-sick,  she  went  up  to  him  and  said  to  him
a  second  time  :  "  Sundaraka,  enjoy  me  even  now,  for  my
life  depends  on  you."  When  she  said  this  to  him,  the  virtuous
Sundaraka  said  to  her  :  "  Do  not  speak  thus,  it  is  not  right ;
you  are  my  mother,  as  being  the  wife  of  my  teacher."  Then
Kalaratri  said  :  "If  you  know  what  is  right,  then  grant  me
my  life,  for  what  righteousness  is  greater  than  the  saving  of
life  ?  "  Then  Sundaraka  said  :  "  Mother,^  do  not  entertain
this  wish,  for  what  righteousness  can  there  be  in  approach-
ing the  bed  of  my  preceptor  ?  "  Thus  repulsed  by  him,  and
threatening  him  in  her  wrath,  she  went  home,  after  tearing
her  upper  garment  with  her  own  hand,  and  showing  the  gar-
ment to  her  husband,  she  said  to  him  :  "  Look,  Sundaraka
ran  upon  me  and  tore  this  garment  of  mine  in  this  fashion."
So  her  husband  went  in  his  anger  and  stopped  Sundaraka 's
supply  of  food  at  the  almshouse,  by  saying  that  he  was  a
felon  who  deserved  death.  ^  Then  Sundaraka  in  disgust,
being  desirous  of  leaving  that  country,  and  knowing  the  spell
for  flying  up  into  the  air  which  he  had  learnt  in  the  cow-
house, but  being  conscious  that  he  had  forgotten,  after  hear-
ing it,  the  spell  for  descending  from  the  sky,  which  he  had
been  taught  there  also,  again  went  in  the  night  to  that
deserted  cow-house,  and  while  he  was  there  Kalaratri  came
as  before,  and  flying  up  in  the  cow-house  in  the  same  way  as
on  the  former  occasion,  travelled  through  the  air  to  Ujjayini,
and  having  made  the  cow-house  descend  by  a  spell  in  the

^  See  note  on  p.  20ln^  of  this  volume. — n.m.p.
2  See  Note  2  at  the  end  of  this  chapter. — n.m.p.


110  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

garden  of  herbs,  went  again  to  the  cemetery  to  perform  her
nightly  ceremonies.

And  Sundaraka  heard  that  spell  again,  but  failed  again
to  retain  it ;  for  how  can  magic  practices  be  thoroughly
learnt  without  explanation  by  a  teacher  ?  Then  he  ate  some
roots  there,  and  put  some  others  in  the  cow-house  to  take
away  with  him,  and  remained  there  as  before  ;  then  Kalaratri
came,  and  climbing  up  into  the  cow-house,  flew  through  the
air  by  night,  and  stopping  the  vehicle,  entered  her  house.
In  the  morning  Sundaraka  also  left  that  house,  and  taking
the  roots  with  him  he  went  to  the  market  in  order  to  pro-
cure money  with  which  to  purchase  food.  And  while  he
was  selling  them  there  some  servants  of  the  king,  who  were
natives  of  Malava,  took  them  away  without  paying  for  them,
seeing  that  they  were  the  produce  of  their  own  country.
Then  he  began  to  remonstrate  angrily,  so  they  manacled  him,
and  took  him  before  the  king  on  a  charge  of  throwing  stones
at  them,  and  his  friends  followed  him.  Those  villains  said
to  the  king  :  "  This  man,  when  we  asked  him  how  he  managed
continually  to  bring  roots  from  Malava  and  sell  them  in
Ujjayini,  would  not  give  us  any  answer ;  on  the  contrary
he  threw  stones  at  us."

When  the  king  heard  this,  he  asked  about  that  marvel  ^ :
then  his  friends  said  :  "If  he  is  placed  on  the  palace  with  us,
he  will  explain  the  whole  wonder,  but  not  otherwise."  The
king  consented,  and  Sundaraka  was  placed  on  the  palace,
whereupon  by  the  help  of  the  spell  he  suddenly  flew  up  into
the  heaven  with  the  palace.  And  travelling  on  it  with  his
friends,  he  gradually  reached  Prayaga,^  and  being  now  weary,
he  saw  a  certain  king  bathing  there,  and  after  stopping  the
palace  there,  he  plunged  from  the  heaven  into  the  Ganges,
and,  beheld  with  wonder  by  all,  he  approached  that  king.
The  king,  inclining  before  him,  said  to  him  :  "  Who  art  thou,
and  why  hast  thou  descended  from  heaven  ?  "     Sundaraka

^  I  read  tan  tad.

^  Called  more  usually  by  English  people  Allahabad. Prayaga  means

"the  place  of  sacrifice,"  while  Allahabad,  "abode  of  Allah,"  was  the  name
given  to  the  place  by  Akbar  in  1572.  For  further  details  see  Cunningham,
Archoeological  Reports,  vol.  i,  p.  296  et  seq. — n.m.p.


THE  PALACE  IN  THE  AIR  111

answered  :  "I  am  an  attendant  of  the  god  Siva,  named
Murajaka,  and  by  his  command  I  have  conie  to  thee  desiring
human  pleasures."  When  the  king  heard  this,  he  supposed
it  was  true,  and  gave  him  a  city,  rich  in  corn,  filled  with  jewels,
with  women  and  all  the  insignia  of  rank.  Then  Sundaraka
entered  that  city  and  flew  up  into  the  heaven  with  his
followers,  and  for  a  long  time  roamed  about  at  will,  free  from
poverty.  Lying  on  a  golden  bed,  and  fanned  with  chowries
by  beautiful  women,  he  enjoyed  happiness  like  that  of  Indra.
Then  once  on  a  time  a  Siddha,  that  roamed  in  the  air,  with
whom  he  had  struck  up  a  friendship,  gave  him  a  spell  for
descending  from  the  air,  and  Sundaraka,  having  become
possessed  of  this  spell  enabling  him  to  come  down  to  earth,
descended  from  the  sky-path  in  his  own  city  of  Kanyakubja.
Then  the  king,  hearing  that  he  had  come  down  from
heaven,  possessed  of  full  prosperity,  with  a  city,  went  in
person  to  meet  him  out  of  curiosity,  and  Sundaraka,  when
recognised  and  questioned,  knowing  what  to  say  on  all
occasions,  informed  the  king  of  all  his  own  adventures
brought  about  by  Kalaratri.  Then  the  king  sent  for  Kala-
ratri  and  questioned  her,  and  she  fearlessly  confessed  her
improper  conduct ;  and  the  king  was  angry,  and  made  up  his
mind  to  cut  off  her  ears,  but  she,  when  seized,  disappeared
before  the  eyes  of  all  the  spectators.  Then  the  king  forbade
her  to  live  in  his  kingdom,  and  Sundaraka,  having  been
honourably  treated  by  him,  returned  to  the  air.

24a.  Kuvalaydvall  and  the  Witch  Kalaratri

Having  said  this  to  her  husband,  the  King  Adityaprabha,
the  Queen  Kuvalayavali  went  on  to  say  :  "  King,  such  magic
powers,  produced  by  the  spells  of  witches,  do  exist,  and  this
thing  happened  in  my  father's  kingdom,  and  it  is  famous  in
the  world,  and,  as  I  told  you  at  first,  I  am  a  pupil  of  Kala-
ratri's,  but  because  I  am  devoted  to  my  husband  I  possess
greater  power  even  than  she  did.  And  to-day  you  saw  me
just  at  the  time  when  I  had  performed  ceremonies  to  ensure
your  welfare,  and  was  endeavouring  to  attract  by  a  spell  a
man  to  offer  as  a  victim.     So  do  you  enter  now  into  our


112  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

practice,  and  set  your  foot  on  the  head  of  all  kings,  conquering
them  by  magic  power."  ^


24.  Story  of  Phalabhuti

When  he  heard  this  proposal,  the  king  at  first  rejected
it,  saying  :  "  Wliat  propriety  is  there  in  a  king  connecting
himself  with  the  eating  of  human  flesh,  the  practice  of
witches  ?  "  But  when  the  queen  was  bent  on  committing
suicide,  he  consented  ;  for  how  can  men  who  are  attracted
by  the  objects  of  passion  remain  in  the  good  path  ?  Then
she  made  him  enter  into  the  circle  previously  consecrated,  and
said  to  the  king  after  he  had  taken  an  oath  .  "  I  attempted
to  draw  hither  as  a  victim  that  Brahman  named  Phalabhuti,
who  is  so  intimate  with  you,  but  drawing  him  hither  is  a
difficult  task,  so  it  is  the  best  way  to  initiate  some  cook  in  our
rites,  that  he  may  himself  slay  him  and  cook  him.  And  you
must  not  feel  any  compunction  about  it,  because  by  eating
a  sacrificial  offering  of  his  flesh,  after  the  ceremonies  are  com-
plete, the  enchantment  will  be  perfect,  for  he  is  a  Brahman
of  the  highest  caste."

When  his  beloved  said  this  to  him,  the  king,  though  afraid
of  the  sin,  a  second  time  consented.  Alas  !  terrible  is  com-
pliance with  women  !  Then  that  royal  couple  had  the  cook
summoned,  whose  name  was  Sahasika,  and  after  encouraging
him,  and  initiating  him,  they  both  said  to  him  :  "  Whoever
comes  to  you  to-morrow  morning  and  says,  '  The  king  and
queen  will  eat  together  to-day,  so  get  some  food  ready
quickly,'  him  you  must  slay,  and  make  for  us  secretly  a
savoury  dish  of  his  flesh."  When  the  cook  heard  this,  he
consented,  and  went  to  his  own  house.  And  the  next  morn-
ing, when  Phalabhuti  arrived,  the  king  said  to  him  :  "  Go
and  tell  the  cook  Sahasika  in  the  kitchen  :  '  The  king  together

^  From  the  days  of  the  ancient  Egyptians  it  was  customary  for  kings  to
dabble  in  magic,  and  the  magicians  of  Pharaoh  often  had  Pharaoh  himself  as
a  pupil.  See  Maspero,  Popular  Stories  of  Ancient  Egi/pt,  p.  1.  In  a  note  he
says :  "  Even  as  late  as  the  time  of  the  Renaissance  a  prince  was  more  highly
regarded  because  he  was  a  sorcerer.  For  example,  in  the  Weisskunig  one  finds
the  young  Maximilian  of  Austria  instructed  by  his  ecclesiastical  preceptors
not  only  in  the  secrets  of  white  magic,  but  of  black." — n.m.p.


THE  GRIM  REPAST  113

with  the  queen  will  eat  to-day  a  savoury  mess,  therefore
prepare  as  soon  as  possible  a  splendid  dish.'  "  Phalabhuti
said,  "  I  will  do  so,"  and  went  out.

When  he  was  outside,  the  prince  whose  name  was  Chandra-
prabha  came  to  him,  and  said  :  "  Have  made  for  me  this
very  day  with  this  gold  a  pair  of  earrings,  like  those  you
had  made  before  for  my  noble  father."  When  the  prince
said  this,  Phalabhuti,  in  order  to  please  him,  went  that
moment,  as  he  was  commissioned,  to  get  the  earrings  made,
and  the  prince  readily  went  with  the  king's  message,  which
Phalabhuti  told  him,  alone  to  the  kitchen.  When  he  got
there  and  told  the  king's  message,  the  cook  Sahasika,  true
to  his  agreement,  immediately  killed  him  with  a  knife,  and
made  a  dish  of  his  flesh,  which  the  king  and  queen,  after
performing  their  ceremonies,  ate,  not  knowing  the  truth  ^ ;

^  This  incident  reminds  one  of  Schiller's  ballad :  "  Der  Gang  nach  dem
Eisenhammer  "  (Benfey,  PaTichatantra,  vol.  i,  p.  320).  The  story  of  Fridolin  in
Schiller's  ballad  is  identical  with  the  story  of  Fulgentius  which  is  found  in
the  English  Gesta  Komanorum  (see  Bohn's  Ge*if a  i?07wanor«7w.  Introduction,  p.  1).
Douce  says  that  the  story  is  found  in  Scott's  Tales  from  the  Arabic  and  Persian,
p.  53 J  and  in  the  Conies  Devots  or  Miracles  of  the  Virgin  (Le  Grand,  Fabliaux,
V,  74).  Mr  Collier  states  upon  the  authority  of  M.  Boettiger  that  Schiller
founded  his  ballad  upon  an  Alsatian  tradition  which  he  heard  at  Mannheim.
Cf.  also  the  eightieth  of  the  Sicilianische  Mdrchen,  which  ends  with  these
words  :  "  fVer  gutes  ihut,  wird  gutes  erhalten."  There  is  a  certain  resemblance
in  this  story  to  that  of  Equitan  in  Marie's  Lais.  See  Ellis's  Early  English
Metrical  Romances,  pp.  46  and  47.  It  also  resembles  the  story  of  Lalitanga  in
the  Kathdkoga  (see  my  translation,  p.  l66),  and  the  conclusion  of  the  story  of
Damannaka  (pp.  173,  174).  The  story  of  Fridolin  is  also  found  in  Schoppner's
Sagenbuch  der  Bayerischen  Lande,  vol.  i,  p.  204.

As  Tawney  mentions  above,  the  incident  in  our  story  appears  in  the
Contes  Devots.  The  title  of  this  tale  is:  ^^D'un  Roi  qui  voulut  faire  bruler
le  fils  de  son  Seneschal."  It  was  adapted  in  the  Italian  Cento  Novelle  Antiche,
No.  68,  where  the  plot  is  cleverly  worked  out.  An  envious  knight  advises
one  of  the  king's  favourites,  of  whom  he  is  jealous,  to  hold  his  head  farther
back  when  serving  the  king,  who,  he  says,  objects  to  his  unpleasant  breath.
The  knight  then  tells  the  king  that  his  favourite  page  acts  in  this  way  to
avoid  his  breath.  The  enraged  monarch  orders  his  kilnman  to  throw  the
first  man  who  brings  him  a  message  into  the  furnace.  The  page  is  immedi-
ately dispatched,  but  passing  a  monastery,  goes  in  to  listen  to  Mass.  The
knight  now  sets  out  to  see  if  his  plan  has  worked,  and  arrives  at  the  kiln
before  the  page,  where  he  pays  the  penalty  of  his  wickedness.

The  story  is  also  found  in  a  work  of  Walter  Mapes  of  the  twelfth
VOL.  II.  H


114  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

and  after  spending  that  night  in  remorse,  the  next  morning
the  king  saw  Phalabhuti  arrive  with  the  earrings  in  his  hand.
So,  being  bewildered,  he  questioned  him  about  the  earrings
immediately  ;  and  when  Phalabhuti  had  told  him  his  story,
the  king  fell  on  the  earth,  and  cried  out,  "  Alas,  my  son  !  "
blaming  the  queen  and  himself;  and  when  his  ministers
questioned  him,  he  told  them  the  whole  story,  and  repeated
what  Phalabhuti  had  said  every  day  :  "  '  The  doer  of  good
will  obtain  good,  and  the  doer  of  evil,  evil.'  Often  the
harm  that  one  wishes  to  do  to  another,  recoils  on  oneself,  as

century.  It  was  printed  and  annotated  by  Thomas  Wright,  De  Nugis  Cnrialium
(1850),  Camden  Society.  It  reappears  in  the  Liber  de  Donis  of  Etienne
de  Bourbon  (thirteenth  century) ;  John  of  Bromyard's  Sumvia  Prcedicantium
(fourteenth  century);  the  Dialogiis  Creaturarum  of  Nicolaus  Pergamenus,  etc.
Reference  should  be  made  to  Clouston,  Popular  Tales  and  Fictions,  vol.  ii,
pp.  444-,  445,  whence  these  latter  have  been  taken.

The  Arabic  form  of  the  story  is  found  in  the  Book  of  Sitidibad,  Clouston's
edition,  pp.  137-141  (see  also  pp.  292,  293).  Here  a  sultan  adopts  an  abandoned
infant  who  is  given  the  name  of  Ahmed.  When  grown  up  he  discovers  by
chance  one  day  that  the  favourite  concubine  has  a  slave  as  lover.  He  does
not  report  the  matter,  but  the  guilty  woman  is  afraid,  and  feigning  to  have
been  raped  by  Ahmed,  calls  upon  the  sultan  for  a  suitable  punishment  to
be  inflicted.  The  executioner  is  told  to  behead  the  first  man  who  says  to
him  :  "  Hast  thou  performed  the  business  }  "  Ahmed  is  told  to  ask  this  question
in  a  certain  house.  On  the  way  he  meets  a  group  of  slaves,  and  among  them
is  the  concubine's  lover.  He  tries  to  delay  Ahmed  in  order  to  get  him  into
trouble  with  the  king,  and  finally  agrees  to  take  the  message  himself— with
the  usual  result.

Two  similar  tales  occur  in  C.  Vernieux,  Indian  Tales  and  Anecdotes,  Cal-
cutta, 1873.  In  the  second  of  these  it  is  a  letter,  and  not  a  message,  which
is  used  as  the  instrument  of  death.

As  already  mentioned  in  Vol.  I,  p.  52n\  "the  letter  of  death"  motif  is
a  lieu  commun  in  folk-lore.  It  has  been  referred  to  by  various  names,  such
as  the  "  Uriah  letter,"  "  Bellerophon  letter,"  and  "Mutalammis  letter"  motif,
according  as  to  which  the  particular  author  took  as  the  standard  example —
the  Biblical,  Greek  or  Arabic.

I  think,  however,  that  a  general  term,  such  as  that  suggested  above,  is
preferable.  As  compared  with  the  "  letter  of  death,"  examples  of  the  "  message
of  death  "  are  rare,  but  they  are,  of  course,  only  different  varieties  of  the  same
motif  I  shall  discuss  this  motif  at  greater  length  at  the  end  of  Chapter  XLII,
where  a  good  example  of  the  *'  letter  of  death  "  occurs.

The  incident  of  innocently  eating  the  flesh  or  heart  of  a  loved  one  is
well  known  from  the  story  in  Boccaccio,  day  4,  nov.  10.  For  full  details  see
Lee,  The  Decameron,  its  Sources  atid  Analogues,  pp.  152-156. — n.m.p.


THE  KING  ASCENDS  THE  THRONE  115

a  ball  thrown  against  a  wall  rebounding  frequently ;  thus  we,
wicked  ones,  desiring  to  slay  a  Brahman,  have  brought  about
our  own  son's  death,  and  devoured  his  flesh."

After  the  king  had  said  this,  and  informed  his  ministers,
who  stood  with  their  faces  fixed  on  the  earth,  of  the  whole
transaction,  and  after  he  had  anointed  that  very  Phalabhuti
as  king  in  his  place,  he  made  a  distribution  of  alms,  and  then,
having  no  son,  entered  the  fire  with  his  wife  to  purify  himself
from  guilt,  though  already  consumed  by  the  fire  of  remorse  :
and  Phalabhuti,  having  obtained  the  royal  dignity,  ruled  the
earth ;  thus  good  or  evil  done  by  a  man  is  made  to  return
upon  himself.


[M]  Having  related  the  above  tale  in  the  presence  of  the
King  of  Vatsa,  Yaugandharayana  again  said  to  that  king  :
*'  If  Brahmadatta  therefore  were  to  plot  against  you,  O  great
King,  who,  after  conquering  him,  treated  him  kindly,  he
ought  to  be  slain."  When  the  chief  minister  had  said  this
to  him,  the  King  of  Vatsa  approved  of  it,  and  rising  up  went
to  perform  the  duties  of  the  day,  and  the  day  following  he
set  out  from  Lavanaka  to  go  to  his  own  city  Kausambi,
having  accomplished  his  objects  in  effecting  the  conquest  of
the  regions.  In  course  of  time  the  lord  of  earth,  accompanied
by  his  retinue,  reached  his  own  city,  which  seemed  to  be
dancing  with  delight,  imitating  with  banners  uplifted  the
taper  arms  ^  of  the  dancing-girl.  So  he  entered  the  city,
producing  at  every  step,  in  the  lotus  garden  composed  of  the
■eyes  of  the  women  of  the  city,  the  effect  of  the  rising  of  a
breeze.  And  the  king  entered  his  palace,  sung  by  minstrels,
praised  by  bards,  and  worshipped  by  kings.

Then  the  monarch  of  Vatsa  laid  his  commands  on  the
kings  of  every  land,  who  bowed  before  him,  and  triumphantly
ascended  that  throne,  the  heirloom  of  his  race,  which  he  had
found  long  ago  in  the  deposit  of  treasure.  And  the  heaven
was  filled  with  the  combined  high  and  deep  echoes  of  the
:sound   of  the    drums,    which   accompanied   the    auspicious

^  Literally,  "  creeper-like."


116  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

ceremonies  on  that  occasion,  like  simultaneous  shouts  of
applause  uttered  by  the  guardians  of  the  world,  each  in  his
several  quarter,  being  delighted  with  the  prime  minister  of
the  King  of  Vatsa.  Then  the  monarch,  who  was  free  from
avarice,  distributed  to  the  Brahmans  all  kinds  of  wealth
acquired  by  the  conquest  of  the  world,  and,  after  great
festivities,  satisfied  the  desires  of  the  company  of  kings  and
of  his  own  ministers.

Then  in  that  city  filled  with  the  noise  of  drums  resembling
the  thunder  of  the  clouds,  while  the  king  was  raining  benefits
on  the  fields  ^  according  to  each  man's  desert,  the  people,
expecting  great  fruit  in  the  form  of  corn,  kept  high  festival
in  every  house.  Having  thus  conquered  the  world,  that
victorious  king  devolved  on  Rumanvat  and  Yaugandhara-
yana  the  burden  of  his  realm,  and  lived  at  ease  there  with
Vasavadatta  and  Padmavati.  So  he,  being  praised  by
excellent  bards,  seated  between  those  two  queens  as  if  they
were  the  goddesses  of  Fame  and  Fortune,  enjoyed  the  rising
of  the  moon,  white  as  his  own  glory,  and  continually  drank
wine  as  he  had  swallowed  the  might  of  his  foes.

^  There  is  a  double  meaning  here :  kshetra  means  "  fit  recipients  "  as  well

as  "field."     The  king  no  doubt  distributed  corn. The  point  is  obscured

by  Tawney's  translation.  The  poet  uses  as  a  term  for  "king"  the  word
narendra,  "  Indra  of  men  "  ;  so  the  words  mean  that  "  the  king  (narendra}
pours  forth  benefits  upon  worthy  objects  (kshetras)  with  beating  of  drums,
as  the  god  Indra  pours  forth  rain  upon  the  fields  {kshetras)  amidst  the  thunders
of  the  clouds  "  (Barnett). — n.m.p.


NUDITY  IN  MAGIC  RITUAL  117


NOTE  1.— NUDITY  IN  MAGIC  RITUAL

In  many  forms  of  black  magic  nudity  appears  to  be  an  essential  factor.
The  reason  for  this  is  hard  to  explain,  and  many  suggestions  have  been  put
forward.

The  most  probable  are  :

1.  Dread  of  pollution  which  may  arise  during  a  rite,  and  so  spoil  the
incantation.

2.  Clothes  used  in  a  sacred  or  magical  rite  become  taboo  and  caimot  be
used  again.

3.  In  order  to  do  abnormal  things  successfully,  the  state  of  the  operator
should  also  be  abnormal ;  hence  nudity  is  a  great  asset.

4.  Complete  nudity  represents  total  submission  to  the  spirit  power  whose
aid  is  needed  in  the  particular  rite  to  be  carried  out.

5.  Nudity  is  supposed  to  shock  the  spirits  and  so  force  them  to  grant  the
desired  aid.

6.  The  belief  in  the  apotropaeic  powers  attributed  to  the  sexual  organs.

As  will  be  readily  seen,  it  would  be  little  short  of  pure  guess-work  in
most  cases  to  pick  out  a  nudity  rite  and  definitely  assign  to  it  one  or  other  of
the  above  explanations.  We  can  only  be  certain  of  the  true  reason  when
actions  accompanying  the  ritual  make  it  obvious.  For  instance,  in  many
countries  ceremonies  to  obtain  rain  are  often  carried  out  in  a  state  of  complete
nudity.  Here  the  reasons  seem  to  be  twofold.  In  the  first  place,  as  the
nature  of  the  rite  is  usually  to  produce  rain,  by  drenching  the  body  with
water,  or  standing  up  to  the  neck  in  water,  it  is  obvious  that  any  clothes
would  be  ruined.  Secondly,  if  other  methods  have  failed  it  is  necessary  to
give  the  Rain  God  a  shock,  to  wake  him  up,  to  arouse  his  pity  or  to  make  him
give  what  is  wanted  through  fear.  Thus  some  unusual  and  curious  sight
would  be  bound  to  arrest  his  attention.  A  few  examples  will  help  to  explain
these  points.

On  the  principles  of  homcEopathic  or  imitative  magic,  various  methods  to
produce  rain  after  a  drought  are  employed  in  many  parts  of  the  world.  After
prayers  and  sacrifices  have  proved  ineffective,  other  means  are  tried.  Thus
in  the  Rumanian  village  of  Ploska  both  girls  and  women  go  naked  at  night  to
the  boundaries  of  the  village,  and  pour  water  on  the  ground,  in  the  hope  that
the  sky  will  do  likewise.  Similarly  in  Serbia  a  girl  is  stripped  and  covered  in
grass,  flowers  and  herbs.  She  is  then  conducted,  dancing  and  singing,  to  every
house,  where  she  has  a  pail  of  water  thrown  over  her  (Frazer,  Golden  Boughj
vol.  i,  pp.  248,  273).  In  other  cases  nude  women  have  recourse  to  a  ploughing
rite  to  procure  rain.  Thus  in  Russia  they  draw  a  furrow  round  the  village,  and
bury  at  the  juncture  a  cock,  a  cat  and  a  dog.  The  cat  is  sacred,  and  the  dog
is  considered  a  demonic  character,  so  both  sides  are  thus  conciliated  (Conway,
Demonology y  vol.  i,  p.  267).  In  Chunar,  Mirzapur  district,  after  the  drought
in  1892  had  continued  a  long  time,  the  following  ceremony  was  performed
secretly : — "  Between  the  hours   of  nine  and  ten  p.m.  a  barber's  wife  went


118  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

from  door  to  door  and  invited  all  the  women  to  join  in  ploughing.  They  all
collected  in  a  field  from  which  all  males  were  excluded.  Three  women  from
a  cultivator's  family  stripped  off  all  their  clothes;  two  were  yoked  to  a  plough
like  oxen,  and  a  third  held  the  handle.  They  then  began  to  imitate  the
operation  of  ploughing.  The  woman  who  had  the  plough  in  her  hand
shouted :  *  O  Mother  Earth !  bring  parched  grain,  water  and  chaff.  Our
bellies  are  bursting  to  pieces  from  hunger  and  thirst.'  Then  the  landlord
and  village  accountant  approached  them  and  laid  down  some  grain,  water  and
chaff  in  the  field.  The  women  then  dressed  and  went  home"  (North  Indian
Notes  and  Queries,  vol.  i,  p.  210).  Cf.  Russell,  Tribes  and  Castes  of  the  Central
Provinces,  vol.  iii,  p.  563.

In  a  district  of  Transylvania  the  girls  take  off  all  their  clothes  and,  led  by
an  older  woman,  who  is  also  naked,  steal  a  barrow  and  carry  it  across  the  fields
to  a  brook,  where  they  set  it  afloat.  They  then  sit  on  the  barrow,  keeping
a  tiny  flame  burning  on  each  corner  of  it  for  an  hour.  Then  they  leave  the
barrow  in  the  water  and  return  home  (Frazer,  op.  cit,,  p.  282,  where  other
examples  are  also  given).

Volleys  of  abuse  and  curses  often  accompany  these  rites ;  thus,  when  rain
fails,  the  Meitheis  of  Manipur,  headed  by  their  Raja,  strip  off  all  their  clothes,
and  stand  cursing  each  other  in  the  streets  of  Imphal,  the  capital  town,  while
women  strip  themselves  at  night  and  throw  rice-pounders  into  the  river
(T.  C.  Hodson,  The  Meitheis,  p.  108.  See  also  A.  E.  Crawley,  "Dress,"
Hastings'  Ena/.  liel.  Eth.,  vol.  v,  p.  60).

Nudity  also  enters  into  fertility-rites  practised  by  women.  In  the  Panjab
on  a  Sunday  or  Tuesday  night,  or  during  the  Divali,  or  Feast  of  Lights,  a
barren  woman  desiring  a  child  sits  on  a  stool,  which  is  then  lowered  down
a  well.  After  divesting  herself  of  her  clothes  and  bathing,  she  is  drawn
up  again  and  performs  the  Chaukpurnd  ceremony  with  incantations  taught
by  a  wizard.  Should  there  be  any  difficulty  about  descending  the  well,  the
ceremony  is  performed  beneath  a  sacred  pipal  or  fig-tree.  It  is  believed  that,
after  such  a  ceremony  is  performed,  the  well  runs  dry  and  the  tree  withers,
the  Mana  of  both  having  been  exhausted  during  the  rite  {Census  Report,  Panjab,
1901,  vol.  i,  p.  164.  For  another  version  see  Panjab  Notes  and  Queries,  vol.  iv,
p.  58).  Crooke  records  an  interesting  rite,  also  from  the  Panjab,  performed
during  the  Divali  ("The  Divali,  the  Lamp  Festival  of  the  Hindus,"  Folk-Lore,
vol.  xxxiv,  Dec.  1923,  p.  276.  This  was  a  posthumous  publication).  On  the
Amavas,  or  no-moon  night,  barren  women,  and  those  who  have  lost  several
children,  go  to  a  place  where  four  roads  meet,  strip  themselves  naked,  and
cover  a  piece  of  ground  with  the  leaves  of  five  "  royal "  trees,  the  pipal  (Jicus
religiosa),  the  bar  (^/icus  indica),  the  siras  {acacia  speciosa),  and  the  dm  or  mango.
On  this  they  lay  a  black  bead  representing  the  demigod  Rama,  and,  sitting
down,  bathe  from  pitchers  containing  water  drawn  from  five  wells,  one  in
each  of  the  four  quarters  of  the  town  or  village,  and  one  outside  it  in  the
direction  of  the  north-east.  The  water  is  poured  from  the  pitchers  into  a
vessel  with  a  hole  in  the  bottom,  from  which  it  is  allowed  to  drop  all  over
the  women's  bodies.  The  well  from  which  the  water  has  been  drawn  for  this
purpose  is  supposed  to  lose  its  fertilising  power  and  runs  dry.


NUDITY  IN  MAGIC  RITUAL  119

Magical  powers  of  healing  disease  are  often  practised  in  a  state  of  nudity.
In  the  Sirsa  district  a  man  can  cure  a  horse  attacked  by  a  fit  by  taking  off  all
his  clothes  and  striking  the  animal  seven  times  with  his  shoe  on  its  forehead.
In  the  Jalandhar  district  paralysis  in  cattle  is  cured  by  a  man  stripping  himself
naked  and  walking  round  the  animal  with  a  wisp  of  burning  straw  in  his  hand.
The  Oraon  tribe  supplies  many  instances  of  similar  practices.  At  the  time  of
the  rice  harvest  they  practise  a  solemn  rite  for  driving  fleas  out  of  the  village,
in  the  course  of  which  young  men  strip  off  their  clothes,  bathe,  wrap  them-
selves in  rice-straw,  and  march  round  the  houses,  where  they  receive  doles  of
food  (W.  Crook e,  "  Nudity  in  India  in  Custom  and  Ritual,"  Journ.  Anth.  Inst.,
vol.  xlix,  1919,  p.  248.  See  the  whole  paper  for  numerous  other  references,
only  a  few  of  which  are  quoted  in  this  note).

Semi-nudity  has  always  been  regarded  by  Brahmans  as  a  mark  of  respect
when  in  a  holy  place  or  before  superiors.  Thus  they  bare  their  bodies  in  the
more  sacred  precincts  of  a  temple  or  in  the  presence  of  the  Maharaja.  This
is  still  observed  at  the  Darbars  of  H.H.  the  Maharaja  of  Mysore  (see  Crooke,
Journ.  Anth.  Inst.,  vol.  xlix,  p.  238).

In  circumambulating  the  Kaaba  at  Mecca  pilgrims  at  one  time  used  to
either  strip  or  borrow  other  clothes,  as  their  own  would  become  taboo  owing
to  contact  with  the  sacred  place  or  function  (W.  Robertson  Smith,  Lectures  on
the  Religion  of  the  Semites,  2nd  edition,  p.  48 1 ).

From  the  above  examples  we  can  see  that  there  is  a  distinct  mystic
significance  attached  to  the  naked  body,  an  uncanny  power  which  can  be
utilised  for  the  purposes  of  producing  rain,  procuring  offspring,  etc.  But  as
is  the  case  with  all  power,  it  can  also  be  used  for  less  praiseworthy  purposes.
It  can  be  employed  for  acquiring  magical  properties,  to  gain  control  over  a
person  or  a  spirit.  Thus,  in  Gujarat,  to  obtain  control  over  a  spirit,  the  Hindu
exorcist  goes  to  a  burial-ground  alone  at  midnight  on  the  dark  fourteenth  day
of  Aso  (October),  unearths  the  body  of  a  low-caste  Hindu,  and  bathes  in  the
river.  After  bathing,  while  still  naked,  he  carries  the  body  within  a  circle
cut  with  a  knife  or  formed  by  sprinkling  a  line  of  water ;  then  he  goes  on
muttering  charms,  and  evil  spirits  of  all  kinds  congregate  round  him  (Bombay
Gazetteer,  vol.  ix,  part  i,  p.  418).

A  strange  story  is  told  in  the  United  Provinces  of  a  noted  witch,  known
as  Lona  or  Nona  Chamarin,  a  woman  of  the  caste  of  leather-dressers.  One  day
all  the  village  women  were  transplanting  rice,  and  it  was  noticed  that  Lona
could  do  as  much  work  as  all  her  companions  put  together.  So  they  watched
her,  and  when  she  thought  she  was  unobserved  she  stripped  off  her  clothes,
muttered  some  spells,  and  throwing  a  bundle  of  seedlings  into  the  air,  each
settled  down  into  its  proper  hole  (Crooke,  Tribes  and  Castes  of  the  North- West
Provinces  and  Oudh,  vol.  ii,  p.  171).

Finally  there  is  the  question  of  the  apotropaeic  power  of  the  sexual  organs
themselves  to  be  considered.  Hartland  points  out  (see  his  article,  "  Phalhsm,"
Hastings'  Ency.  Rel.  Eth.,  vol.  ix,  p.  830)  that  as  the  great  instruments  of
reproduction,  and  consequently  the  enemies  of  sterility  and  death,  the  sexual
organs  are  in  many  countries  exhibited  and  employed,  actually  and  by  symbol
— i.e.  magically — to  counteract  the  depredations  of  mortality.     Furthermore,


120  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

they  are  regarded  as  having  prophylactic  virtue  against  all  sorts  of  evil
influences.  Hence  their  common  use  of  priapic  figures  and  ithyphallic  statues.
In  his  article  quoted  above,  Hartland  gives  numerous  references  and  examples,
some  of  which  we  have  already  noticed.


NOTE   2.— WOMEN   WHOSE   LOVE   IS  SCORNED

As  is  only  natural,  the  motif  of  the  revenge  of  a  woman  whose  love  has
been  scorned  enters  into  nearly  every  collection  of  stories  in  the  world.  It  is,
moreover,  not  only  in  fiction  that  we  have  records  of  such  happenings.  Apart
from  Joseph  and  Potiphar's  wife,  we  read  (Paulin  Paris,  l^Aiide  sur  les  diff'ereiits
Textes,  imprimis  et  manuscripts,  du  Roman  des  Sept  Sages),  of  Fausta,  second  wife
of  Constantine  the  Great,  who  caused  the  death  of  Crispus,  son  of  his  first
wife,  and  also  of  Lucinian,  son  of  Lucinius,  by  similar  false  accusations.  Then
there  was  the  case  of  A^oka,  the  great  Buddhist  Emperor  of  India  (274-237  b.c).
After  the  death  of  his  first  wife,  named  (according  to  the  Ceylon  records)
Asandhimitra,  he  married  one  of  her  attendants,  Tishyarakshita,  and  made  her
his  chief  wife.  She  had  fallen  in  love  with  Anoka's  eldest  son  and  heir  (by
another  wife),  Kunala,  Viceroy  of  Taxila.  He  rejected  her  advances,  however,
and  was  shortly  sent  abroad  to  put  down  a  revolt.  The  Emperor  became  ill
in  his  son's  absence  and  decided  to  recall  Kunala  and  set  him  on  the  throne.
Tishyarakshita,  seeing  what  this  would  mean  for  her,  managed  to  cure  the
Emperor  herself,  obtaining  in  return  the  favour  of  exercising  regal  power  for
seven  days.  She  immediately  has  Kunala's  eyes  put  out,  but  later  the  blind
son  comes  to  the  court  disguised  as  a  lute-player,  and  the  queen  is  burnt.
(See  Benfey,  Orient  und  Occident,  vol.  iii,  p.  177;  Cambridge  History  of  India^
vol.  i,  p.  500 ;  Przyluski,  "  La  L^gende  de  I'Empereur  A^oka,"  Annales  du
Musee  Guimet,  vol.  xxxiii,  1923,  chap,  iv,  "  Avadana  de  Kunala,"  p.  281-295.)

Both  the  above  stories  appear  in  W.  A.  Clouston's  Book  of  Sindibad,
pp.  xxvii,  xxix,  to  which  we  shall  refer  again  later.

In  Greek  legend  we  have  the  stories  of  Hippolytus  and  his  stepmother
Phaedra;  Phineus  and  his  sons  with  their  mother-in-law;  Bellerophon  and
Anteia,  wife  of  Proetus;  and  Peleus  and  Astydameia  (called  Hippolyte  in
Horace,  Odes,  iii,  7,  1 7),  wife  of  Acastus.

The  oldest  tale  of  this  nature  comes  from  Egypt,  and  was  current  in
Thebes  towards  the  end  of  the  XlXth  Dynasty.  It  is  known  as  "The  Story
of  the  Two  Brothers,"  and  has  already  been  referred  to  (Vol.  I,  pp.  129,  130)
in  connection  with  the  "  External  Soul "  motif.  I  take  the  following  from
Maspero's  Popular  Stories  of  Ancient  Egypt.  It  forms  the  first  story  in  his
excellently  annotated  collection,  and  is  preceded  by  a  full  bibliography.

The  two  brothers  Anupu  and  Baiti  lived  in  the  same  house.  Anupu,  the
elder  brother,  was  married  and  owned  the  house,  while  Baiti  did  all  the  field
work  and  slept  with  the  cows  each  night.  One  day  both  brothers  were  in
the  fields  and  Anupu  sent  Baiti  to  the  village  to  get  seed.  He  asks  Anupu's
wife  for  it ;  she  is  dressing  her  hair  and  tells  him  to  take  it.     He  shoulders


r


WOMEN  WHOSE  LOVE  IS  SCORNED  121


five  measures  of  the  seed,  which  exhibition  of  strength  at  once  rouses  her
admiration.

"  And  her  heart  went  out  to  him  as  one  desires  a  young  man.  She  arose,
she  laid  hold  on  him,  she  said  to  him  :  '  Come,  let  us  lie  together  for  the  space
of  one  hour.  If  thou  wilt  grant  me  this,  in  faith  I  will  make  thee  two  beauteous
garments.'  The  youth  became  like  a  cheetah  of  the  south  in  hot  rage,  because
of  the  evil  suggestion  she  had  made  to  him,  and  she  was  frightened  exceedingly,
exceedingly.  He  spake  to  her,  saying  ;  '  But  in  truth  thou  art  to  me  as  a  mother,
and  thy  husband  is  to  me  as  a  father,  and  he  who  is  my  elder,  it  is  he  who  enables
me  to  live.  Ah  !  this  horrible  thing  that  thou  hast  said  to  me,  do  not  say  it  to
me  again,  and  for  me  I  shall  tell  it  to  no  one  ;  I  shall  not  let  it  escape  from  my
mouth  for  anyone.'  He  took  up  his  burden  and  went  to  the  fields.  When
he  reached  his  elder  brother  they  set  to  work  at  their  labour."

That  evening  Anupu's  wife  tore  her  garments,  rubbed  fat  on  her  body  to
look  like  bruises  and  told  her  husband,  who  was  the  first  to  get  home,  that
his  brother  had  reduced  her  to  this  condition.  Accordingly  Anupu  prepares
to  slay  Baiti  and  awaits  his  arrival  behind  the  stable  door.  The  cows,  however,
warn  Baiti  of  his  impending  fate,  and  he  flies  with  all  his  might.  We  then  get
the  earliest  example  of  the  "  Magical  Impediments  "  motif — a  sheet  of  water  full
of  crocodiles  separates  the  two  brothers,  and  after  waiting  till  the  next  morning
Baiti  tells  his  brother  the  whole  truth,  and  castrates  himself  on  the  spot.

"  The  elder  brother  cursed  his  heart  exceedingly,  exceedingly,  and  he
remained  there  and  wept  over  him.  He  leapt,  but  he  could  not  pass  over  to
the  bank  where  his  younger  brother  was,  because  of  the  crocodiles.  His
younger  brother  called  to  him,  saying  ;  '  Thus  whilst  thou  didst  imagine  an  evil
action,  thou  didst  not  recall  one  of  the  good  actions  or  even  one  of  the  things
that  I  did  for  thee.  Ah  !  go  to  thy  house,  and  do  thou  thyself  care  for  thy
cattle,  for  I  shall  not  live  longer  in  the  place  where  thou  art — I  go  to  the  Vale
of  the  Acacia.' "

Anupu  is  overcome,  and  returning  home  kills  his  wife  and  throws  her  to
the  dogs.

Turning  to  India,  we  find  examples  of  the  motif  occur  very  frequently.
See,  for  instance,  the  story  of  "  Pala  und  Gopala,"  translated  by  J.  Hertel,
Indische  Erzdhler,  vol.  vii,  1922,  pp.  64-68.

In  his  Book  of  Sindihdd  (pp.  xxx,  xxxi)  Clouston  cites  two  examples
from  H.  H.  Wilson,  Descriptive  Catalogue  of  the  Mackenzie  Collection  of  Oriental
MSS.j  etc.,  1828.

"  In  a  Telugu  palm-leaf  manuscript  entitled  Sdrangdhara  Charita,  the
hero,  Sarangdhara,  is  the  son  of  Rajamahendra,  King  of  Rajamahendri,  whose
stepmother  Chitrangi  falls  in  love  with  him.  He  rejects  her  advances,  on
which  she  accuses  him  to  the  king  of  attempting  to  violate  her,  and  the  king
orders  him  to  have  his  feet  cut  off,  and  to  be  exposed  in  the  forest  to  wild
beasts.  There  a  voice  from  heaven  proclaims  that  the  prince  in  his  former
life  was  Jayanta,  minister  of  Dhaval  Chandra,  who,  being  envious  of  Sumanta,
one  of  his  colleagues,  contrived  to  hide  the  slippers  of  Sumanta  under  the  bed
of  the  queen.     The  king,  finding  them  and  ascertaining  whose  they  were.


122  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

commanded  Sumanta  to  be  exposed  to  wild  beasts  after  having  his  legs  and
hands  cut  off;  in  retribution  of  which  Jayanta,  now  Sarangdhara,  suffers  the
like  mutilation.  He  acknowledges  the  justice  of  the  sentence,  and  his
wounds  are  healed  by  a  Yogi.  A  voice  from  heaven  apprises  the  king  of  the
innocence  of  his  son,  and  he  takes  Sarangdhara  back  and  puts  ChitrangI  to
death.  Sarangdhara  adopts  a  religious  life.  In  the  Tamil  version,  when
the  prince  has  been  mutilated  and  cast  into  the  jungle,  his  dead  mother's
lamentations  are  heard  by  the  Siddhas,  who  restore  the  prince's  limbs,  and
a  voice  from  heaven  apprises  the  king  of  Chitrangi's  guilt.  Again :  In  the
Kuftiara  Rama  Charita,  Ratnangl,  one  of  the  wives  of  Raja  Kampila,  became
enamoured  of  Kumara  Rama,  his  youngest  son,  and  importuned  him  to  gratify
her  desires.  Finding  him  inexorable,  her  love  was  changed  to  hatred,  and
she  complained  to  Kampila  that  Rama  had  attempted  her  chastity.  Kampila
in  a  rage  ordered  Rama  to  be  put  to  death  instantly,  with  his  four  chief
leaders.  The  minister  Bachapa,  however,  secreted  Rama  and  his  friends  in
his  palace,  and  decapitating  five  ordinary  criminals,  produced  their  heads
to  the  raja  as  those  of  his  intended  victims.  Kampila  soon  repented  of  his
haste,  and  the  prince's  death  was  the  subject  of  universal  sorrow.  After  some
time  Rama  reappeared,  and  the  Princess  Ratnangl,  on  hearing  of  this,  hanged
herself,  by  which  Kfimpila  was  satisfied  of  the  innocence  of  his  son."

The  niolif  is  also  found  in  the  Mahdpaduma  Jdlaka  (see  Cambridge  Edition,
vol.  iv,  p.  116,  No.  47ii),  and  Bloomfield,  Life  and  Stories  of  Pdrgvanatha,
pp.  64,  85,  146,  199.  On  the  latter  page  a  preliminary  bibliography  of  the
motif  is  given,  which  includes  references  to  the  Mahdbhdrata,  Kathd  Sarit
Sdgara,  Jdtakas,  Kathdprakdqa,  etc.,  besides  the  collections  of  Ralston,  Steel
and  Temple,  and  Clouston.  One  of  the  references  is  to  Ralston's  Tibetan
Tales,  p.  206.  In  this  story  the  mother  of  Utpalavarna  seduces  her  own
son-in-law  and  he  complies  with  her  desires.  A  maid  discloses  the  matter
and  Utpalavarna  leaves  the  house.  I  would  not  include  such  examples  under
this  motif  Bloomfield,  however,  divides  it  into  three  forms:  the  woman
tempts,  and  the  man  rejects;  the  woman  out  of  hatred  [or  fear]  pretends
that  a  man  has  made  overtures  to  her,  so  as  to  get  him  into  trouble  ;  and
the  woman  tempts  and  the  man  succumbs.  The  whole  point  of  the  motif
is,  I  feel,  the  refusal  of  the  man  and  the  consequent  intended  revenge  of
the  woman.  Thus,  whereas  the  first  variety  is  the  only  true  example  of  the
motif,  the  second  also  may  be  included,  but  the  third  seems  quite  beside
the  point — the  most  important  incident  of  the  motif  being  missing.

Both  Persian  and  Arabic  fiction  abound  in  examples  of  the  motif  The
best-known  collection  is  that  entitled  The  Book  of  Sindihdd,  or  the  Story  of
the  King,  his  Son,  the  Damsel  and  the  Seven  Vazirs.  For  further  details  of  its
history,  etc.,  reference  should  be  made  to  Comparetti's  Ricerche  intomo  al  Lihro
di  Sindihdd,  translated  by  H.  C.  Coote  for  the  Folk-Lore  Society,  1882;  The
Book  of  Sindihdd,  W.  A.  Clouston,  privately  printed,  1884;  and  V.  Chauvin,
Bihliographie  des  Ouvrages  Arabes,  viii,  Synti})a8.

The  frame-story  in  every  case  is  based  on  the  motif  here  under
consideration.     A  brief  outline  is  as  follows: —


WOMEN  WHOSE  LOVE  IS  SCORNED  123

After  numerous  failures  to  teach  the  only  son  of  the  king,  the  sage
Sindibad  finally  succeeds  in  under  six  months.  He  then  discovers  that  the
prince  is  threatened  with  loss  of  life  if  he  speaks  a  single  word  during  the
next  seven  days.  Nevertheless,  he  goes  to  his  father,  who  is  anxious  to  test
his  newly  acquired  knowledge.  To  all  the  king's  questions  he  answers  not  a
word.  At  this  juncture  one  of  the  king's  harem,  who  is  secretly  enamoured
of  the  prince,  enters  the  audience-chamber  and  asks  leave  to  try  privately  to
induce  the  prince  to  speak.  On  leave  being  given  she  tells  him  of  her  love,
and  offers  to  poison  the  king.  The  prince  flies  from  her  in  horror.  The  girl,
fearing  exposure,  tears  her  clothes,  scratches  her  face  and  in  this  condition
returns  to  the  king,  stating  that  the  prince,  only  pretending  to  be  dumb,
has  attempted  to  rape  her,  and  has  suggested  poisoning  the  king.  The  king
orders  the  executioner  to  cut  off  his  son's  head.  There  are  seven  vazirs  at
the  court  and  they  determine  to  do  what  they  can  to  prolong  the  carrying
out  of  this  hasty  sentence,  hoping  in  time  to  establish  the  prince's  innocence.
Accordingly  the  First  Vazir  tells  a  story  showing  the  deceit  of  women,  with
the  result  that  the  king  wavers  in  his  decision.  The  guilty  woman,  however,
now  relates  a  tale  exemplifying  the  deceits  of  man.  The  Second  Vazir  there-
upon retaliates.  These  alternate  stories  continue  till  all  the  Vazirs  have
spoken.  By  this  time  the  unlucky  seven  days  have  passed  and  the  innocence
of  the  prince  is  established,  as  he  can  now  safely  speak  and  give  the  real  facts
of  the  case.

The  collection  also  appears  in  the  Nights  (see  Burton,  vol.  vi,  p.  127),
under  the  title,  "The  Craft  and  Malice  of  Women."  In  the  Persian  Bakhtydr
Nama  it  is  the  vazirs  (ten  in  number)  who  urge  the  death  of  the  accused
man,  and  it  is  he  himself  who  tells  the  stories.  It  also  appears  in  the  Nights
(Burton,  Supp.,  vol.  i,  p.  55  et  seq.)  as  "The  Ten  Wazirs :  or,  the  History  of
King  Azadbakht  and  his  Son."  In  Supp.,  vol.  ii,  pp.  295,  296,  Clouston  writes
a  note  on  the  story.  The  plot,  however,  differs  from  the  other  similar  collec-
tions, not  only  because  of  the  fact  stated  above,  but  also  because  the  son,  in
a  state  of  drunkenness,  wanders  into  the  queen's  bedroom  and  falls  asleep
on  the  bed,  to  be  later  discovered  by  the  royal  couple.  The  king  refuses
to  believe  that  she  knows  nothing  about  the  matter  and  the  jealous  ten
vazirs  do  all  they  can  to  bring  about  the  prince's  death.  Closely  allied  to
these  is  the  Tamil  Alakeswara  Kathd  (see  H.  H.  Wilson,  Descriptive  Catalogue
of  the  Mackenzie  Collection  of  MSS.,  etc.,  vol.  i,  p.  220).  In  the  Turkish  version,
however,  the  plot  follows  the  Arabic,  and  it  is  the  prince's  mother-in-law
who  tempts  his  virtue.  His  horoscope  shows  that  his  life  is  in  danger  for
forty  days  (not  seven,  as  in  the  other  versions)  and  forty  vazirs  tell  stories.
See  E.  J.  W.  Gibb,  The  History  of  the  Forty  Vezirs,  1886.  The  work  is  very
popular  in  Turkey,  where  it  is  known  as,  Qirq  Vezlr  Tnflkhi.  The  original
Turkish  translation  is  said  to  have  been  made  by  one  Sheykh-zada,  and  the
title  of  the  work  to  have  been  Hikdyetu-Erbalna-Sabdhin  we  Mesd — i.e.  The
Story  of  the  Forty  Moms  and  Eves.

There  are  two  other  occurrences  of  the  "scorned  love  of  women"  in
the  Nights.


124  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

The  first  of  these  is  in  the  long  "Tale  of  Kamar  al-Zaman"  (Burton,
vol.  iii,  p.  314).  The  two  brothers,  Amjad  and  As'ad,  are  tempted  to  incest
by  each  other's  mother.  On  being  repulsed  they  shut  themselves  up  in  the
harem,  and  tell  the  king  that  his  two  sons  have  raped  them  and  they  refuse
to  come  out  until  their  two  hearts  are  brought  to  them.  The  enraged
monarch  gives  the  necessary  order,  but  the  pitying  treasurer,  whose  duty
it  is  to  kill  the  brothers,  takes  back  to  the  king  two  vials  of  a  lion's  blood
which  the  brothers  chance  to  slay.  Later  the  repentant  father  finds  the
original  letters  written  by  the  queens  in  his  sons'  clothes.  After  numerous
adventures  Amjad  and  As'ad  meet  their  father  (vol.  iv,  p.  27),  and  marry
two  beautiful  women  they  met  during  their  wanderings,  and  all  is  well  "  till
there  overtook  them  the  Destroyer  of  delights,  and  the  Sunderer  of  societies ;
and  Allah  knoweth  all  things  !  "

The  second  tale  is  that  of  the  "  History  of  Gharib  and  his  Brother  Ajib"
(vol.  vii,  p.  83).  Queen  Jan  Shah  is  suddenly  called  out  as  her  prisoner,
Gharib,  had  broken  her  idol  and  slain  her  men.  She  immediately  goes  to
the  temple  and  (like  Anupu's  wife  in  the  Egyptian  tale)  on  seeing  the  great
strength  of  Gharib  "  her  heart  was  drowned  in  the  love  of  him  and  she  said
to  herself:  'I  have  no  need  of  the  idol  and  care  for  naught  save  this  Gharib,
that  he  may  lie  in  my  bosom  the  rest  of  my  life.' "  On  his  refusal  he  is
turned  into  an  ape  by  her  magic,  and  kept  carefully  in  a  closet.  After  two
years  he  pretends  by  signs  to  agree  to  her  wishes,  and  is  accordingly  restored
to  his  original  shape.  That  evening,  he  seizes  her  by  the  neck,  breaks  it
and  so  kills  her.

The  first  of  the  above  stories  is  common  in  Kashmir ;  see,  e.g.,  Stein  and
Grierson,  "Tale  of  a  King,"  Hatims  Tales,  1923,  pp.  45-57;  and  Knowles,
Folk-Tales  of  Kashmir,  pp.  l66,  423.

Thus  we  see  that,  in  order  for  a  story  to  be  classified  under  the  heading
of  this  motif,  the  woman  must  make  the  suggestion,  be  repulsed,  and  seek
revenge.  This  is  the  natural  sequence  of  events  which  has  proved  so  popular
in  every  part  of  the  East,  whence  it  has  travelled  slowly  westward.  An
interesting  point  to  notice  is  that  it  can  be  traced  from  East  to  West  in
the  same  collection  of  stories — that  of  the  Sindibdd  Kama  cycle,  for  besides
the  various  versions  already  mentioned  (see  also  Vol.  I,  p.  170)  it  is  found
in  the  French  Dolopathos,  the  English  Seven  Wise  Masters,  and  numerous
other  versions. — n.m.p.


BOOK  IV
NARAVAHANADATTAJANANA

CHAPTER  XXI

INVOCATION

VICTORY  to  the  Conqueror  of  Obstacles,^  who  marks
with  a  line,  like  the  parting  of  the  hair,  the  principal
mountains  ^  by  the  mighty  fanning  of  his  ear-flaps,
pointing  out,  as  it  were,  a  path  of  success  !


[M]  Then  Udayana,  the  King  of  Vatsa,  remaining  in
Kausambi,  enjoyed  the  conquered  earth  which  was  under
one  umbrella  ^ ;  and  the  happy  monarch  devolved  the  care
of  his  empire  upon  Yaugandharayana  and  Rumanvat,  and
addicted  himself  to  pleasure  only  in  the  society  of  Vasantaka.
Himself  playing  on  the  lute,  in  the  company  of  the  queens
Vasavadatta  and  Padmavati,  he  was  engaged  in  a  perpetual
concert.  While  the  notes  of  his  lyre  were  married  to  the  soft
sweet  song  of  the  queens,  the  rapid  movement  of  his  executing
finger  alone  indicated  the  difference  of  the  sounds.  And  while
the  roof  of  the  palace  was  white  with  moonlight  as  with  his
own  glory,  he  drank  wine  in  plenteous  streams,  as  he  had
swallowed  the  pride  of  his  enemies  * ;  beautiful  women
brought  him,  as  he  sat  retired,  in  vessels  of  gold,  wine  flaming
with  rosy  glow,^  as  it  were  the  water  of  his  appointment  as
ruler  in  the  empire  of  love ;    he  divided  between  the  two

^  I.e.  Ganesa,  who  has  an  elephant's  head.

2  Seven  principal  mountains  are  supposed  to  exist  in  each  Varsha,  or
division  of  a  continent.

3  See  Appendix  II,  pp.  263-272. — n.m.p.

*  There  is  a  reference  here  to  the  mada,  or  ichor,  which  exudes  from  an
elephant's  temples  when  in  rut.
5  Rdga  also  means  "passion."
125


126  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

queens  the  cordial  liquor,  red,  delicious  and  pellucid,  in
which  danced  the  reflection  of  their  faces  ;  as  he  did  his
own  heart,  impassioned,  enraptured  and  transparent,  in  which
the  same  image  was  found.

His  eyes  were  never  sated  with  resting  on  the  faces  of
those  queens,  which  had  the  eyebrows  arched,  and  blushed
with  the  rosy  hue  of  love,  though  envy  and  anger  were  far
from  them.  The  scene  of  his  banquet,  filled  with  many
crystal  goblets  of  wine,  gleamed  like  a  lake  of  white  lotuses
tinged  red  with  the  rising  sun.  And  occasionally,  accom-
panied by  huntsmen,  clad  in  a  vest  of  dark  green  as  the
paldsa  tree,  he  ranged,  bow  and  arrows  in  hand,  the  forest
full  of  wild  beasts,  which  was  of  the  same  colour  as  himself.
He  slew  with  arrows  herds  of  wild  boars  besmeared  with
mud,  as  the  sun  disperses  with  its  dense  rays  the  masses  of
darkness ;  when  he  ran  towards  them  the  antelopes,  fleeing
in  terror,  seemed  like  the  sidelong  glances  of  the  quarters
previously  conquered  ^  by  him.

And  when  he  slew  the  buffaloes,  the  ground,  red  with
blood,  looked  like  a  bed  of  red  lotuses  come  to  thank  him
hmnbly  for  delivering  it  from  the  goring  of  their  horns.
When  the  lions  too  were  transfixed  by  his  javelins  falling
in  their  open  mouths,  and  their  lives  issued  from  them  with
a  suppressed  roar,  he  was  dehghted.  In  that  wood  he  em-
ployed dogs  in  the  ravines  and  nets  in  the  glades  ;  this  was
the  method  of  his  pursuit  of  the  chase,  in  which  he  relied
only  upon  his  own  resources.

While  he  was  thus  engaged  in  his  pleasant  enjoy-
ments, one  day  the  hermit  Narada  came  to  him  as  he
was  in  the  hall  of  audience,  diffusing  a  halo  with  the
radiance  of  his  body,  like  the  sun,  the  orb  of  heaven,
descending  therefrom  out  of  love  for  the  Solar  dynasty.
The  king  welcomed  him,  inclining  before  him  again  and
again,  and  the  sage  stood  a  moment  as  if  pleased  and
said  to  that  king  :  "  Listen,  O  King ;  I  will  tell  you  a
story  in  a  few  words.  You  had  an  ancestor  once,  a  king
of  the  name  of  Pandu  ;  he  like  you  had  two  noble  wives  ;
one  wife  of  the  mighty  prince  was  named  Kunti  and  the

^  The  quarters  are  often  conceived  of  as  women.


THE  VICE  OF  HUNTING  127

other  Madri/  That  Pandu  conquered  this  sea-engirdled
earth,  and  was  very  prosperous,  and  being  addicted  to  the
vice  of  hunting,  he  went  one  day  to  the  forest.  There  he
Narada  con-  ^^^  %  ^^  arrow  and  slew  a  hermit  of  the  name
demns  the  Vice  of  Arindama,  who  was  sporting  with  his  wife  in
of  Hunting  ^j^^  f^^^m  of  a  dccr.^  That  hermit  abandoned
that  deer-form,  and  with  his  breath  struggling  in  his  throat
cursed  that  Pandu,  who  in  his  despair  had  flung  away
his  bow :  '  Since  I  have  been  slain  while  sporting  at
will  by  thee,  inconsiderate  one,  thou  also  shalt  die  in  the
embraces  of  thy  wife.'  Having  been  thus  cursed,  Pandu,
through  fear  of  its  effect,  abandoned  the  desire  of  enjoyment,
and  accompanied  by  his  wives  lived  in  a  tranquil  grove  of
ascetic  quietism.  While  he  was  there,  one  day,  impelled  by
that  curse,  he  suddenly  approached  his  beloved  Madri,  and
died.  So  you  may  rest  assured  that  the  occupation  called
hunting  is  a  madness  of  kings,  for  other  kings  have  been  done
to  death  by  it,  even  as  the  various  deer  they  have  slain.  For
how  can  hunting  produce  benign  results,  since  the  genius  of
hunting  is  like  a  female  Rakshasa,  roaring  horribly,  intent  on
raw  flesh,  defiled  with  dust,  with  upstanding  hair  and  lances
for  teeth.  Therefore  give  up  that  useless  exertion,  the  sport
of  hunting  ;  wild  elephants  and  their  slayers  are  exposed
to  the  same  risk  of  losing  their  lives.  And  you,  who  are
ordained  for  prosperity,  are  dear  to  me  on  account  of  my
friendship  with  your  ancestors,  so  hear  how  you  are  to  have
a  son  who  is  to  be  a  portion  of  the  God  of  Love.

^  For  an  outline  of  this  story  as  related  in  the  Mahdbhdraia  see  p.  l6.

N.M.P,

^  In  the  eighteenth  tale  of  the  Gesta  Romanorum  Julian  is  led  into  trouble
by  pursuing  a  deer.  The  animal  turns  round  and  says  to  him :  ''  Thou  who
pursuest  me  so  fiercely  shalt  be  the  destruction  of  thy  parents."  See  also
Bernhard  Schmidt's  Griechische  Marchen,p.  38:  "A  popular  ballad  referring  to
the  story  of  Digenes  gives  him  a  life  of  300  years,  and  represents  his  death
as  due  to  his  killing  a  hind  that  had  on  its  shoulder  the  image  of  the  Virgin
Mary,  a  legend  the  foundation  of  which  is  possibly  a  recollection  of  the  old
mythological  story  of  the  hind  of  Artemis  killed  by  Agamemnon"  [Sophocles'
Electra,  568].  In  the  "  Romance  of  Doolin  of  Mayence,"  Guyon  kills  a  hermit  by
mistake  for  a  deer  (Liebrecht's  translation  of  Dunlop's  History  of  Fiction,  p.  138).

See  also  De  Gubernatis,  Zoological  Mythology,  pp.  84-86 ; and  W.  Crooke,

Popular  Religion  and  Folk-Lore  of  Northern  India,  vol.  ii,  p.  238. — n.m.p.


128  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

"Long  ago,  when  Rati  worshipped  Siva  with  praises  in
order  to  effect  the  restoration  of  Kama's  body,  Siva,  being
pleased,  told  her  this  secret  in  few  words  :  '  This  Gauri,^
desiring  a  son,  shall  descend  to  earth  with  a  part  of
herself,  and,  after  propitiating  me,  shall  give  birth  to  an
incarnation  of  Kama.'  Accordingly,  King,  the  goddess  has
been  bom  in  the  form  of  this  Vasavadatta,  daughter  of
Chandamahasena,  and  she  has  become  your  queen.  So  she,
having  propitiated  Siva,  shall  give  birth  to  a  son  who  shall
be  a  portion  of  Kama,  and  shall  become  the  emperor  of  all
the  Vidyadharas."

By  this  speech  the  Rishi  Narada,  whose  words  command
respect,  gave  back  to  the  king  the  earth  which  he  had  offered
him  as  a  present,  and  then  disappeared.  When  he  had  de-
parted, the  King  of  Vatsa,  in  company  with  Vasavadatta,  in
whom  had  arisen  the  desire  of  obtaining  a  son,  spent  the  day
in  thinking  about  it.

The  next  day  the  chief  warder,  called  Nityodita,  came  to
the  lord  of  Vatsa  while  he  was  in  the  hall  of  assembly  and
said  to  him  :  "  A  certain  distressed  Brahman  woman,  accom-
The  Poor  panied  by  two  children,  is  standing  at  the  door.
Brahman  O  King,  dcsiriug  to  see  your  Highness."  When
Woman  ^.j^^  ^ing  heard  this,  he  permitted  her  to  enter,

and  so  that  Brahman  woman  entered,  thin,  pale  and  be-
grimed, distressed  by  the  tearing  of  her  clothes  and  wound-
ing of  her  self-respect,  carrying  in  her  bosom  two  children
looking  like  Misery  and  Poverty.  After  she  had  made  the
proper  obeisance  she  said  to  the  king  :  "  I  am  a  Brahman
woman  of  good  caste,  reduced  to  such  poverty.  As  fate
would  have  it,  I  gave  birth  to  these  two  boys  at  the  same
time,  and  I  have  no  milk  for  them,  O  King,  without  food.
Therefore  I  have  come,  in  my  misery  and  helplessness,  for
protection  to  the  king,  who  is  kind  to  all  who  fly  to  him
for  protection ;  now  my  lord  the  king  must  determine  what
my  lot  is  to  be."

When  the  king  heard  that,  he  was  filled  with  pity,  and  said
to  the  warder  :  **  Take  this  woman  and  commend  her  to  the
Queen  Vasavadatta."     Then  that  woman  was  conducted  into

^  I.e.  Uma  or  Parvatl.


THE  BRAHMAN  WOMAN'S  TALE  129

the  presence  of  the  queen  by  that  warder,  as  it  were  by  her
own  good  actions  marching  in  front  of  her.  The  queen,
when  she  heard  from  that  warder  that  the  Brahman  woman
who  had  come  had  been  sent  by  the  king,  felt  all  the  more
confidence  in  her.  And  when  she  saw  that  the  woman,
though  poor,  had  two  children,  she  thought :  "  This  is  ex-
ceedingly unfair  dealing  on  the  part  of  the  creator !  Alas,
he  grudges  a  son  to  me,  who  am  rich,  and  shows  affection  to
one  who  is  poor  !  I  have  not  yet  one  son,  but  this  woman
has  these  twins."  Thus  reflecting,  the  queen,  who  was  her-
self desiring  a  bath,  gave  orders  to  her  servants  to  provide
the  Brahman  woman  with  a  bath  and  other  restoratives.
After  she  had  been  provided  with  a  bath,  and  had  had  clothes
given  her,  and  had  been  supplied  by  them  with  agreeable
food,  that  Brahman  woman  was  refreshed  like  the  heated
earth  bedewed  with  rain.  And  as  soon  as  she  had  been  re-
freshed, the  Queen  Vasavadatta,  in  order  to  test  her  by
conversation,  artfully  said  to  her  :  "  O  Brahman  lady,  tell
us  some  tale."  When  she  heard  that  she  agreed,  and  began
to  tell  this  story  :


25.  Story  of  Devadatta

In  old  time  there  was  a  certain  petty  monarch  of  the
name  of  Jayadatta,  and  there  was  born  to  him  a  son,  named
Devadatta.  And  that  wise  king,  wishing  to  marry  his  son,
who  was  grown  up,  thus  reflected  :  "  The  prosperity  of  kings
is  very  unstable,  being  like  a  courtesan  to  be  enjoyed  by
force  ^ ;  but  the  prosperity  of  merchants  is  like  a  woman  of
good  family  ;  it  is  steady  and  does  not  fly  to  another  man.
Therefore  I  will  take  a  wife  to  my  son  from  a  merchant's
family,  in  order  that  misfortune  may  not  overtake  his  throne,
though  it  is  surrounded  with  many  relations."  Having
formed  this  resolve,  that  king  sought  for  his  son  the  daughter

^  As  a  courtesan  is  not  enjoyed  by  force,  the  sense  seems  doubtful.
Barnett  explains  in  a  letter  to  me  on  the  subject  that  balavad  does  literally
mean  "forcibly,"  but  that  the  word  is  more  usual  in  the  sense  of  "intensely,"
as  of  rain,  wind,  sound,  etc.  Thus  the  meaning  here  is  "  to  be  intensely  (or
thoroughly)  enjoyed." — n.m.p.

VOL.  II.  I


130  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

of  a  merchant  in  Pataliputra  named  Vasudatta.  Vasudatta
for  his  part,  eager  for  such  a  distinguished  alliance,  gave  that
daughter  of  his  to  the  prince,  though  he  dwelt  in  a  remote
foreign  land.

And  he  loaded  his  son-in-law  with  wealth  to  such  an  extent
that  he  no  longer  felt  much  respect  for  his  father's  magnifi-
cence.* Then  King  Jayadatta  dwelt  happily  with  that  son
of  his  who  had  obtained  the  daughter  of  that  rich  merchant.
Now  one  day  the  merchant  Vasudatta  came,  full  of  desire  to
see  his  daughter,  to  the  palace  of  his  connection  by  marriage,
and  took  away  his  daughter  to  his  own  home.  Shortly  after
the  King  Jayadatta  suddenly  went  to  heaven,  and  that
kingdom  was  seized  by  his  relations,  who  rose  in  rebellion ;
through  fear  of  them  his  son  Devadatta  was  secretly  taken
away  by  his  mother  during  the  night  to  another  country.

Then  that  mother,  distressed  in  soul,  said  to  the  prince  :
"  Our  feudal  lord  is  the  emperor  who  rules  the  eastern
region  ;  repair  to  him,  my  son  ;  he  will  procure  you  the
kingdom."

When  his  mother  said  this  to  him,  the  prince  answered
her  :  "  Who  will  respect  me  if  I  go  there  without  attend-
ants ?  "  When  she  heard  that,  his  mother  went  on  to  say :
"  Go  to  the  house  of  your  father-in-law,  and  get  money  there,
and  so  procure  followers  ;  and  then  repair  to  the  emperor."
Being  urged  in  these  words  by  his  mother,  the  prince,  though
full  of  shame,  slowly  plodded  on  and  reached  his  father-in-
law's  house  in  the  evening.  But  he  could  not  bear  to  enter
at  such  an  unseasonable  hour,  for  he  was  afraid  of  shedding
tears,  being  bereaved  of  his  father  and  having  lost  his  worldly
splendour  ;  besides,  shame  withheld  him.

So  he  remained  in  the  verandah  of  an  almshouse  near,
and  at  night  he  suddenly  beheld  a  woman  descending  with
a  rope  from  his  father-in-law's  house,  and  immediately  he
recognised  her  as  his  wife,  for  she  was  so  resplendent  with
jewels  that  she  looked  like  a  meteor  fallen  from  the  clouds  ;
and  he  was  much  grieved  thereat.  But  she,  though  she
saw  him,  did  not  recognise  him,  as  he  was  emaciated  and

^  The  D.  text  reads  agalad  instead  of  acalad,  "  that  his  pride  on  account
of  his  father's  splendour  vanished." — n.m.p.


THE  FICKLENESS  OF  WOMAN  131

begrimed,  and  asked  him  who  he  was.  When  he  heard  that,
he  answered  :  "I  am  a  traveller."  Then  the  merchant's
daughter  entered  the  almshouse,  and  the  prince  followed  her
secretly  to  watch  her.  There  she  advanced  towards  a  certain
man,  and  he  towards  her,  and  asking  why  she  had  come  so
late,  he  bestowed  several  kicks  on  her.^  Then  the  passion  of
the  wicked  woman  was  doubled,  and  she  appeased  him,  and
remained  with  him  on  the  most  affectionate  terms. ^

When  he  saw  that,  the  discreet  prince  reflected:  "  This
is  not  the  time  for  me  to  show  anger,  for  I  have  other  affairs
in  hand  ;  and  how  could  I  employ  against  these  two  con-
temptible creatures,  this  wife  of  mine  and  the  man  who  has
done  me  this  wrong,  this  sword  which  is  to  be  used  against
my  foes  ?  Or  what  quarrel  have  I  with  this  adulteress,  for
this  is  the  work  of  malignant  desire  that  showers  calamities
upon  me,  showing  skill  in  the  game  of  testing  my  firmness  ?
It  is  my  marriage  with  a  woman  below  me  in  rank  that  is  in
fault,  not  the  woman  herself ;  how  can  a  female  crow  leave
the  male  crow  to  take  pleasure  in  a  cuckoo  ?  "

Thus  reflecting,  he  allowed  that  wife  of  his  to  remain  in
the  society  of  her  paramour  ;  for  in  the  minds  of  heroes
possessed  with  an  ardent  desire  of  victory,  of  what  import-
ance is  woman,  valueless  as  a  straw  ?  But  at  the  moment
when  his  wife  ardently  embraced  her  paramour  there  fell
from  her  ear  an  ornament  thickly  studded  with  valuable
jewels.  And  she  did  not  observe  this,  but  at  the  end  of  her
interview,  taking  leave  of  her  paramour,  returned  hurriedly
to  her  house  as  she  came.  And  that  unlawful  lover  also
departed  somewhere  or  other.

Then  the  prince  saw  that  jewelled  ornament,  and  took  it
up ;  it  flashed  with  many  jewel-gleams,  dispelling  the  gather-
ing darkness  of  despondency,  and  seemed  like  a  hand-lamp
obtained  by  him  to   assist  him  in  searching  for  his  lost

1  Cf.  an  incident  in  "  Giil  and  Sanaubar"  (Liebrecht,  Zur  Folkskunde^

p.  144) also  the  "Tale  of  the  Ensorcelled  Prince,"  Nights  (Burton,  vol.  i,

p.  72),  and  see  Chauvin,  Bibliographie  des  Ouvrages  Arabes,  vi,  p.  51  n^. — n.m.p.

2  This  is  not  a  correct  rendering  of  yadrichchhayd.  It  means  literally,
■*' casually,"  "by  chance,"  or  "arbitrarily."  Barnett  suggests  that  its  meaning
here  is  "at  her  own  pleasure,"  "of  her  own  free  will" — thus  "wantonly"
would  perhaps  be  the  best  translation. — n.m.p.


132  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

prosperity.  The  prince  immediately  perceived  that  it  was
very  valuable,  and  went  off,  having  obtained  all  he  required,
to  Kanyakubja ;  there  he  pledged  that  ornament  for  a
hundred  thousand  gold  pieces,  and  after  buying  horses  and
elephants  went  into  the  presence  of  the  emperor.  And  with
the  troops  which  he  gave  him  he  marched,  and  slew  his
enemies  in  fight,  and  recovered  his  father's  kingdom ;  and
his  mother  applauded  his  success.

Then  he  redeemed  from  pawn  that  ornament,  and  sent
it  to  his  father-in-law  to  reveal  that  unsuspected  secret ;
his  father-in-law,  when  he  saw  that  earring  of  his  daughter's,
which  had  come  to  him  in  such  a  way,  was  confounded,  and
showed  it  to  her.  She  looked  upon  it,  lost  long  ago  like  her
own  virtue  ;  and  when  she  heard  that  it  had  been  sent  by
her  husband  she  was  distracted,  and  called  to  mind  the  whole
circumstance  :  "  This  is  the  very  ornament  which  I  let  fall
in  the  almshouse  the  night  I  saw  that  unknown  traveller
standing  there  ;  so  that  must  undoubtedly  have  been  my
husband  come  to  test  my  virtue,  but  I  did  not  recognise  him,
and  he  picked  up  this  ornament."

While  the  merchant's  daughter  was  going  through  this
train  of  reflection,  her  heart,  afflicted  by  the  misfortune  of
her  unchastity  having  been  discovered,  in  its  agony,  broke.
Then  her  father  artfully  questioned  a  maid  of  hers  who
knew  all  her  secrets,  and  found  out  the  truth,  and  so  ceased
to  mourn  for  his  daughter ;  as  for  the  prince,  after  he  re-
covered the  kingdom,  he  obtained  as  wife  the  daughter  of
the  emperor,  won  by  his  virtues,  and  enjoyed  the  highest
prosperity.


[M]  "So  you  see  that  the  hearts  of  women  are  hard  as
adamant  in  daring  sin,  but  are  soft  as  a  flower  when  the
tremor  of  fear  falls  upon  them.  But  there  are  some  few
women  born  in  good  families  that,  having  hearts  virtuous  ^
and  of  transparent  purity,  become  like  pearls,  the  ornaments
of  the  earth.     And  the  fortune  of  kings  is  ever  bounding

^  Here  there  is  a  pun,  suvritta  meaning  also  '*  well  rounded."


VIRTUE  BRINGS  ITS  OWN  REWARD  133

away  like  a  doe,  but  the  wise  know  how  to  bind  it  by  the
tether  of  firmness,  as  you  see  in  my  story  :  therefore  those
who  desire  good  fortune  must  not  abandon  their  virtue  even
in  calamity,  and  of  this  principle  my  present  circumstances
are  an  illustration,  for  I  preserved  my  character,  O  Queen,
even  in  this  calamity,  and  that  has  borne  me  fruit  in  the
shape  of  the  good  fortune  of  beholding  you."

Having  heard  this  tale  from  the  mouth  of  that  Brahman
woman,  the  Queen  Vasavadatta,  feeling  respect  for  her,  im-
mediately thought  :  "  Surely  this  Brahman  woman  must  be
of  good  family,  for  the  indirect  way  in  which  she  alluded  to
her  own  virtue  and  her  boldness  in  speech  prove  that  she
is  of  gentle  birth,  and  this  is  the  reason  why  she  showed  such
tact  in  entering  the  king's  court  of  justice."  Having  gone
through  these  reflections,  the  queen  again  said  to  the  Brahman
woman  :  "  Whose  wife  are  you,  or  what  is  the  history  of  your
life  ?  Tell  me."  When  she  heard  that,  the  Brahman  woman
again  began  to  speak  :


26.  Story  of  Pingalikd

Queen,  there  was  a  certain  Brahman  in  the  country  of
Malava,  named  Agnidatta,  the  home  of  Fortune  and  of  Learn-
ing, who  willingly  impoverished  himself  to  help  suppliants.
And  in  course  of  time  there  were  born  to  him  two  sons  like
himself  :  the  eldest  was  called  Sankaradatta  and  the  other
Santikara.  Of  these  two,  O  glorious  one,  Santikara  suddenly
left  his  father's  house  in  quest  of  learning,  while  he  was  still
a  boy,  and  went  I  know  not  whither,  and  the  other  son,  his
elder  brother,  married  me,  who  am  the  daughter  of  Yajna-
datta,  who  collected  wealth  for  the  sake  of  sacrifice  only.
In  the  course  of  time  the  father  of  my  husband,  who  was
named  Agnidatta,  being  old,  went  to  the  next  world,  and  his
wife  followed  him  ^ ;  and  my  husband  left  me,  when  I  was
pregnant,  to  go  to  holy  places,  and  through  sorrow  for  his
loss  abandoned  the  body  in  fire  purified  by  the  goddess
Sarasvati ;   and  when  that  fact  was  told  us  by  those  who

^  I.e.  burned  herself  with  his  body.


134  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

accompanied  him  in  his  pilgrimage,  I  was  not  permitted  to
follow  him  by  my  relations,  as  I  was  pregnant.

Then,  while  my  grief  was  fresh,  brigands  suddenly  swooped
down  on  us  and  plundered  my  house  and  all  the  royal  grant ;
immediately  I  fled  with  three  Brahman  women  from  that
place,  for  fear  that  I  might  be  outraged,  taking  with  me  very
few  garments.  And,  as  the  whole  kingdom  was  ravaged,  I
went  to  a  distant  land,  accompanied  by  them,  and  remained
there  a  month,  only  supporting  myself  by  menial  drudgery.
And  then,  hearing  from  people  that  the  King  of  Vatsa  was
the  refuge  of  the  helpless,  I  came  here  with  the  three  Brahman
women,  with  no  other  travelling  provision  than  my  virtue  ;
and  as  soon  as  I  arrived  I  gave  birth  at  the  same  time  to  two
boys.  Thus,  though  I  have  the  friendly  assistance  of  these
three  Brahman  women,  I  have  suffered  bereavement,  banish-
ment, poverty ;  and  now  comes  this  birth  of  twins.  Alas,
Providence  has  opened  to  me  the  door  of  calamity !

Accordingly,  reflecting  that  I  had  no  other  means  of  main-
taining these  children,  I  laid  aside  shame,  the  ornament  of
women,  and  entering  into  the  king's  court  I  made  a  petition
to  him.  Who  is  able  to  endure  the  sight  of  misery  of
youthful  offspring  ?  And  in  consequence  of  his  order,  I  have
come  into  your  august  presence,  and  my  calamities  have
turned  back,  as  if  ordered  away  from  your  door.  This  is
my  history :  as  for  my  name,  it  is  Pingalika,  because  from
my  childhood  my  eyes  have  been  reddened  by  the  smoke  of
burnt- offerings.  And  that  brother-in-law  of  mine  Santikara
dwells  in  a  foreign  land,  but  in  what  land  he  is  now  living
I  have  not  as  yet  discovered.


[M]  When  the  Brahman  woman  had  told  her  history  in
these  words,  the  queen  came  to  the  conclusion  that  she  was  a
lady  of  high  birth,  and,  after  reflecting,  said  this  to  her  with
an  affectionate  manner  :  "  There  is  dwelling  here  a  foreign
Brahman  of  the  name  of  Santikara,  and  he  is  our  domestic
chaplain  ;  I  am  certain  he  will  turn  out  to  be  your  brother-
in-law."     After  saying  this  to  the  eager  Brahman  lady,  the


THE  QUEEN  LONGS  FOR  A  SON      135

queen  allowed  that  night  to  pass,  and  the  next  morning  sent
for  Santikara  and  asked  him  about  his  descent.  And  when
he  had  told  her  his  descent,  she,  ascertaining  that  the  two
accounts  tallied  completely,  showed  him  that  Brahman  lady,
and  said  to  him  :  "  Here  is  your  brother's  wife."  And  when
they  recognised  one  another,  and  he  had  heard  of  the  death
of  his  relations,  he  took  the  Brahman  lady,  the  wife  of  his
brother,  to  his  own  house.  There  he  mourned  exceedingly,
as  was  natural,  for  the  death  of  his  parents  and  his  brother,
and  comforted  the  lady,  who  was  accompanied  by  her  two
children.

And  the  Queen  Vasavadatta  settled  that  the  Brahman
lady's  two  young  sons  should  be  the  domestic  chaplains  of
her  future  son,  and  the  queen  gave  the  eldest  the  name  of
Santisoma,  and  the  next  of  Vaisvanara,  and  she  bestowed
on  them  much  wealth.  The  people  of  this  world  are  like  a
blind  man,  being  led  to  the  place  of  recompense  by  their  own
actions  going  before  them,^  and  their  courage  is  merely  an
instrument.  Then  those  two  children  and  their  mother  and
Santikara  remained  united  there,  having  obtained  wealth.

Then  once  upon  a  time,  as  days  went  on,  the  Queen
Vasavadatta  beheld  from  her  palace  a  certain  woman  of  the
caste  of  potters  coming  with  five  sons,  bringing  plates,  and
she  said  to  the  Brahman  lady  Pingalika,  who  was  at  her  side  :
"  Observe,  my  friend,  this  woman  has  five  sons,  and  I  have
not  even  one  as  yet  ^ ;  to  such  an  extent  is  such  a  one  the
possessor  of  merit,  while  such  a  one  as  myself  is  not."

Then  Pingalika  said  :  "  Queen,  these  numerous  sons  are
people  who  have  committed  many  sins  in  a  previous  exist-
ence, and  are  born  to  poor  people  in  order  that  they  may
suffer  for  them  ;  but  the  son  that  shall  be  born  to  such  a  one
as  you  must  have  been  in  a  former  life  a  very  virtuous  person.
Therefore  do  not  be  impatient,  you  will  soon  obtain  a  son
such  as  you  deserve."  Though  Pingalika  said  this  to  her,
Vasavadatta,  being  eager  for  the  birth  of  a  son,  remained
with  her  mind  overpowered  by  anxiety  about  it.     At  that

^  Purogaik  means  "done  in  a  previous  life,"  and  also  "going  before."
2  Cf.   Gaal,  M'drchen  der  Magyaren,  p,    364;    Gonzenbach's   Sicilianische
Mdrchen,  vol.  i,  pp.  285,  294.


136  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

moment  the  King  of  Vatsa  came,  and  perceiving  what  was
in  her  heart,  said :  "  Queen,  Narada  said  that  you  should
obtain  a  son  by  propitiating  Siva,  therefore  we  must  con-
tinually propitiate  Siva,  that  granter  of  boons."  Upon  that,
the  queen  quickly  determined  upon  performing  a  vow,  and
when  she  had  taken  a  vow,  the  king  and  his  ministers,  and  the
whole  kingdom  also,  took  a  vow  to  propitiate  Siva ;  and
after  the  royal  couple  had  fasted  for  three  nights,  that  lord
was  so  pleased  that  he  himself  appeared  to  them  and  com-
manded them  in  a  dream  :  "  Rise  up  ;  from  you  shall  spring
a  son  who  shall  be  a  portion  of  the  God  of  Love,  and  owing
to  my  favour  shall  be  king  of  all  the  Vidyadharas."

When  the  god,  whose  crest  is  the  moon,  had  said  this  and
disappeared,  that  couple  woke  up,  and  immediately  felt  un-
feigned joy  at  having  obtained  their  boon,  and  considered  that
they  had  gained  their  object.  And  in  the  morning  the  king
and  queen  rose  up,  and  after  delighting  the  subjects  with
the  taste  of  the  nectarous  story  of  their  dream,  kept  high
festival  with  their  relations  and  servants,  and  broke  in  this
manner  the  fast  of  their  vow.  After  some  days  had  passed,
a  certain  man  with  matted  locks  came  and  gave  the  Queen
Vasavadatta  a  fruit  in  her  dream.  Then  the  King  of  Vatsa
rejoiced  with  the  queen,  who  informed  him  of  that  clear
dream,  and  he  was  congratulated  by  his  ministers,  and  sup-
posing that  the  god  of  the  moon- crest  had  given  her  a  son
under  the  form  of  a  fruit,  he  considered  the  fulfilment  of  his
wish  to  be  not  far  off.^

^  The  whole  question  of  supernatural  birth  in  M'drchen,  Sagas  and  custom
has  been  ably  discussed  in  detail  by  Hartland,  The  Legend  of  Perseus,  vol.  i,
pp.  71-181  (the  reference  on  p.  76  to  the  Kathd  Sarit  Sdgara  should  be  ii,  ^(^5).
See  also  V.  Chauvin,  op.  cil.,  v,  p.  43,  under  the  heading  "Conceptions
extraordinaires."

In  the  "Story  of  King  Parityagasena,  his  Wicked  Wife  and  his  Two
Sons,"  which  appears  in  a  later  volume,  the  two  wives  receive  two  heavenly
fruits  from  Durga.  So  in  Chapter  CXX  the  mother  of  the  future  King
Vikramaditya  is  given  a  fruit  by  Siva.  The  fruit  in  question  is  sometimes
a  mango,  as  in  Stokes,  Indian  Fatty  Tales,  p,  4-1  ;  Frere,  Old  Deccan  Days,
p.  254;  Sastrl,  Folk-Lore  in  Southern  India,  p.  140.  In  Stokes,  op.  cil.,  p.  91,
lichi  fruits  are  given,  while  in  other  tales  it  is  a  pomegranate.  It  is  un-
necessary to  give  further  examples,  as  Hartland  has  recorded  anything  of
importance. — n.m.p.


CHAPTER  XXII

THEN,  in  a  short  time,  Vasavadatta  became  pregnant
[M]  with  a  child,  glorious  inasmuch  as  it  was  an
incarnation  of  the  God  of  Love,  and  it  was  a  feast
to  the  eyes  of  the  King  of  Vatsa.  She  shone  with  a  face  the
eyes  of  which  rolled,  and  which  was  of  palish  hue,  as  if  with
the  moon  come  to  visit  her  out  of  affection  for  the  God  of
Love  conceived  in  her.  When  she  was  sitting  down,  the
two  images  of  her  form,  reflected  in  the  sides  of  the  jewelled
couch,  seemed  like  Rati  and  Priti  come  there  out  of  regard
for  their  husband.^  Her  ladies-in-waiting  attended  upon  her
like  the  Sciences  that  grant  desires  come  in  bodily  form  to
show  their  respect  for  the  future  King  of  the  Vidyadharas  ^
conceived  in  her.  At  that  time  she  had  breasts  with  points
dark  like  a  folded  bud,  resembling  pitchers  intended  for  the
inaugural  sprinkling  ^  of  her  unborn  son.  When  she  lay  down
on  a  comfortable  couch  in  the  middle  of  the  palace,  which
gleamed  with  pavement  composed  of  translucent,  flashing,
lustrous  jewels,  she  appeared  as  if  she  were  being  propitiated
by  the  waters,  that  had  come  there  trembling,  through  fear
of  being  conquered  by  her  future  son,  with  heaps  of  jewels  on
every  side.

Her  image,  reflected  from  the  gems  in  the  middle  of
the  chariot,  appeared  like  the  Fortune  of  the  Vidyadharas
coming  in  the  heaven  to  offer  her  adoration.  And  she  felt
a  longing  *  for  stories  of  great  magicians  provided  with  in-
cantations by  means  of  spells,  introduced  appropriately  in
conversation.    Vidyadhara  ladies,  beginning  melodious  songs,

^  1  read  with  a  MS.  in  the  Sanskrit  College  patisnehdd  for  pratisnehdd.
The  two  wives  of  the  God  of  Love  came  out  of  love  to  their  husband,  who
was  conceived  in  Vasavadatta.

2  Vidyadhara  means,  literally,  "  magical  knowledge-holder."

3  The  ceremony  of  coronation.

*  See  Vol.  I,  Appendix  III,  pp.  221-228,  on  the  "  Dohada,  or  Craving  of
the  Pregnant  Woman." — n.m.p.
137


138  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

waited  upon  her  when  in  her  dream  she  rose  high  in  the
sky,  and  when  she  woke  up  she  desired  to  enjoy  in  reaUty
the  amusement  of  sporting  in  the  air,  which  would  give  the
pleasure  of  looking  down  upon  the  earth.  And  Yaugan-
dharayana  gratified  that  longing  of  the  queen's  by  employ-
ing spells,  machines,  juggling,  and  such-like  contrivances.  So
she  roamed  through  the  air  by  means  of  those  various
contrivances,  which  furnished  a  wonderful  spectacle  to  the
upturned  eyes  of  the  citizens'  wives.  But  once  on  a  time,
when  she  was  in  her  palace,  there  arose  in  her  heart  a  desire
to  hear  the  glorious  tales  of  the  Vidyadharas.  Then  Yaugan-
dharayana,  being  entreated  by  that  queen,  told  her  this  tale
while  all  were  listening  :

27.  Story  of  Jlmutavdhana

There  is  a  great  mountain  named  Himavat,^  the  father
of  the  mother  of  the  world, ^  who  is  not  only  the  chief  of
hills,  but  the  spiritual  preceptor  of  Siva,  and  on  that  great
mountain,  the  home  of  the  Vidyadharas,  dwelt  the  lord  of
the  Vidyadharas,  the  King  Jimutaketu.  And  in  his  house
there  was  a  wishing-tree,^  which  had  come  down  to  him  from
his  ancestors,  called  by  a  name  which  expressed  its  nature,
"  The  Giver  of  Desires."  And  one  day  the  King  Jimutaketu
approached  that  wishing-tree  in  his  garden,  which  was  of
divine  nature,  and  supplicated  it :  "  We  always  obtain  from
you  all  we  desire,  therefore  give  me,  O  god,  who  am  now  child-
less, a  virtuous  son."  *  Then  the  wishing-tree  said  :  "  King,
there  shall  be  born  to  thee  a  son  who  shall  remember  his
past  birth,  who  shall  be  a  hero  in  giving,  and  kind  to  all
creatures."     When  he  heard  that,  the  king  was  delighted,

1  See  Vol.  I,  p.  2,  Sn". — n.m.p.

^  Ambika — i.e.  Parvatl  the  wife  of  Siva.

3  See  Vol.  I,  pp.  8,  144,  144^^,  and  also  W.  Crooke,  Popular  Religion  and
Folk-Lore  of  Northern  India,  vol.  ii,  p.  88. — n.m.p.

*  Liebrecht,  speaking  of  the  novel  of  Guerino  Meschino,  compares  this
tree  with  the  sun  and  moon  trees  mentioned  in  the  work  of  the  Pseudo-
Callisthenes,  Book  III,  ch.  xvii.  They  inform  Alexander  that  the  years  of  his
life  are  accomplished,  and  that  he  will  die  in  Babylon.  See  also  Ralston's
Song,K  of  the  Russian  People,  p.  111.


w       ^^^


THE  WISHING-TREE  139


and  bowed  before  that  tree,  and  then  he  went  and  delighted
his  queen  with  the  news  :  accordingly  in  a  short  time  a  son
was  born  to  him,  and  his  father  called  the  son  Jimutavahana.

Then  that  Jimutavahana,  who  was  of  great  goodness,
grew  up  step  by  step  with  the  growth  of  his  innate  com-
passion for  all  creatures.  And  in  the  course  of  time,  when
he  was  made  crown  prince,  he,  being  full  of  compassion  for
the  world,  said  in  secret  to  his  father,  who  was  pleased  by  his
attentions  :  "I  know,  O  father,  that  in  this  world  all  things
perish  in  an  instant,  but  the  pure  glory  of  the  great  alone
endures  till  the  end  of  a  kalpa.^  If  it  is  acquired  by  bene-
fiting others,  what  other  wealth  can  be,  like  it,  valued  by
high-minded  men  more  than  life  ?  And  as  for  prosperity,
if  it  be  not  used  to  benefit  others,  it  is  like  lightning,  which
for  a  moment  pains  the  eye  and,  flickering,  disappears  some-
where or  other.  So,  if  this  wishing-tree,  which  we  possess,
and  which  grants  all  desires,  is  employed  for  the  benefit  of
others,  we  shall  have  reaped  from  it  all  the  fruit  it  can  give.
So  let  me  take  such  steps  as  that  by  its  riches  the  whole
multitude  of  men  in  need  may  be  rescued  from  poverty."

This  petition  Jimutavahana  made  to  his  father,  and
having  obtained  his  permission,  he  went  and  said  to  that
wishing-tree  :  "  O  god,  thou  always  givest  us  the  desired
fruit,  therefore  fulfil  to-day  this  one  wish  of  ours.  O  my
friend,  relieve  this  whole  world  from  its  poverty,  success  to
thee,  thou  art  bestowed  on  the  world  that  desires  wealth  !  "
The  wishing-tree,  being  addressed  in  this  style  by  that  self-
denying  one,  showered  much  gold  on  the  earth,  and  all  the
people  rejoiced  ;  what  other  compassionate  incarnation  of
a  Bodhisattva  except  the  glorious  Jimutavahana  would  be
able  to  dispose  even  of  a  wishing-tree  in  favour  of  the  needy  ?
For  this  reason  every  region  of  the  earth  ^  became  devoted
to  Jimutavahana,  and  his  stainless  fame  was  spread  on  high.

Then  the  relations  of  Jimutaketu,  seeing  that  his  throne
was  firmly  established  by  the  glory  of  his  son,  were  envious,
and  became  hostile  to  him.  And  they  thought  it  would  be
easy  to  conquer  that  place,  which  possessed  the  excellent

^  A  period  of  432  million  years  of  mortals.

2  More  literally,  '"  the  cardinal  and  intermediate  points."


140  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

wishing-tree  that  was  employed  for  bestowing  gifts,  on  ac-
count of  its  not  being  strong  ^ :  then  they  assembled  and  deter-
mined on  war,  and  thereupon  the  self-denying  Jimutavahana
said  to  his  father  :  "As  this  body  of  ours  is  like  a  bubble
in  the  water,  for  the  sake  of  what  do  we  desire  prosperity,
which  flickers  like  a  candle  exposed  to  the  wind  ?  And  what
wise  man  desires  to  attain  prosperity  by  the  slaughter  of
others  ?  Accordingly,  my  father,  I  ought  not  to  fight  with
my  relations.  But  I  must  leave  my  kingdom  and  go  to
some  forest  or  other  ;  let  these  miserable  wretches  be,  let
us  not  slay  the  members  of  our  own  family."

When  Jimutavahana  had  said  this,  his  father,  Jimu-
taketu,  formed  a  resolution  and  said  to  him  ;  "  I  too  must
go,  my  son  ;  for  what  desire  for  rule  can  I,  who  am  old,  have,
when  you,  though  young,  out  of  compassion  abandon  your
realm  as  if  it  were  so  much  grass  ?  "  In  these  words  his
father  expressed  his  acquiescence  in  the  project  of  Jimutava-
hana, who  then,  with  his  father  and  his  father's  wife,  went
to  the  Malaya  mountain.  There  he  remained  in  a  hermitage,
the  dwelling  of  the  Siddhas,  where  the  brooks  were  hidden
by  the  sandalwood-trees,  and  devoted  himself  to  taking  care
of  his  father.  There  he  struck  up  a  friendship  with  the  self-
denying  son  of  Vi^vavasu,  the  chief  prince  of  the  Siddhas,
whose  name  was  Mitravasu.  And  once  on  a  time  the  all-
knowing  Jimutavahana  beheld  in  a  lonely  place  Mitravasu 's
maiden  sister,  who  had  been  his  beloved  in  a  former  birth.
And  the  mutual  gaze  of  those  two  young  people  was  like  the
catching  in  a  frail  net  of  the  deer  of  the  mind.^

Then  one  day  Mitravasu  came  up  suddenly  to  Jimutava-
hana, who  deserved  the  respect  of  the  three  worlds,  with  a
pleased  expression,  and  said  to  him  :  "I  have  a  younger
sister,  the  maiden  called  Malayavati  ;  I  give  her  to  you,
do  not  refuse  to  gratify  my  wish."     When  Jimutavahana

^  The  sense  here  is  not  at  all  clear,  but  is  explained  in  the  1).  text,  which
reads  mukta  instead  o(  i/u/cla,  thus  meaning:  "They  thought  it  would  be  easy
to  conquer  that  (kingdom)  as  it  had  lost  its  strength  on  account  of  the  change
of  place  of  the  excellent  wishing-tree  now  employed  to  bestowing  gifts."
See  Speyer,  op.  cit.,  pp.  lO.S,  104. — n.m.p.

2  Reading  manomrigl,  "the  deer  of  the  mind."


VASUDATTA  AND  THE  ROBBERS       141

heard  that,  he  said  to  him  :  "  O  Prince,  she  was  my  wife  in
a  former  birth,  and  in  that  Hfe  you  became  my  friend,  and
were  Hke  a  second  heart  to  me.  I  am  one  who  remembers
the  former  state  of  existence ;  I  recollect  all  that  happened
in  my  previous  birth."  When  he  said  this,  Mitravasu  said
to  him  :  "  Then  tell  me  this  story  of  your  former  birth,  for
I  feel  curiosity  about  it."  When  he  heard  this  from  Mitra-
vasu, the  benevolent  Jimutavahana  told  him  the  tale  of  his
former  birth  as  follows  :  —


27a.  Jlmutavdhana's  Adventures  in  a  Former  Birth

Thus  it  is  ;  formerly  I  was  a  sky-roaming  Vidyadhara,
and  once  on  a  time  I  was  passing  over  a  peak  of  the  Himalaya.
And  then  Siva,  who  was  below,  sporting  with  Gauri,  being
angry  at  my  passing  above  him,  cursed  me,  saying  :  "  De-
scend into  a  mortal  womb,  and  after  obtaining  a  Vidyadhari
for  your  wife,  and  appointing  your  son  in  your  place,  you
shall  remember  your  former  birth,  and  again  be  born  as  a
Vidyadhara."  Having  pronounced  when  this  curse  should
end,  Siva  ceased  and  disappeared  ;  and  soon  after  I  was  born
upon  earth  in  a  family  of  merchants.  And  I  grew  up  as  the
son  of  a  rich  merchant  in  a  city  named  Vallabhi,  and  my
name  was  Vasudatta.

And  in  course  of  time,  when  I  became  a  young  man,  I
had  a  retinue  given  me  by  my  father,  and  went  by  his  orders
to  another  land  to  traffic.  As  I  was  going  along,  robbers
fell  upon  me  in  a  forest,  and  after  taking  all  my  property,  led
me  in  chains  to  a  temple  of  Durga  in  their  village,  terrible
with  a  long  waving  banner  of  red  silk  like  the  tongue  of
Death  eager  to  devour  the  lives  of  animals.  There  they
brought  me  into  the  presence  of  their  chief,  named  Pulindaka,
who  was  engaged  in  worshipping  the  goddess,  in  order  that  I
might  serve  as  a  victim.  He,  though  he  was  a  Savara,^  the
moment  he  saw  me,  felt  his  heart  melt  with  pity  for  me  ;  an
apparently  causeless  affectionate  movement  of  the  heart  is
a  sign  of  friendship  in  a  former  birth.  Then  that  S  a  vara
king,  having  saved  me  from  slaughter,  was  about  to  complete

1  Member  of  a  savage  tribe.


142  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

the  rite  by  the  sacrifice  of  himself,  when  a  heavenly  voice
said  to  him  :  "  Do  not  act  thus,  I  am  pleased  with  thee,
crave  a  boon  of  me."  Thereupon  he  was  delighted,  and  said  :
"  O  goddess,  thou  art  pleased  ;  what  other  blessing  can  I
need  ;  nevertheless  I  ask  so  much — may  I  have  friendship
with  this  merchant's  son  in  another  birth  also."  The  voice
said,  "So  be  it,"  and  then  ceased  ;  and  then  that  Savara
gave  me  much  wealth,  and  sent  me  back  to  my  own  home.

And  then,  as  I  had  returned  from  foreign  travel  and  from
the  jaws  of  death,  my  father,  when  he  heard  the  whole  occur-
rence, made  a  great  feast  in  my  honour.  And  in  course  of
time  I  saw  there  that  very  same  Savara  chief,  whom  the
king  had  ordered  to  be  brought  before  him  as  a  prisoner  for
plundering  a  caravan.  I  told  my  father  of  it  immediately,
and  making  a  petition  to  the  king,  I  saved  him  from  capital
punishment  by  the  payment  of  a  hundred  thousand  gold
pieces.  And  having  in  this  way  repaid  the  benefit  which  he
conferred  upon  me  by  saving  my  life,  I  brought  him  to  my
house,  and  entertained  him  honourably  for  a  long  time  with
all  loving  attention.  And  then,  after  this  hospitable  enter-
tainment, I  dismissed  him,  and  he  went  to  his  own  village,
fixing  upon  me  a  heart  tender  with  affection.

Then,  while  he  thought  about  a  present  for  me  that
might  be  worthy  of  my  return  for  his  previous  kindness,  he
came  to  the  conclusion  that  the  pearls  and  musk  and  treasures
of  that  kind,  which  were  at  his  disposal,  were  not  valuable
enough.  Thereupon  he  took  his  bow  and  went  off  to  the
Himalaya  to  shoot  elephants,  in  order  to  obtain  a  sur-
passingly splendid  necklace  ^  for  me.  And  while  he  was
roaming  about  there,  he  reached  a  great  lake  with  a  temple
upon  its  shore,  being  welcomed  by  its  lotuses,  which  were
as  devoted  to  their  friend  ^  as  he  was  to  me.  And  sus-
pecting that  the  wild  elephants  would  come  there  to  drink

*  I.e.  of  the  pearls  in  the  heads  of  the  elephants. The  pearl  {kunjara-

mani  gajamukta)  is  said  to  be  found  in  the  brain,  forehead  and  stomach  of  the
elephant.  It  possesses  protective  qualities  and  is  used  in  charms.  See  Bull.
Madras  Mus.,  vol.  iii,  p.  221  ;  North  Indian  Notes  and  Queries,  vol.  iii,  p.  53;
Crooke,  op.  cit.,  vol.  ii,  p.  240 ;  and  Waddell,  Buddhism  of  Tibet,  p.  208. — n.m.p.

*  I.e.  the  sun.


THE  MAIDEN  OF  DIVINE  BEAUTY  143

water,  he  remained  in  concealment  with  his  bow  in  order
to  kill  them.

In  the  meanwhile  he  saw  a  young  lady  of  wonderful
beauty  riding  upon  a  lion  ^  to  worship  Siva,  whose  temple
stood  on  the  shore  of  the  lake ;  looking  like  a  second
daughter  of  the  King  of  the  Snowy  Mountains,  devoted  to
the  service  of  Siva  while  in  her  girlhood.  And  the  Savara,
when  he  saw  her,  being  overpowered  with  wonder,  reflected  :
"  Who  can  this  be  ?  If  she  is  a  mortal  woman,  why  does
she  ride  upon  a  lion  ?  On  the  other  hand,  if  she  is  divine,
how  can  she  be  seen  by  such  as  me  ?  So  she  must  certainly
be  the  incarnate  development  of  the  merits  of  my  eyes  in  a
former  birth.  If  I  could  only  marry  my  friend  to  her,  then
I  should  have  bestowed  upon  him  a  new  and  wonderful  recom-
pense. So  I  had  better  first  approach  her  to  question  her."
Thus  reflecting,  my  friend  the  Savara  advanced  to  meet
her.

In  the  meanwhile  she  dismounted  from  the  lion,  that  lay
down  in  the  shade,  and  advancing  began  to  pick  the  lotuses
of  the  lake.  And  seeing  the  Savara,  who  was  a  stranger,
coming  towards  her  and  bowing,  out  of  a  hospitable  feeling
she  gratified  him  with  a  welcome.  And  she  said  to  him  :
"  Who  are  you,  and  why  have  you  come  to  this  inaccessible
land  ?  "  Thereupon  the  Savara  answered  her  :  "I  am  a
prince  of  the  Savaras,  who  regard  the  feet  of  Bhavani  as  my
only  refuge,  and  I  am  come  to  this  wood  to  get  pearls  from
the  heads  of  elephants.  But  when  I  beheld  you  just  now,
O  goddess,  I  called  to  mind  my  own  friend  that  saved  my
life,  the  son  of  a  merchant  prince,  the  auspicious  Vasudatta.
For  he,  O  fair  one,  is,  like  you,  matchless  for  beauty  and
youth,  a  very  fount  of  nectar  to  the  eyes  of  this  world.
Happy  is  that  maiden  in  the  world  whose  braceleted  hand  is
taken  in  this  life  by  that  treasure-house  of  friendship,  gener-
osity, compassion  and  patience.  And  if  this  beautiful  form
of  yours  is  not  linked  to  such  a  man,  then  I  cannot  help
grieving  that  Kama  bears  the  bow  in  vain."

By  these  words  of  the  king  of  the  hunters  the  mind  of  the
maiden  was  suddenly  carried  away,  as  if  by  the  syllables  of

^  See  Vol.  I,  p.  l7?^^ — n.m.p.


144  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

the  God  of  Love's  bewildering  spell.  And,  prompted  by
love,  she  said  to  that  Savara  :  "  Where  is  that  friend  of
yours  ?  Bring  him  here  and  show  him  to  me."  When  he
heard  that,  he  said  :  "I  will  do  so."  And  that  moment  the
Savara  took  leave  of  her  and  set  out  on  his  journey  in  high
spirits,  considering  his  object  attained.  And  after  he  had
reached  the  village,  he  took  with  him  pearls  and  musk,  a
weight  sufficient  for  hundreds  of  heavily  laden  porters,  and
came  to  our  house.  There  he  was  honoured  by  all  the  in-
mates and,  entering  it,  he  offered  to  my  father  that  present,
which  was  worth  much  gold.  And  after  that  day  and  that
night  had  been  spent  in  feasting,  he  related  to  me  in  private
the  story  of  his  interview  with  the  maiden  from  the  very
commencement.  And  he  said  to  me,  who  was  all  excite-
ment, "  Come,  let  us  go  there,"  and  so  the  Savara  carried  me
off  at  night  just  as  he  pleased.  And  in  the  morning  my
father  found  that  I  had  gone  off  somewhere  with  the  Savara
prince  ;  but  feeling  perfect  confidence  in  his  affection,  he  re-
mained master  of  his  feelings.  But  I  was  conducted  in  course
of  time  by  that  Savara,  who  travelled  fast,  to  the  Himalaya,
and  he  tended  me  carefully  throughout  the  journey.

And  one  evening  we  reached  that  lake,  and  bathed  ;  and
we  remained  that  one  night  in  the  wood,  eating  sweet  fruits.
That  mountain  wood,  in  which  the  creepers  strewed  the
ground  with  flowers,  and  which  was  charming  with  the  hum
of  bees,  full  of  balmy  breezes,  and  with  beautiful  gleaming
herbs  for  lamps,  was  like  the  chamber  of  Rati  to  repose  in
during  the  night  for  us  two,  who  drank  the  water  of  the  lake.
Then  the  next  day  that  maiden  came  there,  and  at  every  step
my  mind,  full  of  strange  longings,  flew  to  meet  her,  and
her  arrival  was  heralded  by  this  my  right  eye,  throbbing
as  if  through  eagerness  to  behold  her.^     And  that  maid  with

^  Throbbing  of  the  right  eye  in  men  portends  union  with  the  beloved.

In  all  countries  involuntary  twitchings  or  itchings  are  looked  upon  with

great  superstition — movements  of  the  right  ear,  hand,  leg,  etc.,  signifying
good  luck  and  the  left  bad  luck.  This  was  the  case  among  the  Hindus,
but  it  applied  only  to  men.  With  women  the  omens  were  reversed.  Thus
in  Kalidasa's  Sakuntald  (Act  V),  SakuntalTi  says,  "  Alas  I  what  means  this
throbbing  of  my  right  eyelid  } "  to  which  Gautaml  replies,  "  Heaven  avert
the  evil  omen,  my  child  !     May  the  guardian  deities  of  thy  husband's  family


«


THE  MEETING  145


lovely  eyebrows  was  beheld  by  me,  on  the  back  of  a  knotty-
maned  lion,  like  a  digit  of  the  moon  resting  in  the  lap  of  an
autumn  cloud ;  and  I  cannot  describe  how  my  heart  felt  at
that  time  while  I  gazed  on  her,  being  full  of  tumultuous
emotions  of  astonishment,  longing  and  fear ;  then  that
maiden  dismounted  from  the  lion,  and  gathered  flowers,  and
after  bathing  in  the  lake,  worshipped  Siva,  who  dwelt  in  the
temple  on  its  banks/

And  when  the  worship  was  ended,  that  Savara,  my  friend,
advanced  towards  her  and,  announcing  himself,  bowed,  and
said  to  her  who  received  him  courteously  :  "  Goddess,  I  have
brought  that  friend  of  mine  as  a  suitable  bridegroom  for  you  :
if  you  think  proper,  I  will  show  him  to  you  this  moment."
When  she  heard  that,  she  said,  "  Show  him,"  and  that
Savara  came  and  took  me  near  her  and  showed  me  to  her.
She  looked  at  me  askance  with  an  eye  that  shed  love,  and
being  overcome  by  Kama  taking  possession  of  her  soul,  said
to  that  chieftain  of  the  Savaras  :  "  This  friend  of  yours  is
not  a  man,  surely  he  is  some  god  come  here  to  deceive  me
to-day  :  how  could  a  mortal  have  such  a  handsome  shape  ?  "

When  I  heard  that,  I  said  myself,  to  remove  all  doubt

convert  it  into  a  sign  of  good  fortune  ! "  As  is  natural,  such  superstitions
enter  largely  into  English  literature.     To  give  a  few  examples :

•^  Mine  eyes  do  itch  ;
Doth  that  bode  weeping  ?  "

Shakespeare,  Othello,  iv,  3.
"  If  your  lips  itch,  you  shall  kisse  somebody."

Melton,  Astrologaster,  p.  32.

"  We  shall  ha'  guests  to-day
.  .  .  My  nose  itcheth  so."

Dekker,  Honest  Whore.

"  By  the  pricking  of  my  thumbs.
Something  wicked  this  way  comes."

Shakespeare,  Macbeth,  iv,  1.
In    The  Encyclopaedia  of  Superstitions,  Folk-Lore   and   the   Occult  Sciences^
(edited  by  Cora  Linn  Daniels  and  Prof.  C.  M.  Stevans,  Chicago  and  Milwaukee^
1903,  vol.  i,  pp.  298-300  and  p.  338)  numerous  references  will  be  found  under
the  headings  "Itching"  and  "Twitching."     Apart  from  superstitions  relating
to  all  parts  of  the  face  are  included  those  regarding  the  palm,  knee,  elbow,
leg,  etc.     For  sneezing  see  Vol.  Ill,  Appendix  I,  of  this  work. — n.m.p.
^  No  doubt  by  offering  the  flowers  which  she  had  gathered.
VOL.  II.  K


146  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

from  her  mind  :  "  Fair  one,  I  am  in  very  truth  a  mortal ;
what  is  the  use  of  employing  fraud  against  one  so  honest  as
yourself,  lady  ?  For  I  am  the  son  of  a  merchant  named
Mahadhana,  that  dwells  in  Vallabhi,  and  I  was  gained  by
my  father  by  the  blessing  of  Siva.  For  he,  when  performing
austerities  to  please  the  god  of  the  moony  crest,  in  order
that  he  might  obtain  a  son,  was  thus  commanded  by  the  god
in  a  dream  being  pleased  with  him  :  '  Rise  up,  there  shall
spring  from  thee  a  great-hearted  son,  and  this  is  a  great  secret,
what  is  the  use  of  setting  it  forth  at  length  ?  '  After  hearing
this,  he  woke  up,  and  in  course  of  time  I  was  bom  to  him  as  a
son,  and  I  am  known  by  the  name  of  Vasudatta.  And  long
ago,  when  I  went  to  a  foreign  land,  I  obtained  this  Savara
chieftain  for  a  chosen  friend,  who  showed  himself  a  true
helper  in  misfortune.  This  is  a  brief  statement  of  the  truth
about  me."

When  I  had  said  this  I  ceased  ;  and  that  maiden,  with
her  face  cast  down  from  modesty,  said  :  "  It  is  so,  I  know  ;
Siva  being  propitiated  deigned  to  tell  me  in  a  dream,  after  I
had  worshipped  him,  '  To-morrow  morning  thou  shalt  obtain
a  husband  ' ;  so  you  are  my  husband,  and  this  friend  of
yours  is  my  brother."  When  she  had  delighted  me  by  this
nectar-like  speech,  she  ceased;  and  after  I  had  deliberated
with  her,  I  determined  to  go  to  my  own  house  with  my
friend,  in  order  that  the  marriage  might  be  solemnised  in  due
form.  Then  that  fair  one  summoned  by  a  sign  of  her  own
that  lion,  on  which  she  rode,  and  said  to  me  :  "  Mount  it,
my  husband."  Then  I,  by  the  advice  of  my  friend,  mounted
the  lion,  and  taking  that  beloved  one  in  my  arms,  I  set  out
thence  for  my  home,  having  obtained  all  my  objects,  riding
on  the  lion  with  my  beloved,  guided  by  that  friend.  And
living  on  the  flesh  of  the  deer  that  he  killed  with  his  arrows,
we  all  reached  in  course  of  time  the  city  of  Vallabhi.  Then
the  people,  seeing  me  coming  along  with  my  beloved,  riding
on  a  lion,  being  astonished,  ran  and  told  that  fact  quickly  to
my  father.  He  too  came  to  meet  me  in  his  joy,  and  when
he  saw  me  dismount  from  the  lion,  and  fall  at  his  feet,  he
welcomed  me  with  astonishment.

And  when  he  saw  that  incomparable  beauty  adore  his  feet,


THE  LION  TRANSFORMATION  147

and  perceived  that  she  was  a  fit  wife  for  me,  he  could  not
contain  himself  for  joy.  So  he  entered  the  house,  and  after
asking  us  about  the  circumstances,  he  made  a  great  feast,
praising  the  friendship  of  the  Savara  chieftain.  And  the  next
day,  by  the  appointment  of  the  astrologers,  I  married  that
excellent  maiden,  and  all  my  friends  and  relations  assembled
to  witness  our  wedding.  And  that  lion,  on  which  my  wife
had  ridden,  having  witnessed  the  marriage,  suddenly,  before
the  eyes  of  all,  assumed  the  form  of  a  man.

Then  all  the  bystanders  were  bewildered,  thinking :
"  What  can  this  mean  ?  "  But  he,  assuming  heavenly
garments  and  ornaments,  thus  addressed  me :  "I  am  a
Vidyadhara  named  Chitrangada,  and  this  maiden  is  my
daughter,  Manovati  by  name,  dearer  to  me  than  life.  I  used
to  wander  continually  through  the  forest  with  her  in  my
arms,  and  one  day  I  reached  the  Ganges,  on  the  banks  of
which  are  many  ascetic  groves.  And  as  I  was  going  along
in  the  middle  of  the  river,  for  fear  of  disturbing  the  ascetics,
my  garland  by  accident  fell  into  its  waters.  Then  the  hermit
Narada,  who  was  under  the  water,  suddenly  rose  up,  and,
angry  ^  because  the  garland  had  fallen  upon  his  back,  cursed
me  in  the  following  words  :  — '  On  account  of  this  insolence,
depart,  wicked  one ;  thou  shalt  become  a  lion,  and  repairing

^  Such  unintentional  injuries  are  common  in  folk-lore.  We  shall  come
across  other  examples  in  the  Ocean  of  Story.  Thus  in  the  twentieth  vampire
story,  in  Chapter  XCIV,  the  king  and  the  hermit's  daughter  lie  down  on  a
bed  of  flowers  under  an  Asvattha  tree.  This  disturbs  the  sacred  home  of
the  Brahman  demon  Jvalamukha,  and  the  king  has  either  to  forfeit  his  own
heart,  or  find  a  Brahman  boy  willing  to  offer  himself  in  his  place.  In  the
«ame  way  in  Chapter  C  the  king's  ministers  climb  into  a  tree  to  gather
fruit  and,  not  knowing  it  was  a  dwelling-place  of  Ganesa,  do  not  rinse  their
mouths  or  wash  their  hands  and  feet.  In  consequence  they  become  fruits
themselves.  Readers  will  remember  the  "Tale  of  the  Trader  and  the  Jinni"
in  the  Nights  (Burton,  vol.  i,  p.  25),  where  the  hapless  trader  is  eating  dates
and  throwing  away  the  stones.  A  huge  Ifrit  suddenly  appears,  and  accuses
the  merchant  with  the  death  of  his  son.  On  being  asked  how  this  was
possible,  he  replies :  "  When  thou  atest  dates  and  threwest  away  the  stones,
they  struck  my  son  full  in  the  breast  as  he  was  walking  by,  so  that  he  died
forthwith."  The  death  of  the  trader  is  only  saved  by  the  stories  of  the  three
Shaykhs  whom  the  trader  and  the  jinni  meet  by  chance.  For  a  note  on  the
^*  jerking  of  the  date-stone  "  see  E.  Forster,  Arabian  Nights'  Entertainments,  1839,
J),  xxvi.     See  also  V.  Chauvin,  op.  cit.,  vi,  p.  23. — n.m.p.


148  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

to  the  Himalaya,  shalt  cany  this  daughter  upon  thy  back.
And  when  thy  daughter  shall  be  taken  in  marriage  by  a
mortal,  then,  after  witnessing  the  ceremony,  thou  shalt  be
freed  from  this  curse.'  Atter  being  cursed  in  these  words  by
the  hermit,  I  became  a  lion,  and  dwelt  on  the  Himalaya,
carrying  this  daughter  of  mine,  who  is  devoted  to  the  worship
of  Siva.  And  you  know  well  the  sequel  of  the  story,  how  by
the  exertions  of  the  Savara  chieftain  this  highly  auspicious
event  has  been  brought  about.  So  I  shall  now  depart ;
good  luck  to  you  all !  I  have  now  reached  the  termination
of  that  curse."

Having  said  this,  that  Vidyadhara  immediately  flew  up
into  the  sky.  Then  my  father,  overwhelmed  with  astonish-
ment at  the  marvel,  delighted  at  the  eligible  connection,  and
finding  that  his  friends  and  relations  were  overjoyed,  made
a  great  feast.  And  there  was  not  a  single  person  who  did  not
say  with  astonishment,  reflecting  again  and  again  on  that
noble  behaviour  of  the  Savara  chieftain  :  "  Who  can  imagine
the  actions  of  sincere  friends,  who  are  not  even  satisfied  when
they  have  bestowed  on  their  sworn  brothers  the  gift  of  life  ?  "
The  king  of  the  land  too,  hearing  of  that  occurrence,  was
exceedingly  pleased  with  the  affection  which  the  Savara
prince  had  shown  me,  and  finding  he  was  pleased,  my  father
gave  him  a  present  of  jewels,  and  so  induced  him  immediately
to  bestow  on  the  Savara  a  vast  territory.  Then  I  remained
there  in  happiness,  considering  myself  to  have  attained  all
that  heart  could  wish,  in  having  Manovati  for  a  wife,  and
the  Savara  prince  for  a  friend.  And  that  Savara  chieftain
generally  lived  in  my  house,  finding  that  he  took  less  pleasure
in  dwelling  in  his  own  country  than  he  formerly  did.  And
the  time  of  us  two  friends,  of  him  and  me,  was  spent  in
continually  conferring  benefits  upon  one  another  without  our
ever  being  satisfied.

And  not  long  after  I  had  a  son  bom  to  me  by  Manovati,
who  seemed  like  the  heart-joy  of  the  whole  family  in  external
visible  form  ;  and  being  called  Hiranyadatta  he  gradually
grew  up,  and  after  having  been  duly  instructed,  he  was
married.  Then  my  father,  having  witnessed  that,  and  con-
sidering that  the  object  of  his  life  had  been  accomplished.


THE  CURSE  COMES  TO  AN  END  149

being  old,  went  to  the  Ganges  with  his  wife  to  leave  the  body.
Then  I  was  afflicted  by  my  father's  death,  but  having  been
at  last  persuaded  by  my  relations  to  control  my  feelings,  I
consented  to  uphold  the  burden  of  the  family.  And  at
that  time  on  the  one  hand  the  sight  of  the  beautiful  face
of  Manovati,  and  on  the  other  the  society  of  the  Savara
prince  delighted  me.  Accordingly  those  days  of  mine  passed,
joyous  from  the  goodness  of  my  son,  charming  from  the
excellence  of  my  wife,  happy  from  the  society  of  my  friend.
Then,  in  course  of  time,  I  became  well  stricken  in  years,
and  old  age  seized  me  by  the  chin,  as  it  were  out  of  love
giving  me  this  wholesome  reproach  :  "  Why  are  you  re-
maining in  the  house  so  long  as  this,  my  son  ?  "  Then
disgust  with  the  world  was  suddenly  produced  in  my  breast,
and  longing  for  the  forest  I  appointed  my  son  in  my  stead.
And  with  my  wife  I  went  to  the  mountain  of  Kalinjara,
together  with  the  King  of  the  Savaras,  who  abandoned  his
kingdom  out  of  love  to  me.  And  when  I  arrived  there,  I  at
once  remembered  that  I  had  been  a  Vidyadhara  in  a  former
state  of  existence,  and  that  the  curse  I  had  received  from
Siva  had  come  to  an  end.  And  I  immediately  told  my  wife
Manovati  of  that,  and  my  friend  the  King  of  the  Savaras,
as  I  was  desirous  of  leaving  this  mortal  body.  I  said,  "  May
I  have  this  wife  and  this  friend  in  a  future  birth,  and  may
I  remember  this  birth,"  and  then  I  meditated  on  Siva  in  my
heart,  and  flung  myself  from  that  hill-side,  and  so  suddenly
quitted  the  body  together  with  that  wife  and  friend.  And
so  I  have  been  now  born,  as  you  see,  in  this  Vidyadhara
family,  under  the  name  of  Jimutavahana,  with  a  power  of
recollecting  my  former  existence.  And  you,  that  prince  of
the  Savaras,  have  been  also  born  again  by  the  favour  of  Siva,
as  Mitravasu  the  son  of  Visvavasu,  the  King  of  the  Siddhas.
And,  my  friend,  that  Vidyadhara  lady,  my  wife  Manovati,
has  been  again  born  as  your  sister,  Malay avati  by  name.  So
your  sister  is  my  former  wife,  and  you  were  my  friend  in  a
former  state  of  existence,  therefore  it  is  quite  proper  that  I
should  marry  her.  But  first  go  and  tell  this  to  my  parents,
for,  if  the  matter  is  referred  to  them,  your  desire  will  be
successfully  accomplished.


150  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

27.  Story  of  Jimutavdhana

When  Mitravasu  heard  this  from  Jimutavahana,  he  was
pleased,  and  he  went  and  told  all  that  to  the  parents  of  Jimu-
tavahana. And  when  they  received  his  proposal  gladly,
he  was  pleased,  and  went  and  told  that  same  matter  to  his
own  parents.  And  they  were  delighted  at  the  accomplish-
ment of  their  desire,  and  so  the  prince  quickly  prepared  for
the  marriage  of  his  sister.  Then  Jimutavahana,  honoured
by  the  King  of  the  Siddhas,  received  according  to  usage  the
hand  of  Malayavati.  And  there  was  a  great  festival,  in
which  the  heavenly  minstrels  bustled  about,  the  dense  crowd
of  the  Siddhas  assembled,  and  which  was  enlivened  by  bound-
ing Vidyadharas.  Then  Jimutavahana  was  married,  and
remained  on  that  Malaya  mountain  with  his  wife  in  very
great  prosperity.  And  once  on  a  time  he  went  with  his
brother-in-law  Mitravasu  to  behold  the  woods  on  the  shore
of  the  sea.  And  there  he  saw  a  young  man  come  in  an
agitated  state,  sending  away  his  mother,  who  kept  exclaim-
ing :  "  Alas,  my  son  !  "  And  another  man,  who  seemed  to
be  a  soldier,  following  him,  conducted  him  to  a  broad  and
high  slab  of  rock  and  left  him  there.  Jimutavahana  said  to
him  :  *'  Who  are  you  ?  What  are  you  about  to  do,  and  why
does  your  mother  weep  for  you  ?  "  Then  the  man  told  him
his  story.

27b.  The  Dispute  about  the  Colour  of  the  Sun's  Horses

Long  ago  Kadru  and  Vinata,  the  two  wives  of  Kai^yapa,
had  a  dispute  in  the  course  of  a  conversation  which  they
were  carrying  on.  The  former  said  that  the  Sun's  horses
were  black,  the  latter  that  they  were  white,  and  they  made
an  agreement  that  the  one  that  was  wrong  should  become  a
slave  to  the  other. ^  Then  Kadru,  bent  on  winning,  actually
induced  her  sons,  the  snakes,  to  defile  the  horses  of  the  Sun
by  spitting  venom  over  them  ;   and  showing  them  to  Vinata

^  Like  the  two  physicians  in  Gesia  Romanorum,  Ixxvi. See  Ocean  of

Story,  Vol.  I,  p.   1 43,  1  ^3n^.     There  was  a  misprint  in  this  note :  chap,  xx
should  read  chap.  xxii. — n.m.p.


GARUDA  AND  THE  FOOLISH  SNAKES        151

in  that  condition,  she  conquered  her  by  a  trick  and  made  her
her  slave  :  terrible  is  the  spite  of  women  against  each  other  !
When  Garuda/  the  son  of  Vinata,  heard  of  that,  he  came
and  tried  to  induce  Kadru  by  fair  means  to  release  Vinata
from  her  slavery  ;  then  the  snakes,  the  sons  of  Kadru,  re-
flecting, said  this  to  him  :  "  O  Garuda,  the  gods  have  begun
to  churn  the  sea  of  milk,  bring  the  nectar  ^  thence  and  give
it  to  us  as  a  substitute,  and  then  take  your  mother  away
with  you,  for  you  are  the  chief  of  heroes."

When  Garuda  heard  that,  he  went  to  the  sea  of  milk,  and
displayed  his  great  might  in  order  to  obtain  the  nectar.  Then
the  god  Vishnu,  pleased  with  his  might,  deigned  to  say  to
him  :  "I  am  pleased  with  thee,  choose  some  boon."  Then
Garuda,  angry  because  his  mother  was  made  a  slave,  asked
as  a  boon  from  Vishnu  :  "  May  the  snakes  become  my  food."
Vishnu  consented,  and  when  Garuda  had  obtained  the  nectar
by  his  own  valour,  he  was  thus  addressed  by  Indra,  who  had
heard  the  whole  story  :  "  King  of  Birds,  you  must  take  steps
to  prevent  the  foolish  snakes  from  consuming  the  nectar,
and  to  enable  me  to  take  it  away  from  them  again."  When
Garuda  heard  that,  he  agreed  to  do  it,  and  elated  by  the  boon
of  Vishnu,  he  went  to  the  snakes  with  the  vessel  containing
the  nectar.

And  he  said  from  a  distance  to  those  foolish  snakes,  who
were  terrified  on  account  of  the  boon  granted  to  him  :  "  Here
is  the  nectar  brought  by  me ;  release  my  mother  and  take  it ;
if  you  are  afraid,  I  will  put  it  for  you  on  a  bed  of  darbha  grass.
When  I  have  procured  my  mother's  release,  I  will  go  ;  take
the  nectar  thence."  The  snakes  consented,  and  then  he  put
the  vessel  of  nectar  on  a  pure  bed  of  kusa  grass, ^  and  they
let  his  mother  go.  So  Garuda  departed,  having  thus  re-
leased his  mother  from  slavery  ;  but  while  the  snakes  were
unsuspectingly  taking  the  nectar,  Indra  suddenly  swooped
down  and,  bewildering  them  by  his  power,  carried  off  the
vessel  of  nectar  from  the  bed  of  kusa  grass.    Then  the  snakes

1  See  the  note  on  the  Garuda  Bird,  Vol.  I,  pp.  103-105. — n.m.p.

2  For  a  long  bibliography  on  the  " eau-de-jouvence"  see  Chauvin,  Biblio-
graphie  des  Oiwrages  Arahes,  vi,  p.  73. — n.m.p.

3  A  peculiarly  sacred  kind  of  darbha  gi'ass.


152  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

in  despair  licked  that  bed  of  darbha  grass,  thinking  there
might  be  a  drop  of  spilt  nectar  on  it ;  the  effect  was  that
their  tongues  were  split,  and  they  became  double-tongued
for  nothing.  What  but  ridicule  can  ever  be  the  portion
of  the  over-greedy?^  Then  the  snakes  did  not  obtain  the
nectar  of  immortality,  and  their  enemy  Garuda,  on  the
strength  of  Vishnu's  boon,  began  to  swoop  down  and  devour
them.  And  this  he  did  again  and  again.  And  whUe  he  was
thus  attacking  them,  the  snakes  ^  in  Patala  were  dead  with
fear,  the  females  miscarried,  and  the  whole  serpent  race  was
well-nigh  destroyed.

And  Vasuki,  the  King  of  the  Snakes,  seeing  him  there
every  day,  considered  that  the  serpent  world  was  ruined  at
one  blow  ;  then,  after  reflecting,  he  preferred  a  petition  to
that  Garuda  of  irresistible  might,  and  made  this  agreement
with  him  :  "I  will  send  you  every  day  one  snake  to  eat,  O
King  of  Birds,  on  the  hill  that  rises  out  of  the  sand  of  the
sea.  But  you  must  not  act  so  foolishly  as  to  enter  Patala,'
for  by  the  destruction  of  the  serpent  world  your  own  object
will  be  baffled."  When  Vasuki  said  this  to  him,  Garuda  con-
sented, and  began  to  eat  every  day  in  this  place  one  snake
sent  by  him  :  and  in  this  way  innumerable  snakes  have
met  their  death  here.  But  I  am  a  snake  called  Sankhachuda,
and  it  is  my  turn  to-day  :  for  that  reason  I  have  to-day,  by
the  command  of  the  King  of  the  Snakes,  in  order  to  furnish
a  meal  to  Garuda,  come  to  this  rock  of  execution,  and  to  be
lamented  by  my  mother.*

^  M.  L^v^que  considers  that  the  above  story,  as  told  in  the  Mahabhdrata,
forms  the  basis  of  the  Birds  of  Aristophanes.  He  identifies  Garuda  with
the  hoopoe  {Les  Mythes  et  Legendes  dc  VInde  et  de  la  Perxe,  p.  14-).

*  Rajila  is  a  striped  snake,  said  to  be  the  same  as  the  dundubha,  a  non-
venomous  species.

3  The  D.  text  reads  mardakdrind,  instead  of  mandaknrind,  thus  making
the  sense:  "You  must  not  enter  Patala,  pursuing  your  work  of  destruction."

— N.M.P.

*  The  remarks  which  Ralston  makes  (Russian  Folk-Tales,  p.  6.5)  with
regard  to  the  snake,  as  represented  in  Russian  stories,  are  applicable  to  the
Naga  of  Hindu  superstition :  '*  Sometimes  he  retains  throughout  the  story
an  exclusively  reptilian  character,  sometimes  he  is  of  a  mixed  nature,  partly
serpent  and  partly  man."  The  snakes  described  in  Veckenstedt's  Wendische
Sagen  (pp.  402-409)  resemble  in  some  points  the  snakes  which  we  hear  so


F


THE  GREAT  SELF-SACRIFICE  153


27.  Story  of  Jzmutavdhana

When  Jimutavahana  heard  this  speech  of  Sankhachtida's
he  was  grieved,  and  felt  sorrow  in  his  heart,  and  said  to  him  :
"  Alas  !  Vasuki  exercises  his  kingly  power  in  a  very  cowardly
fashion,  in  that  with  his  own  hand  he  conducts  his  subjects
to  serve  as  food  for  his  enemy.  Why  did  he  not  first  offer
himself  to  Garuda  ?  To  think  of  this  effeminate  creature
choosing  to  witness  the  destruction  of  his  race  1  And  how
great  a  sin  does  Garuda,  though  the  son  of  Kasyapa,  commit !
How  great  folly  do  even  great  ones  commit  for  the  sake  of
the  body  only !  So  I  will  to-day  deliver  you  alone  from
Garuda  by  surrendering  my  body.  Do  not  be  despondent,
my  friend."

When  Sankhachuda  heard  this,  he,  out  of  his  firm  patience,
said  to  him  :  "  This  be  far  from  thee,  O  great-hearted  one  ;
do  not  say  so  again.  The  destruction  of  a  jewel  for  the  sake
of  a  piece  of  glass  is  never  becoming.  And  I  will  never  incur
the  reproach  of  having  disgraced  my  race."  In  these  words
the  good  snake  Sankhachuda  tried  to  dissuade  Jimutavahana,
and  thinking  that  the  time  of  Garuda 's  arrival  would  come
in  a  minute,  he  went  to  worship  in  his  last  hour  an  image  of
Siva  under  the  name  of  Gokarna,  that  stood  on  the  shore  of
the  sea.

And  when  he  was  gone,  Jimutavahana,  that  treasure-
house  of  compassion,  considered  that  he  had  gained  an
opportunity  of  offering  himself  up  to  save  the  snake's  life.
Thereupon  he  quickly  dismissed  Mitravasu  to  his  own  house
on  the  pretext  of  some  business,  artfully  pretending  that  he
himself  had  forgotten  it.  And  immediately  the  earth  near
him  trembled,  being  shaken  by  the  wind  of  the  wings  of
the  approaching  Garuda,  as  if  through  astonishment  at  his

much  of  in  the  present  work.    See  also  Bartseh's  Sagen,  M'drchen  und  Gehrduche,

aus  Meklenburg,  vol.  i,  p.  277  et  seq. Numerous  references  will  be  found

in  the  General  Index  of  Vol.  I,  under  "Serpent"  and  "Snake."

In  Arabian  fiction  the  most  extraordinary  snake  story  is  "The  Queen
of  the  Serpents,"  Nights  (Burton,  vol.  v,  p.  29S  et  seq.).  The  serpents  in  this
story  are  wholly  reptilian,  except  the  queen  herself,  who  "shone  like  a
crystal  and  whose  face  was  as  that  of  a  woman,  and  who  spake  with  human
speech."     See  also  Hartland,  Legend  of  Perseus,  vol.  ii,  p.  44. — n.m.p.


154  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

valour.  That  made  Jimutavahana  think  that  the  enemy
of  the  snakes  was  approaching,  and  full  of  compassion  for
others  he  ascended  the  stone  of  execution.  And  in  a  moment
Garuda  swooped  down,  darkening  the  heaven  with  his
shadow,  and  carried  off  that  great-hearted  one,  striking  him
with  his  beak.  He  shed  drops  of  blood,  and  his  crest- jewel
dropped  off,  torn  out  by  Garuda,  who  took  him  away  and
began  to  eat  him  on  the  peak  of  the  mountain.  At  that
moment  a  rain  of  flowers  fell  from  heaven,  and  Garuda  was
astonished  when  he  saw  it,  wondering  what  it  could  mean.

In  the  meanwhile  Sankhachuda  came  there,  having  wor-
shipped Gokarna,  and  saw  the  rock  of  execution  sprinkled
with  many  drops  of  blood ;  then  he  thought :  "  Alas  I
surely  that  great-hearted  one  has  offered  himself  for  me,  so
I  wonder  where  Garuda  has  taken  him  in  this  short  time.
I  must  search  for  him  quickly,  perhaps  I  may  find  him."
Accordingly  the  good  snake  went  following  up  the  track
of  the  blood.  And  in  the  meanwhile  Garuda,  seeing  that
Jimutavahana  was  pleased,  left  off  eating  and  thought  with
wonder  :  "  This  must  be  someone  else,  other  than  I  ought
to  have  taken,  for  though  I  am  eating  him,  he  is  not  at  all
miserable ;  on  the  contrary  the  resolute  one  rejoices."  While
Garuda  was  thinking  this,  Jimutavahana,  though  in  such  a
state,  said  to  him  in  order  to  attain  his  object :  "  O  King  of
Birds,  in  my  body  also  there  is  flesh  and  blood  ;  then  why
have  you  suddenly  stopped  eating,  though  your  hunger  is
not  appeased  ?  "  When  he  heard  that,  that  King  of  Birds,
being  overpowered  with  astonishment,  said  to  him  :  "  Noble
one,  you  are  not  a  snake ;  tell  me  who  you  are."  Jimutava-
hana was  just  answering  him,  "  I  am  a  snake,^  so  eat  me,
complete  what  you  have  begun,  for  men  of  resolution  never
leave  unfinished  an  undertaking  they  have  begun,"  when
Sankhachuda  arrived  and  cried  out  from  afar :  "  Stop,  stop,
Garuda !  he  is  not  a  snake ;  I  am  the  snake  meant  for  you,
so  let  him  go  ;  alas  !  how  have  you  suddenly  come  to  make
this  mistake  ?  "

On  hearing  that,  the  King  of  Birds  was  excessively  be-

^  The  word  ndgn,  which  means  "  snake,"  may  also  mean,  as  Dr  Brockhaus
explains  it,  "a  mountaineer" — from  nnga,  "a  mountain."


GARUDA  IS  ASHAMED  OF  HIS  CONDUCT     155

wildered,  and  Jimutavahana  was  grieved  at  not  having  ac-
complished his  desire.  Then  Garuda,  learning,  in  the  course
of  their  conversation  ^  with  one  another,  that  he  had  begun
to  devour  by  mistake  the  King  of  the  Vidyadharas,  was
much  grieved.  He  began  to  reflect :  "  Alas  !  in  my  cruelty
I  have  incurred  sin.  In  truth,  those  who  follow  evil  courses
easily  contract  guilt.  But  this  great-hearted  one  who  has
given  his  life  for  another,  and  despising  ^  the  world,  which  is
altogether  under  the  dominion  of  illusion,  come  to  face  me,
deserves  praise."  Thinking  thus,  he  was  about  to  enter  the
fire  to  purify  himself  from  guilt,  when  Jimutavahana  said  to
him  :  "  King  of  Birds,  why  do  you  despond  ?  If  you  are
really  afraid  of  guilt,  then  you  must  determine  never  again
to  eat  these  snakes  ;  and  you  must  repent  of  eating  all  those
previously  devoured,  for  this  is  the  only  remedy  available  in
this  case  ;  it  was  idle  for  you  ever  to  think  of  any  other."

Thus  Jimutavahana,  full  of  compassion  for  creatures,
said  to  Garuda,  and  he  was  pleased,  and  accepted  the  advice
of  that  king,  as  if  he  had  been  his  spiritual  preceptor,  deter-
mining to  do  what  he  recommended  ;  and  he  went  to  bring
nectar  from  heaven  to  restore  to  life  rapidly  that  wounded
prince,  and  the  other  snakes,  whose  bones  only  remained.^
Then  the  goddess  Gauri,  pleased  with  Jimutavahana 's  wife's
devotion  to  her,  came  in  person  and  rained  nectar  on  him  :
by  that  his  limbs  were  reproduced  with  increased  beauty,
and  the  sound  of  drums  of  the  rejoicing  gods  was  heard
at  the  same  time.  Then,  on  his  rising  up  safe  and  sound,
Garuda  brought  the  nectar  of  immortality  *  from  heaven  and

^  I  conjecture  kramad  for  krandat.  If  we  retain  krandat  we  must  suppose
that  the  King  of  the  Vidyadharas  wept  because  his  scheme  of  self-sacrifice
was  frustrated.

"  I  read  adhah  for  adah.

^  See  Manning,  Ancient  India,  vol.  ii,  p.  330  et  seq.,  and  Crooke,  op.  ciL,
vol.  ii,  p.  122. — N.M.p.

*  In  the  Sicilian  stories  of  Laura  Gonzenbach,  an  ointment  does  duty  for
the  Amrita — cf.,  for  one  instance  out  of  many,  page  1 45  of  that  work.  Ralston
remarks  that  in  European  stories  the  raven  is  connected  with  the  Water  of
Life.  See  his  exhaustive  account  of  this  cycle  of  stories  on  pages  231  and  232
of  his  Russian  Folk-Tales.  See  also  Veckenstedt's  Wendische  Sagen,  p.  245,  and
the  story  which  begins  on  page  227.  In  the  thirty-third  of  the  Syrian  stories
collected  by  Prym  and  Socin  we  have  a  King  of  Snakes  and  Water  of  Life.


156  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

sprinkled  it  along  the  whole  shore  of  the  sea.  That  made  all
the  snakes  there  rise  up  alive,  and  then  that  forest  along  the
shore  of  the  sea,  crowded  with  the  numerous  tribe  of  snakes,
appeared  like  Patala  ^  come  to  behold  Jimutavahana,  having
lost  its  previous  dread  of  Garuda.

Then  Jimutavahana 's  relations  congratulated  him,  having
seen  that  he  was  glorious  with  unwounded  body  and  undying
fame.  And  his  wife  rejoiced  with  her  relations,  and  his
parents  also.  Who  would  not  joy  at  pain  ending  in  happi-
ness ?  And  with  his  permission  Sankhachuda  departed  to
Rasatala,^  and  without  it  his  glory,  of  its  own  accord,  spread
through  the  three  worlds.  Then,  by  virtue  of  the  favour  of
the  daughter  of  the  Himalaya,  all  his  relations,  Matanga  and
others,  who  were  long  hostile  to  him,  came  to  Garuda,  before
whom  the  troops  of  gods  were  inclining  out  of  love,  and
timidly  approaching  the  glory  of  the  Vidyadhara  race,
prostrated  themselves  at  his  feet.  And  being  entreated  by
them,  the  benevolent  Jimutavahana  went  from  that  Malaya
mountain  to  his  own  home,  the  slope  of  the  Himalaya.
There,  accompanied  by  his  parents  and  Mitravasu  and
Malay avati,  the  resolute  one  long  enjoyed  the  honour  of
Emperor  of  the  Vidyadharas.  Thus  a  course  of  fortunate
events  always  of  its  own  accord  follows  the  footsteps  of  all
those  whose  exploits  arouse  the  admiration  of  the  three
worlds.


[M]  When  the  Queen  Vasavadatta  heard  this  story  from
the  mouth  of  Yaugandharayana  she  rejoiced,  as  she  was
eager  to  hear  of  the  splendour  of  her  unborn  son.  Then,  in
the  society  of  her  husband,  she  spent  that  day  in  conversa-
tion about  her  son,  who  was  to  be  the  future  King  of  the
Vidyadharas,  which  was  suggested  by  that  story,  for  she
placed  unfailing  reliance  upon  the  promise  of  the  favouring
gods.

^  The  home  of  the  serpent  race  below  the  earth. See  Vol.  I,  pp.  200,

203. — N.M.p.

*  Here  equivalent  to  Patala.


CHAPTER  XXIII

THEN  Vasavadatta  on  the  next  day  said  to  the  King
[M]  of  Vatsa  in  private,  while  he  was  surrounded
by  his  ministers  :  "  My  husband,  ever  since  I  have
been  pregnant  with  this  child  the  difficulty  of  taking  care  of
it  afflicts  my  heart ;  and  last  night,  after  thinking  over  it
long,  I  fell  asleep  with  difficulty,  and  I  am  persuaded  I  saw
a  certain  man  come  in  my  dream,  glorious  with  a  shape
distinguished  by  matted  auburn  locks  and  a  trident-bearing
hand  ;  and  he,  approaching  me,  said  as  if  moved  by  com-
passion :  '  My  daughter,  you  need  not  feel  at  all  anxious
about  the  child  with  which  you  are  pregnant ;  I  will  protect
it,  for  I  gave  it  to  you.  And  hear  something  more,  which  I
will  tell  you  to  make  you  confide  in  me  :  a  certain  woman
waits  to  make  a  petition  to  you  to-morrow ;  she  will  come
dragging  her  husband  with  her  as  a  prisoner,  reviling  him,
accompanied  by  five  sons,  begirt  with  many  relations  ;  and
she  is  a  wicked  woman,  who  desires  by  the  help  of  her  rela-
tions to  get  that  husband  of  hers  put  to  death,  and  all  that
she  will  say  will  be  false.  And  you,  my  daughter,  must
beforehand  inform  the  King  of  Vatsa  about  this  matter,  in
order  that  that  good  man  may  be  freed  from  that  wicked
wife.'  This  command  that  august  one  gave  and  vanished,
and  I  immediately  woke  up,  and  lo  !  the  morning  had  come."
When  the  queen  had  said  that,  all  spoke  of  the  favour  of
Siva,  and  were  astonished,  their  minds  eagerly  expecting  the
fulfilment  of  the  dream  ;  when  lo  !  at  that  very  moment
the  chief  warder  entered  and  suddenly  said  to  the  King  of
Vatsa,  who  was  compassionate  to  the  afflicted  :  "  O  King,  a
certain  woman  has  come  to  make  a  representation,  accom-
panied by  her  relations,  bringing  with  her  five  sons,  reviling
her  helpless  husband."  When  the  king  heard  that,  being
astonished  at  the  way  it  talhed  with  the  queen's  dream,  he
commanded  the  warder  to  bring  her  into  his  presence.  And
167


158  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

the  Queen  Vasavadatta  felt  the  greatest  delight,  having  be-
come certain  that  she  would  obtain  a  good  son,  on  account
of  the  truth  of  the  dream.  Then  that  woman  entered  by
the  command  of  the  warder,  accompanied  by  her  husband,
looked  at  with  curiosity  by  all,  who  had  their  faces  turned
towards  the  door.  Then,  having  entered,  she  assumed  an
expression  of  misery,  and  making  a  bow  according  to  rule,
she  addressed  the  king  in  council  accompanied  by  the
queen  :  "  This  man,  though  he  is  my  husband,  does  not  give
to  me,  helpless  woman  that  I  am,  food,  raiment  and  other
necessaries,  and  yet  I  am  free  from  blame  with  respect  to
him."

When  she  had  said  this,  her  husband  pleaded:  "King,
this  woman  speaks  falsely,  supported  by  her  relations,  for
she  wishes  me  to  be  put  to  death.  For  I  have  given  her
supplies  beforehand  to  last  till  the  end  of  the  year ;  and  other
relations  of  hers,  who  are  impartial,  are  prepared  to  witness
the  truth  of  this  for  me."  When  he  had  said  this  to  the  king,
the  king  of  his  own  accord  answered  :  "  The  trident-bearing
god  himself  has  given  evidence  in  this  case,  appearing  to  the
queen  in  a  dream.  What  need  have  we  of  more  witnesses  ?
This  woman  with  her  relations  must  be  punished."

When  the  king  had  delivered  this  judgment,  the  discreet
Yaugandharayana  said :  "  Nevertheless,  King,  we  must  do
what  is  right  in  accordance  with  the  evidence  of  witnesses,
otherwise  the  people,  not  knowing  of  the  dream,  would  in  no
wise  believe  the  justice  of  our  proceedings."  When  the  king
heard  that  he  consented,  and  had  the  witnesses  summoned
that  moment,  and  they,  being  asked,  deposed  that  that
woman  was  speaking  falsely.  Then  the  king  banished  her,
as  she  was  plotting  against  one  well  known  to  be  a  good
husband,  from  his  territory,  with  her  relations  and  her  sons.
And  with  heart  melting  from  pity  he  discharged  her  good
husband,  after  giving  him  much  treasure,  sufficient  for
another  marriage.  And  in  connection  with  the  whole  affair
the  king  remarked  :  "  An  evil  wife,  of  wildly  ^  cruel  nature,
tears  her  still  Uving  husband  like  a  she- wolf,  when  he  has
fallen  into  the  pit  of  calamity  ;   but  an  affectionate,  noble

^  Here  there  is  a  pun  ;  dktila  may  also  mean  "by  descent."


THE  SHREWISH  WIFE  159

and  magnanimous  wife  averts  sorrow  as  the  shade  ^  of  the
wayside  tree  averts  heat,  and  is  acquired  by  a  man's  special
merits."  Then  Vasantaka,  who  was  a  clever  story-teller,
being  at  the  king's  side,  said  to  him  a  propos  of  this  :  "  More-
over, King,  hatred  and  affection  are  commonly  produced  in
living  beings  in  this  world  owing  to  their  continually  recalling
the  impressions  of  a  past  state  of  existence,  and  in  proof  of
this  hear  the  story  which  I  am  about  to  tell :


28.  Story  of  Sinhapardkrama

There  was  a  king  in  Benares  named  Vikramachanda,  and
he  had  a  favourite  follower  named  Sinhaparakrama,  who
was  wonderfully  successful  in  all  battles  and  in  all  gambling
contests.  And  he  had  a  wife,  very  deformed  both  in  body
and  mind,  called  by  a  name  which  expressed  her  nature,
Kalahakari.2  This  brave  man  continually  obtained  much
money  both  from  the  king  and  from  gambling,  and,  as  soon
as  he  got  it,  he  gave  it  all  to  his  wife.  But  the  shrewish
woman,  backed  by  her  three  sons  begotten  by  him,  could
not,  in  spite  of  this,  remain  one  moment  without  a  quarrel.
She  continually  worried  by  yelling  out  these  words  at  him
with  her  sons  :  "  You  are  always  eating  and  drinking  away
from  home,  and  you  never  give  us  anything."  And  though
he  was  for  ever  trying  to  propitiate  her  with  meat,  drink
and  raiment,  she  tortured  him  day  and  night  like  an
interminable  thirst.

Then  at  last  Sinhaparakrama,  vexed  with  indignation  on
that  account,  left  his  house  and  went  on  a  pilgrimage  to  the
goddess  Durga,  that  dwells  in  the  Vindhya  hills.  While  he
was  fasting,  the  goddess  said  to  him  in  a  dream :  "  Rise  up,
my  son  ;  go  to  thy  own  city  of  Benares  ;  there  is  an  enormous
Nyagrodha  tree  ;  by  digging  round  its  root  thou  wilt  at  once
obtain  a  treasure.  And  in  the  treasure  thou  wilt  find  a  dish
of  emerald,  bright  as  a  sword-blade,  looking  like  a  piece  of

1  Kulind  may  mean  "  falling  on  the  earth/'  referring  to  the  shade  of
the  tree.     Mdrgasthdmeans  "in  the  right  path  "  when  applied  to  the  wife.

2  I.e.  Madam  Contentious.  Her  husband's  name  means  "of  lion-like
might."


160  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

the  sky  fallen  down  to  earth  ;  castmg  thy  eyes  on  that,  thou
wilt  see,  as  it  were,  reflected  inside,  the  previous  existence  of
every  individual,  in  whatever  case  thou  mayest  wish  to  know
it.  By  means  of  that  thou  wilt  learn  the  previous  birth  of
thy  wife  and  of  thyself,  and  having  learned  the  truth  wilt
dwell  there  in  happiness  free  from  grief."

Having  thus  been  addressed  by  the  goddess,  Sinhapara-
krama  woke  up  and  broke  his  fast,  and  went  in  the  morning
to  Benares ;  and  after  he  had  reached  the  city  he  found  at
the  root  of  the  Nyagrodha  tree  a  treasure,  and  in  it  he  dis-
covered a  large  emerald  dish,  and,  eager  to  learn  the  truth,
he  saw  in  that  dish  that  in  a  previous  birth  his  wife  had  been
a  terrible  she-bear  and  himself  a  lion.  And  so,  recognising
that  the  hatred  between  himself  and  his  wife  was  irremedi-
able, owing  to  the  influence  of  bitter  enmity  in  a  previous
birth,  he  abandoned  grief  and  bewilderment.  Then  Sinha-
parakrama  examined  many  maidens  by  means  of  the  dish,
and  discovering  that  they  had  belonged  to  alien  races  in  a
previous  birth,  he  avoided  them,  but  after  he  had  discovered
one  who  had  been  a  lioness  in  a  previous  birth,  and  so  was  a
suitable  match  for  him,  he  married  her  as  his  second  wife,
and  her  name  was  Sinha^ri.  And  after  assigning  to  that
Kalahakari  one  village  only  as  her  portion,^  he  lived,  de-
lighted with  the  acquisition  of  treasure,  in  the  society  of  his
new  wife.  Thus,  O  King,  wives  and  others  are  friendly  or
hostile  to  men  in  this  world  by  virtue  of  impressions  in  a
previous  state  of  existence.


[M]  When  the  King  of  Vatsa  had  heard  this  wonderful
story  from  Vasantaka,  he  was  exceedingly  deUghted,  and  so
was  the  Queen  Vasavadatta.  And  the  king  was  never  weary
day  or  night  of  contemplating  the  moon-like  face  of  the

^  Speyer  (o/).  cit.,  p.  104)  suggests  grasaikabhdgini  as  a  more  probable
reading  than  grdmaikahhdginl,  thus  meaning  that  the  repudiated  wife  was
merely  accorded  her  livelihood.  Similar  subsistence-allowances  were  given
as  punishment  to  the  wicked  officials  in  Mudrd-Iiakshasa,  Act.  Ill  (see  p.  135  of
the  Bombay  edition). — n  m.p.


THE  AUSPICIOUS  BIRTH-CHAMBER  161

pregnant  queen.  And  as  days  went  on  there  were  born  to
all  of  his  ministers  in  due  course  sons  with  auspicious  marks,
which  heralded  approaching  good  fortune.  First  there  was
born  to  Yaugandharayana,  the  chief  minister,  a  son,  Maru-
bhuti  by  name.  Then  Rumanvat  had  a  son  called  Harisikha,
and  to  Vasantaka  there  was  born  a  son  named  Tapantaka.
And  to  the  head  warder,  called  Nityodita,  whose  other  title
was  Ityaka,^  there  was  born  a  son  named  Gomukha.  And
after  they  were  born  a  great  feast  took  place,  and  during  it
a  bodiless  voice  was  heard  from  heaven  :  "  These  ministers
shall  crush  the  race  of  the  enemies  of  the  son  of  the  King  of
Vatsa  here,  the  future  universal  emperor."

And  as  days  went  by  the  time  drew  near  for  the  birth  of
the  child  with  which  the  Queen  Vasavadatta  was  destined
to  present  the  King  of  Vatsa,  and  she  repaired  to  the  orna-
mented lying-in  chamber,  which  was  prepared  by  matrons
having  sons,  and  the  windows  of  which  were  covered  with
arka  and  saml  plants.  The  room  was  hung  with  various
weapons,  rendered  auspicious  by  being  mixed  with  the  gleam
of  jewel-lamps,  shedding  a  blaze  ^  able  to  protect  the  child  ^ ;
and  secured  by  conjurers  who  went  through  innumerable
charms  and  spells  and  other  incantations,  so  that  it  became
a  fortress  of  the  matrons  hard  for  calamity  to  storm ;  and
there  she  brought  forth  in  good  time  a  prince  of  lovely  aspect,
as  the  heaven  brings  forth  the  moon  from  which  stream  pure
nectarous  rays.

The  child,  when  born,  not  only  irradiated  that  room,  but
the  heart  also  of  that  mother,  from  which  the  darkness  of
grief  had  departed;  then,  as  the  delight  of  the  inmates  of
the  harem  *  was  gradually  extended,  the  king  heard  of  the

^  I  read  (after  Bohtlingk  and  Roth)  Ityakdpara.  See  chapter  xxxiv^
//.  115.

2  re/fw  also  means  "might,"  "courage."

3  See  note  at  the  end  of  this  chapter. — n.m.p.

*  The  word  harem,  from  the  Arabic  haram  and  harim,  means  "  that  which
is  prohibited/'  and  is  applied  to  that  portion  of  the  house  allotted  to  the
women,  and  also  to  the  women  themselves.  It  is  further  used  to  denote  a
particularly  sacred  spot,  such  as  the  sanctuary  at  Mecca.  Owing  to  its  con-
stant use  in  English,  it  is  often  employed  in  describing  the  women's  quarters
in  non-Moslem  lands,  or  in  countries  where  only  a  certain  proportion  of  the
VOL.  II.  L


162  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

birth  of  a  son  from  the  people  who  were  admitted  to  it ;  the
reason  he  did  not  give  his  kingdom  in  his  deUght  to  the  person
who  announced  it  was  that  he  was  afraid  of  committing  an
impropriety,  not  that  he  was  avaricious.

And  so  the  king,  suddenly  coming  to  the  harem  with
longing  mind,  beheld  his  son,  and  his  hope  bore  fruit  after  a
long  delay.  The  child  had  a  long  red  lower  lip  like  a  leaf,
beautiful  flowing  hair  like  wool,  and  his  whole  face  was  like
the  lotus,  which  the  Goddess  of  the  Fortune  of  Empire  carries
for  her  delight.  He  was  marked  on  his  soft  feet  with  um-
brellas and  chowries,  as  if  the  fortunes  of  other  kings  had
beforehand  abandoned  their  badges  in  his  favour,  out  of  fear.
Then,  while  the  king  shed  with  tearful  eye,  that  swelled  with
the  pressure  of  the  fullness  of  the  weight  of  his  joy,  drops

inhabitants  are  Moslems.  The  other  words  used  with  a  similar  meaning  are
zenana,  seraglio  and  purdah.

Zenana^  or  more  correctly  zanana,  is  from  the  Persian  san,  "  woman  "  (yvv^),
and  is  almost  exclusively  used  in  India.  The  word  has  become  familiar  in
Britain  owing  to  the  establishment  in  India  of  zenana  schools,  hospitals  and
missionary  societies.

Seraglio  has  an  interesting  etymological  history.  It  is  derived  directly
from  the  Italian  serraglio,  *'an  enclosure"  (Latin  sera,  a  bar),  and  has  become
connected  with  harim,  through  confusion  with  the  Persian  sara,  sarai,  which
originally  meant  merely  "an  edifice,"  or  "palace."  In  this  sense  .varm  was
largely  used  by  the  Tartars,  from  whom  the  Russians  obtained  the  use  of  the
word,  degrading  it,  however,  to  mean  only  a  "shed."  In  the  language  of
the  Levantine  Franks  it  became  serail  and  serraglio.  It  was  at  this  point  that
a  mistaken  "  striving  after  meaning  "  with  the  Italian  serrato,  "  shut  up,"  etc.,
connected  it  with  the  private  apartments  of  women.

The  Italian  traveller  Pietro  della  Valle  (1586-1652)  refers  to  the  subject
in  his  Travels  (vol.  i,  p.  36) : —

"  This  term  serraglio,  so  much  used  among  us  in  speaking  of  the  Grand
Turk's  dwelling  .  .  .  has  been  corrupted  into  that  form  from  the  word  serai,
which  in  their  language  signifies  properly  'a  palace.'  .  .  .  But  since  this  word
serai  resembles  serraio,  as  a  Venetian  would  call  it,  or  seraglio  as  we  say,  and
seeing  that  the  palace  of  the  Turk  is  {serrato  or)  shut  up  all  round  by  a  strong
wall,  and  also  because  the  women  and  a  great  part  of  the  courtiers  dwell  in
it  barred  up  and  shut  in,  so  it  may  perchance  have  seemed  to  some  to  have
deserved  such  a  name.  And  thus  the  real  term  serai  has  been  converted  into
serraglio."

See  Yule's  Hohson  Jobson,  under  "Serai,  sert/e,"  whence  I  have  taken  the
above  extract.

The  use  of  sardi,  meaning  "  house  "  or  "  building,"  is  very  well  known.


THE  BIRTH  OF  NARAVAHANADATTA       163

that  seemed  to  be  drops  of  paternal  affection,^  and  the
ministers,  with  Yaugandharayana  at  their  head,  rejoiced,  a
voice  was  heard  from  heaven  at  that  time  to  the  following
effect :  —

"  King,  this  son  that  is  born  to  thee  is  an  incarnation  of
Kama,  and  know  that  his  name  is  Naravahanadatta  ;  and  he
will  soon  become  emperor  of  the  kings  of  Vidyadharas,  and
maintain  that  position  unwearied  for  a  Kalpa  of  the  gods."  ^
When  so  much  had  been  said,  the  voice  stopped,  and  immedi-
ately a  rain  of  flowers  fell  from  heaven,  and  the  sounds  of  the
celestial  drums  went  forth.  Then  the  king,  excessively  de-
lighted, made  a  great  feast,  which  was  rendered  all  the  more
solemn  from  the  gods  having  begun  it.  The  sound  of  cymbals
floated  in  the  air,  rising  from  temples,  as  if  to  tell  all  the
Vidyadharas  of  the  birth  of  their  king ;  and  red  banners,
flying  in  the  wind  on  the  tops  of  the  palaces,  seemed  with

though  perhaps  not  often  recognised,  in  the  word  "caravanserai"  (Persian
Jcarwdnsardi),  "a  (halting)-place  for  camels."

Turning  to  the  word  purdah,  or  pardah,  it  is  derived  from  parda,  "a
curtain,"  and  has  come  to  mean  the  women's  part  of  the  house,  which  is
separated  from  the  rest  by  a  thick  curtain  or  blinds  to  which  this  name  is
given.

The  literature  dealing  with  the  haum  life  of  the  East  is  naturally
voluminous.  The  following  references,  however,  contain  the  more  important
accounts : —

"Harim,"  Hughes'  Dictionary  of  Islam,  pp.  163-167;  Hoffman's  article
in  Ersch  and  Gruhev  s  Enci/clopddie ;  J.  M.  Mitchell,  Ency.  Brit.  (]  1th  edit.),
vol.  xii,  pp.  950-952 ;  F.  Millingen,  "  The  Circassian  Slaves  and  the  Sultan's
Harem,"  Journ.  Anth.  Soc,  1870,  pp.  cix-cxx ;  G.  Dorys,  La  Femme  Turque,  1902  ;
Harvey,  Turkish  Harems  and  Circassian  Homes,  1871  ;  L.  M.  Garnett,  The
Women  of  Turkey  and  their  Folk-Lore,  1901  ;  E.  Lott,  Harem  Life  in  Egypt  and
Constantinople,  1869  ;  E.  W.  Lane,  Manners  and  Customs  of  the  Modern  Egyptians
(5th  edit,  I860),  pp.  175-191  ;  B.  Mullick,  Essays  on  the  Hindu  Family  in  Bengal,
Calcutta,  1882;  J.  Jolly,  Recht  und  Sitte,  Strassburg,  1896;  S.  C.  Bose,  The
Hindoos  as  They  Are,  Calcutta,  1881  ;  M.  F.  Billington,  Woman  in  India,  London,
1895;  Otto  Rothfeld,  Women  of  India  [1920].

For  further  references  see  the  numerous  articles  in  Hastings'  Ency.
Rel.  Eth.  under  "Birth,"  "Education,"  "Emancipation,"  "Ethics,"  "Family"
and  "  Marriage." — n.m.p.

1  Sneha,  which  means  "love,"  also  means  "oil."  This  is  a  fruitful  source
-of  puns  in  Sanskrit.

^  Infinitely  longer  than  a  mortal  Kalpa.  A  mortal  Kalpa  lasts  432
million  years.


164  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

their  splendour  to  fling  red  dye  to  one  another.  On  earth
beautiful  women  assembled  and  danced  everywhere,  as  if
they  were  the  nymphs  of  heaven  glad  that  the  God  of  Love
had  been  born  with  a  body.^  And  the  whole  city  appeared
equally  splendid  with  new  dresses  and  ornaments  bestowed
by  the  rejoicing  king.  For  while  that  rich  king  rained  riches
upon  his  dependents,  nothing  but  the  treasury  was  empty.
And  the  ladies  belonging  to  the  families  of  the  neighbouring
chieftains  came  in  from  all  sides,  with  auspicious  prayers,
versed  in  the  good  custom, ^  accompanied  by  dancing-girls
bringing  with  them  splendid  presents,  escorted  by  various
excellent  guards,  attended  with  the  sound  of  musical  instru-
ments, like  all  the  cardinal  points  in  bodily  form.  Every
movement  there  was  of  the  nature  of  a  dance,  every  word
uttered  was  attended  with  full  vessels,^  every  action  was  of
the  nature  of  munificence,  the  city  resounded  with  musical
instruments,  the  people  were  adorned  with  red  powder,*
and  the  earth  was  covered  with  bards — all  these  were  so  in
that  city  which  was  full  of  festivity.

Thus  the  great  feast  was  carried  on  with  increasing
magnificence  for  many  days,  and  did  not  come  to  an  end
before  the  wishes  of  the  citizens  were  fully  satisfied.  And
as  days  went  on  that  infant  prince  grew  like  the  new  moon,
and  his  father  bestowed  on  him  with  appropriate  formalities

^  He  is  often  called  Ananga,  ^^the  bodiless/' as  his  body  was  consumed  by
the  fire  of  Siva's  eye.

2  Or  virtuous  and  f^enerous.

3  It  is  still  the  custom  to  give  presents  of  vessels  filled  with  rice  and
coins.  Empty  vessels  are  inauspicious,  and  even  now  if  a  Bengali  on  going
out  of  his  house  meets  a  person  carrying  an  empty  pitcher  he  turns  back^  and
waits  a  minute  or  two.

*  This  is  the  kunkam,  kunkum,  or  kunku  already  mentioned  in  Vol.  I,
pp.  244,  256.  It  enters  largely  into  Hindu  ceremony  and  ritual,  especially
on  auspicious  occasions  and  at  times  of  general  rejoicing.

It  is  described  as  a  pink  powder  made  of  turmeric,  lime-juice  and  borax.
It  seems  to  be  a  more  agreeable  substitute  for  vermilion,  whose  constant  use
has  probably  an  injurious  effect  on  the  skin  and  hair.  The  powder  is  used  in
the  Maratha  country  in  the  same  way  as  vermilion,  and  a  married  woman  will
smear  a  little  patch  on  her  forehead  every  day  and  never  allow  her  husband
to  see  her  without  it.  See  Russell,  op.  cit.,  vol.  iv,  p.  109.  In  the  month  of
fasting  (Shrawan)  the  auspicious  kunkam  is  not  used,  but  at  festivals  such  as^
the  Holi  it  is  greatly  in  evidence. — n.m.p.


HffF'


THE  CHILD'S  FUTURE  MINISTERS  165


the  name  of  Naravahanadatta,  which  had  been  previously-
assigned  to  him  by  the  heavenly  voice.  His  father  was  de-
lighted when  he  saw  him  make  his  first  two  or  three  totter-
ing steps,  in  which  gleamed  the  sheen  of  his  smooth  fair
toe-nails,  and  when  he  heard  him  utter  his  first  two  or  three
indistinct  words,  showing  his  teeth  which  looked  like  buds.

Then  the  excellent  ministers  brought  to  the  infant  prince
their  infant  sons,  who  delighted  the  heart  of  the  king,  and
commended  them  to  him.  First  Yaugandharayana  brought
Marubhuti,  and  then  Rumanvat  Harisikha,  and  then  the
head  warder  named  Ityaka  brought  Gomukha,  and  Vasan-
taka  his  son  named  Tapantaka.  And  the  domestic  chaplain
Santikara  presented  the  two  twin  sons  of  Pingalika,  his
nephews  Santisoma  and  Vaisvanara.  And  at  that  moment
there  fell  from  heaven  a  rain  of  flowers  from  the  gods,  which
a  shout  of  joy  made  all  the  more  auspicious,  and  the  king
rejoiced  with  the  queens,  having  bestowed  presents  on  that
company  of  ministers'  sons.  And  that  Prince  Naravahana-
datta was  always  surrounded  by  those  six  ministers'  sons,
devoted  to  him  alone,  who  commanded  respect  even  in  their
boyhood,  as  if  with  the  six  political  measures  ^  that  are  the
cause  of  great  prosperity.  The  days  of  the  lord  of  Vatsa
passed  in  great  happiness,  while  he  gazed  affectionately  on
his  son  with  his  lotus-like  face,  going  from  lap  to  lap  of  the
kings  whose  minds  were  lovingly  attached  to  him,  and  making
in  his  mirth  a  charming  indistinct  playful  prattling.

^  Peace,  war,  march,  halt,  stratagem,  and  recourse  to  the  protection  of
a  mightier  king.


166  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


NOTE  ON  PRECAUTIONS  OBSERVED  IN  THE  BIRTH-CHAMBER

On  page  l6l  we  saw  that  the  room  in  which  Vasavadatta  was  con-
fined had  its  windows  covered  with  sacred  plants.  These  were  to  act  as  a
protection  against  the  possible  intrusions  of  evil  spirits,  whose  malign  in-
fluence was  feared  on  such  an  auspicious  occasion.  Furthermore,  the  room
was  hung  with  various  weapons.  Here  again  we  have  a  charm  to  ward  off
danger.

In  India  iron  does  not  bring  good  luck,  but  scares  away  evil  spirits,
consequently  weapons  hung  up  in  the  birth-chamber  act  as  a  powerful  pro-
tection. In  the  same  way  our  horseshoe  is  really  only  lucky  because  of  the
power  in  iron  to  repel  evil  influences.  Steel  is  equally  effective.  In  her
Rites  of  the  Twice-born,  Mrs  Stevenson,  in  describing  the  Brahman  birth-
chamber,  states  that  the  scissors  which  have  been  used  to  sever  the  umbilical
cord  are  put  under  the  pillow  on  which  the  young  mother's  head  is  resting,
and  the  iron  rod  with  which  the  floor  has  been  dug  up  for  the  burial  of  the
after-birth  is  placed  on  the  ground  at  the  foot  of  the  bed.  This  iron  rod
is  part  of  a  plough,  and,  if  the  householder  does  not  possess  one  of  his  own,
it  is  specially  borrowed  for  the  occasion ;  its  presence  is  so  important  that
it  is  not  returned  for  six  days,  however  much  its  owner  may  be  needing  it.
The  midwife,  before  leaving,  often  secretly  introduces  a  needle  into  the
mattress  of  the  bed,  in  the  hope  of  saving  the  mother  after-pains.

Frazer  {Golden  Bough,  vol.  iii,  p.  234  et  seq.)  has  collected  numerous
examples  showing  the  dislike  of  spirits  for  iron  in  various  parts  of  the  world,
especially  Scotland,  India  and  Africa.  Among  the  Majhwar,  an  aboriginal
tribe  in  the  hill  country  of  South  Mirzapur,  an  iron  implement  such  as  a
sickle  or  a  betel-cutter  is  constantly  kept  near  an  infant's  head  during  its
first  year  for  the  purpose  of  warding  off"  the  attacks  of  ghosts  (W.  Crooke,
Tribes  and  Castes  of  the  North- Western  Provinces  and  Oudh,  vol.  iii,  p.  431).
Among  the  Maravars,  an  aboriginal  race  of  Southern  India,  a  knife  or  other
iron  object  lies  beside  a  woman  after  childbirth  to  keep  off"  the  devil  (F.  Jagor,
''Bericht  iiber  verschiedene  Volksstiimme  in  Vorderindien,"  Zeitschrijl  Jur
Ethnologic,  vol.  xxvi,  1894,  p.  70).  When  a  Mala  woman  is  in  labour,  a
sickle  and  some  nm  leaves  are  always  kept  on  the  cot.  In  Malabar  people
who  have  to  pass  by  burning-grounds  or  other  haunted  places  commonly
carry  with  them  iron  in  some  form,  such  as  a  knife,  or  an  iron  rod  used  as
a  walking-stick.  When  pregnant  women  go  on  a  journey,  they  carry  with
them  a  few  twigs  or  leaves  of  the  nhn  tree,  or  iron  in  some  shape,  to  scare  evil
spirits  lurking  in  groves  or  burial-grounds  which  they  may  pass  (E.  Thurston,
Ethnographic  Notes  in  Southern  India,  Madras,  1906,  p.  341  ;  and  Castes  and
Tribes  of  Southern  India,  vol.  iv,  p.  369  et  seq.).  See  also  the  articles  on
pregnancy  observances  in  the  Panjab  by  H.  A.  Rose,  Joum.  Anth.  Inst.,
vol.  xxxv,  1905,  pp.  271-282.

In  Annam  parents  sometimes  sell  their  child  to  a  smith,  who  puts  an  iron
anklet  on  the  child's  foot,  usually  adding  a  small  iron  chain.     After  the  child


r


PRECAUTIONS  IN  THE  BIRTH-CHAMBER     167


has  grown  and  all  danger  from  the  attack  of  evil  spirits  is  over,  the  anklet  is
broken.

The  use  of  the  sword  to  scare  away  evil  spirits  during  childbirth  is  found
in  the  Philippines,  where  the  husband  strips  naked  (see  p.  117  of  this  volume)
and,  standing  on  guard  either  inside  the  house  or  on  the  roof,  flourishes  his
sword  incessantly  until  the  child  is  born.

In  Malaya  a  piece  of  iron  is  numbered  among  the  articles  necessary
for  the  defence  of  infancy  against  its  natural  and  spiritual  foes.  See
R.  J.  Wilkinson,  Papers  on  Malay  Subjects,  part  i,  p.  1,  Kuala  Lumpur,  I9O8.

As  iron  frightens  demons  away  it  is  not  surprising  that  it  is  used  in  cases
of  illness.  Thus,  during  an  outbreak  of  cholera,  people  often  carry  axes  or
sickles  about  with  them.  On  the  Slave  Coast  of  Western  Africa,  when  her
child  is  ill,  a  mother  will  attach  iron  rings  and  bells  to  the  child's  ankles
and  hang  iron  chains  round  its  neck.

Iron  has  a  similar  significance  of  driving  away  spirits  at  death,  thus  the
chief  mourners  will  carry  iron  with  them.  When  a  woman  dies  in  childbed
in  the  island  of  Salsette,  they  put  a  nail  or  other  piece  of  iron  in  the  folds  of
her  dress ;  this  is  done  specially  if  the  child  survives  her.  The  intention
plainly  is  to  prevent  her  spirit  from  coming  back ;  for  they  believe  that
a  dead  mother  haunts  the  house  and  seeks  to  carry  away  her  child
(G.  F.  D'Penha,  "Superstitions  and  Customs  in  Salsette,"  Indian  Antiquary,
vol.  xxviii,  1899,  p.  115).

In  all  these  cases  the  original  cause  of  the  dread  of  iron  by  evil  spirits
appears  to  be  simply  that  the  spirits  themselves  date  back  to  Stone  Age
times,  and  the  discovery  of  iron,  with  its  enormous  advantages  over  stone,
attached  to  it  miraculous  powers  which  the  evil  spirits,  in  their  ignorance,
came  to  dread.

Crooke  in  his  article,  "  Charms  and  Amulets  (Indian),"  Hastings'  Ency.
Rel.  Eth.  (vol.  iii,  p.  443),  gives  other  useful  references.  He  first  refers  to
W.  Johnson,  Folk  Memory,  I9O8,  p.  I69  et  seq.,  where  the  protective  value
of  iron  is  described.  When  a  child  is  still-born,  the  Burmese  place  iron
beside  the  corpse,  with  the  invocation :  "  Never  more  return  into  thy  mother's
womb  till  this  metal  becomes  as  soft  as  down  "  (Shway  Yoe  [Sir  George  Scott],
The  Burman,  vol.  i,  p.  3).  The  Vadvals  of  Thana,  in  order  to  guard  against
the  spirit  which  attacks  the  child  on  the  sixth  day  after  birth  (an  unconscious
recognition  of  the  danger  from  infantile  lockjaw,  caused  by  neglect  of  sanitary
precautions),  place  an  iron  knife  or  scythe  on  the  mother's  cot,  and  an  iron
bickern  at  the  door  of  the  lying-in  room — a  custom  which  also  prevails  in
the  Panjab  (Campbell,  Notes  on  the  Spirit  Basis  of  Belief  and  Custom,  Bombay,
1885,  p.  387;  Malik  Muhammad  Din,  The  Bahdwalpur  State,  Lahore,  1908,
p.  98).  An  iron  bracelet  is  worn  by  all  Hindu  married  women,  those  of  high
rank  enclosing  it  in  gold  (Rajendralala  Mitra,  The  Indo- Aryans,  London,  1881,
vol.  i,  pp.  233,  279  ;  Risley,  Tribes  and  Castes  of  Bengal,  vol.  i,  p.  532,  533  ;
vol.  ii,  p.  41).  In  the  form  of  the  sword  it  has  special  power.  When  a  birth
occurs  among  the  Kachins  of  Upper  Burma,  guns  are  fired,  knives  {dha)  and
torches  are  brandished  over  the  mother,  and  old  rags  and  chillies  are  burned
to  scare  demons  by  the  stench  {Gazetteer,  Upper  Burma,  vol.  i,  pt.  i,  p.  S^9)'


168  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

The  Mohammedans  of  North  India  wave  a  knife  over  a  sufferer  from  cramp,
with  the  invocation :  "  I  salute  God !  The  knife  is  of  steel !  The  arrow  is
sharp !  May  the  cramp  cease  through  the  power  of  Muhammad,  the  brave
one !  "  {North  Indian  Notes  and  Queries,  vol.  v,  p.  35).  On  the  Irrawaddy
river  in  Burma  iron  pyrites  is  valued  as  a  charm  against  alligators  (Yule,
Mission  to  Ava,  London,  1858,  p.  198).  A  curious  belief  in  the  sanctity  of
iron  appears  among  the  Doms,  a  criminal  tribe  of  North  India.  They  inherit
from  the  Stone  Age  the  belief  that  it  is  unlawful  to  commit  a  burglary  with
an  iron  tool ;  anyone  disobeying  this  rule  is  expelled  from  the  community,
and  it  is  believed  that  the  eyes  of  the  offender  will  start  from  his  head  (North
Indian  Notes  and  Queries,  vol.  v,  p.  63).

Apart  from  the  reference  to  the  birth-chamber  of  the  son  of  the  King  of
Vatsa  being  hung  with  various  weapons,  we  are  told  that  they  were  "  rendered
auspicious  by  being  mixed  with  the  gleam  of  jewel-lamps,  shedding  a  blaze
able  to  protect  the  child."  There  are  two  similar  descriptions  in  Chapters
XXVI II  and  XXXIV,  where  the  light  of  the  lamps  is  eclipsed  by  the  beauty
of  the  expectant  mother.

We  have  already  seen  (Vol.  I,  p.  77»^)  that  demons  fear  the  light  and  can
indulge  in  their  machinations  only  when  it  is  dark.  The  same  idea  obtains  at
the  time  of  childbirth,  for  being  a  most  critical  period,  evil  spirits  naturally
try  to  take  every  advantage.  Thus  it  is  an  almost  universal  custom  to  have
lights  in  the  birth-chamber  to  scare  away  such  spirits  as  may  be  hovering
round  to  do  what  harm  they  can.

"  The  rule  that,  where  a  mother  and  new-born  child  are  lying,  fire  and
light  must  never  be  allowed  to  go  out,"  says  Hartland,  "  is  equally  binding
in  the  Highlands  of  Scotland,  in  Korea,  and  in  Basutoland ;  it  was  observed
by  the  ancient  Romans ;  and  the  sacred  books  of  the  Parsis  enjoin  it  as  a
religious  duty ;  for  the  evil  powers  hate  and  fear  nothing  so  much  as  fire
and  light."

Among  the  Chinese,  as  soon  as  the  birth-pangs  are  felt,  the  women  light
candles  and  burn  incense  before  the  household  shrine  and  gods.  Red  candles
are  also  lighted  in  the  chamber  as  at  a  wedding,  the  idea  being  that  a  display
of  joy  and  cheerful  confidence  repels  all  evil  influences.

Crooke  (op.  cit.  supra,  pp.  444,  445)  also  gives  useful  references  about  the
protecting  powers  of  light  and  fire  in  all  parts  of  the  world.

The  Nayars  of  Malabar  place  lights,  over  which  rice  is  sprinkled,  in  the
room  in  which  the  marriage  is  consummated  (Bull.  Madras  Museum,  vol.  iii,
p.  234 ;  cf.  Dubois,  Hindu  Manners,  Customs  and  Ceremonies,  p.  227).  Among
the  Savaras  of  Bengal  the  bridesmaids  warm  the  tips  of  their  fingers  at  a
lamp,  and  rub  the  cheeks  of  the  bridegroom  (Risley,  op.  cit.,  vol.  ii,  p.  243).
The  Mohammedan  Khojas  of  Gujarat  place  a  four-wicked  lamp  near  a  young
child,  while  the  friends  scatter  rice  (Bombay  Gazetteer,  vol.  ix,  pt.  ii,  p.  45).
In  Bombay  the  lamp  is  extinguished  on  the  tenth  day,  and  again  filled  with
butter  and  sugar,  as  a  mimetic  charm  to  induce  the  light  to  come  again
and  bring  another  baby  (Panjab  Notes  and  Queries,  vol.  iv,  p.  5).  The  Srigaud
Brahmans  of  Gujarat  at  marriage  wear  conical  hats  made  of  leaves  of  the


PRECAUTIONS  IN  THE  BIRTH-CHAMBER     169


sacred  tree  Butea  frondosa,  and  on  the  hat  is  placed  a  lighted  lamp  {Bombay
Gazetteer,  vol.  ix,  pt.  i,  p.  19  ;  and  cf.  idem,  p.  272).

Fire  is  commonly  used  for  the  same  purpose.  The  fires  lit  at  the  Holi
spring  festival  are  intended  as  a  purgation  of  evil  spirits,  or  as  a  mimetic
charm  to  produce  sunshine.  Touching  fire  is  one  of  the  methods  by  which
mourners  are  freed  from  the  ghost  which  clings  to  them.  When  an  Arer
woman  of  Kanara  has  an  illegitimate  child,  the  priest  lights  a  lamp,  plucks
a  hair  from  the  woman's  head,  throws  it  into  the  fire,  and  announces  that
mother  and  child  are  free  from  taboo  (Bombay  Gazetteer,  vol.  ix,  pt.  i,  p.  215).
The  rite  of  fire-walking  practised  in  many  parts  of  the  country  appears  to
be  intended  as  a  means  of  purging  evil  spirits ;  and  the  fire  lighted  by  all
castes  in  the  delivery-room  seems  to  have  the  same  object.  Such  use  of  fire
is  naturally  common  among  the  Zoroastrian  fire-worshippers  (Shea-Troyer,  The
Dabistan,  Paris,  1843,  vol.  i,  p.  317).

In  the  Nights  (Burton,  Supp.,  vol.  i,  p.  279)  we  read :  "  When  the  woman
came  to  her  delivery,  she  gave  birth  to  a  girl-child  in  the  night,  and  they
sought  fire  of  the  neighbours."

In  the  text  of  the  Ocean  of  Story  under  discussion  the  lamps  are  described
as  *' jewel-lamps,  shedding  a  blaze,"  and  in  Chapter  XXXIV  we  read  of  "a
long  row  of  flames  of  the  jewel-lamps."  Tawney  gives  a  note  to  this  latter
reference,  but  does  not  tell  us  what  jewel-lamps  are.  The  question  arises  as
to  whether  they  are  lamps  encrusted  with  jewels,  lamps  carved  out  of  a  solid
jewel,  or  jewels  so  bright  that  they  do  the  service  of  lamps.  The  first  seems
quite  probable,  while  the  second  is  most  unlikely  and,  as  far  as  I  can  discover,
does  not  appear  in  folk-tales.  But  the  luminous  jewel  is  of  very  common
occurrence,  and  not  only  appears  largely  in  Eastern  fiction,  but  enters  into
Alexandrian  myths  and  is  found  in  the  works  of  mediaeval  physiologists.

Clouston,  Popular  Tales  and  Fictions,  vol.  i,  p.  412,  gives  references  from
the  Gesta  Romanorum,  the  Talmud,  Pseudo-Callisthenes,  Lucian's  De  Dea  Syria,
The  Forty  Vazirs,  and  ends  his  note  with  "Jewel-lamps  are  often  mentioned
in  the  Kathd  Sarit  Sagara,"  so  he  evidently  thought  the  references  were  to
jewels.

In  the  Nights  (Burton,  vol.  i,  p.  l66)  a  room  is  lit  by  a  light  which  "came
from  a  precious  stone  big  as  an  ostrich  egg  .  .  .  and  this  jewel,  blazing  like
the  sun,  cast  its  rays  far  and  wide."

On  the  other  hand,  lamps  enter  so  enormously  into  Hindu  ritual  that
one  is  inclined  to  think  that  lamps  are  really  meant,  especially  when  we  read
of  the  "long  row  of  flames."  Whenever  a  luminous  jewel  is  mentioned  it  is
nearly  always  a  single  stone.  There  are  exceptions,  however.  The  gable  of
Prester  John's  palace  was  lit  at  night  by  two  carbuncles,  one  at  either  end.
But  a  whole  row  of  such  jewels  used  for  such  a  purpose  is  unheard  of. — n.m.p.


BOOK  V:  CHATURDARIKA
CHAPTER  XXIV

INVOCATION

MAY  Gane^a,  painting  the  earth  with  mosaic  by
means  of  the  particles  of  red  lead  flying  from  his
trunk  whirled  round  in  his  madness,^  and  so,  as
it  were,  burning  up  obstacles  with  the  flames  of  his  might,
protect  you.


[M]  Thus  the  King  of  Vatsa  and  his  queen  remained
engaged  in  bringing  up  their  only  son  Naravahanadatta,
and  once  on  a  time  the  minister  Yaugandharayana,  seeing  the
king  anxious  about  taking  care  of  him,  said  to  him  as  he  was
alone  :  "  King,  you  must  never  feel  any  anxiety  now  about
the  Prince  Naravahanadatta,  for  he  has  been  created  by  the
adorable  god  Siva  in  your  house  as  the  future  emperor  over
the  kings  of  the  Vidyadharas ;  and  by  their  divine  power  the
kings  of  Vidyadharas  have  found  this  out,  and  meaning
mischief  have  become  troubled,  unable  in  their  hearts  to
endure  it;  and  knowing  this,  the  god  with  the  moon  crest
has  appointed  a  prince  of  the  Ganas,^  Stambhaka  by  name,
to  protect  him.  And  he  remains  here  invisible,  protecting
this  son  of  yours,  and  Narada  coming  swiftly  informed  me
of  this."

While  the  minister  was  uttering  these  words  there  descended
from  the  midst  of  the  air  a  divine  man  wearing  a  diadem
and  a  bracelet,  and  armed  with  a  sword.  He  bowed,  and
then  the  King  of  Vatsa,  after  welcoming  him,  immediately
asked  him  with  curiosity  :   "  Who  are  you,  and  what  is  your

^  The  elephant-headed  god  has  his  trunk  painted  with  red  lead  like  a
tame  elephant,  and  is  also  liable  to  become  mast.

2  Followers  and  attendants  upon  Siva. See  Vol.  I,  p.  202. — n.m.p.

170


SAKTIVEGA  BEGINS  HIS  STORY  171

errand  here  ?  "  He  said  :  "  I  was  once  a  mortal,  but  I  have
now  become  a  king  of  the  Vidyadharas,  named  Saktivega,
and  I  have  many  enemies.  I  have  found  out  by  my  power
that  your  son  is  destined  to  be  our  emperor,  and  I  have  come
to  see  him,  O  Eiig."

When  Saktivega,  overawed  at  the  sight  of  his  future
emperor,  had  said  this,  the  King  of  Vatsa  was  pleased,  and
again  asked  him  in  his  astonishment :  "  How  can  the  rank
of  a  Vidyadhara  be  attained,  and  of  what  nature  is  it,  and
how  did  you  obtain  it?  Tell  me  this,  my  friend."  When
he  heard  this  speech  of  the  king's  that  Vidyadhara  Saktivega,
courteously  bowing,  answered  him  thus  :  "  O  King,  resolute
souls  having  propitiated  Siva  either  in  this  or  in  a  former
birth,  obtain  by  his  favour  the  rank  of  Vidyadhara.  And
that  rank,  denoted  by  the  insignia  of  supernatural  know-
ledge, of  sword,  garland  and  so  on,  is  of  various  kinds,  but
listen  !  I  will  tell  you  how  I  obtained  it."  Having  said  this,
Saktivega  told  the  following  story,  relating  to  himself,  in  the
presence  of  the  Queen  Vasavadatta  :—

29.  Story  of  the  Golden  City

There  lived  long  ago  in  a  city  called  Vardhamana,^  the
ornament  of  the  earth,  a  king,  the  terror  of  his  foes,  called
Paropakarin.  And  this  exalted  monarch  possessed  a  queen
of  the  name  of  Kanakaprabha,^  as  the  cloud  holds  the
lightning,  but  she  had  not  the  fickleness  of  the  lightning.
And  in  course  of  time  there  was  born  to  him  by  that  queen
a  daughter,  who  seemed  to  have  been  formed  by  the  creator
to  dash  Lakshmi's  pride  in  her  own  beauty.  And  that  moon
of  the  eyes  of  the  world  was  gradually  reared  to  womanhood
by  her  father,  who  gave  her  the  name  of  Kanakarekha,^
suggested  by  her  mother's  name  Kanakaprabha.

Once  on  a  time,  when  she  had  grown  up,  the  king,  her
father,  said  to  the  Queen  Kanakaprabha,  who  came  to  him
in  secret :    "A  grown-up  daughter  cannot  be  kept  in  one's

^  The  modern  Burdwan. This  is,  however,  not  necessarily  so  (Barnett).

— N.M.P.

2  Kanaka-prabhd  means  "lustre  of  gold." — n.m.p.

3  I.e.  "gold-gleam/'  or  "  streak  of  gold." — n.m.p.


172  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

house,  accordingly  Kanakarekha  troubles  my  heart  with
anxiety  about  a  suitable  marriage  for  her.  For  a  maiden  of
good  family  who  does  not  obtain  a  proper  position  is  like
a  song  out  of  tune ;  when  heard  of  by  the  ears  even  of  one
unconnected  with  her  she  causes  distress.  But  a  daughter
who  through  folly  is  made  over  to  one  not  suitable  is  like
learning  imparted  to  one  not  fit  to  receive  it,  and  cannot
tend  to  glory  or  merit,  but  only  to  regret.  So  I  am  very
anxious  as  to  what  king  I  must  give  this  daughter  of  mine,
and  who  will  be  a  fit  match  for  her."

When  Kanakaprabha  heard  this  she  laughed  and  said  :
"  You  say  this,  but  your  daughter  does  not  wish  to  be
married ;  for  to-day,  when  she  was  playing  with  a  doll  and
making  believe  it  was  a  child,  I  said  to  her  in  fun :  '  My
daughter,  when  shall  I  see  ycu  married  ?  '  When  she  heard
that,  she  answered  me  reproachfully  :  '  Do  not  say  so ;  you
must  not  marry  me  to  anyone;  and  my  separation  from
you  is  not  appointed.  I  do  well  enough  as  a  maiden,  but
if  I  am  married,  know  that  I  shall  be  a  corpse ;  there  is  a
certain  reason  for  this.'  As  she  has  said  this  to  me  I  have
come  to  you,  O  King,  in  a  state  of  distress  ;  for,  as  she  has
refused  to  be  married,  what  use  is  there  in  deliberating  about
a  bridegroom  ?  "

When  the  king  heard  this  from  the  queen  he  was  be-
wildered, and  going  to  the  private  apartments  of  the  princess
he  said  to  his  daughter  :  "  When  the  maidens  of  the  gods
and  Asuras  practise  austerities  in  order  to  obtain  a  husband,
why,  my  daughter,  do  you  refuse  to  take  one  ?  "  When  the
Princess  Kanakarekha  heard  this  speech  of  her  father's  she
fixed  her  eyes  on  the  ground  and  said  :  "  Father,  I  do  not
desire  to  be  married  at  present,  so  what  object  has  my  father
in  it,  and  why  does  he  insist  upon  it  ?  "  That  King  Paropa-
karin,  when  his  daughter  addressed  him  in  that  way,  being
the  discreetest  of  men,  thus  answered  her  :  "  How  can  sin
be  avoided  unless  a  daughter  is  given  in  marriage?  And
independence  is  not  fit  for  a  maiden  who  ought  to  be  in  de-
pendence on  relations.  For  a  daughter,  in  truth,  is  bom
for  the  sake  of  another  and  is  kept  for  him.  The  house  of
her  father  is  not  a  fit  place  for  her  except  in  childhood.     For


THE  STRANGE  CONDITION  FOR  MARRIAGE     173

if  a  daughter  reaches  puberty  unmarried  her  relations  go  to
hell,  and  she  is  an  outcast,  and  her  bridegroom  is  called  the
husband  of  an  outcast."

When  her  father  said  this  to  her,  the  Princess  Kanaka-
rekha  immediately  uttered  a  speech  that  was  in  her  mind  :
"  Father,  if  this  is  so,  then  whatever  Brahman  or  Kshatriya
has  succeeded  in  seeing  the  city  called  the  Golden  City,  to  him
I  must  be  given,  and  he  shall  be  my  husband,  and  if  none
such  is  found,  you  must  not  unjustly  reproach  me."  When
his  daughter  said  that  to  him,  that  king  reflected :  "  It  is  a
good  thing  at  any  rate  that  she  has  agreed  to  be  married  on
a  certain  condition,  and  no  doubt  she  is  some  goddess  born
in  my  house  for  a  special  reason,  for  else  how  comes  she  to
know  so  much  though  she  is  a  child  ?  "  Such  were  the  king's
reflections  at  that  time ;  so  he  said  to  his  daughter,  "  I  will
do  as  you  wish,"  and  then  he  rose  up  and  did  his  day's  work.

And  on  the  next  day,  as  he  was  sitting  in  the  hall  of
audience,  he  said  to  his  courtiers :  "  Has  anyone  among
you  seen  the  city  called  the  Golden  City?  Whoever  has
seen  it,  if  he  be  a  Brahman  or  a  Kshatriya,  I  will  give  him
my  daughter  Kanakarekha  and  make  him  crown  prince."
And  they  all,  looking  at  one  another's  faces,  said  :  "  We  have
not  even  heard  of  it,  much  less  have  we  seen  it."

Then  the  king  summoned  the  warder  and  said  to  him :
"  Go  and  cause  a  proclamation  to  be  circulated  in  the  whole
of  this  town  with  the  beating  of  drums,^  and  find  out  if
anyone  has  really  seen  that  city."  When  the  warder  re-
ceived this  order,  he  said,  "  I  will  do  so,"  and  went  out ;  and
after  he  had  gone  out  he  immediately  gave  orders  to  the  city
guards,  and  caused  a  drum  to  be  beaten  all  round  the  city,
thus  arousing  curiosity  to  hear  the  proclamation,  which  ran  as
follows  ;— "  Whatever  Brahman  or  Kshatriya  youth  has  seen
the  city  called  the  Golden  City,  let  him  speak,  and  the  king
will  give  him  his  daughter  and  the  rank  of  crown  prince."
Such  was  the  astounding  announcement  proclaimed  all  about
the  town  after  the  drum  had  been  beaten.  And  the  citizens
said,  after  hearing  that  proclamation  :  "  What  is  this  Golden
City  that  is  to-day  proclaimed  in  our  town,  which  has  never

1  See  Vol.  I,  p.  118«2._N.M.P.


174  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

been  heard  of  or  seen  even  by  those  among  us  who  are
old  ?  "  But  not  a  single  one  among  them  said  :  "I  have
seen  it."

And  in  the  meanwhile  a  Brahman  living  in  that  town,
Saktideva  by  name,  the  son  of  Baladeva,  heard  that  proc-
lamation ;  that  youth,  being  addicted  to  vice,  had  been
rapidly  stripped  of  his  wealth  at  the  gaming-table,  and  he
reflected,  being  excited  by  hearing  of  the  giving  in  marriage
of  the  king's  daughter  :  "  As  I  have  lost  all  my  wealth  by
gambling,  I  cannot  now  enter  the  house  of  my  father,  nor
even  the  house  of  a  courtesan,  so,  as  I  have  no  resource,  it  is
better  for  me  to  assert  falsely  to  those  who  are  making  the
proclamation  by  beat  of  drum  that  I  have  seen  that  city.
Who  will  discover  that  I  know  nothing  about  it,  for  who  has
ever  seen  it?  And  in  this  way  I  may  perhaps  marry  the
princess."

Thus  reflecting,  Saktideva  went  to  the  city  guards  and
said  falsely  :  "I  have  seen  that  city."  They  immediately
said  to  him :  "  Bravo  !  Then  come  with  us  to  the  king's
warder."  So  he  went  with  them  to  the  warder.  And  in  the
same  way  he  falsely  asserted  to  him  that  he  had  seen  that
city,  and  he  welcomed  him  kindly,  and  took  him  to  the  king.
And  without  wavering  he  maintained  the  very  same  story
in  the  presence  of  the  king  :  what  indeed  is  difficult  for  a
blackleg  to  do  who  is  ruined  by  play  ?

Then  the  king,  in  order  to  ascertain  the  truth,  sent  that
Brahman  to  his  daughter  Kanakarekha,  and  when  she  heard
of  the  matter  from  the  mouth  of  the  warder,  and  the  Brah-
man came  near,  she  asked  him :  "  Have  you  seen  that  Golden
City  ?  "  Then  he  answered  her  :  "  Yes,  that  city  was  seen
by  me  when  I  was  roaming  through  the  earth  in  quest  of
knowledge."  ^  She  next  asked  him  :  "  By  what  road  did
you  go  there,  and  what  is  it  like  ?  "  That  Brahman  then
went  on  to  say :  "  From  this  place  I  went  to  a  town  called
Harapura,  and  from  that  I  next  came  to  the  city  of  Benares  ;
and  from  Benares  in  a  few  days  to  the  city  of  Paundravar-
dhana,  thence  I  went  to  that  city  called  the  Golden  City,  and

^  For  an  account  of  the  Wanderjahre  of  young  Brahman  students  see
Dr  Biihler's  introduction  to  the  Vikramankadevacharita.


THE  FALSE  ASSERTION  175

I  saw  it,  a  place  of  enjoyment  for  those  who  act  aright,  like
the  city  of  Indra,  the  glory  of  which  is  made  for  the  delight
of  gods.^  And  having  acquired  learning  there,  I  returned
here  after  some  time  ;  such  is  the  path  by  which  I  went,  and
such  is  that  city."

After  that  fraudulent  Brahman  Saktideva  had  made  up
this  story,  the  princess  said,  with  a  laugh :  "  Great  Brahman,
you  have  indeed  seen  that  city ;  but  tell  me,  tell  me  again,
by  what  path  you  went."  When  Saktideva  heard  that,  he
again  displayed  his  effrontery,  and  then  the  princess  had
him  put  out  by  her  servants.  And  immediately  after  putting
him  out  she  went  to  her  father,  and  her  father  asked  her :
"  Did  that  Brahman  speak  the  truth  ?  "  And  then  the
princess  said  to  her  father  :  "  Though  you  are  a  king  you  act
without  due  consideration  ;  do  you  not  know  that  rogues
deceive  honest  people?  For  that  Brahman  simply  wants
to  impose  on  me  with  a  falsehood,  but  the  liar  has  never
seen  the  Golden  City.  And  all  kinds  of  deceptions  are
practised  on  the  earth  by  rogues ;  for  listen  to  the  story  of
Siva  and  Madhava,  which  I  will  tell  you."  Having  said
this,  the  princess  told  the  following  tale  : —

29a.  Siva  and  Madhava

There  is  an  excellent  city  rightly  named  Ratnapura,^  and
in  it  there  were  two  rogues  named  Siva  and  Madhava.  Sur-
rounding themselves  with  many  other  rogues,  they  contrived
for  a  long  time  to  rob,  by  making  use  of  trickery,  all  the  rich
men  in  the  town.  And  one  day  those  two  deliberated
together  and  said  :  "  We  have  managed  by  this  time  to
plunder  this  town  thoroughly  ;   so  let  us  now  go  and  live  in

^  More  literally,  "those  whose  eyes  do  not  wink."  The  epithet  also
means  "worthy  of  being  regarded  with  unwinking  eyes."  No  doubt  this
ambiguity  is  intended. "  The  city  of  Indra  "  is  svarga — a  temporary  para-
dise, where  the  blessed  enjoy  unequalled  delights  before  their  next  birth  on
earth.  The  duration  of  the  stay  is  in  proportion  with  their  good  deeds  in
their  previous  life.  In  Vol.  I,  p.  59,  Vararuchi  speaks  of  the  "  perishable  joys
of  Svarga."  It  is  here  that  the  Gandharvas  and  Apsarases  are  in  continual
service  of  Indra,  as  we  have  already  seen  (Vol.  I,  p.  201). — n.m.p.

"  I.e.  the  city  of  jewels.


176  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

the  city  of  Ujjayini ;  there  we  hear  that  there  is  a  very  rich
man  named  Sankarasvamin,  who  is  chaplain  to  the  king.
If  we  cheat  him  out  of  his  money  we  may  thereby  enjoy  the
charms  of  the  ladies  of  Malava.  He  is  spoken  of  by  Brah-
mans  as  a  miser,  because  he  withholds^  half  their  usual  fee
with  a  frowning  face,  though  he  possesses  treasure  enough  to
jfill  seven  vessels ;  and  that  Brahman  has  a  pearl  of  a  daughter
spoken  of  as  matchless ;  we  will  manage  to  get  her  too  out
of  him  along  with  the  money."

Having  thus  determined,  and  having  arranged  before-
hand what  part  each  was  to  play,  the  two  rogues  Siva  and
Madhava  went  out  of  that  town.  At  last  they  reached
Ujjayini,  and  Madhava,  with  his  attendants,  disguised  as  a
Rajput,  remained  in  a  certain  village  outside  the  town.  But
Siva,  who  was  expert  in  every  kind  of  deception,  having
assumed  the  disguise  of  a  reUgious  ascetic,  first  entered  that
town  alone.  There  he  took  up  his  quarters  in  a  hut  on  the
banks  of  the  Sipra,  in  which  he  placed,  so  that  that  could  be
seen,  clay,  darbha  grass,  a  vessel  for  begging,  and  a  deerskin.
And  in  the  morning  he  anointed  his  body  with  thick  clay,  as
if  testing  beforehand  his  destined  smearing  with  the  mud  of
the  hell  Avichi.  And  plunging  in  the  water  of  the  river,  he
remained  a  long  time  with  his  head  downward,  as  if  rehears-
ing beforehand  his  futiu-e  descent  to  hell,  the  result  of  his
evil  actions.  And  when  he  rose  up  from  his  bath  he  remained
a  long  time  looking  up  towards  the  sun,^  as  if  showing  that
he  deserved  to  be  impaled.  Then  he  went  into  the  presence
of  the  god,  and  making  rings  of  ku^a  grass,^  and  muttering
prayers,  he  remained  sitting  in  the  posture  called  Padma-
sana,*  with  a  hypocritical,  cunning  face,  and  from  time  to
time  he  made  an  offering  to  Vishnu,  having  gathered  white
flowers,  even  as  he  took  captive  the  simple  hearts  of  the
good  by  his  villainy ;   and  having  made  his  offering  he  again

^  Askandin  is  translated  "granting"  by  Monier  Williams  and  the
Petersburg  lexicographers.

2  For  the  amazing  austerities  of  Hindu  ascetics  see  Vol.  I,  p.  79n^ — n.m.p.

3  These  are  worn  on  the  fingers  when  offerings  are  made.

*  A  particular  posture  in  religious  meditation,  sitting  with  the  thighs
crossed,  with  one  hand  resting  on  the  left  thigh,  the  other  held  up  with  the
thumb  upon  the  heart,  and  the  eyes  directed  to  the  tip  of  the  nose.


w


THE  TWO  ROGUES  177


pretended  to  betake  himself  to  muttering  his  prayers,  and
prolonged  his  meditations  as  if  fixing  his  attention  on  wicked
ways.

And  the  next  day,  clothed  in  the  skin  of  a  black  antelope,
he  wandered  about  the  city  in  quest  of  alms,  like  one  of  his
own  deceitful  leers  intended  to  beguile  it,  and  observing  a
strict  silence,  he  took  three  handfuls  of  rice  from  Brahmans'
houses,  still  equipped  with  stick  and  deerskin,  and  divided
the  food  into  three  parts,  like  the  three  divisions  of  the  day,^
and  part  he  gave  to  the  crows,  and  part  to  his  guest,  and
with  the  third  he  filled  his  maw  ;  and  he  remained  for  a  long
time  hypocritically  telling  his  beads,  as  if  he  were  counting
his  sins  at  the  same  time,  and  muttering  prayers  ;  and  in  the
night  he  remained  alone  in  his  hut,  thinking  over  the  weak
points  of  his  fellow-men,  even  the  smallest  ;  and  by  thus
performing  every  day  a  difficult  pretended  penance  he  gained
complete  ascendancy  over  the  minds  of  the  citizens  in  every
quarter.  And  all  the  people  became  devoted  to  him,  and  a
report  spread  among  them  in  every  direction  that  Siva  was
an  exceedingly  self-denying  hermit.

And  in  the  meanwhile  his  accomplice,  the  other  rogue,
Madhava,  having  heard  from  his  emissaries  how  he  was
getting  on,  entered  that  city ;  and  taking  up  his  abode  there
in  a  distant  temple,  he  went  to  the  bank  of  the  Sipra  to  bathe,
disguised  as  a  Rajput,  and  after  bathing,  as  he  was  returning
with  his  retinue,  he  saw  Siva  praying  in  front  of  the  god,
and  with  great  veneration  he  fell  at  his  feet  and  said  before
all  the  people  :  "  There  is  no  other  such  ascetic  in  the  world,
for  he  has  been  often  seen  by  me  going  round  from  one  holy
place  to  another."  But  Siva,  though  he  saw  him,  kept  his
neck  immovable  out  of  cunning,  and  remained  in  the  same
position  as  before,  and  Madhava  returned  to  his  own  lodging.

And  at  night  those  two  met  together  and  ate  and  drank,
and  deliberated  over  the  rest  of  their  programme,  what  they
must  do  next.     And  in  the  last  watch  of  the  night  Siva  went

^  There  seem  to  be  two  or  three  mistakes  in  Brockhaus'  text.  D.  reads
hhikmtrayam  iatah  .  .  .  cakre  trih  satyam  iva  khandasah,  "  he  divided  the  begged
food,  three  handfuls  of  rice,  into  three  parts,  just  as  he  broke  asunder  the
truth."     See  Speyer,  op.  ciL,  pp.  104,  105. — n.m.p.

VOL.   II.  M


178  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

back  leisurely  to  his  hut.  And  in  the  morning  Madhava
said  to  one  of  his  gang  :  "  Take  these  two  garments  and  give
them  as  a  present  to  the  domestic  chaplain  of  the  king  here,
who  is  called  Sankarasvamin,  and  say  to  him  respectfully  :
'  There  is  a  Rajput  come  from  the  Deccan  of  the  name  of
Madhava,  who  has  been  oppressed  by  his  relations,  and  he
brings  with  him  much  inherited  wealth  ;  he  is  accompanied
by  some  other  Rajputs  like  himself,  and  he  wishes  to  enter
into  the  services  of  your  king  here,  and  he  has  sent  me  to
visit  you,  O  treasure-house  of  glory.'  "

The  rogue  who  was  sent  off  by  Madhava  with  this
message  went  to  the  house  of  that  chaplain  with  the  present
in  his  hand,  and  after  approaching  him,  and  giving  him  the
present  at  a  favourable  moment,  he  delivered  to  him  in
private  Madhava 's  message,  as  he  had  been  ordered  ;  he,
for  his  part,  out  of  his  greed  for  presents,  believed  it  all,
anticipating  other  favours  in  the  future,  for  a  bribe  is  the
sovereign  specific  for  attracting  the  covetous.  The  rogue
then  came  back,  and  on  the  next  day  Madhava,  having
obtained  a  favourable  opportunity,  went  in  person  to  visit
that  chaplain,  accompanied  by  attendants,  who  hypocritic-
ally assumed  the  appearance  of  men  desiring  service,^  pass-
ing themselves  off  as  Rajputs,  distinguished  by  the  maces
they  carried  ;  he  had  himself  announced  by  an  attendant
preceding  him,  and  thus  he  approached  the  family  priest,
who  received  him  with  welcomes  which  expressed  his  delight
at  his  arrival.  Then  Madhava  remained  engaged  in  conversa-
tion with  him  for  some  time,  and  at  last  being  dismissed  by
him,  returned  to  his  own  house.

On  the  next  day  he  sent  another  couple  of  garments  as
a  present,  and  again  approached  that  chaplain  and  said  to
him  :  "  I  indeed  wish  to  enter  into  service  to  please  my  re-
tainers, for  that  reason  I  have  repaired  to  you,  but  I  possess
wealth."  When  the  chaplain  heard  that,  he  hoped  to  get
something  out  of  him,  and  he  promised  Madhava  to  procure
for  him  what  he  desired,   and  he   immediately  went    and

^  Kdrpa(ika  may  mean  a  pilgrim,  but  it  seems  to  be  used  in  the  Katha
Sarit  Sagara  to  mean  a  kind  of  dependent  on  a  king  or  great  man,  usually  a
foreigner.     See  Chapters  XXXVIII,  LIII  and  LXXXI  of  this  work.


r


MADHAVA  FEIGNS  SICKNESS  179


petitioned  the  king  on  this  account,  and,  out  of  respect  for
the  chaplain,  the  king  consented  to  do  what  he  asked.  And
on  the  next  day  the  family  priest  took  Madhava  and  his
retinue,  and  presented  them  to  the  king  with  all  due  respect.
The  king  too,  when  he  saw  that  Madhava  resembled  a  Rajput
in  appearance,  received  him  graciously  and  appointed  him  a
salary.  Then  Madhava  remained  there  in  attendance  upon
the  king,  and  every  night  he  met  Siva  to  deliberate  with  him.
And  the  chaplain  entreated  him  to  live  with  him  in  his  house,
out  of  avarice,  as  he  was  intent  on  presents.

Then  Madhava  with  his  followers  repaired  to  the  house
of  the  chaplain  ;  this  settlement  was  the  cause  of  the  chap-
lain's ruin,  as  that  of  the  mouse  in  the  trunk  of  the  tree  was
the  cause  of  its  ruin.  And  he  deposited  a  chest  in  the  strong-
room of  the  chaplain,  after  filling  it  with  ornaments  made  of
false  gems.  And  from  time  to  time  he  opened  the  box  and
by  cunningly  half  showing  some  of  the  jewels  he  captivated
the  mind  of  the  chaplain,  as  that  of  a  cow  is  captivated  by
grass.  And  when  he  had  gained  in  this  way  the  confidence
of  the  chaplain,  he  made  his  body  emaciated  by  taking  little
food,  and  falsely  pretended  that  he  was  ill.

And  after  a  few  days  had  passed,  that  prince  of  rogues
said  with  weak  voice  to  that  chaplain,  who  was  at  his  bed-
side :  "  My  condition  is  miserable  in  this  body,  so  bring,
good  Brahman,  some  distinguished  man  of  your  caste,  in
order  that  I  may  bestow  my  wealth  upon  him  for  my  happi-
ness here  and  hereafter,  for,  life  being  unstable,  what  care
can  a  wise  man  have  for  riches  ?  "  That  chaplain,  who  was
devoted  to  presents,  when  addressed  in  this  way,  said,  "  I
will  do  so,"  and  Madhava  fell  at  his  feet.  Then  whatever
Brahman  the  chaplain  brought,  Madhava  refused  to  receive,
pretending  that  he  wanted  a  more  distinguished  one.  One  of
the  rogues  in  attendance  upon  Madhava,  when  he  saw  this,  said :
"  Probably  an  ordinary  Brahman  does  not  please  him.  So  it
will  be  better  now  to  find  out  whether  the  strict  ascetic  on  the
banks  of  Sipra  named  Siva  pleases  him  or  not. ' '  When  Madhava
heard  that,  he  said  plaintively  to  that  chaplain :  "  Yes,  be  kind,
and  bring  him,  for  there  is  no  other  Brahman  like  him."

The  chaplain,  thus  entreated,  went  near  Siva,  and  beheld


180  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

him  immovable,  pretending  to  be  engaged  in  meditation.
And  then  he  walked  round  him,  keeping  him  on  his  right
hand,  and  sat  down  in  front  of  him  :  and  immediately  the
rascal  slowly  opened  his  eyes.  Then  the  family  priest,
bending  before  him,  said  with  bowed  head  :  "  My  lord,  if  it
will  not  make  you  angry,  I  will  prefer  a  petition  to  you.
There  is  dwelling  here  a  very  rich  Rajput  from  the  Deccan,
named  Madhava,  and  he,  being  ill,  is  desirous  of  giving  away
his  whole  property  :  if  you  consent,  he  will  give  you  that
treasure  which  glitters  with  many  ornaments  made  out  of
priceless  gems."  When  Siva  heard  that,  he  slowly  broke
silence,  and  said  :  "  O  Brahman,  since  I  live  on  alms,  and
observe  perpetual  chastity,  of  what  use  are  riches  to  me  ?  "
Then  that  chaplain  went  on  to  say  to  him  :  "  Do  not  say
that,  great  Brahman ;  do  you  not  know  the  due  order  of  the
periods  in  the  life  of  a  Brahman  ?  ^  By  marrying  a  wife,
and  performing  in  his  house  offerings  to  the  Manes,  sacrifices
to  the  gods  and  hospitality  to  guests,  he  uses  his  property
to  obtain  the  three  objects  of  life  ^  ;  the  stage  of  the  house-
holder is  the  most  useful  of  all."  ^

Then  Siva  said  :  "  How  can  I  take  a  wife,  for  I  will  not
marry  a  woman  from  any  low  family  ?  "  When  the  covetous
chaplain  heard  that,  he  thought  that  he  would  be  able  to
enjoy  his  wealth  at  will,  and,  catching  at  the  opportimity,
he  said  to  him  :  "I  have  an  unmarried  daughter  named
Vinayasvamini,  and  she  is  very  beautiful ;  I  will  bestow  her
in  marriage  on  you.  And  I  will  keep  for  you  all  the  wealth
which  you  receive  as  a  donation  from  Madhava,  so  enter  on
the  duties  of  a  householder."  When  Siva  heard  this,  having
got  the  very  thing  he  wanted,  he  said  :  "  Brahman,  if  your
heart  is  set  on  this,*  I  will  do  what  you  say.     But  I  am  an

^  First  he  should  be  a  Brahmacharin  or  unmarried  religious  student,  next
a  Grihasthn  or  householder,  then  a  Vanaprastha  or  anchoret,  lastly  a  Bhikshu
or  beggar.

2  I.e.  virtue,  wealth,  pleasure ;  dhanna,  artha,  kama.

3  In  his  translation  of  this  story  from  the  D.  text  in  The  Golden  Town,
1909,  Barnett  adds  "among  the  men  in  the  four  orders"  before  "the  stage,"
thus  making  the  meaning  clearer. — n.m.p.

*  Graha  also  means  "planet" — i.e.  inauspicious  planet.  Siva  tells  the
truth  here.


SIVA  MARRIES  THE  CHAPLAIN'S  DAUGHTER    181

ascetic  who  knows  nothing  about  gold  and  jewels  :  I  shall
act  as  you  advise  ;   do  as  you  think  best."

When  the  chaplain  heard  that  speech  of  Siva's  he  was
delighted,  and  the  fool  said,  "  Agreed,"  and  conducted
Siva  to  his  house.  And  when  he  had  introduced  there  that
inauspicious  guest  named  Siva,^  he  told  Madhava  what  he
had  done,  and  was  applauded  by  him.  And  immediately
he  gave  Siva  his  daughter,  who  had  been  carefully  brought
up,  and  in  giving  her  he  seemed  to  be  giving  away  his  own
prosperity  lost  by  his  folly.  And  on  the  third  day  after  his
marriage  he  took  him  to  Madhava,  who  was  pretending
to  be  ill,  to  receive  his  present.  And  Madhava  rose  up  and
fell  at  his  feet,  and  said  what  was  quite  true :  "  I  adore  thee
whose  asceticism  is  incomprehensible."  ^  And  in  accordance
with  the  prescribed  form  he  bestowed  on  Siva  that  box  of
ornaments  made  of  many  sham  jewels,  which  was  brought
from  the  chaplain's  treasury.  Siva  for  his  part,  after  re-
ceiving it,  gave  it  into  the  hands  of  the  chaplain,  saying  :  "I
know  nothing  about  this,  but  you  do."  And  that  priest
immediately  took  it,  saying  :  "I  undertook  to  do  this  long
ago,  why  should  you  trouble  yourself  about  it  ?  "  Then
Siva  gave  them  his  blessing,  and  went  to  his  wife's  private
apartments,  and  the  chaplain  took  the  box  and  put  it  in  his
strong-room.

Madhava  for  his  part  gradually  desisted  from  feigning
sickness,  affecting  to  feel  better  the  next  day,  and  said  that
his  disease  had  been  cured  by  virtue  of  his  great  gift.  And
he  praised  the  chaplain  when  he  came  near,  saying  to  him :
"  It  was  by  your  aiding  me  in  an  act  of  faith  that  I  tided
over  this  calamity."  And  he  openly  struck  up  a  friendship
with  Siva,  asserting  that  it  was  due  to  the  might  of  Siva's
holiness  that  his  life  had  been  saved.  Siva,  for  his  part,
after  some  days  said  to  the  chaplain  :  "  How  long  am  I  to
feast  in  your  house  in  this  style?  Why  do  you  not  take
from  me  those  jewels  for  some  fixed  sum  of  money  ?  If  they
are  valuable,  give  me  a  fair  price  for  them."

When  the  priest  heard  that,  thinking  that  the  jewels  were

^  I.e.  the  auspicious  or  friendly  one.

2  There  is  probably  a  double  meaning  in  the  word  "incomprehensible."


182  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

of  incalculable  value,  he  consented,  and  gave  to  Siva  as
purchase-money  his  whole  living.  And  he  made  Siva  sign  a
receipt  for  the  sum  with  his  own  hand,  and  he  himself  too
signed  a  receipt  for  the  jewels,  thinking  that  that  treasure
far  exceeded  his  own  wealth  in  value.  And  they  separated,
taking  one  another's  receipts,  and  the  chaplain  lived  in  one
place,  while  Siva  kept  house  in  another.  And  then  Siva  and
Madhava  dwelt  together,  and  remained  there,  leading  a  very
pleasant  life  consuming  the  chaplain's  wealth.  And  as  time
went  on,  the  chaplain,  being  in  need  of  cash,  went  to  the  town
to  sell  one  of  the  ornaments  in  the  bazar.

Then  the  merchants,  who  were  connoisseurs  in  jewels,
said  after  examining  it  :  "  Ha  !  the  man  who  made  these
sham  jewels  was  a  clever  fellow,  whoever  he  was.  For  this
ornament  is  composed  of  pieces  of  glass  and  quartz  with
various  colours  and  fastened  together  with  brass,  and  there
are  no  gems  or  gold  in  it."  When  the  chaplain  heard  that,
he  went  in  his  agitation  and  brought  all  the  ornaments  from
his  house,  and  showed  them  to  the  merchants.  When  they
saw  them,  they  said  that  all  of  them  were  composed  of
sham  jewels  in  the  same  way  ;  but  the  chaplain,  when  he
heard  that,  was,  so  to  speak,  thunderstruck.  And  immedi-
ately the  fool  went  off  and  said  to  Siva  :  "  Take  back  your
ornaments  and  give  me  back  my  own  wealth."  But  Siva
answered  him  :  "  How  can  I  possibly  have  retained  your
wealth  till  now  ?  Why,  it  has  all  in  course  of  time  been
consumed  in  my  house."

Then  the  chaplain  and  Siva  fell  into  an  altercation,  and
went,  both  of  them,  before  the  king,  at  whose  side  Madhava
was  standing.  And  the  chaplain  made  this  representation
to  the  king  :  "  Siva  has  consumed  all  my  substance,  taking
advantage  of  my  not  knowing  that  a  great  treasure  which  he
deposited  in  my  house  ^  was  composed  of  skilfully  coloured
pieces  of  glass  and  quartz  fastened  together  with  brass."
Then  Siva  said  :  "  King,  from  my  childhood  I  have  been  a
hermit,  and  I  was  persuaded  by  that  man's  earnest  petition
to  accept  a  donation,  and  when  I  took  it,  though  inexperienced
in  the  ways  of  the  world,  I  said  to  him,  '  I  am  no  connoisseur

*  Perhaps  we  ought  to  read  dattva  for  tatra.


r


THE  ROGUES  ARE  TRIUMPHANT  183


in  jewels  and  things  of  that  kind,  and  I  rely  upon  you,'  and
he  consented,  saying,  '  I  will  be  your  warrant  in  the  matter.'
And  I  accepted  all  the  donation  and  deposited  it  in  his  hand.
Then  he  bought  the  whole  from  me  at  his  own  price,  and
we  bold  from  one  another  mutual  receipts  ;  and  now  it  is
in  the  king's  power  to  grant  me  help  in  my  sorest  need."

Siva  having  thus  finished  his  speech,  Madhava  said :
"  Do  not  say  this  ;  you  are  honourable,  but  what  fault  have
I  committed  in  the  matter  ?  I  never  received  anything
either  from  you  or  from  Siva  ;  I  had  some  wealth  inherited
from  my  father,  which  I  had  long  deposited  elsewhere ;  then
I  brought  that  wealth  and  presented  it  to  a  Brahman.  If
the  gold  is  not  real  gold,  and  the  jewels  are  not  real  jewels,
then  let  us  suppose  that  I  have  reaped  fruit  from  giving  away
brass,  quartz  and  glass.  But  the  fact  that  I  was  persuaded
with  sincere  heart  that  I  was  giving  something  is  clear  from
this,  that  I  recovered  from  a  very  dangerous  illness."

When  Madhava  said  this  to  him  without  any  alteration
in  the  expression  of  his  face,  the  king  laughed,  and  all
his  ministers,  and  they  were  highly  delighted.  And  those
present  in  court  said,  laughing  in  their  sleeves  :  "  Neither
Madhava  nor  Siva  has  done  anything  unfair."  Thereupon
that  chaplain  departed  with  downcast  countenance,  having
lost  his  wealth.  For  of  what  calamities  is  not  the  blinding
of  the  mind  with  excessive  greed  the  cause  ?  And  so  those
two  rog-ues  Siva  and  Madhava  long  remained  there  happy
in  having  obtained  the  favour  of  the  delighted  king.^

^  This  is  the  first  of  several  excellent  "thieving"  stories  which  appear  in
the  Ocean  of  Story.  The  history  of  stealing  plays  a  very  important  part  in  both
fact  and  fiction  in  India.  The  "  Art  of  Stealing  in  Hindu  Fiction  "  has  recently
been  treated  by  Bloomfield  in  two  most  entertaining  and  instructive  papers,
Amer.  Journ.  Phil.,  vol.  xliv,  part  ii,  pp.  97-133  ;  part  iii,  pp.  1.93-229,  1923.  I
shall  have  occasion  to  refer  to  these  again.  The  arch-thief  of  Hindu  fiction
is  Muladeva,  whom  Bloomfield  identifies  with  Karnisuta,  Gonlputraka,
Gonikaputra  and  Gonikiisuta.  We  shall  meet  him  in  the  fifteenth  vampire
story.  Chapter  LXXXIX,  in  the  "  Story  of  the  Magic  Pill,"  and  also  in  the
last  story  of  the  whole  work.  He  is  supposed  to  have  written  a  famous  manual
of  thievery  entitled  Steyasdstra-pravartaka  or  SteyasTitra-pravartaka.

The  science  is  regarded  with  the  utmost  seriousness,  and  thieving  was
regularly  taught  to  a  selected  number  of  pupils,  a  high  standard  of  mutual
regard  existing  between  teacher  and  pupil.     See  J.  J.  Meyer's  remarks  on


184  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

29.  Stonj  of  the  Golden  City

"  Thus  do  rogues  spread  the  webs  of  their  tongue  with
hundreds  of  intricate  threads,  like  fishermen  upon  dry  land,
living  by  the  net.  So  you  may  be  certain,  my  father,  that
this  Brahman  is  a  case  in  point.  By  falsely  asserting  that
he  has  seen  the  City  of  Gold,  he  wishes  to  deceive  you,  and
to  obtain  me  for  a  wife.  So  do  not  be  in  a  hurry  to  get  me
married  ;  I  shall  remain  unmarried  at  present,  and  we  will
see  what  will  happen."  When  the  King  Paropakarin  heard
this  from  his  daughter  Kanakarekha,  he  thus  answered  her  :
"  When  a  girl  is  grown  up,  it  is  not  expedient  that  she  should
remain  long  unmarried,  for  wicked  people  envious  of  good
qualities  falsely  impute  sin.  And  people  are  particularly
fond  of  blackening  the  character  of  one  distinguished  ;  to
illustrate  this,  listen  to  the  story  of  Haras vamin  which  I  am
about  to  tell  you."

thieves'  practices  in  his  introduction  to  Dasa  Kvmara  Charita,  or  The  Story  of
the  Ten  Princes,  p.  1 5  et  seq.

Among  the  numerous  extracts  from  thieving  stories  collected  by  Bloom-
field,  I  will  here  quote  a  Tamil  story,  reported  by  De  Rosairo  in  The  Onentalist,
vol.  iii,  p.  183.  Apart  from  the  excellence  of  the  tale  itself  it  affords  a  good
parallel  to  the  ascetic  practices  of  the  rogue  Siva  in  our  text,  showing  to  what
a  degree  of  risk  and  personal  discomfort  the  expert  thief  must  be  prepared
to  go.

A  king  wishes  to  study  the  art  of  stealing,  in  order  to  mete  out  more
perfect  justice.  His  learned  minister  presents  before  him  a  notorious  thief
and  pilferer.  After  the  king  has  dismissed  all  attendants,  he  expresses  his
desire  to  become  the  thief  s  pupil.  To  his  surprise,  the  thief  pleads  ignorance
of  the  art  of  stealing,  and  asserts  that  he  has  been  most  unjustly  accused.
The  king  dismisses  him,  but  on  the  next  day  misses  his  signet-ring  off  his  ring-
finger.  The  thief,  though  asserting  his  innocence,  is  condemned  to  be  impaled
upon  a  three-pronged  stake.  But  the  king,  uneasy  in  his  mind,  disguises  him-
self, and  goes  in  the  still  of  the  night  to  the  place  of  execution.  As  he  comes
near  he  hears  tlie  thief,  in  pitiful  accents,  address  the  Almighty  Creator,  plead-
ing his  innocence,  and  calling  for  vengeance  from  heaven  on  the  head  of  him
who  had  judged  him  so  wrongly  and  pronounced  so  unjust  and  heavy  a  punish-
ment. The  king  has  the  thief  set  free,  but  on  the  next  morning  the  thief
appears  once  more,  and,  with  expressions  of  respect  and  civility,  presents  to
his  Majesty  the  lost  signet-ring.  When  asked  to  explain,  the  thief  says  ;
"  May  it  please  your  Majesty,  I  have  the  ring  because  I  played  my  part  with
alacrity  and  decision.  Should  your  Majesty  wish  to  follow  my  profession,
there  would  be  no  difficulty  in  doing  so,  if  you  could  but  behave  as  I  did —


THE  HERMIT  ACCUSED  OF  CANNIBALISM    185

29b.  The  Iniquity  of  Scandal

There  is  a  city  on  the  banks  of  the  Ganges  named  Kusu-
mapura,^  and  in  it  there  was  an  ascetic  who  visited  holy
places,  named  Harasvamin.  He  was  a  Brahman  living  by
begging  ;  and  constructing  a  hut  on  the  banks  of  the  Ganges,
he  became,  on  account  of  his  surprisingly  rigid  asceticism,  the
object  of  the  people's  respect.^  And  one  day  a  wicked  man
among  the  inhabitants,  who  could  not  tolerate  his  virtue,
seeing  him  from  a  distance  going  out  to  beg,  said  :  "  Do  you
know  what  a  hypocritical  ascetic  that  is  ?  It  is  he  that  has
eaten  up  all  the  children  in  this  town."  When  a  second
there  who  was  like  him  heard  this,  he  said :  "It  is  true  ;  I
also  have  heard  people  saying  this."  And  a  third  confirm-
ing it  said  :  "  Such  is  the  fact."  The  chain  of  villains'  con-
versation binds  reproach  on  the  good.  And  in  this  way  the
report  spread  from  ear  to  ear,  and  gained  general  credence  in
the  city.  And  all  the  citizens  kept  their  children  by  force
in  their  houses,  saying  :  "  Harasvamin  carries  off  all  the
children  and  eats  them."^

And  then  the  Brahmans  in  that  town,  afraid  that  their
offspring  would  be  destroyed,  assembled  and  deliberated
about  his  banishment  from  the  city.     And  as  they  did  not

namely,  maintain  a  lie  even  when  put  to  extreme  trial.  My  behaviour  is  the
first  lesson  in  the  art  your  Majesty  is  desirous  of  being  taught."

For  the  practices  of  modern  thieves  see  Russell,  Tribes  and  Castes  of  the
Central  Provinces,  vol.  i,  pp.  234,  248;  vol.  iv,  pp.  190,  191,  472-474,  483-487,
606-6O8  ;  and  Kennedy,  Criminal  Classes  of  Bombay,  1908. — n.m.p.

^  Thecity  of  flowers — i.e.  Pataliputra. See  p.  Sdn^  of  this  volume. — n.m.p.

^  Perhaps  we  ought  to  read  yayau  for  dadau.  This  1  find  is  the  reading
of  an  excellent  MS.  in  the  Sanskrit  College,  for  the  loan  of  wiiich  I  am  deeply
indebted  to  the  Principal  and  Librarian.

^  A  report  similar  to  that  spread  against  Harasvamin  was  in  circulation
during  the  French  Revolution.  Taine  in  his  history  of  the  Revolution,  vol.  i,
p.  418,  tells  the  following  anecdote: — "M,  de  Montlosier  found  himself  the
object  of  many  unpleasant  attentions  when  he  went  to  the  National  Assembly.
In  particular  a  woman  of  about  thirty  used  to  sharpen  a  large  knife  when  he
passed  and  look  at  him  in  a  threatening  manner.  On  inquiry  he  discovered
the  cause — Deux  enfants  du  quartier  out  disparu  enleves  par  des  bohemiens,  et  c  est
maintenant  un  bruit  repandu  que  M.  de  Montlosier,  le  marquis  de  Mirabeau,  et  d'autres
deputes  du  cote  droit  se  rassemhlent  pour  Jaire  des  orgies  dans  lesquelles  ils  mangent
de  petits  enfants."


186  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

dare  to  tell  him  face  to  face,  for  fear  he  might  perhaps  eat
them  up  in  his  rage,  they  sent  messengers  to  him.  And
those  messengers  went  and  said  to  him  from  a  distance  :
"  The  Brahmans  command  you  to  depart  from  this  city."
Then  in  his  astonishment  he  asked  them:  "Why?"  And
they  went  on  to  say  :  "  You  eat  every  child  as  soon  as  you
see  it."  When  Haras vamin  heard  that,  he  went  near  those
Brahmans,  in  order  to  reassure  them,  and  the  people  fled
before  him  for  fear.  And  the  Brahmans,  as  soon  as  they  saw
him,  were  terrified  and  went  up  to  the  top  of  their  monastery.
People  who  are  deluded  by  reports  are  not,  as  a  rule,  capable
of  discrimination.  Then  Harasvamin,  standing  below,  called
all  the  Brahmans  who  were  above,  one  by  one,  by  name,  and
said  to  them  :  "  What  delusion  is  this,  Brahmans  ?  Why
do  you  not  ascertain  with  one  another  how  many  children
I  have  eaten,  and  whose,  and  how  many  of  each  man's
children  ?  "

When  they  heard  that,  the  Brahmans  began  to  compare
notes  among  themselves,  and  found  that  all  of  them  had
all  their  children  left  alive.  And  in  course  of  time  other
citizens,  appointed  to  investigate  the  matter,  admitted  that
all  their  children  were  living.  And  merchants  and  Brahmans
and  all  said  :  "  Alas  !  in  our  folly  we  have  belied  a  holy
man ;  the  children  of  all  of  us  are  alive  ;  so  whose  children
can  he  have  eaten  ?  "  Harasvamin,  being  thus  completely
exonerated,  prepared  to  leave  that  city,  for  his  mind  was
seized  with  disgust  at  the  slanderous  report  got  up  against
him  by  wicked  men.^  For  what  pleasure  can  a  wise  man
take  in  a  wicked  place,  the  inhabitants  of  which  are  wanting
in  discrimination  ?  Then  the  Brahmans  and  merchants,  pros-
trating themselves  at  his  feet,  entreated  him  to  stay  there,
and  he  at  last,  though  with  reluctance,  consented  to  do  so.

29.  Story  of  the  Golden  City
"  In  this  way  evil  men  often  impute  crime  falsely  to  good
men,  allowing  their  malicious  garrulity  full  play  on  beholding
their  virtuous  behaviour.     Much  more,  if  they  obtain  a  slight

^  Cf.  Virgil's  well-known  description  of  the  growth  of  rumour,  ^neid,  iv,
74  et  seq. — N.M.p.


THE  PRINCESS  PERSISTS  IN  HER  RESOLVE    187

glimpse  of  any  opportunity  for  attacking  them,  do  they
pour  copious  showers  of  oil  on  the  fire  thus  kindled.  There-
fore if  you  wish,  my  daughter,  to  draw  the  arrow  from  my
heart,  you  must  not,  while  this  fresh  youth  of  yours  is  de-
veloping, remain  unmarried  to  please  yourself,  and  so  incur
the  ready  reproach  of  evil  men."

Such  was  the  advice  which  the  Princess  Kanakarekha
frequently  received  from  her  father  the  king,  but  she,  being
firmly  resolved,  again  and  again  answered  him  :  "  Therefore
quickly  search  for  a  Brahman  or  Kshatriya  who  has  seen
that  City  of  Gold  and  give  me  to  him,  for  this  is  the  condition
I  have  named."

When  the  king  heard  that,  reflecting  that  his  daughter,
who  remembered  her  former  birth,  had  completely  made  up
her  mind,  and  seeing  no  other  way  of  obtaining  for  her  the
husband  she  desired,  he  issued  another  order  to  the  effect
that  henceforth  the  proclamation  by  beat  of  drum  was  to
take  place  every  day  in  the  city,  in  order  to  find  out  whether
any  of  the  new-comers  had  seen  the  Golden  City.  And  once
more  it  was  proclaimed  in  every  quarter  of  the  city  every
day,  after  the  drum  had  been  beaten  :  "If  any  Brahman
or  Kshatriya  has  seen  the  Golden  City,  let  him  speak ;  the
king  will  give  him  his  own  daughter,  together  with  the  rank
of  crown  prince."  But  no  one  was  found  who  had  obtained
a  sight  of  the  Golden  City.


CHAPTER  XXV

29.  Story  of  the  Golden  City

IN  the  meanwhile  the  young  Brahman  Saktideva,  in
very  low  spirits,  having  been  rejected  with  contempt
by  the  princess  he  longed  for,  said  to  himself :  "  To-day
by  asserting  falsely  that  I  had  seen  the  Golden  City  I
certainly  incurred  contempt,  but  I  did  not  obtain  that
princess.  So  I  must  roam  through  the  earth  to  find  it,  until
I  have  either  seen  that  city  or  lost  my  life.  For  of  what  use
is  my  life,  unless  I  can  return,  having  seen  that  city,  and
obtain  the  princess  as  the  prize  of  the  achievement  ?  "

Having  thus  taken  a  vow,  that  Brahman  set  out  from  the
city  of  Vardhamana,  directing  his  course  toward  the  southern
quarter  ;  and  as  he  journeyed  he  at  last  reached  the  great
forest  of  the  Vindhya  range,  and  entered  it,  which  was  diffi-
cult and  long  as  his  own  undertaking.  And  that  forest,  so
to  speak,  fanned,  with  the  soft  leaves  of  its  trees  shaken  by
the  wind,  him,  who  was  heated  by  the  multitudinous  rays
of  the  sun ;  and  through  grief  at  being  overrun  with  many
robbers  it  made  its  cry  heard  day  and  night  in  the  shrill
screams  of  animals  which  were  being  slain  in  it  by  lions  and
other  noisome  beasts.  And  it  seemed,  by  the  unchecked
rays  of  heat  flashed  upward  from  its  wild  deserts,  to  en-
deavour to  conquer  the  fierce  brightness  of  the  sun  :  in  it,
though  there  was  no  accumulation  of  water,  calamity  was  to
be  easily  piu'chased  ^  :  and  its  space  seemed  ever  to  extend
before  the  traveller  as  fast  as  he  crossed  it.

In  the  course  of  many  days  he  accomplished  a  long  journey
through  this  forest,  and  beheld  in  it  a  great  lake  of  pure  cold
water  in  a  lonely  spot,  which  seemed  to  lord  it  over  all  lakes,
with  its  lotuses  like  lofty  umbrellas,  and  its  swans  like  gleam-
ing white  chowries.     In  the  water  of  that  lake  he  performed

^   Probably  a  poor  pun there  is  a  play  upon  the  words  Jala,  "  water,"

and  Jada,  "fools,"  thus  the  sense  is:  "The  forest  is  without  gatherings  of
water  (or  fools),  yet  it  is  fertile  in  misfortune"  (Barnett). — n.m.p.

188


THE  HERMITAGE  189

the  customary  ablutions,  and  on  its  northern  shore  he  beheld
a  hermitage  with  beautiful  fruit-bearing  trees  ;  and  he  saw
an  old  hermit  named  Suryatapas  sitting  at  the  foot  of  an
Asvattha  tree,  surrounded  by  ascetics,  adorned  with  a
rosary,  the  beads  of  which  by  their  number  seemed  to  be  the
knots  that  marked  the  centuries  of  his  life,^  and  which  rested
against  the  extremity  of  his  ear  that  was  white  with  age.
And  he  approached  that  hermit  with  a  bow,  and  the  hermit
welcomed  him  with  hospitable  greetings.

And  the  hermit,  after  entertaining  him  with  fruits  and
other  delicacies,  asked  him  :  "  Whence  have  you  come,  and
whither  are  you  going  ?  Tell  me,  good  sir."  And  Sakti-
deva,  inclining  respectfully,  said  to  that  hermit :  "  I  have
come,  venerable  sir,  from  the  city  of  Vardhamana,  and  I  have
undertaken  to  go  to  the  Golden  City  in  accordance  with  a
vow.  But  I  do  not  know  where  that  city  lies  ;  tell  me,  vener-
able sir,  if  you  know."  The  hermit  answered  :  "  My  son,  I
have  lived  eight  hundred  years  in  this  hermitage,  and  I  have
never  even  heard  of  that  city."  Saktideva,  when  he  heard  this
from  the  hermit,  was  cast  down,  and  said  again  :  "  Then  my
wanderings  through  the  earth  will  end  by  my  dying  here."

Then  that  hermit,  having   gradually  elicited  the  whole

^  Lenormant  in  his  Chaldoean  Magic  and  Sorcery,  p.  41  (English  transla-
tion), observes :  "  We  must  add  to  the  number  of  those  mysterious  rites  the
use  of  certain  enchanted  drinks,  which  doubtless  really  contained  medicinal
drugs,  as  a  cure  for  diseases,  and  also  of  magic  knots,  the  efficacy  of  which
was  firmly  believed  in,  even  up    to    the  Middle  Ages."     See  also  Ralston's

Songs  of  the  Russian  People,  p.  288. Cf.  the  speech  of  the  river-goddess,

Tamasa,  in  Act  III  of  the  Uttara  Rama  Charita  as  translated  by  Wilson  (Select
Specimejis  of  the  Theatre  of  the  Hindus,  vol.  ii,  1827):

"  And  homage  therefore  should  be  done

This  day  to  their  great  Sire,  the  Sun,

For  that  the  lucky  knot  has  told,

Twelve  years  their  rapid  course  have  rolled.

Since,  from  the  daughter  of  the  Earth,

Kusa  and  Lava  drew  their  birth."

In  a  note  explaining  the  "lucky  knot"  Wilson  states  that  the  expression
alludes  to  the  practice,  still  in  use  amongst  the  Hindus,  of  making  a  knot  every
year  of  a  person's  life  in  the  string  or  thread  which  is  wound  round  the  paper
scroll  on  which  the  calculations  of  his  nativity  are  inscribed.  For  collected
references  on  knots  in  magic  and  ritual  see  Frazer,  Golden  Bough,  vol.  iii,
pp.  293-317.— N.M.p.


190  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

story,  said  to  him  :  "If  you  are  firmly  resolved,  then  do  what
I  tell  you.  Three  yqjanas  from  here  there  is  a  country
named  Kampilya,  and  in  it  is  a  mountain  named  Uttara,
and  on  it  there  is  a  hermitage.  There  dwells  my  noble  elder
brother  named  Dirghatapas  ^ ;  go  to  him,  he  being  old  may

^  In  the  story  of  the  "  Beautiful  Palace  East  of  the  Sun  and  North  of
the  Earth"  (Thorpe,  Yule-tide  Stories,  p.  158)  an  old  woman  sends  the  youth,
who  is  in  quest  of  the  palace,  to  her  old  sister,  who  again  refers  him  to  an
older  sister  dwelling  in  a  small  ruinous  cottage  on  a  mountain.  In  I^ura
Gonzenbach's  Sicilianische  Marche?i,  p.  86,  the  prince  is  sent  by  one  "  Einsiedler  "
to  his  brother,  and  this  brother  sends  him  to  an  older  brother,  and  he  again  to
an  older  still,  who  is  described  as  "  Steinalt."  See  also  p.  l62.  We  have  a
similar  incident  in  Melusiiie,  p.  447.  The  story  is  entitled  "  La  Montagne
Noire  ou  Les  Filles  du  Diable."  See  also  //  Pe?itamerone,  ninth  diversion  of
the  fifth  day  (Burton,  vol.  ii,  pp.  54.9,  550)  ;  Ralston's  Russian  Folk-Tales,  p.  76  ;
Waldau's  Bohmische  Marchen,  pp.  37,  255  et  seq.;  Dasent's  Popular  Tales  from
the  Norse,  1859,  pp.  31-32,  212-213,  and  330-331  ;  and  Kaden's  Uriter  den
Olivenb'dumen,  p.  56.

The  motif  is  found  in  the  first  voyage  of  Aboulfaouaris,  Les  Mille  et  un

Jours,  Lille,  1784,  vol.  iv,  p.  l66,  whence  it  was  copied  in  "The  Story  of  Qara
Khan,"  a  sub-tale  in  The  Story  of  Jewad,  translated  by  E.  J.  W.  Gibb,  Glasgow,
1884.     See  Chauvin,  op.  cit.,  vii,  pp.  60,  6l«*,  where  other  references  are  given.

Clouston,  Popular  Tales  and  Fictions,  vol.  ii,  pp.  94-98,  quotes  from  a  paper
by  Cowell,  "  The  Legend  of  the  Oldest  Animals,"  in  Y  Cymrodor  (Welsh
Society's  Journal),  October  1882,  where  in  the  "Story  of  Kilhwch  and
Olwen  "  Arthur's  ambassadors  seek  certain  tidings  by  the  aid  of  animals,  each
referring  them  to  an  older  and  cleverer  one  than  themselves.  In  the  "Tale  of
the  Jealous  Sisters,"  Dozon,  Contes  Albanais  (No.  2),  the  hero  meets  a  lamia,
in  quest  of  a  magic  flower,  who  not  only  refrains  from  eating  him,  but  directs
him  to  her  elder  sister,  and  she  again  refers  him  to  her  elder  sister.  In  the
tale  of  "  Hasan  of  Bassorah  "  in  the  Nights  (Burton,  vol.  viii,  pp.  72-82),  Hasan
is  sent  by  a  venerable  Shaykh  to  his  brother,  and  thence  to  the  King  of  the
Camphor  Islands,  who  all  aid  him  in  his  search  for  the  Islands  of  Wak.  There
is  no  mention  of  each  being  older  than  the  last,  although  the  story  is  always
quoted  as  an  example  of  this  motif

A  curious  variant  is  found  in  Sastri's  Dravidian  Nights.  The  hero,  in  quest
of  the  pdrijata  flower,  is  sent  to  an  ascetic  who  opened  his  eyes  every  watch,
then  to  one  who  opened  his  eyes  every  second  watch,  and  finally  to  one  who
only  opened  them  every  third  watch.

I  do  not  agree  with  Clouston  {op.  cit.,  p.  98),  who  says:  "The  idea  is
probably  a  survival  of  some  primitive  myth,  suggested  by  the  physical  and
mental  imbecility  of  extreme  old  age — 'second  childhood.'  "  On  the  contrary,
old  age  in  man  is  usually  venerated  in  the  East,  and  apart  from  the  use  of
the  motif  to  the  story-teller  to  excite  the  curiosity  of  his  audience  as  the
denouement  is  thus  continually  postponed,  it  serves  as  an  excellent  lesson  in
perseverance  and  patience. — n.m.p.


THE  SEARCH  CONTINUED  191

perhaps  know  of  that  city."  When  Saktideva  heard  that,
hope  arose  in  his  breast,  and  having  spent  the  night  there,
he  quickly  set  out  in  the  morning  from  that  place.

And  wearied  with  the  laborious  journey  through  difficult
forest  country,  he  at  last  reached  that  region  of  Kampilya
and  ascended  that  mountain  Uttara;  and  there  he  beheld
that  hermit  Dirghatapas  in  a  hermitage,  and  he  was  delighted
and  approached  him  with  a  bow ;  and  the  hermit  received
him  hospitably,  and  Saktideva  said  to  him  :  "I  am  on  my
way  to  the  City  of  Gold  spoken  of  by  the  king's  daughter  ;
but  I  do  not  know,  venerable  sir,  where  that  city  is.  How-
ever, I  am  bound  to  find  it,  so  I  have  been  sent  to  you  by  the
sage  Suryatapas  in  order  that  I  may  discover  where  it  lies."
When  he  had  said  this,  the  hermit  answered  him  :  "  Though
I  am  so  old,  my  son,  I  have  never  heard  of  that  city  till  to-
day ;  I  have  made  acquaintance  with  various  travellers  from
foreign  lands,  and  I  have  never  heard  anyone  speak  of  it,
much  less  have  I  seen  it.  But  I  am  sure  it  must  be  in  some
distant  foreign  island,  and  I  can  tell  you  an  expedient  to  help
you  in  this  matter  ;  there  is  in  the  midst  of  the  ocean  an
island  named  Utsthala,  and  in  it  there  is  a  rich  king  of  the
Nishadas  ^  named  Satyavrata.  He  goes  to  and  fro  among
all  the  other  islands,  and  he  may  have  seen  or  heard  of  that
city.  Therefore  go  first  to  the  city  named  Vitankapura,
situated  on  the  border  of  the  sea.  And  from  that  place  go
with  some  merchant  in  a  ship  to  the  island  where  that  Nishada
dwells,  in  order  that  you  may  attain  your  object."

When  Saktideva  heard  this  from  the  hermit,  he  immediately
followed  his  advice,  and  taking  leave  of  him  set  out  from  the
hermitage.  And  after  accomplishing  many  kos  and  crossing
many  lands  he  reached  the  city  of  Vitankapura,  the  ornament
of  the  seashore.  There  he  sought  out  a  merchant  named
Samudradatta,  who  traded  with  the  island  of  Utsthala,  and
struck  up  a  friendship  with  him.  And  he  went  on  board  his
ship  with  him,  and  having  food  for  the  voyage  fully  supplied
by  his  kindness,  he  set  out  on  the  ocean  path.  Then,  when
they  had  but  a  short  distance  to  travel,  there  arose  a  black
cloud  with  rumbling  thunder,  resembling  a  roaring  Rakshasa,

^  Wild  aboriginal  tribes  not  belonging  to  the  Aryan  race.


192  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

with  flickering  lightning  to  represent  his  lolling  tongue.
And  a  furious  hurricane  began  to  blow  like  Destiny  herself,
whirling  up  light  objects  and  hurling  down  heavy/  And
from  the  sea,  lashed  by  the  wind,  great  waves  rose  aloft  like
the  mountains  equipped  with  wings,^  indignant  that  their
asylum  had  been  attacked.  And  that  vessel  rose  on  high
one  moment,  and  the  next  moment  plunged  below,  as  if
exhibiting  how  rich  men  are  first  elevated  and  then  cast
down.

And  the  next  moment  that  ship,  shrilly  laden  with  the
cries  of  the  merchants,  burst  and  split  asunder  as  if  with
the  weight.  And  the  ship  being  broken,  that  merchant  its
owner  fell  into  the  sea,  but  floating  through  it  on  a  plank  he
at  last  reached  another  vessel.  But  as  Saktideva  fell  a  large
fish,  opening  its  mouth  and  neck,  swallowed  him  without
injuring  any  of  his  limbs.  And  as  that  fish  was  roaming  at
will  in  the  midst  of  the  sea  it  happened  to  pass  near  the
island  of  Utsthala  ;  and  by  chance  some  servants  of  that
king  of  the  fishermen,  Satyavrata,  who  were  engaged  in  the

*  Destiny  often  elevates  the  worthless,  and  hurls  down  men  of  worth.

Clouston  {Popular  Tales  and  Fictions,  vol.  i,  p.  407)  compares  this  sentiment
with  Defoe's  scathing  reply  to  Lord  Haversham's  Vindication  of  his  Speech  :
"  Fate  makes  footballs  of  men ;  kicks  some  upstairs  and  some  down  ;  some
are  advanced  without  honour,  others  suppressed  without  infamy; — some  are
raised  without  merit,  some  are  crushed  without  crime ;  and  no  man  knows,
by  the  beginning  of  things,  whether  his  course  will  issue  in  a  peerage  or  a
pillory."  And  these  passages  from  the  drama  of  Mrichchhakatika,  or  The
Toy  Cart  (Wilson,  Theatre  of  the  Hindus):

"  Fate  views  the  world
A  scene  of  mutual  and  perpetual  struggle  ;
And  sports  with  life  as  if  it  were  a  wheel
That  draws  the  limpid  water  from  the  well ;
For  some  are  raised  to  affluence,  some  depressed
In  want,  and  some  are  borne  awhile  aloft.
And  some  hurled  down  to  wretchedness  and  woe."

"  O  Fate  !  thou  sportest  with  the  fortunes  of  mankind.
Like  drops  of  water  trembling  on  the  lotus-leaf."

— N.M.P.

*  The  usual  story  is  that  Indra  cut  off  the  wings  of  all  except  Mainaka,
the  son  of  Himavat  by  Mena.  He  took  refuge  in  the  sea.  Here  it  is
represented  that  more  escaped.  So  in  Bhartrihari  Ntti  Sataka,  st.  76  (Bombay
edition).


ALIVE  FROM  THE  FISH'S  BELLY  193

pursuit  of  small  fish,  came  there  and  caught  it.  And  those
fishermen,  proud  of  their  prize,  immediately  dragged  it  along
to  show  their  king,  for  it  was  of  enormous  size.  He  too,  out
of  curiosity,  seeing  that  it  was  of  such  extraordinary  size,
ordered  his  servants  to  cut  it  open ;  and  when  it  was  cut
open  Saktideva  came  out  alive  from  its  belly,  having  endured
a  second  wonderful  imprisonment  in  the  womb.^     Then  the

1  For  Saktideva's  imprisonment  in  the  belly  of  the  fish  cf.  Chapter  LXXIV
of  this  work ;  Indian  Fairy  Tales,  by  Miss  Stokes,  No.  xiv ;  and  Lucian's
Vera  Historia,  Book  I.  In  this  tale  the  fish  swallows  a  ship.  The  crew
discover  countries  in  the  monster's  inside,  establish  a  "scientific  frontier/'

and  pursue  a  policy  of  Annexation. In  Chapter  CXXIII  of  the  Oceati  of

Story  the  huge  fish  appears  twice :  firstly  in  the  "  Story  of  the  Two
Princesses,"  where  it  swallows  a  ship  and  all  on  board ;  and  secondly  in  the
tale  of  "  Ke^ata  and  Kandarpa/'  where  a  woman  is  rescued  from  a  fish's  belly.
To  the  former  of  these  Tawney  adds  a  few  further  references.

Similar  incidents  are  found  in  the  Hindi  Bundelkhandi,  where  the  hero
Alha  is  cut  out  from  captivity  in  a  fish's  inside  (see  Ind.  Ant,,  vol.  xiv,
October  1885,  p.  258).  In  some  cases  the  flights  of  fancy  of  the  story-
teller fall  little  short  of  those  indulged  in  by  Lucian.  In  a  Kasmiri  tale
(J.  H.  Knowles,  "Pride  Abased,"  Ind.  Ant.,  vol.  xv,  June  1886,  p.  157)  a  king
lives  inside  a  fish  for  years,  until  he  is  finally  rescued  by  a  potter  who  is
hacking  at  the  stranded  fish  with  an  axe.  Similarly  in  Miss  Stokes'  tale
"Loving  Laili"  lives  twelve  years  in  a  rohita  fish.  All  these  stories  appear
to  me  to  be  merely  examples  of  one  of  the  numerous  forms  of  exaggeration
dear  to  Oriental  story-tellers,  and  which  comes  in  most  handily  as  part  of  the
hero's  adventures  during  his  travels  in  a  foreign  land,  or  while  on  his  search
for  a  lost  bride,  magic  article  or  what  not.

In  the  case  of  Sindbad,  he  is  not  swallowed  by  a  fish,  but  lands  with  the
crew  on  a  huge  fish's  back  mistaken  for  an  island.  See  Nights,  Burton,  vol.  vi,
p.  6  with  note.  Further  references  will  be  found  in  Crooke,  Popular  Religion
and  Folk-Lore  of  Northern  India,  vol.  ii,  p.  254 ;  and  Chauvin,  op.  cit.,  vii,  p.  9,
under  "  La  Baleine."

Various  explanations  of  this  legend  have  been  offered,  some  rather
fantastic  like  that  of  a  certain  American  astronomer  of  the  last  century  who
saw  the  star-group  "  Cetus  "  in  the  whale  and  the  "moon  passing  through  it
in  three  days  and  nights  "  in  Jonah.  There  are,  however,  other  cosmological
interpretations  deserving  of  more  attention.  We  have  already  seen  (pp.  81-83
of  this  volume)  how  widespread  was  the  belief  that  at  eclipses  the  luminary
was  swallowed  or  attacked  by  some  monster,  and  it  is  quite  understandable
that  the  primitive  mind  might  easily  conceive  of  the  sunset  being  caused  by
a  huge  fish  swallowing  the  sun.  But  when  we  come  to  the  Jonah  legend,  we
find  that  the  prophet  was  in  the  fish — i.e.  invisible  to  human  eyes — for  three
days — the  period  of  the  moon's  disappearance  at  the  end  of  the  month  (see
R.  Campbell  Thompson,  Semitic  Magic,  pp.  53,  54).  Jonah  is  the  Hebrew
VOL.  II.  N


194  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

fisher-king  Satyavrata,  when  he  saw  that  young  man  come
out  and  bestow  his  blessing  on  him,  was  astonished,  and  asked
him  :  "  Who  are  you,  and  how  did  this  lot  of  dwelling  in  the
belly  of  the  fish  befall  you  ?  What  means  this  exceedingly
strange  fate  that  you  have  suffered  ?  "  When  Saktideva
heard  this  he  answered  that  king  of  the  fishermen  :  "  I  am
a  Brahman  of  the  name  of  Saktideva  from  the  city  of
Vardhamana;  and  I  am  bound  to  visit  the  City  of  Gold,
and  because  I  do  not  know  where  it  is,  I  have  for  a  long
time  wandered  far  over  the  earth  ;  then  I  gathered  from  a
speech  of  Dirghatapas'  that  it  was  probably  in  an  island,
so  I  set  out  to  find  Satyavrata  the  king  of  the  fishermen,
who  lives  in  the  island  of  Utsthala,  in  order  to  learn  its
whereabouts,  but  on  the  way  I  suffered  shipwreck,  and  so,
having  been  whelmed  in  the  sea  and  swallowed  by  a  fish,
I  have  been  brought  here  now."

word  for  "  dove,"  and,  as  Robertson  Smith  has  pointed  out  {Religion  of'  the
Semites,  quoting  Al-Nadim,  294*),  it  was  at  Harran,  the  city  sacred  to  the
moon-god,  that  the  dove  was  not  sacrificed.

A  fairly  widely  accepted  interpretation  of  the  Jonah  legend,  however,  is
that  it  is  a  prophecy  conveyed  under  a  parable.  There  are  several  reasons
given  for  the  propagation  of  this  view.  In  the  first  place,  no  reference  of
the  supposed  conversion  of  Nineveh  by  Jonah  is  mentioned  by  Isaiah,  Ezekiel,
Hosea,  or  the  other  prophets,  and  no  records  of  Jonah's  visit  to  the  city  have
been  discovered.  Jeremiah  (li,  34)  clearly  shows  the  meaning  of  expressions
similar  to  those  found  in  the  Jonah  story.  Here  we  read  ;  "Nebuchadrezzar,
the  king  of  Babylon,  hath  devoured  me,  he  hath  crushed  me,  he  hath  made
me  an  empty  vessel,  he  hath  swallowed  me  up  like  a  dragon,  he  hath  filled
his  belly  with  my  delicates,  he  hath  cast  me  out."  See  also  Jeremiah  1,  17  ;
1,  44;  and  Isaiah  xxvii,  1.

Other  interpretations  of  the  story  have  been  advocated.  W.  Simpson
{The  Jonah  Legend,  London,  1899)  considers  that  it  is  an  initiatory  legend
showing  death  and  subsequent  resurrection,  embodying  the  same  principles
as  Christian  baptism  and  the  Brahmanic  "rite  of  the  twice-born."  He  points
out  that  Jonah  (ii,  2)  cried  out  from  "hell" — i.e.  "Hades,"  "Sheol,"  or  the
"grave" — which  shows  that  there  was  no  real  "fish"  in  the  case,  and  that
it  was,  on  the  contrary,  the  dramatic  action  of  a  ceremony,  with  its  symbolic
accessories.

For  other  interesting  references  see  G.  A.  Smith,  7'he  Book  of  the  Twelve
Prophets,  1899,  vol.  ii,  p.  524;  Hans  Schmitt,  Jona,  1907;  and  T.  K.  Cheyne,
''Jonah,"  Ency.  Brit.^  vol.  xv,  pp.  496,  497.  For  a  Polynesian  and  Dutch  New
Guinea  parallel  of  the  Jonah  story  see  respectively  Macculloch,  Childhood  of
Fiction,  p.  50,  and  Frazer,  Folk-Lore  of  the  Old  Testament,  vol.  iii,  p.  83. — n.m.p.


SAKTIDEVA  MEETS  A  RELATION  195


When  Saktideva  had  said  this,  Satyavrata  said  to  him :
"  I  am  in  truth  Satyavrata,  and  this  is  the  very  island  you
were  seeking ;  but  though  I  have  seen  many  islands  I  have
never  seen  the  city  you  desire  to  find,  but  I  have  heard  of  it
as  situated  in  one  of  the  distant  islands."  Having  said  this,
and  perceiving  that  Saktideva  was  cast  down,  Satyavrata,  out
of  kindness  for  his  guest,  went  on  to  say  :  "  Brahman,  do
not  be  despondent ;  remain  here  this  night,  and  to-morrow
morning  I  will  devise  some  expedient  to  enable  you  to  attain
your  object."  The  Brahman  was  thus  consoled  by  the
king,  and  sent  off  to  a  monastery  of  Brahmans,  where  guests
were  readily  entertained.  There  Saktideva  was  supplied  with
food  by  a  Brahman  named  Vishnudatta,  an  inmate  of  the
monastery,  and  entered  into  conversation  with  him.  And
in  the  course  of  that  conversation,  being  questioned  by  him,
he  told  him  in  a  few  words  his  country,  his  family  and  his
whole  history.  When  Vishnudatta  heard  that,  he  immedi-
ately embraced  him,  and  said  in  a  voice  indistinct  from  the
syllables  being  choked  with  tears  of  joy  :  "  Bravo  !  you  are
the  son  of  my  maternal  uncle  and  a  fellow-countryman  of
mine.  But  I  long  ago  in  my  childhood  left  that  country
to  come  here.  So  stop  here  awhile,  and  soon  the  stream  of
merchants  and  pilots  that  come  here  from  other  islands  will
accomplish  your  wish."

Having  told  him  his  descent  in  these  words,  Vishnudatta
waited  upon  Saktideva  with  all  becoming  attentions.  And
Saktideva,  forgetting  the  toil  of  the  journey,  obtained  delight,
for  the  meeting  of  a  relation  in  a  foreign  land  is  like  a  fountain
of  nectar  in  the  desert.  And  he  considered  that  the  accom-
plishment of  his  object  was  near  at  hand,  for  good  luck
befalling  one  by  the  way  indicates  success  in  an  under-
taking. So  he  reclined  at  night  sleepless  upon  his  bed,
with  his  mind  fixed  upon  the  attainment  of  his  desire,  and
Vishnudatta,  who  was  by  his  side,  in  order  to  encourage  and
delight  him  at  the  same  time,  related  to  him  the  following
tale  :  —


196  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

29c.  ASokadatta  and  Vijayadatta  ^

Formerly  there  was  a  great  Brahman  named  Govinda-
svamin,  Hving  on  a  great  royal  grant  of  land  on  the  banks
of  the  Yamuna.  And  in  the  course  of  time  there  were  born
to  that  virtuous  Brahman  two  sons  like  himself,  Ai^okadatta
and  Vijayadatta.  While  they  were  living  there,  there  arose
a  terrible  famine  in  that  land,  and  so  Govindasvamin  said  to
his  wife  :  "  This  land  is  ruined  by  famine,  and  I  cannot  bear
to  behold  the  misery  of  my  friends  and  relations.  For  who
gives  anything  to  anybody  ?  So  let  us  at  any  rate  give  away
to  our  friends  and  relations  what  little  food  we  possess  and
leave  this  country.  And  let  us  go  with  our  family  to  Benares
to  live  there."  When  he  said  this  to  his  wife  she  consented,
and  he  gave  away  his  food  and  set  out  from  that  place  with  his
wife,  sons  and  servants.  For  men  of  noble  soul  cannot  bear
to  witness  the  miseries  of  their  relatives.  And  on  the  road  he
beheld  a  skull-bearing  Saiva  ascetic,  white  with  ashes,  and  with
matted  hair,  like  the  god  Siva  himself  with  his  half-moon.

The  Brahman  approached  that  wise  man  with  a  bow,
and  out  of  love  for  his  sons  asked  him  about  their  destiny,
whether  it  should  be  good  or  bad,  and  that  Yogi  answered
him  :  "  The  future  destiny  of  your  sons  is  auspicious,  but  you
shall  be  separated.  Brahman,  from  this  younger  one,  Vijaya-
datta, and  finally  by  the  might  of  the  second,  A^okadatta,
you  shall  be  united  to  him,"  Govindasvamin,  when  that
wise  man  said  this  to  him,  took  leave  of  him  and  departed,
overpowered  with  joy,  grief  and  wonder  ;  and  after  reaching
Benares  he  spent  the  day  there  in  a  temple  of  Durga  out-
side the  town,  engaged  in  worshipping  the  goddess  and  such-
like occupations.  And  in  the  evening  he  encamped  outside
that  temple  under  a  tree  with  his  family,  in  the  company
of  pilgrims  who  had  come  from  other  countries.  And  at
night,  while  all  were  asleep,  wearied  with  their  long  journey,
stretched  out  on  strewn  leaves  and  such  other  beds  as
travellers  have  to  put  up  with,  his  younger  son  Vijayadatta,^
who  was  awake,  was  suddenly  seized  with  a  cold  ague  fit;

^  Cf.  Grimm's  M'drchen,  No.  60;  Sicilianische  Marchen,  Nos.  39  and  40,
with  Dr  Kohler's  notes.


THE  COLD  AGUE  FIT  197

that  ague  quickly  made  him  tremble,  and  caused  his  hair  to
stand  on  end,  as  if  it  had  been  the  fear  of  his  approaching
separation  from  his  relations.  And  oppressed  with  the  cold
he  woke  up  his  father,  and  said  to  him :  "A  terrible  ague
afflicts  me  here  now,  father,  so  bring  fuel  and  light  me  a  fire
to  keep  off  the  cold  ;  in  no  other  way  can  I  obtain  relief  or
get  through  the  night."  When  Govindasvamin  heard  him
say  this,  he  was  distressed  at  his  suffering,  and  said  to  him :
"  Whence  can  I  procure  fire  now,  my  son  ?  "  Then  his  son
said  :  "  Why,  surely  we  can  see  a  fire  burning  near  us  on  this
side,  and  it  is  very  large,  so  why  should  I  not  go  there  and
warm  my  body  ?  So  take  me  by  the  hand,  for  I  have  a
shivering  fit,  and  lead  me  there."  Thus  entreated  by  his  son,
the  Brahman  went  on  to  say  :  "  This  is  a  cemetery,^  and  the
fire  is  that  of  a  fimeral  pyre,  so  how  can  you  go  to  a  place
terrible  from  the  presence  of  goblins  and  other  spirits,  for
Vijayadatta  Y^u  are  Only  a  child  ?  "  When  the  brave  Vijaya-
hecdmes  a  datta  heard  that  speech  of  his  affectionate  father
Rakshasa  -^e  laughed,  and  said  in  his  confidence  :  "  What
can  the  wretched  goblins  and  other  evil  ones  do  to  me  ?
Am  I  a  weakling?  So  take  me  there  without  fear."  When
he  said  this  so  persistently,  his  father  led  him  there,  and  the
boy  warming  his  body  approached  the  pyre,  which  seemed  to
bear  on  itself  the  presiding  deity  of  the  Rakshasas  ^  in  visible
form,  with  the  smoke  of  the  flames  for  dishevelled  hair,  devour-
ing the  flesh  of  men.     The  boy  at  once  encouraged  his  father  ^

^  If  such  a  word  can  be  applied  to  a  place  where  bodies  are  burnt.

The  usual  expression  is  "burning-ground/'  or  "burning-ghat." — n.m.p.

2  See  Vol.  I,  pp.  204,  205.  When  Hanuman,  the  monkey-god,  entered
Lanka  in  the  form  of  a  cat,  to  reconnoitre,  he  saw  that  the  Rakshasas  who
slept  in  the  house  "were  of  every  shape  and  form.  Some  of  them  disgusted
the  eye,  while  some  were  beautiful  to  look  on.  Some  had  long  arms  and
frightful  shapes ;  some  were  very  fat  and  some  were  very  lean ;  some  were
dwarf  and  some  were  prodigiously  tall.  Some  had  only  one  eye,  and
others  had  only  one  ear.  Some  had  monstrous  bellies,  hanging  breasts,  long
projecting  teeth,  and  crooked  thighs ;  whilst  others  were  exceedingly  beauti-
ful to  behold  and  clothed  in  great  splendour.  Some  had  the  heads  of  serpents,
some  the  heads  of  asses,  some  of  horses,  and  some  of  elephants."  For  further
details  see  Crooke,  op.  cit.,  vol.  i,  pp.  246-250. — n.m.p.

3  Samdsvasya,  the  reading  of  a  MS.  in  the  Sanskrit  College,  would  perhaps
give  a  better  sense.


198  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

and  asked  him  what  the  round  thing  was  that  he  saw  inside
the  pyre.  And  his  father,  standing  at  his  side,  answered
him  :  "  This,  my  son,  is  the  skull  of  a  man  which  is  burning
in  the  pyre."

Then  the  boy  in  his  recklessness  struck  the  skull  with  a
piece  of  wood  lighted  at  the  top  and  clove  it.  The  brains
spouted  up  from  it  and  entered  his  mouth,  like  the  initiation
into  the  practices  of  the  Rakshasas,  bestowed  upon  him  by
the  funeral  flame.  And  by  tasting  them  that  boy  became
a  Rakshasa,^  with  hair  standing  on  end,  with  sword  that  he

1  Although  at  first  sight  the  disgusting  method  by  which  Vijayadatta
becomes  a  Rakshasa  may  appear  merely  fantastic  and  revolting,  the  idea  is
based  on  practices  which  enter  into  the  Tantric  rites  of  the  Sakta  worshippers
of  Devi,  in  one  of  her  various  forms,  as  Kali,  Durga,  Chamunda,  etc.  Apart
from  the  cannibalism  and  human  sacrifices  connected  with  this  worship,  we
find  similar  and  even  more  loathsome  practices  among  the  Aghorl  caste,  who
are  not  even  extinct  to-day  (see  p.  90n^).  Members  of  this  caste  eat  the
most  disgusting  things  imaginable,  including  putrid  corpses,  human  and  animal
excretions,  etc.

As  Crooke  points  out  ("  Aghori,"  Hastings'  Enci/,  Rel.  Eih.,  vol.  i,  p.  212),
these  vile  practices  may  perhaps  be  accounted  for  by  similar  ones  which
existed,  and  in  some  cases  do  still  exist,  among  wizards  and  medicine-men
of  savage  tribes.  The  idea  at  the  root  of  such  practices  is  that  the  unusual
and  filthy  food  thus  consumed  enhances  the  spiritual  exaltation  of  the  eater.
I  consider  it  is  really  the  same  principle  as  we  saw  (p.  117)  existed  in  the
minds  of  people  who  perform  rites  in  a  state  of  nudity.

The  following  examples  of  eating  disgusting  food  for  magical  reasons  have
been  collected  by  Crooke  (op.  cit.,  p.  212)  :  According  to  Haddon  (Report
Cambridge  Exped.,  vol.  v,  p.  321),  at  Mabuiag  in  Torres  Straits,  the  Maidelaig,
or  sorcerer,  "made  a  practice  of  eating  anything  that  was  disgusting  and
revolting  in  character,  or  poisonous  or  medicinal  in  nature,  not  only  during
the  course  of  instruction,  but  subsequently,  whenever  about  to  perform  a
special  act  of  sorcery.  For  instance,  they  were  said  frequently  to  eat  flesh
of  corpses,  or  to  mix  the  juices  of  corpses  with  their  food.  One  effect  of  this
diet  was  to  make  them  '  wild  '  so  that  they  did  not  care  for  anyone,  and  all
affection  temporarily  ceased  for  relatives,  wife  and  children  ;  and  on  being
angered  by  any  of  them,  they  would  not  hesitate  to  commit  murder."  In
parts  of  Melanesia,  according  to  Codrington,  Mana,  or  spiritual  exaltation,  is
gained  by  eating  human  flesh ;  and  in  this  way  people  obtain  the  power  of
becoming  vampires,  the  ghost  of  the  corpse  which  was  eaten  entering  into
friendly  relations  with  the  eater  (Joum.  Anlh.  Iml.,  vol.  x,  p.  305  ;  Melanestans,
p.  222).  In  Central  Africa,  according  to  Macdonald,  witches  and  wizards  feed
on  human  flesh,  and  anyone  tasting  a  morsel  of  such  food  becomes  himself  a
wizard  {Joum.  Anth.  Inst.,  vol.  xxii,  p.  107).     Among  nearly  all  the  Bantu  negro


THE  TERRIBLE  TRANSFORMATION  199

had  drawn  from  the  flame,  terrible  with  projecting  tusks  :
so  he  seized  the  skull  and,  drinking  the  brains  from  it,  he
licked  it  with  tongue  restlessly  quivering  like  the  flames  of
fire  that  clung  to  the  bone.  Then  he  flung  aside  the  skull,
and  lifting  his  sword  he  attempted  to  slay  his  own  father
Govindasvamin.  But  at  that  moment  a  voice  came  out
from  the  cemetery  :  "  Kapalasphota,^  thou  god,  thou  oughtest
not  to  slay  thy  father.  Come  here."  When  the  boy  heard
that,  having  obtained  the  title  of  Kapalasphota  and  become
a  Rakshasa,  he  let  his  father  alone  and  disappeared;  and
his  father  departed,  exclaiming  aloud  :  "  Alas,  my  son !
Alas,  my  virtuous  son  !  Alas,  Vijayadatta !  "  And  he  re-
turned to  the  temple  of  Durga,  and  in  the  morning  he  told
his  wife  and  his  eldest  son  Asokadatta  what  had  taken  place.
Then  that  unfortunate  man  together  with  them  suffered
an  attack  of  the  fire  of  grief,  terrible  like  the  falling  of
lightning  from  a  cloud,  so  that  the  other  people  who  were
sojourning  in  Benares,  and  had  come  to  visit  the  shrine  of
the  goddess,  came  up  to  him  and  sympathised  heartily  with
his  sorrow.

In  the  meanwhile  a  great  merchant,  who  had  come  to
worship  the  goddess,  named  Samudradatta,  beheld  Govinda-
svamin in  that  state.  The  good  man  approached  him  and
comforted  him,  and  immediately  took  him  and  his  family
home  to  his  own  house.     And  there  he  provided  him  with  a

races  there  is  a  lingering  suspicion  that  the  sorcerer,  or  person  desiring  to
become  a  sorcerer,  is  a  corpse-eater,  a  ghoul  who  digs  up  the  bodies  of  dead
persons  to  eat  them,  either  from  a  morbid  taste,  or  in  the  belief  that  this
action  will  invest  him  with  magical  powers.  In  Uganda,  as  well  as  in  many
parts  of  Bantu  Africa,  there  is  believed  to  exist  a  secret  society  of  such  ghouls,
who  assemble  at  midnight  for  the  purpose  of  disinterring  and  eating  corpses.
People  cursed  with  this  morbid  taste  are  in  Uganda  called  basezi  (Johnston,
Uganda,  vol.  ii,  pp.  578,  692  et.  seq.).

Stories  similar  to  those  in  the  present  work  are  still  told  in  India  (Panjab
Notes  and  Queries,  vol.  ii,  p.  75  ;  Steel  and  Temple's  Wide-Awake  Stories,  p.  418).
Even  at  the  present  day  the  Odi  magicians  in  Malabar  are  said  to  eat  filth  as
a  means  of  acquiring  power  (Fawcett,  Bulletin  of  the  Madras  Museum,  vol.  iii,
p.  311).

For  further  details  reference  should  be  made  to  Bourke,  Scatalogic  Rites
of  all  Nations,  see  especially  ch.  xliii,  under  "  Witchcraft,"  etc. — n.m.p.

^  I.e.  "skull-cleaver."


200  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

bath  and  other  luxuries,  for  this  is  the  innate  tendency  of  the
great,  to  have  mercy  upon  the  wretched.  Govindasvamin
also  and  his  wife  recovered  their  self-command,  having
heard  ^  the  speech  of  the  great  Saiva  ascetic,  hoping  to  be
reunited  to  their  son.  And  thenceforth  he  lived  in  that  city
of  Benares,  in  the  house  of  that  rich  merchant,  having  been
asked  by  him  to  do  so.  And  there  his  other  son  Aiokadatta
grew  up  to  be  a  young  man,  and  after  studying  the  sciences
learnt  boxing  and  wrestling.  And  gradually  he  attained
such  eminence  in  these  arts  that  he  was  not  surpassed  by
any  champion  on  the  earth.  And  once  on  a  time  there  was
a  great  gathering  of  wrestlers  at  an  idol  procession,  ^  and  a
great  and  famous  wrestler  came  from  the  Deccan.  He  con-
quered all  the  other  wrestlers  of  the  King  of  Benares,  who
was  called  Pratapamukuta,  before  his  eyes.  Then  the  king
had  Aj^okadatta  quickly  summoned  from  the  house  of  that
excellent  merchant,  and  ordered  him  to  contend  with  that
wrestler.  That  wrestler  began  the  combat  by  catching  the
arm  of  Ai^okadatta  with  his  hand,  but  A^okadatta  seized
his  arm  and  hurled  him  to  the  ground.  Then  the  field  of
combat,  as  it  were,  pleased,  applauded  the  victor  with  the
resounding  noise  produced  by  the  fall  of  that  champion
wrestler.  And  the  king  being  gratified,  loaded  A^okadatta
with  jewels,  and  having  seen  his  might,  he  made  him  his
own  personal  attendant.  So  he  became  a  favourite  of  the
king's,  and  in  time  attained  great  prosperity,  for  to  one  who
possesses  heroic  qualities  a  king  who  appreciates  merit  is  a
perfect  treasure-house.

Once  on  a  time  that  king  went  on  the  fourteenth  day
of  the  month  away  from  his  capital,  to  worship  the  god  Siva
in  a  splendid  temple  in  a  distant  town.  After  he  had  paid
The  Call  ^^^  devotions,  he  was  returning  by  night  near
from  ihe  the  Cemetery  when  he  heard  this  utterance  issue

Funeral  Pyre     ^^^    •  ^  .     c.  q   j^^^^   ^j^^    ^j^-^f  magistrate    OUt   of

private  malice  proclaimed  that  I  deserved  death,  and  it  is

^  Perhaps  we  ought  to  read  smritva  for  srutva,  "  remembering,"  "  calling
to  mind."

^  Barnett  {Golden  Town,  p.  \6)  translates  simply  "a  religious  festival."

N.M.P.


THE  IMPALED  MAN  201

now  the  third  day  since  I  was  impaled,  and  even  now  my
life  will  not  leave  my  body,  though  I  am  innocent,  so  I  am
exceedingly  thirsty.  O  King,  order  water  to  be  given  me."
When  the  king  heard  it,  out  of  pity  he  said  to  his  personal
attendant  Asokadatta :  "  Send  that  man  some  water."
Then  Asokadatta  said :  "  Who  would  go  there  at  night  ?
So  I  had  better  go  myself."  Accordingly  he  took  the  water
and  set  off.

After  the  king  had  proceeded  on  his  way  to  his  capital,
the  hero  entered  that  cemetery,  the  interior  of  which  was
difficult  to  penetrate,  as  it  was  filled  with  dense  darkness
within ;  in  it  there  were  awful  evening  oblations  offered
with  the  human  flesh  scattered  about  by  the  jackals  ;  in
places  the  cemetery  was  lighted  up  by  the  flaming  beacons
of  the  blazing  funeral  pyres,  and  in  it  the  Vetalas  made
terrible  music  with  the  clapping  of  their  hands,  so  that  it
seemed  as  if  it  were  the  palace  of  black  night. ^  Then  he
cried  aloud :  "  Who  asked  the  king  for  water  ?  "  And  he
heard  from  one  quarter  an  answer  :  "I  asked  for  it."  Follow-
ing the  voice  he  went  to  a  funeral  pyre  near,  and  beheld  a
man  impaled  on  the  top  of  a  stake,  and  underneath  it  he  saw
a  woman  that  he  had  never  seen  before,  weeping,  adorned
with  beautiful  ornaments,  lovely  in  every  limb  —  like  the
night  adorned  with  the  rays  of  the  moon,  now  that  the  moon
itself  had  set,  its  splendour  having  waned  in  the  dark  fort-
night, come  to  worship  the  funeral  pyre.^  He  asked  the
woman  :  "  Who  are  you,  mother,^  and  why  are  you  standing
weeping  here  ?  "     She  answered  him  :  "I  am  the  ill-fated

^  Barnett  {pp.  cit,  p.  17)  translates  "while  the  tuneless  hand-clapping  of
goblins  rang  out ;  it  was  like  black  Night's  own  palace." — n.m.p.

2  The  passage  is  not  clear.  Speyer  (op.  cit.,  p.  105)  points  out  that  the
difficulty  vanishes  when  we  read  citdrohaya  of  the  D.  text  instead  of  citdrcdya
in  Brockhaus.  The  wife,  who  sits  down  on  the  earth  near  her  impaled  husband,
is  duly  compared  to  a  night  of  the  dark  half  of  the  month,  at  the  time  when
the  moon  has  set;  both,  in  fact,  are  preparing  to  ascend  the  pyre  that  is  to
consume  their  husband — the  woman  after  the  death  of  the  tortured  man,  and
Night  in  the  glow  of  the  approaching  dawn, — n.m.p.

2  As  the  lady  was  young  and  beautiful,  this  mode  of  address  may  seem
strange,  but  it  is  an  assurance  that  the  speaker  has  no  designs  on  the  other's
chastity.  It  corresponds  with  the  Arabic  "  Ya  Ummi !  " — "  O  my  mother  !  "
See  Nights  (Burton,  vol.  viii,  p.  87). — n.m.p.


202  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

wife  of  him  who  is  here  impaled,  and  I  am  waiting  here  with
the  firm  intention  of  ascending  the  funeral  pyre  with  him.
And  I  am  waiting  some  time  for  his  Ufe  to  leave  his  body,
for  though  it  is  the  third  day  of  his  impalement  his  breath
does  not  depart.  And  he  often  asks  for  that  water  which  I
have  brought  here,  but  I  cannot  reach  his  mouth,  my  friend,
as  the  stake  is  high."  When  he  heard  that  speech  of  hers,  the
mighty  hero  said  to  her  :  "  But  here  is  water  in  my  hand  sent
to  him  by  the  king,  so  place  your  foot  on  my  back  and  lift  it
to  his  mouth,  for  the  mere  touching  of  another  man  in  sore  need
does  not  disgrace  a  woman."  When  she  heard  that,  she  con-
sented, and,  taking  the  water,  she  climbed  up  so  as  to  plant  her
two  feet  on  the  back  of  A^okadatta,  who  bent  down  at  the  foot
of  the  stake.  Soon  after,  as  drops  of  blood  unexpectedly  began
to  fall  upon  the  earth  and  on  his  back,  the  hero  lifted  up  his  face
and  looked.  Then  he  saw  that  woman  cutting  off  slice  after
slice  of  that  impaled  man's  flesh  with  a  knife  and  eating  it.^
Then,  perceiving  that  she  was  some  horrible  demon,  ^  he

^  So  in  Laura  Gonzenbach's  Sicilianische  M'drchen,  p.  66',  a  lovely  woman
opens  with  a  knife  the  veins  of  the  sleeping  prince  and  drinks  his  blood.  See
also  Veckenstedt's  Wendische  Sageti,  p.  354.  Ralston  in  his  Russian  Folk-Tales,
p.  17,  compares  this  part  of  the  story  with  a  Russian  story  called  "The  Friend"

(Afanasief,  vi,  No.  66). The  incident  in  our  text  found  its  way  into  the

story  of  "Brave  Seventee  Bai/'  Frere's  Old  Deccan  Days,  pp.  27,  28.  The
best-known  story  of  people  digging  up  corpses  and  eating  them  occurs  in
the  "  History  of  Sidi  Nu'uman,"  Nights  (Burton,  Supp.,  vol.  iii,  pp.  325-336).
A  very  similar  tale  is  current  at  Palena,  in  the  Abruzzi,  and  is  given  in  vol.  iii
of  the  Archivio  per  lo  studio  delle  Tradizioni  Popolari  (Palermo,  1882),  p.  222.
An  important  abstract  was  given  by  E.  Sidney  Hartland  to  W.  S.  Clouston,
who  printed  it  on  pp.  585-586  of  the  same  volume  of  the  Nights  as  given  above.
In  this  case  (as  in  that  of  Sidi  Nu'uman)  the  attention  of  the  husband  is
drawn  to  his  wife's  behaviour  as  she  cannot  eat  anything  when  at  home  and
merely  "  picks  a  few  grains  of  rice  with  a  large  pin."  Her  suspicious  husband
follows  her  one  night  to  the  burial-ground,  where  she  meets  with  certain
female  companions,  who  open  a  grave  and  feast  on  a  newly  buried  corpse.
V^»  hen  on  the  next  day  the  husband  shows  he  is  no  longer  in  ignorance  of
his  wife's  strange  pastime,  he  is  immediately  turned  into  a  dog  by  her  magic.

Other  references  will  be  found  in  Crooke,  Popular  Folk-Lore  of  Northern
India,  vol.  ii,  pp.  l68,  l69:  Chauvin,  op.  cit.,  vii,  p.  199;  and  Macculloch,
The  Childhood  of  Fiction,  ch.  x. — n.m.p.

^  One  is  tempted  to  read  vikritdm  lor  vikfitiin,  but  vikriti  is  translated  by
the  Petersburg  lexicographers  as  Gesperisierscheinung,  Vikritam  would  mean
transformed  into  a  Rakshasl.


THE  JEWELLED  ANKLET  203

dragged  her  down  in  a  rage,  and  took  hold  of  her  foot  with
its  tinkUng  anklets  in  order  to  dash  her  to  pieces  on  the
earth.  She  for  her  part  dragged  away  from  him  that  foot,
and  by  her  deluding  power  quickly  flew  up  into  the  heaven
and  became  invisible.  And  the  jewelled  anklet,  which  had
fallen  from  her  foot  while  she  was  dragging  it  away,  re-
mained in  one  of  Asokadatta's  hands.  Then  he,  reflecting
that  she  had  disappeared  after  showing  herself  mild  at  first,
and  evil-working  in  the  middle,  and  at  the  end  horror-
striking  by  assuming  a  terrible  form,  like  association  with
wicked  men,  and  seeing  that  heavenly  anklet  in  his  hand,
was  astonished,  grieved  and  delighted  at  the  same  time  ;
and  then  he  left  that  cemetery,  taking  the  anklet  with  him,
and  went  to  his  own  house,  and  in  the  morning,  after  bathing,
to  the  palace  of  the  king.

And  when  the  king  said,  "  Did  you  give  the  water  to  the
man  who  was  impaled  ?  "  he  said  he  had  done  so,  and  gave
him  that  anklet ;  and  when  the  king  of  his  own  accord  asked
him  where  it  came  from,  he  told  that  king  his  wonderful
and  terrible  night  adventure.  And  then  the  king,  perceiving
that  his  courage  was  superior  to  that  of  all  men,  though  he
was  before  pleased  with  his  other  excellent  qualities,  was
now  more  exceedingly  delighted  ;  and  he  took  that  anklet
in  his  joy  and  gave  it  with  his  own  hand  to  the  queen,  and
described  to  her  the  way  in  which  he  had  obtained  it.  And
she,  hearing  the  story  and  beholding  that  heavenly- jewelled
anklet,  rejoiced  in  her  heart  and  was  continually  engaged  in
extolling  Asokadatta.  Then  the  king  said  to  her  :  "  Queen,
in  birth,  in  learning,  in  truthfulness  and  beauty  Asoka-
datta is  great  among  the  great ;  and  I  think  it  would  be  a
good  thing  if  he  were  to  become  the  husband  of  our  lovely
daughter  Madanalekha ;  in  a  bridegroom  these  qualities  are
to  be  looked  for,  not  fortune  that  vanishes  in  a  moment,  so  I
will  give  my  daughter  to  this  excellent  hero."

When  she  heard  that  speech  of  her  husband's,  that  queen
approving  the  proposal  said :  "It  is  quite  fitting,  for  the
youth  will  be  an  appropriate  match  for  her,  and  her  heart
has  been  captivated  by  him,  for  she  saw  him  in  a  spring-
garden,  and  for  some  days  her  mind  has  been  in  a  state  of


204  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

vacancy  and  she  neither  hears  nor  sees.  I  heard  of  it  from
her  confidante,  and,  after  spending  an  anxious  night,  towards
morning  1  fell  asleep,  and  I  remember  I  was  thus  addressed
As  k  d  tt  ^^  some  heavenly  woman  in  a  dream  :  '  My  child,
marries  thou  must  not  give  tliis  thy  daughter  Madanalekha

the  Kings  to  anyouc  but  A^okadatta,  for  she  is  his  wife
''"^  ^^  acquired  by  him  in  a  former  birth.'  And  when
I  heard  it  I  woke  up,  and  in  the  morning  I  went  myself  on
the  strength  of  that  dream  and  consoled  my  daughter.  And
now  my  husband  has  of  his  own  accord  proposed  the  marriage
to  me.  Let  her,  therefore,  be  united  to  him,  as  a  spring-
creeper  to  its  stalk."  ^  When  the  king's  beloved  wife  said
this  to  him,  he  was  pleased,  and  he  made  festal  rejoicings,
and  summoning  A^okadatta  gave  that  daughter  to  him.
And  the  union  of  those  two,  the  daughter  of  the  king,
and  the  son  of  the  great  Brahman,  was  such  that  each
enhanced  the  other's  glory,  like  the  union  of  prosperity  and
modesty.

And  once  upon  a  time  the  queen  said  to  the  king,  with
reference  to  the  anklet  brought  by  A^okadatta :  "  My
husband,  this  anklet  by  itself  does  not  look  well,  so  let
another  be  made  like  it."  When  the  king  heard  that,  he
gave  an  order  to  the  goldsmiths  and  other  craftsmen  of  the
kind,  to  make  a  second  anklet  like  that.  But  they,  after
examining  it,  said :  "It  is  impossible,  O  king,  to  make
another  like  it,  for  the  work  is  heavenly,  not  human.  There
are  not  many  jewels  of  this  kind  upon  the  earth,  so  let  another
be  sought  for  where  this  was  obtained."  When  the  king  and
the  queen  heard  this,  they  were  despondent,  and  A^okadatta,
who  was  there,  on  seeing  that,  immediately  said :  "  I  myself
will  bring  you  a  fellow  to  that  anklet."  And  having  made
this  promise  he  could  not  give  up  the  project  on  which  he
was  resolved,  although  the  king,  terrified  at  his  temerity,
endeavoured  to  dissuade  him  out  of  affection.

And  taking  the  anklet  he  went  again  on  the  fourteenth

^  Indian  rhetoric  always  compares  the  union  of  husband  and  wife  to  the
creeper  clinging  to  a  tree.  This  is,  moreover,  found  in  the  D.  text,  which
reads  vrkshenevariavl  lata.  See  Speyer,  op.  cil.,  p.  10.5.  Barnett  {Golden  Toton,
p.  18)  translates  "as  a  climbing  plant  of  spring  with  its  tree." — n.m.p.


HUMAN  FLESH  FOR  SALE  !  205

night  of  the  black  fortnight  to  the  cemetery  where  he  had
first  obtained  it ;  and  after  he  had  entered  that  cemetery
which  was  full  of  Rakshasas  as  it  was  of  trees,  besmirched
with  the  copious  smoke  of  the  funeral  pyres,  and  with  men
hanging  from  their  trunks  ^  which  were  weighed  down  and
surrounded  with  nooses,  he  did  not  at  first  see  that  woman
that  he  had  seen  before,  but  he  thought  of  an  admirable
device  for  obtaining  that  bracelet,  which  was  nothing  else
than  the  selling  of  human  flesh.  ^  So  he  pulled  down  a  corpse
from  the  noose  by  which  it  was  suspended  on  the  tree,  and
he  wandered  about  in  the  cemetery,  crying  aloud :  "  Human
flesh  for  sale,  buy,  buy  !  "  ^  And  immediately  a  woman
called  to  him  from  a  distance,  saying :  "  Courageous  man,
bring  the  human  flesh  and  come  along  with  me."  When
he  heard  that,  he  advanced,  following  that  woman,  and
beheld  at  no  great  distance  under  a  tree  a  lady  of  heavenly
appearance,  surrounded  with  women,  sitting  on  a  throne,
glittering  with  jewelled  ornaments,  whom  he  would  never
have  expected  to  find  in  such  a  place,  any  more  than  to  find
a  lotus  in  a  desert.

And  having  been  led  up  by  that  woman,  he  approached
the  lady  seated  as  has  been  described,  and  said :  "  Here  I
am ;  I  sell  human  flesh :  buy,  buy  !  "  And  then  the  lady  of
He  obtains  hcavculy  appearance  said  to  him :  "  Courageous
the  second  hcro,  foT  what  pricc  will  you  sell  the  flesh  ?  "
Anhlet  Then   the    hero,    the    corpse    hanging    over   his

shoulder  and  back,  said  to  her,  showing  her  at  the  same  time
that  single  jewelled  anklet  which  was  in  his  hand  i  "  I  will
give  this  flesh  to  whoever  will  give  me  a  second  anklet  like
this  one  ;  if  you  have  got  a  second  like  it,  take  the  flesh."
When  she  heard  that,  she  said  to  him  :  "I  have  a  second  like
it,  for  this  very  single  anklet  was  taken  by  you  from  me.  I
am  that  very  woman  who  was  seen  by  you  near  the  impaled
man,  but  you  do  not  recognise   me  now,  because    I  have

^  Skandha  when  applied  to  the  Rakshasas  means  "  shoulder."

^  Literally, "  great  flesh."    "  Great  "  seems  to  give  the  idea  of  unlawfulness,

as  in  the  Greek  //.cya  cpyov.

3  This  resembles  the  Tantric  rite  described  in  the  Mdlatl  Mddhava.     See

note  at  the  end  of  this  chapter. — n.m.p.


206  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

assumed  another  shape.  So  what  is  the  use  of  flesh  ?  If
you  do  what  I  tell  you,  I  will  give  you  my  second  anklet,
which  matches  the  one  in  your  hand."  When  she  said  this
to  the  hero,  he  consented,  and  said ;  "  I  will  immediately  do
whatever  you  say."

Then  she  told  him  her  whole  desire  from  the  beginning  :
"  There  is,  good  sir,  a  city  named  Trighanta  on  a  peak  of
the  Himalayas.  In  it  there  lived  a  heroic  prince  of  the  Rak-
shasas  named  Lambajihva.  I  am  his  wife,  Vidyuchchhikha
by  name,  and  I  can  change  my  form  at  will.  And  as  fate
would  have  it,  that  husband  of  mine,  after  the  birth  of  my
daughter,  was  slain  in  battle  fighting  in  front  of  the  King
Kapalasphota  ;  then  that  king  being  pleased  gave  me  his
own  city,  and  I  have  lived  with  my  daughter  in  great  comfort
on  its  proceeds  up  to  the  present  time.  And  that  daughter
of  mine  has  by  this  time  grown  up  to  fresh  womanhood,  and
I  have  great  anxiety  in  my  mind  as  to  how  to  obtain  for  her
a  brave  husband.  Then  being  here  on  the  fourteenth  night
of  the  lunar  fortnight,  and  seeing  you  coming  along  this  way
with  the  king,  I  thought :  '  This  good-looking  youth  is  a  hero
and  a  fit  match  for  my  daughter,  so  why  should  I  not  devise
some  stratagem  for  obtaining  him  ?  '  Thus  I  determined,
and  imitating  the  voice  of  an  impaled  person,  I  asked  for
water,  and  brought  you  into  the  middle  of  that  cemetery
by  a  trick.  And  there  I  exhibited  my  delusive  power  in
assuming  a  false  shape  and  other  characteristics,  and,  saying
what  was  false,  I  imposed  upon  you  there,  though  only  for
a  moment.  And  I  artfully  left  one  of  my  anklets  there  to
attract  you  again,  like  a  binding  chain  to  draw  you,  and  then
I  came  away.  And  to-day  I  have  obtained  you  by  that
very  expedient ;  so  come  to  my  house,  marry  my  daughter
and  receive  the  other  anklet."

When  the  Rakshasi  said  this  to  him,  the  hero  consented,
and  by  means  of  her  magic  power  he  went  with  her  through
the  air  to  her  city.  And  he  saw  that  city  built  of  gold  on  a
peak  of  the  Himalayas,  like  the  orb  of  the  sun  fixed  in  one
spot,  being  weary  with  the  toil  of  wandering  through  the
heavens.  There  he  married  that  daughter  of  the  Prince  of
the  Rakshasas,  by  name  Vidyutprabha,  like  the  success  of  his


THE  UNEXPECTED  ARRIVAL  207

own  daring  incarnate  in  bodily  form.  And  Asokadatta  dwelt
with  that  loved  one  some  time  in  that  city,  enjoying  great
comfort  by  means  of  his  mother-in-law's  wealth.  Then  he
said  to  his  mother-in-law  i  "  Give  me  that  anklet,  for  I  must
now  go  to  the  city  of  Benares,  for  I  myself  long  ago  promised
the  king  that  I  would  bring  a  second  anklet,  that  would  vie
with  the  first  one  so  distinguished  for  its  unparalleled  beauty."
The  mother-in-law  gave  him  that  second  anklet  of  hers  and
in  addition  a  golden  lotus.^

Then  he  left  that  city  with  the  anklet  and  the  lotus,
after  promising  to  return,  and  his  mother-in-law  by  the
power  of  her  magic  knowledge  carried  him  once  more
And  returns  through  the  air  to  the  cemetery.  And  then  she
safeli/  to  stopped  under  the  tree  and  said  to  him :  "I  always

the  Palace  comc  here  on  the  fourteenth  night  of  the  black
fortnight,  and  whenever  you  come  here  on  that  ^  night
you  will  find  me  here  under  the  banyan-tree."  When
Asokadatta  heard  this,  he  agreed  to  come  there  on  that
night,  and  took  leave  of  that  Rakshasi,  and  went  first  to
his  father's  house.  And  just  as  he  was  gladdening  by  his
unexpected  arrival  his  parents,  who  were  grieved  by  such  an
absence  of  his,  which  doubled  their  grief  for  their  separation
from  their  younger  son,  the  king,  his  father-in-law,  who  had
heard  of  his  arrival,  came  in.  The  king  indulged  in  a  long
outburst  of  joy,  embracing  him  who  bent  before  him,  with
limbs  the  hairs  of  which  stood  on  end  like  thorns,  as  if  terrified
at  touching  one  so  daring.^

Then  Asokadatta  entered  with  him  the  palace  of  the
king,  like  joy  incarnate  in  bodily  form ;  and  he  gave  to  the
king  those  two  anklets  matched  together,  which  so  to  speak
praised  his  valour  with  their  tinkling;  and  he  bestowed  on
that  king  the  beautiful  golden  lotus,  as  it  were  the  lotus
with  which  the  presiding  Fortune  of  the  Rakshasas'  treasure
plays,  torn  from  her  hand.  Then  being  questioned  out  of
curiosity  by  the  king  and  queen  he  told  the  story  of  his

^  Cf.  the  golden  rose  in  Gaal,  Mdrchen  der  Magyaren,  p.  44.
2  Reading  tasyan  for  tasvidn.

^  Somadeva  no  doubt  means  that  the  hairs  on  the  king's  body  stood  on
end  with  joy. See  Vol.  I,  p.  120w\ — n.m.p.


208  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

exploits,  which  poured  nectar  into  their  ears.  The  king  then
exclaimed :  "  Is  glittering  glory,  which  astonishes  the  mind
by  the  description  of  wonderful  exploits,  ever  obtained
without  a  man's  bringing  himself  to  display  boldness  ?  "
Thus  the  king  spoke  on  that  occasion,  and  he  and  the
queen,  who  had  obtained  the  pair  of  anklets,  considered  their
object  in  life  attained,  now  that  they  had  such  a  son-in-law.
And  then  that  palace,  resounding  with  festal  instruments,
appeared  as  if  it  were  chanting  the  virtues  of  A^okadatta.

And  on  the  next  day  the  king  dedicated  the  golden  lotus
in  a  temple  made  by  himself,  placing  it  upon  a  beautiful
silver  vessel ;  and  the  two  together,  the  vessel  and  the  lotus,
gleamed  white  and  red  like  the  glory  of  the  king  and  the
might  ^  of  A^okadatta.  And  beholding  them  thus,  the  king,
a  devout  worshipper  of  Siva,  with  eyes  expanded  with  joy,
spoke  inspired  with  the  rapture  of  adoration :  "  Ah  !  this
lofty  vessel  appears,  with  this  lotus  upon  it,  like  Siva  white
with  ashes,  with  his  auburn  matted  locks.  If  I  had  a  second
golden  lotus  like  it  I  would  place  it  in  this  second  silver
vessel."  When  A^okadatta  heard  this  speech  of  the  king's,
he  said:  "I,  King,  will  bring  you  a  second  golden  lotus."
When  the  king  heard  that,  he  answered  him :  "I  have  no
need  of  another  lotus ;  a  truce  to  your  temerity  !  "

Then  as  days  went  on,  Ai^okadatta  being  desirous  of
bringing  a  golden  lotus,  the  fourteenth  day  of  the  black
fortnight  returned ;  and  that  evening  the  sun,  the  golden
lotus  of  the  sky-lake,  went  to  the  mountain  of  setting,  as  if
out  of  fear,  knowing  his  desire  for  a  golden  lotus  ;  and  when
the  shades  of  night,  brown  as  smoke,  began  immediately  to
spread  everywhere  like  Rakshasas,  proud  of  having  swallowed
the  red  clouds  of  evening  as  if  they  were  raw  flesh,  and  the
mouth  of  night  like  that  of  an  awful  goblin  began  to  yawn,
shining  and  terrible  as  tamdla,  full  of  flickering  flames,'*
A^okadatta  of  his  own  accord  left  the  palace  where  the
princess  was  asleep,  and  again  went  to  that  cemetery.
There  he  beheld  at  the  foot  of  that  banyan-tree  his  mother-

^  According  to  the  canons  of  Hindu  rhetoric  glory  is  always  white.
2  Night  is  com{)ared  to  a  female  goblin  (Rakshasi).     These  creatures  have
fiery  mouths.


r


THE  LAKE  OF  GOLDEN  LOTUSES  209


in-law  the  Rakshasi,  who  had  again  come,  and  who  received
him  with  a  courteous  welcome;  and  with  her  the  youth
went  again  to  her  home,  the  peak  of  the  Himalayas,  where
his  wife  was  anxiously  awaiting  him.  And  after  he  had
remained  some  time  with  his  wife  he  said  to  his  mother-
in-law  :  "  Give  me  a  second  golden  lotus  from  somewhere  or
other."  When  she  heard  that,  she  said  to  him :  "  Whence
can  I  procure  another  golden  lotus  ?  But  there  is  a  lake
here  belonging  to  our  King  Kapalasphota,  where  golden
lotuses  of  this  kind  grow  on  all  sides.  From  that  lake  he
gave  that  one  lotus  to  my  husband  as  a  token  of  affection."
When  she  said  this,  he  answered  her  :  "  Then  take  me  to
that  lake  in  order  that  I  may  myself  take  a  golden  lotus  from
it."  She  then  attempted  to  dissuade  him,  saying :  "  It  is
impossible  ;  for  the  lake  is  guarded  by  terrible  Rakshasas  "  ;
but  nevertheless  he  would  not  desist  from  his  importunity.
Then  at  last  his  mother-in-law  was  with  much  difficulty
induced  to  take  him  there,  and  he  beheld  from  afar  that
heavenly  lake  on  the  plateau  of  a  lofty  mountain,  covered
with  dense  and  tall-stalked  lotuses  of  gleaming  gold,  as  if
from  continually  facing  the  sun's  rays  they  had  drunk  them
in,  and  so  become  interpenetrated  with  them.

So  he  went  there  and  began  to  gather  the  lotuses ;  and
while  he  was  thus  engaged  the  terrible  Rakshasas  who
guarded  it  endeavoured  to  prevent  him  from  doing  so.
Asokadatta  -^^^  being  armed  he  killed  some  of  them,  but
meets  his  the  others  fled  and  told  their  King  Kapalas-
Brother  phota,i  and  when  that  King  of  the  Rakshasas

heard  of  it  he  was  enraged,  and  came  there  himself,  and  saw
Ai^okadatta  with  the  lotuses  he  had  carried  off.  And  in  his
astonishment  he  exclaimed  as  he  recognised  his  brother :
"  What !  is  this  my  brother  Asokadatta  come  here  ?  "  Then
he  flung  away  his  weapon,  and,  with  his  eyes  washed  with
tears  of  joy,  he  quickly  ran  and  fell  at  his  feet,  and  said
to  him :  "I  am  Vijayadatta,  your  younger  brother ;  we  are
both  the  sons  of  that  excellent  Brahman  Govindasvamin.
And  by  the  appointment  of  destiny  I  became  a  Rakshasa
such  as  you  see,  and  have  continued  such  for  this  long  time ;

^  Cf.  Sicilianiscke  MdrcheUj  collected  by  Laura  Gonzenbach,  vol.  i,  p.  l60,
VOL.  II.  0


210  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

and  I  am  called  Kapalasphota  from  my  cleaving  the  skull
on  the  funeral  pyre.  But  now  from  seeing  you  I  have  re-
membered my  former  Brahman  nature,  and  that  Rakshasa
nature  of  mine,  that  clouded  my  mind  with  delusion,  has
left  me."  When  Vijayadatta  said  this,  A^okadatta  embraced
him,  and,  so  to  speak,  washed  with  copious  tears  of  joy  his
body  defiled  by  the  Rakshasa  nature.  And  while  he  was
thus  engaged  there  descended  from  heaven  by  divine  com-
mand the  spiritual  guide  of  the  Vidyadharas,  named  Kau^ika.
And  he,  approaching  these  two  brothers,  said  :  "  You  and
your  family  are  all  Vidyadharas,  who  have  been  reduced  to
this  state  by  a  curse,  and  now  the  curse  of  all  of  you  has
terminated.  So  receive  these  sciences,  which  belong  to  you,
and  which  you  must  share  with  your  relations.  And  return
to  your  own  proper  dwelling,  taking  with  you  your  relations."
Having  said  this,  the  spiritual  guide,  after  bestowing  the
sciences  on  them,  ascended  to  heaven.

And  they,  having  become  Vidyadharas,  awoke  from  their
long  dream  and  went  through  the  air  to  that  peak  of  the
Himalayas,  taking  with  them  the  golden  lotuses ;  and  there
A^okadatta  repaired  to  his  wife,  the  daughter  of  the  King
of  the  Rakshasas,  and  then  her  curse  came  to  an  end  and
she  became  a  Vidyadhari.  And  those  two  brothers  went  in
a  moment  with  that  fair-eyed  one  to  Benares,  travelling
through  the  air.  And  there  they  visited  their  parents,  who
were  scorched  with  the  fire  of  separation,  and  refreshed
them  by  pouring  upon  them  the  revivifying  nectar  of  their
own  appearance.  And  those  two,  who,  without  changing  the
body,  had  gone  through  such  wonderful  transformations,
produced  joy  not  only  in  their  parents,  but  in  the  people
at  large.  And  when  Vijayadatta's  father,  after  so  long  a
separation,  folded  him  in  a  close  embrace,  he  filled  not  only
his  arms,  but  also  his  desire.

Then  the  King  Pratapamukuta,  the  father-in-law  of
A^okadatta,  hearing  of  it,  came  there  in  high  delight;  and
A^okadatta,  being  kindly  received  by  the  king,  entered  with
his  relations  the  king's  palace,  in  which  his  beloved  was
anxiously  awaiting  him,  and  which  was  in  a  state  of  festal
rejoicing.     And  he  gave  many  golden  lotuses  to  that  king,


VIDYADHARAS  CURSED  TO  MORTAL  BIRTH    211

and  the  king  was  delighted  at  getting  more  than  he  had
asked  for.  Then  Vijayadatta's  father  Govindasvamin,  full
of  wonder  and  curiosity,  said  to  him  in  the  presence  of  all :
"  Tell  me,  my  son,  what  sort  of  adventures  you  had  after  you
had  become  a  Rakshasa  in  the  cemetery  during  the  night."

Then  Vijayadatta  said  to  him  :  "  My  father,  when  in
my  reckless  frivolity  I  had  cloven  the  burning  skull  on  the
funeral  pyre,  as  fate  would  have  it,  I  immediately,  as  you
Vijayadatta  ^^^>  became  a  Rakshasa  by  its  brains  having
relates  his  entered  my  mouth,  being  bewildered  with  delu-
Adventures  ^{qyi.  Then  I  was  Summoned  by  the  other  Rak-
shasas,  who  gave  me  the  name  of  Kapalasphota,  and  I  joined
them.  And  then  I  was  led  by  them  to  their  sovereign,
the  King  of  the  Rakshasas,  and  he,  when  he  saw  me,  was
pleased  with  me  and  appointed  me  commander-in-chief.
And  once  on  a  time  that  King  of  the  Rakshasas  went,  in  his
infatuation,  to  attack  the  Gandharvas,  and  was  there  slain  in
battle  by  his  foes.  And  then  his  subjects  accepted  my  rule,
so  I  dwelt  in  his  city  and  ruled  those  Rakshasas ;  and  while
I  was  there  I  suddenly  beheld  that  elder  brother  of  mine,
Asokadatta,  who  had  come  for  golden  lotuses,  and  the  sight
of  him  put  a  stop  to  that  Rakshasa  nature  in  me.  What
follows,  how  we  were  released  from  the  power  of  the  curse,
and  thereby  recovered  our  sciences,^  all  this  my  elder  brother
will  relate  to  you."

When  Vijayadatta  had  told  this  story,  Asokadatta  began
to  tell  his  from  the  beginning  :  "  Long  ago  we  were  Vidya-
dharas,  and  from  the  heaven  we  beheld  the  daughters  of
the  hermits  bathing  in  the  Ganges  near  the  hermitage  of
Galava,^  and  then  we  fell  suddenly  in  love  with  them,  and
they  returned  our  affection ;  all  this  took  place  in  secret,
but  their  relations,  who  possessed  heavenly  insight,  found
it  out  and  cursed  us  in  their  anger  :  '  May  you  two  wicked
ones  be  born  both  of  you  to  a  mortal  woman,  and  then
you  shall  be  separated  in  a  marvellous  manner,  but  when  the
second  of  you  shall  behold  the  first  arrived  in  a  distant  land,

^  Magical  sciences,  in  virtue  of  which  they  were  Vidyadharas  or  science-
holders.

2  A  son  or  pupil  of  Visvamitra.


212  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

inaccessible  to  man,  and  shall  recognise  him,  then  you  shall
have  your  magic  knowledge  restored  to  you  by  the  spiritual
preceptor  of  the  Vidyadharas,  and  you  shall  again  become
Vidyadharas,  released  from  the  curse  and  reunited  to  your
friends.'  Having  been  cursed  in  this  way  by  those  hermits,
we  were  both  bom  here  in  this  land,  and  you  know  the  whole
story  of  our  separation ;  and  now  by  going  to  the  city  of  the
King  of  the  Rakshasas,  by  virtue  of  my  mother-in-law's
magic  power,  to  fetch  the  golden  lotuses  I  have  found  this
younger  brother  of  mine.  And  in  that  very  place  we  ob-
tained the  sciences  ^  from  our  preceptor  Prajnaptikau^ika,
and  suddenly  becoming  Vidyadharas  we  have  quickly  arrived
here."  Thus  Asokadatta  spoke,  and  then  that  hero  of  vari-
ous adventures,  delighted  at  having  escaped  the  darkness
of  the  curse,  bestowed  on  his  parents  and  his  beloved,  the
daughter  of  the  king,  his  wonderful  sciences  of  many  kinds,
so  that  their  minds  were  suddenly  awakened  and  they  became
Vidyadharas.

Then  the  happy  hero  took  leave  of  the  king,  and  with  his
brother,  his  parents  and  his  two  wives  flew  up  and  quickly
reached  through  the  air  the  palace  of  his  emperor.  There  he
beheld  him,  and  received  his  orders,  and  so  did  his  brother,
and  he  bore  henceforth  the  name  of  Ai^okavega,  and  his
brother  of  Vijayavega.  And  both  the  brothers,  having  be-
come noble  Vidyadhara  youths,  went,  accompanied  by  their
relations,  to  the  splendid  mountain  named  Govindakuta,
which  now  became  their  home.  And  Pratapamukuta,  the
King  of  Benares,  overpowered  by  wonder,  placed  one  of  the

^  Prajnapti,  "foreknowledge,"  is  one  of  the  many  "sciences"  controlled
by  Vidyadharas,  or  "holders  of  magic  science."

She  (for  the  science  is  feminine)  occurs  again  at  the  beginning  of
Chapter  XXX;  in  the  "Story  of  Alankaravatl,"  Chapter  LI;  and  in  the
"Story  of  the  Silent  Couple,"  Chapter  CXI.  In  Chapter  XLV  the  art  is
said  to  be  founded  on  Sankhya  and  Yoga  and  is  described  as  "  the  famous
supernatural  power,  and  the  independence  of  knowledge,  the  dominion  over
matter  that  is  characterised  by  lightness  and  other  mystic  properties."

Various  other  sciences  besides  Prajnapti  occur  in  this  work,  thus  in
Chapter  XLVI  the  science  called  Mohani,  "bewitching,"  appears,  and  in
Chapter  CVII  it  is  Gaurl,  "with  three  eyes,  armed  with  a  trident,"  who
paralysed  the  chief  heroes  of  Naravahanadatta's  army.  See  Bloomfield^
Proc.  Amer.  Phil.  Soc,  vol.  Ivi,  1917,  pp.  1-6. — n.m.p.


THE  CHANCES  OF  SUCCESS  213

golden  lotuses  in  the  second  vessel  in  his  temple,  and  offered
to  Siva  the  other  golden  lotuses  presented  by  Ai^okadatta,
and,  delighted  with  the  honour  of  his  connection,  considered
his  family  highly  fortunate.


29.  Story  of  the  Golden  City

"  Thus  divine  persons  become  incarnate  for  some  reason,
and  are  born  in  this  world  of  men,  and  possessing  their
native  virtue  and  courage,  attain  successes  which  it  is  hard
to  win.  So  I  am  persuaded  that  you,  O  sea  of  courage,  are
some  portion  of  a  divinity,  and  will  attain  success  as  you
desire  ;  daring  in  achievements  hard  to  accomplish  even  by
the  great,  generally  indicates  a  surpassingly  excellent  nature.
Moreover,  the  Princess  Kanakarekha,  whom  you  love,  must
surely  be  a  heavenly  being,  otherwise  being  a  mere  child  how
could  she  desire  a  husband  that  has  seen  the  Golden  City  ?  "
Having  heard  in  secret  this  long  and  interesting  story  from
Vishnudatta,  Saktideva,  desiring  in  his  heart  to  behold  the
Golden  City,  and  supporting  himself  with  resolute  patience,
managed  to  get  through  the  night.


214  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


NOTE  ON  TANTRIC  RITES  IN  THE  MALATi  MADHAVA

Bhavabhuti,  the  great  romantic  dramatist  of  India,  who  flourished  towards
the  end  of  the  seventh  century,  has  three  plays  attributed  to  him — the  Mdlati
Madhava,  the  Maha  Vtra  Charita,  and  the  Uttara  llama  Charita.

It  is  in  the  first  of  these  that  we  have  such  insight  into  the  esoteric  rites
of  Hinduism.  The  Tantric  practices  pictured  here  are  so  vivid  and  detailed
that  imagination  must  have  been  aided  by  a  knowledge  of  actual  fact.  The
goddess  whose  worship  figures  so  largely  in  the  play  is  Chamunda,  a  form  of
Durga.  Among  the  rites  of  the  high  priest  is  the  sacrifice  of  a  human  virgin,
and  by  means  of  sorcery  Mfilatl  is  led  to  the  dread  temple  of  the  goddess.

The  hero  Madhava  has  decided,  like  Faust,  to  call  the  powers  of  evil
to  his  aid  in  his  winning  of  Malati.  Accordingly  he  prepares  for  the  necessary
Tantric  rites  by  procuring  human  flesh  as  an  offering — flesh  which  had  been
obtained  not  by  the  common  method  of  cutting  it  from  a  man  slain  in  battle,
but,  we  are  led  to  suppose,  by  more  grim  and  sanguinary  means.  Chance
takes  Madhava,  with  his  offering  of  flesh,  to  the  very  temple  where,  little  as
he  knows  it,  his  beloved  is  bound  and  about  to  be  offered  up  as  a  sacrifice  to
Chamunda.

The  temple  is  situated  in  a  burning-ground  and  as  Madhava  approaches
the  terrors  of  the  place  begin  to  have  their  effect  on  him.  On  hearing  a
noise  behind  he  speaks  as  follows  (the  extracts  given  here  are  taken  from
Act  V  of  the  play,  as  translated  by  H.  H.  Wilson;  see  his  Theatre  of  the
Hindus  J  vol.  ii,  1827)  : —

"  Now  wake  the  terrors  of  the  place,  beset
With  crowding  and  malignant  fiends  ;  the  flames
From  funeral  pyres  scarce  lend  their  sullen  light.
Clogged  with  their  fleshly  prey,  to  dissipate
The  fearful  gloom  that  hems  them  round.     Pale  ghosts
Sport  with  foul  goblins,  and  their  dissonant  mirth
In  shrill  respondent  shrieks  is  echoed  round.
Well,  be  it  so.     I  seek,  and  must  address  them.
Demons  of  ill,  and  disembodied  spirits,
Who  haunt  this  spot,  I  bring  you  flesh  for  sale.
The  flesh  of  man  untouched  by  trenchant  steel.
And  worthy  your  acceptance.     (-4  great  noise.)
How,  the  noise

High,  shrill,  and  indistinct,  of  chattering  sprites
Communicative  fills  the  charnel  ground.
Strange  forms  like  foxes  flit  along  the  sky ;
From  the  red  hair  of  their  lank  bodies  darts
The  meteor  blaze  ;  or  from  their  mouths  that  stretch
From  ear  to  ear  thickset  with  numerous  fangs.
Or  eyes  or  beards  or  brows,  the  radiance  streams.


TANTRIC  RITES  IN  THE  MALATI  MADHAVA     215

And  now  I  see  the  goblin  host :  each  stalks,
On  legs  like  palm-trees,  a  gaunt  skeleton.
Whose  fleshless  bones  are  bound  by  starting  sinews.
And  scantly  cased  in  black  and  shrivelled  skin :
Like  tall  and  withered  trees  by  lightning  scathed
They  move,  and  as  amidst  their  sapless  trunks
The  mighty  serpent  curls — so  in  each  mouth
Wide-yawning  rolls  the  vast  blood-dripping  tongue.
They  mark  my  coming,  and  the  half-chewed  morsel
Falls  to  the  howling  wolf — and  now  they  fly.

(^Pauses  and  looks  round. ^
Race — dastardly  as  hideous — all  is  plunged
In  utter  gloom.     (^Considering.)     The  river  flows  before  me.
The  boundary  of  the  funeral  ground,  that  winds
Through  mouldering  bones  its  interrupted  way.
Wild  raves  the  torrent  as  it  rushes  past.
And  rends  its  crumbling  bank ;  the  wailing  Owl
Hoots  through  its  skirting  groves,  and  to  the  sounds
The  loud-moaning  Jackal  yells  reply."

Suddenly  Madhava  hears  a  voice  and  rushes  off  alarmed.

Meanwhile  the  priest  and  priestess  in  the  temple  have  dressed  the  luck-
less Malati  as  a  victim  and  a  ritual  dance  is  being  performed  round  her  as  she
lies  bound  and  terrified.     The  priest  begins  his  incantations  thus  :

•'  Hail — hail — Chamunda,  mighty  goddess,  hail !
I  glorify  thy  sport,  when  in  the  dance.
That  fills  the  court  of  Siva  with  delight.
Thy  foot  descending  spurns  the  earthly  Globe.
Beneath  the  weight  the  broad-backed  tortoise  reels ;
The  egg  of  Brahma  trembles  at  the  shock ;
And  in  a  yawning  chasm,  that  gapes  like  hell.
The  sevenfold  main  tumultuously  rushes.

The  elephant  hide  that  robes  thee,  to  thy  steps
Swings  to  and  fro — the  whirling  talons  rend
The  crescent  on  thy  brow — from  the  torn  orb
The  trickling  nectar  falls,  and  every  skull
That  gems  thy  necklace  laughs  with  horrid  life —
Attendant  spirits  tremble  and  applaud.
The  mountain  falls  before  thy  powerful  arms.
Around  whose  length  the  sable  serpents  twine
Their  swelling  forms,  and  knit  terrific  bands.
Whilst  from  the  hood  expanded  frequent  flash
Envenomed  flames —

As  rolls  thy  awful  head,

The  lowering  eye  that  glows  amidst  thy  brow


216  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

A  fiery  circle  designates,  that  wraps

The  spheres  within  its  terrible  circumference :

Whilst  by  the  banner  on  thy  dreadful  staff,

High  waved,  the  stars  are  scattered  from  their  orbits.

The  three-eyed  God  exults  in  the  embrace

Of  his  fair  Spouse,  as  Gaurl  sinks  appalled

By  the  distracting  cries  of  countless  fiends.

Who  shout  thy  praise.     Oh,  may  such  dance  afford

Whate'er  we  need — whate'er  may  yield  us  happiness."

W^hile  this  is  proceeding  Madhava  enters  unseen  and  slaying  the  priest
releases  Malatl.

There  are  many  other  striking  episodes  in  the  play,  but  the  above  is
sufficient  to  show  the  Tan  trie  basis  of  the  scene  described  in  pp.  198,  199  and
205  of  this  volume. — n.m.p.


CHAPTER  XXVI

29.  Story  of  the  Golden  City

THE  next  morning,  while  Saktideva  was  dwelling  in  the
monastery,  in  the  island  of  Utsthala,  Satyavrata,  the
king  of  the  fishermen,  came  to  him  and  said  to  him
in  accordance  with  the  promise  which  he  had  made  before  :
"  Brahman,  I  have  thought  of  a  device  for  accomplishing
your  wish.  There  is  a  fair  isle  in  the  middle  of  the  sea  named
Ratnakuta,  and  in  it  there  is  a  temple  of  the  adorable  Vishnu
founded  by  the  Ocean,  and  on  the  twelfth  day  of  the  white
fortnight  of  Ashadha  there  is  a  festival  there,  with  a  procession,
and  people  come  there  diligently  from  all  the  islands  to  offer
worship.  It  is  possible  that  someone  there  might  know  about
the  Golden  City,  so  come  let  us  go  there,  for  that  day  is  near."
When  Satyavrata  made  this  proposal,  Saktideva  con-
sented gladly,  and  took  with  him  the  provisions  for  the
journey  furnished  by  Vishnudatta.  Then  he  went  on  board
the  ship  brought  by  Satyavrata,  and  quickly  set  out  with  him
on  the  ocean-path ;  and  as  he  was  going  with  Satyavrata  on
the  home  of  marvels  ^  in  which  the  monsters  resembled  islands,
he  asked  the  king,  who  was  steering  the  ship  :  "  What  is
this-  enormous  object  which  is  seen  in  the  sea  far  off  in  this
direction,  looking  like  a  huge  mountain  equipped  with  wings
rising  at  will  out  of  the  sea  ?  "  Then  Satyavrata  said  :
"  Brahman,  this  is  a  banyan-tree  ^ ;  underneath  it  they  say
that  there  is  a  gigantic  whirlpool,  the  mouth  of  the  submarine
fire.  And  we  must  take  care  in  passing  this  way  to  avoid  that
spot,  for  those  who  once  enter  that  whirlpool  never  return
again."  While  Satyavrata  was  thus  speaking,  the  ship  began
to  be  carried  in  that  very  direction  by  the  force  of  the  wind.^

^  I.e.  the  Ocean.

2  Cf.  the  €pueos  fJieyas  <f>vXXoi(Ti  Ti9rjXu)<i  in  the  Odyssey,  Book  XII,  103.

3  The  metre  of  this  line  is  incorrect.     There  is  a  superfluous  syllable.

Perhaps  we  ought  to  read   ambuvegatah,  "by  the  current." The  D.  text

shows  Tawney's  guess  was  quite  correct. — n.m.p.

217


218  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

When  Satyavrata  saw  this  he  again  said  to  Saktideva  :
"  Brahman,  it  is  clear  that  the  time  of  our  destruction  has
now  arrived,  for  see,  this  ship  suddenly  drifts^  in  that
direction.  And  now  I  cannot  anyhow  prevent  it,  so  we  are
certain  to  be  cast  into  that  deep  whirlpool,  as  into  the
mouth  of  death,  by  the  sea  which  draws  us  on  as  if  it  were
mighty  Fate,  the  result  of  our  deeds.  And  it  grieves  me  not
for  myself;  for  whose  body  is  continuing?  But  it  grieves
me  to  think  that  your  desire  has  not  been  accomplished  in
spite  of  all  your  toils,  so  while  I  keep  back  this  ship  for  a
moment  quickly  climb  on  to  the  boughs  of  this  banyan-tree ;
perhaps  some  expedient  may  present  itself  for  saving  the
life  of  one  of  such  noble  form;  for  who  can  calculate  the
caprices  of  Fate  or  the  waves  of  the  sea  ?  "

While  the  heroic  Satyavrata  was  saying  this  the  ship  drew
near  the  tree  ;  at  that  moment  Saktideva  made  a  leap  in  his
terror  ^  and  caught  a  broad  branch  of  that  marine  banyan-
tree,^  but  Satyavrata 's  body  and  ship,  which  he  offered  for
another,  were  swept  down  into  the  whirlpool,  and  he  entered
the  mouth  of  the  submarine  fire.  But  Saktideva,  though  he
had  escaped  to  the  bough  of  that  tree,  which  filled  the  regions
with  its  branches,  was  full  of  despair,  and  reflected :  "I
have  not  beheld  that  Golden  City,  and  I  am  perishing  in
an  uninhabited  place ;  moreover,  I  have  also  brought  about
the  death  of  that  king  of  the  fishermen.  Or,  rather,  who  can
resist  the  awful  Goddess  of  Destiny,  that  ever  places  her  foot
upon  the  heads  of  all  men  ?  "  *  While  the  Brahman  youth
was  thus  revolving  thoughts  suited  to  the  occasion  on  the

^  I  think  we  ought  to  read  adhah,  "downwards."

^  Brockhaus  does  injustice  to  Saktideva,  who  was  no  coward  in  the  greatest
dangers.     The  D.  text  reads  visadhvasah,  "fearless,"  instead  of  'tha  sddhvascU.

— N.M.P.

^  Cf.  Odyssei/,  xii,  432  :

avrap  lyu)  irorl  fAaKphv  ipivthv  vxj/ofT*  aipdtis

TW   ■7rpoa-<f>VS  €)(OfX1]V  (U9  VVKXipU,

Similarly  Sindbad  saves  himself  by  bestriding  a  tub  which  carried  him

under  the  lee  of  a  lofty  island,  with  trees  overhanging  the  tide.     Thereupon
(Nights,  Burton,  vol.  vi,  p.  7)  "I   caught  hold  of  a  branch  and  by  its  aid
clambered  up  on  to  the  land,  after  coming  nigh  unto  death." — n.m.p.
*  aAA.'  dpa  -ijyi  Kar   dvSpoJv  Kpdara  /Saivei,  Iliad,  xix,  v.  93.


THE  GIGANTIC  BIRD  219

trunk  of  the  tree  the  day  came  to  an  end.  And  in  the  even-
ing he  saw  many  enormous  birds,  of  the  nature  of  vultures,
coming  into  that  banyan-tree  from  all  quarters,  filling  the
sides  of  heaven  with  their  cries,  and  the  waves  of  the  sea,
that  was  lashed  by  the  wind  of  their  broad  wings,  appeared
as  if  running  to  meet  them  out  of  affection  produced  by
long  acquaintance.

Then  he,  concealed  by  the  dense  leaves,  overheard^  the
conversation  of  those  birds  perched  in  the  branches,  which
was  carried  on  in  human  language.  One  described  some
The  City  of  distant  island,  another  a  mountain,  another  a
Gold  at  last  distant  region,  as  the  place  where  he  had  gone  to
roam  during  the  day,  but  an  old  bird  among  them  said  :
"I  went  to-day  to  the  Golden  City  to  disport  myself,  and
to-morrow  morning  I  shall  go  there  again  to  feed  at  my
ease ;  for  what  is  the  use  of  my  taking  a  long  and  fatiguing
journey  ?  "  Saktideva's  sorrow  was  removed  by  that  speech
of  the  bird's,  which  resembled  a  sudden  shower  of  nectar,
and  he  thought  to  himself :  "  Bravo  !  that  city  does  exist,
and  now  I  have  an  instrument  for  reaching  it — this  gigantic
bird,  given  me  as  a  means  of  conveyance."  Thinking  thus,
Saktideva  slowly  advanced  and  hid  himself  among  the  back-
feathers  of  that  bird  while  it  was  asleep,  and  next  morning,
when  the  other  birds  went  off  in  different  directions,  that
vulture,  exhibiting  a  strange  partiality  to  the  Brahman  like
destiny,^  carrying  Saktideva  on  his  back  where  he  had  climbed
up,  went  immediately  to  the  Golden  City  to  feed  again.^    Then

^  Here  we  have  another  example  of  the  "  overhearing  "  motif.  See  Vol.  I,
p.  48w^,  and  the  note  on  p.  107  of  this  volume.  As  stated  in  this  latter
reference,  I  shall  give  further  variants  in  a  note  in  Vol.  Ill,  Chapter  XXIX.

N.M.P.

2  Pakshapdta  also  means  "flapping  of  wings."  So  there  is  probably  a
pun  here.

3  So  in  the  Swedish  tale,  "  The  Beautiful  Palace  East  of  the  Sun  and
North  of  the  Earth/'  the  phoenix  carries  the  youth  on  his  back  to  the
palace.  Cf  the  halcyon  in  Lucian's  Vera  Historia,  Book  II,  40  (see  Fowler's
translation,  Oxford,  1905,  vol.  ii,  p.  I69),  whose  nest  is  seven  miles  in  cir-
cumference, and  whose  egg  is  probably  the  prototype  of  that  in  the  Arabian
Nights.  Cf  also  the  Gliicksvogel  in  Prym  and  Socin,  Syrische  Mdrchen,  p.  269,
and  the  eagle  which  carries  Chaucer  in  The  House  of  Fame.

In  the  Kathdkoga  (Tawney,  pp.  29,  30)  the  hero  Nagadatta  climbs  up  a


220  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

the  bird  alighted  in  a  garden,  and  Saktideva  got  down  from
its  back  unobserved  and  left  it,  but  while  he  was  roam-
ing about  there  he  saw  two  women  engaged  in  gathering
flowers  ;  he  approached  them  slowly,  who  were  astonished
at  his  appearance,  and  he  asked  them  :  "  What  place  is  this,
good  ladies,  and  who  are  you  ?  "  And  they  said  to  him  :
"  Friend,  this  is  a  city  called  the  Golden  City,  a  seat  of  the
Vidyadharas,  and  in  it  there  dwells  a  Vidyadhari,  named
Chandraprabha,  and  know  that  we  are  the  gardeners  in  her
garden,  and  we  are  gathering  these  flowers  for  her."  Then
the  Brahman  said  :  "  Obtain  for  me  an  interview  with  your
mistress  here."  When  they  heard  this,  they  consented,  and
the  two  women  conducted  the  young  man  to  the  palace  in
their  city.

When  he  reached  it,  he  saw  that  it  was  glittering  with
pillars  of  precious  stones,  and  had  walls  of  gold,^  as  it  were  the
very  rendezvous  of  prosperity.  And  all  the  attendants,  when
they  saw  him  arrived  there,  went  and  told  Chandraprabha
the  marvellous  tidings  of  the  arrival  of  a  mortal ;  then  she
gave  a  command  to  the  warder,  and  immediately  had  the
Brahman  brought  into  the  palace  and  conducted  into  her
presence.  When  he  entered  he  beheld  her  there  giving  a  feast
to  his  eyes,  like  the  creator's  ability  to  create  marvels  repre-

banyan-trce  and  sounds  gongs  in  order  to  scare  away  enormous  bharunda  birds,
who,  by  the  wind  produced  by  the  flapping  of  their  wings,  cause  a  stranded
ship  to  continue  on  its  course.  In  the  same  collection  of  Jain  stories  (pp.  l64,
165)  Lalitanga,  having  overheard  a  valuable  secret  from  the  conversation  of
two  birds,  crawled  in  among  the  feathers  of  one  of  the  birds  and  lay  there.
"  At  the  hour  of  dawn  they  all  went  to  the  city  of  Champa.  Lalitanga  crept
out  of  the  bird's  feathers,  and  entered  the  city."

Our  old  friend  Sindbad  makes  similar  use  of  the  rukh  when  stranded  on  a
desert  island.  The  great  bird  suddenly  alighted  on  a  great  white  dome,  its
egg,  "  and  brooded  over  it  with  its  wings  covering  it  and  its  legs  stretched
out  behind  it  on  the  ground,  and  in  this  posture  it  fell  asleep,  glory  be  to
Him  who  sleepeth  not !  When  I  saw  this,  I  arose  and,  unwinding  my  turband
from  my  head,  doubled  it  and  twisted  it  into  a  rope,  with  which  I  girt  my
middle  and  bound  my  waist  fast  to  the  legs  of  the  rukh,  saying  in  myself:
*  Peradventure,  this  bird  may  carry  me  to  a  land  of  cities  and  inhabitants,  and
that  will  be  better  than  abiding  in  this  desert  island  '  "  (Nights,  Burton,  vol.  vi,
p.  17).  I  have  already  given  (Vol.  1,  pp.  103-105)  full  references  to  the
Garu^a  bird,  rukh,  etc. — n.m.p.

^  We  should  read  sauvarnabhitii


THE  FOUR  PRINCESSES  221

sented  in  bodily  form.  And  she  rose  from  her  jewelled  couch,
while  he  was  still  far  off,  and  honoured  him  with  a  welcome
herself,  overpowered  by  beholding  him.  And  when  he  had
taken  a  seat  she  asked  him  :  "  Auspicious  sir,  who  are  you
that  have  come  here  in  such  guise,  and  how  did  you  reach  this
land  inaccessible  to  men  ?  "  When  Chandraprabha  in  her
curiosity  asked  him  this  question,  Saktideva  told  her  his
country  and  his  birth  and  his  name,  and  he  related  to  her  how
he  had  come  in  order  to  obtain  the  Princess  Kanakarekha  as
the  reward  of  beholding  the  Golden  City.

When  Chandraprabha  heard  that,  she  thought  a  little  and
heaved  a  deep  sigh,  and  said  to  Saktideva  in  private  :  "  Listen,
I  am  about  to  tell  you  something,  fortunate  sir.  There  is  in
this  land  a  king  of  the  Vidyadharas  named  Sasikhanda,  and
we  four  daughters  were  bom  to  him  in  due  course  ;  I  am  the
eldest,  Chandraprabha,  and  the  next  is  Chandrarekha,  and
the  third  is  Sasirekha,  and  the  fourth  Sasiprabha.  We
gradually  grew  up  to  womanhood  in  our  father's  house,  and
once  upon  a  time  those  three  sisters  of  mine  went  together  to
the  shore  of  the  Ganges  to  bathe,  while  I  was  detained  at  home
by  illness  ;  then  they  began  to  play  in  the  water,  and  in  the
insolence  of  youth  they  sprinkled  with  water  a  hermit  named
Agryatapas  while  he  was  in  the  stream.  That  hermit  in  his
wrath  cursed  those  girls,  who  had  carried  their  merriment  too
far,i  saying  :  '  You  wicked  maidens,  be  born  all  of  you  in
the  world  of  mortals.'  When  our  father  heard  that,  he  went
and  pacified  the  great  hermit,  and  the  hermit  told  how  the
curse  of  each  of  them  severally  should  end,  and  appointed  to
each  of  them  in  her  mortal  condition  the  power  of  remember-
ing her  former  existence,  supplemented  with  divine  insight.
Then,  they  having  left  their  bodies  and  gone  to  the  world
of  men,  my  father  bestowed  on  me  this  city,  and  in  his
grief  went  to  the  forest ;  but  while  I  was  dwelling  here  the
goddess  Durga  informed  me  in  a  dream  that  a  mortal  should
become  my  husband.    For  this  reason,  though  my  father  has

^  It  looks  as  if  Tawney  guessed  at  the  more  correct  atinirbandhimh  of  the
D.  text,  which  means  "over-insisting,"  "with  excessive  insistence  "  ;  the  ati?iir-
vartinih  of  Brockhaus  would  mean  "  feeling  satisfaction,"  "  coming  into  being,"
or  "coming  to  completion,"  all  of  which  are  quite  inappropriate  here. — n.m.p.


222  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

recommended  to  me  many  Vidyadhara  suitors,  I  have  rejected
them  all  and  remained  unmarried  to  this  day.  But  now  I
am  subdued  by  your  wonderful  arrival  and  by  your  handsome
form,  and  I  give  myself  to  you ;  so  I  will  go  on  the  approach-
ing fourteenth  day  of  the  lunar  fortnight  to  the  great  moun-
tain called  Rishabha  to  entreat  my  father  for  your  sake,  for
all  the  most  excellent  Vidyadharas  assemble  there  from  all
quarters  on  that  day  to  worship  the  god  Siva,  and  my  father
comes  there  too,  and  after  I  have  obtained  his  permission  I
will  return  here  quickly  ;   then  marry  me.     Now  rise  up."

Having  said  this,  Chandraprabha  supplied  Saktideva
with  various  kinds  of  luxuries  suited  to  Vidyadharas,  and
while  he  remained  there  he  was  as  much  refreshed  as  one
The  Forbidden  heated  by  a  forest  conflagration  would  be  by
Terrace  bathing   in   a   lake  of  nectar.     And   when   the

fourteenth  day  had  arrived  Chandraprabha  said  to  him  :
"  To-day  I  go  to  entreat  my  father's  permission  to  marry
you,  and  all  my  attendants  will  go  with  me.  But  you  must
not  be  grieved  at  being  left  alone  for  two  days ;  moreover,
while  you  remain  alone  in  this  palace,  you  must  by  no
means  ascend  the  middle  terrace."

When  Chandraprabha  had  said  this  to  that  young  Brah-
man she  set  out  on  her  journey,  leaving  her  heart  with  him,
and  escorted  on  her  way  by  his.  And  Saktideva,  remaining
there  alone,  wandered  from  one  magnificent  part  of  the  palace
to  another  to  delight  his  mind ;  and  then  he  felt  a  curiosity  to
know  why  that  daughter  of  the  Vidyadhara  had  forbidden
him  to  ascend  the  roof  of  the  palace,  and  so  he  ascended  that
middle  terrace  of  the  palace ;  for  men  are  generally  inclined
to  do  that  which  is  forbidden.  And  when  he  had  ascended  it
he  saw  three  concealed  pavilions,  and  he  entered  one  of  them,
the  door  of  which  was  open ;  and  when  he  had  entered  it  he
saw  a  certain  woman  lying  on  a  magnificently  jewelled  sofa,
on  which  there  was  a  mattress  placed,  whose  body  was  hidden
by  a  sheet.  But  when  he  lifted  up  the  sheet  and  looked  he
beheld  lying  dead  in  that  guise  that  beautiful  maiden,  the
daughter  of  King  Paropakarin ;  and  when  he  saw  her  there
he  thought :  "  What  is  this  great  wonder  ?  Is  she  sleeping
a  sleep  from  which  there  is  no  awaking,  or  is  it  a  complete


THE  UNEXPLAINED  MIRACLE  223

delusion  on  my  part  ?  That  woman,  for  whose  sake  I  have
travelled  to  this  foreign  land,  is  lying  here  without  breath,
though  she  is  alive  in  my  own  country,  and  she  still  retains
her  beauty  unimpaired,  so  I  may  be  certain  that  this  is  all
a  magic  show,  which  the  creator  for  some  reason  or  other
exhibits  to  beguile  me."

Thinking  thus,  he  proceeded  to  enter  in  succession  those
other  two  pavilions,  and  he  beheld  within  them  in  the  same
way  two  other  maidens.  Then  he  went  in  his  astonishment
out  of  the  palace,  and  sitting  down  he  remained  looking  at
a  very  beautiful  lake  below  it,  and  on  its  bank  he  beheld  a
horse  with  a  jewelled  saddle  ;  so  he  descended  immediately
from  where  he  was,  and  out  of  curiosity  approached  its  side  ;
and  seeing  that  it  had  no  rider  on  it,  he  tried  to  mount  it,
and  that  horse  struck  him  with  its  heel  and  flung  him  into
the  lake.  And  after  he  had  sunk  beneath  the  surface  of  the
lake  he  quickly  rose  up  to  his  astonishment  from  the  middle
of  a  garden  lake  in  his  own  city  of  Vardhamana  ;  and  he  saw
himself  suddenly  standing  in  the  water  of  a  lake  in  his  own
native  city,  like  the  kumuda  plants,  miserable  without  the
light  of  the  moon.^     He  reflected :  "  How  different  is  this  city

1  Or  Chandraprabha,  whose  name  means  "  light  of  the  moon."  The  for-
bidden chamber  will  at  once  remind  the  reader  of  Perrault's  La  Barhe  Bleue,
The  lake  incident  is  exactly  similar  to  one  in  Chapter  LXXXI  of  this  work
and  to  that  of  Kandarpaketu  in  the  Hitopadesa.  In  Wirt  Sikes'  British  Goblins,
p.  84,  a  draught  from  a  forbidden  well  has  the  same  effect.  See  Ralston's
Russian  Folk-Tales,  p.  99-  He  refers  to  this  story  and  gives  many  European
equivalents.  See  also  Veckenstedt's  Wendische  Sagen,  p.  214.  Many  parallels
will  be  found  in  the  notes  to  Grimm's  Mdrchen,  Nos.  3  and  46,  to  which
Ralston  refers  in  his  exhaustive  note.

The  "forbidden  chamber"  motif  has  already  been  ably  discussed  by

Sidney  Hartland  ("  The  Forbidden  Chamber/'  Folk-Lore  Journal,  vol.  iii,  ]885,
pp.  193-242),  so  that  there  is  no  need  to  go  into  any  great  detail  here.
One  of  the  closest  accounts  to  that  in  our  text  occurs  in  the  third  Kalandar's
tale  {Nights,  Burton,  vol.  i,  p.  l60).  In  this  story  Ajib,  son  of  Khazib,  is
entrusted  with  the  keys  of  a  palace  containing  forty  chambers  all  of  which
he  can  open  except  one,  and  he  is  warned  that  if  he  does,  he  and  his  beloved
will  be  separated  for  ever.  However,  as  usual,  curiosity  overcomes  him,  and
as  soon  as  he  opens  the  door  a  wonderful  perfume  meets  his  nose  which  im-
mediately sends  him  into  a  faint.  After  a  time  he  recovers  and  inspects  the
room,  which  is  lit  with  lamps  of  gold  diffusing  a  scent  of  musk  and  ambergris.
"  Presently,"  he  says  when  relating  the  story,  "  I  espied  a  noble  steed,  black


224  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

of  Vardhamana  from  that  city  of  the  Vidyadharas  !  Alas  !
what  is  this  great  display  of  marvellous  delusion  ?  Alas  I  I,
ill-fated  wretch,  am  wonderfully  deceived  by  some  strange
power  ;  or  rather,  who  on  this  earth  knows  what  is  the  nature
of  destiny  ?  "  Thus  reflecting,  Saktideva  rose  from  the
midst  of  the  lake,  and  went  in  a  state  of  wonder  to  his  own
father's  house.  There  he  made  a  false  representation,  giving
as  an  excuse  for  his  absence  that  he  had  been  himself  going
about  with  a  drum,  and  being  gladly  welcomed  by  his  father
he  remained  with  his  delighted  relations  ;  and  on  the  second
day  he  went  outside  his  house,  and  heard  again  those  words
being  proclaimed  in  the  city  by  beat  of  drum :  "  Let  who-
ever, being  a  Brahman  or  a  Kshatriya,  has  really  seen  the
Golden  City  say  so  :  the  king  will  give  him  his  daughter
and  make  him  crown  prince."

as  the  murks  of  night  when  murkiest,  standing,  ready  saddled  and  bridled
(and  his  saddle  was  of  red  gold)  before  two  mangers,  one  of  clear  crystal
wherein  was  husked  sesame,  and  the  other  also  of  crystal  containing  water
of  the  rose  scented  with  musk.  When  I  saw  this  I  marvelled  and  said  to
myself,  '  Doubtless  in  this  animal  must  be  some  wondrous  mystery ' ;  and
Satan  cozened  me,  so  I  led  him  without  the  palace  and  mounted  him ;  but
he  would  not  stir  from  his  place.  So  I  hammered  his  sides  with  my  heels,
but  he  moved  not,  and  then  I  took  the  rein-whip  and  struck  him  withal.
When  he  felt  the  blow,  he  neighed  a  neigh  with  a  sound  like  deafening
thunder,  and  opening  a  pair  of  wings  flew  up  with  me  in  the  firmament  of
heaven  far  beyond  the  eyesight  of  man.  After  a  full  hour  of  flight  he
descended  and  alighted  on  a  terrace  roof  and  shaking  me  off"  his  back  lashed
me  on  the  face  with  his  tail  and  gouged  out  my  left  eye,  causing  it  roll
along  my  cheek.  Then  he  flew  away."  He  then  goes  down  from  the
terrace  and  finds  himself  among  the  ten  one-eyed  youths  who  had  met  with
similar  adventures  themselves,  and  through  whom  Ajib  had  originally  started
on  his  adventure.

Reference  should  be  made  to  W.  Kirby  (who  wrote  some  of  the
analogues  in  Burton's  edition  of  the  Nights,  vol.  x,  and  Supp.,  vol.  vi),  "The
Forbidden  Doors  of  the  Thousand  and  one  Nights,"  Folk-Lore  Journal,  vol.  v,
pp.  112-124;  Clouston,  Popular  Tales  and  Fictions,  vol.  i,  pp.  198-205;  ditto.
The  Book  of  Sindibad,  pp.  173,  174,  308,  309;  J.  A.  Macculloch,  Childhood  of
Fiction,  pp.  306-324  ;  and  V.  Chauvin,  op.  cit.,  v,  p.  203.  The  whole  subject
has  recently  been  discussed  by  P.  Saintyves,  Les  Contes  de  Perrault,  1923,
pp.  359-396,  which  contains  a  full  bibliography.  For  the  identification  of
Bluebeard  with  Gil  de  Rais  and  Comorre  the  Cursed  see  E.  A.  Vizetelly,
Bluebeard,  1902,  and  cf.   A.    France,  Les  Sept  Femmes  de  Barbe  Bleu,  1909-

—  N.M.P.


SAKTIDEVA  WINS -AND  LOSES  THE  PRINCESS    225

Then  Saktideva  hearing  that,  having  successfully  accom-
plished the  task,  again  went  and  said  to  those  who  were
proclaiming  this  by  beat  of  drum :  "I  have  seen  that
city."  And  they  took  him  before  that  king,  and  the  king,  re-
cognising him,  supposed  that  he  was  again  saying  what  was
untrue,  as  he  had  done  before.  But  he  said  :  "  If  I  say  what
is  false,  and  if  I  have  not  really  seen  that  city,  I  desire  now
to  be  punished  with  death  ;  let  the  princess  herself  examine
me."  When  he  said  this,  the  king  went  and  had  his  daughter
summoned  by  his  servants.  She,  when  she  saw  that  Brah-
man, whom  she  had  seen  before,  again  said  to  the  king  :
"  My  father,  he  will  tell  us  some  falsehood  again."  Then
Saktideva  said  to  her  :  "  Princess,  whether  I  speak  truly  or
falsely,  be  pleased  to  explain  this  point  which  excites  my
curiosity.  How  is  it  that  I  saw  you  lying  dead  on  a  sofa
in  the  Golden  City  and  yet  see  you  here  alive  ?  "

When  the  Princess   Kanakarekha  had  been  asked  this
question  by  Saktideva,   and   furnished  with   this  token  of
his  truth,  she  said  in  the  presence  of  her  father  :    "  It  is
true  that  this  great-hearted  one  has  seen  that  city,  and  in
a  short  time  he  will  be  my  husband,  when  I  return  to  dwell
there.     And  there  he  will   marry  my  other  three   sisters  ;
and  he  will  govern  as  king  the  Vidyadharas  in  that  city.
But  I  must  to-day  enter  my  own  body  and  that  city,  for
I  have  been  born  here  in  your  house  owing  to  the  curse  of  a
hermit,  who  moreover  appointed  that  my  curse  should  end
in  the  following  way :  '  When  you  shall  be  wearing  a  human
form,  and  a  man,  having  beheld  your  body  in  the  Golden
City,  shall  reveal  the  truth,  then  you  shall  be  freed  from
your  curse,  and  that  man  shall  become  your  husband.'     And
though  I  am  in  a  human  body  I  remember  my  origin,  and  I
possess  supernatural  knowledge,  so  I  will  now  depart  to  my
own  Vidyadhara  home,  to  a  happy  fortune."     Saying  this,
the  princess  left  her  body,  and  vanished,  and  a  confused
cry  arose  in  the  palace.

And  Saktideva,  who  had  now  lost  both  the  maidens^
thinking  over  the  two  beloved  ones  whom  he  had  gained  by
various  difficult  toils,  and  who  yet  were  not  gained,  and
not  only  grieved  but  blaming  himself,  with  his  desire  not.

VOL.   II.  p


226  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

accomplished,  left  the  king's  palace  and  in  a  moment  went
through  the  following  train  of  thought :— "  Kanakarekha  said
that  I  should  attain  my  desire  ;  so  why  do  I  despond,  for
success  depends  upon  courage  ?  I  will  again  go  to  the  Golden
City  by  the  same  path,  and  destiny  will  without  doubt  again
provide  me  with  a  means  of  getting  there."

Thus  reflecting,  Saktideva  set  out  from  that  city;  for
resolute  men  who  have  once  undertaken  a  project  do  not  turn
back  without  accomplishing  their  object.  And  journeying
^aktideva  sets  on,  he  again  reached  after  a  long  time  that  city
out  again  named  Vitankapura,  situated  on  the  shore  of  the
sea.  And  there  he  saw  the  merchant  coming  to  meet  him,
with  whom  he  originally  went  to  sea,  and  whose  ship  was
wrecked  there.  He  thought :  "  Can  this  be  Samudradatta,
and  how  can  he  have  escaped  after  falling  into  the  sea  ?
But  how  can  it  be  otherwise  ?  I  myself  am  a  strange  illustra-
tion of  its  possibility."  While  he  approached  the  merchant
thinking  thus,  the  merchant  recognised  him,  and  embraced
him  in  his  delight ;  and  he  took  him  to  his  own  house
and  after  entertaining  him  asked  him :  "  When  the  ship
foundered,  how  did  you  escape  from  the  sea  ?  "

Saktideva  then  told  him  his  whole  history,  how,  after
being  swallowed  by  a  fish,  he  first  reached  the  island  of
Utsthala ;  and  then  he  asked  the  good  merchant  in  his  turn :
"  Tell  me  also  how  you  escaped  from  the  sea."  Then  the  mer-
chant said :  "  After  I  fell  into  the  sea  that  time,  I  remained
floating  for  three  days  supported  on  a  plank.  Then  a  ship
suddenly  came  that  way,  and  I,  crying  out,  was  descried  by
those  in  her,  and  taken  on  board  her.  And  when  I  got  on
board  I  saw  my  own  father,  who  had  gone  to  a  distant  island
long  before,  and  was  now  returning  after  a  long  absence.  My
father,  when  he  saw  me,  recognised  me,  and  embracing  me
asked  my  story  with  tears,  and  I  told  it  him  as  follows  :  —
'  My  father,  you  had  been  away  for  a  long  time  and  had  not
returned,  and  so  I  set  about  trading  myself,  thinking  it  was
my  proper  employment ;  then  on  my  way  to  a  distant  island
my  ship  was  wrecked,  and  I  was  plunged  in  the  sea,  and  you
have  found  me  and  rescued  me.'  When  I  had  said  this  to
him,  my  father  asked  me  reproachfully :  '  Wliy  do  you  run


THE  FISHERMEN  SEEK  REVENGE  227

such  risks  ?  For  I  possess  wealth,  my  son,  and  I  am  en-
gaged in  acquiring  it ;  see,  I  have  brought  you  back  this  ship
full  of  gold.'  Thus  spoke  my  father  to  me,  and  comforting
me,  took  me  home  in  that  very  ship  to  my  own  dwelling  in
Vitankapura."

When  Saktideva  had  heard  this  account  from  the  mer-
chant, and  had  rested  that  night,  he  said  to  him  on  the
next  day:  "Great  merchant,  I  must  once  more  go  to  the
island  of  Utsthala,  so  tell  me  how  I  can  get  there  now."
The  merchant  said  to  him .  "  Some  agents  of  mine  are
preparing  to  go  there  to-day,  so  go  on  board  the  ship,  and
set  out  with  them."  Thereupon  the  Brahman  set  out  with
the  merchant's  agents  to  go  to  that  island  of  Utsthala,  and
by  chance  the  sons  of  the  king  of  the  fishermen  saw  him
there,  and  when  they  were  near  him  they  recognised  him,
and  said  :  "  Brahman,  you  went  with  our  father  to  search
here  and  there  ^  for  the  Golden  City,  and  how  is  it  that
you  have  come  back  here  to-day  alone  ?  "  Then  Saktideva
said :  "  Your  father,  when  out  at  sea,  fell  into  the  mouth
of  the  submarine  fire,  his  ship  having  been  dragged  down
by  the  current."  When  those  sons  of  the  fisher-king  heard
that,  they  were  angry,  and  said  to  their  servants  :  "  Bind
this  wicked  man,  for  he  has  murdered  our  father.  Other-
And  has  ^^^^  ^^^   could  it    havc   happened  that,   when

strange  two  men  wcrc  in  the  same  ship,  one  should  have

Adventures  fallen  iuto  the  mouth  of  the  submarine  fire  and
the  other  escaped  it  ?  So  we  must  to-morrow  morning
sacrifice  our  father's  murderer  in  front  of  the  goddess  Durga,
treating  him  as  a  victim."  Having  said  this  to  their  ser-
vants, those  sons  of  the  fisher-king  bound  Saktideva,  and
took  him  off  to  the  awful  temple  of  Durga,  the  belly  of  which
ivas  enlarged,  as  if  it  continually  swallowed  many  lives,  and
which  was  like  the  mouth  of  Death  devouring  tamdla  with
projecting  teeth. ^

There  Saktideva  remained  bound  during  the  night,   in

^  Brockhaus*  <a<flA  disturbs  the  sense.  The  D.  text  renders  the  passage
cinvann  itas  tadd,  "at  that  time  you  went  .  .  ." — n.m.p.

2  Following  the  D.  text,  Speyer  (op.  cit.,  p.  105)  would  translate,  "whose
TOWS  of  teeth  are  adorned  with  bells." — n.m.p.


228  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

fear  of  his  life,  and  he  thus  prayed  to  the  goddess  Durga  :
"  Adorable  one,  grant er  of  boons,  thou  didst  deliver  the
world  with  thy  form,  which  was  like  the  orb  of  the  rising  sun,
appearing  as  if  it  had  drunk  its  fill  of  the  blood  gushing
freely  from  the  throat  of  the  giant  Ruru  ^  ;  therefore  deliver
me,  thy  constant  votary,  who  have  come  a  long  distance  out
of  desire  to  obtain  my  beloved,  but  am  now  fallen  without
cause  into  the  power  of  my  enemies."  Thus  he  prayed  to
the  goddess,  and  with  difficulty  went  off  to  sleep;  and  in
the  night  he  saw  a  woman  come  out  of  the  inner  cell  of  the
temple  ;  that  woman  of  heavenly  beauty  came  up  to  him,  and
said  in  a  compassionate  manner :  "  Do  not  fear,  Saktideva,
no  harm  shall  happen  to  you.  The  sons  of  that  fisher-king
have  a  sister  named  Vindumati;  that  maiden  shall  see  you
in  the  morning  and  claim  you  for  a  husband,  and  you  must
agree  to  that ;  she  will  bring  about  your  deliverance  :  and
she  is  not  of  the  fisher  caste  :  for  she  is  a  celestial  female
degraded  in  consequence  of  a  curse."  When  he  heard  this
he  woke  up,  and  in  the  morning  that  fisher- maiden  came  to
the  temple,  a  shower  of  nectar  to  his  eyes.  And  announcing
herself,  she  came  up  to  him  and  said  in  her  eagerness :  "I
will  have  you  released  from  this  prison,  therefore  do  what
I  desire.  For  I  have  refused  all  these  suitors  approved  of  by
my  brothers,  but  the  moment  I  saw  you,  love  arose  in  my
soul;  therefore  marry  me."  When  Vindumati,  the  daughter
of  the  fisher-king,  said  this  to  him,  Saktideva,  remember-
ing his  dream,  accepted  her  proposal  gladly  ;  she  procured
his  release,  and  he  married  that  fair  one,  whose  wish  was
gratified  by  her  brothers  receiving  the  command  to  do  so
from  Durga  in  a  dream.  And  he  lived  there  with  that
heavenly  creature  that  had  assumed  a  human  form,  obtained
solely  by  his  merits  in  a  former  life,  as  if  with  happy
success.

And  one  day,  as  he  was  standing  upon  the  roof  of  his
palace,  he  saw  a  Chandala  coming  along  with  a  load  of  cow's
flesh,  and  he  said  to  his  beloved  :  "  Look,  slender  one  !  how
can  this  evil-doer  eat  the  flesh  of  cows,  those  animals  that

^  The  Danavas  are  a  class  of  demons  or  giants.  Rum  was  a  Danava  slain
by  Durga. See  Vol.  I,  pp.  199-200. — N.m.p.


THE  SACRED  COW  229

are  the  object  of  veneration^  to  the  three  worlds?"  Then
Vindumati,  hearing  that,  said  to  her  husband  :  "  The  wicked-
ness of  this  act  is  inconceivable ;  what  can  we  say  in  pallia-
tion of  it  ?  I  have  been  born  in  this  race  of  fishermen  for  a
very  small  offence  owing  to  the  might  of  cows,  but  what  can
atone  for  this  man's  sin  ?  "  When  she  said  this,  Saktideva
said  to  her  :  "  That  is  wonderful.  Tell  me,  my  beloved,
who  are  you,  and  how  came  you  to  be  born  in  a  family  of
fishermen  ?  "  When  he  asked  this  with  much  importunity,
she  said  to  him  :  "I  will  tell  you,  though  it  is  a  secret,  if  you
promise  to  do  what  I  ask  you."  He  affirmed  with  an  oath  :
"  Yes,  I  will  do  what  you  ask  me."

She  then  told  him  first  what  she  desired  him  to  do  :
"  In  this  island  you  will  soon  marry  another  wife,  and  she,
my  husband,  will  soon  become  pregnant,  and  in  the  eighth
The  Strange  month  of  her  pregnancy  you  must  cut  her  open
Bargain  and  take  out  the  child,  ^  and  you  must  feel  no

compunction  about  it."  Thus  she  said,  and  he  was  aston-
ished, exclaiming  :  "  What  can  this  mean  ?  "  And  he  was
full  of  horror ;  but  that  daughter  of  the  fisher- king  went
on  to  say  :  "  This  request  of  mine  you  must  perform  for  a

^  For  details  of  the  cow-worship  of  the  Hindus  see  the  note  at  the  end
of  this  chapter. — n.m.p.

2  Once  again  this  extraordinary  act  is  not  merely  the  product  of  the
story-teller's  fertile  imagination,  but  is  founded  on  fact.  Risley  (Tribes  and
Castes  of  Bengal,  vol.  i,  p.  94)  states  that  among  the  Bhandaris  of  Bengal,  when
a  pregnant  woman  dies  before  delivery,  her  body  is  cut  open  and  the  child
taken  out,  both  corpses  being  buried  in  the  same  grave.  J.  S.  Campbell
{Notes  on  the  Spirit  Basis  of  Belief  and  Custom,  Bombay,  1885)  tells  us  that  in
Bombay,  when  a  woman  dies  in  pregnancy,  her  corpse,  after  being  bathed
and  decked  with  flowers  and  ornaments,  is  carried  to  the  burning-ground.
There  her  husband  sprinkles  water  on  her  body  from  the  points  of  a  wisp  of
the  sacred  darbha  grass  and  repeats  holy  verses.  Then  he  cuts  her  right  side
with  a  sharp  weapon  and  takes  out  the  child.  Should  it  be  alive,  it  is  taken
home  and  cared  for;  should  it  be  dead,  it  is  then  and  there  buried.  The
hole  in  the  side  of  the  corpse  is  filled  with  curds  and  butter,  covered  with
cotton  threads,  and  then  the  usual  rite  of  cremation  is  carried  out.

For  further  details  on  foeticide  and  abortion  reference  should  be  made
to  Havelock  Ellis,  Studies  in  the  Psychology  of  Sex,  vol.  vi,  pp.  605-6l2;
Westermarck,  The  Origin  and  Development  of  the  Moral  Ideas  (2nd  edition,  1912),
ch.  xvii;  and  A.  E.  Crawley,  "Foeticide,"  Hastings'  Ency.  Rel.  Eth.,  vol.  vi,
pp.  54-57,  all  of  which  contain  full  bibliographical  references. — n.m.p.


230  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

certain  reason.  Now  hear  who  I  am,  and  how  I  came  to
be  born  in  a  family  of  fishermen.  Long  ago  in  a  former
birth  I  was  a  certain  Vidyadhari,  and  now  I  have  fallen  into
the  world  of  men  in  consequence  of  a  curse.  For  when  I
was  a  Vidyadhari  I  bit  asunder  some  strings  with  my  teeth
and  fastened  them  to  lyres,  and  it  is  owing  to  that  that  I
have  been  born  here  in  the  house  of  a  fisherman.  So,  if  such
a  degradation  is  brought  about  by  touching  the  mouth  with
the  dry  sinew  of  a  cow,  much  more  terrible  must  be  the
results  of  eating  cow's  flesh !  "  While  she  was  saying  this,
one  of  her  brothers  rushed  in  in  a  state  of  perturbation  and
said  to  Saktideva  :  "  Rise  up  !  an  enormous  boar  has  appeared
from  somewhere  or  other,  and  after  slaying  innumerable
persons  is  coming  this  way  in  its  pride,  towards  us."  When
Saktideva  heard  that,  he  descended  from  his  palace,  and
mounting  a  horse,  spear  in  hand,^  he  galloped  to  meet  the
boar,  and  struck  it  the  moment  he  saw  it ;  but  when  the  hero
attacked  him  the  boar  fled,  and  managed,  though  wounded,
to  enter  a  cavern  ;  and  Saktideva  entered  there  in  pursuit
of  him,  and  immediately  beheld  a  great  garden  shrubbery
with  a  house.  And  when  he  was  there  he  beheld  a  maiden
of  very  wonderful  beauty,  coming  in  a  state  of  agitation  to
meet  him,  as  if  it  were  the  goddess  of  the  wood  advancing  to
receive  him  out  of  love.

And  he  asked  her  :  "  Auspicious  lady,  who  are  you,  and
why  are  you  perturbed  ?  "  Hearing  that,  the  lovely  one  thus
answered  him :  "  There  is  a  king  of  the  name  of  Chanda-
vikrama,  lord  of  the  southern  region.  I  am  his  daughter,
auspicious  sir,  a  maiden  named  Vindurekha.  But  a  wicked
Daitya,  with  flaming  eyes,  carried  me  off  by  treachery  from
my  father's  house  to-day  and  brought  me  here.  And  he,
desiring  flesh,  assumed  the  form  of  a  boar,  and  sallied  out ;
but  while  he  was  still  hungry  he  was  pierced  with  a  spear
to-day  by  some  hero  ;  and  as  soon  as  he  was  pierced  he
came  in  here  and  died.  And  I  rushed  out  and  escaped
without  being  outraged  by  him."  Then  Saktideva  said  to
her ;    "  Then  why  all  this  perturbation  ?     For  I  slew  that

^  In  //.  172b  I  conjecture  saktihasto  for  l^aktidevo,  as  we  read  in  si.  181b
that  the  boar  was  wounded  with  a  sakti.


VINDUREKHA  BECOMES  PREGNANT         231

boar  with  a  spear,  princess."  Then  she  said,  "  Tell  me  who
you  are,"  and  he  answered  her,  "I  am  a  Brahman  named
Saktideva."  Then  she  said  to  him,  "You  must  accordingly
He  marries  bccome  my  husband,"  and  the  hero  consenting
Vindurekha  went  out  of  the  cavern  with  her.  And  when  he
arrived  at  home  he  told  it  to  his  wife  VindumatI,  and  with
her  consent  he  married  that  Princess  Vindurekha.  So,  while
Saktideva  was  living  there  with  his  two  wives,  one  of  his
wives,  Vindurekha,  became  pregnant ;  and  in  the  eighth
month  of  her  pregnancy,  the  first  wife  Vindumati  came  up
to  him  of  her  own  accord  and  said  to  him  :  "  Hero,  remember
what  you  promised  me  ;  this  is  the  eighth  month  of  the
pregnancy  of  your  second  wife  ;  so  go  and  cut  her  open  and
bring  the  child  here,  for  you  cannot  act  contrary  to  your  own
word  of  honour."  When  she  said  this  to  Saktideva,  he  was
bewildered  by  affection  and  compassion  ;  but  being  bound
by  his  promise  he  remained  for  a  short  time  unable  to  give
an  answer ;  at  last  he  departed  in  a  state  of  agitation  and
went  to  Vindurekha  ;  and  she  seeing  him  come  with  troubled
air  said  to  him :  "  Husband,  why  are  you  despondent  to-
day ?  Surely  I  know :  you  have  been  commissioned  by
Vindumati  to  take  out  the  child  with  which  I  am  pregnant ;
and  that  you  must  certainly  do,  for  there  is  a  certain
object  in  view,  and  there  is  no  cruelty  in  it,  so  do  not  feel
compassion ;  in  proof  of  it  hear  the  following  story  of
Devadatta :

29d.  Devadatta  the  Gambler

Long  ago  there  lived  in  the  city  of  Kambuka  a  Brahman
named  Haridatta  ;  and  the  son  of  that  auspicious  man,
who  was  named  Devadatta,  though  he  studied  in  his  boy-
hood, was,  as  a  young  man,  exclusively  addicted  to  the  vice
of  gaming.  As  he  had  lost  his  clothes  and  everything  by
gambling,^  he  was  not  able  to  return  to  his  father's  house,  so

^  The  Indian  has  been  an  inveterate  gambler  from  the  earliest  times.
In  a  famous  hymn  of  the  Big-Veda  (x,  34)  a  gambler  tells  of  the  fatal  fasci-
nation the  dice  have  had  for  him,  and  the  consequent  ruin  and  slavery,  which
■was  one  of  the  final  conditions  of  the  debtor.  Details  of  the  play  referred  to  are
not  described,  but  scattered  allusions  seem  to  show  that  four,  and  sometimes


232  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

he  entered  once  on  a  time  an  empty  temple.  And  there  he
saw  alone  a  great  ascetic,  named  Jalapada,  who  had  attained
many  objects  by  magic,  and  he  was  muttering  spells  in  a
corner.  So  he  went  up  to  him  slowly  and  bowed  before  him,
and  the  ascetic,  abandoning  his  habit  of  not  speaking  to  any-
one, greeted  him  with  a  welcome  ;  and  after  he  had  remained
there  a  moment,  the  ascetic,  seeing  his  trouble,  asked  him

five  dice  were  used,  and  the  aim  of  the  gambler  was  to  throw  a  number
which  should  be  a  multiple  of  four  (see  Liiders,  Das  JViirfelspiel  im  alien
Jjidien;  Caland,  Zeit.  d.  deutsch.  morg.  Ges.,  vol.  Ixii,  p.  123  et  seq.  ;  and  Keith,
Joum.  Roy.  As.  Soc,  1908,  p.  823  et  seq.).

Cheating  at  play  appears  in  the  Rig-Veda  as  one  of  the  most  frequent  of
crimes,  and  the  word  for  "  gamester,"  kitava,  came  to  mean  "  cheat "  in  classical
Sanskrit.

In  the  Mahdbharata  the  vice  of  gambling  is  often  mentioned.  The  Kuru
prince  schemed  to  overthrow  the  Pandus  by  gambling,  and  the  well-known
episode  of  Nala  and  Damayantl  (iii,  59-61)  shows  the  extent  to  which  it  was
carried.

The  theme  also  occurs  in  the  Mrichchhakatika,  where  there  is  a  vivid
description  of  a  gambler's  quarrel  in  Act  II.  See  also  the  story  of"  Nala  and
Davadanti "  (Tawney,  Kathdkoga,  p.  201,  etc.).

Crooke  gives  some  interesting  details  in  the  last  of  his  mass  of  valuable
papers,  "The  Divali,  the  Lamp  Festival  of  the  Hindus,"  Folk-Lore,  vol.  xxxiv,
1923,  pp.  287,  288.  The  Nepalese  are  inveterate  gamblers,  and  a  tale  is  told
of  a  man  who  cut  off  his  left  hand  and  put  it  down  under  a  cloth  as  his  stake.
When  he  won  he  insisted  on  his  opponent  cutting  off  his  hand,  or  else
restoring  all  his  winnings  (D.  Wright,  History  of  Nepal,  p.  39).  In  Kashmir
nearly  all  classes  gamble  at  the  Divali  under  the  belief  that  winning  will
bring  them  luck  during  the  coming  year  (F.  Drew,  The  Jummoo  and  Kashmir
Territories,  p.  72 ;  but  see  W.  R.  Lawrence,  The  Valley  of  Kashmir,  p.  266).
In  the  Deccan,  at  the  Divali,  men  and  women  play  chess  till  midnight  in  the
hope  that  the  goddess  ParvatT  will  bring  them  cartloads  of  treasure  (Bombay
Gazetteer,  vol.  xviii,  part  i,  p.  251),  At  their  chief  festival  held  in  March  by
the  Shans  of  Upper  Burma  gambling  is  permitted  to  Burmese,  Shans  and
Chinese,  but  not  to  natives  of  India.  The  gambling  booths  are  put  up  to
auction,  and  even  the  Pongyi  priests  may  be  seen  gambling  in  the  lines  of
huts  outside  the  gambling  enclosure  (Sir  J.  G.  Scott,  J.  P.  Hardiman,  Gazetteer
of  Upper  Burma  and  the  Shan  States,  Part  II,  vol.  i,  p.  229).  In  the  Panjab,
success  in  gambling  at  the  Divali  is  believed  to  bring  good  luck.  Native
gentlemen  gamble  only  with  their  wives,  so  that,  whoever  wins,  they  lose
nothing.  Traders  play  to  find  out  whether  the  next  year  will  be  lucky  or
not.  If  a  man  wins  he  speculates  freely,  but  if  he  loses  he  confines  himself
to  safe  ordinary  business  (Panjab  Notes  and  Queries,  vol.  ii,  p.  152).

For  further  details  see  J.  L.  Paton,  "  Gambling,"  Hastings'  Ency.  Bel.  Eth.y
vol.  vi,  p.  164  and  the  references  there  given. — n.m.p.


THE  HEAVENLY  NYMPH  233

the  cause,  and  he  told  him  of  his  affliction  produced  by  the
loss  of  his  wealth,  which  had  been  dissipated  in  gambling.
Then  the  ascetic  said  to  Devadatta  :  "  My  child,  there  is  not
wealth  enough  in  the  whole  world  to  satisfy  gamblers  ;  but
if  you  desire  to  escape  from  your  calamity,  do  what  I  tell
you,  for  I  have  made  preparations  to  attain  the  rank  of  a
Vidyadhara;  so  help  me  to  accomplish  this,  O  man  of
fortunate  destiny,^  you  have  only  to  obey  my  orders  and
then  your  calamities  will  be  at  an  end."  When  the  ascetic
said  this  to  him,  Devadatta  promised  to  obey  him,  and
immediately  took  up  his  residence  with  him.

And  the  next  day  the  ascetic  went  into  a  corner  of  the
cemetery  and  performed  worship  by  night  under  a  banyan-
tree,  and  offered  rice  boiled  in  milk,  and  flung  portions  of  the
oblation  towards  the  four  cardinal  points,  after  worshipping
them,  and  said  to  the  Brahman,  who  was  in  attendance  on  him  :
"  You  must  worship  here  in  this  style  every  day,  and  say  :
*  Vidyutprabha,  accept  this  worship.'  And  then  I  am  certain
that  we  shall  both  attain  our  ends."  Having  said  this,  the
ascetic  went  with  him  to  his  own  house.  Then  Devadatta,
consenting,  went  every  day  and  duly  performed  worship  at
the  foot  of  that  tree,  according  to  his  instructions.  And  one
day,  at  the  end  of  his  worship,  the  tree  suddenly  clave  open,
and  a  heavenly  nymph  came  out  of  it  before  his  eyes,  and  said  :
"  My  good  sir,  my  mistress  summons  you  to  come  to  her."
And  then  she  introduced  him  into  the  middle  of  that  tree.
When  he  entered  it  he  beheld  a  heavenly  palace  made  of
jewels,  and  a  beautiful  lady  within  it  reclining  upon  a  sofa.
And  he  immediately  thought  :  "  This  may  be  the  success  of
our  enterprise  incarnate  in  bodily  form  " ;  but  while  he  was
thinking  thus  that  beautiful  lady,  receiving  him  graciously,
rose  with  limbs  on  which  the  ornaments  rang  as  if  to  welcome
him,  and  seated  him  on  her  own  sofa.  And  she  said  to  him  :
"  Illustrious  sir,  I  am  the  maiden  daughter  of  a  king  of  the
Yakshas,  named  Ratnavarsha,  and  I  am  known  by  the  name
of  Vidyutprabha  ;  and  this  great  ascetic  Jalapada  was  en-
deavouring to  gain  my  favour  ;  to  him  I  will  give  the  attain-
ment of  his  ends,  but  you  are  the  lord  of  my  life.     So,  as  you

^  Literally,  having  auspicious  marks.


234  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

see  my  affection,  marry  me."  When  she  said  this,  Devadatta
consented,  and  did  so.  And  he  remained  there  some  time,
but  when  she  became  pregnant  he  went  to  the  great  ascetic
with  the  intention  of  returning,  and  in  a  state  of  terror  he
told  him  all  that  had  happened,  and  the  ascetic,  desiring
his  own  success,  said  to  him  :  "  My  good  sir,  you  have  acted
quite  rightly,  but  go  and  cut  open  that  Yakshi  and,  taking
out  the  embryo,  bring  it  quickly  here."  The  ascetic  said
this  to  him,  and  then  reminded  him  of  his  previous  promise ;
and  being  dismissed  by  him,  the  Brahman  returned  to  his
beloved,  and  while  he  stood  there  despondent  with  reflecting
on  what  he  had  to  do  the  Yakshi  Vidyutprabha  of  her  own
accord  said  to  him  :  "  My  husband,  why  are  you  cast  down  ?
I  know  Jalapada  has  ordered  you  to  cut  me  open,  so  cut  me
open  and  take  out  this  child,  and  if  you  refuse  I  will  do  it
myself,  for  there  is  an  object  in  it."  Though  she  said  this  to
him,  the  Brahman  could  not  bring  himself  to  do  it ;  then  she
cut  herself  open  and  took  out  the  child  and  flung  it  down
before  him,  and  said  :  "  Take  this,  which  will  enable  him  who
consumes  it  to  obtain  the  rank  of  a  Vidyadhara.  But  I,
though  properly  a  Vidyadhari,  have  been  born  as  a  Yakshi
owing  to  a  curse,  and  this  is  the  appointed  end  of  my  cm^e,
strange  as  it  is,  for  I  remember  my  former  existence.  Now
I  depart  to  my  proper  home,  but  we  two  shall  meet  again
in  that  place."  Saying  this,  Vidyutprabha  vanished  from  his
eyes.  And  Devadatta  took  the  child  with  sorrowful  mind
and  went  to  that  ascetic  Jalapada  and  gave  it  to  him,  as  that
which  would  ensure  the  success  of  his  incantations ;  for  good
men  do  not  even  in  calamity  give  way  to  selfishness.

The  great  ascetic  divided  the  child's  flesh,  and  sent
Devadatta  to  the  wood  to  worship  Durga  in  her  terrific  form.
And  when  the  Brahman  came  back  after  presenting  an
oblation,  he  saw  that  the  ascetic  had  made  away  with  all  the
flesh.  And  while  he  said,  "  What  1  have  you  consumed  it
all  ?  "  the  treacherous  Jalapada,  having  become  a  Vidya-
dhara, ascended  to  heaven.  When  he  had  flown  up,  with
sword  blue  as  the  sky,  adorned  with  necklace  and  bracelet,
Devadatta  reflected  :  "  Alas,  how  I  have  been  deceived  by
this  evil-minded  one  !     Or,  rather,  on  whom  does  not  exces-


r


DEVADATTA  SEEKS  REVENGE      235


sive  compliance  ^  entail  misfortune  ?  So  how  can  I  revenge
myself  on  him  for  this  ill  turn,  and  how  can  I  reach  him  who
has  become  a  Vidyadhara  ?  Well !  I  have  no  other  resource
in  this  matter  except  propitiating  a  Vetala."  After  he  had
made  up  his  mind  to  do  this,  he  went  at  night  to  the  cemetery.
There  he  summoned  at  the  foot  of  a  tree  a  Vetala  into  the
body  of  a  man,  and  after  worshipping  him  he  made  an
oblation  of  human  flesh  to  him.  And  as  that  Vetala  was
not  satisfied,  and  would  not  wait  for  him  to  bring  more,  he
prepared  to  cut  off  his  own  flesh  to  gratify  him.  And
immediately  that  Vetala  said  to  that  brave  man  :  "  I  am
pleased  with  this  courage  of  yours ;  do  not  act  reck-
lessly. So,  my  good  sir,  what  desire  have  you  for  me  to
accomplish  for  you  ?  "  When  the  Vetala  said  this  the  hero
answered  him  :  "  Take  me  to  the  dwelling-place  of  the
Vidyadharas,  where  is  the  ascetic  Jalapada,  who  deceives
those  that  repose  confidence  in  him,  in  order  that  I  may
punish  him."  The  Vetala  consented,  and  placing  him  on  his
shoulder,  carried  him  through  the  air  in  a  moment  to  the
dwelling  of  the  Vidyadharas.  And  there  he  saw  Jalapada  in
a  palace,  seated  on  a  jewelled  throne,  elated  at  being  a  king
among  the  Vidyadharas,  endeavouring  by  various  speeches
to  induce  that  Vidyutprabha,^  who  had  obtained  the  rank  of
a  Vidyadhari,  to  marry  him  in  spite  of  her  reluctance.  And
the  moment  that  the  young  man  saw  this  he  attacked  him,
with  the  help  of  the  Vetala,  being  to  the  eyes  of  the  delighted
Vidyutprabha  what  the  moon,  the  repository  of  nectar,  is
to  the  partridges.®  And  Jalapada  beholding  him  suddenly
arrived  in  this  way,  dropped  his  sword  in  his  fright,  and  fell
from  his  throne  on  the  floor.  But  Devadatta,  though  he  had
obtained  his  sword,  did  not  slay  him;  for  the  great-hearted
feel  pity  even  for  their  enemies  when  they  are  terrified.

And  when  the  Vetala  wanted  to  kill  him,  he  dissuaded
him,  and  said  :  "Of  what  use  will  it  be  to  us  to  kill  this  miser-
able heretic  ?     So  take  him  and  place  him  in  his  own  house

^  The  D.  text  reads  "excessive  uprightness."    See  Speyer,  op.  cit.,  p.  107.

N.M.P.

2  I  read  Vidyutprahhdm  for  Vidyadharlm.     But  perhaps  it  is  unnecessary.

3  The  Chakora  is  said  to  subsist  upon  moonbeams.


236  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

on  earth  ;  it  is  better  that  this  wicked,  skull-bearing  ascetic
should  remain  there."  At  the  very  moment  that  Devadatta
was  saying  this  the  goddess  Durga  descended  from  heaven
and  appeared  to  him,  and  said  to  him  who  bent  before  her  :
"My  son,  I  am  satisfied  with  thee  now,  on  account  of  this
incomparable  courage  of  thine ;  so  I  give  thee  on  the  spot
the  rank  of  King  of  the  Vidyadharas."  Having  said  this,  she
bestowed  the  magic  sciences  ^  on  him  and  immediately  dis-
appeared. And  the  Vetala  immediately  took  Jalapada,  whose
splendour  fell  from  him,  and  placed  him  on  earth  (wicked-
ness does  not  long  ensure  success)  ;  and  Devadatta,  accom-
panied by  Vidyutprabha,  having  obtained  that  sovereignty
of  the  Vidyadharas,  flourished  in  his  kingdom.

29.  Story  of  the  Golden  City

Having  told  this  story  to  her  husband  Saktideva,  the
softly  speaking  Vindurekha  again  said  to  him  with  eager-
ness :  "  Such  necessities  do  arise,  so  cut  out  this  child  of
mine  as  Vindumati  told  you,  without  remorse."  When
Vindurekha  said  this,  Saktideva  was  afraid  of  doing  ^vrong,
but  a  voice  sounded  from  heaven  at  this  juncture  :  "  O
Saktideva,  take  out  this  child  without  fear,  and  seize  it  by
the  neck  with  your  hand,  then  it  will  turn  into  a  sword."
Having  heard  this  divine  voice,  he  cut  her  open,  and  quickly
taking  out  the  child  he  seized  it  by  the  throat  with  his  hand  ;
and  no  sooner  did  he  seize  it  than  it  became  a  sword  in  his
hand  ;  like  the  long  hair  of  Good  Fortune  seized  by  him  with
an  abiding  grasp.^

Then  that  Brahman  quickly  became  a  Vidyadhara,  and
Vindurekha  that  moment  disappeared.®  And  when  he  saw
that,  he  went,  as  he  was,  to  his  second  wife  Vindumati  and
told  her  the  whole  story.  She  said  to  him  :  "  My  lord,  we
are  three  sisters,  the  daughters  of  a  king  of  the  Vidyadharas,

^  So  making  him  a  Vidyadhara  or  "  magic-knowledge-holder."

2  The  D.  text  reads  satlvatah,  "courage,"  instead  of  Brockhaus'  mtatahf

*'  abiding." — n.m.p.

^  The  sudden  transformation  is  doubtless  to  be  attributed  to  the  magical

power  of  steel,  for  which  see  pp.  l66-l6.9  of  this  volume. — n.m.p.


VINDUMATI  EXPLAINS  237

who  have  been  banished  from  Kanakapuri  in  consequence
of  a  curse.  The  first  was  Kanakarekha,  the  termination  of
whose  curse  you  beheld  in  the  city  of  Vardhamana  ;  and  she
has  gone  to  that  city  of  hers,  her  proper  home.  For  such
was  the  strange  end  of  her  curse,  according  to  the  dispensa-
tion of  Fate ;  and  I  am  the  third  sister,  and  now  my  curse
is  at  an  end.  And  this  very  day  I  must  go  to  that  city  of
mine,  my  beloved,  for  there  our  Vidyadhara  bodies  remain.
And  my  elder  sister,  Chandraprabha,  is  dwelling  there  ;  so
you  also  must  come  there  quickly  by  virtue  of  the  magic
power  of  your  sword.  And  you  shall  rule  in  that  city,  after
obtaining  all  four  of  us  as  wives,  bestowed  upon  you  by  our
father,  who  has  retired  to  the  forest,  and  others  in  addition
to  us."

Thus  Vindumati  declared  the  truth  about  herself,  and
Saktideva,  consenting,  went  again  to  the  City  of  Gold,  this
time  through  the  air,  together  with  that  Vindumati.  And
Saktideva  whcu  he  arrived  he  again  saw  those  three
returns  to  the  darlings  of  his  bending  before  him,  Kanakarekha
City  of  Gold  ^^^  ^]^g  others,  after  entering  with  their  souls,
as  was  fitting,  those  heavenly  female  bodies,  which  he  saw
on  a  former  occasion  extended  lifeless  on  the  couches  in
those  three  pavilions.  And  he  saw  that  fourth  sister  there,
Chandraprabha,  who  had  performed  auspicious  ceremonies,
and  was  drinking  in  his  form  with  an  eye  rendered  eager  by
seeing  him  after  so  long  an  absence.

His  arrival  was  joyfully  hailed  by  the  servants,  who  were
occupied  in  their  several  duties,  as  well  as  by  the  ladies,  and
when  he  entered  the  private  apartments  that  Chandraprabha
said  to  him  :  "  Noble  sir,  here  is  that  Princess  Kanakarekha,
who  was  seen  by  you  in  the  city  of  Vardhamana,  my  sister
called  Chandrarekha.  And  here  is  that  daughter  of  the
fisher-king,  Vindumati,  whom  you  first  married  in  the  island
of  Utsthala,  my  sister  Sasirekha.  And  here  is  my  youngest
sister  Sasiprabha,  the  princess,  who  after  that  was  brought
there  by  the  Danava  and  then  became  your  wife.  So  now
come,  successful  hero,  with  us  into  the  presence  of  our
father,  and  quickly  marry  us  all,  when  bestowed  upon  you
by  him."


238  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

When  Chandraprabha  had  swiftly  and  boldly  uttered
this  decree  of  Kama,  Saktideva  went  with  those  four  to  the
recesses  of  the  wood  to  meet  their  father;  and  their  father,
the  King  of  the  Vidyadharas,  having  been  informed  of  the
And  marries  facts  by  all  his  daughters,  who  bowed  at  his
the  Four  Sisters  f^^t,  and  also  movcd  by  a  divine  voice,  with  de-
lighted soul  gave  them  all  at  once  to  Saktideva.  Immediately
after  that  he  bestowed  on  Saktideva  his  opulent  realm  in
the  City  of  Gold,  and  all  his  magic  sciences;  and  he  gave
the  successful  hero  his  name,^  by  which  he  was  henceforth
known  among  his  Vidyadharas.  And  he  said  to  him :
"No  one  else  shall  conquer  thee,  but  from  the  mighty
lord  of  Vatsa  there  shall  spring  a  universal  emperor,  who
shall  reign  among  you  here  under  the  title  of  Naravahana-
datta  and  be  thy  superior  ;  to  him  alone  wilt  thou  have  to
submit."  With  these  words  the  mighty  lord  of  the  Vidya-
dharas, named  Sa^ikhandapada,  dismissed  his  son-in-law
from  the  wood  where  he  was  practising  asceticism,  after  en-
tertaining him  kindly,  that  he  might  go  with  his  wives  to  his
own  capital.  Then  that  Saktivega,  having  become  a  king,
entered  the  City  of  Gold,  that  glory  of  the  Vidyadhara  world,
proceeding  thither  with  his  wives.  Living  in  that  city,  the
palaces  of  which  gleamed  with  fabric  of  gold,  which  seemed
on  account  of  its  great  height  to  be  the  condensed  rays  of
the  sun  falling  in  brightness,  he  enjoyed  exceeding  happiness
with  those  fair-eyed  wives,  in  charming  gardens,  the  lakes  of
which  had  steps  made  out  of  jewels.


[M]  Having  thus  related  his  wonderful  history,  the
eloquent  Saktivega  went  on  to  say  to  the  King  of  Vatsa  :
"  Know  me  O  lord  of  Vatsa,  ornament  of  the  lunar  race,  to
be  that  very  Saktideva  come  here,  full  of  desire  to  behold  the

^  The  Brockhaus  text  is  not  clear  here.  The  meaning  (as  the  D.  text
shows)  is  that  the  king  altered  the  name  of  his  son-in-law  a  little  by  changing
the  last  syllable  det^a  into  vega,  the  latter  being  a  termination  found  among
Vidyadharas.  The  same  thing  happened  in  the  case  of  A^okadatta  and  Vijaya-
datta  (see  p.  212).  It  will  be  noticed  that  the  altered  name,  Saktivega,  is
used  a  few  lines  lower  down. — n.m.p.


SAKTIVEGA  DEPARTS  239

two  feet  of  your  son  who  is  just  born  and  is  destined  to  be
our  new  emperor.  Thus  I  have  obtained,  though  originally
a  man,  the  rank  of  sovereign  among  the  Vidyadharas  by  the
favour  of  Siva  :  and  now,  O  King,  I  return  to  my  own  home.
I  have  seen  our  future  lord ;  may  you  enjoy  unfailing  felicity."
After  finishing  his  tale,  Saktivega  said  this  with  clasped
hands,  and  receiving  permission  to  depart,  immediately  flew
up  into  the  sky  like  the  moon  in  brightness ;  and  then  the
King  of  Vatsa,  in  the  company  of  his  wives,  surrounded  by
his  ministers,  and  with  his  young  son,  enjoyed,  in  his  own
capital,  a  state  of  indescribable  felicity.


240  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


NOTE  ON  THE  SACRED  COW  OF  THE  HINDUS

Although  the  worship  of  the  sacred  cow  plays  such  an  important  part
in  modern  Hinduism,  there  appears  to  be  considerable  doubt  as  to  whether
the  practice  dates  from  historical  or  prehistorical  times  in  India.  Thus  in
Hastings'  Ency.  lie/.  Eth.,  in  the  article  on  "Animals"  (vol.  i,  p.  507),  by
N.  W.  Thomas,  we  read :  "  Unlike  Egypt,  it  is  clear  that  India  developed  a
respect  for  the  animal  in  historic  times  "  ;  while  in  the  article  on  the  "  Cow
(Hindu),"  by  H.  Jacobi  (vol.  iv,  pp.  224-226),  we  find:  "The  belief  in  the
sanctity  of  the  cow,  which  is  a  very  prominent  feature  of  Hinduism,  seems  to
have  been  inherited  by  the  Indians  from  prehistoric  times,  before  they  and
the  Iranians  had  separated."  Crooke  (op.  cil.,  vol.  ii,  p.  226)  is  inclined  to
support  the  former  view,  but  inspection  of  the  early  references  in  the  Avesta,
Rig-Veda,  Atharva-Veda  show,  without  doubt,  that  the  cow  was  held  sacred
from  the  very  earliest  times.  In  the  Purdnas  the  worship  increased,  while  in
the  Mahdbhdrata  the  great  sacredness  of  the  cow  becomes  a  firmly  established
fact — so  firmly  indeed  that  even  to-day  its  slaughter  fills  the  Hindu  with  such
horror  that  it  is  prohibited  in  native  states  under  treaties  with  the  English.

We  will  now  examine  the  evidence  in  closer  detail.

The  Vedic  Indians  were  a  nation  of  meat-eaters,  the  chief  food  being  the
ox,  sheep  and  goat.  The  slaughter  of  the  ox,  however,  was  always  regarded
as  a  kind  of  sacrificial  act,  and  therefore  particularly  appropriate  for  the
entertainment  of  guests.  It  also  played  an  important  part  at  wedding
festivals.  In  the  Cambridge  History  of  India,  vol.  i,  p.  102,  A.  B.  Keith  points
out  that  there  is  no  inconsistency  between  this  eating  of  flesh  and  the  growing
sanctity  of  the  cow,  which  bears  already  in  the  Rig-Veda  the  epithet  aghnyd,
"  not  to  be  killed."  Such  a  term  should  be  looked  upon  merely  as  a  proof  of
the  high  value  attached  to  an  animal  which  supplied  the  milk  that  meant  so
much  both  for  secular  and  sacred  use  to  the  Vedic  Indian.

It  is  interesting  to  note  that  in  Rig-Veda  days  the  cow  was  used  as  a
standard  of  value,  and  the  epithet  sataddya  denotes  that  the  price  of  a  man's
blood  was  a  hundred  cows.  Although  there  were  no  coins  even  in  the  times
of  the  later  Sanihitds  and  Brdhmanas,  the  nishka,  originally  a  gold  ornament,
was  used  as  a  unit  of  value  and  the  cow  was  gradually  being  superseded
as  such.

Early  Buddhist  literature  shows  the  ancient  systems  of  barter  and
reckoning  values  by  cows  almost  entirely  replaced  by  a  metal  currency,
commodities  being  stated  in  figures  of  a  certain  coin,  or  its  fractions  (see
Joum.  Roy.  As.  Soc,  1901,  p.  882  et  .seq.).

But  quite  apart  from  the  sanctity  attached  to  the  cow  in  Vedic  times
owing  to  its  value  as  a  supplier  of  milk,  the  mystic  relation  between  the
cow  and  the  universe  is  alluded  to  in  the  Rig-Veda  in  several  places  {e.g.
i,  153,  3;  viii,  90,  15;  x,  11,  1).  For  further  details  see  A.  A.  Macdonell,
Vedic  Mythology,  Grundriss  d.  Indo-Arischen  Philologie,  iii,  1a,  1 897,  under  "  Cow  "
and  "Cows."


THE  SACRED  COW  OF  THE  HINDUS         241

The  same  idea  is  found  in  the  Atharva-Veda,  especially  in  viii,  10  and
22-29.  By  the  time  of  the  Purdnas  the  idea  has  become  fully  developed
as  a  legend  and  in  the  Vishnu  Purdna  (Wilson,  vol.  i,  ch.  xiii)  we  get  the
following  (according  to  Jacobi's  resume)  : —

Prithu,  son  of  Vena,  having  been  constituted  universal  monarch,  desired
to  recover  for  his  subjects  edible  plants,  which,  during  the  preceding  period
of  anarchy,  had  all  perished.  He  therefore  assailed  the  Earth,  which,  assuming
the  form  of  a  cow,  fled  from  him  and  traversed  all  the  heavenly  regions.  At
last  she  yielded  to  him,  and  promised  to  fecundate  the  soil  with  her  milk.
Thereupon  Prithu  flattened  the  surface  of  the  earth  with  his  bow,  uprooting
and  thrusting  away  hundreds  and  thousands  of  mountains.  Having  made
Svayanibhuva  Manu  the  calf,  he  milked  the  Earth,  and  received  the  milk
into  his  own  hand,  for  the  benefit  of  mankind.  Thence  proceeded  all  kinds
of  corn  and  vegetables  upon  which  people  subsist  now  and  always.  By
granting  life  to  the  Earth,  Prithu  was  as  her  father;  and  she  thence  derived
the  patronymic  appellation  Prithivl  ("daughter  of  Prithu  ").  Then  the  gods,
the  sages,  the  demons,  the  Rakshasas,  the  Gandharvas,  Yakshas,  Pitris,
serpents,  mountains  and  trees  took  a  milking  vessel  suited  to  their  kind,
and  milked  the  Earth  of  appropriate  milk.  And  the  milker  and  the  calf
were  both  pecuhar  to  their  own  species.

The  cow  was  also  identified  with  speech,  and  as  speech  was  regarded
as  divine  we  have  here  an  additional  reason  for  the  sanctity  of  the  cow.
Jacobi  (op.  cit.,  p.  225)  points  out  that  this  identification  was  perhaps  due,  not
so  much  to  a  popular  association  of  ideas,  as  to  a  chance  similarity  of  sound
between  the  two  words  go,  "  cow,"  and  gd,  "to  sing,"  or  perhaps glr,  "  speech."

The  doctrine  of  ahimsd,  the  forbidding  of  any  injury  to  an  animal,  was
not  fully  developed  in  the  Brdhmana  period.  For  although  the  Satapatha
Brdhmana  prohibits  the  eating  of  a  cow  (iii,  1,  2,  21),  the  great  sage  Yajna-
valkya  ate  meat  of  milch  cows  and  oxen  provided  the  flesh  was  amsala —
i.e.  "firm,"  or  "tender."

It  is  only  when  the  belief  in  transmigration  strengthened  the  philosophic
tenets  of  the  Brdhmanas  as  to  the  unity  and  concord  of  existence  that  the
taboo  was  really  established.  It  has  been  pointed  out  that  the  cow  was  still
killed  for  guests  in  the  Grihya  STitras,  but  it  should  be  noticed  that  the  offer
to  kill  a  cow  for  a  guest  was  merely  a  rite  of  hospitality,  corresponding
somewhat  to  the  "my  house  and  everything  in  it  is  yours"  attitude  of  the
Oriental  of  to-day.  In  vol.  i,  ch.  x,  p.  232  of  the  Cambridge  History  of  India,
E.  W.  Hopkins  makes  this  quite  clear — the  host  says  to  the  guest,  holding
the  knife  ready  to  slay  the  cow,  that  he  has  the  cow  for  him  ;  but  the  guest
is  then  directed  to  say :  "  Mother  of  Rudras,  daughter  of  the  Vasus,  sister  of
the  Adityas,  navel  of  immortality  (is  she).  Do  not  kill  the  guiltless  cow ;
she  is  (Earth  itself),  Aditi,  the  goddess.  I  speak  to  them  that  understand."
He  adds :  "  My  sin  has  been  killed  and  that  of  So-and-so ;  let  her  go  and  eat
grass."  But  if  he  really  wants  to  have  her  eaten,  he  says:  "I  kill  my  sin
and  the  sin  of  So-and-so"  (in  killing  her),  and  though  in  many  cases  the  off"er
of  the  cow  is  thus  plainly  a  formal  piece  of  etiquette,  yet  the  offering  to  the
VOL.  II.  Q


242  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

guest  was  not  complete  without  flesh  of  some  sort ;  and  it  is  clear  from  the
formulas  that  any  of  the  worthiest  guests  might  demand  the  cow's  death,
though  as  the  "six  worthy  guests"  are  teacher,  priest,  father-in-law,  king,
friend,  and  Aryan  "reborn"  man,  and  all  of  these  were  doubtless  well
grounded  in  that  veneration  for  the  cow  which  is  expressed  above  by  identify-
ing her  with  Earth  (as  Aditi),  there  was  probably  seldom  any  occasion  to
harrow  the  feelings  of  the  cow-revering  host.

Gradually  there  was  no  question  of  the  cow  being  killed,  the  goat  being
the  animal  usually  substituted.  As  already  mentioned,  it  is  in  the  Mahdbharata
that  we  find  the  great  sacredness  of  the  cow  fully  established.  Here  emphasis
is  laid  on  the  great  merit  acquired  by  gifts  of  cows,  and  the  value  of  the
animal  for  religious  sacrifice  owing  to  its  great  purity.

So  pure,  indeed,  is  the  cow  that  its  five  products,  paNchagai^a  (milk,
curds,  ghee,  urine  and  dung),  are  also  considered  pure  and  enter  largely,
sometimes  in  a  very  disgusting  way,  into  rites  of  purification,  besides  being
used  in  exorcism,  magic,  disease  and  domestic  ritual.

The  peculiar  smell  of  cows  has  led  to  the  myth  tracing  their  descent  from
Surabhi,  "the  fragrant  one."  It  is  fully  given  in  Mahahharata,  xiii,  77.
Surabhi  once  practised  austerities  and  Brahma  granted  her  immortality  and  a
region  above  the  three  worlds  to  dwell  in,  called  Goloka.  This  is,  therefore,
the  cow's  heaven,  a  beautiful  place,  only  to  be  attained  by  those  who  have
achieved  merit  on  earth  by  the  continual  gifts  and  worship  of  cows.
For  other  rites  in  the  Mahdbharata  see  xiii,  80,  1-3  ;  78,  24-  et  seij.
The  connection  of  the  bull  with  Siva,  the  celestial  cow,  Kamadhenn,
with  Indra,  and  the  friendship  of  Krishna  with  the  herdsmen  and  his  love
of  the  gopls,  particularly  Riidha,  have  all  added  to  the  general  sacredness  of
the  cow.

Its  connection  with  fertility  seems  to  appear  in  the  phallic  worship  of
Siva,  where  the  evil  influences  of  the  female  principal  through  the  yoni  are
partly  counteracted  by  the  bull,  Nandin,  being  placed  between  the  i/oni  and
the  direction  of  the  village.

For  further  details  on  this  part  of  the  question  see  E.  Sellon,  "The
Phallic  Worship  of  India,"  Mem.  Anih.  Soc.  Ldn.,  vol.  i,  1865,  pp.  327-3.S4.

For  references  on  cow  ritual,  apart  from  those  already  mentioned  at  the
beginning  of  the  note,  see  Dubois,  op.  cit.,  pp.  191-192,  573-574,  686,  706 ;
the  Index  of  Macdonell's  A  History  of  Sanskrit  Literature  under  "  Cow "  ;
Russell,  Tribes  atid  Castes  of  the  Central  Provinces,  vol.  i,  p.  415,  where  a  most
curious  penalty  for  killing  a  cow  by  members  of  the  Tiyor  caste  is  described ;
and  Stevenson,  lUtes  of  the  Twice-born,  pp.  l6l,  194,  273,  311  et  seq.,  324  el  seq.,
and  376.  The  fullest  account,  however,  is  that  by  Crooke,  "  The  Veneration
of  the  Cow  in  India,"  Folk-I^re,  vol.  xxiii,  1912,  pp.  275-306.  I  did  not  dis-
cover this  interesting  article  till  my  note  was  in  the  press.  I  notice  that  he
(pp.  280,  291)  has  entirely  abandoned  his  old  views  (line  10  of  note),  and  fully
recognises  the  great  antiquity  of  cow-worship  among  the  Hindus. — n.m.p.


APPENDIX    I


APPENDIX   I

THE  STORY  OF  URVA^I  AND  PURURAVAS

This  well-known  story  appears  in  many  forms  owing  to  its
great  age  and  the  enormous  popularity  it  has  always  enjoyed.
As  related  in  the  Ocean  of  Story,  it  has  unfortunately  lost
nearly  all  its  original  character  and  charm.  Before  attempt-
ing, therefore,  to  offer  any  suggestions  as  to  the  possible
meaning  of  the  legend,  it  will  be  as  well  to  tell  the  story  in
its  original  form.

In  the  first  place,  however,  I  would  like  to  point  out  why
this  story  is  so  intensely  interesting.  It  is  the  first  Indo-
European  love-story  known,  and  may  even  be  the  oldest
love-story  in  the  world.  Its  history  throughout  the  whole
range  of  Sanskrit  literature  is  astonishing.  The  story  itself
can  be  regarded  from  several  points  of  view— all  of  them
interesting.  Firstly,  it  is  a  tale  of  a  great  love,  full  of  deep
feeling  and  real  pathos.  Its  beauty  is  quite  sufficient  to
immortalise  it,  whatever  else  we  may  read  in  it.  Secondly,
it  contains  incidents  which  strike  one  as  distinctly  sym-
bolical, and  immediately  open  up  that  ever-fascinating
pursuit  of  theorising.  Thirdly,  it  has  a  distinct  historical
and  anthropological  value,  and  is  without  doubt  the  earliest
example  of  nuptial  taboo  in  existence.  Lastly,  the  tale  so
appealed  to  Kalidasa  that  he  made  it  the  theme  of  his  play
Vikramorvasi,  still  further  beautifying  it  with  some  of  the
choicest  gems  of  his  poetical  genius.

We  first  hear  of  Urvasi  and  Pururavas  in  a  somewhat
obscure  hymn  of  the  Rig-Veda  (x,  95).  It  consists  of  a
dialogue  when  the  Apsaras  is  about  to  leave  her  mortal
husband  for  ever.  As  the  story  is  incomplete  and  dis-
jointed, we  must  pass  on  to  the  fuller  account  as  found  in
the  Satapatha  Brdhmana  (v,  1),  which,  however,  includes
several  of  the  verses  from  the  Rig-Veda,^

1.  The  nymph  Urvasi  loved  Pururavas,  the  son  of  Ha.
When  she  wedded  him  she  said  :  "  Thrice  a  day  shalt  thou
embrace  me  ;  but  do  not  lie  with  me  against  my  will,  and  let

^  J.  Eggeling's  translation,  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  vol.  xliv,  pp.  68-74.
245


246  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

me  not  see  thee  naked,  for  such  is  the  way  to  behave  to  us
women."

2.  She  then  dwelt  with  him  a  long  time,  and  was  even
with  child  of  him,  so  long  did  she  dwell  with  him.  Then  the
Gandharvas  said  to  one  another  :  "  For  a  long  time,  indeed,
has  this  Urva^i  dwelt  among  men  :  devise  ye  some  means
how  she  may  come  back  to  us."  Now  a  ewe  with  two  lambs
was  tied  to  her  couch  :  the  Gandharvas  then  carried  off  one
of  the  lambs.

3.  "  Alas,"  she  cried,  "  they  are  taking  away  my  darling,
as  if  I  were  where  there  is  no  hero  and  no  man  !  "  They
carried  off  the  second,  and  she  spake  in  the  selfsame
manner.

4.  He  then  thought  within  himself :  "  How  can  that  be
(a  place)  without  a  hero  and  without  a  man  where  I  am  ?  "
And  naked  as  he  was  he  sprang  up  after  them  :  too  long
he  deemed  it  that  he  should  put  on  his  garment.  Then  the
Gandharvas  produced  a  flash  of  lightning  and  she  beheld
him  naked  even  as  by  daylight.  Then,  indeed,  she  vanished.
"  Here  I  am  back,"  he  said,  and  lo  !  she  had  vanished.
Wailing  with  sorrow  he  wandered  all  over  Kurukshetra.
Now  there  is  a  lotus-lake  there  called  Anyatahplaksha.  He
walked  along  its  bank,  and  there  nymphs  were  swimming
about  in  the  shape  of  swans.

5.  And  she  (Urvasi),  recognising  him,  said  :  "  This  is
the  man  with  whom  I  have  dwelt."  They  then  said:  "Let
us  appear  to  him!"  "So  be  it!"  she  replied,  and  they
appeared  to  him.

6.  He  then  recognised  her  and  implored  her  {Rig-Veda,
X,  95,  1)  :  "  Oh,  my  wife,  stay  thou,  cruel  in  mind  :  let  us
now  exchange  words  !  Untold,  these  secrets  of  ours  will  not
bring  us  joy  in  days  to  come." — "  Stop,  pray,  let  us  speak
together  !  " — this  is  what  he  meant  to  say  to  her.

7.  She  replied  {Rig-Veda,  x,  95,  2)  :  "  What  concern
have  I  with  speaking  to  thee  ?  I  have  passed  away  like  the
first  of  the  dawns.  Pururavas,  go  home  again :  I  am  like
the  wind,  difficult  to  catch." — "  Thou  didst  not  do  what  I
had  told  thee  ;  hard  to  catch  I  am  for  thee,  go  to  thy  home
again!  " — this  is  what  she  meant  to  say.

8.  He  then  said,  sorrowing  {Rig-Veda,  x,  95,  14)  :  "  Then
will  thy  friend  rush  away  this  day,  never  to  come  back,  to  go
to  the  farthest  distance  :  then  will  he  lie  in  Nirriti's  lap,  or
the  fierce  wolves  will  devour  him." — "  Thy  friend  will  either


APPENDIX  I-URVASI  AND  PURURAVAS     247

hang  himself  or  start  forth ;  or  the  wolves  or  dogs  will  devour
him  !  " — this  is  what  he  meant  to  say.

9.  She  replied  {Rig-Veda,  x,  95,  15)  :  "  Pururavas,  do
not  die  !  Do  not  rush  away !  Let  not  the  cruel  wolves
devour  thee  !  Truly,  there  is  no  friendship  with  women,
and  theirs  are  the  hearts  of  hyenas." — "  Do  not  take  this  to
heart !  There  is  no  friendship  with  women  :  return  home  !  "
— this  is  what  she  meant  to  say.

lo:  {Rig 'Veda,  x,  95,  16):  "When  changed  in  form  I
walked  among  mortals,  and  passed  the  nights  there  during
four  autumns.  I  ate  a  little  ghee,  once  a  day,  and  even  now
feel  satisfied  therewith." — This  discourse  in  fifteen  verses
has  been  handed  down  by  the  Bahvricas.  Then  her  heart
took  pity  on  him.

11.  She  said  :  "  Come  here  the  last  night  of  the  year  from
now  :  then  shalt  thou  lie  with  me  for  one  night,  and  then
this  son  of  thine  will  have  been  born."  He  came  there  on  the
last  night  of  the  year,  and  lo !  there  stood  a  golden  palace.
They  then  said  to  him  only  this  (word),  "  Enter !  "  and  then
they  bade  her  go  to  him.

12.  She  then  said :  "  To-morrow  morning  the  Gandharvas
will  grant  thee  a  boon,  and  thou  must  make  thy  choice."  He
said  :  "  Choose  thou  for  me  1  "  She  replied  :  "  Say,  let  me
be  one  of  yourselves  !  "  In  the  morning  the  Gandharvas
granted  him  a  boon,  and  he  said  ;  "  Let  me  be  one  of  your-
selves !  "

13.  They  said  :  "  Surely  there  is  not  among  men  that
holy  form  of  fire  by  sacrificing  wherewith  one  would  become
one  of  ourselves."  They  put  fire  into  a  pan  and  gave  it  to
him,  saying  :  "  By  sacrificing  therewith  thou  shalt  become
one  of  ourselves."  He  took  it  (the  fire)  and  his  boy  and
went  on  his  way  home.  He  then  deposited  the  fire  in  the
forest  and  went  to  the  village  with  the  boy  alone.  He  came
back  and  thought,  "  Here  I  am  back,"  and  lo  !  it  had  dis-
appeared :  what  had  been  the  fire  was  an  Asvattha  tree
{Ficus  religiosa),  and  what  had  been  the  pan  was  a  Sami  tree
(Mimosa  suma).     He  then  returned  to  the  Gandharvas.

14.  They  said  :  "  Cook  for  a  whole  year  a  mess  of  rice
sufficient  for  four  persons  ;  and  taking  each  time  three  logs
from  this  Asvattha  tree,  anoint  them  with  ghee,  and  put
them  on  the  fire  with  verses  containing  the  words  '  log '  and
'  ghee  '  :  the  fire  which  shall  result  therefrom  will  be  that
very  fire  (which  is  required)."


248  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

15.  They  said  :  "  But  that  is  recondite  (esoteric),  as  it
were.  Make  thyself  rather  an  upper  arani  (fire-stick)  of
Ai^vattha  wood,  and  a  lower  arani  of  Sami  wood :  the  fire
which  shall  result  therefrom  will  be  that  very  fire."

16.  They  said  :  "  But  that  also  is,  as  it  were,  recondite.
Make  thyself  rather  an  upper  arani  of  A^vattha  wood,  and  a
lower  ararii  of  Asvattha  wood :  the  fire  which  shall  result
therefrom  will  be  that  very  fire."

17.  He  then  made  himself  an  upper  arani  of  Asvattha
wood,  and  a  lower  arani  of  Asvattha  wood,  and  the  fire
which  resulted  therefrom  was  that  very  fire  :  by  offering
therewith  he  became  one  of  the  Gandharvas.  Let  him
therefore  make  himself  an  upper  and  a  lower  arani  of
Ai^vattha  wood,  and  the  fire  which  results  therefrom  will
be  that  very  fire  :  by  offering  therewith  he  becomes  one  of
the  Gandharvas.

In  the  above  version  there  are  several  points  to  be
noticed  :

1.  A  heavenly  nymph  loves  a  mortal  man.

2.  The  nuptial  taboo.

3.  The  inability  to  preserve  it.

4.  The  swan- nymphs.

5.  The  aloofness  of  the  nymph.

6.  Sudden  pity  for  the  mortal.

7.  The  necessity  for  the  mortal  to  become  immortal.

8.  The  fire-sacrifice  as  a  means  of  achieving  this.
Looking  at  the  legend  as  it  stands,  it  appears  to  show  how

impossible  it  is  for  a  mere  man  to  aspire  to  a  heavenly  bride.
His  nature  is  such  that  he  is  incapable  of  abiding  by  the
accustomed  conditions  of  such  a  marriage,  and  in  consequence
misery  is  bound  to  result,  unless  by  following  the  prescribed
rules  of  sacrifice  and  esoteric  ritual  he  can  manage  to  rise
to  her  level.  Then,  and  only  then,  can  he  expect  eternal
happiness.

Before  examining  the  tale  in  greater  detail  it  will  be
advisable  to  see  if  the  other  versions  give  us  further  data  to
work  upon.  It  occurs  in  the  Mahdbhdrata  and  most  of  the
Purdnas,  The  best  account,  however,  is  probably  that  in
the  Vishnu  Purdna,  The  following  portions  are  taken  from
the  translation  by  H.  H.  Wilson.

We  are  first  given  more  details  about  our  hero.

It  has  already  been  related  how  Buddha  begot  Pururavas
by  Ila.     Pururavas  was  a  prince  renowned  for  liberality,


APPENDIX  I-URVASI  AND  PURURAVAS     249

devotion,  magnificence,  and  love  of  truth,  and  for  personal
beauty.  Urvasi,  having  incurred  the  imprecation  of  Mitra
and  Varuna,  determined  to  take  up  her  abode  in  the  world  of
mortals,  and  descending  accordingly,  beheld  Pururavas.

Then  follow  the  incidents  of  the  taboo,  the  rams,  lightning,
and  disappearance  of  Urvasi.  The  heart-broken  Pururavas
wandered  naked  over  the  world  like  one  insane.

At  length  coming  to  Kurukshetra,  he  saw  Urvasi  sport-
ing with  four  other  nymphs  of  heaven  in  a  lake  beautiful
with  lotuses,  and  he  ran  to  her  and  called  her  his  wife,  and
wildly  implored  her  to  return.  "  Mighty  monarch,"  said  the
nymph,  "  refrain  from  this  extravagance.  I  am  now  preg-
nant :  depart  at  present,  and  come  hither  again  at  the  end  of
a  year,  when  I  will  deliver  to  you  a  son,  and  remain  with  you
for  one  night."  Pururavas,  thus  comforted,  returned  to  his
capital.  Urvasi  said  to  her  companions  :  "  The  prince  is  a
most  excellent  mortal :  I  lived  with  him  long  and  affection-
ately united."  "  It  was  well  done  of  you,"  they  replied  ;
"he  is  indeed  of  comely  appearance,  and  one  with  whom
we  could  live  happily  for  ever."  When  the  year  had  expired
Urvasi  and  the  monarch  met  at  Kurukshetra,  and  she  con-
signed to  him  his  first-born,  Ayus  ;  and  these  annual  inter-
views were  repeated  until  she  had  borne  to  him  five  sons.
She  then  said  to  Pururavas  :  "  Through  regard  for  me  all
the  Gandharvas  have  expressed  their  joint  purpose  to  bestow
upon  my  lord  their  benediction  ;  let  him,  therefore,  demand
a  boon."  The  Raja  replied  :  "  My  enemies  are  all  destroyed,
my  faculties  are  all  entire ;  I  have  friends  and  kindred,
armies  and  treasures  :  there  is  nothing  which  I  may  not
obtain  except  living  in  the  same  region  with  my  Urvasi.
My  only  desire,  therefore,  is  to  pass  my  life  with  her."  When
he  had  thus  spoken,  the  Gandharvas  brought  to  Pururavas
a  vessel  with  fire  and  said  to  him  :  "  Take  this  fire  and,
according  to  the  precepts  of  the  Vedas,  divide  it  into  three
fires ;  then  fixing  your  mind  upon  the  idea  of  living  with
Urvasi,  offer  oblations,  and  you  shall  assuredly  obtain  your
wishes."

The  Raja  took  the  brazier  and  departed,  and  came  to  a
forest.  Then  he  began  to  reflect  that  he  had  committed  a
great  folly  in  bringing  away  the  vessel  of  fire  instead  of  his
bride  ;  and  leaving  the  vessel  in  the  wood  he  went  discon-
solate to  his  palace.  In  the  middle  of  the  night  he  awoke,
and   considered   that   the   Gandharvas   had  given  him  the


250  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

brazier  to  enable  him  to  obtain  the  felicity  of  living  with
Urva^i,  and  that  it  was  absurd  in  him  to  have  left  it  by  the
way.  Resolving,  therefore,  to  recover  it,  he  rose  and  went
to  the  place  where  he  had  deposited  the  vessel ;  but  it  was
gone.  In  its  stead  he  saw  a  young  Asvattha  tree  growing
out  of  a  Sami  plant,  and  he  reasoned  with  himself,  and  said :
"  I  left  in  this  spot  a  vessel  of  fire,  and  now  behold  a  young
Asvattha  tree  growing  out  of  a  Sami  plant.  Verily  I  will
take  these  types  of  fire  to  my  capital,  and  there,  having  en-
gendered fire  by  their  attrition,  I  will  worship  it."  Having
thus  determined,  he  took  the  plants  to  his  city,  and  prepared
their  wood  for  attrition,  with  pieces  of  as  many  inches  long
as  there  are  syllables  in  the  Gayatri :  he  recited  that  holy
verse  and  rubbed  together  sticks  of  as  many  inches  as  he
recited  syllables  in  the  Gayatri.  Having  thus  elicited  fire,
he  made  it  threefold,  according  to  the  injunctions  of  the
Vedas,  and  offered  oblations  with  it,  proposing  as  the  end  of
the  ceremony  reunion  with  Urvasi.

In  this  way,  celebrating  many  sacrifices  agreeably  to  the
form  in  which  offerings  are  presented  with  fire,  Pururavas
obtained  a  seat  in  the  sphere  of  the  Gandharvas,  and  was
no  more  separated  from  his  beloved.  Thus  fire,  that  was  at
first  but  one,  was  made  threefold  in  the  present  Manwantara
by  the  son  of  Ila.

In  this  version  the  most  important  difference  is  the  more
detailed  account  of  the  fire-ritual.  Here  we  at  once  see  an
unmistakable  symbolism,  and  perhaps  a  lesson  to  show  the
importance  of  sacrifice  when  carried  out  in  strict  accordance
with  the  teachings  of  the  Vedas.  We  have  now  become
acquainted  with  the  legend  in  its  fullest  form  and  need  not
look  at  the  numerous  other  versions,  all  of  which  are  based
on  the  above.

I  would,  however,  refer  again  to  the  original  dialogue  in
Hymn  xcv  of  the  Rig-Veda,  As  we  have  already  seen,  verses
1,  2,  14,  15  and  16  recur  in  the  Satapatha  Brdhmana,  There
are  thirteen  other  verses,  which  describe  the  pleading  of
Pururavas  on  once  again  finding  his  beloved.  He  recalls  the
trick  by  which  the  Gandharvas  made  him  break  his  promise,
and  the  disadvantages  he  had,  being  only  a  mortal.  Urvas^i
is  unmoved.  Then  he  thinks  of  their  son — what  will  he
think  when  he  sees  no  father,  when  he  hears  he  has  been
deserted  ?     Urvasi  replies  ^  :

1  R.  T.  H.  Griffith,  vol.  iv,  Benares,  1892,  p.  304  et  seq.


APPENDIX  I-URVASI  AND  PURtJRAVAS     251

"  I  will  console  him  when  his  tears  are  falling  :  he
Shall  not  weep  and  cry  for  care  that  blesses.
That  which  is  thine  between  us  will  I  send  thee.
Go  home  again,  thou  fool ;   thou  hast  not  won  me."

Pururavas  in  his  misery  determines  to  destroy  himself
(as  in  the  other  versions),  and  finally  Urvasi  speaks  thus  :

"  Thus  speak  these  gods  to  thee,  O  son  of  Ila  :  as
Death  has  verily  got  thee  for  his  subject,
Thy  sons  shall  serve  the  gods  with  their  oblation,
And  thou,  moreover,  shalt  rejoice  in  Svarga."

Thus  the  obdurate  nymph  shows  no  signs  of  yielding  to
her  broken-hearted  lover.  She  merely  consoles  him  by  telling
him  that  the  gods  have  promised  that,  after  his  death,  his
sons  shall  offer  them  sacrifices,  and  Pururavas  himself  shall
attain  the  abode  of  the  blessed.

I  feel  that  this  sad  ending,  this  unsatisfied  love,  would
in  time  lose  any  significance  it  may  once  have  had,  and  as
the  tale  found  its  way  into  newer  works  a  happier  and  more
conventional  ending  would  be  substituted.

As  is  usual  in  nearly  every  legend,  scholars  have  en-
deavoured to  interpret  the  story  of  Pururavas  and  Urvasi  as
a  nature-myth.  Max  Miiller  tried  to  do  this  by  his  usual
method  of  comparative  philology.  The  principle  he  worked
upon  was,  that  in  order  to  arrive  at  the  original  meaning
of  a  myth  all  you  have  to  do  is  to  trace  to  their  source
the  original  meanings  of  the  names  of  the  gods  or  goddesses
mentioned.  In  most  cases  these  names  will  be  found  to
denote  elemental  phenomena,  and  will  have  some  natural
significance,  such  as  an  earthquake,  the  sunset,  a  storm,  the
sky,  and  so  on.

Applying  this  principle  to  the  tale  under  discussion,  he
would  derive  Urvasi  from  uru,  "  wide,"  and  a  root  as,  "  to
pervade,"  thus  meaning  "  that  which  occupies  the  wide
spaces  of  the  sky  " — i.e,  "  the  dawn."  Pururavas  he
identifies  with  the  Greek  TroXvSeuKi]^,  "  endowed  with  much
light,"  deriving  the  Sanskrit  word  from  the  root  ru,  "  to
cry,"  and  applied  to  a  loud  or  crying  colour — i.e.  red.  Thus
the  name  really  means  the  sun.  So  the  story  simply  ex-
presses the  sun  chasing  the  dawn.     "  Thus,"  says  Miiller/

1  Max  Miiller,  Oxford  Essays,  1856,  p.  6l  et  seq.  (reprinted  in  Chips  from
a  German  Workshop,  vol.  ii,  1868,  pp.  101-108,  117-121,  126-l.SO).


252  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

" '  Urva^i  loves  Pururavas  '  meant  '  the  sun  rises ' ;  '  Urvai^i
sees  Pururavas  naked '  meant  '  the  dawn  is  gone '  ;  '  Urvai^i
finds  Pururavas  again '  meant  '  the  sun  is  setting.'  "

This  system  of  tracing  the  origin  of  myths  through  ety-
mology has  proved  almost  entirely  unsuccessful.  The  reasons
for  this  are  numerous.  Among  others  may  be  mentioned  the
fact  that  myths  very  similar  indeed  to  those  found  among
Aryan  peoples  have  also  been  discovered  among  Australians,
South  Sea  Islanders,  Eskimos,  etc.  Then  again,  the  mean-
ing of  a  god's  name  need  have  nothing  whatever  to  do  with
the  myth  in  which  it  occurs,  for  the  simple  reason  that  nothing
was  more  usual  than  to  attach  the  name  of  a  popular  god  to
some  old  myth,  the  real  origin  of  which  had  long  been  for-
gotten. Names  like  Gilgamish,  Buddha,  Alexander,  Solomon,
David  and  a  hundred  others  continually  drew  to  them  stories
long  ante-dating  (or  post-dating)  them,  which  really  had
nothing  to  do  with  them  at  all.  If  there  were  no  miracles
connected  with  a  popular  hero  or  saint,  some  had  to  be  found
— and  were  found.  Then  again,  proper  names  of  mortals
were  often  derived  from  natural  phenomena,  and  a  story
told  about  "  Sun  "  and  "  Moon,"  two  members  of,  say,  some
Brazilian  tribe,  would  in  later  years  be  told  of  "  the  sun  "
and  "  the  moon."

But  apart  from  all  this,  philologists  differ  widely
as  to  the  true  etymology  of  words,  especially  names  of
deities.  Nothing  can  be  proved  definitely,  and  the  whole
system  is  one  that  the  mythologist  of  to-day  "  turns
down."  ^

The  beginning  of  the  story  is  simple  enough.  The
heavenly  nymph  falls  in  love  with  a  mortal  who  returns  her
love  to  the  very  utmost.  Although  warned  that  he  must
abide  by  certain  conditions,  he  is  willing  to  risk  everything.
He  is  told  that  the  conditions  are  merely  in  accordance  with
the  usual  custom.  Whether  she  means  the  custom  among
Apsarases  or  Aryan  womanhood  as  a  whole  we  are  not  told.
Anyhow,  we  have  here  the  earliest  example  of  a  nuptial  taboo,
which  in  after  years  appeared  in  a  Greek  Mdrchen,  known  to

^  For  further  suggested  explanations,  etc.,  see  A.  Kuhn,  Die  Herahkunft
des  Feuers  und  dcs  GMertranks,  p.  81  et  seq.  (2nd  edition,  p.  73  et  seq^\
A.  Weber,  Ind.  Slreifen,  vol.  i,  1868-1879,  p.  l6  et  seq.;  K.  F.  Geldner  in
Pischel  and  Geldner's  Vedische  Studien,  vol.  i,  1889,  pp.  244  et  seq. ;  H.  Olden-
berg,  Religion  des  Veda,  p.  253  ;  ditto.  Die  Literalur  des  alien  Indien,  1903,
pp.  5S-5b  ;  Garrett's  Classical  Dictionary,  p.  486 ;  Macdonell,  Vedic  Mythology,
p.  135.


APPENDIX  I-URVASI  AND  PURtTRAVAS     253

us  through  the  Latin  of  Apuleius — the  famous  Cupid  and
Psyche  myth.

This  is  not  the  place  to  go  into  any  details  on  the  subject
of  taboo,  which  has  been  so  ably  discussed  by  Frazer  (see  the
volume  of  The  Golden  Bough  (iii)  entitled  "  Taboo  and  the
Perils  of  the  Soul  ").  I  would,  however,  draw  attention  to
J.  A.  MaccuUoch's  Childhood  of  Fiction,  pp.  324  et  seq,,  where
wiU  be  found  many  interesting  variants  to  our  story  in  the
folk-lore  of  both  civilised  and  semi- civilised  peoples.

Although  not  usually  mentioned,  there  is  a  story  closely
resembling  "  Cupid  and  Psyche  "  in  the  Pentamerone,  second
day,  ninth  diversion  (Burton,  vol.  i,  p.  211  et  seq,),  entitled
"  The  Padlock."

It  seems  very  probable  that  all  these  taboos  in  legend  had
their  origin  in  taboos  in  real  life,  many  examples  of  which
have  been  noted  (Macculloch,  op,  cit,  p.  335).

In  all  these  taboo  stories  the  taboo  seems  to  be  made  to
be  broken  ;  perhaps  it  is  intended  to  teach  some  lesson  or
explain  some  principle.  It  may  show  the  weakness  of  human
nature,  the  evil  results  of  lack  of  determination  or  the  neces-
sity for  unremitting  care  and  forethought — any  or  all  of
which  ideas  would  perfectly  well  serve  as  an  incentive  to  a
more  protracted  study  and  careful  observance  of  the  Vedas.

Frazer 's  theory  as  to  the  origin  of  tales  like  "  Urvasi  and
Pururavas  "  and  "  Cupid  and  Psyche  "  is  interesting.^  He  con-
siders that  they  represent  a  stage  of  decay  in  a  cycle  of  stories
which  originally  were  totemic.  He  argues  thus  :  "  Now,
wherever  the  totemic  clans  have  become  exogamous,  that  is,
wherever  a  man  is  always  obliged  to  marry  a  woman  of  a
totem  different  from  his  own,  it  is  obvious  that  husband  and
wife  will  always  have  to  observe  different  totemic  taboos,
and  that  a  want  of  respect  shown  by  one  of  them  for  the
sacred  animal  or  plant  of  the  other  would  tend  to  domestic
jars,  which  might  often  lead  to  the  permanent  separation  of
the  spouses,  the  offended  wife  or  husband  returning  to  her
or  his  native  clan  of  the  fish-people,  the  bird-people  or  what
not.  That,  I  take  it,  was  the  origin  of  the  sad  story  of  the
man  or  woman  happily  mated  with  a  transformed  animal
and  then  parted  for  ever.     Such  tales,  if  I  am  right,  were  not

1  The  Golden  Bough,  vol.  iv,  "The  Dying  God/'  pp.  130,  131.  I  would
especially  draw  attention  to  the  fine  collection  of  references  given  in  the
notes  on  these  two  pages.  vSee  also  P.  Saintyves,  Les  Conies  de  Perrault,
p.  41 6  et  seq.


254  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

wholly  fictitious.  Totemism  may  have  broken  many  loving
hearts.  But  when  that  ancient  system  of  society  had  fallen
into  disuse,  and  the  ideas  on  which  it  was  based  had  ceased
to  be  understood,  the  quaint  stories  of  mixed  marriages  to
which  it  had  given  birth  would  not  be  at  once  forgotten.
They  would  continue  to  be  told,  no  longer,  indeed,  as  myths
explanatory  of  custom,  but  merely  as  fairy  tales  for  the
amusement  of  the  listeners.  The  barbarous  features  of  the
old  legends,  which  now  appeared  too  monstrously  incredible
even  for  story-tellers,  would  be  gradually  discarded  and
replaced  by  others  which  fitted  in  better  with  the  changed
beliefs  of  the  time.  Thus  in  particular  the  animal  husband
or  animal  wife  of  the  story  might  drop  the  character  of  a
beast  to  assume  that  of  a  fairy."

Personally  I  am  not  in  the  least  convinced  by  this  theory,
which,  although  ingenious,  seems  entirely  devoid  of  any  sort
of  proof,  and  is,  moreover,  one  of  those  delightful  theories
that  can  have  no  proof.  The  idea  of  an  animal  husband  or
wife  would  not  tax  the  imagination  of  a  story-teller  very
far,  and,  moreover,  nothing  has  yet  been  thought  of  too  wild
for  the  boundless  imagination  of  the  Hindus,  whose  pantheon
is  so  full  of  animal  incarnations.

Referring  to  the  tale  under  discussion,  Frazer  states  in
conclusion  that  "  we  can  still  detect  hints  that  the  fairy  wife
was  once  a  bird- woman,"  and  in  the  note  below  says  that  a
clear  trace  of  the  bird  nature  of  Urvasi  occurs  in  the  Sata-
patha  Brdhmana.  Here  again  I  would  cry  "  not  proven."
As  already  mentioned  (Vol.  I,  p.  201),  Apsarases  were  origin-
ally water-nymphs,  those  who  "  moved  about  in  the  water."
In  verse  10  of  the  version  in  the  Rig-Veda  Pururavas  says  in
speaking  of  Urvasi  :

"  She  who  flashed  brilliant  as  the  falling  lightning
Brought  me  delicious  presents  from  the  waters."

This  is  merely  describing  Urvasi 's  home  :  "  from  the
waters  (of  the  firmament)."  Her  nature  was  that  of  a
beautiful  bird  moving  serenely  through  the  waters,  and  when
we  find  her  in  her  celestial  home  in  the  guise  of  a  swan  I  see
no  reason  to  take  this  to  be  an  early  example  of  either  the
"  Beauty  and  the  Beast  "  or  the  famous  "  swan-maiden  "
cycle  of  stories.  Furthermore,  the  one  important  feature
of  this  latter  cycle  is  the  discovery  of  the  disguise  on  the


r


APPENDIX  I-URVASI  AND  PURtJRAVAS     255


part  of  the  man  and  his  immediate  efforts  to  keep  her  in  her
human  shape.

Then  comes  the  aloofness  of  Urvasi  after  her  reunion
with  Pururavas.  In  the  earliest  version  she  maintains  this
attitude  to  the  end.  In  other  versions  she  softens,  and  all
ends  happily.  This  makes  a  prettier  story,  and  perhaps  that
explains  a  lot.  Anyhow  in  no  version  is  the  lesson,  which  is
intended  to  be  conveyed,  lost  sight  of.  A  mortal  love  and
marriage  is  all  very  nice  and  proper,  but  it  is  only  temporary.
There  is  a  far  greater  goal  to  be  obtained  —  that  of  im-
mortality— and  until  the  mere  mortal  has  realised  the  necessity
to  strive  after  something  higher  and  finer  he  cannot  hope  to
enjoy  the  lasting  fruits  of  a  passionate  love.

We  now  come  to  the  incident  about  the  sacrificial  fire.
It  does  not  occur  in  Hymn  xcv  of  the  Rig-Veda,  but  in
Hymn  xxix  ^  there  is  a  full  account  of  the  process  of  fire-making
by  means  of  the  fire-drill  (arani),  and  the  analogy  between  the
process  and  the  intercourse  of  the  sexes  is  realised.  It  seems
rather  as  if  the  fire-incident  was  connected  with  the  story  of
Urvasi  at  a  later  date,  and  merely  introduced  to  show  the
importance  of  sacrificial  fires  as  initiatory  rites  to  the  final
attainment  of  immortality.  In  the  version  found  in  the
Satapatha  Brdhmana  Pururavas  is  given  holy  fire  by  sacrific-
ing with  which  he  can  obtain  his  wish — to  become  a  Gan-
dharva.  He  leaves  the  fire  in  the  forest  and  on  his  return
finds  the  fire  and  the  pan  turned  into  two  trees,  one  an
Asvattha  (i.e.  Ficus  religiosa — the  modern  pipal,  aswat,  jari,
basri,  bo,  etc.),  and  the  other  a  Sami  tree  (i.e.  Mimosa  suma —
the  name  of  the  leaves  is  Prosopis  spicigera).  He  there-
upon returns  to  the  Gandharvas  for  further  instructions.
After  mentioning  various  rites  and  methods  of  making  fire
from  the  two  trees,  they  finally  tell  him  that  if  both  sticks  for
the  fire-drill  are  made  out  of  the  Asvattha  tree  the  resulting
fire  will  be  "  that  very  fire."

In  the  Vishnu  Purdna  details  are  more  fully  described,  as
already  seen.  Pururavas  realised  that  the  fire  had  been  given
him  "to  enable  him  to  retain  the  felicity  of  living  with
Urvasi."  On  returning  to  the  place  where  he  left  the  fire  he
finds  a  young  Asvattha  tree  growing  out  of  a  Sami  plant.
He  immediately  takes  wood  from  each  tree,  which  he  makes

1  Rig-Veda,  iii,  29.  See  Griffith's  translation,  vol.  ii,  pp.  2.5-27,  which
begins :  "  Here  is  gear  for  friction,  here  tinder  made  ready  for  the  spark.
Bring  thou  the  matron  [lower  stick],  we  will  rub  Agni  in  ancient  fashion  forth."


256  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

into  the  upper  and  lower  parts  of  a  fire-drill — taking  care  to
cut  them  in  accordance  with  a  specially  prescribed  ritual.
As  he  works  the  fire-drill  he  fixes  his  mind  on  reunion  with
his  beloved,  thus  employing  a  kind  of  sexual  sympathetic
magic.  Finally  stress  is  laid  on  the  importance  of  celebrating
sacrifices  in  the  form  in  which  offerings  are  prescribed  with
fire.  Pururavas  carries  out  the  necessary  instructions  of  the
Gandharvas  and  regains  Urvasi.

Thus  (the  version  ends)  fire  that  was  at  first  but  one  was
made  threefold.  The  three  kinds  of  fire  referred  to  are  :
vadavdgni,  which  is  submarine,  causes  the  waves,  and  keeps
the  level  of  the  ocean  uniform  by  consuming  so  much  water
— the  inpouring  rivers  making  the  deficit ;  laukikdgniy  the
domestic  fire  ;  and  vrika,  the  fire  in  one's  own  body  which
can  be  heard  on  putting  the  fingers  in  one's  ears.^

It  is  possible  that  the  fire  resulting  from  the  friction  of
the  two  sticks  symbolised  the  child,  for  in  a  very  large  number
of  primitive  tribes  in  all  parts  of  the  world  the  vertical  stick
is  known  by  a  name  signifying  "  male,"  while  the  horizontal
stick  is  called  "  female,"  and  in  some  cases  (as  among  the
Thompson  Indians  of  British  Columbia)  as  soon  as  the  spark
falls  on  the  tinder  of  dried  leaves  or  grass  they  exclaim :  "The
woman  has  given  birth  !  "

The  whole  subject  of  the  fire-drill  has  been  fully  discussed
by  Frazer,^  while  reference  should  also  be  made  to  Crooke  ^
and  Thurston."*

It  is  curious  that  Frazer  (p.  209)  states  that  the  sticks  are
not  taken  from  the  same  tree,  but  that  one  must  be  hard  and
the  other  soft.  Certainly  this  seems  reasonable,  but  he  must
have  overlooked  the  statements  in  the  Satapatha  Brdhmana
and  also  the  numerous  examples  quoted  by  Thurston,  where
both  sticks  are  made  from  the  same  tree.

^  For  full  details  of  the  Agnyadhana,  or  ^'  Establishment  of  the  Sacred
Fires,"  see  Satapatha  Brdhmana,  part  i,  second  kdnda,  p.  274  ei  seq.

2  The  Golden  Bough,  vol',  ii,  ch.  xv,  "The  Fire  Drill"  (pp.  206-226),  and
ch,  xvi,  "  Father  Jove  and  Mother  Vesta"  (pp.  227-252).  See  also  the  General
Index  under  "  Friction."

^  Poptdar  Rcligio7i  oj'  Northern  hidia,  vol.  ii,  pp.  1.92-195.

*  Ethnographic  Notes  in  Southern  India,  pp.  464-470 ;  and  Castes  and
Tribes  of  Southern  India,  vol.  i,  p.  99,  where  it  is  interesting  to  note  that
although  the  Badagas  make  fire  by  friction,  reference  is  made  in  their  folk-
legends  not  to  this  mode  of  obtaining  fire,  but  to  chakkamukki  (flint  and  steel).
Commenting  upon  this,  T.  C.  Hodson  {Primitive  Culture  of  India,  Roy.  As.  Soc.
Forlong  Fund,  vol.  i,  p.  Si))  suggests  that  possibly  the  flint  and  steel  had
superseded  the  use  of  the  fire-drill,  except  in  the  solemnity  of  funeral  rites.


APPENDIX  I-URVASI  AND  PURtJRAVAS     257

In  order  to  appreciate  the  extent  to  which  the  sacred  fire
entered  into  Hindu  ritual  as  time  went  on  we  have  only  to
glance  at  the  daily  offering  to  the  fire  made  by  the  modern
Brahman,  known  as  homa.  It  is  made  twice  daily,  once  in
the  morning  before  breakfast  and  again  at  night  before
dinner.  It  consists  of  ghee,  curds,  and  rice  or  grain.^  Homa
is  also  performed  at  the  investiture  of  the  Sacred  Thread,  at
hair-cutting,  marriages,  srdddha,  etc.

After  his  wedding  a  Brahman  can  either  be  an  ordinary
householder  or  an  agnihotrl — i.e,  fire-priest — and  observe  the
full  forty-eight  rites  (instead  of  the  ordinary  sixteen).  The
fire  used  at  any  important  ceremony  such  as  a  wedding
should  be  kindled  by  friction  and  the  fire  in  the  domestic
hearth  lit  by  it.  Full  details  of  the  agnihotrl  have  been  given
by  Crooke.^

Thus,  I  think,  we  can  regard  the  fire-incident  of  the
story  of  Pururavas  and  Urvasi  as  showing  the  great  sym-
bolical significance  of  fire- sacrifice  as  a  means  of  attaining
Svarga,  the  abode  of  the  blessed,  and  ensuring  a  final  state
of  immortality.


Before  closing  this  appendix  I  would  refer  again  to
Kalidasa's  dramatic  version  of  the  legend.  It  is  known  as
Vikramorvasl,  or  "  Urvasi  won  by  Valour,"  and  is  a  play  in
five  acts.  The  plot  differs  considerably  from  the  original
story  and  is  briefly  as  follows  : —

King  Pururavas,  in  answer  to  the  cries  of  some  nymphs,
rescues  one  of  their  companions,  Urvasi,  from  the  clutches
of  a  demon,  pursuing  him  in  his  heavenly  car.  The  two  fall
in  love  with  one  another.  Urvasi  is  called  to  the  Court  of
Indra,  but  sees  the  king  in  his  garden  later  on.  Complica-
tions arise  as  Pururavas  is  already  married  and  the  queen
becomes  jealous.

Urvasi  has  to  act  at  Indra's  court  and  when  asked  in  the
play  whom  she  loves  says  "  Pururavas  "  in  mistake  for  Puru-
shottama  (Vishnu).  This  enrages  her  teacher  Bharata,  who
curses  her,  saying  that  as  she  had  forgotten  her  part  so  she
would  be  forgotten  in  heaven.      However  Indra  takes  pity

^  For  a  full  description  of  the  offerings  see  Stevenson,  Rites  of  the  Twice-
born,  p.  226-227.

'^  Tribes  and  Castes  of  the  North- West  Provinces  and  Oiidh,  under
"Agnihotrl."     See  also  Frazer,  op.  cit.,  pp.  247-250,

VOL.  II.  R


258  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

on  her  and  says  she  can  be  united  to  Pururavas  until  he  sees
the  son  which  she  will  bear  him.  The  lovers  wander  together
on  the  Himalayas,  when  Urva^i,  seeing  Pururavas'  attention
attracted  for  a  moment  by  a  nymph,  enters  in  her  anger  the
groves  of  Karttikeya,  forbidden  to  females.  The  curse  of
Bharata  begins  to  take  effect  and  she  is  immediately  changed
into  a  creeper.  The  king  in  his  frenzied  misery  at  her  loss  be-
comes insane,  and  wanders  through  the  forest  inquiring  for  his
beloved  of  every  tree,  stream,  mountain,  or  animal  he  meets.

Everywhere  he  imagines  he  sees  traces  of  his  lost  one—
the  flowers  heavy  with  dew  are  her  eyes  glistening  with  start-
ing tears,  the  rippling  water  is  her  frown,  the  meandering
current  her  undulating  gait.  Wilson's  translation  gives  a
very  good  idea  of  the  original.

Pururavas  inquires  of  a  swan  :—

"  Ho !  Monarch  of  the  tribes  that  breast  the  stream,
Forbear  awhile  your  course  :    forgo  the  provender
Of  lotus  stems,  not  needed  yet,  and  hear
My  suit — redeem  me  from  despair — impart
Some  tidings  of  my  love — 'tis  worthier  far
To  render  kindly  offices  to  others
Than  meanly  labour  for  a  selfish  good-
He  heeds  me  not,  but  still  on  Manasa
Intent,  collects  his  store — and  now  I  note  him
More  closely,  I  suspect  some  mystery.
Why  seek  to  veil  the  truth  ? — if  my  beloved
Was  never  seen  by  thee  as  graceful  straying
Along  the  flowery  borders  of  the  lake.
Then  whence  this  elegant  gait — 'Tis  hers — and  thou
Hast  stolen  it  from  her— in  whose  every  step
Love  sports — thy  walk  betrays  thee  ;   own  thy  crime,
And  lead  me  quickly  to  her.     {Laughs.)     Nay,  he  fears
Our  Royal  power— the  plunderer  flies  the  king."

Later  he  sees  a  lotus  with  a  bee  amid  its  petals  and
exclaims  :

"  Say,  plunderer  of  the  honeyed  dew,  hast  thou
Beheld  the  nymph  whose  large  and  languid  eye
Voluptuous  rolls  as  if  it  swam  with  wine  ?
And  yet  methinks  'tis  idle  to  inquire.
For  had  he  tasted  her  delicious  breath
He  now  would  scorn  the  lotus.     I  will  hence."


APPENDIX  I— URVASI  AND  PURORAVAS     259

After  many  inquiries  for  Urvasi  he  finds  a  gem,  which
proves  to  be  the  jewel  of  restoration.  Suddenly  he  sees  a
vine  :

"What  means  this  strange  emotion? — as  I  gaze
Upon  this  vine — no  blossoms  deck  its  boughs  ;
Nipped  by  the  falling  rains,  like  briny  tears,
The  buds  have  perished,  and  the  mournful  shrub
All  unadorned  appears  to  pine  in  absence  —
No  bees  regale  her  with  their  songs — silent
And  sad,  she,  lonely,  shows  the  image
Of  my  repentant  love,  who  now  laments
Her  causeless  indignation — ^I  will  press
The  melancholy  likeness  to  my  heart —
Vine  of  the  wilderness,  behold
A  lone,  heart-broken  wretch  in  me.
Who  dreams  in  his  embrace  to  fold
His  love,  as  wild  he  clings  to  thee.
And  might  relenting  fate  restore
To  these  fond  arms  the  nymph  I  mourn,
I'd  bear  her  hence,  and  never  more
To  these  forbidden  haunts  return."

Gradually  the  creeper  is  transformed  into  Urvasi  and
Pururavas  finds  he  is  in  the  arms  of  his  beloved :

"  What  can  this  mean  ? — through  every  fibre  spreads
The  conscious  touch  of  Urvasi— yet  all
I  deemed  her  charms  deceived  me — let  me  wake
And  realise  the  vision  or  dispel  it.
'Tis  no  deceit — 'tis  she— my  best  beloved."     (Faints.)

The  pair  are  happily  united,  but  Urvasi  remembers  the
curse.  Years  pass  and  by  accident  Pururavas  meets  Ayus,
his  son,  and  in  consequence  Urvasi  must  return  to  heaven.
Once  again  Indra  saves  the  situation  and  all  ends  happily.


APPENDIX    II


APPENDIX  II

UMBRELLAS

Owing  to  the  great  antiquity  and  significance  of  the  umbrella,
and  to  the  fact  that  there  appears  to  be  no  recent  compre-
hensive work  on  the  subject,  I  shall  give  here  a  few  notes  on
its  history  and  Western  migration.

In  the  first  place  the  etymology  of  the  word  is  interesting.
Our  English  word  umbrella  is,  of  course,  a  misnomer,  for
being  derived  from  the  Italian  diminutive  omhrella  (Latin
umbra)  it  means  "  little  shade,"  and  has  no  reference  what-
ever to  rain.  It  is  curious  that  we  do  not  use  a  correct  self-
explanatory  word,  like  the  French  parapluie,  the  German
Regenschirm,  and  the  Spanish  paraguas,  etc.

Turning  to  classical  references  we  find  the  word  umbracu-
lum,  meaning  "  a  sunshade,"  used  by  Ovid  (Fasti,  ii,  311 ;  Ars
Amat,  ii,  209-210) ;  Martial  (xiv,  28) ;  TibuUus  (ii,  5,  97) ;
and  Ammianus  Marcellinus  (xxviii,  4)  ;  while  the  word
umbella  occurs  in  the  same  sense  in  Martial  (xi,  73-76)  and
Juvenal  (ix,  50).  The  Greek  equivalent  a-KiaSeiov  occurs  in
Arrian  (Indica,  xvi),  where  he  states  that  the  umbrella  is
used  by  all  Indians  of  consideration;  and  Athenaeus  (ii,  31).
It  is  also  found  represented  on  numerous  ancient  Greek
vase-paintings.  The  word  parasol  appears  to  be  of  much
later  origin.  It  is  mentioned  in  the  Petrarchian  vocabu-
lary (fourteenth  century)  as  the  equivalent  of  saioual  (from
the  Persian  sdydban  or  sdiwdn,  "  an  umbrella  ").  The  word
is  now  only  used  to  denote  the  fragile  and  elegant  variety
of  sunshade  used  by  ladies.

It  is  impossible  to  say  with  any  certainty  where  the
umbrella  originated,  but  evidence  seems  to  point  to  the
Mesopotamian  region  as  its  home.  It  was  the  emblem  of
royalty  in  both  Babylon  and  Assyria,  as  can  be  seen  from
the  marvellous  reliefs  in  the  British  Museum,  excavated  by
Sir  Henry  Layard.  The  Nimrud  Gallery  contains  sculptures
from  Calah,  and  some  of  the  reliefs  show  Assur-nasir-pal  in
his  chariot  or  on  his  throne  with  the  royal  umbrella  held  over
him.  Similar  reliefs  will  be  found  in  the  Nineveh  Gallery.
263


264  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

The  ancient  Egyptian  kings  used  the  umbrella  in  exactly
the  same  manner  as  the  Assyrians.  It  appears  from  a  Theban
painting  reproduced  in  Wilkinson's  Manners  and  Customs  of
the  Ancient  Egyptians  (vol.  i,  1878,  p.  235)  that  the  honour
also  extended  to  members  of  the  royal  family.  In  this
particular  case  it  is  an  Ethiopian  princess,  and  the  umbrella,
composed  of  lotus  leaves,  is  fixed  into  the  chariot  on  the
left-hand  side.

The  use  of  the  umbrella  as  a  symbol  of  power  and  sove-
reignty appears  to  have  existed  in  all  parts  of  Asia  from  a
very  early  date.  In  the  Far  East  the  centre  of  the  practice
was  undoubtedly  China,  and  bas-reliefs  dating  back  to  the
eleventh  century  B.C.  have  been  found  depicting  its  use.
In  Dr  Bushell's  Chinese  Art,  vol.  i,  1905  (H.M.  Stationery
Office),  Figs.  1  and  5  show  such  bas-reliefs  of  the  Han  Dynasty.
The  latter  represents  an  umbrella  being  held  over  the  head
of  King  Ch'eng  of  the  Chou  Dynasty  (see  op.  cit,  p.  18).
Elaborate  examples,  such  as  those  in  the  bas-reliefs,  were
used  only  by  the  sovereign  and  those  to  whom  the  honour  was
specially  granted.  The  usual  variety  was  made  of  varnished
paper  on  split  bamboo.  Large  quantities  of  these  were,  and
still  are,  exported  to  Singapore,  whence  they  find  their  way
through  Java,  Sumatra  and  Malaya  to  the  coastal  towns  of
Burma.

It  is,  however,  chiefly  to  Burma,  where  the  etiquette  has
remained  unchanged,  that  we  look  for  the  full  significance
of  the  umbrella.  As  in  ancient  India,  so  also  in  Burma
the  colour  of  the  royal  umbrella  (tibyu)  was  white.  It  was
about  twelve  or  fifteen  feet  high,  with  a  diameter  of  nearly
six  feet.  It  was  carried  only  over  the  king,  and  possibly  his
chief  wife.  It  formed,  moreover,  one  of  the  five  articles  of
regalia,  the  others  being  the  crown  {mako),  sceptre  {thanlyet)^
sandal  {chenin)  and  chowrie  {thdmyi  yat).  The  umbrellas
have  distinctive  names  attached  to  them,  such  as  "  the
trembling,"  "moon,"  "golden,"  "sun,"  "lotus,"  "uplifted"
and  so  forth.  When  Superintendent  at  Port  Blair,  Sir  Richard
Temple  managed  to  get  drawings  and  carvings  made  of
the  complete  regalia  of  the  Burmese  kings.^  Nine  white
umbrellas  mark  the  king,  while  the  heir-apparent  has  eight
golden  ones,  and  a  lesser  number  are  allotted  to  other  members
of  the  royal  family,  the  tributary  chiefs  and  other  high
officials.     If  a  king  abdicated,  he  forfeited  the  right  of  the

1  See  Ind.  AnL,  vol.  xxxi,  Nov.  1902,  pp.  442-444.


R


APPENDIX  II -UMBRELLAS  265


regalia.  An  exception  to  this  rule,  however,  occurred  in  the
case  of  King  Kunzaw  of  the  eleventh  century,  who  abdicated
on  religious  grounds.  He  was  allowed  to  continue  the  use  of
the  royal  symbol,  and  also  of  the  title  Tibyuzaung  ("  wearer
of  the  white  umbrella  "),  which  is  attached  to  all  Burmese
kings.^  The  lesser  officials  have  red  umbrellas,  though  in
some  cases  leave  was  given  to  cover  the  outside  with  coloured
silks  or  satins,  usually  pink  or  green.  Fringes  were  con-
sidered an  additional  honour.  The  inside  was  nearly  always
black.

The  common  umbrellas  in  general  use  were  made  of  native
parchment-like  paper  glued  to  spokes  of  split  bamboo  and
coated  with  black  varnish.  Priests  were  allowed  a  yellow
varnish,  giving  a  diaphanous  appearance.^

A  favourite  trick  of  King  Noung  daw  Gyee  was  to  con-
tinually issue  new  edicts  as  to  the  length  of  umbrella  handles
allowed,  with  the  result  that  district  officials  made  small
fortunes  by  fines. ^

As  can  be  expected,  the  umbrella  had  also  a  religious
significance,  and  we  find  images  of  Gautama  crowned  with
this  symbol  of  sovereignty.  In  Buddhist  architecture  the
*'  Wheel  of  Light,"  symbolising  the  Buddha,  is  overshadowed
by  an  umbrella,  and  every  Burmese  pagoda  is  surmounted
by  a  htee,  htl  or  ti,  which  are  really  metal  (and  occasionally
stone)  umbrellas  with  bells  and  other  decorations  attached.*
The  significance  of  the  ti  is  shown  by  an  incident  connected
with  the  history  of  the  famous  Shwe  Dagon  pagoda  at
Rangoon.  When,  in  1768,  it  reached  its  present  height
of  321  feet  from  the  platform,  it  was  crowned  with  a  ti
by  the  Mon  kings  of  Pegu.  This  was  destroyed  by  an
earthquake  in  1768,  and  five  years  later  King  Sinbyushin
replaced  it  by  one  of  true  Burmese  shape,  and  the  event
symbolised  the  complete  Burmanising  of  the  Mon  country

^  See  R.  Grant  Brown,  "The  Pre-Buddhist  Religion  of  the  Burmese/'
Folk-Lore,  June  1921,  vol.  xxxii,  pp.  77-100.  In  his  address  to  the  Governor-
General  of  India  in  1855,  the  King  of  Burma  styled  himself  "the  monarch
who  reigns  over  the  great  umbrella-wearing  chiefs  of  the  Eastern  countries."

2  See  J.  Nisbet,  Burma  under  British  Rule  and  Before,  1901,  p.  204.

^  See  Shway  Yoe  (Sir  George  Scott),  The  Burman,  his  Life  and  Notions,
1896,  p.  406.

*  For  details  of  the  ti  in  Burmese  architecture  reference  should  be  made
to  J.  Fergusson,  J.  Burgess  and  R.  Phene  Spiers'  History  of  Indian  and  Eastern
Architecture,  2  vols.,  1910,  vol.i,  p.  70,  and  Sir  George  Scott's  article,  "Burma
and  Assam  (Buddhism  in),"  Hastings'  Ency.  Rel.  Eth.,  vol.  iii,  pp.  42,  43.


266  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

and  celebrated  the  recent  successes  against  Siam,  China
and  Manipur.^

Passing  to  India  we  find  similar  evidence  of  the  great
importance  attached  to  the  umbrella.  It  appears  in  ancient
rock  sculptures  and  enters  into  Hindu  iconography.  In  the
Bharhut  tope  there  is  a  carving  of  a  casket  containing  relics
guarded  by  a  seven-headed  Naga,  and  over  it  is  an  umbrella
of  state.  At  Sanchi  we  find  sculptured  representations  of
two  and  even  three  such  symbols  placed  one  above  the  other
over  temples,  the  double  and  triple  canopies  of  which  appear
to  be  fixed  to  the  same  handle  or  staff,  as  in  the  modern  state
umbrellas  of  China  and  Burma.  Thus  we  have  a  primary
idea  of  the  accumulated  honour  of  stone  or  metal  discs  which
subsequently  became  such  a  prominent  feature  of  Buddhist
architecture,  culminating  in  the  many-storied  pagodas  of
China  and  Japan.^

It  will  be  remembered  that  in  our  text  in  the  Ocean  of
Story  (p.  49)  the  colour  of  the  umbrella  is  given  as  white,
while  on  p.  55  it  is  described  as  "  gleaming  white  like  snow."
In  this  connection  it  is  of  interest  to  quote  a  paragraph  from
Yule,  Marco  Polo,  vol.  i,  p.  355  :  "  An  Indian  prince,  in  a
Sanskrit  inscription  of  the  ninth  century,  boasts  of  having
wrested  from  the  King  of  Marwar  the  two  umbrellas  pleasing
to  Parvati,  and  white  as  the  summer  moonbeams.  Prithi
Raj,  the  last  Hindu  king  of  Delhi,  is  depicted  by  the  poet
Chand  as  shaded  by  a  white  umbrella  on  a  golden  staff."
This  was  also  the  colour  in  the  Jdtakas.  In  the  Rds  Mala,
however,  Forbes  ^  describes  an  image  of  Wun  Raj  (Vanaraja)
in  which  the  king  is  covered  by  a  scarlet  umbrella.

The  question  naturally  arises  as  to  why  the  umbrella  had
such  a  universal  importance  throughout  the  East.  Several
suggestions  have  been  put  forward,  some  of  which  seem  quite
feasible.  In  the  first  place  it  was  thought  to  symbolise  the
firmament  owing  to  its  shape,  and  in  support  of  this  view
Russell  (op.  cit,  pp.  450-451)  states  that  "  when  one  of  the
early  Indian  monarchs  made  extensive  conquests,  the  annexed

^  See  Nisbet,  op.  cit.,  vol.  ii,  p.  385.  The  subsequent  history  of  the  it  is
to  be  found  in  Captain  C.  J.  F.  S.  Forbes'  British  Burma  and  its  People,  1878,
pp.  200-201.

2  See  Jotini.  Indian  Art  and  Industrif,  vol.  xvi,  April  1912,  p.  3.  It  is
quoted  by  Russell,  Tribes  and  Castes  of  the  Central  Provinces,  vol.  ii,  p.  449.

3  See  the  1924  edition,  with  notes  by  H.  J.  Rawlinson.  The  umbrella  is
shown  in  vol.  i,  p.  40.     See  also  note  on  p.  440.


APPENDIX  II -UMBRELLAS  267

territories  were  described  as  being  brought  under  his  umbrella ;
of  the  King  Harsha-Vardhana  (a.d.  606-648)  it  is  recorded
that  he  prosecuted  a  methodical  scheme  of  conquest  with  the
deliberate  object  of  bringing  all  India  under  one  umbrella —
that  is,  of  constituting  it  into  one  state.  This  phrase  seems
to  support  the  idea  that  the  umbrella  symbolised  the  firma-
ment. Similarly,  when  Visvamitra  sent  beautiful  maidens
to  tempt  the  good  King  Harischandra,  he  instructed  them  to
try  and  induce  the  king  to  marry  them,  and  if  he  would  not
do  this,  to  ask  him  for  the  Puchukra  Undi  or  State  Umbrella,
which  was  the  emblem  of  the  king's  protecting  power  over
his  kingdom,  with  the  idea  that  that  power  would  be  de-
stroyed by  its  loss.  Chhatrapati  or  Lord  of  the  Umbrella
was  the  proudest  title  of  an  Indian  king.  When  Sivaji  was
enthroned  in  1674  he  proclaimed  himself  as  Pinnacle  of  the
Kshatriya  race  and  Lord  of  the  Royal  Umbrella.  All  these
instances  seem  to  indicate  that  some  powerful  significance,
such  as  that  already  suggested,  attached  to  the  umbrella.
Several  tribes,  as  the  Gonds  and  Mundas,  have  a  legend  that
their  earliest  king  was  born  of  poor  parents,  and  that  one
day  his  mother,  having  left  the  child  under  some  tree  while
she  went  to  her  work,  returned  to  find  a  cobra  spreading  its
hood  over  him.  The  future  royal  destiny  of  the  boy  was  thus
predicted."

Another  suggestion  as  to  the  original  significance  of  the
umbrella  is  that  it  was  used  to  protect  the  eyes  of  the  sove-
reign from  the  people — his  glance  being  considered  magical
and  harmful.  This,  however,  seems  more  unlikely  than  the  op-
posite—namely, that  the  sacred  person  of  his  Majesty  should
be  protected  from  the  common  gaze  of  the  populace;  but
both  ideas  lose  their  value  when  we  remember  the  use  of  the
symbol  on  temples  and  the  fact  that  the  umbrella  is  always
represented  as  held  vertically  over  the  king's  head,  thus  pro-
tecting it  from  the  powerful  rays  of  a  tropical  sun.  It  seems,
however,  quite  possible  that,  apart  from  the  actual  harm  it
might  do,  the  sun  should  never  be  allowed  to  shine  direct  on
the  sacred  person  of  the  king.  This  idea  is  strengthened  by
the  fact  that  at  the  most  important  period  of  a  Brahman's
life  he  had  to  keep  the  sun  from  shining  on  his  head.  Thus
we  read  in  the  Grihya  Sutras  ^  that  on  the  day  when  a  Brah-
man student  of  the  Veda  took  a  bath  to  signify  that  the  time
of  his  studentship  was  at  an  end,  he  entered  a  cow-shed  before

^  Oldenberg,  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  vol.  xxx,  pp.  l65,  275.


268  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

sunrise,  hung  over  the  door  a  skin  with  the  hair  outside,
and  sat  there  :  on  that  day  the  sun  should  not  shine  upon
him.  Frazer  ^  includes  this  under  the  various  taboos  of
sacred  persons  in  the  section  "  Not  to  see  the  Sun,"  and  gives
numerous  examples  where  the  sovereign  (as  in  the  case  of  the
Mikado)  was  so  sacred  that  the  sun  was  not  worthy  to  shine
upon  him.

The  migration  of  the  umbrella  from  East  to  West  was
slow  and  gradual.  This  is  not  to  be  wondered  at  when  we
remember  the  great  size  of  the  state  umbrella,  and  the  fact
that  as  yet  the  folding  variety  was  unknown.  The  costliness
of  such  articles  would  also  be  a  great  disadvantage,  besides
being  very  hard  to  obtain.  Mediaeval  accounts  given  by
travellers  are  not  very  numerous.  Marco  Polo,  in  describing
the  Court  of  Kublai  Kaan  in  1292  says  ^  that  generals  who
have  command  of  100,000  men  are  awarded  a  tablet  of  gold
according  to  their  rank,  etc.,  and  that  everyone,  moreover,
who  holds  a  tablet  of  this  exalted  degree  is  entitled,  when-
ever he  goes  abroad,  to  have  a  little  yellow  canopy,  such  as
is  called  an  umbrella  {palieque  in  Pauthier,  unum  pallium  in
the  Latin  text),  carried  on  a  spear  over  his  head  in  token  of
his  high  command.

In  Europe  the  umbrella  was  not  unknown  at  this  time
and  Martino  da  Canale,  a  contemporary  of  Polo,  states  that
in  Venice  "  when  the  Doge  goes  forth  of  his  palace,  '  si  vait
apres  lui  un  damoiseau  qui  porte  une  umbrele  de  dras  a  or  sur
son  chief,'  which  umbrella  had  been  given  by  ''  Monseigneur
VApostoille.'  There  is  a  picture  by  Girolamo  Gambarota,  in
the  Sala  del  Gran  Consiglio,  at  Venice,  which  represents  the
investiture  of  the  Doge  with  the  umbrella  by  Pope  Alexander
III,  and  Frederick  Barbarossa  (concerning  which  see  Sanuto
Junior,  in  Muratori,  xxii,  512  ").^  Ibn  Batuta  (ii,  440)  tells
us  that  in  his  time  (c.  1332)  parasols  were  in  general  use
at  Constantinople.  It  was  also  in  the  fourteenth  century
that  the  folding  umbrella  was  first  noticed.  It  is  described
by  Marignolli  as  "  a  thing  like  a  little  tent-roof  on  a  cane
handle,  which  they  open  out  at  will  as  a  protection  against
sun  or  rain.  This  they  call  a  chatyr  ;  I  brought  one  to
Florence  with  me."  *

^  Golden  Bough,  vol.  x,  pp.  18-21.

2  Yule,  Marco  Polo,  vol.  i,  p.  351.

3  Idem,  ibid.,  p.  3.54.

*  See  Yule  and  Cordier,  Cathay  and  the  Way  Thither^  vol.  iii,  p.  256.


APPENDIX  II-UMBRELLAS  269

The  next  mention  of  a  similar  variety  appears  to  be  that
given  by  Duarte  Barbosa.^  They  are  described  as  "  made
of  finely  worked  silk  with  many  golden  tassels,  and  many
precious  stones  and  seed  pearls."  In  an  interesting  note
Dames  states  that  the  next  mention  of  umbrellas  which  open
and  shut  is  probably  that  in  a  passage  in  the  Decadas  of
Joao  de  Barros  (III,  x,  9,/,  264,  ed.  of  1563).  It  speaks  of
events  which  occurred  at  Cananor  in  1526.  The  first  part
of  the  passage  is  quoted  in  Hobson  Johson  (ed.  1903,  p.  851),
but  the  description  itself  is  omitted.     It  is  as  follows  : —

"  All  this  is  mounted  on  a  staff  as  an  awning,  as  we  have
said,  and  the  canes  play  up  and  down,  shutting  and  opening
to  close  it  or  spread  it  out.  And  when  they  would  put  up  the
great  crown  which  gives  the  shade,  they  insert  into  that  staff
(piam)  a  very  light  wooden  shaft  (aste)  about  fifteen  palms  in
length,  and  then  they  run  it  by  means  of  a  socket  (noete)  work-
ing on  the  wooden  staff,  in  order  that  it  may  be  fully  spread
out  when  it  arrives  at  the  top  of  the  staff.  There  they  put  a
cross-piece  of  wood  through  the  shaft,  in  which  there  is  a  hole,
so  that  it  remains  fixed  and  does  not  fall  down."

Although  umbrellas  were  used  by  the  Anglo-Saxons,^  as
is  shown  in  the  Harleian  MS.  (603  in  the  British  Museum),
they  do  not  reappear  in  England  till  the  seventeenth  century,
and  even  then  remained  practically  unknown  until  early  in
the  following  century,  when  it  became  the  practice  for  coffee-
houses to  keep  large  umbrellas  for  use  of  their  patrons  ^  in
very  much  the  same  way  as  they  are  used  to-day  by  com-
missionaires of  clubs  and  hotels.  The  custom,  however,
could  not  have  been  very  familiar,  for  in  1752  Colonel  Wolfe
noticed  their  use  in  Paris  and  wondered  why  they  had  not
been  introduced  into  England.

Jonas  Hanway  (1712-1786)  is  stated  to  be  the  first  man  to
habitually  carry  an  umbrella.  It  is  interesting  to  note  that
the  Anglo-Indian  term  used  for  an  umbrella  in  the  seven-
teenth and  eighteenth  centuries  was  "  roundel,"  a  word  of
early  English  origin  applied  to  a  variety  of  circular  objects,
as  a  mat  under  a  dish,  a  target,  shield,  etc.^     The  form

1  The  Book  of  Duarte  Barbosa,  trans,  by  M.  Longworth  Dames,  Hakluyt
Society,  1921,  vol.  i,  pp.  206-207.

2  See  Fig.  23  in  Mrs  Ashdown's  British  Costume,  1910.

3  The  Tatler,  No.  238,  17th  October  1710.

*  See  Yule,  Hobson  Jobson,  under  "Roundel,"  also  " Umbrella,"  "Kittysol,"
"Sombrero";  R.  C.  Temple,  hid.  Ant.,  December  1904,  p.  31 6;  and  Murray's
New  English  Dictionary  under  "Roundel."


270  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

"  arundel  "  is  also  found.  The  fact  that  the  Anglo-Indians
called  the  umbrella  a  roundel  and  regarded  it  as  a  symbol
of  sovereignty  or  nobility  indicated  that  it  was  as  yet  little
known  in  England.  W.  W.  Skeat  ^  points  out  that  "  some
kind  of  umbrella  was,  however,  occasionally  used  by  ladies
at  least  as  far  back  as  1709  ;  and  a  fact  not  generally  known
is  that  from  about  the  year  1717  onwards  a  '  parish  '  um-
brella, resembling  the  more  recent  '  family '  umbrella  of  the
nineteenth  century,  was  employed  by  the  priest  at  open-
air  funerals,  as  the  church  accounts  of  many  places  testify."

Murray's  New  English  Dictionary  gives  a  long  and  inter-
esting list  of  quotations  under  "Umbrella,"  the  earliest
being  as  follows  : —

"1611.  'Many  of  them  doe  carry  other  fine  things  .  .  .
which  they  commonly  call  in  the  Italian  tongue  '  umbrellaes.'
.  .  .  These  are  made  of  leather  something  answerable  to  the
form  of  a  little  caunopy  and  hooped  in  the  inside  with  divers
little  wooden  hoopes  that  extend  the  umbrella  in  a  pretty
large  compass.' — Coryate,  Crudities,  iii."

Among  others  may  be  mentioned  two  references  from  the
writings  of  Swift :

"  1704.  '  A  large  skin  of  Parchment  .  .  .  served  him  for  a
Night-cap  when  he  went  to  bed,  and  for  an  Umbrello  in  rainy
Weather.'— TaZ^  of  a  Tub,  ix."

"  c.  1712.  '  The  tuck'd  up  semstress   walks   with   hasty
strides
While  streams  run  down  her  oil'd  umbrella's
sides.' — A  City  Shower,''

Finally  the  following  lines  from  Gay's  Trivia,  Bk.  I,
give  quite  a  good  idea  of  the  history  of  the  umbrella  : —

"  1716.  '  Good  housewives  all  the  winter's  rage  despise,
Defended  by  the  riding  hood's  disguise  ;
Or  underneath  the  umbrella's  oily  shade
Safe  through  the  wet  on  clinking  pattens  tread.

Let  Persian  dames  the  umbrella's  ribs  display
To  guard  their  beauties  from  the  sunny  ray  ;

1   The  Past  at  our  Doors,  1911,  pp.  97,  98.


APPENDIX  II -UMBRELLAS  271

Or  sweating  slaves  support  the  shady  load
When  Eastern  monarchs  show  their  state  abroad ;
Britain  in  winter  only  knows  its  aid
To  guard  from  chilly  showers  the  walking  maid.'  "

Very  few  early  examples  of  English  umbrellas  appear  to
have  been  preserved,  and  the  earliest  specimens  in  the  Victoria
and  Albert  Museum  date  only  from  the  first  half  of  the  nine-
teenth century.  They  belong  to  the  class  which  have  whale-
bone ribs,  thick  wooden  sticks  and  large  oiled  silk  covers.
In  time  gingham  (a  kind  of  cotton  cloth  first  made  in
Guingamp  ^  in  Brittany,  the  yarn  of  which  is  dyed  before  it
is  woven)  was  substituted,  and  in  1848  William  Sangster
patented  the  use  of  alpaca  as  an  umbrella  covering.

The  chief  invention,  however,  was  the  "  Paragon  "  rib,
patented  by  Samuel  Fox  in  1852.  It  is  formed  of  a  thin  strip
of  steel  rolled  into  a  trough  section,  thus  combining  lightness,
strength  and  elasticity.

Huge  umbrellas  have  always  been  in  demand  in  native
courts  in  all  parts  of  Africa,  and  many  are  made  in  England
for  this  purpose.  Brewer  (Dictionary  of  Phrase  and  Fable —
"  Umbrella  ")  quotes  a  paragraph  from  The  Graphic  of  18th
March  1894,  p.  270 :  "  An  umbrella  is  now  being  made  in
London  for  an  African  potentate  which,  when  unfurled,  will
cover  a  space  sufficient  for  twelve  persons.  The  stick  is  .  .  .
fifteen  feet  long."

In  1874  the  sacred  umbrella  of  King  Koffee  Kalcalli  of
the  Ashantees  was  captured  and  found  its  way  to  the  South
Kensington  Museum.  Many  similar  ones  were  to  be  seen  at
the  Empire  Exhibition,  Wembley,  in  1924.

In  his  famous  Pilgrimage  to  El  Medinah  and  Meccah,
three  vols.,  1855-1856  (vol.  iii,  pp.  140-141)  Burton  describes
the  Sherif  of  Meccah  as  being  "  plainly  dressed  in  white
garments  and  a  white  muslin  turban  .  .  .  and  the  only
emblem  of  his  dignity  was  the  large  green  satin  umbrella
borne  by  an  attendant  on  foot."  And  in  a  note  he  adds  :
"  From  India  to  Abyssinia  the  umbrella  is  the  sign  of  royalty  :
the  Arabs  of  Meccah  and  Senaa  probably  derived  the  custom
from  the  Hindus."

When  visiting  the  Emir  of  Abyssinia  at  Harar,^  Burton

1  The  New  English  Dictionary  derives  the  word  from  the  Malay  ging-gang,
meaning  *^  striped."

2  First  Footsteps  in  East  Africa,  1 856,  p.  336.


272  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

was  received  by  his  Highness  under  a  red  satin  umbrella
heavily  fringed.

Apart  from  the  references  already  given,  the  following
may  be  consulted  : —

O.  Uzanne,  UOmhrelle,  Paris,  1883  (see  the  interesting
copy  in  the  Ashbee  Collection,  British  Museum).  It  was
translated  into  English  as  The  Sunshade,  the  Glove,  the  Muff,
London,  1883.  References  to  the  umbrella  in  the  Rdmdyana
and  Mahdbhdrata  will  be  found  on  pp.  13-16.  See  also  by
the  same  author,  Les  Ornements  de  la  Femme,  "L'Ombrelle
(Le  Parasol— Le  Parapluie),"  Paris,  1892,  pp.  131-195.

For  further  information  see  W.  Sangster,  Umbrellas  and
their  History,  1855  (see  also  the  1871  edition  by  Cassell  &  Co.,
with  illustrations  by  Bennett)  ;  "  Pagodas,  Aurioles  and
Umbrellas,"  F.  C.  Gordon  Cumming,  The  English  Illustrated
Magazine,  1887-1888,  pp.  601-612,  and  654-667  ;  S.  Baring-
Gould,  Strange  Survivals,  1892,  p.  129  et  seq,  ;  numerous  short
articles  are  referred  to  in  Poole's  Index  of  Periodical  Literature,


APPENDIX  III


VOL.   II.


APPENDIX   III

POISON-DAMSELS

On  page  91  of  this  volume  we  read  of  the  methods  employed
by  Yogakarandaka,  the  minister  of  King  Brahmadatta,
against  our  hero,  the  King  of  Vatsa :  "  He  tainted,  by  means
of  poison  and  other  deleterious  substances,  the  trees,  flowering
creepers,  water  and  grass  all  along  the  line  of  march.  And  he
sent  poison- damsels  as  dancing-girls  among  the  enemy's  host,
and  he  also  dispatched  nocturnal  assassins  into  their  midst."

The  tactics  of  this  minister  are  as  curious  as  they  are  un-
scrupulous. We  have  read  of  wells  being  poisoned  and  even
of  diseased  clothes  being  left  for  the  enemy  to  find,  but  the
poisoning  of  the  vegetation  and  the  dispatching  of  poisoned
women  are  much  more  uncommon.

This  subject  is  of  great  interest  from  many  points  of  view,
and  as  there  appears  to  be  very  little  published  on  the  matter,
especially  poison-damsels,  I  will  discuss  the  whole  question  in
some  detail.

Although  by  far  the  greater  part  of  this  appendix  will  be
on  poison-damsels,  I  will  first  give  a  few  notes  on  the  practice
of  poisoning  water,  etc.,  in  both  classical  and  modern  times.

Poisoned  Water,  Etc,

The  references  to  such  practices  in  Sanskrit  literature  are
not  numerous.  They  are,  however,  mentioned,  and  even  ad-
vocated, in  the  Code  of  Manu,  vii,  195,  where,  in  the  chapter
on  the  duties  of  kings,  we  read^ :  "  When  he  has  shut  up  his
foe  (in  a  town)  let  him  sit  encamped,  harass  his  kingdom  and
continually  spoil  his  grass,  food,  fuel  and  water."

The  glosses  of  the  commentators  on  this  text  refer  in
general  terms  to  bad  or  harmful  substances  which  are  mixed
with  the  grass,  etc.,  or  to  destroying  them  by  fire,  water  and
so  on.  The  bad  substances  may  be  supposed  to  include  poison.
In  only  one  of  the  glosses  is  the  actual  word  "  poison  "  used.

In  the  well-known  medical  work  dating  from  about  the

^  Buhler's  translation,  Sacred  Books  of  the  East^  vol.  xxv,  p.  247.
275


276  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

beginning  of  the  Christian  era,  the  Susruta  Samhitd,^  we  read
in  a  chapter  on  the  subject  of  the  nature  of  animal  poisons,
etc.,  the  following  :  —

"  A  sheet  of  poisoned  water  becomes  slimy,  strong-
smelling,  frothy  and  marked  with  (black-coloured)  lines  on
the  surface.  Frogs  and  fish  living  in  the  water  die  without
any  apparent  cause.  Birds  and  beasts  that  live  (in  the  water
and)  on  its  shores  roam  about  wildly  in  confusion  (from  the
effects  of  poison),  and  a  man,  a  horse  or  an  elephant,  by
bathing  in  this  (poisoned)  water  is  afflicted  with  vomiting,
fainting,  fever,  a  burning  sensation  and  swelling  of  the  limbs.
These  disorders  (in  men  and  animals)  should  be  immediately
attended  to  and  remedied,  and  no  pains  should  be  spared
to  purify  such  poisoned  water.  The  cold  ashes  of  Dhava,
Asva-karna,  Asana,  Pdribhadra,  Pdtald,  Siddhaka,  Mokshaka,
Rdja-druma  and  Somavalka  burnt  together,  should  be  cast
into  the  poisoned  pool  or  tank,  whereby  its  water  would  be
purified  ;  as  an  alternative,  an  Anjali-measure  (half  a  seer)
of  the  said  ashes  cast  in  a  Ghata-measure  (sixty-four  seers)
of  the  required  water  would  lead  to  its  purification.

"  A  poisoned  ground  or  stone-slab,  landing-stage  or  desert
country  gives  rise  to  swellings  in  those  parts  of  the  bodies  of
men,  bullocks,  horses,  asses,  camels  and  elephants  that  may
chance  to  come  in  contact  with  them.  In  such  cases  a  burning
sensation  is  felt  in  the  affected  parts,  and  the  hair  and  nails
(of  these  parts)  fall  off.  In  these  cases,  the  poisoned  surface
should  be  purified  by  sprinkling  it  over  with  a  solution  of
Ananta  and  Sarva-gandha  (the  scented  drugs)  dissolved  in  wine
(Sura),  or  with  (an  adequate  quantity  of)  black  clay  dissolved
in  water,  or  with  the  decoction  of  Vidanga,  Pdthd  and  Katabhi.

"  Poisoned  hay  or  fodder,  or  any  other  poisoned  food-stuff,
produces  lassitude,  fainting,  vomiting,  diarrhoea,  or  even
death  (of  the  animal  partaking  thereof).  Such  cases  should
be  treated  with  proper  anti-poisonous  medicines  according
to  the  indications  of  each  case.  As  an  alternative,  drimis
and  other  musical  instruments  smeared  with  plasters  of  anti-
poisonous  compounds  (Agadas)  should  be  beaten  and  sounded
(round  them).  Equal  parts  of  silver  {Tdra),  mercury  (Sutdra),
and  Indra-Gopa  insects  with  Kuru-Vinda  equal  in  weight  to
that  of  the  entire  preceding  compound,  pasted  with  the  bile
of  a  Kapila  (brown)  cow,  should  be  used  as  a  paste  over  the

^  English  translation,  edited  by  K.  K.  L.  Bhishagratna,  Calcutta,  191 1>
vol.  ii,  pp.  Q9Q-Q[)^.


APPENDIX  III -POISON-DAMSELS  277

musical  instruments  (in  such  cases).  The  sounds  of  such
drums,  etc.  (pasted  with  such  anti-poisonous  drugs),  are  said
to  destroy  the  effects  of  even  the  most  dreadful  poison."^

Turning  to  Europe,  we  find  that  from  the  earliest  times
writers  on  military  law  have  continually  distinguished  be-
tween the  law  of  nature  and  the  law  of  nations,  showing  how
the  two  sometimes  coincide,  but  as  often  operate  in  opposite
directions.  They  have,  moreover,  condemned  the  use  of  poison
in  warfare  as  being  against  all  laws — human  and  divine.

Hugo  Grotius  in  his  great  work,  Be  jure  belli  ac  pads,
writes  as  follows  ^  (Book  III,  chap,  iv,  sec.  15,  etc.)  : —

"  As  the  laws  of  nations  permit  many  things  .  .  .  which
are  forbidden  by  Natural  Law,  so  they  forbid  some  things
which  are  permitted  by  Natural  Law.  For  him  whom  it  is
lawful  to  put  to  death,  whether  we  put  to  death  by  the  sword
or  by  poison,  it  makes  no  difference,  if  we  look  to  Natural  Law.
It  is  doubtless  more  generous  to  kill  so  that  he  who  is  killed
has  the  power  of  defending  himself ;  but  this  is  not  due  to
him  who  has  deserved  to  die.  But  the  Laws  of  Nations,  if  not
of  all,  at  least  of  the  best,  have  long  been,  that  it  is  not  lawful
to  kill  an  enemy  by  poison.  This  consent  had  its  rise  in
common  utility,  that  the  dangers  of  war,  which  are  numerous
enough,  may  not  be  made  too  extensive.  And  it  is  probable
that  this  rule  proceeded  from  kings,  whose  life  may  be  de-
fended from  other  causes,  better  than  the  lives  of  other
persons  ;  but  is  less  safe  than  that  of  others  from  poison,
except  it  be  defended  by  the  scruples  of  conscience  and  the
fear  of  infamy.

''  Livy  (xliii,  18),  speaking  of  Perseus,  calls  these  clandestine
atrocities  :  so  Claudian  {De  Bello  Gild.,  v,  273)  and  Cicero
{De  Offic,  iii,  22)  use  like  expressions.  The  Roman  consuls
say  that  it  is  required,  as  a  public  example,  that  nothing  of
the  kind  be  admitted,  in  the  epistle  to  Pyrrhus  which  Gellius
{Noct  Attic,  iii,  8)  gives.  So  Valerius  (vi,  5,  1).  And  when  the
prince  of  the  Catti  offered  to  procure  the  death  of  Arminius
by  poison,  Tiberius  rejected  the  offer,  thus  gaining  glory  like
that  of  the  ancient  generals  (Tacitus,  Ann,,  ii,  88).

"  Wherefore  they  who  hold  it  lawful  to  kill  the  enemy  by
poison,  as  Baldus,  following  Vegetius  {Cons.,  ii,  188),  regard

^  See  also  Kautilya's  Arthasdstra,  new  edition,  J.  Jolly  and  R.  Schmidt,
Lahore,  1923,  ix,  6,  86 ;  xii,  4,  6-8,  14.

2  Trans.  W.  Whewell,  Cambridge,  1  853,  vol.  iii,  chap,  iv,  pp.  86-88.


278  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

mere  Natural  Law,  and  overlook  the  Instituted  Law  of
Nations.  ...  To  poison  fountains,  which  must  be  discovered
before  long,  Florus  says  (Lib.  II,  20),  is  not  only  against  old
rule,  but  also  against  the  law  of  the  gods  ;  as  the  Laws  of
Nations  are  often  ascribed  to  the  gods  ;  nor  is  it  to  be
wondered,  if  to  diminish  dangers,  there  be  some  such  tacit
conventions  of  belligerents,  as  formerly  in  the  permanent
war  of  the  Chalcidians  and  Eretrians  (Strabo,  x,  p.  488)  it
was  agreed  not  to  use  missiles.

"But  the  same  is  not  true  of  making  waters  foul  and
undrinkable  without  poisoning  them  (i$]sch.,  De  male  oh,  leg,,
p.  262a),  which  Solon  and  the  Amphictyons  are  said  to  have
justified  towards  barbarians  :  and  Oppian  mentions  as  cus-
tomary in  his  time.  For  that  is  the  same  thing  as  turning
away  a  stream,  or  intercepting  a  spring  of  water,  which  is
lawful  both  by  Natural  Law  and  by  consent."

Nearly  a  hundred  years  later  (1758)  Emeric  de  Vattel,  the
Swiss  jurist,  published  his  Droit  des  Gens,  It  was  founded  on
the  works  of  Wolff  and  Leibnitz,  with  many  quotations  from
Grotius.  After  practically  repeating  the  above  extract,  he
continues  ^  :

"  Assassination  and  poisoning  are,  therefore,  contrary  to
the  laws  of  war,  and  are  alike  forbidden  by  the  Natural  Law
and  the  consent  of  civilised  nations.  The  sovereign  who  makes
use  of  such  execrable  means  should  be  regarded  as  an  enemy
of  the  human  race,  and  all  nations  are  called  upon,  in  the
interest  of  the  common  safety  of  mankind,  to  join  forces  to
punish  him.  In  particular,  an  enemy  who  has  been  the  object
of  his  detestable  practices  is  justified  in  giving  him  no  quarter.
Alexander  the  Great  declared  '  that  he  was  determined  to
take  the  most  extreme  measures  against  Darius,  and  no
longer  treat  him  as  an  enemy  in  lawful  war,  but  as  a  poisoner
and  an  assassin  '  (Quint.  Curt.,  iv,  9,  18).  The  interest  and
the  safety  of  those  in  command,  far  from  allowing  them  to
authorise  such  practices,  call  for  the  greatest  care  on  their
part  to  prevent  the  introduction  of  them.

"  Eumenes  wisely  said  '  that  he  did  not  think  any  general
would  want  to  obtain  a  victory  by  the  use  of  means  which
might  in  turn  be  directed  against  himself  (Justin.,  xiv,  1, 12).
And  it  was  on  the  same  principle  that  Alexander  condemned

^  Lex  Droit  de.s  Gnis,  ou  Principes  de  la  Loi  Naturellc  appliques  d  la  Conduite
et  aux  Affaires  des  Nations  et  des  Souverains,  E.  de  Vattel,  translated  by  C.  G.
Fenwick,  Washington,  19l6,  vol.  iii,  ch.  viii,  pp.  288-289. — n.m.p.


APPENDIX  III— POISON-DAMSELS  279

the  act  of  Bessus,  who  had  assassinated  Darius  (Quint,
Curt.,  vi,  3,  14)."

The  importance  of  Grotius's  De  jure  belli  ac  pads  Hes
chiefly  in  the  fact  that  it  forms  the  foundation  of  the  Inter-
national Law  of  the  present  day.  It  was  the  first  of  such
works  to  influence  sovereigns  and  statesmen,  for  it  showed
in  an  exhaustive  and  masterly  fashion  what  all  men  were
beginning  to  feel.

The  value  of  Vattel's  work  is  due  to  the  fact  that  it  con-
sists of  all  that  is  best  in  the  works  of  his  predecessors,
Grotius,  Pufendorf,  Leibnitz,  Bynkershoek  and  Wolff.  Con-
sequently it  became  the  handbook  of  statesmen  and  jurists,
and  is  still  quoted  as  one  of  the  great  authorities.

As  we  have  already  seen,  both  these  jurists  condemned
all  unnecessary  methods  of  killing  an  enemy — particularly  by
any  form  of  poisoning.  But,  as  history  is  largely  a  record  of
cruelty  exercised  by  those  in  power,  we  must  not  be  sur-
prised to  find  that,  especially  in  mediaeval  times,  the  number
of  deaths  due  to  some  form  of  poisoning  was  very  large.  At
the  same  time  superstition  and  general  ignorance  of  medicine
probably  lay  at  the  bottom  of  many  so-called  poison  mysteries
of  ancient  days,  while  in  some  cases,  as  with  the  Borgias,
reliable  evidence  is  weak.

There  are,  however,  many  occasions  on  which  poison  in
some  form  or  other  has  been  used  in  warfare.

For  instance,  when  the  young  Egyptian  Sultan  Faraj
withdrew  before  the  conquering  hosts  of  Timur  (Tamerlane)
in  1400  he  took  care  to  poison  both  the  fields  and  water
before  leaving.  It  is  related  ^  that  in  consequence  Timur  lost
so  many  men  and  animals  that  he  desisted  from  the  pursuit.

In  India  the  most  deadly  poison  is  undoubtedly  the
variety  of  aconite  found  in  the  Himalayan  districts.  This  is
the  so-called  "  Nepal  aconite,"  known  as  his,  bish,  bikh,  etc.
There  are  numerous  forms  of  the  series,  the  most  deadly  being
A,  spicatum.  It  is  so  poisonous  in  the  Sikkim  Terai  that
the  sheep  often  have  to  be  muzzled.  The  uses  to  which  the
aconites  are  put  vary,  for  the  rural  drug- dealer  has  a  great
knowledge  of  the  plant  and  finds  many  commercial  uses  for
it,  such  as  an  adulterant  in  making  bhang  from  Indian  hemp,
for  poisoning  arrow-heads  (for  which  see  Lewin,  "  Arrow
Poisons,"  Virchow's  Archiv  Path,  Anat  und  Phys.,  1894,
pp.  138,  289)  and  many  other  uses.

1  Hans  Schiltberger's  Reisebuch,  ed.  by  Langmantel,  Tiibingen,  1885,  25,  38.


280  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

The  Indian  aconites  are  confined  to  the  mountain  tracts
of  the  north-eastern  boundary,  stretching  from  Afghanistan
and  Baluchistan,  through  Kashmir,  Nepal,  Sikkim,  Bhutan
and  Assam  to  Burma.^

The  Gurkhas  of  Nepal  regard  the  plant  as  a  great  protec-
tion against  enemy  attacks,  and  Hamilton^  describes  how
they  can  destroy  whole  armies  by  poisoning  the  water,  and  in
the  Nepalese  war  the  British  found  the  wells  poisoned  with
crushed  aconite.

The  poisoning  of  water  is  not  confined  to  India.  Thus
Burton  ^  tells  us  that  the  Yuta  Indians  have  diminished  in
numbers  owing  to  the  introduction  of  arsenic  and  corrosive
sublimate  in  springs  and  provisions.

Similar  havoc  was  wrought  among  the  Australians,*  while
in  Tasmania  ^  poisoned  rum  was  used  to  exterminate  the
aborigines.

In  Brazil,  when  the  import  of  African  slaves  rendered  the
capture  of  the  natives  less  desirable  than  their  extermination,
the  Portuguese  left  the  clothes  of  people  who  had  died  of
smallpox  and  scarlet  fever  for  them  to  find  in  the  woods.*
It  is  also  said '  that  the  caravan  traders  from  the  Missouri
to  Santa  Fe  communicated  smallpox  to  the  Indian  tribes  of
that  district  in  1831  by  infectious  clothing  and  presents  of
tobacco.

But  vile  as  all  these  acts  are,  they  are  easily  eclipsed  by
the  inhuman  methods  of  warfare  introduced  by  the  Germans
in  the  Great  War.  They  have  cast  a  blot  on  European  history
which  neither  compunction  nor  time  can  ever  eradicate.

This  is  not  the  place  to  describe  in  detail  the  different
varieties  of  poison-gases  used  in  the  Great  War,  but  I  would
give  a  few  reliable  references  sent  me  by  the  War  Office  :

^  The  different  species  of  aconites  are  fully  discussed  in  Watt's  Commercial
Products  of  India,  the  abridgment  of  The  Dictionary  of  the  Economic  Products
of  India,  1908,  pp.  18-24.

2  Francis  Hamilton,  Account  of  the  Kingdom  of  Nepal,  Edinburgh,  1819,
p.  99.

3  City  of  the  Saints,  186l,  p.  576.

*  E.  J.  Eyre,  Journals  of  Expeditions  of  Discovery  into  Central  Australia,
1845,  vol.  i,  pp.  175-179.

^  Bowick,  Last  of  the  Tasmanians,  p.  58.

•  J.  J.  von  Tschudi,  ReLien  durch  Sudamerika,  vol.  ii,  p.  262.

'  J.  Frobel,  Seven  Years'  Travel  in  Central  America,  1859,  p.  272;  and
A.  R.  Wallace,  Narrative  of  Travels  on  the  Amazon  and  Rio  Negro,  p.  326.


p


APPENDIX  III -POISON-DAMSELS  281


L.  Georges,  UArme  bacteriologique  future  concurrente  des
armes  chimique  et  balistique ;  tentatives  allemandes  repetees
de  son  emploi  de  1914  a  1918,  1922  ;  Col.  Zugaro,  "  Les
bacteries  comme  arme  de  guerre,"  Bull.  Beige  des  Sci.  Milit.,
June  1924  (the  original  article  appeared  in  Exercito  e
Marina,  4th  March  1924).  See  also  A.  A.  Roberts,  The  Poison
War,  1915,  and  the  bibliography  at  the  end.

The  Historical  Section  of  the  War  Office  informs  me  that
in  General  Botha's  campaign  in  German  South- West  Africa
the  poisoning  of  wells  was  both  authenticated  and  admitted.
It  is  believed  that  the  poison  used  to  make  the  wells  un-
serviceable was  chloride  of  mercury,  which  was  available  as
it  was  employed  in  the  gold-mining  industry.  The  official
records  of  the  campaign  are  in  the  hands  of  the  Government
of  the  Union  of  South  Africa.

The  following  references  may  be  consulted  by  readers
generally  interested  in  the  subject  of  poisons  : —

A.  Wynter  Blyth,  Old  and  Modern  Poison  Lore,  Inter-
national Health  Exhibition,  London,  1884  ;  A.  W.  and  M.  W.
Blyth,  Poisons  :  their  Effects  and  Detection,  new  edition,  1920  ;
C.  J.  S.  Thompson,  Poison  Mysteries,  1923  ;  M.  P.  Naidu,
The  History  of  Professional  Poisoners  and  Coiners  of  India,
Madras,  1912  ;  T.  N.  Windsor,  Indian  Toxicology,  Calcutta,
1906  ;  R.  Calmette,  Les  Venins,  les  animaux  venimeux  et  la
serotherapie  antivenimeuse,  Paris,  1907.

We  now  pass  on  to  the  study  of  the  poison- damsel.

The  Poison-Damsel  in  India

Although  the  poison- damsel  is  found  in  the  Kathd  Sarit
Sdgara,  her  appearance  in  Sanskrit  literature  is  rare.

There  are,  however,  two  or  three  works  in  which  she  is
mentioned.  Of  these  the  most  important  is  undoubtedly
Vi^akhadatta's  political  drama,  the  Mudrd-Bdkshasa,  or
Signet-ring  of  Rakshasa,  This  play,  written  about  the  seventh
century  a.d.,  deals  with  events  which  happened,  or  were
supposed  to  have  happened,  at  the  formation  of  the  great
Maurya  Empire  in  313  B.C.  From  the  commencement  of
this  dynasty  dates  the  unbroken  chain  of  Indian  history,
and  Chandragupta,  its  founder,  must  be  regarded  as  the  first
paramount  sovereign  or  emperor  of  India.  He  obtained  the
throne  of  Pataliputra  under  circumstances  which  have  a
distinct  bearing  on  the  subject  under  discussion.     At  the


282  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

end  of  327  B.C.  or  in  the  early  spring  of  the  following  year*
Alexander  the  Great  began  his  invasion  of  Northern  India.
He  had  gradually  pushed  farther  and  farther  eastwards  until,
at  the  river  "Y^aa-i^  (the  modern  Beas,  a  tributary  of  the
Sutlej),  his  victorious  advance  received  a  sudden,  but  none
the  less  definite,  check  by  his  army  refusing  to  proceed  with
the  expedition.

Thus  he  was  prevented  from  attempting  the  overthrow  of
two  great  peoples,  the  Prasii  and  the  Gangaridae,  which,  he
was  informed,  inhabited  a  district  beyond  the  Ganges.

The  king  of  these  peoples  was  a  certain  Agrammes  or
Xandrames  (according  to  the  Greek  writers),  who  has  been
identified  by  some  with  Dhana-Nanda,  Nanda,^  or  Nandrus,
King  of  Magadha  (South  Bihar).

At  this  time  Chandragupta,  an  illegitimate  relation^  of
Nanda,  held  the  position  of  Commander-in-Chief  in  his  army.
He  chanced  to  incur  Nanda 's  displeasure  and  fled  to  the
Panjab,  where  he  is  said  to  have  met  Alexander  and  to  have
made  a  close  study  of  his  methods  of  warfare.

However  this  may  be,  the  mention  of  Alexander  in  con-
nection with  Chandragupta  is  of  the  greatest  interest  in  this
inquiry.  For,  as  we  shall  see  later,  the  European  versions
of  the  poison-damsel  find  their  origin  in  a  certain  Pseudo-
Aristotelean  work  purporting  to  have  been  written  for  Alex-
ander and  sent  to  him  on  his  campaigns,  when  age  prevented
his  learned  tutor  from  continuing  his  duties  personally.  This
work  was  known  as  the  Secretum  Secretorum,  and  will  be  fully
discussed  in  the  course  of  this  appendix.

It  will  suffice  here  merely  to  draw  attention  to  the  fact
that  it  was  Aristotle  who  was  credited  with  the  wise  teachings
and  prudent  counsels  which  helped  Alexander  so  much  in
his  Eastern  campaigns,  and  it  was  he  who,  in  the  Secretum
Secretorum,  prevented  him  from  losing  his  life  at  the  hands
of  the  poison-damsel.

^  Scholars  differ  about  the  duration  of  Alexander's  Indian  expedition.
See  v.  A.  Smith,  Early  History  of  India,  1904,  pp.  106,  107,  and  also  the  3rd
edition,  ipi^ ;  A.  E.  Anspach,  De  Alexandri  Magni  Expeditione  Indica,  London,
1903 ;  F.  W.  Thomas  in  ch.  xviii  of  the  Cambridge  History  of  India,  with  the
Bibliography  on  pp.  674-676.

2  We  have  already  come  across  a  legend  of  his  reign  in  Vol.  I,  pp.  IS,  17,
S5  et  seq.

*  Said  to  have  been  the  Son  of  Mura,  a  concubine  of  the  king.  Hence
his  surname  Maurya.


APPENDIX  III— POISON-DAMSELS  283

In  just  the  same  way,  Chandragupta  benefited  by  the
advice  of  a  wise  minister.  For  at  the  very  time  that  he  fled
to  the  Pan  jab  there  was  a  certain  Brahman  named  Chanakya
(Kautilya  or  Vishnugupta  ^)  who,  incensed  against  King
Nanda,  owing  to  an  effrontery  to  which  he  had  been  sub-
jected, became  not  only  a  fellow- conspirator  with  Chandra-
gupta in  the  overthrow  of  Nanda,  but  was  the  directing
force  guiding  every  movement  of  the  plot.  Although  details
of  the  defeat  of  Nanda  are  hidden  under  a  veil  of  mingled
fact  and  fiction,  it  seems  almost  certain  that  Chandragupta
had  the  assistance  of  strong  allies,  the  chief  of  whom
was  Porus,^  who  ruled  on  the  far  side  of  the  Hydaspes
(Jhelum).

On  his  ascending  the  throne  of  Pataliputra  Chandragupta,
not  forgetful  of  the  part  played  by  Chanakya  in  his  success,
made  him  his  chief  minister,  and  it  is  at  this  point  that  the
Mudrd-Bakshasa  commences.  We  find  Chanakya  involved
in  a  maze  of  political  intrigue,  employing  every  form  of
cunning  and  strategy  imaginable.  His  chief  object  is  to  win
over  the  late  king's  ex-minister  Rakshasa  and  so  sever  the
one  remaining  link  with  the  old  line  of  Nanda  kings.  In  this
he  is  ultimately  successful,  but  only  after  he  has  answered
every  stroke  of  his  opponents  by  a  more  effective  counter-
stroke,  at  the  same  time  shielding  Chandragupta  from  the
n-umerous  attempts  on  his  life.  These  attempts  were  of
different  kinds,  including  a  poisoned  draught  and  nocturnal
assassins  who  were  instructed  to  get  into  Chandragupta 's
sleeping  chamber  by  a  subterranean  passage  and  kill  him  in
his  sleep.  The  plot  was,  however,  discovered  by  Chanakya.
In  relating  the  circumstances  to  Rakshasa,  one  of  his  secret
agents,  Viradhagupta,  speaks  ^  as  follows  : —

^  Chanakya  appeared  in  Vol.  I,  p.  55  et  seq.,  as  a  Brahman  who  brought
about  Nanda's  death  by  a  magical  rite.  In  the  same  volume  (p.  233)  his
name  is  mentioned  as  an  alternative  of  Kautilya,  the  supposed  author  of  the
Arthasdstra.     See  p.  233w^.

2  Jacobi's  edition  of  Hemachandra's  Sthaviravalicharita,  -p.  55  et  seq. ;  and
Lassen,  Indische  Alterthumskunde,  vol.  ii,  pp.  313-317.

3  The  translation  given  is  that  by  H.  H.  Wilson,  Select  Specimens  of
the  Theatre  of  the  Hindus,  vol.  iii,  1827,  p.  71.  Reference  should  be  made  to
his  Introduction,  which  contains  the  different  versions  of  the  tale  of  Nanda,
Chandragupta  and  Chanakya.  For  more  recent  translations  of  the  Mudrd-
Rdkshasa  see  those  by  S.  C.  Chakravarti,  Calcutta,  1908,  and  B.  Goswami,
Calcutta  [1909].


284  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

-Before  the  king  retired  to  rest,


The  watchful  minister  was  wont  to  enter

The  chamber,  and  with  diligent  scrutiny

Inspect  it — thus,  he  saw  a  line  of  ants

Come  through  a  crevice  in  the  wall,  and  noticed

They  bore  the  fragments  of  a  recent  meal ;

Thence  he  inferred  the  presence  of  the  feeders

In  some  adjoining  passage,  and  commanded

That  the  pavilion  should  be  set  on  fire

That  moment — soon  his  orders  were  obeyed.

And  our  brave  friends,  in  flame  and  smoke  enveloped,

Unable  to  escape,  were  all  destroyed."

Rakshasa  replies  :

"  'Tis  ever  thus — Fortune  in  all  befriends
The  cruel  Chandragupta — when  I  send
A  messenger  of  certain  death  to  slay  him.
She  wields  the  instrument  against  his  rival,
Who  should  have  spoiled  him  of  one  half  his  kingdom.
And  arms,  and  drugs,  and  stratagems  are  turned
In  his  behalf,  against  my  friends  and  servants.
So  that  whate'er  I  plot,  against  his  power.
Serves  but  to  yield  him  unexpected  profit."

The  "  messenger  of  certain  death  "  was  the  poison-damsel
which  Rakshasa  had  prepared  for  Chandragupta's  undoing.
The  plot  was  discovered  by  the  ever-watchful  Chanakya,
who,  instead  of  killing  or  returning  the  girl,  passed  her  on  to
Parvataka,  who,  although  a  former  ally  of  Chandragupta,  was
thought  best  out  of  the  way.

It  appears  that  the  girl  could  poison  only  once,  and,  like
the  cobra,  would  be  of  little  danger  after  the  accumulated
poison  had  been  spent  in  her  first  embrace.

Rakshasa,  thinking  of  the  well-known  incident  in  the
Mahdbhdrata,  says  (Chakravarti's  translation) :

"  Friend,  see  how  strange  I  As  Karna  in  order  to  kill
Arjuna  reserved  a  strong  lance  capable  of  destroying  only  one
person  once  and  for  aU,  I  too  kept  a  vigorous  poisonous
maid  to  kill  Chandragupta.  But  as  the  lance,  to  the  great
advantage  of  Krishna,  killed  the  son  of  Hidimba,  so  she
killed  the  Lord  of  the  Mountains  [Parvataka]  to  be  destroyed
by  the  wicked  Chanakya,  to  his  very  great  advantage."

There  is  no  need  to  pursue  this  reference  further.    Suffi-


APPENDIX  III -POISON-DAMSELS  285

cient  has  now  been  said  to  show  the  analogy  between  Chandra-
gupta  and  Chanakya  on  the  one  hand,  and  Alexander  and
Aristotle  on  the  other.  Both  kings  were  saved  from  the
deadly  results  of  a  poison-damsel  by  their  equally  clever
ministers,  both  were  in  the  Pan  jab  during  the  reign  of  the
last  of  the  Nanda  kings,  and  both  would  naturally  be  the
cause  of  endless  plots.

Although  the  possible  connection  of  what  may  be  two
versions  of  a  single  incident  (whether  fact  or  fiction)  is  nothing
more  than  a  suggestion,  the  idea  is  none  the  less  fascinating,
and  one  on  which  much  research  might  be  carried  out.

Before  dealing  with  the  Secretum  Secretorum  I  should
mention  other  occurrences  of  the  poison- damsel  in  Sanskrit
literature.

In  the  Parisishtaparvan  we  find  a  slightly  different  version
of  the  story.  Here  it  is  Nanda  himself  who  has  prepared  the
poison- damsel,  and  his  minister  Rakshasa  has  nothing  to  do
with  it.   The  passage  is  as  follows  ^ : —

"  Then  Chandragupta  and  Parvata  [sic]  entered  Nanda's
palace  and  began  to  divide  his  great  store  of  treasures.  Now
in  the  castle  there  lived  a  maiden  who  was  cared  for  as  if  all
treasures  were  combined  in  her.  King  Nanda  had  had  her  fed
on  poison  from  the  time  of  her  birth.  Parvata  was  seized
with  such  a  passion  for  her  that  he  locked  her  in  his  heart
like  his  guardian  deity.  Chandragupta's  teacher  [Chanakya]
gave  her  to  him,  and  he  immediately  began  to  celebrate  the
ceremony  of  taking  hands.  During  this,  however,  poison  was
transferred  to  him  through  her,  because  their  perspiration,
caused  by  the  heat  of  the  sacrificial  fire,  was  mixed  together.
The  strength  of  this  poison  caused  Parvata  great  agony  ;  all
his  limbs  relaxed,  and  he  said  to  Chandragupta  :  '  I  feel  as  if
I  had  drunk  poison  ;  even  speaking  is  well-nigh  impossible.
Help  me,  friend.     I  am  surely  going  to  die.'  "

Chanakya,  however,  advises  Chandragupta  to  let  him
die,  as  then  he  will  have  the  entire  treasure  to  himself.  Thus
that  king  of  the  Himalayan  mountain  died,  and  Chandragupta
became  ruler  of  two  mighty  kingdoms.

That  the  poison- damsel  was  well  known  and  regarded

^  Ausgewahlte  Erz'dhlungen  aus  Hemacandras  Parisishtaparvan,  Johannes
Hertel,  Leipzig,  1908,  viii,  line  S27  et  seq.  Bloomfield  refers  to  this  in  his
Life  and  Stories  of  Pdrgvandtha,  p.  198.  On  p.  62  of  this  work  the  word
'*  poison-damsel "  is  used  as  a  simile  of  a  stolen  jewel-casket  which  was
destined  to  bring  bad  luck  to  whoever  touched  it.


286  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

with  the  greatest  fear  is  clear  from  the  seventy-first  tale  of
the  Suvdbahuttankathd,  where,  on  the  demand  of  Dharmdat
for  King  Kamsundar's  daughter,  the  wily  minister  Siddhreh
gets  out  of  the  difficulty  by  saying  that  the  girl  is  a  poison-
damsel,  and  by  a  clever  trick  persuades  Dharmdat  to  depart.*
Both  Hertz  ^  and  Bloomfield  ^  state  that  there  is  a  treatise
in  Sanskrit  for  finding  out  whether  a  woman  is  a  poison-
damsel.  It  is  described  by  Weber,*  but  appears  on  inspection
to  be  nothing  more  than  a  treatise  on  horoscopes  which  some-
times show  if  a  child  is  going  to  be  a  poison-damsel  when
grown  up,  but  there  is  no  method  given  for  discovering  if  a
woman  one  might  chance  to  meet  is  a  poison-damsel  or  not.

Secretum  Secretorum

After  thus  briefly  enumerating  the  chief  Sanskrit  refer-
ences to  poison-damsels,  we  must  now  take  a  big  jump  to
Europe  in  search  of  further  evidence.  This  does  not  mean
that  there  is  no  trace  of  our  motif  in  Persia,  Mesopotamia,
Arabia,  Syria  and  Asia  Minor,  but  merely,  that  as  Eastern
Europe  in  the  Middle  Ages  was  the  centre  of  great  literary
activity  and  the  entrepot  between  East  and  West,  it  is  here
that  we  are  most  likely  to  find  data  to  help  us  in  our  inquiry.
Having  surveyed  the  evidence,  we  must  look  eastwards  for
links  with  India,  and  westwards  to  mark  the  extent  of  its
ultimate  expansion.

In  the  first  place,  then,  it  is  necessary  to  become  more
acquainted  with  the  character  of  the  Secretum,  to  ascertain,
if  possible,  why  it  was  written,  the  cause  of  its  immense
popularity,  and  what  is  known  of  the  history  of  the  work
itself.^  We  shall  then  be  in  a  better  position  to  estimate  the
value  of  the  inclusion  of  such  a  motif  as  that  of  the  poison-
damsels.

^  "  Uber  die  Suvabahuttarikatha,"  Johannes  Hertel,  Festschrift  fur  Ernst
Windisch,  Leipzig,  1914,  pp.  146,  147.

^  "  Die  Sage  vom  Giftmadchen,"  Abhandlungen  d.  k.  hayer.  Akad.  d.  fViss,,
vol.  XX,  1893,  p.  143.

8  Op.cit.,p.  199.

*  Verzeichnis  der  Sanskrit  Handschriften  der  Koniglichen  Bibliothek,  Berlin^
1853,  vol.  i,  p.  263  (No.  879),  note  2.

^  Although  space  will  not  permit  any  detailed  discussion  of  this  tangled
mass  of  evidence,  I  shall  endeavour  to  supply  ample  reference  to  the  existing
literature  on  the  subject.


APPENDIX  III-POISON-DAMSELS  287

About  the  very  time  that  Somadeva  wrote,  a  work  ap-
peared in  European  literature  in  the  Latin  language,  trans-
lated from  the  Arabic.  It  was  entitled  Secretum  Secretorum,
De  Secretis  Secretorum,  or  De  Regimine  Princi'pum}  It
purported  to  be  nothing  less  than  a  collection  of  the  most
important  and  secret  communications  sent  by  Aristotle  to
Alexander  the  Great  when  he  was  too  aged  to  attend  his
pupil  in  person.  Such  letters  had  been  circulated  from  the
earliest  times,  but  here  was  a  treatise  containing  not  only  the
essence  of  political  wisdom  and  state-craft,  but  regulations
for  the  correct  conduct  of  body  and  mind,  and  an  insight  into
the  mysteries  of  occult  lore.

Since  his  death  in  322  B.C.  the  reputation  of  Aristotle
had  gradually  increased,  and  in  the  Middle  Ages  any  work
bearing  his  name  was  sure  to  be  received  with  the  greatest
enthusiasm.  Furthermore,  the  name  of  Alexander  was  sur-
rounded by  an  ever-growing  wealth  of  romance  and  mystery.
No  wonder,  then,  that  the  discovery,  or  supposed  discovery,
of  the  actual  correspondence  between  these  two  great  men
created  something  of  a  sensation.

The  Secretum,  however,  is  not  reckoned  among  Aristotle's
genuine  works,  but  as  one  of  a  number  of  unauthenticated
treatises  which,  reflecting  as  it  does  theories  and  opinions
contained  in  his  famous  philosophical  writings,  was  readily
accepted  as  a  work  of  the  Master  himself.  Its  popularity
was  so  great  that  it  became  the  most  widely  read  work
of  the  Middle  Ages,  and  contributed  more  to  Aristotle's
reputation  than  any  of  his  fully  authenticated  writings.  It
was  translated  into  nearly  every  European  language,  and
consequently  played  a  very  considerable  part  in  European
literature.

As  already  mentioned,  the  Latin  version  of  the  Secretum
first  made  its  appearance  in  the  twelfth  century.  There  were
two  distinct  recensions,  a  longer  and  a  shorter  one,  both
derived  from  Arabic  MSS.,  which  in  their  turn  were  said  to
rest  upon  Greek  originals.  Owing  to  the  complicated  and
uncertain  history  of  the  Secretum  it  was  considered  necessary
in  the  later  MSS.  to  account  in  some  way  for  the  appearance
of  this  hitherto  unheard  of  correspondence  between  Aristotle
and  Alexander.  A  kind  of  prologue  was  accordingly  added,
both  to  the  longer  and  shorter  rescensions,  written  by  the

^  For  other  titles  see  Forster,  De  Aristotelis  quce  femntur  secretis  sccretorum
commentaiio,  Kilise,  1888,  1.


288  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

alleged  discoverer  of  the  work,  Yatiya  ibn  Batriq  ^ — i,e,  John
the  son  of  Patricius,  who  was  a  Syrian  freedman  under  the
Khalifa  al-Ma'mun  {circa  800).  He  first  gives  what  he  describes
as  the  preliminary  correspondence  between  Aristotle  and
Alexander,  and  states  that  in  accordance  with  the  commands
of  the  Khalifa,  who  had  somehow  heard  of  the  existence  of
the  Secretum,  he  started  on  a  prolonged  search  for  the  MS.  and
"  left  no  temple  among  the  temples  where  the  philosophers
deposited  their  hidden  wisdom  unsought,"  until  finally  he
came  across  the  object  of  his  search  in  the  Temple  of  the  Sun
dedicated  to  ^sculapius  (Asklepios).  It  was  written  in  letters
of  gold,  and  he  immediately  translated  it  first  into  Rumi
(Syriac),  and  then  from  Rumi  into  Arabic.  Whether  Yahya
was  really  the  double  translator  is  unknown.  He  certainly
would  know  Syriac  and  Arabic,  but  if  he  was  ignorant  of
Greek  we  must  assume  that  the  translation  from  the  Greek
into  Syriac  had  been  made  earlier.  It  has  been  suggested
that  it  was  on  the  occasion  of  the  second  translation  that
the  other  treatises  previously  existing  independently  were
incorporated,  thus  accounting  for  the  longer  and  shorter
recensions  found  both  in  the  Arabic  and  Latin  versions.
The  number  of  existing  Latin  MSS.  is  very  large,  and  every
library  of  any  note  possesses  a  number  of  copies.^

As  was  only  to  be  expected  with  a  popular  book  like
the  Secretum,  it  suffered  greatly  at  the  hands  of  copyists,
who  removed  or  added  chapters  as  they  thought  fit.  The
work  was,  moreover,  so  wide  in  its  scope  that  in  some
cases  a  chapter  was  enlarged  to  such  a  degree  that  it
appeared  as  a  fresh  work  of  its  own  and  was  circulated
separately.  This  is  what  happened  with  the  chapters  on
Regimen  Sanitatis — rules  for  preserving  the  health — and
that  on  Precious  Stones,  while  that  on  Physiognomy  was
incorporated  into  the  works  of  Albertus  Magnus  and  Duns
Scotus.3

A  comparison  of  the  various  texts  and  translations  shows

^  See  Steinschneider  in  Virchow's  Archiv  filr  pathologische  Anatomic  und
Physiologic,  lii,  p.  364  ct  seq. ;  and  Forster,  op.  cit.,  p.  23  et  seq.

2  There  is  no  complete  bibliography  of  the  MSS.,  prints,  etc.,  of  the
Secretum  in  all  the  different  languages  in  the  libraries  of  Europe,  but  Forster
made  a  list  of  no  less  than  207  Latin  MSS.  See  the  Centralblatt  fur  Biblio-
thckswescn,  vol.  vi,  1889,  p.  1  et  seq.

3  See  Thorndike,  A  History  of  Magic  and  Experimental  Science,  vol.  ii,
pp.  266,  267.


w


APPENDIX  III— POISON-DAMSELS  289


that  in  all  probability  these  very  chapters,  or  sections,  which
are  also  found  as  separate  works,  did  not  form  part  of  the
original  composition,  but  were  added  at  a  later  date.  The
chief  reasons  for  arriving  at  this  conclusion  will  be  given  a
little  later.  Thus  a  kind  of  "  enlarged  edition  "  was  formed,
which  would  naturally  enjoy  a  greater  circulation.  Without
going  over  the  ground  that  has  already  been  sufficiently
covered,^  I  would  merely  mention  the  two  men  who  are  re-
puted to  have  made  the  Latin  translations.  The  first  was  a
Spanish  Jew,  who,  on  his  conversion  to  Christianity,  took  the
name  of  Johannes  Hispaniensis,  or  Hispalensis.  He  flourished
in  the  middle  of  the  twelfth  century,  and  translated  only  the
section  dealing  with  the  health-rules  and  the  four  seasons.
It  had,  however,  the  prologue  prefixed  to  it,  and  bore  the
Latinised  form  of  the  Arabic  title,  "  In  Alasrar."  The  other
translator  was  a  French  priest,  Philip  Clericus  of  Tripoli,^
who  at  the  request  of  his  Archbishop,  Guido  of  Valencia,
translated  the  whole  work  from  an  Arabic  original  he  had
found  in  Antioch.  His  date  is  fixed  at  the  beginning  of  the
thirteenth  century.  As  time  went  on  these  two  versions  got
blended,  and  any  knowledge  of  the  separate  works  was  lost.
The  most  interesting  and  important  of  the  Arabic  originals
have  been  compared  and  discussed  by  Steinschneider,^  who
found  a  similar  confusion  of  the  chapters  as  in  the  Latin
texts.

There  is  also  a  Hebrew  version,  which  is  quite  as  old  as
any  of  the  complete  texts.  It  is  now  almost  universally  recog-
nised as  the  work  of  Judah  Al-Harizi,*  who  flourished  in  the
early  thirteenth  century.    It  formed,  in  all  probability,  one  of

^  Wiistenfeld,  "  Die  Uebersetzungen  arabischer  Werke  in  das  Lateinische/*
Abhandl.  der  K.  Gesell.  der  Wissensch.,  Gottingen,  vol.  xxii,  1877,  p.  25  et  seq.  ;
Suchier,  Denkm'dler  provenzalischer  Literatur  und  Sprache,  Halle,  1883,  vol.  i,
p.  531  ;  Forster,  op.  cit.,  p.  25  et  seq.

2  Favre,  Melanges,  Geneve,  1856,  vol.  11,  p.  41,  N.l  ;  Knust  in  Jahrbuch  fiir
romanische  und  englische  Literatur,  vol.  x,  p.  156  et  seq.;  Cecioni,  //  Secretum
Secretorum  attributo  ad  Aristotele,  see  //  Propugnatore,  N.S.,  II,  part  ii,  p.  84
et  seq,,  Bologna,  1889;  and  Brunet,  Violier  des  Histories  Romaines,  Paris,  1858,.
p.  429.

3  Uebersetzungen,  p.  995 — cf.  also  p.  245  et  seq.,  where  a  full  bibliography-
is  given.

*  Steinsehneider,  Hebr.  Biblioth.,  ix,  p.  44  et  seq.,  xi,  p.  74;  Knust  in
Jahrbuch  fur  romanische  u.  englische  Literatur,  xii,  p.  366  et  seq. ;  Wiistenfeld,.
op.  cit.,  p.  83 ;  Revue  des  £tudes  Juives,  iii,  p.  241.

VOL.  II.  T


290  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

the  cycle  of  Alexandrian  legends  upon  which  Harizi  was
working.  This  Hebrew  version,  translated  by  Gaster,^  is
important  in  tracing  the  history  of  the  Secretum  as  it  follows
the  Arabic  faithfully,  and  represents  the  work  before  it
was  encumbered  with  the  enlarged  chapters  on  Astronomy,
Physiognomy,  etc.  One  of  the  most  convincing  proofs  of  the
subsequent  addition  of  these  chapters  is  the  fact  that  none  of
them  is  included  in  the  index  of  either  the  longer  Arabic  or
Hebrew  texts,  and  the  Latin  versions  derived  from  them.  But
apart  from  this  Forster  has  traced  the  chapter  on  Physiognomy
to  the  Greek  treatise  of  Polemon,  while  Steele  has  ascribed  part
of  the  Rule  of  Health  section  to  Diodes  Carystius  (320  B.C.).
The  medical  knowledge  displayed  in  the  enlarged  chapters
places  the  author  in  the  eighth  or  ninth  century,  but  when
restored  to  their  original  proportions  we  can  reduce  the
date  by  at  least  a  century.  Scholars  are  agreed  that  there
is  no  Greek  text  in  existence,  and  no  proof  that  it  ever  did
exist.  Now  if  we  look  more  closely  into  the  longer  Arabic
and  Hebrew  texts,  we  find  that  the  background  of  the
book  is  wholly  Eastern — Persian  and  Indian — while,  on  the
other  hand,  there  is  hardly  a  mention  of  Greece.  If  any
analogy  or  simile  is  needed,  it  is  the  sayings  and  doings  of
Persians  or  Indians  that  are  quoted.  TjEie  allusion  to  chess,
the  occurrence  of  Eastern  place-names,  and  animals,  all  tend
to  point  to  the  influence  under  which  the  Secretum  really
originated.  Among  similar  Eastern  works  whose  history  is
now  fairly  completely  known  may  be  mentioned  Syntipas,
Kalilah,  and  Barlaam  and  Josaphat  All  these  slowly  migrated
westwards,  changing  their  character  with  their  environ-
ment, and  readily  adapting  themselves  to  any  new  purpose
for  which  they  might  be  wanted.  Among  the  later  insertions
added  by  the  Greek  author  of  Barlaam  is  a  "  Mirror  of
Kings,"  which  closely  resembles  portions  of  the  Secretum,
The  composition  of  this  work  is  now  placed  at  about  the
first  half  of  the  seventh  century,  and  the  vicissitudes  through
which  the  two  works  have  gone  are  in  all  probability  very
similar.  2

Having  thus  briefly  glanced  at  the  history  of  the  Secretum^
we  are  now  in  a  better  position  to  examine  the  actual  reference

^  *'The   Hebrew   Version  of  the  Secretum  Secretomm,"  Joum.   lloy.   As.
Soc.,  Oct.  1907,  pp.  879-912,  and  Jan.  and  Oct.  19O8,  pp.  III-I62,  1065-1084.
*  For  further  notes  on  this  see  Caster,  op.  cit,  Oct.  I9O8,  p.  1080.


APPENDIX  III— POISON-DAMSELS  291

to  poison-damsels.  In  the  first  place  we  should  note  that  it
is  omitted  in  both  those  sections  which  were  not  included  in
the  index  (see  supra),  but  occurs  in  the  oldest  portion — that  of
the  rules  for  "  the  ordinance  of  the  king,  of  his  purveyance,
continence  and  discretion."

According  to  the  text,  Aristotle  is  warning  Alexander
against  entrusting  the  care  of  his  body  to  women,  and  to
beware  of  deadly  poisons  which  had  killed  many  kings  in  the
past.  He  further  advises  him  not  to  take  medicines  from  a
single  doctor,  but  to  employ  a  number,  and  act  only  on  their
unanimous  advice.  Then,  as  if  to  prove  the  necessity  of  his
warnings,  he  recalls  a  great  danger  which  he  himself  was  able
to  frustrate.  "  Remember,"  he  says,  "  what  happened  when
the  King  of  India  sent  thee  rich  gifts,  and  among  them  that
beautiful  maiden  whom  they  had  fed  on  poison  until  she  was
of  the  nature  of  a  snake,  and  had  I  not  perceived  it  because
of  my  fear,  for  I  feared  the  clever  men  of  those  countries
and  their  craft,  and  had  I  not  found  by  proof  that  she  would
be  killing  thee  by  her  embrace  and  by  her  perspiration,  she
would  surely  have  killed  thee."

This  is  from  the  Hebrew  text  (Caster's  translation),  and,
as  has  already  been  mentioned,  represents  the  early  recension.
It  will  be  noted  that  the  person  who  sent  the  poison-damsel
was  a  king  of  India.  In  some  of  the  Arabic  texts  it  is  the
king's  mother,  and  in  most  of  the  later  versions  the  queen  of
India,  who  sends  the  poisoned  woman.  Then  again  the  con-
tamination differs — sometimes  it  is  caused  by  the  kiss  or  bite,
in  other  versions  by  the  perspiration,  intercourse,  or  even  only
the  look.

The  translation  ^  of  one  of  the  Arabic  texts  (MS.  Gotha,
1869)  is  as  follows  :—

"  Remember  the  mother  of  the  Indian  king  who  sent  to
thee  presents,  one  of  which  was  a  girl  who  had  been  brought
up  on  poison  until  her  nature  had  become  that  of  poisonous
serpents.  And  if  I  had  not  found  out  through  my  knowledge
of  the  Indian  kings  and  physicians,  and  had  not  suspected
her  to  be  capable  of  inflicting  a  fatal  bite,  surely  she  would
have  killed  thee."

Another  MS.  (Laud.  Or.,  210)  ends  with :  "  she  surely
would  have  killed  thee  by  her  touch  and  her  perspiration."

1  See  the  appendix  to  Fasc.  V  of  Steele's  Opera  hactenus  inedita  Rogeri
Baconi,  by  A.  S.  Fulton,  Oxonii,  1920,  p.  xl.


292  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

The  Spread  of  the  Legend  in  Europe

As  already  mentioned,  the  work  has  been  translated  in  full,
or  partly  edited,  in  numerous  European  languages.  These
include  Spanish,  Italian,  Provengal,  Dutch,  French  and
English.  Full  bibliographical  details  will  be  foimd  in  the
excellent  article,  "  Die  Sage  vom  Giftmadchen,"  by  W.
Hertz,^  to  which  I  am  indebted  for  many  useful  references
and  translations.  There  are,  however,  only  one  or  two
of  these  which,  owing  to  their  importance  in  literature  or
curiosity  of  their  version,  interest  us  here.

The  incidents  of  the  story  must  have  been  well  known  in
Spain  by  the  fifteenth  century,  as  GuUlem  de  Cervera  when
referring  to  the  tricks  of  women  in  his  Romania,  xv,  96,
verse  1000,  obsei-ves :  "  The  Indian  wanted  to  murder  Alex-
ander through  a  woman  " ;  and  later,  when  advising  care  with
regard  to  presents,  he  continues  :  "  Alexander  took  gifts  from
India,  and  the  maiden  who  thought  to  rouse  his  passion  was
beautiful.  If  Aristotle  had  not  been  versed  in  astronomy,
Alexander  would  have  lost  all  he  possessed  through  presents."  ^

Heinrich  von  Meissen,  a  German  poet  of  the  thirteenth
century,  generally  known  as  Frauenlob,  and  famous  for  the
display  of  learning  in  his  poems,  teUs  us  that  ^  a  certain
queen  of  India  was  so  clever  that  she  brought  up  a  proud
damsel  on  poison  from  infancy.  She  gave,  according  to  the
text,  "  poisoned  words  " — ^that  is  to  say,  the  breath  from  her
mouth  when  speaking  was  poisonous — and  her  look  also
brought  sudden  death.  This  maiden  was  sent  to  King  Alex-
ander in  order  to  cause  his  death  and  thus  bring  freedom  to

1  Ahhandluiigen  derk.  bayerischen  Akad.  der  Wissensch.,  I,  CI.  xx,  Bd.  1,  Abth,
Munchen,  1893.

^  Alexandri  pres  do  Aristotils  nofos

D'Indis  et  Le  puciela  Apres  d' astronotnia,

Quel  cuydet  passio  Alexandri  per  dos

Darj  car  era  tarn  biela.  Perdera  quant  avia.

Romania,  xv,  107,  verses  1149-1150.

3  Frauenlob's  poetry  was  edited  by  L.  Ettmiiller  in  1 843 ;  a  selection  will
be  found  in  K.  Bartsch,  Deutsche  Liederdichter  des  12.  his  IJf..  Jahrhunderts  (3rd
edit.,  1893).  An  English  translation  of  Frauenlob's  Cantica  canticorum,  by
A.  E.  Kroeger,  with  notes,  appeared  in  1887  at  St  Louis,  U.S.A.  See  also
A.  Boerkel,  Frauenlob  (2nd  edit.,  1881),  and  F.  H.  Von  der  Hagen,  Minnesinger,,
iii,  Ilia,  verse  3.


APPENDIX  III-POISON-DAMSELS  293

her  land.     A  master  saw  through  this  and  gave  the  king  a
herb  to  put  in  his  mouth,  which  freed  him  from  all  danger.

Frauenlob  cites  the  above  as  a  warning  to  princes  to
beware  of  accepting  gifts  from  conquered  foes.  The  idea  of
the  miraculous  herb  is  entirely  new  and  seems  to  have  been
an  invention  of  the  poet.

A  peculiar  rendering  is  found  in  a  French  prose  version  of
the  early  fourteenth  century.  It  has  been  described  by  Ernest
Renan  in  the  Histoire  Litteraire  (xxx,  p.  567  et  seq.).  The
work  is  in  three  different  texts.  According  to  the  most  recent
(sixteenth  century),  Le  Cuer  de  Philosophie,  by  Antoine
Verard,  the  tale  of  the  "  Pucelle  Venimeuse  "  is  roughly  as
follows  : —

A  certain  king  was  once  informed  by  a  soothsayer  that  a
child,  named  Alexander,  had  just  been  born  who  was  destined
to  be  his  downfall.  On  hearing  this  disconcerting  news,  the
king  thought  of  an  ingenious  way  in  which  to  get  rid  of  the
menace,  and  gave  secret  orders  for  several  infant  girls  of  good
family  to  be  nourished  on  deadly  poison.  They  all  died  except
one,  who  grew  to  be  a  beautiful  maiden  and  learnt  to  play  the
harp,  but  she  was  so  poisonous  that  she  polluted  the  air  with
her  breath,  and  all  animals  which  came  near  her  died.

Once  the  king  was  besieged  by  a  powerful  army,  and  he
sent  this  maiden  by  night  into  the  enemy's  camp  to  play  the
harp  before  their  king.  She  was  accompanied  by  two  others,
who  were,  however,  not  poisonous.  The  king,  struck  by  her
beauty,  invited  her  to  his  tent.  As  soon  as  he  kissed  her  he
fell  dead  to  the  ground,  and  the  same  fate  overtook  many  of
his  followers  who  gathered  round  her  on  the  same  evening.
At  this  juncture  the  besieged  army  made  a  sortie  and  easily
overcame  the  enemy,  who  were  demoralised  by  the  death  of
their  leader.

Delighted  with  the  success  of  his  experiment,  the  king
ordered  the  damsel  to  be  even  better  cared  for,  and  nourished
with  even  purer  poison  than  hitherto.

Meanwhile  Alexander,  grown  to  manhood,  had  started  his
campaigns,  besieged  and  conquered  Darius,  and  made  his
name  feared  throughout  the  world.

Then  the  king,  anxious  to  put  his  long- conceived  plan
into  execution,  had  five  maidens  beautifully  attired,  the
fifth  being  the  poisoned  damsel,  more  lovely  and  more  richly
clad  than  the  rest ;  these  he  sent  to  Alexander,  ostensibly
as  a  mark  of  his  love  and  obedience,  accompanied  by  five


294  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

attendants  with  fine  horses  and  rare  jewels.  When  Alexander
saw  the  lovely  harpist  he  could  scarcely  contain  himself,  and
immediately  rushed  to  embrace  her.  But  Aristotle,  a  wise
and  learned  man  of  the  court,  and  Socrates,  the  king's  tutor,
recognised  the  poisonous  nature  of  the  maiden  and  would  not
let  Alexander  touch  her.  To  prove  this  Socrates  ordered  two
slaves  to  kiss  the  damsel,  and  they  immediately  fell  dead.
Horses  and  dogs  which  she  touched  died  instantly.  Then
Alexander  had  her  beheaded  and  her  body  burnt.

In  some  of  the  German  versions  ^  the  name  of  the  poison
is  mentioned.

The  most  curious  version,  however,  is  that  occurring  in
the  Italian  edition  of  Brunetto  Latini's  Li  livres  dou  Tresor,^
and  which  runs  as  follows  :—

There  ruled  a  wise  queen  in  the  land  of  Sizire,  and  she
discovered  by  her  magical  art  that  a  son  of  Olympus,  Alex-
ander by  name,  would  one  day  deprive  her  of  her  kingdom.
As  soon  as  she  was  informed  of  the  birth  of  this  hero,  she
considered  how  she  might  destroy  him  and  thus  evade  her
fate.  She  first  procured  Alexander's  portrait,  and  seeing
that  his  features  betrayed  a  sensual  nature,  made  her  plans
accordingly.

In  that  country  there  exist  snakes  so  large  that  they
can  swallow  a  whole  stag,  and  their  eggs  are  as  big  as  bushel
baskets.  The  queen  put  a  baby  girl,  just  born,  into  one  of
these  eggs,  and  the  snake-mother  hatched  it  out  with  her
other  eggs.  The  little  one  came  out  with  the  young  snakes
and  was  fed  by  the  snake-mother  with  the  same  food  that  she
gave  her  own  young  ones.  When  the  young  snakes  grew  up,
the  queen  had  the  girl  brought  to  her  palace  and  shut  up  in  a
cage.  She  could  not  speak,  and  only  hissed  like  a  snake,  and
anyone  coming  near  her  too  often  either  died  or  fell  into
disease.  After  seven  weeks  the  queen  had  her  fed  with  bread,
and  gradually  taught  her  to  speak.

After  seven  years  the  girl  began  to  be  ashamed  of  her
nakedness,  wore  clothes  and  became  accustomed  to  human
food.  She  grew  into  one  of  the  most  beautiful  creatures  in  the
world,  with  a  face  like  an  angel.

^  Georg  Henisch,  Keunhundert  Geddchtnuss-wurdige  Geheimnuss  vnnd  Wun-
derwerck,  in  Hochteutsche  sprach  gebracht,  Basel,  1 575,  36 ;  Michael  Bapst  von
Rochlitz,  Artzney  Kunst  vnd  Wiinder  Buck,  Eissleben,  l604,  i,  19.

2  //  Tesoro  di  Brunetto  Latini  versi/icato,  see  Atti,  Series  IV,  Classe  di
scienze  morali,  storiche  e  filologiche,  vol.  iv,  part  1,  111  et  seq.,  Roma,  1888.


APPENDIX  III— POISON-DAMSELS  295

Once  upon  a  time  Alexander  chanced  to  come  to  that
country,  and  the  queen,  thinking  that  her  opportunity  had
arrived,  offered  him  the  girl,  with  whom  he  at  once  fell  in  love,
saying  to  Aristotle,  "  I  will  lie  with  her."  But  Aristotle,  with-
out whose  permission  he  would  not  even  eat,  saw  the  beauty
of  the  maiden,  her  glittering  face  and  her  look,  and  said  to
Alexander :  "  I  see  and  recognise  in  this  creature  the  bearing
of  snakes.  Her  first  nourishment  was  poison,  and  whoever
comes  in  contact  with  her  will  be  poisoned."  Seeing  that
Alexander  was  loath  to  believe  him,  Aristotle  continued:
"  Procure  me  a  snake  and  I  will  show  you."  He  ordered  the
girl  to  be  kept  carefully  overnight,  and  the  next  morning  a
dreadful  snake  was  brought  to  him  which  he  shut  up  under
a  big  jar.  Then  he  ordered  a  basket  of  fresh  dittany  to  be
ground  in  a  mortar,  and  with  the  juice  thus  obtained  he
drew  a  circle  round  the  jar  about  an  ell  away  from  it.  Then
a  servant  lifted  the  jar  and  the  snake  crawled  out  and  crept
along  the  circle  of  juice  trying  to  find  a  way  out.  But  it
could  find  no  outlet  and  crawled  continuously  round  and
round  until  it  died.^

"See,"  said  Aristotle,  "that  will  also  happen  to  that
maiden."  Then  Alexander  had  the  three  girls  brought,  and
drew  a  circle  of  the  juice  all  round  them,  and  called  them  to
him.  The  two  maidens  ran  to  him,  but  the  third,  the  poisoned
damsel,  remained  within  the  circle,  looking  in  vain  for  an  out-
let. She  then  began  to  choke,  her  hair  stood  on  end,  and  she
died  suddenly  like  the  snake.

It  is  impossible  to  say  if  this  tale  is  really  old,  or  merely
emanated  from  the  poet's  own  imagination.  Although  the
kingdom  of  Sizire  appears  to  be  unknown,  it  is  interesting  to
note  the  mention  of  the  huge  swallowing  powers  of  the  snakes,
which  naturally  point  to  India  as  the  home  of  the  story.

As  already  pointed  out  (p.  98n*  et  seq,),  the  magic  circle
could  be  used  as  a  vantage-ground  from  which  to  summon
spirits  and  also  as  a  barrier  from  which  there  was  no  escape.
It  appears  that  even  in  the  early  Babylonian  texts  the  proto-
type of  the  magic  circle  possessed  these  same  properties,  and
in  his  Semitic  Magic  R.  Campbell  Thompson  describes  it  as
a  kind  of  haram  through  which  no  spirit  could  break.  The
circle  was  sometimes  made  of  kusurra  (flour),  flour  of  lime,

^  For  numerous  references  on  the  use  of  dittany  in  the  works  of  classical
writers,  particularly  Plutarch  and  Pliny,  see  Thorndike,  A  History  of  Magic
and  Experimental  Science,  vol.  i,  pp.  218,  495.


296  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

which  may,  perhaps,  have  been  a  mixture  of  meal  and  lime,
while  in  other  cases  flour  and  water  were  used  for  tracing
the  circle.  The  mixture  was  described  as  the  "  net  of  the
corn- god,"  thus  fully  explaining  the  office  it  was  supposed
to  perform.

Hertz  {op,  cit,  p.  105)  refers  to  a  mediaeval  legend  told  by
Hieronymus  Rauscher.  Once  upon  a  time  a  terrible  dragon
overcame  a  land  and  no  human  power  could  destroy  him  ;
then  the  bishop  ordered  the  people  to  fast  for  ten  days,  where-
upon he  said  :  "  In  order  that  you  may  discover  what  power
lies  in  fasting,  you  must  all  spit  into  this  mug."  After  this  he
took  that  saliva  and  traced  a  circle  round  the  dragon,  which
was  unable  to  get  out  of  it  (Das  ander  Hundert  der  Bapis-
tischen  LUgen,  Laugingen,  1564,  c.  32).  Aristotle  {Hist  Anim,,
viii,  28,  2)  and  Pliny  {Nat  Hist,  vii,  2,  5)  believed  that
human  saliva,  and  especially  that  of  a  fasting  person,  was
dangerous  to  poisonous  animals.  The  same  effect  is  attributed
to  the  juice  of  garlic.  Johannes  Hebenstreidt  {Regiment
pestilentzischer  gifftiger  Fieber,  Erfford,  1562,  Folio  H.,  p.  lb)
tells  us  that  a  white  worm  was  found  in  the  heart  of  a  prince
who  had  died  after  a  long  illness.  When  they  put  this  worm
on  a  table  surrounded  by  a  circle  of  garlic,  he  crawled  round
until  he  died  {cf.  Harsdorffer,  Der  grosse  Schauplatz  lust-
u.  lehrreicher  Geschichte,  Frankfurt,  1660,  ii,  113,  N.  9).  Wolf-
gang Hildebrand  (Magia  naturalis,  200)  states  that  a  circle
drawn  round  a  snake  with  a  young  hazel  branch  will  cause  its
death.

The  spread  of  the  tale  of  the  poison-damsel  in  Europe  was
greatly  increased  by  its  inclusion  in  the  famous  collection
of  stories,  "  invented  by  the  monks  as  a  fire-side  recreation  ;
and  commonly  applied  in  their  discourses  from  the  pulpit,"
known  as  the  Gesta  Romanorum.  These  tales  date  from  the
thirteenth  and  fourteenth  centuries.  In  Swan's  English
translation,  edited  by  Thomas  Wright,  the  tale  forms  No.  11
of  the  collection.  We  are  informed  that  it  was  the  Queen
of  the  North  (Regina  Aquilonis)  who,  having  heard  of  Alex-
ander's proficiency,  nourished  her  daughter  upon  poison  and
sent  her  to  him.  The  story  as  told  here  is  very  brief  indeed,
chief  importance  being  laid  upon  the  "  application,"  in  which
any  good  Christian  is  represented  by  Alexander,  the  Queen
of  the  North  is  a  superfluity  of  the  good  things  in  life,  the
envenomed  beauty  is  luxury  and  gluttony,  which  are  poison
to  the  soul.   Aristotle  exemplifies  conscience,  and  the  moral  is :


r

P       Let


APPENDIX  III-POISON-DAMSELS  297


us  then  study  to  live  honestly  and  uprightly,  in  order
that  we  may  attain  to  everlasting  life.

The  popularity  of  the  Gesta  Romanorum  must  have  done
much  to  cause  the  spread  of  the  poison- damsel  motif,  and  as
time  went  on,  the  idea  found  its  way,  sometimes  little  changed
and  at  other  times  hardly  recognisable,  into  the  literature  of
most  European  countries.

When  discussing  the  different  methods  of  poison  trans-
ference we  shall  meet  with  numerous  interesting  versions.
The  most  recent  adaption  of  the  story  is  probably  that  of  the
American  poet,  Nathaniel  Hawthorne.^  It  appeared  under
the  title  of  "Rappacini's  Daughter,"  and  tells  of  a  certain
doctor  of  Padua  who  was  always  making  curious  experiments.
Soon  after  the  birth  of  his  daughter  the  heartless  father  de-
cides to  use  her  for  his  latest  experiment.  He  has  a  garden
full  of  the  most  poisonous  plants,  and  trains  her  up  to  con-
tinually inhale  their  odours.  As  years  pass  she  not  only
becomes  immune  from  poison,  but  so  poisonous  herself  that,
like  Siebel  in  Faust,  any  flowers  she  touches  wither.  The
girl  herself  was  beautiful,  and  a  young  man  falls  in  love  with
her,  but  marriage  seems  out  of  the  question.  A  colleague  of
her  father's,  however,  prepares  a  potion  for  the  lover  which
would  neutralise  the  poison.  The  plan  succeeds,  but  because
poison  has  now  become  part  of  her  very  life  the  sudden
application  of  the  antidote  kills  her.

This  idea  might  be  well  taken  from  similar  results  that  the
sudden  complete  stoppage  of  drugs  in  a  habitual  drug- fiend
would  produce.  We  shall  consider  the  possible  connection  of
opium  with  our  motif  a  little  later.

1  now  propose  to  look  rather  more  fully  into  the  different
methods  by  which  the  poison- damsel  was  said  to  transfer  her
poison.

Some  versions  speak  merely  of  the  kiss.  Thus  in  the
Persian  version  of  the  Fables  of  Pilpay,  the  Anvdr-i-Suhaili,
we  read  of  a  queen  who  wished  to  kill  her  husband,  so
knowing  he  had  a  special  weakness  for  kissing  the  neck  of
his  favourite  concubine,  she  has  it  rubbed  with  poison.  The
plot  is,  however,  discovered  by  a  slave. ^

The  same  idea  is  found  in  the   Vissdsabhojana-J dtaka,

^  Mosses  from  an  Old  Manse,  Peterson's  Shilling  Library,  New  England
Novels,  Edinburgh,  1883,  p.  9S.

2  See  the  translation  by  Eastwick,  1854,  p.  582.  See  also  Benfey,  Das
Panchatantra,  vol.  i,  p.  598.     For  other  references  see  Chauvin,  op,  cit,  ii,  p.  87.


298  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

where  a  herd  of  cows  yield  but  little  milk  through  fright  of  a
lion  in  the  neighbourhood.  Finding  out  that  the  lion  is  very-
attached  to  a  certain  doe,  the  herdsmen  catch  it  and  rub  it  all
over  w^ith  poison  and  sugar.  They  keep  it  for  a  day  or  two
until  it  has  properly  dried,  and  then  let  it  go.  The  lion  mean-
while has  missed  its  friend  and  on  seeing  it  again  licks  it  all
over  with  pleasure,  and  so  meets  its  death.  Then  as  a  kind  of
moral  ^  we  read  :

"  Trust  not  the  trusted,  nor  th'untrusted  trust ;
Trust  kills  ;  through  trust  the  lion  bit  the  dust."

Other  methods  are  through  the   look,   the   breath,   the
perspiration,  the  bite  and,  finally,  sexual  intercourse.
We  will  consider  the  fatal  look  first.

The  Fatal  Look

As  has  already  been  mentioned  in  some  versions  of  the
story,  it  is  merely  a  look  from  the  poison-damsel  which  is
fatal.  When  we  consider  the  practically  universal  fear  of  the
evil  eye,  it  is  not  to  be  wondered  at  that  such  an  idea  should
have  crept  into  these  versions.  A  large  number  of  examples
from  all  parts  of  the  world  will  be  found  in  Hertz,  op,  cit^
pp.  107-112  ;  reference  should  also  be  made  to  F.  T.  Elworthy,
The  Evil  Eye,  1895,  and  his  article,  "  Evil  Eye,"  in  Hastings'
Ency.  Rel.  Eth.,  vol.  v,  pp.  608-615.

There  is  a  wide-spread  Oriental  belief  that  the  look  of
a  snake  is  poisonous,  hence  the  Sanskrit  name  drig-visa  or
driM-visa,  "poison  in  a  glance."  The  Indians  also  believed
that  a  single  snake  dibya  could  poison  the  atmosphere  with
its  eyes  (Wise,  Commentary  on  the  Hindu  System  of  Medicine^
London,  1860,  p.  399).

Similar  snakes  are  reported  by  the  Arabs  as  living  in  the
desert  (see  Barbier  de  Meynard,  Les  Colliers  d'Or,  allocutions
morales  de  Zamakhschari,  Paris,  1876,  p.  94).  Likewise  al-
Qazwini  in  his  Kosmographie  tells  of  snakes  existing  in  the
Snake  Mountains  of  Turkestan  which  also  killed  by  their
glance.  It  is  interesting  to  note  that  these  deadly  snakes
have  entered  into  stories  connected  with  Alexander  the  Great.
Thus  in  the  Secretum  Secretorum  ^  we  read :  "I  furthermore
command  thee  and  warn  thee  that  thy  counsellor  be  not  red-

1  See  the  Cambridge  edition,  No.  93,  vol.  i,  p.  228.

2  Gaster's  Hebrew  version,  section  48,  op.  cil.,  Jan.  1908,  pp.  137,  138.


APPENDIX  III -POISON-DAMSELS  299

haired,  and  if  he  has  blue  eyes,  in  Arabic  called  azrk,  and  if
he  be  one  of  thy  relations,  do  not  trust  them,  do  not  confide
in  them  any  of  thy  affairs,  and  beware  of  them  in  the  same
manner  as  thou  bewarest  of  the  Indian  snakes  which  kill  with
their  look  from  a  distance."

According  to  another  myth,^  during  one  of  his  campaigns
Alexander  came  across  a  valley  on  the  Indo-Persian  frontier
guarded  by  deadly  serpents  whose  mere  glance  was  fatal.
Learning  that  this  valley  was  full  of  precious  stones,  he  erected
mirrors  in  which  the  serpents  might  stare  themselves  to
death,  and  so  secured  the  gems  by  employing  the  carcasses  of
sheep  in  a  manner  with  which  we  have  already  become  accus-
tomed in  the  story  of  "  Sindbad  the  Sailor."  See  also  the
description  of  Epiphanius.^  According  to  Albertus  Magnus
the  scheme  was  suggested  by  Aristotle.^  He  also  tells  a  some-
what similar  tale  of  Socrates  in  his  commentary  on  the  Pseudo-
Aristotelean  work  on  the  properties  of  the  elements  and
planets.*  In  the  reign  of  Philip  of  Macedon,  who  is  himself
described  as  a  philosopher  and  astronomer,  the  road  between
two  mountains  in  Armenia  became  so  poisoned  that  no  one
could  pass.  Philip  vainly  inquired  the  cause  from  his  sages
until  Socrates  came  to  the  rescue  and,  by  erecting  a  tower  as
high  as  the  mountains  with  a  steel  mirror  on  top  of  it,  saw
two  dragons  polluting  the  air.  The  mere  glance  of  these
dragons  was  apparently  not  deadly,  for  men  in  air-tight
armour  went  in  and  killed  them.

Thus  it  seems  that  it  was  the  breath  of  the  dragon  that
caused  death.^  This  will  be  discussed  shortly.  The  fatal
glance  of  snakes  reminds  us  at  once  of  Medusa,  whose  hair  was

^  "  Pseudo-Aristotelisches  Steinbuch  von  Liittich,"  Zeitschrijt  fur  deutsches
Altert.,  xviii,  364,  28  et  seq.  Cf.  Samuel  Ibn  Zarza,  Michlal  Joji.  In  Brunetto
Latini  these  basilisks  are  destroyed  by  warriors  who  are  protected  from  them
by  large  glass  bottles  {Li  Livres  dou  Tresor,  p.  p.  Chabaille,  Paris,  1863,  L.  V,
c.  141).      Cf.  Laistner,  R'dtsel  der  Sphinx,  1898,  vol.  ii,  p.  263  et  seq.

2  Thorndike,  History  of  Magic  and  Experimental  Science,  vol.  i,  p.  496.

3  Z)e  mirahilibus  mundi  {De  secretis  mulienim,  Amstelodami,  I669,  p.  176
et  seq.y

*  De  causis  et  properietatibus  elementorum,  11,  ii,  1.  See  also  the  complete
edition  of  his  work  by  Augustus  Borgnet,  vol.  ix,  p.  643.  The  extract  quoted
above  and  those  immediately  following  are  taken  from  Thorndike,  op.  cit.,
vol.  ii,  pp.  262-263.

^  Compare  the  poisonous  breath  of  the  snakes  in  the  Jdtakas — e.g.  Daddara-
Jdtaka  (No.  304),  Cambridge  edition,  vol.  iii,  p.  11.


300  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

composed  of  serpents,  one  glance  at  which  was  sufficient  to
turn  the  unwary  into  stone.

It  is  in  myths  like  that  of  Perseus  and  the  Gorgon  that  the
fatal  glance  is  more  understandable.  For  in  the  case  of  the
Alexander  story,  if  a  single  look  produced  death,  the  warning
of  Aristotle  would  come  too  late.  Some  of  the  translators
seem  to  have  realised  this,  and  in  cases  where  the  text  read
"  by  the  glance  "  it  has  been  altered  to  "  continual  (or  pro-
longed) look."  It  is  clear,  I  think,  that  the  reading  is  not
correct  and  is  found  only  in  some  of  the  later  texts.

The  Poisonous  Breath

The  idea  of  poisonous  breath,  such  as  we  find  in  some  of
the  versions  of  the  poison-damsel  story,  is  quite  a  common  one
in  fiction.  As  we  saw  in  Frauenlob's  version,  the  girl's  breath
was  poisonous.  The  same  statement  is  made  by  Peter  of
Abano,^  the  Jesuit  Del  Rio,^  Michael  Bapst,  Wolfgang
Hildebrand  and  Caspar  de  los  Reyes.^  For  further  details
see  Hertz,  ojp,  cit,  pp.  112,  113.

The  notion  of  the  poisonous  breath  may  perhaps  be  traced
in  some  cases  to  stories  of  people  living  on  poison  in  order  to
protect  themselves  against  any  attempt  on  their  lives  by
the  same  means.  The  story  of  Mithradates  (Pliny,  Hist.  Nat,
XXV,  3)  is  a  well-known  case  in  point.  Discovering  that  the
Pontic  duck  lived  on  poison,  he  utilised  its  blood  as  a  means
of  inoculation,  and  finally  was  able  to  eat  poison  regularly.

Of  more  interest  to  us,  however,  as  showing  the  Indian
belief  in  the  use  of  poison  as  nourishment,  is  the  tale  of
Mahmud  Shah,  King  of  Gujarat.  It  was  current  about  1500,
and  versions  are  found  in  the  travels  of  Varthema  *  and
Duarte  Barbosa.^

The  story  goes  that  Mahmud 's  father  reared  his  son  on
poison  to  frustrate  any  attempts  on  the  part  of  enemies  to
poison  him.  In  Varthema 's  account  we  read  :  "  Every  day
he  eats  poison.     Do  not,  however,  imagine  that  he  fills  his

^   IJbellux  de  veneris,  c.  3  (Conciliator,  Venetiis,  1548,  fol.  2,  278,  col.  2).
^  Disquisition es  Magicoe,  Moguntiee,  l606,  i,  55.
3  Elysius  Campus,  483.

*  Travels  of  Ludovico  di  Varthema,  G.  P.  Badger,  Hakluyt  Society,  1863,
pp.  109-110.

*  The  Book  of  Duarte  Barbosa,  M.  Longworth  Dames,  Hakluyt  Society,
1918,  vol.  i,  pp.  121-123.


APPENDIX  III -POISON-DAMSELS  301

stomach  with  it ;  but  he  eats  a  certain  quantity,  so  that
when  he  wishes  to  destroy  any  great  personage  he  makes  him
come  before  him  stripped  and  naked,  and  then  eats  certain
fruits  which  are  called  chofole,  which  resemble  a  muscatel  nut.
He  also  eats  certain  leaves  of  herbs,  which  are  like  the  leaves
of  the  sugar  orange,  called  by  some  tamboli  ;  and  then  he
eats  some  lime  of  oyster  shells,  together  with  the  above-
mentioned  things.  When  he  has  masticated  them  well,  and
has  his  mouth  full,  he  spurts  it  out  upon  that  person  whom  he
wishes  to  kill,  so  that  in  the  space  of  half-an-hour  he  falls  to
the  ground  dead.  This  sultan  has  also  three  or  four  thousand
women,  and  every  night  that  he  sleeps  with  one  she  is  found
dead  in  the  morning.  Every  time  that  he  takes  off  his  shirt,
that  shirt  is  never  again  touched  by  anyone  ;  and  so  of  his
other  garments  ;  and  every  day  he  chooses  new  garments.
My  companions  asked  how  it  was  that  this  sultan  eats  poison
in  this  manner.  Certain  merchants,  who  were  older  than  the
sultan,  answered  that  his  father  had  fed  him  upon  poison
from  his  childhood."

In  Barbosa's  version  we  have  a  very  interesting  and
accurate  account  of  gradual  inoculation  by  poison  compared
with  the  taking  of  opium  :

"  He  began  to  eat  it  in  such  small  doses  that  it  could  do
him  no  evil,  and  in  this  manner  he  continued  so  filled  with
poison  that  when  a  fly  touched  him,  as  soon  as  it  reached  his
flesh  it  forthwith  died  and  swelled  up,  and  as  many  women  as
slept  with  him  perished.

"  And  for  this  he  kept  a  ring  of  such  virtue  that  the  poison
could  have  no  effect  on  her  who  put  it  in  her  mouth  before  she
lay  down  with  him.  And  he  could  never  give  up  eating  this
poison,  for  if  he  did  so  he  would  die  forthwith,  as  we  see  by
experience  of  the  opium  which  the  most  of  the  Moors  and
Indians  eat ;  if  they  left  off  eating  it  they  would  die  ;  and  if
those  ate  it  who  had  never  before  eaten  it,  they  too  would
die  ;  so  they  begin  to  eat  it  in  such  small  quantities  that  it
can  work  them  no  ill,  as  they  are  reared  on  it,  and  as  they
grow  up  they  are  accustomed  to  it.  This  opium  is  cold  in  the
fourth  degree  ;  it  is  the  cold  part  of  it  that  kills.  The  Moors
eat  it  as  a  means  of  provoking  lust,  and  the  Indian  women
take  it  to  kill  themselves  when  they  have  fallen  into  any
folly,  or  for  any  loss  of  honour,  or  for  despair.  They  drink
it  dissolved  in  a  little  oil,  and  die  in  their  sleep  without
perception  of  death."


302  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

Dames  {op,  cit,  p.  122)  notes  that  it  was  Ramusio's
versions  of  the  travels  of  Varthema  and  Barbosa  which  spread
the  story  through  Europe,  until  it  found  its  way  into  Purchas
(ii,  1495).  Butler's  allusion  in  Hvdihras,  where  he  turns  the
poison  into  "  asps,  basilisks  and  toads,"  is  as  follows  : —

"  The  Prince  of  Cambay's  daily  food
Is  asp,  and  basilisk,  and  toad ;
Which  makes  him  have  so  strong  a  breath.
Each  night  he  stinks  a  queen  to  death."

Part  II,  canto  i,  line  753  et  seq.

Dames  refers  to  a  curious  tale  he  heard  about  Nadir  Shah
among  the  Baloches  (see  Folk-Lore,  1897,  p.  77),  in  which
the  king's  breath  was  so  poisonous  that  of  the  two  girls  who
helped  him  to  clean  his  teeth,  one  died  outright,  and  the
other  only  just  managed  to  recover.

It  is  interesting  to  note  that  in  Varthema 's  account  of
Mahmud  Shah  he  distinctly  speaks  of  the  practice  of  betel-
chewing  so  widely  distributed  throughout  the  East.  The
fruit  called  chofole,  coffolo,  or  in  Arabic  fufel,  faufel,  is  the
betel  nut,  the  fruit  of  the  areca — Areca  Catechu.  The  tamholi
are  the  leaves  of  the  betel  vine  or  pan — Chavica  Betel.  The
third  ingredient,  "  some  lime  of  oyster  shell,"  is  the  small
pellet  of  shell  lime  or  chunam  which  is  added  to  the  piece  of
dried  nut,  both  being  wrapped  in  the  leaf.  Although  betel-
chewing  is  not  poisonous,  as  was  proved  as  early  as  the  fif-
teenth century  by  the  botanist  Clusius  (Charles  de  I'Escluse
or  Lecluse,  1526-1609),^  it  has  been  known  to  have  curious
effects  on  people  strongly  addicted  to  the  habit,  and  it  is
quite  natural  that  such  effects  would  be  exaggerated  in  the
hands  of  story-tellers,  or  merely  in  the  gradual  spread  of  a
local  story  first  told,  perhaps,  with  a  large  percentage  of
truth,  which  in  time  would  become  smaller  and  smaller.

The  spitting  of  betel  juice  in  a  person's  face  was  an  Indian
way  of  offering  a  gross  insult.  In  speaking  of  the  city  of  Kail,
or  Cail  (a  port,  now  forgotten,  on  the  coast  of  the  Tinnevelly
district  of  the  Madras  Presidency),  Marco  Polo  ^  says :  "  If
anyone  desires  to  offer  a  gross  insult  to  another,  when  he

^  See  the  note  to  his  translation  of  Garcia  de  Orta,  L.  I,  c.  25  (Aromatum
Historia,  Antverpite,  1567,  p.  122  et  seq.).  The  English  translation,  The  Simples
and  Drugs  of  India,  is  by  Clements  Markham,  London,  1913.

2  The  Book  of  Ser  Marco  Polo,  Yule,  vol.  ii,  p.  371.


APPENDIX  III— POISON-DAMSELS  303

meets  him  he  spits  this  leaf  or  its  juice  in  his  face.  The  other
immediately  runs  before  the  king,  relates  the  insult  that  has
been  offered  him,  and  demands  leave  to  fight  the  offender.
The  king  supplies  the  arms,  which  are  sword  and  target,  and
all  the  people  flock  to  see,  and  there  the  two  fight  till  one  of
them  is  killed.  They  must  not  use  the  point  of  the  sword,  for
this  the  king  forbids."

In  an  interesting  letter  to  me  on  the  subject,  Dr  J.  D.
Gimlette,^  the  Residency  Surgeon  of  Kelantan,  tells  me  that
in  the  old  days  Malays  were  in  the  habit  of  conveying  poison
to  anyone  they  wanted  "  out  of  the  way  "  in  a  "  chew  "  of
betel.  The  modern  Malay  criminal  may  also  attempt  to
poison  his  victim  during  the  process  of  betel-chewing.  The
poison,  consisting  of  the  bile  of  the  green  tree-snake  {ular
puchok,  Dryophis  prasinus,  Boie-Dipsodomorphince)  mixed
with  that  of  the  green  water-frog  and  that  of  the  jungle-crow,
is  smeared  on  the  gambler  used  in  betel-chewing.  White
arsenic,  a  common  Eastern  poison,  could  easily  be  mixed
with  the  lime,  and  might  well  go  undetected  if  the  betel
leaf  was  not  carefully  wiped  to  remove  any  grittiness.  The
Malays  must  always  have  been  suspicious  of  such  tricks,
as  even  to-day  they  always  wipe  the  leaves  thoroughly  before
commencing  chewing.

Sufficient  has  now  been  said  to  show  how,  in  the  East
especially,  exaggerated  stories  of  poison  breaths  might  arise.
I  shall  have  more  to  say  on  betel- chewing  in  a  later  volume.

Opium

Significant,  too,  is  the  mention  of  opium  by  Barbosa.  He
speaks  of  "  opium  which  the  most  of  the  Moors  and  Indians
eat."  Although  the  contrary  view  has  been  expressed,  the
weight  of  evidence  appears  to  indicate  that  the  eating  and
drinking  of  opium  is  much  more  deleterious  than  smoking  it.

Both  Mahmtid  Shah  and  his  son  have  been  described  as
great  opium-eaters,  and  at  this  time  the  practice  was  on  the
increase.  The  early  history  of  the  drug  is  very  uncertain,  but
the  discovery  of  opium  began  to  attract  attention  about  the
third  century  b.c,  when  references  to  it  are  found  in  the
works  of  Greek  writers.  The  home  of  the  Papaver  somniferum
appears  to  have  been  the  Levant,  whence  it  soon  spread  to

^  See  the  2nd  edition  (1923)  of  his  Malay  Poisons  and  Charm  Cures.


304  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

Asia  Minor.  It  was,  however,  the  Arabs  who  were  chiefly
responsible  for  disseminating  the  knowledge  of  the  plant  and
its  varied  uses,  and  to  the  Mohammedans  can  be  attributed
its  introduction  into  both  India  and  China.  Thus  all  the
vernacular  names  for  the  drug  are  traceable  to  the  Semitic
corruption  of  ojpos  or  opion  into  afyun}

It  was  not  long  before  opium  found  favour  with  the
Hindus.  There  were  many  reasons  for  this.  It  was  looked
upon  as  a  cure  for  several  diseases,  and  enabled  those  who
took  it  to  exist  on  very  little  food  during  famines ;  it  was  a
great  restorative,  a  means  of  imparting  strength  in  any
laborious  work,  and  was,  moreover,  considered  a  strong
aphrodisiac.  Apart  from  all  this,  opium  was  welcomed  by
ascetics,  and,  besides  gdnja,  or  Indian  hemp  (from  which
bhang  is  made),  became  a  means  of  producing  the  physical
inertia  and  abnormal  mental  exaltation  required  for  the
complete  conquest  of  all  sensation  and  movement.  It  was
also  found  to  aid  the  observance  of  a  protracted  fast.

Then,  again,  it  was  venerated  on  account  of  the  pleasant
and  soothing  visions  it  produced,  which  were  regarded  as  the
excursions  of  the  spirit  into  paradise.

No  wonder  then  that  such  a  powerful  drug  took  a  strong
hold  of  the  people,  and  appears  in  some  form  or  other  in
literature.  True  it  was  unknown  in  India  in  the  time  of
Somadeva,  but  there  was  no  lack  of  other  poisons,  as  is  clear
from  the  most  cursory  glance  at  the  earliest  Hindu  medical
works.

Russell  ^  says  that  opium  is  administered  to  children
almost  from  the  time  of  their  birth,  partly  because  its  effects
are  supposed  to  be  beneficial,  and  also  to  prevent  them  from
crying  and  keep  them  quiet  while  their  parents  are  at  work.
One  of  the  favourite  methods  of  killing  female  children  was
to  place  a  fatal  dose  of  opium  on  the  nipple  of  the  mother's
breast.  The  practice  of  giving  children  opium  is  said  to  be
abandoned  at  the  age  of  eight  or  nine,  but  as  that  is  about

^  The  full  history  of  opium  has  yet  to  be  written,  but  I  would  refer
readers  to  Watt's  Commercial  Products  of  India,  19O8,  pp.  845-861,  which  is  a
revised  and  abridged  account  from  his  Dictionary  of  the  Economic  Products  of
India,  and  contains  many  useful  references.  The  latest  and  most  interesting
information  will  be  found  in  a  little  pamphlet  by  Prof.  H.  A.  Giles,  Some
Truths  about  Opimn,  Cambridge,  1923.  The  article  "Opium,"  by  E.  M.
Holmes,  in  the  Eyicy.  Brit,  is  also  well  worth  perusal.

2  Tribes  and  Castes  of  the  Central  Provinces,  vol.  iii,  p.  SI 9.


APPENDIX  III-POISON-DAMSELS  305

the  marriage  age  of  girls  it  seems  as  if  the  harm  would  be
already  done,  and  the  habit  a  very  difficult  one  to  break.  I
can  find  no  evidence  as  to  whether  children  were  given
poisonous  herbs  to  suck  before  opium  was  introduced;  the
possibility,  however,  seems  quite  a  likely  one.  The  prohibition
of  alcoholic  liquor  by  the  Brahman  priesthood  only  led  to
the  use  of  noxious  drugs,  and  opium  contributed  much  to  the
degeneration  of  the  Rajputs,  the  representatives  of  the  old
Kshatriya  or  warrior  class. ^


Poison  by  Intercourse

The  fatal  look  and  poisonous  breath  which  help  to  char-
acterise the  poison-damsel's  snake  nature  cannot  be  taken
alone.  They  appear  to  be  mere  variants  of  the  original  idea
stated,  or  perhaps  only  hinted  at,  in  the  story  as  told  in  India.
There  are  several  considerations  that  help  to  show  what  was
originally  meant.  In  all  versions  we  are  told  that  the  girl  was
very  beautiful  and  at  once  captured  the  admiration  of  her
intended  victim.  The  evil  effects  of  her  bite  are  mentioned.
Remembering  the  Eastern  origin  of  the  tale,  we  must  regard
this  as  an  amorous  bite  on  the  lip,  probably  drawing  blood,
and  so  allowing  the  poisonous  saliva  of  the  girl  to  enter  the
whole  system  of  the  man.  Then,  again,  the  perspiration  is
mentioned. 2  All  these  facts  point  to  intercourse  as  the  most
obvious  and  successful  way  of  passing  on  the  poison.

Aristotle  told  Alexander  that  if  he  had  had  intercourse
with  the  poisoned  woman  he  would  have  died.  I  take  this
to  include  all  the  numerous  methods  which  in  later  versions
were  taken  separately.  The  idea  would  be  appreciated  by  the
Hindu,  who  would  imagine  the  woman  bringing  into  play  the
whole  ars  amoris  indica,  as  detailed  by  Vat  sy  ay  ana.  It  is
almost  surprising  that  no  versions  suggest  nail-scratchings  as
a  means  of  conveying  the  poison.

So  much  for  the  actual  idea  of  poisonous  intercourse,  but

^  See  Col.  Tod's  Annals  and  Antiquities  of  Rajasthdn,  edited  by  W.  Crooke,
Oxford,  1920 ;  the  latter's  articles  on  the  Rajput  clans  in  his  Tribes  and  Castes
of  the  North- Western  Provinces  and  Oudh ;  and  Russell,  op.  cit.,  vol.  iv,  p.  423  et
seq.  For  evidence  against  the  Rajputs  being  the  offspring  of  the  Kshatriyas
see  Forbes,  Rds  Mala,  edited  by  H.  G.  Rawlinson,  1924,  vol.  i,  p.  21n^.

2  In  one  version,  that  in  the  Parisishtaparvan,  the  perspiration  was  caused
by  the  heat  of  the  sacrificial  fire  (see  supra).

VOL.  II.  U


306  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

the  question  which  is  of  far  greater  interest  is,  What  gave  rise
to  such  an  idea  ?

Perhaps  it  depends  on  the  interpretation  of  the  word
"  poisonous."  It  is  well  known  that  in  many  countries  the
first  intercourse  after  marriage  is  looked  upon  with  such
dread,  and  as  an  act  of  so  inauspicious  a  nature,  that  the
husband  either  appoints  a  proxy  for  the  first  night,  or  else
takes  care  that  if  the  girl  is  a  virgin  the  hymen  be  broken
by  artificial  means. ^  It  is  hard  to  say  exactly  why  the  first
sexual  connection  was  so  greatly  feared,  but  the  chief  idea
seems  to  have  been  that  at  any  critical  time  evil  spirits  are
especially  active.  We  have  already  seen  (pp.  166-169)  how
special  care  had  to  be  taken  at  birth ;  so  also  at  marriages  it
was  equally  important  to  guard  against  any  malign  influences
which  may  be  at  work  trying  to  do  harm  on  the  first  night
of  the  marriage.  Such  attempts,  however,  would  not  be
renewed,  and  if  only  the  husband  could  shift  the  primary
danger  on  to  someone  else's  shoulders  all  would  be  well.

There  is  no  evidence  that  any  form  of  poisoning  was
feared,  but  the  idea  occurs  in  a  curious  passage  from  Mande-
ville.  In  describing  the  islands  in  the  lordship  of  Pr ester
John,  he  says  '^ :

"  Another  Yle  is  there  toward  the  Northe,  in  the  See
Occean,  where  that  ben  fuUe  cruele  and  ful  evele  Wommen
of  Nature  ;  and  thei  han  precious  Stones  in  hire  Eyen  :  and
thei  ben  of  that  kynde,  that  zif  thei  beholden  ony  man  with
wratthe,  thei  slen  him  anon  with  the  beholdynge,  as  doth  the
Basilisk.3

"  Another  Yle  is  there,  fulle  fair  and  gode  and  gret,  and
f  ulle  of  peple,  where  the  custom  is  suche,  that  the  firste  nyght
that  thei  ben  maryed,  thei  maken  another  man  to  lye  be  hire
Wifes,  for  to  have  hire  Maydenhode :  and  therfore  thei  taken
gret  Huyre  and  gret  Thank.     And  ther  ben  certain  men  in

^  See  Ploss,  Das  JVeib  in  der  Natur  u.  Volkerkunde,  3rd  edition  of  Bartels,
Leipzig,  185)1,  p.  310  et  seq.  For  the  use  of  the  proxy  see  Antoine  de  Moya,
Sucesos  de  las  Ixlas  Filipinas,  Paris,  1890;  Moncelon,  Bulletins  de  la  Soci^U
d'Anlhrop.  de  Paris,  3  serie  IX,  1886,  p.  368.  Further  references  will  be
found  in  Westermarck,  History  of  Human  Marriage,  vol.  i,  p.  170  et  seq.

2  The  Voiage  and  Travaile  of  Sir  John  Maundevile,  Kt.,  with  an  Introduction,
Additional  Notes  and  Glossary,  J.  O.  Halliwell,  1839,  p.  285  et  seq.  (In  the
1866  reprint  the  page  is  284  et  seq.)  The  1895  edition,  illustrated  by  Layard,
omits  all  the  al)ove  except  the  first  paragraph  (p.  355).

3  Pliny,  Lib.  VII,  c.  2.


APPENDIX  III -POISON-DAMSELS  307

every  Town,  that  serven  of  non  other  thing  ;  and  thei  clepen
hem  Cadeberiz,  that  is  to  seyne,  the  Foles  of  Wanhope.  For
thei  of  the  Contree  holden  it  so  gret  a  thing  and  so  perilous,
for  to  have  the  Maydenhode  of  a  Woman,  that  hem  semethe
that  thei  that  haven  first  the  Maydenhode,  puttethe  him  in
aventure  of  his  Lif.  And  zif  the  Husbonde  fynde  his  Wif
Mayden,  that  other  next  nyghte,  aftre  that  sche  scholde  have
ben  leyn  by  of  the  man,  that  is  assigned  therefore,  perauntes
for  Dronkenesse  or  for  some  other  cause,  the  Husbonde
schalle  pleyne  upon  him,  that  he  hathe  not  done  his  Deveer,
in  suche  cruelle  wise,  as  thoughe  he  wolde  have  him  slayn
therfore.  But  after  the  firste  nyght,  that  thei  ben  leyn  by,
thei  kepen  hem  so  streytely,  that  thei  ben  not  so  hardy  to
speke  with  no  man.  And  I  asked  hem  the  cause,  whi  that
thei  helden  suche  custom :  and  thei  seyden  me,  that  of  old
tyme,  men  hadden  ben  dede  for  deflourynge  of  Maydenes,
that  hadden  Serpentes  in  hire  Bodyes,  that  stongen  men
upon  hire  Zerdes,  that  thei  dyeden  anon:  and  therefore
thei  helden  that  custom,  to  make  other  men,  ordeyn'd
therfore,  to  lye  be  hire  Wyfes,  for  drede  of  Dethe,  and  to
assaye  the  passage  be  another,  rather  that  for  to  putte  hem
in  that  aventure."

Although  we  must  look  upon  the  above  as  an  invention
of  Mandeville  himself,  the  idea  could  well  have  been  founded
on  fact.  For  instance,  apart  from  the  custom  of  employing
proxies  for  the  first  night  of  marriage,  there  has  always  been
a  curious  connection  between  snakes  and  intercourse.  In
India  the  snake  is  often  represented  as  encircling  the  linga.
In  a  paper  read  before  the  Asiatic  Society,  J.  H.  Rivett-
Carnac  ^  refers  to  certain  paintings  in  Nagpur,  and  says  that
"  the  positions  of  the  women  with  the  snakes  were  of  the  most
indecent  description  and  left  no  doubt  that,  so  far  as  the  idea
represented  in  these  sketches  was  concerned,  the  cobra  was
regarded  as  the  phallus."

The  subject  has  been  treated  by  many  scholars  ^  and
cannot  be  discussed  here  further.

^  "  Rough  Notes  on  the  Snake  Symbol  in  India,"  Joum.  Roy.  As.  Soc,
Bengal,  1879.

2  c.  F.  Oldham,  "The  Nagas,"  Jourfi.  Roy.  As.  Soc,  July  19OI,  pp.
461-473;  J.  A.  Macculloch,  "Serpent  Worship  (Primitive  and  Introductory),"
Hastings'  Eficy.  Rel.  Eih.,  p.  409,  and  W.  Crooke,  "Serpent  Worship  (Indian),"
ditto,  p.  415.  See  also  E.  S.  Hartland,  "  Phallism,"  ditto,  vol.  ix,  p.  815  e^  seq.,
^nd  the  references  given  in  these  articles.


808  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

The  most  simple  explanation  of  the  true  meaning  of
poisoning  by  intercourse  which  at  once  suggests  itself  is  that
it  was  merely  venereal  disease  unrecognised  as  such.  Here  we
at  once  open  up  an  enormous  field  of  research,  much  too  com-
plicated and  technical  to  pursue  here.  All  I  can  hope  to  do
is  to  state  briefly  what  the  chief  opinions  on  the  subject  are,
and  the  consequent  bearing  they  have  upon  the  question  of
poison-damsels.

In  spite  of  assertions  to  the  contrary,  it  is  a  generally
accepted  fact  that  syphilis  was  introduced  into  Europe  by
way  of  Spain  in  1493  by  Columbus'  men,  who  had  contracted
the  disease  in  Haiti.  From  Spain  it  spread  to  Italy,  being
carried  there  by  the  Spanish  troops  who  enlisted  in
Charles  VIII 's  army.  This  view  is  held  by  Havelock  Ellis  ^
and  many  other  authoritative  writers.  It  is  also  accepted
by  the  National  Council  for  Combating  Venereal  Disease  and
the  British  Medical  Journal  (see  below).

There  has,  however,  been  considerable  controversy  on  the
subject,  some  attempting  to  prove  that  venereal  disease  has
existed  in  all  countries  from  the  earliest  times,  and  that
mummies  from  ancient  Egj^t  show  undoubted  signs  of
syphilis.  One  of  our  greatest  authorities  on  such  subjects,
however.  Prof.  G.  Eliot  Smith,  tells  me  that  there  is  abso-
lutely no  evidence  even  to  suggest  that  the  disease  existed
in  Egypt  before  mediaeval  times.  He  says,  moreover,  that
there  is  no  sign  of  it  in  ancient  Egyptian  remains,  and  that
had  it  existed  there  it  most  certainly  would  have  left  its
mark.  2

In  Central  America,  however,  the  antiquity  of  the  disease
is  fairly  well  established.  As  time  went  on,  the  natives  became
practically  immune,  but  when  it  spread  to  the  Spaniards,  the
disease  assumed  a  virulent  form.   In  an  article  on  the  subject

1  Psychology  of  Sex  ^  vol.  vi  ("Sex  in  Relation  to  Society"),  p.  321  et  seq.

^  See  "The  Alleged  Discovery  of  Syphilis  in  Prehistoric  Egyptians,"
The  Lancet,  22nd  August  1908.  Readers  wishing  to  pursue  the  subject  will
find  the  following  references  useful : — Buret,  Le  Syphilis  Aujotirdliui  et  chez  les^
Anciens,  18.90;  A.  V.  Notthaft,  "Die  Legende  von  der  Altertums-syphilis,"
Rindjlcisch  Festschrift,  1907,  pp.  377-592;  Okamura  in  Monatsschrift  ftir
praktische  Dermatologie,  vol.  xxviii,  p.  296  et  seq. ;  Virchow  in  Zeitschrift  Jur
Ethnologic,  Heft  2  and  3,  189.9,  p.  21 6;  J.  Knott,  "The  Origin  of  Syphihs,"
New  York  Medical  Journal,  31st  October  1908;  Rosenbaum,  Geschichte  der
Lustseuche  im  Allertume,  .5th  edition  ;  K.  K.  Chatterji,  Syphilis  in  Geyieral  Practice,,
with  special  reference  to  the  Tropics,  Calcutta,  1920  (see  especially  pp.  4  and  5).


APPENDIX  III -POISON-DAMSELS  309

one  of  the  greatest  authorities  ^  on  Central  America  declares
his  belief  in  the  American  origin  of  syphilis.  He  quotes
(among  others)  Montejo  y  Robledo  in  the  fourth  report  of
the  International  Americanists'  Congress  at  Madrid  in  1881
{Adas,  Tomo  I,  p.  331  et  seq,).

That  the  Mexicans  looked  upon  the  disease  as  something
divine  is  clear  from  the  fact  that  they  had  a  god  of  syphilis,
named  Nanahuatzin,  who  was  a  satellite  of  the  sun-god.  The
only  known  statue  of  the  god  is  in  Mr  Fenton's  collection,
inspection  of  which  leaves  little  doubt  as  to  its  identification.
Mr  Fenton  also  showed  me  the  sun-god,  which  is  represented
as  having  gap-teeth,  in  keeping  with  the  disease  which
undoubtedly  forms  one  of  its  attributes.

Although  scholars  are  not  unanimous  in  their  acceptance
of  the  above  theory,  evidence  to  the  contrary  seems  to  be
quite  unconvincing.

However  this  may  be,  stories  certainly  existed  in  the
Middle  Ages  in  Europe  which  seem  to  show  undoubted  refer-
ence to  the  disease,  which  was  looked  upon  as  a  magic  poison-
ing, the  handiwork  of  a  witch,  or  exceedingly  clever  woman,
whose  knowledge  was  something  out  of  the  ordinary.  Take,
for  instance,  the  legend  of  the  death  of  King  Wenceslaus  II
of  Bohemia  in  1305.

According  to  the  contemporary  poet,  Ottacker,^  the  king
grew  daily  weaker  without  any  apparent  cause.  Suspicion
fell  on  the  king's  favourite  and  trusted  mistress,  one  Agnes,  a
most  beautiful  and  accomplished  woman.  It  was  rumoured
that  she  had  accepted  bribes  from  certain  men  to  defile  herself
in  such  a  manner  as  to  bring  about  the  king's  death  by  her
embrace.  "  How  could  you  do  a  deed  like  this  ?  "  says  the
poet.  "  How  could  you  mix  poison  with  the  fathomless  sweet-
ness which  you  carry  in  your  delicate  body  ?  Mistress,  you
betrayed  him,  just  as  the  Romans  did  when  they  betrayed
an  emperor.     They  brought  up  a  child  on  poison,  who  later

^  E.  Seler,  Gesammeltc  Abhandlungen  zur  Amerikanischen  Sprach-und  Alter-
tumskunde,  Berlin,  1904,  vol.  ii,  p.  94  et  seq.  (originally  published  in  Zeitschrift
fiir  Ethnologie,  1895,  pp.  366,  449  et  seq.).  See  also  Brasseur  de  Bourbourg,
Popol  Vuh,  Paris,  186 1,  p.  cxlii;  ioycQ,  Mexican  ArcluBology,  p.  239;  and  Las
Casas,  Historia  Apologetica,  cap.  19.

2  This  is  the  German  poet  and  historian  who  flourished  at  the  end  of
the  thirteenth  and  beginning  of  the  fourteenth  centuries,  and  must  not  be
confounded  with  the  King  of  Bohemia  (Ottacker  or  Ottakar)  of  about  the  same
date.


310  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

became  the  emperor's  mistress,  and  after  he  had  lain  with  her
he  died.  But  that  case  was  different,  as  the  child  had  been
trained  by  the  Romans  that  she  might  poison  the  Emperor."

The  poet,  in  conclusion,  curses  her  and  calls  down  the
wrath  of  heaven  on  any  such  treacherous  woman. ^

About  a  hundred  years  later  we  find  a  curious  tale  deal-
ing with  the  death  of  King  Ladislao  (also  called  Ladislaus,
Ladislas,  or  Lanzilao)  of  Naples.  He  aspired  to  absolute  rule
of  Italy,  but,  according  to  one  version,  was  mysteriously
poisoned  by  a  trick  of  the  Florentines.  The  story  goes  ^  that
they  bribed  a  certain  unscrupulous  doctor  of  Perugia,  whose
beautiful  daughter  was  the  mistress  of  Ladislao.  The  un-
natural father  persuaded  the  girl  that  if  she  wanted  to  be
loved  exclusively  and  unceasingly  by  her  royal  lover  she
must  secretly  rub  herself  with  a  certain  ointment  which  he
himself  had  prepared  for  her.  The  deluded  girl  believed  him
and  did  his  bidding,  used  the  ointment,  which  was  composed
chiefly  of  the  juice  of  aconite  (monk's-hood),  and  both  she
and  the  king  lost  their  lives.

Although  such  stories  as  these  are  of  considerable  interest,
they  afford  no  conclusive  proof  of  the  existence  of  venereal
disease  in  Europe  before  the  end  of  the  fifteenth  century.
It  is  impossible  to  say  what  was  the  exact  nature  of  these
mysterious  illnesses  or  how  they  originated.

Syphilis  appears  to  have  been  unknown  in  India  till  the
'  end  of  the  fifteenth  or  beginning  of  the  sixteenth  century,
when  it  was  introduced  by  the  Portuguese. ^

But  quite  apart  from  such  evidence  as  this,  the  time  the
disease  takes  to  show  itself  is  greatly  against  its  use  in  a  story
where  the  effect  has  to  be  immediate  and  causing  practically
instantaneous  death.

It  seems,  therefore,  that  we  must  look  for  some  means  of

^  For  the  complete  passage  see  R.  D.  P.  Hieronymus  Pez,  Scriptores
rerum  Austriacarum  veleres  ac  genuini,  Tom.  Ill,  Ratisbonae,  1745,  cap.  dccliv,
pp.  741-742.

2  Angelo  di  Costanzo,  Hisioria  del  regno  di  Napoli,  Aquila,  1 581 ,  p.  279  fi  'eq,
Gregorovius,  Gexchichte  der  Sfadt  Rom  im  Mittelaltcr,  VI,  2nd  edition,  p.  625.

2  See  J.  Jolly,  Indische  Medizin,  Strassburg,  1.901  ;  I  wan  Bloch,  Ursprung
der  Syphilis,  Jena,  l.qoi,  vol.  i,  p.  283  et  scq.  The  British  Medical  Journal  tells
me  that  they  know  of  no  evidence  of  the  occurrence  of  syphilis  in  India  before
1495  and  consider  its  introduction  can  be  placed  with  very  little  doubt  about
A.D.  1500.  It  was  due  to  the  Portuguese  explorers,  who  had  been  infected  as
a  sequel  to  the  introduction  of  the  disease  in  Europe  by  Columbus'  men.


r


APPENDIX  III-POISON-DAMSELS  311

imparting  death  which  (1)  existed  undoubtedly  from  olden
times  in  India,  (2)  is  practically  instantaneous,  and  (3)  has  a
distinct  connection  with  poison.

Although  poisonous  plants  could  be  cited,  there  is  a  much
more  obvious  and  certain  thing— namely,  the  sting  of  the
cobra.  Here,  I  think,  we  have  the  clue  to  the  whole  idea.

In  the  first  place  we  are  fully  aware  of  the  great  antiquity
of  the  reverence  paid  to  the  cobra  in  India,  a  reverence  which,
however,  is  naturally  mixed  with  dread.  How  great  that
dread  must  be  we  can  better  appreciate  when  we  glance  at
the  amazing  statistics  of  deaths  due  to  snake-bite.  The
average  annual  death-roll  is  about  20,000  people.  In  1889
there  were  22,480  human  beings  and  3,793  cattle  killed  by
snakes,  the  chief  being  the  cobra,  the  krait  and  Russell's
viper.  In  more  recent  years  the  figures  have  increased.  Thus
in  1911  the  deaths  due  to  snake-poison  were  24,312  ;  in
1915,  26,406,  while  in  1922  the  figure  dropped  to  20,090.

No  further  evidence  is  needed  to  emphasise  the  deadliness
of  the  sting  of  the  cobra  and  the  krait.  If  the  poison  enters  a
large  vera,  death  is  very  rapid  and  all  so-called  antidotes  are  un-
availing. The  poison  of  a  snake  becomes  exhausted  after  it  has
struck  frequently,  and  in  cases  where  a  cobra's  sting  does  little
harm  it  is  usually  to  be  explained  by  the  fact  that  the  reptile
must  have  already  bitten  and  not  yet  re-formed  its  poison.

It  is  a  curious  fact  that  a  snake  cannot  poison  itself  or  one
of  its  own  species,  and  only  any  other  genus  of  venomous
snake  in  a  slight  degree.  This  brings  us  a  step  nearer  our
inquiry.  It  is  obvious  that  in  a  country  like  India,  infested
with  snakes,  and  where  the  resulting  mortality  is  so  large,
the  customs  of  the  reptiles  should  have  been  studied  in
detail.  This  has  been  largely  done  by  snake-charmers,  whose
livelihood  depends  on  their  ability  to  catch  them  alive  and
train  them  sufficiently  for  their  particular  object  in  view.  A
snake-charmer's  secret  lies  chiefly  in  his  dexterity  and  fear-
lessness. There  is,  however,  another  important  factor  to  be
considered — inoculation.  It  is  a  well-known  fact  that  snake
venom  is  perfectly  digestible,  and  that  if  the  mouth  and
stomach  are  free  from  abrasions  quantities  of  venom  can  be
taken  with  no  ill  effects.   It  is  on  this  principle  that  the  snake-

^  For  further  details  of  deaths  from  snake-bite  in  India  prior  to  1891  see
Sir  Joseph  Fayrer,  On  Serpent-tvorship  and  on  the  Venomous  Snakes  of  India,
being  a  paper  read  before  the  Victoria  Institute,  1892.  For  the  recent  figures
I  am  indebted  to  the  High  Commissioner  for  India.


312  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

charmers  work,  inoculating  themselves  with  increasing  doses
of  venom  until  they  are  immime  from  the  bite  of  the  par-
ticular snake  whose  venom  they  have  used.  For  instance,
if  cobra-venom  is  chosen,  immunity  will  be  obtained  only
against  cobra- venom,  and  viper- venom  would  prove  fatal  in
the  usual  way.^

It  is  a  fairly  widely  recognised  fact  that  a  child  who  has
once  had  measles  is  not  likely  to  get  it  again,  for  the  simple
reason  that  a  stronger  resistance  is  set  up  by  the  one  attack.
We  are  all  aware  that  vaccination  is  a  protection  against
smallpox,  and  that  anti-typhoid  inoculation  preserves  one  to
a  considerable  degree  against  typhoid  fever.  In  the  former
case  the  vaccine  lymph  actually  causes  a  mild  attack  of
smallpox  (just  in  the  same  way  as  the  snake-charmer  gets
slightly  poisoned  by  his  repeated  bites),  and  in  the  latter
case  dead  typhoid  bacilli  are  injected  under  the  skin.  Just
as  cobra-inoculation  is  no  protection  against  viper-venom,  so
vaccination  is  no  protection  against  typhoid.

As  the  system  on  which  the  snake-charmer  works  became
more  and  more  familiar,  and  experience  showed  only  too  well
the  fatal  results  of  cobra  bites  to  people  who  are  not  immune,
it  is  quite  reasonable  to  imagine  that  this  knowledge  would
find  its  way  into  fiction.  It  would,  indeed,  be  curious  if  it  was
not  so,  for  as  history  affords  so  many  examples  of  vegetable
and  mineral  poisoning,  we  can  well  understand  that  stories,
at  any  rate,  would  arise  telling  of  snake-poisons.

All  the  story-teller  had  to  do  was  to  transfer  the  idea
from  the  snake-charmer  to  a  beautiful  maiden,  and  introduce
the  possibility  of  passing  on  a  poison  thus  accumulated.  The
method  of  doing  this  would  naturally  be  intercourse,  a  bite,
perspiration  and  so  on.

As  is  to  be  expected,  we  find  stories  where  the  poison  is
definitely  stated  as  being  derived  from  plants.  The  chief  of
these  was  el-bls  (the  Arabic  form  of  the  Sanskrit  visJia),  In
al-Qazwini's  ^  Kosmographie  we  read  :   "  Among  the  wonders

1  I  have  to  thank  Miss  Joan  Procter,  Curator  of  Reptiles  at  the  Zoological
Society,  for  giving  me  valuable  information  about  cobras  and  vipers.  See
A.  T.  Wall,  "  On  the  Difference  of  the  Physiological  Effects  produced  by  the
Poison  of  Indian  Venomous  Snakes,"  Proc.  Roy.  Soc,  1881,  vol.  xxxii,  p.  333;
G.  Lamb,  Some  Observations  on  the  Poison  of  the  Banded  Krait,  Calcutta,  1 904.

2  Silvestre  de  Sacy,  Chrestomathie  Arabe,  2nd  edition,  Paris,  1826,  iii,  398.
J.  Gildemeister,  Scriptonim  Arabum  de  Rebus  Indicts  loci,  219-  Gutschmid  in
Zeitschr.  d.  deutschen  morg.  Gesel.,  xv,  95.


APPENDIX  III— POISON-DAMSELS  313

of  India  may  be  mentioned  the  plant  el-bis,  which  is  found
only  in  India,  and  which  is  a  deadly  poison.  The  Indian  kings,
we  are  told,  when  they  want  to  conquer  an  enemy  ruler,  take
a  new-born  girl  and  strew  the  plant  first  for  some  time  under
her  cradle,  then  under  her  mattress  and  then  under  her
clothes.  Finally  they  give  it  her  to  drink  in  her  milk,  until
the  growing  girl  begins  to  eat  it  without  hurt.  This  girl  they
send  with  presents  to  the  king  whom  they  wish  to  destroy,
and  when  he  has  intercourse  with  her  he  dies."


Conclusion

To  summarise  briefly,  I  would  say  that  the  motif  of  the
poison-damsel  originated  in  India  at  a  very  early  period
before  the  Christian  era.  The  poison-damsel  herself  has  no
existence  in  actual  fact,  but  is  merely  the  creation  of  the
story-teller,  who  derived  the  idea  from  what  he  saw  around
him.  First  of  all  he  was  acquainted  with  poisonous  herbs
and  knew  something  of  the  uses  to  which  they  were  put,  but
he  was  still  more  familiar  with  the  ways  of  the  snake-charmer
and  the  methods  of  his  gradual  inoculation.  He  could  not  help
being  fully  aware  of  the  fatal  results  of  the  bite  of  the  cobra
and  krait,  and  the  reverence  and  fear  of  the  snake  through-
out India  was  everywhere  evident.  Thus  there  was  plenty  of
material  for  the  creation  of  the  poison-damsel,  and  in  later
days  the  knowledge  of  opium  and  other  foreign  drugs  would
merely  introduce  some  new  variant  of  the  tale.

Like  so  many  Eastern  stories,  the  legend  of  the  poison-
damsel  travelled  slowly  westwards,  and  received  its  greatest
impetus  by  becoming  attached  to  the  Pseudo-Aristotelean
myths  of  mediaeval  Europe.  Its  inclusion  in  such  a  famous
collection  as  the  Gesta  Romanorum  was  a  further  means  of  its
increasing  popularity.

I  need  hardly  say  that  I  have  touched  only  the  very
fringe  of  the  subject.  Whilst  many  important  and  extremely
interesting  queries  have  been  raised  in  the  course  of  this
appendix,  I  have,  for  the  most  part,  refrained  from  offering
any  solution,  and  have  been  content  with  stating  facts  and
giving  references.

Most  readers  will,  I  think,  agree  with  me  that,  despite
many  disadvantages,  there  is  much  that  is  attractive  about
the  poison-damsel.


INDEX  I


SANSKRIT  WORDS  AND  PROPER  NAMES


The  n  stands  for  "  note  "  and  the  index  number  refers  to  the  number  of  the  note.     If  there
is  no  index  number  to  the  n  it  refers  to  a  note  carried  over  from  a  previous  page.


Abano,  Peter  of,  Libellus  de
veneris,  300,  tSOOw^ ;  works
of,  99w

Abbott,  G.  F.,  Macedonian
Folk-Lore,  lOn^

Abruzzi,  Palena  in  the,  202n^

Acacia  speciosa  {siras  tree),
118

Achilles  with  his  horses,
Xanthos  and  Balios,  con-
versation of,  57n^

Aconitum  spicatum,  deadliest
aconite,  279

Adah,  155^2

Adam's  Bridge  (Rama's
Bridge),  Sin^

Adam's  exile,  Ceylon  re-
garded by  the  Arabs  as
the  place  of.  Sin},  S5n

Adam's  footprint,  857i

Adam's  Peak,  beliefs  regard-
ing the  depression  on,  8in^,
85w

Adhah,  155n2

Adhah  (downwards),  218n^

Adityaprabha,    King,    97-99,

_  111-114

Adityasena,  King,  54-59,  62,
64,  65,  68,  79

.^schines,  278

iEsculapius  (Asklepios),  MS.
of  Secretnm  Secretorum  found
in  the  Temple  of  the  Sun
dedicated  to,  288

Afanasief,  * '  The  Friend , "
202ni'

Afghanistan,  aconite  in,  280

Africa,  General  Botha's  cam-
paign in  German  S.W.,  281 ;
polyandry  in,  18 ;  umbrellas
used  at  native  courts  in,  271

Afyun  (opium),  304

Agadas  (anti-poisonous  com-
pounds), 276

Agamemnon,  127^^

Aghnyd  (not  to  be  killed),
240

315


Aghori,  sect  of  ascetics,  90n^

Agnes,  mistress  of  King
Wenceslaus  II,  309

Agni,  God  of  Fire,  97,  101,
255ni

Agnidatta,  Brahman  named,
95,  133

Agnihotfi  (fire-priest),  257

Agnyadhana  (* '  Establish-
ment of  the  Sacred
Fires"),  256wi

Agrammes  or  Xandrames
(Dhana  -  Nanda,  Nanda,
etc.),  282,  282n2

Agryatapas,  hermit  named,
221

Ahalya,  story  of,  45-46

Ahastagrahayogydm ,  24ni

Ahimsa,  doctrine  of,  241

Ajib,  son  of  Khazlb,  223ni

Akbar,  110^2

Akula  (by  descent),  158^^

Alaka,  93

Alakeswara  Katha,  the,  123

Albertus  Magnus,  De  viira-
hilibus  mundi,  299,  299^^3;
works  of,  288,  288^3

Alexander  the  Great,  252,
282,  285,  287,  288,  291,
292,  292n2,  293-296,  299,
300 ;  and  Darius,  278

Alexander  III,  Pope,  268

''Allah,  Abode  of"  (Allaha-
bad), 110w2

Allahabad  («•  Abode  of
Allah  "),  110n2  ;  pillars  at,
92ni

Allahabad  (Prayaga),  llOn^

Al  -  QazwinT,     Kosmographicj

_  298,  312

Am  tree  (mango),  118

Amavas,  or  no-moon  night,
118

Ambika  (Parvati,  Durga,etc.),
138^2

Ambuvegatak  ("by  the  cur-
rent"), 217n3


America,       antiquity      of

syphilis    in    Central,    308,

309,  309^1
Amjad  and  As'ad,  124
Ammianus  Marcellinus,  263
Amrita  (nectar),  15571*;  stolen

by  Rahu,  81
Amsala  {''firm^'  or  "tender"),

'241
Ananga,    a   name    of   Kama,

the  Hindu  Cupid,  Hn^
Ananga  ("the  bodiless  " — i.e.

Kama),  164^
Ananta  (a  scented  drug),  276
Andromeda  and  Perseus,  70^2
Angia  or  angiya  (bodice),  50,

50^5
Angiya  or  an^a  (bodice),  50,

50n5
Angiya,  bodice   of  Northern

India,  50n5
Anglo  -  Saxons,        umbrellas

used  by,  269,  269n2
Anjali-measure    (half-a-seer),

276
Annam  parents,  children  sold

to  a  smith  by  some,    166,

167
Anspach,  A.  E.,  De  Alexandri

Magni    Expeditione    Indica,

282ni
Anteia,  Bellerophon  and,  120
Antichrist,  announcement  of

the  birth  of,  39n2
Antioch,   Arabic   MS.   found

in,  289
Anupu  and  Baiti,  two  brothers

called,  120-121
Anvdr-i-Suhaih  {Fables  of  Pil-

pay),  297,  297w2
Anyatahplaksha,    Lotus-lake

called,  246,  249
Apollonius  of  Tvana,  "Dra-
gons of  India,'*'  108n
Apsaras   Urva^I,   34-36,   245-

259
Apsarases,  2>tm\  175w^  252


316


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


Apuleius,     the     Cupid    and
Psyche  myth,  253  ;   Golden
Ass,  60^2
Arabia,  poison-damsel  in,  286
Arabs,  meeting  eyebrows  con-
sidered beautiful    by  the,
104n
Arabs  regard  Ceylon  as  the
place  of  Adam's  exile,  84w\
85n
Aralu  (Sheol  or  Hades),  61w^
Arani     (fire-drill    or     -stick),

248,  255,  256
Areca  Catechu,  302
Arer  women  of  Kanara,  169
Argha,  an  oblation  to  gods  and

venerable  men,  77,  77n^
Argo,  the  freeing  of,  12n^
Arindama,  hermit  named,  127
Aristophanes,  Birds,  152?i^
Aristotle,  282,  285,  287,  288,
291,  292,  294-296,  299,  300 ;
Hist.  Anim.,  296
Aristotle,    Pseudo-,    Secretum

Secretorum,  286  et  seq.
Arjuna,  son  of  Pandu,  16,  284
Arka  plants,  161
Arminius,  offer  of  the  prince
of  the  Catti  to  poison,  277
Arrian,  Indica,  263
Ars  anions  indica,  305
Artemis,  the  hind  of,  127^^
Artha  (wealth),  180^^
Arthasdtra,  the,  Kautilya,

211n\  2837ii
'Arthato,  40^2
Arudhah,  89^2

Aryans,   polyandry  regarded
with  disfavour  by  the,  17 ;
value  of  war  horses  among
_  the,  blrO-

Aryavarman,  King,  73,  74,  78
J  a'  (to  pervade),  251
As'ad  and  Amjad,  124
Asana,  ashes  of,  276
Asandhimitra,  wife  of  A^oka,

120
Ashadha,  217
Ashantees,       King       Koffee

Kalcalliof  the,  271
Ashbee     Collection,     British

Museum,  272
Asia  Minor,  poison-damsel  in,

286
Asklepios  (iEsculapius),  288
Aso  (October),  119
AiSoka,  Buddhist  Emperor  of

India,  120
A^oka,  first  Emperor  of  India,
Pataliputra  the  capital  of,
39ni


A^okadatta  and  Vijayadatta,
196-213,  238ni

A^okavega,  name  given  to
Asokadatta,  212

Assam,  aconite  in,  280;
customs  connected  with
eclipses  in,  81  ;  Kamarupa
the  western  portion  of,  94,
94?i4

Assur-nasir-pal,  royal  um-
brella held  over,  263

Assyria,  magic  circle  in,  99n  ;
_  umbrella  in,  263

Asta,  105«i

Aste  (shaft  of  umbrella),  269

Astydameia  and  Peleus,  120

Am,  105ni

Asuhhih  ('*with  his  breath"),
41ni*

Asura  brothers  Sunda  and
Upasunda,  13-14

Asura,  Rahu  an,  81,  82

Asura  Taraka,  the,  100,  101,
102,  103

Asuras,  93/1^;  Mayadhara,
King  of  the,  35

Asva-kama,  ashes  of,  276

A^vattha  tree  {Ficus  religiosa),
96,1477i\189,247,250,255;
voice  from  the,  97

Aswat  tree,  255

Atharva-Veda,  the,  240,  241

Athenaeus,  263

Atinirbajidhinih  (over-insist-
ing), 221n^  *

Atinirvartinih  (feeling  satis-
faction), 221ni

Atkinson,  T.  D.,  *♦  Points  of
the  Compass,"  Hastings'
Ency.  Rel.  Eth.,  biri^

Australians,  nature  myths
among  the,  252

Austria,  Maximilian  of,  112w^

Auvergne,  William  of,  works
_  of,  99m

Avantika    (Vasavadatta),    21-

23,  29
Avichi,  the  hell  called,  176
Axon,   W.    E.    A.,  Lancashire
_  Gleanings,  76w^  77n
Ay  us,    son    of    UrvasI    and

Pururavas,  249,  259
Azrk  (Arabic,  "blue  eyes"),
299

Babylon,  belief  in  vampires
in,  61n^ ;  Nebuchadrezzar,
King  of,  194n ;  umbrella  in,
263

Babylonia,  magic  circle  in,
99n


Bachapa,    minister    of    Raja

Kampila,  122
Bacon,  Roger,  works  of,  99n
Badagas,   fire   made    by   the,

256/1*
Badarika,  hermitage  of,  36
Badger,    G.     P.,     Travels    of
Ludovico  di  Varthema,  300,
300;i*,  301
Bahvricas,      verses      handed

down  by  the,  247
Baiti,       Anupu      and,      two

brothers  called,  120-121
Bakhtydr  Ndma,  the,  123
Baladeva,  father  of  Saktideva,

174
Balavad  (forcib)y),  129ni
Balios  and  Xanthos,  conversa-
tion of  Achilles  with,  57n^
Baloches,  the,  302
Baluchistan,  aconite  in,  280
Bandello,  Novelle,  lOn
Banerji-Sastri,    "The    Plays
of     Bhasa,"     Jouivi.     Roy.
As.  Soc,  21ni
Banjara  women  wear  spangles

set  in  gold,  23h
Bantu    negro    races,    eating
human    flesh    among    the,
198/11,  199n
Bapst,  Michael,  300
Bapst  von  Rochlitz,  Michael,
Artzney  Kunst  vnd   W under
Buck,  294wi
Bar  tree  {Ficus  indica),  118
Barbarossa,  Frederick,  268
Barbier    de     Mevnard,     Les

Colliers  d' Or,  298
Barbosa,    Duarte,    269,    300,

300n6,  301,  303

Baring-Gould,   104n ;    Curious

Myths  of  the  Middle  Ages,

39n2  ;  Strange  Sunnvals,  272

Barnett,  L.  D.,  102n\  llQn\

I29n\  nin\  I80n\  188ni ;

"  Bhasa,"   Joum.   Roy.  As,

Soc,    2ln} ;    Golden    Tototit

200n2,   201n»;  Hindu  Gods

and  Heroes,  45n*

Barrow,  H.  W.,  **  Aghorisand

Aghorapanthis,"       Joum.

A  nth.  Soc.  Bond).,  ^Qrfi

Bartsch,  K.,  Deutsche  Lieder-

dichter  des  12.  bis  14.  Jahr-

hunderts,    292/1^;      Sagen,

Mdrchen  und  Gehr'duche  aus

Meklenburg,9&n*,  107S  153n

Basezi,  people  who  eat  human

flesh  (Uganda),  199n
Basile,  Pentarnerone  (Burtons
translation),  5ni,  190ni,  253


INDEX  I -SANSKRIT  WORDS,  ETC.


317


Basri  tree  {Fiats  religiosa),  255
Batata,  Ibn,  268,  268^4
Bayard,  the  Karling  legend

of,  5W
Beas    (the    ancient  "Y^aorts),

282
Bellephoron,  tale  of,  GOn^
Bellerophon  and  Anteia,  120
Benares,  88-90,  159,  160,  174,

196,  199,  200,  207,  210,  212 ;

Brahmadatta,  King  of,  88,

89,  91,  95,    115;    Pratapa-

mukuta,  King  of,  200
Benfey,   Orient  und   Occident,

120 ;     PaUchatantra,     52n^,

108/1,  llSni,  297^2
Bengal,    the    Bhandaris    of,

229^2 ;  customs  connected

with     lights     among     the

Savaras  of,  168;  hard  life

of  women  in  Eastern,  19
Betul  district,  23n
Bhadra,  a  Vidyadhari  named,

66-69,  71,  75-80
Bhandaris  of  Bengal,  229^2
Bhang,  304 ;   aconite  used  in

making,  279
Bharata,   teacher    of  Urvasi,

257,  258
Bharatas,  great  poem  relating

to  the  {Mahdhhdraia),  16
Bharhut  tope,  266^
Bhartrihari  Niti  Sataka,   the,

192n2
Bhdrunda  birds,  220w
B  h  a  s  a,     Svapna-vdsavadatta,

21ni
Bhavabhuti,      dramatist      of

India,     214;      Mahd     Vira

Charita,  214;    Mdlati  Mdd-

hava,   205n3,    214;     Uttara

Rdma  Charita,  214
Bhavani      (Parvati,      Durga,

etc.),  143
Bhavisyati,  70n^
Bheels  or  Bhillas,  89,  89wi
Bhikshu  or  beggar,  180w^
Bhillas  or  Bheels,  89,  89ni
Bhillas,    Pulindaka,    King    of

the,  89,  89ni
Bhima,  son  of  Pandu,  16
Bhishma,    uncle    of    Dhrita-

rashtra  and  Pandu,  16
Bhutan,  aconite  in,  280
Bihar,  kingdom  of  Magadha

in  South,  282
Bikh  (Nepal  aconite),  279
Billington,  M.  F.,  Woman  in

India,  163w
Ris  (Nepal  aconite),  279
Bisk  (Nepal  aconite),  279


Bismarck  Archipelago,  poly-
andry in  the,  18
Bloch,    I  wan,    Der    Ursprung

der  Syphilis,  SlOn^
Bloomfield,    ' *  Ahalyayai  "  ;

["Art     of     Entering

Another's     Body,"]     Proc.

Amer.  Phil.  Soc,  45w4,212ni;

"Art  of  Stealing   in

Hindu    Fiction,"     Amer.

Joum.    Phil.,    183n^ ;    Life

and  Stories  of  Pdrgvandtha,

14/1,     108n,     122,     285^1,

28Qn^ ;    Vedic    Concordance,

45ri4
Blyth,  A.    Wynter,   Old    and

Modern  Poison  Lore,  281
Blyth,    A.    W.    and    M.    W.,

Poisons :    their    Ejects    and

Detection,  281
Bo  tree  {Ficus  religiosa),  255
Boccaccio,    Decameron,     lOw,

76wi,  114^
Bodhisattva,  a,  139
Boerkel,  A.,  Frauenlob,  292w3
Boettiger,  M.,  113#
Bohn's  edition,  Gesta  Romano-
nan,  113n^
Bohtlingk    and    Roth,    53^2,

67wi,  161ni
Boie-DipsodomorphincB   (green

tree-snake),  303
Bombay,   former  practice  of

infanticide  in,  18,  19
Borgias,   poisonings   by   the,

279
Borgnet,    Augustus,    edit,   of

Pseudo- Aristotle,  De  causis

et  properietatibus  elemen-

tonim,  299w4
Bose,  S.  C,  The  Hindoos  as

They  Are,  163w
Botha's  campaign  in  German

S.W.  Africa,  General,  281
Bourbon,  Etienne    de.   Liber

de  Donis,  114n
Bourbourg,       Brasseur       de,

Popol  Vuh,  309^1
Bourke,  Scatalogic  Rites  oj  all

Nations,  199n
Bowick,    Last    of    the    Tas-

manians,  280n^
Brahma,   I2>n\   14,   Un,   100,

101,  242
Brahmachdrin  (an  unmarried

religious  student),  180?^^
Brahmadatta,    King  of  Ben-
ares, 88,  89,  91,  95,  115
Brdhmanas,  the,  240
Brand,     Popular     Antiquities,

99n,  105n


Brazil,    infected    clothes   in,

280,  280n«
Brewer,  Dictionary  of  Phrase

and  Fable,  271
Bridges,  J.   H.,   Opiis  Maius

of  Roger  Bacon,  100?i
Brocken     mountain,      104n2,

105n
Brocken     scene,      Goethe,

Faust,  \Of)n
Brockhaus'   text,    24ni,   89#,

92w6,    97n2,    154wi,    177ni,

201^2,  218/i2,  2217^1,  227w\

236712,  238^1
Bromyard,    John    of,    Summa

Prcedicantium,  114w
Brown,  R.  Grant,  "The  Pre-

Buddhist   Religion   of  the

Burmese,"  Folk-Lore,  265ni
Brukolak  (vampire),  meeting

eyebrows  in  Greece  denote

a,  lOin
Brunet,    Violier  des  Histories

Romaines,  289^2
Brunetto  Latini,  Li  Livres  dou

Tresor,  294,  294^2,  299^1
Bubbal,  pillars  at,  92^^
Buddha,    In^,   32,    85n,   252,

265 ;  Pururavas,  son  of  Ila

and,  248
Buddhist  sage,  Nagasena,  32
Buhler,    Code  of  Mann,  275,

275n^ ;    Vikramdnkadevacha-

rita,  nin^
Burdwan  (Vardhamana),  171,

171ni
Buret,  Le  Syphilis  Aujourd^hui

et  chez  les  Anciens,  308w2
Burgess,    J.,   and   R.   Phene

Spiers,     J.     Fergusson,

History  of  Indian  and  Eastern

Architecture,  265n*
Burlingame,     "The    Act    of

Truth,"  Jo^^^^,  Roy.  As.  Soc,

31-33
Burma,      aconite      in,     280 ;

childbirth  customs  among

the  Kachins  of  Upper,  167  ;

gambling  among  the  Shans

of  Upper,  232w ;  umbrellas

in,  264-266
Burton,  Annotated  Bibliography

of    Sir    Richard,     N.     M.

Penzer,  \0n
Burton,    R.    F.,    City    of  the

Saints,    280,    280^3;    First

Footsteps    in    East    Africa,

271^2 ;    Goa   and   the   Blue

Mountains,  19 ;  Nights,  lOn,

6Sn},  104n,  104w^  123,  124,

13hi\     U7n\    153w,    169,


318


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


Burton,  R.  F. — continued
190^1,  193/ii,  201n3,  202ni,
218^3,   219/13,   220/1,  .223ni,
224w;      Pilgrimage    to     El
Medinah  and  Meccah,  271 ;
translation  of  Basile's  Pen-
tainerone,  bn^,  \^0n},  253
Bushell,  Chinese  Art,  264-
Butea  frondos-a,    the    sacred

tree,  169
Butler,  Hudihras,  302
Bynkershoek,  works  of,  279

Cadeberiz,      professional

proxies  of  husbands,  307
Cail     or      Kail,      Tinnevelly

district     of     the     Madras

Presidency,  302
Calah,  sculptures  from,  263
Caland,   W.    ["Zur   Exegese

und    Kritik    der    rituellen

Sutras  "],  Zeitsch  d.  d.  morg.

Gesell,  232n
Calmette,  R.,  Les  Fenins,  les

animaux  venimeux  et  la  sero-

therapie  antivenivieuse,  281
Cambridge    edition    of     the

Jdtakas,  298/1^
Campbell,  Notes  on  the  Spirit

Basis  of  Belief  and  Custom,

167,  229n2
Campbell  Thompson,  R.,  The

Devils  and    Evil  Spirits   of

Babylonia,      6171^ ;      Semitic

Magic,  mn,  193^1,  295
Camphor    Islands,    King    of

the,  190?ii
Cananor,  269
Candace,  Queen  of  Ethiopia,

eunuch  of,  85?i
Carnatic,  the,  92n*
Catti    offers    to    poison    Ar-

minius,  prince  of  the,  277
Cecioni,  IlSecretum  Secretorum

attributo  ad  Aristotele,  289^^
Central  Africa,  eating  human

flesh  in,  l9Sn^
Central  America,  antiquity  of

syphilis  in,  308,  309,  309^1
Central   India  Agency,  hard

life  of  women  in  the,  19
Central   India,   Pardhi    caste

of,  88ni
Central      Provinces,      belief

about    Rahu    in    the,    82 ;

(ilctis  made  in  districts  of

the,  23w
Ceylon  (Lanka),  82,  Sin?-
Ceylon     regarded     by     the

Arabs    as     the     place    of

Adam's  exile,  84w^,  85w


Chakkajnukki  (flint  and  steel),

256«4
Chakora      (partridge),      235,

235n3
Chakora  subsists  upon  moon-
beams, 235^3
Chakra,  54n3
Chakradhara,       Brahman

named,  59,  60,  65
Chakra  vaka  ( Brah  many  duck),

36
Chakra varti,  S.   C,  trans,  of

Mtidrd  llakshasa,  283n3
Chaldeea  and  Babylon,  belief

in  vampires  in,  61n^
Chalita,    a    dramatic    dance,

35,  35n2
Champa,  220/t
Chamunda    (ParvatI,    Durga,

Kali,"  Devi,    etc.),    198wS

214-215
Chanakya  (Kautilya,  or  Vish-

nugupta).  Brahman  named,

283,  283/ii,  284,  285
Chand,  the  poet,  266
Chan^ala,  228
Chandamahasena,     King,    6,

48,*  93,  128
Chandavikrama,  King,  230
Chandragupta,  founder  of  the

Maurya  Empire,  281-285
Chandraprabha,  son  of  Adit-

yaprabha,  113,  114
Chandraprabha,     Vidyadhari

named,  220-222,  237,  238
Chandraprabha,        wife       of

Dharmagupta,  39
Chand rarekha,    daughter    of

Sa^ikhanda,  221,  237
Charles      de      I'Escluse      or

L6cluse      (Clusius),      302,

302ni
Chatterji,    K.  K.,  Syphilis  in

General  Practice,  with  Special

Reference    to    the    Tropics,

308/12
Chaturdarika  (Book  V),  170-

242
Chatyr  (folding  umbrella),  268
Chaucer,  House  of  Fame,  219?i3
Chaukpumd  ceremony,  118
Chauvin,  V.,  Bibliographie  des

Ouvrages  Arahes,  46n^,  6Sn},

108/1,     122,     131ni,    13en\

U7n\   151w2,  I90n\  193wi,

202/ii,  224w,  297n2
Chavica  Betel  (betel  vine  or

pan),  302
Chedi,  land  of,  89
Ch'^ng  of  the  Chou  Dynasty,

King, 264


Chenin  (sandal),  264

Cheyne,  T.  K.,  **  Jonah,"
Ency.  Brit.,  194/1

Chhatrapati,  Lord  of  the  Um-
brella, title  of  an  Indian
king,  267

Chhattlsgarh  division  of  the
Central  Provinces,  82

Child,  English  and  Scotch
Popular  Ballads,  16n}

China,  customs  connected
with  eclipses  in,  81 ;  intro-
duction of  opium  by  the
Mohammedans  into,  304 ;
pagodas  of,  266  ;  umbrellas
in,  264

Chitrangada,  Vidyadhara
named,  147,  148

ChitrangI,  stepmother  of
Sarangdhara,  121,  122

Chqfole,  fruits  called,  301,  302

Chola  mandala,  or  district,
92w*

Chola  race,  the  king  of  the,
92,  92n*

Chola,  sovereignty  of,  92, 92w*

Choll,  bodice  of  Western
India,  50/i^

Chou  Dynasty,  King  Ch'^ng
of  the,  264

Chowrie  {thdmt/i  yat),  264

Chowries,  43,  80,  90,  111,  162;
swans  like,  188

Chunar,  Mirzapur  district,
rites  to  produce  rain  in,
117,  118

Cicero,  De  Officius,  277

Circars,  Northern,  92n2

Citdrcdya,  20ln^

Citdrohdya,  201w2

Claudian,  De  Bello  Gild.,  277

Clouston,  W.  S.,  123,  202ni;
Book  ofSindibdd,  114/1,  120,
121,  1^2,  224n ;  A  Group  of
Eastern  Ro7natwes  and  Stories,
108/1 ;  Popular  Tales  atid
Fictions,  108n,  114w,  122,
169,  190ni,  192/11,  224n

Clusius,  Aromatum  Historia,
302,  302ni;  (Charles  de
I'Escluse  or  L^cluse),  302,
302^1

Cochin,  Nairs  or  Navars  of,
17-19

Codrington,  **  Melanesians,"
Joum.  Anlh.  Inst.,  198/1^

Coelho,  Contos  Populare*
Portuguezes,  lOti^

Cqffolo  or  chofole  (betel  nut),
302

Collier,  Mr,  113w»


INDEX  I -SANSKRIT  WORDS,  ETC.


319


Columbus*  men,  introduction
of  syphilis  into  Europe  by,
308

Comorre  the  Cursed,  identi-
fication of  Bluebeard  with,
224w

Compare tti,  Richercke  intorno,
etc.,  122

Constantine  the  Great,
Fausta,  wife  of,  120

Constantinople, parasols  in, 268

Conway,  Demonology,  117

Conybeare,  F.  C,  *'A
Brittany  Marriage  Custom,"
Folk-Lore,  2^

Coorg  (South  India),  poly-
andry in,  18

Coote,  H.  C,  trans,  of  Com-
paretti's  Richercke  intorno
al  Libro  di  Sindibdd,  122

Cordier,  Yule  and,  Book  oj
Ser  Marco  Polo,  85^1,  266,
268,  268?t2,  302,  302«2,  303;
Cathay  and  the  Way  Thither,
85/i,  268n4

Coromandel  coast,  Chola  the
modern  appellation  of,  92w*

Cory  ate.  Crudities,  270

Costanzo,  Angelo  di,  Historia
del  regno  di  Napoli,  310,
310^^2

Co  well,  **The  Legend  of  the
Oldest  Animals,"  Y  Cymro-
dor,  190^1

Crawley,  A.  E.,  "Dress,"
Hastings'  Ency.  Rel.  Eth,
118;  ''Foeticide,"  Hast-
ings' E?icy.  Rel.  Eth.,  229n^ ;
"Magical  Circle,"  Hast-
ings' Ency.  Rel.  Etk.,  99w

Crispus,  son  of  Constantine
the  Great,  120

Crooke,  W.,  **  Aghori,"  Hast-
ings' Ency.  Rel.  Eth.,  90^^,
198n^  ;  '  *  Charms  and  Amu-
lets (Indian),"  Hastings'
Ency.  Rel.  Eth.,  167;
''Demons  and  Spirits
{Indian),"  Hastings'  Ency.
Rel.Eth.Mn^;  "TheDivali,
the  Lamp  Festival  of  the
Hindus,"  Folk-Lore,  118,
232n;  "  Hill  Tribes  of  the
Central  Indian  Hills,"
Journ.  Anth.  Inst.,  24w;
"The  Holi:  a  Vernal  Festi-
val of  the  Hindus,"  Folk-
Lore,  59n^;  "The  Legends
of  Krishna,"  Folk-Lore,
39n2 ;  '"  Nudity  in  Custom,
And  Ritual,"  Journ.  Anth.


Crooke,  W. — continued

Inst.,  119  ;  Popular  Religion
and  Folk-Lore  of  Northern
India,  bin}-,  82,  83,  96^1,
99^,  127n2,  138n3,  142^^,
155/13,  193^1^  197^2^  202^1,
240,  256,  256n3;  "Serpent
Worship  (Indian),"  Hast-
ings' Ency.  Rel.  Eth.,  307^^  ;
"Some  Notes  on  Homeric
Folk-Lore,"  Folk-Lore,
bln^ ;  Tribes  and  Castes  of
the  North- Western  Provinces
and  Oudh,  119,  166,  168,
257,  257n2,  3057^1;  "The
Veneration  of  the  Cow  in
India,"  Folk-Lore,  242

Cumming,  F.  C.  Gordon,
"Pagodas,  Aurioles  and
Umbrellas,"  The  English
Illustrated  Magazine,  272

Cunningham,  General,  69^^;
Ancient  Geography  of  India,
3ni;  Archaeological  Reports,
110^2

Cupid,  Ananga,  a  name  for

Kama    the    Hindu,    74^2 ;

Kamadeva,  the  Hindu,  51w^

Cupid  and  Psyche  myth,  253

Curula   of  Ptolemy,    Murala

identified  with,  92w^

Dadau,  185^2

Ddhaishind  (consume),  25,  25w3

Daitya,  230

Damannaka,  story  of,  113ni

Dames,  M.  Long  worth,  Book
of  Duarte  Barbosa,  18,
269ni,  300,  SOOn^,  301,  303 ;
"A  Legend  of  Nadir
Shah,"  Folk-Lore,  302

Danava,  237

Danavas,  demons  or  giants,
22871^;  war  between  Indra
and  the,  35

Dandin, Z)aA\a  Kumara  Charita,
183^1,  184n

Daniels,  C.  L.,  and  C.  M.
Stevans,  Encyclopedia  of
Superstitions,  Folk-Lore  and
the  Occult  Sciences,  145/^

Darbars  of  H.H.  the  Maha-
raja of  Mysore,  119

Barbha  grass,  151,  152,  176,
229^2

Darius,  293

Darius  and  Alexander  the
Great,  278

Bar  say  at,  53w^

Tiasa  Kumara  Charita,  the,
Dandin,  183n\  184w


Dasent,  Popular    Tales  from

the  Norse,  190?i^
Dasnamis     ("ten     names"),

90n3
Dattvd,  182wi
David,  252
[Davids,    Caroline    F.    Rhys,

"Notes  on  Early  Economic

Conditions     in     Northern

India "]    Journ.    Roy.    As.

Soc,  240
Davids,       Rhys,       "Adam's

Peak,"     Hastings'      Ency.

Rel.    Eth.,    85w;     Buddhist

India,   3n^ ;    trans,    of  the

Jdtakas,  62v}
Day,    L.    B.    [Folk- Tales   of

Bengal],  lOSn
Deccan,    gambling    in    the,

232n;    wrestler  from   the,

200
Dekker,  The   Honest    Whore,

U5n
Del  Rio,  Disquisitiones  Magicce,

300,  300^2
Delhi,  Hastinapura  near,  16 ;

the   Lat   at,   92ni ;    Prithi

Raj,  the  last  Hindu  king

of,  266
Democritus,  108w
Denmark,  meeting  eyebrows

in,  104w.
Dervish  Makhlis  of  Ispahan,

The  Thousand  and  One  Days,

6^2

Deva,  238#
Devaddru  wood,  106
Devadasa,  story  of,  86-88
Deva-ddsls  (handmaids  of  the

gods),  17
Devadatta  the  gambler,  231-

236  ;  story  of,  129-132
Devasena,  herdsman  named,

51,   52 ;    king  named,  6-8,

69,  71,  79
Devi    (Kali,  Durga,    Parvati,

Chamunda,     etc.),     198^^,

214,  215';  Tantric  rites  of

votaries  of,  198^^,  199n
Dhd  (knives),  167
Dhana-Nanda  or  Nanda

( Agrammes  or  Xandrames),

282,  282^2
Dhd?in  (carrying),  90^3
Dharma  (virtue),  180^2
Dharmagupta ,        merchant

named,  39-41
Dharmakalpadruma,  14n
Dharmdat,  King,  286,  2B>^n^
Dhamd   at    the    sun's    door,

sitting,  82


320


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


Dkatd,  In^

Dhdtrd,  In^

Dkava,  ashes  of,  276

Dhaval     Chandra,     Jayanta,

minister  of,  121
Dhritarashtra,  prince  named,

16
Dibya  =  heavenly  (snake),  298
Diodes  Carystius,  290
Dirghatapas,       brother       of

Suryatapas,  190,  191,  194
Divall,   or    Feast   of  Lights,

118,  232w
Dokada    motif    (longings    of

pregnancy),  31
Doms,  belief  in  the  sanctity

of  iron   among   the,    168 ;

a  criminal  tribe   of  North

India,  168
Dorys,  G.,  Lm  Femme  Turque^

163n
Douce,  Mr,  llSn^
Dozon,  Contes  Albanais,  190n^
D'Penha,    G.     F.,     ''Super-
stitions   and    Customs    in

Salsette,"  Ind.  Ant,  167
DraupadI,  wife   of  Yudhish-

thira  and  his  brothers,  13,

i3n3,  14,  16,  17,  22
Dravida,  92n2

Dravidians,    polyandry  prac-
tised by  the,  17
Drew,   F.,    2'he   Jummoo   and

Kashmir  Territories^  232n
Drig-visa      (*' poison       in     a

"glance"),  298
Dristi-visa     ("poison     in     a

glance"),  298
Drupada,  father  of  Draupadi,

16
Dryopkis  prasinus  (green  tree-
snake),  303
Duarte    Barbosa,    269,    300,

300n6,  301,  303
DTd)    grass    as    a  relief  from

taboo     during     eclipses,

82
Dubois,  Hindu  Manners,  Cus-
toms  and    Ceremonies,    168,

242
Duhkalabdhika,    a    daughter

of  Devasena,  69-71
Dundubka,    a    non-venomous

snake, 152n2
Dunlop,    History    of    Fiction

(Liebrecht's    trans.),    6n2,

39n2,  127w2
Duns  Scotus,  works  of,  288,

288^3
Durdarsdh,  97n2
Durdasdh,  97n^


Durga  (Parvati,  GaurT,  etc.),
62, 136/ii,  159,  221,  228,  236

Durga,  temple  of,  141,  196,
199;  like  the  mouth  of
Death,  227

Durgaprasad  text,  28n2,  dOn^,
35ni,  36ni,  ^On}\  Un\
44n2,  bin},  5Sn\  56nS
60ni,  70ni,  yg^i,  ^2n\
102ni,  104ni,  140ni,  152n3,
177ni,  180/i3,  201n2,  204ni,
218n2,  221ni,  227n^^  23bn\
236n2,  238ni

Durva  grass,  rice,  flowers
and  water,  Argka  an  obla-
tion of,  77,  77ni

Durvasas,  hermit  named,  23,
24

Eggling,  J.,  Sacred  Books  of
the  East,  245ni

Egypt,  belief  in  vampires  in,
61^1 ;  umbrellas  in,  264

Ekacakra,  Pandus  lived  at,  16

El-bls  found  only  in  India,  313

Elijah,  31

Eliot  Smith,  Prof.  G.,  308

Ellis,  Early  English  Metrical
Romances,  113w^

Ellis,  Havelock,  Studies  in
the  Psychology  of  Sex,  22971^,
308,  308ni

Elworthy,  F.  T.,  The  Evil  Eye,
298;  <'Evil  Eye,"  Hast-
ings' Ency.  Rel.  Eth.,  298

Emir  of  Abyssinia  at  Harar,
Burton's  visit  to  the,  271,
271n2

Enthoven,  R.  E.,  Iri^

Epiphanius,  299,  299w2

E  r  s  c  h  and  G  r  u  b  e  r.  En-
cyclopddie,  163n

Eskimos,  nature  myths
among  the,  252

Ethiopia,  eunuch  of  Candace,
Queen  of,  85n

Etienne  de  Bourbon,  Liber  de
Donis,  114n

Ettmiiller  edit,  of  Frauenlob's
poetry,  292n3

Eumenes,  condemnation  of
use  of  poison  by,  278

Europe,  introduction  of
syphilis  by  Columbus'
men  into,  308 ;  the  poison-
damsel  in,  292-297

Eva,  28ni

Eyre,  E.  J.,  Journals  of  Ex-
peditions of  Discovery  into
Central  Australia,  280,'280n*

Ezekiel,  194n


Faraj,  the  Egyptian  Sultan,

279
Faufel   (betel    nut,    Arabic),

302
Fausboll,  v.,  Indian  Mythology

according  to  the  Mahdbhdratat

45w*;  edit,  of  the  JdtakaSf

52ni
Fausta,  wife  of  Constantine

the  Great,  120
Favre,  Melanges,  289n2
Fawcett,  Bulletin  of  the  Madras

Museum,  199n
Fayrer,      Sir     Joseph,      On

Serpent  -  worship     and      on

the     Venomous    Snakes     of

India;'  311ni
Fenton,  Mr,  309
Fen  wick,    C.    G.,    trans,    of

Vattel '  s  Drot7  des  Gens,  278ni
Fergusson,  J.,  J.  Burgess  and

R.    Phene    Spiers,    History

of  Indian  and  Eastern  Ar-
chitecture, 265n*
Ficus    hidica    {bar    or     Nya-

grodha  tree),  42,  42n2,  118
Ficus  religiosa  (A^vattha  tree),

247;      {pipal     tree),     118;

{aswatfjari,  etc.),  255
Flinders    Petrie,    "Assyrian

and  Hittite  Society,"  An-
cie7it  Egypt,  88w^
Florence,  umbrella  in,  268
Florus,  278
Forbes,    C.   J.   F.   S.,  British

Burma  and  its  People,  266n^ ;

Has  Mdld,  266,  266^3, 305ni
Forbes,    Duncan,    Adventures

of  Hatim  Tai,  Qn^
Forlong  Fund,  the,  256w*
Forster,    De    Aristotelis    qtut

feruntur   secretis    secretorum

commentatio,    287ni,    288ni,

289m1
Forster,    E.,    Arabian  Nights*

Entertainments,  147w^
Fox,    Samuel,     inventor    of

"Paragon"    rib    for    um-
brellas, 271
France,  A.,  Les  Sept  Femmet

de  Barbe  Bleu,  224n
Frauenlob  {i.e.  Heinrich  von

Meissen),  292,  292n3,  300;

Cantica  Canticorum,  292n*
Frazer,  Folk-Lore  of  the  Old

Testament,     194n ;      Golden

Bough,  72ni,  83, 105n,  108n,

117,  118,  166,   189ni,  253.

253^1,    256,    256n2,    257n«,

268,  268ni ;  Pausanias,  70n*
Frederick  Barbarossa,  268


INDEX  I -SANSKRIT  WORDS,  ETC.


321


Frere,  Old  Deccan  Days,  3n,

108n,  136wi,  202^1
Fridolin,  story  of,  llSn^
Frobel,  J.,  Seven  Years'  Travel

in  Central  America,  280^'^
Fvfel  or  faufel   (betel    nut,

Arabic),  302
Fulgentius,  story  of,  llSn^

Gd  (to  sing),  241

Gaal,  Mdrchen  der  Magyar  en,

135^2,  207^11
Galava,  hermitage  of,  211 ;  a

son  or  pupil  of  Vi^vamitra,

211^2
Gana    Stambhaka   appointed

to  protect  Naravahanadatta,

170
Ganas  (attendants   of  Siva),

102
Gandhara,  Subala,  King  of,  16
Gandhari,    wife    of    Dhrita-

rashtra,  16
Gandharva,  desire  to  become

a,  255
Gandharva  form  of  marriage,

5,  66
Gandharvas,    35,    36,    175^^,

241,  247-249,  255,  256
Gandharvas'  trick  to  ensure

Urva^i's  return,  246
Ganesa    (son    of    Siva    and

ParvatI),  99,  100,  102,  103,

125,  125^1,  147^1,  170
Gangaridae     and     Prasii

peoples,  282
Ganges,  River,  4,  2>%i^,  54,  55,

67ni,  91,  921^2,  94,  102,  110,

147,  148, 185,  211,  221,  282
Gdnja  (Indian  hemp),  304
Garcia  de  Orta,   The  Simples

and  Drugs  of  India,  English

trans.  Clements  Markham,

302^1
Garnett,  L.  M.,   The   Women

of  Turkey  and   their   Folk-

Lore,  163w
Garrett's  Classical  Dictionary,

252ni
Garuda,    son    of  Vinata,   56,

56^2,  151-156,  220n
Gaspar  de  los  Reyes,  Elysius

Campus,  300,  SOOw^
Gaster,      "The      Hebrew

Version    of    the    Secretum

Secretornm,'^     Joum.     Roy.

As.   Soc,  290,  290^1,  291,

298,  298n2
Gaurl  (Parvati,  Durga,  etc.),

wife  of  Siva,  100,  102,  128,

128ni,  141,  155,  212^1,  216

VOL.   II.


Gautama  (Buddha),  265
Gautama,  hermit  named,  45-

46
Gautami,  144n'
Gay,  Trivia,  270,  271
Gaya  corresponds  with  king-
dom of  Magadha,  district

of,  3^1
Gayatri,  metre  of  four  lines

of  eight  syllables,  250
Geden,  Rev.  A.  S.,  67ni
Geldner,       Pischel      and,

Vedische  Studien,  252i?^
Gellius,  Nodes  Atticae,  211
Georges,  L.,  VArme  bacterio-

logique future  concurrente  des

armes  chimique  et  balistique,

281
German  methods  of  warfare,

280,  281
Germany,  meeting  eyebrows

in,  ICkn
Gerould,  G.  H.,  The  Grateful

Dead  (Folk- Lore  Society),

80wi
Gespensterscheinung      {mkriti) ,

202w2
Ghanta  and  Nighanta,  14ri
Ghata  -  measure     (sixty  -  four

seers),  276
Gibb,    E.   J.   W.,    History  of

the  Forty  Vezirs,  \2^',' The

Story  ofJewad,  190/ii
Gil  de  Rais,  identification  of

Bluebeard  with,  224n
Gildemeister,    J.,    Scriptorum

Arabum    de    Rebus    Indicis

loci,  312^2
Giles,    H.    A.,    Some    Tndhs

about  Opium,  304w^
Gilgamesh,  252
Gimlette,      J.      D.,      Malay

Poisons    and    Charm    Cures,

303,  303^1
Ging-gang  (striped),  211n^
Glr  (speech),  241
Girolamo  Gambarota,  picture

by,  268
Go  (cow),  241

Godavari,  waters  of  the,  92, 93
Goethe,  Faust,  lObn,  297
Gokarna  (Siva),  153,  154
Goloka,  a  region  above  the

three  worlds,  242
Gomukha,  son  of  Nityodita,

161,  165
Gonds,  tribe  of,  267
Gonikaputra,  183w^
Gonikasuta,  lS3n^
Gonlputraka,  183w^
Gonzenbach,     Sicilianische


Gonzenbach — continued

Mdrchen,  6^2,  80/^1,  113wi,

135^2,  1557^4,  190?ii,  1967^1,

202^1,  209^1
Gopalaka,    son    of    Chanda-

mahasena,    11,    12,  20,"  25,

26-30,  34,  89
Gopis,  Krishna's  love  of  the,

242
Goswami,  B.,  trans,  of  Mudrd-

Rdkshasa,  283^3
Gould,    S.     Baring-,     104^3;

Curious  Myths  of  the  Middle

Ages,    397i2 ;     Strange   Sur-
vivals, 272
Govindakuta,      mountain

named,  212
Govindasvamin,       Brahman

named,  196,  197,  199,  200,

209,  211
Graha  (planet),  180n*
Grdmaikabhdgini,  160n^
Grand,  Le,  Fabliaux,  113^^
Grdsaikabhdgim,  160^^
Greece,  meeting  of  eyebrows

in,  104n
Gregorovius,     Geschichte    der

Stadt    Rom    im    Mittelalter,

310n2
Grierson,  Stein  and,  Hatim's

Tales,  124
Griffith,    metrical    trans,    of

the  Rdmdyana,  4571*  ;  trans.

of   Rig-Veda,   250,    2mn^,

255^1
Grihastha     or      householder,

'l80ni
Grihya     Siltras,     Oldenberg,

267,  267^1
Grimm,   Deutsche  Mythologie,

105n ;       Irische      Mdrchen,

104:n;  Mdrchen,  QOn^,  l9Qn\

223n^ ;    Teutonic  Mythology

(trans,    Stally brass),    43w^,

57^1,  96^1
Grohmann,  Sagen  aus  B'dhmen,

13^4,  43^1,  99n,  104n
Grossler,  Sagen  aus  der  Graf-

schaft  Mansfeld,  99n
Grotius,  Hugo,  De  jure  belli

ac  pads,  277-279
Gruber,     Ersch      and,     En

cyclopddie,  lQ3n
Gubernatis,     De,     Zoological

Mythology,  bln^,  I21n^
Guerino  Meschino,  novel  of,

13871*
Guhachandra,       merchant

named,  40-44
Guhasena,    father   of  Guha-
chandra, 40,  41


322


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


Guhyaka,  favour  of  the,  98,

98«i
Guhyakas,      attendants       of

Kuvera,  98«i
Guido    of    Valencia,     Arch-
bishop, 289
Guillem  de  Cervera,  Romania,

292,  292/i2
Guinganip,      gingham      first

made  in,  271
Gujarat,  Mahmud  Shah,  King

of,  300-302 ;  Srigaud  Brah-

mans  of,  168,  169
Guna  (rope),  75/1^
Gunavarman,       merchant

named,  55
Gupta  Empire,  Magadha  the

nucleus  of  the,  3n^
Gupta,  Rai    Bahadur   B.   A.,

notes  on  sdmudrika,  In^
Gurkhas  of  Nepal,  poisoning

of  wells  by  the,  280,  280/^2
Gutschmid  in  Zeit.  d.  d.  morg.

GeseU,  312/i2

Haddon,     Report     Cambridge

Exped.,  198rii
Hades  (Aralu  or  Sheol),  61n^;

descent     of    Ishtar     into,

61ni ;  (Sheol  or  Hell),  lUn
Hagen,     F.     H.     von     der.

Minnesinger,  292n^
Haiti,  syphilis  in,  308
Hakluyt  Society,  18
Hall,  92/1^
Halliwell,  T.  O.,  The  Voiage

and    Travaile   of  Sir   John

Maundevile,  Kt,  306,  306^2,

307
Hamilton,  Francis,  Account  of

the  Kingdom  of  Nepal,  2S0n^
Han  Dynasty,   bas-reliefs  of

the,  264
Hans     Schiltberger's     Reise-

buch,  279ni
Hanuman,  the  monkey-god,

73,  197w2
Han  way,  Jonas,  first  man  to

use  an  umbrella,  269
Haram,  hafim  (harem),  16bi*;

magic  circle  as  a  kind  of,

295  ;  (a  sacred  spot),  161w*
Harapura,  174
Harar,   Burton's  visit  to  the

Emir  of  Abyssinia  at,  271,

271n2
Harasvamin,  ascetic  named,

184-186  ;  story  of,  39 wi
Hardiman,  J.  P.,  J.  G.  Scott,

Gazetteer  of  Upper  Burma

and  the  Shan  States,  232n


Harem  (Arabic  haram,  harim,
that  which  is  prohibited),

161/i4

Haridatta,  Brahman  named,
231

Hafim,  haram  [harem),  161n*,

'  162n,  "l63n

Harisikha,  son  of  Rumanvat,
161,  165

Harischandra,  King,  267

Harleian  MS.,  269

Harran,  city  sacred  to  the
moon-god,  194«

Harsdorffer,  Der  grosse  Schaji-
platz  lust-mid  lehrreicher
Geschichte,  296

Harsha-Vardhana,  King,  267

Hartland,  E.  S.,  168,  202;ii ;
"The  Forbidden  Cham-
ber," Folk- Lore  Journal,
223wi ;  The  Legend  of  Per-
seus, lOn^,  967iS  136mS  153w;
"Phallism,"  Hastings'
Enct/.  Rel.  Eth.,  119,  307n2

Harvey,  Turkish  Harems  and
Circassian  Homes,  163n

Harz  mountains,  104n2

Hasan,  104ni

Hastagrahdyogydm,  24w^

Hastinapura,  1,  ln2,  16,  54

Hastings'  Enci/clopoidia  of
Religion  and  Ethics,  bin},
6ln\  81,  83,  85/1,  SSn},
90Ai3,  99/1,  118,  119,  163/1,
167,  19Sn\  229;i2,  232n,  240,
265/iS  298,  307^2

Havelock  Ellis,  Studies  in  the
Psychology/  of  Sex,  229^2,
308,  308ni

Hawaian  Islands,  polyandry
in  the,  18

Hawthorne,  Nathaniel,
''  Rappacini's  Daughter,"
Mosses  from  an  Old  Manse,
297,  297ni

Hebenstreidt,  Johannes,
Regimeyit  pestilentsischer
giffUger  Fieber,  296

Heinrich  von  Meissen
(Frauenlob),  292,  292n3

Heliodorus,  Mthiopica,  62w^,
106/1*

Hemachandra,  ParLsish(apar-
van,  108/i,  285,  286n},  305n2  ;
Sthavirdvalicharita,  283/i2

Henderson,  Folk-Lore  of  the
Northern  Counties,  2n},  9Sn*,
104n

Henisch,  Georg,  Neiinhundert
Ged'dchtnuss-wurdige  Geheim-
nuss  und  fVunderwerck,  294 w^


Hercules,  72n2

Herissaye,  Noel    du    Fail  de

la,  Contes  d* Eutrapel ,  3;i
Herrera,  A.  de.   West  Indies,

88/ii
Hertel,  J.,  Ausgewahlte  Erz'dh-

lungai     aus     Hemacandra  s

Parisishtaparvan,         285n^ ;

"Pala    und    Gopala,"    /«-

dische  Erzahler,  121 ;  "  Uber

die     Suvabahuttarlkatha,"

Festschrift  fiir  Ernst   Wind-

isch,  286,  286/ii
Hertz,  W,,  ''Die  Sage   vom

Giftmiidchen,"         Ahhand-

lungen    der    k.     bayerischen

Akademie  der  fVissenschaften,

286,  286/r.  292,  292/11,  296,

298,  300
Hidimba,  son  of,  284
High  Commissioner  for  India,

311wi
Hildebrand,  Wolfgang,  Magia

naturalis,  296,  300
Himalaya,    daughter   of   the

(ParvatI,  Durga,  etc.),  156
Himalaya  mountains,  54,  94,

142,  144,  147,  143
Himalayas,     206,     209,    210,

258;  Pandu  retires  to  the,

16
Himavat,    Mainaka,    son    of,

192/i2
Himavat  mountain,  138
Hindu  Kush,  67^1
Hindustani  districts,  iikli  worn

in  the,  23/i
Hippolytus     and     his     step-
mother Phaedra,  legend  of,

120
Hiranyadatta,  son   of  Mani-

vati,  148
Hispaniensis,        Johannes,

trans,  of  the  Secretum  Secre-

torum,  289
Hitopadesa,  the,  223wi
Hocart,      A.     M.,     "Flying

through     the     Air,"     Ind.

Ant.,  64 ni
Hodson,  T.  C,  The  Meitheis,

118 ;    Primitive    Culture    of

India  (Roy.  As.  Soc),  97w,

256/1*
Hoffman's    article    in    Ersch

and   Gruber's  Encyclopddie

{hafim),  163/t
Hoil  festival,  59ni,  164w4,  169
Holmes,    E.    M.,    "Opium,"

Enctj.  Brit,  304ni
Homa,  daily  offering  to   the

fire,  257,  257ni


INDEX  I -SANSKRIT  WORDS,  ETC.


323


tomer,  Iliads,  218n*  ;  Odyssey,

\Q^n\  2llrfi,  2l%n^
lopkins,  E.  W.,  in  Cambridge

History  of  India,  241
iorace,  Odes,  120
-losea,  194n
^tee,  htl  or  ti  (stone  or  metal

umbrellas),  265,  265^*
hughes'   Dictionary  of  Islam

(Harim),  163*^
Hiinas    (Huns?),    94,    94# ;

defeatofthe,  94,  94ri3

Hydaspes  (Jhelum),  Porus,
ruler  of,  283,  283^2

Ibn  Batata,  268

Ifrit;  accusation  of  the,  147ni

Ila,    Pururavas,  son  of,   245,

248,  250,  251
Illaka,  merchant  named,  9
Imphal,  capital  of  Manipur,

118
India,  dread  of  the  cobra  in,

311,    312 ;     Mohammedans

introduce  opium  into,  304  ;

poison-damsel  in,  281-286  ;

Portuguese     introduce

syphilis  into,  310,  310^^
Indians  of  British  Columbia,

Thompson,  256
Indians  inveterate  gamblers,

231^1
Indo-scythae  of  the  ancients,

the  Turks,  93^3
Indra,  34,  35,  45,  46,  54,  100,

101,   102,  103,   n&n\   151,

175,  192n2,  242,  257,  259
Indra-Gopa  insects,  276
"Indra  of  men"  (narendra),

116ni
Indus,  39^1
Irrawaddy  river,  168
Isaiah,  194n
Ishtar   into    Hades,    descent

of,  61ni
Ityaka,    or    Nityodita,     161,

161^1,  165
Ityakapara    or    Ityaka,    161,

161^1
Iva,  28^1,  71n2

Jacobi,  H.,  "Cow  (Hindu),"
Hastings'  E?icy.  Rel.  Eth.,
240,  241;  edit,  of  Hema-
chandra's  Sthavirdvali-
charita,  283n2

Jada  (fools),  188iii

Jagor,  F.,  "Bericht  iiber
verschiedene  Volksstamme
in  Vorderindien,"  Zeit-
^chrift  fur  Ethnologic,  166


Jala  (water),  188^1
Jalandhar,   curing  cattle  in,

119
Jalapada,  ascetic  named,  232-

236
Jan  Shah,  Queen,  124
Jari     tree     {Ficus     religiosa),

255
Jastrow,  Morris,  The  Religion

of  Babylonia    and   Assyria,

6bii
Java,  264
Jayadatta,  king  named,  129,

130
Jayanta,  minister  of  Dhaval

Chandra,  121,  122
Jayastamhha  (pillar  of  victory),

■92#
Jebb,  Prof.,  notes  on  Theo-

phrastus'     [Characters']

"  Superstitious  Man,"  98n*
Jeremiah,  194?^
Jhelum      (the      Hydaspes),

Porus,  King  of,  283,  283^2
Jlmutaketu,     Lord     of    the

Vidyadharas,  138-140
Jimutavahana,  story  of,  138-

150,  153-156
Jinn  summoned  by  rubbing

magic  article,  58w^
Joao     de     Barros,     Decadas,

269
Johannes  Hispaniensis,  trans.

of  the  Secretum  Secretorum,

289
John    of    Bromyard,    Summa

Praedicantium,  114n
John,    son  of   Patricius    [i.e.

Yahya  ibn  Batrlq),  alleged

discoverer  of  the  Secretum

Secretorum,  288
Johnson,  W.,   Folk   Memory,

167
Johnston,  Uganda,  199n
Jolly,    J.,    Indiscke    Medizin,

310/i3;  Eecht  und  Sitte,  163n
Jonah,  the  Hebrew  word  for

-dove,"  193^1,  194n
Jonah    legend,    the,    193n^,

194n
Jonas  Hanway,  first  man  to

use  an  umbrella,  269
Joseph  and   Potiphar's  wife,

120
Joyce,    Mexican    Arckceology,

309?^l
Jubbulpore  district,  23n
Judah    Al-Harizi,    trans,    of

Secretum    Secretorum,     289,

289n*
Justinian,  278


Juvenal,  263

Jvalamukha,  Brahman  demon
named,  147ni

Kaaba  at  Mecca,  119
Kachchhapa,  King  of,  69
Kachins    of    Upper    Burma,

childbirth   customs  among

the,  167
Kaden,    Unter  den  Oliven-

bau?ne7i,  6n^,  190n^
Kadru  and  Vinata,  wives  of

Kasyapa,  150-151
Kail      or      Cail,     Tinnevelly

district     of     the     Madras

Presidency,  302
Kailasa,  14,  93
Kalahakari,    wife    of    Sinha-

parakrama,  159,  169n^,  160
Kalaratri,  99,  103,  105-111
Kalaratri,    Kuvalay avail   and

the  witch,  99-100,  103,  104,

111-112
Kalasoka,       foundation       of

Pataliputra  attributed    to,

39ni
Kali       (Devi,        Durga,

Chamunda,  etc.),  198^^
Kalidasa,     Sakuntald,     144^^ ;

Vikramorvasi,  245,  257-259
Kalinga,  the  people  of,   92,

92/i2  ;  site  of,  92,  92^2
Kalinjara,  mountain  of,  149
Kalpa     (measure     of    time),

139^1;   of  the   gods,    163,

163^2;  a  mortal,  163^2
[Kalyana  Malla]  The  Ananga-

Ranga,  \0n
Kama  (God  of  Love),  74^2,

105,    128,    143,    145,    163;

son   of  Vasavadatta  to  be

a  portion  of,   13
Kama  (pleasure),  180^2
Kama  Shastra  Society,  \0n
Kama  STitra,  Vatsyayana,  9^2,

49/i3,  305
Kamadeva,  the  Hindu  Cupid,

51/^2
Kamadhenu,  cow  granting  all

desires,  45,  45^2  ;    celestial

cow  connected  with  Indra,

242
Kamarupa,  the  King  of,  94,

94?^* ;  the  western  portion

of  Assam,  94n*
Kambuka,  231
Kampila,  Raja,  122
Kampilya,  190,  191
Kamsundar,  King,  286,  286^1
Kan  darpaydmi  ("  Whom  shall

I  make  mad?"),  100


324


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


Kanakaprabha,      wife     of

Paropakarin,  171,   172
Kanaka-prabhd  {lustre  o{  gold),

171n2
Kanakapun,  237
Kanakarekha,     daughter     of

Paropakarin,   171-174,  184,

187,    213,    221,    222,   225,

226,  237
Kanaka-rekha  (gold-gleam   or

streak  of  gold),  171^^
Kanara,  Arer  women  of,  169
Kandarpa,  the  God  of  Love,

100
Kandarpaketu,  223ni
Kant  a,  92 /j^
Kanyakubja,  111,  132
Kdpdla  (skull),  90n^
Kapaladhfirin     or      Kapalika

(Aghorl),  90/i3
Kapalasphota     {i.e.     ' '  skull-
cleaver")',  199
Kapalasphota,    King    of    the

Rakshasas,  206,  209,  210
Kapalika     or      Kapaladharin

(Aghorl),  90ri3
Kapila  (brown)  cow,  276
Kara   (hand    or  tribute),  27,

27^2
Karkotaka,  67,  73,  78
Karna,  284
Karnisuta,  183w^
Karnovun  (head  of  the  house),

19
Kdrpatika    (dependent    of    a

king),  nSn^
Karttikeya,    258;    birth    of,

100-103
Karwdvmrni   (caravanserai,   a

halting-place    for  camels),

162n,  163m
Kashmir,    aconite    in,     280;

blouse  in,  50n^ ;  gambling

in,  232n;  princess  of,  whose

beauty  maddens,  ^n^
Kdxtkdgatamehdt  ("at  hearing

this  her  affection  came  to

its  highest  pitch  "),  ISn^
Ka^yapa,     153;     Kadru     and

Vinata,  wives  of,  150,  151
Kaiabhi,  decoction  of,  276
Kathdkoqa,  Tawnev,  5n^,  108;j,

113n^  219n3,  232n
Kauravas    or    Kuru    princes,

sons  of  Dhritarashtra,  16
Kau^ambi,     47-49,     54,     115,

125
Kau.4ika,  the  spiritual  guide

ofthe  Vidyadharas,  210
Kautilva,    Arthasastra,   277 n^,

283ni


Kaverl,  the,  92

Kazwlnl,  A.     See  Qazwini

Keith,    A.    B.,   in   Cambridge

History   of  India,   240;    in

["Game  of  Dice"]  Jonm.

Roy.  As.  Soc,  232?t
Kelantan,  303
Kennedy,   Criminal  Classes  of

Bombatf,  185n
Kerala  (Murala  or  Malabar),

92;i5
Ketu,  the  body  of  Rahu,  81
Khalifa  al  Ma'mun,  288
Khazlb,  Ajib  son  of,  223ni
Khojas  of  (jujarat,    customs

connected      with       lights

among  the  Mohammedan,

168
Kirby,  W.,  "The  Forbidden

Doors  of  the  Thousand  and

One     Nights,"     Folk-Lore

Joum.,  224n
Kiriyd  ("  Act  of  Truth  "),  31
Kitava      (gamester,      cheat),

232ri
Kling  (Kalinga),  92^2
Knott,  J.,    "The    Origin    of

Syphilis,"  New  York  Med.

Joum.,  308^^2
Knowles,    J.    H.,   Folk -Tales

of  Kashmir,    124;    "Pride

Abased,"  Ind.  Ant.,  193ni
Knust  in  Jahrbuch  fur  roman-

ische  nnd  englische  Literatur,

289/i2-  4
Koffee  Kalcalli,  King  of  the

Ashantees,  271
KokCd  eyes,  104n
Koiiler,  Dr,  196wi
Kos    (measure   of    distance),

191
Kramad,  155ni
Krandat,  \bfyn}
Krishna,  35,  242,  284
Krittikfis,      the      six      {i.e.

Pleiades),  102,  \0%i^
Kroeger,     A.     E.,      English

trans.      of      Frauenlob's

Cantica  Canticorum,  292w^
Kshatriya   caste,   17,   69,  73,

173,  224
Kshatriya  race  and  Lord   of

Royal    Umbrella,    title    of

Pinnacle  of  the,  267
Kshetra  ("fit  recipients"  and

"field"),  116^1
Kublai  Kaan,  court  of,  268
Knce.su,  92w®
Kuhn,  A.,  Die  Herabknnft  des

Feners  und  des  Gotiertranks,

252ni


KnUna  (falling  on  the  earth),

159ni
Kumara   Rama,  son  of   Raja

Kampila,  122
Kumara    Rama    Charita,    the,

122
Kumuda  plants,  223
Kunala,    Viceroy    of    Taxila

and  son  of  A^oka,  120
KnhJaramaniga;'amuktd{pe&T\)f

142ni
Kunkam,  kunkum  or  ktinkii  (red

powder),  164w*
Kunti     or     Pritha,     wife    of

Pandu,  16,  126  •

Kunti,  story  of,  23-24
Kuntibhoja,  king  named,  23
Kunzaw,  King,  265
Kurmis,    blood    mixed    with

lac  dye  among  the,  24n
Kurta,     Kashmirian     bodice,

50^5
Kurt  as     worn     by     Pathan

women,  50n^
Kuru    or    Kauravas    princes,

sons  of  Dhritarashtra,  16
Kuru  prince,  the,  232n
Kuru'Vinda,  276
Kurubas,    custom    regarding

bodily  marks  among  the,

7ni
Kurukshetra,  246,  249
Kusa  grass,  151,  151  w^,  176
Knsa   or  did)  grass  as   relief

from  taboo  during  eclipses,

82
Kusumapura        ("City       of

Flowers,"  i.e.  Pataliputra),

39ni,  185ni
Kimirra  (flour),  295
Knio,  40/i2

Kuvalayavall,  Queen,  98
KuvalayavalT   and  the  witch

Kalaratri,  99-100,  103,  104,

111,  112
Kuvera,  God  of  Wealth  and

Lord     of    Treasure,     93;

Guhyakas    attendants    of,

98?ii

Ladislao  (Ladislaus,  Ladislas

or  Lanzilao)  of  Naples,  310 ;

legend  of  the  death  of,  310
Lakh  eras    and     Patwas,    (ikli

made  by  the,  2Sn
Lakshmi  or  SrT,  Goddess  of

Prosperity,  65,  65w^
I^istner,   Rdisel  der  Sphinx,

299wi
Lalitanga,    story    of,     113n*>

220n


F


INDEX  I -SANSKRIT  WORDS,  ETC.


325


^ambajihva,    Prince    of   the

Rakshasas,  206
^ane,    E.    W.,    Maimers    and

Customs     of     the     Modem

Egyptians,  163w
Langmantel,    edit,    of  Hans

Schiltberger's       Reisebuck,

279^1
Lanka    (Ceylon),    82,    84m\

197n2  ;  painting  of  Sita  in,

22#
Larice  of  Ptolemy,  Lata  the,

93^2

Las  Casas,  HistoriaApologetica^

309^1
Lat  at  Delhi,  92^1
Lata,  women  of,  93
Latini,    Brunetto,    Li    Livres

dou  Tresor,  294,  294^2,  299^^
Laukikdgni  (domestic  fire),  256
Lavanaka  (Book  III),  1-124
Lavanaka,  12,  20,  25,  26,  28,

49,  51,  94,  95,  115
Lawrence,  W.  R.,  The  Valley

of  Kashmir,  '2i^2n
Layard,   Sir   Henry,   excava-
tions of,  263
Lecluse,  Charles  de  (Clusius),

302
Lee,  The Decameron,its  Sources

and   Analogues,    lOn,    76n^,

114n
Leibnitz,  works  of,  278,  279
Lenormant,    Chaldcean  Magic

and    Sorcery,    61n^,     69w^,

189wi
Levant    the     home    of    the

Pa  paver  somniferum,  303
L^veque,  Mythes  et  Legendes

de  I'Inde  et  de  la  Perse,  152n^
Lewin,      *' Arrow     Poisons,"

Virchow's      Archiv      Path.

Anat.  Phys.,  279
Lichi  fruits,  136n^
Liebrecht  trans,  of  Dunlop's

Histoiy  of  Fiction,  ^n^,  39?^2,

I2ln\  Zur  Volkskunde,  39?i2,

106>2*,  131ni
Lihga,  connection  with  snakes,

307
Livy,  277
Lona     or     Nona     Chamarin,

witch  called,  119
Lott,  E.,  Harem  Life  in  Egypt

and  Constantinople,  163n
Lucan,  Pharsalia,  62^1^
Lucian,    De  Dea  Syria,    169 ;

Vera  Historia,  193nS  219^3
Lucinian,  son  of  Lucinius,  120
Lucinias,  father  of  Lucinian,

120


Liiders,    Das   Wiirfelspiel   im

alten  Indien,  232n
Lull,  Raymond,  works  of,  99ii
Lustrato  exercitus,  89n*

Mabuiag  in  Torres  Strait,
198^1

Macculloch,  J.  A.,  The  Child-
hood of  Fiction,  108n,  194n,
202ni,  224n,  253 ;  "  Serpent
Worship  (Primitive  and
Introductory),"  Hastings'
Ency.  Pel.  Eth.,  307^2

Macdonald  ["East  Central
African  Customs"],  Journ.
Anth.  Inst.,  198^^

Macdonell,  A.  A.,  A  History
of  Sanskrit  Literature,  45n*,
242  ;  Vedic  Mythology,  240,
252ni   .

Macedon,  Philip  of,  299

Mada  (ichor),  125»i*

Madanalekha,  daughter  of
Pratapamukuta,  203,  204

Madhava,  214^216

Madhava  and  Siva,  two  rogues
called,  175-183

Madras,  92n2

Madras  Presidency,  Kail  or
Cail  in  the  Tinnevelly
district  of  the,  302

Madri,  wife  of  Pandu,  16,
127

Madrid,  309

Magadha,  Girivraja  the
ancient  capital  of,  3n^  ;  the
home  of  Buddhism,  3?^^ ;
the  King  of,  26-28,  30,  37,
38,  47,  94  ;  the  kingdom
of,  3^1,  12,  20;  Nanda  or
Dhana  -  Nanda,  King  of,
282,  282ri2 ;  the  nucleus  of
the  Maurya  and  the  Gupta
empires,  3w^ ;  Pradyota,
King  of,  3,  3?ii,  12,  20,  21 ;
Rajagriha  (modern  Rajgir)
later  capital  of,  3n^

Magnus,  Albertus,  De  Mira-
hilihus  mundi,  299,  299^3

Mahd  Vira  Charita,  the
Bhavabhuti,  214

Mahdhhdrata,    the,    13?i^,    16,

17,    lln,    81,    108711,    122,

127^1,    152/ii,    232n,    240-

242,  248,  272,  284

Mahadeva  (Siva),  82

Mahadhana,        merchant

named,  146
Mahdpaduma-Jdtaka,  122
Mahdpuriishalakshana   (thirty-
two  lucky  marks),  1n^


Maharaja     of     Mysore,     the

Darbarsof  H.H.  the,  119
Mahasena,  King,  2
Mahendra,  the  mountain,  92
Mahmud     Shah,      King      of

Gujarat,  300-302
Mahram  (breast-cover),  50n^
Maidelaig  or  sorcerer,  198^^
Mainaka,    son    of    Himavat,

192n2
Majhwar,  an  aboriginal  tribe

of  South  Mirzapur,  166
Majjdo  ("  cat "),  i&n^
Majjdo  ("  my  lover  "),  46iti
Makandika,  4
Mako  (crown),  264
Mala    woman    in    labour,    a

sickle  and  nlm  leaves  kept

on  the  cot  of  a,  166
Malabar  (Murala  or  Kerala),

92n^ ;    customs    connected

with     lights     among     the

Nayars  of,    168 ;    Nairs  or

Nayars     of,     17-19  ;     Odi

magicians  in,  199w
MalatI,  214-216
Mdlati   Madhava,  the,  %i^i^,

214-216
Malava,    110,    133,    176;    the

ladies  of,  93
Mdlavikdgnimitra,  35^2
Malaya,  264
Malaya  mountain,   140,    150,

156
Malayavati,   sister  of  Mitra-

vasu,  140,  150,  156
Malik  Muhammad   Din,   The

Bahdwalpur  State,  167
Mana,  118
Mana,  or  spiritual  exaltation

gained    by    eating    human

flesh,  198#
Manaar,  the  island  of,  Mfn}
Mandakdrind,  \b2n^
Mandala  (district),  the  Chola,

92n4
Mandara  mountain,  Q7n^,  93
Mandara  (paradise)  tree,  101,

101n2
Mandeville,    Sir    John,    306,

307
Mang  boy,  82
Manipur,  266;    the  Meitheis

of,  118
Mannheim,  Alsatian  tradition

heard  at,  lldn^
Manning,  Ancient  India,  \btm^
Manomrigi  (deer  of  the  mind),

140n2
Manovati,  daughter  of  Chit-
rangada,  147-149


326


♦    THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


Manu,  17

Manwantara      (measure      of

time),  250
Mapes,     Walter,     story    by,

liani,  11471
Maravars,  aboriginal   race  of

Southern  India,  166
Mardadkarind ,  1 52#
Margaret   of   Navarre,    Hep-

tavieron,  %i^,  10/i
Margasthd  (in  the  right  path),

159^1
Marie,  Lmis,  llS/i^
Marignolli,  description  of  an

umbrella  by,  268,  268?i*
Markham,  Clements,  trans,  of

Garcia  de  Orta,  The  Simples

and  Dnigs  of  India,  302 n^
Martial,  263

Martino  de  Canale,  contem-
porary of  Marco  Polo,  268
Marubhuti,  son    of   Yaugan-

dharayana,  161,  165
Marwar,  King  of,  266
Marwari  Bania  women  wear

spangles  set  in  gold,  23n
Maspero,   Popular  Stones   of

Ancient   Egypt,   l\%i^,   120-

121
Matanga,  a  relation  of  San-

khachuda,  156
Mathura,  9
Mali,  53Ai2
Matter,  E.  J.,   "  Pontus  and

the    Fair    Sidone,"    Mod.

Lang.  Ass.  Avier.,  76^^
Maurya     Empire,     Chandra-

gupta,  founder  of  the,  281 ;

events  which  happened  at

the  formation  of  the,  281,

282;  Magadha  the  nucleus

of  the,  3ni
Mayadhara,     King     of     the

Asuras,  35
Maximilian  of  Austria,  \\2ri^
Mecca,   the    Kaaba    at,    119;

the  sanctuary  at,  161n*
Medusa,  the  head  of,  299,  300
Megasthenes,  39/4^
Mehtar  caste  or  scavengers,

82
Meissen,     Heinrich     von

(Frauenlob),  292,  292n3
Meitheisof  Manipur,  the,  118
Melanesia,  eating  human  flesh

in,  198ni
Melton,  Astrologaster,  145n
Mena,    parent    of    Mainaka,

192n2
Meru,   the  world    mountain,

67ni,  102


Mesopotamia,  poison-damsel
in,  286  ;  the  probable  home
of  the  umbrella,  263

Mexico,  customs  connected
with  eclipses  among  the
Tlaxcalans  of,  81 ;  punish-
ment for  adultery  in,  8&n^

Meyer,  J.  J.,  Dasa  Kuvidra
Charita,  or  The  Stoi-y  of  the
Ten  Princes,  183/1^,  184w

Meynard,  Barbier  de,  Les
Colliers  d'Or,  298

Mikado  so  sacred  that  the  sun
must  not  shine  on  him,  268

Milinda,  King,  32

Milindapanhd,  the,  32

Millingen,  F.,  "The  Circas-
sian Slaves  and  the  Sultan's
Harem,"  Journ.  Anth.  Soc,
163n

Milton,  Paradise  Lost,  42^^

Mimosa  suma  (Prosopis  spici-
gera),  255  ;  (SamI  tree),  247

Mirzapur,  the  Majhwar  an
aboriginal  tribe  of  South,
166

Mirzapur  district,  rites  to  pro-
duce rain  in  Chunar,  117,
118

Missouri,  280

Mitchell,  J.  M.,  ''Harem,"
Ency.  Brit.,  163w

Mithradates,  300

Mitra,  249

Mitra,  Rajendralala,  The  Indo-
Aryans,  167

Mitra vasu,  son  of  Visviivasu,
140,  141,  150,  153,  156

Mlechchhas  destroyed,  93

Modi,  J.  J.,  "A  few  Ancient
Beliefs  about  the  Eclipse
and  a  few  Superstitions
based  on  these  Beliefs,"
Journ.  Anth.  Soc.  Bomb.^  82,
83

Mohani  ("bewitching"),
212^1

Mokshaka,  ashes  of,  276

Moncelon,  Bulletins  de  la
Societe  d^Aiithrop.  de  Paris,
306^1

Mon  kings  of  Pegu,  265

Mongolia,  polyandry  in,  18

Montlosier,  M.  de,  185«3

Moore,  Thomas,  The  Epi-
curean, 6;i2

Moya,  Antoine  de,  Sucesos  de
las  Islas  Filipinas,  306/i^

Mrichchhaka(ika  or  Toy  Cart,
the,  192ni,  232n

Mudhd  'iti,  40n2


1


Miidheti,  AQnr
Mudrd-Rakshasa,  or  Signet-ring

of  Rdkshasa,  Visakhadatta,

160wi,  281,  283,  283«3,  284
Mukhopadhyaya,    Prof.    N

mani,  93n^
Mukta,  140^1
Miiller,   Max,    Chips  from   a

German     Workshop,    25 In^ ;

Oxford  Essays,   251,  251n^
Mullick,    B.,    Essays    on    the

Hindu    Family    in    Bengal,

163n
Mundas,  tribe  of,  267
Mura,  a  concubine  of  Nanda,

282^3

Murajaka,    Sundaraka     calls

himself.  111
Murala  (Kerala  or  Malabar),

92w5

Muralas,  tribute  imposed  on
the,  92,  92w5«

Murray,  New  English  Dic-
tionary, 269?i^  270

"  Mutalammis  letter"  motif ,
lUn

Mysore,  the  Darbars  of  H.H.
the  Maharaja  of,  119

Na  tad,  74w^

Naga  (mountain),  154m^

Xdga  (snake  or  mountaineer),
154ni

Naga  (snake)  of  Hindu  super-
stition, 152w*,  153w

Naga,  the  seven-headed,  266

Nagadatta,  219^3

Nagasena,  a  Buddhist  sage
named,  32

Nagpur  division  of  the  Cen-
tral Provinces,  82

Nagpur,  paintings  at,  307,
307^1

Nakula,  son  of  Pan^u,  16

Naidu,  M.  P.,  The  History  of
Professional  Poisoners  and
Coiners  of  India,  281

Nairs  or  Nayars  of  Travan-
core.  Cochin  and  Malabar*
17-19

Nanahuatzin,  Mexican  god  of
syphilis,  309

Nanda  or  Dhana  -  Nanda
(Agrammes  or  Xandrames),
282,  283,  285

Nandana,  the  garden  of  the
gods,  34

Nandin,  the  bull  of  Siva,  242

Narada,  hermit  named,  12,
13,  15,  25,  34,  35,  126-128,
135,  147,  170


I


INDEX  I -SANSKRIT  WORDS,  ETC.


327


Naravahanadatta,  son  of  the
King   of   Vatsa,  7n^,    163,
165,  170,  212^1,  238
Naravahanadattajanana(  Book
IV),  125-169

Narayana  (Vishnu),  81

Narendra  ("Indra  of  men"),
116ni

Navarre,  Margaret  of,  Hep-
tameron,  2n^,  lOn

Nayandnanavdntolka  ("  cast-
ing forth  flames  out  of
her  eyes  and  mouth "),
104ni

Nayars  or  Nairs  of  Malabar,
customs  connected  with
lights  among  the,  168

Nayars  or  Nairs  of  Tra van-
core.  Cochin  and  Malabar,
17-19

Nayars  originally  a  military
caste,  19

Nebuchadrezzar,  King  of
Babylon,  194)^

Negelein  in  Teutoiiia,  bl'n?-

Nepal  aconite  {bis,  bish  or
bikh),  278

Nepal,  gambling  in,  232»i;
poisoning  of  wells  bv  the
Gurkhas  of,  280

New  Caledonia,  polyandry  in,
18

New  Hebrides,  polyandry  in
the,  18

Nicasi,  G.,  "  Le  credenze
religiose  delle  popolazioni
rurali  dell'alte  valle  del
Taveri,"  Lares,  lO^n

Nicolaus  Pergamenus,  Dia-
logus  Creaturannn,  114n

Nihsdra  (void  of  substance),
92^3

Nilgiri  Hills,  customs  con-
nected with  eclipses  among
the  Todas  of  the,  82  ;  prev-
alence of  fraternal  poly-
andry among  the  Todas  of
the,  18

Nlm  leaves  kept  on  the  cot  of
a  Mfila  woman  in  labour,  a
sickle  and,  166

Nimishekshandh,  bOn"^

Nimrud  Gallery,  British
Museum,  263

Nineveh,  194^2

Nineveh  Gallery,  British
Museum,  263

Nirriti's  lap,  246

Nisbet,  3.,  Burma  under  British
Rule  and  Before,  265*1^,
266^1


Nishadas,  King  of  the,  191,

191^1
Nishka  (a  unit  of  value),  240
Nityodita,    chief    warder

named,  128,   129
Nityodita     or     Ityaka,     161,

161^1,  165
Nivdrija,  44^^
Noete  (socket),  269
Nona    or     Lona     Chamarin,

witch  called,  119
North    and  Central   Bhutan,

Polyandry  in,  18
Northern  Circars,  92?? ^
Notthaft,    A.    v.,    "Die

Legende    von    der    Alter-

tums-syphilis,"    Rijidfleisch

Festschrift,  308^2
Noung  daw  Gyee,  King,  265
Nyagradha  tree  [Ficus  Indica),

42,  42^2^  159,  160

Odi    magicians   in    Malabar,

1997*
Okamura,    Monatsschrift    fiir

praktische      Dermatologie,

308n2
Oldenberg,      Grihya     Sutras,

267,    267^1;    Die   Literatur

des     alten     Indien,     252n^ ;

Religion  des  Veda,  252 n^
Oldham,  C.  F.,  "The  Nagas,"

Joiirn.  Roy.  As.  Soc,  307 ?^2
Ombrello    (Italian    umbrella),

263
Opion  (opium),  304
Opos  (opium),  304
Oppian,  278
Oraon  tribe,  119
Orissa,  92?i2
Orta,  Garcia  de.  The  Simples

and  Drugs  of  India,  Eng.

trans.  Clements  Markham,

302^1
Ottacker  or  Ottokar,  German

poet,  309,  309^2
Ottokar  or  Ottacker,  German

poet,  309,  309n2
Ovid,     Ars    Amatoria,     263;

Fasti,  263

Pacific  Islands,  polyandry  in
the,  18

Padma,  the  land  of,  95

Padmiisana,  sitting  in  the
posture  called,  176,  176n*

PadmavatI,  wife  of  the  King
of  Vatsa,  3,  4,  12,  21-23,
25,  26-30,  34,  38,  47,  48,
51,  89,  93,  94,  116,  125

Padua,  a  doctor  of,  297


Pakshapdta  {^Sippingof  wings),

219n2
Paldsa  tree,  126
Palena  in  the  Abruzzi,  202^^
Pali-bothra  ( Patalipu  tra),  39^1
Palieque  (umbrella),  268
Pallair's  arm,  72^2
Pallis  (Tamil  agriculturists),

interpretation     of    bodily

marks  among  the,  Iti^
Panchagavya,  the  five  sacred

products  of  the  cow,  242
PaTichatantra,     the,     Benfey,

52?ii,  108w,  113/^1,  297^2
Panda va  race,  King  of  Vatsa

sprung   from   the,  1 ;    the

moon  the  progenitor  of  the,

13,  13ni
Pandu,  ancestor  of  Udayana,

126-127;  prince  named,  16
Pandu,  race  of,  89
Pandus,  the,  22Qn
Pandyan  kingdom,  92vi*
Panjab,  282,  283,  285  ;  former

practice    of  infanticide   in

the,   18,   19 ;    gambling  in

the,  232/1
Papaver    somniferum,    Levant

the  home  of  the,  303
P«rflgi/«*  (umbrella),  263
Paraguay,  polyandry  in,  18
Parapluie  (umbrella),  263
Parasikas  (Persians),  93,  94,

94?ii
Pdrgvandtha,  the,  14n
Parda  (curtain),  163n
Pardah  or  purdah,  163n
Pardhi  caste  of  Central  India,

punishment    for    adultery

among,  88ni
Pdribhadra,  ashes  of,  276
Parijata,  one  of  the  five  trees

of  Paradise,  13,  13^2
Pdrijdta  flower,  190*1^
Paris,    Paulin,    £tude  sur  les

dijferents  Textes,  imprimes  et

manuscripts,   du  Roman  des

Sept  Sages,  120
Paris,  umbrellas  in,  269
Parisishtaparvan,  the,  Hema-

chandra,  108w,  285,  285wi,

305^2
Parityagasena,  story  of,  136w^
Paropakarin,  King,  171,  172,

184,  222
Parvan  (book),  16
Parvataka,  ally  of  Chandra-

gupta,  284,  285
Parvati  (Durga,  Gauri,  etc.),

wife  of  Siva,  82,  101,  232w,

266


828


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


Pascal  (afterwards),  lOn^

Patala,  ashes  of,  276

Patala,  the    underworld,   92,

152,  156,  156»i-2
Patali,    son    of   (Pataliputra),

Pataliputra     (Pataliputta     or

Pali-bothra),  39,   39ni,   86,

87,  130,  185^1,  281,  283
Pdtha,  decoction  of,  276
Pati  (husband),  4:9h*  ;  (king),

49w*
Paiisnehad,  137ni
Patna  corresponds  with  king-
dom of  Magadha,  district

of,  3ni
Patna,     Pataliputra     the

modem,  397i^
Paton,    J.   L.,    **  Gambling,''

Hastings'   Eiicy.  lid.   Eth.y

232/1
Pat  was    and    Lakheras,    tikti

made  by  the,  23w
Pauly-Wissowa,  bln^
Paundravardhana,    69,    69n^,

74,' 75,  79,  86,  174
Pegu,  Mon  kings  of,  265
Peleus  and  Astydameia,  120
Penzer,     N.     M.,     Aimotated

Bibliography  of  Sir  Richard

Burton,  lOn
Percy,  Reliques,  lO/i
Pergamenus,    Nicolaus,  Dia-

logus  Creaturarum,  114n
Perrault,  LfiBarhe Blene,  22M^
Perseus  and  Andromeda,  70w'^
Perseus  and  the  Gorgon,  300
Persia,  poison-damsel  in,  286
Persians   (Paraslkas),  93,  94,

94n^ ;     meeting    eyebrows

considered     beautiful     by

the,  104n
Peru,  customs  connected  with

eclipses  among  the  Sencis

of  Eastern,  81
Perugia,  a  doctor  of,  310
Peter  of  Abano,  works  of,  99n;

Libellus  de  Veneris,  300,

300ni
Petrie,    Flinders,    "Assyrian

and       Hittite       Society,"

Ancient  Egypt,  88/1^
Pez,   R.   D.   P.    Hieronymus,

Scriptores     rerum     Austria-

carum  veteres  ac  genuini,  310,

310m1
Phaedra,   legend    of    Hippo-

lytus  and  his  stepmother,
120
Phalabhuti,   story   of,    95-99,

112-115


Philip    Clericus    of    Tripoli,

trans,      of     the     Secretum

Sccretonini,  289,  289;i2
Philip  of  Macedon,  299
Philippines,     scaring     away

evil  spirits  in  the,  167
Phineus,  120
Piam  (staff),  269
Pietro   del  la    V^alle,    Travels ^

162n
PingalikA,  story  of,    133-134,

135,  165
Pipal  tree  {Ficusreligiosa), IIS,

255
Pischel  and  Geldner,  Vedische

Studien,  252ni
Pisharoti,  A.    K.  and  K.    R.

"  Bhasa's  Works,  Are  they

Genuine?"  Bull.Sch.  Orient.

Stud.,  21ni
Pisharoti,    K.    R.,    "Svapna-

vasavadatta,"  Quart.  Journ.

Mythic.  Soc,  21  ni
Pitris,  241
Pleiades,  the  six  (Krittikas),

102,  102n2
Pliny,  295/11,  306/i3 ;  Naturalis

Historia,  lO^i,  296,  300
Ploss,  Das  Weib  in  der  Natur

und  F'dlkerkunde,  30671^
Plutarch,  295ni
Polemon,  Greek  treatise  of,

290
7roAu8€VKr/9     (endowed     with

much  light),  251
Pongyi  priests,  232n
Poole,     Index    of    Periodical

Literature,  272
Port  Blair,  264
Porus,  ruler  of  the  Hydaspes

(Jhelum),  283,  283?i2
Potiphar's  wife,  Joseph  and,

120
Prabandhacintamani,  Tawney,

108w
Prabhdte   (at  daybreak),  b\n^
Pradyota,  King  of  Magadha,

3,  3^1,  12,  20,  21
Prajapati,  14n
Prajnapti      (foreknowledge),

212ni
Prajnaptikaui^ika,     the     pre-
ceptor, 212
Pranrtta,  35ni
PrasiiandGangaridaepeoples,

282
Pratapa    (valour    and    heat),

54^3
Pratapamukuta,       King      of

Benares,  200,  210,  212
Pratisnehad,  137ni


Pravdte  (in  windy   weather),

51ni
Pravrtta,  35wi
Prayaga   (Allahabad),    110n2;

(''  the  place  of  sacrifice  "),

110n2
Preller,    "Otus    and    Ephi-

altes,"     Giiechische     Myth-

ologie,  13n*
Prescott,    W.,    [The  Conquest

oj"]  Peru,  88ni
Prester  John,  islands  of  the

Lordship  of,  306
Prester  John's  palace,  gable

of,  169
Prithii     or     Kunti,     wife    of

'  Pandu,  16,  126
Prithi   Raj,  last  Hindu  king

of  Delhi,  266
Prithivl        ("  daughter        of

Prithu"),  earth  called,  241
Prithu,  son  of  Vena,  241
Priti  and  Rati  (affection  and

love),  wives  of  the  God  of

Love,  27,  51,  6ln\  128,  137
Procter,  Miss  Joan,  Sl2n^
Prosopis     spicigera      {Mimosa

suma),  255
Prym     and     Socin,     Syrische

Marc  hen,     76ni,    'l55n*,

219/63
Przyluski,  "La   L^gende  de

I'Empereur    A9oka,"     An-
nates    dfi     Musee     Guitnet,

120
Pseudo- Aristotle,  De  causis  et

properietatibus    elementorum ,

299n* ;  Secretum  Secretorutn,

286  et  seq.
Psyche  myth,  the  Cupid  and,

253
Ptolemy,  Lata  the  Larice  of,

93/i2 ;     Murala     identified

with  the  Curula  of,  92n'^ ;

regio  Sorefanum  of,  92n*
Publius  Syrus,  38n^
P  u  b  n  a,       Paundravardhana

identified  withj  69ni
Puchukra     Undi     or     State

Umbrella,  267
Pufendorf,  works  of,  279
Pulindaka,     chief    of    the

Savaras,  141
Pulindaka,     King    of    the

Bhillas,  89,  89ni
Punyasena,  story  of,  10-11
Purdnas,  the,  240,  241,  248
Purdah  (harem),  162n
Purdah  or  pardah,  163/1
Purogaih  (done  in  a  previous

life), 'l35?ii


INDEX  I -SANSKRIT  WORDS,  ETC.


329


Puriiravas  and    Urvasi,   story

of,  34-36,  245,  259
Purushottama  (Vishnu),  257

Qazwini,    al-,    Kosmographie,

298,  312
Quintus  Curtius,  278

Radlia  and  the  gopis,  242


■gopi
,  12&


Rdga  (passion),  125^1^

Rahu,  63,  63»ii,  81, 82, 94, 94n2

Rahu  and  eclipses,  note  on,

81-83
Raipur  district,  23w
Raja  Kampila,  122
Raja  Puriiravas,  249
Rdja-druma,  ashes  of,  276
Rajagriha     (modern     Rajgir)

the    later    capital    of    Ma-
gad  ha,  3?ii
Rajamahendra,     King     of

Rajamahendri,  121
Rajas  (dust  and  passion),  106,

106ni
Rajendralala       Mitra,       The

Indo-Aryans,  167
Rajgir  (Rajagriha),  capital  of

Magadha,  Sn^
Rqjila,  a  striped  snake,  162n-
Rajpiit,    91  ;     Madhava    dis-
guised as  a,  176,  177
Rajputana,    spangles    set    in

gold  worn  by  women  from,

23n
Rajputs,  degeneration  of  the,

305,  305ni
Rakshasa  (goblin),   58^^,   69,

71,   74,    75,    78,    79,    191;

the    female,     107^^,    127;

Vijayadatta  becomes  a,  198,

199
Rakshasa,  minister  of  Nanda,

281,  283-285
Rakshasa      nature       leaves

Vijayadatta,  210
Rakshasa  Havana,  84?ii
Rakshasas,  93,  106,  208,  209,

241 ;  cemetery  full  of,  205  ;

description  of,  197 n^  ;  King

of  the,    209-212;    Lamba-

jihva,  prince  of  the,  206  ;

south  neighboured  by,  54
RakshasI  (female    Rakshasa),

69^2
RakshasI      Vidyuchchhikha,

206,  207,  209
Ralston,    Russian   Folk-Tales,

60w2,  61ni,  71^1,  98ri4,  122,

15271*,  155n4,  190>ii,  202^1,

223ni ;  songsof  the  Russian

people,  138n4,  189«i


Ralston,    Schiefner    and,

Tibetan    Tales,    14n,    76tii,

122
Rama,  9,  22,  22^1,  46,  73,  82,

84,  84ni,  93,  118
Rama's    Bridge     (Ramasetu),

84ni
Ramartham  ("for  the  sake  of

a  fair  one  "),  73n^
Ramasetu    (Rama's    Bridge),

84?ii
Rdmdyana,    the,    22^^,    34^^^

45n4,  84wi,  102^1,  272
Ramesvarman,  island  of,  8471^
Ramusio's    versions    of    Var-

thema  and  Barbosa,  302
Rangoon,  Sh we  Dagon  pagoda

at,  265
Rasatala    {i.e.     Patala),     156,

156wi'  2
Rati  and  Priti  (love  and  affec-
tion), wives  of  the  God  of

Love,    27,    51,    51^2,    128,

137,  144
Ratnakuta,     the,     island    of,

217
Ratnangi,      wife      of      Raja

Kampila,  122
Ratnapura  (City   of  Jewels),

175,  175?i2
Ratnavarsha,     King    of    the

Yakshas,  233
Rauscher,   Hieronymus,   Das

ander    Hundert    der    Bapis-

tischen  Liigen,  296
Ravana,    Chief  of   the    Rak-
shasas, 9,  22^1,  82,  84^1
Rawlinson,    H.   J.,    notes    in

Forbes'    Rds   Mala,    2&Qn^,

305ni
Raymond  Lull,  works  of,  99n
Rege7ischirm  (umbrella),  263
Regina   Aquilonis  (Queen  of

the  North),  296
Regio  Calingarum  (Kalinga),

92^2

Regio  Soretanum  of  Ptolemy,

927i*
Renan,  Ernest,  Histoire  Lit-

teraire,  293
Reva,  93
Reyes,  Caspar  de  los,  Eh/sius

Campus,  300,  300^3
Rhamba  the  nymph,  34,  35
Rhodope,     the     Thracian

sorceress,  Qn?-
Rhys  Davids,  T.W.,  "Adam's

Peak,"      Hastings'      Ency.

Rel.    Eth.,    85w  ;    Buddhist

India,    ^ri^  ;    trans,   of  the

Jdtakas,  52n^


Rig-  Veda,  the, 34ni ,  bln^,  86^1,

'  88^1,  231^1,  232w,  240,  245-
247,  250,  254,  255,  2b^i^

Rishabha,   mountain    named,

■  222

Rishi  (holy  sage),  14*1,  128

Rishi  Vyasa,  17

Rishis,  102

Risley,  Tribes  and  Castes  of
Bengal,  2^1,  167,  229^2

Rivers,  The  Todas,  82

Rivett-Carnac,  J.  H.,  "  Rough
Notes  on  the  Snake  Symbol
in  India,"  Joimi.  As.  Soc.
Bengal,  307,  307n^

Roberts,  A.  A,,  The  Poison
War,  281

Robertson  Smith,  W.,  Lectures
on  the  Religio7i  of  the  Semites,
119,  1947i

Robledo,  Montejo  y,  309

Rochlitz,  Michael  Bapst  von,
Artzney  Kunst  und  W under
Buch,  294ni

Roger  Bacon,  works  of,  99n

Ronaldshay,  India,  a  Bird's-
Eye  View,  88ni

Rosairo,  de,  Tamil  story  in
The  Orientalist,  184^1

Rose,  H.  A.  ["Hindu  Preg-
nancy Observances  in  the
Punjab"],  Joum.Anth.  Inst.,
166;  ["Muhammedan  Preg-
nancy Observances  in  the
Punjab  "]  Jouiii.  Anth.  Inst.,
166

Rosenbaum,  Geschichte  der
Lustseuche  im  Alterttime,
308^2

Roth,  Bohtlingk  and,  53^2,
67wi,  161^1

Rothfeld,  Otto,  Women  of
India,  163*1

Roumania.     See  Rumania

Ru  (to  cry),  251

Rukh,  the,  220?i

Rumania,  nudity  rites  to  pro-
duce rain  in,  117

Rumanvat,  minister  of  the
King  of  Vatsa,  1,  4,  6,  8-
12,  20,  34,  91,  116,  125,
161,  165

Rumi  (Syriac),  288

Ruru,  the  giant,  228,  228^^1

Russell,  Tribes  aiid  Castes  of
the  Central  Provinces,  22n3,
23w,  83,  88*ii,  118,  164n*,
185?i,  242,  266,  266^2,  304,
304^2,  305>2i

Russia,  rites  to  produce  rain
in,  117


330


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


Sackc/uikiriyd      '("act      of
,   truth  "),  31

SacliI,  Indra,  husband  of,  45
Sacy,    Silvestre    de,    Chresto-

mathie  Arabe,  312w-
Sadehasya,  lOO/i'^
Sahadeva,  son  of  Pandu,  16
Sahasika,  cook    named,    112,

113
St  Thomas,  85w
Saintyves,    P.,  Les   Contes  de

Perrault,  22hi,  253/<i
Saioual     (parasol,      Persian),

263
Saiva  ascetic,  a  skull-bearing,

196,  200
Saiva  mendicants,  ten  classes

of,  90/«3
Saiwdn    (umbrella,    Persian),

263
Sakha,  son  of  Karttikeya,  102
Siikta    worshi})|)ers    of  Devi,

Tantric  rites  of  the,  198^^,
^  199/i

Sakti,  boar  wounded  with  a,
,   230ni
Saktideva,  Brahman  named,

174,  175,  188,  189,  191-195,

213,  217-222,  224-231,  236-
,   238

Saktidevo,  230^^
Saktihasto,  230 n^
Saktivetjra  (Saktideva),  a  king

of   the  Vidyadharas,  80w^,

171,  238,  238ri\  239
Sakuntald,  Kalidasa,  144n^
Sala   del    Gran    Consiglio   at

Venice,  268
Salsette,  customs   connected

with  iron  in,  167
Samdhajiya ,  1 9  In^
SambandhaiUy     ceremony     of

alliance    as    husband    and

wife,  18
Sarnbhavak,  S9n^
Samhitas,  the,  240
Sami  plants,  161
Sam!  tree  (Mimosa  snnia),  247,

250,  255
Sampadah,  89w^
Samudradatta,    merchant

named,  191,  199,  226
Samiidrika,    the    interpreting

of  bodily  marks,  7w'
Sanchi,  umbrellas  at,  266
Sangster,  William,  271 ;    Um-
brellas aiid  their  History,  272
Sankaradatta,   son    of   Agni-

datta,  133
Sankarasvamin,    chaplain

named,  176,  178


Sankhachuda,  snake  named,
152-154,  156

Sankhya,  212«i

Santa  Fe,  280

Silntikara,  son  of  Agnidatta,
133-135,  165

Sfintisoma,  son  of  Pingalika,
135,  165

Sard  or  sardi  (edifice  or
palace,  Persian),  162«

Sarangdhara,  121,  122

Sdrangdhara  Charita,  the,  121

Sarasvatl,  the  goddess,  133

Sarim-gandha  (scented  drug),

,   276

Sasikhanda,  King  of  the
Vidyadharas,  221

Sasikhandapada.  King  of  the
Vidyadharas,  238

Sa^iprabha,  daughter  of  Sasi-
khanda, 221,  237

SaSirekha,  daughter  of  Sasi-
khanda, 221,  237

Skstrl,  Drnvidian  Nights,  190ni ;
Folk- Lore  in  Southern  India,

^  136ni

Saiaddya  (an  epithet  denoting
the  price  of  a  man's  blood),

,  240

Satanlka,  ancestor  of  the  King

^  of  Vatsa,  54

Satapatha  Brdhmana,  the,  241,
245,  250,  254-256

Satatah  (abiding),  236^2

Sati,  53^2

Sattva  (monsters),  79 w^

Sattvatah  (courage),  236n2

Satyddhishthdnain  ("truth-
command  "),  31

Satyavddya  ( ' '  truth-utter-
ance "),  31

Satyavrata,  King  of  the  Nis-
hadas,  191,  192,  194,  195,
217,  218

Saugor  district,  23ji

Sanvarnabhilti,  220n^

Savara,  one  of  a  wild  tribe,

,  22n3,  141-149

Savaras  of  Bengal,  customs
connected  with  lights
among  the,  168

Sdydban  (umbrella,  Persian),
263

Schiefner,  German  transla-
tion of  Taraiiraha,  History
of  Buddhism,  69n2

Schiefner  and  ]^a.\stou ,  Tibetan
Tales,  \hi,  76>ii,  122

Schiller,  "  Der  Gang  nach
dem  K,i  sen  hammer,"
Gedichte,  113ni ;  «<  Der  Graf


Schiller — continued

von    Hapsburg,"    Gedichte,

49n2
Schiltberger,  Hans,  Reisebiich,

279ni
Schmidt,    Bemhard,    Griech'

ische  Mdrchen,  57wS  127n*
Schmitt,  Hans,  Jona,  194n
Schofield,    H.,    '*The   Story

of  Horn  and  Rimenhild,  *

Mod.    Lang.     Ass.     Amer.,

76wi
Schiippner,      Sagenbtich      (or

Geschichte)   der  Bayerischen

Lande,  113iii
Scott,  J.  G.,  J.  P.  Hardiman,

Gazetteer  of  Uppei'  Burma

and  the  Shan  States,  2S2n
Scott,    Sir   J.    G.,    "Burma

and  Assam  (Buddhism  in),"

Hastings'  Ency.  Ret.  Eth.,

265«4;    (Shway    Yoe)    The

Burman,      his     Life     and

Notions,  167,  265n3
Scott,  Jonathan,    Tales  from

the     Arabic     and     Persian,

113^1
Seler,  E.,  Gesammelte  Abhand-

lungen    zur    Amerikanischen

Sprach-und    A  Itertumskujide,

309,  309/ii
Sellon,  E.,    "The  Phallic

Worship  of  India,"   Mem.

Anth.  Soc.  Ldn.,  242
Sencis    of  Eastern    Peru,

customs    connected     with

eclipses  among  the,  81
Sera  (a  bar,  Latin),  162w
Seraglio  (harem),  162w
Serail,  162n
Serbia,  rites  to  produce  rain

in,  117
Serraglio  (enclosure,  Italian),

162n
Serrato  (shut  up,  Italian),  162n
Sesha,  the  serpent,  90,  90n2
Shahabad    corresponds    with

kingdom  of  Magadha,  dis-
trict of,  3ni
Shakespeare,    Henry    V  and

Henry   VI,  98?i* ;  Macbeth,

145/i';  Othello,  145»
Shans  of  Upper  Burma,  gam-
bling among  the,  232n
Shea-Troyer,    The    Dabistdn,

169
Sheol  (Aralu  or  Hades),  61wS

194n
Sheykh-zada,  123
Shrawan  (month  of  fasting),

164n4


i    f   ShwavYc


INDEX  I -SANSKRIT  WORDS,  ETC.


331


vay  Yoe  (Sir  George  Scott),
The  Bui'man,  his  Life  and
Notions,  167,  265^3
Shwe  Dagon  pagoda  at  Ran-
goon, 265
Siam,  266

Siberia,  polyandry  in,  18
Siddha    (independent  super-
human), 111
Siddhaka,  ashes  of,  276
Siddhas,   Un,    67,    67^^,    75,

75^3^  140,  149,  150
Siddhreh,  minister  of  Kam-

sundar,  286
Sidney  Hartland.    See  Hart-
land,  E.  S.
Sikes,   Wirt,   British   Goblins,

Ibn^,  98/^4,  223/ii
Sikkim-Bengal  frontier,  poly-
andry on  the,  18
Sikkim  Terai,  aconite  in  the,

279
Silvestre    de    Sacy,    Chresto-

inalhie  Arabe,  ^V2rfi
Simpson,     W.,      The     Jonah

Legend,  194n
Simrock,  Deidsche  Volksbilcher,

bln^,  64n2,  76wi
Slnahand  (breast-cover),  50n^
Sinbyushin,  King,  265
Sindbad    and    the    enormous

birds,  220n
Sindh,  subduing  of  the  King

of,  93
Sindur  (vermilion),  23»i
Singapore,  264
Sinhaksha,  story  of  King,  49^^
Sinhaparakrama,      story     of,

159-160
Sinhasri,     second     wife     of

Sinhaparakrama,  160
Sinhavarman,     brother     of

Padmavati,  89
Sipra,  banks  of  the,  176-178
Siras  tree  {Acacia  speciosa),  118
Sirsn  district,  curing  a  horse

in  the,  119
Sita,    wife   of   Rama,    9,    22,

22ni,  84^1
Sitoda  river,  67,  75
Siva,  1,  14,  46;i4,  51,  66,  74,
75,   82,  84,  85,  85>i,  90;i3.
100,  101-104,  106,  111,  128,
136,   138,   138>^2,   141,   143,
145,  146,  148, 149,  153,  157,
164^1,   170,  171,   196,  200,
208,    213,    222,    238,    242;
skull-bearing    worshippers
of,  90,  90n3
Siva  and   Madhava,  story  of,
175-183


Sivaji,  King,  267

Sivi  and  the  heavenly  eyes.

King,  32,  33
Sizire,  Queen  of,  294
Skandha  (shoulder),  205*1^
Skandhadasa,      merchant

named,  71,  72
Skeat,  W.  VV.,  The  Past  at  our

Doors,  270,  270n^
o-KiaSetoi/  (sunshade),  263
Slave    Coast,    iron    rings    at-
tached to  sick  children  on
the,  167
Smith,  G.  A.,  The  Book  of  the

Tivelve  Prophets,  194«
Smith,  Prof.  G.  Eliot,  308
Smith,  W.  Robertson,  Lectures
on  the  Religion  of  the  Semites,
119,  194w
Smith,   V.  A.,  Early  History

of  India,  282ni
Smritva  (remembering),  200^1
Snake  Mountains   of  Turke-
stan, 298
Sneha  (affection),  77^2,  163?ii
Sneha  (oil),  11  n^,  163?zi
Socin,     Prym     and,     Syrische
Mdrchen,  76ni,  155^^4^  219^3
Socrates,  294,  299
Sohag  or  lucky  trousseau,  23/i
Solomon,  252
Solon,  278

Soma  (the  moon),  45w*
Soma  and   Suryo  (the  moon

and  sun),  81
Somadatta,  son  of  Agnidatta,

95-97
Somadeva,  Kathd  Sarit  Sagara,

39/ii,  207^3,  281,  304
Somaprabha,  story  of,  39-44
Soma-valka,  ashes  of,  276
Sophocles,  Electra,  121n^
Soretanum  of  Ptolemy,  Regie,

92?i4
South  Bihar,  districts  corre-
sponding to  the  kingdom
of  Magadha  in,  3^1,  282
South   Sea  Islanders,  nature

myths  among  the,  252
Speyer,  "Studies  about  the
Kalhdsaritsdgara , "      V  erh.
Kon.   Akad.    Weten.    Amst.,
2Sn^,  36^1, 53/i3,  QOn^-  3,  70^1.
92n6,    1401,    IQOn^,     llln\
201^2,  227^2,  235;ii
Spiers,  R.  Phene,  J.  Fergus-
son,  J.  Burgess  and.  History
of  Indian  and  Eastern  Archi-
tecture, 265w*
Spooner,  D.  B.,   "The  Zoro-
astrian     Period    of    Indian


Spooner,  D.  B. — continued

History,"   Journ.   Roy.   As,

Soc,  39^1
Spooner  and  Waddell,  ruins  at

Patna  discovered  by,  39/1^
Srdddha,  ceremony  of,  257
Sravasti,  6

Sri,    Goddess   of  Prosperity,
,  65,  65/^l

Sri,  wife  of  Vishnu,  51
Srigaud  Brahmans  of  Gujarat,

168,  169
Srikantha,  land  of,  97
Srutvd  (having  heard),  200^^
Stallybrass  trans,  of  Grimm's

Teutonic    Mythology,    43^1,

bln^
Stambhaka,  a  Gana  appointed

to    protect    Naravahana-

datta,  170
Steel     and    Temple,     Wide-

Awake    Stories,    I0%yi,    122,

199w
Steele,     R.,     Opera     hactenus

inedita  Rogeri  Baconi,   290,

291,  291^1
Stein   and   Grierson,  Hatim's

Tales,  124
Steinschneider,  Hebr.  Bib-

lioth.,  289w*;  Ucbersetzungen,

289^3;  in  Virchow's  Archiv

fur  Path.  Anat.  und  Phys.^

288ni
Stevans,  C.  M.,  C,  L.  Daniels

and,  Ency.  of  Superstitions,

Folk-Lore    and    the    Occult

Sciences,  1457^
Stevenson,  Mrs  S.,  The  Rites

of  the  Twice- bom,  bin^,  83,

166,  242,  261n^
Steyasdstra  -  pravartaka,     the,

i837ii
Sthavirdvalicharita,       H  e  m  a-

chandra,  283^2
Stokes,    Indian    Fairy    Tales y

42ni,  43/i2, 57^1, 136-^1, 193^1
Stokes'    edit,   of   The    Togail

Troi,  72^2
Strabo,  278

Straparola,  The  Nights,  lOn
Subala  of  Gandhara,  King,  16
Suchier,  Denkmdler  provenza-

lischer      Literatnr      und

Sprache,  289^1
Sudra  woman,  16
Sudras,  95,  96

Sukthankar,  V.  S.,  Eng.  trans,
of  Svapna-vdsavadatta,  21'n}  ;

"  Studies  in  Bhasa,"  Journ.
Bomb.  Br.  Roy.  As.  Soc^
21wi


332


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


Sumanta,  121,  122

Sumatra,  264

Sunda  and   Upasunda,   story

of,  13-Un
Sundaraka  and  the  witches,

105-111
Surd  (wine),  276
Surabhi  ("the  fragrant  one"),

242
Siirya  and  Soma  (the  sun  and

moon),  81
Suryatapas,    hermit    named,

189,  191
Susruta  Samhila,  the, 276, 276w^
Sutdra  (mercury),  276
Sutlej,    Beas    a    tributary    of

the,  282
Sutras,  the,  17
Suvdbahuttarikathdj    the,    286,

286^1
Suvritta  (well-rounded),  132n^
Svddvaushadha    (sweet    medi-
cine), 85n^
Svapna  -  vdsavadatta,       Bhasa,

21ni,  25^4
Svarga,    the    abode    of    the

blessed    and    the    city    of

Indra,  175/ii,  257
Svayambhuya  Manu,  the  calf,

241
Svayamvara       (marriage       by

choice),  16
Swan,    trans,    of    the    Gesta

Romanorum,  296
Swift,    A    City   Shower,   270;

Tale  of  a  tub,  21^
Syria,  poison-damsel  in,  286
Syrius,  Publius,  38/i^

Tacitus,  Annals,  277
Taddkhydtim,  50n*
Taddkhtfdtum,  50w*
Taddvdrasthitamahattaram,

29/ii
Taine,  H.  A.  [Lex  Origines  de  la

France  Conte7nporaine],  lS6n^
Tali,  ceremony  of  tying  the,

17,  18
Talikattu,  ceremony  of  tying

the  Id/i  round  the  neck  of

the  bride,  17,  18
Tamdla,  208,  227
Tamasa,    the    river   goddess,

189ni
Tamboli,  leaves  of  the  betel

vine,  301,  302
Tamerlane  (Tlmur),  279
Tamraliptii,  71
Tan  mahattarakaih,  28w2
Tan  tad,  llOn^
Tan j ore,  92n*


Tanmahdturagaih,  28ii-
Tantric   rites    of   the   Sakta

worshippers  of  Devi,  198n^,

199n
Tapantaka,  son  of  Vasantaka,

161,  165
Tdra  (silver),  276
Taraka,  the  Asura,  100,  102,

103
Taranatha,    HLstorij    of    Bnd-

dhixin,  Schiefner's  German

translation,  Q9n^
ToAmdn,  207n^
Tasydn,  207n2
Tatah,  227ni
Tatra,  Uii^,  182/1^
Tawney,  C.   H.,  92n«,  101w2,

102^1,    116ni,    169,    221ni;

Kathdkoqa,  fm^,  lOSw,  113;ii,

219^3,23271;  ^'Meeting Eye-
brows,"   Ind.    A?U.,    104n;

Prabandliacintdmani,  108/1
Taxila,  Kunala,  son  of  Asoka

and  Viceroy  of,  120
Tejas    (might    or    courage),

i61n2
TejasvatI,  wife  of  Adityasena,

55,  56,  58
TejovatI,  wife  of  Vihitasena,

36-37
Teli,  oil-presser's  caste,  82
Telugu  palm-leaf  MS.,  121
Temple,  R.   C.   [Notes  on  a

Collection    of    Regalia    of

the    Kings    of    Burma    of

the    Alompra    Dynasty "],

Ind.  Ant,  264?ii
Temple,    Sir    Richard,   62/1^,

264,  269,  269/1*
Temple,    Steel    and,     Wide-
Awake    Stories,    108/1,    122,

199n
Tinnevelly  district  of  Madras

Presidency,    Kail    or    Cail

in  the,  302
'Thasddhvasdt,2\^n^
Thdynyi  yat  (chowrie),  264
Thana,     childbirth     customs

among  the  Vadvals  of,  167
Thanlyet  (sceptre),  264
Theophrastus'       [Characters'],

"Superstitious  Man, "Jebb,

notes  on,  98n*
Thomas,  E.  J.,  **Sun,  Moon

and      Stars      (Buddhist),"

Hastings'   Ency.  Rel.  Eth.,

Thomas,  F.  W.,  Cambridge
History  of  India,  282ni ;
"The  Piays  of  Bhasa,"
Joum.  Hoy.  As.  Sac.,  21n^


Thomas,  N.  W.,  "Animals,"

Hastings'  Ency.  Rel.  Eth.,

240
Thompson,   C.  J.   S.,   Poison

Mysteries,  281
Thompson,  R.  Campbell,  The

Devils   and  Evil  Spirits  of

Babylonia,  Qln} ;    Semitic

Magic,  9^/1,  193^1,  295
Thompson  Indians  of  British

Columbia,  256
Thorndike,  History  of  Magic

a?id     Experimental    Science,

99/1,    108/1,    288/i3,    295ni,

299n2«
Thorpe,  Yule-tide  Stories, l^'^,

80ni,  190/ii,  219;i3
Thurston,  E.,  Castes  o)id  Tribes

of  Southern  India,  166,  256,

256n*;    Ethnographic  Notes

in  Southern  India,  7n^,  166,

256,  256w4
Ti  (stone  or  metal  umbrellas),

265,  265w*
Tibet,   polyandry   in,    18;

prevalence    of    fraternal

polyandry  in,  18
Tibullus,  263
Tibyuzaung  ("  Wearer  of  the

White  Umbrella  "),  265
T^ka,    forehead   mark    made

in  an  initiation  ceremony,

22n3
ra^, spangles  worn  by  Hindu

women  of  good  caste,  22n3,

23w
Tilaka,  caste  mark,  22n3
Tilottama,  a  beautiful  woman

made  by  Visvakarman,  14,

14n,  46
Timira,  36

Timur  (Tamerlane),  279
Tipyu  (royal  umbrella),  264
Tishyarakshita,  second  wife  of

A^oka, 120
Tiyor  caste,  242
Tlaxcalans  of  Mexico, customs

connected    with    eclipses

among  the,  81
Tobit,   the  apocryphal    book

of,  69/i3
Tod,  Annah  and  Antiquities  of

lidjasthdn,  305/1^
Todas  of    the  Nilgiri   Hills,

customs    connected     with

eclipses    among    the,    82;

prevalence      of     fraternal

polyandry  among   the,   18
Torello,  76ni
Torres    Strait,    Mabuiag    in,

198/11


J


INDEX  I -SANSKRIT  WORDS,  ETC.


333


Transylvania,  nudity  rites  for

producing  rain  in,  118
Travancore,  Nairs  or  Nayars

of,  17-19 ;  women  well  cared

for  in,  19
Trighanta,  206
Tripoli,    Philip    Clericus    of,

trans,  of  the  Secretum  Secre-

torum,  289,  2S9n^
Tschudi,    J.    J.    von,    Reisen

durck  Sudamerika,  280ri^
TulasI  or  sacred  basil,  82
Tumburu,  a  teacher  called,  35
Turkestan,  polyandry  in,  18 ;

the    Snake   Mountains   of,

298
Turks  (Turushkas),  93,  937i3 ;

the    Indo-scythae     of    the

ancients,  93n^
Turushkas  (Turks),  93,  93^3
Tylor,  E.  B.,  Primitive  Culture,

83,  96wi,  103^1

Udaya,  mountain  named,  67,

67ni
Udaya    (rising,    appearance),

67ni
Udayagiri  (eastern  mountain),

67ni
Udayana,  King  of  Vatsa,  1,  3,
6,  8,  11-13, 15,  20,  22^3,  23,
25-30,  34,  36,  37,  38,  47-54,
80,    84,    85,   89-91,   93-95,
115,  116, 125, 126,  128, 135-
137,  157,  158,  160-162,  165,
170,  171,  238,  239
Udayaparvata  (eastern  moun-
tain), 67^1
Uganda,  society  of  ghouls  in,

199n
UjjayinI,    10,    54-58,     78-80,

*93,  108-110,  176
Ular    puchok     (green      tree-
snake),  303
Uma    (Parvati,   Gaurl,    etc.),
wife  of  Siva,  51,  101,  102,
106
Umbella  (sunshade),  263
Umbra  ("little  shade"),  263
U mhraculiim  (sunshade),  263
Union  of  South  Africa,  281
Unmadini,  story  of,  6-8
Unum  pallium  (umbrella),  268
Upasunda  and  Sunda,   story
of,    13-14w;    (the    ancient
Beas),  282
Uru  (wide),  251
Urvasi  and    Puriiravas,  story

of,  34-36,  245-259
Utkandharaq  ca  suciram  (' '  with
uplifted  necks"),  30^2


Utpalavarna  seduces  her  son-
in-law,  i22

Utpreksha,  lln^

Utsthala,  island  of,  191,  192,
194,  217,  226,  227,  237

Uttara,  mountain  named,
190,  191

Uttara  Rama  Charita,  the,
Bhavabhuti,  34^2,  189?ii,
214

Uzanne,  O.,  VOmbrelle,  272  ;
Les  Ornernents  de  la  Femme,
272  ;  The  Sunshade,  the
Glove,  the  Muff,  272

Vadavdgni    (submarine    fire),

256
Vadvals  of  Thana,  childbirth

customs  among  the,  167
Vaisvanara,  son  of  Pingalikji,

135,  165
Vaisvanaradatta,  son  of  Agni-

datta,  95
Valencia,  Archbishop   Guido

of,  289
Valerius,  277
Vallabhl,  141,  146
Valle,   Pietro  della,    Travels,

162n
Vanaprastha  or  anchoret,  180w^
Vanaraja  (Wun  Raj),  266
Vararuchi,  58ni,  107^1,  175ni
Vardhamana  (Burdwan),  171.
171ni,   188,  189,  223,    224,
237
Varsha    (division    of   a    con-
tinent),  125?i2
Varthema,  300-302
Varuna    (the    divine   judge),

249
Vasantaka,    minister    of   the
King  of  Vatsa,  20-22,   25,
26,  28,  29,  34,  38,  45,  47,
125,  159-161,  165
Vasavadatta,  wife  of  the  King
of  Vatsa,  1,  3,  6,  8,  12,  13,
20-22,  25-30,  34,  36,  38,  47,
48,   50,  93,  94,    116,    125,
128,  129,  133,  135-137,  156-
158,  160,  161,  171
Vasishta,  the  sage,  45^^
Vasudatta,       Jimutavahana's

former  name,  141,  143, 146
Vasudatta,  merchant  named,

130
Vasuki,  king  of  the  snakes,

152,  153
Vasunemi,  the  snake,  22^3
Vatsa,  Udayana  the  King  of,
1,  3,  6,   8,   11-13,   15,  20,
22n3,  23,  25-30,  34,  36,  37,


Vatsa — continued

38,  47-54,  80,  84,  85,  89-91,
93-95,  115,  116,  125,  126,
128,  135-137,  157,  158, 160-
162,  165,  170,  171,  238,  239,
275
Vat  sy  ay  an  a,  Kama  Sfdra,  9n^,

49^3,  305
Vattel,  E.  de,  Les  Droit  des
Gens,  on  Principes  de  la  Loi
Naturelle     appliques     a     la
Conduite  et  aux  Affaires  des
Nations    et    des    ISouverains,
278,  278^1,  279
Veckenstedt,      Wendische
Sagen,    42ni,    98^^,    107^^,
152^4,  155n4,  202^1,  223^^1
Vega,  238ni

Vegetius,  Co7is.,  277  .

Vena,  Prithu,  son  of,  241
Venezuela,  polyandry  in,  18
Venice,   Sala  del  Gran   Con-

siglio  at,  268
Verard,    Antoine,     Le     Cuer

de  Philosophie,  293
Vernieux,    C,    Indian    Tales

and  Anecdotes,  114n
Vetala  (vampire),  236  ;  carries
Devadatta  through  the  air,
235;  propitiated  bv  Deva-
datta, 235
Vetalas,  201
Vibhishana,      brother      of

Ravana,  84^^
Victoria  and  Albert  Museum,

271
Victoria  Institute,  311^1
Vidanga,  decoction  of,  276
Vidura,    brother    of    Dhrita-

rashtra  and  Pandu,  16
Vidushaka,  story  of,  54-80
Vidyadhara  (independent
superhuman),  141, 148,  149,
222,  225,  237;  named
Chitrangada,  147,  148;
race,  a  maiden  of  the,  66;
rites  to  attain  the  rank  of
a,  233,  234;  Saktideva
becomes  a,  236
Vidyadhara  (magical  know-
ledge-holder), 137^2
Vidyaharas,  25,  67,  128,  136,
138,  150, 163,  170,  171,  211,
212,  221,  224,  225,  238,
238%^ ;  Asokadatta  and
Vijayadatta  become,  210 ;
Emperor  of  the,  156 ;  for-
tune of  the,  137  ;  Golden
City  a  seat  of  the,  220;
Kau^ika  the  spiritual  guide
of  the,  210;  King  of  the.


334


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


V  idy  aharas —  continued

137,  155,  156;  sonof  Vasa-

vadatta  to  be  the  king  of

the,  13,  85
Vidyadhari     (female     Vidya-

dhara),    141,    230;    Asoka-

datta's    wife    becomes    a,

210;  Bhadra,  66-69,  71,75-

80 ;  named  Chandraprabha,

220-222
Vidyddharim,  235/i2
Vidyuchehhikha,      wife      of

Lambajihva,  206,  207,  209
Vidyutprabha,    daughter    of

Vidyuchehhikha,  206,  207 ;

Yakshi  named,  233-236
Vidyutprabham,  235^2
Vihitasena,  story  of,  36-37
Vijayadatta  and  Asokadatta,

196-213,  238/ii
Vijayavega,    name    given    to

Vijayadatta,  212
Vikramachanda,  King,  159
Vikramaditya,  King,  136ni
Fikramdn  kadevacharita,

Buhler,  174^1
/^ry5rramonmf,Kalidasa,257-259
Vikritdm  (transformed  into  a

Rakshasa),  202^2
Vikriti     {Gespensterscheinung),

2b2n2
Fikritim,  202n2
Vinata  and  Kadru,  wives  of

Ka^yapa,  150-151
VinayasvaminI,    daughter   of

Sankarasvamin,  180
Vindhya  hills,  13n*,  56,  159 ;

mountains,    54;    peaks   of

the,  92 ;  range,  188
VindumatI,  daughter  of  the

fisher-king,  228,  229,  231,

236,  237
Vindurekha,      daughter     of

Chandavikrama,    230,   231,

236
Viradhagupta,        agent       of

Rakshasa,  283,  284
Virata,  the  King  of,  22
Viravarman,    grandfather    of

Devadasa,  87
Virchow,  Rudolf,  in  Zeit.  fur

Ethnohgie,  308n2
Virchow's    Archiv    fiir   path.

Anat.     und     Phys.,     Lewin

in,  279,  Steinschneider  in,

288ni
Virddrya,  44^2
Virgil,  .^neid,  186ni
Visddhvasah  (fearless),  218^2
Vi^akha,  son  of   Karttikeya,

102


Visakhadatta,  Mudrd  -  lidk-
shasa  or  Signet-ring  of  Rak-
shasa, \mn\  281, 283, 283^3,
284

Vishnu  (Narayana  or  Puru-
shottama),  34-36,  51,  94,
81,  151,  152,  176,  217,  257

Vishnu  Purdna,  the,  81,  241,
248,  255

Vishnudatta,  Brahman  named,
195,  213,  217

Vishnuvamin,  husband  of
Kalaratri,  105

Vissdsabhojana-  Jdtaka,  297,
298,  298ni

Vi^vakarman,  the  architect  of
the  gods,  14,  Hn^,  46

Vii^vamitra,  267 ;  Galava  a  son
or  pupil  of,  211^2

Visvavasu,  chief  prince  of
the  Siddhas,  140,  149

Vitankapura,  191,  226,  227

Vizetelly,  E.  A.,  Bluebeard,
22471

Vrika  (fire  in  one's  own  body),
256

Vrkshenevdrtavi  lata  ("a  climb-
ing plant  of  spring  with  its
tree"),  204ni

Vyddhi  (disease),  37ni

Vyasa,  the  Rishi,  17

Vyasana  (vice  of  hunting),  21,
21n2

Waddell,  L.  A.,  Buddhism  of
Tibet,  142ni;  Discovery  of  the
Lost  Site  ofPdtaliputra,  39w^

Waddell  and  Spooner,  ruins
at  Patna  discovered  by,39ni

Wak,  islands  of,  190^1

Waldau,  Bdhmische  Marchen,
76^1,  190^1

Wallace,  A.  R.,  Narrative  of
Travels  on  the  Amazon  and
Rio  Negro,  280w'

Wallis,  W.  D.,  "Prodigies
and  Portents,"  Hastings'
Ency.  Rel.  Eth.,  83

Walpurgis  night,  104^2

Watt,  Commercial  Products  of
India,  280/ii,  304wi;  Diction-
ary of  the  Economic  Products
of  India,  280ni,  304ni

Weber,  A.,  Indische  Streifen,
252n^ ;  Verzeichniss  der
Sanskrit  Handschriflen  der
Koniglichen  Bibliothek,  286,
286^4

Webster,  Duchess  ofMalfi,,  2n^

Wembley,  Empire  Exhibition
at,  271


Wenceslaus  II,  Legend  of
the  death  of,  309,  309n2

Westermarck,  History  of
Human  Marriage,  18,  19,
23w,  24w,  306ni ;  Origin  and
Development  of  the  Moral
Ideas,  96ni,  97n,  229w'-

Whewell ,  W. ,  trans .  of  Gortius,
Dejure  belli  ac  pads,  2nn^

Wilkinson,  Sir  J.  G.,  Manners
and  Customs  of  the  Ancient
Egyptians,  264

Wilkinson,  R.  J.,  Papers  on
Malay  Subjects,  167

William  of  Auvergne,  works
of,  99/1

Wilson,  H.  H.,  2;ii,  92ni- »,
93w2-  3,  94w* ;  Descriptive
Catalogue  of  the  Macke?izie
Collection  of  Oriental  MSS.,
121,  123 ;  Essays  on  Sanskrit
Literature,  92n* ;  Select
Specimens  of  the  Theatre  of
the  Hindm,  189ni,  192w\
214,  258,  259,  283/1^;  Vishnu
Purdna,  81,  241,  248,  255

Windsor,  T.  N.,  Indian  Toxi-
cology, 281

Wirt  Sikes,  British  Goblins,
75/i2,  98n^  223?ii

Wise,  Commentary  on  the  Hindu
System  of  Medicine,  298

Wolfe,  Col.,  269

Wolff,  works  of,  278,  279

Wright,  D.,  History  of  Nepal,
232n

Wright,  Th.,  De  Nugis  Curi-
alium  (Camden  Society)
114w ;  edit,  of  the  Gesta
Roynanorum,  296

Wun  Raj  (Vanaraja),  266

Wiistenfeld,  "Die  LJberset-
zungen  arabischer  Werke
in  das  lateinische,"  Abh.  d.
K.  Gesell.  d.  IVissen.,  289w»

Xandrames  or  Agrammes
(Dhana-Nanda,  Nanda,
etc.),  282,  282^2

Xanthos  and  Balios,  conversa-
tion of  Achilles  with,  57n^

"Ya  Ummi"  ("O  my
mother!"  Arabic),  201w3^

Yad  At  ("carry  out  the  plan"),
12,  12^1

Yadrichchhayd{cas\i&\\y),l3ln^

Yahya  ibn  Batriq  {i.e.  John,
son  of  Patricius),  alleged
discoverer  of  the  Secretum
Secretorum,  288


INDEX  I -SANSKRIT  WORDS,  ETC.


335


Vajnadatta,  father  of  Pinga-
lika,  133

Yajnivalkya,  the  great  sage,
241

Yaksha  (servant  of  the  gods),
52,  97

Yakshas,  241 ;  Ratnavarsha,
King  of  the,  233

Yakshi  named  Vidyutprabha,
233-236

Yamadanshtra,  Rakshasa
named,  74,75,  78,  79

Yamuna  (Jumna),  196

Yaugandharayana,  minister
of  the  King  of  Vatsa,  1,  4,
6,  8,  10-13,  15,  20,  21,  31,
34,  36,  47,  48,  52-54,  84,
85,  89  91,  95,  115,  116,  125,
138,  156, 158,  161,  163,  165,
170

Yai^au,  185w2


Yoga,  2l2n^

Yogakarandaka,  minister  of
Brahmadatta,  91,  275

Yogesvari,  friend  of  Bhadra,
67,  77

Yogi,  196  ;  wounds  healed  by
a,  122

Yojanas  (measures  of  dis-
tance), 57,  57^2,  75,  190

Yoni,  242

Yudda-kdnda  ("battle  sec-
tion") of  the  Rdmdyana,
84iii

Yudhishthira,  son  of  Pandu,
16        ■

Yudhishthira  and  hisbrothers,
ancestors  of  the  King  of
Vatsa,  13-17

Yukta,  140ni

Yule,  Hohso7i  Jobson,  162^,269,
269n*  ;  Mission  to  Ava,  168


Yule  and  Cordier,  The  Book
ofSer  Marco  Polo,  85^,  266,
268,  268^2,  302,  302^2,  303 ;
Cathay  and  the  Way  Thither,
85n,  268^4

Yuta  Indians,  poisoning  of
the,  280

Zan  (woman),  162n
Zanana  (zenana),  162?i
Zarza,    Samuel    Ibn,    Michlal

Jqfi,  299?^l
Zenana  (harem),  162n
Zeus,      Indra      the      Hindu,

45n4
Zingerle,     Kinder-und    Haus-

mdrchen  aus  Tirol,  70n^
[Zoroaster]  A  vesta,  240
Zugaro , ' '  Les  bacteries  comme

arme    de    guerre,"     BnlL

Beige  des  Sci.  Milit.,  281


INDEX  II

GENERAL


"Aberglaube,"     Pauly-

Wissowa,  57w^
Abhandlungen  der  k.  hay.  Akad.

d.      Wissenschaften,      "Die

Sage  vom    Giftmiidchen,"

W.  Hertz,  286,  286?i2,  292,

292ni,  296,  298,  300
Abhandhmgen  d.  K.  Gesell.  d.

Wissenschaften,       '*Die

Uebersetzungen  arabischer

Werke  in  das  lateinische,"

Wiistenfeld,  289?ii
Abiding  {satatah),  23671^
"Abode  of  Allah"  (Allaha-
bad), 110^2
Abode  of  the  blessed,  Svarga

the,  175wi,  257
Aboriginal  race  of  Southern

India,  Maravars,  166
Aboriginal     tribe    of    South

Mirzapur,the  Majhwar,  166
Abortion,  229^2
Abscess  formed  by  grief,  2
Account    of    the    Kingdom    of

Nepal,    Francis    Hamilton,

280;i2
Aconite,    girl    rubbed    with

ointment  made  of  the  juice

of,    310;    used   in   making

bhang,    279 ;    varieties    of,

279,    280,    280ni;    various

uses  for,  279
Act   of  hospitality,    offer   to

kill  a  cow  an,  241
"Act  of  Truth,  The,"  Bur-

lingame,    Joum.    Roy.    As.

Soc,  31-33
"Act  of  truth"  (kiriya),  31  ;

(sachchakiriyd),  31
"  Act  of  Truth  "  motif  31-33
"Adam's     Peak,"     T.     W.,

Rhys     Davids,     Hastings'

Ency.  Rel.  Eth.,  85ri
Adjunct  to    kingship,   flying

through  the  air  an,  64^^
Adorned   with   red    powder,

people,  164,  164^*
Adrift   on  the   Ganges,   girl

in  basket,  4
"Adultery,"  Hastings'  Ency.

Rel  Eth.,  88ni

VOL.  II.


Adultery,  nose  cut  off  as
punishment  for,  88,  88n^  ;
among  the  Pardhi  caste,
punishment  for,  88/^^ ;  in
places  other  than  India,
punishments  for,  88?i^  ;  of
Devadasa's  wife,  86,  87;
of  a  gambler's  wife,
ordinary  occurrence  of  the,
86^1

Adventures  of  Asokadatta,
211,  212;  of  Jimutavahana
in  a  former  birth,  141-149;
of  Samudradatta,  226,  227  ;
of  Vijayadatta,  211

Adventures  of  HaUm  Tat,
Duncan  Forbes,  67^2

Advice  of  Chakradhara,  59,
60 ;  of  Narada,  15

jEneid,  Virgil,  186?ii

jEthiopica,   Heliodorus,  62n^,

1067i4

Affection  {sneha),  lln^,  163^^
Affection  and  Love  (Priti  and

Rati),  wives  of  the  God  of

Love,  27,  51,  52n2,  128,  137
Afflictions  cured  by  violence,

2,  2ni,  ^n
Afterwards  (pascdi),  lOri^
Age  venerated  in  the  East,

old,  190ni
Agent  of  Rakshasa,  Viradha-

gupta,  283,  284
"Aghorl,"        W.        Crooke,

Hastings'  Ency.  Rel.  Eth.,

90n3,  198ni
"Aghoris     and     Aghorapan-

this,"  H.  W.  Barrow,  Jouj-n.

Anth.  Soc.  Bomb.,  ^Qm^
Agreement    of    Kadru    and

Vinata,  150
Ague  fit  attacks  Vijayadatta,

196,  197
"Ahalyayai,"     Bloomfield,

Vedic     Concordance,     45w^ ;

Proc.  Am.  Phil.  Soc,  45n*
Aid     of     Brahma     implored

against    Sunda    and    Upa-

sunda, 14n
Air,  demon  flies  through  the,

203 ;  dragons  pollute  the,

337


Air — continued

299;  flying  through  the,
62-64ni ;  horse  flies  up  in
the,  224;  magical  rides
in  the,  103-105n;  palace
in  the,  110,  111 ;  polluted
with  poison  -  damsel's
breath,  293;  power  of
flying  through  the,  103,
104  ;  spells  to  enable  Vasa-
vadatta  to  roam  through
the,  138 ;  transportation
through  the,  75

Air-tight  armour,  men  in,  299

Alakeswara  Kathd,  the,  123

"  Alankaravatl,  Story  of,"
212ni

Alexandri  Magni  Expeditione
Indica,  De,  A.  E.  Anspach,
282ni

Alexandrian  legends,  290

Alexandrian  myths,  jewel-
lamp  in,  169

Alive  in  the  fish's  belly,
Saktideva  found,  193

Alleged  discovery  of  the
Secretum  Secretorum  by
Yayha  ibn  Batriq,  288

"Alleged  Discovery  of
Syphilis  in  Prehistoric
Egyptians,"  The  Lancety
308^2

"  Alles  aus  einer  Erbse,'*
Kaden,  Unter  den  Oliven-
b'dumen,  5^^

All-Hallows  Day,  105w

Alliance  of  husband  and  wife,
Sambandham,  ceremony  of,
18

Alligators,  iron  pyrites  as
charm  against,  168

Ally  of  Chandragupta,  Par-
vataka,  284,  285

Amazing  discovery  of  King
Adityaprabha,  98,  99

Ambassador  sent  by  the  King
of  Magadha  to  the  King  of
Vatsa,  20,  38

Amer.  Joum.  Phil.,  "Art  of
Stealing  in  Hindu  Fiction,"
Bloomfield,  183ni


338


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


American  origin  of  syphilis,
SaS,  309

Amorous  bite,  the,  305

Analogy  between  Chandra-
gupta  and  Alexander,  283,
285  ;  between  fire-drill  and
intercourse  of  the  sexes,
255,  256

Ananga-Rangay  the  [Kalyana
Malla],  lO/i

Ancestor  of  Udayana,  Pandu
an,  126-127;  Satanlka  an,
54

Ancestors  of  Udayana,  13

Anchoret  or  Fdnaprasthoy
180ni

"Ancient  Beliefs  about  the
Eclipse  and  a  few  Super-
stitions based  on  these  Be-
liefs, A  few,"  J.  J.  Modi,
Journ.  Anth.  Soc.  Bomb.,  82,
83

Ancient  capital  of  Magadha,
Girivraja,  3n^

Ancient  Egypt,  "  Assyrian  and
Hittite  Society,"  Flinders
l^etrie,  88ni

Ancient  Geography  of  India,
Cunningham,  3n^

Ancient  India,  Manning,  155w^

Ancients,  Turks  the  Indo-
scythae  of  the,  93/1^

Ander  Hundert  der  Bapistuschen
Lilgen,  Das,  Hieronymus
Rauscher,  296

Anger  of  Vidyadharas  with
Bhadra,  67

Animal  husband  or  wife,  254

Animals,  garlic  juice  danger-
ous to  poisonous,  296 ;
human  saliva  dangerous  to
poisonous,  296 ;  language
of,  107wi

"Animals,"  N.  W.  Thomas,
Hastings'  Ency.  Rel.  Eth.,
240

Animating  a  dead  body,  62

Anklet  given  to  A^okadatta,
second,  207

Anklet,  heavenly  workman-
ship of  the,  204;  the
jewelled,  203

Annates  dn  Musee  Guimet,
La  Legende  de  I'Empereur
Acjoka,"  Przyluski,  120

Annals,  Tacitus,  277

Annals  and  Antiquities  of  Ra-
jasthan.  Tod,  305ni

Annotated  Bibliography  of  Sir
Richard  Burton,  N.  M.
Penzer,  lOn


Announcement  of  the  birth
of  Antichrist,  39n2

Anthropological  value  of  the
story  of  Urva^I  and  l^uru-
ravas,  245

Antidote  kills  the  poison-
damsel,  297

Anti-poisonous  compounds
(agadas),  276

Antiquary,  lln

Antiquity  of  syphilis  in  Cen-
tral America,  308,  309

Antiquity  of  the  umbrella,
263-265

Anvdr-i-Suhailt  {Fables  of  Pil-
pay),  297,  297w2

Apartment  of  the  princess,
Vidushaka  watches  in  the,
74

Apocryphal  Book  of  Tobit,
69n3

Appearance  [udaya),  67w^

Appearance  of  Kalaratri,  re-
pulsive, 103,  104

Appease  Vishnu,  Pururavas'
penance  to,  36

Arabian  fiction,  stages  of  love
in,  10m

Arabian  Nights.     See  Nights

Arabian  Nights*  Entertainments,
E.  Forster,  147ni

Arabic  betel  nut  {fTfel  or
faufel),  302

Arabic  "blue  eyes"  {azrk),
299

Arabic  MS.  found  in  Antioch,
289

Arabic  "O  my  mother"
("Ya  Umml"),  201^3

Arabic  origin  of  the  Secretum
Secretorum,  287

Arabic  originals  of  the  Secre-
tum Secretorum,  288,  289

Archaeological  Reports,  Cun-
ningham, llOn^

Archaeological  Survey  of  India,
the  Government,  39n^

Archbishop  Guidoof  Valencia,
289

Archery,  great  feat  performed
by  Arjuna  in,  16

Architect  of  the  gods,  Vi^-
vakarman,  14,  14^^,  46

Architecture,  Ti  in  Burmese,
265,  265n*

Archiv  Path.  Anat.  Phys.,
Virchow's,  "Arrow

Poisons,"       Lewin,      279 ;
Steinschneider  in,  28Sn^

Archivio  per  lo  studio  delle
Tradizioni  Popolari,  202r0-


Arch-thief  of  Hindu  fiction,
Maladeva  the,  183ni

Aristotelis  quce  feruntur  secretis
secretorum  commentatio,  Z)e,
Forster,  287wi,  288n^-2,289ni

Arm  of  the  Hakshasa,  cut  off
by  Vidushaka,  71 ;  door
fastened  with  the,  71,  71n2

Arm,  Pallair's,  72n2

Armour,  men  in  air-tight,  299

Army  of  the  King  of  Vatsa,
elephants  in  the,  90  ;  wav-
ing lights  in  the,  89,  89n*

Aromatum  Historia,  Clusius,
302,  302ni

"Arrow  Poisons,"  Lewin,
Virchow's  Archiv  Path.
Anat.  Phys.,  279

Ars  Amaloria,  Ovid,  263

Arsenic,  white,  303

Art  of  interpreting  bodily
marks,  Sdmudrika,  7n^

"Art  of  Stealing  in  Hindu
Fiction,"  Bloomfield,  Amer.
Journ.  Phil.,  183ni

Art  of  stealing,  king  wishes
to  study  the,  184n,  185n

Artha.(dstra,  Kautilya,  277wi,
283ai1

Articles  of  regalia,  the  five,
264

Artzney  Kunst  und  Wunder-
Buch,  Michael  Bapst  von
Rochlitz,  294ni

Ascend  the  jewelled  throne,
refusal  of  Udayana  to,  53

Ascending  the  jewelled
throne,  115

Ascetic  named  Harasvamin,
184-186;  named  Jalapada,
232-236

Ascetic,  rogue  Siva  disguised
as  a  religious,  176  ;  a  skull-
bearing  Saiva,  196,  200;
story  of  the  hypocritical,
4-5

Ascetics,  the  Aghorl  sect  of,
90m3

Ascetics  made  ridiculous,  5

Ashes  of  Asana,  276 ;  of
Aha-kama,  276  ;  of  Dhava,
276  ;  of  Mokshaka,  276 ;  of
Paribhadra,  276  ;  of  Pdtala,
276;  of  Rdja-dmma,  276;
of  Siddhaka,  276  ;  of  Soma-
valka,  276

Ashes,  circle  of,  lOOn

Assassins  sent  to  the  enemy
camp,  nocturnal,  91

Assertion  of  Saktideva,  the
false,  174,  175


t


*  Assyrian        and        Hittite
Society,"   Flinders   Petrie,
Ancient  Egypt,  S8n^
istrologaster,  Melton,  145^
\t  daybreak  {prabhdte),  61n^
itharva-Veda,  the,  240,  241

\ttempt  of  Rahu  to  swallow
Surya  and  Soma,  81

Attempts  on  Chandragupta's
life,  283,  284

Attendants  of  Kuvera,  Guh-
yakas,  98ni

Auburn  matted  locks  of  Siva,
208

Ausgew'dhlte  Erz'dhlungen  aus
Hemacandras  Parisishtapar-
van,  J.  Hertel,  285ni

Auspicious  birth-chamber,
the,  161

Austerities,  fire  propitiated
by  Vidushaka  with,  58 ;
performed  by  Gauri,  100;
performed  by  the  King  of
Vatsa,  84,  85;  power
obtained  by,  85 ;  practised
by  Sunda  and  Upasunda,
13n* ;  propitiating  Siva
with,  84,  85;  of  Siva
troubled  by  the  God  of
Love,  100

Australians,  poisoning  of,
280,  280?i4

Autumn,  thunder  ceases  in
the,  92ii3

Avarice  of  the  chaplain,  179

Avesta,  the  [Zoroaster],  240

Baby  girl  brought  up  by  huge

snakes,  294
Back    burned    by    vessel    of

boiling  rice,  24
Back   feathers   of  the   huge

bird,    Saktideva    hides

among  the,  219
Background  of  the  magic  art,

the  "act  of  truth"  at  the,

31
Background  of  the  Secretum

Secretormn,  Eastern,  290
**  Bacteries  comme  arme  de

guerre,  Les,"  Col.  Zugaro,

Bull.  Beige  des  Sci.  Milit.,

281
Bahdwalpur  State,  The,  Malik

Muhammad  Din,  167
Bakhtydr  Ndma,  the,  123
Banks  of  the  Sipra,  176-178 ;

of  the    Yamuna    (Jumna),

196
Banyan-tree  saves  Saktideva's

life,  218


INDEX  II -GENERAL

Banj^an-tree,  worship  in  the
cemetery  under  a,  233

Bar  (Latin  sera),  lQ2n

Barbarians,  North  defiled  by,
53

Barbe  Bleue,  La,  Perrault,
223ni

Bargain  of  Vindumati,  the
strange,  229

Barlaam  and  Josaphat,  290

Basil,  TulasI  or  sacred,  82

Basilisk,  299^^,  306

Basket  containing  girl  set
adrift  on  the  Ganges,  4

Bas-reliefs  of  the  Han
Dynasty,  264

Battle  of  Rama  and  Ravana,
84ni

"Battle  Section"  (Yudda-
kdnda)  of  the  Rdmdyand,
84wi

Beat  of  drum,  proclamation
by,  73,  73w2,  173,  187,
224

Beautiful  lady  found  by  Vidii-
shaka  in  the  temple,  66

Beautiful  maiden  fed  on
poison,  291

Beautiful  maidens  found  dead
by  Saktideva,  223

"Beautiful  Palace  East  of
the  Sun  and  North  of
the  Earth,"  Thorpe,  Yule-
tide  Stories,  80^1,  190^1,
219nS

Beautiful  woman  Tilottama
made  by  Vi^vakarman,  14,
lin

"Beauty  and  the  Beast"
motif,  254

Beauty  that  maddens,  7,  8

Beauty  of  the  two  maidens,
the  illuminating,  43,  43n2

Bees,  Guhachandra  and  the
Brahman  assume  the  shape
of,  42

Beggar  or  Bhikshu,  180#

Belief  that  the  dead  rise  from
the  tomb  in  the  form  of
vampires,  61^^ ;  in  the
poisonous  look  of  snakes,
298;  about  Rahu  in  the
Central  Provinces,  82;  in
the  sanctity  of  iron  among
the  Doms,  168 ;  in  trans-
migration, 241 ;  in  vampires
in  Egypt,  Qln^

"  Bellephoron,  Tale  of,"
Apuleius,  Golden  Ass,  60^^

"Bellerophon  letter"  motif,
114/1


339

"Bericht  iiber  verschiedene
Volksstiimme  in  Vorderin-
dien,"  F.  Jagor,  Zeitschrift
fur  Ethnologie,  166

Betel,  poison  conveyed  in  a
"chew"  of,  303

Betel-chewing,  effect  of,  302

Betel  juice  in  a  person's  face,
insult  of  spitting,  302,  303

Betel  nut  {fufel  or  faufel,
Arabic),  302;  (coffolo  or
chofole),  301,  302

Betel  vine,  leaves  of  the
{Tamholi),  301,  302

Betel  vine  or  pan  {Chavica
Betel),  302

Bewilderment  one  of  the  six
faults  of  man,  106^^

Bewitching  (Mohanl),  212n^

Bhartrihari  Nlti  Sataka,  the,
192n2

"Bhasa,"Barnett,  Joum.  Boy.
As.  Soc.,  21ni

"Bhasa's  Works,  are  they
Genuine?",  A.  K.  and
K.  R.  Pisharoti,  Bull.  Sch.
Orient.  Stud.,  21n^

Bibliographie  des  Ouv rages
Arabes,  V.  Chauvin,  4671^,
58ni,  108n,  122,  131^1,
136wi,  147^1,  151^2,  190ni,
193ni,  202ni,  224w,  297n2

Bibliography  of  the  MSS.
of  the  Secretum  Secretorum,
288ni

Bibliography  of  Sir  Richard
Burton,  Annotated,  N.  M.
Penzer,  10^

Bibliophilists,  Society  of
English,  2n^

Bile,  of  the  green  tree-snake
as  poison,  303;  of  the
green  water-frog  as  poison,
303  ;  of  the  jungle-crow  as
poison,  303

Bird  carries  Saktideva  to  the
the  Golden  City,  219,  220

Birds,  Aristophanes,  lt>2n'^

Birds,  hiding  in  the  feathers
of,  219^3,  220n  ;  king  of  the
(Garuda),  151,  152,  154,
155 ;  language  of  the,
107*1^ ;  like  vultures,  enor-
mous, 219 ;  overheard  by
Saktideva,  conversation  of,
219,  219ni

Birth  of  Antichrist,  announce-
ment of  the,  39n2

Birth,  adventures  of  Jimuta-
vahana  in  a  former,  141-
149 ;     of    a    daughter    to


340


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


Birth — continued

Adityasena,  55 ;  of  Kart-
tikeya,  100-103;  of  the
king's  horse,  the  former,
56 ;  of  Naravahanadatta,
161-162  ;  power  of  remem-
bering former,  149 ;  of
Sinhaparakrama's  wife,
previous,  160;  of  Soma-
prabha,  39,  40;  speaking
immediately  after,  39,  39/1^  ;
of  Vasavadatta,  former,  30

**  Birth,  supernatural,"  motif,
136wi

Birth  -  chamber,  the  auspi-
cious, 161  ;  iron  rod  kept
in  the,  166  ;  lights  to  scare
away  evil  spirits  in  the,
168 ;  precautions  observed
in  the,  166-169

Birth-rate  in  India,  the  high,
18

Bite,  the  amorous,  305 ;  of
the  poison-damsel  fatal,
291

Black  magic,  99?i ;  nudity  in,
117

Blessed,  Svarga,  abode  of
the,  175ni,  257

Blind,  DhritarSshtra  born,
16  ;  executioners  when  at-
tempting to  impale  Soma-
datta  become,  96

Blood,  epithet  denoting  the
price  of  a  man's  {Satadaya),
240;  of  husband  mixed
with  betel  and  eaten  by
the  bride,  24w  ;  mixed  with
lac  (lye,  24n ;  mixing  or
exchanging,  by  bride  and
bridegroom,  23n

Blood  rite,  use  of  vermilion
a  survival  of  the,  23ai,
24n

Blue  eyes  [azrk,  Arabic),  299

Bluebeard,  E.  A.  Vizetelly,
22471

Bluebeard,  identification  of,
224n

Boar  pursued  by  Saktideva,
230

Bodice  {angia  or  angii/a),  50,
50/i5

Bodice,  kurta  the  Kash-
mirian,  50n^ ;  of  Western
India,  the  choft,  bOri^ ;
worn  by  Hindu  and  Mo-
hammedan women  of  the
North,  50n5

Bodies,  maidens  with  ser-
pents in  their,  307


"Bodiless,  The"  (Ananga),
164ni

Bodily  marks,  interpreting
(samudrika),  Tn}

Body,  animating  a  dead,  62;
fire  in  one's  own  (vrika),
256

Body  of  Rahu  called  Ketu,
81

Body  of  Rahu  the  progenitor
of  meteors  and  comets,  81

Bohmische  Marchen,  Waldau,
76»i,  190»ii

Bolting  horse  of  Adityasena,
56

Bombay  Gazetteer,  the,  119,
168,  169,  232n

Book  (parvan),  16

Book  III,  Lfivanaka,  1-124

Book  IV,  Naravahanadatta-
janana,  125-169

Book  V,  Chaturdarika,  170-
242

Book  of  Dnarte  Barbosa,  The,
M.  Longworth  Dames,  18,
269wi,  300,  300^15^  301,  303

Book  of  Ser  Marco  Polo,  The,
Yule  and  Cordier,  85w,  266,
268,  268n^  302,  302n2,  303

Book  of  Sifidibad,  Clouston,
114?i,  120,  121,  122,  224n

Book  of  Tobit^the  apocryphal,
69?i3

Book  of  the  Twelve  Prophets^
The,  G.  A.  Smith,  194n

Boon  granted  to  Kunti,  24 ;
granted  to  Pururavas  by
the  Gandharvas,  247,  249 ;
granted  by  Siva,  136

Boons,  image  of  Gane^a  which
grants,  99

Borax,  turmeric  and  lime-
juice,  powder  made  of,
[hinkam),  164  w*

Bracelet  worn  by  Hindu
women,  an  iron,   167

Brahman  demon,  '  Jvala-
mukha,  147n^

Brahman  miser,  the,  176

Brahman  monastery,  the,  57-
59

Brahman  named  Agnidatta,
95,  133;  named  Chakra-
dhara,  59,  60,  65 ;  named
Chanakya  (Kautilya  or
Vishnugupta),  283-285;
named  Govindasvamin,
196,  197,  199,  200,  209,
211;  named  Haridatta,
231  ;  named  Saktideva,
174,  175,  188,  189,  191-195,


Brahman — continued

213,  217-222,  224-231,  236-
238;  named  Vishnudatta,
195,  213,  217

Brahman,  periods  in  the  life
of  a,  180,  180ni ;  students,
Wanderjahre  of,  \lhi^ ;  who
has  seen  the  Golden  City,
Kanakarekha  will  marry
a,  173;  woman  entertains
Vidushaka,  69 ;  woman,
the  poor,  128,  129,  133-135

Brdhmanas,  the,  240

Brahmans  feasted  by  Guha-
chandra,  41

Brahmans  of  Gujarat,  Sri-
gaud,  168,  169;  of  the
monastery,  65

Brahmans  oppose  the  king's
entrance,  57  ;  oppose  poly-
andry, 17

Brahmans,  Pandus  disguised
as  mendicant,  16;  villages
given  to,  59

Brahmanyduck(Chakravaka),
36

Brains  from  a  skull,  drinking,
199

Brave  Brahman  Vidushaka,
58

**  Brave  Seventee  Bai,"  Frere,
Old  Deccan  Days,  202wi

Breast-cover  {mahram),  50/1^;
{miaband),  50n^

Breath, air  polluted  by  poison-
damsel's,  292,  293;  the
poisonous,  300-303

Bribed  to  cause  king's  death,
woman,  309

Bribery,  politic  expedient  of,
45n^

Bridegroom,  tali  tied  by  a
mock,  18

Bridge  across  the  ocean  con-
structed by  the  monkeys,
84,  84ni,  85w

British  Burma  and  its  People,
C.  J.  F.  S.  Forbes,  226ni

British  Goblins,  Wirt  Sikes>
75n2,  98n4,  223^^1

British  Medical  Journal,  308^
3l0>i3

British  Museum,  61ni,  263,
269

**  Brittany  Marriage  Custom,
A,"  F.  C.  Conybeare,  Fo/^-
Lore,  23;i

Broken  heart,  death  from  a,
132

Broken-hearted  king,  the,.
25


INDEX  II -GENERAL


341


Brother  of  Dhritarashtra  and

Pandu,  Vidura,  16
Brother   of   Padraavati,    Sin-

havarman,  89
Brothers      Asokadatta      and

Vijayadatta,     meeting     of

the,  209
Brothers,   stories  of  hostile,
I  Un

f      **  Brothers,     Story     of     the

Two,"     Maspero,    Popular

Stories  from  Ancient  Egypt^

120
Brothers    Sunda    and    Upa-

sunda,  Asura,  13-14
Brought   up    on    el-his,   girl,

313
Brown  (Kapila)  cow,  276
Buddhism,      Magadha      the

home  of,  Zn^
Buddhism  of  Tibet ^  Waddell,

142ni
Buddhist  centre,  Pataliputra,

the,  39wi
Buddhist  Emperor  of  India,

A^oka,  120
Buddhist  India,  Rhys  Davids,

3ni
Buddhist     mendicant,     Siva

assumes  form  of,  106
Buddhist  sage  named  Naga-

sena,  32
Bull,  god  whose  ensign  is  a

(Siva),  101,  lOlwi;  Nandin
I     .     the,  242,

Bull  with  Siva,  connection  of

the,  242
Bull.    Madras    Mus,,    liln^y

168,  199>i
Bull.      Sch.      Orient.      Stud.,

"Bhasa's  Works,  are  they

Genuine?",     A.     K.    and

K.   R.    Pisharoti,  2ln^
Bulletins  de  la  Societcd'  Anthrop.

de  Paris,  Moncelon  in  the,

Burglary  with  an  iron  tool,
unlawful  to  commit  a,  168

Buried  treasure,  52,  87

*' Burma  and  Assam  (Bud-
dhism in),"  Sir  J.  G.  Scott,
Hastings'  Enci/.  Bel.  Eth.,
265^*

Burma  under  British  Rule  and
Before,  J.  Nisbet,  265^2,
266^1

Burman,  his  Life  and  Notions,
The,  Shway  Yoe  (Sir
J.  G.  Scott),  167,   26bn^

Burmese  architecture,  ti  in,
265,  265n*


Burning    of    Vasavadatta's

pavilion,  21
Burning-ghat,  197^^
Burning-ground,  197^^ ;  king

taken  for  the  keeper  of  the,

57,  57^3
"By  the  current"   {ambuve-

gatah),  217n3
By  descent  {dkula),  158?t^

Calf,  Svilyambhuya  Manu  the,

241
Call  from  a  funeral  pyre,  200
Cambridge  History    of  India,

3?ii,  120,  240,  241,  282^1
Camden  Society,  114n
Camels,    halting  -  place    for

(caravanserai     or     karwdn-

sardi),  162n,  163n
Cannibalism     during    the

French  Revolution,  185>i3
Cannibalism  among  the  Sakta

worshippers,  198/1^
Cannibalism,  hermit  accused

of,  185
Cafitica  caniicorutn,  Frauenlob,

292n3
Capital  of  A^oka,  Pataliputra

the,  39^1
Capital  of  Magadha,  Girivraja

the    ancient,     Rajagriha

(modern  Rajgir)  the  later,

3/ii
Capture,  marriage  by,  24»i
Caravanserai         {karwdnsardi,

Persian),    a    halting-place

for  camels,  162w,  163>i
Cardinal  points  as  only  gar-
ment, 98,  98»i3
Carried  off  by  the  animated

corpse,  the  mendicant,  62
Carried  off  by  Garuda,  Jimu-

tavahana,  154
Carry  out  the  plan  (yad  hi),

12,  12wi
Carrying  {dhdrin),  90n^
Caste,    the    Kshatriya,    17;

the  Mang,  a  low,  82 ;  the

Pardhi,  88)1^;  of  scavengers,

the  Mehtar,  82;  Teli  the

oil-pressers',  82  ;  the  Tiyor,

242
Caste  mark  {Tilaka),  22^3
Castes  and  Tribes  of  Southern

India,    E.    Thurston,    166,

256,  256^4
"  Casting    forth    flames    out

of  her  eyes  and  mouth "

{naya7idnatiavdfitolkd),  104w^
Casually  {yadrichchhayd) ,  ISl^i^
Cat  {majjdo),  iW-


Cat,  Hanuman  assumes  form
of,  191n^ ;  Indra  assumes
form  of,  46

Cat  sacred  in  Russia,  117

Cathay  and  the  Way  Thither,
Yule  and  Cordier,  85«,
268^1*

Cattle  in  Jalandhar,  cure  for,
119

Cause  of  polyandrous  mar-
riage of  Draupadi,  16,  17

Cause  of  the  setting  of  the
sun,  the  west  the,  53

Causes  of  low  proportion  of
females  to  males  in  India,
18,  19

Causes  of  polyandry,  18,  19

Celestial  cow  Kamadhenu
connected  with  Indra,  242

Celestial  rank  abandoned  by
Somaprabha,  44

Cemetery,  horrors  of  the,  60-
62,  201 ;  full  of  Rakshasas,
205;  the  religious  mendi-
cant in  the,  62 ;  to  get
warm,  Vijayadatta  goes  to
the,  197 ;  worship  under  a
banyan-tree  in  the,  233

Census  of  India,  17,  18

Census  Report,  Panjab,  118

Cento  Novelle,  Antiche,  113n^

Centralblatt  fur  Bibliothek-
swesen,  288w^

Centre,  Pataliputra  the  great
Buddhist,  39ni

Centuries  of  life,  knots  that
mark  the,  189,  189n^

CeremoniesofNairs, marriage,
17,  18

Ceremony,  the  Chaukpumd,llS

Ceremony  of  alliance  as
husband  and  wife  {Samband-
ham),  18

Ceremony  in  honour  of  Siva,
a  horrible,  104

"Certain  death,  messenger
of"  [i.e.  poison-damsel),
284

Chalcidians  and  Eretrians,
war  of  the,  278

Chaldcean  Magic  and  Sorcery,
Lenormant,  61#,  69^3,
189/11

Chanters  of  the  Sama  Veda,

Chaplain     named     Sankaras-

vamin,  176,  178
Character  indicated  by  bodily

marks,  7ni
Chariot,  Rakshasa  as  a,  75,  78,

79


342


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


Charm  against  alligators,  iron

pyrites  as  a,  168
Charm  for  appeasing  the  fire,

42 ;  to  change  shape,  20 ;

to  ward  off  danger,  weapons

a,  166
Charmed    circle,    the,    OSn*,

99n,  lOOn
"Charms  and  Amulets

(Indian),"       W.      Crooke,

Hastings'  Enci/.  Rel.  Eth.y

167
Chase  by  the   king,   pursuit

of  the,  126
Cheat  {kitava)y  232/i
Cheating  at  play  a  frequent

crime,  23271
Chest  filled  with  false  gems,

179,  181
"Chew"    of    betel,    poison

conveyed  in  a,  303
Chief  enemy  of  the  King  of

Vatsa,     Brahmadatta    the,

88,  89,  91,  95,  115
Chiefof  the  monkeys,  Sugrlva,

84,  84^1
Chief  prince  of  the  Siddhas,

Vi^vfivasu,  140,  149
Chief  of  the  Savaras,   Pulin-

daka,  141
Chief  wardernamed  Nityodita,

128,  129
Child  becomes  a  sword,  the

murdered,  236
Child    protected    by    lamps,

161  ;    sold    to   a  smith   by

Annam  parents,  166,  167  ;

taken   from    woman    after

cutting     her     open,     229,

229n2;    symbolised  by  fire

produced     by     fire  -  drill,

256
Child-bearing,  evil  effect  of

early,  18
Childbirth,  knife  to  keep  off

the     devil     kept     beside

woman  after,  166
Childbirth  customs,  166,  167  ;

among     the     Kachins     of

Upper  Burma,  167  ;  among

the     Vadvals     of     Thana,

167
Childhood     of    Fiction,     The,

J.    A.    Macculloch,    lOSn,

194n,  202ni,  224n,  253
Children,    Haras vamin    ac-
cused     of     eating,      185 ;

method  of  killing  female,

304
Children    like     Misery     and

Poverty,  two,  128


Children  on  the  Slave  Coast,
iron  rings  attached  to,  167

Child's  flesh  eaten  by  Jala-
pada,  234

Chin,  character  indicated  by
the,  In}

Chinese  Art,  Bushell,  264

Chips  from  a  German  Work-
shop, Max  Mailer,  251n^

Chloride  of  mercury,  2B1

Choice,  marriage  by  {svayam-
vara),  16

Cholera,  iron  used  during
attack  of,  167

Chrestomathie  Arahe,  Silvestre
de  Sacy,  312w2

Churning  of  the  Ocean,  65n^,
67ni,  81

"  Circassian  Slaves  and  the
Sultan's  Harem,"  F.  Mill-
ingen,  Joiim.  Anth.  Soc.f
163w

Circle,  the  charmed,  98-lOOn  ;
the  magic,  98-lOOw,  295,
296

Circle  of  ashes,  lOOn

Circle  of  dittany  juice,  lOOn,
295,  295ni

Circle  as  a  kind  of  haranij  the
magic,  295

Circumambulating  the  tree,
96,  97

City,  Kanakarekha  will  marry
a  Brahman  or  Kshatriya
who  has  seen  the  Golden,
173  ;  search  of  Saktideva  for
the  Golden,  188-195 ;  Story
of  the  Golden,  171-175,
184,  186-195,  213,  217-231,
236-238

"City  of  flowers"  Kusuma-
pura  (Pataliputra),  39w^,
185/ii

City  given  to  Sundaraka,  111

City  of  Gold  at  last  reached,
219,  220;  bestowed  on
Saktideva,  233 ;  return  of
Saktideva  to  the,  237

City  of  Indra,  Svarga,  175n^

"City  of  jewels,"  Ratnapura,
175,  175^2

"City  named  of  the  ele-
phant," Hastinapura,  1,  In^

City  sacred  to  the  moon-god,
Harran,  194n

Citi/  of  the  Saints,  Burton,  280,
280^3

Cifi/  Shmer,  A,  Swift,  270

Class  of  Rishi  (holy  sage),
Devarshi  the  highest,  34,
34n3


Classes  of  Saiva  mendicants,
ten,  90n3

Classical  Dictionary,  Garrett,
252^1

Classical  writers,  dittany  in
the  works  of,  295n^

Clever  Physician,  Story  of
the,  2,  2ni

Clothes  in  Brazil,  infected,
280

Clothes  infected  with  small-
pox, 280n«- '

Clue  to  the  poison  -  damsel
myth,  cobra  sting  the,  311

Cobra  in  India,  dread  of  the,
311

Cobra  regarded  as  phallus,
307

Cobra,  reverence  paid  to  the,
311,  312

Cobra  sting  a  clue  to  the
poison-damsel  myth,  311

Code  of  Mann,  275,  275/ii

Coffee-houses,  umbrellas  used
by,  269

Collection  of  communications
from  Aristotle  to  Alex-
ander, the  Secretum  Secre-
tonim,  287

Collects  his  wives,  Vidushaka,
78,79

College,  the  Sanskrit,  50n*,
74ni,  89^3,  97n2,  100n2,
137ni,  185^2,  197n3

Colliers  d'Or,  Les,  Barbier  de
Meynard,  298

Collyrium  and  kohl,  50n*

Colour  of  the  Sun's  Horses,
Dispute  about  the,  150-152

Columns  of  victory,  92,  92n^

Comets  and  meteors,  Rahu's
body  the  progenitor  of,  81

Command  of  Siva  to  the
Rakshasa,  74,  75

Commentary  on  the  Hindu
System  of  Medicine,  Wise,
2'98

Commercial  Products  of  India,
Watt,  280ni,  304ni

Communal  or  group  marriage,
17

Communications  from  Aris-
totle to  Alexander,  Secretum
Secretorum  a  collection  of,
287

Compassion  of  Jimutavahana,
139

"Conceptions  extraordin-
aires,"  Chauvin,  Biblio-
graphic des  Onvrages  Arabes,
136ni


INDEX  II -GENERAL


343


Conciliation,  politic  expedient
of,  45^3

Concubine  of  Nanda,  Mura
a,  282^3

Concubine  rubbed  with
poison,  neck  of  a,  297

Condition  for  marriage,
Kanakarekha's,  173

Conditions  of  Urva^i's  mar-
riage to  Pururavas,  145-146
-  Confucian  classic  Tsun  Tsiu
i  ("Springs  and  Autumns"),

81

Connection  between  snakes
and  intercourse,  307 ;  of
I  the   bull   with    Siva,    242;

of  the  celestial  cow  Kiima-
dhenu  with  Indra,  242 ;  of
the  cow  with  fertility,
242

Conquering  of  the  earth  by
the  King  of  Vatsa,  91-94

Conqueror  (or  Victor)  of
Obstacles  (Ganesa),  1,  125,
125?ii

Conquest,  preparation  of  the
king  for,  53

[Conquest  o/]  PerUi  W.
Prescott,  88/ii

Cons.y  Vegetius,  277

Construction  of  a  bridge
across  the  ocean  by
monkeys,  84-85n

Consume  {dahauhind)  25,  25w^

Contamination  by  the  poison-
damsel,  different  methods
of,  291

Contes  Albanais,  Dozon,  190w^

Contes  Devots  or  Miracles  of
the  Virgin,  llSii^

Contes  d^ Eutrapel,  Noel  du
Fail  de  la  Herissaye,  3w

Contes  de  Perrault,  Les,  P.
Saintyves,  224n,  2b3n^

Continent,  division  of  a
(Varsha),  125?i2

Continuity,  magic  circle  de-
notes finality  and,  99/i

Contos  Populares  Portugueses,
Coelho,  76ni

Conversation  of  Achilles  with
his  horses  Xanthos  and
Balios,  57ni

Conversation  of  birds  over-
heard by  Saktideva,  219,
219ni

Conversation  of  birds,  over-
hearing, 107n^

Conversations  of  Rakshasas,
giants,  vampires,  etc.,
overhearing,  107n^


Cook    named    Sahasika,    112,

113
Copyists,  Sccretum  Secretorum

suffered  at  the    hands    of,

288
"  Corn-god,  net  of  the,"  circle

of  flour  and  water  called

the,  295,  296
Corpse,  flames  issuing  from  the

mouth  of  a,  62 ;    mustard

seed    growing    from     the

navel  of  a,  62
Corpses,  digging  up  and  eat-
ing, 202ni
Corpses  eaten,  flesh  of,  198;^l
Country  of  the  Bharatas,  16
Courage     (sattvatah),     2SQn^ ;

(tejas),  161n^
Court  of  Kublai  Kaan,  268
Courtesan  visited  by  Guha-

chandra,  44
Covetousness  one  of  the  six

faults  of  man,  106?^3
Cow  (go),  241
Cow    an    act    of   hospitality,

offer  to  kill  a,  241
Cow  connected  with  fertility,

242
Cow  connected   with   Indra,

Kamadhenu  the  celestial,

242
Cow     granting     all     desires,

Kamadhenu,  45,  45^^
Cow,  Hindu  filled  with  horror

at  the  slaughter  of  a,  240
*'Cow  (Hindu),"  H.  Jacobi,

Hastings'  Enci/.  liel.  Eth.y

240,  241
Cow  of  the  Hindus,  the  sacred,

240-242
Cow  identified  with  speech,

241
Cow,  Kapila  (brown),  276
Cow  ritual,  241,  242
Cow,  the  sacred,  229,  229^^
Cow  and  the  universe,  mystic

relation  between  the,  240
Cow   used  as  a  standard    of

value,  240
Cow-house  flies  through  the

air,  108,  109
Cow-house,  Sundaraka  takes

shelter  in  a,  106
Cow's  heaven,  242
Cows  and  oxen  eaten  by  the

sage    Yajnivalkya,    milch,

241
"Craft  and  Malice  of  Women,

The,"  Burton,  Nights,  123
Creation  of  the  story-teller,

poison-damsel,  313


"Credenze  religiose  delle
popolazioni  rurali  dell'alte
valle  del  Taveri,"  G.  Nicasi,
LareSf  lOSn

Creeper  clinging  to  a  tree,
union  of  husband  and  wife
compared  to  a,  204?ii

Creeper,  Urvasi  changed  into
a,  258

Creeper-like  sword  (flexible,
well-tempered),  93,  93?ii

Creepers  poisoned  by  Yoga-
karandaka,  91

Crest,  god  with  the  (Siva),
136,  170

Cries  of  vultures  and  jackals,
60

Crimijial  Classes  of  Bomhay,
Kennedy,  185w

Criminal  tribe  of  North  India,
Doms  a,  168

Crow  as  poison,  bile  of  the
jungle-,  303

Crown  [mako),  264

Crudities,  Cory  ate,  270

Cry,  to  {ru),  251

Cuer  de  Philosophic,  Le,
Antoine  Verard,  293

Curds,  a  sacred  product  of
the  cow,  242

Cure  of  afflictions  by  violence,
2,  2ni,  3w ;  of  disease  by  a
shock,  37,  37^1

Curing  cattleinJalandhar,  119

Curing  a  horse  in  the  Sirsa
district,  119

Curious  Myths  of  the  Middle
Ages,  Baring-Gould,  39n^

Curl  at  back  of  head  or  near
right  temple  considered
unlucky,  7/1^ ;  at  back  of
Palli  bride's  head  indicates
death  of  her  eldest  brother-
in-law,  7n^  ;  on  bride's  fore-
head among  Pallis  indicates
widowhood,  lin}- ;  on  fore-
head lucky,  In^

Current,  by  the  (ainbuvegatah),
2177i3

Curse  of  Agryatapas,  121 ;  of
Arindama,  127 ;  of  Asoka-
datta's  wife  ends,  210 ;  of
Bharata,  257,  258;  of
Gautama,  46  ;  of  the  her-
mits, 211 ;  of  Narada,  147  ;
of  Siva,  141

Curse,  death  of  Pandu  owing
to  a,  16 ;  laid  upon  Puru-
ravas by  Tumburu,  35

Cursed,  the  three  sisters,  237

Curtain  [parda),  163n


41
844


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


Curved  sword  of  the  King  of

Vatsa,  93,  93ni
Custom  of  kings  to  dabble  in

magic,  112n
Custom    regarding   bodily

marks  among  the  Kurubas,

Customs  connected  with
eclipses,  81-83;  connected
with  eclipses  in  Northern
India,  82,  83;  connected
with  eclipses  among  the
Sencis  of  Eastern  Peru,  81  ;
connected  with  eclipses
among  the  Tlaxcalans  of
Mexico,  81;  connected  with
eclipses  among  the  Todas
of  the  Nilgiri  Hills,  82;
connected  with  iron  in
Salsette,  167

Cuts  herself  open,  Vidyut-
prabha,  234

Cutting  the  noses  off  impaled
robbers,  60-62

Cutting  off  of  the  Rakshasa's
arm  by  Vidushaka,  71

Cutting  open  a  woman  and
taking  out  the  child,  229,
229n2

Cycle  of  tales,  The  Sindibad
Kama,  124

Dahistdn,    The,    Shea-Troyer,

169
Daily    offering    to    the    fire

(hoina),  257,  257ni
Damsel,  the  poison-,  275-313
Damsel  brought  up  on  poison

from  infancy,  293
Damsel  in  India,  the  poison-,

281-286
Damsels     sent     among     the

enemy's  host,  poison-,  91,

91ni
Dance,   chalila,    a    dramatic,

35,  35n2
Dancing,      nymphs      display

their  skill  in,  35
Danger,  weapcms  a  charm  to

ward  off,  166
Daring  task   undertaken  by

Vidushaka,  60-62
Dasa  Kumara  Charita,  or  The

Story  of  the    Ten    Princes,

J.  J.  Meyer,  183ni,  184n
Date  of  the  worship  of  the

sacred  cow,  240
Date-stones,  jerking  of,  147n^
Daughter  of  Adityasena,  55,

62  ;  of  Devasena,  69-71 ;  of

the  Himalaya  (ParvatI),  156


"Daughter,    Giving    of   a,"

negotiation  termed,  47
Daughter,  marriage   of  Siva

and  the  chaplain's,  181
"  Daughter  of  Prithu,"  Earth

called  Prithivi,  241
Daughters  of  hermits,  Vidya-

dharas    fall    in    love   with

the,  211
Daughters  of  the  Rakshasa,

74  ;  of  Sasikhanda,  221
Daybreak,  at  (prabhate),  51n^
Dead,  Kanakarekha  found  by

Saktideva,  222,  223
Dead  body,  animating  a,  62
Dead  and  dying,  magic  circle

a  protective  barrier  to  the,

99m
Dead  rise  from  the  tomb  in

the  form  of  vampires,  be-
lief that  the,  61n^
Dead    robbers    tenanted    by

demons,  61,  61?i^
Deadliest    aconite    {Aconitum

spicatum),  279
Deadly      serpents,      valley

guarded  by,  299
Deadly  snakes  and  Alexander

the  Great,  299,  300
De     Aristotelis     quce  feruntur

secretis    secretorum    commen-

tatio,  Forster,  287wi,  288^1-2,

289^1
Death    from    broken    heart,

132
Death  of  eldest    brother-in-
law  indicated  by  curl   on

the   back  of  Palli    bride's

head,  In^
Death  of  Guhasena,  41
Death  of  King   Ladislao   of

Naples,  legend  of  the,  310
Death  of  King  VVenceslaus  II,

legend  of  the,  309,  309n2
**  Death,   Letter   of,"   motif,

114n
Death,  the  message  of,  113-

114n
"Death,    messenger   of  cer-
tain,"   the  poison  -  damsel

the,  284
Death    in    mirrors,    serpents

stare  themselves  to,  299
Death   of  Panc^u  owing  to  a

curse,  16
Death,    south    inhabited    by

the  God  of,  54
Death,  temple  of  Durga  like

the  mouth  of,  227
Death   the    tenth    and    final

stage  of  love-sickness,  9/1^


Death  from  unrequited  love,

8-lOn
Death  in  his  wife's  embrace,

Pandu's,  127
Death,     woman     bribed    to

cause  king's,  309
Deaths     of     Duhkalabdika's

husbands,  mysterious,    69,

70
Deaths    from    snake  -  bite,

statistics  of,  311
De  Bella  Gild.,  Claudian,  277
Decadas,  Joao  de  Barros,  269
Decameron,    Boccaccio,    lOn,

76ni,  114n
Decameron,    its     Sources    and

Analogues,  Lee,   lOn,  76n^,

lUn
De     causis     et    properictaiibus

elementorum,    Pseudo-
Aristotle,  299/1*
Decay  of  vegetation,  symbol

of  the  gradual,  61n^
"  Declaring  presence  "  motif,

76ni,  ITn
Decoction  of  Katabhi,  Pathd

and  Vidanga,  276
De  Dea  Syria,  Lucian,  169
Dedication    of    the    golden

lotus  to  a  temple,  208
Deer,  hermit  in  the  form  of  a,

127
Deer  of  the  mind  {manomrigi),

140;i2
Defeat  of  the  Hfinas,  94,  9in^
Defile  theSun's  horses, snakes

spit  venom  to,  150
Degeneration  of  the  Rajputs,

305,  305^1
Deity  of  sweepers,  Rahu  a,  82
De  jure  belli  ac  pacts,   Hugo

Grotius,  277-279
Delicate  mission  of  Agni,  101
Delights,  destroyer  of  (death),

124
Delta  of  the  Ganges,  92n2
Demon    eating   the   impaled

man's  flesh,  a  horrible,  202
Demon  flies  up  in  the  air,  203
Demon  J  valamukha,Brahman ,

147ni
Demonologtf,  Conway,  117
Demons,  dead    robbers    ten-
anted   by,    61,    61wi;   fire-
breathing,  61
"DemonsandSpirits(Indian),"

W.  Crooke,  Hastings'  Ency.
RcL  Eth.,  61ni
Denkmdler    provenzalischer
Liter  atur    und    Sprache,
Suchier,  289^1


r


De     Nugis     Curialium,     Th.

Wright  (Camden  Society),

lUn
De  Officiis,  Cicero,  277
Dependent  of  a  king  {kdrpa-

tika),  178#
Depression  on  Adam's  Peak,

beliefs  regarding  the,  84^^,

85w
De  liegimine  Principum  {Secre-

ttim  Secretorum),  287,  287^^
Descending  from  the  air,  spell

forgotten  by  Sundaraka  for,

110
Descending     nodes,     Rahu's

body  "epresents,  81
Descent    (dkula),    158n^ ;    of

Ishtar   into    Hades,    Gln^ ;

of  Vidushaka  into  the  sea,

72
Description   of   Naravahana-

datta,    162 ;  of  Rakshasas,

197^2  ;  of  the  terrors  of  the

cemetery, 60-62;  of  witches,

103-104^1
Descriptive    Catalogue   of   the

Mackenzie       Collection      of

Oriental     MSS.,       H.     H.

Wilson,  121,  123
De    Secretis    Secretoruniy    287,

287ni
Desire  of  Gauri  for  a  son,  100
Desire    of  the    king    for    a

second  golden  lotus,  208
Desire  one  of  the  six  faults

of  man,  106n3
*' Desires,  Giver  of,"  a  wish-
ing-tree  called,  138,  139
Destiny,  Goddess  of,  218
Destiny   of  Govindasvamin's

sons  foretold,  196
Destroyer  of  delights  (death),

124
Destruction    of    the    Mlech-

chhas,  93;  of  the  serpent

race,  152
Deutsche  Liederdichter  des  12.

his    IJf..     Jahrhunderts,     K.

Bartsch,  292^3
DeuLs'che  Mythologie,   Grimm,

105^
Deutsche  Volksbucher,  Simrock,

57ni,  64n2,  76wi
"Deux     Anglais     k     Paris,"

Fabliau,  2n^
Devil,   knife   kept  beside   a

woman  after  childbirth  to

keep  off  the,  166
Devils    and    Evil    Spirits    of

Babylonia,   The,   R.   Camp-
bell Thompson,  61w^


INDEX  II -GENERAL

Dhamiakalpadruma,  14n
Dialogus  C?  eatura7'um, Nicolaus

Pergamenus,  114?i
Dice,   gambling  with,  231^^,

232^
Dictionary    of    the    Economic

Products    of   India,    Watt,

280«S  304^1
Dictionary  of  Islam,  Hughes,

Dictionary  of  Phrase  and
Fable,  Brewer,  271

Different  methods  of  con-
tamination by  the  poison-
damsel,  291

Digestible  snake  venom,  311

Digging  up  corpses  and  eat-
ing them,  202ni

Dimple  in  cheek  indicates
looseness  of  character,  IrO-

Diplomacy  of  Yaugandhara-
yana,  3

Disappearance  of  Bhadra,  68  ;
of  Kalaratri,  111

Discoverer  of  the  Secretimi
Secretorum,  Yahya  ibn
Batrlq,  the  alleged,  288

Discovery  by  Guhachandra
that  his  wife  is  a  divine
being,  42,  43

Discovery  of  the  king,  amaz-
ing, 98,  99

Discovery  of  the  Lost  Site  of
Pdtalipulra,  L.  A.  Waddell,
39/ii

Discovery  of  ruins  at  Patna
by  Waddell  and  Spooner,
39^ii

Disease  [vyddhi),  37 fi^

Disease  in  connection  with
the  poison-damsel  myth,
venereal,  308,  309

Disease  cured  by  shock,  37,
37^1

Disfavour  of  Aryans  for  poly-
andry, 17

Disguise  of  Pandus  as
mendicant  Brahmans,  16  ;
of  Vasavadatta,  Vasantaka
and  Yaugandharavana,  20,
21

Disguised  as  a  Rajput,
Madhava,  176,  177;  as  a
religious  ascetic,  Siva,  176

Disgusting  food,  eating,  198n^

Dish  of  emerald  reveals  the
past,  159,  160

Dislike  of  spirits  for  iron,
166

Dispute  about  the  colour  of
the  Sun's  horses,  150-152


345

Disquisitiones  Magicoe,  Del  Rio,

300,  300^2
Dissension,  politic  expedient

of  sowing,  45^3
Distance, measure  o([yojanas),

57,  57n2,  75 ;    {kos),  191
Distinctive     names     of    um-
brellas, 264
Distinguishing    signs    of

Naravahanadatta,  7ni
District,   the    Choi  a   mandala

or,  92n*
Districts  of  Patna,  Gaya  and

Shahabad  correspond  with

kingdom  of  Magadha,  3n^
Dittany   juice,   circle    traced

round    snake    with,    295 ;

magic  circle  of,  lOOn,  295
Dittany    in    the    works    of

classical  writers,  295^^
"  Divali,  the  Lamp   Festival

of  the  Hindus,"  W^  Crooke,

Folk-Lore,  118,  232n
Divine   being,   discovery   by

Guhachandra  that  his  wife

is  a,  42,  43;  origin  of  Pandus

in  a  single,  17
Divine  beings,  horses  as,  57,

57ni
Divine  man,  170
Divine   sage    (Devarshi),  34,

34rt3

Divine,  speech  regarded  as,

241 ;  syphilis  regarded  by

Mexicans  as,  309
Divine  voice,  a,  63,  65
Division    of   a    continent

(Varsha),  125n2
Doctor    of    Padua,    297;    of

Perugia,  310
Doctrine  of  ahimsd,  241
Doe     rubbed    with     poison,

298
Doe,  tale  of  the  lion  and  the,

298
Dog  a  demonic  character  in

Russia,  117
Doge   of  Venice   carries   an

umbrella,  268
Dogs  held  in  esteem  by  the

moon,  81
Dogs,  wife  thrown  to  the,  121
Dolopathos,  124
Domestic  fire  {laukikdgni),  256
Door  fastened  with  the  arm

of  the  Rakshasa,  71,  72?i2
Dove,     Jonah    the    Hebrew

word  for,  193^1,  \Un
Downwards  [adhah),  218^^
Dragon,  mediaeval  legend  of

a,  296


346


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


'Dragons    of   India,"    Apol-

lonius  of  Tyana,  108n
Dragons  pollute  the  air,  299
Dramatic  dance  called  chalita,

35,  35m2
Dramatist   of  India,    Bhava-

bhuti,  214
Dravidian  Nights,  Sastri,  190n^
Drawn    sword    in    her  hand,
Kalaratri  with  a,  106,  lOOn*
Dread  of  cobra  in  India,  311
Dread  of  eclipses,  81,  82
Dream,     fruit     given     to

Vasavadatta  in  a,  136
Dream  of  Vasavadatta,  157
"Dress,"     A.     E.     Crawley,
Hastings'  Ency.  Uel.  Eth.,
118
Drinking  brains  from  a  skull,

199
Drinking  heavenly  wine,  43
Droit  des  Gens,  on  Priricipes  dc
la  Loi  Naturelle  appliques  d
la  Conduite  et  aiuc  Ajfaires
des  yalioiis  et  des  Souverains,
E.   de  Vattel,   278,  278ni,
279
Drowning,  leg  of  the  giant

saves  Vidushaka  from,  73
Drug,  a  scented  [ananta),  276  ;

{sama-ga7idha),  276
Drum,  proclamation  by  beat

of,  73,  73w2,  173,  187,  224
Drums    j)asted    with    anti-
poisonous  drugs,  276
Duarte  Barbosa,  The  Book  of,
M.  Longworth  Dames,  18,
269ni,  300,  30074^,  301,  303
Duchess  o/'M«/yi',  Webster,  2r0-
Duck    lives    on    poison,    the

Pontic,  300
Duel  as  result  of  insult,  303
**D'un   Roi  qui  voulut  faire
brftler  le  fils  de  son  Sene-
schal," Contes  Dt'vots,  113n^
Dung,  a  sacred  )>roduct  of  the

cow,  242
Dust  (rajas),  106,  106ni
Dwelling  of  the  Goddess  of

Prosperity,  Timira  the,  36
"  Dying  God,  The,"  Frazer,
Golden  Bough,  253,  253/ii

Earliest  example  of  nuptial
taboo,  252

Early  English  Metrical  Ro-
mances, Ellis,  113n^

Early  History  of  India,  V.  A.
Smith,  282ni

Early  history  of  opium,  303,
304


Early  marriage  in  India,  evil
effects  of,  18

Ears,  character  indicated  by
the,  7ni;  eyes  of  Hindu
ladies  said  to  reach  their,
50,  50n*

Earth  (Aditi),  241,  242

Earth  called  Prithivl
(daughter  of  Prithu),  241

Earth  conquered  by  the  King
of  Vatsa,  91-94

Earth  goddess,  49

Earth  milked  by  living
creatures,  241

Earth  under  one  umbrella,
125,  125«3

[**  East  Central  African  Cus-
toms "]  Macdonald,  Joum.
Afith.  Inst.,  198^1

East,  Ganges  flows  towards
the,  54 ;  the  j)referred
quarter,  54 ;  presided  over
by  Indra,  54

Eastern  background  of  the
Secretum  Secretorum,  290

Eastern  mountain  {udayagiri),
67n^ ;  (udayaparvata),  67n^

Eastern  mountain  behind
which  the  sun  rises,  Udaya,
67ni

Eastern  quarter  subdued  by
the  King  of  Vatsa,  91

Eating  children,  Harasvamin
accused  of,  185

Eating  disgusting  food,
198ni

Eating  and  drinking  opium
more  harmful  than  smok-
ing it,  303

Eating  flesh  of  corpses,
198^1

Eating  lime  of  oyster  shells,
301,302

Eating  human  flesh,  103, 104  ;
among  the  Bantu  negro
races,  198ni,  199;i;  in
Central  Africa,  198/ii ;
Mana  or  spiritual  exalta-
tion gained  by,  198w^ ;  in
Melanesia,  l9Sn} ;  power
of  becoming  vampires  by,
198ni

Eating  the  impaled  man's
flesh,  a  horrible  demon,  202

Eating  opium,  303,  304

Eating  the  ox,  sacrificial  act
of,  240

Eating  poison  regularly,  300

Eating  of  a  snake  gives  power
of  understanding  the
language  of  animals,  108n


"Eau-de-jouvence,"  Chauvin,
Bibliographie  des  Ouvrages
Arabes,  \f>\n^

Ecclesiastes,  107w^

Eclipse  an  important  event
among  modern  Hindus,  83

Eclipses  among  the  Tlax-
calans  of  Mexico,  81 ;  among
the  Todas  of  the  Nilgiri
hills,  82 ;  in  Assam,  81 ;
in  China,  81 ;  in  Northern
India,  82,  83 ;  regarded
with  dread,  81,  82

Eclipses,  Note  on  Rahu  and,
81-83

Edifice  {sara  or  sarat,  Persian),
162n

Effect  of  betel-chewing,  302

Effects  of  poison,  ring  to
destroy  the,  301

Egyptian  Sultan  Faraj,  279

"Egyptians,  Alleged  Dis-
covery of  Syphilis  in  Pre-
historic," The  Lancet,  308n*

Electra,  Sophocles,  llln^

Elephant,  city  named  of  the
(Hastinapura),  1,  In^

Elephant-faced  god  (Gane^),
99-103,  125,  125711,  Uln^,
170

Elephants  in  the  army  of  the
King  of  Vatsa,  90

Elephants,  necklace  from  the
heads  of,  142,  142ni

Emblem  of  royalty,  the
umbrella  an,  263

Embrace,  killing  by,  291

Embraces,  Pan^u's  death  in
his  wife's,  127

Embryo  cut  out  of  woman,234

Embryo  of  Karttikeya  takes
a  thousand  years  to  de-
velop, 102

Emerald  reveals  the  past,
dish  of,  159,  160

Emperor  of  India,  A^oka  the
Buddhist,  120 ;  Pataliputra
the  capital  of  A^oka,  the
first,  39ni

Emperor  of  the  Vidyadharas,
156

Empire  Exhibition, Wembley,
271

Empire,  Goddess  of  the
Fortune  of,  162

Empty  vessels  inauspicious,
164n3

Enclosure  {serraglio,  Italian),
162n

Encyclop'ddie,  Ersch  and
Gruber.  163w


INDEX  II -GENERAL


34r


'Encyclopasdia  Britannica,
"Harem,"  J.  M.  Mitchell,

I     lG3w;      "Jonah,"     T.     K.

I  Cheyne,  194n;  "Opium,"
E.  M.  Holmes,  304ni

E7icycloi)(edia  of  Beligion  and
Ethics,  Hastings',  163n ;
"Adam's  Peak,"  T.  W.
Rhys  Davids,  85n  ;  "Adul-
tery," 88rji;  "Aghorl,"
W.  Crooke,  90^3,  198ni ;
"  Animals,"  N.  W.  Thomas,
240;  "Burma  and  Assam
(Buddhism  in),"  Sir  G.
Scott,  265^4;  "Charms  and
Amulets  (Indian),"  W.
Crooke,  167;  "Cow
(Hindu),"  H.  Jacobi,  240,
241 ;  ' « Demons  and  Spirits
(Indian),"  W.  Crooke,  61^1 ;
"Dress,"  A.  E.  Crawley,
118;  "Evil  Eye,"  F.  T.
El  worthy,  298;  "Foeticide,"
A.  E.  Crawley,  229^2;
"Gambling,"  J.  L.  Paton,
23271;  "Magic,"  99w;
"Magical  Circle,"  A.  E.
Crawley,  99n  ;  "  Phallism,"
E.  S.  Hartland,  119,307^2;
"  Points  of  the  Compass,"
T.  D.  Atkinson,  54n^;
"  Prodigies  and  Portents,"
W.  D.Wallis,83;  "Serpent
Worship  (Indian),"  W.
Crooke,  307^2;  "Serpent
Worship  (Primitive  and
Introductory),"  J.  A.  Mac-
culloch,  307^2;  "Sun,
Moon  and  Stars  (Bud-
dhist),"E.  J.  Thomas,81,83

Encyclopaedia  of  Superstitions y
Folk-Lore  and  the  Occult
Sciences,  C.  L.  Daniels  and
C.  M.  Stevans,  145^1

Endowed  with  much  light
(TToAvSevKrys),  251

Enemies  of  the  King  of  Vatsa
subdued,  91-94

Enemies  of  man,  six  faults
that  are  the,  106,  106^3

Enemy  of  the  King  of  Vatsa,
Prahmadatta  the  chief,
88-91,  95,  115

Enemy,  spitting  at  an,  302,
303

English  Dictionary,  NeWy
Murray,  269n*,  270

English  Illustrated  Magaziyie,
The,  "Pagodas,  Aurioles
and  Umbrellas,"  F.  C.
Gordon  Cumming,  272


English    and    Scotch     Popular

Ballads,  Child,  76ni
English  trans,  of  Frauenlob's

Cantica    canticorum,    A.    E.

Kroeger,  292^3
English  umbrellas,  examples

of,  271
Enormous  birds  like  vultures,

219
"Ensorcelled  Prince,  Tale  of

the,"  Burton,  Nights,  131ni
Entry     of     the     king     into

Kausambi,  the  triumphant,

49-51,  115
Envy  one  of  the  six  faults  of

man,  106n3
Epics,  the,  45w*
Epicurean,     The,     Thomas

Moore,  Qn^
Epithet   denoting   the   price

of  a  man's  blood  Isatadaya),

240
Eretrians,   war  of  the    Chal-

cidians  and  the,  278
Esoteric  rites  of  Hinduism,

214
Essays   on    the  Hindu  Family

in  Bengal,  B.  Mullick,  163n
Essays  on  Sanskrit  Literature,

H.  H.  Wilson,  92n*
"  Establishment  of  the  Sacred

Fires,"  Agnyadhana,  256ni
Ethiopian  princess,  264
Ethnographic  Notes  in  Southern

India,   Thurston,  In^,    166,

256,  256n*
Etiquette,  offer   of  a   cow  a

piece  of,  241
Etude  stir  les  differ ents  Textes,

imprinies   et  manuscripts,   du

Roman     des     Sept      Sages,

Paulin  Paris,   120
Etymology,  tracing  origin  of

myths  through,  251,  252  ;  of

the  word  "umbrella,"  263  ;

of  the  word  zenana,  162n
Eunuch  of  Candace,  Queen  of

Ethiopia,  85n
Eunuchs,  29,  29^1
European    form    of    "death

from  love  "  motif,  lOn
European  literature,  Secretum

Secretorum  in,  292-297
Events  which    happened    at

the  formation  of  the  Maurya

Empire,  281
Evil  effects  of  early  marriage

in  India,  18  ;  of  premature

child-bearing  in  India,  18 ;

of  primitive  midwifery  in

India,  18


Evil  Eye,  The,  F.  T.  Elworthy,

298
"Evil  Eye,"  F.  T.  Elworthy,

Hastings'  Ency.  Ilel.  Eth.y

298
Evil  eye  and  the  fatal  look,

298
Evil  omen  of  an  eclipse,  82
Evil    omen    when     children

speak   shortly  after  birth,

39/i2

Evil  results  of  sudden  wealth,
59

Evil  spirits  active  on  first
night  of  marriage,  306

Evil  spirits,  lights  in  the
birth-chamber  to  scare
away,  168 ;  measures  to
prevent  entry  of,  166 ;
scared  away  by  iron,  166-
168  ;  scared  away  by  steel,
166-168  ;  scared  away  with
a  sword  in  the  Philippines,
167

Exaltation  gained  by  eating
human  flesh,  Mana  or
spiritual,  198^^

Examples  of  English  um-
brellas, 271

Excavations  of  Sir  Henry
Layard,  263

Excitement  of  the  women  on
seeing  the  king  and  queens,
50-51

Executioners  become  blind
when  attempting  to  impale
Somadatta,  96

Exercito  e  Marina,  281

Existence  in  fact,  poison-
damsel  has  no,  313

Expedition  of  Alexander  re-
ceives a  check,  282

Expedition,  preparation  of  the
King  of  Vatsa  for  the,  89

Explanations  of  the  fish
legend,  193n

"External  Soul','  motif  120

Eye,  the  fire  of  Siva's,  lOO^i^,
1647^1 ;  throbbing,  144-1 45w

Eye  and  the  fatal  look,  the
evil,  298

Eyebrows,  meeting,  103-104w

Eyes,  blue  [azrk,  Arabic),  299;
King  Sivi  and  the  heavenly,
32,  33  ;  of  Hindu  ladies  said
to  reach  their  ears,  50,
50w*;  kohl'd,  104n;  women
with  precious  stones  in
their,  306

Eyes  of  Indra,  the  thousand,
46,  46?i4


348


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


Fables    of    Pilpay     [Anvai'-i-

Suhaiti),  297,  297n2
Fauliaiu,    "Deux   Anglais    k

Paris,"  2wi
Fabliaux,  Le  Grand,  llSji^
Faces,  boy  with  six  (Kartti-

keya),  102 ;  of  the  women

like  moons,  50,  50ri-
Fact,   poison-damsel   has   no

existence  in,  313
Factors    in    favour    of  poly-
andry, 19
Failure      of      Brahmadatta's

stratagem,  91
"Fair    Margaret   and   Sweet

William,"  ballad  of,  Percy,

lieliques,  10/i
Falling  on  the  earth  {kuhna)^

159.il
False  assertion  of  Saktideva,

174,  175
False  gems,  chest  filled  with,

179,  181
Fame,  the  Goddess  of,  90, 116
Fame  of  Jimutavahana,  139
Fasti,  Ovid,  263
Fasting,  month  of  (Shrawan),

164n*
Fatal    bite    of    the    poison-
damsel,  291  ;    kiss  of  the

poison-damsel,  294  ;    look,

the,  298-300
Faults  that  are  the  enemies

of  man,  six,  106,  106^^
Faust,  Goethe,  105n,  297
Favour  of  the  Guhyaka,  98,

98/ii ;  of  the  king  won  by

Vidushaka,  59
Fear  of  Bhadra,  67,  68
Fearless  [visddhvasak),  218^^
Feast  in  honour  of  the  birth

of  the  king's  son,  163,  164  ;

of  Indra,  35  ;  of  Lights,  the

Divali,  118;  of  Rama,  82
Feat  in  archery  performed  by

Arjuna,  a  great,  16
Feathers     of    birds,     hiding

among  the,  219^3,  220/1
Feats  of  strength,  superiority

of  Pan^u  princes  in,  16
Feeling    satisfaction    {atinir-

vartimk),  22 In^
Feet,  character  foretold  by,

7ni
Feigned  illness  of  Madhava,

179,181;  madness  of  Vidu-
shaka, 68
Fellow  to  the  jewelled  anklet

craved  by  the  queen,  204
Female    children    in     India,

neglect  of,  18,  19


Female  children,  method  of
killing,  304

Female,  horizontal  stick  as,
256

Female  Rakshasa  (Rakshasi),
69/i2,  107ni,  127

Females  in  India,  low  pro-
portion of,  18,  19

Femme  Turque,  La,  G.  Dorys,
163/1

Fertility,  connection  of  the
cow  with,  242  ;  rites,  nudity
in,  118

Festival,  the  Holi,  59wS  164w*,
169

Festschrift  fiir  Ernst  Wiiidisch,
"  Uber  die  Suvabahuttari-
katha,"  J.  Hertel,  286,
286/ii

Fickleness  of  Devadatta's
wife,  131

Field  {kshetra),  116/ii

Fields  and  water  poisoned  by
Faraj,  279

Final  stage  of  love-sickness,
death  the,  9/i2

Finality  and  continuity,  magic
circle  denoted,  99/^

Finding  of  the  jewelled
throne,  52,  53

Finger,  character  indicated
by,  In^

Fire,  Agni,  God  of,  97

Fire  appears  to  Guhachandra,
a  god  of,  42

Fire-breathing  demons,  61

Fire,  charm  for  appeasing  the,
42 ;  daily  offering  to  the
{homa),  257,  257/1^;  domestic
[laukikdgni),  256;  given
to  Pururavas,  247,  249;
and  light,  rules  in  all
parts  of  the  world  regard-
ing, 168 ;  obtained  with
fire-stick,  250;  in  one's
own  body  {tirika),  256  ;  pro-
duced by  fire-drill  sym-
bolical of  the  child,  256;
propitiated  by  Vidushaka
with  austerities,  58  ;  to  the
queen's  palace,  plot  to  set,
3;  ritual,  248-250;  the
sacrificial,  247, 249,  250, 255;
of  Siva's  eye,  lOO/i^,  164/1^ ;
son  born  to  Siva  and  Uma
in  the,  102  ;  submarine
{vadavagni),  256 ;  turned
into  an  A^vattha  tree,  247,
250

Fire-drill  {arani),  255,  256;
and     intercourse     of    the


Fire-drill — continued

sexes,     analogy    between,

255,  256 ;  symbolical  of  the

child,  fire  produced  by  the,

256
Fire  by  friction,  making,  247,

249,  250,  255,  256
Fire  God,  sword  of  the,  58,

60,  71,  72,  74
Fire-priest  [agnihotn),  257
Fire-stick  {arani),  24^ ;  made

of  A^vattha  and  Sam!  wood,

248,  250
Fire-walking,  rite  of,  169
Fire  of  the  wrath  of  6iva,  66
'•Fires,  Establishment  of  the

Sacred,"     Agnvadhana,

256/ii
Firm  [amsala),  241
First      Emperor     of     India,

Pataliputra  the  capital  of

A^ka  the,  39/ii
First  Footsteps  in  East  Africa,

Burton,  271^2
First     Indo-European     love-
story,  245
First  man  to  use  an  umbrella,

Jonas  Hanway,  269
First  night  of  marriage,  evil

spirits  active  on  the,  306
Fish,  a  rohita,  193ni
Fish  swallows  Saktideva,  192
Fisherman  prepare  to  sacrifice

Saktideva,    sons     of    the,

227,  228
Fish's  belly,  Saktideva  found

alive  in  the,  193
Fit  recipients  (kshetra),  116n^
Five-arrowed  God  of  Love,  1
Five  articles  of  regalia,  264
Five  brothers  with  one  wife,

13,  13n3,  16,  17
Five  "royal"  trees,  118
Five  sacred  products  of  the

cow  [paflchagavya),  242
Five  sons  of  Pan^u,  16
Five  trees  of  Paradise,  Pari-

jata  one  of  the,  13,  13/1^
Flames    issuing    from    the

mouth  of  a  corpse,  62
Flapping   of   wings    [paksha-

pdta),  219n2
Flesh  of  corpses  eaten,  198/i^
Flesh  eaten  by  Jalapada,  the

child's,  234
Flesh,    eating    human,    103,

104  ;  oblation  of  human,  99 ;

for   sale,   human,   205;    in

Tantric  rites,  human,  214
Flexible,  well-tempered  sword

(creeper-like),  93,  93n^


J


r


Flint  and  steel  {chakkamukki)^
256h4

Florentines,  Ladislao
poisoned  by  the,  310

Flour  [kusurra),  295

Flow  of  the  Ganges  towards
the  East,  54

Flower,  the  parijata,  190n^

"Flowers,  the  city  of,"  Ku-
sumapura  or  Pataliputra.
39ni,  185^1

Flying  through  the  air,  62-
64^1,  103,  104

"Flying  through  the  Air,"
A.  M.  Hocart,  Ind.  Ant.,
64^1

Fodder,  poisoned,  276

Foeticide,  229^2

"Foeticide,"  A.  E.  Crawley,
Hastings'  Ency.  Rel.  Eth.,
229*12

Folding  umbrella  {chatyr),  268

Folk-lore,  the  "Act  of
Truth"  motif  in,  31-33

Folk-Lore,  ' '  A  Brittany  Mar-
riage Custom,"  F.  C.  Cony-
beare,  23n;  "The  Divali,
the  Lamp  Festival  of  the
Hindus,"  W.  Crooke,  118,
232n;  "The  Holl:  A  Vernal
Festival  of  the  Hindus,"
W.  Crooke,  59^^;  "A
Legend  of  Nadir  Shah,"
M.  Longworth  Dames,  302  ;
"The  Legends  of  Krishna,"
W.  Crooke,  39^2;  "the
Pre-Buddhist  Religion  of
the  Burmese,"  R.  Grant
Brown, 265/1^;  "Some Notes
on  Homeric  Folk-Lore,"
W.  Crooke,  bln^;  'The
Veneration  of  the  Cow  in
India,"  W.  Crooke,  242

Folk-Lore  Journal,  '  The  For-
bidden Chamber,"  E.  S.
Hartland,  223nM  "The
Forbidden  Doors  of  the
Thousand  andOne  Nights,"
W.  Kirby,  224n

Folk-Lore  of  the  Northern
Counties,  Henderson,  2ni,
98n*,  104n

Folk-Lore  of  the  Old  Testament,
Frazer,  i94n

Folk-Lore  Society,  SOn^,  122

Folk-Lore  in  Southern  India,
Sastrl,  136^1

Folk  Memory,  W.  Johnson,
167

Folk-Tales  of  Bengal,  L.  B.
Day,  108n


INDEX  II -GENERAL

Folk-Tales  of  Kashmir,
Knowles,  124

Food,  eating  disgusting,  198ni

Food  of  Garuda,  snakes  be-
come, 151,  152

Foolish  snakes,  the,  151

Fools  {jada),  imi^

Footprint,  depression  on
Adam's  Peak  regarded  as
Adam's,  85n

"Forbidden  Chamber,  The,"
E.  S.  Hartland,  Folk-Lore
Journal,  223ni

"  Forbidden  Chamber  "  motif,
223^1,  224)1

''Forbidden  Doors  of  the
Thousand  and  One  Nights,
The,"  W.  Kirby,  Folk-Lore
Journal,  224?^

Forbidden  Terrace,  the,  222-
224n

Forced  on  Somaprabha,
marriage,  41

Forcibly  {balavad),  Vl^n^

Forehead,  curl  lucky  on  the,
IrO- ;  curl  on  Palli  bride's,
indicates  widowhood,  7n^

Forehead  mark  made  in  an
initiation  ceremony,  tikU,
22n3,  23n

Forehead-streaks,  22-24n,  26,
27,  29

Foreknowledge,  Prajiiapti,
212ni

Forgotten  by  Sundaraka,
spell  for  descending  from
the  air,  110

Form  of  the  "Act  of  Truth,"
32

Form  of  Buddhist  mendicant
assumed  by  Siva,  106

Form  of  a  cat  assumed  by
Hanuman,  197^2 ;  of  a  cat
assumed  by  Indra,  46  ;  of  a
man  assumed  by  the  lion,
147

Formation  of  the  Maurya
Empire,  events  which  hap-
pened at  the,  281

Former  birth,  adventures  of
Jimutavahana  in  a,  141-
149 ;  of  the  king's  horse,
56  ;  power  of  remembering,
149  ;  of  Vasavadatta,  30

Former  name  of  Jimutava-
hana, Vasudatta,  141

Forms  of  marriage  enjoyed  by
Kshatriyas,  the  lowest,  17

Forms  of  polygamy,  17

Fortune  of  Empire,  Goddess
of  the,  162


349

Fortune,  the  Goddess  of,  49,

116
Fortune,    handful    of    water

offered  to,  6n^
Fortune,  the    long    hair    of

Good,  236
Fortune  of  Victory,  90
Fortune  of  the  Vidyadharas,

137
Forty  Vazirs,  The,  169
Foundation  of  Pataliputra  at-
tributed to  Kalasoka,  39^^
Founder  of  the  Maurya  Em-
pire,    Chandragupta    the,

281-285
Four-faced   to  behold  Tilot-

tama,  Siva  becomes,  14
Four  politic  expedients,  45,

45^3
Four     sisters,     marriage     of

Saktideva  to  the,  238
"Fragrant      one,      the"

(Surabhi),  242
Frame-story  of  Book  oj  Sindi-

bdd,  122,  123
Fraternal  polyandry,  18
Frauenloh,  A.  Boerkel,  2^2n^
Freedman  under  Khalifa  al-

Ma'mun,  Yahya  ibn  Batriq,

a  Syrian,  288
French  poem  of  "Horn  and

Rimenhild,"  76^1
French  Revolution,  report  of

cannibalism     during     the,

185n3
French  version  of  the  poison-
damsel  myth,  293
Friction,  making  fire  by,  247,

249,  250,  255,  256
"Friend,     The,"     Afanasief,

202^1
Friend  of  Bhadra,  Yoge^vari,

67
Friendship   of  Jimutavahana

and  the  Savara  chief,  142  ;

of  Krishna  with  the  herds-
men, 242  ;  of  the  Rakshasa

Yamadanshtra     for     Vidu-

shaka,  75
Frog  as  poison,  bile  of  the

green  water-,  303
Fruit  given  to  Vasavadatta  in

a  dream,  136
Fruit  received   from    Durga,

heavenly,  136#
Fruits     called     chofole,    301,

302
Funeral    pyre,    call   from   a,

200
Future  ministers  of  Narava-

hanadatta,  165


850


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


Gable     of     Prester    John's

palace,  169
Gain  love,  stratagem  to,  44
Gaining   love   by  magic  aid,

43,44
Gambler      Devadatta,      the,

231-236  »

Gambler's  wife,  ordinary  oc-
currence of  the  adultery  of

a,  88ni
Gambling,    231n\    232n;    in

the  Deccan,  232n ;  in  Kash-
mir, 232w ;  in  Nepal,  232n ;

in  the  Panjiib,  232n ;  among

the  Shans  of  Upper  Burma,

232n
"Gambling,"    J.    L.    Paton,

Hastings'  Ena/.   Rel.  Eth.,

232n
["  Game  of  Dice,  The  "]  A.  B.

Keith,  Joum.  Roy.  As.  Soc,

232n
Gamester  (kitava),  232n
Gaming-table,  Saktideva  loses

his  wealth  at  the,  174
Gaming,  vice  of,  231
"Gang     nach     dem     Eisen-

hammer,  Der,"  Schil  er,

Gedickte,  113/1^
Garden  of  the  gods,  Nandana,

34;  of  herbs,  a,  108,  110;

of  Kailasa,  14
Garlands    made    by   Vasava-

datta,  unfading,  22,  23,  26,

27,  29
Garlic    juice     dangerous    to

poisonous  animals,  296
Garment,  cardinal  points  as

only,  98,  98n»
Gazetteer,  Upper  Burma,  167,

232/1
Gedickte,  Schiller,"  Der  Gang

nach  dem   Eisenhammer,"

WZn} ;     "Der     Graf    von

Habsburg,"  49/i2
Gems,  chest  filled  with  false,

179,    181  ;     given    to    the

chaplain,  181
General    of    Indra's    forces,

Karttikeya,  103
German    poet,    Ottacker    or

Ottokar,  309,  309^2
German    South-West  Africa,

General  Botha's  campaign

in,  281
Germanversionsof  the  poison-
damsel  myth,  294,  294/1^
Gesammelte  Ahhandlungen  zur

Amerikanischen     Sprach-tind

Altertumskunde,     E.     Seler,

309,  309n^


Gesckichte  (or  Sagenhuch)  der

Bayerischen  Lande,  Schopp-

ner,  U3n}
Gesckichte    der    Lustsettche   im

Altertume,  Rosenbaum,308w2
Gesckickte   der  Stadt  Bom  im

Mitt ela Iter,    Gregorovius,

310/^2
Gespenstersckeinung    Ivikri  t  i),

202n2
Gestn  Romanonim,113n},  127n^,

I50n\  169,  296,  297
"  Geste  of  King  Horn,"  76n^
Ghee,  a  sacred  product  of  the

cow,  242
Ghosts,  iron  implement  kept

near  child's  head  to  ward

off,  166
Ghouls  in  Uganda,  society  of,

199w
Giant  Ruru,  228,  22Sn}
Giant  saves  Vidushaka  from

drowning,  the  leg  of  the,  73
Giant    under   the    sea,    ship

stopped  by  the  leg  of  a,  72
Giants,    overhearing   conver-
sations of,  107/i^
Gift  of  Vishnu  to  Pururavas,

Urva^i  thei  34,  35
Gingham  first  made  in  Guin-

gamp,  Brittany,  271
Girl  in  a  basket  set  adrift  on

the  Ganges,  4
Girl      brought      up      among

poisonous     herbs,    297;

brought  up  on  el-bis,  313 ;

brought   by  huge    snakes,

294
Girl  with  the  snake  nature,

294,  295
Girl  rubbed  with  ointment  of

juice  of  aconite,  310
Girls    nourished    on    poison,

infant,  293
"Giver  of  Desires,"  a  wishing-

tree  called,  138,  139
"Giving     of    a     daughter,"

negotiation  called,  47
"Glance,  poison  in  a"  {drig-

visa  or  dristi-visa) ,  298
Glass  and  quartz,  jewels  of,

182
Glory  whitein  Hindu  rhetoric,

208ni
Gliicksvogel,  219n^
Goa  and  tke  Blue  Mountains,

R.  F.  Burton,  19
God  whose  crest  is  the  moon

(Siva),  136
Godof  Death, south  inhabited

by  the,  54


God  whose  ensign  is  a  bull
(Siva),  101,  lOlni

God  of  Fire,  Agni,  97,  101,
255ni

God  of  fire  appeased  by
Guhachandra,  a,  42

God,  Gane^a,  the  elephant-
faced,  103;  Hanuman,  the
monkey-,  197^2 ;  Harran,
city  sacred  to  the  moon-,
194n ;  Nanahuatzin,  satel-
lite of  the  Mexican  sun-,
309  ;  the  trident  -  bearing
(Siva),  158

God  of  Love  (Kama),  27,  27n^
55,  66,  94,  100,  101,  127,
136,  144,  164 ;  consumed
by  Siva,  100,  lOOn^ ;  the
five-arrowed,  1  ;  incarna-
tion of  the,  137 ;  wives  of
the,  51,  51n2

God  with  the  moon  crest
(Siva),  170

Godofthe  people,  Indra  a, 45n*

God  of  the  Sea  propitiated
by  Rama,  84n^

God,  Sword  of  the  Fire,  58,
60,  71,  72,  74

God  of  syphilis  (Nana-
huatzin), 309

God  of  Wealth  and  Lord  of
Treasures  (Kuvera),  93

Goddess  of  Destiny,  218 ;  of
Fame,  90,  116;  of  Fortune,
49,  116 ;  of  the  Fortune  of
Empire,  162

Goddess,  the  Earth,  49

Goddess  Gauri  born  in  the
form  of  Vasavadatta,  128

Goddess  of  Prosperity
(Lakshmi  or  Sri),  65,  65n^,
75;  Timira  the  dwelling
of  the,  36

Goddess  Sarasvati,  133

Goddess,  Tamasa,  the  river-,
189^1

Goddess,  temple  of  the,  62-68

Gods,  Ganges  the  river  of
the,  54,  54n2,;  Kalpa  of
the,  163,  163^2;  Nandana
the  garden  of  the,  34 ;
Vi^vakarman  the  architect
of  the,  14,  14n

Gold  at  last  reached.  City  of,
219,  220

Gold  bestowed  on  Saktideva,
the  City  of,  238

"Gold-gleam"  {kanaka-rekha),
171n3

Gold, lustreof  {kanaka-prabha),
171n2


INDEX  II -GENERAL


351


rold,  return  of  Saktideva  to

the  City  of,  237
Told,  streak  of  {kanaka-rekha),

171^3
jolden  Ass,  Apuleius,  60/1^
jolden   Bough,    Frazer,  72nS
83,   imn,   108n,    117,    118,
166,  189^11,  253,  253ni,  256,
256n2,  257?z2,  268,  268ni
jolden     City,     Kanakarekha
will  marry  a   Brahman   or
Kshatriya    who    has  ^  seen
the,  173 ;  search  of  Sakti-
deva for  the,  188-195;    a
seat   of  the    Vidyadharas,
220 ;  Story  of  the,  171-175,
184,  186-195,  213,  217-231,
236-238

Golden  lotus,  the,  207;
dedicated  to  a  temple,
208;  desired  by  the  king,
a  second,  208

Golden  lotuses,  the  lake  of,
209

Golden  throne,  the,  52,  53

Golden  Town,  Barnett,  200/i^
2OI11I

Golden  umbrella,  heir-
apparent  has  a,  264

Good  deeds,  heavenly  wives
as  a  reward  for,  44,  45

Good  Fortune,  the  long  hair
of,  236

Government  Archaeological
Survey  of  India,  39/ii

*' Graf  von  Habsburg,  Der,"
Schiller,  Gedichte,  4:9n^

Graphic,  The,  271

Grass,  darhha,  151,  152,  176,
229^i2 ;  kusa,  151,  151n3, 176

Grass  poisoned  by  Yogaka-
randaka,  91,  275

Grateful  Dead,  The,  G.  H.
Gerould  (Folk-Lore
Society,  80>^^

Great  circle,  98-lOOri

Great  feat  in  archery  per-
formed by  Arjuna,  16

Great  poem  relating  to  the
Bharatas  (the  Mahd-
bhdrata),  16

Great  sage  Yajfiivalkya,  241

Great  self-sacrifice  of  Jimuta-
vahana,  153,  154

Great  War,  poisons  in  the,
280,  281

Green  tree-snake  {Ular
puchok,  Dryophis  prasinus  or
Bale  -  Dipsodomorphince),
303  ;  as  poison,  bile  of  the,
303


Green  water-frog  as  poison,

bile  of  the,  303
Greek  origin  of  the  Secretum

Secretorum,  287,  288
Greek   treatise   of  Polemon,

290
Griechische     Marchen,     Bern-
hard  Schmidt,  57ni,  127^2
Griechische  Mythologie,  Preller,

13n*
Grief  forms  an  abscess,  2
Grief  of  the  princess  on  losing

her  husband,  66,  67
Grihya     STdras,      Oldenberg,

241,  267,  267ni
Grim  repast  of  Kuvalayavali

and  Adityaprabha,  113
Grosse  Schauplatz  lust-u.  lehr-

reicher     Geschichte,    Der,

Harsdorffer,  296
Group  or  communal  marriage,

17
Group  of  Eastern  Bomances  and

Stories,  Clouston,  IO871
Grundriss     der    Indo-Arischen

Philo logic,  Vedic  Mythology,

A.  A.  Macdonell,  240
Guardian  spirit  haunts  one  of

the  pyramids,  ^n^
Guide    of  the    Vidyadharas,

Kau^ika  the  spiritual,  210
*'Gul    and    Sanaubar,"    Lie-

brecht,      Zur     Volkskundc,

131ni

Hair  of  Good  Fortune,  the

long,  236
Hakluyt  Society,  300w*5
Half  a  seer  (Anjali-measure),

276
Hallowe'en,  105?i
Halt,    political    measure    of,

165^1
Halting  -  place     for     camels

(caravanserai     or     karwdn-

sardi,  162n,  163w.
Hand  {kara),  27,  27^^
Hand  cut  off  as  a  stake  at

gambling,  the  left,  232?i
Hand  of  a  lady  compared  to

a  lotus,  65w^
Handful  of  water  offered  to

Fortune,  6n^
Hands    of    Love,    UrvasI    a

stupefying  weapon  in  the,

34,  34^2
Hard  life  of  women  in   the

Central  India  Agency,  19 ;

in  Eastern  Bengal,  19
Hard  treatment  accorded  to

women  in  India,  18


Hard  work  done  by  women

in  India,  18
Hare  in  the  moon,  82
Harem,  98,  98ri2,  161,  161n*,

162n,  163w
"Harem,"    J.    M.    Mitchell,

Ency.  Brit.,  163w
Harem  Life  in  Egi/pt  and  Con-

stantinople,  E.  Lott,  163n
"Harim,"     Dictionary    of

Islam,  Hughes,  163n
Harpist,  the  poisonous,  293
"Hasan      of      Bassorah,"

Burton,  ^ghts,  190/1^
Hatims     Tales,     Stein     and

Grierson,  124
Haunted  pyramid,  6^2
Having  heard  (srutva),  200n^
Hay,  poisoned,  276
Head,  curl  on  back  of,  con-
sidered unlucky,  In^
Head  deprived   of  the   um-
brella, 94,  94n5
Head    of    the    house,    Kar-

novun, 19
Head,     iron    implement     to

ward  off  ghosts  kept  near

child's,  166
Head    of  the    King    of   the

Paraslkas   cut   off,  93,  94,

94^1' 2
Head  of  Medusa,  299,  300.
Head    of    Rahu    cut    off   by

Vishnu,  81
Head  of  Rjlhu,  the  immortal,

81
Heads    of   elephants,    neck-
laces from  the,  142,  142n^
Healing  disease,  nudity  rites

in,  118,  119
Health,  rules  for  preserving,

288
Heart,  death  from  a  broken,

132
Heart    of    a    prince,    white

worm  in  the,  296
Heat  {pratdpa),  54^^
Heaven,  the  cow's,  242
Heaven,  voice  from,  30,  73
Heavenly     Eye     and     King

Sivi,  32,  33
Heavenly  fruit  received  from

Durga,  136*1^
Heavenly     lady     buys     the

human  flesh,  205
Heavenly  maidens,  the  two,

43
Heavenly  nymph  comes  out

of  a  tree,  233
Heavenly     wine,     drinking,

43


352


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


Heavenly    wives    as    reward

for  good  deeds,  44,  45
Heavenly     workmanship     of

the  anklet,  204
Hebr.      Bibliotk.,      Stein-

schneider,  289n*
"Hebrew     Version     of    the

Sec  return  Sectetoru  m,"

Gaster,  Jouni.  Roy.  As.  Soc,

290,  290/ii,  291,  298,  29Sn^
Hebrew    word    for    "dove,"

Jonah  the,  I93n\  IHn
"Heimonskinder,  Die,"  Sim-
rock,  Deutsche  Volksb'iicher,

bin}
**  Heinrich  der  Lowe,"  Sim-
rock,  Deutsche  Volksb'uchert

76ni
Heir  apparent  has  a  golden

umbrella,  264
Hell  Avichi,  the,  176
Hell  (Sheol,  Hades, or  AralQ),

194n
Hemp,  Indian  [ganja),  304
Henrij  V,  Shakespeare,  98n*
Henri/  VI,  Shakespeare,  987i*
Heptamero7iy      Margaret      of

Navarre,  2n^,  \0n
Herabkunft  des  Feuers  und  des

Gottertranks,  Die,  A.  Kuhn,

252ni
Herb  as  protection  from  the

poison-damsel,  293
Herbs,  a  garden  of,  108,  110  ;

girl     brought    up    among

poisonous,  297
Herdsman  named  Devasena,

51,52
Herdsmen,      friendship      of

Krishna    with    the,     242 ;

the  king  and  the,  51,  52
Hermit    accused    of    canni-
balism, 185
Hermit    named    Agryatapas,

221;  named  Arindama,  127;

named    Durvasas,   23,    24 ;

named     Suryatapas,      189,

191
Hermit  Gautama,  45-46
Hermit    Narada     visits     the

King  of  Vatsa,  12,  13
Hermitage  of  Badarika,  63;

of  Galava,  211
Hermits,  Vidyadharas  fall  in

love  with  the  daughters  of,

211
Hiding    in    the    feathers    of

birds,  219-220n
High  birth-rate  in  India,  18
High   rank  betrayed  by  the

smell  of  the  body,  22n,  22n^


Highest  class  of  Rishi  (holy
sage),  Devarshi'  the,  34,
34/i3

Hikayetu-Erba%ia-Sabahin    we

Mesa  {The  Story  of  the  Forty

Moms  and  Eves),  123
"Hill  Tribes  of  the  Central

Indian  Hill,"  W.  Crooke,

Joum.  A  nth.  Inst.,  24w        •
Hills,  the  Vindhya,  13n*,  56,

159
Himalayan  country,  67w^
Himalayan  mountain,  Parva-

taka  king  of  the,  284,  285
Himalayan  regions,  fraternal

polyandry  prevalent  in  the,

18
Hind  of  Artemis,  127n2
Hindoos    as    They    Are,    The,

S.  C.  Bose,  U3n
Hindu  Cupid,  Ananga  a  name

for  Kama  the,  74^^  ;  Kama-

deva  the,  51^^
Hindu  Gods  and  Heroes,  L.  D.

Barnett,  45n*
Hindu  iconography,  umbrella

in,  266
Hindu  king  of  Delhi,  Prithi

Raj  the  last,  266
Hindu  Manners,  Customs  and

Ceremonies,     Dubois,     168,

242
Hindu  married  women,  iron

bracelet  worn  by,  167
Hindu     and      Mohammedan

women      of     the      North,

bodice  worn  by,  bOn^
Hindu  poetry,  the  smile  in,

50/ii
["  Hindu  Pregnancy  Observ-
ances in  the  Punjab"]  H.

A.  Rose,  Joum.  Antk.  Inst.,

166
Hindu  rhetoric,  glory  white

in,  208^1
Hindu    ritual,   lamps   promi-
nent in,  169
Hindu  Zeus,  Indra  the,  45w*
Hinduism,  esoteric  rites,  214
Hindus,  opium   favoured  by

the,  304 ;  the  sacred  cow

of  the,  240-242
Hissing    like   a   snake,    girl,

294
Histoire      LittSraire,      Ernest

Renan, 293
Hist.  Anim.,  Aristotle,  296
HistoriaApologetica,  Las  Casas,

309^1
Historia  del  regno  di  Napoli,

Angelo  di  Costanzo,  SlOn*^


Historical  Section  of  the  War

Office,  281
Historical  value  of  the  story  of

Urvai^I  and  Pururavas,  245
History    of   Buddhism,    Tara-

natha,  69n2
"History  of  Gharib  and  his

Brother     Ajib,"     Burton,

Nights,  124
History    of   Fiction,     Dunlop

(Liebrecht's    trans.),     6/1*,

39n2,  127n2
Hijstory  of  the   Forty    Vazirs,

E.  J.  W.  Gibb,  123
History  of  Human   Marriage,

Westermarck,  18,  19,  23n,

2471,  306ni
History,      importance     of

Magadha  in,  3/i^
History  of  Magic  and  Experi-
mental Science,   Thorndike,

99n,    108w,    288/i3,    295wS

299/i2'  *
History  of  Nepal,  D.  Wright,

232k
History  of  opium,  early,  303,

304
History       of      Professional

Poisoners    and     Coiners    of

India,  M.  P.  Naidu,  281
History  of  Sanskrit  Literature,

A.  A.  Macdonell,  45n*,  242
History      of     the      Secretum

Secretorum,  286
History  of  the  Shwe  Dagon

pagoda,  265
"History  of  Sidi  Nu'uman,"

Burton,  Nights,  202ni
Hitopadesa,  the,  223n^
Hobson    Jobson,    Yule,    162n,

269,  269n4
"Holl;  A  Vernal  Festival  of

the     Hindus,     The,"     VV.

Crooke,  Folk-Lore,  59ni
Home     of     Buddhism     and

Jainism,  Magadha  the,  3n}
Home  of  the  umbrella,  263
"Homeric  Folk-Lore,   Some

Notes     on,"    VV.    Crooke,

Folk-Lore,  57n^
Homoeopathic  magic,originof,

the  idea  of  "overhearing  "

motif,  10Tn\  lOSn
Honest  Whore,  Dekker,  145n
Honour  of  Siva,   a   horrible

ceremony  in,  104
Hoopoe,    Garu^a    identified

with  the,  152^1
Horizontal    marks    on    fore-
head,   years    of   longevity

foretold  by  the,  7n^


INDEX  II -GENERAL


353


horizontal    stick    "female,"

256
'Horn     and    Rimenhild,"

French  poem  of,  76^^^
'Horn  and   Rimenhild,  The

Story    of,"     H.    Schofield,

Mod.  Lang.  Ass.  Amer.,  76w^
Horoscope  shows  if  child  is

to  be  a  poison-damsel,  286
Horrible  ceremony  in  honour

of  Siva,  104
Horrible    demon  eating  the

impaled  man's  flesh,  202
Horror,  slaughter  of  the  cow

fills  the  Hindu  with,  2-10
Horrors  of  the  cemetery,  201
Horse  of  Adityasena,  56-58
Horse   flies    up    in    the    air,

224w
Horse  with  a  jewelled  saddle,

223
Horse  in  mythology,  57n^
Horse  in  the  Sirsa  district,

curing  a,  119
Horse  superstitions,  57w^
Horse-worship,  57n^
Horses   among   the  Aryans,

value  of  war,  577^^
Horses  are  divine  beings,  57,

57^1
Horses  an  object  of  worship,

Horses,  the  Sun's,  57 ;  dis-
pute about  the  colour  of
the  Sun's,  150-152

Hospitality,  offer  to  kill  a
cow  an  act  of,  241

Hostile  brothers,  stories  of,
14)1

House  of  Fame,  Chaucer,  219^2,^

House,  Karnovun,  head  of
the,  19 ;  magical  circle  a
protective  barrier  round
a,  99>i

Householder  or  Grihastha,
180/^1

Hudibras,  Butler,  302

Huge  snakes,  baby  girl
brought  up  by,  294

Human  flesh,  eating,  103,
104;  in  Africa,  eating,
198/i^ ;  among  the  Bantu
negro  races,  eating,  198n\
199m  ;  Mana  or  spiritual
exaltation  gained  by  eat-
ing, 198n^ ;  in  Melanesia,
eating,  198iii ;  oblation  of,
99 ;  power  of  becoming  vam-
pires by  eating,  198n^  ;  for
sale,  205;  in  Tantric  rites,
214


Human  sacrifices  among  the

Sfikta  worshippers,  l9Sn^
Human  saliva  dangerous    to

poisonous  animals,  296
Hundred    sons    of    Dhrita-

rashtra,  16
Hunting  a  madness  of  kings,

127
Hunting,    vice    of   {vyasana),

21,  2ln^,  127
Husband,  an  animal,  254
Husband  (pati),  49n*
Husband,  proxy  for,  306,  307
Husband  of  Sachi,  Indra,  45
Husband  and  wife,  samband-

harn,  ceremony  of  alliance

as,  18
Husband's  blood  mixed  with

betel    and    eaten    by    the

bride,  2in
Husbands,  mysterious  deaths

of  Duhkalabdhika  s,  69,  70
Husbands,    professional

proxies  for,  Cadeberiz,  307
Husbands     by     worshipping

Ganesa,     maidens    obtain,

99,  'lOO
Hypocrisy  of  Siva,  177
Hypocritical  Ascetic,  Story  of

the,  4-5

Icelandic  Sagas  about  meet-
ing eyebrows,  103n^
Ichor  {mada),  90,  93,  125w*
Iconography,      umbrella      in

Hindu,  266
Identification    of    Bluebeard

with  Comorre  the  Cursed,

22471 ;    with    Gil   de    Rais,

224w
Identification  of  speech  with

the  cow,  241
Iliad,  Homer,  218w*
Illness  feigned  by  Madhava,

179,  181
Illuminating    beauty    of   the

two  maidens,  43,  43?^^
//  Propugnatore,  289n-
II   Tesoro  di   Brunetto   Latini

versiflcato,  294w^
Image  of  Ganesa  which  grants

boons,  99,' 103
Image  of  Siva,  103
Images  of  Gautama,  265
Immortal  head  of  Rahu,  81
Immortality      brought      by

Garuda,  nectar  of,  155,  156
Immortality      granted       to

Surabhi,  242
Immunity  from  snake-bite  by

inoculation,  311,  312


Impaled     man,     Ai^okadatta

takes  water  to  the,  201
Impaled  robbers,  60-62
'•  Impediments,  the  magical,"

inotif,  121
Implement  kept  near  child's

head  to  ward  off  ghosts,  an

iron,  166
Important      event      among

modern     Hindus,     eclipse

an,  83
Inauspicious,    empty    vessels

are,  164?i3
Inauspicious  marks,  4,  ^n^,  7,

77il

Incarnation  of  the  God  of
Love,  137

Incident  which  caused  poly-
andrus  marriage  of  Drau-
padl,  16,  17

Index  of  Periodical  Literature,
Poole,  272

India,  a  Bird's  -  Eye  View,
Ronaldshay,  8871^

Indian  Antiquary,  "Flying
through  the  Air,"  A.  M.
Hocart,  6472^;  "Meeting
Eyebrows,"  Tawney,  10471^ ;
["Notes  on  a  Collection  of
Regalia  of  the  Kings  of
Burma  of  the  Alompra
Dynasty"]  R.  C.  Temple,
264/11,  269,  2697*4;  "Pride
Abased,"  J.  H.  Knowles,
193/ii;  "Superstitions  and
Customs  in  Salsette."
G.  F.  D'Penha,  167

Indian  Fairy  Tales,  Stokes,
427*1,  437*2,  577*1,  1367*1,
1937*1

Indian  hemp  [gdnja),  304

Indian  history,  importance  of
Magadha  in,  37*i

Indian  Mythology  according  to
the  Mahdbhdrata,  F.  Faus-
boll,  457*4

Indian  Tales  and  Anecdotes,
C.  Vermieux,  11471

Indian  Toaicology,  T.  N.
Windsor,  281

Indica,  Arrian,  263

Indische  Erzdhler,  ' '  Pala  und
Gopala,"  Hertel,  121

Indische     Medizin,    J.    Jolly,

3107*3

Indische  Streifen,  A.   Weber,

2527*1
Indo-Aryans,  7'Ae,Rajendralala

Mitra,  167
Indo  -  European    love  -  story^^

the  first,  245


VOL.   II.


§54


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


Infancy,  damsel  brought  up
on  poison  from,  293,  313

Infant  girls  nourished  on
poison,  293

Infanticide  in  Bombay,former
practice  of,  18,  19 ;  in  the
Panjab,  former  practice  of,
18,  19

Infanticide  one  of  the  causes
of  low  proportion  of
females  in  India,  18,  19

Infants,  opium  given  to,  304

Infected  clothes  in  Brazil,
280,  280ai«'7

Inheritance,  matriarchal,  19

Iniquity  of  scandal,  the,  185,
186

Initiation  ceremony,  fika  a
forehead  mark  made  in  an,
22n3

Injuries,  unintentional,  147,
147m1

Inoculation  against  typhoid
fever,  312

Inoculation  of  snake-
charmers,  311,  312

Insects,  Indra-gopa,  276

Insult,  duel  as  result  of,  303 ;
of  spitting  betel  juice  in  a
person's  face,  302,  303

Intercourse,  connection  be-
tween snakes  and,  307 ;
poison  by,  305-310

Intercourse  of  the  sexes,
analogy  between  the  fire-
drill  and,  255,  256

International  Americanists'
Congress,  309

Interpretations  of  the  story
of  Urva^I  and  Pururavas,
251-255

Interpreting  bodily  marks
{sdmudrika),  IrO-

Intrigue  of  Ahalya  found  out
by  Gautama's  supernatural
power,  45,  46

Introduction  of  syphilis  into
Europe  by  Columbus'  men,
308,  308^1;  into  India  by
the  Portuguese,  310n,  310^3

Invasion  of  Northern  India
by  Alexander  the  Great,
282,  282ni

Investiture  of  the  Doge  with
the  umbrella,  268 ;  of  the
Sacred  Thread,  257

Irische  Mdrchen,  Grimm,  104n

Iron  among  the  Doms,  belief
in  the  sanctity  of,  68

Iron  bracelet  worn  by  Hindu
married  women,  167


Iron,  childbirth  customs  in
connection  with,  166,  167 ;
protective  value  of,  166, 167

Iron  implement  near  child's
head  to  ward  off  ghosts,  166

Iron  pyrites  as  charm  against
alligators,  168

Iron  rings  attached  to  ^ick
children  on  the  Slave  Coast,
167

Iron  rod  kept  in  the  birth-
chamber,  166

Iron  in  Salsette,  customs
connected  with,  167

Iron  scares  away  evil  spirits,
166-168

Iron  tool,  unlawful  to  commit
a  burglary  with  an,  168

Iron  used  during  attack  of
cholera,  167

Irresistible  power  of  truth,  31

Island  of  Manaar,  84n^ ;  of
Ramesvarman,  84^^;  of
Ratnakuta,  217;  named
Utsthala,  191,  192, 194, 217,
226,  227,  237

Islands  of  the  lordship  of
Prester  John,  306

Islands  of  Wak,  190^1

Italian  serraglio  ("an  en-
closure"), 162n;  serrato
("shut  up"),  162/1

Italian  version  of  the  poison-
damsel  myth,  394,  395

Itching  and  twitching,  super-
stitions connected  with,
Uin\  145)1

Jackals,  cries  of,  60
Jahrhuch    f'lir  romanische  und

englische    LiteratuTy     Knust

in,  289w2'  *
Jainism,  Magadha  the  home

of,  3ni
Jdiaka^,  the,  52?^l,  108/1,  122,

266
' '  Jealous  Sister,  Tale  of  the,"

Dozon,    Contes  Albanais,

190ni
Jealousy  of  the  Kuru  princes

for  the  Pan^us,  16
Jealousy  of  Somaprabha,  44
Jerking  of  date-stones,  147n^
Jewad,  The  Story  of,  E.  J.  W.

Gibb,  190ni
Jewel  drof)ped  byDevadatta*s

wife,  131
Jewel-lamps,  161,  169
Jewelled  anklet,  the,  203
Jewelled  saddle,  horse  with

a,  223


Jewelled  throne,  the,  52,  63

Jewels  of  glass  and  quartz,
182

Jewels,  Ratnapura,  city  of,
175,  175n2;  the  sea  pro-
pitiated with,  72,  12n^

Jona,  Hans  Schmitt,  194n

"Jonah,"  T.  K.  Cheyne,£ncy.
Brit.,  194n

Jonah  Legend,  The,  W.  Simp-
son, 194n

Jour7i.  Anthro.  Inst.  ["East
Central  African  Customs"],
Macdonald,  198wi ;  "Hill
Tribes  of  the  Central  Indian
Hills,"  VV.  Crooke,  24w;
["Hindu  Pregnancy  Ob-
servances in  the  Punjab"]
H.A.Rose,  166;  "  Melan-
esians,"  Codrington,  198ni;
["Muhammedan  Pregnancy
Observances  in  the  Pun-
jab"] H.  A.  Rose,  166;
"  Nudity  in  Custom  and
Ritual,"  W.  Crooke,  119

Journ.  Anthro.  Soc,  "The
Circassian  Slaves  and  the
Sultan's  Harem,"  F.  Mil-
lingen,  163n

Journ.  Anthro.  Soc.  oj'  Bombay,
"Aghoris  and  Agorapan-
this,"  H.  VV.  Barrow,  90n8;
"A  few  Ancient  Beliefs
about  the  Eclipse  and  a
few  Superstitions  based  on
these  Beliefs,"  J.  J.  Modi,
82,83

Journ.  As.  Soc.  Bengal,
"  Rough  Notes  on  the
Snake  Symbol  in  India,"
J.  H.  Rivett-Carnac,  307,
307ni

Journ.  Bom.  Br.  Roy.  As.
Soc,  "Studies  in  Bhasa,"
Sukthankar,  21ni

Journal  of  Indian  Art  and
Industry,  266^2

Journ.  Roy.  As.  Soc,  "  The
Act  of  Truth,"  Burlingame,
31,  33;  "Bhasa,"  Barnett,
21ni;  ["The  Game  of
Dice"]  A.  B.  Keith,  232n;
"The  Hebrew  Version  of
the  Secretum  Secretorum,"
Gaster,  290,  290ni,  291,  298,
298/i2;  "TheNagas,"C.  F.
Oldham,  307/1^;  ["Notes
on  Early  Economic  Con-
ditions in  Northern  India,*
Caroline  F.  Rhys  Davids],
240 ;  "  The  Plays  of  Bhasa,^'


INDEX  II -GENERAL


355


Joum.  Roy.  As.  Soc. — cont.
Banerji-Sastri,  21n^  ;  "  The
Plays  of  Bhasa,"  Thomas,
21n^;    "The  Zoroastrian
Period  of  Indian  History,"

D.  B.  Spooner,  39ni
Journals  of  Expeditions  of  Dis-
covery into  Central  Australittj

E.  J.  Eyre,  280r.4
Journey  of  Vidushaka  to  find

Bhadra,  69,  71

Judgment  of  the  King  of
Vatsa,  158

Juice  of  aconite,  girl  rubbed
with  ointment  of,  310

Jummoo  and  Kashmir  Terri-
tories, The,  F.  Drew,  22>2n

Jungle-crow  as  poison,  bile
of  the,  303

Kalilah  wa  Dimnak,  290
Kama  SFitra,  Vatsyayana,  9n^,

49w3,  305
Karling    legend    of    Bayard,

57ni
Kashmirian  bodice,  the  kurtd,

Kathdkoga,  the,  Tawney,  6n\
I08n,  U3n\  219^3,  232w

Kathaprakdqa,  122

Katha  Sarit  Sdgara,  80/ii,  122,
136ni,  169,  178^1,  281

Keeper  of  the  burning-
ground,  the  king  taken
for  the,  57,  bln^

"  Kesata  and  Kandarpa,"  tale
of,  193^1

Kicked  by  Somadatta,  old
Brahman,  96

**  Kilhwch  and  Olwen,  Story
of,"  Cowell,  Y  Cymrodor,
190wi

Killed  each  day  in  the  apart-
ment of  the  princess,  a
man,  69,  70

Killing  by  embrace  or  per-
spiration, 291

Killing  female  children,
method  of,  304

Kind  reception  of  Vasavadatta
by  Padmavati,  22

Kiiider-und  Hausmdrchen  aus
Tirol,  Zingerle,  70^^

King  addicted  to  pleasure,
125

King  Adityaprabha,  97-99,
111,  112-114;  Adityasena,
54-59,  62,  64,  65,  79  ;  Arya-
varman,  73,  74,  78 ;  of  the
Asuras,  Mayadhara,  35 ;
of  Benares,   Brahmadatta,


King — conti7iued
88,  89,  91,  95,  115;  of
Benares,  Pratapamukuta,
200;  of  the  Bhillas,  Pulin-
daka,  89,  89^^  ;  of  the  birds
(Garuda),  151, 152, 154, 155;
of  the  Camphor  Islands,
190/j^ ;  Chandamahasena,  6,
48,  93, 128;  Chandavikrama,
230 ;  of  the  Chola  race,  92,
92w*;  Devasena,  69,  71;  and
the  herdsmen,  51,  52 ;  of
Kachchhapa,  69  ;  of  Kama-
rupa,.  94,  94^1*;  of  India
sends  Alexander  a  poison-
damsel,  291,  292;  of
Magadha,  Nanda  or
Dhana-Nanda,  282,  282^2;
[narendra),  116n.^ ;  of  the
Nishadas,  191, 191n^  ;  of  the
Parasikas  cut  off,  the  head
of  the,  93-94ni2;  Paropa-
karin,  171,  172;  {pati),
49n*  ;  Pururavas,  34-36  ;  of
the  Rakshasas,  209-212 ;
rogue  wishes  to  enter  the
service  of  the,  178,  179  ;  of
the  Siddhas,  149 ;  of  Sindh,
subdued,  93;  of  the  Snakes,
Vasuki,  152;  of  the  Snowy
Mountain  (Siva),  143 ;  of
the  Vidyadharas,  13,  85, 137,
156,  156,  171 ;  Vihitasena,
36  -  37  ;  Vikramachanda,
159 ;  wishes  to  study  the
art  of  stealing,  184n,  185n  ;
of  the  Yakshas,  Ratna-
varsha,  233

Kingdom  of  Magadha,  3n}y
12,20

Kingdom,  the  Pandyan,  92w*

•'Kings,  Mirror  of,"  Barlaam,
290

Kingship,  flying  through  the
air  an  adjunct  of,  64n^

Kiss  of  the  poison-damsel,
the  fatal,  294

Knife  kept  beside  a  woman
after  childbirth  to  keep  off
the  devil,  166

Knives  {dhd),  167

Knot,  the  lucky,  189/1^

Knots,  magic,  189n^

Knots  that  mark  the  centuries
of  life,  189,  189^1

Knowledge-holder,  magical
{vidyddhara),  137^1^

Kohl  and  Collyrium,  App.  II,
Vol.  I,  50w*

Kos7nographie,  Al-QazwinT,
298,  312


Krait,  fatal  sting  of  the,  311,

312
Kumara    Rdma    Charita,    the,

122

Labour,    a    sickle    and    nlm

leaves  kept  on  the  cot  of

a  Mala  woman  in,  166
Lac  dye,  blood  mixed  with,

24n
Ladies,  eyes  of  Hindu,  said

to  reach  their  ears,  50,  50w*
Ladies  of  Malava,  93
Lady  buys  the  human  flesh,

a  heavenly,  205
Lady   compared   to   a   lotus,

the  hand  of  a,  ^bn^
Lady  found  by  Vidushaka  in

the  temple,  a  beautiful,  66
Lady  riding  on  a  lion,  143
Lais,  Marie,  113w^
Lake  of  golden  lotuses,  209
Lamps,  jewel-,  169
Lamps   prominent  in  Hindu

ritual,  169
Lamps,  protection  of  the  child

by,  161
Lancashire  Gleanings^  W.  E.  A.

Axon,  76rii,  77
Lancet,    The,    "The    Alleged

Discovery    of   Syphilis    in

Prehistoric     Egyptians,"

308n2
Land  of  Chedi,  89  ;  of  Padma,

95;  ofthe  Siddhas,  67,  67^2,

75,  75?i3  ;  of  Srikantha,  97
Language  of  animals,  107^^ ;

of  birds,  107ni
Lares,  "Le  credenze  religiose

delle    popolazioni    rurali

dell'alte  valle  del  Taveri,"

G.  Nicasi,  108w
L'Arme  bacteriologique  future

concurrente  des  armes  chim-

iqiie  et  balistique,  L.  Georges,

281
Last    Hindu   king  of  Delhi,

Prithi  Raj  the,  266
Last      of      the      Tasjuanians,

Bowick,  280n5
Latin     translations     of     the

Secretum     Secretorum,     288,

288/^2

Law,  Natural,  277,  278
Laws  of  Nations,  277-279
Lead,  marking  with  red,  2Sn
Leaves  of  the  betel  vine,  tam-

boli,  301,  302
Lectures  on  the  Religion  of  the

Semites,     W,     Robertson

Smith,  119,  IU71


356


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


Left  hand  cut  off"  as  a  stake
at  gambling,  232n

Leg  of  the  giant  cut  off*,  72,
72/.2

Leg  of  the  giant  saves  Vidu-
shaka  from  drowning,  73

Leg  of  a  giant,  ship  stopped
in  the  sea  by  the,  72

Legend  of  Bayard,  the  Karl-
ing,  57/i^

Legend  of  a  dragon ,  mediaeval ,
296

Legend  of  the  death  of  King
Ladislao  of  Naples,  310  ;  of
King  Wenceslaus  II,  309,
309^2

Legend  of  Hippolytus  and  his
stepmother  Phcedra,  120

Legend  of  Jonah,  193^^1,  194/i

*'  Legend  of  Nadir  Shah,"
M.  Longworth  Dames,
Folk-Lore,  302

"Legend  of  the  Oldest
Animals,  The,"  Cowell,  Y
Cyynrodor,  I90n^

Legend  of  Perseus,  E.  S.  Hart-
land,  70/^2,  96nM36;ii,  153»i

Legend  of  Urvasi  and  Puru-
ravas,  34-36,  245-259

"Legende  de  I'Empereur
Agoka,  La,"  Przyluski,  An-
nates du  Musee  Guhnei,  120

** Legende  von  der  Altertums-
syphilis,"  A.  V.  Notthaft,
Rindjleisch  Festschrift,  308)i2

Legends,  Alexandrian,  290

•'  Legends  of  Krishna,"  W.
Crooke,  Folk-Lore,  39^^

"Letter  of  Death"  motifs
114/1

Libelliis  de  Veneris,  Peter  of
Abano,  300,  2>Q0n}

Liber  de  Donis,  Etienne  de
Bourbon,  114n

Lib.  VII,  Pliny,  306n3

Life,  attempts  on  Chandra-
gupta's,  283,  284 ;  done  in
a  previous  {purogaih),  I35n} ;
knots  that  mark  the  cen-
turies of,  189,  189m^  ;  raven
connected  with  the  Water
of,  155n*  ;  the  three  objects
of,  180,  180/i2

Life  of  a  Brahman,  periods  in
the,  180,  180;^!

Life  by  Garuda,  snakes  re-
stored to,  155,  156

Life  of  Jimutavahana  saved
by  Savara  chief,  141,  142

Life  of  the  princess  saved  by
Vidushaka.  63


Life  of  Saktideva  saved  by
the  banyan-tree,  218

Life  of  Savara  chief  saved  by
Jimutavahana,  142

Life  of  Somadatta  spared  by
the  king,  96

Life  and  Stories  of  Pdrg-
vandtha,  Bloomfield,  14n,
108n,  122,  285;ii,  286^3

"Light  of  the  moon,"
Chandraprabha  means,  223,
223»i

Light,  rules  in  all  parts  of
the  world  regarding,  168

Lights  among  the  Moham-
medan Khojas  of  Gujarat,
customs  connected  with,
168 ;  among  the  Nayars  of
Malabar,  customs  con-
nected with,  168;  among
the  Savaras  of  Bengal,
customs  connected  with,
168

Lights  in  the  army  of  the
King  of  Vatsa,  waving,  89,
89/i4

Lights  in  the  birth-chamber
to  scare  away  evil  spirits,
168

Lights,  Divali  or  Feast  of,
118

Li  Livres  dou  Tresor,  Brunetto
Latini,  294,  294^2,  299^^1

Lime-juice,  borax  and  tur-
meric, powder  made  of
{kunkam),  164ii*

Lime  of  oyster  shells  eaten,
301,  302

Lion  assumes  the  form  of  a
man,  147

Lion  and  the  doe,  tale  of
the,  298

Lion,  lady  riding  on  a,  143

Lion  transformation,  the,  147,
148

Lions,  Vindhya  hills  haunted
by,  56,  56n3

Literatur  des  alien  Indien,  Die,
H.  Oldenberg,  252^^

Literature ,  poison-damsel  rare
in  Sanskrit,  281

Literature,  Secretum  Secre-
tonim  in  European,  286-291

"  Little  shade  "  {umbra),  263

Li vingcreatures, earth  milked
by,  241

Loathsome  practices  of  the
Aghorl  caste,  198n^

Locks  of  Siva,  the  auburn,
208

Lofty  umbrella,  55,  55^1,  89


Lofty  umbrellas,  lotuses  like,
188

VOmbrelle,  O.  Uzanne,  272

Long  hair  of  Good  Fortune,
236

Longing  to  hear  stories,  Vasa-
vadatta's,  137

Longing  of  Vasavadatta  for  a
son,  135

Look,  the  fatal,  298-300

Look  of  snakes,  belief  in  the
poisonous,  298

Looseness  of  character  indi-
cated by  dimple  in  cheek,
7ni

Lord  of  the  Mountains  (Par-
vataka),  284,  285

Lord  of  Obstacles  (Gane^),
102

Lord  of  Treasure,  Kuvera
God  of  Wealth  and,  93

Lord  of  the  Umbrella,  Chhat-
rapati,  title  of  Indian  kings,
267

Lord  of  the  Vidyadharas,
Jimutaketu,  138-140

Lordship  of  Prester  John,
islands  of  the,  306

Lotus-lake  called  Anyatah-
plaksha,  246,  249

Lotus  which  closes  in  the
night,  25,  257ii

Lotus  desired  by  the  king,
a  second,  208

Lotus,  the  golden,  207;  dedi-
cated to  a  temple,  208

Lotus,  hand  of  a  lady  com-
pared to  a,  65n^

Lotuses,  the  lake  of  golden,
209 ;  like  lofty  umbrellas,
188

Love  and  affection  (Rati  and
Priti),  wives  of  the  God  of
Love,  51,  51n2

Love  consumed  by  Siva,  God
of,  100,  100?ii

Love,  death  from  unrequited,
8,  9,  9^2,  \0n ;  five-arrowed
God  of,  1 ;  the  God  of
(Kama  or  Kandarpa),  27,
21n\  55,  66,  94,  100,  101,
127,  136,  144,  164;  Guha-
chandra  tortured  with  the
pain  of,  40;  incarnation  oi
the  God  of,  137 ;  the  over-
whelming power  of,  9 ;
stages  of,  9  ti^,  lOw;  strata-
gem to  gain,  44;  Urva^i,
a  stupefying  weapon  in  the
hands  of,  34,  34n2 ;  wives
oftheGodof,  51,  51^2


I


I

Love  of  the  gopts,  Krishna's,

242
Love   of    Indra   for   Ahalya,

45,  46
Love  by  magic,  gaining,  43,

44
Love  on  mere  mention.  143,

144
Love-scratches,   varieties   of,

49^3
Love-sickness,  death  the  final

stage  of,  9n^
Love  (sneka),  163n}
Love-story,    the    first    Indo-
European,  245
Love-story  in  the  world,  the

first,  245
Love    of    Tishyarakshita    for

Kunala,   120
Love     of    women,    rejected,

105,  109 ;  the  scorned,  120-

124
Loving   Couple   who  died  of

Separation,  Story  of  the,  9
Loving  nails,   the   prints  of,

49,  49^3
Low  caste,  Mang  a,  82
Low  proportion  of  females  to

males  in  India,  causes  of,

18,  19
Lowest    forms    of    marriage

enjoyed  by  Kshatriyas,  17
Lucky,     curl     on     forehead

considered,  7?^^
Lucky  knot,  189^1
Lucky    marks    of     Buddha,

7wi
Lucky  trousseau  {sokdg),  23w
Lustre  of  gold  (kanaka-pj-ahha),

171n3
Lying-in     chamber,     the

ornamented,  161

Macbeth,  Shakespeare,  145n
Macedonian  Folk-Lore,   G.   F.

Abbott,  70n2
Mad,   whom    shall    I    make  ?

{kan  darpaydmi),  100
"Mad  Lover,  The,"  Burton,

Nights,  lOn
Madam       Contentious

(Kalahakarl),  159?i2
Maddening  beauty,  7,  8
Madness    feigned    by    Vidu-

shaka,  68
Magia     naturalis,     Wolfgang

Hildebrand,  296,  300
"Magic,"     Hastings'    Ency.

Rel.  Eth.,  99w
Magic  aid,  gaining  love  by,

43,  44


INDEX  II -GENERAL

Magic  art,    "Act  of  Truth"

at  the  background  of  the,

31
Magic  art  of  the  Vidyadhari,

66,  67
Magic  article,  jinn  summoned

by  rubbing  a,  58»i^
Magic  circle,  98-lOOn,  295  ;  in

Assyria,  99?i ;  in  Babylonia,

99n ;    denotes  finality  and

continuity,  99n  ;  as  kind  of

haram,  295  ;  as  prison,  100?z
Magic,    custom    of  kings   to

dabble  in,  112^^  ;  nudity  in

black,  117  ;  origin  of  "over-
hearing "     motif    may    be

traced     to     homoeopathic,

107ni,  108n
Magic    gifts    given    up    by

Bhadra,  78
Magic  knots,  189^^
"Magic  Pill,  Story  of  the,"

183ni
Magic    power    of   witches'

spells,  103,  104
Magic  Ritual,  Nudity  in,  117-

120
Magic  virtue  of  steel,  106n*
"Magical    Circle,"    A.    E.

Crawley,    Hastings'    Ency,

Rel.  Eth.,  99n
"Magical      impediments"

motif,  121
Magical     knowledge-holder

{vidyddhara),  137/1^
Magical    powers    of   healing

disease,    nudity     in,     118,

119
Magical  rides  in  the  air,  103-

lObn
Magicians    in   Malabar,   Odi,

199n
Mahd    Fir  a    Charita,    Bhava-

bhuti,  214
Mahdbhdrata,   the,    13n*,    16,

17.  77>i,  81, 108^,122,127^1,

1527^1,  232n,  240-242,  248,

272,  284
Mahapdduma-Jdtaka,  the,  122
Maid  and  the  monkey,  the,  5
Maiden     fed    on    poison,     a

beautiful,  291
Maiden    of   the    Vidyadhara

race,  66
Maidens     found     dead     by

Saktideva,  beautiful,  223
Maidens  obtain  husbands  by

worshipping    Ganesa,    99,

100
Maidens    with    serpents    in

their  bodies,  307


357

Maidens  sitting  on  trees  con-
nected with  tree-worship,
43,  43?ii

Maidens,  the  two  heavenly, 43

Making  fire  by  friction,  247,
249,  250,  255,  256

Mdlati  Mddhava,  the,  Bhava-
bhuti,  2057i3;  Tantric  rites
in  the,  214-216

Malay  Poisons  and  Charm
Cures,  J.  D.  Gimlette,  303,
303^1

Male  vertical  stick,  256

Man  killed  each  day  in  the
apartment  of  the  princess,
69,  70

Mango  [dm  tree),  118

Manners  and  Customs  of  the
Ancietit  Egyptians,  Wilkin-
son, 264

Manners  and  Customs  of  the
Modem  Egyptians,  E.  W.
Lane, 163n

Man's  blood,  epithet  denoting
the  price  of  a  (sataddya),
240

Manual  of  thievery  called
Steyasdstra-pravartaka,183n^

MSS.  of  Secretum  Secretorum,
bibliography  of,  288?^2

March  of  the  King  of  Vatsa,
89,90

March,  political  measure  of,
165^1

Mdrchen,  252

Mdrchen,  Grimm,  60n^,  l^^n^,
223ni

Mdrchen  der  Magyar  en,  Gaal,
135n2,  207^1

Marco  Polo,  The  Book  of  Ser,
Yule  and  Cordier,  85w,  266,
268,  2mn^,  302,  302^^,  303

Mark  the  centuries  oi  life,
knots  that,  189,  189/ii

Mark  of  the  king,  nine  white
umbrellas,  264

Mark  of  respect,  "Mother"
a  mode  of  addressing  as  a,
201,  201^3  J  semi-nudity  as
a,  119

Marks,  inauspicious,  4,  4n^,
7,  7^1

Marriage  of  Adityasena  and
Tejasvati,  55;  of  Asoka-
datta  and  Madanalekha,
204 ;  of  Asokadatta  and
Vidyutprabha,  206,  207  ;  of
Bhadra  and  Vidushaka,  66

Marriage  by  capture,  24»^;
ceremonies  of  the
Nayars,  17,  18;  by  choice


358


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


Marriage — continued

{svayamvara).  16;  communal
or  group,  17  ;  of  Devadatta
and  Vidyutprabha,  234  ;  of
DraupadT,  the  polyandrous,
13-U,  16,  17;  enjoyed  by
Kshatriyas,  lowest  forms  of,
17 ;  evil  spirits  active  on
first  night  of,  306  ;  forced
on  Somaprabha,  41  ;  gdn-
dharva  form  of,  5,  66 ;  in
India,  evil  effects  of  early,
18 ;  Kanakarekha's  con-
dition for,  173;  of  the
King  of  Vatsa  to  Padma-
vatl,  26,  27;  of  ManovatI
and  Vasudattii,  147 ;  of
Saktideva  to  the  four
sisters,  238;  of  Saktideva
and  VindumatI,  228;  of
Saktideva  and  Vindurekha,
231 ;  of  Siva  and  the  chap-
lain's daughter,  181  ;  iikti
affixed  to  girl's  forehead  at
her,  23?i ;  of  Vidushaka  to
the  daughter  of  Devasena,
71 ;  of  Vidushaka  to  King
Aryavarman's  daughter,
75;  of  Vidushaka  and  the
princess,  65

Married,  refusal  of  Kanaka-
rekha  to  be,  172,  173

Married  women,  iron  bracelet
worn  by  Hindu,  167

Marrying  out  of  one's  rank,
misfortune  of,  131

Matriarchal  inheritance,  19

Matted  locks  of  Siva,  the
auburn,  208

Measure  of  distance  [kos),  191 ;
of  time  (kalpa),  139ni,  163,
163n2 ;  of  time  (Manwan-
tara),  250

Measuresof  distance  [yojanas),
57,  bln\  75,  190

Measures  to  prevent  entry  of
evil  spirits,  166

Measures,  the  six  political,
165,  165wi

Mediaeval  legend  of  a  dragon,
296

Medical  Journal,  The  British,
308,  310n3

Meeting  of  Alexander  and
Chandragupta,  282,  285;
of  A^okadatta  and  his
brother  Vijayadatta,  209;
of  the  maiden  and  Jlmu-
tavahana,  145 ;  of  the  two
queens,  21  ;  of  Vidushaka
and  Bhadra,  77


Meeting  eyebrows,  103-104/1
"Meeting    Eyebrows,"

Tawney,  Ind.  Ant.,  104n
Meitheis,  The,  T.  C.  Hodson,

118
*'Melanesians,"    Codrington,

Journ.  Anth.  Inst.,  198^^
Melanges,  Favre,  Wdn^
Melusi7ie,      "  La      Montagne

Noire    ou     les     Filles    du

Diable,"  190«i
Memoirs  of  the  Anthropological

Society    of   London,    *'The

Phallic  Worship  of  India,"

E.  Sellon,  242
Men  in  air-tight  armour,  299
Mendicant  Brahmans,  Piindus

disguised  as,  16
Mendicant    carried     off'    by

animated  corpse,  62
Mendicant  in  the  cemetery,

the  religious,  62
Mendicant,       the       princess

carried    off    by    the,    63;

Siva  assumes  form  of,  106 ;

slain  by  Vidushaka,  63
Mendicants,    ten    classes    of

Saiva,  90/1^
Mention,  love  on  mere,  143,

144
Merchant     named    Dharma-

gupta,  39-41 ;  named  Guha-

chandra,     40-44 ;      named

Gunavartman,   55 ;   named

Mahadana,      146 ;     named

Samudradatta,     191,     199,

226 ;  named  Skandhadasa,

71,  72;  named  Vasudatta,

130
Mercury  {Suidra),  276;  chlo-
ride of,  281
Message  of  death,  the,  113-

114;i
*  'Messenger  of  certain  death  "

{i.e.    the    poison  -  damsel),

284
Metal    or    stone     umbrellas

{htee,  ha  or  ti),  265,  265/i*
Metamorphoses,     stone,    46,

467i3

Meteors  and  comets,  Rahu's
body  the  progenitor  of,  81

Method  of  killing  female
children,  304

Methods  of  contamination  by
the  poison -damsel,  differ-
ent, 291

Methods  of  punishment  of
adultery,  various,  88w'

Mexican  Archceolotnt,  Jovce,
309ni


Mexican  sun-god,  309
Mexicans  regard  syphilis  as

divine,  309
Michlal     Jo/i,     Samuel     Ibn

Zarza,  299/1^
Middle  Ages,  poison-damsel

in  the,  292-297
Midwifery  in  India,  primitive

methods  of,  18
Might  {tejas),  IQln-
Migration   of  the    umbrella,

268,  269
Milch  cows  and   oxen  eaten

by  the  sage  Yajiiivalkhya,

241
Milindapanlia,  the,  32
Military  caste,  Nayars  origin-
ally a,  19
Milk,  nectar  in   the  sea  of,

151 ;  poison  given  to  infant

in,  313 ;  sacred  product  of

the  cow,  242
Milked  by  living  creatures,

the  earth,  241
Mille  et  U7i  Jours,  Les,  190n^
Mind,  deer  of  the  {manoinrigi),

140?i2
Minister     of     Brahraadatta,

Yogakarandaka,  91,  275 ;  of

Dhaval  Chandra,  Jayanta,

121 ;    of  Kamsundar,    Sid-

dhreh,    286;     of     Nanda,

Rakshasa,  283-285
Ministers  ofNaravahana-

datta,  the  future,  165
Minnesinger,   F.    H.   von   der

Hagen,  292^3
Mirabilihus     Mtindi,     De,

Albertus      Magnus,      299,

299;i3
Miracles    of    the    Virgin    or

Contes  Devots,  113n^
Miraculous  herb,  293
"Mirror  of  Kings,"  Barlaam,

290
Mirrors,  serpents  stare  them-
selves to  death  in,  299
Miser,  the  Brahman,  176
Misery    and     Poverty,     two

children  like,  128
Misfortune  of  marrying  out

of  one's  rank,  131
Mission  of  Agni,  the  delicate,

101
Mission  to  Ava,  Yule,  168
Mistress  of  Ladislao,  310
Mock   bridegroom,    tali   tied

by  a,  18
Mode  of  address  as  mark  of

respect,    "Mother."    201,

201n3


INDEX  II -GENERAL


359


Modern    appellation   of   the

Cororaandel    coast,    Chola

district,  92/1*
Modern    Hindus,  eclipse    an

important  event  among,  83
Mod.  Lang.  Ass.  Arner.,  "The

Story  of  Horn  and  Rimen-

hild,"  H.  Schofield,  1W-;

"  Pontus  and  the  Fair  Si-
done,"  E.  J.  Matter,  76/1^
Mohammedan  Khojas  of  Guja-
rat,    customs      connected

with  lights  among  the,  168
Mohammedan  women  of  the

north,  bodice  worn  by,  50ii
Mohammedans     introduce

opium     into     India      and

China,  304
Mohammedans      of      North

India,  168
Monarch,  Vidushaka  becomes

a,  80
Monastery  of  B  rah  mans,  57-

59,  65,  195
Monastery  at  Karkotaka,  73
Monatsschrift    fur    praktische

Dermatologie,  Okamura.  in,

308^2
Monkey-god,  Hanuman  the,

73,  197^2
Monkey  and  the  maid,  5
Monkeys  construct  a  bridge

across  the  ocean,  84,  84ri^

85n
Monkeys,    Sugriva    chief   of

the,  84,  84wi
Monsters  {sattva),  79 w^
"  Montagne     Noire     ou     les

Filles     du     Diable,     La,"

Melusine,  l^On^
Month  of  fasting  (Shrawan),

164n4
Moon    crest,    god    with    the

(Siva),  136,  170
Moon,  dogs  held  in  esteem

by  the,  81 ;  hare  in  the,  82
"Moon,    light    of    the,"

Chandraprabha  means  the,

223,  223^1
Moon  the  progenitor  of  the

Pandava  race,  13,  13^^
Moon  (Soma),  the,  45w*,  81
Moonbeams,  Chakora  subsists

upon,  235n^
Moon-god,  Harran  city  sacred

to  the,  194?i
Moons,    the     faces     of    the

women  like,  50,  50?^^
Moral  of  the    poison-damsel
myth  in  the  Gesta  Romano-
rum,  296,  297


Morals  of  Indra,  45n*

Mortal  kalpa,  a  (measure  of
time),  163^2

Mortals,  a  river  that  cannot
be  crossed  by,  75

Mosses  from  an  Old  Manse,
Nathaniel  Hawthorne,
297^1

"Mother,"  mode  of  address  as
mark  of  respect,  201,  201n^

Motf,  "The  Act  of  Truth,"
31-33;  "Beauty  and  the
Beast,"  254;  "Bellerophon
letter,"  114w  ;  "Death  from
Love,"  9n2,  lOn ;  "declar-
ing presence,"  76n^  77 ;
"The  dohada,"  31;  "Ex-
ternal Soul,"  120;  *^  For-
bidden Chamber,"  223^1,
224^)1 ;  "Letter  of  Death,"
114w ;  "Magical  Impedi-
ments," 121;  "Mutalammis
letter,"  114i»;  "The  Older
and  Older,"  190^1 ;  "Over-
hearing," 107n^,  lOSn,
219^1;  "The  Poison-dam-
sel," 275-313;  "Scorned
Love  of  Women,"  120-124;
"Supernatural  Birth,"
136^1;  "Swan  Maiden,"
245;  "Uriah  letter,"  114w

Mount  Meru,  102

Mountain  behind  which  the
sun  rises,  Udaya  the
eastern,  Q7n^

Mountain,  the  Brocken,
104/1.2,  105n ;  named  Govin-
dakuta,  212  ;  Himavat,  138;
Kalinjara,  149  ;  Mahendra,
92;  the  Malaya,  140,  150,
156;  Mandara,  67ni,  93;
Meru,  the  world,  67v} ;
called  Rishabha,  222;  of
the  rising  sun,  68,  75;
named  Udaya,  67,  67n^ ;
named  Uttara,  190,  191

Mountain  [naga),  154n^

Mountaineer  (ndga),  154n^

Mountaineer,  a  wild
(Savara),  141-149

Mountains,  the  Harz,  104w2  ;
Lord  of  the  (Parvataka),
284,  285;  the  Himalaya,
54;  King  of  the  Snowy
(Siva),  143;  of  Turkestan,
the  Snake,  298;  the
Vindhya,  54
Mouth    of  a    corpse,   flames

issuing  from  the,  62
Mouth  of  Death,  temple  of
Durga  like  the,  227


Mrichchhakatika,  or  Toy  Cart,
Wilson,  192nS  232n

Mudrd  -  Rdkshasa,  the,  or
Signet-ring  of  Rdkshasa,
Visakhadatta,  160^^,  281,
283-284

[ « '  M  uhammedan  Pregnancy
Observances  in  the  Pun-
jab"] H.  A.  Rose,  Joum.
Anth.  Inst.,  166

Mummies,  attempts  to  find
traces  of  venereal  disease
in,  308,  308ni

Muratori,  Sanuto  Junior,  268,
268^3

Murdered  child  becomes  a
sword,  236

Mustard-seeds  enable  Vidu-
shaka to  travel  through
the  air,  63,  64;  growing
from  the  navel  of  a  corpse,
62

Muzzling  sheep  owing  to
aconite,  279

"My  lover"  {majjdo),  46w^

Mysterious  deaths  of  Duhka-
labdhika's  husbands,  69,  70

Mystic  relation  between  the
cow  and  the  universe,  240

Mystic  significance  attached
to  the  naked  body,  119

Myth,  the  Cupid  and  Psyche,
253 ;  French  version  of  the
poison  -  damsel,  293-294  ;
German  versions  of  the
poison-damsel,  294,  294ri^ ;
Italian  version  of  the,  294-
295  ;  story  of  Urvai^i  and
Pururavas  interpreted  as  a
nature,  251

Myth  of  Rahu,  unknown
origin  of  the,  81

Mythes  et  Legendes  de  I'Inde
el  de  la  Perse,  Leveque,
152/ii

Mythologie,  Deutsche,  Grimm,
'  105/1

Mythology,  the  horse  in,  57?i^

Myths  traced  through  ety-
mology, origin  of,  251,  252

"Nagas,  The,"  C.  F.  Oldham,
Journ.  Roy.  As.  Soc,  307 n^

Nails,  the  prints  of  loving,  49,
49^3

Naked  body,  mystic  signifi-
cance attached  to  the,
119

Naked,  Urvasi  must  not  be
seen,  245,  246  ;  worshipping
the  gods,  98.  98^^


#
360


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


"Nala     and     Davadanti,"

Tawney,  Kathdkoqa,  232 /i
"  Nala      and       Damayantl,"

Mahabhdrata,  lln,  232/i
Name    of    Jimutavahana,

former,  141
Name  of  Phalabhuti  given  to

Somadatta,  97
Names      denoting      natural

phenomena,  251,  252
Names     of     umbrellas,     dis-
tinctive, 264
Narrative   of   Travels    on    the

Aniazon     and     Rio    Xegro,

A.   K.  Wallace,  280^'
Nations,  Ljiws  of,  277-279
Native  courts  in  Africa,  um-
brellas used  at,  271
Nat.  Hist.,   Pliny,  108>i,  296,

300
Natural  Law,  277,  278
Natural    phenomena,    names

denoting,  251,  252
Nature  myth,  story  of  Urvasi

and   Pururavas  interpreted

as  a^  251
Nature     myths     among    the

Australians,   Eskimos   and

South  Sea  Islanders,  252
Nature     of     the     Rakshasas

leaves  Vijayadatta,  210
Nature  of  a  snake  acquired

by  maiden,  291,  294,  295
Navel  of  a  corpse,  mustard-
seeds  growing  from  the,  62
Neck    of   concubine    rubbed

with  poison,  297
Necklace  from  the  heads  of

elephants,  142,  U2n^
Necks,  with  uplifted  {utkan-

dhardg  ca  suciram),  30/^^
Nectar  (Amrita),  155n*  ;  Ga-

ruda  ordered  to  bring,  151;

of  immortality  brought  by

Garuda  to  the  snakes,  155,

156
Neglect   of  female   children

in  India,  18
Negotiation  termed  "giving

of  a  daughter,"  the,  47
Negro   races,   eating   human

flesh    among    the     Bantu.

l9Sn\  199/1
Nepalese  War,  the,  280
"  Net  of  the  corn-god,"  circle

of  flour  and  water   called

the,  296
Neiihundert      Ged'dchtnuss-

wurdige-Geheimjiuss  und

W  iinderwerck,     Georg

Henisch,  294wi


New  English  Dictiona  ry,
Murray,  269/1*,  270

Neiv  York  Medical  Journal,
"The  Origin  of  Syphilis,"
J.  Knott,  308/i2

Night,  lotus  which  closes  in
the,  25,  25/ii

Night  of  marriage,  evil  spirits
active  on  first,  306

Nights,  The  Thousand  and  One,
Burton,  10/i,  58/1^  104/i,
iai/ii.123,124, 131/ii,147/ii,
153/1,  169,  190/^1,  193/ii,
201 /i3,  202/ii,  218/i3,  219/i3,
220/i,  223/ii,  224/1

Nights,  Straparola,  10/i

Nine  white  umbrellas  mark
the  king,  264

Nodes  AtiicoB,  Gellius,  277

Nocturnal  assassins  sent  to
the  enemy's  camp,  91

Nodes.  Rahu's  bodyrepresents
the  descending,  81

No-moon  night  or  Amavas,
118

Non-existence  of  polyandry
among  Nayars  to-day,  18

Non-fraternal  polyandry,  18

Non-venomous  snake  {dun-
dubha),  152^2

North  defiled  by  barbarians,  53

North  India,  Mohammedans
of,  168

North  Indian  Notes  and  Queries,
118,  1427ii,  168

North,  Queen  of  the  (Regina
Aquilonis),  296

Northern  India,  customs  con-
nected with  eclipses  in,  82,
83

Nose,  character  indicated  by,
7/ii

Nose  cut  off  as  punishment
for  adultery,  88,  88/ii

Noses  of  impaled  robbers  cut
ofl^,  60-62

Not  to  be  killed  {aghnyd),  240

"  Not  to  see  the  sun"  taboo,
268

Note  on  nudity  in  magic
ritual,  117-120;  on  poly-
andry, 16-19 ;  on  the  pre-
cautions observed  in  the
bir.th-chamber,  166-169;
on  Rahu  and  eclipses,  81-
83;  on  the  sacred  cow  of
the  Hindus,  240-241;  on
Tantric  rites  in  the  Mdlafl
Mddhava,  214-216;  on
women  whose  love  is
scorned,  120-124


Notes  on  the  '*  Act  of  Truth  "
motif  in  folk-lore,  31-33

[*'  Notes  on  a  Collection  of
Regalia  of  the  Kings  of
Burma  of  the  Alompra
Dynasty"]  R.  C.  Temple,
Ind.  Ant.,  264/ii,  269,  269/i<

[*'  Notes  on  Early  Economic
Conditions  in  Northern
India,"  Caroline  F.  Rhys
Davids]  Joum.  Roy.  As.
Soc,  240

Notes  on  sdmudrika,  by  Rai
Bahadur  B.  A.  Gupta,  7/i^

Notes  on  the  Spirit  Basut  of
Belief  arid  Custom,  J.  S.
Campbell,  167,  229n^

Nourished  on  poison,  infant
girls,  293

Nourishment,  poison  as,  300

Novel  of  Guerino  Meschino,
138/i4

Novelle,  Bandello,  lOn

Novels  of  the  tenth  day  of
the  Decameron,  source  of
the,  76wi

Nucleus  of  the  Maurya  and
Gupta  empires,  Magadha,
the,  3ni

Nudity  in  black  magic,  117 ;
in  fertility  rites,  118;  in
healing  disease,  118,  119 ;
in  magic  ritual,  note  on,
117-120  ;  in  rites  to  pro-
duce rain,  117,  118

''Nudity  in  Custom  and
Ritual,"  W.  Crooke,  Joum.
Anth.  Inst.,  119

Number  of  horizontal  lines
on  forehead  as  indication
of  years  of  longevity.  In}

Nuptial  taboo,  248 ;  earliest
example  of,  252

Nurses  of  Karttikeya,  the,  102

Nymph  comes  out  of  a  tree,
a  heavenly,  233

Nymph,  Rambha  the,  34,  35

Nymph  Urva^!,  the,  34-36,
245-259

Nymphs  of  heaven  displaying
their  skill  in  dancing,  35

Nymphs  in  the  shape  of
swans,  246

Object  of  worship,  horses  an,

57/ii

Objects  of  life,  the  three,
180,  180/i2

Oblation  to  gods  and  vener-
able men,  argha  an,  77,
77/ii


INDEX  II -GENERAL


361


Oblation  of  human  flesh,  99
Oblation  made  to  the  tree,

97
Observances,  pregnancy,  166
Obstacles,  Conqueror  or  Victor

of  (Ganesa),  1,  125,  125?^l ;

Lord  of  (Ganesa),  102
Ocean,  Churning  of  the,  65n^

67^^    81  ;    Saktideva    pre-
pares  to    cross    the,    191  ;

Vidushaka  prepares  to  cross

the,   71,   72 ;    whirlpool  in

the,  217,  218
Ocean  of  Story,  the.  14w,  31,

39/ii,    bOn\    56?z2-3,    ^n\

62^i2,  82,  90>^3,  107^1,  UTn\

150ni,    169,    l%Zn\    193ni,

245,  266
October  (Aso),  119
Odes,  Horace,  120
Odyssey,  Homer,  106>i4,  217^2,

218»3
Offer  of  Catti  prince  to  poison

Arminius,  277
Offer  to  kill  a  cow  an  act  of

hospitality,  241
Offering    to    the    fire,    daily

{homo),  257,  257^11
Oil  {sneha),  lln^,  163/^l
Oil-presser's  caste,  the  Tell,

82
Ointment  of  juice  of  aconite,

girl  rubbed  with,  310
Old    age    venerated    in    the

East,  190/ii
Old  Deccan  Days,  Frere,  3n,

108^1,  136ni,  202l^^
Old  and  Modem  Poison  Lore,

A.  Wynter  Blyth,  281
"Older    and    older"    motif,

190/ii
Oldest  love-story  in  the  world,

245
Omen,  eclipse   an    evil,    82 ;

whenchildren  speakshortly

after  birth,  an  evil,  39^^
One-eyed  boy,  Vasantaka  dis-
guised as  a,  20,  22
One    umbrella,    the    earth

under,  125,  125^3
Opera  hactenns  inedita  Ilogeri

Baconi,    Steele,    290,    291,

291^1
Opium,   early    history    of,

303,  304;  eating,  303-305;

favoured    by    the    Hindus,

304  ;  given  to  infants,  304
"Opium,"    E.    M.    Holmes,

Ency.  Brit.,  304n^
Opium  {ppos,  opion  or  afyim),

304


Opium,    Some     Truths    about,

H.  A.  Giles,  3047^1
Opposition    of   Brahmans   to

entrance  of  the  king,  57  ;

of  Brahmans  to  polyandry,

17
Opus  Maius  of  Roger  Bacon,

J.  H.  Bridges,  100^
Order  of  St  John,  39>i3
Order  of  Vishnu  to  Indra  to

give  Urvasi   to    Puriiravas,

34,35
Ordinary      occurrence      of

adulterv    of    a    gambler's

wife,  88?ii
Orgies  held  by  witches,  104,

104^2

Orient  und  Occident,  Benfey,
120

Orientalist,  Tamil  story  in  the,
De  Rosairo,  184n

Origin  and  Development  of  the
Moral  Ideas,  Westermarck,
96^1,  97n,  229^2

Origin  of  eclipses,  81-83 ;  of
the  myth  of  Rahu,  un-
known, 81 ;  of  myths  traced
through  etymology,  251,
252  ;  of  idea  of  ''overhear-
ing" motif  may  be  homoeo-
pathic magic,  107n^,  108ii ;
of  Pandus  in  a  single  divine
being,  17;  ofstory  of  Urvasi
and  Pururavas,  Frazer's
theory  of  the,  253,  254 ;  of
the  umbrella,  263

"Origin  of  Syphilis,  The,"
J.  Knott,  New  York  Medical
Journal,  308/2,2

Original  significance  of  the
umbrella,  267

^07'igines  de  la  France  co?item-
poraifie,  Les,  Taine]  ISbn^

Ornamental  lying-in  chamber,
161

Ornaments  de  la  Femtne,  Les,
O.  Uzanne,  272

Othello,  Shakespeare,  145?z

"Otus  and  Ephialtes,"
Preller,  Griechische  Myth-
ologie,  13n*

Overheard  by  Saktideva,  the
conversation  of  birds,  219

"Overhearing"  motif,  107n^
108r.,  219?ii

Over-insisting  {atinirhand-
hinih),  221ni

Overwhelming  power  of  love,
9

Ox,  sacrificial  act  of  eating
the,  240


Oxen     eaten     by    the     sage

Yajiiivalkya,     milch     cows

and,  241
Oxford  Essays,  Max   Miiller,

251,  251^1
Oyster  shells  eaten,  lime  of,

301,  302

"Padlock,    The,"     Burton,

Pentamerone,  253
Pagoda,  history  of  the  Shwe

Dagon,  265
"Pagodas,    Aurioles    and

Umbrellas,"  F.  C.  Gordon

Cumming,  The  English  Illus-
trated Magazine,  272
Pagodas  surmounted  by  um-
brellas, 265,  266
Pain    of   love,    Guhachandra

tortured  with  the,  40
Painting  of  Sita,  22,  22^^
Paintings  in  Nagpur,  307
"Palaund  Gopala,''  J.  Hertel,

Indische  Erz'dhler,  121
Palace  in  the  air,   the,  110,

111
Palace,     gable     of     Prester

John's,  169  ;  plot  to  set  fire

to  the  queen's,  3
Palace  [sard  or  sarat,  Persian),

162n
Palm-leaf  MS.,  a  Telugu,  121
Pan  containing  fire  turns  into

SamI  tree,  247,  250
Panchatantra ,    the,    B  e n  f e y ,

52ni,  108?^,  113^1,  297^^2
Patijdb,  Census  Report,  118
Panjab  Notes  and  Queries,  118,

168,  232/z
Papers     on     Malay     Subjects,

R.  J.  Wilkinson,  167
Paradise  Lost,  Milton,  427i2
Paradise,  Parijata  one  of  the

five  trees  of,  13,  l^n
Paradise  tree  (mafidara),  101,

101n2
Paragon    rib    for    umbrellas,

271
Parasol  (saioual,  Persian),  263
Parasols    in    Constantinople,

268

Parish  umbrella,  270

Parisishtaparvan,      Hema-

chandra,  108y^.  285,  2^f>n\
305^2

Partridge      (Chakora),      235,

235713
Passion    [rajas),    106,    ]06n^;

[rdga),  li^ri^
Past,  dish  of  emerald  reveals

the,  159,  160


362


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


Past  at  our  Doors,  The,  W.  W.

Skeat,  270,  270/1^
Pathan  women,  Kurtas  worn

by,  50^5
Pausanias,  Frazer,  lOn^
Pavilion     of     Vasavadatta

burned, 21
Pavilions,  the  three,  222
Peace,  political  measure  of,

165ni
Peak,    beliefs  regarding   the

depression      on      Adam's,

84^1,  85/1
Peaks  of  the  Vindhya,  92
Pearl  Ikunjaramani  gajaimtktd),

142ni
Pearls     in      the      heads     of

elephants,  142^^
Penance       performed       by

Pururavas,  36
Pentameronc,     Basile     (trans.

Burton),  ^n\  190/ii,  253
People     adorned    with     red

powder,  164,  164ti*
People  who  eat  human  flesh,

hasezi,  199n
People,  Indra  a  god  of  the,

45^4  ;  of  Kalinga,  92,  92n2  ;

red  as  vermilion,  58-59n^
Periods     in     the     life    of    a

Brahman,  180,  180/ii
Perseverance,  the  reward  of,

97
Persian  sard  or  sardi  (edifice

or  palace),  162n
Persian     umbrella     (sdiwdn),

263 ;  {smjdbaii),  263
Perspiration,  killing  by  the,

285,  291 ;  poison  transferred

through  the,  285
Peru     [Conquest    of],     W.

Prescott,  88rii
Pervade,  to  (rt.v),  251
Petrarchian  vocabulary,  263
"Phallic  Worship   of  India,

The,"  E.  Sellon,  Mcm.Anth.

Soc.  U?t.,  242
"  Phallism,"  E.  S.  Hartland,

Hastings'  Enaj.  llel.  Eth.,

119,  307^2
Phallus,    cobra   regarded  as,

307
Pharsalia,  Lucan,  62n^
Phenomena,  names  denoting

natural,  251,  252
Physician,  story  of  the  clever,

2,  2/ii
Pilgr'nnage  to  El  Medinah  and

Meccah,  Burton,  271
Pilgrimage,  Ramasetu  a  place

of,  84ni


*'  Pill,  Story  of  the  Magic,"

183/ii
Pillar  of  victory  set   up  by

the  King  of  Vatsa,  91,  92,

92ni
Pillars  at  Allahabad,  Bubbal,

etc.,  92/1^
Pinnacle    of    the    Kshatriya

race  and  Lord  of  the  Royal

Umbrella,  title  of,  267
Place  of  Adam's  exile,  Ceylon

regarded  by  the  Arabs  as,

84;i^,  Sbn
Place  of  pilgrimage,  Ramasetu

a,  84;ii
''Place    of   Sacrifice"    (Pra-

yaga  or  Allahabad),  llOn^
Plains  of  the  Ganges,  677J^
Planet  (graha),  ISOn*
Plants,     arka,     161  ;     poison

caused    from,    312 ;     saml,

161 ;  windows  covered  with

sacred,  161,  166
Play,  wealth  lost  at,  86
"Plays     of     Bhasa,      The,"

Banerji-Sastri,  Joum.  Roy.

As.  Soc,  21  n^
"Plays     of     Bhasa,      The,"

Thomas,    Joum.    Roy.    As.

Soc,  21n^
Pleasure  [kdma),  180^^ ;  king

addicted  to,  125
Plot   to   get    the    king    and

queen    to    Lavanaka,    12 ;

to  overthrow  Nanda,  283 ;

to  set  fire  to  the  queen's

palace,  3  ;  of  Yaugandhara-

yana  to  give  the  King  of

Vatsa     dominion     of    the

earth,  3
Plots  to  kill    Chandragupta,

283,  284
Ploughing   to   produce   rain,

117,  118
Poem      relating      to      the

Bharatas,    the    great    (the

Mahdbhdrata),  16
Poet  Chand,  the,  266
Poet    Ottacker    or    Ottokar,

the  German,  309,  309/1^
Poetry,  the  smile  in  Hindu,

50ni
"  Points    of    the    Compass,"

T.  D.  Atkinson,  Hastings'

Ency.  Ret.  Eth.,  54«i
Poison,  beautiful  maiden  fed

on,  291,   313;  bile  of  the

green  tree-snake  as,  303 ;

bile   of  the  green  water-
frog  as,  303;    bile  of  the

jungle  crow  as,  303  ;  caused


Poison — continued

from  plants,  312  ;  conveyed
in  a  "chew"  of  betel,  303 ;
damsel  brought  up  on,  291,
313  ;  doe  rubbed  with,  298 ;
eaten  regularly,  300 ;  given
to  infant  in  milk,  313;
infant  girls  nourished  on,
293;  by  intercourse,  305-
310;  neck  of  concubine
rubbed  with,  297 ;  as
nourishment,  300;  the
Pontic  duck  lives  on,  300;
ring  to  destroy  effects  of,
301  ;  transferred  through
perspiration,  285

Poison  -  damsel  in  Arabia,
Asia  Minor,  Mesopotamia,
Persia  and  Syria,  286 ;  in
Europe,  292-297;  has  no
existence  in  fact,  313  ;  fatal
bite  of  the,  291 ;  fatal  kiss
of  the,  294  ;  in  the  Gesta
Romanorum,  296,  297  ;  herb
as  protection  against  the,
293;  in  India,  281-286
killed  by  antidote,  297
kills  Parvataka,  284,  285
**  messenger  of  certain
death,"  284;  in  the
Middle  Ages,  286;  prepared
by  Nanda,  285;  in  the
Secretum  Secretorum,  286-
291  ;  sent  to  Alexander  the
Great,  291-295 ;  treatise  to
discover  if  a  woman  is  a,
286,  286n*

Poison  -  damsel  myth,  cobra
sting  a  clue  to  the,  311 ;
French  version  of  the,  293,
294 ;  German  version  of
the,  294,  294nM  Itahan
version  of  the,  294,  295;
venereal  disease  in  con-
nection with  the,  308

Poison  -  damsels,  Appendix
III,  275-313;  Sanskrit
references  to,  281-286 ;
sent  among  the  enemy's
host,  91,  91ni

"  Poison  in  a  glance  "  {drig*
visa  or  dristi-visa),  298

Poison  Lore,  Old  and  Modem,
A.  Wynter  Blyth,  281

Poison  My.iteries,  C.  J.  S.
Thompson,  281

Poison  War,  The,  A.  A.
Roberts,  281

Poisoned  by  the  Florentines,
Ladislao,  310

Poisoned  hay  or  fodder,  276


11


oisoned      trees,      creepers,
water,  grass,  91
'oisoned  water,  etc.,  275-280
'oisoned    wells    in    German

South-West  Africa,  281
'oisoned  words  {i.e.  poison-
ous breath),  292

i*oisoning  of  Australians,  280,
280w* ;  of  Tasmanians,  280,
280/i5;  of  wells  by  the
Gurkhas  of  Nepal,  280;
of  the  Yuta  Indians,  280

Poisonings  by  the  Borgias,
279

Poisonous  animals,  garlic  j  uice
dangerous  to,  296 ;  human
saliva  dangerous  to,  296

Poisonous  breath,  300-303

Poisonous  harpist,  the,  293,
294

Poisonous  herbs,  girl  brought
up  among,  297

Poisonous  look  of  snakes,
belief  in  the,  298

Poisonous  saliva,  305

Poisons  condemned  by  the
Romans,  use  of,  277,  278

Poisons  in  the  Great  War,
280,  281

Poisons  of  India,  279,  280

Poisons  :  their  Effects  and  De-
tection, A.  W'.  and  M.  W.
Blyth,  281

Policy  incarnate  in  bodily
form,  Vasavadatta,  38

Politic  expedients,  the  four,
45,  45/i3

Political  measures,  the  six,
165,  165>ii

Polyandrous  marriage  of
Draupadi,  13,  IS/i^,  14,  16,
17

Polyandry  in  the  Bismarck
Archipelago,  18;  causes
of,  18,  19 ;  non-existent
among  the  Nayars  to-day,
18  ;  factors  in  favour  of,  19  ;
in  the  Hawaian  Islands.  18 ;
in  New  Caledonia,  18 ;  in
the  New  Hebrides,  18;
note  on,  16-19 ;  shortage
of  women  a  cause  of,  18  ;
in  various  parts  of  the
world,  16-19

Polygamy,  forms  of,  17

Polygyny,  17

Pontic  duck  lives  on  poison,
300

"  Pontus  and  the  Fair  Sidone,"
E.  J.  Matter,  Mod.  Lang.
Ass.  Amer.,  7Qn^


INDEX  II -GENERAL

Poor  Brahman  woman,  the,
128,  129,  133-135

Pope  Alexander  III,  268

Popol  Vuh,  Brasseur  de  Bour-
bourg,  309/^1

Popular  Antiquities  of  Great
Britain,  Brand,  99n,  105/i

Popular  Religion  and  Folk-
Lore  of  Northern  India,  W.
Crooke,  57^1,  82,  83,  96ni,
99n,  127n2,  138yi3,  142^1,
155;i3,  193^1,  197^2,  202^1,
240,  256,  256/i3

Popular  Stories  of  Ancient
Egypt,  Maspero,  112n^,
120-121

Popular  Tales  and  Fictions,
Clouston,  108n,  ll^i,  122,
169,  190^1,  192^1,  224n

Popular  Tales  from  the  Norse,
Dasent,  196n^

Popularity  of  the  Secretum
Secretorum,  286

Portion  of  house  allotted
to  the  women,  harem,
161^4

Portuguese  Christians,  85w

Portuguese,  introduction  of
syphilis  into  India  by  the,
310,  310/^3

Posture  called  Padmasana,
sitting  in  the,  176,  176n*

Poverty,  two  children  like
Misery  and,  128

Powder,  people  adorned  with
red,  164,  164w* ;  made  of
turmeric,  lime-juice  and
borax  {kunkam),  164^*

Power  and  sovereignty,  the
umbrella  a  symbol  of,  264

Power  of  becoming  vampires
by  eating  human  flesh,
198^1 ;  of  flying  through
the  air,  103,  104 ;  of  love,
the  overwhelming,  9 ;  ob-
tained by  austerities,  85 ;
of  remembering  former
birth,  149;  of  truth,  the
irresistible,  31 ;  of  witches'
spells,  magic,  103,  104

Prahandhacintdmani,  Tawney,
108n

Prakrit  dialect,  46

Prayer  of  the  mendicant  to
Durga,  62

Prayer  of  Saktideva,  228

"Pre-Buddhist  Religionof  the
Burmese,  The,"  A.  Grant
Brown,  Folk-Lore,  265w^

Precautions  observed  in  the
birth-chamber,  166-169


363

Preceptor,   Prajnaptikausika,

212
Precious  stones  in  their  eyes,

women  with,  306
Precious     stones,     rules     for

preserving,  288  ;  valley  full

of,  299
Pregnancy  observances,  166-

169
Pregnancy    of    Vasavadatta,

137,  138  ;    of  Vindurekha,

231
Preparation  of  the   king  for

conquest,  53 ;    of  the  king

for  the  expedition,  89
Present   of  a   poison-damsel

sent     to     Alexander     the

Great,  291-295
Present  sent  to  the  chaplain

by  the  rogue  Madhava,  178
Prevalence  of  fraternal  poly-
andry   in    the    Himalayan

regions,  18 ;  in  Tibet,  18 ;

among   the  Todas   of  the

Nilgiri  hills,  18
Previous   birth    of  Sinapara-

krama's  wife,  160
Previous     life,     done     in     a

{purogaih),  135n^
Price     of     a     man's     blood,

epithet     denoting     the

(sataddya),  240
-Pride    Abased,"  J.   H.

Knowles,  Ind.  Ant.,  193n^
Pride  one  of  the  six  faults

of  man,  106/1^
Pride    of   wealth,    Brahmans

intoxicated  with  the,  59
Priest,  fire-  (agnihotrl),  257
Primitive  Culture,  E.  B.  Tylor,

83,  96ni,  103^1
Primitive  Culture  of  India,  T.

C.  Hodson  (Roy.  As.  Soc),

97n,  256/^4
Primitive    methods    of    mid-
wifery in  India,  18
Prince  eaten  by  his  parents,

113,  114
Prince     of    the     Rakshasas,

Lambajihva,  206
Prince  of  the  Siddhas,  Visva-

vasu,  the  chief,  140
Princes  named  Dhritarashtra

and  Pandu,  16
Princess    carried    off  by    the

mendicant,  63
Princess   of    Kashmir   whose

beauty  maddens,  6^^
Princess,  Vidushaka  watches

in   the   apartment   of  the,

74


364


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


Princess  won  by  Saktideva,
225

Princess's  life  saved  by  Vidu-
shaka,  63

Prints  of  loving  nails,  49,  49w^

Prison,  magic  circle  as  a,  lOOn

Proc.  Amer.  Phil.  Soc.,  "  Ahal-
yayai,"  Bloomfield,  45n^ ;
"  On  the  Art  of  Entering
Another's  Body,"  Bloom-
field,  212ni

Procession  of  the  king,
triumphant,  51

Proclamation  announced  by
beatof  drum,73,  73n2,  173,
187,  224

*'  Prodigies  and  Portents,"
VV.  D.  WalHs,  Hastings'
Enc^.  Rel.  Eth.,  83

Producing  fire  {i.e.  "rubbing
Agni  forth  "),  255wi

Products  of  the  cow,  the  five
sacred  {panchagavtja),  242

Professional  proxies  for
husbands,  Cadeberiz,  307

Progenitor  of  meteors  and
comets,  Rahu's  body  the,  81

Progenitor  of  the  Pandava
race,  the  moon  the,  13,
13ni

Propitiating  Siva  to  obtain  a
son,  136 ;  Siva  with  aus-
terities, 84,  85  ;  the  Vetala,
235

Propngnatore,  II,  2S9n^

Prosperity,  Lakshml  or  Sri,
Goddess  of,  65,  65w^  75;
Timira  the  dwelling  of  the
Goddess  of,  36

Protection  against  the  poison-
damsel,  herb  as,  293;  of
child  by  lamps,  161  ;  of  a
mightier  king,  political
measure  of  recourse  to  the,
165ni

Protective  barrier  to  the
dead  and  dying,  magic
circle  a,  99n

Protective  barrier  round  a
house,  magic  circle  a,  99n

Protective  value  of  iron,  166,
167

Proxies  for  husbands,  Cade-
beriz professional,  307

Proxy  for  husband,  306,  307

Pseudo  -  Aristotelean  work,
Secret  urn  Secretonim,  286-291

Pseudo-Aristotelisches  Stein-
buch  von  Liittich,"  Zeit-
schrift  fiir  dentsches  Altert.,
299ni


Psendo-Callistheiies,  1387i*,  169
Psychology  of  Sex,  Studies  in

the,  Havelock  Ellis,  229n2,

308,  308ni
' '  Pucelle       Venimeuse"

(poison-damsel),  293
Punishment      for      adultery

among    the    Pardhi    caste,

88ni
Punishment      for     adultery,

nose  cut  off  as,  88,  88n^ ;

in  places  other  than  India,

88ni
Pupil  of  Vi^vamitra,  Galava

a  son  or,  21  In^
Puranas,  the,  240,  241,  248
Pursuit  of  a  boar  by  Saktideva,

230
Pursuit  of  the  chase  by  the

king,  126
Pyramids  haunted  by  guardian

spirit,  one  of  the,  6n'-
Pyrites     as     charm     against

alligators,  iron,  168

"Qara  Khan,  The  Story  of,"

E.  J.  W.  Gibb,   The  Story

of  Jewad,  I90n^
Qirq  Fesir  Tarlkhi  [Histoiy  of

the  Forty  Vezirs),  123
Quarrel  of  Sunda  and  Upa-

sunda,  14,  14n
Quarrelsome  wife,  the,   159-

160
Quart.     Joum.     Mythic.    Soc.,

"  S  V  a  p  n  a  -  vasavadatta,"

K.  R.  Pisharoti,  2ln^
Quartz,  jewels  of  glass  and,

182
Queen   of  Ethiopia,   eunuch

of  Candace,  85n
Queen  of  India  sends  Alex-
ander a  poison-damsel,  294
Queen  Jan  Shah,  124
Queen  KuvalayavalT,  98
Queen  of  the  North  (Regina

Aquilonis),  296
'Queen    of   the    Serpents,"

Burton,  Nights,  153n
Queen  of  Sizire,  294
Queen's  palace,   plot  to   set

fire  to  the,  3
Quotations  about  umbrellas,

270,  271

Race,  King  of  the  Chola,  92,
92n* ;  the  King  of  Vatsa
sprung  from  the  Pan^ava,  1 ;
moon  the  progenitor  of  the
Pan^ava,  13,  I3n} ;  of  Pan^u,
89'


Rain    in    Chunar,     Mirzapur

district,  rites   to  produce.

117,  118
Rain,  nudity  in  rites  to  pro-
duce, 117,  118;  ploughing

to  produce,  117,  118
Rain  ritual  in  various  parts  of

the  world,  nudity  in,  117,

118
Rdmayana,    the,    22n^,    34n*

45rt*,  'Un\  102ni,  272
Rams  of  Urva^I,  246,  249
Range,  the  Vindhya,  188
Rank   abandoned    by   Soma-

prabha,  celestial,  44
Rank  betrayed    by  smell  of

the  body,  high,  22,  22^2
Rank  of  a  Vidyadhara,  rites

to  obtain  the,  233,  234
**  Rappacini's      Daughter,"

Mosses  from  an  Old  Manse,

Nathaniel  Hawthorne,  297,

197w^
Rare    appearance    of    the

poison-damsel    in  Sanskrit

literature,  281
Bos  Mfild,  Forbes,  266,  266n8,

305ni
R'dtsel  der  Sphinx,    Laistner,

299ni
Raven    connected    with    the

Water  of  Life,  155^4
Reason   for  split  tongues  of

snakes,  152
Reasons  for  nudity  in  magic

ritual,  117
Recensions   of   the    Secretum

Secretorum,  287,  288-291
Recht  und  Sitte,  J.  Jolly,  163n
Recitation  of  Phalabhuti   at

the  king's  door,  97,  98
Recognition,  the  ring  of,  76,

77
Reconciliation  of  the  King  of

Magadha,  47
Recourse  to  the  protection  of

a    mighter    king,    political

measure  of,  165;i^
Red  lead,  marking  with,  23n
Red  powder,  people  adorned

with,  164,  164m*
Red  umbrellas,  lesser  officials

have,  265
Red  used  in  marriage  rites,

the  colour,  23w,  24n
Red  as  vermilion,  people,  58,

59,  mn}
Refusal  of  Kanakarekha  to  be

married,  172,   173;  of  the

king  to  ascend  the  jewelled
throne,  53


fl


INDEX  II -GENERAL


1  egalia,  five  articles  of,  264
J  egimen    Sanitatis,    chapters

of  Secretum  Secretorum,  288
J  egiment    pestilentzischer

giffiiger    Fieber,    Johannes

Hebenstreidt,  296
"  Legion    above     the    three

worlds  called  Goloka,  242
leisehuch,  Hans  Schiltberger,

279^1
leise?i  (lurch  Siidamerika,  J.  J.

von  Tschudi,  ISOhi^
lejected  love  of  women,  105,

109,  120-124
dejection     of    Kalaratri     by

Sundaraka,  105,  109
tielation    between    the    cow

and  the  universe,  mystic,

240
Relation    of   Sankhachuda,

Matanga,  156
Relations  attack  Jimiitaketu,

140
Relative  found  by  Saktideva,

195
Relief    from     taboo     during

eclipses,  kma  or  dlb  grass

as,  82
Religion     of    Babylonia     and

Assyria,     Morris     Jastrow,

61ni
"  Religion  of  the  Burmese,The

Pre-Buddhist,"     R.    Grant

Brown,  Folk-Lore,  265n,^
Religion  of  the  Semites,  Lectures

on  the,  W.  Robertson  Smith,

119,  194»i
Religion  des  Veda,  H.  Olden-
berg,  252;ii
Religious  acts  before  making

a     sachchakiriya      (Act     of

Truth),  31,  32
Religious  ascetic,  rogue  Siva

disguised  as  a,  176
Religious   mendicant  in  the

cemetery,  62
Religious  significance  of  the

umbrella,  265,  266
Religious    student,    Brahma-

chdrin,  an  unmarried,  180^^
Reliques,  Percy,  lOw
Remembering  {pnntvd),  200n^
Remembering   former   birth,

power  of,  149
Renunciation    by    Bhadra    of

her  magic  gifts,  78
Repast  of   Kuvalayavall  and

Adityaprabha,     the     grim,

113
Report    Cambridge  ExpeditioUy

Haddon,  198ni


Report  of  cannibalism  during

the     French     Revolution,
185^3

Report  on  the  Excavations  of
Pdtaliputra  (Patna),  39^1

Repulsive  appearance  of
Kalaratri,  103,  104

Respect,  "  Mother,"  mode  of
address  as  a  mark  of,  201,
20\n^ ;  semi-nudity  as  a
mark  of,   119

Restored  to  life  by  Garuda,
snakes,  155,  156

Result  of  insult,  duel  as,  303

Return  of  Asokadatta  to
Benares,  207 ;  to  Kaus-
arabl,  the,  48-50,  67;  of
Saktideva  to  the  City  of
Gold,  237  ;  of  Vidushaka
to  the  temple,  66 ;  of
Vidushaka,  the  triumph-
ant, 79

Reunion  of  Vasavadatta  and
the  King  of  Vatsa,  29 ;  of
Vidushaka  and  Bhadra,  77,
78

Reveals  the  past,  dish  of
emerald,  159,  160

Revenge  planned  by  Deva-
datta,  235

Reverence  paid  to  the  cobra,
oil,  312

Revolution,  report  of  canni-
balism during  the  French,
185^3

Revue  des  £tudes  Juives,  289n*

Reward  for  good  deedS;
heavenly  wives  as,  44,  45 ;
of  perseverance,  the,  97 ;
of  virtue,  133

Ricerche  intorno  al  Libro  di
Sindibad,  Comparetti,  122

Rides  in  the  air,  magical,
103-105ti

Riding  on  a  lion,  lady,  143

"Right  path,  in  the"  (indr-
gasthd),  159n^

Rig- Veda,   the,   34^^,   57^^,

*  86/?i,  88>^l,  231^1, 232/1,  240,

245-247, 250, 254,255,  255^^

Rindfeisch  Festschrift,  ' '  Die
Legende  von  der  Alter-
tums -syphilis,"  A.  V.
Notthaft,  308^2

Ring  to  destroy  the  effects
of  poison,  301  ;  given  by
Bhadra  to  Vidushaka,  68;
of  recognition,  the,  76,  77

Rings  of /rwA'a  grass,  176,  176^^

Rising  sun,  the  mountain  of
the,  75


365

Rising  {udaya),  67w^

Rite  of  fire-walking,  169

Rites  to  attain  the  rank  of  a
Vidyadhara,  233,  234

Rites  of  Hinduism,  esoteric,
214

Rites,  human  flesh  in  Tantric,
214

Rites  in  the  Mdlati  Mddhava,
Tantric,  214-216

Rites  to  produce  rain,  nudity
in,  117,  118;  in  various
parts  of  the  world,  nudity
in,  117,  118

Rites  of  the  Sakta  wor-
shippers of  Devi,  Tantric.
198^1,  199n

Rites  of  the  Twice-born,  Mrs.  S
Stevenson,   54wi,    83,   166,
242,  257^1

Ritual,  cow,  142,  241;  the
fire,  248-250;  lamps  prom-
inent in  Hindu,  169;  nudity
in  magic,  117-120

River  of  the  gods  {i.e.  the
Ganges),  54,  54^2

River  that  cannot  be  crossed
by  mortals,  75

River-goddess,  Tamasa,  lS9rt^

Roam  through  the  air,  spells
to  enable  Vasavadatta  to,
138

Roaming  Vidyadhara,  a  sky-,
141

Robbers  fall  upon  Jimutava-
hana,  141

Robbers,  the  impaled,  60-62

Robbers  tenanted  by  demons,
dead,  61,  Qln^

Rogue  sends  the  chaplain  a
present,  178 ;  wishes  to
enter  the  service  of  the
king,  178,  179

Rogues,  triumph  of  the,  183

Rohita  fish,  193n^

"Romance  of  Doolin  of
Mayence,"  Dunlop,  History
of  Fiction,  12.1n^

"  Romance  of  Merlin,"  Dun-
lop, History  of  Fiction,  39^^

Romaiiia,  Guillem  de  Cervera,
292,  292n2

Romans,  use  of  poisons  con-
demned by  the,  277,  278

Room  hung  with  weapons,
161

Rope  {guna),  75?^l

"  Rough  Notes  on  the  Snake
Symbol  in  India,"  J.  H.
Rivett-Carnac,  Joum.  As^
Soc.  Bengal,  307,  307^1


366


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


Roundel,  Anglo-Indian  term

for  umbrella,  269,  26972*
Royal    Asiatic   Society,    For-

long  Fund,  Primitive  Culture

of  India,  T.  C.  Hodson,  97n,

256n*
"  Royal "  trees,  the  five,  118
Royal  umbrella  [tipyii),  264
Royalty,     the     umbrella    an

emblem  of,  263
"Rubbing  Agni  forth"  (i.e.

producing  fire),  255n^
Rubbing  magic  article,  jinn

summoned  by,  58n^
Ruins  at  Patna  discovered  by

Waddell  and  Spooner,  39n^
Ruler  of  the  Hydaspes  (Jhe-

lum),  Poms,  283,  2837i2
Rules  for  preserving  health,

288;  regarding  fire  and  light

in  all  parts  of  the  world,

168
Russell's  viper,  deaths  from

sting  of,  311
Russian   Folk-Tales ^    Ralston,

60^2,  61ni,  71ni,  98n^  122,

152w4,  155w*,  190ni,  202wi,

223ni

Sacred  basil  or  Tulasi,  82
Sacred  Books  of  the  £aj<,245w^,

267/ii,  275wi
Sacred  cow,  the,  229,  229ni ;

of  the  Hindus,  24.0-242
"Sacred  Fires,  Establishment

of  the,"  Agnyadhana,  256n^
Sacred     to     the     moon-god,

Harran  the  city,  194w
Sacred      pipal      tree      {Ficus

religiosa),  118,  255
Sacred        plants,        windows

covered  with,  161,  166
Sacred  spot  {haram),  161n*
Sacred    Thread    investiture,

257
Sacred   tree  Butea  frondosa,

169
Sacrifice    among    the    Sakta

worshippers,  human,  198n^
Sacrifice  of  the  daughter  of

Adityasena  ordered  by  the

goddess,  62
Sacrifice  of  Jimiitavahana,  the

great,  153,  154
"Sacrifice,    The    place    of"

(Prayaga),  llOn^
Sacrifice   Saktideva,    sons    of

the  fisherman  prepare  to,

227,  228
Sacrifices  to  water-spirits,  72,

72  ni


Sacrificial  act  of  eating  the

ox,  240
Sacrificial  fire,  the,  247,  249,

250,  255
Saddle,  horse  with  ii  jewelled,

223
Sagas    about    meeting    eye-
brows, Icelandic,  103n^
Sagas  from  the  Far  East,  6n},

52ni,2
Sage,  divine   (Devarshi),  34,

34n3
Sage  Yajiiivalkya,  the  great,

241
Sage  Vasishta,  45/1^
"Sage     vom     Giftmiidchen,

Die,"   W.    Hertz,  Abhand-

lungen    d.    bayer.    Akad.    d.

Wisseii.,    286,    286^2,    292,

292ni,  296,  298,  300
Sagen  aus  Bohmen,  Grohmann,

13n*,  43^1,  99n,  104w
Sagen     aus     der     Grafsckaft

Mansfeld,  Grossler,  99n
Sagen,  M'drchen  und  Gebrduche

aus    Meklenburg,     Bartsch,

98n*,  107^1,  15371
Sagenbuch  (or   Geschichte)    der

Bayerischen  Lande,  Schopp-

ner,  113n^
"  Sake  of  a  fair  one.  for  the  "

{rdmdrtkam),  73n^
^akuntald,  Kalidasa,  144n^
Sale  of  human  flesh,  205
Saliva  dangerous  to  poisonous

animals,  human,  296
Saliva,  the  poisonous,  305
Sama  Veda,  chanters  of  the,

57
Samhitas,  the,  240
Sanctity  of  iron  among  the

Doms,  belief  in  the,  168
Sanctuary  at  Mecca,  161n*
Sandal  (chenin),  264
Sanskrit  College,   the,   50n*,

74ni,    897i3,    97w2,    100n2,

137ni,  185n2,  197w3
Sanskrit     literature,     poison-
damsel  rare  in,  281
Sanskrit  references  to  poison-
damsels,  281-286
Sanuto  Junior,  Muraiori,  268,

268n3
Sarangdhara  Charita,  the,  121
Satapatha  Brdhttmna^  the,  241,

245,  250,  254-256
Satellite     of     the     Mexican

sun-god,     Nanahuatzin     a,

309
Saved  by  shock,  Vihitasena,

37,  37ni


Saving    of    the    princess    by

Vidushaka,  63
Scandal,    The     Iniquity    of,

185,  186
Scarlet  fever,  280
Scatalogic  Rites  of  all  Nationtf

Bourke, 199n '
Scavengers,  Mehtar  caste  of,

82
Scented  drug  {Ananta),  276;

{Sarva-gandka),  276
Sceptre  {tlianlyet),  264
Science   of   thieving,    183n^,

184n
Sciences  of  the  Vidyadharas,

210-212,  212wi
Scorned  love  of  women,  120-

124
Scratches,   varieties  of  love,

49n8
Screams  of  witches,  60
Scriptores  rerum   Austriacarum

veteres  ac  genuini,  R.  D.  P.

Hieronymus  Pez,  3lOn^
Scriptoruvi    Arabum   de  Rebus

Indids  loci,  J.  Gildemeister,

312w2
Sculptures  from  Calah,  263
Sea  of  milk,  nectar  in  the,

151
Sea  propitiated  with  jewels,

72,  72ni
Sea  propitiated  by  Rama,  the

God  of  the,  84n^
Search  of  Saktideva  for  the

Golden    City,  188-195;    of

Vidushaka  for  Bhadra,  69,

71
Second      anklet      given      to

Asokadatta,  206
Second  golden  lotus  desired

by  the  king,  208
Second  rejection  of  Kalaratri

by  Sundaraka,  109
Secret     of     the     forbidden

terrace,  222,  223
Secrets    of    Brahmadatta

learnt  by  spy,  91
Secretum    Secretorum,    Pseudo-
Aristotle,  285,  286-291
Secretum    Secretorum    attributo

ad    Aristotele,    II,    Cecioni,

289712
Sect  of  ascetics,  the  Aghorl,

90n3
Seduce  Sunda  and  Upasunda,

Tilottama     sent     to,     14,

14w
Seeing  the  king  and  queens,

excitement  of  the  women

on,  50,  51


INDEX  II -GENERAL


367


Select  Specimens  of  the  Theatre

of  the  Hindus,  H.  H.  Wilson,

189ni,  192ni,  214,  258,  259,

283w3
Self-sacrifice  of  Jimutavahana,

Great,  153,  154
Semi-nudity      as      mark      of

respect,  119
Semitic  Magic,    R.    Campbell

Thompson,  99n,  193ni,  295
Semitic  opos  or  opion  (opium),

304
Separation     of    Rama    from

Sita,    9  ;     of    UrvasI    and

Pururavas,  35,  36,  245-259
Sept  Femmes  de  Barbe   Bleu,

Les,  A.  France,  224n
Serpent     race     nearly     de-
stroyed, 152
Serpent  Sesha,  90,  90^2
"  Serpent  Worship  (Indian),"

W.  Crooke,  Hastings'  Ency.

Rel.  Eth.,  307n2
"  Serpent  Worship  (Primitive

and  Introductory),"  J.  A.

Macculloch,    Hastings'

Ency.  Rel.  Eth.,  307^2
Serpent-worship    and    on    the

Venomous  Snakes  of  India,

On,     Sir    Joseph     Fayrer,

311ni
Serpents     in     their    bodies,

maidens  with,  307
"  Serpents,    The    Queen    of

the,"  Burton,  Nights,  153n
Serpents  stare  themselves  to

death  in  mirrors,  299
Serpents,  valley  guarded  by

deadly,  299
Service   of  the   king,  rogue

wishes  to  enter  the,  178,

179
Setting  of  the  sun,  the  west

the  cause  of  the,  53
Seven-headed  Naga,  the,  266
Seven  Wise  Masters,  The,  124
Seven  Years'  Travel  in  Central

America,  J.  Frobel,  280n'
Sexes,  analogy  between  fire-
drill  and  intercourse  of  the.

255
"Shade,  little"  {umbra),  263
Shaft  {aste),  269
Shame  of  Garuda,  155
Shape    of   bees   assumed    by

Guhachandra     and     the

Brahman,  42
Sheep     muzzled     owing     to

aconite,  279
Shock  saves  Vihitasena,  37,

37ni


Ship  stopped  in  the  sea  by

the  leg  of  a  giant,  72  ;  ship

swept  into  the   whirlpool,

218

Shortage  of  women  a  cause

of  polyandry,  18
Shoulder  {skandha),  205ni
Shrewish  wife,  the,  159,  160
''Shroud,     The,"      Ralston,

Russian  Folk-Tales,  60^2

Shut  up  (Italian  *err«^a),  162n

Sicilianische  Marchen,  Gonzen-

bach,     6^2,     80^1,     113ni,

135^2^  155^4^  190^1,  196711,

202ni,  209ni
Sickle  and  mm  leaves  kept  on

the  cot  of  a  Mala  woman

in  labour,  166
"  Sidi  Nu'uman,  History  of,"

Burton,  Nights,  202^1
Signet -ring    of    Rdkshasa    or

Mudrd'Rdkshasa,       Visa-

khadatta,  160^1,  281,  283-

284
Significance  of  the  umbrella,

263-265  ;  religious,  265,  266
Silence    broken    by    ascetic,

vow  of,  4
"Silent     Q)uple,     Story     of

the,"  212ni
Silver  {Tara),  276
Similarity    of  nature    myths

among  many  peoples,  252
Simples  and  Drugs  of  India,

Garcia  de  Orta,  302n^
Sin  of  Indra,  45,  46
"Sindbad  the  Sailor,"  299
Siudibdd  Ndma  cycle  of  tales,

124
Sing  igd),  241
Single  divine  being,  origin  of

the  Piindus  in  a,  17
Sisters,    marriage    of    Sakti-

deva  to  the  four,  238  ;  the

three,  237
Site  of  Kalinga,  92,  ^2n^ ;  of

Pataliputra,  39ni
Sitting    dharnd  at   the   sun's

door,  82
Sitting  in  the  posture  called

Padmasana,  176,  i76n*
Six  faces,  a  boy  with  (Kart-

tikeya),  102
Six  faults  that  are  the  enemies

of  man,  106,  106#
Six    Krittikas   {i.e.   Pleiades),

102,'l02n2
Six    political  measures,   the,

165,  165ni
Sixty-four     seers     (Ghata-

measure),  276


Skill  in  dancing,  nymphs
display  their,  35

Skull  {kdpdla),  90n3

Skull-bearing  Saiva  ascetic,
196,  200

Skull-bearing  worshippers  of
Siva,  90,  90n3

Skull-cleaver  (Kapalasphota),
199

Skull,  drinking  brains  from  a,
199

Skull  struck  by  Vijayadatta,
198^1

Sky-roaming  Vidyadhara,  141

Slain  by  Vidushaka,  the
mendicant,  63

Slaughter  of  the  cow  fills  the
Hindu  with  horror,  240

Slave  of  Kadru,  Vinata  be-
comes the,  151

Slavonian  superstition  about
meeting  eyebrows,  103^^

Smallpox,  clothes  infected
with,  280;  traders  infect
Indians  with,  280 ;  vaccina-
tion against,  312

Smell  of  the  body,  high  rank
betrayed  by  the,  22,  22?i2

Smile  in  Hindu  poetry,  hOri^

Smith,  Annam  parents  sell
children  to  a,  166,  167

Smoking  opium  less  harmful
than  eating  or  drinking  it,
303

Snake  {dibya),  298 ;  [naga),
154711

Snake-bite,  statistics  of  deaths
from,  311

Snake  called  Sankhachuda,
152-154,  156

Snake  cannot  poison  one  of
its  own  species,  311

Snake-charmer's  inoculation,
311,  312

Snake,  dundubha,  a  non-
venomous,  1527*2  .  rdjila  a
striped,.  152^2

Snake,  girl  only  able  to  hiss
like  a,  294

Snake,  the  green  tree-  [Ular
puchok,  Drijophis  prasinus
or  Boie  -  Dipsodoynorphince,
303

Snake  gives  power  of  under-
standing language  of
animals,  eating  a,  108n

Snake  nature  acquired  by
maiden,  291,  294,  295  ;  girl
with  the,  294,  295

Snake  as  poison,  bile  of  the
green  tree-,  303


368


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


"Snake  Symbol  in  India,
Rough  Notes  on  the,"
J.  H.  Rivett-Carnac,  Joum.
As.  Soc.  Bengal,  307,  307ni

Snake  Vasunemi,  the,  22n^

Snake  venom  digestible,  311

Snakes  and  Alexander  the
Great,  deadly,  299

Snakes,  baby  girl  brought  up
by  huge,  294  ;  become  the
food  of  Garuda,  151,  152;
belief  in  the  poisonous  look
of,  298;  the  foolish,  151;  of
Hindu  superstition,  152w*,
153w ;  and  intercourse,
connection  between,  307;
reason  for  split  tongues  of,
152;  restored  to  life  by
Garuda,  155,  156  ;  sons  of
Kadru,  150;  spit  venom
and  defile  the  Sun's  horses,
150 ;  Vasuki,  King  of  the,
152

Snares  laid  in  the  path  of  the
King  of  Vatsa,  91

Sneezing,  145n

Snowy  Mountains.  King  of
the  (Siva),  143

Soaps  used  at  Brahman
wedding,  22n'

Societies,  Sunderer  of  (death),
124

Society  of  English  Biblio-
philists,  2n^

Society  of  ghouls  in  Uganda,
199w

Society  of  witches,  104-105ji

Socket  {noete),  269

"Some  Notes  on  Homeric
Folk-Lore,"  W.  Crooke,
Folk-Lore,  57n^

Some  Truths  about  Opium,
H.  A.  Giles,  304wi

Son  of  Adityaprabha  eaten,
113,  114

Son  born  to  Siva  and  Uma  in
the  fire,  102

Son,  desire  of  Gauri  for  a,
100;  longing  of  Vasavadatta
for  a,  135 ;  promised  to
Vasavadatta,  13;  propitiat-
ing Siva  to  obtain  a,  136;
or  pupil  of  Visvamitra,
Galava  a,  21  In^;  of  Ruman-
vat,  Hari^ikha,  161,  165;
of  Vasantaka,  Tapantaka,
161, 165;  of  Vinata,  Garuc^a,
151;  worshipping  Gane^a
to  obtain  a,  100,  102-  of
Yaugandharayana,  Maru-
bhuti,  161,  165


Son  of  Hi^imba,  284

Son  of  the  King  of  Vatsa  to
be  King  of  the  Vidya-
d haras,  85

Son-in-law  seducefl  by  Utpa-
lavarna,  122

Son  of  Nityodita,  Gomukha,
161,  165

Son  of  Patali  (Pataliputra),
39ni

Sougs  of  the  Russian  People^
Ralston,  138>i4,  189ni

Sons  of  the  fisherman  prepare
to  sacrifice  Saktideva,  227,
228

Sons  of  Kadru,  snakes  the,
150;  of  Kilrttikeya,  102;
of  Pandu,  the  five,  16

Sorcerer  or  Maidelaig,  198ni

Sorceress,  Rhodope  the
Thracian,  Qnr

Source  of  the  novels  of  the
10th  day  of  the  Decameron,
76jii

South  Kensington  Museum,
271

South  neighboured  by  Riik-
shasas  and  inhabited  by
the  God  of  Death,  54

South,  tikti  worn  in  the,  23w

Southern  India,  Maravars  an
aboriginal  race  of,  166

Sovereignty  of  Chola.  92,
92^4        *

Sovereignty,  the  umbrella  a
symbol  of  power  and,  264

Sowing  dissension,  politic  ex-
pedient of,  45n^

Spangles  set  in  gold  worn  by
women  from  Rajputana,  23n

Spangles  worn  by  Hindu
women  of  good  caste,  iikti,
22n\  23»i

Speaking  immediatelv  after
birth,  39,  397i2

Speech  {gir),  241 ;  identified
with  the  cow,  241 ;  re-
garded as  divine,  241

Spell  for  descending  from  the
air  forgotten  by  Sundaraka,
110

Spell  overheard  by  Sunda-
raka, the  witches',  107

Spells  to  drive  away  Rak-
shasas,  106  ;  to  enable  Vasa-
vadatta to  roam  through
the  air,  138;  magic  power
of  witches',  103,  104

Spies  sent  to  Benares,  89,  90

Spirits  active  on  first  night  of
marriage,  evil,  306


Spirits  date  back  to  the  Stone

Age,    167;    lights    in    the

birth-chamber      to      scare

away    evil,   168;    measures

to   prevent   entry  of  evil,

166  ;  scared  away  by  iron,

evil,  166-168 ;  scared  away

by    steel,     evil.     166-168;

scared  away  with  a  sword

in  the  Philippines,  evil,  167
Spiritual  exaltation  or  Mana

gained    by   eating    human

flesh,  19ani
Spiritual  guide  of  the  Vidya-

haras,  Kausika  the,  210
Spitting   at   an  enemy,  302,
.  303
Spitting    betel    juice    in    a

person's  face,  insult  of,  302,

303
Split  tongues  of  snakes,  reason

for,  152
Spread  of  the  poison-damsel

myth  in  Europe,  292-297
Spread  of  syphilis  in  Europe,

308
Spring  festival,  the  Holi,  169
"Springs      and     Autumns"

{Tsun  Tsiu),  the  Confucian

classic,  81
Spy    learns     the    secrets    of

Brahmadatta,  91
Staff  (p/«w),  269
Stages  of  love,  9/1^,  lOn
Stake  at  gambling,  left  hand

cut  off  as  a,  232n
Standard  of  value,  cow  used

as  a,  240
State  umbrella  or  Puchukra

Undi,  267
Statistics     of     deaths     from

snake-bite,  311
Statue  of  the  god  of  syphilis,

309
Stealing  of  Amrita  by  Rahu,

81
"Stealing  in  Hindu  Fiction,

Art  of,"  Bloomfield,  Amer.

Joum.  Phil.,  183ni
Stealing,     king     wishes     to

study  the  art  of,  184n,  185m
Steel,  flint  and  {chakkamukki) ,

256n^
Steel,  magic  virtue  of,  106w* ;

scares    away    evil    spirits,

161-168
Steyasastra-pravartaka,  a

manual  of  thievery  called,

183ni
Sihaviravaticharita,     Hemach-

andra  (Jacobi's  edit.),  283n^


S  ipulation  of  Somaprabha
on  her  marriage,  41,  4t\n^-^

S  one  Age,  spirits  date  back
to  the,  167

S  one,  Ahalya  turned  into,
46

S  one  or  metal  umbrellas
{htee,  ha,  ti),  265,  265n*

S  ;one  metamorphoses,  46,
46n3

S  :ones  in  their  eyes,  women
with  precious,  306

S  :ones,  valley  full  of  precious,
299

Stories  of  Ancient  Egypt,
Popular,  Maspero,  112w^,
120-121

Stories  of  children  who  speak
shortly  after  birth,  39,
39w2

Stories,  Vasavadatta  s  longing
to  hear,  137

Storm  comes  up  at  sea,  191,
192

Story  of  Ahalya,  45,  46;  of
Alankaravati,  212^^ ;  of  the
Brahman  woman,  69-70 ;
of  the  Clever  Physician,  2,
2nM  of  Devadasa,  86-88;
of  Devadatta,  129-132 ;  of
the  Golden  City,  171-175,
184,  186-195,  213,  217-231,
236-238 ;  of  Harasvamin,
39n^;  of  the  Hypocritical
Ascetic,  4-5  ;  of  Jimutava-
hana,  138-150,  153-156 ;  of
Ke^ata  and  Kandarpa,
193ni ;  of  KuntI,  23-24 ;  of
Lalitanga,  llSn^,  220n ;  of
the  Loving  Couple  who
died  of  Separation,  9;  of
Phalabhuti,  95-99,  112-115;
of  Pingalika,  133-134;  of
Punyasena,  10-11 ;  of  Sakti-
vega,  80n^ ;  of  Sinhapara-
krama,  159-160  ;  of  Soma-
prabha, 39-44;  of  Sunda
and  Upasunda,  13-14n;  of
Umadini,  6-8;  of  Urva^i
and  Pururavas,  34-36,  245-
259;  of  Vidushaka,  54-80;
of  Vihitasena,  36-37 ;  of
"The  Witch  Girl,"  71ni

Story  of  the  Forty  Moms  and
Eves  {Hikdyetu-Erhaina
Sahdhin  we  Mesa),  123

"Story  of  Horn  and  Rimen-
hild,"  H.  Schofield,  Mod.
La7ig.  Ass.  Amer.,  76n^

Story  of  Jewad,  The,  E.  J.  W.
Gibb,  190#

VOL.  II.


INDEX  II -GENERAL

"  Story  of  Kilhwch  and
Olwen,"  Cowell,  Y  Cym-
rodor,  190n^

"Story  of  the  Magic  Pill,"
183ni

"  Story  of  King  Paritya-
gasena,"  136n^

"Story  of  Qara  Khan,"  The
Story  of  Jewad,  E.  J.  W.
Gibb,  i90ni

"  Story  of  the  Silent  Couple,"
212^1

"  Story  of  King  Sinhaksha,"
49n3

Story  of  the  Ten  Princes  or
Dasa  Kunidra  Charita,  J.  J.
Meyer,  183ni,  184n

"  Story  of  the  Two  Brothers,"
Maspero,  Popular  Stories  of
Ancient  Egypt,  120

"  Story  of  the  Two  Prin-
cesses," 193/1^

Story-teller,  poison-damsel  a
creation  of  the,  313

Strange  bargain  of  Vindumati,
229

Strange  Survivals,  S.  Baring-
Gould,  272

Stratagem,  failure  of  Brahma-
datta's,  91 ;  to  gain  love,
44 ;  the  King  of  Vatsa  con-
ducted to  Lavanaka  by
a,  20 ;  political  measure,
165ni ;  of  Vidushaka,  68

Streak  of  Gold  {kanaka-reklid) ,
171^3

Stream  named  Sitoda,  67

Streams  of  ichor,  90,  93

Strength,  superiority  of
Pandu  princes  in  feats  of,
16'

Striped  [ging-gang),  271n^

Striped  snake,  rdjila  a,  152^^

Student,  Brahmachdrin  an  un-
married religious,  180w^

Students,  Wanderjahre  of
Brahman,  174n^

"Studies  about  the  Kathd-
saritsdgara,"  Speyer,  Ferh.
Kon.  Akad.  Weten,  Amst.,
28n2,  36/^1,  53n3,  mn^'^,
70»ii,  92n6,  140/11,  160ni,
177^1,  201^2,  227n2,  235ni

"  Studies  in  Bhasa,"  Suk-
thankar,  Journ.  Bom.  Br.
As.  Soc,  21^1

Studies  in  the  Psychology  of
Sex,  Havelock  *Ellis,  22W,
308,  308ni

Study  the  art  of  stealing,
king  wishes  to,  184n,  185?i


369

Stupefying    weapon    in    the

hands    of  Love,    UrvasI  a,

34,  34n2
Subduing  the  King  of  Sindh,

93
Subduing  the  King  of  Vatsa's

enemies,  91-94
Submarine    fire     (vadavdgni),

Substance,  void  of  hiihsdra),
92n3  ^    •

Substitute  for  vermilion,  ku7i-
kam  a,  164/1*

Sucesos  de  las  Islas  Filipinos,
Antoine  de  Moya,  306ni

Sudden  wealth,  evil  results
of,  59

Suicide  contemplated  by  the
King  of  Vatsa,  25

Sultan  Faraj,  the  Egyptian,
279

Summa  Prcedicantium,  John  of
Bromyard,  114n

Summoning  a  jinn  by  rub-
bing magic  article,  58/1^;
a  supernatural  being  by
thought,  58^1;  a  sword
by  thought,  58,  58/ii

Sun-god,  Mexican,  Nana-
huatzin  a  satellite  of  the,
309

Sun  kept  from  Brahman's
head  on  day  his  student-
ship ends,  267,  268

"Sun,  Moon  and  Stars  (Bud-
dhist)," E.  J.  Thomas,
Hastings'  Ency.  Rel.  Eth.,

"Sun,     Moon     and     Stars,"

Hastings'  Ency.  Rel.  Eth.,

83
Sun,  mountain  of  the  rising,

75
"  Sun,  not  to  see  the,"  taboo,

268
Sun  rises,  Udaya  the  eastern

mountain    behind    which,

677ii
Sun  (Surya),  81
Sun,  Temple  of  the,  MS.  of

Secretum    Secretorum   found

in  the,  288
Sun,  the  west  the    cause  of

the  setting  of  the,  53
Sun's  door,  sitting  dharna  at

the,  82
Sun's     horses,    57 ;     dispute

about   the   colour   of  the,

150-152
Sunderer  of  societies  (death),

124

2a


870


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


Sun-rising,  mountain  of  the,

67,  68
Sunshade,  the  Glove,  the  MuJJ,

The,  O.  Uzanne,  272
Sunshade  (umbella),  263  ;  [wn-

braculum),  263 ;    (o-KiaSetov),

263
Superiority  of  Pandu  princes

in  feats  of  strength,  16
Supernatural  beingsummoned

by  thought,  58^1
''Supernatural  birth"  motif,

136ni
Supernatural   birth,    sons   of

Dhritarashtra    and     Pan^u

by,"  16
Supernatural  power,  Ahalya's

intrigue      found     out     by

Gautama's,  45,  46
Superstitions  connected  with

itching      and      twitching,

144rn^,     145n ;      connected

with  wedding  rings,  99?i
"Superstitions  and  Customs

in  Salsette,"  G.  F.  D'Penha,

Ind.  Ant.,  167
Superstitions,  horse,  57?i^
''Superstitious  Man"  \Charac-

ters\j  Prof.  Jebb's  notes  on

Theophrastus',  98n*
Surmounted    by     umbrellas,

Pagodas,  265,  266
Survival   of   the   blood   rite,

use  of  vermilion  a,  23n,  24n
Susruta     Samhitd,    the,    276,

276ni
Suvabahuttarikathd,    the,    286,

286wi
"  Suvabahuttarikatha,  Ueber

die,"  J.  Hertel,  Festschrift

fiir  Ernst  Windisch,  286^^
Svapna  -  Vdsavadatta,     Bhasa,

21ni,  25n*
*•  Svapna- Vasavadatta,"  K.  R.

Pisharoti,    Quart.    Journ.

Mythic.  Soc,  21n^
Swallow    Surya    and    Soma,

Rahu's  attempt  to,  81
Swallowing  of  Saktideva  by  a

fish,  192
"Swan  Maiden"  motif  254
Swans  like  chowries,  188
Swans,  nymphs  in  the  shape

of,  246
Sweeper  or  deity  of  sweepers,

Riihu  a,  82
Sweet    medicine    (svddvau-

shadha),  SSn^
Sword.acreeper-like(flexible,

well-tempered),    93,   93ni ;

of  the  fire-god,  58,  60,  71,


Sword — continued

72,  74 ;  in  her  hand,  Kala-
ratri  with  a  drawn,  106,
106/1*;  of  the  King  of
Vatsa,  the  curved,  33,  93ni ;
murdered  child  becomes  a,
236 ;  to  scare  away  evil
spirits  during  childbirth  in
the  Philippines,  167;  that
comes  on  thought,  58,  58/i^

Symbol  of  the  gradual  decay
of  vegetation,  Ish  tar's
descent  to  Hades  a,  61n^

Symbol  of  power  and
sovereignty,  the  umbrella,
264

Symbolical  of  child,  fire  pro-
duced by  fire-drill,  256

Symbolical  incidents  in  the
story  of  Urva^I  and  Puru-
ravas,  245

Syntipas,  290

Syphilis  Aujonrd'hui  et  chez
les  Anciens,  Le,  Buret,
308n2

Syphilis  in  Central  America,
antiquity  of,  308,  309

Syphilis,  Nanahuatzin,  god
of,  309 ;  introduced  into
Europe  by  Columbus'  men,
308;  introduced  into  India
by  the  Portuguese,  310 ;
regarded  by  Mexicans  as
divine,  309

Syrian  freedman  under
Khalifa  al-Ma'mun,  Yahya
ibn  Batriq,  a,  288

Syrische  Marchen,   Prym    and
■  Socin,  7Qn\  155n4,  219n3

Tablet  in  the  British  Museum,

61ni
Taboo   during   eclipses,  kusa

or  dub  grass  as  relief  from

the,  82
Taboo,    earliest    example    of

nuptial,  252  ;    "not  to  see

the  sun,"  268;  the  nuptial,

248
"Taboo    and    the    Perils    of

the  Soul,"  Frazer,   Golden

Bough,  253
Taboo  stories,  253
"Tale    of    the    Ensorcelled

Prince,"     Burton,     Nights,

131ni
"  Tale  of  the  Jealous  Sisters,"

Dozon,     Contes    Albanais,

190^1
"Tale  of  Kamar  al-Zaman,"

Burton,  Nights,  124


"Tale  of  a  King,"  Stein  and

Grierson,  Hatitns  Tales,  124
"  Tale  of  the  Trader  and  the

Jinn,"     Burton,    Nights,

147^1
Tale  of  a  Tub,  Swift,  270
Tales  from    the    Arabic    and

Persian,  Douce,  113n^
Talmud,  the,  169
Tamil     story     in     Orientalist,

De  Rosairo,  184n
Tantric  rites,  human  flesh  in,

214;  in  the  Mdlali  Mddhava,

214-216
Task    undertaken    by    Vidu-

shaka,  a  daring,  60-62
Tasmanians,  poisoning  of  the,

280,  280n5
Teacher  called  Tumburu,  a,

35
Temple   of  Chamun^a,    214,

215
Temple,  curl  near  the  right,

unlucky,  7n^
Temple    of   Durga,  62,   141,

196,  199,  227
Temple  of  the  goddess,  the,

62-68
Temple,   golden  lotus   dedi-
cated to  a,  208
Temple  of  the  Sun  dedicated

to  ^sculapius  (Asklepios),

MS.  of  Secretum  Secretorum

found  in  the,  288
Tempting  of  Baiti  by  Anupu's

wife,    121 ;     of   Sundaraka

by  Kalaratri,  105,  109
Ten  classes  of  Saiva  mendi-
cants, 90n3
Ten  names  (Da^namls),  90n*
"  Ten  Wazirs  :  or  the  History

of  King  Azadbakht  and  his

Son,"  Burton,  Nights,  123
Tenanted   by    demons,  dead

robbers,  61,  61  n^
Tender  {ainsala),  241
Tending    of    the     king    by

Vidushaka,  58
Terrace,  the  forbidden,  222,

223,  223n\  224n
Terrible     Rakshasa,     Vijaya-

datta  becomes  a,  198,  199
Terrors     of     the     cemetery,

description  of  the,  60-62
Teutonic    Mythology,    Grimm,

43ni,  57wi,  96ni
"That  which  is  prohibited"

{haram,  harim),  161w*
Theory  of  the  origin  of  the

story  of  Urvai^I  and  Purfi-

ravas,  253-254


INDEX  II -GENERAL


371


Thief  of  Hindu  fiction,
Muladeva  the  arch-,  183^^

Thieving  in  Hindu  fiction,
183w,  ISin,  ISbn

Thieving,  the  science  of,
183^1,  184ri

Thirty  -  two  lucky  marks
{mahapurushalakskana)  and
eighty  minor  marks  pos-
sessed by  Buddha,  7^1

Thought,  Rakshasa  comes  on,
75,  78  ;  summoning  a  super-
natural being  by,  bSri^ ;
sword  that  comes  on,  58,
58^1

Thousand  eyes  of  Indra,  the,
46,  46^4

Thotisand  Nights  and  a  Night.
See  Nights

Thousand  and  One  Days,
Dervish  Makhlis  of
Ispahan,  Gn^

Thousand  years  to  develop,
embryo  of  Karttikeya
takes  a,  102

Thracian  sorceress  Rhodope,

Thread,    investiture    of    the

sacred,  257
Three  forms  of  polygamy,  17
Three     forms     of    "scorned

women  "  motif,  122
Three   objects   of  life,   180,

180n2
Three  pavilions,  the,  222
Three  sisters,  the,  237
Three     worlds,      Goloka      a

region  above  the,  242
Throbbing   eye,    144,    144n^,

145n
Throne,      finding      of      the

jewelled,  52,  53
Thunder      ceases      in      the

autumn,  92n^
Tibetan   Tales,  Schiefner  and

Ralston,  14n,  76^1,  122
Tibetans,  polyandry  practised

by  the,  17
Time,     measure    of    (kalpa),

139wi ;  (Manwantara),  250
Title  of  Indian  kings,  Chhat-

rapati  or  Lord  of  the  Um-
brella, 267
Todas,  The,  Rivers,  82
Togail,     Troi,    the,     Stokes,

72n2
Tomb  in  the  form  of  vampires,

belief  that  the   dead   rise

from  the,  Qlti^
Tongues  of  snakes,  reason  for

split,  152


Tool,  unlawful   to  commit  a

burglary  with  an  iron,  168
Tope,  the  Bharhut,  266
Torches  waved  over  women

after  delivery   by  Kachins

of  Upper  Burma,  167
Tortured    with    the    pain    of

love,  Guhachandra,  40
Totemic  origin  of  the  story

of    Urvasi   and    Pururavas,

253,  254
Toy  Cart  or  Mrichchhakatika,

192^1,  2^2n
Tracing      origin      of     myths

through    etymology,     251,

252
' '  Trader  and  the  Jinni,  Tale  of

the,"  Burton,  Nights,  147^^
Traders  infect  Indians  with

smallpox,  280
Transactions     of     the     Royal

Society  of  Literature,  77 n
Transformation,  the  lion,  147,

148
Transformation  of  Vijayadatta

into  a  Rakshasa,  198,  199
Transformed  into  a  Rakshasa

{vikritam),  202n2
Translations  of  the  Secretum

Secretorum,  287-290
Transmigration,  belief  in,  241
Transportation   through    the

air,  75
Travelling   through    the   air,

62-64,  64ni
Travels  of  Ludovico  di    Var-

thema,  G.  P.  Badger,  300,

300n*,  301
Travels,    Pietro   della   Valle,

162n
Treasure,  the  buried,  52,  87 ;

at  the  foot  of  a  Nyagrodha

tree,  159, 160  ;  guarded  by

a  Yaksha,  52  ;  Kuvera,  God

of  Wealth  and  Lord  of,  93
Treatise     to     discover     if    a

woman  is  a  poison-damsel,

286,  286^4
Treatise     of     Polemon,     the

Greek,  290
Tree,     Ai^vattha     [Ficus     re-

ligiosa),     96,     189 ;     Butea

frondosa,  the  sacred,   169;

called  "Giver  of  Desires,"

a  wishing-,  138,  139 ;  cir-
cumambulating the,  96,  97 ;

heavenly  nymph  comes  out

of  a,  233 ;  a  Nyagrodha
{Ficus  Indica),  159,  160;
oblation  made  to  the,  97;
the  palasa,  126


Tree-snake,  the  green  {Ular

puchok,    Dry  op  his    p>rasinus

or    Boie-Dipsodomorphinae),

303
Tree-snake  as  poison,  bile  of

the  green,  303
Tree-spirits,  worship  of  trees

and,  96ni,  97
Tree-worship,  maidens  sitting

on   trees   connected  with,

43,  43ni
Trees,  the  five  "royal,"  118;

of  Paradise,  Parijata  one  of

the  five,  13,  \2>n^  ;  poisoned

by  Yogakarandaka,  91,  275;

and  tree-spirits,  worship  of,

96ni,  9771
Tribe  of  North  India,  Doms

a  criminal,  168
Tribe,  the  Oraon,  119
Tribes  and  Castes  of  Bengal^

Risley,  24w,  167,  229^2
Tribes  and  Castes  of  the  Central

Provinces,      Russell,     22/2.^,

23n,  83,  88ni,  118,   164n*,

185ti,  242,  266,  266n2,  304,

304^2,  305#
Tribes  and  Castes  of  the  North-

West   Provinces   and    Oudh^

W.  Crooke,  119,  166,  168,

257,  257^2,  305^1
Tribes  of  Gonds  and  Mundas,

267
Tribute  {kara),  27,  27n2  ;  im-
posed on  the  Muralas,  92,

92n56
Trick  to  ensure  Urvai^i's  re-
turn, Gandharvas',  246
Trident-bearing    god    (Siva),

158
Triumph  of  the  rogues,  183
Triumphant     entry     of     the

king  into  Kausambi,  49-51
Triumphant  return  of  Vidii-

shaka,  79
Trivia,  Gay,  270,  271
Trousseau,  sohdg,  the  lucky,

23n
"Truth,   Act  of,"   motif  31-

33
"  Truth  -  command  "      {satyd-

dhistdnam),  31
Truth,  the  irresistible  power

of,  31
"  Truth  -  utterance  "      [satya-

vddya),  31
Tsun     Tsiu     ("Springs     and

Autumns  "),  the  Confucian

classic,  81
Turkish  Harems  and  Circassian

Ho7nes,  Harvey,  163w


872


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


Turmeric,     lime-juice      and

borax,    powder     made     of

{kunkam),  164/1*
Twins  born  to  poor  Brahman

woman,  134
Twitching  and  itching,  super-
stitions    connected    with,

144ni,  145n
**Two  Brothers,  Story  of  the,"

Maspero,  Popular  Stories  of

Ancient  Egypt,  120-121
"Two  Brothers,  The,"  Schief-

ner    and    Halston,    Tibetan

Tales,  14n
Two    children     like     Misery

and  Poverty,  128
"Two    Princesses,    Story    of

the,"  193ni
Tying  the  /rt/i  round  the  neck

of  the  bride,  ceremony  of

tdlikaUu,  17,  18
Typhoid     fever,     inoculation
against,  312

"  Uber  die  Suvfibahuttari-
katha,"J.  Hertel,/'e.y/.9cArj/?
fiir  Ernst  Windisch,  286?ii

**  Uebersetzungen  arabischer
Werke  in  das  Lateinische,
Die,"  Wustenfeld,  Abh.  d.
k.  Gesell.  d.  Wisseti.,  289^^

Uebersetzungen,  Stein-
schneider,  289w^

Uganda,  Johnston,  199n

Umbrella  in  Assyria,  263 ;  in
Babylon,  263 ;  in  Burma,
264-266;  carried  by  the
Doge  of  Venice,  268;
Chhatrapati  or  Lord  of
the,  title  of  Indian
kings,  267  ;  in  China,  264  ;
classical  references  to
the,  263  ;  the  earth  under
one,  125,  \2bn^ ;  in  Egypt,
264 ;  etymology  of  the
word,  263 ;  a  folding
{chalyr),  268 ;  given  to
Vidushaka  by  the  king,
59,  59n2 ;  head  deprived
of  the,  94,  94n5;  heir-
apparent  has  a  golden,  264;
in  Hindu  iconography,  266;
Jonas  Hanway  first  man  to
use  an,  269 ;  a  lofty,  55,
55ni,  89  ;  migration  of  the,
268,  269;  original  signifi-
cance of  the,  267  ;  {palieque
in  Pauthier's  text),  268 ;  a
parish,  270;  Puchukra
Undi  or  State,  267 ;  re-
ligious significance  of  the,


Umbrella — contimied

265,  266;  a  symbol  of
power  and  sovereignty,
264;  {unnm  pallium),  268;
a  white,  49,  49n^  00
Umbrellas,  appendix  on,  263-
272;  distinctive  names  of,
264  ;  examples  of  English,
271 ;  lotuses  like  lofty,
188;  metal  or  stone  {htce,
ha,  or  ti),  265,  265n* ;
pagodas  surmounted  by,
265,  266 ;  Paragon  rib  for,
271  ;  in  Paris,  269  ;  quota-
tions about,  270,  271 ;  used
hy  Anglo-Saxons,  269,
269n2 ;  used  by  coffee-
houses, 269  ;  used  by  lesser
officials,  red,  265  ;  used  at
native  courts  in  Africa,  271
Umbrellas    and   their   History,

W.  Sangster,  272
Uncle   of  Dhritarashtra   and

Pandu,  Bhishma,  16
Under     one     umbrella,     the

earth,  125,  125n3
Underworld,  Patala  the,  92
Unfading    garlands,    22,    23,

26,  27,  29
Unintentional    injuries,    147,

147wi
Union  of  husband  and  wife
compared     to     a     creeper
clinging  to  a  tree,  204n^
Unit  of  value  [nishka),  240
Universe,  mystic  relation  be-
tween the  cow  and  the,  240
Unknown  origin  of  the  myth

of  Rahu,  81
Unlawful  tocommit  a  burglary

with  an  iron  tool,  168
Unlucky,  curl  at  back  of  head
or  near  right  temple  con-
sidered, In}-
Unmarried  religious  student,

Brahmacharin,  180n^
Unrequited  love,  death  from,

8,  9,  9n2,  10^^
UnterdenOlivenb'dumen,  Kaden,

5ni,  190ni
Uplifted  necks,  with  {idkan-

dharaq  ca  suciram),  30n2
Upper      Bunna,      childbirth
customs  among  the  Kachins
of,  167 ;   gambling  among
the  Shans  of,  232n
"  Uriah  letter"  motif,  114n
Urine,  a  sacred    produce   of

the  cow,  242
Urspning  dcr   Syphilis,    Iwan
Bloch,  310n3  '


Use   of   the   magical   circle,

99n,  100;j
Use  of  poisons  condemned  by

the  Romans,  277,  278
Uses  of  aconite,  various,  279
Uses  of  "overhearing"  motifs

107ni
Uttara    Rama     Charita,    the,

Bhavabhuti,     34^2,     189ni,

214

Vaccination  against  smallpox,
312

Valley  full  of  precious  stones,
299

Valley  guarded  by  deadly
serpents,  299

Falley  of  Kash?nir,  The,  W.  R.
Lawrence,  232n

Valour  {pratdpa),  54»*

Value,  cow  used  as  a  standard
of,  240 ;  of  iron,  the  protec-
tive, 166,  167;  unit  of
{nishka),  240 ;  of  war  horses
among  the  Aryans,  57^^

Vampire  (Brukolak),  meeting
eyebrows  in  Greece  denote
a,  104n

Vampires,  belief  that  the
dead  rise  from  the  tomb
in  the  form  of,  Qln^  ;  in
Egypt,  belief  in,  61n^;  over-
hearing conversations  of,
107/1^ ;  power  of  becoming,
by  eating  human  flesh,
198?ii ;  (Vetalas),  201

Vanished  princess,  the,  225

Variants  of  the  story  of
Ahalya,  45n*

Varieties  of  aconite,  279,  280  ;
of  love-scratches,  i9n^

Various  uses  of  aconite,  279

Various  versions  of  the  story
of  Urva^I  and  Pururavas,
246-250

Varthema,  Travels  of  Ludovico
di,  G.  P.  Badger,  300,
30O«4,  301

Vedas,  the,  17,  67n\  106,  249,
250,  253

Vedic  age,  Indra  in  the,  45w*

Fedic  Coficordance,  Bloomfield,
45n*

Vedic  days,  horses  an  object
of  worship  from,  57n^

Fedic  Mythology,  A.  A.
Macdonell,  Grundriss  d.
Indo-A  rischen  Ph  ilo  logie,
240,  252?ii

Fedische  Studien,  Pischel  and
Geldner,  252ni


INDEX  II -GENERAL


373


Vegetation,  Ishtar's  descent
to  Hades  symbol  of  the
gradual  decay  of,  61w^

Venerated  in  the  East,  old
age,  190ni

*' Veneration  of  the  Cow  in
India,  The,"  W.  Crooke,
Folk-Lore,  242

Venereal  disease  in  connec-
tion with  the  poison-damsel
myth,  308

Venines,  les  animaux  venijneux,
etc.,  Les,  R.  Calmette,  281

Venom  and  defile  the  sun's
horses,  snakes  spit,  150

Fera  Historia,  Lucian,  193n^,
219^3

Ferh.  Kon.  Akad.  Weten.
Amst.,  "Studies  about  the
Kathasaritsagara,^^  Speyer,
28^2,  36^1,  53^3,  60rii'3,
70ni,  92n«,  UOn^,  160ni,
177ni,  201n2,  227n2,  235wi

Vermilion  {sendur),  23/1;  the
basis  of  the  tikU,  22n3 ;
kunkam  a  substitute  for,
164n*  ;  people  red  as,  58,
59,  59ni ;  a  survival  of  the
blood  rite,  use  of,  23n,  24w

Verses  handed  down  by  the
Bahvricas,  247

Versions  of  the  story  of
Urva^i  and  Pururavas,  246-
250

Vertical  stick  "male,"  256

Ferzeichnis  der  Sanskrit  Hand-
schriften  der  Kbniglichen  Bib-
liothek,  Weber,  286,  286n*

Vessel  of  fire  given  to  Puru-
ravas, 247,  249

Vessels  inauspicious,  empty,
164w3

Vice  of  gambling,  231

Vice  [vyasana)  of  hunting,  21,
21n2,  127

Victorious  King  of  Vatsa,  the,
93,  94

Victory,  fortune  of,  90

Victory  set  up  by  the  King
of  Vatsa,  a  pillar  of,  91,  92,
92ni

Fikramdnkadevacharita,
Buhler,  174ni

Fikramorvasl,  Kalidasa,  245,
257-259

Villages  given  to  Brahmans,
59

Violence,  afflictions  healed
by,  2,  27*1,  3w

Fiolier  des  Histories  Romaines,
Brunet,  289^2


Viper,  deaths  from  sting   of

Russell's,  311
Virtue  {dharma),  180n2;  brings

its  own  reward,  133
Fishnu  Pur  ana,  the,  81,  241,

248,  255
Visit   of  Guhachandra    to   a

courtesan,  44
Fissasabhojana  -  Jataka,     297,

298,  298ni
Foiage   and    Travaile    of  Sir

John  Maundevile,  Kt.,  T.  O.

Halliwell,  306,  306^2,  307
Voice  from  the  Asvattha  tree,

97
Voice,  a  divine,  63,  65
Voice  from  heaven,  30,  73
Void  of  substance    Inihsdra),

92^3
"Von  einem  der  auszog  das

Fiirchten    zu     lernen,"

Grimm,  M'drchen,  60n2
Votary  of  the  Asvattha  tree,

Somadatta  a,  96,  96^1,  97
Vow  of  Saktideva,  188
Vow   of    silence    broken   by

ascetic,  4
Vultures,  cries  of,  60  ;  enor-
mous birds  like,  219

Wanderjahre  of  Brahman
students,  174^^

War  between  the  Chalcidians
and  Eretrians,  278;  be-
tween Indra  and  the
Danavas,  35

War  horses  among  the
Aryans,  value  of,  bln^

War  Office,  280,  281

War,  poisons  in  the  Great,
280,  281  ;  politic  expedient
of,  45n3,  165ni ;  political
measure  of,  45n3,  165^^

Ward  off  danger,  weapons  a
charm  to,  166

Ward  off  ghosts,  iron  imple-
ments kept  near  child's
head  to,  166

Warder  named  Nityodita,
chief,  128,  129

Warfare,  German  methods
of,  280

Warning  of  Aristotle  to  Alex-
ander, 291  ;  of  Brahma  to
the  God  of  Love,  100

Watch  of  Vidushaka  in  the
apartment  of  the  princess,
74

Water  {Jala),  188ni

Water-frog  as  poison,  bile  of
the  green,  303


Water  and  fields  poisoned  by
Faraj,  279.     See  Amrita

Water  of  Life,  raven  con-
nected with  the,  155n'*

Water  poisoned  by  Yogaka-
randaka,  91,  275

Water,  etc.,  poisoned,  275-
280

Water-spirits,  sacrifices  to,
72,  72/ii

Water  taken  to  the  impaled
man,  201

Water  weapon,  the,  34n2

Waters  of  the  Godavari,  92,
93

Waving  lights  in  the  army  of
the  King  of  Vatsa,  89,  89n*

Wealth  {artha),  180^2;  be-
stowed on  Phalabhuti,  98;
Brahmans  intoxicated  with
the  pride  of,  59;  evil  results
of  sudden,  59;  and  Lord  of
Treasure,  Kuvera,  God  of,
93;  lost,  at  the  gaming-
table, Saktideva's,  174 ;
lost  at  play,  86

Weapon  in  the  hands  of  Love,
Urvai^i  a  stupefying,  34,
34^2

Weapon,  the  water,  34^2;
the  whirlwind,  34^2

Weapons  a  charm  to  ward
off  danger,  166

Weapons,  room  hung  with,
161

"  Wearer  of  the  white  um-
brella "  (Tibyuzaung),  265

Weather,  in  windy  {pravdte),
51ni

Wedding  rings,  superstitions
connected  with,  99w

Wedding,  soaps  used  at
Brahman,  22^2

Weeping  woman  near  the
impaled  man,  201

JVeib  in  der  Natur-und  Folker-
kunde,  Das,  Ploss,  306ni

Weisskunig,  112n^

Well-rounded  (suvritta),  132n^

Well -tempered,  flexible
sword  (creeper-like),  93,
93ni

Wells  poisoned  in  German
South- West  Africa,  281

Wells  poisoned  by  the
Gurkha  of  Nepal,  280

Welsh  Society's  Journal,  190^^

Wendische  Sagen,  Vecken-
stedt,  42ni,  98n4,  I07n\
162n\  155^4,  202n\  223ni

Werewolf,  104n


374


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


West  the  cause  of  the  setting

of  the  sun,  53
West  Indies,  A.  de  Herrera,

88wi
Western  India,  ckoti,  bodice

of,  50n5
Western    portion    of  Assam,

Kamarupa,  94,  94n*
-  Wheel  of  Light,"  265
Whirlpool  in  the  ocean,  the,

217,  218
Whirlwind     weapon,     the,

34n2
White  arsenic,  303
White  chowries,  43
White,   glory  in   Hindu

rhetoric  is,  208ni
White  smile,  the,  50,  50ni
White  umbrella,  49,  49n^  80;

the  royal,  264
**  White  umbrella,  wearer  of

the  "  (Tibyuzaung),  265
White  worm  in  the  heart  of

a  prince,  296
♦*  Whom  shall  I  make  mad  ?  "

{lean  darpaydmi),  100
Wide  (uru),  251
Wide-Awake    Stories,   Steel

and    Temple,    108n,    122,

199n
Widowhood  indicated  by  curl

on  the  Palli  bride's  temple,

7ni
Wife,  adultery  of  Devadasa's,

86,    87 ;    an   animal,    254 ;

of    Anupu    tempts    Baiti,

121 ;    fickleness   of   Deva-

datta's,  131 ;  five  brothers

with  one,  13,  13^3,  16,  17 ;

the  quarrelsome,  159,  160;

of  Raja  Kampila,  RatnangI,

122;    the    shrewish,     159,

160;  thrown  to  the  dogs,

121;      of     Vihitasena,

TejovatI,  36,  37
Wild    mountaineer    (Savara),

141-149
Windows  covered  with  sacred

plants,  161,  166
Windy  weather,  in  (pravdte),

51ni
Wine   (sura),    276 ;    drinking

heavenly,  43
Winning  of  the   princess  by

Saktideva,  225
"Wisdom    of    the    East"

Series,  45n*
Wishing-cow  of  the  good,  45,

45n2
Wishing-tree   called    "  Giver

of  Desires,"  a,  138,  139


Witch  called   Lona  or  Nona

Chamarln,  119
"Witch  Girl,"  story  of  the,

71ni
Witch  Kalaratri,  tht/,  99-100,

103,  104,  111-112
Witches,  description  of,  103,

104,  104n^ ;  orgies  held  by,
104,  104n2,  105n;  screams
of,  60;  society  of,  104,
104n2,  105n ;  Sundaraka
and  the,  105-111

Witches'  spells,  magic  power
of,  103,  104 ;  overheard  by
Sundaraka,  107

"With  his  breath  "  (asubhih),
41wi

Wives  of  the  God  of  Love
(Rati  and  Priti),  51,  51n2;
of  Ka^yapa,  Kadru  and
Vinata,  150,  151 ;  of  Pandu,
Pritha  or  Kunti  and  Madri,
16,  126,  127  ;  as  reward  for
good  deeds,  heavenly,  44,
45  ;  of  the  Sultan  Mahmud
Shah,  301,  302;  Vidushaka
collects  his,  78,  79

Woman  (zan),  162w;  bribed  to
cause  king's  death,  309;
cut  open  and  child  taken
out,  229,  229^2;  near  the
impaled  man,  weeping,
201 ;  the  poor  Brahman,
128,  129,  133-135

Woman  in  India,  M.  F.  Bill-
ington,  163n

Women,  hard  treatment
accorded  to,  in  India,  18;
harem  the  portion  of  the
house  allotted  to  the,  161n*;
in  India,  hard  work  done
by,  18;  iron  bracelet  worn
by  Hindu  married,  167 ;
of  Lata,  93 ;  whose  love
is  scorned,  120-124;  like
moons,  the  faces  of  the,
50,  50^2;  with  precious
stones  in  their  eyes,  306  ;
rejected  love  of,  105,  109;
on  seeing  the  king  and
queens,  excitement  of,  50,
51 ;  well  cared  for  in
Travancore,  19

Women  in  India,  Otto  Roth-
feld,  163

Women  of  Turkey  and  their
Folk  -  Lore,  I'he,  L.  M.
Garnett,  163»

Wood,  the  devadaru,  106

Work  done  by  women  in
India,  hard,  18


Workmanship  of  the  anklet,
heavenly,  204

Works  of  Albertus  Magnus,
288,  288n3;  of  Bynker-
schock,  279;  of  Duns
Scotus,  288,  288n3;  of
Leibnitz,  278,  279;  of
Pufendorf,  279 ;  of  Wolff,
278,  279

World  mountain,  Meru  the,
67ni

Worlds,  Goloka  a  region
above  the  three,  242

Worm  in  the  heart  of  a  prince,
a  white,  296

Worship  in  the  cemetery
under  a  banyan-tree,
233

Worship,  horses  an  object  of,
57ni

Worship  of  the  sacred  cow,
240;  of  trees  and  tree-
spirits,  96ni,  97n

Worshipper  of  Vishnu,  Puru-
ravas  a  devoted,  34

Worshippers  of  Siva,  skull-
bearing,  90,  90w8

WorshippingGane^a, maidens
obtain  husbands  by,  99,
100,  103 ;  to  obtain  a  son,
100,  102

Worshipping  the  gods  naked,
98,  98n8

Wounds  healed  by  a  Yogi,
122

Wrath  of  Kalaratri,  105,  109  ;
of  Siva,  fire  of  the,  66

Wrath  one  of  the  six  faults
of  man,  106,  106w«

Wrestler  from  the  Deccan,
200

Writers,  dittany  in  the  works
of  classical,  295wi

Wiirfelspiel  im  alien  Indim,
Luders,  232n


Y  Cymrodor,  "  The  Legend'
the     Oldest      Animal/
Cowell,  190^1

Years  of  longevity  foretold
by  number  of  horizontal
marks  on  forehead,  7n^

Yule-tide  Stories,  Thorpe,  76n*,
80ni   190wi


Zeitschriftfiir  deutsches  A  Itert,,
"  Pseudo-  Aristotelisches
Steinbuch  von  Liittich,"
299wi


INDEX  II -GENERAL


375


Zeit.  d.  d.  morg.  Gesell.  ["Zur
Exegese  und  Kritik  der
rituellen  Sutras"],  W.
Caland,  232n

Zeitschrift  der  deutschen  mor-
genl'dndischen  Gesellschaft,
Gutschmid  in,  312ni

Zeitschrift  fiir  Ethnologie,
Virchowin,308?i2;  "Bericht


Zeitschrift — continued

iiber   verschiedene   Volks-

stamme  in  Vorderindien,"

F.  Jagor,  166
Zoological     Mythology,     De

Gubernatis,  57n\  121n^
Zoological  Society,  312^^
"  Zoroastrian  Period  of  Indian

History,      The,"     D.     B.


"  Zoroastrian,  etc." — cont.

Spooner,    Journ.    Roy.   As.

Soc,  39^1
["Zur   Exegese    und    Kritik

der  rituellen  Sutras  "]  W.

Caland,    Zeit     d.    d.   morg.

Gesell.,  232n
Zur     Volkskunde,     Liebrecht,

39^2,  106^4,  131ni


Printed  in  Great  Britain

BY  The  Riverside  Press  Limited

Edinburgh


4


^


I


o
o


73'


^
g

^

^


o     .

ctJ    O
>

0     0     jj

o

CO


>


CO  ^

QQ  CO

t-^  CO


University  of  Toronto
Library


DO  NOT

REMOVE

THE

CARD

FROM

THIS

POCKET


Acme  Library  Card  Pocket
LOWE-MARTIN  CO.  LIMITED
