The Ocean of Story (Kathasaritsagara), Vol. 7 (Somadeva; C. H. Tawney (trans.); N. M. Penzer (ed.), 1924)
==========================================================
Vol. 7 of the complete Kathasaritsagara — Somadeva's 11th-century Ocean of Story, the great Sanskrit story-cycle — in C. H. Tawney's translation (1880-84), edited with introduction and notes by N. M. Penzer (1924-28, 10 vols.). Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/oceanofstorybein07somauoft).

IfXil  I


m


*$%k


tftftilf


m


ifff


THE
OCEAN  OF  STORY


THE

OCEAN  OF  STORY

BEING

G.  H.  TAWNEY'S  TRANSLATION

OF

SOMADEVA'S  KATHA  SARIT  SAGARA

(OR  OCEAN   OF  STREAMS  OF  STORY)


NOW    EDITED    WITH    INTRODUCTION,    FRESH

EXPLANATORY  NOTES  AND  TERMINAL  ESSAY

BY

N.   M.   PENZER,   M.A.,   F.R.G.S.,    F.G.S.

MEMBER   OF  THE  FOLK-LORE   SOCIETY  J  FELLOW  OF  THE

ROYAL  ANTHROPOLOGICAL  INSTITUTE  J   MEMBER

OF  THE  ROYAL  ASIATIC  SOCIETY,   ETC.

AUTHOR  OF

"AN  ANNOTATED  BIBLIOGRAPHY  OF  SIR  RICHARD  FRANCIS

BURTON."   ETC.


IN  TEN  VOLUMES


VOL.    VII


WITH  A  FOREWORD  BY

MAURICE  BLOOMFIELD

M.A.,   PH.D.,    HON.    LL.D.

PROFESSOR  OF  SANSKRIT  AND  COMPARATIVE  PHILOLOGY,

JOHNS   HOPKINS  UNIVERSITY


LONDON:      PRIVATELY     PRINTED      FOR      SUBSCRIBERS      ONLY
BY  CHAS.  J.  SAWYER  LTD.,   GRAFTON  HOUSE,    W.l.     MCMXXVII


Made  and  Printed  in  Great  Britain


FOREWORD

Scope  of  Hindu  Fiction  Literature

THE  Brihat-Kdthd,  or  Great  Story  collection  of
Gunadhya,  as  well  as  the  supposed  excerpt  from  it,
Somadeva's  Ocean,  are  pretty  nearly  unique  both  in
size  and  in  the  wealth  and  welter  of  story-telling.  If  I  am
not  mistaken,  even  Somadeva's  Ocean  has  no  equal  or  superior
in  these  respects  in  the  fiction  literature  of  the  world  ;  yet
it  is  by  no  means  a  complete  expression  of  what  we  might
call  the  fiction  genius  of  India.  There  are  many  other
Brahmanical  collections  of  importance,  as  well  as  equally  im-
pressive Buddhist  and  Jaina  collections — Jatakas,  Avadanas,
Charitras,  Kavyas  and  Kathanakas — known  all  over  India
and  the  Asiatic  countries  which,  chiefly  owing  to  the  spread
of  Buddhism,  have  become  intellectual  tributaries  of  India.
In  a  paper  the  part-title  of  which  is,  "  On  Recurring  Psychic
Motifs  in  Hindu  Fiction,"  *  I  have  sketched  very  briefly  the
scope  of  this  literature,  as  far  as  India  is  concerned.  The  total
of  fiction  contained  in  these  books  is  enormous ;  it  reflects
both  fancy  and  fact,  though  incidental  sketches  of  and  allusions
to  real  life  render  Hindu  fiction  a  scarcely  less  valuable
record  of  Hindu  life  than  the  more  schematic  treatises  which
deal  with  customs,  manners  and  institutions.2

Suggestions  as  to  Encyclopcedic  Treatment

I  am  sure  that  the  idea  of  a  complete  catalogue  or  clearing-
house of  these  stories  and  the  organic  motifs  which  enter  into
their  composition  has  flitted  across  the  mind  of  many  readers
and  students  of  this  fascinating  subject.     Benfey  began  the

1  Journal  of  the  American  Oriental  Society,  vol.  xxxvi,  pp.  54>ff.

2  As  an  example  of  this  kind  of  fructification  of  fiction  we  may  take
Fick's  Die  Sociale  Gliederung  im  nordostlichen  Indien,  which  is  based  almost
entirely  upon  the  Buddhist  Jatakas.

v


vi  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

"  scientific  "  study  of  fiction  by  following  the  Panchatantra
stories  in  their  wanderings  all  over  the  world.  He  thereby
generated  an  instinct  or  urge  to  do  something  similar  in
every  editor  or  translator  of  a  fable,  fairy  tale  or  novel.

Since  there  is  nothing  new  under  the  sun,  it  scarcely
happens  that  any  writer  on  these  subjects  is  so  forgetful  as
not  to  remember  parallels  that  he  has  seen  before,  or  so
repressed  or  abstemious  as  not  to  allude  or  refer  to  them.
In  connection  with  the  Ocean  both  Tawney  and  Penzer  have
brought  into  play  their  wide  reading  and  learning  to  show
how  farspread  are  these  ideas,  how  varied  their  manipula-
tion, and  how  dependent  their  sense  and  real  meaning  upon
their  universal  use,  in  distinction  from  their  use  in  any  one
particular  connection.

A  future  Science  (vidyd)  of  fiction  casts  its  shadow  before  :
it  were  idle  to  say  that  it  is  now  present  in  person,  as  the
Hindus  occasionally  say  of  their  vidyds.  Here  and  there  an
important  salient  motif  stands  out  very  clearly,  so  that  we
seem  to  see  it  in  all  its  bearings ;  but  in  the  main  there  are
mere  disjecta  membra.  Classifications,  such  as  those  pro-
posed by  the  FF.  Folk-Lore  Society,  or  by  the  English  Folk-
Lore  Society,  are,  in  the  main,  tentative  and  one-sided.  The
materials  at  our  disposal  are  fragmentary  ;  their  original
value  obscured  by  varied  handling ;  the  time  and  place  of
their  origination  for  the  most  part  unknown.  I  shall  illustrate
this  quite  fully  below.

The  uses  of  fiction-study  so  far  have  been  rather  in
the  direction  of  Comparative  Literature  or  the  History
of  Literature.  Here  they  help  regularly  to  appreciate  the
character  and  origin  of  literary  composition.  In  a  voice
that  is  at  the  same  time  both  sprightly  and  authoritative
they  tell  us  whence  a  given  composition  has  derived  its
material  foundation,  whether  these  compositions  be  Western
Oriental,  Italian  novelle,  or  the  dramatic  and  poetic  motifs  of
Shakespeare  and  Goethe.


FOREWORD  vii

Future  Science  of  Fiction

But  fiction  must  develop  in  the  end  into  a  self-centred
science  whose  real  philosophical  or  psychological  meaning  is
as  yet  unstatable.  A  prerequisite  is  obviously  the  collec-
tion, assortment  and  critical  appraisal  of  all  the  materials
that  appertain  to  the  subject.  I  have  long  thought  that
such  study  should  rest  upon  encyclopaedic  treatment,
undertaken  country  by  country,  and  have  had  in  mind
particularly  (in  accord  with  my  own  studies  and  those  of
my  school)  an  "Encyclopaedia  of  Hindu  Fiction"  which
might  serve  as  a  pattern  for  similar  works  undertaken  in
respect  to  other  countries.  Our  work  has  been  haphazard,
opportunistic  and  tentative,  but,  I  think,  it  begins  to  show
its  ultimate  significance.  I  would  refer  the  attentive  reader
of  these  pages,  first  of  all,  to  the  List  of  Papers  at  the  end
of  this  Foreword ;  it  will  show  how  the  separate  items  of
such  an  Encyclopaedia  have  emerged,  one  by  one,  from  the
titanic  mass  of  Hindu  fiction  themes.  Any  one  of  these
papers  will  also  reveal  how  different  is  the  look  of  a  given
story  or  idea  when  treated  with  the  relative  finality  of
such  a  purpose,  as  compared  with  the  sporadic,  reminiscent
and  unsifted  observations  of  most  authors  who  handle  such
themes.

The  "Dohada"  Motif

Mr  Penzer  has  graciously  credited  my  article,  "  On  the
Dohada,  or  Craving  of  Pregnant  Women,"  by  basing  upon  it
his  lengthy  Appendix  III  in  Vol.  I  of  the  Ocean.  The  reader
of  fiction  who  has  seen  this  idea  flit  across  his  pages  will
certainly  be  amazed  at  its  previously  unsuspected  persistence
and,  so  to  speak,  organic  development.  I  have  since  found
that  Jaina  writers  scarcely  ever  let  pass  the  opportunity  of
ascribing  to  noble  women,  pregnant  with  a  future  Saint  or
Emperor  (Arhat  or  Chakravartin),  longings  to  perform  good
deeds  while  in  this  condition.  It  is  with  those  authors  not  a
bright  invention,  but  a  cut-and-dried  cliche.  When  they  arrive
at  this  point  in  the  course  of  their  chronicles  (Charitras)  they


viii  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

take  the  motif  out  of  its  pigeon-hole,  to  put  it  back  again  for
use  on  the  next  similar  occasion.

Soon  after  the  appearance  of  my  article  Dr  Alfred  Ela  of
Boston  published  (from  the  medical  point  of  view)  an  article,
"  Longings  of  the  Pregnant,  viewed  in  Light  from  the  East,"  1
in  which  he  makes  extensive  use  of  the  materials  and  their
classification  in  my  article,  and  combines  them,  very  learnedly,
with  previously  reported  medical  observations.


The  "Overhearing"  Motif  in  Encyclopedic  Treatment

Mr  Penzer,  in  Vol.  Ill,  pp.  60  ff.,  of  the  Ocean,  has  a  long
note  on  the  motif  "  Overhearing,"  with  reference  to  fiction
in  general.  He  had  not  at  that  time  seen  my  treatment  of
the  same  theme  in  a  26-page  article,  "  On  Overhearing  as
a  Motif  of  Hindu  Fiction,"  American  Journal  of  Philology,
vol.  xli,  pp.  309  ff.  The  materials  gathered  there  have  made
it  possible  to  state  a  sort  of  preliminary  psychology  or  philos-
ophy of  the  motif.  On  the  whole  the  imaginary  conversation
of  birds  is  the  standard  source  of  information.  "  A  little
bird  told  me  "  seems  to  be  the  rock-bottom  of  the  notion,
founded  upon  the  sincere  folk-lore  feeling  that  the  chirp  and
twitter  and  cluck  of  birds  is  the  prime  and  natural  source  of
otherwise  inaccessible  information.  But  many  other  pairs  of
beings — divine,  cosmic  or  animal — are  overheard.

The  motif  is  in  the  nature  of  a  deus  ex  machina,  designed,
or  rather  intuitively  produced,  to  save  from  death,  disease
or  catastrophe  ;  to  procure  fairy-tale  wealth  and  success  ;  or
to  furnish  helpful  information  or  instruction  in  perplexing
situations.  Whenever  and  wherever  the  hero  is  in  danger  or
trouble,  he  happens  to  overhear  a  conversing  pair  who  tell  him
how  to  extricate  himself.  If  the  hero  is  destined  to  emerge
from  poverty  or  low  station,  usually  quite  abysmal,  to  unex-
pected and  not  to  be  expected  wealth  or  glory,  the  conversing
pair  point  the  way.  And  again,  if  someone  in  the  story  needs
guidance,  moral  or  worldly-wise,  his  course  will  be  determined
by  what  two  say  to  each  other  in  conversation.

The  motif  is  for  the  most  part  progressive.     Rarely  is  a

1  Boston  Medical  and  Surgical  Journal,  vol.  clxxxiii,  pp.  576  ff.  (1920).


FOREWORD  ix

story  designed  around  overhearing ;  the  motif  enters  when
there  is  a  hitch — at  a  point  where  the  hearer  or  reader  is
perplexed  as  to  what  will  come  next,  meaning,  how  will
the  narrator  extricate  himself,  or  save  the  situation.  Just
at  that  point  the  principal  person,  or  his  companion  or  con-
fidant, will  overhear  to  his  advantage.  The  story  has  come
to  an  impasse  ;  the  motif  releases  the  standstill.

Important  Role  of  Organised  Brigandage  in  Hindu  Fiction

The  pages  of  the  Kathd-sarit-sagara  are  full  of  accounts  of
wild  robber  tribes  :  Bhillas,  Savaras,  Kiratas,  Pulindas,  etc.
These  accounts  are  often  quite  conflicting  and  paradoxical.
Bhillas  are  robbers,  but  sometimes  low-caste  persons  peace-
fully engaged  :  usually  low-born  and  rude,  they  are  some-
times quite  noble  and  distinguished  ;  they  sacrifice  victims
to  bloody  Durga,  but  are  open  to  kind  impulses  and  the
sense  of  gratitude.  My  most  recently  published  encyclopaedic
article  x  has  gathered  and  sifted  the  statements  of  Hindu
fiction  literature  in  general  that  pertain  to  this  theme.

The  resulting  mosaic,  as  it  were,  is  perfectly  clear  in  out-
line and  amazingly  definite  in  detail.  The  activities  of  these
robber  folk,  which  often  seem  to  be  paradoxical,  turn  out
to  be  quite  logical ;  the  theme,  though  essentially  romantic,
carries  with  it  a  fairly  accurate  history  of  their  doings  from
the  time  of  the  Veda  up  to  the  modern  thugs  and  dacoits,
who  are  doubtless  their  offspring  in  direct  descent.  Of
immediate  practical  importance  is,  that  a  given  Bhilla  story
often  depends  for  its  proper  understanding  upon  some  other
of  its  kind,  or  owes  its  flavour  to  the  impressions  pro-
duced by  this  class  of  stories  in  the  approximate  whole  of
Fiction.

On  the  tessellated  pages  of  the  Ocean  there  is  many  a  story
and  many  a  motif  which  can  be  properly  understood  only  in
the  light  of  related  items.  The  stories  of  any  one  given
collection  are,  at  times,  mere  torsos  or  fragments  of  those
of  another.    One  or  two  illustrations  will  make  this  clear  :

1  "On  Organized  Brigandage  in  Hindu  Fiction,"  American  Journal  of
Philology,  vol.  xlvii,  pp.  205  ff.


x  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

The  Story  of  Balavinashtaka  as  Part  of  a  Cycle  of  Stories

The  story  of  the  clever  boy,  Balavinashtaka,  is  told  in
Ocean,  Vol.  I,  pp.  184  jff.,  under  the  caption  "  Story  of  the
Clever  Deformed  Child."  The  boy  has  a  stepmother,  who
neglects  and  starves  him  :  he  owes  his  name  to  the  fact  that
people  say  this  child  {bala)  is  deformed  (vinashtaka).  This
analysis  of  the  name  is  dubious.  Sir  Richard  Temple's
definition  of  the  boy  as  an  enfant  terrible  (p.  xxiv  of  the
Foreword  to  Vol.  I)  does  not  quite  get  its  point :  the  story
belongs  to  the  large  cycle  of  stories  of  the  clever,  shrewd,
resourceful  lad  who  figures  especially  in  India  in  the
Mahaushadha  and  Rohaka  cycles,  more  particularly  in  the
latter.

Mr  Penzer,  in  his  note  on  p.  186,  correctly  defines  and
compares  the  story  as  being  a  clever  lad  story,  but  does  not
seem  to  be  acquainted  with  the  Rohaka  cycle  from  which  it
is  derived.

The  cycle  of  stories  connected  with  the  shrewd  boy
Rohaka  (Balavinashtaka  of  the  present  story)  occurs  in  many
Jaina  texts  and  commentaries.  Professor  Pulle,  I  think,
first  drew  attention  to  this  cycle  in  his  valuable  essay,  "  Un
Progenitore  Indiano  del  Bertoldo"  (Venezia,  1888),  Studi
Italiani  di  Filologia  Indo-Iranica  (Firenze,  1898),  pp.  1-18.
The  stories  occur  in  the  Commentators  to  the  Avasyaka  and
Nandi;  in  the  Upadesapada,  by  Haribhadra;  and  in  Rajase-
khara's  Antarakathdsarhgraha ;  also  in  the  Old  Gujarat!
Kathakallola,  by  Ratnasundara,  a  version  of  the  Pancha-
tantra  which  Hertel  has  translated  in  Das  Pancatantra,
pp.  194  jff.1  It  is  also  woven  into  Jfianasagara's  novel  Ratna-
chuda, a  Jaina  text  which  has  been  translated  recently  by
Professor  Hertel  in  his  series  Indische  Erzahler,  vol.  vii,
PP-  99  jff.  In  the  Preface  to  that  volume,  pp.  10  jff.,  he  gives
an  account  of  other  Jaina  versions  of  the  Ratnachuda  story.
The  same  boy's  series  of  clever  acts  and  devices  I  have
found  in  Ajitaprabha's  Santinatha  Charitra,  published  in
Bhavnagar  by  the  Jain  Dharmaprasarak  Press,  Virasamvat
2443  (a.d.  1917).     In  the  Ratnachuda  Rohaka  is  the  son  of  an

1  Cf.  Zachariae,  Kleine  Schriften,  pp.  66,  9±ff.,  190n.


FOREWORD


XI


actor  named  Kusilava 1 ;  he  is  maltreated  by  his  stepmother,
Rukmini.

The  story  introduces  some  traits  that  are  wanting  in  the
Kathd-sarit-sdgara,  but  winds  up  similarly  with  the  boy's  point-
ing to  his  father's  shadow,  by  way  of  reassuring  him  that  his
wife  is  not  keeping  company  with  another  man.  This  he  had
suspected  on  account  of  the  boy's  previous  wily  innuendoes.

Rohaka,  in  the  sequel,  performs  a  long  list  of  clever  acts,
such  as  making,  by  the  king's  order,  a  rope  of  sand  2 ;  and
many  other  "  stunts  "  with  which  we  are  familiar  from  the
Buddhist  Epic,  the  Mahdummagga  Jdtaka  (546).  The  king
contemplates  making  Rohaka  his  chancellor,  just  as  in  the
Buddhist  story.  Rohaka  is  clearly  the  Jaina  imitation  of
or  parallel  to  the  Buddhist  Mahosadha  (Mahaushadha).  The
Balavinashtaka  story  seems  to  be  a  mere  extract  from  a
cycle  of  such  stories  which  were  afloat  prior  to  the  composition
of  the  Brihatkathd.  In  any  case  the  nature  of  that  story
cannot  be  determined  without  reference  to  the  clever  lad
cycles.  Moreover  the  clever  lad  cycle  has  many  points  of
contact  with  the  clever  lass  cycle,  upon  which  I  have  touched
in  the  Journal  of  the  American  Oriental  Society,  vol.  xxxvi,
pp.  65 ff.


The  Rupinikd  Story  made  up  of  a  Variety  of  Independent

Motifs

The  engaging  story  of  the  devoted  hetcera,  Rupinika,
Kathds,  xii  (Ocean,  Vol.  I,  pp.  138 ff.),  reads,  at  first  sight,  like
a  well-constructed,  concinnate  composition  that  might  come
from  the  head  of  an  unusually  clever  and  inventive  narrator.
But  it  is,  in  reality,  a  mixtum  compositum,  consisting  of  four
distinct  tales  :

(1)  The  story  of  Rupinika's  devoted  love.

(2)  The  journey  in  the  elephant's  cadaver.

(3)  The  weaver  as  Vishnu.

(4)  The  bawd  on  the  pillar.

1  In  the  Kathdkallola  the  boy  is  called  Roho ;  his  father,  the  actor,  is
Bharata.

2  This  he  dodges  by  asking  the  king  to  send  him  a  piece  of  old  sand-rope
as  a  pattern.


xii  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

Mr  Penzer  has  not  pointed  out  that  the  story  as  a  whole,
but  with  totally  different  motifs  substituted  for  (2),  (3)  and  (4),
is  the  most  important  element  in  the  biography  of  the  re-
doubtable Hindu  hero  Miiladeva,  the  outstanding  romantic
figure  of  Hindu  fiction  :  versed  in  the  arts,  practices  and
tricks  of  love  and  all  its  accessories ;  cultivated  conversa-
tionalist ;  brilliant  narrator ;  marvellous  musician ;  expert
in  massage,  perfumes  and  ointments ;  knowing  how  to  send
a  lady  a  present — in  fact,  man  of  the  world  and  arbiter
elegantice,  or,  according  to  the  Hindu  Love  Bibles,  a
typical  ndyaka,  or  "hero."  He  is,  in  addition,  master-thief
and  resourceful  thief-catcher,  great  magician  and  furious
gambler.1

What  is  the  actual  relation  of  Miiladeva  to  Lohajangha  of
the  Rupinika  story  ?  Miiladeva  figures  under  that  name  very
interestingly  in  the  Kathd-sarit-sdgara,  chapters  lxxxix,  xcviii
and  cxxvii,  but  he  is  not  brought  into  contact  with  Rupinika.
On  the  other  hand  the  Jaina  handling  of  the  theme,  as  told
in  Devendra's  Maharashtri  version,  in  his  vritti  to  the  Uttard-
dhyayana  Sutra,  brings  Miiladeva  into  contact  with  the  noble
hetcera  Devadatta.  This  version  of  the  theme  is  more  widely
known,2  but  even  Devendra's  version  has  the  ear-marks  of  very
secondary  handling.  It  is,  moreover,  laid  under  suspicion,
because  the  Jainas  have  exalted  Miiladeva  to  the  station  of  a
typical  religious,  whose  chief  glory  is  that  he  once,  in  the  course
of  his  adventures,  fed  a  starving  ascetic — in  the  Jaina  view
a  superlatively  meritorious  act,  which  results  in  Miiladeva's
kingship.  Even  after  all  diligent  watch  we  are  still  in  the
dark  as  to  the  prime  story,  and  certainly  the  version  which

1  Miiladeva's  artistry  is  proverbial;  see  Hertel,  Paid  und gopala,  p.  109.

2  We  are  indebted  for  our  knowledge  of  Miiladeva  primarily  to  Professor
Pavolini  of  Florence  in  Giornale  della  Societa  Asiatica  Italiana,  ix,  175  ff.  Other
treatments  and  other  matters  pertaining  to  this  subject  are  discussed  in  my
article,  "The  Character  and  Adventures  of  Miiladeva,"  Proceedings  of  the
American  Philosophical  Society,  1913,  lii,  pp.  6l6  ff.  See  also  Journal  of  the
American  Oriental  Society,  xliii,  266,  and  the  small  drama  (bhana),  called  Padma-
prabhritakam,  ascribed  to  Sudraka.  This  is  one  of  four  such  Bhanas,  by
different  authors,  published  under  the  title  Chaturbhani,  by  the  Pandits
M.  Ramakrishna  Kavi  and  S.  K.  Ramanatha  Sastri,  in  Sivapurl  (Trichur)  in  the
year  1922.  Here  figure  all  the  personages  of  the  Miiladeva  cycle:  Miiladeva
himself,  his  love  Devadatta,  his  friend  Sa£a,  and  others.


FOREWORD  xiii

substitutes  the  adventures  of  Rupinika  and  Lohajangha  for
Devadatta  and  Mtiladeva  is  an  obvious  rifacimento  from  a
later  time.


The  "  Show  Me  How  "  Motif

Dann  hat  er  die  Teile  in  seiner  Hand,
Fehlt  leider  nur  das  geistige  Band.

Goethe's  Faust,  First  Part.

Who  has  not  at  one  time  or  another  seen  a  Punch  and
Judy  show  ?  Punch,  after  an  unimaginably  nefarious  life,  in
the  course  of  which  he  makes  away  with  his  own  wife,  Judy,
is  finally  taken  off  by  the  policeman  to  be  hanged.  Arrived
at  the  tree  from  which  he  is  to  be  suspended,  Punch  pretends
not  to  know  how  to  put  the  noose  around  his  neck,  and  asks
the  policeman  to  show  him.  The  policeman  puts  the  noose
around  his  own  neck,  Punch  instantly  pulls  the  rope,  and  up
goes  the  policeman — to  the  agonised  joy  of  the  small  boys
assembled.  This  is  the  widely  diffused  motif,  "  Show  me
how,"  and  the  story  of  the  wily  female  Siddhikari,  as  told  in
the  Ocean,  Vol.  I,  pp.  157  ff.  (Kathd-sarit-sdgara,  chapter  xiii),
is  but  a  single  expression  of  it.

The  motif  belongs  to  the  class  which  I  have  rubricated  as
psychic  motifs l :  in  this  class  the  mental  processes  are  the
same,  but  the  actors  and  real  properties  differ  in  almost  every
case.  One  of  the  features  of  the  "  Show  Me  How  "  motif
is  that  the  quick  wit  (matiprakarsha)  of  a  successful  rogue
sometimes  wins  the  sympathy  of  the  hearer,  no  matter  how
reprehensible  his  act  or  his  character.

Thus  in  Parker's  Village  Folk-Tales  of  Ceylon,  vol.  iii,
pp.  346  ff.,  figures  a  thief,  Matalana  by  name,  son  of  the
king  by  a  concubine.  The  king  gives  orders  to  a  carpenter
to  make  a  pair  of  stocks  for  Matalana,  though  he  has  not  yet
been  caught.  Matalana  comes  along,  asks  the  carpenter  the
purpose  of  the  stocks,  and,  when  he  is  told,  requests  to  be
shown  how  it  is  done.  The  carpenter  shows  how,  the  thief
locks  him  into  the  stocks,  and  spices  his  confinement  with
blows  and  jeers.     In  this  story  persons  and  things  are  all

1  See  Journal  of  the  American  Oriental  Society,  xxxvi,  54  ff.


xiv  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

different,  but  the  psychology  is  so  much  like  that  of  the
Siddhikari  story  as  to  suggest  dependence  of  one  story  upon
the  other.

A  variant  of  the  Siddhikari  story  in  the  Southern  Texlus
Simplicior  of  Panchatantra \  is  clearly  a  secondary  derivative
of  that  story.  A  neglected  merchant's  wife  runs  away  with
his  jewels.  She  rests  under  a  banyan-tree,  where  a  drummer
(maddali)  observes  her  and  finds  out  her  story.  Wishing  to
possess  himself  of  her  jewels,  he  tells  her  that  her  conduct  is
unseemly,  that  she  would  suffer  from  the  wives  of  her  brothers,
and  advises  her  to  commit  suicide.  She  says  she  does  not
know  how  :  he  shows  her  how  to  do  it  with  a  drum-cord.
She  is  to  fasten  the  cord  to  the  tree,  put  her  head  into  the
noose,  and  then  move  her  feet.  At  her  request  he  shows  her
how,  inadvertently  pushes  the  drum  away  from  himself,  and
hangs  by  the  neck.     The  woman  returns  to  her  husband.

The  "Show  Me  How"  motif  is  applied  with  great  pre-
dilection in  stories  in  which  a  wicked  ascetic  (kdpdlika,  yogin,
etc.)  desires  to  sacrifice  a  noble  man  for  his  own  purposes,
notably  to  obtain  magic  power.  I  have  touched  upon  this
aspect  of  the  motif,  which  appears  more  than  once  in  the
Ocean,  in  my  encyclopaedic  article,  "  On  False  Ascetics  and
Nuns,"  Journal  of  the  American  Oriental  Society,  xliv,
213  ff.  Thus  in  Kaihas,  xcviii,  69  jf. ;  xcix,  15  jf. ;  Vetala-
panchavimsati,  24,  25,  the  Vetala  warns  King  Vikrama  against
the  Kapalika  who  has  sent  him  to  fetch  the  corpse  from  the
tree :  "  That  wicked  mendicant  for  whom  you  have  fetched
the  corpse,  wishing  to  offer  you  as  victim,  will  say  to  you  :
6  King,  prostrate  yourself  on  the  ground  in  such  a  way  that
eight  limbs  will  touch  it.'  Then,  great  King,  you  must  say
to  that  ascetic,  'Show  me  how  to  do  it,'  and  I  will  do  it  as
you  do  it.  Then  he  will  fling  himself  on  the  ground  and
show  you  how  to  perform  the  prostration,  and  that  moment
you  must  cut  off  his  head  with  the  sword."  In  due  course
Vikrama  cuts  off  the  head  of  the  ascetic,  and  he  tears  and
drags  the  lotus  of  his  heart  out  of  his  inside.

Another  phase  of  the  "Show  Me  How"  motif  still  has
the  wicked  ascetic,  but  introduces  in  addition  the  feature  that

1  See  Hertel ,  Zeitschrift  der  Deittschen Morgenlandischen  Gescllschaftyhii,^.


FOREWORD  xv

he  is  (a  la  Hansel  and  Gretel)  thrown  into  a  boiling  pot.
This  story  occurs  in  the  Vikrama-charita.  As  early  as  the
year  1878  Professor  Weber,  in  Indische  Studien,  vol.  xv,
pp.  215  jf.,  277,  published  an  account  of  it,  making  the  proper
comparisons  with  Western  analogues.1  A  pretty  version  of
the  story  may  be  read  in  the  rather  inaccessible  Lescallier's
he  Trone  Enchante,  p.  177  (tenth  story),  which  I  would  repeat
here  in  digest :

King  Bekermaditjet  (Vikramaditya)  is  lost  while  on  a
hunt.  He  meets  an  old  woman,  about  to  load  a  bundle  of
faggots  upon  her  head,  and  essays  to  help  her.  Out  of  grati-
tude she  tells  him  of  a  Queen  Abnonly,  and  the  king  deter-
mines to  find  her.  He  travels  until  he  comes  to  a  district
strewn  with  human  heads.  One  of  the  heads  laughs,  and  he
asks  for  the  occasion  of  its  merriment.  The  head  responds  :
"  I  laugh  because  in  a  few  hours  your  head  will  keep  company
with  ours.  A  short  distance  from  here  lives  a  demon  in  the
guise  of  a  Djogui  (Yogi).  He  addresses  passers-by  pleasantly,
and  tells  them  that  he  will  show  them  a  curious  thing.  He
tells  them  to  take  an  iron  pot  full  of  black  peas,  put  it  upon
a  fire,  and  let  him  know  when  it  is  boiling.  Then  the  demon
throws  him  into  the  pot,  eats  him,  and  throws  the  head  upon
the  ground."  The  laughing  head  then  advises  him  to  request
the  demon  at  the  crucial  moment  to  show  him  how  to  do  it,
to  seize  him,  and  throw  him  into  the  pot.  Then  he  is  to  take
some  of  the  peas  and  scatter  them  upon  the  skulls,  whereupon
they  will  come  to  life  and  become  his  servants.  All  this
happens  as  prescribed,  and  after  further  adventures  Vikrama,
with  the  help  of  his  newly  acquired  friends,  obtains  the  Queen
Abnonly.

The  "  Show  Me  How  "  Motif  in  the  Beast  Fable

The  motif  finally  crops  out  in  a  beast  fable,  again  with
every   actor   or   real   property   changed.     In    the    Southern

1  Cf.  Dasent's  "  East  of  the  Sun  and  West  of  the  Moon  "  story  of  Buttercup,
who  is  to  be  cooked  for  dinner  by  the  ogre's  daughter.  But  she  does  not
know  how  to  go  about  executing  him,  so  he  tells  her  to  lay  her  head  on  the
block  ;  he  would  show  her.     Whereupon  he  cuts  off  her  head.


xvi  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

Textus  Simplicior  of  Panchatantra,1  a  Brahman  makes  a
pilgrimage  to  Kasi  (Benares).  On  the  way  he  sees  a  tiger
which  had  been  caught  and  put  into  a  box  by  a  soldier,  who
had  then  wandered  off  in  search  of  water.  The  tiger  implores
the  Brahman  to  release  him,  and  no  sooner  done  than  the
tiger  seizes  the  Brahman  to  devour  him.  The  Brahman
remonstrates  :  they  appeal  to  arbiters.  The  first  is  an  old
cow  who  is  all  for  ingratitude ;  she  has  borne  ten  calves  for
her  owner,  and  given  him  a  daily  drona  of  milk.  Now  that
she  is  old  and  unprofitable,  he  beats  and  starves  her.  They
next  appeal  to  an  old  Sudra  woman,  who  is  similarly  im-
pressed with  the  absence  of  gratitude  as  illustrated  by  her
own  life.  Lastly  they  consult  a  jackal,  who  declines  to  pass
judgment,  because  he  is  the  friend  of  both  litigants,  but
finally  consents  to  express  an  opinion  if  they  will  return  to
their  former  positions.  The  tiger  releases  the  Brahman  and
crawls  back  into  the  box,  into  which  he  is  now  fastened  by
the  Brahman.

In  Dubois,  Le  Pantcha-T  antra,  p.  49,  a  crocodile  asks  a
Brahman  to  carry  it  to  the  Ganges  in  order  that  it  may  live
in  its  holy  waters.  The  Brahman  puts  the  crocodile  into  his
travelling  bag.  As  he  is  about  to  place  it  into  the  water  the
crocodile  catches  hold  of  the  Brahman's  leg.  The  Brahman
reproaches  it  for  its  ingratitude,  but  the  crocodile  points  to
the  spirit  of  the  times,  in  which  virtue  and  gratitude  consist
in  devouring  one's  supporter.  They  appeal  to  a  mango-tree
and  an  old  cow,  who  support  the  crocodile's  thesis.  Then
they  appeal  to  a  fox,  who  also  at  first  decides  against  the
Brahman.  But  the  fox  wishes  to  see  how  they  carried  out
their  journey  together.  The  crocodile  crawls  back  into  the
bag,  is  killed,  and  devoured  by  the  fox.

This  story  has  run  a  wide  career  both  in  Hindu  "  Folklore  "
and  in  the  West ;  see  Benfey,  Pantschatantra,  i,  113  jf. ;  Orient
und  Occident,  iii,  481 ;  Jacobs,  Indian  Fairy  Tales,  p.  242 ;
Krohn,  K.,  Mann  und  Fuchs  Helsingfors,  1871 ;  Kohler,
Kleinere  Schriften,  i,  199;  Indian  Antiquary,  xii,  170jfiT.,  177;
Parker,  Village  Folk-Tales  of  Ceylon,  i,  339 ;  iii,  348 ;  Frere,
Old  Deccan  Days,  p.  198  ;   Stokes,  Indian  Fairy  Tales,  p.  17 ;

1  See  Hertel,  Zeitschrift  der  Dadschen  Morgenlandischen  Gesellschaft,  lxi,  32.


FOREWORD  xvii

Steel  and  Temple,  Wide- Awake  Stories,  p.  116  ;  Butterworth,
Zigzag  Journeys  in  India,  p.  128 ;  O'Connor,  Folk-Tales
from  Tibet,  p.  12  ;  Smeaton,  Karens  of  Burma,  pp.  126,  131  ;
Rouse,  Talking  Thrush,  p.  65  ;  Campbell,  Santal  Folk-Tales,
p.  40  ;  Bompas,  Folklore  of  the  Santal  Parganas,  pp.  149,  312  ;
Swynnerton,  Romantic  Tales  from  the  Panjdb,  pp.  303  ff.  ;
Skeat,  Fables  and  Folk-Tales  from  an  Eastern  Forest,  p.  20.
There  are  in  these  versions  wide  variations  and  tangles  with
other  motifs,  and  it  is  curious  to  observe  that  a  sort  of  "  Cage  "
motif  emerges  from  the  mass  as  a  scarcely  intelligible  remnant
of  the  "  Show  Me  How  "  motif.  I  cannot  see  in  any  other
light,  for  instance,  the  inconsequential  story  in  Hemavijaya's
Katharatndkara,  story  167,1  in  which  a  lioness  warns  her  son
against  black-heads.  He  roams  the  forest  and  asks  all  the
animals — jackal,  sambara,  hare,  antelope,  and  even  tiger  :
"  Art  thou  the  black-head,  art  thou  the  black-head  ?  "  And
they  answer  :  "  We  are  no  black-heads."  He  finally  meets
a  carpenter,  whom  he  asks  the  same  question.  The  carpenter
says  :  "If  you  do  as  I  tell  you,  I  will  show  you  the  black-
head." The  lion  agrees.  The  carpenter  builds  a  strong  cage  ;
the  lion  enters  it :  the  carpenter  rams  iron  bolts  into  the  door
of  the  cage,  then  shows  him  his  head,  saying  :  "I  am  the
black-head."     The  lion  perishes  miserably.

The  motif  of  the  cow  neglected  in  her  old  age  is  similarly
worked  up,  quite  by  itself,  flimsily  in  Dadhadhamma-J dtaka
(409),  where  a  discarded  old  elephant  complains  of  the  in-
gratitude of  the  king,  its  master,  and  is  restored  to  honour
by  the  intercession  of  the  Bodhisat.

Chronology  of  Stories  and  Motifs

The  chronology  of  stories  and  motifs  is,  as  a  rule,  indeter-
minate. I  am  not  speaking  now  of  the  legends  of  the  gods
and  demigods  which  have  persisted  from  Veda,  Epic  and
Purana  to  this  day,  such  as,  e.g.,  the  legend  of  Purtiravas
and  Urvasi,  Indra  and  Ahalya,  and  the  like.  I  mean  the
mdrchen,  fables,  noodle-stories,  anecdotes,  pranks,  etc.,  which
make  up   the   stock    of   Hindu   narrative   of  Brahmanical,

1  Hertel's  translation,  ii,  147  ff.
vol.  vii.  b


xviii  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

Buddhist  and  Jaina  times.  We  find  many  starts  in  the  Epic  ;
notably  the  Mahdbhdrata  has  a  fairly  developed  beast  fable,
which  is  treated  there  with  Epic  breadth,  quite  distinct  from
the  style  of  the  Panchatantra  cycle.1


Vedic  Beginnings  :    The  "  Overhearing  "  Motif

Rarely  a  fiction  motif  of  the  kind  I  have  in  mind  goes
back  to  Vedic  times.  Thus  the  "  Overhearing  "  motif  figures
in  Chhdndogya  Upanishad  (iv,  1,  2)  quite  amazingly  in  the
service  of  theosophy  :  Janasruti  is  a  pious  man,  devoted  to
charity — "  spending  much  ;  cooking  much  ;  causing  rest-
houses  to  be  built  everywhere,  so  that  people  from  every-
where might  be  entertained  by  him."  Some  flamingos
(harhsa  birds)  fly  by  at  night ;  one  says  to  the  other  :  "  I
say,  blear-eye,  don't  you  see  Janasruti's  brilliance  is  spread
out  like  the  heavens  ;  don't  touch  it,  don't  burn  yourself !  "
The  other  harhsa  replies  :  "  What  sort  is  he  of  whom  you
speak  as  though  he  were  Raikva  with  the  push-cart  ?  "
Janasruti  overhears,  searches  for  Raikva,  and  finds  him
sitting  under  the  push-cart,  scratching  his  itch.  For  all
that,  he  owns  the  great  Upanishad  doctrine  which  Janasruti
extracts  from  him  only  at  the  price  of  one  thousand  cows,  a
gold  necklace,  a  wagon  with  mules,  and  his  own  daughter.


The  "  Drinking  Apart  "  Motif

The  harhsa  bird  figures  once  more  in  a  fairy-tale  concep-
tion that  goes  back  to  Vedic  times,  endures  persistently
during  later  Hindu  times,  but  has  then  lost  its  fairy-tale
character  altogether.  I  allude  to  the  well-known  magic  by
virtue  of  which  this  distinguished  bird  "  drinks  apart  "  milk
from  water.2     All  attempts  to  explain  this  as  a  feature  of  the

1  Professor  Jacobi,  Mahdbhdrata,  p.  241,  cites  the  fables  of  the  Great  Epic.

2  Noted,  very  early,  by  Colebrooke,  Transactions  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society,
i,  159^-"  "Because  the  bird  seems,  as  the  Hindus  apprehend,  to  extract  his
food  by  suction  from  solution  in  water;  wherefore  a  bird  of  this  genus  is
considered  an  emblem  of  discrimination,  as  being  capable  of  discriminating
milk  from  water."


FOREWORD  xix

natural  history  of  the  hamsa  are,  in  my  opinion,  fatuous,
because  the  hamsa  is  not  alone  in  "  drinking  apart " — i.e.
separating  two  substances  in  drinking.

There  is,  to  begin  with,  the  bird  krunc,  which,  in  addition
to  the  hamsa,  performs  the  same  "  stunt "  in  Mditrayani  Sam-
hitd,  iii,  11,6,  and  parallel  Yajur  texts.  As  a  matter  of  fact,
in  these  Vedic  texts  it  is  the  bird  krunc,  "  curlew,"  that  "  drinks
apart "  milk  and  water  (adbhyah  kshiram) ;  the  hamsa  "  drinks
apart "  soma  and  water  {adbhyah  somam).  Lanman,  in
Journal  of  the  American  Oriental  Society,  xix,  157,  quotes
two  passages  from  Pali  Buddhist  texts,  in  which  the
krunc  continues  to  do  this  at  a  very  late  time.1  The  Mdi-
trayani passage,  cited  above,  contains  more  cases  of  "  drinking
apart,"  pertaining  to  spiritual  matters.  And,  anent  Rig-
Veda,  x,  131,  4,  5,  it  seems  that  the  Asvins,  the  heavenly
physicians,  aided  by  Sarasvati,  cured  Indra's  "katzen  jammer,"
when  he  had  mixed  his  drinks,  by  taking  surd  (brandy)  on
the  top  of  his  accustomed  soma.  The  brandy  had  been  ad-
ministered to  him  by  his  tricky  enemy,  the  demon  Namuchi.2
And  again,  from  Rig-Veda  times,  ants  have  the  power  of
"  drinking  apart  "  water  from  the  desert  sands ;  see  Rig-Veda,
i,  112,  15,  vamrdm  vipipdndm,  "the  ant  which  drinks  apart,"
and  Bloomfield,  Hymns  of  the  Atharva  Veda,  Introductions
to  2,  3,  and  6,  100  ;  American  Journal  of  Philology,  vii,
4>S2ff.3  I  have  always  thought  it  curious  that  this  motif  is
lost  in  later  literature,  except  as  an  illustration  of  discern-
ment (viveka) ;  it  could  have  been  applied  fruitfully — e.g.  to
the  many  cases  of  poisoning  in  which  fiction  abounds.

Stories  that  contain  the  Motif  of  the  Rebounding  Bow

There  is  one  motif  of  rather  varied  application  which
figures  in  stories  that  go  back  to  the  Veda.     These  are  widely

1  Udana,  viii,  7  :  Vidva  pajahati  papakain  konco  khirapako  va  ninnagam}  "  The
wise  man  leaves  evil  as  the  milk-drinking  curlew  leaves  water."

2  Bloomfield,  Journal  of  the  American  Oriental  Society,  xv,  148  ff.,  15.9;
Oldenberg,  Nachrichten  von  der  Koniglichen  Gesellschaft  der  Wissenschaften  zu
Gottingen,  1893,  No.  9.

3  Cf.,  as  a  late  echo  of  this  conception,  Uvasagadasao,  Appendix  on
Gosala,  p.  4.


xx  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

scattered,  so  that  the  motif  is  scarcely  recognised  by  students
of  fiction  as  having  become  standard.  The  Kathd-sarit-
sdgara  has  it  only  in  a  rather  unintelligible  version  of  the
Panchatantra  fable  of  "  The  Greedy  Jackal "  (Ocean,  Vol.  V,
p.  77).  Kshemendra's  version,  in  Brihat-kathd-manjari,  ii,
20  jf.,  is  even  more  garbled.1

These  two  versions,  as  will  appear  below,  show  clearly
how  important  it  is  to  know  a  story  in  all  its  occurrences.
The  older  Panchatantra  versions  rule  out  the  Brihatkathd
forms  of  this  fable,  automatically,  as  it  were ;  cf.  Penzer,
Vol.  V,  pp.  212  Jf.  It  will  be  profitable  to  exhibit  this  singular
motif  in  all  its  occurrences  from  Veda  to  the  North  Buddhist
texts — to  wit :

The  Vedic  Story  of  the  Rebounding  Bow

Satapatha  Brdhmana  (XIV,  i,  Iff.). — Once  upon  a  time
Agni,  Indra,  Soma,  Makha,  Vishnu  and  the  Visve  Devas,  except
the  two  Asvins,  held  a  sacrificial  session  in  Kurukshetra,  that
they  might  attain  excellence  and  become  glorious,  and  eaters
of  food.  It  was  agreed  that  the  first  to  compass  the  end  of
the  sacrifice  should  be  considered  the  most  excellent.  Vishnu
won,  but  was  unable  to  restrain  his  desire  for  glory.  Taking
his  bow  and  three  arrows  he  stepped  forth  in  defiance  of  the
others.  As  he  stood  with  his  head  resting  upon  the  end  of
his  bow,  none  dared  to  accept  the  challenge  and  make  the
attack.  Then  said  the  ants  (vamri)  to  them  :  "  What  would
you  give  to  him  that  should  gnaw  the  bowstring  ?  "  "  Food
would  we  give  to  him,  and  he  should  find  water  even  in  the
desert."  2  "  So  be  it,"  said  the  ants.  Then  they  proceeded
to  gnaw  the  bowstring.  The  ends  of  the  bow  sprang  apart
and  cut  off  the  head  of  Vishnu.  .  .  .  Then  the  Devas  gave
to  those  ants  all  food  to  be  eaten,  but  all  food  is  water.

Variants  of  this  storyette  are  familiar  in  the  Vedic  writ-
ings :  Mditrdyani  Samhitd,  IV,  v,  9 ;  Panchavimsa  Brdhmana,
VII,  v,  6  ;  Tdittiriya  Aranyaka,  I,  v,  2  ;  and  Sayana  in  his
commentary  to  Big-Veda,  X,  clxxii,  2,  where  Indra  assumes
the  form  of  an  ant,  and  gnaws  Rudra's  bowrstring  so  that  it

1  See  Marikowski,  pp.  1 7,  47.  2  Cf.  the  preceding  rubric,


FOREWORD  xxi

cuts  off  his  head.    See  for  these  Vedic  stories,  Oliphant  in  the
Proceedings  of  the  American  Philological  Association,  vol.  xli,

PP-  lvj(F-


Later  Stories  of  the  Rebounding  Bow

The  same  motif  appears  next  in  Panchatantra,  ii,  3,  which
may  now  be  surveyed  in  Professor  Edgerton's  translation :
The  Panchatantra  Reconstructed,  vol.  i,  pp.  220 jf. ;  vol.  ii,
pp.  340jfjf.  A  hunter  kills  successively  a  deer  and  a  boar,  but
the  boar  in  his  agony  also  kills  the  hunter.  A  jackal  comes
along,  sees  the  three  carcases,  piles  them  up,  but,  instead  of
eating  of  them,  out  of  too  great  greed  gnaws  the  sinew-end
at  the  tip  of  the  hunter's  bow.  Whereupon,  as  the  cord  is
severed,  he  is  pierced  by  the  bow  in  the  throat,  and  perishes.

The  Oriental  and  Western  offshoots  of  this  story  are
sketched  by  Benfey,  Pantschatantra,  vol.  i,  pp.  S19jf.  In
Somadeva's  version  (Ocean,  Vol.  V,  p.  77)  the  operation  of
the  motif,  as  well  as  the  greed  of  the  jackal,  is  somewhat
obscured :  "  He  went  first  to  eat  what  had  been  placed  on
the  bow,  and  that  moment  the  arrow  fixed  in  it  flew  up  and
pierced  him  so  that  he  died."  Kshemendra  is  no  better.
These  versions  are  based  upon  the  kindred  motif  of  the  auto-
matic bow  which  we  know  from  Das  a  Kumar  a  Charita  :  see
now  Hertel's  translation,  vol.  i,  p.  33  ;  vol.  ii,  p.  7.  Cf.  also
Hertel,  Das  Pancatantra,  pp.  169  Jf.,  185  jf.

In  Ralston,  Tibetan  Tales,  pp.  286  jf.,  this  motif  is  coupled
conveniently  with  another  quite  common  motif  of  excessive
greed — namely,  "  Mutual  Poisonings."  A  jackal,  seeing  the
bodies  of  five  hundred  robbers  who  had  poisoned  one  another
out  of  greed  for  the  booty  which  belonged  to  them  in  common,
exclaims  :  "As  an  extremely  large  amount  of  booty  has
accrued  to  me,  I  will  take  each  part  of  it  in  turn."  So  he
seizes  a  bow  with  his  jaws,  gnaws  the  knots  of  the  bowstring,
the  string  snaps,  and  the  end  of  the  bow  strikes  the  roof  of
his  mouth  so  hard  that  the  jackal  dies.

Next,  the  motif  is  used,  quite  ingeniously,  in  a  story ette
in  which  the  bowstring  is  burned  by  fire,  and  the  rebounding
bow  kills,  so  as  to  revenge  an  injury  done  by  its  victim.     In


xxii  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

the  Southern  Textus  Amplior  of  the  Panchatantra,  iii,  13,  a
hunter  king  lives,  surrounded  by  a  thousand  Kiratas.  He
falls  in  love  with  Sumukhi,  the  wife  of  one  of  his  Kiratas,
kills  the  latter,  and  compels  his  pregnant .  widow  to  cohabit
with  him.  She  begets  her  son,  whom  the  king  believes  to
be  his  own,  and  brings  up  tenderly.  When  the  boy  is  five
years  of  age  he  happens  to  sit  with  other  boys  around  a  fire
in  the  forest.  The  king  comes  there  too,  and  stretches  out
before  the  fire,  placing  his  strung  bow  by  his  side.  The  boy
places  a  burning  faggot  upon  the  bowstring,  so  that  the
string  is  burned,  and  the  rebounding  bow  hits  the  king  in
the  head  and  kills  him.  See  Hertel  in  Z.D.M.G.,  lxi,  72
(ad  p.  65).

Finally,  Julg,  Mongolische  Mdrchen,  p.  169  jff.,  reports  the
motif  in  a  very  faded  form  and  unexpected  connection.  A
poor  young  weaver  has  destroyed  by  Kakataliya  luck x  a
hostile  army  marching  against  a  king.  Returning  with
immense  booty,  the  king  is  ready  to  accept  him  as  a  husband
for  his  daughter,  but  the  queen  insists  that  he  must  demon-
strate his  personal  courage  by  killing  a  big  fox.  Unable  to
find  the  fox,  he  returns,  but,  on  nearing  the  castle,  he  notices
that  he  has  lost  his  bow.  In  the  meantime  the  fox  has  found
the  bow,  has  bitten  its  string  in  two,  and  has  been  killed  by
its  rebounding  end.  When  the  "hero"  comes  there,  the  fox
lies  dead ;  he  returns  with  his  pelt  in  triumph.  He  finally
marries  the  princess,  and  rules  half  the  kingdom.  Julg's
version  of  the  story  is  corroborated  by  a  report  of  it  which
Benfey  has  printed,  as  coming  from  Schiefner's  pen,  in  Pan-
tschatantra,  ii,  541.  Here  also  the  hero  finds  "  den  fuchs
durch  den  bogen,  dessen  sehne  er  aufzupressen  versucht
hatte,  getodtet."

Minor  Motifs

The  Encyclopedist  of  Fiction  will  ultimately  experience,
perhaps,  his  most  striking  impression  from  what  may  be

1  See  the  author  in  American  Journal  of  Philology,  xl,  1 2  ff.,  25 ;  Hertel,  "Zum
Marchen  vom  tapferen  Schneiderlein,"  Zeitschrift  des  Vcreins  fur  Volkskunde  in
Berlin,  1.913,  xxiii,  51-57.


FOREWORD


xxin


called  the  "  minor  motifs"  These  flit  across  every  page  of
fiction.  When  first  met  with  they  appear  to  be  mere  acci-
dents of  narration,  devices  of  a  given  story-teller  who,  of
course,  is  sure  to  draw  to  some  extent  upon  his  own  resources
of  imagination,  else  how  would  he  come  to  be  a  story-teller  ?
Such  are,  e.g.,  the  runaway  horse,  often  of  reversed  training *
not  understood  by  his  master,  the  king  or  prince,  who  is  then
carried  off  to  the  jungle,  where  he  experiences  his  real  adven-
ture. Or,  the  hero  meets,  on  the  banks  of  a  beautiful  lake —
a  veritable  mdnasa  lake — a  correspondingly  beautiful  maiden,
usually  princess,  accompanied  by  her  confidante  or  duenna.
Or,  the  hero  saves  some  maiden  from  the  onslaught  of  an
infuriated  elephant,  either  by  courageously  or  trickily  con-
quering him,  or  by  taming  him  through  the  lure  of  his  lute.
Again,  the  hero,  utterly  penniless,  is  received  lovingly  by  a
disinterested  and  very  beautiful  hetcera,  much  to  the  disgust
of  her  "  mother,"  the  old  bawd  (akkd,  kuttani  or  kuttini),
ultimately  to  elevate  the  hetcera  to  his  own  exalted  station.
Or,  both  hero  and  heroine  are  carried  by  a  fairy  bird  (bhar-
anda,  bherunda  or  garuda)  to  a  far  distance,  which  brings  the
denouement  of  their  adventures.  And  so  on  ad  infinitum.
Pretty  nearly  all  these  adventures,  which  seem  at  first  sight
flowers  of  the  imagination,  prove  in  the  end  to  be  stencilled,
pigeon-holed  cliche.  The  mass  or  total  of  fiction  is  really  not
inventive,  even  though  the  first  expression  of  a  given  motif
must  have  been  an  act  of  imaginative  creation.  To  find  its
place  and  time  is  a  delicate  task,  because  the  beginnings  of
fictional  ideas  are  not  revealed  by  existing  literature,  and  are
doubtless  with  primitive  folk-lore  ideas  of  which  we  have
no  record.  The  so-called  folk-lore  books  of  India,  of  which
we  have  some  sixty  or  more,  are  certainly  not,  for  the  over-
whelming part  of  them,  mythogenic ;  they  are,  as  a  rule,
popular  recasts  of  stories  from  Panchatantra,  Jdtaka,  etc.,  as
well  as,  of  course,  of  many  foreign  sources.

A  few  of  these  ideas  are  salient  enough  to  have  received
some  kind  of  notice  or  rubrication  at  the  hands  of  fiction
observers.  But  the  great  mass  has  been  passed  by  unnoticed.
I  shall  pick  here  a  couple  of  them,  not  unknown  to  the  readers

1  See  my  Life  and  Stories  of  the  Jaina  Savior  Parcvanatha,  pp.  204  ff.


xxiv  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

of  the  Ocean,  but  of  such  fleeting  incidental  character  as  not
to  impress  him  with  their  real  significance  in  the  technique  of
either  Somadeva  or  other  fiction  writers.


Looking  for  Water

Quite  en  passant,  in  these  pages  (above,  p.  xvi)  appears,
very  irrelevantly,  a  soldier  who  had  placed  a  tiger  in  a  box
and  then  wandered  off  in  search  of  water.  The  motif  is
introduced  simply  to  give  the  Brahman  a  chance  to  come
in  contact  with  the  tiger.  It  is  at  least  as  early  as  the  Epic  :
in  Mahdbharata,  iii,  36,  136,  the  Brahman  Yavakri,  who  has
attempted  to  seduce  Raibhya's  daughter-in-law,  is  deprived
by  magic  of  his  water-pot,  and  roams  in  vain  in  search  for
water,  until  he  is  killed  by  a  demon.

Looking  for  water  appears  as  a  progressive  motif  in  the
Kathd-sarit-sdgara  four  times,  if  not  oftener.  Thus,  x,  128  j§f.
(Ocean,  Vol.  I,  p.  115),  Mrigankavati,  beloved  of  the  young
Brahman  Sridatta,  while  roaming  in  the  Vindhya  forest,
becomes  exhausted  with  fear  and  exertion,  and  is  very
thirsty  withal.  Sridatta  goes  in  search  of  water,  loses  his  way,
and  passes  the  night  in  the  forest.  When  he  arrives  in  the
morning  on  the  spot  where  he  left  the  princess  she  is  nowhere
to  be  seen.  And  Kathds.,  lvi,  12  jf.  (Ocean,  Vol.  IV,  p.  221),
the  Brahman  Chandrasvamin,  impoverished  by  famine,
undertakes  to  bring  his  two  children  to  his  father-in-law's
house.  They  reach  a  wilderness,  where  he  leaves  the  two
children,  exhausted  by  thirst,  to  look  for  water.  He  is  cap-
tured by  the  Bhilla  chief  Simhadamshtra  to  be  sacrificed  to
Durga.  But  by  the  favour  of  the  sun-god  all  turns  out  well.
These  two  passages  show  how  incidental,  yet  how  effective
at  the  bottom,  is  the  motif,  but  it  has  not  as  yet  been  recog-
nised as  such  by  the  fictionists.  Yet  the  motif  is  perfectly
standard  ;  it  occurs  twice  more  in  the  Kathd-sarit-sdgara,
liv,  9  (Ocean,  Vol.  IV,  p.  187),  and  Hi,  196  (Ocean,  Vol.  IV,
p.  152).  These  two  Kathd-sarit-sdgara  occurrences  are  so
mechanical  as  to  entitle  one  to  say  that  whenever  Somadeva
wishes  to  separate  two  people  or  parties,  all  he  has  to  do  is
to  make  one  of  them  go  in  search  for  water.     The  motif  is


FOREWORD  xxv

everywhere  in  fiction  :  see,  e.g.,  Devendra's  stories,  J.  J.  Meyer,
Hindu  Tales,  pp.  24,  33,  42,  68  ;  Jtilg,  Mongolische  Mdrchen,
p.  165 ;  Jiilg,  Kalmukische  Mdrchen,  p.  32  ;  Kathdkoga,  in
Tawney's  translation,  pp.  99 jf.,  141,  206 ;  Samarddityasam-
kshepa,  v,  283  ff. ;  Charpentier,  Paccekabuddhageschichten,
p.  126 ;  Hertel,  Indische  Mdrchen,  p.  91 ;  Lescallier,  Le
Trone  Enchante,  i,  71,  bottom;  Parker,  Village  Folk-Tales
of  Ceylon,  i,  81,  96;  Frere,  Old  Deccan  Days,  pp.  18,  59,  198.
See  also  Hertel,  Das  Pancatantra,  p.  109,  note  4.  Note
especially  Hemavijaya's  Kathdratndkara,  story  21  (Hertel's
translation,  i,  58jf.),  in  which  this  haphazard  motif,  that
ordinarily  glides  into  the  story  almost  unperceived,  is  made  the
pivot  of  a  rather  exquisite  anecdote  belonging  to  the  riddle
sphere.  The  four  brothers  of  Yudhishthira  go  successively
in  search  for  water,  are  asked  riddles  which  they  are  unable
to  answer,  and  therefore  sink  to  the  ground  in  a  faint.  Yudhi-
shthira follows,  is  also  asked  a  profound  cosmic  riddle,  which
he  answers  correctly,  and  the  four  brothers  are  restored  to
life.


Deserted  City

Scarcely  less  significant  for  the  technique  of  story -telling,
though  not  as  frequent,  is  the  city  which  has  become  deserted,
because  its  inhabitants  have  been  devoured  by  some  demon.
I  have  noted  only  two  occurrences  of  this  motif — one  in
Kathd-sarit-sdgara,  x,  71  (Ocean,  Vol.  I,  p.  Ill) :  Sridatta  and
his  friend  Nishthuraka  meet  on  the  road  a  weeping  woman
who  professes  to  have  lost  her  way  while  travelling  to  Ujjayini.
Sridatta  invites  her  to  join  them,  and  they  halt  by  day  in  a
certain  deserted  town.  Sridatta  wakes  up  in  the  night  and
sees  that  the  woman  has  slain  Nishthuraka,  and  is  devouring
his  flesh.  Sridatta  seizes  her  by  the  hair.  The  woman  turns
out  to  be,  not  an  original  RakshasI,  but  a  heavenly  nymph
under  a  curse,  because  she  had  been  induced  by  Kubera
to  interfere  with  Visvamitra's  austerities.  Visvamitra  had
cursed  her  into  a  RakshasI :  it  is  she  who  has  eaten  all
the  inhabitants  of  the  deserted  city.  The  curse  ends  when
Sridatta  takes  hold  of  her.


xxvi  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

In  Pdrsvandtha  Charitra,  ii,  315  ff.,  Prince  Bhima
(Bhimasena)  and  his  friend  Matisagara  come  to  a  deserted  city,
where  they  see  a  lion  with  a  man  in  his  paws,  about  to  devour
him.  The  city  is  Hemapura;  its  king  was  Hemaratha,  who
had  a  Purohrita,  Chanda  ("  Cruel "),  hated  of  all  men.  The
king  also  was  cruel  by  nature.  An  enemy  of  Chanda  spread
the  report  that  he  was  intimate  with  a  low-born  woman
(mdtangi).1  The  king  consulted  an  oracle,  and,  though  he
did  not  determine  the  truth,  had  Chanda  wrapped  in  hemp
and  boiled  in  oil.  Chanda  had  no  chance,  before  he  died,  to
wear  away  his  sins,  therefore  was  reborn  as  a  Rakshasa,
named  Sarvagila  ("  All-Devourer  ").  Remembering  the  hos-
tilities of  his  former  birth,  he  came  to  that  city,  hid  away
its  people,  and,  having  assumed  the  shape  of  a  lion,  carried
off  King  Hemaratha.  Bhima  rescues  Hemaratha.;  the  lion
is  appeased  and  brings  back  the  people  of  Hemapura.

I  should  like  especially  to  draw  the  attention  of  the  reader
to  the  mechanical  and  paradoxical  way  in  which  this  funda-
mentally tragic  motif  is  blended  with  a  satirical  use  of  the
"  Laugh  and  Cry  *  motif  in  Swynnerton's  Romantic  Tales  from
the  Panjab  (p.  87),  as  quoted  by  Mr  Penzer  on  p.  261  of  the
present  volume.2

The  motif  figures  also  in  Kathds.,  xliii  (Ocean,  Vol.  Ill,
p.  281 ;  cf.  pp.  58,  59),  where  a  deserted  city  is  peopled  by
automata ;  and  also  in  Pdrsvandtha  Charitra,  vi,  314 ;
Tawney's  Kathdkoga,  p.  129;  in  the  story  of  Bambhadatta
(Jacobi,  Ausgewdhlte  Erzdhlungen,  p.  7,  1.  28  ;  J.  J.  Meyer,
Hindu  Tales,  p.  26) ;  Panchadandachhatlraprabandha,  ii,  p.  27 ;
Divydvaddna,  pp.  9,  19  ;  Hertel,  Indische  Mdrchen,  pp.  142,
187 ;  Geschichte  von  Pdla  und  Gopdla,  p.  70  ;  Panchdhhydnod-
dhdra,  in  the  story  of  Ratnapala;  Hertel,  Das  Pancatantra,
p.  109,  note  4  ;   Jiilg,  Mongolische  Mdrchen,  p.  26.

1  This  also  is  a  fairly  standard,  yet  unlisted  motif  of  fiction ;  see  my
Life  of  Pargvanatha,  p.  195.

2  [I  should  here  point  out  that  Professor  Bloomfield's  reference  is  to
Swynnerton's  Romantic  Tales  from  the  Panjab,  with  Indian  Nights'  Entertainment,
Ldn.,  1908  ;  while  my  reference  on  p.  26 1  is  from  his  previous  work,  Romantic
Tales  from  the  Panjab,  Ldn.,  1903. — n.m.p.]


FOREWORD


xxvn


Concluding  Remarks

The  preceding  remarks  are  not  intended  as  a  systematic
statement  of  a  plan  for  such  an  Encyclopaedia  as  I  have  in
mind.  They  are  intended  rather  to  establish  the  conviction
in  the  mind  of  the  reader  that  an  Encyclopedia  of  Fiction,
whatever  form  and  scope  it  may  ultimately  assume,  is  plainly
a  sine  qua  non  of  fruitful — we  might  say  final — Fiction  study.
I  am  very  grateful  to  Mr  Penzer  for  giving  these  ideas  a
permanent  habitat  in  his  great  work,  and  by  the  side  of
the  many  elaborate  notes  and  comments  with  which  he  has
very  wisely  enriched  it.  The  time  will  come  when  concerted
academic  action  will  produce  a  work  hardly  less  exigent
than  Dr  Hastings'  Encyclopcedia  of  Religion  and  Ethics  :  it
will  be  in  the  main  the  work  of  a  future  generation,  but  the
present  generation  need  not  hesitate  to  prepare  its  way  by
suggestion  and  illustrative  example.

Maurice  Bloomfield.

Johns  Hopkins  University,
October  1926.


LIST    OF   PAPERS

PUBLISHED    BY

Professor  MAURICE  BLOOMFIELD
AND  HIS  SCHOOL

PREPARATORY   TO   AN

Encyclopaedia  of  Hindu  Fiction

By  Professor  Bloom  field

"The  Character  and  Adventures  of  Muladeva":  Proceedings  of  the  American
Philosophical  Society,  Hi,  616-650.

"  On  Talking  Birds  in  Hindu  Fiction  "  :  Festschrift  fur  Ernst  Windisck,  349-361.

"  On  Recurring  Psychic  Motifs,  and  The  Laugh  and  Cry  Motif" :  Journal  of

the  American  Oriental  Society,  xxxvi,  54-89.
1*  On  the  Art  of  Entering  Another's  Body ;  a  Hindu  Fiction  Motif"  :  Proceedings

of  the  American  Philosophical  Society,  lvi,  1-43.

"The  Fable  of  the  Crow  and  the  Palm-Tree;  a  Psychic  Motif  in  Hindu
Fiction"  :  American  Journal  of  Philology,  xl,  1-36.

"The  Dohada,  or  Craving  of  Pregnant  Women;  a  Motif  of  Hindu  Fiction"  :
Journal  of  the  American  Oriental  Society,  xl,  1-24.

"On  the  Practice  of  giving  Animals  Intoxicating  Drink"  :  ibid.,  336-339-

u  On  Overhearing  as  a  Motif  of  Hindu  Fiction  "  :  American  Journal  of  Philology,
xli,  309-335.

"  Joseph  and  Potiphar  in  Hindu  Fiction " :  Transactions  of  the  American
Philological  Association,  liv,  141-176.

"  The  Art  of  Stealing  in  Hindu  Fiction  "  :  American  Journal  of  Philology,  xliv,
97-133,  193-229.

"  On  False  Ascetics  and  Nuns  in  Hindu  Fiction " :  Journal  of  the  American
Oriental  Society,  xliv,  202-242.

"  On  Organized  Brigandage  in  Hindu  Fiction  "  :  American  Journal  of  Philology,
xlvii,  205-233.

By  Dr  E.  W.  Burlingame

"The  Act  of  Truth  (Saccakiriya) ;  a  Hindu  Spell  and  its  Employment  as  a
Psychic  Motif  in  Hindu  Fiction "  :  Journal  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society,
July  1917,  pp.  429-467.

xxviii


LIST  OF  PAPERS  xxix

By  Dr  W.  N.  Brown

"The  Wandering  Skull  "  :  American  Journal  of  Philology,  xl,  423-430.

"  Escaping  One's  Fate ;  a  Hindu  Paradox  and  its  Use  as  a  Psychic  Motif  in
Hindu  Fiction  "  :  Studies  in  Honor  of  Maurice  Bloomjield,  89-104.

"  Vyaghramarl,  or  the  Lady  Tiger-Killer;  a  Study  of  the  Motif  of  Bluff  in
Hindu  Fiction  "  :  American  Journal  of  Philology,  xlii,  122- J  51.

"The  Silence  Wager"  :  ibid.,  xliii,  289-317.

"The  Tar-Baby  at  Home"  :  Scientific  Monthly,  xv,  228-234.


By  Dr  Ruth  Norton

The   Life-Index;   a   Hindu    Fiction  Motif":    Studies  in  Honor  of  Maurice
Bloomfield,  211-224.


CONTENTS

BOOK  XII:   SASANKAVATI— continued
CHAPTER  LXXXIII
Author's  Preface  ....


PAGE

xxxvii


I63g.  King  Trivikramasena  and  the  Mendi-
cant .  .  .  .1

163g  (9).  Anangarati    and    her    Four

Suitors  .  .  .1

163g.  King  Trivikramasena  and  the  Mendi-
cant .  .  .  .4


CHAPTER  LXXXIV

163g.  King  Trivikramasena  and  the  Mendi-
cant ...  .5

163g  (10).  Madanasena  and  her  Rash

Promise  .  .         5

163g.  King  Trivikramasena  and  the  Mendi-
cant ....         9


CHAPTER  LXXXV

163g.  King  Trivikramasena  and  the  Mendi-
cant .  .  .  .10

163g  (11).  King  Dharmadhvaja  and
his  Three  Very  Sensitive
Wives    .  .  .10

163g.  King  Trivikramasena  and  the  Mendi-
cant .  .  .  .12


XXXI


xxxii  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

CHAPTER  LXXXVI

PAGE

163g.  King  Trivikramasena  and  the  Mendi-
cant .  .  .  .13
163g  (12).  King  Yasahketu,  his  Vid-
yadhari    Wife    and    his
Faithful  Minister  .       13
163g.  King  Trivikramasena  and  the  Mendi-
cant             .              .              .              .25

CHAPTER  LXXXVII

163g.  King  Trivikramasena  and  the  Mendi-
cant .  .  .  .29
163g  (13).  The  Brahman  Harisvamin,
who  first  lost  his  Wife,
and  then  his  Life  .       29
163g.  King  Trivikramasena  and  the  Mendi-
cant             .              .              .  .33

CHAPTER  LXXXVIII

163g.  King  Trivikramasena  and  the  Mendi-
cant .  .  .  .35
163g  (14).  The    Merchant's    Daughter
who  fell  in  love  with  a
Thief     .              .  .35
163g.  King  Trivikramasena  and  the  Mendi-
cant            .              .              .              .39

CHAPTER  LXXXIX

163g.  King  Trivikramasena  and  the  Mendi-
cant .  .  .  .40
163g  (15).  The  Magic  Pill       .  .       40

163g.  King  Trivikramasena  and  the  Mendi-
cant .  .  •  .48


CONTENTS
CHAPTER  XC


XXXlll


PACxE


163g.  King  Trivikramasena  and  the  Mendi-
cant .  .  .  .49
163g  (16).  The    Sacrifice    of    Jimuta-

vahana  .  .  .49

163g.  King  Trivikramasena  and  the  Mendi-
cant .  .  .  .63


CHAPTER  XCI

163g.  King  Trivikramasena  and  the  Mendi-
cant .  .  .  .66

163g  (17).  The  Beautiful  Unmadini    .       66

163g.  King  Trivikramasena  and  the  Mendi-
cant .  .  .  .69


CHAPTER  XCII

163g.  King  Trivikramasena  and  the  Mendi-
cant .  .  .  .71

163g  (18).  The  Brahman's  Son  who
failed  to  acquire  the
Magic  Power       .  .       71

163g.  King  Trivikramasena  and  the  Mendi-
cant .  .  .  .77


CHAPTER  XCIII

163G.  King  Trivikramasena  and  the  Mendi-
cant .

163G  (19).  The  Thief's  Son     .
163g.  King  Trivikramasena  and  the  Mendi-
cant .


vol.  vn.


78
78

85


xxxiv  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

CHAPTER  XCIV

PAGE

163g.  King  Trivikramasena  and  the  Mendi-
cant .  .  .  .87
163g  (20).  The    Brahman    Boy     who
offered    himself    up    to
save  the  Life  of  the  King       87
163g.  King  Trivikramasena  and  the  Mendi-
cant             .              .              .  .96

CHAPTER  XCV

163g.  King  Trivikramasena  and  the  Mendi-
cant .  .  .  .98
163g  (21).  Anangamanjari,    her    Hus-
band   Manivarman    and
the    Brahman    Kamala-
kara       .              .              .98
163g.  King  Trivikramasena  and  the  Mendi-
cant             ....     104

CHAPTER  XCVI

163g.  King  Trivikramasena  and  the  Mendi-
cant .  .  .  .108
163g  (22).  The  Four  Brahman  Brothers
who      resuscitated      the
Lion       .              .             .     108
163g.  King  Trivikramasena  and  the  Mendi-
cant            ....     Ill

CHAPTER  XCVII

163g.  King  Trivikramasena  and  the  Mendi-
cant ....     112
163g  (23).  The  Hermit  who  first  Wept

and  then  Danced  ,      112


CONTENTS  xxxv

CHAPTER  XCVII— continued

PAGE

163g.  King  Trivikramasena  and  the  Mendi-
cant ....     115

CHAPTER  XCVIII

163g.  King  Trivikramasena  and  the  Mendi-
cant ....      116

163g  (24).  The  Father  that  married
the  Daughter  and  the  Son
that  married  the  Mother       117

163g.  King  Trivikramasena  and  the  Mendi-
cant .  .  .  .120

CHAPTER  XCIX

163g  (25).  Conclusion  of  King  Trivi-
kramasena  and  the
Mendicant  .  .     122

163.  Story  of  Mrigankadatta     .  .  .  .     125

CHAPTER  C

Invocation       .  .  .  .  .  .128

163.  Story  of  Mrigankadatta    .  .  .  .128

CHAPTER  CI

163.  Story  of  Mrigankadatta    ....     134

163h.  Sundarasena  and  Mandaravati  .     137

163.  Story  of  Mrigankadatta     .  ...  .     161

CHAPTER  CII
163.  Story  of  Mrigankadatta    .  .  .  .162


xxxvi  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

CHAPTER  CIII

PAGE

163.  Story  of  Mrigankadatta    ....     175
M(ain  story)     ......     192

APPENDIX

The  Twenty-five  Tales  of  a  Vetala  (cont.)  .  .     199

Index    I — Sanskrit  Words  and  Proper  Names  .     271

Index  II— General        .  .  .  .  .283


PREFACE


/  %    one  Appendix  to  the  present  volume.
±      m      It  consists  of  notes  on  the  remaining  seventeen
(really  sixteen1)  vampire  stories.

The  collection,  as  given  by  Somadeva,  is  obviously  in
the  form  in  which  he  found  it,  and  it  has  been  presented  in
its  entirety,  despite  the  fact  that  several  of  the  tales  had
already  appeared  ;  and  others  we  shall  meet  again  later.

So  far  from  being  superfluous,  I  consider  this  repetition  is
both  interesting  and  valuable.  It  shows  what  was  probably
the  form  of  the  story  in  the  original  Brihat-kathd,  and  the
form  it  had  after  it  had  found  its  way  into  other  collections.

The  Foreword  to  the  present  volume  is  of  the  greatest
importance,  as  it  represents  a  definite  step  in  the  study  of
Fiction  motifs.

Although  the  tabulating  and  explaining  of  "  incidents  "
in  folk-tales  was  begun  in  1884  by  Sir  Richard  Temple  in
Wide-Awake  Stories,  folklorists  seem  to  have  made  but  little
headway.  Professor  Bloomfield,  whose  work  I  have  quoted
so  often,  now  takes  up  the  cudgels  himself,  and  has  honoured
my  work  by  a  most  original  and  suggestive  Foreword.

Dr  Barnett  and  Mr  Fenton  still  gallantly  sail  with  me  on
the  Ocean,  though  at  times  I  fear  I  have  taken  them  on  a
long  voyage ;  but  the  terrors  of  the  deep  seem  to  leave  them
unmoved !

N.  M.  P.

St  John's  Wood,  N.W.8,
December  1926.


By  mistake  I  said  "sixteen  (really  fifteen)  "  in  the  Preface  to  Volume  VI.


xxxvii


THE
OCEAN  OF  STORY


BOOK  XII :   SA&ANKAVATI— continued

CHAPTER  LXXXIII

163g.  King  Trivikramasena  and  the  Mendicant

SO  King  Trivikramasena  again  went  to  the  simsapd  tree,
and  taking  the  Vetala  down  from  it,  placed  him  on  his
shoulder,  and  set  out.  Then  the  Vetala  said  to  him  :
'  King,  this  wandering  about  in  a  cemetery  at  night  is  in-
consistent with  your  kingly  rank.  Do  you  not  see  that  this
place  of  the  dead  *  is  full  of  Bhutas,2  and  terrible  at  night,
and  full  of  darkness  as  of  the  smoke  of  funeral  pyres?
Alas,  what  tenacity  you  display  in  this  undertaking  you
have  engaged  in,  to  please  that  mendicant!  So  listen  to
this  question  from  me,  which  will  render  your  journey  more
agreeable.


163g  (9).  Anangarati  and  her  Four  Suitors3

There  is  in  Avanti  a  city  built  by  gods  at  the  beginning
of  the  world,  which  is  limitless  as  the  body  of  Siva,  and  re-
nowned for  enjoyment  and  prosperity,  even  as  his  body  is
adorned  with  the  snake's  hood  and  ashes.4  It  was  called
Padmavati  in  the  Krita  Yuga,  Bhogavati  in  the  Treta  Yuga,
Hiranyavati  in  the  Dvapara  Yuga,  and  Ujjayini  in  the  Kali
Yuga.5  And  in  it  there  lived  an  excellent  king,  named
Viradeva,  and  he  had  a  queen  named  Padmarati.     The  king

1  Literally,   "grove    of  ancestors" — i.e.    cemetery. The    German

"Ahnenhain."     See  Vol.  VI,  p.  254. — n.m.p.

2  See  Vol.  I,  p.  206 ;  Vol.  VI,  p.  1 29 ;  and  Crooke,  Religion  and  Folk-Lore
of  Northern  India,  new  edition,  1926,  p.  190  et  seq. — n.m.p.

3  See  Appendix,  p.  199. — n.m.p.

4  Here  we  have  one  of  the  puns  in  which  our  author  delights.

5  For  a  note  on  the  four  Yugas,  or  Ages  of  the  World,  see  Vol.  IV,,

p.  240/11. — N.M.P.

VOL.    VII.  1  A


2  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

went  with  her  to  the  bank  of  the  Mandakini,1  and  propitiated
Siva  with  austerities,  in  order  to  obtain  a  son.  And  after
he  had  remained  a  long  time  engaged  in  austerities,  he  per-
formed the  ceremonies  of  bathing  and  praying,  and  then
he  heard  this  voice  from  heaven,  uttered  by  Siva,  who  was
pleased  with  him  :  "  King,  there  shall  be  born  to  thee  a
brave  son  to  be  the  head  of  thy  family,  and  a  daughter,  who
with  her  matchless  beauty  shall  put  to  shame  the  nymphs
of  heaven."  When  King  Viradeva  had  heard  this  voice  from
heaven,  he  returned  to  his  city  with  his  consort,  having
gained  all  he  desired.

There  he  first  had  a  son  born  to  him,  named  Suradeva,
and  after  a  time  Queen  Padmarati  gave  birth  to  a  daughter.
And  her  father  gave  her  the  name  of  Anangarati,  on  the
ground  that  she  was  beautiful  enough  to  inspire  love  in
the  breast  of  Kama.  And  when  she  grew  up,  in  his  desire
to  procure  for  her  a  suitable  husband,  he  had  brought  the
portraits  of  all  the  kings  of  the  earth,  painted  on  canvas.
And  as  no  one  of  them  seemed  a  match  for  her,  he  said  to

1  This  river  joins  the  Alaknanda  at  Rudraprayag,  and  rises  at  Kedarnath,
the  famous  temple  in  the  Garhwal  District  of  the  United  Provinces  of  Agra
and  Oudh  (see  Vol.  VI,  p.  88).  It  should  not  be  confused  with  a  river  of
the  same  name  mentioned  by  Kalidasa  in  the  Malavikagnimitra  (see  Tawney's
translation,  p.  7w2,  where  he  points  out  that  the  Narmada  is  probably  meant
here).

The  twin  peaks  of  Kedarnath  and  Badarinath  (see  Ocean,  Vol.  IV,  p.  159W1)
rise  at  a  distance  of  ten  miles  apart,  and  between  these  lies  the  temple,  which
ranks  as  one  of  the  twelve  famous  linga  shrines  in  India.  Although  it  was
an  important  religious  centre  in  Buddhist  times,  it  was  not  until  the  arrival
of  the  Saiva  reformer,  Sankaracharya,  about  the  beginning  of  the  eighth
century,  that  it  attained  its  greatest  sanctity  as  a  place  of  holy  pilgrimage.
Situated  at  a  height  of  over  11,000  feet,  among  roses  and  syringa  bushes  on
the  eternal  snow,  it  is  said  to  have  a  strange  effect  on  pilgrims.

Crooke  tells  us  (Hastings'  Ency.  Rel.  Eth.,vo\.  vii,p.  680)  that  the  sanctity
of  the  place  has  been  explained  by  the  fact  that  pilgrims  become  overpowered
by  the  strong  scent  of  the  flowers.  "This,"  he  continues,  "combined  with
the  rarity  of  the  air,  produces  a  sense  of  faintness,  which  is  naturally  attributed
to  spirit  agency,  while  the  strange  sounds  produced  by  falling  avalanches  and
rendings  of  the  ice  and  snow  doubtless  contribute  to  the  same  belief."  For
further  details  concerning  Kedarnath  and  other  sacred  places  in  the  neigh-
bourhood, see  Crooke  (op.  cit.  sup.)  and  the  numerous  references  there  given

— N.M.P.


THE  FOUR  SUITORS  3

his  daughter,  in  his  tenderness  for  her :  "I  cannot  find  a
suitable  match  for  you,  my  daughter,  so  summon  all  the
kings  of  the  earth,  and  select  your  own  husband."  When
te  princess  heard  that,  she  said  to  her  father  :  "  My  father,
I  am  too  modest  to  select  my  own  husband,  but  I  must  be
given  in  marriage  to  a  good-looking  young  man,  who  is  a
perfect  master  of  one  art ;  I  do  not  want  any  other  better
man."

When  the  king  heard  this  speech  of  his  daughter  Anan-
garati,  he  proceeded  to  search  for  a  young  man  such  as  she
had  described,  and  while  he  was  thus  engaged,  there  came
to  him  from  the  Deccan  four  magnificent  men,  brave  and
skilful,  who  had  heard  from  the  people  what  was  going  on.
Those  four  suitors  for  the  hand  of  the  princess  were  received
with  respect  by  the  king,  and  one  after  another  they  told  to
him  in  her  presence  their  respective  acquirements.

The  first  said  :  "  I  am  a  Sudra,  Panchaphuttika  by  name.
I  make  every  day  five  splendid  pairs  of  garments  :  the  first
of  them  I  give  to  my  god,  and  the  second  to  a  Brahman,  the
third  I  retain  for  my  own  wearing,1  the  fourth  I  should  give
to  my  wife,  if  this  maid  here  were  to  become  my  wife,  the
fifth  I  sell,  and  procure  myself  meat  and  drink.  As  I  possess
this  art,  let  Anangarati  be  given  to  me."

When  he  had  said  this,  the  second  man  said  :  "I  am  a
Vaisya,  Bhashajna  by  name.  I  know  the  speech  of  all  beasts
and  birds,2  so  let  the  princess  be  given  to  me."

When  the  second  had  said  this,  the  third  said  :  "I  am  a
Kshatriya  king,  by  name  Khadgadhara,  renowned  for  might
of  arm  :  my  equal  in  the  art  of  swordmanship  does  not  exist
upon  the  earth,  so  bestow  this  maiden  on  me,  O  King."

When  the  third  had  said  this,  the  fourth  said  :    "I  am

1  More  literally,  "for  my  own  two  garments."  A  Hindu  wears  two
pieces  of  cloth.

2  See  Vol.  IV,  p.  145W1 ;  Herrtage's  edition  of  the  English  Gesta  Roman-
orum,  p.  55;  the  Greek  fable  of  Teiresias,  Waldau,  B'dhmische  Marchen,  p.  1
[see  Frazer,  Apollodorus,  The  Library,  vol.  i,  p.  363] ;  and  Hagen's  Helden-
Sagen,  vol.  ii,  p.  24.  We  are  told  that  Melampus  buried  the  parents  of  a
brood  of  snakes,  and  they  rewarded  him  by  licking  his  ears  so  that  he
understood  the  language  of  birds  (Preller,  Griechiscke  Mythologie,  vol.  ii,
p.  474).


4  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

a  Brahman,  named  Jivadatta,  and  I  possess  the  following
art :  I  can  restore  to  life  dead  creatures,  and  exhibit  them
alive  * ;  so  let  this  maiden  obtain  for  a  husband  me,  who  am
renowned  for  daring  exploits."

When  they  had  thus  spoken,  the  King  Viradeva,  with  his
daughter  by  his  side,  seeing  that  they  were  like  gods  in  shape
and  dress,  remained  lost  in  doubt.


163g.  King  Trivikramasena  and  the  Mendicant

When  the  Vetala  had  told  this  story,  he  said  to  King
Trivikramasena,  menacing  him  with  the  before -mentioned
curse  :  "So  tell  me,  King,  to  which  of  these  four  ought
the  maiden  Anangarati  to  be  given  ?  "

When  the  king  heard  this,  he  gave  the  Vetala  the  following
answer  :  "  You  are  thus  repeatedly  making  me  break  silence
simply  in  order  to  waste  time ;  otherwise,  master  of  magic,
howr  could  you  possibly  ask  such  an  absurd  question  ?  How
can  a  woman  of  Kshatriya  caste  be  given  to  a  Sudra  weaver  ?
Moreover,  how  can  a  Kshatriya  woman  be  given  to  a  Vaisya  ?
And  as  to  the  power  of  understanding  the  language  of  beasts
and  birds,  which  he  possesses,  what  is  the  practical  use  of  it  ?
And  as  for  the  fourth,  the  Brahman,  who  fancies  himself  such
a  hero,  of  what  worth  is  he,  as  he  is  a  sorcerer,  and  degraded
by  abandoning  the  duties  of  his  caste  ?  Accordingly  the
maiden  should  be  given  to  the  third  suitor,  the  Kshatriya
Khadgadhara,  who  is  of  the  same  caste,  and  distinguished
for  his  skill  and  valour."

When  the  Vetala  heard  this,  he  left  the  king's  shoulder,
as  before,  and  quickly  returned  by  the  power  of  his  magic  to
his  own  place ;  and  the  king  again  pursued  him,  as  before,
to  recover  him,  for  despondency  never  penetrates  into  a
hero's  heart,  that  is  cased  in  armour  of  fortitude.

1  See  Vol.  VI,  p.  1 8w1.— n.m.p.


CHAPTER   LXXXIV

163g.  King  Trivikramasena  and  the  Mendicant

THEN  Trivikramasena  went  and  took  the  Vetala
from  the  simsapd  tree,  and  put  him  on  his  shoulder
once  more,  and  set  out ;  and  as  he  was  going  along,
the  Vetala  said  from  the  top  of  his  shoulder:  "You  are
weary,  King,  so  listen  to  this  tale  that  is  capable  of  dispelling
weariness.


163g  (10).  Madanasena  and  her  Bash  Promise  1

There  was  an  excellent  king  of  the  name  of  Virabahu,
who  imposed  his  orders  on  the  heads  of  all  kings.  He  had  a
splendid  city  named  Anangapura,  and  in  it  there  lived  a  rich
merchant  named  Arthadatta  ;  that  merchant -prince  had  for
elder  child  a  son  named  Dhanadatta,  and  his  younger  child
was  a  pearl  of  maidens,  named  Madanasena.

One  day,  as  she  was  playing  with  her  companions  in
her  own  garden,  a  young  merchant,  named  Dharmadatta,  a
friend  of  her  brother's,  saw  her.  When  he  saw  that  maiden,
who  with  the  full  streams  of  her  beauty,  her  breasts  like
pitchers  half-revealed,  and  three  wrinkles  like  waves,  re-
sembled a  lake  for  the  elephant  of  youth  to  plunge  in  in
sport,  he  was  at  once  robbed  of  his  senses  by  the  arrows  of
love,  that  fell  upon  him  in  showers.  He  thought  to  himself  :
"  Alas,  this  maiden,  illuminated  with  this  excessive  beauty,
has  been  framed  by  Mara,2  as  a  keen  arrow  to  cleave  asunder
my  heart."  While  engaged  in  such  reflections,  he  watched
her  long ;  the  day  passed  away  for  him  as  if  he  were  a  chakra-
vdka.3    Then   Madanasena  entered  her   house,  and  grief  at

1  See  Appendix,  pp.  199-204. — n.m.p.

2  See  Vol.  VI,  p.  I87n\— n.m.p.

3  See  Vol.  VI,  p.  7lw3.  For  a  note  on  the  name  "Brahmani"  see  Crooke,
Ind.  Ant.,  vol.  x,  1881,  p.  293,  and  also  his  new  edition  of  Religion  and  Folk-Lore
of  Northern  India,  p.  374. — N.M.P.

5


6  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

no  longer  beholding  her  entered  the  breast  of  Dharmadatta.
And  the  sun  sank  red  into  the  western  main,  as  if  inflamed
with  the  fire  of  grief  at  seeing  her  no  more.  And  the  moon,
that  was  surpassed  by  the  lotus  of  her  countenance,  knowing
that  that  fair-faced  one  had  gone  in  for  the  night,  slowly
mounted  upward.

In  the  meanwhile  Dharmadatta  went  home,  and  thinking
upon  that  fair  one,  he  remained  tossing  to  and  fro  on  his
bed,  smitten  by  the  rays  of  the  moon.1  And  though  his
friends  and  relations  eagerly  questioned  him,  he  gave  them
no  answer,  being  bewildered  by  the  demon  of  love.  And  in
the  course  of  the  night  he  at  length  fell  asleep,  though  with
difficulty,  and  still  he  seemed  to  behold  and  court  that  loved
one  in  a  dream  ;  to  such  lengths  did  his  longing  carry  him.
And  in  the  morning  he  woke  up,  and  went  and  saw  her  once
more  in  that  very  garden,  alone  and  in  privacy,  waiting  for
her  attendant.  So  he  went  up  to  her,  longing  to  embrace
her,  and  falling  at  her  feet  he  tried  to  coax  her  with  words
tender  from  affection.  But  she  said  to  him  with  great  earnest-
ness :  "I  am  a  maiden  betrothed  to  another.  I  cannot  now
be  yours,  for  my  father  has  bestowed  me  on  the  merchant
Samudradatta,  and  I  am  to  be  married  in  a  few  days.  So
depart  quietly :  let  not  anyone  see  you ;  it  might  cause
mischief."  But  Dharmadatta  said  to  her :  "  Happen  what
may,  I  cannot  live  without  you ! "

When  the  merchant's  daughter  heard  this,  she  was  afraid
that  he  would  use  force  to  her,  so  she  said  to  him  :  "  Let  my
marriage  first  be  celebrated  here,  let  my  father  reap  the  long-
desired  fruit  of  bestowing  a  daughter  in  marriage ;  then  I  will
certainly  visit  you,  for  your  love  has  gained  my  heart."

When  he  heard  this,  he  said :  "I  love  not  a  woman  who
has  been  embraced  by  another  man  :  does  the  bee  delight
in  a  lotus  on  which  another  bee  has  settled  ?  "  When  he
said  this  to  her,  she  replied :  "  Then  I  will  visit  you  as
soon  as  I  am  married,  and  afterwards  I  will  go  to  my
husband."  But  though  she  made  this  promise,  he  would
not  let  her  go  without  further  assurance,  so  the  merchant's
daughter  confirmed  the  truth  of  her  promise  with  an  oath.

1  See  Vol.  VI,  pp.  lOOn1,  101n.— n.m.p.


HER  PROMISE  KEPT  7

Then   he   let   her   go,   and   she   entered  her   house  in   low
spirits.

And  when  the  lucky  day  had  arrived,  and  the  auspicious
ceremony  of  marriage  had  taken  place,  she  went  to  her
husband's  house  and  spent  that  day  in  merriment,  and  then
retired  with  him.  But  she  repelled  her  husband's  caresses
with  indifference,  and  when  he  began  to  coax  her  she  burst
into  tears.  He  thought  to  himself,  "  Of  a  truth  she  cares  not
for  me,"  and  said  to  her,  "  Fair  one,  if  you  do  not  love  me,
I  do  not  want  you ;  go  to  your  darling,  whoever  he  may
be."  When  she  heard  this,  she  said  slowly,  with  downcast
face  :  I  love  you  more  than  my  life,  but  hear  what  I  have
to  say.  Rise  up  cheerfully,  and  promise  me  immunity  from
punishment ;  take  an  oath  to  that  effect,  my  husband,  in
order  that  I  may  tell  you."

When  she  said  this,  her  husband  reluctantly  consented,
and  then  she  went  on  to  say  with  shame,  despondency  and
fear  :  "  A  young  man  of  the  name  of  Dharmadatta,  a  friend
of  my  brother's,  saw  me  once  alone  in  our  garden,  and  smitten
with  love,  he  detained  me ;  and  when  he  was  preparing  to
use  force,  I,  being  anxious  to  secure  for  my  father  the  merit
giving  of  a  daughter  in  marriage,  and  to  avoid  all  scandal,
made  this  agreement  with  him  :  '  When  I  am  married,  I  will
pay  you  a  visit  before  I  go  to  my  husband  ' ;  so  I  must  now
keep  my  word.  Permit  me,  my  husband.  I  will  pay  him  a
visit  first,  and  then  return  to  you,  for  I  cannot  transgress  the
law  of  truth  which  I  have  observed  from  my  childhood."

When  Samudradatta  had  been  thus  suddenly  smitten  by
this  speech  of  hers,  as  by  a  down-lighting  thunderbolt,  being
bound  by  the  necessity  of  keeping  his  word,  he  reflected  for
a  moment  as  follows  :  "  Alas  !  she  is  in  love  with  another
man ;  she  must  certainly  go  !  Why  should  I  make  her  break
her  word  ?  Let  her  depart !  Why  should  I  be  so  eager  to
have  her  for  a  wife  ?  "  After  he  had  gone  through  this  train
of  thought,  he  gave  her  leave  to  go  where  she  would ;  and
she  rose  up  and  left  her  husband's  house.

In  the  meanwhile  the  cold-rayed  moon  ascended  the  great
eastern  mountain,  as  it  were  the  roof  of  a  palace,  and  the
nymph  of  the  eastern  quarter  smiled,  touched  by  his  finger.


8  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

Then,  though  the  darkness  was  still  embracing  his  beloved
herbs  in  the  mountain  caves,  and  the  bees  were  settling  on
another  cluster  of  kumudas,  a  certain  thief  saw  Madanasena
as  she  was  going  along  alone  at  night,  and  rushing  upon
her,  seized  her  by  the  hem  of  her  garment.  He  said  to  her :
"  Who  are  you,  and  where  are  you  going  ?  "  When  he  said
this,  she,  being  afraid,  said  :  "  What  does  that  matter  to  you  ?
Let  me  go  !  I  have  business  here."  Then  the  thief  said  :
"  How  can  I,  who  am  a  thief,  let  you  go  ?  "  Hearing  that,
she  replied  :  "  Take  my  ornaments."  The  thief  answered
her  :  "  What  do  I  care  for  these  gems,  fair  one  ?  I  will  not
surrender  you,  the  ornament  of  the  world,  with  your  face
like  the  moonstone,  your  hair  black  like  jet,  your  waist  like
a  diamond,1  your  limbs  like  gold,  fascinating  beholders  with
your  ruby-coloured  feet."

When  the  thief  said  this,  the  helpless  merchant's  daughter
told  him  her  story,  and  entreated  him  as  follows  :  "  Excuse
me  for  a  moment,  that  I  may  keep  my  word,  and  as  soon  as  I
have  done  that,  I  will  quickly  return  to  you,  if  you  remain
here.  Believe  me,  my  good  man,  I  will  never  break  this
true  promise  of  mine."  When  the  thief  heard  that,  he  let
her  go,  believing  that  she  was  a  woman  who  would  keep  her
word,  and  he  remained  in  that  very  spot,  waiting  for  her
return.

She,  for  her  part,  went  to  that  merchant  Dharmadatta.
And  when  he  saw  that  she  had  come  to  that  wood,  he  asked
her  how  it  happened,  and  then,  though  he  had  longed  for  her,
he  said  to  her,  after  reflecting  a  moment :  "  I  am  delighted  at
your  faithfulness  to  your  promise ;  what  have  I  to  do  with
you,  the  wife  of  another  ?  So  go  back,  as  you  came,  before
anyone  sees  you."  When  he  thus  let  her  go,  she  said,  "  So
be  it,"  and  leaving  that  place,  she  went  to  the  thief,  who  was
waiting  for  her  in  the  road.  He  said  to  her  :  "  Tell  me  what
befell  you  when  you  arrived  at  the  trysting-place."  So  she
told  him  how  the  merchant  let  her  go.  Then  the  thief  said  :
"  Since  this  is  so,  then  I  also  will  let  you  go,  being  pleased
with  your  truthfulness  :  return  home  with  your  ornaments  !  ,;

So  he  too  let  her  go,  and  went  with  her  to  guard  her.

1  The  word  vajra  also  means  thunderbolt.


WHICH  WAS  THE  MOST  GENEROUS  ?  9

And  she  returned  to  the  house  of  her  husband,  delighted  at
having  preserved  her  honour.  There  the  chaste  woman  entered
secretly,  and  went  delighted  to  her  husband.  And  he,  when
he  saw  her,  questioned  her  ;  so  she  told  him  the  whole  story.
And  Samudradatta,  perceiving  that  his  good  wife  had  kept
her  word  without  losing  her  honour,  assumed  a  bright  and
cheerful  expression,  and  welcomed  her  as  a  pure-minded
woman,  who  had  not  disgraced  her  family,  and  lived  happily
with  her  ever  afterwards.


163g.  King  Trivikramasena  and  the  Mendicant

When  the  Vetala  had  told  this  story  in  the  cemetery  to
King  Trivikramasena,  he  went  on  to  say  to  him  :  "So  tell
me,  King,  which  was  the  really  generous  man  of  those  three,
:he  two  merchants  and  the  thief?  And  if  you  know  and
do  not  tell,  your  head  shall  split  into  a  hundred  pieces."

When  the  Vetala  said  this,  the  king  broke  silence,  and
said  to  him  :  "Of  those  three  the  thief  was  the  only  really
generous  man,  and  not  either  of  the  two  merchants.  For
of  course  her  husband  let  her  go,  though  she  was  so  lovely
and  he  had  married  her  :  how  could  a  gentleman  desire  to
keep  a  wife  that  was  attached  to  another  ?  And  the  other
resigned  her  because  his  passion  was  dulled  by  time,  and  he
was  afraid  that  her  husband,  knowing  the  facts,  would  tell
the  king  the  next  day.  But  the  thief,  a  reckless  evildoer,
working  in  the  dark,  was  really  generous,  to  let  go  a  lovely
woman,  ornaments  and  all."

When  the  Vetala  heard  that,  he  left  the  shoulder  of  the
king  and  returned  to  his  own  place,  as  before ;  and  the  king,
with  his  great  perseverance  no  whit  dashed,  again  set  out,  as
before,  to  bring  him.


CHAPTER  LXXXV

163g.  King  Trivikramasena  and  the  Mendicant

THEN  King  Trivikramasena  again  went  and  took
that  Vetala  from  the  simsapa  tree  and  put  him  on
his  shoulder,  and  set  out  with  him  ;  and  as  he  was
going  along,  the  Vetala  on  his  shoulder  said  to  him  :  "  Listen,
King,  I  will  tell  you  an  interesting  story.


163g  (11).  King  Dharmadhvaja  and  his  Three  Very
Sensitive  Wives  ^

There  lived  of  old  in  Ujjayini  a  king  of  the  name  of
Dharmadhvaja  ;  he  had  three  wives,  who  were  all  daughters
of  kings,  and  whom  he  held  very  dear.  The  first  of  them
was  called  Indulekha,  the  second  Taravali,  and  the  third
Mrigankavati ;  and  they  were  all  possessed  of  extraordinary
personal  charms.  And  the  successful  king,  who  had  con-
quered all  his  enemies,  lived  happily,  amusing  himself  with
all  those  three  queens.

Once  on  a  time,  when  the  festival  of  the  spring  season
had  arrived,  he  went  with  all  those  three  wives  to  the  garden
to  amuse  himself.  There  he  beheld  the  creepers  weighed
down  with  flowers,  looking  like  Kama's  bows,  with  rows  of
bees  for  strings,  strung  for  him  by  the  spring.  And  the  king,
who  resembled  the  mighty  Indra,  hearing  the  notes  which
the  cuckoos  uttered  on  the  sprays  of  the  garden  trees,  like  the
edict  of  Love,  the  god  of  enjoyment,  betook  himself  with
his  wives  to  wine,  which  is  the  very  life  of  that  intoxication
by  which  Kama  lives.  And  he  joyed  in  drinking  the  liquor
first  tasted  by  them,  perfumed  with  their  sighs,  red  as  their
bimba  lips.2

1  See  Appendix,  pp.  204-211. — n.m.p.

2  See  Ocean,  Vol.  I,  p.  31n2;  also  Macdonell  and  Keith,  Vedic  Index,
vol.  ii,  p.  68. — n.m.p.

10


THE  DISADVANTAGES  OF  DELICACY  11

Then,  as  Indulekha  was  playfully  pulling  the  hair  of
the  king,  a  blue  lotus  leaped  from  her  ear  and  fell  on  her
lap.  Immediately  a  wound  was  produced  on  the  front  of
her  thigh  by  the  blow,  and  the  delicate  princess  exclaimed,
Oh  !  Oh  !  "  and  fainted.  When  the  king  and  the  attend-
ants saw  that,  they  were  distracted  with  grief,  but  they
gradually  brought  her  round  with  cold  water  and  fanning.
Then  the  king  took  her  to  the  palace  and  had  a  bandage
applied  to  the  wound,  and  treated  her  with  preparations
made  by  the  physicians.

And  at  night,  seeing  that  she  was  going  on  well,  the  king
•etired  with  the  second,  Taravali,  to  an  apartment  on  the
•oof  of  the  palace  exposed  to  the  rays  of  the  moon.  There
the  rays  of  the  moon,  entering  through  the  lattice,  fell  on  the
>ody  of  the  queen,  who  was  sleeping  by  the  king's  side,  where
it  was  exposed  by  her  garment  blowing  aside.  Immediately
she  woke  up,  exclaiming,  "Alas,  I  am  burned  !  "  and  rose  up
from  the  bed  rubbing  her  limbs.  The  king  woke  up  in  a
state  of  alarm,  crying  out  :  "  What  is  the  meaning  of  this  ?  "
ten  he  got  up  and  saw  that  blisters  had  been  produced
on  the  queen's  body.  And  the  Queen  Taravali  said  to  him
when  he  questioned  her  :  "  The  moon's  rays  falling  on  my
exposed  body  have  done  this  to  me."  When  she  said  this,
and  burst  into  tears,  the  king,  being  distressed,  summoned
her  attendants,  who  ran  there  in  trepidation  and  alarm.  And
he  had  made  for  her  a  bed  of  lotus  leaves,  sprinkled  with
water,  and  sandalwood  lotion  applied  to  her  body.

In  the  meanwhile  his  third  wife  Mrigankavati  heard  of  it,
and  left  her  palace  to  come  to  him.  And  when  she  had  got
into  the  open  air,  she  heard  distinctly,  as  the  night  was  still,
the  sound  of  a  pestle  pounding  rice  in  a  distant  house.  The
moment  the  gazelle-eyed  one  heard  it  she  said,  "  Alas,  I  am
killed !  "  and  she  sat  down  on  the  path,  shaking  her  hands
in  an  agony  of  pain.  Then  the  girl  turned  back,  and  was
conducted  by  her  attendants  to  her  own  chamber,  where  she
fell  on  the  bed,  and  groaned.  And  when  her  weeping  attend-
ants examined  her,  they  saw  that  her  hands  were  covered
with  bruises,  and  looked  like  lotuses  upon  which  black  bees
had  settled.     So  they  went  and  told  the  king.     The  King


12  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

Dharmadhvaja  arrived  in  a  state  of  consternation,  and
asked  his  beloved  what  it  all  meant.  Then  the  tortured
queen  showed  him  her  hands,  and  said  to  him:  "As  soon
as  I  heard  the  sound  of  the  pestle,  these  became  covered
with  bruises."  Then  the  king,  filled  with  surprise  and  de-
spondency, had  sandalwood  1  unguent  and  other  remedies
applied  to  her  hands,  in  order  to  allay  the  pain.

He  reflected  :  "  One  of  my  queens  has  been  wounded  by
the  fall  of  a  lotus,  the  second  has  had  her  body  burned  even
by  the  rays  of  the  moon,  and  alas  !  the  third  has  got  such
terrible  bruises  produced  on  her  hands  by  the  mere  sound  of
a  pestle.  By  a  dispensation  of  fate  the  excessive  delicacy,
which  is  the  distinguishing  excellence  of  my  queens,  has  now
become  in  them  all,  at  one  and  the  same  time,  a  defect."
Engaged  in  such  reflections  the  king  wandered  round  the
women's  apartments,  and  the  night  of  three  watches  passed
for  him  as  tediously  as  if  it  had  consisted  of  a  hundred
watches.  But  the  next  morning  the  physicians  and  surgeons
took  measures  which  caused  him  soon  to  be  comforted  by  the
recovery  of  his  wives.

163g.  King  Trivikramasena  and  the  Mendicant

When  the  Vetala  had  told  this  very  wonderful  story,  he
put  this  question  to  King  Trivikramasena  from  his  seat  on
his  shoulder  :  "  Tell  me,  King,  which  was  the  most  delicate
of  those  queens  ;  and  the  curse  I  before  mentioned  will  take
effect  if  you  know  and  do  not  say."

When  the  king  heard  that,  he  answered  :  "  The  most
delicate  of  all  was  the  lady  upon  whose  hands  bruises  were
produced  by  merely  hearing  the  sound  of  the  pestle,  without
touching  it.  But  the  other  two  were  no  match  for  her,
because  the  wound  of  the  one  and  the  blisters  of  the  other
were  produced  by  contact  with  the  lotus  and  the  rays  of  the
moon  respectively."

When  the  king  had  said  this,  the  Vetala  again  left  his
shoulder  and  returned  to  his  own  place,  and  the  persevering
king  again  set  out  to  fetch  him.

1  See  note  on  pp.  105-107. — n.m.p.


CHAPTER  LXXXVI

163g.  King  Trivikramasena  and  the  Mendicant

THEN  King  Trivikramasena  again  went  to  the
simsapd  tree,  and  recovered  the  Vetala,  and  placed
him  on  his  shoulder,  and  set  out  with  him  again
silently,  as  before.  Then  the  Vetala  again  said  to  him  from
his  seat  on  his  shoulder  :  "  King,  I  love  you  much  because  you
are  so  indomitable ;  so  listen,  I  will  tell  you  this  delightful
story  to  amuse  you.


163g  (12).  King  Yasahketu,  his  Vidyadhari  Wife  and  his
Faithful  Minister- l

In  the  land  of  Anga 2  there  was  a  young  king  named
asahketu,  like  a  second  and  unburnt  God  of  Love  come  to
earth  to  conceal  his  body.3  He  conquered  by  his  great  valour
all  his  enemies ;  and  as  Indra  has  Brihaspati  for  a  minister,
he  had  Dirghadarsin.  Now,  in  course  of  time,  this  king,
infatuated  with  his  youth  and  beauty,  entrusted  to  that
minister  his  realm,  from  which  all  enemies  had  been  eradi-
cated, and  became  devoted  to  pleasure  only.  He  remained
continually  in  the  harem  4  instead  of  the  judgment-hall ;  he
listened  to  delightful  songs  in  the  women's  apartments
instead  of  hearkening  to  the  voice  of  his  well-wishers  ;  in  his
thoughtlessness  he  was  devoted  to  latticed  windows  and  not
to  the  affairs  of  his  kingdom,  though  the  latter  also  were  full
of  holes.

But  the  great  minister  Dirghadarsin  continued  unweariedly

1  See  Appendix,  pp.  211-212. — n.m.p.

2  The   country    around   Bhagalpur.      Its   capital   was   Champapuri.      Its
western  boundary  was  the  juncture  of  the  Ganges  and  the  Sarayu. — n.m.p.

3  Or,  "to  protect  the  realm  of  Anga";  a  shameless  pun!     The  God  of
Love  was  consumed  by  the  fire  of  Siva's  eye.

4  See  Vol.  II  of  the  Ocean,  pp.  l6lw4,  l62n,  l63n.— n.m.p.
13


14  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

upholding  the  burden  of  his  kingdom's  cares,  day  and  night.
And    a    general    rumour    spread    to    the    following    effect :
"  Dirghadarsin  has  plunged  in  dissipation  the  sovereign,  who
is  satisfied  with  the  mere  name  of  king,  and  so  he  manages
now  to  enjoy  himself  all  his  master's  power."     Then  the
minister  Dirghadarsin  said  of  himself  to  his  wife  MedhavatI :
"  My  dear,  as  the  king  is  addicted  to  pleasure,  and  I  do  his
work,    a   calumny   has    been   circulated   among   the  people
against  me,  to  the  effect  that  I  have   devoured  the  realm.
And  a  general  rumour,  though  false,  injures  even  great  men
in  this   world :   was   not  Rama  compelled  by   a  slanderous
report  to  abandon  his  wife  Slta  ?    So  what  course  must  I
adopt  in  this  emergency  ?  "     When  the  minister  said  this,
his  firm-souled   wife   MedhavatI,1  who  was  rightly  named,
said  to  him :  "  Take  leave  of  the  king  on  the  pretext  of  a
pilgrimage  to  holy  bathing-places ;    it  is   expedient,  great-
minded  sir,  that   you   should   go   to   a   foreign   land  for  a
certain  time.     So  you  will  be  seen  to  be  free  from  ambition,
and  the  calumny  against  you  will  die  out.    And  while  you
are  absent  the  king  will  bear  the  burden  of  the  kingdom
himself,  and  then  this  vicious  tendency  of  his  will  gradually
diminish,  and  when  you  return  you  will  be  able  to  discharge
your  office  of  minister  without  blame."

When  Dlrghadarsin's  wife  said  this  to  him,  he  said,  "  I
will  do  so  "  ;  and  he  went  and  said  to  King  Yasahketu  in  the
course  of  conversation  :  "  Give  me  leave  to  depart,  King,  I
am  going  on  a  pilgrimage  for  some  days,  for  my  heart  is  set
on  that  religious  duty."  When  the  king  heard  that,  he  said  :
"  Do  not  do  so  !  Cannot  you,  without  going  on  pilgrimages,
perform  in  your  house  noble  religious  duties,  such  as  charity
and  so  on,  which  will  procure  you  heaven  ?  "  When  the
minister  heard  this,  he  said :  "  King,  that  purity  which
comes  of  wealth  is  sought  by  charity  and  so  on,  but  holy
bathing-places  have  an  everlasting  purity.  And  a  wise  man
must  visit  them  while  he  is  young,  for  otherwise  how  can
he  be  sure  of  reaching  them,  as  this  body  cannot  be  relied
on  ?  "  While  he  was  saying  this,  and  the  king  was  still
trying  to  dissuade  him,  a  warder  entered,  and  said  to  the

1  I.e.  wise.


THE  KINDLY  MERCHANT

King,  the  sun  is  plunging  into  the  middle  of  the  lake
heaven,  so  rise  up,  this  is  the  hour  appointed  for  you  to
bathe  in,  and  it  is  rapidly  passing  away."  When  the  king
heard  this,  he  immediately  rose  up  to  bathe,  and  the  minister,
whose  heart  was  set  on  pilgrimage,  bowed  before  him,  and
went  home  to  his  own  house.

There  he  left  his  wife,  whom  he  forbade  to  follow  him,
and  managed  cunningly  to  set  out  in  secret,  without  even
his  servants  suspecting  his  departure.  And  alone  he  wan-
dered from  country  to  country  with  resolute  perseverance,
and  visited  holy  bathing-places,  and  at  last  he  reached  the
land  of  Paundra.1  In  a  certain  city  in  that  country  not
far  from  the  sea  he  entered  a  temple  of  Siva,  and  sat
down  in  a  courtyard  attached  to  it.  There  a  merchant  named
Nidhidatta,  who  had  come  to  worship  the  god,  saw  him  ex-
hausted with  the  heat  of  the  sun's  rays,  dusty  with  his  long
journey.  The  merchant,  being  a  hospitable  man,  seeing  that
the  traveller,  who  was  in  such  a  state,  wore  a  Brahmanical
thread,2  and  had  auspicious  marks,  concluded  that  he  was
a  distinguished  Brahman,  and  took  him  home  to  his  own
house.  There  he  honoured  him  with  a  bath,  food  and  other
refreshments  in  the  most  luxurious  style,  and  when  his
fatigue  was  removed,  he  said  to  him  :  "  Who  are  you,  whence
do  you  come,  and  where  are  you  going  ?  "  And  the  Brahman
gave  him  this  reserved  answer  :  "I  am  a  Brahman  of  the
name  of  Dirghadarsin  ;  I  have  come  here  on  pilgrimage  from
the  land  of  Anga."  Then  the  merchant -prince  Nidhidatta
said  to  him  :  "I  am  about  to  go  on  a  trading  expedition  to
the  Island  of  Gold,3  so  you  must  live  in  my  house  until  I
return ;  and  then  you  will  have  recovered  from  the  fatigue
which  you  have  incurred  by  roaming  to  holy  places,  and  you
can  go  home."  When  Dirghadarsin  heard  that,  he  said  :
'  Why  should  I  remain  here  ?  I  will  go  with  you,  great
merchant,  if  you  like."     The  good  man  said,    "So  be  it,"

1  This   corresponds   to   Bengal — Bihar,  the  country  of  the    sugar-cane.

— N.M.P.

2  See  note  at  the  end  of  chapter. — n.m.p.

3  I.e.    Suvarnadvipa,   probably    Sumatra.     Suvarnabhumi,   mentioned   in
Kautilya's  Arthasastra,  is  usually  identified  with  Lower  Burma. — n.m.p


16  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

and  then  the  minister,  who  had  long  discarded  the  use  of
beds,1  spent  that  night  in  his  house.

The  next  day  he  went  with  that  merchant  to  the  sea,
and  embarked  on  a  ship  laden  with  his  merchandise.  He
travelled  along  in  that  ship,  and  beheld  the  awful  and
wonderful  ocean,  and  in  course  of  time  reached  the  Isle  of
Gold.  What  had  a  man  holding  the  office  of  prime  minister
to  do  with  sea- voyages  ?  But  what  will  not  men  of  honour  do
to  prevent  their  fame  from  being  sullied  ?  So  he  remained
some  time  in  that  island  with  that  merchant  Nidhidatta,  who
was  engaged  in  buying  and  selling.

And  as  he  was  returning  with  him  on  the  ship,  he  sud-
denly saw  a  wave  rise  up,  and  then  a  wishing-tree  2  arise
out  of  the  sea;  it  was  adorned  with  boughs  glittering  with
gold,  which  were  embellished  with  sprays  of  coral,  and  bore
lovely  fruits  and  flowers  of  jewels.  And  he  beheld  on  its
trunk  a  maiden,  alluring  on  account  of  her  wonderful  beauty,
reclining  on  a  gem-bestudded  couch.  He  reflected  for  a
moment :  "  Aha  !  What  can  this  be  ?  "  And  thereupon  the
maiden,  who  had  a  lyre  in  her  hand,  began  to  sing  this  song  :
"  Whatever  seed  of  works  any  man  has  sown  in  a  former  life,
of  that  he,  without  doubt,  eats  the  fruit ;  for  even  fate  cannot
alter  what  has  been  done  in  a  previous  state  of  existence."

When  the  heavenly  maiden  had  sung  this  song,  she  im-
mediately plunged  into  that  sea,  with  the  wishing-tree,  and
the  couch  on  which  she  was  reclining.  Then  Dirghadarsin
reflected :  "  I  have  to-day  seen  a  wonderful  sight ;  one
would  never  have  expected  to  find  in  the  sea  a  tree,  with
a  heavenly  maiden  singing  on  it,  appearing  and  disappearing
as  soon  as  beheld.  Or  rather,  this  admirable  treasure-house
of  the  sea  is  ever  the  same :  did  not  Lakshmi,  and  the  moon,
and  the  Parijata  tree,  and  other  precious  things  come  out  of
it  ?  "    But  the  steersman  and  the  rest  of  the  crew,  perceiving

1  The  D.  text  reads  cirad  avaptamyano  .  .  .  instead  of  B.'s  cirad  apasta-
sayano  .  .  .  ,  which  appears  to  be  the  better  reading.  Dirghadarsin  has  been
sleeping  in  the  open  during  his  pilgrimage,  and  now  enjoys  the  welcome
luxury  of  a  bed.  Thus  the  D.  text  means,  "...  after  a  long  time  he  had
again  got  a  bed  in  which  to  pass  the  night.  ..."  See  Speyer,  op.  cit.,
p.  135. — N.M.P.

2  See  Vol.  I,  p.  144W1.


DIRGHADAR&N'S  RETURN  17

that  Dirghadarsin  was  astonished  and  puzzled,  said  to  him  :
"  This  lovely  woman  always  appears  here  in  the  same  way,  and
sinks  down  again  at  once  ;  but  this  sight  is  new  to  you."

This  is  what  they  said  to  the  minister,  but  he  still  con-
tinued in  a  state  of  wonder,  and  so  he  reached  in  course  of
time  on  the  ship,  with  that  Nidhidatta,  the  coast  for  which
they  were  making.  There  the  merchant  disembarked  his
wares,  gladdening  the  hearts  of  his  servants,  and  the  minister
went  in  high  spirits  with  him  to  his  house,  which  was  full
of  mirth  at  his  arrival.  And  after  he  had  remained  there
a  short  time,  he  said  to  Nidhidatta  :  "  Merchant -prince,  I
have  long  reposed  comfortably  in  your  house,  now  I  wish  to
return  to  my  own  land  ;  I  wish  you  all  happiness."  With
these  words  he  took  leave  of  the  merchant -prince,  who  was
sorely  unwilling  to  let  him  go,  and  with  his  virtue  for  his
only  companion  he  set  out  thence ;  and  having  in  course  of
time  accomplished  the  long  journey,  he  reached  his  own
native  land  of  Anga.

There  the  spies,  who  had  been  placed  by  King  Yasahketu
to  watch  for  his  return,  saw  him  coming,  before  he  entered
the  city,  and  informed  the  king;  and  then  the  king,  who
had  been  much  afflicted  by  his  absence,  went  out  from  the
city  to  meet  him,  and  came  up  to  him  and  welcomed  him  with
an  embrace.  Then  the  king  conducted  into  the  palace  his
minister,  who  was  emaciated  and  begrimed  with  his  long
journey,  and  said  to  him  :  "  Why  did  you  leave  me,  bringing
your  mind  to  this  cruel  heartless  step,  and  your  body  into
this  squalid  state  from  its  being  deprived  of  unguents  ?  1
But  who  knows  the  way  of  the  mighty  god  Fate,  in  that  you
suddenly  fixed  your  mind  on  a  pilgrimage  to  holy  waters
and  other  sacred  places  ?  So  tell  me,  what  lands  have  you
wandered  through,  and  what  novel  sights  have  you  seen  ?  "
Then  Dirghadarsin  described  his  journey  to  the  Island  of
Gold,  in  all  its  stages,  and  so  was  led  to  tell  the  king  of  that
maiden,  the  jewel  of  the  three  worlds,  whom  he  had  seen
rise  out  of  the  sea  and  sit  on  the  wishing-tree  singing.  All
this  he  narrated  exactly  as  it  took  place.

The  moment  the  king  heard  this,  he  fell  so  deeply  in  love

1  One  of  our  author's  puns.
VOL.   VII.  B


18  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

with  her  *  that  he  considered  his  kingdom  and  life  valueless
without  her.  And  taking  his  minister  aside,  he  said  to  him  :
"  I  must  certainly  see  that  maiden,  otherwise  I  cannot  live.
I  wrill  go  by  the  way  which  you  have  described,  after  wor-
shipping Fate.  And  you  must  not  dissuade,  and  you  must
by  no  means  follow  me,  for  I  will  travel  alone  incognito,  and
in  the  meanwhile  you  must  take  care  of  my  kingdom.  Do  not
disobey  my  order,  otherwise  my  death  will  lie  at  your  door."
Thus  spake  the  king,  and  refused  to  hear  his  minister's  answer,
and  then  dismissed  him  to  his  own  house  to  see  his  relations,
who  had  long  been  wishing  for  his  return.  There,  in  the  midst
of  great  rejoicing,  Dirghadarsin  remained  despondent :  how  can
good  ministers  be  happy  when  their  lord's  vices  are  incurable  ?
And  the  next  night  King  Yasahketu  set  out,  disguised  as
an  ascetic,  having  entrusted  his  kingdom  to  the  care  of  that
minister.  And  on  the  way,  as  he  was  going  along,  he  saw  a
hermit,  named  Kusanabha,  and  he  bowed  before  him.  The
hermit  said  to  the  king  who  was  disguised  as  an  ascetic  :
"  Go  on  your  way  boldly  :  by  going  to  sea  in  a  ship  with  the
merchant  Lakshmldatta  you  shall  obtain  that  maiden  whom
you  desire."  This  speech  delighted  the  king  exceedingly,
and  bowing  again  before  the  hermit,  he  continued  his
journey.  And  after  crossing  many  countries,  rivers  and
mountains,  he  reached  the  sea,  which  seemed  to  be  full  of
eagerness  to  entertain  him.  Its  eddies  looked  like  eyes  ex-
panded to  gaze  at  him,  eyes  of  which  waves  were  the  curved
brows,  and  which  were  white  with  shrill-sounding  conchs  for
pupils.  On  the  shore  he  met  the  merchant  Lakshmldatta,
spoken  of  by  the  hermit,  who  was  on  the  point  of  setting  out
for  the  Isle  of  Gold.  The  merchant  prostrated  himself  be-
fore him  when  he  saw  the  signs  of  his  royal  birth,  such  as  the
discus-marked  footprint  and  so  on ;  and  the  king  embarked
on  the  ship  with  him,  and  set  out  with  him  on  the  sea.  And
when  the  ship  had  reached  the  middle  of  the  ocean,  that
maiden  arose  from  the  water,  seated  on  the  trunk  of  the
wishing-tree,  and  while  the  king  was  gazing  at  her,  as  a  par-
tridge at  the  moonlight,  she  sang  a  song,  which  the  accom-
paniment of  her  lyre  made  more  charming  :  "  Whatever  seed
1  See  Vol.  I,  p.  128W1.— n.m.p.


THE  SEA-MAIDEN  19

of  works  any  man  has  sown  in  a  former  life,  of  that  he,  with-
out doubt,  eats  the  fruit;  for  even  fate  cannot  alter  what
has  been  done  in  a  previous  state  of  existence.  So  a  man  is
helplessly  borne  along  to  experience  precisely  that  lot  which
fate  has  appointed  for  him,  in  that  place  and  in  that  manner
which  fate  has  decreed  ;  of  this  there  can  be  no  doubt."

When  the  king  heard  her  singing  this  song,  and  thus  set-
ting forth  the  thing  that  must  be,  he  was  smitten  with  the
arrow  of  love,  and  remained  for  some  time  motionless,  gazing
at  her.  Then  he  began,  with  bowed  head,  to  praise  the  sea
in  the  following  words  :  "  Hail  to  thee,  storehouse  of  jewels,
of  unfathomable  heart,  since  by  concealing  this  lovely  nymph
thou  hast  cheated  Vishnu  out  of  Lakshmi !  So  I  throw  my-
self on  thy  protection,  thou  who  canst  not  be  sounded  even
by  gods,  the  refuge  of  mountains  *  that  retain  their  wings ;
grant  me  to  obtain  my  desire."  While  he  was  uttering  this,
the  maiden  disappeared  in  the  sea,  with  the  tree,  and  when
the  king  saw  that,  he  flung  himself  into  the  sea  after  her,  as
if  to  cool  the  flames  of  love's  fire.

When  the  merchant  Lakshmidatta  saw  that  unexpected
sight,  the  good  man  thought  the  king  had  perished,  and  was
so  afflicted  that  he  was  on  the  point  of  committing  suicide,
but  he  was  consoled  by  the  following  utterance,  that  came
from  the  heavens  :  "  Do  not  act  rashly  ;  he  is  not  in  danger
though  he  has  plunged  into  the  sea  :  this  king,  Yasahketu
by  name,  has  come,  disguised  as  an  ascetic,  to  obtain  this  very
maiden,  for  she  was  his  wife  in  a  former  state  of  existence,
and  as  soon  as  he  has  won  her  he  shall  return  to  his  realm  of
Anga."  Then  the  merchant  continued  his  intended  voyage,
to  accomplish  his  purposes.

But  when  King  Yasahketu  plunged  into  the  sea,  he  sud-
denly beheld  to  his  astonishment  a  splendid  city.  It  gleamed
with  palaces  that  had  bright  pillars  of  precious  stones,  walls
flashing  with  gold,  and  latticed  windows  of  pearl.  It  was
adorned  with  gardens  in  which  were  tanks  with  flights  of
steps  composed  of  slabs  of  every  kind  of  gem,  and  wishing-

1  The  word  that  means  "mountain"   also  means  "king." For  the

myth  about  Indra  cutting  off  the  wings  of  the  mountains,  see  Vol.  VI,  p.  Sri1.

— N.M.P.


20  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

trees  that  granted  every  desire.  He  entered  house  after
house  in  that  city,  which,  though  opulent,  was  uninhabited,
but  he  could  not  find  his  beloved  anywhere.  Then,  as  he  was
looking  about,  he  beheld  a  lofty  jewelled  palace,  and  going
up  to  it  he  opened  the  door  and  went  in.  And  when  he
had  entered  it,  he  beheld  a  solitary  human  form  stretched
out  upon  a  gem-bestudded  couch,  with  its  whole  length
covered  with  a  shawl.  Wondering  whether  it  could  be  that
very  lady,  he  uncovered  her  face  with  eager  expectation,
and  saw  his  lady-love.  Her  beautiful  moonlike  countenance
smiled  when  the  black  robe  fell  from  it  like  darkness,  and
she  seemed  like  a  night,  illumined  with  moonlight,  gone  to
visit  Patala  in  the  day.  At  sight  of  her  the  king  was  in  a
state  of  ecstasy,  like  that  which  a  man,  travelling  through
a  desert  in  the  season  of  heat,  experiences  on  beholding  a
river.  She,  for  her  part,  opened  her  eyes,  and,  when  she  saw
that  hero  of  auspicious  form  and  bodily  marks  thus  suddenly
arrived,  sprang  from  her  couch  in  a  state  of  excitement.  She
welcomed  him,  and  with  downcast  countenance  seemed  to
honour  him  by  flinging  on  his  feet  the  full-blown  lotuses  of
her  wide-expanded  eyes  ;  and  then  she  slowly  said  to  him  :
"  Who  are  you,  and  why  have  you  come  to  this  inaccessible
lower  region  ?  And  why,  though  your  body  is  marked  with
the  signs  of  royalty,  have  you  undertaken  the  vow  of  an
ascetic  ?  Condescend  to  tell  me  this,  distinguished  sir,  if  I
have  found  favour  in  your  sight."

When  the  king  had  heard  this  speech  of  hers,  he  gave
her  this  answer  :  "  Fair  one,  I  am  the  King  of  Anga,  by
name  Yasahketu,  and  I  heard  from  a  friend,  on  whom  I  can
rely,  that  you  were  to  be  seen  here  every  day  in  the  sea.
So  I  assumed  this  disguise,  and  abandoned  my  kingdom  for
your  sake,  and  I  have  come  here,  and  followed  you  down
through  the  sea.     So  tell  me  who  you  are."

When  he  said  this,  she  answered  him  with  mixed  feelings
of  shame,  affection  and  joy  :  "  There  is  a  fortunate  king
of  the  Vidyadharas  named  Mrigankasena ;  know  that  I  am
his  daughter,  Mrigankavati  by  name.  That  father  of  mine,
for  some  reason  unknown  to  me,  has  left  me  alone  in
this  city  of  his,  and  has  gone  somewhere  or  other  with  his.


cnKic


THE  CONDITION  21


i


subjects.  So  I,  feeling  melancholy  in  my  solitary  abode,
rise  up  out  of  the  sea  on  a  movable  1  wishing-tree,  and  sing
of  the  decrees  of  fate."

When  she  had  said  this,  the  brave  king,  remembering  the
speech  of  the  hermit,  courted  her  so  assiduously  with  speeches
tender  with  love  that  she  was  overpowered  with  affection,  and
promised  to  become  his  wife  at  once,  but  insisted  on  the
following  condition  :  "  My  husband,  for  four  days  in  every
month,  the  fourteenth  and  eighth  of  the  white  and  black  fort-
nights, I  am  not  my  own  mistress  2 ;  and  whithersoever  I  may
go  on  those  days,  you  must  not  question  me  on  the  subject  nor
forbid  me,  for  there  is  a  reason  for  it."  3  When  the  heavenly
maiden  had  stated  in  these  words  the  only  condition  on
which  she  would  consent  to  marry  the  king,  he  agreed  to  it,
and  married  her  by  the  gdndharva  form  of  marriage.

And  one  day,  while  the  king  was  living  happily  with
MrigankavatI,  she  said  to  him  :  "  You  must  stop  here,  while
I  go  somewhere  for  a  certain  business,  for  to-day  is  the  four-
teenth day  of  the  black  fortnight  of  which  I  spoke  to  you.
And  while  you  are  waiting  here,  my  husband,  you  must  not
enter  this  crystal  pavilion,  lest  you  should  fall  into  a  lake
there  and  go  to  the  world  of  men."  When  she  had  said  this
she  took  leave  of  him,  and  went  out  of  that  city,  and  the
king  took  his  sword  and  followed  her  secretly,  determined  to
penetrate  the  mystery.

Then  the  king  saw  a  terrible  Rakshasa  approaching,  look-
ing like  Hell  embodied  in  a  human  shape,  with  his  cavernous
mouth,  black  as  night,  opened  wide.  That  Rakshasa  uttered
an  appalling  roar,  and  swooping  down  on  MrigankavatI,  put

1  The  Sanskrit  College  MS.  reads  y antra  for  Brockhaus'  yatra.  The
wishing-tree  was  moved  by  some  magical  or  mechanical  contrivance.

2  The  Sanskrit  College  MS.  reads  anayatta,  which  Dr  Kern  has  conjectured.

3  This  part  of  the  story  may  remind  the  reader  of  the  story  of  Melusina,
the  European  snake-maiden.  See  Simrock's  Deutsche  Volksb'ucher,  vol.  vi.  It
bears  a  certain  resemblance  to  that  of  the  Knight  of  Stauffenberg  (Simrock,
op.  cit.,\o\.  iii).  Cf.  also  "Ein  Zimmern  und  die  Meerfrauen,"  in  Birlinger,
Aus  Schwaben,  p.  7,  and  De  Gubernatis,  Zoological  Mythology,  vol.  ii,  p.  206.
There  is  a  slight  resemblance  in  this  story  to  the  myth  of  Cupid  and  Psyche.

■ For  the  "Taboo"  motif \  which  first  appeared  in  the  tale  of  Urvasi  and

Pururavas,  see  Vol.  II,  pp.  252-253. — n.m.p.


22  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

her  in  his  mouth  and  swallowed  her.  When  the  mighty
king  saw  that,  he  was  at  once,  so  to  speak,  on  fire  with
excessive  anger,  and  rushing  forward  with  his  great  sword,
black  as  a  snake  that  has  cast  its  slough,1  drawn  from
the  sheath,  he  cut  off  with  it  the  head  of  the  charging
Rakshasa,  the  lips  of  which  were  firmly  pressed  together.
Then  the  burning  fire  of  the  king's  anger  was  quenched  by
the  stream  of  blood  that  poured  forth  from  the  trunk  of
the  Rakshasa,  but  not  the  fire  of  his  grief  at  the  loss  of  his
beloved.  Then  the  king  was  blinded  with  the  darkness  of
bewilderment,  and  at  a  loss  what  to  do,  when  suddenly
Mrigankavati  cleft  asunder  the  body  of  that  Rakshasa,
which  was  dark  as  a  cloud,  and  emerged  alive  and  uninjured,
illuminating  all  the  horizon  like  a  spotless  moon.  When  the
king  saw  his  beloved  thus  delivered  from  danger,  he  rushed
eagerly  forward  and  embraced  her,  exclaiming :  "  Come !
Come  !  "  And  he  said  to  her  :  "  My  beloved,  what  does  all
this  mean  ?  Is  it  a  dream  or  a  delusion  ?  "  When  the  king
asked  the  Vidyadhari  this  question,  she  remembered  the
truth,  and  said  :  "  Listen,  my  husband  !  This  is  no  delusion,
nor  is  it  a  dream ;  but  such  was  the  curse  imposed  upon  me
by  my  father,  a  king  of  the  Vidyadharas.  For  my  father,
who  formerly  lived  in  this  city,  though  he  had  many  sons,  was
so  fond  of  me  that  he  would  never  take  food  when  I  was  not
present.  But  I,  being  devoted  to  the  worship  of  Siva,  used
always  to  come  to  this  uninhabited  place  on  the  fourteenth
and  eighth  days  of  the  two  fortnights.

"  And  one  fourteenth  day  I  came  here  and  worshipped
Gauri  for  a  long  time ;  and,  as  fate  would  have  it,  so  ardent
was  my  devotion  that  the  day  came  to  an  end  before  my
worship  was  finished.  That  day  my  father  ate  nothing  and
drank  nothing,  though  he  was  hungry  and  thirsty,  as  he
waited  for  me,  but  he  was  very  angry  with  me.  And
when  I  returned  in  the  evening  with  downcast  countenance,
conscious  of  my  fault,  his  love  for  me  was  so  completely
overpowered  by  the  force  of  Destiny  that  he  cursed  me  in
the  following  words  :    c  As  owing  to  your  arrogance  I  was

1  For  bhujagah  the  Sanskrit  College  MS.  reads  bhujaga,  which  seems  to
give  a  better  sense  than  the  reading  in  Brockhaus'  text.


THE  END  OF  THE  CURSE  23

devoured  to-day  by  hunger,  so  on  the  eighth  and  fourteenth
days  of  the  fortnights  of  every  month,  and  on  those  days  only,
a  Rakshasa  named  Kritantasantrasa  shall  swallow  you,
when  you  go  to  that  place  outside  the  city  to  worship  Siva  ;
and  on  every  occasion  you  shall  make  your  way  through  his
heart  and  come  out  alive.  But  you  shall  not  remember  the
curse,  nor  the  pain  of  being  swallowed  ;  and  you  shall  remain
alone  here.'  When  my  father  had  uttered  this  curse,  I
managed  gradually  to  propitiate  him,  and  after  thinking  a
little,  he  appointed  this  termination  to  my  curse  :  '  When
a  king  named  Yasahketu,  lord  of  the  land  of  Anga,  shall
become  your  husband,  and  shall  see  you  swallowed  by  the
Rakshasa,  and  shall  slay  him,  then  you  shall  issue  from  his
heart,  and  shall  be  delivered  from  your  curse,  and  you  shall
call  to  mind  your  curse  and  the  other  circumstances,  and  all
your  supernatural  sciences.'

"  When  he  had  appointed  this  end  of  my  curse,  he  left
me  alone  here,  and  went  with  his  retinue  to  the  mountain
of  Nishadha  in  the  world  of  men.  And  I  remained  here,  thus
engaged,  bewildered  by  the  curse.  Rut  that  curse  has  now
come  to  an  end,  and  I  remember  all.  So  I  will  immediately
go  to  my  father  on  the  Nishadha  mountain ;  the  law  that
governs  us  celestial  beings  is,  that  when  our  curse  is  at  an
end  we  return  to  our  own  place.  You  are  perfectly  free  to
remain  here  or  go  to  your  kingdom,  as  you  like."

When  she  had  said  this,  the  king  was  sorry,  and  he  made
this  request  to  her  :  "  Fair  one,  do  me  the  favour  not  to  go
for  seven  days.  Let  us  in  the  meanwhile  cheat  the  pain  of
parting  by  amusing  ourselves  here  in  the  garden.  After  that
you  shall  go  to  your  father's  abode,  and  I  will  return  to
mine."  When  he  made  this  proposal,  the  fair  one  agreed
to  it.  Then  the  king  diverted  himself  with  her  for  six  days
in  the  gardens,  and  in  tanks,  the  lotus-eyes  of  which  were
full  of  tears,  and  that  seemed  to  toss  aloft  their  waves  like
hands,  and  in  the  cries  of  their  swans  and  cranes  to  utter
this  plaintive  appeal :  "  Do  not  leave  us  !  "  And  on  the
seventh  day  he  artfully  decoyed  his  darling  to  that  pavilion
where  was  the  tank  that  served  as  a  magic  gate  x  conducting

1  I  follow  the  reading  of  a  MS.  in  the  Sanskrit  College — yantradvaravapika.


24  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

to  the  world  of  men  ;  and  throwing  his  arms  round  her  neck
he  plunged  into  that  tank,  and  rose  up  with  her  from  a  tank
in  the  garden  of  his  own  city.  When  the  gardeners  saw
that  he  had  arrived  with  his  beloved,  they  were  delighted,
and  they  went  and  told  his  minister  Dirghadarsin.  And  the
minister  came  and  fell  at  his  feet,  and,  seeing  that  he  had
brought  with  him  the  lady  of  his  aspirations,  he  and  the
citizens  escorted  him  into  the  palace.  And  he  thought
to  himself :  "  Ah  !  I  wonder  how  the  king  has  managed  to
obtain  this  celestial  nymph,  of  whom  I  caught  a  transient
glimpse  in  the  ocean,  as  one  sees  in  the  heaven  a  lightning
flash.  But  the  fact  is,  whatever  lot  is  written  for  a  man
by  the  Disposer,  in  the  inscription  on  his  forehead,1  infallibly
befalls  him,  however  improbable."

Such  were  the  reflections  of  the  prime  minister;  while
the  rest  of  his  subjects  were  full  of  joy  at  the  return  of  the
king,  and  of  astonishment  at  his  having  won  the  celestial
nymph.  But  Mrigankavati,  seeing  that  the  king  had  returned
to  his  own  kingdom,  longed,  as  the  seven  days  were  com-
pleted, to  return  to  the  home  of  the  Vidyadharas.  But
the  science  of  flying  up  into  the  air  did  not  appear  to  her,
though  she  called  it  to  mind.  Then  she  felt  as  one  robbed  of
a  treasure,  and  was  in  the  deepest  despondency.  And  the  king
said  to  her :  "  Why  do  you  suddenly  appear  despondent  ?
Tell  me,  my  darling  ?  "  Then  the  Vidyadhari  answered  him :
"  Because  I  remained  so  long,  after  I  had  been  released  from
my  curse,  out  of  love  for  you,  my  science  has  abandoned
me,  and  I  have  lost  the  power  of  returning  to  my  heavenly
home."  When  King  Yasahketu  heard  this,  he  said,  "  Ha  !
I  have  now  won  this  Vidyadhari,"  and  so  his  rejoicing  was
complete.

When  the  minister  Dirghadarsin  saw  this,  he  went  home,
and  at  night,  when  he  was  in  bed,  he  suddenly  died  of  a
broken  heart.     And  Yasahketu,  after  he  had  mourned  for

1  The  vulgar  belief  is  that  man's  fate  is  written  upon  his  skull,  the
sutures  being  the  writing.  Thus  in  the  Nights  (Burton,  vol.  iii,  p.  123)  the  pea-
hen says  to  the  duck :  "  That  which  is  on  our  foreheads  we  must  indeed
fulfil,  and  when  our  doomed  day  draweth  near,  who  shall  deliver  us  ?  But
not  a  soul  departeth  except  it  have  accomplished  its  predestined  livelihood
and  term." — n.m.p.


WHY  HIS  HEART  BROKE


25


him,  remained  long  bearing  the  burden  of  empire  himself,
with  Mrigankavati  for  his  consort.


163g.  King  Trivikramasena  and  the  Mendicant

When  the  Vetala,  seated  on  the  shoulder  of  King  Trivi-
kramasena, had  told  him  this  story  on  the  way,  he  went  on
to  say  to  him  :  "So  tell  me,  King,  why  did  the  heart  of
that  great  minister  suddenly  break,  when  his  master  had
thus  succeeded  so  completely  ?  Did  his  heart  break  through
grief  at  not  having  won  the  nymph  himself?  Or  was  it
because  he  longed  for  the  sovereign  power,  and  thus  was
disappointed  at  the  king's  return  ?  And  if  you  know  this,
King,  and  do  not  tell  me  on  the  spot,  your  merit  will  at  once
disappear,  and  your  head  will  fly  in  pieces."  When  King
Trivikramasena  heard  that,  he  said  to  the  Vetala  :  "  Neither
of  these  two  feelings  actuated  that  excellent  and  virtuous
minister.  But  he  said  to  himself :  '  This  king  neglected  his
kingdom  out  of  devotion  to  mere  human  females,  much  more
will  he  do  so  now  that  he  is  attached  to  a  heavenly  nymph.
So,  though  I  have  gone  through  much  suffering,  the  disease
has  been  aggravated  by  it,  instead  of  being  cured,  as  I  had
hoped.'  It  was  under  the  influence  of  such  reflections  that
the  minister's  heart  broke."

When  the  king  had  said  this,  that  juggling  Vetala  returned
to  his  own  place,  and  the  resolute  king  ran  swiftly  after  him,
to  bring  him  back  again  by  force.


26  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


NOTE   ON   THE   SACRED   THREAD

The  rite  of  investiture  with  the  sacred  thread  is  known  as  upanayana,  and
is  the  most  important  ceremony  in  a  Brahman's  life.  Before  it  takes  place  he
is  only  a  Sudra,  but  now  he  becomes  a  Brahman  and  enters  the  ranks  of  the
Twice-born.  From  a  boy  dependent  on  women,  he  now  becomes  a  man,
and  henceforth  can  eat  only  with  men.  But  of  the  greatest  importance  is  the
fact  that  until  upanayana  no  Brahman  can  marry,  and  consequently  cannot
raise  up  seed  so  necessary  for  the  performance  of  Sraddha  and  other  similar
ceremonies.

The  investiture  generally  takes  place  when  the  boy  is  eight  years  of  age,
if  a  Brahman,  eleven  if  a  Kshatriya  and  twelve  if  a  Vaisya.  Interesting
descriptions  of  the  ceremony  will  be  found  as  follows :  J.  Campbell,  Bombay
Gazetteer,  vol.  ix,  pt.  i,  pp.  14m1,  36-39,  141  ;  vol.  xv,  pt.  i,  pp.  152-154,  170,
174,  196,  198,  343;  vol.  xviii,  pt.  i,  pp.  116-120,  187-189,  226-228;  vol.  xxiv,
pp.  48-50,  140,  141.  See  also  J.  Jolly,  "  Recht  und  Sitte,"  §  56,  Encyclopaedia
of  Indian  Philology,  1896,  and  L.  D.  Barnett,  Antiquities  of  India,  pp.  140-142.

The  most  recent  account,  however,  and  certainly  the  most  detailed,
appears  in  Mrs  Stevenson's  Rites  of  the  Twice-Born,  pp.  27-45.  Although
reference  should  be  made  there  for  full  details,  I  shall  give  a  few  extracts
dealing  with  the  most  important  parts  of  the  ceremony.

The  date  on  which  so  great  a  rite  can  take  place  has  to  be  carefully
selected.  Firstly,  it  must  start  only  on  a  Monday,  Wednesday,  Thursday  or
Friday.  Secondly,  the  chosen  day  must  fall  in  the  bright  fortnight.  The
month  can  only  be  Magna,  Phalguna,  Chaitra  or  Vaisakha.  Invitations  are  sent
out  about  ten  days  before  the  ceremony.

The  first  act  is  the  setting  up  of  a  booth  on  four  posts.  There  is  also  a  fifth
post,  quite  small,  which  represents  Brahma.  Ganesa  is  fully  worshipped,  after
which  the  fifteen  divine  mother-goddesses  are  installed  and  worshipped.  The
seven  other  goddesses  are  also  worshipped  and  four  Brahmans  recite  a  hymn
from  a  different  Veda.  The  boy  has  to  spend  the  night  preceding  the  actual
ceremony  in  absolute  silence,  with  his  body  smeared  with  a  yellow  substance
(pifi).  In  the  morning  the  child  is  led  to  the  booth,  where  the  sacrificial  fire
is  burning  on  the  altar.  He  is  now  shaved,  washed,  and  eats  with  his  mother
for  the  last  time.  After  several  other  minor  acts  the  actual  investiture  takes
place.  But  first  we  must  describe  the  thread  itself.  It  is  of  cotton  spun  by
a  Brahman  virgin  and  twisted  by  a  Brahman.  The  colour  varies,  in  accordance,
it  is  said,  with  the  mind  of  the  caste  of  the  weaver.  Thus  the  Brahmans  wear
white,  the  Kshatriyas  red,  and  the  Vai^yas  yellow.  Originally  the  cord  of  a
Brahman  was  of  munja  grass,  that  of  Kshatriyas  was  a  bowstring  or  of  kasa
grass,  and  that  of  Vai^yas  of  wool,  hemp  or  murva.  The  length  of  the  cord
is  ninety-six  times  the  breadth  of  the  four  fingers  of  a  man,  the  reason  being
that  a  man's  height  is  ninety-six  times  the  breadth  of  one  finger ;  and  each  of
his  four  fingers  represents  one  of  the  four  states  his  soul  experiences — viz.
waking,  dreaming,  dreamless  sleep,  and  the  state  of  the  Absolute  Brahma.


THE  SACRED  THREAD


27


The  cord  must  be  threefold,  because  there  are  three  qualities  out  of  which
our  bodies  are  compounded :  reality,  passion,  darkness.  The  twist  of  the
thread  must  be  upward,  so  that  the  good  quality  may  predominate,  and  so
the  wearer  may  rise  to  great  spiritual  heights.  The  threefold  thread  must  be
twisted  three  times,  lest  the  bad  quality,  the  darkness,  should  strive  to  gain
ascendancy  and  pull  the  soul  down.  The  whole  cord  is  tied  together  by  a
knot  called  Brahmagranthi,  which  has  three  parts,  representing  Brahma,  Vishnu,
and  Siva,  and  in  addition  to  this,  extra  knots  are  made  in  the  cord  to  repre-
sent the  various  Pravaras  to  be  found  in  the  particular  gotra  or  lineage  of  the
candidate.     We  proceed  to  the  actual  investiture.

The  boy  faces  the  sun,  holding  the  thread  by  the  thumb  and  little  finger
of  each  hand,  in  such  a  way  that  it  passes  in  front  of  the  three  middle  fingers.
The  left  hand  must  be  held  higher  than  the  right.  The  preceptor  repeats  a
mantra,  at  the  conclusion  of  which  the  boy  slips  the  thread  over  his  own  head.
He  now  receives  a  staff,  varying  in  size  and  wood  according  to  his  caste.  He
then  sits  on  a  stool  facing  west  and  receives  water  poured  into  his  joined
hands.  He  now  looks  at  the  sun,  offers  a  coconut  and  receives  a  new  name,
to  be  used  only  at  the  ceremony.  A  series  of  questions  and  answers  follows,
concluding  with  the  teaching  of  the  most  famous  of  all  mantras,  the  gayatfi.
So  sacred  is  the  verse  that  both  the  boy  and  his  guru  are  covered  with  a  silk
shawl,  lest  any  sound  be  overheard.  The  right  ear  of  the  child  into  which
the  verse  is  repeated  becomes  holy  for  life  after  merely  hearing  it.  It  usually
takes  three  days  for  the  verse  to  be  learned  perfectly.  The  boy  now  offers  nine
pieces  of  wood  dipped  in  clarified  butter  to  the  fire,  with  appropriate  prayers
to  Agni,  Sarasvati,  and  the  Sun.

The  initiate  is  now  a  Twice-born  Brahman,  and  ceremonially  pure,  so  he
touches  all  the  different  parts  of  his  own  body  to  purify  them  also.  In  the
evening,  for  the  first  time  in  his  life,  the  boy  can  perform  the  evening  worship,
Sandhya,  which  hereafter  never  must  be  omitted.

This  important  part  of  the  ceremony  used  to  occur  at  the  end  of  the
second  day,  the  complete  investiture  taking  three  days.  In  modern  times,
however,  the  three  days'  ceremonies  are  usually  performed  in  a  single  day.
During  the  night  of  the  second  day  the  initiate  has  to  observe  many  rules  of
self-denial,  such  as  absolute  silence,  sleeping  on  the  floor,  avoiding  any  food
containing  salt,  etc.  On  the  third  day  he  pours  clarified  butter  nine  times
into  the  sacred  fire,  begins  the  study  of  the  Vedas,  and  has  a  bath.  This  bath
makes  him  eligible  for  marriage.  The  water  for  it  is  fetched  by  eight  "  lucky  "
women  in  eight  new  water-pots,  containing  rice,  red  powder  and  flowers.  He
dons  new  clothes,  wears  a  bigger  loin-cloth,  and  partakes  of  a  little  food.  The
symbols  of  his  studentship  are  given  away  and  his  mother  marks  his  eye-
lashes with  lamp-black  and  makes  a  smudge  of  it  near  his  right  ear.  This  is
the  final  chance  on  the  part  of  the  mother  to  safeguard  her  son  against  evil
influences.  The  boy  can  now  look  in  a  mirror,  carry  an  umbrella,  and  wear
shoes.  In  place  of  his  student's  staff  he  is  given  a  green  bamboo  tied  with  the
yellow  loin-cloth  he  had  worn  before  the  initiation.  Then  follows  the  staging
of  a  little  comedy,  in  which  the  boy  pretends  he  is  making  a  pilgrimage  to
Benares.     The  pilgrimage  is  interrupted  and  the  boy  is  taken  home.     There


28  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

are  still  certain  rules  he  is  expected  to  observe.  He  should  not  play  or  sing,
look  down  into  deep  water,  climb  a  tree  for  fruit,  walk  streets  in  the  evening,
leap  from  high  cliffs,  or  ever  speak  unworthily.  He  must  admire  the  glow  of
the  sun  both  night  and  morning.  He  must  never  make  fun  of  a  woman,  or
spit  towards  the  sun,  and  should  keep  away  as  far  as  possible  from  all  low-
caste  persons  and  women.  At  night  he  should  always  have  a  light  when  he
dines  to  prevent  him  from  injuring  any  living  thing  in  the  dark.  Finally,  he
must  always  tell  the  truth.  He  is  now  a  man  in  every  sense  of  the  word,  and
must  never  dine  with  women,  and  sleep  only  in  the  men's  part  of  the  house.

The  above  is  an  outline  of  a  much   fuller   description   given   by   Mrs
Stevenson,  as  already  stated. — n.m.p.


CHAPTER  LXXXVII

163g.  King  Trivikramasena  and  the  Mendicant

THEN  the  king  went  back  to  the  simsapd  tree,  and
taking  the  Vetala  from  it,  placed  him  on  his  shoulder,
and  brought  him  along,  and  as  he  was  going  along
with  him,  the  Vetala  again  said  to  the  king  :  "  Listen,  King.
I  will  tell  you  a  short  story.

163g  (13).  The  Brahman  Harisvamin,  who  first  lost  his  Wife,

and  then  his  Life  1

There  is  a  city  of  the  name  of  Varanasi,2  the  abode  of
Siva.  In  it  there  lived  a  Brahman,  named  Devasvamin,
honoured  by  the  king.  And  that  rich  Brahman  had  a  son
named  Harisvamin ;  and  he  had  an  exceedingly  lovely  wife,
named  Lavanyavati.  I  think  the  Disposer  must  have  made
her  after  he  had  acquired  skill  by  making  Tilottama  and  the
other  nymphs  of  heaven,  for  she  was  of  priceless  beauty  and
loveliness.

Now,  one  night  Harisvamin  fell  asleep,  as  he  was  reposing
with  her  in  a  palace  cool  with  the  rays  of  the  moon.  At  that
very  moment  a  Vidyadhara  prince,  by  name  Madanavega,
roaming  about  at  will,  came  that  way  through  the  air.  He
saw  that  Lavanyavati  sleeping  by  the  side  of  her  husband,  and
her  robe,  that  had  slipped  aside,  revealed  her  exquisitely
moulded  limbs.  His  heart  was  captivated  by  her  beauty ;
and  blinded  by  love,  he  immediately  swooped  down,  and
taking  her  up  in  his  arms  asleep,  flew  off  with  her  through
the  air.

Immediately  her  husband,  the  young  Harisvamin,  woke

1  See  Appendix,  pp.  212-215. — n.m.p.

2  I.e.  Benares,  the  religious  capital  of  Hinduism.  To-day  Hindus  call
it  either  Kasi  or  Bandras.  The  former  name  was  originally  that  of  a  tribe
living  between  the  Ganges  and  the  Ghaghra.  Hiuen  Tsiang  writes  Po-lo-na-se
(  =  Varanasi  or  Baranasi). — n.m.p.

29


30  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

up,  and  not  seeing  his  beloved,  he  rose  up  in  a  state  of  dis-
traction. He  said  to  himself :  "  What  can  this  mean  ?
Where  has  she  gone  ?  I  wonder  if  she  is  angry  with  me  ?
Or  has  she  hidden  herself  to  find  out  my  real  feelings,  and  is
making  fun  of  me  ?  "  Distracted  by  many  surmises  of  this
kind,  he  wandered  hither  and  thither  that  night,  looking  for
her  on  the  roof,  and  in  the  turrets  of  the  palace.  He  even
searched  in  the  palace  garden,  and  when  he  could  not  find
her  anywhere,  being  scorched  with  the  fire  of  grief,  he  sobbed
and  lamented  :  "  Alas  !  my  beloved  with  face  like  the  moon's
orb,  fair  as  the  moonlight,  did  this  night  grudge  your
existence,  hating  your  charms  that  rival  hers  ?  *  That  very
moon,  that,  vanquished  by  your  beauty,  seemed  to  be  in
fear,  and  comforted  me  with  its  rays  cool  as  sandalwood,2
now  that  I  am  bereaved  of  you,  seems  to  have  seen  its
opportunity,  and  smites  me  with  them,  as  if  with  burning
coals,  or  arrows  dipped  in  poison."  While  Harisvamin  was
uttering  these  laments,  the  night  at  last  slowly  passed  away  ;
not  so  his  grief  at  his  bereavement.

The  next  morning  the  sun  dispelled  with  his  rays  the
deep  darkness  that  covered  the  world,  but  could  not  dispel
the  dense  darkness  of  despondency  that  had  settled  on  him.
The  sound  of  his  bitter  lamentations,  that  seemed  to  have
been  reinforced  by  wailing  power  bestowed  on  him  by  the
chakravdkas,  whose  period  of  separation  was  at  an  end  with
the  night,  was  magnified  a  hundredfold.  The  young  Brah-
man, though  his  relations  tried  to  comfort  him,  could  not
recover  his  self-command,  now  that  he  was  bereaved  of  his
beloved,  but  was  all  inflamed  with  the  fire  of  separation.
And  he  went  from  place  to  place,  exclaiming  with  tears  :  "  Here
she  stood,  here  she  bathed,  here  she  adorned  herself  and  here
she  amused  herself."

But  his  friends  and  relations  said  to  him  :  "  She  is  not
dead,  so  why  do  you  kill  yourself?  If  you  remain  alive,
you  will  certainly  recover  her  somewhere  or  other.  So  adopt
a  resolute  tone,  and  go  in  search  of  your  beloved ;  there  is
nothing  in  this  world  that  a  resolute  man,  who  exerts  himself,

1  Dvesha  must  be  a  misprint  for  dveshat.

2  See  note  on  pp.  105-107. — n.m.p.


THE  AGONY  OF  BEREAVEMENT


31


cannot  obtain."  When  Harisvamin  had  been  exhorted  in
these  terms  by  his  friends  and  relations,  he  managed  at  last,
after  some  days,  to  recover  his  spirits  by  the  aid  of  hope.
And  he  said  to  himself :  "I  will  give  away  all  that  I  have  to
the  Brahmans,  and  visit  all  the  holy  waters,  and  wash  away
all  my  sins.  For  if  I  wipe  out  my  sin,  I  may  perhaps,  in  the
course  of  my  wanderings,  find  that  beloved  of  mine."

After  going  through  these  reflections,  suitable  to  the  occa-
sion, he  got  up  and  bathed,  and  performed  all  his  customary
avocations  ;  and  the  next  day  he  bestowed  on  the  Brahmans
at  a  solemn  sacrifice  various  meats  and  drinks,  and  gave  away
to  them  all  his  wealth  without  stint.

Then  he  left  his  country,  with  his  Brahman  birth  as
his  only  fortune,  and  proceeded  to  go  round  to  all  the  holy
bathing-places  in  order  to  recover  his  beloved.  And  as  he
was  roaming  about,  there  came  upon  him  the  terrible  lion  of
the  hot  season,  with  the  blazing  sun  for  mouth,  and  with  a
mane  composed  of  his  fiery  rays.  And  the  winds  blew  with
excessive  heat,  as  if  warmed  by  the  breath  of  sighs  furnaced
forth  by  travellers  grieved  at  being  separated  from  their
wives.  And  the  tanks,  with  their  supply  of  water  diminished
by  the  heat,  and  their  drying  white  mud,  appeared  to  be
snowing  their  broken  hearts.  And  the  trees  by  the  road-
side seemed  to  lament 1  on  account  of  the  departure  of  the
glory  of  spring,  making  their  wailing  heard  in  the  shrill
moaning  of  their  bark,2  with  leaves,  as  it  were  lips,  parched
with  heat.

At  that  season  Harisvamin,  wearied  out  with  the  heat  of
the  sun,  with  bereavement,  hunger  and  thirst,  and  continual
travelling,  disfigured,3  emaciated  and  dirty,  and  pining  for
food,  reached,  in  the  course  of  his  wanderings,  a  certain
village,  and  found  in  it  the  house  of  a  Brahman  called  Pad-
manabha,  who  was  engaged  in  a  sacrifice.  And  seeing  that
many  Brahmans  were  eating  in  his  house,  he  stood  leaning


1  For  arudanniva  the  Sanskrit  College  MS.  reads  abhavanniva.

2  Bohtlingk  and  Roth,  s.v.,  say  that  chira  in  Taranga  73,  sloka  240,  is
perhaps  a  mistake  for  chlrl,  grasshopper ;  the  same  may  perhaps  be  the  case
in  this  passage.

3  For  virupa  the  Sanskrit  College  MS.  gives  viriiksha.


32  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

against  the  doorpost,  silent  and  motionless.  And  the  good
wife  of  that  Brahman  named  Padmanabha,  seeing  him  in
this  position,  felt  pity  for  him,  and  reflected :  "  Alas,
mighty  is  hunger  !  Whom  will  it  not  bring  down  ?  For
here  stands  a  man  at  the  door,  who  appears  to  be  a  house-
holder, desiring  food,  with  downcast  countenance  ;  evidently
come  from  a  long  journey,  and  with  all  his  senses  impaired
by  hunger.  So  is  not  he  a  man  to  whom  food  ought  to  be
given  ?  "

Having  gone  through  these  reflections,  the  kind  woman
took  up  in  her  hands  a  vessel  full  of  rice  boiled  in  milk,  with
ghee  and  sugar,  and  brought  it,  and  courteously  presented
it  to  him,  and  said  :  "Go  and  eat  this  somewhere  on  the
bank  of  the  lake,  for  this  place  is  unfit  to  eat  in,  as  it  is
filled  with  feasting  Brahmans."

He  said,"  I  will  do  so,"  and  took  the  vessel  of  rice,  and
placed  it  at  no  great  distance  under  a  banyan-tree  on  the
edge  of  the  lake ;  and  he  washed  his  hands  and  feet  in  the
lake,  and  rinsed  his  mouth,  and  then  came  back  in  high
spirits  to  eat  the  rice.  But  while  he  was  thus  engaged,  a
kite,  holding  a  black  cobra  with  its  beak  and  claws,  came
from  some  place  or  other,  and  sat  on  that  tree.  And  it  so
happened  that  poisonous  saliva  issued  from  the  mouth  of
that  dead  snake,  which  the  bird  had  captured  and  was  carry-
ing along.  The  saliva  fell  into  the  dish  of  rice  which  was
placed  underneath  the  tree,  and  Harisvamin,  without  observ-
ing it,  came  and  ate  up  that  rice.  As  soon  as  in  his  hunger
he  had  devoured  all  that  food,  he  began  to  suffer  terrible
agonies  produced  by  the  poison.  He  exclaimed :  "  When
fate  has  turned  against  a  man,  everything  in  this  world
turns  also ;  accordingly  this  rice  dressed  with  milk,  ghee  and
sugar  has  become  poison  to  me."

Thus  speaking,  Harisvamin,  tortured  with  the  poison,
tottered  to  the  house  of  that  Brahman,  who  was  engaged  in
the  sacrifice,  and  said  to  his  wife  :  "  The  rice,  which  you  gave
me,  has  poisoned  me ;  so  fetch  me  quickly  a  charmer  who
can  counteract  the  operation  of  poison  ;  otherwise  you  will
be  guilty  of  the  death  of  a  Brahman."

When  Harisvamin  had  said  this  to  the  good  woman,  who


THE  INNOCENT  WRONGED


33


was  beside  herself  to  think  what  it  could  all  mean,  his  eyes
closed,  and  he  died.

Accordingly  the  Brahman,  who  was  engaged  in  a  sacrifice,
drove  out  of  his  house  his  wife,  though  she  was  innocent  and
hospitable,  being  enraged  with  her  for  the  supposed  murder
of  her  guest.  The  good  woman,  for  her  part,  having  incurred
groundless  blame  from  her  charitable  deed,  and  so  become
branded  with  infamy,  went  to  a  holy  bathing-place  to  perform
penance.

Then  there  was  a  discussion  before  the  superintendent  of
religion,1  as  to  which  of  the  four  parties,  the  kite,  the  snake,
or  the  couple  who  gave  the  rice,  was  guilty  of  the  murder  of
a  Brahman  ;  but  the  question  was  not  decided.


163g.  King  Trivikramasena  and  the  Mendicant

"  Now  you,  King  Trivikramasena,  must  tell  me  which  was
guilty  of  the  murder  of  a  Brahman ;  and  if  you  do  not,  you
will  incur  the  before-mentioned  curse."

When  the  king  heard  this  from  the  Vetala,  he  was  forced
by  the  curse  to  break  silence,  and  he  said  :  "  No  one  of  them
could  be  guilty  of  the  crime ;  certainly  not  the  serpent,  for
how  could  he  be  guilty  of  anything,  when  he  was  the  helpless
prey  of  his  enemy,  who  was  devouring  him  ?  To  come  to
the  kite  ;  what  offence  did  he  commit  in  bringing  his  natural
food,  which  he  had  happened  to  find,  and  eating  it,  when
he  was  hungry  ?  And  how  could  either  of  the  couple  that
gave  the  food  be  in  fault,  since  they  were  both  people  ex-
clusively devoted  to  righteousness,  not  likely  to  commit  a
crime  ?     Therefore  I  think  the  guilt  of  slaying  a  Brahman

1  I.e.  Dharmaraja,  possibly  the  officer  established  by  Asoka  in  his  fifth
edict  (see  Senart,  Les  Inscriptions  de  Piyadasi,  p.  125).  The  term  Dharmaraja
is  applied  to  Yudhishthira  and  Yama.  It  means  literally  king  of  righteousness
or  religion.  There  is  a  Dharma  Raja  in  Bhutan.  Bohtlingk  and  Roth  seem  to
take  it  to  mean  Yama  in  this  passage.  The  succession  of  the  Dharma  Raja
in  Bhutan  is  arranged  on  the  reincarnation  theory.  On  his  death  his  spirit  is
supposed  to  transmigrate  into  the  body  of  a  newly  born  male  child,  who  has
to  be  searched  for  and  identified  by  omens.  Thus  the  succession  can  be  kept
entirely  in  the  hands  of  the  Lhasa  priests.  See  further  L.  A.  Waddell,
"  Bhutan,  Buddhism  in,"  Hastings'  Ency.  Rel.  Eth.,  vol.  ii,  p.  562. — n.m.p.
vol.   VII.  C


34


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


would  attach  to  any  person  who  should  be  so  foolish  as,
for  want  of  sufficient  reflection,  to  attribute  it  to  either  of
them."

When  the  king  had  said  this,  the  Vetala  again  left  his
shoulder,  and  went  to  his  own  place,  and  the  resolute  king
again  followed  him.


CHAPTER  LXXXVIII

163g.  King  Trivikramasena  and  the  Mendicant

THEN  King  Trivikramasena  went  to  the  simsapd
tree,  and  again  got  hold  of  the  Vetala,  and  took  him
on  his  shoulder ;  and  when  the  king  had  set  out,  the
Vetala  again  said  to  him  :  "  King,  you  are  tired  ;  so  listen,
I  will  tell  you  an  interesting  tale.


163g  (14).  The  Merchant's  Daughter  who  fell  in  love  with

a  Thief1

There  is  a  city  of  the  name  of  Ayodhya,  which  was  the
capital  of  Vishnu,  when  he  was  incarnate  as  Rama,  the
destroyer  of  the  Rakshasa  race.  In  it  there  lived  a  mighty
king,  of  the  name  of  Viraketu,  who  defended  this  earth,  as  a
rampart  defends  a  city.  During  the  reign  of  that  king  there
lived  in  that  city  a  great  merchant,  named  Ratnadatta,  who
was  the  head  of  the  mercantile  community.  And  there
ras  born  to  him,  by  his  wife  Nandayanti,  a  daughter  named
latnavati,  who  was  obtained  by  propitiating  the  deities.
And  that  intelligent  girl  grew  up  in  her  father's  house,  and
as  her  body  grew,  her  innate  qualities  of  beauty,  gracefulness
and  modesty  developed  also.  And  when  she  attained  woman-
hood, not  only  great  merchants,  but  even  kings,  asked  her  in
marriage  from  her  father.  But  she  disliked  the  male  sex
so  much  that  she  did  not  desire  even  Indra  for  a  husband,
and  would  not  even  hear  of  marriage,  being  determined  to
die  sooner  than  consent  to  it.  That  made  her  father  secretly
sorrow  much,  on  account  of  his  affection  for  her,  and  the
report  of  her  conduct  spread  all  over  the  city  of  Ayodhya.

At  that  time  all  the  citizens  were  continually  being
plundered  by  thieves,  so  they  assembled  together,  and  made
this  complaint  to  King  Viraketu  :    "  Your  Majesty,  we  are

1  See  Appendix,  pp.  215-221.— n.m.p.
35


36  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

continually  being  robbed  by  thieves  every  night,  and  we
cannot  detect  them,  so  let  your  Highness  take  the  necessary
steps."  When  the  king  had  received  this  petition  from  the
citizens,  he  stationed  watchmen  in  plain  clothes  all  round
the  city,  in  order  to  try  to  discover  the  thieves.

But  they  could  not  find  them  out,  and  the  city  went
on  being  robbed ;  so  one  night  the  king  himself  went  out  to
watch  ;  and  as  he  was  roaming  about,  armed,  he  saw  in  a
certain  part  of  the  town  a  single  individual  going  along  the
rampart.  He  showed  great  dexterity  in  his  movements,  as
he  made  his  footfall  perfectly  noiseless,  and  he  often  looked
behind  him  with  eyes  anxiously  rolling.  The  king  said  to
himself :  "  Without  doubt,  this  is  the  thief,  who  sallies  out
by  himself  and  plunders  my  city."  So  he  went  up  to  him.
Then  the  thief,  seeing  the  king,  said  to  him  :  .  "  WTho  are
you  ?  "  And  the  king  answered  him  :  "I  am  a  thief."  Then
the  thief  said  :  "  Bravo  !  you  are  my  friend,  as  you  belong
to  the  same  profession  as  myself ;  so  come  to  my  house  ;
I  will  entertain  you."  When  the  king  heard  that,  he  con-
sented, and  went  with  him  to  his  dwelling,  which  was  in
an  underground  cavern  in  a  forest.  It  was  luxuriously  and
magnificently  furnished,  illuminated  by  blazing  lamps,  and
looked  like  a  second  Patala,  not  governed  by  King  Bali.

When  the  king  had  entered,  and  had  taken  a  seat,  the
robber  went  into  the  inner  rooms  of  his  cave-dwelling.  At
that  moment  a  female  slave  came  and  said  to  the  king  :
"  Great  sir,  how  came  you  to  enter  this  mouth  of  death  ?
This  man  is  a  notable  thief;  no  doubt,  when  he  comes  out
of  those  rooms,  he  will  do  you  some  injury  :  I  assure  you,
he  is  treacherous  ;  so  leave  this  place  at  once."  When  the
king  heard  this,  he  left  the  place  at  once,  and  went  to  his
own  palace  and  got  ready  his  forces  that  very  night.

And  when  his  army  was  ready  for  battle,  he  came  and
blockaded  the  entrance  of  that  robber's  cave  with  his  troops,
who  sounded  all  their  martial  instruments.1  Then  the  brave
robber,  as  his  hold  was  blockaded,  knew  that  his  secret  had
been  discovered,  and  he  rushed  out  to  fight,  determined  to  die.
And  when  he  came  out  he  displayed  superhuman  prowess

1  I  prefer  the  reading  of  the  Sanskrit  College  MS. — turyakulaih.


THE  ROBBER  IS  CAPTURED


37


in  battle ;  alone,  armed  with  sword  and  shield,  he  cut  off
the  trunks  of  elephants ;  he  slashed  off  the  legs  of  horses
and  lopped  off  the  heads  of  soldiers.  When  he  had  made
this  havoc  among  the  soldiers,  the  king  himself  attacked
him.  And  the  king,  who  was  a  skilful  swordsman,  by  a
dexterous  trick  of  fence  forced  his  sword  from  his  hand,  and
then  the  dagger  which  he  drew.  And  as  he  was  now  disarmed,
the  king  threw  away  his  own  weapon  and,  grappling  with  him,
flung  him  on  the  earth,  and  captured  him  alive.  And  he
brought  him  back  as  a  prisoner  to  his  own  capital,  with  all
his  wealth.  And  he  gave  orders  that  he  should  be  put  to
death  by  impalement  next  morning.

Now,  when  that  robber  was  being  conducted  with  beat  of
drum  2  to  the  place  of  execution,  that  merchant's  daughter,
Ratnavati,  saw  him  from  her  palace.  Though  he  was
wounded,  and  his  body  was  begrimed  with  dust,  she  was  dis-
tracted with  love  as  soon  as  she  saw  him.  So  she  went  and
said  to  her  father,  Ratnadatta:  "I  select  as  my  husband
this  man  here,  who  is  being  led  off  to  execution,  so  ransom
him  from  the  king,  my  father.  If  you  will  not,  I  shall  follow
him  to  the  other  world."  When  her  father  heard  this  he
said  :  "  My  daughter,  what  is  this  that  you  say  ?  Before  you
would  not  accept  suitors  endowed  with  all  virtues,  equal  to
the  God  of  Love.  How  comes  it  that  you  are  now  in  love
with  an  infamous  brigand  chief  ?  "  Though  her  father  used
this  argument,  and  others  of  the  same  kind,  with  her,  she
remained  fixed  in  her  determination.  Then  the  merchant
went  quickly  to  the  king,  and  offered  him  all  his  wealth,  if  he
would  grant  the  robber  his  life.  But  the  king  would  not  make
over  to  him,  even  for  hundreds  of  crores  of  gold  pieces,  that
thief  who  had  robbed  on  such  a  gigantic  scale,  and  whom
he  had  captured  at  the  risk  of  his  own  life.  Then  the  father
returned  disappointed,  and  his  daughter  made  up  her  mind
to  follow  the  thief  to  the  other  world,  though  her  relations
tried  to  dissuade  her ;  so  she  bathed  and  got  into  a  palan-
quin,2 and  went  to  the  spot  where  his  execution  was  taking
place,  followed  by  her  father  and  mother  and  the  people,  all
weeping.

1  See  Vol.  I,  p.  118w2.— n.m.p.  See  Vol.  Ill,  p.  14w1.— n.m.p.


38  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

In  the  meanwhile  the  robber  had  been  impaled  by  the
executioners,  and  as  his  life  was  ebbing  away  on  the  stake
he  saw  her  coming  there  with  her  kinsfolk.  And  when  he
heard  the  whole  story  from  the  people  he  wept  for  a  moment,
and  then  he  laughed  a  little,  and  then  died  on  the  stake.
Then  the  merchant's  virtuous  daughter  had  the  thief's  body
taken  down  from  the  stake,  and  she  ascended  the  funeral
pyre  with  it.1

And  at  that  very  moment  the  holy  Siva,  who  was  in-
visibly present  in  the  cemetery,  spake  from  the  air  :  "  Faithful
wife,  I  am  pleased  with  thy  devotedness  to  thy  self-chosen
husband,  so  crave  a  boon  of  me."  When  she  heard  that,
she  worshipped,  and  prayed  the  god  of  gods  to  grant  her  the
following  boon  :  "  Lord,  may  my  father,  who  has  now  no  sons,
have  a  hundred,  for  otherwise,  as  he  has  no  children  but  me,
he  would  abandon  his  life."  2  When  the  good  woman  had
said  this,  the  god  once  more  spake  to  her,  saying  :  "  Let  thy
father  have  a  hundred  sons  !  Choose  another  boon ;  for  such
a  steadfastly  good  woman  as  thou  art  deserves  something  more
than  this."

When  she  heard  this,  she  said  :  "If  the  Lord  is  pleased
with  me,  then  let  this  husband  of  mine  rise  up  alive,  and
be  henceforth  a  well-conducted  man  !  "  Thereupon  Siva,
invisible  in  the  air,  uttered  these  words :  "Be  it  so ;  let  thy
husband  rise  up  alive,  and  lead  henceforth  a  life  of  virtue,  and
let  King  Viraketu  be  pleased  with  him  !  "  And  immediately
the  robber  rose  up  alive  with  unwounded  limbs.

Then  the  merchant  Ratnadatta  was  delighted,  and  aston-
ished at  the  same  time;  and  with  his  daughter,  Ratnavati,
and  the  bandit  his  son-in-law,  and  his  delighted  relations,
he  entered  his  own  palace,  and  as  he  had  obtained  from  the
god  the  promise  of  sons,  he  held  a  feast  suitable  to  his  own
joy  on  the  occasion.

And  when  King  Viraketu  heard  what  had  taken  place
he  was  pleased,  and  he  immediately  summoned  that  heroic

1  See  Appendix  I,  on  Widow -burning,  in  Vol.  IV,  pp.  255-272. — n.m.p.

2  Cf.  Mahabhdrata,  Vanaparva ;  section  297  (Pativrata-mahatmya),  si.  39.
See  vol.  ii,  p.  637,  of  the  new  edition  of  Roy's  translation,  Calcutta,  1919,
etc. — N.M.P.


RETRIBUTION


39


thief,  and  made  him  commander  of  his  army.  And  thereupon
the  heroic  thief  gave  up  his  dishonest  life,  and  married  the
merchant's  daughter,  and  led  a  respectable  life,  honoured  by
the  king.


163g.  King  Trivikramasena  and  the  Mendicant

When  the  Vetala,  seated  on  the  shoulder  of  King  Trivikra-
masena, had  told  him  this  tale,  he  asked  him  the  following
question,  menacing  him  with  the  before-mentioned  curse  :
"  Tell  me,  King,  why  that  thief,  when  impaled,  first  wept
and  then  laughed,  when  he  saw  the  merchant's  daughter
come  with  her  father."  Then  the  king  said  :  "  He  wept  for
sorrow  that  he  had  not  been  able  to  repay  the  merchant
for  his  gratuitous  kindness  to  him ;  and  he  laughed  out  of
astonishment,  as  he  said  to  himself :  '  What !  has  this
maiden,  after  rejecting  kings  who  asked  for  her  hand,  fallen
in  love  with  me  ?  In  truth  a  woman's  heart  is  an  intricate
labyrinth.'  "

When  the  king  had  said  this,  the  mighty  Vetala,  by
means  of  the  magic  power  which  he  possessed,  again  left
the  king's  shoulder  and  returned  to  his  station  on  the  tree,
and  the  king  once  more  went  to  fetch  him.


CHAPTER  LXXXIX

163g.  King  Trivikramasena  and  the  Mendicant

THEN  King  Trivikramasena  again  went  back  to  the
simsapd  tree  and  took  the  Vetala  from  it,  and  set  out
with  him  once  more;  and  as  the  king  was  going
along,  the  Vetala,  perched  on  his  shoulder,  said  to  him  :
"  Listen,  King,  I  will  tell  you  another  story.

163g  (15).  The  Magic  Pill 1

There  was  in  the  kingdom  of  Nepala  a  city  named  Siva-
pura,  and  in  it  there  lived  of  old  time  a  king  rightly  named
Yasahketu.2  He  devolved  upon  his  minister,  named  Prajna-
sagara,  the  burden  of  his  kingdom,  and  enjoyed  himself  in  the
society  of  his  queen,  Chandraprabha.  And  in  course  of  time
that  king  had  born  to  him,  by  that  queen,  a  daughter  named
Sasiprabha,  bright  as  the  moon,  the  eye  of  the  world.

Now  in  course  of  time  she  grew  up  to  womanhood,  and
one  day,  in  the  month  of  spring,  she  went  to  a  garden,  with
her  attendants,  to  witness  a  festive  procession.  And  in  a
certain  part  of  that  garden  a  Brahman,  of  the  name  of
Manahsvamin,  the  son  of  a  rich  man,  who  had  come  to  see  the
procession,  beheld  her  engaged  in  gathering  flowers,  raising
her  lithe  arm,  and  displaying  her  graceful  shape ;  and  she
looked  charming  when  the  grasp  of  her  thumb  and  fore-
finger on  the  stalks  of  the  flowers  relaxed.  When  the  young
man  Manahsvamin  saw  her,  she  at  once  robbed  him  of  his
heart,  and  he  was  bewildered  by  love  and  no  longer  master
of  his  feelings.3  He  said  to  himself :  "  Can  this  be  Rati
come  in  person  to  gather  the  flowers  accumulated  by  spring,
in  order  to  make  arrows  for  the  God  of  Love  ?  Or  is  it  the
presiding  goddess  of  the  wood,  come  to  worship  the  spring  ?  "

1  See  Appendix,  pp.  222-233. — n.m.p.

2  His  name  means  "  Glory-banner." — n.m.p.

8  His  name,  Manahsvdmifi,  would  imply  that  he  ought  to  be.

40


MCLADEVA,  MASTER  OF  MAGIC


41


While  he  was  making  these  surmises,  the  princess  caught
sight  of  him.  And  as  soon  as  she  saw  him,  looking  like
a  second  God  of  Love  created  with  a  body,  she  forgot  her
flowers,  and  her  limbs,  and  her  own  personal  identity.

While  those  two  were  thus  overpowered  by  the  passion  of
mutual  love  at  first  sight,  a  loud  shout  of  alarm  was  raised,
and  they  both  looked  with  uplifted  heads  to  see  what  it  could
mean.  Then  there  came  that  way  an  elephant,  rushing
along  with  its  elephant-hook  hanging  down,  that  driven
furious  by  perceiving  the  smell  of  another  elephant *  had
broken  its  fastenings,  and  rushed  out  in  a  state  of  frenzy,
breaking  down  the  trees  in  its  path,  and  had  thrown  its
driver.  The  princess's  attendants  dispersed  in  terror,  but
Manahsvamin  eagerly  rushed  forward,  and  took  her  up  alone
in  his  arms,  and  while  she  clung  timidly  to  him,  bewildered
with  fear,  love  and  shame,  carried  her  to  a  distance,  out  of
reach  of  the  elephant.  Then  her  attendants  came  up  and
praised  that  noble  Brahman,  and  conducted  her  back  to  her
palace.  But  as  she  went  she  frequently  turned  round  to  look
at  her  deliverer.  There  she  remained,  thinking  regretfully  of
that  man  who  had  saved  her  life,  consumed  day  and  night
by  the  smouldering  fire  of  love.

And  Manahsvamin  then  left  that  garden,  and  seeing  that
the  princess  had  entered  her  private  apartments,  he  said  to
himself,  in  regretful  longing  :  "I  cannot  remain  without  her,
nay,  I  cannot  live  without  her  :  so  my  only  resource  in  this
difficulty  is  the  cunning  Mtiladeva,  who  is  a  master  of  magic
arts."  Having  thus  reflected,  he  managed  to  get  through  that
day,  and  the  next  morning  he  went  to  visit  that  master  of
magic,  Mtiladeva.  And  he  saw  that  master,  who  was  ever
in  the  company  of  his  friend  Sasin,  full  of  many  marvellous
magic  ways,  like  the  sky  come  down  to  earth  in  human  shape.2
And  he  humbly  saluted  him,  and  told  him  his  desire ;  then
the  master  laughed,  and  promised  to  accomplish  it  for  him.
Then  that  matchless  deceiver  Mtiladeva  placed  a  magic  pill  in

1  For  gaja  the   Sanskrit   College  MS.  reads   mada. For   a   note   on

elephants  in  the  state  of  must  see  Vol.  VI,  pp.  67W1,  68n. — n.m.p.

2  The  word  siddha  also  means  a  class  of  demigods  who  travel  through  the
sky :  Sasin  means  "  moon."


42  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

his  mouth,1  and  transformed  himself  into  an  aged  Brahman;
and  he  gave  the  Brahman  Manahsvamin  a  second  pill  to  put
in  his  mouth,  and  so  made  him  assume  the  appearance  of  a
beautiful  maiden.

And  that  prince  of  villains  took  him  in  this  disguise  to
the  judgment-hall  of  the  king,  the  father  of  his  lady-love,
and  said  to  him  :  "  O  King,  I  have  only  one  son,  and  I
asked  for  a  maiden  to  be  given  him  to  wife,  and  brought
here  from  a  long  distance ;  but  now  he  has  gone  somewhere  or
other,  and  I  am  going  to  look  for  him ;  so  keep  this  maiden
safe  for  me  until  I  bring  back  my  son,  for  you  keep  safe  under
your  protection  the  whole  world."  2  When  King  Yasahketu
heard  this  petition  he  granted  it,  fearing  a  curse  if  he  did
not,  and  summoned  his  daughter,  Sasiprabha,  and  said  to
her :  "  Daughter,  keep  this  maiden  in  your  palace,  and  let  her
sleep  and  take  her  meals  with  you."  The  princess  agreed,
and  took  Manahsvamin,  transformed  into  a  maiden,  to  her
own  private  apartments ;  and  then  Muladeva,  who  had  assumed
the  form  of  a  Brahman,  went  where  he  pleased,  and  Manah-
svamin remained  in  the  form  of  a  maiden  with  his  beloved.

And  in  a  few  days  the  princess  became  quite  fond  of  and
intimate  with  her  new  attendant ;  so,  one  night,  when  she
was  pining  at  being  separated  from  the  object  of  her  affec-
tions, and  tossing  on  her  couch,  Manahsvamin,  who  was  on  a
bed  near  her,  concealed  under  a  female  shape,  said  secretly
to  her  :  "  My  dear  Sasiprabha,  why  are  you  pale  of  hue,  and
why  do  you  grow  thinner  every  day,  and  sorrow  as  one
separated  from  the  side  of  her  beloved  ?  Tell  me,  for  why
should  you  distrust  loving  modest  attendants  ?  From  this
time  forth  I  will  take  no  food  until  you  tell  me."

When  the  princess  heard  this  she  sighed,  and  slowly  told
the  following  tale  :  "  Why  should  I  distrust  you  of  all  people  ?
Listen,  friend,  I  will  tell  you  the  cause.  Once  on  a  time  I
went  to  a  spring  garden  to  see  a  procession,  and  there  I  beheld

1  He  does  not  swallow  the  pill,  but  keeps  it  in  his  mouth,  as  the  sequel
shows.  Cf.  the  piece  of  wood,  by  the  help  of  which  Preziosa,  in  the  Pent-
amerone,  turns  herself  into  a  bear  (see  Burton's  translation,  vol.  i,  p.  185).  As
soon  as  she  takes  it  out  of  her  mouth  she  resumes  her  human  form. — n.m.p.

2  Cf.  Vol.  I,  p.  83.


THE  CHANGE  OF  SEX


43


a  handsome  Brahman  man,  who  seemed  like  the  month  of
spring,  having  the  loveliness  of  the  moon  free  from  dew,
kindling  love  at  sight,  adorning  the  grove  with  play  of  light.
And  while  my  eager  eyes,  drinking  in  the  nectarous  rays  of
the  moon  of  his  countenance,  began  to  emulate  the  partridge,
there  came  there  a  mighty  elephant  broken  loose  from  its
bonds,  roaring  and  distilling  its  ichor  like  rain,  looking  like
a  black  rain-cloud  appearing  out  of  season.  My  attendants
dispersed  terrified  at  that  elephant,  but  when  I  was  be-
wildered with  fear  that  young  Brahman  caught  me  up  in  his
arms  and  carried  me  to  a  distance.  Then  contact  with  his
body  made  me  feel  as  if  I  were  anointed  with  sandalwood  *
ointment,  and  bedewed  with  ambrosia,  and  I  was  in  a  state
which  I  cannot  describe.  And  in  a  moment  my  attendants
reassembled,  and  I  was  brought  back  reluctant  to  this  my
palace,  and  seemed  to  myself  to  have  been  cast  down  to
earth  from  heaven.  From  that  time  forth  I  have  often  in-
terviews in  reveries  with  my  beloved,  that  rescued  me  from
death,  and  even  when  awake  I  seem  to  see  him  at  my  side.
And  when  I  am  asleep  I  see  him  in  dreams,  coaxing  me  and
dispelling  my  reserve  with  kisses  and  caresses.  But,  ill-fated
wretch  that  I  am,  I  cannot  obtain  him,  for  I  am  baffled  by
ignorance  of  his  name  and  other  particulars  about  him.  So
I  am  consumed,  as  you  see,  by  the  fire  of  separation  from  the
lord  of  my  life."

When  Manahsvamin's  ears  had  been  filled  with  the  nectar
of  this  speech  of  the  princess's,  that  Brahman,  who  was
present  there  in  female  form,  rejoiced,  and  considered  that
his  object  was  attained,  and  that  the  time  had  come  for  re-
vealing himself,  so  he  took  out  the  pill  from  his  mouth,  and
displayed  himself  in  his  true  form,  and  said  :  "  Rolling-eyed
one,  I  am  that  very  Brahman  whom  you  bought  with  a  look
in  the  garden,  and  made  your  slave  in  the  truest  sense  of  the
word.  And  from  the  immediate  interruption  of  our  acquaint-
ance I  derived  that  sorrow,  of  which  the  final  result  was  my
taking,  as  you  see,  the  form  of  a  maiden.  Therefore,  fair
one,  grant  that  the  sorrow  of  separation,  which  both  of  us
have  endured,  may  not  have  been  borne  in  vain,  for  Kama

1  See  note,  pp.  105-107. — n.m.p.


44  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

cannot  endure  beyond  this  point."  When  the  princess  sud-
denly beheld  her  beloved  in  front  of  her,  and  heard  him  utter
these  words,  she  was  at  once  filled  with  love,  astonishment
and  shame.  So  they  eagerly  went  through  the  gdndharva
ceremony  of  marriage.  Then  Manahsvamin  lived  happily  in
the  palace,  under  two  shapes  ;  keeping  the  pill  in  his  mouth
during  the  day,  and  so  wearing  a  female  shape,  but  at  night
taking  it  out,  and  assuming  the  form  of  a  man.1

Now,  as  days  went,  the  brother-in-law  of  King  Yasah-
ketu,  named  Mrigankadatta,  gave  his  own  daughter,  named
Mrigankavati,  in  marriage  to  a  young  Brahman,  the  son
of  the  minister  Prajnasagara  :  and  with  her  he  bestowed
much  wealth.  And  the  Princess  Sasiprabha  was  invited,  on
the  occasion  of  her  cousin's  marriage,  to  her  uncle's  house,
and  went  there  accompanied  by  her  ladies-in-waiting.  And
among  them  went  the  young  Brahman,  Manahsvamin,  wear-
ing the  attractive  form  of  a  young  maiden  of  exquisite
beauty.

Then  that  minister's  son  beheld  him  disguised  in  female
form,  and  was  deeply  pierced  with  the  shafts  of  the  archer
Love.  And  when  he  went  to  his  house,  accompanied  by  his
bride,  it  seemed  to  him  to  be  empty ;  for  he  was  robbed  of
his  heart  by  that  seeming  maiden.  Then  he  continued  to
think  of  nothing  but  the  beauty  of  that  supposed  maiden's
face,  and,  bitten  by  the  great  snake  of  fierce  passion,  he
suddenly  became  distracted.  The  people  who  were  there
ceased  from  their  rejoicing,  and  in  their  bewilderment  asked
what  it  meant,  and  his  father,  Prajnasagara,  hearing  of  it,
came  to  him  in  haste.  And  when  his  father  tried  to  com-
fort him,  he  woke  up  from  his  stupor,  and  uttered  what  was
in  his  mind,  babbling  deliriously.  And  that  father  of  his
was  very  much  troubled,  as  he  thought  that  the  matter  was
one  altogether  beyond  his  power.  Then  the  king  heard  of
it,  and  came  there  in  person.  And  at  once  he  saw  that  the
minister's  son  had  been  in  a  moment  reduced  by  strong
passion  to  the  seventh  2  stage  of  love-sickness ;  so  he  said  to

1  Cf.  the  story  of  Bandhudatta  (Vol.  Ill,  p.  191),  who  turns  her  lover
into  a  monkey  by  placing  a  cord  round  his  neck. — n.m.p.

2  For  the  ten  stages  of  love-sickness  see  Vol.  II,  pp.  9w2,  lOn.


THE  MINISTERS'  ADVICE


45


his  ministers  :  "  How  can  I  give  him  a  maiden  whom  a
Brahman  left  in  my  care  ?  And  yet,  if  he  does  not  obtain
her,  he  will  without  doubt  reach  the  last  stage.  If  he  dies,  his
father,  who  is  my  minister,  will  perish  ;  and  if  he  perishes,
my  kingdom  is  ruined,  so  tell  me  what  I  am  to  do  in  this
matter."

When  the  king  said  this,  all  those  ministers  said  :  "  They
say  that  the  special  virtue  of  a  king  is  the  protection  of  the
virtue  of  his  subjects.  Now  the  root  of  this  protection  is
counsel,  and  counsel  resides  in  counsellors.  If  the  counsellor
perishes,  protection  perishes  in  its  root,  and  virtue  is  certain
to  be  impaired.1  Moreover,  guilt  would  be  incurred  by  caus-
ing the  death  of  this  Brahman  minister  and  his  son,  so  you
must  avoid  doing  that,  otherwise  there  is  a  great  chance  of
your  infringing  the  law  of  virtue.  Accordingly  you  must
certainly  give  to  the  minister's  son  the  maiden  committed
to  your  care  by  the  first  Brahman,  and  if  he  returns  after  the
lapse  of  some  time,  and  is  angry,  steps  can  be  taken  to  put
matters  right."

When  the  ministers  said  this  to  the  king,  he  agreed  to
give  that  man,  who  was  palming  himself  off  as  a  maiden,  to
the  minister's  son.  And  after  fixing  an  auspicious  moment,
he  brought  Manahsvamin,  in  female  form,  from  the  palace
of  the  princess ;  and  he  said  to  the  king  :  "If,  King,  you
are  determined  to  give  me,  whom  another  committed  to  your
care,  to  a  person  other  than  him  for  whom  I  was  intended,  I
must,  I  suppose,  acquiesce ;  you  are  a  king,  and  justice
and  injustice  are  matters  familiar  to  you.2  But  I  consent  to
the  marriage  on  this  condition  only,  that  I  am  not  to  be  con-
sidered as  a  wife  until  my  husband  has  spent  six  months  in
visiting  holy  bathing-places,  and  returns  home ;  if  this  con-
dition is  not  agreed  to,  know  that  I  will  bite  my  own  tongue
in  two,  and  so  commit  suicide."

When  the   young  man,   disguised   in  female  form,   had

1  Here  the  MS.  in  the  Sanskrit  College  has  mantrinase  mTdanasad  rakshya
dharmakshatir  dhruvam,  which  means,  "  we  should  certainly  try  to  prevent
virtue  from  perishing  by  the  destruction  of  its  root  in  the  destruction  of  the
minister."

2  Read  with  the  D.  text  .  .  .  tavadya  tau,  "...  from  hence  the
righteousness  or  injustice  is  yours." — n.m.p.


46  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

prescribed  this  condition,  the  king  informed  the  minister's  son
of  it,  and  he  was  consoled,  and  accepted  the  terms ;  and  he
quickly  went  through  the  ceremony  of  marriage,  and  placed
in  one  house  Mrigankavati,  his  first  wife,  and  his  second
supposed  wife,  carefully  guarded,  and,  like  a  fool,  went  on  a
pilgrimage  to  holy  bathing-places,  to  please  the  object  of  his
affections.

And  Manahsvamin,  in  female  form,  dwelt  in  the  same
house  with  Mrigankavati,  as  the  partner  of  her  bed  and
board.  And  one  night,  while  he  was  living  there  in  this  way,
Mrigankavati  said  to  him  secretly  in  the  bedchamber,  while
their  attendants  were  sleeping  outside  :  "  My  friend,  I  cannot
sleep  ;  tell  me  some  tale."  When  the  young  man  disguised
in  female  form  heard  this  he  told  her  the  story,  how  in  old
time  a  royal  sage,  named  Ida,  of  the  race  of  the  sun,  assumed,
in  consequence  of  the  curse  of  Gauri,  a  female  form  that
fascinated  the  whole  world,  and  how  he  and  Buddha  fell  in
love  with  one  another  at  first  sight,  meeting  one  another  in
a  shrubbery  in  the  grounds  of  a  temple,  and  were  there  united,
and  how  Pururavas  was  the  fruit  of  that  union.  When  the
artful  creature  had  told  this  story,  he  went  on  to  say  :  "So
by  the  fiat  of  a  deity,  or  by  charms  and  drugs,  a  man  may
sometimes  become  a  woman,  and  vice  versa,  and  in  this  way
even  great  ones  do  sometimes  unite  impelled  by  love."

When  the  tender  fair  one,  who  regretted  her  husband,
who  had  left  her  as  soon  as  the  marriage  had  taken  place,
heard  this,  she  said  to  her  supposed  rival,  in  whom  she  had
come  to  confide  by  living  with  her  :  "  This  story  makes  my
body  tremble,  and  my  heart  as  it  were  sink ;  so  tell  me,
friend,  what  is  the  meaning  of  this  ?  "  When  the  Brahman
disguised  in  female  form  heard  this  he  went  on  to  say  :  "  My
friend,  these  are  violent  symptoms  of  love ;  I  have  felt
them  myself,  I  will  not  conceal  it  from  you."  When  he
said  this,  Mrigankavati  went  on  slowly  to  say  :  "  Friend,  I
love  you  as  my  life,  so  why  should  I  not  say  what  I  think
it  is  time  to  reveal  ?  Could  anyone  by  any  artifice  be  intro-
duced into  this  palace  ?  "  When  the  pupil  of  that  master-
rogue  heard  this,  he  took  her  meaning,  and  said  to  her  :  "If
this  is  the  state  of  affairs,  then  I  have  something  to  tell  you.


THE  RETURN  OF  MCLADEVA


47


I  have  a  boon  from  Vishnu,  by  which  I  can  at  pleasure
become  a  man  during  the  night,  so  I  will  now  become  one
for  your  sake."  So  he  took  the  pill  out  of  his  mouth,  and
displayed  himself  to  her  as  a  handsome  man  in  the  prime
of  youth.  And  so  the  Brahman  lived  with  the  wife  of  the
minister's  son,  becoming  a  woman  in  the  day,  and  resuming
his  male  form  at  night.  But  hearing  in  a  few  days  that  the
son  of  the  minister  was  on  the  point  of  returning,  he  took
the  precaution  of  eloping  with  her  from  that  house  during  the
night.

At  this  point  in  the  story,  it  happened  that  his  teacher,
Muladeva,  heard  all  the  circumstances  ;  so  he  again  assumed
the  form  of  an  old  Brahman,  and  accompanied  by  his  friend
Sasin,  who  had  assumed  the  form  of  a  young  Brahman,  he
went  and  respectfully  said  to  King  Yasahketu  :  "I  have
brought  back  my  son ;  so  give  me  my  daughter-in-law."
Then  the  king,  who  was  afraid  of  being  cursed,  deliberated
and  said  to  him  :  "  Brahman,  I  do  not  know  where  your
daughter-in-law  has  gone,  so  forgive  me ;  as  I  am  in  fault,
I  will  give  you  my  own  daughter  for  your  son."  When  the
king  had  said  this  to  that  prince  of  rogues,  disguised  in  the
form  of  an  old  Brahman,  who  asserted  his  false  claim  with
the  sternness  of  assumed  anger,  he  gave  his  daughter  with
all  due  ceremonies  to  his  friend  Sasin,  who  pretended  to  be  the
supposed  Brahman's  son.  Then  Muladeva  took  the  bride
and  bridegroom,  who  had  been  thus  united,  off  to  his  own
home,  without  showing  any  desire  for  the  king's  wealth.

And  there  Manahsvamin  met  them,  and  a  fierce  dispute
took  place  between  him  and  Sasin  in  the  presence  of  that
Muladeva.  Manahsvamin  said  :  "  This  Sasiprabha  should  be
given  to  me,  for  long  ago,  when  she  was  a  maiden,  I  married
her  by  the  favour  of  the  master."  Sasin  said  :  "  You  fool,
what  have  you  to  do  with  her  ?  She  is  my  wife,  for  her
father  bestowed  her  on  me  in  the  presence  of  the  fire."  So
they  went  on  wrangling  about  the  princess,  whom  they  had
got  hold  of  by  means  of  magic,  and  their  dispute  was  never
decided.


48  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

163g.  King  Trivikramasena  and  the  Mendicant

"  So  tell  me,  King,  to  which  of  the  two  does  that  wife  be-
long ?  Resolve  my  doubt.  The  conditions  of  non-compliance
are  those  which  I  mentioned  before."

When  King  Trivikramasena  was  thus  addressed  by  the
Vetala  on  his  shoulder,  he  gave  him  this  answer :  "I  con-
sider that  the  princess  is  the  lawful  wife  of  Sasin,  since  she
was  openly  given  to  him  by  her  father  in  the  lawful  way.
But  Manahsvamin  married  her  in  an  underhand  way,  like  a
thief,  by  the  gdndharva  rite ;  and  a  thief  has  no  lawful  title
to  the  possessions  of  another."

When  the  Vetala  heard  this  answer  of  the  king's,  he
quickly  left  his  shoulder,  and  went  back  to  his  own  place,
and  the  king  hurried  after  him.


CHAPTER  XC

163g.  King  Trivikramasena  and  the  Mendicant

THEN  King  Trivikramasena  went  back  to  the
simsapd  tree,  and  again  took  the  Vetala  from  it,  and
set  out  with  him  on  his  shoulder ;  and  as  he  was
returning  from  the  tree,  the  Vetala  once  more  said  to  him :
"  Listen,  King,  I  will  tell  you  a  noble  story.


163g  (16).  The  Sacrifice  of  Jimutavahana  l

There  is  in  this  earth  a  great  mountain  named  Himavat,
where  all  jewels  are  found,  which  is  the  origin  of  both  Gauri
and  Ganga,  the  two  goddesses  dear  to  Siva.  Even  heroes
cannot  reach  its  top  2 ;  it  towers  proudly  above  all  other
mountains ;  and  as  such  its  praises  are  sung  in  strains  of
sooth  in  the  three  worlds.  On  the  ridge  of  that  Himavat
there  is  that  city  rightly  named  the  Golden  City,  which
gleams  like  a  mass  of  the  sun's  rays  deposited  by  him  on
earth.

Of  old  there  lived  in  that  splendid  city  a  fortunate  lord
of  the  Vidyadharas,  named  Jlmutaketu,  who  dwelt  there  like
Indra  on  Meru.  In  his  palace  garden  there  was  a  wishing-
tree,  which  was  an  heirloom  in  his  family,  which  was  well
known  as  the  Granter  of  Desires,  and  not  named  so  without
reason.  The  king  supplicated  that  divine  tree,  and  obtained
by  its  favour  a  son,  who  remembered  his  former  birth,  and
was  the  incarnation  of  a  portion  of  a  Bodhisattva.  He  was
a  hero  in  munificence,  of  great  courage,  compassionate  to
all  creatures,  attentive  to  the  instructions  of  his  spiritual
adviser,  and  his  name  was  Jimutavahana.  And  when  he
grew  up  to  manhood,  his  father,  the  king,  made  him  crown
prince,  being  impelled  thereto  by  his  excellent  qualities,  and
the  advice  of  the  ministers.

1  See  the  Appendix,  pp.  233-240. — n.m.p.

2  The  MS.  in  the  Sanskrit  College  reads  surasandrishtaprishlas.
VOL.  vn.  49  D


50  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

And  when  Jimutavahana  was  made  crown  prince,  the
ministers  of  his  father,  desiring  his  welfare,  came  to  him  and
said  :  "  Prince,  you  must  continually  worship  this  wishing-
tree  invincible  by  all  creatures,1  which  grants  all  our  desires.
For,  as  long  as  we  have  this,  not  even  Indra  could  injure  us,
much  less  any  other  enemy."

When  Jimutavahana  heard  this,  he  inly  reflected  :  "  Alas  !
our  predecessors,  though  they  possessed  such  a  divine  tree,
never  obtained  from  it  any  fruit  worthy  of  it ;  some  of  them
asked  it  for  wealth  and  did  nothing  more ;  so  the  mean  creatures
made  themselves  and  this  noble  tree  contemptible.  Well,  I
will  make  it  inserve  a  design  which  I  have  in  my  mind."

After  the  noble  prince  had  formed  this  resolution  he
went  to  his  father,  and  gained  his  good  will  by  paying  him
all  kinds  of  attentions,  and  said  to  him  in  private,  as  he
was  sitting  at  ease  :  "  Father,  you  know  that  in  this  sea
of  mundane  existence,  all  that  we  behold  is  unsubstantial,
fleeting  as  the  twinkling  of  the  wave.  Especially  are  the  twi-
light, the  dawn,  and  fortune  shortlived,  disappearing  as  soon
as  revealed ;  where  and  when  have  they  been  seen  to  abide  ?
Charity  to  one's  neighbour  is  the  only  thing  that  is  perman-
ent in  this  cycle  of  change ;  it  produces  holiness  and  fame
that  bear  witness  for  hundreds  of  Yugas.  So  with  what
object,  father,  do  we  keep  for  ourselves  such  an  unfailing
wishing-tree,  as  all  these  phenomenal  conditions  are  but
momentary  ?  Where,  I  ask,  are  those,  our  predecessors,
who  kept  it  so  strenuously,  exclaiming :  '  It  is  mine,  it  is
mine '  ?  Where  is  it  now  to  them  ?  For  which  of  them
does  it  exist,  and  which  of  them  exists  for  it  ?  So,  if  you
permit,  father,  I  will  employ  this  wishing-tree,  that  grants
all  desires,  for  attaining  the  matchless  fruit  of  charity  to
one's  neighbour."

His  father  gave  him  leave,  saying  :  "  So  be  it !  "  And
Jimutavahana  went  and  said  to  the  wishing-tree  :  "  O  god,
thou  didst  fulfil  all  the  cherished  wishes  of  our  predecessors,
so  fulfil  this  one  solitary  wish  of  mine  !  Enable  me  to  be-
hold this  whole  earth  free  from  poverty ;    depart,  and  good

1  I  adopt  the  reading  of  the  Sanskrit  College  MS.,  adhrisya  for  adhrishya,
invincible,  instead  of  adrisya,  invisible.


THE  KINGDOM  IS  ABANDONED  51

luck  attend  thee  ;  thou  art  bestowed  by  me  on  the  world  that
desires  wealth."  When  Jimutavahana  had  said  this,  with
joined  hands,  a  voice  came  forth  from  the  tree  :  "  Since
thou  hast  relinquished  me,  I  depart."  And  in  a  moment
the  wishing- tree  flew  up  to  heaven,  and  rained  wealth  on  the
earth,  so  plenteously  that  there  was  not  one  poor  man  left
on  it.  Then  the  glory  of  that  Jimutavahana  spread  through
the  three  worlds,  on  account  of  that  ardent  compassion  of  his
for  all  creatures.

That  made  all  his  relations  impatient  with  envy  ;  and
thinking  that  he  and  his  father  would  be  easy  to  conquer,  as
they  were  deprived  of  the  calamity-averting  tree  which  they
had  bestowed  on  the  world,  they  put  their  heads  together  and
formed  a  design,  and  then  girded  on  their  harness  for  war,
to  deprive  Jimutavahana  and  his  father  of  their  realm.

When  Jimutavahana  saw  that,  he  said  to  his  father  :
"  Father,  what  other  has  might,  when  thou  hast  taken  up
arms  ?  But  what  generous  man  desires  to  possess  a  realm,
if  he  must  do  so  by  slaying  his  relations  for  the  sake  of  this
wicked  perishable  body  ?  So  of  what  use  is  sovereignty  to
us  ?  We  will  depart  to  some  other  place,  and  practise  virtue
that  brings  happiness  in  both  worlds.  Let  these  miserable
relations  that  covet  our  kingdom,  joy  their  fill !  "

When  Jimutavahana  said  this,  his  father,  Jimutaketu,
answered  him  :  "  My  son,  I  desire  a  realm  for  your  sake
only  ;  if  you,  being  penetrated  with  compassion,  give  it  up,
of  what  value  is  it  to  me,  who  am  old  ?  "  When  Jimuta-
vahana's  father  agreed  to  his  proposal,  he  went  with  him  and
his  mother  to  the  Malaya  mountain,  abandoning  his  kingdom.
There  he  made  him  a  retreat  in  the  valley  of  a  brook,  the
stream  of  which  was  hidden  by  sandalwood-trees,  and  spent
his  time  in  waiting  on  his  parents.  And  there  he  made  a
friend  of  the  name  of  Mitravasu,  the  son  of  Visvavasu,  the
King  of  the  Siddhas,  who  dwelt  on  that  mountain.

Now,  one  day,  as  Jimutavahana  was  roaming  about,  he
went  into  a  temple  of  the  goddess  Gauri,  that  was  situated
in  a  garden,  in  order  to  worship  in  the  presence  of  the
image.  And  there  he  saw  a  beautiful  maiden,  accompanied
by  her  attendants,  playing  on  the  lyre,  intent  on  pleasing


52  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

the  daughter  of  the  mountain.1  And  the  deer  were  listening
to  the  sweet  sound  of  the  lyre  in  the  musical  performance,
standing  motionless,  as  if  abashed  at  beholding  the  beauty
of  her  eyes.2  She  had  a  black  pupil  in  her  white  eye,  and
it  seemed  as  if  it  strove  to  penetrate  to  the  root  of  her  ear.3
She  was  thin  and  elegant  in  her  waist,  which  appeared  as
if  the  Creator  had  compressed  it  in  his  grasp  when  making
her,  and  deeply  impressed  on  it  the  marks  of  his  fingers
in  the  form  of  wrinkles.4  The  moment  Jimutavahana  saw
that  beauty,  it  seemed  as  if  she  entered  by  his  eyes  and  stole
away  his  heart.  And  when  the  maiden  saw  him,  adorning  the
garden,  producing  longing  and  disturbance  of  soul,  looking
as  if  he  were  the  God  of  Spring  retired  to  the  forest  through
disgust  at  the  burning  up  of  the  body  of  the  God  of  Love,
she  was  overpowered  with  affection,  and  so  bewildered  that
her  lyre,  as  if  it  had  been  a  friend,  became  distracted  and
mute.

Then  Jimutavahana  said  to  an  attendant  of  hers  :  "  What
is  your  friend's  auspicious  name,  and  what  family  does  she
adorn  ?  "  When  the  attendant  heard  that,  she  said  :  "  She
is  the  sister  of  Mitravasu,  and  the  daughter  of  Visvavasu,  the
King  of  the  Siddhas,  and  her  name  is  Malayavatl."  When
she  had  said  this  to  Jimutavahana,  the  discreet  woman
asked  the  son  of  the  hermit,  who  had  come  with  him,  his
name  and  descent,  and  then  she  made  this  brief  remark  to
Malayavatl,  smiling  as  she  spoke  :  "  My  friend,  why  do  you
not  welcome  this  prince  of  the  Vidyadharas  who  has  come
here  ?  For  he  is  a  guest  worthy  of  being  honoured  by  the
whole  world."  When  she  said  this,  that  daughter  of  the
King  of  the  Siddhas  was  silent,  and  her  face  was  cast  down
through  shame.     Then  her  attendant  said  to  Jimutavahana  :

1  I.e.  Parvati  or  Durga.

2  See  Vol.  I,  p.  90,  and  Baring-Gould's  remarks  in  his  Curious  Myths  of
the  Middle  Ages,  new  edition,  "The  Piper  of  Hamelin,"  p.  417  et  seq.  For
numerous  analogues  see  Chauvin,  op.  cit.,  viii,  pp.  155-156. — n.m.p.

3  Here  there  is  an  insipid  pun  about  the  army  of  the  Pandavas  penetrating
by  the  help  of  Arjuna  the  host  of  Karna.  There  seems  to  be  an  allusion  to
Krishna  also.     For  vivikshathn  the  Sanskrit  College  MS.  reads  vimathnatim.

4  Kshemendra's  description  is  much  more  detailed.  See  note  at  the  end
of  the  chapter. — n.m.p.


THE  SICKNESS  OF  SEPARATION  53

"  The  princess  is  bashful,  permit  me  to  show  you  the  proper
courtesy  in  her  place."  So  she  alone  gave  him  a  garland  with
the  arghya.  Jimutavahana,  as  soon  as  the  garland  was  given
to  him,  being  full  of  love,  took  it,  and  threw  it  round  the
neck  of  Malay  avati.  And  she,  looking  at  him  with  loving,
sidelong  looks,  placed,  as  it  were,  a  garland  of  blue  lotuses
on  him.

Thus  they  went  through  a  sort  of  silent  ceremony  of
mutual  election,  and  then  a  maid  came  and  said  to  that
Siddha  maiden  :  "  Princess,  your  mother  desires  your
presence  ;  come  at  once."  When  the  princess  heard  that,
she  withdrew  regretfully  and  reluctantly  from  the  face  of  her
beloved  her  gaze,  that  seemed  to  be  fastened  to  it  with  the
arrows  of  love,  and  managed,  not  without  a  struggle,  to  return
to  her  house.  And  Jimutavahana,  with  his  mind  fixed  on
her,  returned  to  his  hermitage.

And  when  Malayavati  had  seen  her  mother,  she  went  at
once  and  flung  herself  down  on  her  bed,  sick  of  separation
from  her  beloved.  Then  her  eyes  were  clouded,  as  it  were,
by  the  smoke  of  the  fire  of  love  that  burnt  in  her  bosom,  she
shed  floods  of  tears,  and  her  body  was  tortured  with  heat ;
and  though  her  attendants  anointed  her  with  sandalwood
unguent,1  and  fanned  her  with  the  leaves  of  lotuses,  she
could  not  obtain  any  relief  on  the  bed,  in  the  lap  of  her
attendant  or  on  the  ground.  Then  the  day  retired  some-
where with  the  glowing  evening,  and  the  moon  ascending
kissed  the  laughing  forehead  of  the  east,  and  though  urged
on  by  love  she  was  too  bashful  to  send  a  female  messenger
to  her  chosen  one,  or  to  adopt  any  of  the  measures  that
lovers  usually  take ;  but  she  seemed  loth  to  live.  And  she
was  contracted  in  her  heart,  and  she  passed  that  night,  which
the  moon  made  disagreeable  to  her,  like  a  lotus  which  closes
at  night,  and  bewilderment  hung  round  her,  like  a  cloud  of
bees.

And  in  the  meanwhile  Jimutavahana,  who  was  tortured
at  parting  with  her,  though  lying  on  his  bed,  spent  the  night
as  one  who  had  fallen  into  the  hands  of  Kama ;  though  his
glow  of  love  was  of  recent  birth,  a  pallid  hue  began  to  show

1  See  note,  pp.  105-107. — n.m.p.


54  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

itself  in  him  ;  and  though  shame  made  him  dumb,  he  uttered
the  pain  which  love  produced.

Next  morning  he  returned  with  excessive  longing  to  that
temple  of  Gauri  where  he  had  seen  the  daughter  of  the  King
of  the  Siddhas.  And  while  distracted  with  the  fire  of  passion
he  was  being  consoled  by  the  hermit's  son,  who  had  followed
him  there.  Malay avati  also  came  there ;  for,  as  she  could
not  bear  separation,  she  had  secretly  gone  out  alone  into  a
solitary  place  to  abandon  the  body.  And  the  girl,  not  seeing
her  lover,  who  was  separated  from  her  by  a  tree,  thus  prayed,
with  eyes  full  of  tears,  to  the  goddess  Gauri :  "  Goddess,
though  my  devotion  to  thee  has  not  made  Jimutavahana
my  husband  in  this  life,  let  him  be  so  in  my  next  life  !  "  As
soon  as  she  had  said  this,  she  made  a  noose  with  her  upper
garment,  and  fastened  it  to  the  branch  of  the  asokd  tree  in
front  of  the  temple  of  Gauri.  And  she  said :  "  Prince
Jimutavahana,  lord  renowned  over  the  whole  world,  how  is
it  that,  though  thou  art  compassionate,  thou  hast  not
delivered  me  ?  "  When  she  had  said  this,  she  was  proceed-
ing to  fasten  the  noose  round  her  throat,  but  at  that  very
moment  a  voice  spoken  by  the  goddess  came  from  the  air  :
"  Daughter,  do  not  act  recklessly,  for  the  Vidyadhara  prince,
Jimutavahana,  the  future  emperor,  shall  be  thy  husband."

When  the  goddess  said  this,  Jimutavahana  also  heard
it,  and  seeing  his  beloved  he  went  up  to  her,  and  his  friend
accompanied  him.  And  his  friend,  the  hermit's  son,  said  to
the  young  lady  :  "  See,  here  is  that  very  bridegroom  whom
the  goddess  has  in  reality  bestowed  upon  you."  And  Jimuta-
vahana, uttering  many  tender  loving  speeches,  removed  with
his  own  hand  the  noose  from  her  neck.  Then  they  seemed
to  have  experienced,  as  it  were,  a  sudden  shower  of  nectar,
and  Malayavati  remained  with  bashful  eye,  drawing  lines
upon  the  ground.  And  at  that  moment,  one  of  her  com-
panions, who  was  looking  for  her,  suddenly  came  up  to  her,
and  said  in  joyful  accents  :  "  Friend,  you  are  lucky,  and
you  are  blessed  with  good  fortune  in  that  you  have  obtained
the  very  thing  which  you  desired.  For,  this  very  day,  Prince
Mitravasu  said  to  the  great  king  your  father,  in  my  hearing  :
'  Father,  that  Vidyadhara  prince,  Jimutavahana,  the  object


THE  MARRIAGE  FESTIVAL


55


of  the  world's  reverence,  the  bestower  of  the  wishing-tree,
who  has  come  here,  should  be  complimented  by  us,  as  he  is
our  guest ;  and  we  cannot  find  any  other  match  as  good  as
him  ;  so  let  us  pay  him  a  compliment  by  bestowing  on  him
this  pearl  of  maidens,  MalayavatL'  The  king  approved,
saying,  '  So  be  it,'  and  your  brother,  Mitravasu,  has  now  gone
to  the  hermitage  of  the  illustrious  prince  on  this  very  errand.
And  I  know  that  your  marriage  will  take  place  at  once,  so
come  back  to  your  palace,  and  let  this  illustrious  prince  also
return  to  his  dwelling."  When  the  princess's  companion  said
this  to  her,  she  departed  slowly  from  that  place,  rejoicing
and  regretful,  frequently  turning  her  head.

And  Jimutavahana  also  returned  quickly  to  his  hermitage,
and  heard  from  Mitravasu,  who  came  there,  his  commission,
which  fulfilled  all  his  wishes,  and  welcomed  it  with  joy.  And
as  he  remembered  his  former  births,  he  gave  him  an  account
of  one  in  which  Mitravasu  was  his  friend,  and  Mitravasu's
sister  his  wife.1  Then  Mitravasu  was  pleased,  and  informed
the  parents  of  Jimutavahana,  who  were  also  delighted,  and
returned,  to  the  joy  of  his  own  parents,  having  executed  his
mission  successfully.  And  that  very  day  he  took  Jimuta-
vahana to  his  own  house,  and  he  made  preparations  for  the
marriage  festival  with  a  magnificence  worthy  of  his  magic
power,  and  on  that  very  same  auspicious  day  he  celebrated
the  marriage  of  his  sister  to  that  Vidyadhara  prince ;  and
then  Jimutavahana,  having  obtained  the  desire  of  his  heart,
lived  with  his  newly  married  wife,  Malayavati.  And  once  on
a  time,  as  he  was  roaming  about  out  of  curiosity  with  Mitra-
vasu on  that  Malaya  mountain,  he  reached  a  wood  on  the
shore  of  the  sea.  There  he  saw  a  great  many  heaps  of  bones,
and  he  said  to  Mitravasu  :  "  What  creatures  are  these  whose
bones  are  piled  up  here  ?  "  Then  his  brother-in-law,  Mitra-
vasu, said  to  that  compassionate  man :  "  Listen,  I  will  tell
you  the  story  of  this  in  a  few  words.  Long,  long  ago,  Kadru,
the  mother  of  the  snakes,  conquered  Vinata,  the  mother  of
Garuda,  in  a  treacherous  wager,  and  made  her  a  slave.
Through  enmity  caused  thereby,  the  mighty  Garuda,2  though


1  See  Vol.  II,  p.  141. — n.m.p.

2  The  Sanskrit  College  MS.  has  baldd  for  the  ball  of  Brockhaus'  edition.


For


56  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

he  had  delivered  his  mother,  began  to  eat  the  snakes  of  the
sons  of  Kadru.  He  was  thenceforth  continually  in  the  habit
of  entering  Patala,  and  some  he  smote,  some  he  trampled,  and
some  died  of  fright.

"  When  Vasuki,  the  king  of  the  snakes,  saw  that,  he  feared
that  his  race  would  be  annihilated  at  one  fell  swoop,  so  he
supplicated  Garuda,  and  made  a  compact  with  him,  saying  :
4  King  of  birds,  I  will  send  you  one  snake  every  day  to  this
southern  sea  for  your  meal.  But  you  must  by  no  means
enter  Patala,  for  what  advantage  will  you  gain  by  destroying
the  snakes  at  one  blow  ?  '  When  the  king  of  the  snakes  said
this,  the  mighty  Garuda  saw  that  the  proposal  was  to  his
advantage,  and  agreed  to  it.  And  from  that  time  forth  the
king  of  birds  eats  every  day,  on  the  shore  of  the  sea,  a  snake
sent  by  Vasuki.  So  these  are  heaps  of  bones  of  snakes  de-
voured by  Garuda,  that  have  gradually  accumulated  in  course
of  time,  and  come  to  look  like  the  peak  of  a  mountain."

When  Jimutavahana,  that  treasure-house  of  courage
and  compassion,  had  heard,  inly  grieving,  this  story  from  the
mouth  of  Mitravasu,  he  thus  answered  him  :  "  One  cannot
help  grieving  for  King  Vasuki,  who,  like  a  coward,  offers  up
every  day  his  subjects  to  their  enemy  with  his  own  hand.  As
he  has  a  thousand  faces  and  a  thousand  mouths,  why  could
he  not  say  with  one  mouth  to  Garuda  :  '  Eat  me  first '  ?  And
how  could  he  be  so  cowardly  as  to  ask  Garuda  to  destroy
his  race,  and  so  heartless  as  to  be  able  to  listen  continually,
unmoved,  to  the  lamentation  of  the  Naga  women  ?  *  And
to  think  that  Garuda,  though  the  son  of  Kasyapa  and  a  hero,

the  "wager"  see  Vol.  II,  p.   150. For  a  note  on  the  Garuda  bird,  see

Vol.  I,  pp.  103-105.  In  his  review  on  my  first  volume,  in  Journ.  Roy.  As.  Soc,
October  1924,  Mr  R.  P.  Dewhurst  queries  the  statement  that  the  fabulous
bird  becomes  the  eorosh  of  the  Zend  {i.e.  Avestan)  literature,  as  there  is  no
such  word  in  either  of  the  two  Avestan  dictionaries.  Subsequent  correspon-
dence with  Mr  Dewhurst  has  shown  that  the  word  eorosh  (quoted  by  Burton,
Nights,  vol.  vi,  p.  16ft1)  is  probably  due  to  a  combination  of  a  misreading  and
a  misprint,  and  that  it  should  be  chanmrosh  (also  written  chamrosh),  which  is
a  Pahlavi  word  occurring  in  the  Bundehesh  (50-58)  and  in  the  Mainyo  i-Khirad
(lxii,  37),  and  means  a  mythological  bird  which  is  said  to  be  the  chief  of  all
birds,  and  to  sit  on  the  summit  of  Mount  Alburz. — n.m.p.

1  The  Sanskrit  College  MS.  reads  Tarkshyan  nanakranda  nityakarnana
nirghrinam.


THE  YOUTH  AND  HIS  MOTHER      57

and  though  sanctified  by  being  the  bearer  of  Krishna,  should
do  such  an  evil  deed  !  Alas  the  depths  of  delusion  !  "  When
the  noble-hearted  one  had  said  this,  he  formed  this  wish  in
his  heart :  "  May  I  obtain  the  one  essential  object  in  this
world  by  the  sacrifice  of  the  unsubstantial  body  !  May  I
be  so  fortunate  as  to  save  the  life  of  one  friendless  terrified
Naga  by  offering  myself  to  Garuda  !  "

While  Jimutavahana  was  going  through  these  reflections,
a  doorkeeper  came  from  Mitravasu's  father  to  summon  them,
and  Jimutavahana  sent  Mitravasu  home,  saying  to  him  :  "  Go
you  on  first,  I  will  follow."  And  after  he  had  gone,  the  com-
passionate man  roamed  about  alone,  intent  on  effecting
the  object  he  had  in  view ;  and  he  heard  afar  off  a  piteous
sound  of  weeping.  And  he  went  on,  and  saw  near  a  lofty
rocky  slab  a  young  man  of  handsome  appearance  plunged
in  grief :  an  officer  of  some  monarch  seemed  to  have  just
brought  him  and  left  him  there,  and  the  young  man  was
trying  to  induce  by  loving  persuasions  1  an  old  woman,  who
was  weeping  there,  to  return.

And  while  Jimutavahana  was  listening  there  in  secret,
melted  with  pity,  eager  to  know  who  he  could  be,  the  old
woman,  overwhelmed  with  the  weight  of  grief,  began  to  look
again  and  again  at  the  young  man,  and  to  lament  his  hard
lot  in  the  following  words :  "  Alas,  Sankhachuda,  you  that
were  obtained  by  me  by  means  of  a  hundred  pangs  !  Alas,
virtuous  one !  Alas,  son,  the  only  scion  of  our  family,  where
shall  I  behold  you  again  ?  Darling,  when  this  moon  of  your
face  is  withdrawn,  your  father  will  fall  into  the  darkness
of  grief;  and  how  will  he  live  to  old  age?  How  will  your
body,  that  would  suffer  even  from  the  touch  of  the  sun's
rays,  be  able  to  endure  the  agony  of  being  devoured  by
Garuda  ?  How  comes  it  that  providence  and  the  king  of
the  snakes  were  able  to  find  out  you,  the  only  son  of  ill-
starred  me,  though  the  world  of  snakes  is  wide  ?  "  When
she  thus  lamented,  the  young  man,  her  son,  said  to  her  :  "  I
am  afflicted  enough,  as  it  is,  mother ;  why  do  you  afflict  me
more  ?  Return  home ;  this  is  my  last  reverence  to  you,
for  I  know  it  will  soon  be  time  for  Garuda  to  arrive  here."

1  The  Sanskrit  College  MS.  has  sanunayam.


58  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

When  the  old  woman  heard  that,  she  cast  her  sorrowful  eyes
all  round  the  horizon,  and  cried  aloud :  "  I  am  undone ;  who
will  deliver  my  son  ?  "

In  the  meanwhile  Jimutavahana,  that  portion  of  a
Bodhisattva,  having  heard  and  seen  that,  said  to  himself,
being  profoundly  touched  with  pity :  "I  see  this  is  an
unhappy  snake,  of  the  name  of  Sankhachuda,  who  has  now
been  sent  by  King  Vasuki,  to  serve  as  food  for  Garuda.  And
this  is  his  aged  mother,  whose  only  son  he  is,  and  who  had
followed  him  here  out  of  love,  and  is  lamenting  piteously
from  grief.  So,  if  I  cannot  save  this  wretched  Naga  by
offering  up  this  exceedingly  perishable  body,  alas  !  my  birth
will  have  been  void  of  fruit."

When  Jimutavahana  had  gone  through  these  reflections
he  went  joyfully  up  to  the  old  woman,  and  said«  to  her  :
"  Mother,  I  will  deliver  your  son."  When  the  old  woman
heard  that,  she  was  alarmed  and  terrified,  thinking  that
Garuda  had  come,  and  she  cried  out:  "Eat  me,  Garuda;
eat  me!"  Then  Sankhachuda  said  :  "  Mother,  do  not  be
afraid.  This  is  not  Garuda.  There  is  a  great  difference
between  this  being,  who  cheers  one  like  the  moon,  and  the
terrible  Garuda."  When  Sankhachuda  said  this,  Jimuta-
vahana said  :  U  Mother,  I  am  a  Vidyadhara,  come  to  deliver
your  son ;  for  I  will  give  my  body,  disguised  in  clothes,  to  the
hungry  Garuda;  and  do  you  return  home,  taking  your  son
with  you."

When  the  old  woman  heard  that,  she  said  :  "  By  no  means,
for  you  are  my  son  in  a  still  higher  sense,  because  you  have
shown  such  compassion  for  us  at  such  a  time."  When
Jimutavahana  heard  that,  he  replied :  "  You  two  ought
not  to  disappoint  my  wish  in  this  matter."  And  when  he
persistently  urged  this,  Sankhachuda  said  to  him  :  "Of  a
truth,  noble-hearted  man,  you  have  displayed  your  com-
passionate nature,  but  I  cannot  consent  to  save  my  body
at  the  cost  of  yours  ;  for  who  ought  to  save  a  common  stone
by  the  sacrifice  of  a  gem  ?  The  world  is  full  of  people  like
myself,  who  feel  pity  only  for  themselves,  but  people  like
you,  who  are  inclined  to  feel  pity  for  the  whole  world,  are
few  in  number ;   besides,  excellent  man,  I  shall  never  find  it


THE  ROCK  OF  SACRIFICE  59

in  my  heart  to  defile  the  pure  race  of  Sankhapala,  as  a  spot
defiles  the  disk  of  the  moon."

When  Sankhachuda  had  in  these  words  attempted  to
dissuade  him,  he  said  to  his  mother :  "  Mother,  go  back,  and
leave  this  terrible  wilderness.  Do  you  not  see  here  this  rock
of  execution,  smeared  with  the  clotted  gore  of  snakes,  awful  as
the  luxurious  couch  of  death  !  But  I  will  go  to  the  shore
of  the  sea,  and  worship  the  lord  Gokarna,  and  quickly  return,
before  Garuda  comes  here."  When  Sankhachuda  had  said
this,  he  took  a  respectful  leave  of  his  sadly  wailing  mother,
and  went  to  pay  his  devotions  to  Gokarna.

And  Jimutavahana  made  up  his  mind  that,  if  Garuda
arrived  in  the  meantime,  he  would  certainly  be  able  to  carry
out  his  proposed  self-sacrifice  for  the  sake  of  another.  And
while  he  was  thus  reflecting,  he  saw  the  trees  swaying  with
the  wind  of  the  wings  of  the  approaching  king  of  birds,  and
seeming,  as  it  were,  to  utter  a  cry  of  dissuasion.  So  he  came
to  the  conclusion  that  the  moment  of  Garuda's  arrival  was
at  hand ;  and,  determined  to  offer  up  his  life  for  another,  he
ascended  the  rock  of  sacrifice.  And  the  sea,  churned  by
the  wind,  seemed  with  the  eyes  of  its  bright-flashing  jewels
to  be  gazing  in  astonishment  at  his  extraordinary  courage.
Then  Garuda  came  along,  obscuring  the  heaven,  and  swoop-
ing down,  struck  the  great-hearted  hero  with  his  beak,  and
carried  him  off  from  that  slab  of  rock.  And  he  quickly
went  off  with  him  to  a  peak  of  the  Malaya  mountain,  to  eat
him  there ;  and  Jimutavahana 's  crest- jewel  was  torn  from  his
head,  and  drops  of  blood  fell  from  him,  as  he  was  carried
through  the  air.  And  while  Garuda  was  eating  that  moon
of  the  Vidyadhara  race,  he  said  to  himself  :  "  May  my  body
thus  be  offered  in  every  birth  for  the  benefit  of  others,  and
let  me  not  enjoy  heaven  or  liberation,  if  they  are  dissociated
from  the  opportunity  of  benefiting  my  neighbour."  And
while  he  was  saying  this  to  himself,  a  rain  of  flowers  fell
from  heaven.

In  the  meanwhile  his  crest- jewel,  dripping  with  his  blood,
had  fallen  in  front  of  his  wife  Malayavati.  When  she  saw
it,  she  recognised  it  with  much  trepidation  as  her  husband's
crest- jewel,  and  as  she  was  in  the  presence  of  her  father-in-


60  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

law  and  mother-in-law  she  showed  it  them  with  tears.  And
they,  when  they  saw  their  son's  crest-jewel,  were  at  once
beside  themselves  to  think  what  it  could  mean.  Then
King  Jimutaketu  and  Queen  KanakavatI  found  out  by  their
supernatural  powers  of  meditation  the  real  state  of  the  case,
and  proceeded  to  go  quickly  with  their  daughter-in-law  to  the
place  where  Garuda  and  Jimutavahana  were.  In  the  mean-
while Sankhachuda  returned  from  worshipping  Gokarna  and
saw,  to  his  dismay,  that  that  stone  of  sacrifice  was  wet  with
blood.  Then  the  worthy  fellow  exclaimed  with  tears  :  "  Alas,
I  am  undone,  guilty  creature  that  I  am  !  Undoubtedly
that  great-hearted  one,  in  the  fullness  of  his  compassion,
has  given  himself  to  Garuda  in  my  stead.  So  I  will  find
out  to  what  place  the  enemy  has  carried  him  off  in  this
moment.  If  I  find  him  alive,  I  shall  escape  sinking  in  the
mire  of  dishonour."  While  he  said  this,  he  went  following
up  the  track  of  the  drops  of  blood,  that  he  saw  lying  close
to  one  another  on  the  ground.

In  the  meanwhile  Garuda,  who  was  engaged  in  devouring
Jimutavahana,  saw  that  he  was  pleased  ;  so  he  immediately
stopped,  and  said  to  himself :  "  Strange  !  This  must  be
some  matchless  hero ;  for  the  great-hearted  one  rejoices
even  while  I  am  devouring  him,  but  does  not  lose  his  life.
And  on  so  much  of  his  body  as  is  not  lacerated  he  has  all
the  hairs  erect,  as  it  were  a  coat  of  mail ;  and  his  look  is
lovingly  fixed  on  me,  as  if  I  were  his  benefactor.  So  he  can-
not be  a  snake  ;  he  must  be  some  saint ;  I  will  cease  from
devouring  him,  and  question  him."  While  Garuda  was  thus
musing,  Jimutavahana  said  to  him  :  "  King  of  birds,  why
do  you  desist  ?  There  is  flesh  and  blood  in  my  body,  and
you  are  not  satisfied  as  yet,  so  go  on  eating  it."  When  the
king  of  birds  heard  this,  he  asked  him  with  much  astonish-
ment :  "  Great-souled  one,  you  are  not  a  snake,  so  tell  me
who  you  are."  But  Jimutavahana  answered  Garuda:  "In
truth  I  am  a  Naga ;  what  is  the  meaning  of  this  question  of
yours  ?  Do  according  to  your  kind,  for  who  that  is  not  foolish
would  act 1  contrary  to  the  purpose  he  had  undertaken  ?  ':

1  The  Sanskrit  College  MS.  reads  vidadhyad.     This  is  the  reading  which
I  follow  here,  in  preference  to  that  of  Brockhaus.


THE  APPEAL  TO  GAURI  61

While  he  was  giving  this  answer  to  Garuda,  Sankhachuda
came  near,  and  called  out  to  Garuda  from  a  distance :
"  Do  not  do  a  rash  and  criminal  deed,  son  of  Vinata.  What
delusion  is  this  that  possesses  you  ?  He  is  not  a  snake  ;  lo !
I  am  the  snake  designed  for  you."  When  Sankhachtida  had
said  this  he  came  up  quickly,  and  standing  between  those
two,  and  seeing  Garuda  bewildered,  he  went  on  to  say :
"  Why  are  you  perplexed  ;  do  you  not  see  that  I  have  hoods
and  two  tongues  ;  and  do  you  not  observe  the  charming
appearance  of  this  Vidyadhara  ?  "  While  Sankhachuda
was  saying  this,  the  wife  and  parents  of  Jimutavahana  came
there  with  speed.  And  his  parents,  seeing  him  mangled,
immediately  cried  out :  "  Alas,  son  !  Alas,  Jimutavahana  !
Alas,  compassionate  one,  who  have  given  your  life  for  others  !
How  could  you,  son  of  Vinata,  do  this  thoughtless  deed  ?  "

When  Garuda  heard  this,  he  was  grieved,  and  he  said :
"  What !  Have  I  in  my  delusion  eaten  an  incarnation  of  a
Bodhisattva  ?  This  is  that  very  Jimutavahana  who  sacri-
fices his  life  for  others,  the  renown  of  whose  glory  pervades
all  these  three  worlds.  So,  now  that  he  is  dead,  the  time  has
arrived  for  my  wicked  self  to  enter  the  fire.  Does  the  fruit
of  the  poison- tree  of  unrighteousness  ever  ripen  sweet  ?  "
While  Garuda  was  distracted  with  these  reflections,  Jimuta-
vahana, having  beheld  his  family,  fell  down  in  the  agony  of
his  wounds,  and  died.

Then  his  parents,  tortured  with  sorrow,  lamented,  and
Sankhachuda  again  and  again  blamed  his  own  negligence.
But  Jimutavahana's  wife,  Malayavati,  looked  towards  the
heavens,  and  in  accents  choked  with  tears  thus  reproached
the  goddess  Ambika,  who  before  was  pleased  with  her,  and
granted  her  a  boon  :  "At  that  time,  O  goddess  Gauri,  thou
didst  promise  me  that  I  should  have  for  husband  one  destined
to  be  paramount  sovereign  over  all  the  kings  of  the  Vidya-
dharas,  so  how  comes  it  that  thou  hast  falsified  thy  promise
to  me?"  When  she  said  this,  Gauri  became  visible,  and
saying,  "  Daughter,  my  speech  was  not  false,"  she  quickly
sprinkled    Jimutavahana    with    nectar    from    her    pitcher.1

1  Cf.  Waldau's  Bohmische  Marchen,  p.  594,  and  see  Bernhard  Schmidt's
Griechische  Marchen,  p.  106.


62  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

That  made  the  successful  hero  Jimutavahana  at  once  rise
up  more  splendid  than  before,  with  all  his  limbs  free  from
wounds.

He  rose  up,  and  prostrated  himself  before  the  goddess,
and  then  all  prostrated  themselves,  and  the  goddess  said  to
him  :  "  My  son,  I  am  pleased  with  this  sacrifice  of  thy  body,
so  I  now  anoint  thee  with  this  hand  of  mine  emperor  over
the  Vidyadharas,  and  thou  shalt  hold  the  office  for  a  kalpa."
With  these  words  Gauri  sprinkled  Jimutavahana  with  water
from  her  pitcher  and,  after  she  had  been  worshipped,  dis-
appeared. And  thereupon  a  heavenly  rain  of  flowers  fell  on
that  spot,  and  the  drums  of  the  gods  sounded  joyously  in
the  sky.

Then  Garuda,  bending  low,  said  to  Jimutavahana  :
"  Emperor,  I  am  pleased  with  thee,  as  thou  art  an  un-
paralleled hero,  since  thou,  of  soul  matchlessly  generous,
hast  done  this  wonderful  deed,  that  excites  the  astonishment
of  the  three  worlds,  and  is  inscribed  on  the  walls  of  the  egg
of  Brahma.  So  give  me  an  order,  and  receive  from  me
whatever  boon  thou  dost  desire."  When  Garuda  said  this,
the  great-hearted  hero  said  to  him :  "  Thou  must  repent,  and
never  again  devour  the  snakes  ;  and  let  these  snakes,  whom
thou  didst  devour  before,  whose  bones  only  remain,  return
to  life."  Thereupon  Garuda  said  :  "  So  be  it ;  from  this  day
forth  I  will  never  eat  the  snakes  again ;  heaven  forfend  !
As  for  those  that  I  ate  on  former  occasions,  let  them  return
to  life."

Then  all  the  snakes  that  he  had  eaten  before,  whose
bones  alone  remained,  rose  up  unwounded,  restored  to  life  by
the  nectar  of  his  boon.  Then  the  gods,  the  snakes  and  the
hermit  bands  assembled  there  full  of  joy,  and  so  the  Malaya
mountain  earned  the  title  of  the  three  worlds.  And  then  all
the  kings  of  the  Vidyadharas  heard  by  the  favour  of  Gauri
the  strange  story  of  Jimutavahana ;  and  they  immediately
came  and  bowed  at  his  feet,  and  after  he  had  dismissed
Garuda,  they  took  him  to  the  Himalayas,  accompanied  by
his  rejoicing  relations  and  friends,  a  noble  emperor,  whose
great  inauguration  ceremony  had  been  performed  by  Gauri
with  her  own  hands.     There  Jimutavahana,  in  the  society


THE  VETALA'S  QUESTION  63

of  his  mother  and  father,  and  of  Mitravasu  and  Malayavati,
and  of  Sankhachuda,  who  had  gone  to  his  own  house,  and
returned  again,  long  enjoyed  the  dignity  of  emperor  of
the  Vidyadharas,  rich  in  jewels,  which  had  been  gained  by
his  marvellous  and  extraordinarily  heroic  action.


163g.  King  Trivikramasena  and  the  Mendicant

Having  told  this  noble  and  interesting  tale,  the  Vetala
proceeded  to  put  another  question  to  King  Trivikramasena  :
"  So  tell  me,  which  of  those  two  was  superior  in  fortitude,
Sankhachuda  or  Jimutavahana  ?  And  the  conditions  are
those  which  I  mentioned  before."  When  King  Trivikrama-
sena heard  this  question  of  the  Vetala's  he  broke  his  silence,
through  fear  of  a  curse,  and  said,  with  calm  composure  :
"  This  behaviour  was  nowise  astonishing  in  Jimutavahana,
as  he  had  acquired  this  virtue  in  many  births,  but  Sankha-
chuda really  deserves  praise,  for  that,  after  he  had  escaped
death,  he  ran  after  his  enemy  Garuda,  who  had  found  another
self-offered  victim  1  and  had  gone  a  long  distance  with  him,
and  importunately  offered  him  his  body."

When  that  excellent  Vetala  had  heard  this  speech  of  that
king's  he  left  his  shoulder  and  again  went  to  his  own  place,
and  the  king  again  pursued  him  as  before.

1  The  MS.  in  the  Sanskrit  College  reads  any  am  vrittatmanam :  any  am  at
any  rate  must  be  right.


64  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


A  COMPARISON  WITH  KSHEMENDRA

In  the  passage  on  p.  52,  describing  the  beauty  of  Malayavati,  we  have
one  of  the  few  places  where  Kshemendra  is  more  prolix  than  Somadeva.  It
is  a  good  example  of  the  difference  in  purpose  of  the  two  authors.  Somadeva
aims  at  giving  an  exact  copy  of  the  work  before  him,  and  does  not  indulge  in
rhetorical  elaborations  of  his  own  invention  whenever  opportunity  offers.  This,
on  the  other  hand,  is  just  what  Kshemendra  does,  and  whenever  a  chance
occurs  for  expatiating  on  a  woman's  beauty  or  some  rather  arresting  natural
or  unnatural  phenomena,  he  is  unable  to  let  the  opportunity  slip.

In  this  instance  he  takes  twelve  slokas  to  describe  Malayavati's  beauty,
beginning  at  the  soles  of  her  feet  and  ending  with  the  hair  of  her  head.  The
following  translation  has  been  specially  made  by  Dr  L.  D.  Barnett :

Brihatkathamanjari — Slokas  792-803

792.  Hearing  this,  being  attracted  by  curiosity,  he  entered  the  residence  of

the  Mountain's  Daughter  and  beheld  a  lotus-eyed  maiden,  the  quint-
essence of  the  world.

793.  Bright  was  the  pair  of  her  lotus-feet,  coloured  like  buds  of  coral,  as

though  it  had  moisture  clinging  to  it  from  treading  an  ocean  of  passion
[i.e.  raga ;  lit.  red  colour].

794.  The  female  swan  of  beauty  was  brightly  displayed  in  the  pair  of  her

slender  legs,  which  were  like  a  couple  of  young  stalks  in  the  lotus-pool
of  loveliness.

795.  She  bore  hips  which  were  rods  of  the  plantain-tree  for  the  peacock  of

dalliance,  resembling  an  arch  of  lovely  ivory  in  the  city  of  the  God
of  the  Flower-bow,

796.  which  were  a  pair  of  sandbanks  in  the  river  of  beauty,  a  couple  of  litters

for  Rati.     Her  loins  were  Kama's  own  city,  of  which  the  moat  was  her
girdle.

797.  Kama,  when  disturbed  by  the  fire  of  Siva's  wrath,  had  plunged  into  the

eddies  of  the  pool  of  her  navel,  and  was  traceable  there  by  the  smoky
streak  of  its  line  of  hairs.

798.  Because  of  the  buds  of  rays  from  her  brilliant  pearl-necklace  her  breasts

had  become  like  a  pair  of  ruddy  geese  having  sprouts  of  young  lotus-
stalks  stuck  in  their  mouths.

799.  Her  arms,  graceful  as  creepers  on  the  sandal-tree  of  youth,  were  adorned

with  snakes  consisting  of  rays  from  the  sapphires  of  the  bracelets  on
her  upper  and  lower  arms.

800.  By  the  beauties  of  her  lips  the  sylvan  line  of  leaf-buds  created,  as  it  were,

by  Spring,  Kama's  young  son,  became  dusky.

801.  The  crowd  of  her  ogling  glances,  coming  under  the  sunshade  of  her

brow  high  above  the  clear-cut  upright  rod  of  her  nose,  attained  the
nature  of  unboundedly  generous  givers  of  lotuses.


KSHEMENDRA


65


802.  She  bore  a  line  of  curls  like  a  row  of  bees  on  the  lotus  of  her  face.

Seeing  her,  who  was  like  a  eulogy  on  the  king  Good  Fortune  presented
by  Kama,

803.  he  became  engrossed  in  her,  having  his  eyes  staring  with  wonder,  speedily
stirred  to  trembling  by  Kama  in  his  new  incarnation.


VOL.   VII.


CHAPTER  XCI

163g.  King  Trivikramasena  and  the  Mendicant

THEN  the  brave  King  Trivikramasena  went  back
once  more  to  the  simsapd  tree,  and  taking  the  Vetala
from  it,  carried  him  off  on  his  shoulder.  And  when
he  had  set  out,  the  Vetala  said  to  him,  from  his  perch  on  his
shoulder  :  "  Listen,  King ;  to  cheer  your  toil,  I  will  tell  you
the  following  tale.

163g  (17).  The  Beautiful  Unmddini  *

There  was  a  city  of  the  name  2  of  Kanakapura  situated
on  the  bank  of  the  Ganges,  in  which  the  bounds  of  virtue
were  never  transgressed,  and  which  was  inaccessible  to  the
demon  Kali.  In  it  there  was  a  king  rightly  named  Yaso-
dhana,  who,  like  a  rocky  coast,  protected  the  earth  against
the  sea  of  calamity.  When  Destiny  framed  him,  she  seemed
to  blend  together  the  moon  and  the  sun,  for  although  he
delighted  the  world,  the  heat  of  his  valour  was  scorching,
and  the  circle  of  his  territory  never  waned.  This  king  was
unskilled 3  in  slandering  his  neighbour,  but  skilled  in  the
meaning  of  the  Sastras,  he  showed  poverty  in  crime,  not  in
treasure  and  military  force.  His  subjects  sang  of  him  as
one  afraid  only  of  sin,  covetous  only  of  glory,  averse  to  the
wives  of  others,  all  compact  of  valour,  generosity  and  love.

In  that  capital  of  that  sovereign  there  was  a  great
merchant,  and  he  had  an  unmarried  daughter,  named
Unmadini.  Whoever  there  beheld  her  was  at  once  driven
mad  by  the  wealth  of  her  beauty,  which  was  enough  to  be-
wilder even  the  God  of  Love  himself.  And  when  she  attained
womanhood,  her  politic  father,  the  merchant,  went  to  King

1  See  the  Appendix,  pp.  241-244. — n.m.p.

2  The  Sanskrit  College  MS.  reads  prdg  for  nama.

3  The  Sanskrit  College  MS.  gives  mandyam  for  maurkhyaw.

66


PEARL  OF  THE  THREE  WORLDS  67

Yasodhana,  and  said  to  him  :  "  King,  I  have  a  daughter
to  give  in  marriage,  who  is  the  pearl  of  the  three  worlds  ;  I
dare  not  give  her  away  to  anyone  else,  without  informing
your  Majesty.  For  to  your  Majesty  belong  all  the  jewels  on
the  whole  earth,  so  do  me  the  favour  of  accepting  or  rejecting
her."

When  the  king  heard  this  report  from  the  merchant,  he
sent  off,  with  due  politeness,  his  own  Brahmans,  to  see
whether  she  had  auspicious  marks  or  not.  The  Brahmans
went  and  saw  that  matchless  beauty  of  the  three  worlds,
and  were  at  once  troubled  and  amazed ;  but  when  they  had
recovered  their  self-control  they  reflected  :  "  If  the  king  gets
hold  of  this  maiden  the  kingdom  will  be  ruined,  for  his
mind  will  be  thrown  off  its  balance  by  her,  and  he  will  not
regard  his  kingdom ;  so  we  must  not  tell  the  king  that  she
possesses  auspicious  marks."  When  they  had  deliberated
to  this  effect,1  they  went  to  the  king,  and  said  falsely  to
him  :  "  She  has  inauspicious  marks."  Accordingly  the  king
declined  to  take  that  merchant's  daughter  as  his  wife.

Then,  by  the  king's  orders,  the  merchant,  the  father  of  the
maiden  Unmadini,  gave  her  in  marriage  to  the  commander  of
the  king's  forces,  named  Baladhara.  And  she  lived  happily
with  her  husband  in  his  house,  but  she  thought  that  she  had
been  dishonoured  by  the  king's  abandoning  her  on  account
of  her  supposed  inauspicious  marks.

And  as  time  went  on,  the  lion  of  spring  came  to  that
place,  slaying  the  elephant  of  winter,  that,  with  flowering
jasmine  creepers  for  tusks,  had  ravaged  the  thick-clustering
lotuses.  And  it  sported  in  the  wood,  with  luxuriant  clusters
of  flowers  for  mane,  and  with  mango  buds  for  claws.  At  that
season  King  Yasodhana,  mounted  on  an  elephant,  went  out
to  see  the  high  festival  of  spring  in  that  city  of  his.  And  then
a  warning  drum  was  beaten,  to  give  notice  to  all  matrons
to  retire,  as  it  was  apprehended  that  the  sight  of  his  beauty
might  prove  their  ruin.

When  Unmadini  heard  that  drum,  she  showed  herself  to
the  king  on  the  roof  of  her  palace,  to  revenge  the  insult  he
had  offered  her  by  refusing  her.     And  when  the  king  saw

1  The  Sanskrit  College  MS.  gives  mankshu  for  mantram.


68  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

her,  looking  like  a  flame  shooting  up  from  the  fire  of  love,
when  fanned  by  spring  and  the  winds  from  the  Malaya
mountain,  he  was  sorely  troubled.  And  gazing  on  her
beauty,  that  pierced  deep  into  his  heart,  like  a  victorious
dart  of  Kama,  he  immediately  swooned.  His  servants
managed  to  bring  him  round,  and  when  he  had  entered  his
palace  he  found  out  from  them,  by  questioning  them,  that
this  was  the  very  beauty  who  had  been  formerly  offered  to
him,  and  whom  he  had  rejected.  Then  the  king  banished
from  his  realm  those  who  reported  that  she  had  inauspicious
marks,  and  thought  on  her  with  longing,  night  after  night,
saying  to  himself:  "Ah  !  how  dull  of  soul  and  shameless  is
the  moon,  that  he  continues  to  rise,  while  her  spotless  face
is  there,  a  feast  to  the  eyes  of  the  world  !  "  Thinking  thus
in  his  heart,  the  king,  being  slowly  wasted  by  the  smoulder-
ing fire  of  love,  pined  away  day  by  day.  But  through
shame  he  concealed  the  cause  of  his  grief,  and  with  difficulty
was  he  induced  to  tell  it  to  his  confidential  servants,  who
were  led  by  external  signs  to  question  him.  Then  they  said  :
"  Why  fret  yourself  ?  Why  do  you  not  take  her  to  yourself,
as  she  is  at  your  command  ?  "  But  the  righteous  sovereign
would  not  consent  to  follow  their  advice.

Then  Baladhara,  the  commander-in-chief,  heard  the
tidings,  and,  being  truly  devoted  to  him,  he  came  and  flung
himself  at  the  feet  of  his  sovereign,  and  made  the  following
petition  to  him  :  "  King,  you  should  look  upon  this  female
slave  as  your  slave  girl,  not  as  the  wife  of  another;  and  I
bestow  her  freely  upon  you,  so  deign  to  accept  my  wife.  Or
I  will  abandon  her  in  the  temple  here ;  then,  King,  there
will  be  no  sin  in  your  taking  her  to  yourself,  as  there  might
be  if  she  were  a  matron."  When  the  commander-in-chief
persistently  entreated  the  king  to  this  effect,  the  king
answered  him,  with  inward  wrath  :  "  How  could  I,  being  a
king,  do  such  an  unrighteous  deed  ?  If  I  desert  the  path
of  right,  who  will  remain  loyal  to  his  duty  ?  And  how  can
you,  though  devoted  to  me,  urge  me  to  commit  a  crime,  which
will  bring  momentary  pleasure,1  but  cause  great  misery  in  the

1  Duhkhavahe,  the  reading  of  Brockhaus'  edition,  is  obviously  a  misprint
for  sukhavahe,,  which  I  find  in  the  Sanskrit  College  MS.


DEATH,  THE  FINAL  RELEASE  69

next  world  ?  And  if  you  desert  your  lawful  wife  I  shall  not
allow  your  crime  to  go  unpunished,  for  who  in  my  position
could  tolerate  such  an  outrage  on  morality  ?  So  death  is  for
me  the  best  course."  With  these  words  the  king  vetoed
the  proposal  of  the  commander-in-chief,  for  men  of  noble
character  lose  their  lives  sooner  than  abandon  the  path  of
virtue.  And  in  the  same  way  the  resolute-minded  monarch
rejected  the  petition  of  his  citizens,  and  of  the  country  people,
who  assembled,  and  entreated  him  to  the  same  effect.

Accordingly,  the  king's  body  was  gradually  consumed
by  the  fire  of  the  grievous  fever  of  love,  and  only  his  name
and  fame  remained.1  But  the  commander-in-chief  could
not  bear  the  thought  that  the  king's  death  had  been  brought
about  in  this  way,  so  he  entered  the  fire ;  for  the  actions  of
devoted  followers  are  inexplicable.2

163g.  King  Trivikramasena  and  the  Mendicant

When  the  Vetala,  sitting  on  the  shoulder  of  King  Trivi-
kramasena, had  told  this  wonderful  tale,  he  again  said  to
him  :  "So  tell  me,  King,  which  of  these  two  was  superior  in
loyalty,  the  general  or  the  king  ;  and  remember,  the  previous
condition  still  holds."  When  the  Vetala  said  this,  the  king
broke  silence,  and  answered  him  :  "Of  these  two  the  king
was  superior  in  loyalty."  When  the  Vetala  heard  this,  he
said  to  him  reproachfully  :  "  Tell  me,  King,  how  can  you
make  out  that  the  general  was  not  his  superior  ?  For,
though  he  knew  the  charm  of  his  wife's  society  by  long
familiarity,  he  offered  such  a  fascinating  woman  to  the  king
out  of  love  for  him ;  and  when  the  king  was  dead  he  burnt
himself ;  but  the  king  refused  the  offer  of  his  wife  without
knowing  anything  about  her."

When  the  Vetala  said  this  to  the  king,  the  latter  laughed,
and  said :  "  Admitting  the  truth  of  this,  what  is  there  as-
tonishing in  the  fact  that  the  commander-in-chief,  a  man  of

1  May  we  compare  this  king  to  Daphnis,  who  rbv  avrw  avv€  Trucpov  e/xoTa,
kolL  cs  reXos  avvt  fxocpas  ?

2  Cf.  the  behaviour  of  the  followers  of  the  Emperor  Otho,  who  threw
themselves  on  his  pyre,  after  he  had  killed  himself  in  his  tent.


70  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

good  family,  acted  thus  for  his  master's  sake,  out  of  regard
for  him  ?  For  servants  are  bound  to  preserve  their  masters
even  by  the  sacrifice  of  their  lives.  But  kings  are  inflated
with  arrogance,  uncontrollable  as  elephants,  and  when  bent
on  enjoyment  they  snap  as  under  the  chain  of  the  moral  law.
For  their  minds  are  overweening,  and  all  discernment  is
washed  out  of  them  when  the  waters  of  inauguration  are
poured  over  them,  and  is,  as  it  were,  swept  away  by  the
flood.  And  the  breeze  of  the  waving  chowries  fans  away
the  atoms  of  the  sense  of  scripture  taught  them  by  old
men,  as  it  fans  away  flies  and  mosquitoes.  And  the  royal
umbrella  keeps  off  from  them  the  rays  of  truth,  as  well  as
the  rays  of  the  sun ;  and  their  eyes,  smitten  by  the  gale  of
prosperity,  do  not  see  the  right  path.  And  so  even  kings
that  have  conquered  the  world,  like  Nahusha  and  others,  have
had  their  minds  bewildered  by  Mara,  and  have  been  brought
into  calamity.  But  this  king,  though  his  umbrella  was  para-
mount in  the  earth,  was  not  fascinated  by  Unmadini,  fickle
as  the  Goddess  of  Fortune ;  indeed,  sooner  than  set  his  foot
on  the  wrong  path,  he  renounced  his  life  altogether ;  therefore
him  I  consider  the  more  self-controlled  of  the  two."

When  the  Vetala  heard  this  speech  of  the  king's,  he  again
rapidly  quitted  his  shoulder  by  the  might  of  his  delusive
power,  and  returned  to  his  own  place  ;  and  the  king  followed
him  swiftly,  as  before,  to  recover  him  :  for  how  can  great
men  leave  off  in  the  middle  of  an  enterprise  which  they  have
begun,  even  though  it  be  very  difficult  ?


CHAPTER  XCII

163g.  King  Trivikramasena  and  the  Mendicant

THEN   in   that   cemetery,   full  of  flames  of  funeral
pyres,    as  of  demons,   flesh- devouring,   with    lolling
tongues  of  fire,  the  undaunted  King  Trivikramasena
went  back  that  same  night  to  the  simsapd  tree.

And  there  he  unexpectedly  saw  many  corpses  of  similar
appearance  hanging  upon  the  tree,  and  they  all  seemed  to
be  possessed  by  Vetalas.  The  king  said  to  himself :  "  Ah  !
what  is  the  meaning  of  this  ?  Is  this  deluding  Vetala  doing
this  now  in  order  to  waste  time  ?  For  I  do  not  know  which
of  these  many  corpses  here  I  ought  to  take.  If  this  night
shall  pass  away  without  my  accomplishing  my  object  I  will
enter  the  fire,  I  will  not  put  up  with  disgrace."  But  the
Vetala  discovered  the  king's  intention,  and  pleased  with  his
courage  he  withdrew  that  delusion.  Then  the  king  beheld
only  one  Vetala  on  the  tree  in  the  corpse  of  a  man,  and  he
took  it  down,  and  put  it  on  his  shoulder,  and  once  more
started  off  with  it.  And  as  he  trudged  along,  the  Vetala
again  said  to  him  :  "  King,  your  fortitude  is  wonderful ;  so
listen  to  this  my  tale.


163g  (18).  The  Brahman's  Son  who  failed  to  acquire  the

Magic  Power1

There  is  a  city  called  Ujjayini,  inferior  only  to  BhogavatI
and  Amaravati,  which  Siva,  who  was  won  by  the  toilsome
asceticism  of  Gauri,  being  in  love  with  the  matchless  pre-
eminence of  its  excellence,  himself  selected  as  his  habitation.
It  is  full  of  various  enjoyments,  to  be  attained  only  by  dis-
tinguished well-doing ;  in  that  city  stiffness  and  hardness
is  seen  only  in  the  bosoms  of  the  ladies,2  curvature  only  in

1  See  Appendix,  pp.  244-24-9. — n.m.p.

2  See  Vol.  I,  p.  30w2,  31m.—  n.m.p.
71


72  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

their  eyebrows,1  and  fickleness  only  in  their  rolling  eyes  ;
darkness  only  in  the  nights  ;  crookedness  only  in  the  am-
biguous phrases  of  poets  ;  madness  only  in  elephants  ;  and
coldness  only  in  perils,  sandalwood  juice  and  the  moon.

In  that  city  there  was  a  learned  Brahman,  named  Deva-
svamin,  who  had  offered  many  sacrifices,  and  possessed  great
wealth,  and  who  was  highly  honoured  by  the  king,  whose
name  was  Chandraprabha.  In  time  there  was  born  to  that
Brahman  a  son,  named  Chandrasvamin,  and  he,  though  he
had  studied  the  sciences,  was,  when  he  grew  up,  exclusively
devoted  to  the  vice  of  gambling.2  Now  once  on  a  time  that
Brahman's  son,  Chandrasvamin,  entered  a  great  gambling-
hall  to  gamble.  Calamities  seemed  to  be  continually  watch-
ing that  hall  with  tumbling  dice  for  rolling  eyes,  like  the
black  antelope  in  colour,  and  saying  to  themselves  :  "  Whom
shall  we  seize  on  here  ?  "  And  the  hall,  full  of  the  noise  of
the  altercations  of  gamblers,  seemed  to  utter  this  cry  :  "  Who
is  there  whose  wealth  I  could  not  take  away  ?  I  could  im-
poverish even  Kuvera,  the  lord  of  Alaka."  Then  he  entered
the  hall,  and  playing  dice  with  gamblers,  he  lost  his  clothes
and  all,  and  then  he  lost  borrowed  money  in  addition.  And
when  he  was  called  upon  to  pay  that  impossible  sum,  he
could  not  do  it,  so  the  keeper  of  the  gambling-hall  seized
him  and  beat  him  with  sticks.3  And  that  Brahman's  son,
when  beaten  with  sticks  all  over  his  body,  made  himself
motionless  as  a  stone,  and  to  all  appearance  dead,  and
remained  in  that  state.

When  he  had  remained  there  in  that  condition  for  two
or  three  days,  the  proprietor  of  the  gambling  establishment
got  angry,  and  said,  in  the  gambling-hall,  to  the  gamblers
who  frequented  it :  "  This  fellow  has  begun  to  try  on  the
petrifaction  dodge,  so  take  the  spiritless  wretch  and  throw
him  into  some  blind  well ;  but  I  will  give  you  the  money."

1  Bhanga  also  means  defeat.

2  This  vice  was  prevalent  even  in  the  Vedic  age.  See  Zimmer,  Alt-
Indisches  Leben,  pp.  283-287  ;  Muir's  Sanskrit  Texts,  vol.  v,  pp.  425-430.  It
is  well  known  that  the  plot  of  the  Mahabharata  principally  turns  on  this
vice. See  Ocean,  Vol.  II,  pp.  231a1,  232w.— n.m.p.

3  Compare  the  conduct  of  Mathura  in  the  Mrichchhakatika.  For  the
penniless  state  of  the  gambler  see  p.  1 95,  and  Gaal,  Marchen  der  Magyaren,  p.  3.


THE  PASUPATA  ASCETIC


73


When  the  proprietor  said  this  to  the  gamblers  they  took
up  Chandrasvamin,  and  carried  him  to  a  distant  wood,  to  look
for  a  well.  There  an  old  gambler  said  to  the  others  :  "  This
fellow  is  all  but  dead ;  so  what  is  the  good  of  throwing  him
into  a  well  now  ?  So  let  us  leave  him  here,  and  say  that  we
left  him  in  a  well."  All  approved  his  speech,  and  agreed  to
do  as  he  recommended.

Then  the  gamblers  left  Chandrasvamin  there  and  went
their  ways,  and  he  rose  up  and  entered  an  empty  temple  of
Siva  that  stood  near.  There  he  recovered  his  strength  a  little,
and  reflected  in  his  grief :  "  Alas  !  being  over- confiding,  I
have  been  robbed  by  these  gamblers  by  downright  cheating,
so  where  can  I  go  in  this  condition,  naked,  cudgelled  and
begrimed  with  dust  ?  What  would  my  father,  my  relations
or  my  friends  say  of  me,  if  they  saw  me  ?  So  I  will  remain
here  for  the  present,  and  at  night  I  will  go  out,  and  see  how
I  can  make  shift  to  get  food,  to  satisfy  my  hunger."  While
he  was  going  through  these  reflections,  in  hunger  and  naked-
ness, the  sun  abated  his  heat,  and  abandoned  his  garment  the
sky,  and  went  to  the  mountain  of  setting.

Thereupon  there  came  there  a  Pasupata  ascetic,  with  his
body  smeared  with  ashes,  with  matted  hair  and  a  trident,
looking  like  a  second  Siva.  When  he  saw  Chandrasvamin
he  said  to  him  :  "  Who  are  you  ?  "  Thereupon  Chandra-
svamin told  him  his  story,  and  bowed  before  him,  and  the
hermit,  when  he  heard  it,  said  to  him  :  "  You  have  arrived
at  my  hermitage,  as  an  unexpected  guest,  exhausted  with
hunger;  so  rise  up,  bathe  and  take  a  portion  of  the  food
I  have  obtained  by  begging."  When  the  hermit  said  this
to  Chandrasvamin  he  answered  :  "  Reverend  sir,  I  am  a
Brahman  ;   how  can  I  eat  a  part  of  your  alms  ?  "

When  the  hospitable  hermit,  who  possessed  magic  powers,
heard  that,  he  entered  his  hut,  and  called  to  mind  the  science
which  produced  whatever  one  desires,  and  the  science  ap-
peared to  him  when  he  called  it  to  mind,  and  said  :  "  What
shall  I  do  for  you  ?  "  And  he  gave  it  this  order  :  "  Provide
entertainment  for  this  guest."  The  science  answered :  "I
will."  And  then  Chandrasvamin  beheld  a  golden  city  rise
up,  with  a  garden  attached  to  it,  and  full  of  female  attendants.


74  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

And  those  females  came  out  of  that  city,  and  approached
the  astonished  Chandrasvamin,  and  said  to  him :  "  Rise
up,  good  sir;  come,  eat  and  forget  your  fatigue."  Then
they  took  him  inside,  and  made  him  bathe,  and  anointed
him ;  and  they  put  splendid  garments  on  him,  and  took
him  to  another  magnificent  dwelling.  And  there  the  young
man  beheld  a  young  woman  who  seemed  their  chief,  who  was
beautiful  in  all  her  limbs,  and  appeared  to  have  been  made
by  the  Creator  out  of  curiosity  to  see  what  he  could  do.
She  rose  up,  eager  to  welcome  him,  and  made  him  sit
beside  her  on  her  throne  ;  and  he  partook  with  her  of  heavenly
food,  and  ate  with  much  delight  betel-nut,  flavoured  with
five  fruits.

And  next  morning  he  woke  up,  and  saw  only  that  temple
of  Siva  there,  and  neither  that  city,  nor  that  heavenly  lady,
nor  her  attendants.  Then  the  hermit  came  out  of  the  hut,
smiling,  and  asked  him  how  he  had  enjoyed  himself  in  the
night,  and  the  discreet  Chandrasvamin,  in  his  despondency,
said  to  the  hermit :  "  By  your  favour,  reverend  sir,  I  spent
the  night  happily  enough  ;  but  now,  without  that  heavenly
lady,  my  life  will  depart."  When  the  hermit  heard  that,
being  kind-hearted,  he  laughed  and  said  to  him  :  "  Remain
here ;  you  shall  have  exactly  the  same  experiences  this
night  also."  When  the  hermit  said  this,  Chandrasvamin
consented  to  stay,  and  by  the  favour  of  the  hermit  he  was
provided,  by  the  same  means,  with  the  same  enjoyments
every  night.

And  at  last  he  understood  that  this  was  all  produced  by
magic  science,  so,  one  day,  impelled  by  destiny,  he  coaxed
that  mighty  hermit  and  said  to  him  :  "  If,  reverend  sir,  you
really  take  pity  on  me,  who  have  fled  to  you  for  protection,
bestow  on  me  that  science,  whose  power  is  so  great."  When
he  urged  this  request  persistently,  the  hermit  said  to  him  :
"  You  cannot  attain  this  science  ;  for  it  is  attained  under
the  water,  and  while  the  aspirant  is  muttering  spells  under
the  water,  the  science  creates  delusions  to  bewilder  him,  so
that  he  does  not  attain  success.  For  there  he  sees  himself
born  again,  and  a  boy,  and  then  a  youth,  and  then  a  young
man,  and  married,  and  then  he  supposes  that  he  has  a  son.


THE  WATER  CHARM


75


And  he  is  falsely  deluded,  supposing  that  one  person  is  his
friend  and  another  his  enemy,  and  he  does  not  remember
this  birth,  nor  that  he  is  engaged  in  a  magic  rite  for  acquir-
ing science.  But  whoever,  when  he  seems  to  have  reached
twenty-four  years,  is  recalled  to  consciousness  by  the  science
of  his  instructor,  and,  being  firm  of  soul,  remembers  his  real
life,  and  knows  that  all  he  supposes  himself  to  experience  is
the  effect  of  illusion,  and  though  he  is  under  the  influence
of  it  enters  the  fire,  attains  the  science,  and  rising  from  the
water  sees  the  real  truth.  But  if  the  science  is  not  attained
by  the  pupil  on  whom  it  is  bestowed,  it  is  lost  to  the  teacher
also,  on  account  of  its  having  been  communicated  to  an  unfit
person.  You  can  attain  all  the  results  you  desire  by  my
possession  of  the  science  ;  why  do  you  show  this  persistence  ?
Take  care  that  my  power  is  not  lost,  and  that  your  enjoyment
is  not  lost  also."

Though  the  hermit  said  this,  Chandrasvamin  persisted  in
saying  to  him  :  "I  shall  be  able  to  do  all  that  is  required  *  ;
do  not  be  anxious  about  that."  Then  the  hermit  consented
to  give  him  the  science.  What  will  not  good  men  do  for  the
sake  of  those  that  implore  their  aid  ?  Then  the  Pasupata
ascetic  went  to  the  bank  of  the  river,  and  said  to  him  :  "  My
son,  when,  in  repeating  this  charm,  you  behold  that  illusion,
I  will  recall  you  to  consciousness  by  my  magic  power,  and
you  must  enter  the  fire  which  you  will  see  in  your  illusion.
For  I  shall  remain  here  all  the  time  on  the  bank  of  the  river
to  help  you."  When  that  prince  of  ascetics  had  said  this,
being  himself  pure,  he  duly  communicated  that  charm  to
Chandrasvamin,  who  was  purified  and  had  rinsed  his  mouth
with  water.

Then  Chandrasvamin  bowed  low  before  his  teacher,  and
plunged  boldly  into  the  river,  while  he  remained  on  the
bank.  And  while  he  was  repeating  over  that  charm  in
the  water,  he  was  at  once  bewildered  by  its  deluding
power,  and  cheated  into  forgetting  the  whole  of  that  birth.
And  he  imagined  himself  to  be  born  in  his  own  person  in
another  town,  as  the  son  of  a  certain  Brahman,  and  he
slowly  grew  up.     And  in  his  fancy  he  was  invested  with  the

1  I  read  sakshyami,  with  the  Sanskrit  College  MS.


76  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

Brahmanical  thread,  and  studied  the  prescribed  sciences,  and
married  a  wife,  and  was  absorbed  in  the  joys  and  sorrows  of
married  life,  and  in  course  of  time  had  a  son  born  to  him,
and  he  remained  in  that  town  engaged  in  various  pursuits,
enslaved  by  love  for  his  son,  devoted  to  his  wife,  with  his
parents  and  relations.

While  he  was  thus  living  through  in  his  fancy  a  life  other
than  his  real  one,  the  hermit,  his  teacher,  employed  the
charm  whose  office  it  was  to  rouse  him  at  the  proper  season.
He  was  suddenly  awakened  from  his  reverie  by  the  employ-
ment of  that  charm,  and  recollected  himself  and  that  hermit,
and  became  aware  that  all  that  he  was  apparently  going
through  was  magic  illusion,  and  he  became  eager  to  enter
the  fire,  in  order  to  gain  the  fruit  which  was  to  be  attained
by  the  charm  ;  but  he  was  surrounded  by  his  elders,  friends,
superiors  and  relations,  who  all  tried  to  prevent  him.  Still,
though  they  used  all  kinds  of  arguments  to  dissuade  him,
being  desirous  of  heavenly  enjoyment,  he  went  with  his
relations  to  the  bank  of  the  river,  on  which  a  pyre  was  pre-
pared. There  he  saw  his  aged  parents  and  his  wife  ready
to  die  with  grief,  and  his  young  children  crying;  and  in  his
bewilderment  he  said  to  himself  :  "  Alas  !  my  relations  will
all  die  if  I  enter  the  fire,  and  I  do  not  know  if  that  promise
of  my  teacher's  is  true  or  not.  So  shall  I  enter  the  fire  ?  Or
shall  I  not  enter  it  ?  After  all,  how  can  that  promise  of
my  teacher's  be  false,  as  it  is  so  precisely  in  accordance  with
all  that  has  taken  place  ?  So,  I  will  gladly  enter  the  fire."
When  the  Brahman  Chandrasvamin  had  gone  through  these
reflections,  he  entered  the  fire.

And  to  his  astonishment  the  fire  felt  as  cool  to  him  as
snow.  Then  he  rose  up  from  the  water  of  the  river,  the
delusion  having  come  to  an  end,  and  went  to  the  bank.
There  he  saw  his  teacher  on  the  bank,  and  he  prostrated
himself  at  his  feet,  and  when  his  teacher  questioned  him,  he
told  him  all  his  experiences,  ending  with  the  cool  feel  of  the
fire.  Then  his  teacher  said  to  him  :  "  My  son,  I  am  afraid  you
have  made  some  mistake  in  this  incantation,  otherwise  how
can  the  fire  have  become  cool  to  you  ?  This  phenomenon
in  the  process  of  acquiring  this  science  is  unprecedented."


THE  LOST  SCIENCE  77

When  Chandrasvamin  heard  this  remark  of  the  teacher's
he  answered  :  "  Reverend  sir,  I  am  sure  that  I  made  no
mistake."

Then  the  teacher,  in  order  to  know  for  certain,  called
to  mind  that  science,  and  it  did  not  present  itself  to  him  or
his  pupil.  So,  as  both  of  them  had  lost  the  science,  they  left
that  place  despondent.


163g.  King  Trivikramasena  and  the  Mendicant

When  the  Vetala  had  told  this  story,  he  once  more  put
a  question  to  King  Trivikramasena,  after  mentioning  the
same  condition  as  before  :  "  King,  resolve  this  doubt  of
mine ;  tell  me,  why  was  the  science  lost  to  both  of  them,
though  the  incantation  was  performed  in  the  prescribed
way  ?  ':  When  the  brave  king  heard  this  speech  of  the
Vetala's  he  gave  him  this  answer  :  "  I  know,  lord  of  magic,
you  are  bent  on  wasting  my  time  here ;  still  I  will  answer.
A  man  cannot  obtain  success,  even  by  performing  correctly
a  difficult  ceremony,  unless  his  mind  is  firm,  and  abides  in
spotless  courage,  unhesitating  and  pure  from  wavering.  But
in  that  business  the  mind  of  that  spiritless  young  Brahman
wavered,  even  when  roused  by  his  teacher,1  so  his  charm
did  not  attain  success,  and  his  teacher  lost  his  mastery  over
the  charm,  because  he  had  bestowed  it  on  an  undeserving
aspirant."

When  the  king  had  said  this,  the  mighty  Vetala  again
left  his  shoulder  and  went  back  invisible  to  his  own  place,
and  the  king  went  back  to  fetch  him  as  before.

1  Prabodhya  should,  I  think,  be  prabudhya.


CHAPTER  XCIII

163g.  King  Trivikramasena  and  the  Mendicant

THEN  King  Trivikramasena  again  went  and  took
the  Vetala  from  the  simsapd  tree,  and  putting  him
on  his  shoulder  set  out  with  him ;  and  as  he  was
returning  from  the  tree,  the  Vetala  once  more  said  to  him  :
"  Listen,  King.     I  will  tell  you  a  delightful  tale.

163g  (19).  The  Thief  s  Son  1

There  is  a  city  named  Vakrolaka,  equal  to  the  city  of  the
gods  ;  in  it  there  dwelt  a  king  named  Suryaprabha,  equal
to  Indra.  He,  like  Vishnu,  rescued  this  earth,  and  bore  it  a
long  time  on  his  arm,  gladdening  all  men  by  his  frame  ever
ready  to  bear  their  burdens.2  In  the  realm  of  that  king
tears  were  produced  only  by  contact  with  smoke ;  there  was
no  talk  of  death  except  in  the  case  of  the  living  death  of
starved  lovers,  and  the  only  fines  were  the  fine  gold  sticks
in  the  hands  of  his  warders.  He  was  rich  in  all  manner  of
wealth,  and  he  had  only  one  source  of  grief — namely,  that,
though  he  had  many  wives,  no  son  was  born  to  him.

Now,  at  this  point  of  the  story,  there  was  a  merchant,
of  the  name  of  Dhanapala,  in  the  great  city  of  Tamralipti,
the  wealthiest  of  the  wealthy.  And  he  had  born  to  him  one
daughter  only,  and  her  name  was  Dhanavati,  who  was  shown
by  her  beauty  to  be  a  Vidyadhari  fallen  by  a  curse.  When  she
grew  up  to  womanhood,  the  merchant  died ;  and  his  relations
seized  his  property,  as  the  king  did  not  interfere  to  protect  it.3

1  See  Appendix,  pp.  249,  250. — n.m.p.

2  It  also  means,  in  the  case  of  Vishnu,  "  by  his  incarnation  in  the  form
of  a  boar."

3  Both  the  D.  text  and  also  the  corresponding  passage  in  Kshemendra
read  the  contrary  to  the  B.  text — namely,  that  it  was  his  relations,  backed
by  the  king,  who  tried  to  seize  the  wife's  inheritance.  See  Speyer,  op.  cit.,
p.  136. — N.M.P.

78


THE  IMPALED  THIEF


79


Then  the  wife  of  that  merchant,  who  was  named  Hiran-
yavati,  took  her  own  jewels  and  ornaments,  which  she
had  carefully  concealed,  and  left  her  house  secretly  at  the
beginning  of  the  night,  with  her  daughter  DhanavatI,  and
fled,  to  escape  from  her  husband's  relations.  And  with
difficulty  did  she  get  outside  the  town,  leaning  upon  the
hand  of  her  daughter,  for  without  her  was  the  darkness  of
night,  and  within  her  the  darkness  of  grief.  And  as  she  went
along  in  the  thick  darkness  outside  the  town,  it  chanced,  so
fate  would  have  it,  that  she  ran  her  shoulder  against  a  thief
impaled  on  a  stake,  whom  she  did  not  see.  He  was  still
alive,  and  his  pain  being  aggravated  by  the  blow  he  received
from  her  shoulder,  he  said  :  "  Alas  !  who  has  rubbed  salt
into  my  wounds  ?  "  The  merchant's  wife  then  and  there
said  to  him  :  "  Who  are  you  ?  "  He  answered  her  :  "I  am
a  detected  thief  impaled  here,1  and  though  I  am  impaled,
my  breath  has  not  yet  left  my  body,  wicked  man  that  I  am.
So  tell  me,  lady,  who  you  are  and  whither  you  are  going  in
this  manner."  When  the  merchant's  wife  heard  this,  she
told  him  her  story  ;  and  at  that  moment  the  eastern  quarter
adorned  her  face  with  the  outshining  moon,  as  with  a  beauty-
patch.

Then,  all  the  horizon  being  lighted  up,  the  thief  saw  the
merchant's  daughter,  the  maiden  DhanavatI,  and  said  to
her  mother  :  "  Listen  to  one  request  of  mine  :  I  will  give
you  a  thousand  pieces  of  gold  ;  come,  give  me  this  maiden
daughter  of  yours  to  wife."  She  laughed,  and  said  :  "  What
do  you  want  with  her  ?  "  Then  the  thief  replied  :  "I  am
now  as  good  as  dead,  and  I  have  no  son ;  and  you  know,  a
sonless  man  does  not  inherit  the  worlds  of  bliss.  But,  if  you
agree  to  my  proposal,  whatever  son  she  may  give  birth  to
by  my  appointment,  whoever  may  be  his  father,  will  be  the
issue  raised  up  to  me.  This  is  the  reason  why  I  ask  for
her,  but  do  you  accomplish  that  desire  of  mine."  When  the
merchant's  widow  heard  this,  she  consented  to  it  out  of
avarice.  And  she  brought  water  from  somewhere  or  other,
and  poured  it  on  the  hand  of  that  thief,  and  said  :  "I  give
you  this  my  maiden  daughter  in  marriage."

1  There  is  probably  a  pun  in  suchitah.


80  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

He  then  gave  to  her  daughter  the  command  aforesaid,
and  then  said  to  the  merchant's  widow :  "  Go  and  dig  at  the
foot  of  this  banyan-tree,  and  take  the  gold  you  find  there  ;
and  when  I  am  dead,  have  my  body  burned  with  the  usual
ceremonies,  and  throw  my  bones  into  some  sacred  water,
and  go  with  your  daughter  to  the  city  of  Vakrolaka.  There
the  people  are  made  happy  by  good  government  under  King
Suryaprabha,  and  you  will  be  able  to  live  as  you  like,  free
from  anxiety,  as  you  will  not  be  persecuted."  When  the
thief  had  said  this,  being  thirsty  he  drank  some  water  which
she  brought ;  and  his  life  came  to  an  end,  spent  with  the
torture  of  impalement.

Then  the  merchant's  widow  went  and  took  the  gold
from  the  foot  of  the  banyan-tree,  and  went  secretly  with
her  daughter  to  the  house  of  a  friend  of  her  husband's ;  and
while  she  was  there,  she  managed  to  get  that  thief's  body
duly  burned,  and  had  his  bones  thrown  into  sacred  water,
and  all  the  other  rites  performed.  And  the  next  day  she  took
that  concealed  wealth  and  went  off  with  her  daughter,  and
travelling  along  reached  in  course  of  time  that  city  Vakrolaka.
There  she  bought  a  house  from  a  great  merchant  named
Vasudatta,  and  lived  in  it  with  her  daughter,  Dhanavati.

Now  at  that  time  there  lived  in  that  city  a  teacher  of
the  name  of  Vishnusvamin.  And  he  had  a  pupil,  a  very
handsome  Brahman,  of  the  name  of  Manahsvamin.  And
he,  though  he  was  of  high  birth,  and  well  educated,  was  so
enslaved  by  the  passions  of  youth  that  he  fell  in  love  with
a  courtesan  of  the  name  of  Hamsavali.  But  she  demanded  a
fee  of  five  hundred  gold  dinars,  and  he  did  not  possess  this
sum,  so  he  was  in  a  state  of  perpetual  despondency.

And  one  day  that  merchant's  daughter,  Dhanavati,  saw
him  from  the  top  of  her  palace,  such  as  I  have  described,
with  attenuated  but  handsome  frame.  Her  heart  was  cap-
tivated by  his  beauty  ;  so  she  called  to  mind  the  injunction
of  that  thief  her  husband,  and  artfully  said  to  her  mother,
who  was  near  her  :  "  Mother,  behold  the  beauty  and  youth
of  this  young  Brahman,  how  charming  they  are,  raining
nectar  into  the  eyes  of  the  whole  world."  When  that  mer-
chant's widow  heard  this,  she  saw  that  her  daughter  was  in


THE  ABANDONED  CHILD  81

love  with  the  young  Brahman,  and  she  thought  thus  in  her
mind  :  "  My  daughter  is  bound  by  the  orders  of  her  husband
to  choose  some  man,  in  order  to  raise  up  issue  to  her  husband,
so  why  should  she  not  invite  this  one  ?  "  When  she  had
gone  through  these  reflections,  she  entrusted  her  wish  to  a
confidential  maid,  and  sent  her  to  bring  the  Brahman  for  her
daughter.

The  maid  went  and  took  that  Brahman  aside,  and  com-
municated her  mistress's  wish  to  him,  and  that  young  and
dissolute  Brahman  said  to  her  :  "If  they  will  give  me  five
hundred  gold  dinars  for  Hamsavali,  I  will  go  there  for  one
night."  When  he  said  this  to  the  maid,  she  went  and  com-
municated it  to  the  merchant's  widow,  and  she  sent  the
money  to  him  by  her  hand.  When  Manahsvamin  had  re-
ceived the  money,  he  went  with  the  maid  to  the  private
apartments  of  the  widow's  daughter,  Dhanavati,  who  had
been  made  over  to  him.  Then  he  saw  that  expectant  fair
one,  the  ornament  of  the  earth,  as  the  partridge  beholds  the
moonlight,  and  rejoiced  ;  and  after  passing  the  night  there,
he  went  away  secretly  next  morning.

And  Dhanavati,  the  merchant's  daughter,  became  preg-
nant by  him,  and  in  due  time  she  brought  forth  a  son,  whose
auspicious  marks  foreshadowed  his  lofty  destiny.  She  and
her  mother  were  much  pleased  at  the  birth  of  a  son  ;  and
then  Siva  manifested  himself  to  them  in  a  dream  by  night,
and  said  to  them  :  "  Take  this  boy,  as  he  lies  in  his  cradle,
and  leave  him,  with  a  thousand  gold  pieces,  early  in  the
morning,  at  the  door  of  King  Sfiryaprabha.  In  this  way  all
will  turn  out  well."  The  merchant's  widow  and  the  mer-
chant's daughter,  having  received  this  command  from  Siva,
woke  up,  and  told  one  another  their  dream.  And  relying
upon  the  god,  they  took  the  boy  and  the  gold,  and  laid  them
together  at  the  gate  of  King  Suryaprabha's  palace.1

1  So  in  the  legend  of  Pope  Gregory  the  child  is  exposed  with  a  sum  of
gold  at  its  head,  and  a  sum  of  silver  at  its  feet  {English  Gesta,  edited  by
Herrtage,  No.  lxi).  The  story  will  also  be  found  in  Simrock's  Deutsche  Volks-
bilcher,  vol.  xi ;  here  we  have  the  gold  and  silver,  as  in  the  Gesta.  See  also
No.  85  in  Gonzenbach's  Sicilianishe  M'drchen,  with  Dr  Kohler's  notes.  Cf.
Nos.  v  and  vi  in  Prym  and  Socin's  Syrische  M'drchen  for  stories  of  exposed

children  who  attain  wealth  and  power. In  folk-tales  the  u  exposed  child  "  is

VOL.   VII.  p


82  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

In  the  meanwhile  Siva  thus  commanded  in  a  dream  King
Suryaprabha,  who  was  tormented  with  anxiety  to  obtain
a  son  :  "  Rise  up,  King,  somebody  has  placed  at  the  gate  of
your  palace  a  handsome  child  and  some  gold,  take  him  as
he  lies  in  his  cradle."  When  Siva  had  said  this  to  the  king,
he  woke  up  in  the  morning,  and  at  that  moment  the  warders
came  in  and  told  him  the  same,  and  so  he  went  out  him-
self, and  seeing  at  the  gate  of  the  palace  that  boy  with  a
heap  of  gold,  and  observing  that  he  was  of  auspicious  appear-
ance, having  his  hands  and  feet  marked  with  the  line,  the
umbrella,  the  banner  and  other  marks,  he  said,  "  Siva  has
given  me  a  suitable  child,"  and  he  himself  took  him  up  in
his  arms,  and  went  into  the  palace  with  him.  And  he  made
a  feast,  and  gave  away  an  incalculable  amount  of  wealth,  so
that  only  the  word  "  poor  "  was  without  its  proper  wealth
of  signification.  And  King  Suryaprabha  spent  twelve  days  in
music,  and  dancing,  and  other  amusements,  and  then  he  gave
that  son  the  name  of  Chandraprabha.

And  gradually  Prince  Chandraprabha  increased  in  stature
as  well  as  in  excellent  character,  delighting  his  dependents
by  both.  And  in  course  of  time  he  grew  up,  and  became
capable  of  bearing  the  weight  of  the  earth,  winning  over  the
subjects  by  his  courage,  his  generosity,  his  learning  and
other  accomplishments.  And  his  father,  King  Suryaprabha,
seeing  that  he  possessed  these  qualities,  appointed  him  his
successor  in  the  kingdom,  and  being  an  old  man,  and  having
accomplished  all  his  ends  in  life,  he  went  to  Varanasi.  And
while  that  son  of  his,  distinguished  for  policy,  was  ruling  the
earth,  he  abandoned  his  body  at  Varanasi,  in  the  performance
of  severe  asceticism.

And  that  pious  King  Chandraprabha,  hearing  of  the
death  of  his  father,  lamented  for  him,  and  performed  the
usual  ceremonies,  and  then  said  to  his  ministers  :  "  How  can
I  ever  pay  my  debt  to  my  father  ?  However  I  will  make  one
recompense  to  him  with  my  own  hand.     I  will  take  his  bones

usually  set  adrift  on  a  river  by  jealous  relations,  and  subsequently  rises  to  great
prosperity.  For  this  widely  spread  motif  see  Chauvin,  op.  cit.,  vii,  p.  95  el  seq.,
and  Cosquin,  "Le  Lait  de  la  Mere  et  le  Coffre  Flottant/'  Etudes  Folkloriques
pp.  199-264.— n.m.  p.


THE  KING'S  PILGRIMAGE  83

and  duly  fling  them  into  the  Ganges,  and  I  will  go  to  Gaya,
and  offer  an  obsequial  cake  to  all  the  ancestors,  and  I  will
diligently  perform  a  pilgrimage  to  all  sacred  waters,  as  far  as
the  eastern  sea."  When  the  king  said  this,  his  ministers
said  to  him :  "  Your  Majesty,  kings  ought  never  to  do  these
things,  for  sovereignty  has  many  weak  points,  and  cannot
subsist  a  moment  without  being  upheld.  So  you  must  pay
this  debt  to  your  father  by  the  instrumentality  of  another.
What  visiting  of  holy  waters,  other  than  the  doing  of  your
duty,  is  incumbent  upon  you  ?  Kings,  who  are  ever  carefully
guarded,  have  nothing  to  do  with  pilgrimage,  which  is  ex-
posed to  many  dangers."  When  King  Chandraprabha  heard
this  speech  of  his  ministers  he  answered  them  :  "  Away
with  doubts  and  hesitations  !  I  must  certainly  go  for  my
father's  sake;  and  I  must  visit  the  sacred  waters  while  I
am  young  and  strong  enough.  Who  knows  what  will  take
place  hereafter,  for  the  body  perishes  in  a  moment  ?  And  you
must  guard  my  kingdom  until  I  return."  When  the  ministers
heard  this  resolve  of  the  king's  they  remained  silent.  So  the
king  got  ready  all  the  requisites  for  the  journey.

Then,  on  an  auspicious  day,  the  king  bathed,  made  offerings
to  the  fire,  gave  complimentary  presents  to  Brahmans,  and
ascended  a  chariot  to  which  the  horses  were  yoked,  subdued
in  spirit  and  wearing  the  dress  of  an  ascetic,1  and  started
on  his  pilgrimage.  With  difficulty  did  he  induce  the  feudal
chiefs,  the  Rajputs,  the  citizens  and  the  country  people,  who
followed  him  as  far  as  the  frontier,  to  return,  much  against
their  will;  and  so,  throwing  the  burden  of  his  realm  upon
his  ministers,  King  Chandraprabha  set  out  in  the  company  of
his  private  chaplain,  attended  by  Brahmans  in  chariots.  He
was  diverted  by  beholding  various  garbs,  and  hearing  various
languages,  and  by  the  other  distractions  of  travel ;  and  so,
seeing  on  his  way  all  kinds  of  countries,  in  course  of  time  he
reached  the  Ganges.  And  he  gazed  upon  that  river,  which
seemed  with  the  ridges  of  its  waves  to  be  making  a  ladder
for  mortals  to  ascend  into  heaven  by ;  and  which  might  be
said  to  imitate  Ambika,  since  it  sprang  from  the  mountain

1  I  read  with  the  Sanskrit  College  MS.  prayatah  for  prayatah.  The  latter
reading,  however,  gives  a  fair  sense.     In  si.  67  I  read  tishthaty.


84  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

Himavat,  and  playfully  pulled  in  its  course  the  hair  of  Siva,
and  was  worshipped  by  the  divine  Rishis  and  the  Ganas.  So
he  descended  from  his  chariot,  and  bathed  in  that  river,  and
threw  into  it,  in  accordance  with  pious  custom,  the  bones  of
King  Suryaprabha.

And  after  he  had  given  gifts,  and  performed  the  srdddha*
he  ascended  the  chariot,  and  set  out,  and  in  course  of  time
reached  Prayaga,2  celebrated  by  Rishis,  where  the  meeting
streams  of  the  Ganges  and  Yamuna  gleam  for  the  welfare  of
men,  like  the  line  of  flame  and  the  line  of  smoke  of  the  sacri-
ficial butter  blending  together.  There  King  Chandraprabha
fasted,  and  performed,  with  various  pious  actions,  such  as
bathing,  distribution  of  wealth,  and  so  on,  the  solemn  cere-
mony of  the  srdddha,  and  then  he  went  on  to  Varanasi,  which
seemed  by  the  silken  banners  of  its  temples,  tossed  up  and
down  by  gusts  of  wind,  to  cry  out  from  afar  :  "  Come  and
attain  salvation."

In  that  city  he  fasted  for  three  days,  and  then  worshipped
Siva  with  various  meat-offerings,  as  became  his  own  rank,
and  then  set  out  for  Gaya.  As  he  travelled  through  the
woods,  the  trees,  which  were  bent  down  by  the  weight  of  their
fruit,  and  in  which  the  birds  were  sweetly  singing,  seemed  at
every  step  to  be  bowing  before  him  and  praising  him  at  the
same  time  ;  and  the  winds,  throwing  about  the  woodland
flowers,  seemed  to  honour  him  with  posies.  And  so  he
crossed  the  forest  districts  and  reached  the  sacred  hill  of
Gaya.3    And  there  he  duly  performed  a  srdddha,  in  which  he

1  See  Vol.  I,  p.  56711. — n.m.p.

2  The  modern  Allahabad.     See  Vol.  II,  p.  11  On1,  and  Vol.  IV,  p.  l66n\

N.M.P.

3  Literally,  "head  of  Gaya."  When  Gayasura  was  engaged  in  devotion
on  the  hill  Kolahal,  about  thirty  miles  from  Gaya,  Brahma  and  the  other  gods
came  to  him,  and  asked  him  what  object  he  had  in  view.  He  said  that  his
wish  was  that  his  body  might  become  the  holiest  thing  in  the  world,  so  that
all  who  touched  it  might  at  once  obtain  salvation.  The  request  was  granted.
But  Yama  complained  to  Brahma  that  no  one  now  came  to  hell,  so  that  his
position  had  become  a  sinecure.  Thereupon  Brahma,  after  taking  counsel
with  the  other  gods,  went  to  Gayasura,  and  asked  him  to  give  his  body  for
a  place  on  which  to  perform  a  sacrifice.  He  consented.  Then  Brahma  per-
formed his  sacrifice  on  the  body  of  Gayasura,  placed  several  gods  on  it,  and
made  it  immovable.     His  body  now  lies  with  its  head  towards  the  north  and


GAYA,  THE  HOLY


85


bestowed  many  gifts  on  Brahmans,  and  then  he  entered  the
Holy  Wood.  And  while  he  was  offering  the  sacrificial  cake
to  his  father  in  the  well  of  Gaya,  there  rose  out  of  it  three
human  hands  to  take  the  cake.  When  the  king  saw  this,  he
was  bewildered,  and  said  to  his  own  Brahmans  :  "  What  does
this  mean  ?  Into  which  hand  am  I  to  put  the  cake  ?  "  They
said  to  him  :  "  King,  this  hand,  in  which  an  iron  spike  is  seen,
is  certainly  the  hand  of  a  thief ;  and  this  second  hand,  which
holds  a  colander,1  is  the  hand  of  a  Brahman  ;  and  this  third
hand,  which  has  a  ring  and  the  auspicious  marks,  is  the  hand
of  a  king.  So  we  do  not  know  into  which  hand  the  sacrificial
cake  is  to  be  put,  or  what  it  all  means."  When  the  Brahmans
said  this  to  the  king,  he  was  unable  to  arrive  at  any  certain
decision.


163g.  King  Trivikramasena  and  the  Mendicant

When  the  Vetala,  on  the  shoulder  of  the  king,  had  told
this  wonderful  tale,  he  said  to  King  Trivikramasena  :  "  Now
into  whose  hand  should  the  cake  have  been  put  ?    Let  your

its  feet  towards  the  south.  It  is  therefore  called  Gayakshetra.  The  area  of
Gayakshetra  is  ten  square  miles.  The  interior  part  of  Gayakshetra,  about
two  square  miles  in  extent,  is  called  Gayasirah,  or  the  head  of  Gaya.  A  more
usual  form  appears  to  be  Gayasirah,  the  head  of  the  Asura  Gaya.  It  is  a  little
south-west  of  Bishnu  Pad.  The  pilgrims  offer  pindas  there.  The  principal
part  of  Gayasirah  is  called  Gayamukha.  Sraddhas  are  performed  there.
Dharmaranya,  which  I  have  translated  "  Holy  Wood,"  is  a  place  in  the  east
of  Bodh  Gaya,  where  Dharmaraja  performed  a  sacrifice.  Gayakupa,  or  the
well  of  Gaya,  is  in  the  south-west  of  Gayasirah.  Here  pindas  are  offered  to
ancestors  who  have  been  great  sinners.  The  above  note  is  summarised  from
some  remarks  by  Babu  Sheo  Narain  Trivedi,  Deputy  Inspector  of  Schools,
made  for  my  information,  at  the  request  of  W.  Kemble,  Esq.,  C.S.,  Magistrate
of  Gaya.  Pandit  Mahesa  Chandra  Nyayaratna  has  pointed  out  to  me  that
there  is  an  account  of  the  glories  of  Gaya  in  the  Vayu  Purana,  and  another
in  the  Padma  Purana.     [These  agree  pretty  nearly  with  that  given  above.]

See  also  Barth's  Religions  of  India,  p.  278,  note  2. It  would  be  hard  to

overestimate  the  sacredness  of  the  little  village  of  Gaya  in  the  eyes  of
Buddhists.  It  "is  now,"  says  Sir  George  Grierson  (in  a  most  interesting
article,  "Gaya,"  Hastings'  Ency.  Rel.  Eth.,  vol.  vi,  p.  182),  "the  most  holy
spot  on  the  earth  to  something  like  a  hundred  and  forty  millions  of  people."
The  whole  article  should  be  read. — n.m.p.

1  Used  for  filtering  the  soma-juice,  see  Bohtlingk  and  Roth,  s.v.


86  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

Highness  tell  me  that ;  and  remember  the  previous  condition
is  still  binding  on  you."

When  King  Trivikramasena,  who  was  well  versed  in  law,
heard  this  from  the  Vetala,  he  broke  silence,  and  answered
him  :  "  The  sacrificial  cake  should  have  been  placed  in  the
hand  of  the  thief,  for  King  Chandraprabha  was  his  son,
raised  up  to  him  by  his  appointment,  and  he  was  not  the  son
of  either  of  the  other  two.  For  though  the  Brahman  begot
him,  he  cannot  be  considered  his  father,  as  he  sold  himself
for  money  for  that  one  night.  However,  he  might  have  been
considered  the  son  of  King  Stiryaprabha,  because  he  had
the  sacraments  performed  for  him,  and  brought  him  up,  if  the
king  had  not  received  his  wealth  for  this  purpose.  For  the
gold  which  was  placed  at  the  head  of  the  child  in  the  cradle
was  the  price  paid  to  King  Suryaprabha  for  bringing  him
up,  and  other  services.  Accordingly  King  Chandraprabha  was
the  son,  begotten  by  another  man,  of  that  thief,  who  received
his  mother  with  the  pouring  of  water  over  the  hands,  who
gave  the  order  for  his  being  begotten,  and  to  whom  all  that
wealth  belonged  ;  and  he  ought  to  have  placed  the  sacrificial
cake  in  the  thief's  hand ;   this  is  my  opinion."

When  the  king  said  this,  the  Vetala  left  his  shoulder,  and
went  to  his  own  place,  and  King  Trivikramasena  again  went
after  him  to  bring  him  back.


CHAPTER  XCIV

163g.  King  Trivikramasena  and  the  Mendicant

THEN  King  Trivikramasena  went  and  took  down
that  Vetala  from  the  simsapd  tree,  and,  putting  him
on  his  shoulder,  started  off  with  him  again.  And
when  he  had  set  out  in  silence,  the  Vetala  spake  to  him  from
his  shoulder  :  "  King,  what  is  the  meaning  of  this  persistency
of  yours  ?  Go,  enjoy  the  good  of  the  night ;  it  is  not  fitting
that  you  should  carry  me  to  that  wicked  mendicant.  How-
ever, if  you  are  obstinately  bent  on  it,  so  be  it ;  but  listen  to
this  one  story.


163g  (20).  The  Brahman  Boy  who  offered  himself  up  to  save

the  Life  of  the  King  l

There  is  a  city  called  Chitrakuta,2  rightly  so  named,  where
the  established  divisions  of  the  castes  never  step  across  the
strict  line  of  demarcation.  In  it  there  lived  a  king,  named
Chandravaloka,  the  crest- jewel  of  kings,  who  rained  showers
of  nectar  into  the  eyes  of  those  devoted  to  him.  Wise  men
praised  him  as  the  binding-post  of  the  elephant  of  valour,
the  fountain-head  of  generosity  and  the  pleasure-pavilion  of
beauty.  There  was  one  supreme  sorrow  in  the  heart  of  that
young  prince,  that,  though  he  enjoyed  all  kinds  of  prosperity,
he  could  not  obtain  a  suitable  wife.

Now,  one  day,  the  king,  accompanied  by  mounted  at-
tendants, went  out  to  a  great  forest  to  hunt,  in  order  to  dispel
that  sorrow.  There  he  cleft  with  continual  shafts  the  herds
of  wild  swine,  as  the  sun,  shining  in  the  dun  sky,3  disperses
the  darkness  with  his  rays.     Surpassing  Arjuna  in  strength,

1  See  Appendix,  pp.  250-256. — n.m.p.

2  I.e.  wonderful  peak.

3  Here  there  is  probably  a  pun.  The  phrase  may  mean  that  the  king
delighted  in  the  dark  grey  skins  of  the  pigs.

87


88  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

he  made  the  lions,  impetuous  in  fight,  and  terrible  with  their
yellow  manes,  repose  upon  beds  of  arrows.  Like  Indra  in
might,  he  stripped  of  their  wings  l  the  mountain-like
Sarabhas,  and  laid  them  low  with  the  blows  of  his  darts  hard
as  the  thunderbolt.  In  the  ardour  of  the  chase  he  felt  a
longing  to  penetrate  into  the  centre  of  the  wood  alone,  so  he
urged  on  his  horse  with  a  smart  blow  of  his  heel.  The  horse,
being  exceedingly  excited  by  that  blow  of  his  heel,  and  by
a  stroke  of  the  whip,  cared  neither  for  rough  nor  smooth,
but  darting  on  with  a  speed  exceeding  that  of  the  wind,  in
a  moment  traversed  ten  yojanas,  and  carried  the  king,  the
functions  of  whose  senses  were  quite  paralysed,  to  another
forest.

There  the  horse  stopped,  and  the  king,  having  lost  his
bearings,  roamed  about  wearied,  until  he  saw  near  him  a
broad  lake,  which  seemed  to  make  signs  to  him  to  approach
with  its  lotuses,  that,  bent  down  towards  him  and  then
raised  again  by  the  wind,  seemed  like  beckoning  hands.2  So
he  went  up  to  it,  and  relieved  his  horse  by  taking  off  its
saddle  and  letting  it  roll,  and  bathed  and  watered  it,  and
then  tied  it  up  in  the  shade  of  a  tree,  and  gave  it  a  heap  of
grass.  Then  he  bathed  himself,  and  drank  water,  and  so  he
dispelled  his  fatigue,  and  then  he  let  his  eye  wander  hither
and  thither  in  the  delightful  environs  of  the  lake.  And  in
one  part  he  saw,  at  the  foot  of  an  asoka  tree,  a  wonderfully
beautiful  hermit's  daughter,  accompanied  by  her  friend.
She  wore  garlands  of  flowers,  and  a  dress  of  bark,  which
became  her  well.  And  she  looked  exceedingly  charming  on
account  of  the  elegant  way  in  which  her  hair  was  plaited
together  after  the  hermit  fashion.  And  the  king,  who  had
now  fallen  within  the  range  of  the  arrows  of  love,  said  to  him-
self :  "  Who  can  this  be  ?  Can  it  be  Savitri  come  to  bathe
in  the  lake  ?  Or  can  it  be  Gauri,  who  has  slipped  away  from
the  arms  of  Siva,  and  again  betaken  herself  to  asceticism  ?

1  This  alludes  to  Indra's  clipping  with  his  bolts  the  wings  of  the  moun-
tains.    The  Sarabha  is  a  fabulous  eight-legged  animal.     See  Vol.  VI,  p.  Snl.

— N.M.P.

2  The  natives  in  India  beckon  in  this  way. This  is  the  general  practice

not  only  in  India  but  throughout  the  East.     Our  form  of  beckoning  means
"Go  away  !  "  to  the  Eastern.     See  Burton,  Nights,  vol.  vi,  p.  109«2. — n.m.p.


THE  FAIR  INDIVARAPRABHA


89


Or  can  it  be  the  beauty  of  the  moon  that  has  taken  upon
herself  a  vow,  as  the  moon  has  set,  now  that  it  is  day  ?
So  I  had  better  approach  her  quietly  and  find  out."  Having
thus  reflected,  the  king  approached  that  maiden.

But  when  she  saw  him  coming,  her  eyes  were  bewildered
by  his  beauty,  and  her  hand  relaxed  its  grasp  on  the  garland
of  flowers,  which  she  had  before  begun  to  weave,  and  she
said  to  herself :  "  Who  is  this  that  has  found  his  way
into  such  a  wood  as  this  ?  Is  he  a  Siddha  or  a  Vidyadhara  ?
In  truth  his  beauty  might  satisfy  the  eyes  of  the  whole
world."  When  these  thoughts  had  passed  through  her  mind
she  rose  up,  and  modestly  looking  askance  at  him  she  pro-
ceeded to  go  away,  though  her  legs  seemed  to  want  all  power
of  movement,

Then  the  polite  and  dexterous  monarch  approached  her  and
said  :  "  Fair  one,  I  do  not  ask  you  to  welcome  and  entertain
a  person  seen  for  the  first  time,  who  has  come  from  a  dis-
tance, and  desires  no  fruit  other  than  that  of  beholding  you  ;
but  how  is  your  running  away  from  him  to  be  reconciled
with  the  obligations  of  hermit  life  ?  "  When  the  king  said
this,  the  lady's  attendant,  who  was  equally  dexterous,  sat  down
there,  and  entertained  the  king.

Then  the  eager  king  said  to  her,  with  an  affectionate
manner  :  "  Worthy  lady,  what  auspicious  family  is  adorned
by  this  friend  of  yours  ?  What  are  the  ear-nectar-distilling
syllables  of  her  name  ?  And  why  does  she  torture  in  this
wilderness,  with  the  discipline  appropriate  to  ascetics,  her
body,  which  is  soft  as  a  flower  ?  "  When  her  friend  heard
this  speech  of  the  king's  she  answered  :  "  This  is  the  maiden
daughter  of  the  great  hermit  Kanva,  borne  to  him  by  Menaka  ;
she  has  been  brought  up  in  the  hermitage,  and  her  name  is
Indivaraprabha.  She  has  come  here  to  bathe  in  this  lake  by
permission  of  her  father,  and  her  father's  hermitage  is  at  no
great  distance  from  this  place."

When  she  said  this  to  the  king  he  was  delighted,  and  he
mounted  his  horse,  and  set  out  for  the  hermitage  of  the  hermit
Kanva,  with  the  intention  of  asking  him  for  that  daughter
of  his.  He  left  his  horse  outside  the  hermitage,  and  then  he
entered  with  modest  humility  its  enclosure,  which  was  full  of


90  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

hermits  with  matted  hair,  and  coats  of  bark,  thus  resembling
in  appearance  its  trees.  And  in  the  middle  of  it  he  saw  the
hermit  Kanva  surrounded  with  hermits,  delighting  the  eye
with  his  brightness,  like  the  moon  surrounded  with  planets.
So  he  went  up  to  him,  and  worshipped  him,  embracing  his
feet.  The  wise  hermit  entertained  him  and  dispelled  his
fatigue,  and  then  lost  no  time  in  saying  to  him  :  "  My  son
Chandravaloka,  listen  to  the  good  advice  which  I  am  about
to  give  you.  You  know  how  all  living  creatures  in  the  world
fear  death  :  so  why  do  you  slay  without  cause  these  poor
deer  ?  The  Disposer  appointed  the  weapon  of  the  warrior
for  the  protection  of  the  terrified.  So  rule  your  subjects
righteously,  root  up  your  enemies,  and  secure  fleeting  Fortune
and  her  gifts  by  the  warlike  training  of  horse,  and  elephant,
and  so  on.  Enjoy  the  delights  of  rule,  give  gifts,  diffuse  your
fame  through  the  world ;  but  abandon  the  vice  of  hunting,
the  cruel  sport  of  death.  What  is  the  profit  of  that  mis-
chievous hunting,  in  which  slayer,  victim  and  horse  x  are
all  equally  beside  themselves  ?  Have  you  not  heard  what
happened  to  Pandu  ?  "

The  intelligent  King  Chandravaloka  heard  and  accepted
cheerfully  this  advice  of  the  hermit  Kanva,  and  then  answered
him  :  "  Reverend  sir,  I  have  been  instructed  by  you  ;  you
have  done  me  a  great  favour  ;  I  renounce  hunting,  let  living
creatures  be  henceforth  free  from  alarm."  When  the  hermit
heard  that,  he  said  :  "I  am  pleased  with  you  for  thus  grant-
ing security  to  living  creatures  ;  so  choose  whatever  boon
you  desire."  When  the  hermit  said  this,  the  king,  who  knew
his  time,  said  to  him  :  "If  you  are  satisfied  with  me,  then
give  your  daughter  Indivaraprabha."  When  the  king  made
this  request,  the  hermit  bestowed  on  him  his  daughter,  who
had  just  returned  from  bathing,  born  from  an  Apsaras,  a  wife
meet  for  him.  Then  the  wives  of  the  hermits  adorned  her,
and  the  marriage  was  solemnised,  and  King  Chandravaloka
mounted  his  horse  and  set  out  thence  quickly,  taking  with
him  his  wife,  whom  the  ascetics  followed  as  far  as  the  limits
of  the  hermitage  with  gushing  tears.  And  as  he  went  along,
the  sun,  seeing  that  the  action  of  that  day  had  been  pro-

1  The  Sanskrit  College  MS.  reads  vahyasya,  which  I  have  followed.


THE  BRAHMAN  DEMON


91


longed,1  sat  down,  as  if  wearied,  on  the  peak  of  the  mountain
of  setting.  And  in  course  of  time  appeared  the  gazelle-eyed
nymph  of  night,  overflowing  with  love,  veiling  her  shape  in  a
violet  robe  of  darkness.

Just  at  that  moment  the  king  found  on  the  road  an
asvattha  tree,  on  the  bank  of  a  lake,  the  water  of  which  was
transparent  as  a  good  man's  heart.  And  seeing  that  that
spot  was  overshadowed  with  dense  boughs  and  leaves,  and
was  shady  and  grassy,  he  made  up  his  mind  that  he  would
pass  the  night  there.  Then  he  dismounted  from  his  horse,  and
gave  it  grass  and  water,  and  rested  on  the  sandy  bank  of  the
lake,  and  drank  water,  and  cooled  himself  in  the  breeze  ;
and  then  he  lay  down  with  that  hermit's  daughter,  under
that  tree  on  a  bed  of  flowers.  And  at  that  time  the  moon
arose,  and  removing  the  mantle  of  darkness,  seized  and
kissed  the  glowing  face  of  the  East.  And  all  the  quarters  of
the  heaven  were  free  from  darkness,  and  gleamed,  embraced
and  illuminated  by  the  rays  of  the  moon,  so  that  there  was
no  room  for  pride.2  And  so  the  beams  of  the  moon  entered
the  interstices  in  the  bower  of  creepers,  and  lit  up  the  space
round  the  foot  of  the  tree  like  jewel-lamps.

And  the  next  morning  the  king  left  his  bed,  and,  after
the  morning  prayer,  he  made  ready  to  set  out  with  his  wife  to
rejoin  his  army.  And  then  the  moon,  that  had  in  the  night
robbed  the  cheeks  of  the  lotuses  of  their  beauty,  lost  its
brightness,  and  slunk,  as  if  in  fear,  to  the  hollows  of  the
western  mountain ;  for  the  sun,  fiery  red  with  anger,  as  if
desirous  to  slay  it,  lifted  his  curved  sword  in  his  outstretched
fingers.3  At  that  moment  there  suddenly  came  there  a
Brahman  demon,  black  as  soot,  with  hair  yellow  as  the
lightning,  looking  like  a  thunder- cloud.  He  had  made
himself  a  wreath  of  entrails  ;  he  wore  a  sacrificial  cord  of
hair  ;  he  was  gnawing  the  flesh  of  a  man's  head,  and  drinking
blood  out  of  a  skull.     The  monster,  terrible  with  projecting


1  The  Sanskrit   College   MS.   gives  duradhva-gamana-klantam  vikshya  tarn
nripatim  lada  :  "having  seen  that  the  king  was  wearied  with  his  long  journey."

2  The  passage  is  full  of  puns  :  "  darkness  "  means  the  quality  of  darkness
in  the  mind  ;  and  "illuminated  "  means  also  "calmed."

3  There  is  also  an  allusion  to  the  circle  of  the  sun's  rays.


92  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

tusks,  uttered  a  horrible  loud  laugh,  and  vomiting  fire  with
rage,1  menaced  the  king  in  the  following  words :  "  Villain !
know  that  I  am  a  Brahman  demon,  Jvalamukha  by  name,  and
this  asvatiha  tree  my  dwelling  is  not  trespassed  upon  even  by
gods,  but  thou  hast  presumed  to  occupy  and  enjoy  it  with  thy
wife.  So  receive  from  me,  returned  from  my  nightly  wander-
ings, the  fruit  of  thy  presumption.  I,  even  I,  O  wicked  one,
will  tear  out  and  devour  the  heart  of  thee,  whose  mind  love
has  overpowered,  aye,  and  I  will  drink  thy  blood."

When  the  king  heard  this  dreadful  threat,  and  saw  that
his  wife  was  terrified,  knowing  that  the  monster  was  invul-
nerable, he  humbly  said  to  him  in  his  terror  :  "  Pardon  the
sin  which  I  have  ignorantly  committed  against  you,  for  I  am
a  guest  come  to  this  your  hermitage,  imploring  your  protec-
tion. And  I  will  give  you  what  you  desire,  by  bringing  a
human  victim,  whose  flesh  will  glut  your  appetite ;  so  be
appeased,  and  dismiss  your  anger."  When  the  Brahman
demon  heard  this  speech  of  the  king's  he  was  pacified,  and
said  to  himself :  "  So  be  it !  That  will  do."  Then  he  said
to  the  king  :  "I  will  overlook  the  insult  you  have  offered  me
on  the  following  conditions.  You  must  find  a  Brahman  boy,
who,  though  seven  years  old  and  intelligent,  is  of  so  noble
a  character  that  he  is  ready  to  offer  himself  for  your  sake.
And  his  mother  and  father  must  place  him  on  the  earth,
and  hold  him  firmly  by  the  hands  and  feet,  while  he  is  being
sacrificed.  And  when  you  have  found  such  a  human  victim
you  must  yourself  slay  him  with  a  sword-stroke,  and  so
offer  him  up  to  me,  on  the  seventh  day  from  this.  If  you
comply  with  these  conditions,  well  and  good ;  but  if  not,  King,

1  This  is  another  example  of  the  "  unintentional  injuries  "  motif,  which  we
have  already  had  in  No.  27a,  Vol.  II,  p.  147.  To  the  references  given  in  the
note  on  that  page  I  would  add  an  ancient  Egyptian  story  of  the  twelfth
dynasty,  called  by  Maspero  (Popular  Stories  of  the  Ancient  Egypts,  p.  101),  "The
Shipwrecked  Sailor."  After  the  hero  has  satisfied  his  hunger  on  the  island
he  makes  a  fire-lighter,  lights  a  fire,  and  offers  a  burnt-offering  to  the  gods.
Immediately  a  voice  like  thunder  is  heard,  the  earth  trembles,  and  an  enor-
mous serpent  appears.  It  commands  him  to  say  who  has  brought  him  to  the
island.  In  a  note,  Maspero  suggests  that  among  the  plants  collected  for  the
fire  there  may  have  been  some  that  acted  as  a  summons  to  the  genius  loci,
while  he  himself  had  no  intention  of  performing  a  magic  rite. — n.m.p.


THE  GOLDEN  IMAGE  93

I  will  in  a  moment  destroy  you  and  all  your  court."  When
the  king  heard  this,  in  his  terror  he  agreed  at  once  to  the
conditions  proposed,  and  the  Brahman  demon  immediately
disappeared.

Then  King  Chandravaloka  mounted  his  horse,  and  set
out  with  Indivaraprabha  in  quest  of  his  army,  in  a  state
of  the  utmost  despondency.  He  said  to  himself :  "  Alas,
I,  bewildered  by  hunting  and  love,  have  suddenly  incurred
destruction  like  Pandu  1 ;  fool  that  I  am  !  For  whence  can  I
obtain  for  this  Rakshasa  a  victim  such  as  he  has  described  ?
So  I  will  go  in  the  meantime  to  my  own  town,  and  see  what
will  happen."  While  thus  reflecting,  he  met  his  own  army,
that  had  come  in  search  of  him,  and  with  that  and  his  wife
he  entered  his  city  of  Chitrakuta.  Then  the  whole  kingdom
rejoiced,  when  they  saw  that  he  had  obtained  a  suitable
wife,  but  the  king  passed  the  rest  of  the  day  in  suppressed
sorrow.

The  next  day  he  communicated  to  his  ministers  in  secret
all  that  had  taken  place,  and  a  discreet  minister  among  them
said  to  him  :  "  Do  not  be  downcast,  King,  for  I  will  search
for  and  bring  you  such  a  victim,  for  the  earth  contains  many
marvels."

When  the  minister  had  consoled  the  king  in  these  words,
he  had  made  with  the  utmost  rapidity  a  golden  image  of  a
seven-years-old  child,  and  he  adorned  its  ears  with  jewels,
and  placed  it  on  a  chariot,2  and  had  it  carried  about  in  the
towns,  villages  and  stations  of  herdsmen.  And  while  that
image  of  a  child  was  being  carried  about,  the  minister  had
the  following  proclamation  continually  made  in  front  of  it,
with  beat  of  drum  :  "  If  a  Brahman  boy  of  seven  years  old
will  willingly  offer  himself  to  a  Brahman  demon  for  the  good
of  the  community,  and  if  his  mother  and  father  will  permit
the  brave  boy  to  offer  himself,  and  will  hold  his  hands
and  feet  while  he  is  being  slain,  the  king  will  give  to  that
boy,  who  is  so  eager  to  benefit  his  parents  as  to  comply  with

1  See  Vol.  II,  pp.  126,  127.

2  The  B.  text  has  a  corrupted  reading.  For  karne  ratharpitam  it  has  karnl-
ratharpitam ;  thus  we  must  translate  ".  .  .  and  dressed  it  with  ornaments,  then
he  placed  it  in  a  palankeen  .  .  ."     See  Speyer,  op.  cit.,  pp.  136,  137. — n.m.p.


94  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

these  conditions,  this  image  of  gold  and  gems,  together  with
a  hundred  villages."

Now  it  happened  that  a  certain  seven-years-old  Brahman
boy,  living  on  a  royal  grant  to  Brahmans,  who  was  of  great
courage  and  admirable  character,  heard  this  proclamation.
Even  in  his  childhood  this  boy  had  always  taken  pleasure  in
benefiting  his  fellow-men,  as  he  had  practised  that  virtue  in
a  former  life  ;  in  fact,  he  seemed  like  the  ripe  result  of  the
merits  of  the  king's  subjects  incarnate  in  bodily  form.  So  he
came  and  said  to  the  men  who  were  making  this  proclama-
tion :  "I  will  offer  myself  up  for  your  good  ;  but  first,  I  will
go  and  inform  my  parents;  then  I  will  return  to  you."
When  he  said  this  to  them  they  were  delighted,  and  they
let  him  go.  So  he  went  home,  and  folding  his  hands  in  an
attitude  of  supplication,  he  said  to  his  parents  :  "I  wish  to
offer  for  the  good  of  the  community  this  perishable  body  of
mine  ;  so  permit  me  to  do  so,  and  put  an  end  to  your  poverty.
For  if  I  do  so,  the  king  will  give  me  this  image  of  myself,
made  of  gold  and  gems,  together  with  a  hundred  villages,
and  on  receiving  them  I  will  make  them  over  to  you.  In
this  way  I  shall  pay  my  debt  to  you,  and  at  the  same  time
benefit  my  fellow-men ;  and  your  poverty  will  be  at  an  end
and  you  will  have  many  sons  to  replace  me."

As  soon  as  he  had  said  this,  his  parents  answered  him  :
"  What  is  this  that  you  say,  son  ?  Are  you  distracted  with
wind  ?  Or  are  you  planet-struck  ?  Unless  you  are  one  of
these,  how  could  you  talk  in  this  wild  way  ?  Who  would
cause  his  son's  death  for  the  sake  of  wealth  ?  What  child
would  sacrifice  its  body  ?  "  When  the  boy  heard  this  speech
of  his  parents  he  rejoined  :  "I  do  not  speak  from  a  dis-
ordered intellect ;  hear  my  speech,  which  is  full  of  sense.
This  body,  which  is  full  of  indescribable  impurities,  which  is
loathsome  by  its  very  birth,  and  the  abode  of  pain,  will  soon
perish  1  anyhow.  So  wise  men  say  that  the  only  solid  and
permanent  thing  in  a  fleeting  universe  is  that  merit  which  is
acquired  by  means  of  this  very  frail  and  perishable  body.2
And  what  greater  merit  can  there  be  than  the  benefiting  of

1  Vinasyaiva  should  be  vinasyeva.

2  I  follow  the  Sanskrit  College  MS.,  which  reads  etenatyasarena.


THE  VICTIM  IS  FOUND  !


95


all  creatures  ?  So,  if  I  do  not  show  devotion  to  my  parents,
what  fruit  shall  I  reap  from  my  body  ?  "  By  this  speech,
and  others  of  the  same  kind,  the  resolute  boy  induced  his
weeping  parents  to  consent  to  his  wish.  And  he  went  to  the
king's  servants,  and  obtained  from  them  that  golden  image,
together  with  a  grant  of  a  hundred  villages,  and  gave  them  to
his  parents.  Then  he  made  the  king's  servants  precede  him,
and  went  quickly,  accompanied  by  his  parents,  to  the  king  in
Chitrakuta.

Then  King  Chandravaloka,  beholding  arrived  the  boy,
whose  courage  x  was  so  perfect,  and  who  thus  resembled  a
bright  protecting  talisman,  was  exceedingly  delighted.  So  he
had  him  adorned  with  garlands,  and  anointed  with  unguents,
and,  putting  him  on  the  back  of  an  elephant,  he  took  him  with
his  parents  to  the  abode  of  the  Brahman  demon.

Then  the  chaplain  drew  a  circle  2  near  the  asvattha  tree,
and  performed  the  requisite  rites,  and  made  an  oblation  to
the  fire.  And  then  the  Brahman  demon,  Jvalamukha,  ap-
peared, uttering  a  loud  laugh,  and  reciting  the  Vedas.  His
appearance  was  very  terrible  ;  he  was  drunk  with  a  full
draught  of  blood,  yawning,  and  panting  frequently  ;  his  eyes
blazed,  and  he  darkened  the  whole  horizon  with  the  shadow
of  his  body.  Then  King  Chandravaloka,  beholding  him,
bent  before  him,  and  said  :  "  Adorable  one,  I  have  brought
you  this  human  sacrifice,  and  it  is  now  the  seventh  day,
gentle  sir,  since  I  promised  it  you  ;  so  be  propitious,  receive
this  sacrifice,  as  is  due."  When  the  king  made  this  request,
the  Brahman  demon  looked  at  the  Brahman  boy,  licking  the
corners  of  his  mouth  with  his  tongue.3

At  that  moment  the  noble  boy,  in  his  joy,  said  to  himself  :
"  Let  not  the  merit  which  I  acquire  by  this  sacrifice  of  my
body  gain  for  me  heaven,  or  even  a  salvation  which  involves
no  benefits  to  others,  but  may  I  be  privileged  to  offer  up  my
body  for  the  benefit  of  others  in  birth  after  birth  !  "  While  he
was  forming  this  aspiration,  the  heaven  was  suddenly  filled
with  the  chariots  of  the  heavenly  host,  who  rained  flowers.

1  Tejas  means  "courage/'  and  also  "brightness."

2  See  Vol.  IV,  p.  98w4  and  Vol.  Ill,  p.  201  et.  seq.—K.M.P.

3  Asrikkanim  is  probably  a  misprint  for  srikkcmim.


96  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

Then  the  boy  was  placed  in  front  of  the  Brahman  demon,
and  his  mother  took  hold  of  his  hands  and  his  father  of
his  feet.  Then  the  king  drew  his  sword,  and  prepared  to
slay  him  ;  but  at  that  moment  the  child  laughed  so  loudly
that  all  there,  the  Brahman  demon  included,  abandoned  the
occupation  in  which  they  were  engaged,  and  in  their  astonish-
ment put  their  palms  together  and,  bowing,  looked  at  his  face.


163g.  King  Trivikramasena  and  the  Mendicant

When  the  Vetala  had  told  this  entertaining  and  romantic
tale,  he  once  more  put  a  question  to  King  Trivikramasena  :
"  So  tell  me,  King,  what  was  the  reason  that  the  boy  laughed
in  such  an  awful  moment  as  that  of  his  own  death  ?  I  feel
great  curiosity  to  know  it ;  so,  if  you  know,  and  do  not  tell
me,  your  head  shall  split  into  a  hundred  pieces."   -

When  the  king  heard  this  from  the  Vetala,  he  answered
him  :  "  Hear  what  was  the  meaning  of  that  child's  laugh.  It
is  well  known  that  a  weak  creature,  when  danger  comes  upon
it,  calls  upon  its  father  or  mother  to  save  its  life.  And  if  its
father  and  mother  be  gone,  it  invokes  the  protection  of  the
king,  who  is  appointed  to  succour  the  afflicted,  and  if  it  cannot
obtain  the  aid  of  the  king,  it  calls  upon  the  deity  under  whose
special  protection  it  is.  Now,  in  the  case  of  that  child,  all
those  were  present,  and  all  behaved  in  exactly  the  opposite
manner  to  what  might  have  been  expected  of  them.  The
child's  parents  held  its  hands  and  feet  out  of  greed  of  gain,
and  the  king  was  eager  to  slay  it  to  save  his  own  life,  and  the
Brahman  demon,  its  protecting  deity,  was  ready  to  devour  it.
The  child  said  to  itself :  '  To  think  that  these  should  be  thus
deluded,  being  led  so  much  astray  for  the  sake  of  the  body,
which  is  perishable,  loathsome  within,  and  full  of  pain  and
disease !  Why  should  they  have  such  a  strange  longing  for
the  continuance  of  the  body,  in  a  world  in  which  Brahma,
Indra,  Vishnu,  Siva,  and  the  other  gods,  must  certainly
perish.'  Accordingly  the  Brahman  boy  laughed  out  of  joy
and  wonder,  joy  at  feeling  that  he  had  accomplished  his
object,  and  wonder  at  beholding  the  marvellous  strangeness
of  their  delusion."


THE  VETALA  IS  CAUGHT  AGAIN  97

When  the  king  had  said  this  he  ceased,  and  the  Vetala
immediately  left  his  shoulder  and  went  back  to  his  own
place,  disappearing  by  his  magic  power.  But  the  king,
without  hesitating  a  moment,  rapidly  pursued  him  :  the
hearts  of  great  men,  as  of  great  seas,  are  firm  and  unshaken.


VOL.   VII.


CHAPTER  XCV

163g.  King  Trivikramasena  and  the  Mendicant

THEN  King  Trivikramasena  again  went  and  took  the
Vetala  from  the  simsapd  tree,  and  carried  him  along
on  his  shoulder.  And  as  he  was  going  along,  the
Vetala  again  said  to  the  king :  "  Listen,  King,  I  will  tell  you
a  story  of  violent  attachment.

163g  (21).  Anangamanjari,  her  Husband  Manivarman
and  the  Brahman  Kamaldkara 1

There  is  a  city  called  Visala,  which  is  like  a  second  city  of
Indra,  made  by  the  Creator  on  earth,  for  the  sake  of  virtuous
people  who  have  fallen  from  heaven.  In  it  there  lived  a
fortunate  king,  named  Padmanabha,  who  was  a  source  to
good  men,  and  excelled  King  Bali.2  In  the  reign  of  that  king
there  lived  in  that  city  a  great  merchant,  named  Arthadatta,
who  surpassed  in  opulence  the  God  of  Wealth.  And  to  him
there  was  born  a  daughter  named  Anangamanjari,  who  was
exhibited  on  earth  by  the  Creator  as  a  likeness  of  a  heavenly
nymph.  And  that  merchant  gave  her  to  the  son  of  a  dis-
tinguished merchant  dwelling  in  Tamralipti,  and  named
Manivarman.  But  as  he  was  very  fond  of  his  daughter
Anangamanjari,  because  she  was  his  only  child,  he  would  not
let  her  leave  his  house,  but  kept  her  there  with  her  husband.
But  Anangamanjari's  husband  Manivarman  was  as  distaste-
ful to  her  as  a  biting  bitter  medicine  to  a  sick  man.  But
that  lovely  one  was  dearer  than  life  to  her  husband,  as  wealth
hardly  won  and  long  hoarded  is  to  a  miser.

Now  once  on  a  time  that  Manivarman,  longing  to  see  his

1  See  Appendix,  pp.  256-258. — n.m.p.

2  Tawney  seems  not  to  have  appreciated  the  punning  comparison  to
Vishnu,  his  weapons  and  defeat  of  Bali,  that  runs  through  this  sentence.  See
further  Speyer,  op.  cit.,  p.  137. — n.m.p.

98


THE  DARTS  OF  KAMA  99

parents,  went  to  his  home  in  Tamralipti  to  visit  them.  After
some  days  had  passed,  the  hot  season  descended  upon  the
land,  impeding  the  journey  of  men  absent  from  home  with
the  sharp  shafts  of  the  sun's  rays.  The  winds  blew  laden
with  the  fragrance  of  the  jasmine  and  trumpet-flower,  and
seemed  like  the  hot 1  sighs  of  the  cardinal  points  on  account
of  the  departure  of  spring.  Lines  of  dust  raised  by  the  wind
flew  up  to  heaven,  like  messengers  sent  by  the  heated  earth
to  hasten  the  approach  of  the  clouds.  The  days  passed
slowly,  like  travellers  exhausted  by  the  severe  heat,  and
longing  for  the  shade  of  the  trees.  The  nights,  pale-gleaming
with  moonbeams,  became  exceedingly 2  reduced  owing  to  the
loss  of  the  spring  with  all  its  happy  meetings.

One  day  in  that  season,  that  merchant's  daughter
Anangamanjari  was  sitting  with  her  intimate  friend  in  a  lofty
window  of  her  house,  white  with  sandalwood  ointment,3  and
elegantly  dressed  in  a  thin  garment  of  silk.  While  there,  she
saw  a  young  Brahman,  named  Kamalakara,  the  son  of  the
king's  chaplain,  passing  by,  and  he  looked  like  the  God  of
Love,  risen  from  his  ashes,  going  to  find  Rati.  And  when
Kamalakara  saw  that  lovely  one  overhead,  like  the  orb
of  the  moon,4  he  was  full  of  joy,  and  became  like  a  cluster
of  kumuda  flowers.  The  sight  of  those  two  young  persons
became  to  one  another,  by  the  mighty  command  of  Kama,  a
priceless  6  fascination  of  the  mind.  And  the  two  were  over-
come by  passion,  which  rooted  up  their  modesty,  and  carried
away  by  a  storm  of  love-frenzy,  which  flung  their  minds  to
a  distance.  And  Kamalakara's  companion,  as  soon  as  he  saw
that  his  friend  was  love-smitten,  dragged  him  off,  though
with  difficulty,  to  his  own  house.

As  for  Anangamanjari,  she  inquired  what  his  name  was,
and,  having  no  will  of  her  own,  slowly  entered  the  house  with
that  confidante  of  hers.  There  she  was  grievously  afflicted
with  the  fever  of  love,  and  thinking  on  her  beloved,  she

1  Ushma  should  probably  be  ushna.

2  In  the  Sanskrit  College  MS.  ati  is  inserted  before  durbalatam.

3  See  note  at  the  end  of  the  chapter.— n.m.p.

4  The  moon  is  the  patron  of  the  kumuda ;  the  sun  of  the  kamala,  or  lotus.
Kamalakara  means  a  collection  of  kamalas.

5  The  Sanskrit  College  MS.  reads  achurnam — "without  powder."


100  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

rolled  on  the  bed,  and  neither  saw  nor  heard  anything.
After  two  or  three  days  had  passed,  being  ashamed  and
afraid,  unable  to  bear  the  misery  of  separation,  thin  and  pale,
and  despairing  of  union  with  her  beloved,  which  seemed  a
thing  impossible,  she  determined  on  suicide.  So  one  night,
when  her  attendants  were  asleep,  she  went  out,  drawn,  as  it
were,  by  the  moon,  which  sent  its  rays  through  the  window
like  fingers,  and  made  for  a  tank  at  the  foot  of  a  tree  in  her
own  garden.  There  she  approached  an  image  of  the  goddess
Chandi,  her  family  deity,  that  had  been  set  up  with  much
magnificence  by  her  father,  and  she  bowed  before  the  goddess,
and  praised  her,  and  said  :  "  Though  I  have  not  obtained
Kamalakara  for  a  husband  in  this  life,  let  him  be  my  husband
in  a  future  birth  !  "  When  the  impassioned  woman  had
uttered  these  words  in  front  of  the  goddess,  she  made  a  noose
with  her  upper  garment,  and  fastened  it  to  an  asoka  tree.

In  the  meanwhile  it  happened  that  her  confidante,  who
was  sleeping  in  the  same  room,  woke  up,  and  not  seeing  her
there,  went  to  the  garden  to  look  for  her.  And  seeing  her
there  engaged  in  fastening  a  noose  round  her  neck,  she  cried
out,  "  Stop  !  stop  !  "  and  running  up,  she  cut  that  noose
which  she  had  made.  Anangamanjari,  when  she  saw  that
her  confidante  had  come  and  cut  the  noose,  fell  on  the  ground
in  a  state  of  great  affliction.  Her  confidante  comforted  her,
and  asked  her  the  cause  of  her  grief,  and  she  at  once  told
her,  and  went  on  to  say  to  her  :  "  So  you  see,  friend  Malatika,
as  I  am  under  the  authority  of  my  parents  and  so  on,  and
have  little  chance  of  being  united  to  my  beloved,  death  is  my
highest  happiness."  While  Anangamanjari  was  saying  these
words  she  was  exceedingly  tortured  with  the  fire  of  Love's
arrows,  and  being  overpowered  with  despair,  she  fainted  away.

Her  friend  Malatika  exclaimed  :  "  Alas,  the  command
of  Kama  is  hard  to  resist,  since  it  has  reduced  to  this  state
this  friend  of  mine,  who  was  always  laughing  at  other  mis-
guided women  who  showed  a  want  of  self-restraint.1 "
Lamenting  in  these  words,  she  slowly  brought  Ananga-
manjari round  with  cold  water,  fanning,  and  so  on ;  and,  in

1  I  take  anyavinitavanitahasinl  as  one  word,  and  read  vilapantl  instead  of
vilapanthn.


THE  MISERY  OF  SEPARATION  101

order  to  allay  her  heat,  she  made  her  a  bed  of  lotus  leaves,
and  placed  on  her  heart  a  necklace  cool  as  snow.  Then
Anangamanjari,  with  her  eyes  gushing  with  tears,  said  to  her
friend  :  "  Friend,  the  necklace  and  the  other  applications  do
not  allay  my  internal  heat.  But  do  you  by  your  cleverness
accomplish  something  which  will  really  allay  it.  Unite  me
to  my  beloved,  if  you  wish  to  preserve  my  life."  When  she
said  this,  Malatika  lovingly  answered  her  :  "  My  friend,  the
night  is  now  almost  at  an  end,  but  to-morrow  I  will  make  an
arrangement  with  your  beloved,  and  bring  him  to  this  very
place.  So  in  the  meanwhile  control  yourself,  and  enter  your
house."  When  she  said  this,  Anangamanjari  was  pleased,
and  drawing  the  necklace  from  her  neck,  she  gave  it  to  her  as
a  present.  And  she  said  to  her  :  "  Now  go  to  your  house,
and  early  to-morrow  go  thence  to  the  house  of  my  beloved ;
and  may  you  prosper  !  "  Having  dismissed  her  confidante
in  these  words,  she  entered  her  own  apartments.

And  early  next  morning  her  friend  Malatika  went,  with-
out being  seen  by  anyone,  to  the  house  of  Kamalakara,  and
searching  about  in  the  garden,  she  saw  him  at  the  foot  of  a
tree.  He  was  rolling  about,  burning  with  the  fire  of  love,
on  a  bed  of  lotus  leaves  moistened  with  sandalwood  juice,1
and  a  confidential  friend  of  his  was  trying  to  give  him  relief
by  fanning  him  with  a  plantain  leaf.  She  said  to  herself :
"  Is  it  possible  that  he  has  been  reduced  to  this  stage  of
love's  malady  by  separation  from  her  ?  "  So  she  remained
there  in  concealment,  to  find  out  the  truth  about  it.

In  the  meanwhile  that  friend  of  Kamalakara's  said  to
him  :  "  Cast  your  eye,  my  friend,  for  a  moment  round  this
delightful  garden,  and  cheer  up  your  heart.  Do  not  give
way  to  despondency."  When  the  young  Brahman  heard
this,  he  answered  his  friend  :  "  My  friend,  my  heart  has
been  taken  from  me  by  Anangamanjari,  the  merchant's
daughter,  and  my  breast  left  empty ;  so  how  can  I  cheer  up
my  heart  ?  Moreover,  Love,  finding  me  robbed  of  my  heart,
has  made  me  a  quiver  for  his  arrows ;  so  enable  me  to  get
hold  of  that  girl,  who  stole  it."

When  the  young  Brahman  said  that,  Malatika's  doubts

1  See  note  at  the  end  of  the  chapter. — n.m.p.


102  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

were  removed,  and  she  was  delighted,  and  showed  herself,
and  went  up  to  him,  and  said  :  "  Happy  man,  Anangaman-
jari has  sent  me  to  you,  and  I  hereby  give  you  her  message,
the  meaning  of  which  is  clear :  '  What  sort  of  conduct  is  this
for  a  virtuous  man,  to  enter  a  fair  one's  bosom  by  force,  and
after  stealing  away  her  heart,  to  go  off  without  showing
himself  ? '  It  is  strange  too  that  though  you  have  stolen
the  lady's  heart,  she  now  wishes  to  surrender  to  you  her-
self and  her  life.  For  day  and  night  she  furnaces  forth  hot
sighs,  which  appear  like  smoke  rising  from  the  fire  of  love  in
her  burning  heart.  And  her  teardrops,  black  as  collyrium,
fall  frequently,  looking  like  bees  attracted  by  the  fragrance
of  her  lotus-like  face.  So  if  you  like,  I  will  say  what  will  be
for  the  good  of  both  of  you."

When  Malatika  said  this,  Kamalakara  answered  her :
"  My  good  lady,  this  speech  of  yours,  though  it  comforts  me
by  showing  that  my  beloved  loves  me,  terrifies  me,  as  it  tells
that  the  fair  one  is  in  a  state  of  unhappiness.  So  you  are  our
only  refuge  in  this  matter ;  do  as  you  think  best."  When
Kamalakara  said  this,  Malatika  answered  :  "I  will  to-night
bring  Anangamanjari  secretly  into  the  garden  belonging  to
her  house,  and  you  must  take  care  to  be  outside.  Then  I
will  manage  by  some  device  of  mine  to  let  you  in,  and  so
you  will  be  able  to  see  one  another  in  accordance  with  your
wishes."  When  Malatika  had  by  these  words  delighted  the
young  Brahman,  she  went  away,  having  accomplished  her
object,  and  delighted  Anangamanjari  also.

Then  the  sun,  in  love  with  the  twilight,  departed  some-
where or  other,  together  with  the  day,  and  the  heaven
adorned  itself,  placing  the  moon  on  its  western  quarter  like
a  patch  on  the  forehead.  And  the  pure  white  kumuda
cluster  laughed  joyously  with  the  cheerful  faces  of  its  opened
flowers,  as  if  to  say  :  "  Fortune  has  left  the  lotus  cluster
and  come  to  me."  Thereupon  the  lover  Kamalakara  also
adorned  himself,  and,  full  of  impatience,  slowly  approached
the  outside  of  the  door  that  led  into  the  garden  of  Ananga-
manjari's  house.  Then  Malatika  managed  to  bring  into  that
garden  Anangamanjari,  who  had  with  difficulty  got  through
the  day.    And  she  made  her  sit  in  the  middle  of  it,  in  a  bower


THE  TRIPLE  TRAGEDY


103


of  mango-trees,  and  went  out  and  brought  in  Kamalakara
also.  And  when  he  entered  he  beheld  Anangamanjari  in
the  midst  of  dense-foliaged  trees,  as  gladly  as  the  traveller
beholds  the  shade.

While  he  was  advancing  towards  her  she  saw  him,  and
as  the  violence  of  her  passion  robbed  her  of  shame,  she
eagerly  ran  forward  and  threw  her  arms  round  his  neck.
She  faltered  out,  "  Where  are  you  going  ?  I  have  caught
you,"  and  immediately  her  breath  was  stopped  by  the  weight
of  excessive  joy,  and  she  died.  And  she  fell  on  the  ground,
like  a  creeper  broken  by  the  wind.  Alas  !  strange  is  the
course  of  love,  that  is  terrible  in  its  consequences.  When
Kamalakara  beheld  that  misfortune,  which  was  terrible  as
a  thunderstroke,  he  said,  "  Alas  !  what  is  this  ?  "  and  fell
senseless  on  the  ground.  In  a  moment  he  recovered  con-
sciousness ;  and  then  he  took  his  beloved  up  in  his  arms
and  embraced  and  kissed  her,  and  lamented  much.  And
then  he  was  so  violently  oppressed  by  excessive  weight  of
sorrow  that  his  heart  burst  asunder  at  once,  with  a  crack.
And  when  Malatika  was  lamenting  over  their  corpses,  the
night,  seeing  that  both  these  lovers  had  met  their  end,  came
to  an  end,  as  if  out  of  grief.  And  the  next  day  the  relations
of  both,  hearing  from  the  gardeners  what  had  happened,
came  there  distracted  with  shame,  wonder,  grief  and  be-
wilderment. And  they  remained  for  a  long  time  doubtful
what  to  do,  with  faces  downcast  from  distress  :  bad  women
are  a  grievous  affliction,  and  a  source  of  calamity  to  their
family.

At  this  moment  Manivarman,  the  husband  of  Ananga-
manjari, came,  full  of  longing  to  see  her,  from  his  father's
house  in  Tamraliptl.  When  he  reached  his  father-in-law's
house,  and  heard  what  had  taken  place,  he  came  running  to
that  garden,  his  eyes  blinded  with  tears.  There,  beholding
his  wife  lying  dead  beside  another  man,  the  passionate  man
at  once  yielded  up  his  breath,  that  was  heated  with  the
fire  of  grief.  Then  the  people  there  began  to  cry  out,  and
to  make  an  uproar,  and  all  the  citizens  heard  what  had
taken  place,  and  came  there  in  a  state  of  astonishment.

Then  the  goddess  Chandi,  who  was  close  at  hand,  having


104  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

been  called  down  into  that  garden  long  ago  by  the  father
of  Anangamanjari,  was  thus  supplicated  by  her  Ganas  :
"  Goddess,  this  merchant  Arthadatta,  who  has  established
an  image  of  thee  in  his  garden,  has  always  been  devoted  to
thee,  so  have  mercy  upon  him  in  this  his  affliction."  When
the  beloved  of  Siva,  the  refuge  of  the  distressed,  heard  this
prayer  of  her  Ganas,  she  gave  command  that  the  three
should  return  to  life,  free  from  passion.  So  they  all,  by  her
favour,  immediately  arose,  as  if  awaking  from  sleep,  free
from  the  passion  of  love.  Then  all  the  people  were  full  of
joy,  beholding  that  marvel ;  and  Kamalakara  went  home,
with  his  face  downcast  from  shame  ;  and  Arthadatta,  hav-
ing recovered  his  daughter1  Anangamanjari,  who  looked
thoroughly  ashamed  of  herself,  together  with  her  husband,
returned  to  his  house  in  high  spirits.

163g.  King  Trivikramasena  and  the  Mendicant

When  the  Vetala  had  told  this  story  that  night  on  the
way,  he  again  put  a  question  to  King  Trivikramasena.  He
said  :  "  King,  tell  me,  which  of  those  three,  who  were  blinded
by  passion,  was  the  most  infatuated  ?  And  remember,  the
curse  before-mentioned  will  take  effect  if  you  know  and  do
not  say."

When  the  king  heard  this  question  of  the  Vetala's  he
answered  him  :  "It  seems  to  me  that  Manivarman  was  the
most  infatuated  with  passion  of  the  three.  For  one  can
understand  those  two  dying,  as  they  were  desperately  in
love  with  one  another,  and  their  amorous  condition  had
been  fully  developed  by  lapse  of  time.  But  Manivarman  was
terribly  infatuated,  for  when  he  saw  his  wife  dead  of  love
for  another  man,  and  the  occasion  called  for  indignation,
he  was  so  far  from  being  angry  that,  in  his  great  love,  he
died  of  grief."

When  the  king  had  said  this,  the  mighty  Vetala  again  left
his  shoulder,  and  departed  to  his  own  place,  and  the  king
again  went  in  pursuit  of  him.

1  I  insert  sutam  at  the  beginning  of  the  line.  The  su  is  clear  enough  in
the  Sanskrit  College  MS.,  but  the  rest  of  the  word  is  illegible.


SANDALWOOD  105


NOTE   ON   SANDALWOOD

On  p.  99  of  this  chapter  we  read  of  the  fair  Anangamanjarl  being  "  white
with  sandalwood  ointment."  Then  again  on  p.  101  the  love-sick  Kamalakara
vainly  tries  to  quench  the  fire  of  love  by  lying  on  "a  bed  composed  of  lotus
leaves  moistened  with  sandalwood  juice. "  So  too  in  the  eleventh  Vetala  one  of
the  princesses  has  "sandalwood  lotion  applied  to  her  body"  (p.  11),  while  the
third  unfortunate  lady  "  had  sandalwood  unguent  and  other  remedies  applied
to  her  hands,  in  order  to  allay  the  pain"  (p.  12).  See  also  the  references
on  pp.  30,  43,  53  and  72.  We  thus  see  that  there  appears  to  be  two  distinct
uses  to  which  sandalwood  was  put :  as  a  face-cream  for  cooling  and  perfuming
the  skin,  and  as  a  medicinal  application  to  relieve  pain,  burns,  fever,  etc.

It  will  be  interesting  to  see  how  far  this  is  confirmed  by  the  historical
evidence  that  exists  with  reference  to  sandalwood.  All  forms  of  the  word  as
found  in  English  (Sandal,  Sandle,  Sanders,  Sandahvood)  are  derived  from  the
Sanskrit  chandana,  "refreshing,"  through  the  Persian  sandal,  chandal,  the
Arabic  sandal,  sandali-aswadt  the  Greek  cravraXov,  o-dv8a\ov,  Low  Latin  santalum,
and  French  sandal,  santal.

Sandalwood  is  the  wood  of  the  Santalum  album,  Linn.,  order  Santalaceae,
which  is  a  small  evergreen  tree  native  in  the  dry  regions  of  South  India
(e.g.  Western  Ghats,  Mysore  and  Coimbatore),  while  in  Bombay,  Poona,
Gujarat,  and  several  localities  in  Northern  India  it  is  chiefly  a  cultivated
plant.  The  fragrance  for  which  the  wood  is  so  prized  depends  on  the  presence
of  essential  oil,  situated  chiefly  in  the  dark  central  wood  of  the  tree.  It  is
the  roots  which  yield  the  largest  quantity  and  finest  quality  oil.  It  is  pale
yellow  in  colour,  transparent,  with  a  resinous  taste  and  a  peculiarly  fragrant
and  penetrating  odour.  The  outer  parts  of  old  trunks  and  young  trees  are
almost  entirely  without  scent,  hence  the  sandal-cutters  carefully  remove  the
outer  and  generally  lighter  portion  of  the  wood,  which  they  term  the  "sap."
The  heartwood  is  cut  into  small  chips,  and  distillation  is  slowly  carried  on
for  ten  days,  at  the  end  of  which  period  the  whole  of  the  oil  is  extracted.

According  to  one  authority  100  parts  of  sandalwood  yield,  upon  distillation
with  steam,  1-25  to  2*8  parts  of  the  essential  oil  (Watt,  Economic  Products  of
India,  vol.  vi,  pt.  ii,  p.  464).  Another  author  (Seemann,  Intellectual  Observer,
vol.  iv,  p.  74)  states  that  a  pound  of  wood  yields  about  two  drachms  of  oil.
In  Hindu  medical  works  sandalwood  is  described  as  bitter,  cooling,  astringent,
and  useful  in  biliousness,  vomiting,  fever,  thirst  and  heat  of  the  body  (Dutt,
Materia  Medica  of  the  Hindus,  p.  225  of  the  1877  edition).  The  wood  ground
up  with  water  to  the  consistence  of  paste  is  a  common  application  among  the
natives  to  erysipelous  and  local  inflammations,  to  the  temples  in  fevers,  and
to  allay  heat  in  cutaneous  diseases.  In  remittent  fevers  it  acts  as  a  diaphoretic
(Drury,  Useful  Plants  of  India,  p.  383).  The  paste  is  also  used  for  painting
the  body  after  bathing,  and  is  employed  for  making  the  Shardana,  or  caste-
marks,  especially  in  Southern  India.  Sandalwood  powder  mixed  with  coconut-
water  is  used  in  bathing  to  cool  the  body,  and  is  especially  efficient  in  the


106  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

case   of  headache,  prickly  heat,  etc.     Watt  (op.  cit.,  p.   465)  gives  several
references  to  accounts  of  the  effective  use  of  the  oil  in  venereal  diseases.

We  pass  on  to  the  value  of  the  wood  for  other  domestic  and  religious
purposes.  In  these  cases  it  is  the  perfume  of  the  distilled  oil  which  is  so
important.  As  mentioned  above,  the  oil  from  the  roots  is  the  finest,  although
an  oil  is  expressed  from  the  seeds,  but  this  is  a  thick,  viscid  oil  used  only  by
the  poorer  classes  in  lamps.  The  essential  oil  constitutes  the  basis  of  the
majority  of  attars  distilled  in  India,  and,  mixed  with  pure  alcohol,  forms
the  perfumer's  Extrait  de  bois  de  Santal.  In  order  to  sweeten  it  for  use  on  the
handkerchief  a  slight  addition  of  rose  is  required.  It  mixes  well  with  soap.
With  charcoal  and  a  little  nitre  it  forms  sandal  pastilles  for  perfuming
apartments,  but  much  of  the  odour  is  lost  in  the  preparation  (Seemann,  op.  cit.t
p.  74).

The  wood  is  used  chiefly  in  the  carving  industry — boxes,  cabinets,  work-
tables,  walking-sticks,  fans,  picture-frames,  etc.,  being  some  of  the  more  usual
articles  so  made.  The  Kanara  district  is  the  chief  home  of  the  sandalwood-
carving  industry.  For  the  possible  identification  of  the  Algum  or  Almug  trees
of  1  Kings  x,  11,  12,  and  2  Chronicles  ii,  8;  ix,  10,  11,  see  the  article  by
G.  E.  Post  in  Hastings'  Dictionary  of  the  Bible,  vol.  i,  p.  63,  and  W.  H.  SchofF,
The  Ship  «  Tyre,"  1920,  pp.  27,  28.

Turning  to  its  sacred  uses,  we  find  that  idols  are  carved  from  the  wood.
It  is  interesting  to  notice  that  among  the  treasures  brought  from  India  by
Hiuen  Tsiang  were  two  sandalwood  figures  of  Buddha,  the  larger  of  which
was  modelled  on  one  made  by  the  desire  of  Udayana,  King  of  Kausambi  (see
Beal,  Life  oj  Hiuen  Tsiang,  pp.  213,  214).  An  emulsion  of  the  wood  is  given
as  an  offering  to  the  gods,  and  an  incense  made  of  it  is  burned  before  them.
A  considerable  export  for  making  incense  followed  in  the  wake  of  Buddhism,
and  the  amount  used  in  this  fashion  by  China  was,  and  still  is,  particularly
large.  The  Parsis  consume  large  quantities,  usually  of  an  inferior  variety,  in
their  fire-temples.  The  relatives  of  the  deceased  who  can  afford  to  buy  the
wood,  do  so  for  cremation  purposes,  while  all  Hindus  add  at  least  one  piece
of  it  to  the  funeral  pyre.

Although  sandalwood  was  used  in  India  from  at  least  the  fifth  century  B.C.,
it  was  almost  entirely  confined  to  Buddhist  and  Hindu  peoples.  In  the
West  it  appears  not  to  have  been  known  until  the  beginning  of  the  Christian
era,  the  earliest  Roman  reference  being  in  the  famous  Periplus  of  the  Erythrcean
Sea  (circa  a.d.  80).  Here  we  read  (36)  of  two  market-towns  on  the  Persian
Gulf  called  Apologus  [Obollah  of  Saracen  times],  and  Ommana  [Oman]  :

"To  both  of  these  market-towns  large  vessels  are  regularly  sent  from
Barygaza,  loaded  with  copper  and  sandalwood  and  timbers  of  teakwood  and
logs  of  blackwood  and  ebony"  (see  SchofTs  edition,  1912,  pp.  36,  152,  and
further,  Lassen,  Indische  Alterthumskunde,  vol.  i,  p.  287).

Barygaza  is   the    modern   Broach   in   the   Gulf  of  Cambay,  the   Greek
.  name  being  from  the  Prakrit  Bharukachchha,  a  corruption  of  the  Sanskrit
Bhrigukachchha.

The  wood  is  mentioned  by  Cosmas  Indicopleustes  (sixth  century  a.d.)
under  the  name    Tzandana,  and   frequently  by  the  early  Arab  traders  who


SANDALWOOD  107

visited  India  and  China.  Both  Cosmas  and  the  Arabs  attributed  the  wood  to
China,  the  mistake  arising  from  the  fact  that  the  Chinese  vessels  trading  with
the  merchants  of  Bagdad  had  picked  up  cargoes  of  the  wood  at  Ceylon  and
such  Indian  ports  as  Broach.  (See  M'Crindle's  edition,  Hakluyt  Soc.,  1897,
p.  366.)  As  was  only  to  be  expected  with  a  people  so  fond  of  perfumes  as
the  Mohammedans,  sandalwood  became  a  great  favourite  with  them,  and
caused  a  considerable  spread  of  its  use  in  the  Middle  and  Near  East.

For  early  European  references  see  Yule  and  Burnell,  Hobson  Jobson,
under  "Sandal."  (The  article  in  the  1903  edition  adds  nothing  to  that  of
1886.)

With  regard  to  the  modern  sandalwood  trade  of  both  India  and  the
various  islands  of  the  Malay  Archipelago  and  the  Pacific  we  are  not  concerned,
but  a  good  idea  of  this  may  be  got  from  the  following : —

Watt,  op.  cit.,  vol.  iv,  pt.  ii,  pp.  466,  467 ;  Seemann,  op.  cit.,  p.  78  et  seq. ;
"C.B.,"  Leisure  Hour,  1869,  pp.  598-600;  and  the  anonymous  articles  in  The
Practical  Magazine,  vol.  vii,  1877,  pp.  373,  374,  and  in  Scientific  American,  vol.
cviii,  1913,  p.  558,  which  deals  largely  with  the  need  for  great  and  more
careful  cultivation  of  the  tree,  and  finally  in  the  Annual  Statement  oj  the  Sea-
borne Trade  of  British  India,  the  most  recent  copies  of  which  show  that  the
export  trade  has  steadily  increased  since  1921,  and  now  stands  at  about  eight
hundred  tons  per  annum.

So  far,  we  have  spoken  only  of  the  Santalum  album,  which  is  the  one
referred  to  in  the  Ocean.  Mention,  however,  should  also  be  made  of  the  Red
Sanders  Tree,  Pterocarpus  santalinus,  which  is  used  chiefly  as  a  dye.  Owing,
however,  to  the  modern  introduction  of  aniline  dyes,  its  use  in  this  capacity
has  been  very  considerably  curtailed.  See  further,  Watt,  op.  cit.,  vol.  vi,  pt.  i,
p.  359  et  seq.;  and  D.  Hooper,  "Caliature  Wood,"  Nature,  vol.  lxxxvi,  1911*
pp.  311,  312. — n.m.p.


CHAPTER  XCVI

163g.  King  Trivikramasena  and  the  Mendicant

THEN  King  Trivikramasena  again  fetched  the  Vetala
from  the  top  of  the  simsapd  tree,  and  put  him  on
his  shoulder,  and  as  he  was  going  along,  the  Vetala
said  to  him  on  the  way  :  "  King,  you  are  good  and  brave,
so  hear  this  matchless  tale.

163g  (22).  The  Four  Brahman  Brothers  who  resuscitated

the  Lion  x

There  lived  once  on  the  earth  a  king,  named  Dharani-
varaha,  who  was  lord  of  the  town  of  Pataliputra.2  In  his
realm,  which  abounded  in  Brahmans,  there  was  a  royal  grant
to  Brahmans  named  Brahmasthala  ;  and  on  it  there  lived  a
Brahman  of  the  name  of  Vishnusvamin.  He  had  a  wife
that  was  as  well  suited  to  him  as  the  oblation  to  the  fire.
And  in  course  of  time  he  had  four  sons  by  her.  And  when
they  had  learned  the  Vedas,  and  passed  their  childhood,
Vishnusvamin  went  to  heaven,  and  his  wife  followed  him.

Then  all  his  sons  there,  being  in  a  miserable  state,  as
they  had  no  protectors,  and  having  had  all  their  property
taken  from  them  by  their  relations,  deliberated  together,  and
said  :  "  We  have  no  means  of  support  here,  so  why  should
we  not  go  hence  to  the  house  of  our  maternal  grandfather
in  the  village  named  Yajnasthala  ?  "  Having  determined
on  this,  they  set  out,  living  on  alms,  and  after  many  days
they  reached  the  house  of  their  maternal  grandfather.  Their
grandfather  was  dead,  but  their  mother's  brothers  gave  them
shelter  and  food,  and  they  lived  in  their  house,  engaged  in

1  See  Appendix,  pp.  258-260. — n.m.p.

2  I  read  with  the  Sanskrit  College  MS.  Kusumapurakhyanagareharah.  But
Kusumapurakhye  nagare  svardt,  the  reading  of  Professor  Brockhaus'  text,  would
mean  "an  independent  monarch  in  the  city  of  Pataliputra,"  and  would  give
almost  as  good  a  sense.

108


THE  ATTEMPTED  SUICIDE  109

reading  the  Vedas.  But  after  a  time,  as  they  were  paupers,
their  uncles  came  to  despise  them,  and  neglected  to  supply
them  with  food,  clothes  and  other  necessaries.

Then  their  hearts  were  wounded  by  the  manifest  con-
tempt shown  for  them  by  their  relations,  and  they  brooded
over  it  in  secret,  and  then  the  eldest  brother  said  to  the  rest :
1  Well !  brothers,  what  are  we  to  do  ?  Destiny  performs
everything ;  no  man  can  do  anything  in  this  world  at  any
place  or  time.  For  to-day,  as  I  was  wandering  about  in  a
state  of  distraction,  I  reached  a  cemetery ;  and  in  it  I  saw
a  man  lying  dead  on  the  ground,  with  all  his  limbs  relaxed.
And  when  I  saw  him  I  envied  his  state,  and  I  said  to  myself  :
4  Fortunate  is  this  man,  who  is  thus  at  rest,  having  got  rid
of  his  burden  of  grief.'  Such  was  the  reflection  that  then
occurred  to  me.  So  I  determined  to  die,  and  I  tried  to  hang
myself  by  means  of  a  rope  fastened  to  the  branch  of  a  tree.
I  became  unconscious,  but  my  breath  did  not  leave  my
body;  and  while  I  was  in  this  state  the  rope  broke,  and  I
fell  to  the  earth.  And  as  soon  as  I  recovered  consciousness
I  saw  that  some  compassionate  man  was  fanning  me  with  his
garment.  He  said  to  me  :  '  Friend,  say,  why  do  you  allow
yourself  to  be  thus  afflicted,  though  you  are  wise  ?  For  joy
springs  from  good  deeds,  and  pain  from  evil  deeds  ;  these
are  their  only  sources.  If  your  agitation  is  due  to  pain,
then  perform  good  deeds.  How  can  you  be  so  foolish  as  to
desire  to  incur  the  pains  of  hell  by  suicide  ?  '  With  these
words  that  man  consoled  me,  and  then  departed  somewhere
or  other ;  but  I  have  come  here,  having  abandoned  my  design
of  committing  suicide.  So  you  see  that,  if  Destiny  is
adverse,  it  is  not  even  possible  to  die.  Now  I  intend  to  go
to  some  holy  water,  and  there  consume  my  body  with  aus-
terities, in  order  that  I  may  never  again  endure  the  misery
of  poverty."

When  the  eldest  brother  said  this,  his  younger  brothers
said  to  him  :  "  Sir,  why  are  you,  though  wise,  afflicted  with
pain  merely  because  you  are  poor  ?  Do  you  not  know  that
riches  pass  away  like  an  autumn  cloud.  Who  can  ever
count  on  retaining  fortune  or  a  fickle  woman,  though  he
carry   them   off    and   guard   them   carefully,  for   both   are


110  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

insincere  in  their  affection  and  secretly  hostile  to  their  pos-
sessor ?  So  a  wise  man  must  acquire  by  vigorous  exertion
some  eminent  accomplishment,  which  will  enable  him  fre-
quently to  bind1  and  lead  home  by  force  riches,  which  are
like  bounding  deer."  When  the  eldest  brother  was  addressed
in  this  language  by  his  brothers,  he  at  once  recovered  his
self-control,  and  said  :  "  What  accomplishment  of  this  kind
should  we  acquire  ?  "  Then  they  all  considered  and  said
to  one  another  :  "  We  will  search  through  the  earth  and
acquire  some  magic  power."  So  having  adopted  this  resolu-
tion, and  fixed  upon  a  trysting-place  at  which  to  meet,  the
four  separated,  going  east,  west,  north  and  south.

And  in  course  of  time  they  met  again  at  the  appointed
spot,  and  asked  one  another  what  each  had  learned.  Then
one  of  them  said  :  "I  have  learned  this  magic  secret :  if  I
find  a  bit  of  a  bone  of  any  animal,  I  can  immediately  produce
on  it  the  flesh  of  that  animal."  When  the  second  heard
this  speech  of  his  brother's,  he  said  :  "  When  the  flesh  of
any  animal  has  been  superinduced  upon  a  piece  of  bone,  I
know  how  to  produce  the  skin  and  hair  appropriate  to  that
animal."  Then  the  third  said  :  "  And  when  the  hair  and
flesh  and  skin  have  been  produced,  I  am  able  to  create  the
limbs  of  the  animal  to  which  the  bone  belonged."  And  the
fourth  said  :  "  When  the  animal  has  its  limbs  properly
developed,  I  know  how  to  endow  it  with  life."

When  they  had  said  this  to  one  another,  the  four  brothers
went  into  the  forest  to  find  a  piece  of  bone  on  which  to  dis-
play their  skill.  There  it  happened  that  they  found  a  piece
of  a  lion's  bone,  and  they  took  it  up  without  knowing  to
what  animal  it  belonged.  Then  the  first  covered  it  with  the
appropriate  flesh,  and  the  second  in  the  same  way  produced
on  it  all  the  requisite  skin  and  hair,  and  the  third  completed
the  animal  by  giving  it  all  its  appropriate  limbs  and  it  became
a  lion,  and  then  the  fourth  endowed  it  with  life.  Then  it  rose
up  a  very  terrible  lion,  furnished  with  a  dense  shaggy  mane,
having  a  mouth  formidable  with  teeth,2  and  wTith  hooked  claws

1  I  follow  the  Sanskrit  College  MS.,  which  reads  baddhvd  for  buddhya.

2  The  Sanskrit  College  MS.  gives  the  reading  sadamshtrasankatamukhah,
which  I  follow.


THE  NEED  FOR  WISDOM  ill

at  the  end  of  its  paws.  And  charging  the  four  authors  of
its  being,  it  slew  them  on  the  spot,  and  then  retired  glutted
to  the  forest.  So  those  Brahmans  perished  by  making  the
fatal  mistake  of  creating  a  lion  ;  for  who  can  give  joy  to  his
own  soul  by  raising  up  a  noisome  beast  ?

So,  if  Fate  be  not  propitious,  an  accomplishment,  though
painfully  acquired,  not  only  does  not  bring  prosperity,  but  actu-
ally brings  destruction.  For  the  tree  of  valour  only  bears
fruit,  as  a  general  rule,  when  the  root,  being  uninjured,1  is
watered  with  the  water  of  wisdom,  and  when  it  is  surrounded
with  the  trench  of  policy.


163g.  King  Trivikramasena  and  the  Mendicant

When  the  Vetala,  sitting  on  the  shoulder  of  the  king,  had
told  this  tale  on  the  way,  that  night,  to  King  Trivikramasena,
he  went  on  to  say  to  him  :  "  King,  which  of  these  four  was
guilty  in  respect  of  the  production  of  the  lion,  that  slew  them
all  ?  Tell  me  quickly,  and  remember  that  the  old  condition
is  still  binding  on  you."

When  the  king  heard  the  Vetala  say  this,  he  said  to
himself :  "  This  demon  wishes  me  to  break  silence,  and  so
to  escape  from  me.  Never  mind,  I  will  go  and  fetch  him
again."  Having  formed  this  resolution  in  his  heart,  he
answered  that  Vetala  :  "  That  one  among  them  who  gave
life  to  the  lion  is  the  guilty  one.  For  they  produced  the
flesh,  the  skin,  the  hair  and  the  limbs  by  magic  power,
without  knowing  what  kind  of  animal  they  were  making;
and  therefore  no  guilt  attaches  to  them  on  account  of  their
ignorance.  But  the  man  who,  when  he  saw  that  the
animal  had  a  lion's  shape,  gave  life  to  it,  in  order  to  display
his  skill,  was  guilty  of  the  death  of  those  Brahmans."

When  the  mighty  Vetala  heard  this  speech  of  the  king's,
he  again  left  his  shoulder  by  magic  power  and  went  back  to
his  own  place,  and  the  king  again  went  in  pursuit  of  him.

1  I  read  avikrite,  with  the  Sanskrit  College  MS.


CHAPTER  XCVII

163g.  King  Trivikramasena  and  the  Mendicant

THEN  the  noble  King  Trivikramasena  went  back,
and  again  took  down  that  Vetala  from  the  simsapd
tree,  and  though  the  Vetala  transformed  himself  in
all  possible  ways,  he  put  him  on  his  shoulder  and  started  off
with  him  in  silence,  and  then  the  Vetala  said  to  him  :  "  King,
though  the  business  in  which  you  are  engaged  is  not  becoming
to  you,  you  exhibit  in  it  undaunted  perseverance  ;  so  listen,
I  will  tell  you  a  tale  to  dispel  your  fatigue.

163g  (23).  The  Hermit  who  first  Wept  and  then  Danced1

There  is  in  the  land  of  Kalinga  a  city  named  Sobhavati,
like  the  city  of  Indra  in  heaven,  the  abode  of  those  that  act
aright.  It  was  ruled  by  a  king  named  Pradyumna,  whose
sway  was  mighty,  and  who,  like  the  god  Pradyumna,  was
celebrated  for  his  exceeding  power  and  valour.  The  only
detraction  heard  in  his  realm  was  that  of  the  string  from
the  bow,  the  only  pressure  that  of  the  fingers  on  the  cymbal  ;
vice  was  only  known  in  the  name  of  the  age,2  and  keenness
only  in  the  pursuit  of  knowledge.

In  a  certain  part  of  that  town  there  was  a  grant  named
Yajnasthala,  given  by  that  king,  on  which  many  Brahmans
were  settled.  There  lived  on  it  a  very  wealthy  Brahman
who  had  mastered  the  Vedas,  whose  name  was  Yajnasoma.
He  maintained  a  sacrificial  fire,  and  honoured  guests  and  the
gods.  After  his  youth  was  past,  there  was  born  to  him  by
his  wife,  who  was  in  every  way  a  suitable  match  for  him,  an
only  son,  the  child  of  a  hundred  wishes.     And  that  promising

1  See  Appendix,  pp.  260,  26 1. — n.m.p.

2  Guna  means  **  virtue  "  and  also  "  string  "  ;  kara,  "  finger  "  and  "tribute  "  ;
the  kaliyuga,  or  w  age  of  vice,"  is  the  last  and  worst.  Vaikritam  in  //.  2  may
perhaps  mean  "  anger,"  as  in  79  SL  2  :  see  Bohtlingk  and  Roth  s.v.

112


THE  HERMIT  VAMASIVA  113

boy  grew  up  in  his  father's  house,  and  the  Brahmans  duly
called  him  Devasoma.  And  when  he  had  attained  the  age
of  sixteen  years,  that  boy,  who  captivated  all  by  his  know-
ledge, modesty  and  other  good  qualities,  suddenly  died  of
a  fever.  Then  Yajnasoma,  together  with  his  wife,  remained
lovingly  embracing  that  dead  boy,  and  lamenting  over  him,
and  refused  for  a  long  time  to  let  him  be  taken  away  to  be
burnt.

Then  the  old  men  assembled  and  reproved  that  Brahman
in  the  following  words  :  "  Brahman,  are  you  not  aware,
though  you  know  what  is  near  and  far,  that  the  condition  of
this  Fata  Morgana  of  a  world  is  frail  as  a  bubble  on  water  ?
Look  at  those  kings  who  filled  the  earth  with  their  armies,
and  enjoyed  themselves  in  this  world,  deeming  themselves
immortal,  lying  on  jewelled  couches  on  the  delightful  summits
of  palaces,  that  resounded  with  the  warbling  of  music,  having
their  bodies  anointed  with  sandalwood  ointment  and  other
fragrant  unguents,  and  begirt  with  beautiful  women.  Even
these  no  one  could  save  from  being  consumed  by  flesh-
devouring  flames,  lying  alone  on  the  funeral  pyre  in  the
cemetery,  whither  the  dead  are  followed  by  weeping  friends,
and  when  their  extremities  had  been  shrivelled,  from  being
at  last  devoured  by  the  jackals :  much  less  can  any  others
escape  this  fate.  So  tell  us,  wise  man,  what  mean  you  by
embracing  that  corpse  ?  "  Many  other  speeches  of  this  kind
did  they  address  to  him.

At  last,  with  difficulty,  his  relations  got  him  to  stop  cling-
ing to  his  dead  son ;  and  then,  after  the  body  had  been  laid
out,  they  put  it  on  a  bier,  and  with  loud  lamentations  carried
it  to  the  burning-place,  accompanied  by  many  people,  who
shed  tears  on  account  of  the  calamity.

Now  at  that  time  there  was  dwelling  in  that  cemetery
an  old  Pasupata  ascetic  possessing  supernatural  power,  who
lived  in  a  hut.  His  name  was  Vamasiva.  His  body  was
emaciated  with  age  and  excessive  asceticism,  and  bound  round
with  veins,  as  if  with  fear  that  it  would  break.  He  was
covered  all  over  with  hair  white  with  ashes,  his  matted  locks
were  yellow  as  lightning,  and  he  looked  like  a  second  Siva.
When  that  hermit  heard  in  the  distance  the  lamentation  of

VOL.   VII.  h


114  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

those  people  outside  his  hut,  he  said  to  the  pupil  that  lived
with  him  :  "  Rise  up  !  go  and  find  out  the  meaning  of  this
confused  noise  outside  in  the  cemetery,  such  as  I  never  heard
before,  and  come  back  quickly  and  tell  me."

Now  this  pupil  was  one  who  had  taken  a  vow  of  living
on  the  products  of  begging ;  he  was  a  fool,  and  a  rogue,  and
an  egoist,  puffed  up  with  contemplation,  magical  powers  and
other  things  of  the  kind,  and  at  this  time  he  was  annoyed
because  his  teacher  had  rebuked  him.  So,  when  his  teacher
gave  him  this  order,  he  answered  him  :  "I  will  not  go  !  Go
yourself,  for  my  time  for  begging  is  fast  slipping  away."
When  the  teacher  heard  that,  he  said  :  "  Out  on  you,  fool,
devoted  to  your  belly !  Only  half  one  watch  of  the  day  has
passed ;  how  can  it  be  your  time  for  begging  now  ?  "  When
the  wicked  pupil  heard  that  he  was  angry,  and  said  to  his
teacher :  "  Out  on  you,  you  decrepit  old  creature  !  I  am  no
longer  your  pupil,  and  you  are  no  longer  my  teacher.  I  will
go  elsewhere  :  carry  this  vessel  yourself."  When  he  had  said
this,  he  put  down  in  front  of  him  his  stick  and  water- vessel,
and  got  up  and  went  away.

Then  the  hermit  left  his  hut,  laughing  as  he  went,  and
came  to  the  place  where  the  young  Brahman  had  been
brought  to  be  buried.  And  when  the  hermit  saw  him  with
the  people  lamenting  for  the  flower  of  his  youth,  being
afflicted  with  old  age,  and  possessed  of  magical  powers,  he
determined  to  enter  his  body.  So  he  quickly  went  aside,
and  first  wept  aloud,  and  immediately  afterwards  he  danced
with  appropriate  gesticulations.  Then  the  ascetic,  longing
to  be  young  again,  abandoned  his  own  body,  and  at  once
entered  by  magic  power  that  young  Brahman's  body.  And
immediately  the  young  Brahman  on  the  pyre,  which  was
ready  prepared,  returned  to  life,  and  rose  up  with  a  yawn.
When  his  relations  and  all  the  people  saw  that,  they  raised
a  loud  shout  of  "  Hurrah  !  he  is  alive  !  he  is  alive  !  "

Then  that  ascetic,  who  was  a  mighty  sorcerer,  and  had
thus  entered  the  young  Brahman's  body,  not  intending  to
abandon  his  vow,  told  them  all  the  following  falsehood  :
"  Just  now,  when  I  went  to  the  other  world,  Siva  himself
restored  my  life  to  me,  telling  me  that  I  must  take  upon  me


CONFLICTING  EMOTIONS  115

the  vow  of  a  Pasupata  ascetic.  And  I  must  this  moment  go
into  a  solitary  place  and  support  this  vow,  otherwise  I  cannot
live;  so  depart  you,  and  I  also  will  depart."  Saying  this  to
all  those  present,  the  resolute  votary,  bewildered  with  mixed
feelings  of  joy  and  grief,  dismissed  them  to  their  own  homes.
And  he  himself  went  and  threw  that  former  body  of  his  into
a  ravine  ;  and  so  that  great  magician,  who  had  taken  the  vow,
having  become  young,  went  away  to  another  place.


163g.  King  Trivikramasena  and  the  Mendicant

When  the  Vetala  had  told  this  story  that  night  "[on  the
way,  he  again  said  to  King  Trivikramasena  :  "  Tell  me,  King,
why  did  that  mighty  magician,  when  entering  another  body,
first  weep,  and  then  dance  ?  I  have  a  great  desire  to  know
this."

When  that  king,  who  was  a  chief  of  sages,  heard  this
question  of  the  Vetala's,  fearing  the  curse,  he  broke  silence,
and  gave  him  this  answer  :  "  Hear  what  the  feelings  of  that
ascetic  were.  He  was  grieved  because  he  thought  that  he
was  just  going  to  abandon  that  body,  which  had  grown  up
with  him  through  many  years,  by  living  in  which  he  had
acquired  magic  power,  and  which  his  parents  had  fondled
when  he  was  a  child,  so  he  wept  violently,  for  affection  for
one's  body  is  a  deeply  rooted  feeling.  But  he  danced  for  joy
because  he  thought  that  he  was  about  to  enter  a  new  body,
and  that  by  means  of  that  he  would  acquire  greater  magic
power  ;   for  to  whom  is  not  youth  pleasing  ?  "

When  the  Vetala,  who  was  inside  that  corpse,  heard  this
speech  of  the  king's,  he  left  his  shoulder  and  went  back  to
that  simsapd  tree  ;  but  that  exceedingly  undaunted  monarch
again  ran  after  him  to  recover  him,  for  the  resolution  of
determined  men  surpasses  in  firmness  the  mighty  mountains,
and  remains  unshaken  even  at  the  end  of  a  kalpa.


CHAPTER  XCVIII

163g.  King  Trivikramasena  and  the  Mendicant

THEN  the  brave  King  Trivikramasena,  disregarding
the  awful  night,  which  in  that  terrible  cemetery
assumed  the  appearance  of  a  Rakshasi,  being  black
with  darkness,  and  having  the  flames  of  the  funeral  pyres
for  fiery  eyes,  again  went  to  the  simsapd  tree,  and  took
from  it  the  Vetala,  and  put  him  on  his  shoulder.

And  while  he  was  going  along  with  him,  as  before,  the
Vetala  again  said  to  that  king  :  "  0  King,  I  am  tired  out
with  going  backwards  and  forwards,  though  you  are  not ;
so  I  will  put  to  you  one  difficult  question,  and  mind  you
listen  to  me.


163g  (24).  The  Father  that  married  the  Daughter  and  the
Son  that  married  the  Mother1

There  was  in  the  Deccan  a  king  of  a  small  province,  who
was  named  Dharma  ;  he  was  the  chief  of  virtuous  men,  but
he  had  many  relations  who  aspired  to  supplant  him.  He
had  a  wife  named  Chandravati,  who  came  from  the  land  of
Malava ;  she  was  of  high  lineage,  and  the  most  virtuous  of
women.  And  that  king  had  born  to  him  by  that  wife  one
daughter,  who  was  not  without  cause  named  Lavanyavati.2

And  when  that  daughter  had  attained  a  marriageable  age,
King  Dharma  was  ejected  from  his  throne  by  his  relations,
who  banded  together  and  divided  his  realm.  Then  he  fled
from  his  kingdom  at  night  with  his  wife  and  that  daughter,
taking  with  him  a  large  number  of  valuable  jewels,  and  he
deliberately  set  out  for  Malava,  the  dwelling-place  of  his
father-in-law.  And  in  the  course  of  that  same  night  he
reached  the  Vindhya  forest  with  his  wife  and  daughter.  And
when  he  entered  it,  the  night,  that  had  escorted  him  thus

1  See  Appendix,  p.  262. — n.m.p.  2  I.e.  possessed  of  beauty.

116


THE  MISLEADING  FOOTPRINTS


117


far,  took  leave  of  him  with  drops  of  dew  by  way  of  tears.
And  the  sun  ascended  the  eastern  mountain,  stretching  forth
its  first  rays,  like  a  warning  hand,  to  dissuade  him  from
entering  that  brigand-haunted  wood.  Then  he  travelled
through  it  with  his  wife  and  daughter,  having  his  feet
wounded  with  sharp  points  of  kusa  grass,  and  he  reached  a
village  of  the  Bhillas.  It  was  full  of  men  who  robbed  their
neighbours  of  life  and  property,  and  shunned  by  the  virtuous,
like  the  strong  city  of  Death.

Then  beholding  the  king  from  a  distance  with  his  dress
and  ornaments,  many  Savaras,  armed  with  various  weapons,
ran  to  plunder  him.  When  King  Dharma  saw  that,  he  said
to  his  daughter  and  wife  :  "  The  barbarians  will  seize  on  you
first,  so  enter  the  wood  in  this  direction."  When  the  king
said  this  to  them,  Queen  Chandravati  and  her  daughter
Lavanyavati,  in  their  terror,  plunged  into  the  middle  of  the
wood.  And  the  brave  king,  armed  with  sword  and  shield,
killed  many  of  the  Savaras,  who  came  towards  him,  raining
arrows.  Then  the  chief  summoned  the  whole  village,  and
falling  on  the  king,  who  stood  there  alone,  they  slashed  his
shield  to  pieces  and  killed  him  ;  and  then  the  host  of  bandits
departed  with  his  ornaments.  And  Queen  Chandravati,
concealed  in  a  thicket  of  the  wood,  saw  from  a  distance  her
husband  slain  ;  so  in  her  bewilderment  she  fled  with  her
daughter,  and  they  entered  another  dense  forest  a  long
distance  off.  There  they  found  that  the  shadows  of  the
trees,  afflicted  by  the  heat  of  midday,  had  laid  themselves
at  their  cool  roots,  imitating  travellers.  So,  tired  and  sad,
the  queen  sat  down  weeping  with  her  daughter,  in  a  spot  on
the  bank  of  a  lotus-lake,  under  the  shade  of  an  asoka  tree.

In  the  meanwhile  a  chief,  who  lived  near,  came  to  that
forest  on  horseback,  with  his  son,  to  hunt.  He  was  named
Chandasimha,  and  when  he  saw  their  footsteps  imprinted  in
the  dust,  he  said  to  his  son  Sinhaparakrama  :  "  We  will
follow  up  these  lovely  and  auspicious  tracks,  and  if  we  find
the  ladies  to  whom  they  belong,  you  shall  choose  whichever
you  please  of  them."  When  Chandasimha  said  this,  his  son
Sinhaparakrama  said  to  him  :  "I  should  like  to  have  for  a
wife  the  one  that  has  these  small  feet,  for  I  know  that  she


118  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

will  be  young  and  suited  to  me.  But  this  one  with  large
feet,  being  older  than  the  other,  will  just  suit  you."  When
Chandasimha  heard  this  speech  of  his  son's,  he  said  to  him :
"  What  is  this  that  you  say  ?  Your  mother  has  only  recently
gone  to  heaven,  and  now  that  I  have  lost  so  good  a  wife,  how
can  I  desire  another  ?  "  When  Chandasimha's  son  heard
that,  he  said  to  him  :  "  Father,  do  not  say  so,  for  the  home
of  a  householder  is  empty  without  a  wife.  Moreover,  have
you  not  heard  the  stanza  composed  by  Muladeva  ?  '  Who
that  is  not  a  fool  enters  that  house  in  which  there  is  no
shapely  love  eagerly  awaiting  his  return,  which,  though
called  a  house,  is  really  a  prison  without  chains.'  So,  father,
my  death  will  lie  at  your  door  if  you  do  not  take  as  your
wife  that  companion  of  the  lady  whom  I  have  chosen."

When  Chandasimha  heard  this  speech  of  his  son's,  he
approved  it,  and  went  on  slowly  with  him,  tracking  up  their
footsteps.  And  he  reached  that  spot  near  the  lake,  and  saw
that  dark  Queen  Chandravati,  adorned  with  many  strings  of
pearls,1  sitting  in  the  shade  of  a  tree.  She  looked  like  the
midnight  sky  in  the  middle  of  the  day,  and  her  daughter,
Lavanyavati,  like  the  pure  white  moonlight,  seemed  to  il-
lumine her.  And  he  and  his  son  eagerly  approached  her,  and
she,  when  she  saw  him,  rose  up  terrified,  thinking  that  he  was
a  bandit.

But  the  queen's  daughter  said  to  her  :  "  Mother,  do  not
be  afraid ;  these  are  not  bandits ;  these  two  gentle-looking,
well-dressed  persons  are  certainly  some  nobles  come  here  to
hunt."  However,  the  queen  still  continued  to  hesitate  ;  and
then  Chandasimha  got  down  from  his  horse  and  said  to  the
two  ladies  :  "  Do  not  be  alarmed  :  we  have  come  here  to  see
you  out  of  love ;  so  take  confidence  2  and  tell  us  fearlessly
who  you  are,  since  you  seem  like  Rati  and  Priti  fled  to  this
wood  in  sorrow  at  Kama's  having  been  consumed  by  the
flames  of  Siva's  fiery  eye.     And  how  did  you  two  come  to

1  By  reading  muktdtdraughamanditam,  with  the  D.  text,  we  see  it  was  rather
the  great  splendour  of  the  orients  (pearls  of  the  finest  water)  that  attracted
Chandasimha. — n.m.p.

2  I  read  visvasya,  with  the  Sanskrit  College  MS.,  in  place  of  visramya,  which
means  "having  rested."


COMPLICATED  RELATIONSHIPS  119

enter  this  unpeopled  wood  ?  For  these  forms  of  yours  are
fitted  to  dwell  in  a  gem-adorned  palace.  And  our  minds  are
tortured  to  think  how  your  feet,  that  deserve  to  be  supported
by  the  lap  of  beautiful  women,  can  have  traversed  this  ground
full  of  thorns.  And,  strange  to  say,  the  dust  raised  by  the
wind,  falling  on  your  faces,  makes  our  faces  lose  their  bright-
ness from  despondency.1  And  the  furious  heat  of  the  beams
of  the  fierce-rayed  sun,  as  it  plays  on  your  flower-soft  bodies,
burns  us.  So  tell  us  your  story  ;  for  our  hearts  are  afflicted  :
we  cannot  bear  to  see  you  thus  abiding  in  a  forest  full  of  wild
beasts."

When  Chandasimha  said  this,  the  queen  sighed,  and,  full
of  shame  and  grief,  slowly  told  him  her  story.  Then  Chanda-
simha, seeing  that  she  had  no  protector,  comforted  her  and
her  daughter,  and  coaxed  them  with  kind  words  into  be-
coming members  of  his  family.  And  he  and  his  son  put  the
queen  and  her  daughter  on  their  horses,  and  conducted  them
to  their  rich  palace  in  Vittapapuri.  And  the  queen,  being
helpless,  submitted  to  his  will,  as  if  she  had  been  born  again
in  a  second  life.  What  is  an  unprotected  woman,  fallen  into
calamity  in  a  foreign  land,  to  do  ?  Then  Sinhaparakrama,  the
son  of  Chandasimha,  made  Chandravati  his  wife,  on  account
of  the  smallness  of  her  feet.  And  Chandasimha  made  her
daughter,  the  Princess  Lavanyavati,  his  wife,  on  account  of
the  largeness  of  her  feet.  For  they  made  this  agreement
originally,  when  they  saw  the  two  tracks  of  the  small  foot-
steps ;    and  who  ever  swerves  from  his  plighted  word  ?

So,  from  the  mistake  about  the  feet,  the  daughter  became
the  wife  of  the  father,  and  the  mother  the  wife  of  the  son ;
and  so  the  daughter  became  the  mother-in-law  of  her  own
mother,  and  the  mother  became  the  daughter-in-law  of  her
own  daughter.  And  in  course  of  time  both  of  them  had  by
those  husbands  sons  and  daughters,  and  they  also  had  sons
and  daughters  in  due  course  of  time.  So  Chandasimha  and
Sinhaparakrama  lived  in  their  city,  having  obtained  as  wives
Lavanyavati  and  Chandravati."

1  I  adopt  Dr  Kern's  conjecture  of  hata  for  ahata.


120  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

163g.  King  Trivikramasena  and  the  Mendicant

When  the  Vetala  had  told  this  story  on  the  way  at  night,
he  again  put  a  question  to  King  Trivikramasena  :  "  Now,
King,  about  the  children  who  were  in  course  of  time  born  to
the  mother  and  daughter  by  the  son  and  the  father  in  those
two  lines — what  relationship  did  they  bear  to  one  another  ?
Tell  me  if  you  know.  And  the  curse  before  threatened  will
descend  on  you  if  you  know  and  do  not  tell."

When  the  king  heard  this  question  of  the  Vetala's,  he
turned  the  matter  over  and  over  again  in  his  mind,  but  he
could  not  find  out,  so  he  went  on  his  way  in  silence.  Then
the  Vetala  in  the  dead  man's  body,  perched  on  the  top  of
his  shoulder,  laughed  to  himself,  and  reflected  :  "  Ha  !  ha  !
the  king  does  not  know  how  to  answer  this  puzzling  ques-
tion, so  he  is  glad,  and  silently  goes  on  his  way  with  very
nimble  feet.  Now  I  cannot  manage  to  deceive  this  treasure-
house  of  valour  any  further,1  and  this  is  not  enough  to  make
that  mendicant  stop  playing  tricks  with  me,  so  I  will  now
deceive  that  villain,  and  by  an  artifice  bestow  the  success,
which  he  has  earned,  upon  this  king,  whom  a  glorious  future
awaits."

When  the  Vetala  had  gone  through  these  reflections,  he
said  to  the  king  :  "  King,  though  you  have  been  worried  with
so  many  journeys  to  and  fro  in  this  cemetery  terrible  with
black  night,  you  seem  quite  happy,  and  you  do  not  show
the  least  irresolution.  I  am  pleased  with  this  wonderful
courage  that  you  show.2  So  now  carry  off  this  body,  for  I
am  going  out  of  it ;  and  listen  to  this  advice  which  I  give
you  for  your  welfare,  and  act  on  it.  That  wicked  mendicant,
for  whom  you  have  fetched  this  human  corpse,  will  imme-
diately summon  me  into  it,  and  honour  me.  And  wishing  to
offer  you  up  as  a  victim,  the  rascal  will  say  to  you  :  '  King,
prostrate  yourself  on  the  ground  in  such  a  way  that  eight

1  I  read  param,  with  the  MS.  in  the  Sanskrit  College.

2  This  idea  is  found  also  in  European  story-books.  See  Kuhn's  Sagen  mis
Westfalen,  p.  277  :  "  Diese  Unerschrockenheit  gefiel  dem  Tetifel  so  sehr,  dass  sich
sein  Zom  nicht  nur  legte,  sondern"  etc.  See  also  Grimm's  Irische  Elfenmarchen
(which  is  based  on  Croker's  Tales),  p.  8.


THE  CORPSE  IS  DELIVERED


121


limbs  will  touch  it.'  Then,  great  King,  you  must  say  to
that  ascetic  1  :  '  Show  me  first  how  to  do  it,  and  then  I  will
do  exactly  as  you  do.'  Then  he  will  fling  himself  on  the
ground,  and  show  you  how  to  perform  the  prostration,  and
that  moment  you  must  cut  off  his  head  with  the  sword.
Then  you  will  obtain  that  prize  which  he  desires,  the  sove-
reignty of  the  Vidyadharas.  Enjoy  this  earth  by  sacrificing
him  !  But  otherwise  that  mendicant  will  offer  you  up  as
a  victim.  It  was  to  prevent  this  that  I  threw  obstacles  in
your  way  for  such  a  long  time  here.  So  depart ;  may  you
prosper  !  "  When  the  Vetala  had  said  this,  he  went  out  of
that  human  corpse  that  was  on  the  king's  shoulder.

Then  the  king  was  led  by  the  speech  of  the  Vetala,  who
was  pleased  with  him,  to  look  upon  the  ascetic  Kshantisila
as  his  enemy,  but  he  went  to  him  in  high  spirits,  where  he
sat  under  the  banyan- tree,  and  took  with  him  that  human
corpse.

1  Sramana.


CHAPTER  XCIX

163g  (25).  Conclusion  of  King  Trivikramasena  and  the

Mendicant l

THEN  King  Trivikramasena  came  up  to  that  mendi-
cant Kshantisila,  carrying  that  corpse  on  his  shoulder.
And  he  saw  that  ascetic,  alone  at  the  foot  of  a  tree,
in  the  cemetery  that  was  terrible  with  a  night  of  the  black
fortnight,  eagerly  awaiting  his  arrival.  He  was  in  a  circle
made  with  the  yellow  powder  of  bones,  the  ground  within
which  was  smeared  with  blood,  and  which  had  pitchers  full
of  blood  placed  in  the  direction  of  the  cardinal  points.2  It
was  richly  illuminated  with  candles  of  human  fat,8  and  near
it  was  a  fire  fed  with  oblations  ;  it  was  full  of  all  the  necessary
preparations  for  a  sacrifice,  and  in  it  the  ascetic  was  engaged
in  worshipping  his  favourite  deity.

So  the  king  went  up  to  him,  and  the  mendicant,  seeing
that  he  had  brought  the  corpse,  rose  up  delighted,  and  said,
praising  him  :  "  Great  King,  you  have  conferred  on  me  a
favour  difficult  to  accomplish.  To  think  that  one  like  you
should  undertake  this  enterprise  in  such  a  place  and  at  such
a  time !  Indeed  they  say  with  truth  that  you  are  the  best
of  all  noble  kings,  being  a  man  of  unbending  courage,4  since
you  forward  the  interests  of  another  with  such  utter  dis-
regard of  self.  And  wise  men  say  that  the  greatness  of
great  ones  consists  in  this  very  thing,  that  they  swerve  not
from  what  they  have  engaged  i  to  do,  even  though  their  lives
are  in  danger."

With  these  words  the  mendicant,  thinking  he  had  gained

1  See  Appendix,  p.  263. — n.m.p.

2  I  read,  with  the  MS.  in  the  Sanskrit  College,  lipta  for  klipta,  and  purna
for  purva.

3  See  Vol.  Ill,  pp.  150-154.— n.m.p.

4  The  Sanskrit  College  MS.  reads  nishkampam.  But  perhaps  we  ought
to  read  nishkampa,  "  O  fearless  one."  Satyam  must  be  used  adverbially.
Kulabhubhritam  also  means  (e  of  great  mountains."


THE  END  OF  THE  MENDICANT  123

his  end,  took  the  corpse  down  from  the  shoulder  of  that
king.  And  he  bathed  it,  and  anointed  it,  and  threw  a  gar-
land round  it,  and  placed  it  within  that  circle.  And  he
smeared  his  limbs  with  ashes,  and  put  on  a  sacrificial  thread
of  hair,  and  clothed  himself  in  the  garments  of  the  dead,
and  thus  equipped  he  continued  for  a  time  in  meditation.
Then  the  mendicant  summoned  that  mighty  Vetala  by  the
power  of  spells,  and  made  him  enter  the  corpse,  and  pro-
ceeded to  worship  him.  He  offered  to  him  an  argha x  of
white  human  teeth  in  a  skull  by  way  of  an  argha  vessel  ;
and  he  presented  to  him  flowers  and  fragrant  unguents  ;  and
he  gratified  him  with  the  savoury  reek  of  human  eyes,2
and  made  an  offering  to  him  of  human  flesh.  And  when  he
had  finished  his  worship,  he  said  to  the  king,  who  was  at  his
side  :  "  King,  fall  on  the  ground,  and  do  obeisance  with  all
your  eight  limbs  to  this  high  sovereign  of  spells  who  has
appeared  here,  in  order  that  this  bestower  of  boons  may
grant  you  the  accomplishment  of  your  heart's  desire."

When  the  king  heard  that,  he  called  to  mind  the  words
of  the  Vetala,  and  said  to  the  mendicant :  "  I  do  not  know
how  to  do  it,  reverend  sir  ;  do  you  show  me  first,  and  then  I
will  do  exactly  as  you."  Then  the  mendicant  threw  himself
on  the  ground,  to  show  the  king  what  he  was  to  do,  and  then
the  king  cut  off  his  head  with  a  stroke  of  his  sword.  And
he  tore  and  dragged  3  the  lotus  of  his  heart  out  of  his  inside,
and  offered  his  heart  and  head  as  two  lotuses  to  that  Vetala.

Then  the  delighted  hosts  of  goblins  uttered  shouts  of
applause  on  every  side,  and  the  Vetala  said  to  the  king  from
inside  the  corpse  :  "  King,  the  sovereignty  of  the  Vidya-
dharas,  which  this  mendicant  was  aiming  at,  shall  fall  to  your
lot  after  you  have  finished  the  enjoyment  of  your  earthly
sway.  Since  I  have  given  you  much  annoyance,  choose
whatever  boon  you  desire."  When  the  Vetala  said  this,  the
king  said  to  him  :    "  Since  you  are  pleased  with  me,  every

1  In  the  I),  text  "very  pure  human  blood"  (sunirmalaih  nararaktaih)  is  offered
as  an  argha,  an  oblation  to  gods  and  venerable  men,  generally  consisting  of
water,  rice  and  durva  grass. — n.m.p.

2  I  read  nctraiseha  for  netre  cha,  with  the  Sanskrit  College  MS.

3  Perhaps  patitat  would  give  a  better  sense.


124  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

boon  that  I  could  desire  is  obtained  ;  nevertheless,  as  your
words  cannot  be  uttered  in  vain,  I  crave  this  boon  of  you  :
may  these  first  twenty-four  questions  and  answers,  charming
with  their  various  tales,  and  this  conclusion,  the  twenty-
fifth  of  the  series,  be  all  famous  and  honoured  on  the  earth  !  ':
When  the  king  made  this  request  to  the  Vetala,  the  latter
replied  :  "  So  be  it !  And  now  listen,  King  ;  I  am  going  to
mention  a  peculiar  excellence  which  it  shall  possess.  This
string  of  tales,  consisting  of  the  twenty-four  first,  and  this
final  concluding  tale,  shall  become,  under  the  title  of  c  The
Twenty-five  Tales  of  a  Vampire,'  famous  and  honoured  on
the  earth,  as  conducing  to  prosperity  !  Whosoever  shall
read  respectfully  even  a  sloka  of  it,  or  whosoever  shall  hear
it  read,  even  they  two  shall  immediately  be  freed  from  their
curse.  And  Yakshas,  and  Vetalas,  and  Kushmandas,  and
witches,  and  Rakshasas,  and  other  creatures  of  the  kind
shall  have  no  power  where  this  shall  be  recited."  When
the  Vetala  had  said  this,  he  left  that  human  corpse,  and
went  by  his  supernatural  deluding  power  to  the  habitation
he  desired.

Then  Siva,  being  pleased,  appeared,  accompanied  by  all
the  gods,  to  that  king,  visibly  manifest,  and  said  to  him,  as
he  bowed  before  him  :  "  Bravo,  my  son,  for  that  thou  hast
to-day  slain  this  hypocritical  ascetic,  who  was  so  ardently  in
love  with  the  imperial  sovereignty  over  the  Vidyadharas  !  I
originally  created  thee  out  of  a  portion  of  myself,  as  Vikra-
maditya,  in  order  that  thou  mightest  destroy  the  Asuras,
that  had  become  incarnate  in  the  form  of  Mlechchhas.  And
now  thou  hast  again  been  created  by  me  as  an  heroic  king
of  the  name  of  Trivikramasena,  in  order  that  thou  mightest
overcome  an  audacious  evildoer.  So  thou  shalt  bring  under
thy  sway  the  earth  with  the  islands  and  the  realms  below,
and  shalt  soon  become  supreme  ruler  over  the  Vidyadharas.
And  after  thou  hast  long  enjoyed  heavenly  pleasures,  thou
shalt  become  melancholy,  and  shalt  of  thy  own  will  abandon
them,  and  shalt  at  last  without  fail  be  united  with  me.
Now  receive  from  me  this  sword  named  Invincible,  by  means
of  which  thou  shalt  duly  obtain  all  this."  When  the  god
Siva  had  said  this  to  the  king,  he  gave  him  that  splendid


SOVEREIGNTY  OVER  THE  VIDYADHARAS     125

sword,  and  disappeared  after  he  had  been  worshipped  by  him
with  devout  speeches  and  flowers.

Then  King  Trivikramasena,  seeing  that  the  whole  business
was  finished,  and  as  the  night  had  come  to  an  end,  entered
his  own  city  Pratishthana.  There  he  was  honoured  by  his
rejoicing  subjects,  who  in  course  of  time  came  to  hear  of
his  exploits  during  the  night,  and  he  spent  the  whole  of  that
day  in  bathing,  giving  gifts,  in  worshipping  Siva,  in  dancing,
singing,  music  and  other  enjoyments  of  the  kind.  And  in  a
few  days  that  king,  by  the  power  of  the  sword  of  Siva,  came
to  enjoy  the  earth,  that  was  cleared  of  all  enemies,  together
with  the  islands  and  the  lower  regions  ;  and  then  by  the  ap-
pointment of  Siva  he  obtained  the  high  imperial  sovereignty
over  the  Vidyadharas,  and  after  enjoying  it  long,  at  last  be-
came united  with  the  blessed  one,  so  attaining  all  his  ends.1

163.  Story  of  Mrigdnkadatta

When  that  minister  Vikramakesarin,  meeting  in  the  way
the  successful 2  Prince  Mrigankadatta,  after  he  had  been  long
separated  from  him  by  a  curse,  had  told  him  all  this,  he
went  on  to  say  to  him :  "  So,  Prince,  after  that  old  Brahman
had  told  me  in  that  village  this  story,  called  c  The  Twenty-
five  Tales  of  a  Vampire,'  he  went  on  to  say  to  me:  'Well,
my  son,  did  not  that  heroic  King  Trivikramasena  obtain
from  the  favour  of  a  Vetala  the  thing  that  he  desired  ?  So
do  you  also  receive  from  me  this  spell,  and  laying  aside  your
state  of  despondency  win  over  a  chief  among  the  Vetalas,  in
order  that  you  may  obtain  reunion  with  Prince  Mriganka-
datta. For  nothing  is  unattainable  by  those  who  possess
endurance  :  who,  my  son,  will  not  fail,  if  he  allows  his
endurance  to  break  down  ?     So  do  what  I  recommend  you

1  Here  ends  the  Vetalapaiichavimsati,  which  began  in  Vol.  VI,  p.  165. —

N.M.P.

2  The  Sanskrit  College  MS.  reads  sa  kritartham, But  surely  Mriganka-
datta could  hardly  be  described  as  "successful"  before  he  had  obtained
Sasankavati.  The  difficulty,  however,  vanishes  if  instead  of  B.'s  svakritartham
nijagada  rajaputram  we  read  prakrtartham  nijagada  rajaputram  with  D.  The
translation  then  would  be  "spoke  to  the  prince  (again)  of  the  present
subject."     See  Speyer,  op.  cit.,  p.  138. — n.m.p.


126  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

to  do  out  of  affection  ;  for  you  kindly  delivered  me  from  the
pain  of  the  bite  of  a  poisonous  serpent.' 1  When  the  Brah-
man said  this,  I  received  from  him  the  spell  with  the  practice
to  be  employed  with  it,  and  then,  King,  I  took  leave  of  him,
and  went  to  Ujjayim.  There  I  got  hold  of  a  corpse  in  the
cemetery  at  night,  and  I  washed  it  and  performed  all  the
necessary  processes  with  regard  to  it,  and  I  summoned  a
Vetala  into  it  by  means  of  that  spell,  and  duly  worshipped
him.  And  to  satisfy  his  hunger,  I  gave  him  human  flesh  to
eat ;  and  being  greedy  for  the  flesh  of  men,  he  ate  that  up
quickly,  and  then  said  to  me  :  '  I  am  not  satisfied  with  this  ;
give  me  some  more.'  And  as  he  would  not  wait  any  time,  I
cut  off  my  own  flesh,2  and  gave  it  to  him  to  please  him  ;
and  that  made  that  prince  of  magicians  exceedingly  pleased
with  me.  Then  he  said  to  me  :  '  My  friend,  I  am  much
pleased  now  with  this  intrepid  valour  of  thine,  so  become
whole  in  thy  limbs  as  thou  wast  before,  and  crave  from  me
whatever  boon  thou  desirest.'  When  the  Vetala  said  this
to  me,  I  answered  him  then  and  there  :  *  Convey  me,  god,
to  that  place  where  my  master  Mrigankadatta  is  ;  there  is
no  other  boon  which  I  desire  more  than  this.'  Then  the
mighty  Vetala  said  to  me  :  '  Then  quickly  get  up  on  my
shoulder,  that  I  may  carry  thee  rapidly  to  that  master  of
thine.'  When  the  Vetala  said  this,  I  consented,  and  eagerly
climbed  up  on  his  shoulder,  and  then  the  Vetala,  that  was
inside  that  human  corpse,  rapidly  set  out  through  the  air,
carrying  me  with  him.  And  he  has  brought  me  here  to-
day, King;  and  when  that  mighty  Vetala  saw  you  on  the
way,  he  brought  me  down  from  the  air,  and  thus  I  have

1  The  B.  text  is  corrupt  here.  Read  with  the  D.  text  tvam  me  bandhuh
sarpadamsartiharia,  "  I  hold  you  for  my  kinsman,  since  you  have  rescued  me
of  the  pain  of  a  serpent's  bite."     See  Speyer,  op.  cit.,  p.  138. — n.m.p.

2  See  Vol.  I,  pp.  84,  84W1,  85,  and  also  Vol.  VI,  pp.  122,  122w2,  123w.  To
the  references  given  in  Vol.  I,  I  would  add  F.  Panzer,  Beowulf,  1 910,  p.  191  ;
and  to  those  in  Vol.  VI,  the  tale  of  "  La  Montagne  Noire,"  Melusine,  vol.  ii,
p.  447.  Here  the  hero  rides  on  the  back  of  a  crow,  to  whom  he  has  to  give
flesh  as  often  as  he  says  "  couac."  At  last  he  has  to  give  him  flesh  from  his
own  thighs.  The  wounds  are  healed  instantaneously  by  means  of  a  "Jiole
de  graisse"  which  he  carries  with  him.  Cf.  also  No.  6l  of  Gonzenbach's
Sicilianische  M'drchen  with  Dr  Kohler's  notes. — n.m.p.


AUGURY  OF  SUCCESS  127

been  made  to  reach  the  sole  of  your  foot.  And  I  have  to-day
been  reunited  with  my  master,  and  the  Vetala  has  departed,
having  accomplished  what  was  required  of  him.  This,  0
bestower  of  honour,1  is  my  great  adventure,  since  I  was
separated  from  you  by  the  curse  of  the  Naga."

When  Mrigankadatta,  as  he  was  going  to  UjjayinI  to
win  his  beloved,  had  heard,  on  the  way,  from  his  minister,
Vikramakesarin,  this  account  of  his  adventures  since  he  had
been  separated  from  him,  that  prince  rejoiced,  as  he  had  in
course  of  time  found  some  of  his  ministers,  who  were  separated
from  him  by  the  curse  of  Paravataksha,  and  as  he  augured
therefrom  success  in  all  that  he  had  in  hand.

1  The  Sanskrit  College  MS.  reads  kopita  for  mdnada — i.e.  "Since  I  was
separated  from  you  by  the  curse  of  the  enraged  Naga."


CHAPTER  C

INVOCATION

HONOUR   to   the    vanquisher    of    obstacles,1    round
whose   knees,  when  he  is  dancing  at  night,    there
winds  a  garland  of  stars,  which  appears  as  if  it  had
fallen  from  the  globes  on  his  forehead  !

163.  Story  of  Mrigankadatta

Then,  the  story  being  ended,  the  delighted  Mrigankadatta
rose  up  from  the  middle  of  the  path  and  set  out  again  for
Ujjayini,  for  which  he  had  long  ago  started  in  order  to  find
Sasankavati,  with  a  party  of  eight,  including  himself,  having
recovered  Vikramakesarin,  accompanied  by  Gunakara,  and
Vimalabuddhi,  and  Vichitrakatha,  and  Bhimaparakrama,  and
Prachandasakti,  and  the  Brahman  Srutadhi,  and  he  kept
looking  out  for  those  of  his  companions  separated  from  him
by  the  curse  of  the  Naga  whom  he  had  not  yet  recovered.

And  in  course  of  time  he  reached  a  treeless  desert,  all
the  water  in  which  had  been  dried  up  by  the  heat,  and  which
was  full  of  sand  heated  by  the  fierce  blaze  of  the  sun.  And
as  the  prince  was  traversing  it,  he  said  to  his  ministers  :
"  Observe  how  long,  terrible  and  difficult  to  cross  is  this
great  desert ;  for  it  has  in  it  no  refuge :  it  is  pathless  and
abandoned  by  men,  and  the  blaze  of  its  fire  of  grief  seems
to  ascend  in  these  sandy  mirages  ;  its  rough  and  dishevelled
locks  are  represented  by  the  dry,  rustling  blades  of  grass,
and  its  thorns  make  it  appear  to  have  its  hair  standing  on
end  through  fear  of  the  lions,  tigers  and  other  noisome
beasts ;  and  it  laments  in  the  cries  of  its  deer  exhausted
by  the  heat  and  longing  for  water.  So  we  must  cross  this
terrible  desert  as  quickly  as  we  can."

When  Mrigankadatta  had  said  this,  he  quickly  crossed
that   desert   with   his    ministers,    who    were    afflicted    with

1  Ganesa,  who  is  represented  with  the  head  of  an  elephant.  In  si.  8  I
read,  with  the  Sanskrit  College  MS.,  vibhrashtapatha.

128


THE  LAKE  AND  THE  TREE  129

hunger  and  thirst.  And  he  beheld  in  front  of  him  a  great
lake  filled  with  pellucid  and  cold  water,  looking  like  streams
that  had  flowed  down  from  the  moon  after  it  had  been  melted
with  the  heat  of  the  sun.  It  was  so  broad  that  it  filled  the
whole  horizon,  and  it  looked  like  a  jewel-mirror  made  by
the  Fortune  of  the  three  worlds,  in  order  to  behold  in  it  the
reflection  of  herself.  That  lake  resembled  the  Mahabharata,
for  in  it  the  Dhartarashtras  x  were  making  a  disturbance,
and  many  Arjuna-trees  were  reflected  2 ;  and  it  was  refresh-
ing and  sweet  to  the  taste ;  it  was  like  the  churned  sea  of
doom,  for  its  precious  fluid  was  drunk  by  the  blue-necked
jays  that  assembled  near  it,3  and  Vishnu  might  have  resorted
to  it  to  find  the  Goddess  of  Beauty 4 :  it  resembled  an
earthly  Patala,  for  its  profound  cool  depths  were  never
reached  by  the  rays  of  the  sun,  and  it  was  an  unfailing
receptacle  of  lotuses.5

And  on  the  western  shore  of  that  lake  the  prince  and
his  ministers  saw  a  great  and  wonderful  tree.  Its  numerous
far-reaching  boughs,  agitated  by  the  wind,  appeared  like
arms,  and  the  cloud-stream  that  clung  to  its  head  was  like
the  Ganges,  so  that  it  resembled  Siva  dancing.  With  its
lofty  top,  that  pierced  the  sky,  it  seemed  to  be  standing
erect  out  of  curiosity  to  see  the  beauty  of  the  garden  of
Nandana.  It  was  adorned  with  fruit  of  heavenly  flavour,
that  clung  to  its  branches,  and  so  it  looked  like  the  wishing-
tree  of  heaven,  with  goblets  of  nectar  suspended  on  it  by  the
gods.  It  waved  its  shoots  like  finger-tips,  and  seemed  with
the  voices  of  its  birds  to  say  again  and  again  :  "  Let  no  one
question  me  in  any  way  !  "  6

1  This  word  means  "the  sons  of  Dhritariishtra,"  and  also  "geese  with
black  legs  and  bills."

2  This  also  means  "in  which  Arjuna  was  displaying  great  activity."

3  There  is  also  an  allusion  to  Siva's  having  drunk  the  poison  that  was
produced  by  the  Churning  of  the  Ocean.

4  There  is  an  allusion  to  Vishnu's  having  obtained  Lakshml  from  the
ocean  when  churned.  The  passage  may  also  mean  that  the  beauty  of  the
lake  was  permanent.

5  This  expression  also  means  that  "  it  rested  on  the  head  of  the  serpent
Ananta"  :  which  was  true  of  Patala  or  Hades.

6  Instead  of  B.'s  prakshid  iti  read  sprakshtd,  with  the  D.  text,  "Let  no  one
touch  me  in  any  way  !"     See  Speyer,  op.  cit.,  p.  138. — n.m.p.

vol.   VII.  I


130  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

While  Prince  Mrigankadatta  was  looking  at  that  tree,
his  ministers,  worn  out  with  hunger  and  thirst,  ran  towards
it,  and  the  moment  they  saw  those  fruits  on  it,  they  climbed
The  Wonder-  UP  to  eat  tnem>  anc*  immediately  they  lost  their
Jul  Tree  thai  human  form,  and  were  all  six  suddenly  turned
transforms  Men  m^0  fruits.  Then  Mrigankadatta  was  bewildered
at  not  seeing  those  friends  of  his,  and  he  called
on  every  one  of  them  there  by  name.  But  when  they  gave
no  answer,  and  could  not  be  seen  anywhere,  the  prince  ex-
claimed in  a  voice  agonised  with  despair  :  "  Alas  !  I  am
undone  !  "  and  fell  on  the  ground  in  a  swoon.  And  the
Brahman  Srutadhi,  who  had  not  climbed  up  the  tree,  was
the  only  one  left  at  his  side.

So  the  Brahman  Srutadhi  at  once  said  to  him  by  way  of
consolation  :  "  Why,  my  sovereign,  do  you  lose  your  firm-
ness, and  despair,  though  you  have  learned  wisdom  ?  For  it
is  the  man  who  is  not  distracted  in  calamity  that  obtains
prosperity.  Did  you  not  find  those  ministers,  after  they  had
been  separated  from  you  by  the  curse  of  the  Naga  ?  In  like
manner  shall  you  again  recover  them,  and  get  back  the  others
also,  and  moreover  you  shall  soon  be  united  with  Sasan-
kavati."  When  Srutadhi  said  this  to  the  prince,  he  answered
him  :  "  How  can  this  be  ?  The  truth  is  that  all  this  train  of
events  was  arranged  for  our  ruin  by  the  Disposer.  If  it  was
not  so  arranged,  how  came  the  Vetala  to  appear  in  the  night
and  Bhimaparakrama  to  do  as  he  did,  and  how  came  it  to
pass  that  I  heard  about  Sasankavati  through  the  conversa-
tion that  took  place  between  them,  and  that  I  set  out  from
Ayodhya  to  fetch  her  ?  How  came  it  to  pass  also  that  we
were  all  separated  from  one  another  in  the  Vindhya  forest  by
the  curse  of  the  Naga,  and  that  some  of  us  were  in  course  of
time  reunited,  and  that  this  second  separation  has  now  taken
place  and  with  that  the  ruin  of  all  my  plans  ?  It  all  tallies
together,  my  friend.  The  fact  is  they  have  been  devoured
in  that  tree  by  a  demon,  and  without  them  what  is  Sasan-
kavati to  me,  or  what  is  my  life  worth  to  me  ?  So  away
with  delusions  !  "  When  Mrigankadatta  had  said  this,  he  rose
up  to  throw  himself  into  the  lake  out  of  sorrow,  although
Srutadhi  tried  to  prevent  him.


THE  PROPITIATION  OF  GANESA


131


At  that  moment  a  bodiless  voice  came  from  the  air  :  "  My
son,  do  not  act  rashly,  for  all  will  end  well  for  thee.  The  god
Ganesa  himself  dwells  in  this  tree,  and  he  has  been  to-day
insulted  by  thy  ministers  unwittingly.1  For  they,  King,
being  pinched  with  hunger,  climbed  up  into  the  tree  in  which
he  dwells,  to  pick  its  fruits,  in  a  state  of  impurity,  having
neither  rinsed  their  mouths  nor  washed  their  hands  and  feet ;
so  the  moment  that  they  touched  the  fruits  they  became
fruits  themselves.  For  Ganesa  inflicted  on  them  this  curse :
4  Let  them  become  that  on  which  their  minds  are  fixed  !  '
Moreover,  thy  four  other  ministers,  who,  the  moment  they
arrived  here,  climbed  up  the  tree  in  the  same  way,  were
turned  into  fruits  by  the  god.  Therefore  do  you  propitiate
Ganesa  with  ascetic  practices,  and  by  his  favour  thou  shalt
attain  all  thy  objects."

When  Mrigankadatta  had  been  thus  addressed  by  the
voice  from  the  air,  that  seemed  to  rain  nectar  into  his  ears,
hope  again  sprang  up  in  his  bosom,  and  he  gave  up  all  idea  of
suicide.  So  he  bathed  in  the  lake,  and  worshipped  Ganesa,
who  dwelt  in  that  tree,  without  taking  food,  and  joining  his
palms  in  an  attitude  of  supplication  praised  him  in  the  follow-
ing words  :  "  Hail,  thou  elephant-faced  lord,  who  art,  as  it
were,  worshipped  by  the  earth,  that  with  its  plains,  rocks
and  woods  bows  under  the  crushing  weight  of  thy  tumultuous
dance  !  Hail,  thou  that  hast  the  twin  lotuses  of  thy  feet
worshipped  by  the  three  worlds,  with  the  gods,  Asuras  and
men  that  dwell  in  them  ;  thou  whose  body  is  in  shape  like  a
pitcher  for  the  abundant  storing  of  various  splendid  successes  !
Hail,  thou,  the  flame  of  whose  might  blazes  forth  like  twelve
fierce  suns  rising  at  once  ;  thou  that  wast  a  premature  day
of  doom  to  the  race  of  the  Daityas,  whom  Siva,  Vishnu,
and  Indra  found  hard  to  conquer  !  Hail,  thou  that  wardest
off  calamity  from  thy  votaries  !  Hail,  thou  that  diffusest
a  blaze  of  flame  with  thy  hand,  while  it  glitters  with  thy
mighty  axe,  that  seems  anxious  to  illuminate  thee  in  sport !
I  fly  for  refuge  to  thee,  Ganesa,  that  wast  worshipped  even
by  Gauri,  in  order  that  her  husband  might  successfully  ac-
complish his  undertaking  in  the  conquest  of  Tripura ;  honour

1  Another  unintentional  injury.     See  p.  92W1,  and  Vol.  II,  p.  147ft1. — n.m.p.


132  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

to  thee  !  "  When  Mrigankadatta  had  in  these  words  praised
Ganesa,  he  spent  that  night  fasting,  on  a  bed  of  kusa  grass
under  that  tree.  In  the  same  way  that  prince  spent  eleven
nights,  being  engaged  in  propitiating  Ganesa,  the  king
of  impediments  ;  and  Srutadhi  remained  in  attendance  on
him.

And  on  the  night  of  the  twelfth  day  Ganesa  said  to  him  in
a  dream  :  "  My  son,  I  am  pleased  with  thee  ;  thy  ministers
shall  be  released  from  their  curse,  and  thou  shalt  recover
them ;  and  with  them  thou  shalt  go  and  win  Sasankavati  in
due  course  ;  and  thou  shalt  return  to  thy  own  city,  and  rule
the  whole  earth."  After  Mrigankadatta  had  been  thus  in-
formed in  a  dream  by  the  god  Ganesa,  he  woke  up,  when  the
night  came  to  an  end,  and  told  Srutadhi  the  vision  that  he
had  seen.  Srutadhi  congratulated  him  on  it;  and  then,  in
the  morning,  the  prince  bathed  and  worshipped  Ganesa,  and
proceeded  to  walk  round  the  tree  in  which  the  god  dwelt,
with  his  right  hand  towards  it,1  and  while  he  was  thus
engaged  all  his  ten  ministers  came  down  from  the  tree,
having  been  released  from  the  form  of  fruits,  and  fell  at  his
feet.  Besides  the  six  who  were  mentioned  before,  there  were
Vyaghrasena  and  Sthiilabahu,  and  Meghabala,  and  the  fourth,
Dridhamushti.

Then  the  prince,  having  recovered  all  those  ministers  at
the  same  instance,  with  eye,  with  gestures,2  and  with  voice
agitated  by  the  workings  of  joy,  looked  at  his  ministers,  one
by  one,  again  and  again,  exceedingly  lovingly,  and  embraced
them,  and  then  spoke  to  them  ;  having  successfully  attained
his  object.  And  they,  beholding  with  tears  in  their  eyes
their  master,  who,  after  the  asceticism  which  he  had  gone
through,  was  slender  as  a  new  moon,  and  having  been  told

1  See  Vol.  I,  pp.  190-193.— n.m.p.

2  The  Petersburg  lexicographers  read  kalanaya  for  kalataya.     The  three

verbs  correspond  to  the  three  nouns. Speyer  (op.  cit.,  p.   139),  however,

considers  pramadamanthanarambha  also  corrupt.  He  would  translate  the  passage
as  follows:  "Then  the  prince,  having  recovered  all  those  ministers  at  the
same  instance,  looked  at  them  with  his  eyes,  embraced  them  with  impetuous-
ness  and  then  spoke  to  them  with  a  faltering  voice,  owing  to  the  emotion  of
his  exceeding  love ;  so  he  saluted  them  one  by  one,  again  and  again,  happy
by  his  success." — n.m.p.


THE  MINISTERS  RECOVERED  133

the  true  explanation  of  the  whole  by  Srutadhi,  felicitated
themselves  on  having  truly  a  protecting  lord.

Then  Mrigankadatta,  having  attained  good  hope  of
accomplishing  his  enterprise,  joyfully  broke  his  fast  with
those  ministers,  who  had  performed  all  necessary  ablutions
in  the  tank.


CHAPTER  CI


163.  Story  of  Mrigdnkadatta

THEN  Mrigankadatta,  refreshed  by  breaking  his  fast,
sat  down  with  those  ministers  of  his  on  the  bank
of  that  lake.  Then  he  courteously  asked  those  four
ministers,  whom  he  had  recovered  that  day,  for  an  account
of  their  adventures  during  the  time  that  he  was  separated
Vvashrasena  fr°m  them.  Thereupon  that  one  of  them  who
relates  the  was  called  Vyaghrasena  said  to  him :  "  Listen,
Adventures  Prince,  I  now  proceed  to  relate  our  adventures.
MinisterTafter  When  I  was  carried  to  a  distance  from  you  by
their  Separation  the  curse  of  the  Naga  Paravataksha,  I  lost  my

from  the  Prince  sense^  and  ^  thaf.  ^^  j  wandered  through  the

forest  by  night.  At  last  I  recovered  consciousness,  but  the
darkness,  which  enveloped  me,  prevented  me  from  seeing
where  the  cardinal  points  lay,  and  what  path  I  ought  to
take.  At  last  the  night,  that  grief  made  long,1  came  to
an  end  ;  and  in  course  of  time  the  sun  arose,  that  mighty
god,  and  revealed  all  the  quarters  of  the  heaven.  Then  I
said  to  myself :  '  Alas  !  Where  can  that  master  of  mine
be  gone  ?  And  how  will  he  manage  to  exist  here  alone
separated  from  us  ?  And  how  am  I  to  recover  him  ?  Where
shall  I  look  for  him  ?  What  course  shall  I  adopt  ?  I  had
better  go  to  Ujjayini ;  for  I  may  perhaps  find  him  there  ;
for  he  must  go  there,  to  find  Sasankavati.'  With  such  hopes
I  set  out  slowly  for  Ujjayini,  threading  that  difficult  forest
that  resembled  calamity,  scorched  by  the  rays  of  the  sun,  that
resembled  showers  of  fiery  powder.

"  And  at  last,  somehow  or  other,  I  reached  a  lake,  with
full-blown  lotuses  for  expanded  eyes,  that  seemed  to  hold  con-
verse with  me  by  means  of  the  sweet  cries  of  its  swans  and
other  water-birds  ;   it  stretched  forth  its  ripples  like  hands  ;


The  Sanskrit  College  MS.  reads  dinayam  for  dirghayam.


134


THE  HERMIT-BOY  135

its  surface  was  calm  and  broad  1 ;  the  very  sight  of  it  took
away  all  grief ;  and  so  in  all  points  it  resembled  a  good  man.
I  bathed  in  it,  and  ate  lotus-fibres,  and  drank  water ;  and
while  I  was  lingering  on  its  bank  I  saw  these  three  arrive
there,  Dridhamushti,  and  Sthulabahu  and  Meghabala.  And
when  we  met,  we  asked  one  another  for  tidings  of  you.  And
as  none  of  us  knew  anything  about  you,  and  we  suspected  the
worst,  we  made  up  our  minds  to  abandon  the  body,  being
unable  to  endure  separation  from  you.

"  And  at  that  moment  a  hermit-boy  came  to  bathe  in  that
lake ;  his  name  was  Mahatapas,  and  he  was  the  son  of  Dirgha-
tapas.  He  had  matted  hair,  he  diffused  a  brightness  of  his
own,  and  he  seemed  like  the  God  of  Fire,  blazing  with  mighty
flame,  become  incarnate  in  the  body  of  a  Brahman,  in  order  to
consume  once  more  the  Khandava  forest 2 ;  he  was  clothed  in
the  skin  of  a  black  antelope,  he  had  an  ascetic's  water- vessel
in  his  left  hand,  and  on  his  right  wrist  he  bore  a  rosary  of
Aksha  seeds  by  way  of  a  bracelet ;  the  perfumed  earth  that
he  used  in  bathing  was  stuck  on  the  horns  of  the  deer  that
came  with  him,  and  he  was  accompanied  by  some  other
hermit-boys  like  himself.  The  moment  he  saw  us  about  to
throw  ourselves  into  the  lake  he  came  towards  us — for  the
good  are  easily  melted  with  compassion,  and  show  causeless
friendship  to  all.  And  he  said  to  us  :  6  You  ought  not  to
commit  a  crime  characteristic  of  cowards,  for  poltroons,  with
their  minds  blinded  with  grief,  fall  into  the  gulfs  of  calamity,
but  resolute  men,  having  eyes  enlightened  by  discernment,
behold  the  right  path,  and  do  not  fall  into  the  pit,  but  as-
suredly attain  their  goal.  And  you,  being  men  of  auspicious
appearance,  will  no  doubt  attain  prosperity ;  so  tell  me  what
is  your  grief  ?    For  it  grieves  my  heart  to  see  you  thus.'

"  When  the  hermit-boy  had  said  this,  I  at  once  told
him  the  whole  of  our  adventure  from  the  beginning ;  then
that  boy,  who  could  read  the  future,3  and  his  companions
exhorted  us  with  various  speeches,  and  diverted  our  minds

1  When  applied  to  the  good  man,  it  means  "his  heart  was  benevolent
and  large."

2  See  Vol.  Ill,  p.  228,  228w2.

3  I  follow  the  reading  of  the  Sanskrit  College  MS. — ayati-daj-sina.


136  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

from  suicide.  Then  the  hermit-boy,  after  he  had  bathed,  took
us  to  his  father's  hermitage,  which  was  at  no  great  distance,
to  entertain  us.

"  There  that  hermit's  son  bestowed  on  us  the  arghya,  and
made  us  sit  down  in  a  place  in  which  even  the  trees  seemed  to
have  entered  on  a  course  of  penance,  for  they  stood  aloft  on
platforms  of  earth,  and  lifted  on  high  their  branches  like  arms,
and  drank  in  the  rays  of  the  sun.  And  then  he  went  and
asked  all  the  trees  in  the  hermitage,  one  after  another,  for
alms.  And  in  a  moment  his  alms-vessel  was  filled  with  fruits
that  of  themselves  dropped  from  the  trees  ;  and  he  came
back  with  it  to  us.  And  he  gave  us  those  fruits  of  heavenly
flavour,  and  when  we  had  eaten  them,  we  became,  as  it  were,
satisfied  with  nectar.

"  And  when  the  day  came  to  an  end,  and  the  sun  de-
scended into  the  sea,  and  the  sky  was  filled  with  stars — as  if
with  spray  flung  up  by  his  fall — and  the  moon,  having  put  on
a  white  bark-robe  of  moonlight,  had  gone  to  the  ascetic  grove
on  the  top  of  the  eastern  mountain1 — as  if  desiring  to  with-
draw from  the  world  on  account  of  the  fall  of  the  sun — we
went  to  see  the  hermits,  who  had  finished  all  their  duties  and
were  sitting  together  in  a  certain  part  of  the  hermitage.  We
bowed  before  them,  and  sat  down,  and  those  great  sages  wel-
comed us,  and  with  kindly  words  at  once  asked  us  whence
we  came.  Then  that  hermit-boy  told  them  our  history  until
the  time  of  our  entering  the  hermitage.  Then  a  wise  hermit
there,  of  the  name  of  Kanva,  said  to  us  :  '  Come,  why  have
you  allowed  yourselves  to  become  so  dispirited,  being  as  you
are,  men  of  valour  ?  For  it  is  the  part  of  a  brave  man  to
display  unbroken  firmness  in  calamity,  and  freedom  from
arrogance  in  success,  and  never  to  abandon  fortitude.  And
great  men  attain  the  title  of  great  by  struggling  through
great  difficulties  by  the  aid  of  resolution,  and  accomplish-
ing great  things.  In  illustration  of  this,  listen  to  this  story
of  Sundarasena,  and  hear  how  he  endured  hardship  for  the
sake  of  Mandaravati.'  When  the  hermit  Kanva  had  said
this,  he  began,  in  the  hearing  of  us  and  of  all  the  hermits,  to
tell  the  following  tale.

1  The  Sanskrit  College  MS.  gives  prachyam  saila-sringa-tapovanam.


THE  FIVE  MINISTERS


137


163h.  Sundarasena  and  Manddravati1

There  is  a  country  named  Nishadha,  that  adorns  the  face
of  the  northern  quarter  ;  in  it  there  was  of  old  a  city  of  the
name  of  Alaka.  In  this  city  the  people  were  always  happy
in  abundance  of  all  things,2  and  the  only  things  that  never
enjoyed  repose  were  the  jewel-lamps.  In  it  there  lived  a
king  of  the  name  of  Mahasena,  and  not  without  reason  was
he  so  named,  for  his  enemies  were  all  consumed  by  the
wonderful  and  terrible  fire  of  his  valour,  which  resembled
that  of  the  God  of  War.  That  king  had  a  prime  minister
named  Gunapalita,  who  was  like  a  second  Sesha,  for  he  was
a  mine  of  valour,  and  could  bear  up,  like  that  serpent,  the
weight  of  the  earth.  The  king,  having  destroyed  his  enemies,
laid  upon  him  the  weight  of  his  kingdom  and  devoted  himself
to  pleasure  ;  and  then  he  had  a  son  born  to  him  by  his  Queen
Sasiprabha,  named  Sundarasena.  Even  when  he  was  a  child,
he  was  no  child  in  good  qualities,  and  the  goddesses  of
Valour  and  Beauty  chose  him  for  their  self-elected  husband.

That  prince  had  five  heroic  ministers,  equal  in  age  and
accomplishments,  who  had  grown  up  with  him  from  their
childhood,  Chandaprabha,  and  Bhimabhuja,  and  Vyaghra-
parakrama,  and  the  heroic  Vikramasakti,  and  the  fifth  was
Dridhabuddhi.  And  they  were  all  men  of  great  courage,
endowed  with  strength  and  wisdom,  well  born,  and  devoted
to  their  master,  and  they  even  understood  the  cries  of  birds.3
And  the  prince  lived  with  them  in  his  father's  house  without
a  suitable  wife,  being  unmarried,  though  he  was  grown  up.
And  that  heroic  Sundarasena  and  his  ministers  reflected  :
"  Courage  invincible  in  assault,  and  wealth  won  by  his  own
arm,  and  a  wife  equal  to  him  in  beauty,  become  a  hero  on  this
earth.     Otherwise,  what  is  the  use  of  this  beauty  ?  "

And  one  day  the  prince  went  out  of  the  town  to  hunt,
accompanied  by  his  soldiers,  and  by  those  five  companions ;


1  In  his  Golden   Town,  L.  D.    Barnett   treats  this    as    a    separate    stor}\
See  pp.  37-56. — n.m.p.

2  The  Sanskrit  College  MS.  reads  sukhitejane.     The  sense  is  the  same.

3  See  Vol.  II,  pp.  107ft1,  108w;  Vol.  IV,  p.   145nT,  and  Grohmann,  Sagen
aus  Bohmen,  p.  242.


138


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


and  as  he  was  going  out,  a  certain  famous  female  mendicant
named  Katyayani,  bold  from  the  maturity  of  her  age,  who
had  just  returned  from  a  distant  foreign  country,  saw  him,
and  said  to  herself,  when  she  beheld  his  superhuman  beauty :
"  Is  this  the  moon  without  Rohini  or  the  God  of  Love  without
Rati  ?  "  But  when  she  asked  his  attendants,  and  found  out
that  it  was  the  prince,  she  was  astonished,  and  praised  the
marvellousness  of  the  creation  of  the  Disposer.1  Then  she
cried  out  to  the  prince  from  a  distance  with  a  shrill  and  far-
reaching  voice:  "Be  victorious,  O  Prince!"  and  so  saying
she  bowed  before  him.  But  at  that  moment  the  mind  of  the
prince  was  wholly  occupied  by  a  conversation  which  he  had
begun  with  his  ministers,  and  he  went  on  without  hearing  the
female  ascetic.  But  she  was  angry,  and  called  out  to  him  in
such  a  loud  voice  that  he  could  not  help  hearing  her  :  "  Ho  !
Prince  !  Why  do  you  not  listen  to  the  blessing  of  such  a  one
as  I  am  ?  What  king  or  prince  is  there  on  the  earth  that  does
not  honour  me  2  ?  But  if  your  youth  and  other  advantages
render  you  so  proud  now,  it  is  certain  that,  if  you  obtain  for
a  wife  the  maiden  Mandaravati,  the  daughter  of  the  King  of
Hansadvipa,  you  will  be  too  much  puffed  up  with  arrogance
to  listen  to  the  speech  of  Siva,3  the  great  Indra,  and  other
gods,  much  less  to  the  words  of  wretched  men."

When  the  ascetic  had  said  this,  Sundarasena,  being  full
of  curiosity,  called  her  to  him,  and  bent  before  her  and  pro-
pitiated her.  And  being  anxious  to  question  her,  he  sent  her
under  the  care  of  his  servants  to  rest  in  the  house  of  his
minister  Vikramasakti.  Then  the  prince  went  off,  and  after
he  had  enjoyed  the  sport  of  hunting,  he  returned  to  his  palace,
and  said  his  daily  prayers,  and  took  his  food,  and  then  he
sent  for  the  ascetic,  and  put  the  following  question  to  her  :
"  Reverend  mother,  who  is  this  maiden  named  Mandaravati,
that  you  spoke  of  to-day  ?  Tell  me,  for  I  feel  great  curiosity
about  her."

When  the  ascetic  heard  this,  she  said  to  him  :  "  Listen,  I
will  tell  you  the  whole  story.     I  am  in  the  habit  of  wandering


1  The  Sanskrit  College  MS.  reads  dhatuh  samagryya — (sic)  vaichitryam.

2  See  Vol.  Ill,  p.  259.— n.m.p.

3  The  Sanskrit  College  MS.  reads  manye  (I  think)  for  Hara.


THE  PICTURE— AND  ITS  EFFECT  139

about  the  whole  of  this  earth  and  the  islands,  for  the  sake  of
visiting  sacred  bathing-places  and  other  holy  spots.  And  in
the  course  of  my  travels  I  happened  to  visit  Hansadvipa.
There  I  saw  the  daughter  of  King  Mandaradeva,  a  suitable
match  for  the  sons  of  gods,  not  to  be  beheld  by  those  who
have  done  evil  works  ;  she  bears  the  name  of  MandaravatI,
and  has  a  form  as  charming  as  the  presiding  goddess  of
the  garden  of  the  gods  ;  the  sight  of  her  kindles  love,  and  she
seems  like  another  moon  all  composed  of  nectar,  created  by
the  Disposer.  There  is  no  other  beauty  on  the  earth  equal
to  hers  1 ;  only  you,  Prince,  I  think,  emulate  her  wealth  of
loveliness.  As  for  those  who  have  not  seen  her,  their  eyes
are  useless,  and  they  have  been  born  in  vain."

When  the  prince  heard  this  from  the  mouth  of  the  female
ascetic,  he  said  :  "  Mother,  how  are  we  to  get  a  sight  of  her
beauty,  which  is  so  surpassing  ?  "  When  the  female  ascetic
heard  this  speech  of  his,  she  said  :  "I  took  such  interest  in
her  on  that  occasion  that  I  painted  a  picture  of  her  on  canvas,
and  I  have  it  with  me  in  a  bag ;  if  you  feel  any  curiosity
about  it,  look  at  it."  When  she  had  said  this,  she  took  the
picture  out  of  her  bag,  and  showed  it  to  the  gratified  prince.
And  Sundarasena,  when  he  beheld  that  maiden,  who,  though
she  was  present  there  only  in  a  picture,  seemed  to  be  of
romantic  beauty,  and  like  a  flowing  forth  of  joy,  immediately
felt  his  limbs  covered  all  over  with  hairs  erect  from  hor-
ripilation, as  if  he  had  been  pierced  with  the  dense  arrows
of  the  god  of  the  flowery  bow.2  He  remained  motionless,
hearing  nothing,  speaking  nothing,  seeing  nothing ;  and,  with
his  whole  heart  fixed  on  her,  was  for  a  long  time  as  if  painted
in  a  picture.

WTien  the  prince's  ministers  saw  that,  they  said  to  that
female  ascetic  :  "  Reverend  mother,  paint  Prince  Sundara-
sena on  this  piece  of  canvas,  and  let  us  have  a  specimen  of
your  skill  in  catching  likenesses."  The  moment  she  heard
that,  she  painted  the  prince  on  canvas.     And  when  they  saw

1  The  Sanskrit  College  MS.  reads  sadrisl  and  anyatra.

2  For  falling  in  love  with  a  picture  see  Vol.  IV,  p.  132/*1.  For  the
conventional  signs  of  love  in  the  Greek  romances  see  Rohde,  Der  Griechiscke
Roman,  p.  157  et  seq.


140  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

that  it  was  a  striking  likeness,  all  who  were  present  there,
said  :  "  The  reverend  lady's  likenesses  exactly  resemble  the
originals,  for  when  one  looks  at  this  picture,  one  thinks  that
one  sees  the  prince  himself;  so  the  beauty  of  the  Princess
Mandaravati  is  sure  to  be  such  as  it  is  represented  in  the
picture."

When  the  ministers  had  said  this,  Prince  Sundarasena  took
the  two  pictures,  and  being  pleased,  honoured  that  female
ascetic.  Leaving  her  befittingly  dwelling  in  a  separate
place,  he  entered  the  inner  chamber,  carrying  the  portrait  of
his  beloved.  "  Can  it  be  a  face,"  [he  mused]  "  or  the  moon
with  the  blackness  of  its  markings  purged  by  loveliness  ?
Are  these  the  two  pitchers  of  Kama's  regal  coronation,  or  a
pair  of  breasts  ?  Are  these  waves  of  the  ocean  of  beauty,"
[or]  "  a  triple  belly-dimple  like  creeping  plants  ?  Is  this
a  hip,  or  Rati's  litter  of  sport  ?  "  In  this  way  studying
Mandaravati,  limb  by  limb,  though  he  had  only  her  painted
form  before  him,  he  remained  fallen  upon  his  couch ;  and
in  this  state  he  continued  day  after  day,  abstaining  from
meat  and  drink ;  and  so  in  the  course  of  a  few  days  he  was
completely  exhausted  by  the  pain  of  love's  fever.1

When  his  parents,  Sasiprabha  and  Mahasena,  found  that
out,  they  came  of  their  own  accord  and  asked  his  friends  the
cause  of  his  indisposition.  And  his  companions  told  them
the  whole  story,  as  it  had  happened,  how  the  daughter  of
the  King  of  Hansadvipa  had  come  to  be  the  cause  of  his
complaint.  Then  Mahasena  said  to  Sundarasena :  "  My
son,  why  do  you  so  improperly  conceal  this  attachment  of
yours  ?  For  Mandaravati  is  a  pearl  of  maidens,  and  she  will
be  a  good  match  for  you.  Besides,  her  father,  Mandaradeva,
is  a  great  friend  of  mine.  So  why  do  you  torment  yourself
about  a  matter  of  this  kind,  which  is  quite  becoming,  and
can  be  easily  arranged  by  an  ambassador  ?  "  When  King
Mahasena  had  said  this,  he  deliberated,  and  sent  off  an
ambassador  named  Surathadeva  to  Hansadvipa,  to  ask  for
the  daughter  of  King   Mandaradeva.     And  he  put  into  his

1  Tawney  has  merely  made  a  paraphrase  of  this  passage  describing
Mandaravati' s  beauty,  and  with  the  kind  help  of  Dr  Barnett  I  have  made  an
entirely  new  and  complete  translation. — n.m.p.


THE  AMBASSADOR  141

hand  the  portrait  of  Sundarasena,  executed  on  canvas  by
that  female  ascetic,  which  showed  how  wonderfully  handsome
he  was.

The  ambassador  travelled  quickly,  and  reached  the  city
of  King  Mahendraditya  on  the  shore  of  the  sea,  named
Sasankapura.  There  he  embarked  on  a  ship,  and  after
some  days  he  reached  the  palace  of  King  Mandaradeva  in
Hansadvipa.  He  was  announced  by  the  warders  and  entered
the  palace,  and  saw  that  king,  and  after  he  had  in  due
form  delivered  to  him  the  present,  he  said  to  him  :  "  Great
monarch,  King  Mahasena  sends  you  this  message  :  '  Give  your
daughter  to  my  son  Sundarasena  ;  for  a  female  ascetic,  of
the  name  of  Katyayani,  made  a  portrait  of  her,  and  brought
it  here,  and  showed  it  to  my  son,  as  the  picture  of  a  pearl  of
maidens.  And  as  Sundarasena's  beauty  so  nearly  resembles
hers,  I  felt  a  desire  to  have  his  form  painted  on  canvas  also,
and  herewith  I  send  the  picture.  Look  at  it.  Moreover,
my  son,  who  is  of  such  astonishing  beauty,  does  not  wish
to  be  married,  unless  he  can  find  a  wife  that  resembles  him,
and  nobody  but  your  daughter  is  a  match  for  him  in  appear-
ance.' This  is  the  message  the  king  entrusted  to  me,  when
he  put  this  portrait  into  my  hand.  Look  at  it,  King ;  let
the  spring-flower  be  united  to  the  spring."

When  the  king  heard  this  speech  of  the  ambassador's,
he  was  delighted,  and  he  sent  for  his  daughter  Mandaravati
and  the  queen  her  mother.  And  in  their  company  he  opened
and  looked  at  that  portrait,  and  immediately  he  ceased  to
cherish  the  proud  thought  that  there  was  no  fitting  match  for
his  daughter  on  the  earth.  And  he  said  :  "  My  daughter's
beauty  will  not  have  been  created  in  vain,  if  she  is  united  to
this  prince.  She  does  not  look  her  best  without  him,  nor  is
he  complete  without  her ;  what  is  the  lotus-bed  without  the
swan,  and  what  is  the  swan  without  the  lotus-bed  ?  "

When  the  king  said  this,  and  the  queen  expressed  her
complete  approbation  of  it,  Mandaravati  suddenly  became
bewildered  with  love.  She  remained  with  her  wide-expanded
eyes  immovably  fixed  on  the  picture,  as  if  possessed,  as  if
asleep  (though  she  was  wide  awake),  as  if  herself  a  paint-
ing.   Then  Mandaradeva,  seeing  his  daughter  in  that  state,


142  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

consented  to  give  her  in  marriage,  and  he  honoured  that
ambassador.

And  on  the  next  day  the  king  sent  off  his  counter-
ambassador,  who  was  a  Brahman  named  Kumaradatta,  to
King  Mahasena.  And  he  said  to  the  two  ambassadors  :
"  Go  quickly  to  that  King  Mahasena,  the  lord  of  Alaka,
and  say  to  him  from  me  :  '  I  give  you  my  daughter  out  of
friendship  ;  so  tell  me,  will  your  son  come  here,  or  shall  I
send  my  daughter  to  you  ?  '  "  When  the  two  ambassadors
had  received  this  message  from  the  king,  they  immediately
started  off  together  on  the  sea  in  a  ship  ;  and  they  reached
Sasankapura,  and  thence  they  travelled  by  land,  and  reached
that  opulent  city  of  Alaka,  which  seemed  like  the  original
Alaka.1  They  went  to  the  king's  palace  and  entered  with
the  usual  courtesies,  and  saw  King  Mahasena,  who  welcomed
them.  And  they  told  that  king  the  answer  which  Mandara-
deva  entrusted  to  them  ;  and  when  the  king  heard  it,  he  was
pleased,  and  showed  both  of  them  great  honour.

Then  the  king  found  out  the  star  under  which  the  prin-
cess was  born,  from  her  father's  ambassador ;  and  he  asked
his  astrologers  when  a  favourable  time  would  arrive  for  the
marriage  of  his  son.  And  they  answered  that  an  auspicious
time  would  present  itself  in  three  months  for  bridegroom
and  bride,  on  the  fifth  day  of  the  white  fortnight  of  the
month  Kartika.  And  so  the  King  of  Alaka  informed  Man-
daradeva  that  the  marriage  ought  to  take  place  on  that
day,  and  that  he  would  send  his  son,  and  this  he  wrote  in
a  letter,  and  committed  it  to  the  care  of  the  ambassador
Kumaradatta,  and  another  ambassador  of  his  own  named
Chandrasvamin.  So  the  ambassadors  departed,  and  gave  the
letter  as  they  were  directed,  and  told  the  King  of  Hansadvipa
all  that  had  taken  place.  The  king  approved,  and  after
honouring  Chandrasvamin,  the  ambassador  of  Mahasena,
he  sent  him  back  to  his  master.  And  he  returned  to  Alaka,
and  reported  that  the  business  was  satisfactorily  settled  ;
and  then  all  on  both  sides  remained  eagerly  expecting  the
auspicious  day.

And  in  the  meanwhile  Mandaravati,  in  Hansadvipa,  who

1  The  capital  of  the  God  of  Wealth.


THE  FIRE  OF  LOVE


143


had  long  ago  fallen  in  love  with  the  prince  from  seeing  his
picture,  thought  that  the  auspicious  day  for  the  marriage
was  a  long  way  off,  and  felt  unable  to  endure  so  much  delay  ;
and  being  affectionate,  she  became  desperately  enamoured,
and  was  grievously  tormented  with  the  fire  of  love.  And
in  the  eager  longing  of  her  heart  for  Sundarasena,  even  the
anointing  with  sandalwood  ointment  became  a  shower  of  hot
coals  on  her  body,  and  a  bed  of  lotus  leaves  was  to  her  a
bed  of  hot  sand,  and  the  rays  of  the  moon  seemed  like  the
scorching  points  of  flame  of  a  forest  conflagration.  She  re-
mained silent,  avoiding  food,  adopting  a  vow  of  loneliness  ;
and  when  her  confidante  questioned  her  in  her  anxiety,  she
was  at  last,  with  difficulty,  induced  to  make  the  following
avowal :  "  My  friend,  my  marriage  is  far  off,  and  I  cannot
bear  to  wait  for  the  time,  separated  from  my  intended
husband,  the  son  of  the  King  of  Alaka.  Distant  is  the  time,
and  the  place,  and  various  is  the  course  of  fate  ;  so  who
knows  what  will  happen  to  any  one  here  in  the  meantime  ?
So  I  had  better  die."  Saying  this,  MandaravatI,  being  sick
with  separation,  passed  immediately  into  a  miserable  state.

When  her  father  and  mother  heard  that  from  the  mouth
of  her  confidante,  and  saw  her  in  such  a  condition,  they
deliberated  with  the  ministers,  and  came  to  the  following
conclusion  :  "  That  King  Mahasena,  the  sovereign  of  Alaka,
is  on  good  terms  with  us,  and  the  Princess  MandaravatI  is
unable  to  endure  the  delay  here,  so  why  should  we  feel  any
delicacy  about  it  ?  Happen  what  will,  let  us  send  her  to
Alaka,  for  when  she  is  near  her  beloved,  she  will  be  able
patiently  to  endure  the  delay."  When  King  Mandaradeva
had  gone  through  these  deliberations,  he  comforted  his
daughter  MandaravatI,  and  made  her  embark  on  a  ship  with
wealth  and  attendants,  and  after  her  mother  had  recited  a
prayer  for  her  good  fortune  he  sent  her  off  from  Hansadvlpa
by  sea  on  an  auspicious  day.  to  travel  to  Alaka,  in  order  that
she  might  be  married  there  ;  and  he  sent  with  her  a  minister
of  his  own,  named  Vinltamati.

And  after  the  princess,  travelling  in  a  ship  on  the  ocean,
had  left  Hansadvlpa  some  days'  sail  behind  her,  there  sud-
denly rose  up  against  her  a  roaring  cloud,  as  it  were  a  bandit,


144  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

showering  raindrops  like  arrows,  that  sang  terribly  in  the
whistling  wind.  And  the  gale,  like  mighty  fate,  in  a  moment
dragged  her  ship  to  a  distance,  and  smote  it,  and  broke  it
in  pieces.  And  those  attendants  were  drowned,  and  among
them  Vinitamati ;  and  all  her  treasure  was  whelmed  in  the
ocean.

But  the  sea  lifted  up  the  princess  with  a  wave,  as  it  were
with  an  arm,  and  flung  her  up  alive  in  a  forest  on  the  shore,
near  the  scene  of  the  shipwreck.  To  think  that  she  should
have  fallen  into  the  sea,  and  that  a  towering  wave  should
have  landed  her  in  a  forest !  Behold  now,  how  nothing
is  impossible  to  Destiny  !  Then  she,  in  such  a  situation,
terrified  and  confused,  seeing  that  she  was  alone  in  a  solitary
wood,  was  again  plunged  in  a  sea,  but  this  time  it  was  the  sea
of  grief.  She  exclaimed:  "Where  have  I  arrived?  Surely
it  is  a  very  different  place  from  that  for  which  I  set  out !
Where,  too,  are  those  attendants  of  mine  ?  Where  is  Vini-
tamati ?  Why  has  this  suddenly  happened  to  me  ?  Where
shall  I  go,  ill-starred  as  I  am  ?  Alas  !  I  am  undone !
What  shall  I  do  ?  Cursed  Fate,  why  did  you  rescue  me
from  the  sea  ?  Ah,  father  !  Ah,  mother  !  Ah,  husband,
son  of  the  King  of  Alaka  !  Look  ;  I  am  perishing  before  I
reach  you  ;  why  do  you  not  deliver  me  ?  "  While  uttering
these  and  similar  exclamations,  Mandaravati  wept  copiously
with  tears  that  resembled  the  pearls  of  a  broken  necklace.

And  at  that  very  time  a  hermit  named  Matanga  came
there  from  his  hermitage,  which  was  not  far  off,  to  bathe  in
the  sea.  That  sage,  who  was  accompanied  by  his  daughter
named  Yamuna,  who  had  observed  a  vow  of  virginity  from
her  childhood,  heard  the  sound  of  Mandaravatf  s  weeping.
And  with  his  daughter  he  approached  her  kindly,  and  he
saw  her,  looking  like  a  doe  separated  from  a  herd  of  deer,
casting  her  sorrowing  eyes  in  every  direction.  And  the  great
sage  said  to  her  with  an  affectionate  voice  :  "  Who  are  you,
and  how  did  you  get  into  this  wood,  and  why  do  you  weep  ?  "
Then  Mandaravati,  seeing  that  he  was  a  compassionate  man,
slowly  recovered  herself,  and  told  him  her  story,  with  face
dejected  with  shame.

Then  the  hermit  Matanga,  after  meditating,  said  to  her  :


THE  ARRIVAL  OF  PRINCE  SUNDARASENA  145

"  Princess,  cease  to  despair ;  recover  your  composure !
Though  you  are  delicate  of  body  as  a  sirisha  flower,  the
calamity  of  sorrow  afflicts  you  :  do  misfortunes  ever  con-
sider whether  their  victim  is  tender  or  not  ?  But  you  shall
soon  obtain  the  husband  you  desire  ;  so  come  to  this  hermit-
age of  mine,  which  is  at  no  great  distance  from  this  place,
and  remain  there  with  this  daughter  of  mine  as  in  your  own
house."  When  the  great  hermit  had  comforted  her  with
these  words,  he  bathed,  and,  accompanied  by  his  daughter,
led  Mandaravati  to  his  hermitage.  There  she  remained  lead-
ing an  ascetic  life,  longing  to  meet  her  husband,  delighting
herself  with  waiting  upon  that  sage,  accompanied  by  his
daughter.

And  in  the  meanwhile  Sundarasena,  who  was  emaciated
with  long  expectation,  remained  killing  the  time  in  Alaka,
continually  counting  the  days,  eager  for  his  marriage  with
Mandaravati,  and  his  friend  Chandaprabha  and  the  rest
were  trying  to  console  him.  And  in  course  of  time,  as  the
auspicious  day  drew  nigh,  his  father,  the  king,  made  pre-
parations for  his  journey  to  Hansadvipa.  And  after  prayers
had  been  offered  for  a  prosperous  journey,  Prince  Sundara-
sena started  from  his  home  on  an  auspicious  day,  shaking
the  earth  with  his  armies.

And  as  he  was  marching  along  with  his  ministers  he
reached  in  course  of  time,  to  his  delight,  that  city  Sasan-
kapura,  which  adorned  the  shore  of  the  sea.  There  King
Mahendraditya,  hearing  of  his  approach,  came  to  meet  him,
bowing  humbly;  and  the  prince  entered  the  city  with  his
followers,  and,  mounted  on  an  elephant,  he  reached  the
palace  of  the  king.

And  as  he  went  along,  the  splendour  of  his  beauty  fluttered
the  hearts  of  the  ladies  of  the  city,  as  the  hurricane  flutters
the  lotus-bed.  In  the  palace  King  Mahendraditya  showed
him  every  attention,  and  promised  to  accompany  him  ;  and
so  he  rested  there  that  day.  And  he  spent  the  night  in  such
thoughts  as  these  :  "  Shall  I  ever  get  across  the  sea,  and  win
that  blushing  bride  ?  "

And  next  morning  he  left  his  army  in  that  very  city,
and  went  with   King  Mahendraditya  to  the  shore  of  the

VOL.    VII.  K


146  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

sea.  There  he  and  his  ministers,  together  with  that  king,
embarked  on  a  large  ship,  that  was  well  supplied  with  food
and  water.  And  the  prince  made  the  small  retinue,  that  he
could  not  help  taking,  embark  on  a  second  ship.  Then  the
ship  was  let  go,  and  its  flag  fluttered  in  the  wind,  and  those
two  kings,  who  were  in  it,  shaped  their  course  towards  the
south-western  quarter.

And  after  two  or  three  days  had  passed,  as  they  were
sailing  on  the  sea,  there  suddenly  arose  a  great  hurricane.
And  the  ranges  of  forest  on  the  shores  of  the  sea  shook  to
and  fro,  as  if  in  astonishment  at  the  unprecedented  character
of  the  gale.  And  the  waters  of  the  sea,  inverted  by  the  wind,
were  turned  upside  down,  again  and  again,  as  affections  are
by  lapse  of  time.  And  an  offering  of  jewels  was  made  to
the  sea,1  accompanied  by  a  loud  cry  of  woe  ;  and  the  pilots
let  loose  the  sail  and  relaxed  their  efforts  at  the  same  time,
and  all  excitedly  flung  out  very  heavy  stones  on  all  sides,
fastened  by  chains,  and  flung  away  their  hopes  of  life  at  the
same  time ;  and  the  two  vessels,  driven  to  and  fro  by  the
waves,  as  elephants  by  elephant-drivers,2  wandered  about  in
the  sea,  as  if  in  the  melee  of  a  battle.

Then  Sundarasena,  beholding  that,  was  moved  from
his   seat,   as  if  from  his  self-command,8  and  said  to  King

1  Offerings  to  the  sea  are  still  common  among  tribes  on  the  coast.  In
parts  of  Kathiawar  a  fire  is  lighted  on  the  seashore,  butter  is  thrown  into  it,
and  milk  and  sugar  are  poured  into  the  sea.  The  fishing  caste,  particularly
at  the  end  of  the  monsoon,  when  fishing  craft  put  out  to  sea,  pour  milk,
spirits,  flowers  and  coco-nuts  into  the  sea.  Their  festival  at  the  close  of
the  stormy  weather  is  generally  known  as  the  Narali-purnima,  or  coco-nut
festival,  held  at  the  full  moon  of  Savan  or  August,  when  people  go  to  the
shore,  offer  coco-nuts,  and  have  their  foreheads  marked  with  red  by  a  Brahman.
Koli  women  on  the  Bombay  coast  wear  glass  bangles  only  on  the  left  wrist,
because  on  their  wedding-day  the  right-arm  bangles  are  taken  off  and  thrown
into  the  sea  to  win  its  favour  for  their  husbands.  W.  Crooke,  Religion  and
Folklore  of  Northern  India,  1926,  pp.  55,  56.  See  also  the  same  author,
a  Water,  Water-Gods  (Indian),"   Hastings'  Ency.  Rel.  Eth.,  vol.  xii,  p.  717. —

N.M.P.

2  Bohtlingk  and  Roth  give  ndgabandha  in  this  passage  as  "  eine  Schlange
als  Fessel."  I  do  not  quite  see  how  to  bring  in  this  translation,  though  I  fear
that  my  own  is  not  correct.

3  I  read  dhairydd  for  adhairyad.


THE  WORLD  OF  WATER  147

Mahendraditya  :  "  It  is  through  my  demerits  in  former  births
that  this  day  of  doom  has  suddenly  come  upon  you.  So  I
cannot  endure  to  witness  it ;  I  will  fling  myself  into  the  sea."
When  the  prince  had  said  this,  he  quickly  girt  his  upper
garment  round  his  loins,  and  flung  himself  then  and  there  into
the  sea.  And  when  his  five  friends,  Chandaprabha  and  the
others,  saw  that,  they  too  flung  themselves  in,  and  Mahen-
draditya did  the  same.  And  while,  having  recovered  their
presence  of  mind,  they  were  swimming  across  the  ocean,  they
all  went  in  different  directions,  being  separated  by  the  force
of  the  waves.  And  immediately  the  wind  fell,  and  the  sea
became  hushed  and  calm,  and  bore  the  semblance  of  a  good
man  whose  wrath  is  appeased.1

And  in  the  meanwhile  Sundarasena,  with  whom  was
Dridhabuddhi,  found  a  ship  that  had  been  driven  from  some-
where or  other  by  the  wind,  and  with  that  minister  of  his  as
his  only  companion  he  climbed  up  on  it,  as  it  were  on  a
second  swing  of  incertitude  oscillating  between  rescue  and
destruction.  Then,  having  lost  all  courage,  he  drifted,  not
knowing  his  bearings,  looking  on  the  whole  world  as  made
of  water,  confiding  in  his  god  ;  and  the  ship,  which  was
wafted  along  by  a  gentle  and  favourable  breeze,  as  if  by
a  deity,  carried  him  to  the  shore  in  three  days.  There  it
stuck  fast,  and  he  and  his  companion  sprang  to  shore  and
to  a  hope  of  life  at  the  same  moment.

And  when  there,  he  recovered  breath,  and  said  to
Dridhabuddhi :  "  I  have  escaped  even  from  the  sea,  from
the  infernal  regions,  though  I  went  below ;  but  since  I
have  not  been  able  to  do  so  without  causing  the  death  of
my  ministers  Vikramasakti,  and  Vyaghraparakrama,  and
Chandaprabha,  and  Bhimabhuja,  such  fine  fellows  as  they
were,  and  also  of  King  Mahendraditya,  who  became  with-
out cause  so  good  a  friend  to  me — of  all  these — how
can  I  now  live  with  honour  ?  "  When  he  said  this,  his
minister  Dridhabuddhi  said  to  him :  "  Prince,  recover
your  composure;  I  am  persuaded  that  we  shall  have  good
fortune,  for  they  may  perhaps  make  their  way  across  the

1  Storms  play  an  important  part  in  Greek  [and  Arabian]  romances.  See
Rohde,  Der  Griechische  Roman,  pp.  428-468.


148  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

sea,  as  we  have  done.  Who  can  discern  the  mysterious  way
of  Destiny  ?  "

While  Dridhabuddhi  was  saying  this,  and  other  things  of
the  same  kind,  two  hermits  came  there  to  bathe.  The  good
men,  seeing  that  the  prince  was  despondent,  came  up  to  him
and  asked  him  his  story,  and  said  kindly  to  him  :  "  Wise  sir,
even  the  gods  are  not  able  to  alter  the  mighty  influence  of
actions  in  a  previous  state  of  existence,  that  bestow  joy  and
sorrow.  So  a  resolute  man,  who  wishes  to  take  leave  of
sorrow,  should  practise  right -doing ;  for  right -doing  is  the
true  remedy  for  it,  not  regrets,  nor  emaciation  of  the  body.
So  abandon  despondency,  and  preserve  your  body  by  resolute
endurance  :  as  long  as  the  body  is  preserved,  what  object  of
human  endeavour  cannot  be  attained  ?  Moreover,  you  pos-
sess auspicious  marks  ;  you  are  certain  to  enjoy  prosperity."
Saying  this  the  hermits  consoled  him,  and  took  him  to  their
hermitage.

And  Prince  Sundarasena  remained  waiting  there  for  some
days,  accompanied  by  Dridhabuddhi.

And  in  the  meanwhile  his  ministers  Bhimabhuja  and
Vikramasakti,  having  swam  across  the  sea,  reached  the  shore
in  a  separate  place.  And  hoping  that  perhaps  the  prince
might  have  escaped  from  the  sea  like  themselves,  they  entered
that  great  forest  and  searched  for  him  bewildered  with  grief.
And  his  other  two  ministers,  Chandaprabha  and  Vyaghra-
parakrama,  and  King  Mahendraditya,  in  the  same  way
escaped  from  the  sea,  and  sorrowfully  sought  for  Sundarasena,
and  when  they  did  not  find  him  were  afflicted ;  and  at  last
they  found  their  ship  unharmed  and  went  to  Sasankapura.
Then  those  two  ministers,  and  the  army  that  had  been  left
in  that  city,  hearing  what  had  happened,1  went  weeping  to
their  own  city  Alaka.  And  when  they  arrived  without  the
prince,  lamenting  their  loss,  the  citizens  wept,  and  one
universal  wail  was  heard  in  the  city.  When  King  Mahasena
and  his  queen  heard  that  news  of  their  son,  they  were  in
such  a  state  that  they  would  have  died,  if  it  were  not  that
their  allotted  term  of  life  had  not  yet  expired.  And  when
the  king  and  the  queen  were  bent  on  suicide,  the  ministers

1  The  Sanskrit  College  MS.  has  jnata-vrittanta.


I


NEWS  OF  THE  SHIPWRECK  149

dissuaded  them  with  various  speeches,  which  gave  them  reasons
for  entertaining  hope.  Then  the  king  remained  in  a  temple
of  Svayambhu,1  outside  the  town,  engaged  in  asceticism  with
his  attendants,  inquiring  for  news  of  his  son.

And  in  the  meanwhile  King  Mandaradeva,  in  Hansadvipa,
heard  the  news  of  the  shipwreck  of  his  daughter,  and  of  that
of  his  proposed  son-in-law.  And  he  also  came  to  know  that  his
son-in-law's  two  ministers  had  arrived  in  Alaka,  and  that
King  Mahasena  there  was  keeping  himself  alive  by  hope,
being  engaged  in  practising  austerities.  Then  that  king
also,  who  was  afflicted  by  grief  for  the  loss  of  his  daughter,
and  was  only  prevented  by  his  ministers  from  committing
suicide,  entrusted  to  them  the  care  of  his  kingdom,  and  with
his  Queen  Kandarpasena,  went  to  the  city  of  Alaka  to  visit
King  Mahasena,  who  was  his  partner  in  misfortune.  And
he  made  up  his  mind  that  he  would  do  whatever  that  king
did  as  soon  as  he  had  trustworthy  intelligence  with  regard
to  the  fate  of  his  son.  And  so  he  came  to  King  Mahasena,
who  was  still  more  grieved  when  he  heard  of  the  fate  of
Mandaravati,  and  sorrowed  in  sympathy  with  him.  Then
that  King  of  Hansadvipa  remained  practising  austerities
with  the  King  of  Alaka,  restraining  his  senses,  eating  little,
sleeping  on  darbha  grass.

When  they  had  been  all  scattered  in  this  way  in  different
directions  by  the  Disposer,  as  leaves  by  a  wind,  it  happened
that  Sundarasena  set  forth  from  the  hermitage  in  which  he
was,  and  reached  that  hermitage  of  Matanga,  in  which
Mandaravati  was  staying.  There  he  beheld  a  lake  of  clear
water,  the  bank  of  which  was  thickly  planted  with  trees  bent
down  with  the  weight  of  many  ripe  fruits  of  various  flavours.
As  he  was  weary,  he  bathed  in  that  lake,  and  ate  sweet  fruits,
and  then  walked  on  with  Dridhabuddhi,  and  reached  a  forest
stream.  And  going  along  its  bank,  he  saw  some  hermit
maidens  engaged  in  gathering  flowers  near  a  temple  contain-
ing a  linga.  And  in  the  midst  of  them  he  beheld  one  hermit
maiden,  who  seemed  to  be  the  peerless  beauty  of  the  world,
illuminating  the  whole  wood  with  her  loveliness,  as  if  with
moonlight,  making  all  the  regions  full  of  blown  blue  lilies

1  "  The  self-existent/'  a  name  of  Siva,  Vishnu  and  Buddha.


150  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

with  her  glance,  and  sowing  with  her  footfalls  a  thicket  of
lotuses  in  the  forest.

Then  the  prince  said  to  Dridhabuddhi :  "  Who  can  this
be  ?  Can  she  be  a  nymph  of  heaven  worthy  of  being  gazed
upon  by  the  hundred-eyed  Indra  ;  or  is  she  the  presiding
goddess  of  the  forest,  with  her  shoot-like  fingers  clinging  to
the  flowers  ?  Surely  the  Creator  framed  this  very  wonderful
form  of  hers  after  he  had  perfected  his  skill  by  continual
practice  in  creating  many  nymphs  of  heaven.  And  lo !  she
exactly  resembles  in  appearance  my  beloved  Mandaravati,
whose  beauty  I  beheld  in  a  picture.  Why  should  she  not  be
the  lady  herself?  But  how  can  this  be?  She  is  in  Hansa-
dvipa,  far  away  from  this  heart  of  the  forest.  So  I  cannot  *
conceive  who  this  fair  one  is,  and  whence  she  comes,  and
how  she  comes  to  be  here."  And  Dridhabuddhi,  when  he
saw  that  fair  maid,  said  to  the  prince :  "  She  must  be  whom
you  suppose  her  to  be,  otherwise  how  could  her  ornaments,
though  made  of  forest  flowers,  thus  resemble  a  necklace,  a
zone,  a  string  of  bells,  and  the  other  ornaments  usually  worn  ?
Moreover,  this  beauty  and  delicacy  are  not  produced  in  a
forest ;  so  you  may  be  certain  that  she  is  some  heavenly
nymph,  or  some  princess,  not  the  daughter  of  a  hermit.  Let
us  rise  up  and  stand  here  2  a  moment  to  find  out."  When
Dridhabuddhi  had  said  this,  they  both  of  them  stood  there
concealed  by  a  tree.

And  in  the  meanwhile  those  hermit  maidens,  having
gathered  their  flowers,  went  down  into  that  river  with  that
lovely  girl  to  bathe.  And  while  they  were  amusing  them-
selves by  splashing  about  in  it,  it  happened  that  a  crocodile
came  and  seized  that  lovely  girl.  When  those  maidens  saw
that,  they  were  bewildered,  and  they  cried  out  in  their  sorrow  :
"  Help,  help,  ye  woodland  deities  !  For  here  is  Mandaravati,
while  bathing  in  the  river,  suddenly  and  unexpectedly  seized
by  a  crocodile,  and  perishing."  When  Sundarasena  heard
that,  he  thought  to  himself,  "  Can  this  really  be  that  beloved
of  mine  ?  "  and  rushing  forward  he  quickly  killed  that  croco-
dile with  his  dagger.     And  when  she  fell  from  the  monster's

1  I  read  tanna,  which  I  find  in  the  Sanskrit  College  MS.,  for  tatra.

2  The  Sanskrit  College  MS.  has  ehi  for  iha.


THE  MEETING


151


mouth,  as  it  were  from  the  mouth  of  Death,  he  carried  her  up
on  the  bank  and  comforted  her.

And  she,  for  her  part,  having  got  over  her  fear,  and  see-
ing that  he  was  a  charming  person,  said  to  herself :  "  Who
is  this  great-hearted  one  that  my  good  fortune  has  brought
here  to  save  my  life  ?  Wonderful  to  say,  he  bears  a  close  re-
semblance to  that  lover  of  mine  whom  I  saw  in  a  picture,  the
high-born  son  of  the  King  of  Alaka.  Can  he  possibly  be  that
very  man  ?  But  out  on  my  evil  thought !  Heaven  forfend  !
May  such  a  man  never  be  an  exile  from  his  native  land  !  So
it  is  not  fitting  for  me  now  to  remain  in  the  society  of  a
strange  man.  Accordingly  I  will  leave  this  place :  may
prosperity  be  the  lot  of  this  great-souled  one  !  "  After  going
through  these  reflections,  Mandaravati  said  to  those  com-
panions of  hers  :  "  First  take  a  respectful  leave  of  this  noble
gentleman,  and  then  come  with  me  ;   we  will  now  depart."

When  Prince  Sundarasena,  whose  doubts  were  before
unsatisfied,  heard  this,  he  conceived  great  confidence  from
merely  hearing  his  own  name,  and  he  questioned  one  of  her
companions,  saying  to  her  :  "  Auspicious  one,  whose  daughter
and  of  what  condition  is  this  friend  of  yours  ?  Tell  me,  for  I
feel  a  great  desire  to  know."  When  he  questioned  the  hermit
maiden  in  these  words  she  said  to  him  :  "  This  is  the  Princess
Mandaravati,  the  daughter  of  the  King  Mandaradeva,  the
sovereign  of  Hansadvlpa.  She  was  being  conducted  to  the
city  of  Alaka  to  be  married  to  Prince  Sundarasena,  when
her  ship  was  wrecked  in  the  sea,  and  the  waves  flung  her
up  upon  the  shore  ;  and  the  hermit  Matanga  found  her  there
and  brought  her  to  his  hermitage."

When  she  said  this,  Sundarasena's  friend  Dridhabuddhi,
dancing  like  one  bewildered  with  joy  and  despondency,  said
to  the  prince :  "I  congratulate  you  on  having  now  been
successful  in  obtaining  the  Princess  Mandaravati,  for  is  not
this  the  very  lady  of  whom  we  were  thinking  ?  "  When  he
had  said  this,  her  companions,  the  hermit  maidens,  questioned
him,  and  he  told  them  his  story ;  and  they  gladdened  with
it  that  friend  of  theirs.  Then  Mandaravati  exclaimed,  "  Ah,
my  husband  ! "  and  fell  weeping  at  the  feet  of  that  Sundara-
sena.    He,  for  his  part,  embraced  her  and  wept,  and  while


152  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

they  were  weeping  there,  even  stocks  and  herbs  wept,  melted
with  compassion.

Then  the  hermit  Matanga,  having  been  informed  of  all
this  by  those  hermit  maidens,  came  there  quickly,  accom-
panied by  Yamuna.  He  comforted  that  Sundarasena,  who
prostrated  himself  at  his  feet,  and  took  him  with  Mandaravati
to  his  own  hermitage.  And  that  day  he  refreshed  him  by
entertaining  him,  and  made  him  feel  happy  ;  and  the  next
day  the  great  hermit  said  to  that  prince  :  "  My  son,  I  must
to-day  go  for  a  certain  affair  to  Svetadvipa,  so  you  must
go  with  Mandaravati  to  Alaka ;  there  you  must  marry  this
princess  and  cherish  her,  for  I  have  adopted  her  as  my
daughter,  and  I  give  her  to  you.  And  you  shall  rule  the
earth  for  a  long  time  with  her ;  and  you  shall  soon  recover
all  those  ministers  of  yours."  When  the  hermit  had  said
this  to  the  prince  and  his  betrothed,  he  took  leave  of  them,
and  went  away  through  the  air  with  his  daughter  Yamuna,
who  was  equal  to  himself  in  power.

Then  Sundarasena,  with  Mandaravati,  and  accompanied
by  Dridhabuddhi,  set  out  from  that  hermitage.  And  when
he  reached  the  shore  of  the  sea,  he  saw  coming  near  him
a  lightship  under  the  command  of  a  young  merchant.  And
in  order  to  accomplish  his  journey  more  easily  he  asked  the
young  merchant,  who  was  the  owner  of  that  ship,  through
Dridhabuddhi  hailing  him  from  a  distance,  to  give  him  a
passage  in  it.  The  wicked  merchant,  who  beheld  Mandara-
vati, and  was  at  once  distracted  with  love,  consented,  and
brought  his  ship  near  the  shore.  Then  Sundarasena  first
placed  his  beloved  on  board  the  ship,  and  was  preparing  to
get  on  board  himself  from  the  bank  where  he  stood,  when
the  wicked  merchant,  coveting  his  neighbour's  wife,  made  a
sign  to  the  steersman,  and  so  set  the  ship  in  motion.  And
the  ship,  on  board  of  which  the  princess  was  crying  piteously,
rapidly  disappeared  from  the  view  of  Sundarasena,  who  stood
gazing  at  it.

And  he  fell  on  the  ground  crying  out,  "  Alas,  I  am
robbed  by  thieves ! "  and  wept  for  a  long  time ;  and  then
Dridhabuddhi  said  to  him  :  "  Rise  up  !  Abandon  despond-
ency !    This  is  not  a  course  befitting  a  hero.     Come  along !


THE  ATTACK  OF  THE  PULINDAS  153

Let  us  go  in  that  direction  to  look  for  that  thief :  for  even
in  the  most  grievous  hour  of  calamity  the  wise  do  not  take
leave  of  their  fortitude."  When  Sundarasena  had  been  thus
exhorted  by  Dridhabuddhi,  he  was  at  last  induced  to  rise  up
from  the  shore  of  the  sea  and  set  out.

And  he  went  on  his  way  weeping,  and  crying  out,  "  Alas,
Queen  !  Alas,  Mandaravati !  "  continually  scorched  by  the
fire  of  separation,  fasting,  accompanied  only  by  the  weeping
Dridhabuddhi ;  and  almost  beside  himself  with  distraction
he  entered  a  great  wood.  And  when  in  it  he  paid  no  atten-
tion to  the  wise  counsels  of  his  friend,  but  ran  hither  and
thither,  thinking  only  of  his  beloved.  When  he  saw  the
creepers  in  full  bloom,  he  said  :  "  Can  this  be  my  beloved
come  here,  adorned  with  blown  flowers,  having  escaped
from  that  merchant-robber  ?  "  When  he  saw  the  beautiful
lotuses,1  he  said  :  "  Can  she  have  dived  into  a  tank  in  her
fear,  and  is  she  lifting  up  her  face  with  long-lashed  eyes
and  looking  at  me  ?  "  And  when  he  heard  the  cuckoos
singing,  concealed  by  the  leafy  creepers,  he  said  :  "Is  the
sweet- voiced  fair  one  here  addressing  me  ?  "  Thus  raving
at  every  step,  he  wandered  about  for  a  long  time,  scorched
by  the  moon,  as  if  it  were  the  sun  ;  and  so  to  him  the  night
was  the  same  as  the  day.

And  at  last  the  prince,  with  Dridhabuddhi,  emerged  from
that  wood,  though  with  difficulty,  and,  having  lost  his
way,  reached  a  great  wilderness.  It  was  perilous  with  fierce
rhinoceroses,  dangerous  as  being  inhabited  by  lions,  and  so
was  as  formidable  2  as  an  army,  and  moreover  it  was  beset
by  a  host  of  bandits.  When  the  prince  entered  this  wilder-
ness, which  was  refugeless,  and  full  of  many  misfortunes,
like  misery,  he  was  set  upon  with  uplifted  weapons  by  some
Pulindas,  who  happened  to  be  on  the  look-out  for  human
victims  to  offer  to  Durga,  by  order  of  Vindhyaketu,  the  king

1  Instead  of  B.'s  abjeshu  sdlishu  read  with  the  D.  text  abjeshu  salishu,  "the
lotuses  with  their  bees."     See  Speyer,  op.  cit.,  pp.  139, 140. — n.m.p.

2  I  read  sudurdharsham ;  the  Sanskrit  College  MS.  reads  senanlm  (sic)  iva
durdharskam;  the  word  translated  "  rhinoceros "  can  also  mean  "sword  "5
the  adjective  before  it  may  mean  "uplifted/'  and  the  word  translated
"inhabited  by  lions"  may  perhaps  mean  "commanded  by  a  king."


154


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


of  the  Pulindas,  who  lived  in  that  region.  When  the  prince
was  tormented  with  five  fires — of  misfortune,  exile,  the  grief
of  separation,  that  affront  from  a  base  man,  fasting,  and  the
fatigue  of  the  journey — alas !  Fate  created  a  sixth  fire  in
the  form  of  an  attack  of  bandits,  as  if  in  order  to  exhaust  his
self-command.

And  when  many  of  the  bandits  rushed  towards  him  to
seize  him,  showering  arrows,  he,  with  only  one  companion  to
help  him,  killed  them  with  his  dagger.  When  King  Vindhya-
ketu  discovered  that,  he  sent  forward  another  force,  and
Sundarasena,  being  skilled  in  fighting,  killed  a  great  many
bandits  belonging  to  that  force  also.  At  last  he  and  his
companion  fainted  from  the  exhaustion  of  their  wounds  ;
and  then  those  Savaras  bound  them,  and  took  them  and
threw  them  into  prison.  The  prison  was  full  of  multitudes
of  vermin,  filthy  with  cobwebs,  and  it  was  evident  that  snakes
frequented  it,  as  they  had  dropped  there  the  skins  that  clung
to  their  throats.1  The  dust  in  it  rose  as  high  as  the  ankle,2
it  was  honeycombed  with  the  holes  and  galleries  of  mice,
and  full  of  many  terrified  and  miserable  men  that  had  been
thrown  into  it.  In  that  place,  which  seemed  the  very  birth-
place of  hells,  they  saw  those  two  ministers  Bhimabhuja  and
Vikramasakti,  who,  like  themselves,  had  entered  that  wilder-
ness after  escaping  from  the  sea,  in  order  to  look  for  their
master,  and  had  been  already  bound  and  thrown  into  prison.
They  recognised  the  prince  and  fell  weeping  at  his  feet,  and
he  recognised  them,  and  embraced  them,  bathed  in  tears.

Then  their  woes  were  increased  a  hundredfold  by  seeing
one  another ;  but  the  other  prisoners  there  said  to  them,  in
order  to  console  them  :  "  Enough  of  grief!  Can  we  avoid  the
effect  of  acts  done  in  a  previous  state  of  existence  ?  Do  you
not  see  that  the  death  of  all  of  us  together  is  imminent  ?
For  we  have  been  collected  here  by  this  king  of  the  Pulindas
in  order  that  he  may  offer  us  up  to  Durga  on  the  coming


1  This  seems  practically  nonsense.  For  galalambibhih  we  should  read
gartalambibhih,  which  would  mean  that  the  snake-skins  clung  to  the  holes  in
the  prison-walls. — n.m.p.

2  I  follow  the  reading  of  the  Sanskrit  College  MS.,  which  gives  daghna
instead  of  lagna.


THE  KING  OF  THE  BHILLAS


155


fourteenth  day  of  the  month.  So  why  should  you  grieve  ?
The  way  of  Fate,  that  sports  with  living  beings,  is  strange  ;
as  she  has  given  you  misfortune,  she  may  in  the  same  way
give  you  prosperity."  When  the  other  prisoners  had  said  this
to  them,  they  remained  there  bound  with  them  :  it  is  terrible
to  see  how  little  respect  calamities  show  even  for  the  great.

And  when  the  fourteenth  day  arrived,  they  were  all  taken
thence,  by  the  orders  of  the  king,  to  the  temple  of  Durga  to
be  sacrificed.  It  seemed  like  the  mouth  of  Death,  the  flame
of  the  lamp  being  its  lolling  tongue,  the  range  of  bells  being
its  row  of  teeth,  to  which  the  heads  of  men  clung.1  Then
Sundarasena,  when  he  saw  that  goddess,  bowed  before
her,  and  praised  her  with  mind  humbled  by  devotion,  and
uttered  this  prayer :  "  0  thou  goddess  that  didst  quell  the
oppression  of  the  Asuras  with  thy  blood-streaming  trident,
which  mangled  haughty  Daityas,  thou  that  givest  security  to
thy  votaries,  look  upon  me,  goddess,  that  am  burned  up  with
the  forest-fire  of  grief,  with  a  favourable  nectar-shedding  eye,
and  refresh  me.     Honour  to  thee  !  "

While  the  prince  was  saying  this,  Vindhyaketu,  that  king
of  the  Pulindas,  came  there  to  worship  the  goddess  Durga.
The  moment  the  prince  saw  the  king  of  the  Bhillas  he  re-
cognised him,  and,  being  bowed  down  with  shame,  said
of  his  own  accord  to  his  friends  :  "  Ha  !  this  is  that  very
Vindhyaketu,  the  chief  of  the  Pulindas,  who  comes  to  my
father's  court  to  pay  him  homage,  and  is  the  lord  of  this
vast  wilderness.  Whatever  may  happen,  we  must  not  say
anything  here,  for  it  is  better  for  a  man  of  honour  to  die
than  to  make  known  who  he  is  under  such  circumstances."

While  the  prince  was  saying  this  to  his  ministers,  King
Vindhyaketu  said  to  his  servants  :  "  Come  now,  show  me
this  heroic  human  victim  who  killed  so  many  of  my  warriors
when  he  was  being  captured."  As  soon  as  his  servants  heard
this,  they  brought  Sundarasena,  smeared  with  clotted  blood
and  defiled  with  wounds,  into  the  presence  of  that  king.
When  the  king  of  the  Bhillas  saw  him,  he  half  recognised
him,  and,  being  terrified,  said  to  him  :  "  Tell  me,  who  are
you,  and  whence  do  you  come  ?  "     Sundarasena  answered

1  The  Sanskrit  College  MS.  reads  vyasaktavirasirasain.


156


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


the  king  of  the  Bhillas  :  "  What  does  it  matter  who  I  am,  or
whence  I  come  ?   Do  what  you  are  about  to  do."

Then  Vindhyaketu  recognised  him  completely  by  his  voice,
and  exclaiming  excitedly,  "  Alas  !  alas  !  "  fell  on  the  ground.
Then  he  embraced  the  prince,  and  said  :  "  Alas,  great  King
Mahasena,  see  what  a  fitting  return  I,  villain  that  I  am,
have  now  made  for  your  numerous  benefits,  in  that  I  have
here  reduced  to  such  a  state  your  son,  whom  you  value
as  your  life,  Prince  Sundarasena,  who  has  come  here  from
somewhere  or  other  !  "  This  and  many  other  such  laments
he  uttered  in  such  a  way  that  all  there  began  to  shed  tears.
But  the  delighted  companions  of  Sundarasena  comforted
the  Bhilla  king,  saying  to  him :  "  Is  not  this  much,  that  you
recognised  the  prince  before  any  misfortune  had  happened  ?
What  could  you  have  done  after  the  event  had  taken  place  ?
So  why  do  you  despond  in  the  midst  of  this  joy  ?  "

Then  the  king  fell  at  the  feet  of  Sundarasena  and  lovingly
honoured  him,  and  Sundarasena  got  him  to  set  all  the  human
victims  free.  And  after  he  had  shown  him  all  due  respect
he  took  him  to  his  village,  and  his  friends  with  him,  and
proceeded  to  bandage  his  wounds  and  administer  medicines
to  him ;  and  he  said  to  him :  "  Tell  me,  Prince,  what  brought
you  to  this  place,  for  I  have  a  great  desire  to  know."  Then
Sundarasena  related  to  him  all  his  adventures.  And  that
prince  of  the  Savaras,  being  astonished,  said  to  him  :  "  What
a  wonderful  chain  of  events  !  That  you  should  have  set
out  to  marry  Mandaravati,  and  that  you  should  then  have
been  wrecked  *  in  the  sea,  and  that  this  should  have  led  to
your  reaching  the  hermitage  of  Matanga  and  to  your  meeting
your  beloved  there,  and  that  this  merchant,  in  whom  you
confided,  should  have  carried  her  off  from  you,  and  that
you  should  have  entered  the  wilderness  and  have  been  im-
prisoned for  sacrifice,  and  recognised  by  me  and  delivered
from  death — how  strangely  does  all  this  hang  together  !
Therefore  honour,  by  all  means,  to  mysteriously  working
Destiny !  And  you  must  not  feel  anxious  about  your
beloved,  for,  as  Destiny  has  done  all  this,  she  will  also  do
you  that  other  service  soon."

1  I  read,  with  the  Sanskrit  College  MS.,  patah  for  praptih.


THE  ARRIVAL  OF  THE  PRINCESS


157


While  the  king  of  the  Pulindas  was  saying  this,  his
commander-in-chief  came  quickly  in  a  state  of  high  delight,
and  entering,  said  to  him  :  "  King,  a  certain  merchant  entered
this  wilderness  with  his  followers,  and  he  had  with  him  much
wealth  and  a  very  beautiful  lady,  a  very  gem  of  women ;
and  when  I  heard  of  this,  I  went  with  an  army  and  seized
him  and  his  followers,  with  the  wealth  and  the  lady,  and  I
have  them  here  outside."  When  Sundarasena  and  Vindhya-
ketu  heard  this,  they  said  to  themselves  :  "  Can  these  be
that  merchant  and  Mandaravati  ?  "  And  they  said  :  "  Let  the
merchant  and  the  lady  be  brought  in  here  at  once."  And
thereupon  the  commander-in-chief  brought  in  that  merchant
and  that  lady.  When  Dridhabuddhi  saw  them,  he  ex-
claimed :  "  Here  is  that  very  Princess  Mandaravati,  and
here  is  that  villain  of  a  merchant !  Alas,  Princess,  how
came  you  to  be  reduced  to  this  state,  like  a  creeper  scorched
by  the  heat,  with  your  bud-lip  dried  up,  and  with  your
flower-ornaments  stripped  off  ?  "  While  Dridhabuddhi  was
uttering  this  exclamation,  Sundarasena  rushed  forward
and  eagerly  threw  his  arms  round  the  neck  of  his  beloved.
Then  the  two  lovers  wept  for  a  long  time,  as  if  to  wash  off
from  one  another,  by  the  water  of  a  shower  of  tears,  the
defilement  of  separation.

Then  Vindhyaketu,  having  consoled  them  both,  said  to
that  merchant :  "  How  came  you  to  carry  off  the  wife  of
one  who  confided  in  you  ?  "  Then  the  merchant  said,  with
a  voice  trembling  with  fear  :  "I  have  fruitlessly  done  this,  to
my  own  destruction,  but  this  holy  saint  was  preserved  by  her
own  unapproachable  splendour.  I  was  no  more  able  to  touch
her  than  if  she  had  been  a  flame  of  fire  ;  and  I  did  intend,
villain  that  I  was,  to  take  her  to  my  own  country,  and  after
her  anger  had  been  allayed,  and  she  had  been  reconciled
with  me,  to  marry  her."  When  the  merchant  had  said  this,
the  king  ordered  him  to  be  put  to  death  on  the  spot ;  but
Sundarasena  saved  him  from  execution.  However,  he  had
his  abundant  wealth  confiscated — a  heavier  loss  than  that
of  life  ;  for  those  that  have  lost  their  wealth  die  daily,  not
so  those  that  have  lost  their  breath.

So  Sundarasena  had  that  merchant  set  at  liberty,  and  the


158


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


wretched  creature  went  where  he  would,  pleased  at  having
escaped  with  life  ;  and  King  Vindhyaketu  took  Mandaravati,
and  went  with  her  and  Sundarasena  to  the  palace  of  his  own
queen.  There  he  gave  orders  to  his  queen,  and  had  Mandara-
vati honoured  with  a  bath,  with  clothes  and  with  unguents ;
and  after  Sundarasena  had  been  in  the  same  way  bathed  and
adorned,  he  made  him  sit  down  on  a  splendid  throne,  and
honoured  him  with  gifts,  pearls,  musk,  and  so  on.  And  on
account  of  the  reunion  of  that  couple,  the  king  made  a  great
feast,  at  which  all  the  Savara  women  danced  delighted.

Then  the  next  day  Sundarasena  said  to  the  king :  "  My
wounds  are  healed  and  my  object  is  attained,  so  I  will  now
go  hence  to  my  own  city  ;  and,  please,  send  off  at  once  to
my  father  a  messenger  with  a  letter,  to  tell  the  whole  story
and  announce  my  arrival."  1  When  the  Savara  chief  heard
this,  he  sent  off  a  messenger  with  a  letter,  and  gave  him  the
message  which  the  prince  suggested.

And  just  as  the  letter-carrier  was  reaching  the  city  of
Alaka,  it  happened  that  King  Mahasena  and  his  queen,
afflicted  because  they  heard  no  tidings  of  Sundarasena,  were
preparing  to  enter  the  fire  in  front  of  a  temple  of  Siva,
surrounded  by  all  the  citizens,  who  were  lamenting  their  ap-
proaching loss.  Then  the  Savara  who  was  bearing  the  letter,
beholding  King  Mahasena,  came  running  up,  proclaiming
who  he  was,  stained  with  dust,  bow  in  hand,  with  his  hair
tied  up  in  a  knot  behind  with  a  creeper,  black  himself,  and
wearing  a  loin-cincture  of  vilva  leaves.  That  letter-carrier
of  the  Bhillas  said  :  "  King,  you  are  blessed  with  good
fortune  to-day,  as  your  son  Sundarasena  has  come  with
Mandaravati,  having  escaped  from  the  sea ;  for  he  has
arrived  at  the  court  of  my  master  Vindhyaketu,  and  is  on
his  way  to  this  place  with  him,  and  has  sent  me  on  before."
Having   said   this,    and   thus    discharged    his    confidential  2

1  Vrittantam  should  probably  be  vrittanta,  and  should  be  joined  with  the
words  that  follow.

2  If  confidential,  how  was  it  that  "all  the  people  there"  knew  all  about
it  at  once  ?  The  B.  text  reads  rarak-sucih,  which  obviously  troubled  Tawney,
as  he  omitted  the  second  word  entirely.  But  if  we  read  haran  cusam,  with  the
D.  text,  all  becomes  plain,  as  the  messenger  speaks  his  words  aloud  before  the
whole  court.     See  further  Speyer,  op.  cit.}  p.  140. — n.m.p.


THE  WELCOME  LETTER


159


commission,  the  letter-carrier  of  the  Bhilla  king  laid  the  letter
at  the  monarch's  feet.  Then  all  the  people  there,  being
delighted,  raised  a  shout  of  joy  ;  and  the  letter  was  read
out,  and  the  whole  of  the  wonderful  circumstances  became
known.  And  King  Mahasena  recompensed  the  letter-carrier,
and  abandoned  his  grief,  and  made  great  rejoicings,  and
entered  his  palace  with  all  his  retainers.  And  the  next  day,
being  impatient,  he  set  out  to  meet  his  son,  whose  arrival
he  expected,  accompanied  by  the  King  of  Hansadvipa.  And
his  force  of  four  arms  marched  along  with  him,  innumerable,
so  that  the  earth  trembled,  dreading  insupportable  weight.

In  the  meanwhile  Sundarasena  set  out  from  that  village
of  the  Bhillas  for  his  own  home,  with  Mandaravati.  And  he
was  accompanied  by  his  friends  Vikramasakti  and  Bhima-
bhuja,  whom  he  found  in  the  prison,  and  Dridhabuddhi  too
was  with  him.  He  himself  rode  on  a  horse  swift  as  the
wind,  by  the  side  of  Vindhyaketu,  and  seemed  by  the  hosts
of  Pulindas  that  followed  him  to  be  exhibiting  the  earth  as
belonging  to  that  race.  And  as  he  was  marching  along,  in  a
few  days  he  beheld  on  the  road  his  father  coming  to  meet
him,  with  his  retinue  and  his  connections.  Then  he  got
down  from  his  horse,  and  the  people  beheld  him  with  joy,
and  he  and  his  friends  went  up  and  fell  at  the  feet  of  his
father.  His  father,  when  he  beheld  his  son  looking  like  the
full  moon,  felt  like  the  sea,  which  surges  with  throbbings  of
joy  and  overflows  its  bounds,  and  could  not  contain  himself
for  happiness.1  And  when  he  saw  Mandaravati,  his  daughter-
in-law,  bowing  at  his  feet,  he  considered  himself  and  his
family  prosperous,  and  rejoiced.  And  the  king  welcomed
Dridhabuddhi  and  the  other  two  ministers  of  his  son,  who
bowed  at  his  feet,  and  he  received  Vindhyaketu  with  still
warmer  welcome.

Then  Sundarasena  bowed  before  his  father-in-law  Man-
daradeva,  whom  his  father  introduced  to  him,  and  rejoiced
exceedingly  ;  and  beholding  his  ministers  Chandaprabha  and
Vyaghraparakrama,  who  had  arrived  before,  clinging  to  his
feet,  he  considered  that  all  his  wishes  were  accomplished.
And  immediately  King  Mahendraditya,  who  was  delighted

1  An  allusion  to  the  phenomenon  of  the  tides.


160  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

at  hearing  what  had  happened,  came  there  from  Sasanka-
pura  out  of  affection.  Then  Prince  Sundarasena,  mounted
on  a  splendid  horse,  escorting  his  beloved,  as  Nadakuvara
did  Rambha,  went  with  all  those  to  his  own  home,  the  city
of  Alaka,  the  dwelling-place  of  all  felicities,  abounding  in
virtuous  men.  And  accompanied  by  his  beloved  he  entered
the  palace  of  his  father,  being  sprinkled,  as  he  passed  through
the  city,  by  the  wives  of  the  citizens,  who  were  all  crowding
to  the  windows,  with  the  blue  lotuses  of  their  eyes.  And  in
the  palace  he  bowed  at  the  feet  of  his  mother,  whose  eyes
were  full  of  tears  of  joy,  and  then  spent  that  day  in  rejoicings,
in  which  all  his  relations  and  servants  took  part.

And  the  next  day,  in  the  long-desired  hour  fixed  by  the
astrologers,  the  prince  received  the  hand  of  Mandaravati,
who  was  bestowed  on  him  by  her  father.  And  his  father-
in-law,  King  Mandaradeva,  as  he  had  no  son,  bestowed  on
him  many  priceless  jewels,  in  his  joy,  and  the  reversion  of
his  kingdom  after  his  own  death.  And  his  father,  King
Mahasena,  without  exhausting  the  earth,  made  a  great  feast,
in  a  style  suitable  to  his  desires  and  means,  in  which  all
prisoners  were  released,1  and  a  rain  of  gold  was  seen.2  And
having  beheld  Sundarasena  prosperous  by  his  union  with
Mandaravati,  and  having  taken  part  in  his  wedding  festivi-
ties, in  which  all  the  women  danced  to  song,  and  having  been
honoured  by  King  Mahasena,  King  Mandaradeva  returned
to  his  own  territory,  and  the  King  of  Sasankapura  returned  to
that  city,  and  Vindhyaketu,  the  lord  of  the  great  wilderness,
returned  to  his  domain.

And  after  some  days  had  elapsed,  King  Mahasena,  per-
ceiving that  his  son  Sundarasena  was  virtuous  and  beloved  by
the  subjects,  established  him  in  his  throne,  and  went  himself  to
the  forest.  And  Prince  Sundarasena,  having  thus  obtained  the
kingdom,  and  having  conquered  all  his  enemies  by  the  might
of  his  arm,  ruled  with  those  ministers  the  whole  earth,  and
found  his  joy  in  the  possession  of  Mandaravati  ever  increasing.

1  For  references  to  this  custom,  both  in  Eastern  and  European  tales,  see
Chauvin,  op.  cit.  vi,  p.  101?*2. — n.m.p.

2  The  Sanskrit  College  MS.  gives  vrishta-hiranya-vastram — in  which  gold
and  garments  were  showered  on  the  people.


THE  FRUIT-TRANSFORMATION  161

163.  Story  of  Mrigankadatta

When  the  minister  Vyaghrasena  had  told  this  story  on
the  bank  of  the  lake  to  Mrigankadatta,  he  went  on  to  say  to
him  :  "  This  wonderful  tale,  Prince,  did  the  hermit  Kanva
relate  to  us  in  the  hermitage,  and  at  the  end  of  the  tale  the
compassionate  man  said  to  us,  to  comfort  us  :  '  So,  my  sons,
those  who  endure  with  resolute  hearts  terrible  misfortunes
hard  to  struggle  through,  attain  in  this  way  the  objects  they
most  desire ;  but  those  others  whose  energies  are  paralysed  by
loss  of  courage,  fail.  Therefore  abandon  this  despondency,
and  go  on  your  way.  Your  master  also,  Prince  Mriganka-
datta, shall  recover  all  his  ministers,  and  shall  long  rule  the
earth,  after  having  been  united  with  Sasankavati.'  When
that  great  hermit  had  said  this  to  us,  we  plucked  up
courage  and  spent  the  night  there,  and  then  set  out  from
that  hermitage,  and  in  course  of  time  reached  this  wood,
travel- worn.  And  while  here,  being  tortured  with  excessive
thirst  and  hunger,  we  climbed  up  this  tree  sacred  to  Ganesa
to  get  fruits,  and  we  were  ourselves  turned  into  fruits  ;  and  we
have  now,  Prince,  been  released  from  our  fruit-transformation
by  your  austerities.  Such  have  been  the  adventures  of  us
four  during  our  separation  from  you,1  brought  about  by
the  curse  of  the  Naga ;  and  now  that  our  curse  is  expired,
advance,  united  with  us  all,  towards  the  attainment  of  your
object."

When  Mrigankadatta  had  heard  all  this  from  his  minister
Vyaghrasena,  he  conceived  hopes  of  obtaining  Sasankavati,
and  so  passed  that  night  there.

1  I  read  sapopanite,  with  the  Sanskrit  College  MS.


VOL.  VII.


CHAPTER  CII

163.  Story  of  Mrigdnkadatta

THEN,  the  next  morning,  Mrigankadatta  rose  up
from  the  shore  of  that  beautiful  lake,  together  with
all  his  ministers,  who  had  rejoined  him,  and  in
company  with  them,  and  the  Brahman  Srutadhi,  set  out  for
Ujjayini,  to  win  Sasankavati,  after  he  had  paid  his  orisons
to  that  tree  of  Ganesa.1

Then  the  heroic  prince,  accompanied  by  his  ministers,
again  crossed  various  stretches  of  woodland  which  contained
many  hundreds  of  lakes  and  were  black  with  tamdla  trees  2
throughout  their  whole  expanse,  looking  like  nights  in  the
rainy  season  when  the  clouds  collect ;  and  others  which  had
their  canes  broken  by  terrible  infuriated  elephants  roaming
through  them,  in  which  the  arjuna  trees  formed  a  strong
contrast  to  the  tamdla  trees,3  and  which  thus  resembled  so
many  cities  of  King  Virata  ;  and  ravines  of  mighty  moun-
tains, which  were  pure,  though  strewn  with  flowers,  and
though  frequented  by  subdued  hermits  were  haunted  by
fierce  beasts ;  and  at  last  came  near  the  city  of  Ujjayini.

Then  he  reached  the  River  Gandhavati,  and  dispelled
his  fatigue  by  bathing  in  it ;  and  after  crossing  it,  he  arrived
with  his  companions  in  that  cemetery  of  Mahakala.  There
he  beheld  the  image  of  mighty  Bhairava,  black  with   the

1  See  the  Dummedha  Jdtaka,  Cambridge  edition,  No.  50,  vol.  i,  p.  1 26  et  seq. ;
Burton's  translation  of  the  Pentamerone  of  Basil  e,  vol.  i,  p.  59,  and  Vol.  II  of
this  translation,  pp.  96,  96nl,  97 ;  also  Ralston's  Tibetan  Tales,  Introduction,
p.  Hi.

2  Or  "  black  as  tamala."

3  Or  "  which  were  of  opposite  appearance,  being  white."  The  word  arjuna
(white)  also  refers  to  the  hero  Arjuna,  one  of  the  Pandavas,  who  lived  dis-
guised as  a  eunuch  in  the  city  of  King  Virata.  Kichaka  (cane)  was  the  leader
of  the  host  of  King  Virata,  and  was  conquered  by  Bhlma  (terrible).  The
passage  contains  another  pun  which  will  be  obvious  to  those  acquainted  with
Hindu  customs.

162


THE  CITY  OF  UJJAYINl  163

smoke  from  neighbouring  pyres,  surrounded  with  many
fragments  of  bones  and  skulls,  terrible  with  the  skeletons
of  men  which  it  held  in  its  grasp,  worshipped  by  heroes,
frequented  by  many  troops  of  demons,  dear  to  sporting
witches.

And  after  crossing  the  cemetery,  he  beheld  the  city  of
Ujjayini,  a  yuga  old,  ruled  by  King  Karmasena.  Its  streets
were  watched  by  guards  with  various  weapons,  who  were
themselves  begirt  by  many  brave  high-born  Rajputs  ;  it  was
surrounded  with  ramparts  resembling  the  peaks  of  mighty
mountains ;  it  was  crowded  with  elephants,  horses  and
chariots,  and  hard  for  strangers  to  enter.

When  Mrigankadatta  beheld  that  city,  which  was  thus
inaccessible  on  every  side,  he  turned  his  face  away  in  de-
spondency, and  said  to  his  ministers :  "  Alas,  ill-starred  man
that  I  am  !  though  it  has  cost  me  hundreds  of  hardships  to
reach  this  city,  I  cannot  even  enter  it :  what  chance  then
have  I  of  obtaining  my  beloved  ?  "  When  they  heard  this,
they  said  to  him  :  "  What !  Do  you  suppose,  Prince,  that
this  great  city  could  ever  be  stormed  by  us,  who  are  so  few
in  number  ?  We  must  think  of  some  expedient  to  serve  in
this  emergency,  and  an  expedient  will  certainly  be  found  :
how  comes  it  that  you  have  forgotten  that  this  expedition
has  frequently  been  enjoined  by  the  gods  ?  "

When  Mrigankadatta  had  been  thus  addressed  by  his
ministers,  he  remained  for  some  days  roaming  about  outside
the  city.

Then  his  minister  Vikramakesarin  called  to  mind  that
Vetala  which  he  had  long  ago  won  over,  intending  to  employ
him  to  fetch  the  prince's  love  from  her  dwelling-house.  And
the  Vetala  came,  black  in  hue,  tall,  with  a  neck  like  a  camel,
elephant-faced,  with  legs  like  a  bull,  eyes  like  an  owl,  and
the  ears  of  an  ass.  But  finding  that  he  could  not  enter  the
city,  he  departed  :  the  favour  of  Siva  secures  that  city  against
being  invaded  by  such  creatures.

Then  the  Brahman  Srutadhi,  who  was  versed  in  policy,
said  to  Mrigankadatta,  as  he  was  sitting  in  gloom,  sur-
rounded by  his  ministers,  longing  in  his  heart  to  enter  the
city  :    "  Why,  Prince,  though  you  know  the  true  principles


164  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

of  policy,  do  you  remain  bewildered,  like  one  ignorant  of
them  ?  Who  will  ever  be  victorious  in  this  world  by  dis-
regarding the  difference  between  himself  and  his  foe  ?  For
at  every  one  of  the  four  gates  of  this  city  two  thousand
elephants,  twenty-five  thousand  horses,  ten  thousand  chariots
and  a  hundred  thousand  footmen  remain  harnessed  and
ready,  day  and  night,  to  guard  it ;  and  they  are  hard  to
conquer,  being  commanded  by  horses.  So,  as  for  a  handful
of  men,  like  ourselves,  entering  it  by  force,  that  is  a  mere
chimerical  fancy,1  not  a  measure  calculated  to  ensure  success.
Moreover,  this  city  cannot  be  overthrown  by  a  small  force  ;
and  a  contest  with  an  overwhelming  force  is  like  fighting  on
foot  against  an  elephant.  So  join  with  your  friend  Maya-
vatu,  the  king  of  the  Pulindas,  whom  you  delivered  from
the  terrible  danger  of  the  water-monsters  in  the  Narmada,
and  with  his  friend  Durgapisacha,  the  very  powerful  king
of  the  Matangas,  who  is  attached  to  you  on  account  of  his
alliance  with  him,2  and  with  that  king  of  the  Kiratas,  named
Saktirakshita,  who  is  famous  for  his  valour  and  has  observed
a  vow  of  strict  chastity  3  from  his  youth  upwards,  and  let  them
all  bring  their  forces,  and  then  do  you,  thus  strengthened
by  allies,  fill  every  quarter  with  your  hosts,  and  so  accom-
plish the  object  you  have  in  view.  Moreover,  the  king
of  the  Kiratas  is  awaiting  your  coming  from  a  distance  in
accordance  with  your  agreement ;  how  have  you  come  to
forget  this  ?     And   no  doubt  Mayavatu  is  ready  awaiting

1  I.e.  patangavritti.  The  word  seems  to  mean  "subsistence  of  birds."
Cf.  Macbeth,  iv,  2,  33.  Pandit  Rama  Chandra  of  Alwar  points  out  that  the
reference  in  patangavritti  is  to  the  "rushing  of  a  moth  into  a  candle."  In  the
text,  therefore,  "would  be  a  mere  reckless  rushing  on  destruction"  should  be
substituted  for  "  is  a  mere  chimerical  fancy." Cf.  Jataka,  544,  and  Bloom-
field,  "Art  of  Stealing,"  Amer.  Journ.  Phil.,  vol.  xliv,  1923,  p.  117. — n.m.p.

2  I  find  tat-sambandhanuragina  in  three  India  Office  MSS.  kindly  lent  me

by  Dr  Rost. The  incident  of  Mayavatu's  deliverance  appeared  in  Vol.  VI,

p.  36. — N.M.P.

3  The  D.  text  reads  balasabrahmacarina  instead  of  balisa-brahmacarina.
That  this  is  the  more  correct  reading  is  clear  from  the  previous  mention  of
Saktirakshita  (Vol.  VI,  p.  25),  where  he  is  described  as  "a  student  in  the
sciences,  observing  a  vow  of  chastity,  ...  a  friend  of  mine  from  childhood."
Here  the  B.  text  has  bala-siihrid,  etc. — n.m.p.


THE  KING  OF  THE  MATANGAS  165

your  arrival,  in  the  territory  of *  the  king  of  the  Matangas,
for  you  made  this  agreement  with  him.  So  let  us  go  to  the
castle  named  Karabhagriva,  on  the  southern  slope  of  the
Vindhyas,  in  which  that  chief  of  the  Matangas  dwells.  And
let  us  summon  there  Saktirakshita,  the  king  of  the  Kiratas,
and  united  with  them  all  make  a  fortunate  expedition  with
every  chance  of  success."

When  Mrigankadatta  and  his  ministers  heard  this  speech
of  Srutadhi's,  which  was  full  of  sense  and  such  as  the  wise
would  approve,  they  eagerly  accepted  it,  saying  :  "  So  be  it."
And  the  next  day  the  prince  adored  that  unresting  traveller
of  the  sky,  the  sun,  the  friend  of  the  virtuous,  that  had  just
arisen,  revealing  every  quarter  of  the  world,2  and  set  out  for
the  abode  of  Durgapisacha,  king  of  the  Matangas,  on  the
southern  slope  of  the  Vindhya  range.  And  his  ministers
Bhimaparakrama,  and  Vyaghrasena,  and  Gunakara  and
Meghabala  with  Vimalabuddhi,  and  Sthulabahu  with  Vichi-
trakatha,  and  Vikramakesarin,  and  Prachandasakti,  and
Srutadhi  and  Dridhamushti  followed  him.  With  them  he
successively  crossed  forests  wide-ranging  as  his  own  under-
takings, and  stretches  of  woodland  profound  as  his  own
schemes,  with  no  better  refuge  at  night  than  the  root  of  a
tree3  on  the  shore  of  a  lake,  and  reached  and  ascended  the
Vindhya  mountain  lofty  as  his  own  soul.

Then  the  prince  went  from  the  summit  of  the  mountain
down  its  southern  slope,  and  beholding  afar  off  the  villages
of  the  Bhillas,  full  of  elephants'  tusks  and  deer-skins,  he  said
to  himself  :  "  How  am  I  to  know  where  the  dwelling  of  that
king  of  the  Matangas  is  ?  "  While  engaged  in  such  reflec-
tions, he  and  his  ministers  saw  a  hermit-boy  come  towards
them,  and  after  doing  obeisance  to  him,  they  said  :  "  Fair
sir,  do  you  know  in  what  part  of  this  region  the  palace  of

1  I  read  Matangarajadesagato ;  the  reading  of  the  India  Office  MS.,
No.  1882,  is  rajadesagato,  which  would  mean:  "by  the  invitation  of  the  king
of  the  Matangas."  For  duragamana,  in  si.  31,  No.  2166  reads  dutagamana — i.e.
"the  coming  of  your  messenger."     This  makes  better  sense.

2  A  pun  !  It  also  means  "  holding  prosperity,  and  holding  out  hopes  to
the  world."

3  All  the  three  India  Office  MSS.,  which  Dr  Rost  has  kindly  lent  me,
read  nisasrayah.


166


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


Durgapisacha,  the  king  of  the  Matangas,  is  ?  For  we  wish
to  see  him."

When  that  good  young  ascetic  heard  this,  he  said  :  "  Only
a  kos  distant  from  this  place  is  a  spot  called  Panchavati,  and
not  far  from  it  was  the  hermitage  of  the  hermit  Agastya,  who
with  small  effort  cast  down  from  heaven  the  haughty  King
Nahusha ;  where  Rama,  who  by  command  of  his  father  took
up  his  dwelling  in  a  forest,  accompanied  by  Lakshmana  and
his  wife  Sita,  long  waited  on  that  hermit ;  where  Kabandha,1
who  guided  Rama  to  the  slaughter  of  the  Rakshasas,  pro-
ceeded to  attack  Rama  and  Lakshmana,  as  Rahu  does  the
sun  and  moon,  whose  arm,  a  yojana  in  length,  Rama  felled,
so  that  it  resembled  Nahusha  in  his  serpent  form  come  to
supplicate  Agastya  ;  where  even  now  the  Rakshasas  hear-
ing the  roaring  of  the  clouds  at  the  beginning  of  the  rainy
season  call  to  mind  the  twanging  of  the  bow  of  Rama ;
where  the  aged  deer,  that  were  fed  by  Sita,  beholding  the
regions  deserted  in  every  direction,  with  eyes  filling  with
tears,  reject  the  mouthful  of  grass  ;  where  Maricha,  who
brought  about  Sita's  separation  from  her  husband,  assumed
the  form  of  a  golden  deer  and  enticed  away  Rama,  as  if  to
save  from  slaughter  those  deer  that  were  still  left  alive ;
where,  in  many  a  great  lake  full  of  the  water  of  the  Kaveri,
it  appears  as  if  Agastya  had  vomited  up  in  driblets  the  sea
that  he  swallowed.2  Nor  far  from  that  hermitage,  on  a
tableland  of  the  Vindhya,  is  a  stronghold  tangled  and  in-
accessible, named  Karabhagriva.  In  it  dwells  that  mighty
Durgapisacha  of  terrible  valour,  chief  of  the  Matangas,
whom  kings  cannot  conquer.  And  he  commands  a  hundred
thousand  bowmen  of  that  tribe,  every  one  of  whom  is
followed  by  five  hundred  warriors.  With  the  aid  of  those
brigands  he  robs  caravans,  destroys  his  enemies,  and  enjoys
this  great  forest,  caring  nought  for  this  or  that  king."  3

When  Mrigankadatta  had  heard  this  from  the  young
hermit,  he  took  leave  of  him,  and  went  quickly,  with  his


1  Professor  Monier  Williams  refers  us  to  Ramayana,  iii,  75.

2  See  Vol.  VI,  pp.  43/11,  44n. — n.m.p.

3  So,  in  the  eighty-ninth  chapter  of  the  u  Wilkina  Saga,"  Heime  goes  off
to  join  the  robber  chief  Ingram  (Hagen's  Helden-Sagen,  vol.  i,  p.  242).


THE  ARRIVAL  AT  THE  CAMP  167

companions,  in  the  direction  indicated  by  him,  and  in  course
of  time  he  arrived  in  the  environs  of  Karabhagriva,  that
stronghold  of  the  king  of  the  Matangas,  which  were  crowded
with  Bhilla  villages.  And  within  them  he  beheld  near  at
hand  on  every  side  crowds  of  Savaras,  adorned  with  pea-
cocks' feathers  and  elephants'  teeth,  clothed  in  tigers'  skins,
and  living  on  the  flesh  of  deer.  When  Mrigankadatta  saw
those  Bhillas,  he  said  to  his  ministers :  "  See  !  These  men
live  a  wild  forest  life  like  animals,  and  yet,  strange  to  say,
they  recognise  Durgapisacha  as  their  king.  There  is  no  race
in  the  world  without  a  king ;  I  do  believe  the  gods  introduced
this  magical  name  among  men  in  their  alarm,  fearing  that
otherwise  the  strong  would  devour  the  weak,  as  great  fishes
eat  the  little."  *  And  while  he  was  saying  this,  and  trying
to  find  the  path  that  led  to  the  stronghold  Karabhagriva,
the  scouts  of  Mayavatu,  the  king  of  the  Savaras,  who  had
already  arrived  there,  recognised  him,  having  seen  him
before.  They  immediately  went  and  told  that  Mayavatu
of  his  arrival,  and  he  with  his  army  went  to  meet  him.

.  _  And  when  that  king  of  the  Pulindas  came  near,

dattTarrkes  an(*  saw  tne  prince,  he  alighted  from  his  horse,
at  the  Camp  and  ran  forward  and  fell  at  his  feet.  And  he
°th  p«S^°^emkraeec*  tne  Prmce,  who  asked  after  his  health,
and  then  mounted  him  and  his  ministers  on
horses,  and  brought  them  to  his  own  camp.  And  that  king
of  the  Savaras  sent  his  own  warder  to  inform  the  king  of
the  Matangas  of  the  prince's  arrival.

And  Durgapisacha,  the  king  of  the  Matangas,  quickly
came  there  from  his  own  place,  and  his  appearance  justified
his  name.2  He  seemed  like  a  second  Vindhya  range,  for
his  body  was  firm  as  a  rocky  peak,  his  hue  was  black  as
tamdla,  and  Pulindas  lay  at  his  foot.  His  face  was  rendered
terrible  by  a  natural  three-furrowed  frown,  and  so  he  ap-
peared as  if  Durga,  the  dweller  in  the  Vindhya  range,  had

1  The  India  Office  MS.,  No.  21 66,  reads  matsyanyayabhayodayat. The

B.  text  was  hopelessly  corrupt.     D.  reads  matsyanyayabhayad  ayam  (viz.  rajas-
abdak). — n.m.p.

2  His  name  means  "  Wild  Man  of  the  Stronghold  "  or  "  Demon  of  the
Stronghold."


168  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

marked  him  with  the  trident,  to  claim  him  as  her  own.
Though  young,  he  had  seen  the  death  of  many  "  secular
birds  "  ;  though  black,  he  was  not  comely  ;  and  he  crouched
to  none,  though  he  hugged  the  foot  of  a  mountain.1  Like
a  fresh  cloud,  he  displayed  the  peacock-tail  and  the  gay-
coloured  bow ;  like  Hiranyaksha,2  his  body  was  scarred  by
the  furious  boar ;  like  Ghatotkacha,  he  was  mighty  and
possessed  a  haughty  and  terrible  shape  3 ;  like  the  Kali  age,
he  allowed  those  born  under  his  sway  to  take  pleasure  in
wickedness  and  break  through  the  bonds  of  rule.  And  the
mass  of  his  host  came  filling  the  earth,  like  the  stream  of
the  Narmada  when  let  loose  from  the  embrace  of  Arjuna.4
And  so  the  aggregated  army  of  the  Chandalas  moved  on,
blackening  all  the  horizon  with  a  dark  hue,  making  those
who  beheld  it  say  in  perplexity  to  themselves :  "  Can  this  be
a  mass  of  rock  rolling  down  from  the  Anjana  mountain,5  or
is  it  a  premature  bank  of  the  clouds  of  the  day  of  doom  that
has  descended  upon  the  earth  ?  "

And  their  chief,  Durgapisacha,  came  up  to  Mrigan-
kadatta,  placing  his  head  upon  the  ground  even  when  at  a
distance,  and  bowed  before  him,  and  said  :  "  To-day  the
goddess  Durga  is  pleased  with  me,  in  that  your  Highness,  of
such  a  noble  race,  has  come  to  my  house.  On  that  account
I  consider  myself  fortunate  and  successful."  When  the  king
of  the  Matangas  had  said  this,  he  gave  him  a  present  of  pearls,
musk  and  other  rarities.  And  the  prince  kindly  accepted
it  with  the  usual  courtesies.  Then  they  all  encamped  there.
That  great  forest  was  covered  all  over  with  elephants  fastened
to  posts,  with  horses  in  stables,  and  tented  footmen  ;  and
was  scarcely  able  to  contain  itself,  being  confused  with  its
good  fortune  in  thus  being  assimilated  to  a  city,  which  was
unprecedented  in  the  course  of  its  existence.

1  The  passage  is  full  of  puns :  vayas  means  "  age  "  and  "  bird  "  ;  krishna
"  black  "  and  also  the  god  of  that  name  ;  bhubhrit  "  king  "  and  also  "  mountain."

2  Killed  by  Vishnu  in  the  form  of  a  boar.

3  Another  play  on  words.  It  may  mean  "was  the  son  of  the  Pandava
Bhlma."

4  See  note  at  the  end  of  the  chapter. — n.m.p.

5  Anjana  is  a  black  pigment  applied  to  the  eyes. See  Vol.  I,  p.  211

et  seq. — n.m.p.


THE  ALLIES  169

Then  in  that  wood,  when  Mrigankadatta  had  bathed  in
the  river  for  good  fortune,  and  had  taken  food,  and  was
sitting  at  his  ease  in  a  secluded  spot,  surrounded  by  his
ministers,  Mayavatu  also  being  present,  Durgapisacha  said
to  Mrigankadatta,  in  the  course  of  conversation,  speaking
in  a  tone  softened  by  affection  and  regard  :  "  This  King
Mayavatu  came  here  a  long  time  ago,  and  has  been  remain-
ing here  with  me,  my  lord,  awaiting  your  orders.  So  where,
my  Prince,  have  you  all  remained  so  long  ?  And  what  have
you  done  ?     Tell  me,  now,  the  business  that  detained  you  ?  "

When  the  prince  heard  this  speech  of  his,  he  said :
"  After  I  had  left  the  palace  of  our  friend  here,  Mayavatu,
with  Vimalabuddhi  and  Gunakara,  and  Srutadhi,  and  Bhima-
parakrama,  whom  I  had  also  recovered,  I  found  on  my  way
this  Prachandasakti  and  Vichitrakatha,  and  in  course  of
time  also  this  Vikramakesarin.  Then  these  men  here  found
on  the  border  of  a  beautiful  lake  a  tree  sacred  to  Ganesa,
and  climbed  up  it  to  pick  its  fruit,  and  so  were  turned  into
fruits  themselves  by  the  curse  of  the  god.  Then  I  propiti-
ated Ganesa,  and  not  without  difficulty  set  them  free,  and
at  the  same  time  I  delivered  these  four  other  ministers  of
mine,  Dridhamushti  and  Vyaghrasena  and  Meghabala  and
Sthulabahu,  who  had  previously  suffered  the  same  trans-
formation. With  all  these  thus  recovered,  I  went  to
Ujjayini ;  but  the  gates  were  guarded,  and  we  could  not
even  enter  the  town,  much  less  could  we  think  of  any
device  for  carrying  off  Sasankavati.  And  as  I  had  no  army
with  me,  I  had  no  locus  standi  for  sending  an  ambassador.
So  we  deliberated  together,  and  came  here  to  you.  Now,
my  friend,  you  and  your  allies  have  to  decide  whether  we
shall  attain  our  end  or  no."

When  Mrigankadatta  had  related  his  adventures  in  these
words,  Durgapisacha  and  Mayavatu  said  :  "Be  of  good
courage ;  this  is  but  a  little  matter  for  us  to  accomplish  at
once ;  our  lives  were  originally  created  for  your  sake.  We
will  bring  here  that  King  Karmasena  in  chains,  and  we  will
carry  off  his  daughter  Sasankavati  by  force."

When  the  king  of  the  Matangas  and  Mayavatu  said  this,
Mrigankadatta  said  lovingly  and  very  respectfully  :    "  What


170


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


will  you  not  be  able  to  accomplish,  for  this  resolute  courage
of  yours  is  a  sufficient  guarantee  that  you  will  carry  out  that
furtherance  of  your  friend's  interests  which  you  have  under-
taken. When  the  Creator  made  you  here,  he  infused  into  your
composition  qualities  borrowed  from  your  surroundings,  the
firmness  of  the  Vindhya  hills,  the  courage  of  the  tigers,  and
the  warm  attachment  to  friends  of  the  forest l  lotuses.  So  de-
liberate, and  do  what  is  fitting."  While  Mrigankadatta  was
saying  this,  the  sun  retired  to  rest  on  the  summit  of  the  moun-
tain of  setting.  Then  they  also  rested  that  night  in  the  royal
camp,  as  was  meet,  sleeping  in  booths  made  by  the  workmen.
And  the  next  morning  Mrigankadatta  sent  off  Gunakara
to  bring  his  friend  Saktirakshita,  the  king  of  the  Kiratas.
He  went  and  communicated  the  state  of  affairs  to  that
sovereign  ;  and  in  a  very  few  days  the  king  of  the  Kiratas  re-
turned with  him,  bringing  a  very  large  force.  Ten  hundred
thousand  footmen,  and  two  hundred  thousand  horses,  and  a
myriad  of  furious  elephants  on  which  heroes  were  mounted,
and  eighty-eight  thousand  chariots  followed  that  king,  who
darkened  the  heaven  with  his  banners  and  his  umbrella.
And  Mrigankadatta,  with  his  friends  and  ministers,  went  to
meet  him  in  high  spirits,  and  honoured  him,  and  conducted
him  into  the  camp.  And  in  the  meanwhile  other  friends
and  relations  of  the  king  of  the  Matangas,  and  all  those  of
King  Mayavatu,  having  been  summoned  by  messengers,  came
in.2  And  the  camp  swelled  like  an  ocean,  giving  joy  to  the
heart  of  Mrigankadatta,  with  shouts  rising  up  like  the  roar
of  the  waves,  and  hundreds  of  battalions  pouring  in  like
rivers.  And  Durgapisacha  honoured 3  those  assembled  kings  *
with  musk,  and  garments,  and  pieces  of  flesh,   and  spirits


1  Vana  might  mean  "water."

2  Two  of  the  India  Office  MSS.  read  cha  te  datta  diitah,  the  other  reads
cha  taddattadutah.  I  think  these  readings  give  a  better  sense.  The  king  of
the  Matangas  is  here  Durgapisacha.

3  I  read  samamanayat,  the  conjecture  of  Dr  Kern.  I  find  it  in  MSS.
Nos.  1882  and  21 66.

4  Speyer  (op.  cit.,  p.  141)  suspects  a  misreading  in  the  B.  text.  For
yuktan,  etc.,  the  D.  text  has  mulcta,  etc.  Thus,  instead  of  u .  .  .  those  assembled
kings  with  musk  .  .  .,"  we  should  read  "...  those  kings  with  pearls,
musk  .  .  ." — n.m.p.


THE  ART  OF  DIPLOMACY


171


distilled  from  fruits.  And  Mayavatu,  the  king  of  the  Savaras,
gave  them  all  splendid  baths,  unguents,  food,  drink  and  beds.
And  Mrigankadatta  sat  down  to  eat  with  all  those  kings  who
were  seated  in  their  proper  places.1  He  even  went  as  far  as
to  make  the  king  of  the  Matangas  eat  in  his  presence,  though
at  a  little  distance  from  him :  the  fact  is,  it  is  necessity  and
place  and  time  that  take  precedence,  not  one  man  of  another.

And  the  next  day,  when  the  newly  arrived  force  of  Kiratas
and  others  had  rested,  Mrigankadatta,  sitting  on  a  throne  of
ivory  in  the  assembly  of  the  kings,  where  he  had  been  duly
honoured,  after  he  had  had  the  place  cleared  of  attendants,
said  to  his  friends,  the  king  of  the  Matangas,  and  the  others  :
"  Why  do  we  now  delay  ?  Why  do  we  not  quickly  march
towards  Ujjayini  with  the  whole  of  this  force  ?  "

When  the  Brahman  Srutadhi  heard  this,  he  said  to
that  prince :  "  Listen,  Prince,  I  now  speak  according  to  the
opinion  of  those  who  know  policy.  A  king  who  wishes  to
be  victorious  must  first  see  the  distinction  between  what
is  practicable  and  what  is  not  practicable.  What  cannot  be
accomplished  by  an  expedient,  he  should  reject  as  impractic-
able. That  is  practicable  which  can  be  accomplished  by  an
expedient.  Now  expedients  in  this  matter  are  of  four  kinds,
and  are  enumerated  as  conciliation,  gifts,  division  and  force.
This  order  represents  their  comparative  advantages,  the  first
being  better  than  the  second,  and  so  on.  So,  my  prince,  you
ought  first  to  make  use  of  conciliation  in  this  business.  For,
as  King  Karmasena  is  not  greedy  of  gain,  gifts  are  not  likely
to  succeed ;  nor  is  division  likely  to  be  of  any  use,  for  none
of  his  servants  is  angry  or  covetous,  or  indignant  with
him  on  account  of  having  been  treated  with  neglect.  As  for
force,  its  employment  is  risky  ;  as  that  king  lives  in  a  difficult
country,  he  has  a  very  formidable  army,  and  has  never  been
conquered  by  any  king  before.  Moreover,  even  mighty  ones
cannot  always  be  assured  of  having  the  fortune  of  victory  on
their  side  in  battles ;  besides,  it  is  not  becoming  in  one  who
is  a  suitor  for  a  maiden's  hand  to  slaughter  her  relations.
So  let  us  send  an  ambassador  to  that  monarch,  adopting  the

1  Being  a  man  of  high  caste,  he  ate  with  men  that  had  none,  or  next
to  none.     Dr  Kern  wishes  to  read  karye,  but  all  the  MSS.  have  Mryam.


172


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


method  of  conciliation.  If  that  does  not  succeed,  the  method
of  force  shall  be  employed  as  being  unavoidable."  All  there,
when  they  heard  this  speech  of  Srutadhi's,  approved  it,  and
praised  his  statesmanship.

Then  Mrigankadatta  deliberated  with  them  all,  and  sent
a  servant  of  the  king  of  the  Kiratas,  a  noble  Brahman,  Suvi-
graha  by  name,  who  possessed  all  the  requisites  of  a  diploma-
tist, to  King  Karmasena,  as  an  ambassador  to  communicate
the  result  of  their  deliberations,  and  he  carried  with  him  a
letter,  and  was  also  entrusted  with  a  verbal  message.     The
ambassador  went  to  Ujjayini,  and,  being  introduced  by  the
warder,  entered  the  king's  palace,  the  interior  of  which  looked
very  magnificent,  as  its  zones  were  crowded  with  splendid
horses  and  with  elephants  ;    and  he  saw  that  King  Karma-
sena, sitting  on  his  throne,  surrounded  by  his  ministers.     He
did  obeisance  to  that  sovereign,  who  welcomed  him ;    and
after  he  had  sat  down,  and  his  health  had  been  inquired
after,  he  proceeded  to  deliver  to  him  his  letter.     And  the
king's  minister,  named  Prajnakosa,  took  it,  and  broke  the  seal,
and  unfolding  the  letter,  proceeded  to  read  it  out  to  the
following  effect :  "  All  hail !    The  auspicious  Mrigankadatta,
ornament  of  the  circle  of  the  earth,  son  of  the  great  king
of  kings  who  is  lord  of  the  city  of  Ayodhya,  the  fortunate
Amaradatta,  from  the  slope  of  the  forest  at  the  foot  of  the
castle  of  Karabhagriva,  where  he  now  is,  with  kings  sub-
missive and  obedient  to  him,  sends  this  plain  message  to
the  great  King  Karmasena  in  Ujjayini,   who  is  the  moon
of  the  sea  of  his  own  race,  with  all  due  respect :  You  have
a  daughter,  and  you  must  without  fail  give  her  to  another,
so  give  her  to  me,  for  she  has  been  declared  by  the  gods  a
suitable  wife  for  me ;  in  this  way  we  shall  become  allies,  and
our  former  enmity  will  be  at  an  end.    If  you  do  not  consent,  I
will  appeal  to  my  own  strong  arms  to  give  me  this  object  of
my  desires."     When  the  letter  had  been  thus  read  by  the
minister  Prajnakosa,  King  Karmasena,  inflamed  with  rage,
said  to  his  ministers  :  "  These  people  are  always  hostile  to
us ;  and  observe,  this  man,  not  knowing  his  place,  has  on
the  present  occasion  worded  his  communication  in  an  objec-
tionable form.     He  has  put  himself  first  and  me  last,  out  of


THE  ADVANCE  173

contempt ;  and  at  the  end  the  conceited  fellow  has  bragged
of  the  might  of  his  arm.  So,  I  do  not  consider  that  I  ought
to  send  any  reply.  As  for  giving  him  my  daughter,  that  is
out  of  the  question.  Depart,  ambassador  !  let  your  master
do  what  he  can."  *

When  King  Karmasena  said  this,  that  Brahman  am-
bassador Suvigraha,  being  a  man  of  spirit,  gave  him  an
answer  well  suited  to  the  occasion  :  "  Fool,  you  boast  now,
because  you  have  not  seen  that  prince.  Make  ready ;  when
he  arrives,  you  will  learn  the  difference  between  yourself
and  your  opponent."  When  the  ambassador  said  this,  the
whole  court  was  in  a  state  of  excitement ;  but  the  king,
though  in  wrath,  said:  "Away  with  you!  Your  person
is  inviolable,  so  what  can  we  do  ?  "  Then  some  of  those
present,  biting  their  lips  and  wringing  their  hands  together,
said  one  to  another  :  "  Why  do  we  not  follow  him  and  kill
him  this  moment  ?  "  But  others,  being  masters  of  them-
selves, said  :  "  Let  the  young  fool  of  a  Brahman  go  !  Why
do  you  trouble  yourselves  about  the  speech  of  this  babbler  ?
We  will  show  what  we  can  do."  Others  again,  appearing
to  foreshadow  by  their  frowns  the  speedy  bending  of  their
bows,  remained  silent,  with  faces  red  with  rage.

The  whole  court  being  thus  incensed,  the  ambassador
Suvigraha  went  out,  and  repaired  to  Mrigankadatta  in  his
camp.  He  told  him  and  his  friends  what  Karmasena  had
said ;  and  the  prince,  when  he  heard  it,  ordered  the  army
to  march.  Then  the  sea  of  soldiers,  set  in  motion  by  the
order  of  the  commander,  as  by  a  violent  gust  of  wind,  in
which  men,  horses  and  elephants  moved  like  bounding  sea-
monsters,  exciting  satisfaction  in  the  mind  of  the  allied
monarchs,2  assumed  an  agitation  terrifying  to  the  minds
of  timid  men.  Then  Mrigankadatta,  making  the  earth  miry
with  the  foam  of  high-mettled  horses  and  the  frontal  ichor
of  elephants,  and  deafening  the  world  with  the  noise  of  his
drums,  moved  on  slowly  to  Ujjayini  to  victory.

1  Cf.  the  way  in  which  King  Melias  receives  the  proposals  of  Osantrix  in  the
fifty-third  chapter  of  the  "  Wilkina  Saga  "  (Hagen's  Helden-Sagen,  vol.  i,  p.  182).

2  Or  "of  the  mountains  that  retained  their  wings" — i.e.  by  taking  refuge
from  Indra  in  the  sea.     The  pun  is,  of  course,  most  intentional.


174


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


NOTE  ON  ARJUNA  AND  THE  NARMADA.


This  refers  to  an  incident  in  the  "  Uttarakanda,"  or  last  book  of  the
Ramayana.  It  is  really  only  an  appendix  and  deals  with  incidents  antecedent
to  those  in  the  poem  itself.  Ravana,  after  defeating  numerous  kings,  attacks
Arjuna  or  Karttavlrya,  King  of  Mahishmati,  on  the  banks  of  the  Narmada,  and
is  defeated,  captured  and  imprisoned  by  Arjuna.  Griffith  (Ramayana,  vol.  v,
p.  322),  following  the  works  of  Signor  Gorresio  and  Muir,  places  the  incident
in  sections  xxi  and  xxii,  but  in  the  complete  prose  translation  by  M.  N.  Dutt
it  appears  in  sections  xxxvi-xxxviii,  as  related  by  Agastya  to  Rama.

Section  xxxvi  contains  a  beautiful  description  of  the  holy  River  Narmada
(Dutt  calls  it  Nerbuda ;  it  is  the  Narbada  or  Nerbudda  of  modern  atlases,  the
Namados  of  Pliny,  and  Nammadios  of  the  Periplns),  followed  by  the  bathing
of  Ravana  and  his  worship  of  Siva.  The  worship,  however,  is  interrupted  by
an  overwhelming  current  of  the  stream,  flowing  in  an  opposite  direction.
Some  of  Ravana' s  retinue  go  to  discover  the  cause  of  this  strange  phenomenon
and  report  as  follows  : —

"  O  lord  of  Rakshasas,  an  unknown  person,  huge  as  a  Sdla  tree,  is  sport-
ing with  females  obstructing  the  course  of  Nerbuda  like  unto  a  dam.  And
being  withheld  by  the  thousand  arms  of  that  man,  the  waters  of  Nerbuda
are  continually  throwing  up  high  waves."

At  this  Ravana  advances  to  fight  Arjuna,  and  several  of  the  latter's
ministers  are  killed.  Arjuna  thereupon  "rose  up  from  the  waters  like  an
elephant,"  and  the  waters  thus  released  from  this  human  dam  flowed  on
their  accustomed  way.  [This  is  the  actual  incident  referred  to  in  our  text.]
A  terrible  duel  ensues.  "  And  taking  up  their  clubs,  Arjuna  and  Ravana
begin  to  fight  with  one  another,  emitting  cries  like  the  mutterings  of  clouds,
like  unto  two  huge  bulls  fighting  for  a  cow,  two  agitated  oceans,  two  moving
mountains,  two  effulgent  Adityas,  two  burning  flames,  two  proud  elephants,
two  proud  lions,  and  like  the  very  Rudra  and  Kala."

Eventually  Ravana  is  overcome,  bound  and  carried  off  by  Arjuna. — n.m.p.


CHAPTER  CIII

163.  Story  of  Mrigdnkadatta

THEN  Mrigankadatta,  accompanied  by  his  friends,
crossed  the  Vindhya  range,  and,  with  his  army  ready
for  battle,  reached  the  frontier  of  Ujjayini.  When
the  brave  King  Karmasena  heard  that,  he  also  made  ready
for  the  fight,  and  with  his  army  moved  out  from  the  city
to  meet  him.  And  when  those  two  armies  came  to  close
quarters,  and  could  see  one  another,  a  battle  took  place  be-
tween them  that  gladdened  heroes.  The  battlefield  seemed
like  the  dwelling-place  of  Hiranyakasipu,  as  it  was  full  of
timid  demons  dispersed  in  terror  by  the  roar  of  the  Man-
lion  x ;  the  continued  dense  shower  of  arrows  flying  through
the  air,  and  cutting  one  another,  descended  on  brave  warriors,
like  locusts  on  the  tender  herb.  Dense  clouds  of  pearls
gleamed  as  they  sprang  from  the  frontal  globes  of  elephants
struck  with  swords,  resembling  the  necklace  of  the  Fortune
of  that  battle  broken  in  her  agitation.  That  place  of  combat
appeared  like  the  mouth  of  Death  ;  and  the  sharp  points  of
spears,  that  seized  on  men,  horses  and  elephants,  were  like
his  fangs.  The  heads  of  strong-armed  warriors,  cut  off  with
crescent-headed  arrows,  flew  up  to  heaven,  as  if  leaping  up  2
to  kiss  the  heavenly  nymphs  ;  and  at  every  moment  trunks
of  brave  heroes  danced,  as  if  in  delight  at  the  battle  of  their
noble  leader  being  gloriously  illuminated ;  and  so  for  five
days  that  hero-destroying  battle  went  on,  with  flowing  rivers
of  blood,  rich  in  mountains  of  heads.

And  in  the  evening  of  the  fifth  day  the  Brahman  Srutadhi

1  Krishna,  in  the  form  of  a  man-lion,  destroyed    Hiranyakasipu.     The
word  man-lion  also  refers  to  brave  soldiers.     For  sashpeshu  No.   1882  reads


2  I  read,  with  India  Office  MS.  No.  1882,  dividattordhvajhampani ;  the  two
other  MSS.  agree  in  the  reading jampdni.     For  bhruvasalinam  I  read  bhujasalinam,
which  I  find  in  the  three  India  Office  MSS.
175


176  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

came  secretly  to  Mrigankadatta  when  he  was  closeted  with
his  ministers,  and  said  to  him  :  "  While  you  were  engaged
in  fighting,  I  went  away  from  the  camp,  in  the  disguise  of
a  mendicant,  and  entered  Ujjayini,  the  gates  of  which  were
almost  deserted  :  and  now  listen  ;  I  will  tell  you  truly  what
I  observed,  being  myself  all  the  while,  though  near  at  hand,
unseen  in  virtue  of  my  knowledge.  As  soon  as  King  Karma-
sena  went  out  to  battle,  Sasankavati,  with  the  permission  of
her  mother,  also  left  the  palace,  and  repaired  to  a  temple  of
Gauri  in  that  city  to  propitiate  the  goddess,  in  order  to  ensure
her  father's  success  in  combat.  And  while  she  was  there,
she  said  in  secret  to  a  devoted  confidante :  '  My  friend,  it  is
for  my  sake  that  my  father  has  become  involved  in  this
war.  And  if  he  is  conquered  he  will  give  me  to  that  prince  ;
for  kings  disregard  love  for  offspring  altogether  when  the
interests  of  their  kingdoms  are  at  stake.  And  I  do  not  know
whether  that  prince  is  a  suitable  match  for  me  in  respect  of
personal  appearance  or  not.  I  would  sooner  meet  my  death
than  marry  an  ugly  husband.  I  think  a  good-looking
husband,  even  though  poor,  is  to  be  preferred  to  an  ugly  one,
though  he  be  emperor  over  the  whole  earth.  So  you  must  go
to  the  army  and  see  what  he  is  like,  and  then  return.  For,
my  fortunate  friend,  Chaturika  1  is  your  name,  and  Prudence
is  your  nature.'

"  When  the  princess  had  given  this  order  to  her  confidante,
that  girl  managed  to  come  to  our  camp,  and  after  seeing  you,
Prince,  went  and  said  to  that  princess  :  '  My  friend,  I  can  say
nothing  but  this  :  even  Vasuki 2  himself  has  not  got  a  tongue
able  to  describe  the  beauty  of  that  prince.  So  far,  however,  I
can  give  you  an  idea  of  it :  as  there  is  no  woman  in  the  world
equal  to  you  in  good  looks,  so  there  is  no  man  equal  to  him.
But  alas  !  that  is  but  a  feeble  description  of  him ;  I  believe
in  these  three  worlds  there  is  no  Siddha,  or  Gandharva,  or
god  like  him.'  By  this  speech  of  her  confidante's  Sasan-
kavati's  heart  was  fixed  on  you,  and  at  the  same  moment  it
was  nailed  to  you  by  the  God  of  Love  with  his  arrows.     And

1  I.e.  «  Prudence."

2  The  king  of  the  snakes.  See  for  his  thousand  mouths  and  thousand
tongues  p.  56  of  this  volume.


THE  ABDUCTION  177

from  that  time  forth  she  has  remained  desiring  the  welfare
of  you  and  also  of  her  father,  becoming  gradually  attenuated
by  penance  and  grief  of  separation  from  you.

"So  go  secretly  this  very  night  and  carry  off  that
princess  from  that  sanctuary  of  Gauri,  which  is  now  un-
frequented, and  bring  her  here  without  being  observed.  Let
her  be  conveyed  to  the  palace  of  Mayavatu  ;  and  then  these
kings,  after  securing  your  rear  against  the  fury  of  the  foe,
shall  come  there  with  me.  Let  this  fighting  be  put  an  end  to.
Do  not  allow  any  further  slaughter  of  soldiers.  And  ensure
the  personal  safety  of  yourself  and  the  king  your  father-in-
law.  For  war,  that  involves  a  great  waste  of  human  life,  is
an  inexpedient  expedient,  and  sages  affirm  it  to  be  the  worst
of  all  political  measures."

When  Srutadhi  had  said  this  to  Mrigankadatta,  that
prince  and  his  ministers  mounted  their  horses  and  set  out
secretly  at  night.  And  the  prince  arrived  at  the  city  of
Ujjayini,  in  which  only  women  and  children  and  sleepy
men  were  left,  and  entered  it  easily,  as  the  gates  were  kept
by  only  a  few  drowsy  guards.1  And  then  he  proceeded  to
that  famous  sanctuary  of  Gauri,  which  was  easily  discovered
by  the  description  which  Srutadhi  had  given  of  it.  It  was
situated  in  a  great  garden  called  Pushpakaranda,  and  was
just  then  illuminated  by  the  rays  of  the  moon,  which  at  that
time  adorned  the  face  of  the  East.2

In  the  meanwhile  Sasankavati,  who  remained  sleepless,
though  her  companions,  worn  out  by  attendance  and  other
fatigues,  were  sleeping  around  her,  was  saying  to  herself :
"  Alas  !  for  my  sake  brave  kings  and  princes  and  heroes  are
being  slain  every  day  in  battle  in  both  these  armies.  More-
over, that  prince,  who  has  appealed  to  the  ordeal  of  battle
for  my  sake,  was  long  ago  designated  as  my  husband  by  the
goddess  Durga  in  a  dream  ;  and  the  God  of  Love  has  with
unfailing  aim  cut  out  my  heart  with  a  continual  shower  3  of

1  No.  1882  has  mattairasamvritadvaram.

2  There  is  an  intentional  pun  in  this  passage,  which  may  be  translated
"  illuminated  by  the  moon  with  his  rays  "  or  "  pointed  out  by  the  moon  with
his  fingers."

3  For  parasparam  I  read  paramparam,  following  Bohtlingk  and  Roth.
This  is  the  reading  of  MS.  No.  1882.

VOL.   VII.  M


178  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

arrows,  and  taken  it  and  presented  it  to  him.  But,  ill-
starred  girl  that  I  am,  my  father  will  not  give  me  to  that
prince,  on  account  of  the  previous  enmity  between  them,
and  his  own  pride  :  so  much  I  gathered  from  his  letter.  So
what  is  the  use  of  a  sure  revelation  by  a  goddess  in  a  dream,
when  Fate  is  adverse  ?  The  fact  is,  I  see  no  chance  of  obtain-
ing my  beloved  in  any  way.  So  why  should  I  not  abandon
my  hopeless  life,  before  I  hear  of  some  misfortune  happening
to  my  father  or  to  my  lover  in  battle  ?  "  1  With  these  words
she  rose  up,  and  in  her  grief  went  in  front  of  Gauri  and  made
a  noose  with  her  outer  garment,  fastening  it  to  an  asoka  tree.

In  the  meanwhile  Mrigankadatta,  with  his  companions,
entered  that  garden  and  fastened  his  horse  to  a  tree  in  front
of  the  temple  and  sanctuary  of  Gauri.  Then  Mrigankadatta 's
minister  Vimalabuddhi,  seeing  the  princess  near,  said  of  his
own  accord  to  the  prince  :  "  Look,  Prince,  here  is  some
lovely  girl  trying  to  hang  herself;  now,  who  can  she  be?"
When  the  prince  heard  that,  he  looked  at  her  and  said  :
"  Aha  !  who  can  this  girl  be  ?  Is  she  the  goddess  Rati  ?
Or  is  she  happiness  incarnate  in  bodily  form  ?  Or  is  she  the
beauty  of  the  moon,  having  taken  shape,2  or  the  command  of
Kama  living  and  walking  ?  Or  is  she  a  nymph  of  heaven  ?
No,  that  cannot  be.  For  what  can  make  heavenly  nymphs
hang  themselves  ?  So  let  us  remain  here  for  a  time  concealed
by  trees,  until  we  find  out  for  certain,  somehow  or  other,
who  she  is."  When  he  had  said  this,  he  and  his  ministers
remained  there  in  concealment ;  and  in  the  meanwhile  the
despondent  Sasankavati  offered  this  prayer  to  the  goddess  :
"  O  adorable  Gauri,  that  deliverest  the  afflicted  from  their
pain,  grant  that,  though,  owing  to  my  sins  in  a  former  state
of  existence,  Prince  Mrigankadatta  has  not  become  my
husband  in  this  birth,  he  may  become  such  in  a  future  life."
When  the  princess  had  said  this,  she  bowed  before  the  god-
dess, and  fastened  the  noose  round  her  neck,  with  eyes  moist
with  tears.

At  that  moment  her  companions  woke  up,  and,  distressed
at  not  seeing  her,  began  to  look  for  her,  and  quickly  came

1  I  read  vd  rane,  the  conjecture  of  Dr  Kern.

2  Sakara  is  a  misprint  for  Sakara,  which  I  find  in  MS.  No.  1882.


THE  WORD  OF  BHAVANl  179

where  she  was.  And  they  said  :  "  Alas,  friend,  what  is  this
that  you  have  undertaken  ?  Out  on  your  rashness  !  "  With
these  words  they  removed  the  noose  from  her  neck.  So,
while  the  girl  was  standing  there  ashamed  and  despondent,
a  voice  came  from  the  inner  shrine  of  Gauri's  temple  :  "  Do
not  despond,  my  daughter  Sasankavati ;  that  word,  fair  one,
that  I  spake  to  thee  in  a  dream,  cannot  prove  false.  Here  is
that  husband  of  thine  in  a  former  life,  Mrigankadatta,  come
to  thy  side  :  go  and  enjoy  with  him  the  whole  earth."

When  Sasankavati  heard  this  sudden  utterance,  she
slowly  looked  aside  a  little  confused,  and  at  that  moment
Vikramakesarin,  the  minister  of  Mrigankadatta,  came  up  to
her,  and  pointing  out  the  prince  with  his  finger,
ofMrivanka-  said  to  her:  "Princess,  Bhavani  has  told  you
datta  and         the  truth,  for  here  is  the  prince,  your  future  hus-

band,  come  to  you,  drawn  by  the  cords  ot  love.
When  the  princess  heard  that,  she  cast  a  sidelong  glance,
and  beheld  that  noble  lover  of  hers,1  standing  in  the  midst
of  his  companions,  looking  like  the  moon  having  descended
from  heaven  begirt  by  the  planets,  like  the  standard  by  which
beauty  is  tested  in  others,  raining  nectar  into  the  eyes.

Then  she  remained  motionless  as  a  pillar,  and  every  hair
stood  erect  with  joy  on  all  her  limbs,  so  that  they  appeared
to  be  covered  with  the  feathers  at  the  end  of  Kama's  arrows
raining  upon  her.  And  at  that  moment  Mrigankadatta  came
up  to  her,  and,  in  order  to  dispel  her  shame,  he  addressed  to
her,  with  a  voice  raining  the  honey  of  love,  the  following
speech  appropriate  to  the  occasion  2  :  "  Fair  one,  you  have
made  me  leave  my  own  country  and  kingdom  and  relations,
and  brought  me  from  a  distance,  enslaving  me  and  binding
me  with  the  chain  of  your  virtues.  So  now  I  have  gained
this  fruit  of  my  dwelling  in  the  forest,  and  of  my  sleeping
on  the  ground,  and  of  my  living  on  wild  fruits,  and  endur-
ing the  fierce  heat  of  the  sun,  and  of  my  emaciation  with
asceticism,  that  I  have  beheld   this  form   of  yours   which

1  Dr  Kern  prefers  tejasvinam  to  tejasvindm. — I  have  adopted  this  conjecture,
which  is  supported  by  two  of  the  India  Office  MSS.

2  I  read  kalochitam,  the  conjecture  of  Dr  Kern  ;  it  is  found  in  the  three
MSS.  lent  me  by  Dr  Rost.


180  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

rains  nectar  into  my  eyes.  And  if  you  love  me  enough  to
care  to  please  me,  bestow  also,  gazelle-eyed  one,  that  feast
of  the  eyes  upon  the  ladies  of  our  city.  Let  the  war  cease ;
let  the  welfare  of  both  armies  be  ensured  ;  let  my  birth  be
made  a  success,  and  let  my  father's  blessing  be  gained  for
me  at  the  same  time."

When  Mrigankadatta  had  said  this  to  Sasankavati,  she
slowly  answered,  with  eyes  fixed  on  the  ground :  "I  indeed
have  been  purchased  with  your  virtues  and  made  your  slave,
so  do,  my  husband,  what  you  think  will  be  for  our  good."
When  Mrigankadatta  had  been  refreshed  by  this  nectar-like
speech  of  hers,  and  saw  that  his  point  was  gained,  he  praised
the  goddess  Gauri  and  bowed  before  her,  and  then  he  made
the  princess  get  up  behind  him  on  his  horse,  and  his  ten "
ministers  mounted  and  took  her  ladies-in-waiting  up  behind
them  ;  and  then  the  prince,  with  his  sword  drawn,  set  out
from  that  city  at  night,  accompanied  by  them,  sword  in
hand.  And  though  the  city-guards  saw  those  eleven  heroes,
they  did  not  dare  to  stop  them,  for  they  looked  as  formidable
as  so  many  angry  Rudras.  And  leaving  Ujjayini,  they  went
with  Sasankavati  to  the  palace  of  Mayavatu,  in  accordance
with  the  advice  of  Srutadhi.

While  the  guards  were  exclaiming  in  their  distraction,
"  Who  are  these,  and  whither  are  they  gone  ?  "  it  gradually
became  known  in  Ujjayini  that  the  princess  had  been  car-
ried off.  And  the  queen-consort  hurriedly  dispatched  the
governor  of  the  city  to  the  camp,  to  tell  King  Karmasena  what
had  taken  place.  But  in  the  meanwhile  the  head  of  the
scouts  came  to  King  Karmasena  in  the  camp  there  at  night,
and  said  to  him :  "  King,  Mrigankadatta  and  his  ministers
left  the  army  secretly  in  the  early  part  of  this  night,  and
went  on  horseback  to  Ujjayini,  to  carry  off  Sasankavati,  who
is  in  the  temple  of  Gauri.  So  much  I  have  discovered  for
certain :  your  Highness  knows  what  step  it  is  now  desirable
to  take."

When  King  Karmasena  heard  this,  he  sent  for  his  general,
and  communicated  to  him  privately  the  information  he  had
received,   and   said   to   him :     "  Choose   five  hundred    swift

1  Dasibkik  is  a  misprint  for  dasabhih,  the  reading  of  the  MSS.


THE  INVITATION  181

horses,  and  set  picked  men  on  them,  and  go  with  them
secretly  to  Ujjayini,  and  wherever  you  find  that  villain
Mrigankadatta,  kill  him,  or  make  him  prisoner  :  know  that
I  will  follow  you  quickly,  leaving  my  army  behind  me."

When  the  general  received  this  order  from  the  king,  he
said,  "  So  be  it,"  and  set  out  by  night  for  Ujjayini  with  the
prescribed  force.  And  on  the  way  he  met  the  governor  of
the  town,  from  whom  he  heard  that  the  princess  had  been
carried  off  by  some  daring  men  in  another  direction.  Then
he  returned  with  the  governor  of  the  town,  and  told  King
Karmasena  what  had  taken  place.  When  the  king  heard
it,  he  thought  it  impossible,  and  remained  quiet  during  the
night,  without  making  an  attack.  And  in  the  camp  of
Mrigankadatta,  Mayavatu  and  the  other  kings  passed  the
night  under  arms,  by  the  advice  of  Srutadhi.

And  next  morning  the  sagacious  King  Karmasena  found
out  the  real  state  of  the  case,  and  sent  off  an  ambassador  to
the  kings  in  the  camp  of  Mrigankadatta ;  and  he  instructed
the  ambassador  to  give  this  message  by  word  of  mouth  :
"  Mrigankadatta  has  carried  off  my  daughter  by  a  stratagem  :
never  mind  that ;  for  what  other  man  would  be  as  suitable
a  match  for  her  ?  So  now  let  him  come  to  my  palace,  and
do  you  come  too,  in  order  that  I  may  celebrate  my  daughter's
marriage  with  appropriate  ceremonies."  *  And  the  kings
and  Srutadhi  approved  of  this  proposal,2  and  said  to  the
ambassador  :  "  Then  let  your  master  retire  to  his  own  city,
and  we  will  ourselves  go  and  bring  the  prince  there."  When
the  ambassador  heard  that  proposal,  he  went  and  reported
it  to  his  master ;  and  Karmasena  agreed  to  it,  and  left  for
Ujjayini  with  his  army.  When  the  kings  saw  that,  they
went,  with  Mayavatu  at  their  head,  and  accompanied  by
Srutadhi,  to  Mrigankadatta.

And  in  the  meanwhile  Mrigankadatta,  with  Sasankavati,
had  reached  the  palace  of  Mayavatu  in  the  city  of  Kanchana-
pura.     There  the  queens  of  Mayavatu  welcomed  him,  and

1  So  King  Nidung,  in  the  "Wilkina  Saga"  (chapter  cxxxi),  asks  King
Sigmund  to  come  to  his  palace  if  he  wishes  to  marry  his  daughter  (Hagen's
Helden-Sagen,  vol.  i,  p.  322).

2  Dr  Kern  points  out  that  Sraddhatus  is  a  misprint  for  Sraddadhus.


182


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


his  companions,  and  his  beloved,  with  becoming  hospitality,
and  he  rested  there  with  them,  having  successfully  accom-
plished his  object.  And  the  next  day  the  kings  came  there
with  Srutadhi :  the  heroic  king  of  the  Kiratas,  Saktirakshita,
with  his  army,  and  the  mighty  King  Mayavatu,  leader  of  the
Savaras,  and  the  hero  Durgapisacha,  lord  of  the  host  of  the
Matangas  ;  and  all  of  them,  when  they  beheld  Mriganka-
datta  united  to  Sasankavati,  like  the  white  water-lily  to  the
night,  rejoiced  and  congratulated  him.  And  after  they  had
shown  him  the  honour  he  deserved,  they  told  him  the  message
of  Karmasena,  and  how  he  had  gone  to  his  own  palace.

Then  Mrigankadatta,  having  established  there  his  camp,
that  was  like  a  moving  city,  sat  down  with  them  all  to  take
counsel.  And  he  said  to  the  kings  and  to  his  ministers  :
•j. .  _  .   ,  „    "  Tell  me,  shall  I  go  to  Uiiayini  to  be  married

Mrigankadatta  '  &  .      JJ    J

takes  counsel  of  or  not  ?  ':  And  they  with  one  accord  gave  the
his  Ministers  following  answer  :  "  That  king  is  a  villain  ;  so
how  can  a  visit  to  his  palace  turn  out  well  ?  *
Moreover,  there  is  no  need  of  it,  as  his  daughter  has  arrived
here."  Then  Mrigankadatta  said  to  the  Brahman  Srutadhi  :
"  Why  do  you  remain  silent,  Brahman,  like  one  taking  no
interest  in  the  proceedings  ?  Tell  me,  do  you  approve  of  this
step  or  not  ?  "

Then  Srutadhi  said  :  "If  you  will  listen,  I  will  tell  you
what  I  think  :  my  opinion  is  that  you  ought  to  go  to  the
palace  of  Karmasena.  For  he  sent  you  this  message  because
he  saw  no  other  way  out  of  the  difficulty  2 ;  otherwise,  how
would  a  powerful  prince  like  that,  when  his  daughter  had
been  carried  off,  give  up  fighting,  and  go  home  ?  Moreover,
what  could  he  do  to  you  when  you  arrived  at  his  court,
since  you  would  take  your  army  with  you  ?  On  the  con-
trary, if  you  go  there,  he  will  be  well  disposed  to  you,  and
he  will  again  be  one  of  your  chief  allies  out  of  love  for  his
daughter.     The  reason  he  makes  this  proposal,  which  is  a

1  Here  No.  1882  reads  griheshu  kritavairasya  gamane.

2  Thus  Tawney  paraphrases  asadhyena.  But  if  we  read  asathyena,  with  the
D.  text,  the  sense  is  much  improved :  "...  it  cannot  be  with  an  insidious
purpose  that  he  sent  you  this  message  ;  otherwise  .  .  ."  etc.  See  Speyer,
op.  cit.t  p.  141. — n.m.p.


NEWS  OF  THE  PRINCE  183

perfectly  legitimate  one,  is  that  he  does  not  wish  his  daughter
to  be  married  in  an  irregular  manner.  So  I  think  it  advis-
able that  you  should  go  to  Ujjayini."  When  Srutadhi  said
this,  all  who  were  present  approved  his  speech,  and  said  :
"  Bravo !     Bravo !  "

Then  Mrigankadatta  said  to  them  :  "I  admit  the  truth
of  all  this  ;  but  I  do  not  like  to  marry  without  my  father
and  mother.  So  let  someone  be  sent  off  from  this  place  to
summon  my  father  and  mother  ;  and  when  I  have  learnt
their  wish,  I  will  do  what  is  proper."  When  the -hero  had
said  this,  he  took  the  advice  of  his  friends,  and  then  and
there  sent  off  his  minister  Bhlmaparakrama  to  his  parents.

And  in  the  meanwhile  his  father,  King  Amaradatta,  in
the  city  of  Ayodhya,  found  out  in  course  of  time  from  his
subjects  that  the  charge  which  Vinitamati  brought  against
the  prince,  and  which  caused  his  banishment  from  his  native
land,  was  wholly  groundless.  Then,  in  his  wrath,  he  put
to  death  that  wicked  minister  and  his  family,  and  fell  into
a  pitiable  state,  being  terribly  afflicted  on  account  of  the
banishment  of  his  son.  And  he  left  his  capital,  and  remained
in  a  sanctuary  of  Siva,  outside  the  city,  called  Nandigrama  ;
and  there  he  and  his  wives  gave  themselves  up  to  severe
asceticism.

After  he  had  remained  there  some  time,  Bhlmaparakrama,
whose  approach  was  announced  by  scouts,  arrived,  thanks
to  the  speed  of  his  swift  horse,  at  the  city  of  Ayodhya.  He
beheld  that  city  plunged  in  despair,  on  account  of  the  absence
of  the  prince,  as  if  it  were  once  more  going  through  the
painful  agitation  caused  by  the  exile  of  Rama.  Thence  he
went  to  Nandigrama,  surrounded  by  citizens  who  asked  him
for  news  of  the  prince,  and  hearing  from  their  mouths  what
had  happened  to  the  king.  There  he  beheld  King  Amara-
datta, with  his  body  emaciated  by  asceticism,  surrounded  by
his  queens,  eager  for  news  of  his  beloved  son.

Bhlmaparakrama  went  up  to  him  and  fell  at  his  feet,
and  the  king  embraced  him,  and  asked  for  news  of  his  son  ;
and  thereupon  Bhlmaparakrama  said  to  him  with  tears  :
"  Your  son  Mrigankadatta  has  won  by  his  valour  the  Princess
Sasankavati,  the  daughter  of  King  Karmasena.     But,  as  he


184  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

is  devoted  to  his  parents,  it  does  not  seem  at  all  becoming
to  him  to  marry  her,  unless  the  king  and  the  queen  can  be
present  at  the  ceremony.  So  your  son,  placing  his  head
upon  the  ground,  has  sent  me  to  request  you  to  come  to  him.
And  he  awaits  your  Highness's  arrival,  in  Kanchanapura,  in
the  palace  of  King  Mayavatu,  the  monarch  of  the  Savaras.
Now  hear  the  story  of  our  adventures."  And  thereupon
Bhimaparakrama  began  with  the  banishment  of  his  master,
and  related  all  his  various  and  wonderful  adventures,
involving  the  long  story  of  the  misfortunes  of  their  forest
sojourn  and  their  separation,  with  the  war,  and  winding  up
with  the  prince's  reconciliation  with  Karmasena.

When  King  Amaradatta  heard  that,  he  made  up  his
mind  that  it  was  well  with  his  son,  and  in  his  joy  he  announced
that  he  would  set  out  that  moment.  He  mounted  an
elephant,  and  accompanied  by  his  queen,  his  subject  kings
and  his  ministers,  and  followed  by  a  force  of  elephants  and
cavalry,  he  started  full  of  eagerness  to  join  his  son.  And,
travelling  uninterruptedly,  the  king  reached  in  a  few  days  his
son's  camp,  that  was  pitched  in  the  territory  of  the  monarch
of  the  Savaras.

And  when  Mrigankadatta,  who  had  long  been  yearning
for  his  father,  heard  of  his  approach,  he  went  out  to  meet
him  with  all  the  kings.  And  he  saw  him  from  a  distance,
and  dismounted  from  his  horse,  and  fell  at  the  feet  of  his
father,  who  was  seated  on  an  elephant,  and  at  the  feet  of  his
mother.  And  when  embraced  by  his  father,  he  filled  with
his  body  his  clasping  arms,  with  satisfaction  his  heart,  and
his  eyes  with  tears.  His  mother  too  folded  him  in  a  long
embrace,  and  looking  at  him  again  and  again  was  for  some
time  unable  to  let  him  go,  as  if  fearing  a  second  separation.
And  Mrigankadatta  introduced  to  his  father  Amaradatta
the  kings  his  friends,  and  they  bowed  before  him  and  the
queen.  And  that  couple,  the  king  and  the  queen,  received
lovingly  those  friends  who  had  stood  by  their  only  son  in
his  difficulties.

Then  Amaradatta  entered  the  palace  of  Mayavatu  and
saw  Sasankavati,  his  future  daughter-in-law,  who  bowed  at
his  feet.     And  after  accepting  a  present,  he  departed  with


THE  ROYAL  AMBASSADOR  185

the  queen  and  that  daughter-in-law,  and  took  up  his  quarters
in  his  own  camp.  And  there  he  took  food  with  his  son  and
all  the  kings,  and  spent  that  day  agreeably  with  song,  music
and  dancing.  And  he  thought  that  all  his  objects  in  life  had
been  gained,  thanks  to  his  son  Mrigankadatta,  the  future
emperor,  who  had  attained  so  much  glory.

And  in  the  meanwhile  the  wise  King  Karmasena,  after
deliberating,  sent  off  an  ambassador  to  Mrigankadatta  with
the  following  message,  which  was  contained  in  a  letter,  and  also
intended  to  be  delivered  by  word  of  mouth :  "  I  know  that
you  will  not  come  to  Ujjayini,  so  I  will  send  to  you  my  own
son  Sushena ;  he  will  bestow  on  you  with  due  ceremonies  his
sister  Sasankavati :  so  you  ought  not,  blameless  one,  to  marry
her  in  an  irregular  manner,  if  you  value  my  friendship."

And  when  the  prince  had  heard  this  message  delivered  in
the  royal  hall  of  audience,  his  father  the  king  himself  gave
this  answer  to  the  ambassador  :  "  Who  but  King  Karma-
sena would  send  such  a  gracious  message  ?  That  excellent
monarch  is  truly  well  disposed  to  us,  so  let  him  send  here
his  son  Sushena ;  we  will  so  order  matters  as  that  his
daughter's  marriage  shall  give  him  satisfaction."  When  the
king  had  given  this  answer,  and  dismissed  the  messenger
with  due  honours,  he  said  to  his  son,  and  Srutadhi,  and  the
kings  :  "  We  had  better  go  now  to  Ayodhya  ;  that  is  the
place  where  the  marriage  can  be  performed  with  most  eclat ;
and  there  we  can  entertain  Sushena  with  becoming  mag-
nificence. And  let  King  Mayavatu  wait  here  for  Sushena ;
when  that  prince  arrives  he  can  come  on  after  us  to  Ayodhya
with  him.  But  we  will  go  on  in  front  to  make  the  necessary
preparations  for  the  marriage."  And  all  present  approved
this  speech  of  the  king's.

Then,  the  next  day,  the  king  with  the  queen  and  his
soldiers,  and  Mrigankadatta  with  the  kings  and  his  ministers,
started  off  with  Sasankavati,  exulting  in  their  success,  leaving
Mayavatu  to  wait  there  for  Sushena.  Their  army  moved
on  like  a  deep  and  terrible  sea,  agitated  with  hundreds  of
waves  in  the  form  of  troops  of  bounding  horses,  filling  all
the  horizon  with  a  flood  of  countless  marching  footmen,
rendering  all  other  sounds  inaudible  with  the  confused  din


186


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


that  arose  from  it.  And  gradually  advancing,  father  and  son
reached  the  palace  of  Saktirakshita,  the  king  of  the  Kiratas,
that  lay  in  their  course.

There  they  and  their  attendants  were  courteously  and
generously  welcomed,  with  heaps  of  valuable  jewels,  gold,
and  splendid  garments.  And  they  stayed  there  one  day  with
their  army,  taking  food  and  resting,  and  then  they  set  out
and  reached  in  course  of  time  their  city  of  Ayodhya.  It
seemed  like  a  lake  in  windy  weather  as  they  entered  it ;  for
the  ladies  of  the  city  who  had  climbed  up  to  the  windows  of
the  palaces,  as  they  moved  to  and  fro,  seemed  like  swaying,
full-blown  lotuses,  sending  forth  shoots  of  beauty  ;  and  their
rolling  eyes,  eager  to  behold  the  prince,  who  after  a  long
absence  had  returned,  bringing  a  bride  with  him,  were  like
dancing  blue  lilies  :  it  was  crowded  with  assembling  kingly
swans,  and  tossing  with  wavy  banners.  And  father  and  son
looked  grand  as  they  sat  on  thrones  being  blessed  by  the
Brahmans,  praised  by  heralds,  and  hymned  by  bards.

And  when  the  people  there  saw  the  great  beauty  of
Sasankavati,  they  exclaimed,  in  their  astonishment :  "If
they  were  to  behold  this  daughter  of  Karmasena,  the  Ocean
would  cease  to  boast  of  the  beauty  of  his  daughter  Lakshmi,
and  the  Himalaya  would  no  longer  pride  himself  on  Gaurl."
And  then,  when  the  festival  came  on,  the  quarters,  re-echoing
the  sound  of  the  auspicious  drums  of  rejoicing,  as  it  were,
gave  notice  to  the  kings.  And  the  whole  city  was  full  of
exultation,  and  the  vermilion  colours  that  covered  it  through-
out seemed  like  its  red  glow  of  affection  overflowing  in
external  form.

The  next  day  the  astrologers  fixed  an  auspicious  date
for  the  prince's  marriage,  and  his  father,  King  Amaradatta,
began  to  make  preparations  for  it.  And  the  city  was  filled
so  full  of  various  jewels,  coming  from  all  quarters,  that  it
put  to  shame  the  city  of  Kuvera.

And  soon  a  servant  of  King  Mayavatu  came  to  the
sovereign  in  high  spirits,  introduced  by  the  warder,  and
said  to  him  :  "  King,  Prince  Sushena  and  King  Mayavatu
have  arrived,  and  they  are  both  waiting  on  the  frontier  of
this  realm  of  Ayodhya."     When   King  Amaradatta  heard


THE  GIFTS  OF  SUSHENA  187

that,  he  sent  his  own  general  with  a  body  of  soldiers  to  meet
Sushena.  And  Mrigankadatta,  out  of  regard  for  his  friend,
also  went  out  with  the  general  from  Ayodhya  to  meet  the
prince.  And  both  of  those  princes  dismounted,  while  yet
a  great  distance  apart,  and  met  together,  embracing  one
another  and  asking  after  one  another's  health.  And  out  of
love  they  entered  the  city  in  the  same  chariot,  giving  a  great
feast  to  the  eyes  of  the  ladies  of  the  city.

And  there  Sushena  had  an  interview  with  the  king,  and
was  received  by  him  with  much  respect,  and  then  he  went
to  the  private  apartments  of  his  sister  Sasankavati.  There
she  rose  up  weeping  and  embraced  him,  and  he  sat  down  and
said  to  the  princess,  who  was  overwhelmed  with  shame  :  "  My
father  directs  me  to  tell  you  that  you  have  done  nothing
unbecoming,  for  he  has  just  come  to  learn  that  Prince  Mrigan-
kadatta was  appointed  your  husband  by  the  goddess  Gauri
in  a  dream,  and  it  is  the  highest  duty  of  women  to  follow  the
steps  of  their  husbands."  When  he  had  said  this  to  the  girl
she  dismissed  her  shame,  looking  at  her  heart  with  downcast
face,  as  if  to  tell  it  that  its  desire  was  gained.

Then  Sushena  brought  and  gave  to  Sasankavati  in  the
presence  of  the  king  her  own  accumulated  wealth  :  two
thousand  bhdras  l  of  gold,  five  camels  heavily  laden  with
jewelled  ornaments,  and  another  treasure  of  gold.  And  he
said  :  "  This  is  her  own  private  property,  but,  as  for  what
her  father  has  sent,  I  will  give  it  her  in  due  course  at  the
marriage  altar."  Then  they  all  ate  and  drank,  and  spent
the  day  there  in  the  king's  presence  in  great  comfort,  with
Mrigankadatta  and  his  suite.

The  next  day  dawned,  the  day  fixed  as  auspicious,  and
Mrigankadatta  performed  his  own  daily  ceremony,  of  bath-
ing and  so  on  ;  in  which  the  king  himself  displayed  the
The  Royal  utmost  interest,  in  his  joy  at  the  occasion.  And
Wedding  then  Sasankavati,  though  her  beauty  was  suffi-
cient bridal  ornament,  was  solemnly  adorned  by  the  ladies,
only  out  of  regard  for  the  good  old  custom,  not  because
anything  of  the   kind  was   needed.      Then   the  bride   and

1  A    bhara  =  20    ialas. The    equations,    however,    vary.      See    L.    D.

Barnett,  Antiquities  of  India,  pp.  207,  209. — n.m.p.


188


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


bridegroom  left  the  room  in  which  the  previous  ceremony  took
place,  and  in  which  Sushena  presided,  and  ascended  the  altar-
platform,  where  a  fire  was  burning.  And  on  it  the  prince
received  the  hand  of  the  princess,  which  was  resplendent
with  the  hues  of  a  lotus  that  she  held,  as  Vishnu  the  hand
of  Lakshmi.  And  when  they  circumambulated  the  fire,
the  face  of  Sasankavati  was  red  and  tearful  from  heat  and
smoke,  though  anger  was  far  from  her.  And  the  handfuls
of  parched  grain,  thrown  into  the  fire,  appeared  like  the
laughs  of  the  God  of  Love,  pleased  with  the  success  of  his
scheme.  And  when  the  first  handful  was  thrown,  Sushena
gave  the  five  thousand  horses,  and  a  hundred  elephants,
and  two  hundred  bhdras  of  gold,  and  twenty  camels  laden
with  loads  of  splendid  raiment,  valuable  gems  and  pearl -
ornaments.  And  at  each  subsequent  sprinkling  of  grain
Sasankavati's  brother  gave  her  a  portion  of  the  wealth
gained  by  the  conquest  of  the  earth,  double  that  given  at
the  preceding.1

Then  Mrigankadatta,  the  auspicious  ceremony  having
been  performed,  entered  his  own  palace  with  his  newly
married  bride,  Sasankavati,  while  the  sound  of  festal  drums
rose  up  in  the  air.  And  the  king,  his  father,  gratified  his
ministers  and  the  citizens  of  his  capital  with  presents  of
elephants,  horses,  garments,  ornaments,  meat  and  drink,
suited  to  the  worth  of  the  recipient,  beginning  with  the
circle  of  dependent  monarchs,  and  ending  with  the  parrots
and  pet  mainas.  And  the  king  displayed  on  this  occasion
such  exceedingly  lavish  generosity  that  even  the  trees  had
garments  and  gems  fastened  to  them,  and  presented  the
appearance  of  earthly  wishing-trees.

Then  the  king  and  Mrigankadatta  feasted  with  the  kings
and  Sasankavati  and  Sushena,  and  spent  the  rest  of  the  day
in  a  wine-party.  Then,  after  the  inhabitants  of  the  palace
had  eaten  and  drunk  well,  and  enjoyed  music  and  dancing,
the  sun,  having  accomplished  his  journey,  and  having  drunk
up  the  moisture  of  the  earth,  entered  the  cavern  of  the
western  mountain.     And  the  glory  of  the  day,  seeing  that

1  For  a  full  description  of  all  the  intricate  rites  of  a  Hindu  marriage
ceremony,  see  Mrs  Stevenson,  Rites  of  the  Twice-Born,  chapter  iv. — n.m.p.


THE  WEDDING  NIGHT  189

he  had  departed  somewhere  or  other  with  the  evening  that
was  all  ablaze  with  a  warm  glow,  ran  after  him  in  a  fit
of  jealous  anger,  and  the  birds  flying  to  and  fro  seemed
like  her  agitated  zone.1  And  then  in  due  course  appeared
advancing  the  wanton  nymph  Night,  beautiful  with  her
waving  black  robe  of  darkness,  and  showing  a  face  in  which
stars  rolled  for  eyeballs,  and  the  God  of  Love  waxed
mighty.  And  the  moon,  own  brother  to  the  curved  corner
of  an  angry,  long-eyed  beauty's  eye,  arose,  and,  glowing
with  fresh  rosy  colour,  made  itself  the  driving-hook  of  the
elephant  of  the  eastern  mountain.  And  the  eastern  quarter,
that  was  clear  and  bright  with  the  departure  of  the  dark-
ness, bore  a  laughing  face,  to  which  the  moon,  like  a  new
shoot  of  the  twining  plant  of  love,  formed  an  extemporised
ear-ornament.

And  at  night  Mrigankadatta,  after  performing  his
evening  devotions,  retired  to  his  luxuriously  appointed  bed-
chamber with  his  bride  Sasankavati.  And  during  it,  that
fair  one's  moonlike  countenance,  dispelling  the  darkness
and  lighting  up  the  pictured  panels  of  the  room,  seemed  to
render  unnecessary  the  lamps  hanging  there,  that  were
made  of  precious  stones.2  And  the  next  morning  Mriganka-
datta was  aroused  by  the  soft  sweet  strains  of  the  following
song  :  "  The  night  has  passed ;  leave  your  bed,  Prince,  for
the  breezes  of  morning  are  blowing,  fanning  the  perfumed
locks  of  the  gazelle-eyed  fair  ones.  And  the  dewdrops
collected  on  the  points  of  the  blades  of  durvd  grass  sparkle
brilliantly,  looking  like  pearls  fallen  from  the  necklace  of
the  night  quickly  following  the  moon.  And  observe,  Prince,
the  bees  that  long  sported  in  the  cups  of  the  white  water-
lilies,  opening  when  touched  by  the  beams  of  the  moon,  and
drank  the  honey,  and  were  joyous  at  having  obtained  an
entrance,  now  that  the  water-lilies  are  closed  and  their  glory
is  departing,  are  seeking  some  other  retreat ;    for  to  whom

1  The  words  are,  by  a  misprint,  wrongly  divided  in  Brockhaus'  text.

2  Cf.    Heliodorus,    III,    v,    irXkov    airo    rQtv    ocftOaXfxtov    o-tXas    -q    twv   SctSoyv

a.7T7jvya^eVj  quoted   by   Rohde,  Der  Griechische  Roman,  p.    152,  note. See

Vol.  II,  p.  169.  Mr  A.  H.  Krappe  kindly  sends  me  the  following  additional
references :  Bartsch,  Herzog  Ernst,  p.  cl  et  seq. ;  Schroder,  Sand  Brandon,
p.  104;  A.  N.  Ram  baud,  La  Russe  epiqne,  pp.  387,  405. — n.m.p.


190


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


are  black  souls  faithful  in  calamity  ?  And  the  God  of  Love,
seeing  that  the  lip  of  the  night  has  been  adorned  by  the
finger  of  the  sun,  has  stripped  it  of  the  moon,  which  served
it  for  a  beauty-patch,  and  has  gradually  dissipated  the
darkness,  which  was  a  black  powder  to  set  it  off."

Aroused  by  these  strains  at  the  hour  of  dawn,  Mriganka-
datta  cast  off  sleep,  and,  leaving  Sasankavati,  at  once  started
up  from  his  couch.  And  he  rose  and  performed  the  cere-
monies of  the  day,  his  father  having  made  all  the  arrange-
ments that  devolved  on  him ;  and  accompanied  by  his
beloved  he  passed  many  more  days  in  similar  rejoicing.

Then  his  father  Amaradatta  first  inaugurated  the  prince's
brother-in-law  Sushena  with  the  holy  waters,  and  placed  a
turban  of  honour  on  his  head,  and  bestowed  on  him  as  a
mark  of  respect  a  suitable  territory,  and  elephants,  horses,
quantities  of  gold  and  garments,  and  a  hundred  beautiful
women.  And  then  the  king  complimented  the  king  of  the
Savaras  and  the  king  of  the  Kiratas,  Mayavatu  and  Sakti-
rakshita,  with  their  relations  and  wives,  and  that  King
Durgapisacha,  the  leader  of  the  host  of  the  Matangas,  and
the  ministers  of  Mrigankadatta  with  Srutadhi,  by  giving
them  territories,  cows,  horses,  gold  and  garments.  Then
King  Amaradatta  dismissed  the  king  of  the  Kiratas  and
the  other  monarchs,  with  Sushena,  to  their  own  dominions,
and  ruled  his  realm  in  happiness,  at  ease  because  his  valour
was  so  well  known.  Mrigankadatta,  for  his  part,  having
conquered  his  enemies,  and  attained  his  ends,  remained  in
happiness  with  his  wife  Sasankavati,  whom  he  had  gained
after  a  long  struggle,  and  with  Bhimaparakrama  and  his
other  ministers.

And  in  course  of  time  old  age,  slowly  creeping  on,
approached  the  root  of  the  ear  of  that  King  Amaradatta,
appearing  as  if  it  had  taken  form  in  order  to  say  to  him  :
"  You  have  enjoyed  the  good  things  of  fortune  :  your  age
is  fully  ripe  ;  surely  it  is  now  time  to  retire  from  the  world."
Then  the  king's  mind  became  averse  to  enjoyment,  and  he
said  to  his  ministers  :  "  Listen,  I  will  now  tell  you  the
scheme  I  have  in  my  mind.  My  life  has  passed  :  that  grey
hue  which  is  the  harbinger  of  death  has  just  now  twitched


THE  CORONATION  191

my  locks  * ;  and  when  old  age  once  arrives,  a  vicious  clinging
to  enjoyment  on  the  part  of  persons  like  myself,  when  all  the
zest  is  gone,  is  mere  vanity.  And  though  in  some  people
a  mad  passion  of  avarice  and  lust  goes  on  increasing  with
increasing  age,  that  is  without  doubt  the  natural  tendency
of  base  souls,  and  the  good  do  not  acquire  it.  Now  I  have
this  son  here,  Mrigankadatta,  who  has  gained  glory  by  con-
quering the  sovereign  of  Avanti  and  his  allied  kings,2  who
abounds  in  good  qualities,  is  beloved  by  his  subjects,  and
has  excellent  friends.  So  I  propose  to  make  over  to  him
my  mighty  kingdom,  and  to  retire  to  a  holy  water  for  morti-
fication of  the  flesh  :  conduct  in  conformity  with  the  laws
laid  down  for  the  various  periods  of  life,  that  their  enemies
cannot  blame,  becomes  men  of  great  soul."

When  the  calm  and  resolute  ministers  heard  this  deter-
mined speech  of  the  king's,  they,  and  in  due  course  the  queen
and  the  citizens,  all  approved  it,  saying :  "So  let  it  be !  "
Then  the  king  performed  the  joyful  ceremony  of  the  corona-
tion 3  of  his  son  Mrigankadatta  at  a  moment  fixed  by  the
astrologers,  on  a  day  selected  by  the  chief  Brahmans  as-
sembled together.  And  on  that  day  the  palace  of  the  king
was  full  of  people  running  hither  and  thither  at  the  order
of  the  warder,  and  all  the  officials  in  it  had  their  hands  full,
and  it  reeled  with  the  merriment  of  famous  bards  and  of
lovely  women  who  were  dancing  there.  And  while  the
water  of  holy  places  was  being  poured  in  copious  showers
upon  the  head  of  Mrigankadatta  and  his  wife,  a  second  flood
seemed  to  gush  from  the  eyes  of  his  joyful  parents.  And
when  that  new  king,  of  lionlike  might,  mounted  his  lion-
seat,  it  seemed  as  if  his  enemies,  bowed  down  by  fear  of
his  wrath,  crouched  on  the  ground  in  a  fashion  other  than
lionlike.

Then  his  father,  King  Amaradatta,  prolonged  for  seven  days
the  great  feast,  in  which  the  king's  highway  was  decorated,

1  See  M.  Bloomfield,  "On  Recurring  Motifs  in  Hindu  Fiction,"  Journ.
Amer.  Orient.  Soc,  vol.  xxx,  pp.  57,  58. — n.m.p.

2  For  Sarajakavarti  I  read  Sarajakavanti ;  Mrigankadatta  might  be  said  by
an  admiring  father  to  have  conquered  the  King  of  Ujjayini.

3  It  corresponds  to  the  European  ceremony  of  coronation,  though
performed  with  water.


192  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

and  the  subject-kings  honoured  according  to  their  worth.
And  on  the  eighth  day  he  went  out  of  the  city  with  his  wife,
and  after  turning  back  Mrigankadatta  and  the  citizens,  who
followed  him  with  tearful  faces,  he  went  with  his  ministers
to  Varanasi.  There  the  king  remained  with  his  body  steeped
in  Ganges  water,  worshipping  Siva  three  times  a  day,  per-
forming penance,  like  a  hermit,  by  living  on  roots  and  fruits  ;
and  his  wife  shared  all  his  devotions  and  privations.

But  Mrigankadatta,  for  his  part,  having  obtained  that
kingdom  broad  and  pure  as  the  sky,  which  the  sun  takes  as
his  domain,  and  having  overwhelmed  the  kings  with  imposi-
tion of  numerous  tributes,  as  the  sun  does  the  mountains
with  showers  of  rays,  began  to  blaze  forth  with  increasing
heat  of  valour.  And  associated  with  his  lieutenants  Maya-
vatu  and  Karmasena  and  the  others,  and  with .  his  own
ministers  headed  by  Srutadhi,  he  conquered  this  circle  of
the  earth,  with  all  its  continents,  as  far  as  the  four  cardinal
points,  and  ruled  it  under  one  umbrella.1  And  while  he
was  king,  such  calamities  as  famine  and  the  dread  of  robbers
and  of  foreign  invaders  were  heard  of  only  in  tales  ;  and  the
world  was  ever  joyous  and  happy,  and  enjoyed  unparalleled
felicity,  so  that  it  seemed  as  if  the  gentle  reign  of  Rama  the
good  were  renewed.  And  so  the  monarch  established  him-
self in  that  city  of  Ayodhya  with  his  ministers,  and  kings
came  from  various  quarters  to  worship  the  lotus  of  his  foot,
and  he  long  enjoyed  with  his  beloved  Sasankavati  pleasures,
the  joy  of  which  no  enemy  marred.2


[M]  When  the  hermit  Pisangajata  had  told  this  story
in  the  wood  on  the  Malaya  mountain  to  Naravahanadatta,
who  was  separated  from  his  beloved,  he  went  on  to  say  to
him  :  "  So,  my  son,  as  Mrigankadatta  in  old  time  gained
Sasankavati  after  enduring  affliction,  you  also  will  regain
your    Madanamanchuka."       When    Naravahanadatta    had

1  See  Vol.  II,  p.  267.—N.M.P.

2  This  is  the  conclusion  of  the  story  of  Mrigankadatta,  which  begins  in
Vol.  VI,  p.  10.


THE  END  OF  THE  STORY  193

heard  this  nectarous  utterance  of  the  mighty  hermit  Pisan-
gajata,  he  conceived  in  his  heart  the  hope  of  regaining
Madanamanchuka.  And  with  his  mind  fixed  on  her,  he
took  leave  of  that  good  hermit,  and  roamed  about  on  the
Malaya  mountain,  looking  for  Lalitalochana,  the  fair  one
that  originally  brought  him  there.


VOL.    VII.  N


194


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


NOTE  ON  THE  POSITION   OF  BOOK  XII

After  the  completion  of  Book  XII,  the  longest  in  the  whole  work,  we
once  again  return  to  Naravahanadatta,  whom  we  had  nearly  forgotten,  and
to  whom  the  hermit  Pisangajata  was  telling  the  tale  of  Mrigankadatta.  Let
us  look  back  for  a  moment  at  the  circumstances  which  led  up  to  the  tale.

We  read  (Vol.  VI,  p.  l)  that  Naravahanadatta  .  remained  at  Kausambi
with  his  numerous  wives,  but  "  ever  cherished  the  head  queen,  Madanaman-
chuka, more  than  his  own  life.  .  .  ."  One  night  he  sees  in  a  dream  a
heavenly  maiden  carry  him  off.  But  it  proves  to  be  no  dream,  and  on  wak-
ing he  finds  himself  on  the  plateau  of  a  great  hill  with  a  beautiful  maiden
by  his  side.  The  prince  pretends  to  be  still  asleep  to  see  what  will  happen.
She  first  assumes  the  form  of  Madanamanchuka,  but,  on  seeing  there  is  no
need  for  such  a  stratagem,  marries  him  in  her  own  shape  by  the  gandharva
form  of  marriage.  Naravahanadatta,  anxious  to  discover  the  identity  of  the
fair  charmer,  proceeds  to  tell  her  a  tale.  In  reply  she  tells  him  one  which
is  really  her  own  history.  It  transpires  that  her  name  is  Lalitalochana  and
that  through  love  she  has  brought  him  to  the  Malaya  mountain  on  which
they  now  are.  They  live  together  happily  (his  other  wives  knowing  all  about
it  by  their  magical  powers),  but  one  day  he  loses  sight  of  his  loved  one  as
she  disappears  into  a  dense  thicket.  He  decides  to  wait  for  her  on  the  bank
of  a  lake,  after  bathing  and  worshipping  the  gods.  He  muses  as  he  sits
longing  for  reunion  with  Madanamanchuka.  He  seems  already  to  have  forgotten
Lalitalochana.  So  deeply  does  his  grief  at  separation  from  his  first  wife  affect
him  that  he  faints.  At  that  moment  the  hermit  Pisangajata  arrives  on  the
scene  and  revives  him,  and  leading  him  to  his  hermitage  tells  him  the  tale
of  Mrigankadatta  (Vol.  VI,  p.  10  e/  seq.)  in  order  to  cheer  him  up.  This  long
tale  with  its  numerous  sub-tales  finishes  on  p.  192  of  the  present  volume  with
the  following  words  : —

"When  the  hermit  Pisangajata  had  told  this  story  in  the  wood  on  the
Malaya  mountain  to  Naravahanadatta,  who  was  separated  from  his  beloved.  ..."

The  "beloved"  we  naturally  take  to  be  Lalitalochana,  because  she  has
wandered  off  somewhere  picking  flowers,  and  Madanamanchuka  has  been
mentioned  only  once,  quite  casually.     But,  strange  to  say,  our  text  continues  :

"  He  went  on  to  say  to  him,  '  So,  my  son,  as  Mrigankadatta  in  old  time
gained  Sasankavati  after  enduring  affliction,  you  also  shall  regain  your
Madanamanchuka.  .  .

This  seems  quite  inexplicable.  We  know  nothing  about  Madanamanchuka
being  lost.  As  far  as  we  are  able  to  judge  she  is  staying  quietly  at  Kausambi
awaiting  her  husband's  return.  There  is  no  possibility  of  an  error  in  the
original  text,  for  it  continues  :

"When  Naravahanadatta  had  heard  this  nectarous  utterance  of  the
mighty  hermit  Pisangajata,  he  conceived  in  his  heart  the  hope  of  regaining
Madanamanchuka.  And  with  his  mind  fixed  on  her,  he  took  leave  of  that
good  hermit.  .  .  ."


THE  POSITION  OF  BOOK  XII  195

So  Madanamanchuka  was  lost,  but  when  and  where  is  a  mystery.  The
Kashmirian  compilers,  whom  Somadeva  so  carefully  copied,  do  not  seem  to
have  noticed  this,  or  at  any  rate  they  did  not  let  it  worry  them  at  all.  We
are  not  allowed  to  forget,  however,  that  Lalitalochana  is  lost  too,  for  the
text  concludes :

"  And  roamed  about  on  the  Malaya  mountain,  looking  for  Lalitalochana,
whom  he  had  lost,  the  fair  one  that  originally  brought  him  there."

She  was  obviously  only  a  momentary  love  pour  passer  le  temps,  like  so
many  of  our  hero's  other  wives ;  but  with  Madanamanchuka  it  was  quite
different.  She  was  his  first  and  chief  love,  and,  as  we  shall  see  in  Book  XV,
she  is  the  only  one  to  be  crowned  with  him  at  his  coronation.  We  can  well
understand  that  he  would  be  much  more  concerned  if  Madanamanchuka  were
lost  than  if  it  were  only  Lalitalochana.     But  apparently  both  are  lost !

In  order  to  find  a  solution  to  the  problem  we  must  look  ahead  at  the
Books  immediately  following.  Book  XIII,  which  is  very  short,  leaves  us  in
no  doubt  whatever  as  to  whose  loss  the  prince  is  worrying  so  much  about.
It  begins  (Vol.  VIII,  p.  1)  as  follows :

"Then  Naravahanadatta,  the  son  of  the  King  of  Vatsa,  afflicted  with
separation,  being  without  Madanamanchuka  .  .  .  found  joy  nowhere."

He  meets  two  Brahmans  to  whom  he  relates  the  story  of  his  great  loss.
They  cheer  him  up  by  telling  him  how  they  have  surmounted  seemingly  im-
passable obstacles  and  gained  the  object  of  their  desires.  At  this  moment
Gomukha  and  others  of  the  prince's  retinue  suddenly  arrive,  and,  "  accompanied
by  Lalitalochana,"  all  return  to  the  city.

So  ends  the  Book.  Thus  we  are  no  nearer  a  solution,  but,  if  anything,
rather  more  muddled.  For  not  a  word  is  said  as  to  how,  when  or  where
Lalitalochana  was  found.  Naravahanadatta  apparently  does  not  care  one  way
or  the  other.     There  she  is,  so  she  might  as  well  come  along  too !

We  turn  to  the  next  Book  (XIV)  and  find  that  our  hero  is  quietly  living
in  KausambI  with  all  his  wives,  including  Madanamanchuka !  But  immediately
afterwards  the  whole  mystery  is  solved,  for  we  read :

u  Then  it  happened  one  day  that  he  could  not  find  his  principal  charmer,
Madanamanchuka,  anywhere  in  the  female  apartments,  nor  could  her
attendants  find  her  either."

The  whole  court  is  thrown  into  confusion  by  this  sudden  loss,  and  vain
efforts  are  made  to  find  her.  Naravahanadatta  is  tricked  into  marrying  an
amorous  Vidyadhari  named  Vegavati,  but  obtains  information  and  help  from
her  in  recovering  his  lost  love.  He  sets  out  on  his  search  and  is  led  into
several  other  amorous  adventures  which  result  in  as  many  marriages.  After
each  one,  however,  the  prince  continues  his  search  for  Madanamanchuka.

Thus  we  see  that  Book  XII  is  clearly  in  its  wrong  position.  It  must  come
after  the  loss  of  Madanamanchuka.  The  same,  of  course,  applies  to  Book  XIII.
In  fact,  it  seems  clear  that  the  adventure  with  Lalitalochana  is  merely  one
of  the  many  which  occur  in  Book  XIV.  Yet  why  has  she  the  honour  of
a  Book  to  herself,  while  the  others  are  all  crammed  together?  This  and
many  other  questions  which  arise  will  be  discussed  further  in  the  Terminal
Essay   in  Vol.   IX,  where   each   Book  is  dealt  with  separately.     Here  it  is


196


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


sufficient  to  note  that  a  clear  mistake  in  the  order  of  events  has  occurred.
We  have  a  number  of  distinct  adventures  all  dependent  on  the  loss  of
Madanamanchuka,  and  one  of  them,  that  with  Lalitalochana,  has  got  out  of
place  and  been  used  as  a  kind  of  frame-story  for  the  story  of  Mrigankadatta.
The  fact  may  appear  somewhat  trifling,  but  on  the  contrary,  it  is  of  the  utmost
importance  in  determining  the  original  form  of  the  Katha-sarit-sagara,  and  the
changes  it  has  undergone  in  the  hands  of  its  Kashmirian  redactors. — n.m.p.


APPENDIX


APPENDIX

THE  TWENTY-FIVE  TALES  OF  A  VETALA

(Continued)

Anangarati  and  her  Four  Suitors
(Vetala  9— pp.  1-4)

This  story  is  practically  a  verbatim  repetition  of  the  first  part
of  No.  38  (Vol.  IV,  p.  144  et  seq.),  which  bears  exactly  the  same
title.  It  also  has  several  points  of  resemblance  to  Vetala  2
(Vol.  VI,  pp.  179-181  and  261-266).  Sufficient  references  have
already  been  given  at  the  above  pages.

In  the  Hindi  version  *  the  tale  is  No.  7.  The  differences
are  trifling.  We  first  get  a  more  detailed  inventory  of  the
lady's  charms :  "  Her  face  was  like  the  moon,  her  hair  like
clouds,  her  eyes  like  those  of  a  deer,  her  eyebrows  like  a  bent
bow,  her  nose  like  a  parrot's,  her  neck  like  that  of  a  pigeon,
her  teeth  like  pomegranate-grains,  the  red  colour  of  her  lips
like  that  of  a  gourd,  her  waist  like  the  leopard's,  her  hands
and  feet  like  soft  lotuses,  her  complexion  like  the  Champa  :
in  short,  the  splendour  of  her  youth  increased  daily."  She
stipulates  that  her  husband  must  be  possessed  of  good  looks,
good  qualities  and  good  sense.  The  first  suitor  can  make  a
certain  cloth  for  which  he  can  obtain  five  rubies.  He  dis-
poses of  them  the  same  way  as  the  Stidra  does  in  our  version.
The  second  understands  the  language  of  animals.  The  third
knows  all  the  Sastras,  while  the  fourth  is  a  wonderful  archer.
They  all  draw  attention  to  their  good  looks.  No  mention  is
made  of  what  castes  they  belong  to,  but  in  his  reply  to  the
Vetala  the  king  shows  to  what  castes  each  must  belong,  and
that  the  princess  should  naturally  marry  the  one  of  her  own
caste.

The  story  does  not  appear  in  the  Tamil  version,  another
one  entirely  different  being  substituted.  See  B.  G.  Babington,
Veddla  Cadai,  pp.  55-57.

Madanasend  and  her  Rash  Promise
(Vetala  10— pp.  5-9)

This  is  the  ninth  story  in  the  Hindi  version.2  It  is  more
condensed  than  in  Somadeva.    The  thief  is  no  gallant,  as  in  our

1  W.  B.  Barker,  Baital  Packisi,  pp.  157-173.  2  Ibid.,  pp.  174-1 8  k

199


200


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


text,  and  thinks  only  of  securing  the  jewels  which  Madana-
sena  is  wearing.  The  would-be  lover,  by  name  Som(a)datt(a),
is  amazed  at  the  girl  keeping  her  word.  "  This  affair,"  he
says,  "  is  like  jewels  without  a  suitable  dress,  or  food  without
ghi,  or  singing  without  melody ;  they  are  all  alike  unnatural.
In  the  same  way  dirty  clothes  will  mar  beauty  ;  bad  food
will  undermine  strength  ;  a  bad  wife  will  worry  one  to  death  ;
a  disreputable  son  will  ruin  his  family ;  an  enraged  demon  will
kill.  A  woman,  whether  she  love  or  hate,  will  be  a  source
of  pain.  There  are  few  things  a  woman  will  not  do,  for  she
never  brings  to  her  tongue  what  is  in  her  heart,  never  speaks
out  what  is  on  her  tongue,  never  tells  what  she  is  doing  :  the
deity  has  created  woman  in  this  world  a  strange  creature."

On  returning  home  her  husband  has  ceased  to  feel  any
affection  for  her,  and  says  :  "  The  beauty  of  a  cuckoo  is  its
note,  of  a  woman  is  chastity  ;  an  ugly  man's  beauty  is  know-
ledge, and  a  devotee's  beauty  is  forgiveness."  The  reply  to
the  Vetala's  question  is  the  same  in  both  versions.

Once  again  Babington's  l  modesty  intervenes,  and  he
entirely  omits  the  tale  in  the  Tamil  version  as  "  being  unfit
for  publication  "  !

As  a  matter  of  fact  the  tale  is  highly  moral,  and  is  a  lesson
in  magnanimity.  As  such  it  has  migrated  towards  the  West
and  has  found  a  place  in  every  important  literature  in  the
world.  In  fact,  it  is  one  of  the  most  interesting  stories  with
which  we  have  to  deal,  and  a  volume  could  easily  be  written
on  its  ramifications  and  the  different  uses  of  its  chief  motifs.
In  these  present  notes  I  shall  give  ample  reference  for  the
preparation  of  such  a  volume,  but  will  be  able  to  deal  briefly
with  only  some  of  the  most  important  variants.

Although  in  Somadeva  the  story  appears  complete  in
itself,  in  most  of  its  other  forms  it  is  nearly  always  a  sub-
story,  being  quoted  by  some  clever  person  in  order  to  find  a
thief  by  noting  what  different  answers  are  given  to  the  ques-
tion put  at  the  end  of  the  tale.  Thus  in  this  case  the  original
form  of  the  story  has  been  preserved,  although,  of  course,  it
is  no  longer  the  Vetala  who  asks  the  question.

Let  us  examine  some  Indian  parallels  first.     In  Hema-

we  read  of  Cillana,  the  wife  of
wonderful  garden.     It  contains  a


vijaya's  Kathdratndkara  2
King  Srenika,  who  has  a


1  Babington,  op.  cit.,  p.  57.

2  J.  Hertel,  Kathdratndkara.
Erz'dhlungen  von  Hemavijaya,  vol.


Das  Mdrchenmeer.     Eine  Sammlung  indisaher
1920,  p.  233  et  seq.


APPENDIX— TALES  OF  A  VETALA     201

fine  mango-tree,  from  which  a  thief  has  been  stealing  fruit
to  satisfy  the  pregnant  cravings  (see  Vol.  I,  pp.  221-228)  of
his  wife.  This  he  successfully  accomplishes  by  magically
making  the  tree  bend  towards  him.  The  matter  is  reported
to  the  king,  who  seeks  advice  from  his  minister  Abhaya.
This  astute  man  manages  to  attend  a  meeting  of  all  the
worst  characters  of  the  city.  They  have  a  concert  and  get
very  merry.  Abhaya  volunteers  to  tell  them  a  story,  which
he  proceeds  to  do  :

"  An  old  spinster,  longing  for  a  husband,  steals  flowers
from  a  garden,  wherewith  to  worship  the  God  of  Love.  She
is  caught  in  the  act  by  the  gardener,  who  bids  her  do  his  will
for  ransom.  She  agrees  to  come  to  him  after  her  wedding.
After  she  has  succeeded  in  obtaining  a  husband  she  starts,
arrayed  in  her  best,  to  fulfil  her  contract,  but  is  successively
held  up  by  robbers,  who  crave  her  jewels,  and  by  a  hungry
Rakshasa,  both  of  whom  she  tells  of  her  engagement  with
the  gardener.  She  promises  to  return  after  she  has  been
with  the  gardener.  When  she  comes  to  each  in  turn,  they
are  so  much  struck  with  her  honesty  that  they  allow  her  to
return  unharmed  to  her  husband."

At  the  completion  of  the  story  Abhaya  turns  to  the
company  and  asks  which  character  had  displayed  the  most
magnanimity.  Various  answers  are  given,  but  the  mango-
thief,  who  is  also  present,  at  once  votes  for  the  robbers.  Hence
Abhaya  spots  the  thief.

The  story  is  quoted  by  Bloomfield  *  in  "  The  Art  of  Steal-
ing in  Hindu  Fiction,"  to  which  excellent  article  I  must  now
refer  more  fully.  As  already  stated  above,  the  chief  theme
of  the  story  is  magnanimity.  To  such  an  extent  is  this  gospel
preached  that  it  is  made  to  affect  not  only  people  in  the
ordinary  walks  of  life,  but  thieves  also.  So  the  "Noble
Thief  "  becomes  one  of  those  lesser  motifs,  which,  however,
merits  individual  consideration.  Professor  Bloomfield  has
treated  the  subject  with  his  accustomed  scholarly  elucida-
tion. The  following  extracts,  therefore,  are  to  be  found  in
his  article  mentioned  above,  pp.  218-220.

The  Robin  Hood  of  Indian  fiction  is  Apaharavarman,  who,
in  the  second  story  of  the  Dasa-kumdra-charita,  not  only
plunders  the  rich  to  give  to  the  poor,  but  also  aids  a  loving
couple,  by  first  bringing  them  together,  and  then  steering  them
into  the  haven  of  happiness.

1  Amer.  Journ.  Phil.,  vol.  xliv,  1923,  pp.  200-201.


202


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


Then  in  the  Satapatta  Jdtaka,  No.  279,  we  read  of  a
generous  robber  who  lets  off  a  poor  man  who  has  collected
a  debt  of  a  thousand  pieces.

In  the  Daridravarnana,  "  desciiption  of  poverty,"  in  the
Sdrngadhara  Paddhati,  stanza  9,  a  poor  man  says  to  his  wife :
"  Hand  me  the  rag,  or  take  the  boy  into  your  own  lap."
The  wife  responds  :  "  There  is  nothing  here  on  the  floor,
husband,  but  behind  you  there  is  a  heap  of  straw."  A  thief,
come  to  steal,  hears  them,  throws  a  strip  of  cloth,  which  he  has
got  elsewhere,  over  the  boy,  and  goes  off  in  tears.

In  Viracharita,  adhyaya  26  (Indische  Studien,  xiv,  138),  five
robbers  come  from  Ayodhya  to  Mount  Satasringa.  There  lives
an  ascetic,  Sutapas,  who,  during  a  famine,  has  gone  from  home,
leaving  his  family  behind.  The  robbers,  out  of  pity,  support
the  family,  and  thus  save  its  life.  After  twelve  years  Sutapas
returns,  rejoices  to  find,  contrary  to  expectation,  that  his
family  is  alive,  and  rewards  the  robbers  with  magic  gifts.

In  Pdrsvandtha  Ckaritra,  ii,  619  et  seq.,  a  young  thief,
Mahabala,  son  of  a  good  family,  to  be  sure,  decides  to  steal  in
the  house  of  a  merchant,  Datta.  As  he  peeks  into  the  house
through  a  lattice  window  he  hears  Datta  quarrelling  bitterly
with  his  son  over  some  trifling  disagreement  of  accounts.
Out  of  decency  he  reflects  that  a  man  who  will  abandon  sleep
in  the  middle  of  the  night  and  quarrel  with  his  diligent  and
proper  son  over  such  a  trifle,  will  die  of  a  broken  heart  if  he
were  to  steal  his  property.  So  he  goes  to  the  house  of  a
courtesan,  Kamasena.  He  sees  her  lavish  her  professional
ministrations  upon  a  leprous  slave  as  though  he  were  a  god.
He  decides  that  he  cannot  steal  from  anyone  as  greedy  for
money  as  all  that.  Then  he  goes  to  the  house  of  a  Brahman,
and  sees  him  sleeping  with  his  wife  on  a  couch.  A  dog  urin-
ates into  the  Brahman's  outstretched  hand,  who  says  "  Thank
you  "  as  he  rises  with  a  start.  The  thief  reflects  that  such  is
the  Brahman's  greed  for  alms  that  it  persists  even  while  he  is
asleep.  He,  therefore,  must  not  steal  there.  He  then  decides
to  eschew  mean  folk,  and  breaks  into  the  king's  palace.

In  Prabandhacintdmani  (Tawney,  p.  17),  Vanaraja,  des-
tined by  his  horoscope  for  kingship,  is  temporarily  a  thief.
Once  he  digs  a  tunnel  into  a  merchant's  house,  and  is  stealing
his  wealth,  when  his  hand  slips  into  a  bowl  of  curds.  He
says  to  himself,  "  I  have  eaten  in  this  house,"  and  so  he
leaves  all  the  merchant's  possessions  there  and  goes  out.

Apart  from  the  "  Noble  Thief  "  motif  our  tale  contains


APPENDIX— TALES  OF  A  VETALA     203

another  one  which  is  found  throughout  folklore  stories  of  all
lands — namely,  the  "  Promise  to  Return  "  motif.  How  often
have  we  read  of  people  caught  by  ogres,  giants,  ghouls,  etc.,
who  have  been  released  on  the  understanding  that  in  a  certain
time  and  at  a  certain  place  they  will  return  !  Examples
have  already  occurred  in  the  Ocean  (see,  e.g.,  Vol.  Ill,  p.  33),
and  abound  in  the  Nights  and  all  European  collections.
Here  it  is  only  necessary  to  note  the  occurrence  in  passing.
The  motif  has  been  fully  treated  by  Bloomfield  *  as  far  as
Hindu  fiction  is  concerned.

Now,  to  return  to  the  story  of  the  damsel's  rash  promise,
we  find  that  it  soon  spread  to  neighbouring  countries — Burma,2
Persia,3  Palestine,4  Arabia,5  and  so  on  to  Turkey  6  and  across
to  Europe.  Here  it  was  given  new  impetus  by  being  included
by  Boccaccio  first  in  his  Filocolo  7  and  later  in  the  Decameron.8
It  was  included  in  numerous  French  versions,  and  used  by
Chaucer  for  the  Franklin's  Tale.

I  have,  of  course,  mentioned  only  the  chief  milestones
on  the  road  of  its  progress,  but  they  are  quite  sufficient  to
show  its  wide  circulation  both  in  the  Orient  and  Occident.

The  story  has  been  studied  chiefly  by  students  of  Chaucer
and  Boccaccio.  Of  Chaucer  articles  I  would  mention  the
one  by  Clouston,  Originals  and  Analogues  of  some  of  Chaucer's
Canterbury  Tales,  part  iv,  No.  16,  The  Chaucer  Society,
2nd  series,  20,  London,  1886,  pp.  291-340.  Here  will  be
found  translations  of  most  of  the  above-named  versions,  all
given  as  variants  of  the  Franklin's  Tale.  See  also  W.  H.
Schofield,  "  Chaucer's  Franklin's  Tale,"  Modern  Language
Ass.  Amer.,  vol.  xvi  (N.S.),  vol.  ix,  pp.  405-449.

1  Life  and  Stories  of  the  Jaina  Savior  Parcvanatha,  Baltimore,  1919.  p.  183
et  seq.     See  also  his  "  Art  of  Stealing  .  .   .,"  op.  cit.,  p.  218w28.

2  See  J.  Bandow,  Precedents  of  Princess  Thoodamma  Tsari,  1881,  p.  18  et  seq.

3  Tutl-namah,  India  Office  MS.  See  Clouston,  Originals  and  Analogues,
Chaucer  Soc.,  2nd  series,  20,  p.  310  et  seq. ;  J.  Malcolm,  Sketches  of  Persia,  1828,
chap,  xx,  vol.  ii,  pp.  164-171  ;  J.  Scott,  Bahar-Danush,  vol.  ii,  p.  295.

4  M.  I.  Levi,  Melusine,  vol.  ii,  1885,  cols.  542-546;  Gaster,  Exempla  of  the
Rabbis,  pp.  79,  206.

5  Nights,  from  the  Tunis  MS.  of  Habicht.  See  Chauvin,  op.  cit,  viii,
pp.  123,  124.

6  Rosen,  Tnti-nameh,  vol.  i,  pp.  243-258;  cf.  vol.  ii,  p.  168  et  seq.  and
p.  174;  J.  Hammer,  Rosenbl,  vol.  ii,  p.  277;  Gibb,  Forty  Veziers,  p.  105.

7  Book  IV,  question  4,  vol.  ii,  p.  48  of  the  Moutier  edition,  1829.

8  Day  10,  novel  5,  u  Madonna  Dianora  and  Messer  Ansaldo."


204


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


The  author  supports  the  view  that  Chaucer  based  his
story  on  an  old  Breton  lay,  as  indeed  he  says  himself  in  The
Prologe  of  the  Frankeleyns  Tale  :

"  Thise  olde  gentil  Britons  in  hir  dayes
Of  divers  aventures  maden  layes,
Rymeyed  in  hir  firste  Briton  tonge  ;
Which  layes  with  hir  instruments  they  songe,
Or  elles  redden  hem  for  hir  plesaunce  ;
And  oon  of  hem  have  I  in  remembrance.  ..."

A  large  number  of  useful  references  will  be  found  in  A.  C.
Lee's  The  Decameron,  its  Sources  and  Analogues,  pp.  322-328.

The  Russian  variant  of  Radloff,  Proben  der  Volkslitteratur
der  Turkischea  Stamme  Slld-Slbiriens,  vol.  hi,  p.  389,  besides
being  in  Clouston,  op.  cit.  sup.,  p.  320  et  seq.,  is  included  by
Coxwell,  Siberian  and  Other  Folk  Tales,  p.  351  et  seq.

King  Dharmadhvaja  and  his  Three  Very  Sensitive  Wives
(Vetdla  11— pp.  10-12)

In  the  Hindi  version  *  this  story  forms  No.  10,  and  No.  11
in  the  Tamil.2  The  Hindi  merely  mentions  the  three  sensitive
wives  in  the  last  few  lines  of  the  story.  The  rest  is  taken
up  with  a  lengthy  exposition  of  the  Jain  religion.  It  is  well
worth  giving  in  full :

In  the  country  of  Gaur  there  was  a  city,  Bardhaman  by
name,  of  which  Gunsekhar  was  king.  His  minister  was  a
Jain,  named  Abhaichand,  and  he  had  converted  the  king  to
the  Jain  religion  by  his  arguments.  He,  in  consequence,
prohibited  the  worship  of  Siva  and  of  Vishnu,  and  gifts  of
cows,  and  of  land,  and  of  pinds  3 ;  put  an  end  to  gambling
and  wine-drinking ;  and  would  not  allow  anyone  to  convey
bones  to  the  Ganges.  And  the  minister  who  was  charged  to
see  to  all  those  things  proclaimed  throughout  the  city,  by
sound  of  drum,  that  if  anyone  should  commit  those  acts  which
were  forbidden,  his  property  should  be  confiscated,  and  he
would  receive  punishment  and  be  sent  out  of  the  country.

One  day  the  minister  said  to  the  king  :  "  Great  King,
be  pleased  to  hear  the  decisions  (or  judgments)  of  religion.
Whoever  takes  the  life  of  another,  loses  his  own  life  in  the

1  Barker,  op.  cit.,  pp.  184-191.

2  Babington,  op.  cit.,  pp.  58-59-

3  Sanskrit,  pinda.     See  Vol.  I,  p.  o6nl.


APPENDIX— TALES  OF  A  VETALA     205

next  world  :  the  life  and  death  of  one  who  has  been  born
into  this  world  are  not  exempt  from  the  penalty  of  sin ;  again
and  again  he  is  born  and  dies.  Hence  it  is  right  for  every-
one who  receives  birth  into  this  world  to  practise  religion.
Behold  !  Brahma,  Vishnu  and  Mahadev,  overpowered  by
love,  anger,  avarice  and  fascination,  have  descended  to
earth  in  various  forms  ;  but  more  excellent  than  all  these,
a  cow,  free  from  enmity,  anger,  intoxication,  rage,  avarice
and  inordinate  affection,  is  supporting  the  people  and  those
who  are  her  sons;  and  solacing  the  creatures  of  the  earth
in  many  ways  is  cherishing  them.  Hence  gods  and  Munis
reverence  the  cow,  and  for  this  reason  it  is  not  right  to  regard
the  gods.  In  this  world  reverence  the  cow.  And  it  is
righteous  to  protect  beasts  and  birds,  from  the  elephant  to
the  ant.  In  this  world  there  is  no  righteousness  greater
than  this.  Those  men  who  increase  their  own  flesh  by  eat-
ing the  flesh  of  other  creatures,  in  the  final  period  will  surely
fall  into  hell.  Hence  it  is  right  that  a  man  should  protect
animals.  Those  who  do  not  sympathise  with  the  griefs  of
other  creatures,  but  kill  and  eat  them,  their  lives  will  be
short  in  this  world ;  and  in  the  next  life  they  will  be  born
maimed,  lame,  one-eyed,  blind,  dwarfed,  humpbacked  or
deficient  in  bodily  proportions.  All  such  as  eat  the  bodies
of  beasts  and  birds  will  hereafter  destroy  their  own  bodies.
And  from  drinking  wine  and  eating  flesh  great  sin  arises,
and  hence  both  are  wrong."

In  this  manner  the  minister,  having  explained  his  own
sentiments,  gained  over  the  king  to  the  Jain  religion,  and
henceforward  that  monarch  governed  his  kingdom  accord-
ing to  the  precepts  of  that  religion — paying  no  respect  to
Brahmans,  Yogis,  Sannyasis,  or  fakirs  of  any  kind.  One
day,  overcome  by  death,  he  gave  up  the  throne  to  Dharm-
dhwaj,  his  son,  who,  having  ordered  his  father's  minister
Abhaichand  to  be  seized,  caused  all  his  hair  to  be  shaved
off  but  seven  locks,  had  his  face  blackened,  and  mounting
him  upon  an  ass,  with  drums  beating,  sent  him  on  a  circuit
through  the  city,  and  then  banished  him  the  country.
Henceforward  he  governed  free  from  anxiety.

The  Tamil  version  resembles  that  in  our  present  text  much
more  closely.  There  is  a  slight  difference  in  the  mishap
which  befell  the  first  of  the  three  queens.  She  was  walking
with  the  king  in  a  flower  garden,  when  a  bee  came  and  settled


206  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

upon  a  flower  which  was  interwoven  with  the  braiding  of
her  hair.  She  immediately  fainted  away  and  fell  down.  Her
female  attendants  raised  her  up,  and  recovered  her  from  her
swoon.

We  have  already  discussed  the  "  Bed  "  sybarite,1  and
will  now  consider  analogues  to  the  present  story  of  the  three
sensitive  queens.

For  the  earliest  historical  examples  we  must  go  back  to
the  people  who  are  responsible  for  the  word  "  sybarite."
The  ancient  city  of  Sybaris  lay  in  Magna  Graecia,  on  the  Gulf
of  Tarentum,  between  two  rivers,  the  Sybaris  and  the  Crathis.
It  was  the  oldest  Greek  colony  in  the  region,  being  founded
about  720  B.C.  As  time  went  on  the  city  became  great  and
opulent,  with  numerous  dependencies  and  a  highly  important
trade  both  on  land  and  sea.  The  luxury  and  magnificence
of  the  Sybarites  soon  became  proverbial,  and  in  the  sixth
century  no  Greek  city  could  approach  it  in  wealth  and
splendour.  But  such  enormous  opulence  was  too  great,  and
had  been  acquired  in  too  short  a  time,  to  be  sustained  for
long.  The  great  industry  the  Sybarites  displayed  in  the
development  of  their  trade,  agriculture,  irrigation,  etc.,  soon
gave  way  to  the  luxury  and  effeminacy  with  which  they  are
chiefly  connected  to-day.  The  story  of  their  fall  does  not
concern  us  here,  and  readers  are  referred  to  the  excellent
chapter  on  "  Sybaris  "  contained  in  Lenormant's  fine  work,
La  Grande-Grece.2  In  510  b.c.  Sybaris  was  razed  to  the
ground  by  the  Crotoniats,  and  the  channel  of  the  River
Crathis  was  diverted  so  as  to  flow  over  the  ruins.  In  the
days  of  Herodotus  Sybaris  was  only  a  memory,  but  the  story
of  its  luxury  lived  on,  and  the  word  sybarite  found  its  way
into  nearly  every  European  language.

As  is  only  natural,  stories  of  the  amazing  luxury  and
effeminacy  of  the  Sybarites  found  their  way  into  the  works
of  ancient  classical  writers,  which  were  repeated  again  and
again  by  subsequent  authors.  Hence  we  find  Athenaeus,  in
his  Deipnosophists,3  quoting  Sybarite  tales  from  Timaeus,  the
Greek  historian  of  about  300  B.C.     Of  particular  interest  to

1  Vol.  VI,  pp.  288-294.

2  F.  Lenormant,  La  Grande-Grece.  Pay  sages  et  Histoire,  3  vols.,  Paris,
1881-1884.     See  vol.  i,  pp.  246-330,  especially  pp.  282-289.

8  Book  xii,  15-20.  See  the  English  translation  by  C.  D.  Yonge,  in
Bohn's  Classical  Library,  vol.  iii,  pp.  830-835.


APPENDIX— TALES  OF  A  VETALA     207

us  is  the  fact  that  one  of  the  tales  resembles  the  unfortunate
experience  of  the  third  sensitive  wife  in  Somadeva — viz.  the
witnessing,  or  merely  hearing,  work  being  done,  causing
physical  suffering  to  the  person  in  question.

A  few  extracts  from  Athenseus  will  give  a  good  idea  of
the  kind  of  stories  current  over  two  hundred  years  after  the
sacking  of  Sybaris :

4 'And  why  need  we  mention  the  Sybarites,  among  whom
bathing  men  and  pourers  of  water  were  first  introduced  in
fetters,  in  order  to  prevent  their  going  too  fast,  and  to  pre-
vent also  their  scalding  the  bathers  in  their  haste  ?  And  the
Sybarites  were  the  first  people  to  forbid  those  who  practised
noisy  arts  from  dwelling  in  their  city  :  such  as  braziers,  and
smiths,  and  carpenters,  and  men  of  similar  trades ;  provid-
ing that  their  slumbers  should  always  be  undisturbed.  And
it  used  to  be  unlawful  to  rear  a  cock  in  their  city.

"And  Timaeus  relates  concerning  them  that  a  citizen  of
Sybaris,  once  going  into  the  country,  seeing  the  husband-
men digging,  said  that  he  himself  felt  as  if  he  had  broken  his
bones  by  the  sight ;  and  someone  who  heard  him  replied  :
1 1,  when  I  heard  you  say  this,  felt  as  if  I  had  a  pain  in
my  side.  .  .  .'  But  they  had  carried  their  luxury  to  such
a  pitch  that  they  had  taught  even  their  horses  to  dance  at
their  feasts  to  the  music  of  the  flute.  Accordingly  the  people
of  Crotona,  knowing  this,  and  being  at  war  with  them,  as
Aristotle  relates  in  his  History  of  the  Constitution  of  Sybaris,
played  before  their  horses  the  air  to  which  they  were  accus-
tomed to  dance  ;  for  the  people  of  Crotona  also  had  flute-
players  in  military  uniform.  And  as  soon  as  the  horses
heard  them  playing  on  the  flute,  they  not  only  began  to
dance,  but  ran  over  to  the  army  of  the  Crotonians,  carrying
their  riders  with  them.  .  .  .  And  one  of  the  Sybarites,  once
wishing  to  sail  over  to  Crotona,  hired  a  vessel  to  carry  him
by  himself,  on  condition  that  no  one  was  to  splash  him,  and
that  no  one  else  was  to  be  taken  on  board,  and  that  he  might
take  his  horse  with  him.  And  when  the  captain  of  the  ship
had  agreed  to  these  terms,  he  put  his  horse  on  board,  and
ordered  some  straw  to  be  spread  under  the  horse."

Athenseus  then  quotes  the  twenty-fifth  book  of  the
History  of  Phylarchus,  where,  after  dealing  with  the  strict
rules  of   etiquette  in   vogue    at    Syracuse,   he   proceeds  to


208  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

compare  the  customs  of  the  Sybarites  which  violate  all  the
traditional  social  customs  of  Greece  :

"The  Sybarites,  having  given  loose  to  their  luxury,  made
a  law  that  women  might  be  invited  to  banquets,  and  that
those  who  intended  to  invite  them  to  sacred  festivities  must
make  preparation  a  year  before,  in  order  that  they  might
have  all  that  time  to  provide  themselves  with  garments  and
other  ornaments  in  a  suitable  manner  worthy  of  the  occasion,
and  so  might  come  to  the  banquet  to  which  they  were  invited.
And  if  any  confectioner  or  cook  invented  any  peculiar  and
excellent  dish,  no  other  artist  was  allowed  to  make  this  for  a
year ;  but  he  alone  who  invented  it  was  entitled  to  all  the
profit  to  be  derived  from  the  manufacture  of  it  for  that  time,
in  order  that  others  might  be  induced  to  labour  at  excelling
in  such  pursuits.  And  in  the  same  way,  it  was  provided  that
those  who  sold  eels  were  not  to  be  liable  to  pay  tribute,  nor
those  who  caught  them  either.  And  in  the  same  way  the
law  exempted  from  all  burdens  those  who  dyed  the  marine
purple  and  those  who  imported  it."

For  an  explanation  of  the  obvious  exaggeration  of  some
of  the  above  tales,  see  Lenormant,  op.  cit,  pp.  286-288.

The  question  arises  as  to  whether  the  source  of  the  Indian
tales  under  discussion  can  be  correctly  attributed  to  these
historiettes  of  Timseus,  which  must  have  greatly  amused  the
Athenians  for  whom  he  wrote.

Even  if  we  date  the  Vetdlapanchavimsati  as  early  as  the
very  beginning  of  the  Christian  era,  there  would  have  been
three  hundred  years  for  the  motif  to  migrate  !  But  as
Lenormant  has  said  :  "  Ce  qui  est  certain,  c'est  que  les
Sybarites  usaient  de  leur  richesse  pour  entretenir  un  luxe
inoui',  bien  plus  conforme  aux  habitudes  de  l'Asie  qu'a  celles
de  la  Grece."  It  seems  impossible  that  the  luxury  and
opulence  of  so  many  of  the  ancient  Indian  courts  should  not
have  given  rise  to  the  "  Sybarite  "  motif,  without  any  necessity
for  importation.  At  the  same  time,  if  the  tales  did  travel
from  West  to  East,  they  would  surely  have  met  with  an
appreciative  reception  in  India.

In  a  Siamese  story  *  three  out  of  four  ladies  suffer  merely
from  seeing  things  happen,  while  the  fourth  is  the  same  as
the  second  lady  in  our  text.     The  first  gets  swollen  hands  on

1  A.  Bastian,  Geographische  nnd  ethnologische  Bilder,  Jena,  1 873,  pp.  267,  268.


APPENDIX— TALES  OF  A  VETALA     209

seeing  someone  crushing  rice  ;  the  second  feels  as  if  her
breast  was  being  beaten  to  bits  on  hearing  a  drum  being
played  ;  and  the  wrist  of  the  third  becomes  tired  on  seeing
someone  fetching  water  ;  while  the  fourth  is  covered  with
bruises  where  the  rays  of  the  moon  fall  on  her.

Similar  stories  are  found  in  several  European  collections,1
with  but  trifling  differences.  In  a  seventeenth-century  col-
lection by  A.  le  Metel  d'Ouville2  we  find  some  fresh  and
rather  curious  details,  including  another  "  bed "  sybarite.
Here  four  women,  who  were  neighbours,  all  claimed  to  be  the
most  delicately  sensitive.  Finally  they  decided  to  go  before
a  judge  and  each  to  state  her  case.

The  first  one  said  that  one  fresh  summer's  morning,
clad  in  only  her  chemise  and  a  pair  of  bedroom  slippers,
having  stretched  out  her  foot  to  catch  the  dew,  a  rose  leaf
fell  on  it,  thereby  causing  her  to  limp  for  more  than  three
months.

The  second  said  that  one  day  her  maid  in  making  her  bed
had  carelessly  left  a  small  crease  in  the  middle  of  the  sheet,
which  was  of  the  finest  Dutch  linen.  Having  lain  down  on
this  crease  somewhat  roughly,  she  broke  three  ribs,  and  was
in  the  doctor's  hands  for  three  months.

The  third  said  that  she  had  always  been  careful  in  in-
structing her  maid  to  comb  her  hair  in  such  a  way  that
exactly  the  same  number  of  hairs  should  be  on  each  side
of  the  parting,  well  knowing  how  serious  it  might  be  if  she
made  a  mistake.  One  day  she  inadvertently  put  three  or
four  more  hairs  on  one  side  than  on  the  other,  thus  causing
her  head  to  remain  sideways  for  over  six  weeks.

The  fourth  addressed  the  other  three  :  "  Now  then,  ladies,
there  is  not  one  of  you  who  at  least  once  a  day  hasn't  got  to
perform  the  acts  of  nature,  for  it  is  a  thing  so  necessary  to
life  that  without  it  you  could  not  exist.  However,  speaking
of  that,  there  happened  to  me  the  day  before  yesterday  some-
thing that  hasn't  happened  to  any  of  you  others.  While
faisant  mes  affaires,  although  I  do  it  as  gently  as  possible,  to
show  you  the  extent  of  my  delicacy,  I  burst  a  vein  du  derriere,
and  no  doctor  can  heal  it  without  damaging  all  the  others.

1  Bolte  and  Polivka,  op.  cit.,  vol.  iii,  p.  238.

2  L' Elite  des  Contes  du  Sieur  d'Ouville,  edited  with  notes  by  G.  Brunet,
Paris,  1883,  vol.  ii,  pp.  149-151.  See  also  Contes  a  rire,  ou  Recreations  Frangaises,
new  edition,  Paris,  1769,  vol.  ii,  pp.  169-171  ;  or  vol.  ii,  pp.  109-111  of  the
Amsterdam  edition  of  1732.

VOL.  vii.  O


210  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

Consequently  I  prefer  to  remain  with  this   blemish  rather
than  make  worse  the  thing  that  I  want  to  heal."

The  judge  is  quite  at  a  loss  as  to  what  decision  he  ought
to  give,  and  the  reader  is  asked  to  decide  for  himself.

It  cannot  be  denied  that  some  of  the  misfortunes  which
befell  the  fair  sybarites  mentioned  above  tax  our  credibility
rather  heavily.  In  fact,  in  many  cases  we  are  led  to  suspect
fraud  and  hypocrisy ;  and  as  the  sequel  shows,  our  charges
would  not  have  been  without  justification,  for  in  the
Sukasaptati  we  find *  that  the  supposed  sensitiveness  of
Kamalila,  the  beloved  wife  of  King  Vikramaditya,  is  used
as  a  cloak  to  her  unchastity.  Balapandita,  the  clever
daughter  of  the  king's  private  chaplain,  realises  why  the
fish  laughed,  but  hesitates  to  say.  After  several  digressions,
which  form  subsequent  tales,  a  learned  Brahman,  by  name
Pushpahasa,  who  had  never  been  known  to  laugh  himself,
is  asked  to  solve  the  mystery.2  On  hearing  the  details  he
bursts  out  laughing  and  strikes  the  queen  in  the  face  with
some  flowers.  She  at  once  falls  unconscious,  and  is  tended
by  the  enraged  king.  On  calling  for  an  explanation  of  his
extraordinary  conduct,  Pushpahasa  answers  :  "I  laugh
because  during  the  night  the  queen  was  struck  by  her  lover
with  canes  and  did  not  feel  any  ill  effects,  yet  now,  when
struck  with  a  few  flowers,  she  has  fallen  (or  pretends  to  have
fallen)  unconscious."  The  king  is  not  at  first  convinced  of
the  truth  of  the  story,  but  at  Pushpahasa's  advice  he  takes
off  her  bodice  3  and  sees  the  marks  of  the  canes.

On  this  story  was  based  another  one,  included  in  Cristo-
foro  Armeno's  Persian  (?)  collection.4  Here  we  read  that  King
Behram  possesses  a  wonderful  silver  statue  which  laughs
if  anyone  tells  a  lie  in  its  presence.  The  king  is  anxious  to
marry  a  girl  as  modest  as  she  is  beautiful,  but  will  not  brook
of  any  sort  of  deception.  Accordingly  he  determines  to  test
each  one  in  the  presence  of  the  statue.

Four  beautiful  maidens  are  brought  forward.  The  king
chats  to  the  first  of  these  ladies,  and  throws  some  rose  leaves

1  R.  Schmidt,  Die  (Julcasaptati  (Textus  Simplicior),  Kiel,  1894,  tale  5,  p.  11.
I  have  already  (Vol.  I,  p.  4>6n2)  referred  to  it  in  connection  with  "  the  fish  that
laughed."

2  R.  Schmidt,  ibid.,  tale  9,  p.  22.

3  This  is  doubtless  the  angiga,  or  kurtd  of  Kashmir.     See  Vol.  II,  p.  50w5.

4  H.  Fischer  and  J.  Bolte,  Die  Reise  der  S'dhne  Giaffers,  p.  119  et  seq.


APPENDIX— TALES  OF  A  VETALA     211

on  her  breast.  A  tiny  twig  chances  to  hit  her  in  the  face,
whereupon  she  behaves  as  if  about  to  die.  With  trouble
Behram  revives  her  and  takes  her  to  the  window  in  front
of  the  statue.  Immediately  the  statue  bursts  out  laughing.
The  lady  is  in  no  way  perturbed,  but  covers  her  face  with  her
hands,  as  if  in  the  presence  of  a  man  other  than  the  king.
At  this  the  statue  laughs  again.

The  second  lady  comes  forward.  Behram,  who  has  now
donned  a  garment  embroidered  with  fur,  proceeds  to  embrace
her,  but  she  at  once  draws  back  in  pain,  for  the  hairs  of  the
fur  have  hurt  her  so  much.  The  statue  laughs.  The  king
leads  her  to  a  mirror,  but  she  immediately  covers  her  face,  as
she  does  not  consider  it  becoming  that  anyone  but  he  should
see  her  face.     At  this  absurdity  the  statue  laughs  again.

The  third  lady  also  gives  two  proofs  of  her  amazing
delicacy.  Behram  leads  her  into  the  garden,  and  on  passing
a  sheet  of  water  she  covers  her  face.  On  the  king  demanding
an  explanation,  she  says  that  as  the  water  contains  many
fishes,  some  of  them  are  sure  to  be  of  the  male  sex,  and  he
alone  should  look  on  her  face.  He  looks  back  at  the  statue
and  sees  it  laughing.  A  great  wind  suddenly  arises,  and  a
little  boat  on  the  water  is  sunk  with  all  hands.  At  this
sight  the  girl  sinks  unconscious  to  the  ground.  Once  again
the  statue  laughs.

The  fourth  lady  is  genuinely  modest,  but  in  no  exagger-
ated way.  The  statue  does  not  laugh,  and  the  king  selects
her  as  his  bride.  It  transpires  that  the  other  three  girls,  so
far  from  being  delicate  or  modest,  have  paramours  whose
sadistical  cravings  they  willingly  satisfy.

King  Yasahketu,  his  Vidyddhari  Wife,  and  his  Faithful

Minister

(Vetala  12— pp.  13-25)

In  the  Hindi  version  *  the  story  is  No.  11.  It  is  much
more  condensed  than  in  Somadeva.  The  minister  has  all
his  adventures  entirely  alone,  and  sees  the  magic  tree  from
the  seashore.     The  rest  follows  practically  as  in  our  text.

The  Tamil  version  2  (No.  12)  begins  as  in  Somadeva.  The
minister  makes  friends  with  the  merchant,  and  goes  on  board
with  him.  Suddenly  a  storm  arises,  and  the  boat  is  tossed
about  at  the  mercy  of  the  waves.     Finally  they  arrive  at  a

1  Barker,  op.  cit.,  pp.  192-204.  2  Babington,  op.  cit.,  pp.  59*64.


212  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

little  island,  and  disembark.  They  find  a  temple,  and  under
a  tree,  opposite  the  temple,  a  raised  throne,  upon  which  they
perceive  a  beautiful  woman  reclining.  They  think  she  is  a
goddess  and  return  immediately.  On  returning,  the  king
sets  out  for  the  island,  but  in  company  with  the  minister.
The  "  giant  "  swallows  the  damsel,  but  the  king  kills  him,
tears  open  his  entrails,  and  rescues  the  girl  alive,  whereupon
she  tells  her  story  as  in  our  text,  and  all  ends  happily.  The
question  and  answer  at  the  end  are  the  same  in  all  versions.

There  is  little  to  be  said  about  the  story  that  has  not
already  been  noted  elsewhere.  The  subaqueous  palace  has  been
discussed  in  Vol.  VI  (pp.  279-281),  while  the  "  Wishing-tree  "
and  "Taboo "  motifs  have  been  referred  to  in  Vol.  I  (p.  144nx)
and  Vol.  II  (pp.  252-253)  respectively.  The  woman's  tale  about
the  Rakshasa  and  her  father's  curse  somewhat  resembles  "  The
Story  of  the  Twelfth  Statuette  "  in  Vikrama's  Adventures.  (See
Edgerton's  translation,  pp.  lxxxiv  and  117-125.)  The  versions
differ  slightly,  but  the  main  incidents  are  the  same — the  woman
had  been  the  wife  of  a  Brahman,  but  he  did  not  love  her
(in  some  versions  she  was  unfaithful),  and  cursed  her  at  his
death,  saying  that  every  night  she  should  be  tormented  by
a  Rakshasa.  On  asking  for  mercy  he  granted  release  from
the  curse  when  some  hero  should  kill  the  Rakshasa.

The  Brahmin  Harisvdmin,  who  first  lost  his  Wife,
and  then  his  Life

(Vetdla  13— pp.  29-34)

This  story  is  No.  12  in  the  Hindi  version,1  which  has
several  slight  differences.  For  instance  the  ravisher  is  a
"  Gandharb "  and  carries  off  Lavanyavati  in  a  chariot.
When  the  distracted  husband  reaches  the  house  of  the
Brahman  there  is  no  mention  of  the  wife  till  the  end  of
the  tale  ;  the  man  himself  fills  Harisvamin's  cup  with  "  rice-
milk."  The  food  is  poisoned  by  a  black  serpent  instead  of
a  dead  cobra  in  the  clutches  of  a  kite.  The  ending  is  the
same  as  in  our  text.

In  the  Tamil  version  2  the  tale,  which  is  No.  16,  is  much
more  condensed.  The  hero  is  called  Arjuna  Svami,  and  his
wife  is  named  Vanapadi.  The  incidents,  however,  closely
resemble  those  in  Somadeva.      The  details  about  the  food

1  Barker,  op.  cit.,  p.  204  et  seq.

2  Babington,  op.  cit.,  p.  68  et  seq.


APPENDIX— TALES  OF  A  VETALA     213

differ  slightly  :  "  She  accordingly  brought  and  gave  him
some  rice  and  savoury  food,  which  he  received  in  a  leaf  and
wrapped  up  in  a  bundle.  So  one  evening,  after  bathing  and
finishing  his  devotions,  he  sprinkled  water  on  the  rice  which
he  had  kept  in  his  bundle,  and  was  in  the  act  of  eating  it
when,  even  as  a  sickness  visiting  the  flower  of  youth,  and  as
death  coming  in  the  hour  of  full  enjoyment,  and  as  a  danger
coming  upon  one  who  is  alone,  a  kite,  which,  urged  by  hunger,
had  seized  upon  a  cobra  de  capella  ..."  Babington  adds
an  interesting  note  in  which  he  attributes  the  king's  evasive
answer  to  his  deference  to  Garuda,  the  king  of  the  birds,  and
also  to  the  Nagas,  so  widely  worshipped  in  Northern  India.
See  also  Oesterley,  Baitdl  Pachisi,  p.  202.

The  chief  motif  of  the  story,  food  being  poisoned  by
animals,  is  found  in  several  collections  of  stories.  The
majority  of  these  have  been  noted  by  Benfey,  Pantschatantra,
vol.  i,  p.  362,  and  Chauvin,  op.  cit.,  viii,  p.  60.

A  few  examples  will  show  the  different  uses  made  of  the
motif.  I  notice  a  curious  one  in  Bloomfield's  Life  and  Stories
of  the  Jaina  Savior  Pdrgvandtha,  pp.  34-35.     I  give  it  in  full :

"  In  a  great  forest  in  the  Vindhya  mountains,  on  a  banyan-
tree,  lived  a  pair  of  parrots.  Theirs  was  a  beloved  young
parrot.  One  day  it  flew  off,  but  being  very  young,  it  fell
upon  the  ground.  A  hermit  picked  it  up,  took  it  to  his
hermitage,  fed  it,  educated  it,  and  treated  it  like  a  son.  One
day  the  young  parrot  overheard  the  abbot  of  the  hermitage
tell  his  pupils  that  in  the  middle  of  the  sea  there  was  an  island,
Harimela,  in  the  north-east  corner  of  which  stood  a  large
mango-tree,  bedewed  with  ambrosia  ;  and  that  the  fruit  of
this  tree  restored  youth  by  curing  deformities,  diseases  and
old  age.  The  young  parrot,  remembering  his  decrepit  parents,
considered  that  he  might  now  pay  the  debt  of  their  love.  He
flew  to  the  magic  tree  and  fetched  one  of  the  mangoes,  but,
on  returning,  grew  tired  and  fell  into  the  ocean,  keeping  the
fruit  in  his  bill.  A  merchant  by  the  name  of  Sagara  picked
him  up  ;  the  parrot,  out  of  gratitude,  presented  him  with
the  fruit,  after  which  he  flew  away  to  get  another.  The
merchant  decided  to  make  the  virtue  of  the  fruit  universally
accessible.  When  he  arrived  at  Jayapura  he  presented  it  to
the  king  then  ruling,  who  had  it  planted,  in  order  to  repro-
duce the  fruit  for  the  benefit  of  his  people.  But  a  serpent,
carried  in  the  beak  of  a  bird,  happened  to  drop  poison  upon


214  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

one  of  the  mangoes,  so  that  it  ripened  and  fell  to  the  ground.
The  keeper  of  the  garden  joyously  took  it  to  the  king,  who
gave  it  to  his  chaplain,  and  he  ate  of  it  and  died.  The
king  in  rage  had  the  tree  cut  down.  But  a  host  of  men,
afflicted  with  incurable  diseases,  ate  of  its  fruit  for  euthanasia
(sukhamrityave),  and  became  thereby  like  unto  the  God  of
Love.  The  king,  discerning  the  true  state  of  things,  regretted
his  rash  act,  and  lost  pleasure  in  his  kingdom."

In  the  Satrumjaya  Mdhdtmyam,  xiv,  207,  *  death  does  not
follow,  and  the  man  in  question  himself  relates  the  circum-
stances to  Javada,  upon  thinking  of  whom  he  was  saved  from
the  fatal  effects  of  the  poison.

The  motif  found  its  way  into  the  Book  of  Sindibdd  and  the
Seven  Vazlrs.  In  the  former  of  these  works  2  it  forms  the
first  of  the  prince's  tales  told  after  the  story  of  the  seventh
vazir.  It  tells  of  a  most  generous  host  who  .  welcomed
everyone  who  came  to  his  house  :

"He  received  them  after  the  fashion  of  the  generous,  for
this  was  ever  his  custom.  A  slave-girl  went  to  fetch  milk,
that  he  might  feast  his  guests  with  sugar  and  milk — two
very  good  things.  She  covered  not  the  top  of  the  milk-dish.
Hearken  to  these  words,  and  take  warning  :  A  stork  was
passing  in  the  air,  having  snatched  up  an  old  "snake  from  the
desert.  How  can  one  fly  from  the  decrees  of  fate  ?  Saliva
dropped  from  the  mouth  of  that  viper,  and  that  milk  was
mixed  with  poison  ;  and  whoever  took  any  of  that  milk  fell
down,  and  there  died  forthwith."

The  prince  asks  who  is  to  blame.  Various  answers  are
given,  but  he  replies  :  "  All  these  opinions  are  mistaken.  No
one  was  to  blame  ;  it  was  the  decree  of  God."

An  abbreviated  form  of  the  same  story  occurs  in  the
conclusion  of  the  Seven  Vazlrs,3

In  the  Bahdr-i-Ddnish  of  'Inayatu-'llah 4  the  motif  is
used  in  quite  a  different  manner.  Here  an  adulterous  wife
has  been  discovered  by  her  husband,  but  when  asleep  she

1  A.  Weber,  "  Ueber  das  f  atrunjaya  Mahatmyam.  Ein  Beitrag  zur
Geschichte  der  Jaina,"  Abh.  f.  d.  Kunde  d.  Morg.,  Leipzig,  1858,  pp.  43-44.

2  Clouston,  Book  of  Sindibdd,  p.  89.

3  Ibid.,  p.  213.  See  also  pp.  26*3-266,  where  our  version  and  one  or  two
others  are  given.

4  J.  Scott,  Bahar-Damish,  vol.  i,  p.  78  et  seq.


APPENDIX— TALES  OF  A  VETALA     215

suspends  him  head  downwards  from  a  tree  and  proceeds  to
carry  on  an  orgy  with  her  lover  in  full  view  of  the  unfortun-
ate husband.  The  couple  finally  become  dead  drunk  and
fall  senseless  on  the  ground.  At  this  point  a  snake  glides
dowTn  the  tree,  passes  by  the  frightened  husband,  and  spits
venom  into  the  cup  of  the  lovers.  Presently  they  awake
from  their  drunken  stupor;  the  man  drinks  of  the  cup
and  dies,  while  the  wife  is  finally  persuaded  to  release  her
husband,  who  becomes  an  ascetic.

To  conclude,  I  would  mention  the  variant  in  the  Tamil
Alakesa  Kathd.  Here  a  Brahman  pilgrim  offers  food  to  an
old  Brahman.  Unknown  to  both  a  serpent  carried  in  a  kite's
mouth  poisons  it.  The  old  man  eats  the  food  and  dies.  The
youth  is  accused  of  murdering  him  and  is  put  in  prison  and
flogged.  He  prays  to  Kali  in  his  misery,  and  she  destroys
the  whole  village  where  the  young  Brahman  has  been  im-
prisoned. Kali  then  "  infuses  herself  into  the  person  of  one
of  the  villagers  "  and  tells  them  the  whole  truth,  whereupon
the  youth  is  released  and  all  is  well.

The  motif,  being  really  only  applicable  to  snake-infested
countries,  is  not  one  which  found  ready  acceptance  in
Western  collections.

The  Merchant's  Daughter  who  fell  in  love  with  a  Thief
(Vetdla  14— pp.  35-39)

There  are  several  differences  in  each  of  the  two  chief
vernacular  versions.

In  the  Hindi 1  (No.  13)  version  no  mention  is  made  of  the
girl's  dislike  for  men.  In  searching  for  the  thief  it  is  the  king
who  asks  the  other  man  who  he  is.  On  finding  they  are  both
of  the  same  profession  they  proceed  to  rob  several  houses.
They  take  their  loot  to  a  well  outside  the  city,  which  proves
to  be  really  an  entrance  to  Patala,  where  the  real  thief  dwells.
The  king  is  warned  by  a  female  servant  and,  being  shown
the  way  back,  effects  his  escape.  Another  day  the  complete
army  go  down  the  well  and  surround  the  thief's  house.  He
manages,  however,  to  escape  to  a  demon  who  is  lord  of  the
city  and  implores  his  aid.  Accordingly,  remembering  past
benefits,  the  demon  destroys  most  of  the  army.  The  king
is  in  flight,  when  the  thief  calls  out :  "  Hola  !  thou  a  Rajput,
and  fleeing  from  combat  ?  "     At  this  the  king  stops,  fights

1  Barker,  op.  cit.,  p.  211  et  seq.


216  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

the  thief,  and  finally  overcomes  him.  He  then  has  the  thief
bathed,  finely  clad,  and  paraded  through  the  streets  on  a
camel,  and  so  to  be  led  to  the  stake  of  impalement.  The
girl's  father  offers  the  king  five  lakhs  for  the  thief's  release,
but  in  vain.  When  she  is  about  to  become  a  Sati,  the  goddess
Devi  appears  and  grants  a  boon.  The  girl  immediately
craves  that  life  be  restored  to  the  thief.  There  is  no  men-
tion of  the  request  about  her  father  having  a  hundred  sons.
The  answer  to  the  Vetala's  question  will  be  discussed  later.

In  the  Tamil  version  *  the  story  is  No.  17  of  the  collection.
It  begins  as  in  Somadeva  :  the  king,  however,  does  not
trouble  to  have  the  city  watched,  but  goes  to  see  to  matters
for  himself  at  once,  apparently  without  any  kind  of  disguise.
He  meets  the  thief  who  was  the  chief  of  all  the  robbers,
with  his  body  blackened,2  his  head  bare,  girded  with  a  black
cincture,  and  wearing  a  weapon  to  cleave  asunder  those  who
opposed  him."  When  asked  by  the  king  who  he  is,  the  thief
replies :  "  I  am  the  son  of  Bhadra  Kali,  the  tutelary  goddess
of  this  neighbourhood,  and  I  am  going  my  rounds  about  the
town."  "  Very  well,"  replied  the  king,  "  come  and  be  chief
guard  of  my  palace."

The  thief  can  do  nothing  but  comply.  He  makes,  how-
ever, an  attempt  to  secure  assistance,  by  calling  to  some  of
his  accomplices  in  thieves'  language.  He  is  overheard,  the
other  thieves  are  slain,  and  he  himself  is  led  off,  smeared
in  sandalwood,  with  a  garland  round  his  neck,  to  the  place  of
impalement.  Then  follows  the  incident  of  the  daughter's
request  to  her  father  as  in  our  version.  He  presents  himself
before  the  king  and  offers  a  cat's-eye  (chrysoberyl)  as  a
present,  and  promises  to  give  "  great  riches  "  if  his  Majesty
will  release  the  thief.  The  king  refuses  indignantly,  saying  :
"  You  must  be  yourself  a  thief,  who  come  thus  to  speak
in  behalf  of  a  robber.  Get  out  of  my  presence  !  "  When
she  was  about  to  become  a  Sati,  Siva  and  his  consort,  "  who
had  viewed  all  these  transactions  from  the  sky,  called  out  to
the  damsel  from  the  bull-vehicle  on  which  they  were  seated,

1  Babington,  op.  cit.,  p.  71  et  seq.

2  In  a  note  Babington  points  out  that  the  blackened  bodies  of  thieves
were  also  anointed  [with  grease  ?],  so  that  the  police  would  have  difficulty  in
catching  hold  of  them.  In  order  to  obviate  this  the  "  tiger's-claw,"  a  sort  of
knuckle-duster  with  curved  claws,  is  employed.  This  baghnakh  or  wagnuck
was  the  weapon  with  which  Sivaji  murdered  Afzal  Khan.  See  Duffs  History
of  the  Mahrattasy  vol.  i,  p.  172.


APPENDIX— TALES  OF  A  VETALA     217

and  said :  '  Ask  whatever  gift  you  desire  ' ;  to  which  she
replied  :  '  I  wish  you  to  raise  up  this  robber  and  present
him  to  me.'  They  were  delighted  with  her  constancy,  and
having  resuscitated  the  robber,  delivered  him  over  to  her,
and  went  to  Cailasam."  Once  again  there  is  no  mention  of
the  girl's  first  request  about  her  father.

Although  the  above  versions  differ  in  several  minor  in-
cidents from  that  of  our  text,  no  new  motifs  are  introduced.
Somadeva  alone  makes  the  distracted  girl  think  first  of  her
father,  although  about  to  die.  The  tale  contains  several
interesting  motifs.  Almost  at  the  commencement  we  read
of  the  heroine's  hatred  of  men.  This  motif  occupies  a  very
minor  place  in  the  story,  and,  as  we  have  seen  above,  dis-
appears entirely  in  the  Hindi  version.  No  explanation  is
given  as  to  why  she  hated  men  or  to  account  for  her  sudden
passion  for  the  thief.  In  the  Nights,  however,  the  motif
assumes  a  more  important  form,  and  the  hatred  of  men  by
the  princess  is  accounted  for  by  a  dream  in  which  she  sees
the  cruelty  and  desertion  of  the  male  sex.  It  is  only  after  a
clever  trick  of  the  lover  that  the  princess  is  persuaded  that
she  was  mistaken.  The  two  stories  in  which  this  occurs  are
"  Tale  of  Taj  al-Muluk  and  the  Princess  Dunya  "  (Burton,
vol.  iii,  p.  31  et  seq.)  and  "  Ardashir  and  Hayat  al-Nufus  "
(idem.,  vol.  vii,  p.  227  et  seq.).

We  pass  on  to  the  more  important  motifs.  An  appro-
priate name  for  the  thieving  motif  occurring  in  our  story,
and  also  later  in  Chapter  CXII,  is  hard  to  express  in  a  single
short  sentence.  I  have  chosen  "  tracking  the  thief,"  but
it  really  covers  only  one  aspect  of  the  motif — namely,  the
tracking  of  the  thief  by  the  king  in  disguise — somewhat
similar  to  the  nocturnal  adventures  indulged  in  by  Harun
al-Rashid  in  the  Nights.  (See  the  Ocean,  Vol.  VI,  p.  37nK)
Although  the  famous  Caliph  might  well  be  regarded  as  the
stock  type  for  such  habits,  his  name  cannot  be  given  to
the  motif,  as  so  many  of  his  rambles  were  made  in  order
to  discover  what  the  people  really  thought  about  him,  or
merely  in  the  hope  of  finding  some  amusing  adventure.

With  the  scope  of  the  motif  thus  qualified,  I  proceed.

As  mentioned  in  Vol.  II,  p.  183W1,  the  arch-thief  of  Hindu
fiction  is  Miiladeva,  who  figures  personally  in  the  next  Vetala
story.  Although  the  great  majority  of  stories  about  him
deal  with  his  clever  tricks  and  wonderful  escapes,  there  is
a  tale  in  Jacobi's  Ausgewahlte  Erzahlungen  in  Mdhdrdshtri


218  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

which  tells  how  Muladeva  became  King  of  Bennayada  under
the  name  of  Vikramaraja.  He  was  elected  to  the  throne  by
the  rite  of  pancadivyddhivdsa.  The  passage  (from  Meyer's
translation,  Hindu  Tales,  p.  212)  has  already  been  given
in  my  note  on  the  rite  (Vol.  V,  p.  176).  In  his  new  role  of
king  Muladeva  soon  proves  himself  an  exemplary  protector
of  his  land,  and,  following  the  dictum  laid  down  in  the
Arthasdstra,1  becomes  the  terror  of  thieves  and  rogues.  It
is  at  this  point  of  his  career  that  he  acts  like  King  Viraketu
of  our  text.

The  story  well  merits  reproduction 2 :

In  the  city  of  Bennayada  lived  a  beggar,  named  Mandiya,
addicted  to  stealing  other  people's  property.  He  spread  the
report  that  he  was  suffering  from  loathsome  sores,  and  kept
his  knees  covered  with  ointment ;  and  swathed  in  bandages,
he  hobbled  along  with  apparent  difficulty,  supporting  his  feet
with  a  staff.

By  day  he  begged,  by  night  he  dug  breaches  into  houses
[see  Vol.  V,  p.  142n2],  stole  much  property,  and  deposited  it
in  a  cave  [Meyer  reads  "  an  underground  dwelling  "]  in  the
environs  of  the  town.  There  also  lived  his  sister,  a  maiden.
In  the  middle  of  the  cave  was  a  well.  And  every  accomplice
whom  the  thief  enticed  by  means  of  money  and  brought
there  as  a  carrier  of  the  loot,  his  sister  bade  sit  down  on  a
seat  previously  placed  near  the  well,  and  taking  hold  of  their
feet,  under  the  pretext  of  washing  them,  she  pushed  them
into  the  well,  where  they  perished.

Thus  Mandiya  continued  in  his  robberies,  the  guards
being  unable  to  catch  him.  The  citizens'  complaints  reached
Miiladeva's  ears,  so  he  appointed  a  new  chief  of  the  guard ;
but  he  also  could  not  catch  the  thief.  Then  Muladeva  him-
self, clad  in  a  dark  robe,  went  out  that  night  and  sat  down
near  a  certain  gambling-hall  [Meyer  :  "  shed  "].  Mandiya
came  along  and  asked :  "  Who  sits  here  ?  "  Muladeva
answered  :  "  I  am  a  beggar."  Mandiya  said  :  "  Come,  I'll
make  a  man  of  you !  "  Muladeva  got  up.  A  breach  was  dug
into  the  house  of  a  rich  man,  and  the  thief  took  out  great

1  "The  king  should  protect  his  subjects  against  the  rascalities  of  thieves,
robbers,  cheats  and  other  rogues"  (Kautilya's  Arthasastra,  iv,  6).

2  I  follow  Bloomfield's  translation  (see  later)  of  Jacobi's  work  already-
cited,  supplemented  by  Meyer's  rendering  in  Hindu  Tales,  p.  223  et  seq.


APPENDIX— TALES  OF  A  VETALA     219

treasures,  which  he  loaded  upon  Muladeva.  They  proceeded
outside  the  city,  Muladeva  in  front,  the  thief  with  drawn
sword  behind.

When  they  had  arrived  at  the  cave,  Mandiya  began  to
bury  the  treasure.  He  said  to  his  sister:  "Wash  the  feet
of  this  guest."  She  bade  him  sit  down  on  the  seat  at  the
brink  of  the  well,  and  took  hold  of  his  foot,  under  pretence
of  washing  it.  Observing  its  delicacy,  she  guessed  that  he
was  a  person  of  quality  [Meyer  :  "  limbs  were  weakly  "],  and
pity  sprung  up  in  her  heart.  She  made  a  signal  on  the  flat
of  his  foot,  "Flee,  lest  you  die !  "  So  he  did,  and  she  cried
after  him:  "He  has  fled!  He  has  fled!  "  Mandiya  drew
his  sword,  and  pursued  the  king  on  the  highway.  When
Muladeva  perceived  that  Mandiya  was  close  upon  him,  he
hid  behind  a  linga  of  Siva  on  the  square.  The  thief  mis-
took it  for  the  figure  of  a  man,  cleft  it,  and  returned  to  his
underground  dwelling  [Meyer:  "having  stayed  there  over-
night]. In  the  morning  he  begged  in  the  market-place.
Thence  the  king  had  him  brought  to  his  presence,  treated
him  courteously,  and  asked  his  sister  for  wife.  Mandiya
gave  her  to  the  king  with  a  dowry.  After  a  time  the  king
told  Mandiya  that  he  needed  money.  Mandiya  procured  it,
and  was  honoured  by  the  king.  The  king  kept  asking  for  more,
until  he  learned  from  the  sister  (his  wife)  that  Mandiya  had
no  more.  Thereupon  the  king  returned  the  goods  to  their
rightful  owners,  and  ordered  Mandiya  to  be  impaled  upon  a
stake.

The  similarity  of  the  above  with  our  tale  is  considerable,
and  it  does  not  lose  by  the  omission  of  the  girl's  sudden  love
for  the  thief.  Cf  Natesa  Sastri's  Folklore  in  Southern  India,
p.  53  et  seq.

The  motif  also  occurs  in  two  other  tales  in  Jacobi's  work
mentioned  above.  They  concern  the  means  by  which  Agala-
datta  (Agadadatta)  tracks  down  a  thief  who  is  constantly
pillaging  the  city.  Some  idea  of  the  usual  lurking-places  of
thieves  is  given  when  Agaladatta  starts  on  his  search  :

"In  the  houses  of  prostitutes,  in  taprooms,  in  gambling
places,  and  in  the  stalls  of  the  bakers ;  in  sheds  of  the  parks,
where  one  can  get  water  to  drink,  in  the  huts  of  ascetics,  in
empty  temples,  in  the  squares,  in  bazaars  and  markets,  he
fearlessly  stalked  his  prey."


220  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

The  thief  turns  out  to  be  a  mendicant  who  behaves  as
does  Mandiya  in  the  story  quoted  above.  The  mendicant
is  killed,  and  his  daughter  is  taken  off  by  Agaladatta,  who
receives  the  king's  daughter  as  a  reward.  Without  giving
further  examples  of  the  use  of  the  "  catching  the  thief "
motif  I  would  refer  readers  to  Bloomfield's  excellent  article
"  The  Art  of  Stealing  in  Hindu  Fiction,"  Amer.  Journ.  Phil,
vol.  liv,  1923,  pp.  194-202.  He  deals  with  the  "  Romance  "
part  of  the  story  on  pp.  221-225,  to  which  we  now  proceed.

In  the  Kathdkoga  (Tawney,  p.  215)  the  Princess  Dava-
danti  takes  pity  on  a  condemned  thief  and  by  means  of  an
"  act  of  truth  breaks  his  bonds  and  scatters  the  guards.
Cf.  also  p.  126  of  the  same  work.  "  Pity's  akin  to  love,"
as  we  soon  discover  in  following  the  development  of  our
motif.

In  the  Kanavera  Jdtaka  (No.  318,  Cambridge  edition,
vol.  iii,  p.  42)  Sama,  the  chief  courtesan  of  the  King  of
Benares,  falls  in  love1  with  a  thief  who  is  being  led  off  to
execution.  She  accordingly  bribes  the  governor  to  say  that
the  thief  is  her  brother  and  must  therefore  be  allowed  to
escape.     He  consents,  but  only  if  a  substitute  be  found.

Now  the  price  of  Sanaa's  favours  was  a  thousand  pieces,
and  that  night  a  rich  young  merchant  calls  at  her  house  with
the  required  sum.  Sama  places  the  money  in  her  lap  and
bursts  into  tears.  On  the  merchant's  inquiring  the  cause,
she  replies  :  "  My  lord,  this  robber  is  my  brother,  though  he
never  comes  to  me,  because  people  say  I  follow  a  vile  trade.
When  I  sent  a  message  to  the  governor,  he  intimated  that
for  a  thousand  he  would  let  the  prisoner  go.  And  now  I
cannot  find  anyone  to  go."  The  youth  volunteers  to  take
the  money.  He  is  mistaken  for  the  substitute  and  executed.
Sama  then  lives  with  the  thief  in  luxury.  The  sequel  is
most  dramatic.  As  time  goes  on  the  thief  thinks  that  a
woman  who  was  capable  of  such  an  amazing  act  might  easily
turn  on  him  if  she  found  another  love  she  preferred.  He
therefore  leads  her  into  a  thicket  and  chokes  her,  leaving  her
for  dead.  On  regaining  consciousness  Sama  harbours  no
thought  of  revenge,  but  still  wants  her  lover.  She  sends  out
strolling  actors  with  a  message  in  verse.  At  last  they  find
the  thief,  but  he  is  taking  no  risks,  and  sends  back  a  verse  of
refusal.     The  actors  return  and  make  a  full  report.     Where-

1  For  the  "  Devoted  Hetaera  "  motif  see  Bloomfield,  Proc.  Amer.  Phil.  Soc,
vol.  Hi,  p.  630  et  seq.


APPENDIX— TALES  OF  A  VETALA     221

upon  Sama  plunges  once  more  into  a  life  of  debauchery  and
prostitution.

The  story  occurs  again  in  the  Jdtakas,1  but  the  ending  is
different.  The  thief  tells  the  girl  of  his  evil  intentions,  and
she  begs  as  a  mark  of  final  devotion  to  be  allowed  to  circum-
ambulate him.  This  request  he  grants,  and  when  Sulasa  is
behind  him  flings  him  down  a  mountain  precipice  with
superhuman  strength.

For  further  parallels  see  Burlingame,  Buddhist  Legends
(Harvard  Oriental  Series,  vol.  xxix),  vol.  ii,  p.  227.

There  still  remains  the  "  Laugh  and  Cry  "  motif  to  be  con-
sidered, but  as  this  occurs  again  in  Vetala  23,  and  the  "  Laugh  "
motif  alone  in  Vetala  20,  I  shall  leave  the  discussion  of  both
its  varieties  till  we  deal  with  these  tales  in  question  (see  pp.
253,  260).  Suffice  it  to  point  out  here  that  the  answer  given
to  the  Vetala 's  question  as  to  why  the  thief  first  wept  and
then  laughed  differ  in  Hindi  and  Tamil  versions.  In  both
of  these  he  laughs  first,  which  I  consider  less  dramatic  than
as  in  our  text.  In  the  Hindi,  however,  the  reply  changes
the  order,  for  the  text  says,  "  He  first  burst  out  laughing,
and  then  began  to  weep  bitterly,"  while  the  explanation
given  is  :  "  He  reflected  that  he  could  not  requite  her  kind-
ness in  being  willing  to  give  up  her  whole  property  to  save
his  life,  and  this  reflection  deeply  grieved  him.  Then  it
struck  him  as  very  odd  that  she  should  fall  in  love  with  a
man  just  about  to  suffer  death  :  that  the  proceedings  of  the
Deity  were  inscrutable  ;  that  he  bestows  prosperity  on  the
inauspicious ;  knowledge  on  one  destitute  of  high  lineage ;
a  beautiful  wife  on  a  fool ;  and  showers  upon  hills  :  thus
reflecting,  he  laughed."

In  the  Tamil  version  the  order  remains  throughout.
"  First  he  laughed,"  replied  the  king,  "  to  think  that  such  an
extraordinary  event  should  have  taken  place,  although  the  girl
had  not  been  previously  acquainted  with  him  ;  then  he  wept,
being  moved  to  compassion,  when  he  saw  the  affliction  of  her
father  and  mother."

1  Sulasa  Jataka,  No.  419,  Cambridge  edition,  vol.  iii,  p.  260  et  seq.


222  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

The  Magic  Pill
(Vetdla  15— pp.  40-48)

The  story  of  the  magic  pill  is  practically  the  same  in  the
Hindi  version  (No.  14).1  The  incident  of  the  infuriated
elephant  is  omitted.  The  daughter's  name,  not  the  queen's,
is  Chandraprabha.  Muladeva  and  Sasin  are  described  as
"  two  learned  and  deeply  read  Brahmans  "  who  come  quite
by  chance  on  the  love-sick  youth  as  he  lies  swooning  from
excess  of  love  in  their  path.  When  Muladeva  returns  to  the
court  to  claim  his  "  daughter,"  and  is  told  she  is  gone,  he
demands  the  princess  in  marriage  for  his  son.  As  the  king
will  otherwise  be  cursed,  he  grants  the  request  immediately.
The  Vetala's  question  is  rather  more  elaborate,  for,  on  the
king  deciding  that  Sasin  was  the  lawful  husband,  he  replies  :
"  Being  pregnant  by  the  Brahman  Manasvl "  (so  he  is  called),
"how  could  she  be  the  wife  of  Sasi  ?  "  The  king  replies  :
"  No  one  was  aware  that  she  was  with  child  by  Manas vi,
and  Sasi  married  her  before  five  or  ten  people  ;  on  this
account,  then,  she  remains  his  wife,  and  that  child  also  will
possess  the  right  of  performing  the  funeral  obsequies."

The  Tamil  version  (No.  18) 2  is  reduced  to  a  mere  skeleton,
lacking  all  interest  and  importance,  and  is  quite  unworthy  of
any  discussion.

The  story  occurs  in  a  more  complicated  form  in  the
Turkish  Tuti-ndmah,3  where  a  sorceress  gives  the  love-sick
youth  a  magic  seal.  By  putting  it  in  his  mouth  he  is  turned
into  a  girl.  In  this  form  he  marries  the  king's  son.  Thus
he  has  easy  access  to  the  princess,  and  finally  escapes  with
her.  The  princess  keeps  the  seal  in  her  mouth  during  the  day
and  is  thus  turned  into  a  man,  but  at  night  they  both  revert
to  their  original  shapes.  The  sorceress  demands  back  her
"daughter"  from  the  king,  who  pays  a  thousand  gold  pieces
by  way  of  compensation.

In  the  Persian  Tuti-ndmah  *  the  tale  is  much  more  simple.
A  pill  is  used  as  in  our  text,  but  there  is  no  mention  of  any
claim  for  the  "  daughter."

1  Barker,  op.  cit.,  p.  225  et  seq.

2  Babington,  op.  cit.3  p.  76  et  seq.

3  Rosen,  op.  cit.,  vol.  ii,  p.  178.  In  Wickerhauser's  version,  p.  240,
compensation  is  obtained  in  the  shape  of  a  magic  purse  that  always  contains
a  thousand  dinars.

4  Iken,  Touti  Nameh,  Stuttgart,  1 822,  p.  97.


APPENDIX— TALES  OF  A  VETALA     223

We  turn  to  the  one  motif  the  story  contains  :  the  change
of  sex.  I  cannot  find  this  exact  method  used  in  other  tales
to  change  sex,  but  it  is  employed  for  rather  similar  purposes.
For  instance,  in  one  tale  our  friend  Muladeva  turns  himself
into  a  dwarf  by  means  of  a  magic  pill.1

In  the  Kathdkoga  (Tawney,  p.  110)  a  girl  puts  a  magic
plant  in  her  ear  and  immediately  becomes  a  man.  But  in
Indian  literature  perhaps  the  best-known  case  of  change  of
sex,  or  in  this  case  exchange  of  sex,  occurs  in  the  Mahdbhdrata,
Udyoga  Parva,  sects,  cxc-cxciv 2 :

King  Drupada  longs  for  a  son  in  order  to  revenge  himself
on  Bhlshma.  Siva  at  last  says  he  shall  have  a  child  which
shall  be  female  and  male.  In  due  course  a  daughter  is  born,
but  trusting  in  Siva's  promise,  Drupada  and  his  wife  announce
the  birth  of  a  son,  whom  they  call  Sikhandin,  and  bring  up
the  girl  as  if  she  were  a  boy.  She  attains  the  age  of  puberty
and  the  question  of  marriage  arises.  The  daughter  of  a  power-
ful king  is  selected,  and  the  ceremony  is  performed.  When  the
bride  discovers  that  she  has  been  tricked,  and  her  husband
is  really  a  girl,  her  father  is  furious,  and  marches  against
Drupada  to  drive  him  from  the  throne  and  kill  Sikhandin.

Meanwhile  the  unhappy  Sikhandin  decides  on  suicide,
and  goes  into  the  forest  to  put  her  plan  into  action.  There
she  meets  a  Yaksha  who  takes  pity  on  her  and  agrees  to
exchange  sex  with  her  until  the  danger  has  passed.  All  is
arranged  satisfactorily  and  the  two  kings  are  reconciled.
But  Kuvera  discovers  what  the  Yaksha  has  done  and  curses
him  so  that  he  must  always  remain  a  woman.  On  the
request  of  other  Yakshas,  however,  the  curse  is  allowed  to
end  on  the  death  of  Sikhandin.  The  prince  returns  to  the
Yaksha  in  accordance  with  his  bargain,  but  is  told  of
Kuvera' s  curse  and  returns  in  happiness  to  his  wife.

1  Meyer,  Hindu  Tales,  p.  193.  See  also  his  translation  of  Dasa-
kwndra-charita,  p.  83.

2  It  occurs  in  vol.  hi,  pp.  529-538  of  the  new  edition  of  Roy's  trans-
lation. It  should  be  remembered  that  in  the  story  quoted  from  the  Maha-
bharata,  Sikhandin  was  a  subsequent  birth  of  Amba,  the  eldest  daughter  of
the  King  of  Kasi,  who,  after  being  carried  off  by  Bhlshma,  tried  in  vain  to
be  accepted  as  wife  by  King  Saubha.  Through  asceticism  she  obtained  the
promise  that  she  would  kill  Bhlshma,  and  became  a  man  in  her  next  birth
in  order  to  do  so.  For  full  references  see  Sorensen,  Index  to  Names  in  the
Mahdbhdrata,  under  "Amba"  and  "(Jikhandin."


224  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

Several  versions  of  this  tale  exist  in  different  parts  of  India.
One  was  written  in  Persian  by  'Izzat  Ullah  in  1712  under
the  title  of  Gul-i  Bakdwali,1  while  another,  based  on  a
Tamil  version,  appeared  in  Dubois'  Pantcha-T antra,  p.  15.
Cf.  No.  14  of  Dozon's  Contes  Albanais,  and  No.  58  of  Hahn's
Griechische  und  albanesische  Mar  chert.

So  far  the  transformations  have  been  made  either  by  a
magic  pill,  seal  or  plant,  or  merely  by  mutual  agreement
with  a  superhuman  being.  We  have  already  seen  (Vol.  VI,
p.  59  el  seq.)  that  the  most  usual,  and  certainly  less  com-
promising, method  of  enjoying  illicit  intercourse  by  magical
means  was  by  temporarily  changing  the  man  into  some  animal
whose  presence  would  incite  no  comment.  As  the  motif
travelled  westwards  it  seems  that  water  became  the  more
usual  medium.  Sometimes  it  was  an  enchanted  spring,  or  else
a  lake  or  well,  by  bathing  in  which  the  change  was  effected.

A  story  of  a  sex-changing  well  is  found  in  all  versions  of
the  Book  of  Sindibdd,2  and  so  in  the  Nights  (Burton,  vol.  vi,
p.  145  el  seq.).

A  certain  prince  is  to  marry  the  daughter  of  a  neighbour-
ing king.  Her  cousin  is  jealous  and  bribes  the  prince's  vazir
to  do  what  he  can  to  prevent  the  marriage.  The  vazir
accompanies  the  prince  to  his  fiancee's  kingdom,  and  on  the
way  leads  him  to  "  a  certain  spring  of  running  water  in  the
mountains  there,  called  Al-Zahra,  whereof  whosoever  drank
from  a  man  became  a  woman."  The  prince  stays  on  the
spot  bemoaning  his  sad  fate,  while  his  rival  rejoices  at  the
news.  By  chance  a  cavalier  rides  up,  who  proves  to  be  a
king's  son  of  the  Jann.  He  takes  pity  on  the  prince  and
conveys  him  to  the  Black  Country,  where,  after  obtaining
leave  from  the  king,  one  Zu'l  Janahayn,  he  drinks  of  a  stream
and  is  turned  back  again  to  his  original  shape.  Variants  of
the  tale  occur  in  the  Hebrew  and  Spanish  texts.  See  further
Clouston,  op.  cit.,  p.  300.

In  another  tale  of  the  Nights 3  we  read  of  a  magic  cauldron

1  Garcin  de  Tassy,  Allegories  Recits  Poetiques,  2nd  edit.,  1876,  pp.  349,
350  and  372-374  ;  also  Clouston,  Eastern  Romances,  pp.  279  and  532  et  seq.

2  See  Chauvin,  op.  cit.,  viii,  p.  43  ;  Clouston,  Book  of  Sindibad,  pp.  80,
156  and  299.

3  "The  Tale  of  Warlock  and  the  Young  Cook  of  Baghdad,"  Burton,
Supp.,  Nights,  vol.  vi,  p.  137.  See  also  the  note  on  pp.  121  and  354.  Lane  was
told  a  version  of  the  story  in  Cairo.  See  his  Manners  and  Customs  of  the
Modern  Egyptians,  5th  edit.,  I860,  pp.  468-469.


APPENDIX— TALES  OF  A  VETALA     225

full  of  water,  into  which  a  vizier  plunges  at  the  bidding  of  a
sorcerer.  Immediately  *  he  finds  himself  in  the  sea,  and  on
coming  to  dry  land  discovers  he  has  turned  into  a  woman.
He  marries  and  becomes  a  mother  of  seven.  "  She  "  tires  of
the  life,  and  flinging  "herself"  into  the  sea  comes  up  again
in  the  cauldron  in  his  original  sex,  to  find  that  he  has  really
been  absent  only  a  few  seconds.     (See  further,  p.  245.)

A  curious  Arabic  story  introducing  our  motif  occurs  in  the
collection  of  proverbs  of  al-Mufaddal  ibn  Salama,  called  the
Fakhir.  When  dealing  with  "The  Magic  Seed  "  in  Vol.  VI,
p.  62,  I  quoted  the  third  sub-story  of  it.  The  following
forms  the  first  sub-story,  and  is  told  by  the  stranger  in  the
hopes  of  saving  Khurafa's  life 2 :

I  was  in  prosperous  circumstances,  then  they  ceased  and
I  was  ridden  with  debt.  So  I  went  out,  fleeing,  and  a  terrible
thirst  befell  me ;  so  I  journeyed  to  a  well  and  alighted  that
I  might  drink.  Then  someone  called  out  to  me  from  the
well,  "  Stand  !  "  so  I  went  away  from  it  and  did  not  drink.
But  the  thirst  overcame  me  and  I  returned ;  then  he  called
out  to  me.  Again  I  returned  a  third  time  and  drank,  and
paid  no  attention  to  him.  Then  he  said  :  "  O  Allah  !  if  it
is  a  man  transform  him  into  a  woman,  and  if  it  is  a  woman
transform  her  into  a  man."  And  lo  !  I  was  a  woman.  I
went  to  a  certain  city  and  a  man  married  me  and  I  bore  him
two  children.  Thereafter  I  returned  to  my  own  country,
and  I  passed  by  the  well  of  which  I  had  drunk  and  I  alighted.
He  called  out  to  me  as  he  had  called  at  first,  but  I  drank
and  paid  no  attention  to  him.  So  he  prayed  as  at  first,  and
I  became  a  man  as  I  had  been.  Then  I  came  to  my  own
country  and  married  a  wife  and  begat  on  her  two  children.
So  I  have  two  sons  of  my  loins  and  two  of  my  womb.

Stories  of  sex-changing  water  cannot,  however,  be  re-
garded as  of  common  occurrence  in  folk-tales,  the  most  usual
use  of  magical  water,  streams,  wells,  etc.,  being  as  an  eau  de
jouvence,  or  "  water  of  life."

There  is  a  curious  gipsy  tale  in  which  a  second  curse

1  This  instantaneous  transportation  has  occurred  more  than  once  in  the
Ocean;  see  Vol.  II,  pp.  223,  823ft1,  and  Vol.  VI,  pp.  213  and  279.

2  D.  B.  Macdonald,  "The  Earlier  History  of  the  Arabian  Nights,"  Journ.
Roy.  As.  Soc,  July  1924,  p.  373.

VOL.    VII.  P


226  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

neutralises  the  effect  of  the  first.     It  is  included  in  one  of
von  Wlislocki's  works 1 :

A  youth  pleases  a  beautiful  river-nymph,  daughter  of  the
moon-king,  by  his  piping,  to  which  she  has  been  dancing.  In
return  she  gives  him  a  silver  sickle,  promising  him  yet  fairer
gifts  if  he  will  come  again.  Alas  !  he  is  late  for  the  tryst,
and  finds  her  dead  on  the  ground,  heart-broken  at  his  breach
of  faith  ;  for  these  ladies'  hearts  are  very  fragile.  Her  sister
appears  from  the  river  and  curses  him,  if  a  man,  to  become
a  woman,  if  a  woman,  to  become  a  man.  She  then  carries
the  dead  nymph  back  into  the  river,  and,  as  it  seems,  there
restores  her  to  life,  for  immediately  afterwards  a  magnifi-
cent black  steed  stands  before  the  desolate  youth  (now
become  a  girl)  and  declares  that  she  is  sent  by  the  deceased
maiden  to  bear  him  where  his  fortune  blossoms.  Mounted
on  the  steed,  he  is  borne  through  the  air  like  lightning  to  the
aid  of  a  king's  daughter,  given  to  a  dragon  who  dwells  in  a
fountain  and  requires  a  maid  once  a  year  for  dinner.  He
slays  the  dragon  with  the  sickle,  and  the  king  in  his  joy
gives  him  his  daughter  to  wife.  He  accepted  the  lady  amid
the  general  excitement,  without  thinking  that  he  was  no
longer  a  man,  but  a  woman.  This  was  awkward.  The  bride
complained  to  her  father,  who  was  afraid  to  attempt  his  life
by  direct  means.  Wherefore  he  sent  him  instead  to  rob  the
cloud-king  of  three  golden  apples,  which  had  the  property,
one  of  them  of  making  wealthy,  another  of  making  lucky,  and
the  third  of  making  healthy.  His  steed  helps  him  to  accom-
plish the  task.  But  when  the  monster,  half-man,  half-dog,
that  guards  the  apples  finds  that  he  has  been  cozened  he
flings  the  curse  after  the  robber  :  "  If  a  man,  become  woman  ;
if  a  woman,  become  man."  The  curse  sets  matters  right  again.
"I  don't  know  what  has  happened,  dearest  father,"  says  the
bride  to  the  king,  "but  my  husband  is  a  man  after  all."

There  is  also  an  Albanian  version  2  in  which  the  dragon-
slayer  is  born  a  girl.  She  kills  a  lamia  to  whom  the  king  has
given  his  son,  and  is  rewarded  with  a  magical  steed.  Later
on  she  wins  another  king's  daughter  in  marriage  by  a  feat
of  athletics,  and,  as  in  the  last  tale,  is  guilty  of  the  thought-
lessness of  taking  the  bride.     Being  prescribed  a  series  of

1  Volksdichtungen  der  siebenbiirgischen  und  siidungarischen  Zigeuner,  Vienna,
1 890,  No.  34,  p.  260.

2  Dozon,  Contes  Albanais,  No.  14,  p.  109.


APPENDIX— TALES  OF  A  VETALA     227

tasks  by  the  king,  with  the  same  object  of  getting  rid  of  her,
she  at  last  is  cursed  by  some  serpents  with  the  requisite
change  of  sex.

Now,  both  the  above  tales  are  also  versions  of  the  great
Andromeda  cycle,1  and  could  be  quoted  in  connection  with
the  sacrifice  of  Jimutavahana,  which  is  the  next  Vetala  tale
with  which  we  shall  deal.     (See  p.  233  et  seq.)

Before  discussing  our  motif  from  an  anthropological  point
of  view  we  should  see  whether  Greek  mythology  can  offer  us
any  similar  tales  for  comparison.  Foremost  among  such
legends  is  that  of  Tiresias,  or  Teiresias.  He  was  a  famous
Theban  soothsayer,  son  of  Everes  and  a  nymph  Chariclo,
and  he  was  blind.  One  of  the  causes  given  for  his  blindness
was  that  once  on  Mount  Cyllene  (some  accounts  say  Mount
Cithaeron,  in  Bceotia)  he  saw  two  snakes  copulating,  and  that
having  wounded  them  (or  having  killed  the  female)  he  was
turned  from  a  man  into  a  woman,  but  that  on  observing  the
same  snakes  (or  another  pair)  copulating  on  another  occasion
(many  accounts  make  him  kill  the  male)  he  regained  his
original  sex.  "  Hence,"  continues  the  account  given  by
Apollodorus,2  "  when  Hera  and  Zeus  disputed  whether  the
pleasures  of  love  are  felt  more  by  women  or  by  men,  they
referred  to  him  for  a  decision.  He  said  that  if  the  pleasures
of  love  be  reckoned  at  ten,  men  enjoy  one  and  women  nine.
Wherefore  Hera  blinded  him,  but  Zeus  bestowed  on  him  the
art  of  soothsaying."

It  is  interesting  to  note  that  the  ill-luck  attached  to
anyone  who  sees  snakes  coupling  is  by  no  means  confined
to  Greek  mythology,  and  we  find  the  superstition  fully  de-
veloped in  India.  Frazer,  op.  cit.  sup.,  gives  references  to
works  quoting  the  superstition  from  North  and  South  India,
Burma  and  the  East  Indian  Islands.  I  confess  I  can  offer
no  explanation  for  the  belief,  unless  it  is  based  on  the  fact
that  as  the  Nagas  are  so  widely  worshipped  in  India,  a
devotee  so  indiscreet  as  to  remain  a  witness  of  any  personal
and  intimate  relationship  between  them  would  naturally
incur  their  wrath.     The  idea  is  quite  an  accepted  fact  in

1  S.  Hartland,  Legend  of  Perseus,  vol.  iii,  pp.  28-29.

2  See  Frazer's  trans.,  Loeb  Classics,  vol.  i,  p.  365  et  seq.  The  story  is  also
found  in  Phlegon,  Mirabilia,  4 ;  Tzetzes,  Scholiast  on  Lycophron,  683  ;  Ovid,
Metamorphoses,  iii,  31 6  et  seq.;  Hyginus,  Fab.  75,  and  in  several  other  works
given  by  Frazer.


•


228  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

mythology,  and  another  account  given  to  explain  the  blind-
ness of  Tiresias  himself  was  that  he  had  chanced  to  see
Athena  bathing  naked.

Then  there  was  Caeneus,1  one  of  the  Lapithse,  who  was
originally  a  girl  called  Caenis.  She  was  seized  by  Poseidon
and  dragged  to  his  watery  abode,  where  she  became  his
mistress.  Having  tasted  the  joys  of  his  new  love,  Poseidon
asked  her  to  choose  whatever  she  most  longed  for.  Caenis
replied  (Ovid,  Met.,  xii,  200  et  seq.)  :  "  The  wrong  that  you
have  done  me  calls  for  a  mighty  prayer,  the  prayer  that  I
may  never  again  be  able  to  suffer  so.  Grant  me  that  I  be
not  woman  !  So  grant  all  my  prayers."  Not  only  did  her
sex  change,  but  the  new  Caeneus  was  made  invulnerable  in
battle.  At  his  death,  according  to  some  of  the  accounts,  he
was  changed  back  to  a  woman  again.  This  change  of  sex
at  death  will  be  referred  to  a  little  later.

Finally  there  is  the  story  of  Iphis,  daughter  of  Ligdus
and  Telethusa  of  Phaestus  in  Crete.2  Ligdus  longed  for  a
son,  and  told  his  wife  that  if  it  was  a  girl  she  was  to  be  killed.
Just  previous  to  the  birth  the  "  daughter  of  Inachus "
(i.e.  Io,  worshipped  as  the  goddess  Isis)  appeared  to  her  in
a  dream,  telling  her  to  save  the  child  whatever  sex  it  was,
finishing  with  the  words  :  "I  am  the  goddess  who  brings
help  and  succour  to  those  who  call  upon  me,  nor  shall  you
have  cause  to  complain  that  you  have  worshipped  a  thank-
less deity."  A  girl  was  duly  born,  but  Telethusa  pretended
it  was  a  boy,  and  Ligdus,  being  deceived,  had  it  brought
up  as  a  boy,  and  named  it  Iphis.  Now  Iphis  is  a  name  of
common  gender,  so  Telethusa  rejoiced.  Time  passed,  and
Iphis  was  betrothed  to  Ianthe,  daughter  of  Telestes.  The
distracted  mother  postponed  the  marriage  as  long  as  pos-
sible and  prayed  fervently  to  Isis.  "  The  goddess  seemed  to
move,  nay,  moved  her  altar,  the  doors  of  the  temple  shook,
her  moon-shaped  horns  shot  forth  gleams  of  light,  and  the
sistrum  rattled  noisily."  The  omen  proved  auspicious,  and
lo  !   Iphis  had  become  a  man.

The  similarity  between  the  above  Greek  legend  and  the
tale  of  Drupada  in  the  Mahdbhdrata  and  its  numerous
variants  is  at  once  noticeable.

1  See,  for  example,  Apollodorus,  Library,  Epitome  i,  22;  Apollonius
Rhodius,  Argon,  i,  57-64  ;  Ovid,  Met.,  xii,  459-532  ;  Virgil,  Aen.,  vi,  448  et  seq.

2  Ovid,  Metamorphoses,  ix,  666  et  seq.  I  use  the  edition  in  the  Loeh-
Classics,  by  F.  J.  Miller,  vol.  ii,  pp.  51-61,  1922.


APPENDIX— TALES  OF  A  VETALA     229

Surveying  all  the  tales  noted  above,  we  find  that  the
"  Change  of  Sex "  motif  is  employed  in  several  different
ways.  The  question  naturally  arises  as  to  what  originated
such  ideas.  Was  it  the  result  of  the  story-tellers'  imagina-
tion, or  can  the  motif  find  its  basis  in  real  religious  and
anthropological  beliefs  ?

In  Indian  folk-lore  we  find  evidence  of  the  actual  belief
in  change  of  sex,  quite  apart  from  pretended  change  of  sex
usually  employed  as  a  prophylactic.  In  the  Bombay  dis-
trict it  is  generally  believed  among  the  village  inhabitants
that  the  performance  of  certain  rites  can  change  sex,  as  well
as  the  incantations  of  Yogis,  and  the  blessings  or  curses  of
Mahatmas  (Enthoven,  Folklore  of  Bombay,  p.  340).

There  are  also  numerous  legends  current  in  different
parts  of  India  which  involve  a  change  of  sex.  In  some  cases
the  selection  of  the  tribal  deity  has  its  origin  in  such  legends.
Here  are  examples  of  the  kind  of  legends  to  which  I  refer.

At  Bateswar  (Bateshar),1  a  small  place  on  the  right  bank
of  the  Jumna,  forty-three  miles  south-east  from  Agra,  an
immense  number  of  temples  line  the  banks  of  the  river  for
over  a  mile.  The  local  legend  regarding  these  temples  is
that  at  the  time  when  the  first  of  the  line  of  Bhaduria  Rajas
reigned  it  was  the  rule  for  each  Raja  to  send  a  princess  for
the  seraglio  of  the  Emperor  of  Delhi.  The  Bhaduria  Raja
had  a  daughter,  but  not  wishing  to  send  her  to  the  harem  of
the  Delhi  king  he  represented  that  he  had  no  daughter :  the
other  Rajas,  who  had  sent  their  daughters,  were  indignant
at  this,  and  informed  the  Delhi  emperor,  who  thereupon
ordered  a  search  to  be  made.  In  this  extremity  the  daughter
of  the  Raja  fled  alone  to  Bateswar,  and  prayed  to  the  Devi
at  the  temple  to  save  her  from  the  pollution  of  a  Mohammedan
seraglio.  Her  sex  was  accordingly  changed,  and  she  emerged
from  the  temple  a  boy !  On  this  the  grateful  Raja  diverted  the
river  and  built  the  temples  along  its  banks  which  now  exist.

Another  version  of  the  story  says  that  one  Raja  Hara,  of
some  place  unknown,  and  Raja  Badan,  the  Bhaduria  Raja,
once  made  an  agreement  with  each  other  to  marry  their
children  should  one  have  a  son  and  the  other  a  daughter.
Both,  however,  had  daughters,  but  the  Bhaduria  Raja  con-
cealed the  circumstance,  and  proclaimed  that  he  had  a
son.  Accordingly,  in  due  time,  the  daughter  of  Raja  Hara
was  married  to  the  supposed  son  of  Bhaduria  Raja.       The

1  Cunningham,  Arch.  Survey  Ind.}  vol.  vii,  pp.  5,  6.


230  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

imposition  was,  however,  soon  found  out,  and  Raja  Hara  ad-
vanced with  an  army  to  avenge  the  injury,  when  the  daughter
of  the  Bhaduria  Raja,  to  save  her  father  from  the  imminent
danger,  determined  to  die  and  end  the  strife.  Accordingly  she
jumped  into  the  Jumna  :  but  to  the  surprise  of  all,  instead  of
drowning,  she  emerged  a  boy ;  and  Raja  Hara,  finding  that
the  Bhaduria  Raja  really  had  a  son  to  whom  his  daughter  had
been  married,  retired  pacified.  The  grateful  Bhaduria  Raja
then  diverted  the  Jumna  from  the  spot  where  his  daughter
had  jumped  in,  and  instituted  a  great  annual  fair  in  honour
of  the  circumstance,  and  built  those  temples  all  along  the
Jumna  which  we  see  now.

In  the  Baroda  volume  of  the  Gazetteer  of  the  Bombay
Presidency  (vol.  vii,  1883,  p.  612)  we  find  another  legend
similar  to  the  latter.  The  Chavada  king  of  Pattan  and  the
Solanki  king  of  Kabri  resolved  on  forming  a  royal  alliance.
But,  by  evil  chance,  both  kings  had  daughters ;  neither  had
a  son.  Thereupon  the  Kabri  Raja  fraudulently  passed  off
his  girl  as  a  boy  and  a  marriage  was  duly  celebrated.  Diffi-
culties ensued,  and  the  girl-husband  found  herself  constrained
to  flee  from  Pattan.  In  the  forest  of  the  Devi  she  rested  a
while.  Her  dog  [bitch]  plunged  into  a  pool,  and  to  the  wonder
of  the  princess  changed  her  sex  on  the  spot ;  her  mare  jumped
and  came  forth  a  stallion  ;  the  princess  herself  then  tried  the
magic  of  the  water,  and  lo!  she,  too,  changed  into  a  man.
From  that  time  the  Solanki  Rajputs  followed  the  Devi.1

Among  the  Dhanwar,  a  primitive  tribe  in  the  wild  country
of  Bilaspur  adjoining  Chota  Nagpur,  it  is  believed  that  the
sex  of  a  person  may  change  in  transmigration,  for  male
children  are  sometimes  named  after  women  relatives  and
female  after  men.2  Such  a  belief  is  not  confined  to  India,
as  we  have  already  seen  in  the  case  of  Caeneus.  It  conforms,
says  Frazer,3  to  an  observation  of  Plato  or  Aristotle  that  the
sex  of  a  person  generally  changes  at  each  transmigration  of
his  soul  into  a  new  body.  A  similar  belief  is  found  among  the
Urabunna  and  Waramunga  tribes  of  Central  Australia.4

1  For  another  version  see  Enthoven,  Folklore  of  Bombay,  pp.  339-340,
reprinted  from  hid.  Ant.,  vol.  xlv,  191 6,  Supp.,  p.  124.  The  tale  is  also  told
of  Lake  Mansarovar;  see  Enthoven,  hid.  Ant.,  vol.  xli,  1912,  p.  42.  See  also
Crooke,  Religion  and  Folklore  of  Northern  India  (new  edition),  p.  279.

2  Russell,  Tribes  and  Castes  of  the  Central  Provinces,  vol.  ii,  p.  500.

3  Apollodorus,  vol.  ii,  p.  150wl.

4  Spencer  and  Gillen,  Northern  Tribes  of  Central  Australia,  p.  148.


APPENDIX— TALES  OF  A  VETALA     231

We  now  come  to  the  pretended  change  of  sex.  The
necessity  for  dressing  a  boy  as  a  girl  and  vice  versa  at  certain
critical  times  of  their  life  is  a  well-recognised  and  strictly
observed  custom  not  only  in  India  but  in  the  most  diverse
parts  of  the  world.  Westermarck  *  and  Frazer  2  have  given
abundant  examples  of  such  customs,  chiefly  employed  at
marriage  ceremonies  in  order  to  avert  the  Evil  Eye  and  to
deceive  any  demons  who  might  attempt  to  harm  either  of  the
happy  couple  at  such  an  auspicious  and  dangerous  time.

References  to  the  authorities  already  given  will  at  once
show  that  in  many  countries  it  is  the  custom  for  priests  to
change  their  sex  to  all  intents  and  purposes.  In  the  Pelew
Islands,  for  example,  a  man  who  is  inspired  by  a  goddess
immediately  dresses  and  behaves  like  a  woman  for  the  rest
of  his  life.  He  is,  moreover,  henceforth  treated  and  actually
regarded  as  a  woman.  This  pretended  change  of  sex,  says
Frazer,3  may  explain  a  widespread  custom  whereby  men  dress
and  live  like  women.  He  gives  numerous  references,  and
suggests  that  such  transformations  were  often  carried  out  in
obedience  to  intimations  received  in  dreams  or  in  a  state  of
ecstasy.  Such  inspirations  act  with  both  sexes,  and  many  cases
of  women  dressing  and  behaving  as  men,  after  having  received
their  "  call,"  could  be  given.4  But  apart  from  worshippers
seeking  to  assimilate  themselves  with  their  deities,  there  is  also
the  example  of  the  gods  themselves  to  be  considered.

From  the  early  days  of  the  Babylonians  and  Assyrians
the  sex  of  deities  has  been  known  to  undergo  change.  And
this  change  has  been  dependent  on  a  human  anthropological
change — that  from  a  matriarchate  to  a  patriarchate.  Thus,
whereas  the  goddess  Ishtar  of  the  Babylonians  and  Assyrians,
and  the  'Ashtar(t)  of  the  Canaanites,  Hebrews  and  Phoeni-
cians was  a  divine  counterpart  of  the  human  matriarch,  we
find  that  where  the  laws  of  society  changed,  the  sex  of  the
deity  also  became  changed.5     Thus  among  the  Semites  of

1  History  of  Human  Marriage,  vol.  ii,  p.  518  et  seq.

2  Golden  Bough  (Adonis,  Attis,  Osiris),  vol.  ii,  p.  253  et  seq.

3  Op.  cit,  pp.  254,  255.

4  See  my  Appendix,  "  Indian  Eunuchs,"  Vol.  Ill,  pp.  322  and  327 ;  also
Crawley,  "Dress,"  Hastings'  Ency.  Rel.  Eth.,  vol.  v,  p.  71.

5  See  Robertson  Smith,  Religion  of  the  Semites,  pp.  58,  478 ;  Sayce,
Babylonians  and  Assyrians,  p.  240 ;  Paton,  "  Ashtart,"  and  u  Ishtar,"  Ency.  Rel.
Eth.,  vol.  ii,  p.  115  et  seq.,  and  vol.  vii,  p.  429;  Tremearne,  Ban  of  the  Bori,
pp.  418,419.


232  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

Southern  Arabia  she  has  turned  into  the  masculine  'Athtar ;
so  also  in  Abyssinia,  Moab  and  North  Africa.

The  change  of  sex  of  a  deity  is  usually  an  etymological
change,  and  in  some  cases  both  genders  apply  to  a  single
deity  representing  male  and  female  principles.  This  re-
minds us  of  the  Ardhanarlsvara  form  of  Siva  and  the  Greek
Hermaphroditus.  Such  religious  beliefs,  if  not  the  basis  of
similar  ideas  in  folk-tales,  at  least  give  assurance  of  their
unquestioned  reception  and  use  as  a  fiction  motif.

In  conclusion  I  would  quote  a  passage  from  Pliny's
Naturalis  Historia,  as  showing  the  beliefs  generally  held
and  quoted  by  so  eminent  a  writer  of  the  first  century  a.d.
The  genuineness  of  his  conviction  is  surely  enhanced  when
we  remember  that  his  views  of  nature  and  of  God  were
undoubtedly  Stoic,  and  that  he  considered  any  use  of  the
magical  arts  an  act  of  violence  against  nature  (ii,  114;  xxx,  3).
The  passage  in  question  is  from  Book  VII,  chapter  iii,
section  4 * :

"  The  change  of  females  into  males  is  undoubtedly  no  fable.
We  find  it  stated  in  the  Annals  that,  in  the  consulship  of
P.  Licinius  Crassus  and  C.  Cassius  Longinus  [Consuls  a.u.c.
581],  a  girl,  who  was  living  at  Casinum  with  her  parents,  was
changed  into  a  boy  ;  and  that,  by  the  command  of  the
Aruspices,  he  was  conveyed  away  to  a  desert  island.  Licinius
Mucianus  informs  us  that  he  once  saw  at  Argos  a  person
whose  name  was  then  Arescon,  though  he  had  been  formerly
called  Arescusa  :  that  this  person  had  been  married  to  a  man,
but  that,  shortly  after,  a  beard  and  marks  of  virility  made
their  appearance,  upon  which  he  took  to  himself  a  wife.  He
had  also  seen  a  boy  at  Smyrna  to  whom  the  very  same  thing
had  happened.  I  myself  saw  in  Africa  one  L.  Cossicius,  a
citizen  of  Thysdris,  who  had  been  changed  into  a  man  the
very  day  on  which  he  was  married  to  a  husband."

In  commenting  on  this  passage  Bostock  says  that  a
similar  case  is  mentioned  by  Ambrose  Par6,  the  great  French
surgeon  of  the  sixteenth  century.  The  subject  in  question
was  brought  up  as  a  girl,  but,  in  consequence  of  a  sudden
muscular  exertion,  the  organs  of  the  male  were  developed,
which  had  previously  been  concealed  internally.2  He  con-
cluded by  remarking  that  most  similar  cases  of  a  supposed

1  I  quote  from  the  six-volume  edition,  trans.  Bostock  and  Riley,  Bonn's
Classical  Library,  1885,  1886.

2  Cf.  Montaigne,  Essays,  Book  I,  cap.  20.


APPENDIX— TALES  OF  A  VETALA     233

change  of  sex  are  from  the  female  to  the  male,  evidently  of
the  kind  mentioned  by  Pare  ;  that  cases  of  the  contrary
kind  have  also  occurred  ;  and  even  of  the  sex  being  doubt-
ful, or  of  both  existing  together.  Modern  research,  however,
rather  proves  that  such  recorded  changes  of  sex  are  from  the
male  to  the  female,  due  to  an  abnormal  development  of  the
clitoris.1  But  here  we  reach  the  threshold  of  teratology  in
its  most  modern  and  scientific  sense,  and  this  is  beyond  the
scope  of  our  present  inquiry.

Sufficient  has,  I  think,  been  already  said  to  show  that  the
"  Change  of  Sex  "  motif,  which  figures  in  the  fifteenth  tale
of  the  Vetala,  is  not  to  be  dismissed  as  a  fantastic  invention
of  the  story-teller,  but  is  to  be  regarded  as  one  which  has
ample  justification  for  its  existence,  having  its  roots  firmly
embedded  in  ancient  religious  beliefs  and  in  the  legends  and
rites  of  many  primitive  peoples.  Modern  surgery  has  only
shown  that  apparent  change  of  sex  can  occur,  and  has  occurred.
How  readily,  then,  would  the  unscientific  mind  be  prepared
to  accept  such  a  miracle  !

The  Sacrifice  of  Jimutavahana
{Vetala  16— pp.  49-63)

This  story  has  already  appeared  in  Vol.  II,  p.  138  et  seq.,
but  here  we  had  two  sub-stories  included  :  the  first  (27a)
giving  the  hero's  adventures  in  a  former  life,  and  the  second
(27b)  dealing  with  the  dispute  about  the  colour  of  the  sun's
horses.2     Apart  from  this  the  two  tales  are  almost  identical.

Turning  to  the  Hindi  version 3  (No.  15)  we  find  that,
although  the  story  is  shorter,  there  are  but  few  deviations
— the  son  offers  to  go  forth  and  conquer  the  relations  who
would  seize  the  throne  after  the  "  kalpa-briksh  "  has  made
everyone  equally  rich,  but  his  father  points  out  the  frailty
of  the  body  and  both  go  to  the  Malyachal  hill  and  live  in
a  cottage.  There  is  no  incident  of  Malayavati  attempting
suicide.     Details  about  Garuda  are  omitted,  and  when  he

1  See,  for  instance,  R.  F.  Burton,  "  Notes  on  an  Hermaphrodite,"  Mem.
Anth.  Soc.  Ldn.,  vol.  ii,  pp.  262-263.  For  a  complete  study  of  the  modern
developments  of  teratology,  see  E.  Schwalbe,  Morphologie  der  Missbildungen.

2  See  M.  Winternitz,  "The  Serpent  Sacrifice  mentioned  in  the  Maha-
bharata,"  Journ.  Bombay  Branch  Roy.  As.  Soc,  August  1926,  pp.  74-91
(especially  p.  80).

3  Barker,  op.  cit.,  p.  250  et  seq.


234  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

alights  to  seize  his  prey,  he  has  to  make  a  second  attempt,
as  "  the  first  time  the  prince  escaped."  It  is  a  bracelet,
instead  of  a  crest- jewel,  which  drops  at  the  feet  of  Jimuta-
vahana's  wife.  He  does  not  actually  die,  as  in  the  text  of
Somadeva's  version,  but  is  apparently  left  in  a  mangled  state,
to  get  home  as  best  he  can.  Although  Garuda  restores  the
snakes  to  life,  there  is  no  appearance  of  Gauri  to  heal  Jimuta-
vahana's  wounds.  The  Vetala's  question  is  the  same  in
both  cases,  but  the  answer  is  different.  In  Somadeva  the
king  says  that  the  reason  why  Jimutavahana's  action  was
not  so  great  as  that  of  Sankhacuda  was  because  he  had
already  acquired  virtue  in  previous  births,  but  the  Hindi
version  merely  says  it  was  because  he  was  of  the  Kshatriya
caste,  and  such  an  action  would  be  a  small  matter  for  him.

The  Tamil  version1  is,  as  usual,  very  much  abbreviated.
The  story  (No.  19)  begins  straight  away  with  the  petition
to  Garuda,  whom  Babington  calls  a  Brahmany  kite.  When
the  hero  offers  himself  in  place  of  the  proper  victim,  Garuda
at  once  grants  him  a  boon  without  doing  him  any  harm.
The  question  of  the  Vetala  is  :  "  Which,  therefore,  was  the
greater  of  these  two  ?  " — i.e.  the  "  kite  "  or  the  king.  The
reply  is  :  "  The  king  was  a  man  and  understood  all  things,
in  consequence  of  which  he  promised  to  give  up  his  life.
The  kite  was  in  the  habit  of  feeding  on  whatever  it  seized :
that  a  charitable  thought  should  come  across  it,  and  that  it
should  promise  to  abandon  its  prey,  was  the  greatest  action."

A  version  of  the  tale  occurs  in  the  Sinhdsanadvdtrinsika,2
where  it  forms  the  story  of  the  Eleventh  Statuette.

The  following  outline,  as  given  by  Edgerton,  is  based  on
the  Southern  Recension,  which  comes  nearest  to  the  original
text.

While  Vikrama  was  wandering  about  the  earth,  he  stopped
once  by  night  under  a  tree  where  dwelt  a  venerable  bird
named  Long-lived  (Cirarhjivin).  At  night  his  bird-friends
gathered  together,  and  he  asked  them  about  their  doings
during  the  day.  One  of  them  was  in  great  grief  this  night.
Being  asked  to  declare  the  cause,  he  at  first  refused,  on  the
ground  that  it  would  do  no  good.  But  being  urged,  on  the
ground  that  sorrow  is  relieved  by  the  telling  of  it,  he  told  a
story  of  a  city  subject  to  a  Rakshasa,  where  each  household

1  Babington,  op.  cit.,  p.  78  et  seq.

2  See  Edgerton,  Vikrama  s  Adventures,  pt.  i,  p.  lxxxiii.


APPENDIX— TALES  OF  A  VETALA     235

in  turn  had  to  give  a  man  a  day  as  food  for  the  Rakshasa.
The  turn  had  now  come  to  a  Brahman,  a  friend  of  the  speak-
ing bird  in  a  former  birth,  who  must  sacrifice  himself  or  his
only  son.  Therefore  the  bird  was  grieved,  as  befits  a  friend.
The  king,  hearing  this,  went  thither  by  his  magic  sandals,  and
took  his  seat  upon  the  sacrificial  rock,  waiting  for  the  Rak-
shasa. The  Rakshasa  came,  and  was  astonished  to  see  his
cheerful  expression,  and,  learning  that  he  was  giving  himself
for  others,  offered  to  grant  him  any  desire.  The  king  obtained
from  him  the  promise  to  abstain  from  eating  men  henceforth.

Then  there  is  the  tale  of  the  Rakshasa  Baka  in  the
Mahdbhdrata,1  who  protected  the  town  and  the  country,  accept-
ing as  his  fee  a  cartload  of  rice,  two  buffaloes,  and  the  human
being  who  brought  them  to  him.  The  turn  had  now  come
to  a  poor  Brahman  who  could  not  afford  to  buy  a  man,  and
would  not  willingly  part  with  any  of  his  family.  Accordingly
he  decides  to  go  to  the  Rakshasa  with  his  whole  family.
Kunti  says  that  one  of  her  sons  will  go  instead,  and  Bhima
willingly  agrees  to  the  proposal.  He  takes  the  food  and
begins  to  eat  it  himself  on  the  way.  After  a  fearful  struggle
he  overcomes  Baka ;  and  his  relatives,  other  Rakshasas,
promise  never  to  molest  human  beings  again.

The  Rakshasas  soon  become  dragons;  and  even  in  one
of  the  Kalmuck  tales  2  we  read  of  two  such  creatures  who,
not  satisfied  with  robbing  the  people  of  the  water  needed  for
irrigation,  exacted  a  yearly  toll  of  a  man  alternately  of  high
and  low  degree.  The  turn  of  the  Khan  had  come,  but  his  son
goes  in  his  stead.  On  his  way  he  is  joined  by  a  friend  of  his,
a  poor  man's  son,  who  offers  to  go  in  his  place.  Finally  they
agree  to  go  together,  but  through  overhearing  the  dragons
talking  about  how  easily  they  could  be  killed,  if  people  only

1  For  full  references  see  Sorensen's  Index,  under  "  Baka."

2  Jiilg,  Siddhi-Kiir,  No.  2 ;  corresponding  to  Coxwell,  Siberian  and  Other
Folk-Tales,  No.  4,  p.  183  et  seq. ;  and  to  Busk,  Sagas  from  the  Far  East,  No.  2,
p.  18  et  seq.  In  error  Tawney  thought  it  was  the  same  as  Busk's  5th  tale,
"  How  the  Serpent-gods  were  propitiated,"  but  this  is  also  No.  5  of  Jiilg  and
No.  7  of  Coxwell,  where  it  is  called  "Sunshine  and  his  Younger  Brother."
The  tale  tells  of  a  lake  guarded  by  dragons  who  had  to  be  propitiated  yearly
by  a  youth  born  in  a  certain  month.  The  hero  and  the  princess,  who  has
fallen  in  love  with  him,  are  sewn  in  a  skin  together  and  thrown  to  the  dragons.
They  are  touched  by  the  mutual  love  of  the  couple  and  set  them  free,  at  the
same  time  allowing  the  water  to  irrigate  the  land.


236  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

knew,  they  manage  to  overcome  them,  and  the  country  be-
comes fruitful  once  again.  The  rest  of  the  story  is  composed
of  a  long  series  of  stock  motifs  introduced  one  after  the  other,
and  does  not  concern  us.

But  before  going  any  further  into  tales  dealing  with
human  sacrifices  necessary  for  the  propitiation  of  gods,
dragons,  etc.,  we  should  look  rather  closer  at  our  tale  of
Jimutavahana .

It  has  always  been  regarded  as  a  Buddhist  legend  of
ancient  date  which  was  utilised  by  Gunadhya  in  the  Brihat-
kathd,  and  also  found  its  way  into  the  Vetdlapanchavirhsati  ;
hence  it  appears  twice,  although  rather  differently,  in  Soma-
deva.  In  the  first  half  of  the  seventh  century  a.d.  it  became
the  subject  of  Harsha's  drama,  the  Ndgdnanda.

In  order  to  try  to  discover  the  origin  of  the  legend  we
must  bear  in  mind  that  the  chief  characters  are  Nagas,
Garuda  and  the  hero  who  saves  the  former  from  destruction.

Now,  in  a  paper  on  the  Nagas,1  C.  F.  Oldham  points  out
that  in  most  of  the  temples  dedicated  to  Vasuki  (king  of
the  snakes,  often  mentioned  in  the  Ocean),  or  Basdeo,  in  the
Chenab  Valley  there  is,  besides  the  figure  of  the  Naga  Raja,
a  representation  of  his  Vezier,  who  is  called  Jimutavahana.
Legend  says  that  Basdeo  was  engaged  in  war  with  Garuda,
and  that,  on  one  occasion,  the  Naga  chief  was  surprised  by
the  enemy  and  had  a  narrow  escape.  In  fact,  he  was  saved
only  by  the  devotion  of  his  minister,  who  gave  his  own  life
to  save  that  of  his  master.  This  probably  means  that
Jimutavahana  was  killed  in  covering  the  retreat  of  the  Raja.
Basdeo  escaped  to  the  Kailas  Kund,  a  mountain  lake  some
13,000  feet  above  the  sea,  between  the  Chenab  and  Ravi
valleys.  Meantime  an  army  was  raised,  by  which  Garuda
was  defeated.  The  Naga  Raja,  in  his  gratitude,  ordered
that  in  future  Jimutavahana  should  be  worshipped  in  the
same  temple  with  himself.  It  would  seem  from  this  that
Vasuki,  like  other  Solar  kings,  received  divine  honours  during
his  lifetime.

The  legend  just  referred  to  seems  to  relate  to  some  of  the
struggles  between  the  unregenerate  and  the  Aryanised  tribes.
It  is  probably  founded  on  fact.  At  all  events,  a  great
festival  is  held  annually  at  the  Kailas  Kund,  which  is  attended
by  all  the  population  of  the  surrounding  country.

1  "  The  Nagas  :  a  Contribution  to  the  History  of  Serpent  Worship "
Journ.  Roy.  As.  Soc,  July  1901,  pp.  461-473,  with  seven  illustrations.


APPENDIX— TALES  OF  A  VETALA     237

The  fact  that  Harsha  (i.e.  Siladitya  Harshavardhana,
Raja  of  Thanesar  and  Kanauj,  a.d.  606-647  *)  wrote  a  drama
based  on  the  legend  must  have  added  greatly  to  its  dis-
semination, especially  when  we  remember  that  Hiuen  Tsiang
spent  about  eight  years  (635-643)  in  his  dominions.  It  is
related  by  I-Tsing,  who  lived  about  a.d.  670,  that  Harsha
kept  all  the  best  writers,  especially  poets,  at  his  court,  and
that  he  used  to  join  in  the  literary  recitals  personally.  He
would  take  the  part  of  Jimutavahana  in  his  own  play  amid
the  sound  of  song  and  instrumental  music.2  It  is  also  in-
teresting to  note  that  a  version  of  our  tale  is  related  by  Hiuen
Tsiang  about  a  great  river  (the  Karakash,  or  possibly  the
Khotan-daria)  flowing  200  li  or  so  south-east  of  K'iu-sa-ta-na
(Khotan,  Eastern  Chinese  Turkestan).

The  story  tells  how  the  people  took  advantage  of  the
river  to  irrigate  their  lands,  but  after  a  time  the  waters
ceased  to  flow.  Having  inquired  the  reason  from  an  Arhat,
the  king  learned  that  the  stoppage  was  caused  by  a  dragon,
and  that  the  offering  of  sacrifices  and  prayers  would  cause
the  water  to  flow  again.  The  king  acted  accordingly,  when
a  woman  emerged  from  the  stream,  saying  that  her  husband
had  just  died,  and  that  without  a  lord  to  issue  orders  the
current  of  the  stream  would  remain  arrested.  If,  however,
she  obtained  one  of  the  king's  ministers  as  a  second  husband,
all  would  be  well.  The  king  returned  to  the  royal  apart-
ments and  informed  the  ministers  of  what  had  happened.
One  of  the  chief  ministers  volunteered  to  save  the  country,
and  after  due  rejoicings  entered  the  river  clad  in  white  and
riding  a  white  horse ;  but  as  he  advanced  into  the  stream  he
did  not  sink,  and  whipping  it  with  his  lash  the  water  opened
and  he  disappeared.  Shortly  afterwards  the  white  horse
came  up  alone  and  floated  on  the  water,  carrying  on  his  back

1  See  V.  A.  Smith,  Early  History  of  India,  1904,  pp.  282-302;  ditto,
Oxford  History  of  India,  2nd  edit.,  1923,  pp.  165-171  ;  and  R.  Mookerji,
Harsha,  Rulers  of  India  Series,  Ldn.,  1926,  p.  152  et  seq.

2  See  S.  Beal,  Buddhist  Records  of  the  Western  World  (Hiuen  Tsiang)
vol.  i,  p.  210w18;  and  A.  B.  Keith,  Sanskrit  Drama,  1924,  pp.  170,  171.  The
Nagananda  has  been  translated  with  a  metrical  version  of  Somadeva's  tale  (from
chap,  xxii,  not  chap,  xc)  by  B.  Hale  Wortham.  The  latter,  with  a  metrical
version  of  the  story  of  HariSarman  (see  Ocean,  Vol.  Ill,  p.  77  et  seq.),  appeared
in  Journ.  Roy.  As.  Soc,  vol.  xviii,  1886,  p.  1  et  seq.  Numerous  native  editions,
translations  and  partial  translations  will  be  found  catalogued  in  the  new
Supplement  to  the  Catalogue  of  Sanskrit  .  .  .  Books,  Brit.  Mus.,  1926.


238  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

a  great  sandalwood  drum,  in  which  was  a  letter  saying  that
all  was  well  with  the  minister,  and  that  the  drum  was  sent
for  the  king  to  suspend  at  the  south-east  of  the  city  ;  if  an
enemy  approached,  it  would  begin  to  roll.  The  river  started
to  flow  in  its  accustomed  manner,  and  the  country  was  pros-
perous once  again.  "  Many  years  and  months  have  elapsed
since  then,"  says  Hiuen  Tsiang  in  conclusion,  "and  the  place
where  the  dragon-drum  was  hung  has  long  since  disappeared,
but  the  ruined  convent  by  the  side  of  the  drum-lake  still  remains,
but  it  has  no  priests  and  is  deserted."  »

Before  speaking  of  the  numerous  variants  of  our  story
in  the  West,  I  would  draw  attention  to  a  very  curious  and
interesting  tale  from  the  Japanese,  Ko-ji-ki.  The  great  im-
portance of  this  work  lies  in  the  fact  that  "  it  has  preserved
for  us  more  faithfully  than  any  other  book  the  mythology,
the  manners,  the  language  and  the  traditional  history  of
Ancient  Japan."  It  marks  the  point  of  the  great  change
in  the  history  not  only  of  Japanese  literature  but  of  Japan  as
a  whole.  I  refer,  of  course,  to  the  great  influence  of  Chinese
civilisation  and  literature.  The  date  of  the  completion  of
the  Ko-ji-ki  was  a.d.  712,  and  although  Buddhism  had
reached  Japan,  via  China  and  Korea,  by  a.d.  538,  it  appears
to  owe  nothing  to  its  introduction.  The  sole  object  of  the
work  as  originally  proposed  by  the  Emperor  Temmu  (673-686)
was  to  collect  together  the  annals  of  the  chief  families  of
Japan,  before  they  were  covered  by  the  dust  of  oblivion.
The  following  story,  therefore,  is  of  undoubted  interest.  The
translation  is  that  made  by  B.  H.  Chamberlain  in  1882.2  It
forms  section  xviii  and  is  called  "  The  Eight-forked  Serpent "  :

So,  having  been  expelled,  [His-Swift-Impetuous-Male-
Augustness]  descended  to  a  place  [called]  Tori-Kami  at  the
head-waters  of  the  River  Hi  in  the  Land  of  Idzumo.  At
this  time  some  chop-sticks  came  floating  down  the  stream.
So  His-Swift-Impetuous-Male-Augustness,  thinking  that  there
must  be  people  at  the  head-waters  of  the  river,  went  up  it
in  quest  of  them,  when  he  came  upon  an  old  man  and  an
old  woman — two  of  them — who  had  a  young  girl  between
them,  and  were  weeping.  Then  he  deigned  to  ask  :  "  Who
are  ye  ?  "  So  the  old  man  replied,  saying  :  "I  am  called
an  Earthly  Deity,   a  child  of  the  Deity   Great-Mountain-

1  Beal,  op.  cit.,  vol.  ii,  pp.  320-322.

2  Trans.  As.  Soc.  Japan,  vol.  x  :  Supplement,  reprinted  February  1920.


APPENDIX— TALES  OF  A  VETALA     239

Possessor.  I  am  called  by  the  name  of  Foot-Stroking-Elder,
my  wife  is  called  by  the  name  of  Hand- Stroking  Elder,  and
my  daughter  is  called  by  the  name  of  Wondrous- Inada-
Princess."  Again  he  asked  :  "  What  is  the  cause  of  your
crying  ?  "  The  old  man  answered,  saying  :  "I  had  origin-
ally eight  young  girls  as  daughters.  But  the  eight-forked
serpent  of  Koshi  has  come  every  year  and  devoured  one,  and
it  is  now  its  time  to  come  :  wherefore  I  weep."  Then  he
asked  him  :  "  What  is  its  form  like  ?  "  [The  old  man]
answered,  saying  :  "Its  eyes  are  like  akahagachi  [the  winter-
cherry],  it  has  one  body  with  eight  heads  and  eight  tails.
Moreover  on  its  body  grows  moss,  and  also  chamcecyparis
[a  coniferous  tree]  and  cryptomerias.  Its  length  extends
over  eight  valleys  and  eight  hills,  and  if  one  looks  at  its  belly
it  is  all  constantly  bloody  and  inflamed."  Then  His-Swift-
Impetuous-Male-Augustness  said  to  the  old  man  :  "If  this
be  thy  daughter,  wilt  thou  offer  her  to  me  ?  "  He  replied,
saying  :  "  With  reverence,  but  I  know  not  thine  august
name."  Then  he  replied,  saying  :  "  I  am  elder  brother  to
the  Heaven-Shining-Great-August-Deity.  So  I  have  now
descended  from  Heaven."  Then  the  Deities  Foot-Stroking-
Elder  and  Hand-Stroking-Elder  said  :  "  If  that  be  so,  with
reverence  will  we  offer  her  to  thee."  So  His-Swift-Impetuous
Male-Augustness,  at  once  taking  and  changing  the  young
girl  into  a  multitudinous  and  close-toothed  comb,  which  he
stuck  into  his  august  hair-bunch,  said  to  the  Deities  Foot-
Stroking-Elder  and  Hand-Stroking-Elder  :  "  Do  you  distil
some  eightfold  refined  liquor.  Also  make  a  fence  round
about.  In  that  fence  make  eight  gates;  at  each  gate  tie
together  eight  platforms,  on  each  platform  put  a  liquor-
vat,  and  into  each  vat  pour  the  eightfold  refined  liquor,
and  wait."  So  as  they  waited,  after  having  thus  prepared
everything  in  accordance  with  his  bidding,  the  eight-forked
serpent  came  truly  as  the  old  man  had  said,  and  immediately
dipped  a  head  into  each  vat,  and  drank  the  liquor.  There-
upon it  was  intoxicated  with  drinking,  and  all  the  heads  lay
down  and  slept.  Then  His-Swift-Impetuous-Male-Augustness
drew  the  ten-grasp  sabre,  that  was  augustly  girded  on  him,
and  cut  the  serpent  in  pieces,  so  that  the  River  Hi  flowed  on
changed  into  a  river  of  blood.  .  .  .

We  leave  the  East,  and  on  arriving  in  Europe  find  the
story  of  a  hero  sacrificing  himself  or  endangering  his  life  for


240  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

that  of  some  hapless  person  whose  turn  it  is  to  be  destroyed
by  a  monster.  So  extensive  is  the  cycle  in  European  folk-
tales that  many  volumes  would  be  required  to  give  them  all.
E.  S.  Hartland  »  has  already  written  three  volumes  on  the
subject,  and  he  has  far  from  exhausted  the  variants,  still  less
has  he  discussed  all  possible  sources  of  the  motif.  Frazer
also  has  given  us  a  useful  list  of  forty-one  different  versions,
the  first  five  of  which  are  all  from  ancient  Greek  mythology.2
He  has  added  to  this  list  in  the  Golden  Bough*  and  discusses
the  possible  origin  of  the  custom  of  sacrifices  to  water-spirits.
Following  his  usual  style  he  brings  together  a  large  number
of  customs  from  all  parts  of  the  world  showing  various  aspects
of  the  worship  of  water-spirits.

Their  conception  as  serpents  or  dragons  is  widespread,
and  in  many  cases  animal  or  human  sacrifices  are  needed  as
an  offering.  In  other  cases  they  are  looked  upon  as  kindly
disposed  to  humans  and  the  dispensers  of  fertility.  They
bestow  offspring  on  barren  women,  and,  in  Greek  mythology
especially,  we  meet  with  similar  ideas  of  the  procreative
power  of  water.  Marriages  of  human  beings  of  both  sexes
to  water-deities  are  continually  found — a  motif  which  appears
to  be  based  partly  on  the  idea  that  a  cruel  god  must  be  paci-
fied, and  partly  on  the  belief  of  sympathetic  magic — the
generative  act  would  be  sure  to  produce  fertility  in  the  earth
and  among  both  men  and  animals.  It  will  thus  be  seen  that
it  would  be  mere  folly  to  attempt  to  attribute  such  a  wide-
spread motif  to  any  one  origin.  The  customs  marshalled  for
us  by  Frazer  certainly  show  certain  definite  lines  of  belief
which  have  a  distinct  connection  with,  or  which  may  be
looked  upon  as  variants  of,  the  story  under  consideration.

At  the  same  time  the  origin  of  a  Buddhist  legend  may
well  rest  on  true  historical  fact,  far  back  in  the  dim  ages  of
the  early  struggles  between  the  Aryans  and  the  dark-skinned
races  they  encountered  in  their  migration  through  Northern
India.

1  The  Legend  of  Perseus,  3  vols.,  1894-1896.

2  Pausanias's  Description  of  Greece,  vol.  v,  pp.  143-144.

3  Vol.  ii  (The  Magic  Art),  pp.  155-170.


APPENDIX— TALES  OF  A  VETALA     241

The  Beautiful  Unmddini
(Vetdla  17— pp.  66-70)

The  Hindi  version  l  (No.  16)  differs  but  little  from  our
text.  During  the  argument  between  the  king  and  his
commander-in-chief,  the  latter  threatens  to  turn  Unmadini
into  a  prostitute,  so  that  she  can  no  longer  be  regarded  as  his
wife.  Then  he  will  lead  her  to  the  palace.  The  king  promises
punishment  if  such  a  step  is  taken.  Finally,  both  the
husband  and  his  wife  throw  themselves  on  a  funeral  pyre.
The  question  that  follows  is  naturally  :  "Of  these  three,
whose  was  the  greatest  virtue  ?  "  The  answer  is  as  in
Somadeva.

The  Tamil  version  2  (No.  20)  is  much  abbreviated.  The
king  sends  for  a  "  soothsayer,"  who  examines  the  girl's
horoscope,  apparently  without  any  deception,  and  reports
that  if  he  married  her  he  would  lose  his  kingdom.  The
tale  then  ends  in  a  few  lines.  The  king's  action  is  considered
the  noblest,  as  in  the  other  versions.

It  occurs  as  No.  26  in  the  Persian  Tuti-ndmah.3  Here
the  discussion  about  the  moral  aspect  of  the  situation  is
carried  on  in  the  presence  of  the  counsellors  only,  and  the
king  is  the  only  one  who  dies.  In  the  Turkish  Tuti-ndmah 4
it  is  not  the  father,  but  a  procuress,  who  first  offers  the  girl
to  the  king.  The  girl  also  dies  on  hearing  of  the  king's
death.

As  compared  with  the  early  versions  of  our  story  in  Bud-
dhist literature,  that  of  Somadeva  is  decidedly  condensed.

In  the  Pali  Jdtaka  5  the  lady's  name  is  Ummadanti,  the
beautiful  daughter  of  a  rich  merchant  named  Tiritavaccha.
On  his  offering  her  to  the  king,  he  sends  Brahmans  to  see
if  she  has  auspicious  marks.  The  effect  of  her  presence  on
the  Brahmans  is  amazing.  On  catching  sight  of  her,  they
completely  lost  their  self-control,  just  as  if  they  were  in-
toxicated with  passion,  and  forgot  that  they  had  left  their
meal  unfinished.  Some  of  them  took  a  morsel,  and  thinking
they  would  eat  it  put  it  on  their  heads.     Some  let  it  fall  on

1  Barker,  op.  cit.,  p.  271  et  seq.

2  Babington,  op.  cit.,  p.  81  et  seq.

3  Iken,  op.  cit.,  p.  109.

4  Rosen,  op.  cit.,  vol.  ii,  p.  191,  and  Wickerhauser,  op.  cit.,  p.  253.  See
also  Oesterley,  op.  cit.,  pp.  207,  208.

6  Cambridge  edition,  No.  527,  vol.  v,  1905,  p.  108.
VOL.  VII.  Q


242  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

their  hips.  Others  threw  it  against  the  wall.  Everyone  was
beside  himself.  When  she  saw  them  thus  she  said,  "They
tell  me  these  fellows  are  to  test  the  character  of  my  marks,"
and  she  ordered  them  to  be  taken  by  the  scruff  of  their
necks  and  thrust  out.  And  they  were  sorely  annoyed,  and
returned  to  the  palace  in  a  great  rage  with  Ummadanti,
and  they  said  :  "  Sire,  this  woman  is  no  mate  for  you  ;  she
is  a  witch."  The  king  thought,  "  They  tell  me  she  is  a
witch,"  and  he  did  not  send  for  her.  She  is  accordingly
married  to  Ahiparaka,  a  high  court  official.

At  this  point  the  story  is  interrupted  by  our  being  told
how  the  girl  had  become  so  beautiful,  and  her  actions  in  a
previous  birth  are  recounted.

The  tale  continues.  Ahiparaka  warns  his  wife  not  to  show
herself  during  the  coming  Kattika  festival,  when  the  king  is
sure  to  be  near  the  house.  But  this  is  the  very  chance  the
slighted  Ummadanti  has  been  waiting  for,  and  she  makes  her
plans  accordingly.

At  night  the  town  is  en  fete,  and  the  king  rides  in  a
magnificent  car  through  the  streets.  As  he  approaches
the  house,  Ummadanti  throws  flowers  at  the  king,  and  on
catching  sight  of  her  he  is  unable  to  continue  the  procession.
He  discovers  her  name,  returns  to  his  palace,  and  lies  like
"  a  mad,  haunted  man  "  on  his  couch,  saying  :

"A  lily  maid,  with  eyes  soft  as  a  doe's,
In  the  full  moon's  clear  light  before  me  rose,
Beholding  her  in  robe  of  dovelike  hue,
Methought  two  moons  at  once  came  into  view.

Darting  one  glance  from  her  bright,  lovely  eyes,
The  temptress  took  me  captive  by  surprise,
Like  woodland  elf  upon  some  mountain  height,
Her  graceful  motion  won  my  heart  at  sight.

So  dark  and  tall  and  fair  the  maid,  with  jewels  in  her  ears,
Clad  in  a  single  garment,  like  a  timid  doe,  appears.

With  long-tressed  hair  and  nails  all  stained  red,
O'er  her  soft  arms  rich  sandal  essence  shed,
With  tapering  fingers  and  a  gracious  air,
When  will  she  smile  on  me,  my  charmer  fair  ?


APPENDIX— TALES  OF  A  VETALA     243

When  will  Tiriti's  slender- waisted  maid,
A  gold  adornment  on  her  breast  displayed,
With  her  soft  arms  embracing  cling  to  me,
E'en  as  a  creeper  to  some  forest  tree  ?

When  will  she  stained  with  dye  of  lac  so  bright,
With  swelling  bosom,  maiden  lily-white,
Exchange  a  kiss  with  me,  as  oft  a  glass
Will  from  one  toper  to  another  pass  ?

Soon  as  I  saw  her  standing  thus,  so  fair  to  outward  view,
No  longer  master  of  myself,  reason  away  I  threw.

When  Ummadanti  I  beheld,  with  jewelled  ear-rings  bright,
Like  one  amerced  right  heavily,  I  slept  not  day  nor  night.

Should  Sakka  grant  a  boon  to  me,  my  choice  were  quickly

ta'en,
I  would  be  Ahiparaka  one  night  or  haply  twain,
And  Ummadanti  thus  enjoyed,  he  might  o'er  Sivi  reign."

Ahiparaka  is  aghast  at  the  condition  of  the  king  and  does
all  in  his  power  to  make  him  accept  her.  A  long  series  of
stanzas  follows,  repeated  alternately  between  the  king  and
Ahiparaka,  until  finally  the  right  mode  of  action  is  borne  upon
the  king,  and  he  overcomes  his  infatuation.

The  story  also  occurs  at  length  in  the  Jdtaka-mdld,1  and
follows  the  Pali  version  fairly  closely.  The  occasion  of  the
girl's  revenge  is  during  the  Kaumudi  festival,  which  appar-
ently begins  in  the  daytime,  for  we  have  a  fine  description
of  the  town :  "Its  streets  and  squares  had  been  sprinkled
and  cleansed  ;  their  white  ground  was  strewed  with  many-
coloured  flowers  :  gay  flags  and  banners  were  floating  aloft ;
everywhere  there  was  dancing  and  singing,  representations
of  burlesques,  ballets  and  music ;  the  mingled  scents  of
flowers,  incense,  odoriferous  powders,  perfumes,  garlands,
strong  liquors,  also  of  the  perfumed  water  and  the  ointments
used  in  ablutions,  filled  the  air  with  fragrance ;  lovely  articles
were  being  exposed  for  sale ;  the  principal  streets  were
thronged  by  a  merry  crowd  of  townsmen  and  landsmen  in
their  best  dress."

1  J.  S.  Speyer,  Gatakamata,  Sacred  Books  of  the  Buddhists,  vol.  i,  1895,
No.  13,  p.  114  et  seq.


244  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

The  ending  is  slightly  different.  The  minister  is  appeased
by  the  unwavering  constancy  of  the  king,  and  pours  praises  on
such  a  virtuous  ruler.

In  fact,  in  all  Buddhist  versions  the  endings  are  merely
moralistic,  and  only  in  the  Hindu  versions  do  we  get  the
dramatic  sequel.  Cf.  also  the  version  in  the  Burmese  collec-
tion, Buddhaghosha's  Parables  (Story  of  the  Rahandama
Uppalavanna).

Reference  should  also  be  made  to  an  interesting  passage
in  Kalhana's  Rdjataranginl 1  (Book  IV,  verses  17-37).  Here
we  read  of  Durlabhaka-Pratapaditya  II  who  fell  violently
in  love  with  a  rich  merchant's  wife:  "Though  he  had  not
touched  her,  he  felt  as  if  she,  who  was  like  the  nectar  of
bliss,  were  fixed  [in  him]  even  to  the  very  marrow."

For  long  he  fights  against  his  all-consuming  passion,  but
his  illness  grows  on  him  until  he  is  near  to  death.  The
merchant  begs  the  king  to  accept  his  wife,  and  adds  that  if
he  still  refuses  he  will  put  her  in  a  temple  as  a  dancing-girl,
whence  she  can  easily  be  removed.  At  last  the  king  gives
in  and  marries  the  object  of  his  passion,  who  in  time  bears
him  three  children.


The  Brahman's  Son  who  failed  to  acquire  the  Magic  Power

(Vetdla  18— pp.  71-77)

In  theJHindi  version  2  the  tale  (No.  17)  is  considerably
abbreviated.  We  get  no  details  of  the  gambling  at  all.  The
Brahman's  son,  here  called  Gunakar,  is  quite  willing  to  eat
any  food  the  ascetic  has  to  offer,  until  he  sees  it  is  prepared
in  a  human  skull.  It  is  a  Yakshini  who  produces  the  illusion
of  the  palace.  She  stays  with  him  during  the  night,  and  in
the  morning  he  wants  to  acquire  possession  of  the  Science.
He  is  told  that  in  order  to  do  this  he  must  sit  at  midnight
in  the  middle  of  the  water  for  forty  days.  This  Gunakar
accomplishes,  and  is  then  told  to  do  the  same  in  fire.  He
gets  leave  to  visit  his  family,  but  on  returning  completes  the
ordeal.  As  in  our  version,  the  object  is  not  gained  owing  to
instability  of  mind  and  intention.

1  Stein,  vol.  i,  p.  1 22.

2  Barker,  op.  cit.,  p.  285  el  seq.  On  p.  290  the  first  line  of  the  footnote
translation  is  in  its  wrong  place  and  should  be  moved  to  the  same  position  on
p.  289.


APPENDIX— TALES  OF  A  VETALA     245

In  the  Tamil  version  *  (No.  13)  the  tale  is  reduced  to  a
mere  precis,  and  the  incidents  are  either  omitted  or  so  altered
that  the  whole  point  of  the  story  is  lost.  The  Brahman  is
represented  as  dying  of  hunger  when  a  "  devotee  "  rescues
him  by  offering  him  rice,  which  he  eats  till  he  is  satisfied.
Then,  without  his  even  asking,  the  ascetic  instructs  him  in
magic.  The  Brahman  goes  to  bathe  and  sees  a  vision  of  a
child  standing  before  him.  On  finishing  his  bathe  he  returns
to  the  ascetic  and  explains  that  the  vision  lasted  only  while
his  head  was  under  the  water.  This  completes  the  story.
To  the  Vetala's  question  the  king  answers  that  such  magical
deeds  can  be  accomplished  only  by  those  bent  on  bestowing
charity  to  Brahmans.

Apart  from  the  obvious  moral  contained  in  our  story,  the
only  incident  worth  noticing  2  is  the  illusion  produced  when
immersed  in  water,  both  as  to  place  and  the  passing  of  time.

When  dealing  with  the  "  Change  of  Sex "  motif  in
Vetala  15,  I  quoted  (p.  225)  a  story  from  the  Nights  in  which
a  vizier  plunges  into  a  cauldron,  and,  in  the  few  minutes
that  his  head  is  covered  by  the  water,  imagines,  by  the  power
of  illusion,  that  he  has  spent  many  years  as  a  woman  in
a  fisherman's  hut.  In  a  note  on  p.  224  I  mentioned  that
Lane  heard  a  similar  tale  in  Cairo.  The  tale  in  question
concerned  the  means  by  which  a  certain  Sultan,  who  scoffed
at  the  story  of  the  Mi'raj,  or  Ascension  of  Muhammed,  was
finally  converted  to  the  Faith.  It  was  obviously  an  abbre-
viated account  of  the  widely  circulated  tale  which  found  its
way  into  the  Forty  Vazlrs,  and  so  appears  in  the  collections
of  Petis  de  la  Croix  3  and  Cazotte  and  Chavis.4  It  is  of  con-
siderable interest  as  a  later  variant  of  our  Indian  original,
particularly  because  of  the  use  to  which  the  motif  has  been
put.

Before  speaking  of  the  possible  origin  of  such  illusions
as  to  time  and  place  I  will  give  such  portions  of  the  tale  as
concern  our  inquiry.  I  borrow  from  Gibb's  translation  of  the
Forty  Vazirs,  p.  16  et  seq.  The  tale  forms  the  First  Vazir's
story  :

1  Babington,  op.  cit.,  pp.  64,  65.

2  I  have  already  (Vol.  II,  pp.  23  m1,  232n)  given  a  note  on  gambling
to  No.  29d,  "  Devadatta  the  Gambler,"  which  commences  like  the  Vetala's
18th  tale.

3  Histoire  de  la  Sultane  de  Pe?'set  et  des  Visirs.     Conies  Turcs,  Paris,  1707.

4  Cabinet  des  Fees,  vols,  xxxviii-xli,  Paris,  1788-1793.


246  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

"  One  day  the  doctors  of  the  law  were  assembled  in  the
council  of  the  King  of  Egypt  and  were  talking  over  the  details
of  the  Ascension.  They  said  :  c  The  Most  Noble  Apostle
made  the  Ascension,  and  God  Most  High  showed  him  the
Seven  Heavens,  the  Eight  Paradises,  and  the  Seven  Hells,
and  spake  with  him  ninety  thousand  words  ;  and  when  he
returned  to  his  place  he  found  his  bed  still  warm,  and  the
water  had  not  wholly  run  out  of  an  ewer  which  had  been
upset  beside  him,  so  he  straightway  raised  the  ewer  from  the
ground.'  The  King  of  Egypt  marvelled  thereat  and  said  :
'  These  words  which  ye  speak  are  remote  from  reason  :  the
depth  of  each  of  theSeven  Heavens  is  a  five-hundred-years'
journey,  and  the  distance  between  each  is  a  five-hundred-years'
journey,  yet  ye  say  that  he  traversed  the  Heavens,  and  the
Eight  Paradises,  and  the  Seven  Hells,  and  conversed  to  the
extent  of  ninety  thousand  words  and  came  back  again  and
found  his  bed  warm  and  his  ewer  not  empty — that  is  remote
from  reason.'  Although  they  insisted  with  him  that  God  Most
High  was  almighty,  it  was  in  vain.  When  the  assembly  broke
up,  news  of  this  reached  Sheykh  Shihab-ud-Din."

He  hastened  to  the  king's  presence,  and  through  the
power  of  illusion,  by  merely  opening  and  shutting  windows,
displayed  in  turn  an  army,  the  city  in  flames,  the  Nile  over-
flowing its  banks,  and  a  garden  like  unto  Paradise.  The  tale
then  continues  :

"  The  sheykh  let  open  again  the  shut  windows,  and  nothing
was  visible.  Then  he  bade  bring  a  tub  and  fill  it  with  water  ;
and  the  king  told  them  to  obey,  so  they  brought  it.  The
sheykh  said  :  '  O  King,  hold  about  thee  a  towel,  and  plunge
once  into  this  water,  then  come  out  and  sit  down,  and  I  will
show  thee  a  wonder.'  Then  the  king  held  about  him  a
towel  and  went  into  the  tub  and  plunged  in  it,  and  when  he
put  out  his  head  he  saw  himself  on  the  skirt  of  a  trackless
mountain  by  the  seashore.  Then  was  the  king  bewildered,
and  he  cried  :  '  Dost  thou  see  ?  The  sheykh,  he  has  by
magic  cast  me  into  the  desert  and  seized  my  throne  !  '  Thus
thinking,  he  looked  about  and  saw  some  persons  cutting
wood  on  the  mountain.  He  went  up  to  them  and  saluted
them,  and  they  returned  the  salute,  and  asked  :  '  What  man
art  thou  ?  '  The  king  said  :  '  I  am  a  merchant.  The  ship
in  which  I  was  sank  in  the  sea ;  I  laid  hold  of  a  plank  and  was


APPENDIX— TALES  OF  A  VETALA     247

saved,  and  am  come  here.'  Then  had  they  compassion  on
him,  and  each  of  them  gave  him  some  old  garment,  and  they
clothed  him.  The  king  said  to  them  :  •  Who  are  ye  and
whence  are  ye  ?  '  They  replied  :  '  Behind  this  mountain
is  a  city;  we  belong  to  it.'  Then  the  king  went  with  them
to  that  city,  and  while  he  was  wandering  through  the  bazaar
he  happened  on  the  shop  of  an  aged  farrier.  The  farrier
said  to  him  :  '  O  youth,  whence  art  thou  come  ?  '  And
the  king  again  declared  that  he  was  a  merchant  whose  ship
had  sunk,  and  that  he  had  managed  to  save  himself;  and
he  asked  for  advice.  The  old  man  said  :  '  As  thou  art  a
stranger,  go  sit  at  the  door  of  the  bath,  and  ask  of  every
woman  that  comes  out  if  she  have  a  husband,  and  according
to  the  custom  of  the  city,  whatsoever  woman  says  to  thee
that  she  has  no  husband  shall  be  thy  wife.'  So  the  poor
king  went  and  sat  at  the  door  of  the  bath  and  asked  the
ladies  that  came  out ;  but  they  each  answered,  '  I  have  a
husband,'  and  went  away.  Of  a  sudden  a  lady  attended  by
several  servants  came  out,  and  when  he  said  to  her,  c  Hast
thou  a  husband?  '  she  replied,  'No,'  and  passed  on.  After-
ward one  of  that  lady's  servants  returned  and  took  the  king
and  brought  him  to  her.  She  said,  •  By  the  command  of
God  I  am  become  thy  wife  '  ;  and  the  king  was  thankful  for
that  event.  He  lived  seven  years  with  that  lady  and  had
two  sons  and  a  daughter.  At  length  all  her  means  were
used  up  and  they  had  nothing  left  to  eat,  and  the  lady  said
to  him  :  '  O  man,  go  earn  something,  that  we  and  our  chil-
dren may  live.'  Then  the  king  was  sad,  and  he  went  to  the
farrier  and  told  him  how  things  stood  with  him,  and  the
farrier  asked  him  if  he  knew  any  trade.  The  king  replied
that  he  knew  none,  so  the  farrier  put  a  few  pence  into  his
hand  and  said  :  c  Go  buy  a  rope  and  sit  among  the  porters,
and  he  whose  load  thou  carriest  will  give  thee  two  or  three
pence,  and  so  thou  shalt  live.'  The  king  did  as  the  farrier
told  him,  and,  having  no  other  resource,  was  for  some  days
a  porter  and  carried  loads.  When  he  took  up  the  loads  the
rope  would  cut  his  shoulders,  and  he  would  think  on  the
estate  he  had  enjoyed  and  weep.  One  day,  while  strolling
along,  he  came  upon  the  seashore.  Now  ablution  had  be-
come necessary  for  the  king,  so  he  went  into  the  water  and
plunged  in  it,  and  when  he  put  his  head  out  he  beheld  him-
self in  his  own  palace,  and  the  sheykh  was  sitting  looking
at  him.  ..."


248  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

In  a  note  at  this  point  Gibb  states  that  the  trick  of
making  one  imagine  that  he  has  in  a  few  seconds  experienced
adventures  that  seem  to  have  lasted  over  a  long  period
appears  to  have  been  a  favourite  one  with  the  dervishes.
Several  instances  of  it  occur  in  the  tales  of  'All  'Aziz  that
he  has  published  under  the  title  of  The  Story  of  Jewdd  (see,
e.g.,  pp.  29,  30).  "It  may  have  been  effected,"  says  Gibb,
"  by  means  of  some  intoxicating  preparation  like  hashish."

I  believe  that  he  has  really  hit  upon  the  true  origin  of
such  tales,  and  consequently  I  have  looked  for  descriptions
of  the  effect  of  hashish  which  exhibit  such  phenomena  as
shown  in  our  text.

In  the  second  article,  under  the  title  of  "  Les  Poisons  de
l'lntelligence,"  Revue  des  Deux  Mondes,  March  1877,  p.  816
et  seq.9  M.  Charles  Richet  deals  with  "  Le  Hachich — L'  Opium
— Le  Cafe."  In  describing  the  effect  of  hashish  he  points
out  how  completely  all  idea  of  place  and  time  is  lost :

"  Le  temps  parait  d'une  longueur  demesuree.  Entre  deux
idees  nettement  concues,  on  croit  en  concevoir  une  infinite
d'autres,  mal  determinees  et  incompletes,  dont  on  a  une
conscience  vague,  mais  qui  remplissent  d 'admiration  par
leur  nombre  et  leur  etendue.  II  semble  done  que  ces  idees
sont  innombrables,  et,  comme  le  temps  n'est  mesure  que  par
le  souvenir  des  idees,  le  temps  parait  prodigieusement  long.
Par  example,  imaginons,  comme  e'est  le  cas  pour  le  hachich,
que  dans  l'espace  d'une  seconde  nous  concevions  cinquante
pensees  differentes ;  comme  en  general  pour  concevoir
cinquante  pensees  differentes  il  faut  plusieurs  minutes,  il  nous
semblera  que  plusieurs  minutes  se  sont  passees,  et  ce  n'est
qu'en  faisant  a  Pinflexible  horloge  qui  nous  marque  les  heures
la  constatation  reguliere  du  temps  ecoule  que  nous  nous
apercevrons  de  notre  erreur.  Avec  le  hachich,  la  notion  du
temps  est  compl£tement  bouleversee,  les  secondes  sont  des
annees  et  les  minutes  des  siecles.  .  .  ."

Everything  seen  tends  to  be  extraordinarily  exaggerated :
an  ordinary  staircase  appears  as  a  flight  of  steps  leading  to
the  heavens,  a  small  stream  becomes  a  great  sea,  a  single
soldier  is  a  mighty  army,  the  slightest  noise  is  like  a  crash  of
thunder.  The  senses  of  appreciation  are  strangely  affected.
Thus  a  discordant  sound  seems  like  celestial  music,  the  most
commonplace  garden  becomes  a  heavenly  Nandana  surpass-
ing mortal  description.  Finally,  as  the  effect  of  the  drug
loses  its  hold,  if  an  overdose  has  not  been  taken,  the  memory


APPENDIX— TALES  OF  A  VETALA     249

is  not  impaired,  and  all  the  experiences  seen  and  felt  can  be
described  in  detail.

With  regard  to  the  drug  making  people  insensible  to  heat,
Burton  notes  (Nights,  vol.  hi,  p.  91ft1)  its  use  among  stokers.
Herklots  gives  a  description  of  the  numerous  preparations  of
the  drug.1

Doubtless  an  extensive  bibliography  could  be  made  on
hashish  and  its  effects,2  but  the  above  is  quite  sufficient  for
our  purposes,  as  it  shows  beyond  a  doubt  that  the  reports  of
hashish-takers  are  quite  sufficient  to  give  rise  to  a  story  such
as  we  have  been  considering  above.

The  Thief  s  Son
(Vetdla  19— pp.  78-85)

The  Hindi  version 3  (No.  18)  commences  as  in  our  text,  but
after  the  thief  has  been  married  by  the  daughter's  circum-
ambulation  of  the  stake  four  times,  he  asks  the  mother
to  deliver  her  over  to  a  handsome  Brahman  and  offer  him
five  hundred  gold  muhars.  Thus  a  son  will  be  born.  The
daughter,  by  name  Mohani,  soon  sees  a  Brahman  who
attracts  her,  and  the  mother  offers  him  a  hundred  ashrafis
if  he  will  spend  the  night  with  Mohani  and  give  her  a  son.
There  is  no  question  of  marriage,  and  the  courtesan  does
not  appear.     The  story  then  continues :

He  agreed  to  remain.  As  they  were  conversing,  night
came  on.  She  set  before  him  a  sumptuous  supper.  It  is  a
true  proverb  that  enjoyment  is  of  eight  kinds  :  first,  per-
fume ;  second,  woman ;  third,  dress ;  fourth,  singing ;
fifth,  betel ;  sixth,  food  ;  seventh,  the  couch  ;  and  eighth,
ornaments  ;   and  all  these  were  now  at  hand.

When  three  hours  were  passed,  he  went  into  the  chamber
destined  for  voluptuous  enjoyment,  and  the  whole  night
passed  in  pleasure.  When  morning  came,  he  went  home  ;
and  she,  arising,  came  to  her  companions.  One  of  them
asked  her  what  pleasure  she  had  had  with  her  lover.  She
replied  :  "  When  I  went  and  sat  near  him,  I  felt  a  palpitation
in  my  frame  ;    but  when,  smiling  and  looking  lovingly,  he

1  Qanun-i-Islam,  new  edition,  Crooke,  1921,  p.  326  et  seq.

2  See  Watt,  Dictionary  of  the  Economic  Products  of  India,  vol.  ii,  p.  1 03  et  seq.,
and  the  numerous  references  given.  The  latest  work  on  the  subject  I  have
seen  is  Jules  Giraud,  Testaments  d'un  Haschischeen,  Paris  [1913].

3  Barker,  op.  cit.f  p.  295  et  seq.


250  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

took  my  hand,  he  quite  overcame  me,  and  I  know  not  what
afterwards  happened."  It  has  been  said  that  a  woman  for-
gets not  either  in  this  or  any  other  birth  a  husband  who  is
illustrious,  or  brave,  or  clever,  or  a  chief,  or  generous,  or  who
protects  his  wife.  The  result  was  that  she  became  pregnant ;
and  when  her  time  was  accomplished,  a  boy  was  born.  On
the  sixth  night  after  her  delivery  his  mother  beheld  in  a
vision  a  Yogi  with  matted  hair,  a  shining  moon  on  his  fore-
head, ashes  of  cow-dung  rubbed  over  his  body,  having  a
white  Brahmanical  thread  ;  sitting  upon  an  as  an  of  white
lotuses,  with  a  necklace  of  human  heads  round  his  neck,  and
a  bandlet  of  white  serpents  thrown  over  his  shoulders,  holding
a  shell  in  one  hand,  and  in  the  other  a  trident,  assuming  a
very  frightful  form,  he  appeared  before  her,  saying  :  "  To-
morrow, at  midnight,  put  this  child,  together  with  a  purse
of  a  thousand  gold  muhars,  in  a  large  basket,  and  place  it
at  the  gate  of  the  palace."  When  she  awoke  in  the  morning
she  narrated  the  dream  to  her  mother,  detailing  all  the  circum-
stances.    The  mother,  next  day,  did  as  had  been  suggested.

The  remainder  of  the  tale  follows  Somadeva,  but  in  a
much  abbreviated  form,  details  of  the  pilgrimage  to  Gaya
being  entirely  absent.  The  question  and  answer  are  the
same.

The  story  is  not  found  in  the  Tamil  version,  and  another
tale  altogether  has  been  substituted.1

In  Sivadasa's  recension  Dhanavati  does  not  bump  into
the  thief  at  all,  but  speaks  to  him  out  of  idle  curiosity.  There
are  also  a  few  other  trifling  differences.  See  further  Oesterley,
op.  cit.,  p.  209.

The  story  is  not  a  very  interesting  one  from  the  point  of
view  of  annotation,  the  only  motif  (already  noticed  on  pp.  81n,
82n)  being  a  variant  of  the  "  exposed  child."

The  Brahman  Boy  who  offered  himself  up  to  save  the  Life

of  the  King

(Vetala  20— pp.  87-97)

The  Hindi  version2  (No.  19)  is  more  abbreviated  than
that  in  Somadeva,  but  certain  incidents  are  fuller.  Thus
the  hermit,  after  reproving  the  king  for  indulging  in  the  vice
of  hunting,  quotes  the  following  from  the  Dharma-sdstras

1  Babington,  op.  cit.,  pp.  85-86.

2  Barker,  op.  cit.,  p.  311  et  seq.


APPENDIX— TALES  OF  A  VETALA     251

as  particularly  applicable  to  the  case  in  point :  "  Austere
devotion  is  not  equal  to  a  forgiving  spirit,  nor  is  pleasure
so  desirable  as  content,  nor  wealth  as  friendship,  nor  justice
as  mercy.  He  who  is  zealous  in  the  discharge  of  his  religious
duties,  and  who  has  attained  wealth,  good  qualities,  knowledge,
celebrity  and  influence,  who  knows  no  pride,  is  contented  with
his  own  wife,  and  is  truthful,  will  obtain  final  emancipation
and  absorption  ;  and  he  who  slays  devotees  with  matted
hair,  and  those  who  are  without  clothing,  and  the  inoffensive,
will  at  death  descend  into  hell.  And  the  monarch  who  does
not  punish  the  oppressor  of  his  people  will  also  suffer  the
torments  of  Naraka.  And  he  who  has  intercourse  with  a
king's  wife,  or  his  friend's  wife,  or  a  maiden,  or  a  woman
in  advanced  pregnancy,  will  surely  fall  into  the  nethermost
hell."  The  hermit  marries  his  daughter  to  the  king  by  the
gdndharva  form  of  marriage.  The  adventure  with  the  demon
occurs  at  midnight,  and  not  on  the  following  morning.  No
reason  at  all  is  given  as  to  why  the  demon  is  so  angry,  and
he  says  immediately,  "  O  King,  I  will  devour  thy  wife ! "
and  then  continues,  "  If  thou  wilt  cut  off  with  thine  own
hand  the  head  of  a  Brahman's  son  of  seven  years  of  age,  and
give  it  me,  I  will  not  devour  her."  Neither  the  king  himself
nor  his  court  is  in  any  way  implicated.  The  golden  image
is  taken  to  the  cross-roads,  and  on  the  third  day  a  poor  Brah-
man decides  to  sacrifice  one  of  his  three  sons.  He  discusses
the  matter  with  his  wife  :  he  will  not  give  up  the  eldest,  she
will  not  sacrifice  the  youngest.  The  second  son,  hearing  the
argument,  offers  himself  accordingly.  There  is  nothing  about
the  parents  holding  the  boy  down  while  he  is  killed.  The
important  difference  is  that  the  boy  first  laughed  and  then
cried.  But  this  appears  to  be  a  mistake,  for  the  question
of  the  Vetala  is  merely  :  "  Why  did  the  boy  laugh  ?  "  The
king's  reply  is  the  same  as  in  Somadeva.

In  both  the  original  recensions  of  Sivadasa  and  the  Tamil
version  the  boy  only  laughs,  and  for  exactly  the  same  reason
as  in  our  present  text.

The  Tamil  version  *  (No.  21)  has  been  reduced  to  a  single
page,  and  is  devoid  of  all  interest  or  importance.

The  tale  contains  two  distinct  motifs,  the  first  being  that
of  "  Self- Sacrifice  "  and  the  second  the  "  Laugh."

1  Babington,  op.  cit.,  pp.  82-83.  I  fail  to  understand  Bloomfield's  note  in
Journ.  Amer.  Orient.  Soc,  vol.  xxxvi,  p.  83,  where  he  says  the  story  occurs  in  no
version  except  the  Tamil.


252


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


With  the  first  of  these  we  are  already  well  acquainted.
It  has  always  been  a  great  factor  in  Buddhist  legends,  as  we
have  seen  from  the  story  of  Jimutavahana.  And  is  it  not
the  foundation-stone  on  which  the  whole  edifice  of  Chris-
tianity has  been  built  ?  In  the  story  of  Vfravara  (Vol.  VI,
p.  191  et  seq.)  we  had  another  striking  example  of  the  motif,
and  my  notes  on  pp.  272  and  273  of  the  same  volume  supplied
many  analogues.

Without  discussing  the  subject  further,  we  can  at  once
pass  on  to  the  variant  of  our  story  found  in  Dr  Behrnauer's
translation1  of  the  Dresden  MS.  of  the  Forty  Vazirs.  Here
we  read  of  a  king  from  whose  foot  issued  a  wasting  sweat,  for
the  cure  of  which  no  remedy  could  be  found.  The  assembled
physicians  came  to  the  conclusion  that  the  only  way  to  save
him  was  for  the  body  of  an  Indian  boy  to  be  split  open,  and
the  king's  foot  thrust  into  the  wound.  After  the  boy  had
been  duly  procured  and  was  about  to  be  split  open,  he  began
to  laugh,  and  on  being  asked  the  reason,  replied  in  a  similar
strain  as  in  our  text,  but  concluded  with  the  following  words  :

"...  Now,  indeed,  my  parents  sell  me  to  the  king,  and  he
is  about  to  kill  me  for  the  healing  of  his  pain,  so  that  thereby
he  may  be  delivered  in  this  present  life  ;  but  what  will  he
say  in  that  other  world  in  his  justification  before  the  Majesty
of  the  Most  High  ?  Now  have  I  found  no  tenderness  in  my
mother,  nor  any  affection  in  my  father,  nor  yet  any  justice
or  equity  in  the  king  ;  whom  then  shall  I  implore  ?  I  fly
for  refuge  to  that  God  who  is  an  almighty  Avenger  :  for  all
the  injustice  wrought  against  me,  He  will  surely  take  me  in
charge,  and  cause  to  be  bestowed  on  me  my  full  right !  "

At  this  the  king  was  filled  with  fear  and  shame,  and,  re-
leasing the  boy,  warm  tears  fell  from  his  eyes.  The  physicians
thereupon  restored  the  king  to  health  by  rubbing  his  foot
with  the  tears.  No  mention  is  made  of  fashioning  a  golden
image  in  the  likeness  of  the  boy.  In  the  Bengali  version  of
the  Vikrama-charita,2  however,  a  rich  man  makes  a  golden

1  Die  Vierzig  Veziere  oder  Weisen  Meister,  ein  altmorgenl'dndischer  Sittcnroman
aus  dem  Turkischen  ubertragen  von  Dr.  Walter  Fr.  Adolf  Behmauer,  Leipzig,  1851.
See  also  Gibb's  translation,  p.  405,  and  Chauvin,  op.  cit.,  viii,  p.  179,  for  several
analogues.

2  This  version,  usually  known  as  the  Vararuchi  Recension,  is  ignored  by
Edgerton  in  his  Vikramas  Adventures,  as  being  secondary  to  the  Jainistic
Recension,  and  of  no  importance  in  the  reconstruction  of  the  original  text.
See  Benfey,  Pantschatantra,  vol.  i,  p.  109.


APPENDIX— TALES  OF  A  VETALA     253

statue,  offering  it  to  anyone  who  is  willing  to  sacrifice  himself.
Vikrama  agrees,  and  cuts  off  his  head,  but  is  healed  by  the
goddess.

We  now  come  to  the  second  motif  in  our  story,  that  of
the  "  Laugh."  Of  all  methods  of  expressing  human  feeling
or  emotion,  often  sudden  and  unexpected,  none  is  so  general
as  laughter.1  Certainly  people  weep  for  joy  as  well  as  for
sorrow,  but  a  laugh  may  be  actuated  by  feelings  of  almost
unlimited  scope.  The  very  act  of  laughing  arouses  curiosity
in  others,  partly,  I  suppose,  because  of  the  personal  nature
of  a  laugh,  and  partly  because  it  creates  a  feeling  of  inferi-
ority that  is  only  removed  when  the  reason  for  the  laugh  is
known.  Some  laughs  are  self-explanatory,  but  many  are
not,  and  it  is  here  that  the  story-teller  has  seen  a  motif  of  the
widest  application  and  endless  possibilities.  He  has  not
contented  himself  with  the  obvious  use  of  laughter — making
a  character  laugh  for  joy  when  we  should  expect  him  to
laugh,  or  to  give  an  ironical  laugh  when  the  situation  makes
its  omission  practically  impossible.  No,  he  is  far  cleverer
than  that ;  he  makes  his  characters  laugh,  perhaps  with  joy,
at  a  time  when  we  would  least  expect  it ;  and  we,  as  we  read,
are  genuinely  anxious  to  know  the  cause  of  the  laugh.  The
melodramatic  villain's  "  Ha !  Ha ! ",  the  nervous  laugh  of
the  heroine  or  of  the  persecuted,  the  triumphant  laugh  of
the  victor,  the  malicious  laugh  of  the  wrongdoer,  and  the
hysterical  laugh  of  the  miserable,  need  no  explanation  or
comment.  They  merely  attest  the  manifold  emotions  which
can  be  registered  through  the  same  medium.

In  Hindu  fiction  I  would  divide  laughs  into  two  distinct
varieties  :  (1)  those  which  clearly  show  their  nature,  but
not  the  reason  which  prompted  them ;  (2)  curious  and
mysterious  laughs  which  give  no  clue  either  to  their  real
nature  or  their  significance.

1  See,  for  instance,  Thomas  Hobbes,  Humane  Nature,  Ldn.,  1 650,  pp.  101-
105;  ditto,  The  Leviathan,  Ldn.,  1651,  p.  27;  H.  Spencer,  "The  Physiology
of  Laughter,"  Macmillaris  Magazine,  March  I860,  pp.  395-402  (reprinted  in
his  Essays,  vol.  i,  pp.  194-209);  George  Meredith,  "  On  the  Idea  of  Comedy,"
New  Quarterly  Magazine,  April  1877,  pp.  1-40;  A.  Schopenhauer,  The  World  as
Will  and  Idea,  vol.  i,  pp.  76-80,  sect.  13 ;  vol.  ii,  pp.  270-284  ;  H.  Bergson,  Le
Rire,  Paris,  1924  (see  Brereton  and  Rothwell's  trans,  from  the  1900  edition,
Ldn.,  1911) ;  James  Sully,  An  Essay  on  Laughter,  Ldn.,  1902  ;  C.  Lloyd  Morgan,
"  Laughter,"  Hastings'  Ency.  Rel.  Eth.,  vol.  vii,  pp.  803-805 ;  and  J.  C.
Gregory,  The  Nature  of  Laughter,  Ldn.,  1924.


254


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


Both  varieties  are  dramatic,  the  second  more  than  the
first.  It  is,  of  course,  the  dramatic  laugh  that  becomes  such
a  force  in  the  hands  of  the  story-teller.  It  has  been  observed
that,  with  but  very  few  exceptions,  all  Biblical  laughs  are
dramatic — usually  of  scorn  or  derision.  The  innocent  laugh
of  joy  would  nearly  always  pass  unheeded  by  the  chronicler
or  historian,  as  it  would  lack  the  interest  necessary  to  produce
a  dramatic  situation.

Now,  in  the  first  category  as  suggested  above  would
come  the  laugh  in  the  story  under  discussion.  It  is  quite
clear  that  the  laugh  was  a  laugh  of  joy,  but  the  point  was
why  did  the  boy  laugh  when  he  was  about  to  be  killed  ?  As
we  shall  see  later,  when  discussing  the  combined  "  Laugh  and
Cry  "  motif  in  Vetala  23,  it  is  much  more  usual  for  the  laugh
to  show  its  nature,  but  not  its  incentive,  when  in  combination
with  weeping.

We  shall  therefore  confine  ourselves  here  to  a  short  con-
sideration of  the  second  category — the  curious,  enigmatic,
mysterious  laugh.

The  first  laugh  we  encountered  in  the  Ocean  was  a  most
curious  and  uncanny  laugh,  without  the  least  clue  as  to  its
significance — the  laugh  of  the  dead  fish  (Vol.  I,  p.  46).  In
my  note  on  pp.  46  and  47  I  added  numerous  variants  of  the
laughing  fish,  and  so  need  not  add  anything  further  here.
In  another  place  (Vol.  V,  p.  30)  we  had  a  strange  paradoxical
laugh  caused  by  grief.  This  form,  as  Bloomfield  has  pointed
out,1  is  distinctly  rare.  The  use  of  the  enigmatic  laugh  to
illustrate  the  unswerving  laws  of  karma  is  well  shown  in  a
tale  in  the  Jainistic  Kathakoga  (Tawney,  p.  185  et  seq.).

The  Princess  Madanamanjari  chanced  to  overhear  certain
of  her  father's  courtiers  flattering  him  by  saying  that  their
luck  in  enjoying  such  a  fortune  of  rule  was  due  solely  to  the
king,  from  whose  favour  it  sprang.  At  this  she  laughed  a
little,  and  then  remained  silent.  The  king  asked  his  daughter
the  reason  of  her  laughing,  saying  :  "  My  darling,  what  is
this  ?  "  His  daughter  answered  :  "  My  father,  these  ser-
vants of  yours  said  what  is  not  true ;  for  that  reason  I
laughed."  The  king  said  :  "  My  dear,  what  is  untrue  ?  "
She  answered  :  "  Their  assertion  that  their  happiness  springs
from  your  favour  :  that  is  untrue."  The  king  asked  his
daughter  :    "  Then,  my  dear,  what  is  true  ?  "     She  said  :

1  "  On  Recurring  Psychic  Motifs  in  Hindu  Fiction,  and  the  Laugh  and
Cry  Motif,"  Journ.  Amer.  Orient.  Soc,  vol.  xxxvi,  p.  8 On47.


APPENDIX— TALES  OF  A  VETALA     255

"  Every  man  fares  according  to  his  own  actions."  When  the
king  heard  this  speech  of  his  daughter  in  the  audience  hall
he  flew  into  a  passion,  and  calling  his  ministers  said  this  to
them  :  "  Come,  come  !  bring  some  poor  leper  afflicted  with
disease,  and  very  wretched,  as  a  fit  bridegroom  for  my
daughter,  in  order  that  this  Madanamanjarl  may  be  given
to  him,  so  that  she  may  reap  the  fruit  of  her  own  actions."

After  some  trouble  the  necessary  leper  was  found,  but
Madanamanjari,  firmly  believing  that  at  the  appointed  time
she  would  enjoy  the  fruit  of  her  karma,  was  in  no  way  per-
turbed. On  the  contrary,  she  seemed  quite  satisfied  with
her  father's  choice,  and  behaved  like  a  loving  and  dutiful
wife,  even  offering  to  carry  her  diseased  husband  on  her  back
wherever  he  might  want  to  go.  (See  the  Ocean,  Vol.  V,
p.  155ft2.)  She  was  duly  rewarded  by  her  husband,  who
turned  out  to  be  nothing  less  than  a  mighty  Vidyadhara,
and  soon  installed  his  faithful  wife  as  his  queen  in  a  palace
of  purest  gold.  Needless  to  say,  her  father  was  at  last
convinced  of  the  truth  of  his  daughter's  original  remark.

Another  story  concerned  with  the  workings  of  fate  occurs
in  Stokes'  Indian  Fairy  Tales,  p.  114,  where  there  is  a  triple
sardonic  laugh.  A  still  more  enigmatic  laugh  is  that  uttered
by  a  corpse  in  the  Prabandhacinlamani.

A  prince  is  out  hunting  at  night,  and,  in  aiming  at  a  boar,
chances  to  kneel  on  the  corpse  of  a  thief,  that  has  fallen  to
the  ground  after  impalement,  whereupon  the  corpse  cries
out  to  him ;  but  in  no  way  perturbed,  the  prince  shoots  his
arrow,  kills  the  boar,  and  then  turns  to  the  corpse.  At  this
it  rises  up  and  utters  a  loud  laugh,  at  the  same  time  granting
boons  to  the  intrepid  prince.  No  explanation  of  the  laugh
is  given,  and  its  significance  is  left  for  the  reader  to  decide.
The  subsequent  adventures  of  the  prince  point  to  the  laugh
being  one  of  admiration  mixed  with  ironic  glee  at  the  thought
of  the  subsequent  adventures  that  were  to  happen  to  the
prince  (see  Bloomfield,  op.  cit.,  p.  84).

In  conclusion  I  would  mention  the  laugh  of  trickery  and
deceit.  We  have  an  example  of  this  in  the  story  of  "  Thin-
thakarala,  the  Bold  Gambler,"  which  occurs  in  Vol.  IX,
Chapter  CXX1.  Disguised  as  an  ascetic  he  has  gradually
won  the  favour  and  respect  of  the  king.  On  one  occasion
he  remains  for  a  long  time  in  conversation  with  him.  When
the  king  is  preparing  to  depart,  a  female  jackal  utters  a  yell,
whereupon  the  sham  ascetic  laughs ;  and  being  persistently


256  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

asked  to  explain  the  reason  he  tells  the  king  that  the  jackal
has  told  him  that  a  pitcher  of  jewels  is  buried  at  a  certain
place.  On  going  to  the  spot  the  king  discovers  this  is  true,
and  thus  believes  in  the  ascetic  more  than  ever.  Needless  to
say,  the  gambler  had  previously  buried  the  pitcher  himself.

For  further  "  Trick  "  motifs  see  Bloomfield,  op.  cit,  pp.  85, 86.
On  the  latter  page  he  mentions  a  story  from  Shaikh  Chilli's
Folktales  of  Hindustan,  p.  124,  in  which  a  disguised  robber
takes  service  with  an  eloped  couple,  a  prince  and  princess,
the  latter  being  disguised  as  a  man.  He  treacherously
kills  the  prince,  but  spares  the  princess  on  learning  her
sex.  Shortly  afterwards  she  laughs.  The  robber  surlily  asks
her  to  keep  quiet,  and  demands  why  she  laughs.  She  points
to  the  sky,  and  says  :  "  Look  up,  look  up,  what  a  beautiful
kite  !  "     When  he  looks  up  she  cuts  off  his  head.

Anangamanjari,  her  Husband  Manivarman  and  the  Brahman

Kamaldkara

(Vetdla  21— pp.  98-104)

There  is  but  little  difference  between  our  text  and  that
of  the  Hindi  version  1  (No.  20),  as  far  as  the  several  incidents
are  concerned.  There  is  nothing  about  the  wife  disliking
her  husband ;  and  she  must  have  been  a  mere  child,  as  she
only  arrives  at  the  age  of  puberty  while  he  is  away  on  a
trading  expedition.  In  her  frenzy  of  love  for  the  young
Brahman  she  turns  to  the  moon,  crying  out,  "  O  moon  !  I
have  heard  that  in  you  resides  the  water  of  immortality,  and
that  you  are  pouring  out  this  water  by  means  of  your  rays,
but  to-day  you  are  pouring  out  poison  on  me,"  and  turning
to  her  companion,  she  adds  :  "  Take  me  hence,  for  I  am
being  consumed  by  the  moon."  The  ending  of  the  story  is
important,  and  in  my  opinion  is  a  great  improvement  on
Somadeva.  The  lovers  do  not  come  to  life  again,  thus  the
highly  dramatic  climax  is  not  lost.  The  question  and  answer
are  as  in  Somadeva.

The  Tamil  version  2  (No.  14)  is  as  usual  reduced  to  a
minimum.  The  only  difference  is  that  the  girl  had  the  youth
as  a  lover  before  she  was  married.

It  will  be  remembered  that  in  the  notes  on  Vetala  19
(p.  249)  we  saw  that  there  was  no  corresponding  tale  in  the

1  Barker,  op.  cit.,  p.  325  et  seq.

2  Babington,  op.  cit.y  pp.  65,  66.


APPENDIX— TALES  OF  A  VETALA    257

Tamil  version,  and  that  an  entirely  different  one  had  been
substituted  instead.  This  story  chances  to  be  a  variant  of
the  tale  now  under  consideration,  so  I  will  reproduce  it  in
full »  :

"In  the  city  of  Shegapuram,  as  King  Natchetiran  was
one  day  patrolling  the  streets,  he  met  in  his  way  with  some
robbers  [who  had  plundered  a  girl  of  her  ornaments,  and
were  detaining  her  as  their  prisoner  in  a  starving  condition.
The  king]  2  attacked  and  slew  them,  and  after  his  victory
lodged  the  girl  in  an  old  temple  which  was  in  the  vicinity,
whilst  he  himself  entered  the  city,  in  order  to  cook  a  meal
and  bring  it  back  to  her.

"A  procuress  met  him  on  his  return,  and  after  soliciting
him  with  earnest  entreaties  to  accompany  her,  under  an
assurance  that  she  would  afterwards  carry  the  food  to  the
girl,  she  took  him  along  with  her  and  left  him  with  her
mistress.  The  mistress  no  sooner  beheld  him  than  she  fell  in
love  with  him  and  detained  him ;  so  that  he  forgot,  in  her
society,  the  poor  girl  whom  he  had  left  in  the  temple,  and
who  was  grieving,  because  the  king  who  had  gone  to  fetch
food  for  her  had  still  not  returned.

"Whilst  she  was  in  this  situation,  a  merchant  chanced  to
perceive  her,  and  taking  her  away  to  his  own  house,  placed
food  before  her.  They  were  thus  enjoying  each  other's
company,  when  he  perceived  a  rat  running  along,  which  he
struck  at  and  killed.  Upon  this  he  launched  out  into  many
various  expressions  of  boastings  and  vauntings  of  his  own
courage  ;  which  when  she  heard,  she  made  the  following
reflections  :  "  Talk  you  thus  big  because  you  have  killed  a
rat !  The  king  who  quitted  me  just  now,  cut  to  pieces  a  band
of  robbers  and  brought  me  away ;  he  made  not  such  a
mighty  swaggering,  and  yet  you  must  needs  talk  thus."
Maintaining  such  an  opinion  as  this,3  she  was  unable  to
endure  remaining  with  such  a  contemptible  wretch,  and
quitted  life.  Perceiving  this,  the  merchaut,  under  the  in-
fluence of  fear,  lest  the  king  who  had  left  her  in  the  temple
should  hear  of  her  death,  and  should  seize  on  his  property
and  kill  him,  bestowed  all  his  wealth  in  gifts  and  charities,

1  Babington,  op.  cit.,  p.  85  et  seq.

2  The  words  in  square  brackets  are  supplied  from  the  context  by
Babington,  who  suspects  an  omission  in  the  text.

3  Cf.  Ocean,  Vol.  V,  p.  24.

VOL.   VII.  R


258  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

and  destroyed  himself.  Then  the  king  who  had  abandoned
her,  recalling  her  to  mind,  went  and  searched  in  the  place
where  he  had  lodged  her,  but  being  unable  to  find  her  was
grievously  afflicted,  and  destroyed  himself.  The  procuress
hearing  the  news,  and  reflecting  that  it  was  through  her
means  that  these  three  persons  had  lost  their  lives,  likewise
destroyed  herself."

The  Vetala  naturally  asks  which  of  the  four  deaths  was
the  most  extraordinary,  to  which  the  king  replies  :  "  The
rest  died  through  excess  of  passion  [i.e.  contempt,  fear  and
sorrow  respectively] ;  the  death  of  the  procuress  was  the  most
extraordinary . ' '

The  story  of  the  three  deaths  through  love  is  distinctly
dramatic  and  not  without  pathos.  This  is  not  the  first  time
that  such  deaths  have  occurred  in  the  Ocean  (see  Vol.  II,
pp.  8-10),  and  many  analogues  could  be  cited.  I  have
already  given  a  number  in  a  note  in  Vol.  II,  p.  9n29  lOn ;  the
only  other  triple  death  I  know  of  being  in  a  tale  in  the  Nights
(Burton,  vol.  v,  p.  134).  As  I  mentioned  in  the  note  referred
to,  death  was  the  last,  or  tenth,  stage  of  love  in  Hindu  ethics
as  listed  by  Vatsyayana  in  the  Kama  Sutra.

The  Four  Brahman  Brothers  who  resuscitated  the  Lion
{Vetala  22— pp.  108-111)

In  the  Hindi  version l  (No.  21)  we  find  that  the  four
brothers  are  all  the  despair  of  their  unhappy  father.  The
eldest  was  a  gambler ;  the  second,  a  wencher ;  the  third,  a
fornicator  ;  the  fourth,  an  atheist.  One  day  he  began  to  say
to  his  sons :  "  Whoever  is  a  gambler,  Fortune  enters  not
his  house."  The  eldest  son  was  troubled  in  mind  at  this.
Again  the  father  said  :  "  It  is  written  in  the  'Rajniti'  that
'  Cutting  off  a  gambler's  nose  and  ears,  drive  him  out  of  the
country,  that  he  may  thus  prove  an  example  to  others.  And
though  a  gambler's  wife  and  children  are  in  the  house,  do
not  consider  them  to  be  so,  since  it  is  not  known  when  they
will  be  lost.  And  those  who  are  fascinated  by  the  allure-
ments of  courtesans  are  storing  grief  for  themselves;  and,
being  in  the  power  of  harlots,  give  up  their  property,  and  at
last  commit  theft.'  And  it  has  also  been  said  that  *  The
wise  keep  aloof  from  women  who  can  fascinate  a  man  in  a

1  Barker,  op.  cit.,  p.  333  et  seq.


APPENDIX— TALES  OF  A  VETALA     259

second ;  and  the  unwise,  forming  an  affection  for  her,  forfeit
their  truthfulness,  good  disposition,  good  name,  their  way  of
life  and  mode  of  thought,  their  vows  and  their  religion.  And
to  such  the  advice  of  their  spiritual  preceptors  comes  amiss.'
And  it  is  also  said  :  '  He  who  has  lost  all  sense  of  shame,  fears
not  to  disgrace  another.'  And  it  is  a  proverb  that  :  'A  wild
cat  who  devours  its  own  young  ones  is  not  likely  to  let  a  rat
escape.'  "

He  continued  :  "  Those  who  have  not  read  science  in
their  boyhood,  and  in  youth,  agitated  by  love,  have  re-
mained in  the  pride  of  youth,  in  their  old  age  feel  regret,  and
are  burned  up  by  the  fire  of  avarice."

The  brothers  repent  of  their  evil  ways,  and  set  out  for
another  city,  where  they  acquire  great  learning.  On  their
way  home  they  meet  a  Kanjar,  who,  having  tied  in  a  bundle
the  skin  and  bones  of  a  tiger  which  he  had  found  dead,  is
about  to  depart.  They  think  that  here  is  a  chance  to  put
their  learning  to  a  test,  and  accordingly  do  so.  The  rest
follows  as  in  Somadeva.

In  the  Tamil  version1  (No.  15)  the  brothers  chance  to  be
travelling  together  on  business,  and,  in  return  for  kindness
to  an  ascetic,  are  given  the  power  of  raising  the  dead  to  life.
They  come  across  a  dead  tiger,  and  experiment  as  in  our  text.

We  are  not  surprised  to  find  the  lion  changed  into  a  tiger,
as  the  former  is  scarce  in  India  and  appears  little  in  Hindu
fiction.2

We  have  in  this  story  merely  a  variety  of  the  "  Resusci-
tation "  motif  already  discussed  in  the  notes  on  Vetala  2
(Vol.  VI,  p.  262  et  seq.).  It  is  closely  allied  to  the  "  Joint
Efforts  "  motif  (Vetala  5,  Vol.  VI,  p.  273  et  seq.),  but  this  is
not  always  the  case,  as  the  resuscitation  may  be  achieved
by  a  single  individual.  Thus  in  the  Bahdr-i-Ddnish 3  we
read,  in  the  "  History  of  the  Prince  of  Futtun  and  the  Princess
Mherbanou,"  of  a  venerable  sage  who  was  met  by  the  prince
and  his  wonder-working  companions,  as  they  were  journey-
ing in  search  of  the  princess.  His  locks  were  white,  and  he
was  bent  in  stature  like  a  violet.  He  was  sitting  at  the  foot
of  a  tree  putting  together  the  separated  skeleton  of  a  cow,
on  which  he  poured  water.     Immediately  on  sprinkling  the

1  Babington,  op.  cit.,  pp.  67,  68.

2  See  Ocean j  Vol.  I,  p.  67 'nl.  Tawney,  by  mistake,  wrote  "Tiger"  instead
of  "Lion"  in  the  heading  to  the  story  (Vol.  II,  p.  348).

3  Scott's  translation,  vol.  ii,  pp.  290,  291.


260  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

water,  the  various  blood  vessels  and  members  reunited,  and
the  flesh  and  skin  reappeared  on  the  decayed  frame.  .  .  .
By  command  of  the  Almighty  Lord  of  Power,  one  of  whose
peculiar  properties  is  to  raise  the  dead,  life  revisited  the
animal,  and  instantly  standing  up,  she  began  to  low.  The
truth  of  the  sacred  text  ("All  things  live  by  water  ")  was
exemplified.

The  story  as  given  in  Benfey's  Pantschatantra  (vol.  ii,
p.  332)  is  somewhat  different.  Here  we  have  four  brothers,
of  whom  three  possess  all  knowledge,  but  only  one  possesses
common  sense.  The  first  brother  joins  together  the  bones
of  the  lion,  the  second  covers  them  with  skin,  flesh  and
blood,  the  third  is  about  to  give  the  animal  life,  when  the
brother  who  possesses  common  sense  says  :  "  If  you  raise
him  to  life  he  will  kill  us  all."  Finding  that  the  third
brother  will  not  desist  from  his  intention,  he  climbs  up  a
tree,  and  so  saves  his  life,  while  his  three  brothers  are  torn
to  pieces.

The  Hermit  who  first  Wept  and  then  Danced
(Vetdla  23— pp.  112-115)

Both  the  Hindi »  and  the  Tamil 2  (No.  22  in  each  case)
are  greatly  abbreviated  and  much  poorer  versions  of  our
text ;  they  exhibit  no  alternate  reading  or  fresh  incidents.
The  two  motifs  contained  in  the  story  are  "  Entering  Another's
Body  "  and  the  "  Laugh  and  Cry."  Both  have  been  discussed
so  fully  and  competently  by  Professor  Bloomfield 3  that  any
remarks  I  may  have  to  make  must  be  little  more  than
repetition.

With  regard  to  the  first  motif  I  would  refer  readers  to
the  notes  already  given  in  Vol.  I,  pp.  37-38,  and  especially
Vol.  IV,  pp.  46-48.

As  previously  pointed  out  (p.  253),  the  "  Laugh  and  Cry  "
motif  is  one  in  which  each  display  of  emotion  shows  its
nature  but  not  its  incentive.  I  mean  that  the  laugh  is
caused  by  the  feeling  of  joy,  and  the  tears  by  grief.  This  is
not  the  case  with  the  laugh  alone,  which  is  a  mighty  weapon
in  the  hands  of  the  story-teller,  as  we  have  already  seen.     The

1  Barker,  op.  cit.,  p.  338  et  seq.

2  Babington,  op.  cit.,  p.  84.

3  Proc.  Amer.  Phil.  Soc„  vol.  lvi,  43  Jf.,  and  Journ.  Amen  Orient.  Soc.,  vol.
xxxvi,  pp.  69-79.


APPENDIX— TALES  OF  A  VETALA     261

laugh  and  cry  coming  together  excite,  by  their  paradoxical
contact,  not  only  pathos  and  sympathy,  but  also  humour,
curiosity  and  mystery.

In  Vetala  14  the  thief  weeps  because  he  cannot  repay  the
merchant's  kindness,  and  laughs  because  he  is  so  astonished
to  think  how  unfathomable  is  the  heart  of  woman  that  she
chooses  a  condemned  thief  as  her  husband  after  rejecting  kings.
It  is  not  so  much  that  either  the  weeping  and  laughing  was
curious  in  itself,  or  even  that  they  both  followed  immediately
one  on  the  other,  but  that  a  man  about  to  be  impaled  should
exhibit  emotions  so  diametrically  opposed.  It  is  this  that  forms
such  an  important  and  dramatic  incident  in  the  story.  So  also
in  our  present  tale,  but  to  a  lesser  extent.  In  the  numerous
and  varied  examples  of  the  motif  given  by  Bloomfield,
the  explanation  of  the  person's  conduct  is  often  due  to  the
powers  of  reading  future  events,  and  the  weeping  is  nearly
always  sympathetic.  The  Ocean  appears  to  supply  more
examples  of  the  motif  than  other  works  of  Hindu  fiction.

It  has  found  its  way  into  many  modern  collections,  such
as  those  by  Fleeson,  Day,  Swynnerton,  Knowles,  Temple,
Natesa  Sastri,  etc.  One  use  of  the  motif  in  Swynnerton's
Romantic  Tales  from  the  Panjdb,  p.  203  et  seq.,  is  very  curious,
being  a  mixture  of  drama  and  comedy.

Raja  Rasalu  was  on  his  way  to  fight  the  giants  of  Gand-
garh,  when  he  arrived  at  a  deserted  city.  Amazed  at  the
solitude,  he  stood  in  an  open  space  and  surveyed  the  scene.
Just  then  he  caught  sight  of  some  smoke  issuing  from  a  dis-
tant corner,  and  making  his  way  to  it  he  saw  there  a  miserable
old  woman  kneading  and  baking  quantities  of  bread  and
preparing  abundance  of  sweetmeats,  but  all  the  time  she
was  either  weeping  or  laughing.  Surprised  at  a  spectacle  so
extraordinary,  Rasalu  halted  and  said  :  "  Mother,  in  this
solitary  place  who  is  to  eat  all  that  food,  and  why  are  you
both  weeping  and  laughing  ?  "  "  The  king  of  this  palace,"
said  the  woman,  "  is  Kashudeo,  and  he  has  ordered  that
a  human  being,  a  buffalo  and  four  hundred  pounds  of  bread
shall  be  sent  daily  to  a  certain  place  for  the  giants.  Once
I  had  seven  sons,  of  whom  six  have  been  devoured,  and
to-day  it  is  the  turn  of  the  seventh,  and  to-morrow  it  will  be
the  turn  of  myself.  This  is  my  trouble  and  it  makes  me  cry.
But  I  am  laughing  because  also  to-day  my  seventh  son  was
to  have  been  married,  and  because  his  bride — ha  !  ha  ! —
will  have  now  to  do  without  him."


262


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


The  Father  that  married  the  Daughter  and  the  Son  that
married  the  Mother

(Vetdla  24— pp.  116-121)

In  Somadeva's  version  of  the  Vetdlapanchavimsati  the
story  of  the  mixed  relations  forms  No.  24,  at  the  end  of  which
the  Vetala,  getting  no  answer  from  the  king,  warns  him  of
the  evil  intentions  of  the  mendicant.  This  is  the  last  story
of  the  collection,  but  there  is  still  another  one  left  to  form
the  complete  twenty-five.  However,  Somadeva,  or  rather
the  Kashmirian  compilers,  merely  relate  Vikrama's  adven-
tures with  the  mendicant,  and  call  it  Vetala  25.  Now,  in  the
Hindi  version x  the  same  predicament  presented  itself,  but  a
different  plan  was  adopted.  The  "  Laugh  and  Cry  "  story
is  repeated,  with  hardly  any  difference,  as  No.  24,  while  our
No.  24  becomes  the  Hindi  No.  25.  The  conclusion  is  abbre-
viated, and  follows  on  at  the  end  of  the  story.  In  the  Tamil 2
no  attempt  is  made  to  get  over  the  difficulty,  and  our  Nos.  24
and  25  form  the  Tamil  No.  24,  with  which  that  version  ends.

The  Hindi  version  of  the  story  of  the  mixed  relationships
follows  that  of  Somadeva,  although  much  abbreviated.  The
Tamil  begins  differently  :

King  Senapati,  having  determined  on  travelling  round  the
world,  left  his  wife  and  his  daughter  and  set  out  on  his  tour.
Without  his  knowledge  his  wife  and  daughter  followed  him,
and  as  they  were  travelling  along  missed  their  way  ;  so,  not
knowing  which  way  he  had  gone,  they  took  that  which  lay
straight  before  them.  As  they  proceeded  on  their  journey
it  began  to  rain,  and  they  therefore  put  up  in  a  choultry.
They  then  pursued  their  journey  on  beyond  it,  when  two
Brahmans,  a  father  and  son,  who  were  travelling  along  that
road,  observing  their  footsteps,  said  to  each  other  :  "  These
appear  like  the  footsteps  of  some  females  or  other;  let  us
therefore  follow  them.  ..."

The  tale  then  agrees  with  oi*r  version.  The  advice  of  the
Vetala  given  to  the  king  is  wisely  taken,  and  forms,  as  stated
above,  the  last  story.

1  Barker,  op.  cit.}  p.  357  et  seq.

2  Babington,  op.  cit.}  pp.  87-90.


APPENDIX— TALES  OF  A  VETALA     263

Conclusion  of  King  Trivikramasena  and  the  Mendicant
(Vetdla  25— pp.  122-125)

The  only  motif  contained  here,  apart  from  the  employ-
ment of  black  magic,  is  that  generally  known  as  "  Pretended
Ignorance."  We  had  an  example  of  it  in  No.  8a,  where
the  cunning  witch,  Siddhikari  (Vol.  I,  p.  157),  is  pursued  by
a  certain  Domba,  with  his  drum,  with  the  intention  of  rob-
bing her.  In  time  the  intended  thief  catches  her  up,  and
she  explains  that  she  is  about  to  hang  herself,  and  asks  the
Domba  to  fasten  the  noose  for  her  to  a  tree.  This  he  does ;
whereupon  she  pretends  to  be  ignorant  of  the  way  of  putting
the  noose  round  her  neck.  He  stands  on  his  drum  to  show
her  how  to  do  it,  when  she  kicks  it  away,  and  so  he  hangs.

The  motif  in  these  two  stories  has  travelled  far  and  wide,
and  is  found  in  numerous  collections  both  in  the  East  and
the  West.  Perhaps  the  best-known  tale  in  which  it  occurs
is  "  Hansel  and  Grethel," *  where,  after  the  children  are
about  to  be  devoured  by  the  witch,  Grethel  is  told  to  climb
in  the  oven  to  see  if  it  is  warm  enough  to  bake  the  bread.
Suspecting  her  evil  designs,  Grethel  pretends  she  does  not
know  how  to  do  it.  "  Silly  goose ! "  says  the  old  woman,
"  the  door  is  big  enough  ;  just  look,  I  can  get  in  myself,"
and  she  creeps  up  and  thrusts  her  head  into  the  oven.  Then
Grethel  gives  her  a  push  that  drives  her  far  into  it,  and  shuts
the  iron  door  and  fastens  the  bolt.

For  numerous  variants  see  Saintyves,  Les  Contes  de
Perrault,  pp.  276-281  and  371-374 ;  and  Cosquin,  Etudes
Folkloriques,  pp.  351-356.

1  See  Grimm,  No.  15,  Bolte,  op.  cit.,  p.  115  et  seq.


264


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


COMPARATIVE  TABLE

Showing  Order  of  Tales  of  the  Vetalapanchavhhsati  in  its  Three
Chief  Translations


Somadeva,  Ocean,  Vol.  VI,  pp.  168-221

Hindi

Tamil

1.  How  the  Prince  obtained  a  Wife

1

I

2.  Three  Young  Brahmans

2

2

3.   King  and  Two  Wise  Birds

4

6

4.  Adventures  of  Viravara  .

3

7

5.  Somaprabha  and  Three  Suitors

5

4

6.  Lady  and  the  Changed  Heads  .

6

5

7.  King's  Dependent  and  the  Nereid

8

8

8.  Three  Fastidious  Men    .

23

3

Ocean,  Vol.  VII,  pp.  1-125

9.  Anangarati  and  Four  Suitors     .

7

(9)1

10.  Madanasena  s  Rash  Promise

9

lO-

11.  Three  very  Sensitive  Wives

10

ll

12.  King  Yasabketu  and  his  Wife    .

11

12

13.  Harisvamin  and  his  Bad  Luck  .

12

16

14.  Merchant's  Daughter  and  Thief

13

17

15.   Magic  Pill

14

18

16.  Sacrifice  of  Jimutavahana

15

19

17.  Beautiful  Unmadini

16

20

18.  Brahman's  Son  and  Magic  Power

17

13

19.  The  Thief's  Son              ...

18

(23)>

20.  Brahman  Boy's  Sacrifice

19

21

21.  Anangamanjari  and  Kamalakara

20

14

22.  Four  Brothers  and  the  Lion

21

15

23.  Hermit  who  Wept  and  Danced

22

22

24.  Curious  Relationships  ^

253

24*

25.  Conclusion                       J

The  order  of  the  tales  in  the  Marathi  version  is  exactly  the  same  as  that
in  the  Hindi  version,  on  which  all  the  other  vernacular  translations  are  based.


1  An  entirely  different  story.

2  Not  translated  by  Babington.


3  In  order  to  complete  the  number  of  tales,  22  is  repeated  with  very
slight  differences  as  24.

4  There  is  no  25  in  the  Tamil  version.


APPENDIX— TALES  OF  A  VETALA


265


In  conclusion  I  append  a  short  Bibliography  of  the
Vetdlapanchavirhsati,  several  items  of  which  have  been
already  mentioned  in  briefer  form  in  the  notes  to  the
Appendices  of  Vols.  VI  and  VII.


1.  Sivaddsa:
Luber,  A.


Sanskrit  Versions

Der  Vetdlapancavingati  oder  FiXnf-
undzwanzig  Erzdhlungen  eines
Dcemon.  Erster  Teil.  Nach  £ivi-
dasa's  [sic]  Redaction  [in  Lassen's
Anthologia  Sanscritica]  aus  dem
Sanskrit  iibersetzt,  mit  Einleitung,
Anmerkungen  und  Nachweisen
von  ...  I.  Abteilung  .  .  .

Gorz,  1875.


Uhle,  H.


Die  Vetdlapancavingatika  in  den
Recensionen  des  Qivaddsa  und  eines
Ungenannten,  mit  Kritischem
Commentar  herausgegeben  von
.  .  .  Abhandlungen  fur  die  Kunde
des  Morgenlandes  herausgegeben
von  der  Deutschen  Morgenland-
ischen  Gesellschaft  .  .  .  vol.  viii,
pp.  xxx +  1-236.

Leipzig,  1884.


Krishnanatha  K,
Prabhu.


The  Vetal  Panchvishi  or  The
Twenty-five  Stories  of  Vetal.  Trans-
lated by  .  .  .  from  the  Sanskrit
of  Dhewdas  [or  rather  Sivadasa]
republished.

Bombay,  1890.
In  the  original  edition  of  1825  the
name  of  the  compiler  is  given  as
"Shewdass."


266


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY
[Fumi,  F.  G.]


Bettei,  V.


Bettei,  V.


Uhle,  H.


2.  Jambhaladatta :
Jibananda
Vidyasagara.


Novelle  del  Vetdla  (Novella  i-v).
Tradotte  dal  sanscrito.  Archivio
per  lo  Studio  delle  Tradizioni
Popolari,  vol.  xi,  pp.  1-28.

Palermo,  1892.

6  Novelle  Soprannumerarie  alia
Vetdlapancavigati.  Archivio  per  lo
Studio  delle  Tradizioni  Popolari,
vol.  xiii,  pp.  313-325,  537-554.

Torino-Palermo,  1894.

Vetdlapancavimgatikd.  II  venti-
cinquenovelle  d'un  lemure.  [Trans-
lated into  Italian  from  Sivadasa's
recension,  with  critical  notes,
by  .  .  .]  Studi  Italiani  di  Filologia
Indo-Iranica.

Florence,  1897-1909.
The  translation  appears,  with  con-
tinuous pagination,  in  the  Appen-
dices of  vols,  i,  ii,  iii,  vi  and  vii.

Die  Vetdlapancavimsatikd  des  Siva-
ddsa  nach  einer  Handschrift  von
1487  (Samv.  1544).  Text  mit  krit-
ischem  Apparat  nebst  einer  Inhalt-
sangabe  der  Erzahlungen  von  .  .  .
Berichte  uber  die  Verhandlungen  der
Koniglich  sdchsischen  Gesellschaft
der  Wissenschaften  zu  Leipzig,
Philologisch  -  Historische  Klasse.
Vol.  lxvi,  pp.  3-87,  1914.

Vetala  Panchavinshati ;  or,  Twenty-
five  Tales  related  by  a  Vampire  to
Rajah  Vikramaditya.  Compiled  [or
rather  edited]  by  Pandit  .  .  .

Calcutta,  1873.


APPENDIX— TALES  OF  A  VELATA


267


3.  More  than  one  Recension :


Uhle,  H.


Programm  des  Gymnasiums  zum
heiligen  Kreuz  in  Dresden  .  .  .
Erste  Abtheilung.  Die  fiinfzehnte
[or  rather  23rd]  Erzdhlung  der  Vetd-
lapantchavingati.  Sanskrit  Text
[in  three  recensions — viz.  Siva-
dasa's,  Jambhaladatta's  and  an
anonymous  one]  mit  Uebersetzung
und  Anmerkungen  von  .  .  .

Dresden,  1877.


Hindi  and  other  Vernacular  Versions


Lallu  Lai.


Buetal  Pucheesee ;  being  a  collection
of  twenty-five  stories  .  .  .  translated
into  Hindoostanee  [or  rather  Hindi]
from  the  Brij  Bhakka  of  Soorut
Kubeeshwur;  by  Muzhur  Ulee
Khani  Vila,  and  Shree  Lulloo  Lai
Kub.  Calcutta,  1805.

Several  subsequent  editions  were
published  in  Calcutta — e.g.  1809,
1830,  1834,  1849.  An  abridged
version  appeared  in  Benares  [n.d.],
revised  and  edited  by  V.  H.  Sarma,
while  a  complete  one  was  pub-
lished in  Allahabad  in  1903.


Babington,  B.  G.


The  Veddla  Cadai,  being  the  Tamul
Version  of  a  Collection  of  Ancient
Tales  in  the  Sanscrit  Language;
Popularly  known  throughout  India,
and  entitled  The  Vetdla  Pancha-
vinsati.

Miscellaneous  Translations  from
Oriental  Languages,  vol.  i.

London,  1831.


268  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

Kali  Krishna.


Isvarachandra
Vidyasagara.


Lancereau,  E.


Barker,  W.  B.


Hollings,  W.


Bytal  Puchisi;  or  the  Twenty-five
Tales  of  Bytal.  Translated  from
the  Brujbhakha  into  English  by
Rajah  Kalee-Krishen  Behadur.

Calcutta,  1834.

[Vetdlapanchavimsati.  The  Baital
Pacifist,  or  Tales  of  a  Demon.
Translated  from  the  Hindi  by  .  .  .]
Calcutta,  1846.
Numerous  editions.  The  second
was  published  in  1851  and  the
tenth  in  1876.

Other  editions:  Calcutta,  1910
and  1911.

Extraits  du  Betdl-patchisi  (traduit)
par  M.  .  .  .  Journal  Asiatique,
Serie  IV,  vol.  xviii,  pp.  15-36,
366-410 ;  vol.  xix,  pp.  333-365.

Paris,  1851-1852.

The  Baital  Pachisi ;  or,  Twenty-five
Tales  of  a  Demon.  A  new  edition
of  the  Hindi  text,  with  each  word
expressed  in  the  Hindustani  char-
acter .  .  .  by  .  .  .  Edited  by
E.  B.  Eastwick.

Hertford,  1855.
A  new  edition  with  a  vocabulary
by  D.  Forbes  appeared  in  London,
1857.  Other  editions  were  :  Bom-
bay, 1857;  Agra,  1860;  Agra,
1862,  and  Bombay,  1868.

The  Bytal  Pueheesee.  Translated
into  English  by  .  .  .

Calcutta,  1860.
Other  editions :  Calcutta,  1866 ;
Allahabad,  1894  and  1900.


APPENDIX— TALES  OF  A  VELATA


269


Sadasiv  Chhatre.


Baital  pachisi;  or,  Twenty-five
Tales  of  a  Demon.  Translated  from
the  Hindi  by  Sadasiva  Kasinatha
Chhatre.  Bombay,  1862.

Other  editions  :  Bombay,  1862  and
1889 ;  Poona,  1875  and  1880.


Bhola  Nath.


Burton,  R.  F.


Vikramavildsa.  A  metrical  version
of  the  Baitdl-pachisi,  or  Twenty-five
Stories  of  King  Vikramdditya.  By
Bholanatha  Chaube.

Mainpuri,  1867.
Another  edition  appeared  in  Luck-
now,  1870.

Vikram  and  the  Vampire ;  or,  Tales
of  Indian  Devilry.  Adapted  by  .  .  .
Fraser's  Magazine,  vols,  lxxvii  and
lxxviii,  1868.

It  appeared  in  book  form  as  Vik-
ram and  the  Vampire,  or  Tales  of
Hindu  Devilry,  London,  1870,  and
was  reprinted  in  the  "Memorial
Edition  "  of  1893.


Platts,  J.


Harajivana  U.
Meheta.


Oesterley,  H.


The  Baital  Pachisi,  or  The  Twenty-
five  Tales  of  a  Sprite.  Translated
from  the  Hindi  text  of  D.  Forbes
by  .  .  .  London,  1871.

Baitdl-pachisi.     Twenty-five  Tales
of  a  Demon.    Translated  by  .  .  .
and  Balakrishnadasa  Garigadasa.
Bombay,  1872.

Baital  Pachisi  oder  die  funfund-
zwanzig  Erzdhlungen  eines  Damon.
In  deutscher  Bearbeitung  mit
Einleitung,     Anmerkungen     und


270


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


Oesterley,  H.


[Kalidasa  Gupta.]


[Deveze,  G.]


Andersson,  H.


Ryder,  A.  W.


Kincaid,  C.  A.


Nachweisen  von  .  .  .  Bibliothek
Orientalischer  Marchen  und  Er-
zahlungen  .  .  .         Leipzig,  1873.

[Vetdlapanchavimsati.  Translated
into  Bengali  verse  by  .  .  .]

[Calcutta,  1879.]
New  editions  :  Calcutta,  1911  and
1916.

Le  Bditdl  Paccisi  conies  Hindis.
[Translated  into  French,  with  an
introductory  preface,  by  .  .  .]  {Le
Museon,  torn,  xi.)

Louvain,  1892,  etc.

Likspokets  Tjugufem  Berdttelser.
Goteborgs  Kungl.  Vetenskaps-  och
Vitterhetssamhdlles  Handlingar,  4
foljden,  iii.         Gothenburg,  1901.

Twenty-two  Goblins.  Translated
from  the  Sanskrit.

London  and  Toronto,  1917.

Tales  of  King  Vikrama.

Oxford  University  Press,  1921.


INDEX  I

SANSKRIT  WORDS  AND  PROPER  NAMES


The  n  stands  for  "note "  and  the  index  number  refers  to  the  number  of  the  note.    If  there
is  no  index  number  to  the  n  it  refers  to  a  note  carried  over  from  a  previous  page.


Abhaichand,  a  Jain  minister,

204,  205
Abhaya,  minister  named,  201
Adityas,  174
Afzal  Khan,  216ft2
Agaladatta  ( Agadadatta),  219,

220
Agastya,  hermit  named,  166,

166ft2,  174
Agni  (the  God  of  Fire),  27
Agra,    229;    and    Oudh,   the

provinces  of,  2ft1
Ahiparaka,  242,  243
Aksha  seeds,  rosary  of,  135
Alaka,  the  capital  of  Kuvera,
72,  142, 142ft1 ;  city  called,
137,   142,    142W1,   142-145,
148,    149,    151,    152,    158,
160
Alakesa  Katkd,  the,  215
Alaknanda,  the  river,  2ft1
Alburz,  Mount,  56ft
Algum  or  Almug  trees,  106
'All   'Aziz,    Story   of  Jewdd,
248.    See  also  under  Gibb,
E.  J.  W.
Allahabad,  84ft2
Al-Mufaddal  ibn  Salama,  col-
lection of  proverbs  called
the  Fdkhir,  225
Al-Zahra,      a      sex-changing

spring,  224
Amaradatta,  King,  father  of
Mrigankadatta,    172,    183,
186,  190,  191
Amaravati,  city  called,  71
Amba    (Amva),   daughter   of

the  King  of  Kasi,  223ft2
Ambika,  the  goddess,  61,  83
Anangamanjari,  her  Husband
Manivarman,  and  the  Brah-
man Kamalakara,  98,  98ft1,
99-104,  256-258
Anangapura.  city  called,  5
Anangarati     and     her    Four

Suitors,  1,  1ft3,  2-4,  199
Ananta,  the  serpent,  129ft5

271


Andromeda  cycle  of  stories,

the,  227
Anga,  the  land  of,  13,  13ft2-3,

15,  17,  19,  20,  23
Angiyd  or  kurtd,  bodice  used

in  Kashmir,  210ft3
Anjana,  black  pigment  applied

to  the  eyes,  168ft5
Anjana  mountain,  the,  168
Anonymous  ["  Sandal-wood"],

The      Practical     Magazine,

vol.   vii,    Ldn.,   December

1877,  107
Anonymous     ["The    True

Sandalwood  of  India  "],

Scientific  American,  vol.  cviii,

New  York,  June  1913,  107
Apaharavarman,    the    Robin

Hood  of  Indian  fiction,  201
Apollodorus,     Library,     227,

228ft1,    230ft3.       See    also

under  Frazer,  J.  G.
Apollonius    Rhodius,    Argon-

autica,  228ft1
Apologus  (Obollah  of  Saracen

times),  106
Apsarases    (servants    of    the

gods),  90
Arabia,  the  tenth  Vetala  story

in,  203,  203ft5
Ardhanarlsvara  form  of  Siva,

the,  232
Arescon,  formerly  called  Ares-

cusa,  232
Arescusa,  a  girl  turned  into

a  boy,  232
Argha  or  arghya,  an  oblation

to  gods  and  venerable  men,

53,  123,  123ft1,  136
Aristotle,  on  change  of  sex,

230;   History   of  the    Con-
stitution of  Sybaris,  207
Arjuna  (or   Karttavirya,   one

of  the  Pandavas),  52ft3,  87,

129ft2,   162ft3,  168,   168ft*;

and  the  Narmada,  Note  on,

174


Arjuna," white,"  162ft3;  trees,

129,  129ft2,  162,  162ft3
Armeno,  collection  of  stories

of  Cristoforo,  210,  210ft*
Arthadatta,  merchant  named,

5,  98
Arthasdstra,     Kautilya,    15ft3,
_  218,  218ft1
Asan   of   white    lotuses,   an,

250
Ashrafls,  a  hundred,  249
Ashtar(t),  the  goddess,  231
Asoka,  33ft1
Asoka  tree,  54,  88,  100,  117,

178
Asuras  (enemies  of  the  gods),

124,  131,  155
Asvattha  tree,  91,  92,  95
Athena    naked,    Tiresias

blinded  by  seeing,  228
Athenaeus,  Deipnosophists,  206,

206ft3,  207.     See  also  under

Yonge,  C.  D.
Athtar,    originally   Ashtar(t)

or  Ishtar,  232
Avanti,  the  land  of,  1,  191
Ayodhya,  city  called,  35, 130,

172,    183,    185,    186,    187,

192,  202
'Aziz,  'Ali,  Story  of  Jewdd,  248

Babington,  B.  G.,  The  Veddla
Cadai,  being  the  Tamul
Version  of  a  Collection  of
Ancient  Tales  in  the  Sanscrit
Language,  Ldn.,  1831,  199,
200,  200ft1,  204ft2,  211ft2,
212ft2, 216ft1- 2, 222ft2, 234ft1,
241ft2,  245ft1,  250ft1,  251ft1,
256ft2,  257ft1-2,  259ft1, 260ft2,
262ft2,  264ft2

Babu  Sheo  Narain  Trivedi  on
Gaya,  85ft

Badan,  the  agreement  be-
tween the  Rajas  Hara  and,
229,  230

Badarlnath,  2ft1


272


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


Baghnakh  or  wagnuck,  weapon
for  catching  thieves,  216w2

Baka,  Rakshasa  named,  235

Baladhara,  a  commander-in-
chief,  67,  68

Bali,  King,  36,  98,  98w2

Banaras  or  Kasi — i.e.  Benares,
29w2

Bandhudatta  turning  her
lover  into  a  monkey,  44wx

Bandow,  C.  J.,  The  Precedents
of  Princess  Thoodamma
fsari,  Rangoon,  1881,  203w2

Banyan-tree,  32,  80,  121

Baranasi  or  Varanasi  (Ben-
ares), 29n2

Barddhaman,  a  city,  204

Baring-Gould,  S.,  Curious
Myths  of  the  Middle  Ages,
new  ed.,  Ldn.,  Oxford  and
Cambridge,  1869,  52rc2

Barker,  W.  B.,  and  Eastwick,
E.  B.,  The  Baitdl  Pachlsl,
or  Twenty-five  Tales  of  a
Demon,  Hertford,  1855,
199n1-2,204*1,211»1,212»1,
215W1,  222ft1,  233n3,  241m1,
244w2,  249rc3,  250w2,  256m1,
258ft1,  260ft1,  262ft1

Barnett,  L.  D.,  translation
made  by,  140ft1;  translation
of  twelve  slokas  of  Kshe-
mendra's  Brihat-katha-man-
jarl,  64,  65  ;  Antiquities  of
India,  Ldn.,  1913,  26,187n1;
The  Golden  Town  and  other
Tales,  Ldn.,  1909, 137ft1 ;  A
Supplementary  Catalogue  of
Sanskrit  .  .  .  Books  in  the
British  Museum,  Ldn.,  1908,
237ft2

Barth,  A.,  The  Religions  of
India,  trans.  J.  Wood,
2nd  ed.,  Ldn.,  1889,  85ft

Bartsch,  K.,  Herzog  Ernst,
Vienna,  1869,  189w2

Barygaza,the  modern  Broach,
106

Basdeo  or  Vasuki,  king  of  the
snakes,  236

Bastian,  A.,  Geographische  und
ethnographischeBilder,  Jena,
1873,  208ft1

Bateswar  (Bateshar),  229,
229m1

Beal,  S.,  Buddhist  Records  of
the  Western  World,  2  vols.,
Ldn.,  1884,  237ft2,  238m1;
The  Life  of  Hiuen  Tsiang
by  the  Shaman  Hwui  Li,
popular  ed.,  Ldn.,  1914, 106


Behram,  King,  210,  211

Behrnauer,  W.  Fr.  A.,  Die
Vierzig  Veziere  oder  Weisen
Meister,  ein  altmorgenldnd-
ischer  Sittenroman,  Leipzig,
1851,  252,  252ft1

Benares,  27,  29ft2,  220

Benfey,  Theodor,  Pantscha-
tantra,  2  vols.,  Leipzig,  1859,
213,  252ft2,  260

Bengal — Bihar,  the  country
of  the  sugar-cane,  15ft1

Bennayada,  Muladeva,  King
of,  218,  219

Bergson,  H.,  Le  Rire,  Paris,
1924,  253ft1

Bhaduria  Rajas,  the,  229,
230

Bhagalpur,  13ft2

Bhairava,  162

Bhara—i.e.  20  tulds,  187,
187ft1,  188

Bhashajna,  Vaisya  named,  3

BhavanI,  179

Bhillas,  117,  155,  158,  159,
165,  167

Bhima  (terrible),  162ft3, 168ft3,
235

Bhimabhuja,  minister  of  Sun-
darasena,  137,  147,  148,
154,  159

Bhlmaparakrama,  minister  of
Mrigankadatta,  128,  130,
165,  169,  183,  184,  190

Bhishma,  223,  223ft2

Bhogavati,  city  called,  1,  71

Bhutas  (demons),  1,  lft2

Bilaspur,  230

Bimba  lips,  10,  10ft2

Birlinger,  A.,  Aus  Schwaben,
2  vols.,  Wiesbaden,  1874,
21ft3

Bloomfield,  M.  ["On  the  Art
of  Entering  Another's
Body  "],  Proc.  Amer.  Phil.
Soc,  vol.  lvi,  1917,  260ft3;
"The  Art  of  Stealing  in
Hindu  Fiction,"  Amer.
Journ.  Phil.,  vol.  xliv,  1923,
164ft1,  201,  201ft1,  203ft1,
218ft2,  220;  ["The  Char-
acter and  Adventures  of
Muladeva "]  Proc.  Amer.
Phil.  Soc,  vol.  Hi,  1913,
220ft1 ;  The  Life  and  Stories
of  the  Jaina  Savior  Parc-
vanatha,  Baltimore,  1919,
203,  203ft1,  213;  "On
Recurring  Motifs  in  Hindu
Fiction,"  Journ.  Amer.
Orient.  Soc,  vol.  xxx,  191ft1;


Bloomfield,  M. — continued
"  On  Recurring  Psychi
Motifs  in  Hindu  Fiction-
the  Laugh  and  Cry  Motif,1
Journ.  Amer.  Orient.  Soc.
vol.  xxxvi,  251ft1,  254
254ft1,  255,  256,  260ft3
Boccaccio,  Decameron,  203
203ft8 ;  Filocolo,  203,  203ft
Bodhisattva,    incarnation    o

a,  49,  58,  61
Bohn's     Classical     Library
206/i2,  232ft1

Bohtlingk,  O.,  and  Roth,  R
[Sanskrit  Dictionary],  1852-
1875,  31ft2,  33ft1,  85ft1
112ft2,  146w2,  177ft3

Bolte,  J.,  Fischer,  H.,  and
Die  Reise  der  S'dhne  Giaffen
aus  dem  Italienischen  da
Christoforo  Armeno  ubersetzt
durch  Johann  Wetzel,  1583,
Tubingen,  1895,  210ft4

Bolte,  J.,  and  Polivka,  G.,
Anmerkungen  zu  den  Kinder-
und  Hausmdrchen  der  Bruder
Grimm,  3  vols.,  Leipzig,
1913-1918,  209ft1,  263ft1

Bombay  district,  belief  in
sex-changing  in  the,  229

Bostock,  J.,  and  Riley,  H.  T.,
The  Natural  History  of
Pliny,  Bohn's  Classical
Library,  6  vols.,  Ldn.,
1855-1856,  232,  232ft1

Brahma,  26,  27,  62,  84ft3,  96,
205

Brahmagranthi,  a  knot  on
the  sacred  thread,  27

Brahmasthala,  a  royal  grant
called,  108

Brereton,  C,  and  Rothwell,
F.,  Laughter  (trans,  of
Bergson's  Le  Rire,  1900),
Ldn.,  1911,  253wi

Brihaspati,  the  minister  of
Indra,  13

Brihat-katha,  the,  236

Brihat-katha-manjarl,  Kshe-
mendra,  64

Broach,  the  old  Barygaza,
106,  107

Bfrockhaus]  text  of  the
K.S.S.,  16ft1,  21m1,  22ft1,
55ft2,  60ft1,  68ft1,  78ft3,  93ft2,
108ft2,  125ft2,  129ft«,  153ft1,
158ft2,  164ft3,  167ft1,  170n4,
189ft1

Brunet,  G.,  Utlite  des  Contes
du  Sieur  d'Ouville,  2  vol
Paris,  1883,  209ft2


INDEX  I— SANSKRIT  WORDS,  ETC.


273


Buddha,  149ft1;  figures  of
sandalwood,  106  ;  and  the
sage  Ida  in  female  form,
the  union  of,  46

Buddhaghosha?  s  Parables,  244

Burlingame,  E.  W.,  Buddhist
Legends,  Harvard  Orient
Series,  3  vols.,  203,  203ft2

Burnell,  A.  C,  Yule,  H.,  and,
Hobson-Jobson :  being  A
Glossary  of  Anglo-Indian
Colloquial  Words  and
Phrases,  Ldn.,  1886,  107

Burton,  R.  F.,  //  Pentamerone,
or  The  Tale  of  Tales  .  .  .
of  Giovanni  Battista  Basile,
2  vols.,  Ldn.,  1893,  42ft1,
162/t1;  "  Notes  on  an  Her-
maphrodite," Mem.  Anth.
Soc.  Ldn.,  vol.  ii,  233ft1;
The  Thousand  Nights  and
a  Night,  10  vols.,  Kama-
shastra  Society,  Benares,
1885,  1886;  Supplemental
Nights  .  .  .,  6  vols.,  1886-
1888,  24ft1,  56w,  88ft2,  203,
217,  224,  224ft3,  245,  249,
258

[Busk,  R.  H.]  Sagas  from
the  Far  East;  or  Kalmouk
and  Mongolian  Traditionary
Tales,  Ldn.,  1873,  235ft2    .

Caeneus,  one  of  the  Lapithae,
228

Caenis,  the  prayer  of,  228

Cailasam,  217

Cambridge  edition  of  the
Jdtaka,  162ft1,  220,  221ft1,
241ft*

Campbell,  J.  M.,  Gazetteer  of
the  Bombay  Presidency,  26
vols.,  Bombay,  1896,  26,
230

Cassicius,  L.,  a  citizen  of
Thysdris,  232

Cassius  Longinus,  C,  Roman
consul,  232

Cazotte,  Jacques,  and  Chavis,
Dom  [Les  Veillees  du  Sultan
Schahriar  .  .  .  ],  Le  Cabinet
des  Fees,  vols,  xxxviii-xli,
Geneva,  1788-1793,  245,
245ft4

"  C.B."  ["  What  I  saw  of  the
Sandal- Wood  Trade  "],  The
Leisure  Hour,  Ldn.,  Sept-
ember 1869,  107

Chaitra,  the  month  of,
26

Chakravdkas,  5,  5ft3,  30

VOL.   VII.


Chamberlain,  B.  H.  ["  Ko-
Ji-Ki  ...  or  Records  of
Ancient  Matters  "],  Trans.
As.  Soc.  Japan,  vol.  x,
Supp.,  Yokohama,  1882,
238,  238ft2

Champa,  woman's  complexion
like  the,  199

Champapuri,  the  capital  of
Anga,  13ft2

Chandalas,  the,  168

Chandana,  u  refreshing/'  105

Chandaprabha,  minister  of
Siindarasena,  137, 145, 147,
148,  159

Chandasimha,  117, 118, 118ft1,
119

Chandi,  the  goddess,  100,  103

Chandra  of  Alwar,  Pandit
Rama,  164ft1

Chandraprabha,  king  named,
72 ;  King,  82-84,  86

Chandraprabha,  wife  of  Yasa-
hketu,  40

Chandrasvamin,  142 ;  son  of
Devasvamin,  72-77

Chandravaloka,  king  named,
87,  90,  93,  95

Chandravati,  wife  of  Dharma,
116-119

Chanmrosh  (chamrosh),  a  myth-
ological bird,  56ft

Chariclo,  a  nymph,  227

Charitra,  Parsvanatha,  the,  202

Chaturika  ("Prudence"),
176

Chaucer,  Franklin  s  Tale,  203,
204

Chauvin,  Victor,  Bibliographic
desOuvrages  Arabes,  11  vols.,
Liege  and  Leipzig,  1892-
1909,  52ft2,  82ft1,  160ft1,
203ft5,  213,  224ft2,  252ft1

Chavada  king  of  Pattan,  the,
230

Chavis,  Dom,  Cazotte,
Jacques,  and  [Les  Veillees
du  Sultan  Schahriar  .  .  .],
Le  Cabinet  des  Fees,  vols,
xxxviii-xli,  Geneva,  1788-
1793,  245,  245ft*

Chenab  Valley,  figures  of  the
Naga  Raja  and  his  Vezier
in  the,  236

Chilli,  Shaik,  Folk-Tales  of
Hindustan,  2nd  ed.,  Alla-
habad, 1913,  256

China,  sandalwood  by  mistake
attributed  to,  107

Chitrakuta,  city  called,  87,
87w2,  93,  95


Chota  Nagpur,  230

Cillana,  wife  of  King  Srenika,
200

Ciramjivin  (Long-lived),  bird
named,  234

Cithaeron,  Mount,  227

Clouston,  W.  A.,  The  Book
of  Sindibad ;  or,  The  Story
of  the  King,  his  Son,  the
Damsel,  and  the  Seven  Vazirs
[Glasgow],  1884,  214ft2-3,
224,  224w2;  A  Group  of
Eastern  Romances  and  Stories
[Glasgow],  1889,  224ft1 ;
Originals  and  Analogues  of
some  of  Chaucer  s  Canterbury
Tales,  Ldn.,  1886,  203
203ft3,  204

Cosmas  Indicopleustes  [The
Christian  Topography],  106,

Cosquin,  E.,  Etudes  Folk-
loriques,  Paris,  1922,  82ft,
263

Cox  well,  C.  F.,  Siberian  and
OtherFolk-Tales,Ldn.,1925,
204,  235ft2

Crathis  and  Sybaris,  the
rivers,  206

Crawley,  A.  E.,  "Dress,"
Hastings'  Ency.  Bel.  Eth.,
vol.  v,  231ft4

Cristoforo  Armeno's  collec-
tion of  stories,  210,  210ft4

Croix,  F.  Petis  de  la,  Histoire
de  la  Sultane  de  Perse,  et  des
Visirs.  Contes  Turcs.,  Paris,
1707,  245,  245ft3

Croker's  Tales,  Grimm's
Irische  Elfenmdrchen,  based
on,  120ft2

Crooke,  W.,  "The  Brahmani
Duck,"  Ind.  Ant.,  vol.  x,
1881,  5ft3;  "Kedarnath,"
Hastings'  Ency.  Rel.  Eth.,
vol.  vii,  2ft1 ;  The  Popular
Religion  and  Folk-Lore  of
Northern  India,  %  vols.,  new
ed.,  Oxford  Univ.  Press,
1926, 1ft2, 5ft3, 146ft1,  230ft1;
"Water,  Water-Gods
(Indian),"  Hastings'  Ency.
Rel.  Eth.,  vol.  xii,  146ft1

Crore  (100  lakhs,  orl0,000,000),
37

Crotona,  207

Cunningham,  A.,  Archaeologi-
cal Survey  of  India,  23
vols.,  Simla  (vols,  i  and  ii)
and  Calcutta,  1871-1887,
229ft1


274


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


Cupid  and  Psyche,  the  myth

of,  21w3
Cyllene,  Mount,  227

Daityas  (enemies  of  the  gods),

131,  155
Daphnis,  69ft1
Darbha  grass,  149
Daridravarnana,  "description

of  poverty,"  the,  202
Dasa-kumara-charita,  the,  201,

223ft1.       See    also     under

Meyer,  J.  J.
Datta,  a  merchant,  202
Day,    L.    B.,     collection     of

stories  by,  261
Deccan,  the,  3,  116
Delhi,  the  Emperor  of,  229
"Devadatta    the    Gambler,"

story  of,  245ft2
Devasoma,  son  of  Yajnasoma,

112,  113
Devasvamin, Brahman  named,

29,  72
Devi,  the  goddess,  216
Dewhurst,   R.   P.,  review  of

the   Ocean  in   Journ.   Roy.

As.  Soc,  October  1924, 56ft
Dhanadatta,    son   of    Artha-

datta,  5
Dhanapala,  merchant  named,

78
Dhanavati,    daughter    of

Dhanapala,  78-81
Dhanwar     tribe,     belief    in

change  of  sex  among  the,

230
Dharanivaraha,  king  named,

108'
Dharma,  king  named,  116, 117
Dharmadatta,    merchant

named,  5-8
Dharmadhvaja  and  his  Three

Very  Sensitive  Wives,  King,

10,  10%,  11,  12,  204-211
Dharmardja,    superintendent

of  religion,  33,  33ft1
Dharma- sastr as,  the,  250
Dhartarashtras,  the,  129
Dinars,  80,  81 ;  magic  purse

always  containing  a  thou-
sand, 222ft3
Dirghadar^in,      minister      of

Yasahketu,  13-16,  16ft1,  17,

18,24
Dlrghatapas,  hermit  named,

135
Domba  (a  man  of  low  caste),
'  263
Dozon,    A.,    Conies   Albanais,

Paris,  1881,  224,  226ft2


Dresden  MS.  of  the  Forty
Vazlrs,  252

Dridhabuddhi,  minister  of
Sundarasena,  137,  147-153,
157,  159

Dridhamushti,  minister  of
Mrigankadatta,  132,  135,
165,  169

Drupada,  story  of  King,  223,
228

Drury,  H.,  The  Useful  Plants
of  India,  2nd  ed.,  Ldn.,
1873,  105

Dubois,  J.  A.,  Le  Pantcha-
Tantra,  Paris,  1862,  224

Duff,  J.  G.,  A  History  of  the
Mahrattas,  3  vols.,  Ldn.,
1826,  3rd  ed.,  Bombay,
1873,  216ft2

Dummedha  Jataka,  the,  No.  50,
162ft1

Durga  (Parvati,  Uma,  wife  of
Siva),  52ft1,  153,  154,  155,
167,  168

Durgapisacha,  king  named,
164-167,  167ft2,  168-170,
170ft2,  182,  190

D[urgaprasad]  text  of  the
K.SS.,  the,  16n\  45ft2,
78ft3,  118ft1,  123ft1,  125ft2,
126ft1,  129ft*,  153ft1,  158ft2,
164w3,  167ft1,  170ft*,  182ft2

Durlabhaka-Pratapaditya  II
and  the  merchant's  wife,
244

Durva  grass,  123ft1,  189

Dutt,  M.  N.,  The  Ramayana.
Translated  into  English  Prose
from  the  Original  Sanskrit  of
Valmiki,  7  vols.,  Calcutta,
1892-1894,  174

Dutt,  U.  C,  The  Materia
Medicaof  the  Hindus.  Com-
piled from  Sanskrit  Medical
Works,  Calcutta,  1877,  105

Dvapara  Yuga,  the,  1,  1ft5


Eastwick,E.B., Barker,  W.B.,
and,  The  Bait  a  I  Pachisi,
or  Twenty-Jive  Tales  of  a
Demon,  Hertford,  1855,
199ft1'2,  204ft1,  211ft1,  212ft1,
215ft1,  222ft1,  233ft3,  241ft1,
244ft2,  249ft3,  250ft2,  256ft1,
258ft1,  260ft1,  262ft1

Edgerton,  Franklin,  Vikramas
Adventures,  or  The  Thirty-
Two  Tales  of  the  Throne,
Cambridge,  Mass.,  1926,
212,  234w2,  252ft2


Enthoven,  R.  E.,  The  Folklort
of  Bombay,  Oxford,  1924,
229,  230ft1;  ["The  Folk-
lore of  Gujarat  "]  Ind.  Ant.,
vol.  xli,  1912,  and  vol.  xlv,
1916,  230ft1

Eorosh,  probably  a  mistake
for  chanmrosh,  56ft

Europe,  the  tenth  Vetala
story  in,  203

Everes,  father  of  Tiresias,
227

Fischer,  H.,  and  Bolte,  J.,
Die  Reise  der  S'dhne  Giqffers
aus  dem  Italienischen  des
Christoforo  Armeno  ubersetzt
d'urch  Johann  Wetzel,  1583,
Tubingen,  1895,  210ft4

Fleeson,  K.  N.,  collection  of
stories  by,  261

Frazer,  J.  G.,  Apollodorus,
The  Library,  2  vols.,  Loeb
Classical  Library,  Ldn.,
New  York,  1921,  3ft2,  227,
227ft2,  228ft1,  230ft3;  The
Golden  Bough,  3rd  ed.,  12
vols.,  1911-1915,  231ft23,
240,  240ft3;  Pausanias  De-
scription of  Greece,  2nd  ed.,
6  vols.,  Ldn.,  1913,  240,
240ft2


"


Ganas   (attendants   of  Siva),

84,  104
Gandharva  form  of  marriage,

the,  21,  44,  48,  194,  251
Gandharvas     (attendants

the  gods),  176
Gandhavati,  the  river,  162
G  a  n  e  &  a    (son   of  Siva  and

Parvati),    26,     128ft1,    131,

132,  161,  162,  169
Ganga,  the  goddess,  49
Ganges,  the,  13ft2,  29ft2,  66,

83,  84,  129,  192,  204
Garcin  de  Tassy.     See  under

Tassy,  Garcin  de
Garhwal  District,  the,  2ft1
Garuda,  55,  56,  56ft,  57-63,

213,  233,  234,  236
Gaster,  M.,  The  Exempla  of

the  Rabbis,  Ldn.,  Leipzig,

1924,  203ft*
Gaur,  the  country  of,  204
Gauri  (Durga,  Parvati,  etc.),

22,  46,  49,  51,  54,  61,  62,

71,  88,  131,  176-180,  186,

187,  234
Gaya,  83,  84,  84ft3,  85

250


INDEX  I— SANSKRIT  WORDS,  ETC,


275


"  Gaya,"     G.    A.     Grierson,

Hastings'  Ency.  Rel.  Eth.,

vol.  vi,  85ft
Gayakshetra,    the    body    of

Gayasura,  85ft
Gayakupa,  the  well  of  Gaya,

85ft
Gayasirah,  the  head  of  Gaya,

85ft      '
Gayasura,  use  of  the  body  of,

84ft3,  85ft
Gayatrl  mantra,  the,  27
Ghaghra,  the  river,  29ft2
Ghatotkacha,  168,  168ft3
Gibb,  E.  J.  W.,  The  History

of  the  Forty  Veziers,  or  the

Story    of  the  Forty  Morns

and   Eves,   Ldn.,   1886,

203ft*,    245,    252ft1;     The

Story  ofJewad.    A  Romance

by    'All    'Aziz    Efendi   the

Cretan,  Glasgow,  1884,  248
Gillen,  F.  J.,  Spencer,  B.,and,

Northern  Tribes  of  Central

Australia,  1899,  230ft4
Giraud,  Jules,  Testaments  aVun

Haschischeen,  Paris  [1913],

249ft2
Gokarna,  59,  60
Gomukha,  minister  of  Nara-

vahanadatta,  195
Gonzenbach,     Laura,

Sicilianische  Marchen,  with

notes  by  R.  Kohler,  2  vols.,

Leipzig,  1870,  Sin1,  126ft2
Gorresio,  Signor  Gaspare,  the

work  of,  174
Gotra,  or  lineage  of  a  person,

27
Gould,  S.  Baring-.    See  under

Baring-Gould,  S.
Gregory,  the  legend  of  Pope,

81ft1
Gregory,  J.  C,  The  Nature  of

Laughter,  Ldn.,  1924,  253ft1
Grierson,    G.    A.,    "Gaya,"

Hastings'  Ency.  Rel.  Eth.,

vol.  vi,  85ft
Griffith,   R.  T.   H.,    The

Ramayan  ofValmiki,  5  vols.,

Ldn.,  and  Benares,   1870-

1874,  174
Grimm,    J.   and    W.,    Irische

Elfenmarchen,    Leipzig,

1826,  120ft2
Grohmann,   J.  V.,  Sagen  aus

Bohmen,  Prague,  1836,137ft3
Gubernatis,  A.  de,  Zoological

Mythology,  or  the  Legends  of

Animals,  2  vols.,  Ldn.,  1872,

21n*


Guna,  "virtue,"  or  "string,"

112ft2
Gunadhya,  236
Gunakar,    a  Brahman's   son,

244
Gunakara,  minister  of  Mrigan-

kadatta,     128,     165,"  169,

170
Gunapalita,  137
Gunshekar,  a  king,  204

Habicht,  C.  M.,  edition  of
The  Arabian  Nights,  203ft5

Hades,  Patala  or,  129ft5

Hagen,  F.  H.  v.  d.,  Altdeutsche
und  Altnordische  Helden-
Sagen,  3  vols.,  Breslau,
1872-1880, 3w2, 166HM73H1,
181W1

Hahn,  J.  G.  von,  Griechische
und  albanesische  Marchen,
Leipzig,  1864,  224

Hale  Wortham,  B.  See  under
Wortham,  B.  Hale

Hammer,  Rosenbl,  2  vols.,
Stuttgart  and  Tubingen,
1813,  203w*

Hamsadvipa,  138-143,  145,
149,  150,  151,  159

Hamsavall,  courtesan  named,
80,81

Hara  and  Raja  Badan,  the
agreement  between  Raja,
229-230

Harisvamin,  who  first  lost  his
Wife,  and  then  his  Life, The
Brahman,  29,  29ft1,  30-33,
212-215

Harsha  (i.e.  Siladitya  Harsha-
vardhana),  Nagananda,  236,
237,  237W1'2

Hartland,  E.  S.,  The  Legend
of  Perseus,  3  vols.,  Ldn.,
1894  - 1896,  227/11,  240,
240ft1

Harun  al-Rashld,  nocturnal
adventures  of,  217

Hastings,  James,  Dictionary
of  the  Bible,  106.  For  de-
tails see  under  Dictionary,
Encyclopaedia  of  Religion
and  Ethics,  2ft1,  33ft1,  85ft,
146ft1,  231ft4' 5,  253ft1.  For
details  see  under  Ency.  Rel.
Eth.

Heliodorus  [Mthiopicd],  189ft2

Hemavijaya,  Katharatnakara,
200,  200ft2.  See  also  under
Hertel,  J.

Hera  and  Zeus,  dispute  be-
tween, 227


Herklots,G.  A.,  Islam  in  India,

or  the    Qanun-i- Islam,   new

ed.,    Oxford    Univ.    Press,

1921,  249,  249ft1
Hermaphroditus,  232
Herodotus,  206
Herrtage,  S.  J.  H.,  The  Early

English  Versions  of  the  Gesta

Romanorum,  Early  English

Text  Soc,  No.  xxxiii,  Ldn.,

1879,  3ft2,  81ft1
Hertel,    J.,     Katharatnakara.

Das    Marchenmeer.        Eine

Sammlung   indischer  Erz'dh-

lungen   von   Hamavijaya,   3

vols.,  1920,  200ft2
Himalaya,  the,  186
Himalayas,  the,  62
Himavat,  a  great  mountain,

49,84
Hiranyakasipu,  175,  175ft1
Hiranyaksha,  168,  168ft2
Hiranyavati,  city  called,  1
Hiranyavati,  wife  of  Dhana-

pala,  79
Hiuen    Tsiang,    29ft2,    106;

story  related  by,  237,  238
Hobbes,     Thomas,     Humane

Nature,  Ldn.,  1650,  253ft1;

The  Leviathan,  Ldn.,  1651,

253ft1
Hooper,    D.,    "Caliature

Wood,"  Nature,  vol.  lxxxvi,

1911,  107
Hyginus,  Fabulce,  221n2

Ianthe,  daughter  of  Telestes,

228
Ida,  royal  sage  named,  46
Iken,  C.  J.  L.,  Touti  Nameh,

eine     Sammlung    Persischer

Marchen     von     Nechschebi,

Stuttgart,      1882,     222ft4,

241ft3
"  Inachus,  daughter  of,"  Io,

the,  228
'Inayatu-'llah,      Bahar-i-

Danush,    214.       See    also

under  Scott,  J.
India    Office    MSS.    of   the

K.S.S.,      164ft2,       165ft13,

167ft1,      170ft2'3,      175ft1-2,

177ft1'3,     178ft2,      179ft1-2,

182ft1
India,  scarcity  of  lions  in,  259
Indlvaraprabha,  daughter  of

Kanva,  89,  90,  93
Indra  (the  king  of  the  gods),

10,  13,  19,  35,  49,  50,  78,

88,  88ft1,  96,  98,  112,  131,

150,  173ft2


276


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


Indulekha,    wife   of    King

Dharmadhvaja,  10,  11
Io  (Isis),   the    "daughter  of

Inachus,"  228
Iphis,   daughter    of    Ligdus,

228
Ishtar,  the  goddess,  231
Isis,  the  goddess,  228
I-Tsing   on   Harsha  and  his

court,  237
Izzat  Ullah,   Gul-i  Bakdwall,

224,  224ft1

Jacobi,  H.  G.,  Ausgewdhlte
Erz'dhlungen  in  Mahdrdshtri,
Leipzig,  1886,  217,  219  '

Jdtaka,  The,  Dummedha  (No.
50),  162m1  ;  Kanavera  (No.
318),  220 ;  Mahdndradakas-
sapa  (No.  544),  164ft1 ;  Sata-
patta  (No.  279),  202  ;  Sulasd
(No.  419),  221ft1;  Umma-
dantl  (No.  527),  241

Jdtaka,  Cambridge  edition  of
the,  162ft1,  220,  221ft1,
241ft5 ;  -maid,  the,  243

Jimutaketu,  a  lord  of  the
Vidyadharas,  49,  51

Jimutavahana,  The  Sacrifice
of,  49,  49ft1,  50-63,  233-240

Jimutavahana,  vezier  of  the
Naga  Raja  called,  236

Jivadatta,  Brahman  named,  4

Jolly,  J.,  "  Recht  und  Sitte,"
Encyclopaedia  of  Indian
Philology,  1896,  26

Jiilg,  Bernhard,  Kalmukische
Mdrchen.  Die  Mdrchen  des
Siddhi-Kiir,  Leipzig,  1866,
235ft2

Jumna,  the  river,  229,  230

Jvalamukha,  Brahman  demon
named,  92,  95

Kabandha,  166,  166ft1
Kabri,  the  king  of,  230
Kadru,  mother  of  the  snakes,

55,56
Kailas  Kund,  a  mountain  lake,

236
Kala,  174
Kalhana,   Rdjataranginl,  244.

See  also  under  Stein,  M.  A.
Kali  (the  goddess),  215
Kali,  the  demon,  66
Kali     Yuga     (the     "age    of

vice  "),  1,  1ft5,  112ft2,  168
Kalidasa,  Mdlavikdgnimitra,

2ft1.        See      also      under

Tawney,  C.  H.
Kalinga,  the  land  of,  112


Kalpa  {i.e.   1000  Mahayugas,

or  4320  million  years),  62,

115
Kama,  the   God  of  Love,  2,

10,  43,  53,  64,  65,  68,  99,

100,  118,  140,  178,  179
Kamala — i.e.  "lotus,"  99ft4
Kamalakara,  Anangamanjari,

her  Husband  Manivarman,

and  the  Brahman]  98,  98ft1,

99-104,  256-258
Kamallla,   wife    of   Vikrama-

ditya,  210
Kamasena,       the       greedy

courtesan,  202
Kanakapura,  city  called,  66
Kanakavati,  wife  of  Jimuta-
ketu, 60
Kanara,    the    home    of    the

sandalwood-carving  indus-
try, 106
Kanauj,      Harsha,     Raja     of

Thanesar  and,  237
Kanavera    Jdtaka,    the     (No.

318),  220
Kanchanapura,    city    called,

181,  184
Kandarpasena,  Queen,  149
Kanva,    hermit    named,    89,

90,  136,  161
Kara,  u  finger,"  or  "  tribute,"

112ft2
Karabhagriva,  castle  named,

165,  166,  167,  172
Karakash      (possibly      the

Khotan-daria),   tale    about

the,  237
Karma    (acts    and    their   re-
tribution), 254,  255
Karmasena,   King,  163,  169,

171,    172,   173,    175,    176,

180-186,  192
Kama,  52ft3

Kartavlrya  or  Arjuna,  174
Karttika,  the  month,  142
Kdsa  grass,  26
Kdsi  or  Bandras  {i.e.  Benares),

29ft2
Kasi,  the  King  of,  223ft2
Kasyapa,   father   of  Garuda,

56
Kathd,  Alakesa,  the,  215
Kathdratndkara,    Hemavijaya,

200,  200w2
Kathd- sarit-sdgara,  the,  196
Kathiawar,    sea-offerings    in,

146fti
Kattika  festival,  the,  242
Katyayani,  female  mendicant

named,  138,  141
Kaumudi  festival,  the,  243


Kausambi,  106,  194,  195
Kautilya,    Arthasdstra,     15ft3,

218,  218ft1
Kaveri,  the  river,  166
Kedarnath,  one  of  the  twelve

lihga  shrines  in  India,  2ft1
Keith,    A.    B.,    The    Sanskrit

Drama,  Oxford,  1924, 237ft2
Keith,     A.     B.,     Macdonell,

A.  A.,  and,  Vedic  Index  of

Names  and  Subjects,  2  vols.,

Ldn.,  1912,  10ft2
Kemble,    W.,  in   a  note   on

Gaya,  85ft
Kern,  Dr,  21ft2,  119ft1,  170ft3,

171ft1,  178ft1, 179ft1-2,  181ft2
Khadgadhara,     Kshatriya

named,  3,  4
Khandava    forest,    the,    ]

135ft2   .
Khurafa,  225
Kichaka  (cane),  162ft3
Kiratas,   the,   164,  165,   170,

171,  172,  182,  186,  190
K'iu-sa-ta-na  (Khotan),  237
Knowles,  J.  H.,  collection  of

stories  by,  261
Kohler,     R.,     notes    to

Gonzenbach's    Sicilianisa

Mdrchen,  81ft1,  126ft2
Koli     women,     sea-offerings

among,  146?i2
Kos   (generally   one   and   an

eighth  mile),  166
Krappe,  Mr  A.  H.,  189ft2
Krishna,  52ft3,  57,  175ft1
Krita  Yuga,  the,  1,  1ft5
Kritantasantrasa,      Raksh

named,  23
Kshantisila,    ascetic    named,

121,  122
Kshatriya  (warrior  caste),  3,

4,  234
Kshatriyas  at  the  upanayana,

age  of,  26
Kshemendra,  52ft4,  64,  78ft3;

Brihat-kathd-manjarl,  64
Kuhn,    A.,   Sagen,    Gebrduche

und  Mdrchen  aus  Westfalen,

2     vols.,     Leipzig,     1859,

120ft2
Kumaradatta,    Brahman

named,  142
Kumuda  flowers,  cluster  of,  8,

99,  99ft4,  102
Kund,     Kailas,    a    mountain

lake,  236
KuntI,  235
Kurtd  or  angiyd,  bodice  used

in  Kashmir,  210ft3
Kusa  grass,  117,  132


135.


sche


lasa


I


INDEX  I— SANSKRIT  WORDS,  ETC.


277


Kusanabha,  hermit  named,  18
Kushmandas  (demons),  124
Kuvera,  the  God  of  Wealth,
72,  186,  223

Lakh  (100,000),  216

Lakshmana  (brother  of
Rama),  166

Lakshml  (Goddess  of  Pros-
perity and  Beauty,  and  wife
of  Vishnu,  16,  19,  129ft*,
186,  188

Lakshmidatta,  merchant
named,  18,  19

Lalitalochana,  heavenly
nymph  named,  193-196

Lane,  E.  W.,  An  Account  of
the  Manners  and  Customs  of
the  Modern  Egyptians,  5th
ed.,  Ldn.,  I860,  224?i3

Lapithae,  Caeneus,  one  of  the,
228

Lassen,  C,  Indische  Alter-
thumskunde,  4  vols.,  Bonn,
Leipzig,  1847-1862,  106

Lavanyavati,  daughter  of
Dharma,  116,  116ft2,  117-
119 ;  wife  of  Harisvamin,
29,  212

Lee,  A.  C,  The  Decameron,
its  Sources  and  Analogues,
Ldn.,  1909,  204

Lenormant,  F.,  La  Grande-
Grece.  Paysages  et  Histoire,
3  vols.,  Paris,  1881-1884,
206,  206ft2,  208

Levi,  M.  I.  ["Une  Fable  de
la  Fontaine  et  Les  Contes
Orientaux"]  (No.  11),  Melu-
sine,  cols.  541-545,  203ft4

Licinius  Crassus,  P.,  Roman
consul,  232

Ligdus,  228

Lihga  of  Siva,  219 ;  temple
containing  a,  149 ;  shrines
in  India,  twelve  famous,  2ft1

LloydMorgan,C./-'Laughter/'
Hastings'  Ency.  Pel.  Eth.,
vol.  vii,  253ft1

Loeb  Classical  Library,  the,
227ft2,  228ft2

M'Crindle,  J.W.,  The  Christian
Topography  of  Cosmas,  an
Egyptian  Monk,  Hakluyt
Soc,  Ldn.,  1897,  107

Macdonald,  D.  B.,  "The
Earlier  History  of  the
Arabian  Nights,"  Journ.
Roy.  As.  Soc,  July  1924,
225w2


Macdonell,  A.  A.,  and  Keith,

A.  B.,  Vedic  Index  of  Names

and  Subjects,  2  vols.,  Ldn.,

1912,  10ft2
Madanamanchuka,    head

queen  of  Naravahanadatta,

192-196
Madanamanjari,  the  laugh  of,

254
Madanasena    and    her     Rash

Promise,  5, 5ft1, 6-9, 199-204
Madanavega,    Vidyadhara

named,  29
Magna,  the  month  of,  26
Mahabala,  a  young  thief,  202
Mahabharata,  lake  resembling

the,  129
Mahabharata,  the,  38ft2,  72ft2,

223,  223ft2,  228,  235.     See

also  under  Roy,  P.  C.
Mahadev  (Siva),  205
Mahakala,   the   cemetery  of,

162
\Mahanaradakassapa   Jdtaka]

(No.  544),  164ft1
Mahasena,  king  named,  137,

140-143,    148,     149,    156,

158,  159,  160
Mahatapas,  son  of  Dirghata-

pas,  135
Mahatmas,     belief    in     sex-
changing       blessings       or

curses  of,  229
Mdhdtmyam,  Satrurhjaya,  the,

214
Mahendraditya,    King,     141,

145,  147,  148,  159
Mahesa  Chandra  Nyayaratna,

Pandit,  85ft
Mahishmati,  Arjuna,  King  of,

174
Mainasy  188
Mala,  Jdtaka-,  the,  243
Malatika,  friend  of  Ananga-

manjari,  100-103
Malava,  the  land  of,  116
Mdlavikdgnimitra,  Kalidasa,  2ft1
Malaya    mountain,    the,    51,

55,  59,   62,   68,   192,   193,

194,  195
Malayavati,  daughter  of  Vis-

vavara,  52-55,  59,  61,  63,  64
Malcolm,  J.,  Sketches  of  Persia,

2  vols.,  Ldn.,  1827,  203ft3
Malyachal  hill,  the,  233
Manahsvamin,      Brahman

named,    40,    40ft3,    41-47,

80,81
Mandakim,  the  river,  2,  2ft1
Mandaradeva,    king    named,

140-143,  149,  151,  159,  160


Mandaravati,  Sundarasena
and,  137,  137ft1,  138-160

Mandiya,  a  beggar,  218-220

Manivarman,  and  the  Brah-
man Kamalakara,  Ananga-
manjari,  her  Husband,  98,
98ft1,  99-104,  256-258

Mansarovar,  tale  about  the
lake,  230ft1

Mara  (the  tempter  of  Gautama
Buddha),  5,  5ft2,  70

Maricha  (a  Rakshasa),  166

Maspero,  G.,  Popular  Stories
of  Ancient  Egypt,  trans,  by
MrsC.  H.W.Johns,  Ldn.,
1915,  92ft1

Ma  tang  a,  hermit  named,
144,  149,  151,  152,  156

Matangas,  the,  164,165, 165ft1,
166-170,  170ft2,  171,  182,
190

Mathura,  the  conduct  of,  72ft3

Mayavatu,  king  named,  164,
164ft<  167,  169-171,  177,
180-182,  184-186,  190,  192

Medhavati,  the  wife  of  Dlr-
ghadarsin,  14,  14ft1

Meghabala,  minister  of
Mrigankadatta,  132,  135,
165,  169

Melusina,  the  European
snake-maiden,  21ft3

Menaka  (a  beautiful  Apsaras),
89

Meredith,  George,  "  On  the
Idea  of  Comedy,"  New
Quarterly  Magazine,  April
1877,  253ft1

Meru,  Mount,  49

Metel  d'Ouville,  A.  le,  col-
lection of  stories  by,  209,
209ft2.  See  also  under
Brunet,  G.

Meyer,  J.  J.,  Dasa  Kumar  a
Charita,  or  The  Story  of  the
Ten  Princes,  1902,  223ft1;
Hindu  Tales.  An  English
Translation  of  JacobVs  Aus-
gew'dhlte  Erzdhlungen  in
Maharashtri,  Ldn.,  1909,
218,  218ft2,  223ft1

Miller,  F.  J.,  Ovid,  Metamor-
phoses, 2  vols.,  Loeb  Classi-
cal Library,  Ldn.,  1916,
228ft2

Mi'raj,  or  Ascension  of
Muhammed,  the,  245

Mitravasu,  a  friend  of  Jimuta-
vahana,  51,  52,  54,  55,  57,
63

Mlechchhas,  124


278


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


Mohani,  249

Montaigne,    M.    de,    Essays,

232ft2
Mookerji,  R.,  Harsha,  Rulers

of  India  Series,  Ldn.,  1926,

237W1
Morgan,  C.  Lloyd.    See  under

Lloyd  Morgan,  C.
Moutier,   I.,  edition  of  Boc-
caccio's Filocolo,  203ft7
Mrichchhakatika,  the,  72ft3
Mrigankadatta,  44  ;  Story  of,

125-127,  128-133,  134-136,

161,  162-173,  175-192
Mrigankasena,  king   named,

20
Mrigankavati,     daughter     of

Mrigankadatta,      44,      46 ;

daughter  of  Mrigankasena,

20-22,24,25;  wife  of  King

Dharmadhvaja,  10,  11
Mufaddal    ibn    Salama,    al-,

collection  of  stories  called

the  Fakhir,  225
Muhammed,    the    Mi'raj     or

Ascension  of,  245
Muhars,  gold,  249,  250
Muir,  John,  Original  Sanskrit

Texts,  5  vols.,  Ldn.,  1858-

1872,  72n2,  174
Muladeva,  the  arch-thief  of

Hindu    fiction,    217,    218,

219,  223  ;  magician  named,

41,  47,  222;  the  stanza  of,

118
Munja  grass,  26
Murva,   sacred   thread   made

of,  26
Must  state,  elephants  in,  41ft1

Nadakuvara,  160

Nagas,  snake-demons,  56-58,

60,   127,   127ft1,   128,   130,

134,  161,  213,  227,  236
Nagpur,  Chota,  230
Nahusha,    king    named,    70 ;

King,  166
Namados  or  Nammadios — i.e.

Narmada,  174
Nandana  (the  garden  of  the

gods),  129,  148
Nandayanti,  wife   of  Ratna-

datta,  35
Nandigrama,  temple   called,

183
Naraka,  the  torments  of,  251
Narali-purnima,   or    coco-nut

festival,  the,  146ft2
Naravahanadatta,  son  of  the

King   of  Vatsa,   192,   194,

195


Narbada — i.e.  Narmada,  the,

174
Narmada,  the  river,  2ft1,  164,

168  ;  Note  on  Arjuna  and

the,  174
Natchetiran,  King,  257
Natesa   Sastri,    Pandit.     See

under  Sastri,  Pandit  Natesa
Nepala,     the     kingdom     of,

40
Nerbuda — i.e.  Narmada,  the,

174
Nerbudda — i.e.  Narmada,  the,

174
Nidhidatta,  merchant  named,

15-17
Nishadha,  country  called,  137  ;

the  mountain  of,  23
Nyayaratna,    Pandit    Mahesa

Chandra,  85ft


Oesterley,  Hermann,  Baital
Pachisi  oder  die  funfund-
zwanzig  Erzdhlungen  eines
Damon,  Bibl.  Orient.  Mar-
chen  u.  Erz'dhl.,  Leipzig,
1873,  213,  241ft4,  250

Oldham,  C.  F.,  "The  Nagas:
a  Contribution  to  the  His-
tory of  Serpent  Worship,"
Journ.  Roy.  As.  Soc,  July
1901,  236ft1

Ommana,  Oman  of  Saracen
times,  106

Otho,  the  devotion  of  the
followers  of  the  Emperor,
69ft2

Oudh,  the  provinces  of  Agra
and,  2ft1

Ouville,  A.  le  Metel  d',  col-
lection of  stories  by,  209,
209ft2.  See  also  under
Brunet,  G.

Ovid,  Metamorphoses,  227ft2,
228ft1>2.  See  also  under
Miller,  F.  J.


Paddhati,    Sarngadhara,    the,

202
Padma  Purana,  the,  85ft
Padmanabha,       Brahman

named,  31, 32;  king  named,

98
Padmarati,    Queen    of   Vira-

deva,  1,  2
Padmavati,  city  called,  1
Palestine,  the  tenth    Vetala

story  in,  203,  203ft4
Pali  Jdtaka,  the,  241


Pancadivyadhivdsa,  the  rite  of,

218
Panchaphuttika,  Sudn

named,  3

Panchavati,  166

Pandavas,  the,    52ft3,   162ft3,
168ft3

Pandu,  90,  93

Panzer,    F.,    Beowulf,    1910,

126ft2
Paravataksha,    the    curse    of

the  Naga,  127,  134
Pare,  Ambrose,   French  sur-
geon, on  changes  of  sex,

232,  233
Parijata  tree,  the,  16
Pdrsvandtha     Charitra,      the,

202
Parvati   (Durga,   Uma,   etc.),

52ft1
Pasupata  ascetic,  73,  75,  11,

115
Patala,   the  underworld,   20,

36,  56,  129,  129ft5,  215
Pataliputra,  city  called,  108,

i08ft2
Paton,  L.  B.,  "  Ashtart  "  an<

"  Ishtar,"  Hastings'  Ency.

Rel.  Eth.,  vols,  ii  and  vii,

231ft5
Pattan,  the  King  of,  230
Paundra,    the    land    of    (i,e.

Bengal-Bihar),  15,  15ft1
Pelew     Islands,      pretend(

change  of  sex  in  the,  231
Persia,  the  tenth  Vetala  stoi

in,  203,  203ft3
Petis  de  la  Croix,  F.,  Histoir

de  la  Sultane  de  Perse,  et  de

Visirs.    Contes  Turcs,  Paris

1707,  245,  245ft3
Phaestus,  Telethusa  of,  228
Phalguna,  the  month  of,  26
Phlegon,  Mirabilia,  227ft2
Phylarchus,  History,  207
Pindas,  offerings  of,  85ft
Pisangajata,    hermit    named,

192-194
Plti,  body  smeared  with,  26
Plato  on  change  of  sex,  230
Pliny,  174;  Naturalis  Historia,

232.     See  also  under  Bos

tock,  J.,  or  Riley,  H.  T.
Polivka,    G.,    Bolte    J.,  and,

Anmerkungen  zu  den  Kinder-

und  Hausm'drchen  der  Br'uder

Grimm,    3    vols.,    Leipzig,

1913-1918,  209ft1,  263ft1
Po-lo-na-se  of  Hiuen  Tsiang-

i.e.  Benares,  the,  29ft2
Poseidon,  228


INDEX  I— SANSKRIT  WORDS,  ETC.


279


Post,  G.  E.,  "Algum  Trees,

Almug   Trees,"    Hastings'

Dictionary  of  the  Bible,  vol .  i,

1900,  106
Prabandhacintdmaniy        Meru-

tunga  Acarya,  202,  255
Prachandasakti,   minister    of

Mrigankadatta,    128,    165,

169
Pradyumna,    the    god,    112;

king  named,  112
Prajnakosa,  minister  named,

172
Prajnasagara,      minister      of

Yasahketu,  40,  44
Pratishthana,      city      called,

125
Pravaras,  the,  27
Prayaga — i.e.  Allahabad,  84,

84ft2
Preller,  L.,  Griechische  Myth-

ologie,    2    vols.,    3rd    ed.,

Berlin,  1872-1875,  3ft2
Preziosa  transformed  into  a

bear   through    a    piece   of

wood,  42ft1
Priti    (wife   of    the    God    of

Love),  118
Prym,  E.,  and  Socin,  A.  [Der

Neu-Aramaeische  Dialekt  des

Tur   'Abdin],  2  vols.,  Got-

tingen,    1881;  vol.   ii  also

entitled,  Syrische  Sagen  und

Maerchen    aus    dem    Volks-

munde,  81ft1
Psyche,  the  myth  of  Cupid

and,  21ft3
Pulindas,  the,   153-155,   157,

159,  164,  167
Purdnas,  the  Padma  and  Vayu,

85ft
Pururavas,    son    of    Buddha

and  the  sage  Ida  in  female

form,  46
Pushpahasa,  a  learned  Brah-
man, 210
Pushpakaranda,     garden

called,  177

RadlofF,  W.,  Die  Spracken  der
turkischen  St'dmme  Sud-
Sibiriens  und  der  Dsungar-
ischen  Steppe,  vol.  i ;  Proben
der  Folks  litter  atur  der  Turk-
ischen St'dmme  Sud-Sibiriens ,
parts  1-6,  St  Petersburg,
1866-1886,  204

Rfihu,  166

Rajatarangini,  Kalhana,  244

Rakshasa  named  Kritanta-
santrasa,    23;    swallows


Rakshasa — continued

Mrigankavati,    a    terrible,

21,  22
Rakshasas  (demons),  93,  124,

166,  174,  201,  212,  234,  235
Rakshasi,    female     form     of

Rakshasa,  116
Ralston,  W.  R.  S.,  and  Schief-

ner,    F.    A.    von,     Tibetan

Tales,  Ldn.,  1882,  162ft1
Rama,  14,  35,  166,  174,  183,

192
Rama     Chandra    of     Alwar,

Pandit,  164ft1
Rdmayana,    the,    174.       See

also  under  Griffith,  R.  T.  H.
Rambaud,    A.   N.,   La   Russe

epique,  Paris,  1876,  189ft2
Rambha,  160
Rasalu,  Raja,  261
Rati    (wife   of    the    God    of

Love),  40,  64,  99,  118,  138,

140,  178
Ratnadatta,  merchant  named,
4  35,  37,  38

Ratnavati,  daughter  of  Ratna-
datta, 35,  37,  38
Ravana,    chief    of  the    Rak-
shasas, 174
Ravi  Valley,  the,  236
Rhodius    Apollonius,    Argon-

autica,  228ft1
Richet,  Charles,  "Le  Hachich

—  L'Opium  —  Le     Cafe,"

Revue    des    Deux    Mondes,

March  1877,  248
Riley,  H.  T.,  Bostock,  J.,  and,

The  Natural  History  of  Pliny,

Bonn's    Classical    Library,

6  vols.,  Ldn.,  1855,   1856,

232,  232ft1
Rishis,  the  divine,  84
Robertson  Smith,  W.,  Religion

of  the  Semites,  Ldn.,  1894,

231ft*
Robin  Hood  of  Indian  fiction,

Apaharavarman,  the,  201
Rohde,    E.,   Der    Griechische

Roman  und  Seine  Vorlaufer,

Leipzig,  1876, 139ft2,  147ft1,

189ft2
RohinI  (a  star),  138
Rosen,     Georg,     Tuti-Nameh.

Das  Papageienbuch,  2  vols.,

Leipzig,  1858,  203ft6, 222ft3,

241ft*
Rost,  Dr,  164ft2,  165ft3
Roth,  R.,  Bohtlingk,  O.,  and

[Sanskrit  Dictionary],  1852-

1875,    31ft2,    33ft1,     85ft1,

112ft2,  146w2,  177ft3


Roth  well,  F.,  Brereton,  C,
and,  Laughter  (trans,  of
Bergson's  Le  Rire,  1900),
Ldn.,  1911,  253ft1

Roy,  P.  C,  The  Mahabharata
of  Krishna  -  Dwaipayana
Vyasa,  new  ed.,  Calcutta,
1919,  etc.,  38ft2,  223ft2

Rudra,  174

Rudras,  180

Rudraprayag,  2ft1

Russell,  R.  V.,  and  Rai  Baha-
dur Hira  Lai,  The  Tribes
and  Castes  of  the  Central
Provinces  of  India,  4  vols.,
Ldn.,  1916,  230ft2

Saintyves,   P.,  Les   Contes  de

Perrault,  Paris,  1923,  263
Saktirakshita,    king    named,

164,  164ft3,  165,  170,  182,
^  186,  190
Sdla  tree,  174
Salama,  al-Mufaddal  ibn.   See

under  Mufaddal
Sama,  courtesan  of  the  King

of  Benares,  220,  221
Samudradatta,  merchant

named,  6,  7,  9
Sandhya,    evening    worship,

,    27

Sankaracharya,      the      Saiva

reformer,  2ft1
Sankhachuda,  57-61,  63,  234
Sankhapala,  the  race  of,  59
Sarabhas,      fabulous      eight-
legged  animals,  88,  88ft1
Sarasvati,  27
Sarayu,  the  river,  13ft2
Sdmgadhara     Paddhati,     the,
,   202
Sasankapura,  city  called,  141,

142,  145,  148,  160
SasankavatI,    Book    XII,    1-

192
SasankavatI,      daughter      of
Karmasena,  125ft2, 128,130,
132,   134,    161,    162,    169,
176-190,  192,  194
Sasin,   magician    named,   41,

41ft2,  47,  222
Sasiprabha,    daughter  of
Yasahketu,  40,  42,  44,  47 ;
wife  of  Mahasena,  137, 140
Sastras,  the,  66,  199
Sdstras,  Dharma-,  the,  250
Sastrl,  Pandit  S.  M.  Natesa,
collection    of    stories    by,
261 ;    Folklore   in    Southern
India,    4    parts,    Bombay,
1884-1893,  219


280


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


Satapatta   Jataka    (No.    279),

,  202

Satas>inga,  Mount,  202

Sati  (widow-burning),  216

Satrumjaya  Mahatmyam,  the,
214

Saubha,  King,  223ft2

Savan  or  August,  festival  held
in,  146W1

Savaras,  117,  154,  156,  158,
167,  171,  182,  184,  190

Savitri,  88

Sayce,  A.  H.,  Babylonians  and
Assyrians.  Life  and  Customs,
Ldn.,  1900,  231ft*

Schiefner,  F.  A.  von,  Ralston,
W.  R.  S.,  and,  Tibetan
Tales,  Ldn.,  1882,  162ft1

Schmidt,  Bernhard,  Griech-
ische  Marchen,  Sagen  und
Volkslieder,  Leipzig,  1877,
61ft1

Schmidt,  R.,  Die  Cukasaptati
(Textus  Simplicior) ,  Kiel,
1894,  210ft1- 2

Schoff,  W.  H.,  The  Periplus
of  the  Erythraean  Sea,  New
York,  Ldn.,  etc.,  1912,106;
The  Ship  "Tyre,"  Ldn.,
1920,  106

Schofield,  W.  H.,  "Chaucer's
Franklin's  Tale,"  Modern
Language  Ass.  Amer.,  vol.
xvi  (N.S.),  vol.  ix,  203

Schopenhauer,  A.,  The  World
as  Will  and  Idea,  3  vols.,
Ldn.,  1883,  1886,  253ft1

Schroder,  Carl,  Sanct  Brandan,
Erlangen,  1871,  189ft2

Schwalbe,  E.,  Die  Morpho-
logic der  Missbildungen  des
Menschen  und  der  Tiere,
3  vols.,  Jena,  1906-1913,
233ft1

Scott,  J.,  Bahar-Danush ;  or,
Garden  of  Knowledge,  3
vols.,  Shrewsbury,  1799,
203ft3,  214ft4,  259

Seeman,  B.  ["  Sandal- wood
and  its  Commercial  Import-
ance "],  The  Intellectual
Observer,  vol.  iv,  No.  20,
Ldn.,  1863,  105-107

Senart,  E.,  Les  Inscriptions  de
Piyadasi,  2  vols.,  Paris,
1881,  1886,  33ft1

Sesha  (a  thousand-headed
snake),  137

Shaikh  Chilli,  Folktales  of
Hindustan,  2nd  ed.,  Allaha-
bad, 1913,  256


[Shakespeare]  Macbeth,
164ft1

Shardana  or  caste-marks  made
of  sandalwood  paste,  105

Shegapuram,  the  city  of,
257

Shivaji,  Afzal  Khan's
murderer,  216ft2

Shriban  (Siva),  216

Siddhas  (independent  super-
humans),  51-54,  89,  176

Siddhikarl,  the  witch,  263

Sikhandin,  girl  who  changed

,   her  sex,  223,  223ft2

Siladitya  Harshavardhana
(Harsha),  237

Simrock,  K.,  Die  deutschen
Volksb'ucher  13  vols.,  Frank-
furt a.  Main,  1845-1865,
21ft3,  81ft1

Simsapa  tree,  1,  5,  10,  13,  29,
35,  40,  49,  66,  71,  78,  87,
98,  108,  112,  115,  116

Sinhaparakrama,  117,  119

Sinhasanadvatrinsika,  the,  234,
,  234ft2

Sirlsha  flower,  145

Slta,  the  wife  of  Rama,  14,
166

Siva,  1,  2,  13ft3,  15,  22,  23,
27,  29,  38,  49,  64,  71,  73,
74,  81,  82,  84,  88,  96,  104,
113,  114,  118,  124,  125,
129, 129ft3,  131,  138, 149ft1,
163,   174,   183,    192,   204,

,  216,  219,  223,  232

Sivadasa,  recension  of  the
Vetdlapanchavimsati,       250,

,   251

Sivapura,  city  called,  40

Smith,  V.  A.,  The  Early
History  of  India,  Oxford,
1904,  237ft1;  The  Oxford
History  of  India,  2nd  ed.,
Oxford,  1923,  237ft1

Smith,  W.  Robertson.  See
under  Robertson  Smith,  W.

Sobhavati,  city  called,  112

Socin,  A.,  Prym,  E.,  and  [Der
Neu-Aramaeische  Dialekt  des
Tur  'Abdin],  2  vols.,  Got-
tingen,  1881  ;  vol.  ii,  also
entitled :  Syrische  Sagen  und
Maerchen  aus  dem  Volks-
munde,  81ft1

Solanki  king  of  Kabri,  the,
230

Somadeva,  64,  195,  199,  200,
207,  211,  212,  216,  217,
234,  236,  237ft2,  241,  250,
251,  256,  259,  262,  264


Som(a)datt(a),  the  speech  of,
200

Sorensen,  S.,  An  Index  to  the
Names  in  the  Mahabharata,
13  vols.,  Ldn.,  1904-1925,
223ft2,  235ft1

Spencer,  H . ,  Essays :  Scientific,
Political  and  Speculative,
3  vols.,  Ldn.,  1868-1874,
253ft1;  "The  Physiology
of  Laughter,"  Macmillan's
Magazine,  March  1860,
253ft1

Speyer,  J.  S.,  The  Gatakamala,
or  Garland  of  Birth- Stories,
Ldn.,  1895;  also  forming
vol.  i  of  Sacred  Books  of
the  Buddhists,  1895,  243ft1 ;
Studies  about  the  Kathasarit-
sagara,  Amsterdam,  1908,
16ft1,  78ft3,  93ft2, 98ft2, 125w2,
126ft1,  129ft6,  132ft2,  153ft1,
a  158ft2,  170ft4,  182ft2

Sraddha,  the  ceremony  of,
the,  26,  84,  85n

Srenika,  King,  200

Srutadhi,  Brahman  named,
128,  130,  132,  133,  162,
163,  165,  169,  171,  172,
175,  177,  180,  181,  182,
183,  185,  190,  192

Stein,  M.  A.,  Kalhana's
Rajataranginl.  A  Chronicle
of  the  Kings  of  Kasmir,  2
vols.,  Westminster,  1900,
244ft1

Stevenson,  Mrs  Sinclair,  The
Rites  of  the  Twice-Born,
Oxford  Univ.  Press,  1920,
26,  28,  188ft1

Sthulabahu,  minister  of  Mri-
gankadatta,  132,  135,  165,
169

Stokes,  M. ,  Indian  Fairy  Tales,
Ldn.,  1880,  255

Sudra,  before  the  upanayana
a  Brahman  boy  is  a,  26

Sudra  caste,  3,  4,  199

Sukasaptati,  the,  210.  See
also  under  Schmidt,  R.

Sulasa  Jataka,  the  (No.  419),
221ft1

Sully,  James,  An  Essay  on
Laughter,  Ldn.,  1902,  253:

Sumatra,  15ft3

Sundarasena    and     Manda:

,  vatl,  137,  137ft1,  138-160

Suradeva,  son  of  Viradeva

Surathadeva,  140

Suryaprabha,     king     nam
78.  80.  81.  82.  84.  86


on


INDEX  I— SANSKRIT  WORDS,  ETC.


281


Sushena.  son  of  Karmasena,
185-188,  190

Sutapas,  an  ascetic,  202

Suvarnabhumi  —  i.e.  Lower
Burma,  15ft3

Suvarnadvipa,  probably  Sum-
atra (the  Island  of  Gold),
15ft3

Suvigraha,  Brahman  named,
172,  173

Svayambhu,  the  "self-
existent,"  149,  149ft1

Svetadvipa,  152

Swynnerton,  C,  Romantic  Tales
from  the  Panjab,  Ldn.,  1903,
261

Sybaris,  city  and  river,  206, 207

Tamdla,  black  as,  167 ;  trees,
162,  162ft2

Tamralipti,  city  called,  78,
98,  99,  103

Taravali,  wife  of  King  Dhar-
madhvaja,  10,  11

Tassy,  Garcin  de,  Allegories
Recits  Poetiques,  2nd  ed.,
1876,  224W1

Tawney,  C.  H.,  98ft2,  140ft1,
158ft2,  182ft2,  235ft2,  259ft2 ;
The  Kathakoca ;  or,  Treasury
of  Stories,  Roy.  As.  Soc,
1895,  220,  223,  254;  The
Mdlavikagnimitra.  A  Sanskrit
Play  by  Kalidasa,  Calcutta,
1875,  2ft1;  The  Prabandha-
cintamaniy  or  Wishing- stone
of  Narratives  by  Merutunga
Acaryay  Calcutta,  1901,  202

Teiresias  or  Tiresias,  the
legend  of,  3ft2,  227,  228

Tejas,  "courage  "  or  "bright-
ness," 95ft1

Telethusa  of  Phsestus,  228

Temmu,  the  Emperor,  pro-
poser of  the  Ko-ji-ki,  238

Temple,  Sir  R.  C,  collection
of  stories  by,  261

Thanesar  and  Kanauj,
Harsha,  the  Raja  of,  237

"  fhinthakarala,  the  bold
Gambler,"  story  of,  255, 256

Tilottama,  a  heavenly  nymph,
29

Timaeus,  the  Greek  historian,
206,  207,  208

Tiresias  or  Teiresias,  the
legend  of,  3ft2,  227,  228

Tremearne,  A.  J.  N.,  The  Ban
of  the  Bori,  Ldn.  [1914],
231ft*

Treta  Yuga,  the,  1,  1ft5


Tripura,  the  conquest  of,  131

Trivedi,  Babu  Sheo  Narain,
on  Gaya,  85ft

Trivikramasena  and  the  Men-
dicant, King,  1,  4,  5,  9,  10,
12,  13,  25,  29,  33-34,  35,
39,  40,  48,  49,  63,  66,  69-
70,  71,  77,  78,  85-86,  87,
96-97,  98,  104,  108,  111,
112,  115,  116,  120-121;
Conclusion  of,  122,  122ft1,
123-125,  263

Trivikramasena's  request,
King,  124

Tsiang,  Hiuen,  29ft2,  106;
story  related  by,  237,  238

Tsing,  I-,  on  Harsha  and  his
court,  237

Tulas  (measures  of  weight),
187ft1

Turkey,  the  tenth  Vetala
story  in,  203,  203ft6

Tzetzes,    John,    Scholiast    on

,    Lycophron,  227ft2

Udayana,  King  of  Kausambi,

106
Ujjayini,   city  called,   1,   10,

71,126,  127,  128,134,163,

169,   171,  172,    173,    175,

176,   177,    180,   181,    182,

183,  185,  191ft2
Ullah,  Izzat,  Gul-i  Bakawati,

224,  224ft1
UmmadantI,     daughter    of

Tritavaccha,  241-243
UmmadantI  Jataka  (No.  527),

241
Unmadini,  The  Beautiful,  66,

66ft1,  67-69,  241-244
Upa?iayana,     investing     with

the  sacred  thread,  26
Uppalavanna,    Story   of    the

Rahandama,  244
Urabunna     tribe,     belief    in

change  of  sex  among  the,

230
"  Uttarakanda,"  the  last  book

of  the  Ramayana,  174

Vaisakha,  the  month  of,  26

Vaisya  caste,  3,  4

Vaisyas  at  the  upanayana,  age
of,  26

V aj  ra,  "diamond"  or
"  thunderbolt,"  8ft1

Vakraloka,  city  called,  78,  80

Vamasiva,  hermit  named,  113

Vanaraja,  202

Varanasi  or  Baranasi  (Ben-
ares), 29ft2


Varanasi,  city  called,  29,
29ft2,  82,  84,  192

Vararuchi  Recension  of  the
Vikrama-charita,  the,  252ft2

Vasudatta,  merchant  named,
80

Vasuki,  the  king  of  the
snakes,  56,  58,  176,  176ft2,
236

Vatsa,  the  King  of,  195

Vatsyayana,  Kama  Sutra,  258

Vayu  Pur  ana,  the,  85ft

Vedas,  the,  26,  27,  95,  108,
109,  112

Vegavati,  Vidyadhari  named,
195

Vetala,  Appendix:  The
Twenty-five  Tales  of  a,
(co?it.),  263 ;  entering  a
corpse  by  the  power  of
spells,  123,  126;  the
friendly,  163  ;  questions  of
the,  4,  9,  12,  25,  33,  39,
48,  63,  69,  77,  85,  96,  104,
111,  115,  120;  the  stories
of  the,  1-119

Vetalapanchaviihsati,  the,  236,
262 ;  coincidence  of  the
Marathi  and  Hindi  versions
of  the,  264;  Comparative
Table  of  stories  in  the
three  chief  translations  of
the,  264;  date  of  the,  208  ;
the  end  of  the,  125,  125ft1 ;
the  Hindi  version  of  the,
199,204,205,211,212,215,
221,   222,   233,    234,  241,

244,  249,  250,    251,   256,

258,  259,  260,  262,  264;
Sivadasa's  recension  of  the,
250,  251 ;  the  Tamil  ver-
sion of  the,  199,  200,  204,
205,  206,  211,  212,  213,
216,   221,   222,   234,  241,

245,  250,   251,    256,    257,

259,  260,  262,  264,  264ft*
Vetala's  favour  through  cour-
age, winning  a,  120,  120ft2,
126

Vetalas  (demons),    124,    125,

127,  130
Vichitrakatha,      minister     of

Mrigankadatta,    128,    165,

169
Vidy  ad  haras        (independent

superhumans),   20,  22,  24,

29,  49,  52,  54,  55,  58,  59,

61,   62,  63,  89,   121,    123,

124,  125,  255
Vidyadhari,    female    form   of

Vidyadhara,  78,  195


282


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


Vidyadharl    Wife,    and     his

Faithful     Minister,     King

Yasahketu,   his,    13,    13m1,

14-25
Vikrama-charita,   the   Bengali

version  of  the,  252,  252ft2
Vikramaditya,  King,  210 ;  an

incarnation  of  Siva,  124
Vikramakesarin,    minister  of

Mrigankadatta,    125,    127,

128,  163,  165,  169,  179
Vikramaraja,     Muladeva     as

King  of  Bennayada,  218
Vikramasakti,      minister     of

Sundarasena,  137,  138,  147,

148,  154,  159
Vilva  leaves,  158
Vimalabuddhi,     minister     of

Mrigankadatta,    128,    165,

169,  178
Vinata,    mother   of    Garuda,

55,  61
Vindhya,    the,     166 ;    forest,

the,   116,    130;  hills,    the,

170  ;  mountain(s),  the,  165,

213  ;  range,  the,  165,  167,

175
Vindhyaketu,    king    named,

153-160
Vindhyas,  the,  165
Vinitamati,    minister    of

Amaradatta,  183 ;  minister

of  Mandaradeva,  143,  144
Virabahu,  king  named,  5
Viracharita,  the,  202
Viradeva,  king  named,  1,  2,

4
Vlraketu,    king    named,    35,

38,  218
Virata,  King,  162,  162ft3
Viravara,  the  story  of,  252
Virgil,  Aeneid,  228ft1
Visala,  city  called,  98
Vishnu,   19,    27,   35,   47,   78,

78ft2,  96,  98ft2,  129,  129ft4,

131,  149ft1,  168ft2,  188,  204,

205
Vishnusvamin,  80 ;  Brahman

named,  108
Visvavasu,  a  king  of  the  Sid-

dhas.  51.  52


Vittapapuri,  119
Vyaghraparakrama,    minister

of  Sundarasena,  137,    147,

148,  159
Vyaghrasena,      minister      of

Mrigankadatta,    132,    134,

161,  165,  169

Wagnuck  or  bagnakh,  weapon
for  catching  thieves,  216ft1

Waddell,  L.  A.,  "Bhutan,
Buddhism  in,"  Hastings'
Ency.  Rel.  Eth.,  vol.  ii,
33ft'1

Waldau,  A.,  Bohmisches  Mar-
chenbuch,  Prague,  1860,  3ft2,
61m1

Waramunga  tribe,  belief  in
change  of  sex  among  the,
230

Watt,  G.,  A  Dictionary  of  the
Economic  Products  of  India
.  .  .,6  vols.,  Calcutta,  1889-
1896,  105-107,  249ft2

Weber,  A.,  "  Ueber  das  £at-
runjaya  Mahatmyam.  Ein
Beitrag  zur  Geschichte  des
Jaina,"  Abhandl.f.  d.  Kunde
d.  Morgen.,  Leipzig,  1858,
214ft1

Westermarck,  E.,  The  History
of  Human  Marriage,  3  vols.,
5th  ed.,  Ldn.,  1921,  231m1

Wickerhauser,  M.,  Die  Papa-
geim'drchen,  Leipzig,  1858,
222ft3,  241ft3

Winternitz, M.,  "The  Serpent
Sacrifice  mentioned  in  the
Mahabharata, "  Joum.  Bom-
bay Br.  Roy.  As.  Soc,
August  1926,  233ft2

Wlislocki,  H.  von,  Volksdich-
tungen  der  siebenbiirgischen
und  siidungarischen  Zigeuner,
Vienna,  1890,  226ft1

Wortham,  B.  Hale,  The
Buddhist  Legend  of  Jimu-
tavahana  from  the  Katha-
Sarit-Sagara,  Ldn.,  237ft2;
"  The  Stories  of  Jimuta-
vahana  and   Harisarman,"


Wortham — continued

Journ.      Roy.      As.      Soc.
vol.  xviii,  1886,  237ft2

Yajnasoma,  Brahman  named,
112,  113

Yajnasthala,    village    callec
108,  112

Yakshas  (subjects  of  Kuvera),
124,  223

YakshinI,  female  form  of
Yaksha,  244

Yama  (the  God  of  Death),
33ft\  84ft3

Yamuna,  the  river,  84;
daughter  of  Matanga,  144,
152

Yasahketu — i.e.  "Glory-
banner,"  king  named,  40,
40ft2 ;  his  Vidyadharl  Wife
and  his  Faithful  Minister,
King,  13,  13ft1,  14-25,  211-
212

Yasodhana,king  named, 66, 67

Yogi,  the  vision  of  the,  250

Yogis,  belief  in  sex-changing
incantations  of,  229

Fq/awfl.?(measuresof  distance)
88,  166

Yonge,  CD.,  The  Deipnosc
phists,  or  Banquet  of  the
Learned  of  Atheneus,  3  vols.,
Bohn's  Classical  Library,
Ldn.,  1854,  206ft3

Yudhishthira,  33ft1

Yuga  old,  the  city  of  Ujjayim
a,  163

Yugas  or  Ages  of  the  World,
the  four,  1,  1ft5,  50

Yule,  H.,and  Burnett,  A.  C,
Hobson-Jobson :  being  A
Glossary  of  Anglo-Indian
Co  lloquial  Words  and  Phrases,
Ldn.,  1886,  107

Zend  literature — i.e.  Aveste

56ft
Zeus,  dispute  between  He]

and,  227
Z  i  m  m  e  r ,     H . ,     A  Itindiscl

Leben,  Berlin,  1879,  72ft2


Abduction     of     tfasankavati,

the,  180
Abhandl.  f.  d.  Kunde  d.  Mor-

gen.,    "  Ueber  das  £atrun-

jaya       Mahatmyam.       Ein

Beitrag  zur  Geschichte  der

Jaina,"    A.    Weber,    1858,

214ft1
Abnormal     development     of

the  clitoris,  change  of  sex

due  to,  233
Absolute  Brahman,  one  of  the

four  states  of  the  soul,  the,

26
Account  of  the  ceremony  of

wpanayana,  26-28
Account    of   the  Manners  and

Customs     of     the     Modern

Egyptians,  An,  E.  W.  Lane,

224ft3
Actions    in    previous    births,

the  unchangeable  effect  of,

148,  154
[Adonis,     Attis,     Osiris)     The

Golden  Bough,  vol.  ii,  J.  G.

Frazer,  231ft2- 3
Adrift   on    a   river,    exposed

children  set,  81ft1,  82ft
Adventures  of  the  four  minis-
ters, the,  134-136,  161
Adventures,  or  The  Thirty-Two

Tales   of    the    Throne,    Vi-

kramds,  F.  Edgerton,  212,

234w2,  252ft2
Aeneid,  Virgil,  228ft1
Age  of  boys  at  the  upanayana,

26  ;  the  grey  locks  of  old,

190,  191,  191ft1
"Age  of  vice,"  the  haliyuga,

112ft2
Ages  of  the  World,  the  four

Yugas,  or,  1,  1ft5
Agreement      between       the

father   and    the    son,    the,

117,  118,  119;  between  the

Rajas     Hara    and     Badan,

229-230;    between  Vasuki

and  Garuda,  the,  56
"Ahnenhain" — i.e.  "grove of

ancestors"    (  =  cemetery),

lft1

283


INDEX  II

GENERAL

Air,  power  of  flying  in  the,

24,    29,    126,    127;    voice

from   the,    2,    19,    38,   54,

131
["Algum       Trees,       Almug

Trees"]      G.      E.      Post,

Hastings'  Dictionary  of  the

Bible,  106
Alive    from    the    body    of  a

Rakshasa,     Mrigankadatta

emerges,  22
Allegories      Recits     Poetiques,

Garcin  de  Tassy,  224ft1
Ally  moves  towards  Ujjayini,

the,  173
Altdeutsche      u.      Altnordische

Helden-Sagen,   F.  H.  v.  d.

Hagen,  3ft2,    166ft3,   173ft1,

181ft1
Altindisches  Leben,  H.  Zimmer,

72ft2
Amazing    effect    of    Umma-

danti's      beauty     on     the

Brahmans,  241,  242
Amer.     Journ.     Phil.,     "The

Art  of  Stealing  in  Hindu

Fiction,"     M.     Bloomfield,

vol.xliv,  1923, 164ft1,  201ft1,

203ft1,  218ft2,  220
Amer.     Orient.     Soc.     Journ.,

191ft1,    251ft1,    254ft1,   255,

256,  260ft3.    For  details  see

under  Journ.  Amer.  Orient.

Soc.
Amer.  Phil.  Soc.  Proc,  220ft1,

260ft3.       For    details     see

under    Proc.    Amer.    Phil.

Soc.
Analogues  of  some  of  Chaucer's

Canterbury   Tales,   Originals

and,  W.  A.  Clouston,  203,

203ft3,  204
"Ancestors,  grove   of" — i.e.

a  cemetery,  lft1
Animal  transformations,  42ft1,

44ft1
Animals,   knowledge   of  the

speech    of,    3,    3ft2,     199;

listening      to      Malayavati

playing   on    the   lyre,    52,

52ft2


Anmerkungen  zu  den  Kinder-
und  Hausmarchen  der  Briider
Grimm,  J.  Bolte  and  G.
Polivka,  209ft1,  263ft1

Annals,  the,  232

Annual  festival  at  Kailas
Kund,  236

Annual  Statement  of  the  Sea-
born Trade  of  British  India,
107

Anointing  and  blackening
the  bodies  of  thieves,  216,
216ft2

"  Another's  Body,  Entering,"
motif,  260

Answers  to  the  Vetala's  ques-
tions, the  king's,  4,  9,  12,
25,  33,  34,  39,  48,  63,  69,
70,  77,  86,  96,  104,  111,
115

Anlh.  Soc.  Ldn.  Mem.,  "  Notes
on  an  Hermaphrodite,"
R.  F.  Burton,  vol.  ii,  233ft1

Antiquary,  Indian,  "The  Brah-
mani  Duck,"  W.  Crooke,
vol.  x,  1881,  5ft3;  ["The
Folklore  of  Gujarat "],
R.  E.  Enthoven,  vols,  xli
and  xlv,  1912,  1916,  230ft1

Antiquities  of  India,  L.  D.
Barnett,  26,  187ft1

Apollodorus,  The  Library,
J.  G.  Frazer,  3ft2,  227,  227ft2,
228ft1,  230ft3

Appearance  of  the  helpful
Vetala,  the,  163 ;  of  the
terrible  demon,  the,  91,
92,  95

Appendix :  The  Twenty-five
Tales  of  a  Vetala  (cont.),
199-263

Appreciation  affected  by  the
use  of  hashish,  the  senses
of,  248,  249

Arabian  Nights,  The.  See
under  Nights

Arabian  romances,  storms  in,
147ft1

Arch-thief  of  Hindu  fiction,
Muladeva,  the,  217,  218,
219


284


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


Archaeological  Survey  of  India,
A.  Cunningham,  229ft1

"  Ardashir  and  Hayat  al-
Nufus,"  The  Nights,  R.  F.
Burton,  217

Argonautica,  Apollonius
Rhodius,  228ft1

Army  of  Saktirakshita,  the,
170

Art  of  diplomacy,  the,  171,
172

["  Art  of  Entering  Another's
Body,  On  the  "J  M.  Bloom-
field,  Proc.  Amer.  Phil.  Soc,
260ft3

(Art,  The  Magic)  The  Golden
Bough,  vol.  ii,  J.  G.  Frazer,
240ft3

"Art  of  Stealing  in  Hindu
Fiction,  The,''  M.  Bloom-
field,  Amer.  Journ.  Phil.,
164ft1,  201,  201ft1,  203ft1,
218ft2,  220

Arthasdstra,  Kautilya,  15ft3,
218,  218ft1

Ascension  of  Muhammed,  the
Mi 'raj  or,  245

Ascetic,  disguising  as  an,  18,
19,  83,255;  named  Kshan-
tislla,  121,  122;  Pasupata,
73,  75, 113, 115;  the  speech
of  the  female,  138,  138ft2

Ashes  of  cow-dung  on  body,
rubbing,  250

"Ash tart,"  L.  B.  Paton,
Hastings'  Ency.  Rel.  Eth.,
231ft5

Ass,  Vetala  with  ears  of  an,
163

Assyrians,  Babylonians  and,
A.  H.  Sayce,'231ft5

Attack  of  the  Pulindas,  the,
154

Ausgew'dhlte  Erzdhlungen  in
Mdhardshtri,  H.  G.  Jacobi,
217,  219  '

Auspiciousmarks,boywith,82

Aus  Schwaben,  A.  Birlinsrer,
21ft3  *

Austerities  to  obtain  a  son,
performing,  2

Aversion  for  the  male  sex,
girl's,  35

Babe  exposed  at  the  palace

gate,  81,  81ft1,  82ft,  250
Babylonians      and     Assyrians,

A.  H.  Sayce,  231ft5
Bahar-Danush,  or  Garden    of

Knowledge,  J.  Scott,  203ft3,

214ft4.  259ft3


B aha r-i-D anish,  'Inayatu-
'llah,  214,  259

Baital  Pachisi  oder  die  funf-
undzwanzig  Erzdhlungen
eines  Damon,  H.  Oesterley,
213,  241ft4,  250

Baital  Pachisi,  or  Twenty-Jive
Tales  of  a  Demon,  The,
W.  B.  Barker  and  E.  B.
Eastwick,  199ft1'2,  204ft1,
211ft1,  212ft1,  215ft1,  222ft1,
233ft3,  241ft1,  244ft2,  249ft3,
250ft2,  256ft1,  258ft1,  260ft1,
262ft1

"Baka,"  An  Index  to  the
Names  in  the  Mahabharata,
S.  Sorensen,  235ft1

Ban  of  the  Bori,  The,  A.  J.  N.
Tremearne,  231ft5

Bandlet  of  white  serpents,
250

Bangles  thrown  into  the  sea,
women's  right-arm,  146ft1

Bath  qualifying  for  marriage,
27

Bathing  in  enchanted  water,
change  of  sex  through,
224-226

Battle,  the  great,  175

Bear  through  a  piece  of
wood,  transformation  into
a,  42ft1

Beasts  and  birds,  knowledge
of  the  speech  of,  3,  3ft2,
199

Beating  of  drum,  205  ;  when
thief  is  led  to  execution,
37,  37ft1

Beautiful  Unmadini,  The,  66,
66ft1,  67-69,  241-244

Beauty,  the  Goddess  of
(Lakshmi),  129,  129ft4, 137;
illuminating,  5,  149,  189;
of  Malayavati,  the,  52,  64,
65  ;  similes  and  metaphors
of  Hindu,  8,  64,  65,  140 ;  of
Ummadanti,  the  amazing,
241,  242

Beckoning  in  the  East,  way
of,  88,  88ft2

Bed  of  lotus  leaves,  143 ;  of
lotus  leaves  and  sandal-
wood juice,  101,  101ft1

"  Bed  "  sybarite,  206,  206ft1,
209

Belief,  in  change  of  sex  at  the
soul's  transmigration,  230 ;
about  the  fate  of  man,
Eastern,  24,  24ft1 ;  in  sex-
changing  rites  in  India,
229


Bengali  version  of  tl
Vikrama-charita,  the,  251
252ft2

Beowulf,  F.  Panzer,  126ft2

Betel,  one  of  the  eight  enjoy-
ments, 249 ;  nut,  flavoured
with  five  fruits,  74

"  Bhutan,  Buddhism  in,"
L.  A.  Waddell,  Hastings'
Ency.  Rel.  Eth.,  33ft1

Bible,  Dictionary  of  the,  Hast-
ings', 106.  For  details  see
under  Dictionary  .  .  .

Biblical  laughs  are  dramatic,
most,  254

Bibliographic  des  Ouvrages
Arabes,  Victor  Chauvin,
52ft2,  82ft,  160ft1,  203ft5,
213,  224ft2,  252ft1

BirdnamedLong-lived(GVa»w-
jivin),  234 ;  poisons  food,
dead  snake  carried  by  a,  32

Birds,  knowledge  of  the
speech  of,  3,  3ft2,  137,
137ft3,  199;  mythological,
56,  56ft

Birth,  the  signs  of  royal,  18,
20 ;  the  unchangeable  effect
of  actions  in  a  previous,
148,  154

Births,  remembering  former,
55

Black  pigment  applied  to  the
eyes,  anjana,  168ft5

Blackening  and  anointing
the  bodies  of  thieves,  216,
216ft2

Blessings  of  Mahatmas,  sex-
changing,  229

Blindness,  the  causes  of
Tiresias',  227

Blisters  produced  by  the  rays
of  the  moon,  11

Blood,  ground  inside  magic
circle  smeared  with,  122

Blue  lotuses,  eyes  like,  160

Boar,  Hiranyaksha  killed  by
Vishnu  in  the  form  of  a,
168,  *168ft2

Bodies  of  thieves  blackened
and  anointed,  216,  216ft2

["  Body,  On  the  Art  of  Enter-
ing Another's"]  M.  Bloom-
field,  Proc.  Amer.  Phil.  Soc,
260ft3

Body,  cutting  off  flesh  from
own,  126,  126ft2;  of  Gay a-
sura,  the  use  of  the,  84w3,
85ft ;  magician  enters  an-
other, 114,  115;  of
Rakshasa,     Mrigankadat


.


INDEX  II— GENERAL


285


Body — continued

emerges  alive  from  the,
22  ;  rubbing  ashes  of  cow-
dung  on,  250 ;  the  three
qualities  of  the,  27

Bohmisches  Mdrchenbuch,  A.
Waldau,  3ft2,  Gin1

Bombay  Branch  Roy.  As.  Soc,
Journ.,  233ft2.  For  details
see  under  Journ.  Bombay
Br.,  etc

Bombay,  The  Folklore  of,  R.  E.
Ent'hoven,  229,  230ft1

Bombay  Presidency,  Gazetteer
of  the,  J.  M.  Campbell,  26,
230

Bones,  circle  of  yellow  pow-
der of,  122,  123 ;  the  pile
of,  55  j  seeing  men  digging
causes  feeling  of  broken,
207

Book  XII:  SasankavatI,  1-193

Book  XII,  Note  on  the  Posi-
tion of,  194-196

Book  of  Sindibad,  the,  214,
214ft2-3,  224,  224ft2.  See
also  under  Clouston,  W.  A.

Booth  on  four  posts  at  the
ceremony  of  upanayana,  26

Bori,  The  Ban  of  the,  A.  J.  N.
Tremearne,  231ft5

Bough,  The  Golden,  J.  G.
Frazer,  231ft23,  240,  240ft3

Boy,  the  laugh  of  the  Brah-
man, 96  ;  who  offered  him-
self up  to  save  the  Life  of
the  King,  The  Brahman,
87,  87ft1,  88-96,  250-256;
with  a  thousand  gold  pieces
exposed  at  the  palace  gate,
8,  81m1,  82ft,  250

Brahman,  the  Absolute,  one
of  the  four  states  of  the
soul,  26 ;  Brothers  who
resuscitated  the  Lion,  The
Four,  108,  108ft1,  109-111,
258-260 ;  demon  named
Jvalamukha,  91,  92,  93,  95,
96  ;  Harisvamin,  who  first
lost  his  Wife  and  then  his
Life,  The,  29,  29m1,  30-33,
212-215  ;  Kamalakara,  An-
angamanjari,  her  Husband
Manivarman,  and  the,  98,
98ft1,  99-104,  256-258 ;  and
the  magician,  the  dispute
between  the,  47 ;  named
Devasvamin,  29, 72  ;  named
Jivadatta,  4 ;  named  Ku-
maradatta,  142;  named
Manabsvamin,  40-47, 80-81 ;


Brahman — continued

named  Padmanabha,  31,
32  ;  named  Srutadhi,  128,
130,  132,  133,  162,  163,
165,  171,  172,  175,  177,
180,  181,  182,  183,  185,
190,192;  namedSuvigraha,
172,  173;  named  Vishnu-
svamin,  108  ;  named  Yajna-
soma,  112,  113

"Brahmani  Duck,  The,"  W.
Crooke,  Indian  Antiquary,
5ft3

Brahmanical  thread,  the,  15,
15ft2,  26-28,  76,  250

Brahman's  Son  who  failed  to
acquire  the  Magical  Power,
The,  71,  71m1,  72-77,  244-
249

Brahmans,  losing  self-control
at  sight  of  beauty,  241,  242;
at  the  upanayana,  age  of,
26

Brahmany  kite,  Garuda  re-
presented as  a,  234

Brave  thief,  the,  36,  37

Breaches  into  houses,digging,
Indian  method  of  thieving,
218

Breasts  like  pitchers,  5

Breton  lay,  Chaucer's  Frank-
lin s  Tale  based  on  a,  204

"  Brightness  "  or  "  courage,"
tejas,  95m1

Brihat-katha,  the,  236

Brihat-katha-manjari,  Kshe-
mendra,  64

Broken  bones,  seeing  men
digging  causes  feeling  of,
207 ;  heart,  death  caused
by  a,  24,  25,  103

Brothers  who  resuscitated  the
Lion,  The  Four  Brahman,
108, 108ft1,  109-111, 258-260

Bruises  produced  by  the  sound
of  a  pestle,  11,  12

Buddhaghosha  s  Parables,  244

Buddhist  Legend  of  Jimuta-
vahana  from  the  Katha-
Sarit-Sagara,  The,  B.  Hale
Wortham,  237ft2

Buddhist  Legends,  E.  W.  Bur-
lingame,  221

Buddhist  Records  of  the  West-
ern World,  S.  Beal,  237ft2,
238ft1

Bundehesh,  the,  56w

Burns  produced  by  the  rays
of  the  moon,  11,  209;
sandalwood  applied  as  re-
lief for,  11,  105


Butter  to  the  fire,  offerings
of  clarified,  27

Cabinet  des  Fees,  Le,  41  vols.,
Paris  and  Geneva,  1785-
1793,  245ft*

"Cafe,  Le  Hachich — L'Opium
— Le,"  Charles  Richet,
Revue  des  Deux  Mondes,
248

"Caliature  Wood,"  D.
Hooper,  Nature,  107

Candles  of  human  fat,  122,
122ft3

Captives  at  a  feast,  releasing,
160,  160W1

Carving  industry,  sandalwood
chiefly  used  in  the,  106

Caste-marks  or  Shardana  made
of  sandalwood  paste,  105

Castes  of  the  Central  Provinces
of  India,  The  Tribes  and,
R.  V.  Russell,  230ft2

Castle  of  Karabhagriva,  the,
165-167

Catalogue  of  Sanskrit  .  .  ,
Books  in  the  Library  of  the
British  Museum.  A  Supple-
mentary, L.  D.  Barnett,
237ft2

"  Catching  the  Thief"  motif y
217-221

Catching  thieves,  "tiger's
claw,"  an  instrument  used
for,  216w2

"fatrunjaya  Mahatmyam,
Ueber  das,"  A.  Weber,
Abhandl.  f.  d.  Kunde  d*
Morgen.,  214ft1

Cauldron,  the  magic,  224,
225

Causes  for  Tiresias'  blindness,
different,  227,  228

Cemetery,  "  grove  of  an-
cestors " — i.e.  a,  In1 ;  of
Mahakala,  the,  162

Ceremonies,  Hindu  marriage,
188,  188ft1;  pretended
changes  of  sex  at  marriage,
231

Ceremony  of  coronation,  the,
191,  191ft3;  of  upanayana,
the,  26-28;  of  walking
round  a  tree,  132,  132ft1

Chandal  or  sandal,  105

Change  of  matriarchate  into
patriarchate,  231,  232;  of
sex  of  deities,  231,  232  ;  of
sex,  Indian  legends  about,
229-230  ;  change  of  sex  at
death,  228,  230


286


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


"  Change  of  Sex  "  motif,  the,
223-233

Changes  of  sex,  modern  re-
search on,  233,  233ft1

["  Character  and  Adventures
of  Muladeva,  The"]  M.
Bloomfield,  Proc.  Amer.
Phil.  Soc,  220ft1

"  Chaucer's  Franklin's  Tale,"
W.  H.  Schofield,  Modern
Lang.  Ass.  A?ner.,  203

Child  carried  about,  golden
image  of  a,  93,  94;  exposed
at  the  palace  gate,  81,  81ft,1,
82ft,  250

Child's  laugh,  the,  96

[Christian  Topography  of  Cos-
mas,  an  Egyptian  Monk,
The]  J.  W.  M'Crindle,  107

Churning  of  the  Ocean,  the,
129ft3-4

Circle  of  the  earth  under  one
umbrella,  ruling  the,  192,
192/11;  magic,  95,  95ft2;  of
yellow  powder  of  bones,
122,  123

Circumambulating  tree,  132,
132ft1

Circumambulation  of  the  fire,
188,  188ft1

City  called  Alaka,  137,  142,
142ft1,  143,  144,  145,  148,
149,  151,  152,  158,  160;
called  AmaravatI,  71;  called
Anangapura,  5;  called
Ayodhya,  35,  130,  172,  183,
185,  186,  187,  192,  202;
called  Chitrakuta,  87,  87ft2,
93,  95;  called  Kanakapura,
66 ;  called  Kanchanapura,
181,  184;  called  Patali-
putra,  108,  108ft2;  called
Pratishthana,  125 ;  called
Sasankapura,  141,  142,  145,
148,  160;  called  Sivapura,
40;  called  SobhavatI,  112;
called  Tamralipti,  78,  98,
99,  103  ;  called  Ujjayini,  1,
10,  71,  126,  127,  128,  134,
162,  163,  169,  171,  172,
173,  175,  176,  177,  180,
181,  182,  183,  185,  191ft2;
called  Vakrolaka,  78,  80;
called  VaranasI,  29,  29ft2,
82,  84,  192 ;  called  Visala,
98;  the  Golden,  49;  pro-
duced by  magic  power,
golden,  73,  74 ;  in  the  sea,
the  wonderful,  19,  20 ;  of
Sybaris,  the  ancient,  206,
207


Classical      Library,      Bohn's,

206ft3,  232ft1 ;  Library,  the

Loeb,  227ft2,  228ft2
"Claw,   tiger's,"    instrument

used  for  catching  thieves,

216ft2
Clever  thief,  the,  201
Clitoris,  changes  of  sex  due

to   abnormal  development

of  the,  233
Cobra     carried     by     a     kite

poisons  food,  dead,  32,  212,

213
Cocks  forbidden  in  the  ancient

Sybaris,  rearing,  207
Coco-nut  festival,  the  Narali-

purnima  or,  146ft1
Coco-nuts  to  the  sea,  offerings

of,  146ft1
"  Coffre  Flottant,  Le  Lait  de

la    Mere    et    le,"    Etudes

Folkloriques,     E.     Cosquin,

82ft
Coincidence  of  the   Marathi

and  Hindi  versions  of  the

Vetalapanchavirhsati,  264
Colander,    filterer    of    soma-

juice,  85,  85ft1
Collection  of  proverbs  called

the  Fdkhir  by  al-Mufaddal

ibn  Salama,  225 ;  of  stories

of  Cristoforo  Armeno,  210,

210ft4
Colony,    Sybaris,   the    oldest

Greek,  206
Colour  of  the  sacred  thread,

26
Comb,  girl  turned  into  a,  239
Combat,  the  great,  175
"  Comedy,  On  the  Idea  of,"

George      Meredith,      New

Quarterly  Magazine,  253ft1
Commander-in-chief,  the  de-
voted, 69,  69ft2
Compact  between  Vasuki  and

Garuda,  the,  56
Comparative  Table  of  stories

in  the  three  chief  versions

of  the    Vetalapanchavimsati,

264
Comparison  between  the  style

of  Somadeva  and  that  of

Kshemendra,  64
Complexion  like  the  Champa,

woman's,  199
Conclusion    of    King    Trivi-

kramasena  and  the  Mendi-
cant, 122,  122ft1,  123,  124,

125,  263
Conquest    of    Tripura,    the,

131


7*4 1


:

torn


Constitution  of  Sybaris,

of  the,  Aristotle,  207
Contempt,  suicide  due  to,  251
Contents  of  an  argha  orarghya

123ft1
Conies    Albanais,     A.    Dozi

224,  226ft2
Contes   de    Perrault,    Lest

Saintyves,  263
Contes   a  rire,   ou    Recreatu

Francaises,  new  ed.,  3  vols.,

Paris,  1769,  209ft2
Contes     du     Sieur     d'Ouville,

V Elite  des,G.  Brunet,  209ft2
Contes   Turcs.    Histoire  de  la

Sultane    de    Perse,    et    des

Visirs,  F.  Petis  de  la  Croix,

245,  245ft3
Conversion  to  Jain  religion,

the  king's,  204,  205
"  Cook  of  Baghdad,  The  Tale

of  Warlock  and  the  Young,"

The  Nights,  R.  F.  Burton,

224
Copulating     snakes,     ill-luck

caused  by  seeing,  227
Cord  round  the  neck,  trans-
formation   by    placing    a,

44ft1;  the  sacred,  26-28
Coronation,  the  ceremony  of,

191,  191ft3
Corpse,    the    laugh    of    the,

255 ;     by    the     power     of

spells,   Vetala   entering  a,

123,  126
Cotton   used  for   the  sacred

thread,  26
Couch,  one  of  the  eight  en-
joyments, the,  249
Country  called  Nishadha,  137
"Courage  "  or  "brightness,"

tejas,  95ft1
Courage,  winning  a  Vetala's

favour  through,  120,  120ft2,

126
Courtesan  named  Hamsavali,

80,   81;  the  trick  of  the,

220
Cow-dung  on  body,  rubbing

ashes  of,  250
Cravings      of     a      pregnant

woman,  201
Crest-jewel  falls  in  front  of

his    wife,    Jimutavahana's,

59
Crocodile,      Mandaravati     is

seized  by  a,  150
Cry  of  the  dying  thief,  the,

38,  39;  the  hermit's,  114
"  Cry,  Laugh  and,"  motif,  221,

254.  260.  261


£ukasaptati  (Textus  Simplicior),
Die,  R.  Schmidt,  210m1-2

Curious  laughs,  253,  254,
255 ;  relationship,  the,  119

Curious  Myths  of  the  Middle
Ages,  S.  Baring-Gould,
52ft2

Current  in  the  Narmada  flow-
ing in  opposite  direction,
174

Curse  of  Ganesa,  the,  131,
132

Curses  of  Mahatmas,  belief
in  sex-changing,  229

Custom  of  pretending  change
of  sex,  231 ;  of  priests
changing  their  sex,  231  ;
of  releasing  prisoners  at  a
feast,  160,  160ft1

Customs  of  the  Modern
Egyptians,  An  Account  of
the  Manners  and,  E.  W.
Lane,  224ft3

Cutting  off  own  flesh,  176,
176n2

Cycle  of  stories,  the  Andro-
meda, 227

Dance  to  the  flute,  horses
taught  to,  207

Danced,  The  Hermit  who
first  Wept  and  then,  112,
112ft1,  113-115,  260-261

Darkness,  one  of  the  three
qualities  of  the  body,  27

Dasa  Kumara  Charita  or  The
Story  of  the  Ten  Princes,
J.  J.  Meyer,  223ft1

Date  of  the  foundation  and
destruction  of  Sybaris,  206  ;
for  the  rite  of  upanayana,
26  ;  of  the  Vetalapanchaviih-
sati,  208

Daughter  who  fell  in  love
with  a  Thief,  The  Mer-
chant's, 35,  35n\  36-39,
215-221 ;  and  the  Son  that
married  the  Mother,  The
Father  that  married  the,
116,  116ft1,  117-119,  262

**  Daughter  of  Inachus,"  Io,
the,  228

Days,  battle  lasting  five,  175  ;
feast  lasting  seven,  191

Dead  fish,  the  laugh  of  the,
254 ;  to  life,  power  of  re-
storing, 4,  4ft1;  snake
carried  by  a  kite  poisons
food,  32,  212,  213

Death  caused  by  the  fever  of
love,  69,   69ft1,  103;   from


INDEX  II— GENERAL

Death — continued

a  broken  heart,  24,  25,
103 ;  change  of  sex  at,
228,  230 ;  from  excessive
joy,  103  ;  the  last  stage  of
love-sickness,  258;  of  the
mendicant,  the,  123

Decameron,  Boccaccio,  203,
203ft8

Decameron,  its  Sources  and
Analogues,  The,  A.  C.  Lee,
204

Deceit,  the  laugh  of  trickery
and,  255,  256

Deer  listening  to  Malayavati
playing  on  the  lyre,  52,
52ft2 ;  Marlcha  assuming
the  form  of  a  golden,  166
.  Deipnosophists,  Athenaeus,
206,  206ft3,  207

Deities,  change  of  sex  of,
231,  232

Delicate  women,  the  four,
209,  210

Delusion,  Chandrasvamin's,
75,  76

Demon  named  Jvalamukha,
Brahman,  91-93,  95,  96

Description  of  the  ceremony
of  upanayana,  26-28  ;  falling
in  love  by  mention  or,  17,
18,  18ft1;  of  the  friendly
Vetala,  163;  of  Malayavati's
beauty,  Kshemendra's,  64,
65  ;  of  the  sandalwood  oil,
105,  106

Description  of  Greece,  Pau-
sanias\  J.  G.  Frazer,  240ft2

Desires,  wishing-tree  called
Granter  of,  49

Destruction  of  old  Sybaris,
the,  206

Deutschen  Volksbiicher,  Die,
K.  Simrock,  21ft3,  81ft1

Deux  Mondes,  Revue  des,  248.
For  details  see  under  Revue
des  Deux  Mondes

Development  of  the  clitoris,
changes  of  sex  due  to
abnormal,  233

"  Devoted  Hetaera "  motif,
220ft1

Devotion  of  the  commander-
in-chief,  the,  69,  69ft2

"  Diamond  "  or  "  thunder-
bolt," vajra,  8ft1

Diamond,  waist  like  a,  8

Dictionary  of  the  Bible,  James
Hastings  ["  Algum  Trees,
Almug  Trees  "],  G.  E.  Post,
vol.  i,  1900,  106


287

Dictionary  of  the  Economic
Products  of  India,  A,  G.
Watt,  105,  106,  107,  249ft2

Different  kinds  of  laughter,
253-256

Digging  breaches,  Indian
method  of  thieving,  218;
feeling  of  broken  bones
caused  by  seeing  men,  207  ;
pain  caused  by  hearing
about  men,  207

Diplomacy,  the  art  of,  171,
172

Direction,  the  stream  of  the
Narmada  changing  its,  174

Disastrous  voyages  to  Alaka,
the,  143,  144

Discus-marked  footprint,  a
sign  of  royal  birth,  18

Disguising  as  an  ascetic,  18,
19,  83,  255

Dishes  in  Sybaris,  taking
patent  on,  208

Dislike  for  the  male  sex,
girl's,  35,  217

Dispute  between  Hera  and
Zeus,  the,  227 ;  between
the  magician  and  the
Brahman,  the,  47

Divine  mother-goddesses,
worship  of  the  fifteen,  26

Domestic  and  religious  pur-
poses, sandalwood  for,  105
106

Dragon-drum,  the,  238

Dragons,  gods,  etc.,  human
sacrifices  to,  236,  240  ;  lake
guarded  by,  235ft2

Drama,  The  Sanskrit,  A.  B.
Keith,  237ft2

Dramatic  laughs,  254

Dreaming,  one  of  the  four
states  of  the  soul,  26

Dreamless  sleep,  one  of  the
four  states  of  the  soul,  26

"Dress,"  A.  E.  Crawley..
Hastings'  Ency.  Rel.  Eth.,
231ft4

Dress,  one  of  the  eight  enjoy-
ments, 249

Drinking  enchanted  water,
change  of  sex  through,  224,
225 ;  the  sea,  Agastya,  116,
116ft2

Drum, beating  of,  205 ;  beaten
when  thief  is  led  to  execu-
tion, 37,  37ft1;  the  sandal-
wood, 238

Dwarf  through  a  magic  pill,
Muladeva  turned  into  a,
223


288


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


/


Dye,  the  Red  Sanders  tree
chiefly  used  as  a,  107

Dying  thief,  the  cry  and
laugh  of  the,  38,  39  ;  thief,
marriage  of  the,  79

"  Earlier  History  of  the
Arabian  Nights,  The,"
D.  B.  Macdonald,  Journ.
Roy.  As.  Soc.,  225ft2

Early  English  Versions  of
the  Gesta  Romanorum,  The,
S.  J.  H.  Herrtage,  3ft2,
81/11

Early  History  of  India,  The,
V.  A.  Smith,  237ft1

Early  references  to  sandal-
wood, 106,  107

Ears  of  an  ass,  Vetala  with,
163

Earth  under  one  umbrella,
ruling  the  circle  of  the,
192,  192ft1

East,  Sagas  from  the  Far
[R.  H.  Busk],  235ft2

East,  way  of  beckoning  in
the,  88,  88ft2

Eastern  belief  about  the  fate
of  man,  24,  24ft1

Eastern  Romances  and  Stories,
A  Group  of,  W.  A.  Clouston,
224ft1

Eau  de  jouvence,  or  "  water
of  life,"  magical  water  used
as,  225

Economic  Products  of  India,
A  Dictionary  of  the,  G.
Watt,  105,  106,  107,  249ft2

Effect  of  actions  in  previous
births,  the  unchangeable,
148,  154;  on  man  of  the
rays  of  the  moon,  evil,  6,
6ft1 ;  on  pilgrims,  Kedar-
nath  has  a  strange,  2ft1;
of  Ummadanti's  beauty  on
the  Brahmans,  amazing,
241,  242

Effects  of  hashish,  the,  248,
249,  249ft2

Effeminacy  of  the  old  Syb-
arites, the  luxury  and,  206-
208

"  Efforts,  Joint,"  motif,  259

Egyptians,  Manners  and
Customs  of  the  Modern,  An
Account  of  the,  E.  W.  Lane,
224w3

"  Eight-  forked  Serpent,  The,"
B.  H.  Chamberlain,  Trans.
As.  Soc.  Japan,  238,  238ft2,
239


Eight  kinds  of  enjoyment,
the,  249;  Paradises,  the,
246 ;  years,  Brahman  boys
invested  with  the  sacred
thread  at,  26

Elephant  of  winter,  the,  67

Elephant-faced  god  (Gane£a),
131 ;  Vetala,  the,  163

Elephants  in  must  state,  41,
41ft1

Eleven  years,  Kshatriya  boys
invested  with  the  sacred
thread  at,  26

Eleventh  Statuette  in  the
Sinhasanadvatrinsika,  the
story  of  the,  234,  235

Elite  des  Contes  du  Sieur
d'Ouville,  L\  G.  Brunet,
209ft2

Emperor  of  Delhi,  the,  229

Emperor  Otho's  followers,  the
devotion  of,  69ft2

Encyclopaedia  of  Indian  Phil-
ology, "  Recht  und  Sitte,"
J.  Jolly,  1896,  26

Encyclopaedia  of  Religion  and
Ethics,  Hastings'/ 'Ashtart"
and  "  Ishtar,"  L.  B.  Paton,
vols,  ii  and  vii,  231ft5 ;
"Bhutan,  Buddhism  in,"
L.A.Waddell,  vol.  ii,  33ft*;
"Dress,"  A.  E.  Crawley,
vol.  v,  231ft4;  "Gaya,"
G.  A.  Grierson,  vol.  vi,  85ft  ;
"Kedarnath,"  W.  Crooke,
vol.  vii,  2ft1;  "Laughter,"
C.  Lloyd  Morgan,  vol.  vii,
253ft1;  "Water,  Water-
Gods  (Indian),"  W.  Crooke,
vol.  vi,  85ft

End  of  the  Vetalapanchavim-
sati,  the,  125,  125m1

English  Versions  of  the  Gesta
Romanorum,  The  Early,  S.J.
H.  Herrtage,  3ft2,  81m1

Enigmatic  laughs,  253,  254,
255

Enjoyment,  the  eight  kinds
of,  249

Entering  another  body,
magician,  114,  115

["Entering  Another's  Body,
On  the  Art  of"]  M.
Bloomfield,  Proc.  Amer.
Phil.  Soc,  260ft3

Entrance  to  Patala,  a  well  as
an,  215

Erect  with  joy, hairs  standing,
69,  139,  139ft2,  179

Ernst,  Herzog,  K.  Bartsch,
189ft2


Escape  of  Mandaravati,   the

wonderful,  144
Essay  on  Laughter,  An,  James

Sully,  253ft1
Essays,     M.    de    Montaigne,

232ft2
Essays,  H.  Spencer,  253ft1
Etknologische      Bilder,      Geo-

graphische  und,  A.  Bastian,

208ft1
Etudes  Folkloriques ,  E .  Cosquin,

82ft,  263
Etymological  change,  change

of  sex  of  deities  usually  an,

232
"Eunuchs,       Indian,"      The

Ocean    of    Story,    N.     M.

Penzer,  Vol.  Ill,  231ft*
European    folk-lore,    the

sacrificing  hero  in,  239,  240
Evil  effect  on  man  of  the  rays

of  the  moon,  6,  6ft1
Evil  Eye,  pretended  change

of  sex  to  avert  the,  231
Excellent  dishes  in  Sybaris,

taking  patent  on,  208
Exchange     of    sex     with

Yaksha,  Sikhandin's,  22


'he.


Exempla  of  the  Rabbis,    Th

M.  Gaster,  203ft4
"Exposed  Child"  motif,  81,

81ft1,  82ft,  250
Eye,    pretended    change    of

sex  to  avert  the  Evil,  231
Eyes,  anjana,  black  pigment

applied  to  the,  168ft5  ;  and

flesh,    offering    of   human,

123 ;  like  blue  lotuses,  160 ;

of  a  Vetala   like   an   owl,

163

Fable  of  Teiresias,  the  Greel

3ft2,  227
Fabulce,  Hyginus,  227ft2
Face  like  the  moonstone,  8
Face-cream,  sandalwood  us

as,  105
Faces   and   mouths,    Vasuki,

the  king  of  the  snakes,  has

a  thousand,  56,  176ft2
Fainting     caused     by     love

sickness,  100,  194
Fairy  Tales,  Indian,  M.  Stok(

255
Faithful       Minister,        Kin$

Yasahketu,  his  Vidyadharl

Wife  and  his,  13,  13ft1,  14-

25,  211-212
Fdkhir,     the,     collection     of

proverbs  of  al-Mufaddal  ibn

Salama,  225


INDEX  II— GENERAL


289


Fall  of  the  ancient  Sybaris,
reasons  for  the,  206

Falling  lotus  produces  a
wound  on  the  queen's
thigh,  11

Falling  in  love  by  mere  men-
tion, 17,  18,  18th1;  in  love
with  a  picture,  139,  139ft2,
141,  143

False  rumour,  the,  14  ;  state-
ment, the,  67

Fat,  candles  of  human,  122,
122n3

Fate  of  a  man  is  written  on
his  skull,  the,  24,  24ft1

Father  that  married  the
Daughter  and  the  Son  that
married  the  Mother,  The,
116,  116ft1,  117-119,  262

Favour  through  courage,
winning  a  Vetala's,  120,
120ft2,  126

Feast  lasting  seven  days,
191 ;  releasing  prisoners  at
a,  160,  160ft1

Feeling  of  broken  bones
caused  by  seeing  men  dig-
ging, 207

Fees,  Le  Cabinet  des,  41  vols.,
Paris  and  Geneva,  1785-
1793,  245ft4

Female  apartments,  man
transformed  into  a  girl  in
the,  42-47 ;  ascetic,  the
speech  of  the,  138,  138ft2

Festival  at  Kailas  Kund,
annual,  236 ;  the  Kattika,
242;  the  KaumudI,  243;
Narali-purnima,  or  coco-
nut, 146ft2

Fever  of  love,  death  caused
by  the,  69,  69m1;  sandal-
wood applied  as  relief  for,
53,  53ft1,  101,  101ft1,  105,
143

Fiction,  laughs  in  Hindu,
253-256;  Muladeva,  the
arch-thief  in  Hindu,  217-
219

Fifteen  divine  mother-
goddesses,  worship  of  the,
26

Fight  between  Ravana  and
Arjuna,  the,  174

Figures  of  Buddha  made  of
sandalwood,  106 ;  of  the
Naga  Raja  and  his  Vezier
in  the  Chenab  Valley,  236

Filocolo,  Boccaccio,  203,  203ft7

"  Finger  "  or  "  tribute,"  kara,
112ft1

VOL.  VII.


Fingers  represent    the   four

states  of  the  soul,  the  four,

26
Fire,  circu mam bulat ion  of  the,

188,    188ft1;    the    God    of

(Agni),  135 ;  of  love,  the,

143 ;   offerings  of  clarified

butter  to  the,  27  ;  throwing

parched  grain  into  the,  188,

188ft1
Fires,  torments  of  the  six,  154
First  Vazir,  the  story  of  the,

in  the  Forty  Vazlrs,  245-247
Fish,  the  laugh  of  the  dead,

254
Five  days'  battle,  the,   175;

fruits,  betel  flavoured  with,

74;  ministers  of  Sundara-

sena,  the,  137
Flesh,   cutting  of  own,   126,

126ft2;    offering  of  human

eyes  and,  123
Flowers,  kumuda,  8,  99,  102 ;

to    the    sea,    offerings    of,

146ft1;  sirisha,  145
Flute,  horses  taught  to  dance

to  the,  207
Flying  in  the  air,  24,  29,  126,

127
Folklore  of  Bombay,  The,  R.  E.

Enthoven,  229,  230ft1
"Folklore  of  Gujarat,  The,"

R.  E.  Enthoven,  bid.  Ant.,

230ft1
Folk-Lore  of  Northern  India,

The  Popular  Religion   and,

W.  Crooke,  1ft2,  5ft3,  146ft1,

230ft1
Folklore     in     Southern    India,

Pandit  Natesa  Sastrl,  219
Folk-lore,  the  sacrificing  hero

in  European,  239,  240
Folktales  of  Hindustan,  Shaikh

Chilli,  256
Folk-Tales,  Siberian  and  Other,

C.  F.  Coxwell,  204,  235ft2
Followers,    the    devotion    of

the  Emperor  Otho's,  69ft2
Food,  dead  snake  carried  by

a  kite  poisons,  32,  212,  213,

215 ;  one  of  the  eight  en-
joyments, 249
Footprints,  discus-marked,  a

sign  of  royal  birth,  18
Forehead,  man'sfate  iswritten

on  his,  24,  24ft1 ;  the  moon

compared  to  a  patch  on  the,

102
Forest,   the    Khandava,    135,

135ft2;   the  Viiidhya,   116,

130


Form  of  a  Man-lion,  Krishna
in  the,  175ft1 ;  of  marriage,
the  gandharva,  21,  44,  48,
194,  251;  of  Siva,  the
ArdhanarisVara,  232

Former  births,  remembering,
55 ;  births,  the  unchange-
able effect  of  actions  in,
148,  154

Fortune,  the  Goddess  of,
70

Forty  Vazlrs,  the,  245,  252

Forty  Veziers,  or  The  Story  of
the  Forty  Morns  and  Eves,
The  History  of  the,  E.  J.  W.
Gibb,  203w«,  245,  252ft1

Foundation  of  Sybaris,  date
of  the,  206

Four  Brahman  Brothers  who
resuscitated  the  Lion,  The,
108,  108ft1,  109-111,  258-
260 ;  delicate  neighbours,
the,  209,  210;  fingers  re-
present the  four  states  of
the  soul,  the,  26  ;  ministers,
the  adventures  of  the,  134-
136,  161 ;  posts,  booth  on,
26 ;  Suitors,  Anangarati
and  her,  1,  1ft3,  2-4,  199;
Yugas  or  Ages  of  the  World,
the,  1,  1ft5

Franklins  Tale,  Chaucer,  203,
204

Friendly  Vetala,  the,  163

Fruits,  betel  -  nut  flavoured
with  five,  74 ;  transforma-
tion of  humans  into,  130,
131,  161

Funeral  pyre,  widow  ascend-
ing, 38,  38ft1

Furious  elephant,  the,  41,
41ft1

Gale,  the  terrible,  146
Gambler,   the  penniless,   72,

72ft3
"Gambler,   Devadatta  the,"

245ft2
"  Gambler,        fnmtn^arala,

the   bold,"   story  of,   255,

256
Gambling,    the   vice   of,    72,

72ft2
Garden  of  Nandana,  the,  129  ;

called  Pushpakaranda,  177
Gatakamala,    or    Garland    of

Birth    Stories,    The,    J.    S.

Speyer,  243ft1
Gate,   boy   with   a  thousand

gold  pieces  exposed  at  the

palace,  81,  81ft1,  250


290


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


"Gaya,"  G.  A.  Grierson,
Hastings'  Ency.  Rel.  Eth.,
85ft

Gazetteer  of  the  Bombay
Presidency,  J.  M.  Campbell,
26,  230

Generous  men,  the  three,  7-9

Geograpkische  und  etfmologische
Bilder,  A.  Bastian,  208ft1

Gesta  Romanorum,  the  English,
3ft2,  81ft1

Giajfers  aus  dem  Italienischen
des  Christoforo  Armeno  uber-
setzt  durch  Johann  Wetzel,
1583,  Die  Reise  der  Sonne,
J.  Bolte  and  H.  Fischer,
210ft*

Gifts,  Sushena's,  188

Gipsy  tale  about  change  of
sex,  226

Girl  changes  her  sex,  223 ;
through  a  magic  pill,  man
transformed  into  a,  42-47;
turned  into  a  comb,  239

"Glory-banner,"  Yasahketu
—i.e.,  40,  40ft2

Glossary  of  A  nglo-  Indian
Words  .  .  .,  Hobson-
Jobson :  being  A,  H.  Yule
and  A.  C.  Burnell,  107

God  of  Fire,  the  (Agni),  135  ;
of  Love,  the  (Kama),  13,
13w3,  37,  40,  41,  52,  66,  99,
138,  176,  177,  188,  189,
190,  201,  214  ;  Pradyumna,
the,  112;  of  War,  the,  137;
of  Wealth,  the  (Kuvera),
98,  142ft1

Goddess  of  Beauty,  the
(Lakshml),  129, 129ft4,  137;
Chandl,  the,  100,  103;  of
Fortune,  the,  70  ;  regarded
as  a  woman,  man  inspired
by  a,  231 ;  of  Valour,  the,
137

Gods,  dragons,  etc.,  human
sacrifices  to,  236,  240

Gold,  the  Island  of — i.e.
Suvarnadvipa,  probably
Sumatra,  15,  15ft3,  16,  17,
18

Golden  Bough,  The,  J.  G.
Frazer,  231ft2- 3,  240,  240ft3

Golden  City,  the,  49;  city
produced  by  magic  power,
73,  74;  deer,  Marlcha
assuming  the  form  of  a,
166 ;  image  of  a  child
carried  about,  93,  94

Golden  Town,  and  other  Tales,
The,  L.  D.  Barnett,  137m1


Grain  into  the  fire,  throwing

parched,  188,  188m1
Grande-  Grece.       Pay  sages      et

Histoire,  La,  F.  Lenormant,

206,  206ft2,  208
Granter  of  Desires,  wishing-

tree  called,  49
Grass,    darbha,     149 ;    durva,

123ft1,  189 ;  kdsa,  26 ;  kusa,

117,  132 ;  munja,  26
Greek    colony,    Sybaris,    the

oldest,  206;  romances,  signs

of  love  in,  139ft2;  romances,

storms  in,  147ft1
"Grethel,    Hansel    and,"

Anmerkungen  zu  den  Kinder-

und  Hausmarchen  der  Br'uder

Grimm,    J.    Bolte    and    G.

Polivka,  263,  263ft1
Grey  hair  in   Hindu  fiction,

190,  191,  191ft1
Griechische     und     albanesische

Marchen,  J.  G.  von  Hahn,

224
Griechische  Marchen,  Sagen  und

Volkslieder,      B.     Schmidt,

61ft1
Griechische      Mythologie,       L.

Preller,  3ft2
Griechische   Roman    und  Seine

Vorl'dufer,  Der,  E.  Rohde,

139ft2,  147ft1,  189ft2
Group   of   Eastern   Romances

and     Stories,     A,     W.      A.

Clouston,  224ft1
"  Grove  of  ancestors  " — i.e.  a

cemetery,  1ft1
Gul-i   Bakdwati,   Izzat    Ullah,

224,  224ft1

"  Hachich — L'Opium — Le
Cafe,  Le,"  Charles  Richet,
Revue  des  Deux  Mondes,  248

Hair  in  Hindu  fiction,  grey,
190,  191,  191ft1;  sacrificial
thread  of,  123 ;  except
seven  locks,  shaving  all
the,  205

Hairs  standing  erect  with  joy,
60,  139,  139ft2,  179

Hands  in  the  well  of  Gaya,
the  three  human,  85

"Hansel  and  Grethel,"  An-
merkungen zu  den  Kinder-
und  Hausmarchen  der  Bruder
Grimm,  J.  Bolte  and  G.
Polivka,  263,  263ft1

Harem,  13,  13w4

Harsha,  R.  Mookerji,  237ft1

Haschischeen,  Testaments  d'un,
Jules  Giraud,  249w2


Hashish,  effects  of,  248,  249,

249ft2
Hatred  of  men,  girl's,  35,  217
Head,  pouring  holy  water  on

the,  191,  191ft3
Heading  of  Vetala  22,  mis-
take  of  writing   "  Tiger  "

instead  of  "Lion"  in  the,

259
Heads,    necklace    of  human,

250
Heap    of    snake-bones,    the,

55,  56
Hearing  things  happen,  pain

caused  by,  12,  207,  209
Heart,    death    caused    by   a

broken,  24,  25,  103
Heaven,    voice    from,   2,   19,

38,  54,  131
Heavenly    maiden    on     the

wishing-tree,   the,    16,   18,

19
Heavens,  the  Seven,  246
Helden- Sagen,    Altdeutsche    u.

Altnordische,    F.    H.    v.    d.

Hagen,   3ft2,   166ft3,  173ft1,

181ft1
Hell  in  human  shape,  a  Rak-

shasa  looking  like,  21
Hells,  the  Seven,  246
Helpful  Vetala,  the,  163
Hemp,   sacred  thread  ma

of,  26
"  Hermaphrodite,    Notes

an,"   R.   F.   Burton,  Mem.

Anth.  Soc.  Ldn.,  233ft1
Hermit  who  first  Wept  and

then    Danced,    The,     112,

112ft1,    113-115,    260-261;

named Agastya,  166;  named

Dirghatapas,    135 ;    named

Kanva,   89,   90,    136,    161;

named      Kusanabha,      18 ;

named  Matanga,  144,  151,

152 ;    named    Pisangajata,

192-194;  named  Vamasiva,

113
Hermitage  of  Agastya,   166;

of  Kanva,  89,   90,   161 ;  of

Matanga,    144,    145,     149,

151,  152,  156
Hero  in  European  folk-lore,

the  sacrificing,  239,  240
Herzog    Ernst,     K.     Bartsch,

189ft2
"  Hetaera,    Devoted,"    motif,

220ft1
Hiding-places      of     thieves,

usual,  219
Hill,  the  Malyachal,  233
Hills,  the  Vindhya,  170


ik-

:


INDEX  II- GENERAL


291


Hindi  version  of  the  Vetala-
panchavirhsati,  the,  199,  204,
205,  211,  212,  215,  221,  222,
233,  234,  241,  244, 249,  250,
251,  256,  258, 259,  260,  262,
264

Hindi  and  Marathi  versions
of  the  Vetalapanchavimsati,
264

Hindu  beauty,  similes  and
metaphors  of,  8,  64,  65,
140 ;  fiction,  laughs  in,
253-256;  fiction,  Muladeva,
the  arch-thief  in,  217-219 ;
marriage  ceremonies,  188,
ISSn1 ;  medical  works,
description  of  sandalwood
in,  105;  pun,  1,  lft4,  13,
13ft3,  17,  17ft1,  19,  19ft1,  52,
52w3,  79,  79ft1,  87,  87ft3,  91,
91ft2,  98,  98ft2,  162,  162ft3,
165,  165ft2,  168,  168ft1-  3,
173,  173w2,  177,  177ft2

Hindu  Tales,  J.  J.  Meyer,
218,  218ft2

Hindustan,  Folk -tales  of,
Shaikh  Chilli,  256

Histoire  de  la  Sultane  de  Perse,
et  des  Visirs.  Contes  Turcs,
F.  Petis  de  la  Croix,  245,
245ft3

"  History  of  the  Arabian
Nights,  The  Earlier."  D.  B.
Macdonald,  Journ.  Roy.  As.
Soc,  225ft2

History,  Phylarchus,  207

History  of  the  Constitution  of
Sybaris,  Aristotle,  207

History  of  the  Forty  Veziers  of
the  Story  of  the  Forty  Morns
and  Eves,  The,  E.  J.  W.
Gibb,  203n«,  245,  252ft1

History  of  Human  Marriage,
The,  E.  Westermarck,  231ft1

History  of  India,  The  Early,
V.  A.  Smith,  237ft1

History  of  India,  The  Oxford,
V.  A.  Smith,  237ft1

History  of  the  Mahrattas,  A,
J.  G.  Duff,  216ft2

"  History  of  the  Prince  of
Futtun  and  the  Princess
Mherbanou,"  Bahar-
Danush,  J.  Scott,  259

History  of  the  temples  on
the  banks  of  the  Jumna,
the,  229,  230

Hobson-Jobson :  being  A  Glos-
sary of  Anglo-Indian  .  .  .
Words,  H.  Yule  and  A.  C.
Burnell,  107


Holy  spot  on  the  earth,  Gaya,
the  most,  85ft ;  water  on
the  head,  pouring,  191,
191ft3

Horripilation,  60,  139,  139ft2,
179

Horses  taught  to  dance  to
music,  207

Houses,  digging  breaches
into,  Indian  method  of
thieving,  218

"  How  the  Serpent  -  gods
were  propitiated,"  Sagas
from  the  Far  East  (R.  H.
Busk),  235ft2

Human  eyes  and  flesh,  offer-
ing of,  123 ;  fat,  candles
of,  122,  122ft3;  heads,
necklace  of,  250  ;  sacrifice,
the,  95,  96 ;  shape,  Rak-
shasa  looking  like  Hell  in,
21 ;  teeth,  an  argha  of
white,  123,  123ft1

Humane  Nature,  Thomas
Hobbes,  253ft1

Humans  and  water-deities,
marriages  between,  240

Hundred  sons,  Ratnadatta  is
promised  a,  38,  38ft2

Hunting,  the  vice  of,  90,
250

Hurricane,  the  great,  146

Husband,  the  generous,  7,
9 ;  Manivarman,  and  the
Brahman  Kamalakara,

Anangamanjarl,  her,  98,
98ft1,  99-104,  256-258

Hypocrisy  of  Queen  Kama-
Hla,  the,  210

Hypocritical  ladies,  the  three,
211

"Idea  of  Comedy,  On  the,"

George      Meredith,      New

Quarterly  Magazine,  253ft1
Idea  of  time  and  placeaffected

by  use  of  hashish,  248,  249
Idea,  The  World  as  Will  and,

A.  Schopenhauer.  253ft1
Ignorance,     the     pretended,

121,  123
"  Ignorance,         Pretended,"

motif  263
Ill-luck    caused    by    seeing

snakes  coupling,  227
Illuminating  beauty,  5,   149,

189
Illusion,  Chandrasvamin's,  75,

76
Illusions   produced   when  in

water,  245-247


//   Pentamerone.      See   under

Pentamerone,  II
Image  of  a  child  carried  about,

golden,  93,  94
Imaginary  life  in  the  water,

the,  75,  76
Incantations  of  Yogis,  belief

in  sex-changing,  229
Incarnation  of  a  Bodhisattva,

49,  61
Index    to    the    Names    in    the

Mahabharata,  An,  S.  Soren-

sen,  223ft2,  235ft1
India,    Antiquities   of,    L.    D.

Barnett,  26,  187ft1
India,  Archaeological  Survey  of,

A.  Cunningham,  229ft1
Indian      Antiquary,     "The

Brahmani     Duck,"     W.

Crooke,  vol.  x,  1881,  5ft3;

["The  Folklore  of  Gujarat"]

R.  E.  Enthoven,  vols,  xli,

1912.      and      xlv,      1916,

230ft1
" Indian  Eunuchs,"  The  Ocean

of  Story,    N.    M.    Penzer,

Vol.  Ill,  Appendix,  231ft4
Indian  Fairy  Tales,  M.  Stokes,

255
Indian  legends  about  change

of  sex,  229,  230 ;  method

of  thieving,  218  ;  parallels

to    Vetala    No.    10,    200-

203
Indische    Alterthumskunde ,    C.

Lassen,  106
Indische     Studien,     17     vols.,

1850-1885,  202
Industry,    sandalwood    used

chiefly  in  the  carving,  106
Infatuation,  the  king's,  242,

243
"Injuries,       unintentional,"

motif,  92,  92ft1,  131,  131ft1
Inscriptions  de   Piyadasi,  Les,

E.  Senart,  33ft1
Instantaneous  transportation,

24,  225,  225ft1
Instrument       for       catching

thieves,  216ft2
Intellectual       Observer,       The

["Sandal-wood      and      its

Commercial  Importance  "],

B.  Seemann,  vol.  iv,  No.  20,
Ldn.,  1863,  105-107

Intoxicating  beauty  of  Ura-
madantl,  the,  241,  242

Investiture  with  the  sacred
thread,  upanayana,  the  rite
of,  26-28

Invincible,  sword  named,  124


292


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


Invitations  to  the  ceremony
of  apanayana,  26 ;  made  a
year  beforehand,  208

Irische  Elfenm'drchen,  J.  and
W.  Grimm,  120rc2

"Ishtar,"  L.  B.  Paton,  Hast-
ings' Ency.  Rel  Eth.,  231n5

Islam  in  India,  or  the  Qanun-
i-Islam,  G.  A.  Herklots,
249W1

Island  of  Gold,  the  —  i.e.
Suvarnadvlpa,  probably
Sumatra,  15,  15w3,  16-18


Jain  minister,  the  punishment
of  the,  205  ;  religion,  the
king's  conversion  to,  204,
205

Japan,  Trans.  As.  Soc,  238w2.
For  details  see  under  Trans.
As.  Soc.  Japan

Jewdd,  The  Story  of,  E.  J.  W.
Gibb,  248

Jewels  to  the  sea,  offering  of,
146,  146W1

"  Joint  Efforts  "  motif,  259

Journ.  Amer.  Orient.  Soc,
"  On  Recurring  Motifs  in
Hindu  Fiction,"  M.  Bloom-
field,  vol.  xxx,  191ft1;
["  On  Recurring  Psychic
Motifs  in  Hindu  Fiction —
the  Laugh  and  Cry  Motif"]
M.  Bloomfield,  vol.  xxxvi,
251ft1,  254,  254ft1,  255,  256,
260ft3

Journ.  Bombay  Branch  Roy.
As.  Soc,  "The  Serpent
Sacrifice  mentioned  in  the
Mahabharata,"  M.  Winter-
nitz,  August  1926,  233ft2

Journ.  Phil.,  Amer.,  164ft1,
201m1.  For  details  see
under  Amer.  Journ.  Phil.,
203ft1,  218ft2,  220

Journ.  Roy.  As.  Soc,  R.  P.
Dewhurst,  review  of  the
Ocean  of  Sto?i/,  October
1924,  56ft;  "the  Earlier
History  of  the  Arabian
Nights,"  D.  B.  Macdonald,
July  1924,  225ft2;  "The
Nagas :  a  Contribution  to
the  History  of  Serpent
Worship,"  C.  F.  Oldham,
July  1901,  236ft1;  "The
Stories  of  Jimutavahana
and  Harisarman,"  B.  Hale
Wortham,  vol.  xviii,  1886,
237ft2


Jouvence,  eau  de,  or  "water  of
life,"  magical  water  used
as,  225

Joy,  death  caused  by  ex-
cessive, 103 ;  horripilation
from,  60,  139,  139ft2,  179

Kalhanas  Rajataranginl,  M.  A.
Stein,  244ft1

Kalmukische  Mdrchen.  Die
Mdrchen  des  Siddhi-Kiir,
B.  Julg,  235ft2

Kama  Sidra,  Vatsyayana,  258

Kathakoca ;  or,  Treasury  of
Stories,  The,  C.  H.  Tawney,
220,  223,  254

Kathdratndkara.  Das  Mdrchen-
meer,  J.  Hertel,  200,  200ft2

"  Kedarnath,"  W.  Crooke,
Hastings'  Ency.  Rel.  Eth.,
2ft1

Kinder-  und  Hausm'drchen  der
Br'uder  Grimm,  Anmerkungen
zu  den,  J.  Bolte  and  G.
Polivka,  209ft1,  263ft1

Kinds  of  enjoyments,  eight,
249 ;  of  laughter,  different,
253

King  Amaradatta,  172,  183,
186,  190,191;  Bali,  36,98,
98ft2;  Behram,  210,  211;
of  Bennayada,  Muladeva,
218;  the  Brahman  Boy
who  offered  himself  up
to  save  the  Life  of  the,
87,  87ft1,  88-96,  250-256;
Chandraprabha,  82-84,  86 ;
Dharmadhvaja  and  his
Three  Very  SensitiveWives,
10,  10ft1,  11,  12,  204-211  ;
Drupada,  the  story  of,
223,  228 ;  Karmasena,  163,
169,  171,  172,  173,  175,
176,  180-186,  192;  of  Kau-
sambi,  Udayana,  106 ;  of
Mahishmati,  Arjuna,  174 ;
Nahusha,  166

King  named  Chandraprabha,
72  ;  Chandravaloka,  87,  90,
93,  95;  Dharanivaraha,  108;
Dharma,  116,  117;  Durga-
pisacha,  164-167,  167n2,
168,  169,  170,  170w2,  182,
190;  Mahasena,  137,  140-
143,  148,  149,  156,  158,
159,  160;  Mahendraditya,
141,  145,  147,  148,  159;
Mandaradeva,  140-143,149,
151,  159,  160;  Mayavatu,
164,  164w2,  167,  169,  170,
171,    177,    180,    181,    182,


King — continued

184,  185,  186,  190,  192
Mrigankasena,  20 ;  Na
husha,  70 ;  Padmanabha
98;  Pradyumna,112;  Sakti
rakshita,  164,  164w3,  165
170,  182,  186,  190 ;  Surya
prabha,  78,  80,  81,  82,  84
86;  Vindhyaketu,  153-160
Virabahu,  5 ;  Viradeva,  1
2,  4;  Viraketu,  35,  38
218;  Visvavasu,  51,  52
Yasahketu,  40,  40n2 ;  Yaso-
dhank,  66,  67

King  Natchetiran,  257 ;  of
the  snakes,  Vasuki,  56,  58,
176,  176n2,  236;  Srenika,
200 ;  Trivikramasena  and
the  Mendicant,  1,  4,  5,  9,
10,  12,  13,  25,  29,  33-34,
35,  39,  40,  48,  49,  63,  66,
69-70,  71,  77,  78,  85-86,
87,  96-97,  98,  104,  108,
111,112,115,116,120-121;
Conclusion  of  King  Trivi-
kramasena and  the  Mendi-
cant, 122,  122m1,  123-125,
263 ;  Trivikramasena's  re-
quest, 124 ;  of  Vatsa,  the,
195;  Virata,  162,  162n3;
Yasahketu,  his  Vidyadhari
Wife  and  his  Faithful
Minister,  13,  ISn1,  14-25,
211-212

King's  answers  to  the  Vetala's
questions,  the,  4,  9,  12,  25,
33,  34,  39,  48,  63,  69,  70,
77,  86,  96,  104,  111,  115

Kings  of  Pattan  and  Kabri,
the  agreement  between
the,  230

Kite,  Garuda  represented  as
a  Brahmany,  234 ;  poisons
food,  dead  snake  carried
by  a,  32,  212,  213,  215

Knot  on  the  sacred  thread,
Brahmagranthi,  a.,21

Knowledge  of  the  speech  of
animals,  3,  3w2,  137,  137w3,
199

Ko-ji-ki,  the,  238

["  Ko-Ji-Ki  ...  or   Records
of      Ancient       Matters  "
B.  H.  Chamberlain,  Trans.
As.  Soc.  Japan,  238,  238w2

Ladies,  the  three  hypocritical,
211

"  Lait  de  la  Mere  et  le  Coffre
Flottant,  Le,"  ttudes
Folkloriques,  E.  Cosquin,  82rs


T^Tcp      <ri


Lake    guarded    by    dragons,

235ft2 ;      Mansarovar,     tale

about,    230ft1 ;    resembling

the  Mahabharata,  129  ;  the

sex-changing,  224
Lamp-black  at  the  upanayana

ceremony,   smearing  with,

27
Lamps     made     of    precious

stones,  189,  189ft2
Land  of  Anga,  the,  13,  13ft23,

15,  17,  19,  23;  of  Kalinga,

the,   112;  of  Malava,  the,

116
Language  of  animals,  know-
ledge of  the,  3,  3ft2,  137,

137ft3,  199
Language  Ass.  Amer.,  Modern,

203.     For  details  see  under

Mod.  Lang.  Ass.  Amer.
Laugh  of  the  Brahman  boy,

the,  96  ;  of  the  corpse,  the,

255  ;  of  the  dead  fish,  the,

254 ;  the  demon's,  92,  95  ;

of  the  dying  thief,  the,  38,

39
"  Laugh  and  Cry  "  motif,  the,

221,  254,  260,  261
"Laugh"   motif,    the,    221,

251,  253-255
Laughing  statue,  the,  210, 211
Laughs  in  Hindu  fiction,  253-

256
Laughter,  different  kinds  of,

253
"Laughter,"      C.      Lloyd

Morgan,     Hastings'    Ency.

Rel.  Eth.,  253ft1
Laughter,     C.    Brereton    and

F.  Rothwell  (trans,  of  H.

Bergson's  Le  Rire),  253ft1
Laughter,  An  Essay  on,  James

Sully,  253ft1
Laughter,  The  Nature  of,  J.  C.

Gregory,  253ft1
"  Laughter,  The   Physiology

of,"  H.  Spencer,Macmillans

Masazine,  253ft1
Lay,  Chaucer  s  Franklin  s  Tale

based  on  a  Breton,  204
Leaves,  vilva,  158
Legend  of  Jimutavahana ,   The

Buddhist,  B.  HaleWortham,

237ft2
Legend  of  Perseus,  The,  E.  S.

Hartland,  227ft1,  240ft1
Legend  of  Pope  Gregory,  the,

81ft1 ;  of  Tiresias,  the,  3ft2,

227
Legends  about  change  of  sex,

Indian,  229,  230


INDEX  II— GENERAL

Leisure  Hour,  The  ["  What  I
saw  of  the  Sandal- wood
Trade"],  C.  B.,  Ldn.,
September  1869,  107

Length  of  the  sacred  thread,
26

Letter  in  the  sandalwood
drum,  the,  238

Leviathan,  The,  Thomas
Hobbes,  253ft1

Library,  Apollodorus,  The,
J.  G.  Frazer,  3ft2, 227, 227ft2,
228ft1,  230ft3

Library,  Bohn's  Classical,
206ft3,232ft1;  LoebClassical,
227ft2,  228ft2

Life,  The  Brahman  Hari-
svamin,  who  first  lost  his
Wife,  and  then  his,  29,
29ft1,  30-33,  212-215;  of
the  King,  The  Brahman
Boy  who  offered  himself
up  to  save  the,  87,  87ft1,
88-96,  250-256;  power  of
restoring  dead  to,  4,  4ft1;
sprinkling  with  the  water
of,  61,  61ft1,  259,  260;  in
the  water,  the  imaginary,
75,  76

"Life,  water  of,"  magical
water  used  as,  225

Life  of  Hiuen  Tsiang,  The,
S.  Beal,  106

Life  and  Stories  of  the  Jaina
Savior  Parcvanatha,  The,
M.  Bloomfield,  203ft1,  213

Lion,  The  Four  Brahman
Brothers  who  resuscitated
the,  108,  108ft1,  109-111,
258-260;  of  spring,  the,
67

Lions  in  India,  scarcity  of,
259

Lips,  bimba,  10,  10ft2

Locks,  grey,  190,  191,  191ft1 ;
shaving  all  the  hair  except
seven,  205

Long-lived  (Ciramjivin),  bird
named,  234

Longest  book  in  the  K.S.S.,
Book  XII,  the,  194

Loss  of  Madanamanchuka,
the,  195

Lotus,  kamala,  99ft4;  leaves,
bed  of,  143 ;  leaves  and
sandalwood  juice,  bed  of,
101,  101ft1 ;  produces  a
wound  on  the  queen's
thigh,  a  falling,  11

Lotuses,  an  asan  of  white,
250;  eyes  like  blue,  160


293

Love,  death  caused  by  the
fever  of,  69,  69ft1 ;  the  fire
of,.143;  the  God  of  (Kama),
13,  13ft3,  37,  40,  41,  52,  66,
99,  138,  176,  177,  188,  189,
190,  201,  214;  in  Greek
romances,  signs  of,  139ft1;
by  mere  mention,  or  de-
scription, 17,  18,  18ft1;
with  a  picture,  falling  in,
139,  139ft2,  141,  143;  for
a  thief,  Ratnavati's  sudden,
37

Love-sickness,  the  ten  stages
of,  44ft2

Lurking-places  of  thieves,
usual,  219

Luxury  and  effeminacy  of  the
old  Sybarites,  the,  206-
208

Lyre,  deer  listening  to  Mala-
yavati's  playing  on  the,  52,
52ft2

Macbeth  [Shakespeare],  164ft1

Macmillan's  Magazine,  "  The
Physiology  of  Laughter,"
H.  Spencer,  March  1860,
253ft1

Mad  elephant,  the,  41,
41ft1

Maddening  beauty,  Unma-
dini's,  66,  68,  69

"  Madonna  Dianora  and
Messer  Ansaldo,"  De-
cameron, Boccaccio,  203ft8

(Magic  Art,  The)  The  Golden
Bough,  vol.  ii,  J.  G.  Frazer,
240ft3

Magic  cauldron,  the,  224,
225 ;  circle,  the,  95,  95ft2,

122,  123;  Pill,  The,  40,
40ft1,  41-47,  222-233;  plant,
change  of  sex  through  a,
223,  224;  Power,  The
Brahman's  Son  who  failed
to  acquire  the,  71,  71ft1,
72-77,  244-249;  powers  of
the  four  brothers,  the,  110,
111 ;  powers,  hermit  pos-
sessing, 73,  113,  114;  purse
always  containing  a  thou-
sand dinars,  222ft3;  sandals,
235 ;  seal,  transformation
through  a,  222,  224;  spells,

123,  126
Magical  rites,  123
Magician  and  the  Brahman,

the  dispute  between  the,
47;  enters  another  body,
114,  115


294


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


Mahabharata,  An  Index  to  the
Names  in  the,  S.  Sorensen,
223ft2,  235ft1

Mahabharata  of  Krishna-
Dwaipayana  Vyasa,  The,
P.  C.  Roy,  38n2,  223ft2

Mahrattas,  A  History  of  the,
J.  G.  Duff,  216ft1

Maiden  on  the  wishing-tree,
the  heavenly,  16,  18,  19

Maidens,  the  three  hypo-
critical, 211

Mainyo  i-Khirad,  the,  56ft

Malavikagnimitra,  Kalidasa,
2ft1

Male  sex,  girl's  dislike  for
the,  35,  217

Man  inspired  by  a  goddess
regarded  as  a  woman,  231 ;
transformed  into  a  girl
through  a  magic  pill,  42-

Mango-fruit,  serpent  carried
by  a  bird  poisons,  213,  214

Man-lion,  form  assumed  by
Krishna,  175,  175m1

Manners  and  Customs  of  the
Modern  Egyptians,  An
Account  of  the,  E.  W.  Lane,
224ft3

Man's  fate  is  written  on  his
skull,  24,  24ft1

Marathi  and  Hindi  versions
of  the  Vetalapanchavimsati,
coincidence  of  the,  264

Marks,  boy  with  auspicious,
82

Marriage,  bath  qualifying  for,
27 ;  of  Brahmans  before
the  upanayana,  no,  26 ;
ceremonies,  Hindu,  188,
188ft1 ;  ceremonies,  pre-
tended change  of  sex  at,
231 ;  between  the  dying
thief  and  the  merchant's
daughter,  the,  79;  the
gandharva  form  of,  21,  44,
48,  194,  251

Marriage,     The     History     of
Human,    E.    Westermarck
231ft1

Marriages  between  humans
and  water-deities,  240

Materia  Medica  of  the  Hindus
The,  U.  C.  Dutt,  105

Material  of  the  sacred  thread
26

Matriarchate  into  patriarch-
ate, change  of,  231,  232

Meaning  of  the  child's  laugh,
the,  96


Medical  works,  description  of
sandalwood  in  Hindu,  105

Meditation,  supernatural
power  of,  60

Meeting  of  Sundarasena  and
Mandaravati,  the,  151

Melusine,  Recueil  de  Mythologie
.  .  .,  10  vols.,  Paris,  1901,
126^2  ;  [«  Une  Fable  de  la
Fontaine  et  les  Contes
Orientales "]  Israel  Levi,
No.  2,  cols.  541-545,  203ft4

Mem.  Anth.  Soc.  Ldn.,  "  Note
on  an  Hermaphrodite,"
R.  F.  Burton,  vol.  ii,  233ft1

Men,  girl's  dislike  for,  35, 217;
the  three  generous,  7,  8,  9

Mendicant,  the  death  of  the,
123  ;  King  Trivikramasena
and  the,  1,  4,  5,  9,  10,  12,
13,  25,  29,  33-34,  35,  39,
40,  48,  49,  63,  66,  69-70,
71,  77,  78,  85-86,  87,  96-97,
98.  104,  108,  111,  112,  115,
116,  120-121;  Conclusion
of  King  Trivikramasena
and  the,  122,  122ft1,  123-
125,  263;  named  Kshan-
tisila,  121,  122

Mention,  falling  in  love  by
mere,  17,  18,  18ft1

Merchant  named  Arthadatta,
5,  98 ;  named  Dhanapala,
78 ;  named  Dharmadatta,
5-8;  named  Lakshmidatta,
18,  19 ;  named  Nidhidatta,
15-17  ;  named  Ratnadatta,
35,  37,  38 ;  named  Samu-
dradatta,  6,  7,  9 ;  named
Vasudatta,  80  ;  the  wicked,
152,  157

Merchant's  Daughter  who
fell  in  Love  with  a  Thief,
The,  35,  35ft1,  36-39,  215-
221

Merchant's  wife  and
Durlabhaka  -  Pratapaditya
II,  the,  244

Metamorphoses,  Ovid,  227ft2,
228ft1- 2

Metaphors  of  Hindu  beauty,
64,  140

Method  of  thieving,  Indian,
218

Milk  to  the  sea,  offerings  of,
146ft1

Minister,  King  Yasahketu,
his  Vidyadhari  Wife  and
his  Faithful ;  13,  13ft1,  14-
25,  211-213;  the  punish-
ment of  the  Jain,  205


Ministers,  the  adventures  of
the  four,  134-136,  139 ;  of
Sundarasena,  the  five,  137
turned  into  fruits,  Mrigan-
kadatta's,  130,  131,  161

Mirabilia,  Phlegon,  227ft2

Mirror  allowed  after  th
upanayana,  looking  in  a,  27

Mistake,  Garuda's,  61 ;  about
the  order  of  events  in  the
K.S.S.,  195,  196

Modern  Language  Ass.  Amer.,
"Chaucer's  Franklin's
Tale,"  W.  H.  Schofield,
vol.  xvi  (N.S.),  vol.  ix,  203

Modern  research  on  changes
of  sex,  233,  233ft1

Monkey,  transformation  in
a,  44ft1

Monster,  the  terrible,  91,  92,
95

"  Montagne,  Noire,  La,'
Melusine,'  vol.  ii,  126ft2

Month  Kartika,  the,  142

Moon,  blisters  produced  b
the  rays  of  the,  11 ;  com
pared  to  a  patch  on  th
forehead,  102 ;  dangerou
for  man,  the  rays  of  th
6,  6ft1

Moonstone,  face  like  the,  8

Morphologie  der  Missbildung
E.  Schwalbe,  233ft1

Most  holy  spot  on  the  eart
Gaya,  the,  85ft

Mother,  The  Father  th
married  the  Daughter  an
the  Son  that  married  th
116,  116ft1,  117-119,  262
of  the  snakes,  Kadru,  th
55,  56

Mother-goddesses,  worship
the  fifteen  divine,  26

Motif,  "  Catching  the  Thief,
217-221;  "Change  of  Sex,
223-233;  "Devote
Hetsera,"  220ft1;  "  Ente
ing  Another's  Body,"  260
"Exposed Child," 81,  81ft
82ft,  250;  "Joint  Efforts,
259;  the  "Laugh,"  22
251,  253-256  ;  "  Laugh  an
Cry,"  221,  254,  260,  261
the  "Noble  Thief,"  201
202;  "Pretended  Igno
ance,"  263;  "Promise
Return,"  203,  204;  th
"Resuscitation,"  259;  th
"Self-Sacrifice,"  251,  252
the  "Sybarite,"  208;  th
"Taboo,"    21,    21ft3,  212


INDEX  II— GENERAL


295


Motif — continued

the  "Trick,"  256;  "Un-
intentional Injuries,"  92,
92ft1,  131,  131ft1
"Motifs  in  Hindu  Fiction —
the  Laugh  and  Cry  Motif,
On  Recurring  Psychic,"
M.  Bloomfield,  Joum.  Amer.
Orient.  Soc.,  251ft1,  254m1,
255,  256,  260ft3

"  Motifs  in  Hindu  Fiction,
On  Recurring,"  M.  Bloom-
field,  Joum.  Amer.  Orient.
Soc,  191/11

Mount  Alburz,  56ft ;  Cithaeron,
227;  Cvllene,  227;  Meru,
49 ;  Satasnnga,  202

Mountain,  the  Anjana,  168  ;
heap  of  snake-bones  re-
sembling the  peak  of  a,  56  ;
of  Himavat,  the,  49,  84;
the  Malaya,  51,  55,  59,  62,
68,  192,  193,  194,  195 ;  of
Nishadha,  the,  23;  the
Vindhya,  165,  213

Mountains,  myth  about  Indra
cutting  the  wings  of  the,
19,  19ft1,  88,  88ft1

Mouth,  transformations
through  putting  magic  pills
in  the,  42,  42ft1,  43,  44,  47

Mouths,  Vasuki,  the  king  of
the  snakes,  has  a  thousand
faces  and,  56,  176ft2

Movable  wishing-tree,  the,
16,  18,  19,  21,  21m1

Mrichchhakatika,  the,  72ft3

Music,  horses  taught  to  dance
to,  207

Mysterious  laughs,  253-255

Mystery  of  the  loss  of  Ma-
danamanchuka,  the,  194,
195

Myth  of  Cupid  and  Psyche,
the,  21ft3;  about  Indra
cutting  the  wings  of  the
mountains,  19ft1,  88ft1

Mythological  birds,  56,  56ft

Mythology,  Zoological,  A.  de
Gubernatis,  21ft3

Myths  of  the  Middle  Ages,
Curious,  S.  Baring-Gould,
52ft2

Nagdnanda,  Harsha,  235,
237ft2

"  Nagas :  a  Contribution  to
the  History  of  Serpent
Worship,  The,"  C.  F.  Old-
ham, Journ.  Roy.  As.  Soc,
236ft1


Names  in  the  Mahdbharata,  An
Index  to  the,  S.  Sorensen,
223ft2,  235ft1

Naturalis  Historia,  Pliny,  232

Nature,  but  no  reason,  laughs
showing  their,  253,  254

Nature,     "  Caliature    Wood,"

D.  Hooper,     vol.    lxxxvi,
1911,  107

Nature,    Humane,    Thomas

Hobbes,  253ft1
Nature     of     Laughter,     The,

J.  C.  Gregory,  253ft1
Neck,     transformation     by

placing  a  cord  round  the,

44ft1
Necklace    of   human    heads,

250
Neighbours,  the  four  delicate,

209,  210
[Neu-Aramaeische  Dialekt   des

Tur  'Abdin]  vol.  ii  entitled  :

Syrische  Sagen  und  Maerchen,

E.  Prym    and    A.    Socin,
81ft1

New  Quarterly  Magazine,  "  On
the  Idea  of  Comedy,"
George  Meredith,  April
1877,  253ft1

Night,  the  wedding,  189

Nights  and  a  Night,  The
Thousand,  R.  F.  Burton,
24ft1,  56ft,  88ft2,  203,  217,
224,  224ft3,  245,  249,  258

"Noble  Thief"  motif,  the,
201,  202

Noisy  traders  forbidden  in
the  ancient  Sybaris,  all,
207

Northern  Tribes  of  Central
Australia,   B.   Spencer  and

F.  J.  Gillen,  230w4

Note  on  Arjuna  and  the
Narmada,  174 ;  on  the
Position  of  Book  XII,  194-
196  ;  on  the  Sacred  Thread,
26-28 ;  on  Sandalwood,
105-107

"  Notes  on  an  Hermaphro-
dite," R.  F.  Burton,  Mem.
Anth.  Soc.  Ldn.,  233ft1

Numerous  Indian  legends
about  change  of  sex,  229,
230

Oblation  to  gods  and  vener-
able men,  argha  or  arghya,
53,  123,  123ft1

Observer,  The  Intellectual,  105-
107.  For  details  see  under
Intellectual,  etc.


Obstacles,  vanquisher  of,
Ganesa,  128,  128ft1

Ocean,  the  Churning  of  the,
129ft3' *

Ocean  of  Story,  The,  72ft2,
203

Offering  of  human  eyes  and
flesh,  123

Offerings  of  clarified  butter
to  the  fire,  27 ;  to  the  sea,
146,  146ft1

Oil,  description  of  the  sandal-
wood, 105,  106

Old  age,  the  grey  locks  of,
190,  191,  191ft1

Oldest  Greek  colony,  Sybaris,
the,  206

Omission  of  Vetala  No.  10
in  the  Vedala  Cadai,  200,
200ft1

"Opium  —  Le  Cafe,  Le
Hachich,  L',"  Charles
Richet,  Revue  des  Deux
Mondes,  248

Order  of  events  in  the  K.S.S.,
mistake  about  the,  195,
196 ;  of  tales  in  the  three
chief  translations  of  the
Vetalapanchavimsati,  264

Origin  of  the  story  of  Jimu-
tavahana,  possible,  240

Original  Sanskrit  Texts,  J.
Muir,  72n2,  274

Originals  and  Analogues  of
some  of  Chaucer  s  Canter-
bury Tales,  W.  A.  Clouston,
203,  203ft3,  204

Ornaments,  one  of  the  eight
kinds  of  enjoyment,  249

Ovid,  Metamorphoses,  F.  J.
Miller,  228ft2

Owl,  Vetala  with  eyes  like
an,  163

Own  flesh,  cutting  off,  126,
126ft2

Oxford  History  of  India,  The,
V.  A.  Smith,  237ft1

Pain,  hearing  about  men
digging  causes,  207;  san-
dalwood lotion  (unguent,
etc.)  applied  as  relief  for,
11,  12,  12ft1,  53,  53ft1,  101,
101ft1,  105

Painting,  falling  in  love  with
a,  139,  139ft2,  141,  143

Palace  gate,  child  with  a
thousand  gold  pieces  ex-
posed at  the,  81,  81ft1,  250

Palaces,  subaqueous,  19,  20,
212


296


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


Palanquin,  37,  37ft2
Pantcha-Tantra,     Le,     J.     A.

Dubois,  224
Pantschatantra,  Theodor  Ben-
fey,  213,  252ft2,  260
Papageim'drchen,    Die,    M.

Wickerhauser,  222ft3,  241ft4
Parables,  Buddhaghosha 's ,  244
Paradises,  the  Eight,  246
Parallels   to  Vetala   No.   10,

Indian,  200-203
Parched  grain  into  the  fire,

throwing,  188,  188m1
Parcvandtha.     The   Life    and

Stories  of  the  Jaina  Savior,

M.  Bloomfield,  203ft1,  213
Passion,    one    of    the    three

qualities  of  the  body,  27
Paste  of  ground  sandalwood

and  water,  uses  of,  105,  106
Patch  on  the  forehead,  moon

compared  to  a,  102
Patents  on  peculiar  dishes  in

Sybaris,  taking,  208
Patriarchate,  change  of  matri-

archate  into,  231,  232
Paupers,  the  four,  108,  109
Pausanias*     Description    of

Greece,  J.  G.  Frazer,  240ft2
Peak  of  a  mountain,  heap  of

snake  -  bones      resembling

the,  56
Peculiar    dishes    in    Sybaris,

taking  patents  on,  208
Penniless  gambler,   the,   72,

72ft3
Pentamerone,  II,  G.  B.  Basile,

42ft1,  162ft1
Performance  of  the  wedding

ceremony,  the,  188,  188ft1
Perfume,    one   of  the    eight

enjoyments,  249
Periplus  of  the  Erythrcean  Sea,

The,    106,    174.     See   also

under  SchofF,  W.  H.
Perseus,  The  Legend  of,  E.  S.

Hartland,  227w\  240ft1
Persian  Tutl-namah,  the,  222,

241
Pestle,  bruises  produced  by

the  sound  of  a,  11,  12
Phil.  Soc,  Proc.  Amer.,  220ft1.

For  details  see  under  Proc.

Amer.  Phil.  Soc.
"  Physiology     of     Laughter,

The,"    H.    Spencer,    Mac-

millan's  Magazine,  253ft1
Picture,  falling  in  love  with

a,  139,  139ft2,  141,  143
Pigment  applied  to  the  eyes,

anjana,  black,  168ft5


Pile  of  bones,  the,  55

Pilgrimage  to  Gaya,  the,  83,
250

Pilgrims,  the  strange  effect
of  Kedarnath  on,  2ft1

Pill,  The  Magic,  40,  40ft1,
41-47,  222-233

"Piper  of  Hamelin,  The,"
Curious  Myths  of  the  Middle
Ages,  S.  Baring-Gould,  52ft2

Pitchers,  breasts  like,  5

Place  on  the  earth,  Gaya,  the
most  holy,  85ft ;  of  holy
pilgrimage,  Kedarnath,  2ft1;
and  time  affected  by  use  of
hashish,  idea  of,  248,  249

Plant,  change  of  sex  through
a  magic,  223,  244

Plants  of  India,  The  Useful,
H.  Drury,  105

Pliny,  The  Natural  History  of,
J.  Bostock  and  H.  T.  Riley,
232,  232ft1

Poisoned  dish  of  rice,  the,  32

Pool,  sex-changing,  230

Pope  Gregory,  the  legend  of,
81ft1

Popular  Religion  and  Folk-Lore
of  Northern  India,  The,
W.  Crooke,  1ft2,  5ft3,  146ft2,
230ft1

Popular  Stories  of  Ancient
Egypt,  G.  Maspero,  92ft1

Position  of  Book  XII,  Note
on  the,  194-196

Possible  origin  of  the  story  of
Jimutavahana,  240

Posts,  at  the  upanayana  cere-
mony, booth  on  four,  26

Pouring  holy  water  on  the
head,  191,  191ft3

Powder  of  bones,  circle  of
yellow,  122,  123

Power,  The  Brahman's  Son
who  failed  to  acquire  the
Magic,  71,  71ft1,  72-77,  244-
249 ;  of  flying  in  the  air,
24,29,126,127;  of  medita-
tion, 60;  of  resuscitation,
4,  4ft1,  110,  111

Powers  of  the  four  brothers,
the  magic,  110,111 ;  hermit
possessing  magic,  73,  113,
114

Prabandhacintamani,  or
Wishing-stone  of  Narratives,
C.  H.  Tawney,  202

Practical  Magazine,  The,
"Sandal-wood,"  Anony-
mous, vol.  vii,  Ldn.,
December  1877,  107


Prayer  to  become  a  man,
Caenis',  228

Precedents  of  Princess  Thoo-
damma  Tsari,  The,  C.  J,
Bandow,  203ft2

Precious  stones,  lamps  made
of,  189,  189ft2

Pregnant  cravings  of  a  woman,
201

Presents,  the  splendid,  188

Pretended    change    of    sej
231;  ignorance,   121,   123,
263

Previous  births,remembering,
55 ;  births,  the  unchange-
able effect  of  actions
148,  154

Priests   changing    their   se:
custom  of.  231

Prison,  the  Savara,  154

Prisoners  at  feasts,  releasing,
160,  160ft1

Proben  der  V olkslitteratur  dt
T'urkischen      Stdmme      Siid-
Sibiriens,  W.  Radloff,  204

Proc.  Amer.   Phil.  Soc,

the  Art  of  Entering  An-
other's Body,"  M.  Bloom-
field,  vol.  lvi,  1917,  260ft3;
["  The  Character  and  Ad-
ventures of  Muladeva
M.  Bloomfield,  vol. lii,  191  3,
220ft1

Prolixity  of  Kshemendra's
text,  64,  65

Prologe  of  the  Frankeley?
Tale,  The,  Chaucer,  204

Promise,  Madanasena  and  hei
Rash,  5,  5ft1,  6-9,  199-204
never  to   eat  the   snakes
Garuda's,  62

"  Promise  to  Return  "  mot
the,  203,  204

Proverbs  of  al-Mufaddal  ibi
Salama,  the  Fakhir,  a  col-
lection of,  225

"  Prudence,"  Chaturika,  176

"  Psychic  Motifs  in  Hindi
Fiction  —  the  Laugh  am
Cry  Motif,  On  Recurring,"
M.  Bloomfield,  Journ.  Amer.
Orient.  Soc,  251ft1,  254ft1,
255,  256,  260ft3

Pterocarpus     santalinus,     R(
Sanders  Tree,  107

Pun,  Hindu,  1,  lw4,  13,  13ft3
17,  17ft1,  19,  19ft1,  52,  52ft3
79,  79ft1,  87,  87ft3,  91,  91ft2,
98,  98w2,  162,  162ft3,  165,
165ft2,  168,  168ft1,  168ft3,
173.  173w2   177.  177ft2


INDEX  II— GENERAL


297


Punishment     of     the     Jain

minister,  the,  205
Purposes,    sandalwood    used

for  domestic  and  religious,

105,  106
Purse    always    containing    a

thousand     dinars,     magic,

222ft3
Pyre,      widow      ascending

funeral,  38,  38ft1

Qanun-i- Islam,  Islam  in  India,
or  the,  G.  A.  Herklots,
249ft1

Qualities  of  the  body,  the
three,  27

Quarterly  Magazine,  New,  "On
the  Idea  of  Comedy,"
George  Meredith,  253ft1

Queen  Kandarpasena,  149 ;
named  Chandravati,  116-
119;  named  Padmarati,  1,  2

Questions,  the  Vetala's,  4,  9,
12,  25,  33,  39,  48,  63,  69,
77,  85,  96,  104,  111,  115,
120

Raja  Badan  and  Raja  Hara,

the    agreement    between,

229,  230
Rajas,    the     Bhaduria,     229,

230
Rajataraiigini,      Kalhana's,

M.  A.  Stein,  244ft1
Ramayan    of    Valmiki,     The,

R.  T.  H.  Griffith,  174
Ramayana,  The,  M.  N.  Dutt,

174
Range,    the    Vindhya,    165,

167,  175
Ranks    of    the     Twice-born

through     the      upanayana,

entering  the,  26
Rash    Promise,    Madanasena

and  her,  5,  5ft1,  6-9,  199-204
Rays   of  the   moon,   blisters

produced  by  the,  11,  209 ;

of  the  moon  on  man,  evil

effect  of  the,  6,  6ft1
Reality,    one    of    the    three

qualities  of  the  body,  27
Reason,  laughs  showing  their

nature,  but  no,  253,  254
Reasons   for  the  fall  of  the

ancient  Sybaris,  206
Recension  of  the  Sinhdsana-

dvatrinsika,    the    Southern,

234 ;  of  the    V etalapancha-

vimsati,     Sivadasa's,      250,

251 ;  of  the  Vikrama-charita,

the  Vararuchi,  252ft2


"  Recht  und  Sitte,"  J.  Jolly,
Encyclopaedia  of  Indian
Philology,  26

Recreations  Francoises,  Contes
a  rire,  ou,  3  vols.,  new  ed.,
Paris,  1769,  Amsterdam,
1732,  209ft2

"  Recurring  Motifs  in  Hindu
Fiction,  On,"  M.  Bloom-
field,  Journ.  Amer.  Orient.
Soc,  191ft1

"  Recurring  Psychic  Motifs  in
Hindu  Fiction — the  Laugh
and  Cry  Motif,  On,"  M.
Bloomfield,  Journ.  Amer.
Orient.  Soc,  251ft1,  254ft1,
255,  256,  260ft3

Red  colour  of  the  Kshatriya's
sacred  thread,  26  ;  Sanders
Tree,  Pterocarpus  santalinus,
107

References  to  sandalwood,
early,  106,  107

"  Refreshing,"  chandana,  105

Reise  der  Sohne  Giaffers  aus
dem  Italienischen  des  Christo-
foro  Armeno  ubersetzt  durch
Johann  Wetzel  1583,  Die,  J.
Bolte  and  H.  Fischer,  210ft4

Relationship,  the  curious,  119

Releasing  prisoners  at  feasts,
160,  160ft1

Relief  for  pain,  fever,  etc.,
sandalwood  applied  as,  11,
12,  12ft1,  53,  53ft1,  101,
101ft1,  105,  143

Religion  and  Folk-Lore  of
Northern  India,  The  Popular,
W.  Crooke,  lft2,  5ft3,  146ft1,
230ft1

Religion  of  the  Semites,  W.
Robertson  Smith,  231ft6

Religion,  the  king's  con-
version to  Jain,  204,  205 ;
superintendent  of  —  i.e.
Dharmaraja,  33,  33ft1

Religions  of  India,  The,  A.
Barth,  85ft

Religious  purposes,  sandal-
wood used  for,  106

Remembering  former  births,
55

Report,  the  false,  67

Request,  King  Trivikrama-
sena's,  124

Research  on  changes  of  sex,
modern,  233,  233W1

Resuscitation  of  Ananga-
manjari,  her  husband  and
her  lover,  104;  power  of,
4,  4ft1,  110,  111


"Resuscitation"  motif,   the.

259  J

"  Return,  Promise  to,"  motif,

the,  203,  204
Revenge,  Unmadinl's,  67,  68
Revue  des  Deux  Mondes,  "  Le

Hachich  —  L'Opium  —  Le

Cafe,"      Charles      Richet,

March  1877,  248
Rice,  the  poisoned,  32
Rights    obtained    after    the

upanayana,  various,  27
Rire,  Le,  H.  Bergson,  253ft1
Rite  of  investiture  with  the

sacred    thread,    upanayana,

the,     26 ;     of    pancadivya-

dhivdsa,  the,  218
Rites     of     Hindu     marriage

ceremonies,  188,  188ft1;  in

India,      belief      in      sex-
changing,     229 ;     magical,

122,  123
Rites  of  the  Twice-Born,  The,

Mrs  S.  Stevenson,  26,  28,

188ft1
River,   exposed   children  set

adrift  on  a,  81ft1,  82ft ;  the

imaginary  life  in  the,  75,

76 ;    related      by     Hiuen

Tsiang,  story  about  a  great,

237,  238
Robbers       blackened       and

anointed,  bodies    of,    216,

216ft2
Roman   und   Seine    Vorl'dufer,

Der  Griechische,  E.  Rohde,

139ft2,  147ft1,  189ft2
Romances,  signs   of  love   in

Greek,    139ft2 ;    storms    in

Greek,  147ft1
Romances  and  Stories,  A  Group

of  Eastern,  W.  A.  Clouston,

224ft1
Romantic  Tales  from  thePanjab,

C.  Swynnerton,  261
Roots  of  the  sandalwood-tree

give  the  best  oil,  105
Rosary  of  Aksha  seeds,  135
Rosenol,  J.  Hammer,  203ft6
Royal  birth,  the  signs  of,  18,

20;     umbrella,     the,     70;

wedding,  the,  188
Rules  and  taboos  of  a  Twice-
born  Brahman,  28
Rumour,  the  false,  14
Russe     epique,     La,     A.     N.

Rambaud,  189ft2

Sacred  Books  of  the  Buddhists,
vol.  i :  The  Gatakamala,
J.  S.  Speyer,  243ft1


298


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


Sacred  place  of  Kedarnath,
the,  2W1;  Thread,  Note  on
the,  26-28  ;  uses  of  sandal-
wood, 106

Sacrifice  of  the  Brahman  boy,
the  self-,  95,  96  ;  of  Jimuta-
vahana,  The,  49,  49ft1,  50-
63,  233-240

"  Sacrifice  mentioned  in  the
Mahabharata,  The  Ser-
pent," M.  Winternitz,
Journ.  Bombay  Br.  Roy.  As.
Soc,  233w2

"  Sacrifice,  Self-,"  motif,  the,
251,  252

Sacrifices  to  water-spirits,  240

Sacrificial  thread  of  hair,  123

Sacrificing  hero  in  European
folk-lore,  the,  239,  240

"Saga,  Wilkina,"  the,  Alt-
deutsche  u.  Altnordische
Helden-Sagen,  F.  H.  von
Hagen,  166n3,  173m1,  181W1

Sagas  from  the  Far  East
(R.  H.  Busk),  235w2

Sage  named  Ida,  royal,  46

Sagen  aus  B'dhmen,  J.  V.
Grohmann,  137w3

Sagen,  Gebrauche  u.  Marchen
aus  Westfalen,  A.  Kuhn,
120n2

Sanct  Brandan,  Schroder,  189w2

Sandal,  Sandalwood,  from
the  Sanskrit  chandana,
"refreshing,"  105

"Sandal,"  Hobson-Jobson,  H.
Yule  and  A.  C.  Burnell,107

Sandali-asivad,  105

Sandals,  magic,  235

Sandalwood,  30,  30w2,  43,
43W1,  72,  99,  99ra3,  216;
applied  as  relief  for  pain,
fever,  etc.,  11,  12,  12m1,
53,  53ni,  101,  lOln1,  105,
143  ;  for  cooling  and  per-
fuming the  skin,  99,  99w3,
105,  113;  drum,  the,  238;
Note  on,  105-107;  and
water,  uses  of  ground,  105,
106

["  Sandal  -  wood  ""  Anony-
mous, The  Practical  Maga-
zine, 107

["  Sandal- wood  and  its  Com-
mercial Importance  "]  B.
Seemann,  The  Intellectual
Observer,  105-107

Sanders,  from  the  Sanskrit
chandana,  "refreshing,"  105

Sandle.  from  the  Sanskrit
chandana,  "refreshing,"  105


Sanskrit  College  MS.  of  the
K.S.S.,  the,  21w12,  22n\
23n1,31w1-3,  Sen1, 41*1,  45^
49W1,  50w\  52n3,  55w2,  56w\
51n\  60^,63%!,  66w23,  67m1,
68w\  75W1,  83W1,  90m1,  din1,
94w2,  99n25,  104m1,  lOSn2,
UOn1-2,  llln1  118ra2, 120w\
122w2-*,  123w2, 125w2, 127W1,
128n\  134/i1,  135w3,  136W1,
137ra2,  138w13, I39n\  USn1,
150w12, 153w2,  154rc2,  155W1,
156wi,  160rc2,  161%i

Sanskrit  Drama,  The,  A.  B.
Keith,  237w2

Sanskrit  Texts,  0?'iginal,  J.
Muir,  72w2,  174

Santal  or  sandal,  105

cavTaXov ,  ardvSaXov,  105

Santalum  album,  sandalwood-
tree,  105-107

Scarcity  of  lions  in  India,  259

Scholiast  on  Lycophron,  John
Tzetzes,  227w2

Science  of  flying  in  the  air,
24,  29,  126,  127 ;  that  pro-
duces all  one  desires,  the,
73,  74,  75

Sciences,  study  of  the,  72,
76

Scientific  American  ["  The  True
Sandalwood  of  India "],
Anonymous,  vol.  cviii,  New
York,  June  1913,  107

Sea,  Agastya  swallowing  the,
166,  166w2;  offerings  to
the,  146,  146W1

Seal,  transformation  through
a  magic,  222

Secrets  of  the  four  brothers,
the  magic,  110,  111

Seeing  things  happen,  pain
caused  by,  207,  208,  209,
211

Self-control  at  sightof  beauty,
Brahmans  losing,  241,  242

"Self-existent,"  Svayambhu,
the,  149,  149m1

Self-sacrifice  of  the  Brahman
boy,  the,  95,  96

"Self-Sacrifice"  motif,  251,
252

Semites,  Religio?i  of  the,  W.
Robertson  Smitli,  231w5

Senses  of  appreciation  affected
by  the  use  of  hashish,  248,
249

Sensitive  Wives,  King  Dhar-
madhvaja  and  his  Three
Very,  10,  lOn1,  11,  12,  204-
211


3

nro-


;


Serpent  Ananta,  the,  129n5 ;

carried  by  a  kite  poisons

food,  dead,  32,  212,    213,

215
"Serpent,  The  Eight-forked,"

B.  H.  Chamberlain,  Tra\

As.  Soc.  Japan,  238,  23:

239
"  Serpent  -  gods     were     pro

pitiated,  How  the,"  Sagas
from  the  Far  East  (R.   H.

Busk),  235w2
"  Serpent  sacrifice  mentioned

in  the  Mahabharata,  The

M.     Winternitz,    Jour

Bombay  Br.  Roy.  As.  Soc

233w2
"Serpent    Worship,    The

Nagas:    a  Contribution  to

the    History    of,"    C.    F.

Oldham,    Jown.    Roy.    As.

Soc,  236W1
Serpents,   bandlet  of  white,

250
Servants,  the  devotion  of,  69,

69w2,  70
Seven    days,     feast     lasting,

191;    Heavens,   the,    246;

Hells,     the,     246;    locks,

shaving  all  the  hair  except,

205
Seven  Vazirs,  the,  214
Seven    Vazirs,    The   Book

Sindibad  ;  or,  The  Story  of

the     King,     his     Son,     the

Damsel,    and    the,    W.    A.

Clouston,      214w2- 3,      224,

224w2
Seventh  stage  of  love- sickness,

the    (loss    of    shame),    44,

44n2
"Sex,     Change     of,"     motif,

223-233
Sex  at  death,  change  of,  228,

230  ;  of  deities,  change  of,

231,  232 ;  girl's  dislike  for

the  male,  35,  217;  Indian

legends   about  change  of,

229,  230  ;  modern  research

on  changes  of,  233,  233W1 ;

with  a  Yaksha,  Sikhandin's

exchange  of,  223
Sex-changing  water,  224-226
Shape,  Rakshasa  looking  like

Hell  in  human,  21
Shaving  the  hair  except  seven

locks,  205
Ship    "Tyre,"    The,    W.    H.

Schoff,'l06
Shipwreck    of    MandaravatI,

the.  144


„


"Shipwrecked  Sailor,  The,'
Popular  Stories  of  Ancient
Egypt,  G.  Maspero,  92ft1

Shoes  allowed  after  the  upan-
ayana,  wearing,  27

Siamese  story,  pain  through
seeing  things  happen  in,
208,  209

Siberian  and  Other  Folk-Tales,
C.  F.  Coxwell,  204,  235ft2

Sicilianische  Mdrchen,  Laura
Gonzenbach,  81ft1,  126ft2

Siddhi-Kiir,  Kalmiikische  Mdr-
chen. Die  Mdrchen  des,
B.  Jiilg,  235ft2

Signs  of  love  in  Greek  ro-
mances, 139ft2 ;  of  royal
birth,  the,  18,  20

Silver  statue,  the  wonderful,
210,  211

Simile  of  the  Durga  temple,
155  ;  of  the  moon,  102

Similes  of  Hindu  beauty,  8,
64,  65

Sindibad.  Book  of,  the,  214,
214ft2-  3,  224,  224ft2.  See
also  under  Clouston,  W.  A.

Singing,  one  of  the  eight
enjoyments,  249

Six  fires,  torments  of  the,
154

Sketches  of  Persia,  J.  Malcolm,
203ft3  '

Skin,  sandalwood  for  cleaning
and  perfuming  the,  99,
99ft3,  105

Skull,  man's  fate  is  written
on  his,  24,  24ft1

Sleep,  dreamless,  one  of  the
four  states  of  the  soul,  26

Smell  of  other  elephants
makes  an  elephant  furious,
41,  41ft1

Snake  carried  by  a  kite
poisons  food,  dead,  32,  212,
213,  215

Snake-maiden,  Melusina,  the
European,  21ft3

Snakes  copulating,  ill-luck
caused  by  seeing,  227 ;
Vasuki,  the  king  of  the,
56,  58,  176,  176ft2,  236

Soma-juice,  colander,  a  fil-
terer  of,  85,  85ft1

Son  who  failed  to  acquire  the
Magic  Power,  The  Brah-
man's, 71,  71ft1,  72-77,  244-
249 ;  that  married  the
Mother,  The  Father  that
married  the  Daughter  and
the.    116.    116ft1     117-119.


INDEX  II-  GENERAL

Son — continued

262  ;  The  Thief's,  78,  78ft1,
79-85,  249-250

Song  of  the  heavenly  maiden,
the,  16,  18,  19

Sons,  Ratnadatta  is  promised
a  hundred,  38,  38ft2

Soothsayer,  Tiresias,  a
Theban,  227,  228

Soul,  change  of  sex  at  trans-
migration of  the,  230;  the
four  states  of  the,  26

Sound  of  a  pestle,  bruises
produced  by  the,  11,  12

Southern  India,  Folklore  in,
Pandit  Natesa  Sastrl,  219

Southern  Recension  of  the
Sinhasanadvatrinsika,  the,
234

Speech  of  animals,  knowledge
of  the,  3,  3ft2,  137,  137ft3,
199 ;  of  the  female  as-
cetic, the,  138,  138ft2;  of
Som(a)datt(a),  the,  200

Spells,  magic,  123,  126

Spirits  to  the  sea,  offerings  of,
146ft1

Splendid  presents,  the,  188

Spot  on  the  earth,  Gaya,  the
most  holy,  85ft

Sprachen  der  turkischen  Stdmme
Sud-Sibiriens,  Die,  W.  Rad-
loff,  204

Spread  of  the  tenth  Vetala
story,  the,  203 ;  of  the
word  sybarite,  wide,  206

Spring,  change  of  sex  through
bathing  in  a,  224

Spring,  the  lion  of,  67

Sprinkling  with  the  water  of
life,  61,  61ft1,  259,  260

Stages  of  love-sickness,  the
ten,  44n2

State  of  must,  elephants  in
the,  41ft1

Statement,  the  false,  67

Statement  of  the  Seaborne  Trade
of  British  India,  Annual,  107

States  of  the  soul,  the  four,  26

Statue,  King  Behram's  won-
derful, 210,  211

Statuette  in  the  Sinhasana-
dvatrinsika ,  the  story  of  the
Eleventh,  234,  235

"Stealing  in  Hindu  Fiction,
The  Art  of,"  M.  Bloom-
field,  Amer.  Journ.  Phil.,
164ft1,  201,  201ft1,  203ft1,
218ft2,  220

Stokers,  hashish  used  among,
249


299

Stolen  wife,  the,  29

Stones,  lamps  made  of
precious,  189,  189ft2

Stories  of  Ancient  Egypt,
Popular,  G.  Maspero,  92ft1

Stories  of  the  Jaina  Savior
Parcvanatha,  The  Life  and,

^  M.  Bloomfield,  203ft1,  213

Stories,  the  Andromeda  cycle
of,  227;  Cristoforo  Ar-
meno's  collection  of,  210,
210ft4;  about  the  effeminacy
and  luxury  of  the  Sybarites,
207,  208;  in  the  three
chief  versions  of  the  Vctdla-
panchavimsati,  Comparative
Table  of,  264;  of  the
Vetala,  the,  1-199

"  Stories  of  Jimutavahana  and
Harisarman,  The,"  B.  Hale
Wortham,  Journ.  Roy.  As.
Soc,  237ft2

Storm,  the  terrible,  146,  147

Storms  in  Greek  romances,.
147ft1

Story  of  Abhaya,  the,  201 ;
of  the  Eleventh  Statuette
in  the  Sinhasanadvatrinsika ,
234,  235;  of  the  First
Vazir,  in  the  Forty  Vazirs,
245-247;  about  a  great
river  related  by  Hiuen
Tsiang,  237,  238 ;  of  King
Drupada,  223,  228;  of
Mrigankadatta,  125-127,
128-133,  134-136,  161,  162-
173,  175-192;  of  the  Ra-
handama  Uppalavanna,  244  -y
of  "  Thinthakarala,  the
Bold  Gambler,"  255,  256 ;
in  the  Vedala  Cadai,  omis-
sion of,  200,  200ft1 ;  in  the
Vedala  Cadai,  substitution
of,  199  ;  of  Viravara,  252

Story  of  Jewad,  The,  E.  J.  W.
Gibb,  248

Strange  effect  of  Kedarnath
on  pilgrims,  the,  2ft1

Stream  of  the  Narmada
changing  its  direction,  the,
174 ;  sex-changing,  224

String  round  the  neck,  trans-
formation by  placing  &r
44ft1

"String  "  or  "virtue,"  gunay
112ft2

Studies  about  the  Kathasarit-
sagara,  J.  S.  Speyer,  16n4,
78ft3,  93ft2,  98ft2,  129ft1,
132ft2,  153ft1,  158ft2,  170ft6,
182ft2


300


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


Study  of  the  sciences,  72,  76
Subaqueous  palaces,   19,  20,

212
Substance,    the   body   of  an

upanayana  initiate  smeared

with  yellow,  26
Substitution  of  Vetala  No.  9

in  the  Tamil  version  of  the

Vetdlapanchavimsati,  199
Sugar  and  milk  to  the  sea,

offerings  of,  146ft1
Suicide  due  to  contempt,  257
Suitors,  Anangarati  and  her

Four,  1,  1ft3,  2-4,  199
Sultane  de  Perse,  et  des  Visirs,

Histoire  de  la,  F.  Petis  de

la  Croix,  245,  245ft3
*'  Sunshine  and  his  Younger

Brother,"  Siberianand  Other

Folk-Tales,  C.  F.  Coxwell,

235ft2
Superintendent  of  religion —

i.e.  Dharmardja,  33,  33ft1
Supernatural  power  of  medi-
tation, 60
Superstition      about     seeing

snakes  coupling,  227
Supplementary     Catalogue     of

Sanskrit  .  .  .  Books   in   the

Library      of     the,     British

Museum,  A,  L.  D.  Barnett,

237w2
Surgery    and     sex-changing,

modern,  233,  233ft1
Survey  of  India,  Archaeological,

A.  Cunningham,  229ft1
Swallowed    by   a     Rakshasa,

Mrigankavati,  22
Swallowing  the  sea,  Agastya,

166,  166ft2
Sword  named  Invincible,  124
Sybarite,  "bed,"  206,  206ft1,

209
"  Sybarite  "  motif,  the,  208
Sybarite,  wide  spread  of  the

word,  206
Sybarites,  inhabitants  of  the

city   of  Sybaris,   206-208;

the  three,  10-12
Syrische  Sagen  und  Maerchen

aus   dem    Volksmunde  .   .  .,

E.    Prym    and    A.    Socin,

81ft1.      See      also      under

Neu-Aramaeische,  etc.

Table  of  stories  in  the  three
chief  translations  of  the
Vetdlapanchavimsati,  Com-
parative, 264

"  Taboo  "  motif,  the,  21,  21ft3,
212


Taboos  of  a  Twice  -  born
Brahman,  rules  and,  28

Tale  about  Lake  Mansarovar,
230ft1

"Tale  of  Taj  al-Muluk  and
the  Princess  Dunya,"  The
Nights,  R.  F.  Burton,  217

"Tale  of  Warlock  and  the
Young  Cook  of  Baghdad,
The,"  The  Nights,  Supp.,
R.  F.  Burton,  224ft3

Tales,  Hindu,  J.  J.  Meyer,
218,  218ft2,  223ft1

Tales,  Indian  Fairy,  M .  Stokes,
255

Tales  from  the  Panjdb,  Roman-
tic, C.  Swynnerton,  261

Tales,  Tibetan,  W.  R.  S.
Ralston  and  F.  A.  von
Schiefner,  162ft1

Tales  about  the  luxury  and
effeminacy  of  the  Sybarites,
207,  208;  of  a  Vampire,
The  Twenty-five,  124,  125  ;
of  a  Vetala,  Appendix :
The  Twenty-five,  197-263

Tamil  version  of  the  Vetdla-
panchavimsati, the,  199,  200,
204,205,206,211,212,213,
216,  221, 222, 234,  241,  245,
250, 251,  256,  257, 259,  260,
262,  264,  264ft*

Tank  that  transports  from
one  place  to  another,  24

Teeth,  an  argha  of  white,  123,
123ft1

Temple  of  Durga,  the,  155 ;
of  Gauri,  51,  54,  176-180 ;
of  Siva,  15,  73,  74,  183 ;  of
Svayambhu,  the,  149,  149ft1

Temples  on  the  banks  of  the
Jumna,  history  of  the,  229,
230

Ten  stages  of  love-sickness,
44ft2

Teratology,  changes  of  sex
approaching,  233

Terrible  demon,  the,  91,  92,
95

Testaments  d'un  Haschischeen,
Jules  Giraud,  249ft2

"  Thief,  Catching  the,"  motif,
217-221

Thief,  the  clever,  201;  the
cry  and  laugh  of  the  dying,
38,  39  ;  the  generous,  8,  9  ;
the  marriage  of  the  dying,
79;  The  Merchant's
Daughter  who  fell  in  Love
with  a,  35,  35ft1,  36-39,
215-221


216,


I:


"Thief,    Noble,"   motif,  tl
201,  202

Thief's   Son,  The,   78,   '
79-85,  249-250

Thieves   blackened   and   a
ointed,     bodies     of,     2H
216ft2;   "tiger's  claw,"
instrument  used  for  catc
ing,  216ft2 ;  usual  lurki
places  of,  21 9

Thieving,  Indian  method
218

Thigh,  a  falling  lotus  pro-
duces a  wound  on  the
queen's,  11

Thighs,  giving  away  flesh
from  own,  126ft2

Thirty -Two     Tales     of     the
Throne,     Vikrama's    Adven-
tures; or,  The,  F.  Edgerto
212,  234ft2,  252ft2

Thoodamma    Tsari,   The    Pn
cedents   of  Princess,    C.   J.
Bandow,  203ft2

Thousand  dinars,  magic  purse
always  containing  a,  222ft3 ;
faces  and  mouths,  Vasuki,
the  king  of  the  snakes,
has,  56,  176ft2

Thousand  and  One  Nights,  The.
See  under  Nights

Thread,  Brahmanical,  15,
15ft2,  26-28,  76;  white
Brahmanical,  250  ;  of  hair,
sacrificial,  123 ;  Note  on
the  Sacred,  26-28

Three  generous  men,  the,
7-9 ;  human  hands  in  the
well  of  Gaya,  the,  85;
hypocritical  ladies,  the,
211 ;  qualities  of  the  body,
27 ;  Very  Sensitive  Wives,
King  Dharmadhvaja  and
his,  10,  10ft1,  11,  12,  204-
211 ;  Sybarites,  the,  10-12

Threefold,  the  sacred  thread
is,  27

Throwing  parched  grain  into
the  fire,  188,  188ft1

"Thunderbolt"      or
mond,"  vajra,  8ft1

Tibetan  Tales,  W.  R.  S.  Ra
stonand  F.  A.  von  Schiefner,
162ft1

"Tiger"  instead  of  "  Lio
in   the   heading  of  Vetala
22,     mistake     of    writing,
259ft2

"Tiger's  claw,"  instrument
used  for  catching  thieves,


Lal-

ler,

>n"


216ft2


INDEX  II— GENERAL


301


Time  and  place  affected  by
use  of  hashish,  idea  of,
248,  249  ;  of  the  upanayana
ceremony,  the,  27

Tongues,  Vasuki,  owner  of
a  thousand  mouths  and,
176ft2

Topography  of  Cosmas,  The
Christian,  J.  W.  M'Crindle,
107

Torments  of  Naraka,  the,  251 ;
of  the  six  fires,  the,  154

Torture  of  the  fire  of  love,
the,  143

Touti  Nameh,  eine  Sammlung
Persischer  M'drchen  von
Nechschcbi,  C.  J.  L.  Iken,
222ft4,  241w3

"Tracking  the  Thief"  motif,
217-221

Trade,  sandalwood,  107

Traders  forbidden  in  the
ancient  Sybaris,  all  noisy,
207

Trans.  As.  Soc.  Japan  ["  Ko-
Ji-Ki  ...  or  Records  of
Ancient  Matters"],  B.  H.
Chamberlain,  vol.  x,  Yoko-
hama, 1882,  238,  238ft2

Transformation  of  humans
into  fruits,  130,  131,  161 ;
through  a  magic  plant,
223  ;  through  a  magic  seal,
222

Transformations  through  put-
ting magic  pills  in  the
mouth,  42,  42ft\  43,  44,  47,
223

Translation  of  a  passage  in
Kshemendra's  Brihat-katha-
manjarl,  64,  65

Transmigration,  belief  in  sex-
changing  at  the  soul's,  230

Transportation,  instan-
taneous, 24,  225,  225ft1

Travelling  in  the  air,  24,  29,
126,  127

Tree,  asoka,  54,  88,  100,  117,
178;  asvattha,  91,  92,  95;
banyan,  32,  80,  121 ;  with
right  hand  towards  it,  cir-
cumambulating, 132,132ft1;
the  Parijata,  16  ;  Sala,  174 ;
Simsapa,  1,  5,  10,  13,  29,
35',  40,  49,  66,  71,  78,  87,
98,  108,  112,  115, 116 ;  the
wonderful,  129,  130

Trees,  Algum  or  Almug,  106 ;
arjuna,  162,  162ft3 ;  tamala,
162,  162ft2

Tree-worship,  162,  162ft1


Tribes,  sea-offerings  among
coast,  146ft1

Tribes  and  Castes  of  the  Central
Provinces  of  India,  The,
R.  V.  Russell,  230ft2

Tribes  of  Central  Australia,
Northern,  B.  Spencer  and
F.  J.  Gillen,  230ft4

"  Tribute  "  or  "  finger,"  kara,
112ft2

Trick  of  the  courtesan,  the,
220 ;  of  the  merchant,  the,
152

"  Trick  "motifs,  256

Trickery  and  deceit,  the  laugh
of,  255,  256

"True  sandalwood  of  India,
The,"  Anonymous,  Scientific
American,  107

Truth,  one  of  the  chief  rules
of  a  Twice-born  Brahman,
telling  the,  28

Tutl-namah  (India  Office  MS.
of),  the,  203ft3,  241;  the
Persian,  222,  241;  the
Turkish,  222,  241

Tuti-Nameh.  Das  Papageien-
buch,  Georg  Rosen,  203ft6,
222ft3,  241ft*

Twelve  lihga  shrines  in  India,
2ft1 ;  years,  Vaisya  boys
invested  with  the  sacred
thread  at,  26

Twenty-five  Tales  of  a  Demon,
The  Baital  Pachisi;  or,  W.B.
Barker  and  E.  B.  East-
wick,  199ft1-2,  204ft1,  211ft1,
212ft1,  215ft1,  222ft1,  233ft3,
241ft1,  244ft2,  249ft3,  250ft2,
256ft1,  258ft1,  260ft1,  262ft1

Twenty-five  Tales  of  a  Vam-
pire, The,  124,  125 ;  Tales
of  a  Vetala,  The,  Appendix,
197-263

Twice  -  born,  entering  the
ranks  of  the,  through  the
upanayana,  26

Twice-Born,  The  Rites  of  the,
Mrs  S.  Stevenson,  26,  28,
188ft1

Two  varieties  of  laughs  in
Hindu  fiction,  253

Tzandana,  sandalwood,  106

Umbrella  allowed  after  the
upanayana,  carrying  an,  27  ;
the  royal,  70;  ruling  the
circle  of  the  earth  under
one,  192,  192ft1

Unfortunate  voyage  to  Alaka,
the,  143,  144


"  Unintentional        Injuries  "

motif,  92,  92ft1,  131,  131ft1
Union   of   Buddha   and   the

sage   Ida  in  female   form,

the,  46'
Use  of  hashish  affects  senses

of  appreciation,  248,  249
Useful  Plants  of  India,  The,

H.  Drury,  105
Uses   of  ground  sandalwood

and  water,  105,  106
Usual      lurking  -  places      of

thieves,  219

Valour,  the  Goddess  of,  137

Vampire,  The  Twenty  -  five
Tales  of  a,  124,  125

Vanquisher  of  obstacles — i.e.
Ganesa,  128,  128ft1

Varieties  of  laughs  in  Hindu
fiction,  two,  253

Various  rights  obtained  after
the  upanayana,  27

Vazir  of  the  Naga  Raja  called
Jlmutavahana,  236 ;  the
story  of  the  first,  in  the
Forty  Vazirs,  245-247

Vazirs,  Forty,  the,  245,  252

Vazirs,  Seven,  the,  214

Vedala  Cadai,  being  the  Tamul
Version  of  a  Collection  of
Ancient  Tales  in  the  Sanskrit
Language,  The,  B.  G.
Babington,  199,  200ft1,
204ft2, 211ft2,  212ft2,  216ft1-2,
222ft2,  234ft1,  241ft2,  245ft1,
250ft1, 251ft1, 256ft2,  257ft1- 2,
259ft1,  260ft2,  262ft2,  264ft2

Vedic  Index  of  Names  and
Subjects,  A.  A.  Macdonell
and  A.  B.  Keith,  10ft2

Version  of  the  Vetalapancha-
vimsati,  the  Hindi,  199,
200,  204,  205,  211,  212,
215,  221,  222,  233,  234,
241,  244,  249,  250,  251,
256,  258,  259,  260,  262,
264 ;  of  the  Vetalapancha-
vhhsati,  the  Tamil,  199,
200,  204,  205,  206,  211,
212,  213,  216,  221,  222,
234,  241,  245,  250,  251,
256,  257,  259,  260,  262,
264,  264ft4 ;  of  the  Vikrama-
charita,  the  Bengali,  252,
252ft2

Versions  of  the  V etalapancha-
vimsati,  coincidence  of  the
Marathi  and  Hindi,  264 ;
Comparative  Table  of
stories  in  the  three,  264


302


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


Veziers,    or   the    Story   of  the

Forty  Morns  and  Eves,  The

History  of  the  Forty,  E.  J.

W.  Gibb,  203ft*,  245,  252ft1
"Vice,  age  of,"  the  kaliyuga,

112ft2
Vice   of  gambling,   the,    72,

72ft2 ;  of  hunting,  the,  90,

250
Vierzig    Veziere    oder    Weisen

Meister,    Die,    W.    Fr.     A.

Behrnauer,  252ft1
Vikramas  Adventures ;  or,  The

Thirty-Two    Tales    of    the

Throne,  F.  Edgerton,  212,

234ft2,  252ft2
"  Virtue  "  or  "  string,"  guna,

112ft2
Vision  of  the  Yogi,  the,  250
Voice  from  heaven,  2,  19,  38,

54,  131
Volksdichtungen      der     sieben-

b'urgischen  undsudungarischen

Zigeuner,  H.  von  Wlislocki,

226ft1
V olkslitteratur    der    tiirkischen

Stamme      Sudsibiriens ,      W.

RadlofF,  204
Voyage    to   Alaka,    the    un-
fortunate, 143,  144

Waist  like  a  diamond,  8,  8ft1

Waking,  one  of  the  four  states
of  the  soul,  26

Walking  round  a  tree  with
right  hand  towards  it,  132,
132ft1

War,  the  God  of,  137

"  Warlock  and  the  Young
Cook  of  Baghdad,  The  Tale
of,"  The  Nights,  Supp.,
R.  F.  Burton,  224ft3

Water  on  the  head,  pouring
holy,  191,  191ft3;  illusions
produced  when  in,  245-247;
the  imaginary  life  in  the,
75,  76 ;  of  life,  sprinkling
with  the,  61,  61*1,  259,
260;  sex-changing,  224-226

"  Water  of  life,"  magical
water  used  as,  225

Water-deities,  marriages  be-
tween humans  and,  240

Water-spirits,  sacrifices  to,
240

"Water,  Water-Gods
(Indian),"  W.  Crooke,
Hastings'  Ency.  Rel.  Eth.,
146ft1


Wealth,  the  God  of  (Ku vera),
98,  142ft1;  Sasankavatl's,
187

Weapon  for  catching  thieves,
216ft2

Wedding,  the  royal,  188

Wedding-night,  the,  189

Well,  as  an  entrance  to  Patala,
a,  215  ;  of  Gaya,  the  three
human  hands  in  the,  85 ;
sex-changing,  224,  225

Wept  and  then  Danced,  The
Hermit  who  first,  112,
112ft1,  113-115,  260-261

West,  earliest  reference  to
sandalwood  in  the,  106,
107

Western  World,  Buddhist
Records  of  the,  S.  Beal,
237ft2,  238ft1

Westfalen,  Sagen,  Gebrauche
u.  Mdrchen  aus,  A.  Kuhn,
120ft2

"What  I  saw  of  the  Sandal-
wood Trade,"  C.  B.,  The
Leisure  Hour,  107

White  colour  of  the  Brahmani-
cal  thread,  26,  250  ;  human
teeth,  an  argha  of,  123,
123ft1 ;  lotuses,  an  dsan  of,
250 ;  serpents,  bandlet  of,
250

Wicked  merchant,  the,  152,
157

Widow  -  burning  (sail),  38,
38ft1

Wife  and  Durlabhaka  Prata-
paditya  II,  the  merchant's,
244;  and  his  Faithful
Minister,  King  Ya^ahketu,
his  Vidyadharl,  13,  13ft1,
14-25,  211-212;  and  then
his  Life,  The  Brahman
Harisvamin,  who  first  lost
his,  29,  29ft1,  30-33,  212-
215

"Wilkina  Saga,"  the,  Alt-
deutsche  u.  Altnordische
Helden-Sagen,  F.  H.  von
Hagen,  166w3, 173ft1,  181ft1

Will  and  Idea,  The  World  as,
A.  Schopenhauer,  253ft1

Wings  of  the  mountain,  myth
about  Indra  cutting  the,
19,  19ft1,  88,  88ft1

Winter,  the  elephant  of,  67

Wishing- stone  of  Narratives,
The  Prabandhacintamani ;  or,
C.  H.  Tawney,  202


Wishing-tree  arising  out  c
thesea,  16, 16ft2, 18;  callet
Granter  of  Desires,  49

Wives,  King  Dharmadhvajj
and  his  Three  Very  Sensi-
tive, 10,  10ft1,  11,  12,  204-
211

Woman,  cravings  of  a  preg-
nant, 201 ;  one  of  the  eight
enjoyments,  241;  man
inspired  by  a  goddess  re-
garded as  a,  231

Women,  the  four  delicate,
209,  210

Women's  right-arm  bangles
thrown  into  the  sea,  146ft1

Wonderful  city  in  the  sea,
the,  19,  20 ;  silver  statue,
the,  210,  211;  tree,  the,
129,  130

Wood,  animal  transformation
through  a  piece  of,  42ft1

Wool,  sacred  thread  made  of
26

Word  sybarite,  wide  spread
the,  206

World,    the    four    Yugas
Ages  of  the,  1,  1ft5

World  as  Will  and  Idea,  Tl
A.  Schopenhauer,  253ft1

Worshipof  the  fifteenmothei
goddesses  at  the  ceremonj
of  upanayana,  26 ;  of  tree
162,  162ft1

Wound  produced  by  a  fallii
lotus,  11

Wrath  of  King  Karmasem
the,  172,  173

Wrong  position  of  Book  XIJ
195


Year  beforehand,  invitatioi
made  a,  208

Yellow  colour  of  the  sandal-
wood oil,  105 ;  colour
the  Vai^ya's  sacred  thread,
26  ;  powder  of  bones,  circh
of,  122,  123;  substance,
the  body  of  an  upanayat
initiate  smeared  with.  26


Ziegeuner,  Volksdichtungen  de
siebenburgischen  und  siidun-
garischen,  H.  von  Wlislocki,
226ft1

Zoological   Mythology,    A.    d<
Gubernatis,  21ft3


Printed  in  Great  Britain

by  The  Riverside  Press  Limited

Edinburgh


I


;0m


I


mm*


#  M

w.  ■<#

c  to

CO  C£>

>\A  CO


University  of  Toronto
Library


DO  NOT

REMOVE

THE

CARD

FROM

THIS

POCKET


Acme  Library  Card  Pocket
LOWE-MARTIN  CO.  LIMITED
