The Ocean of Story (Kathasaritsagara), Vol. 8 (Somadeva; C. H. Tawney (trans.); N. M. Penzer (ed.), 1924)
==========================================================
Vol. 8 of the complete Kathasaritsagara — Somadeva's 11th-century Ocean of Story, the great Sanskrit story-cycle — in C. H. Tawney's translation (1880-84), edited with introduction and notes by N. M. Penzer (1924-28, 10 vols.). Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/oceanofstorybein08somauoft).

m


M


mm


m


11


THE
OCEAN  OF  STORY


LSansK


THE


OCEAN  OF  STORY

BEING

G.  H.  TAWNEY'S  TRANSLATION

OF

SOMADEVA'S  KATHA  SARIT  SAGARA

(OR  OCEAN   OF  STBEAM8  OF  STORY)


NOW    EDITED    WITH    INTRODUCTION,    FRESH

EXPLANATORY  NOTES  AND  TERMINAL  ESSAY

BY

N.   M.   PENZER,   M.A.,   F.R.G.S.,    F.G.S.

MEMBER  OF  THE  FOLK-LOBE  SOCIETY  ;  FELLOW  OF  THE

ROYAL  ANTHROPOLOGICAL   INSTITUTE;   MEMBER

OF  THE   ROYAL  ASIATIC   SOCIETY,   ETC.

AUTHOR  OF

"AN  ANNOTATED   BIBLIOGRAPHY   OF  SIR  RICHARD  FRANCIS

BURTON,"   ETC.


IN  TEN  VOLUMES


VOL.    VIII


WITH  A  FOREWORD  BY

Professor  W.  R.  HALLIDAY,  B.A.,  B.Litt.

THE  UNIVERSITY,   LIVERPOOL


LONDON:      PRIVATELY     PRINTED      FOR      SUBSCRIBERS     ONLY
BY  CHAS.  J.  SAWYER  LTD.,   GRAFTON  HOUSE,   W.I.     MCMXXVII


Made  and  Printed  in  Great  Britain


FOREWORD

IT  is  a  high  honour  but  also  something  of  an  embarrass-
ment to  an  amateur  to  be  invited  to  figure  among  the  dis-
tinguished specialists  who  have  contributed  introductions
to  the  previous  volumes  of  this  great  edition,  in  which  Mr
Penzer's  learning  continues  to  enliven  and  illuminate  fold
after  sinuous  fold  of  one  of  the  world's  great  story-books.  My
friend  Professor  Rand  not  long  ago  delighted  a  large  audience
by  denning  a  specialist  as  "  the  man  who  knows  more  and
more  about  less  and  less,"  and  it  is  certainly  the  experience
of  one  whose  special  studies  lie  mainly  in  another  direction
that  it  is  not  easy  to  keep  abreast  of  the  increasing  literature
of  his  hobbies.1  Nor  perhaps  does  the  eighth  volume  par-
ticularly lend  itself  to  an  introduction  by  a  student  of  mdrchen.
It  is  a  good  deal  taken  up  with  what  may  rather  be  called
epic  themes  of  the  warfare  of  gods  and  supernatural  beings,
which  are  interesting  mainly  from  the  literary  point  of  view.
How  differently,  it  strikes  the  reader,  would  either  Homer,
Milton  or  Wagner  have  managed  these  contests,  and  to
Western  taste  how  marred  is  the  interest  of  the  Indian
narrative  by  Oriental  hyperbole  and  the  too  convenient
recourse  to  magical  powers  and  reincarnations  for  resolving
tragic  knots.  This  contrast  indeed  raises  not  uninteresting
matters  of  literary  aesthetic.  I  can  remember  suffering
similar  disillusionment  when  as  a  boy  I  stumbled  upon  Ellis's
Specimens  of  the  Early  English  Romances  and  learned  how
magical  sources  of  prowess  could  blunt  the  edge  of  heroic
exploits.  But  this  theme  and  the  possibly  fundamental
differences  of  literary  taste   and   imagination  between  the

1  For  example,  I  have  not  yet  had  the  opportunity  of  reading  Bolte,
Name  und  Merkmale  des  Marchens  (FF.  Communications,  No.  36)  and  Zeugnisse
zur  Geschichte  der  Marchen  (FF.  Communications,  No.  39),  Helsinki,  1920  and
1921,  the  substance  of  which  will  form,  I  understand,  the  eagerly  awaited
introduction  to  the  long  overdue  fourth  and  index  volume  to  the  Anmerkungen
zu  den  Kinder-  und  Hausm'drchen  der  Briider  Grimm.


vi  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

East  and  the  West  are  matters  which  I  am  not  competent
to  handle.

Perhaps  the  most  useful  contribution  which  I  can  offer
will  be  to  make  no  pretence  of  writing  an  introduction  in  a
strict  sense  to  the  contents  of  this  particular  volume  but
rather  to  raise  one  or  two  general  questions  with  regard  to
the  methods  of  the  study  of  marchen.  It  is  not  impossible
that  a  well-informed  onlooker  may  form  as  clear  an  idea  of
the  run  of  the  game  as  many  of  the  actual  players,  and
at  worst  it  will  do  no  harm  to  state  opinions  which  may
provoke  the  more  fruitful  discussion  of  those  with  greater
knowledge  of  the  facts.

It  is  probably  true  of  all  forms  of  inquiry,  the  method  of
which  is  comparative,  that  the  initial  enthusiasm  for  noticing
resemblances  outruns  discretion.  At  any  rate  in  the  case  of
marchen  it  may  be  thought  that  the  time  has  now  come
when  differences  should  receive  as  considered  attention  as
similarities,  and  that  analysis  should  no  longer  neglect  one  of
its  two  principal  instruments.  If  it  is  legitimate  and  may
be  profitable  to  record  resemblances,  it  is  very  important
to  distinguish  as  far  as  the  evidence  permits  between  the
categories  of  similarity  and  identity.

Some  apparent  similarities  may  be  due  purely  to  accident.
Thus  on  p.  149  the  flight  of  Indra  and  the  gods  reminded
Tawney  of  Ovid,  Metamorphoses,  v,  321-331.  As  a  literary
coincidence  the  analogy  is  correct,  but  here  its  interest  ends.
For  Ovid's  account  of  the  flight  of  the  Greek  gods  into  Egypt
is  not  a  piece  of  genuine  Greek  mythology  at  all,  but  the
artificial  product  of  the  relatively  late  and  learned  identifica-
tion of  Egyptian  deities  as  alternative  forms  of  the  Olympian
gods  of  Greece.  A  literary  coincidence  may  remind  us  that
a  certain  Spartan,  having  plucked  a  nightingale  of  its  feathers,
regarded  its  exiguous  corpse,  and  remarked  :  "  Thou  art  a
voice  and  nothing  more."  1  The  idea  is  the  same  as  that  of  :
"  Cuckoo,  shall  I  call  thee  bird  or  but  a  wandering  voice  ?  "
Shall  we  then  solemnly  maintain  that  Wordsworth  owed  his
inspiration  to  the  Apophthegmata  Laconica  ?     But  if  not,  is  it

1  [Plutarch]  Apophthegmata  Laconica,  xv,  233a  :  *  <f>a)va  rv  tis  €0-<ri  kcu  ovSev
ZWo."


FOREWORD  vii

not  equally  absurd  to  classify  Grimm,  No.  38,  Mrs  Vixen,  as  a
comic  version  of  the  "Penelope"  motif,  Jacobs,  No.  4?  In
a  sense  perhaps  the  classification  may  be  true,  but  as  regards
the  history  of  the  story  which  forms  the  plot  of  the  Odyssey
it  is  without  value.

Again,  the  time  has  surely  come  when  we  can  take  the
main  contention  of  the  earlier  anthropologists  as  established.
Most  of  us  are  agreed  that  human  nature  and  the  conditions
of  human  life  in  society  are  sufficiently  constant  to  account
for  the  independent  emergence  in  widely  separated  areas  of
similar  or  identical  general  ideas.  Everywhere  man  is  likely
to  propound  to  himself  such  questions  as  how  Heaven  and
Earth  came  to  be  separated  or  to  debate  the  problem  of
the  origin  of  evil,  and  the  limitations  of  human  imagination
are  likely  to  impose  a  similarity  in  the  independent  answers
which  are  suggested  in  different  areas  at  similar  stages  of
cultural  development.  In  the  nature  of  things,  stepmothers
are  likely  everywhere  to  cause  domestic  difficulties,  and  cer-
tain general  superstitious  beliefs — for  example  the  belief  in
the  "External  Soul" — we  know  in  fact  to  be  widely  spread
among  all  the  peoples  of  the  world  at  a  certain  stage  of
culture.

It  is  clear,  therefore,  that  ideas  of  this  kind,  which  are
known  to  be  of  very  general  distribution,  cannot  establish
any  definite  relation  between  the  stories  in  which  they  occur,
and  in  fact  can  give  but  little  help  towards  the  elucidation
of  their  history.  Hence,  where  the  universal  distribution
of  the  idea  is  really  well  established,  it  may  be  thought  that
there  is  but  little  to  be  gained  by  piling  up  further  examples
of  its  occurrence,  unless  they  definitely  enlarge  the  area  of  its
known  distribution.

These  practically  universal  beliefs  again  may  themselves
suggest  or  inspire  stories  which,  having  a  similar  origin,  are
likely  to  have  a  somewhat  similar  form.  Here  -it  will  be
necessary  to  distinguish  carefully  between  tales  which  are
linked  only  by  this  very  general  bond  and  those  which  are
in  a  real  sense  versions  of  the  same  story.  For  example,
the  almost  universal  belief  in  the  necessity  and  efficacy  of
"Foundation  Sacrifice"  has  given  rise  in  widely  separated


viii  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

areas  to  stories  which  inevitably  possess  a  generic  similarity.
Thus  a  modern  Indian  folk-tale  of  the  building  of  a  tank  by
seven  brothers,  and  the  drowning  of  their  sister  in  order  to
fill  it  with  water,  according  to  Groome,  provides  "  a  striking
parallel  "  to  the  Bridge  of  Arta.1  Are,  then,  the  Indian  story,
the  legend  of  the  bridge  at  Zakho  in  Kurdistan2  and  the
numerous  Balkan  variants  of  the  Bridge  of  Arta  to  be  classi-
fied together  as  variants  of  the  same  story  ?  Under  any  of
the  old  tables  of  folk-tale  motifs,  such  as  that  of  Jacobs  in  the
Handbook  of  Folklore,  that  indubitably  would  be  their  fate ;
but  here  I  would  register  the  belief  that  except  within  very
narrow  limits  such  lists,  with  their  too  loose  and  general  tests
of  similarity,  are  almost  useless  as  instruments  of  classification
at  the  present  day.  Now,  if  we  examine  the  detailed  content
of  these  stories,  we  shall  find  that  all  that  is  really  common
to  the  Indian  and  Kurdish  stories  and  the  Balkan  group  of
songs  and  legends  is  an  idea,  the  independent  invention  of
which,  given  the  pre-existence  of  a  belief  in  "Foundation
Sacrifice  "  in  the  three  areas,  is  perfectly  intelligible.  All  the
versions  from  the  Balkan  lands,  on  the  other  hand,  will  be
found  to  agree  with  minor  variations  in  a  real  plot — that  is
to  say,  in  an  identical  series  of  incidents  arranged  in  the  same
general  order  of  interest.

They  are  therefore  properly  to  be  classified  as  versions  of
the  same  story  and  have  an  essential  interconnection.  It  is
true  that  further  analysis  will  distinguish  two  types  repre-
sented by  the  Serbian  Building  of  Scutari  and  the  Greek
Bridge  of  Arta.  Had  these  occurred  at  opposite  ends  of  the
globe,  in  spite  of  the  larger  proportion  of  their  agreement
than  of  their  disagreement  in  detail,  we  might  have  had  to
make  some  allowance  for  the  possibility  of  the  long  arm  of
coincidence,  which,  as  we  have  seen  from  our  Spartan  and
Wordsworth,  is  capable  of  surprising  feats.  But  the  prob-
ability of  the  independent  origin  of  two  so  closely  similar
plots  in  contiguous  areas  is  surely  small,  and  we  are  there-
fore likely  to  suppose  that  one  is  derived  from  the  other,

1  Groome,  Gypsy  Folk-Tales,  pp.  12-13;  Campbell,  Santal  Folk-Tales,  pp.
106-110  ;  Bom  pas,  Folk-Lore  of  the  Santal  Parganas,  pp.  102-106.

2  M.  Sykes,  Dar-ul-Islam,  p.  160.


FOREWORD  ix

though  we  may  differ  as  to  which  is  the  primary  version  of
the  two.1

Nor,  again,  shall  we  be  justified  in  selecting  a  particular
picturesque  episode  in  a  story,  which,  taken  by  itself,  might
well  have  been  invented  more  than  once  independently,  and
in  classifying  with  it  the  narratives  of  similar  episodes,  which
occur  elsewhere  in  a  different  context.  Nor,  where  their  context
elsewhere  is  unknown,  may  we  legitimately  assume  that  it  con-
sisted of  the  same  arrangement  of  episodes  as  the  story  from
which  we  started.  This  last  is  the  vicious  reasoning  which
has  quite  obscured  the  true  relation  of  classical  stories  to  Euro-
pean folk-tales.  To  explain  my  meaning  I  may  refer  by  way
of  illustration  to  the  very  sensible  note  of  Child  upon  the
story  of  Wilhelm  Tell,  which  in  reality  consists  of  a  series
of  connected  incidents  possessing  a  restricted  distribution  in
Teutonic  and  Scandinavian  countries.  To  group  with  it  the
tale  of  Alkon  the  Greek  Argonaut,  the  Persian  story  of  the
twelfth  century  about  the  Shah  who  shot  an  apple  off  his
favourite's  head,  or  the  recorded  feats  of  marksmanship  of  the
Mississippi  keel-boatmen  carries  us  no  further  than  to  establish
the  not  very  surprising  fact  that  many  people  have  thought  it  a
remarkable  test  of  marksmanship  to  be  able  to  shoot  an  object
resting  upon  a  person's  head  or  body  without  inflicting  injury.2

I  have,  of  course,  been  assuming  that  stories  may  have
a  history  and  that  transmission  may  be  a  vera  causa  of  the
appearance  of  the  same  story  in  different  parts  of  the  world.
But  it  is  improbable  that  anyone  nowadays  would  adopt
the  extreme  "  poly  genetic  "  position.  For  while  one  can
imagine  that  an  isolated  incident  A  might  spontaneously
occur  to  different  minds  in  different  countries,  the  imagination
boggles  at  supposing  that  a  chain  of  incidents  A  +  B  +  C  +  D

1  I  have  discussed  this  matter  in  a  note  upon  a  Bulgarian  Gypsy,  Song  of
the  Bridge  in  Journal  of  the  Gypsy-Lore  Society,  3rd  ser.,  iv,  pp.  110-114.  My
own  view  is  that  the  type  represented  by  the  Serbian  Building  of  Scutari  is
primary  and  the  Bridge  of  Arta  secondary.  The  most  important  collections
of  data  are  Kohler,  Aufsatze  uber  Marchen  und  Volkslieder,  pp.  38-47,  and
Politis,  'E/cAoycu  a7ro  ra  rpayovSia  rov  'EXXtjvlkov  Xaov,  i,  pp.  130,  287,  and
Aaoypafyla,  i,  pp.  15,  630,  631.  A  few  supplementary  references  will  be  found
in  my  paper.

2  Child,  Popular  Ballads  of  England  and  Scotland ,  iii,  pp.  14  foil.


x  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

in  precisely  that  order  could  be  invented  more  than  once.
The  familiar  example  is  that  given  by  Cosquin.1  The  hero
seeks  to  recover  a  talisman  from  the  villain,  who  has  stolen
it,  with  the  help  of  his  cat  and  dog  :  the  cat  catches  a  mouse
and  makes  it  put  its  tail  up  the  nose  of  the  sleeping  villain,
who  has  the  talisman  in  his  mouth  ;  the  villain  consequently
sneezes  or  coughs,  the  talisman  drops  out  and  is  picked  up
by  the  cat :  on  the  way  home  the  animals  quarrel  about  their
respective  shares  in  the  success  and  the  ring  is  dropped  into
the  water  across  which  they  are  swimming  at  the  time,  but  is
eventually  recovered  from  the  belly  of  a  fish.  To  suppose
that  precisely  this  sequence  of  incidents  could  possibly  be
invented  many  times  over  independently  among  different
peoples  is  surely  to  impose  an  intolerable  strain  upon  the
possibilities  of  coincidence.

A  story  in  fact  consists  of  a  series  of  incidents  arranged  in  a
definite  order  of  interest — i.e.  a  plot — and  it  is  primarily  upon
this  arrangement  that  the  attention  should  be  concentrated.
The  context  indeed  is  of  as  fundamental  importance  as  the
nature  of  the  incident  itself.  It  may,  of  course,  be  admitted  that
it  is  easier  to  assent  to  principles  than  to  put  them  into  practice.
My  illustrations  have  naturally  been  selected  specimens  and
the  material  is  usually  a  good  deal  less  simple  to  handle.

In  the  nature  of  things,  stories  suffer  modification  in  the
process  of  transmission.  This  may  be  deliberate  where  the
skill  of  the  professional  story-teller  or  story-writer  seeks  by
his  art  to  evolve  new  forms  and  combinations  by  selection,
addition  or  omission,  or,  in  the  extreme  case,  where  a  Shake-
speare may  select  from  a  folk-tale  such  material  as  he  requires
in  order  to  transmute  it  in  the  crucible  of  his  genius.  Not  less
distorting  is  the  result  of  oral  transmission  by  the  unprofes-
sional and  illiterate,  though  here  the  causes  are  less  deliberate
than  attributable  to  faulty  memories,  false  associations  of
ideas  and  sometimes  to  clumsy  efforts  to  repair  an  omission
which  has  become  obvious  even  to  the  narrator.2

1  Cosquin,  Conies  Populaires  de  Lorraine,  i,  pp.  xi  foil.

2  Quite  a  good  example  of  these  defects  is  the  Welsh  Gypsy  version  of
the  "  Champions,"  Journal  of  the  Gypsy-Lore  Society,  3rd  ser.,  ii,  pp.  56-57.
I  have  quoted  some  other  examples  in  Folk-Lore,  xxxiv,  p.  123.


FOREWORD  xi

Indeed  the  question  "  when  is  a  story  the  same  story  ?  "
is  not  easy  to  answer  in  a  general  form  of  words,  and  indi-
vidual cases  will  often  require  ripe  experience  and  a  nicely
balanced  judgment.  Any  at  all  elaborate  plot  is  actually
composed  of  a  number  of  parts  which  are  sometimes  detach-
able and  may  often  be  interchangeable  with  similar  parts  of
different  plots.  Take  the  case  of  a  simple  form  of  story
frame  to  which  sub-stories  are  essential  —  e.g.  The  Silent
Princess,  in  the  modern  Greek  versions  of  which  the  three
usual  problem  stories  to  trap  the  princess  into  speaking
are  Prince  Ahmed  and  the  Fairy  Peri-Banou — Part  I,  The
Carpenter,  the  Tailor  and  the  Man  of  God,  and  How  the
Champions  rescued  the  Princess.  These  problem  stories  are
essential  to  the  plot  of  the  frame,  but  obviously  they  are
detachable,  and  all  are  also  found  as  independent  tales.1

But  almost  any  story  consists  similarly  of  a  number  of
parts  which  are  capable  of  appearing  in  different  combina-
tions. Thus  the  story  of  The  Magical  Flight  (Grimm,  No.  51,
etc.)  may  be  introduced  by  almost  any  episode  which  will
bring  the  hero  into  residence  with  an  ogre's  family.2  Again,
similar  situations  or  episodes  in  stories  may  serve  as  irre-
sistible temptations  to  conflation,  and  a  number  of  hybrid
intermediate  types  arise  until  in  many  cases  we  find  ourselves
obliged  to  handle  rather  a  group  of  interconnected  stories
than  a  single  plot.3  In  practice  the  jungle  is  intricate  and
the  avoidance  of  a  purposeless  circular  wandering  may  tax
the  clearest  head.  But  in  trying  to  blaze  the  path  forward
I  am  sure  that  it  is  well  to  work  only  with  units  of  sufficient
length  and  complexity  to  have  a  really  individual  and  dis-
tinctive pattern  of  their  own.  To  lay  down  rules  where  the
matter  is  so  fluid  is  perhaps  impossible.  Individual  cases
may  be  left  to  common  sense  armed  with  the  maxim  that

1  See  my  notes  in  Dawkins,  Modem  Greek  in  Asia  Minor,  pp.  247-248,
277,  to  which  now  add  the  reference  Bolte  and  Polivka,  op.  cit,  iii,  pp.
53  foil.

2  I  have  noted  examples  of  seven  different  forms  of  introduction  in
Journal  of  the  Gypsy-Lore  Society,  3rd  ser.,  iii,  p.  57.

3  A  familiar  example  will  be  the  related  group  of  stories  of  which  the
main  species  are  represented  by  The  Bobber  Bridegroom,  The  Maid  of  the  Mill,
and  Bluebeard.


xii  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

where  there  is  room  for  doubt  its  benefit  should  be  given
to  the  possibilities  of  coincidence.  It  is  a  sound  rule,  if  more
honoured  in  the  breach  than  in  the  observance,  that  the  more
uncertain  the  quality  of  the  evidence  the  greater  rigour  and
caution  is  necessary  in  handling  it.

With  isolated  incidents  we  must  always  be  in  doubt,  even
where  they  do  not  come  under  the  category  of  beliefs  or  super-
stitions which  are  known  to  be  of  world-wide  distribution.
For  unfortunately  there  are  no  certain  and  objective  tests
which  we  can  apply  to  determine  whether  the  identity  or
similarity  of  such  individual  incidents  considered  by  them-
selves are  due  to  coincidence  and  independent  invention  or
to  borrowing  and  adaptation.  We  are  forced  to  trust  to
common  sense  and  to  keep  always  an  open  mind,  ready  to
admit  evidence  which  may  prove  our  opinions  to  have  been
mistaken.  The  difficulties  which  are  involved,  and  the  kind  of
considerations  which  may  properly  guide  us  in  forming  those
opinions,  may  perhaps  be  illustrated  by  some  examples.

In  Vol.  II,  p.  147n,  Mr  Penzer  has  drawn  attention  to
the  motif  of  "unintentional  injuries,"  which  is  popular  in
Indian  and  Arabic  stories.  Clearly  the  idea  that  a  series
of  adventures  may  be  precipitated  by  the  curse  of  a  spirit  or
person  endowed  with  magical  powers,  who  is  unintentionally
injured  by  the  hero,  is  one  which  might  independently  occur
to  any  people  who  believe  in  the  proximity  of  such  powerful
or  holy  persons.  That  human  beings  are  surrounded  by  in-
visible powers  is  a  belief  which  is  not  restricted  to  India,  and
it  is  not  a  priori  incredible  that  a  European  of  the  Middle
Ages  who  could  accept  the  story  of  Gregory  the  Great  that  an
abbess  who  ate  a  lettuce  without  making  the  sign  of  the  cross
inadvertently  swallowed  a  devil,  with  most  unpleasant  con-
sequences to  herself,  might  independently  invent  or  reinvent
an  incident  of  this  type.  I  am  myself  inclined  to  believe
that  the  use  of  the  "  unintentional  injury  "  as  an  introduction
to  a  tale  is  an  invention  of  Oriental  story-tellers,  but  the
possibility  indicated  must  keep  us  alert  for  the  emergence
of  evidence  to  the  contrary.

On  the  other  hand,  certain  particular  forms  of  this  type
of  introduction — e.g.  the  accidental  dropping  of  a  garland  on


FOREWORD  xiii

the  head  of  an  ascetic  who  is  invisible  under  water1 — must
surely  be  Indian  inventions,  because  they  are  consonant  only
with  Indian  manners.  Mringankadatta's  faux  pas,2  again,
could  occur  only  in  countries  where  betel-chewing  is  practised.3
Spitting,  however,  is  a  pastime  of  universal  distribution,  and
it  remains  an  open  question  whether  the  betel  juice  is  just
an  added  touch  of  local  colour  and  the  Indian  version  is
consequently  secondary,  or  whether  the  form  in  which  mere
mischievous  spitting  arouses  the  curse 4  is  an  adaptation  from
a  more  specific  Indian  invention,  which  has  been  made  by
story-tellers  in  countries  where  betel-chewing  is  unknown.

Sometimes,  where  social  manners  provide  no  test,  the
peculiar  or  bizarre  character  of  an  episode  may  lead  us  to
suppose  that  it  is  very  improbable  that  it  could  have  been
independently  invented  more  than  once.  Thus  another
particular  form  of  the  "  unintentional  injury  "  is  the  story
that  a  young  prince  accidentally  or  mischievously  throws  a
stone  which  breaks  an  old  woman's  pitcher  of  oil — or  water.
"  Ah  !  "  says  she,  "  may  you  desire  the  Three  Fair  Ones
[or  some  other  inaccessible  heroine  or  magical  object],  even
as  I  desired  that  oil  "  or  "  water."  Her  wish  bears  fruit,  and
the  prince  falls  sick  of  longing,  until  he  sets  out  upon  his
hazardous  quest.  Now  it  is  true  that  this  episode  could  have
been  invented  wherever  boys  are  mischievous  and  old  women
carry  liquids  in  pitchers,  but  it  may  be  thought  to  be  too
distinctive  in  character  for  it  to  be  likely  that  a  number  of
story-tellers  in  different  countries  thought  of  it  independently.
The  incident  occurs  frequently  in  the  Near  East  and  in  Medi-
terranean countries  as  far  west  as  Sicily  and  Italy.  I  should
be  surprised  to  find  it  in  Northern  or  Western  Europe.5     The

1  Vol.  II,  p.  147.  2  Vol.  VI,  p.  23.

3  The  practice  of  betel-chewing  and  its  distribution  is  discussed  by
Mr  Penzer  in  Appendix  II  of  the  present  volume.

4  In  the  opening  of  an  Italian  story,  which  is  quoted  by  Cosquin,  Les
Contes  Indiens  et  V  Occident,  p.  234,  the  prince  spits  from  the  palace  window
upon  a  basket  of  white  cheeses,  which  a  peasant  is  carrying  on  his  head.
"May  you  have  no  peace,"  says  the  outraged  peasant,  "until  you  have  found
a  girl  who  is  white  as  the  cheeses,  and  red  as  blood,  and  has  green  hair ! "

5  Dawkins,  op.  cit.,  p.  228  ;  Cosquin,  £tudes  Folkloriques,  p.  555  ;  Les  Contes
Indiens,  etc.,  p.  233,  and  above,  Vol.  V,  p.  171n2.


xiv  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

associated  Indian  forms  which  happen  to  be  known  to  me
are  not  exact  parallels.  Prince  Rasalu  mischievously  de-
stroyed the  water-pots  of  the  women  in  his  father's  capital,
but  his  exile  resulted  not  from  their  curse,  but  from  the  king's
indignant  sentence.1  In  Somadeva  the  prince,  when  playing
at  ball,  accidentally  strikes  a  female  ascetic.2

A  different  introductory  motif,  which  again  seems  to  me
to  be  too  distinctive  to  have  been  invented  more  than  once,
is  connected  with  the  dangers  of  incautiously  mentioning  the
name  of  a  magical  personage  or  of  indulging  in  ill-considered
imprecation,  which  has  a  way  of  being  literally  and  most  un-
pleasantly fulfilled.  These  dangers  are,  of  course,  universally
recognised,3  but  I  cannot  believe  that  it  is  at  all  probable
that  the  following  particular  derivative  of  this  general  super-
stition originated  independently  among  a  number  of  different
peoples.  As  the  result  of  an  ejaculation  of  despondency  (or
very  much  less  frequently  of  joy)  a  magical  being  (jinn,
"  Arab,"  vel  sim.)  unexpectedly  appears  and  declares  :  "  You
called  '  Oh  !  '  {vel  sim.).  That  is  my  name."  This  incident
which  often  serves  as  introduction  to  variants  of  Grimm,
No.  68,  De  Gaudeif  un  sien  Meester,  but  occurs  also  in  other
contexts,  is  frequent  in  the  Near  and  Middle  East  and  is
found  in  Sicily  and  Italy.  In  Northern  and  Western  Europe
it  cannot  be  equally  popular,  and  I  do  not  think  that  it
occurs.4  Cosquin  claimed  that  he  had  proved  its  Indian
origin,  though,  in  fact,  he  cites  no  example  from  further  east
than  the  Caucasus  region — an  instance  of  how  loose  his  argu-
ment too  often  becomes  !  I  do  not  recall  any  Indian  analogue,
but  until  Professor  Bloomfield's  promised  Encyclopedia
of  Hindu  Fiction 5  becomes  an  accomplished  fact  the
student  of  Western  stories  has  no  ready  work  of  reference  by
which  to  check  his  limited  and  superficial  knowledge  of  the
content  of  Eastern  stories.

1  Swynnerton,  Romantic  Tales  from  the  Punjab,  pp.  53-54.

2  See  Vol.  Ill,  p.  259;  Vol.  V,  p.  171.

3  Some  examples  will  be  found  in  Folk-Lore,  xxi,  p.  154.

4  Bolte  and  Polivka,  op.  cit.,  ii,  p.  63,  to  which  add  the  references  given
in  Dawkins,  op.  cit.,  p.  228,  and  Cosquin,  Etudes  Folkloriques,  pp.  532-542.

5  See  Foreword  to  Vol.  VII.


FOREWORD  xv

But,  when  all  is  said  and  done,  the  consideration  of
individual  incidents,  apart  from  their  context,  however
distinctive  they  may  appear  to  be,  must  always  be  fraught
with  doubt  as  to  the  possibilities  of  coincidence.  The  major
foundations  for  arguments  about  transmission  must  rest
always  upon  the  recurrence  of  identical  series  of  connected  in-
cidents ;  for  the  probability  of  independent  origin  diminishes
rapidly  with  increased  complexity  of  correspondence.  Thus
if  the  series  A  +  B  +  C  occurs  in  two  different  areas,  the
chances  in  favour  of  transmission  being  the  true  explana-
tion are  more  than  three  times  greater  than  in  the  case
of  correspondences  limited  to  a  single  isolated  incident.
To  these  latter,  in  fact,  an  element  of  doubt  must  always  be
attached.

Thus,  for  example,  Mr  Penzer,  in  his  very  learned  and
judicious  note  upon  the  "  Swan  Maiden  "  motif,1  has  come  to  the
conclusion  that  it  has  passed  from  India  to  Europe  and  would
agree  with  Bolte  and  Polivka  that  its  occurrence  in  the  Elder
Edda  and  the  Nibelungenlied  points  to  some  early  contact
between  East  and  West.2  Now,  apart  from  this  early  ap-
pearance of  an  almost  identical  idea  in  Teutonic  and  Scandi-
navian poetry,  the  Oriental  origin  of  the  motif  would  have
appeared  to  be  almost  certain.  But,  as  it  is,  some  doubt  must
arise,  for  one  is  bound  to  ask  the  question  how  the  "  Swan
Maiden "  reached  Northern  Europe  without  leaving  any
traces  of  her  flight  from  India  in  Southern  or  Eastern  Europe  ;
for  the  distribution  so  ably  and  conveniently  charted  in
Mr  Penzer's  note  is  of  a  wandering  later  in  date  than  the
Volundarkvitha.  Is  it  not  possible  that  the  same  idea  might
here  have  occurred  independently  to  Eastern  and  Western
imaginations  ?  For  my  own  part  I  am  not  prepared  to  adopt
either  view  as  right  nor  to  reject  the  other  as  wrong.  It  is
a  nice  question  of  probability.  That  the  second  alternative
is  not  impossible  may  be  suggested  by  the  distinct  characters
of  the  Western  and  Oriental  "  Forbidden  Chambers,"  for  which
the  obvious  explanation  is  that  the  idea  of  the  "Forbidden
Chamber  "  motif  itself  occurred  independently  both  in  East

1  See  Appendix  I,  p.  213.

2  Bolte  and  Polivka,  Anmerkungen,  etc.,  iii,  p.  41 6.


xvi  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

and  West.  I  am  inclined,  too,  to  agree  with  Mr  Penzer 1  that
the  acquisition  of  the  "  Magical  Articles  "  by  gift  is  character-
istically Western  and  their  acquisition  by  fraud  Oriental,
and  again  should  explain  the  existence  of  this  apparently
original  difference  by  supposing  that  the  idea  of  the  "  Magical
Articles  "  was  independently  invented  both  in  the  East  and
in  the  West.

My  main  contention  then  is  that  a  story  may  be  regarded
as  a  kind  of  composite  pattern  of  coloured  bricks.  Individual
bricks  considered  by  themselves  are  almost  worthless  for  our
particular  purpose  of  tracing  the  history  of  the  design.  The
whole  point  is  the  relation  of  the  bricks  to  each  other,  and  in
our  analysis  the  smallest  effective  unit  must  be  an  integral
piece  of  the  pattern.

I  pass  next  to  another  instance  of  what  seems  to  me  to  be
faulty  argument.  We  will  suppose  that  we  have  before  us
a  story  of  which  the  design  may  be  analysed  into  the  parts
A,  B,  C  and  D,  each  of  which  is  sufficiently  distinctive  to
satisfy  our  requirements.  We  then  succeed  in  finding  separ-
ate analogues  to  some  or  even  to  all  of  A  B  C  and  D  in  the
stories  of  another  area,  but  in  every  case  they  are  set  in  a
different  context.  We  are  surely  not  then  entitled  to  say
that  the  story  A  +  B  +  C  +  D  belongs  to  both  areas.  Thus
even  if  Cosquin  is  able  to  quote  parallels  to  separate  incidents
in  The  Herdsman  as  occurring  in  different  contexts  in  Avar
or  Indian  stories,  we  shall  not  conclude  that  the  story  is
necessarily  Oriental  in  origin.  Although  the  grounds  upon
which  Hartland  claims  a  Celtic  origin  for  this  particular
variety  of  the  group  represented  by  Grimm,  Nos.  60,  85,  123,
136,  appear  to  be  insufficient,  it  can  hardly  be  doubted  that
its  distribution  is  definitely  European.2

That  nearly  all  the  methods  of  argument  which  we  have
branded  as  vicious  have  been  applied  to  the  study  of  the  rela-
tion of  European  folk-tales  to  classical  mythology  may  be

1  See  Vol.  I,  pp.  25-29 ;  and  Journal  of  the  Gypsy-Lore  Society,  3rd  ser.,
iii,  p.  151.

2  Cosquin,  Contes  Pop.  de  Lorraine,  No.  43,  vol.  ii,  pp.  93-97 ;  Bolte  und
Polivka,  op.  cit.,  iii,  p.  113w4;  Hartland,  Legend  of  Perseus,  iii,  pp.  3-10;  and
my  note  in  Journal  of  the  Gypsy-Lore  Society,  3rd  ser.,  iv,  pp.  157-158.


FOREWORD  xvii

attributed  to  a  natural  enthusiasm  for  discovering  as  many-
links  as  possible  with  the  ancient  world  and  a  lack  of  reflec-
tion upon  the  methods  actually  being  used  to  achieve  this
purpose.  For  instance  we  are  habitually  told  that  Pygmalion
may  be  equated  with  the  story,  which  is  almost  certainly  of
Oriental  origin,  of  The  Carpenter,  the  Tailor  and  the  Man  of
God,  when  actually  the  two  stories  have  nothing  in  common
except  the  idea  that  a  female  statue  may  come  to  life  and
be  loved  by  its  fashioner  or  fashioners.1  Again,  we  are  con-
tinually being  told  that  because  an  isolated  incident  is  to
be  found  in  classical  story,  therefore  the  whole  series  of
incidents  of  which  it  forms  part  in  modern  folk-tales  must
have  existed  in  a  now  lost  form  in  classical  antiquity.  Before
making  these  very  large  assumptions,  it  is  surely  wiser  to
study  the  facts  as  they  are,  rather  than  as  we  would  have
them  to  be.  The  actual  position,  which  I  have  briefly
sketched  elsewhere,2  is  simply  this.  While  isolated  incidents
which  form  part  of  modern  European  folk-tales  are  to  be
found  with  some  frequency  in  classical  mythology,  they
are  found  almost  invariably  in  a  different  context,  and,
contrary  to  the  general  belief,  the  number  of  cases  where
the  parallel  extends  to  any  considerable  combination  of
incidents  (some  such  there  are :  I  think,  for  example,
of  Polyphemus  or  Polyidus  and  the  Snakes)  is  surprisingly
few.

The  quest  for  the  Original  Home  of  the  Fairy  Story  may
be  left  for  the  Wise  Men  of  Gotham  to  undertake  when  they
are  finished  with  hedging  the  cuckoo.  It  is  contrary  alike  to
common  sense  and  to  experience  to  suppose  that  the  story-
telling faculty  has  been  limited  to  any  one  locality,  race  or
people,  and  the  oral  circulation  of  tales  must  always  have  been
mainly  by  exchange — a  fact  which  many  a  field-worker  in  a
not  unexploited  area  has  had  reason  to  regret,  as  he  laboriously
reaps  the  harvest  of  what  in  many  cases  his  predecessors  at
the  same  task  have  sown.  Further,  it  would  not  be  difficult
to  show  that  there  exist  stories  which  have  a  quite  limited

1  See  p.  xiw1,  Vol.  VI,  pp.  264,  275,  and  Folk-Lore,  xxiii,  p.  487.

2  In  a  short  essay  on  "Greek  and  Roman  Folklore"  in  the  American
Series,  Our  Debt  to  Greece  and  Rome,  now  in  the  press.

vol.  vni.  b


xviii  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

distribution  within  the  Indo-European  area.1  The  extreme
Indianist  position,  such  as  that  adopted  by  the  late  Emmanuel
Cosquin,  is  clearly  untenable;  nor  is  his  favourite  form  of
argument — that  if  a  story,  or  even  a  part  of  a  story,  can  be
paralleled  in  India,  ancient  or  modern,  India  must  necessarily
have  given  it  birth — for  obvious  reasons  conclusive.  Actu-
ally I  should  hazard  the  guess  that  a  great  many  of  the  North
Indian  stories,  the  vocabulary  of  which  is  largely  coloured
with  Arabic,  have  relatively  recently  been  brought  to  India
with  Islam.2

This  raises  another  point,  to  which  Mr  Wright  has  drawn
attention — the  view  which  I  once  ventured  to  put  forward 8 —
that  while  it  is  a  romantic  and  attractive  hypothesis  that
oral  tradition  goes  back  to  immemorial  antiquity,  scientific-
ally it  is  a  pure  assumption.  An  assumption  it  must  be,  for
it  cannot,  in  the  nature  of  things,  be  tested,  and  those  who
prefer  to  follow  the  maxim  omne  ignotum  pro  magnifico  are  not
likely  to  be  shaken  by  any  consideration  of  probability.  But
considerations  there  are,  which  suggest  not  only  that  it  is  an
assumption,  but  an  improbable  assumption.  Such  detailed
work  at  stories  as  I  have  done  has  been  upon  philological
material  derived  mainly  from  illiterate  transmission,  Greek

1  In  his  interesting  Foreword  to  Vol.  VI,  my  friend,  Mr  Wright,  put
a  question  mark  against  the  view  that  a  self-contained  Indo-European  group
of  stories  exists.  Now  I  believe  that  there  are  geographical,  historical  and
cultural  reasons  why  it  should  exist,  but  the  question  whether  it  actually  does
exist  is  susceptible,  I  think,  of  quite  a  simple  test.  Is  it  or  is  it  not  true
that  if  any  two  collections  of  folk-tales  from  any  two  countries  within  the
area  are  compared,  the  number  and  character  of  the  correspondences  between
them  will  be  quite  disproportionately  larger  than  those  to  be  observed  between
either  of  the  Indo-European  collections  and  any  collection  of  native  stories
from  elsewhere?  The  area  has,  of  course,  no  impassable  barrier  round  it,
but  where  stories  radiate  outside  it — e.g.  along  the  southward  thrust  of  Arab
influence  in  the  African  continent — it  is  rather  noticeable  how  they  diminish
in  frequency  in  proportion  to  their  distance  from  the  main  area  and  how  their
original  form  tends  to  become  more  completely  submerged  the  farther  they
are  from  home.  In  the  East,  I  imagine  that  the  proportion  of  Indo-European
stories  in  China,  where  they  were  carried  by  Buddhism,  is  relatively  large.
A  few  have  passed  on  to  Japan  and  Korea.

2  See  Folk-Lore,  xxxiv,  p.  1 29.

3  Ibid.,  pp.  124  foil.


FOREWORD  xix

or  Gypsy1;  and  what  perhaps  has  struck  me  most  vividly
is  the  tendency  of  a  not  too  intelligent  oral  transmission  to
disintegrate  the  original  pattern  of  stories  often  into  almost
meaningless  incoherence.  A  cold  and  unsentimental  scrutiny
of  any  peasant  art  over  a  considerable  period  will  lead,  I
fancy,  to  the  same  conclusion.  I  think,  for  instance,  of
Greek  peasant  embroidery  and  the  steady  degeneration  of
the  noble  Venetian  designs  from  which  its  patterns  are  often
derived.  Then  again  I  ask  myself,  is  it  my  experience  as  a
historian  that  history,  when  orally  transmitted,  preserves  for
any  length  of  time  its  pattern  and  remains  an  intelligent  and
reasonably  accurate  version  of  events  ?  But  if  not  historical
tradition,  why  should  fiction  be  more  successful  in  preserving
its  integrity  of  form  ?  Again,  have  not  observers  of  the  back-
ward peoples  again  and  again  recorded  their  surprise  at  the
very  short  memories  of  past  events  which  is  evinced  in  tribal
legend  ?  I  have  myself  come  to  the  conclusion  that  it  is  only
under  special  conditions — e.g.  those  of  a  ritual  formula  like
the  Hymn  of  the  Salii  at  Rome,  the  correct  knowledge  of
which  is  at  once  the  duty  and  pride  of  professionals — that  oral
transmission  is  likely  by  itself  to  conserve  original  forms  for
any  considerable  length  of  time.  I  am  even  a  little  uneasy
about  the  current  supposition  as  to  the  great  antiquity  of  the
Jatakas  in  the  form  in  which  we  have  them.  I  accept  it  as  a
working  hypothesis  because  I  understand  that  it  represents
the  view  of  those  who  ought  to  know,  and  I  have  not  myself
sufficiently  intimate  knowledge  of  the  evidence  to  form  a
sound  opinion.  In  any  case,  even  if  my  scepticism  be  re-
garded as  extreme,  and  it  is  preferable  to  admit  that  some
parts  of  what  oral  tradition  has  preserved  may  be  very  old,
they  are  still  impossible  to  use  for  evidential  purposes,  for
we  cannot  know  which  they  are.  We  have  indications  that
some  parts  are  not  old,  but  we  have  no  touchstone  except

1  In  view  of  the  references  of  Mr  Wright  in  Vol.  VI,  p.  ix,  and  Mr  Penzer
in  Vol.  V,  p.  275,  to  Groome's  theory  that  Gypsies  have  played  an  important
part  as  colporteurs  of  Eastern  folk-tales,  I  should  like  to  retract  the  modified
approval  which  I  gave  to  it  in  Dawkins,  op.  cit.,  p.  218.  Since  then  I  have
had  the  experience  of  working  at  Gypsy  texts  in  detail,  and  my  considered
opinion  is  that  wherever  Groome's  theory  is  tested  it  breaks  down.  My  own
belief  is  that  there  is  nothing  in  it.


xx  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

our  arbitrary  desires  which  will  tell  us  what  parts  are  certainly
old.

Again,  I  myself  agree  with  Dr  Gaster  in  attributing  the
very  greatest  importance  to  literary  sources  both  in  moulding
and  in  giving  permanence  to  the  forms  of  popular  stories.
But  whether  we  agree  with  that  view  or  not,  it  remains  the
fact  that  in  practice  the  study  of  the  history  of  stories  must
necessarily  be  treated  as  literary  history,  because  it  is  only
the  history  of  the  literary  forms  which  can  supply  us  with
definite  dates.

It  will  be  clear  that  believing,  as  I  do,  that  stories  are  in
fact  transmitted  from  area  to  area,  and  that  the  antiquity  of
the  forms  preserved  in  oral  tradition  is  questionable,  I  am  not
likely  to  be  sympathetic  towards  the  efforts,  which  were  very
popular  with  the  older  school  in  this  country,  to  find  in  the
modern  fairy  stories  of  any  country  fragments  of  its  history
or  social  customs  in  a  very  remote  and  prehistoric  past.
Such  investigators  too  have  tended  to  forget  that  the  student
of  folk-tales  is  at  best  engaged  in  breaking  butterflies  on  the
wheel,  and  that  the  fragile  and  beautiful  creatures,  which
suffer  this  indignity  at  his  hands,  flit  hither  from  the  flowers
of  fantasy.  Thus  to  look  to  the  Baba  Yaga's  circular  hut
rotating  upon  its  cock's  foot  for  characteristics  of  the  neo-
lithic Russian's  dwelling  may  be  thought  to  show  a  certain
deficiency  in  humour.  More  legitimate  and  more  profitable
it  would  be  to  investigate  its  connection,  if  any,  with  that
strange  magically  rotating  palace  of  the  Byzantine  Emperor
of  which  we  hear  in  the  Chanson  de  Geste  and  the  Ballad  of
King  Arthur  and  King  Cornwall,1  and  the  possible  relation  of
this  in  turn  to  the  famous  Throne  of  Chosroes.2

Having  illustrated,  mainly  by  examples  drawn  from  the
best  masters,  defects  of  method  and  argument  which  seem
to  me  to  infest  the  study  of  folk-tales,  it  will  be  proper  next
to  ask  the  question  in  what  directions  the  student  may  now
most  profitably  focus  his  attention  and  in  what  practical

1  Child,  op.  cit.,  i,  pp.  274-288.

2  There  is  some  interesting  material  about  the  Throne  of  Chosroes  in
Saxl,  "Friihes  Christentum  unci  spates  Heidentum  in  ihren  kunstlerischen
Ausdrucksformen,"  Wiener  Jahrbuch  fur  Kunstgeschichte,  ii  (xvi),  1923.


FOREWORD  xxi

forms  may  the  results  of  his  labours  be  most  compendiously
and  profitably  expressed.  Again  it  will  be  understood  that
I  offer  only  personal  opinions  to  form  a  basis  of  discussion.
However  little  value  the  former  may  prove  to  have,  the  latter
will  not  be  inopportune  ;  for  it  will  not  ultimately  delay  the
attainment  of  our  journey's  end  to  pause  in  order  to  take
the  bearings  of  the  proximate  landmark  and  perhaps  even
to  look  where  the  feet  are  next  to  be  placed.

I  assume  that  our  ultimate  goal  is  to  discover  through
the  study  of  particular  stories  in  their  different  settings  the
history  of  this  form  of  popular  fiction,  the  laws  which  govern
its  creation  and  transmission,  and  perhaps  eventually  to
assess  the  respective  contributions  to  the  common  stock
which  have  been  made  in  particular  areas  by  particular
peoples.  Our  task,  which  can  hardly  yet  be  said  to  have
emerged  from  its  preliminary  stages,  is  complicated  by  the
bewildering  character  of  the  material  and  the  formidable
quantity  of  it  which  already  demands  assimilation.  Further,
but  little  consideration  appears  as  yet  to  have  been  devoted
to  the  possibility  of  devising  a  convenient  and  standard
method  of  co-ordinating  the  floating  information  which  is  at
present  available ;  while,  lastly,  the  material  is  drawn  from
so  wide  an  area  that  real  knowledge  of  all  the  relevant  facts
■ — linguistic,  cultural,  literary  and  historical,  in  all  sections
of  it — would  overtax  the  qualities  of  a  superman.

It  would  appear  that  specialisation  is  forced  upon  us  and
that  the  student  of  folk-tales  must  join  the  ranks  of  those
"  who  know  more  and  more  about  less  and  less."  I  do  not
mean,  of  course,  that  he  should  be  ignorant  of  the  general
problems  or  not  have  a  good  working  knowledge  of  com-
parative folk-lore  :  without  that  he  will  not  be  an  efficient
specialist.  But  I  do  think  that  he  will  now  profitably  limit  the
scope  of  his  special  investigations  and  perhaps  the  nature  of
his  immediate  ambitions.  The  days  when  the  unsystematic
collection  of  random  analogies  were  useful  are  past.  By  that
I  do  not  mean  that  notes  like  those  of  Tawney,  for  example,
were  not  valuable  in  their  generation.  We  owe,  in  fact,  every-
thing to  him  and  his  peers.  It  is  rather  that  their  particular
lode  has  been  worked  out,  and  we  have  now  learned  all


xxii  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

that  the  method  which  they  employed  is  likely  usefully  to
teach  us.

The  most  profitable  line  which  specialisation  should  now
follow  may  perhaps  be  thought  to  be  regional  or  cultural.  It
would  be  a  very  real  step  forward  if  we  could  arrive  at  reliable
information  as  to  what  actually  does  happen  to  particular
stories  in  a  number  of  particular  areas,  what  different  forms
they  assume,  in  what  direction  they  appear  to  be  travelling,
what  modification  they  undergo,  and  what  precisely  is  the  in-
fluence upon  them  of  the  local  colour  which  is  imposed  by  the
history  and  social  habits  of  any  particular  region.  Thus,  for
example,  the  ideal  annotator  of  modern  Greek  folk-tales  will
need,  of  course,  a  working  knowledge  of  comparative  folk-lore
and  its  problems,  but  the  first  essential  will  be  that  he  should
master  all  the  recorded  Greek  material.  He  will  need  further
to  have  a  very  considerable  knowledge  of  the  stories  of  ad-
jacent countries — Turkey  and  the  other  Balkan  states — and  the
more  he  knows  of  Arabic  and  Persian  the  better.  But  what
we  shall  expect  from  him  primarily  is  an  account  of  the  varia-
tions in  the  forms  of  modern  Greek  stories  and  the  relation  of
the  Greek  forms  to  those  in  contiguous  countries.  Eventu-
ally, of  course,  there  will  be  a  synthesis  of  the  results  of  these
regional  studies,  but  at  the  moment  there  is  justification  for
a  policy  of  reenter  pour  mieux  sauter.  So  little  do  we  know
as  yet  for  certain  about  the  history  of  any  stories  in  detail
that  I  personally  feel  that  the  time  is  not  yet  ripe  for  follow-
ing up  far-reaching  speculations  of  the  kind  put  forward  by
Sir  R.  Temple  in  Volume  I  as  to  Aryan  and  non-Aryan
elements  in  folk-tale.  Even  in  India  it  is  first  necessary  to
pursue  much  further  than  it  has  hitherto  been  taken  the
history  of  stories,  both  literary  and  regional,  and  it  is  safer  if
slower  to  work  towards  the  region  of  pure  speculation  by  ex-
hausting first  the  possibilities  of  the  nearer  if  duller  country,
where  some  definite  facts  are  still  ascertainable.  The  real
danger  of  these  bold  speculations  is  that  they  are  not
susceptible  of  adequate  test,  at  any  rate  in  the  present  state
of  our  knowledge,  but  inevitably  their  acceptance  as  working
hypotheses  may  be  allowed  to  bias  our  investigation  of  data
which  are  ascertainable.


FOREWORD  xxiii

Another  good  reason  for  regional  specialisation  is  this.
Such  evidence  as  non-literary  stories  can  provide  demands
handling  with  a  tact  which  is  informed  by  a  real  intimacy
with  the  language,  psychology,  history  and  habits  of  the
people  who  tell  them.  For  everything  turns  upon  deter-
mining what  is  the  product  of  local  colouring  and  which
are  the  primary  and  which  the  secondary  variations  of  a
story.

For  the  first  of  these,  it  is  obvious  that  where  stories
are  transmitted  by  peasant  story-tellers  they  are  likely  to
be  in  some  degree  recast  in  order  to  suit  the  particular  social
customs  of  their  tellers  or  those  of  their  particular  fairyland.
Such  changes  may  even  affect  the  structure  of  a  story.  For
example,  the  solution  offered  by  polygamy  of  marrying  the
hero  to  successive  princesses  will  not  suit  Western  audiences.
The  story  will  be  modified,  probably  by  means  of  convenient
brothers  or  companions,  to  whom  the  superfluous  heroines
may  be  given  as  brides.  Points  of  this  kind  demand  a  great
deal  more  special  and  local  attention  than  they  have  yet
received.  Hitherto  they  have  been  used  in  the  form  of  vague
and  sweeping  theories  of  untested  general  application,  as  for
instance  the  argument  which  Cosquin  frequently  employs,
that  the  trait  of  kindness  to  animals  must  show  Buddhistic
influence.  Into  this  particular  trap  I  once  nearly  fell  my-
self through  ignorance  of  Moslem  feeling  and  of  specifically
Turkish  custom.1  Of  course  our  specialists  will  be  noting
down  traits  which  may  turn  out  to  be  consonant  with  the
social  life  of  more  than  one  region,  but  these,  if  the  whole
area  is  at  all  systematically  covered,  will  eventually  cancel
out,  or  rather  we  shall  know  accurately  in  what  areas  they
are  truly  at  home  or  will  readily  become  acclimatised.2

For  an  example  of  how  knowledge  of  detail  can  determine
the  relation  of  different  versions  I  will  quote  again  the  late

1  Dawkins,  Modern  Greek  in  Asia  Minor,  p.  265.

2  Thus  Mr  Penzer  properly  notes  in  Vol.  V,  p.  250,  that  digging  through
a  wall  is  a  favourite  mode  of  Indian  thieving.  The  value  of  this  is  not
diminished,  because  we  can  supplement  it  by  pointing  out  that  the  ancient
Greek  word  for  burglar,  Totx<*>/wxos>  is  "the  man  who  digs  through  the  wall."
The  method,  no  doubt,  is  characteristic  of  all  countries  where  houses  are  built
of  mud  or  sun-dried  brick.     Compare  Job  xxiv,  16.


xxiv  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

F.  W.  Hasluck's  brilliant  suggestion  about  All  Baba.  The
variants  of  this  story  may  be  divided  into  two  groups  :  those
in  which  catastrophe  turns  upon  forgetting  a  password  and
those  in  which  it  is  brought  about  by  miscounting.1  With
regard  to  the  first  group,  all  the  versions  in  which  the  pass-
word is  an  obvious  corruption  of  "  Sesame  "  must  clearly  be
secondary  to  the  "  Open  Sesame  "  version.  But  the  relation
of  the  considerable  number  of  variants  in  which  the  password
is  "  Open  Tree,"  "  Open  Hyacinth,"  "  Open  Rose,"  or  some
other  plant  or  flower  is  less  clear.  It  might  be  argued  that
"  Open  Sesame  "  is  on  all  fours  with  the  others  and  may  be
just  one  of  a  number  of  specialised  versions  of  the  use  of  a
plant  name.  Now  Hasluck  pointed  out  that  "  Open  Sesame  "
must  almost  certainly  be  derived  from  the  use  of  sesame  oil
for  lubricating  locks,  exactly  in  the  same  way  as  madchun,
the  name  of  a  sticky  sweetmeat,  is  used  for  a  charm  to  stick
things  together  in  a  Turkish  variant  of  Grimm,  No.  64.  If
that  is  right,  it  can  hardly  be  doubted  that  all  the  other
flower  passwords  are  secondary  to  "Open  Sesame,"  for
which  alone  there  is  a  reason.  Further,  it  follows  from
Hasluck's  explanation  that  the  origin  of  the  "  Open  Sesame  "
version  must  lie  east  of  Mediterranean  lands,  in  the  area  in
which  the  inferior  sesame  oil  first  takes  the  place  of  olive
oil.

It  may  further  be  hoped  that  the  intensive  and  more  ex-
haustive study  of  all  the  variants  in  a  particular  country  and
its  immediate  neighbours  will  supply  us  with  more  reliable
data  than  we  have  at  present  for  forming  a  sound  judgment
upon  the  tendency  of  certain  combinations  of  incidents  to
become  distorted  in  the  process  of  transmission,  an  important
indication  of  direction  where  progressive  distortion  can  be
established.2  I  am  not  at  all  sure  that  in  well-explored  fields
some  indications  might  not  even  be  drawn  from  the  relative
popularity  of  certain  types  of  story.  This,  however,  is  a
line  of  research  which  demands  great  discretion ;  for  obvious

1  See  Folk-Lore,  xxxi,  pp.  321-323.

2  E.g.  the  chain  of  incidents  which  opens  with  the  descent  into  the
underworld  by  getting  on  to  the  black  ram  in  mistake  for  the  white,  which
I  have  mentioned  in  Folk-Lore,  xxxiv,  p.  1 32.


FOREWORD  xxv

reasons  it  does  not  follow  that  what  happens  to  have  been
oftenest  recorded  is  necessarily  oftenest  told.1

But  whatever  may  be  thought  of  these  particular  sugges-
tions, I  cannot  help  feeling  that  in  any  case  sufficient  local
material  has  now  accumulated  in  the  different  parts  of  the
area  to  make  a  more  intensive  examination  advisable,  and
here  seems  in  fact  the  best  prospect  of  securing  new  and  more
accurate  data  upon  which  to  base  our  wider  theories.

For  the  most  convenient  method  of  annotation,  that  notes
exist  not  to  display  the  erudition  of  the  author  but  to  give
clear  and  relevant  information  to  the  reader,  that  they  should
be  as  lucid  as  is  consistent  with  brevity  and  as  brief  as  is
consistent  with  lucidity  may  be  taken  for  granted.  Brevity,
however,  may  be  overdone,  and  in  a  subject  where  results
need  to  be  accessible  to  scholars  who  are  not  specialists  in
the  writer's  particular  field,  the  greatest  care  should  be  taken
to  give  all  the  necessary  information.  In  particular  where
literature  is  quoted,  if  the  writer  is  a  European  medievalist
let  him  remember  that  names  which  may  be  household  words
to  him  will  not  necessarily  be  familiar  to  the  Orientalist,  and
the  Orientalist  may  be  asked  to  show  a  similarly  wise  com-
passion. Somewhere  the  ideal  notes  should  contain  a  key,
whether  it  be  in  the  index  or  elsewhere,  from  which  at  least
the  dates  and  general  character  and,  if  it  is  possible  to  state
it  briefly  without  misleading,  the  interrelation  of  the  im-
portant literary  sources  which  have  been  quoted  should  be
ascertainable.  The  enormous  service  to  those  of  us  who
are  not  Orientalists,  as  well  as  to  those  who  are,  of  such  a
compendious  history  of  the  versions  of  the  Panchatantra
as  that  given  in  Vol.  V,  cannot  be  overestimated.

We  will  also  ask  our  annotator  to  be  explicit  and  exact
about  dates  where  they  are  known,  and  to  leave  us  in  no

1  A  somewhat  analogous  danger  may  be  pointed  out  in  connection  with
a  statistical  use  of  studies  of  particular  stories  like  that  of  Miss  Cox's  Cinderella.
Their  data  may  be  disproportionately  drawn  from  the  different  areas.  I
myself  was  led  into  a  momentary  misapprehension  with  regard  to  the  apparent
frequency  of  a  particular  detail,  until  I  noticed  the  disproportionate  number
of  Finnish  variants  analysed  in  the  book,  for,  with  one  exception,  all  the
examples  which  I  had  noticed  of  this  particular  detail  turned  out  to  be
Finnish.


xxvi  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

doubt,  where  dates  are  uncertain,  as  to  what  is  hypothesis
and  what  is  fact.  How  often  has  Maspero  been  responsible
for  the  quotation  of  some  Ptolemaic  papyrus  as  though  it
were  evidence  from  "  ancient  Egypt  "  in  the  usually  accepted
sense  of  the  term,  and  the  first  edition  of  the  Cambridge
Ancient  History  itself  quoted  the  Sayings  of  Ptahhotep  as
belonging  to  the  Old  Kingdom,  when  the  earliest  papyrus
belongs  in  fact  to  the  Middle  Kingdom  some  centuries
later  !

Next,  as  to  the  recording  of  variants.  If  the  policy  which
I  have  advocated  were  adopted,  I  should  hope  that  my  local
expert  would  give  me  references  to  all  the  variants  from  his
particular  country.  As  regards  the  further  record  of  the  dis-
tribution of  variants,  it  should  be  recognised  that  Bolte  and
Polivka  will  henceforward  be  as  indispensable  to  the  student
of  folk-tales  as  is  his  Liddell  and  Scott  to  the  Greek  scholar.
Hence  the  appropriate  reference  to  Bolte  and  Polivka  should
be  given,  together  with  any  correction  of  the  references  in
that  upon  the  whole  amazingly  accurate  work,  and  any  use-
ful supplementary  additions  which  the  writer  may  be  able  to
make.  But  he  should  not  unnecessarily  duplicate  informa-
tion which  is  already  in  Bolte  and  Polivka.  His  notes  will,
of  course,  discuss  the  views  of  Bolte  and  Polivka  and  those
of  other  scholars  about  the  structure  and  distribution  of  the
story,  and  will  define  the  author's  own  attitude  to  the  points
at  issue.  Here,  where  it  is  a  case  of  quoting  opinions,  there
will  naturally  be  appropriate  references  to  the  books  in  which
they  are  expressed,  whether  they  are  already  mentioned  by
Bolte  and  Polivka  or  not.  But  as  regards  the  bibliography
of  the  occurrence  of  variants,  the  suggested  use  of  Bolte  and
Polivka  as  a  standard  initial  reference  would  save  not  only
ink  and  paper,  but,  what  is  much  more  important,  the  reader's
time.  Many  others  must  have  had  the  lamentable  experience
of  being  referred  for  variants  of  some  story,  let  us  say,  to
Gozenbach,  Liebrecht,  Brugmann-Leskien  and  von  Hahn.
Conscientiously  we  look  them  all  up,  only  to  find  in  nine
cases  out  of  ten  an  identical  set  of  further  references  in  all  of
them.

Finally,   our  ideal  annotator  may  be  advised  to  adopt


FOREWORD  xxvii

Mr  Penzer  as  his  model  in  the  care  and  trouble  taken  in
the  laborious  task  of  indexing  his  material.  There  are  few
literary  labours  more  tiresome  to  execute,  but  there  is  none
more  useful  in  a  work  of  learning.  What  the  lack  of  an  index
means  in  wasted  hours  and  often  fruitless  racking  of  the
memory,  others  who  have  reason  to  lament  the  long  delay
in  the  issue  of  Bolte  and  Polivka's  fourth  volume  will  know
by  bitter  experience.

But  if  the  utility  of  a  work  of  reference  is  largely  dis-
counted by  the  absence  of  this  most  necessary  aid  to  its  use,
the  same  principle  holds  good  of  our  studies  as  a  whole.
Work  which  is  not  made  accessible  is  work  wasted.  Now  in
classical  studies  we  are  no  doubt  exceptionally  fortunate  in
the  self-sacrificing  trouble  which  is  taken  to  provide  us,  not
only  with  dictionaries  of  various  kinds,  but  also  with  perio-
dical surveys  of  what  is  being  done  in  the  many  various
special  fields.  For  example,  it  is  not  very  difficult  for  the
historian  to  keep  himself  adequately  abreast  of  the  general
progress  of  archaeological  research,  and,  this  is  the  real  point,
it  is  made  easy  for  him  to  find  out  where  to  look  for  the  details
of  any  particular  discovery  or  special  technical  discussion,
which  may  throw  light  upon  problems  of  his  own.  With
regard  to  folk-tales,  however,  a  similar  co-ordination  of
labour  is  almost  wholly  to  seek.  A  cynic  declared  of  some
branches  of  the  Intelligence  Services  of  the  Allies  in  the  late
war  that  their  only  really  successful  efforts  in  maintaining
secrecy  were  shown  in  the  prevention  of  any  information
which  they  had  acquired  from  reaching  any  rival  branch
until  it  was  too  late  to  be  of  use ;  the  situation  with  regard
to  the  study  of  folk-tales  is  not  wholly  dissimilar.  We  have
now,  it  is  true,  the  valuable  periodical  summary  of  publica-
tions by  Otto  Weinreich  in  the  Archiv  fur  Religionswissen-
schaft ;  but  in  this  country  little  if  anything  is  done  in  this
direction,  and  even  the  number  of  foreign  books  which  are
sent  for  review  to  Folk-Lore  is  lamentably  less  than  it  ought
to  be.  It  has  certainly  been  my  own  experience  that  one
learns  too  often  only  by  accident  of  major  works  of  real
importance.

In  particular  I  should  like  to  take  this  opportunity  to


xxviii  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

plead  for  some  greater  co-operation  between  Orientalists  and
students  of  Western  marchen  and  literature.  Between  the
two  branches  of  study  there  seems  to  be  a  great  gulf  of  mutual
ignorance,  across  which  it  is  not  the  least  of  Mr  Penzer's
services  to  have  thrown  some  bridges.  Thus  more  than  one
distinguished  student  of  Oriental  literature  appears  never
to  have  had  his  attention  directed  to  the  existence  of  Bolte
and  Polivka,  while  Westerners  are  often  unfamiliar  with  the
literary  history  of  the  Eastern  story-books  which  they  glibly
quote,  are  sometimes  dependent  upon  out-of-date  or  inaccur-
ate translations,  and  are  at  a  loss  to  know  where  to  look  to
correct  deficiencies,  of  which  they  may  be  themselves  acutely
conscious.

To  take  a  specific  instance,  I  think  of  how  much  I  have
learned  from  Mr  Penzer's  treatment  of  the  Tales  of  a  Vetdla.1
To  give  a  critical  estimate  of  its  merits,  and  to  discuss  the
many  suggestive  and  interesting  points  which  the  notes  upon
the  work  and  upon  its  individual  tales  provoke,  wTould  need
a  foreword  to  itself.  One  reflection,  however,  it  may  be
appropriate  to  mention  here.  How  extraordinarily  valuable
would  be  a  book  or — if  the  difficulties  of  unremunerative
publication  were  insuperable — a  series  of  papers  in  some
easily  accessible  periodical,  which  took  these  appendices  for
its  model  and  dealt  in  similar  fashion  with  the  other  great
Indian  collections  of  tales.

A  general  orientation  in  this  branch  of  the  history  of
Indian  literature  is  with  us  a  crying  need.  The  very  names
of  many  of  the  works  which  Mr  Penzer's  notes  upon  Soma-
deva  show  to  be  of  importance  were  quite  unfamiliar  to  me,
and  I  expect  to  many  others  who  approach  these  problems
from  the  Western  side,  even  if  they  may  be  less  shameless  in
confessing  their  ignorance.  The  character  of  their  contents,
the  kind  of  sources  from  which  they  are  probably  drawn,
the  dates  of  their  composition,  their  relation  to  each  other,
whether  they  were  translated  into  Persian  or  Arabic,  and  if
so  when — about  all  these  and  similar  matters  readily  acces-
sible information  as  to  what  is  known  would  be  enormously
helpful.    The  account  itself,  though  it  must  be  authoritative,

1  Vols.  VI  and  VII.


FOREWORD  xxix

need  not  be  very  elaborate,  for  we  have  yet  the  rudiments  to
learn  ;  but  it  will,  of  course,  require  to  be  documented  with
references  which  will  enable  us  to  pursue  particular  questions
in  greater  detail.  A  very  valuable  feature  of  the  model,
which  I  should  hope  would  be  followed,  is  the  critical  estim-
ate of  the  various  translations  in  which  the  works  may  have
become  more  or  less  familiar  in  the  West.

The  more  information  that  our  pundit  can  find  room  to
give  us  about  the  literary  history,  particularly  the  Oriental
literary  history,  of  the  individual  stories  in  these  collections
the  better,  but  even  a  comparatively  general  treatment
would  be  of  great  service.  The  more  I  have  become  involved
in  comparative  methods  of  study  in  other  fields  the  more
deeply  have  I  become  impressed  by  the  dangers  of  mere
erudition  by  index.  Now  most  of  us,  if  we  are  honest,
have  no  adequate  knowledge  of  the  story-literature  of  India
and  the  East.  From  Tawney,  Hertel,  Benfey,  and  so  on,  we
have  been  in  the  habit  of  culling  parallels  and  specimens,
but  without  any  proper  appreciation  of  their  background,  or
knowledge  of  their  literary  context.  A  crying  need,  as  it
seems  to  me,  is  for  some  authoritative  work  which  will  teach
us  the  elements  of  these  essentials,  and  will  guide  us  where
to  look  when  more  detailed  investigation  becomes  necessary.
It  may  be,  of  course,  that  such  a  book  already  exists  ;  but
if  it  does  it  would  appear,  if  only  on  the  internal  evidence
of  some  of  their  arguments,  to  be  unknown  to  the  ordinary
students  of  Western  mdrchen.  Thus  we  are  brought  back
once  more  to  the  urgent  need  of  better  liaison  between
Oriental  and  Western  studies,  the  establishment  of  which,  I
am  convinced,  would  react  beneficially  far  beyond  the  limited
field  of  popular  stories.

I  have  ventured  to  "  think  aloud  "  about  some  general
principles,  which  seem  to  me  vitally  to  affect  the  method  of
the  study  of  folk-tales,  and,  greatly  daring,  have  offered  some
practical  suggestions  as  to  the  form  which  notes  upon  them
might  conveniently  take.  What  value  may  be  attached  to
these  reflections  by  more  professional  students,  who  are  less
distracted  by  other  avocations,  may  be  a  matter  of  doubt ;
there  can  be  no  doubt,  however,  about  the  indebtedness  of


xxx  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

all  who  are  interested  in  Oriental  literature,  in  the  history
of  fiction  and  in  the  study  of  folk-tales  to  this  great  edition
of  Somadeva.  But  "  good  wine  needs  no  bush,"  and  the
discerning  will  require  no  appraisement  from  me  in  order
to  appreciate  the  merits  of  Mr  Penzer's  inestimable  services
to  good  learning.

W.  R.  Halliday.

The  University,  Liverpool.


CONTENTS

BOOK  XIII:    MADIRAVATI
CHAPTER  CIV

PAGE

Author's  Preface  ....  xxxvii

Invocation       .  .  .  .  .  .1

M(ain  story)     ......         1

BOOK   XIV:    PANCHA

CHAPTER  CV

Invocation        .  .  .  .  .  .21

M.     ConL        .  .  .  .  ..21

164.  Story  of  Savitri  and  Angiras        .  .  .22
M.      Cont.        .              .              .              .  .              .23

CHAPTER  CVI

M.      Cont.        .  .  .  .  .  .28

165.  Story  of  the  Child  and  the  Sweetmeat  .  .       35
M.      ConL        .              .              .              .  .  .36

CHAPTER  CVII

M.      ConL        .....  .       43

166.  Story  of  Rama    .              .              .              .  .44
M.      ConL        .              .              .              .              .  .45

xxxi


xxxii  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

CHAPTER  CVIII
M.     Cont.        .  .  .  .  •  .53


PAGE


BOOK   XV:    MAHABHISHEKA

CHAPTER  CIX

Invocation       .  .  .  .  •  .70

M.     Cont.        .  .  .  .  .  .70

CHAPTER  CX

M.     Cont.        .  .  .  .  .  .82


BOOK  XVI:    SURATAMANJARI

CHAPTER  CXI

Invocation       .  .  .  .  .  .94

M.     Cont.        .  .  .  .  .  .94

167.  Story    of    the    Devoted    Couple,    Surasena    and

Sushena  .  .  .  .  .97

M.     Cont.        .  .  .  .  .  .99

CHAPTER  CXII

M.      Cont.        ......     105

168.  Story  of  King  Palaka  and  his  Son  Avantivardhana     106

168a.  King      Chandamahasena      and      the

Asura's  Daughter     .  .  .     106


CONTENTS  xxxiii

CHAPTER  CXII— continued


PAGE


168.  Story  of  King  Palaka  and  his  Son  Avantivardhana     110

168b.  The  Young  Chandala  who  married  the

Daughter  of  King  Prasenajit  .     112

168.  Story  of  King  Palaka  and  his  Son  Avantivardhana     114

168c.  The  Young  Fisherman  who  married  a

Princess      .  .  .  .115

168.  Story  of  King  Palaka  and  his  Son  Avantivardhana     118

168d.  The  Merchant's  Daughter  who  fell  in

love  with  a  Thief    .  .  .118

168.  Story  of  King  Palaka  and  his  Son  Avantivardhana     120
M.     Cont.        .  .  .  .  .  .122

CHAPTER  CXIII

M.     Cont.        ......     124

169.  Story  of  Taravaloka  .  .  .  .125
M.     Cont.        ......     131


BOOK   XVII:    PADMAVATI

CHAPTER  CXIV

Invocation       .  .  .  •  •  ,132

M.      Cont.        .  .  .  ,  .  .132

170.  Story  of  King  Brahmadatta  and  the  Swans         .     133

170a.  How    Parvati    condemned    her    Five

Attendants  to  be  reborn  on  Earth  .     136

VOL.  VIII.  c


xxxiv  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

CHAPTER  CXIV— continued


PAGE


170.  Story  of  King  Brahmadatta  and  the  Swans  .     138

170a.  How    Parvati    condemned    her    Five

Attendants  to  be  reborn  on  Earth  .     138

170.  Story  of  King  Brahmadatta  and  the  Swans         •     142

CHAPTER  CXV

170.  Story  of  King  Brahmadatta  and  the  Swans         .     144
170b.  Muktaphalaketu  and  Padmavati         .     144

CHAPTER  CXVI
170b.  Muktaphalaketu  and  Padmavati  .     156

CHAPTER  CXVII
170b.  Muktaphalaketu  and  Padmavati  .     164

CHAPTER  CXVIII
170b.  Muktaphalaketu  and  Padmavati  .     178

CHAPTER  CXIX

170b.  Muktaphalaketu  and  Padmavati        .  193

170.  Story  of  King  Brahmadatta  and  the  Swans  .  209

M.      Cont.        ......  209

APPENDIX  I

The  "  Swan-Maiden  "  Motif     .  .  .  .217


CONTENTS  xxxv

APPENDIX  II

PAGE

The  Romance  of  Betel-Chewing  .  .  #     235


Index  I — Sanskrit  Words  and  Proper  Names  .     321

Index  II — General  #     337


PREFACE

A  LTHOUGH,  as  mentioned  at  the  end  of  the  text  of
/%  Volume  VII,  the  final  victory  of  the  hero  has  been
.X  m,  achieved  and  the  coronation  duly  taken  place,  with
a  general  gathering  of  the  chief  characters,  yet  we  start  again
on  fresh  adventures  that  seem  to  read  as  a  kind  of  "  addenda,"
or  afterthought,  of  the  compiler.

The  sub-stories  are  rather  involved,  while  in  the  next
volume  they  become  almost  impossible  to  number  with  any
degree  of  success  for  the  purposes  of  quick  reference.

By  the  end  of  the  present  volume  we  shall  be  well  in  sight
of  our  harbour,  and  can  soon  congratulate  ourselves  on  a  long
and,  I  trust,  not  uninteresting  voyage.

The  value  of  this  volume  is  greatly  enhanced  by  a  most
interesting  and  really  useful  Foreword  by  Professor  Halliday.
His  suggestions  are  practical,  and  will  be  consulted  with  great
advantage  by  all  serious  students  of  comparative  folk-lore  and
storiology.

Both  Dr  Barnett  and  Mr  Fenton  continue  to  render  me
valuable  help  in  proof-reading.

N.  M.  P.

St  John's  Wood,  N.W.8,
April  1927.


XXXVll


THE
OCEAN  OF  STORY


BOOK  XIII:  MADIRAVATI
CHAPTER  CIV

INVOCATION

MAY  that  Ganesa,  whom,  when  dancing  in  the  twi-
light intervals  between  the  Yugas,  all  the  worlds
seem  to  imitate  by  rising  and  falling,  protect  you !
May  the  blaze  of  the  eye  in  the  forehead  of  Siva,  who
is  smeared  with  the  beautiful  red  dye  used  by  Gauri  for
adorning  her  feet,  befriend  you  for  your  happiness !

We  adore  the  goddess  Sarasvati,  taking  form  as  speech
to  our  heart's  delight,  the  bee  that  dwells  in  the  lotus  on
the  lake  of  the  mighty  poet's  mind.1


[M]  Then  Naravahanadatta,  the  son  of  the  King  of
Vatsa,  afflicted  with  separation,  being  without  Madana-
manchuka,  roamed  about  on  those  lower  slopes  of  Mount
Malaya,  and  in  its  bordering  forests,  which  were  in  all  the
beauty  of  spring,  but  found  joy  nowhere.2  The  cluster  of
mango-blossoms,  though  in  itself  soft,  yet  seeming,  on
account  of  the  bees  3  that  settled  on  it,  like  the  pliant  bow
of  the  God  of  Love,  cleft  his  heart.  And  the  song  of  the
cuckoo,  though  sweet  in  itself,  was  hard  to  bear,  and  gave
pain  to  his  ears,  as  it  seemed  to  be  harsh  with  the  reproach-
ful utterances  of  Mara.4  And  the  wind  of  the  Malaya  moun-
tain, though  in  itself  cool,  yet  being  yellow  with  the  pollen
of  flowers,  and  so  looking  like  the  fire  of  Kama,  seemed  to
burn  him,  when  it  fell  on  his  limbs.     So  he  slowly  left  that

1  There  is,  of  course,  an  allusion  to  the  Manasa  lake.

2  See  Vol.  VII,  p.  195.— n.m.p.

3  Here  there  is  a  pun;  the  word  translated  "bees"  can  also  mean
"  arrows."

4  The  God  of  Love,  the  Buddhist  devil. See  Vol.  VI,  p.  187n*,  and

Monier  Williams,  Buddhism,  p.  208. — n.m.p.

vol.  vra.  1  A


2  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

region,  being,  so  to  speak,  drummed  out  of  it  by  those  groves
that  were  all  resonant  with  the  hum  of  bees.

And  gradually,  as  he  journeyed  on,  with  the  deity  for  his
guide,  by  a  path  that  led  towards  the  Ganges,  he  reached
the  bank  of  a  lake  in  a  neighbouring  wood.  And  there  he
beheld  two  young  Brahmans  of  handsome  appearance,  sitting
at  the  foot  of  a  tree,  engaged  in  unrestrained  conversation.
And  when  they  saw  him,  they  thought  he  was  the  God  of
Love,  and  they  rose  up  and,  bowing  before  him,  said  :  "  All
hail  to  thee,  adorable  god  of  the  flowery  bow  !  Tell  us  why
thou  wanderest  here  alone  without  that  fragrant  artillery  of
thine,  and  where  is  that  Rati,  thy  constant  companion  ?  "

When  the  son  of  the  King  of  Vatsa  heard  that,  he  said  to
those  Brahmans  :  "I  am  not  the  god  Kama,  I  am  a  mere
mortal ;  but  I  have  indeed  lost  my  Rati." *  When  the
prince  had  said  this,  he  told  his  history,  and  said  to  those
Brahmans  :  "  Who  are  you,  and  of  what  kind  is  this  talk
that  you  two  are  carrying  on  here  ?  "  Then  one  of  those
young  Brahmans  said  to  him  respectfully  :  "  King,  how  can
we  tell  our  secret  in  the  presence  of  a  man  of  your  worth  ?
Nevertheless,  out  of  respect  for  your  command,  I  will  tell
our  history.     Give  ear  !

"  There  is  in  the  territory  of  Kalinga  a  city  of  the  name
of  Sobhavati,  which  has  never  been  entered  by  the  demon
Kali,  nor  touched  by  evil-doers,  nor  seen  by  a  foreign  foe  :
The  Unhappy  such  has  it  been  made  by  the  Creator.  In  it
Lover  there  was  a  wise  and  rich  Brahman,  of  the  name

of  Yasaskara,  who  had  offered  many  sacrifices,  and  he  had
an  excellent  wife  named  Mekhala.  I  was  born  to  them  as
an  only  son,  when  they  were  already  in  middle  life,  and  I
was  in  due  course  reared  up  by  them,  and  invested  with
the  sacrificial  thread.2

"  Then,  while  as  a  boy  I  was  studying  the  Vedas,  there
arose  a  mighty  famine  in  that  land,  owing  to  drought.  So
my  father  and  my  mother  went  off  with  me  to  a  city  named
Visala,  taking  with  them  their  wealth  and  their  servants.
In  that  city,  in  which  fortune  and  learning  dwelt  together,

1  The  word  rati  in  Sanskrit  means  "joy,"  and  "sexual  intercourse.'

2  See  Vol.  VII,  pp.  26-28.— n.m.p.


THE  FAIR  MADIRAVATI  3

having  laid  aside  their  long  feud,  my  father  established  him-
self, having  had  a  house  given  him  by  a  merchant,  who  was
a  friend  of  his.  And  I  dwelt  there  in  the  house  of  my  pre-
ceptor, engaged  in  the  acquisition  of  learning,  in  the  society
of  my  fellow-students  of  equal  age.

"  And  among  them  I  had  a  friend,  a  promising  young

man  of  the  military  caste,  Vijayasena  by  name,  the  son  of  a

very  rich  Kshatriya.     And  one  day  the  unmarried  sister  of

that  friend  of  mine,  whose  name  was  Madiravati,  came  with

him  to  my  teacher's  house.     So  beautiful  was  she  that  I  feel

convinced  that  the  Creator  made  the  orb  of  the  moon,  that

is  like  nectar  to  the  eyes  of  men,  out  of  the  overflowing  of

the  perfect  loveliness  of  her  face.     I  ween,  the  God  of  Love,

when  he  beheld  her  form,  which  was  to  him  a  sixth  weapon,

bewildering  the  world,  valued  but  little  his  other  five  shafts.

When  I  saw  her,  and  heard  from  that  friend  her  name  and

descent,  I  was  at  once  overpowered  by  love's  potent  sway,

and  my  mind  was  altogether  fixed  upon  her.     And  she,  for

her  part,  looked  askance  at  me  with  modest  loving  eye,  and

the  down  standing  erect  on  her  cheeks  told  that  love  had

begun  to  sprout.     And  after  she  had  remained  there  a  long

time  on  the  pretext  of  play,  she  at  last  tore  herself  away  and

went  home,  sending  to  me  from  the  reverted  corner  of  her

eye  a  look  that  was  a  messenger  of  love.

w  Then  I  went  home,  grieved  at  having  to  part  with  her,
and  throwing  myself  flat,  I  tossed  up  and  down  convulsively,
like  a  fish  on  dry  land.  I  said  to  myself :  '  Shall  I  ever  again
behold  her  face,  which  is  the  Creator's  storehouse  of  all  the
nectar  of  beauty  ?  Happy  are  her  companions  *  whom  she
looks  at  with  that  laughing  eye,  and  talks  freely  to  with  that
mouth.'  Engaged  in  such  thoughts  as  these,  I  with  difficulty
got  through  that  day  and  night,  and  on  the  second  day  I
went  to  the  house  of  my  teacher.

"  There  my  friend  Vijayasena  approached  me  courteously,
and  in  the  course  of  a  confidential  conversation  said  to  me
joyfully  :  6  My  mother  has  heard  from  my  sister  Madiravati
that  you  are  so  great  a  friend  of  mine,  and  being  full  of  love

1  No.  1882  has  dhanyd  sa  cha  naro,  No.  2166  dhanyah  sa  cha  naro —
i.e.  "happy  is  that  man."


4  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

for  you,  she  wishes  to  behold  you.  So,  if  you  have  any  regard
for  me,  come  with  me  to  our  house  :  let  it  be  adorned  for  us
with  the  dust  of  your  lotus-like  foot.'  This  speech  of  his
was  a  sudden  refreshment  to  me,  as  an  unexpected  heavy
shower  of  rain  is  to  a  traveller  in  the  desert.  So  I  consented,
and  went  to  his  house,  and  there  I  had  an  interview  with
his  mother,  and  was  welcomed  by  her,  and  remained  there,
gladdened  by  beholding  my  beloved.

11  Then  Vijayasena,  having  been  summoned  by  his  father,
left  me,  and  the  foster-sister  of  MadiravatI  came  to  me,  and
said,  bowing  before  me :  *  Prince,  the  Princess  MadiravatI
trained  up  to  maturity  in  our  garden  a  jasmine  creeper;
and  it  has  recently  produced  a  splendid  crop  of  flowers,
which  laugh  and  gleam  with  joyous  exultation  at  being
united  with  the  spring.  To-day  the  princess  herself  has
gathered  its  buds,  in  defiance  of  the  bees  that  settled  on
the  flowers  ;  and  she  has  threaded  them  like  pearls  into  a
necklace,  and  she  sends  this  to  you  her  old  friend  as  a  new
present.'  When  that  dexterous  girl  had  said  this,  she  gave
me  the  garland,  and  with  it  leaves  of  the  betel,  together
with  camphor  and  the  five  fruits.1  So  I  threw  round  my
neck  the  garland,  which  my  beloved  had  made  with  her  own
hand,  and  I  enjoyed  exceeding  pleasure,  surpassing  the  joy
of  many  embraces.2  And  putting  the  betel  into  my  mouth,
I  said  to  that  dear  companion  of  hers  :  '  What  can  I  say
more  than  this :  I  have  in  my  heart  such  intense  love  for
your  companion,  that  if  I  could  sacrifice  my  life  for  her
I  should  consider  that  it  had  not  been  given  me  in  vain;
for  she  is  the  sovereign  of  my  being.'  When  I  had  said  this
I  dismissed  her,  and  I  went  to  my  teacher's  house  with
Vijayasena,  who  had  that  moment  come  in.

"  The  next  day  Vijayasena  came  with  MadiravatI  to  our
house,  to  the  great  delight 3  of  my  parents.  So  the  love  of
myself  and  MadiravatI,  though  carefully  concealed,  increased
every  day  from  being  in  one  another's  society.

14  And  one  day  a  servant  of  MadiravatI' s  said  to  me  in

1  See  Appendix  II,  p.  246  et  seq. — n.m.p.

2  Two  of  the  India  Office  MSS.  read  alinganadhikam.

3  I  read  sammadah  for  sampadah.     I  find  it  in  MSS.  Nos.  1882  and  2166.


THE  OTHER  SUITOR  5

secret :  '  Listen,  noble  sir,  and  lay  up  l  in  your  heart  what
I  am  going  to  tell  you.  Ever  since  my  darling  Madiravati
beheld  you  there  in  your  teacher's  house  she  has  no  appetite
for  her  food,  she  does  not  adorn  herself,  she  takes  no  pleasure
in  music,  she  does  not  play  with  her  parrots  and  other  pets ;
she  finds  that  fanning  with  plantain  leaves,  and  moist  anoint-
ings with  sandalwood  ointment,2  and  the  rays  of  the  moon,
though  cool  as  snow,  torture  her  with  heat ;  and  every  day
she  grows  perceptibly  thinner,  like  the  streak  of  the  moon
in  the  black  fortnight,  and  the  only  thing  that  seems  to  give
her  any  relief  is  conversation  about  you.  This  is  what  my
daughter  told  me,  who  knows  all  that  she  does,  who  attends
her  like  a  shadow,  and  never  leaves  her  side.  Moreover,  I
drew  Madiravati  herself  into  a  confidential  conversation  and
questioned  her,  and  she  confessed  to  me  that  her  affections
were  fixed  on  you.  So  now,  auspicious  sir,  if  you  wish  her  life
to  be  saved,  take  steps  to  have  her  wishes  fulfilled.'  This
nectarous  speech  of  hers  delighted  me,  and  I  said  :  c  That
altogether  depends  on  you  ;  I  am  completely  at  your  disposal.'
When  she  heard  this  she  returned  delighted,  and  I,  relying
on  her,  conceived  hopes,  and  went  home  with  my  mind  at
ease.

"  The  next  day  an  influential  young  Kshatriya  came
from  Ujjayini  and  asked  Madiravati's  father  for  her  hand.
And  her  father  promised  to  give  him  his  daughter ;  and  I
heard  that  news,  terrible  to  my  ears,  from  her  attendants.
Then  I  was  for  a  long  time  amazed,  as  if  fallen  from  heaven,
as  if  struck  with  a  thunderbolt,  as  if  possessed  by  a  demon.
But  I  recovered,  and  said  to  myself :  '  What  is  the  use  of
bewilderment  now  ?  I  will  wait  and  see  the  end.  It  is  the
self-possessed  man  that  gains  his  desire.'

"  Buoyed  up  by  such  hopes  I  passed  some  days,  and  my
beloved  one's  companions  came  to  me  and  supported  me  by
telling  me  what  she  said.  But  at  last  Madiravati  was  in-
formed that  the  auspicious  moment  had  been  fixed,  and  the
day  of  her  marriage  arrived,  celebrated  with  great  rejoicings.
So  she  was  shut  up  in  her  father's  house,  and  prevented  from

1  MSS.  Nos.  1882  and  2166  give  cha  tat  for  tatha.

2  See  Vol.  VII,  pp.  105-107.— n.m.p.


6  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

roaming  about  at  will,  and  the  processional  entry  of  the
bridegroom's  friends  drew  nigh,  heralded  by  the  sound  of
drums.

"  When  I  saw  that,  I  considered  that  my  miserable  life
had  lost  all  its  zest,  and  came  to  the  conclusion  that  death
was  to  be  preferred  to  separation.  So  I  went  outside  the  city
and  climbed  up  a  banyan-tree,  and  fastened  a  noose  to  it,  and
I  let  myself  drop  from  the  tree  suspended  by  that  noose,  and
let  go  at  the  same  time  my  chimerical  hope  of  obtaining  my
beloved.  And  a  moment  afterwards  I  found  myself,  having
recovered  the  consciousness  which  I  had  lost,  lying  in  the  lap
of  a  young  man  who  had  cut  the  noose.  And  perceiving  that
he  had  without  doubt  saved  my  life,  I  said  to  him  :  '  Noble
sir,  you  have  to-day  shown  your  compassionate  nature ;  but
I  am  tortured  by  separation  from  my  beloved  and  I  prefer
death  to  life.  The  moon  is  like  fire  to  me,  food  is  poison,
songs  pierce  my  ear  like  needles,  a  garden  is  a  prison,  a  wreath
of  flowers  is  a  series  of  envenomed  shafts,  and  anointing  with
sandalwood  ointment  and  other  unguents  *  is  a  rain  of  burning
coals.  Tell  me,  friend,  what  pleasure  can  wretched  bereaved
ones,  like  myself,  to  whom  everything  in  the  world  is  turned
upside  down,  find  in  life  ?  '

"  When  I  had  said  this,  that  friend  in  misfortune  asked
me  my  history,  and  I  told  him  the  whole  of  my  love  affair
with  Madiravati.  Then  that  good  man  said  to  me  :  '  Why,
though  wise,  are  you  bewildered  ?  What  is  the  use  of  sur-
rendering life,  for  the  sake  of  which  we  acquire  all  other
things  ?  A  propos  of  this,  hear  my  story,  which  I  now  proceed
to  relate  to  you.

"  '  There  is  in  the  bosom  of  the  Himalayas  a  country
named  Nishadha,  which  is  the  only  refuge  of  virtue,  banished
from  the  earth  by  Kali,  and  the  native  land  of  truth,  and  the
The  Stranger's  home  of  the  Krita  age.  The  inhabitants  of  that
Story  land  are  insatiable  of  learning,  but  not  of  money-

getting  ;  they  are  satisfied  with  their  own  wives,  but  with
benefiting  others  never.  I  am  the  son  of  a  Brahman  of  that
country  who  was  rich  in  virtue  and  wealth.     I  left  my  home,

1  See  Vol.  VII,  pp.  105-107.— n.m. p.

2  See  Vol.  IV,  p.  240W1.— n.m.p.


THE  LAKE  7

my  friend,  out  of  a  curiosity  which  impelled  me  to  see  other
countries,  and  wandering  about,  visiting  teachers,  I  reached
in  course  of  time  the  city  of  Sankhapura  not  far  from  here,
where  there  is  a  great  purifying  lake  of  clear  water,  sacred
to  Sankhapala,  King  of  the  Nagas,  and  called  Sankhahrada.

"  *  While  I  was  living  there  in  the  house  of  my  spiritual
preceptor  I  went  one  holy  bathing  festival  to  visit  the  lake
Sankhahrada.  Its  banks  were  crowded,  and  its  waters
troubled  on  every  side  by  people  who  had  come  from  all
countries,  like  the  sea  when  the  gods  and  Asuras  churned  it.
I  beheld  that  great  lake,  which  seemed  to  make  the  women
look  more  lovely  as  their  garlands  of  flowers  fell  from  their
loosened  braids,  while  it  gently  stroked  their  waists  with  its
waves  like  hands,  and  made  itself  slightly  yellow  l  with  the
unguents  which  its  embraces  rubbed  off  from  their  bodies.
I  then  went  to  the  south  of  the  lake,  and  beheld  a  clump  of
trees,  which  looked  like  the  body  of  Kama  being  consumed  by
the  fire  of  Siva's  eye ;  its  tdpinchas  2  did  duty  for  smoke,  its
kimsukas3  for  red  coals,  and  it  was  all  aflame  with  twining
masses  of  the  full-blown  scarlet  asoka,4

1  For  the  uses  of  turmeric   see    Note    1    at   the   end   of  this   chapter.

— N.M.P.

2  I.e.  Garcinia  xanthochymus  (Hooker,  Flora  of  British  India,  vol.  i,  p.  269).
See  also  Watt,  Economic  Products,  vol.  iii,  pp.  478,  479. — n.m.p.

3  Butea  frondosa,  found  throughout  India  and  Burma.  It  is  one  of  the
most  beautiful  trees  of  the  plains.  Its  economic  uses  are  manifold — gum,
lac,  dye,  tan,  pigment,  oil,  etc.  The  tree  is  sacred  to  Soma,  and  is  used
in  many  religious  ceremonies,  particularly  in  the  investiture  of  the  sacred
thread,  when  the  leaves  are  used  as  platters,  and  the  stem  for  the  sacred
staff.     See  Watt,  op.  cit.,  vol.  i,  p.  548  et  seq. — n.m.p.

4  Jonesia  asoca.  This  has  been  described  by  Roxburgh  as  perhaps  one
of  the  most  beautiful  trees,  when  in  full  bloom,  in  the  whole  vegetable  king-
dom. Its  flowers  are  red  and  orange,  while  its  leaves  are  abruptly  pinnate
and  shining.  In  the  Mrichchhakalika  we  have  a  description  of  a  garden  where
"  the  asoka,  with  its  rich  red  blossom,  shines  like  a  young  warrior  bathed  in
the  sanguine  shower  of  the  furious  fight."  The  tree  has  been  regarded  as  a
symbol  of  love  from  the  time  when  Sita  took  refuge  from  Ravana  in  a  grove  of
asoka  trees.  Kama  himself  took  refuge  in  one,  when  he  was  burnt,  together
with  the  tree,  by  Siva.  The  flowers,  owing  to  their  auspicious  colour  and
delicate  perfume,  are  used  largely  for  temple  decoration.  See  further
W.  Dymock,  "  Flowers  of  the  Hindu  Poets,"  Journ.  Anth.  Soc.  Bomb.,  vol.  ii,
p.  87. — N.M.P.


8  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

"  '  There  I  saw  a  certain  maiden  gathering  flowers  at  the
entrance  of  an  arbour  composed  of  the  atimukta  creeper.1
She  seemed,  with  her  playful  sidelong  glances,  to  be  threaten-
ing the  lotus  in  her  ear ;  she  kept  raising  her  twining  arm  and
displaying  half  her  bosom,  and  her  beautiful  loosened  hair,
hanging  down  her  back,  seemed  like  the  darkness  seeking
shelter  to  escape  from  her  moon-like  face.  And  I  said  to
myself :  "  Surely  the  Creator  must  have  made  this  girl,
after  he  had  got  his  hand  in  by  creating  Rambha  and  her
sister-nymphs,  but  one  can  see  that  she  is  mortal  by  the
winking  of  her  eyes."  2

"  '  The  moment  I  saw  that  gazelle-eyed  maid,  she  pierced
my  heart,  like  a  crescent-headed  javelin  of  Mara,  bewildering
the  three  worlds.  And  the  moment  she  saw  me  she  was
overcome  by  Kama,  and  her  hands  were  rendered  nerveless
and  listless  by  love,  and  she  desisted  from  her  amusement  of
gathering  flowers.  She  seemed,  with  the  flashings  of  the  ruby
in  the  midst  of  her  moving  flexible  chain,3  to  be  displaying
the  flames  of  affection,  that  had  broken  forth  from  her  heart,
in  which  they  could  not  be  contained ;  and  turning  round,  she
looked  at  me  again  and  again  with  an  eye  that  seemed  to  be
rendered  more  charming  by  the  pupil  coming  down  to  rest  in
its  corner.

"  '  While  we  stood  for  a  time  looking  at  one  another,
there  arose  there  a  great  noise  of  people  flying  in  terror.  And
there  came  that  way  an  infuriated  elephant,  driven  mad  by
the  smell  of  wild  elephants;  it  had  broken  its  chain  and
thrown  its  rider,  and  the  elephant-hook  was  swinging  to  and
fro  at  the  end  of  its  ear.  The  moment  I  saw  the  animal  I
rushed  forward,  and  taking  up  in  my  arms  my  beloved,  who
was  terrified,  and  whose  attendants  had  run  away,  I  carried
her  into  the  middle  of  the  crowd.  Then  she  began  to  recover
her  composure,  and  her  attendants  came  up  ;  but  just  at
that  moment  the  elephant,  attracted  by  the   noise   of  the

1  This  is  the  Gaertnera  racemosa,  usually  known  in  Sanskrit  as  Mddhavl.
See  Hooker,  op.  cit.,  vol.  i,  p.  418,  and  Watt,  op.  cit.,  vol.  iv,  pp.  252,  253.

N.M.P.

2  Cf.  the  Nala  episode  in  Vol.  IV,  p.  239.— n.m.p.

3  More  literally,  "  creeper-like  chain."


THE  DISEASE  OF  LOVE  9

people,  charged  in  our  direction.  The  crowd  dispersed  in
terror  at  the  monster's  approach,  and  she  disappeared  among
them,  having  been  carried  off  by  her  attendants  in  one
direction,  while  I  went  in  another.

"  '  At  last  the  alarm  caused  by  the  elephant  came  to  an
end,  and  then  I  searched  in  every  direction  for  that  slender-
waisted  maid,  but  I  could  not  find  her,  as  I  did  not  know  her
name,  her  family  or  her  dwelling-place ;  and  so  roaming  about,
with  a  void  in  my  heart,  like  a  Vidyadhara  that  has  lost  his
magic  power,  I  with  difficulty  tottered  in  to  my  teacher's
house.  There  I  remained  like  one  in  a  faint  or  asleep,  re-
membering the  joy  of  embracing  my  beloved,  and  anxious
lest  her  love  might  fail.1  And  in  course  of  time  reflection
lulled  me  in  her  lap,  as  if  affected  with  the  compassion  natural
to  noble  women,  and  showed  me  a  glimpse  of  hope,  and  soul-
paining  ignorance  hugged  my  heart,  and  an  exceedingly
severe  headache  took  possession  of  my  brain.2  In  the  mean-
while the  day  slipped  away,  and  my  self-command  with  it,
and  the  lotus-thicket  folded  its  cups  and  my  face  was  con-
tracted with  them,  and  the  couples  of  Brahmany  ducks  were
dispersed  3  with  my  hopes,  the  sun  having  gone  to  rest.

"  '  Then  the  moon,  the  chief  friend  of  love,  that  gladdens
the  eyes  of  the  happy,  rose  up,  adorning  the  face  of  the  east ;
its  rays,  though  ambrosial,  seemed  to  me  like  fiery  fingers,
and  though  it  lit  up  the  quarters  of  the  sky,  it  darkened  in
me  all  hope  of  life.  Then  one  of  my  fellow-students,  seeing
that  in  my  misery  I  had  flung  my  body  into  moonlight  as
into  a  fire,  and  was  longing  for  death,  said  to  me  :  "  Why
are  you  in  this  evil  case  ?  You  do  not  appear  to  have
any  disease ;  but  if  you  have  mental  affliction  caused  by
longing  for  wealth  or  by  love,  I  will  tell  you  the  truth  about
those  objects.  Listen  to  me.  The  wealth,  which  through
over-covetousness    men    desire    to    gain    by   cheating   their

1  I  have  followed  Brockhaus'  text,  which  is  supported  ,by  MS.  No.  3003.
The  other  two  read  tatpremabhayasotkampam.

2  The  words  denoting  "reflection,"  "headache"  and  "ignorance"  are
feminine  in  Sanskrit,  and  so  the  things  denoted  by  them  have  feminine
qualities  attributed  to  them.  Ignorance  means  perhaps  "the  having  no
news  of  the  beloved."     All  the  India  Office  MSS.  read  vriddhaya  for  vrittaya.

3  See  Vol.  VI,  p.  7lw3.— n.m.p.


10  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

neighbours,  or  by  robbing  them,  does  not  remain.  The
poison-trees  1  of  wealth,  which  are  rooted  in  wickedness  and
bring  forth  an  abundant  crop  of  wickedness,  are  soon  broken
by  the  weight  of  their  own  fruit.  All  that  is  gained  by  that
wealth  in  this  world  is  the  toil  of  acquiring  it  and  other
annoyances,  and  in  the  next  world  great  suffering  in  hell —
a  suffering  that  shall  continue  as  long  as  the  moon  and  stars
endure.  As  for  love,  that  love  which  fails  of  attaining  its
object  brings  disappointment  that  puts  an  end  to  life,  and
unlawful  love,  though  pleasing  in  the  mouth,  is  simply  the
forerunner  of  the  fire  of  hell.2  But  a  man's  mind  is  sound
owing  to  good  actions  in  a  former  life,  and  a  hero,  who  pos-
sesses self-command  and  energy,  obtains  wealth  and  the
object  of  his  desires,  not  a  spiritless  coward  like  you.  So,
my  good  fellow,  have  recourse  to  self-command,  and  strive
for  the  attainment  of  your  ends."

"  '  When  that  friend  said  this  to  me  I  returned  him  a
careless  and  random  answer.  However,  I  concealed  my  real
thoughts,  spent  the  night  in  a  calm  and  composed  manner,
and  in  course  of  time  came  here,  to  see  if  by  any  chance  she
lived  in  this  town.  When  I  arrived  here,  I  saw  you  with  your
neck  in  a  noose,  and  after  you  were  cut  down  I  heard  from
you  your  sorrow,  and  I  have  now  told  you  my  own.

"  '  So  I  have  made  efforts  to  obtain  that  fair  one  whose
name  and  dwelling-place  I  know  not,  and  have  thus  exerted
myself  to  gain  what  no  heroism  could  procure ;  but  why  do
you,  when  Madiravati  is  within  your  grasp,  play  the  faint-
heart, instead  of  manfully  striving  to  win  her  ?  Have  you
not  heard  the  legend  of  old  days  with  regard  to  Rukmini  ?
Was  she  not  carried  off  by  Vishnu  after  she  had  been  given
to  the  King  of  Chedi  ?  '

'*  While  that  friend  of  mine  was  thus  concluding  his  tale,
Madiravati  came  there  with  her  followers,  preceded  by  the

1  Here  the  reading  of  MS.  No.  1  882  is  Papamula  yatah  papaphalabharam
prasuyate  Tatkshanenaiva  bhajyante  sighram  dhanavishadrumah.  No.  S003  reads
praptamula,  tadbharenaiva  and  bhujyante.  No.  21 66  agrees  with  No.  1882  in  the
main,  but  substitutes  tana  for  dhana.  I  have  followed  No.  1882,  adopting
tadbharenaiva  from  No.  3003.

2  I  read  yas  chadharmyo  '  gradutah.  MS.  No.  1882  reads  yas  chadhamyo,
No.  3003  reads  yas  chadharmo,  and  No.  2166  reads  as  I  propose.


THE  TEMPLE  OF  KAMA  11

usual  auspicious  band  of  music,  in  order  to  worship  the  God
of  Love  in  this  temple  of  the  Mothers.  And  I  said  to  my
friend  :  c  I  knew  all  along  that  maidens  on  the  day  of  their
Madiravati  marriage  come  here  to  worship  the  God  of  Love :
visits  the  this  is  why  I  tried  to  hang  myself  on  the  banyan-

Tempie  ^ree  m  front  Gf  this  temple,  in  order  that  when

Madiravati  came  here  she  might  see  that  I  had  died  for  her
sake.'  When  that  resolute  Brahman  friend  heard  that,  he
said  :  '  Then  let  us  quickly  slip  into  this  temple  and  remain
hidden  behind  the  images  of  the  Mothers,  and  see  whether  any
expedient  will  then  present  itself  to  us  or  not.'  When  my
friend  made  this  proposal,  I  consented,  and  went  with  him
into  that  temple,  and  remained  there  concealed.

"  And  Madiravati  came  there  slowly,  escorted  by  the
auspicious  wedding  music,  and  entered  that  temple.  And  she
left  at  the  door  all  her  female  friends  and  male  attendants,
saying  to  them  :  '  I  wish  in  private  to  crave  from  the  awful
God  of  Love  a  certain  boon l  that  is  in  my  mind,  so  remain  all
of  you  outside  the  building.'  Then  she  came  in  and  addressed
the  following  prayer  to  Kamadeva  after  she  had  worshipped
him  :  '  O  god,  since  thou  art  named  "  the  mind-born,"  how
was  it  that  thou  didst  not  discern  the  beloved  that  was  in  my
mind  ?  Why  hast  thou  disappointed  and  slain  me  ?  If  thou
hast  not  been  able  to  grant  me  my  boon  in  this  birth,  at  any
rate  have  mercy  upon  me  in  my  next  birth,  O  husband  of
Rati !  Show  me  so  much  favour  as  to  ensure  that  handsome
young  Brahman's  being  my  husband  in  my  next  birth.'

"  When  the  girl  had  said  this  in  our  hearing  and  before
our  eyes,  she  made  a  noose,  by  fastening  her  upper  garment
to  a  peg,  and  put  it  round  her  neck.  And  my  friend  said  to
me  :  '  Go  and  show  yourself  to  her,  and  take  the  noose  from
her  neck.'  So  I  immediately  went  towards  her.  And  I  said
to  her  with  a  voice  faltering  from  excess  of  joy :  '  Do  not  act
rashly,  my  beloved.  See,  here  is  your  slave  in  front  of  you,
bought  by  you  with  the  risk  of  your  life,  in  whom  affection
has  been  produced  by  your  utterance  in  the  moment  of  your
grief.'  And  with  these  words  I  removed  the  noose  from  the
neck  of  that  fair  one.

1  The  word  may  mean  "  bridegroom."


12  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

"  She  immediately  looked  at  me,  and  remained  for  a
moment  divided  between  joy  and  terror,  and  then  my  friend
said  quickly  to  me  :  '  As  this  is  a  dimly  lighted  hour  owing
to  the  waning  of  the  day,  I  will  go  out  dressed  in  Madira-
vati's  garments  with  her  attendants.  And  do  you  go  out  by
the  second  door,  taking  with  you  this  bride  wrapped  up  in
our  upper  garments.  And  make  for  whatever  foreign  country
you  please,  during  the  night,  when  you  will  be  able  to  avoid
detection.  And  do  not  be  anxious  about  me.  Fate  will
bestow  on  me  prosperity.'  When  my  friend  had  said  this,  he
put  on  Madiravati's  dress  and  went  out,  and  left  that  temple
in  the  darkness,  surrounded  by  her  attendants.

"  And  I  slipped  out  by  another  door  with  Madiravati,  who
wore  a  necklace  of  priceless  jewels,  and  went  three  yojanas  in
the  night.  In  the  morning  I  took  food,  and  slowly  travelling
on,  I  reached  in  the  course  of  some  days,  with  my  beloved,  a
city  named  Achalapura.  There  a  certain  Brahman  showed
himself  my  friend,  and  gave  me  a  house,  and  there  I  quickly
married  Madiravati.

"So  I  have  been  living  there  in  happiness,  having  ob-
tained my  desire,  and  my  only  anxiety  has  been  as  to  what
could  have  become  of  my  friend.  And  in  course  of  time  I
came  here  to  bathe  in  the  Ganges,  on  this  day  which  is  the
festival  of  the  winter  solstice,1  and  lo  !  I  found  here  this  man
who  without  cause  showed  himself  my  friend.  And  full  of
embarrassment  I  folded  him  in  a  long  embrace,  and  at  last
made  him  sit  down  and  asked  him  to  tell  me  his  adventures,
and  at  that  moment  your  Highness  came  up.  Know,  son
of  the  King  of  Vatsa,  that  this  other  Brahman  at  my  side
is  my  true  friend  in  calamity,  to  whom  I  owe  my  life  and
my  wife."

When  one  Brahman  had  told  his  story  in  these  words,
Naravahanadatta  said  to  the  other  Brahman :  "I  am  much
pleased  :  now  tell  me,  how  did  you  escape  from  so  great  a
danger  ?  For  men  like  yourself,  who  disregard  their  lives
for  the  sake  of  their  friends,  are  hard  to  find."

1  Following  the  mistaken  interpretation  in  the  Sanskrit  dictionaries
Tawney  translated  "summer  solstice."  See  Note  2  at  the  end  of  this
chapter. — n.m.p.


THE  SUBSTITUTE  13

When  the  second  Brahman  heard  this  speech  of  the  son
of  the  King  of  Vatsa,  he  also  began  to  tell  his  adventures.

"When  I  went  out  that  night  from  the  temple  in
Madiravati's  dress,  her  attendants  surrounded  me  under  the
impression  that  I  was  their  mistress.  And  being  bewildered
The  Adventures™'1^  dancing,  singing  and  intoxication,  they  put
of  the  Brahman  me  in  a  palankeen  1  and  took  me  to  the  house  of
Fnend  Somadatta,  which  was  in  festal  array.     In  one

part  it  was  full  of  splendid  raiment,  in  another  of  piled-up
ornaments ;  here  you  might  see  cooked  food  provided,
there  an  altar-platform  made  ready;  one  corner  was  full  of
singing  female  slaves,  another  of  professional  mimes,  and  a
third  was  occupied  by  Brahmans  waiting  for  the  auspicious
moment.

"  Into  one  room  of  this  house  I  was  ushered  in  the  dark-
ness, veiled,  by  the  servants,  who  were  beside  themselves
with  drink  and  took  me  for  the  bride.  And  when  I  sat
down  there,  the  female  slaves  surrounded  me,  full  of  joy  at
the  wedding  festival,  busied  with  a  thousand  affairs.

"  Immediately  the  sound  of  bracelets  and  anklets  was
heard  near  the  door,  and  a  maiden  entered  the  room  sur-
rounded by  her  attendants.  Like  a  female  snake,  her  head
was  adorned  with  flashing  jewels,  and  she  had  a  white  skin-
like bodice  ;  like  a  wave  of  the  sea,  she  was  full  of  beauty,2
and  covered  with  strings  of  pearls.  She  had  a  garland  of
beautiful  flowers,  arms  shapely  as  the  stalk  of  the  creeper,
and  bright  budlike  fingers  ;  and  so  she  looked  like  the  god-
dess of  the  garden  moving  among  men.  And  she  came  and
sat  down  by  my  side,  thinking  I  was  her  beloved  confidante.
When  I  looked  at  her  I  perceived  that  that  thief  of  my  heart
had  come  to  me,  the  maiden  that  I  saw  at  the  Sankhahrada
lake,  whither  she  had  come  to  bathe,  whom  I  saved  from  the
elephant,  and  who,  almost  as  soon  as  seen,  disappeared  from
my  sight  among  the  crowd.     I  was  overpowered  with  excess

1  I  adopt  Dr  Kern's  conjecture,  aropya  sibikam.  It  is  found  in  two  out
of  three  India  Office  MSS.,  for  the  loan  of  which  I  am  indebted  to  Dr  Rost.
For  a  note  on  palankeens  see  Vol.  Ill,  p.  14-w1. — n.m.p.

2  The  word  which  means  "bodice"  means  also  "the  skin  of  a  snake,"
and  the  word  translated  "beauty"  means  also  "saltness."


14  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

of  joy,  and  I  said  to  myself :  '  Can  this  be  mere  chance,  or  is
it  a  dream,  or  sober  waking  reality  ?  '

"Immediately  those  attendants  of  Madiravati  said  to
the  visitor  :  '  Why  do  you  seem  so  disturbed  in  mind,  noble
lady  ?  '  When  she  heard  that,  she  said,  concealing  her  real
feelings  * :  '  What !  Are  you  not  aware  what  a  dear  friend
of  mine  Madiravati  is  ?  And  she,  as  soon  as  she  is  married,
will  go  off  to  her  father-in-law's  house,  and  I  shall  not  be
able  to  live  without  her ;  this  is  why  I  am  afflicted.  So  leave
the  room  quickly,  in  order  that  I  may  have  the  pleasure  of
a  little  confidential  chat  with  Madiravati.'

"  With  these  words  she  put  them  all  out,  and  fastened
the  door  herself,  and  then  sat  down,  and,  under  the  impres-
sion that  I  was  her  confidante,  began  to  speak  to  me  as
follows  :  '  Madiravati,  no  affliction  can  be  greater  than  this
affliction  of  yours,  in  that  you  are  in  love  with  one  man  and
you  are  given  by  your  father  in  marriage  to  another ;  still,  you
may  possibly  have  a  meeting  or  be  united  with  your  beloved,
whom  you  know  by  having  been  in  his  society.  But  for  me  a
hopeless  affliction  has  arisen,  and  I  will  tell  you  what  it  is  ;  for
you  are  the  only  repository  of  my  secrets,  as  I  am  of  yours.

"  'I  had  gone  to  bathe  on  a  festival  in  the  lake  named  the
lake  of  Sankhahrada,2  in  order  to  divert  my  mind,  which  was
oppressed  with  the  approaching  separation  from  you.  While
thus  engaged,  I  saw  in  the  garden  near  that  lake  a  beautiful
blooming  young  Brahman,  whose  budding  beard  seemed  like
a  swarm  of  bees  come  to  feed  on  the  lotus  of  his  face ;  he  him-
self looked  like  the  moon  come  down  from  heaven  in  the  day,
like  the  golden  binding-post  of  the  elephant  of  beauty.  I
said  to  myself :  "  Those  hermits'  daughters  who  have  not
seen  this  youth  have  only  endured  to  no  purpose  hardship
in  the  woods ;  what  fruit  have  they  of  their  asceticism  ?  "
And  even  as  I  thought  this  in  my  heart,  the  God  of  Love
pierced  it  so  completely  with  his  shafts  that  shame  and  fear
at  once  left  it  together.

1  Because  she  really  wanted  to  talk  to  Madiravati  about  her  own  love
affair.

2  I  omit  cha  after  vinodayitum,  as  it  is  not  found  in  the  three  India  Office

MSS.


THE  RECOGNITION  15

"  ■  Then,  while  I  looked  with  sidelong  looks  at  him  whose
eyes  were  fixed  on  me,  there  suddenly  came  that  way  a  furious
elephant  that  had  escaped  from  its  binding-post.  That
scared  away  my  attendants  and  terrified  myself;  and  the
young  man,  perceiving  this,  ran,  and  taking  me  up  in  his
arms,  carried  me  a  long  way  into  the  midst  of  the  crowd.
While  in  his  arms,  I  assure  you,  my  friend,  I  was  rendered
dead  to  all  beside  by  the  joy  of  his  ambrosial  touch,  and  I
knew  not  the  elephant,  nor  fear,  nor  who  I  was,  nor  where  I
was.  In  the  meanwhile  my  attendants  came  up,  and  there-
upon the  elephant  rushed  down  on  us  like  Separation  in-
carnate in  bodily  form,  and  my  servants,  alarmed  at  it,  took
me  up  and  carried  me  home ;  and  in  the  mSlee  my  beloved
disappeared,  whither  I  know  not.  Ever  since  that  time  I
do  nothing  but  think  on  him  who  saved  my  life,  but  whose
name  and  dwelling  I  know  not,  who  was  snatched  from  me
as  one  might  snatch  away  from  my  grasp  a  treasure  that  I
had  found  ;  and  I  weep  all  night  with  the  female  chakravdkas,
longing  for  sleep,  that  takes  away  all  grief,  in  order  that  I
may  behold  him  in  a  dream.

" '  In  this  hopeless  affliction  my  only  consolation,  my
friend,  is  the  sight  of  yourself,  and  that  is  now  being  far  re-
moved from  me.  Accordingly,  MadiravatI,  the  hour  of  my
death  draws  nigh,  and  that  is  why  I  am  now  enjoying  the
pleasure  of  beholding  your  face.'

"  When  she  had  uttered  this  speech,  which  was  like  a
shower  of  nectar  in  my  ears,  staining  all  the  while  the  moon
of  her  face  with  tear-drops  mixed  with  the  black  pigment  of
her  eyes,  she  lifted  up  the  veil  from  my  face,  and  beheld  and
recognised  me,  and  then  she  was  filled  with  joy,  wonder
and  fear.  Then  I  said  :  '  Fair  one,  what  is  your  cause  of
alarm  ?  Here  I  am  at  your  service.  For  Fate,  when  pro-
pitious, brings  about  unexpected  results.  I,  too,  have  endured
for  your  sake  intolerable  sorrow  :  the  fact  is,  Fate  produces
a  strange  variety  of   effects  in   this   phenomenal  universe.1

1  The  D.  text  reads  yadrisam  as  the  first  word  of  the  line  instead  of
tadrisi.  This  must  be  construed  with  the  preceding  line,  and  the  sense  would
necessarily  be  altered  as  follows :  "  Hereafter  I  will  tell  you  of  what  kind
was  the  intolerable  sorrow  I,  too,  have  endured  for  your  sake,  and  how  strange


16  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

Hereafter  I  will  tell  you  my  story  at  full  length ;  this  is  not
the  time  for  conversation.  Now  devise,  if  you  can,  my  be-
loved, some  artifice  for  escaping  from  this  place.'  When  I
said  this  to  the  girl,  she  made  the  following  proposal,  which
was  just  what  the  occasion  demanded :  *  Let  us  slip  out
quietly  from  this  house  by  the  back  door  ;  the  garden  belong-
ing to  the  house  of  my  father,  a  noble  Kshatriya,  is  just  out-
side :  let  us  pass  through  it  and  go  where  chance  may  take
us.'  When  she  had  said  this,  she  hid  her  ornaments,  and  I  left
the  house  with  her  by  the  way  which  she  recommended.

"  So  in  that  night  I  went  a  long  distance  with  her,  for
we  feared  detection,  and  in  the  morning  we  reached  together
a  great  forest.  And  as  we  were  going  along  through  that
savage  wilderness,  with  no  comfort  but  our  mutual  conversa-
tion, noon  gradually  came  on.  The  sun,  like  a  wicked  king,
afflicted  with  his  rays  the  earth,  that  furnished  no  asylum  for
travellers,  and  no  shelter.1  By  that  time  my  beloved  was
exhausted  with  fatigue  and  tortured  with  thirst,  so  I  slowly
carried  her  into  the  shade  of  a  tree,  which  it  cost  me  a  great
effort  to  reach.

"  There  I  tried  to  restore  her  by  fanning  her  with  my
garment,  and  while  I  was  thus  engaged,  a  buffalo,  that  had
escaped  with  a  wound,  came  towards  us.  And  there  followed
in  eager  pursuit  of  it  a  man  on  horseback  armed  with  a  bow,
whose  very  appearance  proclaimed  him  to  be  a  noble-minded
hero.  He  slew  that  great  buffalo  with  a  second  wound  from
a  crescent-headed  arrow,  striking  him  down  as  Indra  strikes
down  a  mountain  with  the  dint  of  a  thunderbolt.  When  he
saw  us  he  advanced  towards  us,  and  said  kindly  to  me  :
6  Who  are  you,  my  good  sir  ;  and  who  is  this  lady  ;  and  why
have  you  come  here  ?  '

"  Then  I  showed  my  Brahmanical  thread,  and  gave  him
an  answer  which  was  half  truth  and  half  falsehood  :  'lam
a  Brahman ;  this  is  my  wife.   Business  led  us  to  a  foreign  land,

a  variety  of  effects  in  this  phenomenal  world  Fate  produces."  See  Speyer,
op.  cit.,  pp.  141,  142. — n.m.p.

1  The  whole  passage  is  an  elaborate  pun  resting  upon  the  fact  that  the
same  word  means  "tribute"  and  "ray"  in  Sanskrit.  Akranda  sometimes
means  "protector."


i


THE  RETURN  TO  KAUSAMBl  17

and  on  the  way  our  caravan  was  destroyed  by  bandits,  and
we,  separated  from  it,  lost  our  way,  and  so  came  to  enter
this  forest ;  here  we  have  met  you,  and  all  our  fears  are  at
an  end.'  When  I  said  this,  he  was  moved  by  compassion
for  my  Brahmanical  character,  and  said  :  '  I  am  a  chief  of
the  foresters  come  here  to  hunt,  and  you  wayworn  travellers
have  arrived  here  as  my  guests  ;  so  now  come  to  my  house,
which  is  at  no  great  distance,  to  rest.'

"  When  he  had  said  this,  he  made  my  wearied  darling
get  up  on  his  horse,  and  himself  walked,  and  so  he  led  us
to  his  dwelling.  There  he  provided  us  with  food  and  other
requisites,  as  if  he  had  been  a  relation.1  Even  in  bad  dis-
tricts some  few  noble-hearted  men  spring  up  here  and  there.
Then  he  gave  me  attendants,  who  enabled  me  to  get  out  of
that  wood,  and  I  reached  a  royal  grant  to  Brahmans,  where
I  married  that  lady.  Then  I  wandered  about  from  country
to  country,  and  meeting  with  a  caravan  I  have  to-day  come
here  with  her  to  bathe  in  the  water  of  the  Ganges.  And  here
I  have  found  this  man  whom  I  selected  for  myself  as  a  friend,
and  I  have  seen  your  Highness.     This,  Prince,  is  my  story."

When  he  had  said  this  he  ceased,  and  the  Prince  of  Vatsa
loudly  praised  that  Brahman  who  had  obtained  the  prize
he  desired,  the  fitting  reward  of  his  genuine  goodness ;  and
in  the  meanwhile  the  prince's  ministers,  Gomukha  and  the
others,  who  had  long  been  roaming  about  looking  for  him,
came  up  and  found  him.  And  they  fell  at  the  feet  of  Nara-
vahanadatta,  and  tears  of  joy  poured  down  their  faces,
while  he  welcomed  them  all  with  due  and  fitting  respect.
Then  the  prince,  accompanied  by  Lalitalochana,2  returned
with  those  ministers  to  his  city,  taking  with  him  those  two
young  Brahmans,  whom  he  valued  on  account  of  the  tact  and
skill  they  had  displayed  in  attaining  worthy  objects.

1  I  read  bandhavavat  so.  The  late  Professor  Horace  Hay  man  Wilson  ob-
serves of  this  story :  "  The  incidents  are  curious  and  diverting,  but  they  are
chiefly  remarkable  from  being  the  same  as  the  contrivances  by  which  Madhava
and  Makaranda  obtain  their  mistresses  in  the  drama  entitled  MalaU  and  Ma-
dhava or  The  Stolen  Marriage." For  the  plot  of  Bhavabhuti's  Malatlmadhava

{circa  a.d.  700)  see  Keith,  Sanskrit  Drama,  pp.  187,  188,  and  also  pp.  192,  193.

— N.M.P.

2  See  Vol.  VII,  p.  195.— n.m.p.

VOL.    VIII.  B


18  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


NOTE  1.— THE  USE  OF  TURMERIC

Turmeric  (Sanskrit :  kunkuma)  has  been  used  in  India  as  a  substitute  for
saffron  and  other  yellow  dyes  from  a  very  early  period.  In  the  first  place  the
very  colour,  resembling  sunlight,  was  auspicious,  and  therefore  considered
to  possess  protective  powers.  Consequently  turmeric,  as  well  as  the  colour
red,  figures  largely  in  marriage  ceremonies,  and,  in  fact,  in  all  important
functions  occurring  in  the  life  of  a  Hindu.

It  would  not  be  an  exaggeration  to  say  that  the  general  auspiciousness
of  reds  and  yellows  is  a  direct  outcome  of  sun-worship  in  one  form  or  another
(cf.  our  expression,  a  "red-letter"  day).  The  idea  of  festivity  connected
with  the  colour  yellow,  through  its  association  with  the  sun,  has  given  it
an  erotic  significance.  This  is  another  reason  why  it  is  the  chief  colour  at
weddings,  and  in  any  relations  between  the  sexes.  Dymock  gives  numerous
examples  of  this,  both  from  Sanskrit  and  classical  European  literature  ("  On
the  Use  of  Turmeric  in  Hindoo  Ceremonial,"  Journ.  Anth.  Soc.  Bombay,  vol.  ii,
1892,  pp.  441-448).  Apart  from  the  custom  of  smearing  the  body  with
turmeric  at  weddings,  garments  dyed,  or  only  marked  at  the  corners,  with
the  colour  became  lucky.  It  is  also  used  in  cases  of  expectant  pregnancy.
Thus  Mrs  Stevenson  tells  us  in  Rites  of  the  Twice-Born,  p.  113,  that  the
expectant  mother  sits  on  a  low  stool  in  the  centre  of  a  red-besmeared  square
of  ground.  No  men  are  allowed  to  be  present,  and  all  the  ladies  sit  round
her  and  sing  songs,  whilst  the  husband's  sister  smears  turmeric  and  rice  all
over  the  young  wife's  forehead.

It  would  be  superfluous,  if  not  impossible,  to  name  all  the  occasions  On
which  turmeric  is  used.  Owing  to  its  cheapness  and  its  auspiciousness  it  is  in
evidence  wherever  good  luck  is  required,  and  this  applies  to  worship  as  well
as  to  all  important  personal  happenings  in  everyday  life.

The  introduction  of  aniline  dyes,  by  which  glaring  colours  can  be  easily
and  cheaply  obtained,  has  superseded  the  use  of  turmeric  to  some  extent,  but
so  many  and  varied  are  the  uses  of  turmeric — from  medicine  to  curry-making
— that  it  still  plays  a  very  important  part  in  the  life  and  ritual  of  the  Hindu.

For  numerous  references  see  Watt,  Economic  Products,  vol.  ii,  p.  659 ;
also  H.  N.  Ridley,  Spices,  pp.  422-444.  The  latest  article  I  have  seen  on  the
subject  is  "  The  Use  of  Saffron  and  Turmeric  in  Hindu  Marriage  Ceremonies,"
K.  R.  Kirtikar,  Journ.  Anth.  Soc.  Bombay,  vol.  ix,  1913,  pp.  439-454. — n.m.p.


THE  WINTER  SOLSTICE  19


NOTE  2.— THE  FESTIVAL  OF  THE  WINTER  SOLSTICE

As  already  intimated  (p.  12),  Tawney  has  translated  the  text  wrongly.
The  word  in  question  is  'uttarayane,  the  locative  case,  which  simply  means
"at"  or  "in  the  northward  journey" — i.e.  the  ay  ana,  or  "course"  beginning
at  the  winter  solstice.  There  is  no  word  for  "  festival  "  at  all,  but  since  bathing
in  the  sacred  rivers  takes  place  immediately  after  the  solstice  during  the
festivity  known  as  the  Makara-sahkranti,  Tawney  has  doubtless  considered
the  addition  necessary.  He  was  probably  justified;  but  the  text  merely  says
he  was  bathing  "  at  the  winter  solstice."  How  Roth,  Monier  Williams,  etc.,
came  to  call  it  the  "summer  solstice"  I  cannot  imagine.  Full  details  of  the
sankrantis  will  be  found  in  Sewell  and  Dikshit,  Indian  Calendar,  p.  9-  The
following  is  a  brief  account  of  the  festival  from  the  various  sources  shown.

Sankranti  is  the  name  given  to  the  day  on  which  the  sun  passes  into
a  fresh  sign  of  the  zodiac,  and  the  Makara  corresponds  to  Capricornus.  In
ancient  times  a  twelve  nights'  celebration  was  held  immediately  after  the
winter  solstice.  The  period  was  regarded  as  sacred,  for  it  was  then  that
the  three  Ribhus  (Ribhukshan,  Vaja  and  Vibhvan),  who  by  their  extreme
skill  rose  to  be  the  personified  seasonal  deities,  slept.  In  modern  times
the  Makara-sankranti  forms  the  chief  seasonal  festival,  corresponding  to  our
New  Year's  Day.  It  is  the  time  for  the  great  pilgrimage  to  Allahabad  and
the  annual  bath  of  purification  in  the  sacred  rivers  of  the  North.  In  the
South  the  corresponding  festival  is  called  Pongol,  at  which  the  boiling  of  the
new  rice  is  watched  and  regarded  as  an  augury  for  the  New  Year.  In  an
interesting  article  (Hastings'  Ency.  Rel.  Eth.,  vol.  v,  pp.  868-869)  E.  Wr.
Hopkins  describes  the  festival :  "  Cattle  are  led  about  decorated  with  garlands
and  treated  with  veneration.  Presents  are  given  to  friends  at  this  time,
and  general  rejoicing  takes  place.  The  festival  lasts  for  three  days,  and  is
officially  a  celebration  of  the  Vedic  gods  Indra  and  Agni,  with  the  addition
of  the  (later)  god,  Ganesa."

Speaking  of  the  Uttarayana,  as  observed  in  Northern  India,  Crooke  states
(Religion  fy  Folklore  of  Northern  India,  1926,  pp.  31-32)  that  it  is  considered
a  lucky  period  for  all  enterprises ;  while  on  the  other  hand,  the  Dakshindyana,
when  the  sun  moves  southwards,  is  the  unlucky  season.

"In  the  Lower  Himalaya  the  January  Sankranti  is  observed  by  baking
little  images  of  birds  made  of  flour  in  butter  and  oil,  which  are  hung  on  the
children's  necks  and  given  next  day,  the  winter  solstice,  probably  with  the
intention  of  passing  away  evil,  to  the  crows  and  other  birds."

Crooke  refers  us  to  Atkinson,  Himalayan  Districts  of  the  North-Western
Provinces  oj  India,  vol.  ii,  p.  869  et  seq.

Under  the  heading  of"  Joshi,  Jyotishi,  Bhadri,  Parsai,"  "  the  village  priests
and  astrologers,"  Russell  (Tribes  and  Castes  of  the  Central  Provinces,  vol.  iii,
p.  26l)  discusses  the  "Sankrants."  He  says  that  "the  Til  Sankrant,  or  entry
of  the  sun  into  Makara  or  Capricorn,  which  falls  about  the  15th  January,  is
a  special  festival,  because  it  marks  approximately  the  commencement  of  the


20  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

sun's  northern  progress  and  the  lengthening  of  the  days,  as  Christmas  roughly
does  with  us.  On  this  day  every  Hindu  who  is  able  bathes  in  a  sacred  river
at  the  hour  indicated  by  the  Joshis  of  the  sun's  entrance  into  the  sign.
Presents  of  til  or  sesame  are  given  to  the  Joshi,  owing  to  which  the  day  is
called  Til  Sankrant.     People  also  sometimes  give  presents  to  each  other."

Makara  is  usually  taken  to  mean  a  sea-monster,  often  a  crocodile.  We
have  seen,  however  (Vol.  V,  p.  48ft1),  that  in  the  Panchatantra  it  is  translated
as  "crab."  This  could  not  be  so  in  the  signs  of  the  zodiac,  as  Karkati
corresponds  to  Cancer. — n.m.p.


BOOK  XIV:  PANGHA

CHAPTER  CV

INVOCATION

MAY  Siva,  the  granter  of  boons,  who,  when  pleased,
bestowed  on  Uma  half  his  own  body,  grant  you  your
desire !
May  the  vermilion-stained  trunk  which  Ganesa  at  night
throws  up  in  the  dance,  and  so  seems  to  furnish  the  moon-
umbrella  with  a  coral  handle,  protect  you  !


[M]  Then  Naravahanadatta,  son  of  the  King  of  Vatsa,
possessing  as  his  wives  those  various  ladies,  the  most  beauti-
ful in  the  three  worlds,  and  Madanamanchuka  as  his  head-
queen,  dwelt  with  Gomukha  and  his  other  ministers  in
Kausambi,  having  his  every  want  supplied  by  his  father's
magnificent  resources.  His  days  passed  pleasantly  in  dancing,
singing  and  conversation,  and  were  enlivened  by  the  exquisite
enjoyment  of  the  society  of  the  ladies  whom  he  loved.

Then  it  happened  one  day  that  he  could  not  find  his
principal  charmer  Madanamanchuka  anywhere  in  the  female
apartments,  nor  could  her  attendants  find  her  either.1  When
he  could  not  see  his  beloved,  he  became  pale  from  grief,  as
the  moon  loses  its  beauty  in  the  morning,  by  being  separated
from  the  night.  And  he  was  distracted  by  an  innumerable
host  of  doubts,  saying  to  himself :  "I  wonder  whether  my
beloved  has  hidden  herself  somewhere  to  ascertain  my  senti-
ments towards  her ;  or  is  she  indignant  with  me  for  some
trifling  fault  or  other ;  or  is  she  concealed  by  magic,  or  has
she  been  carried  off  by  someone  ?  "  When  he  had  searched
for  her,  and  could  not  find  her  anywhere,  he  was  consumed

1  I  adopt  the  reading  of  MSS.    Nos.   1882  and   2166,  parijanah.     This

seems  to  make  better  sense. See  Vol.  VII,  p.  195. — n.m.p.

21


22  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

by  violent  grief  for  his  separation  from  her,  which  raged  in
his  bosom  like  a  forest  conflagration.  His  father,  the  King
of  Vatsa,  who  came  to  visit  him  as  soon  as  he  knew  the
state  of  affairs,  and  his  mother,  ministers  and  servants  were
all  beside  themselves.  The  pearl  necklace,  sandalwood  oint-
ment, the  rays  of  the  moon,  lotus  fibres  and  lotus  leaves  did
not  alleviate  his  torture,  but  rather  increased  it.  As  for
Kalingasena,  when  she  was  suddenly  deprived  of  that  daughter
she  was  confounded  like  a  Vidyadhari  who  has  lost  her  magic
power.

Then  an  aged  female  guardian  of  the  women's  apartments
said  in  the  presence  of  Naravahanadatta,  so  that  all  there
heard :  "  Long  ago,  that  young  Vidyadhara,  named  Mana-
savega,  having  beheld  Madanamanchuka,  when  she  was  a
maiden,  on  the  top  of  the  palace,  suddenly  descended  from
heaven,  and  approaching  Kalingasena,  told  her  his  name,  and
asked  her  to  give  him  her  daughter.  When  Kalingasena
refused,  he  went  as  he  came.  But  why  should  he  not  have
now  come  secretly  and  carried  her  off  by  his  magic  power?
It  is  of  course  true  that  heavenly  beings  do  not  carry  off  the
wives  of  others ;  on  the  other  hand,  who  that  is  blinded  by
passion  troubles  himself  about  the  right  or  wrong  of  an
action  ? "  When  Naravahanadatta  heard  this,  his  heart
was  overwhelmed  with  anger,  impatience  and  the  sorrow  of
bereavement,  and  became  like  a  lotus  in  the  waves.

Then  Human  vat  said  :  "  This  palace  is  guarded  all
round,  and  it  is  impossible  to  enter  or  go  out  from  it,  except
through  the  air.  Moreover,  by  the  favour  of  Siva  no  mis-
fortune can  befall  her ;  so  we  may  be  certain  that  she  has
hidden  herself  somewhere,  because  her  affection  has  been
wounded.     Listen  to  a  story  which  will  make  this  clear.

164.  Story  of  Sdvitri  and  Angiras

Once  upon  a  time  a  hermit,  named  Angiras,  asked
Ashtavakra  for  the  hand  of  his  daughter  Savitri.  But  Ash-
tavakra  would  not  give  him  his  daughter  Savitri,  though  he
was  an  excellent  match,  because  she  was  already  betrothed
to  someone  else.     Then  Angiras  married  Asruta,  his  brother's


THE  MISTAKEN  MEANING  23

daughter,  and  lived  a  long  time  with  her  as  his  wife  in  great
happiness  ;  but  she  was  well  aware  that  he  had  previously
been  in  love  with  Savitri.

One  day  that  hermit  Angiras  remained  muttering  for  a
long  time  in  an  inaudible  voice.  Then  his  wife  Asruta  asked
him  again  and  again  lovingly  :  "  Tell  me,  my  husband,  why
do  you  remain  so  long  fixed  in  thought  ?  "  He  said  :  "  My
dear,  I  am  meditating  on  the  Savitri  "  ;  and  she,  thinking
that  he  meant  Savitri,  the  hermit's  daughter,  was  vexed  in
soul.  She  said  to  herself,  "  He  is  miserable,"  so  she  went
off  to  the  forest,  determined  to  abandon  the  body.  And  after
she  had  prayed  that  good  fortune  might  attend  her  husband,
she  fastened  a  rope  round  her  neck.  And  at  that  moment
Gayatri  appeared,  with  rosary  of  Aksha  beads  and  ascetic's
pitcher,  and  said  to  her  :  "  Daughter,  do  not  act  rashly  !
Your  husband  was  not  thinking  of  any  woman,  he  was
meditating  on  me,  the  holy  Savitri  "  ;  and  with  these  words
she  freed  her  neck  from  the  noose.  And  the  goddess,  merciful
to  her  votaries,  having  thus  consoled  her,  disappeared.  Then
her  husband  Angiras,  searching  for  her,  found  her  in  the
wood,  and  brought  her  home.  So  you  see  that  women  in
this  world  cannot  endure  the  wounding  of  their  affections.


[M]  "  So  you  may  be  certain  that  this  wife  of  the  prince
is  angry  on  account  of  some  trifling  injury,  and  is  hidden
somewhere  in  this  place ;  for  she  is  under  the  protection  of
Siva,  and  we  must  again  search  for  her."

When  Rumanvat  said  this,  the  sovereign  of  Vatsa  said  :
"  It  must  be  so ;  for  no  misfortune  can  befall  her,  inasmuch
as  a  heavenly  voice  said,  'This  Madanamanchuka  is  an
incarnation  of  Rati,  appointed  by  the  god  to  be  the  wife  of
Naravahanadatta,  who  is  an  emanation  of  the  God  of  Love,
and  he  shall  rule  the  Vidyadharas  with  her  as  his  consort  for
a  kalpa  of  the  gods,'  and  this  utterance  cannot  be  falsified
by  the  event.     So  let  her  be  carefully  looked  for."

When  the  king  himself  said  this,  Naravahanadatta  went
out,  though  he  was  in  such  a  miserable  state.


24  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

But,  however  much  he  searched  for  her,  he  could  not  find
her,  so  he  wandered  about  in  various  parts  of  the  grounds,
like  one  distracted.  When  he  went  to  her  dwelling,  the  rooms
with  closed  doors  seemed  as  if  they  had  shut  their  eyes  in
despair  at  beholding  his  grief;  and  when  he  went  about  in
the  groves  asking  for  her,  the  trees,  agitating  their  shoots  like
hands,  seemed  to  say  :  "  We  have  not  seen  your  beloved."
When  he  searched  in  the  gardens,  the  sdrasa  birds,  flying  up
to  the  sky,  seemed  to  tell  him  that  she  had  not  gone  that
way.  And  his  ministers  Marubhuti,  Harisikha,  Gomukha  and
Vasantaka  wandered  about  in  every  direction  to  find  her.

In  the  meanwhile  an  unmarried  Vidyadhari,  of  the  name
of  Vegavati,  having  beheld  Madanamanchuka  in  her  splendid
and  glorious  beauty,  deliberately  took  her  shape,  and  came
and  stood  alone  in  the  garden  under  an  asoka  tree.  Maru-
bhuti saw  her,  as  he  was  roaming  about  in  search  of  the  queen,
and  she  seemed  at  once  to  extract  the  dart  from  his  pierced
heart.

And  in  his  joy  he  went  to  Naravahanadatta,  and  said  to
him  :  "  Cheer  up,  I  have  seen  your  beloved  in  the  garden."
When  he  said  this,  Naravahanadatta  was  delighted,  and
immediately  went  with  him  to  that  garden.

Then,  exhausted  with  long  bereavement,  he  beheld  that
semblance  of  Madanamanchuka  with  feelings  like  those  with
which  a  thirsty  traveller  beholds  a  stream  of  water.  And
the  moment  he  beheld  her,  the  much-afflicted  prince  longed
to  embrace  her,  but  she,  being  cunning,  and  wishing  to  be
married  by  him,  said  to  him  :  "  Do  not  touch  me  now ;  first
hear  what  I  have  to  say.  Before  I  married  you,  I  prayed  to
the  Yakshas  to  enable  me  to  obtain  you,  and  said  :  '  On  my
wedding-day  I  will  make  offerings  to  you  with  my  own  hand.'
But,  my  beloved,  when  my  wedding-day  came,  I  forgot  all
about  them.  That  enraged  the  Yakshas,  and  so  they  carried
me  off  from  this  place.  And  they  have  just  brought  me  here,
and  let  me  go,  saying  :  ■  Go  and  perform  over  again  that
ceremony  of  marriage,  and  make  oblations  to  us,  and  then
repair  to  your  husband  ;  otherwise  you  will  not  prosper.'  So
marry  me  quickly,  in  order  that  I  may  offer  the  Yakshas  the
worship  they  demand,  and  then  fulfil  all  your  desire."


THE  DISCOVERY  25

When  Naravahanadatta  heard  that,  he  summoned  the
priest  Santisoma  and  at  once  made  the  necessary  preparations,
and  immediately  married  the  supposed  Madanamanchuka,
who  was  no  other  than  the  Vidyadhari  Vegavati,  having  been
for  a  short  time  quite  cast  down  by  his  separation  from  the
real  one.  Then  a  great  feast  took  place  there,  full  of  the
clang  of  cymbals,  delighting  the  King  of  Vatsa,  gladdening
the  queens,  and  causing  joy  to  Kalingasena.  And  the  sup-
posed Madanamanchuka,  who  was  really  the  Vidyadhari
Vegavati,  made  with  her  own  hand  an  offering  of  wine,  flesh
and  other  dainties  to  the  Yakshas.  Then  Naravahanadatta,
remaining  with  her  in  her  chamber,  drank  wine  with  her  in
his  exultation,  though  he  was  sufficiently  intoxicated  with
her  voice.  And  then  he  retired  to  rest  with  her  who  had  thus
changed  her  shape,  as  the  sun  with  the  shadow.  And  she
said  to  him  in  secret :  "  My  beloved,  now  that  we  have  retired
to  rest,  you  must  take  care  not  to  unveil  my  face  suddenly
and  look  at  me  while  asleep." *  When  the  prince  heard
this,  he  was  filled  with  curiosity  to  think  what  this  might  be,
and  the  next  day  he  uncovered  her  face  while  she  was  asleep
and  looked  at  it,  and  lo  !  it  was  not  Madanamanchuka,  but
someone  else,  who,  when  asleep,  had  lost  the  power  of  disguis-
ing her  appearance  by  magic.2  Then  she  woke  up  while  he
was  sitting  by  her  awake.  And  he  said  to  her  :  "  Tell  me,
who  are  you  ?  "  And  the  discreet  Vidyadhari,  seeing  him
sitting  up  awake,  and  being  conscious  that  she  was  in  her  own
shape  and  that  her  secret  was  discovered,  began  to  tell  her
tale,  saying  :  "  Listen,  my  beloved,  I  will  now  tell  you  the
whole  story.

"  There  is  in  the  city  of  the  Vidyadharas  a  mountain  of
the  name  of  Ashadhapura.  There  dwells  a  chief  of  the  Vidya-
dharas, named  Manasavega,  a  prince  puffed  up  with  the  might
of  his  arm,  the  son  of  King  Vegavat.  I  am  his  younger
sister,  and  my  name  is  Vegavati.  And  that  brother  of  mine
hated  me  so  much  that  he  was  not  willing  to  bestow  on  me
the  sciences.     Then  I  obtained  them,  though  with  difficulty,

1  This  bears  a  slight  resemblance  to  the  story  of  Psyche. See  Vol.  II,

p.  252  et  seq.,  for  the  nuptial  taboo. — n.m.p.

2  Cf.  Vol.  Ill,  p.  123.— N.M.P.


26  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

from  my  father,  who  had  retired  to  a  wood  of  ascetics,  and,
thanks  to  his  favour,  I  possess  them  of  greater  power  than
any  other  of  our  race.  I  myself  saw  the  wretched  Madana-
What  happened  manchuka,  in  the  palace  of  Mount  Ashadha,  in  a
to  Madana-  garden,  surrounded  by  sentinels.  I  mean  your
manchuka  beloved,  whom  my  brother  has  carried  off  by
magic,  as  Ravana  carried  off  the  afflicted  Sita,  the  wife  of
Ramabhadra.  And  as  the  virtuous  lady  repels  his  caresses,
he  cannot  subdue  her  to  his  will,  for  a  curse  has  been  laid
upon  him  that  will  bring  about  his  death  if  he  uses  violence
to  any  woman.

"  So  that  wicked  brother  of  mine  made  use  of  me  to  try
to  talk  her  over;  and  I  went  to  that  lady,  who  could  do
nothing  but  talk  of  you.  And  in  my  conversation  with  her
that  virtuous  lady  mentioned  your  name,1  which  was  like  a
command  from  the  God  of  Love,  and  thus  my  mind  then
became  fixed  upon  you  alone.  And  then  I  remembered  an
announcement  which  Parvati  made  to  me  in  a  dream,  much
to  the  following  effect :  '  You  shall  be  married  to  that  man,
the  mere  hearing  of  whose  name  overpowers  you  with  love.'
When  I  had  called  this  to  mind,  I  cheered  up  Madanaman-
chuka,  and  came  here  in  her  form,  and  married  myself  to  you
by  an  artifice.  So  come,  my  beloved,  I  am  filled  with  such
compassion  for  your  wife  Madanamanchuka  that  I  will  take
you  where  she  is ;  for  I  am  the  devoted  servant  of  my  rival,
even  as  I  am  of  you,  because  you  love  her.  For  I  am  so
completely  enslaved  by  love  for  you  that  I  am  rendered  quite
unselfish  by  it."

When  Vegavati  had  said  this,  she  took  Naravahanadatta,
and  by  the  might  of  her  science  flew  up  with  him  into  the
sky  during  the  night.  And  next  morning,  while  she  was
slowly  travelling  through  the  heaven,  the  attendants  of  the
husband  and  wife  were  bewildered  by  their  disappearance.

And  when  the  King  of  Vatsa  came  to  hear  of  it,  he
was  immediately,  as  it  were,  struck  by  a  thunderbolt,  and

1  I  read  with  MSS.  Nos.  1882  and  2166  tvadnamnyudlrite  ;  No.  3003  reads
tvattrasyudirite.  This  seems  to  point  to  the  same  reading,  which  agrees  with
si.  74a.  It  is  also  found  in  a  MS.  lent  me  by  the  Principal  of  the  Sanskrit
College.


THE  MAGICAL  COMBAT  27

so  were  Vasavadatta,  Padmavati  and  the  rest.  And  the
citizens,  and  the  king's  ministers  Yaugandharayana  and  the
others,  together  with  their  sons  Marubhuti  and  the  rest,  were
altogether  distracted.

Then  the  hermit  Narada,  surrounded  with  a  circle  of
light,  descended  there  from  heaven,  like  a  second  sun.  The
King  of  Vatsa  offered  him  the  arghya,  and  the  hermit  said  to
him  :  "  Your  son  has  been  carried  off  by  a  Vidyadhari  to  her
country,  but  he  will  soon  return ;  and  I  have  been  sent  by
Siva  to  cheer  you  up."  And  after  this  prelude  he  went  on  to
tell  the  king  of  Vegavatl's  proceedings  exactly  as  they  took
place.  Then  the  king  recovered  his  spirits  and  the  hermit
disappeared.

In  the  meanwhile  Vegavati  carried  Naravahanadatta
through  the  air  to  the  mountain  Ashadhapura.  And  Mana-
savega,  hearing  of  it,  hastened  there  to  kill  them  both.  Then
Vegavati  engaged  with  her  brother  in  a  struggle  which  was
remarkable  for  a  great  display  of  magic  power  ;  for  a  woman
values  her  lover  as  her  life,  and  much  more  than  her  own
relations.  Then  she  assumed  by  the  might  of  her  magic  a
terrible  form  of  Bhairava,  and  at  once  striking  Manasavega
senseless,  she  placed  him  on  the  mountain  of  Agni.  And  she
took  Naravahanadatta,  whom  at  the  beginning  of  the  con-
test she  had  deposited  in  the  care  of  one  of  her  sciences,1  and
placed  him  in  a  dry  well  in  the  city  of  the  Gandharvas,  to  keep
him.  And  when  he  was  there,  she  said  to  him  :  "  Remain
here  a  little  while,  my  husband  ;  good  fortune  will  befall  you
here.  And  do  not  despond  in  your  heart,  O  man  appointed
to  a  happy  lot !  for  the  sovereignty  over  all  the  Vidyadharas
is  to  be  yours.  But  I  must  leave  this  for  the  present,  to
appease  my  sciences,  impaired  by  my  resistance  to  my  elder
brother.  However,  I  will  return  to  you  soon."  When  the
Vidyadhari  Vegavati  had  said  this,  she  departed  somewhere
or  other.


1  Two  of  the  India  Office  MSS.  read  haste.     So  also  the  Sanskrit  College
MS.


CHAPTER  CVI

THEN  a  certain  Gandharva,  of  the  name  of  Vina-
[M]  datta,  saw  Naravahanadatta  in  that  well.
Truly,  if  there  were  not  great  souls  in  this  world,
born  for  the  benefit  of  others,  relieving  distress  as  wayside
trees  heat,  the  world  would  be  a  withered  forest.  Thus  the
good  Gandharva,  as  soon  as  he  saw  Naravahanadatta,  asked
him  his  name  and  lineage,  and  supporting  him  with  his  hand,
drew  him  out  of  that  well,  and  said  to  him1 :  "If  you  are
a  man  and  not  a  god,  how  did  you  reach  this  city  of  the
Gandharvas  inaccessible  to  man  ?     Tell  me  !  "

Then  Naravahanadatta  answered  him  :  "A  Vidyadhari
brought  me  here,  and  threw  me  into  the  well  by  her  power."
Then  the  good  Gandharva  Vinadatta,  seeing  that  he  had  the
veritable  signs  of  an  emperor,  took  him  to  his  own  dwelling,
and  waited  upon  him  with  all  the  luxuries  at  his  command.
And  the  next  day  Naravahanadatta,  perceiving  that  the
inhabitants  of  the  city  carried  lyres  in  their  hands,  said  to
his  host  :  "  Why  have  all  these  people,  even  down  to  the
children,  got  lyres  in  their  hands  ?  "

Then  Vinadatta  gave  him  this  answer  :  "  Sagaradatta,
the  King  of  the  Gandharvas,  who  lives  here,  has  a  daughter
named  Gandharvadatta,  who  eclipses  the  nymphs  of  heaven  :
it  seems  as  if  the  Creator  had  blended  nectar,  the  moon,  and
sandalwood  and  other  choice  things,  in  order  to  compose
her  body,  as  a  specimen  of  his  skill  in  making  all  that  is
fair.  She  is  always  singing  to  the  lyre  the  hymn  of  Vishnu,
which  the  god  himself  bestowed  on  her,  and  so  she  has  at-
tained supreme  skill  in  music.2     And  the  princess  has  firmly

1  I  follow  Dr  Kern  in  deleting  the  inverted  commas,  and  the  comma
after  drisktvd.

2  I  read  satatam  sd  cha  gdyantl  vindydm  Saurina  svayam  Dattam  svagitakani
kdsktdm  gdndharve  paramam  gatd.  In  this  all  the  three  India  Office  MSS.
substantially  agree.  No.  1882  writes  gdyantl  with  both  short  and  long  i  and
gandharva,  No.  2166  has  kdshthdm  with  short  a,  and  all  three  have  a  short  a  in

28


THE  FAIR  GANDHARVADATTA  29

resolved  that  whoever  is  so  well  skilled  in  music  that  he  can
play  on  the  lyre,  and  sing  perfectly  in  three  scales  a  song  in
praise  of  Vishnu,  shall  be  her  husband.1  The  consequence
is,  that  all  here  are  trying  to  learn  to  play  the  lyre,  but  they
have  not  acquired  the  amount  of  skill  demanded  by  the
princess."

Prince  Naravahanadatta  was  delighted  at  hearing  this
speech  from  the  mouth  of  Vinadatta,  and  he  said  to  him  :
"  All  the  accomplishments  have  chosen  me  for  a  husband,
and  I  know  all  the  music  that  there  is  in  the  three  worlds."
When  he  said  this,  his  friend  Vinadatta  conducted  him  into
the  presence  of  King  Sagaradatta,  and  said  there  :  "  Here
is  Naravahanadatta,  the  son  of  the  King  of  Vatsa,  who  has
fallen  into  your  city  from  the  hand  of  a  Vidyadhari.  He
is  an  adept  in  music,  and  he  knows  the  song  in  praise  of
Vishnu,  in  which  the  Princess  Gandharvadatta  takes  so  much
pleasure."

When  the  king  heard  this,  he  said  :  "  It  is  true.  I  heard
so  much  before  from  the  Gandharvas ;  so  I  must  to-day
receive  him  with  respect  here.  And  he  is  an  emanation
of  a  divinity ;  he  is  not  out  of  place  in  the  abode  of  gods  ;
otherwise,  if  he  were  a  man,  how  could  he  have  come  here
by  associating  with  a  Vidyadhari  ?  So  summon  Gandharva-
datta quickly  and  let  us  test  him."  When  the  king  said  this,
the  chamberlains  went  to  fetch  her.

And  the  fair  one  came  there,  all  glorious  with  flower-
ornaments,  agitating  with  her  beauty,  as  if  with  a  wind,  the
creepers  of  spring.  She  sat  down  at  her  father's  side,  and
the  servants  told  her  what  had  taken  place,  and  immediately,
at  his  command,  she  sang  a  song  to  the  lyre.  When  she  was
joining  the  notes  to  the  quarter- tones,  like  Sarasvati,  the
wife  of  Brahma,  Naravahanadatta  was  astonished  at  her
singing  and  her  beauty.  Then  he  said  to  her  :  "  Princess,
your  lyre  does  not  seem  to  me  to  sound  well.     I  think  there

Gandharve.  It  is  curious  to  see  how  nearly  this  agrees  with  Dr  Kern's  con-
jecture. I  find  that  the  MS.  lent  me  by  the  Principal  of  the  Sanskrit  College
agrees  with  the  reading  I  propose,  except  that  it  gives  gandharva.

1  Cf.  Kathakoqa  (Tawney,  p.  65),  where  a  lyre-playing  contest  takes  place
at  a  Svayamvara.     The  name  of  the  heroine  is  also  Gandharvadatta. — n.m.p.


30  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

must  be  a  hair  on  the  string."  Thereupon  the  lyre  was
examined,  and  they  found  the  hair  where  he  said,  and  that
astonished  even  the  Gandharvas.  Then  the  king  took  the
lyre  from  his  daughter's  hand  and  gave  it  to  him,  saying  :
"  Prince,  take  this,  and  pour  nectar  into  our  ears."  Then  he
played  on  it,  and  sang  the  hymn  of  Vishnu  with  such  skill  that
the  Gandharvas  there  became  motionless  as  painted  pictures.

Then  Gandharvadatta  herself  threw  on  him  a  look  tender
with  affection,  as  it  were  a  garland  of  full-blown  blue  lotuses,1
and  therewith  chose  him  as  her  husband.  When  the  king
saw  it,  and  called  to  mind  his  promise  of  that  import,  he  at
once  gave  him  his  daughter  Gandharvadatta  in  marriage.
As  for  the  wedding  that  thereupon  took  place,  gladdened  by
the  drums  of  the  gods  and  other  festal  signs,  to  what  could
we  compare  it,  as  it  served  as  the  standard  by  which  to
estimate  all  similar  rejoicings.  Then  Naravahanadatta  lived
there  with  his  new  bride  Gandharvadatta  in  heavenly  bliss.

And  one  day  he  went  out  to  behold  the  beauty  of  the
city,  and  after  he  had  seen  all  kinds  of  places  he  entered  the
park  attached  to  it.  There  he  saw  a  heavenly  female  de-
scending from  the  sky  with  her  daughter,  like  the  lightning
with  the  rain  in  a  cloudless  atmosphere.  And  she  was  say-
ing to  her  daughter,  as  she  descended,  recognising  him  by
her  knowledge  :  "  This,  my  daughter,  is  your  future  husband,
the  son  of  the  King  of  Vatsa."  When  he  saw  her  alight  and
come  towards  him,  he  said  to  her  :  "  Who  are  you,  and  why
have  you  come  ?  "

And  the  heavenly  female  said  to  him,  thus  introducing
the  object  of  her  desire  :  "  Prince,  I  am  Dhanavati,  the
wife  of  a  chief  of  the  Vidyadharas,  named  Simha,  and  this
is  my  unmarried  daughter,  the  sister  of  Chandasimha,
and  her  name  is  Ajinavatl.  You  were  announced  as
her  future  husband  by  a  voice  that  came  from  heaven.
Then,  learning  by  my  magic  science  that  you,  the  future
emperor  of  the  Vidyadharas,  had  been  deposited  here  by
Vegavati,  I  came  to  tell  you  my  desire.  You  ought  not
to  remain  in  such  a  place  as  this,  which  is  accessible  to

1  In  the  Svai/amvara  the  election  used  to  be  made  by  throwing  a  garland
on  the  neck  of  the  favoured  suitor. See  Vol.  IV,  pp.  238-240. — n.m.p.


THE  CITY  OF  SRAVASTI  31

the  Vidyadharas,  for  they  might  slay  you  out  of  enmity,  as
you  are  alone,  and  have  not  obtained  your  position  of  em-
peror. So  come,  let  us  now  take  you  to  a  land  which  is
inaccessible  to  them.  Does  not  the  moon  delay  to  shine
when  the  circle  of  the  sun  is  eclipsed  ?  1  And  when  the
auspicious  day  arrives  you  shall  marry  this  daughter  of
mine."  When  she  had  said  this,  she  took  him  and  flew  up
into  the  air  with  him,  and  her  daughter  accompanied  them.
And  she  took  him  to  the  city  of  Sravasti,  and  deposited  him
in  a  garden,  and  then  she  disappeared  with  her  daughter
Ajinavati.

There  King  Prasenajit,  who  had  returned  from  a  distant
hunting  expedition,  saw  that  prince  of  noble  form  and
feature.  The  king  approached  him  full  of  curiosity,  and
asked  him  his  name  and  lineage,  and  then,  being  much  de-
lighted, courteously  conducted  him  to  his  palace.  It  was
full  of  troops  of  elephants,  adorned  with  lines  of  horses,  and
looked  like  a  pavilion  for  the  Fortune  of  Empire  to  rest  in
when  wearied  with  her  wanderings.  Wherever  a  man  born
to  prosperity  may  be,  felicities  eagerly  approach  him,  as
women  do  their  beloved  one.  This  accounts  for  the  fact
that  the  king,  being  an  admirer  of  excellence,  gave  Narava-
hanadatta  his  own  daughter,  named  Bhagirathayasas.  And
the  prince  lived  happily  there  with  her  in  great  luxury,  as
if  with  Good  Fortune  created  by  the  Disposer  in  flesh  and
blood  for  his  delectation.

One  evening,  when  the  lover  of  the  night  had  arisen,

1  The  meaning  is  far  from  clear,  and  we  at  once  suspect  a  corrupted
reading  in  the  B.  text.  The  reading  is  Nenduh  kshipati  kim  kalam,  parikshine
'rka-mandale  f  "  Why  should  the  eclipse  of  the  sun  be  mentioned  ?  "  It  needs
only  the  moon's  conjunction  with  the  sun  to  obliterate  tne  light.  Besides,
the  comparison  with  Naravahanadatta  is  meaningless.

Kalam  kshipati  may  mean  "to  delay,"  but  not  "  to  delay  to  shine."
Now  the  D.  text  reads  :  Nenduh  kshipati  kim  kalam  parikshtno  ' rkamandale  ?
"  Does  not  the  moon,  when  he  is  in  a  state  of  weakness,  spend  some  time
within  the  circle  of  the  sun?"  Here  the  simile  is  clear.  Naravahanadatta
is  in  a  weak  state  at  the  moment,  like  the  new  moon.  As  the  moon  resides
with  the  sun,  to  await  his  time  and  regain  his  strength,  so  Naravahanadatta  is
to  reside  at  Sravasti  with  King  Prasenajit.  A  pun  is  apparently  contained  in
mandale  which  can  mean  both  "circle"  and  "territory."  See  Speyer,  op.  cit,
pp.  142,  143. — n.m.p.


32  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

raining  joy  into  the  eyes  of  men,  looking  like  the  full-orbed
face1  of  the  nymph  of  the  eastern  quarter,  or  rather  the
countenance  of  Bhagirathayasas,  charming  as  nectar,  re-
flected in  the  pure  mirror  of  the  cloudless  heaven,  he  drank
wine  with  that  fair  one  at  her  request  on  the  top  of  a  palace
silvered  over  with  the  elixir  of  moonlight.  He  quaffed  the
liquor  which  was  adorned  with  the  reflection  of  his  beloved's
face,  and  so  gave  pleasure  to  his  eyes  as  well  as  to  his  palate.
And  then  he  considered  the  moon  as  far  inferior  in  beauty
to  his  charmer's  face,  for  it  wanted  the  intoxicating2  play
of  the  eyes  and  eyebrows.  And  after  his  drinking-bout  was
over  he  went  inside  the  house,  and  retired  to  his  couch  with
Bhagirathayasas.

Then  Naravahanadatta  awoke  from  sleep  while  his  be-
loved was  still  sleeping,  and  suddenly  calling  to  mind  his
home,  exclaimed  :  "  Through  love  for  Bhagirathayasas  I
have,  so  to  speak,  forgotten  my  other  wives  !  How  can  that
have  happened  ?  But  in  this,  too,  Fate  is  all-powerful.  Far
away  too  are  my  ministers.  Of  them  Marubhuti  takes
pleasure  in  naught  but  feats  of  prowess,  and  Harisikha  is
exclusively  devoted  to  policy ;  of  those  two  I  do  not  feel
the  need,  but  it  grieves  me  that  the  dexterous  Gomukha,
who  has  been  my  friend  in  all  emergencies,  is  far  away  from
me."  While  he  was  thus  lamenting  he  suddenly  heard  the
words,  "  Ah,  how  sad  !  "  uttered  in  a  low  soft  tone,  like
that  of  a  woman,  and  they  at  once  banished  sleep.  When
he  heard  them  he  got  up,  lighted  a  lamp,3  and  looked  about,
and  he  saw  in  the  window  a  lovely  female  face.     It  seemed

1  MSS.  Nos.  1882  and  2166  read  mukhamandane — i.e.  "face-ornament."

2  Perhaps  the  word  also  conveys  the  meaning  "intoxicated."  MSS.
Nos.  1882  and  2166  give  samadatamranetra,  the  other,  by  mistake,  atama.  This
would  mean  the  "  play  of  the  eyes  a  little  red  with  intoxication  and  of  the
eyebrow."  The  word  I  have  translated  "  palate  "  means  the  tongue,  considered
as  the  organ  of  taste.  The  MS.  kindly  lent  me  by  the  Principal  of  the
Sanskrit  College  reads  samadattamranetra-bhruvibhramaJi.

3  Tawney  translated  "candle"  for  some  inexplicable  reason.  The  B.
text  reads  dipte  dlpe,  "a  lamp  having  been  lit,"  but  the  D.  text  has  the
locative  case,  dipradipe,  literally,  "in  a  bright  lamp,"  or,  as  we  would  trans-
late, "  by  the  light  of  a  lamp."  Thus  it  might  easily  have  been  alight  while
Naravahanadatta  was  sleeping. — n.m.p.


FATAL  CURIOSITY  33

as  if  the  Disposer  had  determined  out  of  playfulness  to
show  him  a  second  but  spotless  moon  not  in  the  sky,  as  he
had  that  night  seen  the  spot-beflecked  moon  of  heaven.  And
not  being  able  to  discern  the  rest  of  her  body,  but  eager  to
behold  it,  his  eyes  being  attracted  by  her  beauty,  he  im-
mediately said  to  himself :  "  Long  ago,  when  the  Daitya
Atapin  was  impeding  the  creation  of  Brahma,  that  god
employed  the  artifice  of  sending  him  to  Nandana,  saying  to
him,  '  Go  there  and  see  a  very  curious  sight,'  and  when  he  got
there  he  saw  only  the  foot  of  a  woman,  which  was  of  wonder-
ful beauty ;  and  so  he  died  from  an  insane  desire  to  see  the
rest  of  her  body.1  In  the  same  way  it  may  be  that  the
Disposer  has  produced  this  lady's  face  only  to  bring  about  my
destruction."  While  he  was  making  this  momentary  surmise,
the  lady  displayed  her  shootlike  finger  at  the  window,  and
beckoned  to  him  to  come  towards  her.

Then  he  deliberately  went  out  of  the  chamber  in  which
his  beloved  was  sleeping,  and  with  eager  impatience  ap-
proached that  heavenly  lady ;  and  when  he  came  near  she
exclaimed  :  "  Madanamanchuka,  they  say  that  your  husband
is  in  love  with  another  woman  !  Alas,  you  are  undone ! " 2
When  Naravahanadatta  heard  this,  he  called  to  mind  his
beloved,  and  the  fire  of  separation  flamed  up  in  his  bosom,
and  he  said  to  that  fair  one  :  "  Who  are  you  ?  Where  did
you  see  my  beloved  Madanamanchuka  ?  And  why  have
you  come  to  me  ?  Tell  me  !  "  Then  the  bold  lady  took  the
prince  away  to  a  distance  in  the  night,  and  saying  to  him,
"  Hear  the  whole  story,"  she  thus  began  to  speak  :

"  There  is  in  the  city  of  Pushkaravati  a  prince  of  the
Vidyadharas  named  Pingalagandhara,  who  has  become
yellow  with  continually  adoring  the  fire.  Know  that  I  am
his  unmarried  daughter,  named  Prabhavati,  for  he  obtained
me  by  the  special  favour  of  the  God  of  Fire,  who  was  pleased
with  his  adoration.     I  went  to  the  city  of  Ashadhapura  to

1  The  three  India  Office  MSS.,  which  Dr  Rost  has  kindly  lent  me,  read
tadanydnga.     So  does  the  Sanskrit  College  MS.

2  The  D.  text  reads  praqamsanti,  which  seems  preferable  :  "  Alas,  Madana-
manchuka, you  are  undone !  For  you  praise  a  husband  who  is  attached  to
other  women."     See  Speyer,  op.  cit,  p.  143. — n.m.p.

vol.  VIII.  0


34  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

visit  my  friend  Vegavati,  and  I  did  not  find  her  there,  as
she  had  gone  somewhere  to  perform  asceticism.  But  hearing
from  her  mother  Prithividevi  that  your  beloved  Madana-
™  i/'j  -ji    .manchuka  was  there,  I  went  to  her.     I  beheld

1  he  v idyadhari  ,         *       •  »    *       •  i  i  t  i

reproaches  her  emaciated  with  fasting,  pale  and  squalid,  with
Naravahana-  ori\y  one  lock,  weeping,  talking  only  of  your
virtues,  surrounded  by  tearful  bands  of  Vidya-
dhara  princesses,  who  were  divided  between  grief  produced
by  seeing  her,  and  joy  produced  by  hearing  of  you.  She  told
me  what  you  were  like,  and  I  comforted  her  by  promising  to
bring  you,  for  my  mind  was  overpowered  by  pity  for  her,  and
attracted  by  your  excellences.  And  finding  out  by  means
of  my  magic  skill  that  you  were  here  at  present,  I  came  to
you,  to  inserve *  her  interests  and  my  own  also.  But  when  I
found  that  you  had  forgotten  your  first  love  and  were  talk-
ing here  of  other  persons,  I  bewailed  the  lot  of  that  wife  of
yours,  and  exclaimed  :    '  Ah,  how  sad  !  '  "

When  the  prince  had  been  thus  addressed  by  her,  he
became  impatient  and  said  :  "  Take  me  where  she  is,  and
impose  on  me  whatever  command  you  think  fit."  When  the
Vidyadhari  Prabhavati  heard  that,  she  flew  up  into  the  air
with  him,  and  proceeded  to  journey  on  through  the  moonlit
night.  And  as  she  was  going  along  she  saw  a  fire  burning
in  a  certain  place,  so  she  took  Naravahanadatta 's  hand,  and
moved  round  it,  keeping  it  on  the  right.  In  this  way  the
bold  lady  managed  by  an  artifice  to  go  through  the  ceremony
of  marriage  with  Naravahanadatta,  for  all  the  actions  of
heavenly  beings  have  some  important  end  in  view.2  Then
she  pointed  out  to  her  beloved  from  the  sky  the  earth  look-
ing like  a  sacrificial  platform,  the  rivers  like  snakes,  the
mountains  like  ant-hills,  and  many  other  wonders  did  she
show  him  from  time  to  time,  until  at  last  she  had  gradually
accomplished  a  long  distance.

Then   Naravahanadatta    became    thirsty   with    his    long

1  This  is  the  second  time  Tawney  has  used  this  obsolete  word  (cf.  Vol.  VII,
p.  50).  Murray,  Oxford  Dictionary,  gives  but  a  single  reference  (1683)  of  its
use. — N.M.P.

2  I  have  altered  the  division  of  the  words,  as  there  appears  to  be  a
misprint  in  Brockhaus'  text.


THE  FORGOTTEN  SWEETMEAT       35

journey  through  the  air,  and  begged  for  water ;  so  she
descended  to  earth  from  her  airy  path.  And  she  took  him
to  the  corner  of  a  forest,  and  placed  him  near  a  lake,  which
seemed  to  be  full  of  molten  silver,  as  its  water  was  white
with  the  rays  of  the  moon.  So  his  craving  for  water  was
satisfied  by  the  draught  which  he  drank  in  that  beautiful
forest,  but  there  arose  in  him  a  fresh  craving  as  he  felt  a
desire  to  embrace  that  lovely  lady.1  But  she,  when  pressed,
would  hardly  consent ;  for  her  thoughts  reverted  with  pity
to  Madanamanchuka,  whom  she  had  tried  to  comfort.  In
truth  the  noble-minded,  when  they  have  undertaken  to  for-
ward the  interests  of  others,  put  out  of  sight  their  own.  And
she  said  to  him  :  "  Do  not  think  ill,  my  husband,  of  my
coldness;  I  have  an  object  in  it.  And  now  hear  this  story
which  will  explain  it.

165.  Story  of  the  Child  and  the  Sweetmeat

Once  upon  a  time  there  lived  in  the  city  of  Pataliputra  a
certain  widow  who  had  one  child.  She  was  young  and
beautiful,  but  poor,  and  she  was  in  the  habit  of  making
love  to  a  strange  man  for  her  gratification,  and  at  night  she
used  to  leave  her  house  and  roam  where  she  pleased.  But,
before  she  went,  she  used  invariably  to  console  her  infant
son  by  saying  to  him,  "  My  boy,  I  will  bring  you  a  sweet-
meat to-morrow  morning,"  and  every  day  she  brought  him
one.  And  the  child  used  to  remain  quiet  at  home,  buoyed
up  by  the  hope  of  that  sweetmeat.

But  one  day  she  forgot,  and  did  not  bring  him  the  sweet-
meat. And  when  the  child  asked  for  the  sweetmeat,  she
said  to  him  :  "  Sweetmeat  indeed  !  I  know  of  no  sweet  but
my  sweetheart !  "  Then  the  child  said  to  himself :  "  She
has  not  brought  me  a  sweetmeat  because  she  loves  another
better  than  me."     So  he  lost  all  hope,  and  his  heart  broke.

1  The  three  India  Office  MSS.  give  Srantam  jalatrisha.  In  No.  1882  the
line  begins  with  atra,  in  the  other  two  with  tatra :  I  have  given  what  I  believe
to  be  the  sense  taking  trisha  as  the  instrumental.  Sranta  appears  to  be
sometimes  used  for  sdnta.  The  Sanskrit  College  MS.  reads  tatra  santam  jala-
trisha tasya  pitambhaso  vane.     This  exactly  fits  in  with  my  rendering.


36  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

[M]  "  So  if  I  were  over-eager  to  appropriate  you  whom  I
have  long  loved,  and  if  Madanamanchuka,  whom  I  consoled
with  the  hope  of  a  joyful  reunion  with  you,  were  to  hear
of  it,  and  lose  all  hope  through  me,  her  heart,  which  is  as
soft  as  a  flower,  would  break.1  It  is  this  desire  to  spare  her
feelings  which  prevents  me  from  being  so  eager  now  for
your  society,  before  I  have  consoled  her,  though  you  are  my
beloved,  dearer  to  me  than  life."

When  Prabhavati  said  this  to  Naravahanadatta,  he  was
full  of  joy  and  astonishment,  and  he  said  to  himself  :  "  Well,
Fate  seems  to  take  a  pleasure  in  perpetually  creating  new
marvels,  since  it  has  produced  Prabhavati,  whose  conduct  is
so  inconceivably  noble  !  "  With  these  thoughts  in  his  mind,
the  prince  lovingly  praised  her,  and  said  :  "  Then  take  me
where  that  Madanamanchuka  is."  When  Prabhavati  heard
that,  she  took  him  up,  and  in  a  moment  carried  him  through
the  air  to  the  mountain  Ashadhapura.  There  she  bestowed
him  on  Madanamanchuka,  whose  body  had  long  been  drying
up  with  grief,  as  a  shower  bestows  fullness  on  a  river.

Then  Naravahanadatta  beheld  that  fair  one  there,  afflicted
with  separation,  thin  and  pale,  like  a  digit  of  the  new  moon.
That  reunion  of  those  two  seemed  to  restore  them  to  life,
and  gave  joy  to  the  world  like  the  union  of  the  night  and  the
moon.  And  the  pair  embraced,  scorched  with  the  fire  of
separation,  and  as  they  were  streaming  with  fatigue  they
seemed  to  melt  into  one.  Then  they  both  partook  at  their
ease  of  luxuries  suddenly  provided  in  the  night  by  the  might
of  Prabhavati's  sciences.  And,  thanks  to  her  science,  no  one
there  but  Madanamanchuka  saw  Naravahanadatta.

The  next  morning  Naravahanadatta  proceeded  to  loose
Madanamanchuka' s  one  lock,2  but  she,  overpowered  with
resentment  against  her  enemy,  said  to  her  beloved  :  "  Long
ago  I  made  this  vow  :  '  That  lock  of  mine  must  be  loosened
by  my  husband  when  Manasavega  is  slain,  but  not  till  then  ;

1  I  delete  the  stop  at  the  end  of  si  100.  All  the  India  Office  MSS.
read  kritasvasa,  and  so  does  the  Sanskrit  College  MS.,  but  kritasa  sd  makes
sense.

2  A  single  braid  of  hair  worn  by  a  woman  as  a  mark  of  mourning  for  an
absent  husband.     Monier  Williams,  sub  voce  "  ekaveni"


THE  METAMORPHOSIS  37

and  if  he  is  not  slain,  I  will  wear  it  till  my  death,  and  then
it  shall  be  loosed  by  the  birds,  or  consumed  with  fire.'  But
now  you  have  loosed  it  while  this  enemy  of  mine  is  still  alive ;
that  vexes  my  soul.  For  though  Vegavati  flung  him  down
on  Agniparvata,  he  did  not  die  of  the  fall.  And  you  have
now  been  made  invisible  here  by  Prabhavati  by  means  of
her  magic  power ;  otherwise  the  followers  of  that  enemy,
who  are  continually  moving  near  you  here,  would  see  you,
and  would  not  tolerate  your  presence."

When  Naravahanadatta  had  been  thus  addressed  by
his  wife,  he,  recognising  the  fact1  that  the  proper  time  for
accomplishing  his  object  had  not  yet  arrived,  said  to  her  by
way  of  calming  her  :  "  This  desire  of  yours  shall  be  fulfilled.
I  will  soon  slay  that  enemy.  But  first  I  must  acquire  the
sciences.  Wait  a  little,  my  beloved."  With  speeches  of
this  kind  Naravahanadatta  consoled  Madanamanchuka,  and
remained  there  in  that  city  of  the  Vidyadharas.

Then  Prabhavati  disappeared  herself,  and,  by  the  power
of  her  magic  science,  bestowed  in  some  incomprehensible  way
on  Naravahanadatta  her  own  shape.  And  the  prince  lived
happily  there  in  her  shape,  and  without  fear  of  discovery,
enjoying  pleasures  provided  by  her  magic  science.  And  all
the  people  there  thought :  "  This  friend  of  Vegavati's  is
attending  on  Madanamanchuka,  partly  out  of  regard  for
Vegavati,  and  partly  on  account  of  the  friendly  feelings
which  she  herself  entertains  for  the  captive  princess  "  ;  for
they  all  supposed  that  Naravahanadatta  was  no  other
than  Prabhavati,  as  he  was  disguised  in  her  shape.  And  this
was  the  report  that  they  carried  to  Manasavega.  Then
one  day  something  caused  Madanamanchuka  to  relate  to
Naravahanadatta  her  adventures  in  the  following  words :

"  When  Manasavega  first  brought  me  here,  he  tried  to
win  me  to  his  will  by  his  magic  power,  endeavouring  to  alarm
me  by  cruel  actions.     And  then  Siva  appeared  in  a  terrible

1  The  B.  text  is  corrupted.  SI.  118  should  read:  evam  uktas  taya  patnya
sddhvyd,  kdlanurodhavan  Naravahanadatto  'tha  santvayan  sa  jagada  tarn :  "  When
Naravahanadatta  had  been  thus  addressed  by  his  faithful  wife,  he,  taking  account
of  the  present  circumstances,  said  to  her  by  way  of  calming  her."  See  Speyer,
op.  cit.,  p.  143. — n.m.p.


38  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

form,  with  drawn  sword  and  lolling  tongue,  and  making  an
appalling  roar,  said  to  Manasavega  :  '  How  is  it  that,  while
I  still  exist,  thou  dost  presume  to  treat  disrespectfully  the
wife  of  him  who  is  destined  to  be  emperor  over
2t2aZnou«t^  the  Vidyadhara  kings?'  When  the  villain
of  her  Treat-  Manasavega  had  been  thus  addressed  by  Siva,  he
ment  while  m    fejj  on  tjie  earth  vomiting  blood  from  his  mouth.

Then  the  god  disappeared,  and  that  villain  im-
mediately recovered,  and  went  to  his  own  palace,  and  again
began  to  practise  cruelties  against  me.1

"  Then  in  my  terror,  and  in  the  agony  of  separation,  I
was  thinking  of  abandoning  my  life,  but  the  attendants  of
the  harem  2  came  to  me,  and  said  to  me  by  way  of  consola-
tion :  '  Long  ago  this  Manasavega  beheld  a  certain  beautiful
hermit  maiden  and  tried  to  carry  her  off  by  force,  but  was
thus  cursed  by  her  relations  :  "  When,  villain,  you  approach
another's  wife  against  her  will,  your  head  shall  split  into  a
thousand  fragments."  So  he  will  never  force  himself  on  the
wife  of  another :  do  not  be  afraid.  Moreover,  you  will  soon
be  reunited  writh  your  husband,  as  the  god  announced.'
Soon  after  the  maids  had  said  this  to  me,  Vegavati,  the
sister  of  that  Manasavega,  came  to  me  to  talk  me  over ;  but
when  she  saw  me,  she  was  filled  with  compassion,  and  she
comforted  me  by  promising  to  bring  you.  And  you  already
know  how  she  found  you.

"  Then  PrithividevI,  the  good  mother  of  that  wicked
Manasavega,  came  to  me,  looking,  with  her  garments  white
as  moonlight,  like  the  orb  of  Chandra  without  a  spot,  seem-
ing to  bathe  me  with  nectar  by  her  charming  appearance  ;
and  with  a  loving  manner  she  said  to  me  :  '  Why  do  you
refuse  food  and  so  injure  your  bodily  health,  though  you  are
destined  to  great  prosperity  ?  And  do  not  say  to  yourself  :
"  How  can  I  eat  an  enemy's  food  ?  "  For  my  daughter
Vegavati  has  a  share  in  this  kingdom,  bestowed  on  her  by  her
father,  and  she  is  your  friend,  for  your  husband  has  married

1  MSS.  Nos.  1882  and  2166  read  na  cha  for  mayi:  "and  did  not  practise
cruelties";  No.  3003  has  mayi.  The  Sanskrit  College  MS.  has  mama
krauryannyavartata  (sic).

2  See  Vol.  II,  pp.  l6lw4,  l62w,  l63n. — n.m.p.


THE  LOST  MAGICAL  POWER  39

her.  Accordingly  her  wealth,  as  belonging  to  your  husband,
is  yours  as  much  as  hers.  So  enjoy  it.  What  I  tell  you  is
true,  for  I  have  discovered  it  by  my  magic  knowledge.'  This
she  said,  and  confirmed  it  with  an  oath,  and  then,  being
attached  to  me,  on  account  of  her  daughter's  connection,  she
fed  me  with  food  suited  to  my  condition.  Then  Vegavati
came  here  with  you,  and  conquered  her  brother  and  saved
you.     The  sequel  I  do  not  know.

44  So  I,  remembering  the  magic  skill  of  Vegavati  and  the
announcement  of  the  god,  did  not  surrender  my  life,  which
was  supported  by  the  hope  of  regaining  you,  and,  thanks  to
the  power  of  the  noble  Prabhavati,  I  have  regained  you,
although  I  am  thus  beset  by  my  enemies.  But  my  only
anxiety  is  as  to  what  would  happen  to  us  if  Prabhavati
here  were  deprived  of  her  power,  and  you  were  so  to  lose  her
shape,  which  she  has  bestowed  on  you  by  way  of  disguise."

This  and  other  such  things  did  Madanamanchuka  say,
while  the  brave  Naravahanadatta  remained  there  with  her,
endeavouring  to  console  her.  But  one  night  Prabhavati  went
to  her  father's  palace,  and  in  the  morning  Naravahanadatta,
owing  to  her  being  at  a  distance,  lost  her  shape,  which  she
had  bestowed  on  him.  And  next  day  the  attendants  beheld
him  there  in  male  form,  and  they  all  ran  bewildered  and
alarmed  to  the  king's  court,  and  said,  "  Here  is  an  adulterer
crept  in,"  thrusting  aside  the  terrified  Madanamanchuka,
who  tried  to  stop  them.

Then  King  Manasavega  came  there  at  full  speed,  accom-
panied by  his  army,  and  surrounded  him.  Then  the  king's
mother  Prithividevi  hurried  thither  and  said  to  him  :  "It
will  not  do  for  you  or  me  either  to  put  this  man  to  death.
For  he  is  no  adulterer,  but  Naravahanadatta,  the  son  of  the
King  of  Vatsa,  who  has  come  here  to  visit  his  own  wife.  I
know  this  by  my  magic  power.  Why  are  you  so  blinded
with  wrath  that  you  cannot  see  it  ?  Moreover,  I  am  bound
to  honour  him,  as  he  is  my  son-in-law,  and  sprung  from  the
race  of  the  moon."

When  Manasavega's  mother  said  this  to  him,  he  flew  into
a  passion,  and  said  :    "  Then  he  is  my  enemy."

Then  his  mother,   out  of  love  for  her  son-in-law,  used


40  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

another  argument  with  him.  She  said :  "  My  son,  you
will  not  be  allowed  to  act  wrongfully  in  the  world  of  the
Vidyadharas.  For  here  there  exists  a  court  of  the  Vidya-
dharas  to  protect  the  right.  So  accuse  him  before  the  presi-
dent of  that  court.1  Whatever  step  you  take  with  regard
to  your  captive  in  accordance  with  the  court's  decision  will
be  commendable  ;  but  if  you  act  otherwise,  the  Vidyadharas
will  be  displeased,  and  the  gods  will  not  tolerate  it."

Manasavega,  out  of  respect  for  his  mother,  consented  to
follow  her  advice,  and  attempted  to  have  Naravahanadatta
bound,  with  the  intention  of  taking  him  before  the  court.
But  he,  unable  to  endure  the  indignity  of  being  bound,  tore
a  pillar  from  the  arched  gateway,  and  killed  with  it  a  great
number  of  his  captor's  servants.  And  the  hero,  whose  valour
was  godlike,  snatched  a  sword  from  one  of  those  that  he  had
killed,  and  at  once  slew  with  it  some  more  of  his  opponents.
Then  Manasavega  fettered  him  by  his  superhuman  powers,
and  took  him,  with  his  wife,  before  the  court.  Then  the
Vidyadharas  assembled  there  from  all  quarters,  summoned
by  the  loud  sound  of  a  drum,  even  as  the  gods  assemble  in
Sudharma.2

And  the  president  of  the  court,  King  Vayupatha,  came
there,  and  sat  down  on  a  jewelled  throne  surrounded  by
Vidyadharas,  and  fanned  by  chowries  which  waved  to  and
w      -7  fro,   as   if  to  winnow   away   all   injustice.     And

JSaravahana-  7        ,  .

datta  before  the  wicked  Manasavega  stood  in  front  of  him,
the -Court of  the and  said  as  follows:   "This  enemy  of  mine,  who,

Vidyadharas      ,,  ■,  .    i     i  •    i    .     i  i  j

-y  though  a  mortal,  has    violated    my  harem,  and

seduced  my  sister,  ought  immediately  to  be  put  to  death  ;
especially  as  he  actually  wishes  to  be  our  sovereign."  When
the  president  heard  this,  he  called  on  Naravahanadatta  for
an  answer,  and  the  hero  said  in  a  confident  tone  :  "  That  is
a  court  where  there  is  a  president ;    he  is  a  president  who

1  I  read  tatrasya  tatpradhandgre  dosham  sirasi  pataya.  The  three  India
Office  MSS.  give  tatrasya)  No.  1882  has  prasddagre  and  dhdraya;  No.  3003
pradhanagre  and  dharaya;  No.  21 66  pradhanagre  and  pataya.  The  Sanskrit
College  MS.  agrees  with  Brockhaus'  text.

2  Originally  belonging  to  the  gods,  but  given  to  Krishna,  when  it
becomes  the  great  hall  where  the  Yadavas  held  their  court.  See  the
Mahabharata,  i,  220  ;  ii,  3  ;  and  xvi,  7. — n.m.p.


THE  TRIAL  41

says  what  is  just ;  that  is  just  in  which  there  is  truth  ;
that  is  truth  in  which  there  is  no  deceit.  Here  I  am
bound  by  magic,  and  on  the  floor,  but  my  adversary  here
is  on  a  seat,  and  free  :  what  fair  controversy  can  there  be
between  us  ?  "

When  Vayupatha  heard  this,  he  made  Manasavega  also
sit  upon  the  floor,  as  was  just,  and  had  Naravahanadatta  set
free  from  his  bonds.  Then  before  Vayupatha,  and  in  the
hearing  of  all,  Naravahanadatta  made  the  following  reply
to  the  accusations  of  Manasavega  :  "  Pray,  whose  harem
have  I  violated  by  coming  to  visit  my  own  wife,  Madana-
manchuka  here,  who  has  been  carried  off  by  this  fellow  ?
And  if  his  sister  came  and  tricked  me  into  marrying  her  by
assuming  my  wife's  form,  what  fault  have  I  committed  in
this  ?  As  for  my  desiring  empire,  is  there  anyone  who  does
not  desire  all  sorts  of  things  ?  "

When  King  Vayupatha  heard  this,  he  reflected  a  little,
and  said  :  "  This  noble  man  says  what  is  quite  just :  take
care,  my  good  Manasavega,  that  you  do  not  act  unjustly
towards  one  whom  great  exaltation  awaits."

Though  Vayupatha  said  this,  Manasavega,  blinded  with
delusion,  refused  to  turn  from  his  wicked  way  ;  and  then
Vayupatha  flew  into  a  passion.  Then,  out  of  regard  for
justice,  he  engaged  in  a  contest  with  Manasavega,  in  which
fully  equipped  armies  were  employed  on  both  sides.  For
resolute  men,  when  they  sit  on  the  seat  of  justice,  keep  only
the  right  in  view,  and  look  upon  the  mighty  as  weak,  and  one
of  their  own  race  as  an  alien.1  And  then  Naravahanadatta,
looking  towards  the  nymphs  of  heaven,  who  were  gazing  at
the  scene  with  intense  interest,  said  to  Manasavega  :  "  Lay
aside  your  magic  disguises,  and  fight  with  me  in  visible  shape,
in  order  that  I  may  give  you  a  specimen  of  my  prowess  by
slaying  you  with  one  blow."

Accordingly  those  Vidyadharas  there  remained  quarrelling
among  themselves,  when  suddenly  a  splendid  pillar  in  the

1  Dr  Kern  would  read  na  cha  for  vata :  "  Righteous  kings  and  judges  see
no  difference  between  a  feeble  and  powerful  person,  between  a  stranger  and
a  kinsman."  But  the  three  India  Office  MSS.  read  vata.  So  does  the  MS.
which  the  Principal  of  the  Sanskrit  College  has  kindly  lent  me.


42  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

court  cleft  asunder  in  the  middle  with  a  loud  noise,1  and  Siva
issued  from  it  in  his  terrific  form.  He  filled  the  whole  sky,
in  colour  like  antimony  ;  he  hid  the  sun  ;  the  gleams  of  his
fiery  eyes  flickered  like  flashes  of  lightning  ;  his  shining  teeth
were  like  cranes  flying  in  a  long  row ;  and  so  he  was  terrible
like  a  roaring  cloud  of  the  great  day  of  doom.  The  great  god
exclaimed,  "  Villain,  this  future  emperor  of  the  Vidyadharas
shall  not  be  insulted !  "  and  with  these  words  he  dismissed
Manasavega  with  face  cast  down,  and  encouraged  Vayupatha.
And  then  the  adorable  one  took  Naravahanadatta  up  in
his  arms,  and,  in  order  to  preserve  his  life,  carried  him  in
this  way  to  the  beautiful  and  happy  mountain  Rishyamuka,
and,  after  setting  him  down  there,  disappeared.  And  then
the  quarrel  among  the  Vidyadharas  in  that  court  came  to  an
end,  and  Vayupatha  went  home  again  accompanied  by  the
other  Vidyadharas  his  friends.  But  Manasavega,  making
Madanamanchuka,  who  was  distracted  with  joy  and  grief,
precede  him,  went  despondent  to  Ashadhapura,  his  own
dwelling.

1  The  Petersburg  lexicographers  are  of  opinion  that  risad  should  be  tasad
or  tasad.     Two  of  the  India  Office  MSS.  seem  to  read  tasad.


CHAPTER  CVII

I  THINK  a  hero's  prosperity  must  be  unequal.  Fate
[M]  again  and  again  severely  tests  firmness  by  the
ordeals  of  happiness  and  misery ;  this  explains  why  the
fickle  goddess  kept  uniting  Naravahanadatta  to  wife  after
wife,  when  he  was  alone  in  those  remote  regions,  and  then
separating  him  from  them.

Then,  while  he  was  residing  on  the  mountain  Rishya-
muka,  his  beloved  Prabhavati  came  up  to  him,  and  said  :
"  It  was  owing  to  the  misfortune  of  my  not  being  present
that  Manasavega  carried  you  off  on  that  occasion  to  the
court,  with  the  intention  of  doing  you  an  injury.  When  I
heard  of  it,  I  at  once  went  there,  and  by  means  of  my  magic
power  I  produced  the  delusion  of  the  appearance  of  the  god,
and  brought  you  here.  For,  though  the  Vidyadharas  are
mighty,  their  influence  does  not  extend  over  this  mountain,
for  this  is  the  domain  of  the  Siddhas.1  Indeed  even  my
science  is  of  no  avail  here  for  that  reason,  and  that  grieves
me,  for  how  will  you  subsist  on  the  products  of  the  forest  as
your  only  food  ?  "  When  she  had  said  this,  Naravahana-
datta remained  with  her  there,  longing  for  the  time  of  de-
liverance, thinking  of  M  adanamanchuka.  And  on  the  banks
of  the  sanctifying  Pampa  lake  near  that  mountain  he  ate
fruits  and  roots  of  heavenly  flavour,  and  he  drank  the  holy
water  of  the  lake,  which  was  rendered  delicious  and  fragrant
by  the  fruits  dropped  from  trees  on  its  banks,  as  a  relish  to
his  meal  of  deer's  flesh.2  And  he  lived  at  the  foot  of  trees
and  in  the  interior  of  caverns,  and  so  he  imitated  the  con-
duct of  Rama,  who  once  lived  in  the  forests  of  that  region.
And  Prabhavati,  beholding  there  various  hermitages  once
occupied  by  Rama,  told  him  the  story  of  Rama  for  his
amusement.

1  See  Vol.  II,  pp.  67,  67ft1  and  75.

2  Here  two  of  the  India  Office  MSS.  read  marnsopadamsam,  the  third
ma  msopad  esam .

43


44  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

166.  Story  of  Rama l

In  this  forest  Rama  once  dwelt,  accompanied  by  Laksh-
mana,  and  waited  on  by  Sita,  in  the  society  of  hermits,
making  to  himself  a  hut  at  the  foot  of  a  tree.  And  Sita,
perfuming  the  whole  forest  with  the  perfume  given  her  by
Anasuya,  remained  here  in  the  midst  of  the  hermits'  wives,
wearing  a  robe  of  bark.

Here  the  Daitya  Dundubhi  was  slain  in  a  cave  by  Bali,
which  was  the  original  cause  of  the  enmity  between  Bali  and
Sugriva.  For  Sugriva,  wrongly  supposing  that  the  Daitya
had  slain  Bali,  blocked  up  the  entrance  of  the  cave  with
mountains,  and  went  away  terrified.  But  Bali  broke  through
the  obstruction  and  came  out  and  banished  Sugriva,  saying :
"  This  fellow  imprisoned  me  in  the  cave  because  he  wanted
to  get  my  kingdom."  But  Sugriva  fled,  and  came  and  estab-
lished himself  on  this  plateau  of  Rishyamuka  with  the  lords
of  the  monkeys,  of  whom  Hanuman  was  the  chief.

Then  Ravana  came  here,  and  beguiling  the  soul  of  Rama
with  the  phantom  of  a  golden  deer,  he  carried  off  his  wife,
the  daughter  of  Janaka.  Then  the  descendant  of  Raghu,
who  longed  for  news  of  Sita,  made  an  alliance  with  Sugriva,
who  desired  the  slaughter  of  Bali.  And  in  order  to  let  his
might  be  known  he  cleft  seven  palm-trees  here  with  an
arrow,  while  the  mighty  Bali  with  great  difficulty  cleft  one
of  them.  And  then  the  hero  went  hence  to  Kishkindhya,
and  after  slaying  Bali  with  a  single  arrow,  which  he  launched
as  if  in  sport,  gave  his  kingdom  to  Sugriva.

Then  the  followers  of  Sugriva,  headed  by  Hanuman,
went  hence  in  every  direction  to  gain  information  about  Sita.
And  Rama  remained  here  during  the  rainy  season  with  the
roaring  clouds,  which  seemed  to  share  his  grief,  shedding
showery  teardrops.  At  last  Hanuman  crossed  the  sea  at
the  suggestion  of  Sampati,  and  by  great  exertions  obtained
for  Rama  the  required  information  ;    whereupon  he  marched

1  This  is  merely  a  very  brief  resume  of  the  second  part  of  Book  II
(Ayodhya-kanda)  of  the  Rdmayana.  For  an  English  verse  translation  see  that
by  R.  T.  H.  Griffith,  5  vols.,  London  and  Benares,  1870-1874;  and  for  a  prose
translation  that  by  M.  N.  Dutt,  7  vols.,  Calcutta,  1892-1894.— n.m.p.


THE  TWO  VIDYADHARIS  45

with  the  monkeys,  and  threw  a  bridge  over  the  sea,  and  killed
his  enemy  the  lord  of  Lanka,  and  brought  back  Queen  Slta
in  the  flying  chariot,  passing  over  this  place.


[M]  "  So,  my  husband,  you  also  shall  attain  good  fortune :
successes  come  of  their  own  accord  to  heroes  who  remain
resolute  in  misfortunes."  This  and  other  such  tales  did
Prabhavati  tell,  while  she  roamed  about  here  and  there  for
her  pleasure  with  Naravahanadatta.

And  one  day,  as  he  was  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Pampa,
two  Vidyadharis,  Dhanavati  and  Ajinavati,  descended  from
heaven  and  approached  him.  These  were  the  two  ladies  who
carried  him  from  the  city  of  the  Gandharvas  to  the  city  of
Sravasti,  where  he1  married  Bhagicathayasas.  And  while
Ajinavati  was  conversing  with  Prabhavati  as  an  old  friend,
Dhanavati  thus  addressed  Naravahanadatta  :  "I  long  ago
bestowed  on  you  this  daughter  of  mine,  Ajinavati,  as  far  as
promises  could  do  it.  So  marry  her ;  for  the  day  of  your
exultation  is  nigh  at  hand."  Prabhavati,  out  of  love  for  her
friend,  and  Naravahanadatta  both  agreed  to  this  proposal.
Then  Dhanavati  bestowed  that  daughter  of  hers,  Ajinavati,
on  that  son  of  the  King  of  Vatsa,  with  appropriate  ceremonies.
And  she  celebrated  the  great  feast  of  her  daughter's  wedding
in  such  style  that  the  glorious  and  heavenly  preparations  she
had  accumulated  by  means  of  her  magic  knowledge  made  it
really  beautiful.

Then  the  next  day  she  said  to  Naravahanadatta  :  "  My
son,  it  will  never  do  for  you  to  remain  long  in  a  nondescript
place  like  this  ;  for  the  Vidyadharas  are  a  deceitful  race,  and
you  have  no  business  here.  So  depart  now  with  your  wife
for  your  own  city  of  Kausambi ;  and  I  will  come  there  with
my  son  Chandasimha  and  with  the  Vidyadhara  chiefs  that
follow  me,  to  ensure  your  success."  2     When  Dhanavati  had

1  Dr  Kern  reads  tena  for  yena.  His  conjecture  is  confirmed  by  the  three
India  Office  MSS.  and  the  Sanskrit  College  MS.

2  I  have  adopted  Dr  Kern's  conjecture  of  saha  for  saki  and  separated
with  him  abhyudayayate  into  two  words,  abhyudayaya  te.  I  find  that  his
conjecture  as  to  saha  is  confirmed  by  the  three  India  Office  MSS.


46  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

said  this,  she  mounted  up  into  the  sky,  illuminating  it,  as  it
were,  with  moonlight,  though  it  was  day,  by  the  gleam  of  her
white  body  and  raiment.

And  Prabhavati  and  AjinavatI  carried  Naravahanadatta
through  the  air  to  his  city  of  Kausambi.  When  he  reached
the  garden  of  the  city  he  descended  from  heaven  into  his
capital,  and  was  seen  by  his  attendants.  And  there  arose
there  a  cry  from  the  people  on  all  sides  :  "  We  are  indeed
happy  ;  here  is  the  prince  come  back !  "  Then  the  King  of
Vatsa,  hearing  of  it,  came  there  quickly  in  high  delight,  as  if
irrigated  with  a  sudden  shower  of  nectar,  with  Vasavadatta
and  Padmavati,  and  the  prince's  wives,  Ratnaprabha  and
the  rest ;  and  Yaugandharayana  and  the  other  ministers  of
the  King  of  Vatsa,  and  Kalingasena  and  the  prince's  own
ministers,  Gomukha  and  his  fellows,  approached  him  in  order
of  precedence  as  eagerly  as  travellers  make  for  a  lake  in  the
hot  season.  And  they  saw  the  hero,  whose  high  birth  quali-
fied him  for  a  lofty  station,  sitting  between  his  two  wives,
like  Krishna  between  Rukmini  and  Satyabhama.  And  when
they  saw  him  they  hid  their  eyes  with  tears  of  joy,  as  if  for
fear  lest  they  should  leap  out  of  their  skins  in  their  delight.
And  the  King  of  Vatsa  and  his  queens  embraced  after  a  long
absence  that  son  of  theirs,  and  could  not  let  him  go,  for  they
were,  as  it  were,  riveted  to  him  by  the  hairs  of  their  bodies
erect  from  joy.1

Then  a  great  feast  began  by  beat  of  drum,  and  Vegavati,
the  daughter  of  Vegavat  and  sister  of  Manasavega,  who  was
married  to  Naravahanadatta,  finding  it  all  out  by  the  might
of  her  recovered  science,  came  down  to  Kausambi  through
the  air,  and  fell  at  the  feet  of  her  father-in-law  and  mother-
in-law,  and  prostrating  herself  before  her  husband,  said  to
him  :  "  Auspicious  sir,  after  I  had  become  weak  by  my
exertions  on  your  behalf,  I  recovered  my  magic  powers  by
self-mortification  in  a  grove  of  ascetics,  and  now  I  have  re-
turned into  your  presence."  When  she  had  said  this,  she  was
welcomed  by  her  husband  and  the  others,  and  she  repaired
to  her  friends,  Prabhavati  and  AjinavatI.

They  embraced  her   and   made   her   sit   between   them.

1  See  Vol.  I,  p.  120ft1.— n.m.p.


THE  TWO  DIVISIONS  47

And  at  that  moment  Dhanavati,  the  mother  of  Ajinavati,  also
arrived  ;  and  various  kings  of  the  Vidyadharas  came  with
her,  surrounded  by  their  forces,  that  hid  the  heaven  like
clouds :  her  own  heroic  son,  the  strong-armed  Chandasimha,
and  a  powerful  relation  of  hers,  Amitagati  by  name,  and
Pingalagandhara,  the  mighty  father  of  Prabhavatl,  and
Vayupatha,  the  president  of  the  court,  who  had  previously
declared  himself  on  Naravahanadatta5  s  side,  and  the  heroic
King  Hemaprabha,  the  father  of  Ratnaprabha,  accompanied
by  his  son  Vajraprabha  and  followed  by  his  army.  And
Sagaradatta,  the  King  of  the  Gandharvas,  came  there,  accom-
panied by  his  daughter  Gandharvadatta,  and  by  Chitrangada.
And  when  they  arrived,  they  were  becomingly  honoured
by  the  King  of  Vatsa  and  his  son,  and  sat  in  due  order  on
thrones.

And  immediately  King  Pingalagandhara  said  to  his  son-
in-law  Naravahanadatta,  as  he  was  in  the  hall  of  assembly  :
"  King,  you  have  been  appointed  by  the  god  1  emperor  over
us  all,  and  it  is  owing  to  our  great  love  for  you  that  we  have
all  come  to  you.  And  Queen  Dhanavati  here,  your  mother-
in-law,  a  strict  votary,  possessing  divine  knowledge,  wearing
the  rosary  and  the  skin  of  the  black  antelope,  like  an  incar-
nation of  Durga,  or  Savitri,  having  acquired  magic  powers,
an  object  of  reverence  to  the  noblest  Vidyadharas,  has  made
herself  ready  to  protect  you ;  so  you  are  certain  to  prosper
in  your  undertaking.  But  listen  to  what  I  am  about  to  say.
There  are  two  divisions  of  the  Vidyadhara  territory  2  on  the
Himalayas  here,  the  northern  and  the  southern,  both  extend-
ing over  many  peaks  of  that  range  ;  the  northern  division  is
on  the  other  side  of  Kailasa,  but  the  southern  is  on  this  side
of  it.  And  this  Amitagati  here  has  just  performed  a  difficult
penance  on  Mount  Kailasa,  in  order  to  obtain  the  sovereignty
over  the  northern  division,  and  propitiated  Siva.  And  Siva
made  this  revelation  to  him,  '  Naravahanadatta  thy  emperor
will  accomplish  thy  desire,'  so  he  has  come  here  to  you.  In
that  division  there  is  a  chief  monarch,  named  Mandaradeva,
who  is  evilly  disposed,  but,  though  mighty,  he  will  be  easy  for

1  Probably  devaninnitah  should  be  one  word.

2  See  Vol.  IV,  pp.  1  and  2.— n.m.p.


48  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

you  to  conquer,  when  you  have  obtained  the  sciences  peculiar
to  the  Vidyadharas.

"  But  the  king  named  Gaurimunda,  who  rules  in  the
midst  of  the  southern  division,  is  evil-minded  and  exceedingly
hard  to  conquer  on  account  of  the  might  of  his  magic  science.
Moreover,  he  is  a  great  friend  of  your  enemy  Manasavega.
Until  he  is  overcome  your  undertaking  will  not  prosper ;  so
acquire  as  quickly  as  possible  great  and  transcendent  power
of  science."

When  Pingalagandhara  had  said  this,  Dhanavati  spake  :
"Good,  my  son!  it  is  as  this  king  tells  thee.  Go  hence  to
the  land  of  the  Siddhas  x  and  propitiate  the  god  Siva,  in  order
that  thou  mayest  obtain  the  magic  sciences,  for  how  can
there  be  any  excelling  without  his  favour  ?  And  these  kings
will  be  assembled  there  to  protect  thee."  Then  Chitrangada
said  :  "  It  is  even  so  ;  but  I  will  advance  in  front  of  all :  let
us  conquer  our  enemies."

Then  Naravahanadatta  determined  to  do  as  they  had
advised,  and  he  performed  the  auspicious  ceremony  before
setting  out,  and  bowed  at  the  feet  of  his  tearful  parents  and
other  superiors,  and  received  their  blessing,  and  then  ascended
with  his  wives  and  ministers  in  a  splendid  palankeen  pro-
vided by  the  skill  of  Amitagati,  and  started  on  his  expedition,
obscuring  the  heaven  with  his  forces,  that  resembled  the
water  of  the  sea  raised  by  the  wind  at  the  end  of  a  kalpa,  as
it  were  proclaiming,  by  the  echoes  of  his  army's  roar  on  the
limits  of  the  horizon,  that  the  emperor  of  the  Vidyadharas
had  come  to  visit  them.

And  he  was  rapidly  conducted  by  the  king  of  the  Gan-
dharvas  and  the  chiefs  of  the  Vidyadharas  and  Dhanavati  to
that  mountain,  which  was  the  domain  of  the  Siddhas.  There
the  Siddhas  prescribed  for  him  a  course  of  self-mortification,
and  he  performed  asceticism  by  sleeping  on  the  ground,  bath-
ing in  the  early  morning,  and  eating  fruits.  And  the  kings
of  the  Vidyadharas  remained  surrounding  him  on  every  side,
guarding  him  unweariedly  day  and  night.  And  the  Vidya-
dhara  princesses,  contemplating  him  eagerly  while  he  was
performing  his  penance,  seemed  with  the  gleams  of  their  eyes

1  In  Sanskrit  Siddhakshetra.


THE  FIVE  MAIDENS  49

to  clothe  him  in  the  skin  of  a  black  antelope.  Others  showed
by  their  eyes  turned  inwards  out  of  anxiety  for  him,  and  their
hands  placed  on  their  breasts,  that  he  had  at  once  entered
their  hearts.

And  five  more  noble  maidens  of  the  Vidyadhara  race,
beholding  him,  were  inflamed  with  the  fire  of  love,  and  made
this  agreement  together :  "  We  five  friends  must  select  this
prince  as  our  common  husband,  and  we  must  marry  him  at
the  same  time,  not  separately ;  if  one  of  us  marries  him
separately,  the  rest  must  enter  the  fire  on  account  of  that
violation  of  friendship."

While  the  heavenly  maidens  were  thus  agitated  at  the
sight  of  him,  suddenly  great  portents  manifested  themselves
in  the  grove  of  ascetics.  A  very  terrible  wind  blew,  uproot-
ing splendid  trees,  as  if  to  show  that  even  thus  in  that  place
should  heroes  fall  in  fight ;  and  the  earth  trembled  as  if
anxious  as  to  what  all  that  could  mean,  and  the  hills  cleft
asunder,  as  if  to  give  an  opening  for  the  terrified  to  escape,
and  the  sky,  rumbling  awfully,  though  cloudless,1  seemed
to  say :  "  Ye  Vidyadharas,  guard,  guard  to  the  best  of  your
power,  this  emperor  of  yours."  And  Naravahanadatta,  in
the  midst  of  the  alarm  produced  by  these  portents,  remained
unmoved,  meditating  upon  the  adorable  three-eyed  god ;
and  the  heroic  kings  of  the  Gandharvas  and  lords  of  the
Vidyadharas  remained  guarding  him,  ready  for  battle,  ex-
pecting some  calamity ;  and  they  uttered  war-cries,  and
agitated  the  forest  of  their  lithe  swords,  as  if  to  scare  away
the  portents  that  announced  the  approach  of  evil.

And  the  next  day  after  this  the  army  of  the  Vidyadharas
was  suddenly  seen  in  the  sky,  dense  as  a  cloud  at  the  end  of
the  kalpa,  uttering  a  terrible  shout.  Then  Dhanavati,  call-
ing to  mind  her  magic  science,  said :  "  This  is  Gaurimunda,
come  with  Manasavega."  Then  those  kings  of  the  Vidya-
dharas and  the  Gandharvas  raised  their  weapons,  but  Gauri-
munda, with  Manasavega,  rushed  upon  them,  exclaiming  :
4  What  right  has  a  mere  man  to  rank  with  beings  like  us  ?

1  Perhaps  we  may  compare  Virgil,  Geo?'gics,  i,  487,  and  Horace,  Odes,  i,
34,  35,  and  Virgil,  JEneid,  vii,  141,  with  the  passages  there  quoted  by  Forbiger.
But  MSS.  Nos.  1882  and  2166  read  udbhuta.

VOL.   VIII.  D


50  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

So  I  will  to-day  crush  your  pride,  you  sky-goers  that  take
part  with  him."  When  Gaurlmunda  said  this,  Chitrangada
rushed  upon  him  angrily,  and  attacked  him.

And  King  Sagaradatta,  the  sovereign  of  the  Gandharvas,
and  Chandasimha,  and  Amitagati,  and  King  Vayupatha,  and
Pingalagandhara,  and  all  the  chiefs  of  the  Vidyadharas,  great
heroes  all,  rushed  upon  the  wicked  Manasavega,  roaring  like
lions,  followed  by  the  whole  of  their  forces.  And  right  ter-
rible was  that  storm  of  battle,  thick  with  the  clouds  of  dust
raised  by  the  army,  with  the  gleams  of  weapons  for  flashes  of
lightning,  and  a  falling  rain  of  blood.  And  so  Chitrangada
and  his  friends  made,  as  it  were,  a  great  sacrifice  for  the
demons,  which  was  full  of  blood  for  wine,  and  in  which  the
heads  of  enemies  were  strewn  as  an  offering.  And  streams
of  gore  flowed  away,  full  of  bodies  for  crocodiles,  and  floating
weapons  for  snakes,  and  in  which  marrow  intermingled  took
the  place  of  cuttlefish-bone.

Then  Gaurlmunda,  as  his  army  was  slain,  and  he  himself
was  nigh  to  death,  called  to  mind  the  magic  science  of  Gauri,
which  he  had  formerly  propitiated  and  made  well  disposed  to
him  ;  and  that  science  appeared  in  visible  form  with  three
eyes,  armed  with  the  trident,1  and  paralysed  the  chief  heroes
of  Naravahanadatta's  army.  Then  Gaurlmunda,  having  re-
gained strength,  rushed  with  a  loud  shout  towards  Narava-
hanadatta,  and  fell  on  him  to  try  his  strength  in  wrestling.
And  being  beaten  by  him  in  wrestling,  the  cogging  Vidya-
dhara  again  summoned  up  that  science,  and  by  its  power
he  seized  his  antagonist  in  his  arms  and  flew  up  to  the  sky.
However,  he  was  prevented  by  the  might  of  Dhanavati's
science  from  slaying  the  prince,  so  he  flung  him  down  on  the
Mountain  of  Fire.

But  Manasavega  seized  his  comrades,  Gomukha  and  the
rest,  and  flew  up  into  the  sky  with  them,  and  flung  them  at
random  in  all  directions.  But,  after  they  had  been  flung  up,
they  were  preserved  by  a  science  in  visible  shape  employed  by
DhanavatI,  and  placed  in  different  spots  on  the  earth.     And

1  It  is  clear  that  the  goddess  did  not  herself  appear,  so  trinetra  is  not
a  proper  name,  unless  we  translate  the  passage  "armed  with  the  trident  of
Gauri."


GANESA  IS  PROPITIATED  51

that  science  comforted  those  heroes,  one  by  one,  saying  to
them,  "  You  will  soon  recover  that  master  of  yours,  successful
and  flourishing,"  and  having  said  this  it  disappeared.

Then  Gaurimunda  went  back  home  with  Manasavega,
thinking  that  their  side  had  been  victorious.

But  Dhanavati  said  :  "  Naravahanadatta  will  return  to
you  after  he  has  attained  his  object ;  no  harm  will  befall
him."  And  thereupon  the  lords  of  the  Gandharvas  and  the
princes  of  the  Vidyadharas,  Chitrangada  and  the  others,  flung
off  their  paralysing  stupor,  and  went  for  the  present  to  their
own  abodes.  And  Dhanavati  took  her  daughter  Ajinavati,
with  all  her  fellow- wives,  and  went  to  her  own  home.

Manasavega,  for  his  part,  went  and  said  to  Madanaman-
chuka :  "  Your  husband  is  slain ;  so  you  had  better  marry  me."
But  she,  standing  in  front  of  him,  said  to  him,  laughing  :
"  He  will  slay  you ;  no  one  can  slay  him,  as  he  has  been
appointed  by  the  god."

But  when  Naravahanadatta  was  being  hurled  down  by
his  enemy  on  the  Mountain  of  Fire,  a  certain  heavenly  being
came  there,  and  received  him ;  and  after  preserving  his  life
he  took  him  quickly  to  the  cool  bank  of  the  Mandakini.  And
when  Naravahanadatta  asked  him  who  he  was,  he  comforted
him,  and  said  to  him  :  "I,  Prince,  am  a  king  of  the  Vidya-
dharas named  Amritaprabha,  and  I  have  been  sent  by  Siva
on  the  present  occasion  to  save  your  life.  Here  is  the  moun-
tain of  Kailasa  in  front  of  you,  the  dwelling-place  of  that
god ;  if  you  propitiate  Siva  there,  you  will  obtain  unimpeded
felicity.  So,  come,  I  will  take  you  there."  When  that  noble
Vidyadhara  had  said  this,  he  immediately  conveyed  him
there,  and  took  leave  of  him,  and  departed.

But  Naravahanadatta,  when  he  had  reached  Kailasa,
propitiated  with  asceticism  Ganesa,  whom  he  found  there  in
front  of  him.  And,  after  obtaining  his  permission,  he  entered
the  hermitage  of  Siva,  emaciated  with  self-mortification,  and
he  beheld  Nandin  at  the  door.  He  devoutly  circumambulated
him,  and  then  Nandin  said  to  him:  "Thou  hast  well-nigh
attained  all  thy  ends;  for  all  the  obstacles  that  hindered
thee  have  now  been  overcome  ;  so  remain  here,  and  perform
a  strict  vow  of  asceticism  that  will  subdue  sin,  until  thou


52  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

shalt  have  propitiated  the  adorable  god  ;  for  success  depends
on  purity."  When  Nandin  had  said  this,  Naravahanadatta
began  a  severe  course  of  penance  there,  living  on  air,  and
meditating  on  the  god  Siva  and  the  goddess  Parvati.

And  the  adorable  god  Siva,  pleased  with  his  asceticism,
granted  him  a  vision  of  himself,  and,  accompanied  by  the
goddess,  thus  spake  to  the  prince,  as  he  bent  before  him  :
"  Become  now  emperor  over  all  the  Vidyadharas,  and  let  all
the  most  transcendent  sciences  be  immediately  revealed  to
thee  !  By  my  favour  thou  shalt  become  invincible  by  thy
enemies,  and,  as  thou  shalt  be  proof  against  cut  or  thrust,
thou  shalt  slay  all  thy  foes.  And  when  thou  appearest,  the
sciences  of  thy  enemies  shall  be  of  no  avail  against  thee.  So
go  forth  :  even  the  science  of  Gauri  shall  be  subject  to  thee."
When  Siva  and  Gauri  had  bestowed  these  boons  on  Narava-
hanadatta, the  god  also  gave  him  a  great  imperial  chariot,  in
the  form  of  a  lotus,  made  by  Brahma.  Then  all  the  sciences
presented  themselves  to  the  prince  in  bodily  form,  and  ex-
pressed their  desire  to  carry  out  his  orders  by  saying  :  "  What
do  you  enjoin  on  us,  that  we  may  perform  it  ?  "

Accordingly  Naravahanadatta,  having  obtained  many
boons,  bowed  before  the  great  god,  and  ascended  the  heavenly
lotus  chariot,  after  he  had  received  permission  from  him  to
depart,  and  went  first  to  the  city  of  Amitagati,  named
Vakrapura ;  and  as  he  went,  the  sciences  showed  him  the
path,  and  the  bards  of  the  Siddhas  sang  his  praises.  And
Amitagati,  seeing  him  from  a  distance,  as  he  came  along
through  the  air,  mounted  on  a  chariot,  advanced  to  meet
him  and  bowed  before  him,  and  made  him  enter  his  palace.
And  when  he  described  how  he  had  obtained  all  these  magic
powers,  Amitagati  was  so  delighted  that  he  gave  him  as  a
present  his  own  daughter  named  Sulochana.  And  with  her,
thus  obtained,  like  a  second  imperial  fortune  of  the  Vidya-
dhara  race,  the  emperor  joyfully  passed  that  day  as  one  long
festival.


CHAPTER  CVIII

THE  next  day,  as  the  new  emperor,  Naravahana-
[M]  datta,  was  sitting  in  Vakrapura,  in  the  hall  of
audience,  a  certain  man  descended  from  heaven,
with  a  wand  in  his  hand,  and  came  up  to  him  and,  bowing
before  him,  said  to  him  :  "  Know,  0  King,  that  I  am  Paura-
ruchideva,  the  hereditary  warder  of  the  emperor  of  the
Vidyadharas,  and  I  have  come  here  to  tender  my  services
to  you  in  that  capacity."  When  Naravahanadatta  heard
this,  he  looked  at  the  face  of  Amitagati ;  and  he  said :  "It
is  true,  my  liege  "  :  so  Naravahanadatta  gladly  admitted  the
newcomer  to  the  office  of  warder.

Then  Dhanavati,  finding  out  by  her  power  what  had
occurred,  with  his  wives,  Vegavati  and  the  others,  and  her
son,  Chandasimha,  and  King  Pingalagandhara  with  Vayu-
patha,  and  Chitrangada  with  Sagaradatta,  and  Hemaprabha
and  the  others,  came  there,  obscuring  the  sun  with  their
armies,  as  if  declaring  beforehand  that  they  would  endure
no  fire  and  heat  in  their  foes.  When  they  arrived  they  fell
at  the  feet  of  that  emperor,  and  he  honoured  them  with  a
welcome  as  their  rank  deserved,  but,  out  of  great  veneration,
he  himself  fell  at  the  feet  of  Dhanavati,  and  she,  being
highly  pleased,  loaded  that  son-in-law  of  hers  with  blessings.
And  when  he  told  the  story  of  his  obtaining  magic  powers,
Chandasimha  and  the  others  were  exceedingly  gratified  at
their  emperor's  success.

And  the  emperor,  seeing  that  his  wives  had  arrived  in
his  presence,  said  to  Dhanavati :  "  Where  are  my  ministers  ?  "
And  she  answered  him  :  "  When  they  had  been  flung  in  all
directions  by  Manasavega,  I  saved  them  by  the  help  of  a
mighty  science,  and  placed  them  in  different  spots."  Then
he  had  them  brought  by  a  science  incarnate  in  bodily  form.
And  they  came,  and  inquired  after  his  welfare  and  clung  to
his  feet.  And  then  he  said  to  them :  "  Why  and  how  and
where  have  you  spent  so  many  days  ?  Tell  me  one  by  one
your  marvellous  tale."  Then  Gomukha  told  his  story  first:
53


54  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

"  When  I  was  flung  away  by  the  enemy  on  that  occasion,
some  goddess  bore  me  up  in  her  hands,  and  comforted  me,
and  placed  me  in  a  distant  forest,  and  disappeared.  Then
Gomukhas  *  was  mmded  in  my  affliction  to  abandon  the
Account  of  Ms  body,  by  hurling  myself  from  a  precipice ;  but
Adventures  a  certain  ascetic  came  up  to  me  and  dissuaded
me,  saying:  'Do  not  act  rashly,  Gomukha,  you  will  again
behold  your  master  when  he  has  gained  his  object.'  Then  I
said  to  him  :  '  Who  are  you,  and  how  do  you  know  that  ?  '
He  answered  :  '  Come  to  my  hermitage,  and  there  I  will  tell
you.'  Then  I  went  with  that  man,  who  by  his  knowing  my
name  had  proved  the  greatness  of  his  knowledge,  to  his  her-
mitage, which  was  called  Sivakshetra.  There  he  entertained
me  and  told  me  his  story  in  the  following  words  :

"  '  I  am  a  Brahman  named  Nagasvamin,  from  a  city
called  Kundina.  When  my  father  went  to  heaven,  I  went
to  Pataliputra,  and  repaired  to  a  teacher  named  Jayadatta,
Nagasvamin  to  acquire  learning.  But,  in  spite  of  all  the
and  the  teaching  I  got,  I  was  so  stupid  that  I  did  not

Witches  manage   to  learn  a  single  syllable  ;   so  all  the

pupils  there  made  game  of  me.  Then,  being  the  victim  of
contempt,  I  set  out  on  a  pilgrimage  to  the  shrine  of  the
goddess  Durga  in  the  Vindhya  mountains ;  and  when  I  had
got  half-way  I  came  across  a  city  named  Vakrolaka.

"  '  I  went  into  that  city  to  beg ;  and  in  one  house  the
mistress  gave  me  with  my  alms  a  red  lotus.  I  took  it,  and
went  on  to  another  house,  and  there  the  mistress  said  to  me,
when  she  saw  it :  "  Alas  !  a  witch  has  secured  possession
of  you !  See,  she  has  given  you  a  man's  hand,1  which  she
has  passed  off  on  you  for  a  red  lotus."  When  I  heard  that,
I  looked  myself,  and  lo !  it  was  no  lotus,  but  a  human  hand.
I  flung  it  away,  and  fell  at  her  feet,  and  said  :  "  Mother,
devise  some  expedient  for  me,  that  I  may  live."  When  she
heard  this  she  said :  "  Go  !  In  a  village  of  the  name  of
Karabha,  three  yojanas  distant  from  this  place,  there  is  a

1  Cf,  Webster's  play,  The  Dutchess  ofMalfey,  where  the  Duchess  says  :

"  What  witchcraft  doth  he  practise,  that  he  hath  left
A  dead  man's  hand  here  ?  "

For  a  note  on  the  u  Hand  of  Glory  "  see  Vol.  III.  pp.  150-154. — n.m.p.


THE  BROWN  COW  55

Brahman  of  the  name  of  Devarakshita.  He  has  in  his
house  a  splendid  brown  cow,  an  incarnation  of  Surabhi;
she  will  protect  you  during  this  night,  if  you  repair  to  her
for  refuge."

"  '  When  she  said  this,  I  ran,  full  of  fear,  and  reached,
at  the  close  of  the  day,  the  house  of  that  Brahman  in  the
village  of  Karabha.  When  I  had  entered,  I  beheld  that
brown  cow,  and  I  worshipped  her  and  said  :  "  Being  terrified,
goddess,  I  have  come  to  you  for  protection."  And  just
then,  night  having  set  in,  that  witch  came  there  through  the
air  with  other  witches,  threatening  me,  longing  for  my  flesh
and  blood.  When  the  brown  cow  saw  that,  she  placed  me
between  her  hoofs,  and  defended  me,  fighting  against  those
witches  all  the  livelong  night.  In  the  morning  they  went
away,  and  the  cow  said  to  me  in  an  articulate  voice  :  "  My
son,  I  shall  not  be  able  to  protect  you  the  next  night.  So
go  on  farther ;  at  a  distance  of  five  yojanas  from  this
place  there  is  a  mighty  Pasupata  ascetic  named  Bhutisiva,
dwelling  in  a  temple  of  Siva  in  a  forest.  He  possesses  super-
natural knowledge,  and  he  will  protect  you  for  this  one
night,  if  you  take  refuge  with  him."

"  '  When  I  heard  that,  I  bowed  before  her,  and  set  out
from  that  place ;  and  I  soon  reached  that  Bhutisiva,  and  took
refuge  with  him.  And  at  night  those  very  same  witches  came
there  also,  in  the  very  same  way.  Then  that  Bhutisiva  made
me  enter  the  inner  apartment  of  his  house,1  and  taking  up
a  position  at  the  door,  trident  in  hand,  kept  off  the  witches.
Next  morning,  Bhutisiva,  having  conquered  them,  gave  me
food,  and  said  to  me  :  "  Brahman,  I  shall  not  be  able  to
protect  you  any  longer ;  but  in  a  village  named  Sandhya-
vasa,  at  a  distance  of  ten  yojanas  from  this  place,  there  is  a
Brahman  named  Vasumati :  go  to  him  :  and  if  you  manage
to  get  through  this  third  night,  you  will  escape  altogether."  2
"  '  When  he  said  this  to  me,  I  bowed  before  him,  and  set
out  from  that  place.  But,  on  account  of  the  length  of  the
journey  that  I  had  to  make,  the  sun  set  before  I  had  reached

1  I  read  antargriham  as  one  word.

2  This  method  of  passing  on  the  hero  is  somewhat  similar  to  the  "older
and  older"  motif,  for  which  see  Vol.  II,  p.  190wl. — n.m.p.


56  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

my  destination.  And  when  night  had  set  in,  the  witches
pursued  after  me  and  caught  me.  And  they  seized  me  and
went  off  with  me  through  the  air,  much  pleased.  But  there-
upon some  other  witches  of  great  power  flew  past  them  in
front.  And  suddenly  there  arose  between  the  two  parties
a  tumultuous  fight.  And  in  the  confusion  I  escaped  from
the  hands  of  my  captors,  and  fell  to  the  ground  in  a  very
desolate  part  of  the  country.1

"  *  And  there  I  saw  a  certain  great  palace,  which  seemed
to  say  to  me  with  its  open  door  :  "  Come  in."  So  I  fled
into  it  bewildered  with  fear,  and  I  beheld  a  lady  of  wonderful
beauty,  surrounded  with  a  hundred  ladies-in-waiting,  gleam-
ing with  brightness,  like  a  protecting  herb  2  that  shines  in
the  night,  made  by  the  Creator  out  of  pity  for  me.  I  im-
mediately recovered  my  spirits  and  questioned  her,  and  she
said  to  me  :  "I  am  a  Yakshini  named  Sumitra,  and  I  am
thus  here  owing  to  a  curse.  And  in  order  that  my  curse  may
come  to  an  end  I  have  been  directed  to  marry  a  mortal :  so
marry  me,  as  you  have  unexpectedly  arrived  here ;  fear
not."  When  she  had  said  this,  she  quickly  gave  orders  to
her  servants  ;    and  she  provided  me,  to  my  great  delight,

1  In  the  above  wild  story  the  hero  has  to  endure  the  assaults  of  the
witches  on  three  successive  nights.  So  in  the  story,  "  The  Headless  Princess  "
(Ralston's  Russian  Folk-Tales,  p.  271),  the  priest's  son  has  to  read  the  Psalter
over  the  dead  princess  three  nights  running.  He  is  hardest  pressed  on  the
last  night;  and  on  each  occasion  at  daybreak  the  "devilry  vanished."  In
the  same  way  in  "The  Soldier's  Midnight  Watch"  (ibid.,  p.  274)  the  soldier
has  three  nights  of  increasing  severity.  So  in  Southey's  Old  Woman  of
Berkeley,  the  assaults  continue  for  three  nights,  and  on  the  third  are  successful.

Cf.   also  the  tale  of  Aristomenes  in  Book   I  of  Apuleius's  Golden  Ass,

but  here  the  witches'  assaults  take  place  on  a  single  night. — n.m.p.

2  Kuhn,  in  his  Sagen  aus  Westfalen,  vol.  ii,  p.  29,  gives  a  long  list  of  herbs
that  protect  men  from  witches.     The  earliest  instance  in  literature  is  perhaps

"...  that  Moly
That  Hermes  once  to  wise  Ulysses  gave."

Milton,  Comus,  655-656.

See  also  Bartsch,  Sagen  aus  Meklenburg,  vol.  ii,  p.  37. Milton's  reference

is  to  Odyssey,  x,  302-306.  For  the  possible  identification  of  the  herb  see
Champault,  Pheniciens  et  Grecs  en  Italie  d'apres  VOdyssee,  1906,  p.  504  et  seq.  ;
Berard,  Les  Pheniciens  et  VOdyssee,  vol.  ii,  p.  288  et  seq.,  and  Henry,  Classical
Review,  December  1906,  p.  434. — n.m.p.


THE  MAGICAL  HORSE  57

with  baths  and  unguents,  food  and  drink,  and  garments.
Strange  was  the  contrast  between  the  terror  caused  by  those
witches  and  the  happiness  that  immediately  followed.  Even
fate  itself  cannot  comprehend  the  principle  that  makes  men
fall  into  happiness  or  misery.

"  '  Then  I  remained  there  in  happiness  with  that  Yakshini
during  those  days  ;  but  at  last  one  day  she  said  to  me  of  her
own  accord :  "  Brahman,  my  curse  is  at  an  end  ;  so  I  must
leave  this  place  at  once.  However,  by  my  favour  you  shall
have  divine  insight ;  and,  though  an  ascetic,  you  shall  have
all  enjoyments  at  your  command,  and  be  free  from  fear.
But  as  long  as  you  are  here,  do  not  visit  the  middle  block  of
buildings  of  this  palace  of  mine."  *  When  she  had  said  this,
she  disappeared ;  and  thereupon,  I,  out  of  curiosity,  went  up
to  the  middle  block  of  buildings,  and  there  I  saw  a  horse.
I  went  up  to  the  horse,  and  he  flung  me  from  him  with  a  kick ;
and  immediately  I  found  myself  in  this  temple  of  Siva.2

"  c  Since  that  time  I  have  remained  here,  and  I  have
gradually  acquired  supernatural  powers.  Accordingly,  though
I  am  a  mortal,  I  possess  knowledge  of  the  three  times.3
In  the  same  way  do  all  men  in  this  world  find  successes
beset  with  difficulties.  So  do  you  remain  in  this  place  ;
Siva  will  bestow  on  you  the  success  that  you  desire.'

"  When  the  wise  being  had  told  me  all  this,  I  conceived
hopes  of  recovering  you,  and  I  remained  there  some  days,
in  his  hermitage.  And  to-day,  my  lord,  Siva  in  a  dream
informed  me  of  your  success,  and  some  heavenly  nymph
seized  me  up,  and  brought  me  here.  This  is  the  history  of
my  adventures."

When  Gomukha  had  said  this,  he  stopped,  and  then
Marubhuti  began  to  tell  his  tale  in  the  presence  of  Narava-
hanadatta :

1  For  the  "Taboo"  or  "Forbidden  Chamber"  motif  see  Vol.  II,  pp.  222,
22.Sn1,  252,  253;  and  Vol.  VII,  pp.  21,  21ft3,  212.  For  its  connection  with
the  "  Swan-Maiden  "  motif  see  Appendix  I,  pp.  213,  234.— n.m.p.

2  For  instantaneous  transportations  see  Vol.  II,  p.  223,  223ft1 ;  Vol.  VI,
pp.  213,  279,  and  Vol.  VII,  pp.  24,  225,  225ft1.  To  the  parallels  quoted  by
Ralston  may  be  added,  Prym  and  Socin's  Syrische  Marchen,  p.  116;  Bernhard
Schmidt's  Griechischc  Marche?i,  p.  94 ;  and  Coelho's  Contos  Portuguezes,  p.  63.

3  Past,  present  and  future. — n.m.p.


58  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

"  When  I  was  flung  away  on  that  occasion  by  Manasa-
vega,  some  divinity  took  me  up  in  her  hands,  and,  placing
me  in  a  distant  forest,  disappeared.  Then  I  wandered  about
MarubhTiiis  afflicted,  and  anxious  to  obtain  some  means  of
Account  of  his  committing  suicide,  when  I  saw  a  certain  hermitage
Adventures  encircled  by  a  river.  I  entered  it,  and  beheld
an  ascetic  with  matted  hair  sitting  on  a  slab  of  rock,  and
I  bowed  before  him  and  went  up  to  him.  He  said  to  me :
•  Who  are  you,  and  how  did  you  reach  this  uninhabited
land  ?  '  Thereupon  I  told  him  my  whole  story.  Then  he
understood  and  said  to  me  :  '  Do  not  slay  yourself  now  !  You
shall  learn  here  the  truth  about  your  master,  and  afterwards
you  shall  do  what  is  fitting.'

"  In  accordance  with  this  advice  of  his  I  remained  there,
eager  for  tidings  of  you,  my  liege  :  and  while  I  was  there
some  heavenly  nymphs  came  to  bathe  in  the  river.  Then
the  hermit  said  to  me  :  c  Go  quickly  *  and  carry  off  the
clothes  of  one  of  those  nymphs  bathing  there,2  and  then
you  will  learn  tidings  of  your  master.'  When  I  heard  that,
I  did  as  he  advised  me,  and  that  nymph  whose  garments  I
had  taken  followed  me,  with  her  bathing-dress  dripping  with
moisture,3  and  with  her  arms  crossed  in  front  of  her  breasts.

"  That  hermit  said  to  her  :  '  If  you  tell  us  tidings  of
Naravahanadatta  you  may  have  back  your  two  garments.'
Then  she  said  :  '  Naravahanadatta  is  at  present  on  Mount
Kailasa,  engaged  in  worshipping  Siva,  and  in  a  few  days  he
will  be  the  emperor  of  the  Vidyadharas.'

1  I.e.  asu ;  but  the  D.  text  reads  asu,  which  suggests  that  the  hermit
pointed  out  one  particular  girl  from  "among  them  "  {asu)  and  told  the  youth
to  get  her  clothes.     Either  reading  might  be  correct. — n.m.p.

2  See  Appendix  I. — n.m.p.

3  There  seems  to  be  a  corrupted  reading  here.  Both  the  B.  and  D.
texts  read  :  hrita-vastrd  'ardra-vasana,  which  literally  means,  "  the  robbed  one
clothed  in  wet  clothing/'  which  is  absurd.  We  have  just  read  that  she  has
taken  off  her  clothes  to  bathe,  and  on  seeing  they  had  been  taken,  follows
the  thief,  covering  her  nakedness  as  best  she  can  with  her  hands.  Unable
to  make  sense,  Tawney  changes  "dress"  to  "bathing-dress,"  which  is,  of
course,  ridiculous.  The  intended  sense  is  fairly  clear,  though  the  correct
reading  is  unknown.  It  must  either  be  "with  moisture  as  her  only  dress,"
or  "with  her  body  (or  skin)  dripping  with  moisture."  The  italics  show  where
the  substituted  word  occurs. — n.m.p.


THE  COOKED  CHILD  59

"  After  she  had  said  this,  that  heavenly  nymph  became,
in  virtue  of  a  curse,  the  wife  of  that  ascetic,  having  made
acquaintance  with  him  by  conversing  with  him.1  So  the
ascetic  lived  with  that  Vidyadhari,  and  on  account  of  her
prophecy  I  conceived  the  hope  of  being  reunited  with  you,
and  I  went  on  living  there.  And  in  a  few  days  the  heavenly
nymph  became  pregnant,  and  brought  forth  a  child,  and  she
said  to  the  ascetic  :  '  My  curse  has  been  brought  to  an  end
by  living  with  you.2  If  you  desire  to  see  any  more  of  me,
cook  this  child  of  mine  with  rice  and  eat  it ;  then  you  will
be  reunited  to  me.'  When  she  had  said  this  she  went  away,
and  that  ascetic  cooked  her  child  with  rice,  and  ate  it ;  and
then  he  flew  up  into  the  air  and  followed  her.

"  At  first  I  was  unwilling  to  eat  of  that  dish,  though  he
urged  me  to  do  so  ;  but,  seeing  that  eating  of  it  bestowed
supernatural  powers,  I  took  two  grains  of  rice  from  the
cooking-vessel,  and  ate  them.  That  produced  in  me  the
effect  that,  wherever  I  spat,  gold 3  was  immediately  produced.
Then  I  roamed  about,  relieved  from  my  poverty,  and  at  last
I  reached  a  town.     There  I  lived  in  a  house  of  a  courtesan,

1  The  three  India  Office  MSS.  read  samstavad.

2  Cf.  Vol.  Ill,  p.  25,  25n2  ;  and  for  what  follows  Vol.  II,  p.  234.

3  Cf.  Vol.  V,  p.  11,  and  the  note  on  that  page.  In  Gonzenbach's
Sicilianiscke  M'drchen,  Quaddaruni's  sister  drops  pearls  and  precious  stones
from  her  hair  whenever  she  combs  it.  Dr  Kohler  in  his  note  on  this  tale  gives
many  European  parallels.  In  a  Swedish  story  a  gold  ring  falls  from  the
heroine's  mouth  whenever  she  speaks,  and  in  a  Norwegian  story  gold  coins.
I  may  add  to  the  parallels  quoted  by  Dr  Kohler,  No.  36  in  Coelho's  Contos

Portugueses,  in  which  tale  pearls  drop  from  the  heroine's  mouth. Tales  of

gold-  and  jewel-spitting  men  or  animals  occur  fairly  widely  in  Russian  folklore.
Thus,  in  a  Votyak  tale  a  horse  produces  silver  coins ;  and  in  another  one,  from
the  same  source,  we  read  of  a  youth  who,  as  a  result  of  eating  the  heart  of
a  golden  eagle,  produces  spittle  which  turns  to  gold  (Coxwell,  op.  cit.,  pp.  588,
589,  590).  In  a  Finnish  tale  the  hero  eats  a  little  bird  and  spits  gold  in
consequence,  and  eventually  becomes  a  tsar  (Coxwell,  op.  cit.,  p.  644 ;  see  also
pp.  1029,  1032).  In  the  Kalmuck  Siddhi-Kiir  the  poor  man  and  his  companion
spit  forth  gold  and  jewels  (Jiilg,  No.  2 ;  Busk,  op.  cit.,  No.  2,  p.  17  et  seq. ;  and
Coxwell,  op.  cit.,  p.  183  et  seq.).  In  the  Tibetan  version  of  the  story  one
spits  gold  and  the  other  turquoises  (Francke,  "Die  Geschichten  des  toten
No-rub-can,"  Zeit.  d.  d.  morg.  Gesell.,  vol.  lxxv,  p.  72  et  seq.).  Cf.  Mahabharata,
Drona  Parva,  55  ;  and  Santi  Parva,  29.  See,  further,  Ocean,  Vol.  IX,  «  Addenda
et  Corrigenda." — n.m.p.


60  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

and,  thanks  to  the  gold  I  was  able  to  produce,  indulged  in
the  most  lavish  expenditure  ;  but  the  bawd,  eager  to  dis-
cover my  secret,  treacherously  gave  me  an  emetic.  That
made  me  vomit,  and  in  the  process  the  two  grains  of  rice,
that  I  had  previously  eaten,  came  out  of  my  mouth,  looking
like  two  glittering  rubies.  And  no  sooner  had  they  come
out,  than  the  bawd  snapped  them  up,  and  swallowed  them.
So  I  lost  my  power  of  producing  gold,  of  which  the  bawd
thus  deprived  me.

"  I  thought  to  myself :  '  Siva  still  retains  his  crescent,
and  Vishnu  his  kaustubha  jewel * ;  but  I  know  what  would
be  the  result  if  those  two  deities  were  to  fall  into  the  clutches
of  a  bawd.2  But  such  is  this  world,  full  of  marvels,  full  of
frauds ;  who  can  fathom  it,  or  the  sea,  at  any  time  ?  '
With  such  sad  reflections  in  my  bosom  I  went  despondent  to
a  temple  of  Durga,  to  propitiate  the  goddess  with  asceticism,
in  order  to  recover  you.  And  after  I  had  fasted  for  three
nights  the  goddess  gave  me  this  command  in  a  dream  :  '  Thy
master  has  obtained  all  he  desires  :  go,  and  behold  him  '  ;
upon  hearing  this  I  woke  up  ;  and  this  very  morning  some
goddess  carried  me  to  your  feet ;  this,  Prince,  is  the  story  of
my  adventures."

When  Marubhuti  had  said  this,  Naravahanadatta  and  his
courtiers  laughed  at  him  for  having  been  tricked  by  a  bawd.

Then  Harisikha  said  :  "  On  that  occasion  when  I  was
seized  by  my  enemy3  some  divinity  saved  me  and  deposited

1  It  was  one  of  the  marvellous  things  which  came  up  at  the  Churning  of
the  Ocean.     See  Mahdbharata,  i,  18. — n.m.p.

2  All  the  India  Office  MSS.  read  'dyapi  for  yopi  and  two  seem  to
read  apatane.  I  find  apatana  in  the  Petersburg  lexicon,  but  not  apatana.  I
have  translated  the  passage  loosely  so  as  to  make  good  sense.  The  Sanskrit
College  MS.  gives  a  reading  which  exactly  suits  my  translation  :  Sachandrardhah
Sivo   'dydpi   Harir  yas   cha   sakaustubhah    Tattayorvedmi   kuttanya   gocharapatane

phalam. D.  fully  agrees  with  this  reading,  except  that  for  yas  cha  it  has

yacca.  This  changes  and  improves  the  meaning  slightly:  "That  Siva  still
retains  his  crescent  and  Vishnu  his  kaustubha  jewel,  they  have  to  thank  for  it,
I  am  sure,  the  fact  that  they  did  not  fall  into  the  clutches  of  a  bawd."  The
italics  show  the  translation  as  suggested  by  Speyer,  op.  cit.,  pp.   143,   144.

N.M.P.

3  Tawney  could  not  have  been  pleased  with  B.'s  reading,  praptam — "was
seized."     Read  prastam,  with  the  D.  text — "thrown  down." — n.m.p.


PREPARATIONS  FOR  THE  BATTLE  61

me  in  Ujjayini.  There  I  was  so  unhappy  that  I  conceived
the  design  of  abandoning  the  body;  so  at  nightfall  I  went
into  the  cemetery  and  proceeded  to  construct  a  pyre  with
Harisikhas  the  logs  there-  1  lighted  it,  and  began  to  wor-
Account  of  Ms  ship  the  fire,  and  while  I  was  thus  engaged  a
Adventures  prince  of  the  demons,  named  Talajangha,  came
up  to  me,  and  said  to  me  :  '  Why  do  you  enter  the  fire  ?
Your  master  is  alive,  and  you  shall  be  united  with  him,  now
that  he  has  obtained  the  supernatural  powers  he  desired.'
With  these  words,  the  demon,  though  naturally  cruel,  lovingly
dissuaded  me  from  death  :  even  some  stones  melt  when  fate
is  propitious.  Then  I  went  and  remained  for  a  long  time
performing  asceticism  in  front  of  the  god ;  and  some  divinity
has  to-day  brought  me  to  you,  my  liege."

Thus  Harisikha  told  his  tale,  and  the  others  in  their  turn
told  theirs,  and  then,  at  the  suggestion  of  Amitagati,  King
Naravahanadatta  incited  the  venerable  Dhanavati,  adored
by  the  Vidyadharas,  to  bestow  all  the  sciences  on  those
ministers  of  his  also.  Then  all  his  ministers  also  became
Vidyadharas  ;  and  Dhanavati  said  :  "  Now  conquer  your
enemies  "  ;  so  on  a  fortunate  day  the  hero  gave  orders  that
the  imperial  troops  should  march  out  towards  the  city  of
Gaurimunda,  called  Govindakuta.

Then  the  army  of  the  Vidyadharas  mounted  up  into  the
sky,  obscuring  the  sun,  looking  like  a  rising  of  Rahu  out  of
due  time,  chilling  to  the  foe.  And  Naravahanadatta  himself
ascended  the  pericarp  of  the  lotus  chariot,  and  placed  his
wives  on  the  filaments,  and  his  friends  on  the  leaves,  and,
preceded  by  Chandasimha  and  the  others,  set  out  through
the  air  to  conquer  his  enemies.  And  when  he  had  completed
half  his  journey  he  came  to  the  palace  of  Dhanavati,  which
was  called  Matangapura,  and  he  stayed  there  that  day,  and
she  did  the  honours  of  the  house  to  him.  And  while  he  was
there,  he  sent  an  ambassador  to  challenge  to  the  combat  the
Vidyadhara  princes  Gaurimunda  and  Manasavega.

The  next  day  he  deposited  his  wives  in  Matangapura,
and  went  with  the  Vidyadhara  kings  to  Govindakuta.  There
Gaurimunda  and  Manasavega  came  out  to  fight  with  them,
and  Chandasimha  and  his  colleagues  met  them  face  to  face.


62  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

When  the  battle  began,  brave  warriors  fell  like  trees  marked
out  for  the  axe,  and  torrents  of  blood  flowed  on  the  mountain
Govindakuta.  The  combat,  eager  to  devour  the  lives  of
heroes,  yawned  like  a  demon  of  destruction,  with  tongues  in
the  form  of  flexible  swords  greedily  licking  up  blood.1  That
great  feast  of  slaughter,  terrible  with  the  rhythmic  clapping
of  hands  on  the  part  of  Vetalas  drunk  with  blood  and  flesh,
and  covered  with  palpitating  corpses  for  dancers,  gave  great
delight  to  the  demons.

Then  Manasavega  met  Naravahanadatta  face  to  face  in
the  conflict,  and  the  prince  himself  rushed  on  him  in  wrath.
And  having  rushed  on  him,  that  emperor  seized  the  villain
by  the  hair,  and  at  once  cut  off  his  head  with  his  sword.
When  Gaurimunda  saw  that,  he  too  sprang  forward  in  a  fury,
and  Naravahanadatta  dragged  him  along  by  the  hair,  for  the
power  of  his  science  left  him  as  soon  as  he  saw  the  prince,
and  flung  him  on  the  ground,  and  seizing  his  legs  whirled
him  round  in  the  air,  and  dashed  him  to  pieces  on  a  rock.  In
this  way  he  slew  Gaurimunda  and  Manasavega ;  and  the  rest
of  their  army,  being  terrified,2  took  to  flight.  And  a  rain  of
flowers  fell  into  the  lap  of  that  emperor,  and  all  the  gods
in  heaven  exclaimed  :  "  Bravo  !  Bravo  !  "  Then  Narava-
hanadatta, with  all  those  kings  that  followed  him,  entered
the  palace  of  Gaurimunda  ;  and  immediately  the  chiefs  of  the
Vidyadharas  who  were  connected  with  Gaurimunda's  party
came  and  submitted  humbly  to  his  sway.

Then  Dhanavati  came  up  to  that  sovereign  in  the  midst
of  the  rejoicings  on  account  of  his  having  taken  possession  of
his  kingdom  after  slaying  all  his  enemies,  and  said  to  him  :
"  My  liege,  Gaurimunda  has  left  a  daughter  named  Ihatma-
tika,  the  belle  of  the  three  worlds  ;  you  should  marry  that
maiden."  When  she  said  this  to  the  king,  he  immediately
sent  for  the  girl,  and  married  her,  and  passed  the  day  very
happily  in  her  society.

The  next  morning  he  sent  Vegavati  and  Prabhavati,  and

1  More  literally,  "  smeared  with  blood  and  relishing  it."  Bohtlingk  and
Roth  seem  to  think  rasat  refers  to  some  noise  made  by  the  swords.

2  All  the  India  Office  MSS.  read  bhltam  for  the  bhimam  of  Brockhaus'
text.


THE  TWO  SPIES  63

had  Madanamanchuka  brought  by  them  from  the  town  of
Manasavega.  When  brought,  she  looked  upon  that  hero  in  his
prosperity,  who  had  destroyed  the  darkness  of  his  enemies,
with  face  expanded  and  wet  with  tears  of  joy  ;  and  at  the
end  of  her  night  of  separation  she  enjoyed  indescribable
happiness,  like  a  lotus  bed  the  open  flowers  of  which  are
wet  with  dew.  Then  he  bestowed  on  her  all  the  sciences,  and,
having  pined  for  her  long,  he  exulted  in  the  society  of  his
beloved,  who  had  thus  in  a  moment  attained  the  rank  of  a
Vidyadhari.  And  in  the  garden  of  Gaurimunda's  city  he
spent  those  days  with  his  wives  in  the  joys  of  a  banquet.
And  then  he  sent  Prabhavati,  and  had  Bhagirathayasas  also
brought  there,  and  bestowed  on  her  the  sciences.

And  one  day,  as  the  emperor  was  sitting  in  his  hall  of
audience,  two  Vidyadharas  came  and  said  to  him  with  due
respect :  "  Your  Majesty,  we  went  hence,  by  the  orders  of
Dhanavati,  to  the  northern  division  of  the  land  of  the
Vidyadharas,  to  find  out  the  movements  of  Mandaradeva.
And  there  we,  being  ourselves  invisible,  saw  that  king  of
the  Vidyadharas  in  his  hall  of  audience,  and  he  happened
to  be  saying  with  regard  to  your  Highness  :  '  I  hear  that
Naravahanadatta  has  obtained  the  sovereignty  over  the
Vidyadharas,  and  has  slain  Gaurimunda  and  the  rest  of  his
opponents  ;  so  it  will  not  do  for  me  to  overlook  that  enemy  ;
on  the  contrary,  I  must  nip  him  in  the  bud.'  When  we  heard
that  speech  of  his,  we  came  here  to  tell  you."

When  the  assembly  of  Naravahanadatta's  partisans
heard  this  from  the  spies,  they  were  all  beside  themselves
with  anger,  and  appeared  like  a  lotus  bed  smitten  by  the
wind.  The  arms  of  Chitrangada,  frequently  waved  and
extended,1  seemed  with  the  tinkling  of  their  bracelets  to  be
demanding  the  signal  for  combat.  The  necklace  of  Amitagati,
rising  up  2  on  his  breast,  as  he  sighed  with  anger,  seemed  to

1  Speyer  (op.  cit.,  p.  169)  would  read  khe  in  preference  to  svau;  thus,
Chitrangada  makes  strong  movements  with  his  arms  in  the  air.  Tawney  must
have  realised  that  svau,  "  own/'  was  superfluous. — n.m.p.

2  Speyer  (op.  cit.,  p.  144)  would  read,  with  the  D.  text,  utphalan  instead
of  B.'s  utphullak;  the  latter  word  does  not  signify  "rise  up,"  but  "wide  open"
or  "  expanded." — n.m.p.


64  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

say  again  and  again:  "Rouse  thyself,  rouse  thyself,  hero."
Pingalagandhara,  striking  the  ground  with  his  hand  so  that
it  resounded,  seemed  to  be  going  through  a  prelude  intro-
ductory to  the  crushing  of  his  enemies.  A  frown  took  its
seat  upon  the  face  of  Vayupatha,  looking  like  a  bow  strung
by  fate  for  the  destruction  of  his  foes.  Chandasimha,
angrily  pressing  one  hand  against  the  other,  seemed  to  say  :
"  Even  thus  will  I  pulverise  my  enemies."  The  arm  of
Sagaradatta,  struck  by  his  hand,  produced  a  sound  that
rang  through  the  air,  and  seemed  to  challenge  that  foe.  But
Naravahanadatta,  though  angry,  was  no  whit  disturbed ;  for
imperturbability  is  the  characteristic  sign  of  the  greatness
of  great  ones.

Then  he  resolved  to  march  forth  to  conquer  his  enemy,
after  obtaining  the  jewels  essential  to  an  emperor  of  the
Vidyadharas.  So  the  emperor  mounted  a  chariot,  with  his
wives  and  his  ministers,  and  set  out  from  that  Govindakuta.
And  all  his  partisans,  the  kings  of  the  Gandharvas  and  the
chiefs  of  the  Vidyadharas,  accompanied  by  their  armies,
marched  along  with  him,  encircling  him,  as  the  planets  do
the  moon.  Then  Naravahanadatta  reached  the  Himalayas,
preceded  by  Dhanavati,  and  found  there  a  large  lake.  With
its  white  lotuses  like  lofty  umbrellas  and  its  soaring  swans
like  waving  chowries,  it  seemed  to  have  brought  a  present
fit  for  a  sovereign.  With  its  lofty  waves  flung  up  towards
him  like  beckoning  hands  at  no  great  distance,  it  seemed  to
summon  him  again  and  again  to  take  the  bath  which  should
ensure  him  supreme  sovereignty.  Then  Vayupatha  said  to
the  king  :  "  My  emperor,  you  must  go  down  and  bathe  in
this  lake  "  ;  so  he  went  down  to  bathe  in  it.  And  a  heavenly
voice  said  :  "  None  but  an  emperor  can  ever  succeed  in
bathing  in  this  lake,  so  now  you  may  consider  the  imperial
dignity  secured  to  you."

When  the  emperor  heard  that  he  was  delighted,  and  he
sported  in  the  water  of  that  lake  with  his  wives,  as  Varuna
does  in  the  sea.  He  took  pleasure  in  watching  them  with
the  moist  garments  clinging  to  their  bodies,1  with  the  fasten-
ings of  their  hair  loosened,  and  their  eyes  reddened  by  the
1  Cf.  Vol.  I,  p.  69,  69n2.— n.m.p.


THE  FAIR  VAYUVEGAYASAS  65

washing  into  them  of  antimony.1  The  rows  of  birds,  flying
up  with  loud  cries  from  that  lake,  appeared  like  the  girdles
of  its  presiding  nymphs  advancing  to  meet  him.  And  the
lotuses,  eclipsed  by  the  beauty  of  the  lotus-like  faces  of  his
wives,  plunged  beneath  the  waves  as  if  ashamed.  And  after
bathing,  Naravahanadatta,  with  his  attendants,  spent  that  day
on  the  bank  of  that  lake.

There  the  successful  prince,  with  his  wives  and  ministers,
spent  his  time  in  jocose  conversation,  and  next  morning  he  set
forth  thence  in  his  chariot  with  his  army.  And  as  he  was
going  along,  he  reached  the  city  of  Vayupatha,  which  lay  in
his  way ;  and  he  stayed  there  a  day  to  please  him.  There  he
fell  in  love  with  a  maiden,  that  he  came  across  in  a  garden,
the  sister  of  Vayupatha,  by  name  Vayuvegayasas.  She,
while  amusing  herself  in  a  garden  on  the  bank  of  the
Hemabaluka 2  river,  saw  him  arrive,  and  though  in  love  with
him  disappeared  at  once.  Then  Naravahanadatta,  supposing
that  she  had  turned  her  back  on  him  for  some  reason  other
than  the  real  one,  returned  with  downcast  face  to  his  quarters.
There  the  queens  found  out  the  adventure  that  had  befallen
the  king  by  means  of  Marubhuti,  who  was  with  him  (for
Gomukha  was  too  clever  for  them  to  try  him),  and  then  they
made  all  kinds  of  jokes  at  the  king's  expense,  while  Gomukha
stood  by  ashamed  at  the  indiscretion  of  Marubhuti.

Then  Gomukha,  seeing  the  king  out  of  countenance,
consoled  him,  and,  in  order  to  ascertain  the  real  sentiments
of  Vayuvegayasas,  went  to  her  city.  There  Vayupatha  saw
him  suddenly  arrived,  as  if  to  take  a  look  at  the  city,  and  he

1  See  Vol.  I,  pp.  211,  212.  Whether  "antimony"  or  "galena"  is  the
correct  translation  here  is  hard  to  say.  As  both  are  usual  for  the  eyes,  in  the
form  of  a  black  powder,  mistakes  have  often  occurred,  not  only  by  the  Hindus
and  Mohammedans  (Watt,  Economic  Products,  vol.  i,  p.  271),  but  even  by
geologists  (La  Touche,  Bibliography  of  Indian  Geology,  vol.  ii,  p.  13).  In
modern  days  galena  is  used  much  more  than  antimony,  of  which  the  Indian
output  is  very  small ;  so  also  in  Burma,  whence  some  of  the  Indian  supplies
were  derived.  (See  my  Mineral  Resources  of  Burma,  pp.  Ill,  112,  with
bibliographical  references.)  The  English  word  antimony  is  probably  derived
from  the  Arabic  al-ithmid.  For  its  etymological  history  see  L.  L.  Bonaparte,
"Antimony,"  Academy,  23rd  February  1884,  p.  135. — n.m.p.

2  The  word  means  "  having  sands  of  gold."

VOL.   VIII.  B


66  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

lovingly  entertained  him,  and  taking  him  aside  said  to  him  :
"  I  have  an  unmarried  sister  named  Vayuvegayasas,  and
holy  seers  have  prophesied  that  she  is  destined  to  be  the  wife
of  an  emperor.  So  I  am  desirous  of  giving  her  as  a  present
to  the  Emperor  Naravahanadatta  ;  pray  do  your  best  to
bring  about  the  accomplishment  of  my  wish.  And  with  this
very  object  in  view  I  was  preparing  to  come  to  you."

When  the  minister  Gomukha  had  been  thus  addressed  by
Vayupatha,  he  said  to  him  :  "  Although  this  prince  of  ours  set
out  primarily  with  the  object  of  conquering  his  enemies,  still,
you  have  only  to  make  the  request,  and  I  will  arrange  this
matter  for  you."  With  these  words  Gomukha  took  leave  of
him,  and  going  back  informed  Naravahanadatta  that  he  had
gained  his  object  without  any  solicitation.

And  the  next  day  Vayupatha  came  in  person  and  re-
quested the  favour,  and  the  sagacious  Gomukha  said  to  the
king  :  "  My  Prince,  you  must  not  refuse  the  request  of
Vayupatha;  he  is  your  faithful  ally;  your  Majesty  should
do  whatever  he  asks."

Then  the  king  consented  to  do  it;  and  Vayupatha  him-
self brought  his  younger  sister,  and  bestowed  her  on  the
emperor,  against  her  will.  And  while  the  marriage  was
being  performed  she  exclaimed  :  "  Ye  guardians  of  the
world,  I  am  being  bestowed  in  marriage  by  my  brother  by
force,  and  against  my  will,  so  I  have  not  committed  any  sin
thereby."  When  she  said  this,  all  the  females  belonging  to
Vayupatha's  household  made  such  a  noise  that  no  outsiders
heard  what  she  said.  But  the  king  was  put  out  of  counten-
ance by  her  speech,  so  Gomukha  was  anxious  to  find  some
means  of  ascertaining  its  import,  and  he  roamed  hither  and
thither  with  that  object.

And  after  he  had  roamed  about  a  while  he  saw,  in  a  certain
retired  spot,  four  Vidyadhara  maidens  preparing  to  enter  the
fire  at  the  same  time.  And  when  he  asked  them  the  cause,
those  fair  ones  told  him  how  Vayuvegayasas  had  broken  her
solemn  agreement.  Then  Gomukha  went  and  told  it  to
King  Naravahanadatta  in  the  presence  of  all  there,  exactly
as  he  had  seen  and  heard.

When  the  king  heard  it  he  smiled,  but  Vayuvegayasas


THE  AGREEMENT  OF  THE  FIVE  67

said :  "  Arise,  my  husband,  let  us  two  quickly  go  and  save
these  maidens ;  afterwards  I  will  tell  you  the  reason  of  this
act  of  theirs."

When  she  said  this  to  the  king  he  went  with  her,  and  with
all  his  followers,  to  the  spot  where  the  tragedy  was  to  take
place.

And  he  saw  those  maidens  with  a  blazing  fire  in  front  of
them  ;  and  Vayuvegayasas,  after  dragging  them  away  from
it,  said  to  the  king :  "  This  first  here  is  Kalika,  the  daughter
of  the  lord  of  Kalakuta,  and  this  second  is  Vidyutpunja,
the  daughter  of  Vidyutpunja ;  and  this  third  is  Matangini,  the
daughter  of  Mandara  ;  and  this  fourth  is  Padmaprabha,  the
daughter  of  Mahadamshtra ;  and  I  am  the  fifth ;  all  we  five,
when  we  saw  you  performing  asceticism  in  the  domain  of
the  Siddhas,  were  bewildered  with  love,  and  we  made  the
following  mutual  agreement :  '  We  will  all  five  *  at  the  same
time  take  this  prince  as  our  dear  husband,  and  no  one  of  us
must  surrender  herself  to  him  alone  ;  if  any  one  of  us  marries
him  separately,  the  others  shall  enter  the  fire  to  bring  down
vengeance  on  her  who  has  been  guilty  of  such  treachery  to
friends.'  It  was  out  of  respect  for  this  agreement  that  I  did
not  wish  to  marry  you  separately ;  indeed,  I  did  not  even
to-day  give  myself  to  you ;  you,  my  husband,  and  the
guardians  of  the  world  can  bear  testimony  as  to  whether
even  now  I  have  broken  this  agreement  willingly.  So  now,
my  husband,  marry  also  those  friends  of  mine  ;  and  you,  my
friends,  must  not  let  any  other  lot  befall  you."  2

When  she  said  this,  those  maidens,  who  had  escaped  from
death,  rejoiced,  and  embraced  one  another;  and  the  king
was  delighted  in  his  heart.  And  the  fathers  of  the  ladies,
hearing  what  had  taken  place,  came  there  immediately,  and
bestowed  their  daughters  on  Naravahanadatta.  And  those
chiefs  of  the  Vidyadharas,  headed  by  the  lord  of  Kalakuta,3
agreed  to  accept  the  sovereignty  of  their  son-in-law.     Thus

1  The  word  asmabhir  has  been  omitted  in  Brockhaus'  text.  It  follows
panchabhir  in  the  three  India  Office  MSS.  and  in  the  Sanskrit  College  MS.

2  Two  of  the  India  Office  MSS.  have  bhavanlyam.  In  the  third  the
passage  is  omitted.     But  the  text  of  Brockhaus  gives  a  good  sense.

3  I  read  prashthas,  which  I  find  in  two  of  the  India  Office  MSS.,  No.  1882
lias  prasthas.


68  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

Naravahanadatta  obtained  at  one  stroke  the  daughters  of
five  great  Vidyadharas,  and  gained  great  importance  thereby.

And  the  prince  remained  there  some  days  with  those
wives,  and  then  his  commander-in-chief,  Harisikha,  said  :
"  Why,  my  liege,  though  you  are  versed  in  the  approved
treatises  on  the  subject,  do  you  act  contrary  to  policy  ?  What
means  this  devotion  on  your  part  to  the  pleasures  of  love,
when  it  is  time  to  fight  ?  This  raising  of  an  expedition  to
conquer  Mandaradeva,  and  this  your  dallying  for  so  many
days  with  your  wives,  are  things  wholly  incompatible."

When  Harisikha  said  this,  the  great  king  answered  him  :
"Your  reproof  is  just,  but  I  am  not  acting  for  my  own
pleasure  in  all  this  ;  this  allying  of  myself  with  wives  involves
the  acquisition  of  friends  ;  and  so  is  the  most  efficacious
method  at  present  of  crushing  the  foe ;  this  is  why  I  have
had  recourse  to  it.  So  let  these  my  troops  now  advance  to
the  conquest  of  the  enemy."

When  the  king  had  given  this  order,  his  father-in-law
Mandara  said  to  him  :  "  King,  that  Mandaradeva  lives  in  a
distant  and  difficult  country,  and  he  will  be  hard  for  you  to
overcome  until  you  have  achieved  all  the  distinctive  jewels
of  an  emperor.  For  he  is  protected  by  the  cave,  called  the
cave  of  Trisirsha,1  which  forms  the  approach  to  his  kingdom,
and  the  entrance  of  which  is  guarded  by  the  great  champion
Devamaya.  But  that  cave  can  be  forced  by  an  emperor  who
has  obtained  the  jewels.  And  the  sandalwood-tree,2  which
is  one  of  the  jewels  of  an  emperor,  is  in  this  country;  so
quickly  gain  possession  of  it  in  order  that  you  may  attain
the  ends  you  have  in  view.  For  no  one  who  is  not  an  emperor
ever  gets  near  that  tree."

Having  heard  this  from  Mandara,  Naravahanadatta  set
out  at  night,  fasting  and  observing  a  strict  vow,  for  that
sandalwood-tree.  As  the  hero  went  along,  very  terrible
portents  arose  to  bewilder  him,  but  he  was  not  terrified  at
them,  and  so  he  reached  the  foot  of  that  mighty  tree.  And
when  he  saw  that  sandalwood-tree,  surrounded  with  a  lofty
platform  made  of  precious  jewels,  he  climbed  up  to  it  with

1  An  epithet  of  Siva.

2  For  a  note  on  sandalwood  see  Vol.  VII,  pp.  105-107. — n.m.p.


THE  SANDAL  WOOD-TREE  69

ladders  and  adored  it.  The  tree  then  said  to  him  with  bodi-
less voice  :  "  Emperor,  thou  hast  won  me,  the  sandalwood-
tree,  and  when  thou  thinkest  on  me  I  will  appear  to  thee,  so
leave  this  place  at  present,  and  go  to  Govindakuta  ;  thus
thou  wilt  win  the  other  jewels  also  ;  and  then  thou  wilt  easily
conquer  Mandaradeva."  On  hearing  this,  Naravahanadatta,
the  mighty  sovereign  of  the  Vidyadharas,  said  :  "I  will  do
so."  And,  being  now  completely  successful,  he  worshipped
that  heavenly  tree,1  and  went  delighted  through  the  air  to
his  own  camp.

There  he  spent  that  night ;  and  the  next  morning  in  the
hall  of  audience  he  related  at  full  length,  in  the  presence  of  all,
his  night's  adventure  by  which  he  had  won  the  sandalwood-
tree.  And  when  they  heard  it,  his  wives,  and  the  ministers
who  had  grown  up  with  him  from  infancy,  and  those
Vidyadharas  who  were  devoted  to  him — namely,  Vayupatha
and  the  other  chiefs,  with  their  forces — and  the  Gandharvas,
headed  by  Chitrangada,  were  delighted  at  this  sudden  attain-
ment of  great  success,  and  praised  his  heroism,  remarkable
for  its  uninterrupted  flow  of  courage,  enterprise,  and  firmness.
And  after  deliberating  with  them,  the  king,  determined  to
overthrow  the  pride  of  Mandaradeva,  set  out  in  a  heavenly
chariot  for  the  mountain  of  Govindakuta,  in  order  to  obtain
the  other  jewels  spoken  of  by  the  sandalwood-tree.

1  See  Vol.  II,  pp.  96,  96nx,  97.  Cf.  also  the  story  of  Aschenkatze,  in  the
Pentamerone  of  Basile  (Burton,  vol.  i,  pp.  59,  6l) ;  the  Dummedha  Jdtaka,
Cambridge  Edition,  No.  50,  vol.  i,  p.  126  et  seq;  Preller,  Romische  Mythologie,
p.  96;  Kuhn,  Sagen  aus  Westfalen,  vol.  i,  pp.  241,  242,  244,  245;  Ovid's
Metamorphoses,  viii,  722-724  and  743  et  seq;  and  Ralston's  Tibetan  Tales,
Introduction,  p.  lii.


BOOK  XV:  MAHABHISHEKA
CHAPTER  CIX

INVOCATION

MAY  Ganesa,  who  at  night  seems,  with  the  spray-
blown  forth  from  his  hissing  trunk  uplifted  in  the
tumultuous  dance,  to  be  feeding  the  stars,  dispel
your  darkness  !


[M]  Then,  as  the  Emperor  Naravahanadatta  was  in  his
hall  of  audience  on  the  mountain  Govindakuta,  a  Vidyadhara
named  Amritaprabha  came  to  him  through  the  air,  the
same  who  had  before  saved  him,  when  he  was  flung  down  by
his  enemy  on  the  Mountain  of  Fire.  That  Vidyadhara  came
and  humbly  made  himself  known,  and,  having  been  lovingly
entertained  by  that  emperor,  said  to  him  :  "  There  is  a  great
mountain  named  Malaya  in  the  southern  region ;  and  in  a
hermitage  on  it  lives  a  great  hermit  named  Vamadeva.  He,
my  liege,  invites  you  to  come  to  him  alone  for  the  sake  of
some  important  affair,  and  on  this  account  he  has  sent  me
to  you  to-day.  Moreover,  you  are  my  sovereign,  won  by
previous  merits  ;  and  therefore  am  I  here ;  so  come  along
with  me  ;  let  us  quickly  go  to  that  hermit  in  order  to  ensure
your  success !

When  that  Vidyadhara  had  said  this,  Naravahanadatta
left  his  wives  and  forces  there,  and  himself  flew  up  into  the
air  with  that  Vidyadhara,  and  in  that  way  quickly  reached
the  Malaya  mountain,  and  approached  the  hermit  Vamadeva.
And  he  beheld  that  hermit  white  with  age,  tall  of  stature,
with  eyeballs  sparkling  like  bright  jewels  in  the  fleshless
sockets  of  his  eyes,  the  depository  of  the  jewels  of  the  emperor
of  the  Vidyadharas,  with  his  matted  hair  waving  like  creepers,
looking  like  the  Himalaya  range  accompanying  the  prince,

70


THE  SEVEN  JEWELS  71

to  assist  him  in  attaining  success.  Then  the  prince  wor-
shipped the  feet  of  that  sage,  and  he  entertained  him,  and
said  to  him  :  "  You  are  the  God  of  Love  consumed  long  ago
by  Siva,  and  appointed  by  him  emperor  of  all  the  Vidyadhara
chiefs,  because  he  was  pleased  with  Rati.1  Now,  I  have  in
this  my  hermitage,  within  the  deep  recess  of  an  inner  cave,
certain  jewels,  which  I  will  point  out  to  you,  and  you  must
seize  them.  For  you  will  find  Mandaradeva  easy  enough  to
conquer  after  you  have  obtained  the  jewels;  and  it  was
with  this  object  that  I  invited  you  hither  by  the  command
of  Siva."

When  the  hermit  had  said  this  to  him,  and  had  instructed
him  in  the  right  method  of  procedure,  Naravahanadatta  joy-
fully entered  that  cave.  In  it  the  hero  overcame  many  and
various  obstacles,  and  then  beheld  a  huge  furious  elephant
charging  him  with  a  deep  guttural  roar.  The  king  smote  it
on  the  forehead  with  his  fist,  and  placed  his  feet  on  its  tusks,
and  actively  mounted  the  furious  elephant.  And  a  bodiless
voice  came  from  the  cave  :  "  Bravo,  emperor !  Thou  hast  won
the  jewel  of  the  mighty  elephant."  Then  he  saw  a  sword
looking  like  a  mighty  snake,  and  he  fell  upon  it,  and  seized
it,  as  if  it  were  the  locks  of  the  Fortune  of  Empire.  Again
a  bodiless  voice  sounded  in  the  cave  :  "  Bravo,  conqueror
of  thy  foes  !  Thou  hast  obtained  the  victorious  sword-jewel."
Then  he  obtained  the  moonlight- jewel  and  the  wife- jewel,
and  the  jewel  of  charms,  named  the  destroying  charm.  And
thus  having  achieved  in  all  seven  jewels  (useful  in  time
of  need,  and  bestowers  of  majesty),  taking  into  account  the
two  first,  the  lake  and  the  sandalwood-tree,  he  went  out
from  that  cave  and  told  the  hermit  Vamadeva  that  he  had
succeeded  in  accomplishing  all  his  objects.2

1  The  Sanskrit  College  MS.  has  Ratya.

2  The  seven  jewels  of  the  Chakravartin  are  often  mentioned  in  Buddhist
works.  In  the  Mahavastu,  p.  108  (edited  by  Senart)  they  are :  chariot,  elephant,
horse,  wife,  householder,  general.  In  a  legend  quoted  by  Burnouf  {Introduction
a  I'Histoire  du  Buddhisme  Indien,  p.  343)  the  same  six  are  enumerated  as  "les
sept  joyaux."  In  both  cases  the  sword  is  omitted.  They  are  also  described
in  the  Maha-Sudassana-Sutta  translated  by  Rhys  Davids  in  the  eleventh  volume
of  the  Sacred  Books  of  the  East  Series.  The  term  Chakravartin,  translated  by
Tawney  as  "emperor/'  is  usually  taken  to  mean  "universal  monarch."     The


72  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

Then  the  hermit  said  lovingly  to  that  emperor  :  "  Go,
my  son,  now  that  you  have  obtained  the  jewels  of  a  great
emperor,  and  conquer  Mandaradeva  on  the  north  side  of
Kailasa,  and  enjoy  the  glorious  fortune  of  the  sovereignty
of  both  sides  of  that  mountain."  When  the  hermit  had
said  this  to  him,  the  successful  emperor  bowed  before  him,
and  went  off  through  the  air  with  Amritaprabha.  And  in  a
moment  he  reached  his  camp  on  Govindakuta,  guarded  by
his  mighty  mother-in-law,  Dhanavati.  Then  those  kings  of
the  Vidyadharas  that  had  sided  with  him,  and  his  wives
and  his  ministers,  who  were  all  watching  for  him,  saw  him,
and  welcomed  him  with  delight.  Then  he  sat  down  and  they
questioned  him,  and  he  told  them  how  he  had  seen  the  hermit
Vamadeva,  and  how  he  had  entered  the  cave,  and  how  he
had  obtained  the  jewels.  Then  a  great  festival  took  place
there,  in  which  celestial  drums  were  joyfully  beaten,  and  the
Vidyadharas  danced,  and  people  generally  were  drunk  with
wine.

And  the  next  day,  in  a  moment  in  which  a  malignant
planet  stood  in  the  house  of  his  foe,  and  one  which  argued  his
own  success,1  as  a  planet  benignant  to  him,  predominated
over  his  enemy's  house,  and  which  was  fraught  with  every
kind  of  prosperity,  Naravahanadatta  performed  the  cere-
monies for  good  fortune,  and  ascended  that  car  made  by
Brahma,  which  Siva  had  bestowed  on  him,  and  set  out  with
his  army  through  the  air,  accompanied  by  his  wives,  to
conquer  Mandaradeva.  And  various  heroes,  his  followers,
marched  surrounding  him,  and  kings  of  the  Gandharvas  and

etymology  of  the  word  has  been  variously  interpreted,  but  that  advanced  by
Jacobi  seems  most  acceptable.  Chakra  must  be  taken  in  its  original  sense
of  "circle,"  while  vartin  denotes  the  idea  of  "abiding  in."  Thus  the  whole
expression  denotes  "he  who  abides  in  the  circle."  The  "circle"  refers  to
the  discus  of  Vishnu,  the  symbol  of  the  sun,  and  only  he  who  had  attained
the  highest  honours  could  rejoice  in  the  name  of  Chakravartin,  so  closely
connected  with  the  deity.  The  number  and  variety  of  the  "jewels"  or
ratnas  varies,  although  seven  was  the  usual  number.  For  further  details  see
H.  Jacobi,  "  Chakravartin,"  Hastings'  Ency.  Bel,  FAh.,  vol.  iii,  pp.  336,  337.
Dr  Barnett  puts  a  query  to  the  above  derivation. — n.m.p.

1  For  atmasamarddhina  the  India  Office  MS.  No.  1882  has  atmasamriddhina\
No.  2166  has  samashtina,  and  No.  3003  agrees  with  Brockhaus'  text.  So  does
the  Sanskrit  College  MS.


MOUNT  KAILASA  73

chiefs  of  the  Vidyadharas,  fearless  and  faithful,  obedient  to
the  orders  of  the  general,  Harisikha,  and  Chandasimha,  with
his  mother,  the  wise  Dhanavati,  and  the  brave  Pingala-
gandhara,  and  Vayupatha  the  strong,  and  Vidyutpunja  and
Amitagati,  and  the  lord  of  Kalaktita,  and  Mandara,  and
Mahadamshtra  and  his  own  friend  Amritaprabha,  and  the  hero
Chitrangada,  with  Sagaradatta — all  these,  and  others  who
were  there  of  the  party  of  the  slain  Gaurimunda,  pressed
eagerly  after  him,  with  their  hosts,  as  he  advanced  intent  on
victory.  Then  the  sky  was  obscured  by  his  army,  and  the
sun  hid  his  face,  as  if  for  shame,  somewhere  or  other,  his
brightness  being  eclipsed  by  the  splendour  of  the  monarch.

Then  the  emperor  passed  the  Manasa  lake,  haunted  by
troops  of  divine  hermits,  and  left  behind  him  Gandasaila,  the
pleasure  garden  of  the  nymphs  of  heaven,  and  reached  the
foot  of  Mount  Kailasa,  gleaming  white  like  crystal,  resembling
a  mass  of  his  own  glory.1  There  he  encamped  on  the  bank
of  the  Mandakini;  and  while  he  was  sitting  there  the  wise
chief  of  the  Vidyadharas,  named  Mandara,  came  up  to  him,
and  addressed  to  him  the  following  pleasing  speech :  "  Let
your  army  halt  here,  King,  on  the  bank  of  the  river  of  the
gods  !  It  is  not  fitting  that  you  should  advance  over  this
mountain,  Kailasa.  For  all  sciences  are  destroyed  by  cross-
ing this  dwelling-place  of  Siva.  So  you  must  pass  to  the
other  side  of  the  mountain  by  the  cave  of  Trisirsha.  And  it
is  guarded  by  a  king  named  Devamaya,  who  is  exceedingly
haughty  ;  so  how  can  you  advance  farther  without  conquer-
ing him  ?  "  When  Mandara  said  this,  Dhanavati  approved
it,  and  Naravahanadatta  waited  there  for  a  day.

While  he  was  there,  he  sent  an  ambassador  to  Devamaya
with  a  conciliatory  message,  but  he  did  not  receive  the  order
it  conveyed  in  a  conciliatory  spirit.  So  the  next  day  the
emperor  moved  out  against  Devamaya,  with  all  the  allied
kings,  prepared  for  battle.  And  Devamaya  too,  when  he
heard  it,  marched  out  towards  him  to  give  battle,  accom-
panied by  numerous  kings,  Varaha,  Vajramushti,  and  others,
and  followed  by  his  army.     Then  there  took  place  on  Kailasa

1  We  have  often  had  occasion  to  remark  that  the  Hindu  poets  conceive
of  glory  as  white.


74  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

a  battle  between  those  two  armies,  and  while  it  was  going  on
the  sky  was  obscured  by  the  chariots  of  the  gods,  who  came
to  look  on.  Terrible  was  that  thundercloud  of  war,  awful
with  the  dense  hailstorm  of  many  severed  heads,  and  loud
with  the  shouting  of  heroes.  That  Chandasimha  slew
Varaha,  the  general  of  Devamaya,  as  he  fought  in  the  front
rank,  was  in  truth  by  no  means  wonderful ;  but  it  was
strange  that  Naravahanadatta,  without  employing  any
magic  power,  took  captive  Devamaya  himself,  when  ex-
hausted by  the  wounds  he  received  from  him  in  the  combat.
And  when  he  was  captured  his  army  was  broken,  and  fled,
together  with  the  great  champions  Vajramushti,  Mahabahu,
Tikshnadamshtra,  and  their  fellows.  Then  the  gods  in  their
chariots  exclaimed  :  "  Bravo  !  Bravo !  "  And  all  present
congratulated  the  victorious  emperor.  Then  that  mighty
monarch  consoled  Devamaya,  who  was  brought  before  him
bound,  and  welcomed  him  kindly,  and  set  him  at  liberty.
But  he,  having  been  subdued  by  the  emperor's  arm,  humbly
submitted  to  him,  together  with  Vajramushti  and  the  others.

Then,  the  battle  having  come  to  an  end,  that  day  passed
away,  and  next  morning  Devamaya  came  to  the  place  of
audience,  and  stood  by  the  side  of  the  emperor,  and  when
questioned  by  him  about  the  cave  of  Trisirsha,  which  he
wished  to  enter,  related  the  following  true  history  of  it.

"  In  old  time,  my  liege,  the  two  sides  of  Mount  Kailasa,
the  north  and  the  south  side,  formed  different  kingdoms,
having  been  assigned  to  distinguished  Vidyadharas.  Then
The  History  of  one>  Rishabha  by  name,  propitiated  Siva  with  aus-
the  Cave  of  terities,  and  was  appointed,  by  that  god,  emperor
Trisirsha  over  berth  of  them.  But  one  day  he  was  passing
over  Kailasa,  to  go  to  the  northern  side,  and  lost  his  magic
science  owing  to  the  anger  of  Siva,  who  happened  to  be  below,
and  so  fell  from  the  sky.  Rishabha  again  propitiated  Siva
with  severe  asceticism,  and  the  god  again  appointed  him
supreme  sovereign  of  both  sides ;  so  he  thus  humbly  addressed
the  god  :  '  I  am  not  permitted  to  pass  over  Kailasa,  so  by
what  path  am  I  to  travel  in  order  to  be  able  to  exercise  my
prerogatives  on  both  sides  of  the  mountain  ?  '  When  Siva,
the  trident-bearing  god,  heard  this,  he  cleft  asunder  Kailasa,


THE  CAVE  OF  TRISIRSHA


75


and  made  this  cavelike  opening  for  Rishabha  to  pass  to  the
northern  side.

"  Then  Mount  Kailasa,  having  been  pierced,  was  des-
pondent, and  addressed  this  petition  to  Siva  :  '  Holy  one,  this
north  side  of  me  used  to  be  inaccessible  to  mortals,  but  it
has  now  been  made  accessible  to  them  by  this  cave-passage ;
so  provide  that  this  law  of  exclusion  be  not  broken.'  When
Siva  had  been  thus  supplicated  by  the  mountain,  he  placed
in  the  cave,  as  guards,  elephants  of  the  quarters,  mighty
basilisks,1  and  Guhyakas ;  and  at  its  southern  opening
Kalaratri,  the  invincible  Chandika.2

"  When  Siva  had  thus  provided  for  the  guarding  of  the
cave,  he  produced  great  jewels,  and  made  this  decree  with
regard  to  the  cave  :  '  This  cave  shall  be  open  at  both  ends
to  anyone  who  has  obtained  the  jewels,  and  is  emperor  over
the  Vidyadharas  with  their  wives  and  their  messengers,3  and
to  those  who  may  be  appointed  by  him  as  sovereigns  over
the  northern  side  of  the  mountain — by  these,  I  say,  it  may
be  passed,  but  by  no  one  else  in  the  world.'  When  the  three-
eyed  god  had  made  this  decree,  Rishabha  went  on  holding
sway  over  the  Vidyadharas,  but  in  his  pride  made  war  on  the
gods,  and  was  slain  by  Indra.  This  is  the  history,  my  liege,
of  the  cave,  named  the  cave  of  Trisirsha;  and  the  cave
cannot  be  passed  by  any  but  persons  like  yourself.

"  And  in  course  of  time  I,  Devamaya,  was  born  in  the  family

1  See  Sir  Thomas  Browne's  Vulgar  Errors  (Pseudodoxia  Epidemica),
Book  III,  chapter  vii,  and  vol.  iii,  112ft1.  The  point  about  the  basilisk  was
that  its  glance  was  fatal,  and  this  is  how  Tawney  expresses  the  word
drigvishahindra.  We  have  seen  (Vol.  II,  p.  298)  that  drig-visha  or  drishti-visha
denotes  "poison  in  a  glance,"  but  in  Hindu  fiction  this  "fatal  look"  occurs
in  humans  as  well  as  in  monsters,  and  is  a  power  that  can  be  acquired  by
prolonged  austerities.  (See  Vol.  IV,  p.  232,  and  Vol.  V,  p.  123.)  The  idea  is
found  in  remote  antiquity;  thus,  after  the  death  of  Osiris,  Isis  at  last  finds
the  box  containing  his  body  at  Byblos.  One  of  the  king's  sons  spies  on  her
while  she  is  embracing  the  dead  body.  Isis  becomes  aware  of  this  and,  turn-
ing round,  kills  him  on  the  spot  by  a  terrible  look.  See  Budge,  Osiris  and  the
Egyptian  Resurrection,  vol.  i,  p.  7. — n.m.p.

2  One  of  the  saktis  ("  energies")  of  Siva.     Others  are  Durga,  Kali,  etc.

3  Two  of  the  India  Office  MSS.  and  the  Sanskrit  College  MS.  read  cha
charanam  for  sadaranam.  This  would  mean,  I  suppose,  that  the  cave  might  be
passed  by  all  the  scouts  and  ambassadors  of  the  Vidyadharas.


76  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

of  Mahamaya,  the  keeper  of  the  entrance  of  the  cave.  And
at  my  birth  a  heavenly  voice  proclaimed  :  '  There  is  now
born  among  the  Vidyadharas  a  champion  hard  for  his  foes  to
conquer  in  fight ;  and  he  who  shall  conquer  him  shall  be
emperor  over  them  ;  he  shall  be  the  master  of  this  child  now
born,  and  shall  be  followed  by  him  as  a  lord.'  I,  that
Devamaya,  have  been  now  conquered  by  you,  and  you
have  obtained  the  jewels,  and  are  the  mighty  sole  emperor
of  both  sides  of  Mount  Kailasa — the  lord  of  us  all  here.  So
now  pass  the  cave  of  Trisirsha,  and  conquer  the  rest  of  your
enemies."

When  Devamaya  had  told  the  story  of  the  cave  in  these
words  the  emperor  said  to  him  :  "  We  will  march  now  and
encamp  for  the  present  at  the  mouth  of  the  cave,  and  to-
morrow morning,  after  we  have  performed  due  ceremonies,
we  will  enter  it."  When  Naravahanadatta  had  said  this,  he
went  and  encamped  with  all  those  kings  at  the  mouth  of
the  cave.  And  he  saw  that  underground  passage  with  deep
rayless  cavity,  looking  like  the  birthplace  of  the  sunless  and
moonless  darkness  of  the  day  of  doom.

And  the  next  day  he  offered  worship,  and  entered  it  in
his  chariot,  with  his  followers,  assisted  by  the  glorious  jewels,
which  presented  themselves  to  him  when  he  thought  of  them.
He  dispelled  the  darkness  with  the  moonlight- jewel,  the  basi-
lisks with  the  sandalwood-tree,  the  elephants  of  the  quarters
with  the  elephant- jewel,  the  Guhyakas  with  the  sword-jewel,
and  other  obstacles  with  other  jewels  ;  and  so  passed  that
cave  with  his  army,  and  emerged  at  its  northern  mouth.
And,  coming  out  from  the  bowels  of  the  cave,  he  saw  before
him  the  northern  side  of  the  mountain,  looking  like  another
world,  entered  without  a  second  birth.  And  then  a  voice  came
from  the  sky  :  "  Bravo,  emperor  !  Thou  hast  passed  this
cave  by  means  of  the  majesty  conferred  by  the  power  of  the
jewels."

Then  Dhanavati  and  Devamaya  said  to  the  emperor  :
"  Your  Majesty,  Kalaratri  is  always  near  this  opening.  She
was  originally  created  by  Vishnu,  when  the  sea  was  churned
for  the  nectar,  in  order  that  she  might  tear  in  pieces  the
chiefs  of  the  Danavas,  who  wished  to  steal  that  heavenly


KALARATRI  IS  PROPITIATED  IN  VAIN         77

drink.  And  now  she  has  been  placed  here  by  Siva  to  guard
this  cave,  in  order  that  none  may  pass  it  except  those  beings,
like  yourself,  of  whom  we  spoke  before.  You  are  our  emperor
and  you  have  obtained  the  jewels,  and  have  passed  this  cave  ;
so,  in  order  to  gain  the  victory,  you  must  worship  this  goddess,
who  is  a  meet  object  of  worship."

In  such  words  did  Dhanavati  and  Devamaya  address
Naravahanadatta,  and  so  the  day  waned  for  him  there.
And  the  northern  peaks  of  Kailasa  were  reddened  with  the
evening  light,  and  seemed  thus  to  foreshadow  the  bloodshed
of  the  approaching  battle.  The  darkness,  having  gained
power,  obscured  the  army  of  that  king,  as  if  recollecting  its
animosity,  which  was  still  fresh  and  new.  And  goblins,  vam-
pires, jackals  and  the  sisterhood  *  of  witches  roamed  about,
as  it  were  the  first  shoots  of  the  anger  of  Kalaratri  enraged
on  account  of  Naravahanadatta  having  omitted  to  worship
her.  And  in  a  moment  the  whole  army  of  Naravahanadatta
became  insensible,  as  if  with  sleep,  but  he  alone  remained  in
full  possession  of  his  faculties.  Then  the  emperor  perceived
that  this  was  a  display  of  power  on  the  part  of  Kalaratri,
angry  because  she  had  not  been  worshipped,  and  he  proceeded
to  worship  her  with  flowers  of  speech :

"  Thou  art  the  power  of  life,  animating  all  creatures,  of
loving  nature,  skilful  in  directing  the  discus  to  the  head  of
thy  foes  ;  thee  I  adore.  Hail !  thou,  that  under  the  form
of  Durga  dost  console  the  world  with  thy  trident  and  other
weapons  streaming  with  the  drops  of  blood  flowing  from  the
throat  of  the  slain  Mahisha.2  Thou  art  victorious,  dancing
with  a  skull  full  of  the  blood  of  Ruru  3  in  thy  agitated  hand,
as  if  thou  wast  holding  the  vessel  of  security  of  the  three
worlds.  Goddess  beloved  of  Siva,  with  uplifted  eyes,  though
thy  name  means  the  night  of  doom,  still,  with  skull  sur-
mounted by  a  lighted  lamp,  and  with  a  skull  in  thy  hand,
thou  dost  shine  as  if  with  the  sun  and  moon."

Though  he  praised  Kalaratri  in  these  words,  she  was  not
propitiated,  and  then  he  made  up  his  mind  to  appease  her

1  Or  possibly  "  Ganas  (Siva's  attendants)  and  witches."

2  The  giant  slain  by  Durga.    See  Wilkins,  Hindu  Mythology,  p.  250.— n.m.p.

3  See  Vol.  II,  p.  228ft1.— n.m.p.


78  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

by  the  sacrifice  of  his  head ;  and  he  drew  his  sword  to  that
purpose.

Then  the  goddess  said  to  him:  "Do. not  act  rashly,  my
son.  Lo !  I  have  been  won  over  by  thee,  thou  hero.  Let
this  thy  army  be  as  it  was  before,  and  be  thou  victorious !  "
And  immediately  his  army  awoke  as  it  were  from  sleep.  Then
his  wives,  and  his  companions,  and  all  the  Vidyadharas,
praised  the  might  of  that  emperor  !  And  the  hero,  having
eaten  and  drunk  and  performed  the  necessary  duties,  spent
that  night,  which  seemed  as  long  as  if  it  consisted  of  a
hundred  watches  instead  of  three.1

And  the  next  morning  he  worshipped  Kalaratri,  and
marched  thence  to  engage  Dhumasikha,  who  had  barred  his
further  advance  with  an  army  of  Vidyadharas.  Then  the
emperor  had  a  fight  with  that  king,  who  was  the  principal
champion  of  Mandaradeva,  of  such  a  desperate  character
that  the  air  was  full  of  swords,  the  earth  covered  with  the
heads  of  warriors,  and  the  only  speech  heard  was  the  terrible
cry  of  heroes  shouting,  "  Slay !  Slay !  "  Then  the  emperor
took  Dhumasikha  captive  in  that  battle  by  force,  and  after-
wards treated  him  with  deference  ;  and  made  him  submit
to  his  sway.  And  he  quartered  his  army  that  night  in  his
city,  and  the  host  seemed  like  fuel  consumed  with  fire,  as  it
had  seen  the  extinction  of  Dhumasikha's  2  pride.

And  the  next  day,  hearing  from  the  scouts  that  Mandara-
deva, having  found  out  what  had  taken  place,  was  advancing
to  meet  him  in  fight,  Naravahanadatta  marched  out  against
him  with  the  chiefs  of  the  Vidyadharas,  determined  to  con-
quer him.  And  after  he  had  gone  some  distance  he  beheld
in  front  of  him  the  army  of  Mandaradeva,  accompanied  by
many  kings,  attacking  in  order  of  battle.  Then  Narava-
hanadatta, with  the  allied  kings  at  his  side,  drew  up  his
forces  in  an  arrangement  fitted  to  encounter  the  formation
of  his  enemies,  and  fell  upon  his  army.

1  The  measures  of  time  vary  considerably,  according  to  the  different
authorities.  Yama  is  the  word  used  here  for  "watch."  It  occurs  in  the  table
as  given  in  the  Bhagavata-purana  (iii.  2).  For  further  details  see  Barnett,
Antiquities  of  India,  p.  219- — n.m.p.

2  Dhumasikha,  literally  "the  smoke-crested,"  means  "fire."


THE  MIGHTY  BATTLE  79

Then  a  battle  took  place  between  those  two  armies,  which
imitated  the  disturbed  flood  of  the  ocean  overflowing  its  bank
at  the  day  of  doom.  On  one  side  were  fighting  Chandasimha
and  other  great  champions,  and  on  the  other  Kanchana-
damshtra  and  other  mighty  kings.  And  the  battle  waxed
sore,  resembling  the  rising  of  the  wind  at  the  day  of  doom,  for
it  made  the  three  worlds  tremble,  and  shook  the  mountains.
Mount  Kailasa,  red  on  one  side  with  the  blood  of  heroes,
as  with  saffron  paint,  and  on  the  other  of  ashy  whiteness,
resembled  the  husband  of  Gauri.  That  great  battle  was
truly  the  day  of  doom  for  heroes,  being  grimly  illuminated
by  innumerable  orbs  of  the  sun  arisen  in  flashing  sword-
blades.  Such  was  the  battle  that  even  Narada  and  other
heavenly  beings,  who  came  to  gaze  at  it,  were  astonished,
though  they  had  witnessed  the  fights  between  the  gods  and
the  Asuras.

In  this  fight,  which  was  thus  terrible,  Kanchanadamshtra
rushed  on  Chandasimha,  and  smote  him  on  the  head  with  a
formidable  mace.  When  Dhanavati  saw  that  her  son  had
fallen  under  the  stroke  of  the  mace,  she  cursed  and  paralysed
both  armies  by  means  of  her  magic  power.  And  Narava-
hanadatta,  on  one  side,  in  virtue  of  his  imperial  might,1  and
on  the  other  side,  Mandaradeva,  were  the  only  two  that
remained  conscious.  Then  even  the  gods  in  the  air  fled  in
all  directions,  seeing  that  Dhanavati,  if  angry,  had  power
to  destroy  a  world.

But  Mandaradeva,  seeing  that  the  Emperor  Naravahana-
datta,  for  his  part,  descended  from  his  chariot,  drawing
the  sword  which  was  one  of  his  imperial  jewels,  quickly  met
him.  Then  Mandaradeva,  wishing  to  gain  the  victory  by
magic  arts,  assumed  by  his  science  the  form  of  a  furious
elephant  maddened  with  passion.  When  Naravahanadatta,
who  was  endowed  with  pre-eminent  skill  in  magic,  saw  this,
he  assumed  by  his  supernatural  power  the  form  of  a  lion.

1  I  read  saptva,  which  I  find  in  MSS.  Nos.  1882  and  2166;  the  other  has
sasva.  I  also  find  chakravartibalad  in  No.  1882  (with  a  short  *),  and  this  reading
I  have  adopted.  The  Sanskrit  College  MS.  seems  to  have  saptva.  In  si.  119
I  think  we  ought  to  delete  the  h  in  sangramah.  In  121  the  apostrophe  before
gra-bhasvarah  is  useless  and  misleading.  In  122  y ad  should  be  separated  from
vismayam.


80  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

Then  Mandaradeva  flung  off  the  body  of  an  elephant,  and
Naravahanadatta  abandoned  that  of  a  lion,  and  fought  with
him  openly  in  his  own  shape.1  Armed  with  sabres,  and
skilled  in  every  elaborate  trick  and  attitude  of  fence,  they
appeared  like  two  actors  skilled  in  gesticulation,  engaged  in
acting  a  pantomime.  Then  Naravahanadatta  by  a  dexterous
sleight  forced  from  the  grasp  of  Mandaradeva  his  sword,
the  material  symbol  of  victory.  And  Mandaradeva,  having
been  thus  deprived  of  his  sword,  drew  his  dagger,  but  the
emperor  quickly  made  him  relinquish  that  in  the  same  way.
Then  Mandaradeva,  being  disarmed,  began  to  wrestle  with
the  emperor,  but  he  seized  him  by  the  ankles,  and  laid  him
on  the  earth.

And  then  the  sovereign  set  his  foot  on  his  enemy's  breast,
and  laying  hold  of  his  hair  was  preparing  to  cut  off  his  head
with  his  sword,  when  the  maiden  Mandaradevi,  the  sister  of
Mandaradeva,  rushed  up  to  him,  and  in  order  to  prevent  him
said  :  "  When  I  saw  you  long  ago  in  the  wood  of  ascetics  I
marked  you  for  my  future  husband,  so  do  not,  my  sovereign,
kill  this  brother  of  mine,  who  is  your  brother-in-law."  When
the  resolute  king  had  been  thus  addressed  by  that  fair-eyed
one  he  let  go  Mandaradeva,  who  was  ashamed  at  having  been
conquered,  and  said  to  him  :  "I  set  you  at  liberty ;  do  not
be  ashamed  on  that  account,  Vidyadhara  chief ;  victory  and
defeat  in  war  bestow  themselves  on  heroes  with  varying
caprice."  When  the  king  said  this,  Mandaradeva  answered
him  :  "Of  what  profit  is  my  life  to  me,  now  that  I  have  been
saved  in  war  by  a  woman  ?  So  I  will  go  to  my  father  in  the
wood  where  he  is,  and  perform  asceticism ;  you  have  been
appointed  emperor  over  both  divisions  of  our  territory  here.
Indeed  this  occurrence  was  foretold  long  ago  to  me  by  my
father  as  sure  to  take  place."  When  the  proud  hero  had  said
this,  he  repaired  to  his  father  in  the  grove  of  ascetics.

Then  the  gods,  that  were  present  in  the  air  on  that
occasion,  exclaimed :  "  Bravo,  great  emperor,  you  have
completely  conquered  your  enemies,  and  obtained  sovereign
sway !  "  When  Mandaradeva  had  gone,  Dhanavati,  by  her
magic  power,  restored  her  own  son,  and  both  armies  with  him,
1  Cf.  Vol.  Ill,  p.  195,  195W1.


THE  FESTIVAL  OF  VICTORY  81

to  consciousness.  So  Naravahanadatta's  followers,  ministers
and  all,  arose  as  it  were  from  sleep,  and,  finding  out  that  the
foe  had  been  conquered,  congratulated  Naravahanadatta,
their  victorious  master.  And  the  kings  of  Mandaradeva's
party,  Kanchanadamshtra,  Asokaka,  Raktaksha,  Kalajihva
and  the  others,  submitted  to  the  sway  of  Naravahanadatta.
And  Chandasimha,  when  he  saw  Kanchanadamshtra,  remem-
bered the  blow  of  the  mace  which  he  received  from  him  in
fight,  and  was  wroth  with  him,  brandishing  his  good  sword
firmly  grasped  in  his  strong  hand.  But  Dhanavati  said  to
him :  "  Enough  of  wrath,  my  beloved  son !  Who  could  conquer
you  in  the  van  of  battle  ?  But  I  myself  produced  that
momentary  glamour,  in  order  to  prevent  the  destruction  of
both  armies."  With  these  words  she  pacified  her  son,  and
made  him  cease  from  wrath,  and  she  delighted  the  whole
army  and  the  Emperor  Naravahanadatta1  by  her  magic
skill.  And  Naravahanadatta  was  exceedingly  joyful,  having
obtained  the  sovereignty  of  the  north  side  of  Kailasa,  the
mountain  of  Siva,  a  territory  now  free  from  the  scourge  of
war,  since  the  heroes  who  opposed  him  had  been  conquered,
or  had  submitted,  or  fled,  and  that  too  with  all  his  friends
unharmed.  Then  shrill  kettledrums  were  beaten  for  the  great
festival  of  his  victory  over  his  enemies,2  and  the  triumphant
monarch,  accompanied  by  his  wives  and  ministers,  and  girt
with  mighty  kings,  spent  that  day,  which  was  honoured  by
the  splendid  dances  and  songs  of  the  Vidyadhara  ladies,  in
drinking  wine,  as  it  were  the  fiery  valour  of  his  enemies.

1  All  the  India  Office  MSS.  and  the  Sanskrit  College  MS.  read  chakravartij
with  a  short  i.

2  The  India  Office  MSS.  Nos.  1882  and  2166  and  the  Sanskrit  College
MS.  read  taraturyam.  It  makes  the  construction  clearer,  but  no  material
difference  in  the  sense.


VOL.   VIII.


CHAPTER  CX

THEN,  the  next  day,  the  Emperor  Naravahanadatta,
[M]  with  his  army,  left  that  plateau  of  Kailasa,
and  by  the  advice  of  King  Kanchanadamshtra,  who
showed  him  the  way,  went  to  that  city  of  Mandaradeva
named  Vimala.  And  he  reached  that  city,  which  was
adorned  with  lofty  ramparts  of  gold,  and  looked  like  Mount
Sumeru  come  to  adore  Kailasa,  and,  entering  it,  found  that
it  resembled  the  sea  in  all  but  the  presence  of  water,  being
very  deep,  characterised  by  unfailing  prosperity,1  and  an
inexhaustible  mine  of  jewels.

And  as  the  emperor  was  sitting  in  the  hall  of  audience  in
that  city,  surrounded  by  Vidyadhara  kings,  an  old  woman  of
the  royal  harem  came  and  said  to  him  :  "  Since  Mandara-
deva has  gone  to  the  forest,  having  been  conquered  by  you,
his  wives  desire  to  enter  the  fire ;  your  Highness  has  now  been
informed  and  will  decide  upon  the  proper  course."  When
this  had  been  announced,  the  emperor  sent  those  kings
to  them,  and  dissuaded  them  from  suicide,  and  bestowed
upon  them  dwelling-houses  and  other  gifts,  treating  them
like  sisters.  By  that  step  he  caused  the  whole  race  of  the
Vidyadhara  chiefs  to  be  bound  to  him  with  bonds  of  affection.
And  then  the  grateful  monarch  anointed  Amitagati,  who
had  been  designated  before  by  Siva,  king  over  the  realm  of
Mandaradeva,  since  he  was  loyal  and  could  be  trusted  not
to  fall  away,  and  he  placed  under  him  the  princes  who  had
followed  Mandaradeva — namely,  Kanchanadamshtra  and  his
fellows.  And  he  diverted  himself  there  in  splendid  gardens
for  seven  days,  being  caressed  by  the  fortune  of  the  northern
side  of  Kailasa,  as  by  a  newly  married  bride.

And  then,  though  he  had  acquired  the  imperial  authority
over  the  Vidyadhara  kings  of  both  divisions,  he  began  to  long
for  more.     He  set  out,  though  his  ministers  tried  to  dissuade

1  Or  "adorned  with  Vishnu's  Lakshml."  Here  we  have  a  pun,  as  she
sprang  from  the  sea.

82


THE  ABANDONED  ENTERPRISE  83

him,  to  conquer  the  inaccessible  fields  of  Meru  situated  in
the  northern  region,  the  home  of  the  gods.  For  high-spirited
men,  though  abundantly  loaded  with  possessions,  cannot  rest
without  acquiring  something  still  more  glorious,  advancing
like  blazing  forest  fires.

Then  the  hermit  Narada  came  and  said  to  the  king  :
"  Prince,  what  means  this  striving  after  things  out  of  your
reach,  though  you  know  policy  ?  For  one  who  out  of  over-
weening self-confidence  attempts  the  impossible  is  disgraced
like  Havana,  who,  in  his  pride,  endeavoured  to  uproot
Kailasa.  For  even  the  sun  and  moon  find  Meru  hard  to
overstep ;  moreover,  Siva  has  not  bestowed  on  you  the
sway  over  the  gods,  but  the  sway  over  the  Vidyadharas,  so
what  need  have  you  of  Meru,  the  home  of  the  gods  ?  Dismiss
from  your  mind  this  chimerical  scheme.  Moreover,  if  you
desire  good  fortune,  you  must  go  and  visit  the  father  of
Mandaradeva,  Akampana  by  name,  in  the  forest,  where  he
is  residing."  When  the  hermit  Narada  had  said  this,  the
emperor  consented  to  do  as  he  directed,  and  so  he  took  leave
of  him,  and  returned  whence  he  came.

And  the  politic  emperor,  having  been  advised  by  Narada
to  relinquish  his  enterprise,1  and  remembering  the  destruc-
tion of  Rishabha,  of  which  he  had  heard  from  Devamaya,
and  having  reflected  over  the  matter  in  his  own  mind,  gave
up  the  idea,  and  went  to  visit  the  kingly  sage  Akampana
in  the  grove  of  ascetics.  And  when  he  reached  that  ascetic
grove,  it  was  crowded  with  great  sages,  engaged  in  con-
templation, sitting  in  the  posture  called  padmdsana,  and  so
resembled  the  world  of  Brahma.2  There  he  saw  that  aged
Akampana,  wearing  matted  hair  and  a  deerskin,  looking  like
a  great  tree  resorted  to  by  hermits.  So  he  went  and  wor-
shipped the  feet  of  that  ascetic,  and  that  royal  sage  welcomed

1  Herein  he  showed  himself  wiser  than  King  Mandhatar,  the  hero  of  the
first  story  in  Ralston's  Tibetan  Tales,  who,  after  acquiring  all  earthly  riches,
aspired  to  the  throne  of  Sakra,  king  of  the  gods.  As  soon  as  he  had  conceived
this  idea  his  good  fortune  came  to  an  end  (see  Ralston,  op.  cit.,  p.  18,  and
also  p.  36).  The  best-known  example  of  a  sudden  fall  after  aspiring  too  high
is,  of  course,  Grimm's  tale  of  "The  Fisherman  and  his  Wife."  For  numerous
analogues  see  Bolte  and  Polivka,  op.  cit.,  No.  19,  vol.  i,  pp.  138-148. — n.m.p.

2  See  Vol.  II,  p.  Il6n*.— n.m.p.


84  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

him  and  said  to  him :  "  You  have  done  well,  King,  in  coming
to  this  hermitage,  for  if  you  had  passed  on,  neglectful  of  it,
these  hermits  here  would  have  cursed  you."

While  the  royal  sage  was  saying  this  to  the  emperor,
Mandaradeva,  who  was  staying  in  that  grove  of  ascetics,
having  taken  the  vows  of  a  hermit,  came  to  his  father,
accompanied  by  his  sister,  the  Princess  Mandaradevi.  And
Naravahanadatta,  when  he  saw  him,  embraced  him,  for  it
is  fitting  that  truly  brave  men  should  show  kindness  to  foes
when  conquered  and  pacified.

Then  the  royal  sage  Akampana,  seeing  Mandaradevi
come  with  her  brother,  said  to  that  emperor  :  "  Here,  King,
is  my  daughter,  Mandaradevi  by  name ;  and  a  heavenly
voice  said  that  she  should  be  the  consort  of  an  emperor ;  so
marry  her,  Emperor,  for  I  give  her  to  you."

When  the  royal  sage  said  this,  his  daughter  said  :  "  I
have  four  companions  here,  of  like  age,  noble  maidens  ;  one
is  a  maiden  called  Kanakavati,  the  daughter  of  Kanchana-
damshtra ;  the  second  is  the  daughter  of  Kalajihva,  Kalavati
by  name ;  the  third  is  the  offspring  of  Dirghadamshtra,  named
Sruta ;  the  fourth  is  the  daughter  of  the  King  of  Paundra,
named  Ambaraprabha,  and  I  am  the  fifth  of  those  Vidyadhara
maidens.  We  five,  when  roaming  about,  saw  previously  in
a  grove  of  ascetics  this  my  destined  husband,  and,  setting
our  hearts  on  him,  we  made  an  agreement  together  that  we
would  all,  at  one  and  the  same  time,  take  him  for  our  husband,
but  that,  if  any  single  one  married  him  alone,  the  others
should  enter  the  fire,  and  lay  the  guilt  at  her  door.  So  it  is
not  fitting  that  I  should  marry  without  those  friends  of  mine ;
for  how  could  persons  like  myself  commit  the  outrageous
crime  of  breaking  plighted  faith  ?  "  1

When  that  self-possessed  lady  had  said  this,  her  father,
Akampana,  summoned  those  four  Vidyadhara  chiefs,  who
were  the  fathers  of  the  four  maidens,  and  told  them  exactly
what  had  occurred;  and  they  immediately  thought  them-
selves very  fortunate,  and  brought  those  maidens,  their
daughters.  Then  Naravahanadatta  married  the  five  in
order,  beginning  with  Mandaradevi.     And  he  remained  there

1  Cf.  the  similar  incident  on  p.  67  of  this  volume. — n.m.p.


THE  RISHABHA  MOUNTAIN  85

with  them  many  days,  worshipping  the  hermits  three  times
a  day,  at  dawn,  noon  and  sunset,  while  his  attendants  held
high  festival.

And  Akampana  said  to  him  :  "  King,  you  must  now  go
to  the  Rishabha  mountain  for  the  great  ceremony  of  your
coronation."  And  thereupon  Devamaya  also  said  to  him :
"  King,  you  must  indeed  do  so,  for  the  emperors  of  old
time,  Rishabhaka  and  others,  were  anointed '  on  that
mountain."

When  Harisikha  heard  that,  he  spoke  in  favour  of
Naravahanadatta's  being  anointed  emperor  on  the  splendid
mountain  of  Mandara,  which  was  near ;  but  a  voice  came
from  heaven  :  "  King,  all  former  emperors  went  through  the
ceremony  of  their  coronation  on  the  Rishabha  mountain;
do  you  also  go  there,  for  it  is  a  holy  place."  2

When  the  heavenly  voice  said  this,  Naravahanadatta
bowed  before  the  hermits  and  Akampana,  and  set  out  thence
for  that  mountain  on  an  auspicious  day.  And  he  reached
that  northern  opening  of  the  cave  of  Trisirsha,  with  many
great  chiefs  of  the  Vidyadharas,  headed  by  Amitagati.
There  the  emperor  worshipped  that  Kalaratri,  and  entered
the  cave  by  that  opening,  and  came  out  by  the  southern
opening.  And  after  he  had  come  out  with  his  forces  he
rested,  at  Devamaya's  request,  in  his  palace  for  that  day,
together  with  his  attendants.

And  while  he  was  there,  he  reflected  that  Siva  was  near
him  on  that  mountain  of  Kailasa,  and  he  went  of  his  own
accord,  with  Gomukha,  to  visit  the  god.  And  when  he
reached  his  hermitage,  he  saw  and  adored  the  cow  Surabhi
and  the  sacred  bull,  and  approached  Nandin,  the  doorkeeper.
And  Nandin  was  pleased  when  the  king  circumambulated
him,  and  opened  the  door  to  him,  and  then  he  entered  and
beheld  Siva,  accompanied  by  Devi.  The  god  diffused  glad-
ness afar  by  the  streams  of  rays  from  the  moon  on  his  crest,

1  Of  course,  in  the  original  the  word  expresses  the  idea  of  sprinkling
with  water.

2  It  may  possibly  mean,  "land  of  the  Siddhas."  In  Chapter  CVII  the
Siddhas  are  mentioned  as  directing  Naravahanadatta's  devotions  on  their
holy  mountain.


86  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

that  seemed  to  dart  hither  and  thither  as  if  conquered  by
the  splendour  of  Gauri's  face.  He  was  playing  with  his
beloved  with  dice,  that,  like  eyes,  were  allowed  at  will  to
pursue  their  objects  independently — that,  though  under  his
command,  were  ever  restlessly  rolling.  And  when  Naravahana-
datta  saw  that  giver  of  boons,  and  that  goddess,  the  daughter
of  the  mountain,  he  fell  at  their  feet,  and  circumambulated
them  three  times.  The  god  said  to  him  :  "  It  is  well,  my
son,  that  thou  hast  come  hither  ;  for  otherwise  thou  mightest
have  suffered  loss.  But  now  all  thy  magic  powers  shall  ever
be  unfailing.  So  go  thou  to  the  Rishabha  mountain,  that
holy  place,  and  obtain  there  at  once  in  fitting  time  thy  great
auguration."

When  the  emperor  had  received  this  command  from  the
god,  he  hastened  to  obey  it,  exclaiming  :  "I  will  do  thy
will,"  and  bowed  before  him  and  his  wife,  and  returned
to  that  palace  of  Devamaya.  The  Queen  Madanamanchuka
playfully  said  to  him  on  his  return  :  "  Where  have  you  been,
my  husband  ?  You  appear  to  be  pleased.  Have  you  man-
aged to  pick  up  here  another  set  of  five  maidens  ?  "  When
she  made  use  of  these  playful  taunts,  the  prince  gladdened
her  by  telling  her  the  real  state  of  affairs,  and  remained  with
her  in  happiness.

And  the  next  day,  Naravahanadatta,  accompanied  by  a
host  of  Gandharvas  and  Vidyadharas,  making,  as  it  were,  a
second  sun  in  the  heavens  by  his  glorious  presence,  ascended
his  splendid  car,  with  his  wives  and  his  ministers,  and  made
for  the  Rishabha  mountain.  And  when  he  reached  that
heavenly  hill,  the  trees,  like  hermits,  with  their  creepers  like
matted  hair  waving  in  the  wind,  shed  their  flowers  before  him
by  way  of  a  respectful  offering.  And  there  various  kings  of
the  Vidyadharas  brought  the  preparations  for  the  coronation
on  a  scale  suited  to  the  might  of  their  master.  And  the  Vidya-
dharas came  to  his  coronation  from  all  quarters,  with  presents
in  their  hands,  all  loyal,  terrified,  vanquished  or  respectful.

Then  the  Vidyadharas  said  to  him  :  "  Tell  us,  King,  who
is  to  occupy  half  your  throne,  and  to  be  anointed  as  queen
consort  ?  "  The  king  answered  :  "  The  Queen  Madana-
manchuka is  to  be  anointed  together  with  me  " ;  and  this  at


THE  CORONATION


87


once  set  the  Vidyadharas  thinking.  Then  a  bodiless  voice
came  from  the  air :  "  Hearken,  Vidyadharas  !  This  Madana-
manchuka is  not  a  mortal ;  for  she  is  Rati  become  incarnate,
in  order  to  be  the  wife  of  this  your  master,  who  is  the  God  of
Love.  She  was  not  born  to  Madanavega  by  Kalingasena,  but,
being  of  superhuman  origin,  was  immediately  substituted
by  the  gods,  who  employed  their  deluding  power,  for  the
infant  to  which  Kalingasena  gave  birth.1  But  the  infant
to  which  she  gave  birth  was  named  Ityaka,  and  remained
at  the  side  of  Madanavega,  having  been  assigned  to  him
by  the  Creator.  So  this  Madanamanchuka  is  worthy  to
share  the  throne  of  her  husband,  for  Siva  long  ago  granted
her  this  honour  as  a  boon,  having  been  pleased  with  her
asceticism."  When  the  voice  had  said  so  much,  it  ceased,
and  the  Vidyadharas  were  pleased,  and  praised  the  Queen
Madanamanchuka .

Then,  on  an  auspicious  day,  the  great  hermits  sprinkled
with  water  from  many  sacred  bathing-places,  brought  in
pitchers  of  gold,  Naravahanadatta  seated  on  the  imperial
throne,  while  Madanamanchuka  occupied  the  left  half  of  it.
And  during  the  ceremony  Santisoma,  the  domestic  chaplain,
was  busily  occupied,  and  the  assembled  cymbals  of  the
heavenly  nymphs  resounded  aloud,2  and  the  murmur  made
by  Brahmans  reciting  prayers  filled  the  ten  points  of  the  sky.
Strange  to  say,  when  the  water,  made  more  purifying  by
holy  texts,  fell  on  his  head,  the  secret  defilement 3  of  enmity
was  washed  out  from  the  minds  of  his  foes.  The  Goddess  of
Fortune  seemed  to  accompany  in  visible  presence  that  water
of  consecration,  under  the  impression  that  it  came  from  the
sea,  and  so  was  a  connection  of  her  own,  and  to  join  with
it  in  covering  the  body  of  that  king.  A  series  of  flower
garlands,  flung  by  the  hands  of  the  nymphs  of  heaven,  falling
on  him,  appeared  like  the  Ganges  spontaneously  descending  on
his  body  with  a  full  stream.     Adorned  with  red  unguent  and

1  See  Vol.  Ill,  p.  131.— n.m.p.

2  The  corresponding  line  in  the  D.  text  reads :  mangalyaturyanadeshu
suglteshu  dyuyoshitam — "at  the  beautiful  songs  of  the  heavenly  nymphs  ac-
companied by  the  auspicious  sound  of  the  (heavenly)  musical  instruments."
See  Speyer,  op.  cit.  p.  145. — n.m.p.

3  I  read  vairamalam.     The  reading  in  Brockhaus'  text  is  a  misprint.


88  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

valour,  he  appeared  like  the  sun  in  the  glory  of  rising,  washed
in  the  water  of  the  sea.1  And  crowned  with  a  garland  of
manddra  flowers,  resplendent  with  glorious  raiment  and  orna-
ments, having  donned  a  heavenly  diadem,  he  wore  the  majesty
of  Indra.  And  Queen  Madanamanchuka,  having  been  also
anointed,  glittered  with  heavenly  ornaments  at  his  side,  like
Saehi  at  the  side  of  Indra.

And  that  day,  though  drums  sounded  like  clouds,  and
flowers  fell  from  the  sky  like  rain,  and  though  it  was  full 2  of
heavenly  nymphs  like  lightning  gleams,  was,  strange  to  say,
a  fair  one.  On  that  occasion,  in  the  city  of  the  chief  of  the
mountains,  not  only  did  beautiful  Vidyadhara  ladies  dance,
but  creepers  shaken  by  the  wind  danced  also ;  and  when
cymbals  were  struck  by  minstrels  at  that  great  festival,  the
mountain  seemed  to  send  forth  responsive  strains  from  its
echoing  caves ;  and  covered  all  over  with  Vidyadharas
moving  about  intoxicated  with  the  liquor  of  heavenly  cordials
it  seemed  to  be  itself  reeling  with  wine ;  and  Indra,  in  his
chariot,  having  beheld  the  splendour  of  the  coronation  which
has  now  been  described,  felt  his  pride  in  his  own  altogether
dashed.

Naravahanadatta,  having  thus  obtained  his  long-desired
inauguration  as  emperor,  thought  with  yearning  of  his
father.  And  having  at  once  taken  counsel  with  Gomukha,
and  his  other  ministers,  the  monarch  summoned  Vayupatha,
and  said  to  him  :  "Go  and  say  to  my  father  :  '  Narava-
hanadatta thinks  of  you  with  exceeding  longing,'  and  tell
him  all  that  has  happened,  and  bring  him  here,  and  bring  his

1  Cf.  Holinshed's  account  of  Richard  II's  coronation:  "The  Archbishop,
having  stripped  him,  first  anointed  his  hands,  after  his  head,  breast,  shoulders,
and  the  joints  of  his  arms,  with  the  sacred  oil,  saying  certain  prayers,  and  in
the  meanwhile  did  the  choir  sing  the  anthem,  beginning  '  Unxerunt  regem
Salomonem.'  "  The  above  quotation  comes  from  the  Clarendon  Press  Edition
of  King  Richard  II,  p.  137,  sub  calcem.

2  I  read  vritam,  which  appears  to  be  the  reading  of  the  three  India  Office
MSS.  and  of  the  Sanskrit  College  MS.  It  is  clear  enough  in  No.  2166.
In  si.  85  I  think  that  the  reading  of  MS.  No.  3003,  nanrityatkevalam  yavad
vatoddhidalata  api,  must  be  something  near  the  truth,  as  yaval,  in  Brockhaus*
text,  gives  no  meaning.  (The  Sanskrit  College  MS.  gives  Anrityannaiva  vatena
dhuta yaval  lata  api.}  Of  course  the  plural  must  be  substituted  for  the  singular.
I  have  translated  accordingly.     Two  MSS.  have  valgad  for  vallad  in  //.  87.


VAYUPATHA'S  INVITATION


89


queens  and  his  ministers  too,  addressing  the  same  invitation
to  them."  When  Vayupatha  heard  this,  he  said  :  "  I  will  do
so,"  and  made  for  Kausambi  through  the  air.

And  he  reached  that  city  in  a  moment,  beheld  with  fear
and  astonishment  by  the  citizens,  as  he  was  encircled  by
seventy  million  Vidyadharas.  And  he  had  an  interview  with
Udayana,  King  of  Vatsa,  with  his  ministers  and  wives,  and
the  king  received  him  with  appropriate  courtesy.  And  the
Vidyadhara  prince  sat  down  and  asked  the  king  about  his
health,  and  said  to  him,  while  all  present  looked  at  him  with
curiosity  :

"  Your  son,  Naravahanadatta,  having  propitiated  Siva,  and
beheld  him  face  to  face,  and  having  obtained  from  him  sciences
difficult  for  enemies  to  conquer,  has  slain  Manasavega  and
Gaurlmunda  in  the  southern  division  of  the  Vidyadhara
territory,  and  conquered  Mandaradeva  who  was  lord  in
the  northern  division,  and  has  obtained  '  the  high  dignity
of  emperor  over  all  the  kings  of  the  Vidyadharas  in  both
divisions,  who  acknowledge  his  authority  ;  and  has  now  gone
through  his  solemn  coronation  on  the  Rishabha  mountain,
and  is  thinking,  King,  with  eager  yearning  of  you  and  your
queens  and  ministers.  And  I  have  been  sent  by  him,  so
come  at  once ;  for  fortunate  are  those  who  live  to  see  their
offspring  elevate  their  race."

When  the  King  of  Vatsa  heard  Vayupatha  say  this,  being
full  of  longing  for  his  son,  he  seemed  like  a  peacock  that
rejoices  when  it  hears  the  roaring  of  the  rain-clouds.  So  he
accepted  Vayupatha's  invitation,  and  immediately  mounted
a  palankeen  with  him,  and  by  the  might  of  his  sciences
travelled  through  the  air,  accompanied  by  his  wives  and
ministers,  and  reached  that  great  heavenly  mountain  called
Rishabha.  And  there  he  saw  his  son  on  a  heavenly  throne,
in  the  midst  of  the  Vidyadhara  kings,  accompanied  by
many  wives;  resembling  the  moon  reclining  on  the  top  of
the  eastern  mountain,  surrounded  by  the  planetary  host,  and
attended  by  a  company  of  many  stars.  To  the  king  the  sight
of  his  son  in  all  his  splendour  was  a  shower  of  nectar,  and

1  Two  of  the  India  Office  MSS.  and  the  Sanskrit  College  MS.  read
asadya ;  the  line  appears  to  be  omitted  in  the  third.


90  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

when  he  was  bedewed  with  it  his  heart  swelled  with  joy,  and
he  closely  resembled  the  sea  when  the  moon  rises.

Naravahanadatta,  for  his  part,  beholding  that  father  of
his  after  a  long  separation,  rose  up  hurriedly  and  eager,  and
went  to  meet  him  with  his  train.  And  then  his  father  em-
braced him,  and  folded  him  to  his  bosom,  and  he  went
through  a  second  sprinkling,1  being  bathed  in  a  flood  of
his  father's  tears  of  joy.  And  Queen  Vasavadatta  long
embraced  her  son,  and  bathed  him  with  the  milk  that  flowed
from  her  breasts  at  beholding  him,  so  that  he  remembered
his  childhood.  And  Padmavati,  and  Yaugandharayana,  and
the  rest  of  his  father's  ministers,  and  his  uncle  Gopalaka,
beholding  him  after  a  long  interval,  drank  in  with  thirsty
eyes  his  ambrosial  frame,  like  partridges ;  while  the
king  treated  them  with  the  honour  which  they  deserved.
And  Kalingasena,  beholding  her  son-in-law,  and  also  her
daughter,  felt  as  if  the  whole  world  was  too  narrow  for  her,
much  less  could  her  own  limbs  contain  her  swelling  heart.
And  Yaugandharayana  and  the  other  ministers,  beholding
their  sons,  Harisikha  and  the  others,  on  whom  celestial
powers  had  been  bestowed  by  the  favour  of  their  sovereign,
congratulated  them.2

And  Queen  Madanamanchuka.  wearing  heavenly  orna-
ments, with  Ratnaprabha,  Alankaravati,  Lalitalochana,
Karpurika,  Saktiyasas  and  Bhaglrathayasas,  and  the  sister
of  Ruchiradeva,  who  bore  a  heavenly  form,  and  Vegavati,
and  Ajinavati  with  Gandharvadatta,  and  Prabhavati  and
Atmanika  and  Vayuvegayasas,  and  her  four  beautiful  friends,
headed  by  Kalika,  and  those  five  other  heavenly  nymphs,  of
whom  Mandaradevi  was  the  chief — all  these  wives  of  the
Emperor  Naravahanadatta  bowed  before  the  feet  of  their
father-in-law  the  King  of  Vatsa,  and  also  of  Vasavadatta
and  Padmavati,  and  they  in  their  delight  loaded  them  with
blessings,  as  was  fitting.

And  when  the  King  of  Vatsa  and  his  wives  had  occupied

1  An  allusion  to  the  sprinkling  at  his  coronation.  The  king  "  put  him  on
his  lap."

2  I  read  drisktva  prabhuprasadaptadivyatvan,  which  I  find  in  two  of  the
India  Office  MSS.     No.  3003  has  prata  for  prabhu.


THE  BANQUET  91

seats  suited  to  their  dignity,  Naravahanadatta  ascended
his  lofty  throne.  And  Queen  Vasavadatta  was  delighted
to  see  those  various  new  daughters-in-law,  and  asked  their
names  and  lineage.  And  the  King  of  Vatsa  and  his  suite,
beholding  the  godlike  splendour  of  Naravahanadatta,  came
to  the  conclusion  that  they  had  not  been  born  in  vain.

And  in  the  midst  of  their  great  rejoicing  *  at  the  reunion
of  relations,  the  brave  warder  Ruchideva  entered  and  said  :
"  The  banqueting  hall  is  ready,  so  be  pleased  to  come  there."
When  they  heard  it  they  all  went  to  that  splendid  banqueting
hall.  It  was  full  of  goblets  made  of  various  jewels,  which
looked  like  so  many  expanded  lotuses,  and  strewn  with  many
flowers,  so  that  it  resembled  a  lotus  bed  in  a  garden ;  and  it
was  crowded  with  ladies  with  jugs  full  of  intoxicating  liquor,
who  made  it  flash  like  the  nectar  appearing  in  the  arms  of
Garuda.  There  they  drank  wine  that  snaps  those  fetters  of
shame  that  bind  the  ladies  of  the  harem ;  wine,  the  essence
of  love's  life,  the  ally  of  merriment.  Their  faces,  expanded
and  red  with  wine,  shone  like  the  lotuses  in  the  lake,  ex-
panded and  red  with  the  rays  of  the  rising  sun.  And  the
goblets  of  the  rosy  hue  of  the  lotus,  finding  themselves  sur-
passed by  the  lips  of  the  queens,  and  seeming  terrified  at
touching  them,  hid  with  their  hue  of  wine.

Then  the  queens  of  Naravahanadatta  began  to  show  signs
of  intoxication,  with  their  contracted  eyebrows  and  fiery
eyes,  and  the  period  of  quarrelling2  seemed  to  be  setting  in;
nevertheless  they  went  thence  in  order  to  the  hall 3  of  feast-
ing, which  was  attractive  with  its  various  viands  provided  by

1  All  the  India  Office  MSS.  read  sangamahotsave.  The  Sanskrit  College
MS.  reads  bandhunam  sangamotsave.

2  This  reading  seems  doubtful,  as  no  further  mention  is  made  of  the
"quarrelling."  The  D.  text  reads  asann  akopakdle  (see  p.  524  of  the  second
edition)  instead  of  B.'s  dsanne kopakdle  'pi,  thus  the  meaning  is  :  "The  wives  of
Naravahanadatta,  though  there  was  no  opportunity  then  of  being  angry,  had
nevertheless  contracted  eyebrows  and  fiery  eyes — for  they  were  intoxicated."
There  is  no  gap,  as  Tawney  supposed.  The  D.  reading  is  undoubtedly  correct.
See  further  Speyer,  op.  cit.,  p.  145. — n.m.p.

3  Literally,  "ground."  No  doubt  they  squatted  on  the  ground  at  the
feast  as  well  as  at  the  banquet — which  preceded  it,  instead  of  following  it —
as  in  the  days  of  Shakespeare.


92  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

the  magic  power.  It  was  strewed  with  coverlets,  abounding
in  dishes,  and  hung  with  curtains  and  screens,  full  of  all
kinds  of  delicacies  and  enjoyments,  and  it  looked  like  the
dancing-ground  of  the  goddesses  of  good  fortune.

There  they  took  their  meal,  and,  the  sun  having  retired
to  rest  with  the  twilight  on  the  western  mountain,  they  re-
posed in  sleeping  pavilions.  And  Naravahanadatta,  dividing
himself  by  his  science  into  many  forms,  was  present  in
the  pavilions  of  all  the  queens.  But  in  his  true  personality
he  enjoyed  the  society  of  his  beloved  Madanamanchuka,
who  resembled  the  night  in  being  moon-faced,  having  eyes
twinkling  like  stars,  and  being  full  of  revelry.  And  the  King
of  Vatsa  too,  and  his  train,  spent  that  night  in  heavenly
enjoyments,  seeming  as  if  they  had  been  born  again  with-
out changing  their  bodies.  And  in  the  morning  all  woke  up,
and  delighted  themselves  in  the  same  way  with  various  enjoy-
ments in  splendid  gardens  and  pavilions  produced  by  magic
power.

Then,  after  they  had  spent  many  days  in  various  amuse-
ments, the  King  of  Vatsa,  wishing  to  return  to  his  own  city,
went,  full  of  affection,  to  his  son,  the  king  of  all  the  Vidya-
dharas,  who  bowed  humbly  before  him,  and  said  to  him :  "  My
son,  who  that  has  sense  can  help  appreciating  these  heavenly
enjoyments  ?  But  the  love  of  dwelling  in  one's  mother-
country  naturally  draws  every  man  l ;  so  I  mean  to  return  to
my  own  city ;  but  do  you  enjoy  this  fortune  of  Vidyadhara
royalty,  for  these  regions  suit  you  as  being  half  god  and  half
man.  However,  you  must  summon  me  again  some  time,
when  a  suitable  occasion  presents  itself ;  for  this  is  the  fruit
of  this  birth  of  mine,  that  I  behold  this  beautiful  moon  of
your  countenance,  full  of  nectar  worthy  of  being  drunk  in
with  the  eyes,  and  that  I  have  the  delight  of  seeing  your
heavenly  splendour."

When  King  Naravahanadatta  heard  this  sincere  speech

1  The  King  of  Vatsa  feels  like  Ulysses  in  the  island  of  Calypso :

te  tffiaTa  S'afA  TT€Tpr)(Ti  Kol  rj'iovtcrcri  Kadifav

8a.Kpv(rL  koll  o"TOva)(rj(ri  kcu  aX.ye<ri  Ovjxbv  epkydoiv
ttovtov  €7r'  drpvyerov  StpKeo-Ktro  SaKpva  \€i/3u)V."

Odyssey,  v,  156-158.


THE  DEPARTURE  OF  THE  KING  OF  VATSA    93

of  his  father,  the  King  of  Vatsa,  he  quickly  summoned
Devamaya,  the  Vidyadhara  prince,  and  said  to  him  in  a  voice
half-choked  with  a  weight  of  tears  :  "  My  father  is  returning
to  his  own  capital  with  my  mothers,  and  his  ministers,  and
the  rest  of  his  train,  so  send  on  in  front  of  him  a  full
thousand  bhdras  *  of  gold  and  jewels,  and  employ  a  thousand
Vidyadhara  serfs  to  carry  it."

When  Devamaya  had  received  this  order,  given  in  the
kind  tones  of  his  master,  he  bowed  and  said  :  "  Bestower
of  honour,  I  will  go  in  person  with  my  attendants  to
Kausambi  to  perform  this  duty."  Then  the  emperor  sent
Vayupatha  and  Devamaya  to  attend  on  their  journey  his
father  and  his  followers,  whom  he  honoured  with  presents  of
raiment  and  ornaments.  Then  the  King  of  Vatsa  and  his
suite  mounted  a  heavenly  chariot,  and  he  went  to  his  own
city,  after  making  his  son,  who  followed  him  a  long  way,
turn  back.  And  Queen  Vasavadatta,  whose  longing  regret
rose  at  that  moment  with  hundredfold  force,  turned  back
her  dutiful  son  with  tears,  and,  looking  back  at  him,  with
difficulty  tore  herself  away.  And  Naravahanadatta,  accom-
panied by  his  ministers,  Gomukha  and  the  rest,  who  had
grown  up  with  him  from  his  youth,  and  with  hosts  of  Vidya-
dhara kings,  with  his  wives,  and  with  Madanamanchuka
at  his  side,  in  the  perpetual  enjoyment  of  heavenly  pleasures
was  ever  free  from  satiety.2

1  A  bhdra  is  20  tulds.

2  In  the  above  chapter  we  have  seen  how,  after  the  defeat  of  Mandaradeva,
Naravahanadatta  proceeds  with  his  coronation  ceremony.  As  in  the  longest
tale  in  the  Nights,  "  King  Omar  bin  al-Nu'uman  and  his  Sons  "  (see  Burton,
vol.  iii,  p.  112),  all  the  chief  characters  of  the  tale  assemble,  and,  with  a  final
blaze  of  glory,  the  curtain  falls.  Surely  this  should  be  the  end  of  the  whole
work.  The  great  object  of  the  hero  has  been  achieved,  all  the  seemingly
unsurmountable  obstacles  have  been  overcome,  every  enemy  has  been  con-
quered, and  every  maiden  has  been  won.  Yet,  to  our  great  astonishment,  we
find  three  more  complete  Books  before  us.  As  we  shall  see  in  the  "  Terminal
Essay,"  the  chief  value  of  the  Books  is  to  clear  up  some  of  the  unsolved
mysteries  of  order  and  arrangement  which  have  presented  themselves  in
previous  Books. — n.m.p.


BOOK  XVI :  SURATAMAN JARI
CHAPTER  CXI

INVOCATION

MAY  Ganesa  protect  you,  the   ornamental  streaks
of  vermilion  on  whose  cheeks  fly  up  in  the  dance,
and  look  like  the  fiery  might  of  obstacles  swallowed
and  disgorged  by  him.


[M]  While  Naravahanadatta  was  thus  living  on  that
Rishabha  mountain  with  his  wives  and  his  ministers,  and
was  enjoying  the  splendid  fortune  of  emperor  over  the  kings
of  the  Vidyadharas,  which  he  had  obtained,  once  on  a  time
spring  came  to  increase  his  happiness.  After  long  inter-
mission the  light  of  the  moon  was  beautifully  clear,  and  the
earth,  enfolded  by  the  young  fresh  grass,  showed  its  joy  by
sweating  dewy  drops,  and  the  forest  trees,  closely  embraced
again  and  again  by  the  winds  of  the  Malaya  mountain,  were
all  trembling,  bristling  with  thorns,  and  full  of  sap.1  The
warder  of  Kama,  the  cuckoo,  beholding  the  stalk  of  the
mango-tree,  with  his  note  seemed  to  forbid  the  pride  of  coy
damsels ;  and  rows  of  bees  fell  with  a  loud  hum  from  the
flowery  creepers,  like  showers  of  arrows  shot  from  the  bow
of  the  great  warrior  Kama.  And  Naravahanadatta's
ministers,  Gomukha  and  the  others,  beholding  at  that  time
this  activity  of  spring,  said  to  Naravahanadatta :  "  See,  King,
this  mountain  of  Rishabha  is  altogether  changed,  and  is
now  a  mountain  of  flowers,  since  the  dense  lines  of  forest
with  which  it  is  covered  have  their  blossoms  full-blown  with

1  There  is  a  play  on  words  here.  Sanskrit  poets  suppose  that  joy
produces  in  human  beings  trembling,  horripilation  and  perspiration.

94


THE  RIVER  MANDAKINI  95

spring.  Behold,  King,  the  creepers,  which,  with  their  flowers
striking  against  one  another,  seem  to  be  playing  the  cas-
tanets * ;  and  with  the  humming  of  their  bees  to  be  singing,
as  they  are  swayed  to  and  fro  by  the  wind  ;  while  the  pollen,
that  covers  them,  makes  them  appear  to  be  crowned  with
garlands ;  and  the  garden  made  ready  by  spring,  in  which
they  are,  is  like  the  Court  of  Kama.  Look  at  this  mango-
shoot  with  its  garland  of  bees  ;  it  looks  like  the  bow  of  the
God  of  Love  with  loosened  string,  as  he  reposes  after  conquer-
ing the  world.  So  come,  let  us  go  and  enjoy  this  festival
of  spring  on  the  bank  of  the  River  Mandakini,  where  the
gardens  are  so  splendid."

When  Naravahanadatta  had  thus  been  exhorted  by  his
ministers,  he  went  with  the  ladies  of  his  harem  to  the
bank  of  the  Mandakini.  And  there  he  diverted  himself  in
a  garden  resounding  with  the  song  of  many  birds,  adorned

1  So  Tawney  translates  samyatalavatlr.  Sdmyatala  means  literally  a  wooden
clapper  for  beating  time,  but  whether  it  consisted  of  pear-shaped  bowls  of
hard  wood,  which  is  what  we  mean  by  castanets,  is  impossible  to  say.  Two
distinct  forms  exist  in  India  to-day — the  Jhang,  made  of  metal,  which  mostly
resembles  the  Moorish  and  Spanish  castanets,  but  consist  of  only  one  pair,  and
the  Khartdls,  which  are  long,  smooth  stones  in  the  shape  of  a  cow's  tongue,
rather  similar  to  nigger-minstrels'  "bones."  A  pair  is  held  in  each  hand.
See  Atiya  Begum  Fyzee  Rahamin,  Music  of  India,  p.  62.  She  informs  me
that  there  remain  very  few  people  who  can  play  the  Khartal.  Whether  India
was  the  original  home  of  the  Castanet  is  not  known  for  certain,  but  what
evidence  there  is,  appears  to  be  in  favour  of  the  theory.  It  is  generally  agreed
that  the  Moors  introduced  the  instrument  into  Spain  "  from  the  East."  Such
a  dance-loving  nation  as  the  Spaniards  not  only  received  it  enthusiastically,
but  discovered  that  the  pomegranate  wood  was  unrivalled  in  the  manufacture
of  the  instrument.  The  tones  differ  considerably  and  improve  with  age.
When  in  Granada  I  made  detailed  inquiries  about  them,  and  discovered  the
most  prized  pairs  are  those  made  from  the  black  wood,  with  hardly  any  of  the
lighter  brown  showing  at  all.  My  finest-sounding  pair,  a  deep  rich  note,  is
almost  entirely  black ;  while  a  light  brown  set  I  have  is  shrill  in  comparison.
The  KporaXa  of  the  Greeks  were  a  kind  of  castanet  made  of  a  split  reed,  and
were  used  to  accompany  dances.  They  corresponded  to  the  Roman  crotala
used  in  the  Dionysiac  and  Bacchanalian  rites.  Literature  on  castanets  seems
very  scarce,  and  the  only  article  I  can  find  entirely  devoted  to  them  is :  Soy
Yo,  "Antiquity  of  the  Castanet,"  Once  a  Week,  vol.  viii,  1863,  pp.  609-610.
Castanets  of  various  woods,  metals  and  ivory  are  found  throughout  the  East,,
and  specimens  from  China,  Burma,  India,  Siam,  Japan  and  Arabia  can  be  seen
at  the  South  Kensington  Museum. — n.m.p.


96  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

with  cardamom  -  trees,1  clove  -  trees,2  vakulas*  asohas*  and
manddras.5  And  he  sat  down  on  a  broad  slab  of  moonstone,6
placing  Queen  Madanamanchuka  at  his  left  hand,  accom-

1  Sanskrit  eld,  which  may  apply  either  to  the  Greater  cardamom,  Amomum
subulatum,  a  native  of  Nepal ;  or  to  the  Lesser  cardamom,  Elettaria  cardamomum,
which  is  indigenous  in  West  and  South  India,  as  well  as  in  Burma.  Eld  is
mentioned  by  Sus>uta  in  the  first  century  a.d.  or  b.c.  as  forming  part  of  a
medicated  "  drum  "  used  for  snake-bites.  It  is  also  given  as  one  of  the  three
aromatic  drugs  (Tri-sugandhi) ;  the  other  two  being  patra  (or  tejpatra,  Cassia
lignea)  and  tvak  (or  gudatvak,  cinnamon).  See  Bhishagratna's  translation,
vol.  ii,  p.  739,  and  vol.  iii,  p.  313.  For  full  details  of  the  two  varieties  of
cardamom  see  Watt,  Diet.  Econ.  Prod.  Ind.,  vol.  i,  pp.  222-223,  and  (especially)
vol.  iii,  pp.  227-236.  For  its  use  in  betel-chewing  see  e.g.  pp.  242,  247  of  this
volume. — n.m.p.

2  Caryophyllus  aromaticus  (or  Eugenia  caryophyllata)  is  a  native  of  the
Moluccas,  the  flower-buds  of  which  yield  the  cloves  of  commerce.  In  spite
of  attempts  by  the  Dutch  to  restrict  the  cultivation  to  the  island  of  Amboyna
the  clove-tree  was  introduced  into  Mauritius  by  the  French  in  1770  (who
used  the  word  clou,  from  which  our  "  cloves  "  is  derived,  through  its  resem-
blance to  a  nail).  Cloves  were  subsequently  cultivated  in  Guiana,  Brazil,  the
West  Indies,  Zanzibar,  Java,  Sumatra  and  India.

The  history  of  the  clove  trade  and  the  struggles  between  the  Portuguese,
Dutch,  French  and  English  forms  a  most  exciting,  though  very  bloody,  story
of  early  sea  adventure  to  the  "spice  islands."  See  Watt,  op.  cit.,  vol.  ii,
p.  202  et  seq. ;  H.  N.  Ridley,  Spices,  pp.  155-196.  Interesting  accounts  appear
in  several  of  the  Hakluyt  Society  volumes :  see  e.g.  G.  P.  Badger,  Travels  of
Ludovico  di  Varthema,  p.  245  et  seq. ;  M.  L.  Dames,  Book  of  Duarte  Barbosa,
vol.  ii,  p.  199;  Yule  and  Cordier,  Cathay  and  the  Way  Thither,  vol.  iv,  p.  101
et  seq.  For  the  use  of  cloves  in  betel-chewing  see  e.g.  pp.  241,  246,  247,  255
of  the  present  volume. — n.m.p.

3  I.e.  Mimusops  elengi,  largely  cultivated  in  India,  but  found  wild  in  the
Deccan  and  Malay  Peninsula.  The  tree  is  chiefly  cultivated  for  its  orna-
mental appearance  and  its  fragrant  flowers.  The  latter  are  used  for  making
garlands,  stuffing  pillows,  etc.,  while  the  attar  distilled  from  them  is  esteemed
as  a  perfume.     See  further  Watt,  op.  cit.,  vol.  v,  p.  249  et  seq. — n.m.p.

4  See  p.  7n*  of  this  volume. — n.m.p.

5  Calotropis  gigantea,  the  giant  swallow-wort,  known  in  Vedic  times  as
arka  ("wedge")  and  in  modern  days  as  maddr.  It  is  used  for  numerous
purposes — gutta-percha,  dye,  tan,  paper-making,  etc. — besides  being  largely
employed  for  sacred,  domestic,  medicinal  and  agricultural  purposes.  For  full
details  and  references  see  Watt,  op.  cit.,  vol.  ii,  pp.  34-49. — n.m.p.

6  This  particular  variety  of  feldspar  comes  almost  entirely  from  the
Dumbara  district  of  the  Central  Province  of  Ceylon.  It  has  been  fully
described  in  various  papers  by  A.  K.  Coomaraswamy,  as  enumerated  in  La
Touche,  Bibliography  of  Indian  Geology,  pt.  i,  1917,  p.  102  et  seq. — n.m.p.


THE  DEVOTED  COUPLE  97

panied  by  the  rest  of  his  harem,  and  attended  by  various
princes  of  the  Vidyadharas,  of  whom  Chandasimha  and
Amitagati  were  the  chief ;  and  while  drinking  wine  and  talk-
ing on  various  subjects,  the  sovereign,  having  observed  the
beauty  of  the  season,  said  to  his  ministers  :  "  The  southern
breeze  is  gentle  and  soft  to  the  feel ;  the  horizon  is  clear ;
the  gardens  in  every  corner  are  full  of  flowers  and  fragrant ;
sweet  are  the  strains  of  the  cuckoo,  and  the  joys  of  the
banquet  of  wine ;  what  pleasure  is  wanting  in  the  spring  ?
Still,  separation  from  one's  beloved  is  during  that  season  hard
to  bear.  Even  animals  *  find  separation  from  their  mates  in
the  spring  a  severe  affliction.  For  instance,  behold  this  hen-
cuckoo  here  distressed  with  separation  !  For  she  has  been
long  searching  for  her  beloved,  who  has  disappeared  from  her
gaze,  with  plaintive  cries,  and  not  being  able  to  find  him  she
is  now  cowering  on  a  mango,  mute  and  like  one  dead."

When  the  king  had  said  this,  his  minister,  Gomukha,  said
to  him  :  "  It  is  true,  all  creatures  find  separation  hard  to
bear  at  this  time ;  and  now  listen,  King ;  I  will  tell  you  in
illustration  of  this  something  that  happened  in  Sravasti.

167.  Story  of  the  Devoted  Couple,  Surasena  and  Sushend 2

In  that  town  there  dwelt  a  Rajput,  who  was  in  the  service
of  the  monarch,  and  lived  on  the  proceeds  of  a  village.  His
name  was  Surasena,  and  he  had  a  wife  named  Sushena,  who
was  a  native  of  Malava.  She  was  in  every  respect  well  suited
to  him,  and  he  loved  her  more  than  life.  One  day  the  king
summoned  him,  and  he  was  about  to  set  out  for  his  camp,
when  his  loving  wife  said  to  him  :  "  My  husband,  you  ought
not  to  go  off  and  leave  me  alone ;  for  I  shall  not  be  able  to
exist  here  for  a  moment  without  you."  When  Surasena's
wife  said  this  to  him,  he  replied  :  "  How  can  I  help  going,
when  the  king  summons  me  ?  Do  you  not  understand  my
position,  fair  one  ?     You  see,  I  am  a  Rajput,  and  a  servant,

1  For  anyonyasya  the  three  India  Office  MSS.  and  the  Sanskrit  College
MS.  read  anyasyastam,  which  means :  "  Not  to  speak  of  other  beings,  even
animals,  etc."

2  This  is  only  another  form  of  the  story  on  pp.  9-10  of  Vol.  II.
VOL.   VIII.  G


98  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

dependent  on  another  for  my  subsistence."  When  his  wife
heard  this  she  said  to  him,  with  tears  in  her  eyes  :  "If  you
must  of  necessity  go,  I  shall  manage  to  endure  it  somehow,
if  you  return  not  one  day  later  than  the  commencement  of
spring."

Having  heard  this,  he  at  last  said  to  her :  "  Agreed,  my
dear  !  I  will  return  on  the  first  day  of  the  month  Chaitra,
even  if  I  have  to  leave  my  duty."

When  he  said  this,  his  wife  was  at  last  induced  to  let  him
go  ;  and  so  Stirasena  went  to  attend  on  the  king  in  his  camp.
And  his  wife  remained  at  home,  counting  the  days  in  eager  ex-
pectation, looking  for  the  joyful  day  on  which  spring  begins,
on  which  her  husband  was  to  return.  At  last,  in  the  course
of  time,  that  day  of  the  spring  festival  arrived,  resonant
with  the  songs  of  cuckoos,  that  seemed  like  spells  to  summon
the  God  of  Love.  The  humming  of  bees,  drunk  with  the
fragrance  of  flowers,  fell  on  the  ear,  like  the  twanging  of
Kama's  bow  as  he  strung  it.

On  that  day  Siirasena's  wife  Sushena  said  to  herself :  "  Here
is  that  spring  festival  arrived ;  my  beloved  will,  without
fail,  return  to-day."  So  she  bathed,  and  adorned  herself,
and  worshipped  the  God  of  Love,  and  remained  eagerly
awaiting  his  arrival.  But  the  day  came  to  an  end  and  her
husband  did  not  return,  and  during  the  course  of  that  night
she  was  grievously  afflicted  by  despondency,  and  said  to
herself  :  "  The  hour  of  my  death  has  come,  but  my  husband
has  not  returned ;  for  those  whose  souls  are  exclusively
devoted  to  the  service  of  another  do  not  care  for  their  own
families."  While  she  was  making  these  reflections,  with  her
heart  fixed  upon  her  husband,  her  breath  left  her  body,  as  if
consumed  by  the  forest-fire  of  love.

In  the  meanwhile  Siirasena,  eager  to  behold  his  wife,  and
true  to  the  appointed  day,  got  himself,  though  with  great
difficulty,  relieved  from  attendance  on  the  king,  and  mount-
ing a  swift  camel  accomplished  a  long  journey  and,  arriving
in  the  last  watch  of  the  night,  reached  his  own  house.  There
he  beheld  that  wife  of  his  lying  dead,  with  all  her  ornaments
on  her,  looking  like  a  creeper,  with  its  flowers  full  blown,
rooted  up  by  the  wind.     When  he  saw  her,  he  was  beside


THE  EARLY  MORNING  DREAM       99

himself,  and  he  took  her  up  in  his  arms,  and  the  bereaved
husband's  life  immediately  left  his  body  in  an  outburst  of
lamentation.

But  when  their  family  goddess,  Chandl,  the  bestower  of
boons,  saw  that  that  couple  had  met  their  death  in  this
way,  she  restored  them  to  life  out  of  compassion.  And  after
breath  had  returned  to  them,  having  each  had  a  proof  of
the  other's  affection,  they  continued  inseparable  for  the  rest
of  their  lives.


[M]  "  Thus,  in  the  season  of  spring,  the  fire  of  separation,
fanned  by  the  wind  from  the  Malaya  mountain,  is  intolerable
to  all  creatures."  When  Gomukha  had  told  this  tale,  Nara-
vahanadatta,  thinking  over  it,  suddenly  became  despondent.
The  fact  is,  in  magnanimous  men,  the  spirits,  by  being
elevated  or  depressed,  indicate  beforehand  the  approach  of
good  or  evil  fortune.1

Then  the  day  came  to  an  end,  and  the  sovereign  performed
his  evening  worship,  and  went  to  his  bedroom,  and  got  into
bed,  and  reposed  there.  But  in  a  dream  at  the  end  of  the
night 2  he  saw  his  father  being  dragged  away  by  a  black

1  Cf.  Hamlet,  Act  V,  sc.  2,  1.  223  ;  Julius  Ccesar,  Act  V,  sc.  1,1.  71  et  seq.

2  See  Vol.  IV,  p.  58,  58n2.  The  theory  about  the  fulfilment  of  dreams
dreamt  just  before  morning  seems  to  have  been  a  widely  spread  view  in
classical  times.     In  Ovid,  Heroides,  xix,  195,  196,  we  read:

"  Namque  sub  aurora,  iam  dormitante  lucerna,
Somnia  quo  cerni  tempore  vera  solent."

And  in  Horace,  Sat.  i,  1 0,  11.  32,  33  :

"...  vetuit  me  tali  voce  Quirinus,
Post  mediam  noctem  visus  cum  somnia  vera."

(See  Wickham's  edition,  vol.  ii,  1891,  p.  103.)

And^Moschus,  Idyll,  ii,  2  et  seq. :

"  vvktos  ore  rpiTarov  \ayos  tWarat  kyyvOi  8'  rjcos,

evre  kol  olt p€K€(ov  TTOifMaiver at  eOvos  oveipiov."

Cf.  also  Inferno,  xxvi,  7  :

"  Ma  se  presso  al  mattin  del  ver  si  sogna,
Tu  sentirai,  di  qua  da  picciol  tempo,
Di  quel  che  Prato,  non  ch'altri,  t'agogna  "  :


100  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

female  towards  the  southern  quarter.  The  moment  he  had
seen  this  he  woke  up,  and,  suspecting  that  some  calamity
might  have  befallen  his  father,  he  thought  upon  the  science
named  Prajnapti,1  who  thereupon  presented  herself,  and  he
addressed  this  question  to  her  :  "  Tell  me,  how  has  my  father
the  King  of  Vatsa  been  going  on  ?  For  I  am  alarmed  about
him  on  account  of  a  sight  which  I  saw  in  an  evil  dream."

When  he  said  this  to  the  science  that  had  manifested
herself  in  bodily  form,  she  said  to  him :  "  Hear  what  has
happened  to  your  father  the  King  of  Vatsa.  When  he  was
in  Kausambi,  he  suddenly  heard  from  a  messenger,  who
had  come  from  Ujjayini,  that  King  Chandamahasena  was
Bad  Xeics  dead,  and  the  same  person  told  him  that  his  wife,
fnm  Kausambi  the  Queen  Angara  vati,  had  burned  herself  with
his  corpse.  This  so  shocked  him,  that  he  fell  senseless  upon
the  ground  :  and  when  he  recovered  consciousness,  he  wept
for  a  long  time,  with  Queen  Vasavadatta  and  his  courtiers,

and  Purgatorio,  ix,  13-18  :

Nell'  ora  che  comincia  i  tristi  lai

La  rondinella,  presso  alia  mattina,

Forse  a  memoria  de'  suoi  prirai  guai ;

E  che  la  mente  nostra,  pellegrina

Piu  dalla  came,  e  men  da'  pensier  presa,

Alle  sue  vision  quasi  e  divina.  .  .  ."

(I  quote  from  Lombardi's  edition,  3  vols.,  Rome,  1820.)

It  is  also  an  accepted  fact  in  English  folk-lore,  see  e.g.  Britten's  edition  of
Aubrey's  Remaines  of  Geniilisme,  p.  57.  Writing  on  the  same  sabject  in  North
Africa,  Doutte  says,  Magie  et  Religion  dans  rAfrique  du  Xordf  p.  400,  "  Les
oneirocritiques  arabes  sont  d'accord  pour  reconnaitre  comme  les  plus  veridiques
les  songes  que  Ton  a  au  point  du  jour ;  l'observation  scientifique  montre,  du
reste,  que  ce  sont  les  songes  precedent  le  reveil  qui  sont  les  plus  nets.  .  .  ."
Among  the  Prophet's  sayings  is :  "  The  truest  dream  is  the  one  which  you
have  about  daybreak  "  (Mishiat,  XXI,  iv,  3).  (Matthews'  translation,  vol.  ii,
p.  392,  quoted  by  Westermarck,  Ritual  and  Belief  in  Morocco,  vol.  ii,  p.  55.)
For  the  Indian  practice  see  Julius  von  Negelein,  Der  Traumschlussd  des
Jagaddeva,  p.  14  d  seq.  Here  we  read  that  a  dream  in  the  first  watch  of
the  night  takes  a  year  to  come  true,  one  in  the  second  watch  six  months,
one  in  the  third  watch  three  months,  one  in  the  fourth  watch  one  month,
one  in  the  last  two  ghatika  within  ten  days,  while  if  the  dream  occurs  at  sun-
rise immediate  fulfilment  will  result.  For  the  four  latter  references  I  am
indebted  to  Professor  Halliday. — n.m.p.
1  See  Vol.  II,  p.  SISn1.— n.m.p.


THIS  TRANSIENT  WORLD  101

for  his  father-in-law  and  mother-in-law  who  had  gone  to
heaven.  But  his  ministers  roused  him  by  saying  to  him  :
4  In  this  transient  world  what  is  there  that  hath  permanence  ?
Moreover,  you  ought  not  to  weep  for  that  king,  who  has  you
for  a  son-in-law,  and  Gopalaka  for  a  son,  and  whose  daughter's
son  is  Naravahanadatta. '  When  he  had  been  thus  admonished,
and  roused  from  his  prostration,  he  gave  the  offering  of  water
to  his  father-in-law  and  mother-in-law.

"  Then  that  King  of  Vatsa  said,  with  throat  half-choked
with  tears,  to  his  afflicted  brother-in-law,  Gopalaka,  who  re-
mained at  his  side  out  of  affection ■ :  c  Rise  up,  go  to  Uj  jayini,
and  take  care  of  your  father's  kingdom,  for  I  have  heard
from  a  messenger  that  the  people  are  expecting  you.'  When
Gopalaka  heard  this  he  said,  weeping,  to  the  King  of  Vatsa  :
1 1  cannot  bear  to  leave  you  and  my  sister,  to  go  to  Uj  jayini.
Moreover,  I  cannot  bring  myself  to  endure  the  sight  of  my
native  city,  now  that  my  father  is  not  in  it.  So  let  Palaka,
my  younger  brother,  be  king  there  with  my  full  consent.'
When  Gopalaka  had  by  these  words  shown  his  unwilling-
ness to  accept  the  kingdom,  the  King  of  Vatsa  sent  his
commander-in-chief,  Rumanvat,  to  the  city  of  Uj  jayini,  and
had  his  younger  brother-in-law,  named  Palaka,  crowned  king
of  it,  with  his  elder  brother's  consent.

"  And  reflecting  on  the  instability  of  all  things  he  became
disgusted  with  the  objects  of  sense,  and  said  to  Yaugandha-
rayana  and  his  other  ministers  :  '  In  this  unreal  cycle  of
mundane  existence  all  objects  are  at  the  end  insipid ;  and  I
have  ruled  my  realm,  I  have  enjoyed  my  pleasures,  I  have
conquered  my  enemies  ;  I  have  seen  my  son  in  the  possession
of  paramount  sway  over  the  Vidyadharas  ;  and  now  my
allotted  time  has  passed  away,  together  with  my  connections ;
and  old  age  has  seized  me  by  the  hair  to  hand  me  over  to
death ;  and  wrinkles  have  invaded  my  body,  as  the  strong
invade  the  kingdom  of  a  weakling  2 ;  so  I  will  go  to  Mount
Kalinjara,  and,  abandoning  this  perishable  body,  will  there
obtain  the  imperishable  mansion  of  which  they  speak.'    When

1  I  read  parsvasthitam  for  parhastham.  The  former  is  found  in  the  three
India  Office  MSS.  and  in* the  Sanskrit  College  MS.

2  The  word  which  means  "wrinkles"  also  means  "strong."


102  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

the  ministers  had  been  thus  addressed  by  the  king,  they
thought  over  the  matter ;  and  then  they  all,  and  Queen
Vasavadatta,  said  to  him,  with  calm  equanimity :  '  Let  it  be,
King,  as  it  has  pleased  your  Highness ;  by  your  favour  we  also
will  try  to  obtain  a  high  position  in  the  next  world.'

"  When  they  had  said  this  to  the  king,  being  like-minded
with  himself,  he  formed  a  deliberate  resolution,  and  said  to
his  elder  brother-in-law,  Gopalaka,  who  was  present :  '  I  look
upon  you  and  Naravahanadatta  as  equally  my  sons  ;  so  take
care  of  this  Kausambi:  I  give  you  my  kingdom.'  When
the  King  of  Vatsa  said  this  to  Gopalaka,  he  replied  :  *  My
destination  is  the  same  as  yours,  I  cannot  bear  to  leave  you.'
This  he  asserted  in  a  persistent  manner,  being  ardently
attached  to  his  sister ;  whereupon  the  King  of  Vatsa  said
to  him,  assuming  *  an  anger  that  he  did  not  feel :  *  To-day
you  have  become  disobedient,  so  as  to  affect  a  hypocritical
conformity  to  my  will ;  and  no  wonder,  for  who  cares  for  the
command  of  one  who  is  falling  from  his  place  of  power  ?  '
When  the  king  spoke  thus  roughly  to  him,  Gopalaka  wept,  with
face  fixed  on  the  ground,  and,  though  he  had  determined
to  go  to  the  forest,  he  turned  back  for  a  moment  from  his
intention.

"  Then  the  king  mounted  an  elephant,  and  accompanied
by  his  queens,  Vasavadatta  and  Padmavati,  set  out  with  his
ministers.  And  when  he  left  Kausambi  the  citizens  followed
him,  with  their  wives,  children  and  aged  sires,  crying  aloud
and  raining  a  tempest  of  tears.  The  king  comforted  them
by  saying  to  them  :  '  Gopalaka  will  take  care  of  you.'  And  so
at  last  he  induced  them  to  return,  and  passed  on  to  Mount
Kalinjara ;  and  he  reached  it,  and  went  up  it,  and  worshipped
Siva,  and  holding  in  his  hand  his  lyre,  Ghoshavati,  that  he
had  loved  all  his  life,  and  accompanied  by  his  queens  that
were  ever  at  his  side,  and  Yaugandharayana  and  his  other
ministers,  he  hurled  himself  from  the  cliff.  And  even  as  they
fell,  a  fiery  chariot  came  and  caught  up  the  king  and  his
companions,  and  they  went  in  a  blaze  of  glory  to  heaven."

When  Naravahanadatta  heard  this  from  the  science  he
exclaimed,  "  Alas  !    My  father !  "  and  fell  senseless  on  the

1  The  three  India  Office  MSS.  read  kritvaiva  for  kritveva.


THE  BLACK  MOUNTAIN


103


ground.  And  when  he  recovered  consciousness  he  bewailed
his  father  and  mother  and  his  father's  ministers,  in  company
with  his  own  ministers,  who  had  lost  their  fathers.

But  the  chiefs  of  the  Vidyadharas  and  Dhanavati  ad-
monished him,  saying  :  "  How  is  it,  King,  that  you  are  beside
yourself,  though  you  know  the  nature  of  this  versatile  world,
that  perishes  in  a  moment,  and  is  like  the  show  of  a  juggler  ?
And  how  can  you  lament  for  your  parents,  that  are  not  to  be
lamented  for,  as  they  have  done  all  they  had  to  do  on  earth  :
who  have  seen  you  their  son  sole  emperor  over  all  the  Vidya-
dharas ?  "  When  he  had  been  thus  admonished  he  offered
water  to  his  parents,  and  put  another  question  to  that  science  :
"  Where  is  my  Uncle  Gopalaka  now  ?     What  did  he  do  ?  "

Then  that  science  went  on  to  say  to  that  king :  "  When
the  King  of  Vatsa  had  gone  to  the  mountain  from  which  he
meant  to  throw  himself,  Gopalaka,  having  lamented  for  him
and  his  sister,  and  considering  all  things  unstable,  remained
outside  the  city,  and  summoning  his  brother,  Palaka,  from
UjjayinI,  made  over  to  him  that  kingdom  of  Kausambi  also.
And  then,  having  seen  his  younger  brother  established  in
two  kingdoms,  he  went  to  the  hermitage  of  Kasyapa  in  the
ascetic  grove  on  the  Black  Mountain,1  bent  on  abandoning
the  world.  And  there  your  uncle  Gopalaka  now  is,  clothed  in
a  dress  of  bark,  in  the  midst  of  self-mortifying  hermits."

When  Naravahanadatta  heard  that,  he  went  in  a  chariot
to  the  Black  Mountain,  with  his  suite,  eager  to  visit  that
uncle.  There  he  alighted  from  the  sky,  surrounded  by  Vidya-
dhara  princes,  and  beheld  that  hermitage  of  the  hermit
Kasyapa.  It  seemed  to  gaze  on  him  with  many  roaming,
black,  antelope-like,  rolling  eyes,  and  to  welcome  him  with  the
songs  of  its  birds.  With  the  lines  of  smoke  ascending  into  the
sky,  where  pious  men  were  offering  the  Agnihotra  oblations,
it  seemed  to  point  the  way  to  heaven  to  the  hermits.  It  was
full  of  many  mountain-like,  huge  elephants,  and  resorted  to
by  troops  of  monkeys2;  and  so  seemed  like  a  strange  sort
of  Patala,  above  ground,  and  free  from  darkness.


1  Asitagiri.

2  This  passage  is  full  of  lurking  puns.


It  may  mean  "full  of  world-
upholding  kings  of  the  snakes,  and  of  many  Kapilas."


104  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

In  the  midst  of  that  grove  of  ascetics  he  beheld  his  uncle,
surrounded  by  hermits,  with  long  matted  locks,  clothed  in
the  bark  of  a  tree,  looking  like  an  incarnation  of  patience.
And  Gopalaka,  when  he  saw  his  sister's  son  approach,  rose
up  and  embraced  him,  and  pressed  him  to  his  bosom  with
tearful  eyes.  Then  they,  both  of  them,  lamented  their  lost
dear  ones  with  renewed  grief :  whom  will  not  the  fire  of  grief
torture,  when  fanned  by  the  blast  of  a  meeting  with  relations?
When  even  the  animals  there  were  pained  to  see  their  grief,
Kasyapa  and  the  other  hermits  came  up  and  consoled  those
two.  Then  that  day  came  to  an  end,  and  next  morning  the
emperor  entreated  Gopalaka  to  come  to  dwell  in  his  kingdom.
But  Gopalaka  said  to  him :  "  What,  my  child ;  do  you  not
suppose  that  I  have  all  the  happiness  I  desire  by  thus  seeing
you  ?  If  you  love  me,  remain  here  in  this  hermitage,  during
this  rainy  season,  which  has  arrived."

When  Naravahanadatta  had  been  thus  entreated  by  his
uncle,  he  remained  in  the  hermitage  of  Kasyapa  on  the  Black
Mountain,  with  his  attendants,  for  the  term  mentioned.


CHAPTER  CXII


NOW,  one  day,  when   Naravahanadatta  was  in  the
[M]     hall  of  audience  on   the  Black   Mountain,  his
commander-in-chief    came    before    him,    and    said :
"  Last  night,  my  sovereign,  when  I  was  on  the  top  of  my
house,  looking  after  my  troops,  I  saw  a  woman  being  carried
off  through  the  air  by  a  heavenly  being,  crying  out :   '  Alas  !
My  husband  !  '     And  it  seemed   as   if  the  moon,  which  is
powerful  at  that  season,  had  taken  her  and  carried  her  off,
finding  that  she  robbed  it  of  all  its  beauty.     I  exclaimed  :
•  Ah,  villain  !     Where  will  you  go,  thus  carrying  off  the  wife
of  another?     In  the  kingdom  of  King  Naravahanadatta  the
protector,  which  is  the  territory  of  the  Vidyadharas,  extend-
ing over  sixty  thousand  yojanas,  even  animals  do  not  work
wickedness,  much  less  other  creatures.5     When  I  had  said
this,  I  hastened  with  my  attendants  and  arrested  that  swift-
footed  *  one,  and  brought  him  down  from  the  air  with  the
lady  :   and  when  we  looked  at  him,  after  bringing  him  down,
we  found  that  it  was  your  brother-in-law,  the  Vidyadhara
Ityaka,  the  brother  of  your  principal  queen,  born  to  Madana-
vega  by  Queen  Kalingasena.     We  said  to  him  :  '  Who  is  this
lady,  and  where  are  you  taking  her  ?  '    And  then  he  answered :
1  This  is   Suratamanjarl,    the   daughter  of  the    Vidyadhara
chief,  Matangadeva,  by  Chxitamanjari.     Her  mother  promised
her  to  me  long  ago ;    and  then  her  father  bestowed  her  on
another,  a  mere  man.     So,  if  I  have  to-day  recovered  my  own
wife,  and  carried  her  off,  what  harm  have  I  done  ?  '     When
Ityaka  had  said  so  much,  he  was  silent.

"  Then  I  said  to  Suratamanjarl  :  '  Lady,  by  whom  were
you  married,  and  how  did  this  person  get  possession  of  you  ?  '
Then  she  said  :  c  There  is  in  Ujjayini  a  fortunate  king  named
Palaka,  he  has  a  son,  a  prince  named  2  Avantivardhana  ;    by

1  For  supddy  No.  1182  reads  puman  and  No.  2166  suman.

2  Two  of  the  India  Office  MSS.  have  sunamavantivardhanah  in  si.  13.  In
the  third  there  is  a  lacuna.

105


106  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

him  I  was  married ;  and  this  night,  when  I  was  asleep  on
the  top  of  the  palace,  and  my  husband  was  asleep  also,  I  was
carried  off  by  this  villain.'  When  she  said  this  I  kept  both
of  them  here,  the  lady  and  Ityaka,  the  latter  in  fetters  ;  it
now  remains  for  your  Majesty  to  decide  what  is  to  be  done."

When  the  emperor  heard  this  from  his  commander-in-
chief,  Harisikha,  he  went  in  some  perplexity  to  Gopalaka  and
told  him  the  story.  Gopalaka  said :  "  My  dear  nephew,  I
do  not  know  about  this ;  I  know  so  much  that  the  lady  was
lately  married  to  Palaka's  son ;  so  let  the  prince  be  summoned
from  Ujjayini,  together  with  the  minister,  Bharataroha ;  then
we  shall  get  at  the  truth."  When  the  emperor  received
this  advice  from  his  uncle,  he  sent  the  Vidyadhara  Dhuma-
sikha  to  Palaka,  his  younger  uncle,  and  summoned  from
Ujjayini  that  prince,  his  son  and  the  minister.  When  they
arrived,  and  bowed  before  the  emperor,  he  and  Gopalaka
received  them  with  love  and  courtesy,  and  questioned  them
about  the  matter  under  consideration.

Then,  in  the  presence  of  Avantivardhana,  who  looked
like  the  moon  robbed  of  the  night,1  of  Suratamanjari,  her
father,  and  of  Ityaka,  of  Vayupatha  and  his  peers,  and  the
hermit  Kasyapa,  and  the  men-at-arms,  Bharataroha  began
to  speak  as  follows  :

168.  Story  of  King  Palaka  and  his  Son  Avantivardhana

Once  on  a  time  all  the  citizens  of  Ujjayini  met  together
and  said  to  Palaka,  the  king  of  that  city  :  "  To-morrow  the
festival  called  the  giving  of  water  will  take  place  in  this  city,
and  if  your  Majesty  has  not  heard  the  true  account  of  the
origin  of  this  festival,  please  listen  to  it  now.

168a.  King  Chandamahdsena  and  the  Asurats  Daughter2

Long  ago  your  father,  Chandamahasena,  propitiated  tlie
goddess  Chandi  with  asceticism,  in  order  to  obtain  a  splendid

1  In  Sanskrit  the  moon  is  masculine  and  the  night  feminine.

2  This  story  is  found  in  Vol.  I,  pp.  124-128.  See  also  the  note  on  the
"External  Soul"  motif  on  pp.  129-132  of  the  same  volume.     The  examples


THE  RAKSHASA  107

sword  and  a  wife.  She  gave  him  her  own  sword,  and  about
a  wife  said  to  him  :  "  Thou  shalt  soon  slay,  my  son,  the
Asura  called  Angaraka,  and  obtain  his  beautiful  daughter
Angaravati  for  a  wife."  When  the  king  had  been  favoured
with  this  revelation  from  the  goddess,  he  remained  thinking
on  the  Asura's  daughter.  Now,  at  this  time,  everybody  that
was  appointed  head  police  officer  in  Ujjayini  was  at  once
carried  off  by  some  creature  at  night  and  devoured.  And
this  went  on  night  after  night.  Then  Chandamahasena,
roaming  leisurely  about  the  city  at  night,  to  investigate  the
matter  for  himself,  found  an  adulterer.  He  cut  off  with  his
sword  his  oiled  and  curled  head,  and  no  sooner  was  his  neck
severed  than  a  certain  Rakshasa  came  and  laid  hold  of  him.
The  king  exclaimed,  "  This  is  the  gentleman  that  comes  and

there  given  afford  only  a  small  idea  of  the  enormous  distribution  of  the  motif.
I  am  therefore  glad  to  add  the  following  further  references  sent  me  by
Dr  A.  H.  Krappe.

(1)  General:  Frazer,  Folk-Lore  in  the  Old  Testament,  vol.  ii,  p.  491  et.  seq.,
(in  connection  \rith  Samson  and  Delilah);  Panzer,  Sigfrid,  Miinchen,  1912,
p.  253  et  seq. ;  and  Bolte  and  Polivka,  op.  cit.,  vol.  iii.,  p.  424  et  seq.,  No.  197
(Grimm,  "  The  Crystal  Ball  ").

(2)  Life  in  Egg:  Cosquin,  Contes  Populaires  de  Lorraine,  vol.  ii,  p.  131  (see
also  vol.  i,  p.  168).

(3)  Life  bound  up  with  Animal:  Hans  Naumann,  Primitive  Gemeinschafts-
kultur,  pp.  99,  104;  Cosquin,  op.  cit.,  vol.  ii,  pp.  144,  356;  Chauvin,  op.  cit.,
v,  p.  235  ;  vi,  p.  88  ;  vii,  p.  67  ;  O.  Tobler,  Die  Epiphanie  der  Seele  in  deutscher
Volkssage  (Dissertation),  Kiel,  191 1*  p.  24.     [Not  seen  by  me.]

(4)  Life  in  Special  Part  of  Body :  RadlofF,  Proben  der  Volkslitteratur  .  .  .,
vol.  i,  p.  66;  Apollodorus,  ed.  Frazer,  vol.  i,  pp.  165,  173  ;  V.  Tille,  Verzeichnis
d.  Bohmischen  Marchen,  1921  (FF  Communications  34),  p.  75  et  seq.;  B.  Ilg,
Maltesische  Marchen,  vol.  i,  p.  154  ;  G.  Jungbauer,  Marchen  aus  Turkestan  u.  Tibet,
Jena,  1923,  p.  197;  A.  P.  Graves,  The  Irish  Fairy  Book,  p.  140;  Revue  des
Traditions  Populaires,  tome  xxv,  August-September  1910,  p.  293.

(5)  Life  in  Weapon,  Ornament,  or  other  Object :  Von  der  Leyen,  Das  Marchen^
1917,  p.  32 ;  Cosquin,  op.  cit.,  vol.  i,  p.  25  ;  W.  Larminie,  West  Irish  Folk-Tales,
p.  152;  T.  Menzel,  Turkische  Marchen.  Billur  K'dschk,  Hanover,  1923,  p.  79;
Jungbauer,  op.  cit.,  p.  68.

(6)  Life  in  Burning  Candle :  Hartland,  Science  of  Fairy  Tales,  p.  205  ;
A.  Stober,  Alsatia,  1858-1861,  p.  263;  John  Rhys,  Lectures  on  the  Origin  and
Growth  of  Religion  .  .  .,  Hibbert  Lectures,  Ldn.,  1888,  p.  514;  J.  G.  Frazer,
Apollodorus,  vol.  i,  p.  65  ;  Tille,  op.  cit.,  p.  113  ;  W.  Hertz,  Deutsche  Sage  im
Elsass,  1872,  p.  118;  W.  Anderson,  Philologus,  vol.  lxxiii,  Leipzig,  1914-1916,
p.  159. — N.M.P.


108  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

eats  the  heads  of  the  police  at  night,"  and  laying  hold  of  that
Rakshasa  by  the  hair  he  prepared  to  slay  him.

Then  the  Rakshasa  said  :  "  King,  do  not  slay  me  under
a  false  impression !  There  is  another  creature  in  this
neighbourhood  that  eats  the  heads  of  the  police."  The
king  said  :  "  Tell  me  I  Who  is  it  ?  "  And  the  Rakshasa
continued  :  "  There  is  in  this  neighbourhood  an  Asura  of  the
name  of  Angaraka,  whose  home  is  in  Patala.  He  it  is  that
eats  your  police  officers  at  the  dead  of  night,  O  smiter  of
your  foes.  Moreover,  Prince,  he  carries  off  by  force  the
daughters  of  kings  from  every  quarter,  and  makes  them
attend  on  his  daughter,  Angaravatl.  If  you  see  him  roaming
about  in  the  forest  slay  him,  and  attain  your  object  in  that
way."

When  the  Rakshasa  had  said  this,  the  king  let  him  go,
and  returned  to  his  palace.  And  one  day  he  went  out  to
hunt.  And  in  the  place  where  he  was  hunting  he  saw  a
monstrous  boar,  with  eyes  red  with  fury,  looking  like  a  piece
of  the  Mountain  of  Antimony1  fallen  from  heaven.  The  king
said  to  himself  :  "  Such  a  creature  cannot  be  a  real  boar.  I
wonder  whether  it  is  the  Asura  Angaraka,  who  has  the  power
of  disguising  himself  "  ;  so  he  smote  the  boar  with  shafts.
But  the  boar  recked  not  of  his  shafts,  and,  overturning  his
chariot,  entered  a  wide  opening  in  the  earth.

But  the  heroic  king  entered  after  him,  and  did  not  see
that  boar,  but  saw  in  front  of  him  a  splendid  castle.  And  he
sat  down  on  the  bank  of  a  lake,  and  saw  there  a  maiden,  with
a  hundred  others  attending  on  her,  looking  like  an  incarna-
tion of  Rati.  She  came  up  to  him  and  asked  him  the  reason
of  his  coming  there,  and  having  conceived  an  affection  for
him  said  to  him,  with  tearful  eyes  :   "  Alas  !     What  a  place

1  So  Tawney  translates  Anjanadri,  but  I  can  find  no  trace  of  such  a
mountain.  Dr  Barnett  thinks  it  is  probably  a  fuller  form  of  the  name  Anjana
— "  antimony  " — which  is  given  to  the  imaginary  elephant  of  the  regent  of  the
West,  Varuna.  See  Amara-kosa,  I,  i,  2,  5.  There  are  several  mountains  of  the
name  mentioned  in  the  Puranas — e.g.  two  in  Jambu-dvipa  and  one  in  Gomeda-
dvipa.  But  they  are  on  the  earth,  and  cannot  fall  out  of  the  sky,  which  is  a
feat  suitable  for  a  Diggaja,  or  elephant  of  the  sky  quarters  (see  Mahabharata
xiii,  132),  who  stands  normally  in  the  middle  of  one  of  the  quarters  of  space  in
the  sky. — n.m.p.


THE  VITAL  SPOT  109

have  you  entered.1  That  boar  that  you  saw  was  really  a
Daitya,  Angaraka  by  name,  of  adamantine  frame  and  vast
strength.  At  present  he  has  abandoned  the  form  of  a  boar
and  is  sleeping,  as  he  is  tired,  but  when  the  time  for  taking
food  comes  he  will  wake  up,  and  do  you  a  mischief.  And  I,
fair  sir,  am  his  daughter,  Angara vati  by  name ;  and,  fearing
that  some  misfortune  may  befall  you,  I  feel  as  if  my  life
were  in  my  throat."

When  she  said  this  to  the  king,  he,  remembering  the  boon
that  the  goddess  Chandi  had  given  him,  felt  that  he  had  now
a  good  hope  of  accomplishing  his  object,  and  answered  her :
"  If  you  have  any  love  for  me,  do  this  which  I  tell  you  :  when
your  father  awakes,  go  and  weep  at  his  side,  and  when  he
asks  you  the  reason  say,  fair  one :  '  Father,  if  anyone  were
to  kill  you  in  your  reckless  daring,  what  would  become  of
me  ?  '  If  you  do  this,  you  will  ensure  the  happiness  of  both
of  us."

When  the  king  said  this  to  her  she  went,  bewildered  with
love,  and  sat  down  and  wept  at  the  side  of  her  father,  who
had  woke  up ;  and  when  he  asked  her  the  cause  of  her  weep-
ing she  told  him  how  she  was  afraid  that  someone  would  slay
him.2  Then  the  Daitya  said  to  her  :  "  Why,  who  can  slay
me,  who  am  of  adamantine  frame  ?  The  only  vulnerable
and  vital  point  I  have  is  in  my  left  hand,3  and  that  the  bow

1  Cf.  the  well-known  story  of  Medea.  See  J.  R.  Bacon,  Voyage  of  the
Argonauts,  pp.  135-136. — n.m.p.

2  For  the  group  of  stories  to  which  this  incident  belongs  see  Grimm
No.  91,  Bolte  and  Polivka,  op.  cit.,  vol.  ii,  p.  297  et  seq.  Cf.  Cosquin,  Contes
Poptdaires  de  Lorraine,  vol.  i,  pp.  1-27.  See  also  Dawkins,  Modern  Greek  in
Asia  Minor,  p.  274. — n.m.p.

3  I  find  a  curious  legend  given  by  Thurston,  op.  cit.,  vol.  vi,  p.  4,  telling
the  origin  of  the  Palli  or  Vanniyan  caste  of  Southern  India.  It  appears  that
two  giants,  Vatapi  and  Mahi  by  name,  worshipped  Brahma  with  such  devotion
that  they  obtained  from  him  immunity  from  death  from  every  cause  save  fire,
which  element  they  had  carelessly  omitted  to  include  in  their  enumeration.
After  enveloping  the  world  in  complete  darkness  and  stillness,  by  swallowing
the  sun  and  wind,  they  struck  terror  into  the  minds  of  all  living  creatures.  In
answer  to  fervent  prayers,  Brahma,  remembering  the  omission  of  the  giants,  told
his  suppliants  to  perform  a  fire  sacrifice.  Armed  horsemen  sprang  from  the
flames  and  destroyed  the  giants.  Their  leader  became  ruler  of  the  country,
and  his  five  sons  were  the  ancestors  of  the  Vanniyan  caste. — n.m.p.


110  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

protects."     This  speech  of  his  was  heard  by  the  king,  who
was  at  the  time  concealed  near.

Then  the  Daitya  bathed,  and  proceeded  to  worship  Siva.
At  that  moment  the  king  appeared  with  his  bow  strung,  and
challenged  to  mortal  combat  the  Daitya,  who  was  observing
religious  silence.  The  Daitya  lifted  up  his  left  hand,  his
right  hand  being  engaged,  and  made  a  sign  to  the  king
to  wait  a  little.  That  very  moment  the  king  smote  him
in  that  hand,  which  was  his  vital  point,  with  a  well- aimed
arrow,  and  the  Daitya  fell  on  the  earth.  And  just  before
he  expired  he  said  :  "If  that  man  who  has  thus  slain  me,
when  thirsty,  does  not  every  year  offer  water  to  my  manes,
his  five  ministers  shall  perish."  The  Daitya  being  thus  slain,
the  king  took  his  daughter,  Angaravati,  and  returned  to  his
city  of  Ujjayini.


168.  Story  of  King  Pdlaka  and  his  Son  Avantivardhana

"  And  after  that  king,  your  father,  had  married  that
queen,  he  used  every  year  to  have  an  offering  of  water  made
to  the  manes  of  Angaraka ;  and  all  here  celebrate  the  feast
called  the  giving  of  water ;  and  to-day  it  has  come  round.
So  do,  King,  what  your  father  did  before  you."

When  King  Palaka  heard  this  speech  of  his  subjects,  he
proceeded  to  set  going  in  that  city  the  festival  of  the  giving
of  water.  When  the  festival  had  begun,  and  the  people  had
their  attention  occupied  by  it,  and  were  engaged  in  shouting,
suddenly  an  infuriated  elephant,  that  had  broken  its  fasten-
ings, rushed  in  among  them.  That  elephant,  having  got  the
better  of  its  driving-hook,  and  shaken  off  its  driver,  roamed
about  in  the  city,  and  killed  very  many  men  in  a  short  time.
Though  the  elephant-keepers  ran  forward,  accompanied  by
professional  elephant-drivers,  and  the  citizens  also,  no  man
among  them  was  able  to  control  that  elephant.  At  last,  in
the  course  of  its  wanderings,  the  elephant  reached  the  quarter
of  the  Chandalas,  and  there  came  out  from  it  a  Chandala
maiden.  She  illuminated  the  ground  with  the  beauty  of  the
lotus  that  seemed  to  cling  to  her  feet,  delighted  because  she


THE  POWER  OF  BEAUTY  m

surpassed  with  the  loveliness  of  her  face  the  moon  its  enemy.1
She  looked  like  the  night  that  gives  rest  to  the  eyes  of  the
world,  because  its  attention  is  diverted  from  other  objects,
and  so  it  remains  motionless  at  that  time.2

That  maiden  struck  that  mighty  elephant,  that  came
towards  her,  with  her  hand,  on  its  trunk ;  and  smote  it  with
those  sidelong  looks  askance  of  hers.  The  elephant  was
fascinated  with  the  touch  of  her  hand  and  pene-
Maiden  who  trated  with  her  glance,  and  remained  with  head
fascinated  the  bent  down,  gazing  at  her,  and  never  moved   a

Elephant  step>8      Then    that    Mj,    j^y    made    a    swmg    with

her  upper  garment,  which  she  fastened  to  its  tusks,  and
climbed  and  got  into  it,  and  amused  herself  with  swinging.
Then  the  elephant,  seeing  that  she  felt  the  heat,  went  into
the  shade  of  a  tree ;  and  the  citizens  who  were  present,  see-
ing this  great  wonder,  exclaimed :  "  Ah !  This  is  some
glorious  heavenly  maiden  who  charms  even  animals  by  her
power,  which  is  as  transcendent  as  her  beauty."

And  in  the  meanwhile  Prince  Avantivardhana,  hearing
of  it,  came  out  to  see  the  wonderful  sight,  and  beheld  that
maiden.  As  he  gazed,  the  deer  of  his  heart  ran  into  that  net
of  the  hunter,  Love,  and  was  entangled  by  it.  She  too,  when
she  saw  him,  her  heart  being  charmed  by  his  beauty,  came
down  from  that  swing,  which  she  had  put  up  on  the  elephant's
tusks,  and  took  her  upper  garment.  Then  a  driver  mounted
the  elephant,  and  she  went  home,  looking  at  the  prince  with
an  expression  of  shame  and  affection.

And  Avantivardhana,  for  his  part,  the  disturbance  caused
by  the  elephant  having  come  to  an  end,  went  home  to  his
palace  with  his  bosom  empty,  his  heart  having  been  stolen
from  it  by  her.  And  when  he  got  home,  he  was  tortured
by  no  longer  seeing  that  lovely  maiden,  and  forgetting  the
feast  of  the  giving  of  water,  which  had  begun,  he  said  to  his

1  The  moon  hates  the  kamala  and  loves  the  kumuda.

2  I  read  stimitasthiteh,  which  I  find  in  MS.  No.  21 66,  and  in  the  Sanskrit
College  MS.

3  Cf.  Vol.  Ill,  p.  172,  I72w2.  The  story  in  the  Gesta  Romanorum,  to  which
reference  is  there  made,  bears  a  close  resemblance  to  the  present  story  ;  but  in
the  present  case  it  appears  as  if  beauty  had  more  to  do  with  fascinating  the  ele-
phant than  modesty.     See  further  Vol.  IX,  "  Addenda  et  Corrigenda." — n.m.p.


112  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

companions  :  "  Do  you  know  whose  daughter  that  maiden  is,
and  what  her  name  is  ?  "  When  his  friends  heard  that,  they
said  to  him  :  "  There  is  a  certain  Matanga,1  in  the  quarter  of
the  Chandalas,  named  Utpalahasta,  and  she  is  his  daughter,
Suratamanjari  by  name.  Her  lovely  form  can  give  pleasure
to  the  good 2  only  by  being  looked  at,  like  that  of  a  pictured
beauty,  but  cannot  be  touched  without  pollution."  When
the  prince  heard  that  from  his  friends,  he  said  to  them  :
"  I  do  not  think  she  can  be  the  daughter  of  a  Matanga,  she
is  certainly  some  heavenly  maiden;  for  a  Chandala  maiden
would  never  possess  such  a  beautiful  form.  Lovely  as  she  is,
if  she  does  not  become  my  wife,  what  is  the  profit  of  my  life  ?  5
So  the  prince  continued  to  say,  and  his  ministers  could  not
check  him,  but  he  was  exceedingly  afflicted  with  the  fire  of
separation  from  her.

Then  Queen  Avantivati  and  King  Palaka,  his  parents,
having  heard  that,  were  for  a  long  time  quite  bewildered.
The  queen  said  :  "  How  comes  it  that  our  son,  though  born
in  a  royal  family,  has  fallen  in  love  with  a  girl  of  the  lowest 3
caste  ?  "  Then  King  Palaka  said  :  "  Since  the  heart  of  our
son  is  thus  inclined,  it  is  clear  that  she  is  really  a  girl  of
another  caste,  who,  for  some  reason  or  other,  has  fallen
among  the  Matangas.  The  minds  of  the  good  tell  them  by
inclination  or  aversion  what  to  do  and  what  to  avoid.  In
illustration  of  this,  Queen,  listen  to  the  following  tale,  if  you
have  not  already  heard  it.

168b.  The  Young  Chandala  who  married  the  Daughter  of
King  Pra^enajit 4

Long  ago  King  Prasenajit,  in  a  city  named  Supratishthita,
had  a  very  beautiful  daughter  named  Kurangi.     One  day  she

1  The  Petersburg  lexicographers  explain  this  as  a  Chandala,  a  man  of  the
lowest  rank,  a  kind  of  Kirata. See  Thurston,  op.  cit.y  vol.  ii,  p.  15. — n.m.p.

2  The  word  "good"  is  used  in  a  sense  approximating  to  that  in  which  it
is  used  by  Theognis  and  the  patricians  in  Coriolanus  (i,  I,  16).

3  I  read  antyajam,  which  I  find  in  two  of  the  India  Office  MSS.  and  the
Sanskrit  College  MS.     In  No.  3003  there  is  apparently  a  lacuna.

4  Cf.  the  Sigala  Jataka,  No.  142,  Cambridge  Edition,  vol.  i,  pp.  304-305.
A  barber's  son  dies  of  love  for  a  Lichchhavi  maiden.  The  Buddha  then  tells
the  story  of  a  jackal  whose  love  for  a  lioness  cost  him  his  life.


THE  YOUNG  CHANDALA  113

went  out  in  the  garden,  and  an  elephant,  that  had  broken
from  its  fastenings,  charged  her,  and  flung  her  up  on  his  tusks,
litter  and  all.  Her  attendants  dispersed,  shrieking,  but  a
young  Chandala  snatched  up  a  sword  and  ran  towards  the
elephant.  The  brave  fellow  cut  off  the  trunk  of  that  great
elephant  with  a  sword-stroke,  and  killed  it,  and  so  delivered
the  princess.  Then  her  retinue  came  together  again,  and  she
returned  to  her  palace  with  her  heart  captivated  by  the  great
courage  and  striking  good  looks  of  the  young  Chandala.  And
she  remained  in  a  state  of  despondency  at  being  separated  from
him,  saying  to  herself :  "  Either  I  must  have  that  man  who
delivered  me  from  the  elephant  for  a  husband,  or  I  must
die."

The  young  Chandala,  for  his  part,  went  home  slowly,  and
having  his  mind  captivated  by  the  princess  was  tortured  by
thinking  on  her.  He  said  to  himself  :  "  What  a  vast  gulf  is
fixed  between  me,  a  man  of  the  lowest  caste,  and  that  prin-
cess !  How  can  a  crow  and  a  female  swan  ever  unite  ?  The
idea  is  so  ridiculous  that  I  cannot  mention  it  or  consider
it,  so,  in  this  difficulty,  death  is  my  only  resource."  After
the  young  man  had  gone  through  these  reflections  he  went
at  night  to  the  cemetery,  and  bathed,  and  made  a  pyre,  and
lighting  the  flame  thus  prayed  to  it :  "  O  thou  purifying  fire,
Soul  of  the  Universe,  may  that  princess  be  my  wife  hereafter
in  a  future  birth,  in  virtue  of  this  offering  up  of  myself  as  a
sacrifice  to  thee  !  "

When  he  had  said  this,  he  prepared  to  fling  himself  into
the  fire,  but  the  God  of  Fire,  pleased  with  him,  appeared  in
visible  shape  before  him,  and  said  to  him :  "  Do  not  act
rashly,  for  she  shall  be  thy  wife,  for  thou  art  not  a  Chandala
by  birth,  and  what  thou  art  I  will  tell  thee.     Listen.

"There  is  in  this  city  a  distinguished  Brahman  of  the
name  of  Kapilasarman ;  in  his  fire-chamber  I  dwell  in  visible
bodily  shape.  One  day  his  maiden  daughter  came  near  me,
and,  smitten  with  her  beauty,  I  made  her  my  wife,  inducing
her  to  forgo  her  objections  by  promising  her  immunity  from
disgrace.  And  thou,  my  son,  wert  immediately  born  to  her
by  virtue  of  my  power,  and  she  thereupon,  out  of  shame,
flung  thee  away  in  the  open  street ;   there  thou  wast  found

VOL.    VIII.  h


114  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

by  some  Chandalas  and  reared  on  goat's  milk.1  So  thou  art
my  son,  born  to  me  by  a  Brahman  lady.  Therefore  thou
canst  not  be  deemed  impure,  as  thou  art  my  son ;  and  thou
shalt  obtain  that  Princess  Kurangi  for  a  wife."

When  the  God  of  Fire  had  said  this  he  disappeared,  and
the  Matanga's  adopted  child  was  delighted,  and  conceived
hope,  and  so  went  home.  Then  King  Prasenajit,  having
been  urged  by  the  god  in  a  dream,  investigated  the  case,
and  finding  out  the  truth  gave  his  daughter  to  the  son  of  the
God  of  Fire.


168.  Story  of  King  Pdlaka  and  his  Son  Avantivardhana

"  Thus,  Queen,  there  are  always  to  be  found  heavenly
beings  in  disguise  upon  the  earth,  and  you  may  be  assured

1  Cf.  the  story  of  the  birth  of  Servius  Tullius,  as  told  by  Ovid,  Fasti,  vi,
627.     The  following  are  Ovid's  lines  :

°  Namque  pater  Tulli  Vulcanus,  Ocresia  mater,
Praesignis  facie  Corniculana  fuit.
Hanc  secum  Tanaquil  sacris  de  more  peractis
Jussit  in  ornatum  fundere  vina  focum.
Hie  inter  cineres  obscaeni  forma  virilis
Aut  fuit  aut  visa  est,  sed  fuit  ilia  magis.
Jussa  loco  captiva  sedet.     Conceptus  ab  ilia
Servius  a  caelo  semina  gentis  habet."

There  are  several  other  versions  of  the  story,  which  differ  only  in  details.  Cf.
Pliny,  Nat.  Hist.,  xxxvi,  204  (Bohn's  translation,  vol.  vi,  chap,  lxx,  p.  384),
where  we  read :

"  In  the  reign  of  Tarquinius  Priscus,  it  is  said,  there  appeared  upon  his
hearth  a  resemblance  of  the  male  generative  organ  in  the  midst  of  the  ashes.
The  captive  Ocrisia,  a  servant  of  Queen  Tanaquil,  who  happened  to  be  sitting
there,  arose  from  her  seat  in  a  state  of  pregnancy,  and  became  the  mother
of  Servius  Tullius,  who  eventually  succeeded  to  the  throne.  It  is  stated,  too,
that  while  the  child  was  sleeping  in  the  palace,  a  flame  was  seen  playing  round
his  head,  the  consequence  of  which  was,  that  it  was  believed  that  the  Lar  of
the  household  was  his  progenitor.  It  was  owing  to  this  circumstance,  we  are
informed,  that  the  Compitalian  games  in  honour  of  the  Lares  were  instituted."

Cf.  also  Dionysios  of  Halikarnassos :  'Pw/xaiVo)  apyacoXoyia,  iv,  2.

For  the  latest  discussion  on  the  legend  Professor  Halliday  refers  me
to  Rose,  Primitive  Culture  in  Italy,  1926,  p.  80  et  seq.  The  author  compares  the
well-known  passage  in  Scott,  Lady  of  the  Lake,  iii,  5.  His  case,  however,  is
weakened  considerably  by  his  apparent  ignorance  of  the  version  in  Somadeva.

— N.M.P.


THE  LOVE-SICK  FISHERMAN  115

Suratamanjari  is  not  a  woman  of  the  lowest  caste,  but  a
celestial  nymph.  For  such  a  pearl  as  she  is  must  belong
to  some  other  race  than  that  of  the  Matangas,  and  without
doubt  she  was  the  beloved  of  my  son  in  a  former  birth;
and  this  is  proved  by  his  falling  in  love  with  her  at  first
sight."

When  King  Palaka  said  this  in  our  presence  I  proceeded
to  relate  the  following  story  about  a  man  of  the  fisher  caste :


168c.  The  Young  Fisherman  who  married  a  Princess

Long  ago  there  lived  in  Rajagriha  a  king  named  Malaya-
simha,  and  he  had  a  daughter  named  Mayavati,  of  matchless
beauty.  One  day  a  young  man  of  the  fisher  caste,  named
Suprahara,  who  was  in  the  bloom  of  youth  and  good  looks,
saw  her  as  she  was  amusing  herself  in  a  spring  garden.  The
moment  he  saw  her  he  was  overpowered  by  love  ;  for  Destiny
never  considers  whether  a  union  is  possible  or  impossible.
So  he  went  home,  and  abandoning  his  occupation  of  catching
fish  he  took  to  his  bed,  and  refused  to  eat,  thinking  only  on
the  princess.  And  when  persistently  questioned,  he  told  his
wish  to  his  mother,  named  Rakshitika,  and  she  said  to  her  son  :
"  My  son,  abandon  your  despondency,  and  take  food ;  I  will
certainly  compass  this  your  end  for  you  by  my  ingenuity."

When  she  said  this  to  him,  he  was  consoled,  and  cherished
hopes,  and  took  food  ;  and  his  mother  went  to  the  palace  of
the  princess  with  fish  from  the  lake.1  There  that  fisher- wife
was  announced  by  the  maids,  and  went  in,  on  the  pretext  of
paying  her  respects,  and  gave  the  princess  that  present  of  fish.
And  in  this  way  she  came  regularly,  day  after  day,  and
made  the  princess  a  present,  and  so  gained  her  good  will,  and
made  her  desirous  of  speaking.  And  the  pleased  princess
said  to  the  fisher- wife  :  "  Tell  me  what  you  wish  me  to  do  ;
I  will  do  it,  though  it  be  ever  so  difficult."

Then  the  fisher-wife  begged  that  her  boldness  might  be
pardoned,  and  said  in  secret  to  the  princess  :  "  Royal  lady,
my  son  has  seen  you  in  a  garden,  and  is  tortured  by  the

1  All  the  India  Office  MSS.  and  the  Sanskrit  College  MS.  read  hridyan—
**  delicious  fish."


116  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

thought  that  he  cannot  be  near  you  ;  and  I  can  only  manage
to  prevent  his  committing  suicide  by  holding  out  hopes  to
him ;  so,  if  you  feel  any  pity  for  me,  restore  my  son  to  life
by  touching  him."  When  the  princess  was  thus  entreated
by  the  fisher- wife,  hesitating  between  shame  and  a  desire  to
oblige,  after  reflection,  she  said  to  her  :  "  Bring  your  son  to
my  palace  secretly  at  night."

When  the  fisher- wife  heard  this,  she  went  in  high  spirits
to  her  son.  And  when  night  came  she  deliberately  adorned
her  son  as  well  as  she  could,  and  brought  him  to  the
private  apartments  of  the  princess.  There  the  princess  took
Suprahara,  who  had  pined  for  her  so  long,  by  the  hand,
and  affectionately  welcomed  him,  and  made  him  lie  down  on
a  sofa,  and  comforted  him,  whose  limbs  were  withered  by
the  fire  of  separation,  by  shampooing  him  with  her  hand,  the
touch  of  which  was  cool  as  sandalwood.1  And  the  fisher-
boy  was  thereby,  as  it  were,  bedewed  with  nectar,  and
thinking  that,  after  long  waiting,  he  had  attained  his  desire
he  took  his  rest,  and  was  suddenly  seized  by  sleep.  And
when  he  was  asleep  the  princess  escaped,  and  slept  in  another
room,  having  thus  pleased  the  fisher-boy,  and  having  avoided
being  disgraced  through  him.

Then  that  son  of  the  fisher-folk  woke  up,  owing  to  the
cessation  of  the  touch  of  her  hand,  and  not  seeing  his  beloved,
who  had  thus  come  within  his  grasp,  and  again  vanished —
like  a  pot  of  treasure  in  the  case  of  a  very  poor  man,  who  is
despondent  for  its  loss — he  was  reft  of  all  hope,  and  his  breath
at  once  left  his  body.  When  the  princess  found  that  out,
she  came  there,  and  blamed  herself,  and  made  up  her  mind
to  ascend  the  funeral  pyre  with  him  next  morning.

Then  her  father,  King  Malayasimha,  heard  of  it,  and
came  there,  and,  finding  that  she  could  not  be  turned  from  her
resolve,  he  rinsed  his  mouth,  and  spake  this  speech :  "  If  I
am  really  devoted  to  the  three-eyed  god  of  gods,  tell  me,  ye
guardians  of  the  world,  what  it  is  my  duty  to  do."

WTien  the  king  said  this,  a  heavenly  voice  answered  him :
"  Thy  daughter  was  in  a  former  life  the  wife  of  this  son  of
the  fisher-folk.

1  For  a  note  on  sandalwood  see  Vol.  VII,  pp.  105-107. — n.m.p.


THE  MIGHT  OF  ASCETICISM  117

"  For,  long  ago,  there  lived  in  a  village  called  Nagasthala
a  virtuous  Brahman,  of  the  name  of  Baladhara,  the  son  of
Mahidhara.  When  his  father  had  gone  to  heaven,  he  was
robbed  of  his  wealth  by  his  relations,  and  being  disgusted
with  the  world  he  went,  with  his  wife,  to  the  bank  of  the
Ganges.  While  he  was  remaining  there  without  food,  in
order  to  abandon  the  body,  he  saw  some  fishermen  eating
fish,  and  his  hunger  made  him  long  for  it  in  his  heart.  So
he  died  with  his  mind  polluted  by  that  desire,  but  his  wife
kept  her  aspirations  pure,  and,  continuing  firm  in  penance,
followed  him  in  death.1

"  That  very  Brahman,  owing  to  that  pollution  of  his
desires,  has  been  born  in  the  fisher  caste.  But  his  wife,
who  remained  firm  in  her  asceticism,  has  been  born  as  thy
daughter,  O  King.  So  let  this  blameless  daughter  of  thine,
by  the  gift  of  half  her  life,2  raise  up  this  dead  youth,  who
was  her  husband  in  a  former  life.  For,  owing  to  the  might  of
asceticism,  this  youth,  who  was  thus  purified  by  the  splendour
of  that  holy  bathing-place,  shall  become  thy  son-in-law,  and
a  king."

When  the  king  had  been  thus  addressed  by  the  divine
voice  he  gave  his  daughter  in  marriage  to  that  youth  Supra-
hara,  who  recovered  his  life  by  the  gift  of  half  hers.  And
Suprahara  became  a  king  by  means  of  the  land,  elephants,
horses  and  jewels  which  his  father-in-law  gave  him,  and,
having  obtained  his  daughter  as  a  wife,  lived  the  life  of  a
successful  man.


1  See  Vol.  Ill,  pp.  10-11.

2  See  Vol.  I,  pp.   188,   188rc2,  189n.     In  si.   143   the  India  Office  MSS.
Nos.  2166  and  1882  and  the  Sanskrit  College  MS.  give  pramayat  for  prabhaya.

I  suppose  it  means  "  from  dying  in  that  holy  place." Cf.  the  story  of  "  Die

verschenkten  Lebensjahre  "  in  Wesselski,  M'drchen  des  Mittelalters,  Berlin,  1925,
pp.  12-15,  and  also  the  note  on  p.  192.  I  am  indebted  to  Dr  A.  H.  Krappe
for  the  following  additional  references  to  the  incident  of  ceding  part  of  one's
life  for  the  benefit  of  another  :  Zeitschr.  d.  Vereins  f.  Volksk.,  vol.  ii,  p.  1 27  ;
L.  Friedlander,  Darstellungen  aus  der  Sittengeschichte  Roms,  1888-1890,  vol.  i,
p.  513,  vol.  iii,  p.  529;  Hertz,  Spielmannsbuch,  1900,  p.  364;  Frazer,  Apollo-
dorus,  vol.  i,  pp.  93,  193 ;  J.  Grimm,  Kleinere  Schriften,  vol.  i,  p.  193 ;  G.  Paris,
Zeitschr.  d.  Vereins  f.  Volksk.,  vol.  xiii,  pp.  10,  15,  17,  20-21  ;  Ex  Oriente  Lux,
vol.  ii,  p.  217;  and  Bolte  and  Polivka,  op.  cit.,  vol.  i,  p.  129. — n.m.p.


118  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

168.  Story  of  King  Pdlaka  and  his  Son  Avantivardhana

"  In  this  way  a  connection  in  a  former  birth  usually  pro-
duces affection  in  embodied  beings  ;  moreover,  in  illustration
of  this  truth,  listen  to  the  following  story  about  a  thief :


168d.  The  Merchant's  Daughter  who  fell  in  love  with  a  Thief1

In  Ayodhya  there  lived  of  old  time  a  king  named  Vira-
bahu,  who  always  protected  his  subjects  as  if  they  were  his
own  children.  And  one  day  the  citizens  of  his  capital  came
to  him  and  said  :  "  King,  some  thieves  plunder  this  city
every  night,  and,  though  we  keep  awake  for  the  purpose,  we
cannot  detect  them  !  "  When  the  king  heard  that,  he  placed
scouts  in  the  city  at  night  to  keep  watch.  But  they  did  not
catch  the  thieves,  and  the  mischief  did  not  abate.  Accord-
ingly the  king  went  out  himself  at  night  to  investigate  the
matter.

And  as  he  was  wandering  about  in  every  direction,  alone,
sword  in  hand,  he  saw  a  man  going  along  on  the  top  of  the
rampart ;  he  seemed  to  tread  lightly  out  of  fear ;  his  eyes
rolled  rapidly  like  those  of  a  crow  ;  and  he  looked  round  like
a  lion,  frequently  turning  his  neck.  He  was  rendered  visible
by  the  steel  gleams  that  flashed  from  his  naked  sword,  which
seemed  like  binding  ropes  sent  forth  to  steal  those  jewels
which  men  call  stars.2  And  the  king  said  to  himself:  "  I
am  quite  certain  that  this  man  is  a  thief ;  no  doubt  he  sallies
out  alone  and  plunders  this  my  city."

Having  come  to  this  conclusion,  the  wily  monarch  went
up  to  the  thief ;  and  the  thief  said  to  him  with  some  trepi-
dation :  "  Who  are  you,  sir  ?  "  Then  the  king  said  to  him  :
"  I  am  a  desperate  robber,  whose  many  vices  make   him

1  This  is  another  version  of  the  Vetala's  fourteenth  story,  which  appears
in  Vol.  VII,  pp.  35-39-  See  also  the  Appendix  of  that  volume,  pp.  215-221.
— N.M.P.

2  I  read  iva  serana :  I  suppose  serana  comes  from  si.  Dr  Kern  would  read
ahrasva-sana  (the  former  word  hesitatingly).  But  iva  is  required.  Prerana
would  make  a  kind  of  sense.  See  Taranga  43,  si.  26a.  The  sloka  is  omitted
in  all  the  three  India  Office  MSS.  and  in  the  Sanskrit  College  MS.


THE  SUDDEN  LOVE  FOR  A  THIEF  119


hard  to  keep  ■ ;  tell  me  in  turn  who  you  are."  The  thief
answered  :  "  I  am  a  robber  who  goes  out  to  plunder  alone  ;
and  I  have  great  wealth  ;  so  come  to  my  house  ;  I  will  satisfy
your  longing  for  riches."  When  the  thief  made  him  this
promise  the  king  said,  "So  be  it,"  and  went  with  him  to  his
dwelling,  which  was  in  an  underground  excavation.  It  was
inhabited  by  beautiful  women,  it  gleamed  with  many  jewels,
it  was  full  of  ever-new  delights,  and  seemed  like  the  city  of
the  snakes.2

Then  the  thief  went  into  the  inner  chamber  of  his
dwelling,  and  the  king  remained  in  the  outer  room  ;  and
while  he  was  there,  a  female  servant,  compassionating  him,
came  and  said  to  him  :  "  What  kind  of  place  have  you
entered  ?  Leave  it  at  once,  for  this  man  is  a  treacherous
assassin,  and  as  he  goes  on  his  expeditions  alone,  will  be
sure  to  murder  you,  to  prevent  his  secrets  being  divulged."  3
When  the  king  heard  that  he  went  out  at  once,  and  quickly
returned  to  his  palace ;  and  summoning  his  commander-in-
chief  returned  with  his  troops.  And  he  came  and  surrounded
the  thief's  dwelling,  and  made  the  bravest  men  enter  it,  and
so  brought  the  thief  back  a  prisoner,  and  carried  off  all  his
wealth.

When  the  night  came  to  an  end  the  king  ordered  his
execution;  and  he  was  led  off  to  the  place  of  execution
through  the  middle  of  the  market.  And  as  he  was  being
led  through  that  part  of  the  town  a  merchant's  daughter
saw  him,  and  fell  in  love  with  him  at  first  sight.  And  she
immediately  said  to  her  father :  "  Know  that  if  this  man,
who  is  being  led  off  to  execution  preceded  by  the  drum  of
death,  does  not  become  my  husband,  I  shall  die  myself."

Then  her  father,  seeing  that  she  could  not  be  dissuaded
from  her  resolution,  went  and  tried  to  induce  the  king  to
spare  that  thief's  life  by  offering  ten  millions  of  coins.     But

1  The  Petersburg  lexicographers  translate  durbharah  by  schwer  beladen.
I  think  it  means  that  the  supposed  thief  had  many  costly  vices,  which  he
could  not  gratify  without  stealing.  Of  course  it  applies  to  the  king  in  a
milder  sense.

2  In  the  realms  below  the  earth.

3  I  read,  after  Dr  Kern,  vihastaghatakah,  "  a  slayer  of  those  who  confide
in  him."     I  also  read  kvasi  for  kvapi,  as  the  three  India  Office  MSS.  give  kvasi.


120  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

the  king,  instead  of  sparing  the  thief's  life,  ordered  him  to  be
immediately  impaled,1  and  was  very  angry  with  the  merchant.
Then  the  merchant's  daughter,  whose  name  was  Vamadatta,
took  the  corpse  of  that  robber,  and  out  of  love  for  him  entered
the  fire  with  it.


168.  Story  of  King  Pdlaka  and  his  Son  Avantivardhana

"  So  you  see,  creatures  are  completely  dependent  upon
connections  in  previous  births,  and  this  being  the  case,  who
can  avoid  a  destiny  that  is  fated  to  him,  and  who  can  prevent
such  a  destiny's  befalling  anybody  ?  Therefore,  King,  it  is
clear  that  this  Suratamanjari  is  some  excellent  being  that
was  the  wife  of  your  son,  Avantivardhana,  in  a  previous  birth,
and  is  therefore  destined  to  be  his  wife  again  ;  otherwise  how
could  such  a  high-born  prince  have  formed  such  an  attach-
ment for  her,  a  woman  of  the  Matanga  caste  ?  So  let  this
Matanga,  her  father  Utpalahasta,  be  asked  to  give  the  prince
his  daughter  ;   and  let  us  see  what  he  says."

When  I  had  said  this  to  King  Palaka,  he  at  once  sent
messengers  to  Utpalahasta  to  ask  for  his  daughter.  And  the
Matanga,  when  entreated  by  these  messengers  to  give  her  in
marriage,  answered  them  :  "I  approve  of  this  alliance,  but
I  must  give  my  daughter  Suratamanjari  to  the  man  who
makes  eighteen  thousand  of  the  Brahmans  that  dwell  in  this
city  eat  in  my  house."  When  the  messengers  heard  this
speech  of  the  Matanga's,  that  contained  a  solemn  promise,
they  went  back  and  reported  it  faithfully  to  King  Palaka.

Thinking  that  there  was  some  reason  for  this,2  the  king
called  together  all  the  Brahmans  in  the  city  of  Ujjayini,  and
telling  them  the  whole  story  said  to  them :  "  So  you  must
eat  here,  in  the  house  of  the  Matanga  Utpalahasta,  eighteen
thousand  of  you ;  I  will  not  have  it  otherwise."  When  the
Brahmans  had  been  thus  commanded  by  the  king,  being  at
the  same  time  afraid  of  touching  the  food  of  a  Chandala,  and
therefore  at  a  loss  what  to  do,  they  went  to  the  shrine  of
Mahakala  and  performed  self-torture.     Then  the  god  Siva,

1  The  three  India  Office  MSS.  give  tu  for  tarn.

2  I  take  sakdranam  as  one  word.


THE  CURSE  OF  SIVA  121

who  was  present  there  in  the  form  of  Mahakala,  commanded
those  Brahmans  in  a  dream,  saying  :  "  Eat  food  here  in  the
house  of  the  Matanga  Utpalahasta,  for  he  is  a  Vidyadhara  ;
neither  he  nor  his  family  are  Chandalas.55  Then  those  Brah-
mans rose  up  and  went  to  the  king,  and  told  him  the  dream,
and  went  on  to  say  :  "So  let  this  Utpalahasta  cook  pure
food  for  us  in  some  place  outside  the  quarter  of  the  Chan-
dalas, and  then  we  will  eat  it  at  his  hands."  When  the  king
heard  this,  he  had  another  house  made  for  Utpalahasta,  and,
being  highly  delighted,  he  had  food  cooked  for  him  there  by
pure  cooks  ;  and  then  eighteen  thousand  Brahmans  ate  there,
while  Utpalahasta  stood  in  front  of  them,  bathed,  and  clothed
in  a  pure  garment.

And  after  they  had  eaten,  Utpalahasta  came  to  King
Palaka,  in  the  presence  of  his  subjects,  and  bowing  before
him  said  to  him :  "  There  was  an  influential  prince  of  the
Vidyadharas,  named  Gaurimunda;  I  was  a  dependent  of
his,  named  Matangadeva  ;  and  when,  King,  that  daughter  of
mine,  Suratamanjari,  had  been  born,  Gaurimunda  secretly
said  to  me  :  '  The  gods  assert  that  this  son  of  the  King  of
Vatsa,  who  is  called  Naravahanadatta,  is  to  be  our  emperor  :
so  go  quickly,  and  kill  that  foe  of  ours  by  means  of  your  magic
power,  before  he  has  attained  the  dignity  of  emperor.5

"  When  the  wicked  Gaurimunda  had  sent  me  on  this
errand,  I  went  to  execute  it,  and  while  going  along  through
the  air  I  saw  Siva  in  front  of  me.  The  god,  displeased,  made
an  angry  roar,  and  immediately  pronounced  on  me  this  curse  :
4  How  is  it,  villain,  that  thou  dost  plot  evil  against  a  noble-
minded  man  ?  So  go,  wicked  one,  and  fall  with  this  same
body  of  thine  into  the  midst  of  the  Chandalas  in  Ujjayini,
together  with  thy  wife  and  daughter.  And  when  someone
shall  make  eighteen  thousand  of  the  Brahmans  that  dwell
in  that  city  eat  in  thy  house,  by  way  of  a  gift  to  purchase
thy  daughter,  then  thy  curse  shall  come  to  an  end,  and
thou  must  marry  thy  daughter  to  the  man  who  bestows
on  thee  the  gift.5

"  When  Siva  had  said  this  he  disappeared,  and  I,  that
very  Matangadeva,  assuming  the  name  of  Utpalahasta,  fell
among  the  men  of  the  lowest  caste;  but  I  do  not  mix  with


122  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

them.  However,  my  curse  is  at  an  end,  owing  to  the  favour
of  your  son,  so  I  give  him  my  daughter,  Suratamanjari.
And  now  I  will  go  to  my  own  dwelling-place  among  the
Vidyadharas,  in  order  to  pay  my  respects  to  the  Emperor
Naravahanadatta."  When  Matangadeva  had  said  this,  he
solemnly  gave  the  prince  his  daughter,  and,  flying  up  into
the  air  with  his  wife,  repaired,  King,  to  thy  feet.

And  King  Palaka,  having  thus  ascertained  the  truth,
celebrated  with  great  delight  the  marriage  of  Suratamanjari
and  his  son.  And  his  son,  Avantivardhana,  having  obtained
that  Vidyadhari  for  a  wife,  felt  himself  fortunate  in  having
gained  more  than  he  had  ever  hoped  for.

Now,  one  day,  that  prince  went  to  sleep  on  the  top  of  the
palace  with  her,  and  at  the  end  of  the  night  he  woke  up,  and
suddenly  discovered  that  his  beloved  was  nowhere  to  be  seen.
He  looked  for  her,  but  could  not  find  her  anywhere,  and
then  he  lamented,  and  was  so  much  afflicted  that  his  father,
the  king,  came,  and  was  exceedingly  discomposed.  We  all,
being  assembled  there  at  that  time,  said  :  "  This  city  is
well  guarded,  no  stranger  could  enter  it  during  the  night ;  no
doubt  she  must  have  been  carried  off  by  some  evilly  disposed
wanderer  of  the  air."  And  even  while  we  were  saying  that,
your  servant,  the  Vidyadhara  Dhumasikha,  descended  from
the  sky.  He  brought  here  this  Prince  Avantivardhana,  and
King  Palaka  also  was  asked  to  part  with  me,  in  order  that  I
might  state  the  facts  of  the  case.  Here  too  is  Suratamanjari
with  her  father,  and  the  facts  concerning  her  are  such  as  I  have
said  :  your  Majesty  is  the  best  judge  of  what  ought  to  be
done  now.


[M]  When  Bharataroha,  the  minister  of  Palaka,  had  told
this  tale,  he  stopped  speaking ;  and  the  assessors  put  this
question  to  Matangadeva  in  the  presence  of  Naravahanadatta ;
"  Tell  us,  to  whom  did  you  give  this  daughter  of  yours,
Suratamanjari  ?  "  He  answered  :  "  I  gave  her  to  Avanti-
vardhana." Then  they  put  this  question  to  Ityaka :  "  Now
do  you  tell  us  why  you  carried  her  off."     He  answered  :


THE  END  OF  THE  TRIAL  123

"  Her  mother  promised  her  to  me  originally."  The  assessors
said  to  Ityaka  :  "  While  the  father  is  alive,  what  authority  has
the  mother  ?  Moreover,  where  is  your  witness  to  prove  the
fact  of  the  mother  having  promised  her  to  you  ?  So  she  is,
with  regard  to  you,  the  wife  of  another,  villain !  "  When
Ityaka  was  thus  put  to  silence  by  the  assessors,  the  Emperor
Naravahanadatta,  being  angry  with  him,  ordered  his  im-
mediate execution,  on  the  ground  of  his  misconduct.  But
the  good  hermits,  with  Kasyapa  at  their  head,  came  and
entreated  him,  saying  :  "  Forgive  now  this  one  fault  of  his  :
for  he  is  the  son  of  Madanavega,  and  therefore  your  brother-
in-law."  So  the  king  was  at  last  induced  to  spare  his  life,
and  let  him  off  with  a  severe  reprimand.

And  he  reunited  that  son  of  his  maternal  uncle,  Avanti-
vardhana,  to  his  wife,  and  sent  them  off  with  their  ministers
to  their  own  city,  in  the  care  of  Vayupatha.


CHAPTER  CXIII

WHEN  Naravahanadatta,  on  the  Black  Mountain,
[M]  had  thus  taken  away  the  virtuous  Surata-
manjari  from  his  brother-in-law,  Ityaka,  who  had
carried  her  off,  and  had  reprimanded  him,  and  had  given
her  back  to  her  husband,  and  was  sitting  in  the  midst  of  the
hermits,  the  sage  Kasyapa  came  and  said  to  him  :  "  There
never  was  a  king  and  there  never  will  be  an  emperor  like
you,  since  you  do  not  allow  passion  and  other  feelings  of  the
kind  to  influence  your  mind  when  you  are  sitting  on  the
seat  of  judgment.  Fortunate  are  they  who  ever  behold  such
a  righteous  lord  as  you  are ;  for,  though  your  empire  is  such
as  it  is,  no  fault  can  be  found  with  you.

"  There  were  in  former  days  Rishabha,  and  other  emperors,
and  they,  being  seized  with  various  faults,  were  ruined,  and  fell
from  their  high  state.  Rishabha,  and  Sarvadamana,  and  the
third  Bandhujivaka,  all  these,  through  excessive  pride,  were
punished  by  Indra.  And  the  Vidyadhara  prince,  Jimuta-
vahana,  when  the  sage  Narada  came  and  asked  him  the  reason
of  his  obtaining  the  rank  of  emperor,  told  him  how  he  gave
away  the  wishing-tree  and  his  own  body,1  and  thus  he  fell
from  his  high  position  by  revealing  his  own  virtuous  deeds.
And  the  sovereign  named  Visvantara,  who  was  emperor
here,  he  too,  when  his  son,  Indivaraksha,  had  been  slain  by
Vasantatilaka,  the  King  of  Chedi,  for  seducing  his  wife,  being
wanting  in  self-control,  died  on  account  of  the  distracting
sorrow  which  he  felt  for  the  death  of  his  wicked  son.

"  But  Taravaloka  alone,  who  was  by  birth  a  mighty
human  king,  and  obtained  by  his  virtuous  deeds  the  imperial
sovereignty  over  the  Vidyadharas,  long  enjoyed  the  high
fortune  of  empire,  without  falling  into  sin,  and  at  last  aban-
doned it  of  his  own  accord,  out  of  distaste  for  all  worldly
pleasures,  and  went  to  the  forest.  Thus,  in  old  times,  did
most  of  the  Vidyadhara  emperors,  puffed  up  with  the  attain-

1  See  Vol.  II,  p.  138  et  seq.t  and  Vol.  VII,  pp.  49-63.— n.m.p.

124


THE  TALE  OF  KASYAPA  125

ment  of  their  high  rank,  abandon  the  right  path,  and  fall,
blinded  with  passion.  So  you  must  always  be  on  your  guard
against  slipping  from  the  path  of  virtue,  and  you  must  take
care  that  your  Vidyadhara  subjects  do  not  swerve  from
righteousness."

When  the  hermit  Kasyapa  said  this  to  Naravahanadatta,
the  latter  approved  his  speech,  and  said  to  him,  with
deferential  courtesy:  "How  did  Taravaloka,  being  a  man,
obtain  in  old  time  the  sway  over  the  Vidyadharas  ?  Tell  me,
reverend  sir."  When  Kasyapa  heard  this  he  said  :  "  Listen,
I  will  tell  you  his  story.


169.  Story  of  Taravaloka

There  lived  among  the  Sivis  l  a  king  of  the  name  of
Chandravaloka.  That  sovereign  had  a  head  wife  named
Chandralekha.  Her  race  was  as  spotless  as  the  sea  of  milk,
she  was  pure  herself,  and  in  character  like  the  Ganges.  And
he  had  a  great  elephant  that  trampled  the  armies  of  his
enemies,  known  on  the  earth  as  Kuvalayapida.  Owing  to  the
might  of  that  elephant  the  king  was  never  conquered  by  any
enemy  in  his  realm,  in  which  the  real  power  wras  in  the  hands
of  the  subjects.

And  when  his  youth  came  to  an  end,  that  king  had  a  son,
with  auspicious  marks,  born  to  him  by  Queen  Chandralekha.
He  gave  the  son  the  name  of  Taravaloka,  and  he  gradually
grew  up,  and  his  inborn  virtues  of  liberality,  self-control
and  discernment  grew  with  him.  And  the  mighty-minded
youth  learned  the  meaning  of  all  words  except  one ;  but  he
was  so  liberal  to  suppliants  that  he  cannot  be  said  ever  to
have  learned  the  meaning  of  the  word  "  No."  Gradually  he
became  old  in  actions,  though  young  in  years ;  and  though  like
the  sun  in  fire  of  valour,  he  was  exceedingly  pleasing  to  look  at2;

1  The  Petersburg  lexicographers  spell  the  word  "Sibi."  The  story  is
really  the  same  as  the  sixteenth  of  Ralston's  Tibetan  Tales,  p.  257.  It  is
also  found  in  the  Chariya  Pitaka.  See  Oldenberg's  Buddha,  p.  302.  Dr  Kern
points  out  that  we  ought  to  read  dugdhabdinirmala.  The  India  Office  MSS.
give  the  words  correctly.

2  The  word  saumya  means  "  pleasing  "  and  also  "  moonlike  "  ;  kala,  in  the
next  line,  means  "  digit  of  the  moon  "  and  also  "  accomplishment."


126  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

like  the  full  moon  he  became  beautiful  by  the  possession  of
all  noble  parts ;  like  the  God  of  Love  he  excited  the  longing
of  the  whole  world ;  in  obedience  to  his  father  he  came  to
surpass  Jimutavahana,  and  he  was  distinctly  marked  with
the  signs  of  a  great  emperor.

Then  his  father,  the  King  Chandravaloka,  brought  for
that  son  of  his  the  daughter  of  the  King  of  the  Madras,
named  Madri.  And  when  he  was  married,  his  father,  pleased
with  the  super-eminence  of  his  virtues,  at  once  appointed  him
crown  prince.  And  when  Taravaloka  had  been  appointed
crown  prince,  he  had  made,  with  his  father's  permission,
almshouses  for  the  distribution  of  food  and  other  necessaries.
And  every  day,  the  moment  he  got  up,  he  mounted  the
elephant,  Kuvalayapida,  and  went  round  to  inspect  those
almshouses.1  To  whosoever  asked  anything  he  was  ready
to  give  it,  even  if  it  were  his  own  life  :  in  this  way  the  fame
of  that  crown  prince  spread  in  every  quarter.

Then  he  had  two  twin  sons  born  to  him  by  Madri,  and  the
father  called  them  Rama  and  Lakshmana.  And  the  boys
grew  like  the  love  and  joy  of  their  parents,  and  they  were
dearer  than  life  to  their  grandparents.  And  Taravaloka  and
Madri  were  never  tired  of  looking  at  them,  as  they  bent  before
them,  being  filled  with  virtue,  like  two  bows  of  the  prince,
being  strung.2

Then  the  enemies  of  Taravaloka,  seeing  his  elephant,
Kuvalayapida,  his  two  sons,  and  his  reputation  for  gener-
osity, said  to  their  Brahmans  :  "Go  and  ask  Taravaloka  to
give  you  his  elephant,  Kuvalayapida.  If  he  gives  it  you,
we  shall  be  able  to  take  from  him  his  kingdom,  as  he  will
be  deprived  of  that  bulwark ;  if  he  refuses  to  give  it,  his
reputation  for  generosity  will  be  at  an  end."  When  the
Brahmans  had  been  thus  entreated  they  consented,  and  asked
Taravaloka,  that  hero  of  generosity,  for  that  elephant.

Taravaloka  said  to  himself :  "  What  do  Brahmans  mean
by  asking  for  a  mighty  elephant  ?    So  I  know  for  certain  that

1  I  read  satrani  or  sattrani  for  patrani,  which  would  mean  (t  fit  recipients."
I  find  sattrani  in  MS.  No.  1882.

2  A  perpetually  recurring  pun !  Guna  in  Sanskrit  means  u  bowstring  "
and  also  "virtue,"  and  is  an  unfailing  source  of  temptation  to  our  author.


THE  ELEPHANT  KUVALAYAPlDA     127

they  have  been  put  up  to  asking  me  by  someone.  Happen
what  will,  I  must  give  them  my  splendid  elephant,  for  how
can  I  let  a  suppliant  go  away  without  obtaining  his  desire,
while  I  live  ?  "  After  going  through  these  reflections,
Taravaloka  gave  the  elephant  to  those  Brahmans  with  un-
wavering mind.

Then  Chandravaloka's  subjects,  seeing  that  splendid
elephant  being  led  away  by  those  Brahmans,  went  in  a  rage
to  the  king,  and  said  :  "  Your  son  has  now  abandoned  this
kingdom,  and  surrendering  all  his  rights  has  taken  upon
him  the  vow  of  a  hermit.  For  observe,  he  has  given  to  some
suppliants  this  great  elephant  Kuvalayapida,  the  foundation
of  the  kingdom's  prosperity,  that  scatters  with  its  mere  smell
all  other  elephants.  So  you  must  either  send  your  son  to
the  forest  to  practise  asceticism,  or  take  back  the  elephant,
or  else  we  will  set  up  another  king  in  your  place."  *

When  Chandravaloka  had  been  thus  addressed  by  the
citizens  he  sent  his  son  a  message,  in  accordance  with  their
demands,  through  the  warder.  When  his  son,  Taravaloka,
heard  that,  he  said  :  "As  for  the  elephant,  I  have  given  it
away,  and  it  is  my  principle  to  refuse  nothing  to  suppliants  ;
but  what  do  I  care  for  such  a  throne  as  this,  which  is  under
the  thumb  of  the  subjects,  or  for  a  royal  dignity  which  does
not  benefit  others,2  and  anyhow  is  transient  as  the  lightning  ?
So  it  is  better  for  me  to  live  in  the  forest,  among  trees,  which
give  the  fortune  of  their  fruits  to  be  enjoyed  by  all,  and  not
here,  among  such  beasts  of  men  as  these  subjects  are."  3

When  Taravaloka  had  said  this  he  assumed  the  dress  of
bark,  and  after  kissing  the  feet  of  his  parents,  and  giving
away  all  his  wealth  to  suppliants,  he  went  out  from  his  own

1  This  story  was  evidently  composed  at  a  time  when  the  recollections  of
the  old  clan  system  were  vivid  in  the  minds  of  the  Hindus.  See  Rhys  Davids'
Buddhism,  p.  28.  Gautama's  relations  "complained  in  a  body  to  the  Raja
Suddhodana  that  his  son,  devoted  to  home  pleasures,  neglected  those  manly
exercises  necessary  for  one  who  might  hereafter  have  to  lead  his  kinsmen
in  case  of  war."

2  I  read  anyanupayoginya,  which  I  find  in  MS.  No.  3003.  No.  1882  has
anyanupabhoginya.  In  the  other  MS.  the  passage  is  omitted.  Another  syllable
is  clearly  required.     The  Sanskrit  College  MS.  reads  kim  chanyanupayoginyatra-

3  Cf.  Richard  II,  v,  1,  35.


128  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

city,  accompanied  by  his  wife,  who  was  firm  in  the  same
resolution  as  himself,  and  his  two  children,  comforting,  as
well  as  he  could,  the  weeping  Brahmans.  Even  beasts  and
birds,  when  they  saw  him  setting  forth,  wept  so  piteously
that  the  earth  was  bedewed  with  the  rain  of  their  tears.

Then  Taravaloka  went  on  his  way,  with  no  possessions
but  a  chariot  and  horses  for  the  conveyance  of  his  children ;
but  some  other  Brahmans  asked  him  for  the  horses  belonging
to  the  chariot ;  he  gave  them  to  them  immediately,  and  drew
the  chariot  himself,  with  the  assistance  of  his  wife,  to  convey
those  tender  young  sons  to  the  forest.  Then,  as  he  was
wearied  out  in  the  middle  of  the  forest,  another  Brahman
came  up  to  him,  and  asked  him  for  his  horseless  chariot.
He  gave  it  to  him  without  the  slightest  hesitation,  and  the
resolute  fellow,  going  along  on  his  feet,  with  his  wife  and  sons,
at  last  with  difficulty  reached  the  grove  of  mortification.
There  he  took  up  his  abode  at  the  foot  of  a  tree,  and  lived
with  deer  for  his  only  retinue,  nobly  waited  on  by  his  wife,
Madri.  And  the  forest  regions  ministered  to  the  heroic
prince,  while  living  in  this  kingdom  of  devotion ;  their
clusters  of  flowers  waving  in  the  wind  were  his  beautiful
chowries,  broad-shaded  trees  were  his  umbrellas,  leaves  his
bed,  rocks  his  thrones,  bees  his  singing- women,  and  various
fruits  his  savoury  viands.

Now  one  day  his  wife,  Madri,  left  the  hermitage  to  gather
fruits  and  flowers  for  him  with  her  own  hands,  and  a  certain
old  Brahman  came  and  asked  Taravaloka,  who  was  in  his
hut,  for  his  sons,  Rama  and  Lakshmana.  Taravaloka  said
to  himself :  "I  shall  be  better  able  to  endure  letting  these
sons  of  mine,  though  they  are  quite  infants,  be  led  away,1
than  I  could  possibly  manage  to  endure  the  sending  a  sup-
pliant away  disappointed  :  the  fact  is,  cunning  fate  is  eager
to  see  my  resolution  give  way  "  :  then  he  gave  those  sons  ta
the  Brahman.  And  when  the  Brahman  tried  to  take  them
away  they  refused  to  go  ;  then  he  tied  their  hands  and  beat
them  with  creepers ;  and  as  the  cruel  man  took  them  away
they  kept  crying  for  their  mother,  and  turning  round  and

1  India  Office  MS.  No.  1882  reads  nitau ;  the  other  two  seem  to  omit  the
lines  altogether.


GENEROSITY  REWARDED  129

looking  at  their  father  with  tearful  eyes.  Even  when  Tara-
valoka  saw  that  he  was  unmoved,  but  the  whole  world  of
animate  and  inanimate  existences  was  moved  at  his  fortitude.

Then  the  virtuous  Madri  slowly  returned,  tired,  from  a
remote  part  of  the  forest  to  her  husband's  hermitage,  bring-
ing with  her  flowers,  fruits  and  roots.  And  she  saw  her
husband,  who  had  his  face  sadly  fixed  on  the  ground,  but  she
could  not  see  anywhere  those  sons  of  hers,  though  their  toys,
in  the  form  of  horses,  chariots  and  elephants  of  clay,  were
scattered  about.  Her  heart  foreboded  calamity,  and  she  said
excitedly  to  her  husband :  "  Alas  !  I  am  ruined  !  Where
are  my  little  sons  ?  "  Her  husband  slowly  answered  her :
"  Blameless  one,  I  gave  those  two  little  sons  away  to  a
poor  Brahman,  who  asked  for  them."  When  the  good  lady
heard  that,  she  rose  superior  to  her  distraction,  and  said  to
her  husband  :  "  Then  you  did  well ;  how  could  you  allow  a
suppliant  to  go  away  disappointed  ?  "  When  she  said  this,
the  equally  matched  goodness  of  that  married  couple  made
the  earth  tremble  and  the  throne  of  Indra  rock.

Then  Indra  saw  by  his  profound  meditation  that  the
world  was  made  to  tremble  by  virtue  of  the  heroic  generosity
of  Madri  and  Taravaloka.  Then  he  assumed  the  form  of  a
Brahman,  and  went  to  Taravaloka's  hermitage,  to  prove  him,
and  asked  him  for  his  only  wife,  Madri.  And  Taravaloka  was
preparing  to  give  without  hesitation,  by  the  ceremony  of
pouring  water  over  the  hands,1  that  lady  who  had  been  his
companion  in  the  wild  forest,  when  Indra,  thus  disguised  as
a  Brahman,  said  to  him :  "  Royal  sage,  what  object  do  you
mean  to  attain  by  giving  away  a  wife  like  this  ?  "  Then
Taravaloka  said  :  "  I  have  no  object  in  view,  Brahman ;
so  much  only  do  I  desire :  that  I  may  ever  give  away  to
Brahmans  even  my  life."  When  Indra  heard  this  he  resumed
his  proper  shape,  and  said  to  him :  "  I  have  made  proof  of
thee,  and  I  am  satisfied  with  thee;  so  I  say  to  thee,  thou
must  not  again  give  away  thy  wife ;  and  soon  thou  shalt  be
made  emperor  over  all  the  Vidyadharas."  When  the  god  had
said  this  he  disappeared.

1  As  Anathapindika  gives  the  Jetavana  garden  to  Buddha  in  the  Bharhut
Sculptures ;  see  also  Vol.  VII,  p.  79.

VOL.  VIII.  I


130  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

In  the  meanwhile  that  old  Brahman  took  with  him  those
sons  of  Taravaloka,  whom  he  had  received  as  a  Brahman's
fee,  and,  losing  his  way,  arrived,  as  fate  would  have  it,  at  the
city  of  that  King  Chandravaloka,  and  proceeded  to  sell  those
princes  in  the  market.  Then  the  citizens  recognised  those
two  boys,  and  went  and  informed  King  Chandravaloka,  and
took  them,  with  the  Brahman,  into  his  presence.  The  king,
when  he  saw  his  grandsons,  shed  tears,  and  after  he  had
questioned  the  Brahman,  and  had  heard  the  state  of  the  case
from  him,  he  was  for  a  long  time  divided  between  joy  and
grief.  Then,  perceiving  the  exceeding  virtue  of  his  son,  he
at  once  ceased  to  care  about  a  kingdom,  though  his  subjects
entreated  him  to  remain,  but  with  his  wealth  he  bought
those  two  grandsons  from  the  Brahman,  and  taking  them
with  him  went  with  his  retinue  to  the  hermitage  of  his  son,
Taravaloka.

There  he  saw  him,  with  matted  hair,  wearing  a  dress  of
bark,  looking  like  a  great  tree,  the  advantages  of  which  are
enjoyed  by  birds  coming  from  every  quarter,  for  he  in  like
manner  had  bestowed  all  he  had  upon  expectant  Brahmans.1
That  son  ran  towards  him,  while  still  a  long  way  off,  and  fell
at  his  feet,  and  his  father  bedewed  him  with  tears,  and  took
him  up  on  his  lap;  and  thus  gave  him  a  foretaste  of  his
ascent  of  the  throne,  as  emperor  over  the  Vidyadharas,  after
a  solemn  sprinkling  with  water.

Then  the  king  gave  back  to  Taravaloka  his  sons,  Rama
and  Lakshmana,  saying  that  he  had  purchased  them;  and,
while  they  were  relating  to  one  another  their  adventures,  an
elephant  with  four  tusks  and  the  goddess  Lakshmi  descended
from  heaven.  And  when  the  chiefs  of  the  Vidyadharas
had  also  descended,  Lakshmi,  lotus  in  hand,  said  to  that
Taravaloka :  "  Mount  this  elephant,  and  come  to  the  country
of  the  Vidyadharas,  and  there  enjoy  the  imperial  dignity  2
earned  by  your  great  generosity."

When  Lakshmi  said  this,  Taravaloka,  after  bowing  at  the

1  The  pun  is  intelligible  enough :  dvija  means  "  Brahman "  and  also
"bird";  asagata  means  "coming  from  every  quarter"  and  "coming  in  hope
to  get  something."

2  Tat  should  not  be  separated  from  the  next  word.


THE  ROYAL  PROCLAMATION  131

feet  of  his  father,  mounted  that  celestial  elephant,  with  her,
and  his  wife,  and  his  sons,  in  the  sight  of  all  the  inhabitants
of  the  hermitage,  and  surrounded  by  the  kings  of  the  Vidya-
dharas  went  through  the  air  to  their  domain.  There  the
distinctive  sciences  of  the  Vidyadharas  repaired  to  him,  and  he
long  enjoyed  supreme  sway,  but  at  last,  becoming  disgusted
with  all  worldly  pleasures,  he  retired  to  a  forest  of  ascetics.


[M]  "  Thus  Taravaloka,  though  a  man,  acquired  in  old
time  by  his  deeds  of  spotless  virtue  the  sovereignty  of  all
the  Vidyadharas.  But  others,  after  acquiring  it,  lost  it  by
their  offences  :  so  be  on  your  guard  against  unrighteous
conduct  either  on  your  own  part  or  on  that  of  another."  *

When  the  hermit  Kasyapa  had  told  this  story,  and  had
thus  admonished  Naravahanadatta,  that  emperor  promised
to  follow  his  advice.  And  he  had  a  royal  proclamation  made
all  round  the  mountain  of  Siva,  to  the  following  effect  :
"Listen,  Vidyadharas;  whoever  of  my  subjects  after  this
commits  an  unrighteous  act  will  certainly  be  put  to  death  by
me."  The  Vidyadharas  received  his  commands  with  implicit
submission,  and  his  glory  was  widely  diffused  on  account  of
his  causing  Suratamanjari  to  be  set  at  liberty;  and  so  he
lived  with  his  retinue  in  the  hermitage  of  that  excellent  sage,
on  the  Black  Mountain,2  in  the  society  of  his  maternal  uncle,
and  in  this  manner  spent  the  rainy  season.

1  The  three  India  Office  MSS.  read  apacharam  tvaw.  The  Sanskrit  College
MS.  gives  apavaram.

2  The  metre  shows  that  'sta  is  a  misprint  for  'sita.  All  the  three  India
Office  MSS.  read  'sita.     So  does  the  Sanskrit  College  MS.


BOOK  XVII:  PADMAVATI
CHAPTER  CXIV

INVOCATION

GLORY  to  Siva,  who  assumes  various  forms;  who,
though  his  beloved  takes  up  half  his  body,1  is  an
ascetic,  free  from  qualities,  the  due  object  of  a  world's
adoration !  We  worship  Ganesa,  who,  when  fanning  away  the
cloud  of  bees,  that  flies  up  from  his  trunk,  with  his  flapping
ears,  seems  to  be  dispersing  the  host  of  obstacles.


[M]  Thus  Naravahanadatta,  who  had  been  established
in  the  position  of  lord  paramount  over  all  the  kings  of  the
Vidyadharas,  remained  on  that  Black  Mountain  in  order  to  get
through  the  rainy  season,  spending  the  time  in  the  hermitage
of  that  sage  Kasyapa,  and  in  the  society  of  his  maternal
uncle,  Gopalaka,  who  was  living  the  life  of  an  ascetic.  He  was
accompanied  by  his  ministers,  and  surrounded  by  twenty-
five  of  his  wives,  and  attended  by  various  Vidyadhara  princes,
and  he  occupied  himself  in  telling  tales.  One  day  the  hermits
and  his  wives  said  to  him  :  "  Tell  us,  now  !  When  Manasa-
vega  took  away  Queen  Madanamanchuka,  by  his  magic  power,
who  amused  you,  impatient  of  separation,  and  how  did  he
do  it  ?  "

When  Naravahanadatta  had  been  asked  this  question  by
those  hermits,  and  by  his  wives,  he  proceeded  to  speak  as
follows  :  "  Can  I  tell  now  how  great  grief  I  endured  when  I
found  out  that  that  wicked  enemy  had  carried  off  my  queen  ?
There  was  no  building,  and  no  garden,  or  room,  into  which  I
did  not  roam  seeking  for  her  in  my  grief,  and  all  my  ministers
with  me.  Then  I  sat  down,  as  if  beside  myself,  in  a  garden
at  the  foot  of  a  tree,  and  Gomukha,  having  obtained  his

1  An  allusion  to  the  Ardhanarisa  form  of  Siva.

132


THE  CITY  OF  VARANASl  133

opportunity,  said  to  me,  in  order  to  console  me  :  'Do  not  be
despondent,  my  sovereign  ;  you  will  soon  recover  the  queen  ;
for  the  gods  promised  that  you  should  rule  the  Vidyadharas
with  her  as  your  consort ;  that  must  turn  out  as  the  gods
predicted,  for  their  promises  are  never  falsified  ;  and  resolute
men,  after  enduring  separation,  obtain  reunion  with  those
they  love.  Were  not  Ramabhadra,  King  Nala  and  your
own  grandfather,1  after  enduring  separation,  reunited  to  their
beloved  wives  ?  And  was  not  Muktaphalaketu,  emperor  of
the  Vidyadharas,  reunited  to  Padmavati,  after  he  had  been
separated  from  her  ?  And  now,  listen,  King ;  I  will  tell  you
the  story  of  that  couple.'  When  Gomukha  had  said  this,  he
told  me  the  following  tale.

170.  Story  of  King  Brahmadatta  and  the  Swans 2

There  is  in  the  country  a  city  famous  over  the  earth  by
the  name  of  Varanasi,  which,  like  the  body  of  Siva,  is  adorned
with  the  Ganges,  and  bestows  emancipation.  With  the  flags
on  its  temples  swayed  up  and  down  by  the  wind  it  seems
to  be  ever  saying  to  men :  "  Come  hither,  and  attain
salvation."  With  the  pinnacles  of  its  white  palaces  it  looks
like  the  plateau  of  Mount  Kailasa,  the  habitation  of  the  god
with  the  moon  for  a  diadem,  and  it  is  full  of  troops  of  Siva's
devoted  servants.3

In  that  city  there  lived  of  old  time  a  king  named  Brahma-
datta,4 exclusively  devoted  to  Siva,  a  patron  of  Brahmans,
brave,  generous  and  compassionate.  His  commands  passed
current  through  the  earth:  they  stumbled  not  in  rocky
defiles ;  they  were  not  whelmed  in  seas ;  there  were  no  con-
tinents which  they  did  not  cross.     He  had  a  queen  named

1  Pitamahah  must  be  a  misprint  for  pitamakak,  as  is  apparent  from  the
India  Office  MSS.

2  This  story  is  in  the  original  prefaced  by  "  Iti  Padmavati  hatha."  It  con-
tinues to  the  end  of  the  Book,  but,  properly  speaking,  the  story  of  Padmavati
does  not  commence  until  Chapter  CXV.

3  There  is  a  reference  to  the  sectaries  of  Siva  in  Benares,  and  the  Ganas
of  Siva  on  Mount  Kailasa.

4  Here  we  have  a  longer  form  of  the  story  of  Brahmadatta,  found  in
Vol.  I,  pp.  20-21.


134  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

Somaprabha,1  who  was  dear  and  delightful  to  him  as  the
moonlight  to  the  chakora,  and  he  was  as  eager  to  drink  her
in  with  his  eyes.  And  he  had  a  Brahman  minister  named
Sivabhtiti,  equal  to  Brihaspati  in  intellect,  who  had  fathomed
the  meaning  of  all  the  Sastras.

One  night,  that  king,  as  he  was  lying  on  a  bed  on  the  top
of  a  palace  exposed  to  the  rays  of  the  moon,  saw  a  couple  of
swans  crossing  through  the  air,  with  bodies  of  gleaming  gold,
looking  like  two  golden  lotuses  opened  in  the  water  of  the
heavenly  Ganges,2  and  attended  by  a  train  of  king  geese.
When  that  wonderful  pair  had  passed  from  his  eyes,  the  king
was  for  a  long  time  afflicted,  and  his  mind  was  full  of  regret
at  no  longer  enjoying  that  sight.  He  passed  that  night
without  sleeping,  and  next  morning  he  told  his  minister,
Sivabhuti,  what  he  had  seen,  and  said  to  him  :  "  So,  if  I
cannot  feast  my  eyes  on  those  golden  swans  to  my  heart's
content,  of  what  profit  to  me  is  my  kingdom  or  my  life  ?  "

When  the  king  said  this  to  his  minister,  Sivabhuti,  he
answered  him  :  "  Do  not  be  anxious  ;  there  is  a  means  of
bringing  about  what  you  desire ;  listen,  King,  I  will  tell  you
what  it  is.  Owing  to  the  various  influence  of  actions  in  a
previous  birth,  various  is  this  infinite  host  of  sentient  beings
produced  by  the  Creator  in  this  versatile  world.  This  world
is  really  fraught  with  woe,  but  owing  to  delusion  there  arises
in  creatures  the  fancy  that  happiness  is  to  be  found  in  it,
and  they  take  pleasure  in  house,  and  food,  and  drink,  and  so
become  attached  to  it.  And  Providence  has  appointed  that
different  kinds  of  food,  drink  and  dwellings  should  be  agree-
able to  different  creatures,  according  to  the  classes  to  which
they  respectively  belong.  So  have  made,  King,  a  great  lake
to  be  the  dwelling-place  of  these  swans,  covered  with  various
kinds  of  lotuses,  and  watched  by  guards,  where  they  will
be  free  from  molestation.  And  keep  always  scattering  on
the  bank  food  of  the  kind  that  birds  love,  in  order  that
water-birds  may  quickly  come  there  from  various  quarters.
Among  them  these  two  golden  swans  will  certainly  come  ;

1  I.e.  "moonlight."

2  There  is  probably  a  double  meaning.  The  clouds  are  compared  to  the
Ganges,  and  it  is  obvious  that  geese  would  cluster  round  lotuses.


THE  GOLDEN  SWANS  135

and  then  you  will  be  able  to  gaze  on  them  continually  :  do
not  be  despondent."

When  King  Brahmadatta's  minister  said  this  to  him,  he
had  that  great  lake  made  according  to  his  directions,  and  it
was  ready  in  a  moment.  The  lake  was  frequented  by  swans,
sdrasas  and  chakravdkas,1  and  after  a  time  that  couple  of
swans  came  there,  and  settled  down  on  a  clump  of  lotuses
in  it.  Then  the  guards  set  to  watch  the  lake  came  and  in-
formed the  king  of  the  fact,  and  he  went  down  to  the  lake
in  a  state  of  great  delight,  considering  that  his  object  had
been  accomplished.  And  he  beheld  those  golden  swans,  and
worshipped  them  from  a  distance,  and  ministered  to  their
comfort  by  scattering  for  them  grains  of  rice  dipped  in  milk.
And  the  king  took  so  much  interest  in  them  that  he  spent  his
whole  time  on  the  bank  of  that  lake  watching  those  swans,
with  their  bodies  of  pure  gold,  their  eyes  of  pearl,  their  beaks
and  feet  of  coral,  and  the  tips  of  their  wings  of  emerald,2
which  had  come  there  in  perfect  confidence.

Now,  one  day,  as  the  king  was  roaming  along  the  bank
of  the  lake,  he  saw  in  one  place  a  pious  offering  made  with
unfading  flowers.  And  he  said  to  the  guards  there  :  "  Who
made  this  offering  ?  "  Then  the  guards  of  the  lake  said  to
the  king  :  "  Every  day,  at  dawn,  noon  and  sunset,  these
golden  swans  bathe  in  the  lake,  and  make  these  offerings,
and  stand  absorbed  in  contemplation :  so  we  cannot  say,
King,  what  is  the  meaning  of  this  great  wonder."  When
the  king  heard  this  from  the  guards  he  said  to  himself :
"  Such  a  proceeding  is  quite  inconsistent  with  the  nature
of  swans ;  surely  there  must  be  a  reason  for  this.  So  I  will
perform  asceticism  until  I  find  out  who  these  swans  are."
Then  the  king  and  his  wife  and  his  minister  gave  up  food,

1  The  sarasa  is  a  large  crane ;  the  chakravdka  the  Brahmany  duck,  for
which  see  Vol.  VI,  p.  7ln3. — n.m.p.

2  I.e.  Tarkshyaratna.  I  have  no  idea  what  the  jewel  is.  B.  and  R.  give  ein
bestimmter  dunkelfarbiger  Edelstein.  In  Jataka  No.  136  there  is  a  golden  goose
who  had  been  a  Brahman.  He  gives  his  feathers  to  his  daughters  to  sell,
but  his  wife  pulls  out  all  the  feathers  at  once ;  they  become  like  the  feathers
of  a  baka.  Afterwards  they  all  grow  white.  See  Rhys  Davids'  Buddhist  Birth
Stories,  p.  ix,  note.  In  si.  4,  1,  I  read  tadrasad  for  tatra  sada,  with  MSS.
Nos.  1882  and  2166;  No.  3003  has  tatrasad.


136  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

and  remained  performing  penance  and  absorbed  in  meditation
on  Siva.  And  after  the  king  had  fasted  for  twelve  days
the  two  heavenly  swans  came  to  him,  and  said  to  him  in  a
dream,  with  articulate  voice  :  "  Rise  up,  King ;  to-morrow
we  will  tell  you  and  your  wife  and  minister,  after  you  have
broken  your  fast,  the  whole  truth  of  the  matter  in  private."
When  the  swans  had  said  this  they  disappeared,  and  next
morning  the  king  and  his  wife  and  his  minister,  as  soon  as
they  awoke,  rose  up,  and  broke  their  fast.  And  after  they  had
eaten,  the  two  swans  came  to  them,  as  they  were  sitting  in
a  pleasure  pavilion  near  the  water.  The  king  received  them
with  respect,  and  said  to  them  :  "  Tell  me  who  you  are."
Then  they  proceeded  to  tell  him  their  history.

170a.  How  Pdrvati  condemned  her  Five  Attendants  to  be
reborn  on  Earth

There  is  a  monarch  of  mountains,  famous  on  the  earth
under  the  name  of  Mandara,  in  whose  groves  of  gleaming
jewels  all  the  gods  roam,  on  whose  table-lands,  watered
with  nectar  from  the  churned  sea  of  milk,  are  to  be  found
flowers,  fruits,  roots  and  water  that  are  antidotes  to  old  age
and  death.  Its  highest  peaks,  composed  of  various  precious
stones,  form  the  pleasure  grounds  of  Siva,  and  he  loves  it
more  than  Mount  Kailasa.

There,  one  day,  that  god  left  Parvati,  after  he  had  been
diverting  himself  with  her,  and  disappeared,  to  execute  some
business  for  the  gods.  Then  the  goddess,  afflicted  by  his
absence,  roamed  in  the  various  places  where  he  loved  to
amuse  himself,  and  the  other  gods  did  their  best  to  console
her.

And  one  day  the  goddess  was  much  troubled  by  the  ad-
vent of  spring,  and  she  was  sitting  surrounded  by  the  Ganas
at  the  foot  of  a  tree,  thinking  about  her  beloved,  when  a
noble  Gana,  named  Manipushpesvara,  looked  lovingly  at
a  young  maiden,  the  daughter  of  Jaya,  called  Chandralekha,
who  was  waving  a  chowrie  over  the  goddess.  He  was  a
match  for  her  in  youth  and  beauty,  and  she  met  his  glance
with  a  responsive  look  of  love,  as  he  stood  by  her  side.     Two


THE  CURSES  OF  THE  GODDESS  137

other  Ganas,  named  Pingesvara  and  Guhesvara,  when  they
saw  that,  interchanged  glances,  and  a  smile  passed  over  their
faces.  And  when  the  goddess  saw  them  smiling  she  was
angry  in  her  heart,  and  she  cast  her  eyes  hither  and  thither,
to  see  what  they  were  laughing  at  in  this  unseemly  manner.
And  then  she  saw  that  Chandralekha  and  Manipushpesvara
were  looking  lovingly  in  one  another's  faces.

Then  the  goddess,  who  was  quite  distracted  with  the
sorrow  of  separation,  was  angry,  and  said  :  "  These  young
people  have  done  well  to  look  lovingly  *  at  one  another  in  the
absence  of  the  god,  and  these  two  mirthful  people  have  done
well  to  laugh  when  they  saw  their  glances  :  so  let  this  lover
and  maiden,  who  are  blinded  with  passion,  fall  into  a  human
birth  ;  and  there  the  disrespectful  pair  shall  be  man  and  wife ;
but  these  unseasonable  laughers  shall  endure  many  miseries
on  the  earth ;  they  shall  be  first  poor  Brahmans,  and  then 2
Brahman-Rakshasas,  and  then  Pisachas,  and  after  that
Chandalas,  and  then  robbers,  and  then  bob-tailed  dogs,  and
then  they  shall  be  various  kinds  of  birds — shall  these  Ganas
who  offended  by  laughing ;  for  their  minds  were  unclouded
when  they  were  guilty  of  this  disrespectful  conduct."

When  the  goddess  had  uttered  this  command,  a  Gana  of
the  name  of  Dhurjata  said  :  "  Goddess,  this  is  very  unjust ;
these  excellent  Ganas  do  not  deserve  so  severe  a  curse,  for  a
very  small  offence."  When  the  goddess  heard  that  she  said
in  her  wrath  to  Dhurjata  also  :  "  Fall  thou  also,  great  sir,
that  knowest  not  thy  place,  into  a  mortal  womb."  When
the  goddess  had  inflicted  these  tremendous  curses,  the  female
warder,  Jaya,  the  mother  of  Chandralekha,  clung  to  her  feet,
and  addressed  this  petition  to  her :  "  Withdraw  thy  anger,
goddess ;  appoint  an  end  to  the  curse  of  this  daughter  of
mine,  and  of  these  thy  own  servants,  that  have  through
ignorance  committed  sin."  When  Parvati  had  been  thus
entreated  by  her  warder,  Jaya,  she  said  :  "  When  all  these,
owing  to  their  having  obtained  insight,  shall  in  course  of

1  It  may  possibly  mean  "acted  a  love  drama."  I  cannot  find  the  sense
I  have  assigned  to  it  in  any  dictionary.

2  Before  anu  we  should,  with  the  India  Office  MSS.,  insert  tad.  Monier
Williams  explains  Brahman- Rakshasa  as  a  "fiend  of  the  Brahmanical  class."


138  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

time  meet  together,  they  shall,  after  visiting  Siva,  the  lord
of  magic  powers,  in  the  place  l  where  Brahma  and  the  other
gods  performed  asceticism,  return  to  our  court,  having  been
freed  from  their  curse.  And  this  Chandralekha,  and  her
beloved,  and  that  Dhurjata  shall,  all  three  of  them,  be  happy
in  their  lives  as  mortals,  but  these  two  shall  be  miserable."

When  the  goddess  had  said  this,  she  ceased ;  and  at  that
very  moment  the  Asura  Andhaka  came  there,  having  heard
of  the  absence  of  Siva.  The  presumptuous  Asura  hoped  to
win  the  goddess,  but  having  been  reproached  by  her  at-
tendants he  departed ;  but  he  was  slain  on  that  account  by
the  god,  who  discovered  the  reason  of  his  coming,  and  pursued
him.2  Then  Siva  returned  home,  having  accomplished  his
object,  and  Parvati,  delighted,  told  him  of  the  coming  of
Andhaka,  and  the  god  said  to  her :  "I  have  to-day  slain  a
former  mind-born  son  of  thine,  named  Andhaka,  and  he  shall
now  be  a  Bhringin  here,  as  nothing  remains  of  him  but  skin
and  bone."  When  Siva  had  said  this  he  remained  there,
diverting  himself  with  the  goddess,  and  Manipushpesvara
and  the  other  five  descended  to  earth.


170.  Story  of  King  Brahmadatta  and  the  Swans

"  Now,  King,  hear  the  long  and  strange  story  of  these
two,  Pingesvara  and  Guhesvara.

170a.  How  Parvati  condemned  her  Five  Attendants  to  be

reborn  on  Earth

There  is  on  this  earth  a  royal  grant  to  Brahmans,  named
Yajnasthala.  In  it  there  lived  a  rich 3  and  virtuous  Brah-
man named  Yajnasoma.  In  his  middle  age  he  had  two  sons
born  to  him  ;  the  name  of  the  elder  was  Harisoma  and  of  the

1  It  is  worth  while  remarking  that  all  the  India  Office  MSS.  read  kshetram,
which  would  make  Siddhisvara  the  name  of  a  place  here.

2  All  the  India  Office  MSS.  read  gatva  fox  jnatva.  I  have  adopted  this ;
and  I  take  tatkdranarp.  adverbially.     MS.  No.  1882  has  gatovijnata.

3  It  appears  from  the  India  Office  MSS.  that  dhanavdn  should  be  inserted
after  brahmano.  In  si.  82  the  India  Office  MSS.  read  chitrayatam,  which  I  have
adopted.


THE  TWO  BROTHERS  139

younger  Devasoma.  They  passed  through  the  age  of  child-
hood, and  were  invested  with  the  sacred  thread,1  and  then
the  Brahman,  their  father,  lost  his  wealth,  and  he  and  his
wife  died.

Then  those  two  wretched  sons,  bereaved  of  their  father,
and  without  subsistence,  having  had  their  grant  taken  from
them  by  their  relations,  said  to  one  another  :  "  We  are  now
reduced  to  living  on  alms,  but  we  get  no  alms  here.  So  we
had  better  go  to  the  house  of  our  maternal  grandfather,
though  it  is  far  off.  Though  we  have  come  down  in  the
world,  who  on  earth  would  welcome  us,  if  we  arrive  of  our
own  accord  ?  Nevertheless,  let  us  go.  What  else  indeed  are
we  to  do,  for  we  have  no  other  resource  ?  "

After  deliberating  to  this  effect  they  went,  begging  their
way,  by  slow  stages,  to  that  royal  grant,  where  the  house  of
their  grandfather  was.  There  the  unfortunate  young  men
found  out,  by  questioning  people,  that  their  grandfather,
whose  name  was  Somadeva,  was  dead,  and  his  wife  also.

Then,  begrimed  with  dust,  they  entered  despairing  the
house  of  their  maternal  uncles,  named  Yajnadeva  and  Kratu-
deva.  There  those  good  Brahmans  welcomed  them  kindly,
and  gave  them  food  and  clothing,  and  they  remained  in
study.  But  in  course  of  time  the  wealth  of  their  maternal
uncles  diminished,  and  they  could  keep  no  servants,  and
then  they  came  and  said  to  those  nephews,  in  the  most  affec-
tionate way  :  "  Dear  boys,  we  can  no  longer  afford  to  keep
a  man  to  look  after  our  cattle,  as  we  have  become  poor,  so
do  you  look  after  our  cattle  for  us."  When  Harisoma  and
Devasoma's  uncles  said  this  to  them  their  throats  were
full  of  tears,  but  they  agreed  to  their  proposal.  Then  they
took  the  cattle  to  the  forest  every  day,  and  looked  after  them
there,  and  at  evening  they  returned  home  with  them,  wearied
out.

Then,  as  they  went  on  looking  after  the  cattle,  owing  to
their  falling  asleep  in  the  day  some  animals  were  stolen,  and
others  were  eaten  by  tigers.  That  made  their  uncles  very
unhappy  ;  and  one  day  a  cow  and  goat  intended  for  sacrifice,
belonging  to  their  uncles,  both  disappeared  somewhere  or

1  For  a  note  on  the  sacred  thread  see  Vol.  VII,  pp.  26-28. — n.m.p.


140  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

other.  Terrified  at  that,  they  took  the  other  animals  home
before  the  right  time,  and,  running  off  in  search  of  the  two
that  were  missing,  they  entered  a  distant  forest.  There  they
saw  their  goat  half  eaten  by  a  tiger,  and  after  lamenting,
being  quite  despondent,  they  said  :  "  Our  uncles  were  keep-
ing this  goat  for  a  sacrifice,  and  now  that  it  is  destroyed
their  anger  will  be  something  tremendous.  So  let  us  dress
its  flesh  with  fire,  and  eat  enough  of  it  to  put  an  end  of  our
hunger,  and  then  let  us  take  the  rest,  and  go  off  somewhere
and  support  ourselves  by  begging."

After  these  reflections  they  proceeded  to  roast  the  goat,
and  while  they  were  so  engaged  their  two  uncles  arrived,
who  had  been  running  after  them,  and  saw  them  cooking
TheMeta-  *^e  goat.  When  they  saw  their  uncles  in  the
morphoses  of  distance  they  were  terrified,  and  they  rose  up  in
Pingesvara  and  great  trepidation,  and  fled  from  the  spot.     And

Guhehara  .-%  .  i        .       ,,     .  ,  -,  -,  1

those  two  uncles  m  their  wrath  pronounced  x  on
them  the  following  curse  :  "  Since,  in  your  longing  for  flesh,
you  have  done  a  deed  worthy  of  Rakshasas,  you  shall  become
flesh-eating  Brahman-Rakshasas."  And  immediately  those
two  young  Brahmans  became  Brahman-Rakshasas,  having
mouths  formidable  with  tusks,  flaming  hair  and  insatiable
hunger ;  and  they  wandered  about  in  the  forest,  catching
animals  and  eating  them.

But  one  day  they  rushed  upon  an  ascetic,  who  possessed
supernatural  power,  to  slay  him,  and  he  in  self-defence  cursed
them,  and  they  became  Pisachas.  And  in  their  condition  as
Pisachas  they  were  carrying  off  the  cow  of  a  Brahman,  to
kill  it,  but  they  were  overpowered  by  his  spells,  and  reduced
by  his  curse  to  the  condition  of  Chandalas.

One  day,  as  they  were  roaming  about  in  their  condition
as  Chandalas,  bow  in  hand,  tormented  with  hunger,  they
reached,  in  their  search  for  food,  a  village  of  bandits.  The
warders  of  the  village,  supposing  them  to  be  thieves,  arrested
them  both,  as  soon  as  they  saw  them,  and  cut  off  their  ears
and  noses.  And  they  bound  them,  and  beat  them  with
sticks,  and  brought  them  in  this  condition  before  the  chiefs
of  the  bandits.     There  they  were  questioned  by  the  chiefs,

1  The  three  India  Office  MSS.  have  viteratuh.


EVIL  OMENS  DISREGARDED  141

and  being  bewildered  with  fear,  and  tormented  with  hunger
and  pain,1  they  related  their  history  to  them.  Then  the
chiefs  of  the  gang,  moved  by  pity,  set  them  at  liberty,  and
said  to  them  :  "  Remain  here  and  take  food ;  do  not  be
terrified.  You  have  arrived  here  on  the  eighth  day  of  the
month,  the  day  on  which  we  worship  Karttikeya,  and  so  you
are  our  guests,  and  should  have  a  share  in  our  feast." 2  When
the  bandits  had  said  this  they  worshipped  the  goddess  Durga,
and  made  the  two  Chandalas  eat  in  their  presence,3  and
having,  as  it  happened,  taken  a  fancy  to  them,  they  would
not  let  them  out  of  their  sight.  Then  they  lived  with  those
bandits  by  robbing,  and,  thanks  to  their  courage,  became
eventually  the  chiefs  of  the  gang.

And  one  night  those  chiefs  marched  with  their  followers
to  plunder  a  large  town,  a  favourite  abode  of  Siva,  which
some  of  their  spies  had  selected  for  attack.  Though  they
saw  an  evil  omen  they  did  not  turn  back,  and  they  reached
and  plundered  the  whole  city  and  the  temple  of  the  god.
Then  the  inhabitants  cried  to  the  god  for  protection,  and
Siva  in  his  wrath  bewildered  the  bandits  by  making  them
blind.  And  the  citizens  suddenly  perceiving  that,  and  think-
ing that  it  was  due  to  the  favour  of  Siva,  assembled,  and
smote  those  bandits  with  sticks  and  stones.  And  Ganas,  mov-
ing about  invisibly,  flung  some  of  the  bandits  into  ravines,
and  dashed  others  to  pieces  against  the  ground.

And  the  people,  seeing  the  two  leaders,  were  about  to  put
them  to  death,  but  they  immediately  turned  into  bob-tailed
dogs.  And  in  this  transformation  they  suddenly  remembered
their  former  birth,  and  danced  in  front  of  Siva,  and  fled  to
him  for  protection.  When  the  citizens,  Brahmans,  mer-
chants, and  all,  saw  that,  they  were  delighted  at  being  free
from  fear  of  robbers,  and  went  laughing  to  their  houses.  And
then  the  delusion  that  had  possessed  those  two  beings,  now
turned  into  dogs,  disappeared,  and  they  awoke  to   reality,

1  Dr  Kern  would  read  kshudduhkavaptasarnklesau.  I  find  that  all  the  three
India  Office  MSS.  confirm  this  conjecture,  so  I  have  adopted  it.

2  Cf.  Virgil's  JEneid,  viii,  172  et  seq.

3  All  the  three  India  Office  MSS.  and  the  Sanskrit  College  MS.  read
svagra,  which  I  have  endeavoured  to  translate.  Perhaps  it  may  mean  M  before
they  took  any  food  themselves."


142  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

and  in  order  to  put  an  end  to  their  curse  they  fasted,  and
appealed  to  Siva  by  severe  asceticism.  And  the  next  morn-
ing the  citizens,  making  high  festival,  and  worshipping  Siva,
beheld  those  dogs  absorbed  in  contemplation,  and  though
they  offered  them  food  the  creatures  would  not  touch  it.

And  the  two  dogs  remained  in  this  state  for  several  days,
beheld  by  all  the  world,  and  then  Siva's  Ganas  preferred
this  prayer  to  him  :  "  O  god,  these  two  Ganas,  Pingesvara
and  Guhesvara,  who  were  cursed  by  the  goddess,  have  been
afflicted  for  a  long  time,  so  take  pity  on  them."  When  the
holy  god  heard  that,  he  said  :  "  Let  these  two  Ganas  be
delivered  from  their  canine  condition  and  become  crows  !  "
Then  they  became  crows,  and  broke  their  fast  upon  the  rice
of  the  offering,  and  lived  happily,  remembering  their  former
state,  exclusively  devoted  to  Siva.

After  some  time,  Siva  having  been  satisfied  by  their  de-
votion to  him,  they  became  by  his  command  first  vultures,
and  then  peacocks ;  then  those  noble  Ganas,  in  course  of  time,
became  swans  ;  and  in  that  condition  also  they  strove  with
the  utmost  devotion  to  propitiate  Siva.  And  at  last  they
gained  the  favour  of  that  god  by  bathing  in  sacred  waters,
by  performing  vows,  by  meditations  and  acts  of  worship,  and
they  became  all  composed  of  gold  and  jewels,  and  attained
supernatural  insight.

170.  Story  of  King  Brahmadatta  and  the  Swans

"  Know,  that  we  are  those  very  two,  Pingesvara  and
Guhesvara,  who,  by  the  curse  of  Parvati,  endured  a  succes-
sion of  woes,  and  have  now  become  swans.  But  the  Gana
Manipushpesvara,  who  was  in  love  with  the  daughter  of  Jay  a,
and  was  cursed  by  the  goddess,  has  become  a  king  upon  earth,
even  yourself,  Brahmadatta.  And  that  daughter  of  Java  has
been  born  as  this  lady,  your  wife,  Somaprabha ;  and  that
Dhurjata  has  been  born  as  this  your  minister,  Sivabhuti.  And
therefore  we,  having  attained  insight,  and  remembering  the  end
of  the  curse  appointed  by  Parvati,  appeared  to  you  at  night.
By  means  of  that  artifice  we  have  all  been  reunited  here  to-
day ;   and  we  will  bestow  on  you  the  perfection  of  insight.


SIDDHISVARA  143

"  Come,  let  us  go  to  that  holy  place  of  Siva  on  the  Tri-
dasa  mountain,  rightly  named  Siddhisvara,1  where  the  gods
performed  asceticism  in  order  to  bring  about  the  destruction
of  the  Asura  Vidyuddhvaja.  And  they  slew  that  Asura  in
fight,  with  the  help  of  Muktaphalaketu,  the  head  of  all  the
Vidyadhara  princes,  who  had  been  obtained  by  the  favour
of  Siva.  And  that  Muktaphalaketu,  having  passed  through
the  state  of  humanity  brought  upon  him  by  a  curse,  obtained
reunion  with  Padmavati  by  the  favour  of  the  same  god.  Let
us  go  to  that  holy  place,  which  has  such  splendid  associations
connected  with  it,  and  there  propitiate  Siva,  and  then  we
will  return  to  our  own  home,  for  such  was  the  end  of  the
curse  appointed  to  all  of  us  by  the  goddess,  to  take  place  at
the  same  time."  When  the  two  heavenly  swans  said  this
to  King  Brahmadatta,  he  was  at  once  excited  with  curiosity  to
hear  the  tale  of  Muktaphalaketu.

1  Here  the  name  of  a  place  sacred  to  Siva.  Before  we  have  had  it  as  the
god's  title.    See  Bohtlingk  and  Roth,  s.v.    It  means  "lord  of  magic  powers."


CHAPTER  CXV

170.  Story  of  King  Brahmadatta  and  the  Swans

THEN  King  Brahmadatta  said  to  those  celestial
swans  :  "  How  did  Muktaphalaketu  kill  that  Vid-
yuddhvaja  ?  And  how  did  he  pass  through  the
state  of  humanity  inflicted  on  him  by  a  curse,  and  regain
Padmavati  ?  Tell  me  this  first,  and  afterwards  you  shall
carry  out  your  intentions."  When  those  *  birds  heard  this,
they  began  to  relate  the  story  of  Muktaphalaketu  as  follows :

170b.  Muktaphalaketu  and  Padmavati

Once  on  a  time  there  was  a  king  of  the  Daityas  named
Vidyutprabha,  hard  for  gods  to  conquer.  He,  desiring  a  son,
went  to  the  bank  of  the  Ganges,  and  with  his  wife  performed
asceticism  for  a  hundred  years  to  propitiate  Brahma.  And
by  the  favour  of  Brahma,  who  was  pleased  with  his  as-
ceticism, that  enemy  of  the  gods  obtained  a  son  named
Vidyuddhvaja,  who  was  invulnerable  at  their  hands.

That  son  of  the  king  of  the  Daityas,  even  when  a  child,
was  of  great  valour ;  and  one  day,  seeing  that  their  town  was
guarded  on  all  sides  by  troops,  he  said  to  one  of  his  com-
panions :  "  Tell  me,  my  friend,  what  have  we  to  be  afraid  of,
that  this  town  is  guarded  on  all  sides  by  troops  ?  "  Then  his
companion  said  to  him  :  "  We  have  an  adversary  in  Indra,
the  king  of  the  gods  ;  and  it  is  on  his  account  that  this
system  of  guarding  the  town  is  kept  up.  Ten  hundred
thousand  elephants,  and  fourteen  hundred  thousand  chariots,
and  thirty  thousand  horsemen,  and  a  hundred  millions  of
footmen  guard  the  city  in  turn  for  one  watch  of  the  night,
and  the  turn  of  guarding  comes  round  for  every  division  in
seven  years."

1  It  appears  from  the  India  Office  MSS.  that  tav  should  be  inserted  after
evam.

144


THE  WEAPONS  OF  BRAHMA  145

When  Vidyuddhvaja  heard  this,  he  said  :  "  Out  on  such  a
throne,  that  is  guarded  by  the  arms  of  others,  and  not  by  its
own  might !  However,  I  will  perform  such  severe  asceticism
as  will  enable  me  to  conquer  my  enemy  with  my  own  arm,
and  put  an  end  to  all  this  insolence  of  his."  When  Vidyud-
dhvaja had  said  this,  he  put  aside  that  companion  of  his,  who
tried  to  prevent  him,  and  without  telling  his  parents  went  to
the  forest  to  perform  penance.

But  his  parents  heard  of  it,  and  in  their  affection  for  their
child  they  followed  him,  and  said  to  him  :  "  Do  not  act
rashly,  son  ;  severe  asceticism  ill  befits  a  child  like  you.  Our
throne  has  been  victorious  over  its  enemies ;  is  there  one
more  powerful  in  the  whole  world  ?  What  do  you  desire  to
get  by  withering  yourself  in  vain  ?  Why  do  you  afflict  us  ?  "
When  Vidyuddhvaja's  parents  said  this  to  him,  he  answered
them  :  "I  will  acquire,  even  in  my  childhood,  heavenly  arms
by  the  force  of  asceticism  :  as  for  our  empire  over  the  world
being  unopposed  of  enemies,  do  I  not  know  so  much  from  the
fact  that  our  city  is  guarded  by  troops  ever  ready  in  their
harness  ?  "

When  the  Asura  Vidyuddhvaja,  firm  in  his  resolution,
had  said  so  much  to  his  parents,  and  had  sent  them  away,
he  performed  asceticism  to  win  over  Brahma.  He  continued
for  a  period  of  three  hundred  years  living  on  fruits  only,  and
successively  for  similar  periods  living  on  water,  air,  and
nothing  at  all.  Then  Brahma,  seeing  that  his  asceticism
was  becoming  capable  of  upsetting  the  system  of  the  world,
came  to  him,  and  at  his  request  gave  him  the  weapons  of
Brahma.  He  said  :  "  This  weapon  of  Brahma  cannot  be
repelled  by  any  weapon  except  the  weapon  of  Pasupati
Rudra,  which  is  unattainable  by  me.  So,  if  you  desire  vic-
tory, you  must  not  employ  it  unseasonably."  WThen  Brahma
had  said  this,  he  went  away,  and  that  Daitya  went  home.

Then  Vidyuddhvaja  marched  out  to  conquer  his  enemies
with  his  father,  and  with  all  his  forces,  who  came  together  to
that  great  feast  of  war.  Indra,  the  ruler  of  the  gods'  world,
heard  of  his  coming,  and  kept  guard  in  heaven,  and  when
he  drew  near  marched  out  to  meet  him,  eager  for  battle,
accompanied   by  his  friend   Chandraketu,  the  king  of  the

VOL.   VIII.  K


146  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

Vidyadharas,  and  by  the  supreme  lord  of  the  Gandharvas,
named  Padmasekhara.  Then  Vidyuddhvaja  appeared,  hiding
the  heaven  with  his  forces,  and  Rudra  and  others  came  there
to  behold  that  battle.  Then  there  took  place  between  those
two  armies  a  battle,  which  was  involved  in  darkness,1  by  the
sun's  being  eclipsed  with  the  clashing  together  of  missiles;
and  the  sea  of  war  swelled  high,  lashed  by  the  wind  of  wrath,
with  hundreds  of  chariots  for  inflowing  streams,  and  rolling
horses  and  elephants  for  marine  monsters.

Then  single  combats  took  place  between  the  gods  and
Asuras,  and  Vidyutprabha,  the  father  of  Vidyuddhvaja,
rushed  in  wrath  upon  Indra.  Indra  found  himself  being
gradually  worsted  by  the  Daitya  in  the  interchange  of  mis-
siles ;  so  he  flung  his  thunderbolt  at  him.  And  then  that
Daitya,  smitten  by  the  thunderbolt,  fell  dead.  And  that
enraged  Vidyuddhvaja  so  that  he  attacked  Indra.  And
though  his  life  was  not  in  danger,  he  began  by  discharging  at
him  the  weapon  of  Brahma  ;  and  other  great  Asuras  struck
at  him  with  other  weapons.  Then  Indra  called  to  mind  the
weapon  of  Pasupati,  presided  over  by  Siva  himself,  which
immediately  presented  itself  in  front  of  him  ;  he  worshipped
it,  and  discharged  it  among  his  foes.  That  weapon,  which
was  of  the  nature  of  a  destroying  fire,  consumed  the  army
of  the  Asuras  ;  but  Vidyuddhvaja,  being  a  child,  only  fell
senseless  when  smitten  by  it,  for  that  weapon  does  not  harm
children,  old  men  or  fugitives.  Then  all  the  gods  returned
home  victorious.

And  Vidyuddhvaja,  for  his  part,  who  had  fallen  senseless,
recovered  his  senses  after  a  very  long  time,  and  fled  weeping,
and  then  said  to  the  rest  of  his  soldiers,  who  had  assembled :
"  In  spite  of  my  having  acquired  the  weapon  of  Brahma,  we
were  not  victorious  to-day,  though  victory  was  in  our  grasp ;
on  the  contrary  we  were  defeated.  So  I  will  go  and  attack
Indra,  and  lose  my  life  in  battle.  Now  that  my  father  is
slain,  I  shall  not  be  able  to  return  to  my  own  city."  When
he  said  this,  an  old  minister  of  his  father's  said  to  him  :  "  The
weapon  of  Brahma,  discharged  unseasonably,  is  too  languid

1  I  have  adopted  the  reading  andhakaritam,  which  I  find  in  the  three  India
Office  MSS.


THE  BOON  GRANTED


147


to  contend  with  other  weapons  discharged,  for  that  great
weapon  was  to-day  overcome  by  the  weapon  of  Siva,  which
will  not  brook  the  presence  of  others.  So  you  ought  not
unseasonably  to  challenge  your  victorious  enemy,  for  in  this
way  you  will  strengthen  him  and  destroy  yourself.  The  calm
and  resolute  man  preserves  his  own  life,  and  in  due  time
regains  might,  and  takes  revenge  on  his  enemy,  and  so  wins
a  reputation  esteemed  by  the  whole  world."

When  that  old  minister  said  this  to  Vidyuddhvaja,  he  said
to  him  :  "  Then  go  you  and  take  care  of  my  kingdom,  but
I  will  go  and  propitiate  that  supreme  lord  Siva."

When  he  had  said  this,  he  dismissed  his  followers,  though
they  were  loth  to  leave  him,  and  he  went  with  five  young
Daityas,  companions  of  equal  age,  and  performed  asceticism
on  the  bank  of  the  Ganges,  at  the  foot  of  Mount  Kailasa.
During  the  summer  he  stood  in  the  midst  of  five  fires,  and
during  the  winter  in  the  water,  meditating  on  Siva ;  and  for
a  thousand  years  he  lived  on  fruits  only.  For  a  second
thousand  years  he  ate  only  roots,  for  a  third  he  subsisted  on
water,  for  a  fourth  on  air,  and  during  the  fifth  he  took  no
food  at  all.1

Brahma  once  more  came  to  grant  him  a  boon,  but  he
did  not  show  him  any  respect :  on  the  contrary  he  said  :
"Depart !  I  have  tested  the  efficiency  of  thy  boon."  And  he
remained  fasting  for  another  period  of  equal  duration,  and
then  a  great  volume  of  smoke  rose  up  from  his  head,  and
Siva  manifested  himself  to  him,  and  said  to  him  :  "  Choose
a  boon."  When  thus  addressed,  that  Daitya  said  to  him  :
"  May  I,  Lord,  by  thy  favour  slay  Indra  in  fight  ?  "  The
god  answered  :  "  Rise  up  !  There  is  no  distinction  between
the  slain  2  and  the  conquered  ;  so  thou  shalt  conquer  Indra
and  dwell  in  his  heaven."

When  the  god  had  said  this,  he  disappeared,  and  Vidyud-
dhvaja, considering  that  the  wish  of  his  heart  was  attained,


1  For  a  note  on  the  austerities  of  Hindu  ascetics  see  Vol.  I,  p.  79ft1.

— N.M.P.

2  I  read  nihatasya,  which  I  find  supported  by  two  of  the  India  Office  MSS.
No.  1882  has  nihitasya,  No.  21 66  nihatasya,  and  No.  3003  has  anitahasya.  The
Sanskrit  College  MS.  has  tihatasya.


148  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

broke  his  fast,  and  went  to  his  city.  There  he  was  welcomed
by  the  citizens,  and  met  by  that  minister  of  his  father's  who
had  endured  suffering  for  his  sake,  and  who  now  made  great
rejoicing.  He  then  summoned  the  armies  of  the  Asuras,  and
made  preparation  for  battle,  and  sent  an  ambassador  to
Indra  to  warn  him  to  hold  himself  in  readiness  for  fight.  And
he  marched  out,  hiding  with  his  banners  the  sky,  which  he
clove  with  the  thunderous  roar  of  his  host,  and  so  he  seemed
to  be  fulfilling  the  wish  *  of  the  inhabitants  of  heaven.  And
Indra,  for  his  part,  knowing  that  he  had  returned  from  win-
ning a  boon,  was  troubled,  but,  after  taking  counsel  with  the
adviser  of  the  gods,2  he  summoned  his  forces.

Then  Vidyuddhvaja  arrived,  and  there  took  place  between
those  two  armies  a  great  battle,  in  which  it  was  difficult  to
distinguish  between  friend  and  foe.  Those  Daityas,  who
were  headed  by  Subahu,  fought  with  the  wind-gods,  and
Pingaksha  and  his  followers  with  the  gods  of  wealth,  Maha-
maya  and  his  forces  with  the  gods  of  fire,  and  Ayahkaya  and
his  hosts  with  the  sun-gods,  and  Akampana  and  his  warriors
with  the  Vidyadharas,  and  the  rest  with  the  Gandharvas  and
their  allies.  So  a  great  battle  continued  between  them  for
twenty  days,  and  on  the  twenty-first  day  the  gods  were
routed  in  fight  by  the  Asuras.

And  when  routed  they  fled,  and  entered  heaven ;  and
then  Indra  himself  issued,  mounted  on  Airavana.  And  the
forces  of  the  gods  rallied  round  him,  and  marched  out  again,,
with  the  leaders  of  the  Vidyadharas,  headed  by  Chandraketu..
Then  a  desperate  fight  took  place,  and  Asuras  and  gods  3
were  being  slain  in  great  numbers  when  Vidyuddhvaja
attacked  Indra,  to  revenge  the  slaughter  of  his  father.  The
king  of  the  gods  cleft  over  and  over  again  the  bow  of  that
chief  of  the  Asuras,  who  kept  repelling  his  shafts  with  answer-
ing shafts.  Then  Vidyuddhvaja,  elated  with  the  boon  of
Siva,  seized  his  mace,  and  rushed  furiously  on  Indra.     He

1  Perhaps  there  is  a  pun  here.  The  word  ishta  may  also  mean  "  sacrifice,"
"  sacred  rite."

2  I.e.  Brihaspati.

3  The  word  for  god  here  is  amara,  literally  "immortal."  This  may  remind
the  classical  reader  of  the  passage  in  Birds,  1224,  where  Iris  says,  "aAA.'  dOdvaros;
el/A,"  and  Peisthetaerus  imperturbably  replies,  " d\\'  o/xws  av  d-n-tdaves."


THE  DEFEAT  OF  INDRA  149

leapt  up,  planting  his  feet  on  the  tusks  of  Airavana,  and
climbed  up  on  his  forehead  and  killed  his  driver.  And  he
gave  the  king  of  the  gods  a  blow  with  his  mace,  and  he  quickly
returned  it  with  a  similar  weapon.  But  when  Vidyuddhvaja
struck  him  a  second  time  with  his  mace,  Indra  fell  senseless
on  to  the  chariot  of  the  wind-god.  And  the  wind-god
carried  him  away  in  his  chariot  out  of  the  fight  with  the
speed  of  thought ;  and  Vidyuddhvaja,  who  sprang  after  him,1
fell  on  the  ground.

At  that  moment  a  voice  came  from  the  air  :  "  This  is  an
evil  day,  so  carry  Indra  quickly  out  of  the  fight."  Then  the
wind-god  carried  off  Indra  at  the  utmost  speed  of  his  chariot,
and  Vidyuddhvaja  pursued  them,  mounted  on  his ;  and  in
the  meanwhile  Airavana,  infuriated  and  unrestrained  by  the
driver's  hook,  ran  after  Indra,  trampling  and  scattering  the
forces.  And  the  army  of  the  gods  left  the  field  of  battle  and
followed  Indra ;  and  Brihaspati  carried  off  his  wife  Sachi,  who
was  much  alarmed,  to  the  heaven  of  Brahma.  Then  Vidyud-
dhvaja, having  gained  the  victory,  and  having  found  Amaravati
empty,  entered  it,  accompanied  by  his  shouting  troops.

And  Indra,  having  recovered  consciousness,  and  seeing
that  it  was  an  evil  time,  entered  that  heaven  of  Brahma
with  all  the  gods.  And  Brahma  comforted  him,  saying:  "Do
not  grieve :  at  present  this  boon  of  Siva  is  predominant ;  but
you  will  recover  your  position."  And  he  gave  him,  to  dwell
in,  a  place  of  his  own,  furnished  with  all  delights,  named
Samadhisthala,  situated  in  a  region  of  the  world  of  Brahma.
There  the  king  of  the  gods  dwelt,  accompanied  by  Sachi  and
Airavana ;  and  by  his  orders  the  Vidyadhara  kings  went  to  the
heaven  of  the  wind-god.  And  the  lords  of  the  Gandharvas
went  to  the  inviolable  world  of  the  moon ;  and  others  went
to  other  worlds,  abandoning  severally  their  own  dwellings.
And  Vidyuddhvaja,  having  taken  possession  of  the  territory
of  the  gods  with  beat  of  drum,  enjoyed  sway  over  heaven2
as  an  unlimited  monarch.

1  I  read  dattajhampo,  which  I  find  in  MS.  No.  3003.  The  other  two  have
dattajampo.     The  Sanskrit  College  MS.  has  dattajhampo.

2  Cf.  Ovid's  Metamorphoses,  v,  321-331,  for  the  flight  of  the  inhabitants
of  the  Grecian  heaven  from  the  giant  Typhosus.


150  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

At  this  point  of  the  story,  Chandraketu,  the  Vidyadhara
king,  having  remained  long  in  the  world  of  the  wind-god,
said  to  himself :  "  How  long  am  I  to  remain  here,  fallen
from  my  high  rank  ?  The  asceticism  of  my  enemy  Vidyud-
dhvaja  has  not  even  now  spent  its  force ;  but  I  have  heard
that  my  friend  Padmasekhara,  the  king  of  the  Gandharvas,
has  gone  from  the  world  of  the  moon  to  the  city  of  Siva  to
perform  asceticism.  I  do  not  know  as  yet  whether  Siva  has
bestowed  a  boon  on  him  or  not ;  when  I  have  discovered
that,  I  shall  know  what  I  myself  ought  to  do."

While  he  was  going  through  these  reflections,  his  friend,
the  king  of  the  Gandharvas,  came  towards  him,  having
obtained  a  boon.  That  king  of  the  Gandharvas,  having
been  welcomed  with  an  embrace  by  Chandraketu,  and  ques-
tioned,1 told  him  his  story  :  "I  went  to  the  city  of  Siva  and
propitiated  Siva  with  asceticism ;  and  he  said  to  me :  'Go!
thou  shalt  have  a  noble  son  ;  and  thou  shalt  recover  thy
kingdom,  and  obtain  a  daughter  of  transcendent  beauty,
whose  husband  shall  be  the  heroic  slayer  of  Vidyuddhvaja.' 2
Having  received  this  promise  from  Siva,  I  have  come  here  to
tell  you."

When  Chandraketu  had  heard  this  from  the  king  of  the
Gandharvas,  he  said  :  "  I  too  must  go  and  propitiate  Siva
in  order  to  put  an  end  to  this  sorrow ;  without  propitiating
him  we  cannot  obtain  the  fulfilment  of  our  desires."  When
Chandraketu  had  formed  this  resolution,  he  went  with  his
wife  Muktavali  to  the  heavenly  abode  of  Siva,  to  perform
asceticism.

And  Padmasekhara  told  the  story  of  his  boon  to  Indra,
and  having  conceived  a  hope  of  the  destruction  of  his  enemy,
went  to  the  world  of  the  moon.  Then  that  king  of  the  gods
in  Samadhisthala,  having  also  conceived  a  hope  of  the  de-
struction of  his  enemy,  called  to  mind  the  counsellor  of  the
immortals.  And  he  appeared  as  soon  as  he  was  thought
upon,  and  the  god,  bowing  before  him,  and  honouring  him,
said  to  him :  "  Siva,  pleased  with  the  asceticism  of  Padma-
sekhara, has  promised  that  he  shall  have  a  son-in-law  who

1  All  the  India  Office  MSS.  read  prishtas.

2  All  the  India  Office  MSS.  read  Vidyuddhvajantako.


VISHNU  IS  SUPPLICATED  151

shall  slay  Vidyuddhvaja.  So  we  shall  eventually  see  an  end
put  to  his  crimes :  in  the  meanwhile  I  am  despondent,  dwell-
ing here  in  misery  on  account  of  my  having  fallen  from  my
high  position.  So  devise,  holy  sir,  some  expedient  that  will
operate  quickly."  When  the  adviser  of  the  gods  heard  this
speech  of  Indra's,  he  said  to  him  :  "  It  is  true  that  that
enemy  of  ours  has  nearly  exhausted  his  asceticism  by  his
crimes  ;  so  now  we  have  an  opportunity  of  exerting  ourselves
against  him.  Come,  then,  let  us  tell  Brahma  ;  he  will  point
out  to  us  an  expedient."

When  Brihaspati  had  said  this  to  Indra,  he  went  with  him
to  Brahma,  and,  after  worshipping  him,  he  told  him  what  was
in  his  mind.  Then  Brahma  said  :  "  Am  I  not  also  anxious
to  bring  about  the  same  end  ?  But  Siva  alone  can  remove
the  calamity  that  he  has  caused.  And  that  god  requires  a
long  propitiation  1  :  so  let  us  go  to  Vishnu,  who  is  like-minded
with  him;   he  will  devise  an  expedient."

When  Brahma  and  Indra  and  Brihaspati  had  deliberated
together  to  this  effect,  they  ascended  a  chariot  of  swans  and
went  to  Svetadvipa,2  where  all  the  inhabitants  carried  the
conch,  discus,  lotus  and  club,  and  had  four  arms,  being  as-
similated to  Vishnu  in  appearance  as  they  were  devoted  to
him  in  heart.  There  they  saw  the  god  in  a  palace  composed
of  splendid  jewels,  reposing  on  the  serpent  Sesha,  having  his
feet  adored  by  Lakshmi.  After  bowing  before  him,  and
having  been  duly  welcomed  by  him,  and  venerated  by  the
divine  sages,  they  took  the  seats  befitting  them.  When  the
holy  one  asked  the  gods  how  they  prospered,  they  humbly
said  to  him :  "  What  prosperity  can  be  ours,  0  God,  as  long
as  Vidyuddhvaja  is  alive  ?  For  you  know  all  that  he  has
done  to  us,  and  it  is  on  his  account  that  we  have  come  here
now  :  it  now  rests  with  you  to  determine  what  further  is  to
be  done  in  this  matter."

When  the  gods  said  this  to  Vishnu,  he  answered  them  :
"  Why,  do  I  not  know  that  my  regulations  are  broken  by  that
Asura  ?     But  what  the  great  lord,  the  slayer  of  Tripura,  has

1  MS.  No.  1882  here  reads  chiraprapyas :  the  other  two  agree  with
Brockhaus.

2  See  Vol.  IV,  p.  185,  185w2.— n.m.p.


152  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

done,  he  alone  can  undo  :  I  cannot.  And  from  him  must
proceed  the  overthrow  of  that  wicked  Daitya.  You  must
make  haste,  provided  I  tell  you  an  expedient ;  and  I  will  tell
you  one  :  listen  !  There  is  a  heavenly  abode  of  Siva,  named
Siddhisvara.  There  the  god  Siva  is  found  ever  manifest.
And  long  ago  that  very  god  manifested  to  me  and  Prajapati  *
his  form  as  the  flame-Zmga,  and  told  me  this  secret.  So  come,
let  us  go  there  and  entreat  him  with  asceticism  ;  he  will  put
an  end  to  this  affliction  of  the  worlds ! "  When  the  god
Vishnu  had  uttered  this  behest,  they  all  went  to  Siddhisvara
by  means  of  two  conveyances,  the  bird  Garuda  and  the
chariot  of  swans.  That  place  is  untouched  by  the  calamities
of  old  age,  death  and  sickness,  and  it  is  the  home  of  unalloyed
happiness,  and  in  it  beasts,  birds  and  trees  are  all  of  gold.
There  they  worshipped  the  linga  of  Siva,  that  exhibits  in
succession  all  his  forms,2  and  is  in  succession  of  various  jewels ;
and  then  Vishnu,  Brahma,  Indra  and  Brihaspati,  all  four,
with  their  minds  devoted  to  Siva,  proceeded  to  perform  a
severe  course  of  asceticism  in  order  to  propitiate  him.

And  in  the  meanwhile  Siva, .  propitiated  by  the  severe
asceticism  of  Chandraketu,  bestowed  a  boon  on  that  prince
of  the  Vidyadharas  :  "  Rise  up,  King !  a  son  shall  be  born  to
thee  who  shall  be  a  great  hero,  and  shall  slay  in  fight  thy
enemy  Vidyuddhvaja  ;  he  shall  become  incarnate  among  the
human  race  by  a  curse,  and  shall  render  a  service  to  the  gods,
and  shall  recover  his  position  by  virtue  of  the  asceticism  of
Padmavati,  the  daughter  of  the  king  of  the  Gandharvas  :
and  with  her  for  a  wife  he  shall  be  emperor  over  all  the
Vidyadharas  for  ten  kalpas" 3  When  the  god  had  granted
this  boon  he  disappeared,  and  Chandraketu  went  back  to
the  world  of  the  wind-god  with  his  wife.

In  the  meanwhile  Siva  was  pleased  with  the  severe  asceti-
cism of  Vishnu  and  his  companions  in  Siddhisvara,  and  he
appeared  to  them  in  the  linga  and  delighted  them  by  the
following  speech  :  "  Rise  up,  afflict  yourselves  no  longer  !  I
have  been  fully  propitiated  with  self-torture  by  your  partisan

1  A  title  of  Brahma.     See  Muir's  Sanskrit  Texts,  vol.  iv,  p.  18.

2  For  anyonya  I  read  any  any  a,  but  all  the  MSS.  confirm  Brockhaus'  text.

3  The  three  India  Office  MSS.  have  dasa  ka/pa?i.


THE  BIRTH  OF  MUKTAPHALAKETU        153

Chandraketu,  the  prince  of  the  Vidyadharas.  And  he  shall
have  a  heroic  son,  sprung  from  a  part  of  me,  who  shall  soon
slay  in  fight  that  Daitya  Vidyuddhvaja.  Then,  in  order
that  he  may  perform  another  service  to  the  gods,  he  shall
fall 1  by  a  curse  into  the  world  of  men,  and  the  daughter  of
the  Gandharva  Padmasekhara  shall  deliver  him  from  that
condition.  And  he  shall  rule  the  Vidyadharas  with  that
lady,  who  shall  be  an  incarnation  of  a  portion  of  Gaurl,  and
shall  be  named  Padmavati,  for  his  consort,  and  at  last  he
shall  come  to  me.  So  bear  up  for  a  little  :  this  desire  of
yours  is  already  as  good  as  accomplished."  When  Siva  had
said  this  to  Vishnu  and  his  companions,  he  disappeared ;
then  Vishnu,  Brahma,  Indra  and  Brihaspati  went,  in  high
delight,  back  to  the  places  from  which  they  came.

Then  Muktavali,  the  wife  of  that  king  of  the  Vidyadharas
named  Chandraketu,  became  pregnant,  and  in  time  she
brought  forth  a  son,  illuminating  the  four  quarters  with  his
irresistible  splendour,2  like  the  infant  sun  arisen  to  remove
the  oppression  under  which  those  ascetics  were  groaning.
And  as  soon  as  he  was  born  this  voice  was  heard  from
heaven  :  "  Chandraketu,  this  son  of  thine  shall  slay  the
Asura  Vidyuddhvaja,  and  know  that  he  is  to  be  by  name
Muktaphalaketu,  the  terror  of  his  foes."

When  the  voice  had  said  so  much  to  the  delighted
Chandraketu,  it  ceased,  and  a  rain  of  flowers  fell ;  and
Padmasekhara  and  Indra,  hearing  what  had  taken  place,
came  there,  and  the  other  gods  who  were  lurking  concealed.
Conversing  to  one  another  of  the  story  of  the  boon  of
Siva,  and  having  rejoiced  thereat,  they  went  to  their  own
abodes.  And  Muktaphalaketu  had  all  the  sacraments  per-
formed for  him,  and  gradually  grew  up ;  and  as  he  grew,
the  joy  of  the  gods  increased.

Then,  some  time  after  the  birth  of  his  son,  a  daughter  was
born  to  Padmasekhara,  the  supreme  lord  of  the  Gandharvas.
And  when  she  was  born  a  voice  came  from  the  air  :   "  Prince


1  I  read  cyutam  for  cyuta.  See  Taranga  117,  si.  152  et  seq.  But  all  the
India  Office  MSS.  agree  with  Brockhaus'  text.  The  tale  itself  will  justify  my
correction.

2  The  word  tejasd  also  means  "valour."


154


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


of  the  Gandharvas,  this  daughter  of  thine,  Padmavati,  shall
be  the  wife  of  that  king  of  the  Vidyadharas  who  shall  be
the  foe  of  Vidyuddhvaja."  Then  that  maiden  Padmavati
gradually  grew  up,  adorned  with  an  overflowing  effulgence  of
beauty,  as  if  with  billowy  nectar  acquired  by  her  being  born
in  the  world  of  the  moon.1

And  that  Muktaphalaketu,  even  when  a  child,  was  high-
minded,  and  being  always  devoted  to  Siva,  he  performed
asceticism,  in  the  form  of  vows,  fasts  and  other  penances.
And  once  on  a  time,  when  he  had  fasted  twelve  days,  and
was  absorbed  in  meditation,  the  adorable  Siva  appeared  to
him,  and  said  :  "I  am  pleased  with  this  devotion  of  thine,
so  by  my  special  favour  the  weapons,  the  sciences,  and  all
the  accomplishments  shall  manifest  themselves  to  thee.  And
receive  from  me  this  sword  named  Invincible,2  by  means  of
which  thou  shalt  hold  sovereign  sway,  unconquered  by  thy
enemies."  When  the  god  had  said  this,  he  gave  him  the
sword  and  disappeared,  and  that  prince  at  once  became
possessed  of  powerful  weapons  and  great  strength  and  courage.

Now  one  day,  about  this  time,  that  great  Asura  Vidyud-
dhvaja, being  established  in  heaven,  was  disporting  himself
in  the  water  of  the  heavenly  Ganges.  He  saw  the  water  of
that  stream  flowing  along  brown  with  the  pollen  of  flowers,
and  remarked  that  it  was  pervaded  by  the  smell  of  the  ichor
of  elephants,  and  troubled  with  waves.  Then,  puffed  up  with
pride  of  his  mighty  arm,  he  said  to  his  attendants  :  "Go  and
see  who  is  disporting  himself  in  the  water  above  me."


1  Literally  "the  nectar-rayed  one."

2  Cf.  Vol.  I,  p.  109W1,  and  Vol.  VI,  p.  72,  72W1  ;  also  Silius  Italicus,i,  430,

quoted  by  Preller,  Griechische  Mythologie,  vol.  ii,  p.  354. The  passage  from

the  Punica  of  Silius  Italicus  is  as  follows  : —

"  Hannibal  agminibus  passim  furit  et  quatit  ensem,
Cantato  nuper  senior  quern  fecerat  igni
Litore  ab  Hesperidum  Temisus,  qui  carmine  pollens
Fidebat  magica  ferrum  crudescere  lingua.  ..."

In  my  note  on  swords  and  their  names  in  Vol.  I,  p.  109W1,  I  referred  to  Caesar's
sword  as  "  Crocea  Mors."  In  a  review  of  the  volume  Professor  Halliday  doubted
its  genuineness  and  suggested  some  mediaeval  source.  My  reference  to
Brewer  supports  this  view,  as  it  occurs  in  Geoffrey  of  Monmouth,  iv,  4
(d.  a.d.  1154). — N.M.P.


THE  BULL  OF  SIVA  155

When  the  Asuras  heard  that,  they  went  up  to  the  stream,
and  saw  the  bull  of  Siva  sporting  in  the  water  with  the
elephant  of  Indra.  And  they  came  back  and  said  to  that
prince  of  the  Daityas  :  "  King,  the  bull  of  Siva  has  gone
higher  up  the  stream,  and  is  amusing  himself  in  the  water
with  Airavana ;  so  this  water  is  full  of  his  garlands  and  of
the  ichor  of  Airavana."  When  that  Asura  heard  this  he
was  wroth,  in  his  arrogance  making  light  of  Rudra,  and  in-
fatuated by  the  full  ripening  of  his  own  evil  deeds  he  said  to
his  followers :  "  Go  and  bring  that  bull  and  Airavana  here,
bound."  Those  Asuras  went  there  and  tried  to  capture
them,  and  thereupon  the  bull  and  elephant  ran  upon  them
in  wrath  and  slew  most  of  them.  And  those  who  escaped
from  the  slaughter  went  and  told  Vidyuddhvaja ;  and  he  was
angry,  and  sent  a  very  great  force  of  Asuras  against  those
two  animals.  And  those  two  trampled  to  death  that  army,
upon  which  destruction  came  as  the  result  of  matured  crime,
and  then  the  bull  returned  to  Siva,  and  the  elephant  to  Indra.

Then  Indra  heard  about  that  proceeding  of  the  Daityas
from  the  guards,  who  followed  Airavana  to  take  care  of  him,
and  he  concluded  that  the  time  of  his  enemy's  destruction
had  arrived,  as  he  had  treated  with  disrespect  even  the
adorable  Siva.  He  told  that  to  Brahma,  and  then  he  united
himself  with  the  assembled  forces  of  the  gods  and  the
Vidyadharas  and  his  other  allies,  and  then  he  mounted
the  chief  elephant  of  the  gods  and  set  out  to  slay  that
enemy  of  his ;  and  on  his  departure  Sachi  performed  for
him  the  usual  ceremony  to  ensure  good  fortune.


CHAPTER  CXVI

170b.  Muktaphalaketu  and  Padmdvatl

THEN  Indra  reached  heaven  and  surrounded  it  with
his  forces,  that  were  rendered  confident  by  the  favour
of  Siva,  and  had  gained  the  suitable  opportunity  and
the  requisite  strength.  When  Vidyuddhvaja  saw  that,  he
marched  out  with  his  army,  ready  for  battle ;  but  as  he
marched  out  evil  omens  manifested  themselves  to  him :
lightning  flashes  struck  his  banners,  vultures  circled  above
his  head,  the  state  umbrellas  were  broken,  and  jackals  uttered
boding  howls.1  Disregarding  these  evil  omens,  nevertheless
that  Asura  sallied  forth  ;  and  then  there  took  place  a  mighty
battle  between  the  gods  and  the  Asuras.

And  Indra  said  to  Chandraketu,  the  king  of  the  Vidya-
dharas  :  "  Why  has  Muktaphalaketu  not  yet  come  ?  "  Then
Chandraketu  humbly  made  answer  :  "  When  I  was  marching
out  I  was  in  such  a  hurry  that  I  forgot  to  tell  him ;  but  he
is  sure  to  hear  of  it,  and  will  certainly  follow  me  quickly."
When  the  king  of  the  gods  heard  this  he  quickly  sent  the
dexterous  charioteer  of  the  wind-god  to  bring  the  noble
Muktaphalaketu.  And  his  father,  Chandraketu,  sent  with
Indra's  messenger  his  own  warder,  with  a  force  and  a  chariot,
to  summon  him.

1  See  Vol.  IV,  pp.  93,  93n2,  94<n ;  Zimmer's  Altindisches  Leben,  p.  60,  and
Preller,  Rbmische  Mythologie,  pp.  102-103:  the  vultures  will  remind  the
English  reader  of  Shakespeare's  Julius  Ccesar,  v,  1,  84  et  seq. ;  for  the  ominous
import  of  lightning  see  Smith's  Dictionary  of  Antiquities,  art.  "  Bidental  "  ;  and
Preller,  op.  cit.,  p.  172.  There  is  a  very  similar  passage  in  Achilles  Tatius,
Lib.  V,  c,  3  :  M  '12s  ovv  Trpo^Xdofxev  twv  dvpiav,  o'uovbs  rjplv  yuverai  7rovr)pbs'  x^AtSdi/a
xtpKOs  SaoKiov  rr]V  A.€VKLirirrjV  7raTao-tr€t  t/£>  Trrepip  els  tyjv  KecfiaXrjv."  See  also
Sir  Thomas  Browne's  Vulgar  Errors,  Book  V,  chap,  xxiii,  sec.  1  ;  Webster's
Dutchess  of  Ma  If ey,  Act  II,  sc.  2  :

"  How  superstitiously  we  mind  our  evils  !

The  throwing  down  salt,  or  crossing  of  a  hare,

Bleeding  at  nose,  the  stumbling  of  a  horse,

Or  singing  of  a  cricket,  are  of  power

To  daunt  whole  man  in  us."

156


THE  TEMPLE  OF  GAURI  15T

But  Muktaphalaketu,  hearing  that  his  father  had  gone
to  battle  with  the  Daityas,  was  eager  to  set  out  for  that
fight  with  his  followers.  Then  he  mounted  his  elephant  of
victory,  and  his  mother  performed  for  him  the  ceremony  to
ensure  good  fortune,  and  he  set  out  from  the  world  of  the
wind  bearing  the  sword  of  Siva.  And  when  he  had  set  out,
a  rain  of  flowers  fell  on  him  from  heaven,  and  the  gods  beat
their  drums  and  favouring  breezes  blew.  And  then  the  hosts
of  the  gods,  that  had  fled  and  hid  themselves  out  of  fear  of
Vidyuddhvaja,  assembled  and  surrounded  him.  As  he  was
marching  along  with  that  large  army,  he  saw  in  his  way  a
great  temple  of  Parvati,  named  Meghavana.  His  devotion
to  the  goddess  would  not  allow  him  to  pass  it  without  wor-
shipping * ;  so  he  got  down  from  his  elephant,  and  taking  in;
his  hand  heavenly  flowers,  he  proceeded  to  adore  the  goddess.

Now  it  happened  that,  at  that  very  time,  Padmavati,  the
daughter  of  Padmasekhara,  the  king  of  the  Gandharvas,  who-
had  now  grown  up,  had  taken  leave  of  her  mother,  who  was
engaged  in  austerities  to  bring  good  fortune  to  her  husband
who  had  gone  to  war,  and  had  come,  with  her  attendant
ladies,  in  a  chariot,  from  the  world  of  Indra,  to  that  temple
of  Gauri,  with  the  intention  of  performing  asceticism  in  order
to  ensure  success  to  her  father  in  battle,  and  to  the  bridegroom
on  whom  she  had  set  her  heart.

On  the  way  one  of  her  ladies  said  to  her  :  "  You  have  not
as  yet  any  chosen  lover,  who  might  have  gone  to  the  war,,
and  your  mother  is  engaged  in  asceticism  for  the  well-being
of  your  father  ;  for  whose  sake,  my  friend,  do  you,  a  maiden,,
seek  to  perform  asceticism  ?  "  When  Padmavati  had  been
thus  addressed  by  her  friend  on  the  way,  she  answered  :  "  My
friend,  a  father  is  to  maidens  a  divinity  procuring  all  happi-
ness ;  moreover,  there  has  already  been  chosen  for  me  a
bridegroom  of  unequalled  excellence.  That  Muktaphalaketu,
the  son  who  has  been  born  to  the  Vidyadhara  king,  in  order
that  he  may  slay  Vidyuddhvaja,  has  been  destined  for  my
husband  by  Siva.  This  I  heard  from  the  mouth  of  my  father
when  questioned  by  my  mother.    And  that  chosen  bridegroom

1  I  read  tadanullanghayan  with  MSS.  No.  1882  and  2166  and  the  Sanskrit
College  MS.     No.  3003  has  anullanghaya.


158  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

of  mine  has  either  gone  or  certainly  is  going  to  battle  ;
so  I  am  about  to  propitiate  with  asceticism  the  holy  Gauri,
desiring  victory  for  my  future  husband  *  as  well  as  for  my
father."

When  the  princess  said  this,  her  attendant  lady  answered
her  :  "  Then  this  exertion  on  your  part,  though  directed  to-
wards an  object  still  in  the  future,  is  right  and  proper  :  may
your  desire  be  accomplished  !  "  Just  as  her  friend  was  say-
ing this  to  her,  the  princess  reached  a  large  and  beautiful  lake
in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  temple  of  Gauri.  It  was  covered
all  over  with  bright  full-blown  golden  lotuses,  and  they  seemed
as  if  they  were  suffused  with  the  beauty  flowing  forth  from
the  lotus  of  her  face.  The  Gandharva  maiden  went  down
into  that  lake  and  gathered  lotuses  with  which  to  worship
Ambika,  and  was  preparing  to  bathe,  when  two  Rakshasis
came  that  way,  as  all  the  Rakshasas  were  rushing  to  the
battle  between  the  gods  and  Asuras,  eager  for  flesh.  They
had  upstanding  hair,  yellow  as  the  flames  vomited  forth  from
their  mouths  terrible  with  tusks,  gigantic  bodies  black  as
smoke,  and  pendulous  breasts  and  bellies.  The  moment  that
those  wanderers  of  the  night  saw  that  Gandharva  princess,
they  swooped  down  upon  her  and  seized  her,  and  carried  her
up  towards  the  heaven.

But  the  deity,  that  presided  over  her  chariot,  impeded
the  flight  of  those  Rakshasis,  and  her  grieving  retinue  cried
for  help ;  and  while  this  was  going  on  Muktaphalaketu  issued
from  the  temple  of  the  goddess,  having  performed  his  worship,
and  hearing  the  lamentation,  he  came  in  that  direction.
When  the  great  hero  beheld  Padmavati  gleaming  bright  in
the  grasp  of  that  pair  of  Rakshasis,  looking  like  a  flash  of
lightning  in  the  midst  of  a  bank  of  black  clouds,  he  ran  for-
ward and  delivered  her,  hurling  the  Rakshasis  senseless  to
earth  by  a  blow  from  the  flat  of  his  hand.  And  he  looked
on  that  torrent  river  of  the  elixir  of  beauty,  adorned  with
a  waist  charming  with  three  wavelike  wrinkles,2  who  seemed

1  I  read  patyus  for  pitus,  with  the  three  India  Office  MSS.  and  the
Sanskrit  College  MS.

2  Burton  (Nights,  vol.  vii,  p.  I30n7)  quotes  this  passage  as  apposite  to
description  in  his  text :  " .  .  .  but  the  perfect  whiteness  of  her  body  overcame


THE  FAIR  PADMAVATI  159

to  have  been  composed  by  the  Creator  of  the  essence  of  all
beauty  when  he  was  full  of  the  wonderful  skill  he  had  ac-
quired by  forming  the  nymphs  of  heaven.  And  the  moment
he  looked  on  her  his  senses  were  benumbed  by  love's  opiate,
though  he  was  strong  of  will ;  and  he  remained  for  a  moment
motionless,  as  if  painted  in  a  picture.

And  Padmavati  too,  now  that  the  alarm  caused  by  the
Rakshasis  was  at  an  end,  at  once  recovered  her  spirits,  and
looked  on  the  prince,  who  possessed  a  form  that  was  a  feast
to  the  eyes  of  the  world,  and  who  was  one  fitted  to  madden
womankind,  and  seemed  to  have  been  created  by  fate  by  a
blending  together  in  one  body  of  the  moon  and  the  God  of
Love.  Then,  her  face  being  cast  down  with  shame,  she  said
of  her  own  accord  to  her  friend  :  "  May  good  luck  befall  him  !
I  will  depart  hence,  from  the  presence  of  a  strange  man."

Even  while  she  was  saying  this  Muktaphalaketu  said  to
her  friend  :  "  What  did  this  young  lady  say  ?  "  And  she
answered  :  "  This  lovely  maiden  bestowed  a  blessing  on  you,
the  saver  of  her  life,  and  said  to  me  :  '  Come,  let  us  depart
from  the  presence  of  a  strange  man.'  "  When  Muktaphala-
ketu heard  this,  he  said  to  her,  with  eager  excitement :  "  Who
is  she  ?  Whose  daughter  is  she  ?  To  what  man  of  great
merit  in  a  former  life  is  she  to  be  given  in  marriage  ?  "  *

When  he  addressed  this  question  to  the  princess's  com-
panion she  answered  him  :  "  Fair  sir,  this  my  friend  is  the
maiden  named  Padmavati,  the  daughter  of  Padmasekhara,
the  king  of  the  Gandharvas,  and  Siva  has  ordained  that  her
husband  is  to  be  Muktaphalaketu,  the  son  of  Chandraketu,
the  darling  of  the  world,  the  ally  of  Indra,  the  destined  slayer
of  Vidyuddhvaja.  Because  she  desires  the  victory  for  that
future  husband  of  hers  and  for  her  father  in  the  battle  now
at  hand,  she  has  come  to  this  temple  of  Gaurl  to  perform
asceticism."

When  the  followers  of  Chandraketu's  son  heard  this,  they

the  redness  of  her  shift,  through  which  glittered  two  breasts  like  twin
granadoes,  and  a  waist  as  it  were  a  roll  of  fine  Coptic  linen,  with  creases  like
scrolls  of  pure  white  paper  stuffed  with  musk." — n.m.p.

1  The  India  Office  MSS.  have  kasmai  dattd  va  ;  but  the  sense  is  much  the
same.


160  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

delighted  the  princess  by  exclaiming  :  "  Bravo  !  here  is  that
future  husband  of  yours."  Then  the  princess  and  her  lover
had  their  hearts  filled  with  joy  at  discovering  one  another,  and
they  both  thought,  "  It  is  well  that  we  came  here  to-day,"
and  they  continued  casting  loving  sidelong  timid  glances
at  one  another  ;  and  while  they  were  thus  engaged  the  sound
of  drums  was  heard,  and  then  a  host  appeared,  and  a  chariot
with  the  wind-god,1  and  the  warder  of  Chandraketu  coming
quickly.

Then  the  wind-god  and  the  warder  respectfully  left  the
chariot  and  went  up  to  that  Muktaphalaketu,  and  said  to
him :  "  The  king  of  the  gods  and  your  father,  Chandraketu,
who  are  in  the  field  of  battle,  desire  your  presence  ;  so  ascend
this  chariot,  and  come  quickly."  Then  the  son  of  the  Vidya-
dhara  king,  though  fettered  by  love  of  Padmavati,  ascended
the  chariot  with  them,  out  of  regard  for  the  interests  of  his
superiors.  And  putting  on  a  heavenly  suit  of  armour  2  sent
by  Indra  he  set  out  quickly,  often  turning  back  his  head  to
look  at  Padmavati.

And  Padmavati  followed  with  her  eyes,  as  long  as  he  was
in  sight,  that  hero,  who  with  one  blow  from  the  flat  of  his
hand  had  slain  the  two  Rakshasis,  and  with  him  ever  in  her
thoughts  she  bathed,  and  worshipped  Siva  and  Parvati,  and
from  that  time  forth  kept  performing  asceticism  in  that  very
place,  to  ensure  his  success.

And  Muktaphalaketu,  still  thinking  on  his  sight  of  her,
which  was  auspicious  and  portended  victory,  reached  the
place  where  the  battle  was  going  on  between  the  gods  and
Asuras.  And  when  they  saw  that  hero  arrive,  well-armed  and
accompanied  by  a  force,  all  the  great  Asuras  rushed  to  attack
him.  But  the  hero  cut  their  heads  to  pieces  with  a  rain  of
arrows,  and  made  with  them  an  offering  to  the  gods  of  the
cardinal  points,  by  way  of  inaugurating  the  feast  of  battle.

But  Vidyuddhvaja,  seeing  his  army  being  slain  by  that

1  It  appears  from  the  beginning  of  the  chapter  that  this  was  the
charioteer  of  Vayu,  the  chief  god  of  the  wind.  In  Chapter  XV,  si.  57,  the
wind-gods  are  opposed  to  the  Daityas.  Bohtlingk  and  Roth  identify  these
wind-gods  with  the  Maruts,  s.v.  Vayu.

2  Dr  Kern  corrects  kavachanam  to  kavacham.  The  latter  word  is  found  in
the  three  India  Office  MSS.  and  the  Sanskrit  College  MS.


THE  FEAST  OF  BATTLE  161

Muktaphalaketu,  himself  rushed  in  wrath  to  attack  him.
And  when  he  smote  with  arrows  that  Daitya,  as  he  came
on,  the  whole  army  of  the  Asuras  rushed  upon  him  from
every  quarter.  When  Indra  saw  that,  he  at  once  attacked
the  army  of  the  Daityas,  with  the  Siddhas,  Gandharvas,
Vidyadharas  and  gods  at  his  back.

Then  a  confused  battle  arose,  with  dint  of  arrow,  javelin,
lance,  mace  and  axe,  costing  the  lives  of  countless  soldiers  ;
rivers  of  blood  flowed  along,  with  the  bodies  of  elephants
and  horses  for  alligators,  with  the  pearls  from  the  heads  of
elephants  1  for  sands,  and  with  the  heads  of  heroes  for
stones.

That  feast  of  battle  delighted  the  flesh-loving  demons,
who,  drunk  with  blood  instead  of  wine,  were  dancing  with
the  palpitating  trunks.  The  fortune  of  victory  of  the  gods
and  Asuras  in  that  sea  of  battle  swayed  hither  and  thither
from  time  to  time,  fluctuating  like  a  tide-wave.  And  in
this  way  the  fight  went  on  for  twenty-four  days,  watched
by  Siva,  Vishnu  and  Brahma,  who  were  present  in  their
chariots.2

And  at  the  end  of  the  twenty-fifth  day  a  series  of  single
combats  was  taking  place  between  the  principal  warriors  of
both  armies  along  the  greater  part  of  the  line  of  fight.  And
then  a  duel  began  between  the  noble  Muktaphalaketu  and
Vidyuddhvaja,  the  former  in  a  chariot,  the  latter  on  an
elephant.  Muktaphalaketu  repelled  the  weapon  of  dark-
ness with  the  weapon  of  the  sun,  the  weapon  of  cold  with
the  weapon  of  heat,  the  rock-weapon  with  the  thunderbolt-
weapon,  the  serpent-weapon  with  the  weapon  of  Garuda,
and  then  he  slew  that  elephant-driver  of  that  Asura  with  one
arrow,  and  his  elephant  with  another.  Then  Vidyuddhvaja
mounted  a  chariot,  and  Muktaphalaketu  killed  the  charioteer
and  the  horses.  Then  Vidyuddhvaja  took  refuge  in  magic.
He  ascended  into  the  sky  invisible  with  his  whole  army,
and  rained  stones  and  weapons  on  all  sides  of  the  army  of

1  I  read  mauktika  for  maulika.  The  three  India  Office  MSS.  and  the
Sanskrit  College  MS.  have  mauktika.

2  Cf.  the  somewhat  similar  battle  descriptions  in  the  Nights  (Burton,
vol.  vii,  p.  6 1,  and  vol.  viii,  p.  136). — n.m.p.

vol.  VIII.  L


162  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

the  gods.  And  as  for  the  impenetrable  net  of  arrows  which
Muktaphalaketu  threw  around  it,  that  Daitya  consumed  it
with  showers  of  fire.

Then  Muktaphalaketu  sent  against  that  enemy  and  his
followers  the  weapon  of  Brahma,  which  was  capable  of  de-
stroying the  whole  world,  after  he  had  pronounced  over  it
the  appropriate  spells.  That  weapon  killed  the  great  Asura
Vidyuddhvaja  and  his  army,  and  they  fell  down  dead  from
the  sky,  And  the  rest — namely,  Vidyuddhvaja's  son  and
his  followers,  and  Vajradamshtra  and  his  crew — fled  in  fear
to  the  bottom  of  the  Rasatala.1

And  then  the  gods  from  heaven  exclaimed  "  Bravo  !
Bravo !  "  and  they  honoured  the  noble  Muktaphalaketu
with  a  rain  of  flowers.  Then  Indra,  having  recovered  his
sway,  as  his  enemy  was  slain,  entered  heaven,  and  there  was
a  great  rejoicing  in  the  three  worlds.  And  Prajapati  him-
self came  there,  making  SachI  precede  him,  and  fastened  a
splendid  crest- jewel  on  the  head  of  Muktaphalaketu.  And
Indra  took  the  chain  from  his  own  neck  and  placed  it  on
the  neck  of  that  victorious  prince,  who  had  restored  his  king-
dom to  him.  And  he  made  him  sit  on  a  throne  equal  in  all
respects  to  his  own ;  and  the  gods,  full 2  of  joy,  bestowed
upon  him  various  blessings.  And  Indra  sent  on  his  warder
to  the  city  of  the  Asiira  Vidyuddhvaja,  and  took  posses-
sion of  it  in  addition  to  his  own  city,  with  the  intention
of  bestowing  it  on  Muktaphalaketu,  when  a  fitting  time
presented  itself.

Then  the  Gandharva  Padmasekhara,  wishing  to  bestow
Padmavati  on  that  prince,  looked  meaningly  at  the  face  of
the  Disposer.  And  the  Disposer,  knowing  what  was  in  his
heart,  said  to  that  prince  of  the  Gandharvas  :  "  There  is
still  a  service  remaining  to  be  done,  so  wait  a  little."  Then
there  took  place  the  triumphal  feast  of  Indra,  with  the  songs
of  Haha  and  Huhu,  and  the  dances  of  Rambha  and  others,
which  they  accompanied  with  their  own  voices.  And  when
the  Disposer  had  witnessed  the  festive  rejoicing  he  departed,

1  One  of  the  seven  hells  (not  places  of  torment).

2  But  the  three  India  Office  MSS.  read  ghurnad  for  purna.  It  could,  I
suppose,  mean  "reeling  with  joy."     The  Sanskrit  College  MS.  has pTtrvva.


THE  TRIUMPH  OF  MUKTAPHALAKETU     163

and  Indra  honoured  the  Lokapalas  1  and  dismissed  them  to
their  several  stations.  And  after  honouring  that  Gandharva
monarch  Padmasekhara,  and  his  train,  he  dismissed  them
to  their  own  Gandharva  city.  And  Indra,  after  treating  with
the  utmost  respect  the  noble  Muktaphalaketu  and  Chandra-
ketu,  sent  them  to  their  own  Vidyadhara  city  to  enjoy  them-
selves. And  then  Muktaphalaketu,  having  destroyed  the
plague  of  the  universe,  returned  to  his  palace,  accompanied
by  his  father  and  followed  by  many  Vidyadhara  kings.  And
on  account  of  the  prince  having  returned  victorious  with  his
father  after  a  long  absence,  that  city  displayed  its  joy,  being
adorned  with  splendid  jewels  and  garlanded  with  flags.  And
his  father,  Chandraketu,  at  once  bestowed  gifts  on  all  his
servants  and  relations,  and  kept  high  festival  in  the  city
for  the  triumph  of  his  son,  showering  wealth  on  it  as  a  cloud
showers  water.  But  Muktaphalaketu,  though  he  had  gained
glory  by  conquering  Vidyuddhvaja,  derived  no  satisfaction
from  his  enjoyments  without  Padmavati.  However,  being
comforted  in  soul  by  a  friend  named  Samyataka,  who  re-
minded him  of  the  decree  of  Siva,  and  consoling  topics  of
that  kind,  he  managed,  though  with  difficulty,  to  get  through
those  days.

1  The  Lokapalas  are  the  guardians  of  the  four  cardinal  and  intermediate
points  of  the  compass.  They  appear  to  be  usually  reckoned  as  Indra,  guardian
of  the  East,  Agni  of  the  South-East,  Varuna  of  the  West,  Yama  of  the  South,
Surya  of  the  South-West,  Pavana  or  Vayu  of  the  North-West,  Kuvera  of  the
North,  Soma  or  Chandra  of  the  North-East.  Some  substitute  Nirriti  for
Surya  and  Isani  or  Prithivi  for  Soma.


CHAPTER  CXVII

170b.  Muktdphalaketu  and  Padmavati

IN  the  meanwhile  that  king  of  the  Gandharvas,  Padma-
gekhara,  re-entered  his  city,  celebrating  a  splendid  triumph;
and  hearing  from  his  wife  that  his  daughter  Padmavati
had  performed  asceticism  in  the  temple  of  Gauri,  to  procure
for  him  victory,  he  summoned  her.  And  when  his  daughter
came,  emaciated  with  asceticism  and  separation  from  her
lover,  and  fell  at  his  feet,  he  gave  her  his  blessing,  and  said
to  her  :  "  Dear  girl,  for  my  sake  you  have  endured  great
hardship  in  the  form  of  penance,  so  obtain  quickly  for  a
husband  the  noble  Muktaphalaketu,  the  son  of  the  king  of
the  Vidyadharas,  the  slayer  of  Vidyuddhvaja,  the  victorious
protector  of  the  world,  who  has  been  appointed  to  marry  you
by  Siva  himself."

When  her  father  said  this  to  her,  she  remained  with  face
fixed  on  the  ground,  and  then  her  mother,  Kuvalayavali,
said  to  him  :  "  How,  my  husband,  was  so  terrible  an  Asura,
that  filled  the  three  worlds  with  consternation,  slain  by  that
prince  in  fight  ?  "  When  the  king  heard  that,  he  described
to  her  the  valour  of  that  prince,  and  the  battle  between  the
gods  and  Asuras.  Then  Padmavati' s  companion,  whose  name
was  Manoharika,  described  the  easy  manner  in  which  he  slew
the  two  Rakshasis.  Then  the  king  and  queen,  finding  out
that  he  and  their  daughter  had  met  and  fallen  in  love,  were
pleased,  and  said  :  "  What  could  those  Rakshasis  do  against
one  who  swallowed  the  whole  army  of  the  Asuras,  as  Agastya
swallowed  the  sea  ?  "  l  Then  the  fire  of  Padmavati's  love
blazed  up  more  violently,  being  fanned  by  this  description  of
her  lover's  surpassing  courage  as  by  a  breeze.

Then  the  princess  left  her  parents'  presence  and  immedi-
ately ascended,  in  eager  longing,  a  jewelled  terrace  in  the
women's  apartments,   which  had  pillars  of  precious  stone

1  See  Vol.  VI,  pp.  43H1,  44w. — n.m.p.

164


UNABATED  PASSION


165


standing  in  it,  and  lattices  of  pearl  fastened  to  them,  and  had
placed  on  its  pavement,  of  costly  mosaic,  luxurious  couches
and  splendid  thrones,  and  was  rendered  still  more  delightful
by  means  of  the  various  enjoyments  which  there  presented
themselves  as  soon  as  thought  of.  Even  when  there,  she  was
exceedingly  tortured  with  the  fire  of  separation.  And  she
saw  from  the  top  of  this  terrace  a  magnificent  heavenly
garden,  planted  with  trees  and  creepers  of  gold,  and  full  of
hundreds  of  tanks  adorned  with  costly  stone.  And  when  she
saw  it  she  said  to  herself :  "  Wonderful !  This  splendid
city  of  ours  is  more  beautiful  even  than  the  world  of  the
moon  in  which  I  was  born.  And  yet  I  have  not  explored
this  city,  which  is  the  very  crest- jewel  of  the  Himalayas,  in
which  there  is  such  a  splendid  suburban  garden  excelling
Nandana.  So  I  will  go  into  this  lovely  shrubbery,  cool  with
the  shade  of  trees,  and  alleviate  a  little  the  scorching  of  the
fires  of  separation."

After  the  young  maiden  had  gone  through  these  reflec-
tions, she  dexterously  managed  to  descend  slowly  from  the
terrace  alone,  and  prepared  to  go  to  that  city  garden.  And
as  she  could  not  go  on  foot  she  was  carried  there  by  some
birds  that  were  brought  to  her  by  her  power,  and  served  as
her  conveyance.  When  she  reached  the  garden  she  sat  in  an
arbour  formed  of  plantains  growing  together,  on  a  carpet  of
flowers,  with  heavenly  singing  and  music  sounding  in  her  ears.
And  even  there  she  did  not  obtain  relief,  and  her  passion  did
not  abate  :  on  the  contrary,  the  fire  of  her  love  increased
still  more,  as  she  was  separated  from  her  beloved.

Then  in  her  longing  she  was  eager  to  behold  that  loved
one,  though  only  in  a  picture,  so  by  her  magic  power  she
summoned  for  herself  a  tablet  for  painting  and  colour-pencils.
And  she  said  to  herself :  "  Considering  even  the  Disposer  is
unable  to  create  a  second  like  my  beloved,  how  can  I,  reed  l
in  hand,  produce  a  worthy  likeness  of  him  ?  Nevertheless,  I
will  paint  him  as  well  as  I  can  for  my  own  consolation."  After
going  through  these  reflections  she  proceeded  to  paint  him
on  a  tablet,  and  while  she  was  thus  engaged,  her  confidante,

1  The  reed  was  no  doubt  used  as  a  brush  or  pencil.  The  Sanskrit
College  MS.  reads  utkantha-sannapanir  aham  katham.


166  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

Manoharika,  who  had  been  troubled  at  not  seeing  her,
came  to  that  place  to  look  for  her.  She  stood  behind  the
princess,  and  saw  her  languishing  alone  in  the  bower  of
creepers,  with  her  painting-tablet  in  her  hand.  She  said
to  herself :  "  I  will  just  see  now  what  the  princess  is  doing
here  alone."  So  the  princess's  confidante  remained  there
concealed.

And  then  Padmavati,  with  her  lotus-like  eyes  gushing
with  tears,  began  to  address,  in  the  following  words,  her  be-
loved in  the  painting  :  "  When  thou  didst  slay  the  formidable
Asuras  and  deliver  Indra,  how  comes  it  that  thou  dost  not
deliver  me  from  my  woe,  though  near  me,  by  speaking  to  me
at  any  rate  ?  To  one  whose  merits  in  a  former  life  are  small,
even  a  wishing-tree  is  ungenerous,  even  Buddha  is  wanting  in
compassion,  and  even  gold  becomes  a  stone.  Thou  knowest
not  the  fever  of  love,  and  canst  not  comprehend  my  pain :
what  could  the  poor  archer  Love,  whose  arrows  are  but
flowers,  do  against  one  whom  the  Daityas  found  invincible  ?
But  what  am  I  saying  ?  Truly  fate  is  adverse  to  me,  for  fate
stops  my  eyes  with  tears,  and  will  not  allow  me  to  behold  thee
for  long  together,  even  in  a  picture."  When  the  princess
had  said  this,  she  began  to  weep  with  teardrops  that  were
so  large  that  it  appeared  as  if  her  necklace  were  broken,  and
great  pearls  were  falling  from  it.

At  that  moment  her  friend  Manoharika  advanced  to-
wards her,  and  the  princess  concealed  the  picture  and  said
to  her  :  "  My  friend,  I  have  not  seen  you  for  ever  so  long ;
where  have  you  been  ?  "  When  Manoharika  heard  this  she
laughed  and  said  :  "I  have  been  wandering  about,  my  friend,
for  a  long  time  to  look  for  you ;  so,  why  do  you  hide  the
picture  ?     I  saw,  a  moment  ago,  a  wonderful  picture."  *

When  Padmavati's  friend  said  this  to  her  she  seized  her
hand,  and  said  to  her  with  a  face  cast  down  from  shame,  and
a  voice  choked  with  tears  :  "  My  friend,  you  knew  it  all  long
ago ;    why  should  I  try  to  conceal  it  ? 2     The  fact  is,  that

1  The  three  India  Office  MSS.  read  atha  srutam,  which,  I  suppose,  means,
"and  I  heard  something  too."

2  This  line  in  Brockhaus'  text  is  unmetrical.  Nos.  1882  and  3003  read
kirn  nu  guhyate,  No.  2 1 66  has  na  for  nu.


THE  DARTS  OF  KAMA  167

prince,  though  on  that  occasion,  in  the  sacred  enclosure  of
Gauri,  he  delivered  me  from  the  terrible  fire  of  the  Rakshasis'
wrath,  plunged  me  nevertheless  in  the  fire  of  love,  with  this
intolerable  flame  of  separation.  So  I  do  not  know  where  to
go,  whom  to  speak  to,  what  to  do,  or  what  expedient  I  must
have  recourse  to,  since  my  heart  is  fixed  on  one  hard  to  obtain."

When  the  princess  said  this,  her  friend  answered  her  :
"  My  dear,  this  attachment  of  your  mind  is  quite  becoming
and  suitable  ;  your  union  would  certainly  be  to  the  enhance-
ment of  one  another's  beauty,  as  the  union  of  the  digit  of
the  new  moon  with  the  hair  of  Siva  matted  into  the  form  of  a
diadem.  And  do  not  be  despondent  about  this  matter:  of
a  truth  he  will  not  be  able  to  live  without  you.  Did  you  not
see  that  he  was  affected  in  the  same  way  as  yourself  ?  Even
women  who  see  you 1  are  so  much  in  love  with  your  beauty
that  they  desire  to  become  men  ;  so  what  man  would  not  be
a  suitor  for  your  hand  ?  Much  more  will  he  be,  who  is  equal
to  you  in  beauty.  Do  you  suppose  that  Siva,  who  declared
that  you  should  be  man  and  wife,  can  say  what  is  false  ?
However,  what  afflicted  one  feels  quite  patient  about  an
object  much  desired,  even  though  it  is  soon  to  be  attained  ?
So  cheer  up  !  He  will  soon  become  your  husband.  It  is  not
hard  for  you  to  win  any  husband,  but  all  men  must  feel  that
you  are  a  prize  hard  to  win."

When  the  princess's  attendant  said  this  to  her,  she
answered  her  :  "  My  friend,  though  I  know  all  this,' what  am
I  to  do  ?  My  heart  cannot  endure  to  remain  for  a  moment
without  that  lord  of  my  life,  to  whom  it  is  devoted,  and
Kama  will  not  bear  to  be  trifled  with  any  further.  For  when
I  think  of  him  my  mind  is  immediately  refreshed,2  but  my
limbs  burn,  and  my  breath  seems  to  leave  my  body  with
glowing  heat."

Even  as  the  princess  was  saying  this  she,  being  soft  as  a
flower,  fell  fainting  with  distraction  into  the  arms  of  that
friend  of  hers.     Then  her  weeping  friend  gradually  brought

1  I  adopt  Dr  Kern's  conjecture  of  yam  for  yd.  It  is  confirmed  by  the
three  India  Office  MSS.  and  by  the  Sanskrit  College  MS.

2  This  meaning  is  assigned  by  Bohtlingk  and  Roth  to  the  word  nirvati  in
this  passage.


168  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

her  round  by  sprinkling  her  with  water  and  fanning  her  with
plantain  leaves.  Her  friend  employed  with  her  the  usual
remedies  of  a  necklace  and  bracelet  of  lotus  fibres,  a  moist
anointing  with  sandalwood  unguent,  and  a  bed  of  lotus
leaves  * ;  but  these  contracted  heat  by  coming  in  contact
with  her  body,  and  seemed  by  their  heating  and  withering
to  feel  the  same  pain  as  she  felt.

Then  Padmavati,  in  her  agitation,  said  to  that  friend  :
"  Why  do  you  weary  yourself  in  vain  ?  My  suffering  cannot
be  alleviated  in  this  way.  It  would  be  a  happy  thing  if  you
would  take  the  only  step  likely  to  alleviate  it."  When  she
said  this  in  her  pain,  her  friend  answered  her :  "  What  would
not  I  do  for  your  sake?  Tell  me,  my  friend,  what  that
step  is."

When  the  princess  heard  this,  she  said  with  difficulty,  as  if
ashamed  :  "  Go,  my  dear  friend,  and  bring  my  beloved  here
quickly ;  for  in  no  other  way  can  my  suffering  be  allayed,  and
my  father  will  not  be  angry :  on  the  contrary,  as  soon  as  he
comes  here  he  will  give  me  to  him."  When  her  friend  heard
that,  she  said  to  her  in  a  tone  of  decision :  "  If  it  be  so,  re-
cover your  self-command.  This  is  but  a  little  matter.  Here
am  I,  my  friend,  setting  out  for  Chandrapura,  the  famous  and
splendid  city  of  Chandraketu,  the  king  of  the  Vidyadharas,
the  father  of  your  beloved,  to  bring  your  beloved  to  you.
Be  comforted  !     What  is  the  use  of  grief  ?  "

When  the  princess  had  been  thus  comforted  by  Mano-
harika,  she  said  :  "  Then  rise  up,  my  friend ;  may  your
journey  be  prosperous!  Go  at  once!  And  you  must  say
courteously  from  me  to  that  heroic  lord  of  my  life,  who
delivered  the  three  worlds :  '  When  you  delivered  me  so
triumphantly  in  that  temple  of  Gauri  from  the  danger  of  the
Rakshasis,  how  is  it  that  you  do  not  deliver  me  now,  when  I
am  being  slain  by  the  god  Kama,  the  destroyer  of  women  ?
Tell  me,  my  lord,  what  kind  of  virtue  is  this  in  persons  like
yourself,  able  to  deliver  the  worlds,  to  neglect  in  calamity  one
whom  you  formerly  saved,  though  she  is  devoted  to  you.' 2

1  For  a  note  on  sandalwood  see  Vol.  VII,  pp.  105-107,  and  for  the  bed  of
lotus  leaves  cf.  Vol.  VII,  pp.  101  and  143. — n.m.p.

2  I  follow  MSS.  Nos.  3003  and  2166,  which  give  jano'  ?nwritto'  pi.


THE  PRAYER  TO  SIVA  169

This  is  what  you  must  say,  auspicious  one,  or  something  to
this  effect,  as  your  own  wisdom  may  direct."  When  Padma-
vati  had  said  this,  she  sent  that  friend  on  her  errand.  And
she  mounted  a  bird,  which  her  magic  knowledge  brought  to  her,
to  carry  her,  and  set  out  for  that  city  of  the  Vidyadharas.

And  then  Padmavati,  having  to  a  certain  extent  recovered
her  spirits  by  hope,  took  the  painting- tablet  and  entered  the
palace  of  her  father.  There  she  went  into  her  own  apartment,
surrounded  by  her  servants,  and  bathed,  and  worshipped  Siva
with  intense  devotion,  and  thus  prayed  to  him :  "  Holy  one,
without  thy  favouring  consent  no  wish,  great  or  small,  is  ful-
filled for  anyone  in  these  three  worlds.  So  if  thou  wilt  not
give  me  for  a  husband  that  noble  son  of  the  emperor  of  the
Vidyadharas,  on  whom  I  have  set  my  heart,  I  will  abandon
my  body  in  front  of  thy  image."

When  she  addressed  this  prayer  to  Siva,  her  attendants
were  filled  with  grief  and  astonishment,  and  said  to  her  :
"  Why  do  you  speak  thus,  Princess,  regardless  of  your  body's
weal  ?  Is  there  anything  in  these  three  worlds  difficult  for
you  to  obtain  ?  Even  Buddha  would  forget  his  self-restraint
if  loved  by  you  !  So  he  must  be  a  man  of  exceptional  merit
whom  you  thus  love."  When  the  princess  heard  this,  carried
away  by  the  thought  of  his  virtues,  she  said  :  "  How  can  I
help  loving  him,  who  is  the  only  refuge  of  Indra  and  the  rest
of  the  gods,  who  alone  destroyed  the  army  of  the  Asuras,  as
the  sun  destroys  the  darkness,  and  who  saved  my  life  ?  "
Saying  such  things,  she  remained  there  full  of  longing,  en-
gaged in  conversation  about  her  beloved  with  her  confidential
attendants.

In  the  meanwhile  her  friend  Manoharika,  travelling  at
full  speed,  reached  Chandrapura,  that  city  of  the  king  of  the
Vidyadharas,  which  Visvakarman  made  wonderful,  and  of
unparalleled  magnificence,  as  if  dissatisfied  with  the  city  of
the  gods,  though  of  that  also  he  was  the  architect.  There  she
searched  for  Muktaphalaketu,  but  could  not  find  him,  and
then,  riding  on  her  bird,  she  went  to  the  garden  belonging  to
that  city.  She  derived  much  pleasure  from  looking  at  that
garden,  the  magic  splendour  of  which  was  inconceivable  :
the  trees  of  which  were  of  glittering  jewels,  and  had  this


170  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

peculiarity,  that  one  tree  produced  a  great  many  flowers  of
different  kinds  ;  which  was  rendered  charming  by  the  blend-
ing of  the  notes  of  various  birds  with  the  sound  of  heavenly
songs  ;   and  which  was  full  of  many  slabs  of  precious  stones.

And  then  various  gardeners,  in  the  form  of  birds,  saw
her,  and  came  up  to  her,  speaking  with  articulate  voice  and
addressing  her  kindly,  and  they  invited  her  to  sit  down  on
a  slab  of  emerald  at  the  foot  of  a  pdrijdta  tree,  and  when
she  was  seated,  served  her  with  appropriate  luxuries.  And
she  received  that  attention  gratefully,  and  said  to  herself :
"  Wonderful  are  the  magic  splendours  of  the  Vidyadharas,
since  they  possess  such  a  garden  in  which  enjoyments  present
themselves  unlooked  for,  in  which  the  servants  are  birds,  and
the  nymphs  of  heaven  keep  up  a  perpetual  concert."  When
she  had  said  this  to  herself,  she  questioned  those  attendants,
and  at  last,  searching  about,  she  found  a  thicket  of  pdrijdta
and  other  trees  of  the  kind,  and  in  it  she  saw  Muktaphalaketu,
appearing  to  be  ill,1  lying  on  a  bed  of  flowers  sprinkled  with
sandalwood  juice.  And  she  recognised  him,  as  she  had  become
acquainted  with  him  in  the  hermitage  of  Gauri,  and  she  said
to  herself:  "Let  me  see  what  his  illness  is,  that  he  is  lying
here  concealed."

In  the  meanwhile  Muktaphalaketu  began  to  say  to  his
friend  Samyataka,  who  was  attempting  to  restore  him  with
ice,  and  sandalwood,  and  fanning :  "  Surely  this  God  of  Love
has  placed  hot  coals  in  the  ice  for  me,  and  in  the  sandalwood
juice  a  flame  of  chaff,  and  in  the  air  of  the  fan  a  fire  as  of  a
burning  forest,  since  he  produces  a  scorching  glow  on  every
side  of  me,  who  am  tortured  with  separation.  So  why,  my
friend,  do  you  weary  yourself  in  vain  ?  In  this  garden,  which
surpasses  Nandana,  even  the  delightful  songs  and  dances
and  other  sports  of  heavenly  nymphs  afflict  my  soul.  And
without  Padmavati,  the  lotus-faced,  the  daughter  of  Padma-
sekhara,  this  fever  produced  by  the  arrows  of  love  cannot  be
alleviated.  But  I  do  not  dare  to  say  this,  and  I  do  not  find  a
refuge  in  anyone ;  indeed  I  know  of  only  one  expedient  for
obtaining  her.     I  will  go  to  the  temple  of  Gauri,  where  I  saw

1  Bohtlingk  and  Roth  consider  that  sakalyaka  is  the  true  reading.  One
MS.  certainly  has  y,  and  I  think  probably  the  others.


NEWS  OF  THE  BELOVED  171

my  beloved,  and  where  she  tore  out  my  heart  with  the  arrows
of  her  sidelong  glances,  and  carried  it  away.  There  Siva,  who
is  united  with  the  daughter  of  the  king  of  the  mountains,
will,  when  propitiated  with  penance,  show  me  how  to  become
united  with  my  beloved."

When  the  prince  had  said  this  he  was  preparing  to  rise
up,  and  then  Manoharika,  being  much  pleased,  showed  her-
self ;  and  Samyataka,  delighted,  said  to  that  prince  :  "  My
friend,  you  are  in  luck ;  your  desire  is  accomplished  !  Look !
Here  is  that  beloved's  female  attendant  come  to  you.  I  be-
held her  at  the  side  of  the  princess  in  the  hermitage  of  the
goddess  Ambika."  Then  the  prince,  beholding  the  friend  of
his  beloved,  was  in  a  strange  state — a  state  full  of  the  burst-
ing forth  of  joy,  astonishment  and  longing.  And  when  she
came  near  him,  a  rain  of  nectar  to  his  eyes,  he  made  her  sit
by  his  side,  and  asked  her  about  the  health  of  his  beloved.

Then  she  gave  him  this  answer  :  "  No  doubt  my  friend
will  be  well  enough  when  you  become  her  husband ;  but  at
present  she  is  afflicted.  For  ever  since  she  saw  you,  and  you
robbed  her  of  her  heart,  she  has  been  despondent,  and  neither
hears  nor  sees.  The  maiden  has  left  off  her  necklace  and
wears  a  chain  of  lotus  fibres,  and  has  abandoned  her  couch
and  rolls  on  a  bed  of  lotus  leaves.  Best  of  conquerors,  I  tell
you,  her  limbs,  now  white  with  the  sandalwood  juice  which
is  drying  up  with  their  heat,  seem  laughingly  *  to  say  :  '  That
very  maiden,  who  formerly  was  too  bashful  to  endure  the
mention  of  a  lover,2  is  now  reduced  to  this  sad  condition
by  being  separated  from  her  dear  one.5  And  she  sends  you
this  message."  Having  said  so  much,  Manoharika  recited
the  two  verses  which  Padmavati  had  put  into  her  mouth.

When  Muktaphalaketu  heard  all  that,  his  pain  departed,
and  he  joyfully  welcomed  Manoharika,  and  said  to  her  :
"  This  my  mind  has  been  irrigated  by  your  speech  as  by
nectar,  and  is  refreshed ;  and  I  have  recovered  my  spirits
and  got  rid  of  my  languor  :  my  good  deeds  in  a  former  life

1  By  the  canons  of  Hindu  rhetoric  a  smile  is  white.  Hence  this  frigid
conceit.

2  I  read  na  for  in.  Two  out  of  the  three  India  Office  MSS.  and  the
Sanskrit  College  MS.  give  na.


172  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

have  to-day  borne  fruit,  in  that  that  daughter  of  the  Gan-
dharva  king  is  so  well  disposed  towards  me.  But  though  I
might  possibly  be  able  to  endure  the  agony  of  separation,
how  could  that  lady,  whose  body  is  as  delicate  as  a  sirisha
flower,  endure  it  ?  So  I  will  go  to  that  very  hermitage  of
Gaurl ;  and  do  you  bring  your  friend  there,  in  order  that  we
may  meet  at  once.  And  go  quickly,  auspicious  one,  and
comfort  your  friend,  and  give  her  this  crest- jewel,  which  puts
a  stop  to  all  grief,  which  the  Self-existent  gave  me  when
pleased  with  me.  And  this  necklace,  which  Indra  gave
me,  is  a  present  for  yourself."  When  the  prince  had  said
this,  he  gave  her  the  crest- jewel  from  his  head,  and  took
the  necklace  from  his  neck  and  put  it  on  hers.

Then  Manoharika  was  delighted,  and  she  bowed  before
him,  and  set  out,  mounted  on  her  bird,  to  find  her  friend
Padmavati.  And  Muktaphalaketu,  his  languor  having  been
removed  by  delight,  quickly  entered  his  own  city  with
Samyataka.

And  Manoharika,  when  she  came  into  the  presence  of
Padmavati,  told  her  of  the  love-pain  of  her  beloved  as  she
had  witnessed  it,  and  repeated  to  her  his  speech,  sweet  and
tender  with  affection,  as  she  had  heard  it ;  and  told  her  of  the
arrangement  to  meet  her  in  the  hermitage  of  Gauri  which
he  had  made,  and  then  gave  her  the  crest- jewel  which  he  had
sent,  and  showed  her  the  chain  which  he  had  given  herself
as  a  present.  Then  Padmavati  embraced  and  honoured  that
friend  of  hers  who  had  been  so  successful,  and  forgot  that
pain  of  the  fire  of  love  which  had  tortured  her  before,  and  she
fastened  that  crest- jewel  on  her  head,  as  if  it  were  joy,  and
began  to  prepare  to  go  to  the  wood  of  Gauri.

In  the  meanwhile  it  happened  that  a  hermit,  of  the  name
of  Tapodhana,  came  to  that  grove  of  Gauri,  with  his  pupil,
named  Dridhavrata.  And  while  there  the  hermit  said  to
his  pupil  Dridhavrata  :  "I  will  engage  in  contemplation  for
a  time  in  this  heavenly  garden.  You  must  remain  at  the
gate,  and  not  let  anyone  in,  and  after  I  have  finished  my
contemplation  I  will  worship  Parvati."  When  the  hermit
had  said  this,  he  placed  that  pupil  at  the  gate  of  the  garden
and  began  to  engage  in  contemplation  under  a  pdrijdta  tree.


THE  PUPIL'S  CURSE  173

After  he  rose  up  from  his  contemplation  he  went  into  the
temple  to  worship  Ambika,  but  he  did  not  tell  his  pupil,  who
was  at  the  gate  of  the  garden.

And  in  the  meanwhile  Muktaphalaketu  came  there
adorned,  with  Samyataka,  mounted  on  a  heavenly  camel.
And  as  he  was  about  to  enter  that  garden  that  pupil  of  the
hermit  forbade  him,  saying :  "  Do  not  do  so  !  My  spiritual
superior  is  engaged  in  contemplation  within."  But  the
prince,  longing  to  see  his  beloved,  said  to  himself :  "  The
area  of  this  garden  is  extensive,  and  it  is  possible  that  she
may  have  arrived  and  may  be  somewhere  within  it,  whereas
the  hermit  is  in  only  one  corner  of  it."  So  he  got  out  of  sight
of  that  hermit's  pupil,  and  with  his  friend  entered  the  garden
by  flying  through  the  air.

And  while  he  was  looking  about,  the  hermit's  pupil  came
in  to  see  if  his  spiritual  superior  had  completed  his  meditation.
He  could  not  see  his  superior  there,  but  he  did  see  the  noble
Muktaphalaketu  with  his  friend,  who  had  entered  the  garden
by  a  way  by  which  it  was  not  meant  to  be  entered.  Then
that  pupil  of  the  hermit  cursed  the  prince  in  his  anger,  saying
to  him :  "As  you  have  interrupted  the  meditation  of  my
spiritual  guide,  and  driven  him  away,  go  with  your  friend  to
the  world  of  men  on  account  of  this  disrespect*"  After  he
had  pronounced  this  curse  he  went  in  search  of  his  superior.
But  Muktaphalaketu  was  thrown  into  great  despondency
by  this  curse  having  fallen  on  him  like  a  thunderbolt  when
his  desire  was  on  the  point  of  being  fulfilled.  And  in  the
meanwhile  Padmavati,  eager  to  meet  her  beloved,  came
mounted  on  a  bird,  with  Manoharika  and  her  other  attend-
ants. And  when  the  prince  saw  that  lady,  who  had  come  to
meet  him  of  her  own  accord,  but  was  now  separated  from
him  by  a  curse,  he  was  reduced  to  a  painful  frame  of  mind,
in  which  sorrow  and  joy  were  blended.  And  at  that  very
moment  Padmavati's  right  eye  throbbed,  boding  evil  fortune,1
and  her  heart  fluttered.  Then  the  princess,  seeing  that  her
lover  was  despondent,  thought  that  he  might  be  annoyed
because  she  had  not  come  before  he  did,  and  approached  him
with  an  affectionate  manner.     Then  the  prince  said  to  her  :

1  See  Vol.  II,  pp.  144W1,  145w;  and  Vol.  V,  pp.  20C»3,  201ft.-— n.m.p.


174  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

"  My  beloved,  our  desire,  though  on  the  point  of  fulfilment,
has  been  again  baffled  by  fate."  She  said  excitedly :  "  Alas  !
how  baffled  ?  "  And  then  the  prince  told  her  how  the  curse
was  pronounced  on  him.

Then  they  all  went,  in  their  despondency,  to  entreat  the
hermit,  who  was  the  spiritual  guide  of  him  who  inflicted  the
curse,  and  was  now  in  the  temple  of  the  goddess,  to  fix  an
end  to  the  curse.  When  the  great  hermit,  who  possessed
supernatural  insight,  saw  them  approach  in  humble  guise,
he  said  in  a  kind  manner  to  Muktaphalaketu :  "  You  have
been  cursed  by  this  fool,  who  acted  rashly  before  he  had  re-
flected 1 ;  however,  you  have  not  done  me  any  harm,  since  I
rose  up  of  myself.  And  this  curse  can  only  be  an  instrument,
not  the  real  reason  of  your  change  :  in  truth,  you  have  in  your
mortal  condition  to  do  the  gods  a  service.  You  shall  come,
in  the  course  of  destiny,  to  behold  this  Padmavati,  and,  sick
with  love,  you  shall  abandon  your  mortal  body,  and  be
quickly  released  from  your  curse.  And  you  shall  recover
this  lady  of  your  life,  wearing  the  same  body  that  she  wears
now;  for,  being  a  deliverer  of  the  universe,  you  do  not  de-
serve to  lie  long  under  a  curse.  And  the  cause  of  all  this
that  has  befallen  you  is  the  slight  stain  of  unrighteousness
which  attaches  to  you  on  account  of  your  having  slain  with
that  weapon  of  Brahma,  which  you  employed,  old  men  and
children."

When  Padmavati  heard  this,  she  said,  with  tears  in  her
eyes,  to  that  sage  :  "  Holy  sir,  let  me  have  the  same  lot  as
my  future  husband  !  I  shall  not  be  able  to  live  for  a  moment
without  him."  When  Padmavati  made  this  request  the
hermit  said  to  her  :  "  This  cannot  be  :  do  you  remain  here
for  the  present  engaged  in  asceticism,  in  order  that  he  may
be  quickly  delivered  from  his  curse,  and  may  marry  you.
And  then,  as  the  consort  of  that  Muktaphalaketu,  you  shall
rule  the  Vidyadharas  and  Asuras  for  ten  kalpas.2  And  while
you  are  performing  asceticism,  this  crest- jewel,  which  he  gave

1  Here  MSS.  Nos.  3003  and  21 66  and  the  Sanskrit  College  MS.  read
aprekshdpurvakdrma,  the  nominative  case  of  which  word  is  found  in  Taranga  64,
//,  20  and  26.     No.  1882  has  aprekshydpurvakdrind.

2  One  kalpa  is  4320  million  years.     See  further  Vol.  V,  p.  27n\ — n.m.p.


THE  COUNTER-CURSE  175

you,  shall  protect  you  ;  for  it  is  of  great  efficacy,  having
sprung  from  the  water-pot  of  the  Disposer."

When  the  hermit,  possessing  divine  insight,  had  said  this
to  Padmavati,  Muktaphalaketu,  bending  low,  addressed  this
prayer  to  him  :  "  Holy  sir,  may  my  faith  in  Siva  be  unwaver-
ing during  my  life  as  a  man,  and  may  my  mind  never  be
inclined  to  any  lady  but  Padmavati."  The  hermit  replied :
"  So  let  it  be  !  "  And  then  Padmavati,  sorely  grieved,
pronounced  on  that  pupil,  whose  fault  had  entailed  these
misfortunes,  the  following  curse :  "  Since  you  have  cursed  in
your  folly  my  destined  husband,  you  shall  be  a  vehicle  for  him
to  ride  on  in  his  human  condition,  possessing  the  property  of
going  with  a  wish  and  changing  your  shape  at  will."  When
the  pupil  had  been  thus  cursed  he  was  despondent,  and  then
the  hermit,  Tapodhana,  disappeared  with  him.

Then  Muktaphalaketu  said  to  Padmavati :  "  I  will  now
go  to  my  city  and  see  what  will  happen  to  me  there."  When
Padmavati  heard  this,  being  terrified  at  separation,  she  at
once  fell  on  the  earth  with  all  her  ornaments,  as  a  creeper,
broken  by  the  wind,  falls  with  all  its  flowers.  And  Mukta-
phalaketu comforted,  as  well  as  he  could,  his  crying  love,  and
departed  with  his  friend,  frequently  turning  his  eyes  to  look
at  her.  And  after  he  was  gone,  Padmavati  was  much  grieved,
and,  weeping,  said  to  her  friend  Manoharika,  who  tried  to
comfort  her  :  "  My  friend,  I  am  certain  that  I  saw  the  god-
dess Parvati  to-day  in  a  dream,  and  she  was  about  to  throw
a  garland  of  lotuses  round  my  neck,  when  she  said,  '  Never
mind !  I  will  give  it  you  on  some  future  occasion,'  and  de-
sisted from  her  intention.  So  I  understand  that  she  wished
in  this  way  to  let  me  know  that  my  union  with  my  beloved
would  be  hindered."  When  she  was  mourning  in  this  way
over  what  had  occurred,  her  friend  said  to  her  :  "  This
dream  was  no  doubt  sent  to  you  when  you  say,  by  the
goddess,  in  order  to  comfort  you.  And  the  hermit  said  the
very  same  to  you,  and  the  gods  have  clearly  thus  ordained.
So,  be  of  good  cheer,  you  will  soon  be  reunited  with  your
beloved."

This  and  other  speeches  from  her  friend,  and  the  magic
efficacy  of  the  crest- jewel,  made  Padmavati  recover  her  self-


176  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

command,  and  she  remained  there  in  the  hermitage  of  Gauri.
And  she  performed  asceticism,  worshipping  there  Siva  and
Parvati  three  times  a  day,  and  also  the  picture  of  her  beloved,
which  she  had  brought  from  her  own  city,  looking  upon  it  as
the  image  of  a  divinity.  Her  parents,  hearing  what  had
taken  place,  came  to  her  in  tears,  and  tried  to  prevent  her,
saying  :  "  Do  not  uselessly  fatigue  yourself  with  penance  to
bring  about  a  desired  end  which  will  anyhow  take  place."  But
she  said  to  them  :  "  How  could  I  live  here  with  any  comfort,
now  that  the  husband  recently  appointed  for  me  by  the
god  has  fallen  into  misery  owing  to  a  curse  ?  For  to  ladies
of  good  family  a  husband  is  a  god.  And  no  doubt  this
calamity  may  soon  be  brought  to  an  end  by  austerities,  and
Siva  may  be  propitiated,  and  then  I  may  be  reunited  with
my  beloved,  for  there  is  nothing  1  that  austerities  cannot
accomplish."

When  Padmavati  had  said  this  with  firm  resolution,  her
mother,  Kuvalay avail,  said  to  her  father,  the  king :  "  King,
let  her  perform  this  severe  asceticism  !  Why  trouble  her
further  on  false  grounds  ?  This  is  appointed  for  her  by
Destiny :  there  is  a  reason  for  it.  Listen.  Long  ago,  in
the  city  of  Siva,  the  daughter  of  the  king  of  the  Siddhas,
named  Devaprabha,  was  performing  a  very  severe  penance,
in  order  to  obtain  the  husband  she  desired.  Now  my
daughter  Padmavati  had  gone  there  with  me  to  visit  the
shrine  of  the  god,  and  she  went  up  to  the  Siddha  maiden
and  laughed  at  her,  saying :  '  Are  you  not  ashamed  to  practise
austerities  in  order  to  obtain  a  husband  ?  '  Then  the  Siddha
maiden  cursed  her  in  her  rage,  saying :  '  Fool !  your  laughter
proceeds  from  childishness :  you  also  shall  perform  painful
austerities  to  your  heart's  content  to  obtain  a  husband/
Accordingly  she  must  of  necessity  endure  the  misery  which
the  curse  of  the  Siddha  maiden  has  entailed  ;  who  can  alter
that  ?  So  let  her  do  what  she  is  doing."  When  the  queen
had  said  this  to  the  king  of  the  Gandharvas,  he  took  leave
at  last,  though  reluctantly,  of  his  daughter,  who  bowed  at  his
feet,  and  went  to  his  own  citv.     And  Padmavati  remained  in

1  Two  of  the  India  Office  MSS.  and  the  Sanskrit  College  MS.  insert
kinchit  before  tapasam.


CONTINUED  ASCETICISM  177

that  hermitage  of  Parvati,  intent  on  religious  observances
and  prayers,  and  every  day  she  went  through  the  air  and
worshipped  that  Siddhisvara  that  was  worshipped  by
Brahma  and  the  other  gods,  of  which  Siva  had  told  her
in  a  dream.


vol.  vni.


CHAPTER  CXVIII

170b.  Muktdphalaketu  and  Padmdvati

WHILE  Padmavati  was  engaged  in  asceticism,  in
order  that  she  might  be  reunited  to  Muktaphala-
ketu,  the  son  of  the  emperor  of  the  Vidyadharas,
that  prince,  feeling  that  his  descent  into  the  world  of  men
was  nigh  at  hand  owing  to  the  curse  of  the  Brahman,  in  his
fear  fled  to  Siva  as  a  refuge.

And  while  he  was  worshipping  Siva  he  heard  a  voice
issue  from  the  inner  cell  of  his  temple  :  "  Fear  not !  For  thou
shalt  not  have  to  endure  misery  while  dwelling  in  the  womb,
and  thou  shalt  not  have  to  suffer  during  thy  life  as  a  mortal,
nor  shalt  thou  long  remain  in  that  condition.1  Thou  shalt
be  born  as  a  strong  and  valorous  prince.  Thou  shalt  obtain
from  the  hermit  Tapodhana  the  control  of  all  weapons,  and
my  Gana  named  Kinkara  shall  be  thy  younger  brother.  With
his  help  thou  shalt  conquer  thy  enemies,  and  accomplish  the
required  service  for  the  gods,  and  thou  shalt  be  reunited  with
Padmavati  and  rule  the  Vidyadharas."  When  that  prince  had
heard  this  voice  he  conceived  hope,  and  remained  waiting  for
the  ripening,  so  to  speak,  of  the  fruit  of  the  curse  pronounced
upon  him.

At  this  point  of  my  story  there  was  a  city  in  the  eastern
region  named  Devasabha,  that  surpassed  in  splendour  the
court  of  the  gods.  In  it  there  lived  a  universal  monarch
named  Merudhvaja,  the  comrade  of  Indra  when  war  arose
between  the  gods  and  Asuras.  That  great-hearted  prince
was  greedy  of  glory,  not  of  the  goods  of  others ;  his  sword
was  sharp,  but  not  his  punishments ;  he  feared  sin,  but  not
his  enemy.  His  brows  were  sometimes  curved  in  anger,  but
there  was  no  crookedness  in  his  heart.  His  arm  was  hard
where  it  was  marked  with  the  horny  thickening  produced  by

1  MS.  No.  1882  reads  garbhavase  kleso;  and  this  seems  to  give  a  sense
more  clearly  in  accordance  with  the  sequel  of  the  story.

178


THE  PROMISE  OF  INDRA  179

the  bowstring,  but  there  was  no  hardness  in  his  speech.  He
spared  his  helpless  enemies  in  battle,  but  he  did  not  exhibit
any  mean  parsimony  with  regard  to  his  treasure  * ;  and  he
took  pleasure  in  virtuous  deeds  and  not  in  women.

That  king  had  always  two  anxieties  in  his  heart :  the
first  was  that  not  even  one  son  was  as  yet  born  to  him ;  the
second  was  that  the  Asuras,  who  escaped  from  the  slaughter
in  the  great  fight  long  ago  between  the  gods  and  Asuras  and
fled  to  Patala,  kept  continually  sallying  out  to  a  distance
from  it  and  treacherously  destroying  holy  places,  temples
and  hermitages  in  his  land,  and  then  retiring  into  Patala
again ;  and  the  king  could  not  catch  them,  as  they  could
move  through  the  air  as  well  as  through  Patala  :  that  afflicted
the  brave  monarch,  though  he  had  no  rivals  upon  earth.

It  happened  that  once,  when  he  was  afflicted  with  these
anxieties,  he  went  to  the  assembly  of  the  gods,  on  the  day
of  the  full  moon  in  the  month  Chaitra,  in  Indra's  splendid
chariot,  which  he  sent  to  fetch  him ;  for  Indra  always  held
a  general  assembly  in  the  early  part  of  that  day,  and  King
Merudhvaja  always  went  to  it  in  his  chariot.  But  on  that
occasion  the  king  kept  sighing,  though  he  was  amused  with
the  dances  and  songs  of  the  heavenly  nymphs,  and  honoured
by  Indra.

When  the  king  of  the  gods  saw  that,  knowing  what  was
in  his  heart,  he  said  to  him  :  "  King,  I  know  what  thy  grief
is  ;  dismiss  it  from  thy  mind.  One  son  shall  be  born  to  thee,
who  shall  be  called  Muktaphaladhvaja,  and  shall  be  a  portion
of  Siva,  and  a  second,  named  Malayadhvaja,  who  shall  be  an
incarnation  of  a  Gana.  Muktaphaladhvaja  and  his  younger
brother  shall  obtain  from  the  hermit  Tapodhana  the  sciences
and  all  weapons  and  a  creature  to  ride  on,  that  shall  possess
the  power  of  assuming  any  shape.  And  that  invincible
warrior  shall  again  obtain  the  great  weapon  of  Pasupati,  and
shall  slay  the  Asuras,  and  get  into  his  power  the  earth  and
Patala.  And  receive  from  me  these  two  air-going  elephants,
Kanchanagiri  and  Kanchanasekhara,  together  with  mighty
weapons."     When  Indra  had  said  this  to  Merudhvaja,  he

1  Literally,  u  too  careful  guarding  of  his  dinaras."     Thnara  is  the  Latin
denarius.


180  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

gave  him  the  arms  and  the  elephants,  and  dismissed  him,
and  he  went  delighted  to  his  own  city  on  the  earth.  But
those  Asuras,  who  had  managed  by  their  treachery  to  cast
discredit  upon  the  king,  escaped  being  caught  by  him,  even
when  mounted  on  the  sky-going  elephant,  for  they  took
refuge  in  Patala.

Then  the  king,  desiring  a  son,  went,  on  his  heavenly
elephant,  to  the  hermitage  of  that  hermit  Tapodhana,  of
whom  Indra  had  told  him.  There  he  approached  that  hermit
and  told  him  that  command  of  Indra,  and  said  to  him  :
"  Reverend  sir,  quickly  tell  me  what  course  I  ought  to  take
to  gain  my  end."  And  the  hermit  recommended  that  the
king  and  his  wife  should  immediately  take  upon  them  a
vow  for  the  propitiation  of  Siva,  in  order  that  they  might
attain  their  end.  The  king  then  proceeded  to  propitiate
Siva  with  that  vow,  and  then  that  god,  being  pleased,  said
to  the  king  in  a  dream  :  "  Rise  up,  King !  Thou  shalt  soon *
obtain  one  after  another  two  invincible  sons  for  the  destruc-
tion of  the  Asuras."  When  the  king  had  heard  this,  he
told  it  to  the  hermit  when  he  woke  up  in  the  morning,  and
after  he  and  his  wife  had  broken  their  fast  he  returned  to
his  own  city.

Then  that  august  and  beautiful  lady,  the  queen  of  Meru-
dhvaja,  became  pregnant  within  a  few  days.  And  Mukta-
phalaketu  was  in  some  mysterious  way  conceived  in  her,
having  been  compelled  by  the  curse  to  abandon  his  Vidya-
dhara  body.  And  that  body  of  his  remained  in  his  own  city
of  Chandrapura,  guarded  by  his  relations,  kept  by  magic
from  corrupting.

So  the  queen  of  Merudhvaja,  in  the  city  of  Devasabha,
delighted  her  husband  by  becoming  pregnant.  And  the
more  the  queen  was  oppressed  by  her  condition,  the  more
sprightly  was  her  husband,  the  king.  And  when  the  time
came,  she  gave  birth  to  a  boy  resembling  the  sun,  who,
though  an  infant,  was  of  great  might,  even  as  Parvati
gave  birth  to  the  God   of  War.     And  then  not   only  did

1  Of  course  we  must  read  avilambitani,  which  is  found  in  two  out  of  the
three  India  Office  MSS.,  and  in  the  Sanskrit  College  MS.  No.  1882  has
vilambitam.


THE  HERMIT'S  REQUEST  181

rejoicing  take  place  over  the  whole  earth,  but  in  the  heaven
also,  in  which  the  gods  struck  their  drums.  And  the  hermit
Tapodhana,  who  possessed  heavenly  insight,  came  there  in
person  to  congratulate  that  King  Merudhvaja.  With  the
help  of  that  hermit  the  rejoicing  king  gave  his  son  the  name
Muktaphaladhvaja  mentioned  by  Indra.

Then  the  hermit  departed.  But  after  the  lapse  of  a  year
a  second  son  was  born  to  the  king  by  that  queen,  and  the
king,  with  the  help  of  that  hermit,  who,  in  the  same  way,
came  there  out  of  joy,  named  him  Malayadhvaja.

Then  Samyataka  was  born  as  the  son  of  the  king's  minister,
in  accordance  with  the  curse,  and  his  father  gave  him  the
name  of  Mahabuddhi.  Then  those  two  princes  gradually
grew  up,  like  lions'  whelps,  with  that  minister's  son,  and  as
they  grew  their  might  developed  also.

And  after  eight  years  only  had  passed,  the  hermit
Tapodhana  came  and  invested  those  princes  with  the  sacred
thread.1  And  during  eight  more  years  he  instructed  them  2
in  knowledge,  and  in  the  accomplishments,  and  in  the  use  of
all  the  mighty  weapons.  Then  King  Merudhvaja,  seeing  that
his  sons  were  young  men,  able  to  fight  with  all  weapons,
considered  that  he  had  not  lived  in  vain.

Then  the  hermit  was  about  to  return  to  his  hermitage,
but  the  king  said  to  him  :  "  Reverend  sir,  now  take  whatever
present  you  desire."  The  great  sage  answered  :  "  This  is
the  present  I  desire  from  you,  King :  that,  with  your  sons,
you  would  slay  the  Asuras  that  impede  my  sacrifices."  The
king  said  to  him  :  "  Then,  reverend  sir,  you  must  now  take
your  present.  So  begin  a  sacrifice  :  the  Asuras  will  come  to
impede  it,  and  then  I  will  come  with  my  sons.  For  formerly
those  Daityas,  after  they  had  treacherously  wrought  you
wrong,  used  to  fly  up  into  the  air,  and  dive  into  the  sea,
and  go  to  Patala.  But  now  I  have  two  air-going  elephants
given  me  by  Indra ;  by  means  of  those  two  I  and  my  sons
will  catch  them,  even  if  they  do  fly  through  the  air."

When  the  hermit  heard  that  he  was  pleased,  and  he  said
to  the  king :    "  Then  do  you   make  in  the   meantime   fit

1  For  a  note  on  the  sacred  thread  see  Vol.  VII,  pp.  26-28. — n.m.p.

2  Viriiyate  is  a  misprint  for  viniyete.


182  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

preparation  for  my  sacrifice,  in  order  that  I  may  go  and  begin
a  long  sacrificial  session  that  will  be  famous  in  every  corner
of  the  earth.  And  I  will  send  you  as  a  messenger  this  my
pupil  Dridhavrata,  who  has  acquired  the  shape  of  an  un-
restrained mighty  bird  going  with  a  wish  ;  and  on  him  shall
Muktaphaladhvaja  ride."  1

When  the  hermit  had  said  this  he  returned  to  his  hermit-
age, and  the  king  sent  after  him  the  preparations  for  the
sacrifice.  With  those  he  began  a  sacrifice,  at  which  the  gods
and  rishis  assembled  in  a  body,  and  the  Danavas,  dwelling
in  Patala,  were  excited  when  they  heard  of  it.

When  the  hermit  knew  that,  he  sent  his  pupil  Dridha-
vrata, who  had  been  made  by  the  curse  to  assume  the  form
of  a  bird,  to  the  city  of  Devasabha.  When  King  Merudhvaja
saw  him  arrive  there,  he  remembered  the  words  of  the  hermit,
and  got  ready  those  two  heavenly  elephants.  And  he  him-
self mounted  the  chief  one,  which  was  named  Kanchanagiri,
and  the  lesser  one,  which  was  named  Kanchanasekhara,  he
gave  to  the  younger  of  his  sons.  But  Muktaphaladhvaja,
taking  with  him  the  heavenly  weapons,  mounted  the  great
bird  Dridhavrata,  and  the  bards  hailed  him  with  songs.  Then
those  three  heroes  sent  their  armies  on  in  front,  and  set  forth,
mounted  on  air- going  steeds,  and  blessed  by  holy  Brahmans.
And  when  they  reached  the  hermitage,  the  hermit,  being
pleased  with  them,  granted  them  this  boon,  that  they  should
be  invulnerable  by  all  weapons.

In  the  meanwhile  the  army  of  the  Asuras  came  to  impede
the  sacrifice,  and  the  soldiers  of  Merudhvaja,  when  they  saw
the  Asuras,  charged  them  with  a  shout.  Then  a  battle  took
place  between  the  Daityas  and  the  men,  but  the  Daityas,
being  in  the  air,  pressed  sore  on  the  men  who  were  on  the
ground.  Then  Muktaphaladhvaja,  mounted  on  his  winged
steed,  rushed  forward  and  cut  and  crushed  the  Daityas  with
a  shower  of  arrows.  And  those  Daityas  who  escaped  his
destroying  hand,  seeing  him  mounted  on  a  bird,  and  re-
splendent with  brightness,  took  to  flight,  supposing  that  he

1  To  my  references  to  the  Garuda  and  other  legendary  birds  in  Vol.  I,
pp.  103-105,  I  must  now  add  Bolte  and  Polivka,  op.  cit.}  vol.  ii,  pp.  134,  135.

— N.M.P.


THE  SECOND  GREAT  BATTLE  183

was  Narayana.  And  all  of  them  fled  in  fear  to  Patala,  and
told  what  had  happened  to  Trailokyamalin,  who  was  at  that
time  king  of  the  Daityas.

When  the  king  of  the  Asuras  heard  that,  he  quickly  in-
quired into  the  matter  by  means  of  his  spies,  and  found  out
that  Muktaphaladhvaja  was  a  mortal ;  and,  unable  to  endure
the  disgrace  of  having  been  defeated  by  a  man,  he  collected
all  the  Danavas  in  Patala,  and,  though  warned  by  omens  to
desist,  went  to  that  hermitage  to  fight.  But  Muktaphala-
dhvaja and  his  men,  who  were  on  the  alert  there,  rushed  to
attack  the  king  of  the  Danavas  as  soon  as  they  saw  him
arrive  with  his  army.  Then  a  second  great  battle  took  place
between  the  Asuras  and  the  men ;  and  the  gods,  headed  by
Rudra  and  Indra,  came  in  their  chariots  to  witness  it.

And  then  Muktaphaladhvaja  saw  instantly  presenting
itself  before  him  there  a  great  weapon  of  Pasupati,  of  irre-
sistible might,  of  huge  size,  with  a  flame  of  fire  streaming  up
The  Weapon  from  it,  with  three  eyes,  with  four  faces,  with  one
of  Pasupati  ]eg  and  eight  arms,  looking  like  the  fire  which  is
to  burn  up  the  world  at  the  end  of  the  kalpa.  The  weapon
said  :  "  Know  that  I  have  come  by  the  command  of  Siva
to  ensure  your  victory."  When  the  weapon  said  this,  the
prince  worshipped  it  and  clutched  it.

In  the  meanwhile  those  Asuras  in  the  air,  raining  arrows,
pressed  hard  the  fainting  army  of  Merudhvaja  that  was  be-
low them.  Then  Muktaphaladhvaja,  who  fought  in  various
manners,  came  to  deliver  that  army,  and  fought  with  the
Asuras,  placing  a  net  of  arrows  between  them  and  his  own
men.

And  when  Trailokyamalin,  the  king  of  the  Asuras,  saw
him  and  his  father  and  brother  mounted  on  their  air-going
steeds,  he  sent  forth  the  snake-weapon.  Innumerable  terrible
venomous  snakes  came  out  of  it,  and  these  Malayadhvaja
slew  with  Garuda  birds,  that  came  out  of  the  Garuda  weapon.
Then  Muktaphaladhvaja  repelled  with  ease  every  weapon  that
the  king  of  the  Daityas  and  his  son  sent  forth.

Then  that  enemy  of  the  gods  and  his  son  and  the  other
Danavas  were  enraged,  and  they  all  at  once  launched  at  him
their  fiery  weapons.     But  those  weapons,  seeing  the  weapon


184  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

of  Pasupati  blazing  in  front  of  him,  were  immediately  terrified,
and  fled.

Then  the  Daityas  were  terrified  and  tried  to  escape,  but
the  hero  Muktaphaladhvaja  perceived  their  intention,  and
immediately  constructed  above  them,  on  all  sides  of  them,
an  impenetrable  net  of  arrows,  like  a  cage  of  adamant.
And  while  the  Danavas  were  circling  within  this,  like  birds,
Muktaphaladhvaja,  with  the  help  of  his  father  and  brother,
smote  them  with  sharp  arrows.  And  the  several  hands,
feet,  bodies  and  heads  of  those  Daityas  fell  on  the  ground,
and  streams  of  blood  1  flowed.  Then  the  gods  exclaimed
"  Bravo ! "  and  followed  up  their  acclamation  with  a  rain  of
flowers,  and  Muktaphaladhvaja  used  the  bewildering  weapon
against  those  enemies.  That  made  the  Asuras  and  their  king
fall  senseless  on  the  earth,  and  then  by  means  of  the  weapon
of  Varuna  the  prince  bound  them  all  with  nooses.

Then  the  hermit  Tapodhana  said  to  King  Merudhvaja  :
"  You  must  by  no  means  kill  those  Asura  warriors  that  have
escaped  the  slaughter ;  but  you  must  win  them  over,  and  win
Rasatala  with  them.  As  for  this  king  of  the  Daityas,  and
his  son,  and  his  ministers,  you  must  take  them  with  the
great  Asuras,  and  the  malignant  Nagas,  and  the  principal
Rakshasas,  and  imprison  them  in  the  cave  of  Svetasaila  in
Devasabha."2  When  the  hermit  had  said  this  to  Merudhvaja
he  said  to  the  Daitya  warriors :  "  Do  not  be  afraid !  We
must  not  slay  you,  but  you  must  henceforth  be  subject  to  the
sway  of  this  Muktaphaladhvaja  and  his  brother."  When  the
king  said  this  to  the  Danavas,  they  joyfully  consented  to  his
proposal.  Then  the  king  had  Trailokyamalin,  the  sovereign
of  the  Daityas,  with  his  son  and  the  others,  conveyed  to
Svetasaila.  And  he  placed  them  in  confinement  in  that  cave,
and  had  them  guarded  by  his  principal  minister,  who  was
backed  by  a  force  of  many  brave  warriors.

Then,  the  battle  having  come  to  an  end,  and  the  gods,
who  were  present  in  their  chariots,  having  departed,  after
showering  manddra  flowers,  a  universal  rejoicing  took  place

1  We  should  probably  read  asranimnagah,  with  two  India  Office  MSS.
No.  3003  has  asrunimnagah.

2  The  three  India  Office  MSS.  give  Devasabhasanne — "  near  Devasabha."


THE  SEVEN  RASATALAS  185

over  the  whole  world,  and  the  victorious  King  Merudhvaja
said  to  his  two  sons  :  "I  will  remain  here  for  the  present  to
guard  the  sacrifice,  and  do  you  march  to  Patala  with  these
soldiers  of  ours,  who  have  possessed  themselves  of  many
chariots  belonging  to  the  Daityas,  and  with  those  soldiers  of
the  Asura  army  who  have  escaped  destruction.  And  con-
ciliate and  win  over  to  our  allegiance  the  inhabitants  of  Patala,
and  appoint  chief  governors  throughout  the  territory;  and
having  thus  taken  possession  of  it,  you  must  return  here."

When  the  heroic  Muktaphaladhvaja,  who  was  mounted
on  his  heavenly  steed,  that  went  with  a  wish,  and  Malaya-
dhvaja  heard  this,  the  two  brothers,  with  their  forces,  entered
Rasatala,  together  with  that  portion  of  the  army  of  the
Danavas  that  had  made  submission,  which  marched  in
front  of  them.  And  they  killed  the  guards  that  opposed  them
in  various  places,  and  proclaimed  an  amnesty  to  the  others
by  beat  of  drum.  And  as  the  people  showed  confidence,
and  were  submissive,  they  took  possession  of  the  seven
Rasatalas,  adorned  with  splendid  palaces  *  built  of  various
jewels,  and  they  enjoyed  those  palaces,  which  were  rendered
delightful  by  gardens  that  gratified  every  wish,  and  had  in
them  lakes  of  heavenly  wine,  with  many  ladders  of  precious
stones.  And  there  they  beheld  Danava  ladies  of  wonderful
beauty,  and  their  daughters,  who  by  means  of  magic  concealed
their  forms  within  trees.

And  then  Svayamprabha,  the  wife  of  Trailokyamalin,
began  austerities  in  order  to  bring  about  the  welfare  of  her
imprisoned  husband,  and  in  the  same  way  her  daughters,
Trailokyaprabha  and  Tribhuvanaprabha,  began  austerities  for
the  welfare  of  their  father.

And  those  princes  honoured  with  various  favours  all  the
inhabitants  of  Patala,  who  were  happy  now  that  they  had
obtained  repose;  and  they  appointed  Sangramasimha  and
other  governors,  and  went  to  their  father  in  the  hermitage
of  Tapodhana.

And  in  the  meanwhile  the  sacrifice  of  the  hermit  there
reached  completion,  and  the  gods  and  the  rishis  prepared  to

1  The  three  India  Office  MSS.  read  purasatair,  "  hundreds  of  cities  "  ?  In
any  case  varais  should  be  varair.


186  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

go  to  their  own  abodes.1  And  as  Indra  was  exceedingly-
pleased,  Merudhvaja  said  to  him  :  "  Come  with  me  to  my
city,  king  of  heaven,  if  thou  be  pleased  with  me."  When
Indra  visits  Indra  heard  that,  he  went,  in  order  to  please  him,
Merudhvaja  with  the  king  and  his  sons  to  the  city  of  Deva-
sabha,  after  taking  leave  of  the  hermit.  And  there  the  king,
who  was  sovereign  of  two  worlds,  entertained  Indra  so  sump-
tuously that  he  forgot  his  happiness  in  heaven.  Then  Indra
too,  being  gratified,  took  the  king  and  his  sons  in  his  own
heavenly  chariot  to  his  celestial  abode,  and  in  that  place,
which  was  charming  with  the  pleasures  of  a  concert  in  which
Narada,  Rambha  and  others  performed,  he  made  Meru-
dhvaja, with  Muktaphaladhvaja  and  Malayadhvaja,  forget
their  toils,  and  gave  them  garlands  from  the  pdrijdta  tree,
and  celestial  diadems,  and  after  honouring  them  sent  them
home.

And  they,  when  they  returned,  kept  going  to  and  fro
between  the  earth  and  Patala,  and,  though  kings  of  men,  held
sway  in  two  worlds.  Then  Merudhvaja  said  to  Muktaphala-
dhvaja :  "  Our  enemies  are  conquered.  You  two  brothers
are  young  men,  and  I  have  various  princesses  who  are  subject
to  my  sway,  and  I  have  sent  for  some  of  them  :  the  fitting
time  has  come  ;   so  take  to  yourselves  wives."

When  Muktaphaladhvaja's  father  said  this  to  him,  he
answered  :  "  Father,  my  mind  is  not  inclined  to  marriage
at  present.  I  will  now  perform  a  course  of  austerities  to
propitiate 1  Siva ;  but  let  this  Malayadhvaja,  my  dear  younger
brother,  be  married."  When  his  younger  brother,  Malaya-
dhvaja, heard  this,  he  said :  "Noble  brother,  is  it  fitting  that
I  should  be  married  before  you  have  taken  a  wife,  or  that
I  should  hold  sway  while  you  are  without  a  kingdom  ?  I
follow  in  your  footsteps."

1  Bohtlingk  and  Roth  would  read  svadhishnyani  for  svadhishthani  in  Taranga
120,  25.  Here  Brockhaus  reads  svadhishthan  rishayas,  which  I  find  in  MS.
No.  1882;  No.  3003  has  what,  judging  from  the  way  shn  is  written  in  this
MS.,  I  take  to  be  svadhishnydnyashayas.  No.  21 66  has  what  for  similar
reasons  I  take  to  be  svadhishnanrishayas.  The  Sanskrit  College  MS.  has
svadhishtanyrishayas.

2  For  aradhayitum  Nos.  1882  and  21 66  give  aradhayan,  which  satisfies  the
metre.     The  Sanskrit  College  MS.  has  aradhitum.


THE  REVELATION  FROM  SIVA  187

When  Malayadhvaja  said  this,  King  Merudhvaja  said  to  his
elder  son,  Muktaphaladhvaja :  "  Your  younger  brother  here
has  spoken  rightly,  but  what  you  have  just  said  is  not  right.
It  is  no  time  for  asceticism  in  this  fresh  youth  of  yours ;  the
present  should  be  to  you  a  time  of  enjoyment.  So  abandon,
my  son,  this  perverse  crotchet  of  yours,  which  is  most  in-
opportune." Though  the  king  addressed  these  admonitions
to  his  elder  son  that  prince  resolutely  refused  to  take  a  wife ;
so  the  king  remained  silent,  to  wait  for  a  more  favourable  time.

In  the  meanwhile,  in  Patala,  the  two  daughters  of  Trailo-
kyamalin's  wife,  Svayamprabha,  who  were  engaged  in  aus-
terities, said  to  their  mother  :  "  Mother,  when  one  of  us  was
seven  and  the  other  eight  years  old,  owing  to  our  want  of
merits,1  our  father  was  imprisoned,  and  we  were  hurled  from
the  royal  rank.  It  is  now  the  eighth  year  that  we  have  been
engaged  in  austerities,  and  yet  Siva  is  not  pleased  with  us,
and  our  father  has  not,  as  yet,  been  released  from  his  im-
prisonment. So  let  us  even  consume  these  unlucky  bodies
in  the  fire,  before  we  also  are  imprisoned,  or  experience  some
other  insult  at  the  hands  of  our  enemy."

When  Svayamprabha's  daughters  said  this  to  her,  she
answered  them  :  "  Wait  a  while,  my  daughters ;  we  shall
regain  our  former  glory.  For  I  know  that  while  I  was  en-
gaged in  austerities  the  god  Siva  said  to  me  in  a  dream  :
'  My  child,  be  of  good  courage !  Thy  husband  shall  recover
his  kingdom,  and  the  princes  Muktaphaladhvaja  and  Malaya-
dhvaja shall  be  the  husbands  of  thy  two  daughters.  And  do
not  suppose  that  they  are  men ;  for  one  of  them  is  a  noble
Vidyadhara,  and  the  other  is  a  Gana  of  mine.'  When  I  had
received  this  revelation  from  Siva  I  woke  up  at  the  close  of
night ;  and  supported  by  this  hope  I  have  borne  great  suffer-
ing. So  I  will  inform  the  king,  your  father,  of  this  matter,
and  with  his  consent  I  will  endeavour  to  bring  about  your
marriage."

When  Queen  Svayamprabha  had  in  these  words  com-
forted her  daughters,  she  said  to  Indumati,  an  old  woman  of
the  harem  :    "  Go  to  my  husband  in  the  cave  of  Svetasaila,

1  I  read  akritapunyayoh — "not  having  done  meritorious  actions."  This  is
the  reading  of  all  the  India  Office  MSS.  and  the  Sanskrit  College  MS.


188  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

and  fall  at  his  feet,  and  say  to  him  from  me  :  '  My  husband,
the  Creator  has  formed  me  of  such  strange  wood  that,  though
the  fire  of  separation  from  you  burns  fiercely,  I  have  not  yet
been  consumed  by  it.  But  it  is  because  I  entertain  a  hope
of  seeing  you  again  that  I  have  not  abandoned  life.'  When
you  have  said  this,  tell  him  the  revelation  that  Siva  made
to  me  in  a  dream,  then  ask  him  about  the  marriage  of  our
daughters,  and  come  back  and  tell  me  what  he  says.  I  will
then  act  accordingly."

When  she  had  said  this  she  sent  off  Indumati ;  and  she
left  Patala  and  reached  the  well-guarded  entrance  of  that
mountain  cave.  She  entreated  the  guards  and  entered,  and
seeing  Trailokyamalin  there  a  prisoner,  she  burst  into  tears,
and  embraced  his  feet.  And  when  he  asked  her  how  she  was,
she  slowly  told  him  all  his  wife's  message.  Then  that  king
said  :  "As  for  what  Siva  says  about  my  restoration  to  my
kingdom,  may  that  turn  out  as  the  god  announced ;  but  the
idea  of  my  giving  my  daughters  to  the  sons  of  Merudhvaja
is  preposterous !  I  would  rather  perish  here  than  give  my
daughters  as  a  present  to  enemies,  and  men  too,  while  myself
a  prisoner ! "

When  Indumati  had  been  sent  away  by  the  king  with
this  message,  she  went  and  delivered  it  to  his  wife,  Svayam-
prabha.  And  when  Trailokyaprabha  and  Tribhuvanaprabha,
the  daughters  of  the  Daitya  sovereign,  heard  it,  they  said
to  their  mother,  Svayamprabha :  "Anxiety  lest  our  youthful
purity  should  be  outraged  makes  the  fire  seem  our  only  place
of  safety,  so  we  will  enter  it,  mother,  on  the  fourteenth  day,
that  is  now  approaching."

When  they  had  thus  resolved,  their  mother  and  her  suite
also  made  up  their  minds  to  die.  And  when  the  fourteenth
day  arrived,  they  all  worshipped  Hatakesvara,  and  made
pyres  in  a  holy  bathing-place  called  Paparipu.

Now  it  happened  that  on  that  very  day  King  Merudhvaja,
with  his  sons  and  his  wife,  was  coming  there  to  worship
Hatakesvara.  And  as  he  was  going  to  the  holy  water  of
Paparipu,  with  his  suite,  to  bathe,  he  saw  smoke  arising  from
the  midst  of  a  grove  on  its  bank.  And  when  the  king  asked,
"How  comes  smoke  to  be  rising  here?"  those  governors  he


THE  ACT  OF  TRUTH  189

had  set  over  Patala,  Sangramasimha  and  the  others,  said
to  him :  "  Great  King,  Svayamprabha,  the  wife  of  Trailo-
kyamalin,  is  engaged  in  austerities  here  with  her  daughters,
the  princesses.  Without  doubt  they  are  now  performing  here
some  sacrificial  rite  in  honour  of  the  fire,  or  possibly  they  are
wearied  out  with  excessive  asceticism,  and  are  immolating
themselves  by  entering  it."

When  the  king  heard  that,  he  went  to  see  what  was  going
on,  with  his  sons,  and  his  wife,  and  those  governors  of  Patala,
ordering  the  rest  of  his  suite  to  remain  behind.  And  con-
cealing himself  there,  he  beheld  those  Daitya  maidens,  with
their  mother,  worshipping  the  fire  of  the  pyres,  which  was
burning  brightly.1  They  seemed,  with  the  effulgence  of  the
great  beauty  of  their  faces  which  shone  out  in  all  directions,
to  be  creating  in  the  lower  world  a  hundred  discs  of  the  moon,
and  to  be  installing  the  God  of  Love  as  king  after  the  conquest
of  the  three  worlds,  with  their  swiftly  moving  necklaces,  that
looked  like  liquid  streams  poured  down  from  the  golden
pitchers  of  their  breasts.  Their  broad  hips,  surrounded  with
the  girdles  which  they  wore,  looked  like  the  head  of  the
elephant  of  love  adorned  with  a  girdle  of  constellations.  The
long  wavy  masses  of  hair  which  they  bore  seemed  like  snakes
made  by  the  Creator  to  guard  the  treasure  of  their  beauty.
When  the  king  saw  them  he  was  astonished,  and  he  said  :
"  The  creation  of  the  Maker  of  All  is  surprising  for  the  novelty
that  is  ever  being  manifested  in  it,2  for  neither  Rambha
nor  Urvasi  nor  Tilottama  is  equal  in  beauty  to  these  two
daughters  of  the  Asura  king."

While  the  king  was  making  these  reflections  to  himself,
Trailokyaprabha,  the  elder  of  the  two  Daitya  maidens,  after
worshipping  the  god  present  in  the  fire,  addressed  this  prayer
to  him  :  "  Since,  from  the  time  that  my  mother  told  me  of
the  revelation  of  Siva  received  by  her  in  a  dream,  my
mind  has  been  fixed  upon  Prince  Muktaphaladhvaja,  that

1  The  three  India  Office  MSS.  give  susamiddham3  which  is  perhaps
preferable  to  the  reading  of  Brockhaus'  text.  The  Sanskrit  College  MS.  gives
susamitam.

2  MSS.  Nos.  1882  and  2166  and  the  Sanskrit  College  MS.  give  lasanna-
vanavadbhuta — "is  ever  displaying  new  marvels."  No.  3003  gives  lasanna-
vatavddbhutd.     The  t  is,  no  doubt,  a  mere  slip  of  the  pen  for  n.


190  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

treasure-house  of  virtue,  as  my  chosen  husband,  I  pray,
holy  one,  that  he  may  be  my  husband  in  a  future  birth,
inasmuch  as,  though  in  this  birth  my  mother  wishes  to
The  Prayer  Sive  me  to  mm>  my  haughty  father,  being  a
of  the  Daitya  captive,  will  not  consent  to  it."  *  When  Tri-
Mmden  bhuvanaprabha,    heard   that,    she,    in   the    same

way,  prayed  to  the  Fire  God  that  Malayadhvaja  might  be
her  husband  in  a  future  life.

Then  King  Merudhvaja,  who  was  delighted  at  hearing
that,  and  the  queen,  his  wife,  said  to  one  another :  "If  our
two  sons  could  obtain  these  two  maidens  for  their  wives,
they  would  reap  fruit  from  their  conquest  of  the  two  worlds.
So  let  us  go  to  them  and  their  mother,  before  they  have  cast
themselves  into  the  fire,  as  they  intend  to  do  in  a  moment,
and  dissuade  them  from  doing  so."  When  the  king,  in  con-
sultation with  the  queen,  had  made  up  his  mind  to  this,  he
went  up  to  them,  and  said  :  "  Do  not  act  rashly  ;  for  I  will
put  a  stop  to  your  sorrow."  When  all  the  Asura  ladies  heard
this  speech  of  the  king's,  that  seemed  like  a  rain  of  nectar  to
their  ears,  and  afterwards  saw  him,  they  all  bowed  before
him.

And  Svayamprabha  said  to  him  :  "  Before,  we  were  con-
cealed by  magic,  and  you  did  not  see  us,  though  we  saw  you ;
but  now  we  have  been  seen  here  by  you,  the  sovereign  of  the
two  worlds.  And  now  that  we  have  been  seen  by  you,  our
sorrow  will  soon  come  to  an  end — much  more  since  you  have
bestowed  on  us  by  your  own  mouth  a  boon  we  never  craved.
So  take  a  seat,  and  receive  the  arghya  and  water  for  the  feet.2
For  you  deserve  to  be  honoured  by  the  three  worlds ;  and
this  is  our  hermitage."  When  she  said  this,  the  king  answered,
laughing  :  "  Give  the  arghya  and  water  for  the  feet  to  these
your  sons-in-law."  Then  Svayamprabha  said  :  "To  them
the  god  Siva  will  give  the  arghya,  and  soon,  but  do  you  re-
ceive it  to-day."     Then  Merudhvaja  said  :   "I  have  already

1  An  act  of  truth.     See  Vol.  II,  pp.  31-33  ;  Vol.  Ill,  pp.  179-182.— n.m.p.

2  I  read  arghyapadyadi  in  si.  180,  6;  as  in  si.  181,  6.  The  y  is  found
in  the  three  India  Office  MSS.  and  the  Sanskrit  College  MS.  I  also  read,  in
si.  1 79,  svagira  datte  devendnarthite  vare,  which  I  find  in  the  three  India  Office
MSS.  and  the  Sanskrit  College  MS.


THE  FEVER  OF  LOVE  191

received  it  all ;  but  do  you,  ladies,  immediately  give  up  your
intention  of  committing  suicide,  and  go  and  dwell  in  one  of
your  cities,  where  every  wish  can  be  gratified;  then  I  will
take  steps  to  ensure  your  welfare."

When  the  king  said  this,  Svayamprabha  said  to  him  :
"  In  accordance  with  your  Majesty's  order  we  have  given  up
our  intention  of  abandoning  the  body ;  but  while  our  lord  is  in
prison,  how  would  it  be  becoming  for  us  to  live  in  our  palace  ?
So  we  will  remain  here,  King,  for  the  present,  until  your  High-
ness shall  perform  the  promise  which  you  spontaneously  made
to  us,  and  shall  cause  our  lord  to  be  set  free,  with  his  servants
and  ministers.  And  he  will  hold  sway  as  your  Majesty's
zealous  officer,  and  will  make  over  his  realm  to  you  if  you
desire  it.  Indeed  he  will  make  a  strict  agreement  with  you
to  this  effect.  And  for  this  we  and  all  the  inhabitants  of
Patala  will  be  your  sureties ;  so  take  our  jewels  from  the
regions  of  Patala  and  make  them  your  own."

When  she  said  this,  King  Merudhvaja  said  to  her  :  "  I
will  see  about  that,  but  you  must  remember  your  promise."
When  the  king  had  said  this,  he  bathed,  and  worshipped
Hatakesvara.  And  those  Daitya  princesses,  having  now  seen
his  sons  with  their  own  eyes,  had  their  minds  entirely  fixed
on  them.  Then  all  the  inhabitants  of  Rasatala  *  fell  at  the
feet  of  the  virtuous  King  Merudhvaja  and  asked  that  Trailo-
kyamalin  should  be  set  at  liberty.  And  then  King  Merudhvaja,
with  his  wife,  sons  and  servants,  left  the  world  of  the  Asuras
and  returned  to  his  own  city,  covering  the  regions  with  his
umbrellas  white  2  as  his  own  glory.  There  his  son  Malaya-
dhvaja  spent  the  night  in  thinking  on  the  younger  daughter
of  the  king  of  the  Danavas,  being  tortured  with  the  fever  of
love,  and  though  he  closed  his  eyes  he  never  slept.  But  that
sea  of  self-control,  Muktaphaladhvaja,  though  he  thought
upon  the  elder  daughter  of  the  Asura  monarch,  who  was

1  Patala  and  Rasatala  seem  to  be  used  indiscriminately  to  denote  "the
nether  world  "  in  this  passage.  Strictly  speaking,  Rasatala  is  one  of  the  seven
Patalas.  The  words  in  si.  189  which  I  have  translated  "regions  of  Patala"
mean,  literally,  "the  Patalas."  In  si  192  the  three  India  Office  MSS.  read
sudrishtayoh — "  having  had  a  good  look  at  them."

2  For  the  significance  of  the  white  umbrella  see  Vol.  II,  pp.  264-265.

— N.M.P.


192  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

deeply  in  love  with  him,  and  though  he  was  young,  and  she
was  fair  enough  to  shake  with  love  the  saintly  minds  of
anchorites,  still,  in  virtue  of  the  boon  he  had  craved  from  the
hermit,  he  was  no  whit  disturbed  in  mind.  But  Merudhvaja,
finding  that  his  elder  son  was  determined  not  to  take  a  wife,
while  Malayadhvaja  was  desperately  in  love,  and  that  on  the
other  hand  that  great  Asura  was  averse  to  giving  him  his
daughters,  remained  with  his  mind  bewildered  as  to  how  to
devise  an  expedient.


CHAPTER  CXIX

170b.  Muktdphalaketu  and  Padmdvati

THEN  King  Merudhvaja,  seeing  that  Malayadhvaja
was  thus  overpowered  with  the  fever  of  love,  said
to  his  queen  :  "If  those  two  daughters  of  Trailo-
kyamalin,  whom  I  saw  in  Patala,  do  not  become  the  wives  of
my  two  sons,  what  advantage  shall  I  have  gained  ?  And  my
son  Malayadhvaja  is  consumed  with  smouldering  flame,  be-
cause he  cannot  obtain  the  younger  of  the  two,  though  shame
makes  him  conceal  the  fire  of  love.  It  is  for  this  very  reason
that,  though  I  promised  Trailokyamalin's  queen  that  I  would
set  him  at  liberty,  I  do  not  at  once  make  my  promise  good.
For,  if  he  is  set  free  from  his  imprisonment,  his  pride  as  an
Asura  will  prevent  his  ever  giving  his  daughters  to  my  sons,
as  being  men.  So  it  is  now  advisable  to  propose  this  matter
to  him  in  a  conciliatory  manner."

When  he  had  gone  through  these  reflections  with  the
queen,  he  said  to  his  warder :  "  Go  to  the  cave  of  Svetasaila,
and  say,  as  from  me,  in  a  kind  manner  to  Trailokyamalin,
the  king  of  the  Daityas,  who  is  imprisoned  there  :  '  King  of
the  Daityas,  by  the  appointment  of  Destiny  you  have  been
long  afflicted  here,  so  now  do  what  I  advise,  and  bring  your
affliction  to  an  end.  Give  to  my  two  sons  your  two  daughters,
who  fell  in  love  with  them  at  first  sight,  and  thus  procure
your  release,  and  rule  your  kingdom,  after  you  have  given
security  for  your  fidelity.'  "

With  this  message  the  king  sent  off  his  warder,  and  he
went  and  delivered  it  to  the  Daitya  monarch  in  that  cave.
The  monarch  answered  :  "I  will  not  give  my  two  daughters
to  two  men  !  "  And  the  warder  returned  and  reported  his
answer  to  the  king.

Then  King  Merudhvaja  began  to  look  about  for  some
other  means   of  attaining  his   end,   and  in   the   course  of
vol.  vin.  193  n


194  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

some  days  Svayamprabha  heard  how  he  had  sped,  so  she
again  sent  Indumati  from  Patala  to  his  palace  with  a
message.

And  Indumati  arrived,  and  had  herself  announced  by  the
female  warder,  and  went  into  the  presence  of  the  great  queen,
who  received  her  graciously.  And  she  bowed  before  her,
and  said  to  her  :  "  Queen,  Queen  Svayamprabha  sends  you
this  message  :  '  Have  you  forgotten  your  own  promise  ?
The  seas  and  the  principal  mountains  will  suffer  change  at
the  day  of  doom,  but  the  promises  of  people  like  you  will  not
change  even  then.  Although  my  husband  has  not  consented
to  bestow  our  daughters  as  you  wished,  reflect,  how  could  he
have  given  them  as  a  present  while  himself  a  prisoner  ?  If
you  release  him  in  a  proper  way  as  an  act  of  kindness l  he
will  certainly  make  you  a  return  by  giving  you  his  daughters.
Otherwise  Svayamprabha  and  her  daughters  will  abandon
their  lives,  and  in  this  way  you  will  fail  to  obtain  daughters-
in-law,  and  also  to  keep  your  promise.'  So  manage,  Queen,
to  make  the  king  set  our  lord  free  on  the  conditions  of
compact  and  security  and  so  on,  in  order  that  all  may  turn
out  well ;  and  accept  this  ornament  sent  by  Svayamprabha,
studded  with  various  gems,  that  confer  the  power  of  becoming
a  Vidyadhara,  and  other  advantages."

When  Indumati  said  this,  the  queen  answered  her  :
"  How  can  I  take  this  from  your  mistress  now  that  she  is
in  trouble  ?  "  But  Indumati  urged  her  vehemently  to  take
it,  saying  :  "  We  shall  be  quite  unhappy  if  you  refuse  to
accept  it,  but  if  you  take  it,  we  shall  consider  our  affliction
alleviated."

Being  thus  strongly  urged  by  Indumati,  the  queen  took
from  her  that  jewelled  ornament,  to  comfort  her;  and  she
made  her  wait  there,  saying  to  her  :  "  Remain  here,  noble
lady,  until  the  king  shall  come  this  way."

In  the  meanwhile  the  king  came  there,  and  Indumati  rose
up  and,  having  been  introduced  by  the  queen,  bowed  before
him,  and  he  received  her  graciously.  And  she  gave  to  that
king  a  crest- jewel  sent  by  Svayamprabha  that  was  a  talisman

1  I  read  muchyate,  with  the  three  India  Office  MSS.  and  the  Sanskrit
College  MS.


THE  WATER  OF  ORDEAL  195

against  poison,  Rakshasas,  old  age  and  disease.1  The
king  said  :  "I  will  accept  this  jewel  when  I  have  kept  my
promise."  But  the  ready-witted  Indumati  said  to  him  :  "A
promise  made  by  the  king  is  as  good  as  kept.  But  if  your
Majesty  will  accept  this,  we  shall  be  very  much  comforted."
When  she  made  this  speech  the  queen  observed,  "  Well
said  !  "  and  took  that  crest- jewel  and  fastened  it  on  the  king's
head.

Then  Indumati  repeated  to  the  king  the  message  of
Svayamprabha  as  she  had  delivered  it  to  the  queen.  Then
the  king,  being  entreated  to  the  same  effect  by  the  queen,
went  on  to  say  to  Indumati :  "  Remain  here  for  to-day ;
to-morrow  morning  I  will  give  you  an  answer."

Having  said  this,  King  Merudhvaja  allowed  a  night  to
pass,  and  the  next  morning  he  summoned  his  ministers,  and
said  to  Indumati :  "  Noble  lady,  go  with  these  ministers  of
mine,  and  after  informing  Trailokyamalin,  bring  from  Patala
those  Asura  ladies,  Svayamprabha  and  the  others,  and  all
the  principal,  inhabitants  of  Patala,  and  the  water  of  ordeal
connected  with  Hatakesvara,  in  a  sealed  vessel.  And  let
Svayamprabha  and  the  others  touch  the  feet  of  Svayam-
prabha's  husband,  in  the  presence  of  my  ministers,  and  by
solemn  oaths  make  themselves  sureties  for  this — namely,
that  Trailokyamalin,  with  his  friends  and  servants,  shall  ever
remain  firm  in  his  allegiance  to  me,  and  that  the  Nagas  shall
not  injure  the  crops.  And  let  all  the  lords  in  Patala  be
sureties  to  the  same  effect ;  and  let  them  all,  with  their  king,
give  their  children  as  hostages2;  and  let  them  all,  with  their
king,  put  this  in  writing,  and  drink  the  water  of  ordeal  in
which  the  image  of  Hatakesvara  has  been  washed  3 :  then  I
will  release  Trailokyamalin  from  prison."

1  The  KaKwv  /cat  yijpaos  aki<ap  of  Empedocles,  Frag,  iii  (Diels).  Sir  Thomas
Browne,  in  his  Vulgar  Errors,  Book  II,  chap,  v,  sect.  11,  makes  mention  of  the
supposed  magic  virtues  of  gems.  He  will  not  deny  that  "bezoar  is  antidotal/'
but  will  not  believe  that  a  "sapphire  is  preservative  against  enchantments."

2  All  the  India  Office  MSS.  and  the  Sanskrit  College  MS.  read  apatyani
for  asatydni.  I  have  adopted  it.  In  si.  29  two  MSS.  and  the  Sanskrit  College
MS.  have  sarvdnga,  the  other  sarvdngam.     I  do  not  understand  the  passage.

3  The  practice  of  ordeal  by  sacred  libation  figures  in  the  list  of  the  five
ordeals  given  in  the  Ydjnavalkya-smriti,  the  standard  law  code  of  the  Mithild


196  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

Having  said  so  much,  the  king  sent  off  Indumati  with
his  ministers.  She  went  with  them  and  informed  Trailo-
kyamalin of  what  was  being  done,  and  as  he  approved  of
her  proceedings  she  went  in  the  same  way  to  Patala,  and  she
brought  there  Svayamprabha  and  the  others,  and  the  water
of  ordeal,  and  she  made  them  all  do  in  the  presence  of  the
king's  ministers  all  that  he  had  prescribed.  And  when  King
Trailokyamalin  had  in  this  way  given  security,  King  Meru-
dhvaja  set  him  free  from  prison  with  his  suite.  And  he  had
him  brought  to  his  own  palace  with  his  family  and  his  at-
tendants, and  courteously  entertained  him ;  and  then  he  took
possession  of  all  the  jewels  of  the  Asuras,  and  sent  Trailo-
kyamalin back  to  his  kingdom.  And  Trailokyamalin  returned
to  Rasatala,  his  home,  and,  having  recovered  his  kingdom,
rejoiced  with  his  servants  and  relations.     And  Merudhvaja

school  (c.  fourth  century  a.d.).     The  other  four  ordeals  were:  (1)  the  balance,

where  the  defendant  is  weighed  twice,  and  must  be  of  lighter  weight  the

second  time  ;  (2)  fire,  where  he  must  walk  across  seven  circles  carrying  a  piece

of  red-hot  iron  in  his  hand  ;  (3)  water,  in  which  he  must  keep  immersed  while

a  runner  fetches  an  arrow  shot  from  a  bow,  and  returns ;  (4)  poison,  usually

made  from  aconite,  is  drunk,  and  must  show  no  ill  effects  during  the  day.

The  ordeal  of  sacred  libation  consists  in  drinking  three  mouthfuls  of  water

in  which  images  either  of  dread  deities  or  of  the  man's  special  deity  have

been  bathed.     The  test  of  innocence  is  the  freedom  in  the  following  seven,

fourteen  or  twenty-one  days  from  any  calamity  such  as  illness,  fire,  death

of  kin,  punishment  by  the  king — the  latter  provision  affording  considerable

room   for   unfair  treatment  of  the   accused.     The  codes  of  Brihaspati  and

Pitamaha  (c.  a.d.  600)  omit  this  latter  detail.     See   A.   B.   Keith,  "Ordeal

(Hindu),"  Hastings'  Ency.  Rel.  Eth.,  vol.  ix,  p.  524 ;  and  J.  Jolly,  Recht  und

Sitte,  p.  144.     Four  further  ordeals  are  added  by  Brihaspati  and  Pitamaha,  the

first  of  which  somewhat  resembles  the  ordeal  of  sacred  libation.     It  consists

in  chewing  unhusked  rice-grains  mixed  with  water  in  which  an  image  of  the

sun  has  been  bathed.     The  accused  states  the  charge  and  faces  east — i.e.

towards  the  sun — as  he  eats;  injury  to  the  gums,  the  appearance  of  blood

when  he  spits  out  the  grains  on  a  leaf,  or  trembling,  is  a  proof  of  guilt.

The  other  ordeals  consist  in  removing  a  hot  piece  of  gold  or  a  ring  from  a

pot  of  boiling  ghi,  licking  a  red-hot  ploughshare,  and  the  last  consists   of

drawing  lots  from  a  jar.     For  further  details  see   Keith,  op.  cit.,  sup.     Cf.

with  the  above  the  ordeal  of  the  adulterous  woman  in  Numbers  vi,  15-31,

and  also  the  Mohammedan  practice  of  charming  away  sickness  and  disease

by  writing  passages  of  the  Quran  on  the  inner  surface  of  a  bowl  and  pouring

water  until  the  writing  is  washed  off.      The  concoction  is  then  drunk.     See

E.  W.  Lane,  Modern  Egyptians,  5th  edit.,  p.  253. — n.m.p.


THE  ASURA  KING'S  PROPOSAL  197

filled   the   earth   with   abundant  treasures  that  came  from
Patala,  as  a  rain- cloud  showers  water.

Then  Trailokyamalin,  the  king  of  the  Daityas,  took
counsel  with  his  wife,  desiring  to  bestow  his  two  beautiful
daughters  on  Merudhvaja's  sons,  and  he  invited  him  to  his
palace,  with  his  relations,  and  came  himself  to  escort  him
there,  remembering  the  benefit  conferred  on  him.  So  he
came  to  King  Merudhvaja,  who  entertained  him,  and  then
he  said  to  him :  "  On  a  former  occasion  your  great  joy
prevented  your  seeing  Rasatala  properly.  But  now  come
and  see  it,  while  we  give  ourselves  up  to  attending  on  you ;
and  accept  from  me  my  two  beautiful  daughters  for  your


sons."


When  the  Asura  king  had  said  this  to  Merudhvaja,  the
latter  summoned  his  wife  and  his  two  sons.  And  he  told
them  the  speech  of  the  Asura  king,  and  how  he  proposed  to
give  his  two  daughters.  Then  his  elder  son,  Muktaphala-
dhvaja,  said  to  him  :  "  I  will  not  marry  until  I  have  propitiated
Siva.  I  said  this  long  ago.  You  must  pardon  this  fault  in
me.  When  I  have  gone,  let  Malayadhvaja  marry ;  for  he  will
never  be  happy  without  that  Patala  maiden."  When  the
younger  son  heard  this,  he  said  to  his  elder  brother  :  "  Noble
sir,  while  you  are  alive  I  will  never  perform  such  a  disgrace-
ful and  unrighteous  act."  Then  King  Merudhvaja  earnestly
exhorted  Muktaphaladhvaja  to  marry,  but  he  would  not
consent  to  do  so ;  and  therefore  Trailokyamalin  took  leave  of
the  king,  who  was  in  a  state  of  despondency,  and  went  back
with  his  suite  to  Patala  as  he  had  come.

There  he  told  what  had  taken  place,  and  said  to  his  wife
and  son  :  "  Observe  how  exclusively  bent  on  humiliating  us
Fortune  is.  Those  very  men  to  whom  formerly  I  refused  to
The  Irony  of  give  my  daughters  in  marriage  when  they  asked
Life  for  them  now  refuse  to  accept  them,  though  I  ask

them  to  do  so."  When  thev  heard  it,  thev  said  :  "  Who  can
tell  how  this  matter  is  in  the  mind  of  Destiny  ?  Can  Siva's
promise  be  falsified  ?  "

While  they  were  saying  these  things,  those  maidens,
Trailokyaprabha  and  Tribhuvanaprabha,  heard  what  had
happened,  and  took  upon  them  the  following  vow  :    "  We


198  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

will  remain  without  food  for  twelve  days,  and  if  at  the  end
of  that  time  the  god  does  not  show  us  favour,  by  bringing
about  our  marriage,  we  will  enter  the  fire  together,  and  we
will  not  preserve  our  bodies  for  insult,  or  merely  for  the  sake
of  continuing  in  life."

When  the  daughters  of  the  Daitya  sovereign  had  made
this  vow,  they  remained  fasting  in  front  of  the  god,  engaged
in  meditation  and  muttering  prayers.  And  their  mother  and
their  father,  the  sovereign  of  the  Daityas,  hearing  of  it,  and
being  very  fond  of  their  daughters,  remained  fasting  in  the
same  way.

Then  Svayamprabha,  their  mother,  quickly  sent  off
Indumati  once  more  to  Merudhvaja's  queen-consort,  to  tell
her  how  matters  were  going.  She  went  and  told  the  queen  the
trouble  in  her  master's  house,  and  so  Merudhvaja  also  came
to  hear  of  it.  Then  that  couple  abandoned  food  out  of  regard
for  the  other  royal  couple,  and  their  sons  did  so  as  well,  out
of  regard  for  their  parents.

Thus  in  two  worlds  the  royal  families  were  in  trouble.
And  Muktaphaladhvaja  remained  without  eating,  and  medi-
tated on  Siva  as  his  refuge.  And  after  six  nights  had  passed,
in  the  morning  the  prince  woke  up  and  said  to  his  friend
Mahabuddhi,  who  had  formerly  been  Samyataka  :  "  My
friend,  I  remember  that  last  night  in  a  dream  I  mounted
my  steed  given  me  by  the  hermit  Tapodhana,  that  changes
its  shape  at  will,  and  goes  where  the  mind  directs,  and  had
become  a  flying  chariot,  and  in  my  despondency  I  went  to
a  heavenly  temple  of  Siva,  very  far  from  here,  on  the  slope
of  Meru.  There  I  saw  a  certain  celestial  maiden  emaciated
with  austerities  ;  and  a  certain  man  with  matted  hair,  point-
ing to  her,  said  to  me,  laughing:  'You  have  come  here  in
this  way  to  escape  from  one  maiden,  and  lo !  here  is  another
waiting  for  you.'  When  I  heard  this  speech  of  his  I  remained
gazing  at  the  beauty  of  that  maiden,  but  found  it  impossible
to  gaze  my  fill,  and  so  at  the  end  of  the  night  I  suddenly
woke  up.

"Sol  will  go  there  to  obtain  that  heavenly  maiden,  and
if  I  do  not  find  her  there  I  will  enter  the  fire.  What  can
Destiny  mean,  by  causing  my  mind  to  become  attached  to


THE  TEMPLE  OF  SIVA  199

this  maiden  seen  in  a  dream,  after  rejecting,  in  the  way  I  did,
the  Daitya  maiden  offered  to  me  a  short  time  ago  ?  At  any
rate,  I  am  persuaded  that,  if  I  go  there,  good  fortune  will
certainly  befall  me."

Having  said  this,  he  called  to  mind  that  vehicle  given
him  by  the  hermit,  which  would  carry  him  to  any  place  con-
ceived in  the  mmd,  and  assume  any  desired  form.  It  turned
into  an  air-going  chariot,  and  he  mounted  it  and  set  out  for
that  heavenly  temple  of  Siva,  and  when  he  reached  it  he
saw  that  it  was  just  as  it  had  seemed  in  his  dream,  and  he
rejoiced.  Then  he  proceeded  to  perform  religious  ablution,
with  all  the  attendant  rites,  in  the  holy  water  there,  named
Siddhodaka,  with  no  one  to  wait  on  him  but  his  friend.

Then  his  father,  King  Merudhvaja,  who  was  in  his  own
city,  emaciated  with  fasting,  accompanied  by  his  wife,  son
and  suite,  heard  that  he  had  gone  off  somewhere  secretly,
and  became  bewildered  with  grief.  And  all  this  was  at  once
known  in  Patala,  exactly  as  it  had  taken  place.  Then
Trailokyamalin  took  with  him  his  two  daughters,  and  came
fasting,  with  his  wife  and  suite,  to  visit  King  Merudhvaja.
And  they  all  resolved  on  the  following  course  of  action  :
"  Surely,  as  it  is  the  fourteenth  day,  the  prince  has  gone
somewhere  to  worship  Siva;  so  we  will  wait  for  him  here
this  day.  But  to-morrow,  if  he  has  not  returned,  we  will
go  where  he  is  :  then,  happen  what  will."

In  the  meanwhile  Padmavati,  who  was  in  that  hermitage
of  Siva  named  Meghavana,  said  that  very  day  to  her  ladies-
in-waiting  :  "  My  friends,  I  remember  that  last  night  I  went
in  a  dream *  to  Siddhisvara,  and  a  certain  man  wearing
matted  hair  came  out  of  the  temple  of  the  god  and  said  to
me:  'My  daughter,  thy  sorrow  is  at  an  end;  thy  reunion
with  thy  husband  is  nigh  at  hand.'  When  he  had  said  this  he
departed,  and  night  and  sleep  left  me  together.  So  come,  let
us  go  there."

When  Padmavati  had  said  this,  she  went  to  that  temple
of  Gauri  on  the  slope  of  Meru.  There  she  saw  with  astonish-
ment that  Muktaphaladhvaja  at  a  distance  bathing  in  Sid-
dhodaka, and  she  said  to  her  friends :  "  This  man  is  like  my

1  See  the  note  on  pp.  99-100  of  this  volume. — n.m.p.


200  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

beloved.  Observe  how  very  like  he  is !  Wonderful !  Can  he
be  the  very  same  ?  It  cannot  be,  for  he  is  a  mortal."  When
her  ladies-in-waiting  heard  that,  and  saw  him,  they  said  to
her :  "  Princess,  not  only  is  this  man  very  like  your  beloved,
but  observe,  his  companion  also  bears  a  resemblance  to  your
lover's  friend  Samyataka.  So  we  know  for  certain  that,  in
accordance  with  your  last  night's  dream  which  you  related
to  us,  Siva  has  by  his  power  brought  those  two  here,  after
their  becoming  incarnate  as  men  owing  to  a  curse.  Other-
wise, how,  being  mortals,  could  they  have  come  to  this  region
of  the  gods  ?  "  When  Padmavati  had  been  thus  addressed
by  her  ladies-in-waiting,  she  worshipped  Siva,  and  in  a  state
of  eager  excitement  remained  concealed  near  the  god's  symbol
to  find  out  who  the  stranger  was.

In  the  meanwhile  Muktaphaladhvaja,  having  bathed,
came  into  the  temple  to  worship  the  god,  and  after  looking
all  round,  said  to  Mahabuddhi :  "  Strange  to  say,  here  is
that  very  temple  which  I  saw  in  my  dream,  made  of  precious
stone,  with  the  form  of  Siva  visible  within  the  linga.  And
now  I  behold  here  those  very  localities  which  I  saw  in  my
dream,  full  of  jewel-gleaming  trees,  which  are  alive  with
heavenly  birds.  But  I  do  not  see  here  that  heavenly  maiden
whom  I  then  saw  ;  and  if  I  do  not  find  her  I  am  determined
to  abandon  the  body  in  this  place."

When  he  said  this,  Padmavati's  ladies-in-waiting  said  to
her  in  a  whisper  :  "  Listen  !  It  is  certain  that  he  has  come
here  because  he  saw  you  here  in  a  dream,  and  if  he  does  not
find  you  he  intends  to  surrender  his  life ;  so  let  us  remain
here  concealed,  and  see  what  he  means  to  do."

And  while  they  remained  there  in  concealment,  Mukta-
phaladhvaja entered,  and  worshipped  the  god,  and  came  out.
And  when  he  came  out  he  walked  devoutly  round  the  temple
Mukta  hala-  three  times,  keeping  his  right  hand  towards  it,1
dhvaja  and    then    he   and   his   friend   remembered   their

remembers  his  former  birth,  and  in  their  joy  they  were  telling
to  one  another  the  events  of  their  life  as  Vidya-
dharas,  when  Padmavati  met  their  view.  And  Muktaphala-
dhvaja, remembering  the  occurrences  of  his  former  life,  as

1  See  Vol.  I,  pp.  190-193.— n.m.p.


THE  MOMENTARY  MEETING  201

soon  as  he  saw  her,  was  filled  with  joy,  and  said  to  his  friend  :
"  Lo,  this  very  Princess  Padmavati,  the  lady  I  saw  in  my
dream !  And  she  has  come  here  by  good  luck ;  so  I  will  at
once  go  and  speak  to  her."

When  he  had  said  this,  he  went  up  to  her  weeping,  and
said  :  "  Princess,  do  not  go  away  anywhere  now  ;  for  I  am
your  former  lover,  Muktaphalaketu.  I  became  a  man  by  the
curse  of  the  hermit  Dridhavrata,  and  I  have  now  remembered
my  former  birth."  When  he  had  said  this  he  tried,  in  his
eagerness,  to  embrace  her.  But  she  was  alarmed  and  made
herself  invisible,  and  remained  there  with  her  eyes  full  of
tears ;  and  the  prince,  not  seeing  her,  fell  on  the  ground  in
a  swoon.

Then  his  friend  sorrowfully  spoke  these  words  into  the
air  :  "  How  is  it,  Princess  Padmavati,  that,  now  this  lover
has  come,  for  whom  you  suffered  such  severe  austerities,  you
will  not  speak  to  him  ?  I  too  am  Samyataka,  the  comrade
of  your  beloved  :  why  do  you  not  say  something  kind  to  me,
as  I  was  cursed  for  you  ?  "  After  saying  this,  he  restored
the  prince,  and  said  to  him  :  "  This  punishment  has  come
upon  you  as  the  result  of  the  crime  you  committed  in  not
accepting  the  Daitya  princess,  who  offered  herself  to  you  out
of  love."

When  Padmavati,  who  was  concealed,  heard  this,  she  said
to  her  ladies-in-waiting:  "Listen!  He  has  no  inclination
for  Asura  maidens."  Then  her  ladies  said  to  her  :  "  You
see  that  all  tallies  together.  Do  you  not  remember  that  long
ago,  when  your  beloved  was  cursed,  he  craved  as  a  boon  from
the  hermit  Tapodhana  that  while  he  was  a  man  his  heart
might  never  be  inclined  to  anyone  but  Padmavati  ?  It  is  in
virtue  of  that  boon  that  he  now  feels  no  love  for  other  women."
When  the  princess  heard  this  she  was  bewildered  with  doubt.

Then  Muktaphaladhvaja,  who  had  no  sooner  seen  his
beloved  than  she  disappeared  from  his  eyes,  cried  out :
"  Ah,  my  beloved  Padmavati !  Do  you  not  see  that  when  I
was  a  Vidyadhara  I  incurred  a  curse  in  Meghavana  for  your
sake  ?  And  now  be  assured  that  I  shall  meet  my  death  here."

When  Padmavati  heard  him  utter  this  and  other  laments,
she  said  to  her  ladies-in-waiting :  "  Though  all  indications


202  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

seem  to  tally,  still  these  two  may  possibly  have  heard  these
things  at  some  time  or  other  by  communication  from  mouth
to  mouth,  and  therefore  my  mind  is  not  convinced.  But  I
cannot  bear  to  listen  to  his  sorrowful  exclamations,  so  I  will
go  to  that  temple  of  Gauri :  moreover,  it  is  the  hour  of
worship  for  me  there."  When  Padmavati  had  said  this,  she
went  with  her  ladies-in-waiting  to  that  hermitage  of  Ambika,
and  after  worshipping  the  goddess  she  offered  this  prayer  :
"  If  the  man  I  have  just  seen  in  Siddhisvara  is  really  my
former  lover,  bring  about  for  me,  goddess,  my  speedy  reunion
with  him."

And  while  Padmavati  was  there,  longing  for  her  be-
loved, Muktaphaladhvaja,  who  had  remained  behind  in
Siddhisvara,  said  to  his  friend  Mahabuddhi,  who  had  been  in
a  former  life  his  friend  Samyataka  :  "I  am  convinced,  my
friend,  that  she  has  gone  to  her  own  haunt,  that  temple  of
Gauri ;  so  come,  let  us  go  there."  When  he  had  said  this,  he
ascended  that  chariot  of  his,  which  went  wherever  the  mind
desired,  and  flew  to  that  hermitage  of  Ambika.

When  Padmavati's  ladies-in-waiting  saw  him  afar  off
coming  down  in  the  chariot  from  the  sky,  they  said  to  Padma-
vati :  "  Princess,  behold  this  marvel !  He  has  come  here
also,  travelling  in  an  air-going  chariot.  How  can  he,  a  mere
man,  have  such  power  ?  "  Then  Padmavati  said  :  "  My
friends,  do  you  not  remember  that  on  Dridhavrata,  who
cursed  him,  I  laid  the  following  curse  :  '  When  my  beloved
is  incarnate  as  a  man,  you  shall  be  his  vehicle,  assuming
any  desired  shape,  and  moving  in  obedience  to  a  wish.'  So,
no  doubt,  this  is  that  hermit's  pupil,  his  vehicle,  wearing  at
present  the  form  of  an  air-going  chariot,  and  by  means  of  it
he  roams  everywhere  at  will."

When  she  said  this,  her  ladies-in-waiting  said  to  her  :  "  If
you  know  this  to  be  the  case,  Princess,  why  do  you  not  speak
to  him  ?  What  are  you  waiting  for  ?  "  When  Padmavati
heard  this  speech  of  her  ladies,  she  went  on  to  say  :  "I
think  that  this  probably  is  the  case,  but  I  am  not  absolutely
certain  as  yet.  But,  even  supposing  he  really  is  my  beloved,
how  can  I  approach  him,  now  that  he  is  not  in  his  own
body,  but  in  another's  body  ?    So  let  us  for  a  time  watch  his


THE  RETURN  TO  SIDDHISVARA  203

proceedings,  being  ourselves  concealed."  When  the  princess
had  said  this,  she  remained  there  concealed,  surrounded  by
her  ladies-in-waiting.

Then  Muktaphaladhvaja  descended  from  the  chariot  in
that  hermitage  of  Ambika,  and,  being  full  of  longing,  said
to  his  friend  :  "  Here  I  had  my  first  interview  with  my  be-
loved, when  she  had  been  terrified  by  the  Rakshasis;  and
I  again  saw  her  in  the  garden  here  when  she  came,  having
chosen  me  for  her  own  ;  and  here  I  received  the  curse,  and
she  wished  to  follow  me  by  dying,  but  was,  though  with
difficulty,  prevented  by  that  great  hermit :  and  now,  see,
that  very  same  lady  flies  out  of  reach  of  my  eyes  !  "

When  Padmavati  heard  him  speak  thus,  she  said  to  her
ladies-in-waiting :  "  True,  my  friends,  it  is  really  my  be-
loved, but  how  can  I  approach  him,  before  he  has  entered  his
former  body  ?  In  this  matter  Siddhisvara  is  my  only  hope.
He  sent  me  the  dream,  and  he  will  provide  for  me  a  way  out
of  my  difficulties."  When  she  had  formed  this  resolution,
she  went  back  to  Siddhisvara.  And  she  worshipped  that
manifestation  of  Siva,  and  offered  this  prayer  to  him :
"  Unite  me  with  my  beloved  in  his  former  body,  or  bestow
death  on  me.  I  see  no  third  way  of  escape  from  my  woe."
And  then  she  remained  with  her  friends  in  the  court  of  the
god's  temple.

In  the  meanwhile  Muktaphaladhvaja  searched  for  the
princess  in  the  temple  of  Gauri,  and,  not  finding  her,  was
despondent,  and  said  to  that  friend  :  "  I  have  not  found  her
here.  Let  us  go  back  to  that  temple  of  Siva ;  if  I  cannot
find  her  there  I  will  enter  the  fire."

When  that  friend  heard  it,  he  said  :  "  Good  luck  will
befall  you  !  The  word  of  the  hermit  and  Siva's  promise
in  your  dream  cannot  be  falsified."  With  these  words  did
Muktaphaladhvaja's  friend  try  to  comfort  him.  And  then
Muktaphaladhvaja  ascended  the  chariot  and  went  with  him
to  Siddhisvara.

When  Padmavati  saw  him  arrive,  she  still  remained  there
invisible,  and  she  said  to  her  ladies-in-waiting  :  "  Look !  He
has  come  to  this  very  place."  He  too  entered,  and  seeing
that  offerings  had  been  recently  placed  in  front  of  the  god,


204  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

Prince  Muktaphaladhvaja  said  to  that  companion  of  his  :
"  Look,  my  friend !  Someone  has  been  quite  recently-
worshipping  this  symbol  of  the  god.  Surely  that  beloved  of
mine  must  be  somewhere  here,  and  she  must  have  done  this
worship."  When  he  had  said  this  he  looked  for  her,  but
could  not  find  her  ;  and  then  in  the  anguish  of  separation  he
cried  out  again  and  again  :  "  Ah,  my  beloved  Padmavati !  "

Then,  thinking  that  the  cry  of  the  cuckoo  was  her  voice,
and  that  the  tail  of  the  peacock  was  her  hair,  and  that  the
lotus  was  her  face,  the  prince  ran  wildly  about,  overpowered
with  an  attack  of  the  fever  of  love,  and  with  difficulty  did
his  friend  console  him ;  and,  coaxing  him,  he  said  to  him :
"  What  is  this  that  you  have  taken  up,  being  weak  with
much  fasting?  Why  do  you  disregard  your  own  welfare,
though  you  have  conquered  the  earth  and  Patala  ?  Your
father,  Merudhvaja,  and  King  Trailokyamalin,  the  king  of
the  Danavas,  your  future  father-in-law,  and  his  daughter
Trailokyaprabha,  who  wishes  to  marry  you,  and  your  mother,
Vinayavati,  and  your  younger  brother,  Malayadhvaja,  will,
if  you  do  not  go  to  them,  suspect  that  some  misfortune  has
happened,  and,  fasting  as  they  are,  will  give  up  their  breath.
So  come  along  !  Let  us  go  and  save  their  lives,  for  the  day
is  at  an  end."

When  Muktaphaladhvaja's  friend  said  this  to  him,  he
answered  him  :  "  Then  go  yourself  in  my  chariot  and  com-
fort them."  Then  his  friend  said  :  "  How  will  that  hermit's
pupil,  who  has  been  made  your  vehicle  by  a  curse,  submit  to
me?"  When  the  prince's  friend  said  this,  he  replied  :  "  Then
wait  a  little,  my  friend :  let  us  see  what  will  happen  here."

When  Padmavati  heard  this  conversation  of  theirs,  she
said  to  her  ladies-in-waiting  :  "I  know  that  this  is  my  former
lover,  by  all  the  notes  tallying,  but  he  is  degraded  by  the  curse,
being  enclosed  in  a  human  body ;  and  I  too  am  thus  afflicted
with  a  curse,  because  I  laughed  at  the  Siddha  maiden."  While
she  was  saying  this  the  moon  rose,  red  in  hue — the  fire  that
devours  the  forest  of  separated  lovers.  And  gradually  the
moonlight  filled  the  world  on  every  side,  and  the  flame  of
love's  fire  filled  the  heart  of  Muktaphaladhvaja.

Then  the  prince  began  to  lament  like  a  chakravdka  at


THE  ACCURSED  FRAME  OF  MORTALITY      205

the  approach  of  night ;  and  Padmavati,  who  was  concealed,
being  despondent,  said  to  him :  "  Prince,  though  you  are  my
former  lover,  still,  as  you  are  now  in  another  body,  you  are
to  me  a  strange  man,  and  I  am  to  you  as  the  wife  of  another  ;
so  why  do  you  lament  again  and  again  ?  Surely  some  means
will  be  provided,  if  that  speech  of  the  hermit's  was  true."

When  Muktaphaladhvaja  heard  this  speech  of  hers,  and
could  not  see  her,  he  fell  into  a  state  which  was  painful
from  the  contending  emotions  of  joy  and  despondency ;  and
he  said  to  her :  "  Princess,  my  former  birth  has  returned  to
my  recollection,  and  so  I  recognised  you  as  soon  as  I  saw
you,  for  you  still  wear  your  old  body;  but  as  you  saw  me
when  I  was  dwelling  in  my  Vidyadhara  *  body,  how  can  you
recognise  me,  now  that  I  am  in  a  mortal  body  ?  So  I  must
certainly  abandon  this  accursed  frame."  When  he  had
said  this  he  remained  silent,  and  his  beloved  continued  in
concealment.

Then,  the  night  being  almost  gone,  and  his  friend  Maha-
buddhi,  who  was  formerly  Samyataka,  having  gone  to  sleep
out  of  weariness,  Prince  Muktaphaladhvaja,  thinking  that
Muktaphala-  ne  cou^  never  obtain  Padmavati  as  long  as  he
dhvaja  enters  continued  in  that  body,  collected  wood 2  and
the  Fire  lighted  a  fire,  and  worshipped  Siva  embodied  in

the  linga,  uttering  this  prayer  :  "  Holy  one,  may  I  by  thy
favour  return  to  my  former  body,  and  soon  obtain  my  be-
loved Padmavati !  "  And  having  said  this,  he  consumed  his
body  in  that  blazing  fire.

And  in  the  meanwhile  Mahabuddhi  woke  up,  and  not
being  able,  in  spite  of  careful  search,  to  find  Muktaphala-
dhvaja, and  seeing  the  fire  blazing  up,  he  came  to  the  con-
clusion that  his  friend,  distracted  with  separation,  had  burnt
himself,  and  out  of  regret  for  his  loss  he  flung  himself  into
that  same  fire.

When  Padmavati  saw  that,  she  was  tortured  with  grief,
and  she  said  to  her  ladies-in-waiting :   "  Alas  !    Shame  !    The

1  The  Sanskrit  adjective  corresponding  to  the  noun  Vidyadhara  is,  of
course,  Vaidyadhara,  but  perhaps  it  is  better  to  retain  the  noun  in  English.

2  I  read  ahritya  for  dhatya.  The  three  India  Office  MSS.  and  the  Sanskrit
College  MS.  have  ahritya.


206  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

female  heart  is  harder  than  the  thunderbolt,  otherwise  my
breath  must  have  left  me,  beholding  this  horror.  So,  how
long  am  I  to  retain  this  wretched  life  ?  Even  now,  owing
to  my  demerits,  there  is  no  end  to  my  woe.  Moreover,  the
promise  of  that  hermit  has  been  falsified  ;  so  it  is  better  that
I  should  die.  But  it  is  not  fitting  that  I  should  enter  this
fire  and  be  mixed  up  with  strange  men,  so  in  this  difficult
conjuncture  hanging,  which  gives  no  trouble,  is  my  best
resource."  When  the  princess  had  said  this,  she  went  in
front  of  Siva,  and  proceeded  to  make  a  noose  by  means  of
a  creeper,  which  she  fastened  to  an  asoka  tree.

And  while  her  ladies-in-waiting  were  trying  to  prevent
her  by  encouraging  speeches,  that  hermit  Tapodhana  came
there.  He  said :  "  My  daughter,  do  not  act  rashly !  That
promise  of  mine  will  not  be  falsified.  Be  of  good  courage !
You  shall  see  that  husband  of  yours  come  here  in  a  moment.
His  curse  has  been  just  now  cancelled  by  virtue  of  your
penance ;  so  why  do  you  now  distrust  the  power  of  your  own
austerities  ?  And  why  do  you  show  this  despondency  when
your  marriage  is  at  hand?  I  have  come  here  because  I
learned  all  this  by  my  power  of  meditation."

When  Padmavati  saw  the  hermit  approaching,  uttering
these  words,  she  bowed  before  him,  and  was  for  a  moment,
as  it  were,  swung  to  and  fro  by  perplexity.  Then  her  be-
loved Muktaphalaketu,  having  by  the  burning  of  his  mortal
body  entered  his  own  Vidyadhara  body,  came  there  with  his
friend.  And  Padmavati,  seeing  that  son  of  the  king  of  the
Vidyadharas  coming  through  the  air,  as  a  female  chdtaka
beholds  a  fresh  rain- cloud,  or  a  kumudvati  the  full  moon
newly  risen,  felt  indescribable  joy  in  her  heart.  And  Mukta-
phalaketu, when  he  saw  her,  rejoiced,  and,  so  to  speak,  drank
her  in  with  his  eyes,  as  a  traveller,  wearied  with  long  wander-
ing in  a  desert,  rejoices  when  he  beholds  a  river.  And  those
two,  reunited  like  a  couple  of  chakravdkas  by  the  termination
of  the  night  of  their  curse,1  took  their  fill  of  falling  at  the  feet
of  that  hermit  of  glowing  brilliancy.2     Then  that  great  hermit

1  See  Vol.  VI,  p.  7 In3. — n.m.p.

2  Probably  the  passage  also  means  that  they  sunned  themselves  in
his  rays.


THE  GOD  OF  FIRE  207

welcomed  them  in  the  following  words  :  "  My  heart  has  been
fully  gratified  to-day  by  seeing  you  reunited,  happy  at  having
come  to  an  end  of  your  curse."

And  when  the  night  had  passed,  King  Merudhvaja  came
there  in  search  of  them,  mounted  on  the  elephant  of  Indra,
accompanied  by  his  wife  and  his  youngest  son,  and  also  Trailo-
kyamalin,  the  sovereign  of  the  Daityas,  with  his  daughter
Trailokyaprabha,  mounted  on  a  chariot,  attended  by  his  harem
and  his  suite.  Then  the  hermit  pointed  out  Muktaphalaketu
to  those  two  kings,  and  described  what  had  taken  place — how
he  had  become  a  man  by  a  curse,  in  order  to  do  a  service  to
the  gods,  and  how  he  had  been  delivered  from  his  human
condition.  And  when  Merudhvaja  and  the  others  heard  that,
though  they  were  before  eager  to  throw  themselves  into  the
fire,  they  bathed  in  Siddhodaka  and  worshipped  Siva,  by  the
hermit's  direction,  and  were  at  once  delivered  from  their
sorrow.  Then  that  Trailokyaprabha  suddenly  called  to  mind
her  birth,  and  said  to  herself :  "  Truly  I  am  that  same  Deva-
prabha,  the  daughter  of  the  king  of  the  Siddhas,  who,  when
undergoing  austerities  *  in  order  that  the  emperor  of  all  the
Vidyadharas  might  be  my  husband,  was  ridiculed  by  Padma-
vati,  and  entered  the  fire  to  gain  the  fulfilment  of  my  desire.
And  now  I  have  been  born  in  this  Daitya  race ;  and  here  is
this  very  prince  with  whom  I  was  in  love,  who  has  recovered
his  Vidyadhara  body.  But  it  is  not  fitting  that,  now  that  his
body  is  changed,  he  should  be  united  to  this  body  of  mine,
so  I  will  consume  my  Asura  body  also  in  the  fire,  in  order  to
obtain  him."

Having  gone  through  these  reflections  in  her  mind,  and
having  communicated  her  intentions  to  her  parents,  she
entered2  the  fire  which  had  consumed  Muktaphaladhvaja.
And  then  the  God  of  Fire  himself  appeared  with  her,  on
whom,  out  of  pity,  he  had  bestowed  her  former  body,  and
said  to  Muktaphaladhvaja :  "  Muktaphaladhvaja,  this  lady,
Devaprabha,  the  daughter  of  the  king  of  the  Siddhas,  for

1  I  read  tapasyanti  for  na  pasyanti.     See  Taranga  117,  £L  111  et  seq.     The
three  India  Office  MSS.  and  the  Sanskrit  College  MS.  have  tapasyanti.

2  All  the  India  Office  MSS.  and  the  Sanskrit  College  MS.  read  anupra-
vishtam.


208  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

thy  sake  abandoned  her  body  in  me ;  so  receive  her  as  thy
wife."

When  the  God  of  Fire  had  said  this,  he  disappeared  ;  and
Brahma  came  there  with  Indra  and  the  rest  of  the  gods,  and
Padmasekhara,  the  king  of  the  Gandharvas,  with  Chandraketu,
the  sovereign  of  the  Vidyadharas.  Then  that  prosperous
king  of  the  Gandharvas  *  gave  his  daughter  Padmavati,  with
due  rites  and  much  activity  on  the  part  of  his  followers,
as  wife  to  Muktaphalaketu,  who  bowed  before  him,  con-
gratulated by  all.  And  then  that  prince  of  the  Vidyadharas
having  obtained  that  beloved,  whom  he  had  so  long  desired,
considered  that  he  had  gathered  the  fruit  of  the  tree  of  his
birth,  and  married  also  that  Siddha  maiden.  And  Prince
Malayadhvaja  was  united  to  that  Daitya  princess,  his  be-
loved Tribhuvanaprabha,  whom  her  father  bestowed  on  him
with  due  rites.

Then  Merudhvaja  having,  on  account  of  his  son  Malay a-
dhvaja's  complete  success,  anointed  him  to  be  sole  ruler  of  a
kingdom  extending  over  the  earth  with  all  its  islands,  went
with  his  wife  to  the  forest  to  perform  austerities.  And
Trailokyamalin,  the  king  of  the  Daityas,  went  with  his  wife
to  his  own  region,  and  Indra  gave  to  Muktaphalaketu  the
splendid  kingdom  of  Vidyuddhvaja.  And  this  voice  came
from  heaven  :  "  Let  this  Muktaphalaketu  enjoy  the  sove-
reignty over  the  Vidyadharas  and  Asuras,  and  let  the  gods
go  to  their  own  abodes  !  "

When  they  heard  that  voice,  Brahma  and  Indra  and  the
other  gods  went  away  delighted,  and  the  hermit  Tapodhana
went  with  his  pupil,  who  was  released  from  his  curse,  and
Chandraketu  went  to  his  own  Vidyadhara  home  with  his
son  Muktaphalaketu,  who  was  graced  by  two  wives.  And
there  the  king,  together  with  his  son,  long  enjoyed  the
dignity  of  emperor  over  the  Vidyadharas.  But  at  last  he
threw  on  him  the  burden  of  his  kingdom,  and,  disgusted  with
the  world  and  its  pleasures,  went  with  the  queen  to  an  ascetic

1  Gandharvarajaya  in  Brockhaus'  text  must  be  a  misprint.  MS.  No.  1882
has  Gandharvaradvyagraparigrahas,  which  satisfies  the  metre  and  makes  sense.
This  is  also  the  reading  of  the  Sanskrit  College  MS.  No.  3003  seems  to  have
the  same,  but  it  is  not  quite  clear.     No.  2166  has  vyadra  for  vyagra.


THE  FINAL  TRIUMPH  209

grove  of  hermits.  And  Muktaphalaketu,  having  before  ob-
tained from  Indra  the  rule  over  the  Asuras,  and  again  from
his  father  the  empire  over  the  Vidyadharas,  enjoyed,  in  the
society  of  Padmavati,  who  seemed  like  an  incarnation  of
happiness,  for  ten  kalpas,  the  good  fortune  of  all  the  pleasures
which  the  sway  of  those  two  wealthy  realms  could  yield,  and
thus  obtained  the  highest  success.  But  he  saw  that  passions
are  in  their  end  distasteful,  and  at  last  he  entered  a  wood
of  mighty  hermits,  and  by  the  eminence  of  his  asceticism
obtained  the  highest  glory,  and  became  a  companion  of  the
lord  Siva.


170.  Story  of  King  Brahmadatta  and  the  Swans

Thus  King  Brahmadatta  and  his  wife  and  his  minister
heard  this  romantic  tale  from  the  couple  of  swans,  and  gained
knowledge  from  their  teaching,  and  obtained  the  power  of
flying  through  the  air  like  gods.  And  then  they  went,
accompanied  by  those  two  birds,  to  Siddhisvara,1  and  there
they  all  laid  aside  the  bodies  they  had  entered  in  consequence
of  the  curse,  and  were  reinstated  in  their  former  position  as
attendants  upon  Siva.2


[M]  "  Hearing  this  story  from  Gomukha  in  the  absence  of
Madanamanchuka  for  a  moment  only,  hermits,  I  cheered  my
heart  with  hope."

When  the  Emperor  Naravahanadatta  had  told  this  story,
those  hermits  in  the  hermitage  of  Kasyapa,  accompanied  by
Gopalaka,  rejoiced  exceedingly.

1  I  read  tadbharyasachivau ;  the  three  words  should  be  joined  together.

2  In  the  original  we  find  inserted  here :  M  Here  ends  the  story  of
Padmavati."


VOL.  VIII.


APPENDIX  I


APPENDIX   I

THE   "SWAN-MAIDEN"  MOTIF

On  p.  58  of  this  volume  we  read  that,  on  arriving  at  a  certain
hermitage,  Marubhuti  chanced  to  see  some  heavenly  nymphs
who  had  come  to  bathe  in  the  river.  At  the  advice  of  the
hermit  he  stole  the  clothes  of  one  of  them,  who  immediately
followed  him,  hoping  to  recover  them.  The  hermit  then
informed  her  that  she  could  have  them  back  if  she  gave  him
certain  information  about  Naravahanadatta.  On  complying,
she  became  the  wife  of  the  hermit,  and  shortly  afterwards
gave  birth  to  a  child.  She  then  departed,  saying  that  if  he
wished  to  be  united  with  her  he  must  cook  and  eat  the  child.
On  doing  so  the  hermit  was  able  to  fly  into  the  air,  and  was
thus  united  with  the  mysterious  nymph.

Such,  briefly,  is  the  story,1  or  rather  motif,  which  at  once
suggests  to  us  the  so-called  Swan-Maiden  cycle,  so  well  known
throughout  European  folk-literature.

At  the  outset  of  any  inquiry  on  such  a  widely  spread  motif,
we  should  pause  a  moment  to  satisfy  ourselves  as  to  what  we
mean  by  the  "  Swan-Maiden  "  motif.  We  mean,  I  take  it,  a
story  that  tells  of  the  hero  coming  by  chance  on  a  number  of
girls  bathing,  or  he  may  see  a  flock  of  birds  who  turn  into  girls.
For  some  reason  or  other  he  steals  their  clothes  or  plumages
(in  many  cases  only  that  of  one),  and  by  so  doing  obtains  one
of  them  for  his  wife.  He  usually  loses  her,  either  by  his
breaking  some  taboo,  or  else  by  her  regaining  her  lost  dress
or  plumage.  In  some  cases  fresh  adventures  end  in  a  happy
reunion  ;  in  others  he  remains  alone  and  disconsolate  for  the
rest  of  his  life.

Accepting  this  as  the  typical  example  of  the  "Swan-
Maiden  motif,  we  can  look  back  at  the  incident  in  Somadeva
and  unhesitatingly  say  that  here  we  have  a  version  of  the
motif  in  question,  though  an  unusual  form  of  it.  We  have
the  girls  bathing,  the  stealing  of  the  clothes,  the  marriage,
the  desertion,  and  the  final  reunion,  In  fact,  the  only  thing
omitted  is  the  "  swan  "  element.     But  of  this  more  anon.

1  Cf.  also  the  Apsaras-swan-maidens  who  occur  in  Story  No.  172aaa,  in
Vol.  IX,  Chapter  CXXI.
213


214  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

The  stealing  of  clothes  of  girls,  while  they  are  bathing,
forms,  as  most  readers  are  well  aware,  one  of  the  best-known
incidents  of  the  early  life  of  Krishna.  The  Prema  Sdgara,1
following  the  Bhdgavata  Pur  ana,2  thus  recounts  the  incident :

"  One  day  all  the  Braj  girls,  collectively,  went  to  an  un-
frequented ghat  to  bathe,  and  having  gone  there  [and]  taken
off  their  clothes  [and]  placed  [them]  on  the  bank,  becoming
naked,  [and]  entered  the  water,  they  began  to  sing  repeatedly
the  virtues  of  Hari,  and  to  sport  [in]  the  water.  At  that  very
time  Sri  Krishna  also,  seated  in  the  shade  of  a  fig-tree,  was
grazing  cows.

"  [By]  chance  having  heard  the  sound  of  their  singing,  he
also  silently  approached,  and  began  to  look  on,  concealedly.
At  last,  as  he  gazed,  when  something  entered  his  mind,  [he]
stole  all  the  clothes  [and]  went  [and]  ascended  a  Kadam-
tree  ;  and  tying  [them  in]  a  bundle,  placed  [them]  before
[himself].  Hereupon,  when  the  cowherdesses  looked,  [and
saw]  there  were  no  clothes  on  the  bank,  then,  in  alarm,  rising
up  on  all  sides,  they  began  to  look  about,  and  to  say  among
themselves  :  '  Just  now  not  even  a  bird  came  here  ;  who  has
taken  away  the  clothes,  Mother  ?  '  In  the  meantime  a  cow-
herdess  saw  that,  with  a  crown  on  [his]  head,  a  staff  in  [his]
hand,  with  a  yellow  sectarial  mark,  a  necklace  of  wild  flowers,
wearing  yellow  robes,  with  a  tied-up  bundle  of  clothes,  pre-
serving silence,  Sri  Krishna  mounted  on  the  Kadam-tree,
is  seated,  concealed.  On  seeing  him  [she]  cried:  'Friend!
behold  him,  the  stealer  of  our  hearts,  the  stealer  of  clothes,
on  the  Kadam-tree,  holding  the  bundle,  [seated]  resplendent.'
Hearing  this  speech,  and  all  the  young  women  having  seen
Krishna,  ashamed,  entered  the  water,  joined  [their]  hands,
bowed  [their]  heads,  supplicated,  [and]  coaxingly  said  :

"  "  Compassionate  to  the  humble  !    beloved  remover  of  grief  !

O  Mohan  !   please  give  our  clothes.'
Hearing  thus,  Kanhai  says  :  '  I  will  not  give  thus,  appealing

[to]  Nand,  [I  swear]  ;
Come  out  one  by  one,  then  you'll  receive  your  clothes.'

"  The  Braj  girls  angrily  said :  '  This  is  a  nice  lesson  you
have  learnt,  in  that  you  are  saying  to  us,  "  Come  out  naked."
We  will  go  at  once  [and]  tell  our  fathers  [and]  friends,  then

1  Pincott's  edition,  1 897,  p.  60  et  seq.

2  See  M.  N.  Dutt's  edition,  Calcutta,  1895-1896,  pp.  104-107.


APPENDIX  I— THE  "SWAN-MAIDEN"  MOTIF    215

they  will  come  [and]  seize  you  as  a  thief;  and  we  will  go
[and]  relate  [this]  to  Nand  [and]  Jasoda,  then  they  also
will  properly  impart  to  you  instruction.  We  are  ashamed
of  something ;  you  have  blotted  out  all  recognition  [on  our
part].'

On  hearing  this  statement,  angrily,  Sri  Krishna  Ji  said :
'  Now  you  shall  obtain  the  clothes  when  you  fetch  them
[yourselves],  not  otherwise.'  Hearing  this  [and]  fearing,
the  cowherdesses  said  :  '  Compassionate  to  the  humble  !  you
yourself  hold  us  in  remembrance,  you  are  the  protector
of  our  husbands  ;  whom  shall  we  bring  ?  For  you  alone,
having  made  vows,  we  are  bathing  in  the  month  Mangsir.'
Sri  Krishna  said  :  '  If  you,  with  sincerity,  on  my  account
are  bathing  [in]  Aghan,  then  abandon  shame  [and]  evasion,
[and]  come  [and]  take  your  clothes.'  When  Sri  Krishna
Chand  had  said  this,  the  cowherdesses,  having  reflected
among  themselves,  began  to  say  :  *  Come,  friends !  what
Mohan  says,  that  alone  we  should  respect ;  because  he  knows
all  [the  state]  of  our  body  [and]  mind  ;  what  shame  [is  there]
in  this  ?  '  Having  thus  settled  among  themselves,  obeying
the  direction  of  Sri  Krishna,  concealing  with  the  hands  the
breast  [and]  privities,  all  the  young  women  issued  from  the
water,  with  heads  bowed  down,  [and]  when  they  went  [and]
stood  before  [him]  on  the  shore,  Sri  Krishna  laughingly  said  :
'  Now,  with  joined  hands,  come  forward,  then  I  will  give  the
clothes.'     The  cowherdesses  said  :

" '  Why  are  you  deceiving  [us],  Darling  of  Nand  !    we  are

plain  simple  Braj  girls.
A  trick  has  been  played ;   consciousness  [and]  sense  are

gone  ;   you  have  played  this  prank,  O  Hari !
Fortifying  [our]  hearts  we  have  committed  shame ;  now  do

you  do  something,  O  Ruler  of  Braj  !  '

"Having  said  this,  when  the  cowherdesses  joined  [their]
hands,  Sri  Krishna  Chand  Ji,  having  given  the  clothes,  came
to  them  [and]  said  :  4  In  your  hearts,  do  not  be  anywise  dis-
pleased at  this  affair  ;  I  have  given  you  this  lesson,  because
in  the  water  is  the  abode  of  the  god  Varuna ;  hence  if  any-
one becomes  naked  [and]  bathes  in  the  water,  all  this  virtue
passes  away.  Perceiving  the  affection  of  your  hearts,  [and]
being  delighted,  I  have  imparted  this  secret  to  you.  Now  go
home ;  then,  in  the  month  of  Katik,  come  [again,  and]  sport
with  me.'  "


216  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

There  is  perhaps  no  actual  connection  whatever  between
the  two  stories.  I  merely  wish  to  emphasise  the  fact  that
one  of  the  chief  incidents  in  the  motif  under  consideration
has  been  known  throughout  India  from  a  very  early  date.

Of  even  older  date,  however,  is  the  story  of  Urvasi  and
Pururavas,  for  which  I  must  ask  readers  to  refer  back  to
Appendix  I  of  Vol.  II,  p.  245  et  seq.  Here  we  saw  that  among
other  incidents  Urvasi  deserts  her  mortal  husband  on  his
breaking  a  taboo.  He  goes  in  search  of  her,  and  comes
upon  nymphs  swimming  in  a  lake  in  the  shape  of  swans,
among  whom  is  the  lost  Urvasi.  They  "  appear  "  to  him
in  their  normal  shape,  but  in  vain  he  tries  to  persuade  her
to  return.

This  is  according  to  the  Satapatha  Brdhmana  version.  In
the  later  Vishnu  Pur  ana,  however,  we  find  the  "  swan  "  inci-
dent has  disappeared,  and  he  discovers  his  beloved  "  sporting
with  four  other  nymphs  of  heaven  in  a  lake  beautiful  with
lotuses."

Can  we  justly  claim  this  ancient  legend  as  a  version,  or
perhaps  even  the  origin,  of  the  "Swan-Maiden"  motifs  At
this  stage  of  our  inquiry  I  doubt  it.  In  the  first  place,  it  is
the  "  fairy  "  woman  who  falls  in  love  with  the  man — a  mortal.
She  it  is  who  imposes  the  taboo.  The  lover  plays  a  distinctly
passive  part,  and  is  naturally  heartbroken  when  deserted.
There  is  nothing  about  stolen  clothes  or  plumages,  and  in  fact
we  have  no  hint  of  her  power  of  changing  into  a  swan  until
she  has  returned  to  her  celestial  home.

If,  however,  we  take  the  stories  in  the  Satapatha  Brdh-
mana and  the  Bhdgavata  Purdna  together,  we  find  a  full  tally
of  all  the  "  swan-maiden  "  incidents  that  are  so  familiar  to
us,  and  which  appear  in  numerous  collections  of  modern
Indian  tales.1  We  can  then,  I  think,  safely  say  that  Sanskrit
literature  contains  sufficient  material  to  produce  a  complete
swan-maiden  story  without  having  to  borrow  a  single  incident
from  outside  India.  But  whether  we  can  regard  India  as  the
one  original  home  of  the  story  from  whence  it  migrated  in
all  directions  2  is  quite  another  matter.

Let  us  shift  our  field  of  inquiry  to  Europe  and  look  at  the
familiar  story  of  "  The  Drummer,"  in  Grimm,  No.  193,  where
the  hero  finds  three  pieces  of  white  linen  lying  on  the  shore

1  See  Bolte  and  Polivka,  op.  cit.f  vol.  iii,  p.  414.

2  For  versions  are  found  in  Tibet,  China,  Japan,  Sumatra,  Celebes,  the
Philippines,  etc.


APPENDIX  I— THE  "SWAN-MAIDEN"  MOTIF    217

of  a  lake.  He  puts  one  in  his  pocket  and  goes  home,  think-
ing no  more  of  the  incident.  Just  as  he  is  going  to  sleep
he  hears  his  name  softly  called  and  a  voice  of  a  maiden
begs  for  the  return  of  her  dress.  The  drummer  gives  it
back  on  the  condition  that  she  tells  him  who  she  is.  The
girl  does  so  and  then  flies  away.  The  rest  of  the  tale  does
not  concern  us.

A  glance  at  Bolte  and  Polivka,1  and  still  more  at  the
important  work  on  the  subject  by  Holmstrom,2  will  show
the  extraordinarily  wide  distribution  of  the  motif.

To  attempt  to  give  a  list  of  variants  here  would  be  both
superfluous  and  unproductive.  I  shall,  therefore,  confine
myself  to  a  discussion  on  the  subject  of  the  origin  of  the  motif
— whether  it  is  a  migrant  from  the  East,  whether  it  is  one  of
those  tales  which  form  the  common  stock  of  ideas  in  all  parts
of  the  world,  or  whether,  perchance,  it  has  travelled  from
Northern  Europe  to  the  East.  We  have  already  seen  that
India  possessed  ample  material  in  her  Vedic  and  Puranic
literature  to  produce  a  complete  swan-maiden  story  which
would  naturally,  in  course  of  time  and  translation,  assume
different  forms,  as  it  passed  from  mouth  to  mouth,  and  later
from  hand  to  hand.

Can  we  find  a  similar  supply  of  material  in  Europe  to
produce  such  a  story  at  a  time  before  Indian  fiction  began
to  filter  through  from  the  East  ?

This,  then,  is  the  first  question  that  presents  itself,  and
one,  I  would  add,  that  is  as  fascinating  as  it  is  hard  to
answer.

When  examining  the  European  variants  we  must  never
lose  sight  of  the  chain  of  incidents  which  we  have  accepted  as
forming  a  "swan-maiden"  story,  and  be  on  our  guard  lest  we
be  led  away  by  some  of  the  numerous  tales  in  which  birdlike
beings  figure.  Thus  the  sirens,  harpies,  keres,  erinyes,  etc.,
are  to  be  shunned  by  us  as  surely  as  they  were  by  the  wiser
of  the  ancient  Greeks.

The  first  point,  then,  which  strikes  us  forcibly  is  that  we
do  not  find  a  true  "  swan-maiden  "  story  in  classical  myth-
ology. This  may  seem  a  sweeping  statement,  but  it  is  true
nevertheless.  The  only  type  of  classical  "  fairy "  being
whose  attributes  and  behaviour  approach  the  swan-maiden

1  Op.  cit.}  iii,  pp.  406-417.

2  Studier  over  svanjungfrumotivet  i  Volundarkvida  och  annorst'ddes,  Malmo,
1919.


218  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

at  all  closely  is  the  nereid  or  nymph  (the  Bulgarian  samo-
divas,  the  Serbian  vilas,  and  the  Rumanian  z&nas).  Even
her  similarity  depends  rather  on  her  modern  role  of  nymph
of  the  woods,  streams,  groves,  hills,  meadows,  etc.,  than  the
classical  nereid,  who  was  in  reality  a  sea-maiden.  As  has
been  shown  by  Holmstrom,1  there  exists  in  the  Balkan
countries,  and  especially  in  modern  Greece,  a  large  number
of  stories  in  which  the  hero  marries  a  nymph  by  stealing  some
portion  of  her  dress.  These  nymphs  were  famous  for  their
dancing,  but  were  unable  to  prove  their  skill  until  the  stolen
garment  was  returned.

In  some  versions  we  find  the  particular  portion  of  the  dress
definitely  mentioned.  When  this  is  so,  it  is  usually  a  veil  or
kerchief,  and  here  we  begin  to  suspect  the  presence  of  local
custom,  and  we  shall  not  be  disappointed.  Writing  on  the
subject,  Lawson 2  says  :  "  And  in  this  detail  of  costume
the  resemblance  of  bride  and  nereid  (vvfi(f>ri  =  nymph  =  bride)
still  holds  good  ;  for  no  wedding-dress  would  be  complete
without  a  kerchief  either  wrapped  about  the  bride's  head  or
pinned  upon  her  breast,  or  carried  in  her  hand  to  form  a  link
with  her  neighbour  in  the  chain  of  dancers."

As  an  example  of  the  kind  of  story  to  which  I  refer,  it
would  be  impossible  to  give  a  better  one  than  that  quoted
by  Lawson  from  Messina.     Briefly  it  is  as  follows  :

A  young  shepherd  played  the  pipes  so  skilfully  that  the
nereids  danced  to  his  music.  So  pleased  were  they  that  they
carried  him  off  each  day  to  the  threshing-floor,  where  they
danced  to  their  hearts'  content.

Having  gradually  overcome  his  fear  and  shyness,  the
young  shepherd  began  to  regard  the  nereids  with  a  critical
eye,  and  soon  espied  one,  more  beautiful  than  all  the  rest,
with  whom  he  fell  violently  in  love.  But  how  to  secure  her
for  a  wife  was  the  question  !  In  this  predicament  he  sought
the  advice  of  an  old  woman  learned  in  such  matters.  She
told  him  to  seize  the  girl's  kerchief  before  the  cock  crew,  and
to  hold  on  to  it  at  all  costs,  no  matter  what  terrible  shape  the
nereid  might  assume.

1  Op.  cit.,  p.  108.  The  actual  variants  quoted,  according  to  his  enumera-
tion, are  SB  (i.e.  Bulgaria)  3,  4  ;  and  OG  (i.e.  Greece  and  Albania)  4,  5,  7,  8,
10,  11.     See  pp.  51  and  59  respectively.

2  Modern  Greek  Folklore  and  Ancient  Greek  Religion,  1.910,  p.  136.  See
also  Farnell,  "  Nature  (Greek),"  Hastings'  Ency.  Rel.  Eth.,  vol.  ix,  p.  226.


APPENDIX  I— THE  "SWAN-MAIDEN"  MOTIF    219

The  shepherd  followed  the  instructions  in  spite  of  the
fact  that  the  girl  changed  into  a  lion,  a  snake  and  a  burning
fire.  The  cock  crew,  and  all  the  nereids  disappeared,  save
the  one  whose  kerchief  had  been  stolen.  And  she  followed
the  shepherd  submissively  and  became  his  wife.

A  hitherto  unpublished  variant  was  told  by  the  gypsies
of  Bukarest  to  Dr  Gaster  in  1877.  With  his  usual  generosity
he  has  allowed  me  to  make  any  use  of  it  I  like,  so  I  herewith
take  the  opportunity  of  giving  a  resume  of  the  tale  :

A  certain  young  man  has  noticed  three  z&nas  dancing
most  beautifully,  and  is  anxious  to  obtain  one  of  them  for  a
wife.  He  is  advised  to  snatch  the  crown  or  wreath  from  the
one  he  likes  the  best.  This  he  does,  and  the  zona  follows  him
and  becomes  his  wife.  The  youth  keeps  the  crown  carefully
locked  away.  As  time  goes  on,  the  couple  are  asked  to  a
wedding  feast,  at  which  the  young  wife  dances  so  beautifully
that  all  present  are  enchanted;  whereupon  she  says  to  her
mother-in-law  that  if  her  husband  would  give  her  back  her
crown  she  would  show  them  that  she  could  dance  even  better
still.  No  sooner  is  the  crown  on  her  head  than  she  starts
dancing  in  the  air,  and  finally  flies  away.  Her  husband  im-
mediately goes  in  search  of  her,  and,  with  the  assistance  of
grateful  animals,  is  able  to  reach  her  palace,  and  be  united
with  her  once  again.

This  is  as  near  as  we  can  get  to  our  story  in  South-eastern
Europe,  without  counting,  of  course,  variants  obviously
derived  from  "  Hassan  of  Bassorah  "  in  the  Nights  (Burton,
vol.  viii,  p.  41  ;   and  Chauvin,  op.  cit.,  vii,  p.  37).

It  is  among  the  Teutonic  races  that  we  find  the  "  Swan-
Maiden  "  motif  most  elaborately  developed.  Not  only  is
primitive  Teutonic  legend  full  of  references  to  swans,1  but
as  Scandinavia  is  one  of  the  chief  haunts  of  the  wild  swan,
we  can  well  imagine  that  any  important  tale  connected  with
a  swan  would  find  a  welcome  acceptance  in  those  already
existing  legends  best  fitted  to  receive  it.

The  question  then  arises  as  to  when  the  swan-maiden  is
first  mentioned  in  Norse  mythology,  and  whence  the  idea  was
derived.  Most  folklorists  who  have  written  on  swan-maidens
have  remarked  on  the  early  mention  of  the  motif  in  early
Norse  legend,  and  have  pointed  out  that  it  occurs  in  the
Icelandic  Eddas  of  about  a.d.  1000.     We  must  not,  however,

1  See  the  references  given  by  Seaton,  u  Swan-Maidens/'  Hastings'  Ency:
Eel.  Eth.,  vol.  xii,  1921,  p.  126.


220  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

accept  such  a  statement  without  examining  the  actual  pas-
sages in  question,  and  satisfying  ourselves  that  both  the
authenticity  and  meaning  of  the  words  are  beyond  suspicion.
First  of  all  let  us  be  quite  clear  about  the  Eddas  themselves.
Edda  is  the  name  of  a  work  on  the  art  of  writing  poetry,
compiled  by  the  famous  Icelandic  historian,  Snorri  Sturluson
(1178-1241).  There  is  no  mention  whatever  of  a  swan-
maiden  in  the  work.  Now  the  basis  of  Snorri's  work  was  a
number  of  old  poems  which,  owing  to  their  similarity  to  the
subject-matter  of  the  Edda,  also  became  known  by  the  name
of  Edda.  As  a  mark  of  distinction  the  work  of  Snorri  was
called  "  the  Younger  "  and  the  ancient  poems  "  the  Elder  "
Edda.  In  our  own  times  "  the  Elder  "  Edda  is  more  usually
known  as  "  the  Eddie  poems."

Having  thus  qualified  the  use  of  the  term  Edda,  we  can
proceed  with  our  inquiry.  "  The  Eddie  poems  "  contain,  as
one  of  the  earliest  and  most  important  poems,  the  Volundar-
kvitha,  or  "Lay  of  Wayland,"  which  dates  from  about  a.d.  900.
It  is  this  poem  which  is  cited  as  containing  the  swan-maiden
reference.  The  story  deals  with  the  exploits  of  Volund
(Velent,  Weland,  Wayland)  the  Smith,  so  widely  diffused
through  Scandinavian  prose  and  verse.  It  is  now  agreed
that  it  came  to  the  North  from  Saxon  regions,  along  with  so
many  other  early  hero  tales.  Legends  about  Wayland,  the
Smith,  persisted  for  centuries  throughout  all  the  Teutonic
lands,  and  it  is  here  we  must  place  the  origin  of  the  legend.
Now,  when  these  hero  tales  reached  Scandinavia,  it  was  in
Norway  that  they  found  a  home.  Their  local  colour  became
Norwegian,  and  with  but  few  exceptions  the  Eddie  poems  are
Norwegian,  and  not  Icelandic.  This  fact  affects  our  inquiry
only  in  a  minor  way,  but  it  is  of  importance  when  we  come
to  consider  the  fusion  of  local  "  swan-metamorphoses "
elements  with  imported  stories.  The  particular  exploit  of
Weland  related  in  the  Volundarkvitha  tells  how  he  was  lamed
by  King  Nithuth,  and  of  his  terrible  revenge.  To  this,  as  a
kind  of  introduction,  has  been  added  the  swan-maiden  in-
cident. Whether  these  were  originally  two  separate  poems
linked  together  by  the  thin  chain  of  prose  narrative,  or  whether
they  were  merely  two  legends  used  as  the  basis  of  a  new  and
homogeneous  poem,  as  we  find  it  in  the  Volundarkvitha,  is  a
debatable  point.  On  the  whole,  however,  the  latter  seems  the
most  probable  explanation.

The    compiler   or    annotator    of    this    poem,    using   his


APPENDIX  I— THE  "SWAN-MAIDEN"  MOTIF    221

knowledge  of  Weland  tradition  (whether  of  earlier  or  later
date),  and  finding  the  MSS.  in  a  very  bad  state,  prefixed  a
prose  narrative  in  which  he  makes  Nithuth  a  Swedish  king
and  Weland's  father  a  Finnish  king.  He  further  identi-
fies the  swan-maidens  with  the  Valkyries.  Now,  the  date
of  the  MS.  is  about  1270  ;  thus  there  was  plenty  of  time
for  "  improvements "  to  be  made  by  those  who  worked
on  older  MSS.  or  who  largely  relied  on  oral  tradition.  The
Valkyrie  legends  had  doubtless  become  more  widely  diffused,
and,  as  we  shall  see  later,  they  were  identified  with  the
swan-maidens  in  another  of  the  Eddie  poems,  the  Helreith
Brynhildar.

We  are  now  in  a  better  position  to  look  at  the  passages
themselves.  First  of  all  comes  the  prose  "  Introduction,"
followed  by  that  portion  of  the  poem  itself  which  concerns
our  inquiry.  I  use  the  most  recent,  and  very  fine,  translation
by  H.  A.  Bellows.1

"  There  was  a  king  in  Sweden  named  Nithuth.  He  had
two  sons  and  one  daughter  ;  her  name  was  Bothvild.  There
were  three  brothers,  sons  of  a  king  of  the  Finns  :  one  was
called  Slagfith,  another  Egil,  the  third  Volund.  They  went
on  snowshoes  and  hunted  wild  beasts.  They  came  into
Ulfdalir,  and  there  they  built  themselves  a  house;  there  was
a  lake  there  which  is  called  Ulfsjar.  Early  one  morning  they
found  on  the  shore  of  the  lake  three  women,  who  were  spinning
flax.  Near  them  were  their  swan-garments,  for  they  were
Valkyries.  Two  of  them  were  daughters  of  King  Hlothver,
Hlathguth  the  Swan- White  and  Hervor  the  All- Wise,  and  the
third  was  Olrun,  daughter  of  Kjar  from  Valland.  These  did
they  bring  home  to  their  hall  with  them.  Egil  took  Olrun,
and  Slagfith  Swan- White,  and  Volund  All- Wise.  There  they
dwelt  seven  winters ;  but  then  they  flew  away  to  find  battles,
and  came  back  no  more.  Then  Egil  set  forth  on  his  snow-
shoes  to  follow  Olrun,  and  Slagfith  followed  Swan- White,  but
Volund  stayed  in  Ulfdalir.  He  was  a  most  skilful  man,  as
men  know  from  old  tales.  King  Nithuth  had  him  taken  by
force,  as  the  poem  here  tells."

In  the  above  story  the  compiler  definitely  states  that  the
swan-maidens  are  Valkyries.

1  The  Poetic  Edda,  Scandinavian  Classics,  vols,  xxi,  xxii,  New  York,  1923,
p.  252  et  seq.


222  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

Now  let  us  look  at  the  poem  he  was  annotating  :


1.  Maids  from  the  south1
Fair  and  young,
On  the  shore  of  the  sea
The  maids  of  the  south,


2.


Hlathguth  and  Hervor,
And  Olrun  the  Wise


through  Myrkwood  2  flew,
their  fate  to  follow  ;
to  rest  them  they  sat,
and  flax  they  spun.

•  •  •  •  •

Hlothver's  children,
Kjar's  daughter  was.


One  in  her  arms
To  her  bosom  white

4.  Swan- White  second —


took  Egil  then
the  woman  fair.

Swan-feathers  she  wore,


And  her  arms  the  third
Next  round  Volund's

5.  There  did  they  sit
In  the  eighth  at  last
(And  in  the  ninth
The  maidens  yearned
The  fair  young  maids

6.  Volund  home
From  a  weary  way,
Slagfith  and  Egil
Out  and  in  went  they,

7.  East  fared  Egil
And  Slagfith  south
Volund  alone


of  the  sisters  threw
neck  so  white.

for  seven  winters,
came  their  longing  again,
did  need  divide  them),
for  the  murky  wood,
their  fate  to  follow.

from  his  hunting  came,
the  weather-wise  bowman,
the  hall  found  empty,
everywhere  seeking.

after  Olrun,

to  seek  for  Swan- White  ;

in  Ulfdalir  lay,


Red  gold  he  fashioned
And  rings  he  strung
So  for  his  wife
In  the  fair  one  home


8.  Red  gold  he  fashioned  with  fairest  gems,

on  ropes  of  bast ;
he  waited  long,
might  come  to  him.

the  lord  of  the  Njars,
in  Ulfdalir  lay.  .  .  .

(The  rest  of  the  poem  does  not  concern  our  inquiry.)

1  I  retain  the  caesural  pause.     Each  half-line  has  two  accented  syllables
and  two  (in  some  cases  three)  unaccented  ones.

2  A  magic,  dark  forest.


This  Nithuth  learned,
That  Volund  alone


APPENDIX  I— THE  "SWAN-MAIDEN"  MOTIF    223

The  only  possible  grounds  for  finding  any  proof  of  the
swan-maidens  being  identical  with  the  Valkyries  is  contained
in  the  ambiguous  reading  of  an  obscure  word  in  line  2  of
stanza  1,  and  again  in  line  5  of  stanza  5.  Gering1  renders
it  "  helmed  "  instead  of  "  fair  and  young."  There  is  nothing
to  show  that  the  former  reading  is  more  correct,  or  that  the
poet  ever  conceived  any  analogy  between  the  two  mythical
beings  at  all.  It  was  the  annotator  who  definitely  connected
the  two — about  three  hundred  years  later.

In  the  Helreith  Brynhildar  we  are  told  of  a  king  who  robs
eight  sisters  of  their  plumages  and  thus  forces  them  to  help
him.  But  so  fragmentary  and  undeveloped  is  the  motif  that
it  has  but  little  value  in  our  inquiry.  Furthermore,  being
of  later  date  than  the  Volundarkvitha,  it  lacks  the  interest  it
might  otherwise  have  possessed.

The  passage  in  question  is  spoken  by  Brynhild  after  she
has  been  burned  and  is  "in  the  wagon  on  Hel-way."  She
passes  the  house  of  a  certain  giantess,  who  chides  her  about
her  former  life  on  earth.  In  course  of  conversation  Brynhild
says  :

"  The  monarch 2  bold  the  swan-robes  bore

Of  the  sisters  eight  beneath  an  oak  ;

Twelve  winters  I  was  if  know  thou  wilt,

When  oaths  I  yielded  the  King  so  young."

This  completes  the  evidence  of  the  existence  of  the
"  swan-maiden  "  in  the  Eddie  poems  ;  and,  on  the  face  of  it,
it  does  not  appear  very  convincing.  We  must,  of  course,
recognise  that  Norse  mythology  possessed  legends  of  animal
transformation  from  the  earliest  times.  This  is  evident  not
only  from  the  swanlike  maidens,  which  later  were  identified
with  the  swan-maidens  themselves,  but  also  from  the  belief
in  the  fylgia,3  a  kind  of  double  which  appeared  in  the  form  of
some  animal  or  bird.  When  it  assumed  the  form  of  a  swan  its
plumage  was  entirely  external — a  "  magical  article  "  which
anyone  who  got  possession  of  it  might  use.  The  attributes
of  the  Valkyries,  their  beauty,  their  habit  of  travelling
through  the  air,  and  their  occasional  encounter  with  mortals
fitted  them  for  identification  with  the  swanlike  maidens  of
Norse  mythology ;    and  even  more  can  we  appreciate  the

1  Die  Edda,  p.  141  el  seq.

2  Possibly  Agnar,  brother  of  Autha.

3  See  Holmstrom,  op.  cit.,  p.  185,  for  numerous  examples.


224  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

ease  with  which  the  swan-maiden  herself  found  congenial
surroundings  in  both  German  and  Scandinavian  legends.

There  still  remains  the  origin  of  the  Valkyries  themselves
to  be  discussed.  We  have  seen  that  in  later  times  they  were
identified  with  swan-maidens,  but  can  we  assign  to  them  a
true  Teutonic  origin  with  no  primary  connection  with  the
swan-maiden  as  we  know  her  ?  If  so,  the  contention  that
she  is  an  immigrant  is  strengthened,  because  in  the  first  place
we  shall  have  established  the  fact  that  she  was  only  an  addi-
tion made  by  the  annotator  of  the  Edda ;  and,  in  the  second
place,  that  it  was  the  Valkyries,  and  not  the  swan-maidens,
that  were  the  direct  development  of  the  bird-element  found
in  early  Teutonic  mythology.

The  Valkyries  were  primarily  helpers  and  guardians  of
heroes  in  battles,  usually  represented  as  clad  in  armour  and
riding  on  chargers.  Their  very  name  means  "choosers  of
the  slain."  Nothing  could  be  further  from  the  delicate  charm
and  beauty  of  the  swan-maiden,  to  whom  war  and  battle
were  unknown.

Yet,  as  we  have  already  seen,  the  Valkyries  had  the
necessary  features  to  attract  and  be  attracted  by  the  swan-
maiden,  if  we  imagine  her  as  an  immigrant  who  had  not
received  the  welcome  in  South-eastern  Europe  she  had  ex-
pected. Owing  to  her  beauty  and  power  of  flying  through
the  air,  the  Valkyrie  may  even  appear  as  a  swan,  but  this
does  not  necessarily  mean  she  is  a  swan-maiden  in  our  sense
of  the  term.

We  may  at  once  accept  the  statement  of  Dr  Golther  1  :
"  A  Valkyrie  may  occasionally  be  a  swan-maiden,  but  a
swan-maiden  is  not  necessarily  a  Valkyrie,  but  only  accident-
ally here  and  there  in  Norse  poetry."  This  merely  bears  out
the  conclusion  we  have  already  arrived  at  above.

As  can  be  seen  from  the  most  recent  article  on  the  subject
by  Krappe,2  we  can  definitely  state  that  the  earliest  extant
evidence  of  the  Valkyrie  tradition  is  to  be  looked  for  in  the
reliefs  of  three  altars  3  discovered  at  Housesteads  (North-
umberland) on  the  site  of  Hadrian's  Wall.     The  altars  in

1  Wolfgang  Golther,  Studien  zur  germanischen  Sagengeschichte,  I,  Der
Valkyrienmythus,  Abhandl.  d.  M'unchener  Akad.f  philos.-philol.  CL,  vol.  xviii,
1890,  p.  428.

2  A.  H.  Krappe,  "The  Valkyries,"  Modern  Language  Review,  vol.  xxi,  1926,
pp.  55-73.

3  The  third  altar  was  discovered  as  recently  as  October  1920.


APPENDIX  I— THE  "SWAN-MAIDEN"  MOTIF    225

question  were  erected  in  the  reign  of  Alexander  Severus
(a.d.  222-235)  by  Teutonic  soldiers  from  Lower  Germany,
who  served  as  mercenaries  in  the  Roman  legions.  They  are
dedicated  to  a  male  divinity  called  Mars  Thincsus  and  his  two
female  companions,  the  Alaisiages,  of  whom  there  appear
to  have  been  several  couples,1  designated  by  the  common
name  of  Alaisiages.2

Now,  in  speaking  of  the  Valkyries  we  are  perhaps  rather
apt  to  connect  them  almost  exclusively  with  the  Viking  age,
quite  ignoring  their  unde  derivatur,  which  appears  to  lie  in  a
pair  of  divinities  of  earlier  Norse  mythology.  Although  the
number  of  the  Valkyries  still  appears  in  the  Hdkonarmdl
(c.  970)  as  two,  it  soon  increases  considerably,  and  finally
becomes  nearly  as  uncertain  and  changeable  as  the  number
of  Gandharvas  in  Hindu  mythology  (see  Ocean,  Vol.  I,  p.  201).
But  the  point  which  concerns  our  present  inquiry  is  the  fact
that  in  a  relief  on  one  of  the  altars  mentioned  above  is  a  bird,
either  a  swan  or  a  goose,  accompanying  an  armed  warrior,
also  taken  to  be  Mars  Thincsus.

Although  evidence  does  not  permit  our  definitely  identi-
fying the  Valkyries  with  the  Alaisiages,3  we  can  safely  say
that  the  former  arose  out  of  the  latter  and  adopted  their
functions.

Frazer4  and  many  other  scholars  have  shown  the  re-
lationship which  exists  between  twins  and  the  sky  ;  and  in
this  connection  it  is  interesting  to  find  that  the  Valkyries
were  also  credited  with  influence  upon  the  weather,  and  on
fertility  in  general.  We  are  now  getting  a  step  nearer  to  the
swan  or  goose,  for  such  a  bird,  through  its  connection  with
the  water,  has,  by  the  simple  medium  of  sympathetic  magic,
been  closely  associated  with  fertility  and  fecundity.  Thus
we  see  that  as  "  Children  of  the  Sky  "  this  pair  of  deities  of
Norse  mythology  have  a  dual  function.  They  are  deities
of  war  and  battle,  but  also  of  the  weather  and  fertility.    It  is

1  I  purposely  do  not  say  "twins,"  because  there  is  no  evidence  to  show
that  either  the  Alaisiages  or  Valkyries  were  twins  at  all.  All  we  know  is  that
at  one  time  their  number  was  two.  It  would  be  very  interesting  if  we  could
determine  whether  they  were  twins,  but  I  fail  to  see  how  it  is  possible.

2  See  T.  Siebs,  Mitteilungen  d.  schles.  Gesell.  f.  Volkskunde,  vol.  xxv,
1924,  pp.  1-17.

3  For  details  of  the  evidence  see  Krappe,  op.  cit.,  p.  57  et  seq.,  and  the
references  there  given.

4  Belief  in  Immortality,  vol.  ii,  p.  268.

VOL.    VIII.  p


226  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

only  in  their  latter  aspect  that  the  presence  of  the  swan  or
goose  finds  an  adequate  explanation.

Owing  to  the  beauty  of  the  Valkyries  it  is  not  surprising
that,  as  time  went  on,  they  assumed  the  role  of  the  Celtic
"  fairy,"  and  were  obviously  the  only  beings  capable  of
playing  the  part  of  the  swan-maiden  to  perfection  when  and
where  the  motif  first  reached  Scandinavia.  But,  quite  apart
from  their  "  fairy  "  aspect,  it  is  of  the  utmost  importance
to  notice  that  whenever  they  assume  the  form  of  animals
the  swan  is  always  the  form  chosen.  This  at  once  points
back  to  the  roots  of  the  Valkyrie  myth  being  embodied  in
the  Alaisiages.  Every  imaginable  animal  figures  in  the
numerous  variants  of  the  "  Swan-Maiden "  motif,  but  the
Valkyries  always  "revert  to  type."  This  fact  is  significant,
and  has  been  duly  noted  by  Krappe,1  who  further  points  out
that  there  is  also  another  proof  that  the  Valkyries  were  swans
even  before  they  became  the  heroines  of  the  story-complex
of  the  fairy  wife  deserting  her  husband — namely,  that  in
quite  a  number  of  tales  the  Valkyries  appear  in  the  shape
of  swans,  whilst  they  desert  their  husbands  in  only  one,  the
Volundarkvitha.

The  point  I  am  anxious  to  make  here  is  simply  this  :
nowhere  among  the  early  primitive  beliefs  of  Europe  are
there  to  be  found  the  roots  of  the  "Swan-Maiden"  motif.
In  Teutonic  mythology  and  primitive  custom  the  swan  has
played  an  important  part,  largely  symbolical,  from  the
earliest  times.  Here  the  swan-maiden  found  a  hearty  wel-
come. In  classical  countries,  although  the  swan  enters  into
many  legends,  the  swan-maiden  found  herself  already  largely
forestalled  by  the  nereids  and  other  fairy  like  beings.

We  will  now  return  to  the  East  and  glance  briefly  at  the
migration  routes  of  the  motif  as  far  as  we  can,  and  see  if  they
point  to  India  as  a  central  starting-place  or  not.  We  have
already  seen  that  Sanskrit  literature  is  the  earliest  source
of  the  incidents  which  go  to  make  the  complete  motif.  If,
therefore,  the  lines  of  migration  radiate  from  India,  the  evi-
dence that  India  is  really  the  home  of  the  swan-maiden  will
be  doubly  strengthened.

In  order  to  understand  more  clearly  the  value  of  this
geographical  inquiry,  readers  should  have  before  them  a  map
of  the  world,  and,  if  possible,  a  copy  of  Holmstrom's  work,

1  Op.  cit.f  p.  67.


APPENDIX  I— THE  "SWAN-MAIDEN"  MOTIF    227

which  contains  such  a  complete  and  clear  bibliography  of
variants  in  every  part  of  the  world.1  We  will  start  from
India  and  travel  westwards.  We  at  once  find  our  motif  in
several  Persian  collections,2  whence  it  soon  reached  Arabia,3
where  it  branched  northwards  to  Turkey  4  and  Russia,5  and
westwards  to  Tunis,6  Algeria  7  and  Morocco,8  and  across  the
Sahara  to  the  West  African  coast,9  as  well  as  Zanzibar,  Zulu-
land  and  Madagascar.10  This  line  of  migration  is  one  that  we
should  expect,  not  only  because  of  the  early  trade  relations
between  East  Africa,  Arabia  and  India,  but  also,  and  more
especially,  because  of  the  Mohammedan  invasion  of  India.

1  An  annotated  list  of  variants  with  geographical  headings  is  given  by
Holmstrom  in  his  work  Studier  over  svanjungfrumotivet,  pp.  21-72.

2  Scott,  Bahar-Danush,  vol.  ii,  Shrewsbury,  1799,  p.  213;  Clouston,
Popular  Tales  and  Fictions,  Ldn.,  1887,  vol.  i,  p.  183;  and  Bricteux,  Contes
Persans,  Bibl.  de  la  Faculte  de  phil.  et  lettr.  de  l'Univ.  de  Liege,  1910,
p.  277.

3  Nights,  Burton,  vol.  v,  p.  346,  and  vol.  viii,  p.  41.  For  another
version  see  Scott,  Arabian  Nights'  Entertainments,  Ldn.,  1811,  vol.  vi,  p.  283.
See  also  Chauvin,  op.  cit.,  vi,  p.  1,  and  vii,  pp.  29,  35  and  39;  [J.  Hammer]
Rosenol,  Tubingen,  1813,  vol.  i,  p.  162 ;  A.  Jahn,  Die  Mehri-Sprache  in
Siidarabien,  Vienna,  1902,  p.  118;  and  Carra  de  Vaux,  L'Abrege  des  Merveilles,
Paris,  1898,  p.  20.

4  J.  Kunos,  Tiirkische  Volksmarchen  aus  Stambul,  Leiden,  1905,  pp.  11,  76,
82,  and  also  Ungarische  Revue,  Leipzig,  1888,  vol.  viii,  pp.  435,  436.

5  Afanasjev,  Narodnya  russkija  skazki,  3rd  edit.,  Moscow,  1897,  vol.  ii,
pp-  90,  91,  101,  103,  163,  l67n,  168  ;  Chudjakov,  V elikorusskija  skazki,  Moscow,
1862,  vol.  iii,  p.  120;  A.  Erlenvejn,  Narodnyja  russkija  skazki  i  zagadh  .  .  .,
1862  i  1863,  2nd  edit.,  Moscow,  1882,  p.  145;  Ralston,  Russian  Folk-Tales,
Ldn.,  1873,  p.  120;  and  Coxwell,  Siberian  and  other  Folk-Tales,  Ldn.,  1925,
pp.  690,  707,  773.

6  H.  Stumme,  Tunisische  Marchen  und  Gedichte,  Leipzig,  1893,  vol.  ii,
p.  13.

7  Certeux  and  Carnoy,  VAlgerie  traditionelle,  Paris,  1884,  vol.  i,  p.  87;
and  G.  Mercier,  he  Chaouia  de  I'Aures,  Paris,  1 896,  p.  64.

8  H.  Stumme,  Marchen  der  Schluh  von  Tazerwalt,  Leipzig,  1895,  p.  102.

9  A.  B.  Ellis,  The  Tshi-speaking  People  of  the  Gold  Coast  of  West  Africa,
Ldn.,  1887,  pp.  208,  211;  Mittheilungen  d.  Seminars  f.  orienlalische  Sprachen,
vol.  v,  3,  pp.  139,  142;  and  R.  H.  Nassau,  Fetichism  in  West  Africa,  Ldn.,
1904,  p.  351.

10  C.  Callaway,  Nursery  Tales,  Traditions  and  Histories  of  the  Zulus,  Ldn.,
1868,  p.  55;  G.  Ferrand,  Contes  populaires  malgaches,  Paris,  1893,  p.  91;
Folk-Lore  Journal,  Ldn.,  1883,  vol.  i,  p.  202  ;  and  E.  Steere,  Swahili  Tales,  Ldn.,
1889,  2nd  edit.,  p.  331.


228  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

We  return  to  India  and  start  on  another  route,  this  time
in  a  northerly  direction.  We  find  our  motif  firmly  estab-
lished in  Tibet,1  among  the  Tartars,2  Kalmucks3  and  Mon-
golians,4 as  well  as  among  such  tribes  of  Northern  Siberia
as  the  Samoyedes,5  Yakuts6  and  Chukchis,7  who  dwell  on
Bering  Strait.  A  most  interesting  feature  is  that  at  this
point  the  motif  crosses  Bering  Strait  into  North  America  8
and  so  on  to  Greenland.9

As  this  is  about  the  farthest  point  from  our  starting-
place,  it  will  be  interesting  to  see  the  form  the  story  has
now  assumed.  I  choose  one  collected  by  K.  Rasmussen,  to
whom  it  was  told  by  a  middle-aged  Greenlander  during  1903-
1904.  I  would  point  out  that  all  his  Greenlandic  stories  are
based  on  oral  tradition,  not  a  single  one  having  ever  been
written  down.

The  tale  in  question  is  called  "  The  Man  who  took  a  Wild
Goose  for  a  Wife."  It  first  appeared  in  Rasmussen's  Nye
Mennesker,  and  was  subsequently  translated  into  Swedish,
when  it  was  published  in  1926.10  The  following  translation
is  taken  from  the  latter,  but,  as  my  notes  show,  has  also  been
compared  with  the  Danish  version :


1  See  Ralston  and  Schiefner,  Tibetan  Tales,  London.,  1882,  p.  4,  and
M.  Castren,  Ethnologische  Vorlesungen  iiber  die  altaischen  Volker,  St  Petersburg,
1857,  p.  174.

2  See  W.  Radloff,  Proben d.  V olkslitteratur  d.  turkischen  St'dmme  Siid-Sibiriens,
St  Petersburg,  vol.  ii,  1868,  p.  201  ;  vol.  iv,  1872,  pp.  318,  502;  vol.  vi,  1886,
p.  122;  and  also  A.  Schiefner,  Die  Heldensagen  d.  minussinschen  Tataren,  St
Petersburg,  1859,  p.  201.

3  Memoires  de  la  Societe  Finno-ougrienne ,  27,  1,  Helsingfors,  1909,  p.  120.

4  B.  Julg,  Mongolische  M'drchen-Sammlung,  Innsbruck,  1868,  p.  192.

5  See  Coxwell,  op.  cit.,  p.  503.

6  Ibid.,  p.  266.

7  Ibid.,  p.  82.

8  See  J.  G.  Kohl,  Kitchi- Garni :  Wanderings  round  Lake  Superior,  Ldn.,
1859,  p.  105;  Ch.  Leland,  The  Algonquin  Legends  of  New  England,  Ldn.,
1884,  pp.  140,  281,  300;  J.  A.  Farrer,  Primitive  Manners  and  Customs,  Ldn.,
1879,  p.  256;  Annual  Report  of  the  Bureau  of  Ethnology  of  the  Smithsonian
Institute,  Washington,  1888,  vol.  vi,  p.  615  ;  and  The  Journal  of  American  Folk-
Lore,  Boston,  1888,  vol.  i,  p.  76.

9  P.  E.  Egede,  Efterretninger  om  Gronland,  Copenhagen,  1788,  p.  55;
Rink,  Tales  and  Traditions  of  the  Eskimo,  1875,  p.  145;  and  K.  Rasmussen,.
Nye  Mennesker,  Copenhagen  and  Christiania,  1905,  p.  181.

10  Gronlandska  Myter  och  Sagor,  Stockholm,  pp.  108-115.


APPENDIX  I— THE  "SWAN-MAIDEN"  MOTIF   229

"There  was  once  a  man  who  saw  a  flock  of  wild  geese
splashing  about  in  a  lake.  They  had  taken  off  their  plum-
ages *  and  were  transformed  into  human  beings,  and  now
they  were  bathing  and  playing.

"He  thought  he  would  like  to  get  a  couple  of  them  for
wives,  and  therefore  hid  their  plumages.  But  as  he  ran  up
to  catch  them,  one  of  them  cried  so  pitifully  that  he  gave  her
back  her  plumage,  but  the  other  one  he  took  home  to  his  old
grandmother,  and  married  her.

"  She  soon  became  pregnant,  and  gave  birth  to  twins,  both
boys.

"  But  soon  the  wild  goose  began  to  long  for  her  companions,
and  therefore  she  took  to  secretly  collecting  feathers,  and
obtained  a  pair  of  bird's  wings.  After  some  time  she  had
got  enough.

"And  one  day,  when  her  husband  was  out  hunting,  she
made  herself  a  new  plumage  of  the  feathers  and  wings  and
flew  off  with  2  her  children.

"  When  the  husband  came  home,  he  at  once  started  looking
for  her,3  and  ran  out  along  the  shore.

"  Here  he  met  two  earth-spirits  who  were  fighting.  They
tried  to  stop  him  as  best  they  could,  but  he  was  a  great
magician  and  conjured  himself  past  them.4  Then  he  met
two  knoll-spirits,  who  also  were  fighting.  They,  too,  placed
themselves  in  his  way,  but  he  even  conjured  himself  past  them.

"  Then  he  came  to  a  cauldron,  and  in  it  there  was  boiling
seal  meat.     It  stood  muttering  to  itself  :

"  c  Look  !     A  man  !     Po-po-po  !  '

"It  tried  to  persuade  him  to  stop  and  eat,  but  he  was
persistent,  and  conjured  himself  on,  and  so  he  met  a  number
of  hairless  puppies,  which  also  tried  to  stop  him.

"  They  were  earth-dogs,  and  they  were  as  naked  as  worms.
He  ran  past  them  to  Kajungajorssuaq,  the  man  whose  penis
is  so  big  that  it  reaches  the  ground.

"The  magician  who  could  read  his  thoughts,  and  knew
that  he  felt  ashamed  of  his  looks,  approached  him  from  the
front.

1  Literally,  "  shapes."

2  The  Swedish  distinctly  says  "  fran,"  but,  as  the  sequel  shows,  this  must
be  a  misprint.     Furthermore,  the  Danish  reads  "  med."

3  According  to  the  Danish  text,  "them."

4  The  Danish  reads:  "But  he  conjured  himself  past  them,  as  he  was  a
great  magician."


230  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

"  ■  From  what  direction  do  you  approach  me  ? '  said  the
man.

"  '  From  here  ! '  said  the  magician.

" '  Good !  If  you  had  come  from  behind,  I  would  have
killed  you.  You  will,  moreover,  catch  up  those  you  are
pursuing  ;    I  can  hear  them.'

"And  so  he  showed  him  the  way.

"The  magician  then  closed  his  eyes  and  leapt  down  on
an  ice-floe,  and  in  this  way  he  floated  towards  those  he  was
pursuing.1

"  When  he  had  nearly  got  there,  the  children  caught  sight
of  him.

" '  Father  is  coming  !  '  they  called  out.

" '  I  want  to  see  him  !     Bring  him  in  !  '  said  the  wife.

"  And  so  he  entered  her  hut.

"  She  had,  however,  already  chosen  another  husband,  an
old  man,  who  at  once  fled.

"  ■  Let  me  get  out !  I  am  nearly  vomiting !  Qa-r-r-r-rit ! '
he  cried,  and  rushed  out  through  the  passage  of  the  house.
He  was  an  old  long-tailed  duck.

"  The  man  and  wife  now  lived  together  again,2  but  she  did
not  like  him,  and  one  day,  therefore,  she  pretended  to  die.

"  Accordingly  she  was  buried ;  but  as  soon  as  he  had  left
the  grave 3  she  broke  out  of  the  dolmen. 4

■I  see  mother  over  there  !  '  both  the  children  cried.

" '  Let  us  have  a  look ! '  said  the  man,  and  looked  out  of
the  window.

" 4  Who  are  you  ?  '  he  asked.

" 'I  am  Qivdluk  !  ' 5  she  lied.

"  He  then  became  so  angry  that  he  harpooned  his  own  wife.

"  While  the  rumour  about  the  murder  was  spreading,  her
people  transformed  themselves  into  wild  geese  and  fled.

"  But  the  husband,  who  thought  that  the  fugitives  would
soon  return  and  take  vengeance,  again  went  in  search  of
Kajungajorssuaq,  and  from  him  obtained  a  long,  heavy  whip.

"And  one  day  the  revengers  came  in  sight;  they  were  so

1  In  other  Greenlandic  versions  of  the  story  he  jumps  on  the  back  of
a  fish.

2  Literally,  "moved  together  again."

3  The  Danish  text  says  "left  her."

4  This  is  the  best  translation  I  can  get  for  stensattningen.  It  literally  means
"  a  paving."

5  The  Danish  text  gives  "  Kritdluk  "  instead  of  Qivdluk.


APPENDIX  I— "THE  SWAN-MAIDEN"  MOTIF   231

numerous  that  they  resembled  a  large  cloud,  but  the  man
took  his  whip,  swung  it,  and  killed  most  of  them.

"  Only  a  few  escaped,  but  they  returned  with  assistance
so  strong  that  they  formed  an  enormous  flock;  but  again
he  swung  his  whip  and  killed  them.  And  this  time  none
escaped.

"  Then  the  man  lived  for  a  long  time  on  all  those  slain,
fat  wild  geese."

And  here  this  story  ends !

It  is  a  strange  story,  and  one  that  is  well  worth  recording.
I  think  we  can  describe  it  as  another  example  of  a  mongrel
tale — an  imported  motif  embedded  in  local  hero  legends.
A  thorough  knowledge  of  Greenlandic  oral  traditions  is
necessary  before  we  can  speak  with  any  authority.  In
this  connection  we  would  have  welcomed  an  annotation  to
Rasmussen's  important  collections.  Perhaps  this  will  come
later.

We  must,  however,  continue  our  travels.

Returning  once  more  to  India  we  set  out  eastwards,  and
find  the  swan-maiden  occurring  in  stories  from  Burma,1
Indo-China,2  China,3  Japan,4  and  also  the  Philippines.5  If
we  travel  in  a  south-easterly  direction  we  will  find  it  in
Sumatra,6  the  Mentawei  Islands,7  Java,8  Borneo,9  Celebes,10

1  See  Journal  of  the  Asiatic  Society  of  Bengal,  Calcutta,  1 839,  vol.  viii,  p.  536.

2  A.  Landes,  Contes  et  legendes  annamites,  Saigon,  1886,  p.  123.

3  N.  B.  Dennys,  The  Folklore  of  China,  Ldn.,  1876,  p.  140;  Folk-Lore
Journal,  1889,  vol.  vii,  p.  318;  T'oung  Pao,  Archives  pour  servir  a  I etude  de
Vhistoire  .  .   .  et  de  I'ethnographie  de  I'Asie  orientate,  Leide,  1896,  vol.  vi,  p.  68.

4  T'oung  Pao,  vol.  vi,  p.  66 ;  A.  B.  Mitford,  Tales  of  Old  Japan,  Ldn.,
1903,  p.  Ill;  D.  Brauns,  Japanische  Marchen  und  Sagen,  Leipzig,  1885,
p.  388.

5  Journal  of  American  Folk-Lore,  1907,  vol.  xx,  p.  95.

6  Mittheilungen  d.  Seminars  f.  orient.  Sprachen,  ii,  1,  Berlin,  1899,  p.  128;
and  C.  M.  Pleyte,  Bataksche  V ertellingen,  Utrecht,  1894,  pp.  109,  217.

7  See  M.  Morris,  Die  Mentawai-Sprache,  Berlin,  1900,  p.  57.

8  T.  J.  Bezemer,  Volksdichtung  aus  Indonesien,  Sagen,  Tierfabeln  und
Marchen,  Haag,  1904,  p.  46.

9  E.  H.  Gomes,  Seventeen  Years  among  the  Sea  Dyaks  of  Borneo,  Ldn.,
1911,  p.  278  ;  and  Transactions  of  the  Ethnological  Society  of  London,  N.S.,  ii,
1863,  pp.  26-27.

10  See  S.  J.  Hickson,  A  Naturalist  in  North  Celebes,  Ldn.,  1889,  pp.  264-
265  ;  and  also  Zeit.  d.  d.  morgen.  Gesell.,  vol.  vi,  Leipzig,  1852,  p.  536.


232  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

the     Moluccas,1     New     Guinea,2     Micronesia,3     Melanesia,4
Polynesia,5  Australia6  and  New  Zealand.7

It  will  thus  be  seen  that  all  these  lines  of  migration
radiate  from  India,  which  fact  seems  clearly  to  point  to  India
as  the  home  of  the  motif.  But  if  we  look  more  closely  at
these  routes  which  we  have  followed  we  will  see  that,  to  a
large  extent,  they  tell  us  the  history  of  India  itself.  They
tell  us  of  the  gradual  expansion  of  Hinduism  and  Buddhism
in  the  East  and  South-east,  while  in  the  North  they  exhibit
the  results  of  the  invasion  of  Islam.  That  the  great  highways,
both  of  land  and  sea,  would  be  followed  in  any  migration
is  natural  enough,  and  we  need  not  lay  much  importance
on  this  side  of  the  question  as  far  as  story-migration  is  con-
cerned. It  is  the  actual  history  of  a  country,  both  religious
and  political,  that  will  tell  us  if  it  is  likely  to  be  a  centre  from
which  tales  would  radiate  in  all  directions,  or  whether,  on  the
other  hand,  it  lies  on  one  of  the  main  routes  from  such  a  centre.


There  but  remains  to  discuss  the  interpretation  of  the
motif — to  put  the  swan-maiden  on  the  operating-table  of
criticism,  to  strip  her  of  her  feathers  and  any  other  orna-
ments she  may  have  acquired  in  course  of  time,  to  dissect
her,  and  by  so  doing  hope  to  discover  what  she  really  is.

This  is  the  cruel  treatment  she  may  expect  from  the
scientific  folklorist,  who  will  not  be  happy  till  he  has  done  it.
He  will  then  begin  guessing,  and  perhaps  give  his  opinion
that  the  swan-maiden  is  nothing  but  a  beautiful  white  cloud
which  is  chased  and  captured  by  the  spirit  of  the  storm.8

1  A.  Bastian,  Indonesien  oder  die  lnseln  der  Malayischen  Archipel,  Berlin,
1884,  vol.  i,  p.  62.

2  H.  Romilly,  From  my  Verandah  in  New  Guinea,  Ldn.,  1889,  p.  134.

3  A.  Bastian,  Allerlei  aus  Folkes-  und  Menschenkunde,  Berlin,  1888,  vol.  i,
p.  60;  and  Zeitschrift  f.  Elhnologie,  vol.  xxxv,  Berlin,  1888,  p.  136.

4  See  Codrington,  The  Melanesia™,  Oxford,  1891,  pp.  172,  379,  397.
6  G.  Turner,  Samoa  a  Hundred  Years  Ago,  Ldn.,  1884,  p.  102.

6  K.  L.  Parker,  Australian  Legendary  Tales,  Ldn.,  1 897,  p.  40.

7  See  R.  Taylor,  Te  Ika  A  Maui;  or,  New  Zealand  and  its  Inhabitants,
2nd  edit,  Ldn.,  1870,  pp.  138,  143;  J.  White,  The  Ancient  History  of  the
Maori,  Ldn.,  1889,  vol.  ii,  p.  127;  and  Zeit.  f.  vergleich.  Sprachforschung,
vol.  xviii,  Berlin,  1869,  p.  6l.

8  E.  H.  Meyer,  Germanische  Mythologie,  Berlin,  1891,  pp.  90,  125.


APPENDIX  I— THE  "SWAN-MAIDEN"  MOTIF   233

Or  he  may  look  upon  her  as  a  being  who  has  strayed  from  the
Isles  of  the  Blessed,  where  she  rightly  belongs.1  He  may,  on
the  other  hand,  regard  her  as  a  founder  of  clans,  taking  into
account  only  the  totemistic  aspect.2  There  is  but  one  other
theory  he  is  likely  to  advance — that  which  would  attach  most
importance  to  the  principle  of  taboo.3

Modern  scholarship  will  at  once  discredit  the  two  former
opinions,  and  will  hesitate  on  which  of  the  two  remaining
theories  to  bestow  its  blessing.  It  will  in  all  probability
make  a  compromise  and  stretch  out  both  hands  at  once,
dividing  the  honours  equally  between  totemism  and  taboo.
I  often  feel  that  in  seeking  a  scientific  "  explanation  "  for
every  motif  we  are  very  liable  to  forget  what  delicate  and
elusive  material  we  have  to  deal  with.  Surely  a  story  may
be  the  result  of  a  beautiful  thought  that  by  the  merest  chance
flitted  through  the  brain  of  some  unknown  person  whose
poetic  imagination  alone  prompted  its  creation.  The  sub-
sequent shaping  of  the  tale  may  perhaps  be  governed  by  the
creator's  subconscious  obedience  to  the  manners  and  customs
of  his  own  environment.

It  is  none  the  less  a  spontaneous  and  unpremeditated
invention.  In  the  case  of  the  swan-maiden  we  have  one
of  the  most  beautiful  themes  in  the  whole  world  of  fiction.
Her  personal  charm  and  elegance,  the  setting  in  which  she
appears,  the  manner  in  which  she  is  captured,  and  the
mystery  surrounding  her  origin  and  abode,  all  add  to  her
fascination,  and  make  us  love  her.

The  simile  implied  in  the  very  term  "  swan-maiden  "  is
beautiful  in  itself.  The  pure  whiteness  of  the  swan,  the  soft
down  of  its  breast,  the  grace  of  its  movement,  the  poise  of
its  head — how  could  it  escape  being  likened  to  a  lovely
woman  ?  No  wonder  the  swan-maiden  was  not  easy  to
capture,  and,  being  captured,  was  still  harder  to  keep.  It
would  require  little  less  than  a  superman  to  make  such  a
being  from  another  world  happy  and  contented  in  her  new
mortal  home.     And  so  the  story  grew.

Look  upon  her  as  you  will,  ascribe  to  her  what  origin  you

1  F.  Liebrecht,  Zur  Volkskunde,  Heilbronn,  1879,  pp.  54-65.

2  E.  S.  Hartland,  Science  of  Fairy  Tales,  1891,  pp.  346,  347;  Frazer,
Totemism  and  Exogamy,  vol.  ii,  p.  566  et  seq. ;  ditto,  Golden  Bough  (Dying  God),
p.  130  et  seq.

3  Hartland,  op.  cit.,  pp.  304-322 ;  J.  A.  Macculloch,  Childhood  of  Fiction,
p.  342.


234  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

like,  she  still  remains  aloof  and  untouched — a  lovely  thing
whom  we  should  be  grateful  to  have  met  at  all.


Conclusions

As  a  result  of  our  inquiry  into  the  origin  of  the  "  Swan-
Maiden  "  motif  the  following  facts  would  seem  to  be
established  :

1.  The  roots  of  the  motif  are  to  be  found  in  early  Sanskrit
literature.

2.  By  Puranic  times  the  motif  had  assumed  a  finished
form  and  began  to  be  popular  in  different  Indian  vernaculars.

3.  It  gradually  migrated  in  all  directions.  Towards  the
North,  North-east,  East  and  South-east  the  dissemination
was  due  largely  to  the  spread  of  Hinduism  and  Buddhism.
Towards  the  West  the  carriers  of  the  tale  were  the  Moslems  ;
which  accounts  for  its  inclusion  in  The  Arabian  Nights.  This
lent  great  impetus  to  its  introduction  into  Europe.

4.  In  Europe  it  found  a  much  more  suitable  environment
in  which  to  thrive  in  Teutonic  rather  than  in  classical  myth-
ology. The  swan-maiden  herself,  however,  has  no  roots  in
European  primitive  popular  belief.

5.  One  of  the  most  interesting  routes  which  the  motif
followed  from  India  was  through  Mongolia  into  Siberia,
across  Bering  Strait,  through  North  America,  and  so  to
Greenland.

6.  The  persistence  and  endurance  of  the  motif  are  due
solely  to  its  charm  and  poetic  beauty.

7.  Although  one  recognises  in  the  motif  primitive  ideas
of  totem  and  taboo,  they  are  of  only  secondary  importance,
and  a  definite  "  interpretation  "  should  not  be  too  strongly
insisted  upon.


APPENDIX   II


APPENDIX  II

THE  ROMANCE  OF  BETEL-CHEWING

The  Ocean  of  Story  contains  several  references  to  betel  and
customs  connected  with  betel-chewing.  Thus,  in  Volume  I,
p.  100,  when  Udayana  has  rescued  the  snake  from  the  hands
of  the  Savara,  we  find  that  among  the  priceless  rewards  given
by  the  snake  is  betel  leaf.

At  the  commencement  of  the  long  story  of  Mrigankadatta
(Vol.  VI,  p.  23)  we  read  that  the  hero,  while  walking  about  on
the  top  of  his  palace,  "  spat  down  some  betel- juice."

In  the  1st  Vetala  story  (id.,  p.  174)  we  learn  that  betel  is
regarded  as  a  luxury,  and  in  the  4th  Vetala  story  (id.,  p.  192)
we  read  of  Viravara,  the  faithful  attendant,  who  spends  part
of  his  daily  salary  on  unguents  and  betel.

An  interesting  reference  is  found  in  the  18th  Vetala  story
(Vol.  VII,  p.  74),  where  the  chief  of  the  beauties,  conjured  up
by  the  science  of  the  hospitable  hermit,  entertains  Chandra-
svamin  with  "  betel-nut,  flavoured  with  five  fruits."

Now,  in  the  present  volume  (p.  4),  one  of  the  Brahmans
relates  how  he  was  given  betel  "  together  with  camphor  and
the  five  fruits."

These  two  latter  references  are  important,  and  we  shall
return  to  them  presently.

Apart  from  this,  Somadeva  tells  us  nothing.  This  is,
indeed,  not  to  be  wondered  at,  for  such  a  well-known  and
long-established  custom  as  betel-chewing  would  call  for  no
expatiation  on  the  part  of  a  native  author.  But  what  is
surprising  is  the  comparative  lack  of  interest  the  custom  has
stimulated  in  the  West.

As  far  as  I  can  discover  there  is  no  comprehensive  article
on  the  subject,1  but  merely  a  host  of  references  or  short
accounts  in  the  works  of  travellers  and  government  officials
from  about  the  beginning  of  the  fifteenth  century  to  date.
Yet  here  we  have  a  custom  which  enters  into  the  daily  life
of  over  a  hundred  millions  of  the  human  race  !

To  the  Indian,  the  Malay  and  the  Indonesian  it  is"not

1  Except  L.  Lewin's  Ueber  Areca  Catechu,  Chavica  Betle  und  das  Betelkauen.
Stuttgart,  1889.
237


238  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

only  his  constant  companion  throughout  life,  but  is  there  to
welcome  him  into  the  world,  to  see  him  safely  married,  and
to  accompany  him  into  the  next  world.  What  other  object
in  existence  can  boast  of  such  devoted  service  to  man  ?

In  the  present  Appendix,  therefore,  I  shall  attempt  to
gather  together  what  data  I  can,  with  the  object  of  ascertain-
ing, as  clearly  as  possible,  the  extent  of  the  custom,  its  exact
nature,  the  numerous  ceremonies  in  which  betel  plays  a  part,
and  the  significance  of  the  custom  from  a  linguistic  and
anthropological  point  of  view.

Etymological  Evidence

Before  surveying  the  area  covered  by  the  custom,  it  will
be  as  well  to  get  some  idea  as  to  the  numerous  words  used  in
its  connection.  In  order  to  chew  betel  in  the  most  widely
prescribed  form,  three  distinct  things  are  necessary :

1.  The  seed,  popularly  called  the  nut,  of  the  Areca  catechu,

or  Areca-nut  Palm.    The  expressions  "  betel-nut  "  and
"  betel-nut  palm  "  are  both  incorrect.

2.  The  leaf  of  the  Piper  betle,  Linn.,1  commonly  known

by  the  vernacular  pan  and  tdmbuli.

3.  A  small  portion  of  lime  (Sans.,  sudhd,  churna),  often

made  from  pounded  shells.

If  a  small  piece  of  the  "  nut,"  together  with  a  pinch  of
the  lime,  is  wrapped  round  by  the  leaf  it  forms  a  chew  "
— known  in  modern  India  as  pdn-supdri.  As  we  shall  see
later,  all  other  forms  of  the  "  chew  "  are  merely  different
"  improvements,"  varying  with  local  custom,  available  in-
gredients, or  the  wealth  of  the  person  concerned.

In  Sanskrit  the  usual  word  to  denote  betel  is  tdmbula,
but  if  the  leaf  is  particularly  mentioned  the  word  nagavalli
is  employed.  This  is  the  case  in  Somadeva.  He  uses  the
former  word  in  all  cases  except  in  the  present  volume  (see
p.  4),  where  nagavalli  means  "  leaves  of  the  betel,"  and,
two  or  three  lines  lower,  tdmbula  is  the  "  chew  "  which  the
young  Brahman  puts  in  his  mouth.  The  usual  Sanskrit
words  for  the  "  nut  " — puga-phalam  and  guv  oka — do  not  occur
in  the  Ocean  at  all.  It  is,  however,  from  the  former  of  these
words  that  most  of  the  vernacular  names  have  been  derived.
Thus  the  Tamil  is  pdkku ;  the  Telugu  is  poka-vakka,  or  simply

1  Not  Piper  Betel,  as  so  often  misquoted.  Linnaeus  used  the  Latin
"  Piper"  and  the  Portuguese  "  Betle  "  in  conjunction.


APPENDIX  II— ROMANCE  OF  BETEL-CHEWING    239

vakka ;  the  Singhalese  is  puvak  or  puvakka ;  the  Gujarati  is
phophal ;  which  leads  to  the  Persian  and  Balochistan  popal,
and  the  Arabic  faufal,  fofal  and  foufal.

We  are  still  a  long  way  from  the  word  areca.  This,  I
believe,  we  can  trace  to  the  Canarese  adake,  or  adike,  and  the
Malayalam  adakka,  adekka.

We  have  already  seen  that  the  modern  term  for  the
"  chew  "  is  pdn-supdri — pan  being  the  leaf,  and  supdri  the
areca-nut.  In  nearly  all  vernaculars — Hindustani,  Bengali,
Gujarati,  Marathi,  etc. — the  words  supdri,  supydri,  sopdri,
hopdri  refer  to  the  "  nut,"  and  are  nearly  always  used  in
conjunction  with  pan  to  indicate  the  two  chief  ingredients
used  in  conjunction.

Turning  to  the  leaf  of  Piper  betle,  we  find  that  the  Sanskrit
tdmbula  and  ndgavalli  both  appear  in  the  vernaculars.  The
more  usual  term,  however,  is  pan,  from  which  the  Anglo-
Indian  pawn  is  derived,  meaning  a  leaf.

The  Malayalam  vettila  (i.e.  veru-\-ila="  simple  leaf")  is
also  used.  Hence  in  Hindustani  we  find  pan  and  tdmbuli  ;
in  Bengali,  pan;  in  Marathi,  vide-cha  pan;  in  Gujarati,
pan,  nagur-vel ;  in  Deccani,  pan ;  in  Tamil,  veltilai.  Then
follows  the  Arabic  tanbol  and  the  Persian  tambol,  tambul.
The  Portuguese  favoured  the  derivates  of  vettila,  which
became  betre  and  betle.  From  this  the  English  betel  gradually
became  the  recognised  form.1

It  remains  but  to  say  a  few  words  about  tdmbula.  The
root- word  is  bula,  with  tarn  as  a  prefix.  It  has  been  shown
recently  by  Przyluski  that  bula  corresponds  to  what  he  calls
the  Austro-Asiatic  (i.e.  non-Indo-Aryan)  bdlu,  and  signifies
"something  that  is  rolled";  hence  all  Austro-Asiatic
languages  use  such  words  as  balu,  mluv,  bolon,  melu,  mlu,  blu,
plu  to  mean  betel.  Some  have  a  prefix,  such  as  la-mlu,
ja-blu,  etc.  In  modern  times  it  is  only  the  direct  Sanskrit
derivates  that  keep  the  prefix.  For  further  details  see
Przyluski's  paper  as  cited  below.2

1  In  the  sixteenth  century  the  English  word  was  spelt  betola,  bettle  and
bettele;  in  the  seventeenth  century  numerous  forms  are  found — e.g.  betele,
betell,  bethel,  betre,  bettaile,  bettle  and  betel;  in  the  eighteenth  and  nineteenth
centuries  betle,  beetle,  betelle  and  betel  were  the  usual  forms.  Thus  the  now
accepted  betel  did  not  become  the  only  recognised  form  till  early  in  the
twentieth  century.

2  "Emprunts  Anaryens  en  Indo-Aryen,"  Bull,  de  la  Soc.  de  Linguistique
de  Paris,  vol.  xxiv,  3rd  fasc.  (No.  75),  1924,  pp.  255-258.


240  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

Garcia  da  Orta

One  of  the  earliest  and  most  important  descriptions  of
betel-chewing,  and  one  in  which  words  connected  with  the
custom  are  discussed,  is  undoubtedly  that  given  by  the
famous  Portuguese  botanist,  Garcia  da  Orta  (1563).

In  the  twenty-second  colloquy  he  deals  with  the  "  fautel,"
while  further  remarks  on  betel  occur  at  the  end  of  the  work.
As  most  readers  are  aware,  it  first  appeared  in  the  form  of  a
dialogue,  which  has  thus  been  described  by  Count  Ficalho,
Garcia  da  Orta  e  o  seu  Tempo  :

"  The  two  interlocutors  are  the  two  characters  united  in
Garcia  da  Orta,  the  two  sides  of  his  spirit  placed  in  front  one
of  the  other.  Dr  Ruano,  the  man  of  the  schools,  the  former
student  of  Salamanca,  erudite,  ready  with  quotations,  with
Dioscorides  and  Pliny  at  his  finger-ends.  Dr  Orta,  the
traveller  and  observer,  who,  in  the  face  of  all  the  quota-
tions, says  tranquilly,  '  I  have  seen  it.'  It  is  enough  for
us  to  note  to  which  of  these  two  entities  Orta  attaches  his
own  name  for  evidence  as  to  which  of  the  two  he  prefers.
From  this  situation,  admirably  conceived  and  maintained
with  much  talent,  the  most  interesting  controversies  result,
which  bring  out,  in  the  clearest  light,  the  spirit  of  the
work."

The  following  extract  is  taken  from  the  translation  made
by  Sir  Clements  Markham  in  1913,1  p.  192  et  seq.  :

1  Colloquies  on  the  Simples  and  Dings  of  India  by  Garcia  da  Orta.  The  first
part  of  the  title  of  the  original  edition  was :  Coloquios  dos  simples,  e  drogas  he
cousas  medicinais  da  India,  e  assi  dalguas  frutas  achadas  nella  onde  se  tratam  alguas
comas  tocantes  amedicina,  pratica,  e  outras  cousas  boas,  pera  saber  copostos  pello
Doutor  garcia  dorta  .  .  .  Being  the  third  work  ever  printed  in  India  the
typography  is  far  from  perfect,  and  the  pagination  is  hopeless.  In  fact,  we
must  really  go  by  signatures  rather  than  the  page  numbers.  Those  of  the
twenty-second  colloquy  are :  M,  Mij,  Miij,  Miiij,  of  which  the  corresponding
page  numbers  are:  101,  90,  101,  92  and  103  (which  has  no  signature).  The
section  on  betel  at  the  end  of  the  work  is  on  li,  liij,  liiij  and  liiiij,  and  four
more  pages  without  signature.  These  correspond  to  pages  210,  211,  210,  210,
212  (three  times)  and  217.  The  pages  are  numbered  on  only  one  side.  I
follow  the  first  edition  in  the  British  Museum.  Until  January  1927  the  Museum
Library  possessed  a  duplicate  copy  of  this  exceedingly  rare  work,  but  it  has
since  been  exchanged  for  another  book  altogether.  There  are,  I  understand,
not  more  than  fifteen  copies  in  the  world.  An  additional  feature  of  great
interest  and  value  about  this  first  edition  is  that  it  contains  the  earliest  verse
of  Camoens.     See  Burton's  Camoens,  Lyricks,  389-391.


APPENDIX  II— ROMANCE  OF  BETEL-CHEWING  241

Rvano.  We  speak  in  Portugal  of  what  is  called  "  nuts
of  India."  You  tell  me  that  the  betre  is  much  used  by  every-
body here.  We  use  it  very  little.  Speaking  the  truth  with
you,  I  have  never  seen  it,  for  we  put  in  its  place  the  vermilion
sandal.

Orta.  Here  it  is  a  common  thing  to  mix  the  food  with
the  betre,  and  in  countries  where  they  have  no  betre  they  also
use  it  for  chewing  with  cravo.1  What  you  say  about  using
vermilion  sandal  in  its  place  does  not  appear  right,  for  in
its  place  they  have  a  medicine  which  is  often  falsified,  and
they  give  a  vermilion  stick  for  it ;  for  as  the  vermilion  sandal
wants  the  smell,  and  is  not  in  Timor  whence  the  other  comes,
as  I  will  tell  you  in  speaking  of  it,  there  is  difficulty  in  know-
ing one  from  the  other.  This  areca  is  more  valuable  and  is
less  perishable.  The  reason  it  is  not  sent  to  Portugal  is  that
the  apothecaries  do  not  ask  for  it,  for  neither  they  nor  the
physicians  are  sufficiently  curious  to  trouble  about  it.  I  will
now  tell  you  the  names  it  has  in  the  countries  where  it  grows.
Among  the  Arabs  it  is  faufel.  Avicenna  calls  it  corruptly
filfel.  It  has  the  same  name  in  Dofar  and  Xael,  Arabian
lands.  The  faufel  is  very  good.  In  Malabar  they  call  it
pac,  and  the  word  for  it  among  the  Naires,  who  are  the
knights,  is  areca,  whence  the  Portuguese  have  taken  the
name,  being  the  land  first  known  to  us,  and  where  it  abounds.
In  Guzerat  and  the  Deccan  they  call  it  cupari,  but  they
have  very  little,  and  only  on  the  skirts  of  the  sea.  There  is  a
better  supply  at  Chaul  because  of  the  trade  with  Ormuz,  and
still  better  at  Mombaim,  land  and  island,  where  the  King  our
Lord  has  made  me  a  grant,  a  long  lease  (emfatiota).  In  all
that  land  of  Bacaim  they  are  very  good,  and  they  are  taken
thence  to  the  Deccan  ;  and  also  to  Cochin  they  take  a  small
kind  called  chacani,  which  are  very  hard  after  they  are  dried.
In  Malacca  there  are  not  so  many,  and  they  are  called  pinam.
In  Ceylon  they  are  in  greater  quantity,  and  they  are  sent  to
parts  of  the  Deccan — namely,  to  Golconda  and  Bisnaga — also
to  Ormuz,  Cambaya,  and  the  Maldive  Islands.  The  name  in
Ceylon  is  poaz.

Ruano.  Serapio  says  that  this  areca  is  wanting  in  Arabia.

Orta.  That  is  true  to  a  great  extent,  for  Arabia  is  a  vast
region,  and  there  is  areca  only  at  Xael  and  Dofar  seaports.
For  this  tree  loves  the  sea  and  will  not  thrive  at  a  distance
from  it.     Where  it  will  grow  they  do  not  fail  to  plant  it,  for

1  I.e.  cloves.
VOL.   VIII.  Q


242  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

the  Moors  and  Gentios  do  not  let  a  day  pass  without  eating
it.  The  Moors  and  Moalis  (who  are  those  that  follow  the  law
against  Mafamede  x)  keep  a  feast  or  fast  of  ten  days,  when
they  say  that  the  sons  of  Ali,  son-in-law  of  Mafamede,  were
besieged  in  a  fortress  and  died.  During  the  ten  days  that
they  were  besieged,  they  sleep  on  the  ground,  and  do  not  par-
take of  betre.  In  these  days  they  chew  cardamom  and  areca,
which  is  much  used  to  chew,  as  it  clears  the  stomach  and  the
brain.

Ruano.  Now  tell  me  how  the  betre  is  used,  how  it  is
administered,  whether  to  help  or  to  rectify.

Orta.  The  betre  is  warm,  and  the  areca  is  cold  and  tem-
perate. The  lime  they  use  with  the  betre  is  much  warmer.
They  do  not  use  our  lime  from  stone,  but  a  lime  made  from
oyster  shells  which  is  not  so  strong.  With  the  areca  they
mix  the  medicines,  you  see,  because  they  are  cold  and  dry,
and  much  drier  when  not  dried  in  the  sun.  Then  they  add
the  cate,2  which  is  a  medicine  I  have  mentioned  before  ;
because  with  the  cate  it  is  a  good  medicine  to  open  the  gums,
fortify  the  teeth,  and  compose  the  stomach,  as  well  as  an
emetic,  and  a  cure  for  diarrhoea.  The  tree  from  which  it  is
collected  is  straight  and  very  spongy,  and  the  leaves  like
those  of  our  palm-trees.  Its  fruit  is  like  that  of  the  nutmeg,
but  not  so  large,  and  very  hard  inside,  with  veins  white  and
vermilion.  It  is  the  size  of  the  small  round  nuts  with  which
the  boys  play.  It  is  not  exactly  round,  for  it  has  a  band
round  it,  though  this  is  not  the  case  with  every  kind  of
catechu,  for  I  must  not  deceive  you.  This  fruit  is  covered  with
a  very  woolly  husk,  yellow  outside,  so  that  it  is  very  like  the
fruit  of  the  date-palm  when  it  is  ripe  and  before  it  becomes
dry.  When  this  areca  is  green  it  is  stupefying  and  intoxicat-
ing, for  those  who  eat  it  feel  tipsy,  and  they  eat  it  to  deaden
any  great  pain  they  have.

Ruano.  How  do  these  Indians  eat  it,  and  how  do  they
prepare  the  medicine  ?

Orta.  It  is  usual  to  cut  the  areca  into  small  pieces  with
some  large  scissors  they  have  for  the  purpose,  and  then  they
chew  them,  jointly  with  the  cate.  Presently  they  take  the  leaves
of  the  betre,  first  pulling  out  the  veins  with  their  thumb-nails,
which  for  this  are  cut  to  a  fine  point,  and  they  do  this  that

1  Muhammed.  They  did  not  follow  any  law  against  Muhammed,  but
were  of  the  Shiah  sect.     [Markham.]

2  I.e.  catechu.     See  later,  p.  247  ;  and  p.  264  et  seq.  of  Orta.


APPENDIX  II— ROMANCE  OF  BETEL-CHEWING    243

it  may  be  more  tender,  and  then  they  chew  it  all  together.
They  spit  out  the  first,  after  the  first  chewing,  and  then  take
more  betre  leaf  and  begin  another  chewing,  expectorating
what  looks  like  blood.  In  this  way  the  head  and  stomach
are  cleared,  and  the  gums  and  teeth  strengthened.  They
are  always  chewing  this  betre,  and  the  women  worse  than  the
men.  The  lords  make  small  pills  of  the  areca,  mixing  it  with
cate,  camphor,1  powder  of  linaloes,2  and  some  amber,  and
this  is  made  for  the  areca  of  the  lords.  Serapio  says  that  in
the  taste  with  the  warmth  there  is  some  bitterness.  I  tried
this  and  found  it  with  scarcely  any  taste.  Serapio  did  not
know  this  areca  and  could  not  ascertain  the  taste.

Ruano.  Silvatico  says  that  he  has  seen  it,  and  that  it  was
mixed  with  the  cinnamon  of  Calicut.

Orta.  It  may  be  that  the  Moors  of  Calicut  take  it  to  the
Strait,  and  that  it  may  come  mixed  with  cinnamon,  but  it  was
not  the  cinnamon  of  Ceylon.  That  of  Calicut  is  much
more  black,  and  is  called  checani.  That  of  Ceylon  is  whiter,
and  once  seen  is  easily  known.

This  is  all  Garcia  has  to  tell  us  about  betel-chewing  in
the  twenty-second  colloquy.  But  in  "  The  Last  Colloquy,"
which  is  really  a  kind  of  Addenda  et  Corrigenda,  he  deals
further  with  betel,  repeating,  however,  much  of  what  he  has
already  said.

It  seems  to  me  that  this  is  partly  why  the  Latin  versions
of  the  works  differ  so  much  from  the  original  edition.  I
notice  that  in  the  1872  Portuguese  reprint3  the  two  sections
on  betel  are  put  together.  A  few  extracts  from  this  "  last
colloquy  "  will,  therefore,  be  quite  sufficient  for  our  purpose.

Ruano  asks  if  they  mix  anything  else  with  the      chew"

1  Here  Markham  has  omitted  a  comma,  which  makes  all  the  difference
to  the  meaning.  The  original  1563  Portuguese  edition  reads:  " .  .  .  e  co
ellas  mistura  cate,  e  cafora,  e  podelinaloes,  e  algii  abre  .  .  ."  The  words
translated  as  "  small  pills"  are  "pirollas  pequenas."  These  undoubtedly
correspond,  says  Mr  Ridley  in  a  letter  to  me  on  the  subject,  to  the  round  flat
discs  which  the  Malays  make  of  chewing-gambier,  etc.

2  Lign- Aloes,  Agallochum,  "  Eaglewood,"  or  Calambac,  the  fragrant  wood
of  Aquilaria  Agallocha,  Roxb.  (Thymelaeaceae),  of  Assam,  Bhutan  and  Burmah.
[Markham.]  The  podelinaloes  of  Garcia  is  the  powdered  resinous  wood.  Like
ambergris,  it  must  have  been  used  only  by  the  rich.  See  further  Watt,  op.  cit.,
vol.  i,  p.  278  et  seq.

3  Edited  by  F.  A.  de  Varnhagen.


244  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

besides  what  has  already  been  mentioned.  Garcia  replies  :
"  They  mix  cate  with  it,  and  important  persons  add  camphor
of  Borneo,  some  lin  aloes,  and  almisquere,  or  ombre"

Here  we  have  a  new  ingredient — almisquere,  also  written
almiscre,  almisere  and  almisque,  in  which  we  recognise  the
salip  misri  of  Egypt,  Persia  and  India,  the  Arabic  sahleb,
the  Greek  fyx«s  and  our  salep.  It  consists  of  the  tuberous
roots  of  various  species  of  Orchis  and  Eulophia.  They  are
stripped  of  their  bark,  heated  until  they  assume  a  horny
appearance,  and  then  allowed  to  dry  slowly.  The  use  of
salep  in  betel- chewing  seems  to  have  been  of  very  rare  occur-
rence. Orta  goes  on  to  say  that  Bahadur,  King  of  Cambay,
declared  camphor  to  be  an  anti-aphrodisiac,  but  that  if  used
in  small  quantities,  mixed  with  other  ingredients,  it  had  not
that  effect.  On  some  occasions  the  king  presents  betel
with  his  own  hands,  "  or  else  by  others  called  Xarabdar  or
Tambuldar."

After  again  describing  the  method  of  preparing  and
chewing  betel,  he  returns  to  the  etymology  of  betel :

Orta.  The  name  in  Malabar  is  betre,  and  in  the  Deccan,
Guzerat  and  Canara,  pam.     The  Malays  call  it  ciri.

Ruano.  Why  is  the  Malabar  name  adopted  rather  than
the  others  ?  It  would  be  more  reasonable  to  call  it  folium
indum,1  or  we  might  call  it  pam,  as  it  is  called  in  Goa.

Orta.  We  call  it  betel  because  Malabar  was  the  first  part  of
India  known  to  the  Portuguese,  and  I  remember  in  Portugal
that  they  did  not  say  they  came  to  India,  but  to  Calicut.
This  was  because  Calicut  was  the  place  whence  all  the  drugs
and  spices  were  taken  up  the  Strait  of  Mecca.  It  was  a  very
rich  place,  and  now,  in  revenge  for  what  we  did  in  Calicut,
all  that  business  is  lost.  Although  the  King  of  Calicut
is  emperor,  he  has  less  power  than  he  of  Cochin,  because  we
helped  him  at  first.  This  is  why  all  the  names  you  see  that
are  not  Portuguese  are  Malayalim.  For  instance,  betre  and
chune,  which  is  lime ;  maynato,  washerman ;  patamar^
a  runner ;  and  many  others.  As  for  calling  it  Folium
Indum,  as  you  suggest,  it  is  not  so  called  in  any  language;
besides,  the  Folium  Indum  is  quite  different.  Avicenna  gives
chapters  for  one  and  the  other  separately.

1  This  is  the  malobathrum  of  Pliny,  to  be  identified  with  various  species,
of  Cinnamomum,  of  which  the  chief  are  C.  tamala  (the  Cassia  lignea)  and
C.  zeylanicum  (true  cinnamon).


APPENDIX  II— ROMANCE  OF  BETEL-CHEWING   245

After  speaking  of  the  confusion  between  Folium  Indum
and  betre  Garcia  concludes  by  thus  describing  "  the  shape  of
the  leaf  and  the  seed  "  :

"  The  shape  of  the  leaf,  as  you  see,  is  more  compressed
and  narrow  towards  the  point  than  the  orange  leaf,  and  when
it  is  ripe  it  is  nearly  yellow.  Some  women  like  it  best  when
it  is  not  so  ripe,  because  it  excites  and  then  settles  well  in  the
mouth.  In  Maluco  this  betre  has  seeds  like  the  tail  of  a  newt,
and  they  eat  them,  finding  them  good  to  the  taste.  This
seed  was  brought  to  Malacca,  where  they  eat  it  and  find  it
very  good.  They  plant  it  and  have  a  place  for  it  to  climb
over.  Some  people,  to  secure  more  profit,  do  the  same  with
pepper  and  with  areca,  making  very  graceful  arbours  of  the
climbing  plants.  It  should  be  well  cared  for,  kept  very  clean
and  well  irrigated."

Garcia  da  Orta  thus  not  only  gives  us  interesting  etymo-
logical and  botanical  details,  but  mentions  several  other
ingredients  used  ina"  chew."  Before  discussing  the  "  five
fruits  "  mentioned  by  Somadeva  I  would  say  a  word  about
the  texts  of  Garcia  da  Orta,  as  the  question  has  an  important
bearing  on  the  spices  or  condiments  used  in  betel-chewing.

The  first  edition  of  the  work  appeared  at  Goa  in  1563,
and  was  reprinted  by  F.  A.  de  Varnhagen,  Lisbon,  1872.
Clusius  (Charles  de  PEscluse  or  Lecluse,  1526-1609)  made  a
Latin  resume  of  it  in  1567,  and  on  it  the  Italian  transla-
tion of  Briganti  (Venice,  1576,  1582,  1589,  etc.)  and  the
subsequent  French  translation  of  Colin  (Lyons,  1619)  were
founded.

The  work  of  Clusius,  however,  was  very  different  from
that  of  Garcia  da  Orta.  Now,  in  his  notes  on  betel  to  Marco
Polo,  Yule  used  the  Venice  1589  edition  of  Briganti.  Thus
in  vol.  ii,  p.  374n4,  the  contents  of  a  "  chew  "  are  really
those  given  by  Clusius  and  not  by  Garcia  da  Orta.  We  shall
revert  to  this  presently.

The  standard  edition  of  Orta's  Coloquios  is  that  by  Count
Ficalho,1  2  vols.,  1891,  1895,  and  it  is  from  the  translation  of
this  that  I  have  quoted  above.

We  can  now  return  to  the  two  references  in  Somadeva
which  speak  of  the  "  five  fruits  "  and  see  to  what  extent
the  twenty-second  colloquy  of  Orta  can  help  in  identifying
them.

1  Strange  to  say,  I  can  find  this  work  in  none  of  the  big  London  libraries,
including  the  British  Museum.


246  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

The  Five  Fruits

As  already  mentioned,  Somadeva  speaks  of  "  areca-nut,1
flavoured  with  the  five  fruits  "  ;  and  later  of  "leaves  of  the
betel,  together  with  camphor  and  the  five  fruits."  Now,
although  Garcia  da  Orta  mentions  several  condiments  used  in
a  "  chew,"  we  are  unable  to  select  five  which  could  be  called
"  fruits,"  even  in  the  widest  sense  of  the  word.

The  best  list  we  can  get  is  areca-nut,  cloves,  lign-aloes,
ambergris  and  catechu.  Of  these  only  the  first  could  possibly
be  called  a  fruit — cloves  are  only  flower-buds.  Thus  Orta
is  not  much  help  in  the  search  for  our  five  fruits.  Further-
more, lign-aloes  seems  to  have  been  only  rarely  used,  while
ambergris  would  have  been  entirely  restricted  to  the  rich.

It  looks,  then,  as  if  we  must  allow  "  fruit  "  to  include
every  kind  of  spice  or  "  flavour."

Now  in  the  Vaidyaka-sabda-sindhu  (revised  by  K.  N.  N.
Sen,  Calcutta,  1913-1914),  a  Hindu  medical  dictionary,  under
the  word  "  Pancasugandhikam,"  which  means  the  "  five
flavours  "  used  in  betel- chewing,  we  find  the  following  list :
(1)  Karpura ;  (2)  Kankala ;  (3)  Lavanga ;  (4)  Jdtiphala ;
(5)  Puga.     We  will  take  each  one  separately.

(1)  Karpura  is,  of  course,  camphor,  and  is  mentioned  in
our  text  quite  distinct  from  the  "  five  fruits."  An  alter-
native Sanskrit  name  is  chandra-bhasma,  a  term  which  refers
to  its  moonlike  coolness.  The  form  karpura,  and  the  ver-
nacular kdpur,  kappln,  etc.,  in  all  probability  have  their
origin  in  the  name  of  the  Sumatran  camphor-tree,  gdbu  or
gambit,  whence  the  Indian  supplies  were  derived.  For
further  details  see  Schoff's  article  on  camphor.2  As  we  shall
see  later,  Ramusio's  recension  of  Marco  Polo  mentions
"  Camphor  and  other  aromatic  spices"  in  connection  with  betel-
chewing.  Marsden  (in  his  edition  of  Marco  Polo)  expressed
his  opinion  that  "  camphor  "  was  a  wrong  translation  for
"  quicklime."  Yule 3  quotes  Garcia  da  Orta  as  saying  :  "  In
chewing  betre  .  .  .  they  mix  areca  with  it  and  a  little  lime.
.  .  .  Some  add  Licio  (i.e.  catechu),  but  the  rich  and  grandees
add  some  Borneo  camphor,  and  some  lign-aloes,  musk  and
ambergris."  This  is,  however,  from  the  Italian  edition  of
1589,  and  represents  what  Clusius  said,  not  Garcia  da  Orta.

1  Tawney  calls  it  betel-nut.

2  Journ.  Amer.  Orient.  Soc,  vol.  xlii,  1922,  pp.  355-370.

3  Marco  Polo,  vol.  ii,  p.  374n4.


APPENDIX  II— ROMANCE  OF  BETEL-CHEWING   24T

We  have  already  seen  (p.  243)  exactly  what  he  did  say  on
the  subject.  It  does  not  alter  Yule's  contention  about
camphor  being  used  ina"  chew,"  but  the  "  musk  "  must  be
an  addition  of  Clusius.1  As  we  shall  shortly  see,  Linschoten
(or  rather  Paludanus)  copies  the  list  almost  verbatim.

Yule  correctly  quotes  'Abdu-r  Razzaq  (1443)  and  Abu-1-
Fazl  (1596)  as  stating  that  camphor  is  an  ingredient  of  pdn-
supdri.  But  as  antedating  Polo,  he  might  have  mentioned
Somadeva,  and  also  the  Chinese  writer  Chau  Ju-Kua  (c.  1250),
for  whom  see  later,  p.  256.

(2)  Kankdla  is  given  by  Watt  (op.  cit.,  vol.  vi,  pt.  1,
p.  256)  as  the  Bombay  vernacular  of  Piper  chaba,  commonly
known  as  Bakek.  Ridley  (Spices,  p.  320)  says  it  is  especi-
ally used  as  a  substitute  for  betel  leaves  when  travelling  in
places  where  the  fresh  leaves  are  not  procurable.  It  seems,
therefore,  that  pan  would  not  be  needed  in  a  "  chew  "  that
already  included  kankdla.  It  should  not  be  confused  with
kankola,  the  Marathi  for  Piper  cubeba,  or  cubebs.

(3)  Lavanga  is  the  cravo  of  Garcia  da  Orta — i.e.  cloves :
Caryophyllus  aromaticus,  Linn.  See  Watt,  op.  cit.,  vol.  ii,
p.  205,  who  says  "...  they  are  also  chewed  in  pan."

(4)  Jdtiphala  is  the  nutmeg,  and  (5)  Puga  is,  of  course,
the  areca-nut  (cf.  the  Sanskrit  puga-phalam).

As  a  comparison  with  the  above  list  it  is  interesting  to
cite  another  set  of  five  "  fruits  "  sent  me  by  a  native  student
of  Indian  sociology  :

( 1 )  Cutch  =  extract  of  catechu — Hind. ,  kat,  kath ;  Sans. ,  kha-
dira.  (2)  Chund  =  lime — Sans.,  sudhd,  churna,  etc.  (3)  Supdri-
the  areca-nut.  (4)  Lavanga  =  cloves.  (5)  Ildchi  =  cardamom,
Elettaria  cardamomum — Sans.,  eld,  chandrabdld,  etc.

The  Singhalese  chew  the  rhizomes  of  A.  masticatorium
with  their  betel.     See  Watt,  op.  cit,  vol.  i,  p.  222.

This  is,  I  think,  as  far  as  we  shall  get  in  identifying  the
five  "  fruits  "  !

But  why  five  ?  May  not  the  number  be  merely  con-
ventional, because  it  is  a  "  lucky  number  "  ?  Surely  Hindu
and  Buddhist  literature,  both  secular  and  religious,  justifies
such  a  contention.  Five  is  continually  occurring  without
any  apparent  reason.2

1  Or  perhaps  a  substitute  for  "  almisquere."

2  Thus,  apart  from  the  uses  mentioned  in  Vol.  I,  p.  255r&2,  we  find
references  to  the  Jive  nectars  (milk,  curds,  ghi,  honey  and  sugar) ;  the  Jive
leaves  of  trees  (mango,  pipal,  pipalo,  jambu  and  udumbara);  tha  Jive  jewels


248  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

Thus,  I  do  not  see  why  we  need  assume  that  the  betel-
chew  de  luxe  must  of  necessity 1  contain  five  "  fruits,"  which
are  so  hard  to  identify.  From  the  list  of  ingredients  we  have
obtained  from  Garcia  da  Orta,  and  any  additional  ones  we
may  find  in  the  works  of  other  early  writers,  it  is  easy  to
select  five,  or  even  more,  "  flavours  "  which  would  satisfy
the  palate  of  the  most  inveterate  epicure  of  betel-chewing.
We  are  entitled,  therefore,  to  regard  the  one  recognised  form
of  a"  chew  "  as  consisting  simply  of  a  portion  of  an  areca-
nut  wrapped  in  a  betel  leaf,  and  flavoured  with  a  pinch  of
shell-lime.

In  places  where  these  ingredients  were  obtainable,  we  must
regard  all  added  "  flavours  "  as  restricted  to  the  houses  of
the  rich — to  be  produced  chiefly  as  a  special  honour  to  a
distinguished  guest.

The  Area  of  the  Custom

The  geographical  area  covered  by  the  custom  of  betel-
chewing  may  be  roughly  taken  as  lying  between  long.  60°
and  170°  east ;  and  lat.  40°  north  and  15°  south.  Outside
this  area  the  custom  occurs  only  where  the  existence  of  an
Asiatic  colony  has  warranted  the  importation  of  the  necessary
ingredients.

The  area  in  question  includes  the  whole  of  the  Indian
Empire,  Southern  Tibet,  Southern  China,  Siam,  Indo-China,
Malaya,  all  the  East  Indian  Archipelago,  Micronesia,  New
Guinea  and  the  remainder  of  Melanesia  as  far  as  the  tiny
volcanic  island  of  Tikopia.  It  is  just  about  here  that  one  can
observe  the  drinking  of  kava  taking  the  place  of  betel-chewing.
In  both  Polynesia  and  Australia  pdn-supdri  can  be  regarded
as  unknown.  Although  areca-nuts  have  been  exported  to  Fiji,
and  possibly  to  other  islands,  betel-chewing  rarely  occurs  in
A;ai;a-drinking  areas.

The  question  that  at  once  presents  itself  is — where  did
the  custom  originate  ?  It  is  impossible  to  say.  Etymological
evidence  seems  to  favour  an  Austro-Asiatic,  rather  than  an

(ruby,  sapphire,  pearl,  emerald  and  topaz),  and  Jive  beauties  of  woman  (hair,
flesh,  bone,  skin  and  youth).  So  also  are  there  Jive  trees  of  paradise,  Jive
arrows  of  Kama,  Jive  products  of  the  cow,  Jive  great  sacrifices,  Jive  sacred
flowers,  five  emblems  of  royalty.  Somadeva  (Vol.  V,  p.  121,  and  Vol.  VI,
p.  157)  speaks  of  flowers  of  "five  colours"  and  "five  hues."  See  further,
W.  E.  Geil,  The  Sacred  5  of  China,  London,  1 926.

1  Yet  cf.  the  "  five  brothers  "  of  the  Sumatran  section  (p.  294).


APPENDIX  II— ROMANCE  OF  BETEL-CHEWING   249

Indo- Aryan  home.  Thus  we  should  look  for  its  origin  in  the
Philippines,  Celebes,  Borneo,  Java  or  Sumatra.

Botanical  evidence  is  very  non-committal  and  uncertain,
owing  largely  to  the  length  of  time  the  Areca  catechu  and
Piper  betle  have  been  cultivated  in  the  East.  The  former
has  been  described  as  a  native  of  Cambodia  and  Indonesia,
and  as  being  cultivated  throughout  tropical  India.  The
latter  is  specified  in  Watt  (op.  cit.,  vol.  vi,  pt.  1,  p.  248)  as
"  probably  a  native  of  Java."  The  evidence  for  such  state-
ments seems  to  be  distinctly  weak.  The  problem  is  increased
by  the  fact  that  it  is  often  hard  to  determine  whether  a  certain
tree  or  shrub  is  really  "  native  "  or  whether  it  is  the  result  of
seeds  planted,  or  accidentally  left,  by  natives  who  have  long
since  departed  from  the  region  in  question,  leaving  no  trace
of  their  former  presence.

Thus,  in  the  Philippines,  there  is  a  variety  of  Areca  catechu
known  as  silvatica  as  well  as  several  other  varieties,  which
has  led  botanists  to  think  that  the  wild  plant  originated  here.
"  In  support  of  this  opinion,"  says  Beccari, 1  "  I  would
observe  that  in  no  other  part  of  Southern  and  Eastern  Asia
or  Malaya  is  any  species  of  Areca  to  be  found  which  in  any
way  approaches  Areca  catechu  in  specific  characters,  whereas
in  the  Philippines  an  entire  group  of  species  exists  closely
related  to  it."

But  later  in  the  paper,  Mr  Merrill,  who  discovered  the
plants  in  question,  is  quoted  as  saying  :  "At  the  place  where
found,  the  plants,  few  in  number,  were  growing  in  a  forested
ravine  along  a  small  stream  at  a  place  where  an  old  and
apparently  much-travelled  native  trail  crossed  the  stream.
I  strongly  suspect  that  the  trees  that  I  found  in  this  place
originated  from  seeds  accidentally  left  there  by  natives."

There  appears  to  be  no  satisfactory  evidence  on  the  ques-
tion. All  we  can  say  is,  that  if  the  custom  did  not  originate
on  the  coasts  of  Southern  India,  it  was  imported  from  the
East  Indian  Archipelago  at  a  very  early  date.

Appliances  of  Betel-Chewing

The  two  chief  objects  used  in  connection  with  betel-
chewing  are  the  areca-nut  cutter  and  the  lime-box,  to  which
is  attached  a  spatula,  or  small  spoon,  for  applying  the  lime.
There  is  also  the  brass  box  used  for  storing  areca-nuts,  and

1  "  Palms  of  the  Philippine  Is,"  Philippine  Joum.  Sci.,  vol.  xiv,  p.  301.


250  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

various  trays  and  bowls  for  holding  the  leaves  and  passing
round  the  chew,"  when  entertaining  a  guest.  Then  there
is  the  mortar  used  by  the  toothless  for  grinding  the  nut  into
a  kind  of  paste.

Although  they  are  rarely  used  to-day,  there  is  the  elabor-
ately embroidered  betel-bag  (for  which  see  below),  and  the
bowls  for  expectorating,  used  in  the  houses  of  the  rich.  As
can  be  well  imagined,  such  a  list  of  articles  used  in  betel-
chewing  makes  a  distinct  call  upon  the  artistic  genius  of  the
particular  country  concerned,  and  accordingly  our  museums
contain  numerous  specimens  of  cutters,  lime-boxes,  etc.,
which  are  objects  of  great  beauty  and  interest.

The  best  collection  in  London  is  to  be  seen  at  the  (much
too  little  known)  Indian  section  of  the  Victoria  and  Albert
Museum.  The  specimens  are  all  to  be  found  in  "  Room  8 —
metal- work."  Case  5  contains  several  examples  of  brass
"  Sireh  "-boxes  from  Sumatra.  Some  have  a  design  of
swastikas  carved  on  their  sides.  Case  13  has  a  very  curious
specimen  of  a  nineteenth-century  comb  and  areca-nut  cutter
combined — from  Tan j ore.  The  portion  forming  the  cutter
represents  a  man  and  a  diminutive  woman.  It  is  of  brass,
and  decorated  with  incised  ornament.  In  the  same  case  is
a  pestle  and  a  mortar  of  brass,  cast  and  turned.  Cases  14
and  17  contain  a  collection  of  Singhalese  cutters  and  lime-
boxes.  The  cutters  vary  in  size  from  about  4  J  to  11|  inches
in  length.  They  are  mostly  of  steel,  often  inlaid  with  silver,  and
partially  encrusted  with  brass.  One  is  carved  in  the  shape  of
a  dragon,  and  another  terminates  in  the  head  of  a  bird.

The  cases  for  chunam  represent,  in  shape  and  average
size,  an  old  English  watch-case.  They  are  usually  of  brass
and  copper,  inlaid  with  silver  and  enriched  with  floral  and
other  designs.  They  all  have  a  chain  of  brass  or  copper,  vary-
ing from  four  inches  to  a  foot  in  length,  to  which  is  attached
a  spatula.  The  spatula  is  usually  about  the  size  of  an  English
saltspoon,  the  head  of  which  is  flat  and  averages  half-an-inch
in  breadth  and  a  quarter  of  an  inch  in  depth.  One  specimen,
however  (in  Case  15),  has  a  head  larger  than  a  five-shilling
piece.

Another  good  collection  of  cutters  will  be  found  in  Wall
Cases  25  and  27.  Some  of  these  are  inlaid  with  coloured
glass,  and  have  handles  of  ivory,  bone  or  pearl.  One  speci-
men is  of  gilt  metal  set  with  green  and  red  glass,  while  another
is  of  steel,  with  double  joints  containing  knives.     Some  are


APPENDIX  II— ROMANCE  OF  BETEL-CHEWING   251

carved  in  the  shape  of  animals — one  is  a  grotesque  horse,
another  a  peacock.

Excellent  illustrations  of  smaller  specimens  will  be  found
on  Plate  XL VI,  with  descriptions  on  pages  336  and  337,  of
Coomaraswamy's  Mediceval  Sinhalese  Art  The  chief  interest
in  this  work,  however,  from  our  point  of  view,  is  the  author's
excellent  description  of  the  betel-bag  (pp.  238-239).  This
article  has  now  almost  entirely  given  place  to  the  box,  but
is  of  high  antiquity,  and  has  been  found  represented  on
very  early  sculptures  (see  later,  p.  254n4).  Owing  to  the  fact
that  Coomaraswamy's  work  was  limited  to  425  copies,  and
is  consequently  exceedingly  rare,  the  following  description
of  the  betel-bag  is  given  in  full :

"  The  betel-bags  (Plates  XXX-XXXIII)  vary  in  size  from
small  ones  carried  in  the  waist-belt  to  very  large  ones,  four
feet  or  more  in  length.  The  latter  were  carried  by  a  servant
in  processions  or  on  journeys,  hung  over  the  shoulder.
Noblemen  were  never  without  an  attendant  carrying  their
betel-bags  (pp.  33-34)  and  lime-box ;  less  important  per-
sonages carried  their  own.  The  large  bags  are  exactly  the
same  in  construction  as  the  small  ones — a  bag  of  oval  shape
made  of  blue  cloth  lined  with  undyed  cotton  cloth,  which
opens  nearly  half-way  down  the  whole  length  at  the  sides  ;
the  inner  part  is  separated  into  two  divisions.  The  inner
division,  again  consisting  of  a  double  piece  of  cloth,  is  also
used  as  a  pocket,  called  hora  payiya,  '  hidden  pocket  '  ;  it
has  a  very  small  opening  at  the  upper  end,  through  which
spices,  money  and  other  valuables  are  put.  Larger  things
are  carried  in  the  two  outer  pockets.  The  handle  is  made  of
embroidered  cloth,  or  of  a  band  of  plaited  cord,  and  is  finished
off  at  the  end  with  a  beautiful  and  ingeniously  worked  and
very  hard  ball  (vegediborale)  and  tassel  (pohottuva).  The
outside  of  the  bag  is  embroidered  on  both  sides  in  red  and
white  cotton  with  conventional  designs,  sometimes  very
elaborately.  Bags  of  later  make  are  often  done  in  red  cloth,
probably  because  the  blue  hand-made  cloth  could  no  longer
be  obtained  ;  some  of  these  are  equally  good,  the  tradition
both  in  design  and  stitches  being  for  some  time  well  main-
tained. Few  or  no  good  bags  are  now  made,  partly  owing  to
the  lack  of  proper  materials.  One  of  the  most  perfect  small
bags  I  have  seen  was  of  red  hand-made  cloth  embroidered
entirely  with  silk,  the  use  of  which  is  very  exceptional.  I
have  referred  to  the  plaited  cord  of  which  the  handles  are


252  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

sometimes  made  ;  for  this,  cotton  cord  of  two  colours  is
plaited  into  a  thick,  stout,  flat  braid,  which  is  very  handsome
and  durable.  It  may  be  mentioned  that  similar  plaited  cord
strings,  but  round,  of  two  or  three  colours  are  made  by  priests
for  ola  book  strings  (potlanu).1

"The  embroidery  of  bags  consists  generally  of  a  centre
design,  floral  or  otherwise,  framed  by  three  or  more  borders
parallel  to  the  edge  of  the  bag.  Of  these  borders  the  inner-
most is  always  pald-peti,2  the  largest  liya-vela,3  the  others  a
variety  of  havadiya  4  or  galbindu  5  pattern.  A  limited  amount
of  coloured  silk  is  sometimes  used  ;  the  small  bag  of  PL  XXX,
No.  1,  is  exceptional  in  having  embroidery  entirely  in  silk.
It  may  be  noted  that  silk  is  frequently  mentioned  in  the
Mahdvamsa,  but  never  with  any  suggestion  of  its  being  an
indigenous  product.  The  edges  of  bags  are  either  bound  with
woven  braid,  which  was  made  in  a  great  variety  of  designs,
or  stitched  with  the  peculiar  8  centipede  '  binding  stitch.6

"  Less  common  than  the  oval  bags  are  the  square  ones.
They  are  made  from  a  square  piece  of  material,  the  four
corners  of  which  are  drawn  together  for  the  attachment  of
the  handle,  consisting  of  four  cords  instead  of  the  two  of  oval
bags."

Turning  to  Malaya  we  find  the  betel-boxes  exhibit  beauti-
ful specimens  of  the  gold-  and  silversmiths'  art.  Every
Malay  house  has  a  betel-box  or  betel-tray  fitted  with  the
requisites  for  chewing.  The  more  humble  article  is  made  of
wood  or  brass.  It  is  generally  about  eight  inches  in  diameter,
shaped  like  the  frustrum  of  a  pyramid  reversed,  uncovered
and  fitted  with  several  brass  or  silver  boxes,  one  without  a
cover  to  hold  accessories  such  as  cardamoms  and  cloves,  and
three  covered  for  the  essentials — catechu,  lime  and  tobacco.
There  is  also  a  small  case,  open  at  each  end,  to  hold  the  betel
leaves,  a  metal  spatula  for  spreading  the  lime  on  them,  and

1  Ola — i.e.  the  leaf  of  Corypha  iimbraculifera,  used  for  MSS.

2  Lotus-petal  border.

3  Vine-creeper.

4  Chain.

5  Gem-dot.

6  Patteya,  "  centipede/'  or  mudum  mesma  (backbone  stitch),  appears  to  be
peculiar  to  Singhalese  embroidery.  It  is  an  elaborated  herring-bone.  Two
needles  are  used  in  conjunction.  For  a  detailed  description  of  the  work  see
Coomaraswamy,  op.  cit.,  p.  241.


APPENDIX  II— ROMANCE  OF  BETEL-CHEWING   253

a  curiously  shaped  scissors  for  cutting  the  dried  areca-nut  into
small  pieces.  A  complete  set  in  old  Malay  silverwork  is  a
much-prized  possession.

In  Malayan  fairy  stories  the  beauty  and  value  of  the  betel
sets  is  naturally  exaggerated,  and  we  read  of  boxes  of  solid
gold  studded  with  jewels  (Overbeck,  Malay.  Roy.  As.  Soc,
vol.  iii,  1925,  pp.  22,  28).

Many  illustrations  of  bowls  to  hold  areca-nuts,  lime-boxes
(Bekas  kapor),  areca-nut  boxes  (Chimbul),  and  betel-leaf
holders  (Bekas  sirih)  will  be  found  in  Ling  Roth's  beautiful
book  on  Malay  silverwork.1

The  betel-leaf  holder  is  a  flat  tapering  hexagonal  vessel,
with  a  vandyked  upper  rim.  It  is  made  out  of  one  piece  of
silver  soldered  together  at  the  back  down  to  the  middle.
Another  piece  of  silver  is  soldered  on  to  form  the  base  (see
Fig.  57  et  seq.  in  Roth's  work).

In  his  work  on  the  natives  of  Sarawak  and  Borneo,2  Roth
quotes  a  passage  describing  the  betel-basket  worn  by  the
Land  Dyak  :  "  On  the  right  side  the  Land  Dyak  suspends  a
small  basket,  often  very  prettily  plaited,  to  which  is  attached
a  knife  in  a  bamboo  sheath,  the  latter  sometimes  tastefully
carved  and  coloured.  The  basket,  knives  and  fittings  are
called  the  tunkin,  the  basket  itself  is  the  tambuk  and  holds
the  siri  leaf  and  is  made  to  contain  round  little  cases  for  lime
and  tobacco  called  dekan,  and  a  piece  of  the  inner  bark  of  the
bayu  tree,  while  the  knife  in  its  sheath  hanging  on  the  outside
of  the  tunkin  is  called  the  suida."

Farther  East,  among  the  Micronesians  and  Melanesians,
the  spatulse  are  almost  always  of  wood,  often  with  elaborately
carved  handles.  The  lime-boxes  are  for  the  most  part  made
from  gourds.  Several  good  examples  can  be  seen  in  the
ethnographical  galleries  at  the  British  Museum.  In  the  last
edition  of  the  Handbook  to  the  Ethnographical  Collections  will
be  found  several  illustrations  of  betel-chewing  accessories.3
Thus  on  page  22  are  specimens  of  lime  spatulse  from  the
Anchorite  Islands,  off  the  north  coast  of  New  Guinea.  The
ornament  is  derived  from  the  tail  of  a  lizard.  Several  other
examples  from  the  south-eastern  portion  of  the  New  Guinea
Archipelago  will  be  found  on  p.  121.     The  handle  of  one  is

1  H.  Ling  Roth,  Oriental  Silverwork,  Malay  and  Chinese,  London,  1910.
See  Figs.  3,  4,  5,  30-34,  38-47,  50-53  and  57-62.

2  The  Natives  of  Sarawak  and  British  North  Borneo,  vol.  ii,  p.  59.

3  See  also  Moseley,  Journ.  Anth.  Inst.,  vol.  vii,  1878,  pp.  379-420.


254  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

rudely  carved  in  the  shape  of  a  human  figure,  while  another
is  a  small  grotesque  crocodile.  The  end  of  all  these  spatulse,
which  is  dipped  into  the  lime  gourd,  is  several  inches  in
length,  thus  differing  considerably  in  appearance  from  the
very  much  smaller  and  differently  shaped  end  of  the  Indian
and  Singhalese  spatulse.  The  reason,  of  course,  is  due  to  the
different  shape  and  dimension  of  the  lime-boxes  used  in  the
two  localities.

On  p.  72  of  the  Handbook  are  illustrations  of  the  complete
apparatus  for  betel-chewing  from  Ceylon,  with  the  exception
of  the  betel-bag  described  above.


Having  thus  acquainted  ourselves  with  the  ingredients
that  form  a  "  chew,"  some  etymological  evidence,  the  extent
of  the  custom,  and  the  appliances  used  in  its  observance,  we
can  proceed  to  the  actual  accounts  found  either  in  Sanskrit
literature,  or  given  by  early  travellers  to  India  and  Indonesia.

Betel-Chewing  in  India  prior  to  a.d.  1800

As  already  intimated,  it  would  be  little  more  than  pure
guesswork  to  attempt  to  give  a  date  at  which  betel-chewing
started  in  India.  It  is,  however,  safe  to  say  that  it  must  have
been  prior  to  about  200  B.C.,  for  we  find  references  to  it  both
in  the  Jatakas  x  and  in  several  other  Pali  works,2  as  well  as
in  the  Jain  scriptures.3  The  "  Bearer  of  the  Betel-bag  "
was  an  important  functionary  in  royal  courts,  and  is  often
mentioned  on  inscriptions.4

In  the  Hitopadesa  betel  is  mentioned  in  Book  III,  fab.  ix,
and  in  the  same  Book,  fab,  xii,  we  are  told  that  it  possesses
thirteen  qualities  hardly  to  be  found  in  the  regions  of  heaven.
It  is  described  as  pungent,  bitter,  spicy,  sweet,  expelling  wind,
removing  phlegm,  killing  worms  and  subduing  bad  smells.
It  also  beautifies  the  mouth,  removes  impurities  and  induces
to  love.  We  find  it  mentioned  by  Susruta,  who  dates  not
later  than  the  first  century  a.d.      In  a  section  on  digestion

1  Mahasllava-Jataka,  No.  51,  Cambridge  Edition,  vol.  i,  p.  132;  and
Andahhuta-Jdtaka,  No.  62,  ditto,  vol.  i,  p.  152.

2  See,  e.g.,  Buddhaghosa's  Visuddhbnagga,  314;  and  Dhammapada-
atthakathd  (Burlingame's  translation,  Harvard  Orient.  Series,  vol.  xxx,  p.  49).

3  E.g.  Aupapdtckd  Sutra,  sect.  38*  in  Leumann's  edition,  p.  50.

4  Epigraphia  Indica,  vol.  xi,  p.  329,  etc.


APPENDIX  II— ROMANCE  OF  BETEL-CHEWING   255

after  a  meal  (ch.  xlvi)  he  says  1  that  the  intelligent  eater
should  partake  of  some  fruit  of  an  astringent,  pungent  or
bitter  taste,  or  chew  a  betel  leaf  prepared  with  broken  areca-
nut,  camphor,  nutmeg,  clove,  etc.

By  the  time  of  Somadeva  the  custom  was  so  common  as
to  call  for  no  description  on  the  part  of  a  native  writer,  and
we  shall  get  no  detailed  information  until  we  begin  to  search
among  the  journals  of  early  travellers  to  India.

lAbd  Allah  ibn  Ahmad  (1225)

One  of  the  earliest  of  these  was  the  Arabian  physician
cAbd  Allah  ibn  Ahmad,  who,  in  his  treatise  on  drugs,  written
about  a.d.  1225,  says  as  follows  2  :

"  Betel  is  seldom  brought  to  us  from  India  now,  because
the  leaves  once  dried  go  into  dust  for  lack  of  moisture.  Such
as  comes  to  Yemen  and  elsewhere  can  be  preserved  if  cut  on
the  branch  and  then  kept  in  honey.  It  is  an  error  to  think
that  betel  is  this  leaf  which  is  now  found  among  us  which  has
the  form  and  odour  of  the  laurel  which  is  known  at  Basra  by
spice  merchants  as  kamdri  leaf,  and  which  comes  from  the
country  of  that  name,  Elkamer,  as  I  have  been  told.  There
are  physicians  in  our  time  who  say  that  this  leaf  is  the  leaf
of  the  malabathrum,  and  who  use  it  as  such,  but  that  is  an
error."

He  also  quotes  from  several  earlier  Arab  writers,  among
whom  is  Sherif,  who  thus  describes  the  custom  :

"  Tambil  (betel)  is  hot  in  the  first  degree  and  dry  in  the
third.  It  dries  the  humidities  of  the  stomach  and  fortifies  a
weak  liver.  The  leaf  eaten  or  taken  with  water  perfumes  the
breath,  drives  care  away,  raises  the  intelligence.  The  Indians
use  it  instead  of  wine  after  their  meals,  which  brightens  their
minds  and  drives  away  their  cares.  This  is  the  manner  of
taking  :   If  one  wishes  to  do  it,  one  takes  a  leaf,  and  at  the

1  Bhishagratna's  translation,  vol.  i,  p.  562.

2  See  J.  von  Sontheimer,  Grosse  Zusammenstellung  liber  die  Krafte  der
bekannten  einfachen  Heil-  und  Nahrungsmittel  von  Abu  Mohammed  Abdallah  Ben
Ahmed  aus  Malaga  bekannt  unter  den  Namen  Ebn  Baithar,  Stuttgart,  1840-1842,
vol.  i,  pp.  200,  201.  I  am  indebted  to  Mr  W.  H.  Schoff  for  drawing  my
attention  to  fAbd  Allah  ibn  Ahmad.


256  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

same  time  half  a  dram  of  lime.  If  lime  is  not  taken,  it  does
not  taste  good,  and  the  mind  is  not  excited.  Whoever  uses
it  becomes  joyful,,  he  has  a  perfumed  breath,  perfect  sleep  by
reason  of  its  aromaticity,  the  pleasure  which  it  brings,  and
its  moderate  odour.  Betel  replaces  wine  among  the  Indians,
by  whom  it  is  widely  used."

Chau  Ju~Kua  (c.  a.d.  1250)

The  Chu-fan-chi  is  a  work  on  the  Chinese  and  Arab  trade
in  the  twelfth  and  thirteenth  centuries  by  Chau  Ju-Kua,  a
descendant  of  the  Emperor  Tai-tsung.  After  mentioning
the  "  areca-nut "  in  Annam,  and  "  areca-nut  wine  "  of  the  east
coast  of  Sumatra,  he  describes  Lambri  or  Ceylon.  Speaking
of  the  king  he  says 1 :  "  All  day  he  chews  a  paste  of  areca-nut
and  pearl  ashes.  .  .  .  Two  attendants  are  always  present
holding  a  golden  dish  to  receive  the  remains  of  the  areca-nut
(paste)  chewed  by  the  king.  The  king's  attendants  pay  a
monthly  fee  of  one  i  2  of  gold  into  the  government  treasury  for
the  privilege  of  getting  the  areca-nut  (paste)  remains,  for  it
contains  "  plum  flower,"  camphor,  and  all  kinds  of  precious
substances."

He  also  includes  areca-nuts  as  one  of  the  products  of  the
Coromandel  Coast,  Java,  Borneo  and  the  Philippines.  We
shall  return  to  him  when  speaking  of  betel  in  China  (see  p.  303).

Marco  Polo  (c.  1295)

Although  the  work  of  Marco  Polo  probably  contains  two
references  to  betel-chewing,  neither  of  them  can  be  regarded
as  undoubtedly  genuine.  The  first  passage  occurs  in  the
geographic  text  (1824,  c.  177,  p.  213),  and  refers  to  the
"  Country  of  Lar  " — i.e.  Gujarat  and  the  northern  Konkam  :
"  E  lor  dens  ont  mout  boune  por  une  erbe  qu'il  usent  a
mangier  que  mout  fait  bien  pair,  e  molt  est  sanin  au  cors  de
Tome."

This  is  translated  by  Yule  (vol.  ii,  p.  365)  as :  "  They
have  capital  teeth,  which  is  owing  to  a  certain  herb  they  chew,

1  Translated  by  Hirth  and  Rockhill,  St  Petersburg,  1911,pp.  72,  73.  For
the  other  references  see  pp.  47,  60,  77,  78,  96,  155  and  160.

2  An  i  weighed  20  taels,  and  seems  to  have  been  used  only  for  weighing
gold.


APPENDIX  II— ROMANCE  OF  BETEL-CHEWING   257

which  greatly  improves  their  appearance,  and  is  also  very
good  for  the  health."  This  seems  to  refer  to  betel  without
doubt,  yet  Yule  has  no  note  on  the  passage  and  does  not
mention  it  in  the  index.

The  second  reference  occurs  in  the  next  chapter  of  Yule
(Bk.  Ill,  ch.  xxi),  "  Concerning  the  City  of  Cail,"  a  forgotten
part  in  the  Tinnevelly  District  of  the  Madras  Presidency.  It
is  found  only  in  the  Ramusio  text,  but  Yule  does  not  seem  to
suggest  that  it  is  spurious :

"  All  the  people  of  this  city,  as  well  as  of  the  rest  of  India,
have  a  custom  of  perpetually  keeping  in  the  mouth  a  certain
leaf  called  Tembul,  to  gratify  a  certain  habit  and  desire  they
have,  continually  chewing  it  and  spitting  out  the  saliva  that
it  excites.  The  Lords  and  gentlefolks  and  the  King  have
these  leaves  prepared  with  camphor  and  other  aromatic
spices,  and  also  mixed  with  quicklime.  And  this  practice
was  said  to  be  very  good  for  the  health.  If  anyone  desires
to  offer  a  gross  insult  to  another,  when  he  meets  him  he  spits
this  leaf  or  its  juice  in  his  face.  The  other  immediately  runs
before  the  King,  relates  the  insult  that  has  been  offered  him,
and  demands  leave  to  fight  the  offender.  The  King  supplies
the  arms,  which  are  sword  and  target,  and  all  the  people
flock  to  see,  and  there  the  two  fight  till  one  of  them  is  killed.
They  must  not  use  the  point  of  the  sword,  for  this  the  King
forbids."  *


'Abdu-r  Razzdq  (1443)

In  his  valuable  account  of  the  Court  of  Vijayanagar,  'Abdu-r
Razzaq,  ambassador  of  Shah  Rukh,  relates  how  he  received
betel  and  camphor  each  time  he  visited  the  king.  In  his
description  of  betel  he  lays  special  stress  on  its  aphrodisiacal
properties.

I  quote  from  the  translation  by  Major,  India  in  the
Fifteenth  Century,  Hakluyt  Society,  1857,  p.  32.

"  The  betel  is  a  leaf  like  that  of  the  orange,  but  longer.
In  Hindoostan,  the  greater  part  of  the  country  of  the  Arabs,
and  the  kingdom  of  Ormuz,  an  extreme  fondness  prevails  for
this  leaf,  which,  in  fact,  deserves  its  reputation.  The  manner
of  eating  is  as  follows.   They  bruise  a  portion  offaufel  (areca),

1  I  have  already  (Vol.  II,  pp.  302-303)  quoted  the  last  portion  of  this
passage  in  connection  with  the  poison-damsels.

VOL.   VIII.  R


258  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

otherwise  called  sipari,  and  put  it  in  the  mouth,  moistening
a  leaf  of  the  betel,  together  with  a  grain  of  chalk,  they  rub
the  one  upon  the  other,  roll  them  together,  and  then  place
them  in  the  mouth.  They  thus  take  as  many  as  four  leaves
at  a  time,  and  chew  them.  Sometimes  they  add  camphor  to
it,  and  sometimes  they  spit  out  the  saliva,  which  becomes  of
a  red  colour.

"  This  substance  gives  a  colour  to  and  brightens  the
countenance,  causes  an  intoxication  similar  to  that  produced
by  wine,  appeases  hunger,  and  excites  appetite  in  those  who
are  satiated  ;  it  removes  the  disagreeable  smell  from  the
mouth,  and  strengthens  the  teeth.  It  is  impossible  to  express
how  strengthening  it  is,  and  how  much  it  excites  to  pleasure.
It  is  probable  that  the  properties  of  this  plant  may  account  for
the  numerous  harem  of  women  that  the  king  of  this  country
maintains.  If  report  speaks  truly,  the  number  of  the  khatoun
[princesses]  and  concubines  amounts  to  seven  hundred."

Ludovico  di  Varihema  (1505)

The  short  account  of  betel  given  by  Varthema,  the  famous
Italian  traveller,  confirms  the  views  of  'Abdu-r  Razzaq  to  a
certain  extent1  :

"As  an  act  of  devotion,  the  king  does  not  sleep  with  a
woman  or  eat  betel  for  a  whole  year.  This  betel  resembles
the  leaves  of  the  sour  orange,  and  they  are  constantly  eating
it.  It  is  the  same  to  them  that  confections  are  to  us,  and
they  eat  more  for  sensuality  than  for  any  other  purpose.
When  they  eat  the  said  leaves,  they  eat  with  them  a  certain
fruit  which  is  called  coffolo,  and  the  tree  of  the  said  coffolo  is
called  Arecha,  and  is  formed  like  the  stem  of  the  date-tree,
and  produces  its  fruit  in  the  same  manner.  And  they  also
eat  with  the  said  leaves  a  certain  lime  made  from  oyster
shells,  which  they  call  Cionama"

Duarte  Barbosa  (1513)

Writing  on  the  west  coast  of  India,  near  Goa,  Barbosa,
the  Portuguese  official,  says  2  :

1  See  the  Hakluyt  Society  edition,  p.  144.  I  am  shortly  editing  a  reprint
of  this  important  work  for  the  Argonaut  Press,  with  an  Introduction  by  Sir
Richard  Temple.

2  See  Dames'  edition  for  the  Hakluyt  Society,  vol.  i,  pp.  168-169.


APPENDIX  II— ROMANCE  OF  BETEL-CHEWING   259

"  This  betel  we  call  '  the  Indian  leaf ' ;  it  is  as  broad  as
the  leaf  of  the  plantain  herb,  and  like  it  in  shape.  It  grows
on  an  ivy-like  tree,  and  also  climbs  over  other  trees  which
are  enveloped  in  it.  These  yield  no  fruit,  but  only  a  very
aromatic  leaf,  which  throughout  India  is  habitually  chewed
by  both  men  and  women,  night  and  day,  in  public  places
and  roads  by  day,  and  in  bed  by  night,  so  that  their  chewing
thereof  has  no  pause.  This  leaf  is  mixed  with  a  small  fruit
(seed)  called  areca,  and  before  eating  it  they  cover  it  with
moistened  lime  (made  from  mussel-  and  cockle-shells),  and
having  wrapped  up  these  two  things  with  the  betel  leaf,  they
chew  it,  swallowing  the  juice  only.  It  makes  the  mouth  red
and  the  teeth  black.  They  consider  it  good  for  drying  and
preserving  the  belly  and  the  brain.  It  subdues  flatulence
and  takes  away  thirst,  so  that  they  take  no  drink  with  it.
From  hence  onward,  on  the  way  to  India,  there  is  a  great
store  thereof,  and  it  is  one  of  the  chief  sources  of  revenue  to
the  Indian  kings.  By  the  Moors,  Arabs  and  Persians  this
betel  is  called  tambttl."


John  Huyghen  van  Linschoten  (1583-1589)

Passing  over  the  brief  references  given  by  Caesar  Frederick  *
(1563-1581)  and  Pedro  Teixeira  2  (1586-1615)  we  come  to  the
most  important  of  all  the  early  accounts — namely,  that  by
Linschoten.  It  contains  several  interesting  interpolations
printed  in  italics,  the  work  of  the  learned  Bernard  ten  Broecke
(whose  name  was  latinised  as  Paludanus),  a  contemporary
of  Linschoten.

So  interesting  and  informative  is  the  account  that  I  give  it
below  in  full,  according  to  the  translation  in  the  edition  printed
for  the  Hakluyt  Society,  edited  by  Burnell  and  Tiele 3 :

"  The  leaves  called  Bettele  or  Bettre,  which  is  very  common
in  India,  and  daily  eaten  by  the  Indians,  doe  grow  in  all  places
of  India,  where  the  Portingals  have  discovered,  not  within
the  countrie  but  only  on  the  sea  coast,  unlesse  it  bee  some
small  quantitie.  It  will  not  growe  in  cold  places,  as  China,
nor  in  over  hot  places,  as  Mosambique  and  Sofala,  and  because

1  Hakluyt's  Voyages,  MacLehose's  edition,  Glasgow,  1904,  vol.  v,  p.  391.

2  Sinclair's  translation,  Hakluyt  Society,  1902,  pp.  199-200.

3  The  Voyage  of  John  Huyghen  van  Linschoten  to  the  East  Indies.  From  the
Old  English  translation  of  1598,  London,  1885,  vol.  ii,  p.  62  et  seq.


260  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

it  is  so  much  used,  I  have  particularly  set  it  downe  in  this
place,  although  it  is  already  spoken  of  in  many  other  places.
You  must  understand  that  this  Bettele  is  a  leafe  somewhat
greater  and  longer  out  than  Orange  leaves,  and  is  planted  by
sticks,  whereupon  it  climeth  like  Ivie  or  pepper,  and  so  like
unto  pepper,  that  afarre  off  growing  each  by  other,  they  can
hardlie  bee  descerned.  It  hath  no  other  fruite  but  the  leaves
only,  it  is  much  dressed  and  looked  unto,  for  that  it  is  the
daily  breade  of  India.  The  leaves  being  gathered  doe  con-
tinue long  without  withering,  alwaies  shewing  fresh  and
greene,  and  are  sold  by  the  dozen,  and  there  is  not  any  woman
or  man  in  all  India,  but  that  every  day  eateth  a  dozen  or  two
of  the  same  leaves  or  more  :  not  that  they  use  them  for  foode,
but  after  their  meale  tides,  in  the  morning  and  all  day  long,
as  likewise  by  night,1  and  [as  they  goe  abroad]  in  the  streetes,
wheresoever  they  be  you  shal  see  them  with  some  of  these
leaves  in  their  handes,  which  continually  they  are  chawing.
These  leaves  are  not  used  to  bee  eaten  2  alone,  but  because
of  their  bitternesse  they  are  eaten 3  with  a  certaine  kinde  of
fruit  which  the  Malabares  and  Portingales  call  Arecca,  the
Gusurates  and  Decanijns,  Suparii,  and  the  Arabians  Fauffel.
This  fruite  groweth  on  trees  like  the  Palme  trees  that  beare
the  Nut  Cocus  in  India,  but  they  are  somewhat  thinner,  with
the  leaves  somewhat  longer  and  smaller.  The  fruit  is  much
like  the  fruit  that  groweth  on  Cipresse  trees,  or  like  a  Nutmeg,
though  some  [of  them  are]  on  the  one  side  flat,  and  on  the
other  [side]  thicker,4  some  being  somewhat  greater  and  very
hard.  They  cut  them  in  the  middle  with  a  knife,  and  so
chaw  them  with  Bettele,  they  are  within  ful  of  veines,  white,
and  [somewhat]  reddish.  There  is  a  kinde  of  Arecca  called
Cechaniin,5  which  are  lesse,  blacker,  and  very  hard,  yet  are
likewise  used  with  Bettele,  and  have  no  taste,  but  onlie  of
[the]  wood,  and  yet  it  moysteneth  the  mouth,  and  coloureth
it  both  red  and  blacke,  whereby  it  seemeth  that  the  lips  and
the  teeth  are  painted  with  blacke  blood,  which  happeneth
when  the  Arecca  is  not  well  dried.  There  is  another  sort
which  in  the  eating  or  chawing  [beeing  swallowed  downe]
maketh  men  light  in  the  heade,  as  if  they  had  drunke  wine
all  the  day  long,  but  that  is  sonne  past.  They  use  yet
another  mixture  which  they  eat  withall,  that  is  to    say,  a

1  Orig.  Dutch:  (add)  "in  the  house."  2  Orig.  Dutch:  "used."

3  Orig.  Dutch:  "chewed."  4  Orig.  Dutch:  "high."

5  Orig.  Dutch:  "Checanijn."


APPENDIX  II— ROMANCE  OF  BETEL-CHEWING   261

cake  or  role  *  made  of  a  certaine  wood  or  tree  called  Kaate,
and  then  they  annoint  the  Bettele  leaves  with  the  chalke
made  of  burnt  oyster  shelles,  which  can  doe  no  hurt  in  their
bodies,  by  reason  of  the  small  quantitie  of  it,  all  this  being
chawed  togeather,  and  the  Iuice  swalloed  downe  into  their
bodies,  for  all  the  rest  they  spit  forth,  they  say  it  is  very  good
for  the  maw,  and  against  a  stinking  breath,  [a  soveraigne
medicine]  for  the  teeth,  and  fastning  of  gummes,  and  [very
good]  2  against  the  Schorbucke,3  and  it  is  most  true  that  in
India  verie  few  men  are  found  with  stinking  breathes  or
tooth  aches,  or  troubled  with  the  Schorbuch  or  any  such  dis-
eases, and  although  they  be  never  so  old,  they  alwaies  have
their  teeth  whole  and  sound,  but  their  mouthes  and  teeth
are  still  as  if  they  were  painted  with  black  blood  as  I  said
before  and  never  leave  spitting  reddish  spittle  like  blood.
The  Portingale  women  have  the  like  custome  of  eating  these
Bettele  leaves,  so  that  if  they  were  but  one  day  without
eating  their  Bettele,  they  perswade  themselves  they  could  not
live  :  Yea,  they  set  it  in  the  night  times  by  their  Beddes
heades,  and  when  they  cannot  sleepe,  they  doe  nothing  els
but  chaw  Bettele  and  spit  it  out  againe.  In  the  day  time
wheresoever  they  doe  sit,  goe,  or  stand,  they  are  continually
chawing  thereof,  like  Oxen  or  Kine  chawing  their  cud  :  for
the  [whole]  exercise  of  [many  Portingale] 4  women,  is  onely
all  the  day  long  to  wash 5  themselves,  and  then  fal  to  the
chawing  of  their  Bettele.  There  are  some  Portingales  that
by  the  common  custome  of  their  wives  eating  of  Bettele,  doe
likewise  use  it.  When  the  Indian  women  6  go  to  visit  one
an  other,  the  Bettele  goeth  with  them,  and  the  greatest  plea-
sure or  entertainment  they  can  shew  one  to  the  other,  is
presently  to  present  them  with  some  Bettele,  Arecca,  and
chalke  in  a  woodden  dish,  which  they  keepe  onely  for  that
purpose.  This  Bettele  is  to  be  sold  in  every  corner,  and
streete,  and  shoppe  7  [of  the  towne],  as  also  in  every  high
way  for  travellers  and  passengers,  and  is  ready  prepared,
that  is  to  say,  so  many  Bettele  leaves,  one  Arecca  and  some

1  Orig.  Dutch:  "  little  ball."

2  Orig.  Dutch  :  "  remedy."

3  Schorbucke  (Dutch,  "  scheurbuyck  ")  is  scurvy.

4  Orig.  Dutch  :  "  the."

5  Orig.  Dutch  :  (add)  "and  bathe."

6  Orig.  Dutch  :  "  when  the  women  or  Indians."

7  Orig.  Dutch:  "on  all  corners  of  the  streets  and  shops.'


262  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

chalke,  and  many  times  some  Cate  for  such  as  desire  to  have
it,  which  they  commonly  keepe  in  their  houses,  or  beare  in
their  hands  in  a  woodden  painted  dish,  and  so  eate  in  this
sort,  first  a  peece  of  Arecca,  and  Cate,  which  they  chaw,  after
that  a  leafe  of  Bettele,  and  with  the  naile  of  their  thumbe,
which  they  purposely  weare  sharpe  and  long,  not  round  as
we  doe,  they  pull  the  veines  [or  stringes]  out  of  the  leafe,  and
so  smeare  it  in  their  mouthes  and  chaw  it.  The  first  sap
thereof  they  spit  forth  :  and  say  that  thereby  they  purge  the
head  and  the  maw  of  all  evill,  and  flegmaticke  humours,1
and  their  spittle  being  as  fowle  as  blacke  blood,  which  colour
proceedeth  from  the  Arecca;  the  rest  of  the  Iuice  they
swallow  downe.

"The  Indians  goe  continually  2  in  the  streetes  and  waies
with  Bettele  and  the  other  mixtures  in  their  handes  chawing,
specially  when  they  go  to  speak  with  any  man,  or  come  before
a  great  Lord,  thereby  to  retaine  a  good  smell,  and  to  keepe
their  breathes  sweet,  and  if  they  should  not  have  it  in  that
sort  with  them  whensoever  they  [meete  or]  speake  with  any
man  of  account,  it  were  a  great  shame  for  them.

"  The  women  likewise  when  they  accompany  secretly  with
their  husbands,  doe  first  eat  a  little  Bettele,  which  {they  think)
maketh  them  apter  to  the  game.  All  the  Indians  eate  it  after
their  meales,  saying  that  otherwise  their  meate  would  upbraide
them  [and  rise  in  their  stomakes\  and  that  such  as  have  used  to
eate  it,  and  leave  it,  doe  [presently]  get  a  stincking  breath.  They
doe  at  certaine  times  forbear e  the  eating  of  Bettele,  [as]  when  any
of  their  neerest  friends  die,  and  also  on  certain  fasting  daies,  as
likewise  some  Arabians  and  the  followers  of  Ali,  Mahomets
brother  in  lawe,  doe  upon  their  fazting  daies.  In  Malabar,  this
leafe  is  called  Bettele,3  in  Decam  Gusurate,  and  Canam*  it  is
called  Pam,5  in  Malaion,*  Siri,1  by  Auicenna,  Tambul,8  but
better  by  others  Tambul.  Auicenna  sayeth,  that  Bettele  streng-
thened the  maw,  and  fastneth  the  flesh  of  the  Gummes,  for  which
purpose  the  Indians  doe  use  it,  but  where  he  ajfirmeth  those

1  Orig.  Dutch  :  "all  evil  humours  and  flegmaticke  "  (as  substantive).

2  Orig.  Dutch:  "commonly."

3  See  p.  62.

4  Read  :  "  Canara  "  or  "  Cuncam."

5  I.e.  Hindustani,  "pan,"  properly  "leaf"  (Sanskrit,  "parna").
•  Orig.  Dutch  :  "  Malaijen  "  (the  country  of  the  Malays).

7  I.e.  Sirih.

8  Orig.  Dutch:  "Tembul.'


APPENDIX  II— ROMANCE  OF  BETEL-CHEWING   263

leaves  to  be  cold  in  the  first  degree,  and  drying  in  the  second,  it  is
not  so,  for  either  his  Booke  is  false  printed,1  for  hee  was  deceived
[therein],  for  those  leaves  are  hotte  and  drie  in  the  end  of  the
second  degree,  as  Garcius  ab  Horto  himself  hath  found  out,  like-
wise the  taste  and  smell  thereof  doe  affirme  it  to  be  so.  This
Bettele  is  like  a  Citron  leafe,  but  [somewhat]  longer,  sharpe  at
the  ende,  having  certain  veines  that  runne  along  the  leafe.  The
rypest  are  holden  to  bee  the  best,  and  are  of  colour  yellow[ish],
although  some  women  chuse  the  unripe,  because  they  are  pleas-
anter  2  in  the  chawing.  The  leaves  doe  wither  by  much  handling.
The  Bettele  in  Malacca,  beareth  a  fruit  like  the  tayle  of  an  Efte,
which  because  it  tasteth  well,  is  eaten  :  it  is  planted  like  a  Vine
upon  stickes,  as  Hoppes 3  with  us.  Some  for  their  greater
benefit  Plant  it  among  Pepper,  and  among  Arecca,  and  thereof
doe  make  a  pleasant  Gallerie.  This  Bettele  must  be  carefully
looked  unto,  and  often  watered.  He  that  desireth  to  know  more
hereof,  let  him  reade  the  worthie  commentaries  of  learned  Clusios,
uppon  the  Chapter  of  Garcius  touching  Bettele.4'

"  The  Noblemen  and  Kinds,  wheresoever  they  goe,  stand
or  sit,  have  alwaies  a  servant  by  them,  with  a  Silver  ketle
[in  their  hand]  full  of  Bettele  and  their  mixtures,  and  [when
they  will  eat]  give  them  a  leafe  ready  prepared.  And  when
any  Ambassadour  commeth  to  speak  with  the  King,  although
the  King  can  understand  them  well,  yet  it  is  their  manner
(to  maintaine  their  estates)  that  the  Ambassadour  speaketh
unto  them  by  an  interpreter,  [that  standeth  there]  in  presence,
which  done,  he  answereth  againe  by  the  same  interpreter.
In  the  meane  time,  the  King  lyeth  on  a  bed,  or  else  sitteth
on  the  ground,  uppon  a  Carpet,  and  his  servant  standeth  by
readie  with  the  Bettele  which  he  continually  chaweth,  and
spitteth  out  the  Iuyce,  and  the  remainder  thereof,  into  a  Silver
Basin  ;  standing  by  him,  or  else  holden  by  some  one  of  his
slaves  or  [his]  wives,  and  this  is  a  great  honour  to  the  Ambas-
sadour, specially  if  he  profereth  him  of  the  same  Bettele  that
he  himselfe  doth  eate.  To  conclude,  it  is  their  common  use
to  eate  it,  which  because  it  is  their  dayly  exercise,  and  that
they  consume  so  much,5  I  have  made  ye  longer  discourse,  the

1  Orig.  Dutch:  "translated."

2  Orig.  Dutch:  "they  give  more  sound."

3  Orig.  Dutch:  "Clif"  (ivy).

4  Annot.  D.  Paludani.

5  Orig.  Dutch:  "love  it  so  much."


264  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

better  to  understand  it,  although  somewhat  hath  beene  said
thereof  in  other  places.  The  Kings  and  Lords  of  India  use
pilles  made  of  Arecca,  Cate  and  Camphora,  with  beaten
Lignum  aloes,1  and  a  little  Amber,  which  they  eate  altogether
with  Bettele  and  Chalke,  in  steede  of  Arecca.

"  Some  mixe  Bettele  with  Licium,  some  and  those  of  the  richer
and  mightier  sort  with  Campher,  others  with  Lignum  aloes,
Muske  and  Amber  Grijs,  and  beeing  so  prepared,  is  pleasant  of
taste  and  maketh  a  sweet  breath.  There  are  some  that  chaw
Arecca  either  with  Cardamomum,  or  with  Cloves.  Within  the
lande  farre  from  the  Sea,  those  leaves  are  solde  verie  deare.  It
is  said  that  the  Kind  of  Decan  Mizamoxa  2  spendeth  yearely
thereof,  to  the  valew  of  above  thirtie  thousand  Milreyes.  This
is  their  banquetting  stuff e,  and  is  given  them  by  travellers,*  and
the  Kings  give  it  to  their  Subjects.  To  the  rich  they  give  thereof
being  mixed  with  their  owne  hands,  and  to  others  [they  send  it]
by  their  servants.  When  they  send  any  man  of  Ambassage  or
otherwise 4  ;  there  are  certaine  Silke  Purses  full  of  prepared
Bettele  delivered  unto  him,  and  no  man  may  depart  before  it  be
delivered  him,  for  it  is  a  [signe  or]  token  of  his  passe  port.

Abu-l-Fazl  'Miami  (1596-1605)

Abu-l-Fazl,  the  learned  minister  of  Akbar,  gives  us  in-
teresting details  about  the  various  kinds  of  betel  leaves.
He  first  refers  to  the  areca-nut  palm,  which  he  describes  as
graceful  and  slender  like  the  cypress.  "  The  wind  often
bends  it,  so  that  its  crown  touches  the  ground  ;  but  it  rises
up  again.  There  are  various  kinds.  The  fruit  when  eaten
raw,  tastes  somewhat  like  an  almond,  but  gets  hard  when  ripe.
They  eat  it  with  betel  leaves."

After  describing  various  fruits  he  proceeds  to  the  betel
leaf5  :

"  The  Betel  leaf  is,  properly  speaking,  a  vegetable,  but
connoisseurs  call  it  an  excellent  fruit.     Mir  Khusrau  of  Dihll

1  Orig.  Dutch:  "crushed  Linaloes  "  (which  is  the  Portuguese  name  for
L.  also).

2  Orig.  Dutch  :  "  Nisamoxa  "  =  Nigam  Shah,  residing  in  Ahmadnagar.

3  Orig.  Dutch :  u  this  they  make  a  present  of  to  travellers."

4  Orig.  Dutch  :  "  when  anybody  will  travel."

5  'Am  I  Akbarl  by  Abu-l-Fazl  'Allami,  translated  from  the  Original  Persian,
H.  Blochmann,  Calcutta,  1873,  vol.  i,  pp.  72-73.


APPENDIX  II— ROMANCE  OF  BETEL-CHEWING   265

in  one  of  his  verses  says  :  *  It  is  an  excellent  fruit  like  the
flower  of  a  garden,  the  finest  fruit  of  Hindustan.'  The  eating
of  the  leaf  renders  the  breath  agreeable,  and  repasts  odorous.
It  strengthens  the  gums,  and  makes  the  hungry  satisfied  and
the  satisfied  hungry.  I  shall  describe  some  of  the  various
kinds  :  1.  The  leaf  called  Bilahri  is  white  and  shining,  and  does
not  make  the  tongue  harsh  and  hard.  It  tastes  best  of  all  kinds.
After  it  has  been  taken  away  from  the  creeper,  it  turns  white,
with  some  care,  after  a  month,  or  even  after  twenty  days,  when
greater  efforts  are  made.  2.  The  Kdker  leaf  is  white  with  spots,
and  full,  and  has  hard  veins.  When  much  of  it  is  eaten,  the
tongue  gets  hard.  3.  The  Jaiswdr  leaf  does  not  get  white,  and
is  profitably  sold  mixed  with  other  kinds.  4.  The  Kapurl  leaf
is  yellowish,  hard,  and  full  of  veins,  but  has  a  good  taste  and
smell.  5.  The  Kapurkdnt  leaf  is  yellowish  green,  and  pungent
like  pepper ;  it  smells  like  camphor.  You  could  not  eat  more
than  ten  leaves.  It  is  to  be  had  at  Banaras ;  but  even  there
it  does  not  thrive  in  every  soil.  6.  The  Banglah  leaf  is  broad,
full,  hard,  plushy,  hot  and  pungent.

"  The  cultivation  is  as  follows  :  In  the  month  of  Chait
(March- April),  about  New- Year's  time,  they  take  a  part  of  a
creeper  four  or  five  fingers  long  with  Karhanj  leaves  on  it
and  put  it  below  the  ground.  From  fifteen  to  twenty  days
after,  according  as  leaves  and  knots  form,  a  new  creeper  will
appear  from  a  knot,  and  as  soon  as  another  knot  forms,  a  leaf
will  grow  up.  The  creepers  and  new  leaves  form  for  seven
months,  when  the  plant  ceases  to  grow.  No  creeper  has
more  than  thirty  leaves.  As  the  plant  grows,  they  prop  it
with  canes,  and  cover  it,  on  the  top  and  the  sides,  with  wood
and  straw,  so  as  to  rear  it  up  in  the  shade.  The  plant  requires
continually  to  be  watered,  except  during  the  rains.  Sometimes
they  put  milk,  sesame  oil  and  its  seeds  pressed  out,  about
the  plant.  There  are  seven  kinds  of  leaves,  known  under
nine  names  :  1.  The  Karhanj  leaf,  which  they  separate  for
seedlings,  and  call  Perl.  The  new  leaf  is  called  Gadautah.
2.  The  Nauti  leaf.  *3.  The  Bahuti  leaf.  4.  The  Chhlw
leaf.  5.  The  Adhinidd  leaf.  6.  The  Agahniyah  or  Lewdr  leaf.
7.  The  Karhanj  leaf  itself.  With  the  exception  of  the
Gadautah,  the  leaves  are  taken  away  from  the  creeper  when
a  month  old.  The  last  kind  of  leaf  is  eaten  by  some  ;  others
keep  it  for  seedlings  :  they  consider  it  very  excellent,  but
connoisseurs  prefer  the  Perl.

"  A  bundle  of  11,000  leaves  was  formerly  called  Lahdsah,


266  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

which  name  is  now  given  to  a  bundle  of  14,000.  Bundles  of
200  are  called  Dholi ;  a  lahdsah  is  made  up  of  dholis.  In
winter  they  turn  and  arrange  the  leaves  after  four  or  five
days ;  in  summer  every  day.  From  five  to  twenty-five
leaves,  and  sometimes  more,  are  placed  above  each  other,
and  adorned  in  various  ways.  They  also  put  some  betel-nut
and  katf h  on  one  leaf,  and  some  chalk  paste  on  another,  and
roll  them  up  :  this  is  called  a  berah.  Some  put  camphor  and
musk  into  it,  and  tie  both  leaves  with  a  silk  thread.  Others
put  single  leaves  on  plates,  and  use  them  thus.  They  are
also  prepared  as  a  dish."

We  can  pass  over  the  brief  accounts  given  by  other
travellers  of  the  first  half  of  the  seventeenth  century,  as
giving  us  no  new  information.  I  refer  to  such  men  as
Francois  Pyrard  of  Laval1  (1601-1608);  Sir  Thomas  Roe2
(1615-1617);  Edward  Terry3  (1616-1619);  and  Pietro  Delia
Valle  4  (1623).

We  can  pause,  however,  for  a  moment  with  Peter  Mundy.

Peter  Mundy  (1628-1634)

In  Relation  VI  he  speaks  of  "  feilds  of  Paan  or  Beetle,"
but  in  Relation  VIII  (1632)  he  speaks  of  "  Bettlenutt,"  thus
confounding  the  names  of  the  two  ingredients,  a  mistake
which  has  been  faithfully  copied  ever  since.  As  we  shall  see
very  shortly,  Fryer  made  matters  worse  by  calling  the  betel-
leaf  "  Arach  "  and  the  areca-seeds  "  Bettle."  Under  the
heading  "  Paan  what  it  is,"  5  Mundy  writes  as  follows  6  :

"  Wee  also  sawe  some  feilds  of  Paan,  which  is  a  kinde  of
leafe  much  used  to  bee  eaten  in  this  Countrie,  thus  :  First
they  take  a  kinde  of  Nutt  called  Saparoz,  and  commonly
with  us  Bettlenutt,  which,  broken  to  peeces,  they  infold  in
one  of  the  said  leaves,  and  soe  put  it  into  their  mouthes.  Then

1  See  Gray's  edition  for  the  Hakluyt  Society,  1887,  1889,  vol.  ii,  pt.  ii,
pp.  362-363.

2  See  Foster's  edition  for  the  Hakluyt  Society,  1899,  vol.  i,  pp.  19-20;
and  vol.  ii,  p.  453ft.

3  Foster,  Early  Travels  in  India,  p.  300.

4  See  Grey's  edition  for  tlie  Hakluyt  Society,  1892,  vol.  i,  pp.  36-37.

5  In  the  Harl.  MS.  2286  Mundy  has  added  "and  the  use  of  it."

6  See  Temple's  edition  for  the  Hakluyt  Society,  vol.  ii,  pp.  96-97.


APPENDIX  II— ROMANCE  OF  BETEL-CHEWING   267

take  they  of  the  said  leaves,  and  puttinge  a  little  slaked  lyme
on  them,  they  also  put  into  their  mouthes,  and  after  them
other,  untill  their  mouthes  are  reasonably  filled,  which  they
goe  champinge,  swalloweng  downe  the  Juice  till  it  be  drie  ;
then  they  spit  it  out.  It  is  accompted  a  grace  to  eat  it  up
and  downe  the  Streets  and  [is]  used  by  great  men.  There  is
noe  vesitt,  banquett,  etts.  without  it,  with  which  they  passe
away  the  tyme,  as  with  Tobaccoe  in  England  ;  but  this  is
very  wholsome,  sweete  in  smell,  and  stronge  in  Taste.  To
Strangers  it  is  most  comonly  given  att  partinge,  soe  that
when  they  send  for  Paane,  it  is  a  signe  of  dispeedinge,  or  that
it  is  tyme  to  be  gon."

In  Relation  XXII  Mundy  gives  an  interesting  description
of  "  A  Pepper  gardein,"  and  correctly  explains  how  the  black
pepper  vine,  Piper  nigrum,  is  planted  at  the  foot  of  the  areca-
palm.1  He  gives  a  sketch  of  the  pepper  garden,2  and  after
explaining  how  the  pepper  plant  grows  upon  the  "  truncke  of
the  Betele  nutt  tree,"  describes  his  drawing  of  the  areca-palm
itself  as  follows  :

"  .  .  .  an  Arrecca  or  betelnutt  tree,  with  the  Fruite  grow-
ing outt  aloft  in  the  trunck  or  stemme.  The  nutt  it  selffe,
when  it  is  ripe  in  the  huske,  is  of  an  orenge  coullour,  much
bigger  then  a  great  Wallnutt.  The  kernell  (which  is  only
estimated)  is  a  little  bigger  then  a  Nuttmegg,  the  inside
greyish  with  white  veynes.  This  is  thatt  thatt  is  eaten  with
Paan  and  is  used  in  Most  of  the  easterne  parts  of  the  world.
The  paan  leafe  is  like  the  pepper  leafe  and  groweth  uppe
somwhatt  after  thatt  manner,  requiring  a  support."

Bernier  (1656-1668)

Francois  Bernier  mentions  3  the  method  by  which  poison
can  be  conveyed  in  a  betel  "  chew."  A  young  nobleman,
by  name  Nazerkan,  was  suspected  by  the  Mogul  of  an  illicit
love  affair.  "As  a  mark  of  distinguished  favour  the  King
presented  the  betel,  in  the  presence  of  the  whole  court,  to
the  unsuspecting  youth,  which  he  was  obliged  immediately
to  masticate,  agreeably  to  the  custom  of  the  country.  .  .  .

1  Even  Sir  Richard  Temple  speaks  of  the  "  betel  palm  "  !

2  Temple,  op.  cit.,  vol.  iii,  pt.  i,  p.  80.

3  See  Constable  and  Smith's  edition,  Oxford,  1914,  pp.  13-14.


268  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

Little  did  the  unhappy  lover  imagine  that  he  had  received
poison  from  the  hand  of  the  smiling  Monarch,  but  indulging
in  dreams  of  future  bliss,  he  withdrew  from  the  palace,  and
ascended  his  paleky.1  Such,  however,  was  the  activity  of
the  poison,  that  he  died  before  he  could  reach  home."

Bernier  also  speaks  (p.  283)  of  the  piquedans,  or  spittoons,
"  of  porcelain  or  silver  .  .  .  very  necessary  in  connection
with  betel-chewing."

Niccolao  Manned  (1653-1708)

The  account  of  the  effects  of  betel-chewing  on  a  Westerner,
who  was  entirely  unacquainted  with  the  custom,  is  given  by
the  Venetian  traveller,  Manucci,2  who  visited  Surat  in  1653.

"  But  among  other  things  I  wasfmuch  surprised  to  see
that  almost  everybody  was  spitting  something  red  as  blood.
I  imagined  it  must  be  due  to  some  complaint  of  the  country,
or  that  their  teeth  had  become  broken.  I  asked  an  English
lady  what  was  the  matter,  and  whether  it  was  the  practice
in  this  country  for  the  inhabitants  to  have  their  teeth  ex-
tracted. When  she  understood  my  question,  she  answered
that  it  was  not  any  disease,  but  [due  to]  a  certain  aromatic
leaf  called  in  the  language  of  the  country  pan,  or  in  Portu-
guese, betele.  She  ordered  some  leaves  to  be  brought,  ate
some  herself,  and  gave  me  some  to  eat.  Having  taken  them,
my  head  swam  to  such  an  extent  that  I  feared  I  was  dying.
It  caused  me  to  fall  down  ;  I  lost  my  colour,  and  endured
agonies  ;  but  she  poured  into  my  mouth  a  little  salt,  and
brought  me  to  my  senses.  The  lady  assured  me  that  every-
one who  ate  it  for  the  first  time  felt  the  same  effects.

"  Betel,  or  pan,  is  a  leaf  similar  to  the  ivy  leaf,  but  the
betel  leaf  is  longer  ;  it  is  very  medicinal  and  eaten  by  every-
body in  India.  They  chew  it  along  with  '  arrecas  '  (areca),
which  physicians  call  Avelans  Indicas  (Indian  filberts),  and
a  little  catto  (hath  or  kattha),  which  is  the  dried  juice  of  a
certain  plant  that  grows  in  India.  Smearing  the  betel  leaf
with  a  little  of  the  kath,  they  chew  them  together,  which
makes  the  lips  scarlet  and  gives  a  pleasant  scent.  It  happens
with  the  eaters  of  betel,  as  to  those  accustomed  to  take  tobacco,
that  they  are  unable  to  refrain  from  taking  it  many  times  a
day.     Thus  the  women  of  India,  whose  principal  business

1  See  Ocean,  Vol.  Ill,  p.  I4>nl.

2  Irvine's  translation,  vol.  i,  p.  62.


APPENDIX  II— ROMANCE  OF  BETEL-CHEWING   269

it  is  to  tell  stories  and  eat  betel,  are  unable  to  remain  many
minutes  without  having  it  in  their  mouths.  It  is  an  exceed-
ingly common  practice  in  India  to  offer  betel  leaf  by  way  of
politeness,  chiefly  among  the  great  men,  who,  when  anyone
pays  them  a  visit,  offer  betel  at  the  time  of  leaving  as  a  mark
of  good  will,  and  of  the  estimation  in  which  they  hold  the
person  who  is  visiting  them.  It  would  be  a  great  piece  of
rudeness  to  refuse  it."

Fryer  (1672-1681).

We  now  come  to  John  Fryer,  who  gives  us  the  following
curious  account  of  the  areca-palm  * :

"  Beetle,  which  .  .  .  must  not  be  slipt  by  in  silence.  .  .  .

"  It  rises  out  of  the  Ground  to  twelve  or  fourteen  Feet
heighth,  the  Body  of  it  green  and  slender,  jointed  like  a  Cane,
the  Boughs  flaggy  and  spreading,  under  whose  Arms  it  brings
forth  from  its  pregnant  Womb  (which  bursts  when  her  Month
is  come)  a  Cluster  of  Green  Nuts,  like  Wallnuts  in  Green
Shells,  but  different  in  the  Fruit ;  which  is  hard  when  dried,
and  looks  like  a  Nutmeg.

"  The  Natives  chew  it  with  Chinam  (Lime  of  calcined
Oyster-Shells)  and  Arach,  a  Convolvulus  with  a  Leaf  like
the  largest  Ivy,  for  to  preserve  their  Teeth,  and  correct  an
unsavoury  Breath.  If  swallowed,  it  inebriates  as  much  as
Tobacco.  Thus  mixed,  it  is  the  only  Indian  Entertainment,
called  Pawn"

Facing  page  110  of  Crooke's  edition  are  Fryer's  drawings
and  diagrams  of  the  areca-palm,  areca-nuts,  mango-trees,  etc.
He  then  describes  an  areca-palm  conservatory  by  comparing
it  to  a  cathedral  in  the  following  way  :

"  These  Plants  set  in  a  Row,  make  a  Grove  that  might
delude  the  Fanatick  Multitude  into  an  Opinion  of  their  being
sacred ;  and  were  not  the  Mouth  of  that  Grand  Impostor
Hermetically  sealed  up,  where  Christianity  is  spread,  these
would  still  continue,  as  it  is  my  Fancy  they  were  of  old,  and
may  still  be  the  Laboratories  of  his  Fallacious  Oracles  :  For
they,  masquing  the  face  of  Day,  beget  a  solemn  reverence,

1  See  Crooke's  edition  for  the  Hakluyt  Society,  vol.  i,  pp.  110-1 11.  Other
references  occur  in  vol.  i,  pp.  119,  136,  143,  151  ;  vol.  ii,  pp.  42,  83,  96.


270  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

and  melancholy  habit  in  them  that  resort  to  them  ;  by  repre-
senting the  more  inticing  Place  of  Zeal,  a  Cathedral,  with  all
its  Pillars  and  Pillasters,  Walks  and  Choirs  ;  and  so  contrived
that  whatever  way  you  turn,  you  have  an  even  Prospect."

In  a  note  on  the  passage  Crooke  says  that  such  places  are
believed  to  be  semi-sacred,  no  one  in  a  state  of  ceremonial
impurity  being  admitted,  as  the  plant  is  supposed  to  be  most
susceptible  to  spirit  influence.     (See  further,  p.  271n2.)

This  concludes  the  evidence  on  betel-chewing  as  afforded  by
travellers  to  India  up  to  the  end  of  the  seventeenth  century.

In  the  eighteenth  and  early  nineteenth  centuries  travellers
and  missionaries  to  India  merely  confirm  the  accounts  of
previous  observers,  and  we  can  pass  them  over  as  unneces-
sary to  our  present  inquiry.  It  was  not  until  government
officials  began  a  detailed  inquiry  among  the  tribes  and  castes
of  all  parts  of  India  that  it  was  realized  to  what  a  great
extent  betel  leaves  and  areca-nuts  entered  into  the  everyday
life  of  the  Hindu.  Although  we  shall  obtain  a  little  informa-
tion from  Northern  India,  we  shall  find  that  it  becomes  more
abundant  as  we  travel  southwards.

Northern  and  Central  India

The  two  castes  connected  with  betel  in  India  are  Bara'i
(Baraiya,  Barui)  and  Tamboli  (Tamoli,  Tamdi).  Generally
speaking,  the  former  grows  the  plant,  while  the  latter  sells
the  leaves.  This  distinction,  however,  does  not  seem  to  be
always  observed.  It  appears  that  the  Bara'i  hardly  ever  sells
the  leaves,  while  the  Tamboli  sometimes  cultivates  the  plant.1
Sheering 2  denies  that  the  distinction  prevails  in  Benares,
and  says  that  there  the  Tamboli  sells  areca-nut  as  well  as
pan,  and  appears  to  be  more  of  a  wholesale  dealer  than  the
Bara'i.  In  the  Meerut,  Agra  and  Rohilkhand  divisions  the
Bara'is  are  replaced  by  the  Tambolis.

Crooke  (op.  cit.,  p.  181)  quotes  Abti-1-Fazl,  and  comments
on  the  passage  about  the  leaves  of  a  "  chew  "  being  tied  with
a  silk  thread.3  He  says  :  "  This  is  very  much  the  modern
practice,    except   that   the   two   leaves    are   very   generally

1  Crooke,  Tribes  and  Castes  of  the  North-  Western  Provinces  and  Oudh,  vol.  i,
p.  177.

2  Hindu  Tribes  and  Castes,  vol.  i,  p.  330.

3  See  p.  266  of  this  Appendix.


APPENDIX  II— ROMANCE  OF  BETEL-CHEWING   271

fastened  together  with  a  clove.  The  conservatory  in  which
the  pan  is  grown  is  treated  with  great  reverence  by  the
grower.  They  do  not  allow  women  to  enter  it,  and  permit
no  one  to  touch  the  plant  or  throw  the  leaves  into  fire.  Very
often  they  are  given  rent-free  holdings  by  rich  landlords  to
tempt  them  to  settle  in  their  neighbourhoods."

In  his  article  on  the  "  Baruis  "  of  Bengal,  Risley  x  tells
us  that  on  the  fourth  of  Baisakh  (April-May)  the  patroness
of  betel  cultivation  is  worshipped  in  some  places  in  Bengal,
with  offerings  of  flowers,  rice,  sweetmeats  and  sandalwood
paste.  Along  the  banks  of  the  Lakhya  in  Eastern  Bengal
the  Baruis  celebrate,  without  a  Brahman,  the  Navami  Pujd
in  honour  of  Ushas  ('Ha>?,  Aurora)  on  the  ninth  of  the  waxing
moon  in  Asvin  (September-October).  Plantains,  sugar,  rice
and  sweetmeats  are  placed  in  the  centre  of  the  pan  garden,
from  which  the  worshippers  retire,  but  after  a  little  return,
and,  carrying  out  the  offerings,  distribute  them  among  the
village  children.  In  Bikrampur  the  deity  invoked  on  the
above  date  is  Sungai,  one  of  the  many  forms  of  Bhagavati.
The  reason  given  by  the  Baruis  for  not  engaging  the  services
of  a  Brahman  is  the  following  :

"  A  Brahman  was  the  first  cultivator  of  the  betel.  Through
neglect  the  plant  grew  so  high  that  he  used  his  sacred  thread
to  fasten  up  its  tendrils,  but  as  it  still  shot  up  faster  than  he
could  supply  thread,  its  charge  was  given  to  a  Kayasth
(writers  and  village  accountants).  Hence  it  is  that  a  Brahman
cannot  enter  a  pan  garden  without  defilement."  2

At  the  present  day  some  Baruis  have  taken  to  trade,  while
others  are  found  in  Government  service  or  as  members  of  the
learned  professions.  The  bulk  of  the  caste,  however,  follow
their  traditional  occupation.  Betel  cultivation  is  a  highly
specialised  business,  demanding  considerable  knowledge  and
extreme  care  to  rear  so  delicate  a  plant.  The  pan  garden
(bard,  bdrej)  is  regarded  as  an  almost  sacred  spot.  Its
greatest  length  is  always  north  and  south,  while  the  entrances
must  be  east  and  west.  The  enclosure,  generally  eight  feet
high,  is  supported  by  hijul   (Sanskrit,  ijjala;   Barringtonia

1  Tribes  and  Castes  of  Befigal,  vol.  i,  pp.  72-73.

2  In  a  note  on  the  passage  Crooke  (Religion  and  Folklore  of  Northern  India,
1926,  p.  263)  says  that  this  is  obviously  an  serological  explanation  of  the  taboo
against  the  Brahman  interfering  with  it,  and  he  is  excluded  from  the  vinery
probably  because  his  "sanctity"  is  supposed  to  exercise  an  injurious  effect
on  such  a  tender  plant.     Cf  the  description  given  above  by  Fryer.


272  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

acutangula)  trees  or  areca-palms.  The  former  are  cut  down
periodically,  but  the  palms  are  allowed  to  grow,  as  they  cast
little  shade  and  add  materially  to  the  profits  of  the  garden.
The  sides  are  closely  matted  with  reeds,  jute  stalks,  or  leaves
of  the  date  or  Palmyra  palm,  while  nal  grass  is  often  grown
outside  to  protect  the  interior  from  wind  and  the  sun's  rays.
The  top  is  not  so  carefully  covered  in,  wisps  of  grass  being
merely  tied  along  the  trellis- work  over  the  plants.  A  sloping
footpath  leads  down  the  centre  of  the  enclosure,  towards
which  the  furrows  between  the  plants  trend,  and  serves  to
drain  off  rain  as  it  falls,  it  being  essential  for  the  healthy
growth  of  the  plant  that  the  ground  be  kept  dry.

The  pan  plant  is  propagated  by  cuttings,  and  the  only
manures  used  are  pdk-mdti,  or  decomposed  vegetable  mould
excavated  from  tanks,  and  khali,  the  refuse  of  oil-mills.  The
plant  being  a  fast-growing  one,  its  shoots  are  loosely  tied
with  grass  to  upright  poles,  while  thrice  a  year  it  is  drawn
down  and  coiled  at  the  root.  As  a  low  temperature  injures
the  plant,  by  discolouring  the  leaves,  special  care  must  be
taken  during  the  cold  season  that  the  enclosure  and  its  valu-
able contents  are  properly  sheltered.  Against  vermin  no
trouble  is  required,  as  caterpillars  and  insects  avoid  the  plant
on  account  of  its  pungency.  Weeds  are  carefully  eradicated,
but  certain  culinary  vegetables,  such  as  pepper,  varieties  of
pumpkins  and  cucumbers,  palwal  {Trichosanihes  diceca)  and
baingan  (egg-plant,  Solanum  melongena),  are  permitted  to  be
grown.  Pan  leaves  are  plucked  throughout  the  year,  but  in
July  and  August  are  most  abundant,  and  therefore  cheapest,
while  a  garden,  if  properly  looked  after,  continues  productive
from  five  to  ten  years.  Four  pan  leaves  make  one  ganda,
and  the  bira,  or  measure  by  which  they  are  sold,  nowadays
contains  in  Eastern  Bengal  twenty  gandas,  although  formerly
it  contained  twenty-four.  In  the  Bhdti  country  (Bakarganj)
thirty-six  gandas  go  to  the  bird.  Pan  leaves  are  never  re-
tailed by  the  Barui  himself,  but  are  sold  wholesale  to  agents
(paikdrs),  or  directly  to  the  paw-sellers.

The  varieties  of  the  Piper  betle  are  numerous,  but  it  is
probable  that  in  different  districts  distinct  names  are  given
to  the  same  species.  The  Jcafuri  or  camphor-scented  pan,
allowed  by  all  natives  to  be  the  most  delicately  flavoured,
is  grown  only  at  Sunargaon  in  Dacca  and  Mandalghat  in
Midnapur  for  export  to  Calcutta,  where  it  fetches  a  fancy
price.      The   next  best  is  the  sdnchi,  which  often  sells  for


APPENDIX  II— ROMANCE  OF  BETEL-CHEWING    273

four  annas  a  bird.  This  is  of  a  pale  green  colour,  and  if  kept
for  a  fortnight  loses  in  pungency  and  gains  flavour.  The
commoner  sorts  are  the  desi,  bangald,  bhdtidl,  dhdldogga,  ghds
pan,  grown  best  in  Bakarganj,  and  a  very  large-leaved  variety
called  bubnd.  The  usual  market-price  of  the  inferior  kinds  is
from  one  to  two  pice  a  bird.

It  has  been  mentioned  that  the  bard  is  regarded  as  almost
sacred,  and  the  superstitious  practices  in  vogue  resemble
those  of  the  silkworm  breeder.  The  Barui  will  not  enter  it
until  he  has  bathed  and  washed  his  clothes,  while  the  low-
caste  man  employed  in  digging  is  required  to  bathe  before
he  commences  work.  Animals  found  inside  are  driven  out,
while  women  ceremonially  unclean  dare  not  enter  within  the
gate.  A  Brahman  never  sets  foot  inside,  and  old  men  have
a  prejudice  against  entering  it.  It  has,  however,  been  known
to  be  used  for  assignations.  At  the  present  day  individuals
belonging  to  the  Dhoba,  Chandal,  Kaibartta,  Sunari,  and
many  higher  and  lower  castes,  as  well  as  Mohammedans,
manage  pan  gardens,  but  they  omit  the  ceremonies  necessary
for  preserving  the  bard  clean  and  unpolluted.

In  the  Central  Provinces  and  Berar  the  Bara'is  reside  prin-
cipally in  the  Amraoti,  Buldana,  Nagpur,  Wardha,  Saugor  and
Jubbulpore  districts.  The  betel- vine  is  grown  principally
in  the  northern  districts  of  Saugor,  Damon  and  Jubbulpore
and  in  those  of  Berar  and  the  Nagpur  plain.  It  is  notice-
able also  that  the  growers  and  sellers  of  the  betel-vine
numbered  only  14,000  in  1911  out  of  33,000  actual  workers
of  the  Bara'i  caste ;  so  that  the  majority  of  them  are  now
employed  in  ordinary  agriculture,  field  labour  and  other
avocations.

Russell *  describes  a  curious  custom  connected  with  the
remarriage  of  widows  as  observed  in  Betul.  The  relatives
of  the  widow  take  the  second  husband  before  Maroti's  shrine,
where  he  offers  a  nut  and  some  betel  leaf.  He  is  then  taken
to  the  malguzar's  house  and  presents  to  him  R.l,  4,  a  coco-
nut and  some  betel-vine  leaf  as  the  price  of  his  assent  to
the  marriage.  If  there  is  a  Deshmukh  [revenue  officer]  of
the  village,  a  coco-nut  and  betel  leaf  are  given  also  to  him.
The  nut  offered  to  Maroti  represents  the  deceased  husband's
spirit,  and  is  subsequently  placed  on  a  plank  and  kicked  off
by  the  new  bridegroom  in  token  of  his  usurping  the  other's
place,  and  finally  buried  to  lay  the  spirit.

1  Russell,  Tribes  and  Castes  of  the  Central  Provinces,  vol.  ii,  191 6,  p.  195.
vol.  vni.  s


274  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

The  Bara'is  especially  venerate  the  Nag,  or  cobra,  and
observe  the  festival  of  Nag-Panchml  (Cobra's  fifth),  in  con-
nection with  which  the  following  story  is  related.  Formerly
there  was  no  betel- vine  on  the  earth.  But  when  the  five
Pandava  brothers  celebrated  the  great  horse  sacrifice  after
their  victory  at  Hastinapura  they  wanted  some,  and  so
messengers  were  sent  down  below  the  earth,  to  the  residence
of  the  queen  of  the  serpents,  in  order  to  try  to  obtain  it.
Basuki,1  the  queen  of  the  serpents,  obligingly  cut  off  the
top  joint  of  her  little  finger  and  gave  it  to  the  messengers.
This  was  brought  up  and  sown  on  the  earth,  and  pan  creepers
grew  out  of  the  joint.  For  this  reason  the  betel-vine  has
no  blossoms  or  seeds,  but  the  joints  of  the  creepers  are  cut  off
and  sown,  when  they  sprout  afresh  ;  and  the  betel- vine  is
called  Nagbel,  or  the  serpent-creeper.  On  the  day  of  Nag-
Panchmi  the  Bara'is  go  to  the  bareja  with  flowers,  coco-nuts
and  other  offerings,  and  worship  a  stone  which  is  placed  in
it,  and  which  represents  the  Nag  or  cobra.  A  goat  or  sheep
is  sacrificed  and  they  return  home,  no  leaf  of  the  pan  garden
being  touched  on  that  day.  A  cup  of  milk  is  also  left,  in  the
belief  that  a  cobra  will  come  out  of  the  pan  garden  and  drink
it.  The  Bara'is  say  that  members  of  their  caste  are  never  bitten
by  cobras,  though  many  of  these  snakes  frequent  the  gardens
on  account  of  the  moist  coolness  and  shade  which  they  afford.

The  preparation  of  the  "  chew  "  for  retail  sale  is  the  same
as  that  in  the  North-Western  Provinces.  Bidas  are  prepared,
consisting  of  a  rolled  betel  leaf  containing  areca-nut,  catechu
and  lime,  and  fastened  with  a  clove.  Musk  and  cardamoms
are  sometimes  added.  Tobacco  should  be  smoked  after
eating  a  bida,  according  to  the  saying  :  "  Service  without
a  patron,  a  young  man  without  a  shield,  and  betel  without
tobacco  are  alike  savourless."  Bidas  are  sold  at  from  two
to  four  for  a  pice  (farthing).  Women  of  the  caste  often
retail  them,  and  as  many  are  good-looking  they  secure  more
custom ;  they  are  also  said  to  have  an  indifferent  reputation.
Early  in  the  spring,  when  they  open  their  shops,  they  burn
some  incense  before  the  bamboo  basket  in  which  the  leaves
are  kept,  to  propitiate  Lakshmi,  the  Goddess  of  Wealth.

For  notes  on  the  Bara'I  and  Tamboli  castes  in  Bombay
see  Enthoven,  Tribes  and  Castes  of  Bombay,  vol.  i,  pp.  59-65,
and  vol.  iii,  pp.  364-369.  In  the  Nizam's  dominions  they
are^dealt  with  by  Syed  Siraj  Ul  Hassan  in  Castes  and  Tribes

1  I.e.  the  serpent-king  Vasuki  of  ancient  Sanskrit  literature.


APPENDIX  II— ROMANCE  OF  BETEL-CHEWING  275

of  H.E.H.  the  Nizam's  Dominions,  vol.  i,  1920,  pp.  28-33  and
596-602.  See  also  G.  A.  Grierson,  Bihar  Peasant  Life,  2nd
edition,  1926,  pp.  248-249.


Southern  India

Owing  to  the  fact  that  social  customs  of  the  Hindus  have
remained  more  unchanged  in  the  south  than  in  any  other
part  of  India,  it  is  necessary  for  us  to  consider  the  different
uses  to  which  betel  is  put  among  the  various  tribes  and  castes
of  the  peninsula.  In  order  to  do  this  in  any  comprehensive
manner,  I  have  found  it  necessary  to  go  through  all  the  seven
volumes  of  Mr  Thurston's  well-known  work  on  the  subject.1
This  has  naturally  taken  a  considerable  amount  of  patience
and  pertinacity,  but  I  do  not  think  the  time  has  been  wasted  ;
for  the  evidence  derived  from  the  work  is  of  undoubted  value,
and  it  would  be  too  much  to  expect  readers  to  be  grateful  for
a  mere  reference  to  a  seven- volume  work  which  lacks  any  sort
of  index.

It  contains  some  three  hundred  references  to  betel — either
to  the  leaf,  the  "  nut "  or  to  the  combined  pan-supari.  Many
of  these  references  are  redundant,  as  betel  is  used  at  practic-
ally every  wedding  ceremony  of  all  tribes  and  castes.  I  shall
therefore  select  from  the  complete  list  of  references  given
below2  such  descriptions  of  customs  and  ceremonies  as  will

1  Castes  and  Tribes  of  Southern  India,  7  vols.,  Madras,  1909.

2  Vol.  i,  pp.  9,  16,  21,  34,  60,  121,  125,  141,  163,  165,  200-204,  220,  233,
240,  247-249,  260,  265,  276,  279,  280,  290-292,  294,  300,  305,  351  and  359;
vol.  ii,  pp.  13,  24,  42,  65,  73,  76,  78,  89,  95,  105,  110,  117,  120,  143,  163,  201,
-255,  260,  270,  272,  294,  306,  322,  330,  343,  347,  349,  350,  358,  363,  369,  385,
386,  415,  416,  430  and  443  ;  vol.  iii,  pp.  18,  22,  38,  46,  74,  79,  80,  81,  83,  101,
104,  110,  114,  128,  146,  149,  171,  172,  174-177,  206-209,  212,  213,  217,  220,
230,  235,  238,  239,  247,  253,  273,  275,  284,  295,  300,  328,  329,  334,  348,  420,
429,  435,  461,  465,  483  and  494;  vol.  iv,  pp.  11,  32,  89,  98,  101-106,  109,  134,
143,  144,  146,  148,  160,  178,  180,  186,  198,  207,  220,  271,  272,  275,  279,  283-
285,  293,  319,  320,  322,  352-356,  363,  368,  369,  372,  374,  377,  381,  383,  385,
398,  420,  422,  426,  430  and  435  ;  vol.  v,  pp.  33,  35-37,  40,  67,  69,  108,  1 13-115,
128,  181,  186,  195,  199,  205,  218,  265-268,  294,  316,  330,  331,  334,  336,  355,
.358,  361,  364,  378,  402,  431,  441,  442,  445,  468,  470,  481-485;  vol.  vi,  pp.  18,
22,  95-100, 117,  133,  137,  138,  175,  176,  184,  242,  252,  253,  255,  258,  323,  355,
360  and  382  ;  vol.  vii,  pp.  9,  17,  24,  30,  53,  54,  57-59,  6l,  64,  75,  78,  79,  86,
89,  176,  178,  192,  193,  200,  201,  248,  253,  259,  282-284,  286,  301,  306,  307,
334,  345-347,  388,  400,  426  and  427.


276  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

clearly  indicate  the  important  part  betel  plays  in  the  life  of
the  native  of  Southern  India.

The  references  from  Thurston  are  taken  volume  by
volume  in  proper  chronological  order,  the  names  of  the  castes
occurring  alphabetically :

Vol.  i,  p.  125.     Badhoyi  (carpenters  and  blacksmiths).

If  a  case  of  a  serious  nature  is  to  be  tried,  the  complainant
goes  to  one  of  the  headmen  of  the  caste,  and,  presenting  him
with  fifty  areca-nuts,  asks  him  to  convene  a  council  meeting.

Page  163.     Bant  (cultivating  class  in  South  Canara).

At  a  puberty  ceremony  among  some  Bants,  the  girl  sits
in  the  courtyard  of  her  house  on  five  unhusked  coco-nuts
covered  with  the  bamboo  cylinder  which  is  used  for  storing
paddy.  Women  place  four  pots  filled  with  water,  and  con-
taining betel  leaves  and  nuts,  round  the  girl,  and  empty  the
contents  over  her  head.  She  is  then  secluded  in  an  outhouse.
The  women  are  entertained  with  a  feast,  which  must  include
fowl  and  fish  curry.  The  coco-nuts  are  given  to  a  washer-
woman. On  the  fourth  day  the  girl  is  bathed,  and  received
back  at  the  house.  Beaten  rice  and  rice-flour  mixed  with
jaggery  (crude  sugar)  are  served  out  to  those  assembled.  The
girl  is  kept  gosha  (secluded)  for  a  time,  and  fed  up  with
generous  diet.

Page  260.  Bonthuk  (nomads — priests,  drummers,  musicians,
shepherds,  etc.).
Each  settlement  has  a  headman,  called  Bichadi,  and  in
case  of  any  dispute  about  his  decision,  the  complainant  has
to  undergo  a  trial  by  ordeal.  This  consists  in  taking  out  an
areca-nut  from  a  pot  of  boiling  cowdung  water.  The  dimen-
sions of  the  pot,  in  height  and  breadth,  should  not  exceed  the
span  of  the  hand,  and  the  height  of  the  cowdung  water  in
the  pot  should  be  that  of  the  middle  finger  from  the  base
to  the  tip.  If,  in  removing  the  nut  from  the  pot,  the  hand
is  injured,  the  guilt  of  the  individual  is  proved.

Page  276,  etc.     Brahman.

The  areca-nut  and  betel  leaf  enter  into  every  important
ceremony  in  the  life  of  a  Brahman — the  upanayana  (p.  276),
his  marriage  (pp.  279,  280,  290-294),  at  which  he  chews
betel  for  the  first  time,  and  his  death  (p.  300).  Widows  are
forbidden  to  use  it  (p.  351).


APPENDIX  II— ROMANCE  OF  BETEL-CHEWING    277

A  still  clearer  idea  of  the  continual  and  highly  important
part  betel  plays  in  a  Brahman's  life  will  be  obtained  by  re-
ferring to  Stevenson's  Bites  of  the  Twice-Born.  Owing  to  the
insufficient  index  to  this  work  I  give  the  references  below.1

Vol.  ii,  p.  13.     Chdliyan  (cotton  weavers).

In  the  tali-tying  ceremony  the  girl  is  conducted  to  a  booth
in  which  are  a  plank,  made  of  the  wood  of  the  pdla  tree,  a
lighted  lamp,  betel  leaves  and  nuts,  and  a  measure  of  raw  rice,
etc.  The  girl  sits  on  the  plank,  holding  a  mimic  arrow  in
her  right  hand.  The  Poduvan,  or  caste  barber,  now  hands
the  tali  to  a  male  member  of  an  Uralan's  (headman's)  family,
who  ties  it  on  the  girl's  neck.  For  his  services  the  Poduvan
receives  a  fanam  (coin)  and  three  bundles  of  betel  leaves.

Page  110.     Danddsi  (watchmen,  and  thieves).

Among  their  marriage  ceremonies  may  be  mentioned  the
following.  The  headman,  or  some  respected  elder  of  the
community,  places  an  areca-nut  cutter  on,  or,  with  some  rice
and  areca-nut,  between  the  united  hands  of  the  contracting
couple,  and  ties  them  together  with  seven  turns  of  a  turmeric-
dyed  thread.  He  then  announces  that  the  grand-
daughter of and  daughter  of  is  united  to

the  grandson  of  and  son  of .     The  parents  of  the

bride  and  bridegroom  pour  turmeric-water  from  a  chank
(Turbinella  rapa)  shell  or  leaf  over  their  united  hands.  The
nut  cutter  is  removed  by  the  bride's  brother,  and,  after
striking  the  bridegroom,  he  goes  away.

Page  117.     Ddsari  (mendicant  caste  of  Vaishnavas).

Devotees  put  kavalam  (sliced  plantain  fruits  mixed  with
sugar,  jaggery  and  fried  grain  or  beaten  rice)  into  the  mouths
of  the  mendicants,  who  eat  a  little  and  spit  the  rest  out  in  the
hands  of  the  devotees.  The  same  thing  is  done  with  betel
leaves.  It  is  believed  that  this  action  will  cure  all  diseases  and
produce  children.

Page    416.      hhava,    or    llavans    (toddy-drawing    castes    of
Malabar,  Cochin  and  Travancore).
Among  the  ceremonies  observed  at  the  seventh  month  of

1  Birth  and  babyhood,  pp.  5,  6,  9"  11,  21  ;  sacred  thread,  pp.  29,  40,  43;
the  wedding  and  its  ceremonies,  pp.  51,  60,  68,  74,  75,  83,  86,  87,  90,  104,
109;  desire  for  a  son,  pp.  112,  116,  118,  120;  death,  pp.  167,  172;  daily  and
monthly  ritual;  pp.  239,  266,  279,  285,  289,  304,  313,  329,  330,  333,  339;
special  ceremonies,  p.  354  ;  Siva  worship,  pp.  385,  392  ;  Vishnu  worship,  p.  414.


278  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

pregnancy  is  that  which  determines  the  sex  of  the  unborn
child.  The  priestess  pours  a  quantity  of  oil  on  the  navel  of
the  woman  from  a  betel  leaf,  and,  from  the  manner  in  which
it  flows  down,  the  sex  is  determined.

Vol.  iii,  p.  81.     Kalian  (a  caste  of  thieves).

On  the  sixteenth  day  after  the  first  menstrual  period  of
a  Kalian  girl,  her  maternal  uncle  brings  a  sheep  or  goat,  and
rice.  She  is  bathed  and  decorated,  and  sits  on  a  plank  while
a  vessel  of  water,  coloured  rice  and  a  measure  filled  with
paddy,  with  a  style  bearing  a  betel  leaf  stuck  on  it,  are  waved
before  her.  Her  head,  knees  and  shoulders  are  touched  with
cakes,  which  are  then  thrown  away.  A  woman,  conducting
the  girl  round  the  plank,  pours  water  from  a  vessel  on  to  a
betel  leaf  held  in  her  hand,  so  that  it  falls  on  the  ground  at  the
four  cardinal  points  of  the  compass,  which  the  girl  salutes.

Page  110.     Kammalan  (carvers  of  eyes  of  images,  etc.).

The  method  of  a  local  official  to  resign  office  is  to  lay  betel
leaf  and  areca-nut  before  his  superior,  and  prostrate  himself
in  front  of  him.  On  p.  114  we  learn  that  the  pdn-supdri  was
taken  to  ratify  a  promise.  On  p.  128  is  described  a  curious
custom  observed  in  commencing  the  building  of  a  house.  The
carpenters  open  three  or  four  coco-nuts,  spilling  the  juice  as
little  as  possible,  and  put  some  tips  of  betel  leaves  into  them ;
and,  from  the  way  these  float  in  the  liquid,  they  foretell
whether  the  house  will  be  lucky  or  unlucky,  whether  it  will
stand  for  a  long  or  short  period,  and  whether  another  will
ever  be  erected  on  its  site.

Page  295.  Kodikkdl-velldlan  is  the  occupational  name  of  a
sub-caste  of  Vellalas,  and  of  Labbai  Mohammedans,  who
cultivate  the  betel-vine.

Vol.  iv,  p.  102  et  seq.     Kudubi  (shifter  of  cultivation).

Some  of  the  caste  are  employed  in  the  preparation  of
cutch,  the  extract  from  the  Acacia  catechu,  obtained  by  boiling
the  chips.

Mr  Lathram,  of  the  Forest  Department,  thus  describes  the
process  :

"  The  first  thing  to  do  is  to  erect  the  ovens,  known  as
wolle.  These  are  made  by  a  party  of  men  a  fortnight  or  so
before  the  main  body  come.  The  ordinary  soil  of  the  field
is  used,  and  the  ovens  are  built  to  a  height  of  18  inches,  and


APPENDIX  II— ROMANCE  OF  BETEL-CHEWING   279

placed  about  5  yards  in  front  of  the  huts  at  irregular  distances,
one  or  two  to  each  hut.  The  oven  is  an  oblong,  about  2  feet
wide  by  3  feet  long,  with  two  openings  above,  about  1  foot  in
diameter,  on  which  the  boilers,  common  ovoid  earthenware
pots  (madike),  are  placed.  The  opening  for  the  fire  is  placed  on
the  windward  side,  and  extends  to  the  far  side  of  the  second
opening  in  the  top  of  the  oven,  the  smoke,  etc.,  escaping
through  the  spaces  between  the  boilers  and  the  oven.  The
earth  forms  the  hearth.  To  proceed  to  the  details  of  the
working,  the  guard  and  the  watcher  go  out  the  first  thing  in
the  morning,  and  mark  trees  for  the  Kudubis  to  cut,  noting
the  name  of  the  man,  the  girth  and  length  of  the  workable
stem  and  branches.  The  Kudubi  then  cuts  the  tree,  and
chips  off  the  sapwood,  a  ring  about  1  inch  wide,  with  his  axe,
and  brings  it  into  the  camp,  where  a  Forester  is  stationed,
who  measures  the  length  and  girth  of  the  pieces,  and  takes
the  weight  of  wood  brought  in.  The  Kudubi  then  takes  it
off  to  his  shelter,  and  proceeds  to  chip  it.  In  the  afternoon
he  may  have  to  go  and  get  firewood,  but  generally  he  can
get  enough  firewood  in  a  day  to  serve  for  several  days'  boiling.
So  much  for  the  men's  work.  Mrs  Kudubi  puts  the  chips
(chakkai)  into  the  pot  nearest  the  mouth  of  the  oven,  and
fills  it  up  with  water,  putting  a  large  flat  wooden  spoon  on
the  top,  partly  to  keep  the  chips  down,  and,  lighting  her  fire,
allows  it  to  boil.  As  soon  as  this  occurs,  the  pot  is  tipped  into
a  wooden  trough  (marige)  placed  alongside  the  oven,  and  the
pot  with  the  chips  is  refilled.  This  process  is  repeated  six
times.  The  contents  of  the  trough  are  put  into  the  second
pot,  which  is  used  purely  for  evaporating.  The  contents  of
this  pot  are  replenished  from  the  trough  with  a  coco-nut
bailer  (chippu)  until  all  the  extract  obtained  from  the  chips
has  been  evaporated  to  a  nearly  solid  residue.  The  contents
are  then  poured  into  a  broken  half -pot,  and  allowed  to  dry
naturally,  being  stirred  at  intervals  to  enable  the  drying  to
proceed  evenly.  The  extract  (rasa)  is  of  a  yellowish -brown
colour  when  stirred,  the  surface  being  a  rich  red-brown.  This
stirring  is  done  with  a  one-sided  spoon  (satuga).  To  make
the  balls,  the  woman  covers  her  hands  with  a  little  wood-ash
to  prevent  the  extract  adhering  to  them,  and  takes  up  as
much  catechu  as  she  can  close  her  hands  on,  and  presses  it
into  shape.  These  balls  are  paid  for  at  R.l,  2  per  100,  and
are  counted  before  the  Forester  next  morning,  and  delivered
to  the  contractor.     This  ends  the  work  done  by  the  Kudubis.


280  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

When  the  balls  have  been  counted,  they  are  rolled  by  special
men  engaged  for  the  purpose  on  a  board  sprinkled  with  a
little  wood-ash,  and  this  is  repeated  daily  for  three  or  four
days  to  consolidate  them.  After  this  daily  rolling  the  balls
are  spread  out  in  the  receiving  shed  to  dry,  in  a  single  layer
for  the  first  day  or  two,  and  after  that  they  may  be  in  two
layers.  After  the  fourth  or  fifth  day's  rolling  they  are  put  in
a  pit  and  covered  with  wood-ashes,  on  which  a  little  water
is  poured,  and,  on  being  taken  out  the  next  day,  are  gone
over,  and  all  balls  which  are  soft  or  broken  are  then  rejected,
the  good  ones  being  put  on  the  upper  storey  of  the  stone  shed
to  get  quite  hard  and  dry."

When  the  cutch  is  mixed  with  the  lime  used  for  the  chew,
mastication  will  at  once  produce  the  red  saliva  so  familiar  in
all  betel-chewing  countries.  For  various  other  descriptions
of  cutch  and  kaih  (a  purer  form  of  cutch)  see  Watt,  op.  cit.,
vol.  i,  pp.  30-44.

Page  178.     Kurumo  (Oriya  agriculturists).

This  caste  has  several  village  deities.  Every  family  ap-
parently keeps  the  house-god  within  the  house,  and  it  is  wor-
shipped on  all  important  occasions.  The  god  itself  is  usually
represented  by  five  areca-nuts,  which  are  kept  in  a  box.  These
nuts  must  be  filled  with  pieces  of  gold,  silver,  iron,  copper  and
lead,  which  are  introduced  through  a  hole  drilled  in  the  base
of  the  nut,  which  is  plugged  with  silver.

Page  398.     Malasar  (forest  tribe  cultivators).

The  Malasars  of  the  plains  observe  a  curious  custom  con-
nected with  the  dead.  The  widow  chews  betel  leaf  and  areca-
nuts,  and  spits  the  betel  over  the  eyes  and  neck  of  the  corpse.
On  the  third  day  after  death,  cooked  rice  and  meat  are  offered
to  the  soul  of  the  deceased  on  seven  arka  (Calotropis  gigantea)
leaves.  The  male  members  of  the  family  then  eat  from  the
same  leaf.

Vol.  v,  p.  195.     Nambutiri  Brdhmans  (of  Malabar).

Among  their  festivals  is  one  called  Tiruvatira,  a  day  on
which  Siva  is  especially  worshipped  and  only  a  single  meal
is  taken.  Night  vigils  are  kept  both  by  the  husband  and
wife,  seated  before  a  lighted  fire,  which  represents  the  sdkshi
(witness)  of  Karmas  and  contracts.  They  then  chew  a  bundle
of  betel-leaves,  not  less  than  a  hundred  in  number.  This  is
called  kettuvettila  tinnuka.     As  the  chewing  of  betel  is  taboo


APPENDIX  II— ROMANCE  OF  BETEL-CHEWING   281

except  in  the  married  state,  this  function  is  believed  to  attest
and  seal  their  irrefragable  mutual  fidelity.

Page  358.     Ndyar  (traders,  artisans,  washermen,  etc.).

On  the  death  of  an  important  member  of  a  taravdd  (de-
scendants in  the  female  line  of  one  common  female  ancestor)
the  practice  of  not  shaving  the  entire  body,  for  a  period
varying  from  forty-one  days  to  a  year,  is  involved.  The
observance,  known  by  the  name  of  diksha,  necessitates  the
effected  man  offering  half-boiled  rice  and  gingelly  seeds  to
the  spirits  of  the  deceased  every  morning  after  his  bath.  He
is  also  under  restriction  from  women,  from  alcoholic  drinks,
from  chewing  betel,  and  also  from  tobacco.

Vol.  vi,  p.  97.  Paraiyan  (low-class  pariahs  of  the  Tamil
country).

Betel  enters  largely  into  every  part  of  the  marriage  cere-
monies, which  are  long  and  intricate.  After  the  exchange  of
betel  has  ratified  the  agreement  of  marriage,  the  bridegroom,
with  several  relations,  etc.,  proceeds  to  the  bride's  home,
where  more  betel  is  exchanged.  After  the  lapse  of  a  few  days
the  girl's  family  is  expected  to  pay  a  return  visit,  and  the
party  should  include  at  least  seven  men.  Betel  is  again
exchanged,  and  the  guests  are  fed,  or  presented  with  a  small
gift  of  money.  When  marriage  follows  close  on  betrothal,  the
girl  is  taken  to  the  houses  of  her  relations,  and  goes  through
the  nalangu  ceremony,  which  consists  of  smearing  her  with
turmeric  paste  (see  Ocean,  Vol.  VIII,  p.  18),  an  oil  bath,  and
presentation  of  betel  and  sweets.  The  auspicious  day  and
hour  for  the  marriage  are  fixed  by  the  Valluvan,  or  priest  of
the  Paraiyans.  The  ceremonial  is  generally  carried  through
in  a  single  day.  On  the  morning  of  the  wedding  day  three
male  and  two  married  female  relations  of  the  bridegroom  go  to
the  potter's  house  to  fetch  the  pots,  which  have  been  already
ordered.  The  potter's  fee  is  a  fowl,  pumpkin,  paddy,  betel,
and  a  few  annas.  The  bride,  accompanied  by  the  headman  and
her  relations,  goes  to  the  bridegroom's  village,  bringing  with
her  a  number  of  articles  called  petti  varisai,  or  box-presents.
These  consist  of  a  lamp,  cup,  brass  vessel,  ear-ornament  called
kaldppu,  twenty-five  betel  leaves,  and  areca-nuts,  onions  and
cakes,  a  lump  of  jaggery  (crude  sugar),  grass  mat,  silver  toe-
ring,  rice,  a  bundle  of  betel  leaves,  and  five  coco-nuts,  which
are  placed  inside  a  bamboo  box.

Numerous  other  ceremonies  follow,  with  which  we  are  not


282  THE   OCEAN  OF  STORY

concerned.  Towards  the  close  of  the  marriage  day,  fruit,
flowers  and  betel  are  placed  on  a  tray  before  the  couple,  and
all  the  kankanams,  seven  in  number,  are  removed,  and  put
on  the  tray.  After  burning  camphor,  the  bridegroom  hands
the  tray  to  his  wife,  and  it  is  exchanged  between  them  three
times.  It  is  then  given  to  the  washerman.  The  proceedings
terminate  by  the  two  going  with  linked  hands  three  times
round  the  pandal.

Page  360.  Senaikkudaiyan  are  a  caste  of  betel-vine  cultivators
and  betel-leaf  sellers,  who  are  found  in  large  numbers  in
the  Tinnevelly  district,  and  to  a  smaller  extent  in  the
other  parts  of  the  Tamil  country.

Vol.  vii,  p.  24.     Tanda  Pulaiyan  (cultivators).

Every  kind  of  sickness  is  attributed  to  the  influence  of  some
demon,  whom  a  magician  is  capable  of  exorcising.  In  the
event  of  sickness,  the  sorcerer  is  invited  to  the  hut.  He  arrives
in  the  evening,  and  is  entertained  with  food,  toddy  and
betel.  He  then  takes  a  tender  coco-nut,  flower  of  the  areca-
palm,  and  some  powdered  rice,  which  he  covers  over  with
a  palm  leaf.  The  sick  person  is  placed  in  front  thereof,
and  a  circle  is  drawn  round  him.  Outside  the  circle  an  iron
stylus  is  stuck  in  the  ground.  The  demon  is  supposed  to  be
confined  within  the  circle,  and  makes  the  patient  cry  out  :
"  I  am  in  pai  (influence  of  the  ghost)  and  he  is  beating  me,"
etc.  With  the  promise  of  a  fowl  or  sheep,  or  offerings  thereof
on  the  spot,  the  demon  is  persuaded  to  take  his  departure.
Sometimes,  when  the  sorcerer  visits  a  house  of  sickness,  a
rice-pan  containing  three  betel  leaves,  areca-nuts,  paddy,  tulsi
(Ocimum  sanctum),  sacred  ashes,  conch  and  cowry  (Cyprcea
moneta)  shells,  is  placed  in  the  yard.  The  sorcerer  sits  in  front
of  the  pan,  and  begins  to  worship  the  demon,  holding  the
shells  in  his  hands,  and  turning  to  the  four  cardinal  points
of  the  compass.  He  then  observes  the  omens,  and,  taking
his  iron  plate,  strikes  it,  while  he  chants  the  names  of  terrible
demons,  Mullva,  Karinkali,  Aiyinar  and  Villi,  and  utters
incantations.  This  is  varied  by  dancing,  to  the  music  of  the
iron  plate,  sometimes  from  evening  till  noon  on  the  following
day.  The  sick  person  works  himself  up  into  the  belief  that
he  has  committed  some  great  sin,  and  proceeds  to  make  con-
fession, when  a  small  money  fine  is  inflicted,  which  is  spent
on  toddy  for  those  who  are  assembled.


APPENDIX  II— ROMANCE  OF  BETEL-CHEWING    283

Page  178.  Toreya  [toluvar  ?]  (cultivators,  chiefly  of  betel- vine).
When  a  married  girl  reaches  puberty  she  is  taken  to
her  father's  house,  and  her  husband  constructs  a  hut  with
branches  of  Ficus  glomerata.  On  the  last  day  of  her  confine-
ment therein  the  hut  is  pulled  down,  and  the  girl  sets  fire  to
it.  The  house  is  purified,  and  the  female  relations  go  to  the
houses  of  the  Ejaman  (headman)  and  caste  people,  and  invite
them  to  be  present  at  a  ceremonial.  A  small  quantity  of
turmeric  paste  is  stuck  on  the  doors  of  the  houses  of  all  who
are  invited.  The  relations  and  members  of  the  caste  carry
betel,  and  other  articles,  on  trays  in  procession  through  the
streets.  The  girl  is  seated  on  a  plank,  and  the  trays  are
placed  in  front  of  her.  Rice-flour,  fruits,  betel,  etc.,  are  tied
in  her  cloth,  and  she  is  taken  into  the  house.  In  the  case  of
an  unmarried  girl  the  hut  is  built  by  her  maternal  uncle.

The  above  extracts  clearly  show  the  numerous  ceremonies
among  different  tribes  and  castes  of  Southern  India  in  which
betel  and  areca-nuts  play  a  part.

With  regard  to  marriage  ceremonies  the  use  of  betel  leaf
and  areca-nuts  is  everywhere  predominant.  In  the  first  place
betel  must  be  looked  upon  as  synonymous  with  our  "tip."
Thus,  if  it  is  necessary  to  employ  a  barber,  washerman,  priest
or  artisan  in  connection  with  the  wedding  ceremonies,  one
may  be  sure  he  will  receive  a  "  tip  "  of  betel  leaves  and
areca-nuts,  to  which  a  fowl  and  other  objects  are  sometimes
added.

Then  there  is  the  exchange  of  betel  to  be  considered.  This
act  constitutes  a  binding  oath.  After  the  fathers  have  ex-
changed betel  the  wedding  is  formally  agreed  upon  and
arranged.  The  bride  and  bridegroom  then  exchange  betel,
which  act  constitutes  a  mutual  oath  of  fidelity.

In  all  the  minor  ceremonies  as  well,  betel  is  constantly
chewed  or  given  away  as  a  general  mark  of  friendship  and  re-
joicing. If  the  bridegroom  can  afford  it,  a  wholesale  distribution
of  pdn-supdri  is  made.

We  may  thus  say  that,  as  betel-chewing  is  the  sine  qua  non
of  the  Hindu's  life,  it  has  naturally  become  an  object  of  good
augury.  Consequently  it  not  only  figures  largely  at  marriage
ceremonies,  but  also  appears  at  birth,  puberty,  sacred  thread
and  tali-tying  ceremonies.  The  widow,  being  unlucky,  must
not  use  it,  but  the  dead  husband  will  need  it  just  the  same,  and
must  have  some  put  in  his  grave  or  on  his  funeral  pyre.


284  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

Assam,  Burma,  Annam  and  Siam

With  the  exception  of  certain  parts  of  Assam,  mentioned
below,  betel-chewing  is  found  throughout  the  four  countries
which  head  this  section.

To  the  east  the  custom  stretches  through  Cambodia
and  Cochin  China  to  Southern  China,  while  to  the  south  it
continues  into  Malaya  and  so  to  the  Eastern  Archipelago.

References  and  short  descriptions  of  betel-chewing  are
naturally  found  in  nearly  every  travel-book  on  the  particular
locality  concerned.  It  will,  therefore,  be  superfluous  to
attempt  to  supply  a  list  of  works  which  mention  it.  I  shall
merely  select  what  I  consider  reliable  and  correct  descriptions,
whether  they  be  from  old  or  recent  works.

In  the  case  of  Assam  we  naturally  turn  chiefly  to  the
recent  works  of  Mills,  Hutton  and  Smith.  Among  both
the  Sema  l  and  Angami 2  Nagas  the  only  narcotic  known  is
tobacco.  With  the  Ao  Nagas,  however,  the  betel  and  areca-
nut  are  in  very  common  use.  In  villages  where  the  ingredients
are  easily  obtainable  most  adults  chew  pan  and  betel-nut
(koyi).

A  quid  consists  of  a  little  areca-nut,  some  lime  (shinu,  stlni)9
a  scrap  of  tobacco  and  a  bit  of  one  of  several  kinds  of  bark
or  wood  which  have  the  effect  of  increasing  the  flow  of
saliva,  all  wrapped  up  in  a  "  pan  "  leaf.  Pan  is  grown  in
many  villages,  but  the  areca-nut  has  to  be  obtained  from
the  plains,  though  an  inferior  wild  variety  is  sometimes  used.
Lime  is  either  bought  in  the  plains  or  made  from  snail-shells
or  egg-shells.3

We  get  further  details  in  Smith's  work  4  on  the  same
tribes,  who  quotes  largely  from  previous  observers.  Betel-
chewing  is  practised  by  a  number  of  the  hill  tribes.  "  Pan
leaf,  betel-nut  and  lime,"  writes  Hunter,5  "  are  essential  to
the  comfort  of  all  the  hill  people,  who  are  inveterate  chewers
of  pan.  They  commence  at  an  early  age,  and  are  rarely  seen
without  a  pan  leaf  in  their  mouths  ;  the  females  are  quite
disfigured  from  the  practice."

1  J.  H.  Hutton,  Sema  Nagas,  1921,  p.  99.

2  J.  H.  Hutton,  Angami  Nagas,  1921,  p.  101.

3  J.  P.  Mills,  The  Ao  Nagas,  1926,  p.  152.

4  W.  C.  Smith,  Ao  Naga  Tribe  of  Assam,  1925,  pp.  137-138.

5  Statistical  Account  of  Assam,  vol.  ii,  p.  220.


APPENDIX  II— ROMANCE  OF  BETEL-CHEWING   285

The  Khasis  "  are  addicted  to  the  use  of .  .  .  betel-nut .  .  .
which  is  chewed  in  large  quantities  by  both  sexes."  1

"  They  greatly  disfigure  their  countenances,"  writes
Dalton,2  "  by  the  constant  and  untidy  chewing  of  pan  leaf."

"  They  are  inveterate  chewers,"  comments  Gurdon,3  "  of
supari  and  the  pan  leaf  (when  they  can  get  the  latter),  both
men,  women,  and  children;  distances  in  the  interior  being
often  measured  by  the  number  of  betel-nuts  that  are  usually
chewed  on  a  journey."

"  Betel-nut,"  writes  Stack,4  "  (kove ;  Khasi,  kwai)  is
largely  consumed  in  the  usual  way,  with  lime  and  pan  leaf
(bithi) ;  and  (as  among  the  Khasis)  time  and  distance  are
computed  by  the  interval  required  to  chew  a  nut.  (The
phrase  is  ingtdt  e-om-ta  er — "the  time  it  takes  to  chew  the
nut  and  pan  leaf  red  "  :  ingtdt,  roll  for  chewing ;  e,  one ;  dm,
chew  ;    er,  red.")

The  practice  is  current  among  the  Kachins.  "The
acknowledged  form  of  introduction  and  friendly  interchange
of  courtesies,"  comments  Hanson,5  "  is  by  exchanging  betel-
nut  boxes."  The  Karen6  also  practise  constantly  the  habit
of  betel-chewing."  Dr  Hutton  is  responsible  for  the  state-
ment that  betel-chewing  among  the  Naga  tribes  is  "  confined
to  Aos,  Lhotas  and  Konyaks  in  touch  with  the  betel-chewing
plainsmen."

Mills  7  says  that  "  betel-nut  is  chewed  with  pan  and  lime
in  the  villages  near  the  plains.  Lime  used  to  be  made  locally
from  the  ground-up  shells  of  fresh-water  snails,  but  is  now
bought  in  the  plains."

The  Rev.  S.  A.  D.  Boggs,  a  former  missionary  among  the
Garos,  reported  to  the  writer  that  betel-chewing  has  been  on
the  increase  among  the  Garos.  It  is  common  among  the
Assamese,  and  it  is  the  opinion  of  Mr  Boggs  that  the  Garos
have  learned  the  habit  from  the  Assamese.  Among  the  Ao
Nagas  the  habit  is  deeply  entrenched.  However,  some
questions  arise  in  this  connection.  The  palm-tree  which
bears  the  areca-  or  betel-nut  does  not  thrive  well  in  the  hills,

1  Census  of  India,  1901,  vol.  i,  p.  198.

2  Descriptive  Ethnology  of  Bengal,  p.  57.

3  The  Khasis,  p.  5.

4  The  Mikirs,  p.  14.

5  The  Kachins,  Rangoon,  1913,  p.  57.

6  H.  I.  Marshall,  The  Karen  People  of  Burma,  1922.

7  The  Lhota  Nagas,  p.  82.


286  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

and  so  the  Nagas  frequently  substitute  the  bark  of  a  certain
root  for  the  nut.  This  may  mean  that  they  brought  the  habit
with  them  into  the  hills  and  have  been  keeping  it  up  in  spite
of  the  scarcity  of  one  of  the  principal  ingredients,  or  else  they
may  have  learned  the  habit  from  others  since  taking  up  their
present  abode.1

T.  C.  Hodson  2  quotes  Dr  Brown 3  as  saying  that  the
Manipuris,  both  male  and  female,  are  inveterate  chewers
of  pan  supdri.  The  whole  of  this  is  brought  from  the  neigh-
bouring district  of  Cachar,  and  forms  a  considerable  trade.
The  betel-nut-tree  will  not  grow  in  Manipur  territory.

The  Shans  of  Northern  Burma  are  also  very  addicted  to
the  habit,  and  their  teeth  become  black  and  shiny.  So  far
from  considering  this  a  blemish,  they  look  upon  it  as  a  mark
of  beauty,  saying  :    "  All  beasts  have  white  teeth."

Mr  Leslie  Mills 4  gives  an  interesting  account  of  the
method  of  making  lime  for  chewing.  A  place  is  chosen  in
the  jungle  where  firewood  is  easily  found,  and  where  lime-
stone blocks  are  near  at  hand.  A  round  hole  or  pit,  six  feet
in  diameter  and  five  feet  in  depth,  is  dug.  Then  a  similar
excavation  is  made  near  it,  the  intervening  ground  being
pierced  near  the  bottom  of  the  pits  to  unite  them.  The  first
hole  is  filled  with  limestones,  which  are  placed  with  care,
leaving  plenty  of  fissures  through  the  mass,  so  that  fire  and
smoke  may  pass  between  the  stones.  In  the  second  pit  a
fire  is  made,  then  plenty  of  wood  is  piled  on  the  flames  ;  the
top  is  covered,  so  that  the  smoke  and  fire  can  find  an  exit  only
through  the  limestones  of  the  first  hole.  Lime  thus  made
is  sometimes  sold  without  further  preparations,  but  often
turmeric  is  beaten  into  it,  making  it  red.  When  areca-nut  is
chewed,  lime  is  always  added,  and  sometimes  cutch,  tobacco
and  spices  folded  in  a  betel  leaf.

Writing  under  the  pseudonym  of  Shway  Yoe,5  Sir  George
Scott  gives  us  a  very  clear  description  of  betel-chewing  in
Burma.  It  is  sometimes  carried  on  simultaneously  with
smoking,  but  most  people  prefer  to  economise  enjoyment,
and  chew  only  in  the  interval  between  smokes.     Chewing  is

1  See,  further,  Smith,  op.  cit,  pp.  155,  158  and  l6l.

2  T.  C.  Hodson,  The  Meitheis,  1 908,  p.  48.

3  R.  Brown,  Annual  Report  on  the  Munnipore  Political  Agency,  1874,  p.  S3.

4  Shans  at  Home,  1910,  p.  173.

5  The  Burman,  his  Life  and  Notions,  p.  71.  For  a  short  description  of
Burmese  betel-boxes  see  p.  273.


APPENDIX  II— ROMANCE  OF  BETEL-CHEWING   287

hardly  an  exact  expression,  and  the  use  of  it  frequently  leads
the  experimenting  Briton  into  the  unpleasant  predicament  of
having  all  the  interstices  between  his  teeth  choked  up  with
little  fragments  of  the  nut,  which,  with  their  indescribable
aromatic  flavour,  stimulate  the  flow  of  saliva  for  four  hours
afterwards.  The  Burman  splits  his  nut  in  half,  smears  a
little  slaked  lime,  usually  white,  but  sometimes  tinted  pink
or  salmon-coloured,  on  the  betel-vine  leaf,  puts  in  a  little
morsel  of  cutch  and  tobacco,  and  then  rolls  it  up  and  stows
away  the  quid  in  the  side  of  his  mouth,  occasionally  squeezing
it  a  little  between  his  teeth.  It  is  as  well  to  be  very  cautious
with  the  lime  and  cutch  (the  juice  of  the  Acacia  catechu)  the
first  time  you  make  a  trial.  The  latter  especially  is  very  as-
tringent. Chewing  kohng-thee  is  an  unlovely  practice.  The
Burman  has  none  of  the  delicacy  with  regard  to  a  spittoon
which  characterizes  the  American,  and  these  articles  require
to  be  of  a  very  considerable  size.  The  monks  are  perhaps
the  most  persistent  chewers  of  the  good  betel.  Smoking  is
prohibited,  but  nothing  is  said  against  betel,  and  it  is  con-
sidered a  great  stimulator  of  the  meditative  faculties.  The
lime  used  very  speedily  corrodes  and  destroys  the  teeth,1  and
then  the  old  pohn-gyee  (Burmese  Buddhist  monk  of  highest
order)  has  to  make  the  scholars  crush  up  the  nuts,  so  that  they
may  not  hurt  his  toothless  gums.  It  is  a  common  belief  that
no  one  can  speak  Burmese  well  till  he  chews  betel.

In  concluding  this  brief  section  on  Burma  I  would  quote,
as  an  example  of  the  present-day  spread  of  betel-chewing,  a
passage  from  a  work  by  W.  G.  White  on  the  nomadic  Mawken
people  of  the  Mergui  Archipelago.2

"  Amongst  the  Dung  Mawken,  who  are  taking  to  the
Burmese  habit  of  betel-chewing,  the  custom  is  coming  into
vogue  of  the  '  joiners '  [i.e.  the  go-between,  who  arrange  mar-
riages, etc.]  offering  to  chew  areca-nuts  with  the  father  of  the
girl  and  any  other  members  of  the  family  who  are  to  take  part
in  the  ceremony.  If  the  offer  is  accepted,  agreement  is  signified,
and  if  it  is  declined,  the  '  joiners  '  cannot  fulfil  their  task."

Passing  over  Annam,  where  we  are  told 3  "all  the
Annamese,  rich  and  poor,  chew  the  betel-nut "  (read  "  areca-
nut  and  pan  "),  we  turn  to  Siam  and  Laos.

1  See  the  human  teeth  in  the  Ethnographical  Gallery  (Nicobar  Islands,
Case  149)  of  the  British  Museum,  showing  the  results  of  betel-chewing.

2  The  Sea  Gypsies  of  Malaya,  p.  203.

3  G.  M.  Vassal,  On  and  off'  Duty  in  Annam,  p.  107.


288  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

The  areca-palm  is  grown  in  every  part  of  Siam,  but  in  few-
districts  is  the  production  sufficient  to  meet  the  enormous
demand  which  the  chewing  proclivities  of  the  Siamese  create.
In  some  parts  of  Southern  Siam,  however,  the  supply  exceeds
the  demand,  and  a  certain  quantity  of  areca-nut  is  exported
thence  to  other  parts  of  the  kingdom  and  to  Singapore
and  Penang.  In  the  suburbs  of  Bangkok  the  areca-palm  is
grown  in  gardens,  where  the  trees  are  planted  in  orderly
rows,  interplanted  with  such  other  fruit-trees  as  are  found  to
thrive  in  the  thin  shade  which  they  cast.  In  the  provinces
the  trees  are  grown  in  rough  plantations,  round  about  the
houses  of  the  peasantry,  and  on  any  patch  of  available  waste
land.  With  its  smooth,  straight  stem,  graceful  topknot  of
leaves  and  hanging  bunches  of  fruit,  sometimes  full  fifty  feet
from  the  ground,  the  areca  is  one  of  the  most  graceful  of  all  the
palm  family.  Once  planted  in  a  moist  situation,  it  requires
absolutely  no  care,  and  though  it  is  possible  that,  by  selection
and  manuring,  the  fruit  might  be  improved,  the  Siamese
cultivator  has  never  thought  it  worth  while  to  take  any
trouble  about  it.  The  areca-nut  is  used  fresh,  dried  or
pickled.  When  fresh,  the  edible,  or  rather  chewable,  kernel
is  yellow  and  soft ;  when  dry,  it  is  brown  and  extremely  hard,
and  has  to  be  cut  up  or  pounded  before  it  can  be  used,  and
when  pickled,  it  is  soft  and  brown  and  rotten-looking.  The
trees  yield  fruit  at  the  end  of  their  third  year,  and  bear  usually
once — but  in  some  places  twice — a  year,  from  a  hundred  to
five  hundred  nuts.  There  appears  to  be  a  ready  and  constant
demand  for  areca-nut  both  in  India  and  China,  and  it  is  prob-
able that  plantations  of  these  palms  in  Southern  Siam  would
be  found  highly  profitable.  Hitherto,  however,  European
planters  have  not  taken  any  interest  in  this  product  of
agriculture.1

The  betel- vine  is  grown  in  gardens,  more  especially  in  the
neighbourhood  of  Bangkok,  where  the  consumption  of  it  is
so  great  that  one  large  market  is  devoted  entirely  to  its  sale.
The  vine  requires  much  care,  yields  leaves  fit  for  use  when
about  a  year  old,  and  continues  to  do  so  for  five  years,  at  the
end  of  which  time  the  foliage  becomes  small  and  of  too  strong
a  flavour  to  be  of  value.

In  his  book  on  a  journey  through  Upper  Siam  and  Laos,
Carl  Bock 2  gives  an  illustration  of  the  golden  betel  set  of  the

1  A.  W.  Graham,  Siam,  a  Handbook,  1912,  pp.  318-319.

2  Temples  and  Elephants,  London,  1 884,  pp.  24,  1 86.


APPENDIX  II— ROMANCE  OF  BETEL-CHEWING  289

King  of  Siam.  It  consists  of  a  number  of  beautifully  carved
boxes  with  pyramidal  tops,  fitting  into  the  upper  portion  of  an
elaborately  made  round  box  which  contains  the  betel  leaves.

As  in  India,  the  areca-nut  plays  a  conspicuous  part  in
the  wedding  ceremony.  In  fact,  it  actually  gives  the  name  to
the  ceremony  itself.  It  is  served  on  a  metal  or  plaited  tray,
and  must  be  accompanied  by  three  other  articles  :  a  cake,
called  Kanom-cheen ;  a  kind  of  mincemeat,  highly  seasoned,
wrapped  in  plantain  leaves,  and  cooked  by  steaming  ;  and,
thirdly,  the  sirih  leaf  and  red  lime.  These  are  all  termed
Kan  mak — literally,  "  a  basin  of  betel-nut  " — and  this  is  the
common  Siamese  name  for  a  wedding.  "  Like  the  Siamese,"
says  Bock,1  "  the  Laosians  are  perpetually  chewing.  Whether
they  are  busy  or  idle,  they  chew  :  whether  they  sit  or  walk,
they  chew.  Teeth  or  no  teeth,  every  Laosian,  from  almost
infancy  to  old  age,  chews  betel.  The  toothless  old  folks
assist  nature  by  placing  the  betel-nut  with  the  accompany-
ing ingredients  into  a  small  mortar — a  sort  of  hybrid  between
a  child's  popgun  and  a  syringe — -which  they  always  carry
with  them ;  a  few  strokes  of  the  rod  suffice  to  crush  the  nuts
and  reduce  them  to  a  pulpy  mass  warranted  not  to  hurt  the
softest  gums."

Without  quoting  from  further  works  on  Siam2  we  will
travel  south  to  the  Malay  Peninsula,  where  betel-chewing  is
universal.

The  Malay  Peninsula

All  Malays  chew  betel,  and  the  pagan  tribes  of  the
Peninsula  have  learned  the  habit  to  a  certain  extent  from
their  overlords.

Skeat  and  Blagden3  give  several  instances  of  this.  Thus
the  Mantra  and  Besisi  smoke  tobacco  and  chew  betel,  or,  as
a  substitute,  cassia  leaves,  together  with  gambier  and  lime,
which  they  obtain  by  barter  from  the  Malays  of  the  coast.
Betel  is  only  sparingly  used,  however,  among  most  of  the

1  Op.  cil.,  pp.  254,  255.

2  See  F.  A.  Neale,  Narrative  of  a  Residence  at  the  Capital  of  the  Kingdom
of  Siam,  pp.  153-155  ;  J.  G.  D.  Campbell,  Siam  in  the  Twentieth  Century,  pp.  146-
147;  A.  C.  Carter,  The  Kingdom  of  Siam,  New  York  and  London,  1904,
pp.  166-167  ;  and  W.  A.  Graham,  Siam,  two  vols.,  London,  1924,  vol.  ii,  pp.  27,
28,  32.  Useful  information  will  also  be  found  in  an  anonymous  article  in  Notes
and  Queries  on  China  and  Japan,  September  1868,  pp.  136-139.

3  Pagan  Races  of  the  Malay  Peninsula,  vol.  i,  p.  93.

VOL.   VIII.  T


290  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

Semang  tribes.  The  Perak  Sakai  are  exceedingly  fond  of
tobacco  and  betel,  the  leaf  of  a  wild  betel,  chambai,  being
used  when  the  Piper  catechu  is  unobtainable.  Ridley  x  says
that  several  wild  pepper  leaves  are  used  as  substitutes  for
the  betel  leaf.  He  has  seen  Selangor  Sakai  near  Kuala
Lumpur  cut  off  long  strips  of  bark  from  Piper  argenteum,  with
the  object  of  chewing  them.  A  portion  only  of  the  bark  was
taken  in  each  case,  so  that  the  plant  might  not  be  killed.2

The  Benua-Jakun  also  chew  betel,  but  not  to  excess  like
the  Malays.3

Mr  Skeat  refers  me  to  his  remarks  on  the  use  of  betel  leaf
in  Malay  marriages.4  The  leaf  (sirih)  is  sent  to  typify  the
formal  proposal  of  marriage.  One  of  the  youth's  representa-
tives, going  with  others  to  meet  the  girl's  parents,  takes  a
betel-leaf  tray  furnished  with  the  usual  betel-chewing  appli-
ances, and  invites  the  parents  to  partake  of  betel,  saying,
before  witnesses  :  "  This  is  a  pledge  of  your  daughter's
betrothal."  The  passing  of  betel  leaf  between  the  families
signifies  the  formal  acceptance.  A  regular  exchange  of
presents  takes  place  ;  formerly,  the  woman  would  occasion-
ally carve  a  chain,  consisting  of  three  or  four  links  out  of  a
single  areca-nut,  in  which  case  the  prospective  bridegroom  was
supposed  to  redeem  it  by  the  payment  of  as  many  dollars  as
there  were  links.  The  areca-nut  presented  on  these  occasions
would  be  wrapped  up  in  a  gradation  of  three  beautifully
worked  cloths,  not  unlike  "  d'oyleys  "  in  general  appearance.
Among  the  articles  of  ordinary  wedding  furniture  is  a  betel
tray  placed  inside  the  bed-curtain.  Presentation  "  betel-leaf
trees  "  were  formerly  carried  in  procession  at  weddings,  also  the
blossom-spikes  of  the  coco-nut  and  areca-nut  palms  in  vases,
along  with  the  many  other  things.

The  great  importance  of  betel  as  a  pledge  of  courtesy,
hospitality  and  good-fellowship  entered  so  much  into  the
social  life  of  the  Malays,  that  definite  fines  were  enumerated
in  the  Malaya  code  for  any  such  breach  of  etiquette :

"  Shall  the  courtesy  of  offering  betel  be  not  returned,  it
is  a  great  offence  to  be  expiated  by  the  offenders  going  to  ask

1  See  his  important  work,  The  Flora  of  the  Malay  Peninsula,  5  vols.,
London,  1922-1925.  The  sections  on  Piper  betle  and  areca  catechu  will  be
found  in  vol.  iii,  p.  40,  and  vol.  v,  p.  4,  respectively.

2  Skeat  and  Blagden,  op.  cit.y  vol.  i,  p.  122,  122/*2.

3  Ibid.,  pp.  129,  133.

4  Malay  Magic,  pp.  365-367,  374.


APPENDIX  II— ROMANCE  OF  BETEL-CHEWING  291

pardon  with  an  offering  of  boiled  rice  and  a  betel  stand ;  if
the  neglect  be  committed  towards  the  headman,  it  is  greatly
aggravated,  and  besides  the  aforesaid  offering,  the  offender
shall  do  obeisance  and  be  fined  ten  mas  ;  if  previous  to  a
marriage,  or  other  ceremony,  the  customary  offering  of  betel
be  not  sent,  giving  notice  thereof  to  headman  and  elders,
the  party  shall  be  fined  the  offering  of  boiled  rice  and  a  betel
stand  ;  shall  a  headman  give  a  feast  to  his  dependents  and
omit  this  etiquette,  he  shall  be  entitled  not  to  the  name
of  penghulu,  but  of  tuah-tuah  only.  At  circumcisions  and
ear-boring,  too,  he  who  has  not  received  the  customary
offering  of  betel  cannot  be  considered  to  have  had  a  proper
invitation."

R.  O.  Winstedt,  who  quotes  the  above  in  a  paper  on  Malay
life  and  customs,1  says  that  the  betel  quid  was  the  Malay
valentine,  "  and  the  highest  favour  that  could  be  bestowed
on  a  subject  from  a  prince's  hand,  or  rather  mouth.  But
the  younger  generation  no  longer  admires  the  red  saliva  and
the  teeth-blackening  effect,  and  so  has  discarded  betel  for
4  Cycle '  cigarettes  and  the  Burma  cheroot :  perhaps  a  more
liberal  diet  and  the  cultivation  of  a  more  sensitive  palate  has
hastened  its  disuse."

Mr  Ridley,  in  course  of  correspondence,  has  given  me
many  curious  bits  of  information  about  betel  in  Malay  :  when
about  to  descend  a  stream  containing  dangerous  rapids,  it  is
correct  to  perform  a  sacrifice  to  the  spirit  of  the  waters.  It
is  safest  to  offer  a  white  chicken,  but,  if  one  is  not  handy,  a
chew  of  betel  is  a  good  substitute.  "  I  once  went  down  the
Perak  river  rapids  on  a  raft  of  bamboos,"  says  Mr  Ridley,  in
a  letter  to  me,  "  and  it  is  both  exciting  and  risky.  The  old
Malay  who  conducted  our  raft,  which  went  first  (we  had  three
rafts),  before  we  started  made  up  a  '  chew '  consisting  of  lime,
gambier  ,areca-nut,  and  betel  leaf.  He  then  declaimed  a
long  incantation  and  hurled  the  ■  chew  '  into  the  water  as  an
offering  to  the  demon  of  the  river."  Among  curious  uses
to  which  areca-nut  is  put  may  be  mentioned  that  in  cases  of
difficult  labour.  An  old  woman  fills  her  mouth  with  small
pieces  of  broken  nut  and  spits  it  up  the  vagina  of  the  ex-
pectant mother.  The  idea  seems  to  be  one  of  suggestion —
just  as  the  betel-chew  produces  an  increased  flow  of  saliva,  so
will  the  desired  result  be  brought  about.

1  Papers  on  Malay  Subjects,  part  2,  The  Circumstances  of  Malay  Life,  Kuala
Lumpur,  1909,  pp.  60-6 1.


292  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

Some  further  curious  customs  are  given  in  a  recent  article,
"Notes  on  Malay  Magic,"  by  R.  O.  Winstedt.1  If  a  child  is
taken  out  in  the  late  afternoon,  the  lobes  of  its  ears  and  the
crown  of  its  head  are  smeared  with  betel- juice,  whose  redness
spirits  fear.  And  at  the  same  hour  a  Perak  woman  will  walk
round  a  house  where  young  children  are  and  spit  out  yellow
turmeric  at  seven  places.  At  a  Malay  burial  betel  is  often
put  inside  the  grave  for  the  use  of  the  deceased  in  the  next
world.  For  the  uses  of  betel  in  Malayan  folklore  see  Overbeck,
Malayan  Branch  Roy.  As.  Soc.  Journ.,  vol.  ii,  pt.  iii,  1924,
pp.  283,  284,  and  vol.  iii,  pt.  iii,  December  1925,  pp.  22,  23,
25,  26  and  28.

The  East  Indian  Archipelago2

The  whole  of  this  wide  area  can  be  described  as  a  betel-
chewing  region.  Even  if  space  permitted,  it  would  be
superfluous  to  quote  most  of  the  accounts  of  the  custom,  as
they  nearly  all  are  mere  repetitions  of  previous  observers.
Nearly  every  traveller  and  missionary,  since  the  days  of  Raffles
and  Marsden,  have  had  something  to  say  on  the  subject.

I  shall  therefore  avoid,  as  far  as  possible,  quoting  accounts
which  give  us  no  new  information.

Sumatra

Of  the  early  accounts  of  betel-chewing  in  Sumatra  the
most  interesting  and  reliable  is  undoubtedly  that  given  by
Thomas  Bowrey  (1669-1679).    In  describing  Achin  he  says  3  r

"  The  Betelee  Areca  is  here  in  great  plenty  and  much
better  then  in  many  Other  countries  of  the  East  and  South
Seas.  Very  few  houses  here  but  have  Severall  trees  of  it
growinge  that  beare  all  the  yeare  longe,  and  the  inhabitants
in  Generall  doe  Eat  thereof,  prepared  thus  :  They  cutt  the
Areca  nut  into  very  thin  Slices,  and  put  about  one  halfe  of  a
nut  into  their  mouth,  and  then  one  betelee  leafe  or  two  (ac-
cordinge  as  they  are  in  bignesse),  and  Spread  a  little  qualified

1  Malayan  Branch  Roy.  As.  Soc.  Jour.,  vol.  iii,  pt.  iii,  December  1925r
p.  11.

2  I  use  this  term  in  preference  to  "  Malay  Archipelago,"  as  I  mean  it  to
exclude  the  Malay  Peninsula,  and  to  include  Sumatra,  Java,  Timor,  Borneo,.
Celebes,  the  Philippines,  and  the  Moluccas.  I  treat  both  Micronesia  and
Melanesia  under  separate  headings.

3  Countries  Round  the  Bay  of  Bengal,  edited  by  Sir  R.  C.  Temple,  Hakluyt
Society,  1905,  pp.  304-306.


APPENDIX  II— ROMANCE  OF  BETEL-CHEWING   293

lime  thereon,  which  by  them  is  called  Chenam,  which  folded
up  together  they  eat  with  the  Nut,  which  after  a  little  Chew-
ing doth  produce  very  much  Liquorish  moisture  in  the  mouth,
which  for  the  most  part  they  Swallow  downe,  and  after  a  good
while  chewinge  untill  it  is  dry,  they  spit  it  out  and  take  more
that  is  fresh,  and  thus  will  they  almost  all  day  longe  chew
betelee  Areca.  They  hold  it  good  for  the  Stomach,  and
keepinge  the  breath  Sweet,  the  latter  of  which  I  am  very
well  Satisfied  in,  but  if  the  Nut  be  green,  which  here  is
very  much  in  Use,  they  onely  cutt  the  nutt  in  2  pieces  and
paringe  off  a  little  of  the  green  rine,  eat  it  with  betelee  as
the  Other,  which  doth  eat  much  more  pleasant  then  the  Old
Ones  doe.

"  The  Leafe  is  the  betelee,  a  broad  leafe  not  very  much
Unlike  to  an  Ivie  leafe,  only  Somethinge  thinner,  and  groweth
resemblinge  the  Vine,  as  followeth  [see  Plate  XVII,  facing
p.  308].

"  Areca,  vizt.  commonly  called  betelee  Nut,  doth  grow
Upon  a  very  comely  Streight  and  Slender  tree,  taperinge  in
joynts,  and  the  nutt  groweth  out  of  the  body  thereof  below
the  branches  as  followeth  [see  Plate  XVII,  as  above].  It  is  a
very  hard  wood,  and  much  Used  by  many  in  India  to  make
lances  and  pikes  On."

In  describing  the  reception  by  the  Queen,  Bowrey  speaks  1
of  her  "  Great  Gold  betelee  box  as  bigge  as  one  of  [the]
eunuchs  can  well  beare  in  his  arms,  brought  downe  and
placed  before  them,  and  they  must  eat  thereof,  although
never  Soe  little,  which  is  accompted  as  great  an  honour  here,
as  knighthood  in  the  Courts  of  European  Kings  there."

It  is  interesting  to  compare  the  above  descriptions
with  those  given  by  William  Dampier  when  discussing  the
products  of  Mindanao  in  the  Philippines,  and  Tonquin.  (See
later,  p.  301  et  seq.)

Turning  to  modern  accounts  Hurgronje  ■  states  that  the
use  of  the  betel  leaf  (ranub)  with  its  accessories  (pineung,
gapu,  gambe — areca-nut,  lime  and  gambier — bakong  and  sundry
odoriferous  herbs)  is  absolutely  universal.  It  figures  both
in  betrothal  and  marriage  ceremonies,  while  the  areca-nut
as  one  of  the  means  of  pronouncing  a  divorce  (taleue\  from
the  Arab,  taldq)  is  for  the  husband  to  take  three  fragments  of

1  Op.  cit.,  pp.  309-310.

2  The  Achehnese,  translated  by  A.  W.  S.  O' Sullivan,  Ley  den  and  London,
1906,  p.  32.


294  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

ripe  areca-nut  and  hand  them  over  one  by  one  with  a  kind  of
dignified  anger  to  the  wife  with  the  words  "  one  taleue\  two
taleu'e\  three  taleue\  thou  art  to  me  but  as  a  sister  in  this
world  and  the  next."  Thereupon  they  give  notice  of  the
dissolution  of  the  marriage  to  the  teungku  [title  given  to  those
who  hold  an  office  connected  with  religion].

The  idea  of  divorce  is  thus  intimately  connected  in  the
minds  of  women  with  these  three  pieces  of  areca-nut.  When
particularly  angry  with  her  husband,  a  woman  will  ask  him
to  give  her  "the  three  bits  of  areca-nut."1  It  sometimes
happens  that  a  person  who  has  just  paid  a  visit  to  a  grave
is  seized  with  a  colic,  or  sits  down  and  behaves  as  though
doting.  He  is  then  said  to  be  seumapa,  meaning  that  a  dead
person  has  addressed  him  or  greeted  him.  In  such  cases  the
sufferer  is  bespewed  with  charmed  sirih  spittle,  a  universally
recognised  remedy  for  many  ailments  in  Acheh.  Should  this
red  spittle  turn  yellowish  in  hue  on  his  body,  the  conjecture
that  he  is  seumapa  becomes  a  certainty.2

Areca-nut  is  used  in  one  way  or  another  for  the  cure  of
nearly  every  illness.  In  the  case  of  cholera  the  nut  is
pounded  and  the  extract  drunk  in  rice-water.

The  most  recent  information  on  betel-chewing  in  Sumatra
is  to  be  found  in  Collet's  Terres  et  Peuples  de  Sumatra,
Amsterdam,  1925.  The  first  general  description  appears  on
p.  223  as  follows  :

"  En  revanche,  la  chique  de  sirih  joue  un  role  fondamental.
Ce  masticatoire  se  compose  d'un  fragment  de  noix  d'arec,
d'un  morceau  de  gambier,  d'un  soupgon  de  chaux  vive  blanche
et  d'une  pincee  de  tabac  enveloppes  dans  une  feuille  fraiche
de  sirih  (piper  bettel),  pliee  selon  des  regies  immuables.  Le
betel,  dont  le  principe  actif  est  une  sorte  de  piperine,  agit  sur
le  systeme  nerveux  comme  un  narcotique  leger.  La  salive
trop  abondante  pour  ne  pas  nuire  a  l'organisme,  communique
une  couleur  pourpre  tout  a  fait  repulsive,  aux  levres  et  a  la
cavite  buccale."

In  another  passage  on  p.  236,  in  view  of  what  has  previ-
ously been  said  about  the  five  fruits,  it  is  interesting  to  note
that  the  ingredients  of  a  "chew"  are,  in  Sumatra,  called  the
"  five  brothers,"  referring  to  the  betel  leaf,  the  areca-nut,
lime,  gambier,  and  tobacco.

Mr  Blagden  tells  me  that  the  above  are  the  five  recognised

1  Hurgronje,  op.  cit,  p.  36*9.

2  Op.  cit.,  p.  4,13.


APPENDIX  II— ROMANCE  OF  BETEL-CHEWING   295

ingredients  throughout  the  whole  of  Malaya.  The  inclusion
of  tobacco  points,  of  course,  to  the  recent  date  of  at  least  one
of  the  five  ingredients,  but  I  have  no  reason  to  doubt  that  the
number  still  reflects  the  influence  of  Hinduism  and  Buddhism
in  the  Eastern  Archipelago :

"  Comme  dans  toute  la  Malaisie,  la  presentation  du  sirih
■ — les  '  cinq  freres  '  d'apres  le  nombre  des  ingredients  de  la
chique  de  betel- — vient  au  premier  rang  des  rites  de  l'hospi-
talite  entre  indigenes.  Au  point  de  vue  de  ceremonial,  le
role  de  ce  masticatoire  implique  l'agrement  ou  le  refus  :  il
reste  le  commencement,  la  source  sociale,  l'amorce  rituelle  de
toute  conversation — Kapala  Adat,  Kapala  Bahasa — en  meme
temps  que  Toffre  de  la  cigarette  tronconique  roulee  dans  une
feuille  de  mai's.  Jamais  non  plus  on  n'oublie  de  presenter  une
natte  au  visiteur  pour  qu'il  s'y  accroupisse."

He  gives  (p.  311)  a  full  description  of  betel-boxes  and
the  different  implements  they  contain.  He  also  mentions  the
use  of  betel  at  both  marriage  and  death  ceremonies  (see
pp.  330,  367).

Java

An  early  description  of  chewing  is  that  given  by  Francois
Leguat1  in  1697:  "Every  one  knows  what  the  Betel  Leaves,
and  Arequa  Nuts  are,  which  all  the  natives  of  this  Island,
both  Men,  Women,  and  Children  chew  incessantly  .  .  .  ,"  and
he  proceeds  to  give  the  usual  account  of  the  process.

Tavernier 2  (1643-1649)  gives  an  amusing  description  of  the
King  of  Bantam  chewing  betel :

"  On  his  right  side  there  was  an  old  black  woman,  who
held  in  her  hands  a  small  mortar  and  a  pestle  of  gold,  in  which
she  crushed  the  betel  leaves,  with  which  she  mixed  areca-nuts
and  dissolved  seed  pearls.  When  she  saw  that  the  whole
was  well  pounded,  she  placed  her  hand  on  the  King's  back,
who  at  once  opened  his  mouth,  and  she  put  the  betel  in  with
her  fingers  as  women  do  when  they  give  pap  to  their  infants,
because  the  king  had  no  teeth,  for  he  had  eaten  so  much  betel,
and  smoked  so  much  tobacco,  that  his  teeth  had  fallen  out."

Modern  accounts  3  tell  us  little  fresh.     Campbell  (vol.  ii,

1  See  Pasfield  Oliver's  edition  for  the  Hakluyt  Society,  vol.  ii,  pp.  229-230.

2  See  Ball's  edition,  vol.  ii,  p.  354;  or  the  1925  reprinted,  edited  by
W.  Crooke,  vol.  ii,  pp.  275-276.

3  See  e.g.  Scidmore,  Java  the  Garden  of  the  East,  p.  42  ;  Campbell,  Java  :
Past  and  Present,  2  vols,  1915.


296  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

p.  1001)  says  that  if  the  labourer  cannot  afford  a  siri-box,  a
small  supply  of  betel  and  nuts  will  usually  be  found  in  the
corner  of  his  handkerchief.  Every  petty  chief  and  his  wife
have  their  siri-box,  that  of  the  man  being  termed  epok  and
that  of  the  woman  chepuri.  As  in  the  case  of  the  Sultan  of
Jogjakarta,  these  sm-boxes  are  sometimes  of  solid  gold  and
bejewelled  with  rare  workmanship  ;  they  are  then  considered
as  family  heirlooms.  Cardamoms  and  cloves  make  up  part
of  the  articles  in  the  siri-box  of  a  person  of  condition  and
quality.

Borneo

The  methods  of  chewing  in  both  Borneo  and  Celebes
present  no  innovations.  Nearly  all  travel-books  to  the  East
Indies  of  the  nineteenth  century  contain  the  usual  short
account.

Speaking  of  the  Dyaks  (or  Dayaks)  of  Sarawak,  Hose  says
they  are  constantly  chewing  and  have  both  lips  and  teeth
discoloured  with  the  practice.1

Spencer  St  John  gives  us  details  of  the  use  of  the  nut  and
betel  leaf  in  Dyak  betrothals  and  marriages.2

Besides  the  ordinary  attention  which  a  young  man  is  able
to  pay  to  the  girl  he  desires  to  make  his  wife,  there  is  a  peculiar
testimony  of  regard  which  is  worthy  of  note.  About  nine  or
ten  at  night,  when  the  family  is  supposed  to  be  asleep  within
the  mosquito  curtains  in  the  private  apartment,  the  lover
quietly  slips  back  the  bolt  by  which  the  door  is  fastened  on
the  inside  and  enters  the  room  on  tiptoe.  He  goes  to  the
curtains  of  his  beloved,  gently  awakes  her,  and  she,  on  hear-
ing who  it  is,  rises  at  once,  and  they  sit  conversing  together
and  making  arrangements  for  the  future  in  the  dark  over  a
plentiful  supply  of  sirih  leaf  and  areca-nut,  which  it  is  the
gentleman's  duty  to  provide.  If,  when  awakened,  the  young
lady  arises  and  accepts  the  prepared  areca-nut,  happy  is  the
lover,  for  his  suit  is  in  a  fair  way  to  prosper,  but  if,  on  the
other  hand,  she  rises  and  says  :  "  Be  good  enough  to  blow
up  the  fire,"  or  "to  light  the  lamp,"  then  his  hopes  are  at  an
end,  as  that  is  the  usual  form  of  dismissal.  Of  course,  if  this
kind  of  nocturnal  visit  is  frequently  repeated  the  parents  do

1  Hose  and  McDougall,  Pagan  Tribes  of  Borneo,  vol.  i,  pp.  32,  60.  See  also
Hose,  Natural  Man,  London,  1 926,  p.  94.

2  Life  in  the  Forests  of  the  Far  East,  2nd  edition,  2  vols.,  London,  1863,
quoted  by  Hickson,  A  Naturalist  in  North  Celebes,  p.  274  et  seq.


APPENDIX  II— ROMANCE  OF  BETEL-CHEWING   297

not  fail  to  discover  it,  although  it  is  a  point  of  honour  among
them  to  take  no  notice  of  the  visit,  and,  if  they  approve  of
him,  matters  take  their  course ;  but  if  not,  they  use  their
influence  with  their  daughter  to  ensure  the  utterance  of  the
fatal:  "  Please  blow  up  the  fire."

When  the  courtship  is  satisfactorily  concluded,  and  it  is
decided  that  the  girl  shall  be  definitely  asked  in  marriage,
then,  with  the  parents'  consent,  a  day  is  fixed  upon  which
they  shall  meet  together  to  discuss  the  harta,  or  price  that  is
to  be  paid  by  the  young  man  for  his  bride.

As  a  preliminary  to  this,  a  present  of  nine  areca-nuts,  nine
sirih-fruits  and  some  gold  or  silver  ornaments  has  to  be  sent
to  the  girl.  In  the  olden  times  of  the  head-hunters  a  fresh
human  head  was  an  indispensable  preliminary  to  any  marriage
negotiations  ;  but  this  abominable  practice  was  effectually
stamped  out  by  the  Dutch  Government  many  years  ago.  It
is  probable  that  this  ghastly  present  was  intended  not  only
as  a  proof  of  personal  bravery  on  the  part  of  the  young  hero,
but  as  a  promise  that  in  the  world  of  spirits  the  young  bride
would  have  at  least  one  slave  to  wait  upon  her.1  The  harta
was  in  former  times  usually  paid  in  land,  houses,  sagoweer-
trees,  pigs,  cloths,  etc.  Nowadays  it  is  often  paid  in  money,
one  thousand  guilders  (£84)  being  about  the  highest  harta
known.2

At  the  appointed  time  the  members  of  the  young  man's
family  repair  to  the  house  of  the  bride,  bringing  with  them  the
harta,  and  after  that  comes  the  bridegroom  himself.  They
mount  the  steps  of  the  house  and  take  their  places  at  a
long  table  in  the  principal  room,  the  bride  and  bridegroom
sitting  side  by  side  at  one  end  of  it.  At  first  everything  is
very  stiff  and  formal.  Food  is  served,  but  not  a  word  is
spoken  by  the  young  couple ;  not  a  muscle  of  their  faces
moves ;  not  even  a  stray  glance  passes  from  one  to  the
other.

Then  comes  the  priest,  who  takes  a  piece  of  areca-nut  and
solemnly  chews  it  for  some  time  with  the  sirlh  and  lime  ;  this
he  removes  from  his  own  mouth  and  puts  it  into  the  bride-
groom's mouth,  who  continues  the  process  for  some  time  and
passes  it  on  to  the  bride.

1  G.  A.  Wilken,  "Jets  over  Schedelvereering  bij  de  volken  van  den
Indischen  Archipel/'  Bijdragen  tot  de  Taal,  Land  en  Volkenkunde  van  Nederlandsch
Jndief  vol.  iv,  1889,  p.  89.

2  N.  Graafland,  De  Minahassa,  Rotterdam,  1867-1869.


298  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

When  this  is  done  the  walian  (or  balian- — i.e.  "he  who
turns  the  spirit " — a  priest)  gives  the  bride  and  bridegroom
rice  and  pork  to  eat  and  sagoweer  wine  to  drink,  and  the  official
part  of  the  ceremony  is  concluded.  At  this  moment  the
couple  retire  to  the  nuptial  chamber,  while  the  guests  amuse
themselves  by  feasting,  drinking  and  singing,  and  the  priest
implores  the  empungs  (ancestral  heroes,  gods  or  spirits)  to  pour
blessings  on  the  happy  pair.

In  Dayak  Kampongs  one  notices  numerous  upright
pillars,  usually  carved  into  human  form.  They  are  known
by  the  name  of  kapatongs,  and  are  erected  as  guardians  of
the  dead.  One  of  the  first  duties  of  surviving  relatives  is
to  make  the  kapatong,  the  soul  of  which  waits  on  and  guards
the  soul  of  the  departed  one.

A  woman  carrying  a  betel-box  is  believed  to  watch  well,
because  when  chewing  betel  one  does  not  sleep ;  but  in  her
case  there  must  always  be  a  male  kapatong  near  by,  for  a
woman  alone  is  not  sufficient  protection.  Betel  makes  the
mouth  and  lips  beautiful  in  the  estimation  of  the  natives,
therefore  many  kapatongs  are  seen  with  betel-box  in  hand.1

Celebes

Throughout  Celebes  the  custom  plays  a  very  important
part  in  the  social  life  of  the  inhabitants.  Many  accounts
could  be  quoted,  but  it  will  suffice  to  quote  from  that  given
by  Hickson,2  who  deals  almost  exclusively  with  Minahassa,
the  most  northerly  province  of  the  island :

"  The  areca-nut 3  plays  an  important  part  in  courtship
in  Minahassa,  as  it  does  all  over  the  Archipelago.

"  When  the  young  Minahassa  falls  in  love  with  a  young
woman  he  sends  her  a  prepared  areca-nut.  If  she  accepts  it,
it  is  taken  as  a  sign  of  encouragement,  and  the  young  man

1  See  Carl  Lumholtz,  Through  Central  Borneo,  vol.  i,  p.  116,  and  vol.  ii,
p.  352.  For  further  short  notices  see  H.  Ling  Roth,  Natives  of  Sarawak  and
British  North  Borneo,  pp.  100,  394-,  395;  H.  Low,  Sarawak:  its  Inhabitants
and  Productions,  1848,  pp.  41,  42;  A.  C.  Hadden,  Head-Hunters :  Black,  White
and  Brown,  p.  217.

2  S.  J.  Hickson,  A  Naturalist  in  North  Celebes,  London,  1889,  pp.  273-274
and  303-304.  See  also  pp.  332-333  ;  and  the  useful  bibliography  of  one  hundred
and  four  items  on  pp.  369-375.

3  I  have  altered  the  word  "  betel"  to  "areca"  whenever  it  is  incorrectly
used.


APPENDIX  II— ROMANCE  OF  BETEL-CHEWING   299

sends  an  emissary  asking  her  to  send  him  one.  If  she  refuses
to  do  this,  or  sends  him  one  which  is  not  prepared  for  chew-
ing, then  it  is  a  sign  that  he  is  rejected  ;  but  if  she  wishes
to  become  his  wife  she  sends  him  a  well-grown  nut,  with
the  necessary  ingredients,  and  the  lover  knows  that  he  is
accepted.

"  Thus  the  word  '  to  court  '  is  in  Tombulu  language  paha-
leijaleijan  lemaan  and  in  Tompakewasch  pangilengilekkan
tenga,  which  means  c  to  continually  ask  for  areca-nut  of  one
another.'

"  We  constantly  find  the  areca-nut  mentioned  in  the  love
songs  and  romances  :

1  Ajohan-o-mej  tetengaan  sambe  eh  rumojoro
Aku  rumojor-o  mange-mo  witi  walenamij .'

'  Give  me  the  areca-nut  box,  my  friend,  and  I  will  go.
I  will  go  below,  and  I  will  go  to  our  house.'

"  The  concluding  portion  of  one  of  their  old  love  songs  tells
us  of  the  reconciliation  of  the  two  lovers  :

"  She :  If  you  return  to  your  former  feelings,  then  shall  I
have  better  thoughts  of  you.

"He:  Love  shines  through  your  words,  and  on  that
account  my  thoughts  return  to  you.

"  She  :  If  your  words  are  true,  dearest,  I  need  have  no  more
heartache  for  you.

"  He :  Weeping,  cut  the  areca-nut  in  two.  Weep  no  more,
for  I  will  truly  take  you  to  me.

"She:  A  young  areca-nut  I  will  cut  in  two  for  you,  my
young  love.  The  young  areca-nut  will  I  cut  in  two,  for  I  love
you.

"  He :  Place  one  half  of  the  young  areca  in  my  mouth,  and
my  feelings  will  be  ever  with  you."

In  his  work  on  Central  Celebes,  Grubauer *  gives  an  inter-
esting description  of  the  betel-bags,  and  reproduces  eighteen
specimens  on  p.  482.  They  exhibit  a  great  variety  of  beauti-
ful designs.  For  the  most  part  they  are  oblong,  and  usually
have  two  tassels  at  the  base  corners.  The  particularly  well-
worked  specimens  date  back  many  years,  and  it  would  seem,

1  A.  Grubauer,  Unter  Kopfjagern  in  Central- Celebes,  Leipzig,  1913,
pp.  482,  483  and  255.


300  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

as  we  saw  was  the  case  in  Ceylon,  that  few  bags  with  such
elaborate  work  are  being  made  to-day.  The  colours  used  in
the  dyeing  are  derived  from  orchids  and  various  minerals
found  locally.

Grubauer  also  gives  a  plate  (on  p.  489)  showing  areca-
nut  cutters.  They  display  excellent  workmanship,  and  fit
neatly  into  a  small  case  which  allows  the  handles  to  remain
uncovered.  The  women's  cutters  differ  slightly  in  design
from  those  used  by  the  men.

Philippine  Islands

Turning  to  the  Philippine  Islands,  one  of  the  earliest  men-
tions of  areca-nuts  is  to  be  found  in  the  Chu-fan-chi,  already
quoted  on  p.  256.  The  author  describes  the  chief  products
of  the  country  as  yellow  wax,  cotton,  pearls,  tortoise-shell,
medicinal  areca-nuts  and  yu-ta  cloth.

One  of  the  first  detailed  accounts  of  chewing  is  that  given
by  De  Morga  at  the  end  of  the  sixteenth  century.  He
describes  the  betel  leaf  and  the  areca-nut  as  if  they  both
came  from  the  same  tree.  As  the  main  part  of  the  account
tells  us  nothing  new  I  shall  merely  give  extracts.

"  The  ordinary  dainty  in  all  these  islands,"  he  says,
according  to  Stanley's  translation,1  "  and  in  many  kingdoms
of  the  mainland,  of  these  parts  is  the  buyo.  This  is  made
from  a  tree  which  has  a  leaf  of  the  pattern  of  the  mulberry
leaf,  and  the  fruit  is  like  an  acorn  of  an  oak,  and  the  inside
is  white ;  this  fruit,  which  is  called  bonga,  is  cut  lengthwise  in
parts,  and  each  one  of  these  is  put  into  a  wrapper  or  envelope,
which  is  made  of  the  leaf,  and  a  powder  of  quicklime  is  put
inside  with  the  bonga,  and  this  composition  is  put  into  the
mouth  and  chewed  ...  all  their  treats  and  luxury  consist
in  dishes  and  salvers  for  buyos  much  gilt,  and  well  arranged,
as  chocolate  is  served  in  New  Spain ;  in  these  buyos  poison
has  been  given  to  many  persons,  of  which  they  have  died
poisoned,  and  this  is  a  very  common  occurrence.

"  The  natives,  when  they  go  out  of  their  houses,  especially
the  great  men,  carry  with  them  for  state  and  show  their  small
boxes  which  are  called  buccetas  of  buyos  ready  made  up,  and
the  leaf  and  nut  and  quicklime  separately  ;  with  these  curious
boxes  of  metal  and  other  materials,  and  scissors  and  other
tools  for  making  buyos  with  care  and  neatness,  wherever  they

1  Issued  by  the  Hakluyt  Society,  1 868,  p.  280  et  seq.


APPENDIX  II— ROMANCE  OF  BETEL-CHEWING    301

stop  they  make  and  use  them,  and  in  the  Parians,  which  are
the  markets,  they  are  sold,  ready  prepared,  and  the  materials
for  making  them."

About  a  hundred  years  later  we  find  a  good  account  given
by  William  Dampier1  during  his  voyage  round  the  world.
He  is  discussing  the  products  of  Mindanao,  and  says  :

"  The  Betel-Nut  is  much  esteemed  here,  as  it  is  in  most
places  of  the  East-Indies.  The  Betel-Tree  grows  like  the
Cabbage-Tree,  but  it  is  not  so  big,  nor  so  high.  The  Body
grows  strait,  about  12  or  14  foot  high  without  Leaf  or  Branch,
except  at  the  Head.  There  it  spreads  forth  long  Branches,
like  other  Trees  of  the  like  nature,  as  the  Cabbage-Tree,  the
Coco-Nut  Tree,  and  the  Palm.  These  Branches  are  about
10  or  12  foot  long,  and  their  stems  near  the  head  of  the  Tree
as  big  as  a  Man's  Arm.  On  the  top  of  the  Tree  among  the
Branches  the  Betel-Nut  grows  on  a  tough  stem  as  big  as  a
Man's  Finger,  in  clusters  much  as  the  Coco-Nuts  do,  and  they
grow  40  or  50  in  a  cluster.  This  Fruit  is  bigger  than  a  Nut-
meg, and  is  much  like  it,  but  rounder.  It  is  much  used  all
over  the  East-Indies.  Their  way  is  to  cut  it  in  four  pieces,
and  wrap  one  of  them  up  in  an  Arek-leaf,  which  they  spread
with  a  soft  Paste  made  of  Lime  or  Plaster,  and  then  chew  it
altogether.  Every  Man  in  these  parts  carries  his  Lime-box
by  his  side,  and  dipping  his  Finger  into  it,  spreads  his  Betel
and  Arek-leaf  with  it.  The  Arek  is  a  small  Tree  or  Shrub,  of
a  green  Bark,  and  the  Leaf  is  long  and  broader  than  a  Willow.
They  are  packt  up  to.  sell  into  Parts  that  have  them  not,  to
chew  with  the  Betel.  The  Betel-Nut  is  most  esteem'd  when
it  is  young,  and  before  it  grows  hard,  and  then  they  cut  it
only  in  two  pieces  with  the  green  Husk  or  Shell  on  it.  It  is
then  exceedingly  juicy,  and  therefore  makes  them  spit  much.
It  tastes  rough  in  the  Mouth,  and  dies  the  Lips  red,  and  makes
the  Teeth  black,  but  it  preserves  them,  and  cleanseth  the
Gums.  It  is  also  accounted  very  wholsom  for  the  Stomach ;
but  sometimes  it  will  cause  great  Giddiness  in  the  Head  of
those  that  are  not  us'd  to  chew  it.  But  this  is  the  Effect
only  of  the  old  Nut,  for  the  young  Nuts  will  not  do  it.  I
speak  of  my  own  experience."

1  A  New  Voyage  Round  the  World,  London,  1697,  pp.  318-319.  I  have
just  brought  out  (1927)  a  new  edition  of  this  important  work  as  the  second
publication  of  the  Argonaut  Press.  It  contains  a  really  excellent  Introduction
by  Sir  Albert  Gray,  President  of  the  Hakluyt  Society.  The  betel  reference
will  be  found  on  page  219.


302  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

Readers  will  at  once  see  that  Dampier  has  confused  the
areca-nut  with  the  betel  leaf.  However,  he  soon  discovered
his  mistake,  and  when  writing  on  Tonquin,  in  his  next  work,
Voyages  and  Discoveries  (p.  52),  made  the  necessary  correc-
tions. After  repeating  the  manner  of  preparing  a  "  chew  "  he
speaks  of  the  betel-boxes  :

"  The  poorer  Sort  carry  a  small  Pouchful  about  with
them  :  But  the  Mandarins,  or  great  Men,  have  curious  oval
Boxes,  made  purposely  for  this  use,  that  will  hold  fifty  or
sixty  Betle  Pellets.  These  Boxes  are  neatly  lackered  and
gilded,  both  Inside  and  Outside,  with  a  Cover  to  take  off ;
and  if  any  Stranger  visits  them,  especially  Europeans,  they
are  sure,  among  other  good  Entertainment,  to  be  treated
with  a  Box  of  Betle.  The  Attendant  that  brings  it,  holds  it
to  the  left  Hand  of  the  Stranger  ;  who  therewith  taking  off
the  Cover,  takes  with  his  right  Hand  the  Nuts  out  of  the  Box.
'Twere  an  Affront  to  take  them  or  give  or  receive  any  thing
with  the  left  Hand,  which  is  confined  all  over  India  to  the
viler  Uses.1

"It  is  accounted  good  Breeding  to  commend  the  Taste
or  Neatness  of  this  Present ;  and  they  all  love  to  be  flatter'd.
You  thereby  extreamly  please  the  Master  of  the  House,  and
ingage  him  to  be  your  Friend  :  and  afterwards  you  may  be
sure  he  will  not  fail  to  send  his  Servant  with  a  Present  of
Betle  once  in  two  or  three  Mornings,  with  a  Complement
to  know  how  you  do.  This  will  cost  you  a  small  gratuity  to
the  Servant,  who  joyfully  acquaints  his  Master  how  grate-
fully you  received  the  Present :  and  this  still  engages  him
more ;  and  he  will  complement  you  with  great  Respect
whenever  he  meets  you."

Further  descriptions  are  unnecessary.  I  shall  therefore
refer  readers  to  that  enormous  work  on  the  history  of  the
Philippines,  1493-1898,  in  fifty-five  volumes,  by  Blair  and
Robertson.2  The  index  occupies  the  last  two  volumes.  Full
references  to  betel-chewing  will  be  found  in  vol.  liv,  p.  144,
under  the  word  "  Buyo."

1  For  the  unclean  left  hand  among  the  Moslems  see  Burton,  Nights,
vol.  i,  p.  264,  264w3,  and  vol.  iv,  p.  129b1.

2  Published  at  Cleveland,  Ohio,  1903-1909.


APPENDIX  II— ROMANCE  OF  BETEL-CHEWING   303

Southern  China

Betel-chewing  has  been  known  in  Southern  China  from
a  very  early  date,  and  in  all  probability  owes  its  existence  to
the  introduction  of  Buddhism.

One  of  the  early  references  is  to  be  found  in  Nan  shih,  the
biography  of  Liu  Mu-chih  (ob.  417),  which  was  compiled  in
the  seventh  century.

In  c.  15,  fol.  2  v°  we  read1 :

"  Mu-chih  used  to  go  to  his  wife's  brothers'  house  to
sponge  on  them  for  meals.  His  wife  was  ashamed  of  this,
but  could  not  stop  it.  Mu-chih  still  went,  and  after  the  meal
asked  for  areca-nut  (pin-lang).  Mu-chih  [wifej's  brothers
laughed  at  him  and  said  :  '  Areca-nut  makes  food  vanish
[i.e.  accelerates  digestion],  that  is  why  you  are  always
hungry.'  "

In  Tlang  shu,  the  history  of  T'ang,  a.d.  600-900,  is  a
description  of  the  country  of  P'an-p'an  in  the  Southern
Sea,  where  "  at  all  weddings  they  make  presents  of  areca-
nut."

We  get  further  information  from  Ling-wai-tai-ta,  in  which
the  author's  preface  is  dated  16th  November  1178.  In  a
paragraph  on  pin-lang  (c.  8,  fol.  3)  he  says  :  "  The  fruit
grows  on  the  leaves,  fastened  to  them  in  clusters,  as  on  willow
twigs.  When  gathered  in  the  spring  it  is  called  juan-pin-
lang  (or  soft  areca-nuts),  and  is  commonly  known  as  pin-
lang-sien  (or  fresh  areca-nuts)  ;  it  is  then  good  to  chew.
When  gathered  in  the  summer  or  the  autumn  and  dried  it  is
called  mi-pin-lang  (or  rice  areca-nuts).  Preserved  in  salt  it
is  called  yen-pin-lang  (or  salted  areca-nuts).  Small  and
pointed  nuts  are  called  M-sin-pin-lang  (or  chicken  heart
areca-nuts),  large  and  flat  ones  ta-fu-tzi  (or  big  bellies)."

The  above  passage  was  repeated  verbatim  by  Chau  Ju-
Kua  in  his  Chu-fan-chi,2  who  describes  the  pin-lang  as  coming
"  from  several  foreign  countries,3  also  from  the  four  dis-
tricts of  Hai-nan ;  it  is  likewise  found  in  Kiau-chi.  The  tree
resembles  the  coir  palm.  .  .  .  When  chewed,  these  nuts  have

1  I  am  indebted  to  the  Rev.  A.  C.  Moule  for  this  translation,  and  also  for
the  two  following  references.

2  Translated  and  annotated  by  Hirth  and  Rockhill,  pp.  213-214.

3  In  a  report  on  the  trade  of  Canton  in  1834  (p.  451)  it  is  stated  that
most  of  the  "betel"  imported  into  China  came  from  Java,  Malacca  and
Penang.


304  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

the  effect  of  preventing  eructation.  In  San-fo-ts'i  they  make
wine  out  of  the  juice."  He  also  borrows  from  Ling-wai-tai-ta
in  saying  that  the  Customs  at  Canton  and  Ts'iian-chou
derive  an  annual  income  of  several  tens  of  thousands  of  strings
of  cash  from  the  trade  carried  on  in  this  product  by  foreign
ships.  The  "  fresh  nuts  "  and  "  salted  nuts  "  come  from
there,  whereas  the  ki-sin  and  the  ta-fu-tzi  varieties  come
mostly  from  Ma-i  [the  Philippine  Islands].

In  a  chapter  on  Hainan  Chau  Ju-Kua  describes  the
island  as  having  mountains  covered  with  areca-  and  coco-
nut-palms, and  that  the  areca-nuts  are  "  extraordinarily
plentiful."

The  great  Chinese  encyclopaedia,  T'u  Shu  Chi  Ch'eng,
has  several  references  to  areca-nuts  and  betel-chewing.  In
quoting  the  passages  it  must  be  remembered  that  the  en-
cyclopaedia consists  of  long  extracts  or  precis  from  Chinese
works  en  masse,  and  not  of  comprehensive  articles,  such  as  are
found  in  similar  Western  works.

Thus  the  Hsi  hart  nan  fang  ts'ao  mu  chuang  states  that
"  Betel-nut  is  grown  in  Lin-i  [Cambodia  or  Cochin  China],
and  the  natives  prize  it  highly.  When  entertaining  relations
by  marriage,  this  is  the  first  thing  they  offer  them,  and  if  it
is  not  produced  when  they  happen  to  meet,  bad  blood  will
ensue."  The  above  statement  is  repeated  in  CKi  min  yao
shu  and  other  works.  Pen  ts'ao  kang  mu  describes  the  climate
of  the  southern  regions  as  very  damp,  "  and  unless  areca-nut
be  eaten,  there  is  no  way  of  warding  off  malaria.  .  .  .  The
inhabitants  of  Ling-nan  [Kuangtung  and  Tongking]  use
areca-nut  in  place  of  tea  as  a  prophylactic  against  malaria.
Its  virtues  are  fourfold  :  (1)  it  can  make  sober  men  drunk  ;
(2)  it  can  make  drunk  men  sober  ;  (3)  it  can  still  the  pangs
of  hunger  ;   (4)  it  can  give  an  appetite  for  food."

The  above  translations  have  been  kindly  made  for  me  by
Dr  Lionel  Giles,  and  are  from  xx,  285,  of  the  T'u  Shu  Chi
Ch'eng.     (See  his  Index  to  the  Chinese  Encyclopaedia.)

With  regard  to  the  use  of  the  areca-nut  in  Chinese
funerals,  De  Groot  explains 1  how  a  kinsman  or  friend  of  the
family  clears  the  way  through  the  streets  at  the  head  of  the
procession.  When  anything  obstructs  the  passage,  such  as  a
stall  of  goods  for  sale,  or  a  load  set  down  by  a  coolie  for  rest,
he  requests  the  owner  to  remove  it,  at  the  same  time  offering
him,  by  the  hands  of  a  coolie  who  follows  at  his  heels,  a  piece

1  Religious  System  of  China,  vol.  i,  1892,  pp.  153-154  and  205.


APPENDIX  II— ROMANCE  OF  BETEL-CHEWING   305

of  an  areca-nut  and  a  little  wet  lime-dough,  wrapped  in  one  or
two  siri  leaves.  This  coolie,  who  wears  no  mourning,  carries
a  basket  of  these  articles  for  distribution.  In  Southern
China  the  chewing  of  betel  and  siri  as  a  stimulant  seems  to
have  been  very  common  in  bygone  centuries,  but  it  has  now
almost  entirely  died  out,  being  supplanted,  it  would  appear,
by  tobacco-  and  opium-smoking.  Nevertheless,  probably  as
a  survival  of  those  good  old  times,  it  is  still  customary  for
any  man  living  at  variance  with  another,  in  case  he  desires  to
apologise  and  accommodate  matters,  to  send  some  of  these
articles  to  the  latter' s  house,  like  a  flag  of  truce  ;  and  it  would
be  considered  highly  improper  on  the  part  of  the  party  to
whom  the  hand  of  reconciliation  is  tendered  in  this  way  to
refuse  to  accept  the  same.  This  fully  explains  why  betel  and
siri  are  also  distributed  at  funerals.  Indeed,  the  clearer  of
the  road  confesses  himself  in  the  wrong  with  regard  to  the
person  whom  he  disarranges,  and  accordingly  he  immediately
makes  his  apologies.  In  many  instances,  clearing  the  road  is
simply  entrusted  to  the  coolie  alone  ;  at  most  of  the  plainer
funerals  it  is  entirely  omitted.  At  burials  of  the  highest
order  it  is  customary  to  station  men  along  the  road  to  dis-
tribute siri  leaves  and  areca-nuts  amongst  the  notable  persons
walking  in  the  procession.

Though  most  of  them  do  not  partake  of  these  drugs,  it
would  be  inconsistent  with  good  manners  to  refuse  to  accept
them.  So  most  men  just  hold  them  between  their  fingers,
or  give  them  away  to  the  coolies  or  anybody  who  likes
them.

In  the  Chinese  Materia  Medica,  pp.  46-47,  G.  A.  Stuart
refers  to  the  usually  accepted  theory  that  the  Chinese  name
for  areca-nut,  pin-lang,  is  a  transcription  of  the  Malay  pinang,
but  states  that  one  authority,  Li  Shih  Chen,  says  it  means
"  an  honoured  guest,"  and  that  the  characters  in  question  are
used  because  of  the  practice  of  setting  the  betel-box  before
guests.

The  betel-vine  is  said  to  grow  in  South  China  as  far
north  as  Szechuan.  The  leaves  are  used  in  Yunnan  as  a
condiment.

Areca-nuts  form  one  of  the  chief  exports  from  Hainan,
where  there  are  large  groves  of  the  areca-palm,  especially  at
Aichow  and  Lingshui.  The  trees  are  planted  some  fifteen  feet
apart,  and  bear  fruit  from  the  age  of  ten  to  ninety  years.
Their  most  prolific  period  is  between  their  fifteenth  and

VOL.    VIII.  U


306  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

thirtieth  year,  when  one  tree  will  produce  seven  or  eight
hundred  nuts,  valued  at  about  forty  cents.  Large  herds  of
cattle  are  allowed  to  roam  at  will  through  the  plantations,
and  their  manure  serves  to  fertilise  the  soil.  The  groves
are  said  to  be  the  seat  of  malaria,  especially  at  the  season
when  the  trees  are  in  flower.  Hainan  nuts  are  superior  to
those  from  Singapore,  which  are  imported  for  the  purposes
of  adulteration.

In  recent  years  it  appears  that  the  areca-palm  is  culti-
vated in  Hainan  only  on  a  very  small  scale  compared  with
the  extensive  cultivation  in  Indo-China.  The  Chinese  soil
and  climate  are  not  so  suitable  for  its  growth,  owing  to  the
excessive  presence  of  moisture.

Apart  from  the  use  of  areca-nuts  in  Southern  China  for
chewing,  and  their  connection  with  various  ceremonies,  such
as  weddings,  etc.,  to  which  we  have  already  referred,  they
are  also  eaten  in  different  ways.  They  are  generally  cooked
with  chicken  essence  and  served  at  the  end  of  a  meal  as
dessert,  or  else  they  are  sliced  thinly  and  rolled  up  in  green
herbage,  accompanied  by  slices  of  fresh  coco-nut.

In  the  years  1922-1924  the  average  tonnage  of  imported
areca-nuts  was  3175,  while  the  export  for  the  same  years  was
1219.

Micronesia

Micronesia  embraces  the  Pelew,  Caroline,  Marianne  and
Gilbert  groups  of  islands.  Betel-chewing  exists  in  the  first
three  groups,  but  appears  to  be  unknown  in  the  Gilbert
Islands,  where  kava-drinking  is  the  chief  narcotic.  "  There
is  certainly  no  betel-chewing  in  the  Gilbert  or  Ellice  Islands,"
says  Mr  Woodford  (of  the  Solomon  Islands)  in  a  letter  to
me :  "  both  groups  are  merely  coral  atolls  and  the  areca-palm
would  not  grow  there."

The  Pelew  Islands

Accounts  of  the  custom  in  the  Pelew  Islands  seem  very
few  and  far  between.  I  notice,  however,  several  references
in  Keate's  work,  derived  from  the  journals  of  Captain  Henry
Wilson 1 :

1  Account  of  the  Pelew  Islands,  2nd  edit.,  London,  1788,  pp.  299,  311.
Similar  evidence  is  found  in  J.  S.  Kubary,  Etknographische  Beitrage  zur  Kenntniss
des  Karolinen  Archipels,  Leyden,  1895,  p.  165.


APPENDIX  II— ROMANCE  OF  BETEL-CHEWING    307

"  The  Beetle-nut  they  had  in  abundance,  and  made  great
use  of  it,  though  only  when  green  ;  contrary  to  the  practice
of  the  people  of  India  who  never  use  it  but  when  dry."

The  plate  facing  p.  332  shows  a  betel-basket,  without
which  "  no  man  stirred  abroad — the  common  order  of  people
had  a  short  piece  of  bamboo,  in  which  they  carried  the
powdered  chinam,  to  strew  over  the  beetle-nut  before  they
put  it  in  their  mouths.  The  Rupacks,  or  great  people,  had
their  chinam  in  a  long  slender  bamboo  nicely  polished,  and
inlaid  with  pieces  of  shells  at  each  end  ;  and  these  were  often
not  inelegantly  fancied."

As  in  so  many  other  betel-chewing  areas,  the  Pelew
islanders  place  betel  on  the  grave  of  the  deceased,  often  by
the  side  of  coco-nuts,  both  of  which  will  be  wanted  in  the
future  life.

The  Carolines

As  we  proceed  eastwards  from  the  Pelew  Islands  we  are
gradually  approaching  the  kava-drinking  area.  It  is  even
more  difficult  to  determine  exactly  where  these  two  customs
meet  in  Micronesia  than  it  is  in  Melanesia.

A  comparative  study  of  the  overlapping  of  the  two
cultures,  for  so  we  must  designate  them,  as  shown  in  these
two  great  Oceanic  groups  of  islands,  presents  a  most  in-
teresting problem,  which  would  repay  a  much  closer  study
by  anthropologists  than  it  has  as  yet  received.  As  we  shall
shortly  see,  Dr  Rivers  has  studied  the  problem  as  far  as
Melanesia  is  concerned,  but  Micronesia  offers  even  greater
opportunities  for  research.  The  whole  history  of  all  the
Oceanic  peoples  is  involved.

In  Micronesia  the  dividing  line  between  betel-chewing
and  kava-drinking  clearly  falls  in  the  Caroline  Islands.  From
the  evidence  I  have  studied  at  the  Royal  Geographical  Society
I  would  put  it  mid-way  between  Yap  in  the  west  and
Ponape  in  the  east.  It  seems  impossible  to  make  any
more  definite  statement  than  this.  I  feel  sure  that  a  close
examination  of  all  the  Caroline  Islands  would  reveal  in
which  direction  the  encroaching  custom  is  betel-chewing  or
kava-drinking.

The  problem,  however,  is  not  to  be  solved  as  easily  as  this,
for  the  Carolines  afford  paradoxical  evidence.  Thus  in  Yap
the  words  used  for  betel  show  their  Polynesian  origin,  yet
kava-drinking  here  is  unknown.     In  Ponape  and  Kusaie  two


308  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

varieties  of  areca-palm  (katai  and  kotop)  grow  in  abundance
in  the  highlands,  yet  betel-chewing  is  absent  and  kava-
drinking  in  vogue.1

The  Marianne  Islands

The  largest  and  most  important  island  of  the  Marianne
or  the  Ladrones  group  is  Guam.  It  lies  about  1200  miles
east  of  the  Philippines,  and  was  discovered  by  Magellan  in
1521.  Narratives  of  early  navigators  and  accounts  of  con-
temporary Jesuit  missionaries  tell  us  that  the  custom  of
betel-chewing  was  universal,  and  that  the  lime  used  in  the
"  chew  "  was  obtained  by  burning  coral  rock.  Kava,  so
widely  used  throughout  Polynesia,  was  unknown.

To-day  matters  have  changed  but  little,  and  every  native
is  addicted  to  betel-chewing.  Both  the  areca-palm  and  the
betel- vine  had  been  cultivated  on  the  island  before  its  dis-
covery by  Magellan,  while  the  only  other  narcotic  known,
tobacco,  was  introduced  by  the  Spaniards  from  America.
The  areca-palm,  although  frequently  planted  by  the  natives,
also  grows  spontaneously.  Thousands  of  young  plants
may  be  seen,"  says  Safford,  in  his  report  on  Guam,  "  in  the
rich  valleys  of  the  southern  part  of  the  island  where  seeds
have  fallen  from  the  palms." 2  The  betel- vine  occurs  only  in
a  state  of  cultivation,  but  requires  little  care,  the  natives
propagating  it  very  easily  from  cuttings  and  allowing  it  to
creep  upon  stone  walls  and  to  climb  over  trees.

Excellent  illustrations  of  the  areca-palm  and  betel-vine
will  be  found  in  Plates  XXXV  and  LXIII  of  Safford's  work.
He  points  out  that  several  important  plants,  such  as  rice,  the
betel-vine  and  the  areca-palm,  cultivated  by  the  aborigines
of  Guam,  were  entirely  unknown  in  Eastern  Polynesia.  They
are,  he  says,  undoubtedly  of  Malayan  origin  and  bear  Malay
names.3  They  probably  found  their  way  to  the  Malayan
Islands  after  the  departure  of  the  people  who  spread  over

1  See  F.  W.  Christian,  Caroline  Islands,  p.  189,  and  also  pp.  263-264
and  334.  Frazer  gives  several  references  to  betel  in  Yap  in  his  Belief  in
Immortality,  vol.  iii,  pp.  10,  171.

2  The  Useful  Plants  of  the  Island  of  Guam,  contributions  to  the  U.S.
National  Herbarium,  vol.  ix,  Smithsonian  Inst.,  1905,  pp.  146-147.

3  The  areca-nut  is  called  pugua  in  Guam,  pua  in  the  Banda  Islands,  puah,
buah  in  Amboina,  niga  in  the  Solomons,  hue  in  New  Britain,  bua  in  the  Pelew
Islands,  and  bonga  or  bunga  in  the  Philippines.  The  vine  is  called  pupulo  or
pupulu  in  Guam,  kolula  in  the  Western  Solomons.


APPENDIX  II— ROMANCE  OF  BETEL-CHEWING   309

the  eastern  Pacific  Islands,  but  before  the  separation  of  the
settlers  of  Guam  from  the  parent  stock.1

Betel-chewing  is  a  matter  of  etiquette  at  all  wedding
feasts,  dances  and  funerals.  Nuts  deprived  of  their  fibrous
envelopes,  fresh  pepper  leaves  and  quicklime,  together  with
cigars,  are  passed  round  to  the  assembled  guests.2

The  kava  pepper  does  not  grow  in  Guam,  and  in  islands
where  it  is  cultivated,  its  leaves  are  occasionally  used  in  the
place  of  those  of  the  betel-vine  for  chewing.


Melanesia

Of  the  three  great  groups  of  islands  into  which  Oceania
is  divided,  Melanesia,  the  most  southerly,  especially  claims
our  attention.  For  it  is  among  this  group  of  islands  that  we
can  see  the  farthest  eastern  limit  of  betel-chewing,  and  the
gradual  substitution  of  kava-drinking.

Melanesia  consist  of  the  following  :

1.  Bismarck  Archipelago.  6.  Banks  Islands.

2.  Eastern  New  Guinea.  7.  New  Hebrides.

3.  Louisiade  Archipelago.  8.  Loyalty  Islands.

4.  Solomon  Islands.  9.  New  Caledonia.

5.  Santa  Cruz  Islands  (with  10.  Fiji  Islands.

Cherry    Island,    Mitre
Island     and     Tikopia
Island).

I  have  arranged  the  list  as  far  as  possible  from  west  to
east,  in  order  to  show  clearly  where  betel-chewing  dies  out.
The  first  four  groups  are  betel-chewing  peoples.  No.  5
indulges  in  both  practices  (though  kava-drinking  here  is
chiefly  ceremonial),  and  Nos.  6  to  10  are  exclusively  kava-
drinkers.

The  two  customs  never  really  exist  together,  and  if  they
appear  to  do  so,  we  can  be  sure  that  we  are  witnessing  the
swamping  of  the  one  by  the  other.  It  would  seem  that  betel-
chewing  is  gaining  on  kava-drinking,  but,  as  already  intimated,
the  importance  of  this  aspect  of  our  subject  is  much  greater
than  merely  to  excite  the  curiosity  of  a  chance  observer.  It
helps  to  determine  the  history  of  Melanesian  immigrants  into
Melanesia  and  in  showing  the  existence  of  a  culture  altogether
different  from  that  prevailing  farther  south  and  in  Polynesia.

1  Safford,  op.  cit.,  p.  154.  2  Ibid.,  p.  187.


310  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

To  such  an  extent  was  Dr  Rivers  struck  by  the  high  import-
ance of  the  division  of  Melanesia  into  these  two  classes —
those  who  chew  betel,  and  those  who  drink  kava — that  in
his  great  work,  The  History  of  Melanesian  Society,  he  bases  his
whole  theory  of  Melanesian  immigration  on  the  acceptance
of  the  existence  of  two  separate  peoples,  whom  he  calls  the
"  Betel-people  "  and  the  "  Kava-people."

In  a  letter  to  me  on  the  subject,  Professor  Williamson
considers  it  possible  that  the  "  Betel-people  "  may  have
reached  Polynesia,  though  he  owns  that  during  his  long
experience  in  Polynesian  society  x  he  has  never  found  betel-
chewing  to  exist.  We  shall  return  to  the  subject  again
shortly.

It  is  unknown  both  in  Australia  and  New  Zealand.

Speaking  of  the  natives  of  New  Ireland  (New  Mecklenburg)
Rannie  says  2  that  he  has  seen  a  very  marked  effect  on
them  when,  during  a  trip  to  Queensland,  they  have  been
deprived  of  their  "  chew."  When  starting  chewing  again
on  their  return  they  become  very  dull,  stupid  and  sleepy,  but
the  effect  wears  off  in  a  few  days.

It  will  be  amply  sufficient  for  our  purpose  to  discuss
betel-chewing  in  Papua,  the  Solomons  and,  finally,  the  little
island  of  Tikopia,  which  I  regard  as  the  most  easterly  point
where  the  custom  is  observed.

Eastern  New  Guinea

In  Eastern  New  Guinea,  or  Papua,  betel-chewing  occurs
among  the  Massim  in  the  south-east,  including  all  the  island
groups,  such  as  the  Louisiade  Archipelago,  and  among  the
western  Papuo-Melanesians,  stretching  as  far  west  on  the
southern  coast  as  the  Cape  Possession.

Professor  Seligmann  refers  me  to  his  work,  The  Melanesians
of  British  New  Guinea,  in  which  he  has  inserted  a  sketch-map
delimiting  these  two  large  groups  (p.  6),  and  also  a  photo-
graph of  the  ceremonial  lime-gourd  of  the  Peace,  or  Priest
Chief  (the  two  are  synonymous)  of  a  Mekeo  tribe,  who  can
stop  any  quarrels  by  scattering  lime  from  his  gourd  (p.  343).

There  appears  to  be  some  doubt  as  to  whether  the  leaf  of
Piper  methysticum  is  used  in  betel-chewing.  Rivers,  Melan-
esian Society,  vol.  ii,  p.  533,  states  that  in  the  Bismarck
Archipelago  the  leaf  used  in  betel-chewing  is  probably  that

1  See  his  Social  and  Political  Systems  of  Central  Polynesia,  3  vols.,  1924.

2  My  Adventures  among  South  Sea  Cannibals,  p.  267.


APPENDIX  II— ROMANCE  OF  BETEL-CHEWING  311

of  Piper  methysticum,  while  in  a  recent  copy  of  Man  l  E.  W.
Pearson  Chinnery  has  written  an  article  on  the  subject.
Rivers  may  possibly  be  right  about  the  Bismarck  Archipelago,
but  Chinnery  can  hardly  be  correct  about  Papua.  As  Sir
Everard  im  Thurn  clearly  proved  in  a  later  number  of
Man,2  his  own  description  of  the  leaf  in  question  shows
that  it  must  have  been  either  the  well-known  Piper  betle
or  possibly  the  Piper  insectifugum,  which  is  similar  in  habit
or  growth.

Chinnery  speaks  of  the  leaf  as  "  a  creeping  plant  which
clings  to  trees  in  the  gardens  and  villages,"  and  has  found
by  personal  experience  that  its  flavour  is  bitter  and  hot.
The  true  kava-plsmt  is  an  upright-growing  shrub,  and  is  not
bitter  and  hot  to  the  taste.  (See  further  the  article  by  im
Thurn,  noted  above.)

Chinnery's  article,  however,  affords  a  very  interesting
description  of  betel-chewing  in  the  Mambare  and  Kumusi
divisions  of  Papua.  The  ingredients  used  are  three  in
number — dang  or  cha  (the  areca-nut),  ong  (lime)  and  pingi
(Piper  betle  ?).3  Dang  or  cha  is  the  nut  of  a  species  of  areca-
palm,  which  is  extensively  cultivated  by  the  Binandere-
speaking  tribes  of  the  coast  and  the  lowlands  of  the  interior.
It  is  similar  to  the  cultivated  buatau  (pidgin  Motuan)  of  other
coastal  regions.  Ong  is  obtained  by  burning  river  shells  in
kilns.  A  layer  of  shells  is  placed  between  each  layer  of  mid-
ribs of  the  nipa  palm,  and  the  kiln  is  lighted  from  the  top  ;
it  burns  downwards  and  deposits  the  burnt  shells  in  a  heap
among  the  ashes,  from  which  they  are  afterwards  separated
and  reduced  to  powder  by  pounding.  Betel-chewing  occupies
a  place  of  great  importance  in  the  ceremonial  life  of  the
Binandere.  The  man  who  has  been  decorated  for  homicide,
and  has  attained  the  state  known  as  kortopu,  is  permitted  to
ornament  his  lime-gourd  with  beeswax  and  red  seeds,  and
rattle  his  lime  stick  against  the  opening  of  the  gourd  when
withdrawing  it  from  the  lime.  Temporary  abstinence  from
betel-chewing  is  a  form  of  self-denial  which  people  are
at  times  obliged  to  practise.  An  instance  of  this  is  seen
in  songs  of  instruction  during  the  ceremonies  following
burial,  when  widows  fulfilling  the  obligations  of  mourning
are  forbidden,  among  other  taboos,  to  eat  the  betel  mixture

1  February  1922,  p.  24  et  seq.

2  April  1922,  p.  57.

3  Here  Chinnery  wrote  Piper


312  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

or  even  desire  it.     The  phrases  of  the  betel-chewing  taboo
are  :

Dang  ta  ge  go  Lorie  !
(Areca-nut  of  speak  not  widow.)
Pingi  ta  ge  go  Lorie !
(Betel-pepper  of  speak  not  widow.)

Another  instance  of  the  ceremonial  importance  of  areca-
nut  (in  this  case  the  wild  variety)  was  observed  by  Chinnery
on  Mount  Chapman.  There  he  was  informed  that  tribes
usually  at  war  with  one  another  congregate  peacefully  during
initiation  ceremonies.  The  symbol  of  this  temporary  truce
is  a  piece  of  broken  areca-nut  (ve — the  wild  variety),  which  is
distributed  among  those  gathered  together  by  the  givers  of
the  ceremony.  The  ceremony  finished,  all  who  have  par-
ticipated return  to  their  districts  and  the  truce  ends.  In  this
district  lime  is  produced  from  the  many  limestone  caves
which  occur  in  the  locality,  and  carried  in  leaves,  gourds
being  absent.

The  use  of  the  pingi  plant  as  part  of  the  mixture  of  betel-
chewers  has  an  extremely  wide  distribution  in  Papua.  On  the
watershed  of  the  Kiko  river,  M.  Staniforth  Smith  (Annual
Report,  British  New  Guinea,  1911,  p.  170)  found  a  kava-plsait,
Macropiper  methysticum,  in  a  native  garden,  but  saw  no
evidence  of  the  manufacture  of  the  beverage.

The  betel-chewer,  when  starting  on  a  journey,  invariably
carries  in  his  netted  bag  a  supply  of  areca-nuts  and  a  gourd
filled  with  lime,  but  he  does  not  appear  to  stock  himself  with
pepper  in  the  same  careful  way.  His  appearance  in  the
village  he  is  visiting  is  a  signal  for  someone  to  dash  away  to
the  outskirts  and  reappear  in  a  few  moments  with  a  coil
or  stalks  of  the  pepper  plant.  He  accepts  this  as  a  matter  of
course,  and  frequently  gives  areca-nuts  in  return  ;  others
gather  around,  and  in  a  few  moments  all  of  them  are  chewing
and  talking  with  evident  enjoyment.

In  some  of  the  mountain  districts  visited  by  Chinnery
betel-chewing  is  not  known.  Chief  among  these  are  the
Biagi  districts  of  Mount  Victoria.  But  the  influence  has
spread  far  inland  in  other  parts,  though  in  the  mountainous
regions  the  areca-nut-palm  is  seldom  cultivated,  and  the
habit  is  not  so  much  in  favour  as  it  is  on  the  coast.  Evidence
of  this  is  shown  by  the  white  teeth  of  the  inhabitants,  and
the  frequent  absence  of  lime-gourds  in  mountain  districts.


APPENDIX  II— ROMANCE  OF  BETEL-CHEWING   313

Chinnery  is  of  the  opinion  that  betel-chewing  is  a  relatively-
late  influence.  Further  botanical  evidence  is  required,  how-
ever, before  any  definite  statement  on  this  point  can  be  made.

Although  betel-chewing  is  apparently  not  indulged  in  by
the  Mafulu  mountain  people  to  such  an  extent  as  it  is  in
Mekeo  and  the  coast,  the  custom  can  be  described  as  fairly
common.  For  a  month  or  so  before  a  big  feast,  during  which
period  they  are  under  a  strict  taboo  restriction  as  to  food,
they  indulge  in  it  largely.  The  betel  used  by  them  is  not  the
cultivated  form  used  in  Mekeo  and  on  the  coast,  but  a  wild
species  only  about  half  the  size  of  the  other  ;  and  the  lime
used  is  not  made  by  grinding  down  sea-shells,  but  is  obtained
from  the  mountain-stone,  which  is  ground  down  to  a  powder.1
The  gourds  in  which  the  lime  is  carried  are  similar  to  those
used  in  Mekeo,  except  that  usually  they  are  not  ornamented,
or,  if  they  are,  the  ornament  is  done  only  in  simple,  straight-
lined  geometric  patterns  (see  Plate  LI,  Figs.  6  and  7,  p.  166).

The  spatulse  are  sometimes  very  simple  and  rudely  de-
corated. The  people  spit  out  the  betel  after  chewing,  instead
of  swallowing  it,  as  is  the  custom  in  Mekeo.

Before  passing  on  to  the  Solomon  Islands,  I  will  conclude
this  section  with  a  description  of  the  custom  among  a  little-
known  tribe  dwelling  on  the  banks  of  the  Fly  river.

About  sixty  miles  from  the  mouth  of  the  Fly,  on  the
eastern  side,  is  a  point  called  Gaima.  This  forms  the  first
outlet  on  the  river  bank  of  a  people  called  Girara  by  Mr  W.  N.
Beaver,2  who  was  magistrate  in  the  Western  Division  of  Papua
for  twenty-seven  years.

They  inhabit  the  inland  district  between  the  rivers  Fly
and  Bamu.  All  the  Girara  people  are  inveterate  betel-
chewers,  and  a  bag  containing  a  lime-pot  and  chewing  gear
is  the  invariable  companion  of  every  man  wherever  he  goes.
The  betel  is  not  the  variety  used  in  the  east  end,  but  a
species  which  the  Motuans  call  viroro.  As  is  well  known,
betel  is  eaten  with  lime  and  various  peppers,  the  best  kinds
of  which  are  grown  as  climbers.  The  Giraras  obtain  lime  by
burning  epa  shell,  which  they  obtain  principally  from  Pagona,

1  R.  W.  Williamson,  The  Mafulu  Mountain  People  of  British  New  Guinea,
London,  1912,  p.  66.

2  W.  N.  Beaver,  Unexplored  New  Guinea,  London,  1920,  p.  205  et.  seq.  It
has  now  been  settled  that  the  name  of  the  tribe  should  be  "  Gogodara."
See  A.  P.  Lyons,  "  Notes  on  the  Gogodara  Tribe  of  Western  Papua,"  Journ.
Roy.  Anth.  Inst,  vol.  lvi,  1926,  p.  329  et  seq.


314  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

on  the  Fly.  Betel-chewing  appears  to  be  attended  with
rather  more  ceremony  here  than  Beaver  noticed  elsewhere.
When  about  to  indulge  in  an  orgy  of  chewing,  the  Girara
man  seats  himself  cross-legged  on  the  ground  and  spreads  his
chewing  gear  around.  (See  the  illustration  facing  p.  192.)  He
peels  four  or  five  nuts  and  places  them  on  his  thigh.  Then,
drawing  a  long  thin  bone  needle  or  skewer  from  its  case  in  the
bag,  he  impales  the  nuts,  one  at  a  time,  and  starts  to  chew,
adding  lime  and  pepper  until  he  has  a  suitable  quid.  The
quid  is  kept  in  the  mouth  day  and  night,  and  even  when  a
man  is  talking  to  you,  you  can  see  the  large  red  ball  project-
ing from  his  lips.  The  lime  sticks  and  betel  needles  are
usually  made  of  cassowary  bone,  but  appear  not  to  have
reached  the  high  stage  of  the  Trobriand  islander,  who  con-
siders it  a  mark  of  esteem  to  manufacture  pieces  of  his  dead
relatives'  bones  into  lime  sticks.  As  amongst  most  betel-
chewers,  the  rattle  of  the  lime  stick  in  the  gourd  is  used  to
express  the  feeling  of  the  user.  He  may  sit  stolidly  enough,
chewing,  but  you  can  tell  by  the  way  he  rattles  his  stick
whether  he  is  pleased,  angry,  contemptuous  or  just  merely
"  don't  care."  The  continued  chewing  among  the  Giraras
renders  them  somewhat  dazed  and  stupid-looking,  and  Beaver
is  of  the  opinion  that  the  betel  used  in  the  district  is  a  very
strong  variety.  Owing,  however,  to  the  universal  use  of
areca-nut,  there  is  very  little  gamada  (kava)  drunk.1

The  Solomon  Islands

The  earliest  description  of  betel-chewing  in  the  Solomon
Islands  is  that  given  by  Alvaro  de  Mendana  in  1568.  It  will
be  noted  that  he  omits  any  mention  of  the  areca-nut.  I  quote
the  following  passage  from  Amherst  and  Thomson's  edition,
published  by  the  Hakluyt  Society 2 :

"  Their  tongue  and  lips  are  very  red,  for  they  colour  them
with  a  herb  which  they  eat ;  it  has  a  broad  leaf,  and  burns
like  pepper  ;  they  chew  this  herb  with  lime  which  they  make
from  white  lucaios,  which  is  a  stone  formed  in  the  sea  like
coral ;    and  having  a  piece  of  this  lime  in  their  mouths,  it

1  Further  references  to  betel-chewing  in  Papua  will  be  found  in  I.  H.
Holmes,  In  Primitive  New  Guinea,  pp.  53,  54,  56  and  6l ;  and  W.  V.  Saville,
In  Unknown  Guinea,  p.  64.

2  Discovery  of  the  Solomon  Islands,  edited,  with  Introduction  and  Notes,
by  Lord  Amherst  of  Hackney  and  Basil  Thomson,  Hakluyt  Society,  London,
1901,  p.  134.


APPENDIX  II— ROMANCE  OF  BETEL-CHEWING   315

makes  a  red  juice,  and  this  is  why  their  tongues  and  lips  are
always  so  red  ;  they  also  smear  their  faces  with  this  juice  for
ornament.  Although  they  chew  this  herb,  they  do  not  get
this  red  juice  unless  they  mix  it  with  the  said  lime."

And  here  I  may  say  a  word  on  this  "  red  juice,"  with
which  we  are  now  so  familiar.  In  spite  of  numerous  inquiries
among  botanists  and  anthropologists  I  have  not  yet  found  a
scientific  explanation  of  exactly  what  chemical  action  takes
place  in  betel-chewing  for  the  saliva  to  turn  red.  Personally
I  believe  it  is  due  to  the  action  of  the  lime  on  the  juice  of  the
betel-leaf,  and  that  the  areca-nut  has  nothing  to  do  with  it
at  all.

Mr  C.  M.  Woodford,  the  Resident  Commissioner  of  the
Solomon  Islands  (1896-1914),  agrees  with  me,  and  says  that
lime  produces  a  similar  change  of  colour  in  other  vegetable
juices.  For  instance,  a  decoction  of  the  root  of  Morinda
citrifloria  is  yellow,  but  changes  to  red  with  the  addition  of
lime,  and  forms  the  source  of  the  red  dye  used  by  the  natives
of  the  Solomon  Islands.

Yet  Dr  Guppy  says  *  that  the  red  colour  may  be  readily
obtained  by  mixing  the  areca-nut  and  lime  in  rain-water.
A  few  simple  experiments  could  surely  settle  the  question
definitely.

Mr  Woodford  tells  me  that,  as  far  as  his  observation  goes,
the  Areca  catechu  does  not  occur  wild  in  the  Solomons,  but  is
grown  always  as  a  cultivated  tree.  There  are  certain  inferior
species  of  Areca  indigenous  to  the  Solomons  which  are  also
used  in  the  absence  of  the  cultivated  nut.  The  unhusked
nuts  of  Areca  catechu  are  yellow  when  ripe,  and  as  large  as  a
small  hen's- egg.  The  nuts  of  the  indigenous  species  of  areca
are  much  smaller,  about  the  size  of  large  acorns,  but  are  more
numerous  to  the  spathe.

Dr  Guppy 2  mentions  five  species  of  areca  besides  the
cultivated  Areca  catechu.  In  another  part  of  his  work3  he
gives  further  details  about  betel-chewing.

In  St  Cristoval  and  the  neighbouring  small  islands  the  lime
is  carried  in  bamboo  boxes,  which  are  decorated  with  patterns
scratched  on  their  surface.     In  the  islands  of  Bougainville

1  The  Solomon  Islands  and  their  Natives,  London,  1887,  p.  303.  Lewin,
Ueber  Areca  Catechu,  Chavica  Betle  und  das  Betelkauen,  p.  66,  maintains  that
the  red  colour  is  due  to  the  areca-nut  alone.

2  The  Solomon  Islands  and  their  Natives,  London,  1887,  p.  303.

3  Op.  cit,  pp.  95-96*.


316  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

Straits  gourds  are  employed  for  this  purpose,  the  stoppers
of  which  are  ingeniously  made  of  narrow  bands  of  the  leaf
of  the  sago-palm  wound  round  and  round  in  the  form  of  a
disc  and  bound  together  at  the  margin  by  fine  strips  of  the
vascular  tissue  of  the  sinimi  fern  (Gleichenia  sp.).  Plain
wooden  sticks,  like  a  Chinese  chopstick,  are  used  for  con-
veying the  lime  to  the  mouth  ;  but  frequently  the  stick  is
dispensed  with,  when  the  fingers  are  used,  or  the  areca-nut
is  dipped  into  the  lime.

The  betel,  known  in  Bougainville  Straits  as  the  kolu,  is
grown  in  the  plantations,  where  it  is  trailed  around  the  stems
of  bananas  and  the  trunks  of  trees.  In  these  straits,  as  on
the  Malay  coast  of  New  Guinea,  the  female  spike,  or  so-called
fruit,  is  more  usually  chewed  with  the  areca-nut.  Around
St  Cristoval  the  leaves  are  generally  preferred.

Dr  Guppy  also  gives  an  interesting  account  of  the  effect
the  chewing  of  one,  and  then  of  two,  areca-nuts  had  on  his
pulse,  head  and  sight.  He  found  their  intoxicating  qualities
far  greater  than  he  had  before  suspected  (see  op.  cit.9  p.  96).

For  the  ceremonial  use  of  the  areca-nut  among  the  people
of  San  Cristoval  see  the  recent  work  by  C.  E.  Fox,1  who  gives
several  folk-tales  in  which  both  nuts  and  leaves  play  an
active  part.  They  also  figure  in  birth,  wedding  and  death
ceremonies  in  somewhat  the  same  way  as  among  the  tribes
and  castes  of  Southern  India.

There  is  a  curious  belief  that  if  a  man  bites  round  an  areca-
nut  someone  in  his  clan  will  die.  He  must  always  bite
lengthwise.

If  a  boy  with  his  first  set  of  teeth  chews  areca,  he  must
throw  the  husks  into  the  fire,  or  his  teeth  will  fall  out.

Tikopia  Island

The  natives  of  the  Reef  Island  chew  betel  and  do  not
drink  kava.  But  in  the  Santa  Cruz  group  and  in  the  Vani-
kolo  Island,  to  the  south-east,  we  find  that,  although  betel-
chewing  is  in  vogue,  kava  is  drunk  on  ceremonial  occasions.
The  same  conditions  are  found  in  Tikopia  and  Cherry  Island.

East  of  this,  kava-drinking  exists  alone  and  forms  the
chief  feature  of  the  whole  of  Polynesia.  As  to  the  different
methods  of  making  kava,  and  the  significance  this  has  on  the
movement  of  the  cult,  readers  should  study  chapter  xxvi  of

1  The  Threshold  of  the  Pacific,  London,  1924,  pp.  11 6,  121,  159,  160,  1 67,
183,  212,  230,  321  and  322.


APPENDIX  II— ROMANCE  OF  BETEL-CHEWING  317

Rivers'  work.1  It  follows,  he  argues,  from  the  distribution
of  kava  and  betel  that  the  &aaa-people  settled  in  Southern
Melanesia,  Fiji  and  Polynesia,  while  the  betel-people  did  not
extend  in  their  south-easterly  movement  beyond  the  Solomon
and  Santa  Cruz  islands.

As  Tikopia  is  the  most  easterly  point  where  betel-chewing
occurs,  we  will  conclude  with  a  few  details  given  by  Rivers
in  Melanesian  Society  (vol.  i,  pp.  333,  322,  316,  314).

Tikopia  is  a  tiny  volcanic  island  situated  in  lat.  12°  17'  S.,
and  long.  168°  58'  E.  The  inhabitants  are  very  fond  of
betel,  which  enters  largely  into  the  more  important  of  their
ceremonies.  Both  the  areca-nut  (kaura)  and  the  betel  leaf
(pita)  must  be  very  plentiful.  The  lime,  called  kapia,  is
kept  in  simple  undecorated  gourds,  and  the  elderly  chief
of  the  Taumako,  whom  Rivers  saw  on  his  visit,  prepared
his  betel  mixture  in  a  cylindrical  vessel  with  a  spatula,
exactly  in  the  same  way  as  it  is  done  by  elderly  men  in  the
Solomon  Islands.

It  seemed  quite  clear  to  Rivers  that  the  kava,  which  is
used  so  extensively  in  ceremonial,  was  never  drunk.

The  Tikopians  become  possessed  by  the  atua  or  ghosts  of
their  ancestors,  and  when  in  such  a  state  (recognized  by  a
sort  of  ague,  staring  eyes  and  shouting)  are  asked  questions
by  men  of  equal  rank.  A  man  who  asks  a  question  chews
betel,  and  taking  some  of  the  chewed  mass  from  his  mouth
he  holds  it  out  to  the  possessed  man,  saying,  "  Eat,"  and  it
is  eaten  by  the  possessed  man,  who  is  then  ready  to  answer
his  questioner.

Offerings  of  kava  and  food  are  made  to  the  dead,  and  with
the  food  some  areca-nut,  without  either  betel  leaf  or  lime,  is
given.  At  the  death  of  a  chief  all  the  relatives  abstain  from
betel  for  about  two  months.2

Conclusion

We  have  now  sufficiently  covered  the  whole  area  in  which
betel-chewing    can    be    called   an   established    custom.     Its

1  Melanesian  Society,  vol.  ii,  pp.  243-257.

2  For  further  references  to  betel-chewing  in  Papua  see  Cay  ley- Webster,
Through  New  Guinea  and  the  Cannibal  Countries,  London,  1898,  p.  27;  George
Brown,  Melanesians  and  Polynesians,  London,  1910,  p.  407  ;  Chignell,  An  Outpost
in  Papua,  London,  1911,  pp.  17,  124,  214,  238;  and  F.  Coombe,  Islands  of
Enchantment,  London,  1911,  pp.  137,  183,  184,  190,  203,  210,  etc.


318  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

further  spread  has  been  checked  by  various  factors.  The
first  of  these  is  botanical.  The  necessary  ingredients  can  be
produced  only  in  latitudes  and  altitudes  favourable  to  the
cultivation  of  the  areca-palm  and  the  betel- vine.

Another  factor  to  be  considered  is  that  in  most  countries
the  betel-vine  requires  expert  attention,  and  is  not  a  plant
which  could  be  properly  cultivated  by  such  primitive  people,
say,  as  the  aborigines  of  Australia.

Then,  there  is  the  question  of  a  rival  narcotic.  It  is
obvious,  I  think,  that  the  custom  of  betel-chewing  would  have
long  since  spread  all  over  China  had  not  opium,  introduced
from  Asia  Minor,  already  obtained  such  a  strong  influence
over  the  people.

In  localities  where  betel-chewing  and  kava-drinking  meet,
we  are  presented  with  an  anthropological  problem,  which,  as
yet,  has  been  only  partially  studied.

In  the  above  pages  I  have  paid  but  little  attention  to  the
agricultural  side  of  the  areca-nut  and  betel- vine.  This  side
of  the  question  does  not  concern  our  inquiry,  but  the  refer-
ences given  below  may  be  of  use  to  readers  interested  in  the
subject.1

1  See  Watt,  Economic  Products  of  India,  vol.  i,  p.  292  et  seq.,  and  vol.  vi,
pt.  i,  p.  248  et  seq. ;  "  Culture  du  Betel  dans  la  Province  de  Thanh-Hoa
(Annam),"  Bulletin  Economique  de  I'Indochine,  vol.  xiv,  1911,  pp.  382-391  ;  "The
Betel  Nut  Industry  in  the  Muar  District,  Johore,"  Agricultural  Bulletin  of  the
Federated  Malay  States,  vol.  v,  1917,  pp.  189-192;  "The  Cultivation  of  the
Areca  Palm  in  Mysore,"  Bulletin,  No.  10,  Department  of  Agriculture,  Mysore
State,  1918 ;  "The  Betel  Leaf  or  Sirih,"  Agricultural  Bulletin  of  the  Federated
Malay  States,  vol.  vi,  1918,  pp.  317-320;  "The  Areca  Nut  in  Ceylon,"  Tropical
Agriculturist,  vol.  lxii,  1924,  pp.  123-125;  "Betel  Vine  Cultivator,"  Tropical
Agriculturist,  vol.  lxiii,  1924,  pp.  107-109;  and  Handbook  of  Commercial
Information  for  India,  C.  W.  E.  Cotton,  Calcutta,  1924,  pp.  285-286.

To  the  bibliography  scattered  throughout  the  Appendix  I  would  add
Balfour's  Encyclopcedia  of  India,  3rd  edit.,  1805,  under  the  words  "Areca
catechu,"  "Betel-box,"  "Betel-leaf,"  "Betel-nut,"  and  "Betel-nut  cracker";
Encyclopcedia  van  Nederlandsch- Indie,  under  "Pinang"  and  "Sirih";  G.  A.
Stephens,  "  Eating  or  Chewing  of  Pan,"  Westminster  Review,  London,  August
1907,  vol.  clxviii,  pp.  163-167;  J.  Molliron,  Text  Book  on  Indian  Agriculture,
1910,  vol.  iii;  A.  Mendis  Gunasekara  Mudaliyar,  The  Ceylon  Antiquary  and
Literary  Register,  Colombo,  1915-1916,  vol.  i,  pt.  2,  pp.  124,  125;  "Betel-Nut
Chewing,"  Every  Saturday,  Boston,  vol.  vii,  p.  741  ;  "  Betel-Nut  Tree,"  Penny
Magazine,  London,  vol.  v,  p.  25;  "Betel-Nut  Chewing,"  Leisure  Hour,  London,
vol.  xviii,  p.  31 1,  592  j  and  P.  C.  Patel,  "  The  Crops  of  the  Bombay  Presidency,"
Bulletin  of  the  Department  of  Agriculture,  Bombay,  1922.


APPENDIX  II— ROMANCE  OF  BETEL-CHEWING  319

Sufficient,  I  think,  has  been  said  to  justify  my  original
contention  that  betel-chewing  holds  a  unique  place  among
the  customs  of  the  world.  The  only  other  article  that  one
could  possibly  suggest  as  its  rival  is  the  Virginian  cigarette.
But,  apart  from  the  history  of  tobacco  cultivation,  it  has
attached  to  it  no  interest  whatever.  True,  it  is  a  habit —
and  only  a  habit — of  many  more  than  a  hundred  millions
of  people — a  habit  easily  acquired  and  carrying  with  it
practically  no  limitations  of  a  climatic  nature,  such  as  affect
betel-chewing.  But  here  the  interest  of  the  cigarette  ends.
It  has  no  religious  or  legal  significance,  and,  of  course,  plays
no  part  in  such  social  institutions  as  birth,  marriage  or  death
ceremonies.

But  in  no  country  is  betel-chewing  only  a  habit.  Pro-
pagated largely  by  the  spread  of  Hinduism  and  Buddhism,  it
has  at  once  become  something  much  more  important  than  a
mere  narcotic.


INDEX  I

SANSKRIT  WORDS  AND  PROPER  NAMES


The  n  stands  for  "note "  and  the  index  number  refers  to  the  number  of  the  note.     If  there
is  no  index  number  to  the  n  it  refers  to  a  note  carried  over  from  a  previous  page.


'Abd  Allah  ibn  Ahmad
(1225),  description  of  betel-
chewing,  255,  255ft2

<Abdu-r  Razzaq  (1443),  de-
scription of  betel-chewing,
247,  257,  258

Abu-1-Fazl  'All ami  (1596-
1605),  description  of  betel-
chewing,  247,  264-266

Achalapura,  city  called,  12

Achilles  Tatius,  passage  about
evil  omens,  156ft1

Afanasjev,  A.  N.,  Narodnya
russkija  skazki,  3rd  ed.,  2
vols.,  Moscow,  1897,  227w5

Agastya,  the  sea  swallowed
by,  164,  164ft1

Agni,  the  God  of  Fire,  19 ;
guardian  of  the  South-East,
163ft1 ;  the  mountain  of,
27

Agnihotra  oblations,  the,  103

Agniparvata,  the  mountain
of,  37

Ahmad,  'Abd  Allah  ibn.  See
under  'Abd  Allah  ibn
Ahmad

Airavana,  Indra's  elephant,
148,  149,  155

Ajinavati,  daughter  of  Simha,
30,  31,  45,  46,  47,  51,  90

Akampana,  sage  named,  83-
85

Akbar,  Abu-1-Fazl,  minister
of,  264

Aksha  beads,  rosary  of,  23

Alankaravati,  wife  of  Nara-
vahanadatta,  90

Alexander  Severus  (a.d.  222-
235),  225

Al-ithmid  (Arabic),  probable
origin  of  the  word  anti-
mony, 65ft1

Allahabad,  the  pilgrimage  to,
19

All-Wise,  one  of  the  three
Valkyries  in  the  Volun-
darkvitha,  221

VOL.    VIII.


Amara-kosa,  the,  108ft1
Amaravati,  place  called,  149
Ambaraprabha,    daughter   of

the  King  of  Paundra,  84
Ambika,    the    goddess,    158,

171,  173,  202,  203
Amboyna,    clove  -  cultivation

restricted  to  the  island  of,

96ft2
Amherst,  Lord,  and  Thomson,

B.,  Discovery  of  the  Solomon

Islands,    Hakluyt    Society,

1901,  314,  314ft2
Amitagati,       Vidyadhara

named,  47,  48,  50,  52,  53,

61,  73,  82,  85,  97
Amritaprabha,       Vidyadhara

named,  51,  70-73
Anasuya  (wife    of  the   Rishi

Atri),  perfume  given  by,  44
Anathapindika  gives  Buddha

the  Jetavana  garden,  129ft1
Andahhuta    Jataka,     No.    62,

'254ft1
Anderson,  W.,  Philologus,  vol.

lxxiii,  Leipzig,    1914-1916,

107ft
Andhaka,  Asura  named,  138
Angaraka,  Asura  named,  107-

109
Angaravati,      daughter     of

Angaraka,  107-110 ;  Queen,

100
Angiras,  Story  of  Savitrl  and,

22-23
Anjana    ("antimony"),     the

imaginary       elephant       of

Varuna,  108ft1
Anjanadri,  the    Mountain   of

Antimony,  Tawney's  trans-
lation of,  108ft1
Annam,  betel-chewing  in,  287
Apollodorus,    Library,    107ft,

117ft2.        See    also    under

Frazer,  J.  G.
Apsaras-swan-maidens,  213ft1
Apuleius,    The    Golden    Ass,

56ft1

321


Ardhanarisa  form  of  Siva,  the

132ft1
Arghya,  the  (oblation  to  gods

and  venerable  men),  27, 190
Aristomenes,  tale  of,  in  The

Golden  Ass,  56ft1
Ar/ca,     the     giant     swallow-
^  wort,  96w5
Ashadha,  Mount,  26
Ashadhapura,  city  called,  33,

42 ;    mountain    called,    25,

26,  36
Ashtavakra,  father  of  Savitrl,

22
Asitagiri,  the  Black  Mountain,

103ft1
Asoka  tree,   7,  24,   96,    96ft4,

206  ;  description  of,  7ft4
A^okaka,    ally    of    Mandara-

deva,  81
Asruta,  wife  of  Angiras,  22,

23
Assam,  betel-chewing  in,  284,

285
Asura's     daughter,     King

Chandamahasena  and  the,

106,'i06ft2,  107,  107ft,  108-

110
Asuras,  enemies  of  the  gods,

7,    79,   107,  108,  138,  143,

145,  146,  148,  151,  153-156,

160,161,162,164,166,169,

174,  178-185,  189-193,  195,

196,  197,  201,  207-209
Asvin,      the      month      of
_  (September-October),  271
Atapin,  Daitya  named,  33
Atimukta  creeper,  the,  8,  8ft1
Atkinson,   E.   T.,   Himalayan

Districts      of   the       North-

Western  Provinces  of  India,

3   vols.,    Allahabad,    1882-
_  1886,  19
Atmanika,    wife    of   Narava-

hanadatta,  90
Aubrey,    John,    Remaines   of

Gentilisme,  100ft.     See  also

under  Britten,  James


322


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


Aupapdtikd  STdra,  the,  254ft3.

Seealso  under  Leumann,E.
Avantivardhana,     son    of

Palaka,  105,  106,  110,  111,

114,  118,  120,  122,  123
Avantivati,     wife     of     King

Palaka,  112
Ayodhya,  city  called,  118
Ayodhyd-kdnda,    Book    II     of

the  Ramdyana,  44ft1

Bacon,  J.  R.,  The  Voyage  of
the  Argonauts,  Ldn.,  1925,
109ft1
Badger,  G.  P.,  Travels  of
Ludovico  di  Varthema,
Hakluyt  Society,  Ldn.,
1863,  96ft2,  258ft1

Badhoyi  caste,  use  of  areca-
nuts  among  the,  276

Bahadur,  the  King  of  Cambay,
244

Baisakh,  the  month  of  (April-
May),  271

Baka,  feathers  of  a,  135ft2

Baladhara,  Brahman  named,
117

Balfour,  E.,  The  Cyclopaedia
of  India,  3rd  ed.,  3  vols.,
Ldn.,  1885,  318/&1

Bali,  the  demon,  44

Ball,  V.,  Travels  in  India  by
Jean  Baptiste  Tavernier,
2  vols.,  Ldn.,  1889;  2nd
ed.,  by  W.  Crooke,  1925,
295ft2

Bandhujivaka,  emperor
named,  124

Bant  caste,  betel  used  in
puberty  ceremony  among
the,  276

Banyan- tree,  6,  11

Bard  (bdrej),  the  pan  garden,
271,  273,  274

Bara'i  (Baraiya,  Barui),  caste
connected  with  betel,  270,
271,  273,  274

Barbosa,  Duarte  (1513),  de-
scription of  betel-chewing,
258,  259

Barnett,  L.  D.,  on  the  trans-
lation of  Anjanddri,  108ft1 ;
Antiquities  of  India,  Ldn.,
1913,  78ft1

Bartsch,  K.,  Sagen,  Mdrchen
und  Gebrduche  aus  Meklen-
burg,  2  vols.,  Vienna,  1879,
56ft2

Basil e,  G.  B.,  //  Pentamerone,
69ft1.  See  also  under
Burton,  R.  F.


Basset,  R.  ["Contes  et
Legendes  de  la  Grece
Ancienne "],  Revue  des
Traditions  Populaires,  vol.
xxv,  Paris,  1910,  107ft
Bastian,  A.,  A  Her  lei  aus  Volks-
und  Menschenfcunde,  2  vols.,
Berlin,  1888,  232ft3;  In-
donesien  oder  die  Inseln  der
Malayischen  Archipel,  5  vols.,
Berlin,  1884-1894,  232ft1
Basuki,    the    queen    of    the

serpents,  274,  274ft1
Beaver,     W.    N.,    Unexplored
New    Guinea,    Ldn.,    1920,
313ft2
Beccari,   O.,   "  Palms  of  the
Philippine  Islands,"  Philip-
pine Journal  of  Science,  vol.
xiv,  249,  249ft1
Bellows,    H.   A.,    The   Poetic
Edda,    Scandinavian    Clas-
sics, vols,   xxi,    xxii,    New
York,  1923,  221,  221ft1
Benares,  sectaries  of  Siva  in,

133ft3
Bengal,  worship  of  the  deity
of  betel  cultivation  in,  271
Berard,  Victor,  Les  Pheniciens
et  I'Odyssee,   2  vols,   Paris,
1902-1903,  56ft2
Bernier,  Francois,  account  of
betel-chewing,  267,  267w2,
268
Bezemer,  T.  J.,  Volksdichtung
aus  Indonesien,  Sagen,  Tier-
fabehi  und  Mdrchen,  Haag,
1904,  231ft8
Bhdgavata  Purdna,  the,  78ft1,
214,  214ft2,  216.     See  also
under    Dutt,    M.     N.,     A
Prose  .  .  .
Bhagirathaya^as,  daughter  of
Prasenajit,  31,  32,  45,  63,
90
Bhairava,  Vidyadhari  assum-
ing a  form  of,  27
Bhdra—i.e.  20  tulds,  93,  93ft1
Bharataroha,  minister  of  King

Palaka,  106,  122
Bharhut      Sculptures,      the,

129ft1
Bhavabhuti,     Mdlatlmadhava,

17ft1
Bhishagratna,  K.  K.  Lai,  An
English  Translation  of  the
Sushruta  Samhita,  3  vols.,
Calcutta,  1907-1916,  96ft1,
255ft1
Bhringin,  Asura  destined  to
become  a,  138


Bhutisiva,  Pa^upata  ascetic
named,  55

Bidds,  a  betel  "chew,"  274

Bird,  measure  of  eighty  betel
leaves,  272

Blagden,  C.  O.,  on  betel-
chewing  in  Sumatra,  294

Blagden,  C.  O.,  Skeat,  W.  W.,
and,  Pagan  Races  of  the
Malay  Peninsula,  2  vols.,
Ldn.,  1906,  289,  289ft3,
290ft2- 3

Blair,  E.  H.,  and  Robertson,
J.  A.,  The  Philippine  Islands,
1493-1898,  55  vols.,  Cleve-
land, Ohio,  1903-1909,  302,
302ft2

Blochmann,  H.,  The  lAin  I
Akbari  by  Abul-Fazl  'A Harm,
3  vols.,  Calcutta,  1873,
1892,  1894,  264ft*

Blundell,  C.  A.  ["  Specimens
of  the  Burmese  Drama  "],
Journ.  As.  Soc.  Bengal,
vol.  viii,  Calcutta,  1839,
231ft1

Boas,  R.,  "The  Central
Eskimo,"  Annual  Report  of
the  Bureau  of  Ethnology
of  the  Smithsonian  Institute,
Washington,  1888,  228ft8

Bock,     Carl,     Temples     and
'Elephants,  Ldn.,  1884,  288,
288ft2,  289,  289ft1

Bohtlingk,  O.,  and  Roth,  R.
[Sanskrit  Dictionary],  1852-
i875,  62ft1,  135ft2,  143ft1,
160ft1,  167ft2,  170ft1,  186ft1

Bolte,  J.,  and  Poh'vka,  G.,
Anmerkungen  zu  den  Kinder-
und  Hausmdrchen  der  Briider
Grimm,  3  vols.,  Leipzig,
1913-1918,  83ft1,  107ft,
109ft2,  117ft2,  182ft1,  216ft1,
217,  217ft1
Bonaparte,  L.  L. ,  "A  ntimony/ '
Academy,  23rd  February
1884,  65ft1
Bonthuk  caste,  areca-nuts  in

ordeals  among  them,  276
Born,       Dr       ["Einige
Bemerkungen  uber  Musik,
Dichtkunst  und   Tanz  der
Yapleute"],  Zeitschrift
fur   Ethnologie,    vol.   xxxv,
Berlin,  1903,  232ft3
Borneo,    betel- chewing    in,
296-297 ;  camphor  used  in
betel-chewing,  244,  246
Bothvild,   daughter   of  King
Nithuth,  221


INDEX  I— SANSKRIT  WORDS,  ETC,


323


Bowrey,  Thomas  (1669-1679),
account  of  betel-chewing,
292,  293
Brahma,  29,  33,  52,   72,  83,
109m3,    144-146,    149,   151,
152,  152m1,  153,  155,  161,
162,  174,  177,  208
Brahmadatta  and  the  Swans,
Story  of  King,  133,  133m2,
134-136,  138,  142-143,  144,
209
Braj    girls,    Krishna  stealing
the    clothes'   of'  the,    214,
215
Brauns,   D.,   Japanische  M'dr-
chen    und    Sagen,     Leipzig,
1885,  231m*
Brewer,  E.  C,  Dictionary  of
Phrase  and  Fable,  Ldn.,  etc.,
1895,  154m2
Bricteux,  A.,  Conies  Persans,
Bibl.  de  la  Faculte  de  phil.
et    lettr.    de     l'Univ.     de
Liege,  1910,  227m2
Briganti,  A.,  Italian  trans,  of
Garcia  da  Orta's  Coloquios
.    .    .,  Venice,    1576,    etc.,
245
Brihaspati,  the  adviser  of  the
'gods,  134,  148m2,  149,  151,
152,  153;  the  law  code  of,
196m
Britten,  James,   Remaines  of
Gentilisme  and  Judaisme  by
John    Aubrey,     Folk- Lore
Society,  Ldn.,  1881,  100m
B[rockhaus']    text   of  the
K.S.S.,    9m1,    31m1,    32m3,
37m1,  40m1,  58m3.  60m3,  62m2,
63m2,    67m1-2,    72m1,    87m3,
91w2,  151m1,  152m2,   153m1,
166m2,  186m1,  189m1,  208m1
Broecke,    Bernard    ten
(Paludanus),  interpolations
in  the  work  of  Linschoten,
259
Brown,    George,    Melanesians
and  Polynesians,  Ldn.,  1910,
217m1
Brown,     R.,     Annual     Report
on   the   Munnipore   Political
Agency,  1874,  286m^
Browne,       Thomas,       Vulgar
Errors     {Pseudodoxia     Epi-
demica),   Ldn.,    1646,   75m1,
156m1,  195m1
Buddha,  166  ;  presented  with
the  Jetavana  garden,  129m1
Buddhaghosa,     Dhammapada-
atthakatha,  254m2.    See  also
under  Burlingame,  E.  W.


Buddhaghosa,  Visuddhimagga,

254m2
Budge,   E.   A.   Wallis,   Osiris
and   the   Egyptian  Resurrec-
tion,   2    vols.,    Ldn.,    1911,
75m1
Burlinghame,  E.  W.,  Buddhist
Legends  translated  from  the
Original  Pali    Text   of   the
Dhammapada     Commentary,
Harvard    Orient.    Ser.,    3
vols.,     Cambridge,     Mass.,
1921,  254m2
Burma,     betel- chewing     in,

285-287

Burnell,    A.    C,    and    Tiele,

P.  A.,  The  Voyage  of  John

Huyghen  van  Linschoten  to

the    East    Indies,     2    vols.,

Hakluvt     Society,      Ldn.,

1885,  259,  259m3

Burnouf,     E.,    Introduction    a

VHistoire       du       Buddisme

Indien,  Paris,  1844,  71m2

Burton,  R.  F.,  Camoens.     The

Lyricks,  2  vols.,  Ldn.,  1884,

240m1  ;    II  Pentamerone,   or

The     Tale    of    Tales  .   .   .

of  Giovanni  Battista  Basile,

2  vols.,  Ldn.,  1893,  96m1;

The  Thousand  Nights  and  a

Night,  10  vols.,  Kamashas-

tra  Society,  Benares,  1885-

1886 ;      Supplemental

Nights,   6  vols.,  1886-1888,

93m2,  158m2,  159m,  161m2,

219,  227m3,  302m1

Busk,   R.  H.,  Sagas  from  the

Far  East,  Ldn.,  1873,  59m3

Byblos,  Osiris  found  dead  at,

75m1

Caesar,  the  sword  of,  154m2
Cail,  the  city  of,  257
Calicut,    cinnamon    used    in

betel-chewing   (Garcia   da

Orta),  243
Callaway,  C,   Nursery   Tales,

Traditions  and  Histories  of

the     Zulus,     Ldn.,      1868,

227m1(>
Calypso,  the  island  of,  92m1
Cambodia,  Areca  catechu  pos-
sibly a  native  of,  249
Cambridge    Edition    of    the

Jataka,  96m1,  112m4,  254m1
Camoens,  Lyricks,  240m1.    See

also  under  Burton,  R.  F.
Campbell,  D.  M.,  Java  :   Past

and  Present,  2  vols.,  Ldn.,

1915,  295m3


Campbell,  J.  G.  D.,  Siam  in
the  Twentieth  Century,  Ldn.,
1902,  289m2
Cancer,    Karkati,    the  corre-
sponding sign  to,  20
Carnoy,  E.  H.,  Certeux,  A.,
and,  L'Algerie  traditionelle,
Paris,  1884,  227m7
Carolines,    betel-chewing    in

the,  307,  308

Carra  de  Vaux,  L'Abrege  des

Merveilles,  Paris,  1898,227m3

Carter,  A.  C,  The  Kingdom  of

Siam,  New  York  and  Ldn.,

1904,  289m2

Castren,      M.,     Ethnologische

Vorlesungen  iiber  die   altai-

schen     Vblker,    vol.    iv     of

Nordische  Reisen   und    For-

schungen,     St     Petersburg,

1857,  228m1

Cayley- Webster,  H.,  Through

New  Guinea  and  the  Cannibal

Countries,  Ldn.,  1898,  317m1

Celebes,     betel  -  chewing    in

Borneo  and,  296-300
Certeux,     A.,     and     Carnoy,
E.    H.,   L'Algerie  tradition-
elle, Paris,  1884,  227m7
Ceylon,  moonstone  from  the

Dumbara  district  of,  96m6
Chait,  the  month  of  (March-
April),  265
Chaitra,    the   month    of,    98,

179
Chakora,  the,  134
Chakra — i.e.  "circle,"  72m
Chakravakas,  Brahmany  ducks,
15,    135,   135m1,  204,   206,
206m1
Chakravartin,    etymology    of
the  word,  72m  ;  the  seven
(six)  jewels  of  the,  71m2
Chaliyan  caste,  betel  in  tali-
tying  ceremony  among  the,
277
Champault,   P.,   Pheniciens  el
Grecs     en      Italie,     d'apres
VOdyssee,  Paris,  1906,  56m2
Chandala  maiden,  the  beauti-
ful,'   110,    111,    112,    115;
who  married  the  Daughter
of    King     Prasenajit,    The
Young,  112,  112m*,  113-114
Chandalas,  the  lowest   rank,
110,   112,   112m1,   114,  121,
137,  140,  141
Chandamahasena      and      the
Asura's    Daughter,     King,
106,  106m2,  107,  107m,  108-
110;  king  named,  100


324


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


Chandasimha,  son  of  Simha,

30,  45/47,  50,  53,  61,'  64,

73,  74,  79,  81,  97
Chandi,  the  goddess,  99,  106,

109
Chandika,  one  of  the  saktis  of

Siva,  75,  75*2
Chandra,    38;     or     Soma,

guardianof  the  North-East,

163**
Chandra-bhasma       (Sanskr.),

camphor,  246
Chandraketu,     king    named,

145,  148,  150,  152, 153, 156,

159,  160,  163,  168,  208
Chandralekha,     daughter    of

Jaya,    36,    137,    138,    142;

wife  of  Chandravaloka,  125
Chandrapura,  city  called,  168,

169,  180
Chandravaloka,  king  named,

125-127,  130
Chariya  Pityaka,  the,  125*1
Chataka,  a  female,  206
Chau  Ju-Kua  (c.  a.d.  1250),

Chu-fan-chi,  247,  256,  300,

303
Chauvin,  Victor,  Bibliographic

desOuvrages  Arabes,  11  vols.,

Liege  and  Leipzig,   1892-

1909,  107ft,  219,  227*3
Chedi,  the  King  of,  10,  124
Chignell,   A.   K.,  An   Outpost

in      Papua,      Ldn.,      1911,

317*1
China,    betel-chewing    in

Southern,  303-306
Chinnery,     E.     W.     Pearson

["  Piper    Methysticum    in

Betel-Chewing"],  Mara,  vol.

xxii,   February   1922,   311,

311*1,  312,  313
Chitrangada,    Gandharva

called,  47,  48,  50,  51,  53,

63,  63ni,  69,  73
Chowries,  40,  128,  136  ;  swans

like  waving,  64
Christian,  F.  W.,  The  Caroline

Islands,  Ldn.,  1898,  308m1
Chudjakov,  J.  A.,    Velikorus-

skija  skazki,  3  vols.,  Moscow,

1860-1862,  227*5
Chutamanjari,  wife  of  Matan-

gadeva,  105
Clouston,     W.     A.,     Popular

Tales  and  Fictions,  2  vols.,

Ldn.,  1887,  227*2
Clusius  (Charles  de  l'Escluse

or  Lecluse),  Latin  resume  of

Garcia  da  Orta's  Coloquios

.  .  .,  1567,  245,  246,  247


Codrington,  R.  H.,  The  Melan-
esia?^, Oxford,  1891,  232*4

Coelho,  A.,  Contos  Populares
Portugueses,  Lisbon,  1879.
57*2,  59*3

Colin,  A.,  French  trans,  of
Garcia  da  Orta's  Coloquios
.  .  .,  Lyons,  1619,  245

Collet,  O.  J.  A.,  Terres  et
Peoples  de  Surnatra,  Am-
sterdam, 1925,  294

Coomaraswamy,  A.  K.,  de-
scriptions of  moonstone,
96*6

Coomaraswamy,  A.  K.,  Medi-
aeval Sinhalese  Art,  Broad
Campden,  1908,  251,  252*6

Coombe,  F.,  Islands  of  En-
chantment, Ldn.,  1911,  317*1

Cordier,  H.,  Yule,  H.,  and
Cathay  and  the  Way  Thither,
4  vols.,  Hakluyt  Society,
Ldn.,  1913-1916,  96*2

Cosquin,  E.,  Contes  Populaires
de  Lorraine,  2  vols.,  Paris,
1886,  107*,  109*2

Cotton,  C.  W.  E.,  Handbook
of  Commercial  Information
for  India,  Calcutta,  1924,
318*i

Coxwell,  C.  F.,  Siberian  and
Other  Folk  -  Tales,  Ldn.,
1925,59*3,227*5,  228*5>6. 7

"  Crocea  Mors,"  the  sword  of
Caesar,  154*2

Crooke,  W.,  A  New  Account  of
East  India  and  Persia  by
John  Fryer,  3  vols.,  Hakluyt
Society",  Ldn.,  1909,  1912,
1915,  269wi;  Religion  and
Folklore  of  Northern  India,
Oxford  University  Press,
1926,  19,  271*2 ;  The  Tribes
and  Castes  of  the  North-
Western  Provinces  and  Oudh,
4  vols.,  Calcutta,  1896,  270,
270*1.  See  also  under
Ball,  V.

Daityas,  enemies  of  the  gods,
33,  44,  109,  110,  144-148,
152,  153,  157,  160*1,  161,
162,  166,  181-185,  188-193,
197-199,  201,  207,  208

Dakshinayana,  the  southward
movement  of  the  sun,  19

Dalton,  E.  T.5  Descriptive
Ethnology  of  Bengal,  Cal-
cutta, 1872,  285*2

Dames,  M.  L.,  The  Book  of
Duarte    Barbosa,    2    vols.,


Dames — continued

Hakluyt      Society,      Ldn.,

1918,  1921,  96*2,  258*2
Dampier,     William,    A     New

Voyage    Round    the    World,

Ldn.,    1697 ;    new   edition

in     the     Argonaut     Press,

1927,     293,     301,     30  In1;

Voyages     and     Discoveries,

1699,  302
Danavas,  enemies  of  the  gods,

76,  182-185,  191,  204
Dandasi      caste,      betel      in

marriage  ceremonies  among

the,  277
Dasari     caste,     betel    leaves

used  by  the,  277
Davids,    Rhys.       See    under

Rhys  Davids
Dawkins,  R.  M.,  Modern  Greek

in  Asia  Minor,  Cambridge,

1916,  109*2
Deccan,    vakula    tree    found

wild  in,  86*3
Delia    Valle,     Pietro.       See

under  Valle,  P.  Delia
Dennys,  N.  B.,  The  Folklore  of

China,  Ldn.,  1876,  231*3
Devamaya,  king  named,  68,

73,  74,  75,  76,  77,  83,  85,

86,  93
Devaprabha,  daughter  of  the

king  of  the  Siddhas,  176
Devarakshita,       Brahman

named,  55
Devasabha,  city  called,  178,

180,  182,  184,  184*2,  186
Devasoma,  son  of  Yajnasoma,

139
Devi  (Gauri,  Parvati,  etc.,  wife

of  Siva),  85
Dhammapada-atthakatha,  Bud-

dhaghosa,  254*2
Dhanavati,  wife  of  Simha,  30,

45,  47,  48,  50,  51,*53,  61,

62,  63,  64,  72,  73,  76,  77,

79,  80,  81,  103
Dholl,   bundle   of  200    betel

leaves,  266
Dhumasikha,    ally    of    Man-

daradeva,    78,    78*2,    106,

122
Dhurjata,  Gana  named,   137,

138,  142
Diggaja,  elephant  of  the  sky

quarters,  lOSn1
Dikshit,  S.  B.,  Sewell,  R.,and,

Indian  Calendar,  Ldn.,  1896,

19
Dionysios  of  Halikarnassos,

'PtojacuKT)  apyaioXoyia,  114*1


1


INDEX  I— SANSKRIT  WORDS,  ETC.


325


Dlrghadamshtra,  father  of
Sruta,  84

Doutte,  E.,  La  Societe  Musul-
mane  du  Maghrib.  Magie  et
Religion  dans  L'Afrique  du
Nord,  Algiers,  1909,  100ft

Dridhavrata,  pupil  of  the
hermit  Tapodhana,  172,
182,  201,  202

Duarte  Barbosa  (1513),  de-
scription of  betel-chewing,
258,  259

Dumbara  district  of  Ceylon,
moonstone  from  the,  96ft6

Dummedha  Jataka,  the,  No.
50,  69ft1

Dundubhi,  Daitya  named,
44

Durga  (Parvati,  Uma,  etc.,
wife  of  Siva),  47,  54,  60,
75ft2,  77,  77ft2,  141

D[urgaprasad]  text  of  the
K.S.S.,  15ft1,  31ft1,  32ft3,
33ft2,  58ftL3,  60ft2-3,  63ft2,
87w2,  91ft2

Dutt,  M.  N.,  A  Prose  English
Edition  of  Srimadbhada-
batam,  Wealth  of  India
Series,  214,  214ft2;  The
Ramayana,  Translated  into
English  Prose  from  the
Original  Sanskrit  of  Valmiki,
7  vols.,  Calcutta,  1892-
1894,  44ft1

Dymock,  W.,  "  Flowers  of  the
Hindu  Poets,"  Journ.  Anth.
Soc.  Bombay,  vol.  ii,  1892,
7ft4 ;  "  On  the  Use  of
Turmeric  in  Hindoo  Cere-
monial," Journ.  Anth.  Soc.
Bombay,  vol.  ii,  1892,  18


Egede,  P.  E.,  Efterretninger

on  Gri'mland,   Copenhagen,

1788,  228^9
Egil,  a  son  of  the  king  of  the

Finns,  221,  222
Eld  (Sanskr.),  cardamom,  96ft1
Ellis,  A.  B.,  The  Tshi- speaking

People  of  the  Gold  Coast  of

West    Africa,    Ldn.,    1887,

227ft9
Empedocles,   magic  gem  of,

195ft1
Enthoven,  R.  E.,  The  Tribes

and  Castes of  'Bombay ,3  vols.,

1920,  274
Erlenvejn,      A.,      Narodnyja

russkija  skazki  i  zagadh,  2nd

ed.,  Moscow,  1882,  227ft5


Farnell,  L.  R.,  "  Nature
(Greek),"  Hastings'  Ency.
Rel.  Eth„  vol.  ix,  218ft2

Farrer,  J.  A.,  Primitive  Man-
ners and  Customs,  Ldn.,
1879,  228ft8

Ferrand,  G.,  Contes  populaires
malgaches,  Paris,  1893,
227ft10

Ficalho,  Count,  Garcia  da  Orta
eoseu  Tempo,  Lisbon,  1886,
240  ;  Garcia  da  Orta's  Colo-
quios      dos      simples   .    .    .,

2  vols.,    1891,    1895,   245,
245ft1

Forbiger,  A.,  P.  Virgilii  Mar-
onis  Opera,  3  vols.,  Lipsise,
1845-1846,  49ft1

Foster,  W.,  Early  Travels  in
India,  Oxford,  1921,  266ft3;
The  Embassy  of  Sir  Thomas
Roe  to  the  Court  of  the  Great
Mogul,  2  vols.,  Hakluyt
Society,  Ldn.,  1899,  266ft2

Foufal  (faufel,  fofal,  etc.),
the  Arabic  for  areca-nut,
239

Fox,  C.  E.,  The  Threshold  of
the  Pacific,  Ldn.,  1924,  316,
316ft1

Francke,  A.  H.,  "Die  Ge-
schichten  des  toten  No-
rub-can,"  Zeit.  d.  d.  morg.
Gesell.,  vol.  lxxiv,  Leipzig,
1921,  59ft3

Frazer,  J.  G.,  Apollodorus.
The  Library,  2  vols.,  Loeb
Classics,  Ldn.,  New  York,
1921,  107ft,  117ft2;  The
Belief  in  Immortality  ,Z  vols.,
Ldn.,  1913,  225*,  225w*,
308W1 ;  Folk-Lore  in  the  Old
Testament,  3  vols.,  Ldn.,
1919,  107ft ;  The  Golden
Bough  {The  Dying  God),
Ldn.,  1920,233ft2;  Toternism
and  Exogamy,  4  vols.,  Ldn.,
1910,  233ft2

Frederick,  Caesar  (1563-1581),
mention  of  betel-chewing,
259,  259ft1

Friedlander,  L.,  Darstellungen
out  der  Sittengeschichte  Roms,

3  vols.,  Leipzig,  1888-1890,
117ft2

Fryer,  John  (1672-1681),  de-
scription of  betel-chewing,
269,  270

Fyzee  Rahamin,  Atiya  Begum,
The  Music  of  India,  Ldn.,
1925,  95ft1


Ganas,    attendants    of    Siva,

77ft1,  133ft3,  136,  137,  141,

142,  178,  179,  187
Ganda,     measure     of     betel

leaves,  272
Gandasaila,  the  garden  of,  73
Gandharvadatta,  daughter  of

Sagaradatta,  28,  29,  30,  47,

90
Gandharvas,     attendants     of

the  gods,  27-30,  45,  47,  49-

51,  64,  69,  72,  86,  146,  148,
149,  150,  153, 154, 157, 158,
159,  161,  162, 163, 164, 176,
208,  225

Ganesa  (son  of  Siva  and
Parvati),  1,  19,  21,  51,  70,
94,  132

Ganges,  the,  2,  12,  17,  87,
117,  125,  133,  134,  134ft2,
144,  147,  154,

Garciada  Orta(1563), descrip-
tion of  betel-chewing,  240-
246

Garcia  da  Orta,  Coloquios  dos
simples,  e  drogas  .  .  .,  1st
ed.,  Goa,  1563,  240ft1

Garuda  (the  sacred  kite),  91,
152,  161,  182ft1,  183

Gaster,  Dr  M.,  Gypsy  variant
of  the  "  swan-maiden  "
story,  219

Gauri  (Parvati,  Uma,  etc.,
wife  of  Siva),  1,  50,  50ft1,

52,  79,  86,  153,  157,  158,
159, 164, 167,  168,  170, 172,
176,  199,  202,  203

Gaurlmunda,  king  named,  48,
49,  50,'  51,  61,  62,  63,  73,
89,  121

Gautama  accused  by  his
relations,  127ft1

Gayatri.  the  goddess,  23

Geil,  W.  E.,  The  Sacred  5  of
China,  Ldn.,  1926,  248ft

Geoffrey  of  Monmouth,  on
Caesar's  sword,  254ft2

Gering,  H.,  Die  Edda,  Leip-
zig, 1892,  223,  223ft1

Ghatika  of  the  night,  fulfil-
ment of  dreams  in  the  last
two,  100ft

GhoshavatI,  lyre  called,  102

Giles,  Dr  Lionel,  translations
from  the  T'u  Shu  Chi  Cheengf
304

Golther,  W.,  Studien  zur  ger-
manischen  Sagengeschichte,  I,
Der  V alky riemny thus,  Ab-
handl.  d.  Munchener  Akad.t
vol.  xviii,  1890,  224ft1


326


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


Gomeda-dvipa,     continent

called,  108ft1
Gomes,  E.  H.,  Seventeen  Years
among   the    Sea   Dyaks    of
Borneo,  Ldn.,  1911,  231ft9
Gomukha,  minister  of  Nara-
vahanadatta,  17,  21,  24,  32,
46,  50,  54,  57,  65,  66,  85,
88,  93,  94,  97,  99,  132,  133,
209
Gonzenbach,  L.,  Sicilianische
Marchen,     with    notes    by
R.  Kohler,  2  vols.,  Leipzig,
1870,  59ft3
Gopalaka,  brother  of  Queen
Vasavadatta,    90,    101-104,
106,  132,  209
Govindakuta,  city  called,  61,
64 ;  mountain   of,    62,    69,
70,  72
Graafland,  N.,  De  Minahassa,

Rotterdam,  1867,  297ft2
Graham,  A.  W.,  Siam,  a  Hand-
book, Ldn.,  1912,  288ft1
Graham,  W.  A.,  Siam,  2  vols.,

Ldn.,  1924,  289ft2
Graves,     A.     P.,     The    Irish
Fairy    Book,    Ldn.,     1909,
107ft
Gray,  Sir  Albert,  Introduction
to     the     Argonaut     Press
edition  of  Dampier's  New
Voyage,  301ft1 ;  The  Voyage
of  Francois  Pyrard  of  Laval,
2   vols.,    Hakluyt    Society,
Ldn.,  1887-1889,  266ft1
Grey,  E.,  The  Travels  of  Pietro
delta  Valle  to  India,  2  vols.,
Hakluyt     Society,     Ldn.,
1891,  266/1*
Grierson,  G.  A.,  Bihar  Peasant

Life,  2nd  ed.,  1926,  275
Griffith,    R.    T.     H.,    The
Rdmdyan     of     Valmiki,     5
vols.,    Ldn.    and    Benares,
1870-1874,  44m1
Grimm,  J.,  Kleinere  Schriften,
8    vols.    Gutersloh,    1864-
1890,  117ft2
Grimm,   J.   and  W.,   Kinder-
und      Hausmdrchen,      83ft1,
107*,     109ft2,     216.       See
also   under  Bolte,   J.,  and
Polivka,  G.
Groot,   J.   J.    M.   De,    The
Religious  System  of  China,
6  vols.,  Leyden,  1892-1901,
304,  304ft1
Grubauer,    A.,    Unter   Kopf-
jdgern    in    Central-  Celebes,
Leipzig,  1913,  299ft1,  300


Gudatvak,  or  ivak  (cinnamon),
one  of  the  three  aromatic
drugs,  96ft1

Guhesvara,  Gana  named,  137,
138,  142

Guhyakas  (subjects  of
Kuvera),  guardians  of  the
cave  of  Tri^Irsha,  75,  76

Guinea,  betel-chewing  in
Eastern  New,  310-314

Guppy,  H.  E.,  The  Solomon
Islands  and  their  Natives,
Ldn.,  1887,  315,315ft12-3

Gurdon,  R.  P.  T.,  The  Khasis,
2nd  ed.,  Ldn.,  1914,  285n3

Hadden,  A.  C,  Head-Hunters:

Black,    White   and    Brown,

Ldn.,  1901,  298ft1
Hadrian's  Wall,  224
Haha  and   Huhu,  the  songs

of,  162
Hakluyt,    R.,    The    Principal

Navigations    .     .    .    of   the

English    Nation,    12    vols.,

Glasgow,  1903-1905,  259ft1
Halikarnassos,   Dionysios  of,

114ft1
Halliday,  Prof.  W.  R.,  on  the

name    of    Caesar's     sword,

154w2  ;    references    to

dreams,    100ft ;    references

to  a  Roman  legend,  114ft1
[Hammer,  J.]  Rosenol,  2  vols.,

Stuttgart    and    Tubingen,

1813,  227ft3
Hanson,    Ola,    The    Kachins,

Rangoon,  1913,  285ft5
Hanuman,      chief      of     the

monkeys,  44
Harisikha,  minister  of  Nara-

vahanadatta,  24,  32,60,61,

68,  73,  85,  90,  106
Harisoma,  son  of  Yajnasoma,

138,  139
Harta,  price  paid  for  a  bride,

297
Hartland,  E.  D.,   The  Science

of  Fairy  Tales,  Ldn.,  1891,

107ft,  233ft2-  3
Hassan,  Dyed  Siraj   Ul,   The

Castes  and  Tribes  of  H.E.H.

'The  Nizam's  Dominions,  vol.

i,  Bombay,  1920,  274,  275
Hastinapura,     the     Pandava

brothers'  victory  at,  274
Hastings,  J.,  Encyclopaedia  of

Religion  and  Ethics,  19,  72ft,

196ft,   218ft2,   219ft1.      For

details    see     under    Ency.

Rel.  Eth.


Hatakesa,  worship  of,  191
Hatakesvara,  188,  195
Hayman  Wilson,  Prof.  H.,  on

story  in  Book  XIII,  17ft1
Hemabaluka  river,  the,  65
Hemaprabha,    king    named,

47,53
Henry,   R.   M.,   "On   Plants
of  the    Odyssey,"    The
Classical    Review,    vol.    xx,
1906,  56ft2
Hermes,  the  Moly  given  to

Ulysses  by,  56ft2
Hertz,  W7.,  Deutsche  Sage  im
Elsass,      Stuttgart,      1872,
107ft ;  Spielmannsbuch,  2nd
ed.,  Stuttgart,  1900,  117ft2
Hervor  the  All- Wise,  one  of
the  three  Valkyries  in  the
Vblundarkvitha,  221,  222
Hickson,   S.  J.,   A  Naturalist
in     North     Celebes,     Ldn.,
1889,  231ft10,  296ft2,  298ft2
Himalaya  range,  the,  70
Himalaya(s),  the,  6,   19,  47,

64,  165
Hirth,     F.,     and     Rockhill,
W.  W.,  Chau  Ju-Kua  ;  His
Work   on    the    Chinese    and
Arab    Trade,    Imperial
Academy   of  Sciences,    St
Petersburg,     1911,     256ft1,
303ft2
Hitopadesa,  the,  254
Hlathguth  the  Swan-White,
one  of  the  three  Valkyries
in    Volundarkvitha,    221,
222
Hodson,  T.  C,  The  Meitheis,

1908,  286,  286ft2
Holinshed's    account   of
Richard     II's     coronation,
88ft1
Holmes,  J.   H.,  In  Primitive
New    Guinea,    Ldn.,    1924,
314ft1
Holmstrom,  H.,  Studier  over
svanjungfrumotivet  i   Volun-
darkvida     och     annorst'ddes,
Malmo,   1919,  217,  217w2,
218,     218ft1,     223ft3,    226,
227ft1
Hooker,    J.   D.,    Flora   of
British  India,  7  vols.,  1875-
1897,  7ft2,  8ft1
Hopkins,  E.   W.,   "  Festivals
and  Fasts  (Hindu),"  Hast-
ings' Ency.  Rel.  Eth.,  vol.  v,
19
Horace,   Odes,  49ft1;    Satires,
99ft1


INDEX  I— SANSKRIT  WORDS,  ETC,


327


Hose,  C,  Natural  Man,  Ldn.,
1926,  296/ii

Hose,  C,  and  McDougall,  W.,
The  Pagan  Tribes  of  Borneo,
2  vols.,  Ldn.,  1912,  296ft1

Housesteads  (Northumber-
land), three  altars  dis-
covered at,  224,  224ft3,  225

Huhu,  the  songs  of  Haha  and,
162

Hurgronje,  C.  S.,  The  Acheh-
nese,  trans,  by  A.  W.  S.
O'Sullivan,  Leyden  and
Ldn.,  1906,  293,  293W2,
294ft1- 2

Hutton,  J.  H.,  The  Angami
Nagas,  Ldn.,  1921,  284,
284ft2 ;  The  Sema  Nagas,
Ldn.,  1921,  284,  284ft1

/,  measure  for  weighing  gold,
256,  256ft2

Ihatmatika,  daughter  of
Gaurimunda,  62

Ilavans,  caste,  betel  leaves
in  pregnancy  ceremony
among  the,  277,  278

Ilg,  B.,  Maltesische  Mdrchen
und  Schw'dnke,  2  vols.,
Leipzig,  1906,  107ft

India,  betel  -  chewing  in
Northern  and  Central,
270-273  ;  betel-chewing  in
Southern,  275-283  ;  the
home  of  the  "  swan-
maiden  "  motif,  232,  234;
prior  to  a.d.  1800,  betel-
chewing  in,  254-270 ;  prob-
ably the  original  home  of
the  castanet,  95ft1

Indivaraksha,  son  of  Vis-
vantara,  124

Indra,  the  king  of  the  gods,
16,  19,  75,  88,  124,  129,
144-153,  155,  156,  157,  159,
160,  161,  162,  166,  169,
172,  178,  179,  180,  181,
183,  186,  207,  208,  209;
guardian  of  the  East,  163ft1

IndumatI,  the  messenger  of
Svayamprabha,  187,  188,
194,  195,  196,  198

Iris  and  Peisthetaerus,  148ft3

I3anl  or  Prithivi  (generally
Soma),  guardian  of  the
North-East,  163ft1

Isis,  the  killing  look  of,
75ft1

Ityaka,  son  of  Kalingasena
and  Madanavega,  87,  105,
106,  122,  123,  124


Izhava  caste,  betel  leaves  in
pregnancy  ceremony  among
them,  277,  278

Jacobi,  H.,  "  Chakravartin,"
Hastings'  Ency.  Rel.   Eth.,
vol.  iii,  72ft
Jahn,  A,  Die  Mehri-Sprache  in

S'udarabicn,  Vienna,  227ft3
Jambu,  one  of  the  five  leaves

of  tree,  247ft2
Jambu -dvipa,     a     continent

round  Mount  Meru,  105ft1
Janaka,  father  of  Sita,  44
Jasoda,  wife  of  Nand,  215
Jataka,  The,  254  ;  Andabhida,

No.  62,  254ft1 ;   Dummedha,

No.  50,  96ft1 ;   Mahasilava,

No.  51,  254ft1;  Sigala,  No.

142,  112ft4;  [Suvannahamsa]

No.  136,  135ft2
Jdtiphala  (nutmeg),  one  of  the

five      flavours      in      betel-
chewing,  246,  247
Java,   betel-chewing  in,  295-

296  ;  Piper  betle,  possibly  a

native  of,  249
Jaya,  motherof  Chandralekha,

136,  137,  142
Jayadatta,  teacher  named,  54
Jetavana  garden,  the,  129ft1
Jhang,     Indian     castanet     of

metal,  the,  95ft1
Jimutavahana,    Vidyadhara

prince,  124,  124ft1,  126
Jolly,  J.,  "  Recht  und  Sitte  "

[Encyclopaedia     of     Indian

Philology,  Strassburg,  1896],

196ft
Jiilg,  B.,  Kalmi'tkische  Mdrchen.

Die    Mdrchen     des    Siddhi-

Kiir,  Leipzig,    1866,   59ft3;

Mongolische       Marchen-

Sammlung,  Innsbruck,  1868,

268ft4
Jungbauer,    G.,   Mdrchen   ans

Turkestan  und  Tibet,  Jena,

1923,  107ft

Kadam-tree,  214

Kailasa,  Mount,  47,  51,  59,
72-77,  79,  81-83,  85,  133,
133ft3,  136,  147

Kaj  ungajorssuaq,  a  mal-
formed man,  229,  230

Kalajihva,  ally  of  Mandara-
deva,  81,  84

Kalakuta,  the  lord  of,  67,  73

Kalaratri,  one  of  the  saktis  of
Siva,  75,  75ft2,  76,  77,  78,
85


Kalavati,   daughter  of  Kala-
jihva, 84
Kali,  the  demon,  2,  6
Kali,  one  of  the  saktis  of  Siva,

75ft2
Kalika,     Vidyadharl    named,

67,  90
Kalinga,  the  territory  of,  2

Kalingasena,  daughter  of
King  Kalingadatta,  22,  25,
46,  87,  90,  105

Kalinjara,  Mount,  101,  102

Kalian  caste,  betel  leaves
used  by  the,  278

Kalpa — i.e.  1000  Mahayugas,
or  4320  million  years,  23,
48,  49,  152,  174,  174ft2,
183,  209

Kama,  the  God  of  Love,  1,  2,
7,  8,  94,  95,  98,  167,  168 ;
burnt  in  an  asoka  tree  by
Siva,  7ft4 ;  the  five  arrows
of,  3,  248ft

Kamadeva — i.e.  Kama,  11

Kdmala  (flowers),  111ft1

Kammalan  caste,  use  of  betel
and  areca  among  the,  278

Kanakavati,  daughter  of  Kan-
chanadamshtra,  84

Kanchanadamshtra,  king
named,  77,  81,  82,  84

Kanchanagiri,  an  air-going
elephant,  179,  182

Kanchana^ekhara,  an  air-
going  elephant,  179,  182

Kahkala  (Bakek),  one  of  the
five  flavours  in  betel-
chewing,  246,  247

Kankola  (Marathi),  Piper
cubeba,  247

Kapilasarman,  Brahman
named,  113

Karabha,  village  called,  55

Karkata,  the  corresponding
sign  to  Cancer,  20

Karpura  (camphor),  one  of
the  five  flavours  in  betel-
chewing,  246

Karpurika,  wife  of  Narava-
hanadatta,  90

Karttikeya  (son  of  Siva  and
Parvati),  141

Kasyapa,  sage  named,  103,
104,  106,  123,  124,  125,
131,  132,  209

Kath,  a  purer  form  of  cutch,
247,  266,  268,  280

Katik,  the  month,  215

KausambI,  city  called,  21,
45,  46,  89,  93,  100,  102,
103


328


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


Kaustubha  jewel  of  Vishnu,
the,  60,  60ft1-  2

Kayasth,  writers  and  village
accountants,  271

Keate,  George,  An  Account  of
the  Pelewe  Islands  .  .  .  of
Captain  Henry  Wilson,  2nd
ed.,  Ldn.,  1788,  306,  306m1

Keith,  A.  B.,  "Ordeal
(Hindu),"  Hastings'  Ency.
Rel.  Etk.,  vol.  ix,  196ft;
The  Sanskrit  Drama,  Oxford,
1924,  17ft1

Kern,  Dr,  13ft1,  28ft1,  29ft,
41ft1,  45ft1-2,  118ft2,  119ft3,
125ft1,  14  lft1,  160ft1,  167ft1

Khartals,  Indian  castanet  of
stones,  95m1

Kimsuka  tree,  7,  7ft3

Kinkara,  Gana  named,  178

Kirata,  a  man  of  low  rank,
112ft1

Kirtikar,  K.  R.,  "The  Use
of  Saffron  and  Turmeric
in  Hindu  Marriage  Cere-
monies," Journ.  Anth.  Soc.
Bombay,  vol.  ix,  1913,  18

Kishkindhya,  the  capital  of
Sugriva,  44

Kodikkal,  caste  of  betel-vine
cultivators,  278

Kohl,  J.  G.,  Kitchi- Garni :
Wanderings  round  Lake
Superior,  Ldn.,  1859,  228ft8

Kohler,  Dr  R.,  notes  in  L.
Gonzenbach  s  Sicilianische
Marchen,  59ft3

Krappe,  A.  H.,  references
obtained  from,  107ft,  117ft2

Krappe,  A.  H.,  "The  Val-
kyries," Modern  Language
Review,  vol.  xxi.  1926, 224ft2,
225ft3,  226ft1

Kratudeva,  son  of  Somadeva,
139

Krishna,  40,  46 ;  steals  the
clothes  of  the  Braj  girls,
214,  215

Krita  age,  the,  6

Kshatriyas  (warrior  caste),  3,
5,  16

Kubary,  J.  S.,  Ethnographische
Beitr'dge  zur  Kenntniss  des
Karolinen  Archipels,  Ley-
den,  1895,  306ft1

Kudubi  caste, cutch-preparers,
278-280

Kuhn,  A.,  Sagen,  Gebr'duche  u.
Marchen  aus  Westfalen,  2
vols.,  Leipzig,  1859,  56ft2,
69ft1


Kumuda  (flowers),  111ft1

Kumudvati,  206

Kundina,  city  called,  54

Kunkuma  (Sanskr.),  turmeric,
18

Kunos,  I.  ["Osmanische
Volksmiirchen "],  Ungar-
ische  Revue,  vol.  viii,  Leip-
zig, 1888,  227ft4 ;  Turkische
Volksmiirchen  aus  Stambul,
Leiden,  1905,  227ft4

KurangI,  daughter  of  King
Prasenajit,  112,  114

Kurumo  caste,  areca-nuts  used
among  the,  280

Kuvalayapida,  elephant
called,  125-127

Kuvalay avail,  wife  of  Pad-
masekhara,  164,  176

Kuvera,  guardian  of  the
North,  163ft1


Lahasah,  bundle  of  betel
leaves,  265,  266

Lakshmana,  brother  of  Rama,
44;  son  of  Taravaloka,  126,
128,  130

Lakshmi,  wife  of  Vishnu,  and
the  Goddess  of  Wealth,
82W1,  130,  151,  274

Lalitalochana,  wife  of  Nara-
vahanadatta,  17,  90

Landes,  A.,  Contes  et  legendes
annamites,  Saigon,  1888,
231ft2

Lane,  E.  W.,  An  Account  of
the  Manners  and  Customs  of
the  Modern  Egyptians,  5th
ed.,  Ldn.,  1860,  196ft

Lanka — i.e.  Ceylon,  45

Lar,  the  country  of,  256

Larminie,  W.,  West  Irish
Folk-  Tales  and  Romances,
Ldn.,  1898,  107ft

Lathram,  Mr,  description  of
preparing  cutch,  278-280

La  Touche,  T.  H.  D.,  A
Bibliography  of  Indian
Geology  and  Physical
Geography,  2  vols.,  Calcutta,
1917-1918,  56ft1,  96ft6

Laval,  F.,  Pyrard  of.  See
under  Pyrard  of  Laval,  F.

Lavanga  (cloves),  one  of  the
five  flavours  in  betel-
chewing,  246,  247

Lawson,  J.  C,  Modern  Greek
Folklore  and  Ancient  Greek
Religion,  Cambridge,  1910,
218,  218ft2


Lecluse,     Charles    de.       See

under  Clusius
Lederbogen,     W.     ["  Duala-

Miirchen  "],Mittheil.  d.  Sem.

f.    orient.    Sprach.,    vol.    v,

Berlin,  1902,  227ft9
Leguat,    Francois    (1697),

description     of    betel-
chewing,  295,  295ft1
Leland,    Ch.,    The  Algonquin

Legends  of  New  England,

Ldn.,  1884,  228ft8
L'Escluse,   Charles    de.     See

under  Clusius
Leumann,    E.,    "  Das    Aupa-

patika  Sutra,"  Abhandl.  f.

d.   Kunde  d.   Morgen.,   vol.

viii,  Leipzig,  1883,  254ft3
Lewin,    L.,    Ueber  Areca

Catechu,   Chavica  Betle   und

das    Betelkauen,    Stuttgart,

1889,  237ft1,  315ft1
Ley  en,     F.    von     der,     Das

Marchen,  1917,  107ft
Lichchhavi  maiden,  the,  112ft4
Liebrecht,    F.    ["Amor    und

Psyche    .    .    .  "],    Zeit.   f.

vergleich.  Sprachforsch.,  vol.

xviii,  Berlin,  1869,  232ft7;

Zur  Volkskunde,  Heilbronn,

1879,  233ft1
Ling   Roth,    H.      See  under

Roth,  H.  Ling
Linga  of  Siva,  152,  200,  205
Linschoten,     J.     H.     van

(1583-1589),  description  of

betel-chewing,    247,    259-

264
Liu    Mu-chi,    Nan    shih,    the

biography  of,  303
Lokapalas,  the  guardians   of

the    cardinal   points,    163,

163ft1
Lombardi,  D.  B.,  La  Divina

Comedia  di  Dante  Alighieri,

vol.  ii :   Purgatorio,  3  vols.,

Rome,  1820,  100ft
Low,    H.,    Sarawak:    its    In-
habitants   and     Productions,

Ldn.,  1848,  298ft1
Lumholtz,     Carl,     Through

Central    Borneo,     2     vols.,

New  York,  1920,  298ft1
Lyon,  A.  P.,  "  Notes  on  the

Gogodara  Tribe  of  Western

Papua,"  Journ.   Roy.  Anth.

Inst.,  vol.  Ivi,  1926;  313ft2

Macculloch,  J.  A.,  The  Child-
hood of  Fiction,  Ldn.,  1905,
233ft3


INDEX  I— SANSKRIT  WORDS,  ETC.


329


Madanamanchuka,  head
queen  of  Naravahanadatta,
1,  21,  23,  24,  25,  26,  33,
33ft2,  34,  35,  36,  37,  42,  43,
51,  63,  86,  87,  88,  90,  92,
93,  96,  132,  209
Madanavega,      Vidyadhara

named,  87,  105,  123
Madar,    the    giant    swallow-
wort,  96w5
Madhava  and   Makaranda  in
the    drama   of  Malati   and
Madhava,  17ft1
Madhavi,  the  atimukta  creeper,

8,  8ft1
Madiravati,  Book  XIII,  1-17;
sister  of  Vijayasena,  3,  4,
5,  6,  10,  11,  12,  13,  14, 14ft1,
15
Madras,    the    King    of    the,

126
Madri,  daughter  of  the  King
of  the   Madras,    126,    128,
129
Mafamede — i.e.   Muhammed,

242,  242ft1
Mahabahu,  Devamaya's  ally,

74
Mahabharata,  the,  40ft2,  60ft1,

108ft1
Maliabhisheka,      Book     XV,

70-93
Mahabuddhi,  friend  of  Mukta-
phaladhvaja,  181,  198,  200,
202,205
Mahadamshtra,      Vidyadhara

named,  67,  73
Mahakala,  the  shrine  of,  120,

121
Mahamaya,   guardian  of  the

cave  of  Trisirsha,  76
Mahasilava   Jdtaka,   the,    No.

51,  254ft1
Maha  -  Sudassana  -  Sutta,    the,
71ft2.     See  also  under  Rhys
Davids
Mahavamsa,  the,  252
Mahavastu,  the,  71ft2
Mahi,  giant  named,  109ft3
Mahidhara,  Brahman  named,

117
Mahisha,     giant     slain     by

Durga,  77,  77ft2
Makara      corresponding      to
Capricornus,  19 ;  usually  a
sea-monster,  20
Makara- sankranti,  the  festival

of  the  winter  solstice,  19
Makaranda  and    Madhava  in
the   drama  of  Malati   and
Madhava,   17ft1


Malasar  tribe,  betel  used  in

death    ceremonies    among

the,  280
Malati  and  Madhava,  or  The

Stolen  Marriage,  17ft1
Malava,  the  land  of,  97
Malay  Peninsula,  vakula  tree

found  wild  in  the,  96ft3
Malaya,  mountain  of,   1,  70,

94,  99
Malayadhvaja,  son  of  Meru-

dhvaja,  179,  181,   183,  185,

186,    187,    190,    191,    192,

193,  197,  204,  208
Malayasimha,    king    named,

115,  116
Manasa  lake,  the,  1ft1,  73
Manasavega,       Vidyadhara

named,   22,  25,  27,  36-43,

46,  48,  49,  50,  51,  53,  58,
61,  62,  63,  89,  132

Mandakim,  the  river,  51,  73,

95
Mandara  flowers,  184 ;  garland

of,  88
Mandara,  the  mountain  of,  85,

136 ;    Vidyadhara    named,

67,  68,  73
Mandaradeva,    king    named,

47,  63,  68,  69,  71,  72,  78,
79,  80,  81,  82,  84,  89,  93

Mandaradevi,  sister  of  Man-
daradeva,  80,  84,  90

Mandaras  (shrubs),  96,  96ft5

Mandhatar,  King,  in  Ralston's
Tibetan  Tales,  83ft1

Manes  of  Angaraka,  water-
offerings  to  the,  110

Mangsir,  the  month,  215

Manipushpesvara,  Gana
named,  136-138,  142

Manoharika,  companion  of
PadmavatI,  164-166.  168,
169,  171-173,  175

Manucci,  Niccolao  (1653-
1708),  account  of  betel-
chewing,  268,  269

Mara,  the  Buddhist  devil  and
God  of  Love,  1,  1ft4,  8

Marco  Polo  (c.  1295),  descrip-
tion of  betel-chewing,  256,
257

Marianne  Islands,  betel-
chewing  in  the,  308,  309

Markham,  Clements,  Col-
loquies on  the  Simples  and
Drugs  of  India  by  Garcia
da  Orta,  Ldn.,  1913,  240,
240ft1

Mars  Thincsus,  altars  dedi-
cated to,  225


Marsden,      W.,      edition     of

Marco  Polo,  246
Marshall,    H.   I.,    The  Karen

People  of  Burma,  Columbus,

1922,  285n6
Marubhuti,  minister  of  Nara-
vahanadatta, 24,  27,  32,  58,
60,  65,  213

Maruts,  the  wind-gods,  160*?1

Matanga  caste,  the,  112,
112ft1,  114,  115,  120,  121

Matangadeva,  Vidyadhara
named,  105,  121,  122

Matangapura,  palace  called,
61

Matangini,  daughter  of
Mandara,  67

Matthews,  A.  N.,  Mishcdt-ul-
Masdbih,  2  vols.,  Calcutta,
1809-1810,  100ft

Mauritius,  clove-trees  intro-
duced into,  96ft2

Mayavati,  daughter  of  Malaya-
simha, 115

McDougall,  W.,  Hose,  C,  and,
The  Pagan  Tribes  of  Borneo,
2  vols.,  Ldn.,  1912,  296ft1

Medea,  the  story  of,  109ft1

Meghavana,  temple  called,
157,  199,  201

Mekhala,  wife  of  Yasaskara,  2

Melanesia,  betel-chewing  in,
309-317

Mendana,  Alvaro  de  (1568),
account  of  betel-chewing,
314,  314ft2

Menzel,  T.,  TiirkischeM'drchen.
Billur     Koschk,      Hanover,

1923,  107ft

Mercier,    G.,   Le    Chaouia  de

I'Aures,  Paris,  1896,  227ft7
Merill,   Mr,   on   the   original

home     of     Areca     catechu,

249
Meru,  Mount,  83,  198,  199
Merudhvaja,     king      named,

178-188,   190-193,   195-199,

204,  207,  208
Messina,        "  swan  -  maiden"

story  from,  218,  219
Meyer,    E.    H.,    Germanische

Mythologie,     Berlin,     1891,

232ft8
Micronesia,  betel-chewing  in,

306-309
Mills,  J.   P.,   The  Ao  Nagas,

Ldn.,     1926,    284,    284ft3;

The    Lhota    Nagas,     Ldn.,

1922,  285ft7
Mills,  L.,  Shans  at  Home,  Ldn.,

1910,  286,  286ft4


330


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


Milton,  Comus,  56ft1

Mitford,  A.  B.,  Tales  of  Old
Japan,  Ldn.,  1903,  231ft4

Mithila  school,  the  (fourth
century  a.d.),  195ft3,  196ft

Molliron,  J.,  Text  Book  on
Indian  Agriculture,  vol.  iii,
1910,  318ft1

Moluccas,  the  clove-tree  a
native  of  the,  96ft2

Monier  Williams,  M.,  36ft2
137ft2  ;  Buddhism  in  its  Con-
nection with  Brahmanism  and
Hinduism,  2nd  ed.,  Ldn.,
1890,  lft4

Monmouth,  Geoffrey  of,  154ft2

Morga,  A.  de,  description  of
betel-chewing,  300,  301

Morris,  M.,  Die  Mentawai-
Sprache,  Berlin,  1900,  23  lft7

Moschus,  Satires,  99ft2

Moule,  Rev.  A.  C,  references
to  betel-chewing  in  China,
303k1

Mrichchhakatika,  the,  7ft4

Mrigankadatta's  insult  of
spitting  betel-juice  on  a
minister,  237

Mudaliyar,  A.  M.  Guna-
sekara,  The  Ceylon  Antiquary
and  Literary  Register,  vol.  i,
pt.  2,  Colombo,  1915-1916,
318ft1

Muir,  John,  Original  Sanskrit
Texts,  5  vols.,  Ldn.,  1858-
1872,  152ft1

Muktaphaladhvaja,  son  of
Merudhvaja,  179,  181,  182,
183,  184-187,  189,  191,  197-
205,  207

Muktaphalaketu,  Vidyadhara
prince  named,  133,  143

Muktaphalaketu  and  Pad-
mavatl,  144-155,  156-163,
164-177,  178-192,  193-209

Muktavali,  wife  of  Chandra-
ketu,  150,  153

Muller,  F.  W.  K.,  «  Melanges
— Aus  dem  Wakan  Sansai
Dzuye,"  T'oung  Pao,  Ar-
chives pour  servir  a  I'etude
de  Vhistoire  .  .  .  de  I'Asie
orientate  .  .  .,  vol.  xi,
Leiden,  1895,  231ft3*4

Mundy,  Peter,  account  of
betel-chewing,  266,  266ft*,
267

Murray,  J.  A.  H.,  Oxford
Dictionary,  34ft1

Myrkwood,  a  magic  forest,
222,  222ft2


Nag,    or    cobra,    the    Bara'is

veneration  of  the,  274
Nagas,  snake-demons,  7,  184,

195
Nagasthala,     village     called,

117
Nagasvamin,  Brahman  named,

54
Nagavalli    (Sanskr.),    "leaves

of  the  betel,"  238,  239
Nagbel,    or    serpent-creeper,

the  betel-vine,  274
Nag-Panchmi  (Cobra's  fifth),

the  festival  of,  274
Nat  grass,  272
Nala,  King,  8ft2,  133
Nalangu  ceremony,  betel  and

turmeric  in  the,  281
Nambutiri    Brahmans,    betel

leaves  in  ceremonies  among

the,  280,  281
Nand,  the  foster-father  of  Sri

Krishna,  214,  215
Nandana,  the  garden  of  the

gods,  33,  165,  170
Nandin,  the  bull  of  Siva,  51,

52,85
Narada,    hermit   named,   27,

79,  83,  124,  186
Naravahanadatta,  son  of  the

King  of  Vatsa,   1,   12,   17,

21-31,  31ft1,   32,  32ft3,  33,

34,  36,  37,  37ft1,  39-43,  45-

53,  58,   60-74,   76-82,   84,

85,  85ft2,  86-91,   91ft2,  92,

93,   93ft2,  94,  95,  99,  101-

105,  121-125,  131,  132,  209,

213
Narayana — i.e.  Vishnu,  183
Nassau,    R.    H.,  Fetichism    in

West   Africa,    Ldn.,    1904,

227^'
Naumann,      Hans,     Primitive

Gemeinschaftskultur,    Jena,

1921,  107w
Navami   Puja,   celebration  of

the,  271
Nayar  caste,  betel-chewing  in

death    ceremonies    among

the,  281
Neale,  F.  A.,  Narrative  of  a

Residence  at  the  Capital  of

the  Kingdom  of  Siam,  Ldn.,

1852,  289w2
Negelein,  J.  von,  Der  Traum-

schliissel      des      Jagaddeva,

Giessen,  1911-1912,  lOOn
Nepal,  the  Greater  Cardamom

a  native  of,  96/&1
New    Guinea,  betel-chewing

in  Eastern,  310-314


Nirriti,  guardian  of  the  South-
East,  163W1

Nithuth,  a  king  of  Sweden,
220,  221,  222

Ocrisia,  mother  of  Servius
Tullius,  114W1

Ola — i.e.  the  leaf  of  Corypha
umbraculifera,  252,  252m1

Oldenberg,  H.,  Buddha,  Ldn.,
1882,  125m1

Oliver,  Pasfield,  The  Voyage
of  Francois  Leguat,  2  vols.,
Hakluyt  Society,  Ldn.,
1891,  295W1

Olrun,  one  of  the  three
Valkyries  in  the  Volun-
darkvitha,  221,  222

Orta,  Dr,  one  of  the  two
interlocutors  in  Garcia  da
Orta's  work,  240 ;  Garcia
da,  description  of  betel-
chewing,  241-244 ;  Garcia
da,  Coloquios  dos  simples  .  .  .,
1st  ed.,  Goa,  1563,  240m1

Osiris,  Isis  and  the  dead  body
of,  75ni

O'Sullivan,  A.  W.  S.  See
under  Hurgronje,  C.  S.

Overbeck,  H.  ["Malay
Customs  and  Beliefs"],
Malay  Br.  Roy.  As.  Soc.
Journ.,  vol.  ii,  1924,  and
vol.  iii,  1925,  292

Ovid,  Fasti,  114ft1;  Heroides,
99ft2 ;  Metamorphoses,  69ft1,
149ft2


Padmaprabha,  daughter  of
Mahadamshtra,  67

Padmasana,  posture  of  medita-
tion called,  83,  83ft2

Padmasekhara,  sovereign  of
the  Gandharvas,  146,  150,
153,  157,  159,  162,  163,
164,  170,  208

Padmavatl,  daughter  of  Pad-
masekhara, 143 ;  Mukta-
phalaketu and,  144-155,
156-163,  164-177,  178-192,
193-209 ;  wife  of  the  King
of  Vatsa,  27,  46,  90,  102  ;
wife  of  Muktaphalaketu,
133

Pala  tree,  277

Palaka,  king  named,  101,  103,
105, 106, 110,  112, 115,  118,
120,  121,  122

Palli  or  Vanniyan  caste,  the
origin  of  the,  109ft3


INDEX  I— SANSKRIT  WORDS,  ETC.


331


Paludanus     (Bernard     ten
Broecke),  interpolations  in
the   work   of    Linschoten,
247,  259,  262,  263,  264
Pampa,  lake  called,  43,  45  *
Pan    (or    iambuli),   the    betel
leaf,   238,   247,    268,   270,
271,  284,  285,  287
Pa?i    garden,    sacredness    of

the,  271,  274
"  Pancasugandhikam  "  —  i.e.
"the  five  flavours"  in  betel-
chewing,  246
Pancha,  Book  XIV,  21-69
Panchatantra,  the,  20
Pimdava    brothers,    the   five,

274
Pan-supari,  the  betel  "chew,"
238,   239,    247,   248,    275,
283,  286
Panzer,  F.,  Sigfrid,  Miinchen,

1912,  107ft
Paparipu,  the  holy  water  of,

188
Paraiyan    caste,    betel    in
marriage  ceremoniesamong
the,  281,  282
Parijata  tree,  170,  172,  186
Paris     ["  Die     undankbare
Gattin  '],  Zeit.  d.  Vereins  f.
Volkskande,  vol.  xiii,  Berlin,
]903,  117ft2
Parker,    K.    L.,    Australian
Legendary       Tales,      Ldn.,
1897,  232ft«
Parvati  (Uma,  Durga,  Gauri,
etc.,  wife  of  Siva),  26,  52,
136,    137,    138,    142,    157,
160,    172,    175,    176,    177,
180 ;  condemned  her  Five
Attendants   to    be    reborn
on  Earth,    How,    136-138,
138-142
Pasfield  Oliver.     See   under

Oliver,  Pasfield
Pasupata    ascetic    named

Bhutisiva,  55
Pasupati  (Rudra),  the  weapon
of,  145,  146,  179,  183,  184
Patala,  the  underworld,  103,
108,    179,    180,     181-183,
185,    187,    188, '  189,    191,
191ft1,  193-197,  204
Pataliputra,  city  called,  35,  54
Patel,   P.  C,  "The  Crops  of
the    Bombay    Presidency,"
Bull.    Dep.    Agriculture,
Bombay,  1922,  318ft1
Patra     (or     tejpatra,     Cassia
lignea),   one    of  the   three
aromatic  drugs,  96ft1


Paundra,  the  King  of,  84
Pauraruchideva,     warder     of
the  Vidyadhara  empire,  53
Pavana  or  Vayu,  guardian  of

the  North-West,  163ft1
Peisthetaerus,  Iris  and,  148ft3
Pelew  Islands,  betel-chewing

in  the,  306,  307
Penzer,  N.  M.,   The  Mineral
Resources   of  Burma,    Ldn.
and  New  York,  1922,  65ft1
Philippine      Islands,      betel-
chewing  in  the,  300-302
Pincott,  F.,  The  Prema  Sagara,
or    Ocean   of  Love,    West-
minster, 1897,  214,  214ft1
Pingalagiindhara,  Vidyadhara
named,  33,  47,  48,  50,  52,
64,  73
Pingesvara,      Gana      named,

\Z1,  138,  142
Pin-lang,  areca-nuts,  303,  305
Pipal,  one  of  the  five  leaves

of  trees,  247ft2
Pipalo,  one  of  the  five  leaves

of  trees,  247ft2
Pisachas,  demons,  137,  140
Pitamaha,   the  law   code   of,

196ft
Pleyte,    C.    M.,    Bataksche
Vertellingcn,  Utrecht,  1894,
231ft6
P 1  i  n  y.     Folium    indum    the

malobathrum  of,  244ft1
Pliny,       Naturalis      Historia,
Bonn's  translation,  6  vols.,
Ldn.,  1855-1856,  114ft1
Polivka,   G.,    Bolte,   J.,   and,
Anmerkungen  zu  den  Kinder-
und  Hausm'drchen  der  Br'uder
Grimm,     3    vols.,    Leipzig,
1913  - 1918,     83ft1,     107ft,
109ft2,  117ft2,  182ft1,  216ft1,
217,  217ft1
Pongol,    the    festival    of  the

winter  solstice,  19
Prabhavati,   daughter  of
Pingalagandhara,     33,     34,
36,  39,  43,  45,  46,  47,  62,
63,  90
Prajapati — i.e.    Brahma,    152,

152ft1,  162
Prajnapti,      science     named,

100,  100ft1
Prasenajit,  king  named,  31,
31ft1 ;  The  Young  Chandala
who  married  the  Daughter
of  King,  112,  112ft*,  113,
114
Preller,  L.,  Griechische  Myth-
ologie,    2    vols.,    3rd     ed.,


Preller,  L., — continued

Berlin,  1872-1875,  154ft2;
R'omische  Mythologie,  3rd
ed.,  Berlin,  1881- 1883, 96ft1
156ft1

Prema  Sagara,  the,  214,  214ft1.
See  also  under  Pincott

Priscus,  the  reign  of  Tar-
quinius,  114ft1

Prithivl  or  IsanI,  guardian  of
the  North-East,  163ft1

Prithividevi,  mother  of  Vega-
vatl,  34,  38,  39

Prym,  E.,  and  Socin,  A.
[Der  Neu-Aramaeische
Dialekt  des  Tur  y Abdin\  2
vols.,  Gottingen,  1881;
vol.  ii  also  entitled :  Syr-
ische  Sagen  und  Maerchen,
58ft2

Przyluski,  J.,  "  Emprunts
Anaryens  en  Indo-Aryen,"
Bull,  de  la  Soc.  de  Linguis-
tique  de  Paris,  vol.  xxiv,
1924,  239,  239ft2

Psyche,  story  of,  25ft1

Puga  (areca-nut),  one  of  the
five  flavours  in  betel-
chewing,  246,  247

Purana,  Bhagavata,   the,  214,

214ft1,  216;  Vishnu,  216
Puranas,  the,  108ft1

Pururavas,  the  story  of  Urva^I
and, 216

PushkaravatI,  city  called,  33
Pyrard  of  Laval,  F.,  mention
of  betel-chewing,266, 266ft1

RadlofF,  W.,  Proben  der  Volks-

litteratur       der       tiirkischen

Stamme    Sud-Sibiriens,    pts.

1-6.   St   Petersburg,    1866-

1886,  107ft,  228ft2
Raghu,  Rama's  ancestor,  44
Rahamin,  Atiya  Begum  Fyzee,

The  Music  of  India,  Ldn.,

1925,  95ft1
Rahu   (the  ascending  node),

61
Rajagriha,  city  called,  115
Rajput  named  Suras ena,  97,

98
Rakshasas,  demons,  107,  108,

137,  140,  158,  184,  195
Rakshasi,     female     form     of

Rakshasa,    158,    159,    160,

164,  167,  168,  203
Rakshitika,     a     fisherwoman

called,  115
Raktaksha,  ally  of  Mandara-

deva,  81


332


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


Ralston,    W.    R.    S.,    Russian
Folk-Tales,      Ldn.,      1875,
56ft1,  57ft2,  227ft5
Ralston,    W.    R.    S.,    and
Schiefner,   F.   A.    von,
Tibetan   Tales,  Ldn..   1882,
69ft1,  83ft1,  125ft1,  228ft1
Rama,  43  ;  son  of  Taravaloka,
126,  128,  130  ;  story  of,  44,
44ft1,  45
Ramabhadra — i.e.  Rama,   26,

133
Ramayana,  the,  44ft1
Rambha,  a  heavenly  nymph,

8,  162,  186,  189
Ramstedt,  G.  J.  [Kalm'uckische
Sprachprobeii],  Memoir  es  de
la  Sociele  Finno-ougrienne,
vol.  xxvii,  Helsingfors,
1809,  228ft3
Ramusio's  text  of  Marco  Polo,

246,  257
Rannie,    D.,    My   Adventures
among  South  Sea  Cannibals,
Ldn.,  1912,  310,  310ft2
Rasatala,   one    of  the   seven
hells,  162,  162m1,  184,  185,
191,  191*1,  196,  197
Rasmussen,    K.,    Gronldndska
Myter    och    Sagor,     Stock-
holm,   1926,    228^10;    xye
Mennesker,  Copenhagen  and
Christiania,       1905,      228,
228ft9
Rati,  wife  of  Kama,  2,  11,  23,

71,  87,  108
Ratnaprabha,   wife   of   Nara-

vahanadatta,  46,  47,  90
Ratnas,     or    jewels     of    the

Chakravartin,  72ft
Ravana    (chief  of  the    Rak-

shasas),  7ft4,  25,  83
Rhys,  John,   Lectures  on   the
Origin  and   Growth  of  Re-
ligion .  .  .,    Hibbert    Lec-
tures, Ldn.,  1888,  107ft
Rhys  Davids,  T.  W.,  Buddhism,
Ldn.,  1890,  127m1;  Buddhist
Birth   Stories,    Ldn.,    1880,
135ft2;  Buddhist   Suttas
Translated  from  Pali,  No.  6,
Sacred  Books  of  the  East
Series,  Oxford,  1881,  71ft2
Ribhukshan,  one  of  the  three

£ibhus,  19
Ribhus,   the   three,  seasonal

deities,  19
Richard       II's      coronation,

account  of,  88ft1
Ridley,     H.     N.,    on     betel-
chewing,  243ft1,  291


Ridley,  H.  N.,  The  Flora
of  the  Malay  Peninsula,
5  vols.,  Ldn.,  1922-1925,
290,  290ft1;  Spices,  Ldn.,
1912,  18,  96ft2,  247

Rink,  H.,  Tales  and  Traditions
of  the  Eskimo,  Edinburgh,
1875,  228ft9

Rishabha,  emperor  of  the
Vidyadharas,  74,  75,  83,
124  ;  mountain,  the,  85,  86,
89,  94

Rishabhaka,  emperor  called,

%  85

Rishis,  the,  182,  185

gishyamuka,  the  mountain
of,  42-44

Risley,  H.  H.,  The  Tribes  and
Castes  of  Bengal,  4  vols.,
Calcutta,  1891,  271ft1

Rivers,  W.,  The  History  of
Melanesian  Society,  2  vols.,
Cambridge,  1914,  310,  317,
317ft1

Robertson,  J.  A.,  Blair,  E.  H.,
and,  The  Philippine  Islands,
55  vols.,  Cleveland,  Ohio,
1903-1909,  302,  302ft2

Rockhill,  W.  W.,  Hirth,  F.,
and,  Chau  Ju-Kua :  His
Work  on  the  Chineseand  Arab
Trade,  Imperial  Academy
of  Sciences,  St  Petersburg,
1911,  256ft1,  303ft2

Roe,  Sir  Thomas,  mention  of
betel-chewing,  266,  266ft2

Romilly,  H.,  From  my  Ver-
andah in  New  Guinea,  Ldn.,
1889,  232ft2

Rose,  H.  J.,  Primitive  Culture
in  Italy,  Ldn.,  1926,  114ft1

Rost,  Dr,  13ft1,  33ft1

Roth,  H.  Ling,  The  Natives  of
Sarawak  and  British  North
Borneo,  2  vols.,  1896,  253,
253ft2, 298ft1 ;  Oriental  Silver-
work,    Malay    and    Chinese,
Ldn.,  1910,  253,  253ft1
Roth,  R.,  Bohtlingk,  O.,  and
[Sanskrit  Dictionary],  1852-
1875,   62ft1,    135ft2,    143ft1,
160ft1,  167ft2,  170ft1,  186ft1
Ruano,   Dr,  one   of  the   two
interlocutors  in   the   work
of  Garcia    da    Orta,    240,
241-244
Ruchideva,  warder  named,  91
Ruchiradeva,  the  sister  of,  90
Rudra,  145,  146,  155,  183
Rukmini,    legend     of,     10;
wife  of  Krishna,  46


Rumanvat,    minister    of   the
King  of  Vatsa,  22,  23,  101

Ruru,     a    Danava    slain    by
Durga,  77,  77ft3

Russell,  R.  V.,  The  Tribes  and
Castes  of  the   Central  Pro-
vinces   of    India,    4    vol
Ldn.,  1916,  19,  273ft1


:


Sachi,  wife  of  Indra,  88,  141

155,  162
Safford,   W.   E.,    The    Useful

Plants    of    the    Island    of

Guam,    Smithsonian    Inst.,

Washington,    1905,    308ft2,

309ft1- 2
Sagaradatta,  king  named,  28,

29,  47,  50,  53,  64,  73
St  John,  Spencer,  Life  in  the

Forests    of   the    Far    East,

2nd    ed.,    2    vols.,     Ldn.,

1863,  296,  296ft2
Sakra,  king  of  the  gods,  83ft1
Saktis  ("  energies  ")  of  Siva,

the,  75ft2
Saktiyasas,    wife    of  Narava-

hanadatta,  90
Samadhisthala,   Indra's  tem-
porary residence,  147,  150
Sampati  (the  vulture  son  of

Garuda),  44
Samyataka,  friend  of  Mukta-

phalaketu,    163,    170,    171,

172,    173,    181,    198,    200,

201,  202,  205
Sandhyavasa,    village   called,

55
Sangramasimha,    governor
f   over  Patala,' 185,  189
Sankhahrada,  lake  called,  7,

13,  14
Sankhapala,  King  of  the

Nagas,  7
Sankhapura,  city  called,  7
Sankranti,  the  day  on  which

the  sun  enters  a  fresh  sign

of  the  zodiac,  19
Santisoma,  priest  named,  25,

87
Sarasas,  large  cranes,  24,  135,

135ft1
Sarasvati,  the  goddess,  1,  29
Sarvadamana,      emperor

named,  124
Sastras,  the,  134
Satapatha  Brahmana,  the,  216
Satyabhama,  wife  of  Krishna,

46
Saville,  W.  V.  J.,  In  Unknown

New    Guinea,    Ldn.,    1926,

314ft1


INDEX  I— SANSKRIT  WORDS,  ETC.


333


Savitrl  and  Angiras,  Story  of,

22-23
Savitri,  the  goddess,  23,  47
Schiefner,    A.,    Die    Helden-
sagen      der       minussinschen
Tataren,     St     Petersburg,
1859,  228ft2
Schiefner,  F.  A.  von,  Ralston,
W.     R.     S.,    and,     Tibetan
Tales,    Ldn.,    1882,    69ft\
83ft1,  125ft1,  228ft1
Schmidt,    Bernhard,     Griech-
ische  Sagen  and  Volkslieder,
Leipzig,  1877,  57ft2
SchofF,  W.    H.,  reference  to

betel-chewing,  255ft2
Schoff,   W.    H.,   "Camphor,"
Journ.    Amer.    Orient.    Soc,
vol.  xlii,  1922,  246,  246ft2
Scidmore,     E.    R.,    Java    the
Garden   of  the  East,    New
York,  1898,  295ft3
Scott,  Sir  J.    G.,  286.     See
also     under     Shway     Yoe
(pseud.)
Scott,  J.,  The  Arabian  Nights'
Entertainments,  6  vols.,  Ldn.,
1811,  227ft3;  Bahar-Danush,
3  vols.,  Shrewsbury,   1799,
227ft2
Scott,   W.,    The  Lady  of  the

Lake,  114ft1
Sea  ton,    M.    E.,    "Swan-
Maidens,"  Hastings'  Ency.
ReL  Eth.,  vol.  xii,  219m1
Seligmann,  C.  G.,  The  Melan-
esia?^ of  British  New  Guinea,
Cambridge,  1910,  310
Sen,  K.  N.  N.,  The  Vaidyaka-
sabda-sindhu,     Calcutta,
1913-1914,  246
Senaikkudaiyan,    caste   of
betel-vine  cultivators,  282
Senart,    E.,    The    Mahavastu,
2    vols.,    Paris,    1882-1890,
71ft2
Servius  Tullius,  the  birth  of,

114ft1
Sesha,  the  serpent  of  Vishnu,

151
Sewell,  R.,  and  Dikshit,  S.  B.,
The  Indian  Calendar',  Ldn.,
1896,  19
Shakespeare,      Julius     Caesar,

99ft1,  156ft1
Sheering,  M.  S.,  Hindu  Tribes
and  Castes,  3  vols.,  Calcutta,
1872,  1879  and  1881,
270ft2
Sherlf,  description  of  betel-
chewing,  255-256


Shway  Yoe  (Sir  J.  G.  Scott),

The  Burman,   his  Life  and

Notions,2nd  ed.,  Ldn.,  1896,

286n5

Siam,  betel-chewing  in,  287,

288,  289
Siddhakshetra,  48ft1
Siddhas,  independent  super-
humans,    43,    48,    52,    67,
85ft2,    161,   176,  204,  207,
208
Siddhisvara,    a    sacred   place
of  Siva,  138ft1,  143,  143ft1,
152,  177,  199,  202,  203,  209
Siddhodaka,   holy    water

called,  199,  207
Siebs,  T.  ["  Neues  zur  ger-
manischen  Mythologie  "],
Mittheil.  d.  schles.  Gesell.  f
Volkskunde,  vol.  xxv,  1924,
225ft2
Sigala  Jataka,  the.   No.   142,

112ft4
Silius  Italicus,  Punica,  154ft2
Simha,   chief  of  the    Vidya-

dharas,  30
Sinclair,  W.  F.,   The  1 ravels
of  Pedro  Teixeira,  Hakluyt
Society,  Ldn.,  1902,  259ft2
Siri  leaf — i.e.  betel  leaf,  253,

296,  305

Sirlh  fruits  given  as  present

to    future     bride,    297  ;

spittle   used   as   a    charm,

,  294

Sirisha   flower,   body    like    a,

172
Slta,  wife  of  Rama,  7ft4,  26,

44,45
Siva,  1,  7,  7ft4,  21,  22,  23,  27,
38,  42,  47,  48,  51,  52,  55,
57,  59,  60,  60ft2,  68m1,  71,
72,  73,  74,  75,  75ft2,  77,
77ft1,  81,  82,  83,  85,  87,
89,  102,  110,  120,  121,  131,
132,  132ft1,  133,  133ft3,  136,
138,  141,  142,  143,  146,
147,  148,  150-157,  159-161,
163,  164,  167,  169,  171,
175-180,  183,  186,  187,  188,
189,  190,  197,  198,  199,
200,  203,  205,  206,  207,
t  209,  277,  280
Sivabhuti,    minister    of

Brahmadatta,  134,  142
Sivakshetra,  hermitage  called,

54
Sivis,  the  (Sibis),  125,  125ft1
Skeat,  W.  W.,  Malay  Magic,

Ldn.,  1900,  290ft4
Skeat,  W.  W.,  and  Blagden,


Skeat — continued

C.  O.,  Pagan  Races  of  the
Malay    Peninsula,     2  vols.,
Ldn.,     1906,    289,    289w3,
290n2-  3
Slagfith,  a  son  of  the  king  of

the  Finns,  221,  222
Smith,  M.  Staniforth,  Annual
Report,   British    New
Guinea,  1911,  312

Smith,  V.  A.,  Travels  in  the
Mogul  Empire  a.d.  1656-
1668  by  Francois  Bernier,
2nd  ed.,  Oxford,  1914,
267w3

Smith,  W.,  Dictionary  of
Greek  and  Roman  Antiquities,
3rd  ed.,  Ldn.,  1890-1891,
156ni

Smith,  W.  A.,  The  Ao  Naga
Tribe  of  Assam,  1925,  284,
284w*,  286W1

Snorri  Sturluson,  "the
Younger"  Edda,  220

Sobhavati,  city  called,  2

Socin,  A.,  and  Prym,  E.
[Der  Neu-Aramaeische
Dialekt  des  Tur  'Abdin],
2  vols.,  Gottingen,  1881 ;
vol.  ii  also  entitled:  Syrische
Sagen  und  Maerchen,  57w2

Solomon  Islands,  betel-
chewing  in  the,  314-316

Soma,  the  kinsuka  tree  sacred
to,  7w3

Soma  or  Chandra,  guardian
of  the  North-East,  162ft1

Somadeva,  Brahman  named,
139;  {The  Katha  Saril
Sagara),  114ft1,  213,  237,
238,  245,  246,  247,  255

Somaprabha,  wife  of
Brahmadatta,  134,  134ft1,
142

Sontheimer,  J.  von,  Grosse
Zusammenstellung  uber  die
Krafte  .  .  .  von  Abdullah
Ben  Ahmed  .  .  .,2  vols.,
Stuttgart,  1840-1842,  255ft2

Southey,  R.,  Old  Woman  of
Berkeley,  56ft1

Soy  Yo,  "  Antiquity  of  the
Castanet,"  Once  a  Week,
vol.  viii,  1863,  95ft1

Spain  from  the  East,  the  Cas-
tanet introduced  into,  95ft1

Speyer,  J.  S.,  Studies  about
the  Kathasaritsagara,
Amsterdam,  1908,  16ft,
31ft3,  37ft1,  60ft2,  63ft1-2,
87ft2,  91ft2


334


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


Sravasti,  city  called,  31,  Sin1,

t  45,  97

Sri    Krishna    stealing    the

clothes  of  the   Braj   girls,

214,  215
Sruta,    daughter    of  Dirgha-

damshtra,  84
Stack,  E.,  The  Mikirs,  Ldn.,

1908,  285*1*
Stanley,     H.     E.     J.,      The

Philippine   Islands  .   .   .  By

Antonio  de  Morga,  Hakluyt

Society,   Ldn.,    1868,    300,

300ft1
Steere,  E.,  Swahili  Tales,  2nd

ed.,  Ldn.,  1889,  227ft10
Stephens,  G.  A.,  "  Eating  or

Chewing    of    Pan,"     West-
minster Review,  vol.  clxviii,

New  York,   August    1907,

318m1
Stevenson,  Mrs  Sinclair,  The

Rites    of    the     Twice-Born,

Oxford  Univ.  Press,  1920,

18,  277
Stober,     A.,     Alsatia,     1858-

1861,  107ft
Stuart,  G.  A.,  Chinese  Materia

Medica,     Shanghai,     1911,

305
Stumme,    H.,    M'drchen     der

Schluh    vo7i    T  azerw  alt,

Leipzig,     1895,    227ft8;

Tunisische      M'drchen      und

Gedichte,  2  vols.,   Leipzig,

1893,  227ft«
Sturluson,    Snorri,    "  the

Younger  "  Edda,  220
Subahu,  Daitya  named,  148
Suddhodana,  Raja,  Gautama's

father,  127ft1
Sudharma,  hall  of  the  gods,

40,  40ft2
Sugriva    (king    of    the

monkeys),  44
Sulochana,    daughter     of

Amitagati,  52
Sumatra,    betel-chewing    in,

292-295
Sumeru,  Mount,  82
Sumitra,  Yakshini  named,  56
Supari,    the    areca-nut,    238,

239,  247,  285
Suprahara,  a  young  fisherman,

115,  116,  117
Supratishthita,     city     called,

112
Surabhi,  the  sacred  cow,  ful-
filling all  wishes,  55,  85
Surasena,  Rajput  named,  97,

98


Suratamanjan,  Book  XVI,
94-131 ;  Chandala  maiden
named,  112,  il5,  120,  121,
122 ;  daughter  of  Matan-
gadeva,  105,  106,  121,  122,
124

Surya,  guardian  of  the  South-
West,  163ft1

Sushena,  wife  of  Surasena,
97,  98

Susruta  (first  century  a.d.
or  B.C.),  mention  of  betel,
254,  255 ;  mention  of  car-
damom {ela),  96ft1

Svayamprabha,  wife  of  Trailo-
kyamalin,  185,  187,  188,
189, 190, 191, 194,  195,  196,
198

Svayamvara  (marriage  by
choice),  29ft1,  30ft1

Svetadvlpa,  151,  151ft2

Svetasaila,  the  cave  of,  184,
187,  193

Swan- White,  one  of  the  three
Valkyries  in  the  Volundar-
kvitha,  221,  222

Syed  Siraj  Ul  Hassan,  The
Castes  and  Tribes  of
H.E.H.  the  Nizam  s  Dom-
inions, vol.  i,  Bombay,  1920,
274,  275


Taels,  Sinhalese  weight, 256ft1
Talajangha,    demon    named,

61
Tamboli     (Tamoli,      Tamdi),

caste  connected  with  betel,

270,  274
Tambula,  the  usual  Sanskrit

word    for    betel    "chew,"

238,  239
Tambuli   (or   pan),   the   betel

leaf,  238
Tanaquil,  Queen,  114ft1
Tanda  Pulaiyan  caste,  betel

used  among  the,  282
Tapincha  tree,  7,  7ft2
Tapodhana,    hermit    named,

172,    175,    178,    179,    180,

181,    184,    185,    198,   201,

206,  208
Taravaloka,  emperor  over  the

Vidyadharas,  124;  Story  of,

125-131
Tarkshyaratna,  a  jewel,  135ft2
Tarquinius  Priscus,  the  reign

of,  114ft1
Tavernier,  J.  R.  (1643-1649),

description     of     betel-
chewing,  295,  295ft1


Tawney,  C.  H.,  12ft1, 19,  32ft3,
34ft1,  58ft3,  60ft3,  63ft1,  71ft2,
75ft2,  95ft1,  108ft1
Tawney,      C.      H.,      The
Kathakoca  ;  or  Treasury  of
Stories,  Roy.  As.  Soc,  1895,
29ft1
Taylor,  R.,  Te  lka  A  Maui;
or  New  Zealand  and  its  In-
habitants,   2nd    ed.,    Ldn.,
1870,  232ft7
Teixeira,  Pedro  (1586-1615),
mention  of  betel-chewing,
259,  259ft2
Tejpatra    or    pair  a,    one     of
the  three  aromatic  drugs,
96ft1
Temple,  R.  C,  The  Countries
Round  the  Bay  of  Bengal,
Hakluyt     Society,     Ldn.,
1905,    292ft3,    293ft1;    The
Travels    of   Peter    Mundy,
4    vols.,    Hakluyt  Society,
Ldn.,    1905,    1914,     1919,
1924,  266ft6,  267ft2
Terry,   Edward,    mention    of

betel-chewing,  266,  266ft3
Thincsus,    Mars,    altars    de-
dicated to,  225
Thomson,     Basil,     Amherst,
Lord,  and,  Discovery  of  the
Solomon    Islands,    Hakluyt
Society,   Ldn.,    1901,   314,
314ft2
Thumb,  A.  ["Zur  neugriech-
ischen  Volkskunde  "],  Zeit.
d.    Vereins   f.     Volkskunde,
vol.     ii,     Berlin,     1892,
117ft2
Thurn,  E.  im  ["  Piper  Methy-
sticum  in  Betel-chewing  "],
Man,  vol.  xxii,  April  192^
311,  311ft2
Thurston,  E.,  Castes  and  Tribe
of  Southern  India,  7  vols.
Madras,  1909,  109ft3,  112?
275,  275ft1- 2
Tiele,  P.  A.,  Burnell,  A.  C.
and,    The    Voyage  of  Jo)
Huyghen  van  Linschoten,
vols.,      Hakluyt      Society
Ldn.,  1885,  259,  259ft3
Tikopia  Island, betel-chewing
in  the,  316-317 ;  the  most
easterly    point    of    betel-
chewing,  248,  310
Tikshnadamshtra,  Devj

maya's  ally,  74
Til    Sankrant,    entry    of    the
sun  into  Makara  or  Capri
corn,  19,  20


73  U

:


INDEX  I— SANSKRIT  WORDS,  ETC.


Tille,      V.,      Verzeichnis     der

Bohmischen     Mar  c  hen    (FF

Communications  34),  1921,
107w
Tilottama,  a  heavenly  nymph,

189
Tiruvatira,  festival  called,  280
Tobler,  O.,  Die  Epiphanie  der

Seele    deutscker     Volkssage,

Kiel,  1911,  107ft
Toreya     caste,     betel     used

among  the,  283
Touche,   La.     See  under  La

Touche
Trailokyamalin,  king  named,

183,    184,    185,    187,    188,

191, 193, 195, 196,  197,  199,

204,  207,  208
Trailokyaprabha,  daughter  of

Trailokyamalin,    185,    188,

189,  197,  204,  207
Tribhivanaprabha,    daughter

of     Trailokyamalin,      185,

188,  190,  197,  208
Trida^a  mountain,  the,  143
Tripura,  the  slayer  of,  Siva,

151
Tri&rsha,    the    cave    of,    an

epithet  of  Siva,  68,   68ft1,

73,  74,  75,  76,  85
Tri-sugandhi,   the  three  aro-
matic drugs,  96ft1
Tula,  coin,  93ft1
Tullius,  the  birth  of  Servius,

114ft1
Turner,  G.,  Samoa  a  Hundred

Years    Ago,     Ldn.,     1884,

232ft5
Tvak  or  gudatvak  (cinnamon),

one  of  the  three  aromatic

drugs,  96ft1
Typhosus,  the  giant,  149ft2


Udayana,  the  King  of  Vatsa,

89 ;    for  rescuing  a  snake,

reward  given  to,  237
Udumbara,    one    of    the   five

leaves  of  trees,  247ft2
Ujjayini,   city    called,   5,   61,

100,    101,    103,    105,    106,

107,  110,  120,  121
Ul  Hassan,  Syed  Siraj.     See

under  Hassan,  S.  S.  Ul
Ulfdalir,  the  home  of  Volund,

221,  222
Ulysses,  by  Hermes,  the  Moly

given  to,  56ft2 ;  in  the  island

of  Calypso,  92ft1
Uma    (Parvati,    Gaurl,    etc.,

wife  of  Siva),  21


Upanayana  ceremony,  betel
and  areca  in  the,  276

UrvasT,  a  heavenly  nymph,
189 ;  and  Pururavas,  the
story  of,  216

Ushas,  the  Navami  Puja  cele-
brated in  honour  of,  271

Utpalahasta,  Matanga named,
112,  120,  121

Uttarayana,  the,  northward
movement  of  the  sun,  19

Vaidyaka-sabda-sindhu,  Hindu

medical     dictionary,     246.

See  also  under  Sen,  K.N.N.
Vaja,  one  of  the  three  Ribhus,

19
Vajramushti,  king  named,  73,

74
Vajraprabha,   son    of   Heraa-

prabha,  47
Vakrapura,  city  called,  52,  53
Vakrolaka,  city  called,  54
Vakula  tree,  96,  96ft3
Valle,  Pietro  Delia,  mention

of     betel  -  chewing,     266,

266ft*
Vamadatta,      a      merchant's

daughter,  120
Vamadeva,  hermit  named,  70-

72
Vanniyan  or  Palli  caste,  the

origin  of  the,  109ft3
Varaha,  king  named,  73,  74
Varanasi,  city  called,  133
Varnhagen,  F.  A.  de,  reprint

of  Garcia  da   Orta's  Colo-

quios  .   .  .,    Lisbon,    1872,

243ft3,  245
Varthema,Ludovicodi  (1505),

description    of   betel-
chewing,  258
Vartin — i.e.  "  abiding  in,"  72ft
Varuna,    the    ruler    of    the

West,    64,    108ft1,    163ft1,

184,  215
Vasantaka,  minister  of  Nara-

vahanadatta,  24
Vasantatilaka,  King  of  Chedi,

124
Vasavadatta,  wife  of  the  King

of  Vatsa,  27,  46,  90,  91,  93,

100,  102
Vassal,    G.   M.,    On   and    Off

Didy  in  Annam,  Ldn.,  1910,

287ft2
Vasuki,     the     king     of    the

serpents,  274ft1
Vasumati,    Brahman   named,

55
Vatapi,  giant  named,  109ft3


335

Vatsa,  the  King  of,  Udayana,
1,2,  12,  13,21,  22,  23,25,
26,  27,  29,  30,  39,  45,  46,
47,  89,  90,  91,  92,  92ft1,  93,
100,  101,  102,  103,  121

Vatsa,  the  Prince  of,  Nara-
vahanadatta,  17

Vaux,  Carra  de.  See  under
Carra  de  Vaux

Vayu,  the  god  of  the  wind,
160ft1 ;  or  Pavana,  guardian
of  the  North-West,  163ft1

Vayupatha,  king  named,  40-
42,  47,  50,  53,  64,  65,  66,
69,  73,  88,  89,  93,  106,  123

Vayuvegaya^as,  sister  of
Vayupatha,  65,  66,  67,  90

Vedas,  the,  2

Vegavat,  king  named,  25,  46

VegavatI,  Vidyadhari  named,
24-27,  30,  34,  37,  38,  39,
46,  53,  62,  90

Velent  (Weland,  Volund,
Wayland)  the  Smith,  220

Vetalas,  demons,  62

Vibhvan,  one  of  the  three
Ribhus,  19

Victoria  and  Albert  Museum,
collections  of  betel  im-
plements, 250

Vidyadhara  court,  Narava-
hanadatta  before  the,  40-
42  ;  territory,  two  divisions
of  the,  47,  48,  80,  89

Vidyadharas,  independent
superhumans,  9,  22,  23,  25,

27,  30,  31,  33,  34,  37,  38,
40,  41,  42,  43,  45,  47-52,
59,  61-64,  66-75,  75ft3,  76,
78,  80-89,  92-94,  97,  101,
103,  105,  106,  121,  122,
124,  125,  129-133,  146,  148,
149, 150, 152-156,  161,  163,
164,  168,  169,  174,  178,
187,  194,  200,  201,  205,
205ft1,  206,  207,  208,  209

Vidyadhari,  female  form  of
Vidyadhara,  22,  24,  25,  27  .

28,  29,  34,  45,  59,  63,  122
Vidyuddhvaja,  son  of  Vidyut-

prabha,  143-157,  159,  160-

164,  208
Vidyutprabha,   king    named,

144,  146
Vidyutpunja,      Vidyadhara

named,  67,  73
Vidyutpunja,      daughter      of

Vidyutpunja,  67
Vijayanagar,  account  of  the

Court  of  ('Abdu-r-Razzaq),

257


336


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


Vijayasena,ayoung  Kshatriya,

3,4
Vimala,  city  called,  82
Vinadatta,  Gandharva  named,

28,29
Vinayavati,    wife    of    Meru-

dhvaja,  204
Vindhya  mountain,  the,  54
Virabahu,  king  named,  118
Viravara,  the  faithful  servant,

237
Virgil,    JEncid,   49m1,    141w2;

Georgics,  49ft1
Visala,  city  called,  2
Vishnu,   10,  28-30,  60,   60w2,

72n,  76,  82w,  151,  152,  153,

161,  277
Vishnu  Pur  ana,  the,  216
Visuddhimagga,  Buddhaghosa,

254w2
Visvakarman,    the    architect

of  the  gods,  169
Visvantara,   emperor  named,

124
Volund  (Velent,  Weland,  etc.)

the  Smith,  220  ;  a  son  of  the

king  of  the  Finns,  221,  222

Warneck,  J.,  "  Studien  iiber
die  Litteratur  der  Toba-
Batak,"  Mittheil.  d.  Sent,
f.  orient.  Sprach.,  vol.  ii,
Stuttgart  and  Berlin,  1899,
231^6

Watt,  G.,  A  Dictionary  of  the
Economic  Products  of  India,
6  vols.,  Calcutta,  1889-
1896,  7w2-3,  8ni,  18,  65»i,
96wi,  2, 3, 5}  243n2,  247,  249,
318ft1

Wayland  (Volund,  Welund,
etc.)  the  Smith,  220

Webster,  H.  Cayley-.  See
under  Cayley- Webster

Webster,  John,  The  Dutchess
of  Malfey,  A  Tragedy,
54ft1,  156ft1

Weland  (Volund,  Wayland,
etc.)  the  Smith,  220


Wesselski,  A.,  M'drchen  des
Mittelalters,  Berlin,  1925,
117ft2

Westermarck,  E.,  Ritual  and
Belief  in  Morocco,  2  vols.,
Ldn.,  1926,  100ft

White,  J.,  The  Ancient
History  of  the  Maori,  6
vols.,  Wellington,  1887-
1890,  232ft7

White,  W.  G.,  The  Sea
Gypsies  of  Malaya,  Ldn.,
1922,  287,  287ft1

Wick  ham,  E.  C,  Quinti
Horatii  Flacci  Opera  Omnia,
2  vols.,  Oxford,  1874,  1891,
99ft2

Wilken,  G.  A.,  "Jets  over
Schedelvereering  bij  de
volken  van  den  Indischen
Archipel,"  Bijdragen  tot
de  Taal,  Land  .  .  .  van
Nederlandsch  Indie,  vol.  iv,
1889,  297ft1

Wilkins,  W.  J.,  Hindu  Myth-
ology, Calcutta,  1882,  77ft2

Williams,  M.  Monier.  See
under  Monier  Williams

Williamson,  Prof.,  on  betel-
chewing  and  Zrautf-drinking,
310

Williamson,  R.  W.,  The
Mafulu  Mountain  People  of
British  New  Guinea,  Ldn.,
1912,  313ft1;  The  Social
and  Political  Systems  of
Central  Polynesia,  3  vols.,
Cambridge,  1924,  210W1

Wilson,  Captain  Henry,  306.
See  also  under  Keate,  G.

Wilson,  Prof.  H.  Hay  man,  on
story  in  Book  XIII,  17ft1

Winstedt,  R.  O.,  "  Notes  on
Malay  Magic,"  Malay  Br.
Roy.  As.  Soc.  Journ.,  vol.
iii,  pt.  3,  December  1925,
292,  292wi;  Papers  on
Malay  Subjects,  pt.  2 :  The
Circumstances      of      Malay


Winstedt — continued

Life,  Kuala  Lumpur,  1909,

29b*1
Woodford,     Mr    C.     M.,    on

betel-chewing,  306,  315
Wiinsche,  A.,  Schopfung  und

Siindenfall  des  erst  en  Men-

schenpaares,  Leipzig,  1906,

vol.  ii  of  Ex  Oriente  Lux,

117n2

Yadavas,  Sudharma,  the  hall

of  the,  40w2
Yajnadeva,  son  of  Somadeva,

139
Yajnasoma,  Brahman  named,

138
Yajnasthala,  a  royal  grant  to

Brahmans,  138
Yajnavalkya-smriti,     the     law

code  of  the  Mithila  school,

195w3,  196n
Yakshas,  subjects  of  Kuvera,

24,25
Yakshini,     female     form     of

Yaksha,  56,  57
Yama,  guardian  of  the  South,

163wi
Ya^askara,  Brahman  named,  2
Yaugandharayana,      minister

of  the  King  of  Vatsa,  27,

46,  90,  101,  102
Yoe,    Shway.        See    under

Shway  Yoe
Yojanas,  measures  of  distance,

12,  55,  105
Yugas  (or  Ages  of  the  World),

1
Yule,   H.,    The  Book  of  Ser

Marco  Polo,  3rd  ed.,  2  vols.,

Ldn.,  1903,  245, 246, 246w3

247,  256,  257
Yule,   H.,  and   Cordier,   H.,

Cathay  and  the  Way  Thither,

4   vols.,    Hakluyt  Society,

Ldn.,  1913-1916,  96w2

Zimmer,     H.,     Altindischt
Leben,  Berlin,  1879,  156nx


I


INDEX  II

GENERAL


Abduction  of  Suratamanjari,
the,  105,  106

Abhandl.  d.  M'unchener
Akademie,  Studien  zur  ger-
maiiischen  Sagengeschichte,
I,  Der  V alky  rienmy  thus,
W.  Golther,  vol.  xviii,
1890,  224ft1

Abhandl.  f.  d.  Kunde  d.
Morgen.,  "  Das  Aupapatika
Sutra,"  E.  Leumann,  vol.
viii,  Leipzig,  1883,  254ft3

Abodes,  the  gods  leaving
their  old,  149,  149ft2

Abrege  des  Merveilles,  L\
Carra  de  Vaux,  227ft3

Absent  husband,  a  single
lock  worn  in  mourning  for,
34,  36,  36ft2

Acacia  catechu,  cutch,  an  ex-
tract from,  278,  287

Academy,  "  Antimony,"  L.  L.
Bonaparte,  23rd  February
1884,  65m1

Accessories  to  betel-chewing,
249-254

Account  of  Assam,  Statistical,
W.  H.  Hunter,  284ft*

Account  of  the  Manners  and
Customs  of  the  Modern
Egyptians,  An,  E.  W.  Lane,
196ft

Account  of  the  Pelew  Islands
.  •  .  oj  Henry  Wilson,  An,
George  Keate,  306ft1

Account  of  the  method  of
making  cutch,  278-280  ;  of
Richard  II's  coronation,
88W1

Accounts  of  betel-chewing
in  the  East  Indian  Archi-
pelago, 292-302  ;  of  betel
by  travellers  to  India  be-
fore a.d.  1800,  255-270;  of
the  history  of  the  clove
trade,  96ft2

Achchnese,  The,  C.  S.
Hurgronje,  293ft2,  294ft1-  2

Aconite  poison,  usually  one
of  the  five  ordeals,  196ft

VOL.    VIII.


Act  of  truth,  the,  189,  190,

190a1
Action    of  the  lime  on  the

betel-juice,  red  saliva  from

the,  315
Adoring     the      fire,     prince

coloured  yellow  by,  33
Adulterer  oiled  and  curled,

head  of  an,  107
Adulterous  woman,  the  ordeal

of  the  (in  Numbers),  196ft
Adventures   among    Soidh   Sea

Cannibals,  My,  D.  Rannie,

310ft2
Mneid,  Virgil,  49ft1,  141ft2
Agallochum     or     Lign-Aloes

used  in  betel-chewing,  243,

243ft2
Age,  a  crest-jewel  as  talisman

against  old,  194,  195,  195ft1;

hair   seized    by   old,    101 ;

tone  of  castanets  improve

with,  95ft1
Agreement  of  five  Vidyadhara

maidens,  the,  66,  67,  84
Agricultural    side    of   betel-
chewing,  the,  318,  318W1
Agricultural    Bulletin    of    the

Federated      Malay      States,

"The  Betel  Leaf  or  Sirih,"

vol.  vi,  1918,  318ft1;  "The

Betel  Nut  Industry  in  the

Muar     District,     Johore,"

vol.  v,  1917,  318ft1
cAin    I   Akbarl   by  Abu-l-Fazl

'4llami>      H.     Blochmann,

264ft*
Air,  flying  through  the,   26,

27,  31,  34,  36,  46,  50,  52,

55,  56,  59,  61,  69,  72,  89,
'  121,    131,    173,   206,   223,

224
Air-going  elephants,  the  two,

179-181
Alaisiages,    the     Valkyries

were  originally,  225,  225ft1,

226
Algerie    traditionelle,    L\     A.

Certeux  and  E.  H.  Carnoy,

227ft7

337


Algonquin  Legends  of  New
England,  The,  Ch.  Lei  and,
228ft8

Allerlei  aus  Folks-  und  Men-
schenkunde,  A.  Bastian,
232ft3

Almisquere  (almisere,  almiscre
or  almisque)  in  betel-
chewing,  use  of,  244,  247ft1

Alsatia,  A.  Stober,  107ft

Altars  at  Housesteads
(Northumberland),  early
evidence  of  Valkyrie  tra-
dition on,  224,  224ft3,  225

Altindisches  Leben,  H.  Zimmer,
156ft1

Ambergris  in  betel-chewing,
use  of,  243,  243ft2,  246,  264

Ambre  used  in  betel-chewing,
244

American  Folk-Lore,  the
Journal  of,  228ft8,  231ft5.
For  details  see  under  Journal

°f  :■  ■

American  Oriental  Society,
Journal  of  the,  246ft2.  For
details  see  under  Journal
of  the  American  .  .  .

Amomum  subulatum,  the
Greater  Cardamom,  96ft1

Amount  of  betel  leaves  used
by  Indians,  daily,  260

Amulets  in  form  of  images  of
birds  given  at  the  winter
solstice,  19

Ancient  History  of  the  Maori,
The,  J.  White,  232ft7

Angami  Nagas,  The,  J.  H.
Hutton,  284ft2

Animal,  Life  bound  up  with,
in  the  "  External  Soul  "
motif,  107ft ;  transforma-
tions, 79,  80,  80ft1

Animals,  gold-  and  jewel-
spitting,  59ft3;  grateful,
219

Anmerkungen  zu  den  Kinder-
und  Hausmdrchen  der  Br'uder
Grimm,  J.  Bolte  and  G.
Polivka,  83ft1,  107ft,  109ft2,


338


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


Anmerkungen — continued
117ft2,    182ft1,   216ft1,   217,
217ft1

Annam,  On  and  Off  Duty  in,
G.  M.  Vassal,  287ft2

Annual  Report,  British  New
Guinea,  M.  Staniforth
Smith,  312

Annual  Report  of  the  Bureau
of  Ethnology  of  the  Smith-
sonian Institute  [*'  The
Central  Eskimo"],  R.  Boas,
Washington,  1888,  228ft8

Annual  Report  on  the  Mun-
nipore  Political  Agency,
R.  Brown,  286ft3

Anthropological  Institute,
Journal  of  the,  253ft3.  For
details  see  under  Journ.
Anth.  Inst.

Anthropological  Society  of
Bombay,  Journal  of  the,  In*,
18.  For  details  see  under
Journ.  Anthr.  Soc.  Bomb.

Antimony,  eyes  reddened  by,
64,  65,  65ft1;  in  India,
small  occurrence  of,  65ft1 ;
the  Mountain  of,  108,
108ft1 ;  probable  derivation
of  the  word,  65ft1

"  Antimony,"  L.L.  Bonaparte,
Academy,  65ft1

Antiquities,  Dictionary  of  Greek
and  Roman,  W.  Smith,
156ft1

Antiquities  of  India,  L.  D.
Barnett,  78ft1

"  Antiquity  of  the  Castanet,"
Soy  Yo,  Once  a  Week,  95ft1

Anxiety  shown  by  eyes
turned  inwards,  49

Ao  Naga  Tribe  of  Assam,  The,
W.  C.  Smith,  284ft4,  286ft1

Ao  Nagas,  The,  J.  P.  Mills,
284ft*

Apollodorus,  The  Library,
J.  G.  Frazer,  107ft,  117ft2

Appearance  of  Siva  at  the
Vidyadhara  court,  the
false,  42

Appearing  by  thought,
science,  100

Appendix  I :  The  "  Swan-
Maiden  "  motif,  213-234;
II:  The  Romance  of
Betel-Chewing,  237-319

Appliances  of  betel-chewing,
249-254

Aquilaria  agallocha  in  betel-
chewing,  use  of  the  word,
243,  243ft2


Arabian  Nights,  The,  as  intro-
ducer of  the  "Swan-
Maiden  "  motif  into  Europe,
227,  234

Arabian  Nights,  The.  See
also  under  Nights  and  a
Night,  The  Thousand

Arabian  Nights'  Entertainments,
J.  Scott,  227w3

Arabic  names  for  betel,  239

Archipelago, betel-chewing  in
the  East  Indian,  292-302

Archives  pour  servir  a  l' etude
de  Vhistoire  .  .  .  de  V Asie
orientale,  T'oung  Rao,
231ft3- 4

Areca  and  betel,  various
names  for,  238,  239,  303,
308ft3;  Garcia  da  Orta's
description  of,  242,  243

Areca  catechu,  or  areca-nut
palm,  seed  (nut)  of  the,
238,  249,  315

Areca  Catechu,  Chavica  Betle
und  das  Betelkauen  Ueber,
L.  Lewin,  237ft1,  315ft1

Areca-nut  cutters,  249,  250,
277

Areca-nut,  the  four  virtues
of  the,  304 ;  vernacular
derivations  of  the  word,
238,  239

"  Areca  Nut  in  Ceylon,  The,"
Tropical  Agriculturist,  318ft1

Areca- nuts,  brass  box  for
storing,  249 ;  connected
with  divorces,  294  ;  differ-
ent kinds  of,  303,  304  ;  dif-
ferent ways  of  eating,  306  ;
in  initiation  ceremonies,
312;  used  in  courtship,  298,
299

Areca-palm  plantation,  de-
scriptions of  an,  269,  270,
305,  306,  308  ;  seeds  (nuts)
of  the,  238

Area  of  the  Custom  of  Betel-
chewing,  The,  248-249

Areas,  division  of  kava-6\r\nk-
ingand  betel-chewing,  307-
309

Argonaut  Press,  the,  258ft1,
301ft1

Argonauts,  The  Voyage  of  the,
J.  R.  Bacon,  109ft1

Aromatic  drugs,  the  three,
96ft1

Arrow,  Rama  splits  seven
palm-trees  with  one,  44

Arrows  of  Kama,  the  five,  3,
248ft


Artificial  lake,  the,  135
Ascetic      named      Bhutisiva,

Pasupata,  55
Asceticism,  practising  severe,

145,  147,  147ft1
Aschenkatze,  the  story  of,  //

Pentamerone,  G.  B.   Basile,

69ft1
Ashes,  chewing  pasteof  betel-
nut  and  pearl,  256
Asiatic     Society     of     Bengal,

Journal  of  the,  231ft1.      For

details  see  under  Journ.  As.

Soc.  .  .  .
Aspirations,  the  result  of  too

high,  83ft1
Assuming    various    forms    by

magic  power,  79,  80,  80ft1
Attar  of  vakula  flowers  used

as  perfume,  96ft3
Attendants  to  be  reborn  on

Earth,    How    Parvati  con-
demned her  Five,  136-138,

138-142
"  Aupapatika  Sutra,  Das,"  E.

Leumann,    Abhandl.  f.    d.

Kunde  d.  Morgen.,  254ft3
Austerities,  power  of  the  fatal

look    acquired    by,    75ft1 ;

practice  of  severe,  145,  147,

147ft1
Australian     Legendary     Tales,

K.  L.  Parker,  232ft«
Austro- Asiatic    languages,

betel  in  the,  239
Avelans      Indicas     (Indian

filberts),  areca-nuts,  268


Bahar-Da?iush,  J.  Scott,  227ft2
Bakek,  Piper  chaba,   used  as

substitute  for  betel  leaves,

247
Balance,  the,  one  of  the  five

ordeals,  196ft
"Ball,  The  Crystal,"  Grimm's

Kinder-    und    Hausmarchen,

107ft
Barbosa,  The  Book  of  Duarte,

M.  L.  Dames,  96ft2,  258ft2
Bark,  areca-nuts  substituted

by,  286
"  Baruis,"     The     Tribes    and

Castes   of  Bengal,    H.    H.

Risley,  271,  271ft1
Basilisks  as  guards  of  the  cave

of  Trislrsha,  75,  75ft1,  76
Basket     used     for     carrying

betel,  253
Bataksche  V ertellingen,  C.   M.

Pleyte,  231ft6


Bath  of  purification,  the
annual,  19

Bathing  girls,  stealing  the
clothes  of,  213,  214,  215;
heavenly  nymph,  stealing
the  clothes  of  a,  58,  58ft2

Battle,  description  of  a,  161,
16 lft2;  the  Valkyries  deities
of,  224,  225

Bawd,  Marubhuti  tricked  by
a,  60

Beads,  rosary  of  Aksha,  23

Beaks  and  feet  of  coral,  swans
with,  135

"  Bearer  of  the  Betel-bag,"
important  function  of  the,
254,  254w4

Beauties  of  woman,  the  five,
248ft

Beautiful  lake,  the,  7;  maiden
fascinates  mad  elephant,
111,  111ft3

Beauty,  the  foot  of  wonderful,
33  ;  illuminating,  110,  111 ;
of  Padmavati,  the,  158,
158ft2,  159,  159ft  ;  simile  of,
13

Bed  of  lotus  leaves,  168,
168ft1,  171

Belief  in  Immortality,  The,
J.  G.  Frazer,  225,  225ft4,
308ft1

Bengali  names  for  betel,
239

«  Betel-bag,  Bearer  of  the,"
important  function  of  the,
254,  254ft4

Betel-bags,  250,  299;  descrip-
tion of,  251,  252

Betel-baskets,  253,  307

Betel-boxes,  249,  250,  286ft5,
288,  293,  295,  298,  300,
302,  305

Betel  "  chew,"  pan-supafi,
238,  239  ;  "  chew,"  poison
conveyed  in  an,  267,  268  ;
cultivation,  265,  271,  272,
273,  305,  306,  308;  ex-
change of — i.e.  a  binding
oath,  281,  283 ;  replaces
wine  among  the  Indians
(Sherif),  256  ;  in  Southern
India,  uses  of,  275-283;
the  thirteen  qualities  of
(the  Hitopadesa),  254  ;  used
as  our  "  tip,"  283  ;  various
names  for,  238,  239,  303,
308ft3

Betel-  chewing,  Appliances
of,  249,  254 ;  Area  of  the
Custom  of,  248-249  ;  areas,


INDEX  II— GENERAL

Betel-chewing — continued
division  of  kava-drinking
and,  308-309;  in  Assam,
Burma,  Annam  and  Siam,
284-289 ;  early  descriptions
of,  240-245, 254-270;  in  the
East  Indian  Archipelago,
292-302;  Etymological
Evidence  of  Words  used  in,
238-239 ;  in  India  prior  to
a.d.  1800,  254-270 ;  in  the
Malay  Peninsula,  289-292  ;
in  Melanesia,  309-317;  in
Micronesia,  306-309 ;  in
Northern  and  Central  India,
270-275  ;  possible  origin  of
the  custom  of,  248,  249;
The  Romance  of,  Appendix
II,  237-319;  taboo  before
marriage,  280,  281;  taboo
of  widows  in  mourning,
311,  312;  the  three  in-
gredients necessary  in,  238;
use  of  cardamom  in,  96ft1,
242,  247,  264,  274,  296;
use  of  cloves  in,  96ft2,  241m1,
246,  247,  255,  264,  271,
274,  296

Betel-juice  to  avert  evil
spirits,  smearing  with,  292  ;
insult  of  spitting,  237,  257  ;
smeared  on  the  face  for
ornament,  314,  315  ;  wine
made  of,  304

Betel  leaf,  different  kinds  of,
265 ;  given  as  reward  to
King  Udayana,  237;
holders,  253

«  Betel  Leaf  or  Sirih,  The,"
Agricultural  Bulletin  of  the
Federated  Malay  States,
318ft1

Betel  leaves,  Bakek  used  as
a  substitute  for,  247  ;  with
camphor  and  the  five  fruits,
4,  4ft1,  237 ;  in  custom  of
widow's  remarriage,  273 ;
prepared  as  a  dish,  266

"Betel -nut,"  incorrect  ex-
pression of,  238,  266

"  Betel-Nut  Chewing,"  Every
Saturday,  318ft1 ;  Leisure
Hour,  318ft1

"  Betel  Nut  Industry  in  the
Muar  District,  Johore,"
Agric.  Bull.  Fed.  Mai.  States,
318ft1

"  Betel  -  Nut  Tree,"  Penny
Magazine,  318ft1

Betel-trays,  250,  252,  282,
283,  289,  290


339

Betel-vine  cultivation,  265,
271-273,  305,  306,  308;
cultivators,  castes  of,  270,
271,  273,  278,  282,  283;
story  of  the  origin  of,  the,
274 ;  varieties  of,  272,  273

Betrayal  of  her  father,
Angaravatl's,  109,  109ft2

Betre  (betel),  Garcia  da  Orta's
account  of,  241-245

Betrothals,  use  of  betel  at,
293,  296

Bezoar  is  antidotal  (Sir
Thomas  Browne),  195ft1

Bibliographic  des  Ouvrages
Arabes,  V.  Chauvin,  107ft,
219,  227ft5*

Bibliography  of  Indian  Geology
and  Physical  Geography,  A,
T.  H.  D.  La  Touche,  65ft1,
96ft6

"  Bidental,"  Dictionary  of
Greek  and  Roman  Antiquities,
W.  Smith,  156ft1

Bihar  Peasant  Life,  G.  A.
Grierson,  275

Bijdragen  tot  de  Taal  .  .  .  van
Nederlandsch  Indie,  "  Jets
over  Schedelvereering  .  .  .
van  den  Indischen  Archi-
pel,  G.  A.  Wilken,  vol.  iv,
1889,  297ft1

Billur  Kbschk,  Turkische
Marchen.,  T.  Menzel,  107ft

Bird,  Dridhavrata  changed
into  a,' 182,  182ft1

Birds,  Aristophanes,  148ft3

Birds,  gardeners  in  form  of,
170 ;  gold  produced  by
eating,  59ft3;  made  at  the
January  sankranti,  images
of,  19 ;  sarasa,  24

Birth  of  the  adopted  Chan-
dala,  the,  113;  ceremonies,
betel  used  in,  316  ;  of  child
ends  a  curse,  59,  59ft2 ;  re-
membering previous,  141,
142,  200,  201,  205,  207;
the  result  of  demerits  in
a  former,  166  ;  of  Servius
Tullius,  the,  114ft1

Black,  by  betel-chewing,
mouths  and  teeth  coloured,
259,  260,  261,  262,  286;
castanets  give  the  best
tone,  95ft1 ;  Mountain,  the,
Asitagiri,  103,  103ft1,  104,
105,124,131,132;  powder,
antimony  or  galena  applied
to  the  eyes  as  a,  65ft1

Blessed,  the  Isles  of  the,  233


340


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


Blue  lotuses,  a  glance  like  a
garland  of  full-blown,  30

Boar,  Asura  assuming  the
form  of  a,  108,  109

Bodies  in  trees  by  magic,
power  of  concealing,  185

Body  in  the  "External  Soul"
motif,  Life  in  Special  Part
of,  107ft ;  garments  cling-
ing to  the,  64,  64ft1;  gift
of  wishing-tree  and  own,
124,  124m1  ;  like  a  sirisha
flower,  172

Bone,  one  of  the  five  beauties
of  woman,  248ft

Book  XIII :  Madiravati,  1-
17;  XIV:  Pancha,  21-69;
XV:  Mahabhisheka,  70-
93 ;  XVI :  Suratamanjari,
94-131

Book  of  Duarte  Barbosa,  The,
M.  L.  Dames,  96ft2,  258ft2

Book  of  Ser  Marco  Polo,  The,
H.  Yule,  245,  246,  246ft3,
247,  256,  257

Boons  of  Siva,  the,  150,  151

Botanical  description  of  betel
and  areca  (Garcia  da  Orta),
242,  245

Bowls  used  in  betel-chewing,
250,  253

Box  for  storing  areca-nuts,
249,  250  ;  for  storing  lime,
249-251,  253,  254,  315

Brahman  named  Baladhara,
117;  Devarakshita,  55;
Kapila^arman,  113 ;  Mahi-
dhara,  117;  Nagasvamin,
54  ;  S  o  m  a  d  e  v  a,  139  ;
Vasumati,  55 ;  Yajnasoma,
138 ;  Yasaskara,  2

Brahmanical  thread,  the,  16

Brahman- Rakshasas,  enemies
of  Brahmans,  137,  137ft2,
140

Brahmans  forbidden  to  use
betel,  widows  of,  278,  283 ;
not  engaged  at  betel  fes-
tivals, 271

Brahmany  ducks,  9,  9ft3

Brass  box  for  storing  areca-
nuts,  249,  250

Bride  and  nereid, resemblance
in  costume  of  Greek,  218;
smeared  with  turmeric  at
wedding,  18,  281;  the
substituted,  12-15

British  Museum,  first  edition
of  Garcia  da  Orta  at  the,
240ft1 ;  specimens  of  lime-
boxes  at  the,  253


11  Brothers,  the  five,"  the  five
ingredients  of  a  betel
"  chew "  in  Sumatra,
294,  295

Brown  cow,  the  wonderful,
55

Brynhildar,  Helreith,  one  of
the  Eddie  poems,  221,  223

Buddha,  H.  Oldenberg,  125ft1

Buddhism ,  M.  Monier
Williams,  lft4

Buddhism,  T.  W.  Rhys  Davids,
127ft1

Buddhist  Birth  Stories,  T.  W.
Rhys  Davids,  135ft2

Buddhist  devil,  Mara,  the,  1,
lft4

Buddhist  Legends  translated
from  the  Original  Pali  Text
of  the  Dhammapada  Com-
mentary, E.  W.  Burlingame,
254ft2

Buddhist  Suttas,  No.  6,  T.  W.
Rhys  Davids,  71ft2

Building  houses,  betel  leaves
used  when,  278

Bull  of  Siva,  the,  155

Bulletin,  No.  10,  "  The  Culti-
vation of  the  Areca  Palm
in  Mysore,"  Dept.  of
Agriculture,  Mysore  State,
1918,  318ft1

Bulletin  of  the  Department  of
Agriculture,  "  The  Crops  of
the  Bombay  Presidency,"
P.  C.  Patel,  Bombay,  1922,
318ft1

Bulletin  Economique  de  V Indo-
chine,  "  Culture  du  Betel
dans  la  Province  de  Thanh-
Hoa  (Annam),"  vol.  xix,
1911,  318ft1

Bulletin  de  la  Societe  de
Lingnistique  de  Paris,
"  Emprunts  Anaryens  en
Indo-Aryen,"  J.  Przyluski,
vol.  xxiv,  1924,  239ft2

Bundlesof  betel  leaves, names
of,  265,  266

Bureau  of  Ethnology  of  the
Smithsonian  Institute,  Annual
Report  of  the,  228ft8.  For
details  see  under  Annual
Report  of  .  .  .

Burman,  his  Life  and  Notions,
The,  Shway  Yoe,  286ft5

Burning  Candle,  Life  in
("External  Soul"  motif),
107w

Butea  frondosa,  the  kinsuka
tree*  7,  7ft3


Calambac  or  Lign- Aloes  used
in  betel-chewing,  243,
243ft2

Calotropis  gigantea,  giant
swallow-wort,  96ft5

Camoens,  The  Lyricks,  R.  F.
Burton,  240ft1

Camphor  and  the  five  fruits,
betel  leaves  with,  4,  4ft1,
237;  used  in  betel-
chewing,  243,  244,  246,
247,  255,  256,  257.  258,
264,  266

"Camphor,"  W.  H.  SchofF,
Journ.  Amer.  Orient.  Soc,
246,  246ft2

Canarese  words  for  betel,  239

Candle,  Life  in  Burning
("External  Soul"  motif),
107ft

"Candle,"  mistake  for  lamp.
32ft3

Cannibal  Countries,  Through
New  Guinea  and  the,  H.
Cayley- Webster,  317ft1

Capricornus,  Makara  corre-
sponding to,  19

Cardamom  in  betel-chewing,
use  of,  96ft1,  242,  247,  264,
274,296;  one  of  the  three
aromatic  drugs,  96ft1 ;  used
for  snake  -  bites,  96ft1 ;
trees,  96,  96ft1

Caroline  Islands,  The,  F.  W.
Christian,  308ft1

Carrying  off  the  clothes  of  a
heavenly  nymph,  58,  58ft2 ;
red-hot  iron,  the  ordeal  oi
fire,  196ft

Ca?yophyllus  aromaticus,  or
Eugenia  caryophyllata,  clove-
tree,  96ft2,  247'

Cassia  leaves,  a  substitute  for
betel  leaves,  289

Cassia  lignea  (pair  a  or
tejpatra),  one  of  the  three
aromatic  drugs,  96ft1

Castanet,  India  probably  the
original  home  of,  95wx

Castanets,  creepers  seeming
to  play  the,  95,  95ft1 ;  two
forms  of  modern  Indian,
95ft1 ;  of  various  material,
95ft1

Caste     of     Southern      India,
origin  of  the  Palli  or  Vanni
yan,  109ft3

Castes  connected  with  be
in     India,    270,    271;
Southern     India,     use
betel  among  the,  276-2


«,


I


Castes  of  Bengal,  The  Tribes

and,  H.  H.  Risley,  271ft1
Castes  of  Bombay,  The  Tribes

and,  R.  E.  Enthoven,  274
Castes  of  the  Central  Provinces
of  India,   The   Tribes  and,
R.  V.  Russell,  19,  273ft1

Castes  of  the  North- Western
Provinces  and  Oudh,  The
Tribes  a?id,  W.  Crooke,
270ft1

Castes  and  Tribes  of  H.E.H.
the  Nizarns  Dominions,  The,
S.  S.  Ul  Hassan,  274,  275

Castes  and  Tribes  of  Southern
India,  E.  Thurston,  109ft3,
112ft1,  275,  275ft1'2

Cote,  catto,  etc. — i.e.  catechu,
242,  243,  244,  261,  262,
264,  268

Catechu  in  betel-chewing,
use  of,  242-244,  246,  274

Cathay  and  the  Way  Thither,  H.
Yule  and  H.  Cordier,  96ft2

Cave  of  Svetasaila,  the,  184,
187,  193 ;  of  Trislrsha,  the,
an  epithet  of  Siva,  68,  68ft1,
73-76,  85

Celebes,  A  Naturalist  in  North,
S.  J.  Hickson,  231ft10

Cefisus  of  India,  1901,  285ft1

"Centipede,"  patteya,  bind-
ing stitch  on  betel-bags,
252,  252ft*

Central  India,  Betel-chewing
in  Northern  and,  270-275

Ceremonies,  areca-nuts  used
in  initiation,  312 ;  betel
used  at  death,  276,  280,
281,  283,  295,  316,  317;
betel     at     marriage,    273,

276,  277,  281,  283,  289,
290,  293,  295,  296,  297,
303,  304,  306,  309,  316;
at  puberty,  276,  278,  283  ;
betel  leaves  in  pregnancy,

277,  278 ;  the  kinsuka  tree
used  in  religious,  7ft3;
turmeric  in  marriage,
18,  277,  281 ;  turmeric  in
puberty,  283  ;  use  of  betel
at  birth,  316

Ceremony  in  the  air,  the
marriage,  34  j  betel  and
areca  in  the  wpanayana,
276,  283;  betel  used  in
the  tali-tying,  277,  283;
of  Naravahanadatta,  the
coronation,  87,  88 ;  of  pour-
ing water  over  the  hands,
129,  129ft1 ;  the  second,  25


INDEX  II— GENERAL

Ceylon  Antiquary  and  Literary
Register,  The,  A.  M.  G.
Mudaliyar,  318ft1
"  Chakravartin,"  H.  Jacobi,
Hastings'  Ency.  Rel.  Eth.,
72ft

"Chamber,  Forbidden,  "motif,

57,  57ft1
Change  of  shapes  by  magic

power,  37,  39
Chaouia      de      V  Aures,      Le,
G.  Mercier,  227ft7

Chariot  catches  up  the  King
of  Vatsa,  heavenly,  102 ;
the  flying,  45,  199,  202,
203;  the  lotus-shaped,  52,
61 ;  one  of  the  jewels  of
Chakravartin,  71ft2;  of
swans,  the,  151,  152

Charm,  slrih  spittle  used  as
a,  294

Charming  away  disease,
Mohammedan  practice  of,
196ft

Charms,  the  jewel  of,  one  of
the  jewels  of  an  emperor,
71

Chau  Ju-Kua :  His  Work  on
the  Chinese  and  Arab  Trade,
F.  Hirth  and  W.  W.  Rock-
hill,  256ft1,  303ft2

Checani — i.e.  the  cinnamon  of
Calicut,  243

"  Chew,"  betel,  pan-supari,
238,  239

Chewing  betel.  See  under
Betel-chewing

Chewing  unhusked  rice-
grains  mixed  with  water,
196ft

Child  cooked  and  eaten,  own,
59,  59ft2;  curse  ended  by
the  birth  of  a,  59,  59ft2  ;
practising  severe  ascetic-
ism, 145  ;  substituted  at
birth,  87,  87ft1;  and  the
Sweetmeat,  Story  of  the,  35

Childhood  of  Fiction,  The,
H.  A.  Macculloch,  233ft3

Children  given  away  by
father,  128,  129

ChH  min  yao  shu,  the,  304

China,  The  Folklore  of,  N.  B.
Denny s,  231ft3

Chinese  encyclopaedia,  T'u
Shu  Chi  Ch'eng,  the,  304

Chinese  Materia  Medica,  G.  A.
Stuart,  305

Chips  of  the  Areca  catechu,
cutch  madefrom  the  boiled,
278,  279


341

Chu-fan-clii,     Chau     Ju-Kua,

256,  300,  303
Churning  of  the  Ocean,  the,

60ft1,  76
Cigarette,    a   rival   of  betel-
chewing,     the     Virginian,
319

Cinnamon  {tvak  or  gudatvak),
one  of  the  three  aromatic
drugs,  96ft1;  in  betel-
chewing,  use  of,  243

Circumambulation,  85,  86,
200,  200ft1

Circumstances  of  Malay  Life,
pt.  2  of  Papers  on  Malay
Subjects,  R.  O.  Winstedt,
291ft1

Citj  called  Achalapura,  12 ;
A  s  h  a  d  h  a  p  u  r  a,  33,  34  ;
Ayodhya,  118;  Chandra-
pur  a,  168,  169,  180;
Devasabha,  178,  180,  182,
184,  184ft2,  186;  Govinda-
kuta,  61,  64;  Kau^ambi,  21,
45,'  46,  89,  93,  100,  102,
103  ;  Kundina,  54  ;  Patali-
putra,35,  54;  Pushkarayati,
33 ;  Rajagriha,  115  ;  San-
khapura,  7  ;  Sobhavati,  2  ;
SravastI,  31,  31m1,  45,  97;
Supratishthita,  112;
UjjayinI,  3,  61,  100,  101,
103,  105, 106,  107, 110, 120,
121;  Vakrapura,  52,  53;
Vakrolaka,  54 ;  Varanasi,
133  ;  Vimala,  82  ;  Visala,  2

City  of  the  snakes,  thief's
home  like  the,  119,  119ft2

Clans,  the  swan-maiden  re-
garded as  a  founder  of,
233,  233ft2

Clarendon  Press  Edition  of
King  Richard  II,  88ft1

Classical  mythology,  no
"  swan-maiden  "  stories  in,
217,  218;  view  about
morning-dreams,  99ft2

Classical  Review,  The,  "  On
Plants  of  the  Odyssey,"
R.  M.  Henry,  vol.  xx,  1906,
56ft2

Clinging  garments,  64,  64ft1

Clothes  of  girls  while  bathing,
stealing,  213,  214,  215;  of
a  heavenly  nymph,  stealing
the,  58,  58ft2

Clou  (French),  "  cloves  "  de-
rived from,  96ft2

Cloud,  the  swan-maiden  in-
terpreted as  a  white,  232,
232ft8


342


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


Clove  trade,  history  of  the,

96ft2;  trees,  96,  96ft2
Cloves  in  betel-chewing,  use
of,  96ft2,  241ft1,  246,  247,
255,  264,  271,  274,  296
Cobra,  or  Nag,  veneration  of
the,  274

Cockle-shells,  lime  made
from,  259

Coins  fall  from  girl's  mouth
when  speaking,  gold,  59ft3

Coldness  of  the  areca  (Garcia
da  Orta),  242

Collections  of  implements
used  in  betel -chewing,
250

Colloquies  on  the  Simples  and
Drugs  of  India  by  Garcia
da  Orta,  C.  Markham,  240,
240ft1

Coloquios  dos  simples,  e
drogas  .  .  .,  Garcia  da  Orta,
240ft1

Colour  of  spittle  produced  by
betel-chewing,  red,  258,
259,  260,  261,  262,  280

Colours,  flowers  of  five,  248ft  ;
significances  of  the  red  and
yellow,  18

Combat,  the  magical,  79,  80,
80ft1

Combing  hair,  pearls  and
precious  stones  produced
by,  59ft3

Compitalian  games,  origin  of
the,  114ft1

Comus,  Milton,  56ft1

Conclusion  of  betel-chewing,
317-319

Conclusions  of  the  "  Swan-
Maiden  "  motif,  234

Confusion  between  Folium
Indum  and  betel,  244,  245

Connection  between  betel-
chewing  and  numerous
harems  in  the  East  ('Abdu-r
Razzaq),  258 ;  between
swan-maidens  and  Val-
kyries, 221,  223,  224

Conservatory,  description  of
an  areca-palm,  269,  270

Contes  et  legendes  annamites,
A.  Landes,  231ft2

Contes  Persans,  A.  Bricteux,
227ft2

Contes  Popidaires  de  Lorraine,
E.  Cosquin,  107ft,  109ft2

Contes  populaires  malgaches,
G.  Ferrand,  227ft10

Contos  Populares  Portuguezes,
A.  Coelho,  57ft2,  59fta


Cooking     and     eating     own

child,  59,59ft2
Coral,   swans    with   feet   and
beaks  of,  135

Coriolanus,  Shakespeare,  112ft2

Coronation,  account  of
Richard  II's,  88ft1;  of
Naravahanadatta,  the,  87,
88

Corypha  umbraculifera,  ola,
252ft1

Costume  of  Greek  bride  and
nereid,  resemblance  of,
218

Countries  Round  the  Bay  of
Bengal  by  Thomas  Bowrey,
The,  R.  C.  Temple,  292ft3,
293ft1

Couple,  Surasena  and  Su-
shena,  Story  of  the  De-
voted, 97,  97ft2,  98,  99

Court,  Naravahanadatta  be-
fore the  Vidyadhara,  40-
42

Courtesy,  betel  as  a  pledge
of,  290,  291

Courtship,  areca-nuts  used  in,
298,  299

Cow,  five  products  of  the,
248ft;  the  wonderful  brown,
55

Cravo — i.e.  cloves  (Garcia  da
Orta),  241,  241ft1,  247

Crest-jewel  with  magic  vir-
tues, 172,  174,  175,  194,
195,  195ft1

"  Crops  of  the  Bombay  Presi-
dency, The,"  P.  C.  Patel,
Bull.  Depi.  Agriculture,
318ft1

Crotala,  Roman  castanets,
95ft1

Crown  or  wreath  from  a  z&na,
stealing  the,  219

Crows,  transformation  into,
142

"  Crystal  Ball,  The,"  Grimm's
Kinder-  und  Hausmdrchen,
107ft

Cubebs,  Piper  cubeba,  247

Cuckoo,  the,  the  warder  of
Kama,  94

Cultivation  of  betel-vine,  265,
271,  272,  273,  305,  306,
308 ;  of  clove-trees,  96ft2

"  Cultivation  of  the  Areca
Palm  in  Mysore,"  Bulletin,
No.  10,  318ft1

Cultivators,  castes  of  betel-
vine,  270,  271,  273,  278,
282,  283


ans    la


:


"  Culture  du  Betel  dans
Province  Thanh-Hoa
(Annam),"  Bull.  Econ.  de
VIndochine,  318ft1

Cunning  Vidyadhari,  the,
24,  25  .

Curds,  one  of  the  five  nectars,
247ft2

Curing  sickness,  betel  used
as  a  charm  for,  282,  294

Curiosity,  death    caused  by,
33;    the    result    of  Nagt
svamin's,  57

Curled  and  oiled  head  of
adulterer,  107

Curse  ended  at  the  birth  of
a  child,  59,  59ft2;  of  the
hermit's  pupil,  the,  173;
laid  on  Manasavega,  the,
38 ;  of  marrying  a  mortal,
Vidyadhari's,  59 ;  trans-
formations according  to  a,
140-142

Curses  of  Parvati,  the,  137

Custom  of  Betel-chewing,
The  Area  of  the,  248-249 ;
at  remarriage  of  widows,
betel  in,  273

Cutch — i.e.  extract  of  catechu,
247,  286,  287;  description
of  preparing,  278-280

Cutter,  areca-nut,  one  of  the
chief  objects  used  in  bei
chewing,  249,  250,  277

Cyclopaedia    of     India,     77
E.  Balfour,*  318ft1


the

:

aves
:tel-


Daily  amount  of  betel  leaves
used  by  Hindus,  260

Darstellung  aus  der  Sitt
geschichte  Boms,  L.  Frit
lander,  117ft2

Date  of  first  start  of  betel
chewing  in  India,  approxi-
mate, 254;  of  the  story  of
Urva£l  and  Pururavas,
early,  216 ;  of  the  Voh
darkvitha,  220,  221

Daughter  who  fell  in  L<
with  a  Thief,  The  M<
chant's,  118,  118ft1,  II
120 ;  King  Chandai
hasena  and  the  Asura
106,  106ft2,  107,  107ft,  1(
110;  of  King  Prasenaj
The  Young  Chandala  wJ
married  the,  112,  ]
113,  114

Daybreak,  the  truest  drei
at,  100ft


Days,  dreams  fulfilled  within
ten,  lOOn

Dead  to  life,  restoring,  80,
81,  99 ;  person,  giving  part
of  one's  life  to,  117,  117n2

Death  caused  by  separation,
98,  116;  ceremonies,  betel
used  in,  276,  280,  281,  283,
295,  316,  317;  the  drum
of,  119;  from  insane
curiosity,  33 ;  with  one
stipulation,  obtaining
immunity  from,  109,  109n3

Deccani  names  for  betel,  239

Deer,  the  artifice  of  the
golden,  44

Deformity  of  mouth  through
betel-chewing,  284,  285

Deities,  seasonal,  the  three
Ribhus,  19

Deity  of  betel  cultivation,
worship  of  the,  271

Delusion,  the  magic,  42,  43

Demerits  in  former  life,  the
result  of,  166

Derivation  of  the  word  anti-
mony, probable,  65ft1

Derivations  of  the  names  for
betel,  vernacular,  239

Description  of  an  areca-palm
conservatory,  269,  270;  of
an  dsoka  tree,  7n4;  of  a
battle,  161,  161n2;  of  betel,
Garcia  da  Orta's,  241-245  ;
of  betel  cultivation,  265 ;
of  different  kinds  of  betel
leaves,  265 ;  of  a  girl's
waist,  158,  158n2,  159» ;  of
a  pan  garden,  271,  272  ;  of
preparing  cutch,  278-280 ;
of  preparing  lime,  286

Descriptions  of  implements
used  in  betel-chewing,  250,
251,  252,  253,  254

Descriptive  Ethnology  of
Bengal,  E.  T.  Dalton,  285n2

Designs  made  on  betel-bags,
251,  252

Desires  when  dying,  the
result  of  pollution  of,  117,

Destroying  charm,   the,  one

of  the  jewels  of  an  emperor,

71
Deutsche  Sage  im  Elsass,  W.

Hertz,  107n
Devil,    Mara,   the    Buddhist,

1,  In*
Devoted     Couple,     Surasena

and  Sushena,  Story  of  the,
97,  97n2,  98,  99


INDEX  II— GENERAL

Dictionary     of    the    Economic

Products    of  India,    A,    G.

Watt,  7w2-3,  8/1*,  18,  65T11,

96W1,  96n2-3'5,  243»2,  247,

249,  3l8n!
Dictionary  of  Greek  and  Roman

Antiquities,  W.  Smith,

156*1*
Dictionary,  Oxford,  J.  A.   H.

Murray,  Mn1
Dictionary,     the       Vaidyaka-

sabda  -  sindhu,    a    Hindu

medical,  246
Different  kinds  of  areca-nuts,

303,   304;   kinds   of  betel

leaves,  265;  opinions  about

the     swan  -  maidens,     232,

232n8,233,233w1»2'3;  ways

of  eating  areca-nuts,  306
Disappearance     of    Madana-

manchuka,  the,  21,  21n*
Discovery      of     the      Solomon

Islands,  Lord  Amherst  and

B.  Thomson,  314n2
Discus  of  Vishnu,  the  symbol

of  the  sun,  72»
Disease,    a     crest -jewel     as

talisman  against,  194,  195,

195/11 ;     Mohammedan

practice  of  charming  away,

196»
Disfigurement    of  mouth

through       betel -chewing,

284,285
Disguising    oneself    lost     in

sleep,  power  of,  25,  25w2
Dish,  betel   leaves  prepared

as  a,  266  ;  of  a  cooked  child

and  rice,  59
Dish    for    the    expectorated

betel  "  chew,"  256
Dispute  among  the  Bonthuk

caste,  custom  of  settling  a,

276
Distance,     magic     power

affected  by,  39
Distribution  of  the   "  Swan-
Maiden  "  motif  wide,  216,

217
Districts  of  betel  cultivation

in  India,  principal,  173
Divina     Comedia     di     Dante

Alighieri,  La,   D.  B.   Lom-
bard!, lOOn
Division  of  toa-drinking  and

betel-chewing   areas,   307,

308,  309  ;  of  self  into  many

forms,  92
Divisions  of  the  Vidyadhara

territorv,  two,  47,  48,  80,

89


343

Divorces,      areca-nuts      con-
nected with,  294
Dogs,     transformation     into

bob-tailed,  141
Drawing  lots  from  ajar,  one  of

the  ordeals  in  Brihaspati's

law  code,  196n
Dream  of  Muktaphaladhvaja,

the,  198
Dreams  before  morning,  ful-
filment  of,  99,  99n2,   100,

lOOn
Drinking,  kava-.     See  under

kava-drinkiiig
Drugs,   the   three    aromatic,

96W1
Drum  beaten  as  thief  is  led

to  execution,  119
"  Drummer,  The,"    Grimm's

Kinder-   und    Hausmarchen,

216,217
Dry      condition,     areca-nuts

used  in,  288,  303
Dual    function    of   the    Val-
kyries, 225
Ducks,  Brahmany,  9,  9w3
Dutch    restrictions    of   clove

cultivation,  96w2
Dutchess  of  Malfey,  The,  John

Webster,  54n*,  156*1
Dwellings,  the  gods  leaving

their  old,  149,  149n2
Dyaks    of    Borneo,    Seventeen

Years  among  the  Sea,  E.  H.

Gomes,  231n9
Dying  God,  The,  The  Golden

Bough,  J.  G.  Frazer,  233n2

Eagle,  gold-spitting  produced
by  eating,  59n3

"  Eaglewood  "  or  Lign- Aloes
used  in  betel-chewing,  243,
243n2

Earliest  evidence  of  the
Valkyrie  tradition,  224,
224n3,  225;  references  to
protecting  herbs,  56n2

Early  accounts  of  betel-
chewing  in  the  East  Indian
Archipelago,  292,  293,  295,
300,  301,  302 ;  date  of  the
story  of  UrvasI  and  Puru-
ravas,  216  ;  descriptions  of
betel  -  chewing,  240-245,
254-270;  Sanskrit  litera-
ture, roots  of  the  "  Swan-
Maiden"  motif  in,  234;
travellers  to  India,  accounts
of  betel  by,  255-270

Early  Travels  in  India,  W.
Foster,  266n3


344


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


East  Indian  Archipelago,
betel-chewing  in  the,  292-
302 ;  Indra,  guardian  of
the,  163ft1

Eastern  castanets  at  the  South
Kensington  Museum,  95ft1 ;
New  Guinea,betel-chewing
in,  310-314 ;  quarter,  the
sun,  the  nymph  of  the,
32

Eating  areca-nuts,  different
ways  of,  306 ;  birds,  gold
produced  by,  59ft3 ;  own
child,  cooking  and,  59,
59ft2  ;  two  grains  of  rice,
spitting  gold  produced  by,
59,  59ft3,  60

"  Eating  or  Chewing  of  Pan,"
G.  A.  Stephens,  West-
minster Review,  318ft1

Economic  Products  of  India,  A
Dictionary  of  the,  G.  Watt,
7ft2- 3.8ft1;  18, 65ft1,  96ft1'2-3'5,
243ft2,  247,  249,  318ft1

Edda,  the  Elder,  or  Eddie
poems,  220,  223,  224

Edda,  Die,  H.  Gering,  223,
223ft1

Edda,  The  Poetic,  H.  A.
Bellows,  221,  221ft1

Eddas,  the  Icelandic,  219,
220

Editions  and  translations  of
Garcia  da  Orta's  Coloquios,
240ft1,  245

Effects  of  betel-chewing  on  a
Westerner,  268

Efterretninger  om  Grbnland,
P.  E.  Egede,  228ft»

Egg,  Life  in,  in  the  "  External
Soul  "  motif,  107ft  ;  shells,
lime  made  from,  284

Eighth  day  of  the  festival,  on
the,  141,  141ft2

Elder  Edda,  or  Eddie  poems,
the,  220,  223,  224

Election  glance,  the,  30

Elephant  called  Kuvala-
yaplda,  125,  126,  127;
fascinated  by  beautiful
maiden,  mad,  111,  111ft3;
maddened  by  smell  of  wild
elephants,  8;  Mandaradeva
assumes  the  form  of  an,
79,  80,  80ft1;  of  the  sky
quarters,  Diggaja,  108ft1 ;
of  Varuna,  Anjana  the
imaginary,  108ft1

Elephant-jewel,  the,  one  of
the  jewels  of  an  emperor,
71,  71ft2  76


Elephants  of  the  sky  quarters
guarding  the  cave  of
Trislrsha,  75,  76;  the  two
air-going,  179-181

Elettaria  cardamomum,  Lesser
Cardamom,  96ft1,  247

Embassy  of  Sir  Thomas  Roe
to  the  Court  of  the  Great
Mogul,  The,  W.  Foster,
266ft2

Emblems  of  royalty,  five,
248ft

Embroidery  made  on  betel-
bags,  251,  252

Emerald,  one  of  the  five
jewels,  248ft  ;  swan's  wings
tipped  with,  135,  135w2

Emperor,  the  jewels  of  an,
64,  68,  69,  71,  72,  75,  76,
77,79

"Emprunts  Anaryens  en
Indo-Aryen,"  J.  Przyluski,
Bull,  de  la  Soc.  de  Linguis-
tique  de  Paris,  239ft2

Encyclopaedia  van  Nederlandsch-
Indie,  318ft1

Encyclopaedia  of  Religion  and
Ethics,  Hastings', "  Chakra-
vartin,"  H.  Jacobi,  vol.  iii,
72ft  ;  "  Festivals  and  Fasts
(Hindu),"  E.  W.  Hop-
kins, vol.  v,  19;  "Nature
(Greek),"  L.  R.  Farnell,
vol.  ix,  218ft2;  "Ordeal
(Hindu),"  A.  B.  Keith,  vol.
ix,  196ft;  "Swan-Maidens,"
M.  E.  Seaton,  vol.  xii,
219ft1

Encyclopaedia  T'u  Shu  Chi
Ck'eng,  the  Chinese,  304

End  of  the  night,  dreams
at  the,  99,  99ft2,  100,
100ft

"  Energies,"  or  saktis  of  Siva,
the,  75ft2

English  Translation  of  the
Sushrida  Samhita,  An,  K.
K.  L.  Bhishagratna,  96ft1,
255ft1

English  word  for  betel,  dif-
ferent spellings  of  the,
239,  239ft1

Epigraphica  India  and  Record
of  the  Archaeological  Survey
of  India,  Calcutta,  1888-
1891,  254ft4

Epiphanie  der  Seele  in  deutscher
Volkssage,  Die,  O.  Tobler,
107w

Erect  with  joy,  hairs  stand-
ing, 46,  46ft1


Erinyes  not  to  be  mistaken
for  swan-maidens,  217

Erotic  significance  of  the
yellow  colour,  18

Eskimo,  Tales  and  Traditions
of  the,  H.  Rink,  228ft9

Ethnographical  Collections,
Handbook  to  the,  253,  254

Ethnographische  Beitr'dge  zur
Kenntnis  des  Karo linen
Archipels,  J.  S.  Kubary,
306ft1

Ethnological  Society  of  London,
Transactions  of  the,  231ft9.
For  details  see  under  Trans.
Ethnol.  .   .  .

Ethno log i e,  Zeitschrift  fur,
232ft3.  For  details  see
under  Zeit.  f.  Ethn.

Ethnologische  Vorlesungen  iiber
die  altaischen  Volker,  M.
Castren,  228ft1

Ethnology  of  Bengal,  Descrip-
tive, E.  T.  Dalton,  285ft2

Etymological  evidence  of
words  used  in  betel-
chewing,  238-239  ;  history
of  the  word  antimony,
65ft1

Etymology  of  betel  (Garcia
da  Orta),  244  ;  of  the  word
Chakravartin,  72ft

Eugenia  caryophyllata  or
Caryophyllus  aromaticus,
clove-tree,  96ft2

European  origin,  "Swan-
Maiden"  motif  not  of,
226

Every  Saturday,  "  Betel- Nut
Chewing,"  318ft1

Evidence  of  the  Valkyrie
tradition,  earliest  extant,
224,  224ft3,  225 ;  of  words
used  in  betel-chewing,
etymological,  238-239

Evil  fortune  indicated  by  low
spirits,  29,  29ft1 ;  omens,
49,  156,  156ft1,  173,  173ft1 ;
spirits,  methods  of  avert-
ing, 292

Exchange  of  betel — i.e.  a
binding  oath,  281,  283

Execution,  drum  beaten  when
thief  is  led  to,  119

Ex  Oriente  Lux,  vol.  ii
[Schopfung  und  Sit nden fall
.  .  .],  A.  Wiinsche,  117ft2

Explanation  for  the  red  saliva
in  betel-chewing,  315

Export  and  import  of  areca-
nuts  in  China,  306


Expression  of  "betel-nut,"
incorrect,  238,  266  ;  of
feelings  by  rattling  lime
stick  in  the  gourd,  314

"External  Soul"  motif,  the,
106ft2,  107ft

Extract  of  the  Acacia  catechu,
cutch,  an,  278,  279

Eye,  throbbing  of  right,  173,
173ft1

Eyes  of  pearl,  swans  with,
135 ;  reddened  by  anti-
mony, 64, 65,  65ft1 ;  turned
inwards,  sign  of  anxiety,
49 ;  winking,  8,  8ft2

Face  smeared  with  betel-juice
for  ornament,  314,  315

Factors  checking  the  spread
of  betel-chewing,  317,  318

Fairy  Book,  The  Irish,  A.  P.
Graves,  107ft

Fairy  Tales,  The  Science  of,
E.  S.  Hartland,  107ft,
233ft2-3

Fasti,  Ovid,  114ft1

Fatal  glance,  the,  75ft1

Father,  Angara vati  betrays
her,  109,  109ft2 ;  gives
away  his  sons,  128,  129

Faufal  (fofal,fonfal),  Arabic
name  of  areca-nut,  239,  257

Feast  on  the  eighth  day  of
the  month,  141,  141ft2

Feelings  expressed  by  rattling
lime  stick  in  the  gourd,
314

Feet  and  beaks  of  coral,
swans  with,  135

Feldspar,  moonstone  a  variety
of,  96w6

Fertility,  the  Valkyries  con-
nected with,  225

Festival  called  the  giving  of
water,  106,  110,111;  called
Tiravatira,  280 ;  of  Nag-
Panchmi  (Cobra's  fifth),
the,  274 ;  of  the  winter
solstice,  the,  12,  12ft1;  of
the  Winter  Solstice,  Note
on  the,  19-20

"  Festivals  and  Fasts  (Hindu)/'
E.  W.  Hopkins,  Hastings'
Ency.  Rel.  Eth.,  19

Fetichism  in  West  Africa,  R.  H.
Nassau,  227ft9

FF  Communications,  107ft

Fiction,  fatal  looks  in  Hindu,
75ft1

Fights  with  witches,  55,  56,
56ft1


INDEX  II— GENERAL

Fire,    the    God     of    (Agni),
33,  113,114,190,207,208;
immunity  from  all   causes
of    death    except,     109ft3;
makes  prince  yellow,  ador-
ing the,  33  ;  the  Mountain
of,  50,  51 ;  nereid  changing
into  a  burning,  219  ;  ordeal
of,  196ft ;    sacrifice,  armed
horsemen   appearing  from
a,     109ft3;     of    separation,
the,  5,  6,  24,  112,  116,  165,
167,  170,  171
First    watch    of    the    night,
fulfilment     of    dreams    in
the,  100ft
Fisherman    who    married    a
Princess,  The  Young,  115-
117
"  Fisherman   and   his    Wife,
The,"  Grimm's  Kinder-  und
Hausm'drchen,  83ft1
Five  arrows  of  Kama,  3, 248ft ;
Attendants   to    be    reborn
on    Earth,     How     Parvati
condemned    her,    136-138,
138-142;     beauties     of
woman,  the,  248ft  ;  colours,
flowers  of,  248% ;  emblems
of  royalty,    248ft ;    Fruits,
The,  246-248 ;  fruits,  betel
leaves  with   camphor   and
the,    4,    4ft1,    237;    great
sacrifices,     248ft;     jewels,
the,  247ft2,  248%;  leaves  of
trees,  the,  247ft2 ;  a  lucky
number,  247  ;  nectars,  the,
247ft2;    ordeals    in    the
Yqjnavalkya-smriti,      195ft3,
196m  ;  products  of  the  cow,
248ft;  sacred  flowers,  248ft;
trees    of   paradise,    248ft ;
Vidyadhara    maidens,    the
agreement  of  the,  66,  67,
84
"  Five    brothers,"    the     five
ingredients     of    a     betel-
"  chew  "  in  Sumatra,  294,
295
Five    of    China,    The    Sacred,

W.  E.  Geil,  248ft
Flavours    used    in    betel-
chewing,  lists  of  the,  246,
247
Flesh,  one  of  the  five  beauties

of  woman,  248ft
Flight     of    the     gods     from
their   old    dwellings,    149,
149ft2
Flora  of  British  India,  J.  D.
Hooker,  7ft2,  8ft1


345

Flora  of  the  Malay  Peninsula,

The,  H.  N.  Ridley,  290ft1
Flower,   body   like  a  sirlsha,
172  ;  offerings  of  the  swans,
135
Flowers  of  asoka  trees  used
for  temple  decoration,  7ft4;
five  sacred,  248ft  ;  mandara,
88, 184  ;  uses  oivakula,  96ft3
"Flowers    of   the    Hindu
Poets,"  W.  Dymock,  Journ.
Anlh.  Soc.  Bombay,  7ft4
Flying  chariot,  the,  45,  199,
202,  203 ;  through  the  air,
26,  27,  31,  34,  36,  46,  50,
52,  55,  56,  59,  61,  69,  72,
89,  121,  131,  173,  206,  223,
224
Folium,  hidum,  various  species
of    Cinnamomum,     244,
244fti
Folklore  of  China,  The,  N.  B.

Dennys,  231ft3
Folk-lore    Journal    ["  Chinese
Zoological  Myths  "],  A.  G.
Hutt,  vol.  vii,  1889,  231ft3;
["  Folk-Tales  of  the  Mala-
gasy "],  James  Sibree,  vol.
i,  1883,  227ft10
Folk-Lore,     The    Journal    of
American,     228ft8,      231ft'5.
For      details     see      under
Journ.  American  .  .  .
Folklore,  Modern  Greek,  J.  C.

Lawson,  218,  218ft2
Folklore   of   Northern    India,
Religion    and,    W.    Crooke,
19,  271ft2
Folk-Lore   in    the    Old    Testa-
ment, J.  G.  Frazer,  107ft
Folk-Tales,  Russian,  W.  R.  S.

Ralston,  56ft1,  57ft2,  227ft5
Folk-Tales,  Siberian  and  Other,
C.  F.  Coxwell,  59ft3,  227ft5,
228ft5'  «• 7
Folk-Tales,     West    Irish,    W.

Larminie,  107ft
Food     produced     by     magic

power,  91,  92
Foot    of    wonderful    beauty,
the,  33

Forbidden     Chamber "     or
"Taboo"    motif,    the,    57,
57ft1
Foreboding  from  elevated  or
depressed  moods,  99,  99ft1,
Forest,  Slta's  perfume  scent-
ing a  whole,  44
Form    of  Mahakala,   Siva  in
the,  120,  121 ;  of  Siva,  the
Ardhanarlsa,  the,  132ft1


346


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


Former  birth,  remembering,
141,  142,  200,  201,  205,
207;  birth,  the  result  of
demerits  in  a,  166

Forms  by  magic  power,  as-
suming various,  79,  80,
80ft1 ;  of  modern  Indian
castanets,  two,  95m1  ;  Nara-
vahanadatta  assuming
many,  92

Fortune,  the  Goddess  of
(Lakshmi),  87;  indicated
by  high  or  low  spirits,  good
or  evil,  99,  99ft1

Four  virtues  of  the  areca-nut,
304

Fourth  night-watch,  fulfil-
ment of  dreams  in  the,
100ft

Fresh  condition,  areca-nuts
used  in,  288,  303,  304

From  my  Verandah  in  New
Guinea,  H.  Romilly,  232ft2

Fruits,  betel-leaves  with
camphor  and  the  five,  4,
4ft1,  237;  The  Five,  246-248

Fulfilment  of  morning-
dreams,  99,  99ft2,  100,  100ft

Full-blown  blue  lotuses,  a
glance  like  a  garland  of,
30

Function  of  the  Valkyries,
dual,  225

Funerals,  betel  used  at,  304,
305,  307,  309

Future,  the  three  times :
past,  present  and,  57ft3

Fylgia  of  Norse  mythology,
the,  223,  223ft3

Gaertnera  racemosa,  the
atimukta  creeper,  8,  8ft1

Galena,  application  to  the
eyes,  65ft1

Gamada — i.e.  kava,  314

Gambir  used  in  betel-
chewing,  289,  293,  294

Games,  origin  of  the  Com-
pitalian,  114ft1

Garcinia  xanthochymus,  the
tapincha  tree,  7,  7ft2

Garden     of     the      heavenly
nymphs,    Gandasaila,    73
the     Jetavana,     129ft1
sacredness  of  the  pan,  271
the  wonderful,  169,  170

Gardens  produced  by  magic
power,  92

Garland  of  full-blown  blue
lotuses,  a  glance  like  a,
30  ;  of  mandara  flowers,  88


Garments    clinging    to    the

body,  64,  64ft1
Garments     from    a     nymph,

stealing,  58,  58ft2,  218
Geese  without  plumages

transformed  into    humans,

229,  230
Gems    with    magic    virtues,

172,    174,   175,    194,   195,

195ft1
General,    one   of   the    seven

(six)  jewels  of  the  Chakra-

vartin,  71ft2
General    references    to    the

"External  Soul"  motif,

107ft
Generosity,    the    reward    of,

130,  131
Generous     Taravaloka,     the,

126-129
Geographical     area     of    the

custom    of   betel-chewing,

248-249
Georgics,  Virgil,  49ft1
Germanische  Mythologie,  E.  H.

Meyer,  232ft8
"  Geschichten  des  toten  No-
rub-can,     Die,"     A.     H.

Francke,  Zeit.  d.  d.   morg.

GeselL,  59ft3
Gesta  Romanorum,  the,  111ft3
Ghi,  one  of  the  five  nectars,

247ft2  ;  removing  a  hot  ring

from  a  pot  of  boiling,  196w
Giant  swallow-wort,  Calotropis

gigantea,    96ft5 ;    Typhceus,

the,  149ft2
Giants    named    Vatapi     and

Mahi,  109rc3
Gift  of  half  one's  life,   117,

117ft2 ;    of  only   wife   to  a

Brahman,  husband's,  129 ;

of   wishing-tree   and   own

body,  124,  124ft1
Girl  like  a  wave  of  the  sea,  13
Girls,    Krishna    stealing   the

clothes   of  the    Braj,  214,

215
Giving  away  his  sons,  father,

128,129;  of  water,  festival

called  the,  106,  110,  111
Glance    of    a    basilisk,    the

fatal,  75ft1 ;  like  a  garland

of  full-blown  blue  lotuses,

30
"  Glory,  hand  of,"  the,  54ft1
Glory    is    white    in     Hindu

rhetoric,  73,  73ft1
Goat's     milk,     the     adopted

Chandala  reared  on,    114,

114ft'1


God  of  Fire,  the  (Agni),  33,

113,  114,  190,207,208;  of

Love  (Kama),  1,  2,  3,   11

14,  23,  26,  71,  87,  95,  98

126,  159,  170,  189  ;  of  War

the,  180
Goddess  of  Fortune,  the,  87  ;

of  Wealth,  Lakshmi,   the,

274
Gods  leaving  their  old  dwell

ings,  the,  149,  149ft2
Gold,  betel  set  of,  288,  289 ;

from    pot    of    boiling   ghi,

removing     hot,      196ft;

spittle  turning  to,  59ft3
Golden    Ass,    The,    Apuleius,

56ft1
Golden    Bough,    The,    J.    G.

Frazer,  233ft2
Golden  deer,  the  artifice  o

the,   44 ;   goose,   Brahma

turned  into  a,  135ft2 ;  rin

falls  from   speaking   girl'

mouth,    59ft3;    swans,    th

two,  134-136
Gold-spitting     produced     b

eating  two  grains  of  rice

59,  59ft3,  60
Good   fortune    indicated    b

high  spirits,  99,  99ft1
Goose,  Brahman  turned  int

a  golden,   135ft2 ;    stealin

the  plumage  of  a,  229
Gourd    filled   with    lime    fo:

betel-chewing,     310,    311

312,  313,  314,  317
Grains  of  rice  produce  powe

of  spitting  gold,  two,  59

59ft3,  60
Grass,  nal,  272
Grateful  animals,  219
Grave   of  a   deceased,  bete

placed  on  the,  307
Greater  Cardamom,  Amomu

subulatum,  96ft1
Greek  castanets,  95ft1
Greenlandic   version   of  th

"Swan-Maiden"    moti

228,  229-231
Griechische  Mdrchen,  Sagen  u

Volkslieder,      B.     Schmid

57ft2
Griechische      Mythologie,

Preller,  154ft2
Grbnldndska  Myter  och  Sago

K.  Rasmussen,  228ft10
Grosse  Zusammenstellung   iib

die    Krafte    der    .    .

Abu     Mohammed    AbdalL

Ben    Ahmed   .    .    .,  J.     vo:

Sontheimer,  255ft2


Growers,  betel-vine,  caste  of,
270,  271,  273,  278,  282,
283

Guardians  of  the  cardinal
points,  the  Lokapalas,
163ft1  ;  of  the  cave  of
Trisrrsha,  75,  76

Gujarati  derivations  of  the
word  betel,  239

Gypsy  variant  of  the  "  swan-
maiden  "  story,  219


Hair,  one  of  the  five  beauties
of  woman,  248w  ;  in  mourn-
ing for  absent  husband,
single  lock  of,  46ft2 ;  pro-
duces pearls  and  precious
stones,      combing,      59ft3 ;

•     seized  by  old  age,  101

Hairs  standing  erect  from
joy,  46,  46ft1

Hakluyt  Society,  the,
257,  258ft1-2,  259,  259ft1-2,
266wi'2.4,6j  269ft1,  292ft3,
295ft1,  300ft1,  301ft1,  314,
314ft2

Hdkonarmdl,  number  of  Val-
kyries in  the,  225

Hamlet,  Shakespeare,  99m1

"  Hand  of  glory,"  the,  54ft1

Hand,  left,  the  Daitya's  vital
point,  109,  109ft3,  110;
red  lotus  turns  into  a
human,  54 ;  uncleanliness
of  the  left,  302,  302ft1

Handbook  of  Commercial  In-
formation for  India,  C.  W.  E.
Cotton,  31  8ft1

Handbook  to  the  Ethnographical
Collections,  253,  254

Hands,  pouring  water  over
the,  129,  129ft1 ;  waves  of
a  lake  like,  7

Harems  and  betel-chewing  in
the  East,  probable  connec-
tion between  the  numerous
(<Abdu-r  Razzaq),  258

Harleian  MS.  No.  2286,  the,
266ft5

Harpies  not  to  be  mistaken
for  swan-maidens,  217

Harvard  Oriental  Series,
254ft2

"  Hassan  of  Bassorah,"  The
Nights,  R.  F.  Burton,  219

Head  of  an  adulterer  oiled
and  curled,  107

Head- Hunters :    Black,    White

and    Brown,    A.    C.   Haddon,

298ft1


INDEX  II— GENERAL

"  Headless    Princess,    The,"
Russian  Folk-Tales,  W.  R.  S.
Ralston,  56m1
Heaven,  voice  from,  30,  85,
87,116,117,149,153,208

Heavenly  chariot  catches  up
the  King  of  Vatsa,  102;
inhabitants  abandoning
their  old  dwellings,  149,
149ft2  ;  nymph,  carrying  off
the  clothes  of  a,  58,  58ft2 ;
nymph  ended  by  living
with  a  mortal,  curse  of  a.
59,  59ft2

Heldensagen  der  7ni?iussinschen
Tataren,  Die,  A.  Schiefner,
228ft2

Hells,  Rasatala  one  of  the
seven,  162,  162ft1

Helreith  Brynhildar,  one  of
the  Eddie  poems,  221,  223

Herbs  protecting  men  from
witches,  56,  56ft2

Hermit  named  Angiras,  22,
23 ;  named  Kasyapa,  104,
106,123,124,125,131,132;
named  Narada,  27,  79,  83,
124,  186;  named  Tapo-
dhana,  172,  175,  178,  179,
180,  181,  184,  198,  201,
206,  208;  named  Vama-
deva,  70-72

Hermitage  called  Siva-
kshetra,  54  ;  of  Kasyapa,
the,  103,  131,  132,  209 ;  of
Tadpodhana,  the,  180,  185

Hermit's  pupil,  the  curse  of
the,  173

Heroides,  Ovid,  99ft2

Hibbert  Lectures,  the,  107ft

Himalayan  Districts  of  the
North- Western  Provinces  of
India,  E.  T.  Atkinson,  19

Hindu  fiction,  fatal  looks  in,
75ft1;  medical  dictionary,
the  Vaidyaka-sabda-sindhu,
246 ;  pun,  1,  1ft3,  2,  2ft1,  9,
9ft2,  11,  lift1,  13,  13ft2,  16,
16ft1,  31,  31ft1,  82,  82ft1,
94,  94ft1,  101,  101ft2,  103,
103ft2,  125,  125ft2,  126,
126ft2,  130,  130ft1,  134,
134ft2,  148,  148ft1,  153,
153ft2;  rhetoric,  glory  is
white  in,  73,  73ft1

Hindu  Mythology,  W.  J.
Wilkins,  77ft2

Hindu  Tribes  and  Castes,
M.  A.  Sheering,  270w2

Hindustani  names  for  betel,
239


347

History  of  the  cave  of
Trisirsha,  the,  74,  75,  76 ;
of  the  clove  trade,  96ft2;
of  the  word  antimony,
etymological,  65ft1

History  of  the  Maori,  The
Ancient,  J.  White,  232ft7

History  of  Melanesian  Society,
The,  W.  Rivers,  310,  316w2,
317

Holder,  betel  leaf,  253

Home  of  the  Castanet,  India
probably  the  original,  85ft1;
like  the  city  of  the  snakes,
thief's,  119  ;  of  the  "  Swan-
Maiden  "  motif,  original,
217

Honey,  one  of  the  five  nectars,
247ft2

Horripilation  caused  by  joy,
46,  46ft1,  94ft1

Horse,  instantaneous  trans-
portation through  the  kick
of  a,  57,  57ft2 ;  one  of  the
seven  (six)  jewels  of  the
Chakravartin,  71ft2 ;  pro-
duces silver  coins,  59ft3

Horsemen  appearing  from  a
fire  sacrifice,  armed,  109ft3

Hot  ring  from  a  pot  of  boil-
ing ghi,  removing,  196ft

House,  betel  leaves  used
when  building  a,  278

Householder,  one  of  the
seven  (six)  jewels  of  the
Chakravartin,  71w2

How  Parvati  condemned  her
Five  Attendants  to  be  re-
born on  Earth,  136-138,
138-142

Hsi  han  nan  fang  ts'ao  mu
chuang,  the,  304

Human  hand,  red  lotus  turns
into  a,  54

Humans,  geese  without
plumages  transformed  into,
229,  230;  possessing  the
fatal  look,  75ft1

Hundreds  of  years,  practising
asceticism  for,  145

Husband  gives  away  only
wife.  129;  a  single  lock
worn  in  mourning  for
absent,  34,  36,  36w2

Ichor-smelling  stream,  the,
154,  155

Identification  of  the  "five
fruits,"  246,  247;  of  the
protecting  herb,  possible,
56ft2  ;      of    swan  -  maidens


348


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


Identification — continued
with      Valkyries     in      the
Volundarkvitha,  221,  223

I  lac  hi,  cardamom,  used  in
betel-chewing,  247

Illness,  betel  and  areca  used
for  curing,  282,  294

Illuminating  beauty,  110,
111

//  Pentamerone,  G.  B.
Basile,  69ft1

Image  of  Hatakesvara  bathed
in  water  which  is  then
drunk,  195,  195ft3

Images  of  birds  made  at  the
January  sankrdnti,  19

Imaginary  elephant  of  Varuna,
Anjana,  the,  108ft1

Immediate  birth,  113,  HSn1;
fulfilment  of  dreams  at
sunrise,  100ft

Immunity  from  death  with
one  stipulation,  obtaining,
109,  109ft3

Implements  used  in  betel-
chewing,  149-154

Import  and  export  of  areca-
nuts  in  China,  306

Inaccessible  to  mortals,
northern  side  of  Mount
Kailasa,  74,  75

Inauguration  of  Naravahana-
datta,  the,  87,  88

Incidents  forming  the  "Swan-
Maiden  "  motif,  213

Incorrect  expression  of
"  betel-nut  "  and  "  betel-
palm,"  238,  266,  267ft1

India  Office  MSS.  of  the
K.S.S'.,3n1,4nHfin1,9»H
10ft1-2, 13/&1, 14w2,21w1,26n1,
27ft1,  28ft2,  32*1  2,  33ft1,
36*1,  SQn1,  38ft1,  40m1,  41m1,
42ft1,  43ft2  45ft1-  2,  49ft1,
59ft1,  60ft2,  62ft2,  67ft1- 2-3,
72ft1,  75ft3,  79m1,  81ft1-  2,
88ft2,  89ft1,  90ft2,  91ft1,  97m1,
101n1,102n1,  105ft1-2,  111ft2,
112ft3,  115ft1,  117ft2,  118ft2,
119ft3,  120*1,  125W1,  126n1,
127wa,128n1,131nL2,133n1,
135ft2,  137ft2,  138ft1-  2-  3,
140ft1, 141ft1-3, 144ft1, 146ft1,
147ft2, 149ft1, 150ft1-2, 151ft1,
152ft2- 3, 153ft1, 157ft1, 158ft1,
159ft1,  160ft2,  161ft1,  162ft3,
166ft1-2, 167ft1, 168ft2, 171ft2,
174ft1, 178ft1, 180ft1, 184ft1-2,
185ft1,  186ft1-  2,  187ft1,
189ft1-2, 190ft2, 191ft1, 194ft1,
195ft2,  205ft2,  207ft1- »  208ft1


Indian  Archipelago,  betel-
chewing  in  the  East,  293-
302  ;  castanets,  two  forms
of,  95ft1;  specimens  of
betel  implements,  250-252

Indian  Calendar,  R.  Sewell
and  S.  B.  Dikshit,  19

Indian  Geology  and  Physical
Geography,  A  Bibliography
of,  T.  H.  D.  La  Touche,
56ft1,  96ft6

Indonesien  oder  die  Inseln  der
Malayischen  Archipel,  A.
Bastian,  232ft1

Infant,  substitution  of,  87,
87ft1

Inferno  [Dante],  99ft2

Ingredients  of  betel-chewing,
lists  of  five,  246,  247;
necessary  in  betel-chewing,
the  three,  238

Inhabitants  abandoning  old
dwellings,  heavenly,  149,
149ft2

Initiation  ceremonies,  areca-
nuts  in,  312

Instantaneous  transportation,
57,  57ft-

Insult  of  spitting  betel-juice,
237,  257

Interpolations  in  Linschoten's
work  made  by  Paludanus,
259

Interpretations  of  the  swan-
maidens,  different,  232,
232ft8,  233,  233n1- 2- 3

Intoxication  caused  by  betel-
chewing,  256,  258,  260,
316

Introduction  a  VHistoire  du
Bud  d  hi  s  m  c  Indien,  E.
Burnouf,  71ft2

"  Introduction  "  to  the  Volun-
darkvitha,  prose,  221

Investigations  of  the  king,
the  nightly,  118,  119

Investiture  with  the  sacri-
ficial thread,  2,  2ft2,  139,
139ft1,  181,  181ft1;  kinsuka
tree  used  in  the,  7ft3

Invincible,  sword  named,  154,
154ft2

Invisibility,  magic,  36,  37

Inwards,  anxiety  shown  by
eyes  turned,  49

Irish  Fairy  Book,  The,  A.  P.
Graves,  107ft

Iron,  carrying  red-hot,  the
ordeal  of  fire,  196ft

Island  of  Calypso,  the,  92ft1 ;
of  Tikopia,  the,  248,  310


Islands  of  Enchantment,  F.
Coombe,  317ft2

"Islands,  spice,"  early  travels
to  the,  96ft2

Isles  of  the  Blessed,  the  swan-
maiden  interpreted  as  be-
longing to  the,  233,  233ft1

Ivory,  areca-nut  cutters  with
handles  of,  250 ;  castanets
of,  95ft1

Jackals,    howling,    an    evil

omen,  156,  156ft1
Jain    Scriptures,  mention  of

betel  in  the,  254,  254ft3
Japan,   Tales  of  Old,   A.   B.

Mitford,  231ft*
Japanische  Marche?i  und  Sagen,

D.  Brauns,  231ft4

Jar,  drawing  lots  from  a,  one
of  theordealsin  Brihaspati's
law  code,  196n

Java  the  Garden  of  the  East,

E.  R.  Scidmore,  295ft3
Java:      Past     and     Present,

D.  M.  Campbell,  295ft3
"  Jets  over  Schedelvereering

.    .   .   ,"     G.    A.    Wilken,

Bijdragen  tot  de  Taal,   .  .  .

van      Nederlandsch      Indie,

297ft1
Jewel  of  charms,  one  of  the

jewels  of  an  emperor,  71 ;

of   Vishnu,   the    kaustubha,

60,  60ft1-'3
Jewel-spitting,  59ft3
Jewels  of  an    emperor,  the,

64,  68,  69,  71,  72,  75,  76,

77,  79;  the  five,  247ft2,  248ft
Jonesia  asoca,  the  asoka  tree,

7,7ft*
"Joshi,      Jyotishi,      Bhadri,

Parsai,"    Tribes  and  Castes

of    the    Central    Provinces,

R.  V.  Russell,  19
Jownal  of  American  Folk- Lore,

The  ["  Omaha  and   Ponka

Myths"],    J.    O.    Dorsey,

vol.  i,  Boston,  1888,  228ft8  ;

["Visajxar  Folk-Tales,  II"]

B.  L.  Maxfield  and  W.  H.

Millington,  vol.  xx,  Boston,

1907,  231ft5
Journal    of    the    American

Oriental  Society,  "Camphor,"

W.    H.    Schoff,    vol.    xlii,

1922,  246ft2
Journal  of  the  Anthropological

Institute,     illustrations      of

betel-chewing   accessories,

vol.  vii,  1878,  253ft3


Journal  of  the  Anthropological
Society  of  Bombay,  "Flowers
of  the  Hindu  Poets,"
W.  Dymock,  vol.  ii,  7ft4;
"  On  the  Use  of  Turmeric
in  Hindoo  Ceremonial, "
W.  Dymock,  vol.  ii,  18 ;
"  The  'Use  of  Saffron  and
Turmeric  in  Hindu
Marriage  Ceremonies,"
K.  R.  Kirtikar,  vol.  ix,  18

Journal  of  the  Asiatic  Society
of  Bengal  ["  Specimens  of
the  Burmese  Drama "],
C.  A.  Blundell,  vol.  viii,
Calcutta,  1839,  231ft1

Journal,  Folk  -  Lore,  227ft10,
231ft3.  For  details  see
under  Folk- Lore  Journal

Journal  of  the  Royal  Anthro-
pological Institute,  "  Notes
on  the  Gogodara  Tribe  of
Western  Papua,"  A.  P.
Lyon,  vol.  lvi,  1926,  313ft2

Joy  causes  trembling,  hor-
ripilation and  perspiration,
94,  94ft1 ;  horripilation
from,  46,  46ft1

Julius  Ccesar,  Shakespeare,
99ft1,  156ft1

Kachins,    The,    Ola    Hanson,

285ft*
Kalmukische     Marchen.       Die

Marchen    des    Siddhi  -  K'ur,

B.  Jiilg,  59ft3
Karen  People  of  Burma,  The,

H.  I.  Marshall,  285ft6
Kathakoca  ;     or    Treasury    of

Stories,  The,  C.  H.  Tawney,

29ft1
Kava-drinkmg,  248,  306,  316,

317,    318 ;    areas,    division

of  betel-chewing  and,  307-

309
K ava-pla.nt,  Macropiper

methysticum,  311,  312
Kensington    Museum,   speci-
mens of  Eastern  castanets

at  the  South,  95ft1
Kerchief  of  a  nereid,  stealing

the,  218,  219
Keres  not  to  be  mistaken  for

swan-maidens,  217
Khasis,  The,  R.  P.  T.  Gurdon,

285ft3
Kick  of  a  horse  as  a  means  of

instantaneous     transporta-
tion, 57,  57ft2
Killing   glance    of  Isis,    the,

75ft1


INDEX  II— GENERAL

Kinder-  und  Hausm'drchen  der
Br'uder  Grimm,  J.  Bolte
and  G.  Polivka,  83ft1,  107ft,
109ft2,  117ft2,  182ft1,  216ft1,
217,  217ft1

Kinds  of  areca-nuts,  different,
303,  304 ;  of  betel  leaves,
different,  265

King  Brahmadatta  and  the
Swans,  Story  of,  133,  133ft2,
134-136,  138,  142-143,  144,
209 ;  Chandamahasena  and
the  Asura's  Daughter,  106,
106ft2,  107,  107ft,  108-110;
of  Chedi,  the,  10,  124 ;  of
the  Madras,  the,  126 ;
Mandhatar  in  Ralston's
Tibetan  Tales,  83ft1 ;  of  the
Nagas,  Sankhapala,  7 ;  of
Paundra,  the,  84  ;  Prasen-
ajit,  The  Young  Chandala
who  married  the  Daughter
of,  112,  112ft4,113,  114;  of
Vatsa,  Udayana,  1,  2,  12,
13,  21,  22,  23,  25,  26,  27,
29,  30,  39,  45,  46,  47,  89,
90,  91,  92,  92ft1,  93,  100,
101,  102,  103,  121

King  named  Chandama-
hasena, 100 ;  Chandraketu,
145,  148,  150,  152,  153,
156,  159,  160,  163,  168,
208;  Chandravaloka,  125,
126,  127,  130;  Devamaya,
68,  73-77,  83,  85,  86,  93;
Gaurimunda,  48-51,  61-63,
73,  89;  Hemaprabha,  47,
53 ;  Kanchanadamshtra,
79,  81,  82,  84;  Malaya-
simha,  115,  116  ;  Mandara-
deva,  4,  63,  68,  69,  71,  72,
78,  79,  80-82,  84,  89;
Merudhvaja,  178-193,  195-
199,  204,  207,  208  ;  Palaka,
101,  103,  105,  106,  110,
112,  115,  118,  120,  121,
122;  Prasenajit,  31,  31ft1;
Sagaradatta,  28,  29,  47,  50,
53,  64 ;  Trailokyamalin,
183,  184,  185,  187,  188,
191,  193,  195,  196,  197,
199,  204,  207,  208;  Vajra-
mushti,  71;  Varaha,  73;
Vayupatha,  40-42,  47,  50,
53,  64-66,  69,  73,  88,  89,
93,  106  ;  Vegavat,  25,  46 ;
Vidyutprabha,  144,  146 ;
Virabahu,  118

"  King  Omar  bin  al-Nu'uman
and  his  Sons,"  The  Nights,
R.  F.  Burton,  93ft2


349

King  Richard  II,  Shakespeare,

88ft1  V

Kingdom    of    Siam,     The,

A.  C.  Carter,  289ft2
Kite  hi-  Garni :      Wanderings

round  Lake  Superior,  J.  G.

Kohl,  228ft8
Kleiner e  Schriften,  J.  Grimm,

117ft2
Knowledge,   magic,   39,    45,

55  ;  of  the  three  times,  57,

57ft3;     a    kind    of    Greek

Castanet,  95ft1

Lady  of  the  Lake,  The,
W.  Scott,  114ft1

Lake,  the  artificial,  135 ;
called  Pampa,  43,  45 ;
called  Sankhahrada,  7,  13,
14 ;  the  Manasa,  1ft1,  73

Law  codes,  Hindu,  195ft3,
196ft

«  Lay  of  Wayland,"  the  Volun-
darkvitha,  or,  one  of  the
Eddie  poems,  220

Leaf  of  the  Piper  betle,  one
of  the  three  necessary
ingredients  in  betel-
chewing,  238,  239

Leaves,  bed  of  lotus,  168,
168ft1,  171 ;  of  betel  with
camphor  and  the  five
fruits,  4,  4ft1 ;  of  the  kinsuka
tree  used  in  investing  with
the  sacred  thread,  7ft3;  of
trees,  the  five,  247ft2

"  Lebensjahre,  Die  verschenk-
ten,"  Marchen  des  Mittel-
alters,  A.  Wesselski,  117ft2

Lectures  on  the  Origin  and
Growth  of  Religion,  John
Rhys,  107ft

Left  hand,  the  Daitya's  vital
point,  109,  109ft3,  110;
hand,  uncleanliness  of  the,
302,  302ft1

Legendary  birds,  182ft1

Legends  of  New  England,
The  Algonquin,  Ch.  Leland,
228ft8

Legends,  swans  and  swan-
maidens  in  Teutonic,  219,
219ft1,  220

Leisure  Hour,  "Betel -Nut
Chewing,"  vol.  xviii,  318ft1

Lesser  Cardamom,  Elettaria
cardamomum,  96ft1

Lhota  Nagas,  The,  J.  P.  Mills,
285ft7

Libation,  ordeal  by  sacred,
195ft3,  196ft


350


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


Library,    Apollodorus,     107ft,

117ft2
Licking  red-hot  ploughshare,

196ft
Life  bound  up  with  Animal,
in  the  "External  Soul"
motif,  107ft ;  in  Burning
Candle  ("External  Soul"
motif)  9  107%;  to  dead
person,  giving  part  of
one's,  117,  117ft2 ;  in  Egg
("  External  Soul  "  motif),
107ft ;  restoring  dead  to,
80,  81,  99;  the  result  of
demerits  in  a  former,  166  ;
in  Special  Part  of  Body
("External  Soul"  motif),
107ft ;  in  Weapon,  Orna-
ment, or  other  Object,
107ft

Life  in  the  Forests  of  the  Far
East,  Spencer  St  John,
296ft2

Lightning,  an  evil  omen,  156,
156ft1

Lign-aloes  in  betel-chewing,
use  of,  243,  243ft2,  246,  264

Lime,  description  of  making,
286 ;  made  from  pounded
shells,  242,  258,  259,  261,
267,  269,  284,  285 ;  one  of
the  three  necessary  in-
gredients in  betel-chewing,
238,  274,  287,  289,  293,
294,  297,  300,  301,  305,
309,  311,  313,  314,  317

Lime-box,  249-251,  253,  254,
301,  315

Lime- gourd,  importance  of
the,  310-314,  317

Linaloes  (Lign- Aloes),  used
in  betel  -  chewing,  243,
243ft2,  244

Ling-wai-tai-ta,  the,  303,  304

Lion,  Naravahanadatta
assumes  the  form  of  a,  79,
80,  80ft1;  nereid  changing
into  a,  219

Lips  discoloured  by  betel-
chewing,  259-261,  268,  314

List  of  five  ordeals  in  the
Yajnavalkya  smriti,  195ft3,
196ft

Lists  of  five  ingredients  in
betel-chewing,  246,  247

Literature,  roots  of  the
"  Swan-Maiden  "  motif  in
Sanskrit,  234

Lock  of  Madanamanchuka's
hair,  the  single,  34,  36,
36n2


Longest  tale  in  the  Nights,
the,  93ft2

Look,  power  of  the  fatal,  75ft1

Lots  from  a  jar,  drawing,
196ft1

Lotus,  chariot  in  form  of  a,
52,  61;  leaves,  bed  of  168,
168ft1,  171 ;  turns  into  a
human  hand,  red,  54

Lotuses,  a  glance  like  a
garland  of  full-blown  blue,
30

Love,  the  asoka  tree  a  symbol
of,  7ft4;  the  God  of  (Kama),
1,  2,3,  11,  14,  23,  26,  71,
87,  95,  98,  126,  159,  170,
189 ;  songs  of  Celebes,
areca-nuts  mentioned  in,
299;  with  a  Thief,  The
Merchant's  Daughter  who
fell  in,  118,  118ft1,  119,
120 ;  the  torture  of,  9,  10

Lover  of  the  night,  the  moon,
the,  31

Lucky  number,  five,  the,  247

Lyre  called  Ghoshavati,  102  ;

the  test  of  playing  on  the,

29

Lyricks,  Camoens,  The,   R.   F.

Burton,  240ft1

Macropiper  methysticum,  the
Amw-plant,  312

Mad  elephant  fascinated  by
beautiful  maiden,  111,
111ft3

Mafulu  Mountain  People  of
British  New  Guinea,  The,
R.  W.  Williamson,  313ft1

Magic,  concealing  bodies  in
trees  by,  185  ;  crest-jewels,
172,  174,  175,  194,  195,
195ft1;  delusion,  the,  42,
43;  invisibility,  36,  37;
knowledge,  39,  45,  55;
lost  in  sleep,  power  of,
25,  25ft2  ;  resuscitation,  80,
81 ;  science,  power  of,  36,
37,  46,  48,  49,  79

Magical  combat,  the,  79,  80,
80ft1

Magie  et  Religion  dans
L'AJrique  du  Nord,  La
Societe  Musulmane  du  Mag-
hrib., E.  Doutte,  100ft

Mahavastu,  The,  E.  Senart,
71ft2

Maiden  fascinates  mad
elephant,  beautiful,  111,
111ft3;  like  a  wave  of  the
sea,  13


Maidens,   the   agreement   of
the    five     Vidvadhara,    66,
67,84
Mdlatimadhava,     Bhavabhuti,

17ft1
Malay      Peninsula,      betel-
chewing   in  the,  289-292;
specimens  of  betel  imple-
ments, 252,  253
Malay  Br.  Roy.  As.  Soc.  Journ.,
"  Notes  on  Malay  Magic,"
R.    O.    Winstedt,    vol.    iii,
December     1925,     292ft1 ;
["  Malay      Customs      and
Beliefs"]     H.     Overbeck,
vols,  ii  and  iii,  1924,  1925,
292
Malay  Magic,  W.  W.  Skeat,

290ft4
Malaya,   The  Sea  Gypsies  of,

W.  G.  White,  287ft1
Malayalam  words    for  betel,

239
Malobathrum  of  Pliny,  Folium

Indum  the,  244ft1
Maltesische  Mdrchen,   B.    Ilg,

107ft
Man   disguised    as   a    bride,

12-15
"  Man  who  took  a  Wild  Goose
for   a   Wife,    The,"    Gron-
Idndska    Myter   och    Sagor,
K.  Rasmussen,  228-231
Man  ["  Piper  Methysticum  in
Betel-Chewing  "J,    E.    W.
Pearson-Chinnery,vol.  xxii,
February  1922,  311,311ft1;
["  Piper    Methysticum    in
Betel-Chewing "]     E.     im
Thurn,     vol.     xxii,    April
1922,  311,  311ft2
Mango,  one  of  the  five  leaves

of  trees,  247ft2
Maori,  The  Ancient  History  of

the,  J.  White,  232ft?
Marathi  names  for  betel,  239
Mdrchen,    Das,    F.     von    der

Leyen,  107ft
Mdrchen   des    Mittelalters,    A.

Wesselski,  117ft2
Mdrchen  der  Schluh  von  Tazer-

walt,  H.  Stumme,  227ft8
Mdrchen    aus     Turkestan    und
Tibet,  G.  Jungbauer,  107ft
Marco  Polo,  The  Book  of  Scr,
H.  Yule,  245,  246,  246ft3,
247,  256,  257
Marriage  agreement   of  the
five    Vidyadhara    maidens,
66,  67,  84 ;  betel-chewing
regarded  as  taboo  before,


Marriage — continued

280,  281;  ceremonies,
betel   in,    273,    276,    277,

281,  283;  289,  290,  293,
295,  296,  297,  303,  304,
306,  309,  316  ;  ceremonies,
turmeric  in,  18,  277,  281 ;
ceremoiry  in  the  air,  the,  34;
ceremony,  the  second,  25

Marriage,   The  Stolen,  Mdlatl

and  Mddhava,  or,  17ft1
Marrying    a    mortal,    Vidya-

dharl's  curse  of,  59
Materia  Medica,  Chinese,  G.  A.

Stuart,  305
Materials,  castanetsof  various.

95ft1;  used  for  betel-bags,

251,  252
Meaning     of     the     "  Swan-
Maiden  "  motif,  213
Measures  of  betel  leaves,  272;

of  time,  varying,  78ft1
Medical        dictionary,       the

Vaidyaka-sabda  -  sindhn,      a

Hindu,  246
Mediaeval  Sinhalese  Art,  A.  K.

Coomaraswamy,  251,  252ft6
Mehri-Sprache  in    Siidarabien,

Die,  A.  Jahn,  227ft3
Meitheis,  The,  T.  C.  Hodson,

286ft2
Melanesian  Society,  The  History

of,  W.  Rivers,  310,  310ft2,

317
Melanesians,  The,  R.  H.  Cod-

rington,  232ft4
Melanesians    of   British    New

Gidnea,   The,   C.  G.    Selig-

mann,  310
Melanesians   and    Polynesians,

George  Brown,  317m1
Mimoir  es   de   la   Societe

Finno-ougrienne ,  228ft3
Men,  gold- and  jewel-spitting,


Mentawai  -  Sprache,    Die,     M.

Morris,  231ft7
Mention   of  betel   in    India,

early,  254,  255
Merchant's     Daughter     who

fell  in  Love  with  a  Thief,

The,  118,  118ft1,  119,  120
Metal,     the     Jhang,     Indian

castanet  of,  95ft1
Metamorphoses,     Ovid,     69ft1,

149ft2
Metaphor  of  the  moon,  31
Method  of  making  lime,  286  ;

of  preparing  cutch,  278-280
Methods     of    averting     evil

spirits,  292


INDEX  II— GENERAL

Migration  routes  of  the
"  Swan  -  Maiden  "  motif,
226-228,  231,  232,  234

Mikirs,  The,  E.  Stack,  285ft4

Milk,  the  adopted  Chandala
reared  on  goat's,  114,  Win1;
one  of  the  five  nectars,
247ft2

Mimusops  elengi,  vakida  tree,
96ft3

Minahassa,  De,  N.  Graafland,
297ft2

Mineral  Resources  of  Burma,
The,  N.  M.  Penzer,  65m1

Misfortune  through  aspiring
too  high,  83ft1

Mishkat,  the,  100ft.  See  also
under  Matthews,  A.  N.

Mitteilungen  der  schlesischen
Gesellschaft  fur  Volkskunde
["  Neues  zur  germanischen
Mythologie "],  T.  Siebs,
vol.  xxv,  1924,  225ft2

Mittheilungen  des  Seminars  fur
orientalischen  Spracheji
["  Duala-Marchen  "J,  W.
Lederbogen,  vol.  v,  1902,
227ft9 ;  [«  Studien  iiber  die
Litterature  der  Toba-
Batak"]  J.  Warneck,  vol.
ii,  Berlin  and  Stuttgart,
1899,  231ft6

Mixture  of  cutch  and  lime
produces  red  saliva,  280

Moalis  (a  Shiah  sect),  betel-
chewing  among  the,  242

Modern  accounts  of  betel-
chewing  in  the  East  Indian
Archipelago,  293-300

Modern  Egyptians,  An  Account
of  the  Manners  and  Customs
of  the,  E.  W.  Lane,  196ft

Modern  Greek  in  Asia  Minor,
R.  M.  Dawkins,  109ft2

Modern  Greek  Folklore  and
Aticient  Greek  Religion,  J.  C.
Lawson,  218,  218ft2

Modern  Language  Review,
"The  Valkyries,"  A.  H.
Krappe,  vol.  xxi,  1926,
224ft2,  225ft3,  226ft1

Mohammedan  practice  of
charmingaway  disease,  196ft

Moly,  a  protecting  herb,  the,
56ft2

Mongolische  Mdrchen-
Sammlung,  B.  Jiilg,  228ft4

Month  to  come  true,  dreams
taking  a,  100ft;  feast  on
the  eighth  day  of  the,  141,
141ft2


351

Moon,  the  lover  of  the  night,
the,  31 ;  metaphor  of  the,
31

Moonlight-jewel,  one  of  the
jewels  of  an  emperor,  71,
76

Moonstone,  a  slab  of,  96,  96ft6

Moors  and  Moalis,  betel-
chewing  among  the,  242

Morning -dreams,  fulfilment
of,  99,  99ft2,  100,  100ft

Mortal,  curse  of  Vidyadhari
ended  by  living  with  a,  59,
59ft2

Mortals,  northern  side  of
Mount  Kailasa  inaccessible
to,  74,  75

Mortar  for  grinding  areca-
nuts  and  betel  leaves,  250,
289,  295

Mothers,  the  temple  of  the,
11

Motif,  the  "  External  Soul,"
106ft2,  107ft;  the  «  Older
and  Older,"  55ft1;  the
"  Swan  -  Maiden,"  57ft2  ;
The  "Swan-Maiden,"
Appendix  I,  213-234;  the
"Taboo,"  or  "Forbidden
Chamber,"  57,  57ft1

Mount  Ashadha,  26  ;  Kailasa,
47,  51,  58,  59,  72-77,  79,
81-83,  85,  133,  133ft3,  136,
147;  Kalinjara,  101,  102;
Meru,83,198,199;  Sumeru,
82

Mountain  of  Agni,  the,  27 ;
of  Antimony,  the,  108,
108ft1;  the  Black,  103,
103ft1,  104,  105,  124,  131,
132  ;  called  Ashadhapura.
25,  27,  36;  called  Govin-
dakuta,  62,  69,  70,  72  ;  of
Fire,  the,  50,  51,  70;  of
Malaya,  the,  1,  70,  94,  99;
of  Mandara,  the,  85,  136  ;
the  Rishabha,  85,  86,  89,
94;  of  Rishvamuka,  the,
42,43,44;  of  the  Siddhas,
the,  43,  43ft1 ;  of  Siva,  the,
131 ;  the  Tridasa,  143

Mountains,  the  Vindhya,  54

Mountain-stone,  lime  for
betel-chewing  made  from,
313
Mourning  for  absent  husband,
single  lock  of  hair  worn  in,
34,  36,  36ft2

Mouth  coloured  red  and  black
by  betel-chewing,  259,  260,
261,  268,  314,  315


352


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


Mouth  when  speaking,  gold

ring  falls  from  girl's,  59ft3
Music  of  Gandharvadatta,  the

wonderful  skill  of,  28,  29
Music   of  India,   The,    Atiya

Begum     Fyzee     Rahamin,

95ft1
Musical  test,  the,  29
Musk  in  betel-chewing,  use

of,  246,  247,  264,  266,  274
Mussel  -  shells,     lime     made

from,  259
My   Adventures    among   South

Sea   Cannibals,  D.    Rannie,

310ft2
Mythologie,  Germanische,  E.  H .

Meyer,  232ft8
Mythology,    no    "Swan-
Maiden"  storiesinclassical,

217,  218;  swan-maiden  in

Norse,  219-226
Mythology,     Hindu,     W.      J.

Wilkins,  77ft*2


Names   of  betel   and   areca,

various,  238,  239,  241,  303,

308ft3 ;  of  bundles  of  betel

leaves,   265,   266 ;    of  the

seven  kinds  of  betel  leaves,

265  ;  of  swords,  154,  154ft2
Nan  shih,   the    biography    of

Lui  Mu-chih,  303,  303ft1
Narodnya    j'usskija    skazki,

A.  N.  Afanasjev,' 227ft5
Narodnyja     russkija    skazki    i

zagadh  .  .  .,  A.  Erlenvejn,

227ft5
Narrative  of  a  Residence  at  the

Capital  of  the  Kingdom  of

Siam,  F.  A.  Neale,  289ft2
Natives  of  Sarawak  and  British

North  Borneo,  The,  H.  Ling

Roth,  253ft2,  298ft1
Natural  Man,  C.  Hose,  296ft1
N atura  lis  Historia,   Pliny,

114ft1
Naturalist  in  North  Celebes,  A,

S.     J.     Hickson,     231ft10,

296ft2
"Nature     (Greek),"     L.     R.

Farnell,     Hastings'     Ency.

Rel,  Eth.,  218ft2
Nectars,  the  five,  247ft2
Nereid  or  nymph,  the  classical

swan-maiden,  218
New  Voyage  Round  the  World,

A,  William  Dampier,  301ft1
New  Year's  Day,  the  Makara-

sankranti  corresponding  to

our,  19


New  Zealand  and  its  Inhabit-
ants, Te  Ika  A  Maui;  or
R.  Taylor,  232ft7

Night,  dreams  at  the  end  of
the,  99,  99ft2;  fulfilment
of  dreams  at  different
watches  of  the,  100ft ;  the
king's  investigations  at,
118,  119;  the  moon,  the
lover  of  the,  31 ;  three
watches  of  the,  78,  78ft1

Nights,  fights  with  witches
for  three,  55,  56,  56ft1

Nights,  The  Arabian,  as  in-
troducer of  the  "  Swan-
Maiden"  motif  into  Europe,
234

Nights  and  a  Night,  The
Thousand,  R.  F.  Burton,
93ft2,  158ft2,  159ft,  161ft2,
219,  227ft3,  302ft1

Norse  mythology,  the  swan-
maiden  in,  219-226

North,  Kuvera,  the  guardian
of  the,  163ft1

Northern  and  Central  India,
betel-chewing  in,  270-275 ;
division  of  the  Vidyadhara
territory,  the,  47,  63

Note  on  the  Festival  of  the
Winter  Solstice,  19-20  ;  on
the  Use  of  Turmeric,  18

"  Notes  on  the  Gogodara
Tribe  of  Western  Papua,"
A.  P.  Lyon,  Journ.  Roy.
Anth.  Inst.,  313ft2

"  Notes  on  Malay  Magic,"
R.  O.  Winstedt,  Malay  Br.
Roy.  As.  Soc.  Journ.,  292,
292ft1

Number,  five,  the  lucky,
247  ;  of  the  jewels  of  the
Chakravartin,  varying,  72ft;
of  the  Valkyries,  original,
225

Numbers,  ordeal  of  the
adulterous  woman  in,  196ft

Numerous  harems  and  betel-
chewing  in  the  East,  prob-
able connection  between
the  (<Abdu-r-Razzaq),  258

Nuptial  taboo,  25,  25ft1

Nursery  Tales,  Traditions  and
Histories  of  the  Zulus,
C.  Callaway,  227ft10

Nutmeg,  in  betel-chewing,
use  of,  247,  255

Nye  Mennesker,  K.  Rasmussen,
228, 228ft9

Nymph,  carrying  off  the
clothes  of  a  heavenly,  58,


Nymph — continued

58ft2,  218;  of  the  eastern
quarter,  the  sun,  the,  32 ;
ended  by  living  with  a
mortal,  curse  of  a  heavenly,
59,  59ft2;  or  nereid,  the
classical  swan-maiden.  218


Oath,  a  binding,  exchange  of

betel  signifies,  281,  283
Objects     used     in    betel-
chewing,  249-254
Oblations,     the     Agnihotra,

103
Occurrence    of  antimony   in

India,  small,  65ft1
Ocean,  the  Churning  of  the,

60ft1,  76
Odes,  Horace,  49ft1
Odyssey,  the,  56ft2,  92ft1
Offering  of  betel  "  chew  "  to

water -spirits,       291;       of

water,  the,  101,  103
Offerings   to    deity   of  betel

cultivation  in  Bengal,  271;

of  the  golden  swans,  the,

135
Oil,  Richard  II  anointed  with

sacred,  88ft1
Oiled  and  curled,  head  of  an

adulterer,  107
Old    age,    a    crest-jewel    as

talisman  against,  194,  195,

195ft1 ;      hair     seized     by,

101
Old    Woman  of  Berkeley,   R.

Southey,  56ft1
"Older    and    Older"    motif,

the,  55ft1
"  Omar  bin  al-Nu'uman  and

his    Sons,     King,"     The

Nights,  R.  F.  Burton,  93ft2
Omens,  evil,  49,  156,  156ft1,

173,  173ft1
On   and   off"  Duty  in  Annam,

G.  M.  Vassal,  287ft2
Once  a  Week,  "  Antiquity  of

the    Castanet,"     Soy    Yo:

vol.  viii,  1863,  95ft1
One    arrow    splitting    seve

palm-trees,    44 ;     lock     of

Madanamanchuka's      hai

the,  34,  36,  36ft2
Opinions    about    the    swa

maiden,  various,  232,  232

233,  233ft1,  233ft2' 3
Opium,     a     rival    of    bet

chewing  in  China,  318
Ordeal,   to    drink  the  wa

of,  195,  195w3,  196ft


:


« Ordeal  (Hindu),"  A.  B.
Keith,  Hastings'  Ency.  Rel.
Eth.,  196ft

Ordeals  among  the  Bonthuk
caste,  areca-nuts  in,  276 ;
in  the  codes  of  Brihaspati
and  Pitamaha,  196ft  ;  in  the
Yajnavalkya-smriti,  list  of
five,  195ft3,  196ft

Oriental  Silverwork,  Malay  and
Chinese,  H.  Ling  Roth,
253ft1

Oriente  Lux,  Ex,  Win2.  For
details  see  under  Wiinsche,
A.

Origin  of  the  betel-vine,  story
of  the,  274 ;  of  the  Com-
pitalian  games,  114m1;  of  the
custom  of  betel-chewing,
possible,  248,  249 ;  of  the
festival  called  the  giving
of  water,  the,  106-110;  of
the  "Swan-Maiden"  motif,
217,  234 ;  of  the  Valkyries,
224,  225,  226 ;  of  the  Palli
or  Vanniyan  caste,  109ft3;
of  the  Volundarkvitha,  220

Origin  and  Growth  of  Religion,
Lectures  on,  John  Rhys,
107ft

Original  home  of  the  Castanet,
India  probably  the,  95ft1 ;
number  of  the  Valkyries,
225

Original  Sanskrit  Texts,  John
Muir,  152ft1

Ornament,  faces  smeared  with
betel-juice  for,  314,  315;
or  other  Object,  Life  in
Weapon,  107ft

Osiris  and  the  Egyptian  Resur-
rection, E.  A.  Wallis  Budge,
75ft1

Outpost  in  Papua,  An,  A.  K.
Chignell,  317ft1

Oval  shape  of  betel-bags,  251,
252

Oxford  Dictionary,  J.  A.  H.
Murray,  34ft1

Oyster  shells  for  betel-
chewing,  lime  from,  242,
258, 261, 269


Pagan  Races  of  the  Malay
Peninsula,  W.  W.  Skeat
and  C.  O.  Blagden,  289ft2,
290ft2

Pagan  Tribes  of  Borneo,  The,
C.  Hose  and  W.  McDougall,
296m1

VOL.    VIII.


INDEX    II— GENERAL

Painting  of  Muktaphalaketu,

Padmavatl's,  165,  166,  176
Palankeen,  13,  13k1,  48,  89
Pali  works,  mention  of  betel

in,  254,254ft2
Palm-trees   with   one   arrow,

Rama  splits  seven,  44
"  Palms    of    the    Philippine

Islands,"  O.  Beccari,  Philip-
pine Journal  of Science, 249ft1
Papers     on     Malay     Subjects,

R.  O.  VVinstedt,  291ft1
Paradise,  five  trees  of,  248ft
Part  of  Body,  Life  in  Special

("External  Soul"   motif),

107ft  ;  of  one's  life  to  dead

person,  giving,  117,  117ft2
Passages  of  the  Qur'an  used

for  charming  away  disease,

196ft
Past,  present  and  future,  the

three  times,  57ft3
Patterns  used  on  betel-bags,

various,  252,  252ft2- 34-5
Pavilions  produced  by  magic

power,  92
Peacocks,transformation  into,

142
Pearl,  areca-nut  cutters  with

handles    of,    250 ;    ashes,

chewing  paste  of  betel-nut

and,  256 ;  one  of  the  five

jewels,  248ft ;   swans  with

eyes  of,  135
Pearls  produced  by  combing

hair,  59ft3
Peasant   Life,    Bihar,    G.    A.

Grierson,  275
Peninsula,   betel-chewing   in

the  Malay,  289-292
Penny  Magazine,  "  Betel-Nut

Tree,"  vol.  v,  318ft1
Pen  ts'ao  kang  mu,  the,  304
Perfume    given    to    Sita    by

Anasuya,    44 ;   made   from

vakula  flowers,  96ft3
Persian  and  Balochistan  words

for  betel,  239
Perspiration   caused  by  joy,

94,  94ft1
Pheniciens   et    Grecs  en   Italie

d'apres  VOdyssee,  P.  Cham-

pault,  56ft2
Pheniciens   et    VOdyssee,    Les,

V.  Berard,  56ft2
Philippine  Islands,  1493-1898,

The,  E.  H.  Blair  and  J.  A.

Robertson,  302ft2
Philippine    Islands,  .    .    .    By

Antonio    de    Morga,     The,

H.  E.  J.  Stanley,  300ft1


353

Philippine  Journal  of  Science,

"  Palms  of  the  Philippine

Islands,"   O.   Beccari,  vol.

xiv,  249ft1
Philologus,  W.  Anderson,  vol.

lxxiii,  107ft
Pickled    areca-nuts,    use    of,

288
Picture  of  Muktaphalaketu,

Padmavati's,  165,  166,  176
Pilgrimage  to  Allahabad,  the

great,  19
Piper   betle,   betel-vine,    238,

238ft1,  239,  249,  272,  311
Piper  chaba—i.e.  Bakek,  247
Piper  cubeba  or  cubebs,  247
Piper   methysticum,   leaves    of

the,  310,  311
Piper  nigrum,  the  black  pepper

vine,  267
Piquedans    or    spittoons    for

betel-chewing,  268
Plantation    of    areca  -  palms,

269,  270,  305,  306,  308 ;  of

betel-vine,  265,  271,   272,

273,  305,  306,  308
Plants  of  the  Island  of  Guam,

The  Useful,  W.  E.  Safford,

308ft2,  309ft1- 2
Ploughshare,  licking  red-hot,

196ft
Plumage  of  a  goose,  stealing

the,  229
Plumages    of    eight    sisters,

king  steals  the,  223
Poetic   Edda,  the   Elder  or,

220,  223,  224
Poetic    Edda,     The,     H.     A.

Bellows,  221,  221ft1
Point  situated  in  left  hand,

vital,  109,  109ft3,  110
Poison  conveyed  in  a  betel-

"  chew,"  267,  268;  a  crest,

jewel  as  talisman  against-

194, 195, 195ft1 ;  the  ordeal

of,  196ft
Poison-trees  of  wealth,  the,

10
Police  officers  abducted  and

killed  at  night,  107
Pollution    of    desires    when

dying,   the  result  of,  117,

117ft1
'Poo/AaiVa/   apyaioXoyia,  Diony-

sios  of  Halikarnassos,  114ft1
Popular    Tales    and    Fictions,

W.  A.  Clouston,  227ft2
Portuguese    derivation     of

betel,  239
Posture  of  meditation  called

padmasana,  83,  83ft1


354


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


Pouring  water  on  the  hands,
129,  129ft1

Powder,  antimony  or  galena
applied  to  the  eyes  as  a
black,  65ft1 ;  of  linaloes  used
in  betel  -  chewing,  243,
243ft2

Power  of  the  fatal  look,  the,
75ft1 ;  of  flying  through  the
air,  26,  27,  31,  34,  36,  46,
50,  52,  55,  56,  59,  61,  69,
72,  89,  121,  131,  173 ;  of
magic  lost  in  sleep,  25,
25ft2 ;  of  magic  science,
36,  37,  46,  48,  49,  79,  92 ;
of  the  sciences,  Vegavati
obtains  the,  25,  26 ;  of
spitting  gold,  59,  59ft3,  60  ;
of  winking,  8,  8ft2

Powers  of  the  colour  yellow,
protective,  18;  super-
natural, 57,  59,  61

Precious  stones  produced  by
combing  hair,  59ft3

Pregnancy  ceremony,  betel
leaves  used  in,  278 ;  cere-
mony, turmeric  used  in,  18

Preparation  of  cutch,  278-280

Present  and  future,  past,  the
three  times,  57ft3

Previous  birth,  remembering,
141, 142,  200,  201,  205, 207

Primitive  Culture  in  Italy,  H.J.
Rose,  114ft1

Primitive  Gemeinschaftskultur,
H.  Naumann,  107ft

Primitive  Manners  and  Customs,
J.  A.  Farrer,  228ft8

Primitive  New  Guinea,  In,  I.  H.
Holmes,  314ft1

Prince  of  Vatsa,  the,  Nara-
vahanadatta,  17

Princess,  The  Young  Fisher-
man who  married  a,  115-
117

Principal  districts  for  betel
cultivation  in  India,  273

Principal  Navigations,  Voyages
.  .  .  of  the  English  Nation,
R.  Hakluyt,  259ft1

Proben  der  V olkslitteratur  der
Turkischen  St'dmme  Siid-
Sibiriens,  W.  RadlofF,  107ft,
228ft2

Products  of  the  cow,  five,
248ft

Progenitor  of  Servius  Tullius,
the,  114ft1

Prognostication  fromelevated
or  depressed  spirits,  99,
99ft1


Prophet  about  dreams,  saying

of  the,  100ft
Prose      English     Edition      of

Srimadbhagabatam,  A,  M.N.

Dutt,  214,  214ft2
Prose  "Introduction"  to  the

Volundarkvitha,  221
Protecting  herbs,  56,  56ft2
Protective     powers     of    the

colour  yellow,  18
Pseudodoxia    Epidemica    or

Vulgar  Errors,  Sir  Thomas

Browne,  75ft1,  156ft1,  195ft1
Puberty     ceremonies,     betel

used    at,    276,    278,    283;

turmeric  used  at,  283
Pun,  Hindu,  1,  1ft3,  2,  2ft1,  9,

9ft2,  11,  lift1,  13,  13ft2,  16,

16ft1,  31,  31ft1,  82,  82ft1,  94,

94ft1, 101, 101ft2, 103,103ft2,

125,  125ft2, 126,  126ft2, 130,

130ft1,     134,     134ft2,     148,

148ft1,  153,  153ft2
Punica,  Silius  Italicus,  154ft2
Pupil,     the     curse     of     the

hermit's,  173
Purgatorio      [Dante],      100ft.

See  also  under  Lombardi,

D.  B.
Purification,  the  annual  bath

of,  19


Qualities  of  the  areca-nut,
four,  304 ;  of  betel,  the
thirteen  (the  Hitopadesa),
254

Quarter,  the  sun,  the  nymph
of  the  eastern,  32

Quarters,  elephants  of  the
sky,  75,  76,  108ft1

Queen  Angaravati,  100 ;
Avantivati,  112;  Chandra-
lekha,  125 ;  Kalingasena,
22,  25,  46,  87,  90,  105;
Madanamanchuka,  wife  of
Naravahanadatta,  1,  21,  23,
24,  25,  26,  33, 33ft2,  34,  35,
36,  37,  42,  43,  51,  63,  86,
87,  88,  90,  92,  93,  96,  132  ;
of  the  serpents,  Basuki,the,
274,  274ft1;  Slta,  44,  45;
Somaprabha,  133,  134 ;
Svayamprabha,  185,  187,
194,  195, 196, 198 ;  Vasava-
datta,  wife  of  the  King  of
Vatsa,  27,  46,  90,  91,  93,
100,  102

Quicklime  used  in  betel-
chewing,  246,  257,  300,
309


Quid  of  betel,  ingredients  of
a,  284

Quran,  the,  used  for  charm-
ing away  disease,  passage
of,  196ft


Rdmdyan  of  Vdlmiki,  The,
R.  T.  H.  Griffith,  44ft1

Ramayana,  The,  M.  N.  Dutt,
44ft1

Reason  for  not  engaging
Brahmans  at  betel  festival,
271

Recht  und  Sitte,  J.  Jolly,  196ft

Red-hot  iron,  carrying,  the
ordeal  of  fire,  196ft;  plough-
share, licking,  196ft

"  Red-letter  "  day,  18

Red  lotus  turns  into  a  human
hand,  54 ;  saliva  in  betel-
chewing,  explanation  for
the,  315 ;  saliva  produced
by  chewing  betel,  258,
259,  260,  261,  262,  280;
unguent  at  coronation
ceremony,  smearing  with,
87  ;  and  yellow  connected
with  sun-worship,  the
colours,  18

Reed,  Greek  castanet  of  a
split,  95ft1

Reference  to  protecting
herbs,  earliest,  56ft2

References  to  betel  in
Stevenson's  Rites  of  the
Twice-Born,  277ft1;  to  betel
in  Thurston's  Castes  and
Tribes  of  Southern  India,
275ft2,  276-283;  to  the
"  External  Soul "  motif,
107ft

Reliefs  of  three  altars  at
Housesteads  (Northumber-
land), 224, 225

Religion  and  Folklore  of
Northern  India,  W.  Crooke,
19,  271ft2

Religious  ceremonies,  the
kinsuka  tree  used  in,  7ft3

Religious  System  of  China,  The,

J.  J.  M.'  De  Groot,  304ft1
Remaines  of  Gentilisme,  John

Aubrey,  100ft
Remarriage  of  widows,  custom

at,  273
Remembering   former   birth,
141,    142,   200,    201,   205,
207
Removing  a  hot  ring  from  a
pot  of  boiling  ghi,  196ft


Report,  Annual,  British   New

Guinea,    M.     Staniforth

Smith,  312
Report    on    the    Munnipore

Political     Agency,     Annual,

R.  Brown,  286ft3
Resemblance   of  costume  of

Greek  bride  and  nereid,  218
Resignation  of  the   King  of

Vatsa,  the,  102
Restoring   dead  to   life,    80,

81,99
Restrictions  of  clove  cultiva-
tion, Dutch,  96ft2
Result  of  demerits  in  former

birth,  the,  166;  of  pollution

of  desires  when  dying,  117,

117ft1
Resuscitation  of  the  devoted

couple,  99 ;   by  magic,  80,

81
Reunion  of  Naravahanadatta

and  Madanamanchuka,  the,

36 ;     with     wife    through

eating  own  child,  59,  59ft2
Review,    The    Classical,    "  On

Plants   of   the    Odyssey,"

R.  M.  Henry,  56ft2
Revue  des  Traditions  Populaires

["  Contes  et  Legendes  de

la  Grece    Ancienne "],   R.

Basset,  August-September

1910,  107ft
Reward   of   generosity,   the,

130,  131
Rhetoric,    glory   is  white   in

Hindu,  73,  73*1*
Rice,  dish  of  a  cooked  child

and,  59
Rice-grains,  mixed  with

water,       chewing,       196ft ;

produce  power  of  spitting

gold,  59,  59ft3,  60
Richard   II,   Shakespeare,

127ft3
Right  eye,  throbbing  of,  173,

173m1
Ring     falls     from     speaking

girl's  mouth,  golden,  59ft3;

from    pot    of  boiling    ghl,

removing  hot,  196ft
Rites  of  the  Twice-Born,  The,

Mrs  S.  Stevenson,  18,  277
Ritual  and  Belief  in  Morocco,

E.  Westermarck,  100ft
Rival   of  betel-chewing,   the

Virginian  cigarette  a,  319
Roman  castanets,  95m1
Romance   of  Betel-Chewing,
The,    Appendix    II,    237-
319


INDEX  II— GENERAL

Romische     Mythologie,     L.

Preller,  96ft1,  156ft1
Roots  of  the  "Swan-Maiden"

motif  in  Sanskrit  literature,

234
Rosary  of  Aksha  beads,  23
Rosenbl  [J.  Hammer],  227ft*
Routes  of  the   "Swan-
Maiden"  motif,  migration,

226,    227,   228,    231,   232,

234
Royalty,    five     emblems     of,

248ft
Rubies,  two  magic  grains  of

rice  like,  60
Ruby,  one  of  the  five  jewels,

248ft
Russian  Folk-Tales,  W.   R.  S.

Ralston,  56ft1,  57ft2,  227ft5


Sacred  Books  of  the  East
Series,  71ft2

Sacred  5  of  China,  The,  W.  E.
Geil,  248ft3

Sacred  flowers,  the  five,  248ft  ;
libation,  ordeal  of,  195ft3,
196ft;  oil,  Richard  II
anointed  with,  88ft1;  thread
ceremony,  betel  used  at
the,  276,  283  ;  thread  used
for  fastening  up  the  betel
creeper,  271 ;  thread,  in-
vestiture with  the,  2,  2ft2,
139,  139ft1,  181,  181ft1;
thread  ceremony,  kinsuka
tree  used  in  the,  7ft3

Sacredness  of  the  pan  garden,
271

Sacrifice,  armed  horsemen
appearing  from  afire,  109ft3;
to  water-spirit,  betel
"chew  "in,  291

Sacrifices,  five  great,  248ft

Sacrificial  thread .  See  Sacred
thread

Saffron,  turmeric  used  as  a
substitute  for,  18

Sagas  from  the  Far  East,  R.  H.
Busk,  59ft3

Sage  named  Akampana,  83-
85 ;  named  Kasyapa,  104,
106,  123-125,  131,  132;
named  Narada,  27,  79,  83,
124,  186

Sagen,  Gebrauche  und  Marchen
aus  Westfalen,  A.  Kuhn,
56ft2,  69ft1

Sagen,  Marchen  und  Gebrauche
aus  Meklenburg,  K.  Bartsch,
56ft2


355

Sagen,  Tierfabeln  und  Marchen,
Volksdichtung  aus  Indonesien,
T.  J.  Bezemer,  231ft*

Salep  in  betel-chewing,  use
of,  244

Salip  missi,  salep,  244

Saliva  in  betel-chewing,  ex-
planation for  the  red,  315 ;
produced  by  chewing  betel,
red,  258-262,  280

Salted  areca-nuts,  use  of,  303,
304

Samoa  a  Hundred  Years  Ago,
G.  Turner,  232ft*

Samodivas,  Bulgarian  nymphs,
218

Sandalwood,  28  ;  cool  as,  116*
116m-1  ;  ointment  (unguent
or  juice),  5,  5ft2,  6,  6ft1,  22,
168,  168ft1,  170,  171

Sandalwood-tree,  one  of  the
jewels  of  an  emperor,  68,
68ft2,  69,  76

Sanskrit  College  MS.  of  the
K.S.S.,  26ft1,  27ft1,  29ft,
32ft2,  33ft1,  35ft1,  36ft1, 38ft1,
40ft1,  41ft1, 45ft1,  60ft2,  67ft1,
71ft1,  72ft2,  75ft3,  79/11,
81ft1-2,  88ft2,  89ft1,  91ft1,
97ft1,  101ft1,  111ft2,  112ft3,
115ft1,  117ft2,  118ft2,  127ft2,
131ft1-2, 141ft3, 147ft2, 149ft1,
157ft1,  158ft1,  160ft2,  161ft1,
162ft3,  165ft1,  167ft1,  171ft2,
174ft1, 176ft1, 180ft1, 186ft1-2,
187ft1, 189ft1-2, 190ft2, 194ft1,
195ft2, 205ft2,  207ft1- 2,  208ft1

Sanskrit  literature,  roots  of
the  "  Swan-Maiden  "  motif
in,  234

Sanskrit  names  for  betel,  238

Sanskrit  Drama,  A.  B.  Keith,
17ft1

Sanskrit  Texts,  Original,  John
Muir,  152ft1

Sapphire,  one  of  the  five
jewels,  248ft

Sarawak :  its  Inhabitants  and
Productions,  H.  Low,  298ft1

Satires,  Horace,  99ft2

Satires,  Moschus,  99ft2

Saying  of  the  Prophet  about

dreams,  100ft
Scandinavian  Classics  Series,

221ft1
Scent    perfuming     a     whole

forest,  Slta's,  44
[Schbpfung      und      Siindenfall
des   ersten    Me?ischenpaares]
A.  Wiinsche,  vol.  ii  of  Ex
Orienle  Lux,  117ft2


356


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


Science  of  dividing  oneself
into  many  forms,  92 ;  of
flying  through  the  air,  26,
27,  31,  34,  36,  46,  50,  52,
55,  56,  59;  named  Praj-
napti,  100,  lOOn1,  102,  103 ;
power  of  magic,  36,  37,  46,
48,  49,  79  ;  in  visible  shape,
50,  52,  53

Science  of  Fairy  Tales,  The,
E.  S.  Hartland,  10  7ft,
233ft2-  3

Sciences,  Vegavati  obtains
the,  power  of  the,  25,  26 ;
of  the  Vidyadharas,  the,
131

Scissors  used  in  betel-
chewing,  252,  253

Sculptures,  the  Bharhut,
129ft1

Sea,  girl  like  a  wave  of  the,
13  ;  swallowed  by  Agastya,
the,  164,  164fti

Sea  Gypsies  of  Malaya,  The,
W.  G.  White,  287ft1

Sea  -  maiden,  the  classical
nereid  a,  218

Search  for  Madanamanchuka,
the,  24

Seasonal  deities,  the  three
Ribhus,  19

Second  marriage  ceremony,
the,  25;  night-watch,  fulfil-
ment of  dreams  in  the,
100ft

Seed  (nut)  of the  Areca  catechu,
one  of  the  three  necessary
ingredients  in  betel-
chewing,  238

Self  -  mortification  of  Nara-
vahanadatta,  the,  48

Sellers,  caste  of  betel-vine,
270,  273,  282

Sema  Nagas,  The,  J.  H.
Hutton,  284ft1

Semi-sacrediness  of  areca-
palms,  270

Separation,  death  caused  by,
98,  116 ;  the  torture  of,  5,
6,  24,  112,  116,  165,  167,
170,  171

Serpent-creeper,  or  Nagbel,
the  betel-vine,  274

Serpents,  Vasuki,  the  king  of
the,  274ft1

Seven  hells,  Rasatala,  one
of  the,  162,  162ft1;  jewels
of  an  emperor,  the,  71,
71ft2  ;  kinds  of  betel  leaves,
265 ;  palm-trees  with  one
arrow,  Rama  cleaves,  44


Seventeen  Years  among  the
Sea  Dyaks  of  Borneo,  E.  H.
Gomes,  231ft9

Severe  asceticism,  child
practising,  145

Shafts  of  Kama,  the  five,  3

Shans  at  Home,  L.  Mills,
286ft4

Shape,  science  in  visible,
50,  52,  53

Shapes  of  areca-nut  cutters,
various,  250,  251;  assuming
animal,  79,  80,  80ft1;  by
magic  power,  change  of,
37,39

Shells,  lime  for  betel-chewing
made  from,  238,  242,  258,
261,  269,  284,  285,  311,
313

Shepherd  stealing  the  ker-
chief of  a  nereid,  218,  219

Shrine  of  the  goddess  Durga,
54  ;  of  Mahakala,  the,  120,
121

Siam,  W.  A.  Graham,  289ft2

Siam,  a  Handbook,  A.  W.
Graham,  288ft1

Siam  in  the  Twentieth  Century,
J.  G.  D.  Campbell,  289ft2

Siberian  and  Other  Folk-Tales,
C.  F.  Coxwell,  59ft3,  227ft5,

228ft*'6'7

Sici  li anise h  e  M'drchen,  L.

Gonzenbach,  59ft3
Sickness,    betel    and     areca

used  for  curing,  282,294
Siddhi-Kur,     Kalmukische

Marchen.    Die  M'drchen  des,

B.  Jiilg,  59ft3
Sigfrid,  F.  Panzer,  107ft
Sign  of  mourning  for  absent

husband,  34,  36,  36ft2
Significance    of    exchanging

betel,   283;    of  white

umbrella,  191ft2
Silk    thread,    betel  "  chew  "

tied  with  a,  266,  270
Silver   coins   produced  by  a

horse,  59ft3
Simile  of  an  asoka  tree,  7ft4 ;

of  beauty,   13;    of  waves,

7
Similes  of  Siva,  42
Singhalese   name   for   betel,

239
Single  lock  of  Madanaman-
chuka, the,  34,  36,  36ft2
Sinhalese  Art,  Mediaeval,  A.  K.

Coomaraswamy,  251,  252ft6
Sirens  not  to  be  mistaken  for

swan-maidens,  217


true,


Six    months    to    come

dreams  taking,  100ft
Sizes  of  implements  used  in

betel-chewing,  250-252
Skill  of  music  of  Gandharva-

datta,  the  wonderful,  28,  29
Skin,  one  of  the  five  beauties

of  woman,  248ft
Sky,    connection     between

twins  and  the,  225
Sky-going      elephants,      the

two,  177,  180,  181
Sky    quarters,    elephants    of

the,  75,  76,  108ft1
Sleep,    power   of  magic  lost

in,  25,  25ft2
Smearing  with  betel-juice  to

avert     evil     spirits,     292 ;

bride     with     turmeric     at

wedding,  18,  281
Smell     of    wild     elephants,

elephant      maddened      by

the,  8
Smiles,  according  to  Hindu

rhetoric,  white,  171,  171ft1
Smithsonian    Institute,    Annual

Report    of  the    Bureau    of

Ethnology    of    the,    228ft8.

For     details     see     under

Annual  Report  .  .  .
Snail  shells,  lime  made  from,

284,  285
Snake,  nereid  changing  into

a,  219;    rewards  given  to

King  Udayana  for  rescuing

a,  237
Snake-bites,  cardamom  used

for,    96ft1 ;    do   not    occur

among  betel-vine  growers,

274
Snakes,  thief's  home  like  the

city  of  the,  119,  119ft2
Social    and    Political    Systems

of  Central  Polynesia,   The,

R.  W.  Williamson,  310ft1
Societe       Finno  -  ougrienne,

Memoires  de  la,  228ft3
Societe  Musulmane  du  Maghrib,

Magie     et     Religion     dans

VAfrique    du    Nord,     La,

E.  Doutte,  100ft
"  Soldier's  Midnight  Watch,

The,"   Russian   Folk-1'ales,

W.  R.  S.  Ralston,  56ft1
Solomon     Islands     and     their

Natives,  The,  H.  B.  Guppy,

315^1,2.3

Solstice,  the  festival  of  the
winter,  12,  12ft1 ;  Note  on
the  Festival  of  the  Winter,
19-20


Son     Avt


Son  Avantivardhana,  Story
of  King  Palaka  and  his,
106,  110-112,  114-115,  118,
120-122

Songs  of  Celebes,  areca-nuts
mentioned  in  the  love,
200 ;  of  Haha  and  Huhu,
the,  162

Sons,  Taravaloka,  giving  away
his  own,  128,  129

"  Soul,  External,"  motif,  the,
106ft2,  107ft

South  Kensington  Museum,
specimens  of  Eastern
castanets  at  the,  95ft1

South,  Yama,  guardian  of  the,
163ft1

Southern  China,  betel-
chewing  in,  303-306;
division  of  the  Vidyadhara
territory,  the,  47,  48;
India,  Use  of  Betel  in,
275-283

Spatula  for  applying  the  lime
in  betel-chewing,  249,  250,

^  252,  253,  254,  313,  317

Speaking,  gold  ring  falls
from  girl's  mouth  when,
59ft3

Special  Part  of  Body,  Life  in
("External  Soul"  motif),
^   107ft

Species  of  betel-vine,  various,
272,  273

Specimens  of  Eastern  casta-
nets at  the  South  Kensing-
ton Museum,  95ft1;  of
implements  used  in  betel-
chewing,  250,  251,  252

Spellings  of  betel,  various
English,  239,  239ft1

"  Spice  islands,"  early  travels
to  the,  96ft2

Spices,  H.  N.  Ridley,  18,  96ft2,
247

Spielmannsbuch,  W.  Hertz,
117ft2

Spirits,  methods  of  averting
evil,  292;  prognostication
from  elevated  or  depressed,
99,  99ft1

Spitting  betel-juice  on  a  per-
son, insult  of,  237,  257;
gold  produced  by  eating
two  rice-grains,  power  of,
59,  59ft3,  60  ;  turmeric  to
avert  evil  spirits,  292

Spittle  coloured  red  by  betel-
chewing,  258-262,  280 ;
turning  to  gold,  59ft3 ;  used
as  a  charm,  sirih,  294


INDEX  II— GENERAL

porcelain    or


Spittoons     of
silver,  268

Spoon  for  applying  the  lime
in  betel-chewing,  249,  250,
252,  253

Spread  of  the  custom  of
betel-chewing,  248-249 ;  of
the  "  Swan-Maiden"  motif,
216-219,  227,  228,  231,  232

Spring  festival,  the  day  of
the,  98

Sprinkling  with  water,  85ft1,
87,  90,  90ft1,  130

Square  shape  of  betel-bags,
252

Starting-place  of  the  migrat-
ing "  Swan-Maiden  "  motif,
India  as  the,  226,  228,  231,
232

Statistica  Account  of  Assam,  A,
W.  W.  Hunter,  284ft*

Stealing  the  clothes  of  bath-
ing Braj  girls,  Krishna,
214,  215;  the  clothes 'of
a  nymph,  58,  58ft2,  218;
the  crown  or  wreath  from
a  z&na,  219 ;  the  plumage
of  a  goose,  229  ;  the  plum-
ages of  eight  sisters,  king,
223

Stem  of  the  kinsuka  tree  used
in  investing  with  the  sacred
thread,  7ft3

Stolen  Marriage,  The,  Mdlatl
and  Mddhava,  or,  17ft1

Stone,  lime  for  betel-chewing
made  from,  313,  314

Stones,  the  Khartals,  Indian
castanet  of,  95ft1 ;  produced
by  combing  hair,  precious,
59ft3

Stories,  Buddhist  Birth,  T.  W.
Rhys  Davids,  135ft2

Story  of  Aschenkatze  in
Basile's  II  Pentamerone,  the,
69W1 ;  of  the  Child  and  the
Sweetmeat,  35  ;  of  the  De-
voted Couple  Surasena  and
Sushena,  97,  97ft2,  98,  99;
of  King  Brahmadatta  and
the  Swans,  133,  133ft2,  134-
136,138,142-143,144,209;
of  King  Palaka  and  his
Son  Avantivardhana,  106,
110-112,  114-115,  118,  120-
122  ;  of  a  man  who  married
a  wild  goose,  Greenlandic,
228-231;  of  Medea,  the,
109ft1 ;  of  the  origin  of  the
betel-vine,  274  ;  of  Psyche,
25ft1;   of  Rama,  44,  44ft1,


357

Story — cont.

45  ;  of  Savitrl  and  Angiras,
22-23  ;  about  the  shepherd
and  the  nereid,  218,  219;
of  Gypsy  origin,  "Swan-
Maiden,"  219;  of  Tarava-
loka, 125-131;  of  Urvasi
and  Pururavas,  the,  216

Studien  zur  germanischen  Sagen-
geschichte,  I,  Der  Valkyrien-
mythus,  W.  Golther,
AbkandL  d.  Munch.  Akad.,
224ft1

Studier  over  svanjungfrumotivet
i  Volundarkmda  och  annor-
stcides,  H.  Holmstrom,  217,
217ft2,  218,  218ft1,  223ft3,
226,  227ft1

Studies  about  the  Kathasarit-
sagara,  J.  S.  Speyer,  16ft,
31ft1,  37ft1,  60ft2,  63ft1-2,
87ft2,  91ft2

Substitute  for  areca-nuts
among  Naga  tribes,  286;
for  betel  leaves,  Bakek
used  as  a,  247  ;  for  saffron,
turmeric  used  as  a,  18 ;  for
wine  in  India,  betel  as  a
(Sherif),  256

Substituted  Madanaman-
chuka,  the,  24,  25

Substitutes  for  betel  leaves,
289,  290

Substitution  of  infant,  87,
87ft1

Sugar,  one  of  the  five  nectars,
247

Summer  solstice,  mistake  for
winter  solstice,  12ft1

Sun,  the  discus  of  Vishnu,
symbol  of  the,  72ft;  the
nymph  of  the  eastern
quarter,  the,  32

Sun-worship  connected  with
the  colours  red  and  yellow,
18

Supernatural  powers,  57,  59,
61

Superstition  of  curing  sick-
ness, betel  in,  282

Superstitions  connected  with
the  betel-garden,  273

Supplanted  bride,  the,  12-
15

Sushruta  Samhita,  An  English
Translation  of  the,  K.  K.  L.
Bhishagratna,  96ft1,  255ft1

Swahili  Tales,  E.  Steere,
227ft10

Swallow- wort, the  giant,  Calo-
tropis  gigantea,  96ft5


358


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


tf  Swan- Maiden  "  motif,  the,
57ft2 ;  Motif,  The,  Appen-
dix I,  213-234;  in  classical
mythology,  no  examples
of,  217,  218;  conclusions
to  the,  234 ;  Greenlandic
version  of  the,  228-231;
Gypsy  variant  of  the,  219  ;
incidents  in  the,  213;
migration  routes  of  the,
226,  227,  228,  231,  232,
234;  not  of  European
origin,  226  ;  origin  of  the,
217,  234;  spread  of  the,
216-219;  227,  228,  231,
232 ;  in  Teutonic  legends,
219-221,  222-226;  various
interpretations  of  the,  232,
233

Swan-maidens,  different  in-
terpretations of,  232,
232ft8,  233,  233ft12-3;  and
Valkyries,  connection
between,  223,  224 ;  in  the
Volundarkvitha,  the  three,
221-223

"  Swan  -  Maidens,"  M.  E.
Seaton,  Hastings'  Ency.
Rel.  Eth.,  219ft1

Swans,  the  chariot  of,  151,
152 ;  like  waving  chowries,
64 ;  Story  of  King  Brah-
madatta  and  the,  133,
133ft2,  134-136,  138,  142-
143,  144,  209  ;  in  Teutonic
legends,  219,  219ft1 ;  trans-
formation into,  142

Sweetmeat,  Story  of  the  Child
and  the,  35

Swinging  on  an  elephant,
amusement  of,  111

Sword  named  Invincible,  154,

^   154ft2

Sword-jewel,  one  of  the  jewels
of  an  emperor,  71,  76

Symbol  of  love,  the  asoka  tree
a,  7n4;  of  the  sun,  the
discus  of  Vishnu,  a,  72ft

Syrische  Sagen  und  Maerchen,
E.  Prym  and  A.  Socin,  57ft2.
See  also  under  Prym,  E.

Taboo  before  marriage,  betel-
chewing  regarded  as,  280,
281 ;  losing  wife  through
breaking  a,  213,  216;
nuptial,  25, 25ft1 ;  the  swan-
maiden  regarded  as,  233,
233ft3,  234 ;  for  widows  in
mourning,  betel-chewing  a,
311,  312


« Taboo  "      or      "  Forbidden

Chamber "  motif,  the,  57,

57ft1
Tale  of  Aristomenes  in  the

Golden   Ass,  56ft1;   in    the

Nights,  the  longest,  93ft2
Tales   and   Fictions,    Popular,

W.  A.  Clouston,  227ft2
Tales   of   Old  Japan,    A.   B.

Mitford,  231ft4
Tales,   The  Science  of  Fairy,

E.     S.     Hartland,     107ft,

233ft2- 3
Tales,    Swahili,     E.     Steere,

227ft10
Tales,     Tibetan,     W.     R.     S.

Ralston    and    F.    A.    von

Schiefner,  69ft1, 83ft1, 125ft1,

228ft1
Tales   and    Traditions  of   the

Eskimo,  H.  Rink,  228ft9
Tales,  Traditions  and  Histories

of  the   Zulus,    Nursery,   C.

Callaway,  227ft10
Tali-tying   ceremony   among

Chaliyan    caste,   betel    in,

277,  283
Tambuldar      or      Xarabdar,

presenters  of  betel,  244
Tamil  words  for  betel,  238,

239
T'ang    shu,    the    history    of

T'ang,  303
Teeth  discoloured  by  betel-
chewing,    259,    260,    261,

286,  301
Te    Ika    A    Maui;    or    New

Zealand  and  its  Inhabitants,

R.  Taylor,  232ft7
Telugu  names  for  betel,  238,

239
Temple    decoration,    flowers

of    asoka    trees    used    for,

7ft4;    of    Durga,     60;     of

the   Mothers,  the,   11 ;  of

Parvati  called  Meghavana,

157,  159;  of  Siva,  55,  57
Temples   and   Elephants,  Carl

Bock,  288ft2,  289ft1
Ten    days,    dreams    fulfilled

within,  100ft
Tenderness  of  the  betel-vine,

270,  271ft2
Terres  et  Peuples  de  Sumatra,

O.  J.  A.  Collet,  294
Territory,  two  divisions  of  the

Vidyadhara,  47,  48,  80,  89
Test,  the  musical,  29
Teutonic  legends,  swans  and

swan -maidens     in,     219,
219ft1,  220


Text  Bookon  Indian  A gricultu?
J.  Molliron,  318ft1

Theories  about  interpretatioi
of  the  swan-maidens,  dif-
ferent,   232,    232ft8,    233,
233ft1- 2-  3

Thief  is  led  to  execution,
drum  beaten  when,  119 ;
The  Merchant's  Daughter
who  fell  in  Love  with  a,
118,  118ft1,  119,  120

Thief's  home  like  the  city  of
the  snakes,  119

Third  night-watch,  fulfilment
of  dreams  in  the,  100ft

Thirteen  qualities  of  betel,
the  (Hitopadesa) ,  254

Thought,  appearance  by,  100

Thousand  Nights  and  a  Night,
The.     See  under  Nights

Thousands  of  years,  practising
austerities  for,  147

Thread,  betel  "chew"  tied
with  a  silk,  266,  270  ;  Brah-
manical,  16 ;  ceremony,
betel  used  at  the  sacred,
276,  283 ;  ceremony,  kin-
suka  tree  used  at  the  sacred,
7ft3;  investiture  with  the
sacrificial,  2, 2ft2, 139, 139ft1,
181,  181ft1 ;  in  marriage
ceremonies,  turmeric-dyed,
277  ;  used  for  fastening  up
the  betel-vine,  sacred,  271

Three  altars  discovered  at
Housesteads  (Northumber-
land), 224,  224ft3,  225;
aromatic  drugs,  the,  96ft1;
ingredients  necessary  in
betel-chewing,238;  months
to  come  true,  dreams
taking,  100ft  ;  nights,  fights
with  witches  for,  55,  56,
56ft1;  Ribhus,  the,  19;
times,  Siva  circumambu-
lated, 86 ;  times,  know-
ledge of  the,  57,  57ft3;
times,  temple  of  Siva  cir-
cumambulated, 200,  200ft1;
watches  of  the  night,  78,
78ft1 ;  wavelike  wrinkles,
waist  with,  158,  158ft2,
159ft

Three-eyed  god,  the,  Siva,
75,  116

Threshold  of  the  Pacific,  The,
C.  E.  Fox,  316ft1

Throbbing  of  right  eye,  173,
173ft

Through  Central  Borneo,  C.
Lumholtz,  298ft1


irough  New  Guinea  and  the
Cannibal  Countries,  H.
Cayley- Webster,  317ft1
Tibetan  Talcs,  W.  R.  S.
Ralston  and  F.  A.  von
Schiefner^ft1, 83ft1,  125ft1,
228ft1

Time,  varying  measures  of,
78ft1

Times,  knowledge  of  the
three,  57,  57ft3;  temple  of
Siva  circumambulated
three,  200,  200ft1

"  Tip,"  betel  used  as  our,
283

Tobacco  smoked  after  eating
betel,  274 ;  used  in  betel-
chewing,  284,  286,  287,
289,  290,  294,  295

Tone  of  castanets  improve
with  age,  the,  95ft1

Tools  used  in  betel-chewing,
249-254

Topaz,  one  of  the  five  jewels,
248ft

Torture  of  separation,  the,  5,
6,  24,  112,  116,  165,  167,
170,  171

Totem,  the  Swan  -  Maiden
regarded  as  a,  233,  233ft2,
234

Totemism  and  Exogamy,  J.  G.
Frazer,  233ft2

T'oung  pao.  Archives  pour
servir  d  I 'etude  de  Phistoire
.  .  .  de  PAsie  orientate
["Melange  s — Aus  dem
Wakan  Sansai  Dzuye "],
F.  W.  K.  Miiller,  Leiden,
1895,  231ft3- 4

Trade,  history  of  the  clove,
96ft2

Tradition,  earliest  evidence  of
the  Valkyrie,  224,  224ft3,
225

Traditions  Populaires,  Revue
des,  107ft.  For  details  see
under  Revue  des  .  .  .

Transactions  of  the  Ethnological
Society  of  London  ["  On
the  Wild  Tribes  of  the
North-West  Coast  of
Borneo"],  Bishop  of
Labuen, 231ft9

Transformation,  animal,  79,
80,  80ft1,  229,  230

Transformations  according  to
a  curse,  140-142

Translations  and  editions  of
Garcia  da  Orta's  Coloquios
.  .  .,  various,  240ft1,  245


INDEX  II— GENERAL

Transportation,  instant-
aneous, 57,  57ft2

Traumschliissel  des  Jagaddeva,
Der,  J.  von  Negelein,  100ft

Travellers  to  India  (1225-
1800),  accounts  of  betel-
chewing,  by,  255-270

Travelling  through  the  air,
26,  27,  31,  34,  36,  46,  50,
52,  55,  56,  59,  61,  69,  72,
89,  121,  131,  173,  206,  223,
224

Travels  in  India,  Early,  W.
Foster,  266ft3

Travels  in  India  by  Jean
Baptiste  Tavemier,  V.  Ball,
295ft2

Travels  of  Ludovico  di
Varthema,  G.  P.  Badger,
96ft2,  258ft1

Travels  in  the  Mogul  Empire
.  .  .  by  Francois  Bernier,
V.  A.  Smith,  267ft3

Travels  of  Pedro  Teixeira,
The,  W.  F.  Sinclair,  259ft2

Travels  of  Peter  Mundy,  R.  C.
Temple,  266ft6,  267ft2

Travels  of  Pietro  della  Valle  to
India,  The,  E.  Grey,  266ft*

Trays  used  in  betel-chewing,
250,  252,  282,  283,  289,
290

Treachery,  Angaravati's,  109,
109ft2

Tree,  asoka,  7,  7ft4,  24,  96,
96ft4,  206  ;  banyan-,  6,  11 ;
cardamom-,  96,  96ft1;
clove-,  96,  96ft2 ;  Kadam-,
214;  kinsuka,  7,  7ft3;  and
own  body,  gift  of  wishing-,
124,  124ft1;  pala,  277;
parijata,  170,  172,  186;
sandalwood-,  one  of  the
jewels  of  an  emperor,  68,
68ft2,  69 ;  tapincha,  7,  7ft2 ;
vakula,  96,  96ft2 ;  worship,
69,  69ft1

Trees,  Danavas  concealing
themselves  by  magic  in,
185 ;  the  five  leaves  of,
247ft2 ;  of  paradise,  five,
248ft
Trembling  caused  by  joy,
94,  94ft1

Tribes  of  Borneo,  The  Pagan,
C.  Hose  and  W.  McDougall,
296ft1

Tribes  and  Castes  of  Bengal,
The,  H.  H.  Risley,  271ft1

Tribes  and  Castes  of  Bombay,
The,  R.  E.  Enthoven,  274


359

Tribes    and     Castes     of     the

Central  Provinces  of  India,

The,    R.    V.    Russell,    19,

273fti

Tribes  and  Castes,  Hindu,  M.  A.

Sheering,  270ft2
Tribes  and  Castes  of  the  North-
Western  Provinces  and  Oudh,
The,  W.  Crooke,  270,  270ft1
Tribes  of  H.E.H.  the  Nizam's
Dominions,  The  Castes  and,
S.  S.  Ul  Hassan,  274,  275
Tribes     of     Southern     India,
Castes   and,    E.    Thurston,
109ft3,  112ft1,  275,  275ft1-2
Tribes    of    Southern    India,
uses  of  betel  among  the,
276-283
Trick  of  the  bawd,  the,  60
Trident- bearing     god,    the,

Siva,  74
Tropical  Agriculturist,  **  The
Areca  Nut  in  Ceylon,"  vol.
lxii,  1924,  318ft1;  «  Betel
Vine  Cultivation,"  vol.  lxiii,
1924,  318ft1
True  dreams,  99,  99ft2,   100,

100ft
Truest  dreams  occur  at  day-
break, the,  lOOw
Truth,  the  act  of,  189,  190,

190ft1
Tshi-speaking    People    of    the
Gold  Coast  of  West  Africa,
The,  A.  B.  Ellis,  227ft9
Tunisische   Marche?i,  und   Ge-

dichte,  H.  Stumme,  227ft6
Turkische   Marchen,   Billur

Kbschk,  T.  Menzel,  107ft
Turkische   Volksm'drchen   aus

Stambul,  I.  Kunos,  227ft4
Turmeric  to  avert  evil  spirits,
spitting,  292  ;  Note  on  the
Use  of,  18 ;  used  in  all  im-
portant Hindu  ceremonies,
18,  277 ;    used  at  puberty
ceremonies,  283 ;    at  wed-
dings,  smearing,    18,   277,
281
Turquoise-spitting,  59ft3
T(u  Shu  Chi  Cheng,  Chinese

encyclopaedia,  304
Twins  and  the  sky,  connec-
tion between,  225
Two  castes  connected  with
betel  in  India,  270,  271;
divisions  of  the  Vidyadhara
territory,  47,  48,  80,  89;
forms  of  modern  Indian
castanets,  95ft1;  grains  of
rice     produce     power     of


360


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


Two — continued

spitting  gold,  59,  59m3,  60 ;

varieties  of  cardamom,  96m.1
Type  of  the  "  Swan-  Maiden  "

motif ,  the  standard,  213

Ueber  Areca  Catechu,  Chavica
Betle  und  das  Betelkauen,
L.  Lewin,  237m1,  315m1

Umbrellas  broken,  the  state,
an  evil  omen,  156,  156m1  ;
white,  191,  191m2

Uncleanliness  of  the  left
hand,  302,  302m1

Unexplored  New  Guinea, W.  N.
Beaver,  313m2

Ungarische  Revue  ["  Osman-
ische  Volksmarchen  "],
I.  Kunos,  vol.  viii,  Leip-
zig, 1888,  227m4

Unguent  at  coronation  cere-
mony, smearing  with,  87,
88

Unguents,  yellow,  7,  7m1

Unhusked  rice-grains  mixed
with  water,  chewing,  196m

Unknown  New  Guinea,  In,
W.  V.  Saville,  314m1

Unnatural  births,  113,  114m1

Unter  Kopfj'dgern  in  Central-
Celebes,  A.  Grubauer,  299m1,
300

"  Use  of  Saffron  and  Turmeric
in  Hindu  Marriage  Cere-
monies," K.  R.  Kirtikar,
Journ.  Anth.  Soc.  Bombay,
18

"  Use  of  Turmeric  in  Hindoo
Ceremonial,  On  the,"  W.
Dymock,  Journ.  Anth.  Soc.
Bombay,  18

Use  of  Turmeric,  Note  on
the,  18

Useful  Plants  of  the  Island  of
Guam,  The,  W.  E.  SafFord,
308m2,  309m1-2

Uses  of  the  giant  swallow-
wort,  various,  96m5  ;  of  the
kinsuka  tree,  various,  7m3;
of  the  vakula  tree,  96m3

Valkyrie  tradition,  earliest
evidence  of  the,  224,  224m3,
225

Valkyrienmythus  Der,  W.
Golther,  Abhandl.  d.  "Munch.
Akad.,  224m1

Valkyries,  origin  of  the,  224-
226 ;  original  number  of
the,  225 ;  dual  function  of


Valkyries — continued

the,  225,  226;  and  swan-
maidens,  connection  be-
tween, 221,  223,  224;  in
the  V'dlundarkvitha,  the
three,  221-223

"Valkyries,  The,"  A.  H.
Krappe,  Modern  Language
Review,  224m2,  225m3,  226m1

Variants  of  the  •'Swan-
Maiden"  motif,  216,  218,
218m1,  219,  227,  228,  231,
232

Varieties  of  areca-nuts,  303,
304;  of  betel-vine,  272,
273  ;  of  cardamom,  96m1

Variety  of  the  jewels  of  the
Chakravartin,  72m

Various  editions  and  trans-
lations of  Garcia  da  Orta's
Coloquios  .  .  .,  240m1,  245 ;
kinds  of  areca-nuts,  303,
304  ;  kinds  of  betel  leaves,
265 ;  names  for  betel  and
areca,  238,  239,  303,  308m3

Varthema,  Travels  of  Ludovico
di,  G.  P.  Badger,  96m2,
258m1

Veil  from  a  nymph,  stealing
the,  218

Velikorusskija  skazki,  J.  A.
Chudjakov,  227m5

Verandah  in  New  Guinea,  From
my,  H.  Romilly,  232m2

Vernacular  names  of  betel,
238,  239

"  Verschenkten  Lebensjahre,
Die,"  Marchen  des  Mittel-
alters,  A.  Wesselski,  117m2

Versions  of  the  "Swan-
Maiden  "  motif,  various,
216,  218,  218m1,  219,  227,
228,  231,  232

Verzeichnis  der  Bbhmischen
Marchen,  V.  Tille,  107m

View  about  morning-dreams,
classical,  99m2

Vilas,  Serbian  nymphs,  218

Virtues  of  areca-nuts,  the
four,  304

Visible  shape,  science  in,  50,
52,53

Vital  point  situated  in  left
hand,  109,  109m3,  110

Voice  from  heaven,  30,  85,
87,  116,  117,  149,  153,
208

V olksdichtung  aus  Indonesien,
T.  J.  Bezemer,  231m8

Volkskunde,  Zur,  F.  Liebrecht,
233m1


Volkslitteratur  der  Turkischen
St'dmme  Slid-  Sibiriens,  Proben
der,  W.  Radloff,  107m,  228m2

Volks-  und  Menschenkunde,
Allerlei  aus,  A.  Bastian,
232m3

V'dlundarkvitha,  the,  or  "  Lay
of  Wayland,"  one  of  the
Eddie  poems,  220-223,  226

Voyage  of  the  Argonauts,  The,
J.  R.  Bacon,  109m

Voyage  of  Francois  Leguat,
The,  Pasfield  Oliver,  295m1

Voyage  of  Francois  Pyrard  of
Laval,  The,  A.  Gray,  266m1

Voyage  of  John  Huyghen  van
Linschoten  to  the  East  Indies,
The,  A.  C.  Burnell  and
P.  A.  Tiele,  259m3

Voyage  Round  the  World,  A
New,  William  Dampier,
301m1

Voyages  and  Discoveries,
'  William  Dampier,  302

Voyages  .  .  .  of  the  English
Nation,  Principal  Naviga-
tions .  .  .,  R.  Hakluyt,
259m1

Vulgar  Errors  or  Pseudodoxia
Epidemica,  Sir  Thomas
Browne,  75m1,  156m1,  195m1

Vulnerable  point  in  left  hand,
only,  109,  109m3,  110

Vultures  as  evil  omens,  156,
156m1  ;  transformation  into,
142


Waist  with  three  wavelike
wrinkles,  158,  158m2,  159m

Wall,  Hadrian's,  224

Wanderings  round  Lake
Superior,  Kitchi-Gami:  J.  G.
Kohl,  228m8

War,  the  God  of,  180;  the
Valkyries  deities  of,  224,
225

Warmth  of  betre  (Garcia  da
Orta),  242

Watches  of  the  night,  fulfil-
ment of  dreams  in  different,
100m;  of  the  night,  the
three,  78,  78m1

Water,  festival  called  the
giving  of,  106,  110,  111;
on  the  hands,  pouring,  129,
129m1;  the  offering  of,  101,
103 ;  of  ordeal,  to  drink
the,  195,  195m3;  the  ordeal
of,  196m  ;  sprinkling  with,
85m1,  87,  90,  90m1,  130


30


Water-spirit,  betel  "  chew  "
offered  to  a,  291

Wave  of  the  sea,  girl  like  a,
13

Wavelike  wrinkles,  waist
with  three,  158, 158ft2, 159ft

Waves,  simile  of,  7

Waving  chowries,  swans  like,
64

"Wayland,  Lay  of,"  the
Volundarkvitha  of,  one  of
the  Eddie  poems,  220

Ways  of  eating  areca-nuts,
different,  306

WealthjLakshmi,  the  Goddess
of,  274 ;  the  poison-tree  of,
10

Weapon  of  Brahma,  the,  145,
146,  174 ;  Ornament  or
other  Object,  Life  in,
107ft  ;  of  Pasupati  (Rudra),
the,  145,  146,  179,  183,
184

Weather  and  fertility,  Val-
kyries connected  with,  225

Wedding  ceremonies,  betel
in,  273,  276,  277,  281,  283,
289,  290,  293,  295,  296,
297,  303,  304,  306, 309,  316

Week,  Once  a,  "  Antiquity  of
the  Castanet,"  Soy  Yo,
vol.  viii,  1863,  95ft1

West  Irish  Folk-Tales,  W.
Larminie,  107ft

West,  Varuna,  guardian  of
the,  108m1,'  163ft1

Westerner,  the  effects  of
betel-chewing  on  a,  268

Westfalen,  Sagen,  Gebr'duche
und  Mdrchen  cms,  A.  Kuhn,
56ft2,  69ft1

Westminster  Review,  "  Eating
or  Chewing  of  Pan,"  G.  A.
Stephens,  vol.  clxviii,  New
York,  August  1907,  318ft1

White  cloud,  the  swan-
maiden  interpreted  as  a,
232,  232ft8 ;  glory  in  Hindu
rhetoric,  73,  73ft1;  smiles
in    Hindu    rhetoric,     171,


INDEX  II— GENERAL

White — continued

171ft1;  umbrellas,   191,
191ft2

Wide  spread  of  the  «  Swan-
Maiden  "  motif,  216

Widows  of  Brahmans  for-
bidden to  use  betel,  276,
283 ;  curious  custom  of
remarriage  of,  273;  in
mourning,  betel- chewing
regarded  as  taboo  for,  311,
312

Wife  given  away  by  husband,
only,  129

Wife-jewel,  one  of  the  jewels
of  an  emperor,  71,  71ft2

Wind-god,  the,  148,  149,  156,
160,  160ft1

Wine  made  from  betel-juice,
304 ;  replaced  by  betel  in
India  (Sherif),  256

Wings  of  swans  tipped  with
emerald,  135,  135ft2

Winking,  power  of,  8,  8ft2

Winter  solstice,  the  festival
of  the,  12,  12ft1 ;  Solstice,
Note  on  the  Festival  of
the,  19-20

Wishing-tree  and  own  body,
gift  of,  124,  124ft1

Witches,  fights  with,  55 ;
herbs  protecting  man  from,
56,  56ft2

Woman,  the  five  beauties  of,
248ft;  ordealof  the  adulter-
ous (in  Numbers),  196ft

Wonderful  beauty,  the  foot
of,  33 ;  brown  cow,  the,  55  ;
garden,  the,  169,  170

Words  used  in  betel-chewing,
etymological  evidence  of,
238-239

Worship  of  the  deity  of  betel
cultivation,  271 ;  of  Kala-
ratri,  Naravahanadatta's,
77,  78 ;  of  trees,  69,  69ft1

Wreath  or  crown  of  a  z&na,
stealing  the,  219

Wrinkles,  waist  with  three
wavelike,  158,  158ft2,  159ft


361

Xarabdar  or  Tambuldar,
presenters  of  betel,  244

Year  to  come  true,  dreams
taking  a,  100ft

Yellow,  from  adoring  the  fire,
turning,  33;  and  red  con-
nected with  sun-worship,
the  colours,  18 ;  unguents,
7,  7ft1

Young  Chandala  who  married
the  Daughter  of  King
Prasenajit,  The,  112, 112ft*,
113,  114

Young  Fisherman  who
married  a  Princess,  The,
115-117

Younger  Edda,  the,  Snorri
Sturluson,  220

Youth,  one  of  the  five
beauties  of  woman,  248ft

Zanas,  Rumanian  nymphs,
218

Zeitschrift  der  deidschen  mor-
genl'dndischen  Gesellschaft,
"  Die  t  Geschichten  des
toten  No-rub-can,"  A.  H.
Fran  eke,  vol.lxxiv,  Leipzig,
1921,  59ft3

Zeitschrift  des  Vereins  fur
Volkskunde  ["  Die  undank-
bare  Gattin  "J,  G.  Paris,
vol.  xiii,  Berlin,  1903,
117ft2;  ["Zur  neugriech-
ischen  Volkskunde "],  A.
Thumb,  vol.  ii,  Berlin,
1892,  117ft2

Zeitschrift  fiir  Ethnologie
["  Einige  Bemerkungen
iiber  Musik  .  .  .  der  Yap-
leute "],  Dr  Born,  vol.
xxxv,  Berlin,  1903,  232ft3

Zeitschrift  fiir  vergleichende
Sprachforschung  ["  Amor
und  Psyche"],  F.  Lieb-
recht,  vol.  xviii,  Berlin,
1896,  232ft7

Zur  Volkskunde,  F.  Liebrecht,
233ft1


vol.  vm,


z2


Printed  in  Great  Britain

by  The  Riverside  Press  Limited

Edinburgh


c


>;&»**.


f  ^:^


m.


w


*%\


tffc


&&


X


p


,#


#<'


Ijjft^iil^*-'  !

;#   '

t

•  ^Ji'!:

:t'  '/N^

,^  1

w  •  «&


:  V;  %


ia0r


%,


i$    ~;  ^fe


H

•  »\

Eh

•
-P

•  •v

00

>>

•

U  r-

O

o

-P

i>

CD

^

cd

<H

-P

O

•

-P

u

J

$3

3

CQ

<D

d

O

CD

£

o

PM

>

<D

<D

S

*d

^

J5

a

•

O

•d

to

o

^

iM

OS

«#

to

j

OS

CO

CD

j           I

CO

University  of  Toronto
Library


DO  NOT

REMOVE

THE

CARD

FROM

THIS

POCKET


Acme  Library  Card  Pocket
LOWE-MARTIN  CO.  limited


flfcwwi
