The Ocean of Story (Kathasaritsagara), Vol. 4 (Somadeva; C. H. Tawney (trans.); N. M. Penzer (ed.), 1924)
==========================================================
Vol. 4 of the complete Kathasaritsagara — Somadeva's 11th-century Ocean of Story, the great Sanskrit story-cycle — in C. H. Tawney's translation (1880-84), edited with introduction and notes by N. M. Penzer (1924-28, 10 vols.). Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/oceanofstorybein04somauoft).

THE
OCEAN  OF  STORY


sfe^a^k


THE


OCEAN  OF  STORY


BEING


C.   H.  TAWNEY'S  TRANSLATION


OF


SOMADEVA'S  KATHA  SARIT  SAGARA


(OR  OCEAN   OF  STREAMS  OF  STORY)


NOW    EDITED    WITH    INTRODUCTION,    FRESH

EXPLANATORY  NOTES  AND  TERMINAL  ESSAY

BY

N.   M.   PENZER,   M.A.,    F.R.G.S.,    F.G.S

MIMBIK   OF   THE   FOLK-LORK   SOCIKTY  J   FELLOW   OF   THE

ROYAL  ANTHROPOLOGICAL  INSTITUTE  ;  MEMBER

OF  THE   ROYAL  ASIATIC  SOCIETY,    ETC.

AUTHOR  OF

"AN  ANNOTATED   BIBLIOGRAPHY  OF  SIR   RICHARD   FRANC  ls

BURTON,"   ETC.


IN  TEN  VOLUMES


VOL.    IV


WITH   A  FOREWORD  BY

Dr  F.   W.   THOMAS,    Ph.D.

LIBRARIAN,    INDIA  OFFICE


LONDON:      PRIVATELY     PRINTED      FOR      SUBSCRIBERS      ONLY
BY    CHAS.  J.   SAWYER   LTD.,   GRAFTON  HOUSE,    WJ.      MCMXXV


Made  and  Printed  in  Ortat  Britain


FOREWORD

NOT  much  has  been  left  to  be  said  by  way  of  in-
troduction to  the  fourth  volume  of  this  splendid
publication.  The  reader  is  familiar  with  the  cir-
cumstances of  the  Sanskrit  author's  life  ;  he  knows  what
is  necessary  concerning  the  literary  sources  of  the  work  ;
he  has  considered  the  origin  of  the  stories,  whether  Aryan
or  Dravidian,  in  India  itself,  and  their  affinities  with  beliefs
and  practices  in  later  India ;  and  he  has  contemplated  the
important  and  difficult  questions  of  transmission — transmis-
sion of  stories  and  motifs  from  country  to  country,  people
to  people,  and  the  no  less  certainly  attested  inverse  process
of  transmission  from  literary  source  to  folk-lore.  Then,
again,  the  very  march  of  the  narrative  has  accustomed
him  to  the  ease  of  the  author's  style,  fitting  the  matter  like
a  glove,  objective,  impersonal  and  unmoved,  whether  the
scene  is  earth  or  heaven  or  one  of  the  various  hells,  an
unvarying  style  equal  to  the  burden  of  the  long  task.  And
the  translator,  as  became  a  ripe  scholar  of  fine  literary  taste,
follows  with  a  rendering  as  free  from  display  as  is  the  original
itself.

It  was  by  no  means  a  matter  of  course  that  the  Great
Tale  of  Gunadhya  should  come  down  to  us  in  so  acceptable
a  form.  The  example  of  Ksemendra's  Brhatkathd-maHjarl
("  Great-Tale  Cluster ")  shows  clearly  that  we  might  have
had  to  be  content  with  a  much  more  restricted  version  by
an  author  solicitous  of  poetical  artifice  rather  than  of  the
adequate  presentation  of  the  matter.  Written  in  an  old
dialect  little  practised  and  contemned  as  vulgar,  the  work
of  Gunadhya  was  not  safeguarded,  like  the  Mahd-Bhdrata
and  Ramdyana,  which  Ksemendra  subjected  to  the  like
treatment,  by  having  been  composed  in  the  sacred  language,
by  a  theme  relating  to  the  great  heroes  of  antiquity,  by
ancient  fame  and  semi-divine  character  attaching  to  the
author.     Even  as  it  is,  the  original  prose  story  is  presented


vi  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

to  us  with  curtailments  and  amplifications  of  the  most
wholesale  character.  While  the  result  has  been,  no  doubt,
favourable  to  the  work  as  an  Ocean  of  Story  and  a  store-
house of  popular  idea  and  folk-lore,  and  thus  better  adapted
to  the  purposes  contemplated  in  Mr  Penzer's  monumental
edition,  it  is  still  a  matter  of  some  concern  to  the  reader  to
realise  rather  more  fully  the  vicissitudes  through  which  the
text  has  passed.

Apart  from  the  Kashmir  redactions  there  exists  a
Sanskrit  version  of  Gunadhya's  work,  bearing  the  title
Brhatkathd :  s'loka-samgraha — i.e.  the  "  Great  Tale  :  Verse
Epitome.''  In  spite  of  its  rather  unassuming  title,  it  must
in  its  complete  form  have  been  —  for  we  possess  only
about  six  of  the  twenty-six  labhas,  "  emprizes  " — of  very
considerable  extent,  say  about  25,000  slokas  or  couplets.
Its  discoverer  and  editor,  M.  Felix  Lacote,  has  published
(Essai  sur  Gunadhya  et  la  Brhatkathd,  Paris,  1908)  along
with  the  text  an  elaborate  discussion  of  all  the  questions
of  higher  criticism  relating  to  the  Kathd-sarit-sdgara  and
the  other  recensions.  M.  Lacote's  conclusions,  which  are
developed  with  great  perspicacity,  may  be  summarised  as
follows.

The  Sloka-samgraha — "  Verse  Epitome  " — of  which  the
MS.  came  from  Nepal,  is  the  work  of  a  Nepalese  writer,  by
name  Budhasvamin,  who  is  at  pains  to  bring  the  poem
into  connection  with  his  own  country.  It  is  of  relatively
early  date,  say  the  eighth  to  the  ninth  century  a.d.  and  is
based  upon  the  Pai^aci  original.  In  its  arrangement,  and
still  more  in  its  contents,  it  differs  widely  from  the  Kashmir
versions.  The  most  significant  feature  of  these  differences,
however,  is  that  they  are  largely  by  way  of  defect.  Great
masses  of  the  subsidiary  tales  in  the  Kathd-sarit-sdgara  are
wanting,  and  thus  the  main  narrative  stands  out  in  much
greater  distinctness  and  amplitude.  It  is  not  that  Kse-
mendra  and  Somadeva  have  greatly  perverted  the  story
although  there  are  some  rather  considerable  dislocations,
which  deface  its  logical  coherence.  The  chief  difference  is
that  the  story  is  reduced  to  a  rather  slender  trickle,  which
tends  to  be  lost  in  the  deluge  of  adventitious  matter.     The


FOREWORD  vii

Paisaci  original,  though  including,  like  other  Indian  narra-
tives, a  quota  of  incidental  tales  and  episodes,  was  concerned
predominantly  with  the  actual  adventures  of  Naravahana-
datta,  a  hero  of  Gunadhya's  own  invention.  A  novel,  in
which  the  subordinate  characters  were  largely  middle-class
people,  it  was  distinguished  by  a  great  variety  and  abund-
ance of  incident.  The  author,  who  was  a  born  story-teller
and  the  real  creator  of  the  literary  Kathd,  appears  to  have
travelled  widely,  perhaps  chiefly  on  the  great  trade-route
which  connected  Prayaga  (Allahabad),  Kausambi  and  Ujjain
with  the  ports  of  Western  and  Eastern  India.  He  had
listened  to  the  tales  of  wayfaring  men  and  of  voyagers
from  the  great  seas.  He  had  visited  the  cities  and  learned
the  narratives  of  local  fame  :  in  the  Kausambi  country,
even  more  than  in  Ujjain,  the  adventures  of  Udayana  must
have  been  the  talk  of  the  village  greybeards.  A  portion
of  the  matter  relating  to  Udayana  and  Pradyota  existed
already,  no  doubt,  in  literary  form,  and  it  is  preserved  to
us  in  Buddhist  originals  or  adaptations.  The  composition
of  the  poem  in  eighteen  sections  may  have  been  imitative
of  the  Mahd-Bhdrata.  Is  there  anything  in  the  idea,  pro-
pounded by  M.  Lacote,  that  its  content,  a  narrative  of
travels  and  loves,  was  inspired  by  the  Greek  novel  ?  The
supposition  has  no  inherent  improbability.  The  literary  in-
fluence of  Greece  in  the  East  did  not  end  with  the  Seleucid,
or  the  Parthian,  empire ;  it  has  recently  (by  Prof.  H.  Jacobi
in  Antidoron,  Festschrift  Jacob  Wackernagel,  Gottingen,  1923,
pp.  126  sqq.)  been  suggested  that  a  far-off  reflex  of  the
hexameter  metre  (known,  perhaps,  in  Gandhara)  is  traceable
in  some  Jain  poems  composed  in  a  rather  late  (Apabhram^a)
dialect.

M.  Lacote  subjects  to  a  lengthy  and  penetrating  criticism
the  composition  of  the  Kashmir  Brhat-kathd.  Somadeva's
claim  to  fidelity  in  the  handling  of  his  original  is  fully  justified
by  a  comparison  with  the  work  of  his  predecessor,  Ksemendra.
A  Brhat-kathd  such  as  he  reproduces,  a  prose  work  in  the
Paisaci  dialect,  existed,  therefore,  in  Kashmir.  But  it  was
no  longer  the  book  which  Gunadhya  had  composed.  It  was
a  huge  compilation,  incorporating  not  only  many  particular


viii  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

stories  from  heterogeneous  sources,  but  even  whole  books
such  as  the  Pancatantra,  the  "Twenty-five  Tales  of  the
Vampire  "  (Vetdla-pancavimsati)  and  the  story  of  Nala.  The
charge  of  abridging,  obscuring  and  dislocating  the  main
narrative  is  valid,  not  against  Somadeva  and  Ksemendra,
but  against  predecessors,  whose  work  of  amplification  had
been  completed,  so  far  as  completion  can  be  predicated,
perhaps  two  or  three  centuries  earlier.  The  process  has
operated  in  the  case  of  other  compilations  within  and  out-
side India.  All  the  rivers  run  into  the  sea ;  and  the  rhap-
sodists  of  different  particular  narratives  were  as  urgent  for
inclusion  in  the  Great  Tale  as  the  latter  was  hospitable  in
admitting  them.  We  only  wonder  who  were  those  com-
pilers possessed  of  competence  and  goodwill  to  adorn  the
Pancatantra,  Nalopdkhydna,  and  so  forth,  with  a  Paisaci
dress,  and  for  what  audience  they  laboured.

The  reader  will  have  remarked  the  intimate  connection
of  the  story  with  questions  of  dialect  and  of  grammars.
At  the  outset,  in  the  Prologue  (Kathd-pitha),  which,  however,
can  hardly  be  attributed  to  Gunadhya  himself,  we  are  con-
fronted with  a  rivalry  between  the  old  Paninean  grammar,
which  demanded  twelve  years  for  the  acquisition  of  the
Sanskrit  language,  and  the  new  system  of  the  Kdtantra,
professing  to  accomplish  the  same  result  in  six.  A  modicum
of  practical  reality  is  here,  no  doubt,  en  jeu.  The  Paninean
grammar,  with  its  artificial  system  and  its  subtle  com-
mentaries, was  doubtless  better  adapted  for  a  lifelong  study
of  the  language  than  for  practical  instruction.  As  the
classical  language  became  more  indispensable  for  worldly
people  of  the  middle  class,  previously  content  with  dialects
or  the  imperfect  Sanskrit  which  we  find  exemplified  in  the
early  Buddhist  texts,  their  ambition  for  culture  might  have
been  unequal  to  the  difficulties  presented  by  the  venerable
text  of  Panini,  itself  in  various  points  out  of  correspondence
with  the  current  speech  of  the  learned.  With  such  aspirants
the  newer  methods  may  have  worked  miracles.  On  the
part  of  Gunadhya  the  recourse  at  such  a  period  to  a  fresh,
unheard-of  literary  speech  may  be  challenged  with  wanton-
ness.    Such  are  the   wilful  ways  of  genius  :    have  we  not


FOREWORD  ix

modern  stories  composed  entirely  in  Chicago  slang  ?  But,
if  we  moderns  are  prepared  to  allow  such  liberty  to  authors
generally,  the  compatriots  of  Gunadhya  required  for  sanction
the  stipulations  of  a  vow.  This  does  not  excuse  us  from
demanding  why  and  how  the  actual  Gunadhya  chose  the
Paisaci.  There  are  too  many,  though  sporadic,  indications
of  "  Paisaci  "  tendencies  in  various  parts  of  India  to  allow
the  supposition  of  a  wholly  artificial  form  of  speech.  On  the
other  hand,  we  have  as  yet  no  real  evidence  of  the  existence
of  any  people  or  class  known  by  the  name  Pisaca,  which
denotes  a  man-eating  demon  or  spirit.  What  designation
Gunadhya  would  have  applied  to  the  dialect  we  cannot  say.
The  name  Paisaci,  though  it  appears  in  the  oldest  Prakrit
grammar,  that  of  Vararuci,  is  perhaps  due  to  the  story
related  of  Gunadhya  himself.  In  later  times  there  were
many  varieties  of  Paisaci,  bearing  subsidiary  designations  of
a  local  character.  Since  the  earliest  language  of  the  group
is  described  as  coinciding  in  general  with  a  particular  local
speech,  the  Sauraseni  of  the  Ganges- Jumna  Doab  and  the
adjacent  regions,  it  would  seem  as  if  the  Paisaci,  which  is
characterised  chiefly  by  a  few  striking  peculiarities  of  pro-
nunciation, was  properly  a  dialect  of  an  inferior  class,  or  of
classes,  in  society.  The  class  may  have  been  of  aboriginal
origin,  whether  Dravidian  or  North- Western  or  otherwise —
there  are  many  such  in  India — and  it  may  have  been  more
widely  than  numerously  represented :  for  instance,  it  may
have  been  in  one  of  those  classes  (such  as  couriers,  ostlers
and  the  like)  with  which  travellers  came  into  contact ;  and
this  might  explain  the  choice  of  it  by  the  travelled  author.
It  would  be  quite  in  accordance  with  Indian  ways  if,  in  this
application,  the  term  Paisaci  were  an  intentional  perversion
of  a  class  or  tribe  name  :  but  to  pursue  this  suggestion
would  be  hazardous.  A  certain  reality  is  lent  to  the  Paisaci
language  by  the  further  statement,  perhaps  itself  concocted
at  no  very  early  date,  that  it  was  adopted  by  a  sect  of
Buddhists  for  their  writings.

As  a  grade  of  non-human  creatures  the  PiSacas  have
already  been  discussed  (see  Vol.  I,  pp.  92-93).  They  are  far
from  respectable,  except  on  the  ground  of  antiquity,  wherein


x  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

they  may  rival  with  the  best,  since  the  Veda  recognises  their
existence.  They  are  with  difficulty  distinguished  from  the
Raksasas,  or  demons,  and  the  distinction  is  not  on  the  credit
side,  since,  while  smaller  and  less  formidable,  they  are  even
more  odious.  If  the  Raksasa  marriage  is  the  forcible  abduc-
tion of  a  woman  after  killing  her  kinsmen  and  breaking  into
her  dwelling,  the  Pi^aca  marriage,  the  basest  of  all,  is  the
overpowering  of  one  asleep  or  tipsy,  or  disordered  in  intellect.
Like  the  Raksasa,  his  meaner  confrere  was  an  eater  of  human
flesh.  Naturally  also  he  was  a  night-walker ;  in  the  books
on  logic  he  is  the  standing  subject  of  the  doubt :  "  Is  it  a
Pis^ca  or  a  tree  stump  ?  "  This  gives  us  his  probably
essential  character  as  the  ordinary  malignant  spirit  of  the
dusk,  or  more  materialistically — for  he  is  attached  to  water
as  the  salamander  is  to  fire — as  Jack-o'-Lantern,  the  "  will-
o'-the-wisp."  His  name  is,  unfortunately,  not  etymologis-
able  with  prudence  ;  and  therefore  the  way  is  still  open  to
those  who  would  regard  this  part  of  his  equipment  as  derived
from  some  aboriginal  people.  That  a  differential  dialect
should  be  ascribed  to  the  Pigaca  we  may  ourselves  (for  do
not  ghosts  "  gibber "  ?)  find  natural  enough ;  still  more
obvious  was  it  to  the  ancient  Hindus,  who  in  their  Brah-
manas  have,  like  Homer  (^aX/n^a  kikXi'ictkovo-l  6eol,  avSfys
3e  vfjuvSiv,  etc.),  quoted  for  us  specimens  of  the  language  of
the  gods.

It  happens  that  the  present  volume  is  largely  concerned
also  with  a  second  class  of  supernatural  beings,  regarding
whom,  therefore,  a  few  remarks  may  not  be  out  of  place.
These  are  the  Vidyadharas — "  knowledge-holders  " — usually
conceived  of  in  connection  with  Kuvera  and  having  a
king,  Cakradharman,  who  resides  in  Kuvera's  palace.  In
general,  however,  they  are  spirits  of  the  air  :  they  scatter
flowers  over  fighting  warriors.  They  are  devoted  to  music
and  dancing,  and  their  females  are  of  extraordinary  beauty.
They  are  weakly  distinguished  from  the  Gandharvas  and
Apsarases,  who  historically  are  their  predecessors.  In  the
Pali  Tripitaka  they  are  still  preponderatingly,  like  the  Gan-
dharvas, spirits  who  seek  to  enter  into  women — perhaps  a
far-off  reminiscence  of  a  stage  when,  as  anthropologists  really


FOREWORD  xi

seem  to  admit,  pregnancy  was  not  known  to  be  a  consequence
of  marriage.

The  name  of  this  class  of  divinities  points  to  their  origin.
It  is  a  constantly  recurring  phrase  in  the  Brdhmanas  that  "  he
becomes "  such  and  such  "  who  knows  this."  The  know-
ledge, or  secret,  or  wpanisad,  was  a  key-knowledge,  which
afforded  access  to  special  powers,  a  talisman :  and  in  later
times  there  were  very  many  vidyds  and  mahd-vidyas  in  the
form  of  mantras,  which  were,  in  fact,  nothing  but  spells.
It  follows  from  this  that  the  Vidyadharas  were,  like  the
Siddhas,  "  those  who  had  realised  a  certain  attainment,"
not  seldom  recruited  from  the  race  of  men.  In  the  Harsa-
carita  of  Bana  (c.  iii.)  a  certain  celebrated  saint  completes
his  career  by  the  performance  of  a  nocturnal  rite,  whereby
he  acquires  "  the  hair-lock,  diadem,  earring,  necklace,
armlet,  girdle,  hammer  and  sword  "  and  becomes  a  Vidya-
dhara  :  he  is  then  rapt  away  through  the  firmament  to
his  appointed  station.  Like  our  wizards  (wise-ards),  the
Vidyadharas  therefore  are  primarily  the  successful  pene-
trators  of  superhuman  secrets  :  that  in  India  they  attained
to  a  distinctive  status  in  a  divine  hierarchy  is  in  full  harmony
with  the  general  tendencies  of  Indian  thought.  Perhaps
Mr  Penzer,  who  has  enriched  this  fine  work  with  so  many
valuable  notes  and  dissertations,  will  consider  the  possibility
of  dealing  somewhat  fully  with  the  literature  of  "  spells,"
for  which  India  supplies  an  inexhaustible  material.

The  "  hammer "  (mudgara)  of  the  Vidyadhara  is  not
without  an  interest  of  its  own.  Mr  A.  B.  Cook,  in  his  Zens,
vol.  i  (Cambridge,  1914),  describes  and  illustrates  (pp.  109-
110)  the  class  of  beings  called  Kabeiroi,  who  were  connected
with  the  Muses  :  "  they  have  bushy  hair,  a  thick  ring  round
the  neck,  a  loin-cloth  about  the  waist,  and  a  heavy  double-
axe  or  hammer  on  the  right  shoulder."  Since  the  Vidya-
dharas are  the  subjects  of  Kuvera  (Kabeiros),  and  since,  like
the  Kabeiroi,  they  have  a  special  mountain  home,  there  is  a
good  chance  that  the  detail  of  the  hammer  may  be  not  devoid
of  historical  significance.  Nor  does  the  matter  end  here.
If  the  Vidyadhara  duplicates  the  Gandharva,  his  consort,
the  Vidyadhari,  who  is  connected  with  music  and  arts,  will


xii  THK  (K  KAN  OF  STORY

h«-ar  a  relation  t(»  the  Gandharva's  feminine  assoeiate,  the
Apsanis.  When  we  have  said  Apsarases,  we  have  practic-
all\  said  Mums,  the  "mountain  goddesses,"  who  in  Greece
eauie  to  he  patronesses  of  music  and  literature.  And  the
Apsaras,  attain,  in  her  timet  ion  of  receiving  the  spirits  of
heroes  falling  »>n  the  held  of  hattlc,  seems  to  have  more  than
a  plausihle  connection  with  the  Northern  Valkyrie.

Mere  than  one  reader,  perhaps,  will  he  surprised  at  the
honourahlc  and  leading  role  played  by  the  Asura  Maya  in
the  Surva-prahha  story.  In  general  the  unorthodox  classes
of  beings  in  Hindu  cosmology  are  far  from  being  definitely
reprobate  (see  Hopkins.  Epic  Mythology,  Strassburg,  1915,
pp.  .'iv  stpp)  :  individuals  in  all  the  grades  arc  capable  of
meritorious  works.  Was  not  even  Havana  famous  as  an
authority  in  medicine  and  grammar?  In  fact,  the  Hindu
theory  of  rebirths  pros  ides  no  place  for  a  final  damnation.
In  the  ease  of  the  Asura  Maya  we  arc  dealing  with  a  personage
indeed,  the  great  architect,  inspircr  of  the  Maya-tnata,  who
in  the  Maha-Bharata  is  the  constructor  of  the  splendid
palaces  there  described.

Finally,  we  need  not  demand  why  in  so  mundane  a  book
as  the  Jirhut-kathd  the  chief  hero's  exploits  should  be  directed
to  an  ultimate  sovereignty  over  a  celestial  realm.  Even
from  our  own  media'val  tales,  even  from  the  Greek  romances,
it  would  not  be  feasible  to  exclude  a  supernatural  clement.
Til--  art   of  storv-telling,   which   begins  with  gods  for  heroes,

r"i  o  o

does  not  quickly  descend  to  a  merely  human  level.
Gunadhya  may  have  thought  that  he  had  gone  far  enough
when  he  accepted  men  and  Yidvadharas  in  place  of  heroes
an  i  *u xls;  and  centuries  after  his  date  the  Kadambari,  the
touching  story  of  Bana,  still  iinds  its  leading  personages  in
tic-  Gandharva  world.

F.  W.  THOMAS.
July  }'ji:,


CONTENTS

BOOK  VIII:   SURYAPRABHA
CHAPTER  XLIV

Author's  Preface  ....

Invocation

M(ain)  story     .....
62.  Story     of    Suryaprabha    and     how
Sovereignty  over  the  Vidyadharas


he     attained


xix
1
1


CHAPTER  XLV

62.  Story     of    Suryaprabha     and     how    he    attained

Sovereignty  over  the  Vidyadharas  .  .17

62a.  The  Brahman  Kala  and  his  Prayers        .       23

62.  Story     of    Suryaprabha     and     how     he     attained

Sovereignty  over  the  Vidyadharas  .  .       25


CHAPTER  XLVI


he     attained


62.  Story     of    Suryaprabha     and     how

Sovereignty  over  the  Vidyadharas  .  .       49

62b.  The  Generous  Danava  Namuchi  .       63

62.  Story     of    Suryaprabha    and     how     he     attained

Sovereignty  over  the  Vidyadharas  .  .       65


CHAPTER  XLVII

62.  Story    of    Suryaprabha     and     how
Sovereignty  over  the  Vidyadharas

xiii


he    attained


67


xiv  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

CHAPTER  XL VIII


pa(;b


62.  Story     of    Suryaprabha     and     how     he     attained

Sovereignty  over  the  Vidyadharas  .  .       75

62c.  Adventure  of  the  Witch  Sarabhanana    .       82

62.  Story     of    Suryaprabha     and     how     he     attained

Sovereignty  over  the  Vidyadharas  83

CHAPTER  XLIX

62.  Story     of    Suryaprabha     and     how     he     attained

Sovereignty  over  the  Vidyadharas  .  .       85

62d.  King     Mahasena     and     his      Virtuous

Minister  Gunasarman  .  .  .85

62dd.  AdityaSarman,      the     Father      of

Gunasarman      .  .  .96

62d.  King     Mahasena     and     his     Virtuous

Minister  Gunasarman  .  .        98

62.  Story     of    Suryaprabha     and    how    he    attained

Sovereignty  over  the  Vidyadharas  .  .      102

CHAPTER  L

62.  Story     of    Suryaprabha     and     how     he    attained

Sovereignty  over  the  Vidyadharas  .  .     108

M.   Cord.  ......     121


BOOK   IX:   ALANKARAVATl
CHAPTER  LI

Invocation        .  .  .  .  .  .122

M.   Cord.  .  .  .  .  .  .122

63.  Story  of  Alankaravati         .  .  .  .123


CONTENTS
CHAPTER  LI— continued


xv


PAOB

M.

Cont.          .....

.      125

64.

Story  of  Rama  and  Sita

.      126

M.

Cont.          .....

.      130

65.

Story  of  the  Handsome  King  Prithvlriipa  .

.      130

M.

Cont.          .....

CHAPTER  LII

.      136

M.

Cont.          .....

.      138

66.

Story  of  Asokamala

.      140

M.

Cont.           .....

.      141

67.

Story  of  Sthiilabhuja

.      142-

M.

Cont.           .....

.      14a

68.

Story  of  Anangarati  and  her  Four  Suitors

.      144

M.

Cont.          .....

.      167

CHAPTER  LIII

M.    Cont.  .  .  .  .  .  .16a

69.  Story  of  King  Lakshadatta  and  his  Dependent

Labdhadatta       .  .  .  .  .168

M.   Cont.  ......     172

70.  Story  of  the  Brahman  Viravara      .  .  .173.

70a.  Suprabha  and  his  Escape  from  Destiny       176
70.  Story  of  the  Brahman  Viravara      .  .  .176.

M.    Cont.  .  .  .  .  .  .181


CHAPTER  LIV

M.    Cont.  ....

71.  Story  of  the  Merchant  Samudra^ura
M.    Cont.  ....


184
191
19»


xvi  TIIK  OCEAN   OF  STORY

CHAPTER    LIV     continued

7'J.    Storv  of  King  Chamarahala

72a.    Yasovarman  and  the  Two  Fortunes
72.    Stor\   of  King  Chamarabfda
M.    Cnnt.  .....


r  m.k

194

11)5
198
201


(HATTER   LV

M.    (»nt.  ......  202

?:{.   Story  of  Chiradiitri  ....  203

M.    font.  ......  204

71.   Story  of  King  Kanakavarsha  and  Madanasundari   .  204

M.    Cunt.  ......  219


CHAPTER  LVI


M.    Cnnt.


Story    of   the    Brahman    Chandrasvamin,    his    Son

Mahipala,  and  liis  Daughter  Chandravati

T.").\.    Prabhfikara  and  Vidyadhari

Story    of   the    Brahman    Chandrasvamin,    his    Son

Mahipala,  and  liis  Daughter  Chandravati

7.m.   Chakra  and  the  Iron  Wheel

Story    of    the    Brahman    Chandrasvamin,    his    Son

Mahipala.  and  his  Daughter  Chandravati

T.m  .   The  Hermit  and  the  Faithful  Wife

Story    of    the    Brahman    Chandrasvamin,    his    Son

Mahipala,  and  his  Daughter  Chandravati

7.">d.   The  Treacherous   Pilsupata   Ascetic  and
King  Tribhuvana

Story    of    the    Brahman    Chandrasvamin,    his    Son
Mahipala,  and  his  Daughter  Chandravati
7">i..    Nala  and  DaniavantI


220

220
225

227
229

232
232

233

234

236
237


CONTENTS  xvii
CHAPTER  L\I— continued

PAOE

75.  Story   of   the   Brahman   Chandrasvamin,   his   Son

Mahipala,  and  his  Daughter  ChandravatI              .  250

M.    Cont.           ......  251

APPENDIX  I

Widow-Burning             .....  253

APPENDIX  II

Nala  and  DamayantI    .....  273

Index  I — Sanskrit  Words  and  Proper  Names  .              .  293

Index  II — General       .....  303


VOL.    IV,


PREFACE

AS  I  mentioned  in  the  Introduction  to  Volume  I,
the  Ocean  of  Story  is  divided  into  one  hundred
and  twenty-four  chapters,  called  tarangas,  "  waves  "
or  "  billows " ;  while  Brockhaus,  following  Somadeva's
metaphoric  nomenclature,  made  a  further  and  independent
division  into  eighteen  Books,  which  he  called  lambakas,
"  surges  "  or  "  swells."

Following  Brockhaus'  text,  Tawney  issued  his  translation
in  two  volumes,  each  containing  nine  Books.  This  volume
takes  us  to  the  end  of  Book  IX  and,  with  the  three  previous
volumes,  corresponds  to  Tawney's  first  volume.  Books
X-XVIII,  however,  contain  much  more  matter  than  the
first  nine  Books,  owing  to  the  inclusion  of  such  large  cycles
of  stories  as  the  Panchatantra  (which  will  appear  in  my
next  volume)  and  the  Vetdla-Panchavimsati.  These  Books
will  probably  occupy  five  more  volumes  of  the  present
edition,  but  I  hope  to  be  able  to  reserve  Volume  X  for  the
accumulated  indexes,  etc.

The  first  hundred  and  twenty-one  pages  of  the  present
volume  are  taken  up  with  the  "  Story  of  Suryaprabha  and
how  he  attained  Sovereignty  over  the  Vidyadharas,"  which,
with  its  few  sub-stories,  constitutes  Book  VIII.  It  is  much
the  longest  tale  we  have  had  so  far,  although  it  is  certainly
not  the  most  interesting.  In  fact,  like  the  longest  tale  in
the  Nights — "  King  Omar  Bin  Al-Nu'uman  " — it  "  has  its
longueurs  and  at  times  is  longsome  enough,"  dealing  at  first
with  somewhat  wearisome  accounts  of  how  the  hero  abducted
each  of  his  brides  and  subsequently  had  to  appease  their
angry  and  indignant  fathers.  Even  when  the  actual  fighting
begins,  we  have  a  long  drawn-out  series  of  single  combats,
which  are,  however,  relieved  in  places  by  some  fine  descrip-
tions of  battle  scenes,  reminding  us  of  similar  ones  in  the
tale  from  the  Nights  mentioned  above.

There  are  also  occasional  passages  of  a  lighter  vein,  which
zix


xx  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

come  as  a  welcome  contrast.  Such,  for  instance,  is  the
conversation  between  Suryaprabha's  wives  on  a  night  when
their  husband  is  too  worried  about  the  slaughter  of  his  men
to  join  them.  They  proceed  to  discuss  the  various  qualities
of  beautiful  women  of  different  lands,  for,  as  Somadeva
says  (D.  text) :  "  .  .  .  there  is  no  occasion  on  which  women
would  not  talk  of  the  chronique  scandaleuse  of  their  town  "
(see  pp.  73,  74).

The  only  sub-story  of  any  length  is  No.  62d,  "  King
Mahasena  and  his  Virtuous  Minister  Gunasarman,"  which
introduces  the  "  Quintessence "  and  "  Scorned  Love  of
Women  "  motifs.

Book  IX  contains  several  good  stories,  such  as  No.  68,
"  Anangarati  and  her  Four  Suitors " ;  No.  69,  "  King
Lakshadatta  and  his  Dependent  Labdhadatta,"  illustrating
the  doctrine  of  karma,  or  inevitable  destiny ;  and  No.  74,
"  King  Kanakavarsha  and  Madanasundari."

The  last  tale  in  the  Book,  however,  is  the  most  important,
for  it  contains  one  of  the  best-known  stories  in  India,  that
of  Nala  and  Damayanti.  It  is  taken  from  the  Mahdbhdrata,
but  has  been  considerably  abbreviated  by  Somadeva.  As
several  of  the  most  beautiful  parts  have  been  omitted,  I
have  given  them  in  Appendix  II,  using  H.  H.  Milman's
translation.

It  is  a  matter  of  much  gratification  that  Dr  Thomas
so  kindly  consented  to  write  the  Foreword  to  the  present
volume ;  for,  apart  from  the  advantages  derived  from  the
pen  of  so  ripe  a  scholar,  there  is  a  further  interest  in  the
fact  that  Dr  Thomas  succeeded  Mr  Tawney  as  Librarian
at  the  India  Office.

Once  again  I  have  to  thank  Dr  Barnett  for  his  continued
proof-reading  and  constant  advice  on  numerous  points.

Both  Mr  Fenton  and  Mr  Marshall  have  been  through
the  proofs  from  the  general  point  of  view,  so  that  mistakes
should  now  be  reduced  to  a  minimum.

N.  M.  P.

St  John's  Wood,
3rd  July  1925.


BOOK  VIII :  SURYAPRABHA
CHAPTER  XLIV

INVOCATION

VICTORY  to  the  elephant- headed  god,  who,  reddening
the  sky  with  the  vermilion  dye  shaken  off  by  the  wind
of  his  flapping  ears,  seems  to  create  sunset,  even  when
it  is  not  due.


[M]  Thus  Naravahanadatta,  the  son  of  the  King  of  Vatsa,
dwelt  happily  in  his  father's  house,  after  he  had  won  those
wives.  And  one  day,  when  he  was  in  his  father's  assembly
hall,  he  saw  a  man  of  heavenly  appearance  come  there,
descending  from  heaven.  And  after  he  and  his  father  had
welcomed  the  man,  who  bowed  before  him,  he  immediately
asked  him  :  "  Who  are  you  and  why  have  you  come  ?  "
Then  he  answered :  "  There  is  a  city  in  this  earth  on  the
ridge  of  Himavat,  called  Vajrakuta,1  and  rightly  so  called,
as  being  all  made  of  diamond.  There  I  dwelt,  as  a  king  of
the  Vidyadharas  named  Vajraprabha,  and  my  name  too  was
rightly  given  me,  because  my  body  is  framed  of  diamond.
And  I  received  this  command  from  Siva  (who  was  pleased
with  my  austerities) :  *  If  thou  remainest  loyal  at  the  ap-
pointed time  to  the  emperor  created  by  me,  thou  shalt
become  by  my  favour  invincible  to  thy  enemies.'  Accord-
ingly I  have  come  here  without  delay  to  pay  my  respects  to
my  sovereign,  for  I  have  already  perceived,  by  means  of  my
science,  that  the  son  of  the  King  of  Vatsa  (who  is  born  of
a  portion  of  the  God  of  Love,  and  appointed  by  the  god
who  wears  a  digit  of  the  moon),  though  a  mortal,  shall  be  sole
emperor  over  both  divisions  of  our  territory.2    And  though,

1  I.e.  diamond-peak.

2  For  ubhayavedyeka  the  Petersburg  lexicographers  read  ubhayavedyardha.
I  have  followed  this  reading.

VOL.  iv.  1  A


2  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

by  the  favour  of  Siva,  a  prince  of  the  name  of  Suryaprabha
was  ruler  over  us  for  a  Kalpa  of  the  gods,  still  he  was  only
lord  in  the  southern  division,  but  in  the  northern  division  a
prince  called  Sruta£arman  was  emperor ;  but  your  Majesty,
being  destined  for  great  good  fortune,  shall  be  sole  emperor
here  over  the  wanderers  of  the  air,  and  your  dominion  shall
endure  for  a  Kalpa."

When  the  Vidyadhara  said  this,  Naravahanadatta,  in  the
presence  of  the  King  of  Vatsa,  said  to  him  again  out  of
curiosity  :  "  How  did  Suryaprabha,  being  a  man,  obtain  of
old  time  the  sovereignty  over  the  Vidyadharas?  Tell  us."
Then  in  private — that  is  to  say,  in  the  presence  of  the  queens
and  ministers! — the  King  Vajraprabha  began  to  tell  that  tale.

62.  Story  of  Suryaprabha  and  how  he  attained  Sovereignty
over  the  Vidyadharas  x

Of  old  there  was  in  the  country  of  the  people  of  Madra
a  town  named  Sakala  2 ;  Chandraprabha,  the  son  of  Angara-
prabha,  was  king  of  it,  whose  name  expressed  his  nature,  as
he  delighted  the  whole  world,  but  he  was  like  fire  in  that  he
scorched  his  enemies.  By  his  wife,  named  Kirtimati,  there
was  born  to  that  king  a  son,  whose  future  glory  was  indicated
by  his  exceedingly  auspicious  marks.  And  when  he  was  born
a  clear  voice  sounded  from  heaven,  which  rained  nectar  into
the  ears  of  King  Chandraprabha :  "  This  king,  now  born,
named  Suryaprabha,  is  appointed  by  Siva  as  the  future
emperor  over  the  kings  of  the  Vidyadharas."  Then  that
Prince  Suryaprabha  grew  up  in  the  house  of  his  father,  who
was  distinguished  by  the  delightful  favour  of  the  enemy  of
Pura,*  and  he,  being  very  clever,  gradually  acquired,  while
still  a  child,  all  knowledge  and  all  the  accomplishments  by
sitting  at  the  feet  of  a  teacher ;  and  then,  when  he  was
sixteen  years  old,  and  captivated  the  subjects  by  his  virtues,

1  This  story,  with  the  usual  sub-stories  introduced,  stretches  to  the  end
of  Book  VIII,  p.  121.— n.m.p.

*  Identified  by  General  Cunningham  with  the  Sangala  of  Alexander
(Ancient  Geography  of  India,  p.  1 79  et  seq.).

»  I.e.  £iva.


THE  POWER  OF  THE  SCIENCES  8

his  father,  Chandraprabha,  appointed  him  Crown  Prince,
and  he  gave  him  the  sons  of  his  own  ministers,  many  in
number,  Bhasa,  Prabhasa,  Siddhartha,  Prahasta  and  others.

And  while  he  was  bearing  with  them  the  burden  of  a
crown  prince's  duty,  one  day  a  great  Asura  of  the  name  of
Maya  came  there,  and  Maya  went  up  in  the  assembly  hall  to
King  Chandraprabha,  who  welcomed  him,  and  said  to  him,
in  the  presence  of  Suryaprabha  :  "  King,  this  son  of  yours,
Suryaprabha,  has  been  appointed  as  the  future  emperor  of
the  kings  of  the  Vidyadharas  by  Siva ;  so  why  does  he  not
acquire  the  magic  sciences  that  will  put  him  in  possession
of  the  dignity  ?  For  this  reason  I  am  sent  here  by  the
god  Siva.  Permit  me  to  take  him  and  teach  him  the  right
method  of  employing  the  sciences,  which  will  be  the  cause
of  his  obtaining  the  sovereignty  of  the  Vidyadharas.  For  he
has  a  rival  in  this  business,  a  lord  of  the  sky-goers,  named
Srutasarman ;  he  too  has  been  appointed  by  Siva.  But
this  prince,  after  acquiring  the  power  of  the  sciences,  shall
conquer  him  with  our  help  and  become  emperor  over  the
lords  of  the  Vidyadharas."

When  Maya  said  this,  King  Chandraprabha  said  :  "  We
are  fortunate ;  let  this  auspicious  one  be  taken  by  you
wherever  you  wish."  Then  Maya  took  leave  of  the  king,
and  quickly  carried  off  to  Patala  Suryaprabha  and  his
ministers,  whom  the  king  permitted  to  depart.  There  he
taught  the  prince  ascetic  practices  of  such  a  kind  that  by
means  of  them  the  prince  and  his  ministers  quickly  acquired
the  sciences.  And  he  taught  him  also  the  art  of  providing
himself  with  magic  chariots,  so  that  he  acquired  a  chariot
named  Bhiitasana.

Then  Maya  brought  Suryaprabha,  mounted  on  that
chariot,  with  his  ministers,  having  acquired  the  sciences,
back  to  his  own  city  from  Patala.  And  after  he  had  led  him
into  the  presence  of  his  parents  he  said  to  him :  "  Now  I
depart,  enjoy  here  all  the  enjoyments  given  by  your  magic
knowledge  until  I  return."  After  saying  this  the  Asura
Maya  departed,  after  having  been  duly  honoured,  and  King
Chandraprabha  rejoiced  in  his  son's  having  acquired  the
sciences.


4  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

Then  Suryaprabha,  by  virtue  of  the  sciences,  was  con-
tinually roaming  through  many  countries  in  his  chariot,  with
his  ministers,  to  amuse  himself.  And  wherever  any  princess
beheld  him  she  was  immediately  bewildered  by
marries  love  and  chose  him  for  her  husband.   The  first  was

several  the  virgin  daughter  of  the  King  of  TamraliptI,

who  was  called  Virabhata ;  her  name  was  Madana-
sena,  and  she  was  the  first  beauty  of  the  world.  The  second
was  Chandrikavati,  the  daughter  of  Subhata,  the  emperor  of
the  western  border,  who  had  been  carried  off  by  the  Siddhas
and  left  somewhere  else.  And  the  third  was  the  famous
daughter  of  Kumbhira,  the  king  of  the  city  of  KanchI,
Varunasena  by  name,  remarkable  for  her  beauty.  And  the
fourth  was  the  daughter  of  King  Paurava,  sovereign  of
Lavanaka,  Sulochana,  by  name,  with  lovely  eyes.  And  the
fifth  was  the  daughter  of  King  Suroha,  the  lord  of  the  land
of  China,  Vidyunmala,  with  charming  limbs,  yellow  as  gold.
And  the  sixth  was  the  daughter  of  King  Kantisena,  ruler
in  the  land  of  Srikantha,  surpassing  in  beauty  the  Apsarases.
And  the  seventh  was  Parapushta,  the  daughter  of  King
Janamejaya,  the  lord  of  the  city  of  Kausambi,  a  sweet- voiced
maid.

And  though  the  relations  of  these  maidens,  who  were
carried  off  by  a  surprise,  found  out  what  had  happened,  still,
as  the  prince  was  confident  in  the  might  of  his  supernatural
science,  they  were  pliant  as  canes.  These  wives  also  ac-
quired the  sciences,  and  Suryaprabha  associated  with  them
all  at  the  same  time,  taking  many  bodies  x  by  his  magic  skill.
Then  he  amused  himself  in  the  company  of  these  wives,  and
of  the  ministers  Prahasta  and  others,  with  roaming  in  the
air,  with  concerts,  drinking- parties  and  other  amusements.

Possessing  heavenly  skill  in  painting,  he  drew  the  Vidya-
dhara  females,  and  in  that  way,  and  by  making  sportive,
sarcastic  speeches,  he  enraged  those  charmers,  and  he  was
amused   at   their   faces,    furrowed   with   frowns,   and   with

1  This  division  of  personality  (kdya-vyuha)  is  more  usually  practised  by
the  gods.  In  the  Mahabharata  (iii,  S05)  Surya  impregnates  KuntI  without
destroying  her  virginity  by  transferring  a  portion  of  his  own  energy  by  means
of  his  yoga  power.     See  the  note  at  the  end  of  the  next  chapter. — n.m.p.


THE  PRINCE'S  ABDUCTIONS  5

reddened  eyes,  and  at  their  speeches,  the  syllables  of  which
faltered  on  their  trembling  lips.  And  that  prince  went  with
his  wives  to  TamraliptI,  and  roaming  through  the  air  sported
in  the  gardens  with  Madanasena.

And  having  left  his  wives  there  he  went  in  the  chariot
Bhiitasana  and,  accompanied  by  Prahasta  only,  visited  the
city  called  Vajraratra.  There  he  carried  off  the  daughter
of  King  Rambha  before  his  eyes,  Tar  avail  by  name,  who  was
enamoured  of  him  and  burning  with  the  fire  of  love.  And  he
came  back  to  TamraliptI  and  there  carried  off  again  another
maiden  princess,  by  name  Vilasinl.  And  when  her  haughty
brother  Sahasrayudha  was  annoyed  at  it  he  paralysed  him
by  his  supernatural  power.  And  he  also  stupefied  Sahasra-
yudha's  mother's  brother,  who  came  with  him,  and  all  his
retainers,  and  made  his  head  shorn  of  hair,  because  he  wished
to  carry  Off  his  beloved  ones.  But  though  he  was  angry  he
spared  to  slay  them  both,  because  they  were  his  wife's  relatives,
but  he  taunted  them,  who  were  downcast  on  account  of  the
overthrow  of  their  pride,  and  let  them  go.  Then  Surya-
prabha,  surrounded  by  nine  wives,  having  been  summoned
by  his  father,  returned  in  his  chariot  to  his  city  Sakala.

And  the  King  Virabhata  sent  from  TamraliptI  an
ambassador  to  Suryaprabha's  father,  King  Chandraprabha,
and  gave  him  the  following  message  to  deliver  :  "  Your  son
The  Kin  's  nas  carried  on*  mv  *wo  daughters,  but  let  that  be,
Wish  for  a  for  he  is  a  desirable  husband  for  them,  as  he  is  a
Proper  master  of  supernatural  sciences,  but,  if  you  love

us,  come  here  now,  in  order  that  we  may  make  a
friendship  based  upon  the  due  performance  of  marriage  rites
and  hospitality."

Thereupon  King  Chandraprabha  rewarded  the  messenger
and  determined  that  he  would  quickly  start  for  that  place
on  the  morrow.  But  he  sent  Prahasta  as  an  ambassador
to  Virabhata,  in  order  to  make  sure  of  his  sincerity,  and  gave
him  Bhiitasana  to  travel  in.  Prahasta  went  quickly  and
had  an  interview  with  King  Virabhata  and  questioned  him
about  the  business,  and  was  informed,  and  highly  honoured
by  him,1  and  promised  him,  who  smiled  graciously,  that  his

1  I  read  bodhitah.


6  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

masters  would  come  early  next  morning,  and  then  he  returned
in  a  moment  to  Chandraprabha  through  the  air.  And  he
told  that  king  that  Vlrabhata  was  ready  to  receive  him.
The  king,  for  his  part,  being  pleased,  showed  honour  to
that  minister  of  his  son's.  Then  King  Chandraprabha,  with
Queen  Kirtimati,  and  Siiryaprabha,  with  VilasinI  and
Madanasena,  mounted  that  chariot  Bhutasana  and  went  off
early  next  day  with  retinue  and  ministers.  In  one  watch
only  of  the  day  they  reached  Tamralipti,  being  beheld,  as
they  passed  through  the  air,  by  the  people  with  eyes  the
lashes  of  which  were  upraised  through  wonder.  And
descending  from  the  sky  they  entered  the  city  side  by  side
with  King  Vlrabhata,  who  came  out  to  meet  them.  The
beautiful  streets  of  the  town  were  irrigated  at  every  step
with  sandalwood  water,  and  seemed  to  be  strewed  with
blue  lotuses  by  means  of  the  sidelong  glances  of  the  city
ladies.  There  Vlrabhata  honoured  his  connection  and  his
son-in-law,  and  duly  performed  the  marriage  ceremony  of
his  daughters.  And  King  Vlrabhata  gave  at  the  marriage-
altar  of  those  daughters  a  thousand  loads  of  pure  gold  and
a  hundred  camels  laden  with  burdens  of  ornaments  made  of
jewels,  and  five  hundred  camels  laden  with  loads  of  various
garments,  and  fifty  thousand  horses,  and  five  thousand
elephants,  and  a  thousand  lovely  women  adorned  with
beauty  and  jewels.  And,  moreover,  he  gratified  his  son-in-
law  Siiryaprabha  and  his  parents  with  valuable  jewels  and
territories.  And  he  duly  honoured  his  ministers,  Prahasta
and  others,  and  he  made  a  feast  at  which  all  the  people  of
the  city  rejoiced.  And  Siiryaprabha  remained  there  in  the
company  of  his  parents  and  his  beloved  wives,  enjoying
delights,  consisting  of  various  dainties,  wines  and  music.

In  the  meanwhile  an  ambassador  arrived  from  Rambha,
in  Vajraratra,  and  in  the  hall  of  assembly  delivered  this
message  from  his  master  :  "  The  Crown  Prince  Siiryaprabha,
confiding  in  the  might  of  his  sciences,  has  insulted  us  by
carrying  off  our  daughter.  But  to-day  we  have  come  to
know  that  he  has  undertaken  to  be  reconciled  to  King  Vlra-
bhata, whose  misfortune  is  the  same  as  ours.  If  in  the  same
way  you  agree  to  be  reconciled  to  us,  come  here  also  quickly  ;


THE  MARRIAGE  OF  RAMBHA'S  DAUGHTER   7

if  not,  we  will  in  this  matter  salve  our  honour  by  death."
When  King  Chandraprabha  heard  that,  he  honoured  the
ambassador,  and  said  to  him  :  "  Go  to  that  Rambha  and
give  him  this  message  from  me  :  '  Why  do  you  afflict  yourself
without  cause?  For  Suryaprabha  is  now  appointed,  by
Siva,  the  future  emperor  of  the  Vidyadharas,  and  inspired
sages  have  declared  that  your  daughter  and  others  are  to  be
his  wives.  So  your  daughter  has  attained  her  proper  place,
but  you,  being  stern,  were  not  asked  for  her.  So  be  appeased,
you  are  our  friend ;  we  will  come  to  your  residence  also.'  "

When  Prahasta  received  this  message  from  the  king  he
went  through  the  air  and  in  a  single  watch  he  reached  Vajra-
ratra.  There  he  told  his  message  to  Rambha,  and  having  been
gladly  received  by  him  he  returned  as  he  came  and  reported
it  to  King  Chandraprabha.  Then  Chandraprabha  sent  his
minister  Prabhasa,  and  had  King  Rambha 's  daughter
Taravali  conducted  to  him  from  Sakala.  Then  he  departed
in  the  air  chariot  with  Suryaprabha,  being  dismissed  with
great  honour  by  King  Vlrabhata  and  all  others.  And  he
reached  Vajraratra,  which  was  full  of  people  awaiting  his
arrival,  and  was  met  by  Rambha,  and  entered  his  palace.

There  Rambha,  having  performed  the  great  feast  of  the
marriage  ceremony,  gave  his  daughter  countless  stores  of
gold,  elephants,  horses,  jewels  and  other  valuables.  And
he  gratified  so  lavishly  his  son-in-law,  Suryaprabha,  that  he
forgot  all  his  own  luxuries.  And  while  they  were  remaining
there,  delighted  with  feasts,  an  ambassador  came  from  the
city  of  Kanchi  to  Rambha.  Rambha,  having  heard  his
message,  said  to  King  Chandraprabha :  "  King,  the  lord  of
Kanchi,  named  Kumbhira,  is  my  elder  brother;  he  has  to-
day sent  me  a  trustworthy  messenger  to  speak  this  speech :
*  Suryaprabha  first  carried  off  my  daughter,  then  yours.  And
now  you  have  made  friendship  with  him  and  his  father,  as
I  hear,  so  bring  about  my  friendship  also  with  them.  Let
them  come  to  my  house,  that  I  may  with  my  own  hand  give
my  daughter  Varunasena  to  Suryaprabha.'  So  grant  this
request  of  my  brother's."  When  Rambha  made  this  request
Chandraprabha  granted  it,  and  sent  Prahasta  and  had
Varunasena  brought  quickly  from  the  city  of  Sakala  to  her


8  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

father,  Kumbhira.  And  the  next  day  he  and  Suryaprabha
and  Rambha,  and  Virabhata  and  all,  with  their  attendants,
went  to  the  city  of  Kanchi.  And  after  they  had  been  met
by  Kumbhira  they  entered  the  city  of  Kanchi,  as  it  were
the  girdle  of  the  earth,  full  of  many  jewels  and  adorned
with  excellences.1  There  Kumbhira  bestowed  his  daughter
on  Suryaprabha,  with  the  usual  ceremonies,  and  gave  much
wealth  to  the  young  couple.

And  when  the  marriage  had  taken  place,  Prahasta,  after
taking  food,  said  to  Chandraprabha,  who  was  all  joy  fulness,
in  the  presence  of  all :  "  King,  in  the  country  of  Srikantha
I  had  an  interview  with  the  king  of  that  land  2 ;  there  King
Kantisena,  whom  I  thus  happened  to  see,  said  to  me  :  *  Let
Suryaprabha  come  to  my  house  with  that  daughter  of  mine
whom  he  has  carried  off.  I  will  perform  the  ceremony  for
him  according  to  rule.  If  he  refuses  I  will  abandon  the
body,  distracted  by  love  for  my  daughter.'  This  is  what  he
then  said  to  me,  and  I  have  now  mentioned  it  on  the  proper
occasion."  When  Prahasta  said  this  King  Chandraprabha
answered  :  "  Go,  then,  take  Kantimati  to  him  ;  we  will  go
there  also."  When  the  king  said  this  to  him  Prahasta  went
off  that  moment  through  the  air  and  did  as  he  had  com-
manded. And  next  morning  Chandraprabha  and  all,  with
Kumbhira,  went  to  the  land  of  Srikantha  in  the  air- travelling
chariot.  There  King  Kantisena  came  to  meet  them,  and
making  them  enter  his  palace  performed  the  auspicious
ceremony  of  his  daughter's  marriage.  Then  he  gave  to
Kantimati  and  Suryaprabha  an  endless  quantity  of  jewels,
which  excited  the  wonder  of  the  kings.

While  they  were  all  remaining  there,  enjoying  all  kinds
of  pleasure,  a  messenger  came  from  KauSambi  and  said :
44  King  Janamejaya  sends  this  message  to  your  honours  :
4  My  daughter,  of  the  name  of  Parapushta,  has  been  carried
off  by  someone  lately.     And  I  have  found  out  to-day  that

1  Kanchi  means  "girdle,"  guna,  "excellence"  and  "thread."  The  last
clause  might  be  translated  "  made  of  threads."

*  The  D.  text  reads  prabhraman  gatavan  aham  ;  thus  Prahasta  says  :  "  King,
in  the  course  of  my  wandering  I  arrived  in  the  country  of  Srikantha.  See
Speyer,  op.  cit.,  p.  116. — n.m.p.


OTHER  MARRIAGES  FOLLOW  9

she  has  come  into  the  power  of  Suryaprabha,  so  let  him
come  with  her  to  my  house  without  fear.  I  will  perform  the
marriage  ceremony  according  to  rule,  and  so  dismiss  him  with
his  wife ;  otherwise  you  will  be  my  enemies  and  I  shall  be
yours.'"  Having  thus  delivered  his  master's  message,  the
ambassador  remained  silent.  Then  King  Chandraprabha
said  to  them  apart :  "  How  can  we  go  to  the  house  of  that
king  who  sends  such  haughty  messages  ?  "  When  the  king's
minister,  named  Siddhartha,  heard  that  he  said :  "  Do  not
entertain  wrong  notions,  King,  for  he  is  justified  in  using
such  language.  For  that  king  is  very  generous,  learned
and  sprung  of  a  noble  race,  a  hero,  one  who  has  offered  the
a&vamedha  sacrifice,1  ever  unconquered  by  others.  How  can
he  have  spoken  anything  unbecoming  in  speaking  according
to  facts  ?  And  as  for  the  enmity  which  he  threatens,  he
does  that  now  on  account  of  Indra.  So  you  must  go  to  his
house,  for  he  is  a  king  faithful  to  his  engagements.  Never-
theless, send  someone  to  find  out  his  intentions."  When
they  heard  this  speech  of  Siddhartha 's  they  all  approved  it.
Then  King  Chandraprabha  sent  Prahasta  to  sound  Jana-
mejaya,  and  honoured  his  messenger.  And  Prahasta  went,
and  after  making  an  agreement  with  the  King  of  KauSambi
brought  a  letter  from  him  and  satisfied  Chandraprabha.

The  king  quickly  sent  that  Prahasta,  and  had  Parapushta
conducted  from  Sakala  to  Janamejaya.  Then  Chandra-
prabha and  the  other  kings,  preceded  by  Suryaprabha,8  with
Kantisena,  went  to  Kausambi  in  the  chariot.  There  the
King  Janamejaya  courteously  honoured  his  son-in-law,  and
his  connection,  and  all  the  others,  by  advancing  to  meet
them,  and  other  ceremonies.  And  after  he  had  performed  the
ceremony  of  the  marriage  rite  he  gave  five  thousand  elephants
and  one  hundred  thousand  excellent  horses,  and  also  five
thousand  camels  laden  with  full  burdens  of  jewels,  gold,
precious  apparel,  camphor  and  aloes-wood.  And  he  made
such  a  feast  that  even  the  realm  of  Yama  8  was  exclusively

1  See  note  at  the  end  of  this  chapter. — n.m.p.

2  I  read  Suryaprabha  for  Suryachandra.

3  What  Yama,  the  judge  of  the  dead,  is  doing  here  seems  hard  to  under-
stand.    The  D.  text  clears  the  difficulty  by  its  reading  of  vadyanrittaikamayam


10  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

engaged  in  dancing  and  music,  a  feast  in  which  excellent
Brahmans  were  honoured  and  all  kings  gratified.

And  in  the  meanwhile  the  heaven  there  suddenly  became
red,  as  if  indicating  that  it  would  soon  be  dyed  crimson
with  blood.  And  the  sky  suddenly  became  full  of  confused,
The  hurtling   noises,    as   if  terrified   at   beholding   a

luiyfulhura  hostile  army  coming  in  the  air.  And  a  mighty
Army  wind  immediately  began  to  blow,  as  if  exciting

the  inhabitants  of  earth  to  war  against  the  wanderers  of  the
air.  And  immediately  a  great  Vidyadhara  army  was  seen  in
the  air,  illuminating  with  brightness  the  circle  of  the  horizon,
loud- shouting,  impetuous.  And  in  the  midst  of  it  Suryaprabha
and  the  others  beheld  with  astonishment  a  very  hand-
some, heavenly  youth.  And  at  that  moment  the  herald
of  the  Vidyadharas  proclaimed  with  a  loud  voice,  in  front  of
that  youth,  whose  name  was  Damodara:  "Victory  to  the
Crown  Prince  Damodara,  son  of  King  Ashadha  !  O  mortal,
dweller  on  the  earth,  Suryaprabha,  fall  at  his  feet.  And  do
homage,  O  Janamejaya  ;  why  have  you  given  your  daughter
to  an  undeserver  ?  Propitiate,  both  of  you,  this  god  at  once,
otherwise  he  will  not  be  appeased."  When  Suryaprabha
heard  this,  and  saw  that  army,  he  was  wroth  and,  seizing
his  sword  and  shield,  he  flew  up  into  the  heaven  by  his
science.  And  all  his  ministers  flew  up  after  him,  with  their
weapons  in  their  hands,  Prahasta,  and  Prabhasa,  and  Bhasa,
and  Siddhartha,  and  Prajnadhya,  and  Sarvadamana,  and
Vitabhlti  and  Subhankara.  And  the  Vidyadharas  fought  a
great  fight  with  them.  And  on  one  side  Suryaprabha,  and
on  the  other  Damodara  advanced,  not  slaying  their  enemies
with  their  swords,  but  receiving  their  weapons  on  their
shields.  Those  men,  few  in  number,  and  those  air  roamers,
a  hundred  thousand  in  number,  found  equality  in  battle,
fighting  with  one  another.  And  all  sword-blades  there
flashed  red  with  blood,  falling  on  the  heads  of  heroes,  like
the  glances  of  the  God  of  Death.  And  the  Vidyadharas
fell  on  the  earth,  with  their  heads  and  their  bodies,  in  front

lokamahoUavam,  which  simply  means  that  "he  gave  a  great  festival  to  his
guests  which  entirely  consisted  of  music  and  dancing."  See  Speyer,  op.  cit.f
p.  116. — N.M.P.


KING  SUBHATA'S  LETTER  11

of  Chandraprabha,  as  if  imploring  protection  out  of  fear.
Siiryaprabha  shone  in  the  world  with  the  glory  of  the  Vidya-
dharas  which  he  had  seen.  The  sky  was  red  with  blood,  as
if  with  vermilion  shed  abroad.  And  Siiryaprabha  at  last
reached,  and  fought  face  to  face  with,  Damodara,  who  was
armed  with  a  sword  and  a  shield.  And  as  he  fought  he
broke  through  his  enemy's  guard  by  a  skilful  management
of  his  weapons,  and  laid  him  on  the  earth,  having  cleft  his
shield  with  his  sword.  And  while  he  was  preparing  to  cut
off  the  head  of  his  struggling  foe,  Vishnu  came  and  made
a  threatening  sound  in  the  sky.  Then  Siiryaprabha,  having
heard  that  sound,  and  having  beheld  Hari,  prostrated  him-
self, and  out  of  respect  for  the  god  spared  to  slay  Damodara.
Hari  carried  him  off  somewhere  as  his  votary  and  saved  him
from  death,  for  the  adorable  one  delivers  in  this  world  and  the
next  his  faithful  followers.  And  the  troops  of  Damodara
fled  in  different  directions.  Siiryaprabha,  for  his  part,  de-
scended from  heaven  to  his  father's  side.  And  his  father,
Chandraprabha,  welcomed  him  on  his  returning  unwounded
with  his  ministers,  and  the  other  kings  praised  him  now  that
his  valour  had  been  seen.

And  while  they  were  all  engaged  in  joyfully  talking  over
the  combat  another  ambassador,  belonging  to  Subhata,
arrived  there.  And  he  came  and  delivered  a  letter  in  the
The  other  presence  of  Chandraprabha ;  and  Siddhartha,
Kings  seek  opening  it,  read  it  out  in  the  assembly.  It  ran
okfmiTriZye  as  follows:  "The  august  King  Chandraprabha,
for  their  e  the  pearl- jewel  of  a  noble  race,  is  thus  respectfully
Daughters  solicited  by  King  Subhata  in  the  Concan.  We
have  learned  that  our  daughter,  who  was  carried  off  by
some  beings  in  the  night,  has  come  into  the  hands  of  thy
son,  and  we  rejoice  thereat.  Make  an  effort,  thou  and  thy
son  Suryaprabha,  to  come  with  her  to  our  house,  without
raising  any  objection,  in  order  that  we  may  behold  our
daughter  returned,  as  it  were,  from  the  other  world,  and
perform  for  her  at  once  the  ceremony  required  for  marriage."
When  this  letter  was  read  by  Siddhartha,  the  King  Chandra-
prabha, consenting,  welcomed  the  messenger  and  rejoiced.
And  he  quickly  sent  Prahasta  to  the  western  border  and  had


12  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

Subhata's  daughter,  Chandrikavati,  conducted  into  her
father's  presence.  And  the  next  morning  they  all  went,
with  Suryaprabha  in  front,  and  in  company  with  Jana-
mejaya,  in  the  chariot  to  the  western  border.  There  King
Subhata,  pleased  at  recovering  his  daughter,  showed  them
much  honour,  and  celebrated  his  daughter's  marriage  festival.
And  he  bestowed  on  Chandrikavati  jewels  and  other  gifts
in  such  liberal  profusion  that  Vlrabhata  and  the  others  were
ashamed  at  what  they  had  given.  Then,  while  Suryaprabha
was  remaining  there  in  the  house  of  his  father-in-law,  there
came  from  Lavanaka  also  an  ambassador  belonging  to  King
Paurava.  He  delivered  to  Chandraprabha  this  message
from  his  master  :  "  My  daughter  Sulochana  has  been  carried
off  by  the  fortunate  Prince  Suryaprabha  :  that  does  not
grieve  me  ;  but  why  should  he  not  be  brought  with  her  to
my  house,  in  order  that  we  may  perform  the  marriage
ceremony  ? "  When  King  Chandraprabha  heard  that  he
honoured  the  messenger  in  his  joy  and  had  Sulochana  escorted
by  Prahasta  into  the  presence  of  her  father.  Then  they,
Subhata  and  all,  in  the  company  of  Suryaprabha,  went  to
Lavanaka  in  the  chariot,  that  came  as  soon  as  it  was  thought
of.  There  Paurava  performed  the  joyful  marriage  ceremony,
and  bestowed  jewels  liberally  on  Suryaprabha  and  Sulo-
chana, and  honoured  the  kings  also.  And  while  they  were
remaining  there  in  delight,  entertained  by  the  king,  Suroha,
the  King  of  China,  also  sent  an  ambassador.  That  king,
like  the  others,  requested,  by  the  mouth  of  the  ambassador,
that,  as  his  daughter  had  been  carried  off,  they  would  come
with  her  to  his  palace.

Then  King  Chandraprabha  was  delighted,  and  he  had
the  King  of  China's  daughter,  Vidyunmala,  also  conducted
by  Prahasta  to  her  father's  house.  And  on  the  next  day
Chandraprabha  and  all  went,  including  Paurava,  together
with  Suryaprabha  and  his  retinue,  to  the  land  of  China.
There  the  king  came  out  to  meet  them,  and  led  them  into
his  own  treasure- chamber,  and  there  performed  the  marriage
ceremony  of  his  daughter.  And  he  gave  to  Vidyunmala
and  Suryaprabha  an  immense  quantity  of  gold,  elephants,
horses,  jewels   and  silk  garments.     And,  being  invited  by


ALL  IS  SETTLED  AMICABLY        18

Suroha,  Chandraprabha  and  the  others  continued  there  for
some  days  in  various  enjoyments.  And  Suryaprabha,  who  was
in  the  prime  of  youth,  was  adorned  by  that  Vidyunmala,1
as  the  rainy  season,  when  the  clouds  abound,  is  adorned  by
the  lightning  garland.

Thus  Suryaprabha  and  his  relatives,  accompanied  by
his  various  charmers,  enjoyed  delights  here  and  there  in
the  houses  of  his  fathers-in-law.  Then  he  took  counsel  with
Siddhartha  and  his  other  ministers  and  dismissed  one  by  one
to  their  own  lands  Virabhata  and  the  other  kings,  with  num-
bers of  horses,  and  then  took  leave  of  that  King  Suroha,
and,  accompanied  by  his  daughter,  with  his  own  parents
and  followers  ascended  that  chariot  Bhutasana  and  went
triumphant  to  his  own  city  of  Sakala.  In  that  city  great
rejoicing  took  place  on  account  of  his  arrival ;  in  one  place
there  was  the  occupation  of  dancing,  in  another  the  delight
of  music  ;  in  one  place  the  amusement  of  drinking,  in  another
the  toilet  rites  of  fair-eyed  ladies ;  in  another  the  voice  of
bards  loud  in  the  praise  of  him  who  had  obtained  what  he
desired.  Then  he  had  brought  his  other  wives,  who  had
remained  in  their  fathers'  houses,  and  with  the  stores  of
elephants  and  horses  bestowed  by  their  fathers,  that  were
brought  with  them,  and  with  the  innumerable  camels  bowed
down  with  burdens  full  of  various  jewels,  he  displayed  in
sport  the  wealth  obtained  by  the  conquest  of  the  world,  and
aroused  the  wonder  of  his  subjects.

Then  Sakala,  inhabited  by  that  fortunate  one,  appeared
glorious,  as  if  the  chiefs  of  the  gods,  of  the  followers  of  Kuvera
and  of  the  snakes,2  had  made  in  it  many  deposits  of  much
wealth.  Then  Suryaprabha  dwelt  there  with  Madanasena,
enjoying  the  pleasures  he  desired,  happy  in  that  all  blessings
were  fully  bestowed  upon  him,  in  the  society  of  his  parents,
with  his  ministers,  accompanied  by  his  other  wives,  expecting
every  day  Maya,  who  had  made  a  promise  to  return.

1  Vidyunmala  means  "  garland  of  lightning."

2  The  D.  text  reads  .  .  .  bhujaga-nagaraih  instead  of  .  .  .  bkujanga-varaih  ;
thus  we  get  a  better  meaning :  " .  .  .  appeared,  by  its  great  wealth  and  heavy
treasures,  as  if  it  were  made  up  of  the  cities  of  the  gods,  of  Kubera,  and  of  the
Snakes,  put  together."     See  Speyer,  op.  cit.,  p.  II 6. — n.m.p.


14  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


NOTE  ON  THE  A$VAMEDHA,  OR  HORSE-SACRIFICE

The  asvamedha,  or  "  horse-sacrifice,"  is  without  doubt  one  of  the  most
ancient  and  important  sacrifices  in  the  whole  of  Indian  ritual.  Its  origin  is
uncertain,  but  evidence  seems  to  point  to  Scythia  as  its  home.  We  are
naturally  reminded  of  the  Greek  sacrifices  of  horses  to  the  sea-god.  Similar
rites  have  been  recorded  of  the  Russians  and  Chinese  (see  Frazer,  Pausanias,
vol.  iv,  pp.  197-198).  There  has  always  been  a  close  connection  between
horses  and  the  sea-god,  and  also  with  the  sun.  The  latter  connection  is
due  not  merely,  I  think,  to  the  fact  that  the  horse  was  the  "  vehicle "  of
the  sun-god,  but  because,  through  its  swiftness,  strength  and  activity,  it  was
itself  a  symbol  of  the  sun.

In  Rig- Veda  days  the  horse  was  naturally  a  much  prized  animal,  and  it
seems  highly  probable  that  horseflesh  was  eaten  only  at  the  asvamedha,  and
then  not  as  flesh,  but  as  a  means  of  imparting  to  the  eater  the  strength  and
endurance  of  the  horse.

The  rite  found  its  way  into  the  Rig-Veda  at  a  very  early  date,  and  two
hymns  (i,  162,  163)  describe  the  sacrifice.  The  most  complete  account,
however,  occurs  in  the  Satapatha-Brahmana  (iii,  1-5)  and  the  Taittiriya-
Brahmana  (iii,  8-9),  as  well  as  in  certain  ritualistic  treatises,  the  Srautasutras.

The  asvamedha  was  the  rite  by  which  a  king  ratified  his  claim  to  suzerainty
over  his  neighbours.  It  was,  therefore,  only  performed  by  powerful  monarchs
whose  strength,  kingdom  and  wealth  warranted  such  great  privileges.

Among  such  kings  may  be  mentioned  Pushyamitra,  Samudragupta,
Kumaragupta  I,  Adityasena,  Rajadhiraja  Chola  and  Sivaskandavarman.  In
some  cases  coins  were  struck  to  celebrate  the  event.  A  reproduction  of  one
of  those  issued  by  Samudragupta  will  be  found  on  the  back  cover  of  each
volume  of  the  Ocean  of  Story.

Beginning  first  as  a  simple  rite  of  sympathetic  magic,  the  asvamedha
increased  in  intricate  detail  until  it  assumed  really  huge  dimensions,  both  as
regards  the  time  it  took  to  perform  and  the  expense  it  involved.  The  benefits
resulting  from  the  sacrifice  were  manifold :  undisputed  power,  success  in  fresh
enterprises,  extension  of  empire,  the  attainment  of  all  personal  wishes  and
general  increase  of  strength.

Unlike  other  sacrifices,  which  were  confined  to  the  priesthood,  the
asvamedha  became  a  great  State  function  in  which  the  populace  took  part,
and  into  which  were  introduced  secular  and  even  obscene  customs,  all  of
which,  however,  are  of  the  greatest  interest.

Although  it  is  impossible  here  to  give  full  details  of  the  sacrifice,  the
following  brief  account  will  afford  some  idea  of  the  main  sequence  of  events.

The  most  auspicious  season  for  the  commencement  of  the  asvamedha  was
the  spring,  about  six  or  seven  days  before  the  full  moon  of  the  month  Phalguna.
There  were  four  principal  officiating  priests — the  hotri,  whose  duties  usually
consisted  in  reciting  verses  from  the  Rig-Veda;  the  adhvaryu,  who  did  all
manual  labour  connected  with  the  sacrifice ;  the  brahman,  who  recited  verses


THE  ASVAMEDHA  OR  HORSE-SACRIFICE      15

to  Indra,  the  chief  Vedic  god  of  the  Aryan  warrior,  whose  chariot  was  drawn
by  tawny  horses ;  and  the  itdgdtri,  a  singer  of  the  Sama-Veda  school.

The  adhvaryu  prepared  a  kind  of  rice-porridge  (brahmaudana}  sufficient
for  four  persons,  which  the  four  priests  ate.  He  then  hung  a  gold  ornament
on  the  king  who  was  making  the  sacrifice,  and  he,  in  his  turn,  presented  the
priests  with  four  thousand  cows  and  four  gold  plates  of  a  hundred  grains  each
(i.e.  four  hundred  gold  pieces).  All  these  acts  had  symbolic  meanings  which
helped  to  assure  the  success  of  the  sacrifice  and  the  full  attainment  of  all
desires  of  the  sacrificer.  In  attendance  on  the  king  were  four  of  his  wives
adorned  with  gold  ornaments — the  consecrated  queen,  the  favourite,  a  dis-
carded wife  and  a  Palagati — i.e.  low-caste  daughter  of  a  courier.

He  now  entered  the  hall  of  the  sacrificial  fires  by  the  eastern  door,  and  his
wives  by  the  southern  door.  After  the  evening  performance  of  the  agniholra
(see  Vol.  II,  p.  257)  had  been  completed,  the  king  lay  between  the  legs  of
his  favourite  wife,  behind  the  garhapatya  hearth,  his  head  facing  the  north.
He  did  not,  however,  enjoy  her,  so  that  his  restraint  might  lend  weight  to  a
successful  reign.  The  other  wives  sat  behind,  and  silence  was  preserved
throughout  the  night.  The  following  morning  various  offerings  were  made
with  full  symbolical  ritual  and  appropriate  verses.

At  this  point  the  horse  was  led  up.  It  had  to  be  of  pure  breed,  and  was
specially  chosen  for  its  speed,  auspicious  markings  and  colouring.  Now  the
symbolical  act  of  tethering  to  the  sacrificial  post  began.  A  bridle  of  special
length  was  anointed  with  the  brahmaudana  butter  and  put  on  its  head,  during
which  appropriate  verses  were  recited.  It  was  then  led  to  a  stagnant  pool
and  ceremoniously  sprinkled.  A  low-caste  man  took  a  "  four-eyed "  dog
{i.e.  with  dark  patches  over  each  eye),  killed  it  with  a  club  of  sidhraka  wood,
and  placing  the  body  on  a  mat  or  hoop  of  rattan  let  it  float  under  the  horse,
at  the  same  time  pronouncing  a  formula  to  ensure  the  destruction  of  anyone
attempting  to  hinder  the  consummation  of  the  sacrifice.

The  horse  was  now  led  back  to  the  fire,  where  oblations  were  offered
corresponding  to  the  number  of  drops  falling  from  the  horse  in  the  process  of
drying.  After  a  long  series  of  ceremonies,  including  the  offering  of  cakes
(purodasas)  to  Savitri  and  gifts  to  the  priests,  on  the  third  day  the  horse  was
released  in  a  north-easterly  direction.  It  could  roam  at  its  own  sweet  will
for  a  whole  year,  and  was  accompanied  by  a  hundred  old  horses.  A  hundred
princes  of  the  blood,  a  hundred  high-born  sons,  and  a  hundred  low-born  sons
of  the  officials,  all  armed  according  to  their  rank  and  fully  instructed  in  their
duties,  were  told  off  to  guard  it  from  any  attempt  at  theft,  from  bathing  in
unclean  water,  from  traps,  or  any  connection  with  mares.  Local  battles  or
even  wars  might  result  from  an  attempt  to  steal  the  horse  (cf.  Mahabharala,
XIV,  lxxi,  14;  and  Mdlavilcagnimitra,  Act  V,  Tawney's  translation,  p.  91).  If
it  got  lost  or  died  another  had  to  be  taken  and  part  of  the  previous  ceremonies
repeated.

During  the  year  of  the  horse's  wanderings  the  secular  element  began  to
assert  itself  at  home.  Daily  offerings  were  made  to  Savitri,  and  daily  recitals
were  given  by  the  hotri  before  the  king  and  the  three  other  chief  priests,
who  were  seated  on  golden  thrones.     Festivities  of  various  kinds  were  freely


16  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

indulged  in  by  the  people — singing,  lute-playing,  dramatic  entertainments,
story-telling,  etc.  The  recitations  of  the  hotri  and  the  rites  preceding  the
first  appearance  of  the  horse  were  repeated  daily  for  the  year.  On  its  return
the  main  ceremony  began.

The  dthshi'i,  or  consecration  of  the  king,  took  place  first.  The  place  of
sacrifice  must  lie  to  the  east,  with  water  in  the  vicinity.  Twenty-one  posts
were  erected,  to  each  of  which  an  animal  was  tied.  The  complete  ceremony
lasted  three  days.  On  the  first  day  the  animals  were  sacrificed  to  Agni-Soma
and  the  heavenly  Soma  was  pressed.  On  the  second  day,  after  singing  hymns,
the  horse  was  yoked  to  a  golden  chariot  with  three  other  horses,  all  decked
with  gold,  and  driven  to  a  pool,  where  it  bathed.  On  its  return  the  first  three
wives,  according  to  their  rank,  anointed  its  fore,  middle  and  hind  quarters,  at
the  same  time  weaving  a  hundred  and  one  golden  ornaments  into  its  mane
and  tail,  accompanied  by  the  necessary  formulae.  A  corn  oblation  was  then
offered  the  horse,  which,  if  not  eaten,  was  thrown  into  the  water.

At  this  juncture  began  the  famous  brahmodya,  or  asking  of  poetical  riddles.
Only  the  hotri  and  the  brahman  took  part  in  this.  (It  is  hard  to  explain  the
custom  of  asking  riddles  at  certain  times  and  in  certain  ceremonies  as  found
in  so  many  parts  of  the  world.  Frazer,  Golden  Bough,  vol.  ix,  p.  121»3,  suggests
that  they  might  have  originally  been  circumlocutions  adopted  at  times  when
for  certain  reasons  the  speaker  was  forbidden  the  use  of  direct  terms.)  The
horse  was  now  bound  with  a  he-goat  to  the  sacrificial  post,  and  several  hundreds
of  other  animals  were  bound  to  similar  posts.

The  horse  was  then  smothered  with  robes.  The  corpse  was  thereupon
circumambulated  three  times  from  both  directions,  by  the  wives,  who  fanned
it.  The  head  queen  proceeded  to  lie  down  next  the  horse  and  was  covered
with  a  cloak.  In  that  position  she  performed  a  very  obscene  act  with  the
horse  symbolising  the  transmission  to  her  of  its  great  powers  of  fertility.
Meanwhile  the  priests  and  women  took  part  in  a  series  of  questions  and
answers,  usually  of  a  very  free  nature.

On  the  queen  getting  up,  the  horse  was  cut  up,  the  way  of  the  knife  being
directed  by  the  three  wives  with  a  hundred  and  one  needles  each,  of  gold,
silver  and  copper,  according  to  their  respective  ranks.  Another  series  of
riddle-asking  followed,  and  then  came  the  roasting  of  the  horse  and  offering
it  to  Prajapati.  The  third  day  was  taken  up  with  the  purification  of  the
sacrificer,  and  the  giving  of  large  presents,  usually  captured  booty,  to  the
priests.

For  further  details  reference  should  be  made  to  Eg^eling's  translation  of
the  oatapatha-Brahmana,  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  vol.  xliv,  pp.  15  et  seq.,
and  274-403;  Bamett,  Antiquities  of  India,  pp.  169-171;  K.  Geldner,
"Aivamedha,"  Hastings'  Ency.  Rel.  Eth.,  vol.  ii,  p.  160;  and  Hillebrandt,
RUuaUitteratur,  Grundriss  der  Indo-Arischen  Philologie  und  Altertumskunde,  vol.  iii,
part  ii,  pp.  149-152. — n.m.p.


CHAPTER  XLV

62.  Story  of  Suryaprabha  and  how  he  attained  Sovereignty
over  the  Vidyadharas

THEN,  one  day,  when  King  Chandraprabha  was  in  the
hall  of  assembly,  and  Suryaprabha  was  there  accom-
panied by  all  his  ministers,  they  called  to  mind  Maya
h  propos  of  a  remark  made  by  Siddhartha,  and  suddenly  the
earth  cleft  open  in  the  middle  of  the  assembly.  Then  first
a  loud- sounding,  fragrant  breeze  ascended  from  the  aperture
in  the  earth,  and  afterwards  the  Asura  Maya  rose  up  from  it,
looking  like  a  mountain  in  the  night,  for  his  hair  gleamed
upon  his  black,  lofty  head  like  the  potent  herbs  upon  the
mountain  peaks,  and  his  crimson  robe  resembled  the  flowing
streams  of  cinnabar.

And  the  King  of  the  Danavas,  after  having  been  duly
honoured  by  King  Chandraprabha,  spake  from  his  seat  on  a
jewelled  throne  :  "  You  have  enjoyed  these  delights  of  earth,
and  now  it  is  time  for  you  to  enjoy  others ;  set  yourselves
now  to  prepare  for  acquiring  them.  Send  out  ambassadors,
and  collect  your  subordinate  kings,  and  your  friends  and
connections ;  then  we  will  unite  with  Sumeru,  Prince  of  the
Vidyadharas,  and  we  will  conquer  Srutasarman,  and  win
the  sovereignty  of  the  sky-goers.  And  Sumeru  is  our  ally,
considering  us  as  friends,  for  he  received  at  the  outset  a
command  from  Siva  to  support  Suryaprabha  and  give  him
his  own  daughter."

When  the  Asura  Maya  said  this,  Chandraprabha  sent,  as
ambassadors  to  all  the  kings,  Prahasta  and  the  other  ministers
that  travelled  through  the  air  ;  and,  by  the  advice  of  Maya,
Suryaprabha  communicated  the  magic  sciences  to  all  his  wives
and  ministers,  on  whom  they  had  not  been  bestowed  already.
And  while  they  were  thus  engaged  the  hermit  Narada
arrived,  descending  from  the  sky,  illuminating  the  whole
horizon  with  brightness.

VOL.  IV.  17  B


18  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

And  after  he  had  received  the  argha  he  sat  down  and  said
to  Chandraprabha  :  "I  am  sent  here  by  Indra,  and  he  sends
this  message  to  your  Highness :  *  I  have  learned  that,  by
the  instigation  of  Siva,  you  purpose,  with  the  assistance  of
the  Asura  Maya,  being  all  of  you  deluded  by  ignorance,  to
obtain  for  this  Siiryaprabha,  of  mortal  frame,  the  great
dignity  of  emperor  of  all  the  chiefs  of  the  Vidyadharas.
That  is  improper,  for  I  have  conferred  it  on  Sruta^arman,
and,  besides,  it  is  the  hereditary  right  of  that  moon  of  the
sea  of  the  Vidyadhara  race.  And  as  for  what  you  are  doing
in  a  spirit  of  opposition  to  me,  and  contrary  to  what  is  right,
it  will  certainly  result  in  your  destruction.  Moreover,  before,
when  your  Highness  was  offering  a  sacrifice  to  Rudra,  I  told
you  first  to  offer  an  a&uamedha  sacrifice,  but  you  did  not  do
it.  So  the  haughty  enterprise  you  are  engaged  in,  without
regard  to  the  gods,  relying  upon  Siva  alone,  will  not  turn  out
to  your  happiness."

When  Narada  had  delivered  in  these  words  the  message
of  Indra,  Maya  laughed  and  said  to  him :  "  Great  hermit,  the
king  of  gods  has  not  spoken  well.  For  what  he  says  about
the  fact  of  Siiryaprabha  being  a  mortal  is  beside  the  point ;
for  who  was  not  aware  of  that  fact  when  he  met  Damodara
in  fight  ?  For  mortals  who  possess  courage  can  obtain  all
powers.  Did  not  Nahusha  and  others  of  old  time  obtain  the
dignity  of  Indra  ?  And  as  for  his  saying  that  he  bestowed
the  empire  on  Srutasarman,  and  that  it  is  his  hereditary
right,  that  also  is  absurd,  for  where  Siva  is  the  giver,  who  has
any  authority  ?  Besides,  did  not  he  himself  take  away  the
sovereignty  of  the  gods  from  Hiranyaksha,  though  it  descended
to  him  as  the  elder  ?  And  as  for  his  other  remark  about
opposition,  and  our  acting  contrary  to  what  is  right,  that  is
false,  for  he  violently  puts  himself  in  opposition  to  us  out  of
selfish  motives;  and  wherein,  pray,  are  we  acting  contrary
to  what  is  right  ?  for  we  are  only  striving  to  conquer  our  rival ;
we  are  not  carrying  off  a  hermit's  wife,  we  are  not  killing
Brahmans.1

"  And  what  he  says  about  the  necessity  of  first  performing

1  Alluding  to  Indra's  slaying  the  demon  Vritra,  who  was  regarded  as  a
Brahman,  and  to  his  conduct  with  Ahalya.


SIVA  THE  OMNIPOTENT  19

an  asvamedha  sacrifice,  and  about  contempt  of  the  gods,  is
untrue,  for  when  sacrifice  to  Siva  has  been  performed,  what
need  is  there  of  other  sacrifices  ?  And  when  Siva,  the  god
of  gods,  is  worshipped,  what  god  is  not  worshipped  ?  And
as  for  his  remark  that  exclusive  attention  to  Kudra  ■  is  not
becoming,  I  answer :  Of  what  importance  are  the  hosts  of
the  other  gods  where  Siva  is  in  arms  ?  When  the  sun  has
risen,  do  the  other  luminaries  give  light  ?  So  you  must  tell
all  this  to  the  king  of  the  gods,  0  hermit,  and  we  shall  con-
tinue to  carry  out  what  we  are  engaged  in.  Let  him  do  what
he  can."

When  the  Rishi  Narada  had  been  thus  addressed  by
the  Asura  Maya,  he  said,  "  I  will  do  so,"  and  took  back  to
the  king  of  the  gods  that  answer  to  his  message.  When
that  hermit  had  departed,  the  Asura  Maya  thus  spake  to
King  Chandraprabha,  who  was  apprehensive  on  account  of
the  message  of  Indra  :  "  You  must  not  be  afraid  of  Indra ;
even  if  he  is  on  the  side  of  Srutasarman  in  fight,  with  the
hosts  of  the  gods,  out  of  hostility  to  us,  still  we  Daityas  and
Danavas  are  countless  in  number,  and,  under  the  leadership
of  Prahlada,  we  are  ranged  together  on  your  side.  And  if
the  destroyer  of  Tripura  x  favours  us  and  is  active  on  our
side,  what  other  miserable  creature  in  the  three  worlds  has
any  power  ?     So  set  about  this  expedition,  heroes."

When  Maya  said  this,  all  those  there  were  pleased,  and
considered  that  it  was  as  he  said.

Then  in  accordance  with  the  messages  carried  by  the
ambassadors,  in  course  of  time  all  the  kings,  Virabhata  and
the  others,  assembled  there,  and  all  the  other  friends  and
The  Great  relatives  of  Chandraprabha.  When  these  kings
Sacrifice  to  with  their  armies  had  been  duly  honoured,  the
Asura  Maya  again  said  to  Chandraprabha :
"  Perform  to-night,  0  King,  a  great  sacrifice  in  honour  of
Siva ;  afterwards  you  shall  do  all  as  I  direct."  When  he
heard  this  speech  of  Maya's,  King  Chandraprabha  immedi-
ately had  preparations  made  for  a  sacrifice  to  Siva.  Then
he  went  to  the  forest  at  night  and,  under  the  instructions  of
Maya,  himself  performed  devoutly  a  sacrifice  to  Rudra.

1  I.e.  Siva.


20  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

And  while  the  king  was  engaged  in  the  fire- offering  there
suddenly  appeared  there  Nandin,  the  prince  of  the  host  of
Bhutas.  He  was  honoured  duly  by  the  delighted  king,  and
said  :  "  The  god  Siva  himself  sends  this  command  by  me  :
1  Through  my  favour  thou  needst  not  fear  even  a  hundred
Indras ;  Suryaprabha  shall  become  emperor  of  the  sky-
goers.'  "  After  he  had  delivered  this  message,  Nandin
received  a  portion  of  the  offering  and  disappeared  with  the
hosts  of  Bhutas.  Then  Chandraprabha  became  confident
in  the  future  elevation  of  his  son,  and  after  completing  the
sacrifice,  at  the  end  of  the  fire- offering,  re-entered  the  city
with  Maya.

And  the  next  morning,  when  King  Chandraprabha  was
sitting  in  secret  conclave  together  with  the  queen,  his  son,
the  kings  and  his  ministers,  the  Asura  Maya  said  to  him  :
"  Listen,  King ;  I  will  to-day  tell  you  a  secret  long  guarded.
You  are  a  Danava,  Sunltha  by  name,  my  mighty  son,  and
Suryaprabha  is  your  younger  brother,  named  Sumundika ;
after  you  were  slain  in  the  war  of  the  gods  you  were  born
here  as  father  and  son.  That  Danava  body  of  yours  has
been  preserved  by  me,  skilfully  embalmed  with  heavenly
drugs  and  ghee.  Therefore  you  must  enter  a  cavern  and
visit  Patala,  and  then  return  to  your  own  body *  by  a  charm
which  I  will  teach  you.  And  when  you  have  entered  that
body  you  will  be  so  much  superior  in  spirit  and  strength
that  you  will  conquer  in  fight  the  wanderers  of  the  air.  But
Suryaprabha,  who  is  an  incarnation  of  Sumundika,  with
this  same  beautiful  body  which  he  now  possesses,  shall  soon
become  lord  of  the  sky-goers."

When  King  Chandraprabha  heard  this  from  Maya,  he
was  delighted,  and  agreed  to  it,  but  Siddhartha  said  this:
"  O  excellent  Danava,  what  ground  of  confidence  have  we  if
this  doubt  should  arise,  '  Why  has  the  king  entered  another
body ;  has  he  then  died  ?  '  And,  moreover,  will  he  forget
us  when  he  enters  another  body,  like  a  man  gone  to  the
other  world  ?     Who  is  he,  and  who  are  we  ?  "  *

1  See  the  note  at  the  end  of  this  chapter. — n.m.p.

*  Similar  phrases  of  comparison  are  found  throughout  the  East,  especially
in  Egypt  and  Syria.     The  main  uses  of  such  expressions  are  to  show  the  great


ENTERING  ANOTHER'S  BODY  21

When  the  Asura  Maya  heard  this  speech  of  Siddhartha's,
he  answered  :  "  You  yourselves  must  come  and  see  him  with
your  own  eyes  entering  another  body,  of  his  own  free  will,
by  the  employment  of  a  charm.  And  hear  the  reason  why
he  will  not  forget  you.  A  man  who  does  not  die  of  his  own
free  will,  and  is  born  in  another  womb,  does  not  remember
anything,  as  his  memory  is  destroyed  by  old  age  and  other
afflictions,  but  whoever  of  his  own  free  will  enters  another's
body,  penetrating  by  the  employment  of  magic  the  internal
organs  and  the  senses,  without  his  mind  and  intellect  being
impaired,  and  passes,  as  it  were,  from  one  house  to  another,
that  prince  among  Yogins  has  supernatural  knowledge  and
remembers  all.  So  do  not  feel  doubtful ;  so  far  from  there
being  any  reason  for  it,  this  king  will  obtain  a  great  divine
body,  free  from  old  age  and  sickness.  Moreover,  you  are
all  Danavas,  and  by  merely  entering  Rasatala,1  and  drinking
nectar,  you  will  obtain  divine  bodies  free  from  sickness."

When  the  ministers  heard  this  speech  of  Maya's,  they  all
said,  "  So  be  it,"  and  consented  to  his  proposal,  abandoning
their  apprehensions  out  of  the  confidence  they  reposed  in  him.
And  by  his  advice  Chandraprabha,  with  all  the  kings,  went
on  the  next  day  to  the  confluence  of  the  Chandrabhaga
and  the  Airavati.2  There  Chandraprabha  left  the  kings
outside,  and  committed  to  their  care  the  wives  of  Surya-
prabha,  and  then  he  entered  in  company  with  Siiryaprabha,
the  queen,  and  the  ministers  with  Siddhartha  at  their  head,

social  difference  between  two  parties,  or  the  distance  of  some  far-off  place.
Readers  will  remember  that  in  the  Nights,  at  the  end  of  each  separate  night,
Shahrazad,  on  her  sister  saying  how  delightful  she  found  the  story,  replies :
"  And  what  is  this  compared  to  what  I  can  tell  thee,  the  night  to  come,  if  I
live,  and  the  king  spare  me."  In  a  note  Burton  compares  this  to  the  Indian :
"  Where  is  Rajah  Bhoj  and  where  is  Ganga  the  oil-man  ? "  Cf.  also  Supp.,
vol.  ii,  p.  7  :  "  Where  am  I  and  where  is  the  daughter  of  the  Kazi  Amin
al-Hukm?"  While  in  vol.  vii,  p.  344,  great  distance  is  expressed  by,  "but
where  is  this  land  and  where  lies  China-land  ?" — n.m.p.

1  One  of  the  seven  underworlds the  others  being  Mahatala,  Atala,

Sutala,  Vitala,  Talatala  and  Patala.  They  are,  however,  collectively  known
as  Patalas,  and  lie  directly  above  the  six  hells,  and  below  Vasumati,  the  earth.
For  details  see  H.  Jacobi,  "Cosmogony  and  Cosmology  (Indian),"  Hastings'
Ency.  Rel.  Eih.,  vol.  iv,  pp.  155-161. — n.m.p.

*  I.e.  Acesines  and  Hydraotes.


22  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

an  opening  in  the  water  pointed  out  by  Maya,  and  after
entering  he  travelled  a  long  distance,  and  beheld  a  heavenly
temple,  and  entered  it  with  all  of  them.

And  in  the  meanwhile  the  Vidyadharas  descended  with
troops  on  those  kings  who  were  remaining  there  outside  the
opening;  and  paralysing  the  kings  by  supernatural  arts,
Suryaprabkas  tnev  carried  on*  tne  wives  of  Suryaprabha,  and
Wmm  are  immediately  a  voice  was  heard  from  the  sky  :
stolen  «  Wicked  Srutas*arman,  if  you  touch  these  wives

of  the  emperor  you  shall  immediately  perish  with  your  host.
So  guard  them  respectfully,  treating  them  like  your  mother ;
there  is  a  reason  for  my  not  immediately  slaying  you  and  set-
ting them  free;  so  let  them  remain  as  they  are  at  present."
And  when  the  kings,  Vlrabhata  and  the  others,  saw  them
carried  off,  they  prepared  to  die  by  fighting  with  one  another.
But  a  voice  from  heaven  forbade  their  attempt,  saying  :  "  No
harm  will  befall  these  daughters  of  yours ;  you  shall  obtain
them  again,  so  you  must  not  act  rashly ;  prosperity  befall
you  !  "     So  the  kings  remained  waiting  there.

In  the  meantime  Chandraprabha  was  in  the  temple  in
Patala  surrounded  by  all  his  companions,  and  there  Maya
said  to  him  :  "  King,  listen  attentively  to  this  wonderful
thing :  I  will  show  you  the  supernatural  art  of  entering
another  body."

He  said  this,  and  recited  the  Sankhya  and  the  Yoga
doctrine  with  its  secrets,  and  taught  him  the  magic  art
of  entering  another  body  ;  and  that  chief  of  Yogins  said :
"  This  is  the  famous  supernatural  power,  and  the  independ-
ence of  knowledge,  the  dominion  over  matter  that  is  char-
acterised by  lightness  and  the  other  mystic  properties.1
The  chief  of  the  gods,  possessing  this  power,  do  not  long  for
liberation ;  in  order  to  obtain  this  power  others  endure  the
hardship  of  muttering  prayers  and  performing  asceticism.
Men  of  lofty  soul  do  not  love  the  pleasures  of  heaven
even  when  attained.  And  listen,  I  will  tell  you  a  story  in
illustration  of  this.


1  See  note  at  the  end  of  this  chapter. — n.m.p.


THE  POWER  OF  ASCETICISM  23

62a.  The  Brahman  Kdla  and  his  Prayers

In  a  former  Kalpa  ■  there  was  a  certain  Brahman,  of
the  name  of  Kala.  He  went  to  the  holy  bathing-place  Push-
kara  and  muttered  prayers  day  and  night.  While  he  was
muttering,  two  myriads  of  years  of  the  gods  passed  away.
Then  there  appeared  a  great  light  inseparable  from  his  head,
which,  streaming  forth  in  the  firmament  like  ten  thousand
suns,8  impeded  the  movement  of  the  Siddhas  and  others
there,  and  set  the  three  worlds  on  fire.

Then  Brahma,  Indra  and  the  other  gods  came  to  him
and  said :  "  Brahman,  these  worlds  are  on  fire  with  your
brightness.  Receive  whatever  boon  you  desire."  He
answered  them :  "  Let  me  have  no  other  pleasure  than
muttering  prayers ;  this  is  my  boon,  I  choose  nothing  else."
When  they  importuned  him,  that  mutterer  of  prayers  went
far  off  and  remained  on  the  north  side  of  the  Himalayas,
muttering  prayers.  jfc   ||  |£ji  ty

When  this  extraordinary  brightness  of  his  gradually
became  intolerable  even  there,  Indra  sent  heavenly  nymphs
to  tempt  him.  That  self-restrained  man  did  not  care  a
straw  about  them  when  they  endeavoured  to  seduce  him.
Then  the  gods  sent  him  Death  as  plenipotentiary.  He
came  to  him  and  said :  "  Brahman,  mortals  do  not  live  so
long,  so  abandon  your  life  ;  do  not  break  the  law  of  nature."
When  the  Brahman  heard  this,  he  said :  "If  the  limit  of
my  life  is  attained,  why  do  you  not  take  me  ?  What  are  you
waiting  for  ?  But  I  will  not  of  myself  abandon  my  life,  O
thou  god  with  the  noose  in  hand ;  indeed,  if  I  were  wilfully
to  abandon  my  life,  I  should  be  a  self-murderer."  When  he
said  this,  and  Death  found  that  he  could  not  take  him  on
account  of  his  power,  he  turned  away  from  him  and  returned
as  he  came.

1  I.e.  a  day  of  Brahma  consisting  of  1000  Yugas.

*  Cf.  the  halo  or  aureole  round  the  heads  of  Christian  saints,  the  circle
of  rays  and  nimbus  round  the  head  of  Greek  divinities,  and  the  beam  that
came  out  of  Charles  the  Great's  mouth  and  illumined  his  head  (Grimm's
Teutonic  Mythologij,  translated  by  Stallybrass,  p.  S2S).  Cf.  Livy,  i,  39;  and
Le  Lotus  de  la  Bonne  Loi  (Burnouf),  p.  4.


24  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

Then  Indra,  repenting,  seized  that  Kala,1  who  had  con-
quered Time  the  destroyer,  in  his  arms  and  took  him  up  to
heaven  by  force.  There  he  remained  averse  to  the  sensual
enjoyments  of  the  place,  and  he  did  not  cease  from  mutter-
ing prayers,  so  the  gods  made  him  descend  again,  and  he
returned  to  the  Himalayas.

And  while  all  the  gods  were  trying  to  induce  him  there  to
take  a  boon,  the  King  Ikshvaku  came  that  way.  When  he
heard  how  affairs  stood,  he  said  to  that  muttercr  of  prayers  :
"  If  you  will  not  receive  a  boon  from  the  gods,  receive  one
from  me."  When  the  mutterer  of  prayers  heard  that,  he
laughed,  and  said  to  the  king  :  "  Are  you  able  to  grant  me
a  boon,  when  I  will  not  receive  one  even  from  the  gods  ?  '
Thus  he  spoke,  and  Ikshvaku  answered  the  Brahman  :  "  If
I  am  not  able  to  grant  you  a  boon,  you  can  grant  me  one ;
so  grant  me  a  boon."  Then  the  mutterer  said :  "  Choose
whatever  you  desire  and  I  will  grant  it."  When  the  king
heard  this,  he  reflected  in  his  mind  :  "  The  appointed  order
is  that  I  should  give,  and  that  he  should  receive ;  this  is
an  inversion  of  the  due  order,  that  I  should  receive  what  he
gives."

Whilst  the  king  was  delaying,  as  he  pondered  over  this
difficulty,  two  Brahmans  came  there  disputing ;  when  they
saw  the  king  they  appealed  to  him  for  a  decision.  The  first
said  :  "  This  Brahman  gave  me  a  cow  with  a  sacrificial  fee  :
why  will  he  not  receive  it  from  my  hand  when  I  offer  to
give  it  back  to  him  ?  "  Then  the  other  said  :  "  I  did  not
receive  it  first,  and  I  did  not  ask  for  it,  then  why  does  he
wish  to  make  me  receive  it  by  force  ?  "  When  the  king
heard  this,  he  said  :  "  This  complainant  is  not  in  the  right ;
why,  after  receiving  the  cow,  do  you  try  to  compel  the  man
who  gave  it  to  take  it  back  from  you  ?  "  When  the  king
said  this,  Indra,  having  found  his  opportunity,  said  to  him  :
14  King,  if  you  hold  this  view  of  what  is  right,  then,  after
you  have  asked  the  Brahman,  who  mutters  prayers,  for  a
boon,  why  do  you  not  take  it  from  him  when  it  is  granted  ?  "
Then  the  king,  being  at  a  loss  for  an  answer,  said  to  that
muttering  Brahman :    "  Revered  sir,  give  me  the  fruit  of

1  Kala  means  Time,  Fate,  Death.


THE  SECOND  UNDERWORLD  25

half  your  muttering  as  a  boon."  Then  the  muttering  Brah-
man said  :  "  Very  well,  receive  the  fruit  of  half  my  mutter-
ing," and  so  he  gave  the  king  a  boon.  By  means  of  that
boon  the  king  obtained  access  to  all  the  worlds,  and  that
muttering  Brahman  obtained  the  world  of  the  gods  called
Sivas.1  There  he  remained  for  many  Kalpas,  and  then
returned  to  earth,  and  by  mystic  contemplation  obtained
independence  and  gained  everlasting  supernatural  power.

62.  Story  of  Suryaprabha  and  how  he  attained  Sovereignty
over  the  Vidyddharas

"  Thus  this  supernatural  power  is  desired  by  wise  men,
who  are  averse  to  heaven  and  such  low  enjoyments  ;  and
you  have  obtained  it,  O  King ;  so,  being  independent,  enter
your  own  body."  When  Maya  said  this  to  King  Chandra-
prabha,  after  communicating  to  him  the  doctrine  of  mystic
contemplation  giving  supernatural  power,2  he  and  his  wife
and  his  son  and  his  ministers  rejoiced  exceedingly.

Then  the  king,  with  his  son  and  companions,  was  led  by
Maya  to  a  second  underworld  and  made  to  enter  a  splendid
city.  And  there  they  saw  a  gigantic  hero,  reclining  at  full
length  upon  a  beautiful  couch,  as  if  asleep,  anointed  with
potent  herbs  and  ghee,  awful  from  the  ghastly  transformation
of  his  features,  surrounded  by  the  daughters  of  the  kings  of
the  Daityas,  with  their  lotus- faces  full  of  melancholy.  Then
Maya  said  to  Chandraprabha  :  "  This  is  your  body,  sur-
rounded by  your  former  brides  ;  enter  it."  The  king  had
recourse  to  the  magic  contemplation  taught  by  Maya,  and
entered  the  body  of  that  hero,  abandoning  his  own  frame.8

1  I  divide  sa  sivakhyanam  and  take  sa  to  be  the  demonstrative  pronoun.

2  I.e.  the  Yoga  system.

3  This  superstition  appears  to  be  prevalent  in  China.  See  Giles's  Strange
Stories  from  a  Chinese  Studio,  vol.  i,  p.  23,  and  other  passages.  It  was  no  doubt
carried  there  by  the  same  wave  of  Buddhism  that  carried  there  many  similar
notions  connected  with  the  transmigration  of  souls,  for  instance  the  belief
that  children  are  born  able  to  speak,  and  that  this  is  very  inauspicious.  (Cf.
Giles,  op.  cit.,  vol.  i,  p.  184,  with  the  story  of  Dharmagupta  and  Chandraprabha
in  the  seventeenth  chapter  of  this  work.)  The  existence  of  this  latter  belief
in  Europe  is  probably  to  be  ascribed  to  the  influence  of  Buddhism.


26  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

Then  the  hero  yawned  slowly,  opened  his  eyes  and  rose
up  from  the  bed,  as  if  awaking  out  of  sleep.  Then  a  shout
arose  from  the  delighted  Asura  brides :  "  Happy  are  we
that  our  husband,  the  god  Sunitha,  is  to-day  restored  to  life."
But  Suryaprabha  and  the  others  were  immediately  despond-
ent, beholding  the  body  of  Chandraprabha  lying  lifeless.
But  Chandraprabha- Sunitha,  appearing  as  if  arisen  from  a
refreshing  sleep,  saw  Maya,  and  falling  at  his  feet  honoured
his  father.  That  father  too  embraced  him,  and  asked  him
in  the  presence  of  all :  "  Do  you  remember  both  your  lives,
my  son  ?  "  He  said  :  "  I  do  remember  them,"  and  related
what  had  happened  to  him  in  his  life  as  Chandraprabha,  and
also  what  had  happened  to  him  in  his  life  as  Sunitha,  and  he
comforted  one  by  one  Suryaprabha  and  the  others,  and  also
his  queens,  mentioning  each  by  name,  and  also  the  Danava
ladies,  his  wives  in  his  first  life.  And  he  preserved  the  body
which  he  had  as  Chandraprabha,  carefully  laid  by,  embalmed
by  means  of  drugs  and  ghee,  saying :  "It  may  possibly  be
useful  to  me."  Then  Suryaprabha  and  the  others,  tranquil
now  that  they  had  gained  confidence,  bowed  before  him,  and
joyfully  congratulated  him.

Then  Maya,  having  conducted  all  of  them  in  high  delight
out  of  that  city,  led  them  to  another  city  adorned  with  gold
and  jewels.  When  they  entered  it  they  beheld  a  lake  of  the
appearance  of  beryl,  filled  with  nectar,  and  they  all  sat  down
on  the  bank  of  it.  And  they  drank  that  nectarous  draught
there,  more  excellent  than  the  Water  of  Life,  in  curiously
ornamented  cups  formed  of  jewels,  which  were  brought  to
them  by  the  wives  of  Sunitha.  And  by  that  draught  they
all  rose  up,  as  from  a  sleep  of  intoxication,  and  became
possessed  of  divine  bodies,  and  of  great  strength  and  courage.

Then  the  Asura  Maya  said  to  Chandraprabha- Sunitha :
"  Come,  my  son,  let  us  go  and  see  your  mother  after  so  long
a  separation."  And  Sunitha  said  :  "  So  be  it,"  and  prepared
LHavan,  the  *°  g°»  conducted  by  Maya,  and  so  proceeded  to
Wiftof  the  fourth  underworld  with  Suryaprabha  and
the  others.  There  they  beheld  curious  cities
made  of  various  metals,  and  at  last  they  all  reached  a  city
built  entirely  of  gold.     There,  on  a  pillar  composed  of  jewels,


LILAVATI  AND  HER  SONS  27

adorned  with  every  luxury,  they  beheld  that  mother  of
Sunitha,  the  wife  of  Maya,  by  name  Lilavati,  surpassing
in  beauty  the  nymphs  of  heaven,  surrounded  with  Asura
maidens,  and  adorned  with  all  ornaments.  The  moment  she
beheld  that  Sunitha,  she  rose  up  in  a  state  of  excitement,
and  Sunitha,  after  saluting  her,  fell  at  her  feet.  Then
she  embraced  with  gushing  tears  the  son  whom  she  once
more  held  in  her  arms  after  so  long  an  interval,  and  again
praised  her  husband  Maya,  who  was  the  cause  of  her
regaining  him.

Then  Maya  said :  "  Queen,  your  other  son,  Sumundika,
has  been  born  again  as  the  son  of  your  son,  and  here  he  is,
Stiryaprabha  by  name.  He  has  been  appointed  by  the  god
Siva  the  future  emperor  of  the  Vidyadharas,  and  is  destined
to  rule  over  them  in  the  body  which  he  now  possesses."

When  Stiryaprabha  heard  this,  and  saw  her  look  at  him
with  an  eye  of  longing  affection,  he  and  his  ministers  fell  at
her  feet.  And  Lilavati  gave  him  her  blessing,  and  said
to  him :  "  My  darling,  you  do  not  require  the  body  of
Sumundika  ;   in  this  you  are  sufficiently  glorious."

When  his  sons  were  thus  triumphant,  Maya  called  to
mind  his  daughter  Mandodari,  and  Vibhishana,  and  when
called  to  mind,  they  came.  And  Vibhishana,  welcomed
with  triumphant  rejoicings,  said  to  him  :  "  O  Prince  of  the
Danavas,  if  you  will  listen  to  my  advice,  I  will  give  it  you.
You  are  among  the  Danavas  singularly  virtuous  and  prosper-
ous, so  you  ought  not  to  take  up  a  causeless  enmity  against
the  gods,  for  you  will  gain  nothing  but  death  from  your
hostility  to  them.  For  Asuras  have  been  slain  in  battle  by
the  gods,  but  not  gods  by  Asuras."

When  Maya  heard  this,  he  said :  "  We  are  not  forcing  on
war,  but  if  Indra  violently  makes  war  on  us,  tell  me,  how
can  we  remain  passive  ?  And  as  for  those  Asuras  who  were
slain  by  the  gods,  they  were  reckless ;  but  did  the  gods  slay
Bali  and  others  who  were  not  infatuated  ?  "  That  king  of
the  Rakshasas  having,  with  his  wife  Mandodari,  been  ad-
dressed with  these  and  similar  speeches  by  Maya,  took  leave
of  him,  and  went  to  his  own  dwelling.

Then  Sunitha,   with  Suryaprabha  and  the  others,  was


28  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

conducted  to  the  third  underworld  to  visit  King  Bali.  In
that  world,  which  surpassed  even  heaven,  they  all  beheld
Bali,  adorned  with  chain  and  tiara,  surrounded  with  Daityas
The  Third  and  Danavas.  Sunitha  and  his  companions
Underworld  fell  at  his  feet  in  due  order,  and  he  honoured
them  with  appropriate  welcome.  And  Bali  was  delighted
with  the  tidings  related  by  Maya,  and  he  quickly  had
summoned  Prahlada  and  the  other  Danavas.  Sunitha  and
the  others  honoured  them  also  by  falling  at  their  feet,  and
they,  being  full  of  joy,  congratulated  them  as  they  bent
before  them.  Then  Bali  said  :  "  Sunitha  became  Chandra-
prabha  on  the  earth,  and  is  now  restored  to  life  for  us  by
regaining  his  body.  And  we  have  also  gained  Suryaprabha,
who  is  an  incarnation  of  Sumundlka.  And  he  has  been
appointed  by  Siva  the  future  emperor  of  the  Vidyadharas  :
and  by  the  power  of  the  sacrifice  offered  by  Chandraprabha
my  bonds  have  been  relaxed.  So  without  doubt  we  have
gained  prosperity  by  recovering  these."

When  Sukra,  the  spiritual  adviser  of  the  Danavas,  heard
this  speech  of  Bali's,  he  said  :  "In  truth,  those  who  act
according  to  right  never  fail  of  prosperity  in  any  matter ;
so  act  according  to  right,  and  do  on  this  occasion  also  what
I  bid  you."  When  the  Danavas,  the  princes  of  the  seven
underworlds,  who  were  assembled  there,  heard  that,  they
agreed  to  it  and  bound  themselves  so  to  act.  And  Bali
made  a  feast  there,  out  of  joy  at  the  recovery  of  Sunitha.

In  the  meanwhile  the  hermit  Narada  arrived  there  again,
and  after  taking  the  argha  he  sat  down,  and  said  to  those
Danavas  :  "I  have  been  sent  here  by  Indra,  and  he  in  truth
The  Arrival  says  this  to  you  :  '  I  am  exceedingly  delighted
of  Narada  at  the  fact  that  Sunitha  has  come  back  to
life ;  so  you  must  not  take  up  a  causeless  enmity  against
me,  and  you  must  not  fight  against  my  ally  Srutagarman.'  "

When  the  hermit  had  thus  delivered  Indra 's  message,
Prahlada  said  to  him  :  "Of  course  Indra  is  pleased  that
Sunitha  has  come  back  to  life  ;  how  could  it  be  otherwise  ?
But  we,  at  any  rate,  are  not  taking  up  causeless  hostility.  This
very  day  we  all  took  an  engagement  that  we  would  not  do
so,  in  the  presence  of  our  spiritual  adviser.     But  if  Indra  makes


INDRA'S  MESSAGE  29

himself  a  partisan  *  of  Sruta^arman,  and  violently  opposes
us,  how  are  we  to  be  blamed  for  it  ?  For  Suryaprabha's  ally,
Siva,  the  god  of  gods,  has  long  ago  appointed  him,  because  he
propitiated  him  first.  So  what  have  we  to  do  with  this  matter
which  has  been  settled  by  the  lord  Siva  ?  It  is  clear  that
this,  which  Indra  says,  is  without  cause  and  and  not  right."

When  Prahlada,  the  King  of  the  Danavas,  said  this  to
Narada,  he  blamed  Indra  by  expressing  his  agreement  with
it,  and  disappeared.  When  he  had  gone,  Usanas  *  said  to  the
kings  of  the  Danavas :  "  Indra  is  evidently  determined  to
oppose  us  in  this  matter.  But,  as  Siva  has  decidedly  girded
up  his  loins  to  show  us  favour,  what  is  his  power,  or  what
will  his  reliance  upon  Vishnu  do  ?  "

The  Danavas  heard  and  approved  this  speech  of  Sukra's,
and,  taking  leave  of  Bali  and  Prahlada,  went  to  their  own
homes.  Then  Prahlada  went  to  the  fourth  underworld,
his  habitation,  and  King  Bali,  rising  up  from  the  assembly,
retired  within.  And  Maya  and  Sunitha  and  the  others,
Siiryaprabha  and  all,  bowed  before  Bali,  and  went  to  their
own  habitations.

After  they  had  eaten  and  drunk  there  sufficiently,  Llla-
vati,  the  mother  of  Sunitha,  came  to  him  and  said :  "  My
son,  you  know  that  these  wives  of  yours  are  the  daughters
of  mighty  ones,  Tejasvati  being  the  daughter  of  the  God  of
Wealth,  Mangalavati  of  Tumburu ;  and  as  for  KirtimatI,
that  wife  that  you  married  in  your  existence  as  Chandra-
prabha,  her  you  know  to  be  the  daughter  of  the  Vasu  Pra-
bhava,  so  you  must  look  upon  these  three  with  an  equal  eye,
my  son."  After  saying  this,  she  commended  to  him  his
three  principal  wives.  Then,  that  night,  Sunitha  entered
his  sleeping  apartment  with  the  eldest  Tejasvati.

But  Siiryaprabha,  in  another  chamber,  with  his  ministers,
reclined  on  a  couch  without  any  of  his  wives  that  night,  and
the  Goddess  of  Sleep8  did  not  come  to  him,  who  remained

1  Here  I  read  Srutasarma-sapakshatvam.

2  Usanas  here  means  Sukra,  the  spiritual  guide  of  the  Asuras.

8  The  word  translated  by  Tawney  as  "goddess  of  sleep"  is  nidra-sM,
but  nidra,  being  feminine  already,  does  not  need  stri  as  well.  In  the  D.  text
it  belongs  to  the  next  word,  and  the  sense  now  becomes  that  the  sleep-deity


30  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

continually  alone,  saying  to  herself :  "  What  is  the  use  of
this  unloving  man,  who  leaves  his  wives  outside  ?  "  And
she  would  not  approach  Prahasta  out  of  jealousy,  as  he  was
so  exclusively  in  love  with  the  cares  of  his  official  duties,
but  the  other  ministers  around  Suryaprabha  went  to  sleep
comfortably.

In  the  meanwhile  Suryaprabha  and  Prahasta  beheld  an
incomparable  maiden  entering,  accompanied  by  a  female
friend.  She  was  so  beautiful  that  Providence  seemed,  after
creating  her,  to  have  placed  her  in  the  lower  regions  in  order
that  the  nymphs  of  heaven,  also  his  creation,  might  not  be
eclipsed  by  her.

And  while  Suryaprabha  was  debating  who  she  might  be,
she  approached  each  of  his  friends,  one  by  one,  and  looked  at
them  ;  and  as  they  did  not  seem  to  possess  the  distinguishing
marks  of  emperors,  she  left  them,  and  seeing  that  Suryaprabha
possessed  them,  she  approached  him,  who  was  lying  in  the
midst  of  them  ;  and  she  said  to  her  friend  :  "  Here  he  is,  my
friend ;  so  touch  him  on  the  feet,  wake  him  up  with  those
hands  of  yours  cool  as  water."  When  her  friend  heard  that,
she  did  so,  and  Suryaprabha  ceased  to  feign  sleep,  and  opened
his  eyes,  and  beholding  those  maidens,  he  said :  "  Who  are
you,  and  why  do  you  come  here  ?  "

When  the  friend  of  the  lady  heard  that,  she  said  to  him :
"  Listen,  King  :  in  the  second  underworld  there  is  a  victori-
ous king  named  Amila,  a  chieftain  of  the  Daityas,  the  son  of
Hiranyaksha ;  this  is  his  daughter  Kalavati,  whom  he  loves
more  than  life.  Her  father  came  back  to-day  from  the  Court
of  Bali,  and  said :  '  I  am  fortunate  in  that  I  have  to-day
beheld  Sunitha  once  more  restored  to  life ;  and  I  have  also
seen  the  young  man  Suryaprabha,  an  incarnation  of  Sumun-
dika,  who  has  been  brought  into  the  world  by  Siva  as  the
future  emperor  of  the  Vidyadharas.  So  I  will  now  offer  a
congratulatory  tribute  to  Sunitha.  I  will  give  my  daughter
Kalavati  to  Suryaprabha,  for  she  cannot  be  given  to  Sunitha
because  she  belongs  to  the  same  family ;  but  Suryaprabha
is  his  son  in  his  birth  as  a  king,  not  in  his  birth  as  an  Asura,

thus  (considering)  did  not  come  to  him  who  was  in  the  habit  of  (enjoying)
female  company,  though  he  was  alone.     See  Speyer,  op.  cit.,  p.  117. — n.m.p.


PRAHASTA  AND  KALAVATl  31

and  any  honour  paid  to  his  son  will  be  paid  to  him.'  When
my  friend  heard  this  speech  of  her  father's,  her  mind  being
attracted  by  your  virtues,  she  came  here  out  of  curiosity  to
see  you."

When  that  friend  of  the  lady's  said  this,  Suryaprabha
pretended  to  be  asleep  in  order  to  discover  the  real  object
of  her  wish.  The  maiden  slowly  approached  the  sleepless
Prahasta,  and  after  telling  him  all  by  the  mouth  of  her  friend,
went  out.  And  Prahasta  advanced  towards  Suryaprabha
and  said  :  "  King,  are  you  awake  or  not  ?  "  And  he,  open-
ing his  eyes,  said  to  him :  "  My  friend,  I  am  awake,  for
how  could  I  sleep  to-day  being  alone  ?  But  I  will  tell  you  a
strange  fact ;  listen,  for  what  can  I  hide  from  you  ?  I  saw
a  moment  ago  a  maiden  enter  here  with  her  friend ;  her
equal  is  not  beheld  in  these  three  worlds.  And  she  departed
in  a  moment,  taking  my  heart  with  her.  So  look  for  her  at
once,  for  she  must  be  somewhere  hereabout."

When  Suryaprabha  said  this  to  him,  Prahasta  went  out,
and  seeing  the  maiden  there  with  her  friend,  he  said  to  her  :
"I,  to  please  you,  have  again  awakened  my  master  here,  so
you,  to  please  me,  must  once  more  grant  him  an  interview.
Behold  once  more  his  form  that  gives  satisfaction  to  your
eyes,1  and  let  him,  who  was  overpowered  by  you  as  soon  as
he  beheld  you,  behold  you  again.  For  when  he  woke  up  he
said  to  me,  speaking  of  you :  ■  Bring  her  from  some  place
or  other  and  show  her  to  me,  otherwise  I  cannot  survive.'
Then  I  came  to  you ;  so  come  and  behold  him  yourself."

When  she  was  thus  addressed  by  Prahasta,  she  hesitated
to  go  in  boldly,  owing  to  the  modesty  natural  to  a  maiden,
and  reflected ;  and  then  Prahasta,  seizing  her  hand,  led  her
into  the  presence  of  Suryaprabha.  And  Suryaprabha,  when
he  saw  that  KalavatI  had  come  near  him,  said  :  "  Fair  one,
was  this  right  of  you  to  come  in  to-day  and  steal  away  my
heart,  as  you  did,  when  I  was  asleep  ?  So,  thief,  I  will  not
leave  you  unpunished  to-day."

1  I  read  paiyasya  rupam.  This  gives  a  better  sense.  It  is  partly  sup-
ported by  a  MS.  in  the  Sanskrit  College.     The  same  MS.  in  the  next  line

reads  tvam  tu  pasyati  chaiko'pi.      I  read  tvam  tu  pasyatu  chaishu'pi. The  D.

text  has  now  proved  this  reading  correct. — n.m.p.


82  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

When  her  sly  friend  heard  this,  she  said  to  him  :  "  Since
her  father  knew  of  it  before,  and  determined  to  assign  this
thief  to  you  for  punishment,  who  can  forbid  you  to  punish
her  ?  Why  do  you  not  inflict  on  her  to  your  heart's  content
the  punishment  due  for  thieving  ?  "  When  Suryaprabha
heard  that,  he  wanted  to  embrace  her,  but  Kalavati,  being
modest,  said  :  "  Do  not,  my  husband,  I  am  a  maiden."
Then  Prahasta  said  to  her  :  "  Do  not  hesitate,  my  queen,
for  the  gdndharva  marriage  is  the  best  of  all  marriages  in  the
world."  When  Prahasta  had  said  this,  he  went  out  with  all
the  rest,  and  Suryaprabha  that  very  moment  made  Kalavati,
the  maiden  of  the  underworld,  his  wife.

And  when  the  night  came  to  an  end  Kalavati  went  to
her  own  dwelling,  and  Suryaprabha  went  to  Sunitha  and
Maya.  They  all  assembled  and  went  into  the  presence  of
The  Great  Prahlada,  and  he,  seated  in  the  hall  of  audience,
Ftati  after    honouring    them    appropriately,    said    to

Maya :  "  We  must  do  something  to  please  Sunitha  on  this
day  of  rejoicing,  so  let  us  all  feast  together."  Maya  said:
"  Let  us  do  so ;  what  harm  is  there  in  this  ?  "

And  then  Prahlada  invited,  by  means  of  messengers,  the
chiefs  of  the  Asuras,  and  they  came  there  in  order  from  all
the  underworlds.  First  came  King  Bali,  accompanied  by
innumerable  great  Asuras.  Close  behind  him  came  Amlla
and  the  brave  Duraroha  and  Sumaya,  and  Tantukachchha,
and  Vikataksha  and  Prakampana,  and  Dhumaketu  and
Mahamaya,  and  the  other  lords  of  the  Asuras  ;  each  of  these
came  accompanied  by  a  thousand  feudal  chiefs.  The  hall  of
audience  was  filled  with  the  heroes,  who  saluted  one  another,
and  after  they  had  sat  down  in  order  of  rank  Prahlada
honoured  them  all.  And  when  the  time  of  eating  arrived
they  all,  with  Maya  and  the  others,  after  bathing  in  the
Ganges,  went  to  a  great  hall  to  dine.  It  was  a  hundred
yqjanas  wide,  and  had  a  pavement  of  gold  and  jewels,  and
was  adorned  with  jewelled  pillars,  and  full  of  curiously
wrought  jewelled  vessels.  There  the  Asuras,  in  the  com-
pany of  Prahlada,  and  with  Sunitha  and  Maya,  and  with
Suryaprabha,  accompanied  by  his  ministers,  ate  heavenly
food  of  various  kinds,  containing  all  the  six  flavours,  solid,


THE  FAIR  MAHALLIKA  33

liquid  and  sweetmeats,  and  then  drank  the  best  of  wine.
And  after  they  had  eaten  and  drunk  they  all  went  to  another
hall,  which  was  made  of  jewels,  and  beheld  the  skilful  dance
of  the  Daitya  and  Danava  maidens.

On  that  occasion  Suryaprabha  beheld  the  daughter  of
Prahlada,  named  Mahallika,  who  came  forward  to  dance,  by
order  of  her  father.  She  illuminated  the  world  with  her
beauty,  rained  nectar  into  his  eyes,  and  seemed  like  the
moon-goddess  ■  come  to  the  underworld  out  of  curiosity.
She  had  her  forehead  ornamented  with  a  patch,2  beautiful
anklets  on  her  feet,  and  a  smiling  face,  and  seemed  as  if  all
made  of  dancing  by  the  Creator.  With  her  curling  hair,  her
pointed  teeth,  and  her  breasts  that  filled  up  the  whole  of
her  chest,8  she  seemed,  as  it  were,  to  be  creating  a  new  style
of  dance.  And  that  fair  one,  the  moment  she  was  beheld
by  Stiryaprabha,  forcibly  robbed  him  of  his  heart,  though
it  was  claimed  by  others.  Then  she  also  beheld  him  from  a
distance,  sitting  among  the  A  sura  princes,  like  a  second  God
of  Love  made  by  the  Creator,  when  the  first  God  of  Love
had  been  burnt  up  by  Siva.  And  when  she  saw  him  her
mind  was  so  absorbed  in  him  that  her  skill  in  the  expression
of  sentiments  by  gesture  forsook  her,  as  if  in  anger  at  be-
holding her  want  of  modesty.  And  the  spectators  beheld  the
emotion  of  those  two,  and  brought  the  spectacle  to  an  end,
saying  :    "  The  princess  is  tired."

Then  Mahallika  was  dismissed  by  her  father,  looking
askance  at  Stiryaprabha,  and  after  she  had  bowed  before
the  princes  of  the  Daityas  she  went  home.  And  the  princes
of  the  Daityas  went  to  their  respective  houses,  and  Stirya-
prabha too  went  to  his  dwelling  at  the  close  of  day.

And  when  the  night  came  Kalavati  again  came  to  visit  him,
and  he  slept  secretly  within  with  her,  with  all  his  followers
sleeping  outside.  In  the  meanwhile  Mahallika  also  came
there,  eager  to  see  him,  accompanied  by  two  confidantes.
Then  a  minister  of  Suryaprabha's,  named  Prajnadhya,  who

1  Literally,  "  the  shape  of  the  moon  " ;  put  for  the  moon,  because  the
author  is  speaking  of  a  woman.     See  Bohtlingk  and  Roth  s.v.
8  See  Vol.  II,  p.  22n3.— n.m.p.
8  See  Vol.  I,  p.  SOn2.— n.m.p.
vol.  IV.  33  c


84  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

happened  at  that  moment  to  have  his  eyes  forsaken  by  sleep,
saw  her  attempting  to  enter.  And  he,  recognising  her,  rose
up  and  said :  "  Princess,  remain  here  a  moment  until  I  enter
Kal&va&t  and  come  out  again."  She,  alarmed,  said :  "  Why
Secret  Visit  are  we  stopped,  and  why  are  you  outside  ?  "
Prajnadhya  again  said  to  her  :  "  Why  do  you  enter  in  this
sudden  way  when  a  man  is  sleeping  at  his  ease  ?  Besides,
my  lord  sleeps  alone  to-night  on  account  of  a  vow."  Then
the  daughter  of  Prahlada,  being  ashamed,  said  :  "  So  be  it ;
enter  " ;  and  Prajnadhya  went  inside.

Seeing  that  Kalavati  was  asleep,  he  woke  up  Siiryaprabha
and  himself  told  him  that  Mahallika  had  arrived.  And
Siiryaprabha,  hearing  of  it,  gently  rose  up  and  went  out,  and
beholding  Mahallika  with  two  others,  he  said :  "  This  person
has  been  supremely  blessed  by  your  arrival ;  let  this  place
be  blessed  also  ;  take  a  seat."

When  Mahallika  heard  this,  she  sat  down  with  her  friends,
and  Siiryaprabha  also  sat  down,  with  Prajnadhya  by  his
side.  And  when  he  sat  down  he  said  :  "  Fair  one,  although
you  showed  contempt  for  me  by  seeming  to  look  on  others
in  the  assembly  with  respect,  nevertheless,  O  rolling-eyed  one,
my  eyes  were  blessed  as  soon  as  they  beheld  your  dancing
as  well  as  your  beauty."

When  Siiryaprabha  said  this,  the  daughter  of  Prahlada
answered  him  :  "  This  is  not  my  fault,  noble  sir  * ;  he  is  in
fault  who  made  me  ashamed  in  the  hall  of  assembly  by  putting
me  beside  my  part  in  the  pantomime."

When  Siiryaprabha  heard  this,  he  laughed  and  said  :  "I
am  conquered."  And  then  that  prince  seized  her  hand  with
his,  and  it  perspired  and  trembled,  as  if  afraid  of  the  rough
seizure.  And  she  said ;  "  Let  me  go,  noble  sir.  I  am  a
maiden  under  my  father's  control."

Then  Prajnadhya  said  to  that  daughter  of  the  chief  of
the  Asuras :  "  Is  not  there  such  a  thing  as  the  gandharva
marriage  of  maidens  ?  And  your  father,  who  has  seen  your
heart,  will  not  give  you  to  another ;  moreover,  he  will
certainly  do  some  honour  to  this  prince  here  ;  so  away  with
timidity  !     Let  not  such  a  meeting  be  thrown  away  !  "

1  I.e.  aryaputra,  used  by  a  wife  in  addressing  a  husband.


THE  JEALOUSY  OF  WOMEN  85

While  Prajnadhya  was  saying  this  to  Mahallika,  Kalavati
woke  up  within.  And  not  seeing  Suryaprabha  on  the  bed,
after  waiting  a  long  time,  she  was  terrified  and  apprehensive,
and  went  out.  And  seeing  her  lover  in  the  company  of
Mahallika,  she  was  angry  and  ashamed  and  terrified.  Mahal-
lika too,  when  she  saw  her,  was  terrified  and  angry  and
ashamed,  and  Suryaprabha  stood  motionless  like  a  painted
picture.  Kalavati  came  to  his  side,  thinking:  "Now  that
I  have  been  seen,  how  can  I  escape  ?  Shall  I  display  shame
or  jealousy  ?  "  And  she  said  with  a  spiteful  intonation  to
Mahallika  :  "  How  are  you,  my  friend ;  how  comes  it  that
you  have  come  here  at  night  ?  "  Then  Mahallika  said :
"  This  is  my  house ;  as  you  have  arrived  here  from  another
mansion  of  the  underworld,  you  are  to-day  my  guest  here."

When  Kalavati  heard  that,  she  laughed  and  said  :  "  Yes,
it  is  clearly  the  case  that  you  entertain  with  appropriate
hospitality  every  guest  as  soon  as  he  arrives  here."  When
Kalavati  said  this,  Mahallika  answered  :  "  When  I  spoke  to
you  kindly,  why  do  you  answer  in  such  an  unkind  and  spite-
ful way,  shameless  girl  ?  Am  I  like  you  ?  Did  I,  without
being  bestowed  in  marriage  by  my  parents,  come  from  a
distance,  and  in  a  strange  place  sleep  in  the  bed  of  a  strange
man  alone  at  night  ?  I  came  to  see  my  father's  guest,  as  he
was  going  away,  in  accordance  with  the  duty  of  hospitality,
a  moment  ago,  accompanied  by  two  female  friends.  When
this  minister  entered,  after  first  reproaching  me,  I  guessed
the  real  state  of  the  case ;  you  have  now  of  yourself
revealed  it."

When  thus  addressed  by  Mahallika,  Kalavati  departed,
looking  askance  at  her  beloved  with  an  eye  red  with  anger.
Then  Mahallika  too  said  to  Suryaprabha  in  wrath  :  "  Now
I  will  depart,  man  of  many  favourites,"  and  went  away.
And  Suryaprabha  remained  in  heartless  despondency,  as
was  reasonable,  for  his  heart,  devoted  to  his  loved  ones,
went  with  them.

Then  he  woke  up  his  minister  Prabhasa  and  sent  him  to
discover  what  Kalavati  had  done  after  she  had  separated
from  him  in  anger ;  and  in  the  meanwhile  he  sent  Prahasta
lo  find  out  about  Mahallika,  and  he  remained  with  Prajnadhya


86  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

awaiting  their  report.  Then  Prabhasa  returned  from  in-
vestigating the  proceedings  of  Kalavati,  and,  being  ques-
tioned, he  said  as  follows  :  "  From  this  place  I  went  to  the
private  apartment  of  Kalavati  in  the  second
/olioics"  underworld,  concealing  myself  by  my  science.
Kalavati  by  And  outside  it  I  heard  the  conversation  of  two
the  help  of  maids.  The  one  said  :  '  My  friend,  why  is  Kala-
vati distressed  to-day  ?  '  Then  the  second  said  :
1  My  friend,  hear  the  reason.  There  is  at  present  in  the
fourth  underworld  an  incarnation  of  Sumundika,  named
Suryaprabha,  who  in  beauty  surpasses  the  God  of  Love ;
she  went  secretly  and  gave  herself  to  him.  And  when  she
had  repaired  to  him  to-day  of  her  own  accord  at  nightfall,
Mahallika,  the  daughter  of  Prahlada,  chose  to  come  there
too.  Our  mistress  had  a  jealous  quarrel  with  her,  and  was
in  consequence  preparing  to  slay  herself,  when  she  was  seen
by  her  sister,  SukhavatI,  and  saved.  And  then  she  went  in-
side, and,  flinging  herself  down  on  a  bed,  she  remained  with  that
sister,  who  was  despondent  when  she  learnt  by  inquiry  what
had  taken  place.'  When  I  had  heard  this  conversation  of  the
two  maids,  I  entered  the  apartment,  and  beheld  Kalavati
and  SukhavatI,  who  resembled  one  another  exactly."

While  Prabhasa  was  saying  this  to  Suryaprabha  in  private,
Prahasta  also  came  there,  and,  being  questioned,  he  said  as
follows  :  "  When  I  arrived  from  this  place  at  the  private
apartment  of  Mahallika,  she  entered  despondent  with  her
two  intimate  friends.  And  I  entered  also,  invisible,  by  the
employment  of  magic  science,  and  I  saw  there  twelve  friends
like  her ;  and  they  sat  round  Mahallika,  who  reclined  on  a
sofa  ornamented  with  splendid  jewels ;  and  then  one  said
to  her :  4  My  friend,  why  do  you  seem  to  be  suddenly  cast
down  to-day  ?  What  is  the  meaning  of  this  despondency
when  your  marriage  is  about  to  come  off  ?  '  When  the
daughter  of  Prahlada  heard  that,  she  answered  her  friend
pensively  :  *  What  marriage  for  me  ?  To  whom  am  I  be-
trothed ?  Who  told  you  ?  '  When  she  said  that,  they  all
exclaimed  :  *  Surely  your  marriage  will  take  place  to-morrow,
and  you  are  betrothed,  my  friend,  to  Suryaprabha.  And
your  mother,  the  queen,  told  us  to-day  when  you  were  not


SCRYAPRABHA'S  FUTURE  WIVES  87

present,  and  ordered  us  to  decorate  you  for  the  marriage
ceremony.  So  you  are  fortunate,  in  that  you  will  have
Suryaprabha  for  a  husband,  through  admiration  for  whose
beauty  the  ladies  of  this  place  cannot  sleep  at  night.  But
this  is  a  source  of  despondency  to  us — what  a  gulf  there  will
now  be  between  you  and  us  !  When  you  have  obtained  him
for  a  husband,  you  will  forget  us.'  When  Mahallika  heard
this  from  their  mouth,  she  said  :  ■  Has  he  been  seen  by  you,
and  is  your  heart  attached  to  him  ?  '  When  they  heard
that,  they  said  to  her  :  t  We  saw  him  from  the  top  of  the
palace,  and  what  woman  is  there  that  a  sight  of  him  would
not  captivate  ?  '  Then  she  said :  '  Then  I  will  persuade
my  father  to  cause  all  of  you  to  be  given  to  him.1  So  we
shall  live  together  and  not  be  separated.'  When  she  said
this,  the  maidens  were  shocked,  and  said  to  her :  '  Kind
friend,  do  not  do  so.  It  would  not  be  proper,  and  would
make  us  ashamed.'  When  they  said  this,  the  daughter  of
the  King  of  the  Asuras  answered  them :  ■  Why  is  it  not
proper  ?  I  am  not  to  be  his  only  wife ;  all  the  Daityas  and
Danavas  will  give  him  their  daughters,  and  there  are  other
princesses  on  the  earth  whom  he  has  married,  and  he  will
also  marry  many  Vidyadhara  maidens.  What  harm  can  it
do  to  me  that  you  should  be  married  among  these  ?  So  far
from  it,  we  shall  live  happily  in  mutual  friendship ;  but
what  intercourse  can  I  hold  with  those  others  who  will  be  my
enemies  ?  And  why  should  you  have  any  shame  about  the
matter  ?  I  will  arrange  it  all.'  While  these  ladies  were
thus  conversing,  with  hearts  devoted  to  you,  I  came  out  at
my  leisure  and  repaired  to  your  presence."

When  Suryaprabha  had  heard  this  from  the  mouth  of
Prahasta,  he  passed  that  night  in  happiness,  though  he
remained  sleepless  in  his  bed.

In  the  morning  he  went  to  the  Court  of  Prahlada,  the
King  of  the  Asuras,  with  Sunitha  and  Maya  and  his  ministers,
to  visit  him.  Then  Prahlada  said  to  Sunitha,  after  showing
him  respect :  "I  will  give  to  this  Suryaprabha  my  daughter
Mahallika,  for  I  must  show  him  some  hospitable  entertain-
ment which  will  be  agreeable  to  you."

1  A  MS.  in  the  Sanskrit  College  reads  asau  where  Brockhaus  reads  amur.


88  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

Sunltha  received  with  joy  this  speech  of  Prahlada's.
Then  Prahlada  made  Suryaprabha  ascend  an  altar-platform,
in  the  middle  of  which  a  fire  was  burning,  and  which  was
Suryaprabha  adorned  with  lofty  jewelled  pillars  illuminated
marries  by  the  brightness  of  the  flame,  and  there  gave

MahallM  ^^  j^s  daUghter,  with  splendour  worthy  of  the
imperial  throne  of  the  Asuras.  And  he  gave  to  his  daughter
and  her  bridegroom  heaps  of  valuable  jewels,  obtained  by
his  triumph  over  the  gods,  resembling  the  summit  of  Mount
Meru.

And  then  Mahallika  boldly  said  to  Prahlada  :  "  Father,
give  me  also  those  twelve  companions  whom  I  love."  But
he  answered  her :  "  Daughter,  they  belong  to  my  brother,
for  they  were  taken  captive  by  him,  and  I  have  no  right  to
give  them  away."

And  Suryaprabha,  after  the  marriage  feast  was  ended,
entered  at  night  the  bridal  chamber  with  Mahallika.

And  the  next  morning,  when  Prahlada  had  gone  to  the
hall  of  assembly  with  his  followers,  Amila,  the  King  of  the
Danavas,  said  to  Prahlada  and  the  others  :  "  To-day  you
And  several  must  all  come  to  my  house,  for  I  intend  to  enter-
other  Beauties  tain  there  this  Suryaprabha,  and  I  will  give  him
my  daughter  Kalavati,  if  you  approve."  This
speech  of  his  they  all  approved,  saying :  "  So  be  it."
Then  they  all  went  in  a  moment  to  the  second  under-
world, where  he  dwelt,  with  Suryaprabha,  Maya  and  others.
There  Amila  gave,  by  the  usual  ceremony,  to  Suryaprabha
his  daughter,  who  had  previously  given  herself.  Surya-
prabha went  through  the  marriage  ceremony  in  the  house  of
Prahlada,  and,  surrounded  by  the  Asuras,  who  had  feasted,
spent  the  day  in  tasting  the  enjoyments  which  they  provided
for  him.

On  the  next  day  Duraroha,  Prince  of  the  Asuras,  invited
and  conducted  them  all  to  his  own  underworld,  the  fifth.
There,  by  way  of  hospitality,  he  gave  to  Suryaprabha  his
own  daughter  Kumadavati,  as  the  others  had  done,  in  the
prescribed  manner.  There  Suryaprabha  spent  the  day  in
enjoyment  with  all  these  united.  And  at  night  he  entered
the  apartment  of  Kumudavati.     There  he  spent  that  night


THE  PRINCE'S  NUMEROUS  BRIDES  39

in  the  society  of  that  lovely  and  loving  woman,  the  beauty
of  the  three  worlds.

And  the  next  day  Tantukachchha  invited  and  conducted
him,  surrounded  with  his  companions,  headed  by  Prahlada,
to  his  palace  in  the  seventh  underworld.  There  that  king
of  the  Asuras  gave  him  his  daughter  ManovatI,  adorned
with  splendid  jewels,  bright  as  molten  gold.  There  Surya-
prabha  spent  a  highly  agreeable  day,  and  passed  the  night
in  the  society  of  ManovatI.

And  the  next  day  Sumaya,  a  prince  of  the  Asuras,  after
presenting  an  invitation,  conducted  him  with  all  his  friends
to  his  underworld,  the  sixth ;  there  he  too  gave  him  his
daughter,  by  name  Subhadra,  with  body  black  as  a  stalk  of
durvd  grass,  like  a  female  incarnation  of  the  God  of  Love ;
and  Suryaprabha  spent  that  day  with  that  black  maiden,
whose  face  was  like  a  full  moon.

And  the  next  day  King  Bali,  followed  by  the  Asuras,  in
the  same  way  led  that  Suryaprabha  to  his  own  underworld,
the  third.  There  he  gave  him  his  own  daughter,  named
Sundari,  with  complexion  lovely  as  a  young  shoot,  and
resembling  a  cluster  of  mddhavi  flowers.  Suryaprabha
then  spent  that  day  with  that  pearl  of  women  in  heavenly
enjoyment  and  splendour.

The  next  day  Maya  also  in  the  same  way  reconducted
the  prince,  who  was  in  the  fourth  underworld,  to  his  own
palace,  which  possessed  curiously  adorned  jewelled  terraces,
was  constructed  by  his  own  magic  power  and,  on  account  of
its  refulgent  splendour,  seemed  to  be  new  every  moment.
There  he  gave  him  his  own  daughter,  named  Sumaya,  whose
beauty  was  the  wonder  of  the  world,  who  seemed  to  be  his
own  power  incarnate,  and  he  did  not  think  that  she  ought  to
be  withheld  from  him  on  account  of  his  being  a  mere  mortal.
The  fortunate  Suryaprabha  remained  there  with  her.  Then
the  prince  divided  his  body  by  his  magic  science,1  and  lived

1  The  magical  powers  obtained  by  Yogis  include  also  the  ability  to
become  invisible,  to  change  one's  size,  to  reach  distant  objects  with  ease,  to
be  transported  anywhere  at  will,  etc.  See  R.  Garbe,  "  Yoga,"  Hastings'
Ency.  Rel.  Elh.,  vol.  xii,  pp.  831-833.  Further  details  will  be  found  in  the
note  at  the  end  of  the  chapter. — n.m.p.


40  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

at  the  same  time  with  all  those  Asura  ladies,  but  with  his
real  body  he  lived  principally  with  his  best  beloved,
Mahallika,  the  daughter  of  the  Asura  Prahlada.

And  one  night,  when  he  was  happy  in  her  presence,  he
asked  the  noble  Mahallika  in  the  course  of  conversation :
"  My  dear,  those  two  female  friends,  who  came  with  you,
where  are  they  ?  I  never  see  them.  Who  are  they,  and
where  have  they  gone  ?  "  Then  Mahallika  said  :  "  You
have  done  well  to  remind  me.  My  female  friends  are  not
only  two,  but  twelve  in  number,  and  my  father's  brother
carried  them  off  from  Indra's  heaven.  The  first  is  named
Amritaprabha,  the  second  Keslni ;  these  are  the  auspiciously
marked  daughters  of  the  hermit  Parvata.  And  the  third  is
Kalindi,  the  fourth  Bhadraka,  and  the  fifth  is  the  noble
Kamala  with  beautiful  eyes.  These  three  are  the  daughters
of  the  great  hermit  Devala.  The  sixth  is  named  SaudaminI,
and  the  seventh  Ujjvala  ;  these  are  both  of  them  daughters
of  the  Gandharva  Haha.  The  eighth  is  by  name  Pivara,
the  daughter  of  the  Gandharva  Huhu.  And  the  ninth  is
by  name  Anjanika,  the  daughter  of  the  mighty  Kala.  And
the  tenth  is  Kes'aravali,  sprung  from  the  Gana  Pingala.
And  the  eleventh  is  Malini  by  name,  the  daughter  of  Kam-
bala,  and  the  twelfth  is  Mandaramala,  the  daughter  of  a
Vasu.  They  are  all  heavenly  nymphs,  born  from  Apsarases,
and  when  I  was  married  they  were  taken  to  the  first  under-
world, and  I  must  bestow  them  on  you,  in  order  that  I  may
be  always  with  them.  And  this  I  promised  them,  for  I  love
them.  I  spoke  too  to  my  father,  but  he  refused  to  give
them,  out  of  regard  for  his  brother."

When  Siiryaprabha  heard  this,  he  said  to  her  with  a
downcast  expression :  "  My  beloved,  you  are  very  mag-
nanimous, but  how  can  I  do  this  ?  "  When  Siiryaprabha
said  this  to  her,  Mahallika  said  in  anger  :  "In  my  presence
you  marry  others,  but  my  friends  you  do  not  desire,  separ-
ated from  whom  I  shall  not  be  happy  even  for  one  moment."
When  she  said  this  to  him,  Siiryaprabha  was  pleased,  and
consented  to  do  it.  Then  that  daughter  of  Prahlada  im-
mediately took  him  to  the  first  underworld  and  gave  him
those  twelve   maidens.     Then  Siiryaprabha  married  those


THE  MOTHERS  OF  THE  ASURAS  41

heavenly  nymphs  in  order,  commencing  with  Amritaprabha.
And,  after  asking  Mahallika's  leave,  he  had  them  taken  by
Prabhasa  to  the  fourth  underworld  and  concealed  there.  And
Suryaprabha  himself  went  there  secretly  with  Mahallika,  but
he  went  to  the  hall  of  Prahlada,  as  before,  to  take  his  meals.

There  the  King  of  the  Asuras  said  to  Sunitha  and  Maya :
"  Go  all  of  you  to  visit  the  two  goddesses,  Diti  and  Danu."
They  said  :  "  So  be  it."  And  immediately  Maya,  Sunitha
The  Goddesses an(*  Suryaprabha  left  the  lower  world,  accom-
Diti  and  panied  by  the  Asuras  in  order  of  precedence,  and
Danu  ascended  the  chariot  Bhutasana,  which  came  to

them  on  being  thought  of,  and  repaired  to  the  hermitage  of
Kas*yapa,  situated  on  a  ridge  of  Mount  Sumeru.  There  they
were  announced  by  hermits  who  showed  them  all  courtesy,
and  after  entering  they  beheld  in  due  order  Diti  and  Danu
together,  and  bowed  their  heads  at  their  feet.  And  those
two  mothers  of  the  Asuras  cast  a  favourable  look  upon  them
and  their  followers,  and  after  shedding  tears  and  kissing
them  joyfully  upon  their  heads,1  and  bestowing  their  blessing
upon  them,  said  to  Maya :  "  Our  eyes  are  to-day  blessed,
having  seen  this  thy  son  Sunitha  restored  to  life,  and  we
consider  thee  one  whose  merits  have  procured  him  good
fortune.  And  beholding  with  heartfelt  satisfaction  this  pros-
perous Sumundika,  born  again  in  the  character  of  Surya-
prabha, possessed  of  heavenly  beauty  and  of  extraordinary
virtue,  destined  to  be  successful  and  glorious,  abounding
in  unmistakable  marks  of  future  greatness,  we  openly  adore
him  here  with  our  bodies.  Therefore  rise  up  quickly,
darlings,  and  visit  Prajapati  here,  our  husband ;  from  be-
holding him  you  shall  obtain  success  in  your  objects,  and  his
advice  will  be  helpful  to  you  in  your  affairs."

When  Maya  and  the  others  received  this  order  from  the
goddesses,  they  went  as  they  were  commanded,  and  beheld
the  hermit  Kas*yapa  in  a  heavenly  hermitage.  He  was  like
pure  molten  gold  in  appearance,  full  of  brightness,  the  refuge

1  The  Petersburg  lexicographers  remark  that  sampadad  is  "wohl
fehlerhajl."  A  MS.  in  the  Sanskrit  College  has  sadarad.  But  this  seems  im-
probable with  sadare  in  the  line  above.  Babu  S.  C.  Mukhopadhyaya  suggests
sammadad,  which  I  have  adopted. This  is  confirmed  by  the  D.  text. — n.m.p.


42  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

of  the  gods,  wearing  matted  locks  yellow  as  flame,  irresistible
as  fire.  And,  approaching,  they  fell  at  his  feet  with  their
followers,  in  order  ;  then  the  hermit  gave  them  the  customary
blessing,  and  after  making  them  sit  down,  out  of  delight  at
their  arrival,  said  to  them  :  "I  am  exceedingly  glad  that  I
have  beheld  all  you  my  sons  ;  thou  art  to  be  praised,  Maya,
who,  without  diverging  from  the  good  path,  art  a  treasure-
house  of  all  sciences ;  and  thou  art  fortunate,  Sunitha,  who
hast  recovered  thy  life  though  lost ;  and  thou,  O  Suryaprabha,
art  fortunate,  who  art  destined  to  be  the  king  of  the  sky-
goers.  So  you  must  all  continue  now  in  the  path  of  righteous-
ness, and  hearken  to  my  word,  by  means  of  which  you  will
obtain  the  highest  fortune,  and  taste  perpetual  joys,  and  by
which  you  will  not  again  to  conquered  by  your  enemies  ;  for
it  was  those  Asuras,  that  transgressed  law,  that  became  a
prey  for  the  discus  of  the  vanquisher  of  Mura.  And  those
Asuras,  Sunitha,  that  were  slain  by  the  gods  are  incarnate
again  as  human  heroes.  He  who  was  thy  younger  brother,
Sumundika,  has  been  born  again  now  as  Suryaprabha.  And
the  other  Asuras,  who  were  your  companions,  have  been
born  as  his  friends ;  for  instance,  the  great  Asura  named
Sambara  has  been  born  as  his  minister  Prahasta.  And  the
Asura  named  Tri^iras  has  been  born  as  his  minister  named
Siddhartha.  And  the  Danava  named  Vatapi  is  now  his
minister  Prajnadhya.  And  the  Danava  named  Uluka  is
now  his  companion  named  Subhankara,  and  his  present
friend  Vitabhiti  was  in  a  former  birth  a  foe  of  the  gods,
named  Kala.  And  this  Bhasa,  his  minister,  is  an  incarna-
tion of  a  Daitya  by  name  Vishaparvan,  and  his  minister
Prabhasa  is  an  incarnation  of  a  Daitya  named  Prabala.
He  was  a  great-hearted  Daitya,  with  a  frame  composed  of
jewels,  who,  when  asked  by  the  gods,  though  they  were  his
enemies,  hewed  his  body  to  pieces,  and  so  passed  into  another
state  of  existence,  and  from  that  body  of  his  all  the  jewels
in  the  world  have  originated.  The  goddess  Durga.  was  so
pleased  at  that  that  she  granted  him  a  boon,  accompanied
by  another  body,  by  virtue  of  which  he  has  now  been  born  as
Prabhasa,  mighty,  and  hard  to  be  overcome  by  his  enemies.
And  those  Danavas,  who  formerly  existed  under  the  names


THE  ANGER  OF  INDRA  43

of  Sunda  and  Upasunda,1  have  been  born  as  his  ministers
Sarvadamana  and  Bhayankara.  And  the  two  Asuras,  who
used  to  be  called  Vikataksha  and  Hayagriva,  have  been
born  as  his  two  ministers  here,  Sthirabuddhi  and  Maha-
buddhi.  And  the  others  connected  with  him,  these  fathers-
in-law,  ministers  and  friends  of  his,  are  also  incarnations  of
Asuras,  who  have  often  vanquished  Indra  and  his  crew.  So
your  party  has  again  gradually  acquired  strength.  Be  of  good
courage ;  if  you  do  not  depart  from  the  right  you  shall
obtain  the  highest  prosperity."

While  the  Rishi  Kas*yapa  was  saying  this,  all  his  wives,
the  daughters  of  Daksha,  headed  by  Aditi,  arrived  at  the
time  of  the  midday  sacrifice.  When  they  had  given  their
The  Arrival  blessing  to  Maya  and  the  others,  who  bowed
of  Indra  before  them,  and  had  performed  their  husband's
orders  for  the  day,  Indra  also  came  there  with  the  Loka-
palas 2  to  visit  the  sage.  And  Indra,  after  saluting  the
feet  of  Kasyapa  and  his  wives,  and  after  having  been
saluted  by  Maya  and  the  others,  looking  angrily  at  Surya-
prabha,  said  to  Maya  :  "  This  is  the  boy,  I  suppose,  that  is
desirous  of  becoming  emperor  of  the  Vidyadharas ;  how  is
he  satisfied  with  so  very  little,  and  why  does  he  not  desire
the  throne  of  heaven  ?  "

Wrien  Maya  heard  this,  he  said :  "  The  throne  of  heaven
was  decreed  to  you  by  Siva,  and  to  him  was  appointed  the
sovereignty  of  the  sky-goers."3  When  Indra  heard  this,  he
said,  with  an  angry  laugh  :  "  This  would  be  but  a  small
matter  for  this  comely  shape  of  a  youth  who  is  furnished
with  such  auspicious  marks."  Then  Maya  answered  him  :
"  If  Srutasarman  deserves  the  sovereignty  of  the  Vidyadharas,
then  surely  this  shape  of  his  deserves  the  throne  of  heaven."

When  Maya  said  this,  Indra  was  angry,  and  rose  and
uplifted  his  thunderbolt,  and  then  the  hermit  Kasyapa  made
a  threatening  noise  of  anger.  And  Diti  and  the  other  wives
became  enraged,  and  their  faces  were  red  with  anger,  and
they  loudly  cried  :  "  Shame  !  "     Then' Indra,  afraid  of  being

1  See  Vol.  II,  pp.  \:\-\  \n. — n.m.p.

2  The  eight  Lokapalas,  or  guardians  of  the  world.

3  I.e.  the  Vidyadharas.


44  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

cursed,  withdrew  his  weapon  and  sat  down  with  bowed  head.
Then  Indra  fell  at  the  feet  of  that  hermit  Kasyapa,  the  sire  of
gods  and  Asuras,  who  was  surrounded  by  his  wives,  and  after
striving  to  appease  him,  made  the  following  representation,
with  hands  folded  in  supplication:  "  O  reverend  one,  this
Suryaprabha  is  attempting  to  take  away  from  Srutasarman
the  sovereignty  of  the  Vidyadharas,  which  I  bestowed  on  him.
And  Maya  is  exerting  himself  in  every  way  to  procure  it  for
Suryaprabha."

When  Prajapati  heard  that,  he  said,  seated  with  Diti  and
Danu  :  "Thou  lovest  Srutasarman,  ()  Indra,  but  Siva  loves
Suryaprabha,  and  his  love  cannot  be  fruitless,  and  he  long
ago  ordered  Maya  to  do  what  he  has  done.  So  what  is  all
this  outcry  that  thou  art  making  against  Maya ;  what
offence  has  he  committed  herein  ?  For  he  is  one  who  abides
in  the  path  of  right,  wise,  discreet,  submissive  to  his  spiritual
superior.  The  fire  of  my  wrath  would  have  reduced  thee  to
ashes,  if  thou  hadst  committed  that  sin,  and  thou  hast  no
power  against  him.     Dost  thou  not  recognise  his  might  ?  "

When  that  hermit  with  his  wives  said  that,  Indra  was
abashed  with  shame  and  fear,  and  Aditi  said  :  "  What  is
that  Srutasarman  like  ?  Let  him  be  brought  here  and  shown
to  us."

When  Indra  heard  this,  he  sent  Matali l  and  had  brought
there  immediately  that  Srutasarman,  the  prince  of  the  sky-
goers.  The  wives  of  Kasyapa,  when  they  had  seen  that
Srutasarman,  who  prostrated  himself,  looked  at  Suryaprabha,
and  said  to  the  hermit  Kasyapa  :  "  Which  of  these  two  is
the  richer  in  beauty  and  in  auspicious  marks  ?  '  Then  that
chief  of  hermits  said  :  "  Srutasarman  is  not  even  equal  to
his  minister  Prabhasa  ;  much  less  is  he  equal  to  that  incom-
parable one.  For  this  Suryaprabha  is  furnished  with  various
heavenly  marks  of  such  excellence  that,  if  he  were  to  make
the  attempt,  he  would  even  find  the  throne  of  Indra  easy  to
obtain.'"  When  they  heard  that  speech  of  Kasyapa's,  all
there  approved  it,  and  said  :   "  So  it  is."

Then  the  hermit  gave  Maya  a  boon  in  the  hearing  of  great
Indra  :     '  Because,    my   son,  thou   didst  remain  undaunted,

1   His  charioteer.


THE  HERMIT'S  BOON  45

even  when  Indra  lifted  up  his  weapon  to  strike,  therefore
thou  shalt  remain  unharmed  by  the  plagues  of  sickness  and
old  age,  which  are  strong  as  the  thunderbolt.  Moreover,
these  two  magnanimous  sons  of  thine,  who  resemble  thee,
shall  always  be  invincible  by  all  their  enemies.  And  this
son  of  mine,  Suvasakumara,  resembling  in  splendour  the
autumn  moon,  shall  come  when  thou  thinkest  of  him,  and
assist  thee  in  the  night  of  calamity."

When  the  hermit  had  thus  spoken,  his  wives  and  the
Rishis  and  the  Lokapalas  in  the  same  way  gave  boons  to
them,  to  Maya  and  the  rest,  in  the  assembly.  Then  Aditi
said  to  Indra  :  "  Desist,  Indra,  from  thy  improper  conduct ;
conciliate  Maya,  for  thou  hast  seen  to-day  the  fruit  of  discreet
conduct,  in  that  he  has  obtained  boons  from  me."

When  Indra  heard  that,  he  seized  Maya  by  the  hand  and
propitiated  him,  and  Srutas*arman,  eclipsed  by  Suryaprabha,
was  like  the  moon  in  the  day.  Then  the  king  of  the  gods
immediately  prostrated  himself  before  Ka^yapa,  his  spiritual
guide,  and  returned  as  he  came,  accompanied  by  all  the
Lokapalas  ;  and  Maya  and  the  others,  by  the  order  of  that
excellent  hermit,  departed  from  his  hermitage  to  meet
success  in  their  proposed  undertaking.


4ti  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


NOTE  ON  THE  POWER  OF  ENTERING  ANOTHER'S  BODY

On  page  22  we  were  told  that  magic  art  was  founded  on  Samkhya  and
Yoga,  and  could  be  described  as  the  "  supernatural  power,  and  the  independ-
ence of  knowledge,  the  dominion  over  matter  that  is  characterised  by  lightness
and  other  mystic  properties."

Thus  in  a  sentence  we  see  the  connecting  link  between  philosophy  and
fiction,  and  we  realise  to  what  an  extent  magic  has  been  enhanced  by  having
such  a  philosophy  for  its  foundation.  If  we  briefly  look  into  the  teachings
of  this  philosophy  we  shall  see  how  easy  and  natural  it  was  for  the  Hindu
story-tellers  to  reach  heights  of  imagination  undreamt  of  by  those  of  other
nations,  for  they  already  had  living  examples  of  the  strange  powers  acquired
by  Yoga  practices.  What  some  of  these  practices  were  we  have  already  seen
in  Vol.  I,  p.  79a1.  These,  however,  are  largely  examples  of  asceticism  which
can  be  witnessed  any  day  in  India,  and  many  of  them  are,  of  course,  merely
pretexts  for  obtaining  money.

But  if  we  look  at  the  original  teachings  of  the  Yogasutras  of  Patanjali,
and  still  more  the  later  Yoga  teachings,  we  shall  see  how  supernatural  powers,
such  as  those  described  in  this  and  the  preceding  chapter  of  the  Ocean  of
Story,  are  not  in  themselves  a  means  of  obtaining  perfection,  but  form
merely  one  stage  in  a  progressive  course  to  the  final  goal  of  salvation  and
emancipation.

In  the  present  work,  however,  the  greatest  stress  must  be  laid  upon  the
magical  technique  of  the  Yoga  philosophy,  because  to  be  king  of  the  Vidya-
dharas,  or  magic-science  holders,  was  the  aim  and  destiny  of  our  hero,
Naravahanadatta.  Moreover,  we  are  continually  reading  of  men  practising
asceticism  in  order  to  obtain  some  magic  power,  which,  when  obtained,  may
be  used  either  for  good  or  bad  purposes.  Sometimes  a  certain  magic  power  is
awarded  by  a  deity  pleased  at  the  asceticism  performed  in  his  or  her  name ;
such  a  power,  as  we  have  already  seen  (Vol.  II,  p.  212,  212m1)  is  termed  a
v'tdya — i.e.  "science"  or  "art" — hence,  of  course,  the  name  of  the  immortal
beings  who  hold  these  "arts"  by  divine  right  —  the  Vidyadharas.  The
particular  vidya  with  which  we  are  concerned  here  is  that  of  entering  another's
body.  It  is  known  by  various  names,  such  as  parasarira-avesa,  parapvrapravesa ,
parakdyapravesa ;  the  usual  terms  in  the  Katha  are  dehantara-avesa  or  any  ad  c-
hapravesako  yogah.

There  are  two  distinct  ways  of  entering  the  body  of  another,  which  we
might  distinguish  as  active  and  passive.

The  active  method  is  by  far  the  commoner  in  folk-lore :  a  body  is  found
abandoned,  and  another  (often  an  enemy)  enters  into  it,  leaving  the  original
occupant  bodiless.  There  is,  of  course,  the  odd  chance  of  the  bodiless  man
finding  the  abandoned  body  of  the  other  man  and  perforce  entering  it,  and
thus  the  two  continue  to  dwell  in  each  other's  bodies.

Readers  will  remember  the  incident  of  King  Nanda  in  the  Story  of
Vararuchi,  the  first  of  our  collection.     Here  (Vol.  I,  p.  37  et  sea.)  Indradatta


ENTERING  ANOTHER'S  BODY  47

enters  the  body  of  the  dead  king  and  rules  the  kingdom  before  it  is  known
that  the  real  Nanda  is  dead.  The  minister  Sakatala,  however,  suspects  the
truth  and  manages  to  destroy  Indradatta's  vacated  body,  thus  compelling
him  to  remain  in  the  dead  Nanda's  body  permanently.  Cf.  Tawney's
translation  of  PrabandhacitUamani,  p.  170.  (In  his  article  on  this  motif  in
Proc.  Amer.  Phil.  Soc.,  vol.  lvi,  1917,  p.  9,  Bloomfield  has,  by  mistake,  referred
to  p.  271.)

In  other  cases,  a  dead  body  hanging  from  a  stake,  or  lying  on  a  pyre  in  a
burning-ground,  is  animated  by  some  mischievous  Vetala  or  Pisacha,  who  uses
this  as  a  means  to  achieve  some  nefarious  object  of  his  own,  or  merely  to  frighten
the  unwary  soul  who  has  wandered  into  the  burning-ground.  Such  incidents
usually  lead  to  most  gruesome  and  thrilling  adventures,  and  (as  we  shall  see  in
a  later  volume)  sometimes  form  the  frame-story  of  an  important  collection
like  the  Vctdla-Panchanimsatikd.

The  passive  method  is  what  we  might  call  the  philosophical  aspect,  in
which  a  man  merely  transfers  his  "mind-stuff"  into  that  of  another  by
concentration — a  kind  of  hypnotism.  It  is  obvious  what  a  much  better  folk-
lore motif  the  former  makes,  although  the  latter  has  also  good  possibilities.
(See  e.g.  Mahabharata,  XIII,  xl  et  seq.,  and  to  a  lesser  extent,  XII,  ccxc,  and
XV,  xxvi.)

In  his  interesting  article  "On  the  Art  of  Entering  Another's  Body,"
already  referred  to,  Prof.  Bloomfield  gives  numerous  references  to,  and  ex-
tracts from,  works  in  Sanskrit  literature  in  which  the  motif  under  discussion
occurs.

A  good  example  is  found  in  the  Kathdkoca  (Tawney,  p.  39  et  seq.).  Here
Prince  Amarachandra,  wishing  to  test  the  extent  of  his  wife's  love,  abandons
his  body  (having  recently  been  taught  the  art  in  return  for  a  meritorious
act),  thus  appearing  dead.  The  faithful  queen  immediately  prepares  to  ascend
the  funeral  pyre,  when  the  Prince  reanimates  his  own  body.

The  most  important  of  all  such  stories  are  those  which  concern  either
King  Mukunda  or  Vikrama.  The  chief  parts  are  played  by  a  devoted  queen,
a  hunchback  and  a  parrot.  The  outline  of  this  cycle  of  stories  is  very  briefly
as  follows : — By  a  clever  trick  a  hunchback  manages  to  enter  the  abandoned
body  of  the  king,  who  has  entered  that  of  a  dead  Brahman.  The  queen
suspects  the  truth  owing  to  the  false  king's  bad  behaviour  when  in  her
presence,  and  finally  obtains  conclusive  evidence  on  the  point.  After  con-
ferring with  the  chief  minister  she  arranges  a  trap  by  means  of  a  parrot  which
has  just  died.  Lamentations  fill  the  palace,  and  the  queen  calls  aloud  for
some  magician  to  make  her  pet  live  again,  even  if  only  for  a  short  time.
The  false  king,  through  conceit  at  his  powers,  at  once  abandons  the  king's
body  and  enters  that  of  the  parrot.  This  is  the  moment  the  queen  has  been
waiting  for.  She  calls  her  husband,  who  is  still  in  the  dead  Brahman's
body.  He  immediately  abandons  it  and  re-enters  his  own,  leaving  the
hunchback,  we  may  suppose,  the  choice  of  his  own  body,  the  parrot  or  the
dead  Brahman.

This  story  also  occurs  (though  not  so  fully)  in  Bloomfield's  Life  and
Stories  of  Pdrcvandtha,  pp.  74-83.


48  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

For  variants  see  Frere,  Old  Deccan  Days,  p.  102  et  seq. ;  J.  H.  Knowles,
Dictionary  of  Kashmiri  Proverbs,  p.  98 ;  Anaryan  (i.e.  F.  F.  Arbuthnot),  Early
Ideas,  p.  131  et  seq. ;  Butterworth,  Zig-Zag  Journeys  in  India,  p.  167  ;  E.  J.  W.
Gibb,  History  of  the  Forty  Vezirs,  p.  313;  Stein  and  Grierson,  Hatim's  Tales,
p.  xxxi ;  and  E.  Cosquin,  Etudes  Folkloriques,  1922,  p.  520  et  seq.  See  also
Chauvin,  op.  cit.,  v,  p.  288,  for  several  variants  to  the  tale  as  it  appears  in
Les  Mille  et  un  Jours  (vol.  ii,  p.  81,  of  the  1783  Lille  edition). — n.m.p.


CHAPTER  XLVI

62.  Story  of  Suryaprabha  and  how  he  attained  Sovereignty

over  the  Vidyddharas

THEN  Maya  and  Sunitha  and  Suryaprabha,  all  of
them,  left  that  hermitage  of  Kasyapa  and  reached
the  junction  of  the  Chandrabhaga  and  Airavati,
where  the  kings,  the  friends  and  connections  of  Suryaprabha,
were  awaiting  him.  And  the  kings  who  were  there,  when
they  saw  Suryaprabha  arrived,  rose  up  weeping  in  despair,
eager  to  die.  Suryaprabha,  thinking  that  their  grief  arose
from  not  seeing  Chandraprabha,  told  them  the  whole  occur-
rence as  it  happened.  Then,  as  they  still  remained  despond-
ent, he  questioned  them,  and  they  reluctantly  related  how
his  wives  had  been  carried  off  by  Srutagarman.  And  they
also  told  him  how  they  were  preparing  to  commit  suicide
through  grief  at  that  outrage,  when  they  were  forbidden  by
a  heavenly  voice.  Then  Suryaprabha  in  wrath  made  this
vow :  "  Even  if  Brahma  and  all  the  other  gods  protect
Sruta^arman,  I  will  certainly  overthrow  him,  a  villain  who
carries  off  the  wives  of  others,  addicted  to  treacherous
insolence."  And  having  made  this  vow,  he  appointed  a
moment  fixed  by  the  astrologers  on  the  seventh  day  for
marching  to  his  overthrow.

Then  Maya,  perceiving  that  he  was  determined,  and  had
made  up  his  mind  to  conquer  his  enemy,  again  confirmed
him  with  his  speech,  and  said  to  him :  "If  you  really  have
made  up  your  mind,  then  I  will  tell  you  this  :  it  was  I  that
on  that  occasion  carried  off  your  wives  by  magic,  and  I
placed  them  in  the  underworld,  thinking  that  thus  you
would  set  about  your  victorious  expedition  in  an  impetuous
manner,  for  a  fire  does  not  of  itself  burn  so  fiercely  as  it
does  when  fanned  by  a  breeze.  So  come,  let  us  go  to  the
underworld;  I  will  show  you  those  wives  of  yours."

When  they  heard  that  speech  of  Maya's,  they  all  rejoiced,
VOL.  iv.  49  d


50  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

and  they  entered  again  by  the  same  opening  as  before,
and  went  to  the  fourth  underworld,  Maya  leading  the  way.
There  Maya  brought  those  wives  of  Suryaprabha 's  out  of
a  dwelling-house  and  delivered  them  over  to  him.  Then
Suryaprabha,  after  receiving  those  wives,  and  the  others,
the  daughters  of  the  Asuras,  went  by  the  advice  of  Maya  to
visit  Prahlada.  He,  having  heard  from  Maya  that  Surya-
prabha had  obtained  boons,  and  being  desirous  of  proving
him,  took  up  his  weapon  and  said  with  feigned  anger  as  he
bowed  before  him  :  "  I  have  heard,  wicked  one,  that  you  have
carried  off  the  twelve  maidens  captured  by  my  brother,  so  I
will  slay  you  now  ;   behold  me."

When  Suryaprabha  heard  that,  he  said  to  him,  without
changing  countenance :  "  My  body  is  at  your  disposal ;
punish  me,  for  I  have  acted  improperly."  When  he  said
this,  Prahlada  laughed,  and  said  to  him  :  "  As  far  as  I  have
tested  you,  you  have  not  a  drop  of  pride  in  you.  Choose  a
boon.     I  am  pleased  with  you."

When  Suryaprabha  heard  this,  he  consented,  and  chose
as  his  boon  devotion  to  his  superiors  and  to  Siva.  Then,
all  being  satisfied,  Prahlada  gave  to  Suryaprabha  a  second
daughter  of  his,  named  Yamini,  and  that  prince  of  the
Asuras  gave  him  two  of  his  sons  as  allies.  Then  Surya-
prabha went  with  all  the  rest  into  the  presence  of  Amila.
He  too  was  pleased  on  hearing  that  he  had  obtained  boons,
and  gave  him  Sukhavati,  his  second  daughter,  and  two  of
his  sons  to  help  him.

Then  Suryaprabha  remained  there  during  those  days,
accompanied  by  his  wives,  inducing  other  kings  of  the  Asuras
to  make  common  cause  with  him.  And  he  heard,  in  the
company  of  Maya  and  the  others,  that  the  three  wives  of
Sunltha  and  his  own  wives,  the  daughters  of  the  kings,  had
all  become  pregnant,  and  when  asked  what  they  longed  for,
they  all  said,  to  see  that  great  battle;  and  the  Asura  Maya
rejoiced  at  it,  perceiving  that  the  Asuras  who  were  slain  in
old  time  had  been  conceived  again  in  them.  "This,"  said
he,  "  is  the  cause  of  their  desire."

So  six  days  passed,  but  on  the  seventh  Suryaprabha  and
the  others,  with  their  wives  and  all,  set  out  from  the  under-


THE  ARMIES  COLLECT  51

world.  Delusive  portents,  which  their  rivals  displayed  to
impede  them,  were  dissipated  by  Suvasakumara,  who  came
when  thought  of.  Then  they  anointed  Ratnaprabha,  the
The  Gathering  son  of  Chandraprabha,  king  of  the  earth,  and
of  the  Forces  ascended  the  chariot  Bhtitasana,1  and  went  all
of  them,  by  the  advice  of  Maya,  to  a  wood  of  ascetics  on
the  bank  of  the  eastern  Ganges,  the  dwelling  of  Sumeru,
the  King  of  the  Vidyadharas.  There  Sumeru  received  them
with  all  honour,  as  they  had  come  on  a  friendly  visit,  having
been  told  the  whole  story  by  Maya,  and  remembering  the
previous  command  of  Siva.  And  while  Chandraprabha  and
the  others  were  in  that  place,  they  summoned  each  of  them
all  their  own  forces,  and  also  their  relations  and  friends.
First  came  those  princes,  the  sons  of  the  fathers-in-law  of
Siiryaprabha,  who  had  acquired  from  Maya  the  required
sciences,  eager  for  the  fray.  They  were  sixteen  in  number,
headed  by  Haribhata,  and  each  was  followed  by  a  force
consisting  of  a  myriad  of  chariots  and  two  myriads  of
footmen.  After  them  came  the  Daityas  and  Danavas,  true
to  their  agreement,  brothers-in-law,  fathers-in-law,  friends
and  other  connections  of  Siiryaprabha.

Hrishtaroman,  and  Mahamaya,  and  Sinhadamshtra  and
Prakampana,  and  Tantukachchha  and  Duraroha,  and
Sumaya,  and  Vajrapanjara,  and  Dhumaketu,  and  Prama-
thana,  and  the  Danava  Vikataksha,  and  many  others  came
from  as  low  down  as  the  seventh  underworld.  One  came
with  seven  myriads  of  chariots,  another  with  eight,  another
with  six,  and  another  with  three,  and  the  least  powerful  of
all  arrived  with  one  myiard.  One  brought  three  hundred
thousand  footmen,  another  two  hundred  thousand,  another
one  hundred  thousand,  and  the  pettiest  potentate  of  all  fifty
thousand.  And  each  brought  a  corresponding  number  of
horses  and  elephants.  And  another  innumerable  host  came,
belonging  to  Maya  and  Sunltha.  And  Suryaprabha's  own
countless  army  also  arrived,  and  those  of  Vasudatta  and  the
other  kings,  and  that  of  Sumeru.

Then  the  Asura  Maya  addressed  this  question  to  the

1  I    read    samarudha-Bhiitasana-vimanakah. This   is   confirmed    by   the

D.  text. — N.M.p.


52  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

hermit  Suvasakumara,  who  came  to  him  when  thought  of,
in  the  presence  of  Siiryaprabha  and  the  others  :  "  Reverend
sir,  we  cannot  review  this  army  here  because  it  is  scattered ;
so  tell  me  where  we  could  get  a  view  of  the  whole  army
at  once  extended  in  long  array."  The  hermit  answered :
"  Not  more  than  a  yqjana  from  here  there  is  a  place  called
Kalapagrama  ;  go  there  and  behold  it  drawn  up  in  line."

When  the  hermit  said  that,  all  the  princes  went  with  him
and  Sumeru  to  Kalapagrama.  There  they  made  the  armies
of  the  Asuras  and  the  kings  take  up  their  positions,  and
The  Army  going  to  an  elevated  spot  they  reviewed  them
w  reviewed  separately.  Then  Sumeru  said  :  "  Srutasarman
has  a  larger  force,  for  he  has  under  him  a  hundred  and  one
chiefs  of  the  Vidyadharas.  And  every  single  one  of  these  is
lord  of  two  and  thirty  kings.  Never  mind !  I  will  draw  some
away  and  make  them  join  you.  So  let  us  go  in  the  morning
to  the  place  named  Valmika.  For  to-morrow  is  the  eighth
lunar  day  of  the  black  fortnight  of  Phalguna,  which  is  a  high
day.  And  on  that  day  there  is  produced  there  a  sign  to  show
the  future  emperor,  and  for  that  reason  the  Vidyadharas  are
going  there  in  a  great  hurry  on  that  day."  ■

When  Sumeru  gave  that  opinion  with  regard  to  the  army,
they  spent  that  day  in  accordance  with  the  law,  and  went  on
the  morrow  to  Valmika  in  chariots  with  their  army.  There
they  encamped  with  shouting  forces  on  the  southern  plateau
of  the  Himalayas,  and  beheld  many  Vidyadhara  kings  that
had  arrived.  And  those  Vidyadharas  had  lighted  fires  there
in  fire-cavities,  and  were  engaged  in  sacrificing,  and  some
were  occupied  with  muttering  prayers.  Then,  where  Surya-
prabha made  a  fire- cavity,  the  fire  burst  forth  of  itself,  owing
to  the  power  of  his  magic  science.

1  In  the  B.  text  we  are  not  told  what  the  sign  is,  but  on  page  54  we
discover  it  was  a  quiver,  which  first  appeared  in  the  shape  of  a  serpent.  In
the  D.  text,  however,  the  quiver  is  actually  mentioned,  the  reading  being
tunam  instead  of  turnam,  and  in  the  next  line  we  find  sainyasamvidhino  instead
of  sainye,  suvidhina.  Thus  in  translating  the  present  text  we  should  insert
"quiver"  after  the  word  "emperor,"  and  continue  with:  "After  Sumeru  had
spoken  thus,  they  spent  that  day  with  the  arrangement  of  the  army,  and
went  on  the  morrow  to  Valmika  in  chariots  with  the  army."  This  is  according
to  Speyer,  op.  cit.,  pp.  117,  118. — n.m.p.


THE  TERRIBLE  SERPENT  53

When  Sumeru  saw  it  he  was  pleased,  but  envy  arose  in
the  breasts  of  the  Vidyadharas  at  the  sight.  Then  one  said
to  him :  "  For  shame,  Sumeru !  Why  do  you  abandon
your  rank  as  a  Vidyadhara  and  follow  this  inhabitant  of
earth  named  Suryaprabha  ?  "  When  Sumeru  heard  this,
he  angrily  rebuked  him.  And  when  Suryaprabha  asked
his  name,  he  said :  "  There  is  a  Vidyadhara  of  the  name  of
Bhima,  and  Brahma  loved  his  wife  at  will ;  from  this  con-
nection he  sprang.  Since  he  sprang  from  Brahma  in  a  secret
way,  he  is  called  Brahmagupta.  Hence  he  speaks  in  a  style
characteristic  of  his  birth."

After  saying  this,  Sumeru  also  made  a  fire-cavity.  And
in  it  Suryaprabha  sacrificed  with  him  to  the  God  of  Fire.
And  in  a  moment  there  suddenly  rose  from  the  hole  in  the
ground  an  enormous  and  terrible  serpent.  In  his  arrogance
that  chief  of  the  Vidyadharas,  named  Brahmagupta,  by
whom  Sumeru  was  blamed,  ran  to  seize  it.  That  serpent
thereupon  sent  forth  a  hissing  wind  from  its  mouth,  which
carried  Brahmagupta  a  hundred  feet,  and  flung  him  down
with  such  violence  that  he  fell  like  a  withered  leaf.  Then  a
chief  of  the  Vidyadharas,  named  Tejahprabha,  ran  to  seize
it ;  he  was  flung  away  by  it  in  the  same  manner.  Then  a
lord  of  the  Vidyadharas,  named  Dushtadamana,  approached
it ;  he  was  hurled  back  like  the  others  by  that  blast  from  its
mouth.  Then  a  prince  of  the  sky-goers,  named  ViriipaSakti,
approached  it ;  he  too  was  flung  away  as  easily  as  a  blade
of  grass  by  that  breath.  Then  two  kings,  named  Angaraka
and  Vijrimbhaka,  ran  towards  it  together,  and  it  flung  them
to  a  distance  with  its  breath.  Thus  all  the  princes  of  the
Vidyadharas  were  flung  away  one  after  another,  and  rose
up  with  difficulty,  with  their  limbs  bruised  with  stones.

Then  Srutasarman,  in  his  pride,  went  forward  to  seize
the  serpent,  but  it  hurled  him  back  with  the  blast  of  its
breath,  like  the  others.  He  fell  at  a  short  distance,  and  rose
up  again,  and  ran  again  towards  it,  when  it  carried  him  a
greater  distance  with  its  breath  and  flung  him  to  earth.
Then  Srutasarman  rose  up  abashed,  with  bruised  limbs,  and
Sumeru  sent  Suryaprabha  to  lay  hold  of  the  serpent.  And
then  the  Vidyadharas  ridiculed  him,  saying :    "  Look  1    he


54  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

too  is  trying  to  catch  the  snake  !     Oh,  these  men,  thoughtless
as  monkeys,  imitate  whatever  they  see  another  doing."

Even  while  they  were  mocking  him,  Suryaprabha  went
and  seized  the  serpent,  whose  mouth  was  quiet,  and  dragged
it  out  of  the  hole.  But  that  moment  the  serpent  became  a
Suryaprabha  priceless  quiver,  and  a  rain  of  flowers  fell  from
obtains  the  the  sky  on  his  head.  And  a  heavenly  voice
Magic  Quiver  SOUnded  aloud :  "  Suryaprabha,  thine  is  this
imperishable  quiver  equal  to  a  magic  power,  so  take  it."
Then  the  Vidyadharas  were  cast  down,  Suryaprabha  seized
the  quiver,  and  Maya  and  Sunitha  and  Sumeru  were
delighted.

Then  Srutas*arman  departed,  accompanied  by  the  host
of  the  Vidyadharas,  and  his  ambassador  came  to  Surya-
prabha and  said :  "  The  august  Lord  Srutas"arman  thus
commands  :  '  Give  me  that  quiver,  if  you  value  your  life.' :
Then  Suryaprabha  said :  "  Ambassador,  go  and  tell  him
this :  '  Your  body  shall  become  a  quiver,  bristling  all  over
with  my  arrows.'  "  When  the  ambassador  heard  this
speech,  he  turned  and  went  away,  and  all  laughed  at  that
furious  message  of  Srutasarman's,1  and  Sumeru,  joyfully
embracing  Suryaprabha,  said  to  him  :  "I  am  delighted  that
that  speech  of  Siva's  has  without  doubt  been  fulfilled,  for
now  that  you  have  acquired  this  excellent  quiver  you  have
practically  acquired  sovereign  empire ;  so  come  and  obtain
now  a  splendid  bow  with  calm  intrepidity."

When  they  heard  Sumeru  say  this,  and  he  himself  led
the  way,  they  all,  Suryaprabha  and  the  others,  went  to  the
mountain  Hemakiita.  And  on  the  north  side  of  it  they
reached  a  beautiful  lake  named  Manasa,  which  seemed  to
have  been  the  first  assay  of  the  Creator's  skill  when  making
the  sea,  which  eclipsed  with  its  full-blown  golden  lotuses,
shaken  by  the  wind,  the  faces  of  the  heavenly  nymphs  sport-
ing in  the  water.  And  while  they  were  contemplating  the
beauty  of  the  lake,  Srutas*arman  and  all  the  others  came  there.

And  then  Suryaprabha  made  a  sacrifice  with  lotuses
and  ghee,  and  immediately  a  terrible  cloud  rose  up  from  that

1  Reading  rabhasokti  for  nabhasokti.  Perhaps  siddhimitam  in  //.  78a  should
be  siddhamidam.


SUMERU'S  TALE  OF  THE  BOW  55

lake.  That  cloud  filled  the  heaven  and  poured  down  a  great
rain,  and  among  the  raindrops  fell  from  the  cloud  a  black
serpent.  By  the  order  of  Sumeru,  Suryaprabha  rose  up
The  Magic  and  seized  that  serpent  with  a  firm  grasp,  though
Bow  it  resisted  ;   thereupon  it  became  a  bow.     When

it  became  a  bow  a  second  snake  fell  from  the  cloud,
through  fear  of  the  fiery  poison  of  which  all  the  sky-goers
fled.  That  serpent  too,  when  seized  by  Suryaprabha,  like
the  first,  became  a  bow-string,  and  the  cloud  quickly  dis-
appeared. And  after  a  rain  of  flowers  a  voice  was  heard
from  heaven :  "  Suryaprabha,  you  have  won  this  bow,
Amitabala,  and  this  string  which  cannot  be  cut ;  so  take
these  priceless  treasures."  And  Suryaprabha  took  that
excellent  bow  with  the  string.  Sruta^arman,  for  his  part,
went  despondent  to  his  wood  of  ascetics,  and  Suryaprabha
and  Maya  and  the  others  were  delighted.

Then  they  asked  Sumeru  about  the  origin  of  the  bow,
and  he  said  :  "  Here  there  is  a  great  and  marvellous  wood
of  bamboo  canes  "  ;  whatever  bamboos  are  cut  from  it  and
thrown  into  this  lake  become  great  and  wonderful  bows  ;
and  these  bows  have  been  acquired  by  several  of  the  gods
before  yourself,  and  by  Asuras  and  Gandharvas,  and  dis-
tinguished Vidyadharas.  They  have  various  names,  but  the
bows  appropriated  to  emperors  are  all  called  Amitabala,
and  were  in  old  time  deposited  in  the  lake  by  the  gods.
And  they  are  obtained,  through  the  favour  of  Siva,  with  these
exertions,  by  certain  men  of  virtuous  conduct  destined  to
be  emperors.  Hence  it  comes  that  Suryaprabha  has  to-day
procured  this  great  bow,  and  these  companions  of  his  shall
procure  bows  suited  to  them.  For  they,  being  heroes  who
have  acquired  the  sciences,  are  appropriate  recipients  for
them,  for  they  are  still  procured  by  worthy  men,  as  is  right."

When  the  companions  of  Suryaprabha,  Prabhasa  and  the
others,  heard  this  speech  of  Sumeru's  they  went  to  the  bam-
boo grove,  and  after  defeating  the  King  Chandradatta,  who
guarded  it,  they  brought  the  bamboos  and  threw  them  into
the  lake.  And  these  heroic  men,  by  fasting  on  the  bank  of
the  lake,  and  muttering  prayers,  and  sacrificing,  obtained

1  See  Crooke,  op.  cit.,  vol.  ii,  p.  113. — n.m.p.


56  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

bows  in  seven  days.  When  they  returned  and  told  their
adventure,  Suryaprabha  returned  with  them  and  Maya
and  the  others  to  that  wood  of  ascetics,  in  which  Sumeru
dwelt.

Then  Sumeru  said  to  him  :  "  It  is  strange  that  your
friends  have  conquered  Chandradatta,  the  king  of  the
bamboo  wood,  though  he  is  invincible.  He  possesses  a
science  called  the  bewildering  science ;  for  that  reason  he
is  hard  to  conquer.  Surely  he  must  have  been  keeping  it
to  use  against  a  more  important  enemy.  For  this  reason  he
did  not  employ  it  against  these  companions  of  yours  on  the
present  occasion,  for  it  can  succeed  only  once  in  his  hands,
not  repeatedly.  For  he  employed  it  once  against  his  spiritual
preceptor  to  try  its  force ;  thereupon  he  laid  upon  him  this
curse.  So  this  matter  should  be  thought  upon,  for  the  might
of  sciences  is  hard  to  overcome,  and  for  that  reason  you  should
consult  the  revered  Maya.  What  can  I  say  in  his  presence  ?
Of  what  avail  is  a  candle  in  the  face  of  the  sun  ?  "

When  Sumeru  had  said  this  to  Suryaprabha,  Maya  said  :
"  Sumeru  has  told  you  the  truth  in  few  words.  Listen  to
this  which  I  now  say  :  From  undeveloped  matter  there
spring  in  this  world  various  powers  and  subordinate  powers.
Among  them  the  sound  expressed  by  Anusvara  arises  from
the  power  of  breathing,  and  becomes  a  spell  of  force  in  magic
sciences,  when  accompanied  with  the  doctrine  of  the  highest
truth.  And  of  those  sciences  which  deal  with  spells,  and
which  are  acquired  by  supernatural  knowledge,  or  austerity,
or  the  holy  command  of  holy  men,  the  power  is  hard  to  resist.
So,  my  son,  you  have  obtained  all  the  sciences  except  two,
in  which  you  are  deficient — namely,  the  science  of  bewilder-
ing and  that  of  counteracting.  But  Yajnavalkya  knows
them;   therefore  go  and  ask  him  to  bestow  them  on  you."

When  thus  advised  by  Maya,  Suryaprabha  went  into  the
presence  of  that  Rishi.

That  hermit  made  him  dwell  for  seven  days  in  the  serpent
lake,  and  ordered  him  to  perform  austerities  for  three  days
in  the  midst  of  the  fire.  And  he  gave  him  the  bewildering
power  when  he  had  endured  for  seven  days  the  bite  of  the
snakes,  and  the  counteracting  power  when  he  had  resisted


THE  MAGIC  CHARIOT  57

for  three  days  the  force  of  the  fire.1  And  when  he  had
obtained  these  sciences  that  hermit  ordered  him  again  to
enter  the  fire-cavity,  and  he  consented  and  did  it.  And
The  Two  immediately  there  was  bestowed  on  Suryaprabha
Sciences  a  chariot  in  the  form  of  a  white  lotus,  that  moved

at  the  will  of  the  possessor  and  travelled  through  the  air,
which  was  furnished  with  a  hundred  and  eight 2  wings,  and
the  same  number  of  dwellings,  and  constructed  of  precious
jewels  of  various  kinds.  And  a  voice  from  heaven  addressed
that  resolute  one :  "  You  have  obtained  this  chariot  suitable
for  an  emperor,  and  you  must  place  your  wives  in  all  these
dwellings,  in  order  that  they  may  be  safe  from  your  enemies."
Then  he,  bending  low,  addressed  this  petition  to  his  pre-
ceptor, Yajnavalkya :  "  Tell  me  what  fee  I  am  to  pay."  The
hermit  answered  him :  "  Remember  me  at  the  time  when
you  are  anointed  emperor ;  this  in  itself  will  be  sufficient
fee ;  in  the  meanwhile  go  to  your  army."  Then  he  bowed
before  that  hermit,  and  ascended  that  chariot  and  went  to
his  army,  that  was  encamped  in  the  place  where  Sumeru
dwelt.  There  he  told  his  story,  and  Maya  and  the  others,
with  Sunitha  and  Sumeru,  congratulated  him,  now  that  he
had  obtained  a  magic  chariot.

Then  Sunitha  called  to  mind  that  Suvasakumara,  and
he  came  and  said  to  Maya  and  the  others,  with  the  kings  :
"  Suryaprabha  has  obtained  a  chariot  and  all  the  magic
sciences  ;  so  why  do  you  even  now  remain  indifferent  about
conquering  your  enemies  ?  "  When  Maya  heard  that,  he
said :  "  Reverend  sir,  you  have  spoken  rightly,  but  first  let
an  ambassador  be  sent  and  let  policy  be  employed."  When
Maya  said  this,  the  hermit's  son  said  :  "  So  be  it !  What
harm  can  this  do  ?  Let  this  Prahasta  be  sent.  He  is  dis-
cerning, eloquent,  and  understands  the  nature  of  business
and  occasions,  and  he  is  stern  and  enduring ;  he  possesses
all  the  qualities  of  an  ambassador."  All  approved  this
speech  of  his,  and  after  giving  Prahasta  instructions  they
sent  him  off  as  ambassador  to  Sruta£arman.

1  In  the  MS.  lent  me  from  the  Sanskrit  College  I  find  sodhahidansasya
and  visodhavahnes.

2  See  Vol.  I,  p.  242n*.— n.m.p.


58  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

When  he  had  gone,  Suryaprabha  said  to  all  his  followers :
"  Hear  the  strange,  wonderful  vision  that  I  have  had — I
remember  I  saw,  toward  the  end  of  last  night,  that  we  were
STtryaprabhas  all  carried  away  by  a  great  stream  of  water,  and
Dream  while  we  were  swept  away  we  kept  dancing  ;   we

did  not  sink  at  all.  Then  that  stream  was  turned  back  by
a  contrary  breeze.  Then  a  certain  man  of  fiery  brightness
drew  us  out  and  threw  us  into  the  fire,  and  we  were  not
burned  by  the  fire.  Then  a  cloud  rained  a  stream  of  blood,
and  that  blood  filled  the  whole  sky ;  then  my  sleep  came  to
an  end  with  the  night."

When  he  said  this,  Suvasakumara  said  to  him  :  "  This
dream  indicates  success  preceded  by  a  struggle.  The  stream
of  water  is  battle  ;  it  is  due  to  valour  that  you  did  not  sink,
but  danced,  and  were  carried  along  by  the  water  ;  the  wind,
that  turned  back  the  water  for  you,  is  some  saviour  to  whom
men  resort  for  protection ;  and  the  man  of  fiery  brightness,
who  drew  you  out  of  it,  is  Siva  in  bodily  form.  And  that  he
threw  you  into  the  fire  means  that  you  are  cast  into  a  great
war ;  and  that  the  clouds  arose,  that  means  the  returning
again  of  fear  ;  and  the  rain  of  a  stream  of  blood,  that  means
the  destroying  of  fear ;  and  the  filling  of  all  the  quarters
with  blood,  that  means  great  success  for  you.  Now  dreams
are  of  many  kinds,1  the  rich- sensed,  the  true- sensed  and  the
senseless.  A  dream  which  quickly  reveals  its  meaning  is
called  rich- sensed,  a  dream  in  which  a  propitious  god  gives
a  command  is  called  true- sensed,  and  one  which  is  brought
about  by  deep  meditation  and  anxiety  they  call  senseless.
For  a  man  under  the  influence  of  sleep,  with  mind  bewildered
by  the  quality  of  passion  and  withdrawn  from  outward
objects,  sees  a  dream  on  account  of  various  causes.  And  it
depends  upon  the  time  when  it  is  seen  whether  it  is  fulfilled
soon  or  late ;  but  this  kind  of  dream  which  is  seen  at  the  end
of  the  night  is  quickly  fulfilled."  2  When  Suryaprabha  and  his
companions  heard  this  from  the  hermit's  son,  they  were  much
pleased,  and,  rising  up,  they  performed  the  duties  of  the  day.

1   Reading  aneko  dhanyartho.

*  Cf.  Odyssey,  iv,  841,  o>9  ol  Ivapyts  ovupov  lirio-crxTo  wurhs  a/xokyy,  where
some  suppose  cuxoAyte  to  mean  the  four  hours  before  daybreak.


THE  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  EMBASSY  59

In  the  meanwhile  Prahasta  returned  from  the  Court  of
Sruta^arman,  and,  when  asked  by  Maya  and  the  others,  he
described  his  adventures  :  "I  went  rapidly  hence  to  the
Prahasta  CUT  named  Trikiitapataka,  situated  on  the
relates  his  mountain  Trikiita,  built  of  gold.  And  being
Adventures  introduced  by  the  doorkeeper,  I  entered,  and  be-
held Srutas*arman  surrounded  by  various  Vidyadhara  kings,
by  his  father  Triktitasena,  and  also  by  Vikramagakti  and
Dhurandhara  and  other  heroes,  Damodara  among  them.
And  sitting  down,  I  said  to  Srutas*arman :  '  I  am  sent  to
visit  you  by  the  august  Stiryaprabha ;  and  he  commissioned
me  to  give  you  this  command :  "  By  the  favour  of  Siva  I
have  obtained  precious  sciences,  and  wives  and  allies.  So
come  and  join  my  army,  together  with  those  chiefs  of  the
sky-goers.  I  am  the  slayer  of  those  that  oppose,  but  the
saviour  of  those  that  bend.  And  as  for  your  carrying
off  from  her  relations *  the  maiden  Kamachudamani,  the
daughter  of  Sunitha,  who  ought  not  to  be  approached,  set
her  at  liberty,  for  that  is  a  deed  of  shame."  '  When  I  said
this,  they  all  exclaimed  in  wrath  :  *  Who  is  he  that  sends
us  this  haughty  command  ?  Let  him  give  commands  to
mortals,  but  who  is  he  compared  with  Vidyadharas  ?  Since
he  assumes  such  airs,  though  he  is  a  miserable  mortal,  he
should  be  destroyed.'  When  I  heard  that,  I  said  :  '  What,
what  ?  Who  is  he  ?  Listen :  he  has  been  created  by  Siva
as  your  future  emperor.  If  he  is  a  mortal,  then  mortals  have
attained  divinity,  and  the  Vidyadharas  have  seen  the  valour
of  that  mortal ;  moreover,  if  he  comes  here  we  shall  soon  see
which  party  will  be  destroyed.'  When  I  said  this  in  wrath,
that  assembly  was  disturbed.  And  Srutagarman  and  Dhur-
andhara rushed  forward  to  slay  me.  And  I  said  to  them  :
*  Come  now,  let  me  see  your  valour  !  '  Then  Damodara  rose
up  and  restrained  them,  exclaiming :  *  Peace !  An  ambassador
and  a  Brahman  must  not  be  slain.'  Then  Vikrama^akti  said
to  me  :  '  Depart,  ambassador,  for  we,  like  your  master,  are
all  created  by  Siva.  So  let  him  come,  and  we  will  see  whether
we  are  able  to  entertain  him  or  not.'     When  he  said  this  in  a

1  Instead    of   hrila  jilateh    the    D.    text    reads    hritajflate,    "carried    off
stealthily." — n.m.p.


60  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

haughty  manner,  I  laughed,  and  said  :  '  The  swans  utter  their
cries  in  the  lotus  bower  and  enjoy  themselves  much,  until
they  see  the  cloud  that  comes  darkening  the  heaven.'  After
saying  this,  I  rose  up  in  a  contemptuous  manner,  left  the
court  and  came  here."

When  Maya  and  the  others  heard  this  from  Prahasta,
they  were  pleased.  And  they  all,  Suryaprabha  and  the  rest,
determined  on  preparing  for  battle,  and  made  Prabhasa,  the
impetuous  in  war,  their  general.  And  receiving  the  command
from  Suvasakumara,  they  all  prepared  that  day  with  strict
vows  to  consecrate  themselves  for  the  combat.1

And  at  night  Suryaprabha,  as  he  was  lying  sleepless,  saw
a  wonderful  and  beautiful  maiden  enter  the  chamber,  in
which  he  was  occupying  a  solitary  couch  in  accordance  with
The  Two  his  vow.  She  came  boldly  up  to  him,  who  pre-
VitUors  tended  to  be  asleep,  with  his  ministers  sleeping

round  him,  and  said  to  her  confidante,  who  was  with  her  :
"  If  he  possesses  such  glorious  beauty  when  he  is  asleep,  and
all  the  graceful  motion  of  his  body  is  still,  what  must  it  be,
my  friend,  when  he  is  awake  ?  So  let  be  !  We  must  not
wake  him  up.  I  have  gratified  the  curiosity  of  my  eyes.
Why  should  I  fix  my  heart  too  fondly  on  him  ?  For  he  will
have  a  battle  with  Srutasarman,  and  who  can  say  what  will
befall  either  party  in  it  ?  For  the  feast  of  battle  is  for  con-
suming the  lives  of  heroes.  And  should  he  not  be  fortunate,
we  shall  have  to  take  some  other  resolve.2  And  how  could
one  like  me  captivate  the  soul  of  a  man  who,  when  roaming
in  the  air,  beheld  Kamachudamani  ?  "

When  she  said  this,  her  confidante  answered  :  "  Why  do
you  say  this  ?  Why,  fair  one,  is  it  your  duty  not  to  allow
your  heart  to  attach  itself  to  him  ?  Why  should  not  he,
the  sight  of  whom  captivated  the  heart  of  Kamachudamani,
captivate  the  heart  of  any  other  lady,  were  she  even  Arun-
dhati  in  bodily  presence  ?  And  do  you  not  know  that  he
will  prosper  in  fight  by  the  force  of  science  ?  And  when  he
is  emperor  you  and  Kamachudamani  and  Suprabha,  of  the

1  I  read  cha  ranadlkshayam.

2  The  MS.  in  the  Sanskrit  College  reads  tatrasyastu  siram  tavat,  "let  him
succeed  in  the  battle."


THE  VIRTUOUS  HERBS  61

same  family,  are  to  be  his  wives ;  so  say  the  holy  sages ;  and
in  these  very  days  he  has  married  Suprabha.  So,  how  can
he  be  unsuccessful  in  fight  ?  For  the  predictions  of  the  sages
are  never  falsified.  And  will  you  not  captivate  the  heart  of
the  man  whose  heart  was  captivated  by  Suprabha  ?  For
you,  blameless  one,  exceed  her  in  beauty.  And  if  you  hesi-
tate through  regard  for  your  relations,  that  is  not  right,  for
good  women  have  no  relations  but  their  husbands."

That  excellent  maiden,  when  she  heard  this  speech  of
her  confidante's,  said :  "  You  have  spoken  truth,  my  friend ;
I  need  no  other  relations.  And  I  know  my  husband  will
conquer  in  fight  by  his  science.  He  has  obtained  jewels
and  sciences,  but  my  mind  is  grieved  because,  up  to  the
present  time,  he  has  not  obtained  the  virtuous  herbs.  Now
they  are  all  in  a  cave  of  the  mountain  Chandrapada.  But
they  are  to  be  obtained  by  an  emperor  possessing  virtue.
So,  if  he  were  to  go  there  and  procure  those  mighty  drugs,
it  would  be  well,  for  his  great  struggle  is  nigh  at  hand,  even
to-morrow."

When  Stiryaprabha  heard  this,  he  flung  off  all  his  feigned
sleep  and,  rising  up,  said  respectfully  to  that  maiden  :
"  Lovely-eyed  one,  you  have  shown  great  favour  to  me,  so
I  will  go  there ;  tell  me  who  you  are."  When  the  maiden
heard  that,  she  was  abashed  with  shame  and  silent,  thinking
that  he  had  heard  all ;  but  her  friend  said :  "  This  is  a  maiden
named  Vilasini,  the  daughter  of  Sumeru,  the  Prince  of  the
Vidyadharas,  who  was  desirous  of  beholding  you."  When
her  friend  said  this,  Vilasini  said  to  her :  "  Come,  let  us  go
now,"  and  went  out  of  the  room.

Then  Stiryaprabha  woke  up  his  ministers,  Prabhasa  and
the  rest,  and  told  them  of  that  method  of  procuring  the  drugs
which  the  lady  spoke  of.  And  he  sent  Prabhasa,  a  fit  person
to  accomplish  that,  to  tell  it  to  Sunitha  and  Sumeru  and  Maya.
And  when  they  came  and  approved  of  it,  Stiryaprabha,
accompanied  by  his  ministers,  went  with  them  in  the  night
to  the  mountain  Chandrapada.  And  as  they  were  gradually
advancing  the  Yakshas,  Guhyakas  and  Kumbhandas,1  being
alarmed,  rose  up  to  bar  their  way,  armed  with  numerous

1  See  Vol.  I,  pp.  202,  203.— n.m.p.


62  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

weapons.  Some  of  them  Suryaprabha  and  his  friends  be-
wildered with  weapons,  some  they  paralysed  by  science,
and  at  last  they  reached  that  mountain  Chandrapada.
When  they  reached  the  mouth  of  the  cavern  in  that
mountain,  the  Ganas  "  of  Siva  prevented  them  from
entering,  assuming  strange,  deformed  countenances.  Then
Suvasakumara  said  to  Suryaprabha  and  the  others  :  "  We
must  not  fight  with  these,  for  the  revered  god  Siva  might
be  angry.  Let  us  praise  that  giver  of  boons  by  his  eight
thousand  names,  and  that  will  make  the  Ganas  favourably
disposed  to  us."

Then  they  all  agreed,  and  praised  Siva ;  and  the  Ganas,
pleased  at  hearing  their  master  praised,  said  to  them  :  "  We
abandon  this  cave  to  you ;  take  its  potent  simples.  But
The  Seven  Suryaprabha  must  not  enter  it  himself;  let
Magical  Prabhasa  enter  it,  for  it  will  be  easy  for  him  to
Herbs  enter."     Then  that  cave,   as  soon  as   Prabhasa

entered  it,  though  before  enveloped  in  darkness,  became
irradiated  with  light.  And  four  very  terrible  Rakshasas,  who
were  servants  there,  rose  up  and,  bending  before  him,  said
to  him:  "Enter."  Then  Prabhasa  entered,  and  collected
those  seven  divine  herbs,  and  coming  out,  gave  them  all  to
Suryaprabha.  And  that  moment  a  voice  was  heard  from
heaven,  saying :  "  Suryaprabha,  of  great  power  are  these
seven  drugs  which  you  have  obtained  to-day."

When  Suryaprabha  and  the  others  heard  that,  they  were
delighted,  and  quickly  returned  to  the  dwelling  of  Sumeru
to  greet  their  army.  Then  Sunitha  asked  Suvasakumara  :
"  Hermit,  why  was  Prabhasa  allowed  by  the  Ganas  to  enter
the  cave,  and  not  Suryaprabha,  and  why  was  he  also  welcomed
by  the  servants  ?  "  When  the  hermit  heard  that,  he  said
in  the  hearing  of  all :  "  Listen,  I  will  explain  this — Prabhasa
is  a  great  benefactor  to  Suryaprabha,  being  a  second  self
to  him  ;  there  is  no  difference  between  them.  Moreover,  no
one  is  equal  in  might  and  courage  to  Prabhasa,  and  this  cave
belongs  to  him  on  account  of  his  good  deeds  in  a  former  life  ;
and  listen,  I  will  tell  you  what  sort  of  a  person  he  was  in  a
former  existence.

1  Sec  Vol.  I.,  pp.  202,  203.— n.m.p.


THE  HORSE  UCHCHAIHSRAVAS  63

62b.  The  Generous  Ddnava  Namuchi

In  old  times  there  was  an  excellent  Danava  named
Namuchi,  who  was  devoted  to  charity  and  very  brave,  and
did  not  refuse  to  give  anything  to  anybody  that  asked,  even
if  he  were  his  enemy.  He  practised  asceticism  as  a  drinker
of  smoke  for  ten  thousand  years,  and  obtained  as  a  favour
from  Brahma  that  he  should  be  proof  against  iron,  stone  and
wood.  Then  he  frequently  conquered  Indra  and  made  him
flee,  so  the  Rishi  Ka^yapa  entreated  him  and  made  him
make  peace  with  the  gods.  Then  the  gods  and  Asuras,  as
their  enmity  was  at  an  end,  deliberated  together,  and  went
to  the  ocean  of  milk  and  churned  it,  with  the  mountain
Mandara.  And  as  Vishnu  and  the  other  gods  received
Lakshmi  and  other  things  as  their  shares,  so  Namuchi  gained
the  horse  Uchchaih^ravas ;  and  the  other  gods  and  Asuras
received  other  various  shares,  appointed  by  Brahma,  of
the  things  that  rose  from  the  sea  when  churned.  And  the
Amrita  at  last  came  up  at  the  end  of  the  churning,  and  the
gods  stole  it,  so  a  quarrel  again  took  place  between  them  and
the  Asuras.  Then,  as  fast  as  the  gods  killed  an  Asura  in
their  fight  with  them,  the  horse  Uchchaih&avas  immediately
restored  him  to  life  by  smelling  him.  The  consequence  was
that  the  gods  found  it  impossible  to  conquer  the  Daityas
and  Danavas.  Then  Brihaspati  said  in  secret  to  Indra,  who
was  in  despair:  "There  is  only  one  expedient  left — adopt
it  without  delay ;  go  to  Namuchi  yourself  and  ask  him  for
that  excellent  horse,  for  he  will  certainly  give  it  to  you,
though  you  are  his  enemy,  sooner  than  mar  the  glory  of  open-
handedness,  which  he  has  been  accumulating  since  his  birth."

When  the  preceptor  of  the  gods  said  that  to  him,  great
Indra  went  with  the  gods  and  craved  as  a  boon  that  horse
Uchchaitisravas  from  Namuchi.  Then  the  great-hearted
Namuchi  reflected :  "I  never  turn  back  a  suppliant,  so  I
will  not  turn  back  Indra ;  and  how  can  I,  as  long  as  I  am
Namuchi,  refuse  to  give  him  the  horse  ?  If  the  glory  of
generosity,  which  I  have  long  been  acquiring  in  the  worlds,
were  to  wither,  what  would  be  the  use  to  me  of  prosperity
or  life  ?  "    Accordingly  he  gave  the  horse  to  Indra,  although


64  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

Sukra  warned  him  not  to  do  it.  Then  Indra,  after  he  had
been  given  the  horse,  lulled  him  to  security,  and  as  he  could
not  be  slain  by  any  other  weapon,  killed  him  with  foam  of
the  Ganges,  in  which  he  had  placed  a  thunderbolt.  Alas!
terrible  in  the  world  is  the  thirst  for  enjoyment,  carried
away  by  which  even  gods  do  not  slirink  from  unbecoming
and  infamous  conduct.

When  Danu,  the  mother  of  Namuchi,  heard  this,  being
afflicted  with  grief,  she  made  by  virtue  of  her  asceticism  a
solemn  resolve  for  the  allaying  of  her  sorrow  :  "  May  that
mighty  Namuchi  be  born  again  in  my  womb,  and  may  he
again  become  invincible  by  the  gods  in  battle."  Then  he
was  again  conceived  in  her  womb,  and  born  as  an  Asura
composed  all  of  jewels,  named  Prabala  on  account  of  his
strength.  Then  he  performed  asceticism,  and  satisfying  sup-
pliants even  with  his  life,  became  successful,  and  as  Prince
of  the  Danavas  conquered  Indra  a  hundred  times.  Then  the
gods  took  counsel  together,  and  came  to  him,  and  said  to  him  :
"  By  all  means  give  us  your  body  for  a  human  sacrifice."  1

1  The  word  which  I  have  translated  "human  sacrifice"  is  purushamedha.
For  the  prevalence  of  human  sacrifices  among  all  nations  of  antiquity  see
Grimm's  Teutonic  Mythology,  translated  by  Stallybrass,  vol.  i,  pp.  44  et
seq.',  see  also  Tylor's  Primitive  Culture,  vol.  ii,  pp.  246,  353,  S6l,  365.  Dr
Rajendra  Lai  Mitra,  Rai  Bahadur,  in  an  essay  in  the  Journ.  As.  Soc.  Bengal
for  1876,  entitled  "Human  Sacrifices  in  India,"  traces  the  history  of  the
practice  in  India,  and  incidentally  among  the  principal  nations  of  antiquity.
The  following  is  his  own  summary  of  his  conclusions  with  respect  to  the
practice  in  India:  (1)  That,  looking  to  the  history  of  human  civilisation,  and
the  rituals  of  the  Hindus,  there  is  nothing  to  justify  the  belief  that  in  ancient
times  the  Hindus  were  incapable  of  sacrificing  human  beings  to  their  gods.
(2)  That  the  Sunah^epha  hymns  of  the  Rig-Veda  Sanhitd  most  probably  refer
to  a  human  sacrifice.  (3)  That  the  Aitareya  Brahmana  refers  to  an  actual,  and
not  a  typical,  human  sacrifice.  (4)  That  the  purushamedha  originally  required
the  actual  sacrifice  of  men.  (5)  That  the  Satapatha  Brahmana  sanctions  human
sacrifice  in  some  cases,  but  makes  the  purushamedha  emblematic.  (6)  That
the  Taittirtya  Brahmana  enjoins  the  sacrifice  of  a  man  at  the  Horse  Sacrifice.
(7)  That  the  Purdnas  recognise  human  sacrifices  to  Chandika,  but  prohibit  the
purushamedha  rite.  (8)  That  the  Tantras  enjoin  human  sacrifices  to  Chandika
and  require  that,  when  human  victims  are  not  available,  an  effigy  of  a  human
being  should  be  sacrificed  to  her.  Of  the  sacrifices  to  Chandika  we  have
enough  and  to  spare  in  the  Katha  Sarit  Sagara.  Strange  to  say,  it  appears
that  human  sacrifices  were  offered  in  Greece  on  Mount  Lykaion  in  Arcadia


THE  HERO  PRABHASA  65

When  he  heard  that,  he  gave  them  his  own  body,  although
they  were  his  enemies ;  noble  men  do  not  turn  their  backs
on  a  suppliant,  but  bestow  on  him  even  their  lives.  Then
that  Danava  Prabala  was  cut  to  pieces  by  the  gods,  and  he
has  been  again  born  in  the  world  of  men  with  the  body  of
Prabhasa.

62.  Story  of  Suryaprabha  and  how  he  attained  Sovereignty

over  the  Vidyddharas

"  So  Prabhasa  was  first  Namuchi,  and  then  he  was
Prabala,  and  then  he  became  Prabhasa  ;  therefore  on  account
of  his  merit  he  is  hard  for  his  enemies  to  conquer.  And  that
cave  of  herbs,  which  belonged  to  that  Prabala,  is  for  that
reason  the  property  of  Prabhasa,  and  is  at  his  command  with
its  servants.  And  below  it  there  is  Patala,1  the  mansion  of
Prabala,  and  in  it  there  are  his  twelve  head  wives,  beautifully
adorned,  and  various  jewels,  and  many  kinds  of  weapons,
and  a  wishing- stone,  and  a  hundred  thousand  warriors,  and
also  horses.  This  all  belongs  to  Prabhasa,  and  was  acquired
by  him  in  a  former  life.  Such  a  hero  is  Prabhasa  ;  in  him
nothing  is  wonderful."

When  they  heard  this  from  the  hermit's  son,  Surya-
prabha and  his  followers,  with  Maya  and  Prabhasa,  went
immediately  to  that  cavern  belonging  to  Prabhasa,  that
led  down  to  Patala,  for  the  purpose  of  securing  the  jewels.
Prabhasa  alone  went  in  by  that  entrance  and  secured  his

even  in  the  time  of  Pausanias.  [See  Frazer's  edition,  vol.  iv,  p.  386.]  Dim
traditions  with  respect  to  the  custom  are  still  found  among  the  inhabitants  of
that  region  (Bernhard  Schmidt,  Grieckiscke  M'drchen,  p.  27).  Cf.  the  institution
of  the  (ftap/xaKol  connected  with  the  worship  of  Apollo  (Preller,  Griechische
Mythologie,  vol.  i,  p.  202;  see  also  pp.  240,  257,  and  vol.  ii,  pp.  310,  466);
Herodotus,  vii,  197;  Plato,  Minos,  p.  315;  and  Preller,  Romische  Mythologie,

p.  104. See  Vol.  I,  p.  116/t1.     The  whole  question  of  human  sacrifice  in  all

parts  of  the  world  has  been  fully  treated  by  a  number  of  scholars  in  Hastings'
Ency.  Rel.  Eth.,  vol.  vi,  pp.  840-867.  I  would,  however,  add  one  useful
reference:  E.  M.  Loeb,  "The  Blood  Sacrifice  Complex,"  Memoirs  of  the  Amer.
Anth.  Ass.,  No.  30,  1923. — n.m.p.

1  Cf.  Chapter  XLV.  In  Chapter  LXXIII  will  be  found  another  instance
of  a  "rifted  rock  whose  entrance  leads  to  hell."  Cf.  the  Hercules  Furens  of
Seneca,  v,  662  et  seq.

VOL.   IV.  E


66  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

former  wives,  and  the  wishing-stone,  and  the  horses,  and
the  Asura  warriors,  and  coming  out  again  with  all  his  wealth,
he  gave  great  satisfaction  to  Suryaprabha.  Then  that
Suryaprabha,  having  quickly  obtained  what  he  wished,  re-
turned to  his  own  camp  with  Maya  and  Sunitha  and  Pra-
bhasa,  followed  by  Sumeru  and  the  other  kings  and  the
ministers.  There,  after  the  Asuras  and  kings  and  others
had  gone  to  their  own  quarters,  he  again  was  consecrated
for  the  fight,  restraining  his  passions,  and  spent  the  rest  of
the  night  on  a  bed  of  kuSa  grass.


CHAPTER  XLVII

62.  Story  of  Suryaprabha  and  how  he  attained  Sovereignty

over  the  Vidyddharas

EARLY  the  next  morning  Suryaprabha  set  out  from
the  hermitage  of  Sumeru  with  his  forces  to  conquer
Sruta^arman.     And    arriving    near  the   mountain   of
Trikuta,  his  dwelling-place,  he  encamped,  driving  away  the
enemy's  army  with   his  own  force,  which  was  established
there.      And  while   he  was  encamped  there  with  Sumeru,
Maya  and  others,  and  was  in  the  hall  of  council,  an  ambassador
came  from  the  lord  of  Trikuta.     And  when  he  came  he  said
to  Sumeru,  the  Vidyadhara  prince  :    "  The  king,  the  father
of  Srutasarman,  sends  you  this  message  :    '  We  have  never
entertained  you,  as  you  were  far  off ;   now  you  have  arrived
in  our  territory  with  guests,  so  now  we  will  show  you  appro-
priate hospitality.'  "     When   Sumeru  heard  this  scoffingly
ambiguous  message,  he  said  in  answer :   "  Bravo  !  you  will
not  get  another  guest  such  a  fit  object  of  hospitality  as  we
are.     Hospitality  will  not  bear  its  fruit  in  the  next  world ;
its  fruit  is  in  this.     So  here  we  are,  entertain  us."     When
Sumeru  said  this,  the  ambassador  returned  to  his  master  as
he  came.

Then  Suryaprabha  and  the  others,  established  upon  an
elevated  place,  surveyed  their  armies  encamped  separately.
Then  Sunitha  said  to  his  father-in-law,  the  Asura  Maya  :
The  Personnel  "  Explain  to  me  the  arrangement  of  the  warriors
of  the  Army  m  0ur  army."  Then  that  all-knowing  prince
of  the  Danavas  said:  "I  will  do  so;  listen,"  and  pointing
them  out  with  his  finger  he  began  to  say  :  "  These  kings,
Subahu,  Nirghata,  Mushtika,  and  Gohara,  and  Pralamba,
and  Pramatha,  and  Kankata,  and  Pingala,  and  Vasudatta
and    others,    are    considered    half- power    warriors.1      And

1  For  a  parallel  to  the  absurdities  that  follow  see  Campbell's  Tales  of  the
West  Highlands,  p.  202.
67


68  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

Ankurin,  and  Suvisala,  and  Dandin,  and  Bhushana,  and
Somila,  and  Unmattaka,  and  Deva^arman,  and  Pitri^arman,
and  Kumaraka,  and  Haridatta  and  others  are  all  full-power
warriors.  And  Prakampana,  and  Darpita,  and  Kumbhira,
and  Matripalita,  and  Mahabhata,  and  Virasvamin,  and
Suradhara,  and  Bhandira,  and  Simhadatta  and  Gunavarman,
with  Kitaka  and  Bhima  and  Bhayankara — these  are  all
warriors  of  double  power.  And  Virochana,  and  Virasena,
and  Yajnasena,  and  Khujjara,  and  Indravarman,  and  Seva-
raka,  and  Krurakarman,  and  Nirasaka — these  princes  are
of  triple  power,  my  son.  And  Sugarman,  and  Bahusalin,  and
Visakha,  and  Krodhana,  and  Prachanda — these  princes  are
warriors  of  fourfold  power.  And  Junjarin,  and  Virasarman,
and  Praviravara,  and  Supratijna,  and  Mararama,  and
Chandadanta,  and  Jalika,  and  the  three,  Simhabhata,
Vyaghrabhata  and  Satrubhata — these  kings  and  princes  are
warriors  of  fivefold  power.  But  this  Prince  Ugravarman
is  a  warrior  of  sixfold  power.  And  the  Prince  Visoka,  and
Sutantu,  and  Sugama,  and  Narendra^arman  are  considered
warriors  of  sevenfold  power.  And  this  King  Sahasrayu  is
a  great  warrior.  But  this  Satanika  is  lord  of  a  host  of  great
warriors.  And  Subhasa,  Harsha  and  Vimala,  the  companions
of  Siiryaprabha,  Mahabuddhi,  and  Achalabuddhi,  Priyankara
and  Subhankara  are  great  warriors,  as  also  Yajnaruchi  and
Dharmaruchi.  But  Visvaruchi,  and  Bhasa  and  Siddhartha,
these  three  ministers  of  Siiryaprabha,  are  chiefs  of  hosts  of
great  warriors.  And  his  ministers  Prahasta  and  Mahartha
are  leaders  of  hosts  of  transcendent  warriors.  And  Praj-
nadhya  and  Sthirabuddhi  are  leaders  of  hosts  of  hosts  of
warriors ;  and  the  Danava  Sarvadamana,  and  Pramathana
here,  and  Dhiimraketu,  and  Pravahana  and  Vajrapanjara,  and
Kalachakra,  and  Marudvega  are  leaders  of  warriors  and  tran-
scendent warriors.  Prakampana  and  Simhanada  are  leaders
of  hosts  of  leaders  of  hosts  of  warriors.  And  Mahamaya,  and
Kambalika,  and  Kalakampana  here,  and  Prahrishtaroman,
these  four  lords  of  the  Asuras,  are  kings  over  chiefs  of  hosts
of  transcendent  warriors.  And  this  Prabhasa,  the  general
of  the  army,  who  is  equal  to  Siiryaprabha,  and  this  son  of
Sumeru,  Kunjarakumara — these  two  are  leaders  of  hosts  of


THE  FEAST  OF  BATTLE  69

chiefs  of  hosts  of  great  warriors.  Such  heroes  are  there  in
our  army,  and  others  besides,  girt  with  their  followers.
There  are  more  in  the  hostile  army,  but  Siva  being  well
disposed  towards  us,  they  will  not  be  able  to  resist  our  host."

While  the  Asura  Maya  was  saying  this  to  Sunitha  another
ambassador  came  from  the  father  of  Srutasarman  and  said
thus  to  him :  "  The  King  of  Trikiita  sends  this  message  to
The  vou  :   *  This  is  a  great  feast  for  heroes — the  feast

Formations  of  which  goes  by  the  name  of  battle.  This  ground
the  Army  js  narrow  for  ft,  therefore  let  us  leave  it  and  go
to  a  place  named  Kalapagrama,  where  there  is  a  wide  space.'  "
When  Sunitha  and  the  other  chiefs  with  their  soldiers  heard
this,  they  agreed,  and  all  of  them  went  with  Suryaprabha
to  Kalapagrama.  And  Srutasarman  and  his  partisans  also,
eager  for  battle,  went  to  that  same  place,  surrounded  with
the  hosts  of  the  Vidyadharas.  When  Suryaprabha  and  his
chiefs  saw  elephants  in  the  army  of  Srutasarman,  they
summoned  their  contingent  of  elephants,  which  was  conveyed
in  the  chariot  that  flew  through  the  air.  Then  Damodara,
that  excellent  Vidyadhara,  drew  up  his  army  in  the  form  of
a  large  needle ;  Srutasarman  himself  took  up  his  position
on  the  flank  with  his  ministers,  and  Damodara  was  in  front,
and  other  great  warriors  in  other  places.  And  Prabhasa,  the
leader  of  Suryaprabha's  army,  arranged  it  in  the  form  of  a
crescent ;  he  himself  was  in  the  centre  and  Kunjarakumara
and  Prahasta  at  the  two  horns ;  and  Suryaprabha  and
Sunitha  and  the  other  chiefs  all  remained  in  the  rear.  And
Sumeru,  with  Suvasakumara,  stood  near  him.  Thereupon
the  war-drums  were  beaten  in  both  armies.

And  in  the  meanwhile  the  heaven  was  filled  with  the
gods  come  to  see  the  battle,  together  with  Indra,  and  the
Lokapalas,  and  the  Apsarases.  And  Siva,  the  lord  of  all,
came  there  with  Parvati,  followed  by  deities,  and  the  Ganas,
and  demons,  and  the  mothers.1     And  holy  Brahma  came,

1  The  personified  energies  of  the  principal  deities,  closely  connected  with
the  worship  of  the  god  Siva.  Professor  Jacobi  compares  them  with  the  Greek
goddesses  called  /i7/t«/j€s,  to  whom  there  was  a  temple  in  the  Sicilian  town  of

Engyion  (Indian  Antiquary,  January   1880). The  mothers  are  sixteen  in

number,  and  are  worshipped  at  sacrifices,  weddings,  house-warmings,  etc.     At


70  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

accompanied  by  the  Vedas,  incarnate  in  bodily  form,  be-
ginning with  the  Gayatri,  and  the  Sastras  and  all  the  great
Rishis.  And  the  god  Vishnu  came,  riding  on  the  king  of
birds,  bearing  his  weapon  the  discus,  accompanied  by  god-
desses, of  whom  the  Goddesses  of  Fortune,  Glory  and  Victory
were  the  chief.  And  KaSyapa  came  with  his  wives,  and  the
Adityas  and  the  Vasus,  and  the  chiefs  of  the  Yakshas,
Rakshasas  and  snakes,  and  also  the  Asuras,  with  Prahlada
at  their  head.  The  sky  was  obscured  with  them,  and  the
The  Bloody  battle  of  those  two  armies  began,  terrible  with
Battle  begins  the  clashing  of  weapons,  accompanied  with  loud
shouts.  The  whole  heaven  was  darkened  by  the  dense  cloud
of  arrows,  through  which  the  flashes,  made  by  the  arrows
striking  against  one  another,  played  like  lightning,  and  rivers
of  blood  flowed,  swollen  with  the  gore  of  many  elephants
and  horses  wounded  with  weapons,  in  which  the  bodies  of
heroes  moved  like  alligators.  That  battle  gave  great  delight
to  heroes,  jackals  and  goblins,  that  danced,  waded  and
shouted  in  blood.

When  the  confused  melee,  in  which  countless  soldiers
fell,  had  abated,  Suryaprabha  and  the  other  chiefs  gradually
began  to  perceive  the  distinction  between  their  own  army
and  that  of  the  enemy,  and  heard  in  order  from  Sumeru
the  names  and  lineage  of  the  chiefs  fighting  in  front  of  the
enemy's  host.  Then  first  took  place  a  single  combat  be-
tween King  Subahu  and  a  chief  of  the  Vidyadharas,  named
Attahasa.  Subahu  fought  a  long  time,  until  Attahasa,  after
riddling  him  with  arrows,  cut  off  his  head  with  a  crescent-
headed  shaft.  When  Mushtika  saw  that  Subahu  was  slain,
he  rushed  forward  in  wrath  ;  he  too  fell,  smitten  by  Attahasa
with  an  arrow  in  the  heart.  When  Mushtika  was  slain,  a
king  named  Pralamba  in  wrath  rushed  on  and  attacked
Attahasa  with  showers  of  arrows,  but  Attahasa  slew  his
retainers,  and  striking  the  hero  Pralamba  with  an  arrow  in

a  wedding  fourteen  are  worshipped  in  the  house,  one  outside  the  village  and
one  near  the  front  door  where  the  wedding  is  celebrated.  As  the  mothers
are  supposed  to  be  the  planets  which  influence  the  unborn  child,  they  are
also  worshipped  to  bring  about  an  easy  delivery.  For  further  details  see
R.  E.  Enthoven,  The  Folk-Lore  of  Bombay,  1924,  pp.  185-187.— n.m.p.


THE  DEATH  OF  ATTAHASA  7X

a  mortal  place,  laid  him  low  on  the  seat  of  his  chariot.  A  king
named  Mohana,  when  he  saw  Praia mba  dead,  engaged  with
Attahasa  and  smote  him  with  arrows.  Then  Attahasa  cut
his  bow  and  slew  his  charioteer,  and  laid  him  low,  slain  with
a  terrific  blow.  When  the  host  of  Srutas*arman  saw  that  the
dexterous  Attahasa  had  slain  those  four  warriors,  expecting  the
victory,  they  shouted  for  joy.  When  Harsha,  the  companion
of  Suryaprabha,  saw  that,  he  was  wroth,  and  with  his  followers
attacked  Attahasa  and  his  followers ;  and  with  shafts  he
repelled  his  shafts,  and  he  slew  his  followers  and  killed  his
charioteer,  and  two  or  three  times  cut  his  bow  and  his  banner,
and  at  last  he  cleft  asunder  his  head  with  his  arrows,  so  that
he  fell  from  his  chariot  on  the  earth,  pouring  forth  a  stream
of  blood.  When  Attahasa  was  slain  there  was  such  a  panic
in  the  battle  that  in  a  moment  only  half  the  two  armies
remained.  Horses,  elephants  and  footmen  fell  down  there
slain,  and  only  the  trunks  of  slaughtered  men  remained
standing  in  the  van  of  battle.

Then  a  chief  of  the  Vidyadharas,  named  Vikritadamshtra,
angry  at  the  slaughter  of  Attahasa,  showered  arrows  upon
Harsha.  But  Harsha  repelled  his  arrows,  struck  down  his
The  Single  chariot  horses,  and  his  banner  and  his  charioteer,
Combats  and  cut  off  his  head  with  its  trembling  earrings.

continue  But  when  Vikritadamshtra  was  killed  a  Vidya-

dhara  king,  named  Chakravala,  in  wrath  attacked  Harsha;
he  slew  Harsha  still  fighting  on,  though  fatigued  with  combat,
after  his  bow  had  been  frequently  cut  asunder  and  his  other
weapons  damaged.  Angry  at  that,  King  Pramatha  attacked
him,  and  he  too  was  slain  by  that  Chakravala  in  fight.  In
the  same  way  four  other  distinguished  kings,  who  attacked
him  one  by  one,  were  slain  one  after  another  by  that
Chakravala — namely,  Kankata,  and  Vi^ala,  and  Prachanda
and  Ankurin.

When  King  Nirghata  saw  that,  he  was  wroth,  and  attacked
Chakravala,  and  those  two,  Chakravala  and  Nirghata,  fought
for  a  long  time,  and  at  last  they  broke  one  another's  chariots
to  pieces  and  so  became  infantry  soldiers,  and  the  two,  rush-
ing furiously  together,  armed  with  sword  and  discus,  cleft
with  sword-strokes  one  another's  heads  and  fell  dead  on  the


72  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

earth.  Then  the  two  armies  were  dispirited,  seeing  those
two  warriors  dead,  but  nevertheless  a  king  of  the  Vidya-
dharas,  named  Kalakampana,  stepped  forward  to  the  front
of  the  fight.  And  a  prince,  named  Prakampana,  attacked
him,  but  he  was  in  a  moment  struck  down  by  that  Kala-
kampana. When  he  was  struck  down,  five  other  warriors
attacked  Kalakampana — namely,  Jalika,  and  Chandadatta,
and  Gopaka,  and  Somila,  and  Pitri^arman ;  all  these  let  fly
arrows  at  him  at  the  same  time.  But  Kalakampana  deprived
all  five  of  their  chariots,  and  slew  them  at  the  same  time,
piercing  the  five  with  five  arrows  in  the  heart.

That  made  the  Vidyadharas  shout  for  joy,  and  the  men
and  Asuras  despond.  Then  four  other  warriors  rushed  upon
him  at  the  same  time,  Unmattaka  and  Pra^asta,  Vilambaka
and  Dhurandhara ;  Kalakampana  slew  them  all  easily.  In
the  same  way  he  killed  six  other  warriors  that  ran  towards
him,  Tejika,  and  Geyika,  and  Vegila,  and  Sakhila,  and
Bhadrankara  and  Dandin,  great  warriors  with  many  followers.
And  again  he  slew  five  others  that  met  him  in  fight,  Bhlma,
Bhishana,  Kumbhira,  Vikata  and  Vilochana.

And  a  king,  named  Sugana,  when  he  saw  the  havoc  that
Kalakampana  had  made  in  the  battle,  ran  to  meet  him.
Kalakampana  fought  with  him  until  both  had  their  horses
and  charioteers  killed  and  were  compelled  to  abandon  their
chariots ;  then  Kalakampana,  reduced  to  fight  on  foot,  laid
Sugana,  who  was  also  fighting  on  foot,  low  on  the  earth  with
a  sword-cut.  Then  the  sun,  having  beheld  that  surprising
struggle  of  Vidyadharas  with  men,  went  grieved  to  rest.1  Not
only  did  the  field  of  battle  become  red,  filled  with  streaming
blood,  but  the  heaven  also  became  red,  when  evening  set
her  footprints  there.  Then  the  corpses  and  demons  began
their  evening  dance,  and  both  armies,  stopping  the  battle,
went  to  their  camps.  In  the  army  of  Sruta^arman  were
slain  that  day  three  heroes,  but  thirty-three  distinguished
heroes  were  slain  in  the  army  of  Suryaprabha.

Then  Suryaprabha,  grieved  at  the  slaughter  of  his  kins-
men and  friends,  spent  that  night  apart  from  his  wives.
And,  eager  for  the  fight,  he  passed  that  night  in  various

1  For  avaham  I  read  ahavam.


THE  LOVE  OF  WOMEN  73

military  discussions  with  his  ministers,  without  going  to
sleep.  And  his  wives,  grieved  on  account  of  the  slaughter
of  their  relations,  met  together  in  one  place  that  night,
having  come  for  the  sake  of  mutual  condolence.  But  even
on  that  melancholy  occasion  they  indulged  in  miscellaneous
conversation ;  there  is  no  occasion  on  which  women  are  not
irrelevant  in  their  talk.1  In  the  course  of  this  conversation
one  princess  said :  "It  is  wonderful !  How  comes  it  that
to-night  our  husband  has  gone  to  sleep  without  any  of  his
wives  ?  "  Hearing  that,  another  said :  "  Our  husband  is
to-day  grieved  on  account  of  the  slaughter  of  his  followers
in  battle,  so  how  can  he  take  any  pleasure  in  the  society  of
women  ?  "  Then  another  said :  "If  he  were  to  obtain  a
new  beauty  he  would  that  instant  forget  his  grief."  Then
another  said :  "  Do  not  say  so ;  although  he  is  devoted  to
the  fair  sex,  he  would  not  behave  in  this  way  on  such  a  sad
occasion."  While  they  were  thus  speaking,  one  said  with
wonder  :  "  Tell  me  why  our  husband  is  so  devoted  to  women,
that,  though  he  has  carried  off  many  wives,  he  is  perpetually
marrying  new  princesses  and  is  never  satisfied."

One  of  the  wives,  a  clever  woman  of  the  name  of  Mano-
vati,  said  when  she  heard  this :  "  Hear  why  kings  have  many
loves.  The  good  qualities  of  lovely  women  are  different,
The  Charms  varying  with  their  native  land,  their  beauty,
of  Women  their  age,  their  gestures  and  their  accomplish-
vary  ments  ;  no  one  woman  possesses  all  good  qualities.

The  women  of  Karnata,  of  Lata,  of  Saurashtra  and
Madhyadesa  please  by  the  peculiar  behaviour  of  their
various  countries.  Some  fair  ones  captivate  by  their  faces
like  an  autumn  moon,  others  by  their  breasts  full  and  firm
like  golden  ewers,  and  others  by  their  limbs,  charming  from
their  beauty.  One  has  limbs  yellow  as  gold,  another  is  dark
like  a  priyangu,  another,  being  red  and  white,  captivates  the
eyes  as  soon  as  seen.     One  is  of  budding  beauty,  another  of

1  Speyer  {op.  cit.}  p.  118)  considers  Tawney's  interpretation  of  apara$rayah
by  u  not  irrelevant  in  their  talk  "  as  being  too  forced.  The  D.  text  reads  the
last  two  words  of  the  line  as  katha  svapura^raya,  which  Speyer  would  translate,
".  .  .  there  is  no  occasion  on  which  women  would  not  talk  of  the  chronique
scandaleuse  of  their  town." — n.m.p.


74  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

full- developed  youth,  another  is  agreeable  on  account  of  her
maturity,  and  distinguished  by  increasing  coquetry.  One
looks  lovely  when  smiling,  another  is  charming  even  in  anger,
another  charms  with  gait  resembling  that  of  an  elephant,
another  with  swan-like  motion.  One,  when  she  prattles,
irrigates  the  ears  with  nectar  ;  another  is  naturally  beautiful
when  she  looks  at  one  with  graceful  contraction  of  the  eye-
brows. One  charms  by  dancing,  another  pleases  by  singing,
and  another  fair  one  attracts  by  being  able  to  play  on  the
lyre  and  other  instruments.  One  is  distinguished  for  good
temper,  another  is  remarkable  for  artfulness,  another  enjoys
good  fortune  from  being  able  to  understand  her  husband's
mind.  But,  to  sum  up,  others  possess  other  particular
merits ;  so  every  lovely  woman  has  some  peculiar  good
point,  but  of  all  the  women  in  the  three  worlds  none  possesses
all  possible  virtues.  So  kings,  having  made  up  their  minds
to  experience  all  kinds  of  fascinations,  though  they  have
captured  many  wives  for  themselves,  are  for  ever  seizing
new  ones.1  But  the  truly  noble  never,  under  any  circum-
stances, desire  the  wives  of  others.  So  this  is  not  our
husband's  fault,  and  we  cannot  be  jealous."

When  the  head  wives  of  Suryaprabha,  beginning  with
Madanasena,  had  been  addressed  in  this  style  by  Manovati
they  made  one  after  another  remarks  to  the  same  effect.
Then,  in  their  merriment,  they  laid  aside  all  the  ties  of
reserve,  and  began  to  tell  one  another  all  kinds  of  secrets.
For,  unfortunately,  there  is  nothing  which  women  will  not
let  out  when  they  are  met  together  in  social  intercourse  and
their  minds  are  interested  in  the  course  of  the  conversation.
At  last  that  long  conversation  of  theirs  was  somehow  or
other  brought  to  an  end,  and  in  course  of  time  the  night
passed  away,  during  which  Suryaprabha  was  longing  to
conquer  the  host  of  his  enemies,  for  he  was  alone,  intently
waiting  for  the  time  when  the  darkness  should  depart.2

1  Labdhakakshyah  is  probably  a  misprint  for  baddhakakshyah.
*  I  read  abhikankshd  for  abhikanksho,  which  is  found  in  Brockhaus's  text.
This  is  supported  by  a  MS.  in  the  Sanskrit  College.


CHAPTER  XLVIII

62.  Story  of  Suryaprabha  and  how  he  attained  Sovereignty
over  the  Vidyddharas

THE  next  morning  Suryaprabha  and  his  party,  and
Sruta^arman  and  his  supporters,  again  went  to  the
field  of  battle  armed,  with  their  forces.  And  again
the  gods  and  Asuras,  with  Indra,  Brahma,  Vishnu  and  Rudra,
and  with  the  Yakshas,  snakes  and  Gandharvas,  came  to  see
the  fight.  Damodara  drew  up  the  troops  of  Srutasarman
in  the  form  of  a  discus,  and  Prabhasa  drew  up  the  troops  of
Suryaprabha  in  the  form  of  a  thunderbolt.  Then  the  battle
of  those  two  armies  went  on,  deafening  the  horizon  with
drums  and  the  shouts  of  champions,  and  the  sun  hid  him-
self in  flights  of  arrows,  as  if  out  of  fear  that  the  warriors
smitten  with  weapons  would  certainly  pierce  his  disk.  Then
Prabhasa,  by  command  of  Suryaprabha,  broke  the  discus
arrangement  of  the  enemy's  host,  hard  for  another  to  break,
and  entered  alone.  And  Damodara  himself  came  and  de-
fended that  opening  in  the  line,  and  Prabhasa  fought  against
him  unaided.  And  Suryaprabha,  seeing  that  he  had  entered
alone,  sent  fifteen  great  warriors  to  follow  him,  Prakampana,
and  Dhiimraketu,  and  Kalakampana,  and  Mahamaya,  and
Marudvega,  and  Prahasta,  and  Vajrapanjara,  and  Kala-
chakra,  and  Pramathana,  and  Simhanada,  and  Kambala,
and  Vikataksha,  and  Pravahana,  and  Kunjarakumaraka,
and  Prahrishtaroman,  the  heroic  Asura  prince  :  all  those
great  warriors  rushed  forward  to  the  opening  in  the  line ;
then  Damodara  exhibited  his  wonderful  heroism,  in  that
alone  he  fought  with  those  fifteen.

When  Indra  saw  that,  he  said  to  the  hermit  Narada,  who
was  at  his  side :  "  Suryaprabha  and  the  others  of  his  party
are  incarnations  of  Asuras,  but  Sruta^arman  is  a  portion  of
me,  and  all  these  Vidyadharas  are  portions  of  the  gods ;  so
observe,  hermit,  this  is  a  disguised  fight  between  the  gods
75


76  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

and  Asuras.  And  observe,  in  it  Vishnu  is,  as  ever,  the  ally
of  the  gods,  for  Damodara,  who  is  a  portion  of  him,  is  fighting
here."

While  Indra  was  saying  this,  fourteen  great  warriors  came
to  assist  the  general  Damodara :  Brahmagupta  and  Vayu-
bala,  and  Yamadamshtra,  and  Suroshana,  and  Roshavaroha,
and  Atibala,  and  Tejahprabha,  and  Dhurandhara,  and
Kuveradatta,  and  Varuna^arman,  and  Kambalika,  and  the
hero  Dushtadamana,  and  Dohana  and  Arohana.  And  those
fifteen  heroes,  joined  with  Damodara,  fighting  in  front  of  the
line,  kept  off  the  followers  of  Siiryaprabha.

Then  single  combats  took  place  between  them.  Prakam-
pana  carried  on  a  missile  fight  with  Damodara,  and  Dhum-
raketu  fought  with  Brahmagupta,  and  Mahamaya  fought
More  Single  with  Atibala,  the  Danava  Kalakampana  fought
Combats  with  Tejahprabha,  and  the  great  Asura  Marud-

vega  with  Vayubala,  and  Vajrapanjara  fought  with  Yama-
damshtra, and  the  heroic  Asura  Kalachakra  with  Suroshana ;
Pramathana  fought  with  Kuveradatta,  and  the  King  of  the
Daityas,  named  Simhanada,  with  Varunasarman.  Pravahana
fought  with  Dushtadamana,  and  the  Danava  Prahrishtaro-
man  fought  with  Roshavaroha  ;  and  Vikataksha  fought  with
Dhurandhara,  Kambala  fought  with  Kambalika,  and  Kun-
jarakumaraka  with  Arohana,  and  Prahasta  with  Dohana,
who  was  also  called  Mahotpata.

When  these  pairs  of  warriors  were  thus  fighting  in  the
front  of  the  line,  Sunitha  said  to  Maya :  "  Alas  !  observe,  our
heroic  warriors,  though  skilled  in  the  use  of  many  weapons,
have  been  prevented  by  these  antagonists  from  entering  the
enemy's  line  ;  but  Prabhasa  entered  before  recklessly  alone,
so  we  do  not  know  what  will  become  of  him  there."

When  Suvasakumara  heard  this,  he  said  :  "  All  the  gods,
Asuras  and  men  in  the  three  worlds  are  not  a  match  for  this
Prabhasa  unaided ;  much  less,  then,  are  these  Vidyadharas.
So  why  do  you  fear  without  reason,  though  you  know  this
well  enough  ?  "

While  the  hermit's  son  was  saying  this,  the  Vidyadhara
Kalakampana  came  to  meet  Prabhasa  in  fight.  Then
Prabhasa  said  to  him  :   "  Ha  !    ha  !   you  have  rendered  me


PRABHASA  IS  SURROUNDED  77

a  great  service,  so  let  me  now  see  your  valour  here."  Saying
this,  Prabhasa  let  fly  at  him  a  succession  of  arrows,  and
Kalakampana  in  return  showered  sharp  arrows  upon  him.
Then  that  Vidyadhara  and  that  man  fought  together  with
arrows  and  answering  arrows,  making  the  worlds  astonished.
Then  Prabhasa,  with  a  sharp  arrow,  struck  down  the  banner
of  Kalakampana ;  with  a  second  he  killed  his  charioteer,
with  four  more  his  four  horses,  and  with  one  more  he  cut  his
bow  in  half,  with  two  more  he  cut  off  his  hands,  with  two
more  his  arms,  and  with  two  more  his  two  ears,  and  with  one
sharp-edged  arrow  he  cut  off  the  head  of  his  foe,  and  thus
displayed  wonderful  dexterity.  Thus  Prabhasa,  as  it  were,
chastised  Kalakampana,  being  angry  with  him  because  he
had  slain  so  many  heroes  in  his  own  army.  And  the  men
and  Asuras,  when  they  saw  that  Vidyadhara  chief  slain,
raised  a  shout,  and  the  Vidyadharas  immediately  proclaimed
their  despondency.1

Then  a  king  of  the  Vidyadharas,  named  Vidyutprabha,
lord  of  the  hill  of  Kalanjara,  in  wrath  attacked  Prabhasa.
When  he  was  fighting  with  Prabhasa,  Prabhasa  first  cut
asunder  his  banner,  and  then  kept  cutting  his  bows  in  two,
as  fast  as  he  took  them  up.  Then  the  Vidyadhara,  being
ashamed,  by  his  delusive  power  flew  up  invisible  into  the
sky,  and  rained  swords,  clubs  and  other  weapons  upon
Prabhasa.  Prabhasa,  for  his  part,  swept  away  his  succession
of  missiles  with  others,  and  by  the  illuminating  weapon  made
that  Asura  manifest,  and  then,  employing  the  weapon  of
fire,  he  burned  up  Vidyutprabha  with  its  blaze,  and  bringing
him  down  from  the  heaven  laid  him  dead  on  the  earth.

When  Srutasarman  saw  this,  he  said  to  his  warriors  :
"  Observe,  this  man  has  slain  two  chiefs  of  hosts  of  great
warriors.  Now  why  do  you  put  up  with  it  ?  Join  together
and  slay  him."

When  they  heard  that,  eight  warriors  in  anger  sur-
rounded Prabhasa.  One  was  a  king  of  the  Vidyadharas
named  Urdhvaroman,  a  lord  of  hosts  of  warriors,  dwelling
in  the  great  mountain  named  Vankataka.  And  the  second
warrior  was  a  chief  of  the  Vidyadharas  named  Vikrosana,  the
1  The  MS.  in  the  Sanskrit  College  reads  jagme.


78  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

king  of  the  rock  Dharanidhara.  And  the  third  was  the  hero
Indramalin,  a  prince  of  the  Vidyadharas,  lord  of  a  host  of
distinguished  warriors,  and  his  home  was  the  mountain  Lila.
Prabhasa  And  the  fourth  was  an  excellent  Vidyadhara
is  repeatedly  named  King  Kakandaka,  a  chief  of  a  host  of
attacked  warriors,  and  his  dwelling  was  in  the  mountain

Malaya.  And  the  fifth  was  Darpavaha  by  name,  lord  of
the  hill  Niketa,  and  the  sixth  was  Dhtirtavyayana,  the  lord
of  the  mountain  An j ana,  and  both  these  Vidyadharas  were
chiefs  of  excellent  warriors.  And  the  seventh  one,  whose
chariot  was  drawn  by  asses,  was  named  Varahasvamin,  king
of  the  mount  Kumuda,  and  he  was  chief  of  a  host  of  great
warriors.  And  the  eighth  warrior  was  like  him,  Medhavara,
King  of  Dundhubhi.

Prabhasa  repelled  the  numerous  arrows  which  these  eight
came  and  discharged,  and  he  pierced  them  all  at  the  same
time  with  arrows.  And  he  slew  the  horse  of  one,  and  of
one  the  charioteer,  and  he  cut  in  half  the  banner  of  one,  and
the  bow  of  another.  But  Medhavara  he  struck  at  the  same
time  with  four  arrows  in  the  heart,  and  at  once  laid  him
dead  on  the  earth.  And  then  he  fought  with  the  others,  and
cut  off  with  an  anjalika  x  the  head  of  Urdhvaroman,  with  its
curled  and  plaited  hair ;  and  of  the  other  six  he  killed  the
horses  and  charioteers,  and  at  last  laid  themselves  low,
cutting  off  their  heads  with  crescent-headed  arrows.  And
then  a  rain  of  flowers  fell  on  his  head  from  heaven,  en-
couraging the  kings  of  the  Asuras,  and  discouraging  the
Vidyadharas.

Then  four  more  great  warriors,  armed  with  bows,  sent
by  Srutagarman,  surrounded  Prabhasa :  one  was  named
Kacharaka,  the  lord  of  the  mountain  Kuranda ;  the  second
Dindimalin,  whose  home  was  the  hill  of  Panchaka;  the
third  was  Vibhavasu,  king  of  the  mountain  Jayapura ;
the  fourth  was  named  Dhavala,  the  ruler  of  Bhumitundika.
Those  excellent  Vidyadharas,  chiefs  of  hosts  of  great  warriors,
let  fly  five  hundred  arrows  at  the  same  time  at  Prabhasa.
But  Prabhasa  easily  disposed  of  all,  one  by  one,  each  with
eight  arrows  :   with  one  arrow  he  cut  down  the  banner,  with

1  Possibly  an  arrow  with  a  head  resembling  two  hands  joined.


ONE  AGAINST  FOURTEEN  79

one  cleft  the  bow,  with  one  he  killed  the  charioteer,  with  four
the  horses,  and  with  one  more  he  cut  off  the  head  of  the
warrior,  and  then  shouted  triumphantly.

Then  another  four  Vidyadharas,  by  the  order  of  Sruta-
garman,  assembled  in  fight  against  Prabhasa.  The  first  was
named  Bhadrankara,  dark  as  the  blue  water-lily,  sprung
from  Mercury  in  the  house  ■  of  VisVavasu,  but  the  second
was  Niyantraka,  like  the  fire  in  brightness,  sprung  from
Mars  in  the  house  of  Jambaka,  and  the  third  was  called
Kalakopa,  very  black  in  hue,  with  tawny  hair,  sprung  from
Saturn  in  the  house  of  Damodara.  And  the  fourth  was
Vikrama^akti,  like  gold  in  brightness,  sprung  from  the  planet
Jupiter  in  the  house  of  the  Moon.  The  three  first  were  lords
of  hosts  of  lords  of  hosts  of  transcendent  warriors,  but  the
fourth  was  a  great  hero  surpassing  the  rest  in  valour.  And
those  haughty  chiefs  attacked  Prabhasa  with  heavenly
weapons.  Prabhasa  repelled  their  weapons  with  the  weapon
of  Narayana  and  easily  cut  asunder  the  bow  of  each  eight
times ;  then  he  repelled  the  arrows  and  clubs  which  they
hurled,  and  slaying  their  horses  and  charioteers,  deprived
them  all  of  their  chariots.

When  Sruta^arman  saw  that,  he  quickly  sent  other  ten
lords  of  the  Vidyadharas,  chiefs  of  lords  of  hosts  or  lords  of
hosts  of  warriors,  two  called  Dama  and  Niyama,  who  exactly
resembled  one  another  in  appearance,  two  sons  born  to  the
Asvins  in  the  house  of  the  lord  of  Ketumala,  and  Vikrama
and  Sankrama,  and  Parakrama  and  Akrama,  and  Samraar-
dana  and  Mardana,  and  Pramardana  and  Vimardana,  the
eight  similar  sons  of  the  Vasus  born  in  the  house  of  Maka-
randa.  And  when  they  came  the  previous  assailants  mounted
other  chariots.  Wonderful  to  say,  though  all  those  fourteen
joined  together  and  showered  arrows  on  Prabhasa,  he  alone
fought  with  them  fearlessly.  Then,  by  the  order  of  Surya-
prabha,  Kunjarakumara  and  Prahasta  left  the  melee  and,
flying  up  from  the  front  of  the  line,  weapons  in  hand,  white
and  black  in  hue,  came  to  the  aid  of  Prabhasa,  like  Rama

1  There  is  probably  a  pun  here.  Kshetra,  besides  its  astrological  sense,
means  a  wife  on  whom  issue  is  begotten  by  some  kinsman  or  duly  appointed
person,  as  in  the  Jewish  law.


80  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

and  Krishna  over  again.  They,  though  fighting  on  foot,
harassed  Dama  and  Xiyama  by  cutting  asunder  their  bows
and  killing  their  charioteers.  When  they,  in  their  fear,
soared  up  to  heaven  Kunjarakumara  and  Prahasta  soared
up  also,  weapons  in  hand.

When  Suryaprabha  saw  that,  he  quickly  sent  them
his  ministers  Mahabuddhi  and  Achalabuddhi  to  act  as
charioteers.  Then  Prahasta  and  Kunjarakumara  discovered,
by  employing  magic  collyrium,  those  two  sons  of  the  Vidyft-
dharas,  Dama  and  Niyama,  though  they  had  made  themselves
invisible  by  magic  power,  and  riddled  them  so  with  showers
of  arrows  that  they  fled.  And  Prabhasa,  fighting  with  the
other  twelve,  cleft  all  their  bows  asunder,  though  they  kept
continually  taking  fresh  ones.  And  Prahasta  came  and
killed  at  the  same  time  the  charioteers  of  all,  and  Kunjara-
kumara slew  their  horses.  Then  those  twelve  together,
being  deprived  of  their  chariots,  and  finding  themselves
smitten  by  three  heroes,  fled  out  of  the  battle.

Then  Srutasarman,  beside  himself  with  grief,  anger
and  shame,  sent  two  more  Vidyadharas,  captains  of  hosts
of  warriors  and  distinguished  warriors :  one  was  called
Chandragupta,  born  in  the  house  of  the  lord  of  the  great
mountain  Chandrakula,  beautiful  as  a  second  moon ;  and  the
second  was  his  own  minister,  named  Narangama,  of  great
splendour,  born  in  the  house  of  the  lord  of  the  mountain
Dhurandhara.  They  also,  after  discharging  a  shower  of
arrows,  were  in  a  moment  deprived  of  their  chariots  by
Prabhasa  and  his  comrades,  and  disappeared.

Then  the  men  and  Asuras  shouted  for  joy  ;  but  there-
upon Srutasarman  came  himself,  with  four  great  warriors
of  mighty  force,  named  Mahaugha,  Arohana,  Utpata  and
Vetravat,  the  sons  respectively  of  Tvashtri,1  Bhaga,  Aryaman
and  Ptishan,  born  in  the  house  of  the  four  Vidyadhara  kings,
Chitrapada    and    others,    that   ruled    over    mount    Malaya.

1  Tvashtri  is  the  Vulcan  of  the  Hindus.  Bhaga  is  an  Aditya  regarded  in
the  Vedas  as  bestowing  wealth,  and  presiding  over  marriage,  his  Nakshatra
is  the  Uttara  Phalguni.  Aryaman  is  also  an  Aditya ;  Pushan,  originally  the
sun,  is  in  later  times  an  Aditya.  The  "canopy  of  arrows"  reminds  us  of  the
saying  of  Dieneces,  Herodotus,  vii,  227,  and  of  Milton,  Paradise  Lost,  vi,  666.


THE  SLAUGHTER  CONTINUES  81

And  Srutasarman  himself,  blinded  with  furious  anger,  was
the  fifth,  and  they  all  fought  against  Prabhasa  and  his  two
companions.  Then  the  host  of  arrows,  which  they  shot  at
one  another,  seemed  like  a  canopy  spread  in  the  sky  by  the
fortune  of  war  in  the  full  blaze  of  the  sun.  Then  those
other  Vidyadharas,  who  had  been  deprived  of  their  chariots
and  had  fled  from  the  battle,  came  back  into  the  fight.

Then  Suryaprabha,  seeing  many  of  them  assembled  in
fight,  under  the  leadership  of  Srutasarman,  sent  other  great
warriors  of  his  own  to  support  Prabhasa  and  his  comrades,
The  Fhht  n^s  own  friends  with  Prajnadhya  at  their  head,
becomes  more  and  the  princes  of  whom  Satanika  and  Virasena
general  were  the  chief.     They  flew  through  the  air,  and

Suryaprabha  sent  the  other  warriors  also  through  the  air  in
the  chariot  Bhiitasana.  When  all  those  archers  had  gone
chariot-borne,  the  other  Vidyadhara  kings,  who  were  on
the  side  of  Srutasarman,  also  came  up.  Then  a  fight  took
place  between  those  Vidyadhara  princes  on  the  one  side
and  Prabhasa  and  his  comrades  on  the  other,  in  which
there  was  a  great  slaughter  of  soldiers.  And  in  the  single
combats  between  the  two  hosts  many  warriors  were  slain
on  both  sides,  men,  Asuras  and  Vidyadharas.  Virasena
slew  Dhumralochana  and  his  followers,  but,  having  been
deprived  of  his  chariot,  he  was  in  his  turn  killed  by  Hari-
garman.  Then  the  Vidyadhara  hero  Hiranyaksha  was
killed  by  Abhimanyu,  but  Abhimanyu  and  Haribhata  were
slain  by  Sunetra.  And  Sunetra  was  killed  by  Prabhasa,  who
cut  off  his  head.  And  Jvalamalin  and  Mahayu  killed  one
another.  But  Kumbhiraka  and  Nirasaka  fought  with  their
teeth,  after  their  arms  were  cut  off,  and  so  did  Kharva  and
the  mighty  SuSarman.  And  the  three,  Satrubhata,  Vyaghra-
bhata  and  Simhabhata,  were  slain  by  Pravahana,  the  Vidya-
dhara king.  Pravahana  was  killed  by  the  two  warriors
Suroha  and  Viroha,  and  those  two  were  slain  by  Simhabala,
the  dweller  in  the  cemetery.  That  very  Simhabala,  whose
chariot  was  drawn  by  ghosts,  and  Kapilaka,  and  Chitraplda,
the  Vidyadhara  king,  and  Jagajjvara,  and  the  hero  Kanta-
pati,  and  the  mighty  Suvarna,  and  the  two  Vidyadhara
kings,  Kamaghana  and  Krodhapati,  and  King  Baladeva
vol.  it.  ?


82  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

and  Vichitraplda — these  ten  were  slain  by  the  Prince
Satanika.

When  these  heroes  had  been  slain,  SrutaSarman,  beholding
the  slaughter  of  the  Vidyadharas,  himself  attacked  Satanika
in  his  anger.  Then  a  terrible  fight  took  place  between  those
two,  lasting  to  the  close  of  the  day,  and  causing  a  great
slaughter  of  soldiers,  exciting  the  wonder  even  of  the  gods ;
and  it  continued  until  hundreds  of  corpses,  rising  up  all
round,  laid  hold  of  the  demons  as  their  partners,  when  the
time  arrived  for  the  joyous  evening  dance.  At  the  close  of
day  the  Vidyadharas,  depressed  at  the  great  slaughter  of
their  army,  and  grieved  at  the  death  of  their  friends,  and
the  men  and  Asuras  having  won  the  victory  by  sheer  force,
stopped  the  combat,  and  went  each  of  them  to  their  own
camps.

At  that  time  two  Vidyadharas,  chiefs  of  captains  of  bands
of  warriors,  who  had  deserted  the  cause  of  Sruta^arman,
came,  introduced  by  Sumeru,  and  said  to  Suryaprabha,  after
bowing  before  him  :  "  We  are  named  Mahay  ana
and  Sumaya,  and  this  Simhabala  was  the  third
of  us  ;  we  had  obtained  magic  power  by  having  the  rule  of
a  great  cemetery,  and  were  unassailable  by  the  other  Vidya-
dharas. While  we,  such  as  you  have  heard,  were  once  taking
our  ease  in  a  corner  of  the  great  cemetery,  there  came  to  us  a
good  witch  named  Sarabhanana,  of  great  and  godlike  power,
who  is  always  well  disposed  towards  us.  We  bowed  before
her  and  asked  her  :  '  Where  have  you  been,  honoured  lady,
and  what  have  you  seen  there  strange  ?  '  She  thereupon
related  this  adventure.


62c.  Adventure  of  the  Witch  Sarabhanana

I  went  with  the  witches  to  visit  my  master,  the  god
Mahakala,1  and  while  I  was  there  a  king  of  the  Vetalas  came
and  reported :  "  See,  O  master,  the  chiefs  of  the  Vidya-
dharas have  killed  our  commander-in-chief,  named  Agnika,
and  one  named  Tejahprabha  is  swiftly  carrying  off  his  lovely
daughter.     But  the  holy  sages  have  foretold  that  she  shall

1  An  epithet  of  Siva  in  his  character  of  the  destroying  deity.


THE  WITCH  83

be  the  wife  of  the  Emperor  of  the  Vidyadharas,  so  grant  us
a  boon  and  have  her  released  before  he  forcibly  carries  her
off  to  a  distance."

When  the  god  heard  this  speech  of  the  afflicted  Vetala,  he
said  to  me  :  "Go  and  set  her  free."  Then  I  went  through
the  air  and  came  up  with  the  maiden.  Tejahprabha  said :
"  I  am  carrying  off  the  girl  for  our  rightful  emperor,  Sruta-
s*arman."  But  I  paralysed  him  by  my  magic  power,  and
bringing  back  the  maiden,  gave  her  to  my  master.  And  he
made  her  over  to  her  own  family.  I,  in  truth,  went  through
this  strange  adventure.  Then  I  remained  there  some  days,
and  after  taking  a  reverent  farewell  of  the  god  I  came  here.

62.  Story  of  Suryaprabha  and  how  he  attained  Sovereignty

over  the  Vidyadharas

"  When  that  witch  Sarabhanana  had  said  this,  we  said  to
her  :  '  Tell  us,  who  is  to  be  the  future  emperor  of  the  Vidya-
dharas ?  You,  in  truth,  know  all.'  She  said :  '  Suryaprabha
will  certainly  be.'  Whereupon  Simhabala  said  to  us:  'This
is  untrue,  for  have  not  the  gods  and  Indra  girded  up  their
loins  to  support  the  cause  of  Srutasarman  ?  '  When  the
noble  woman  heard  that,  she  said  to  us :  '  If  you  do  not
believe  this,  listen.  I  tell  you  that  soon  there  will  be
war  between  Suryaprabha  and  Srutagarman,  and  when  this
Simhabala  shall  be  slain  before  your  eyes  by  a  man  in  battle
you  will  recognise  this  token,  and  will  know  that  this  speech
of  mine  is  true.'  When  that  witch  had  said  this,  she  de-
parted, and  those  days  passed  away,  and  now  we  have  seen
with  our  own  eyes  that  in  truth  this  Simhabala  has  been
slain.  Relying  upon  that,  we  think  that  you  are  indeed
appointed  emperor  of  all  the  Vidyadharas,  and  submitting
ourselves  to  your  rule,  we  have  repaired  to  your  two  lotus-
like feet."

When  the  Vidyadharas  Mahayana  and  Sumaya  said  this,
Suryaprabha,  in  concert  with  Maya  and  the  rest,  received
them  into  confidence  and  honoured  them,  and  they  rejoiced.
When  Srutas*arman  heard  that,  he  was  in  great  consterna-
tion, but  Indra  comforted  him  by  a  message,  sending  to  him


84  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

VisVavasu,  and  commissioning  him  to  say  :  "Be  of  good
cheer !  To-morrow  I  will  aid  thee  with  all  the  gods  in  the
van  of  battle."  This  he  said  to  him  out  of  love,  to  comfort
him.  And  Suryaprabha,  having  been  encouraged  by  be-
holding the  breaking  of  his  enemy's  line,  and  having  seen
in  the  front  of  battle  the  slaughter  of  his  rival's  partisans,
again  forwent  the  society  of  his  charmers,  and  entered  his
dwelling  at  night  surrounded  by  his  ministers.


CHAPTER  XLIX

62.  Story   of  Suryaprabha  and  how  he  attained  Sovereignty
over  the  Vidyddharas

THEN  Suryaprabha,  lying  on  his  couch  at  night,  eager
for  battle,  apart  from  his  wives,  said  to  his  minister
Vitabhiti:  "I  cannot  sleep,  so  tell  me,  my  friend,
some  strange  story  of  courage  and  endurance,  to  amuse  me
during  the  night."  When  Vitabhiti  heard  this  request  of
Suryaprabha 's,  he  answered :  "I  will  obey  your  order  " ;  and
he  told  this  story  :

62d.  King  Mahdsena  and  his  Virtuous  Minister  Gunas'arman

There  is  a  city  UjjayinI,  the  ornament  of  this  earth,  full
of  numberless  jewels  of  pellucid  water.  In  that  city  there
lived  a  king  named  Mahasena,  beloved  by  the  virtuous,  an
unequalled  treasury  of  accomplishments,  having  the  beauty
both  of  the  sun  and  moon.  He  had  a  wife  named  A^okavati,
whom  he  loved  as  his  life ;  there  was  not  another  woman  in
the  three  worlds  equal  to  her  in  beauty.  The  king  ruled
his  realm  with  her  for  consort,  and  he  had  besides  a  friend,  a
Brahman  named  Guna^arman,  whom  he  respected  and  loved.
And  that  Brahman  was  brave  and  very  handsome,  and,
though  young,  had  thoroughly  mastered  the  lore  of  the
Vedas,  and  knew  the  accomplishments,  the  Sastras,  and  the
use  of  weapons,  and  was  always  in  attendance  on  the  king.

And  one  day,  as  he  was  within  the  palace,  a  conversation
arose  about  dancing,  and  the  king  and  queen  said  to  Guna-
sarman,  who  was  in  attendance :  "  You  know  everything,
there  is  no  doubt  about  that ;  so  we  have  a  curiosity  to  see
you  dancing.  If  you  know  how  to  dance,  kindly  exhibit
your  skill."  When  Guna^arman  heard  this,  he  said,  with  a
smile  on  his  face  :  "I  know  how  to  dance,  but  dancing  is
a  thing  not  becoming  in  the  king's  court ;  foolish  dancing  is
86


86  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

generally  ridiculous  and  is  censured  in  the  Sastras.  And  far
from  me  be  shame  here  in  the  presence  of  the  king  and  queen."
When  Gunas*arman  said  that,  the  king  answered  him,  being
urged  on  to  it  by  the  queen  out  of  curiosity  :  "This  will  not
be  like  a  dance  on  the  stage,  or  in  such  places,  which  would
make  a  man  feel  ashamed,  but  merely  a  private  display  of  skill
in  the  society  of  friends.  And  at  present  I  am  not  your  king ;
I  am  your  friend  without  ceremony ;  so  rest  assured  that  I
will  not  eat  to-day  until  I  have  seen  your  skill  in  dancing."

When  the  king  pressed  him  in  this  style,  the  Brahman
consented  to  do  it.  For  how  can  servants  refuse  the  request
of  an  importunate  lord  ?  Then  that  Gunas*arman  danced
so  skilfully  with  his  body  that  the  hearts  of  both  the  king
and  queen  danced  for  joy.  And  at  the  end  of  it  the  king
gave  him  a  lyre  to  play  upon,  and  the  moment  he  tested  its
tones  he  said  to  the  king :  "  This  lyre  is  not  in  good  order,
so  give  me  another  one ;  there  is  a  puppy  inside  this,  your
Majesty  — I  know  that  by  the  indications  of  the  twanging  of
the  strings."  Saying  this,  Gunas'arman  let  go  the  lyre  from
under  his  arm.  Then  the  king  sprinkled  it,  and  unscrewed
and  examined  it,  and  a  puppy  came  out  of  it.1  Then  King
Mahasena  praised  Guna^arman's  omniscience,  and  was  much
astonished,  and  had  another  lyre  brought.  He  played
on  that  lyre,  which,  like  the  Ganges,  that  flows  in  three
worlds,2  was  charming  from  its  swift  stream  of  music,3  and
purged  the  ear  by  its  sound.  Then  in  the  presence  of  the
king,  who  with  his  wife  looked  on  astonished,  he  exhibited
in  turn  his  skill  in  the  nobler  studies.  Then  the  king  said  to
him  :  "If  you  are  skilled  in  fighting,  then  show  me  a  speci-
men of  the  art  of  binding  the  enemy's  limbs  with  your  own
hands  unarmed."  The  Brahman  answered  him  :  "  King,
take  your  weapons  and  strike  at  me,  that  I  may  show  you
a  specimen  of  my  skill."  Then,  as  fast  as  the  king  took  a
sword  or  other  weapon  and  struck  at  him,  Guna^arman,  by
that  artifice  of  fettering  the  limbs,  immediately  disarmed

1  Sec  note  on  next  page. — n.m.p.

1  There  are  three  different  styles  of  music  called  tara,  udara  and  mudara.
So  the  word  marga  contains  a  pun.

*  Ogha  means  "current,"  and  also  "quick  time"  in  music.


THE  POISONED  SAUCE  87

him  with  ease,  and  frequently  fettered  his  hand  and  body,
without  receiving  a  wound.  Then  the  king,  seeing  that  he
was  capable  of  aiding  him  in  his  political  affairs,  praised  that
excellent  Brahman  of  transcendent  ability  and  honoured  him
highly.

But  Queen  A^okavati,  having  beheld  again  and  again
the  beauty  and  abilities  of  that  Brahman,  suddenly  fell  in
love  with  him.  She  thought  to  herself:  "If  I  cannot  ob-
tain him,  of  what  use  is  my  life  to  me  ?  "  Then  she  artfully
said  to  the  king :  "  Do  me  a  kindness,  my  husband,  and
order  this  Gunas*arman  to  teach  me  to  play  on  the  lyre.
For  when  I  beheld  to-day  his  skill  in  playing  on  the  lyre  I
took  a  desperate  fancy  to  the  instrument."  When  the  king
heard  this,  he  said  to  Gunasarman :  "  By  all  means  teach
the  queen  to  play  on  the  lyre."  Then  Gunasarman  said  :
"  I  will  do  so,  my  sovereign ;  we  will  begin  the  practising
on  an  auspicious  day."  Then  he  took  leave  of  the  king
and  went  home.  But  he  put  off  for  many  days  beginning
to  teach  the  queen  the  lyre,  seeing  the  changed  expression
of  the  queen,  and  afraid  of  some  mischief.

One  day  he  was  standing  near  the  king  when  he  was
eating,  and  when  the  cook  was  giving  him  some  condiment
he  prevented  him,  saying :  "  Stop  !  Stop  !  "  The  king
Gunasarman  asked  what  this  meant,  then  the  discreet  man
saves  the  said  :  "  This  sauce  is  poisoned,  and  I  detected  it
Kings Lije  ky  certajn  indications.1  For  when  the  cook  was
giving  you  the  sauce  he  looked  at  my  face,  trembling
with  fear,  and  with  an  eye  that  rolled  apprehensively.
And  we  can  at  once  find  out  whether  I  am  right.  Let
this  sauce  be  given  to  someone  to  eat  and  I  will  counter-
act the  effect  of  the  poison."  When  he  said  this,  the  king
made  the  cook  eat  the  sauce,  and  immediately  after  he  had
eaten  it  he  became  senseless.   Then  Gunasarman  counteracted

1  This  "  Quintessence "  or  "  Deduction  "  motif,  as  it  might  be  called,  is
widely  spread  in  Eastern  folk-tales,  and  occurs  in  Chapter  LXXXII,  where  I
shall  add  a  note  on  the  subject.  As  we  saw  in  my  note  on  the  "  Story  of
Hari^arman  "  in  Vol.  Ill,  pp.  75,  76,  the  "  lucky  guess  "  or  "  Dr  Knowall "  motif
merges  into  the  above  in  stories  where  the  "guess"  is  changed  into  a
"  deduction." — n.m.p.


88  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

the  effect  of  the  poison  on  the  cook  by  a  spell,  and  when
the  king  asked  the  cook  the  truth  of  the  whole  matter
he  said  this :  "  King,  your  enemy,  King  VikramaSakti,
sovereign  of  Gauda,  sent  me  here  to  give  you  poison.  I
introduced  myself  to  your  Majesty  as  a  foreigner  skilful
in  the  culinary  art,  and  entered  your  kitchen.  So  to-day  I
have  been  discovered  by  that  shrewd  man  in  the  act  of
giving  you  poison  in  sauce.  Your  Majesty  knows  what  to
do  now."

When  the  cook  said  this,  the  king  punished  him,  and
being  much  pleased,  gave  Gunasarman  a  thousand  villages
for  saving  his  life.

And  the  next  day,  as  the  queen  kept  vigorously  pressing
him,  the  king  made  GunaSarman  begin  to  teach  her  the  lyre.
Then,  while  he  was  teaching  her  the  lyre,  the  Queen  ASoka-
The  Queen  Vftti  indulged  in  perpetual  coquetry,  laughter
declares  her  and  mirth.  One  day,  wounded  with  the  arrow
of  love,  she  scratched  him  with  her  nails  fre-
quently in  secret,  and  said  to  the  chaste  Gunasarman,
who  entreated  her  to  desist :  "It  was  yourself  that  I
asked  for,  handsome  man,  under  the  pretext  of  learning
to  play  the  lute,  for  I  am  desperately  in  love  with  you,  so
consent  to  my  wishes."  When  she  said  this,  Gunasarman
answered  her :  "  Do  not  talk  so,  for  you  are  my  master's
wife,  and  such  a  one  as  I  am  should  not  commit  such
treason ;  desist  from  this  reckless  conduct."  When  Guna-
sarman said  this,  the  queen  continued :  "  Why  do  you
possess  in  vain  this  beauty  and  skill  in  accomplishments  ?
How  can  you  look  with  a  passionless  eye  on  me  who  love
you  so  much  ?  "

When  Gunasarman  heard  this,  he  answered  sarcastic-
ally :  "  You  are  right.  What  is  the  use  of  beauty  and  skill
which  is  not  tarnished  with  infamy  by  seducing  the  wife  of
another,  and  which  does  not  in  this  world  and  the  next  cause
one  to  fall  into  the  ocean  of  hell  ?  "  When  he  said  this,  the
queen  said  to  him,  pretending  to  be  angry  :  "I  am  deter-
mined to  die  if  you  do  not  do  what  I  say,  so,  being  despised
by  you,  I  will  slay  you  before  I  die."  Then  Gunasarman
said  :   "  By  all  means  let  it  be  so.     For  it  is  better  to  live  for


THE  QUEEN  TEMPTS  89

one  moment,  bound  by  the  bonds  of  righteousness,  than  to
live  unrighteously  for  hundreds  of  crores  of  Kalpas.  And
it  is  far  preferable  for  me  to  die  without  reproach,  having
done  no  wrong,  than  for  me  to  have  done  wrong  and  to
be  put  to  death  by  the  king,  with  reproach  attaching  to  my
name."

When  the  queen  heard  that,  she  went  on  to  say  to  him :
"  Do  not  commit  treason  against  yourself  and  me.  Listen,
I  will  tell  you  something.  The  king  does  not  neglect  to  do
what  I  tell  him,  even  if  it  is  impossible ;  so  I  will  ask  him
and  get  territories  given  to  you,  and  I  will  have  all  your
servants  made  barons,  so  you  will  become  a  king,  for  you
are  distinguished  for  good  qualities.  So  what  have  you  to
fear  ?  Who  can  overpower  you  and  how  ?  So  grant  my
wishes  fearlessly,  otherwise  you  will  not  live."

When  the  king's  wife  said  this,  seeing  that  she  was  deter-
mined, Gunasarman  said  to  her  artfully,  in  order  to  put  her
off  for  a  moment :  "  If  you  are  persistently  set  on  this,  then
I  will  obey  your  command ;  but  it  will  not  be  advisable  to
do  so  immediately,  for  fear  it  should  get  abroad ;  wait  for
some  days ;  believe  that  what  I  say  is  true.  What  object
have  I  in  incurring  your  enmity,  which  would  ensure  my
destruction  ?  "  Thus  Gunasarman  comforted  her  with  that
hope,  and  agreed  to  her  request,  and  then  departed  with
heart  lightened.

Then,  in  the  course  of  some  days,  King  Mahasena  went
and  surrounded  King  Somaka  in  his  treasure- city.  And
when  the  King  of  Gauda,  Vikramasakti,  knew  that  he  had
arrived  there  he  went  and  surrounded  King  Mahasena;
then  King  Mahasena  said  to  Gunasarman :  "  While  we
are  occupied  in  besieging  one  enemy  we  are  besieged  by
another,  so  now  how  are  we  to  fight  with  two  enemies,  as
we  are  unequal  in  force  ?  And  how  long,  being  brave  men,
can  we  remain  without  fighting  a  battle  ?  So  what  are  we
to  do  in  this  difficulty  ?  "

When  Gunasarman,  who  was  at  the  side  of  the  king,  was
asked  this  question,  he  answered  :  "  Be  of  good  courage,  my
sovereign ;  I  will  devise  a  stratagem  that  will  enable  us  to
get  out  of  this  situation,  difficult  as  it  is."     He  comforted


90  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

the  king  with  these  words  and  put  on  his  eyes  an  ointment ■
that  rendered  him  invisible,  and  at  night  went,  without
anyone  seeing  him,  to  the  camp  of  Vikramas*akti.  And  he
entered  into  his  presence,  and  woke  him  up  while
resorts  to  asleep,  and  said  :  "  Know,  O  King,  that  I  am
Magical  come  a  messenger  from  the  gods.     Make  peace

with  King  Mahasena  and  depart  quickly,  other-
wise you  will  certainly  be  destroyed  here  with  your  army.
And  if  you  send  an  ambassador  he  will  agree  to  your  pro-
posals of  peace.  I  have  been  sent  by  the  holy  Vishnu  to
tell  you  this.  For  you  are  a  votary  of  his,  and  he  watches
over  the  safety  of  his  votaries."

When  King  Vikramasakti  heard  this,  he  thought :
"  Certainly  this  is  true  ;  if  he  were  any  other,  how  could  he
enter  this  carefully  guarded  tent  ?  This  is  not  what  a  mere
mortal  could  accomplish."  When  the  king  had  gone  through
these  reflections  he  said  :  "I  am  fortunate  in  receiving  such
a  command  from  the  god ;  I  will  do  what  he  bids  me."
When  the  king  said  that,  GunaSarman  disappeared  by  the
help  of  his  magic  collyrium,  thus  confirming  the  king's  con-
fidence in  him,  and  went  away.  And  he  came  and  told  King
Mahasena  what  he  had  done ;  he  threw  his  arms  round  his
neck  and  hailed  him  as  the  preserver  of  his  life  and  throne.
And  the  next  morning  Vikramasakti  sent  an  ambassador  to
Mahasena,  and  after  making  peace  with  him  returned  home
with  his  army.  But  Mahasena  conquered  Somaka,  and  having
obtained  elephants  and  horses,  returned  to  Ujjayini  a  victor,
thanks  to  GunaSarman.  And  while  he  was  there  GunaSarman
saved  him  from  a  crocodile  while  bathing  in  the  river,  and
from  the  poison  of  a  snake-bite  while  in  his  garden.

Then,  after  some  days  had  passed,  King  Mahasena,
having  got  together  an  army,  went  to  attack  his  enemy
Vikramasakti.  And  that  king,  as  soon  as  he  heard  of  his
approach,  marched  out  to  meet  him  in  fight,  and  a  great
battle  took  place  between  the  two.  And  in  the  course  of  it
the  two  kings  met  in  single  combat  and  disabled  one  another's

1  In  the  Xights  (Burton,  vol.  v,  p.  308)  we  read  of  a  similar  magic
ointment  which  has  the  power  of  conveying  dry-shod  over  the  water  anyone
who  anoints  his  feet  with  it. — n.m.p.


ILLICIT  LOVE  91

chariots.  Then,  in  their  fury,  they  rushed  forward  sword
in  hand,  and  King  Mahasena  through  carelessness  stumbled
and  fell  on  the  earth.  Then  the  King  Vikramasakti  tried  to
strike  him  on  the  ground,  but  Gunasarman  cut  off  his  arm
with  a  discus,  sword  and  all,  and  striking  him  again  in  the
heart  with  an  iron  mace,  laid  him  low.  And  King  Mahasena
rose  up,  and  was  pleased  when  he  saw  his  enemy  dead,  and
said  repeatedly  to  Gunasarman :  "  What  am  I  to  say  ?
This  is  the  fifth  time  that  you  have  saved  my  life,  heroic
Brahman."  Then  Mahasena  conquered  the  army  and
kingdom  of  Vikramasakti,  who  had  been  slain  by  Guna-
sarman, and  after  overcoming  other  kings  by  the  aid  of
GunaSarman  he  returned  to  Ujjayini  and  dwelt  there  in
happiness.

But  Queen  ASokavati  did  not  cease  from  importunately
soliciting  Gunasarman  day  and  night.  But  he  would  never
consent  to  that  crime.  Good  men  prefer  death  to  immodest
Scorned  Love  conduct.  Then  ASokavati,  finding  out  that  he
of  Woman  was  resolved,  one  day,  out  of  enmity  to  him,
affected  to  be  unhappy,  and  remained  with  tearful  counte-
nance.1 Then  Mahasena,  coming  in,  and  seeing  her  in  that
condition,  said :  "  What  is  this,  my  beloved  ?  Who  has
offended  you  ?  Tell  me  the  name  of  the  man  whose  life
and  property  I  am  to  take  by  way  of  punishment  ?  "  Then
the  unforgiving  queen  said  with  affected  reluctance  to  the
king,  who  had  thus  addressed  her :  "  You  have  no  power
to  punish  the  man  who  has  injured  me ;  he  is  not  a  man
you  can  chastise,  so  what  is  the  good  of  revealing  the  injury
to  no  purpose  ?  "  When  she  said  this,  the  king  pressed  her,
and  she  said  deceitfully  :  "  My  husband,  if  you  are  very
anxious  to  know,  listen;  I  will  tell  you.  Gunasarman,
who  pretends  to  be  a  loyal  servant,*  made  an  agreement
with  the  King  of  Gauda,  and  in  order  to  get  money  from
him  undertook  to  do  you  an  injury.  The  wicked  Brahman
secretly  sent  his  confidential  messenger  to  Gauda,  to  make
the  king  hand  over  treasure  and  so  on.     Then  a  confidential

1  See  note  at  the  end  of  the  chapter. — n.m.p.

2  Chhalahatah  is  a  mistake  for  chhaladritah.  See  Bohtlingk  and  Roth
(s.v.  han  with  a).     The  MS.  in  the  Sanskrit  College  has  chhaladatah.


92  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

servant,  seeing  the  king  despondent,  said  to  him  :  4 1  will
manage  this  affair  for  you  ;  do  not  waste  your  wealth.'
When  the  King  of  Gauda  heard  this,  he  had  that  messenger
of  GunaSarman's  cast  into  prison  x  .  .  .  and  the  cook  who
was  to  administer  the  poison  came  here,  carefully  keeping
the  secret.  In  the  meanwhile  GunaSarman's  messenger
escaped  from  prison  and  -  came  here  to  him.  And  he,
knowing  the  whole  story,  revealed  it  all,  and  pointed
out  to  GunaSarman"  that  cook,  who  had  entered  into  our
kitchen.  Then  that  scoundrelly  Brahman  detected  the  cook
in  the  act  of  administering  the  poison  and  denounced  him
to  you,  and  so  had  him  put  to  death.  Then  the  mother  and
the  wife  and  the  younger  brother  of  that  cook  came  here  to
find  out  what  had  become  of  him,  and  the  sagacious  Guna-
sarman, finding  it  out,  put  to  death  his  wife  and  mother,
but  his  brother  escaped  somehow  or  other  and  entered  my
palace.  While  he  was  imploring  my  protection  and  telling
me  the  whole  story,  Gunasarman  entered  my  apartment.
When  the  brother  of  that  cook  saw  Gunasarman  and  heard
his  name,  he  went  out  and  fled  from  my  presence,  whither
I  know  not.  Gunasarman,  for  his  part,  when  he  saw  him
who  had  been  previously  pointed  out  to  him  by  his  servants,
was  abashed,  and  seemed  to  be  thinking  over  something.
And  I,  wanting  to  know  what  it  was,  said  to  him  in  private  :
*  Gunasarman,  why  do  you  seem  to  be  altered  to-day  ?  '
And  he,  being  anxious  to  win  me  over  to  his  side,  as  he  was
afraid  of  the  matter  being  revealed,  said  to  me  :  '  Queen,  I
am  consumed  with  passion  for  you,  so  consent  to  my  wishes,
otherwise  I  cannot  live ;  bestow  on  me  life  as  a  Brahman's
fee.'  When  he  had  said  this,  as  the  room  was  empty,  he
fell  at  my  feet.     Then  I  drew  away  my  foot  and  rose  up  in

1  Here  Brockhaus  makes  a  hiatus.  But  Speyer  (op.  cit.,  pp.  119,  120)
shows  that  there  is  no  necessity  for  such  a  supposition,  as,  by  the  D.  text,  it
is  obvious  that  the  cook  is  first  mentioned  in  si.  104,  not  105 — thus  instead  of
"servant  "  we  should  read  "cook."  Barnett  would  also  change  the  adjective
to  "trusty."  There  is  also  some  difficulty  in  si.  106".  Speyer  conjectures
tadrakshacnpalt/enaiva  into  nirgatya  bandhanat,  "afterwards,  having  made  his
escape  from  prison  in  consequence  of  the  negligence  of  his  gaolers."  For
fuller  details  see  Speyer  as  quoted  above. — n.m.p.

2  I  read  Gunasarmanah  or  Gunasannane.


UNFAVOURABLE  OMENS  93

bewilderment,  and  he,  rising  up,  embraced  me,  a  weak
woman,  by  force.  And  my  maid  Pallavika  came  in  at
that  very  moment.  The  instant  he  saw  her  he  fled  out
alarmed.  If  Pallavika  had  not  come  in  the  villain  would
certainly  have  outraged  me.  This  is  the  injury  he  has  done
me  to-day."

When  the  queen  had  told  this  false  tale,  she  stopped
and  wept.  For  in  the  beginning  wicked  women  sprang  from
Lying  Speech.1  And  the  moment  the  king  heard  it  he  was
all  on  fire  with  anger,  for  reliance  upon  the  words  of  women
destroys  the  discrimination  even  of  the  great.  And  he  said
to  his  dear  wife  :  "  Be  comforted,  fair  one;  I  will  certainly
punish  that  traitor  with  death.  But  he  must  be  slain  by
artifice,  otherwise  we  might  be  disgraced,  for  it  is  well  known
that  five  times  he  has  saved  my  life.  And  we  must  not
proclaim  abroad  his  crime  of  offering  violence  to  you."
When  the  king  said  this  to  the  queen,  she  answered  :  "If
that  crime  may  not  be  published,  may  that  other  one  of  his
be  published,  that  out  of  friendship  for  the  King  of  Gauda
he  attempted  treason  against  his  master  ?  "  When  she  said
this,  he  answered  :  "  You  are  quite  right."  And  so  King
Mahasena  went  to  his  hall  of  audience.

Then  all  the  kings  and  princes  and  barons  came  to
visit  the  king.  And  in  the  meanwhile  Guna£arman  left  his
house  to  go  to  the  court,  and  on  the  way  he  saw  many
unfavourable  omens.  There  was  a  crow  on  his  left  hand,
a  dog  ran  from  the  left  to  the  right,  a  snake  appeared
on  his  right,  and  his  left  arm  and  shoulder  throbbed.2
He    thought    to    himself :      "  These    evil    omens    indicate

1  In  this  sloka  the  D.  text  reads  asatyavacanam  pascaj  instead  of  asatya-
vacanat  papa,  thus  meaning,  "  for  in  the  beginning  Lying  Speech  was  born,
thereafter  wicked  women." — n.m.p.

2  Cf.  the  English  superstitions  with  regard  to  the  raven,  crow  and  mag-
pie (Henderson's  Folk-Lore  of  the  Northern  Counties,  pp.  95  and  96;  Hunt's
Romances  and  Drolls  of  the  West  of  England,  p.  429 ;  Thiselton  Dyer,  English
Folk-Lore,  pp.  80,  81).  See  also  Horace,  Odes,  iii,  27.  In  Europe  the
throbbing  or  tingling  of  the  left  ear  indicates  calamity  (Liebrecht,  Zur  Volks-
kunde,  p.  327;  Hunt,  op.  cit.,  p.  430;  Thiselton  Dyer,  op.  cit.,  p.  279)-  See
also  Bartsch's  Sagen,  Marchen  und  Gebrixuche  aus  Meklenburg,  vol.  ii,  p.  313,  and
Birlinger,  Aus  Schwaben,  pp.  374-378  and  404.     For  similar  superstitions  in


94  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

calamity  to  me  without  doubt,  so  whatever  happens
to  me,  I  hope  no  misfortune  may  befall  the  king,  my
master."  With  these  thoughts  he  entered  the  hall  of
Gunasarman  audience  and  prayed  loyally  that  nothing  un-
it publicly  toward  might  befall  the  palace.  But  when  he
Disgraced  bowed  and  took  his  seat,  the  king  did  not  salute
him  as  before,  but  looked  askance  at  him  with  an  eye
glowing  with  anger.  And  when  Gunasarman  was  alarmed
as  to  what  it  might  mean,  the  king  rose  up  from  the  seat
of  justice  and  sat  at  his  side,  and  said  to  the  astonished
courtiers:    "Hear  what  Gunasarman  has  done  to  me."  x

Then  Gunasarman  said :  "I  am  a  servant,  you  are  my
master,  so  how  can  our  suit  be  equal  ?  Ascend  your  seat  of
judgment  and  afterwards  give  what  order  you  like."  When
the  resolute  man  said  this,  the  king,  by  the  advice  of  the
other  ministers,  ascended  the  seat  of  judgment  and  said  again
to  his  courtiers  :  "  You  know  that  I  made  this  Gunasarman
equal  to  myself,  preferring  him  to  my  hereditary  ministers.
Now  hear  what  treason  he  attempted  to  commit  against  me,
after  making  an  agreement  with  the  King  of  Gauda  by  send-
ing messengers  to  and  fro. "  After  saying  this,  the  king  related
to  them  all  the  fictitious  account  of  the  matter  which  Asoka-
vatl  had  given  him.  And  the  king  also  told  to  his  confi-
dential ministers,  after  dismissing  the  crowd,  the  lying  tale
of  an  attempt  to  outrage  her,  which  she  had  told  against
Gunasarman.

Then  Gunas*arman  said  :    "  King,  who  told  you  such  a

ancient  Greece  see  Jebb's  Characters  of  Theophrastus,  p.  163  :  "The  super-
stitious man,  if  a  weasel  run  across  his  path,  will  not  pursue  his  walk  until
someone  else  has  traversed  the  road,  or  until  he  has  thrown  three  stones
across  it.  When  he  sees  a  serpent  in  his  house,  if  it  be  the  red  snake,  he  will
invoke  Sabazius,  if  the  sacred  snake,  he  will  straightway  place  a  shrine  on  the
spot.  ...  If  an  owl  is  startled  by  him  in  his  walk,  he  will  exclaim  'Glory  be

to  Athene!'  before  he  proceeds."     Jebb  refers  us  to  Ar.  Eccl.,  792. For

notes  on  unfavourable  omens  see  Vol.  Ill,  pp.  46m2,  86m1,  and  for  lucky  omens
pp.  122,  122m1,  171m1  of  this  volume.  For  an  interesting  list  of  both  auspicious
and  inauspicious  omens  see  R.  E.  Enthoven,  The  Folklore  of  Bombay,  1924,
pp.  249-253.— n.m. p.

1  The  Sanskrit  College  MS.  reads  nyayam  for  praptam,  "hear  my  suit
against  Gunasarman."     This  makes  far  better  sense.


GUNASARMAN  IS  ACCUSED  95

falsehood,  who  painted  this  aerial  picture  ?  "  When  the
king  heard  that,  he  said  :  "  Villain,  if  it  is  not  true,  how  did
you  know  that  the  poison  was  in  the  dish  of  rice  ?  "  When
Gunasarman  said,  "  Everything  is  known  by  wisdom,"  the
other  ministers,  out  of  hatred  to  him,  said  :  "  That  is  im-
possible." Then  Gunasarman  said :  "  King,  you  have  no
right  to  speak  thus  without  inquiring  into  the  truth  of  the
matter,  and  a  king  devoid  of  discrimination  is  not  approved
of  by  those  who  understand  policy."  When  he  repeated
this  over  and  over  again,  the  king  exclaimed  that  he  was
an  insolent  wretch,  and  aimed  a  sword-cut  at  him.  But  he
avoided  that  blow  by  employing  his  trick  of  fence,  and  then
the  other  followers  of  the  king  struck  at  him.  And  he  eluded
their  swords  by  his  artifices  of  fence  and  baffled  the  exertions
of  them  all.  And  he  fettered  them,  binding  them  with  one
another's  hair,  showing  wonderful  skill  in  the  employment
of  his  trick  of  disarming.  And  he  made  his  way  out  by  force
from  that  hall  of  assembly  of  the  king,  and  he  killed  about
a  hundred  warriors,  who  pursued  him.  Then  he  put  on  his
eyes  that  ointment  serving  to  render  him  invisible,  which
he  had  in  the  corner  of  his  garment,  and  immediately  left
that  country  without  being  seen.  And  he  made  towards
the  Deccan,  and  as  he  was  going  along  he  thus  reflected
on  the  way :  "  Surely  that  foolish  king  was  set  on  by  that
Asokavati.  Alas  !  women  whose  love  is  slighted  are  worse
than  poison !  Alas !  kings  who  do  not  investigate  the
truth  are  not  to  be  served  by  the  good  !  "

While  engaged  in  such  reflections,  Gunasarman  came  at
last  to  a  village ;  there  he  saw  a  worthy  Brahman  under  a
banyan-tree  teaching  his  pupils.  He  went  up  to  him  and
hailed  him.  The  Brahman,  after  welcoming  him,  immedi-
ately asked  him  :  "  O  Brahman,  what  recension  of  the  Vedas
do  you  recite?  Tell  me."  Then  Gunasarman  answered
that  Brahman  :  "  Brahman,  I  recite  twelve  recensions :  two
of  the  Sama  Veda,  two  of  the  Rig-Veda,  seven  of  the  Yajur
Veda,  and  one  of  the  Atharva-Veda"  Then  the  Brahman
said:  "You  must  be  a  god."  And  he  went  on  to  say  to
Gunasarman,  whose  shape  revealed  his  excellence :  "  Tell
me,  what  country  and  what  family  did  you  adorn  by  being


96  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

born  in  them  ?     What  is  your  name,  and  how  did  you  learn
so  much  ?  "     When  Gunagarman  heard  this,  he  said  to  him  :


62dd.  Adityasarman,  the  Father  of  Gunafarman

In  the  city  of  Ujjayini  there  was  a  Brahman's  son  named
Adityasarman,  and  when  lie  was  a  child  his  father  died,
and  his  mother  entered  the  fire  with  her  husband.1  Then
Adityasarman  grew  up  in  that  city  in  his  uncle's  house,
reading  the  Vedas  and  the  books  of  knowledge,  and  also
the  treatises  on  accomplishments.  And  after  he  had  acquired
knowledge,  and  was  engaged  in  a  vow  of  muttering  prayers,
he  struck  up  a  friendship  with  a  certain  wandering  hermit.
That  wandering  hermit  went  with  his  friend  Adityasarman
and  performed  a  sacrifice  in  a  cemetery  to  get  a  Yakshini
into  his  power.  Then  a  heavenly  maiden,  beautifully
adorned,  appeared  to  him  in  a  chariot  of  gold,  surrounded
with  beautiful  maidens.  She  said  to  him  in  a  sweet  voice  :
"  Mendicant,  I  am  a  Yakshi  named  Vidyunmala,  and  these
others  are  Yakshims.  Take  a  suitable  wife  from  my
following  according  to  your  pleasure.  So  much  have  you
obtained  by  your  employment  of  spells ;  you  have  not
discovered  the  perfect  spell  for  obtaining  me ;  so,  as  I
am  obtained  by  that  only,  do  not  take  any  further  trouble
to  no  purpose."

When  the  Yakshi  said  this  to  him,  the  mendicant  con-
sented, and  chose  one  Yakshini  from  her  retinue.  Then
Vidyunmala  disappeared,  and  Adityasarman  asked  that
Yakshini,  whom  the  hermit  had  obtained :  "Is  there  any
Yakshini  superior  to  Vidyunmala  ?  "  When  the  Yakshini
heard  that,  she  answered :  "  Yes,  handsome  man,  there  is.
Vidyunmala,  Chandralekha  and  Sulochana  the  third  are  the
best  among  the  Yakshims,  and  among  these  Sulochana."

After  saying  that,  the  Yakshini  departed,  to  return  at  the
appointed  time,  and  the  mendicant  went  with  Adityasarman
to  his  house.  There  the  loving  Yakshini  every  day  visited
the  hermit  at  the  appointed  time  and  granted  him  all  that

1  See  Appendix  I,  where  I  have  treated  the  subject  of  satt  at  some
length. — n.m.p.


THE  SPELL  TO  OBTAIN  SULOCHANA  97

he  desired.  One  day  Adityasarman  asked  her  this  question
by  the  mouth  of  that  mendicant :  "  Who  knows  the  proper
spell  for  attracting  Sulochana  ?  "  And  the  Yakshini  sent
him  this  message  by  the  mouth  of  the  mendicant :  "  There
is  a  place  called  Jambuvana  in  the  south.  There  is  a
mendicant  there,  named  Vishnugupta,  who  has  made  his
dwelling  on  the  banks  of  the  Veni ;  he  is  the  best  of  Buddhist
mendicants,  and  knows  the  spell  at  full  length."

When  Adityasarman  learned  this  from  the  Yakshini,  he
went  in  all  eagerness  to  that  country,  followed  by  the  mendi-
cant out  of  love.  There  he  duly  searched  for  the  Buddhist
mendicant,  and  after  he  had  approached  him  he  served  him
devotedly  for  three  years,  and  waited  upon  him  continually.
And  by  the  help  of  that  Yakshini,  who  was  at  the  beck
and  call  of  the  first  mendicant,  his  friend,  he  provided  him
with  heavenly  luxuries,  ministered  seasonably.  Then  that
Buddhist  mendicant,  being  pleased,  gave  to  that  Aditya-
sarman the  spell  for  obtaining  Sulochana,  which  he  desired,
together  with  the  prescribed  rites  to  accompany  it.

Then  Adityasarman,  having  obtained  that  spell,  and
having  duly  employed  it,  went  into  a  solitary  place  and  per-
formed there  the  final  sacrifice  according  to  the  prescribed
ritual,  leaving  no  ceremony  out.  Then  the  Yakshini
Sulochana  appeared  to  him  in  an  air-chariot,  with  world-
enchanting  beauty,  and  said  to  him  :  "  Come  !  come  !  I
have  been  won  by  you;  but  you  must  not  make  me  your
wife  for  six  months,  great  hero,  if  you  wish  to  have  by  me
a  son,  who  will  be  a  favourite  of  fortune,  marked  with
auspicious  marks,  all-knowing  and  invincible."

When  she  said  this,  Adityasarman  consented,  and  she
took  him  off  in  her  chariot  to  Alaka.  And  Adityasarman
remained  there,  looking  at  her  ever  near  him,  with  his  sus-
pense and  doubts  at  an  end,  and  performed  for  six  months  a
vow  as  difficult  as  standing  on  the  edge  of  a  sword.  Then
the  God  of  Wealth,  being  pleased,  himself  gave  that  Sulo-
chana to  Adityasarman,  according  to  a  heavenly  ritual.  I
was  born  as  that  Brahman's  son  by  her,  and  I  was  named
GunaSarman  by  my  father  on  account  of  my  good  qualities.
Then  in  that  very  place  I  learned  in  succession  the  Vedas,
vol.  iv.  a


98  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

the  sciences  and  the  accomplishments,  from  a  prince  of  the
Yakshas  named  Manidara.

Then,  once  upon  a  time,  it  happened  that  Indra  came
to  the  God  of  Wealth,  and  all  who  sat  there  rose  up  when
they  saw  him.  But,  as  fate  would  have  it,  Aditya£arman,
my  father,  was  at  that  time  thinking  of  something  else,  and
did  not  rise  up  in  a  hurry.  Then  Indra,  being  angry,  cursed
him,  and  said  :  "  Out,  fool !  "  Go  to  your  own  world  of
mortals,  you  are  out  of  place  here.  Then  Sulochana  fell  at
his  feet  and  propitiated  him,  and  Indra  answered  :  4  Then
let  him  not  go  to  the  world  of  mortals  himself,  but  let  this
son  of  his  go,  for  one's  son  is  said  to  be  a  second  self.  Let
not  my  word  have  been  spoken  in  vain."

When  Indra  had  said  so  much  he  was  satisfied.  Then
my  father  took  me  and  deposited  me  in  my  uncle's  house
in  Ujjayinl.  For  what  is  ordained  to  be  a  man's  lot  must  be.
There,  as  it  happened,  I  struck  up  a  friendship  with  the  king
of  that  place.  And  listen,  I  will  tell  you  what  happened  to
me  there  afterwards.


62d.  King  Mahdsena  and  his  Virtuous  Minister  Gunas'arman

After  saying  this,  he  described  to  him  what  happened
from  the  very  beginning,  and  what  A^okavati  did,  and  what
the  king  did,  ending  up  with  his  fight.  And  he  went  on  to
say  to  him  :  "  Brahman,  thus  I  have  fled  away  to  go  to  a
foreign  land,  and  on  my  way,  as  I  was  journeying  along,  I
have  seen  you."  When  the  Brahman  heard  that,  he  said  to
Guna£arman  :  "  And  thus  I  have  become  fortunate  by  your
visit,  my  lord.  So  now  come  to  my  house,  and  know  that
I  am  Agnidatta  by  name,  and  this  village  is  my  grant  from
the  king  ;   be  at  ease  here."

After  saying  this,  Agnidatta  made  Guna£arman  enter
his  splendid  mansion,  in  which  were  many  cows,  buffaloes
and  horses.  There  he  honoured  that  guest  with  bath  and
unguents,  and  robes  and  ornaments,  and  with  various  kinds
of  food.  And  he  showed  him  his  daughter,  Sundarl  by
name,  whose  beauty  was  to  be  desired  even  by  the  gods,
on  the  pretence  of  getting  him  to  inspect  her  marks.     And


THE  AUSPICIOUS  MOLES  99

Gunasarman,  for  his  part,  seeing  that  she  was  unsurpassed
in  beauty,  said  :  "  She  will  have  rival  wives.  She  has  a
mole  on  her  nose,  and  consequently  I  assert  that  she  must
have  a  second  one  on  her  breast ;  and  men  say  that  such  is
the  result  of  spots  in  these  two  localities."  When  he  said
this,  her  brother,  by  command  of  her  father,  uncovered  her
breast  and  beheld  there  a  mole.

Then  Agnidatta  said  in  astonishment  to  Gunasarman :
"  You  are  all-knowing,  but  these  moles  of  hers  portend
good  fortune  to  us.  For  wives  generally  have  many  rivals
when  the  husband  is  fortunate ;  a  poor  ■  man  would  find
it  difficult  to  support  one,  much  more  to  support  many."
When  Gunasarman  heard  this,  he  answered  him  :  "  It  is
as  you  say ;  how  could  ill  fortune  befall  a  shape  with  such
auspicious  marks  ?  "  When  he  had  said  this,  Agnidatta
took  occasion  to  ask  him  concerning  the  meaning  of  moles
and  other  marks;  and  he  told  him  what  moles  and  other
marks  portended  on  every  single  limb,  both  in  men  and
women.2

Then  Sundari,  the  moment  she  beheld  Gunasarman,
longed  eagerly  to  drink  him  in  with  her  eyes,  as  the  female
partridge  longs  to  drink  the  moon.  Then  Agnidatta  said  in
private  to  Gunasarman :  "  Illustrious  one,  I  give  you  this
my  daughter  Sundari.  Do  not  go  to  a  foreign  land  ;  remain
at  ease  in  my  house."     When  GunaSarman  heard  this  speech

1  Daridryo  is  probably  a  misprint  for  daridro.

2  Cf.  Thiselton  Dyer's  English  Folk-Lore,  p.  280.  He  remarks :  "  A
belief  was  formerly  current  throughout  the  country  in  the  significance  of
moles  on  the  human  body.  When  one  of  these  appeared  on  the  upper
side  of  the  right  temple  above  the  eye,  to  a  woman  it  signified  good  and
happy  fortune  by  marriage."  This  superstition  was  especially  believed  in  in
Nottingham,  as  we  learn  from  the  following  lines,  which,  says  Mr  Briscoe
(author  of  Nottinghamshire  Facts  and  Fictions),  were  often  repeated  by  a  poor
girl  at  Bunny  : —

"  I  have  a  mole  above  my  right  eye,
And  I  shall  be  a  lady  before  I  die.
As  things  may  happen,  as  things  may  fall,
Who  knows  but  that  I  may  be  Lady  of  Bunny  Hall  ?  "

The  poor  girl's  hopes,  it  is  stated,  were  ultimately  realised,  and  she
became  "  Lady  of  Bunny  Hall."  See  Brand's  Popular  Antiquities,  vol.  hi,
pp.  252-255. See  Vol.  I,  p.  49»\  for  a  short  note  on  moles. — n.m.p.


100  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

of  his,  he  said  to  him  :  "  True,  I  should  be  happy  to  do  so,
but  as  I  have  been  on  a  false  charge  scorched  with  the  fire
of  the  king's  contempt,  it  does  not  please  me.  A  lovely
woman,  the  rising  of  the  moon,  and  the  fifth  note  of  a  lute,
these  delight  the  happy  but  afflict  the  miserable.  And  a
wife  who  falls  in  love  of  her  own  accord  with  a  man  is  sure
to  be  chaste,  but  if  she  is  given  away  by  her  father  against
her  will  she  will  be  like  A^okavatl.1  Moreover,  the  city  of
Ujjayini  is  near  to  this  place,  so  the  king  may  perhaps  hear
of  my  whereabouts  and  oppress  me.  So  I  will  wander  round
to  holy  places,  and  will  wash  off  the  stains  of  sin  contracted
ever  since  my  birth,  and  will  abandon  this  body,  then  I  shall
be  at  rest."

When  he  said  this,  Agnidatta  answered  him,  smiling  :
"  If  even  you  show  so  much  infatuation,  what  are  we  to
expect  from  others  ?  What  annoyance  can  you,  a  man  of
„      ,  pure  character,  derive  from  the  contempt  of  a

is  dissuaded  iool  ?  Mud  thrown  at  the  heaven  falls  upon  the
from  com-  head  of  the  thrower.  The  king  will  soon  reap  the
mi  mg.u  e  ^gjj.  Qf  j^g  want  0f  discrimination,  for  Fortune
does  not  long  wait  upon  a  man  blind  with  infatuation
and  wanting  in  discrimination.  Besides,  if  you  are  dis-
gusted with  women  from  your  experience  of  Asokavatl,
do  you  not  feel  respect  for  them  on  beholding  a  good
woman,  for  you  know  signs  ?  And  even  though  Ujjayini
be  near  this  place,  where  you  are  now,  I  will  take  steps  to
prevent  anyone's  knowing  that  you  are  here.  But  if  you
desire  to  make  a  pilgrimage  to  sacred  places,  then  I  say :
that  is  approved  by  the  wise  only  for  a  man  who  cannot,
according  to  the  scriptures,  attain  happiness  by  performing
the  actions  enjoined  by  the  Vedas ;  but  he  who  can  acquire
merit  by  offerings  to  the  gods,  to  the  manes  of  deceased
ancestors  and  to  the  fire,  by  vows  and  muttering  prayers,
what  is  the  use  of  his  wandering  about  on  pilgrimages  ?  A
pilgrim  whose  pillow  is  his  arm,  who  sleeps  upon  the  ground,
and  lives  on  alms,  and  drinks  only  water,  is  not  free  from

1  Speyer  (op.  cii.,  p.  165)  conjectures  svavasa  as  the  correct  reading  of
svarasa,  thus  bringing  out  the  contrast  of  the  forced  marriage  and  the
love-match. — n.m.p.


SUICIDE  IS  FOLLY  101

cares,  even  though  he  has  attained  equality  with  hermits.
And  as  for  your  desiring  to  abandon  the  body,1  in  this
wise  you  are  also  led  astray,  for  in  the  next  world  suicides
suffer  more  severe  pains  than  here.  An  unbecoming  fault
and  folly  is  not  to  be  committed  by  one  so  young  and
wise  :  decide  for  yourself :  you  must  certainly  do  what  I
tell  you.  I  will  have  made  for  you  here  a  spacious  and
beautiful  subterranean  dwelling;  marry  Sundari,  and  live
at  ease  in  it."

When  he  was  thus  diligently  schooled  by  Agnidatta,
GunaSarman  agreed  to  his  proposal,  and  said  to  him  :  "  I
accept  your  offer;  for  who  would  abandon  a  wife  like
Sundari  ?  2  But  I  will  not  marry  this  your  daughter  till
I  have  accomplished  my  ends.  In  the  meanwhile  I  will
propitiate  some  god  with  strict  asceticism,  in  order  that
I  may  be  revenged  on  that  ungrateful  monarch."

When  he  said  this,  Agnidatta  gladly  consented,  and
Gunasarman  rested  there  in  comfort  during  the  night.  And
the  next  day  Agnidatta  had  a  secret  subterranean  dwelling
constructed  for  his  comfort,  called  Patalavasati.3

And  while  he  was  there  Gunasarman  said  in  secret  to
Agnidatta  :  "  Tell  me,  what  god,  granting  boons  to  his
worshippers,  shall  I  propitiate  here  by  performing  vows,
And  after  and  what  spell  shall  I  use  ?  "  When  the  brave
performing  man  said  that,  Agnidatta  answered  him :  "I
have  a  spell  for  propitiating  the  god  Svamikum-
ara,  which  was  told  me  by  a  teacher  ;  so  with  that  propitiate
the  general  of  the  gods,  the  foe  of  Taraka,  desiring  whose
birth  the  gods,  oppressed  by  their  enemies,  sent  Kama  to
Siva  (and  he,  after  burning  him  up,  decreed  that  henceforth
he  should  be  born  in  the  mind),  whose  origin  they  say  was
various,  from  Siva,  from  the  fire-cavity,  from  fire,  from  the

1  I  read  dehatyagam  and  vanchasi. There  are  also  two  other  improve-
ments in  the  D.  text.  In  si.  229  read  tadesha  for  na  dosho,  and  in  //.  231
jnato  should  be  added  between  yatha  and  icchasi.  Speyer  (p.  121)  would  trans-
late :  "  And  as  for  your  striving  for  happiness  by  abandoning  the  body  .  .  .
Therefore,  this  folly  is  unbecoming  to  one  so  young  and  wise  as  you  are ;
decide  for  yourself  ...  at  ease  in  it  unknown." — n.m.p.

*  I.e.  "  beautiful."     There  is  a  pun  here.

8  Patala  =  Hades — i.e.  the  world  below;  vasati  =  dwelling.


102  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

thicket  of  reeds  and  from  the  Krittikas,  and  who,  as  soon  as
he  was  born,  made  the  whole  world  bend  by  his  irresistible
might,  and  slew  the  unconquered  Asura  Taraka."

Then  Gunagarman  said :  "  Tell  me  that  spell."  And
Agnidatta  gave  Guna^arman  that  spell.  With  it  Guna-
garman  propitiated  Skanda  in  the  subterranean  dwelling,
unremitting  in  his  vow,  waited  upon  by  Sundari.  Then  the
six-faced  god  appeared  to  him  in  visible  form  and  said  :  "  I
am  pleased  with  you ;  choose  a  boon.1  .  .  .  You  shall  possess
an  inexhaustible  treasury,  and,  after  conquering  Mahasena,
you  shall,  my  son,  advance  irresistibly  and  rule  the  earth."
After  giving  him  this  great  boon  Skanda  disappeared,
Marries  and  Guna^arman  obtained  inexhaustible  treasure.

Sundari  Then  the  successful  hero  married,  according  to

the  prescribed  rites,  with  splendour  suited  to  his  greatness,
the  daughter  of  the  Brahman  Agnidatta,  who  fell  more  in
love  with  him  every  day,  like  his  future  good  fortune  in
affairs  come  to  him  in  bodily  form.

And  then  having  collected,  by  virtue  of  his  surpassing
accumulation  of  inexhaustible  treasure,  an  army  consisting
of  many  horses,  elephants  and  foot- soldiers,  he  marched  to
Ujjayini,  overrunning  the  earth  with  the  forces  of  all  the
kings  that  crowded  to  his  banner  out  of  gratitude  for  his
gifts.  And  after  proclaiming  there  to  the  subjects  that
immodest  conduct  of  AgokavatI,  and  after  conquering  King
Mahasena  in  battle,  and  deposing  him  from  the  throne,
he  obtained  the  dominion  of  the  earth.  And  King  Guna-
garman  married  many  daughters  of  kings  besides  Sundari,
and  his  orders  were  obeyed  even  on  the  shores  of  the  sea,
and  with  Sundari  as  his  consort  he  long  enjoyed  pleasures  to
his  heart's  content.


62.  Story  of  Suryaprabha  and  how  he  attained  Sovereignty
over  the  Vidyddharas

4  Thus  King  Mahasena,  in  old  time,  suddenly  incurred
calamity  through  being  unable  to  discriminate  the  character
of  men,  being  a  man  of  dull  intellect,  but  the  clear-headed

1  Here  Brockhaus  supposes  a  hiatus.


THE  END  OF  THE  TALE  103

Gunas*arman,    with  the  help  of  his  own  resolute  character
alone,  obtained  the  highest  prosperity."

After  Suryaprabha  had  heard  this  chivalrous  tale  at  night
from  the  mouth  of  his  minister  Vltabhiti,  the  royal  hero,
who  was  longing  to  traverse  the  great  sea  of  battle,  gained
great  confidence,  and  gradually  dropped  off  to  sleep.


104  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


NOTE  ON  "WOMEN  WHOSE  LOVE  IS  SCORNED"

The  "  women  whose  love  is  scorned  "  motif  has  already  been  discussed  in
Vol.  II,  pp.  120- 124.  The  story  of  Gunasarman  and  Queen  A^okavatl,  in  our
present  text  (p.  87  et  seq.),  is  a  very  good  example  of  the  motif,  and  closely
resembles  in  its  main  outline  that  of  Joseph  and  Potiphar's  wife.  It  is
interesting  to  note  that  in  the  Biblical  (Authorised  Version)  story  it  is
Joseph's  skill  in  the  interpretation  of  dreams  that  ultimately  gets  him  out
of  prison  and  advances  him  so  high  in  Pharaoh's  estimation.  So,  too,  it
is  Gunasarman' s  skill  that  makes  him  so  valuable  and  trusted  a  minister  to
Mahasena.

There  is,  however,  one  great  difference  in  the  two  tales.  In  the  Indian
story  (and  in  practically  every  variant)  the  husband  figures  throughout,  and
finally  discovers  the  truth.  In  the  Biblical  story  the  sudden  interest  of
Pharaoh  occurs  quite  by  chance,  and,  without  any  questioning  as  to  the  cause
of  his  imprisonment,  Joseph  is  set  over  all  the  land  of  Egypt.  We  hear  no
more  of  Potiphar  or  his  wife.

Now,  in  the  Koranic  version,  Potiphar  is  soon  convinced  that  his  wife's
charge  is  false,  because  Joseph's  garment  is  torn  at  the  back.  Accordingly  he
says :  "  O  Joseph,  take  no  further  notice  of  this  affair :  and  thou,  O  woman,
ask  pardon  for  thy  crime,  for  thou  art  a  guilty  person."

The  scandal  soon  becomes  the  one  topic  of  conversation  among  the
women  of  the  town,  and  to  quiet  them  Potiphar's  wife  asks  a  number  of  them
to  a  banquet,  giving  them  each  a  knife.  She  then  calls  in  Joseph,  and,  over-
come by  his  beauty,  they  all  cut  their  hands,  exclaiming :  "  O  God !  this  is
not  a  mortal ;  he  is  no  other  than  an  angel  deserving  the  highest  respect."
Thus  her  weakness  for  him  is  duly  appreciated.

In  spite,  however,  of  Joseph's  proved  innocence,  it  is  thought  better  for
him  to  be  put  in  prison — and  thus  the  incident  of  dreams  can  be  introduced.

It  was  this  Koranic  version  which  Firdausi  used  for  his  Yusuf  u  Zulaikhd,
a  poem  of  9000  couplets.

Since  the  issue  of  Vol.  II  Professor  Bloomfield  has  forwarded  me  a  most
valuable  paper  by  himself  on  "Joseph  and  Potiphar  in  Hindu  Fiction,"  which
appeared  in  the  Trans.  Amer.  Phil.  Assoc.,  vol.  liv,  1923,  pp.  141-167.  Among
others  he  speaks  of  the  Kashmir  version  of  the  story  now  translated  in  Stein  and
Grierson's  Hatim's  Tales,  pp.  33-37,  with  notes  on  pp.  xxxiv  and  xxxv  by  Crooke.

The  chief  point  to  notice  in  this  version  is  the  introduction  of  the  motif
of  selecting  a  king  by  animal  divination.  I  shall  have  more  to  say  on  this
motif  in  Vol.  V  (Chaper  LXV),  where  an  elephant  selects  the  merchant's  son
as  king.

The  references  given  on  p.  145  to  the  Mahdbharata  have  suffered  from
misprints.  The  incident  of  Satyavati  and  Bhlshma  occurs  in  I,  ciii,  1  et  seq.,
and  not  I,  liv,  while  that  of  Uttanka  is  to  be  found  in  I,  iii.

On  p.  l6l  the  variant  of  the  Joseph  motif  in  the  Katha  Sarit  Sdgara
should  read  xxxiii,  40  et  seq.


WOMEN  WHOSE  LOVE  IS  SCORNED  105

After  giving  extracts  from  several  references  mentioned  in  my  note  in
Vol.  II  (pp.  120-124),  Professor  Bloomfield  draws  attention  to  the  fact  that  the
Jaina  texts  handle  the  "  scorned  love  of  women  "  motif  more  familiarly  than
any  other  branch  of  Hindu  literature,  in  connection  with  their  ethics,  which
are  systematised  to  a  degree  not  quite  reached  by  any  other  Hindu  religious
sect.  Among  the  five  lighter  vows  (anutrala)  to  be  observed  as  far  as  possible
by  the  laity  are  discernment  (t'iveka)  and  unbroken  chastity  (abrahmavirati) ;
both  forbid  adultery,  and  consequently  the  Jaina  texts  contain  stories  showing
the  downfall  of  the  wrongdoer  and  the  ultimate  triumph  of  chastity.

Of  the  extracts  quoted  the  most  interesting  story  and  the  one  in
which  the  motif  is  developed  to  its  highest  point  is  undoubtedly  that  in
Vijayadharmasuri's  Mallinatha  Caritra,  vii,  198  et  seq.  As  the  circulation  of
the  Trans.  Amer.  Phil.  Assoc,  unfortunately  appears  to  be  small  in  England,  I
will  quote  Professor  Bloomfield's  account  of  the  story  in  full :

In  Cam  pa  rules  King  Dadhivahana  with  his  queen,  Abhaya,  who  is
attended  by  a  sly  duenna,  named  Pandita.  In  the  same  city  lives  a  rich
merchant,  Vrishabhadasa  (or  Rishabhadasa),  whose  wife  ArhaddasI  bears  him
a  son  who  is  called  Sudarsana,  "  Handsome."  After  growing  into  manhood,
endowed  with  every  bodily  and  spiritual  perfection,  he  is  married  to  a  lovely
maiden  of  good  family,  Manorama.  After  his  father  takes  the  Jaina  vow
(diksha),  he  is  left  in  possession  of  all  his  belongings,  and  lives  as  a  Sraddha
of  high  quality,  honoured  alike  by  the  king  and  his  fellow-citizens.

Now  Sudarsana  has  an  intimate  friend,  Kapila,  chaplain  (purodha)  of  the
king.  His  beautiful  wife,  Kapila,  clever,  and  endowed  with  the  sixty-four
accomplishments  of  a  well-born  lady,  is  rendered  wayward  by  youth's  love-
fervour.  One  day  Kapila  praises  his  friend  Sudarsana  as  "  a  galaxy  of  virtues,
delightful  even  to  the  gods."  From  that  moment  Kapila  knows  no  peace  in
her  desire  to  see  Sudarsana.  Her  husband  happens  to  go  to  another  town
on  the  business  of  the  king ;  she  scents  opportunity,  and  instructs  a  duenna
of  hers  to  go  to  Sudarsana,  and  say  to  him  that  his  friend,  her  husband,  is
sick  ;  why  does  he  not  come  to  make  inquiry  about  him  ?  Sudarsana  tenderly
hastens  over  and  says:  "Wife  of  my  brother,  where  is  my  brother?"  She
tells  him  that  he  is  asleep  in  his  chamber,  let  him  quickly  go  there.  Finding
that  his  friend  is  not  there,  he  reproves  her :  "  Wife  of  my  brother,  why  do
you  fool  me  like  a  child  ? "  She  bares  her  heart,  navel,  breasts,  and  from  her
eyes  dart  the  missiles  of  Kama  upon  him.  She  says :  "  From  the  moment
that  I  heard  an  account  of  your  beauty  and  all  your  other  excellences,  I  have
burned  with  the  love  of  you.  Quench  my  body  with  the  ambrosia  of  your
beauty,  else  it  shall  become  a  heap  of  ashes  in  the  fire  of  Kandarpa."
Craftily  Sudarsana  holds  her  off  by  claiming  that  he  is  a  eunuch,  though  he
goes  about  in  the  garb  of  a  man.  He  makes  his  escape,  reflecting  that  it  is
not  safe  to  go  to  another's  house  whose  inmates  may  be  full  of  guile.

Comes  spring,  when  King  Love  awakes  from  his  slumbers,  when  groves
are  alive  with  bees  and  birds,  and  on  the  branches  of  every  tree  hangs  a
pleasure-swing.  To  disport  themselves  in  such  a  grove  come  King  Dadhivahana
and  his  retinue ;  Sudarsana  in  all  his  beauty ;  the  Brahman  Kapila  with  his


106  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

wife  Kapila ;  Queen  Abhaya ;  and  also  Manorama,  Sudarsana's  wife,  with
her  four  children.  When  Kapila  sees  Manorama  playing  about,  she  asks  her
friend,  Queen  Abhaya,  who  she  may  be,  and  learns  that  Manorama  and  her
children  are  Sudarsana's  family.  Kapila  exclaims  :  "  Gracious  me,  how  clever
are  the  wives  of  merchants !  Her  husband  is  a  eunuch  ;  however  came  the
children  ?  As  easily  would  a  lotus  grow  in  the  sky,  or  the  wind  be  tied  up
in  the  knot  of  a  garment "  [the  ordinary  Hindu  pocket].  When  the  queen
asks  her  to  explain,  she  relates  her  escapade  with  Sudarsana.  The  queen
laughs  at  her,  and  teases  her  by  saying  that  though  she  thinks  herself  wise,
she  does  not  understand  the  true  meaning  of  the  science  of  love  {kamasastrartha).
"  This  merchant  is  ever  a  eunuch  towards  the  beautiful  loves  of  other  men,
as  though  they  be  sisters,  but  not  towards  his  own  wife.  You  have  been
tricked  by  the  guile  of  this  cunning  man,  you  foolish  woman."  Kapila
acknowledges  the  scorn,  and  at  the  same  time  points  out  ironically,  we  may
guess,  that  the  queen  is  brilliant  with  skill  in  the  kamasastra.  She  therefore
challenges  her  to  try  her  hand :  "  I  shall  know  for  certain  your  cleverness  in
matters  of  love,  if,  O  Queen,  you  shall  make  Sudarsana  sport  with  you,  without
shame,  just  as  if  he  were  the  king."

Queen  Abhaya  accepts  the  dare,  returns  to  the  palace,  and  holds  counsel
with  her  old  confidential  nurse  Pandita.  She  bids  her  play  some  deceptive
trick  (kaitavanataka)  which  would  bring  her  together  with  Sudarsana.  The
duenna  remonstrates :  it  is  not  proper  that  she,  the  beloved  of  the  king,
should  do  a  thing  which  works  mischief  both  in  this  and  the  next  world.
Moreover,  Sudarsana  is  a  pious  householder,  who  regards  others'  wives  as
sisters  (paranafisahodara).  How  is  he  to  be  brought  to  the  palace  like  a
noble  elephant  from  the  forest  ?  Yea,  if  he  should  come,  he  would  not  do
as  the  queen  desires.  The  queen  insists  that  she  has  bet  with  Kapila,  and
the  nurse  finally  proposes  the  following  device : — Sudarsana  is  in  the  habit
of  fasting  on  each  day  of  the  four  changes  of  the  moon,  standing  silently  in
some  public  place  in  the  abstracted  kayotsarga  posture.  She  will  then  wrap
him  in  the  folds  of  her  garment ;  lead  him  roundabout  two  or  three  times ;
and  introduce  him  into  the  palace  by  pretending  to  the  door-guards  that  he
is  an  image  of  Kandarpa,  the  God  of  Love.  All  this  happens  as  planned.
When  Queen  Abhaya  sees  him,  she  begins  to  agitate  him  with  the  unfeathered
yet  sharp  darts  from  her  side-wise  coquettish  eyes.  She  asks  him  to  take
pity,  and  bestow  upon  her  the  ambrosial  paradise  pleasure  of  his  embraces  :
"To  what  purpose  do  you,  foolish  man,  practise  the  rigours  of  asceticism,
now  that  you  have  me,  who  would  be  hard  to  reach  even  by  ascetic  vows."
And  afterwards :  "  Why  do  you  spurn  me,  an  unprotected  female,  that  is
being  slain  by  the  arrows  of  the  God  of  Love  ?  Surely  you  can  take  pity
on  a  woman.  Thinking  of  you,  my  days  became  long  as  a  hundred  Kalpas ;
my  nights  long  as  days  of  Brahma.  In  my  far-roving  dreams  I  have  you
before  my  eyes  in  a  thousand  shapes,  single-shaped  though  you  be."

But  dharma-devoted  Sudarsana  firmly  spurns  her.  Abhaya  keeps  on  all
night,  luring  him  with  her  body's  charms  and  with  artful  songs.  Dawn,
gathering  up  the  darkness  with  her  hands  (rays),  rises,  as  if  for  the  express
purpose  of  looking  at  Sudarsana,  pure  in  devotion  to  his  wife.


WOMEN  WHOSE  LOVE  IS  SCORNED  107

Sudarsana's  obduracy  drives  Abhaya  to  threats  :  "This  vow  of  yours  shall
not  block  fate !  I  shall  now  tear  my  body  with  crores  of  nail  scratches,  and
make  a  wild  outcry  [phutkarishyetaram]."  When  yet  he  is  not  shaken,  she
rouses  the  palace  with  her  shrieks — for  devoted  as  well  as  disaffected  women
both  kill :  "  Hear,  ye  guards.  This  fellow,  forcibly  bent  upon  showing  me
love,  is  tearing  me  with  his  sharp  nails.  Run  quickly,  run !  "  The  king
comes  to  the  spot,  asks  Sudarsana  what  he  has  to  say,  but  he  stands  silent.
The  king  orders  him  to  be  impaled  upon  a  stake.  To  the  ear-piercing  cry  of
"  Runner  after  other  men's  wives ! "  the  executioners  set  him  on  the  back
of  an  ass,  a  nimba-leaf  turban  upon  his  head,  his  body  smeared  with  soot.
Bitterly  they  mock  him  as  they  exhibit  him  through  the  great  city,  on  the
way  to  the  "  grove  of  the  Fathers  " — i.e.  the  cemetery  which  is  the  place  of
execution.  But  Sudarsana  keeps  thinking  on  the  fivefold  obeisance  to  the
Jaina  Saviours  (Arhats),  the  paiicanamaskrti.

Now  Manorama,  Sudarsana's  noble  wife,  hears  his  evil  story.  She  does
not  believe  that  her  wise,  law-abiding  and  chaste  husband  can  have  made
advances  to  the  king's  chief  wife,  but,  on  the  contrary,  suspects  her  of  a  trick,
because,  empty  of  soul,  though  lovely  outside,  she  is  a  very  treasury  of  guile.
What  will  not  an  impure  woman  do  when  thwarted  in  her  desires  ?  A  woman
loosed  from  the  scabbard  of  her  modesty  becomes  a  fear-inspiring  sword.
Manorama  then  bathes,  puts  on  white  robes,  and  without  delay  worships  an
image  of  the  Arhat.  Before  the  Arhat's  executive  female  divinity  she  makes
by  proxy  a  truth-declaration  in  behalf  of  her  husband :  "  If  this  Sudarsana  is
indifferent  to  the  wives  of  others,  then  let  me  be  united  with  him  at  once  !  "

By  the  force  of  Manorama's  spiritual  power  the  Arhat's  ancillary  divinity
arrives  at  the  place  of  execution,  where  Sudarsana  sits  impaled  upon  the  stake.
She  turns  the  stake  into  a  throne.  When  the  executioners  hold  their  sharp
swords  to  Sudarsana's  throat,  these  turn  into  garlands,  lovely  with  bees
buzzing  about  them.  The  rope  around  his  neck  becomes  a  jewelled  necklace.
She  produces  by  her  magic  a  rock  which  she  holds  over  the  city,  like  a  lid
about  to  shut  down  on  it.  The  divinity  threatens  to  let  down  the  rock  upon
sinful  king,  retinue  and  citizens  alike.  She  chides  the  king  for  not  having
understood  the  character  of  his  wife,  and  compels  him  to  expiate  his  sin  by
placing  Sudarsana  upon  a  noble  elephant,  and  holding,  like  an  umbrella-bearer,
the  royal  umbrella  over  his  head.  Thus  Sudarsana,  to  the  exultant  shouts  of
the  citizens,  lauded  by  bards,  to  the  beat  of  festal  drums,  returns  to  his  home.
The  king  then  takes  holy  vows,  but  Abhaya  hangs  herself,  and  is  reborn  as  a
Vyantara  demon.  The  pander-nurse,  Pandita,  flees  to  Pataliputra,  where  she
lives  in  the  house  of  the  courtesan  Devadatta.

On  p.  154  of  his  article  on  the  "  Potiphar"  motif  Bloomfield  gives  several
other  references  to  Jaina  works. — n.m.p.


CHAPTER  L

62.  Story  of  Suryaprabha  and  how  he  attained  Sovereignty
over  the  Vidyddharas

THEN  Suryaprabha  and  his  ministers  rose  up  early
in  the  morning  and,  accompanied  by  all  the  troops
of  the  Danavas  and  their  allies,  went  to  the  field
of  battle.  And  Srutasarman  came,  surrounded  by  all  the
forces  of  the  Vidyadharas ;  and  all  the  gods,  Asuras  and
others  again  came  to  look  on.  Both  armies  adopted  the
crescent  formation,  then  there  took  place  a  battle  between
those  two  armies.  The  swift  arrows,1  winged  with  feathers,
clashing  against  one  another  and  cutting  one  another  in
pieces,  also  fought.  The  long  sword-blades  issued  from  the
mouths  of  the  scabbards,  and  drinking  blood,  and  waving  to
and  fro,  appeared  like  the  tongues  of  Death.  The  field  of
battle  seemed  like  a  lake,  the  full-blown  lotuses  of  which  were
the  faces  of  many  heroes ;  on  those  the  shower  of  discuses
descended  like  a  flight  of  Brahmany  ducks  and  so  ruined  the
kingly  swans.  The  combat  appeared,  with  the  severed  heads
of  heroes  flying  up  and  down,  like  a  game  of  ball,  with  which
Death  was  amusing  himself.  When  the  arena  of  combat  was
cleared  from  the  obscuring  dust  by  the  sprinkling  of  bloody
drops,  there  took  place  on  it  the  single  combats  of  furious
champions.2  There  Suryaprabha  fought  with  Srutasarman,
and  Prabhasa  fought  with  Damodara,  and  Siddhartha  fought
with  Mahotpata,  and  Prahasta  with  Brahmagupta,  and
Vitabhi  with  Sangama,  and  Prajnadhya  with  Chandragupta,
and  Priyankara  with  Akrama,  and  Sarvadamana  fought  with
Atibala,  and  Kunjarakumaraka  fought  with  Dhurandhara,
and  other  great  champions  fought  with  others  respectively.

1  Savara  should  probably  be  saraka. The  D.  text  has  proved  Tawney's

conjecture  correct. — n.m.p.

2  Cf.  the  descriptions  of  similar  battles  with   the   Jann   in  the  Nights
(Burton,  vol.  ii,  pp.  253,  271  ;  vol.  vii,  p.  31,  and  vol.  viii,  p.  136).— n.m.i».

108


MANY  CHAMPIONS  FALL  109

Then  first  Mahotpata  silenced  the  arrows  of  Siddhartha
with  his  arrows,  and  after  cleaving  his  bow,  slew  his  horses
and  charioteer.  Siddhartha,  though  deprived  of  his  chariot,
The  Single  charged  him  angrily,  and  with  a  large  iron  mace
Combats  broke  in  pieces  his  chariot  and  horses.     Then

Siddhartha  fought  on  foot  with  Mahotpata  also  on  foot,  and
in  a  wrestling  bout  hurled  him  to  the  ground.  But  while
he  was  trying  to  crush  him,  that  Vidyadhara  was  delivered
by  his  father,  Bhaga,  and  flying  up  into  the  air  left  the
battle-field.  And  Prahasta  and  Brahmagupta  destroyed  one
another's  chariots,  and  then  fought  with  swords,  showing
various  arts  of  fence ;  and  Prahasta  cleft  his  foe's  shield
in  the  course  of  their  sword-play,  and  with  a  dexterous
sleight  laid  him  low  on  the  earth ;  but  when  he  was  about
to  cut  off  his  head  as  he  lay  on  the  ground  he  was  forbidden
by  his  father  Brahma  himself  by  a  sign  from  a  distance ;
then  all  the  Danavas  laughed  the  gods  to  scorn,  saying  :
"  You  gods  have  come  to  save  your  sons,  not  to  behold
the  fray."

In  the  meanwhile  Vitabhaya,  after  cutting  in  two  the
bow  of  Sankrama,  and  slaying  his  charioteer,  slew  him  by
piercing  his  heart  with  the  weapon  of  Kama.  And  Praj-
nadhya,  fighting  on  foot  with  Chandragupta,  sword  to
sword,  after  both  their  chariots  had  been  destroyed,  killed
him  by  cutting  off  his  head.  Then  the  Moon,  angry  at
the  death  of  his  son,  himself  came  and  fought  with  Praj-
nadhya,  and  the  two  combatants  were  evenly  matched.
And  Priyankara,  who  had  also  had  his  chariot  destroyed,
cut  him  in  two  with  one  blow  of  his  sword.  And  Sarva-
damana  easily  killed  Atibala  in  fight,  for  when  his  bow  was
cleft  he  threw  his  elephant  hook  and  smote  him  in  the
heart.

Then  Kunjarakumaraka  in  a  contest,  in  which  missiles
were  opposed  by  answering  missiles,  frequently  deprived
Dhurandhara  of  his  chariot,  and  as  frequently  VikramaSakti
brought  him  a  chariot,  and  defended  him  in  sore  straits,
repelling  weapons  with  weapons ;  then  Kunjarakumaraka
in  wrath  rushed  forward  and  swiftly  hurled  a  great  rock
on  to  the  chariot  of  Vikrama^akti,  and,  when  Vikrama^akti


110  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

retired  with  broken  chariot,  he  crushed  Dhurandhara  with
that  very  stone.1  .  .  .

Then  Suryaprabha,  while  fighting  with  SrutaSarman,  being
angry  on  account  of  the  slaughter  of  Virochana,  killed  Dama
with  one  arrow.  Enraged  at  that,  the  two  AsVins  descended
to  the  combat,  but  Sunitha  received  them  with  showers  of
arrows,  and  a  great  fight  took  place  between  him  and  them.
And  Sthirabuddhi  slew  Parakrama  in  fight  with  a  javelin,
and  then  fought  with  the  eight  Vasus  enraged  on  account
of  his  death.  And  Prabhasa,  seeing  Bhasa  deprived  of  his
chariot,  though  himself  engaged  in  fighting  with  Damodara,
killed  Mardana  with  one  arrow.  The  Danava  Prakampana
killed  Tejahprabha  in  a  missile  combat,  and  then  fought  with
the  God  of  Fire  enraged  on  account  of  his  death.  And
when  Dhumraketu  had  slain  Yamadamshtra  in  fight  he  had
a  terrible  combat  with  the  enraged  Yama.2  And  Simha-
damshtra,  having  crushed  Suroshana  with  a  stone,  fought
with  Nirriti 3  enraged  on  account  of  his  death.  Kalachakra
also  cut  Vayubala  in  two  with  a  discus,  and  then  fought
with  Vayu4  inflamed  with  rage  thereat.  And  Mahamaya
slew  Kuveradatta,  who  deluded  his  foes  by  assuming  the
forms  of  a  snake,  a  mountain  and  a  tree,  assuming  himself
the  forms  of  Garuda,  of  the  thunderbolt  and  of  fire.  Then
Kuvera6  himself  fought  with  him  in  wrath.  In  the  same
way  all  the  gods  fought,  angry  on  account  of  the  slaughter
of  their  sons.  And  then  various  other  princes  of  the  Vidya-
dharas  were  slain  by  various  men  and  Danavas,  darting
forward  from  time  to  time.

And  in  the  meanwhile  a  conflict  went  on  between
Prabhasa  and  Damodara,  terrible  from  its  unceasing
exchange  of  missiles.  Then  Damodara,  though  his  bow  was
cleft  asunder  and  his  charioteer  slain,  took  another  bow  and
fought  on,  holding  the  reins  in  his  own  hands.     And  when

1  Here  Brockhaus  supposes  a  hiatus but  this  is  wrong ;  there  is  no

gap.     The  D.  text  also  reads  straight  on. — n.m.p.
1  The  God  of  Death.

*  I.e.  Destruction  (a  goddess  of  death  and  corruption).

*  I.e.  the  God  of  the  Wind.
»  The  God  of  Wealth.


THE  APPLAUSE  OF  BRAHMA  111

Brahma  applauded  him  Indra  said  to  him :  "  Revered  one,
why  are  you  pleased  with  one  who  is  getting  the  worst  of
it  ?  "  Then  Brahma  answered  him  :  "  How  can  I  help
The  Prowess  being  pleased  with  one  who  fights  for  so  long
of  Prabhasa  with  this  Prabhasa  ?  Who  but  Damodara,  who  is
a  portion  of  Hari,  would  do  this  ?  For  all  the  gods  would
be  a  scant  match  for  Prabhasa  in  fight.  For  that  Asura
Namuchi,  who  was  so  hard  for  the  gods  to  subdue,  and  who
was  then  born  again  as  Prabala,  one  entire  and  perfect
jewel,  has  now  been  born  as  the  invincible  Prabhasa,  son  of
Bhasa,  and  Bhasa  too  was  in  a  former  birth  the  great  Asura
Kalanemi,  who  afterwards  became  Hiranyakasipu  and  then
Kapinjala.  And  Siiryaprabha  is  the  Asura  who  was  called
Sumundika.  And  the  Asura  who  was  before  called  Hiran-
yaksha  is  now  this  Sunitha.  And  as  for  Prahasta  and  others,
they  are  all  Daityas  and  Danavas ;  and  since  the  Asuras
slain  by  you  have  been  born  again  in  these  forms,  the  other
Asuras,  Maya  and  others,  have  espoused  their  cause.  And
see,  Bali  has  come  here  to  look  on,  for  his  bonds  have  been
broken  by  virtue  of  the  great  sacrifice  to  Siva,  duly  performed
by  Siiryaprabha  and  others,  but,  keeping  his  promise  faith-
fully, he  remains  content  with  the  realm  of  Patala  until  your
allotted  period  of  rule  is  at  an  end,  and  then  he  will  be  Indra.
These  are  now  favoured  by  Siva,  so  it  is  not  now  a  time  of
victory  for  you  ;   make  peace  with  your  foes."  '

While  Brahma  was  saying  this  to  the  king  of  gods,  Pra-
bhasa sent  forth  the  great  weapon  of  Siva.  When  Vishnu  saw
that  terrible  all- destroying  weapon  let  loose,  he  also  sent
forth,  out  of  regard  for  his  son,  his  discus  called  Sudarsana.
Then  there  took  place  between  those  divine  weapons,  which
had  assumed  visible  shape,  a  struggle  which  made  the  three
worlds  dread  a  sudden  destruction  of  all  creatures.  Then
Hari  said  to  Prabhasa  :  "  Recall  your  weapon  and  I  will
recall  mine."  And  Prabhasa  answered  him  :  "  My  weapon
cannot  be  launched  in  vain,  so  let  Damodara  turn  his  back
and  retire  from  the  fight,  and  then  I  will  recall  my  weapon."

1  For  B.'s  reading,  vigrakaih,  the  D.  text  has  kirn  grahaih,  "  What  is  the  use
of  fighting  ?  "  This  is  literal  and  seems  correct,  while  T.'s  translation  is  not  a
true  rendering. — n.m.p.


112  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

When  Prabhasa  said  that,  Vishnu  answered :  "  Then  do
you  also  honour  my  discus ;  let  not  either  of  these  weapons
be  fruitless."  When  Vishnu  said  this,  Prabhasa,  who
possessed  tact,  said  :  "  So  be  it ;  let  this  discus  of  thine
destroy  my  chariot."  Vishnu  agreed,  and  made  Damodara
retire  from  the  fight,  and  Prabhasa  withdrew  his  weapon,
and  the  discus  fell  on  his  chariot.  Then  he  mounted  another
chariot  and  went  to  Suryaprabha,  and  then  Damodara,  for
his  part,  repaired  to  SrutaSarman.

And  then  the  single  combat  between  SrutaSarman,  who
was  puffed  up  by  being  a  son  of  Indra,  and  Suryaprabha
became  exceedingly  fierce.  Whatever  weapon  Srutasarman
The  Final  vigorously  employed,  Siiryaprabha  immediately
Duel  repelled  with  opposing  weapons.     And  whatever

delusion  Srutasarman  employed  was  overmastered  by  Siirya-
prabha with  opposing  delusion.  Then  Srutasarman  in  fierce
wrath  sent  forth  the  weapon  of  Brahma,  and  the  mighty
Suryaprabha  let  loose  the  weapon  of  Siva.  That  mighty
weapon  of  Siva  repelled  the  weapon  of  Brahma,  and,  being
irresistible,  was  overpowering  Srutasarman  when  Indra  and
the  other  Lokapalas,  being  indignant,  sent  forth  their  tre-
mendous weapons,  beginning  with  thunderbolts.  But  the
weapon  of  Siva  conquered  all  those  weapons,  and  blazed
exceedingly,  eager  to  slay  SrutaSarman.  Then  Suryaprabha
praised  that  great  weapon,  and  entreated  it  not  to  kill
SrutaSarman,  but  to  take  him  prisoner  and  hand  him  over
to  himself.  Then  all  the  gods  speedily  prepared  to  fight,
and  the  other  Asuras  also,  who  had  come  to  look  on,  did  the
same,  being  eager  to  conquer  the  gods.

Then  a  Gana  named  Vlrabhadra,  sent  by  Siva,  came  and
delivered  this  order  of  his  to  Indra  and  the  other  gods :  "You
came  to  look  on,  so  what  right  have  you  to  fight  here  ?
The  Gods  Moreover,  your  overstepping  the  bounds  of  pro-
join  in  the  priety  will  produce  other  bad  results."  When  the
gods  heard  that,  they  said  :  "  All  of  us  have  sons
here  that  have  been  slain,  or  are  being  slain,  so  how  can  we
help  fighting  ?  l  Love  for  one's  offspring  is  a  feeling  hard
to  lay  aside,  so  we  must  certainly  revenge  ourselves  on  their

1  Cf.  Homer's  Iliad,  Book  XV,  1 13-141.


INDRA  ATTACKS  SURYAPRABHA  113

slayers  to  the  utmost  of  our  power ;    what  impropriety  is
there  in  this  ?  "

When  the  gods  said  this,  Virabhadra  departed,  and  a  great
fight  took  place  between  the  gods  and  the  Asuras  :  Sunitha
fought  with  the  two  AsVins,  and  Prajnadhya  fought  with  the
Moon,  and  Sthirabuddhi  with  the  Vasus,  and  Kalachakra
with  Vayu,  and  Prakampana  with  Agni,  and  Simhadamshtra
with  Nirriti,  and  Pramathana  with  Varuna,  and  Dhumra-
ketu  with  Yama,  and  then  Mahamaya  fought  with  the  God
of  Wealth,  and  other  Asuras  x  at  the  same  time  fought
with  other  gods,  with  missiles  and  opposing  missiles.  And
finally,  whatever  mighty  weapon  any  god  sent  forth  Siva
immediately  destroyed  with  an  angry  roar.  But  the  God
of  Wealth,  when  his  club  was  uplifted,  was  restrained  by
Siva  in  a  conciliatory  manner,  while  various  other  gods,  their
weapons  having  been  broken,  fled  from  the  field  of  battle.
Then  Indra  himself,  in  wrath,  attacked  Suryaprabha,  and
let  fly  a  storm  of  arrows  at  him  and  various  other  weapons.
And  Suryaprabha  repelled  those  weapons  with  ease,  and
kept  striking  Indra  with  hundreds  of  arrows  drawn  back  to
the  ear.

Then  the  king  of  the  gods,  enraged,  seized  his  thunder-
bolt, and  Siva  made  an  angry  noise  and  destroyed  that
thunderbolt.  Then  Indra  turned  his  back  and  fled,  and
TheFight  of ^eNarayana  himself,  in  wrath,  attacked  Prabhasa
Two  Mighty  with  sharp- edged a  arrows.  And  he  fearlessly
Weapons  fought  with  him,  opposing  those  and  other
missiles  with  his  own  missiles;  and  when  his  horses  were
slain,  and  he  was  deprived  of  his  chariot,  he  ascended
another,  and  still  fought  with  that  enemy  of  the  Daityas
on  equal  terms.  Then  the  god,  enraged,  sent  forth
his  flaming  discus.  And  Prabhasa  sent  forth  a  heavenly
sword,  after  consecrating  it  with  magic  formulas.  While
those  two  weapons  were  contending,  Siva,  seeing  that  the
sword  was  gradually  being  overpowered  by  the  discus,  made
an  angry  roar.  That  caused  the  discus  and  sword  to  be
both  destroyed.

1  For  anyonyais  I  read  anye'anyais.

2  Or  perhaps — with  arrows  having  ten  million  points.
VOL.  IV.  H


114  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

Then  the  Asuras  rejoiced,  and  the  gods  were  cast  down,
as  Suryaprabha  had  obtained  the  victory,  and  SrutaSarman
was  taken  prisoner.  Then  the  gods  praised  and  propitiated
Sim  stop*  Siva,  and  the  husband  of  Ambika,  being  pleased,
the  Fight  gave  this  command  to  the  gods  :  "  Ask  any  boon
but  that  promised  to  Suryaprabha.  Who  can  set  aside
what  has  once  been  promised  at  a  burnt-sacrifice  ?  '  The
gods  said  :  "  But,  Lord,  let  that  also  which  we  promised
to  SrutaSarman  be  fulfilled,  and  let  not  our  sons  perish."
Then  they  ceased,  and  the  Holy  Lord  thus  commanded
them :  "  When  peace  is  made,  let  that  be  so ;  and  this  is
the  condition  of  peace :  let  Srutas*arman  with  all  his  retinue
do  homage  to  Suryaprabha.  Then  we  will  issue  a  decree
which  shall  be  for  the  weal  of  both."

The  gods  acquiesced  in  this  decision  of  Siva's,  and  made
SrutaSarman  do  homage  to  Suryaprabha.  Then  they  re-
nounced their  enmity,  and  embraced  one  another;  and  the
gods  and  Asuras  also  laid  aside  their  enmity,  and  made  peace
with  one  another.  Then,  in  the  hearing  of  the  gods  and
Asuras,  the  holy  Siva  said  this  to  Suryaprabha :  "  You
must  rule  yourself  in  the  southern  half-vedi,  but  the  northern
half- vedi  give  to  Srutasarman.  For  you  are  destined,  my
son,  soon  to  receive  the  fourfold  sovereignty  of  all  the
sky-goers,  Kinnaras  and  all.  And  when  you  receive  this,
as  you  will  in  a  distinguished  position,  you  must  also  give
the  southern  half-vedi  to  Srikunjarakumara.  And  as  for
the  heroes  slain  on  both  sides  in  the  battle,  let  them  all
rise  up  alive  with  unwounded  limbs."  After  saying  this,
Siva  disappeared,  and  all  those  heroes  who  were  slain  in
that  battle  rose  up  unwounded,  as  if  they  had  awaked  from
sleep.

Then  Suryaprabha,  the  tamer  of  his  foes,  intent  on
observing  the  command  of  Siva,  went  to  a  remote  extensive
plain,  and,  sitting  in  full  court,  himself  made  Srutasarman,
Peace  and  wno  came  to  him,  sit  down  on  half  of  his  throne.
Friendship  is  And  his  companions,  headed  by  Prabhasa,  and
proclaimed  Srutagarman's  companions,  headed  by  Damo-
dara,  sat  at  the  side  of  the  two  princes.  And  Sunitha
and    Maya,    and    the    other    Danavas,    and    the   kings   of


THE  GODS  AND  ASURAS  MAKE  PEACE       115

the  Vidyadharas  too  sat  on  seats  in  order  of  precedence.
Then  the  Daityas,  who  were  kings  of  the  seven  Patalas,
headed  by  Prahlada,  and  the  kings  of  the  Danavas,  came
there  out  of  joy.  And  Indra  came  with  the  Lokapalas,
preceded  by  Brihaspati,  and  the  Vidyadhara  Sumeru  with
Suvasakumara.  And  all  the  wives  of  Kasyapa  came,  headed
by  Danu,  and  the  wives  of  Suryaprabha  in  the  chariot
Bhutasana.  When  they  had  all  sat  down,  after  showing
one  another  affection,  and  going  through  the  prescribed
courtesies,  a  friend  of  Danu's,  named  Siddhi,  spoke  to  them
as  from  her :  "  0  gods  and  Asuras,  the  goddess  Danu  says
this  to  you  :  '  Say,  if  you  have  ever  felt  before  the  joy  and
satisfaction  which  we  all  feel  in  this  friendly  meeting !  so
you  ought  not  to  wage  against  one  another  war,  which  is
terrible  on  account  of  the  sorrow  it  produces.  Hiranyaksha
and  those  other  older  Asuras,  who  waged  it  to  obtain  the
empire  of  heaven,  have  passed  away,  and  Indra  is  now
the  eldest,  so  what  cause  is  there  for  enmity  ?  '  So  let
your  antagonism  drop,  and  be  happy,  in  order  that  I
may  be  pleased,  and  the  prosperity  of  the  worlds  may  be
ensured."

When  they  had  heard  this  address  of  the  revered  Danu,
uttered  by  the  mouth  of  Siddhi,  Brihaspati,  Indra  having
looked  him  in  the  face,  said  to  her  :  "  The  gods  entertain  no
design  against  the  Asuras,  and  are  willing  to  be  friends  with
them,  unless  they  display  a  treacherous  animosity  against  the
gods."  When  the  preceptor  of  the  gods  said  this,  Maya,
the  King  of  the  Danavas,  said :  "  If  the  Asuras  entertained
any  animosity,  how  could  Namuchi  have  given  to  Indra  the
horse  Uchchaihsravas  that  resuscitates  the  dead  ?  And  how
could  Prabala  have  given  his  own  body  to  the  gods  ?  And
how  could  Bali  have  given  the  three  worlds  to  Vishnu,
and  himself  have  gone  to  prison  ?  Or  how  could  Ayodeha
have  given  his  own  body  to  Visvakarman  ?  What  more
shall  I  say  ?  The  Asuras  are  ever  generous,  and  if  they  are
not  treacherously  injured  they  cherish  no  animosity."  When
the  Asura  Maya  had  said  this,  Siddhi  made  a  speech,  which
induced  the  gods  and  Asuras  to  make  peace  and  embrace
one  another.


116  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

In  the  meanwhile  a  female  warder,  named  Jay  a,1  sent  by
Bhavani,  came  there  and  was  honoured  by  all,  and  she  said
to  Sumeru  :  "I  am  sent  by  the  goddess  Durga  to  you,  and
The  Arrival  she  gives  you  this  order  :  '  You  have  an  un-
of  Jm/ti  married  daughter  named  Kamachudamani ;    give

her  quickly  to  Suryaprabha,  for  she  is  a  votary  of  mine.'  :
When  Jaya,  said  this  to  Sumeru,  he  bowed,  and  answered
her  :  "I  will  do  as  the  goddess  Durga  commands  me,  for
this  is  a  great  favour  to  me,  and  this  very  thing  was  long
ago  enjoined  on  me  by  the  god  Siva."  When  Sumeru
answered  Jaya  on  this  wise,  she  said  to  Suryaprabha  :  "  You
must  set  Kamachudamani  above  all  your  wives,  and  she
must  be  respected  by  you  more  than  all  the  others  ;  this  is
the  order  given  to  you  to-day  by  the  goddess  Gauri,  being
propitious  to  you."

When  Jaya  had  said  this  she  disappeared,  after  hav-
ing been  honoured  by  Suryaprabha.  And  Sumeru  quickly
fixed  upon  an  auspicious  moment  in  that  same  day  for  the
The  Beauteous  marriage,  and  he  had  an  altar  made  there,  with
Kdmarku-  pillars  and  pavement  of  refulgent  jewels,  furnished
with  fire  that  seemed,  as  it  were,  eclipsed  by  their
rays.  And  he  summoned  there  his  daughter  Kamachudamani,
whose  beauty  was  greedily  drunk  in  by  the  eager  eyes  of
gods  and  Asuras.  Her  loveliness  was  like  that  of  Uma ;  and
no  wonder;  for  if  Parvati  was  the  daughter  of  Himalaya,
she  was  the  daughter  of  Sumeru.  Then  he  made  her  ascend
the  altar,  fully  adorned,  resplendent  from  the  ceremony  of
the  marriage-thread,  and  then  Suryaprabha  took  the  lotus-
hand  of  Kamachudamani,  on  which  bracelets  had  been
fastened  by  Danu  and  the  other  ladies.  And  when  the
first  handful  of  parched  grain2  was  thrown  into  the  fire  Jaya
immediately  came  and  gave  her  an  imperishable  celestial
garland  sent  by  Bhavani;  and  then  Sumeru  bestowed  price-
less jewels,  and  an  excellent  elephant  of  heavenly  breed,
descended  from  Airavata.  And  at  the  second  throwing  of
parched  grain  Jaya  bestowed  a  necklace,  of  such  a  kind
that,  as  long  as  it  is  upon  a  person's  neck,  hunger,  thirst

1  See  Vol.  I,  pp.  6,  7,  85. — n.m.p.

2  Cf.  Thiselton  Dyer's  English  Folk-Lore,  p.  203.


THE  WEDDING  FEAST  117

and  death  cannot  harm  them '  ;  and  Sumeru  gave  twice
as  many  jewels  as  before,  and  a  matchless  horse  descended
from  Uchchaihsravas.  And  at  the  third  throwing  of  grain
Jaya  gave  a  single  string  of  jewels,  such  that,  as  long  as
it  is  on  the  neck,  youth  does  not  wither ;  and  Sumeru  gave
a  heap  of  jewels  three  times  as  large  as  the  first,  and  gave  a
heavenly  pearl  that  bestowed  all  kinds  of  magic  powers  upon
its  possessor.

Then,  the  wedding  being  over,  Sumeru  said  to  all  present :
44  Gods,  Asuras,  Vidyadharas,  mothers  of  the  gods,  and  all,
to-day  all  of  you  must  eat  in  my  house ;  you  must  do  me
this  honour;  I  entreat  you  with  palms  folded  above  my
head."  They  were  all  inclined  to  refuse  Sumeru's  invitation,
but  in  the  meanwhile  Nandin  arrived  ;  he  said  to  them,  who
bowed  humbly  before  him  :  "  Siva  commands  you  to  feast
in  the  house  of  Sumeru,  for  he  is  the  god's  servant,  and  if
you  eat  his  food  you  will  be  satisfied  for  ever."  All  of  them,
when  they  heard  this  from  Nandin,  agreed  to  it.

Then  there  came  there  innumerable  Ganas  sent  by  Siva,
under  the  heavenly  leadership  of  Vinayaka,  Mahakala,  Vira-
bhadra  and  others.  They  prepared  a  place  fit  for  dining,  and
caused  the  guests  to  sit  down  in  order,  gods,  Vidyadharas
and  men.  And  the  divine  beings,  Virabhadra,  Mahakala,
Bhringin  and  others,  ministered  to  them  viands  produced  by
Sumeru  by  magic,  and  others  supplied  by  the  cow  Kama-
dhenu,  ordered  to  do  so  by  Siva;  and  they  waited  upon
every  single  guest  according  to  his  rank.  And  then  there  was
a  concert,  charming  on  account  of  the  dancing  of  heavenly
nymphs,  and  in  which  the  bards  of  the  Vidyadharas  kept
continually  joining  out  of  delight.  And  at  the  end  of  the
feast  Nandin  and  the  others  gave  them  all  celestial  garlands,
robes  and  ornaments.  After  they  had  thus  honoured  the
gods  and  others,  all  the  chiefs  of  the  Ganas,  Nandin  and  the
others  departed  with  all  the  Ganas  as  they  had  come.  Then
all  the  gods  and  Asuras,  and  those  mothers  of  theirs,  and
Sruta^arman  and  his  followers  took  leave  of  Sumeru  and
went  each  to  his  own  place.     But  Suryaprabha  and  his  wife,

1  For  note  on  magical  articles  see  Vol.  I,  pp.  25-29,  and  Bolte,  op.  cit.,
Vol.  I,  p.  36l. — N.M.P.


118  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

accompanied  by  all  his  former  wives,  went  in  the  chariot
first  to  that  ascetic  grove  of  Sumeru.  And  he  sent  his
companion  Harsha  to  announce  his  success  to  the  kings
and  to  his  brother  Ratnaprabha.  And  at  the  close  of  day
he  entered  the  private  apartments  of  his  wife  Kamachu-
damani,  in  which  were  splendid  jewelled  couches,  and  which
were  admirably  built.  There  he  flattered  her  by  saying  :
"  Now  other  women  dwell  outside  of  me,  but  you  alone  live
in  my  heart."  Then  the  night  and  his  sleep  gradually  came
to  an  end.

And  in  the  morning  Suryaprabha  got  up  and  went  and
paid  compliments  to  his  head  wives,  who  were  all  together.
And  while  they  were  rejecting  him,  as  being  in  love  with
Preparations  a  new  ^^e»  with  playfully  sarcastic,  sweet,  affec-
forthe  tionate  and  bashful  turns  of  speech,  a   Vidya-

Coronatton  dhara  named  Sushena  came,  announced  by  the
warder,  and  after  doing  homage  said  to  that  triumphant
king  :  "  Your  Highness,  I  have  been  sent  here  by  all  the
princes  of  the  Vidyadharas,  the  lord  of  Trikiita  and  others,
and  they  make  this  representation  to  your  Highness  :  c  It
is  auspicious  that  your  coronation  should  take  place  on
the  third  day  at  the  mountain  Rishabha ;  let  this  be
announced  to  all,  and  let  the  necessary  preparations  be
made.'  "

When  Suryaprabha  heard  that,  he  answered  the  am-
bassador :  "Go  and  say  to  the  King  of  Trikiita  and  the
other  Vidyadharas  from  me :  '  Let  your  honours  begin  the
preparations,  and  say  yourselves  what  further  is  to  be  done ;
I  for  my  part  am  ready.  But  I  will  announce  the  day  to
all,  as  is  fitting.'  "  Then  Sushena  departed,  taking  with
him  this  answer.  But  Suryaprabha  sent  off  his  friends
Prabhasa  and  the  others,  one  by  one,  to  invite  all  the  gods,
and  the  hermits,  Yajnavalkya  and  others,  and  the  kings,  and
the  Vidyadharas,  and  the  Asuras  to  the  great  festival  of  his
coronation.

He  himself  went  alone  to  Kailasa,  the  monarch  of  moun-
tains, in  order  to  invite  Siva  and  Ambika.  And  as  he  was
ascending  that  mountain  he  saw  that  it  gleamed  white  as
ashes,  looking  like  a  second  Siva  to  be  adored  by  the  Siddhas,


THE  HOME  OF  GANESA  119

Rishis  and  gods.  After  he  had  got  more  than  half-way  up
it,  and  had  seen  that  farther  on  it  was  hard  to  climb,  he
beheld  on  one  side  a  coral  door.  When  he  found  that,
Sunaprabha  though  gifted  with  supernatural  power,  he  could
visits  the  not  enter,   he   praised    Siva   with    intent   mind.

Great  Siva  Then  a  man  with  an  elephant's  face  opened  the
door,  and  said :  "  Come !  enter !  the  holy  GaneSa  is  satis-
fied with  you."  Then  Suryaprabha  entered  inly  wondering,
and  beheld  the  god  seated  on  a  broad  slab  of  jyotirasa,1
with  one  tusk,  and  an  elephant's  proboscis,  in  brightness
like  twelve  suns,  with  pendent  stomach,  with  three  eyes,  with
flaming  axe  and  club,  surrounded  by  many  Ganas  with  the
faces  of  animals,  and  falling  at  his  feet  he  adored  him.  The
Vanquisher  of  Obstacles,  being  pleased,  asked  him  the  cause
of  his  coming,  and  said  to  him  with  an  affectionate  voice :
"  Ascend  by  this  path."

Suryaprabha  ascended  by  that  path  another  five  yqjanas,
and  saw  another  great  door  of  ruby.  And  not  being  able
to  enter  there  either,  he  praised  the  god  Siva  by  his  thousand
names  with  intent  mind.  Then  the  son  of  Skanda,  called
ViSakha,  himself  opened  the  door,  proclaiming  who  he  was,
and  introduced  the  prince  into  the  interior.  And  Surya-
prabha, having  entered,  beheld  Skanda  of  the  brightness
of  burning  fire,  accompanied  by  his  five  sons,  like  himself,
Sakha,  Visakha  and  their  brothers,  surrounded  by  in-
auspicious planets  and  infant  planets,8  that  submitted  to
him  as  soon  as  he  was  born,  and  by  ten  millions  of  Ganesas,
prostrate  at  his  feet.  That  god  Karttikeya  also,  being
pleased,  asked  the  cause  of  his  coming,  and  showed  him  the
path  by  which  to  ascend  the  mountain.

In  the  same  manner  he  passed  five  other  jewel- doors  in
succession,  kept  by  Bhairava,  Mahakala,  Virabhadra,  Nandin
and  Bhringin  severally,  each  with  his  attendants,  and  at  last
he  reached  on  the  top  of  the  mountain  an  eighth  door  of
crystal.  Then  he  praised  Siva,  and  he  was  introduced
courteously  by  one  of  the  Rudras,  and  beheld  that  abode  of
Siva  that  excelled  Svarga,  in  which  blew  winds  of  heavenly

1  Probably  some  kind  of  sparkling  gem.

2  Said  to  mean  planets  or  demons  unfavourable  to  children.


120  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

fragrance,  in  which  the  trees  ever  bore  fruit  and  flowers,1  in
which  the  Gandharvas  had  begun  their  concert,  which  was
all  joyous  with  the  dancing  of  Apsarases.  Then,  in  one
part  of  it,  Suryaprabha  beheld  with  joy  the  great  god  Siva,
seated  on  a  throne  of  crystal,  three- eyed,  trident  in  hand,  in
hue  like  unto  pure  crystal,  with  yellow  matted  locks,  with  a
lovely  half- moon  for  crest,  adored  by  the  holy  daughter  of  the
mountain,  who  was  seated  at  his  side.  And  he  advanced,
and  fell  at  the  feet  of  him  and  the  goddess  Durga.  Then
the  adorable  Hara  placed  his  hand  on  his  back,  and  made
him  rise  up,  and  sit  down,  and  asked  him  why  he  had  come.
And  Suryaprabha  answered  the  god :  "  My  coronation  is
nigh  at  hand,  therefore  I  desire  the  Lord's  presence  at  it."
Then  Siva  said  to  him :  "  Why  have  you  gone  through  so
much  toil  and  hardship  ?  Why  did  you  not  think  of  me
where  you  were,  in  order  that  I  might  appear  there  ?  Be
it  so,  I  will  be  present."

The  god,  who  is  kind  to  his  votaries,  said  this,  and  calling
a  certain  Gana,  who  stood  near  him,  gave  him  the  following
command  :  "  Go  and  take  this  man  to  the  Rishabha  moun-
tain, in  order  that  he  may  be  crowned  emperor,  for  that  is
the  place  appointed  for  the  grand  coronation  of  emperors
such  as  he  is."  When  the  Gana  had  received  this  command
from  the  holy  god,  he  took  in  his  lap  with  all  respect  Surya-
prabha, who  had  circumambulated  Siva.  And  he  carried  him
and  placed  him  on  the  Rishabha  mountain  by  his  magic
power  that  very  moment  and  then  disappeared.

And  when  Suryaprabha  arrived  there  his  companions
came  to  him,  and  his  wives  with  Kamachudamani  at  their
head,  and  the  kings  of  the  Vidyadharas,  and  the  gods  with
Indra,  and  the  Asuras  with  Maya  at  their  head,  and  Sruta-
Sarman,  and  Sumeru  with  Suvasakumara.  And  Suryaprabha
honoured  them  all  in  becoming  fashion,  and  when  he  told
the  story  of  his  interview  with  Siva  they  congratulated
him.

1  Cf.  Odyssey,  vii,  1  ]  7.  The  same  is  asserted  by  Palladius  of  the  trees  in
the  island  of  Taprobane,  where  the  Makrobioi  live.  The  fragment  of  Palladius,
to  which  I  refer,  begins  at  the  seventh  chapter  of  the  third  book  of  the
History  of  the  Pseudo-Callisthenes,  edited  by  Carolus  Mueller.


EMPEROR  OF  THE  VIDYADHARAS  121

Then  Prabhasa  and  the  others  brought  the  water  of
consecration  with  their  own  hands,  mixed  with  various
herbs,  in  pitchers  of  jewels  and  gold,  taking  it  from  male
Ska  arrives  an(*  female  rivers,  seas  and  holy  places.  In
for  the  the  meanwhile  the  holy  Siva  came  there,  accom-

Coronatwn  panied  by  Durga  ;  and  the  gods,  and  Asuras  and
Vidyadharas,  and  kings  and  great  Rishis  adored  his  foot.
And  while  all  the  gods,  and  Danavas,  and  Vidyadharas
uttered  loud  cries  of,  "  Blessed  be  this  day  !  "  the  Rishis  made
Siiryaprabha  sit  on  the  throne,  and  pouring  all  the  waters
over  him,  declared  him  Emperor  of  the  Vidyadharas.  And
the  discreet  Asura  Maya  joyfully  fastened  on  his  turban
and  diadem.  And  the  drum  of  the  gods,  preceded  by  the
dancing  of  lovely  Apsarases,  sounded  joyfully  in  heaven,
in  unison  with  the  cymbals  of  earth.  And  that  assembly
of  great  Rishis  poured  the  water  of  consecration  over  Kama-
chudamani  also,  and  made  her  the  appropriate  queen  consort
of  Siiryaprabha.

Then,  the  gods  and  Asuras  having  departed,  Siiryaprabha,
the  Emperor  of  the  Vidyadharas,  protracted  his  great
coronation  feast  with  his  relations,  friends  and  companions.
And  in  a  few  days  he  gave  to  Srutasarman  that  northern
half- vedi  mentioned  by  Siva,  and  having  obtained  his  other
beloved  ones,  he  enjoyed  for  a  long  time,  together  with  his
companions,  the  fortune  of  King  of  the  Vidyadharas.


[M]  "  Thus,  by  virtue  of  the  favour  of  Siva,  Siiryaprabha,
though  a  man,  obtained  of  yore  the  empire  of  the  Vidya-
dharas."

Having  told  this  story  in  the  presence  of  the  King  of
Vatsa,  and  having  bowed  before  Naravahanadatta,  Vajra-
prabha,  the  King  of  the  Vidyadharas,  ascended  to  heaven.
And  after  he  had  gone,  that  hero,  King  Naravahanadatta,
together  with  his  queen,  Madanamanchuka,  remained  in
the  house  of  his  father,  the  King  of  Vatsa,  waiting  to  obtain
the  rank  of  Emperor  of  the  Vidyadharas.


BOOK  IX:  ALANKARAVATI
CHAPTER  LI

INVOCATION

WE   bow  before  that  Ganesa   before  whom,  when
dancing,  even   the   mountains  seem  to  bow,  for
they  are  made  to  stoop,  owing  to  the  earth  being
bent  by  the  weight  of  Ni^umbha.


[M]  Thus  Naravahanadatta,  the  son  of  the  King  of
Vatsa,  dwelt  in  Kausambi  in  the  palace  of  his  father,
having  heard  with  astonishment  of  the  reign  of  the  King
of  the  Vidyadharas.  And  once  on  a  time,  having  gone  out
hunting,  he  dismissed  his  army  and  entered  a  great  forest,
with  Gomukha  as  his  only  companion.  There  the  throbbing
of  his  right  eye  indicated  the  approach  of  good  fortune,1
and  he  soon  heard  the  sound  of  singing,  mixed  with  the
notes  of  a  heavenly  lyre.  After  going  a  short  distance  to
find  whence  the  sound  proceeded,  he  beheld  a  Svayambhu a
temple  of  Siva,  and  after  tying  up  his  horse  he  entered  it.
And  there  he  beheld  a  heavenly  maiden,  surrounded  by
many  other  lovely  maidens,  praising  Siva  with  the  harp.
As  soon  as  he  saw  her,  with  the  effluent  streams  of  her
loveliness  she  disturbed  his  heart,  as  the  orb  of  the  moon
disturbs  the  heart  of  the  sea.  She  too  looked  on  him  with
impassioned,  loving  and  bashful  eye,  and  had  her  mind
solely  fixed  on  him,  and  forgot  to  pour  forth  her  notes.

Then  Gomukha,  who  read  his  master's  soul,  began  to
ask  her  attendants  :    "  Who  is  she,  and  whose  daughter  is

1  See  Vol.  II,  pp.  144-145n.  For  a  long  list  of  lucky  omens  see  Thurston,
Ethnographic  Notes  in  Southern  India,  1906,  pp.  239,  240,  242;  and  R.  E.
Enthoven,  Folk-Lore  of  Bombay,  1924,  p.  249. — N.M.P.

2  I.e.  connected  in  some  way  with  Buddha.     See  Bohtlingk  and  Roth  s.v.

122


PRINCE  DHARMASILA  123

she  ?  "  But  in  the  meanwhile  a  Vidyadhari  of  mature  age,
resembling  her  in  feature,  descended  from  heaven,  preceded
by  a  gleam  red  as  gold.  And  she  came  down  and  sat  by  the
side  of  that  maiden,  and  then  the  maiden  rose  up  and  fell  at
her  feet.  And  that  mature  dame  blessed  that  girl,  saying  :
"  Obtain  without  impediment  a  husband,  who  shall  be  king
of  all  the  Vidyadharas."  Then  Naravahanadatta  came  to
that  gentle-looking  Vidyadhari,  and  bowed  before  her,  and
after  she  had  given  him  her  blessing  he  slowly  said  to  her  :
"  Who  is  this  maiden  of  thine,  mother  ?  Tell  me."  Then
that  Vidyadhari  said  to  him  :   "  Listen,  I  will  tell  you.

63.  Story  of  Alankdravati

There  is  on  the  mountain  heights  of  the  father  of  Gauri *
a  city  named  Srlsundarapura,  and  in  it  there  dwells  a  king
of  the  Vidyadharas  named  Alankaraslla.  That  lofty- souled
king  had  a  wife  named  Kanchanaprabha,  and  in  course  of
time  a  son  was  born  to  the  king  by  her.  And  when  Uma
announced  to  his  father  in  a  dream  that  he  should  be  devoted
to  religion,  he  named  him  Dharmaslla.  And  in  course  of  time
that  son  Dharmaslla  grew  up  to  be  a  young  man,  and  the
king,  having  had  him  taught  the  sciences,  appointed  him
Crown  Prince.  Then  Dharmaslla,  when  appointed  Crown
Prince,  being  exclusively  devoted  to  virtue,  and  self- controlled,
delighted  the  subjects  even  more  than  did  his  father.

Then  the  Queen  Kanchanaprabha,  the  consort  of  King
Alankaraslla,  became  pregnant  again,  and  gave  birth  to
a  daughter.  Then  a  heavenly  voice  proclaimed :  "  This
daughter  shall  be  the  wife  of  the  Emperor  Naravahana-
datta." Then  her  father  gave  her  the  name  of  Alankaravati,
and  the  girl  gradually  grew  like  a  digit  of  the  moon.  And
in  course  of  time  she  attained  mature  youth,  and  learned
the  sciences  from  her  own  father,  and  through  devotion  to  the
god  Siva  began  to  roam  from  temple  to  temple  of  Ills.

In  the  meanwhile  that  brother  of  hers,  Dharmaslla,  who
was  saintly,  though  in  the  bloom  of  youth,  said  in  secret
to  his  father,  Alankaraslla  :  "  My  father,  these  enjoyments,

1  I.e.  the  Himalaya.


124  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

that  vanish  in  a  moment,  do  not  please  me ;  for  what  is
there  in  this  world  which  is  not  distasteful  at  the  last  ?
Have  you  not  heard  on  this  point  the  saying  of  the  hermit
Worldi  En-  Vyasa  ? — 'All  aggregations  end  in  dissolution,
joymetits  are  all  erections  end  in  a  fall,  all  unions  end  in  separa-
but  momentary  tiorlj  and  jjfe  enfe  }n  death.'     So  what  pleasure

can  wise  men  take  in  these  perishable  objects  ?  Moreover,
neither  enjoyments  nor  heaps  of  wealth  accompany  one  into
the  other  world,  but  virtue  is  the  only  friend  that  never
moves  a  step  from  one's  side.  Therefore  I  will  go  to  the
forest  and  perform  a  severe  penance,  in  order  by  it  to  attain
everlasting  supreme  felicity."

When  the  king's  son,  Dharmasila,  said  this,  his  father,
Alankarasila,  was  perturbed,  and  answered  him,  with  tears
in  his  eyes  :  "  My  son,  what  is  this  sudden  delusion  that  has
overtaken  you  while  still  a  boy  ?  For  good  men  desire  a  life
of  retirement  after  they  have  enjoyed  their  youth.  This  is
the  time  for  you  to  marry  a  wife,  and  rule  your  kingdom
justly,  and  enjoy  pleasures,  not  to  abandon  the  world."
When  Dharmasila  heard  this  speech  of  his  father's,  he
answered :  "  There  is  no  period  for  self-control  or  absence
of  self-control  fixed  by  age ;  anyone,  even  when  a  child,
attains  self-control  if  favoured  by  the  Lord,  but  no  bad  man
attains  self-control  even  when  old.  And  I  take  no  pleasure
in  reigning,  nor  in  marrying  a  wife ;  the  object  of  my  life  is
to  propitiate  Siva  by  austerities."

When  the  prince  said  this,  his  father,  Alankarasila,  seeing
that  he  could  not  be  turned  from  his  purpose  even  by  the
greatest  efforts,  shed  tears,  and  said  :  "If  you,  who  are
young,  my  son,  display  such  freedom  from  passion,  why
should  not  I,  who  am  an  old  man  ?  I  too  will  go  to  the
forest."  He  said  this,  and  went  to  the  world  of  men,  and
bestowed  on  Brahmans  and  the  poor  a  myriad  loads  of  gold
and  jewels.  And  returning  to  his  city,  he  said  to  his  wife
Kanchanaprabha  :  "  You  must,  if  you  wish  to  obey  my
commands,  remain  here  in  your  own  city  and  take  care  of
that  daughter  of  ours,  AlankaravatI ;  and  when  a  year  has
passed  there  will  be,  on  this  very  day,  an  auspicious  moment
for  her  marriage.     And  then  I  will  give  her  in  marriage  to


THE  SCIENCE  NAMED  PRAJftAPTI  125

Naravahanadatta,  and  that  son-in-law  of  mine  shall  be  an
emperor,  and  shall  come  to  this  city  of  ours."

Having  said  this  to  his  wife,  the  king  made  her  take  an
oath,  and  then  made  her  return,  weeping,  with  her  daughter,
and  himself  went  with  his  son  to  the  forest.  But  his  wife
Kanchanaprabha  lived  in  her  own  city  with  her  daughter.
What  virtuous  wife  would  disobey  her  husband's  commands  ?
Then  her  daughter  Alankaravati  wandered  about  to  many
temples  together  with  her  mother,  who  accompanied  her
out  of  affection.  And  one  day  the  science  named  Prajrlapti
said  to  her  :  "  Go  to  the  holy  places  in  Kas*mlra  named
Svayambhu,  and  there  offer  worship,  for  then  you  will  obtain
without  difficulty,  for  a  husband,  Naravahanadatta,  the  sole
emperor  of  all  the  Vidyadhara  kings."

After  hearing  this  from  the  science  she  went  with  her
mother  to  Kasmira,  and  worshipped  Siva  in  all  the  holy
places,  in  Nandikshetra,  and  Mahadevagiri,  in  Amarapar-
vata,  in  the  mountains  of  Suresvari,  and  in  Vijaya,  and
Kapatesvara.  After  worshipping  the  husband  of  ParvatI
in  these  and  other  holy  places,  that  princess  of  the  Vidya-
dharas  and  her  mother  returned  home.


[M]  "  Know,  auspicious  youth,  that  this  is  that  very
maiden.  Alankaravati,  and  that  I  am  her  mother  Kanchana-
prabha. And  to-day  she  came  to  this  temple  of  Siva  without
telling  me.  Then  I,  perceiving  it  by  the  Prajiiapti  science,
came  here;  and  I  was  told  by  the  same  science  that  you
had  come  here  also.  So  marry  this  daughter  of  mine  who
has  been  ordained  your  wife  by  the  god.  And  to-morrow
arrives  the  day  of  her  marriage  appointed  by  her  father,  so
return  for  this  day,  my  son,  to  Kau^ambi,  your  own  city.
And  we  will  go  hence ;  but  to-morrow  the  King  Alankarasila
will  come  from  the  grove  of  asceticism  and  himself  give  you
this  daughter  of  his."

When  she  said  this,  Alankaravati  and  Naravahanadatta
were  thrown  into  a  strange  state  of  distraction,  for  their
eyes  were  full  of  tears,  since  their  hearts  could  not  bear  that


126  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

they  should  be  separated  from  one  another  even  for  a  night,
and  they  were  like  Chakravakas  when  the  end  of  the  day  is
near.  When  Kanchanaprabha  saw  them  in  such  a  state,
she  said :  "  Why  do  you  show  such  a  want  of  self-restraint
because  you  are  to  be  separated  for  one  night  ?  People  who
possess  firmness  endure  for  a  long  time  mutual  separation
to  which  no  termination  is  assigned ;  hear  in  proof  of  this
the  tale  of  Ramabhadra  and  Sita.


64.  Story  of  Rama  and  Sita

Long  ago  King  Dasaratha,  the  sovereign  of  Ayodhya,
had  a  son  named  Rama,  the  elder  brother  of  Bharata,
Satrughna  and  Lakshmana.  He  was  a  partial  incarnation
of  Vishnu  for  the  overthrow  of  Ravana,  and  he  had  a  wife
named  Sita,  the  daughter  of  Janaka,  the  lady  of  his  life.  As
fate  would  have  it,  his  father  handed  over  the  kingdom  to
Bharata,  and  sent  Rama  to  the  forest  with  Sita,  and  Laksh-
mana. There  Ravana  carried  off  his  beloved  Sita  by  magic,
and  took  her  to  the  city  of  Lanka,  having  slain  Jatayus  on
the  way.  Then  Rama,  in  his  bereaved  state,  made  Sugriva
his  friend  by  killing  Balin,  and  by  sending  Hanuman  to
Lanka  obtained  news  of  his  wife.  And  he  crossed  the  sea
by  building  a  bridge  over  it,  and  slew  Ravana,  and  gave  the
sovereignty  of  Lanka  to  Vibhishana,  and  recovered  Sita.
Then  he  returned  from  the  forest,  and  while  he  was  ruling
his  kingdom,  that  Bharata  had  made  over  to  him,  Sita
became  pregnant  in  Ayodhya.

And  while  the  king  was  roaming  through  the  city  at
leisure,  with  a  small  retinue,  to  observe  the  actions  of  his
subjects,  he  beheld  a  certain  man  turning  his  wife,  whom  he
held  by  the  hand,  out  of  his  house,  and  giving  out  that  her
fault  was  going  to  the  house  of  another  man.1  And  King
Rama  heard  the  wife  saying  to  her  husband  :  "  King  Rama
did  not  desert  his  wife,  though  she  dwelt  in  the  house  of  the
Rakshasa ;    this  fellow  is  superior  to  him,  for  he  abandons

1  This  seems  to  agree  with  the  story  as  told  in  the  Bhagavata  Puratui.
For  various  forms  of  the  Rama  legend  see  the  translation  of  the  Uttara  Rama
Charita  by  M.  Felix  Neve.


THE  CHASTITY  OF  SlTA  127

me  for  going  to  the  house  of  a  relation."  So  he  went  home
afflicted,  and,  afraid  of  the  slander  of  the  people,  he  abandoned
Sita  in  the  forest.  A  man  of  reputation  prefers  the  sorrow  of
separation  to  ill-repute.  And  Sita,  languid  with  pregnancy,
happened  to  reach  the  hermitage  of  Valmiki,  and  that  Rishi
comforted  her,  and  made  her  take  up  her  abode  there.  And
the  other  hermits  there  debated  among  themselves  :  "  Surely
this  Sita  is  guilty,  otherwise  how  could  her  husband  have
deserted  her  ?  So,  by  beholding  her,  everlasting  pollution
will  attach  to  us.  But  Valmiki  does  not  expel  her  from
the  hermitage  out  of  pity,  and  he  neutralises  by  means  of
his  asceticism  the  pollution  produced  by  beholding  her ;  so
come,  let  us  go  to  some  other  hermitage."  When  Valmiki
perceived  that,  he  said :  "  Brahmans,  you  need  not  have  any
misgivings  about  the  matter ;  I  have  perceived  her  by  my
meditation  to  be  chaste."  When,  even  then,  they  exhibited
incredulity,  Sita  said  to  them  :  "  Reverend  sirs,  test  my
purity  by  any  means  that  you  know  of,  and  if  I  turn  out  to
be  unchaste  let  me  be  punished  by  having  my  head  cut  off."

When  the  hermits  heard  that,  they  experienced  an
emotion  of  pity,  and  they  said  to  her :  "  There  is  a  famous
bathing-place  in  this  forest,  called  Tithibhasaras,  for  a  certain
chaste  woman  named  Tithibhi,  being  falsely  accused  by  her
husband,  who  suspected  her  of  familiarity  with  another  man,
in  her  helplessness  invoked  the  goddess  Earth  and  the  Loka-
palas,  and  they  produced  it  for  her  justification.  There  let
the  wife  of  Rama  clear  herself  for  our  satisfaction."

When  they  said  that,  Sita  went  with  them  to  that  lake.
And  the  chaste  woman  said :  "  Mother  Earth,  if  my  mind
was  never  fixed  even  in  a  dream  on  anyone  besides  my
The  Act  husband,  may  I  reach  the  other  side  of  the  lake."

of  Truth  And  after  saying  this  she  entered  the  lake,  and
the  goddess  Earth  appeared  and,  taking  her  in  her  lap,  carried
her  to  the  other  side.1  Then  all  the  hermits  adored  that
chaste  woman,  and,  enraged  at  Rama's  having  abandoned
her,  they  desired  to  curse  him.  But  Sita,  who  was  devoted
to  her  husband,  dissuaded  them,  saying  :   "  Do  not  entertain

1  For  notes  on  the  "Act  of  Truth"  motif  see  Vol.  II,  pp.  31-33,  and
Vol.  Ill,  pp.  179-182.— n.m.p.


128  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

an  inauspicious  thought  against  my  husband.  I  beg  you
to  curse  my  wicked  self."  The  hermits,  pleased  with  that
conduct  of  hers,  gave  her  a  blessing  which  enabled  her  to
give  birth  to  a  son,  and  she,  while  dwelling  there,  in  good
time  did  give  birth  to  a  son,  and  the  hermit  Valmiki  gave
him  the  name  of  Lava.1

One  day  she  took  the  child  and  went  to  bathe,  and  the
hermit,  seeing  that  it  was  not  in  the  hut,  thought :  "  She  is
in  the  habit,  when  she  goes  to  bathe,  of  leaving  her  child
The  Babe  behind  her,  so  what  has  become  of  the  child  ?
of  Grass  Surely  it  has  been  carried  off  by  a  wild  beast.  I
will  create  another,  otherwise  Sita,  on  returning  from  bath-
ing, will  die  of  grief."  Under  this  impression,  the  hermit
made  a  pure  babe  of  kusa  grass,  resembling  Lava,  and  placed
him  there ;  and  Sita,  came,  and  seeing  it,  said  to  the  hermit :
"  I  have  my  own  boy,  so  whence  came  this  one,  hermit  ?  "
When  the  hermit  Valmiki  heard  this,  he  told  her  exactly
what  had  taken  place,  and  said :  "  Blameless  one,  receive
this  second  son,  named  Kus*a,  because  I  by  my  power  created
him  out  of  ku6a  grass."  When  he  said  this  to  her,  Sita
brought  up  those  two  sons,  Kusa  and  Lava,  for  whom  Valmiki
performed  the  sacraments.  And  those  two  young  princes  of
the  Kshatriya  race,  even  when  children,  learned  the  use  of  all
heavenly  weapons  and  all  sciences  from  the  hermit  Valmiki.

And  one  day  they  killed  a  deer  belonging  to  the  hermitage,
and  ate  its  flesh,  and  made  use  of  a  linga,  which  Valmiki
worshipped,  as  a  plaything.  The  hermit  was  offended
thereby,  but  at  Slta's  intercession  he  appointed  for  those
youths  the  following  expiatory  penance  :  "  Let  this  Lava
go  quickly  and  bring  from  the  lake  of  Kuvera  golden  lotuses,
and  manddra  a  flowers  from  his  garden,  then  worship,  both

1  The  story  of  Genovesa  in  Simrock's  Deutsche  Volksbucher,  vol.  i,  p.  371,
bears  a  striking  resemblance  to  that  of  Sita.  The  way  in  which  Schmerzens-
reich  and  his  father  retire  to  the  forest  at  the  end  of  the  story  is  quite  Indian.
In  the  Greek  novel  of  Hysminias  and  Hysmine  the  innocence  of  the  heroine
is  tested  by  the  fountain  of  Diana  (Scriptores  Erotici,  p.  595).  For  parallels
to  the  story  of  Genovesa  or  Genovefa  see  Prym  and  Socin,  Syrische  M'drchen,
lii,  and  the  Introduction,  p.  xxii.

*  One  of  the  five  trees  of  Paradise.  For  the  golden  lotuses  see
Chapter  XXV.     In  Chapter  LII  we  find  trees  with  trunks  of  gold  and  leaves


LAVA  IS  TAKEN  PRISONER  129

of  you  brothers,  this  liriga  with  those  flowers ;  in  this  way
this  crime  of  those  two  will  be  atoned  for."

When  Lava  heard  this,  he  went,  though  a  boy,  to  Kailasa,
and  invaded  that  lake  and  garden  of  Kuvera,  and,  after  killing
the  Yakshas,  brought  back  the  lotuses  and  the  flowers ;  and
as  he  was  returning,  being  tired,  he  rested  on  the  way  under
a  tree.  And  in  the  meanwhile  Lakshmana  came  that  way,
seeking  a  man  with  auspicious  marks  for  Rama's  human
sacrifice.1  He,  according  to  the  custom  of  Kshatriyas,
challenged  Lava  to  fight,  and  paralysed  him  by  the  stupefy-
ing weapon,  and,  taking  him  prisoner,  led  him  to  the  city  of
Ayodhya.

And  in  the  meanwhile  Valmiki  comforted  Sita,  who  was
anxious  about  the  return  of  Lava,  and  said  to  Kusa  in  his
hermitage  :  "  Lakshmana  has  taken  prisoner  the  child  Lava
and  has  carried  him  off  to  Ayodhya ;  go  and  deliver  him  from
Lakshmana,  after  conquering  him  with  these  weapons."

When  the  sage  said  this,  and  gave  to  Kusa  a  heavenly
weapon,  he  went  and  with  it  attacked  and  besieged  the
sacrificial  enclosure  in  Ayodhya,  and  he  conquered  in  fight
Lava  meets  that  Lakshmana,  who  advanced  to  repel  him,
his  Father  by  the  help  of  those  heavenly  weapons.  Then
Rama  advanced  to  meet  him,  and  when  he  could  not,  though
exerting  himself  to  the  utmost,  conquer  that  Kusa,  owing
to  the  might  of  Valmiki,  he  asked  him  who  he  was  and
why  he  came.  Then  Kusa  said :  "  Lakshmana  has  taken
my  elder  brother  prisoner  and  brought  him  here.  I  have
come  here  to  set  him  at  liberty.      We  two  are  Kusa  and

and  fruit  of  jewels.  A  similar  tree  is  found  in  the  mediaeval  romance  of
King  Alexander.  Dunlop  compares  the  golden  vine  carried  away  by  Pompey.
Liebrecht  remarks  that  there  was  also  a  golden  vine  over  the  gate  of  the
temple  at  Jerusalem,  and  compares  the  golden  lotus  made  by  the  Chinese
emperor  Tunghwan.  He  refers  also  to  Huon  of  Bordeaux,  Ysaie  le  Triste,
and  Grimm's  Kinder-und  Hausmarchen,  130  and  133.  (Liebrecht's  Dunlop,
p.  184.)  See  also  Milton's  Paradise  Lost,  iv,  220  and  256.  Cf.  Thalaba  the
Destroyer,  Book  I,  30.     The  passage  in  the  Pseudo-Callisthenes  will  be  found

in  iii,   28,   Karl  Midler's  edition. For  analogues  to  Grimm's   130th  and

133rd  tales  see  Bolte,  Anmerkungen  zu  den  Kinder-und  Hausmarchen  der  Bruder
Grimm,  vol.  iii,  p.  60  et.  seq.,  and  p.  78  et.  seq. — n.m.p.
1  See  pp.  6inl,  65n. — n.m.p.

VOL.   IV.  I


130  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

Lava,  the  sons  of  Rama ;  this  is  what  our  mother,  the
daughter  of  Janaka,  says."  Thereupon  he  told  her  story.
Then  Rama  burst  into  tears,  and  summoned  Lava,  and
embraced  both,  saying:  "I  am  that  same  wicked  Rama."
Then  the  citizens  assembled  and  praised  Sita,  beholding
those  two  heroic  youths,  and  Rama  recognised  them  as  his
sons.  And  then  he  summoned  the  Queen  Sita  from  the
hermitage  of  Valmiki,  and  dwelt  with  her  in  happiness,
transferring  to  his  sons  the  burden  of  the  empire.


[M]  "  Thus  heroic  souls  endure  separation  for  so  long  a
time,  and  how  can  you  find  it  difficult  to  endure  it  for  only
one  night  ?  "  When  Kanchanaprabha  had  said  this  to  her
daughter  Alankaravati,  who  was  eager  to  be  married,  and
to  Naravahanadatta,  she  departed  through  the  air,  with
the  intention  of  returning  again,  and  took  her  daughter
with  her ;  and  Naravahanadatta,  for  his  part,  returned
despondent  to  KauSambi.

Then,  as  he  could  not  sleep  at  night,  Gomukha  said  to
him  to  amuse  him  :  "  Prince,  hear  this  story  of  Prithvlrupa,
which  I  will  relate  to  you.

65.  Story  of  the  Handsome  King  Prithvlrupa  1

There  is  in  the  Deccan  a  city  named  Pratishthana.  In
it  lived  a  very  handsome  king  named  Prithvlrupa.  Once
on  a  time  two  discerning  Buddhist  hermits  came  to  him,
and  seeing  that  that  king  was  very  handsome,  they  said  to
him  :  "  King,  we  have  travelled  through  the  world  and  we
have  nowhere  seen  a  man  or  woman  equal  to  you  in  beauty,
except  the  daughter  of  King  Rupadhara  and  Queen  Hema-
lata,  in  the  isle  of  Muktipura,  Riipalata  by  name,  and  that
maiden  alone  is  a  match  for  you,  and  you  alone  are  a  match
for  her ;  if  you  were  to  be  united  in  marriage  it  would  be
well."  With  these  words  of  the  hermit,  which  entered  by  his
ears,  the  arrows  of  Love  entered  also  and  stuck  in  his  heart.

1  A  similar  story  occurs  on  p.  207. — n.m.p.


THE  FAIR  RUPALATA  131

Then  King  Prithviriipa,  being  full  of  longing,  gave  this
order  to  his  admirable  painter,  Kumaridatta  by  name :
"  Take  with  you  my  portrait,  accurately  painted  on  canvas,
„,,    „  .  .       and  with  these  two  mendicants  go  to  the  isle  of

The  Painter  ,  °

and  (he  Muktipura,  and  there  show  it  by  some  artifice

Mendicants  to  the  King  Rupadhara  and  his  daughter  Rupa-
lata. Find  out  if  that  king  will  give  me  his
daughter  or  not,  and  take  a  likeness  of  Rupalata  and  bring
it  back."  When  the  king  had  said  this,  he  made  the  painter
take  his  likeness  on  canvas,  and  sent  him  with  the  mendicants
to  that  island.  And  so  the  painter  and  the  mendicants  set
out,  and  in  course  of  time  reached  a  city  named  Putrapura
on  the  shore  of  the  sea.  There  they  embarked  on  a  ship,
and  going  across  the  sea  they  reached  in  five  days  that  island
of  Muktipura.  There  the  painter  went  and  held  up  at  the
gate  of  the  palace  a  notice  to  the  effect  that  there  was  no
painter  like  him  in  the  world.  When  the  King  Rupadhara
heard  of  that,  he  summoned  him,  and  the  painter  entered  the
palace,  and  bowing,  he  said :  "  O  King,  though  I  have  travelled
all  over  the  earth,  I  have  never  seen  my  match  as  a  painter,
so  tell  me  whom  I  am  to  paint  of  gods,  mortals  and  Asuras."
When  the  king  heard  that,  he  summoned  his  daughter
Rupalata  into  his  presence,  and  gave  him  the  following  order  :
*'  Make  a  portrait  of  this  daughter  of  mine  and  show  it  me."
Then  the  painter  Kumaridatta  made  a  portrait  of  the
princess  on  canvas  and  showed  it,  and  it  was  exactly  like
the  original.  Then  King  Rupadhara  was  pleased,  and  think-
ing him  clever,  he  asked  that  painter,  in  his  desire  to  obtain
a  son-in-law  :  "  My  good  fellow,  you  have  travelled  over  the
earth,  so  tell  me  if  you  have  anywhere  seen  a  woman  or  a
man  equal  to  my  daughter  in  beauty."  When  the  king
said  this,  the  painter  answered  him :  "I  have  nowhere  in  the
world  seen  a  woman  or  a  man  equal  to  her,  except  a  king  in
Pratishthana,  named  Prithvirupa,  who  is  a  match  for  her;
if  she  were  married  to  him  it  would  be  well.  Since  he  has
not  found  a  princess  equal  in  beauty,  he  remains,  though
in  his  fresh  youth,  without  a  wife.  And  I,  your  Majesty,
having  beheld  that  king,  dear  to  the  eyes,  took  a  faithful
likeness  of  him,  out  of  admiration  of  his  beauty."


182  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

When  the  king  heard  that,  he  said  :  "  Have  you  that
portrait  with  you  ?  "  And  the  painter  said  :  "I  have,"
and  showed  the  portrait.  Thereupon  the  King  Rupadhara,
B  thF  th  beholding  the  beauty  of  that  King  Prithvlrupa,
and  Daughter  found  his  head  whirl  round  with  astonishment.
are  overcome  by  And  he  said  :  "  Fortunate  are  we  to  have  beheld
the  Painting     that  king  eyen  «n  ft  picture .    j  felicitate  those

who  behold  him  in  the  flesh."  When  Rupalata  heard  this
speech  of  her  father's,  and  saw  the  king  in  the  picture,  she
was  full  of  longing,  and  could  neither  hear  nor  see  anything
else.  Then  the  King  Rupadhara,  seeing  that  his  daughter
was  distracted  with  love,  said  to  that  painter  Kumaridatta :
"  Your  pictures  exactly  correspond  to  the  original,  so  that
King  Prithvlrupa  must  be  an  appropriate  husband  for  my
daughter.  So  take  this  portrait  of  my  daughter  and  set  off
immediately,  and  show  my  daughter  to  King  Prithvlrupa,
and  tell  him  the  whole  incident  as  it  took  place,  and  if  he
pleases,  let  him  come  here  quickly,  to  marry  her."  Thus  the
king  spake,  and  honoured  the  painter  with  gifts,  and  sent  him
off  with  his  ambassador,  in  the  company  of  the  mendicants.

The  painter,  the  ambassador  and  the  mendicants  crossed
the  sea,  and  all  reached  the  Court  of  Prithvlrupa,  in  Pratish-
thana.  There  they  gave  the  present  to  that  king,  and  told
him  the  whole  transaction  as  it  took  place,  and  the  message
of  Rupadhara.  And  then  that  painter  Kumaridatta  showed
to  that  king  his  beloved  Rupalata  in  a  painting.  As  the
king  gazed,1  his  eye  was  drowned  in  that  sea  of  beauty,  her
person,  so  that  he  could  not  draw  it  out  again.     For  the

1  Cf.  the  story  of  Seyf  ul  Mulk  in  the  Persian  Tales  and  the  Bahar-i-
Danish,  C,  xxxv  (Dunlop,  vol.  ii,  p.  208,  Liebrecht's  translation,  p.  335).  See
also  Dunlop's  remarks  upon  the  Polexandre  of  Gomberville.  In  this  romance
Abdelmelec,  son  of  the  Emperor  of  Morocco,  falls  in  love  with  Alcidiana  by
seeing  her  portrait  (vol.  ii,  p.  276,  Liebrecht's  translation,  p.  372).  A  similar
incident  is  found  in  the  romance  of  Agesilaus  of  Colchos  (Liebrecht's  trans-
lation, p.  1 57).     See  Prym   and  Socin,  Syrische  M'drchen,  p.  3 ;    Rohde,  Der

Griechische  Roman,  p.  49  ;  Coelho,  Contos  Populares  Portugueses,  p.  109. The

idea  is  found  in  the  Dasa  Kumara  Charita,  whence  it  found  its  way  into  Persian
and  Arabic  collections.  See  Clouston,  The  Book  of  Sindibad,  pp.  166,  and
303  et  seq. ;  Nights  (Burton,  Supp.,  vol.  i,  p.  226),  and  the  notes  by  Clouston  in
Supp.,  vol.  ii,  pp.  328,  329.  Numerous  references  are  given  in  Chauvin,  op.  cit.,.
v,  p.  132.     See  also  Bolte,  op.  cit.,  vol.  i,  p.  43  et  seq. — n.m.p.


THE  KING'S  ARMY  IS  ATTACKED  133

king,  whose  longing  was  excessive,  could  not  be  satisfied
with  devouring  her  form,  which  poured  forth  a  stream  of
the  nectar  of  beauty,  as  the  partridge  cannot  be  satisfied
with  devouring  the  moonlight.  And  he  said  to  the  painter  :
"  My  friend,  worthy  of  praise  is  the  Creator  who  made  this
beauty,  and  yourself  who  copied  it.  So  I  accept  the  pro-
posal of  King  Rupadhara.  I  will  go  to  the  island  of  Mukti-
pura  and  marry  his  daughter."  After  saying  this,  the  king
honoured  the  painter,  the  ambassador  and  the  hermits,  and
remained  looking  at  the  picture.

And,  afflicted  with  the  sorrow  of  absence,  the  king  spent
that  day  in  gardens  and  other  places,  and  set  out  the
next  day  on  his  expedition,  after  ascertaining  a  favourable
moment.  And  the  king  mounted  the  great  elephant  Manga-
laghata,  and  proceeded  on  his  way  with  many  horses  and
elephants,  with  chiefs  and  Rajputs,  and  with  the  painter
and  the  hermits,  together  with  the  ambassador  of  Rupa-
dhara, and  in  a  few  days  he  reached  the  entrance  of  the
Vindhya  forest,  and  encamped  there  in  the  evening.

The  next  day  the  King  Prithvirupa  mounted  an  elephant
named  Satrumardana,  and  going  on,  entered  that  forest.
And  as  he  was  slowly  proceeding  he  beheld  his  army,  which
The  Bhilias  WM  marching  in  front  of  him,  suddenly  fleeing.
are  Conquered  And  while  he  was  perplexed  as  to  what  it  could
mean  a  Rajput  named  Nirbhaya,  mounted  on  an  elephant,
came  up  and  said  to  him :  "  King,  a  very  large  army  of
Bhilias  attacked  us  in  front  there ;  in  the  fight  that  ensued
those  Bhilias  slew  with  their  arrows  just  fifty  of  our  elephants,
and  a  thousand  of  our  footmen,  and  three  hundred  horses ;
but  our  troops  laid  low  two  thousand  Bhilias,  so  that  for
every  single  corpse  seen  in  our  host  two  are  seen  in  theirs.
Then  our  forces  were  routed,  galled  with  their  arrows,  which
resemble  thunderbolts."

When  the  king  heard  that,  he  was  angry,  and  advancing
he  slew  the  army  of  the  Bhilias,  as  Arjuna  slew  that  of  the
Kauravas.  Then  the  other  bandits  were  slain  by  Nirbhaya
and  his  comrades,1  and  the  king  cut  off  with  one  crescent-

1  For  the  vidruteshu  of  Brockhaus'  edition  I  read  nihateshu,  which  I  find
in  the  Sanskrit  College  MS. This  is  confirmed  by  the  D.  text — n.m.p.


184  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

headed  arrow  the  head  of  the  commander  of  the  Bhillas.
The  king's  elephant  Satrumardana,  with  the  blood  flowing
from  arrow- wounds,  resembled  a  mountain  of  collyrium
pouring  forth  streams  coloured  with  cinnabar.  Then  his
whole  army,  that  had  been  dispersed,  returned,  finding
themselves  victorious,  and  those  Bhillas,  that  had  escaped
slaughter,  fled  in  all  directions.  And  the  King  Prithvlrupa,
having  brought  the  fight  to  an  end,  had  his  might  extolled
by  the  ambassador  of  Rupadhara,  and,  being  victorious,  en-
camped in  that  very  forest  district,  on  the  bank  of  a  lake,
to  recruit  the  strength  of  his  wounded  troops.

And  in  the  morning  the  king  set  out  thence,  and  slowly
advancing  he  reached  that  city  of  Putrapura  on  the  shore
of  the  sea.  There  he  rested  for  a  day,  being  entertained  in
becoming  fashion  by  the  king  of  that  place,  named  Udara-
charita.  And  he  crossed  the  sea  in  ships  supplied  by  him,
and  in  eight  days  reached  the  isle  of  Muktipura.

And  the  King  Rupadhara,  hearing  of  it,  came  to  meet
him,  delighted,  and  the  two  kings  met  and  embraced  one
another.  Then  the  King  Prithvlrupa  entered  his  city  with
him,  being,  to  so  speak,  drunk  in  by  the  eyes  of  the  ladies  of
the  city.  Then  the  Queen  Hemalata  and  the  King  Rupa-
dhara, seeing  that  he  was  a  suitable  husband  for  their
daughter,  rejoiced.  And  that  King  Prithvlrupa  remained
there,  and  Rupadhara  honoured  him  with  entertainment  in
accordance  with  his  own  magnificence.

And  the  next  day  the  long- desiring  Riipalata  ascended
the  altar  in  an  auspicious  moment,  and  he  with  exultation
received  her  hand  in  marriage.  And  when  they  beheld  one
another's  beauty  the  expanded  eye  of  each  was  extended  to
the  ear,  as  if  to  inform  that  organ  that  the  report  it  had
heard  before  was  true.  When  the  parched  grain  was  thrown,
Rupadhara  gave  jewels  in  such  abundance  to  the  happy
couple  that  men  thought  he  was  a  perfect  mine  of  jewels.
And  after  his  daughter's  marriage  had  taken  place  he
honoured  the  painter  and  the  two  mendicants  with  dresses
and  ornaments,  and  bestowed  gifts  on  all  the  others.  Then
that  King  Prithvlrupa,  remaining  in  that  city  with  his
attendants,  enjoyed  the  best  meat  and  drink  the  isle  could


THE  RETURN  TO  PRATISHTHANA  135

produce.  The  day  was  spent  in  singing  and  dancing,  and
at  night  the  eager  king  entered  the  private  apartments  of
Riipalata,  in  which  jewelled  couches  were  spread,  which  was
adorned  with  jewelled  pavement,  the  circuit  of  which  was
propped  on  jewelled  pillars,  and  which  was  lit  up  with  jewel-
lamps.1  And  in  the  morning  he  was  wakened  by  the  bards
and  heralds  reciting,  and  he  rose  up  and  remained  as  the
moon  in  heaven.

Thus  King  Prithvirupa  remained  ten  days  in  that  island,
amusing  himself  with  ever- fresh  enjoyments  furnished  by
his  father-in-law.  On  the  eleventh  day  the  king,  with  the
T,  consent  of  the  astrologers,  set  out  with  Rupa-

Triumphant  lata,  after  the  auspicious  ceremony  had  been
Return  with  performed  for  him.  And  he  was  escorted  by
his  father-in-law  as  far  as  the  shore  of  the  sea,
and  accompanied  by  his  retainers  he  embarked  on  the  ships
with  his  wife.  He  crossed  the  sea  in  eight  days,  and
his  army,  that  was  encamped  on  the  shore,  joined  him,
and  the  King  Udaracharita  came  to  meet  him,  and  then  he
went  to  Putrapura.  There  King  Prithvirupa  rested  some
days,  and  was  entertained  by  that  king,  and  then  he  set
out  from  that  place.  And  he  mounted  his  beloved  Riipalata
on  the  elephant  Jayamangala,  and  he  himself  mounted  an
elephant  named  Kalyanagiri.

And  the  king,  proceeding  by  continual  stages,  in  due
course  reached  his  good  city  of  Pratishthana,  where  flags
and  banners  were  waving.  Then,  after  beholding  Riipa-
lata, the  ladies  of  the  city  lost  at  once  all  pride  in  their  own
beauty,  and  gazed  on  her  with  eyes  unwinking  from  wonder.
Then  King  Prithvirupa  entered  his  palace,  making  high
festival,  and  he  gave  to  that  painter  villages  and  wealth,
and  he  honoured  those  two  hermits  with  wealth  as  they
deserved,  and  gave  complimentary  presents  to  the  chiefs,
ministers  and  Rajputs.  Then  that  king,  having  attained
his  object,  enjoyed  there  this  world's  happiness  in  the  society
of  Riipalata.

1  See  Vol.  II,  p.  169.— n.m.p.


136  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

[M]  After  the  minister  Gomukha  had  told  Naravahana-
datta  this  tale,  with  the  object  of  amusing  him,  he  went  on
to  say  to  the  impatient  prince  :  "  Thus  the  resolute  endure
painful  separation  for  a  long  time,  but  how  is  it  that  you
cannot  endure  it  even  for  one  night,  O  King  ?  For  to-
morrow your  Highness  shall  marry  Alankaravati."  When
Gomukha  had  said  this,  Marubhuti,  the  son  of  Yaugan-
dharayana,  came  up  at  that  instant,  and  said :  "  What
stuff  will  you  not  prate,  being  ungalled,  and  never  having
felt  the  agony  of  love  ?  A  man  possesses  firmness  and  dis-
cernment and  morality  only  so  long  as  he  does  not  come
within  the  range  of  the  arrows  of  Love.  Happy  in  the
world  are  SarasvatI,  Skanda  and  Buddha,  these  three  who
have  brushed  off  and  flung  away  love,  like  a  blade  of  grass
clinging  to  the  skirt  of  the  robe."

When  Marubhuti  said  this,  Naravahanadatta,  perceiving
that  Gomukha  was  distressed,  said  in  order  to  comfort  him  :
"  What  Gomukha  said  to  me  was  appropriate,  and  it  was
said  to  amuse  me,  for  what  loving  friend  exults  over  one
in  the  agony  of  separation  ?  One  afflicted  by  the  pain  of
separation  should  be  comforted  by  his  friends  to  the  best
of  their  ability,  and  the  sequel  should  be  left  to  the  disposal
of  the  five-arrowed  god."

Talking  in  this  style,  and  hearing  various  tales  from
his  attendants,  Naravahanadatta  somehow  managed  to  get
through  that  night.  And  when  morning  came  he  rose  up
and  performed  his  necessary  duties,  and  saw  Kanchana-
prabha  descending  from  heaven,  accompanied  by  her
husband  Alankara^ila,  and  her  son  Dharmasila,  and  that
Alankaravati  her  daughter ;  and  they  all  descended  from
the  chariot  and  came  near  him,  and  he  welcomed  them  as
was  fitting,  and  they  saluted  him  in  like  manner.  And  in
the  meanwhile  thousands  of  other  Vidyadharas  descended
from  heaven,  carrying  loads  of  gold,  jewels  and  other  valu-
ables. And  after  hearing  of  this  occurrence  the  King  of
Vatsa  came  there  with  his  ministers  and  his  queens,  delighted
at  the  advancement  of  his  son.  After  the  King  of  Vatsa
had  performed  the  rites  of  hospitality  duly,  the  King  Alan-
karaslla   said  to   him,   bowing  graciously  :    "  King,   this  is


THE  WEDDING  137

my  daughter  Alankaravati,  and  when  she  was  born  she  was
declared  by  a  voice,  that  came  from  heaven,  to  be  destined
to  be  the  wife  of  this  thy  son,  Naravahanadatta,  the  future
emperor  of  all  the  Vidyadhara  kings.  So  I  will  give  her  to
him,  for  this  is  a  favourable  moment  for  them ;  for  this
reason  I  have  come  here  with  all  these."  The  King  of  Vatsa
welcomed  that  speech  of  the  Vidyadhara  sovereign's,  saying  :
"  It  is  a  great  favour  that  you  do  me.

Then  the  ruler  of  the  Vidyadharas  sprinkled  with  water,
produced  in  the  hollow  of  his  hand  by  virtue  of  his  science,
the  ground  of  the  courtyard.  Immediately  there  was  pro-
duced there  an  altar  of  gold,  covered  with  a  heavenly  cloth,
and  a  pavilion,  not  made  with  hands,  for  the  preliminary
ceremony,  composed  of  various  jewels.  Then  the  successful
King  Alankarasila  said  to  Naravahanadatta :  "  Rise  up,
the  favourable  moment  has  arrived — bathe."  After  he  had
bathed,  and  had  the  marriage-thread  put  on,  the  King
Alankarasila,  being  delighted,  gave  him  with  all  his  heart
his  daughter,  after  bringing  her  to  the  altar  in  her  bridal
dress.  And  when  the  grain  was  thrown  into  the  fire  he  and
his  son  gave  to  his  daughter  thousands  of  loads  of  jewels,
gold,  garments  and  ornaments  and  heavenly  nymphs.  And
after  the  marriage  was  over  he  honoured  them  all,  and  then
took  his  leave  of  them,  and  with  his  wife  and  son  departed,
as  he  came,  through  the  air.  Then  the  King  of  Vatsa,  seeing
his  son  destined  to  advancement,  being  honoured  by  the
bending  kings  of  the  Vidyadharas,  was  delighted,  and  pro-
longed that  feast  to  a  great  length.  And  Naravahanadatta,
having  obtained  Alankaravati,  charming  on  account  of  her
good  conduct,  and  of  noble  virtues,  like  a  skilful  poet  who
has  obtained  a  style,  charming  on  account  of  its  excellent
metre,  and  of  splendid  merits,  remained  delighted  with  her.1

1  An  elaborate  pun.     Rasika  also  means  "full  of  (poetical)  flavour."


CHAPTER    LII

THEN  Naravahanadatta,  tlic  son  of  the  King  of
[M ]  Vatsa.  being  united  to  Alankaravati,  his  new
wife,  remained  in  the  house  of  his  father,  pleased
with  the  heavenly  dancing  and  singing  of  her  maids,  and
enjoying  banquets  with  his  ministers.

And  one  day  his  mother-in-law  Kanchanaprabha,  the
mother  of  Alankaravati,  came  to  him  and  said,  after  he  had
hospitably  entertained  her:  "Come  to  our  palace,  behold
that  city  of  Sundarapura,  and  take  your  delight  in  its  gardens
with  Alankaravati."  When  lie  heard  this  he  consented,  and
he  informed  his  father,  and  by  his  advice  took  Vasantaka
with  him,  and  with  his  wife  and  his  minister  he  ascended  a
splendid  chariot  created  by  his  mother-in-law  by  her  science,
and  set  out  through  the  air;  and  while  in  the  chariot  he
looked  down  from  heaven  and  beheld  the  earth  of  the  size
of  a  mound,  and  the  seas  small  as  ditches,  and  in  due  course
he  reached  the  Himalayas  with  his  mother-in-law,  wife  and
attendants,  and  it  resounded  with  the  songs  of  the  Kinnaris,
and  was  adorned  with  the  companies  of  heavenly  nymphs.
There  he  saw  a  great  many  wonderful  sights,  and  then  he
reached  the  city  of  Sundarapura.  It  was  adorned  with  many
palaces  of  gold  and  jewels,  and  thus,  though  it  was  on  the
Himalayas,  it  made  the  beholder  suppose  that  he  was  looking
on  the  peaks  of  Mount  Mem.1  And  he  descended  from  the
heaven   and.   getting   out   of  the   carriage,   entered  that  city,

'  Dim  traditions  (if  this  mountain  seem  to  have  penetrated  to  Greece
and  I'oiiif.  Aristophanes  {Avliurnuuis,  v ,  Nsj)  speaks  ot  the  King  ot  Persia  as
endued  tor  eight  months  iVI  \ji>'rwr  t)fn',v.  Clark  tells  us  that  Bcrgler  quotes
IMaiitiio,  Stulm.\  -J -l  :  "  Xct/ur  HI,-  mrrciit  Prrsnrum  sihi  monies  i/ni  esse  perhibrntur
(turn  I 'hi  ■_' •.  ./ '  Juurmil,  vol.  viii.  p.  1  .')•-').  See  also  Terence,  Vhormio,  i,  2,
Is  :  I'crv,  in,  !).")  Naravahanadatta's  journey  through  the  air  may  remind  the
reader  ot  the  air-voyage  ot  Alexander  in  the  Pseudo-Callisthenes,  ii,  11.  He
sees  a  serpent  below  him,  and  a  uA(-i<  in  the  middle  of  it.  A  divine  being
whom  he  meets,  tells  him  that  these  objects  are  the  earth  and  the  sea.

138


THE  GARDEN  OF  SIVA  139

which,  as  it  were,  danced  with  the  waving  silk  of  its  banners
in  its  joy  at  having  once  more  a  king.  And  he  entered  that
palace,  with  the  auspicious  ceremony  performed  for  him  by
his  mother-in-law,  accompanied  by  Alankaravati,  and  with  his
favourites  and  Vasantaka.  There  the  fortunate  prince  spent
the  day  in  his  father-in-law's  palace,  in  enjoyments  which  were
provided  for  him  by  the  power  of  his  mother-in-law.

And  on  the  next  day  his  mother-in-law  Kanchanaprabha
said  to  him :  "  There  is  in  this  city  an  image  of  the  holy  self-
existent  husband  of  Uma.1  He,  if  visited  and  worshipped,
gives  enjoyment  and  even  salvation.  Around  it  the  father
of  Alankaravati  made  a  great  garden,  and  brought  down  to
it  a  holy  water,  rightly  named  the  Ganges-pool.  Go  there
to-day  to  worship  the  god  and  to  amuse  yourselves."

When  his  mother-in-law  said  this  to  him,  Naravahana-
datta,  accompanied  by  his  wife  Alankaravati,  and  followed
by  his  attendants,  went  to  that  garden  of  Siva.  It  looked
lovely  with  its  golden-trunked  trees,  which  were  charming
with  their  branches  of  jewels,  the  clear  white  flowers  of  which
were  clusters  of  pearls,  and  the  shoots  of  which  were  coral.2
There  he  bathed  in  the  Ganges-pool  and  worshipped  Siva,
and  wandered  round  the  tanks  that  were  adorned  with
ladders  of  jewels  and  lotuses  of  gold.  And,  accompanied
by  his  attendants,  he  amused  himself  with  Alankaravati  on
their  charming  banks  and  in  bowers  of  the  wish-granting
creeper.  And  in  those  he  delighted  his  soul  with  heavenly
banquets  and  concerts  and  amusing  jokes  caused  by  the
simplicity  of  Marubhiiti.  And  so  Naravahanadatta  dwelt
a  month  there,  amusing  himself  in  gardens,  thanks  to  the
resources  of  his  mother-in-law.  Then  that  Kanchanaprabha
bestowed  on  him,  his  wife  and  his  ministers  garments  and
ornaments  fit  for  gods,  and  with  his  mother-in-law  and  his
attendants  he  returned  in  that  same  chariot  to  Kausambi,
accompanied  by  his  wife,  and  he  gladdened  the  eyes  of  his
parents.

There  Alankaravati  was  thus  addressed  by  her  mother

1  I.e.  Siva.

2  See  note  on  p.   128 and  Clouston,  Eastern  Romances,  pp.  166,  167.

— N.M.P.


140  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

in  the  presence  of  the  King  of  Vatsa :  "  You  must  never
by  jealous  anger  make  your  husband  unhappy,  for  the  fruit
of  that  fault,  my  daughter,  is  separation  that  causes  great
affliction.  Because  I  was  jealous  in  old  time  and  afflicted
my  husband,  I  am  now  consumed  with  remorse,  as  he  has
gone  to  the  forest."  After  saying  this,  she  embraced  her
daughter,  with  eyes  blinded  with  tears,  and  flying  up  into
the  air  went  to  her  own  city.

Then,  that  day  having  come  to  an  end,  the  next  morning
Naravahanadatta,  having  performed  the  appropriate  duties,
was  sitting  with  his  ministers  when  a  woman  rushed  into
The  Terrified  the  presence  of  Alankaravati  and  said  :  "  Queen,
Woman  \  am  a  woman  in  the  utmost  terror  ;   protect  me,

protect  me  !  For  there  is  a  Brahman  come  to  slay  me,  and
he  is  standing  outside ;  through  fear  of  him  I  have  fled  and
come  in  here  to  implore  protection."  The  queen  said  :  "  Do
not  fear.  Tell  your  tale.  Who  is  he  ?  Why  does  he  wish
to  slay  you  ?  "  When  thus  questioned,  the  woman  began  to
say:

66.  Story  of  Atfokamdld

My  sovereign,  I  am  the  daughter  of  a  Kshatriya  in  this
city,  named  Balasena,  and  my  name  is  Asokamala.  When
I  was  a  virgin  I  was  demanded  from  my  father  by  a  rich
Brahman  named  Hathasarman,  who  was  captivated  by  my
beauty.  And  I  said  to  my  father  :  "  I  do  not  like  this  ugly,
grim-visaged  man  for  a  husband ;  if  you  give  me  to  him  I
will  not  remain  in  his  house."  Though  Hathasarman  heard
that,  he  sat  in  dharnd  l  at  the  door  of  my  father's  house  until
he  gave  me  to  him,  being  afraid  of  causing  the  death  of  a
Brahman.  Then  the  Brahman  married  me  and  carried  me
off  reluctant,  and  I  deserted  him  and  fled  to  another  man,
the  son  of  a  Kshatriya.  But  that  Hathasarman  managed
to  crush  him  by  the  power  of  his  wealth,  and  I  went  to
another  Kshatriya,  who  was  well  off.  Then  this  Brahman
went  at  night  and  set  his  house  on  fire.  Then  he  abandoned
me,  and  I  went  to  a  third  Kshatriya,  and  this  Brahman  burnt
his  house  also  at  night.     Then  I  was  abandoned  by  him  also,

1  Sec  note  in  Chapter  LV,  p.  SOSn1,  of  this  volume. — n.m.p.


THE  HEAVENLY  VOICE  141

and  I  became  a  fugitive,  flying  in  terror,  as  the  sheep  flies
from  the  jackal,  from  that  Hathasarman,  who  wishes  to  slay
me,  and  follows  me  step  by  step.  In  this  very  city  I  entered
the  service  of  the  mighty  ViraSarman,  your  servant,  a  Rajput
who  protects  the  helpless.  When  the  wicked  Hathasarman
found  that  out,  he  was  miserable  at  having  no  hope  of  re-
covering me,  and,  being  afflicted  with  separation,  he  was  re-
duced to  skin  and  bone.  But  the  Rajput  ViraSarman,  when
disposed  to  imprison  him  for  my  protection,  was  prevented
by  me,  O  Queen.  To-day  it  chanced  that  I  went  outside  the
house,  and  Hathasarman,  seeing  me,  drew  his  sword  and
rushed  on  me  to  kill  me,  but  I  thereupon  fled  here,  and  the
female  warder,  melted  with  compassion,  opened  the  door  and
let  me  enter,  but  he,  I  know,  is  waiting  for  me  outside.


[M]  When  she  said  this,  the  king  had  the  Brahman
Hathasarman  summoned  into  his  presence.  He  looked  at
Asokamala  with  an  eye  inflamed  with  anger ;  his  form  was
distorted,  he  held  a  sword  in  his  hand,  and  the  joints  of  his
limbs  trembled  with  rage.  The  king  said  to  him  :  "  Wicked
Brahman,  do  you  try  to  kill  a  woman  and  for  her  sake  set
on  fire  your  neighbours'  houses  ?  Why  are  you  so  wicked  ?  "
When  the  Brahman  heard  that,  he  said  :  "  She  is  my  lawful
wife.  She  has  left  my  protection  and  gone  elsewhere.  How
could  I  endure  that  ?  "  When  he  said  this,  Asokamala,  in
distress,  exclaimed :  "  O  guardians  of  the  world,  tell  me
this  :  did  he  not  in  your  presence  marry  me  and  carry  me
off  by  force  against  my  own  will  ?  And  did  I  not  say  at
the  time,  '  I  will  not  dwell  in  his  house '  ?  "  When  she
said  this,  a  heavenly  voice  said  :  "  The  statement  of  Asoka-
mala is  true.  But  she  is  not  a  woman.  Hear  the  truth  about
her.  There  is  a  heroic  king  of  the  Vidyadharas  named
Asokakara.  He  had  no  sons,  and  once  on  a  time  it  happened
that  a  daughter  was  born  to  him,  and  she  grew  up  in  the
house  of  her  father,  under  the  name  of  ASokamala.  And
when  she  arrived  at  an  adult  age,  and  he,  desiring  to  per-
petuate his  race,   offered  her  in  marriage,  she  would   not


142  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

take  any  husband,  through  exceeding  pride  in  her  own
beauty.  For  that  reason  her  father,  vexed  with  her  ob-
stinacy, denounced  this  curse  on  her:  'Become  a  mortal,
and  in  that  state  thou  shalt  have  the  same  name.  And  an
ugly  Brahman  shall  marry  thee  by  force  ;  thou  shalt  abandon
him,  and  in  thy  fear  resort  to  three  husbands  in  succession.
Even  then  he  shall  persecute  thee,  and  thou  shalt  take  refuge
with  a  mighty  Kshatriya  as  his  slave;  but  even  then  the
Brahman  shall  not  desist  from  persecuting  thee.  And  he
shall  see  thee,  and  run  after  thee,  with  the  object  of  killing
thee,  but  thou  shalt  escape,  and  entering  the  king's  palace,
shalt  be  delivered  from  this  curse.'  Accordingly  that  very
Vidyadhari,  A£okamala,  who  was  in  old  time  cursed  by  her
father,  has  now  been  born  as  a  woman  under  the  same
name.  And  this  appointed  end  of  her  curse  has  now  arrived.
She  shall  now  repair  to  her  Vidyadhara  home  and  enter
her  own  body,  which  is  there.  There  she,  remembering  her
curse,  shall  live  happily  with  a  Vidyadhara  prince  named
Abhiruchita,  who  shall  become  her  husband."

When  the  heavenly  voice  had  said  this  it  ceased,  and
immediately  that  A£okamala  fell  dead  on  the  ground.  But
the  king  and  Alankaravati,  when  they  saw  that,  had  their
eyes  suffused  with  tears,  and  so  had  their  courtiers.  But  in
HathaSarman  grief  overpowered  anger  and  he  wept,  blinded
with  passion.  Then  his  eyes  suddenly  became  expanded  with
joy.  All  of  them  thereupon  said  to  him:  "What  does
this  mean?"  Then  that  Brahman  said:  "I  remember  my
former  birth  and  I  will  give  an  account  of  it.     Listen.

67.  Story  of  Sthulabhuja

On  the  Himalayas  there  is  a  splendid  city  named
Madanapura ;  in  it  dwelt  a  Vidyadhara  prince  named
Pralambabhuja.  He  had  born  to  him,  my  lord,  a  son
named  Sthulabhuja,  and  he  in  course  of  time  became  a
handsome  prince  in  the  flower  of  youth.  Then  a  king  of  the
Vidyadharas,  named  Surabhivatsa,  came  with  his  daughter
to  the  palace  of  that  King  Pralambabhuja,  and  said  to  him  :
I  will  give  this  daughter  of  mine,  called  Surabhidatta,  to


PRIDE'S  ABASEMENT  143

your  son  Sthulabhuja;   let  the  accomplished  youth  marry
her  now."

When  Pralambabhuja  heard  this,  he  approved  it,  and
summoning  his  son  he  communicated  the  matter  to  him.
Then  his  son  Sthulabhuja,  out  of  pride  in  his  beauty,  said  to
him  :  "I  will  not  marry  her,  my  father,  for  she  is  not  a  first-
class  beauty."  His  father  thereupon  said  to  him  :  "  What
does  her  plainness  matter  ?  For  she  is  of  high  lineage  and
must  be  honoured  on  that  account,  and  her  father  offered  her
to  me  for  you,  and  I  have  accepted  her,  so  do  not  refuse."

Although  Sthulabhuja  was  thus  entreated  a  second  time
by  his  father,  he  would  not  consent  to  marry  her.  Then  his
father,  in  his  anger,  denounced  against  him  the  following
curse :  "  On  account  of  this  your  pride  in  your  good  looks,
be  born  as  a  man,  and  in  that  state  you  shall  be  ugly  and
with  a  large  mouth.  And  you  shall  acquire  by  force  a  wife
named  Asokamala,  also  fallen  by  a  curse,  and  she,  not  liking
you,  shall  leave  you,  and  you  shall  experience  the  grief  of
separation.  And  as  she  shall  be  attached  to  another,  you
shall  commit  for  her  sake  arson  and  other  crimes,  being
maddened  with  passion  and  emaciated  with  grief."

When  Pralambabhuja  had  uttered  this  curse,  that  virtuous
Surabhidatta  clung  to  his  feet,  weeping,  and  entreated  him  :
"  Pronounce  a  curse  on  me  also ;  let  our  lot  be  the  same;  let
not  my  husband  alone  suffer  calamity  owing  to  my  fault."
When  she  said  this,  Pralambabhuja  was  pleased,  and,  in  order
to  comfort  that  virtuous  woman,  he  appointed  for  her  this  end
to  his  son's  curse  :  "  Whenever  Asokamala  shall  be  released
from  her  curse,  then  he  shall  remember  his  birth  and  be
released  from  this  curse,  and  he  shall  regain  his  own  body,
and  remembering  his  curse  he  shall  be  free  from  pride  and
soon  marry  you ;  then  he  shall  live  with  you  in  happiness."
When  the  virtuous  woman  was  thus  addressed  by  him  she
managed  to  recover  her  self- composure.


[M]  "Know  that  I   am  that  very   Sthulabhuja,   fallen
here  by  a  curse,  and  I  have  experienced  great  grief  owing


144  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

to  the  fault  of  pride.  How  can  proud  men  have  happiness
in  a  previous  or  in  a  present  state  of  existence  ?  And  that
curse  of  mine  is  now  at  an  end."  After  saying  this,  Hatha-
viriiinii  abandoned  that  body  and  became  a  Vidyadhara
youth.  And  he  took  by  the  might  of  his  science  the  body
of  ASokamala  and  flung  it,  without  its  being  seen,  into  the
Ganges,  out  of  compassion.  And  he  sprinkled  immediately
the  chamber  of  Alankaravati  all  round  with  water  of  the
Ganges,  brought  by  the  might  of  his  science,  and  after
bending  before  Naravahanadatta,  his  future  lord,  he  flew  up
into  the  heaven  to  his  destined  prosperity.

All  being  astonished,  Gomukha  told  this  story  of  Anan-
garati,  which  was  appropriate  to  the  incident :


68.  Story  of  Anangarati  and  her  Four  Suitors

There  is  on  the  earth  a  city  rightly  named  Stirapura,1  and
in  it  there  lived  a  king  named  Mahavaraha,  the  destroyer
of  his  foes.  That  king  had  a  daughter  named  Anangarati,
born  to  him  by  his  wife  Padmarati,  owing  to  his  having
propitiated  Gauri ;  and  he  had  no  other  children.  And  in
course  of  time  she  attained  womanhood,  and,  proud  of  her
beauty,  she  did  not  wish  to  have  any  husband,  though  kings
asked  her  in  marriage.  But  she  said  decidedly  :  "I  must
be  given  to  a  man  who  is  brave  and  handsome,  and  knows
some  one  splendid  accomplishment."

Then  there  came  from  the  Deccan  four  heroes,  who,
having  heard  tidings  of  her,  were  eager  to  obtain  her,  and
they  were  furnished  with  the  qualities  which  she  desired.
They  were  announced  by  the  warder  and  introduced,  and
then  King  Mahavaraha  asked  them  in  the  presence  of  Anan-
garati :  "  What  are  your  names  ?  What  is  your  descent,
and  what  do  you  know  ?  "  When  they  heard  this  speech  of
the  king's,  one  of  them  said :  "I  am  Panchaphuttika  by
name,  a  Stidra ;  I  possess  a  peculiar  talent ;  I  weave  every
day  five  pairs  of  garments  ;  one  of  them  I  give  to  a  Brahman,
and  the  second  I  offer  to  Siva,  and  the  third  I  wear  myself,
and  as  for  the  fourth,  if  I  had  a  wife,  I  would  give  it  to  her,

1  I.e.  city  of  heroes.     See  Cunningham's  Ancient  Geography  of  India,  p.  99-


THE  SUITOR'S  ACCOMPLISHMENTS  145

and  the  fifth  I  sell  and  live  upon  the  proceeds."  Then  the
second  said  :  "I  am  a  VaiSya  named  Bhashajna ;  I  know
the  language  of  all  beasts  and  birds."  ■  Then  the  third  said  :
"  I  am  a  Kshatriya  named  Khadgadhara,  and  no  one  sur-
passes me  in  fighting  with  the  sword."  And  the  fourth  said  :
"  I  am  an  excellent  Brahman  named  Jivadatta ;  by  means
of  the  sciences  which  I  possess  by  the  favour  of  Gauri,  I  can
raise  to  life  a  dead  woman." 2  When  they  had  thus  spoken,
the  Sudra,  the  VaiSya  and  Kshatriya,  one  after  another,
praised  their  own  beauty,  courage  and  might,  but  the  Brah-
man praised  his  might  and  valour  and  said  nothing  about
his  beauty.

Then  King  Mahavaraha  said  to  his  doorkeeper  :  "  Take
all  these  now  and  make  them  rest  in  your  house."  The
doorkeeper,  when  he  heard  the  order,  took  them  to  his  house.
Then  the  king  said  to  his  daughter  Anangarati :  "  My
daughter,  which  of  these  four  heroes  do  you  prefer  ?  "  When
Anangarati  heard  that,  she  said  to  her  father :    "  Father,  I

1  Cf.  the  properties  of  the  magic  ring  given  to  Canace  in  the  "  Squire's
Tale,"  and  Grimm's  story  of  "  Die  Drei  Sprachen "  (No.  33,  Kinder-und
Hausmdrcheii).  See  also  Tylor's  Primitive  Culture,  vol.  i,  pp.  18,  423.  In  the
Edda,  Sigurd  learns  to  understand  the  language  of  birds  by  tasting  the  blood
of  Fafner.  For  other  parallels  see  Liebrecht's  Dunlop,  p.  184,  and  note  248.
For  analogues  to  Grimm's  tale,  see  Bolte,  op.  cit.,  vol.  i,  p.  822  et  seq.

— N.M.P.

2  Cf.  the  seventy-seventh  chapter  of  this  work,  the  second  in  the  Vetala
Panchavinsati,  and  Ralston's  exhaustive  note  in  his  Russian  Folk-Tales,
pp.  231,  232,  233.  Cf.  also  Bernhard  Schmidt's  Griechische  Marchen,  p.  114,
and  Bartsch's  Sagen,  Marchen  und  Gebr'duche  aus  Meklenburg,  vol.  i,  p.  486.
The  Pseudo-Callisthenes  (Book  II,  chap,  xl)  mentions  a  fountain  that  restored
to  life  a  salt  fish,  and  made  one  of  Alexander's  daughters  immortal.  This  is
perhaps  the  passage  that  was  in  Dunlop's  mind  when  he  said  (p.  129  of
Liebrecht's  translation)  that  such  a  fountain  is  described  in  the  Greek
romance  of  Isinenias  and  Ismene,  for  which  Liebrecht  takes  him  to  task.
See  the  parallels  quoted  by  Dunlop  and  Liebrecht.  Wheeler,  in  his  Noted
Names  of Fiction,  tells  us  that  there  was  a  tradition  current  among  the  natives
of  Puerto  Rico  that  such  a  fountain  existed  in  the  fabulous  island  of  Bimini,
said  to  belong  to  the  Bahama  group.  This  was  the  object  of  eager  and  long-
continued  quest  to  the  celebrated  Spanish  navigator,  Juan  Ponce  de  Leon.
By  Ismenias  and  Ismene,  Dunlop  probably  means  Hysminias  and  Hysmine.
See  also  Birlinger,  Aus  Schvcaben,  p.  185.  Kuhn,  in  his  Herabkunfi  des  Feuers,
traces  this  story  back  to  the  Satapatha  Brdhmana. See  Vol.   II,  p.  155n*.

— N.M.P.

VOL.   IV.  K


146  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

do  not  like  any  one  of  the  four.  The  first  is  a  Sudra  and
a  weaver ;  what  is  the  use  of  his  good  qualities  ?  The
second  is  a  Vaigya,  and  what  is  the  use  of  his  knowing  the
language  of  cattle,  and  so  on  ?  How  can  I  give  myself  to
them  when  I  am  a  Kshatriya  woman?  The  third,  indeed,
is  a  meritorious  Kshatriya,  equal  to  me  in  birth,  but  he  is  a
poor  man  and  lives  by  service,  selling  his  life.  As  I  am  the
daughter  of  a  king,  how  can  I  become  his  wife  ?  The  fourth,
the  Brahman  Jivadatta,  I  do  not  like ;  he  is  ugly  and  is  ad-
dicted to  unlawful  arts,  and,  as  he  has  deserted  the  Vedas,  he
has  fallen  from  his  high  position.  You  ought  to  punish  him.
Why  do  you  offer  to  give  me  to  him  ?  For  you,  my  father,
being  a  king,  are  the  upholder  of  the  castes  and  the  various
stages  of  life.  And  a  king  who  is  a  hero  in  upholding  religion
is  preferred  to  a  king  who  is  only  a  hero  with  the  sword.  A
hero  in  religion  will  be  the  lord  of  a  thousand  heroes  with
the  sword."  When  his  daughter  had  said  this,  the  king
dismissed  her  to  her  own  private  apartments,  and  rose  up  to
bathe  and  perform  his  other  duties.

And  the  next  day  the  four  heroes  went  out  from  the
house  of  the  doorkeeper  and  roamed  about  in  the  town
out  of  curiosity.  And  at  that  very  time  a  vicious  elephant,
Khadeadhara  named  Padmakabala,  broke  his  fastening  and
kills  the  in  his  fury  rushed  out  from  the  elephant  stable,

Elephant  trampling  down  the  citizens.  And  that  great
elephant,  when  he  saw  the  four  heroes,  rushed  towards
them  to  slay  them,  and  they  too  advanced  towards  him
with  uplifted  weapons.  Then  the  one  Kshatriya  among
them,  named  Khadgadhara,  putting  aside  the  other  three,
alone  attacked  that  elephant.  And  he  cut  off  with  one  blow
the  protended  trunk  of  that  roaring  elephant  with  as  much
ease  as  if  it  had  been  a  lotus- stalk.  And  after  showing  his
agility  by  escaping  between  his  feet,  he  delivered  a  second
blow  on  the  back  of  that  elephant.  And  with  the  third  he
cut  off  both  his  feet.  Then  that  elephant  gave  a  groan
and  fell  down  and  died.  All  the  people  were  astonished  when
they  beheld  that  valour  of  his,  and  King  Mahavaraha  was
also  amazed  when  he  heard  of  it.

The  next  day  the  king  went  out  to  hunt,  mounted  on  an


THE  FOUR  HEROES  147

elephant,  and  the  four  heroes,  with  Khadgadhara  at  their
head,  accompanied  him.  There  the  king  with  his  army
slew  tigers,  deer  and  boars,  and  the  lions  rushed  out  upon
him  in  anger,  hearing  the  trumpeting  of  the  elephants.
Then  that  Khadgadhara  cleft  in  twain,  with  one  blow  of  his
sharp  sword,  that  first  lion  that  attacked  them,  and  the
second  he  seized  with  his  left  hand  by  the  foot,  and  dashing
it  on  the  earth,  deprived  it  of  life.  And  in  the  same  way
Bhashajna  and  Jivadatta  and  Panchaphuttika  each  dashed
a  lion  to  pieces  on  the  earth.  Thus  in  turn  those  heroes
killed  on  foot  many  tigers  and  lions  and  other  animals,  with
ease,  before  the  eyes  of  the  king.  Then  that  king,  being
pleased  and  astonished,  after  he  had  finished  his  hunting,
entered  his  city,  and  those  heroes  went  to  the  house  of  the
doorkeeper.

And  the  king  entered  the  harem  and,  though  tired,  had
his  daughter  Anangarati  quickly  summoned.  And  after  de-
scribing the  valour  of  those  heroes,  one  by  one,  as  he  had  seen
it  in  the  chase,  he  said  to  her,  who  was  much  astonished :
"Even  if  Panchaphuttika  and  Bhashajna  are  of  inferior
caste,  and  Jivadatta,  though  a  Brahman,  is  ugly  and  addicted
to  forbidden  practices,  what  fault  is  there  in  the  Kshatriya
Khadgadhara,  who  is  handsome,  and  of  noble  stature,  and  is
distinguished  for  strength  and  valour ;  who  slew  such  an
elephant,  and  who  takes  lions  by  the  foot  and  crushes  them
on  the  ground,  and  slays  others  with  his  sword  ?  And  if  it
is  made  a  ground  of  reproach  against  him  that  he  is  poor  and
a  servant,  I  will  immediately  make  him  a  lord  to  be  served
by  others :  so  choose  him  for  a  husband,  if  you  please,  my
daughter.''  When  Anangarati  heard  this  from  her  father,
she  said  to  him :  "  Well,  then,  bring  all  those  men  here,  and
ask  the  astrologer,  and  let  us  see  what  he  says."  When  she
said  this  to  him,  the  king  summoned  those  heroes,  and  in
their  presence  he,  accompanied  by  his  wives,  said  to  the
astrologer  with  his  own  mouth  :  "  Find  out  with  which  of
these  Anangarati  has  conformity  of  horoscope,  and  when  a
favourable  moment  will  arrive  for  her  marriage."

When  the  skilful  astrologer  heard  that,  he  asked  the  stars
under  which  they  were  born,  and  after  long  considering  the


148  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

time  he  said  to  that  king  :  "If  you  will  not  be  angry  with
me,  King,  I  will  tell  you  plainly.  Your  daughter  lias  no
conformity  of  lot  with  any  of  them.  And  she  will  not  be
married  on  earth,  for  she  is  a  Vidyadharl  fallen  by  a  curse ;
that  curse  of  hers  will  be  at  an  end  in  three  months.  So  let
these  wait  here  three  months,  and  if  she  is  not  gone  to  her
own  world  then,  the  marriage  shall  take  place."  All  those
heroes  accepted  the  advice  of  that  astrologer,  and  remained
there  for  three  months.

When  three  months  had  passed,  the  king  summoned  into
his  presence  those  heroes,  and  that  astrologer,  and  Anan-
garati.  And  the  king,  when  he  saw  that  his  daughter  had
The  Princess  suddenly  become  exceedingly  beautiful,  rejoiced,
leaves  her  but  the  astrologer  thought  that  the  hour  of  her
Body  death    had    arrived.     And   while   the   king   was

saying  to  the  astrologer,  "  Now  tell  me  what  it  is  proper
to  do,  for  those  three  months  are  gone,"  Anangarati  called
to  mind  her  former  birth,  and,  covering  her  face  with  her
garment,  she  abandoned  that  human  body.  The  king
thought :  "  Why  has  she  put  herself  in  this  position  ?  "
But  when  he  himself  uncovered  her  face  he  saw  that  she
was  dead,  like  a  frost- smitten  lotus-plant,  for  her  eyes  like
bees  had  ceased  to  revolve,  the  lotus-flower  of  her  face  was
pale,  and  the  sweet  sound  of  her  voice  had  ceased,  even  as
the  sound  of  the  swans  departs.  Then  the  king  suddenly
fell  to  earth  motionless,  smitten  by  the  thunderbolt  of  grief
for  her,  crushed  by  the  extinction  of  his  race.1  And  the
Queen  Padmarati  also  fell  down  to  the  earth  in  a  swoon,  and
with  her  ornaments  fallen  from  her  like  flowers,  appeared
like  a  cluster  of  blossoms  broken  by  an  elephant.  The
attendants  raised  cries  of  lamentation,  and  those  heroes
were  full  of  grief;  but  the  king,  immediately  recovering
consciousness,  said  to  that  Jivadatta :  "In  this  matter
those  others  have  no  power,  but  now  it  is  your  opportunity ;
you  boasted  that  you  could  raise  to  life  a  dead  woman ;  if
you  possess  power  by   means   of  science,   then  recall   my

1  Here  there  is  an  elaborate  pun.  "  King"  may  also  mean  "mountain,"
"race"  may  mean  "wings,"  and  the  whole  passage  refers  to  Indra's  clipping
the  wings  of  the  mountains.


THE  SCIENCE  PROVES  USELESS  149

daughter  to  life.  I  will  give  her,  when  restored  to  life,  to
you  as  being  a  Brahman."

When  Jivadatta  heard  this  speech  of  the  king's  he
sprinkled  that  princess  with  water,  over  which  charms  had
been  said,  and  chanted  this  Arya  verse :  "  O  thou  of  the
loud  laugh,  adorned  with  a  garland  of  skulls,  not  to  be  gazed
on,  Chamunda,1  the  terrible  goddess,  assist  me  quickly."
When,  in  spite  of  this  effort  of  Jivadatta's,  that  maiden  was
not  restored  to  life,  he  was  despondent,  and  said :  "  My
science,  though  bestowed  by  the  goddess  that  dwells  in  the
Vindhya  range,  has  proved  fruitless,  so  what  is  the  use  to
me  of  my  life  that  has  become  an  object  of  scorn  ?  "  When
he  had  said  this,  he  was  preparing  to  cut  off  his  head  with  a
great  sword  when  a  voice  came  from  the  sky  :  "  O  Jivadatta,
do  not  act  rashly.  Listen  now.  This  noble  Vidyadhara
maiden,  named  Anangaprabha,  has  been  for  so  long  a  time
a  mortal  owing  to  the  curse  of  her  parents.  She  has  now
quitted  this  human  body,  and  has  gone  to  her  own  world,
and  taken  her  own  body.  So  go  and  propitiate  again  the
goddess  that  dwells  in  the  Vindhya  hills,  and  by  her  favour
you  shall  recover  this  noble  Vidyadhara  maiden.  But  as
she  is  enjoying  heavenly  bliss,  neither  you  nor  the  king
ought  to  mourn  for  her."  When  the  heavenly  voice  had
told  this  true  tale  it  ceased.  Then  the  king  performed
his  daughter's  rites,  and  he  and  his  wife  ceased  to  mourn
for  her,  and  those  other  three  heroes  returned  as  they  had
come.

But  hope  was  kindled  in  the  breast  of  Jivadatta,  and
he  went  and  propitiated  with  austerities  the  dweller  in  the
Vindhya  hills,  and  she  said  to  him  in  a  dream  :  "I  am
satisfied  with  thee,  so  rise  up  and  listen  to  this  that  I  am
about  to  tell  thee.

There  is  a  city  on  the  Himalayas  named  Virapura,  and
in  it  there  dwells  a  sovereign  of  the  Vidyadharas  named
Samara.     He  had  a  daughter,  named  Anangaprabha,  born

1  A  form  of  Durgit  or  Kali,  which  is  especially  connected  with  human
sacrifice  and  tantric  practices.  See  Vol.  II,  p.  214  et  seq.,  where  in  the  Malafi
Mddhava  the  heroine  is  offered  up  as  a  sacrifice  to  Chamunda.  For  a  list  of
Durga's  other  names  see  p.  179  of  this  volume. — n.m.p.


150  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

to  him  by  his  Queen  Anangavatl.  When,  in  the  pride  of
her  youth  and  beauty,  she  refused  to  have  any  husband,  her
parents,  enraged  at  her  persistence,  cursed  her :  "  Become
a  human  being,  and  even  in  that  state  you  shall  not  enter
the  happiness  of  married  life.  When  you  are  a  maiden  of
sixteen  years  you  shall  abandon  the  body  and  come  here.
But  an  ugly  mortal,  who  has  become  such  by  a  curse,  on
account  of  his  falling  in  love  with  the  daughter  of  a  hermit,
and  who  possesses  a  magic  sword,  shall  then  become  your
husband,  and  he  shall  carry  you  off  against  your  will  to
the  world  of  mortals.  There  you,  being  unchaste,  shall
be  separated  from  your  husband.  Because  that  husband
in  a  former  life  carried  off  the  wives  of  eight  other  men,
he  shall  endure  sorrow  enough  for  eight  births.  And  you,
having  become  a  mortal  by  the  loss  of  your  supernatural
science,  shall  endure  in  that  one  birth  the  sufferings  of  eight
births.1  For  to  everyone  the  association  with  the  evil  gives
an  evil  lot,  but  to  women  the  union  with  an  evil  husband
is  equivalent  to  evil.  And  having  lost  your  memory  of  the
past,  you  shall  there  take  many  mortal  husbands,  because
you  obstinately  persisted  in  detesting  the  husband  fitted  for
you.  That  Vidyadhara  Madanaprabha,  who,  being  equal  in
birth,  demanded  you  in  marriage,  shall  become  a  mortal
king  and  at  last  become  your  husband.  Then  you  shall  be
freed  from  your  curse  and  return  to  your  own  world,  and

1  Cf.  the  remarkable  passage  which  M.  Leveque  quotes  from  the  works
of  Empedocles  (Lm  Mythes  et  Legendes  de  CInde  et  de  la  Perse,  p.  90) :

""Eicrriv  dvdyKrjs  xprjpxt,  demv  ifrq(f>i<Tfia  iraAcuov,
cuOiov,  n-AaTcecrcri  Ka.Tt(r<f>pr)yur[x*vov  o/jkois,
evre  tis  dpTrkaKiyari  <p6v(t)  <plka  yvia  p-rfvy
a'ijiatTLV  fj  kvlopKov  dp-apr/jo-as  liropoao~Q
Salfuov,  ol  T€  pate pauovos  XtXd^acri  ftioio,
rpi<i  p.i    p.vpias  w/Jas  dnb  pauedpiov  dXdkrjcrOai,
(pvopevov  7ravTO?a  Sia  \povov  ciSca  dmrjriov,
a/yyaA«as  ^StOTOto  p.iTaWdxrorovra  Kt\t.vdov<i."

I  have  adopted  the  readings  of  Ritter  and  Preller,  in  their  Historia
Philosophic?,  in  preference  to  those  of  M.  Leveque.  It  is  clear  that  Empedocles
supposed  himself  to  be  a  Vidyadhara  fallen  from  heaven  in  consequence  of  a
curse.  As  I  observed  in  an  article  in  the  Calcutta  Review  of  1875,  "The
Bhagavad  Gita  and  Christianity,"  his  personality  is  decidedly  Indian.


THE  HEAVENLY  SWORD  151

you  shall  obtain  that  suitable  match,  who  shall  have  returned
to  his  Vidyadhara  state."

So  that  maiden  Anangaprabha  has  become  Anangarati
on  the  earth,  and  returning  to  her  parents  has  once  more
become  Anangaprabha.  So  go  to  Vlrapuraand  conquer  in
fight  her  father,  though  he  is  possessed  of  knowledge  and
protected  by  his  high  birth,  and  obtain  that  maiden.  Now
take  this  sword,  and  as  long  as  you  hold  it  in  your  hand  you
will  be  able  to  travel  through  the  air;  and,  moreover,  you
will  be  invincible."  Having  said  this,  and  having  given  the
sword  to  him,  the  goddess  vanished,  and  he  woke  up  and
beheld  in  his  hand  a  heavenly  sword.  Then  Jivadatta  rose
up  delighted  and  praised  Durga,1  and  all  the  exhaustion
produced  by  his  penance  was  removed  by  the  refreshment
caused  by  the  nectar  of  her  favour.  And  he  flew  up  into
the  air  with  his  sword  in  his  hand,  and  after  roaming  all
round  the  Himalayas  he  found  that  prince  of  the  Vidya-
dharas  Samara  in  Virapura.  He  conquered  him  in  fight,
and  then  the  king  gave  him  his  daughter  Anangaprabha,
and  he  married  her  and  lived  in  heavenly  felicity.  And
after  he  had  remained  there  some  time  he  said  to  his  father-
in-law  Samara  and  to  his  beloved  Anangaprabha  :  "  Let  us
two  go  to  the  world  of  men,  for  I  feel  a  longing  for  it ;  for
one's  native  land  is  exceedingly  dear  to  living  beings,  even
though  it  may  be  an  inferior  place."2

When  the  father-in-law  heard  that,  he  consented,  but
the  far-seeing  Anangaprabha  was  with  difficulty  induced
to  consent.  Then  Jivadatta  descended  from  heaven  to  the
world  of  mortals,  taking  that  Anangaprabha  in  his  arms.
And  Anangaprabha,  beholding  there  a  pleasant  mountain,
being  wearied,  said  to  him :  "  Let  us  immediately  rest  here."
Then  he  consented,  and  descending  there  with  her  he  produced
food  and  drink  by  the  power  of  the  various  sciences.  Then
Jivadatta,  being  impelled  by  Fate,  said  to  Anangaprabha  :
"Dear  one,  sing  some  sweet  song."  When  she  heard  that,
she  began  to  sing  devoutly  the  praise  of  Siva,  and  with  that
sound  of  her  singing  the  Brahman  was  sent  to  sleep.

1  The  D.  text  has  natambikah,  "  and  bowed  to  Durga." — n.M.p.
1  Cf.  Odyssey,  ix,  27,  28.


152  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

In  the  meanwhile  a  king  named  Harivara,  wearied  out
with  hunting,  came  that  way  in  search  of  spring  water ;
he  was  attracted  by  hearing  the  sound  of  that  singing,  as
Jivadatta  deer  are  attracted,  and,  leaving  his  chariot,  he
u  deserted  went  there  alone.  The  king  first  had  happiness
announced  by  omens,  and  then  he  beheld  that  Ananga-
prabha like  the  real  brightness  of  the  God  of  Love.
Then,  as  his  heart  was  distracted  with  her  song  and  her
beauty,  the  God  of  Love  cleft  it  at  will  with  his  arrows.
Anangaprabha  too,  seeing  that  he  was  handsome,  came
within  range  of  the  god  of  the  flowery  bow,  and  said  to
herself :  "  Who  is  this  ?  Is  he  the  God  of  Love,  without
his  flowery  bow  ?  Is  he  the  incarnation  of  the  favour  of
Siva  towards  me,  being  pleased  with  my  song  ?  '  Then,
maddened  with  love,  she  asked  him  :  "  Who  are  you,  and
how  have  you  come  to  this  forest  ?  Tell  me."  Then  the  king
told  her  who  he  was  and  why  he  had  come.  Then  he  said
to  her :  "  Tell  me,  who  are  you,  fair  one  ?  And  who  is
this,  O  lotus- faced  one,  who  is  sleeping  here?"  When  he
asked  these  questions,  she  answered  him  briefly  :  "I  am  a
Vidyadharl,  and  this  is  my  husband,  who  possesses  a  magic
sword,  and  now  I  have  fallen  in  love  with  you  at  first  sight.
So  come,  let  us  quickly  go  to  your  city  before  he  awakes,
then  I  will  tell  my  story  at  length."

When  the  king  heard  that  he  agreed,  and  felt  as  much
delighted  as  if  he  had  obtained  the  sovereignty  of  the  three
worlds.  And  Anangaprabha  hurriedly  thought  in  her  heart :
41 1  will  take  this  king  in  my  arms  and  quickly  fly  up  to  the
heaven."  But  in  the  meanwhile  her  knowledge  was  stripped
from  her  by  her  treachery  to  her  husband,  and,  remembering
her  father's  curse,  she  became  at  once  despondent.  When
the  king  saw  that,  he  asked  the  cause,  and  then  said  to  her  :
4  This  is  not  the  time  for  despondency  ;  your  husband  here
may  awake.  And  you  ought  not  to  lament,  my  beloved,
over  this  matter  which  depends  on  destiny.  For  who  can
escape  from  the  shadow  of  his  own  head,  or  the  course  of
destiny  ?     So  come,  let  us  depart."

When  the  King  Harivara  said  this,  she  consented  to  his
proposal,  and  he  took  her  quickly  up  in  his  arms.     Then  he


JlVADATTA  IS  DESERTED  153

went  off  quickly  thence,  as  delighted  as  if  he  had  obtained
a  treasure,  and  ascended  his  chariot,  welcomed  with  joy  by
his  servants.  And  he  reached  his  city  in  that  chariot,  which
travelled  swift  as  thought,  accompanied  by  his  beloved,  and
he  aroused  curiosity  in  his  subjects.  Then  King  Harivara
remained  in  heavenly  enjoyments  in  that  city,  which  was
named  after  him,  in  the  society  of  that  Anangaprabha.  And
Anangaprabha  remained  there  devotedly  attached  to  him,
forgetting  all  her  supernatural  power,  bewildered  by  the
curse.

In  the  meanwhile  Jivadatta  woke  up  on  the  mountain,
and  saw  that  not  only  Anangaprabha  was  gone,  but  his
sword  also.  He  thought :  "  Where  is  that  Anangaprabha  ?
Alas  !  Where  is  that  sword  ?  Has  she  gone  off  with  it  ?
Or  were  they  both  carried  off  by  some  being  ?  "  In  his
perplexity  he  made  many  surmises  of  this  sort,  and  he
searched  that  mountain  for  three  days,  being  consumed  with
the  fire  of  love.  Then  he  came  down  and  wandered  through
the  forests  for  ten  days,  but  did  not  find  a  trace  of  her  any-
where. He  kept  crying  out :  "  Alas,  spiteful  fortune,  how
did  you  carry  off,  together  with  the  magic  power  of  the  sword,
my  beloved  Anangaprabha,  both  of  which  you  granted  with
difficulty  ?  "

Thus  employed,  he  wandered  about  without  food  and
at  last  reached  a  village,  and  there  he  entered  the  opulent
mansion  of  a  Brahman.  There  the  handsome  and  well-
He  leams  dressed  mistress  of  the  house,  Priyadatta  by
the  Truth  name,  made  him  sit  down  on  a  seat  and  immedi-
ately gave  this  order  to  her  maids  :  "  Wash  quickly  the
feet  of  this  Jivadatta,  for  to-day  is  the  thirteenth  day  that
he  has  gone  without  food  on  account  of  his  separation."
When  Jivadatta  heard  that,  he  was  astonished,  and  reflected
in  his  own  mind  :  "  Can  Anangaprabha  have  come  here,  or
is  this  woman  a  witch  ?  "  Thus  he  reflected,  and  after  his
feet  were  washed,  and  he  had  eaten  the  food  that  she  gave,
he  humbly  asked  Priyadatta  in  his  great  grief:  "Tell  me  one
thing  :  how  do  you  know  my  history,  blameless  one  ?  And
tell  me  another  thing  :  where  are  my  sword  and  my  beloved
gone  ?  '      When  the  devoted  wife  Priyadatta  heard  that,  she


154  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

said  :  **  No  one  but  my  husband  has  any  place  in  my  heart,
even  in  a  dream,  my  son,  and  I  look  on  all  other  men  as
brothers,  and  no  guest  leaves  my  house  without  entertain-
ment ;  by  virtue  of  that  I  know  the  past,  the  present  and  the
future.  And  that  Anangaprabha  of  yours  has  been  carried
off  by  a  king  named  Harivara,  living  in  a  town  named  after
him,  who,  as  destiny  would  have  it,  came  that  way  while
you  were  asleep,  attracted  by  her  song.  And  you  cannot
recover  her,  for  that  king  is  very  powerful ;  moreover,  that
unchaste  woman  will  in  turn  leave  him  and  go  to  another
man.  And  the  goddess  Durga  gave  you  that  sword  only
that  you  might  obtain  that  lady ;  having  accomplished
that,  the  weapon,  in  virtue  of  its  divine  nature,  has  returned
to  the  goddess,  as  the  lady  has  been  carried  off.  Moreover,
how  have  you  forgotten  what  the  goddess  was  pleased  to  tell
you  when  she  told  the  story  of  the  curse  of  Anangaprabha  ?
So  why  are  you  so  distracted  about  an  event  which  was
destined  to  take  place  ?  Abandon  this  chain  of  sins,  which
again  and  again  produces  extreme  sorrow.  And  of  what
profit  can  be  to  you  now,  my  brother,  that  wicked
female,  who  is  attached  to  another,  and  who  has  become
a  mortal,  having  lost  her  science  by  her  treachery  against
you  ?  "

When  that  virtuous  woman  said  this  to  Jivadatta  he
abandoned  all  passion  for  Anangaprabha,  being  disgusted
with  her  fickleness,  and  thus  answered  the  Brahman  lady  :
"Mother,  my  delusion  has  been  brought  to  an  end  by  this
true  speech  of  thine.  Whom  does  not  association  with  persons
of  virtuous  conduct  benefit  ?  This  misfortune  has  befallen
me  in  consequence  of  my  former  crimes,  so  I  will  abandon
jealousy  and  go  to  holy  places  to  wash  them  out.  What
can  I  gain  by  taking  up  an  enmity  with  others  on  account
of  Anangaprabha?  For  one  who  has  conquered  anger
conquers  this  whole  world."  While  he  was  saying  this,  the
righteous  husband  of  Priyadatta,  who  was  hospitable  to
guests,  returned  to  the  house.  The  husband  also  welcomed
him,  and  made  him  forget  his  grief ;  and  then  he  rested,  and
taking  leave  of  them  both,  started  on  his  pilgrimage  to  holy
places.


THE  CURSE  OF  THE  HERMIT  155

Then,  in  course  of  time,  he  roamed  round  to  all  the  holy
bathing- places  on  the  earth,  enduring  many  toils  in  diffi-
cult ways,  living  on  roots  and  fruits.  And  after  visiting
Jtvadattas  holy  bathing-places  he  went  to  the  shrine  of  the
Former  Life  dweller  on  the  Vindhya  hills ;  there  he  went
through  a  severe  penance,  without  food,  on  a  bed  of  ku$a
grass.  And  Ambika,  satisfied  with  his  asceticism,  said
to  him,  appearing  in  bodily  form  :  "  Rise  up,  my  son,  for
you  four  are  four  Ganas  of  mine.  Three  are  Panchamula,
Chaturvaktra  and  Mahodaramukha,  and  thou  art  the  fourth,
last  in  order,  and  thy  name  is  Vikatavadana.  You  four
once  went  to  the  sand  of  the  Ganges  to  amuse  yourselves,
and  saw  there  a  hermit's  daughter  bathing.  She  was  called
Chapalekha,  the  daughter  of  Kapilajata.  And  she  was
solicited  by  all  of  you,  distracted  with  love.  When  she  said  :
1 1  am  a  maiden ;  go  away  all  of  you, '  the  three  others
remained  quiet,  but  thou  didst  forcibly  seize  her  by  the  arm.
And  she  cried  out :  '  Father,  father,  deliver  me !  '  Then
the  hermit,  who  was  near,  came  up  in  wrath.  Then  thou
didst  let  go  her  arm ;  then  he  immediately  cursed  you,
saying  :  ■  Wicked  ones,  be  born,  all  of  you,  as  human  beings. '
Then  you  asked  the  hermit  that  the  curse  might  end,  and
he  said  :  '  When  the  Princess  Anangarati  shall  be  demanded
in  marriage  by  you,  and  shall  go  to  the  Vidyadhara  world,
then  three  of  you  shall  be  released  from  your  curse.  But
when  she  has  become  a  Vidyadhari,  then  thou,  Vikatava-
dana, shalt  gain  her,  and  lose  her  again,  and  then  thou  shalt
suffer  great  sorrow.  But  after  propitiating  the  goddess
Durga  for  a  long  time  thou  shalt  be  released  from  this  curse.
This  will  happen  to  thee  because  thou  didst  touch  the  hand
of  this  Chapalekha,  and  also  because  thou  hast  much  guilt
attaching  to  thee,  on  account  of  having  carried  off  the  wives
of  others.'  You  four  Ganas  of  mine,  whom  that  hermit
thus  cursed,  became  four  heroes  in  the  Deccan :  Pancha-
phuttika,  and  Bhashajna,  and  Khadgadhara,  these  three
friends,  and  you  the  fourth,  Jivadatta.  Now  the  first  three,
when  Anangarati  returned  to  her  own  place,  came  here,  and
by  my  favour  were  freed  from  their  curse.  And  thou  hast
propitiated  me  now ;    therefore  thy  curse  is  at  an  end.     So


156  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

take  this  fiery  meditation  and  abandon  this  body,  and  con-
sume at  once  the  guilt,  which  it  would  take  eight  births  to
exhaust."

When  the  goddess  Durga  had  said  this,  she  gave  him  the
meditation  and  disappeared.  And  with  that  meditation  he
burned  up  his  wicked  mortal  body,  and  at  last  was  freed
from  the  curse,  and  became  once  more  an  excellent  Gana.
When  even  gods  have  to  endure  so  much  suffering  by
associating  with  the  wives  of  others,  what  must  be  the
result  of  it  to  inferior  beings  ?

In  the  meanwhile  Anangaprabha  became  head  queen  in
Harivara,  the  city  of  the  King  Harivara.  And  the  king
remained  day  and  night  with  his  mind  fixed  on  her,  and
The  Dancing  entrusted  the  great  burden  of  his  kingdom  to  his
Teacher  minister  named  Sumantra.     And  once  on  a  time

there  came  to  that  king  from  Madhyade£a ■  a  fresh  teacher
of  dancing,  named  Labdhavara.  The  king,  having  seen
his  skill  in  music  and  dancing,  honoured  him,  and  made
him  the  instructor  in  dancing  of  the  ladies  of  the  harem.
He  brought  Anangaprabha  so  much  excellence  in  dancing
that  she  was  an  object  of  admiration  even  to  her  rival
wives.  And  from  associating  with  the  professor  of  dancing,
and  from  the  delight  she  took  in  his  teaching,  she  fell  in
love  with  him.  And  the  professor  of  dancing,  attracted
by  her  youth  and  beauty,  gradually  learnt  a  new  strange
dance,2  thanks  to  the  God  of  Love.  And  once  she  ap-
proached the  professor  of  dancing  secretly  in  the  dancing-
hall,  and  being  desperately  in  love  with  him,  said  to  him  :
"  I  shall  not  be  able  to  live  for  a  moment  without  you,
and  the  King  Harivara,  when  he  hears  of  it,  will  not  tolerate
it ;  so  come,  let  us  depart  elsewhere,  where  the  king  will
not  find  us  out.  You  have  wealth  in  the  form  of  gold,
horses  and  camels,  given  by  the  king,  pleased  with  your
dancing,  and  I  have  ornaments.  So  let  us  quickly  go  and
dwell  where  we  shall  be  secure."

The  professor  of  dancing  was  pleased  with  her  proposal,
and  consented  to  this.     Then  she  put  on  the  dress  of  a  man

1  Comprising  the  modern  provinces  of  Allahabad,  Agra,  Delhi  and  Oude.

2  For  anrityaia  I  should  like  to  read  anartyata.


FICKLE  IS  THE  MIND  OF  WOMAN !  157

and  went  to  the  house  of  the  professor  of  dancing,  accom-
panied by  one  female  servant,  who  was  exceedingly  devoted
to  her.  Thence  she  started  on  horseback,  with  that  teacher
She  deserts  of  dancing,  who  placed  his  wealth  on  the  back
King  Harivara  0f  a  camel.  First  she  abandoned  the  splendour
of  the  Vidyadharas,  then  of  a  throne,  and  now  she  put
herself  under  the  shelter  of  a  bard's  fortune.  Alas  !  fickle
is  the  mind  of  women !  And  so  Anangaprabha  went  with
the  teacher  of  dancing  and  reached  a  distant  city  named
Viyogapura.  There  she  dwelt  in  happiness  with  him,  and
the  distinguished  dancer  thought  that  by  obtaining  her  his
name  of  Labdhavara  x  had  been  justified.

And  in  the  meanwhile  King  Harivara,  finding  out  that
his  beloved  Anangaprabha  had  gone  somewhere  or  other,
was  ready  to  abandon  the  body  out  of  grief.  Then  the
minister  Sumantra  said  to  the  king  to  comfort  him  :  "  Why
do  you  appear  as  if  you  do  not  understand  the  matter  ?
Consider  it  yourself.  How,  my  sovereign,  could  you  expect
that  a  woman  who  deserted  a  husband  that  had  by  means
of  his  sword  obtained  the  power  of  a  Vidyadhara,  and  re-
paired to  you  as  soon  as  she  saw  you,  would  be  faithful  even
to  you  ?  She  has  gone  off  with  something  that  she  has
managed  to  get,  having  no  desire  for  anything  good,  as  one
to  whom  a  blade  of  grass  is  a  sprout  of  jewels,  falling  in
love  at  sight  with  a  blade  of  grass.  Certainly  the  teacher  of
dancing  has  gone  off  with  her,  for  he  is  nowhere  to  be  seen.
And  I  hear  that  they  both  were  in  the  concert-hall  in  the
morning.  So  tell  me,  King,  why  are  you  so  persistent  about
her,  though  you  know  all  this  ?  The  truth  is,  a  fickle  dame
is  like  a  sunset,  momentarily  aglow  for  everyone."

When  the  minister  said  this  to  him,  the  king  fell  into  a
musing,  and  thought :  "  Yes,  that  wise  man  has  told  me
the  truth.  For  a  fickle  dame  is  like  human  life ;  connection
with  her  is  unstable;  she  changes  every  moment,  and  is
terrible,  bringing  disgust  at  the  end.  The  wise  man  never
falls  into  the  power  of  deep  rivers  or  of  woman,  both  of
which  drown  him  who  falls  into  their  power,  while  they
exhibit  wanton  sportfulness.     Those  men  are  truly  masters

1  I.e.  one  who  has  obtained  a  prize.


158  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

of  themselves  who  are  free  from  excitement  about  pleasures,
who  are  not  puffed  up  in  prosperity,  and  who  are  unshrink-
ing in  dangers :  such  men  have  conquered  the  world."  After
saying  this,  King  Harivara  abandoned  his  grief  by  the  advice
of  his  minister,  and  remained  satisfied  with  the  society  of  his
own  wives.

And  after  Anangaprabha  had  dwelt  some  time  with  the
teacher  of  dancing,  in  the  city  named  Viyogapura,  he,  as
fate  would  have  it,  struck  up  an  acquaintance  with  a  young
The  G  bl  gambler  named  SudarSana.  Then  the  gambler,
and  the  before  the  eyes  of  Anangaprabha,  soon  stripped

Merchant  the  teacher  of  dancing  of  all  his  wealth.  Then
iranyagupa  Anangaprabha  deserted  her  husband,  who  was
stripped  of  all  his  fortune,  as  if  in  anger  on  that  account,
and  threw  herself  into  the  arms  of  Sudar^ana.  Then  the
teacher  of  dancing,  having  lost  his  wife  and  his  wealth,
having  no  refuge,  in  disgust  with  the  world,  matted  his  hair
in  a  knot  and  went  to  the  banks  of  the  Ganges  to  practise
mortification  of  the  flesh.  But  Anangaprabha,  who  was  ever
taking  new  paramours,  remained  with  that  gambler.  But
one  night  her  lord  Sudarsana  was  robbed  of  all  that  he  had
by  some  robbers,  who  entered  his  house  in  the  darkness.
Then  Sudarsana,  seeing  that  Anangaprabha  was  uncom-
fortable and  unhappy  on  account  of  their  poverty,  said  to
her  :  "  Come  and  let  us  borrow  something  from  a  rich  friend
of  mine,  named  Hiranyagupta,  a  distinguished  merchant."
After  saying  this  he,  being  deprived  of  his  senses  by  destiny,
went  with  his  wife  and  asked  that  great  merchant  Hiranya-
gupta to  lend  him  some  money.  And  the  merchant,  when
he  saw  her,  immediately  fell  in  love  with  her,  and  she  also
with  him,  the  moment  that  she  beheld  him.  And  the
merchant  said  politely  to  Sudarsana :  "  To-morrow  I  will
give  you  gold,  but  dine  here  to-day."  When  Sudarsana
heard  this,  beholding  the  altered  bearing  of  those  two,  he
said:  "I  did  not  come  here  to-day  to  dine."  Then  the
great  merchant  said :  "If  this  be  the  case,  at  any  rate  let
your  wife  dine  here,  my  friend,  for  this  is  the  first  time  that
she  has  visited  my  house."

When  Sudarsana  was  thus  addressed  by  him,  he  remained


THE  GAMBLER  IS  HUMILIATED  159

silent  in  spite  of  his  cunning,  and  that  merchant  went  into
his  house  with  Anangaprabha.  There  he  indulged  in  drink-
ing and  other  pastimes  with  that  fair  one,  unexpectedly
thrown  in  his  way,  who  was  merry  with  all  the  wantonness
of  wine.  But  Sudar£ana,  who  was  standing  outside,  waiting
for  her  to  come  out,  had  the  following  message  brought  to
him  by  the  merchant's  servants,  in  accordance  with  their
master's  orders :  "  Your  wife  has  dined  and  gone  home ;
you  must  have  failed  to  see  her  going  out.  So  what  are
you  doing  here  so  long  ?  Go  home."  He  answered  :  "  She
is  within  the  house,  she  has  not  come  out,  and  I  will  not
depart."  Thereupon  the  merchant's  servants  drove  him
away  from  the  house  with  kicks.  Then  Sudar^ana  went  off
and  sorrowfully  reflected  with  himself :  "  What !  has  this
merchant,  though  my  friend,  robbed  me  of  my  wife?  Or,
rather,  in  this  very  birth  the  fruit  of  my  sin  has  in  such  a
form  fallen  to  my  lot.  For  what  I  did  to  one,  another  has
done  to  me.  Why  should  I,  then,  be  angry  with  another,
when  my  own  deeds  merit  anger  ?  So  I  will  sever  the  chain
of  works,  so  that  I  may  not  be  again  humiliated."

Thus  reflecting,  the  gambler  abandoned  his  anger,  and
going  to  the  hermitage  of  Badarika,1  he  proceeded  to  perform
such  austerities  as  would  cut  the  bonds  of  mundane  existence.

1  Badarinatha  is  a  place  sacred  to  Vishnu  in  the  Himalayas.  The
Badarinatha  peaks,  in  British  Garhwal,  form  a  group  of  six  summits,  from
22,000  to  23,400  feet  above  the  sea.  The  town  of  Badarinatha  is  fifty-five
miles  north-east  of  Srinagar,  on  the  right  bank  of  the  Vishnuganga,  a  feeder
of  the  Alaknanda.  The  temple  is  situated  in  the  highest  part  of  the  town,
and  below  it  a  tank,  supplied  by  a  sulphureous  thermal  spring,  is  frequented
by  thousands  of  pilgrims.  The  temple  is  10,294  feet  above  the  sea.  (Akbar,
an  Eastern  Romance,  by  Dr  van  Limburg-Brouwer,  with  an  introduction  by

Clements   Markham,  p.    1,  note.) The  place  derives  its  name  from  the

worship  of  Vishnu  in  his  manifestation  as  Badarinatha  or  Badarinarayana,
<'  Lord  of  the  badari  or  jujube  tree."  Crooke  (Hastings'  Ency.  Rel.  Eth.,  vol.  ii,
p.  325)  suggests  that  an  ancient  tree-cult  is  probably  associated  with  the
thermal  spring  mentioned  above.  The  founder  of  the  temple  is  said  to  have
been  the  great  teacher  Sankaracharya,  a  Malabar  Brahman,  who  lived  about
the  beginning  of  the  eighth  century  a.d.  Crooke  adds  an  interesting  descrip-
tion given  by  Atkinson  {Himalayan  Gazetteer,  vol.  iii,  p.  24  et  seu.):  "The  idol
in  the  principal  temple  is  formed  of  black  stone  or  marble  about  three  feet
high.     It  is  usually  clothed  with  rich  gold  brocade,  and  above  its  head  is  a


160  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

And  Anangaprabha,  having  obtained  that  exceedingly
handsome  merchant  for  a  dear  husband,  was  as  pleased  as  a
bee  that  has  lighted  on  a  flower.  And  in  course  of  time  she
attained  undisputed  control  over  the  wealth,  as  well  as  over
the  heart,  of  that  opulent  merchant,  who  was  deeply  in  love
with  her.  But  the  King  Virabahu,  though  he  heard  of  the
matchless  beauty  residing  there,  did  not  carry  her  off,  but
remained  strictly  within  the  limits  of  virtue.  And  in  course
of  time  the  wealth  of  the  merchant  began  to  diminish,  on
account  of  the  expenditure  of  Anangaprabha  ;  for,  in  a  house
presided  over  by  an  unchaste  woman,  Fortune  pines  as  well
as  virtuous  women.  Then  the  merchant  Hiranyagupta  got
together  wares  and  went  off  to  an  island  named  Suvarna-
bhumi  to  trade,  and  he  took  that  Anangaprabha  with  him,
out  of  fear  of  being  separated  from  her,  and  journeying  on
his  way  he  at  last  reached  the  city  of  Sagarapura.  There  he
fell  in  with  a  chief  of  fishermen,  a  native  of  that  place,  Saga-
ravira  by  name,  whom  he  found  in  that  city  near  the  sea.
He  went  with  that  seafaring  man  to  the  shore  of  the  sea,  and
with  his  beloved  embarked  on  a  ship  which  he  provided.

And  after  the  merchant  had  travelled  in  anxiety  for
some  days  over  the  sea  in  that  ship,  accompanied  by  Saga-
ravira,   one  day  a  terrible  cloud  of  doom  appeared,   with

small  mirror  which  reflects  the  objects  from  the  outside.  In  front  are  several
lamps  always  burning,  and  a  table  also  covered  with  brocade.  To  the  right
are  images  of  Nara  and  Narayana,  and  on  the  left  those  of  Kuvera  and  Narada.
The  idol  is  adorned  with  one  jewel,  a  diamond  of  moderate  size,  in  the  middle
of  its  forehead,  whilst  the  whole  of  the  properties,  including  dresses,  eating
vessels,  and  other  paraphernalia,  are  not  worth  more  than  Rs.5000  (£333).

"  A  good  deal  of  ostentatious  attention  is  paid  to  the  personal  comfort  of
the  idol  at  Badari.  It  is  daily  provided  with  meals,  which  are  placed  before
it ;  the  doors  of  the  sanctuary  are  then  closed,  and  the  idol  is  left  to  consume
its  meals  in  quietness.  The  doors  are  not  opened  again  till  after  sunset ;  and
at  a  late  hour,  its  bed  being  prepared  by  the  attendants,  the  doors  are  again
closed  until  morning.  The  vessels  in  which  the  idol  is  served  are  of  gold  and
silver,  and  a  large  establishment  of  servants  is  kept  up,  both  male  and  female,
the  latter  as  dancing-girls  and  mistresses  of  the  celibate  priests.  The  only
persons  who  have  access  to  the  inner  apartments  are  the  servants,  and  no  one
but  the  Rawal  himself  is  allowed  to  touch  the  idol."

For  further  details  see  Traill,  Statistical  Account  of  Kumaun,  edit.  Batten,
p.  57 ;  Panjdb  Notes  and  Queries,  vol.  iv,  p.  196;  and  Crooke,  Tribes  and  Castes
of  the  Sorth- Western  Provinces  and  Oudh,  vol.  iv,  p.  340. — n.m.p.


ANANGAPRABHA  IS  RESCUED  161

flashing  eyes  of  lightning,  filling  them  with  fear  of  destruc-
tion. Then  that  ship,  smitten  by  a  mighty  wind,  with  a
violent  shower  of  rain,  began  to  sink  in  the  waves.  That
merchant  Hiranyagupta,  when  the  crew  raised  a
cry  of  lamentation,  and  the  ship  began  to  break
up  like  his  own  hopes,  fastened  his  cloak  round  his  loins
and,  looking  at  the  face  of  Anangaprabha,  exclaimed :  "  Ah !
my  beloved,  where  art  thou  ?  "  and  threw  himself  into  the
sea.  And  he  oared  himself  along  with  his  arms,  and,  as  luck
would  have  it,  he  reached  a  merchant- ship,  and  caught  hold
of  it  and  climbed  up  into  it.

But  that  Sagaravira  tied  together  some  planks  with  a
cord  and  quickly  placed  Anangaprabha  upon  them.  And  he
himself  climbed  up  upon  them,  and  comforted  that  terrified
woman,  and  went  paddling  along  in  the  sea,  throwing  aside
the  water  with  his  arms.  And  as  soon  as  the  ship  had  been
broken  to  pieces  the  clouds  disappeared  from  the  heaven,
and  the  sea  was  calm,  like  a  good  man  whose  wrath  is
appeased.  But  the  merchant  Hiranyagupta,  after  climbing
up  into  the  ship,  which  was  impelled  by  the  wind,  as  fate
would  have  it,  reached  in  five  days  the  shore  of  the  sea.
Then  he  went  on  shore,  grieved  at  the  loss  of  his  beloved ;
but  he  reflected  that  the  dispensations  of  Destiny  were  ir-
remediable; and  he  went  slowly  home  to  his  own  city,  and
being  of  resolute  soul,  he  recovered  his  self-command,  and
again  acquired  wealth  and  lived  in  great  comfort.

But  Anangaprabha,  seated  on  the  plank,  was  piloted  to
the  shore  of  the  sea  in  one  day  by  Sagaravira.  And  there
that  chief  of  the  fishermen,  consoling  her,  took  her  to  his
own  palace  in  the  city  of  Sagarapura.  There  Anangaprabha,
reflecting  that  that  chief  of  the  fishermen  was  a  hero  who
had  saved  her  life,  and  was  equal  to  a  king  in  opulence,  and
in  the  prime  of  youth  and  good  looks,  and  obedient  to  her
orders,  made  him  her  husband.  A  woman  who  has  lost  her
virtue  does  not  distinguish  between  high  and  low.  Then  she
dwelt  with  that  chief  of  fishermen,  enjoying  in  his  house  his
wealth  that  he  put  at  her  disposal.

One  day  she  saw  from  the  roof  of  the  palace  a  handsome
Kshatriya  youth,  named  Vijayavarman,  going  along  the  high

VOL.   IV.  L


162  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

street  of  the  town.  Falling  in  love  with  his  good  looks,
she  went  up  to  him  and  said :  "  Receive  me,  who  am  in
love  with  you,  for  my  mind  has  been  fascinated  by  the
sight  of  you."  And  he  gladly  welcomed  that
the  Fisherman  fairest  woman  of  the  three  worlds,  who  had  fallen
for  Vijaya-  to  him,  as  it  were,  from  the  sky,  and  took  her
home  to  his  house.  But  Sagaravira,  finding  that
his  beloved  had  gone  somewhere  or  other,  abandoned  all,
and  went  to  the  River  Ganges,  intending  to  leave  the  body
by  means  of  ascetic  practices.  And  no  wonder  that  his  grief
was  great,  for  how  could  a  man  of  servile  caste  ever  have
expected  to  obtain  such  a  Vidyadhari  ?  But  Anangaprabha
lived  at  ease  in  that  very  town  with  Vijayavarman,  free  from
restraint.

Then  one  day  the  king  of  that  place,  named  Sagara-
varman,  mounted  a  female  elephant  and  went  out  to  roam
round  his  city.  And  while  the  king  was  looking  at  that  well-
built  city  named  after  him,  he  came  along  the  street  where
the  house  of  Vijayavarman  was.  And  Anangaprabha,  find-
ing out  that  the  king  was  coming  that  way,  went  up  to  the
top  of  the  house,  out  of  curiosity  to  behold  him.  And  the
moment  she  saw  the  king  she  fell  so  desperately  in  love  with
him  that  she  insolently  exclaimed  to  the  elephant-driver :
"  Mahout,  I  never  in  my  life  have  ridden  on  an  elephant,  so
give  me  a  ride  on  yours,  and  let  me  see  how  pleasant  it  is."

When  the  elephant- driver  heard  this,  he  looked  at  the
face  of  the  king,  and  in  the  meanwhile  the  king  beheld  her,
like  the  splendour  of  the  moon  fallen  from  heaven.  And
.  ,,_  the  king,  drinking  her  in  with  insatiate  eye  like

enters  upon  a  partridge,  having  conceived  the  hope  of  gain-
her  Final  Jng  ner>  sai^  to  his  elephant-driver  :  "  Take  the
elephant  near  and  comply  with  her  wish,  and
without  delay  seat  this  moon- faced  dame  on  the  elephant."
When  the  king  said  this,  the  elephant  -  driver  at  once
brought  that  elephant  close  under  the  house.  When
Anangaprabha  saw  that  the  elephant  had  come  near,  she
immediately  flung  herself  into  the  lap  of  the  King  Sagara-
varman.  How  came  it  that,  though  at  first  she  was  averse
to  a  husband,  she  now  showed  such  an  insatiable  appetite


KING  SAGARAVARMAN  163

for  husbands  ?  Surely  her  father's  curse  made  her  exhibit
a  great  change  of  character.  And  she  clasped  the  king
round  the  neck,  as  if  afraid  of  falling,  and  he,  when  his
limbs  were  irrigated  with  the  nectar  of  her  touch,  was  much
delighted.  And  the  king  quickly  carried  off  to  his  own
palace  her  who  had  surrendered  herself  by  an  artifice,  being
desirous  of  being  kissed.  There  he  made  that  Vidyadhari
enter  his  harem,  and  after  she  had  told  him  her  story  he  made
her  his  principal  wife.  And  then  that  young  Kshatriya,
finding  out  that  she  had  been  carried  off  by  the  king,  came
and  attacked  the  king's  servants  outside  the  palace;  and
there  he  left  his  corpse,  not  turning  his  back  in  fight;  for
brave  men  do  not  submit  to  insult  on  account  of  a  woman.
And  it  seemed  as  if  he  was  carried  off  to  the  abode  of  the
gods  by  the  nymphs  of  heaven,  saying  :  "  What  have  you
to  do  with  this  contemptible  woman  ?  Come  to  Nandana  and
court  us."

As  for  that  Anangaprabha,  when  she  had  come  into  the
possession  of  the  King  Sagaravarman,  she  roamed  no  more,
but  remained  faithful  to  him,  as  rivers  are  at  rest  in  the
bosom  of  the  sea.  And  owing  to  the  force  of  destiny  she
thought  herself  fortunate  in  having  obtained  that  husband,
and  he  thought  that  his  life  was  complete  by  having  obtained
her  for  a  wife.

And  in  some  days  Anangaprabha,  the  queen  of  that
King  Sagaravarman,  became  pregnant,  and  in  due  time  gave
birth  to  a  son.  And  the  king  made  a  great  feast  on  account
The  Birth  °^  ^e  birth  of  a  noble  son,  and  gave  the  boy  the
of  Samudra-  name  of  Samudravarman.  And  when  that  son
varman  attained  his  full  stature,  and  became  a  young

man  distinguished  for  might,  the  king  appointed  him  Crown
Prince.  Then  he  brought  to  his  court  Kamalavati,  the
daughter  of  a  certain  king  named  Samaravarman,  to  be
married  to  him.  And  when  that  son  Samudravarman  was
married,  the  king,  being  impressed  by  his  virtues,  gave  him
his  own  kingdom.  That  brave  son  Samudravarman,  being
thoroughly  acquainted  with  the  duties  of  Kshatriyas,  when
he  had  obtained  the  kingdom,  said  to  his  father,  bowing
before  him  :  "  Father,  give  me  leave  to  depart ;  I  am  setting


164  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

out  to  conquer  the  regions.  A  lord  of  earth  that  is  not  in-
tent on  conquest  is  to  be  blamed  as  much  as  the  effeminate
husband  of  a  woman.  And  in  this  world  only  that  fortune
of  kings  is  righteous  and  glorious  which  is  acquired  by  one's
own  strength  after  conquering  the  kingdoms.  What  is  the
use,  father,  of  the  sovereignty  of  those  kings  who  hold  it
merely  for  the  sake  of  oppressing  the  poor  ?  They  devour
their  own  subjects,  ravenous  like  cats."  '

When  he  had  said  this,  his  father  Sagaravarman  replied  :
"  Your  rule,  my  boy,  is  young ;  so  for  the  present  secure
that ;  no  demerit  or  disgrace  attaches  to  one  who  rules  his
subjects  justly.  And  war  is  not  meet  for  kings  without
considering  their  power.  Though  you,  my  child,  are  a  hero,
and  your  army  is  numerous,  still  you  ought  not  to  rely  upon
the  fortune  of  victory,  which  is  fickle  in  fight."

Though  his  father  used  these  and  similar  arguments  with
him,  the  brave  Samudravarman  at  last,  with  great  difficulty,
induced  him  to  consent,  and  marched  out  to  conquer  the
regions.  And  having  conquered  the  regions  in  due  course,
and  reduced  the  kings  under  his  sway,  he  returned  to  his
own  city  in  possession  of  elephants,  horses,  gold  and  other
tributes.  And  there  he  humbly  honoured  the  feet  of  his
delighted  parents  with  great  jewels  produced  in  various
regions.  And  the  glorious  prince  gave,  by  their  orders,  to
the  Brahmans  great  gifts  of  elephants,  horses,  gold  and
jewels.  Then  he  showered  gold  in  such  profusion  upon
suppliants  and  servants  that  the  only  thing  in  the  country
devoid  of  wealth  was  the  word  poor,  which  had  become
without  meaning.2  The  King  Sagaravarman,  dwelling  with
Anangaprabha,  when  he  beheld  the  glory  of  his  son,  considered
that  his  objects  in  life  had  been  accomplished.

And  the  king,  after  spending  those  days  in  feasting,
said  to  his  son  Samudravarman  in  the  presence  of  the
ministers  :  "  I  have  accomplished,  my  son,  what  I  had  to
accomplish  in  this  birth.  I  have  enjoyed  the  pleasures  of
rule,  I  have  not  experienced  defeat  from  my  enemies,  and  I
have  seen  you  in  possession  of  sovereignty.     What  else  does

1  Praja  means  "subjects"  and  also  "offspring."

*  The  word  artha  means  "  wealth  "  and  also  "meaning."


SIVA  IS  CONCILIATED  165

there  remain  for  me  to  obtain  ?  So  I  will  retire  to  a  holy
bathing-place,  while  my  body  retains  strength.  For  see,
old  age  whispers  at  the  root  of  my  ear :  '  Since  this  body
is  perishable,  why  do  you  still  remain  in  your  house  ?  '  "
Having  said  this,  the  King  Sagaravarman,  all  whose  ends
were  attained,  went,  though  his  son  was  opposed  to  it,  to
Prayaga  with  his  beloved.  And  Samudravarman  escorted
his  father  there,  and,  after  returning  to  his  own  city,  ruled
it  in  accordance  with  the  law.

And  the  King  Sagaravarman,  accompanied  by  his  wife
Anangaprabha,  propitiated  the  god  Siva  in  Prayaga  with
asceticism.  And  at  the  end  of  the  night  the  god  said  to  him
The  End  of  in  a  dream  :  "I  am  pleased  with  this  penance
the  Curse  of  yourself  and  your  wife ;  so  hear  this  :  this
Anangaprabha  and  you,  my  son,  are  both  of  the  Vidyadhara
race,  and  to-morrow  the  curse  will  expire,  and  you  will  go
to  your  own  world."

When  the  king  heard  that,  he  woke  up,  and  Ananga-
prabha, too,  who  had  seen  a  similar  dream,  and  they  told
their  dreams  to  one  another.  And  then  Anangaprabha,
delighted,  said  to  the  king  :  "  My  husband,  I  have  now
remembered  all  the  history  of  my  former  birth.  I  am  the
daughter  of  Samara,  a  prince  of  the  Vidyadharas,  in  the  city
of  Virapura,  and  my  name  has  always  been  Anangaprabha.
And  I  came  here  owing  to  the  curse  of  my  father,  having
become  a  human  being  by  the  loss  of  my  science,  and  I
forgot  my  Vidyadhari  nature.  But  now  I  have  recovered
consciousness  of  it."

While  she  was  saying  this,  her  father  Samara  descended
from  heaven,  and  after  he  had  been  respectfully  wel-
comed by  the  King  Sagaravarman  he  said  to  that  daughter
Anangaprabha,  who  fell  at  his  feet  :  "  Come,  daughter,
receive  these  sciences ;  your  curse  is  at  an  end.  For  you
have  endured  in  one  birth  the  sorrows  of  eight  births."  '

1  The  story  of  Anangaprabha  may  be  the  origin  of  the  seventh  novel  of

the  second  day  in  the  Decameron  of  Boccaccio. Possibly,  but  the  point  of

Boccaccio's  story  of  the  "  Soldan  of  Babylon  "  is  that,  after  all  her  intrigues,
she  is  married  to  the  King  of  Algarve  as  a  virgin,  thus  it  really  comes  under
the  "  Deceitful  Wives  "  motif,  and  the  more  lovers  she  has  the  more  corrupt


166  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

Saying  this,  he  took  her  on  his  lap  and  gave  her  back
the  sciences.  Then  he  said  to  the  King  Sagaravarman :
"  You  are  a  prince  of  the  Vidyadharas  named  Madana-
prabha,  and  I  am  by  name  Samara,  and  Anangaprabha  is
my  daughter.  And  long  ago,  when  she  ought  to  have  been
given  in  marriage,  her  hand  was  demanded  by  several
suitors,  but,  being  intoxicated  by  her  beauty,  she  did  not
desire  any  husband.  Then  she  was  asked  in  marriage  by
you,  who  were  equal  in  merit,  and  very  eager  to  marry  her,
but,  as  fate  would  have  it,  she  would  not  then  accept  even
you.  For  that  reason  I  cursed  her,  that  she  might  go  to  the
world  of  mortals.  And  you,  being  passionately  in  love  with
her,  fixed  your  heart  on  Siva,  the  giver  of  boons,  and  wished
intently  that  she  might  be  your  wife  in  the  world  of  mortals,
and  then  you  abandoned  your  Vidyadhara  body  by  magic
art.  Then  you  became  a  man,  and  she  became  your  wife.
Now  return  to  your  own  world  linked  together."

When  Samara  said  this  to  Sagaravarman,  he,  remember-
ing his  birth,  abandoned  his  body  in  the  water  of  Prayaga  ■
and  immediately  became  Madanaprabha.  And  Ananga-
prabha was  rekindled  with  the  brightness  of  her  recovered
science,  and  immediately  becoming  a  Vidyadhari,  gleamed
with  that  very  body,  which  underwent  a  heavenly  change.
And  then  Madanaprabha,  being  delighted,  and  Ananga-
prabha also,  feeling  great  passion  stir  in  both  their  hearts
at  the  sight  of  one  another's  heavenly  bodies,  and  the
auspicious  Samara,  king  of  the  sky-goers,  all  flew  up  into
the  air,  and  went  together  to  that  city  of  the  Vidyadharas,

and  deceitful  is  woman  shown  to  be.  It  has  been  suggested  that  the  story
has  historical  foundations  somewhere  between  1315  and  1320  (see  Lami,
Novelle  Letterarie  di  Firenze,  1754,  pp.  209,  225,  257,  273).  The  "False
Virgin"  motif  is,  however,  a  very  old  one  in  fiction  (see,  for  instance,  the
Mahdbharata,  Udyoga  Parva,  cxv  et  seq.).  For  other  analogues  see  Lee,  The
Decameron,  its  Sources  and  Analogues,  pp.  36-38. — n.m.p.

1  Prayaga — Allahabad,  the  "  place  of  sacrifice,"  ko.t    ^oyrfv.     Here  the

Ganga  and  Yamuna  unite  with  the  supposed  subterranean  Sarasvati. It  is

this  triple  junction  (trivem)  that  accounts  for  the  special  holiness  of  AllahabAd.
See  further  Fiihrer,  Monumental  Antiquities  and  Inscriptions  of  the  North-  Western
Provinces  and  Oudh,  p.  127  et  seq.  See  also  Vol.  II,  p.  11  On2,  of  this  work.
— N.M.P.


THE  RETURN  TO  VlRAPURA  167

Virapura.  And  there  Samara  immediately  gave,  with  due
rites,  his  daughter  Anangaprabha  to  the  Vidyadhara  king,
Madanaprabha.  And  Madanaprabha  went  with  that  be-
loved, whose  curse  had  been  cancelled,  to  his  own  city,  and
there  he  dwelt  at  ease.


[M]  "  Thus  divine  beings  fall  by  virtue  of  a  curse,  and,
owing  to  the  consequences  of  their  own  wickedness,  are
incarnate  in  the  world  of  men,  and  after  reaping  the  fruit
appropriate  to  their  bad  conduct  they  again  go  to  their  own
home  on  account  of  previously  acquired  merit."

When  Naravahanadatta  heard  this  tale  from  his  minister
Gomukha,  he  and  Alankaravati  were  delighted,  and  then  he
performed  the  duties  of  the  day.


CHAPTER  LIII

THEN,  on  the  next  day,  Naravahanadatta's  friend
[M]  Marubhuti  said  to  him,  when  he  was  in  the
company  of  Alankaravati :  "  See,  King,  this  miser-
able dependent ■  of  yours  remains  clothed  with  one  garment
of  leather,  with  matted  hair,  thin  and  dirty,  and  never
leaves  the  royal  gate,  day  or  night,  in  cold  or  heat ;  so  why
do  you  not  show  him  favour  at  last  ?  For  it  is  better  that
a  little  should  be  given  in  time,  than  much  when  it  is
too  late;  so  have  mercy  on  him  before  he  dies."  When
Gomukha  heard  this,  he  said :  "  Marubhuti  speaks  well,
but  you,  King,  are  not  the  least  in  fault  in  this  matter ;  for
until  a  suitor's  guilt,  which  stands  in  his  way,  is  removed,
a  king,  even  though  disposed  to  give,  cannot  give ;  but  when
a  man's  guilt  is  effaced  a  king  gives,  though  strenuously  dis-
suaded from  doing  so ;  this  depends  upon  works  in  a  previous
state  of  existence.  And  a  propos  of  this  I  will  tell  you,  O
King,  the  story  of  Lakshadatta  the  king,  and  Labdhadatta
the  dependent.     Listen.

69.  Story  of  King  Lakshadatta  and  his  Dependent
Labdhadatta  2

There  was  on  the  earth  a  city  named  Lakshapura.  In
it  there  lived  a  king  named  Lakshadatta,  chief  of  generous
men.  He  never  knew  how  to  give  a  petitioner  less  than  a
lac  of  coins,  but  he  gave  five  lacs  to  anyone  with  whom  he
conversed.  As  for  the  man  with  whom  he  was  pleased,  he
lifted  him  out  of  poverty  ;    for  this  reason  his  name  was

1  The  word  in  the  original  is  karpafika.  Bohtlingk  and  Roth  explain  it
in  this  passage  as  "  ein  im  Dienste  eines  Fiirslen  stehender  Beltler."  It  appears
from  Taranga  81  that  a .poor  man  became  a  karpa{ika  by  tearing  a  karpafa,  a
ragged  garment,  in  a  king's  presence.  The  business  of  a  karpafika  seems  to
have  been  to  do  a  service  without  getting  anything  for  it.

2  For  a  note  on  this  story  see  the  end  of  this  chapter. — n.m.p.

168


THE  FAITHFUL  DEPENDENT  169

called  Lakshadatta.  A  certain  dependent  named  Labdha-
datta  stood  day  and  night  at  his  gate,  with  a  piece  of  leather
for  his  only  loin-rag.  He  had  matted  hair,  and  he  never
left  the  king's  gate  for  a  second,  day  or  night,  in  cold,  rain  or
heat,  and  the  king  saw  him  there.  And  though  he  remained
there  long  in  misery,  the  king  did  not  give  him  anything,
though  he  was  generous  and  compassionate.

Then  one  day  the  king  went  to  a  forest  to  hunt,  and  his
dependent  followed  him  with  a  staff  in  his  hand.  There,
while  the  king,  seated  on  an  elephant,  armed  with  a  bow,
and  followed  by  his  army,  slew  tigers,  bears  and  deer,  with
showers  of  arrows,  his  dependent,  going  in  front  of  him,  alone
on  foot,  slew  with  his  staff  many  boars  and  deer.  When
the  king  saw  his  bravery,  he  thought  in  his  heart,  "It  is
wonderful  that  this  man  should  be  such  a  hero,"  but  he  did
not  give  him  anything.  And  the  king,  when  he  had  finished
his  hunting,  returned  home  to  his  city  to  enjoy  himself,  but
that  dependent  stood  at  his  palace  gate  as  before.

Once  on  a  time  Lakshadatta  went  out  to  conquer  a
neighbouring  king  of  the  same  family,  and  he  had  a  terrible
battle.  And  in  the  battle  the  dependent  struck  down  in
front  of  him  many  enemies,  with  blows  from  the  end  of  his
strong  staff  of  acacia  wood.  And  the  king,  after  conquering
his  enemies,  returned  to  his  own  city,  and  though  he  had
seen  the  valour  of  his  dependent,  he  gave  him  nothing.  In
this  condition  the  dependent  Labdhadatta  remained,  and
many  years  passed  over  his  head,  while  he  supported  himself
with  difficulty.

And  when  the  sixth  year  had  come  King  Lakshadatta
happened  to  see  him  one  day,  and  feeling  pity  for  him,
reflected  :  "  Though  he  has  been  long  afflicted  I  have  not
as  yet  given  him  anything,  so  why  should  I  not  give  him
something  in  a  disguised  form,  and  so  find  out  whether  the
guilt  of  this  poor  man  has  been  effaced  or  not,  and  whether
even  now  Fortune  will  grant  him  a  sight  of  her  or  not  ?  "

Thus  reflecting,  the  king  deliberately  entered  his  treasury
and  filled  a  citron  with  jewels,  as  if  it  were  a  casket.  And
he  held  an  assembly  of  all  his  subjects,  having  appointed  a
meeting  outside  his  palace,  and  there  entered  the  assembly


170  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

all  his  citizens,  chiefs  and  ministers.  And  when  the  depend-
ent entered  among  them  the  king  said  to  him  with  an
affectionate  voice :  "  Come  here."  Then  the  dependent,
on  hearing  this,  was  delighted,  and  coming  near,  he  sat  in
front  of  the  king.  Then  the  king  said  to  him  :  "  Utter  some
composition  of  your  own."  Then  the  dependent  recited
the  following  Arya  verse  :  "  Fortune  ever  replenishes  the  full
man,  as  all  the  streams  replenish  the  sea,  but  she  never  even
comes  within  the  range  of  the  eyes  of  the  poor."

When  the  king  had  heard  this,  and  had  made  him  recite
it  again,  he  was  pleased,  and  gave  him  the  citron  full  of
valuable  jewels.  And  the  people  said  :  "  This  king  puts  a
The  Citron  stop  to  the  poverty  of  everyone  with  whom  he  is
of  Jewels  pleased  ;  so  this  dependent  is  to  be  pitied,  since
this  very  king,  though  pleased  with  him,  after  summoning
him  politely,  has  given  him  nothing  but  this  citron.  A
wishing- tree,  in  the  case  of  ill-starred  men,  often  becomes
a  pald£a-tree"  ■  These  were  the  words  which  all  in  the
assembly  said  to  one  another  in  their  despondency  when
they  saw  that,  for  they  did  not  know  the  truth.

But  the  dependent  went  out  with  the  citron  in  his  hand,
and  when  he  was  in  a  state  of  despondency  a  mendicant
came  before  him.  And  that  mendicant,  named  Rajavandin,
seeing  that  the  citron  was  a  fine  one,  obtained  it  from  that
dependent  by  giving  him  a  garment.  And  then  the  mendi-
cant entered  the  assembly  and  gave  that  fruit  to  the  king,
and  the  king,  recognising  it,  said  to  that  hermit 2 :  "  Where,
reverend  sir,  did  you  procure  this  citron  ?  "  Then  he  told
the  king  that  the  dependent  had  given  it  to  him.  Then
the  king  was  grieved  and  astonished,  reflecting  that  his  guilt
was  not  expiated  even  now.  The  King  Lakshadatta  took
the  citron,  rose  up  from  the  assembly  and  performed  the
duties  of  the  day.  And  the  dependent  sold  the  garment,
and,  after  he  had  eaten  and  drunk,  remained  at  his  usual
post  at  the  king's  gate.

And  on  the  second  day  the  king  held  a  general  assembly,
and  everybody  appeared  at  it  again,  citizens  and  all.     And

1  There  is  a  pun  here.    The  word  palasa  also  means  "  cruel,"  "  unmerciful."
*  The  word  used  shows  that  he  was  probably  a  Buddhist  mendicant.


THE  CITRON  IS  AGAIN  RETURNED  171

the  king,  seeing  that  the  dependent  had  entered  the  assembly,
called  him  as  before  and  made  him  sit  near  him.  And  after
making  him  again  recite  that  very  same  Arya,  verse,  being
pleased,  he  gave  him  that  very  same  citron  with  jewels
concealed  in  it.  And  all  there  thought  with  astonishment :
"  Ah  !  this  is  the  second  time  that  our  master  is  pleased
with  him  without  his  gaining  by  it."  And  the  dependent,
in  despondency,  took  the  citron  in  his  hand,  and  thinking
that  the  king's  good- will  had  again  been  barren  of  results,
went  out.  At  that  very  moment  a  certain  official  met  him,
who  was  about  to  enter  that  assembly,  wishing  to  see  the
king.  He,  when  he  saw  that  citron,  took  a  fancy  to  it,  and,
regarding  the  omen,1  procured  it  from  the  dependent  by
giving  him  a  pair  of  garments.  And  entering  the  king's
court  he  fell  at  the  feet  of  the  sovereign,  and  first  gave  him
the  citron,  and  then  another  present  of  his  own.  And
when  the  king  recognised  the  fruit  he  asked  the  official  where
he  got  it,  and  he  replied  :  "  From  the  dependent."  And  the
king,  thinking  in  his  heart  that  Fortune  would  not  even  now
give  the  dependent  a  sight  of  her,  was  exceedingly  sad.
And  he  rose  up  from  the  assembly  with  that  citron,  and
the  dependent  went  to  the  market  with  the  pair  of  garments
he  had  got.  And  by  selling  one  garment  he  procured  meat
and  drink,  and  tearing  the  other  in  half  he  made  two  of  it.

Then  on  the  third  day  also  the  king  held  a  general
assembly,  and  all  the  subjects  entered,  as  before,  and  when
the  dependent  entered,  the  king  gave  him  the  same  citron
again,  after  calling  him  and  making  him  recite  the  Arya
verse.  Then  all  were  astonished,  and  the  dependent  went
out  and  gave  that  citron  to  the  king's  mistress.  And  she,
like  a  moving  creeper  of  the  tree  of  the  king's  regard,  gave
him  gold,  which  was,  so  to  speak,  the  flower,  the  harbinger
of  the  fruit.  The  dependent  sold  it  and  enjoyed  himself
that  day,  and  the  king's  mistress  went  into  his  presence.
And  she  gave  him  that  citron,  which  was  large  and  fine,  and
he,  recognising  it,  asked  her  whence  she  procured  it.  Then
she  said:   "The  dependent  gave  it  me."     Hearing  that,  the

1  Fresh  fruit  and  flowers  are  both  lucky  omens,  and  are  included  in
Thurston's  and  Enthoven's  lists.    See  my  note  on  p.  122nx  of  this  volume. — n.m.p.


172  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

king  thought :  "  Fortune  has  not  yet  looked  favourably
upon  him ;  his  merit  in  a  former  life  must  have  been  slight,
since  he  does  not  know  that  my  favour  is  never  barren  of
results.  And  so  these  splendid  jewels  come  back  to  me
again  and  again."  Thus  the  king  reflected,  and  he  took  that
citron  and  put  it  away  safely,  and  rose  up  and  performed
the  duties  of  the  day.

And  on  the  fourth  day  the  king  held  an  assembly  in  the
same  way,  and  it  was  filled  with  all  his  subjects,  feudatories,
ministers  and  all.  And  the  dependent  came  there  again,
Labdhadatta's  anc*  agam  the  king  made  him  sit  in  front  of  him,
Luck  changes  and  when  he  bowed  before  him  the  king  made
at  last  him  recite  the  Arya  verse,   and  gave  him  the

citron ;  and  when  the  dependent  had  half  got  hold  of  it  he
suddenly  let  it  go,  and  the  citron  fell  on  the  ground  and
broke  in  half.  And  as  the  joining  of  the  citron,  which
kept  it  together,  was  broken,  there  rolled  out  of  it  many
valuable  jewels,  illuminating  that  place  of  assembly.  All
the  people,  when  they  saw  it,  said  :  "  Ah  !  we  were  deluded
and  mistaken,  as  we  did  not  know  the  real  state  of  the  case,
but  such  is  the  nature  of  the  king's  favour."  When  the
king  heard  that,  he  said :  "  By  this  artifice  I  endeavoured
to  ascertain  whether  Fortune  would  now  look  on  him  or
not.  But  for  three  days  his  guilt  was  not  effaced ;  now
it  is  effaced,  and  for  that  reason  Fortune  has  now  granted
him  a  sight  of  herself."

After  the  king  had  said  this,  he  gave  the  dependent  those
jewels,  and  also  villages,  elephants,  horses  and  gold,  and  made
him  a  feudal  chief.  And  he  rose  up  from  that  assembly,  in
which  the  people  applauded,  and  went  to  bathe ;  and  that
dependent  too,  having  obtained  his  ends,  went  to  his  own
dwelling.


[M]  "  So  true  is  it  that,  until  a  servant's  guilt  is  effaced,
he  cannot  obtain  the  favour  of  his  master,  even  by  going
through  hundreds  of  hardships."

When  Gomukha,  the  prime  minister,  had  told  this  tale,


THE  BRAHMAN'S  SALARY  173

he  again  said  to  his  master  Naravahanadatta  :  "  So,  King,
I  know  that  even  now  the  guilt  of  that  dependent  of  yours
is  not  expiated,  since  even  now  you  are  not  pleased  with
him."

When  the  son  of  the  King  of  Vatsa  heard  this  speech
of  Gomukha's,  he  said  :  "  Ha  !  Good  !  "  And  he  immedi-
ately gave  to  his  own  dependent,  who  was  named  Karpatika,
a  number  of  villages,  elephants  and  horses,  a  crore  of  gold
pieces,  and  excellent  garments,  and  ornaments.  Then  that
dependent,  who  had  attained  prosperity,  became  like  a  king.
How  can  the  attendance  on  a  grateful  king,  who  has  excellent
courtiers,  be  void  of  fruit  ?

When  Naravahanadatta  was  thus  employed  there  came
one  day,  to  take  service  with  him,  a  young  Brahman  from
the  Deccan,  named  Pralambabahu.  That  hero  said  to  the
prince :  "I  have  come  to  your  feet,  my  sovereign,  attracted
by  your  renown,  and  I  on  foot  will  never  leave  your  com-
pany for  a  step,  as  long  as  you  travel  on  the  earth  with
elephants,  horses  and  chariots ;  but  in  the  air  I  cannot
go.  I  say  this  because  it  is  rumoured  that  my  lord  will
one  day  be  Emperor  of  the  Vidyadharas.  A  hundred  gold
pieces  should  be  given  to  me  every  day  as  salary."

When  that  Brahman,  who  was  really  of  incomparable
might,  said  this,  Naravahanadatta  gave  him  this  salary.
And  thereupon  Gomukha  said :  "  My  lord,  kings  have  such
servants.     A  propos  of  this,  hear  this  story."

70.  Story  of  the  Brahman  Vlravara  1

There  is  in  this  country  a  great  and  splendid  city  of  the
name  of  Vikramapura.  In  it  there  lived  long  ago  a  king
named  Vikramatunga.  He  was  distinguished  for  statesman-
ship, and  though  his  sword  was  sharp,  his  rod  of  justice  was
not  so ;  and  he  was  always  intent  on  righteousness,  but  not
on  women,  hunting,  and  so  forth.  And  while  he  was  king
the  only  atoms  of  wickedness  were  the  atoms  of  earth  in
the  dust ;  the  only  departure  from  virtue  was  the  loosing
of  arrows  from  the  string ;   the  only  straying  from  justice

1  This  story  is  found  in  the  Hilapadesa,  p.  89  of  Johnson's  translation.


174  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

was  the  wandering  of  sheep  in  the  folds  of  the  keepers  of
cattle.1

Once  on  a  time  a  heroic  and  handsome  Brahman,  from
the  country  of  Malava,  named  Viravara,  came  there  to  take
service  under  that  king.  He  had  a  wife  named  Dharma-
vati,  a  daughter  named  Viravati,  and  a  son  named  Sattva-
vara  ;  these  three  constituted  his  family  ;  and  his  attendants
consisted  of  another  three  :  at  his  hip  a  dagger,  in  one  hand
a  sword,  and  in  the  other  a  polished  shield.  Though  he  had
such  a  small  following,  he  demanded  from  that  king  five
hundred  dinars 2  every  day  by  way  of  salary.  And  the
king  gave  him  that  salary,  perceiving  his  courage,  and  think-
ing to  himself:  "I  will  make  trial  of  his  excellence."  And
the  king  set  spies  on  him,  to  find  out  what  this  man,  with
only  two  arms,  would  do  with  so  many  dinars.

And  Viravara,  every  day,  gave  his  wife  a  hundred  of
those  dinars  for  food  and  other  purposes  ;  and  with  another
hundred  he  bought  clothes,  and  garlands,  and  so  on ;  and
he  appointed  a  third  hundred,  after  bathing,  for  the  worship
of  Vishnu  and  Siva ;  and  the  remaining  two  hundred  he
gave  to  Brahmans,  the  poor  and  so  on ;  and  so  he  expended
every  day  the  whole  five  hundred.  And  he  stood  at  the
palace  gate  of  the  king  for  the  first  half  of  the  day,  and  after
he  had  performed  his  daily  prayers  and  other  duties  he  came
back  and  remained  there  at  night  also.  The  spies  reported
to  the  king  continually  that  daily  practice  of  his,  and  then
the  king,  being  satisfied,  ordered  those  spies  to  desist  from
observing  him.  And  Viravara  remained  day  and  night  at
the  gate  of  the  king's  palace,   sword  in  hand,  excepting

1  These  two  lines  are  an  elaborate  pun — Am  =  "  evil,"  and  also  "earth,"
guna  =  "  virtue,"  and  also  "  string,"  avichara  =  "  injustice,"  also  "  the  movement

of  sheep." Cj\  the  punning  verse  in  the  Kathakoqa,  p.  37,  where  "stick"

also  means  "  punishment,"  and  "the  pressure  of  hands  "  is  also  "oppressive

taxes  "  :

"  In  this  city  sticks  were  connected  only  with  umbrellas,  imprisonings  with

hair,  and  slaying  of  men  was  heard  only  in  chess.
Holes  were    picked   in   necklaces   only :   and    hands   paid    the   tribute   of

pressurejonly  in  marriage."
P*!.  See  also  p.  204  of  this  volume. — n.m.p.

*  See  Vol.  I,  p.  63nl. — n.m.p.


THE  UNDAUNTED  VlRAVARA  175

only  the  time  set  apart  for  bathing  and  matters  of  that
kind.

Then  there  came  a  collection  of  clouds,  bellowing  terribly,
as  if  determined  to  conquer  that  Vlravara,  being  impatient
of  his  valour.  And  then,  though  the  cloud  rained  a  terrible
arrow- shower  of  drops,  Vlravara  stood  like  a  column  and
did  not  leave  the  palace  gate.  And  the  King  Vikramatunga,
having  beheld  him  from  the  palace  in  this  position,  went  up
to  the  roof  of  the  palace  at  night  to  try  him  again.  And  he
called  out  from  above  :  "  Who  waits  at  the  palace  gate  ?  "
And  Viravara,  when  he  heard  that,  answered  :  "I  am  here."
The  king,  hearing  this,  thought :  "  Surely  this  brave  man
deserves  high  rank,  for  he  does  not  leave  the  palace  gate
though  such  a  cloud  is  raining."

While  engaged  in  those  reflections  the  king  heard  a  woman
weeping  bitterly  in  the  distance,  and  he  thought :  "  There
is  not  an  afflicted  person  in  my  dominions,  so  why  does
The  Weeping  she  weep  ?  "  Thereupon  he  said  to  Viravara  :
Woman  "  Hark,  Viravara,  there  is  some  woman  weeping

at  some  distance  from  this  place,  so  go  and  find  out  who  she
is  and  what  is  her  sorrow."  When  Viravara  heard  that,  he
set  out,  brandishing  his  sword,  with  his  dagger  at  his  side.
Then  the  king,  seeing  that  he  had  set  out  when  such  a  cloud
was  blazing  with  lightning,  and  when  the  interval  between
heaven  and  earth  *  was  full  of  descending  drops  of  rain,
being  moved  with  curiosity  and  pity,  came  down  from  the
roof  of  his  palace  and  set  out  behind  him,  sword  in  hand,
unobserved.

And  Viravara,  going  in  the  direction  of  the  wailing,"
followed  unperceived  by  the  king,  reached  a  lake  outside
the  city.  And  he  saw  a  woman  lamenting  in  the  midst  of
it :  "  Ah,  lord  !  Ah,  merciful  one !  Ah,  hero !  How  shall
I  exist  abandoned  by  thee  ?  "  He  asked  her  :  "  Who  are
you,  and  what  lord  do  you  lament  ? "  Then  she  said :
"  My  son,  know  that  I  am  this  earth.  At  present  Vikrama-
tunga is  my  righteous  lord,  and  his  death  will  certainly  take

1  I  follow  the  MS.  in  the  Sanskrit  College,  which  reads  rodorandhre.

2  Here  with  the  Sanskrit  College  MS.  I  read  ruditam  for  the  unmetrical
kranditam. This  is  confirmed  by  the  D.  text. — n.m.p.


176  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

place  on  the  third  day  from  now.  And  how  shall  I  obtain
such  a  lord  again  ?  For  with  divine  foresight  I  behold  the
good  and  evil  to  come,  as  Suprabha,  the  son  of  a  god,  did
when  in  heaven.


70a.  Suprabha  and  his  Escape  from  Destiny

For  he,  possessing  divine  foresight,  foresaw  that  in  seven
days  he  would  fall  from  heaven  on  account  of  the  exhaustion
of  his  merits  and  be  conceived  in  the  body  of  a  sow.  Then
that  son  of  a  god,  reflecting  on  the  misery  of  dwelling  in  the
body  of  a  sow,  regretted  with  himself  those  heavenly  enjoy-
ments :  "  Alas  for  heaven  !  Alas  for  the  Apsarases  !  Alas
for  the  arbours  of  Nandana  !  Alas  !  How  shall  I  live  in  the
body  of  a  sow,  and  after  that  in  the  mire  ?  "

When  the  king  of  the  gods  heard  him  indulging  in  these
lamentations  he  came  to  him  and  questioned  him,  and  that
son  of  a  god  told  him  the  cause  of  his  grief.  Then  Indra  said
to  him :  "  Listen,  there  is  a  way  out  of  this  difficulty  open
to  you.  Have  recourse  to  Siva  as  a  protector,  exclaiming  :
'  Om  ! x  Honour  to  Siva  !  '  If  you  resort  to  him  as  a  pro-
tector you  shall  escape  from  your  guilt  and  obtain  merit,  so
that  you  shall  not  be  born  in  the  body  of  a  pig  nor  fall  from
heaven."  When  the  king  of  the  gods  said  this  to  Suprabha
he  followed  his  advice,  and  exclaiming,  "  Om  !  Honour  to
Siva  I "  he  fled  to  Siva  as  an  asylum.  After  remaining
wholly  intent  on  him  for  six  days,  he  not  only  by  his  favour
escaped  being  sent  into  the  body  of  a  pig,  but  went  to  an
abode  of  bliss  higher  than  Svarga.  And  on  the  seventh  day,
when  Indra,  not  seeing  him  in  heaven,  looked  about,  he  found
he  had  gone  to  another  and  a  superior  world.


70.  Story  of  the  Brahman  Viravara

"  As  Suprabha  lamented,  beholding  pollution  impending,
so  I  lament,  beholding  the  impending  death  of  the  king."

1  For  a  detailed  account  of  the  mystic  syllable  Om,  see  A.   B.  Keith,
"  Ora,"  Hastings'  Ency.  liel.  Eth.,  vol.  ix,  pp.  490-492. — n.m.p.


THE  SUPREME  SACRIFICE  177

When  Earth  "  said  this,  Viravara  answered  her  :  "  If  there
is  any  expedient  for  rescuing  this  king,  as  there  was  an
expedient  for  rescuing  Suprabha  in  accordance  with  the
advice  of  Indra,  pray  tell  it  me."  When  Earth  was  thus
addressed  by  Viravara,  she  answered  him  :  "  There  is  an
expedient  in  this  case,  and  it  is  in  your  hands."  When  the
Brahman  Viravara  heard  this,  he  said  joyfully  ■ :  "  Then  tell
me,  goddess,  quickly ;  if  my  lord  can  be  benefited  by  the
sacrifice  of  my  life,  or  of  my  son  or  wife,  my  birth  is  not
wasted."  When  Viravara  said  this,  Earth  answered  him  :
"  There  is  here  an  image  of  Durga  near  the  palace ;  if  you
offer  to  that  image  your  son  Sattvavara,  then  the  king  will
live,  but  there  is  no  other  expedient  for  saving  his  life."
When  the  resolute  Viravara  heard  this  speech  of  the  goddess
Earth,  he  said:  "I  will  go,  lady,  and  do  it  immediately."
And  Earth  said :  "  What  other  man  is  so  devoted  to  his  lord  ?
Go,  and  prosper."  And  the  king,  who  followed  him,  heard  all.
Then  Viravara  went  quickly  to  his  house  that  night,  and
the  king  followed  him  unobserved.  There  he  woke  up  his
wife  Dharmavati  and  told  her  that,  by  the  counsel  of  the
goddess  Earth,  he  must  offer  up  his  son  for  the  sake  of  the
king.  She,  when  she  heard  it,  said :  "  We  must  certainly
do  what  is  for  the  advantage  of  the  king ;  so  wake  up  our
son  and  tell  him."  Then  Viravara  woke  up  his  son  and
told  him  all  that  the  goddess  Earth  had  told  him,  as  being
for  the  interest  of  the  king,  down  to  the  necessity  of  his  own
sacrifice.  When  the  child  Sattvavara  heard  this,  he,  being
rightly  named,  said  to  his  father 8 :    "  Am  I  not  fortunate,

1  The  Earth  Goddess  in  India  is  worshipped  mainly  in  connection  with
agricultural  seasons.  Her  name  in  Vedic  times  was  Prithivl  (see  Rig-Veda,
v,  84).  She  is  usually  worshipped  in  conjunction  with  her  husband,  Dyaus,
the  Sky-Father.  Parjanya  is  also  given  as  the  consort  of  Prithivl.  He  is
the  Vedic  god  of  ther  ain-cloud.  Mention  should  also  be  made  of  Bhumi,  the
soil,  to  whom  cakes  and  fruits  are  offered  in  certain  villages.  For  further
details  see  Crooke,  op.  cit.,  vol.  i,  p.  26  et  seq.,  and  ditto  in  "Dravidians
(North  India),"  Hastings'  Ency.  Rel.  Eth.,  vol.  v,  pp.  5-1,  where  is  traced  the
developing  of  the  cult  of  the  Earth-Mother  into  a  general  Mother-cult.  See
also  R.  E.  Enthoven,  Folk-Lore  of  Bombay,  1924,  pp.  81-88.— N.m.p.

2  I  read  dhrishyan — i.e.  rejoicing,  from  hrish.

8  The  word  sattvavara  here  means  "  possessing  pre-eminent  virtue."

VOL.   IV.  M


178  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

my  father,  in  that  my  life  can  profit  the  king  ?  I  must
requite  him  for  his  food  which  I  have  eaten;  so  take  me
and  sacrifice  me  to  the  goddess  for  his  sake."  When  the  boy
Sattvavara  said  this,  Viravara  answered  him  undismayed  :
"  In  truth  you  are  my  own  son."  When  King  Vikramatunga,
who  was  standing  outside,  heard  this,  he  said  to  himself :
"  Ah  !   the  members  of  this  family  are  all  equally  brave."

Then  Viravara  took  that  son  Sattvavara  on  his  shoulder,
and  his  wife  Dharmavati  took  his  daughter  Viravati  on
her  back,  and  the  two  went  to  the  temple  of  Durga  by
night.

And  the  King  Vikramatunga  followed  them,  carefully
concealing  himself.  When  they  reached  the  temple,  Sattva-
vara was  put  down  by  his  father  from  his  shoulder,  and,
Viravara  though  he  was  a  boy,  being  a  store-house  of
sacrifices  courage,  he  bowed  before  the  goddess,  and
hu  Son  addressed  this  petition  to  her  :    "  Goddess,  may

our  lord's  life  be  saved  by  the  offering  of  my  head !  And
may  the  King  Vikramatunga  rule  the  earth  without  an
enemy  to  oppose  him  !  "  When  the  boy  said  this,  Viravara
exclaimed:  "Bravo,  my  son!"  And  drawing  his  sword  he
cut  off  his  son's  head  and  offered  it  to  the  goddess  Durga,
saying:  "May  the  king  be  prosperous!"  Those  who  are
devoted  to  their  master  grudge  them  neither  their  sons'
lives  nor  their  own.  Then  a  voice  was  heard  from  heaven,
saying :  "  Bravo,  Viravara !  You  have  bestowed  life  on
your  master  by  sacrificing  even  the  life  of  your  son."

Then,  while  the  king  was  seeing  and  hearing  with  great
astonishment  all  that  went  on,  the  daughter  of  Viravara,
named  Viravati,  who  was  a  mere  girl,  came  up  to  the  head
of  her  slain  brother,  and  embraced  it,  and  kissed  it,  and
crying  out,  "  Alas !  my  brother !  "  died  of  a  broken  heart.
When  Viravara 's  wife  Dharmavati  saw  that  her  daughter  also
was  dead,  in  her  grief  she  clasped  her  hands  together  and
said  to  Viravara  :  "  We  have  now  ensured  the  prosperity  of
the  king,  so  permit  me  to  enter  the  fire  with  my  two  dead
children.  Since  my  infant  daughter,  though  too  young  to
understand  anything,  has  died  out  of  grief  for  her  brother,
what  is  the  use  of  my  life,  my  two  children  being  dead  ?  '


DURGA,  THE  GRANTER  OF  BOONS  179

When  she  spoke  with  this  settled  purpose,  Viravara  said  to
her :  "  Do  so ;  what  can  I  say  against  it  ?  For,  blameless
one,  there  remains  no  happiness  for  you  in  a  world  which  will
be  all  filled  for  you  with  grief  for  your  two  children  ;  so  wait
a  moment  while  I  prepare  the  funeral  pyre."  Having  said
this,  he  constructed  a  pyre  with  some  wood  that  was  lying
there  to  make  the  fence  of  the  enclosure  of  the  goddess's
temple,  and  put  the  corpses  of  his  children  upon  it,  and  lit
a  fire  under  it,  so  that  it  was  enveloped  in  flames.  Then  his
virtuous  wife  Dharmavati  fell  at  his  feet,  and  exclaiming,
"  May  you,  my  husband,  be  my  lord  in  my  next  birth,  and
may  prosperity  befall  the  king !  "  she  leapt  into  that  burning
pyre,  with  its  hair  of  flame,  as  gladly  as  into  a  cool  lake.
And  King  Vikramatunga,  who  was  standing  by  unperceived,
remained  fixed  in  thought  as  to  how  he  could  possibly
recompense  them.

Then  Viravara,  of  resolute  soul,  reflected:  "I  have
accomplished  my  duty  to  my  master,  for  a  divine  voice  was
heard  audibly,  and  so  I  have  requited  him  for  the  food  which
I  have  eaten;  but  now  that  I  have  lost  all  the  dear  family
I  had  to  support x  it  is  not  meet  that  I  should  live  alone,
supporting  myself  only,  so  why  should  I  not  propitiate  this
goddess  Durga  by  offering  up  myself?  "

Viravara,  firm  in  virtue,  having  formed  this  determina-
tion, first  approached,  with  a  hymn  of  praise,  that  goddess
Durga,  the  granter  of  boons.  "  Honour  to  thee,  O  great
Ftravara's  goddess,  that  givest  security  to  thy  votaries ;
Hymn  of  rescue  me,  plunged  in  the  mire  of  the  world,
that  appeal  to  thee  for  protection.  Thou  art
the  principle  of  life  in  creatures ;  by  thee  this  world  moves.
In  the  beginning  of  creation  Siva  beheld  thee  self-produced,
blazing  and  illuminating  the  world  with  brightness  hard  to
behold,  like  ten  million  orbs  of  fiery  suddenly  produced
infant  suns  rising  at  once,  filling  the  whole  horizon  with  the
circle  of  thy  arms,  bearing  a  sword,  a  club,  a  bow,  arrows
and  a  spear.  And  thou  wast  praised  by  that  god  Siva  in
the  following  words :  '  Hail  to  thee,  Chandi,  Chamunda,
Mangala,  Tripura,  Jaya,  Ekanam£a,  Siva,  Durga,  Narayani,

1  In  si,  l6S  (a)  I  read  mama  for  mayd  with  the  Sanskrit  College  MS.


180  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

Sarasvati,  Bhadrakali,  Mahalakshml,  Siddha,  slayer  of  Rum !
Thou  art  Gayatrl,  Maharajnl,  Revati,  and  the  dweller  in  the
Vindhya  hills ;  thou  art  Uma  and  Katyayani,  and  the  dweller
in  Kailasa,  the  mountain  of  Siva.'  When  Skanda,  and
Vasishtha,  and  Brahma,  and  the  others  heard  thee  praised,
under  these  and  other  titles,  by  Siva  well  skilled  in  praising,
they  also  praised  thee.  And  by  praising  thee,  O  adorable
one,  immortals,  Rishis  and  men  obtained,  and  do  now
obtain,  boons  above  their  desire.  So  be  favourable  to  me,
O  bestower  of  boons,  and  do  thou  also  receive  this  tribute  of
the  sacrifice  of  my  body,  and  may  prosperity  befall  my  lord
the  king !  "

After  saying  this,  he  was  preparing  to  cut  off  his  own
head,1  but  a  bodiless  voice  was  heard  at  that  moment  from
the  air  :  "  Do  not  act  rashly,  my  son,  for  I  am  well  pleased
with  this  courage  of  thine;  so  crave  from  me  a  boon  that
thou  desirest."  When  Viravara  heard  that,  he  said  :  "  If
thou  art  pleased,  goddess,  then  may  King  Vikramatunga
live  another  hundred  years.  And  may  my  wife  and  children
return  to  life."  When  he  craved  this  boon  there  again
sounded  from  the  air  the  words  :  "  So  be  it !  "  And  im-
mediately the  three,  Dharmavati,  Sattvavara  and  Viravati,
rose  up  with  unwounded  bodies.  Then  Viravara  was  de-
lighted, and  took  home  to  his  house  all  those  who  had
been  thus  restored  to  life  by  the  favour  of  the  goddess,  and
returned  to  the  king's  gate.

But  the  king,  having  beheld  all  this  with  joy  and
astonishment,  went  and  again  ascended  the  roof  of  his
palace  unobserved.  And  he  cried  out  from  above :  "  Who  is
Viravara  is  on  guard  at  the  palace  gate  ?  "  When  Viravara,
rewarded  wno  was  below,  heard  that,  he  answered  :  "  I  am
here ;  and  I  went  to  discover  that  woman,  but  she  vanished
somewhere  as  soon  as  I  saw  her,  like  a  goddess."  When
King  Vikramatunga  heard  this,  as  he  had  seen  the  whole
transaction,  which  was  exceedingly  wonderful,  he  reflected
with  himself  alone  in  the  night :  "  Oh !  surely  this  man  is
an  unheard-of  marvel  of  heroism  to  perform  such  an  exceed-
ingly meritorious  action  and  not  to  give  any  account  of  it.

1  The  story  as  told  in  Chapter  LXXVIII  is  somewhat  different  f»om  this.


THE  TURBAN  OF  HONOUR        181

The  sea,  though  deep  and  broad,  and  full  of  great  monsters,1
does  not  vie  with  this  man,  who  is  firm  even  in  the  shock  of
a  mighty  tempest.  What  return  can  I  make  to  him,  who
secretly  redeemed  my  life  this  night  by  the  sacrifice  of  his
son  and  wife  ?  "

Thus  reflecting,  the  king  descended  from  the  roof  of  the
palace,  and  went  into  his  private  apartments,  and  passed
that  night  in  smiling.  And  in  the  morning,  when  Viravara
was  present  in  the  great  assembly,  he  related  his  wonderful
exploit  that  night.  Then  all  praised  Viravara,  and  the  king
conferred  on  him  and  his  son  a  turban  of  honour.  And  he
gave  him  many  domains,  horses,  jewels  and  elephants,  and
ten  crores  of  gold  pieces,  and  a  salary  sixty  times  as  great
as  before.  And  immediately  the  Brahman  Viravara  became
equal  to  a  king,  with  a  lofty  umbrella,2  being  prosperous,
himself  and  his  family.


[M]  When  the  minister  Gomukha  had  told  this  tale,  he
again  said  to  Naravahanadatta,  summing  up  the  subject :
"  Thus,  King,  do  sovereigns,  by  their  merit  in  a  previous
life,  sometimes  fall  in  with  exceptionally  heroic  servants,
who,  in  their  nobility  of  soul,  abandoning  regard  for  their
lives  and  all  other  possessions  for  the  sake  of  their  master,
conquer  completely  the  two  worlds.  And  Pralambabahu,
this  lately  arrived  heroic  Brahman  servant  of  yours,  is  seen
to  be  such,  of  settled  virtue  and  character,  a  man  in  whom
the  quality  of  goodness  is  ever  on  the  increase."  When  the
noble-minded  Prince  Naravahanadatta  heard  this  from  his
minister,  the  mighty- minded  Gomukha,  he  felt  unsurpassed
satisfaction  in  his  heart.

1  There  is  a  pun  in  this  word  mahdsattva.  It  means  "noble,"  "good,"
"virtuous,"  and  also  "full  of  great  monsters."

2  See  Vol.  II,  Appendix  II,  pp.  263-272.— n.m.p.


182  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


NOTE  ON  FATE  OR  DESTINY

The  story  of  King  Lakshadatta  and  his  dependent  Labdhadatta  (pp.  168-
172)  is  told  to  show  the  unswerving  power  of  Fate,  which  in  Sanskrit  is
implied  by  such  terms  as  kala,  daiva,  karma,  vidhi,  etc.

In  our  text  we  read  that  the  king,  on  perceiving  his  dependent's
continued  ill  luck,  remarked:  "...  his  merit  in  a  former  life  must  have
been  slight,  since  he  does  not  know  that  my  favour  is  never  barren  of  results."
This  is  the  doctrine  of  karma — viz.  all  sins  in  a  former  life  must  be  expiated  in
the  present  one.  The  conception  is  closely  connected  with  the  Indian  theory
of  transmigration  or  metempsychosis,  which  pervades  all  post-Vedic  religions
and  philosophical  systems  of  India,  and  still  exercises  a  powerful  sway  over
the  popular  mind  of  the  Hindu.  (See  J.  Jolly,  "  Fate  (Hindu),"  Hastings'
Ency.  Rel.  Eth.,  vol.  v,  p.  790 ;  and  L.  de  la  Valine  Poussin,  "  Karma,"  ditto,
vol.  vii,  pp.  673-676.)

In  the  course  of  this  work  we  have  continually  come  across  people  under-
going hardships,  suffering  poverty,  or  enduring  great  privation  owing  to  sins
in  a  former  life.  There  is  no  commoner  motif  'in  Hindu  fiction.  In  the  story
under  consideration  the  king  realises  that  Labdhadatta  is  merely  working  out
his  karma,  and  persists  in  his  attempts  to  help  him,  knowing  that  sooner  or
later  his  guilt  will  be  expiated  and  Fortune  will  smile  on  him  once  again.

A  rather  similar  story  is  found  in  Western  India  and  was  told  by
Mrs  Kabraji  Putlibai  D.  H.  Wadia  in  the  Indian  Antiquary,  vol.  xv,  1886,  p.  221.

The  good  fortune  of  a  merchant  has  suddenly  turned  and  he  is  smitten
with  dire  poverty.  Exhorted  by  his  wife,  the  merchant  takes  his  place  with
other  beggars  seeking  audience  of  the  king.  In  spite  of  his  reduced  circum-
stances, the  king  recognises  him,  and  asks  him  to  wait  till  the  others  have
left.  He  then  fills  a  water-melon  with  gold  coins  and  gives  it  to  the  merchant.
Crestfallen,  he  thanks  the  king,  and  gives  it  to  two  tired  travellers  he  meets
on  the  way  home.

After  months  of  poverty  the  merchant  goes  again  to  the  court,  with
exactly  the  same  result.  Once  more  he  goes  to  court,  and  this  time  the  king
tells  him  what  were  the  contents  of  the  water-melon  and  fills  in  his  presence
a  third  melon  with  rare  jewels,  telling  him  to  be  very  careful  with  it.  His
evil  star  still  pursues  him,  for  on  crossing  the  river  in  front  of  his  house  his
foot  slips  and  the  jewels  are  lost  in  the  water.  He  is  now  fully  persuaded
that  it  is  the  will  of  TsVara  that  he  remain  poor,  until  such  a  day  as  the  change
of  his  luck  be  made  manifest.

This  story  is  quoted  by  Clouston,  A  Group  of  Eastern  Romances,  p.  489
et  seq.,  as  a  parallel  to  the  Persian  story  of  the  "Unlucky  Shoayb"  (p.  118
et  seq.  of  the  same  volume — not  p.  110,  as  stated  on  p.  489).

Shoayb  was  also  a  rich  man  who  suddenly  was  plunged  into  extreme
poverty  and  who  brought  bad  luck  on  everyone  with  whom  he  associated.
The  Vizier  realised  this  and  warned  the  king  of  the  great  danger  of  having
anything  to  do  with  him.     The  king,  however,  said  it  was  all  nonsense,  and


FATE  OR  DESTINY  183

in  vain  tried  to  enrich  him  and  render  him  every  assistance  in  his  power.
Matters  got  worse  and  worse,  and  it  was  found  that  within  the  space  of  twelve
days  Shoayb  had  been  the  ultimate  cause  of  the  death  of  1500  men,  besides
which  a  large  number  were  injured  and  had  lost  their  property.  The  king  at
last  realised  that  the  Vizier  had  been  correct  in  his  advice.

The  idea  of  proving  to  a  man  that  his  evil  star  is  in  the  ascendant  is  a
very  common  one  in  fiction,  and  numerous  examples  could  be  given  in  both
Eastern  and  European  collections.

Perhaps  the  best  known  is  that  which  forms  the  first  novel  of  the  tenth
day  of  the  Decameron.  Here  a  certain  wealthy  Tuscan  named  Ruggieri  de'
Figiovanni  attaches  himself  to  the  Court  of  Alfonso,  King  of  Spain.  Although
he  serves  his  new  master  in  every  possible  manner  he  receives  no  remuneration
whatsoever.  In  disgust  he  leaves  the  court,  and  gives  vent  to  his  feelings
as  he  starts  on  his  journey  to  Italy.  A  secret  agent  of  Alfonso  reports  his
remarks  and  leads  Ruggieri  before  the  king  once  again.  The  king  thereupon
points  out  that  it  is  his  own  evil  fortune  which  would  not  suffer  the  receipt  of
gifts,  and  in  order  to  prove  it  he  produces  two  caskets,  one  filled  with  jewels
and  the  other  with  earth,  saying  that  he  is  bound  to  chose  the  worthless  one,
which  he  accordingly  does.  The  chief  interest  of  this  incident  is,  of  course,
connected  with  the  use  Shakespeare  made  of  it  in  The  Merchant  of  Venice.
For  numerous  analogues  and  variants  of  the  story  both  in  Europe  and  the
East  see  Lee,  The  Decameron,  its  Sources  and  Analogues,  p.  294  et  seq. — n.m.p.


CHAPTER  LIV

THUS  Naravahanadatta  dwelt  in  the  house  of  his
[M]  father,  the  King  of  Vatsa,  being  attended  by
his  affectionate  ministers,  Gomukha  and  the  others,
and  amusing  himself  with  his  loving  Queen  Alankaravati,
whose  jealousy  was  removed  by  her  great  love,  that  refused
to  be  hampered  by  female  pride.  Then,  once  on  a  time,  he
went  to  a  forest  of  wild  beasts,  mounted  on  a  chariot,  with
Gomukha  seated  behind  him.  And,  with  that  heroic  Brah-
man Pralambabahu  going  in  front  of  him,  he  indulged  in
sylvan  sports,  accompanied  by  his  attendants.  And  though
the  horses  of  his  chariot  galloped  at  the  utmost  of  their  speed,
Pralambabahu  outstripped  their  swiftness,  and  still  kept  in
front  of  them.  The  prince,  from  his  position  on  the  chariot,
killed  lions  and  tigers  and  other  wild  beasts  with  arrows,  but
Pralambabahu,  going  on  foot,  slew  them  with  his  sword.
And  Naravahanadatta,  as  often  as  he  beheld  that  Brahman,
said  in  astonishment :  "  What  courage,  and  what  fleetness
of  foot  he  possesses  !  "

And  the  prince,  being  wearied  at  the  end  of  his  hunting,
and  overcome  with  thirst,  went  in  search  of  water,  mounted
on  his  chariot,  with  Gomukha  and  his  charioteer,  and  pre-
ceded by  that  champion  Pralambabahu,  and  in  the  course
of  his  search  he  reached  another  great  forest  far  distant.
There  he  came  to  a  great  and  charming  lake  with  full-blown
lotuses,  looking  like  a  second  sky  on  earth,  studded  with
many  solar  orbs.

There  he  bathed  and  drank  water,  and,  after  he  and  his
companions  had  performed  their  ablutions  and  other  duties,
he  beheld  at  one  end  of  the  lake,  at  a  distance,  four  men
The  Four  of  heavenly  appearance,  dressed  in  heavenly
Heavenly  Men  garments,  adorned  with  heavenly  ornaments,
engaged  in  culling  golden  lotuses  from  that  lake.  And  out
of   curiosity   he   approached  them,   and  when   they  asked

184


THE  ISLAND  OF  NARIKELA  185

him  who  he  was  he  told  them  his  descent,  his  name  and
his  history.  And  they,  pleased  at  seeing  him,  told  him
their  story  when  he  asked  them :

"  There  is  in  the  midst  of  the  great  sea  a  great,  prosperous
and  splendid  island,  which  is  called  the  island  of  Narikela,
and  is  renowned  in  the  world  for  its  beauty.1  And  in  it
there  are  four  mountains  with  splendid  expanses  of  land,
named  Mainaka,  Vrishabha,  Chakra  and  Balahaka ;  in  those
four  we  four  live.  One  of  us  is  named  Rupasiddhi,  and  he
possesses  the  power  of  assuming  various  forms ;  another  is
by  name  Pramanasiddhi,  who  can  measure  the  most  minute
as  well  as  the  largest  things ;  and  the  third  is  Jnanasiddhi,
who  knows  the  past,  the  present  and  the  future ;  and  the
fourth  is  Devasiddhi,  who  possesses  the  power  of  calling
down  to  his  aid  all  the  deities.  We  have  now  gathered  these
golden  lotuses  and  are  going  to  offer  them  to  the  god,  the
husband  of  Sri,  in  Svetadvipa.2  For  we  are  all  of  us  devoted
to  him,  and  it  is  by  his  favour  that  we  possess  rule  over
those  mountains  of  ours,  and  prosperity,  accompanied  with
supernatural  power.  So  come,  we  will  show  you  the  lord
Hari  in  Svetadvipa ;  we  will  carry  you  through  the  air,
friend,  if  you  approve."

When  those  sons  of  gods  said  this,  Naravahanadatta
consented,  and  leaving  Gomukha  and  the  others  in  that
place,  where  they  could  obtain  water,  fruits  and  so  on,  he  went

1  This  reminds  one  of  the  description  which  Palladius  gives  of  the  happy
island  of  Taprobane.  St  Ambrose  in  his  version  speaks  of  it  as  governed  by
four  kings  or  satraps.  The  fragment  begins  at  the  seventh  chapter  of  the
third  book  of  the  History  of  the  Pseudo-Callisthenes,  edited  by  Carolus  Mueller.
See  Rohde,  Der  Griechische  Roman,  p.  239.

2  There  is  much  uncertainty  as  to  the  identification  of  Svetadvipa.
Tawney  suspects  it  is  an  island,  the  same  as  the  Whiteman's  Land  of  the
Icelandic  chronicles.  See  Baring-Gould,  Curious  Myths  of  the  Middle  Ages
(new  edition),  p.  550  et  seq.  Weber  put  it  in  Alexandria,  but  the  theory  is
unsupported.  Sir  George  Grierson,  in  a  letter  to  me  on  the  subject,  favours
Central  Asia,  and  is  inclined  to  agree  with  Richard  Garbe,  who,  in  his  Indien
und  das  Ckristenlum,  p.  192  et  seq.,  suggests  Lake  Balkash  as  its  true  identity.
Another  suggestion  made  by  Kennedy  is  Lake  Issyk-kul,  the  first  account  of
which  was  given  by  Hsiian-tsang,  the  Chinese  Buddhist  pilgrim.  It  lies  about
three  hundred  miles  south  of  Lake  Balkash,  both  lakes  being  in  the  Russo-
Turkestan  province  Semiryechensk. — n.m.p.


186  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

with  them  to  Svetadvipa  through  the  air,  for  Devasiddhi,
one  of  the  four  brothers,  carried  him  in  his  lap.  There  he
descended  from  heaven,  and  beheld  Vishnu,  and  approached
him  from  a  distance,  introduced  by  those  four  sons  of  gods.
The  god  was  reclining  upon  the  snake  Sesha ;  in  front  of
him  sat  Garuda,  at  his  side  was  the  daughter  of  the  sea,1  at
his  feet  was  the  Earth ;  he  was  waited  upon  by  the  discus,
the  conch,  the  club  and  the  lotus,  incarnate  in  bodily  form,
and  the  Gandharvas,  with  Narada  at  their  head,  were  piously
chanting  hymns  in  his  honour,  and  the  gods,  Siddhas  and
Vidyadharas  were  bowing  before  him.  To  whom  is  not
association  with  the  good  a  cause  of  exaltation  ?

Then,  after  that  lord  had  been  honoured  by  those  sons
of  gods,  and  praised  by  Kagyapa  and  others,  Naravahana-
datta  thus  praised  him  with  folded  hands  :  "  All  hail  to
Naravahana-  ^nee»  venerable  one,  the  wishing-tree  of  thy
datta  praises  worshippers,  whose  body  is  encircled  with  the
Vtshnu  wish-granting  creeper  of  Lakshmi,  who  art  the

granter  of  all  desires ;  hail  to  thee,  the  divine  swan,  dwelling
in  the  Manasa-lake  of  the  minds  of  the  good,2  ever  soaring
and  singing  in  the  highest  ether.  Hail  to  thee,  who  dost  tran-
scend all,  and  dwell  within  all,  who  hast  a  form  transcend-
ing qualities,  and  whose  shape  is  the  full  aggregate  of  the
six  kingly  measures 3 ;  Brahma  is  the  bee  on  the  lotus  of  thy
navel,  O  Lord,  humming  with  the  soft  sound  of  Veda- murmur,
though  from  him  spring  many  verses  * ;  thy  foot  is  the  earth,
the  heaven  is  thy  head,  the  cardinal  points  are  thy  ears,  the
sun  and  moon  are  thy  eyes  ;  thy  belly  is  the  egg  of  Brahma,
the  globe  of  the  world ;  thou  art  hymned  by  the  wise  as  the
infinite  soul.  From  thee,  the  home  of  brightness,  spring  all
these  creatures,  O  Lord,  as  the  host  of  sparks  from  the
blazing  fire,  and  when  the  time  of  destruction  comes  they
again  enter  thy  essence,  as  at  the  end  of  the  day  a  flock  of

1  I.e.  Lakshmi  or  Sri.

1  Hatnsa  means  "swan"  and  also  "supreme  soul" — i.e.  Vishnu.

8  War,  peace,  marching,  encamping,  dividing  one's  forces,  seeking  the
alliance  of  a  more  powerful  king.

4  Or  sects.  The  word  used  for  "bee"  means  literally  "the  six-footed."
The  whole  passage  is  full  of  double  meanings,  charana  meaning  "  foot,"  "  line  "
— i.e.  the  fourth  part  of  a  stanza — and  also  "sect."


VISHNU'S  GIFT  187

birds  enters  the  great  tree  in  which  they  dwell.  Thou  flash-
est  forth,  and  createst  these  lords  of  the  world,  who  are  parts
of  thee,  as  the  ocean,  disturbed  with  a  continual  flow,  creates
the  waves.  Though  the  world  is  thy  form,  thou  art  formless  ;
though  the  world  is  thy  handiwork,  thou  art  free  from  the
bondage  of  works ;  though  thou  art  the  support  of  the  world,
thou  art  thyself  without  support.  Who  is  he  that  knows
thy  real  nature  ?  The  gods  have  obtained  various  stages  of
prosperity  by  being  looked  upon  by  thee  with  a  favourable
eye  ;  so  be  propitious,  and  look  upon  me,  thy  suppliant,  with
an  eye  melting  with  love."

When  Naravahanadatta  had  in  these  words  praised
Vishnu,  the  god  looked  upon  him  with  a  favourable  eye,  and
said  to  Narada  :  "  Go  and  demand  back  from  Indra  in  my
name  those  lovely  Apsarases  of  mine,  who  long  ago  sprang
from  the  sea  of  milk,  and  whom  I  deposited  in  his  hand,  and
make  them  mount  the  chariot  of  Indra,  and  quickly  bring
them  here."

When  Narada  received  this  command  from  Hari,  he  said :
"  So  be  it."  And  with  Matali  he  brought  the  Apsarases  from
Indra  in  his  chariot,  and  then  bowing  he  presented  the
Vishnu's  Gift  Apsarases  to  Vishnu,  and  the  holy  one  spake
of  Beautiful  thus  to  the  son  of  the  King  of  Vatsa  :  "  Narava-
Apsarases  hanadatta,  I  give  these  Apsarases  to  thee,  the
future  emperor  of  the  kings  of  the  Vidyadharas.  Thou  art  a
fitting  husband  for  them,  and  they  are  fitting  wives  for  thee,
for  thou  hast  been  created  by  Siva  as  an  incarnation  of  the
God  of  Love."  When  Vishnu  said  that,  the  son  of  the  King
of  Vatsa  fell  at  his  feet,  delighted  at  having  obtained  favour,
and  Vishnu  thus  commanded  Matali :  "  Let  this  Narava-
hanadatta, together  with  the  Apsarases,  be  taken  back  by
thee  to  his  palace,  by  whatever  path  he  desires."

When  the  holy  one  gave  this  command,  Naravahana-
datta, with  the  Apsarases  and  those  sons  of  gods  who  invited
him,  mounted  the  chariot  which  was  driven  by  Matali,  and
went  to  the  island  of  Narikela,  being  envied  even  by  gods.
There  the  successful  hero,  honoured  by  those  four  sons
of  gods,  Rvipasiddhi  and  his  brethren,  and  accompanied
by  Indra's   chariot,    sported   in   succession   on   those   four


188  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

mountains  on  which  they  dwelt,  Mainaka,  Vrishabha  and
the  others,  that  vied  with  heaven,  in  the  company  of  those
Apsarases.  And  he  roamed,  full  of  joy,  in  the  thickets  of
their  pleasure-grounds,  the  various  splendid  trees  of  which
were  in  blossom  on  account  of  the  arrival  of  the  month  of
spring.  And  those  sons  of  gods  said  to  him  :  "  See  !  these
clusters  on  the  trees  seem  to  be  regarding  with  the  expanded
eyes  of  their  open  flowers  their  beloved  spring  that  has
arrived.  See !  the  full-blown  lotuses  shield  the  lake,  as  if
to  prevent  their  place  of  birth  from  being  afflicted  by  the
warmth  of  the  sun's  rays.  See !  the  bees,  after  resorting  to
a  Karnikara  splendid  with  blossoms,  leave  it  again,  finding
it  destitute  of  perfume,  as  good  men  leave  a  rich  man  of  mean
character.  See !  a  concert  is  being  held  in  honour  of  spring,
the  king  of  the  seasons,  with  the  songs  of  the  Kinnarls,  the
notes  of  the  cuckoos  and  the  humming  of  bees."

With  such  words  those  sons  of  gods  showed  Naravahana-
datta  the  range  of  their  pleasure-grounds.  And  the  son  of
the  King  of  Vatsa  amused  himself  also  in  their  cities,  be-
holding the  merry-makings  of  the  citizens,  who  danced
without  restraint  in  honour  of  the  spring  festival.  And
he  enjoyed  with  the  Apsarases  delights  fitted  for  gods.
Wherever  the  virtuous  go,  their  good  fortunes  precede  them.

After  remaining  there  for  four  days 1  thus  occupied,
Naravahanadatta  said  to  those  sons  of  gods,  his  friends  :
"  I  now  wish  to  go  to  my  own  city,  being  anxious  to  behold
my  father  2 ;  so  come  you  also  to  that  city  and  bless  it  with
a  visit."  When  they  heard  that,  they  said  :  "  We  have  seen
you,  the  choicest  jewel  in  that  town ;  what  more  do  we
require  ?  But  when  you  have  obtained  the  sciences  of  the
Vidyadharas  you  must  not  forget  us."  With  these  words
they  dismissed  him,  and  Naravahanadatta  said  to  Matali,
who  brought  him  the  splendid  chariot  of  Indra  :  "  Take  me
to  the  city  of  KauSambi  by  a  course  leading  past  that  lovely
lake,  on  the  bank  of  which  I  left  Gomukha  and  the  others."
Matali  consented,  and  the  prince  ascended  the  chariot  with

1  The  D.  text  reads  tricaturan  instead  of  'atra  caturo,  thus  meaning  "  for
three  or  four  days." — n.m.p.

*  Dariana  utsukah  should  probably  be  read  here  for  the  sake  of  the  metre.


GENERAL  REJOICINGS  189

the  Apsarases,  and  reached  that  lake,  and  saw  Gomukha
and  the  others,  and  said  to  them  :  "  Come  quickly  by  your
own  way.     I  will  tell  you  all  when  I  get  home."

Having  said  this,  he  went  to  Kau^ambi  in  the  chariot
of  Indra.  There  he  descended  from  heaven,  and  dismissed
Matali  after  honouring  him,  and  entered  his  own  palace
Karavahana-  accompanied  by  those  Apsarases.  And  leaving
datta  arrives  them  there,  he  went  and  prostrated  himself
Home  before  the  feet  of  his  father,  who  was  delighted

at  his  arrival,  and  also  of  Vasavadatta  and  Padmavati,  and
they  welcomed  him,  and  their  eyes  were  never  satisfied  with
gazing  on  him.  And  in  the  meanwhile  Gomukha  came,
riding  on  the  chariot,  with  the  charioteer,  and  that  Brah-
man Pralambabahu.  Then,  being  questioned  by  his  father,
Naravahanadatta  related,  in  the  presence  of  all  his  ministers,
his  very  wonderful  adventures.  And  all  said  :  "  God  grants
to  that  virtuous  man,  whom  he  wishes  to  favour,  association
with  good  friends."

When  all  said  this,  the  king  was  pleased,  and  ordered  a
festival  for  his  son  on  account  of  the  favour  which  Vishnu
had  showed  towards  him.  And  he  and  his  wives  saw  those
Apsarases,  his  daughters-in-law,  obtained  by  the  favour  of
Vishnu,  whom  Gomukha  brought  to  fall  at  his  feet,  Deva-
rupa,  and  Devarati,  and  Devamala,  and  the  fourth  Deva-
priya,  whose  names  he  inquired  by  the  mouth  of  their  maids.
And  the  city  of  Kau^ambi,  making  festival,  appeared  as  if
scattering  red  paint  with  its  waving  scarlet  banners,  as  much
as  to  say  :  "  What  am  I  that  Apsarases  should  dwell  in  me  ?
Blessed  am  I  that  the  Prince  Naravahanadatta  has  made
me  a  heavenly  city  upon  earth."

And  Naravahanadatta,  after  he  had  rejoiced  the  eyes  of
his  father,  visited  his  other  wives,  who  were  anxiously  await-
ing him,  and  they,  who  had  been  emaciated  by  those  four
days,  as  if  they  were  four  years,  exulted,  relating  the  various
woes  of  their  separation.  And  Gomukha  described  the
valour  of  Pralambabahu,  while  he  was  protecting  the  horses
during  their  sojourn  in  the  forest,  in  killing  lions  and  other
noxious  beasts.  Thus  listening  to  pleasing,  unrestrained
conversation,  and  contemplating  the  beauty  of  his  beloved


190  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

ones,  that  was  as  nectar  to  his  eyes,  and  making  flattering
speeches,  and  drinking  wine  in  the  company  of  his  ministers,
Naravahanadatta  passed  that  time  there  in  happiness.

Once  on  a  time,  as  he  was  in  the  apartments  of  Alankara-
vati  with  his  ministers,  he  heard  a  loud   sound  of  drums
outside.     Then  he  said  to  his  general,  HariSikha :    "  What
may  be  the   cause   of  this   sudden  great    noise    of  drums
outside  ?  "     When  Hari^ikha  heard  this,  he  went  out,  and
entering  again  immediately,  said  to  the  prince,  the  son  of
the  King  of  Vatsa :  "  There  is  in  this  town  a  merchant  of  the
name  of  Rudra,  and  he  went  to  the  island  of  Suvarnadvipa
on  a  mercantile  expedition.     As  he  was  returning,  the  hoard
of  wealth  that  he  had  managed  to  acquire  was  lost,  being
sunk  in  the  sea  by  his  ship   foundering.     And  he  himself
happened  to  escape  from  the  sea  alive.     And  to-day  is  the
sixth  day  since  he  arrived  in  misery  at  his  own  house.     After
he  had  been  living  here  for  some  days  in  distress  it  happened
that  he  found  a  great  treasure  in  his  garden.     And  the  King
of  Vatsa  heard  of  it  from  his  relations,  so  the  merchant  came
to-day  and  represented  the  matter  to  the  king,  saying  :    '  I
have  obtained  four  crores  of  gold  pieces,  with  a  multitude  of
valuable  jewels,  so,  if  the  king  commands  me,  I  will  hand
them  over.'     The  King  of  Vatsa  thereupon  gave  this  com-
mand to  the  merchant :    *  Who  that  had  any  sense,1  after
seeing  you  in  distress,  plundered  by  the  sea,  would  plunder
you  again,  now  that  you  have  been  supplied  with  wealth  by
the  mercy  of  Providence  ?     Go  and  enjoy  at  will  the  wealth
obtained  from   your   own  ground.'     The   merchant  fell   at
the  king's  feet  full  of  joy,  and  it  is  this  very  man  that  is  now
returning  to  his  house,  with  his  attendants  beating  drums."
When  HariSikha  said  this,  Naravahanadatta  praised  the
justice  of  his  father,  and  said  in  astonishment  to  his  ministers  :
"  If  Destiny  sometimes   takes  away  wealth,   does  she  not
sometimes  give  it  ?     She  sports  in  a  strange  way  with  the
raising  and  depressing   of  men."8     When  Gomukha  heard
that,  he  said :    "  Such  is  the  course  of  Destiny !     And  in
proof  of  this  hear  the  story  of  Samudra^ura.

1  Here  there  is  a  pun.

1  See  Vol.  II,  p.  192^.— n.m.p.


SAVED  BY  A  CORPSE  191

71.  Story  of  the  Merchant  SamudraSura

In  old  times  there  was  a  splendid  city,  belonging  to
the  King  Harshavarman,  called  Harshapura,  the  citizens
of  which  were  made  happy  by  good  government.  In  this
city  there  was  a  great  merchant  named  Samudra^ura ;  he
was  of  good  family,  just,  of  resolute  courage,  a  lord  of  much
wealth.  He  was  once  compelled  by  his  business  to  go  to
Suvarnadvipa,  and  reaching  the  shore  of  the  sea  he  embarked
on  a  ship.  As  he  was  travelling  over  the  sea,  when  his
journey  was  very  nearly  at  an  end,  a  terrible  cloud  arose
and  a  wind  that  agitated  the  deep.  The  wind  tossed  the
ship  about  with  the  violence  of  the  waves,  and  it  was  struck
by  a  sea  monster  and  split  asunder  ;  and  then  the  merchant,
girding  up  his  loins,  plunged  into  the  sea.  And  after  the
brave  man  had  made  some  way  by  swimming  he  found  the
corpse  of  a  man  long  dead,  driven  hither  and  thither  by
the  wind.  And  he  climbed  up  on  the  corpse  and,  skilfully
paddling  himself  along  with  his  arms,  he  was  carried  to
Suvarnadvipa  by  a  favourable  wind.  There  he  got  off  that
corpse  on  to  the  sand,  and  he  perceived  that  it  had  a  cloth
tied  round  its  loins,  with  a  knot  in  it.  When  he  unfastened
the  cloth  from  its  loins,  and  examined  it,  he  found  inside  it
a  necklace  richly  studded  with  jewels.  He  saw  that  it  was
of  inestimable  value,  and  he  bathed  and  remained  in  a  state
of  great  felicity,  thinking  that  the  wealth  he  had  lost  in  the
sea  was  but  a  straw  in  comparison  with  it.

Then  he  went  on  to  a  city  called  Kala^apura,  and  with
the  necklace  in  his  hand  entered  the  enclosure  of  a  great
temple.  There  he  sat  in  the  shade,  and  being  exceedingly
tired  with  his  exertions  in  the  water,  he  slowly  dropped  off  to
sleep,  bewildered  by  Destiny.  And  while  he  was  asleep  the
guards  came  and  saw  that  necklace  in  his  hand,  exposed  to
view.  They  said :  "  Here  is  the  necklace  stolen  from  the
neck  of  the  Princess  Chakrasena ;  without  doubt  this  is  the
thief."  And  so  they  woke  the  merchant  up  and  took  him
to  the  palace.  There  the  king  himself  questioned  him,  and
he  told  him  what  had  taken  place.  The  king  held  out  the
necklace  and  said  to  the  people  present  in  court :   "  This  man


192  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

is  speaking  falsely;  he  is  a  thief;  look  at  this  necklace."
And  at  that  very  moment  a  kite  saw  it  glittering,  and  quickly
swooping  down  from  heaven,  carried  off  the  necklace,  and
disappeared  where  he  could  not  be  traced.1  Then  the  king
in  his  anger  commanded  that  the  merchant  should  be  put
to  death,  and  he,  in  great  grief,  invoked  the  protection  of
Siva.

Then  a  voice  was  heard  from  heaven  :  "  Do  not  put  this
man  to  death ;  he  is  a  respectable  merchant  named  Samu-
dra^ura,  from  the  city  of  Harshapura,  that  has  landed  on
The  Divine  your  territory.  The  thief  who  stole  the  necklace
Voice  fled,  beside  himself  with  fear  of  the  police,  and

falling  into  the  sea  at  night,  perished.  But  this  merchant
here,  when  his  ship  foundered,  came  upon  the  body  of  that
thief,  and  climbing  up  on  it  he  crossed  the  sea  and  came
here.  And  then  he  found  the  necklace  in  the  knot  of  the
cloth  fastened  round  his  loins  ;  he  did  not  take  it  from  your
house.  So  let  go,  King,  this  virtuous  merchant,  who  is  not
a  thief;  dismiss  him  with  honour."  Having  said  this,  the
voice  ceased.  When  the  king  heard  this  he  was  satisfied,
and  revoking  the  capital  sentence  passed  on  the  merchant,
he  honoured  him  with  wealth  and  let  him  go.  And  the
merchant,  having  obtained  wealth,  bought  wares,  and  again
crossed  the  terrible  ocean  in  a  ship,  in  order  to  return  to  his
own  native  land.

And  after  he  had  crossed  the  sea  he  travelled  with  a
caravan,  and  one  day,  at  evening  time,  he  reached  a  wood.
The  caravan  encamped  in  the  wood  for  the  night,  and  while
SamudraSura  was  awake  a  powerful  host  of  bandits  attacked
it.  While  the  bandits  were  massacring  the  members  of  the
caravan  Samudrasura  left  his  wares  and  fled,  and  climbed

1  We  have  already  (Vol.  I,  p.  118m1)  come  across  an  innocent  man  who
by  chance  becomes  possessed  of  a  stolen  necklace.  The  motif  is  common  in
folk-tales,  especially  the  incident  about  a  kite  or  some  other  bird  seizing  a
jewel,  or  turban  containing  a  jewel  or  rarity  of  some  kind  or  other.  This  is
found  in  the  Pantschatantra  (Benfey,  i,  p.  172)  and  appears  several  times  in  the
Sights  (see  Burton,  vol.  iii,  p.  279,  vol.  vi,  p.  182,  and  Supp.,  vol.  iii,  pp.  344,
36S,  589).  It  also  occurs  in  Hebrew  literature  (see  Gaster,  Exempla  of  the
Itabbis,  p.  124,  with  analogues  on  p.  246).  See  also  Clouston,  Popular  Tales
and  Fictions,  vol.  i,  p.  402. — n.m.p.


THE  KITE'S  NEST  193

up  a  banyan-tree  without  being  discovered.  The  host  of
bandits  departed,  after  they  had  carried  off  all  the  wealth,
and  the  merchant  spent  that  night  there,  perplexed  with
fear  and  distracted  with  grief.  In  the  morning  he  cast  his
eye  towards  the  top  of  the  tree  and  saw,  as  fate  would  have
it,  what  looked  like  the  light  of  a  lamp,  trembling  among
the  leaves.  And  in  his  astonishment  he  climbed  up  the  tree
and  saw  a  kite's  nest,  in  which  there  was  a  heap  of  glittering
priceless  jewelled  ornaments.  He  took  them  all  out  of  it,
and  found  among  the  ornaments  that  necklace,  which  he
had  found  in  Suvarnadvipa  and  the  kite  had  carried  off.  He
obtained  from  that  nest  unlimited  wealth,  and,  descending
from  the  tree,  he  went  off  delighted,  and  reached  in  course
of  time  his  own  city  of  Harshapura.  There  the  merchant
Samudrasura  remained,  enjoying  himself  to  his  heart's  con-
tent with  his  family,  free  from  the  desire  of  any  other  wealth


[M]  "  So  you  have  that  merchant's  whelming  in  the  sea,
and  that  loss  of  his  wealth,  and  the  finding  of  the  necklace,
and  again  the  losing  of  it,  and  his  undeserved  degradation
to  the  position  of  a  malefactor,  and  his  immediate  obtaining
of  wealth  from  the  satisfied  king,  and  his  return  voyage  over
the  sea,  and  his  being  stripped  of  all  his  wealth  by  falling  in
with  bandits  on  the  journey,  and  at  last  his  acquisition  of
wealth  from  the  top  of  a  tree.  So  you  see,  Prince,  such  is
the  various  working  of  Destiny,  but  a  virtuous  man,  though
he  may  have  endured  sorrow,  obtains  joy  at  the  last."

When  Naravahanadatta  heard  this  from  Gomukha,  he
approved  it,  and,  rising  up,  he  performed  his  daily  duties,
such  as  bathing  and  the  like.

And  the  next  day,  when  he  was  in  the  hall  of  assembly,
the  heroic  Prince  Samaratunga,  who  had  been  his  servant
ever  since  he  was  a  boy,  came  and  said :  "  Prince,  my
relation  Sangramavarsha  has  ravaged  my  territory,  with
the  help  of  his  four  sons,  Virajita,  and  the  others.  So  I  will
go  myself  and  bring  them  all  five  here  as  prisoners.  Let  my
lord  know  this."

VOL.  IV.  v


194  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

After  saying  this  he  departed.  And  the  son  of  the
King  of  Vatsa,  knowing  that  he  had  but  a  small  force,  and
that  those  others  had  large  forces,  ordered  his  own  army
to  follow  him.  But  that  proud  man  refused  to  receive  this
accession  to  his  force,  and  went  and  conquered  those  five
enemies  in  fight  by  the  help  of  his  own  two  arms  only,  and
brought  them  back  prisoners.  Naravahanadatta  honoured
and  praised  his  follower  when  he  came  back  victorious,  and
said  :  "  How  wonderful !  This  man  has  conquered  his  five
enemies,  though  with  their  forces  they  had  overrun  his  ter-
ritory, and  has  done  the  deed  of  a  hero,  as  a  man  conquers
the  senses  when  they  have  laid  hold  upon  outward  objects,
and  are  powerful,  and  so  accomplishes  emancipation,  the  work
of  the  soul."1  When  Gomukha  heard  that,  he  said:  "If,
Prince,  you  have  not  heard  the  tale  of  King  Chamarabala,
which  is  similar,  listen,  I  will  tell  it.


72.  Story  of  King  Chamarabala

There  is  a  city  named  Hastinapura,  and  in  it  there  lived
a  king  named  Chamarabala,  who  possessed  treasure,  a  fort
and  an  army.  And  he  had  as  neighbours  to  his  territory
several  kings  of  the  same  family  as  himself,  the  chief  of
whom  was  Samarabala,  and  they  put  their  heads  together
and  reflected :  "  This  King  Chamarabala  defeats  us  all,
one  by  one ;  so  we  will  join  together  and  accomplish  his
overthrow."  After  thus  deliberating,  those  five  kings,  being
anxious  to  march  out  against  him  to  conquer  him,  secretly
asked  an  astrologer  when  a  favourable  moment  would  come.
The  astrologer,  not  seeing  a  favourable  moment,  and  not
seeing  good  omens,  said  :  "  There  is  no  favourable  moment
for  you  this  year.  Under  whatever  circumstances  you  set
out  on  your  expedition,  you  will  not  be  victorious.  And
why  are  you  so  eager  for  the  undertaking,  beholding  his
prosperity  ?  Enjoyment  is,  after  all,  the  fruit 2  of  prosperity,
and  you  have  enjoyments  in  abundance.  And  now  hear,  if
you  have  not  heard  it  before,  the  story  of  the  two  merchants.

1  This  passage  is  an  elaborate  pun  throughout.

*  I  read  phalam,  which  I  find  in  the  Sanskrit  College  MS.,  instead  of  param.


THE  LUCKY  ECLIPSE  195

72a.  Yasovarman  and  the  Two  Fortunes

There  was  in  old  time  in  this  country  a  city  named
Kautukapura.  In  it  there  lived  a  king  called  Bahusuvar-
naka,1  rightly  named.  And  he  had  a  young  Kshatriya
servant  named  Yas*ovarman.  To  that  man  the  king  never
gave  anything,  though  he  was  generous  by  nature.  When-
ever, in  his  distress,  he  asked  the  king,  the  king  said  to
him,  pointing  to  the  sun :  "I  wish  to  give  to  you,  but  this
holy  god  will  not  permit  me  to  give  to  you.  Tell  me  what
I  am  to  do?  "  While  he  remained  distressed,  watching  for
an  opportunity,  the  time  for  an  eclipse  of  the  sun  arrived.
Then  Yasovarman,  who  had  constantly  served  the  king,
went  and  said  to  him,  when  he  was  engaged  in  giving  many
valuable  presents:  "Give  me  something,  my  sovereign,
while  this  sun,  who  will  not  permit  you  to  give,  is  in  the
grasp  of  his  enemy." a  When  the  king,  who  had  given
many  presents,  heard  that,  he  laughed,  and  gave  garments,
gold  and  other  things  to  him.

In  course  of  time  that  wealth  was  consumed,  and  he,
being  afflicted,  as  the  king  gave  him  nothing,  and  having
lost  his  wife,  went  to  the  shrine  of  the  goddess  that  dwells
The  Choice  in  the  Vindhya  hills.*  He  said :  "  What  is  the
of  Boons  use  0f  this  profitless  body  that  is  dead  even
while  alive?  I  will  abandon  it  before  the  shrine  of  the
goddess,  or  gain  the  desired  boon."  Resolved  on  this
course,  he  lay  down  on  a  bed  of  darbha  grass  in  front  of  the
goddess,  with  his  mind  intent  on  her,  and  fasting  he  per-
formed a  severe  penance.  And  the  goddess  said  to  him  in  a
dream  :  "  I  am  pleased  with  thee,  my  son ;  tell  me,  shall  I
give  thee  the  good  fortune  of  wealth  or  the  good  fortune  of
enjoyment  ?  "  When  Yasovarman  heard  this,  he  answered
the  goddess :  "I  do  not  precisely  know  the  difference  be-
tween these  two  good  fortunes."  Then  the  goddess  said
to  him:    "Return  to  thy  own  country,  and  there  go  and

1  I.e.  possessor  of  much  gold.

2  See  Vol.  II,  pp.  81-83.— n.m.p.

*  I.e.  Durga.     For  mritajatir  I  read  mritajanir,  which  is  the  reading  of  the
MS.  in  the  Sanskrit  College.     In  the  next  line  JivitS  should  hejivatil.


196  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

examine  into  the  good  fortunes  of  the  two  merchants,  Artha-
varman  and  Bhogavarman,  and  find  out  which  of  the  two
pleases  thee,  and  then  come  here  and  ask  a  like  fortune  for
thyself."  When  YaSovarman  heard  this  he  woke  up,  and
next  morning  he  broke  his  fast  and  went  to  his  own  country
of  Kautukapura.

There  he  first  went  to  the  house  of  Arthavarman,1  who
had  acquired  much  wealth,  in  the  form  of  gold,  jewels  and
other  precious  things,  by  his  business  transactions.  Seeing
that  prosperity  of  his,  he  approached  him  with  due  politeness,
and  was  welcomed  by  him  and  invited  to  dinner.  Then  he
sat  by  the  side  of  that  Arthavarman  and  ate  food  appropriate
to  a  guest,  with  meat- curry  and  ghee.  But  Arthavarman  ate
barley- meal,  with  half  a  pala  of  ghee  and  a  little  rice,  and
a  small  quantity  of  meat- curry.  Yasovarman  said  to  the
merchant,  out  of  curiosity  :  "  Great  merchant,  why  do  you
eat  so  little  ?  "  Thereupon  the  merchant  gave  him  this
answer :  "  To-day  out  of  regard  for  you  I  have  eaten  a
little  rice,  with  meat-curry  and  half  a  pala  of  ghee ;  I  have
also  eaten  some  barley-meal.  But  as  a  general  rule  I  eat
only  a  karsha  of  ghee  and  some  barley- meal.  I  have  a  weak
digestion,  and  cannot  digest  more  in  my  stomach."

When  Yasovarman  heard  that,  he  turned  the  matter  over
in  his  mind,  and  formed  an  unfavourable  opinion  of  that
prosperity  of  Arthavarman 's,  as  being  without  fruit.  Then,
at  nightfall,  that  merchant  Arthavarman  again  brought
rice  and  milk  for  Yasovarman  to  eat.  And  Yasovarman
again  ate  of  it  to  his  fill,  and  then  Arthavarman  drank
one  paid  of  milk.  And  in  that  same  place  Yasovarman
and  Arthavarman  both  made  their  beds  and  gradually  fell
asleep.

And  at  midnight  Yasovarman  suddenly  saw  in  his  sleep
some  men  of  terrible  appearance,  with  clubs  in  their  hands,
entering  the  room.  And  they  exclaimed  angrily  :  "  Fie !
why  have  you  taken  to-day  one  karsha  more  of  ghee  than
the  small  amount  allowed  to  you,  and  eaten  meat- curry,

1  Cf.  the  story  of  Dhanagupta  and  Upabhuktadhana,  Benfey's  Pantschat an-
tra, vol.  ii,  p.  197.  It  is  part  of  the  fifth  story,  that  of  Somilaka.  See  Benfey,
vol.  i,  p.  321,  where  he  traces  it  to  a  Buddhist  source.


THE  MISERY  OF  ILL  HEALTH  197

and  drunk  a  paid  of  milk  ?  "  Then  they  dragged  Artha-
varman  by  his  foot  and  beat  him  with  clubs.  And  they
extracted  from  his  stomach  the  karsha  of  ghee,  and  the
The  Demons  milk,  flesh  and  rice  which  he  had  consumed
of  Indigestion  above  his  allowance.  When  Ya^ovarman  had
seen  that,  he  woke  up  and  looked  about  him,  and  lo !  Artha-
varman  had  awakened  and  was  seized  with  colic.  Then
Arthavarman,  crying  out,  and  having  his  stomach  rubbed
by  his  servants,  vomited  up  all  the  food  he  had  eaten
above  the  proper  allowance.  After  the  merchant's  colic
was  allayed  Ya^ovarman  said  to  himself :  "  Away  with  this
good  fortune  of  wealth,  which  involves  enjoyment  of  such
an  equivocal  kind  !  This  would  be  altogether  neutralised  by
such  misery  of  ill  health."  In  such  internal  reflections  he
passed  that  night.

And  in  the  morning  he  took  leave  of  Arthavarman  and
went  to  the  house  of  that  merchant  Bhogavarman.  There
he  approached  him  in  due  form,  and  he  received  him  with
politeness,  and  invited  him  to  dine  with  him  on  that  day.
Now  he  did  not  perceive  any  wealth  in  the  possession  of
that  merchant,  but  he  saw  that  he  had  a  nice  house,  and
dresses,  and  ornaments.  While  YaSovarman  was  waiting
there,  the  merchant  Bhogavarman  proceeded  to  do  his  own
special  business.  He  took  merchandise  from  one  man  and
immediately  handed  it  over  to  another,  and  without  any
capital  of  his  own  gained  dinars  by  the  transaction.  And
he  quickly  sent  those  dinars  by  the  hand  of  his  servant
to  his  wife,  in  order  that  she  might  procure  all  kinds  of
food  and  drink.  And  immediately  one  of  that  merchant's
friends,  named  Ichchhabharana,  rushed  in  and  said  to  him  :
"  Our  dinner  is  ready ;  rise  up  and  come  to  us,  and  let  us
eat,  for  all  our  other  friends  have  assembled  and  are  waiting
for  you."  He  answered:  "I  shall  not  come  to-day,  for  I
have  a  guest  here."  Thereupon  his  friend  went  on  to  say  to
him  :  "  Then  let  this  guest  come  with  you ;  is  he  not  our
friend  also  ?     Rise  up  quickly."

Bhogavarman,  being  thus  earnestly  invited  by  that
friend,  went  with  him,  accompanied  by  Ya^ovarman,  and
ate  excellent  food.     And  after  drinking  wine  he  returned,


198  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

and  again  enjoyed  all  kinds  of  viands  and  wines  at  his  own
house  in  the  evening.  And  when  night  came  on  he  asked
his  servants  :  "  Have  we  enough  wine  left  for  the  latter  part
of  the  night  or  not  ?  "  When  they  replied,  "No,  master,"
the  merchant  went  to  bed,  exclaiming  :  "  How  are  we  to
drink  water  in  the  latter  part  of  the  night  ?  "

Then  Ya^ovarman,  sleeping  at  his  side,  saw  in  a  dream
two  or  three  men  enter,  and  some  others  behind  them.
And  those  who  entered  last,  having  sticks  in  their  hands,
exclaimed  angrily  to  those  who  entered  first :  '  You
rascals !  Why  did  you  not  provide  wine  for  Bhogavarman
to  drink  in  the  latter  half  of  the  night  ?  Where  have  you
been  all  this  time  ?  "  Then  they  beat  them  with  strokes  of
their  sticks.  The  men  who  were  beaten  with  sticks  said :
"  Pardon  this  single  fault  on  our  part."  And  then  they  and
the  others  went  out  of  the  room.  Then  Yagovarman,  having
Enjoyment  is  seen  *na*  sight,  woke  up  and  reflected :  1C  The
preferable  to  good  fortune  of  enjoyment  of  Bhogavarman,  in
Wealth  which  blessings   arrive  unthought  of,  is  prefer-

able to  the  good  fortune  of  wealth  of  Arthavarman,  which,
although  attended  with  opulence,  is  devoid  of  enjoyment."
In  these  reflections  he  spent  the  rest  of  the  night.

And  early  the  next  morning  Yasovarman  took  leave  of
that  excellent  merchant,  and  again  repaired  to  the  feet  of
Durga,  the  goddess  that  dwells  in  the  Vindhya  range.  And
he  chose  out  of  those  two  good  fortunes  mentioned  by  the
goddess,  when  she  appeared  to  him  on  a  former  occasion,1
while  he  was  engaged  in  austerities,  the  good  fortune  of
enjoyment,  and  the  goddess  granted  it  to  him.  Then  Yaso-
varman returned  home  and  lived  in  happiness,  thanks  to  the
good  fortune  of  enjoyment,  which,  owing  to  the  favour  of
the  goddess,  continually  presented  itself  to  him  unthought  of.

72.  Story  of  King  Chamarabdla

"So  a  smaller  fortune,  accompanied  with  enjoyment,  is
to  be  preferred  to  a  great  fortune,  which,  though  great,  is
devoid  of  enjoyment  and   therefore  useless.     So  why   are

1  I  read  tapahstha-purva-drishtayas  one  word.


THE  BATTLE  BEGINS  199

you  annoyed  at  the  good  fortune  of  King  Chamarabala,
which  is  combined  with  meanness,  and  do  not  consider  your
own  fortune,  which  is  rich  in  the  power  of  giving  and  in
enjoyment  ?  So  an  attack  on  him  by  you  is  not  advisable,
and  there  is  no  auspicious  moment  for  commencing  the
expedition,  and  I  do  not  foresee  victory  to  you."  Though
those  five  kings  were  thus  warned  by  the  astrologer,  they
marched  in  their  impatience  against  King  Chamarabala.

And  when  King  Chamarabala  heard  that  they  had
reached  the  border,  he  bathed  in  the  morning,  and  he  wor-
shipped Siva  duly  by  his  auspicious  names  referring  to
sixty- eight  excellent  parts  of  the  body,1  his  names  that
destroy  sin  and  grant  all  desires.  And  then  he  heard  a
voice  coming  from  heaven :  "  King,  fight  without  fear ;
thou  shalt  conquer  thy  enemies  in  battle."

Then  King  Chamarabala  was  delighted,  and  girded  on
his  armour,  and,  accompanied  by  his  army,  marched  out  to
fight  with  those  foes.  In  the  army  of  his  enemies  there  were
thirty  thousand  elephants,  and  three  hundred  thousand
horses,  and  ten  million  foot- soldiers.  And  in  his  own  army
there  were  twenty  hundred  thousand  foot- soldiers,  and  ten
thousand  elephants,  and  a  hundred  thousand  horses.  Then  a
great  battle  took  place  between  those  two  armies,  and  King
Chamarabala,  preceded  by  his  warder  Vira,2  who  was  rightly
named,  entered  that  field  of  battle,  as  the  holy  Vishnu,  in  the
form  of  the  great  boar,  entered  the  great  ocean.  And  though
he  had  but  a  small  army,  he  so  grievously  smote  that  great
army  of  his  foes  that  slain  horses,  elephants  and  footmen  lay
in  heaps.  And  when  King  Samarabala  came  across  him  in  the
battle  he  rushed  upon  him  and  smote  him  with  an  iron  spear,
and  drawing  him  towards  him  with  a  lasso 3  made  him  prisoner.

1  Siva  is  invoked  by  a  different  name  for  each  limb  which  he  is  asked  to
protect.  See  the  quotations  in  Brand's  Popular  Antiquities  (Bohn's  edition,
vol.  i,  pp.  365,  366)  from  Moresini  Papatus  and  Melton's  Astrologaster.  Brand
remarks :  "  The  Romanists,  in  imitation  of  the  heathens,  have  assigned
tutelary  gods  to  each  member  of  the  body."

2  Vira  means  "  hero."

3  The  lasso  has  been  used  in  war  and  among  herdsmen  and  shepherds
from  early  Egyptian  days.  A  curious  form  appears  in  the  Nights  (Burton,
vol.  vii,  p.  6l  «2). — N.M.P.


200  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

And  in  the  same  way  he  smote  the  second  king,  Samara-
£ura,  in  the  heart  with  an  arrow,  and  drawing  him  towards
him  with  a  noose  made  him  also  prisoner.  And  his  warder,
named  Vira,  captured  the  third  king,  named  Samarajita,  and
brought  him  to  him.  And  his  general,  named  Devabala,
brought  and  presented  to  him  the  fourth  king,  named
Pratapachandra,  wounded  with  an  arrow.  Then  the  fifth
king,  Pratapasena,  beholding  that,  fell  furiously  upon  King
Chamarabala  in  the  fight.  But  he  repelled  his  arrows  with
the  multitude  of  his  own,  and  pierced  him  with  three  arrows
in  the  forehead.  And  when  he  was  bewildered  with  the
blows  of  the  arrows,  Chamarabala,  like  a  second  Destiny,
flung  a  noose  round  his  neck,  and  dragging  him  along  made
him  a  captive.

When  those  five  kings  had  in  this  way  been  taken
prisoner  in  succession,  as  many  of  their  soldiers  as  had
escaped  slaughter  fled,  dispersing  themselves  in  every
The  Beautiful  direction.  And  King  Chamarabala  captured  an
Yasolekha  is  infinite  mass  of  gold  and  jewels,  and  many  wives
captured  belonging  to  those  kings.     And  among  them  the

head  queen  of  King  Pratapasena,  called  Yasolekha,  a  lovely
woman,  fell  into  his  hands.

Then  he  entered  his  city  and  gave  turbans  of  honour  to
the  warder  Vira  and  the  general  Devabala,  and  loaded  them
with  jewels.  And  the  king  made  Yasolekha  an  inmate  of
his  own  harem,  on  the  ground  that  she,  being  the  wife  of
Pratapasena,  was  captured  according  to  the  custom  of  the
Kshatriyas.  And  she,  though  flighty,  submitted  to  him
because  he  had  won  her  by  the  might  of  his  arm.  In  those
abandoned  to  the  intoxication  of  love  the  impressions  of
virtue  are  evanescent.1  And  after  some  days  King  Chamara-
bala, being  solicited  by  the  Queen  YaSolekha,  let  go  those
five  captive  kings,  Pratapasena  and  the  others,  after  they
had  learnt  submission  and  done  homage,  and  after  honour-
ing them,  dismissed  them  to  their  own  kingdoms.  And  then
King  Chamarabala  long  ruled  his  own  wealthy  kingdom,  in

1  The  D.  text  reads  sabala  instead  of  chapala.  Speyer  (op.  cit.,  p.  122)
would  translate :  "...  in  those  who  act  up  to  their  desires  or  their  delusion
the  impressions  of  virtue  are  impure." — n.m.p.


THE  FRUITS  OF  VICTORY  201

which  there  were  no  opponents,  and  the  enemies  of  which
had  been  conquered,  and  he  sported  with  that  Ya^olekha,
who  surpassed  in  form  and  loveliness  beautiful  Apsarases,
being,  as  it  were,  the  banner  that  announced  his  victory
over  his  foes.


[M]  "  Thus  a  brave  man,  though  unsupported,  conquers
in  the  front  of  battle  even  many  enemies  coming  against
him  in  fight,  distracted  with  hate,  and  not  considering  the
resources  of  themselves  and  their  foe,  and  by  his  surpassing
bravery  puts  a  stop  to  the  fever  of  their  conceit  and  pride."

When  Naravahanadatta  had  heard  this  instructive  tale
told  by  Gomukha,  he  praised  it,  and  set  about  his  daily
duties  of  bathing  and  so  on.  And  he  spent  that  night,
which  was  devoted  to  the  amusement  of  a  concert,1  in  sing-
ing with  his  wives  in  such  a  ravishing  way  that  Sarasvatl,
from  her  seat  in  heaven,  gave  him  and  his  beloved  ones  high
commendation.

1  The  D.  text  reading  is  slightly  different  and  means :  "...  as  he  was
fond  of  music,  he  spent  that  night,"  etc.     See  Speyer,  op.  cit.,  p.  123. — n.m.p.


CHAPTER  LV

THEN,  the  next  day,  as  Naravahanadatta  was  sitting
[M]  in  the  apartments  of  Alankaravati,  a  servant  of
Marubhiiti's,  the  brother  of  Sauvidalla,  the  guard  of
the  prince's  harem,  came  and  said  to  him  in  the  presence
of  all  his  ministers  :  "  King,  I  have  attended  on  Marubhuti
for  two  years  ;  he  has  given  food  and  clothing  to  me  and  my
wife,  but  he  will  not  give  me  the  fifty  dinars  a  year  which
he  promised  me  in  addition.  And  when  I  asked  him  for  it
he  gave  me  a  kick.  So  I  am  sitting  in  dharnd  x  against  him
at  your  Highness's  door.     If  your  Highness  does  not  give

1  We  have  already  (Vol.  I,  p.  I35nl;  Vol.  II,  p.  82)  come  across  this
curious  method  of  intended  suicide — usually  employed  to  retrieve  a  debt.
It  consists  in  the  creditor  sitting  at  the  door  of  the  debtor  and  undergoing
a  prolonged  fast  till  the  guilty  one  pays  what  he  owes  rather  than  have  the
man's  blood  on  his  hands,  besides  which  the  fear  of  his  ghost  for  ever  haunting
his  house  is  constantly  before  his  eyes.  This  strange  method  of  exacting
justice  is  mentioned  in  Manu  (V,  iii,  49),  and  is  well  known  in  the  Epics  and
Hindu  fiction.  Another  way  of  practising  dharnd  was  to  thrust  a  spear-blade
through  both  cheeks  and  in  this  state  to  dance  before  the  debtor's  house.
Any  sign  of  suffering  shown  would  at  once  nullify  the  efficacy  of  the  act.
Again,  the  unappeased  creditor  sometimes  stood  with  an  enormous  weight  on
his  head,  swearing  never  to  alter  his  position  until  satisfaction  was  given,  and
pronouncing  at  the  same  time  the  most  horrible  execrations  on  his  debtor
should  he  suffer  him  to  expire  in  that  situation.  This  seldom  failed  to  produce
the  desired  effect,  but  should  he  actually  die  while  in  dharnd,  the  debtor's
house  was  razed  to  the  earth  and  he  and  his  family  sold  for  the  satisfaction
of  the  creditor's  heirs.  Another  and  more  desperate  form  of  dharnd,  only
occasionally  resorted  to,  was  to  erect  a  large  pile  of  wood  before  the  house  of
the  debtor,  and  after  the  customary  application  for  payment  had  been  refused
the  creditor  tied  on  the  top  of  the  pile  a  cow  or  a  calf,  or  very  frequently  an
old  woman,  generally  his  mother  or  other  relation,  swearing  at  the  same  time
to  set  fire  to  it  if  satisfaction  was  not  instantly  given.  All  the  time  the  old
woman  pronounced  the  bitterest  curses,  threatening  to  persecute  the  wretched
debtor  both  here  and  hereafter.  (See  Russell,  Tribes  and  Castes  of  the  Central
Provinces,  vol.  ii,  pp.  265,  266,  who  also  gives  further  details  on  the  subject.)
See  also  ditto,  vol.  iv,  p.  213,  and  the  references  in  Westermarck,  Origin  and
Development  of  the  Moral  Ideas,  vol.  ii,  p.  245»6.— n.m.p.

202


THE  HUNDRED  DINARS  208

judgment  in  this  case  I  shall  enter  the  fire.     What  more
can  I  say  ?     For  you  are  my  sovereign."

When  he  had  said  this  he  stopped,  and  Marubhuti  said  :
"  I  must  give  him  the  dinars,  but  I  have  not  got  the  money
at  present."  When  he  said  this  all  the  ministers  laughed  at
him,  and  Naravahanadatta  said  to  the  minister  Marubhuti :
"  What  are  you  thinking  about,  you  fool  ?  Your  intentions
are  not  over-creditable.1  Rise  up,  give  him  the  hundred
dinars  without  delay."  When  Marubhuti  heard  this  speech
of  his  sovereign's  he  was  ashamed,  and  immediately  brought
that  hundred  dinars  and  gave  it  to  him.  Then  Gomukha
said  :  "  Marubhuti  is  not  to  be  blamed,  because  the  works
of  the  Creator's  hand  have  varying  moods  of  mind.  Have
you  not  heard  the  story  of  King  Chiradatri  and  his  servant,
named  Prasanga  ?

73.  Story  of  Chiradatri

In  old  time  there  was  a  king  named  Chiradatri,  sove-
reign of  Chirapura.  Though  he  was  an  excellent  man,  his
followers  were  extremely  wicked.  And  that  king  had  a
servant,  named  Prasanga,  who  had  come  from  another
country,  and  was  accompanied  by  two  friends.  And  five
years  passed  while  he  was  performing  his  duties,  but  the
king  gave  him  nothing,  not  even  when  an  occasion  was
presented  by  a  feast  or  something  of  the  kind.  And  owing
to  the  wickedness  of  the  courtiers  he  never  obtained  an
opportunity  of  representing  his  case  to  the  king,  though  his
friends  were  continually  instigating  him  to  do  so.

Now  one  day  the  king's  infant  son  died,  and  when  he
was  grieved  at  it  all  his  servants  came  and  crowded  round
him.  And  among  them  the  servant  named  Prasanga,  out
of  pure  sorrow,  said  to  the  king  as  follows,  though  his  two
friends  tried  to  prevent  him  :  "  We  have  been  your  servants,
your  Highness,  for  a  long  time,  and  you  have  never  given  us
anything ;    nevertheless  we  have  remained  here  because  we

1  In  the  D.  text  we  read  murkhabhavah  as  a  single  word,  and  Speyer
(op.  cit.,  p.  123)  would  translate  the  line  with  both  sentences  as  interrogations  :
■  Is  your  stupidity  [still]  such  ?     Does  your  wit  not  exceed  it  ? " — n.m.p.


204  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

had  hopes  from  your  son ;  for  we  thought  that,  although
you  have  never  given  us  anything,  your  son  would  certainly
give  us  something.  If  Fate  has  carried  him  off,  what  is  the
use  of  remaining  here  now  ?  We  will  immediately  take  our
departure."  Thus  he  exclaimed,  and  fell  at  the  feet  of  the
king,  and  went  out  with  his  two  friends.  The  king  reflected  :
"  Ah  I  though  these  men  had  fixed  their  hopes  on  my  son,
they  have  been  faithful  servants  to  me,  so  I  must  not
abandon  them."  Thereupon  he  immediately  had  Prasanga
and  his  companions  summoned,  and  loaded  them  so  with
wealth  that  poverty  did  not  again  lay  hold  on  them.


[M]  "  So  you  see,  men  have  various  dispositions ;  for
that  king  did  not  give  at  the  proper  season,  but  did  give
in  the  unseasonable  hour  of  calamity."  When  Gomukha,
skilful  in  story-telling,  had  said  this,  he  went  on,  at  the
instigation  of  the  son  of  the  sovereign  of  Vatsa,  to  tell  the
following  tale : —

74.  Story  of  King  Kanakavarsha  and  Madanasundari

There  was  in  old  time  on  the  banks  of  the  Ganges  an
excellent  city  named  Kanakapura,  the  people  of  which  were
purified  in  the  water  of  the  river,  and  which  was  a  delightful
place  on  account  of  its  good  government.  In  this  city  the
only  imprisonment  seen  was  the  committing  to  paper  of
the  words  of  poets,  the  only  kind  of  defeat  was  the  curling  in
the  locks  of  the  women,  the  only  contest  was  the  struggle  of
getting  the  corn  into  the  granary.1

In  that  city  there  dwelt  in  old  time  a  glorious  king,
named  Kanakavarsha,  who  was  born  to  Priyadarsana,  the
son  of  Vasuki,  king  of  the  snakes,  by  the  Princess  Ya£o-
dhara.  Though  he  bore  the  weight  of  the  whole  earth,  he
was  adorned  with  innumerable  virtues ;  he  longed  for  glory,
not  for  wealth ;  he  feared  sin,  not  his  enemy.  He  was  dull
in  slandering  his  neighbour,  but  not  in  the  holy  treatises;

1  The  puns  here  defy  translation.


THE  PAINTER  IS  INTRODUCED  205

there  was  restraint  in  the  high-souled  hero's  wrath,  not  in
his  favour ;  he  was  resolute- minded ;  he  was  niggardly  in
curses,  not  in  gifts ;  he  ruled  the  whole  world ;  and  such
was  his  extraordinary  beauty  that  all  women,  the  moment
they  saw  him,  were  distracted  with  the  pain  of  love.

Once  on  a  time,  in  an  autumn  that  was  characterised
by  heat,  that  maddened  elephants,  that  was  attended  by
flocks  of  swans,  and  delighted  the  subjects  with  rejoicings,1
The  Painter  he  entered  a  picture  gallery  which  was  cooled  by
Roladeva  winds  that  blew  laden  with  the  scent  of  lotuses.
There  he  observed  and  praised  the  display  of  pictures,  and
in  the  meanwhile  there  entered  the  warder,  who  said  to  the
king :  "  Your  Majesty,  an  unequalled  painter  has  arrived
here  from  UjjayinI,  boasting  himself  to  be  matchless  in  the
art  of  painting.  His  name  is  Roladeva,  and  he  has  to-day
set  up  a  notice  at  the  palace  gate  to  the  above  effect."

When  the  king  heard  that,  he  felt  respect  for  him,  and
ordered  him  to  be  introduced,  and  the  warder  immediately
went  and  brought  him  in.  The  painter  entered,  and  beheld
the  King  Kanakavarsha  amusing  himself  in  private  with
looking  at  pictures,  reclining  his  body  on  the  lap  of  beauti-
ful women,  and  taking  in  carelessly  crooked  fingers  the
prepared  betel.  And  the  painter  Roladeva  made  obeisance
to  the  king,  who  received  him  politely,  and  sitting  down  said
slowly  to  him  :  "  O  King,  I  put  up  a  notice  principally
through  the  desire  of  beholding  your  feet,  not  out  of  pride
in  my  skill,  so  you  must  excuse  this  deed  of  mine.  And
you  must  tell  me  what  form  I  am  to  represent  on  canvas.
Let  not  the  trouble  I  took  in  learning  this  accomplishment
be  thrown  away,  O  King."  When  the  painter  said  this  to
the  king,  he  replied :  "  Teacher,  paint  anything  you  will  ;
let  us  give  our  eyes  a  treat.  What  doubt  can  there  be  about
your  skill  ?  "

When  the  king  said  this,  his  courtiers  exclaimed  :  "  Paint
the  king.  What  is  the  use  of  painting  others,  ugly  in  comparison

1  Here  the  Sanskrit  text  has  "and  so  resembled  himself."  Each  of  the
Sanskrit  compounds  may  be  taken  in  another  sense.  The  "  heat "  is  valour ;
the  "swans"  subject  kings;  the  sight  of  the  king  delighted  his  subjects,  and
he  possessed  furious  elephants.


206  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

with  him  ?  "  When  the  painter  heard  this  he  was  pleased,
and  painted  the  king,  with  aquiline  nose,  with  almond-
shaped  fiery  eye,  with  broad  forehead,  with  curly  black
hair,  with  ample  breast,  glorious  with  the  scars  of  wounds
inflicted  by  arrows  and  other  weapons,  with  handsome  arms
resembling  the  trunks  of  the  elephants  that  support  the
quarters,  with  waist  capable  of  being  spanned  with  the  hand,
as  if  it  had  been  a  present  from  the  lion-whelps  conquered
by  his  might,  and  with  thighs  like  the  post  for  fastening  the
elephant  of  youth,  and  with  beautiful  feet,  like  the  shoots  of
the  asoka.  And  all,  when  they  beheld  that  life-like  likeness
of  the  king,  applauded  that  painter,  and  said  to  him  :  "  We
do  not  like  to  see  the  king  alone  on  the  picture-panel,  so
paint  on  it  one  of  those  queens  by  his  side,  carefully  choosing
one  that  will  be  a  worthy  pendant  to  him.  Let  the  feast  of
our  eyes  be  complete."

When  they  said  this,  the  painter  looked  at  the  picture
and  said :  "  Though  there  are  many  of  these  queens,  there
is  none  among  them  like  the  king,  and  I  believe  there  is  no
woman  on  the  earth  a  match  for  him  in  beauty,  except  one
princess.     Listen,  I  will  tell  you  about  her.

"  In  Vidarbha  there  is  a  prosperous  town  named  Kundina,
and  in  it  there  is  a  king  of  the  name  of  Deva^akti.  And  he
has  a  queen  named  Anantavati,  dearer  to  him  than  life,  and
The  Fair  ^>y  her  there  was  born  to  him  a  daughter  named
Madana-  Madanasundarl.  How  could  one  like  me  pre-
sundan  sume  to  describe  her  beauty  with  this  one  single

tongue,  but  so  much  will  I  say :  When  the  Creator  had  made
her,  through  delight  in  her  he  conceived  a  desire  to  make
another  like  her,  but  he  will  not  be  able  to  do  it  even  in  the
course  of  yugas.  That  princess,  alone  on  the  earth,  is  a
match  for  this  king  in  shape,  beauty  and  refinement,  in  age
and  birth.  For  I,  when  I  was  there,  was  once  summoned
by  her  by  the  mouth  of  a  maid,  and  I  went  to  her  private
apartments.  There  I  beheld  her,  freshly  anointed  with
sandal  unguent,  having  a  necklace  of  lotus-fibres,  tossing  on  a
bed  of  lotuses,  being  fanned  by  her  ladies-in-waiting  with  the
wind  of  plantain  leaves,  pale  and  emaciated,  exhibiting  the
signs  of  love's  fever.     And  in  these  words  was  she  dissuading


PRINCESS  MADANASUNDARl  207

her  ladies  occupied  in  fanning  her :  '  O  my  friends,  away
with  this  sandal  unguent,  and  these  breezes  wafted  by
plantain  leaves;  for  these,  though  cool,  scorch  up  unhappy
me.'

"  And  when  I  saw  her  in  this  state  I  was  troubled  to
divine  the  reason,  and  after  doing  obeisance  I  sat  down  in
front  of  her.  And  she  said  :  '  Teacher,  paint  such  a  form
as  this  on  canvas  and  give  it  me.'  And  then  she  made  me
paint  a  certain  very  handsome  youth,  slowly  tracing  out  the
form  on  the  ground  with  trembling,  nectar- distilling  hand,1
to  guide  me.  And  when  I  had  so  painted  that  handsome
youth  I  said  to  myself :  '  She  has  made  me  paint  the
God  of  Love  in  visible  form  ;  but,  as  I  see  that  the  flowery
bow  is  not  represented  in  his  hand,  I  know  that  it  cannot  be
the  God  of  Love ;  it  must  be  some  extraordinarily  handsome
young  man  like  him.  And  her  outburst  of  love- sickness
has  to  do  with  him.  So  I  must  depart  hence,  for  this  king,
her  father,  Devasakti,  is  severe  in  his  justice,  and  if  he  heard
of  this  proceeding  of  mine  he  would  not  overlook  it.'  Thus
reflecting,  I  did  obeisance  to  that  Princess  Madanasundari,
and  departed,  honoured  by  her.

"  But  when  I  was  there,  O  King,  I  heard  from  her
attendants,  as  they  talked  freely  together,  that  she  had
fallen  in  love  with  you  from  hearing  of  you  only.2  So  I
have  secretly  taken  a  picture  of  that  princess  on  a  sheet
of  canvas,  and  have  come  here  quickly  to  your  feet.  And
when  I  beheld  your  Majesty's  appearance  my  doubt  was  at
an  end,  for  it  was  clearly  your  Majesty  that  the  princess
caused  to  be  painted  by  my  hand.  And  as  it  is  not  possible
to  paint  her  twice,  such  as  she  is,  I  will  not  represent  her  in
the  picture  as  standing  at  your  side,  though  she  is  equal  to
you  in  beauty."

When  Roladeva  said  this,  the  king  said  to  him :  "  Then
show  her  as  she  is  represented  on  the  canvas  you  have
brought  with  you."  Then  the  painter  looked  out  a  piece
of   canvas   which   was     in   a   bag,    and   showed   the   king

1  The  D.  text  reads  dhrtavartina  instead  of  amrita-vartina,  meaning  a
pencil-holding  hand. — n.m.p.

2  See  Vol.  I,  p.  128n».— n.m.p.


208  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

Madanasundari  in  a  painting.  And  the  King  Kanakavarsha,
seeing  that  even  in  a  painting  she  was  wonderfully  beauti-
ful, immediately  became  enamoured  of  her.  And  he  loaded
that  painter  with  much  gold,  and  taking  the  picture  of  his
beloved  retired  into  his  private  apartments.  There  he  re-
mained with  his  mind  fixed  on  her  alone,  abandoning  all
occupations,  and  his  eyes  were  never  satisfied  with  gazing  on
her  beauty.  It  seemed  as  if  the  God  of  Love  was  jealous
of  his  good  looks,  for  now  that  he  had  obtained  an  oppor-
tunity he  tormented  him,  smiting  him  with  his  arrows  and
robbing  him  of  his  self-control.  And  the  love-pain,  which
he  had  inflicted  on  women  enamoured  of  his  handsome
shape,  was  now  visited  on  that  king  a  hundredfold.

And  in  the  course  of  some  days,  being  pale  and  emaciated,
he  told  to  his  confidential  ministers,  who  questioned  him,  the
thought  of  his  heart.  And  after  deliberating  with  them
The  Formal  he  sent  to  the  King  Devasakti,  as  ambassador,
Proposal  to  ask  for  the  hand  of  his  daughter,  a  trustworthy
Brahman  of  good  birth,  named  Sangamasvamin,  who  was
skilled  in  affairs,  knew  times  and  seasons,  and  could  speak
in  a  sweet  and  lofty  style.  That  Sangamasvamin  went
to  Vidarbha  with  a  great  retinue  and  entered  the  city  of
Kundina.  And  there  he  had  a  formal  interview  with  the
King  DevaSakti,  and  on  behalf  of  his  master  asked  for  the
hand  of  his  daughter.

And  Devasakti  reflected :  "I  must  give  away  this  daughter
of  mine  to  someone,  and  this  King  Kanakavarsha  has  been
described  as  my  equal,  and  he  asks  for  her,  so  I  will  give  her  to
him. ' '  Accordingly  he  granted  the  prayer  of  Sangamasvamin,
and  the  king  displayed  to  the  ambassador  the  astonishing
elegance  in  the  dance  of  his  daughter  Madanasundari.
Then  the  king  sent  away,  after  honouring  him  and  promising
to  give  his  daughter,  that  Sangamasvamin,  who  was  charmed
with  his  sight  of  her.  And  he  sent  with  him  a  counter-
ambassador  to  say  :  "  Fix  an  auspicious  moment  and  come
here  for  the  marriage."  And  Sangamasvamin  returned,
accompanied  by  the  counter- ambassador,  and  told  the  King
Kanakavarsha  that  his  object  was  effected.  Then  the
king  ascertained  a  favourable  moment,  and  honoured  that


THE  WEDDING  IS  CELEBRATED  209

ambassador,  and  heard  from  him  over  and  over  again  how
Madanasundari  was  in  love  with  him.

And  then  the  King  Kanakavarsha  set  out  for  the  city
of  Kundina,  in  order  to  marry  her,  with  mind  at  ease  on
account  of  his  own  irresistible  valour,  mounted  on  the
horse  Aslkala,1  and  he  smote  the  Savaras  that  inhabited
the  border  forests,  and  took  the  lives  of  living  creatures,
like  lions  and  other  wild  beasts.  And  he  reached  Vidarbha,
and  entered  that  city  of  Kundina  with  King  DevaS'akti,  who
came  out  to  meet  him.  Then  he  entered  the  king's  palace,
in  which  preparations  had  been  made  for  the  marriage,
robbing  the  ladies  of  the  city  of  the  feast  which  he  had
given  to  their  eyes.  And  there  he  rested  a  day  with  his
retinue,  pleased  at  the  noble  reception  which  King  Deva-
S'akti gave  him.  And  on  the  next  day  Deva^akti  gave  him
his  daughter  Madanasundari,  together  with  all  his  wealth,
retaining  only  his  kingdom.

And  King  Kanakavarsha,  after  he  had  remained  there
seven  days,  returned  to  his  own  city  with  his  recently  married
bride.  And  when  he  arrived  with  his  beloved,  giving  joy
to  the  world,  like  the  moon  with  the  moonlight,  that  city
was  full  of  rejoicing.  Then  that  Queen  Madanasundari  was
dearer  than  life  to  that  king,  though  he  had  many  wives,  as
Rukmini  is  to  Vishnu.  And  the  wedded  couple  remained
fastened  together  by  their  eyes  with  lovely  eyelashes,  which
were  fixed  on  one  another's  faces,  resembling  the  arrows  of
love.

And  in  the  meanwhile  arrived  the  lion  of  spring,  with  a
train  of  expanding  filaments  for  mane,  tearing  to  pieces  the
elephant  of  female  coyness.  And  the  garden  made  ready
The  Arrival  blossoming  mango-plants,  by  way  of  bows  for
of  Spring  the  God  of  Love,  with  rows  of  bees  clinging  to
them  by  way  of  bow-string.  And  the  wind  from  the  Malaya
mountain  blew,  swaying  the  love-kindled  hearts  of  the
wives  of  men  travelling  in  foreign  lands,  as  it  swayed
the  suburban  groves.  And  the  sweetly  speaking  cuckoos
seemed  to  say  to  men  :   "  The  brimming  of  the  streams,  the

1  .The  Sanskrit  College  MS.  reads  Astkalahayarudhah.
VOL.   IV,  O


210  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

flowers  of  the  trees,  the  digits  of  the  moon  wane  and  return
again,  but  not  the  youth  of  men.1  Fling  aside  coyness  and
quarrelling,  and  sport  with  your  beloved  ones."

And  at  that  time  King  Kanakavarsha  went  with  all  his
wives  to  a  spring  garden  to  amuse  himself.  And  he  eclipsed
the  beauty  of  the  atiokas  with  the  red  robes  of  his  attendants,
and  with  the  songs  of  his  lovely  ladies  the  song  of  the  cuckoos
and  bees.  There  the  king,  though  all  his  wives  were  with
him,  amused  himself  with  Madanasundari  in  picking  flowers
and  other  diversions.  And  after  roaming  there  a  long  time
the  king  entered  the  Godavari  with  his  wives  to  bathe,  and
began  the  water-game.  His  ladies  surpassed  the  lotuses
with  their  faces,  with  their  eyes  the  blue  water-lilies,  with
their  breasts  the  couples  of  Brahmany  ducks,  with  their  hips
the  sandbanks,  and  when  they  troubled  the  bosom  of  the
stream  it  showed  frowns  of  anger,  in  the  form  of  curling
waves.  Then  the  mind  of  Kanakavarsha  took  pleasure  in
them,  while  they  displayed  the  contours  of  their  limbs
in  the  splashing-game.  And  in  the  ardour  of  the  game
he  splashed  one  queen  with  water  from  his  palms  on  her
breast.

When  Madanasundari  saw  it  she  was  jealous,  and  got
angry  with  him,  and  in  an  outburst  of  indignation  said  to
him  :  "  How  long  are  you  going  to  trouble  the  river  ?  '
Madana-  ^nd  gomg  ou^  °f  the  water  she  took  her  other
jrundari  be-  clothes  and  rushed  off  in  a  passion  to  her  own
comes  Jealous  paiace>  telling  her  ladies  of  that  fault  of  her
lover's.  Then  Kanakavarsha,  seeing  her  state  of  mind,
stopped  his  water-game  and  went  off  to  her  apartments.
Even  the  parrots  in  the  cages  warned  him  off  in  wrath
when  he  approached,  and  entering  he  saw  within  the  queen,
afflicted  with  wrath,  with  her  downcast  lotus- like  face
supported  on  the  palm  of  her  left  hand,  with  teardrops
falling  like  transparent  pearls.  And  she  was  repeating,  with
accents  charming  on  account  of  her  broken  speech,  in  a
voice  interrupted  with  sobs,  showing  her  gleaming  teeth,
this  fragment  of  a  Prakrit  song  :  "If  you  cannot  endure
separation,  you  must  cheerfully  abandon  anger.     If  you  can

1  Cf.  the  Lament  of  Moschos  for  Bion,  i,  99-104.


THE  ILL-OMENED  DREAM  211

in  your  heart  endure  separation,  then  you  must  increase
your  wrath.  Perceiving  this  clearly,  remain  pledged  to
one  or  the  other ;  if  you  can  take  your  stand  on  both,  you
will  fall  between  two  stools."

And  when  the  king  saw  her  in  this  state,  lovely  even
in  tears,  he  approached  her  bashfully  and  timidly.  And
embracing  her,  though  she  kept  her  face  averted,  he  set
himself  to  propitiate  her  with  respectful  words,  tender
with  love.  And  when  her  retinue  signified  her  scorn
with  ambiguous  hints,  he  fell  at  her  feet,  blaming  him-
self as  an  offender.  Then  she  clung  to  the  neck  of  the
king,  and  was  reconciled  to  him,  bedewing  him  with  the
tears  that  flowed  on  account  of  that  very  annoyance.  And
he,  delighted,  spent  the  day  with  his  beloved,  whose
anger  had  been  exchanged  for  good- will,  and  slept  there  at
night.

But  in  the  night  he  saw  in  a  dream  his  necklace  suddenly
taken  from  his  neck,  and  his  crest -jewel  snatched  from  his
head,  by  a  deformed  woman.  Then  he  saw  a  Vetala,  with  a
body  made  up  of  the  limbs  of  many  animals,  and  when  the
Vetala  wrestled  with  him  he  hurled  him  to  earth.  And
when  the  king  sat  on  the  Vetala 's  back  the  demon  flew  up
with  him  through  the  air,  like  a  bird,  and  threw  him  into
the  sea.  Then,  after  he  had  with  difficulty  struggled  to  the
shore,  he  saw  that  the  necklace  was  replaced  on  his  neck,
and  the  crest-jewel  on  his  head.

When  the  king  had  seen  this  he  woke  up,  and  in  the
morning  he  asked  a  Buddhist  mendicant,  who  had  come  to
visit  him  as  an  old  friend,  the  meaning  of  the  dream.  And
the  mendicant  answered  clearly  :  "I  do  not  wish  to  say
what  is  unpleasant,  but  how  can  I  help  telling  you  when  I
am  asked  ?  The  fact  that  you  saw  your  necklace  and  crest-
jewel  taken  away  means  that  you  will  be  separated  from
your  wife  and  from  your  son.  And  the  fact  that,  after  you
had  escaped  from  the  sea,  you  found  them  again,  means
that  you  will  be  reunited  with  them,  when  your  calamity
comes  to  an  end."  Then  the  king  said  :  "I  have  not  a  son
as  yet;  let  him  be  born  first."  Then  the  king  heard  from
a  reciter  of  the  Rdmdyana,  who  visited  his  palace,  how  King


212  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

Daiaratha  endured  hardship  to  obtain  a  son ;  and  so  there
arose  in  his  mind  anxiety  about  obtaining  a  son,  and  the
mendicant  having  departed,  the  King  Kanakavarsha  spent
that  day  in  despondency.

And  at  night,  as  he  was  lying  alone  and  sleepless  upon
his  bed,  he  saw  a  woman  enter  without  opening  the  door.
She  was  modest  and  gentle  of  appearance,  and  when  the
The  King's  king  Dowecl  before  her  she  gave  him  her  blessing,
Desire  for  and  said  to  him  :  "  Son,  know  that  I  am  the
a  Son  daughter  of  Vasuki,  the  king  of  the  snakes,  and

the  elder  sister  of  thy  father,  Ratnaprabha  by  name.  I
always  dwell  near  thee,  invisible,  to  protect  thee,  but  to- day >
seeing  thee  despondent,  I  have  displayed  to  thee  my  real
form.  I  cannot  bear  to  behold  thy  sorrow,  so  tell  me  the
cause."

When  the  king  had  been  thus  addressed  by  his  father's
sister,  he  said  to  her :  "I  am  fortunate,  mother,  in  that  you
show  me  such  condescension.  But  know  that  my  anxiety
is  caused  by  the  fact  that  no  son  is  born  to  me.  How  can
people  like  myself  help  desiring  that,  which  even  heroic
saints  of  old  days,  like  Dasaratha  and  others,  desired  for  the
sake  of  obtaining  Svarga."  When  the  Nagi *  Ratnaprabha
heard  this  speech  of  that  king,  she  said  to  her  brother's  son :
"  My  son,  I  will  tell  thee  an  admirable  expedient ;  carry  it
out.  Go  and  propitiate  Karttikeya  with  a  view  to  obtain
a  son.  I  will  enter  thy  body,  and  by  my  power  thou  shalt
support  the  rain  of  Karttikeya  falling  on  thy  head  to  impede
thee,  difficult  to  endure.  And  after  thou  hast  overcome  a
host  of  other  impediments  thou  shalt  obtain  thy  wish."
When  the  Nagi  had  said  this  she  disappeared,  and  the  king
spent  the  night  in  bliss.

The  next  morning  he  committed  his  realm  to  the  care
of  his  ministers,  and  went,  desiring  a  son,  to  visit  the  sole
of  Karttikeya 's  foot.     There  he  performed  a  severe  penance

1  I.e.  female  snake,  somewhat  of  the  nature  of  the  Echidna  of  our
boyhood  :

**  ^/xuru  fiiv  vvfi<f>rfv  kX.iKu>iri8a  naWnrdpyov
"q/iurv  8'afrrc  irckwpov  5<f>iv,  Seivov  t«  pkyav  T€."

Hesiod,  Theog.,  298.


ALL  PERILS  ARE  SURMOUNTED  218

to  propitiate  that  lord,  having  power  given  him  by  the  Nagi
that  entered  his  body.  Then  the  rain  of  Kumara  ■  fell  on
his  head  like  thunderbolts,  and  continued  without  ceasing.
But  he  endured  it  by  means  of  the  Nagi  that  had  entered
his  body.  Then  Karttikeya  sent  Ganesa  to  impede  him  still
further.  And  Ganesa  created  in  that  rain  a  very  poisonous
and  exceedingly  terrible  serpent,  but  the  king  did  not  fear
it.  Then  GaneSa,  invincible2  even  by  gods,  came  in  visible
form  and  began  to  give  him  bites  on  the  breast.  Then
King  Kanakavarsha,  thinking  that  he  was  a  foe  hard  to
subdue,  proceeded,  after  he  had  endured  that  ordeal,  to
propitiate  Ganesa  with  praises.

"  Honour  to  thee,  O  god  of  the  projecting  belly,  adorned
with  the  elephant's  ornament,  whose  body  is  like  a  swelling
pitcher  containing  success  in  all  affairs !  Victory  to  thee,
Ganem  is  0  elephant- faced  one,  that  makest  even  Brahma
propitiated  afraid,  shaking  the  lotus,  which  is  his  throne,
with  thy  trunk  flung  up  in  sport !  Even  the  gods,  the
Asuras  and  the  chief  hermits  do  not  succeed  unless  thou
art  pleased,  the  only  refuge  of  the  world,  O  thou  beloved  of
Siva !  The  chief  of  the  gods  praise  thee  by  thy  sixty-eight
sin- destroying  names,  calling  thee  the  pitcher-bellied,  the
basket-eared  one,3  the  chief  of  the  Ganas,  the  furious  mast
elephant,  Yama  the  noose-handed,  the  Sun,  Vishnu  and
Siva.  With  these  names  to  the  number  of  sixty-eight,
corresponding  to  so  many  parts  of  the  body,  do  they  praise
thee.  And  when  one  remembers  thee  and  praises  thee,  O
lord,  fear  produced  by  the  battle-field,  by  the  king's  court,

1  Cf.  the  following  passage  which  Wirt  Sykes  {British  Goblins,  p.  385)
quotes  from  "The  Mabinogion"  :  "Take  a  bowl  and  throw  a  bowlful  of  water
on  the  slab,"  says  the  black  giant  of  the  wood  to  Sir  Kai,  "and  thou  wilt  hear
a  mighty  peal  of  thunder,  so  that  thou  wilt  think  that  heaven  and  earth  are
trembling  with  its  fury.  With  the  thunder  will  come  a  shower  so  severe  that
it  will  be  hardly  possible  for  thee  to  endure  and  live.  And  the  shower  will
be  of  hailstones ;  and  after  the  shower  the  weather  will  become  fair,  but  every
leaf  that  was  upon  the  tree  will  have  been  carried  away  by  the  shower."  Cf
Prym  and  Socin,  Syrische  M'drchen,  p.  1 1 6,  and  Gaal,  Marchen  der  Magyaren,
pp.  101,  102.

2  I  read  with  the  Sanskrit  College  MS.  ajayyah.

3  Bohtlingk  conjectures  siirpa  for  surya ;  surpa  is  a  winnowing-basket.


214  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

by  gambling,  by  thieves,  by  fire,  by  wild  beasts  and  other
harms,  departs."

With  these  laudatory  verses,  and  with  many  others  of
the  same  kind,  King  Kanakavarsha  honoured  that  king
of  impediments.  And  the  conqueror  of  impediments  said :
"  I  will  not  throw  an  impediment  in  thy  way ;  obtain  a
son,"  and  disappeared  then  and  there  from  the  eyes  of  that
king.

Then  Karttikeya  said  to  that  king,  who  had  endured  the
rain :  "  Resolute  man,  I  am  pleased  with  thee,  so  crave  a
boon."  Then  the  king,  delighted,  said  to  the  god:  "Let
a  son  be  born  to  me  by  thy  favour."  Then  the  god  said :
"  Thou  shalt  have  a  son,  the  incarnation  of  one  of  my
Ganas,  and  his  name  shall  be  Hiranyavarsha  on  the  earth."
And  then  the  rider  on  the  peacock  summoned  him  to  enter
his  inmost  shrine,  in  order  to  show  him  special  favour.1
Thereupon  the  Nagi  left  his  body  invisibly,  for  females  do
not  enter  the  house  of  Karttikeya  through  dread  of  a  curse.
Then  King  Kanakavarsha  entered  the  sanctifying  temple  of
that  god,  armed  only  with  his  human  excellence.  When  the
god  saw  that  he  was  deprived  of  the  excellence  he  formerly
had,  because  he  was  no  longer  inhabited  by  the  Nagi,  he
reflected  :    "  What  can  this  mean  ?  "

And  Karttikeya,  perceiving  by  his  divine  meditation
that  that  king  had  performed  a  very  difficult  vow  by  the
secret  help  of  the  Nagi,  thus  cursed  him  in  his  wrath  :  "  Since
thou  didst  make  use  of  deceit,  intractable  man,
thou  shalt  be  separated  from  thy  son,  as  soon  as
he  is  born,  and  from  thy  queen."  When  the  king  heard  this
curse,  terrible  as  a  thunderstroke,  he  was  not  amazed,  but,
being  a  mighty  poet,  praised  that  god  with  hymns.  Then  the
six-faced  god,  pleased  with  his  well-turned  language,  said  to
him  :  "  King,  I  am  pleased  with  thy  hymns ;  I  appoint
thee  this  end  of  thy  curse :  thou  shalt  be  separated  from
thy  wife  and  son  for  one  year,  but  after  thou  hast  been
saved  from  three  great  dangers  thou  shalt  come  to  an  end
of  the  separation."     When  the  six- faced  god  had  said  this,

1  This  is  the  sense,  but  epsur  cannot  be  right ;  the  Sanskrit  College  MS.
reads  echchhum.     Perhaps  echchhuh  will  do.


THE  BIRTH  OF  KANAKA VARSHA  215

he  ceased  to  speak,  and  the  king,  satisfied  with  the  nectar
of  his  favour,  bowed  before  him  and  went  to  his  own  city.

Then,  in  course  of  time,  he  had  a  son  born  to  him  by
Queen  Madanasundari,  as  the  nectar-stream  is  born  of  the
light  of  the  cold-rayed  moon.  When  the  king  and  queen
saw  the  face  of  that  son,  being  filled  with  great  delight,  they
were  not  able  to  contain  themselves.1  And  at  that  time
the  king  made  a  feast,  and  showered  riches,  and  made  his
name  of  Kanakavarsha  2  a  literal  fact  on  the  earth.

When  five  nights  had  passed,  while  guard  was  being  kept
in  the  lying-in  house,  on  the  sixth  night  a  cloud  suddenly
came  there.  It  swelled,  and  gradually  covered  the  whole
sky,  as  a  neglected  enemy  overruns  the  kingdom  of  a  careless
king.  Then  the  mast  elephant  of  the  wind  began  to  rush,
showering  drops  of  rain  like  drops  of  ichor,  and  rooting  up
trees.  At  that  moment  a  terrible  woman,  sword  in  hand,
opened  the  door,  though  it  was  bolted,  and  entered  that
lying-in  chamber.  She  took  that  babe  from  the  queen  as
she  was  nursing  it  and  ran  out,  having  bewildered  the
attendants.  And  then  the  queen,  distracted,  and  exclaim-
ing, "  Alas,  a  Rakshasi  has  carried  off  my  child ! "  pursued
that  woman,  though  it  was  dark.  And  the  woman  rushed
on  and  plunged  into  a  tank  with  the  child,  and  the  queen,
pursuing  her,  plunged  in  also,  eager  to  recover  her  offspring.
Immediately  the  cloud  disappeared,  and  the  night  came  to
an  end,  and  the  lamentation  of  the  attendants  was  heard
in  the  lying-in  chamber.

Then  the  King  Kanakavarsha,  hearing  it,  came  to  the
lying-in  chamber,  and  seeing  it  empty  of  his  son  and  wife,
was  distracted.  After  he  had  recovered  consciousness  he
began  to  lament :  M  Alas,  my  queen !  Alas,  my  infant
son ! "  And  then  he  called  to  mind  that  the  curse  was  to
end  in  a  year.  And  he  exclaimed  :  "  Holy  Skanda,  how
could  you  give  to  ill-starred  me  a  boon  joined  with  a  curse,
like  nectar  mixed  with  poison  ?     Alas  !    how  shall  I  be  able

1  I  read  tada  for pada,  a  conjecture  of  Babu  S.C.  Mookerjea's.     The  Sanskrit

College  MS.  reads  alyanandabhrite  yuktam  navarldam  yadatmani. The  D.  text

has  atyanandasamayukte  navartetam  taddtmani. — N.M.P.

2  I.e.  showerer  of  riches.


216  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

to  pass  a  year,  long  as  a  thousand  years,  without  the  Queen
Madanasundari,  whom  I  value  more  than  my  life?"  And
the  king,  though  exhorted  by  the  ministers,  who  knew  the
circumstances,  did  not  recover  his  composure,  which  had
departed  with  his  queen.

And  in  course  of  time  he  left  his  city,  distracted  with
a  paroxysm  of  love,  and  wandered  through  the  Vindhya
forest  in  a  state  of  bewilderment.  There,  as  he  gazed  on
the  eyes  of  the  young  does,  he  remembered  the  beauty  of  the
eyes  of  his  beloved,  and  the  bushy  tails  of  the  chamaris  l
reminded  him  of  the  loveliness  of  her  luxuriant  hair,  and
when  he  marked  the  gait  of  the  female  elephant  he  called
to  mind  the  languid  grace  of  her  gait,  so  that  the  fire  of
his  love  broke  out  into  a  fiercer  flame.  And  wandering
about,  exhausted  with  thirst  and  heat,  he  reached  the  foot
of  the  Vindhya  mountains,  and,  after  drinking  the  water  of
a  stream,  he  sat  down  at  the  foot  of  a  tree.

In  the  meanwhile  a  long-maned  lion  came  out  of  a  cavern

of  the  Vindhya  hills,  uttering  a  roar  which  resembled  a  loud

demoniac  laugh,  and  rushed  towards  him  to  slay  him.     At

that  very  moment  a  certain  Vidyadhara  descended  rapidly

from  heaven  and  cleft  that  lion  in  two  with  a  sword- stroke.

And  that  sky-goer,  coming  near,  said  to  the  king :    "  King

Kanakavarsha,  how  have  you  come  to  this  region  ?  "    When

the  king  heard  it,  he  recovered  his  memory,  and  said  to

him  :  "  How  do  you  know  me,  who  am  tossed  with  the  wind

of  separation ?  "     Then  the   Vidyadhara   said :    "I,    when

in  old  time  I  was  a  religious  mendicant,  of  the  name  of

Bandhumitra,  dwelt  in  your  city.     Then  you  helped  me  in

my  rites,  when  I  respectfully  asked  you  to  do  so,   and  so

I  obtained  the  rank  of  a  Vidyadhara,  by  making  a  goblin

my  servant.     Thus  I  recognised  you,  and  being  desirous  to

confer  on  you  a  benefit,  by  way  of  recompense,  I  have  slain

this  lion  which  I  saw  on  the  point  of  killing  you.     And  my

name  has  now  become  Bandhuprabha."

When  the  Vidyadhara  said  this,  the  king  conceived  an
affection  for  him,  and  said :    "  Ah  !    I  remember ;  and  this

1  For  a  note  on  the  chowrie,  or  fly-whisk,  see  Vol.  Ill,  pp.  84«',  85n.
— N.M.P.


THE  LOTUS  LAKE  217

friendship  has  been  nobly  acted  up  to  by  you,  so  tell  me
when  I  shall  be  reunited  with  my  wife  and  son."  When
the  Vidyadhara  Bandhuprabha  heard  that,  he  perceived  it
by  his  divine  knowledge,  and  said  to  the  king :  "  By  a
pilgrimage  to  the  shrine  of  Durga,  in  the  Vindhya  hills,  you
will  recover  your  wife  and  son,  so  go  you  to  prosperity  and
I  will  return  to  my  own  world."  When  he  had  said  this
he  departed,  and  King  Kanakavarsha,  having  recovered  his
self-command,  went  to  visit  that  shrine  of  Durga.

As  he  was  going  along,  a  great  and  furious  wild  elephant,
stretching  out  its  trunk  and  shaking  its  head,  charged  him
in  the  path.  When  the  king  saw  that,  he  fled  by  a  way  full
of  holes,  so  that  the  elephant,  pursuing  him,  fell  into  a  chasm
and  was  killed.  Then  the  king,  fatigued  with  toil  and
exertion,  slowly  going  along,  reached  a  great  lake,  full  of
lotuses  with  straight  upstanding  stalks.  There  the  king
bathed,  drank  the  water  of  the  lake,  and  ate  the  fibres  of  the
lotuses,  and  lying  tired  at  the  foot  of  a  tree  was  for  a  moment
overpowered  by  sleep.  And  some  Savaras,  returning  that
way  from  hunting,  saw  that  king  with  auspicious  marks
lying  asleep.  And  they  immediately  bound  him  and  took
him  to  their  King  Muktaphala,  in  order  that  he  might  serve
as  a  victim.

The  King  of  the  Savaras,  for  his  part,  seeing  that  the
king  was  a  suitable  victim,  took  him  to  the  temple  of  Durga,
to  offer  him  up.  And  when  the  king  saw  the  goddess  he
The  Curse  bowed  before  her,  and  by  her  mercy  and  the
comes  to  an  favour  of  Skanda  his  bonds  fell  off.  When  the
End  King  of  the  Savaras  saw  that  miracle  he  knew

that  it  was  a  mark  of  the  goddess's  favour  towards  him,
and  he  spared  his  life.  So  Kanakavarsha  escaped  the  third
danger,  and  accomplished  the  year  of  his  curse.

And  in  the  meanwhile  the  NagI,  the  aunt  of  the  king,
came  there,  bringing  the  Queen  Madanasundarl  with  her
son,  and  said  to  the  king:  "O  King,  when  I  heard  the
curse  of  Karttikeya  I  took  these  away  by  an  artifice  to  my
own  dwelling  and  preserved  them  there.  Therefore,  Kanaka-
varsha, receive  here  your  wife  and  son,  and  enjoy  this  empire
of  the  earth,  for  now  your  curse  is  at  an  end."


218  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

When  the  Nagi  had  said  this  to  the  king,  who  bowed
before  her,  she  disappeared,  and  the  king  looked  upon  the
arrival  of  his  wife  and  child  as  a  dream.  Then  the  grief  of
separation  of  the  king  and  queen,  who  had  so  long  been
forced  to  live  apart,  trickled  away  in  their  tears  of  joy.
Then  Muktaphala,  the  King  of  the  Savaras,  fell  at  the  feet
of  the  King  Kanakavarsha,  on  finding  that  he  was  his  master,
the  lord  of  the  whole  earth.  And  after  he  had  propitiated
him,  and  persuaded  him  to  visit  his  town,  he  furnished  his
wife  and  child  with  all  kinds  of  luxuries,  such  as  it  was  in
his  power  to  give.

Then  the  king,  remaining  there,  summoned  by  mes-
sengers his  father-in-law  Devasakti  and  his  army x  from  his
own  city.  Then  he  sent  on  in  front  of  him  his  beloved
wife  Madanasundari,  mounted  on  a  female  elephant,  and
his  son,  who  Karttikeya  said  was  to  be  called  Hiranya-
varsha,  and  went  with  his  father-in-law  towards  his
father-in-law's  house.2  And  in  a  few  days  he  reached  the
residence  of  his  father-in-law,  a  hermitage  3  in  the  country
of  Vidarbha,  and  after  that  his  wealthy  city  of  Kundina,
and  there  he  remained  some  time  with  his  wife  and  son,  and
his  army,  being  entertained  by  his  father-in-law.  And  set-
ting out  thence  he  at  last  reached  his  own  town  of  Kanaka-
pura,  where  he  was,  as  it  were,  drunk  in  by  the  eyes  of  the
wives  of  the  citizens,  long  desirous  of  beholding  him  again.
And  with  his  son  and  Madanasundari  he  entered  the  palace,
like  an  embodied  feast,  accompanied  with  joy  and  splendour.
And  there  he  gave  Madanasundari  a  turban  of  honour,  and
made  her  his  head  wife,  and  he  honoured  his  subjects  with
gifts  on  this  day  of  triumph.4    And  then  King  Kanakavarsha

1  The  MS.  in  the  Sanskrit  College  reads  svasainyam,  which  saves  the
metre.

*  Svasuravesmavartmasritas  is  the  reading  of  the  MS.  in  the  library  of  the
Sanskrit  College.

*  An  error  has  crept  in  here.  Asramam  should  read  asritam  of  the  D.
text.  Thus  we  get  over  the  strange  statement  that  Devasakti  resided  in
a  hermitage.  The  sense  is  then  that  Kanakavarsha  reached  Kundina,  the
capital  of  his  father-in-law  situated  in  Vidarbha,  and  stayed  there  for  some
days.     See  Speyer,  op.  cit.,  p.  124. — n.m.p.

4  I  read  manitaprakritih,  following  the  MS.  in  the  Sanskrit  College.


THE  END  OF  THE  STORY  219

ruled  this  circle  of  the  earth,  four-limited  by  the  sea,  without
opponents,  in  perpetual  happiness,  with  his  wife  and  son,
without  experiencing  again  the  grief  of  separation.


[M]  When  the  Prince  Naravahanadatta  heard  this
magnificent  tale  from  his  head  minister  Gomukha,  in  the
company  of  the  fair  Alankaravati,  he  was  exceedingly
delighted.


CHAPTER  LVI

THEN  the  Prince  Naravahanadatta,  with  his  beloved
[M]  by  his  side,  being  much  pleased  at  the  tale  of
Gomukha,  but  seeing  that  Marubhuti  was  quite  put
out,  in  order  to  pay  him  a  compliment,  said  to  him,  at-
tempting to  conciliate  him  :  "  Marubhuti,  why  do  you  not  tell
a  tale  also?"  Then  he  said:  "Well,  I  will  tell  one,"  and
with  pleased  soul  began  to  relate  the  following  story  : —

75.  Story  of  the  Brahman  Chandrasvamin,  his  Son  Mahipdla,
and  his  Daughter  Chandravati

There  once  lived  in  a  town  called  Devakamalapura,  be-
longing to  the  King  Kamalavarman,  an  excellent  Brahman
named  Chandrasvamin.  And  that  wise  man  had  a  wife  like
himself,  distinguished  for  modesty,  and  she  was  a  worthy
match  for  Sarasvati  and  Lakshmi.  And  to  that  Brahman
was  born  a  son  with  auspicious  marks,  and  when  he  was
born  this  voice  was  heard  from  heaven :  "  Chandrasvamin,
you  must  call  your  son  Mahipala,1  because  he  shall  be  a  king
and  long  protect  the  earth."

When  Chandrasvamin  heard  this,  he  made  a  feast  and
called  that  son  Mahipala.  And  in  course  of  time  Mahipala
grew  up,  and  was  taught  the  science  of  missile  and  hand-to-
hand  weapons,  and  was  at  the  same  time  instructed  in  all
knowledge.  And  in  the  meanwhile  his  wife  Devamati
brought  forth  to  Chandrasvamin  another  child,  beautiful
in  all  her  limbs.  And  the  brother  and  sister,  Mahipala  and
Chandravati,  grew  up  together  in  their  father's  house.

Then  a  famine,  caused  by  want  of  rain,  sprang  up  in
that  country,  the  corn  having  been  scorched  up  by  the  rays
of  the  sun.  And  owing  to  that  the  king  began  to  play  the
bandit,  leaving  the  right  path  and  taking  wealth  from  his

1  I.e.  earth-protector,  king.

220


CHANDRASVAMIN  IS  CAPTURED  221

subjects  unlawfully.  Then,  as  that  land  was  going  rapidly
to  ruin,  Chandrasvamin's  wife  said  to  her  husband :  "  Come
to  my  father's  house,  let  us  leave  this  city,  for  our  children
will  perish  here  some  day  or  other."  When  Chandrasvamin
heard  this,  he  said  to  his  wife:  "By  no  means;  for  flight
from  one's  own  country  in  time  of  famine  is  a  great  sin.  So
I  will  take  these  children  and  deposit  them  in  your  father's
house,  and  do  you  remain  here;  I  will  return  soon."  She
agreed,  and  then  Chandrasvamin  left  her  in  his  house,  and
taking  those  two  children,  the  boy  Mahlpala  and  the  girl
Chandravati,  set  out  from  that  city  for  his  father-in-law's
house.  And  in  course  of  time,  as  he  roamed  on,  he  reached
a  great  wilderness,  with  sands  heated  by  the  rays  of  the  sun,
and  with  but  a  few  parched- up  trees  in  it.  And  there  he
left  his  two  children,  who  were  exhausted  with  thirst,  and
went  to  a  great  distance  to  look  for  water  for  them.

Then  there  met  him  a  chief  of  the  Savaras,  named  Simha-
damshtra,  with  his  followers,  going  somewhere  or  other  for
his  own  ends.  The  Bhilla  saw  him  and  questioned  him,
and  finding  out  that  he  was  in  search  of  water,  said  to  his
followers,  "Take  him  to  some  water,"  at  the  same  time
making  a  sign  to  them.  When  they  heard  it,  two  or  three
of  the  Savara  king's  followers,  perceiving  his  intention,  took
the  innocent  Chandrasvamin  to  the  village  and  fettered  him.
And  he,  learning  from  them  that  he  was  fettered  in  order
to  be  offered  as  a  victim,  lamented  for  his  two  children  that
he  had  left  in  the  wilderness.  "  Ah,  Mahlpala  !  Ah,  dear
Chandravati !  Why  did  I  foolishly  abandon  you  in  the
wilderness  and  make  you  the  prey  of  lions  and  tigers  ?  And
I  have  brought  myself  also  into  a  position  where  I  am  sure
to  be  slain  by  bandits,  and  there  is  no  escape  for  me."

While  he  was  thus  lamenting  in  his  terror  he  saw,  to  his
delight,  the  sun.  And  exclaiming,  "  Ah  !  I  will  fling  aside
bewilderment  and  fly  for  refuge  to  my  own  lord,"  the  Brah-
man began  to  praise  the  sun  in  the  following  verses  :  "  Hail
to  thee,  O  Lord !  the  brightness  residing  in  the  near  and  in
the  remote  ether,  that  dispersest  the  internal  and  external
darkness.  Thou  art  Vishnu,  pervading  the  three  worlds ;
thou  art  Siva,  the  treasure-house  of  blessings ;   thou  art  the


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

supreme  lord  of  creatures,  calling  into  activity  the  sleeping
universe.  Thou  deposest  thy  brightness  in  fire  and  in  the
moon,  out  of  pity,  as  it  were,  saying  :  '  Let  these  two  dull
things  shine,'  and  so  thou  dispellest  the  night.  When  thou
risest  the  Rakshasas  disperse,  the  Dasyus  have  no  power,
and  the  virtuous  rejoice.1  So,  thou  matchless  illuminator
of  the  three  worlds,  deliver  me,  who  take  refuge  with  thee.
Disperse  this  darkness  of  my  grief,  have  mercy  upon  me."

When  the  Brahman  had  devoutly  praised  the  sun  with
these  and  other  similar  hymns,  a  voice  was  heard  from
heaven :  "  Chandrasvamin,  I  am  pleased  with  thee,  thou
shalt  not  be  put  to  death,  and  by  my  favour  thou  shalt  be
reunited  with  thy  wife  and  children."  When  the  divine  voice
had  said  this  to  Chandrasvamin,  he  recovered  his  spirits,  and
remained  in  a  state  of  tranquillity,  being  supplied  with
bathing  requisites  and  food  by  the  Savaras.

And  in  the  meanwhile  the  boy  Mahipala,  left  in  the
wilderness  with  his  sister,  as  his  father  did  not  return,
remained  lamenting  bitterly,  supposing  that  some  calamity
The  Children  had  befallen  him.  And  in  this  state  he  was
are  rescued  beheld  by  a  great  merchant,  of  the  name  of
Sarthadhara,  who  came  that  way,  and  the  merchant  asked
him  what  had  happened  to  him.  And  feeling  compassion,
he  consoled  the  boy,  and  observing  that  he  had  auspicious
marks,  he  took  him  and  his  sister  to  his  own  country.  There
that  Mahipala  lived  in  the  house  of  that  merchant,  who
looked  upon  him  with  all  the  affection  of  a  father  for  his  son  ;
and  though  a  boy,  he  was  occupied  in  the  rites  of  the  sacred
fire.

But  one  day  the  minister  of  the  King  Taravarman,  who
lived  in  the  city  of  Tarapura,  the  excellent  Brahman  Anan-
tasvamin,  came  that  way  on  business,  with  his  elephants,
horses  and  foot-soldiers,  and  entered  the  house  of  that
merchant,  being  a  friend  of  his.  After  he  had  rested,  he  saw
the  handsome  boy  Mahipala,  engaged  in  muttering  prayers
and  in  sacrificing  to  the  fire,  and  asked  his  story ;  then  the
Brahman  minister,  finding  that  the  boy  was  of  his  own  caste,
as  he  had  no  children,  begged  the  boy  and  his  sister  from

1  Cf.  for  the  idea  Richard  II,  Act  III,  sc.  2,  line  41  et  seq.


CHANDRASVAMIN  IS  RELEASED  223

the  merchant.  Then  the  merchant,  who  was  a  Vaisya,  gave
him  the  children,  and  Anantasvamin  went  with  them  to
Tarapura.  There  Mahlpala  remained  in  the  house  of  that
minister,  which  abounded  in  wealth  on  account  of  its  master's
knowledge,  and  was  treated  by  him  as  a  son.

And  in  the  meanwhile  Simhadamshtra,  the  King  of  the
Bhillas,  came  to  Chandrasvamin,  who  was  in  captivity  in
that  village,  and  said  to  him  :  "  Brahman,  I  have  been
ordered  in  a  dream  by  the  sun-god  not  to  slay  you,  but  to
set  you  free,  after  doing  you  honour.  So  rise  up  and  go
where  you  please."  After  saying  this  he  let  him  go,  giving
him  pearls  and  musk,  and  supplying  him  with  an  escort
through  the  forest.

And  Chandrasvamin,  being  thus  set  at  liberty,  not  find-
ing his  son  and  his  younger  sister  in  the  wood,  wandered  in
search  of  them ;  and  as  he  wandered  he  found  a  city  named
Th  K'  Jalapura  on  the  shore  of  the  sea,  and  entered

searches  for  as  a  guest  the  house  of  a  certain  Brahman.
his  lost  There,    after    he    had    taken    refreshment    and

then  told  his  story,  the  Brahman,  the  master  of
the  house,  said  to  him :  "A  merchant  named  Kanaka-
varman  came  here  some  days  ago ;  he  found  in  the  forest  a
Brahman  boy  with  his  sister,  and  he  has  gone  off  with  those
two  very  handsome  children  to  the  great  island  of  Narikela,
but  he  did  not  tell  his  name."  When  Chandrasvamin  heard
that,  he  made  up  his  mind  that  those  children  were  his,  and
he  determined  to  go  to  that  beautiful  island.

And  after  he  had  spent  the  night,  and  looked  about
him,  he  made  acquaintance  with  a  merchant  named  Vishnu-
varman,  who  was  about  to  go  to  the  isle  of  Narikela.  And
with  him  he  embarked  in  a  ship,  and  went  across  the  sea  to
the  island,  out  of  love  for  his  children.  When  he  began  to
inquire  there,  the  merchants  who  lived  there  said  to  him  :
"It  is  true  that  a  merchant  named  Kanakavarman  did
come  here  with  two  beautiful  Brahman  children  whom  he
found  in  a  wood.  But  he  has  now  gone  with  them  to  the
island  of  Kataha."  When  the  Brahman  heard  that,  he  went
in  a  ship  with  the  merchant  Danavarman  to  this  island  of
Kataha.     There  he  heard  that  the  merchant  Kanakavarman


224  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

hail  •joiio  from  that  island  to  an  island  named  KarpQra.
In  the  same  way  lie  visited  in  turn  the  islands  of  Karpura,
Suvarna  and  Siinhala  with  merchants,  hut  he  did  not  find  the
merchant  whom  he  was  in  search  of.1  Hut  from  the  people
of  Siinhala  he  heard  that  that  merchant  Kanakavarman
had  gone  to  his  own  city,  named  Chitrakuta.

Then  Chandrasvfunin  went  with  a  merchant  named
Kotisvara  to  Chitrakuta.  crossing  the  sea  in  his  ship.  And
in  that  city  he  found  the  merchant  Kanakavarman,  and
longing  for  his  children,  he  told  him  the  whole  story.  Then
Kanakavarman,  when  he  saw  the  cause  of  his  grief,  showed
him  the  children,  whom  he  had  found  in  the  forest  and
brought  away.  Hut  when  Chandrasvamin  looked  at  those
two  children  he  saw  that  they  were  not  his,  but  some  other
children.  Then  he.  being  afflicted  with  tears  and  grief,
lamented  in  desperate  mood  :  "  Alas  !  though  I  have
wandered  so  far  I  have  not  found  my  son  or  my  daughter.
Malignant  Providence,  like  a  wicked  master,  has  held  out
hopes  to  me.  but  has  not  fulfilled  them,  and  has  made  me
wander  far  and  wide  on  a  false  surmise.''

While  he  was  indulging  in  such  lamentations  he  was  at
last,  though  with  difficulty,  consoled  by  Kanakavarman,  and
exclaimed   in    his  grief :    "  If  I   do   not   find  those  children

1  See  my  note  on  Kataha  in  Vol.  I.  p.  I55nl.  In  the  present  passage  we
read  of  the  island  of  Kataha  and  of  various  neighbouring  islands.  In  a  letter
to  me  on  the  subject  Mr  C.  ().  Hlagden  points  out  that  we  are  not  bound  to
assume  that  the  writer  of  the  passage  had  a  perfect  knowledge  of  the  precise
relative  geographical  positions  of  these  islands — lie  may  have  known  more  or
less  vaguely  that  these  places  were  all  in  the  Indonesian  region.  Karpura-
dvipa  is  the  Camphor  Island,  either  Borneo,  or  the  north  (especially  the
north-west  side)  of  Sumatra,  where  lies  the  port  Barus,  from  which  to  this
d  iv  the  Malays  name  the  true  camphor  Kapur  Hants.  Blagden  considers  this
latter  region  the  most  probable  of  the  two.  Suvarn a-dvipa  is  a  recognised
epijjraphicallv  attested  name  tor  South  and  Central  Sumatra,  from  which
there  was  a  large  export  of  gold.  That  two  regions  in  different  parts  of  this
biir  island  should  be  mentioned  in  our  text  as  separate  islands  is  nothing
remarkable.  The  same  tiling  happened  with  Sunda  (West  Java)  and  Java
I  the  rest  of  the  island)  in  the  case  of  the  early  Portuguese  travellers  and
geographers.

See  further  (i.  Ferrand,  L' Empire  sumatranais  de  Crlvijaya,  and  notes  by
(f.  Coedes  when  reviewing  it  in  the  Bulletin  de  FEcole  Francaise  d'extreme  ()riciitr
vol.  xxiii,  luvj  '.,  p.   V~n.  —  n.m.p.


THE  DIVINE  MOTHERS  225

in  a  year,  by  wandering  over  the  earth,  I  will  abandon  the
body  by  austerities  on  the  bank  of  the  River  Ganges. M
When  he  said  this,  a  certain  seer  there  said  to  him  :  "  Go,
you  will  recover  your  children  by  the  favour  of  Narayani.''
When  he  heard  that,  he  was  delighted,  remembering  the
compassion  shown  him  by  the  sun,  and  he  departed  from
that  city,  honoured  by  the  merchants.

Then,  searching  the  lands  which  were  royal  grants  to
Brahmans,  and  the  villages  and  the  towns,  he  reached  one
evening  a  wood  with  many  tall  trees  in  it.  There  he  made
a  meal  on  fruits  and  water,  and  climbed  up  into  a  tree  to
spend  the  night  there,  dreading  the  lions,  and  tigers,  and
other  noisome  beasts.  And  being  sleepless,  he  saw  in  the
night  at  the  foot  of  the  tree  a  great  body  of  divine  Mothers
assembled,  with  Narayani  at  their  head,1  waiting  for  the
arrival  of  the  god  Bhairava,2  having  brought  with  them  all
kinds  of  presents  suited  to  their  resources.  And  thereupon
the  Mothers  asked  Narayani  why  the  god  delayed,  but
she  laughed  and  gave  no  reason.  And  being  persistently
questioned  by  them,  she  thus  answered  them :

75a.  Prabhakara  and  Vidyddharl

Although  this  story  makes  me  feel  shame,  still,  friends,
I  will  tell  it.  There  is  here,  in  the  city  of  Surapura,  a  king
named  Surasena.  He  has  a  daughter  renowned  for  beauty,
named  Vidyadhari.

When  it  was  time  for  her  to  be  given  in  marriage,  the
king  heard  that  a  son  of  King  Vimala,  named  Prabhakara,
was  equal  to  her  in  beauty.  While  the  king  was  willing  to
give  her  to  Prabhakara,  Vimala  also  learned  that  Surasena's
daughter  was  worthy  of  his  son.  Thereupon  Vimala,  by  the
mouth  of  an  envoy,  asked  Surasena  to  bestow  his  daughter

1  For  an  account  of  the  worship  of  the  Great  Mothers  see  Crooke,
Popular  Religion  and  Folk-Lore  of  Northern  India,  vol.  i,  pp.  111-1 12. — n.m.p.

2  A  name  of  Siva,  meaning  "  fearful."  Eight  or  twelve  forms  are  recog-
nised in  the  classical  side  of  his  worship.  The  popular  modern  side  of  his
character,  however,  is  derived  from  the  village  god  Bhairon,  who  in  time
appropriated  the  attributes  of  Bhairava.  For  details  see  E.  Washburn.
Hopkins,  "  Bhairava,"  Hastings'  Ency.  Rel.  Eth.,  vol.  ii,  pp.  538-539. — n.m.p.

vol.  IV.  p


226  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

Vidyadhari  upon  his  son.  Surasena,  for  his  part,  his  desires
being  attained,  gave  with  due  ceremony  his  daughter  to
Prabhakara.

Then,  on  reaching  her  father-in-law's  city,  named  Vimala-
pura,  Vidyadhari  at  night  went  with  her  husband  to  their
couch.  There  her  husband'  Prabhakara  fell  asleep  without
embracing  her  as  she  desired,  and  when  she  observed  him  she
saw  him  to  be  a  eunuch.  "  Alas  !  I  am  undone  !  How
have  I  come  by  a  eunuch  as  my  lord  ?  "  Grieved  in  her
mind  by  such  thoughts,  the  princess  passed  the  night.  She
then  wrote  a  letter  to  her  father,  saying,  "  How  is  it  that
you  have,  without  making  inquiry,  given  me  to  a  eunuch  ?  '
and  dispatched  it  to  him.  On  reading  the  letter  her  father
became  angry  with  Vimala,  thinking  that  he  had  deceived
him  by  a  trick.  So  King  Surasena  in  the  pride  of  his  power
sent  to  King  Vimala  a  message  by  a  letter,  saying  :  "As
you  have  induced  me  by  fraud  to  give  my  daughter  to  your
son,  who  is  a  eunuch,  suffer  the  result  thereof.  Behold,  I
will  come  and  slay  you."

Vimala  with  his  ministers,  understanding  the  purport
of  the  letter,  took  counsel  together,  but  could  discover  no
way  of  meeting  him,  as  he  was  invincible.  Then  a  minister
named  Pingadatta  said  to  Vimala  :  "  There  is  one  plan  only
in  this  case  ;  carry  it  out,  your  Majesty,  and  all  will  be  well.
There  is  a  Yaksha  named  Sthulasiras,  and  I  know  a  charm
to  propitiate  him,  by  which  he  bestows  the  boon  that  one
desires.  By  means  of  this  charm  acquired  by  me,  propitiate
now  the  Yaksha  and  ask  him  for  genitals  for  your  son  :  the
strife  will  calm  down  at  once."

Thus  addressed  by  the  minister,  the  king  took  from  him
the  charm,  propitiated  the  Yaksha,  and  asked  him  for
genitals  for  his  son.  The  Yaksha  then  giving  them,  his  son
Prabhakara  became  a  man,  but  the  Yaksha  became  a
eunuch.  Vidyadhari,  seeing  Prabhakara  to  be  a  man,  en-
joyed the  delights  of  love  with  her  husband,  and  reflected :
"  I  was  misled  by  the  fault  of  pride  :  my  husband  is  not  a
eunuch,  he  is  a  perfect  man ;  there  can  be  no  other  opinion
about  it."  Having  made  this  observation,  she  wrote  again
to  her  father  to  this  effect,  and  thereby  he  became  calmed.


BHAIRAVA  227

On  learning  of  this  event  the  god  Bhairava,  being  angry
now,  caused  the  Guhyaka  Sthula£iras  to  be  brought  to
him,  and  cursed  him,  saying :  "  As  you  have  become  a
eunuch  by  giving  up  your  genitals,  so  remain  a  eunuch
throughout  your  life,  and  let  Prabhakara  be  a  man."  Thus
the  Guhyaka,  become  a  eunuch,  is  now  suffering  grief,  and
Prabhakara  has  become  a  man,  so  as  to  enjoy  pleasure.
And  on  account  of  that  business  some  delay  has  taken  place
about  his  arrival,  but  know  that  he  will  be  here  soon.


75.  Story  of  the  Brahman  Chandrasvamin,  his  Son  Mahipdla,
and  his  Daughter  Chandravati

While  Narayani  was  saying  this  to  the  Mothers  there
came  there  Bhairava,  the  lord  of  the  company  of  Mothers.
And  he,  having  been  honoured  with  gifts  by  all  the
Mothers,  spent  some  time  in  dancing,  and  sported  with
the  witches.1

And  while  Chandrasvamin  was  surveying  that  from  the
summit  of  a  tree  he  saw  a  slave  belonging  to  Narayani,  and
she  saw  him.  And,  as  chance  would  have  it,  they  fell  in
love  with  one  another,  and  the  goddess  Narayani  perceived
their  feelings.  And  when  Bhairava  had  departed,  accom-
panied by  the  witches,  she,  lingering  behind,  summoned
Chandrasvamin,  who  was  on  the  tree.  And  when  he  came
down  she  said  to  him  and  her  slave  :  "  Are  you  in  love
with  one  another  ?  "  And  they  confessed  the  truth,  and  said
they  were,  and  thereupon  she  dismissed  her  anger  and  said
to  Chandrasvamin:  "  I  am  pleased  with  thee  for  confessing
the  truth,  so  I  will  not  curse  thee,  but  I  will  give  thee  this
slave.     Live  in  happiness."

When   the   Brahman   heard   this,  he   said :     "  Goddess,

1  He  seems  to  correspond  to  the  Junker  Voland,  or  Herr  Urian  of  the
Walpurgisnacht  (see  Bayard  Taylor's  notes  to  his  translation  of  Goethe's
Faust).  See  also,  for  the  assembly  of  witches  and  their  uncanny  president,
Birlinger,  Aus  Schwaben,  pp.  323  and  372.  In  Bartsch's  Sagen,  M'drchen  und
Gebrduche  aus  Meklenburg,  pp.  11-44,  will  be  found  the  recorded  confessions
of  many  witches,  who  deposed  to  having  danced  with  the  Teutonic  Bhairava
on  the  Blocksberg.  The  Mothers  of  the  second  part  of  Faust  probably  come
from  Greece.


228  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

though  my  mind  is  fickle,  I  hold  it  in  check  ;  I  do  not
touch  a  strange  woman.  For  this  is  the  nature  of  the  mind,
but  bodily  sin  should  be  avoided."  When  that  firm-souled
Brahman  said  this,  the  goddess  said  to  him :  "I  am  pleased
with  thee,  and  I  give  thee  this  boon :  thou  shalt  quickly  find
thy  children.  And  receive  from  me  this  unfading  lotus  that
destroys  poison."1  When  the  goddess  had  said  this,  she
gave  the  Brahman  Chandrasvamin  a  lotus  and  disappeared
from  his  eyes.

And  he,  having  received  the  lotus,  set  out,  at  the  end  of
the  night,  and  roaming  along  reached  the  city  of  Tarapura,
where  his  son  Mahipala  and  his  daughter  were  living  in  the
Chandrasvamin  h°use  of  that  Brahman  minister  Anantasvamin.
finds  his  There  he  went  and  recited  at  the  door  of  that

Children  minister,  in  order  to  obtain  food,  having  heard

that  he  was  hospitable.  And  the  minister,  having  been
informed  by  the  doorkeepers,  had  him  introduced  by
them,  and  when  he  saw  that  he  was  learned,  invited  him
to  dinner.  And  when  he  was  invited,  having  heard  that
there  was  a  lake  there,  named  Anantahrada,  that  washed
away  sin,  he  went  to  bathe  there.  While  he  was  returning
after  bathing,  the  Brahman  heard  all  round  him  in  the
city  a  cry  of  grief.  And  when  he  asked  the  cause  the
people  said :  "  There  is  in  this  city  a  Brahman  boy,  of
the  name  of  Mahipala,  who  was  found  in  the  forest  by  the
merchant  Sarthadhara.  The  minister  Anantasvamin,  ob-
serving that  he  had  auspicious  marks,  with  some  difficulty
begged  him  and  his  sister  from  the  merchant,  and  brought
them  both  here.  And  being  without  a  son,  he  has  adopted
the  boy,  whose  excellent  qualities  have  endeared  him  to
King  Taravarman  and  his  people.  To-day  he  has  been
bitten  by  a  poisonous  snake ;  hence  the  cry  of  grief  in  the
city."

When  Chandrasvamin  heard  that,   he  said  to  himself :

4  This  must  be  my  son."    And  reflecting  thus,  he  went  to

the  house  of  that  minister  as  fast  as  he  could.     There  he

saw  his  son  surrounded  by  all,   and  recognised  him,   and

rejoiced,  having  in  his  hand  the  lotus  that  was  an  antidote

1  For  a  short  note  on  poison-detectors  see  Vol.  I,  p.  HOn1. — n.m.p.


MAHlPALA'S  RECOVERY  229

to  snake-poison.  And  he  put  that  lotus  to  the  nose  of
that  Mahipala,  and  the  moment  he  smelt  it  he  was  free
from  the  effects  of  poison.  And  Mahipala  rose  up,  and  was
as  one  who  had  just  awoke  from  sleep,1  and  all  the  people
in  the  city  and  the  king  rejoiced.  And  Chandrasvamin
was  honoured  with  wealth  by  Anantasvamin,  the  king  and
the  citizens,  who  said  :  "  This  is  some  incarnation  of  the
divinity."  And  he  remained  in  the  house  of  the  minister
in  great  comfort,  honoured  by  him,  and  he  saw  his  son
Mahipala  and  his  daughter  Chandravatl.  And  the  three,
though  they  mutually  recognised  one  another,  said  nothing ;
for  the  wise  have  regard  to  what  is  excellent,  and  do  not
discover  themselves  out  of  season.

Then  the  King  Taravarman,  being  highly  pleased  with
the  virtues  of  Mahipala,  gave  him  his  daughter  Bandhumatl.
Then  that  king,  after  giving  him  the  half  of  the  kingdom,
being  pleased  with  him,  laid  the  whole  burden  of  the  king-
dom upon  him,  as  he  had  no  other  son.  And  Mahipala,  after
he  had  obtained  the  kingdom,  acknowledged  his  father,  and
gave  him  a  position  next  to  his,  and  so  lived  in  happiness.

One  day  his  father  Chandrasvamin  said  to  him  :  "  Come,
let  us  go  to  our  own  country  to  bring  your  mother.  For  if
she  hears  that  you  are  the  occupant  of  a  throne,  having  been
long  afflicted,  she  might  think,  '  How  comes  it  that  my  son
has  forgotten  me  ?  '  and  might  curse  you  in  her  anger.  But
one  who  is  cursed  by  his  father  and  mother  does  not  long
enjoy  prosperity.  In  proof  of  this  hear  this  tale  of  what
happened  long  ago  to  the  merchant's  son.


75b.  Chakra  and  the  Iron  Wheel 2

In  the  city  of  Dhavala  there  was  a  merchant's  son  named
Chakra.     He    went   on  a  trading  voyage  to  Svarnadvipa

1  Mukta  for  yukta,  which  is  clearly  a  misprint.

2  This  story  is  identical  with  the  story  of  "  The  Merchant  who  struck  his
Mother,"  as  given  by  the  Rev.  S.  Beal  in  the  Antiquary  for  September  1880.
It  is  also  found  in  the  Avadana  Sataka  :  see  Dr  R.  L.  Mitra's  Account  of  the
Buddhist  Literature  of  Nepal,  p.  28,  where  the  above  MS.  is  described.  See
also  Dr  R.  Morris'  remarks  in  The  Academy  of  the  27th  August  1881.


230  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

against  the  will  of  his  parents.  There  he  gained  great
wealth  in  five  years,  and  in  order  to  return  embarked  on  the
sea  in  a  ship  laden  with  jewels.  And  when  his  voyage  was
very  nearly  at  an  end  the  sea  rose  up  against  him,  troubled
with  a  great  wind,  and  with  clouds  and  rain.  And  the  huge
billows  broke  his  vessel,  as  if  angry  because  he  had  come
against  the  wish  of  his  parents.  Some  of  the  passengers
were  whelmed  in  the  waves;  others  were  eaten  by  sea-
monsters.  But  Chakra,  as  his  allotted  term  of  life  had  not
run  out,  was  carried  to  the  shore  and  flung  up  there  by  the
waves.  While  he  was  lying  there  in  a  state  of  exhaustion
he  saw,  as  if  in  a  dream,  a  man  of  black  and  terrible  appear-
ance come  to  him,  with  a  noose  in  his  hand.  Chakra  was
caught  in  the  noose  by  that  man,  who  took  him  up  and
dragged  him  a  long  distance  to  a  court  presided  over  by  a
man  on  a  throne.  By  the  order  of  the  occupant  of  the
throne  the  merchant's  son  was  carried  off  by  that  noose-
bearer  and  flung  into  a  cell  of  iron.

In  that  cell  Chakra  saw  a  man  being  tortured  by  means
of  an  iron  wheel 1  on  his  head,  that  revolved  incessantly.
And  Chakra  asked  him  :  "  Who  are  you,  by  what  crime  did
you  incur  this,  and  how  do  you  manage  to  continue  alive  ?  "
And  the  man  answered :  "  I  am  a  merchant's  son  named
Khadga,  and  because  I  did  not  obey  the  commands  of  my
parents  they  were  angry,  and  in  wrath  laid  this  curse  upon
me  2  :  '  Because,  wicked  son,  you  torture  us  like  a  hot  wheel
placed  on  the  head,  therefore  such  shall  be  your  punishment. '
When  they  had  said  this  they  ceased,  and  as  I  wept  they
said  to  me  :  '  Weep  not,  your  punishment  shall  only  last
for  one  month.'  When  I  heard  that,  I  spent  the  day  in  grief,
and  at  night  when  I  was  in  bed  I  saw,  as  if  in  a  dream,  a

1  A  similar  transferable  wheel  is  found  in  the  PaRchatantra,  Book  V,
third  story,  Benfey's  Pantschatantra,  vol.  ii,  p.  331.

1  Cf.  Ralston's  Russian  Folk-Tales,  p.  358:  "Great  stress  is  laid  in  the
skazkas  and  legends  upon  the  terrible  power  of  a  parent's  curse.  The  hasty
word  of  a  father  or  mother  will  condemn  even  an  innocent  child  to  slavery
among  devils,  and  when  it  is  once  uttered  it  is  irrevocable."  Throughout  the
present  work  curses  appear  to  be  irrevocable,  but  susceptible  of  modification
and  limitation.  See  Waldau's  Bbhmische  M'drchen,  p.  537,  and  the  remarks  of
Preller  in  his  Griechische  Mythologie,  vol.  ii,  p.  345.


THE  REWARD  OF  COMPASSION  231

terrible  man  come.  He  took  me  off  and  thrust  me  by  force
into  this  iron  cell,  and  he  placed  on  my  head  this  burning
and  ever- revolving  wheel.  This  was  my  parents'  curse,
hence  I  do  not  die.  And  the  month  is  at  an  end  to-day;
still  I  am  not  set  free."

When  Khadga  said  that,  Chakra  in  pity  answered  him :
"  I  too  did  not  obey  my  parents,  for  I  went  abroad  to  get
wealth  against  their  will,  and  they  pronounced  against  me
the  curse  that  my  wealth,  when  acquired,  should  perish.  So
I  lost  in  the  sea  my  whole  wealth,  that  I  had  acquired  in  a
foreign  island.  My  case  is  the  same  as  yours.  So  what  is
the  use  of  my  life  ?  Place  this  wheel  on  my  head.  Let  your
curse,  Khadga,  depart."  When  Chakra  said  this,  a  voice  was
heard  in  the  air  :  "  Khadga,  thou  art  released,  so  place  this
wheel  on  the  head  of  Chakra."  When  Khadga  heard  this,  he
placed  the  wheel  on  the  head  of  Chakra,  and  was  conveyed
by  some  invisible  being  to  his  parents'  house.

There  he  remained  without  disobeying  again  the  orders
of  his  parents  ;  but  Chakra  put  that  wheel  upon  his  head
and  then  spake  thus  :  "  May  other  sinners  also  on  the  earth
be  released  from  the  result  of  their  sins ;  until  all  sins  are
cancelled,  may  this  wheel  revolve  on  my  head."  When  the
resolute  Chakra  said  this,  the  gods  in  heaven,  being  pleased,
rained  flowers,  and  thus  addressed  him  :  "  Bravo  !  Bravo  !
Man  of  noble  spirit,  this  compassion  has  cancelled  thy  sin.
Go;  thou  shalt  possess  inexhaustible  wealth."  When  the
gods  said  this,  that  iron  wheel  fell  from  the  head  of  Chakra
and  disappeared  somewhere.  Then  a  Vidyadhara  youth
descended  from  heaven  and  gave  him  a  valuable  treasure  of
jewels,  sent  by  Indra,  pleased  with  his  self-abnegation,  and
taking  Chakra  in  his  arms,  carried  him  to  his  city  named
Dhavala,  and  departed  as  he  had  come.  Then  Chakra
delighted  his  relations  by  his  arrival  at  the  house  of  his
parents,  and,  after  telling  his  adventures,  remained  there
without  falling  away  from  virtue.


282  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

75.  Story  of  the  Brahman  Chandrasvdmin,  his  Son  Mahipclla,
and  his  Daughter  Chandravati

When  Chandrasvamin  had  told  this  story  he  said  again
to  Mahipala  :  "  Such  evil  fruits  does  opposition  to  one's
parents'  produce,  my  son,  but  devotion  to  them  is  a  wishing-
cow  of  plenty.  In  illustration  of  this  hear  the  following
tale:—

75c.  The  Hermit  and  the  Faithful  Wife

There  was  in  old  time  a  hermit  of  great  austerity,  who
roamed  in  the  forest.  And  one  day  a  hen-crow,  as  he  was
sitting  under  the  shade  of  a  tree,  dropped  dirt  upon  him,  so
he  looked  at  the  crow  with  angry  eyes.  And  the  crow,  as
soon  as  he  looked  at  it,  was  reduced  to  ashes  ;  and  so  the
hermit  conceived  a  vainglorious  confidence  in  the  might  of
his  austerities.

Once  on  a  time,  in  a  certain  city,  the  hermit  entered  the
house  of  a  Brahman  and  asked  his  wife  for  alms.  And
that  wife,  who  was  devoted  to  her  husband,  answered  him  :
"  Wait  a  little,  I  am  attending  upon  my  husband."  Then
he  looked  at  her  with  an  angry  look,  and  she  laughed  at
him  and  said:  "Remember,1  I  am  not  a  crow."  When  the
hermit  heard  that,  he  sat  down  in  a  state  of  astonishment,
and  remained  wondering  how  she  could  possibly  have  come
to  know  of  the  fate  of  the  crow.  Then,  after  she  had  attended
upon  her  husband  in  the  oblation  to  the  fire  and  in  other
rites,  the  virtuous  woman  brought  alms  and  approached
that  hermit.  Then  the  hermit  joined  his  hands  in  the
attitude  of  supplication  and  said  to  that  virtuous  woman  :
"  How  did  you  come  to  know  of  my  adventure  with  the
crow  in  the  forest  ?  Tell  me  first,  and  then  I  will  receive
your  alms."  When  the  hermit  said  this,  that  wife,  who
adored  her  husband,  said  :  "I  know  of  no  virtue  other  than
devotion  to  my  husband ;  accordingly  by  his  favour  I
have  such  power  of  discernment.  But  go  and  visit  a  man
here  who  lives  by  selling  flesh,  whose  name  is  Dharma-
vyadha ;  from  him  thou  shalt  learn  the  secret  of  blessedness

1   Perhaps  we  should  read  mrishyalam,  "forgive  me,"  "be  patient."


THE  MEANS  OF  ACQUIRING  PURITY         283

free  from  the  consciousness  of  self."  The  hermit,  thus  ad-
dressed by  the  all-knowing  faithful  wife,  took  the  portion  of
a  guest  and,  after  bowing  before  her,  departed.

The  next  day  he  went  in  search  of  that  Dharmavyadha,
and  approached  him  as  he  was  selling  flesh  in  his  shop.  And
as  soon  as  Dharmavyadha  saw  the  hermit,  he  said  :  "  Have
Dharmavyadhay°u  Deen  sent  here,  Brahman,  by  that  faithful
the  Righteous  wife?"  When  the  hermit  heard  that,  he  said
Seller  of  Flesh*  tQ  Dharmavyadha  in  his  astonishment:  "How
come  you  to  have  such  knowledge,  being  a  seller  of  flesh  ?  "
When  the  hermit  said  this,  Dharmavyadha  answered  him  :
"  I  am  devoted  to  my  father  and  mother  ;  that  is  my  only
object  in  life.  I  bathe  after  I  have  provided  them  with  the
requisites  for  bathing ;  I  eat  after  I  have  fed  them  ;  I  lie
down  after  I  have  seen  them  to  bed ;  thus  it  comes  to  pass
that  I  have  such  knowledge.  And  being  engaged  in  the
duties  of  my  profession,  I  sell  only  for  my  subsistence  the
flesh  of  deer  and  other  animals  slain  by  others,  not  from
desire  of  wealth.  And  I  and  that  faithful  wife  do  not  in-
dulge self-consciousness,  the  impediment  of  knowledge,  so  the
knowledge  of  both  of  us  is  free  from  hindrance.  Therefore
do  you,  observing  the  vow  of  a  hermit,  perform  your  own
duties,  without  giving  way  to  self- consciousness,  with  a  view
to  acquiring  purity,  in  order  that  you  may  quickly  attain
the  supreme  brightness."

When  he  had  been  thus  instructed  by  Dharmavyadha,
he  went  to  his  house  and  observed  his  practice,  and  after-
wards he  returned  satisfied  to  the  forest.  And  by  his  advice
he  became  perfected,  and  the  faithful  wife  and  Dharmavyadha
also  attained  perfection  by  such  performance  of  their  duties.

75.  Story  of  the  Brahman  Chandrasvamin,  his  Son  Mahipdla,
and  his  Daughter  Chandravati

"  Such  is  the  power  of  those  who  are  devoted  to  hus-
band or  father  and  mother.  So  come,  visit  that  mother
who  longs  for  a  sight  of  you."     When  thus  addressed  by

1  This  character  is  probably  taken  from  the  Mahahharata  (see  Dowson's
Dictionary  of  Hindu  Mythology,  p.  90).


284  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

his  father  t'handrasvfunin,  Mahipala  promised  to  go  to  his
native  land  to  please  Ins  mother.  And  he  disclosed  that  of
his  own  accord  to  Anantasvamin,  his  spiritual  father,  and
when  he  took  upon  him  the  burden  of  his  kingdom  the  king
set  out  with  his  natural  father  by  night.  And  at  last  he
reached  his  own  country,  and  refreshed  his  mother  Deva-
mati  with  a  sight  of  him.  as  the  spring  refreshes  the  female
cuckoo.  And  Mahipala  stayed  there  some  time  with  his
mother,  being  welcomed  by  his  relations,  together  with  his
father,  who  related  their  adventures.

In  the  meanwhile  in  Tfiriipura  the  princess,  his  wife
RandhumatI,  who  was  sleeping  within  the  house,  woke  up
;ii  the  close  of  night.  And  discovering  that  her  husband
had  gone  somewhere,  she  was  distressed  at  her  lonely  state,
and  could  not  find  solace  in  the  palace,  the  garden  or  any
other  place.  Hut  she  remained  weeping,  shedding  tears
that  seemed  to  double  her  necklace,  intent  on  lamentation
only,  desiring  relief  by  death.  Hut  the  minister  Ananta-
svamin came  and  comforted  her  with  hope-inspiring  wrords,
saying  :  "  Hefore  your  husband  went  he  said  to  me  :  '  I  am
going  away  on  some  business  and  I  will  quickly  return/
So  do  not  weep,  my  daughter."

Then  she  recovered  her  self-control,  though  with  difficulty.
Then  she  remained  continually  honouring  with  gifts  excel-
lent Brahmans,  that  came  from  a  foreign  country,  in  order
to  obtain  news  of  her  husband.  And  she  asked  a  poor
Brahman,  named  Sangamadatta,  who  came  for  a  gift,  for
tidings  of  her  husband,  having  told  him  his  name  and  the
signs  by  which  to  recognise  him.  Then  the  Brahman  said  :
i  have  never  beheld  a  man  of  that  kind  ;  but,  Queen,  you
must  not  give  way  to  excessive  anxiety  on  this  account.
Doers  of  righteous  actions  eventually  obtain  reunion  with
loved  ones,  and  in  proof  of  that  I  will  tell  you  a  wonder  which
I   saw.      Listen.


75d.   The  Treacherous  Pdsupata  Ascetic  and  King  Tribhiwana

As  I   was  wandering  round  all  the  holy  places  I  came  to
the  Manasa  lake  on  the  Himalayas,  and  in  it  I  saw,  as  in  a


THE  ADVENTURES  OF  KING  TRIBHUVANA    235

mirror,1  a  house  composed  of  jewels,  and  from  that  building
there  came  out  suddenly  a  man  with  a  sword  in  his  hand,
and  he  ascended  the  bank  of  the  lake,  accompanied  by  a
troop  of  celestial  females.  There  he  amused  himself  with
the  females  in  a  garden  in  the  recreation  of  drinking,  and  I
was  looking  on  from  a  distance  unobserved,  full  of  interest
in  the  spectacle.  In  the  meanwhile  a  man  of  prepossess-
ing appearance  came  there  from  somewhere  or  other.  And
when  he  met  me  I  told  him  what  I  had  seen.  And  with
much  interest  I  pointed  out  to  him  that  man  from  a  dis-
tance, and  when  he  beheld  him  he  told  me  his  own  story  in
the  following  words  : —

"  I  am  a  king  named  Tribhuvana,  in  the  city  of  Tribhu-
vana.  There  a  certain  Pa£upata  ascetic  for  a  long  time  paid
me  court.  And  being  asked  the  reason  by  me,  he  at  once
asked  me  to  be  his  ally  in  obtaining  a  sword  concealed  in  a
cavern,  and  I  agreed  to  that.  Then  the  Pasupata  ascetic
went  with  me  at  night,  and  having,  by  means  of  a  burnt-
offering  and  other  rites,  discovered  an  opening  in  the  earth,
the  ascetic  said  to  me  :  '  Hero  !  enter  thou  first,  and  after
thou  hast  obtained  the  sword,  come  out,  and  cause  me  also
to  enter ;  make  a  compact  with  me  to  do  this. '  When  he
said  this,  I  made  that  compact  with  him,  and  quickly  entered
the  opening,  and  found  a  palace  of  jewels.2  And  the  chief
of  the  Asura  maidens  who  dwelt  there  came  out  from  the
palace,  and  out  of  love  led  me  in,  and  there  gave  me  a  sword.
She  said  :  *  Keep  this  sword,  which  confers  the  power  of
flying  in  the  air,  and  bestows  all  magical  faculties.'  Then  I
remained  there  with  her.  But  I  remembered  my  compact,
and  going  out  with  the  sword  in  my  hand  I  introduced  that
ascetic  into  the  palace  of  the  Asuras  by  that  opening.

"There  I  dwelt  with  the  first  Asura  lady,  who  was  sur-
rounded by  her  attendants,  and  he  dwelt  with  the  second.
One  day  when  I  was  stupefied  with  drinking  the  ascetic
treacherously  took  away  from  my  side  the  sword  and  grasped

1  I  have  followed  the  Sanskrit  College  MS.,  which  gives  adaria.

*  We  naturally  think  of  Aladdin.  For  numerous  variants  see  Chauvin,
Bibliographic  des  Ouvrages  Arabes,  v,  pp.  66,  67.  For  a  note  on  mine  And
cave  spirits  see  Crooke,  op.  cit.,  vol.  i,  pp.  282,  283. — n.m.p.


236  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

it  in  his  own  hand.  When  he  had  it  in  his  grasp  he  possessed
great  power,  and  with  his  hand  he  seized  me  and  flung  me
out  of  the  cavern.  Then  I  searched  for  him  for  twelve  years
at  the  mouths  of  caverns,  hoping  that  some  time  I  might
find  him  outside.  And  this  very  day  the  scoundrel  has
presented  himself  to  my  eyes,  sporting  with  that  very  Asura
lady  who  belongs  to  me."

While  the  King  Tribhuvana  was  relating  this  to  me,
O  Queen,  that  ascetic,  stupefied  with  drink,  went  to  sleep.
And  while  he  was  asleep  the  king  went  and  took  the  sword
from  his  side,  and  by  its  operation  he  recovered  celestial
might.  Then  the  hero  woke  up  that  ascetic  with  a  kick,
and  reproached  the  unfortunate  man,  but  did  not  kill  him.
And  then  he  entered  the  palace  with  the  Asura  lady  and  her
attendants,  recovered  again  like  his  own  magic  power.  But
the  ascetic  was  much  grieved  at  having  lost  his  magic  power.
For  the  ungrateful,  though  long  successful,  are  sure  to  fail
at  last.

75.  Story  of  the  Brahman  Chandrasvdmin,  his  Son  Mahipdla,
and  his  Daughter  Chandravati

"  Having  seen  this  with  my  own  eyes,  I  have  now  arrived
here  in  the  course  of  my  wanderings  ;  so  be  assured,  Queen,
that  you  shall  eventually  be  reunited  to  your  beloved,  like
Tribhuvana,  for  the  righteous  do  not  sink."  When  Bandhu-
mati  heard  that  from  the  Brahman  she  was  highly  delighted,
and  made  him  successful  by  giving  him  much  wealth.

And  the  next  day  a  distinguished  Brahman  came  there
from  a  distant  land,  and  Bandhumati  eagerly  asked  him  for
tidings  of  her  husband,  telling  his  name  and  the  tokens  by
which  he  might  be  recognised.  Then  that  Brahman  said  to
her  :  "  Queen,  I  have  not  seen  your  husband  anywhere,  but
I,  who  have  to-day  come  to  your  house,  am  named,  not
without  reason,  the  Brahman  Sumanas,1  so  you  will  quickly
have  your  wishes  satisfied ;  thus  my  heart  tells  me.  And
reunions  do  take  place,  even  of  the  long  separated.  In  proof
of  this  I  will  tell  you  the  following  tale.     Listen,  Queen.

1  I.e.  benevolent,  and  also  satisfied  at  heart.


THE  CELESTIAL  SWAN  237

75  e.  Nala  and  Daniayanti  l

Of  old  time  there  lived  a  king  named  Nala,  whose  beauty,
I  fancy,  so  surpassed  that  of  the  God  of  Love  that  in  disgust
he  offered  his  body  as  a  burnt- offering  in  the  fire  of  the  eye
of  the  enraged  Siva.  He  had  no  wife,  and  when  he  made
inquiries  he  heard  that  Damayanti,  the  daughter  of  Bhima,
the  King  of  Vidarbha,  would  make  him  a  suitable  wife.
And  Bhima,  searching  through  the  world,  found  that  there
was  no  king  except  Nala  fit  to  marry  his  daughter.

In  the  meanwhile  Damayanti  went  down  into  a  tank  in
her  own  city,  to  amuse  herself  in  the  water.  There  the  girl
saw  a  swan  that  had  fed  on  blue  and  white  lotuses,  and  by
a  trick  she  threw  over  it  her  robe  and  made  it  a  prisoner  in
sport.  But  the  celestial  swan,  when  captured,  said  to  her
in  accents  that  she  could  understand  :  "  Princess,  I  will  do
you  a  good  turn ;  let  me  go.  There  is  a  king  of  the  name
of  Nala,  whom  even  the  nymphs  of  heaven  bear  on  their
hearts,  like  a  necklace  strung  with  threads  of  merit.2  You
are  a  wife  fitted  for  him  and  he  is  a  husband  suited  for  you,
so  I  will  be  an  ambassador  of  Love  to  bring  like  to  like.'*
When  she  heard  that,  she  thought  that  the  celestial  swan
was  a  polished  speaker,  and  so  she  let  him  go,  saying  :  "  So
be  it."  And  she  said  :  "I  will  not  choose  any  husband  but
Nala,"  having  her  mind  captivated  by  that  prince,  who  had
entered  by  the  channel  of  her  ear.

And  the  swan  departed  thence  and  quickly  repaired  to
a  tank  resorted  to  by  Nala,  when  bent  on  sporting  in  the
water.  And  Nala,  seeing  that  the  swan  was  beautiful,
took  it  captive  out  of  curiosity  by  throwing  his  robe  over
it  in  sport.  Then  the  swan  said  :  "  Set  me  free,  O  King,
for  I  have  come  to  benefit  you.  Listen,  I  will  tell  you.
There  is  in  Vidarbha  one  Damayanti,  the  daughter  of
King  Bhima,  the  Tilottama 3  of  the  earth,  to  be  desired
even  by  the  gods.  And  she  has  chosen  you  as  her  future
husband,  having  fallen  in  love  with  you  on  account  of  my

1  This  well-known  story  is  fully  treated  in  Appendix  II,  p.  275  etseq. — n.m.p.

2  Sadguna  means  "good  quality,"  also  "good  thread."

3  See  Vol.  II,  p.  14. — n.m.p.


288  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

description  of  your  virtues ;   and  I  have  come  here  to  tell
you."

Nala  was  at  the  same  time  pierced  with  the  words  of
that  excellent  swan,  that  were  brightened  by  the  splendid
object  they  had  in  view,1  and  with  the  sharp  arrows  of  the
god  of  the  flowery  shafts.  And  he  said  to  that  swan  :  "I
am  fortunate,  best  of  birds,  in  that  I  have  been  selected  by
her,  as  if  by  the  incarnate  fulfilment  of  my  wishes."  When
the  swan  had  been  thus  addressed  by  him,  and  let  go,  it
went  and  related  the  whole  occurrence  to  DamayantI,  as  it
took  place,  and  then  went  whither  it  would.

Now  DamayantI  was  longing  for  Nala ;  so,  by  way  of
a  device  to  obtain  him,  she  sent  her  mother  to  ask  her
father  to  appoint  for  her  the  ceremony  of  the  svayamvara.
DamayanR's  And  her  father  Bhima  consented,  and  sent
Svayamvara  messengers  to  all  the  kings  on  the  earth,  to
invite  them  to  the  svayamvara.  And  all  the  kings,  when
they  had  received  the  summons,  set  out  for  Vidarbha,  and
Nala  went  also  eagerly,  mounted  on  his  chariot.

And  in  the  meanwhile  Indra  and  the  other  Lokapalas
heard  from  the  hermit  Narada  of  the  svayamvara  of  Dama-
yantI, and  of  her  love  for  Nala.  And  of  them  Indra,  the
Wind,  the  God  of  Fire,  Yama  and  Varuna,  longing  for
DamayantI,  deliberated  together,  and  went  to  Nala;  and
they  found  Nala  setting  off  on  the  journey,  and  when  he
prostrated  himself  before  them  they  said  to  him  :  "  Go,
Nala,  and  tell  DamayantI  this  from  us  :  '  Choose  one  of  us
five.  What  is  the  use  of  choosing  Nala,  who  is  a  mortal  ?
Mortals  are  subject  to  death,  but  gods  are  undying.'  And
by  our  favour  thou  shalt  enter  where  she  is,  unperceived
by  the  others."  Nala  said,  "So  be  it,"  and  consented  to  do
the  errand  of  the  gods.  And  he  entered  the  apartments
of  DamayantI  without  being  seen,  and  delivered  that  com-
mand of  the  gods,  exactly  as  it  was  given.  But  when  the
virtuous  woman  heard  that,  she  said  :  "  Suppose  the  gods
are  such,  nevertheless  Nala  shall  be  my  husband.  I  have
no  need  of  gods."     When  Nala  had  heard  her  utter  this

1  The  epithet  refers  also  to  the  arrows  and  means  "  bright  with  excellent
heads."


DAMAYANTl'S  SVAYAMVARA  239

noble  sentiment,  and  had  revealed  himself,  he  went  and
told  it,  exactly  as  it  was  said,  to  Indra  and  the  others  ;
and  they,  pleased  with  him,  gave  him  a  boon,  saying  :  "  We
are  thy  servants  from  this  time  forth,  and  will  repair  to
thee  as  soon  as  thought  of,  truthful  man."

Then  Nala  went  delighted  to  Vidarbha,  and  Indra  and
the  other  gods  assumed  the  form  of  Nala,  with  intent  to
deceive  Damayanti.  And  they  went  to  the  Court  of  Bhima,
assuming  the  attributes  of  mortals,  and  when  the  svayam-
vara  began  they  sat  near  Nala.  Then  Damayanti  came,
and  leaving  the  kings,  who  were  being  proclaimed  one  by
one  by  her  brother,  gradually  reached  Nala.  And  when  she
saw  six  Nalas,1  all  possessing  shadows  and  the  power  of
winking,2  she  thought  in  her  perplexity,  while  her  brother
stood  amazed  :  "  Surely  these  five  guardians  of  the  world
have  produced  this  illusion  to  deceive  me,  but  I  think  that
Nala  is  the  sixth  here,  and  so  I  cannot  go  in  any  other
direction."

When  the  virtuous  one  had  thus  reflected,  she  stood
facing  the  sun,  with  mind  fixed  on  Nala  alone,  and  spoke
thus  :  "  0  guardians  of  the  world,  if  even  in  sleep  I  have
never  fixed  my  heart  on  any  but  Nala,  on  account  of  that
loyal  conduct  of  mine,  show  me  your  real  forms.  And  to
a  maiden  any  other  men  than  her  lover  previously  chosen
are  strangers,  and  she  is  to  them  the  wife  of  another,  so
how  comes  this  delusion  upon  you?"3  When  the  five,
with  Indra  at  their  head,  heard  that,  they  assumed  their
own  forms,  and  the  sixth,  the  true  Nala,  preserved  his  true
form.  The  princess  in  her  delight  cast  upon  the  king  her
eye,  beautiful  as  a  blown  blue  lotus,  and  the  garland  of
election.  And  a  rain  of  flowers  fell  from  heaven.  Then
King  Bhima  performed  the  marriage  ceremony  of  her  and
Nala.     And  the  kings  and  the  gods,  Indra  and  the  others,

1  In  the  Mahdbharata  version  the  numher  is  only  five. — n.m.p.

2  So  in  Heliodorus,  &thiopica,  Lib.  Ill,  cap.  xiii :  "  dXXa  tois  t  6<f>daX.fxois
av  yvbxrdtitv  arevis  Scokov  fiktirovres  kcu  rb  (3X.€<f>apov  ov  iror'  «Vtyivom-e?." — In
the  third  canto  of  the  Purgalorio  Dante  is  much  troubled  at  finding  that
Virgil,  being  a  disembodied  spirit,  casts  no  shadow.

8  For  the  "Act  of  Truth"  see  Vol.  I,  pp.  166,  167;  Vol.  II,  pp.  Sl-SS,
and  Vol.  Ill,  pp.  172«2,  179-182.— n.m.p.


240  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

returned  by  the  way  that  they  came,  after  due  honour  had
been  done  to  them  by  the  King  of  Vidarbha.

But  Indra  and  his  companions  saw  on  the  way  Kali  and
Dvapara,1  and  knowing  that  they  had  come  for  Damayanti,
they  said  to  them  :  "  It  is  of  no  use  your  going  to  VTidarbha  ;
The  Curse  of  we  come  thence ;  and  the  svayamvara  has  taken
the  Dice  place.      Damayanti    has     chosen    King    Nala."

Deities  When  the  wicked  Kali  and  Dvapara  heard  that,

they  exclaimed  in  wrath  :  "  Since  she  has  chosen  that
mortal  in  preference  to  gods  like  thyself,  we  will  certainly

1  Kali  is  the  side  of  the  die  marked  with  one  point.  Dvapara  is  the
side  marked  with  two.  They  are  personified  here  as  demons  of  gambling.
They  are  also  the  present — i.e.  the  fourth  and  the  third  Yugas  or  Ages  of  the

World. There  are  in  the  orthodox  Hindu  chronological  system  four  Yugas

or  Ages  of  the  World.  They  are  in  order  Krita,  Treta,  Dvapara  and  Kali,  and
correspond  roughly  to  the  Gold,  Silver,  Brass  and  Iron  Ages  of  the  classics.
The  Sanskrit  names  are  called  after  the  sides  of  a  die  in  descending  order
of  their  value  in  play.  Thus  Krita  is  the  side  with  four  dots,  while  Kali,  being
the  side  with  only  one  dot,  is  always  a  certain  loser.

The  connection  between  dice  and  the  different  eras  of  the  world  is
perhaps  not  at  first  evident.  It  is  well  explained  by  H.  Jacobi  in  "  Ages  of
the  World,"  Hastings'  Ency.  Rel.  Eth.,  vol.  i,  p.  200  et.  seq.

The  general  idea,  the  same  in  all  Brahmanical  sources,  is  that  the
character,  or,  if  the  expression  may  be  used,  the  proportion  of  virtue,  and  the
length  of  each  Yuga  conform  to  the  number  on  the  side  of  a  die,  after  which
it  is  named.  In  the  Krita  Yuga,  virtue  (dharmd)  was  fully  present  in  men,
with  all  four  feet,  as  it  is  expressed,  but  it  diminished  by  one  quarter  or  foot
in  every  succeeding  age,  till  in  the  Kali  Yuga  only  one  foot  of  dharma  remains.
The  same  proportion  holds  good  with  regard  to  the  duration  of  the  several
ages.

The  Krita  Yuga  lasts  4000  years,  to  which  a  dawn  and  a  twilight  of
400  years  each  are  added  ;  the  same  items  in  Treta  are  3000  and  300 ;  in
Dvapara  2000  and  200;  in  Kali  1000  and  100  years.  [Thus  the  die  with
its  points  of  4,  3,  2  and  1  came  to  have  the  symbolical  meaning.]

The  period  of  the  four  Yugas  together,  technically  called  a  Mahayuga
or  Chaturyuga,  though  commonly  a  Yuga,  lasts  12,000  years  (Manu,  i,  69
et  seq.  =  Mahabharata,  III,  xii,  826  et  seq.).  The  years  in  this  statement  are
interpreted  as  Divine  years,  consisting  each  of  360  human  years,  giving  thus
a  total  of  4,320,000  years  in  each  Mahayuga.  The  usual  descriptions  of  the
Krita  Yuga  reveal  to  us  a  happy  state  of  mankind,  when  life  lasted  4000
years,  when  there  were  no  quarrels  nor  wars,  when  the  rules  of  caste  and  the
precepts  of  the  Vedas  were  strictly  obeyed,  when,  in  short,  virtue  reigned
paramount.  In  the  Kali  Yuga  just  the  reverse  prevails.  There  is  a  confusion
of  castes  and    asramas    [i.e.   the  four  ascetic  stages  of  student,  householder,


KALI'S  OPPORTUNITY  241

separate  that  couple."    After  making  this  vow  they  turned
round  and  departed  thence.

And  Nala  remained  seven  days  in  the  house  of  his  father-
in-law  and  then  departed,  a  successful  man,  for  Nishada,
with  his  wife  Damayanti.  There  their  love  was  greater
than  that  of  Siva  and  Parvatl.  Parvati  truly  is  half  of
Siva,  but  Damayanti  was  Nala's  self.  And  in  due  time
Damayanti  brought  forth  to  Nala  a  son  named  Indrasena,
and  after  that  a  daughter  named  Indrasena.

And  in  the  meanwhile  Kali,  who  was  resolved  on  effecting
what  he  had  promised,  was  seeking  an  occasion  against  Nala,
who  lived  according  to  the  Sastras.  Then,  one  day,  Nala  lost
his  senses  from  drunkenness,  and  went  to  sleep  without  saying
the  evening  prayer  and  without  washing  his  feet.  After  Kali
had  obtained  this  opportunity,  for  which  he  had  been  watching
day  and  night,  he  entered  into  the  body  of  Nala.  When  Kali
had  entered  his  body  King  Nala  abandoned  righteous  practices
and  acted  as  he  pleased.  The  king  played  dice,  he  loved  female
slaves,  he  spoke  untruths,  he  slept  in  the  day,  he  kept  awake
at  night,  he  became  angry  without  cause,  he  took  wealth
unjustly,  he  despised  the  good  and  he  honoured  the  bad.

Moreover,  Dvapara  entered  into  his  brother  Pushkara,
having  obtained  an  opportunity,  and  made  him  depart
from  the  true  path.  And  one  day  Nala  saw,  in  the  house
of  his  younger  brother  Pushkara,  a  fine  white  bull,  named
Danta.  And  Pushkara  would  not  give  the  bull  to  his  elder
brother,  though  he  wanted  it  and  asked  for  it,  because  his

anchorite  and  mendicant].  The  Veda  and  good  conduct  gradually  fall  into
neglect ;  all  kinds  of  vices  creep  in  ;  diseases  afflict  mankind  ;  the  term  of  life
grows  shorter  and  shorter,  and  is  quite  uncertain ;  barbarians  occupy  the
land,  and  people  kill  one  another  in  continual  strife,  till  at  the  end  of  the
Yuga  some  mighty  king  extinguishes  the  infidels.

We  can  thus  clearly  see  the  connection  between  Yugas  and  dice,  and
understand  that  if  Kali  possessed  Nala  he  was  bound  to  lose  everything,
whether  Dvapara  possessed  his  opponent  or  not.  Moreover,  there  seems  to
be  considerable  doubt  in  the  original  texts  as  to  whether  Dvapara  entered
into  Pushkara  at  all,  or  merely  stood  by  watching  Nala  being  gradually
ruined.  The  description  of  Nala's  entire  loss  of  all  restraint  through  the
influence  of  Kali,  as  described  by  Somadeva,  is  an  addition  of  his  own  and
not  in  the  Mahabharata.  See  further  Appendix  II,  p.  276. — n.m.p.
vol.  IV.  Q


242  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

respect  for  him  had  been  taken  away  by  Dvapara.  And
he  said  to  him  :  "  If  you  desire  this  bull,  then  win  it  from
me  at  once  at  play."  When  Nala  heard  that  challenge,  in
his  infatuation  he  accepted  it,  and  then  those  two  brothers
began  to  play  against  each  other.  Pushkara  staked  the
bull,  Nala  staked  elephants  and  other  things;  and  Push-
kara continually  won ;  Nala  as  continually  lost.  In  two  or
three  days  Nala  had  lost  his  army  and  his  treasure,  but  he
still  refused  to  desist  from  gambling,  though  entreated  to
desist,  for  he  was  distracted  by  Kali.  Damayanti,  thinking
that  the  kingdom  was  lost,  put  her  children  in  a  splendid
chariot  and  sent  them  to  the  house  of  her  father.  In  the
meanwhile  Nala  lost  his  whole  kingdom  ;  then  the  hypo-
critical Pushkara  said  :  "  Since  you  have  lost  everything  else,
now  stake  Damayanti  on  the  game  against  that  bull  of  mine."

This  windy  speech  of  Pushkara 's,  like  a  strong  blast,
made  Nala  blaze  like  fire ;  but  he  did  not  say  anything
unbecoming,  nor  did  he  stake  his  wife.  Then  Pushkara  said
to  him  :  "  If  you  will  not  stake  your  wife,  then  leave  this
country  of  mine  with  her. "  When  Nala  heard  this,  he  left  that
country  with  Damayanti,  and  the  king's  officers  saw  him  as
far  as  the  frontier.  Alas !  When  Kali  reduced  Nala  to  such
a  state,  say,  what  will  be  the  lot  of  other  mortals,  who  are
like  worms  compared  with  him  ?  Curse  on  this  gambling,  the
livelihood  of  Kali  and  Dvapara,  without  law,  without  natural
affection,  such  a  cause  of  misfortunes  even  to  royal  sages  !

So  Nala,  having  been  deprived  of  his  sovereignty  by  his
brother,  started  to  go  to  another  land  with  Damayanti,
and  as  he  was  journeying  along,  he  reached  the  centre  of
Nala  deserts  a  forest,  exhausted  with  hunger.  There,  as  he
Damayanft  was  resting  with  his  wife,  whose  soft  feet  were
pierced  with  darbha  grass,  on  the  bank  of  a  river,  he  saw
two  swans  arrive.  And  he  threw  his  upper  garment  over
them,  to  capture  them  for  food,  and  those  two  swans  flew
away  with  it.  And  Nala  heard  a  voice  from  heaven :
44  These  are  those  two  dice  in  the  form  of  swans ;  they  have
descended  and  flown  off  with  your  garment  also."

Then  the  king  sat  down  despondent,  with  only  one  gar-
ment on,  and  providently  showed  to  Damayanti  the  way


DAMAYANTI  IS  DESERTED  243

to  her  father's  house,  saying  :  "  This  is  the  way  to  Vidarbha,
my  beloved,  to  your  father's  house ;  this  is  the  way  to  the
country  of  the  Angas,  and  this  is  the  way  to  Ko6ala."
When  Damayanti  heard  this,  she  was  terrified,  thinking  to
herself :  "  Why  does  my  husband  tell  me  the  way,  as  if  he
meant  to  abandon  me  ?  "  Then  the  couple  fed  on  roots
and  fruits,  and  when  night  came  on  lay  down,  both  of  them
wearied,  in  the  wood  on  a  bed  of  ku4a  grass.  And  Dama-
yanti, worn  out  with  the  journey,  gradually  dropped  off  to
sleep,  but  Nala,  desiring  to  depart,  kept  awake,  deluded
by  Kali.  So  he  rose  up  with  one  garment,  deserting  that
Damayanti,  and  departed  thence,  after  cutting  off  half  her
upper  garment  and  putting  it  on.1  But  Damayanti  woke
up  at  the  end  of  the  night,  and  when  she  did  not  see  in
the  forest  her  husband,  who  had  deserted  her  and  gone,
she  thought  for  some  time,  and  then  lamented  as  follows  :
"  Alas,  my  husband,  great  of  heart,  merciful  even  to  your
enemy  !  You  that  used  to  love  me  so  well,  what  has  made
you  cruel  to  me  ?  And  how  will  you  be  able  to  go  alone
on  foot  through  the  forests,  and  who  will  attend  on  you  to
remove  your  weariness  ?  How  will  the  dust  defile  on  the
journey  your  feet,  that  used  to  be  stained  with  the  pollen
of  the  flowers  in  the  garlands  worn  on  the  heads  of  kings  ?
How  will  your  body,  that  could  not  endure  to  be  anointed
with  the  powder  of  yellow  sandal- wood,  endure  the  heat  of  the
sun  in  the  middle  of  the  day  ?  What  do  I  care  for  my  young
son  ?  What  for  my  daughter  ?  What  for  myself  ?  May  the
gods,  if  I  am  chaste,  procure  good  fortune  for  you  alone !  "

Thus  Damayanti  lamented  in  her  loneliness,  and  then
set  out  by  the  path  which  her  husband  had  shown  her
beforehand.  And  with  difficulty  she  crossed  the  woods,
forests,  rivers  and  rocks,  and  never  did  she  depart  from  her
devotion  to  her  husband  in  any  point.  And  the  might  of
her  chastity  preserved  her  on  the  way,2  so  that  the  hunter

1  The  reluctant  parting  of  Nala  is  much  more  beautifully  described  in
the  Mahabhdrata.     See  Appendix  II,  pp.  278,  279- — n.m.p.

2  Cf.  Milton's  Comus,  v,  421  et  seq.  The  word  "might"  also  means
'•  fire."  This  "fire  "  burnt  up  the  hunter.  The  pun  in  the  previous  sentence
cannot  be  rendered  in  English.


244  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

who,  after  delivering  her  from  the  serpent,  fell  in  love  with
her  for  a  moment  was  reduced  to  ashes.  Then  she  joined  a
caravan  of  merchants,  which  she  met  on  the  way,  and  with
them  she  reached  the  city  of  a  king  named  Subahu.  There
the  daughter  of  the  king  saw  her  from  her  palace,  and,  pleased
with  her  beauty,  had  her  brought  and  gave  her  as  a  present
to  her  mother.  Then  she  remained  in  attendance  on  the
queen,  respected  by  her,  and  when  questioned  she  answered
only  :   "My  husband  has  abandoned  me."

And  in  the  meanwhile  her  father  Bhlma,  having  heard
the  tidings  of  Nala's  misfortune,  sent  trustworthy  men  in
every  direction  to  make  search  for  the  royal  couple.  And
r,  m       one  of  them,  his  minister  named  Suvena,  as  he

Damayanti  ;  .         .  •

returns  to         was  wandering  about   disguised  as  a  Brahman,
her  Fathers     reached   that  palace  of  Subahu.     There  he  saw
mg  °  Damayanti,  who  always  examined  guests,  and  she

saw  with  sorrow  her  father's  minister.  And  having  recognised
one  another,  they  wept  together  so  violently  that  Subahu 's
queen  heard  it.  And  the  queen  had  them  summoned,  and
asked  them  the  truth  of  the  matter,  and  then  she  found  out
that  the  lady  was  Damayanti,  the  daughter  of  her  sister.
Then  she  informed  her  husband,  and  after  showing  her
honour  she  sent  her  to  the  house  of  her  father  with  Suvena
and  an  army.  There  Damayanti  remained,  reunited  with
her  two  children,  inquiring  under  her  father's  guidance  for
news  of  her  husband.  And  her  father  sent  out  spies  to  look
for  her  husband,  who  was  distinguished  by  preternatural
skill  in  cooking  and  driving.  And  King  Bhima  commanded
the  spies  to  say  :  "  Moon,  where  have  you  hid  yourself  so
cruelly,  deserting  your  young  bride  asleep  in  the  forest,
dear  as  a  cluster  of  white  lotuses,  having  taken  a  piece  of
her  robe  ?  " x  This  he  told  them  to  utter  wherever  they
suspected  the  presence  of  Nala.

And  in  the  meanwhile  King  Nala  travelled  a  long  way
at  night  in  that  forest,  clothed  with  the  half-garment,  and  at
last  he  saw  a  jungle- fire.  And  he  heard  someone  exclaim  :
"  Great-hearted  one,  take  me  away  from  the  neighbourhood
of  this  fire,  in  order  that  I,  being  helpless,  may  not  be  burned

1  Here  then  is  a  pun.     Ambara  also  means  "  the  sky."


THE  METAMORPHOSIS  245

up  by  it."  When  Nala  heard  this,  he  looked  round,  and
beheld  a  snake  coiled  up  near  the  fire,  having  his  head
encircled  with  the  rays  of  the  jewels  of  his  crest,1  as  if  seized
on  the  head  by  the  jungle-fire,  with  terrible  flaming  weapons
in  its  hand.  He  went  up  to  it,  and  in  compassion  put  it
on  his  shoulder,2  and  carried  it  a  long  distance,  and  when
he  wished  to  put  it  down  the  snake  said  to  him  :  "  Carry
me  ten  steps  farther,  counting  them  as  you  go."

Then  Nala  advanced,  counting  the  steps,  one,  two,  three,
four,  five,  six,  seven — listen,  snake — eight,  nine,  ten,  and
when  he  said  ten  (daia  3)  the  snake  took  him  at  his  word,
and  bit  him  in  the  front  of  the  forehead,  as  he  lay  on  his
shoulder.  That  made  the  king  small  in  the  arms,  deformed
and  black.  Then  the  king  took  down  the  snake  from  his
shoulder,  and  said  to  him  :  "  Who  art  thou,  and  what  kind
of  a  return  for  my  kindness  is  this  which  thou  hast  made  ?  "
When  the  snake  heard  this  speech  of  Nala's,  he  answered
him  :  "  King,  know  that  I  am  a  king  of  the  snakes  named
Karkotaka,  and  I  gave  you  the  bite  for  your  good ;  that
you  will  come  to  learn;  when  great  ones  wish  to  live  con-
cealed, a  deformed  appearance  of  body  furthers  their  plans.
Receive  also  from  me  this  pair  of  garments,  named  the
4  fire-bleached  '  * ;  you  need  only  put  them  on  and  you  will

1  For  the  jewels  in  the  heads  of  reptiles  see  the  long  note  in  Benfey's
Pahtschatantra,  vol.  i,  p.  214.  The  passage  in  As  You  Like  It  will  occur  to  every-
one. Snakes'  crowns  are  mentioned  in  Grossler,  Sagen  aus  der  Grafschaft
Mansfeld,  p.    178,  in    Veckenstedt's    Wendische   Sagen,  pp.   403-405,  and  in

Grohmann,  Sagen  aus  B'dhmen,  pp.  219,  223. Reference  should  also  be  made

to  Crooke,  op.  cit.,  vol.  ii,  p.  143;  Thurston,  Ethnographic  Notes  in  Southern
India,  p.  284,  and  especially  W.  W.  Skeat,  "  Snakestones,"  Folk-Lore,  vol.  xxiii,
1912,  pp.  45-80;  and  W.  R.  Haliday  in  ditto,  December  1921,  pp.  262-271.

— N.M.P.

2  Preller  in  his  Griechische  Mythologie,  vol.  ii,  p.  475,  refers  to  a  Servian
story,  in  which  a  shepherd  saves  the  life  of  a  snake  in  a  forest  fire.  In  return
for  this  service  the  snake's  father  gives  him  endless  treasures,  and  teaches
him  the  language  of  birds.

8  Dasa  means  "  ten  "  and  also  "  bite."

4  In  Prester  John's  letter  quoted  by  Baring-Gould,  Curious  Myths  oj  the
Middle  Ages,  new  edition,  p.  43,  we  find :  "  In  one  of  our  lands,  hight  Zone,
are  worms  called  in  our  tongue  Salamanders.  These  worms  can  only  live  in
fire,  and  they  build  cocoons  like  silk-worms,  which  are  unwound  by  the  ladies


246  TIIK  OCEAN  OF  STORY

recover  vour  true  form."  When  Karkotaka  had  said  this,
and  had  departed  after  giving  those  garments,  Nala  left  that
wood,  and  in  course  of  time  reached  the  city  of  Kos'ala.

And  going  by  the  name  of  Hrasvabahu,  he  took  service
as  a  cook  in  the  family  of  King  Rituparna,  the  sovereign
of    Kosala.      And    he  acquired  renown   by  making  dishes  of

exquisite  flavour,  and  by  his  skill  in  chariot-
/,iJfi,!!h"\nhi  driving.  And  while  Xala  was  living  there,
in  xjutr  or  his    under  the  name  of  Hrasvabahu,  it  happened  that

once  upon  a   time  one  of  the  spies  of  the  King

Appearance  .

of  V idarbha  came  there.  And  the  spy  heard  men
there  saying  :  "In  this  place  there  is  a  new  cook,  of  the
name  of  Hrasvabahu.  equal  to  Xala  in  his  own  special  art
and  also  in  the  art  of  driving."  The  spy  suspected  that
the  cook  was  Xala  himself,  and  hearing  that  he  was  in  the
judgment-hall  of  the  king,  he  went  there  and  repeated  the
following  Arya  verse,  taught  him  by  his  master  :  '  Moon,
where  have  you  hid  yourself  so  cruelly,  deserting  your
young  bride  asleep  in  the  forest,  dear  as  a  cluster  of  white
lotuses,  having  taken  a  piece  of  her  robe  ?

The  people  present  in  the  judgment-hall,  when  they
heard  that,  thought  that  his  words  were  those  of  a  mad-
man, but  Xala,  who  stood  there  disguised  as  a  cook,  answered
him  :  "  What  cruelty  was  there  in  the  moon's  becoming
invisible  to  the  lotus-cluster,  when  it  reached  and  entered
another  region,  after  one  part  of  the  heaven  *  had  become
exhausted  ?

When  the  spy  heard  this,  he  surmised  that  the  supposed
cook  was  really  Xala  transformed  by  misfortune,  and  he
departed  thence,  and  when  he  reached  Vidarbha  he  told
King  Bhima  and  his  queen  and  Damayanti  all  that  he  had
heard  and  seen.

Then  Damayanti.  of  her  own  accord,  said  to  her  father  :

'Without    doubt   that    man   is   my    husband   disguised  as   a

cook.     So    let    this   amusing   artifice   be   employed   to    bring

of  our  palace,  and  spun  into  cloth  and  dresses,  which  are  worn  by  our
Kxaltedncss.  These  dresses,  in  order  to  be  cleansed  anil  washed,  are  cast  into
flames."

1   <  >r  robe.      The  pun  is  obvious.


NALA'S  SKILL  IN  CHARIOT-DRIVING         247

him  here.  Let  a  messenger  be  sent  to  King  Rituparna,
and  the  moment  he  arrives  let  him  say  to  that  king  :  4  Nala
has  gone  off  somewhere  or  other,  no  tidings  are  heard  of  him ;
The  False  accordingly  to-morrow  morning  Damayanti  will
Svayamvara  again  make  her  svayamvara  ;  so  come  quickly  to
Vidarbha  this  very  day.'  And  the  moment  the  king  hears
his  speech  he  will  certainly  come  here  in  one  day,  together  with
that  husband  of  mine,  who  is  skilled  in  chariot- driving."

Having  thus  debated  with  her  father,  Damayanti  sent
off  that  very  moment  a  messenger  to  the  city  of  Kosala
with  exactly  this  message.  He  went  and  told  it,  as  it  was
given  him,  to  Rituparna,  and  the  king  thereupon,  being
excited,  said  affectionately  to  his  attendant  Nala,  who  was
disguised  as  a  cook  :  "  Hrasvabahu,  you  said  :  4 1  possess
skill  in  chariot-driving.'  So  take  me  this  very  day  to
Vidarbha  if  you  have  sufficient  endurance."  When  Nala
heard  that,  he  said:  "Good!  I  will  take  you  there."
And  thereupon  he  yoked  swift  horses,  and  made  ready  the
splendid  chariot.  He  said  to  himself :  "  Damayanti  has
spread  this  report  of  a  svayamvara  in  order  to  recover  me,
otherwise,  I  know,  she  would  not  have  behaved  in  this  way
even  in  her  dreams.     So  I  will  go  there  and  see  what  happens. "

With  such  reflections  he  brought  to  Rituparna  the  chariot
ready.  And  as  soon  as  the  king  had  mounted  it,  Nala  pro-
ceeded to  drive  on  that  chariot  with  a  speed  exceeding  even
that  of  Garuda.  Then  Rituparna  dropped  his  garment,
and  wished  to  stop  the  chariot  in  order  to  recover  it,  but
Nala  said  to  him  :  "  King,  where  is  that  garment  of  yours  ?
Why,  the  chariot  has  in  this  moment  left  it  many  yqjanas
behind."  When  Rituparna  heard  this,  he  said:  "Well,
give  me  this  skill  in  chariot- driving,  and  I  will  give  you  my
skill  in  dice,  so  that  the  dice  shall  obey  your  command,  and
you  shall  acquire  skill  in  numbers.  And  now  look ;  I  will
give  you  a  proof  of  the  truth  of  what  I  say.  You  see  this
tree  in  front  of  us ;  I  will  tell  you  the  number  of  its  leaves
and  fruits,  and  then  do  you  count  them  for  yourself  and
see."  When  he  had  said  this,  he  told  him  the  number  of
the  leaves  and  fruits  on  that  tree,  and  Nala  counted  them
and  found  them  exactly  as  many  as  he  had  said.     Then


248  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

Nala  gave  to  Rituparna  his  skill  in  driving,  and  Rituparna
gave  to  Nala  his  skill  in  dice  and  numbers.

And  Nala  tested  that  skill  on  another  tree,  and  found
the  number  of  leaves  and  fruits  to  be  exactly  what  he  had
guessed.  And  while  he  was  rejoicing  a  black  man  issued
Kali  leaves  from  his  body,'  and  he  asked  him  who  he  was.
Xala's  Body  Then  he  said :  "I  am  Kali ;  when  you  were
chosen  by  Damayanti,  I  entered  your  body  out  of  jealousy,
so  you  lost  your  fortune  at  play.  And  when  Karkotaka
bit  you  in  the  forest  you  were  not  consumed,  but  I  was
burnt,  as  you  see,  being  in  your  body.  For  to  whom  is  a
treacherous  injury  done  to  another  likely  to  be  beneficial  ?
So  I  depart,  my  friend,  for  I  have  opportunities  against
others."  After  saying  this,  Kali  vanished  from  his  sight,
and  Nala  at  once  became  well  disposed  as  before,  and  re-
covered his  former  splendour.  And  he  returned  and  re-
mounted the  chariot ;  and  in  the  course  of  the  same  day
he  drove  King  Rituparna  into  Vidarbha,  so  rapidly  did  he
get  over  the  ground,  and  there  the  king  was  ridiculed  by
the  people,  who  asked  the  cause  of  his  coming ;  and  he  put
up  near  the  palace.

And  when  he  arrived  Damayanti  knew  of  it,  having
heard  the  wonderful  noise  of  the  chariot,  and  she  inly  re-
joiced, as  she  suspected  that  Nala  had  come  too.  And  she
sent  her  own  maid  to  find  out  the  truth,  and  she  inquired
into  it,  and  came  back  and  said  to  her  mistress,  who  was
longing  for  her  beloved  lord :  "  Queen,  I  have  inquired
into  the  matter ;  this  King  of  Ko6ala  heard  a  false  report
of  your  svayamvara  and  has  come  here,  and  he  has  been
driven  here  in  one  day  by  Hrasvabahu,  his  charioteer  and
cook,  who  is  famous  for  his  skill  in  managing  chariots.
And  I  went  into  the  kitchen  and  saw  that  cook.  And  he  is
black  and  deformed,  but  possesses  wonderful  powers.  It  is
miraculous  that  water  gushed  up  in  his  pots  and  pans  with-
out being  put  in,  and  wood  burst  into  flames  of  its  own
accord   without   having   been   lighted,1   and   various    cakes

1  Cf.  the  twenty-eighth  story  of  the  first  part  of  Sicilianische  Marchen,
Gonzenbach,  "Von  der  Tochter  der  Sonne."  Here  Lattughina  says:  "Fire,
be  lighted,"  and  immediately  a  clear  fire  burned  upon  the  hearth.     Then  she


THE  WONDERFUL  COOK  249

were  produced  in  a  moment.  After  I  had  seen  this  great
miracle  I  came  back  here."

When  Damayanti  heard  this  from  the  maid,  she  reflected  :
"  This  cook,  whom  the  fire  and  the  water  obey,  and  who
knows  the  secret  of  chariot-driving,  can  be  no  other  than
my  husband,  and  I  suspect  he  has  become  changed  and
deformed  on  account  of  separation  from  me,  but  I  will  test
him."  When  she  had  made  this  resolve,  she  sent,  by  way
of  stratagem,  her  two  children  with  that  same  maid,  to  show
them  to  him.  And  Nala,  when  he  had  seen  his  children
and  taken  them  on  his  knees,  after  a  long  separation,  wept
silently  with  a  flood  of  tears.  And  he  said  to  the  maid:
"  I  have  two  children  like  these  in  the  house  of  their  maternal
grandfather.  I  have  been  moved  to  sorrow  by  recollecting
them."  The  maid  returned  with  the  children  and  told  all
to  Damayanti,  and  then  she  conceived  much  hope.

And  early  the  next  day  she  gave  her  maid  this  order  :
"  Go  and  tell  that  cook  of  Rituparna's  from  me  :  '  I  hear
that  there  is  no  cook  like  you  in  the  world,  so  come  and
prepare  my  curry  for  me  to-day.'  "  When  the  maid  com-
municated to  Nala  this  politic  request,  he  got  leave  from
Rituparna  and  came  to  Damayanti.  And  she  said  :  "  Tell
me  the  truth  :  are  you  the  King  Nala  disguised  as  a  cook  ?
I  am  drowned  in  a  sea  of  anxiety,  and  you  must  to-day
bring  me  safe  to  shore."  When  Nala  heard  that,  he  was
full  of  joy,  grief  and  shame,  and  with  downcast  face  he
spoke,  in  a  voice  faltering  from  tears,  this  speech  suited
to  the  occasion :  "I  am  in  truth  that  wicked  Nala,  hard  as
adamant,  who  in  his  madness  behaved  like  fire  in  afflicting

said:  "Come  along,  pan,"  and  a  golden  pan  came  and  placed  itself  upon  the
fire ;  "  Come  along,  oil,"  and  the  oil  came  and  poured  itself  into  the  pan.
De  Gubernatis  (Zoological  yiythology,  vol.  i,  p.  158)  remarks  that  service  in
the  kitchen  is  especially  dear  to  the  young  hero.  Bhima  disguises  himself  as
a  cook  in  the  Virata  Parvan  of  the  Mahabharata.  Pausanias  tells  us,  Book  I,
chap,  xvi :  "  2<Acvk<jj  yap,  o?  wpfidro  <k  Max  (Soviets  o~vv  'A\e£dv8p<p  Bvovri  ev  Uekky
ra  Ait,  to  £uAa  «ri  rov  fiwfiov  Ketfieva  irpovfirj  rt  avrofUiTa  7rpbs  to  ayaXpa,  ko\
dvev  irvpbs  ij<f>dT]."

In  the  "  Story  of  Nur  al-Din  All  and  his  Son,"  Nights  (Burton,  vol.  i,

p.  244),  the  hero  is  discovered  by  his  skill  in  cooking.  See  Chauvin,  op.  cit.,
vi,  p.  105. — n.m.p.


250  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

you."  When  he  said  this,  Damayanti  asked  him:  "If  it
is  so,  how  did  you  become  deformed  ?  "  Then  Nala  told
her  the  whole  of  his  adventures,  from  his  making  friends
with  Karkotaka  to  the  departure  of  Kali  from  him.  And
immediately  he  put  on  the  pair  of  garments  called  the
"fire-bleached,"  given  him  by  Karkotaka,  and  recovered  on
the  spot  his  own  original  shape.

When  Damayanti  saw  that  Nala  had  resumed  his  own
charming  form,  the  lotus  of  her  face  quickly  expanded,  and
she  quenched,  as  it  were,  with  the  waters  of  her  eyes  the
The  Happy  forest-fire  of  her  grief,  and  attained  indescribable,
Reunion  unequalled  happiness.     And  Bhima,  the  King  of

Vidarbha,  quickly  heard  that  intelligence  from  his  joyful
attendants,  and  coming  there  he  welcomed  Nala,  who  showed
him  becoming  respect,  and  he  made  his  city  full  of  rejoicing.
Then  King  Rituparna  was  welcomed  with  the  observance
of  all  outward  courtesy  and  every  hospitable  rite 1  by  King
Bhima,  who  in  his  heart  could  not  help  laughing,  and  after
he  had  in  return  honoured  Nala,  he  returned  to  Ko6ala.
Then  Nala  lived  there  happily  with  his  wife,  describing  to
his  father-in-law  his  outburst  of  wickedness  due  to  the  in-
fluence of  Kali.  And  in  a  few  days  he  returned  to  Nishada
with  the  troops  of  his  father-in-law,  and  he  humbled  his
younger  brother  Pushkara,  beating  him  by  his  knowledge
of  dice,  but,  righteous  as  he  was,  he  gave  him  a  share  of  the
kingdom  again,  after  Dvapara  had  left  his  body,  and  glad
at  having  recovered  Damayanti,  he  enjoyed  his  kingdom
lawfully.

75.  Story  of  the  Brahman  Chandrasvdmin,  his  Son  Mahipdla,
and  his  Daughter  Chandravati

When  the  Brahman  Sumanas  had  told  this  story  to
the  Princess  Bandhumati  in  Tarapura,  whose  husband  was
away,  he  went  on  to  say  to  her  :  "  Even  thus,  Queen,  do
great  ones,  after  enduring  separation,  enjoy  prosperity,  and
following  the  example  of  the  sun,  after  suffering  a  decline,
they   rise   again.     So  you   also,   blameless   one,   shall   soon

1  The  Petersburg  lexicographers  think  that  somvrilti  should  be  sadvritti.


THE  END  OF  THE  TALE  251

recover  your  husband  returning  from  his  absence ;  use
patient  self-control,  banish  grief,  and  console  yourself  with
the  approaching  gratification  of  your  wishes  in  the  return
of  your  husband."  When  the  virtuous  Brahman  had  spoken
these  appropriate  words  she  honoured  him  with  much  wealth,
and  taking  refuge  in  patience,  she  remained  there  awaiting
her  beloved.  And  in  a  few  days  her  husband  Mahipala
returned  with  his  father,  bringing  that  mother  of  his  from
a  distant  land.  And  when  he  returned,  furnishing  a  feast
to  all  eyes,  he  gladdened  Bandhumati,  as  the  full  moon
gladdens  the  lovely  water  of  the  ocean.  Then  Mahipala,
on  whom  her  father  had  already  devolved  the  burden  of  the
kingdom,  enjoyed  as  a  king  desired  pleasures  with  her.


[M]  When  Prince  Naravahanadatta,  the  son  of  the  King
of  Vatsa,  had  heard  in  the  company  of  his  wife,  from  the
mouth  of  his  minister  Marubhuti,  this  matchless  romantic
story,  pleasing  on  account  of  its  picture  of  affection,  he  was
exceedingly  pleased.


APPENDIX    I


APPENDIX  I

WIDOW-BURNING

The  practice  of  burning  the  living  widow  with  the  corpse
of  the  husband  is  stated  ■  to  have  been  an  ancient  Indo-
Germanic  custom,  based  upon  the  belief  that  life  in  the
next  world  is  a  reflex  of  this  life,  and  consequently,  in  his
new  home,  the  deceased  must  be  provided  with  what  has
been  dear  to  him,  or  necessary  to  his  comfort,  while  on  earth.

Apart  from  the  prevalence  of  widow-burning  in  India
(which  I  shall  discuss  at  some  length),  there  is  early  evidence
of  the  practice  both  in  Europe  and  the  Far  East.

Procopius  tells  us  (Bellum  Goticwn,  ii,  14  et  seq.)  that
the  Heruli  retained  many  striking  primitive  customs,  among
which  was  the  suicide  of  widows  on  their  husbands'  pyres.
We  may  surmise  that  such  immolations  were  of  fairly  fre-
quent occurrence,  for  it  was  also  a  custom  that  when  death
seemed  imminent,  either  through  illness  or  old  age,  the  men
were  stabbed  by  an  executioner  and  burned  on  a  pyre.

Between  the  third  and  sixth  centuries  of  our  era  this
Teutonic  tribe  had  migrated  to  many  parts  of  Europe,  from
Sweden  to  the  Black  Sea,  so  that  their  customs  must  have
been  familiar  over  a  wide  area.

Grimm  states  in  his  Deutsche  Rechtsaltertiimer  (p.  451)
that  the  suicide  of  widows  was  a  regular  custom  among  the
Scandinavians  ;  while  Ralston,  speaking  of  the  Slavs,  says :
"  The  fact  that  in  Slavonic  lands,  a  thousand  years  ago,
widows  used  to  destroy  themselves  in  order  to  accompany
their  dead  husbands  to  the  world  of  spirits,  seems  to  rest  on
incontestable  evidence."2

In  the  Norse  versions  of  the  Nibelung  myth,  which  pre-
serve more  of  the  primitive  traditions  than  the  Nibelimgenlied,

»  x  O.   Schrader,  Prehistoric  Antiquities  of  the.  Aryan  Peoples,  Eng.  trans.,

London,  1890,  p.  391.

2  W.   R.  S.   Ralston,  Songs  of  the  Russian  People,  p.  327  et  seq.     This  is
quoted  by  Westermarck,  The  History  of  Human  Marriage,  vol.  i,  p.  319  et  seq.,
who  also  mentions  Dithmar  of  Merseburg,  Chronicon,  viii,  2  (Pertz,  Monumenta
Germanice  historica,  v,  86 1) ;  and  H.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  p.  330.
255


256  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

we  have  the  account  of  the  immolation  of  Brunhild.  In
the  Volsungasaga,  maddened  by  jealousy,  she  compasses
the  death  of  Sigurd,  and  then  flings  herself  on  his  pyre,
thereby  assuring  herself  of  a  speedy  reunion  with  him  in  the
next  world.     (See  Hagen's  Helden-Sagen,  vol.  iii,  p.  166.)

In  Greece  we  have  the  story  of  Evadne,  the  wife  of
Capaneus,  one  of  the  seven  heroes  who  marched  against
Thebes.  When  climbing  up  to  the  walls  of  the  city  he  was
struck  by  a  thunderbolt  of  Zeus,  and  when  he  was  burning
on  the  pyre  his  wife  threw  herself  into  the  flames.  (See
Apollodorus,  Library,  iii,  6,  7  ;  iii,  7,  1  ;  Euripides,  Sup-
pliants, 1034  et  seq.  ;  Zenobius,  Cent,  i,  30  ;  Propertius,  i,
15,  21  et  seq.)  In  some  accounts  of  the  death  of  Paris,  his
wife  (Enone,  distracted  with  grief  at  not  having  forgiven  his
desertion,  threw  herself  on  to  his  burning  pyre.  Herodotus
tells  us  (v,  5)  that  among  a  certain  polygamous  Thracian
tribe  it  was  the  custom,  at  the  death  of  the  husband,  for
the  wives  to  vie  with  each  other  as  to  who  was  the  most
loved,  so  that  she  might  have  the  honour  of  being  slain
(not  burned)  on  her  husband's  tomb.  (Cf.  the  account  given
by  Diodorus  later  in  this  appendix.)  The  chosen  woman  was
killed  by  her  nearest  relative,  and  buried  with  great  honour
beside  her  husband.  Monier  Williams  (Indian  Wisdom,
p.  258ft1)  refers  to  Herodotus'  (iv,  71)  description  of  the
burial  of  Scythian  kings,  where  a  concubine  was  strangled
and  placed  on  the  pyre,  together  with  servants  and  horses —
in  fact,  the  necessities  for  the  next  life.  In  this  custom  he
sees  the  possible  origin  of  the  rite  of  sati  amongst  the  Hindus.
It  certainly  seems  quite  probable  that  early  immigrants
brought  the  custom  into  India  over  the  north-western  passes.
The  date  of  its  introduction  must  have  been  very  early,  for
by  the  fourth  century  B.C.  it  was  well  established  in  the
Panjab.

Suicide  of  widows  seems  also  to  have  been  known  among
the  ancient  Egyptians.  Several  bodies  of  women  were
found  in  the  tomb  of  Amen-hetep  II  at  Thebes,  which
proves  that  in  the  eighteenth  dynasty  favourite  wives  were
either  poisoned,  strangled  or  allowed  to  commit  suicide,  so
that  their  spirits  might  go  to  their  husband  in  the  other
world  and  continue  their  wifely  service  to  him.

Such  customs,  however,  seem  to  have  belonged  to  the
early  dynasties,  and  it  is  only  with  bloodthirsty  rulers  like
Amen-hetep  II  that  the  old   customs  were  revived.     The


APPENDIX  I— WIDOW-BURNING  257

more  usual  practice  was  to  bury  a  number  of  Ushabtiu  or
Shabti  figures  of  stone,  alabaster,  wood,  faience,  etc.,  instead
of  living  slaves,  who  in  earlier  dynasties  were  put  in  the
tombs  with  their  arms  and  legs  broken  at  the  joints.  (See
E.  A.  Wallis  Budge,  Osiris  and  the  Egyptian  Resurrection,
2  vols.,  London,  1911,  vol.  i,  pp.  xxii,  224  and  229.  On
this  latter  page  he  cites  as  a  modern  African  revival  of  sati
a  certain  king  of  Oyo,  Southern  Nigeria,  who  died  in  1859,
at  whose  death  four  men  were  sacrificed  and  forty-two  of
his  wives  committed  suicide.)

Before  speaking  of  the  Indian  sati  I  would  draw  attention
to  the  prevalence  of  the  custom  in  China.

The  remarriage  of  Chinese  widows  was  always  looked
upon  as  an  act  of  unchastity,  while  those  who  committed
suicide  at  their  husband's  death  had  honorary  gateways,
known  as  p'ai  lou  or  p'ai  fang,  erected  in  their  honour  by
Imperial  command.1  De  Groot 2  tells  us  that  the  instances
of  such  suicides  are  so  many  that  it  would  be  useless  to
enumerate  them  in  detail.  The  mode  of  death  was  usually
poison — often  an  overdose  of  opium— but  hanging,  stabbing,
starving  and  drowning  were  also  employed.  Owing  to  the
rarity  of  the  cremation  of  the  dead,  burning  is  not  at  all
common,  although  a  few  cases  have  been  recorded.

Betrothals  being  considered  as  binding  as  the  actual
married  state,  we  find  many  instances  of  suicide  on  the
death  of  the  affianced  husband.

Apart  from  the  details  to  be  found  in  De  Groot 's  work,
Dr  Giles  tells  me  that  Chinese  scholars  will  find  many
interesting  examples  of  widow- suicide  in  the  great  T'u  Shu
Chi  CKeng,  the  Chinese  Encyclopaedia  8  (of  745  volumes  !).
Section  xvi,  in  which  these  examples  occur  (45-114),  forms,
says  Dr  Giles,  a  repertory  of  female  biography  such  as  no
other  nation,  even  at  the  present  day,  can  make  any  pretence
of  rivalling.  The  sub- head,  "  Widows  who  Refuse  to  Marry  a
Second  Time,"  with  its  210  chiian,  is  in  itself  the  equivalent
of  a  voluminous  work,  being  only  exceeded  in  length  by
"Medicine,"  in  section  xvii.

In  Bali,  an  island  in  the  East  Indies,  where  Hinduism
remains  the  accepted  creed,  the  custom  of  widow-burning
is  still  occasionally  practised.     At  the  death  of  a  king  all

1  See  E.  T.  C.  Werner,  China  of  the  Chinese,  1919,  pp.  42,  43.

2  Religious  System  of  China,  vol.  ii,  p.  733  et  seq.

3  See  L.  Giles'  Alphabetical  Index  to  the  Chinese  Encyclopaedia,  1911.
VOL.  IV.  B


258  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

his  wives  and  concubines  were  burned,  amounting  sometimes
to  over  a  hundred.  (See  J.  Crawfurd,  History  of  the  Indian
Archipelago,  1820,  and  Friederich,  Verhandelingen  van  het
Batav.  Genootschap,  xxiii,  10.)

In  some  instances  the  customs  were  less  exacting.  Thus
among  certain  American  Indian  tribes  the  practice  of  burn-
ing the  widow  has  been  mitigated  into  a  rule  that  she  must
lie  beside  her  husband's  corpse  on  the  pyre  till  she  is  nearly
suffocated,  when  she  is  allowed  to  withdraw.  See  Morse,
Report  on  Indian  Affairs,  p.  339  et  seq.  He  is  quoted  by
Frazer  (Pausanias,  vol.  iii,  p.  200),  who  adds  several  other
useful  references.  See  also  Westermarck,  op.  cit.,  vol.  i,
p.  320.

Having  thus  briefly  glanced  at  the  evidence  of  widow-
burning  in  places  other  than  India,  we  will  now  consider  the
practice  in  India  itself.

It  is  known  by  the  name  of  suttee,  or,  more  correctly,  sail.
The  Sanskrit  word  sail  is  a  feminine  noun  meaning  "good,"
"  devout,"  "  true,"  and  consequently  it  denotes  a  person  and
not  a  practice.  The  application  of  the  substantive  to  the
act  instead  of  to  the  person  is  European.

Although  the  antiquity  of  sati  cannot  be  denied,  and  is
probably  a  relic  of  prehistoric  barbarism  preserved  in
aristocratic  Kshatriya  families,1  it  is,  at  first  sight,  a  curious
fact  that  the  Rig-  Veda  is  innocent  of  the  practice.  Further,
it  is  not  acknowledged  in  the  Sutras  or  even  alluded  to  in
Manu.  It  is  practically  absent  from  the  Rdmdyana  and
receives  but  little  approbation  in  the  Mahdbhdrata.  Thus
it  was  not  a  Brahmanic  rite  at  all,  and  was  only  sanctioned
in  later  days  because  it  could  not  be  suppressed.

In  order  to  understand  how  sati  gradually  became
established  in  Hindu  ritual  it  is  necessary  to  remember
exactly  what  the  status  of  the  widow  was,  and  how
dependent  upon  the  priests  the  people  were  for  the  exact
interpretation  of  the  Vedas.

From  the  earliest  times  the  lot  of  the  widow  was  miser-
able and  humiliating  in  the  extreme.  Although  the  laws  were
often  contradictory,  remarriage  was  generally  not  counte-
nanced, and  in  most  cases  meant  social  ruin.  On  the  death
of  her  husband  the  widow  passed  under  the  protection  of
her  sons,  if  adult ;    otherwise  she  was  dependent  on  her

1  L.  D.  Barnett,  Antiquities  of  India,  p.  1 1  <).


APPENDIX  I— WIDOW-BURNING  259

husband's  nearest  relatives.  Her  place  in  the  household
now  became  of  the  lowest.  She  had  to  lead  a  life  of  the
greatest  austerity.  All  her  jewellery  was  removed,  her  head
was  shaved,  she  had  but  one  meal  a  day,  she  was  forced  to
sleep  on  a  single  mat,  and  was  excluded  from  all  festivities,
family  gatherings,  etc.  Her  touch,  in  fact  her  very  shadow,
was  contaminating.

Nor  is  her  lot  less  hard  to-day.  Her  unhappy  fate  has
been  described  recently  by  a  lady  ■  whose  researches  have
been  carried  on  in  a  part  of  India  where  Brahman  traditions
have  been  most  closely  preserved.

On  the  day  of  her  bereavement  the  widow  dons  an  old
sari  and  sits  alone  in  a  corner  of  the  room  without  taking
any  food.  Here  she  sits  for  a  whole  year,  eating  very  little,
and  only  going  out  at  twilight  to  answer  the  calls  of  nature.
Her  head  is  shaven  and  she  is  given  the  terrible  name
Randiranda  (one  who  has  been  a  prostitute),  which  testifies
that  she  is  now  penalised  for  the  sins  of  a  previous  life.  On
the  thirteenth  day  after  the  death  the  widow's  own  mother
brings  her  a  sari,  the  four  corners  of  which  are  dipped  in
water  used  during  the  sraddha  ceremony  (see  Vol.  I,  p.  56U1).
She  now  leaves  her  corner  and  is  invested  in  the  sari  by
another  widow.  It  is  known  as  the  pota  sari,  and  is  so  un-
lucky that  none  of  her  husband's  relatives  will  even  let  the
hem  of  the  garment  touch  them.  This  has  to  be  worn  for
a  year.  The  family  honour  does  not  permit  the  widow  to
look  happy,  healthy  or  properly  fed  ;  accordingly  all  the
hard  work  is  allotted  to  her,  as  little  food  as  possible  is  given
to  her,  while  her  fasts  have  to  be  often  and  rigid.  If  by
this  time  she  is  really  starving,  her  mother  can  take  her
away  to  her  own  house.  If  she  has  no  mother  her  one
chance  of  preservation  is  gone.  A  terrible  fact  is  that  the
younger,  and  therefore  the  more  unprotected  and  helpless,
the  widow  is,  the  more  it  proves  how  vile  her  sin  (in  a  previous
life)  must  have  been.  Accordingly  the  fate  of  a  widow  of
six  or  seven  years  old  is  better  imagined  than  described.

After  wearing  the  pota  sari  for  a  year  it  is  exchanged
for  a  black  one,  which  is  worn  until  her  death.  All  her
clothes  are  black  ;  she  carries  bad  luck  with  her  wherever
she  goes,  and  even  her  friends  will  turn  back  if  they  meet
her  in  the  road.

The  widow's  only  chances  of  a  tolerable  existence  are

1  Mrs  Sinclair  Stevenson,  The  Rites  of  the  Twice-Born,  1920,  pp.  204-208.


260  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

either  that  her  age  may  be  such  that  she  can  retain  her
senior  position  in  the  house,  or  else  that  her  mother- in- law-
has  a  kindly  nature  which  ameliorates  her  unhappy  lot.

When  making  her  numerous  inquiries  into  the  ques-
tion of  the  lot  of  widows,  Mrs  Stevenson  was  answered
more  than  once  by  the  terrible  saying :  "  Paraffin  is
cheap."

We  English,"  she  concludes,  "  believe  satl  to  be  extinct ;
reformers  in  certain  districts  of  India  will  tell  us  differently.
They  know  that  there  are  easy  methods  of  getting  rid  of
an  unwanted  widow  :  simply  to  turn  her  out  of  house  and
home ;  to  push  her  down  a  well  ;  to  give  her  poison ;  to  take
her  on  a  pilgrimage  and  either  lose  her  or  sell  her ;  or  to  set
fire  to  her  and  burn  her  to  death.

"It  is  quite  simple  to  soak  a  heavy  wadded  quilt  in
paraffin,  to  tie  a  young  widow  up  in  it,  pour  more  oil  over
her,  set  fire  to  it  and  lock  her  up  in  a  room.  Then  the
neighbours  can  be  told  that  she  either  accidentally  caught
fire  when  cooking,  or,  like  a  faithful  wife,  herself  committed
satl ;  and  only  God,  c  the  Judge  of  the  fatherless  and  the
widow,'  knows  on  which  side  the  door  of  that  hellish  room
was  locked.  *  Paraffin  is  cheap  ' — and  the  family  honour  has
been  saved."

We  are  now  in  a  better  position  to  understand  the  horror
with  which  the  Indian  woman  must  have  looked  upon  the  pos-
sibility of  becoming  a  widow,  and  terrible  as  satl  was,  we  can
well  imagine  many  of  them  preferring  to  face  the  flames  and
so  end  their  life  in  honour,  than  drag  out  a  dreary  existence
in  misery  and  humiliation.

Apart  from  this,  however,  there  were  several  inducements
offered,  which  would  doubtless  appeal  to  the  Hindu  satl.
She  was  promised  as  many  years  in  Svarga  as  there  are
hairs  on  the  human  head — i.e.  thirty-five  million.  In
addition  to  this,  the  act  purified  all  members  of  both  her
own  and  her  husband's  family,  even  from  the  guilt  of
killing  a  Brahman.  Finally,  a  white  pillar,  or  memorial
stone,  would  mark  the  place  of  her  sacrifice  and  her  spirit
would  be  venerated.

The  satl  stones,  known  as  maha-satl-kal  in  the  South,
are  generally  sculptured  with  a  pointed  pillar  or  post,  from
which  projects  a  woman's  right  arm,  bent  upwards  at  the
elbow.  The  hand  is  raised,  with  fingers  erect,  and  a  lime-
fruit   is   held  between  the  thumb   and  forefinger.     This  is


APPENDIX  I— WIDOW-BURNING  261

what  is  alluded  to  in  the  old  inscriptions,  where  women
are  said  to  "  have  given  arm  and  hand."  Some  of  these
memorials  are  accompanied  with  elaborate  inscriptions.

For  further  details  and  photographs  of  sati- stones  see
A.  H.  Longhurst,  Hampi  Ruins,  Madras,  1917,  pp.  36-39,
from  which  the  above  is  taken.

As  was  only  natural,  the  early  Greek  invaders  of  Northern
India  were  struck  with  the  curious  practice  of  sati,  and  it
is  from  them  that  we  get  our  first  accounts  of  the  rite.
Onesicritus  spoke  of  it  as  specially  a  custom  of  the  Kshatriyas
(Cathaeans)  (Strabo,  xv,  c.  700).

A  good  account  is  given  by  E.  R.  Bevan  in  the  Cambridge
History  of  India,  p.  415,  of  a  sati  which  occurred  at  the
time  of  Eumenes  (316  B.C.).  The  leader  of  an  Indian  con-
tingent which  had  gone  to  fight  under  Eumenes  was  killed
in  battle.  He  had  with  him  his  two  wives.  There  was
immediately  a  competition  between  them  as  to  which  was
to  be  the  sati.  The  question  was  brought  before  the  Mace-
donian and  Greek  generals,  and  they  decided  in  favour  of
the  younger,  the  elder  being  with  child.  At  this  the  elder
woman  went  away  lamenting,  with  the  band  about  her
head  rent,  and  tearing  her  hair,  as  if  tidings  of  some  great
disaster  had  been  brought  her  ;  and  the  other  departed,
exultant  at  her  victory,  to  the  pyre,  crowned  with  fillets  by
the  women  who  belonged  to  her,  and  decked  out  splendidly
as  for  a  wedding.  She  was  escorted  by  her  kinsfolk,  who
chanted  a  song  in  praise  of  her  virtue.  When  she  came
near  to  the  pyre,  she  took  off  her  adornments  and  distributed
them  to  her  familiars  and  friends,  leaving  a  memorial  of
herself,  as  it  were,  to  those  who  had  loved  her.  Her  adorn-
ments consisted  of  a  multitude  of  rings  on  her  hands,  set
with  precious  gems  of  diverse  colours,  about  her  head  golden
stars  not  a  few,  variegated  with  different  sorts  of  stones,
and  about  her  neck  a  multitude  of  necklaces,  each  a  little
longer  than  the  one  above  it.  In  conclusion,  she  said  fare-
well to  her  familiars  and  was  helped  by  her  brother  on  to
the  pyre,  and  there,  to  the  admiration  of  the  crowd  which
had  gathered  together  for  the  spectacle,  she  ended  her  life  in
heroic  fashion.  Before  the  pyre  was  kindled  the  whole  army
in  battle  array  marched  round  it  thrice.  She  meanwhile  lay
down  beside  her  husband,  and  as  the  fire  seized  her  no  sound
of  weakness  escaped  her  lips.  The  spectators  were  moved,
some  to  pity  and  some  to  exuberant  praise.     But  some  of


262  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

the  Greeks  present  found  fault  with  such  customs  as  savage
and  inhumane.     (Quoted  from  Diod.,  xix,  34.)

The  Greeks,  we  find,  had  a  theory  to  account  for  the
custom,  whether  of  their  own  invention  or  suggested  to
them  by  Indian  informants  we  cannot  say.  The  theory
was  that  once  upon  a  tirne  wives  had  been  so  apt  to  get
rid  of  their  husbands  by  poison  that  the  law  had  to  be  intro-
duced which  compelled  a  widow  to  be  burnt  with  her  dead
husband.

The  question  naturally  arises  as  to  how  such  a  cruel
custom,  not  enjoined  by  the  Vedas,  was  adopted  by  Hindus
in  so  many  parts  of  India.  It  has  been  suggested  that  it
is  perhaps  the  extension  of  a  royal  custom,  mentioned  in
the  Epics,  which  gradually  made  the  rule  general,  until
later  law  and  practice  recommended  sail  for  all.

With  the  passing  centuries  it  acquired  the  sanctity  of  a
religious  rite,  and  no  one  thought  of  challenging  its  authority.
By  this  time  the  priests  themselves  knew  little  of  the  ancient
Vedic  texts,  and  the  people,  dependent  on  the  priests  for
their  religious  knowledge,  knew  still  less.  Moreover,  it
does  not  seem  to  have  been  a  practice  which  the  priesthood
would  readily  let  drop,  for  there  is  ample  evidence  to  show
that  certain  of  their  members,  at  any  rate,  derived  con-
siderable benefit  from  the  widow's  immolation  in  both  goods
and  property.

It  appears  that  occasionally  the  direct  authority  for
sail  in  the  Vedas  was  questioned,  and  accordingly  the
Brahman  priests  quoted  a  certain  passage  from  the  Rig-
Veda,  which,  it  was  said,  clearly  enjoined  the  practice.
Whether  this  passage  was  merely  wrongly  quoted  on  pur-
pose, or  actually  forged  and  produced  as  evidence,  is  not  at
all  clear.  Scholars  x  have  endeavoured  to  prove  that  such  a
forgery  was  perpetrated  in  the  middle  of  the  fifteenth  century
by  one  Raghunandana.  The  passage  in  question  taken  from
the  Rig-Veda  text  (x,  18,  7)  is  as  follows  :  —

"  Anasravo  'namivah  su-ratnd  a  rohantu  janayo  yonim
agre."

("  Without  tears,  without  sorrow,  bedecked  with  jewels,
let  wives  go  up  to  the  altar  first.")

1  Sec  H.  H.  Wilson,  Joum.  Roy.  As.  Soc.,  vol.  xvi,  1828,  p.  201  etseq.-y
and  Fitzedward  Hall,  ditto,  vol.  iii,  N.S.,  1867,  p.  188  et  seq.


APPENDIX  I— WIDOW-BURNING  263

The  word  agre  =  "  first "  was  altered  to  agneh  =  "  fire,"
and  hence  the  required  authority  was  established.

The  corresponding  passage  in  the  Atharva-V  eda
(XVIII,  iii,  1)  definitely  condemns  sati  and  could  not  be
altered  so  easily.

According  to  the  translation  by  W.  D.  Whitney,  it  reads  :

"  Get  up,  O  Woman,  to  the  world  of  the  living ;  thou
liest  by  this  one  who  is  deceased  ;  come  !  to  him  who  grasps
thy  hand,  thy  second  spouse,  thou  hast  now  entered  into  the
relation  of  wife  to  husband."

Sati  was  not  accepted  throughout  the  whole  of  India
by  any  means.  It  was  strongest  in  Bengal,  along  the  Ganges
valley  and  in  Rajputana.  It  was  rare  in  the  Panjab,  and
forbidden  in  Malabar.

Many  attempts  were  made  to  suppress  the  custom,  but
with  little  success.  In  the  sixteenth  century  the  Sikh  Guru
Amar  Das  (1552-1574)  condemned  the  practice,  saying :
'  They  are  not  satis  who  burn  themselves  with  the  dead.
The  true  sati  is  she  who  dieth  from  the  shock  of  separation
from  her  husband.  They  also  ought  to  be  considered  satis
who  abide  in  chastity  and  contentment,  who  serve,  and,
when  rising,  ever  remember  their  lord."

Akbar  also  tried  to  suppress  it,  but  only  managed  to
declare  the  act  voluntary.  After  capturing  Goa  one  of  the
first  acts  of  Albuquerque  was  to  abolish  sati  (1510).  It
was  not  until  the  end  of  the  eighteenth  century  that  the
British  began  to  turn  their  attention  to  the  subject.  The
question  was  first  taken  up  by  Sir  C.  Malet  and  Jonathan
Duncan  in  Bombay,  but  little  was  done,  as  the  Government
refrained  from  interfering  with  such  a  time-honoured  custom
of  the  people.  Even  such  authorities  as  Colebrooke  and
Wilson  gave  their  opinion  against  any  interference.  This
attitude,  however,  did  more  harm  than  good,  and  the  number
of  satis  increased.  In  1817  the  number  of  widows  burned
in  Bengal  alone  was  over  seven  hundred.  In  1827  Lord
William  Bentinck  became  Governor- General  of  India,  and
one  of  his  first  reforms  was  to  make  sati  illegal.  He  carried
the  regulation  in  Council  on  4th  December  1829,  by  which
all  who  abetted  sati  were  declared  guilty  of  "  culpable
homicide."  To  the  surprise  of  many  people  the  action  caused
scarcely  any  discontent  or  remonstrance.

In  the  native  states,  however,  matters  did  not  improve,


264  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

and  in  the  Oxford  History  of  India,  p.  689na,  V.  A.  Smith
says  that  among  the  Sikhs  in  the  Panjab  the  sail  murders
were  atrocious.  Four  ladies  were  burned  with  Ranjit
Singh  ;  one,  against  her  will,  with  Kharak  Singh  ;  two  with
Nao  Nihal  Singh  ;  310  (10  wives  and  300  unmarried  ladies
of  his  zenana)  were  sacrificed  at  the  obsequies  of  Raja  Suchet
Singh  ;  in  September  1845"  four  wives  of  Jawahir  Singh  were
forced  on  the  pyre  by  the  soldiery  ;  and,  after  Sobraon,  the
widow  of  Sardar  Shan  Singh  burnt  voluntarily.  Sir  Lepel
Griffin  in  1898  described  that  as  being  the  last  case  in  the
Panjab.

Although  satis  in  the  present  century  are  rare,  several
cases  have  occurred.  One,  for  example,  was  carried  out  in
1904  in  Behar,  another  in  a  small  village  in  the  Panjab  in
1905,  and  two  in  1906  at  Cawnpore  and  Calcutta.

Turning  now  to  actual  descriptions  of  satis,  the  one
which  has  the  greatest  interest  for  us  is  undoubtedly  that
of  Queen  Suryavati,  who,  in  a.d.  1081,  threw  herself  on  the
pyre  of  her  husband  Ananta.

In  my  Introduction  to  Vol.  I  (p.  xxxii)  I  referred  to  this
sati  of  our  author's  patroness  and  to  Ananta 's  suicide
through  despair  at  the  evil  doings  of  his  son  Kalasa.

In  Kalhana's  Rdjatarangini,  or  Chronicle  of  the  Kings
of  Kasmir,  is  the  following  account  of  the  queen's  (her
name  is  spelt  Suryamati)  sati  (Stein's  translation,  1900,  vol.  i,
pp.  305-307)  :—

Then  she  stood  up,  and  as  a  Sati  herself  taking  the
stick,  performed  the  office  of  doorkeeper  for  her  husband
while  she  had  him  adorned  for  the  last  [rites].

She  first  ordered  a  hundred  mounted  soldiers  to  watch
there  over  her  grandson  ;  then  she  sent  forth  her  husband
placed  on  a  litter.

Having  thus  passed  one  night  and  half-a-day,  this  devoted
wife  paid  her  reverence  to  [Siva]  Vijayesdna  (Vijaye^a)  and
proceeded  outside  seated  in  a  litter.

When  the  people  saw  those  two  going  forth,  the  horizon
was  rent,  as  it  were,  by  their  tumultuous  lamentations,
which  mixed  with  the  vibrating  sounds  of  the  funeral
music.

The  moving  [images  of  the]  people  reflected  in  the  orna-
ments of  the  hearse,  which  was  decorated  with  flags,  made


APPENDIX  I— WIDOW-BURNING  265

it  appear  as  if  they  were  close  to  the  king  and  striving  to
follow  him.

Waving  in  the  wind,  the  locks  of  the  princes  who  had
put  their  shoulders  under  the  hearse  appeared  like  splendid
Chowries  [held]  over  the  king,  who  was  placed  in  it.

Viewing  the  last  service  of  the  troops,  the  queen  reached
the  burning-ground  as  the  day  was  sinking.

Whether  from  maternal  affection,  which  is  hard  to
abandon,  or  for  some  other  reason,  she  longed  at  that  moment
to  see  her  son.

Thinking  that  the  dust  which  the  wind  had  tossed  up
was  raised  by  an  armed  force,  she  looked  out,  trembling  with
agitation,  in  the  hope  of  Kalasa's  coming.

At  that  moment  some  people  arrived  by  the  road  from
the  city  (Srinagar).  These  she  herself  asked  :  "  Well,  has
Kalasa  come  ?  "

But  the  son,  who  had  wished  to  come  to  his  mother,  was
kept  back  that  time  by  the  fomenters  of  the  quarrel,  who
frightened  him  in  various  ways.

After  this  the  queen  abandoned  the  hope  of  seeing  her
son,  and  asking  for  water  from  the  Vitastd,  recited  the
following  verse  : —

"  But  those  who  die  with  Vitastd  water  in  their  body,
obtain  for  certain  final  deliverance,  just  like  those  who
proclaim  sacred  learning."

When  she  had  drunk  the  water  brought  to  her,  and  had
sprinkled  it  [over  parts  of  her  body],  she  thus  cursed  those
who  had  destroyed  affection  [between  parents  and  son]  by
their  calumnies  :

"  May  those  who  have  caused  the  fatal  enmity  between
us  two  and  our  son  quickly  be  destroyed,  together  with  their
descendants  !  "

Through  this  unfailing  curse  of  the  afflicted  [queen]
Jayananda,  Jinduraja  and  others  found  an  early  death.

In  order  to  put  a  stop  to  the  slanderous  rumours  which
had  grown  up  with  regard  to  Haladhara's  position  as  her
confidant,  she,  the  Sati,  took  an  oath  in  proper  form,  pledging
[her  happiness  in  a]  future  life.

Having  thus  attested  the  purity  of  her  moral  character,  she
leaped  with  a  bright  smile  from  the  litter  into  the  flaming  fire.

The  sky  became  encircled  [and  reddened]  with  sheets  of
flames,  just  as  if  the  gods,  in  order  to  celebrate  her  arrival,
had  covered  [it]  with  minium.


266  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

The  people  did  not  notice  the  crackling  of  the  fire  owing
to  their  lamentations,  nor  its  heat  owing  to  their  hot  grief.
It  thus  appeared  to  them  as  if  it  were  merely  painted  in  a
picture.

Gangadhara,  Takkibuddha  and  the  litter-carrier  Dandaka,
and  of  the  female  servants. Udda,  Nonika  and  Valga,  followed
her.

Senata  and  Kshemata,  of  the  families  of  Bappata  and
Udbhata,  who  had  been  the  king's  favourites,  renounced
the  world  [and  stopped  as  mendicants]  at  VijayesVara.

The  beings  here  do  not  last  long,  being  fragile,  as  they
are  [mere]  mechanical  contrivances.  The  mind  and  the
glass  bottle  have  [both  however]  this  one  lasting  quality,
that  the  astonishing  tale  and  the  divine  Ganga- water  which
are  preserved  in  them  [respectively]  do  not  escape,  nor
become  stale  nor  decrease.

Before  leaving  Kashmir  I  would  like  to  refer  to  a  double
sail  which  took  place  in  a.d.  1111.  King  Uchchala  had  been
treacherously  murdered  by  conspirators  just  as  he  was  on
his  way  to  the  apartments  of  Bijjala,  his  favourite  wife.

Immediately  after  the  murder,  Radda,  the  chief  con-
spirator, seized  the  throne,  but  he  occupied  it  only  during
the  night  of  the  murder  and  the  following  morning,  for
Gargachandra,  one  of  Uchchala 's  favourite  ministers,  killed
him,  together  with  the  other  conspirators.

Now  besides  Bijjala  the  late  king  had  a  wife  of  low
birth  named  Jayamati,  and  when  affairs  had  reached  this
crisis  she  thought  she  would  probably  be  expected  to  become
a  sat%  so,  being  eager  to  live,  she  said  coaxingly  to  Garga-
chandra :  "Brother,  make  an  arrangement  with  me."  He,
however,  took  the  words  to  be  merely  conventional,  and
began  to  prepare  her  funeral  pyre.

In  the  eighth  book,  365-371,  the  Raj  alar  afiginl  (Stein,
vol.  ii,  p.  31)  describes  the  efforts  made  by  Bijjala  to  throw
herself  on  the  pyre  first,  and  the  disgraceful  behaviour  of
the  pilferers.  The  author  first  marvels  at  the  mentality  of
these  satis.

Nobody  can  understand  these  women  of  unscrutable
mind,  in  whose  heart  there  is  found,  as  it  were,  combined
the  waviness  of  their  ample  locks,  the  excessive  unsteadiness
of  their  eyes  and  the  firmness  of  their  round  breasts.

Though  given  to  unfaithfulness  and  killing  their  husbands,


APPENDIX  I— WIDOW-BURNING  267

yet  they  step  with  ease  into  the  fire.  In  no  manner  can  one
be  sure  of  women.

While  she,  proceeding  in  a  litter,  was  delaying  on  the
road,  Bijjala  got  in  front  of  her  and  entered  the  pyre.

Then  as  she  ( JayamatI)  was  ascending  the  pyre  her  limbs
were  hurt  by  the  pilferers  who  robbed  her  in  eager  desire  of
her  ornaments.

When  the  people  saw  the  two  queens  being  consumed  by
the  flames,  together  with  their  Chowries  and  parasols,  they,
too,  all  raised  lamentations,  and  their  eyes  were  as  if  burning
with  pain.

He  (Gargachandra)  then  displayed  his  noble  character
in  full  purity,  when,  though  requested  by  all,  he  did  not  seat
himself  on  the  throne.

He  looked  out  eagerly  for  certain  persons  in  whose  arms
he  wished  to  place  King  Uchchala's  infant  son,  in  order  to
have  him  consecrated  as  king.


In  Southern  India  the  rites  of  sail  seem  to  have  reached
their  height  of  development  during  the  fourteenth  and
fifteenth  centuries  in  the  kingdom  of  Vijayanagar.  Inter-
esting accounts  are  given  by  Fernao  Nuniz  and  Duarte
Barbosa.  That  of  Nuniz  appears  in  Sewell's  A  Forgotten
Empire,  pp.  391-393,  and  gives  a  really  graphic  description
of  the  rite  :

The  women  have  the  custom  of  burning  themselves
when  their  husbands  die,  and  hold  it  an  honour  to  do  so.
When,  therefore,  their  husbands  die,  they  mourn  with  their
relations  and  those  of  their  husbands,  but  they  hold  that
the  wife  who  weeps  beyond  measure  has  no  desire  to  go  in
search  of  her  husband  ;  and,  the  mourning  finished,  their
relations  speak  to  them,  advising  them  to  burn  themselves
and  not  to  dishonour  their  generation.  After  that,  it  is
said,  they  place  the  dead  man  on  a  bed  with  a  canopy  of
branches  and  covered  with  flowers,  and  they  put  the  woman
on  the  back  of  a  worthless  horse,  and  she  goes  after  them
with  many  jewels  on  her,  and  covered  with  roses ;  she
carries  a  mirror  in  her  hand  and  in  the  other  a  branch  of
flowers,  and  (she  goes  accompanied  by)  many  kinds  of  music,
and  his  relations  (go  with  her)  with  much  pleasure.     A  man


•jf.s


TIIK  OCEAN  OF  STORY


goes  also  playing  on  a  small  drum  and  lie  sings  songs  to  her
tilling  Ikt  that  she  is  going  to  join  Iut  liusbnnd,  and  she
answers  also  in  singing  that  so  she  will  do.  As  soon  as  she
arrives  at  the  place  where  they  are  always  burned,  she  waits
with  the  musicians  till  her  husband  is  burned,  whose  body
they  place  in  a  very  large  pit  that  has  been  made  ready  for
it.  covered  with  much  firewood.  I  More  they  light  the  fire
his  mother  or  nearest  relative  takes  a  vessel  of  water  on  the
head  and  a  firebrand  in  the  hand,  and  goes  three  times
round  the  pit,  and  at  each  round  makes  a  hole  in  the  pot;
and  when  these  three  rounds  are  done,  breaks  the  pot,  which
is  small,  and  throws  the  torch  into  the  pit.  Then  they
apo!y  the  lire,  and  when  the  bodv  is  burned  comes  the  wife
with  ail  the  fcasters  and  washes  her  feet,  and  then  a  Brahman
performs  over  her  certain  ceremonies  according  to  their  law  :
and  when  he  has  finished  doing  this  she  draws  off  with  her
own  hand  all  the  jewels  that  she  wears,  and  divides  them
among  her  female  relatives,  and  if  she  has  sons  she  commends
t!i<::i  to  her  most  honoured  relatives.  When  they  have
taken  off  all  she  has  on.  even  her  good  clothes,  they  put
on  her  some  yellow  cloths,  and  her  relatives  take  her  hand
anl  she  tikes  a  branch  in  the  other,  and  goes  singing  and
running  to  the  pit  where  the  lire  is.  and  then  mounts  on  some
steps  which  are  made  high  up  by  the  pit.  Before  they  do
this  they  go  up  three  times  round  the  fire,  and  then  she
mounts  the  steps  and  holds  in  front  of  her  a  mat  that  prevents
her  from  seeing  the  lire.  They  throw  into  the  lire  a  cloth
containing  rice,  and  another  in  which  they  carry  betel-
leaves,  and  her  comb  and  mirror  with  which  she  adorned
1 1  rself,  saying  that  all  these  arc  needed  to  adorn  herself  by
Ikt  husband's  side.  Finally  she  takes  leave  of  all,  and  puts
a  pot  of  oil  on  her  head,  and  casts  herself  into  the  lire  with
such  courage  that  it  is  a  tiling  of  wonder  :  and  as  soon  as  she
throws  herself  in.  the  relatives  are  ready  with  firewood  and
quickly  cover  her  with  it.  and  after  this  is  done  they  all
raise  loud  lamentations.  When  a  captain  dies,  however
many  wives  he  has.  they  all  burn  themselves,  and  when  the
Kiiiii  dies  thev  do  the  same.

The  spot  where  these  cremations  took  place  was  probably
at  Ximbapurain.  close  to  Talarigattu.  where  there  is  a  large
cinder  mound  covered  over  with  rank  vegetation  and  trees
of  considerable  age.  (Sec  A.  II.  Longhurst,  Ilampi  Ruins,
Madras.    1!»17.  p.    H.)


APPENDIX  I— WIDOW-BURNING  269

Barbosa's  account  affords  an  interesting  comparison
with  that  given  above.  The  following  details  are  taken
from  M.  Longworth  Dames'  translation,  Hakluyt  Society,
1918,  vol.  i,  p.  213  et  seq.  :—

A  great  pit  is  dug  in  the  burning- ground,  in  which  a  pile
of  wood  burns.  When  the  husband's  body  has  been  laid
therein,  and  begins  to  burn,  the  widow,  if  poor  and  of  low
estate,  throws  herself  into  the  midst  of  the  fire.

With  a  woman  of  high  rank,  the  rites  are  much  more
costly  and  elaborate.

After  her  husband's  body  has  been  burned,  she  enter-
tains her  friends  and  relations  in  as  lavish  a   manner  as
possible.     She  then  attires  herself  in  her  finest  clothes  and,
wearing  all  her  jewels,  is  led  on  a  horse  (white,  if  possible)
through  the  whole  city  with  great  rejoicings,  until  the  part}'
arrives  back  at  the  spot  where  the  husband  has  been  burnt.
They  now  cast  a  great  quantity  of  wood  into  the  pit  itself
and  on  its  edge  make  a  great  fire.     When  it  has  burned  up
somewhat  they  erect  a  wooden   scaffold  with  four   or  five
steps,  where  they  take  her  up  just  as  she  is.     When  she  is
on  the  top   she  turns  herself  round   thereon  three  times,
worshipping  towards  the  direction  of  sunrise,  and,  this  done,
she  calls  her  sons,  kindred  and  friends,  and  to  each  she  gives
a  jewel,  whereof  she  has  many  with  her,  and  in  the  same  way
every  piece  of  her  clothing  until  nothing  is  left  except  a
small  piece  of  cloth  with  which  she  is  clothed  from  the  waist
down.     All  this  she  does  and  says  so  firmly,  and  with  such
a  cheerful  countenance,  that  she  seems  not  about  to  die.
Then  she  tells  the  men  who  are  with  her  on  the  scaffold  to
consider  what  they  owe  to  their  wives,  who,  being  free  to
act,  yet  burn  themselves  alive  for  the  love  of  them,  and  the
women  she  tells  to  see  how  much  they  owe  to  their  husbands,
to  such  a  degree  as  to  go  with  them  even  to  death.     Then
she  ceases  speaking,  and  they  place  in  her  hands  a  pitcher
full  of  oil,  and  she  puts  it  on  her  head,  and  with  it  she  again
turns  round  thrice  on  the  scaffold  and  again  worships  to-
wards the  rising  sun.     Then  she  casts  the  pitcher  of  oil  into
the  fire  and  throws  herself  after  it  with  as  much  goodwill
as  if  she  were  throwing  herself  on  a  little  cotton,  from  which
she  could  receive  no  hurt.     The  kinsfolk  all  take  part  at
once  and  cast  into  the  fire  many  pitchers  of  oil  and  butter,
which  they  hold  ready  for  this  purpose,  and  much  wood  on
this,  and  therewith  bursts  out  such  a  flame  that  no  more


270  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

can  be  seen.  The  ashes  that  remain  after  these  ceremonies
are  thrown  into  running  streams.

In  the  case  of  the  death  of  a  king,  Barbosa  tells  us  that
four  or  five  hundred  women  burn  themselves  with  him,  as
well  as  many  men  "  who  are  his  intimates."  In  a  note  on
the  passage  Dames  says  that  there  is  abundant  testimony
as  to  the  number  of  satis  at  the  death  of  a  king  of  Vijaya-
nagar.  Nicolo  Conti  was  told  that  the  king  had  12,000  wives,
of  whom  2000  or  3000  were  chosen  only  on  condition  that
at  his  death  they  should  voluntarily  burn  themselves  with
him.

Dames  states  in  a  note  on  page  213  that  other  interesting
descriptions  of  satis  in  other  parts  of  India  are  given  by
Mandelslo,  Peter  Mundy  and  Thomas  Bowrey.  In  the  case
of  Mandelslo  the  woman  gave  him  one  of  her  bracelets,  no
doubt  in  making  a  distribution  of  her  jewels  such  as  is
described  by  Barbosa  (Travels,  English  translation  by  John
Davies,  1669,  p.  32).  In  the  same  way  Thomas  Bowrey
was  given  by  the  widow  some  flowers  from  her  hair  (Countries
round  the  Bay  of  Bengal,  edited  by  Sir  R.  Temple,  Hakluyt
Society,  London,  1903,  p.  38).  His  description  refers  to
Careda,  between  Madras  and  Machhlipatam,  in  the  year
1672,  while  Mandelslo's  refers  to  Kambayat.  It  is  evident,
therefore,  that  this  custom  was  widely  diffused.

Peter  Mundy 's  account  (Travels,  edited  by  Sir  R.  C.
Temple,  Hakluyt  Society,  vol.  ii,  1914,  pp.  34-36)  refers
to  a  satl  at  Surat  of  a  Banya's  widow  in  1630,  of  which  he
has  left  his  own  sketch.  In  none  of  these  cases  is  there
anything  to  show  that  the  cremation  took  place,  as  at  Vijaya-
nagar,  in  a  deep  pit  into  which  the  widow  threw  herself
either  while  her  husband's  body  was  burning,  or,  in  the  case
of  persons  of  high  rank,  afterwards,  with  a  procession  on
horseback,  and  great  ceremonies.  The  custom  of  performing
the  cremation  in  a  pit,  as  described  by  Barbosa  and  Nuniz,
was  evidently  common  in  Southern  India.  Tavernier  alludes
to  it  in  the  seventeenth  century  as  prevailing  on  the  coast
of  Coromandel.  His  account,  though  short,  shows  that  the
ceremony  was  identical  with  that  described  in  the  text
( Tavernier 's  Travels,  English  edition,  1678,  Part  II,  bk.  iii,
p.  171).

In  general  the  cremation  seems  to  have  taken  place  on
a  pyre,  and  not  in  a  pit,  and  such  is  the  usage  in  cremations
at  the  present  day  in  Northern  India.     In  Western  India


APPENDIX  I— WIDOW-BURNING  271

W.  Crooke  says  (Popular  Religion  and  Folk-Lore  of  Northern
India,  vol.  i,  p.  188)  a  grass  hut  was  erected  in  which  the
widow  sat  holding  her  husband's  head  in  her  lap,  supporting
it  with  her  right  hand  and  holding  in  her  left  a  torch  with
which  she  kindled  the  hut.  Such  a  sail  is  that  described
by  Peter  Mundy,  and  the  hut  or  "  cottage,"  as  he  calls  it,
is  shown  in  the  background  of  his  sketch.  See  also  Dellen's
description  of  a  sail  in  his  Voyage  to  the  East  Indies,  London,
1698,  pp.  48-50,  which  closely  resembles  Mundy 's  account.

In  more  modern  days,  although  satis  have  been  fairly
numerous,  the  prescribed  rites  followed  at  such  immolations
differ  but  little  in  detail  from  what  has  already  been  said.

In  1829,  the  very  year  in  which  satl  was  finally  prohibited,
Sir  William  Sleeman,  in  his  Rambles  and  Recollections,  de-
scribes the  amazing  persistency  which  a  certain  old  woman
at  Jubbulpore  showed  in  her  desire  to  ascend  the  pyre  of
her  husband.  Sir  William  did  all  he  could  to  prevent  it,
and  actually  succeeded  in  delaying  it  for  five  days,  but  the
miseries  of  the  woman  seemed  so  genuine  that  at  last  he
let  her  have  her  way.

"Satisfied  myself,"  he  writes,  "that  it  would  be  un-
availing to  attempt  to  save  her  life,  I  sent  for  all  the  principal
members  of  the  family,  and  consented  that  she  should  be
suffered  to  burn  herself  if  they  would  enter  into  engagements
that  no  other  member  of  their  family  should  ever  do  the
same.  This  they  all  agreed  to,  and  the  papers  having  been
drawn  out  in  due  form  about  midday,  I  sent  down  notice
to  the  old  lady,  who  seemed  extremely  pleased  and  thankful.
The  ceremonies  of  bathing  were  gone  through  before  three,
while  the  wood  and  other  combustible  materials  for  a  strong
fire  were  collected  and  put  into  the  pit.  After  bathing  she
called  for  a  pan  (betel-leaf)  and  ate  it,  then  rose  up,  and
with  one  arm  on  the  shoulder  of  her  eldest  son,  and  the
other  on  that  of  her  nephew,  approached  the  fire.  As  she
rose  up  fire  was  set  to  the  pile,  and  it  was  instantly  in  a  blaze.
The  distance  was  about  one  hundred  and  fifty  yards  ;  she
came  on  with  a  calm  and  cheerful  countenance,  stopped
once,  and  casting  her  eyes  upwards,  said :  '  Why  have  they
kept  me  five  days  from  thee,  my  husband  ?  '  On  coming
to  the  sentries  her  supports  stopped,  she  walked  round  the
pit,  paused  a  moment,  and  while  muttering  a  prayer  threw
some  flowers  into  the  fire.     She  then  walked  deliberately


272  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

and  steadily  to  the  brink,  stepped  into  the  centre  of  the
flame,  sat  down,  and  leaning  back  in  the  midst  as  if  reposing
upon  a  couch,  was  consumed  without  uttering  a  shriek  or
betraying  one  sign  of  agony."

Fuller  details  will  be  found  in  Russell,  Tribes  and  Castes
of  the  Central  Provinces,  vol.  ii,  pp.  369-374.

Further  descriptions  would  be  superfluous,  but  the  few
following  references  might  be  added  to  those  already  given
in  the  course  of  this  appendix  : —

H.  A.  Rose,  A  Glossary  of  the  Tribes  and  Castes  of  the
Punjab  and  North-West  Frontier  Province,  Lahore,  1919,
vol.  i,  pp.  200-201,  404  ;  Indian  Notes  and  Queries,  vol.  iv,
p.  153  ;  North  Indian  Notes  and  Queries,  vol.  ii,  p.  726  ;
The  Imperial  Gazetteer  of  India,  vol.  ii,  1909,  pp.  218,  498  ;
Government  of  Madras  Legislative  Department,  The  Madras
Sail  Regulation  (Madras  Regulation  No.  1  of  1830)  (as
modified  up  to  October  1909),  Madras,  1909  ;  Henry  Jeffreys
Bushby,  Widow- Burning,  London,  1855  ;  A.  K.  Coomar-
aswamy,  Sati :  a  Vindication  of  the  Hindu  Woman  (a  paper
read  before  the  Sociological  Society,  London,  12th  November
1912) ;  G.  T.  Vigne,  "  Widow-Burning,"  Travels  in  Kashmir,
2  vols.,  1842,  vol.  i,  pp.  82-94  ;  "  Suttee  "  in  Yule  and
Burnell,  Hobson  Jobson :  J.  C.  Oman,  Brdhmans,  Theists
and  Muslims  of  India,  1907,  p.  191  et  seq.


APPENDIX    II


VOL.   IV.


APPENDIX  II

NALA  AND  DAMAYANTI

On  page  236  we  saw  that  in  order  to  console  the  unhappy
Queen  Bandhumati,  and  hearten  her  in  her  search  for  her
husband,  the  Brahman  Sumanas  related  the  story  of  Nala
and  Damayantl.  This  tale,  beautiful  in  its  simplicity,  its
tender  pathos  and  in  its  high  tone  of  morality,  is  taken  from
the  Mahdbhdrata  (I,  liii  et  seq.).

There  is,  however,  ample  evidence  in  the  tale  itself  to
show  that  it  dates  back  long  before  the  Epic  period,  and  can
be  assigned,  with  but  little  doubt,  to  Vedic  days.

As  told  by  Somadeva  it  still  retains  its  simple  form,
but  has  been  abbreviated  in  many  places.  Some  of  these
omitted  portions  are  of  considerable  interest  and  beauty,
and  their  absence  is  a  distinct  loss.  I  shall  therefore  give
several  passages  later  in  this  appendix.

We  will  first  consider  the  story  as  it  appears  in  the
Mahdbhdrata.  It  is  called  the  Nalopdkhydna,  or  "  Episode
of  Nala,"  and  occupies  sections  53-79  of  the  Vana  Parva —
i.e.  "  Forest  "  Book.  Yudhishthira  has  gambled  away  his
kingdom,  wife,  and  all  his  possessions.  A  further  loss  forces
him  to  become  an  exile  for  twelve  years,  together  with  his
wife  and  brothers.  It  is  during  this  exile  in  the  forest  (vana)
that  the  story  of  Nala  is  told.

There  are  several  points  to  be  noticed  in  assigning  it
to  a  much  earlier  period  than  that  of  the  work  in  which
it  appears.  It  forms  no  part  of  the  main  plot  of  the
Mahdbhdrata  and  is  inserted  in  exactly  the  same  way  as
the  Rig-Veda  stories  (e.g.  Urvasl  and  Pururavas)  are  intro-
duced by  Somadeva.  The  language  and  textual  forms
agree  much  more  with  those  employed  in  the  Vedas  than
in  the  Epics.  But  perhaps  the  most  important  point  is
that  all  the  gods  mentioned  are  Vedic  —  Indra,  Agni,
Varuna  and  Yama.  There  is  no  mention  of  Siva  or  Vishnu.
In  most  cases  these  post- Vedic  deities  would  have  been
substituted  for  the  old  ones,  or  else  would  have  been
added  in  addition.  But  in  the  case  of  such  a  popular  story
275


276  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

as  Nala   the   transforming   hand   of   the   editor   has   been
withheld.

Somadeva,  however,  being  a  poet  at  a  court  where  Saiva
Hinduism  was  at  its  height,  felt  constrained  to  introduce
the  chief  deity  of  his  work,  and  so  the  love  of  Nala  and
Damayanti  is  said  to  be  "  greater  than  that  of  Siva  and
Parvati  "  (see  p.  241).

The  following  brief  outline  of  the  story  as  originally
told  in  the  Mahdbhdrata  will  show  where  Somadeva  has
made  his  alterations.  The  beginning  is  similar  to  our
version,  except  that  the  swan  appears  to  Nala  first  and  not
to  Damayanti.  It  is  Bhima  himself  who  determines  to
celebrate  his  daughter's  svayamvara.  The  gods  who  procure
Nala's  aid  are  only  four — Indra,  Agni,  Varuna  and  Yama —
and  Nala  is  merely  told  to  announce  their  arrival  and  the
fact  that  they  are  attending  the  svayamvara.  Nala's  inter-
view with  Damayanti  is  of  considerable  length.  At  the
ceremony  Damayanti  sees  only  five  Nalas,  not  six.

The  couple  live  twelve  years  in  perfect  happiness,  until
Kali  has  a  chance  of  entering  Nala's  body.  He  does  it,
however,  not  when  Nala  is  in  a  state  of  drunkenness,  but
when  at  last  he  has  noticed  some  trifling  neglect  in  a  portion
of  his  daily  ablutions.

When  inviting  his  brother  to  play,  Pushkara  says :
" Divyava  vrisheiia"  ("Let  us  play  with  the  vrisha") — i.e.
with  the  principal  dice  known  as  the  "bull."  Somadeva  has
misunderstood  the  sense  of  vrisha  and  makes  the  brothers
play  for  a  bull  as  a  stake  (see  p.  242).

On  being  driven  with  his  hapless  wife  into  the  forest
Nala  sees  some  "  birds  around  him  settling  with  their  golden-
tinctured  wings  "  and  vainly  tries  to  catch  them  with  his  only
garment.  When  the  birds  (not  necessarily,  or  even  likely,
swans)  are  flying  away  with  it  they  say  :

"  Lo,  we  are  the  dice,  to  spoil  thee  thus  descended,  foolish  king !
While  thou  hadst  a  single  garment  all  our  joy  was  incomplete."

Broken-hearted,  Nala  returns  to  Damayanti,  and  it  is
because  of  his  complete  nakedness  that  he  cuts  off  half  of
his  wife's  garment  before  deserting  her  while  she  is  asleep.

Vivid  descriptions  of  the  tropical  forest  are  given,  and
the  distracted  appeals  to  animals  and  vegetation  resemble
those  we  read  of  as  employed  by  Pururavas  in  his  search  for


APPENDIX  II— NALA  AND  DAMAYANTl       277

UrvasI  (see  Vol.  II,  pp.  258,  259).  Damayanti's  adventures
are  many  and  varied.  In  her  imagination  she  comes  to  a
hermitage  where  her  speedy  reunion  with  Nala  is  foretold.
Later  on  she  joins  a  band  of  merchants,  but,  owing  to  her  in-
herent bad  luck,  they  are  nearly  all  killed  by  a  sudden  attack
of  infuriated  wild  elephants.

In  the  meantime  Nala,  transformed  into  a  dwarf,  has
reached  the  Court  of  King  Rituparna,  and  takes  service  as
cook  under  the  name  of  Bahuka.

It  is  at  this  point  that  King  Bhima  sends  out  trustworthy
men  in  all  directions  to  look  for  his  daughter.  The  minister's
name  is  Sudeva.

The  accounts  of  how  Damayanti  is  recognised  by  her
auspicious  mole,  the  prowess  of  the  mysterious  dwarf
charioteer,  the  methods  employed  to  discover  Nala,  and
their  final  reunion  are  all  told  in  greater  detail  than  in  the
version  of  Somadeva.

Before  giving  extracts  from  the  more  important  of  the
omitted  portions  I  would  enumerate  the  other  occurrences
of  the  story  of  Nala  in  Sanskrit  literature.

There  are  two  celebrated  poems  dealing  with  Nala's
adventures.  The  first  is  called  Nalodaya,  the  authorship
of  which  is  uncertain.  For  a  long  time  it  was  considered
to  be  the  work  of  Kalidasa,  but  recent  research  shows  the
author  to  have  been  the  Keraja  poet  called  Vasudeva,  who
lived  in  the  first  half  of  the  ninth  century  a.d.  (A.  S.  Rama-
natha  Ayyar,  "The  Authorship  of  the  Nalodaya,"  Journ.
Roy.  As.  Soc,  April  1925,  pp.  263-275).  The  second  is  the
Naishadha,  by  Sriharsha.  The  Nalodaya,  or  "  Rise  of
Nala,"  deals  in  four  cantos  with  Nala's  restoration  to  power
after  his  reunion  with  Damayanti.  From  our  point  of
view  it  is  of  no  value,  being  merely  compiled  to  exhibit
the  author's  amazing  use  of  varied  and  artificial  metres,
endless  puns  and  tricks  of  style  and  rhyming.  Sriharsha 's
Naishadha  is  also  a  "  trick  "  production.  Although  punning
is  common,  its  chief  characteristic  is  the  consistent  use  of
metaphors  and  long  compound  words,  some  running  into
two  or  three  lines  of  ordinary  printing.  He  has  turned  the
simple  style  of  the  original  into  twenty-two  cantos  of  the
most  elaborate  Kavya  (artificial  poetry)  style.  The  date
of  Sriharsha 's  work  is  about  the  latter  half  of  the  twelfth
century.


278  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

Nala  is  also  the  subject  of  what  Monier  Williams  describes
as  a  very  curious  composition,  half  prose,  half  verse,  called
Nala-cham'pUy  by  an  author  named  Trivikrama.  Finally  there
is  the  Tamil  Nala-Rdja  and  a  Telugu  poem  by  Raghava,
written  about  a.d.  1650.  They  are  both  independent  com-
positions and  not  translations  from  the  Sanskrit.


I  now  proceed  to  the  extracts  from  the  Mahdbhdrata.
The  translation  followed  is  that  by  H.  H.  Milman  in  Monier
Williams'  edition  of  1860.

Nala  is  torn  between  the  power  of  Kali  within  him  and
his  own  nature.  Finally  Kali  is  successful  and  DamayantI
deserted :

Long  within  his  heart  he  pondered,  and  again,  again  weighed

o'er.
Best  he  thought  it  DamayantI  to  desert,  that  wretched  king.
From  her  virtue  none  dare  harm  her  in  the  lonely  forest  way,
Her  the  fortunate,  the  noble,  my  devoted  wedded  wife.
Thus  his  mind  on  DamayantI  dwelt  in  its  perverted  thought,
Wrought  by  Kali's  evil  influence  to  desert  his  lovely  wife.
Of  himself  without  a  garment,  and  of  her  with  only  one,
As  he  thought,  approached  he  near  her  to  divide  that  single

robe.
"  How  shall  I  divide  the  garment  by  my  loved  one  unper-

ceived  ?  "
Pondering  this  within  his  spirit  round  the  cabin  Nala  went ;
In  that  narrow  cabin's  circuit  Nala  wandered  here  and  there,
Till  he  found  without  a  scabbard,  shining,  a  well-tempered

sword.
Then  when  half  that  only  garment  he  had  severed,  and  put  on,
In  her  sleep  Vidarbha's  princess  with  bewildered  mind  he

fled.
Yet,  his  cruel  heart  relenting,  to  the  cabin  turns  he  back  ;
On  the  slumbering  DamayantI  gazing,  sadly  wept  the  king  ;
Thou,  that  sun  nor  wind  hath  ever  roughly  visited,  my  love  !
On  the  hard  earth  in  a  cabin  sleepest  with  thy  guardian  gone.
Thus  attired  in  half  a  garment  she  that  aye  so  sweetly  smiled,
Like  to  one  distracted,  beauteous,  how  at  length  will  she

awake  ?
How  will't  fare  with  Bhima's  daughter,  lone,  abandoned  by

her  lord,


APPENDIX  II— NALA  AND  DAMAYANTl       279

Wandering   in   the   savage   forest,    where   wild   beasts   and

serpents  dwell  ?
May  the  suns  and  winds  of  heaven,  may  the  genii  of  the

woods,
Noblest,  may  they  all  protect  thee,  thine  own  virtue  thy

best  guard.
To  his  wife  of  peerless  beauty  on  the  earth,  'twas  thus  he  spoke.
Then  of  sense  bereft  by  Kali  Nala  hastily  set  forth  ;
And  departing,  still  departing  he  returned  again,  again ;
Dragged  away  by  that  bad  demon,  ever  by  his  love  drawn

back.
Nala,  thus  his  heart  divided  into  two  conflicting  parts,
Like  a  swing  goes  backward,  forward,  from  the  cabin,  to  and

fro.
Torn  away  at  length  by  Kali  flies  afar  the  frantic  king,
Leaving  there  his  wife  in  slumber,  making  miserable  moans.
Reft  of  sense,  possessed  by  Kali,  thinking  still  on  her  he  left,
Passed  he  in  the  lonely  forest,  leaving  his  deserted  wife.

At  first  Damayanti  cannot  believe  she  has  been  deserted.
Perhaps  Nala  is  playing  a  joke  :

"  But  thou'st  had  thy  sport — enough  then,  now  desist,  O
king  of  men,

Mock  not  thou  a  trembling  woman,  show  thee  to  me,  O  my
lord!

Yes,  I  see  thee,  there  I  see  thee  hidden  as  thou  think'st
from  sight,

In  the  bushes  why  conceal  thee  ?  Answer  me.  Why  speak'st
thou  not  ?

O  ungentle  prince  of  monarchs  !  to  this  piteous  plight  re-
duced,

Wherefore  wilt  thou  not  approach  me  to  console  me  in  my
woe  ?

For  myself  I  will  not  sorrow,  nor  for  aught  to  me  befalls.

Thou  art  all  alone,  my  husband,  I  will  only  mourn  for  thee."

As  Damayanti  wanders  on  she  penetrates   deeper  and
deeper  into  the  forest,  which  is  thus  graphically  described  :

Full  of  lions,  pards,  and  tigers,  stags,  and  buffaloes,  and

bears,
Where  all  kinds  of  birds  were  flocking,  and  wild  men  and

robbers  dwelt.


280  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

Thick   with   Sals,   bamboos,    ASwatthas,    Dhavas,   and   the

Ebon  dark,
Oily  Inguds,   KinSuks,  Arjuns,   Nim  trees,   Syandans,   Sal-

malas  ;
Full  with  Rose-apples  and  Mangoes,  Lodh  trees,  Catechus

and  Canes,
Blushing   Lotuses,    Kadambas,    and   the   tree   with    massy

leaves ;
Close  o'erspread  with  Jujubes,  Bel  trees,  tangled  with  the

holy  Fig,
Palms,  Priyalas,  Dates,  Haritas,  trees  of  every  form  and  name.
Pregnant  with  rich   mines  of  metal  many  a  mountain  it

enclosed,
Many  a  shady  resonant  arbour,  many  a  deep  and  wondrous

glen;
Many  a  lake,  and  pool,  and  river,  birds  and  beasts  of  every

shape.
She,  in  forms  terrific  round  her,  serpents,  elves,  and  giants

saw  :
Pools,  and  tanks  of  lucid  water,  and  the  shaggy  tops  of  hills,
Flowing  streams  and  headlong  torrents  saw,  and  wondered

at  the  sight.
And  the  Princess  of  Vidarbha  gazed  where,  in  their  countless

herds,
Buffaloes  and  boars  were  feeding,  bears,  and  serpents  of  the

wood.
Safe  in  virtue,  bright  in  beauty,  glorious,  and  of  high  resolve,
Now  alone,  Vidarbha 's  daughter,  wandering,  her  lost  Nala

sought.

After  many  adventures  she  falls  in  with  a  party  of
merchants,  but  during  the  night  they  are  attacked  by  wild
elephants  :

When  the  midnight  came,  all  noiseless  came  in  silence  deep
and  still,

Weary  slept  the  band  of  merchants,  lo,  a  herd  of  elephants,

Oozing  moisture  from  their  temples,  came  to  drink  the
troubled  stream.

When  that  caravan  they  gazed  on,  with  their  slumbering
beasts  at  rest,

The  tame  elephants  they  scented,  those  wild  forest  ele-
phants ;


APPENDIX  II— NALA  AND  DAMAYANTl       281

Forward  rush  they  fleet  and  furious,  mad  to  slay,  and  wild

with  heat ;
Irresistible  the  onset  of  the  rushing  ponderous  brutes,
As  the  peaks  from  some  high  mountain  down  the  valley

thundering  roll.
Strewn  was  all  the  way  before  them  with  the  boughs,  the

trunks  of  trees  ;
On  they  rushed  to  where  the  travellers  slumbered  by  the

lotus-lake.
Trampled  down  and  vainly  struggling,  helpless  on  the  earth

they  lay.
"  Woe,  oh,  woe  !  "  shrieked  out  the  merchants,  wildly  some

began  to  fly,
In  the  forest's  thickets  plunging  ;    some  stood  gasping,  blind

with  sleep  ;
And  the  elephants  down  beat  them  with  their  tusks,  their

trunks,  their  feet.
Many  saw  their  camels  dying,  mingled  with  the  men  on  foot,
And   in   frantic   tumult   rushing   wildly    struck   each   other

down  ;
Many  miserably  shrieking  cast  them  down  upon  the  earth,
Many   climbed   the  trees   in  terror,    on  the  rough   ground

stumbled  some.
Thus  in  various  wise  and  fatal,  by  the  elephants  assailed,
Lay  that  caravan  so  wealthy,  scattered  all  abroad  or  slain.
Such,  so  fearful  was  the  tumult,  the  three  worlds  seemed  all

appalled,
"  'Tis  a  fire  amid  the  encampment,  save  ye,  fly  ye,  for  your

lives.
Lo,  your  precious  pearls  ye  scatter,  take  them  up,  why  fly

so  fast  ?
Save  them,    'tis   a   common  venture,   fear   ye   not   that   I

deceive."
Thus  t'each  other  shrieked  the  merchants  as  in  fear  they

scattered  round.
"  Yet  again  I  call  upon  you,  cowards  !  think  ye  what  ye  do."
All  around  this  frantic  carnage  raging  through  the  prostrate

host,
DamayantI  soon  awakened,  with  her  heart  all  full  of  dread  ;
There  she  saw  a  hideous  slaughter,  the  whole  world  might

well  appal.
To  such  sights  all  unfamiliar  gazed  the  queen  with  lotus-eyes,
Pressing  in  her  breath  with  terror  slowly  rose  she  on  her  feet.


282  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

When   finally   DamayantI  is  recognised   by   Sudeva   he
describes  her  wasted  frame  :

Like  the  full  moon,   darkly  beauteous,   with   her  fair  and

swelling  breasts,
Her,  the  queen,  that  with  her  brightness  makes  each  clime

devoid  of  gloom,
With    her    lotus-eyes    expanding,    like    Manmatha's    queen

divine ;
Like  the   moonlight   in   its  fullness,   the   desire   of  all  the

world.
From  Vidarbha's  pleasant  waters  her  by  cruel  fate  plucked

up,
Like  a  lotus-flower  uprooted,  with  the  mire  and  dirt  around  :
Like  the  pallid  night,  when  Rahu  swallows  up  the  darkened

moon  :
For  her  husband  wan  with  sorrow,  like  a  gentle  stream  dried

up;
Like  a  pool,  where  droops  the  lotus,  whence  the  affrighted

birds  have  fled,
By  the  elephant's  proboscis,  in  its  quiet  depths  disturbed.
Tender,  soft-limbed,  in  a  palace  fit,  of  precious  stones,  to

dwell.
Like  the  lotus- stem,  uprooted,  parched  and  withered  by  the

sun.
Fair  as  generous,  of  adornment  worthy,  yet  all  unadorned,
Like  the  young  moon's  slender  crescent  in  the  heavens  by

dark  clouds  veiled.

The  rolling  of  Rituparna's  chariot,  driven  by  Nala,   is
heard  approaching  the  city  :

With  the  evening  in  Vidarbha,  men  at  watch,  as  they  drew

near,
Mighty  Rituparna's  coming  to  King  Bhlma  did  proclaim.
Then  that  king,  by  Bhima's  mandate,  entered  in  Kundina's

walls,
All  the  region  round  him  echoing  with  the  thunders  of  his

car.
But  the  echoing  of  that  chariot  when  King  Nala's  horses

heard,
In  their  joy  they  neighed  and  trampled,  even  as  Nala's  self

were  there.


APPENDIX  II— NALA  AND  DAMAYANTl       283

DamayantI  too  the  rushing  of  King  Nala's  chariot  heard,
As  a  cloud   that   hoarsely  thunders  at  the  coming   of  the

rains.
All  her  heart  was  thrilled  with  wonder  at  that  old  familiar

sound.
On  they  seemed  to  come,  as  Nala  drove  of  yore  his  trampling

steeds  :
Like  it  seemed  to  Bhlma's  daughter,  and  e'en  so  to  Nala's

steeds.
On  the  palace-roofs  the  peacocks,  th 'elephants  within  their

stalls,
And  the  horses  heard  the  rolling  of  the  mighty  monarch's

car.
Elephants  and  peacocks  hearing  the  fleet  chariot  rattling  on,
Up  they  raised  their  necks  and  clamoured,  as  at  sound  of

coming  rain.

DamayantI  spake  :

"  How  the  rolling  of  yon  chariot,  filling,  as  it  seems,  the

earth,
Thrills  my  soul  with  unknown  transport !     It  is  Nala,  king

of  men.
If  this  day  I  see  not  Nala  with  his  glowing  moon-like  face,
Him,  the  king  with  countless  virtues,  I  shall  perish  without

doubt.
If  this  day  within  th 'embraces  of  that  hero's  clasping  arms
I  the  gentle  pressure  feel  not,  without  doubt   I  shall  not

live.
If  'tis  not,  like  cloud  of  thunder,  he  that  comes,  Nishadha's

king,
I  this  day  the  fire  will  enter,  burning  like  the  hue  of  gold.
In  his  might  like  the  strong  lion,  like  the  raging  elephant,
Comes  he  not,  the  prince  of  princes,  I  shall  perish  without

doubt.
Not  a  falsehood  I  remember,  I  remember  no  offence ;
Not  an  idle  word  remember,  in  his  noble  converse  free.
Lofty,  patient,  like  a  hero,  liberal  beyond  all  kings,
Nought  ignoble,  as  the  base-born,  even  in  private,  may  he

do.
As  I  think  upon  his  virtues,  as  I  think  by  day,  by  night,
All  this  heart  is  rent  with  anguish,  widowed  of  its  own  be-
loved."


>js\  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

Thus    lamenting,    she    ascended,    as    with    frenzied    mind

possessed,
To  the  palace  roof's  high  terrace  to  behold  the  king  of  men.
In  the  middle  court  high  seated  in  the  car,  the  lord  of  earth,
Rituparna  with  Varshneya  and  with  Vahuka  she  saw.
When  Varshneya  from  that  chariot,  and  when  Vahuka  came

down,
He  let  loose  those  noble  coursers,  and  he  stopped  the  glowing

car.
From  that  chariot  seat  descended  Rituparna,  king  of  men,
To  the  noble  monarch  Bhima  he  drew  near,  for  strength  re-
nowned.
Him  received  with  highest  honour  Bhima,  for  without  due

cause
Deemed  not  he  the  Raja's  visit,  nor  divined  his  daughter's

plot.
"Wherefore  com'st  thou?    hail  and  welcome!"  thus  that

gracious  king  inquires  ;
For  his  daughter's  sake  he  knew  not  that  the  lord  of  men  had

come.
But  the  Raja  Rituparna,  great  in  wisdom  as  in  might,
When  nor  king  within  the  palace,  nor  king's  son  he  could

behold,
Nor  of  svayamvara  heard  he,  nor  assembled  Brahmans  saw,
Thus  within  his  mind  deep  pondering  spoke  of  Kosala  the

lord  :
"  Hither,  O  majestic  Bhima,  to  salute  thee  am  I  come."
But  King  Bhima  smiled  in  secret,  as  he  thought  within  his

mind :
"  What  the  object  of  this  journey  of  a  hundred  yojanas  ?
Passing  through  so  many  cities  for  this  cause  he  set  not  forth ;
For  this  cause  of  little  moment  to  our  court  he  hath  not

come,
'Tis  not  so ; — perchance  hereafter  I  may  know  his  journey's

aim."
After  royal  entertainment  then  the  king  his  guest  dismissed  :
"  Take  then  thy  repose,"  thus  said  he,  "  weary  of  thy  journey,

rest."
Ushered  by  royal  servants,  he  to  th 'appointed  chamber  went :
There  retired  King  Rituparna,  with  Varshneya  in  his  suite.
Vahuka,  meantime,  the  chariot  to  the  chariot-house  had  led,
There  the  coursers  he  unharnessed,  skilfully  he  dressed  them
there,


APPENDIX  II— NALA  AND  DAMAYANTl       285

And  with  gentle  words  caressed  them,  on  the  chariot-seat

sate  down.
But  the  woeful  Damayanti,  when  Bhangasuri  she'd  seen,
And  the  charioteer  Varshneya,  and  the  seeming  Vahuka,
Thought  within  Vidarbha's  princess :  "  Whose  was  that  fleet

chariot's  sound  ?
Such  it  seems  as  noble  Nala's,  yet  no  Nala  do  I  see.
Hath     the    charioteer     Varshneya     Nala's     noble     science

learned  ?
Therefore  did  the  thundering  chariot  sound  as   driven  by

Nala's  self  ?
Or  may  royal  Rituparna  like  the  skilful  Nala  drive  ?
Therefore  did  the  rolling  chariot  seem  as  of  Nishadha's  king  ?  "
Thus  when  Damayanti  pondered  in  the  silence  of  her  soul,
She,   the  beauteous,   sent  her  handmaid  to  that  king  her

messenger.

Accordingly  she  sends  her  maid,  Kesini,  to  find  out  who
the  mysterious  deformed  charioteer  really  is.  After  a  few
preliminary  questions  she  broaches  the  subject  of  Nala :

"  Knows  the  charioteer  Varshneya  whither  royal  Nala  went  ?
Of  his  fortune  hath  he  told  thee  ?     Vahuka,  what  hath  he
said  ?  "

Vahuka  spake  :

"  He  of  the  unhappy  Nala  safe  the  children  borne  away,
Wheresoe'er   he  would   departed,  of  King  Nala  knows   he

nought :
Nothing   of  Nishadha's  Raja,   fair   one !    living   man   doth

know.
Through  the  world,  concealed  he  wanders,  having  lost  his

proper  form.
Only  Nala's  self  of  Nala  knows,  and  his  own  inward  soul,
Of  himself  to  living  mortal  Nala  will  no  sign  betray."

Keslnl  spake  :

"  He  that  to  Ayodhya's  city  went,  the  holy  Brahman  first,
Of  his  faithful  wife  these  sayings  uttered  once  and  once

again :
4  Whither  went'st  thou  then,  O  gamester,  half  my  garment

severing  off ;


286  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

Leaving  in  the  forest  sleeping,  all  forsaken,  thy  belov'd  ?

Even  as  thou  commanded 'st,  sits  she,  sadly  waiting  thy
return,

Day  and  night,  consumed  with  sorrow,  in  her  scant  half-
garment  clad.

Oh  !  to  her  for  ever  weeping,  in  the  extreme  of  her  distress,

Grant  thy  pity,  noble  hero,  answer  to  her  earnest  prayer.'

Speak  again  the  words  thou  uttered 'st,  words  of  comfort  to
her  soul,

The  renowned  Vidarbha's  princess  fain  that  speech  would
hear  again,

When  the  Brahman  thus  had  spoken,  what  thou  answered 'st
back  to  him,

That  again  Vidarbha's  princess  in  the  self-same  words  would
hear."

His  heart  wrung  with  sorrow  and  emotion,  Nala  is  unable
to  restrain  his  tears.  Keslni  returns  to  her  mistress  to  make
her  report.  Damayanti  is  now  more  than  ever  certain  that
the  charioteer  is  indeed  Nala.  However,  she  bids  KeSini
go  again  and  watch  his  every  action.  On  returning  she
relates  the  amazing  things  she  has  seen :

"  Very  holy  is  he,  never  mortal  man  in  all  my  life

Have  I  seen,  or  have  I  heard  of,  Damayanti,  like  to  him.

He  drew  near  the  lowly  entrance,  bowed  not  down  his  stately

head ;
On  the  instant,  as  it  saw  him,  up  th 'expanding  portal  rose.
For  the  use  of  Rituparna  much  and  various  viands  came ;
Sent,  as  meet,  by  royal  Bhima,  and  abundant  animal  food.
These  to  cleanse,  with  meet  ablution,  were  capacious  vessels

set ;
As  he  looked  on  them,  the  vessels  stood,  upon  the  instant,

full.
Then,  the  meet  ablutions  over,  Vahuka  went  forth  and  took
Of  the  withered  grass  a  handful,  held  it  upward  to  the  sun  :
On  the  instant,  brightly  blazing,  shone  the  all-consuming

fire.
Much  I  marvelled  at  the  wonder,  and  amazed  am  hither

come ;
Lo,  a  second  greater  marvel  sudden  burst  upon  my  sight !
He  that  blazing  fire  stood  handling,  yet  unharmed,  unburned

remained.


APPENDIX  II— NALA  AND  DAMAYANTl       287

At   his  will  flows  forth   the  water,   and    as  quickly   sinks

again.
And  another  greater  wonder,  lady,  did  I  there  behold  :
He  the  flowers  which  he  had  taken  gently  moulded  in  his  hands,
In  his  hands  the  flowers,  so  moulded,  as  with  freshening  life

endued,
Blossomed  out  with  richer  fragrance,  stood  erect  upon  their

stems  :
All  these  marvels  having  noted,  swiftly  came  I  back  to  thee."
Damayanti,  when  these  wonders  of  the  king  of  men  she

heard,
Thought  yet  more  King  Nala  present,  by  his  acts  and  mien

revealed.
She  her  royal  lord  suspecting  in  the  form  of  Vahuka,
With  a  gentle  voice  and  weeping  spake  to  Kesini  again  :
"  Go  again,   and   whilst   he    heeds    not,   meat    by   Vahuka

prepared
From  the  kitchen  softly  taking,  hither,  Kesini,  return."
She  to  Vahuka  approaching,  unperceived  stole  soft  away
Of  the  well- cooked  meat  a  morsel ;  warm  she  bore  it  in  her

haste,
And  to  Damayanti  gave  it  Kesini  without  delay.
Of  the  food  prepared  by  Nala  oft  the  flavour  had  she  tried  ;
Tasting  it  she  shrieked  in  anguish  :  "  Nala  is  yon  charioteer."
Stirred  by  vehement  emotion,  of  her  mouth  ablution  made  :
She  her  pair  of  infant  children  sent  with  Kesini  to  him.
Soon  as  he  young  Indrasena  with  her  little  brother  saw,
Up  he  sprang,  his  arms  wound  round  them,  to  his  bosom

folding  both  ;
When  he  gazed  upon  the  children,  like  the  children  of  the

gods,
All  his  heart  o'erflowed  with  pity,  and  aloud  his  tears  broke

forth.
Yet    Nishadha's   lord    perceiving    she    his    strong    emotion

marked,
From  his  hold  released  the  children,  and  to  Kesini  spake

thus  :
"  Oh  !   so  like  mine  own  twin  children  was  yon  lovely  infant

pair.
Seeing  them  thus  unexpected  have  I  broken  out  in  tears.
If  so  oft  thou  comest  hither  men  some  evil  will  suspect.
We  within  this  land  are  strangers ;  beauteous  maiden,  part  in

peace."


288  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

Damayanti  now  decides  on  personal  action  and  manages
to  have  Bahuka  summoned  to  the  palace,  where  she  obtains
from  him  a  confession  that  he  is  Nala.  She  then,  by  an  "  Act
of  Truth,"  calls  on  heaven  to  be  witness  to  her  pure  life
since  her  desertion  by  Nala.

Thus  adjured,  a  solemn  witness,  spake  the  wind  from  out

the  air ;
"  She  hath  done  or  thought  no  evil,  Nala,  'tis  the  truth  we

speak  :
King,   the  treasure   of  her  virtue  in   its  fullness  hath  she

kept,
Her  we  have  watched  and  guarded  ever  closely  for  three

livelong  years.
This   unrivalled   scheme   she   plotted   only   for  thy   absent

sake ;
In  one  day  a  hundred  yojans  who  beside  thyself  may  drive  ?
Thou  hast  met  with  Bhima's  daughter,  Bhima's  daughter

meets  with  thee,
Cast  away  all  jealous  scruple,  to  thy  bosom  take  thy  wife."
Even  as  thus  the  wind  was  speaking,  flowers  fell  showering

all  around  :
And  the  gods'  sweet  music  sounded  on  the  zephyr  floating

light.
As  on  this  surpassing  wonder  royal  Nala  stood  and  gazed,
Of  the  blameless  Damayanti  melted  all  his  jealous  doubts.
Then  by  dust  all  undenled  he  the  heavenly  vest  put  on,
Thought  upon  the  King  of  Serpents,  and  his  proper  form

resumed.
In  his  own  proud  form  her  husband  Bhima's  royal  daughter

saw,
Loud  she  shrieked,  the  undespised,  and  embraced  the  king

of  men.
Bhima's  daughter,  too,  King  Nala,  shining  glorious  as  of  old,
Clasped  unto  his  heart,  and  fondled  gently  that  sweet  infant

pair.
Then  her  face  upon  his  bosom,  as  the  lovely  princess  laid,
In  her  calm  and  gentle  sorrow,  softly  signed  the  long-eyed

queen  :
He,  that  form  still  mire-defiled,  as  he  clasped  with  smile

serene,
Long  the  king  of  men  stood  silent,  in  the  ecstasy  of  woe.
All  the  tale  of  Damayanti,  and  of  Nala  all  the  tale,


APPENDIX  II— NALA  AND  DAMAYANTl       289

To  King  Bhima,  in  her  transport,  told  Vidarbha's  mother-
queen.
Then  replied  that  mighty  monarch  :  "  Nala,  his  ablutions  done,
Thus  rejoined  to  Damayanti  I  to-morrow  will  behold."
They  the  night  in  joy  together  passed,  relating,  each  to  each,
All  their  wanderings  in  the  forest,  and  each  wild  adventure

strange.
In  King  Bhima 's  royal  palace,  studying  each  the  other's  bliss,
With  glad  hearts,  Vidarbha's  princess  and  the  kingly  Nala

dwelt.
In  his  fourth  year  of  divorcement,  reunited  to  his  wife,
Richly  fraught  with  every  blessing,  at  the  height  of  joy  he

stood.
Damayanti  too  re  wedded,  still  increasing  in  her  bliss,
Like  as  the  glad  earth  to  water  opens  its  half-budding  fruits,
She  of  weariness  unconscious,  soothed  each  grief,  and  full  each

joy,
Every  wish  fulfilled,  shone  brightly,  as  the  night  when  high
the  moon.

The  rejoicing  extends  throughout  the  city,  and  all  neces-
sary explanations  are  duly  made.  Nala  now  thinks  of  revenge
and  hurries  back  to  Nishada :

There  a  month  when  he   had    sojourned,   of  King  Bhima

taking  leave,
Guarded  he  by  few  attendants  to  Nishadha  took  his  way.
With  a  single  splendid  chariot,  and  with  elephants  sixteen,
And  with  fifty  armed  horsemen,  and  six  hundred  men  on

foot ;
Making,  as  'twere,  earth  to  tremble,  hastening  onward,  did  the

king
Enter  awful  in  his  anger,  and  terrific  in  his  speed.
Then  the  son  of  Virasena  to  King  Pushkara  drew  near  ;
"Play  we  once  again,"  then  said  he,  "much  the  wealth  I

have  acquired  :
All  I  have,  even  Damayanti,  every  treasure  I  possess,
Set  I  now  upon  the  hazard,  Pushkara,  thy  kingdom  thou  :
In  the  game  once  more  contend  we,  'tis  my  settled  purpose

this,
Brother,  at  a  single  hazard,  play  we  boldly  for  our  lives.
From  another  he  who  treasures,  he  who  mighty  realm  hath

won,

VOL.   IV.  T


290  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

'Tis  esteemed  a  bounden  duty  to  play  back  the  counter

game.
If  thou  shrinkest  from  the  hazard,  be  our  game  the  strife

of  arms,
Meet  we  in  the  single  combat  all  our  difference  to  decide.
An  hereditary  kingdom  may  by  any  means  be  sought,
Be  rewon  by  any  venture,  this  the  maxim  of  the  seers.
Of  two  courses  set  before  thee,  Pushkara,  the  option  make,
Or  in  play  to  stand  the  hazard,  or  in  combat  stretch  the

bow."
By  Nishadha's  lord  thus  challenged,  Pushkara,  with  smile

suppressed,
As  secure  of  easy  victory,  answered  to  the  lord  of  earth  :
"  Oh  what  joy  !    abundant  treasures  thou  hast  won,  again

to  play ;
Oh  what  joy  !    of  Damayanti,  now  the  hard- won  prize  is

mine  :
Oh  what  joy  !  again  thou  livest  with  thy  consort,  mighty-
armed  !
With    the    wealth    I    win    bedecked    soon    shall    Bhlma's

daughter  stand
By  my  side,  as  by  great  Indra  stands  the  Apsara  in  heaven.
Still  on  thee  hath  dwelt  my  memory,  still  I've  waited,  King,

for  thee ;
In  the  play  I  find  no  rapture  but  'gainst  kinsman  like  thy-
self.
When  this  day  the  round-limbed  Princess  Damayanti,  un-

despised,
I   shall  win,  I  rest   contented,  still  within  mine  heart   she

dwells."
Hearing  his  contemptuous  language  franticly  thus  pouring

forth,
With  his  sword  th 'indignant  Nala  fain  had  severed  off  his

head.
But  with  haughty  smile,  with  anger  glaring  in  his  blood-red

eyes,
"  Play  we  now,  not  talk  thus  idly ;  conquered,  thou 'It  no

longer  talk."
Then  of  Pushkara  the  gaming  and  of  Nala  straight  began  :
In  a  single  throw  by  Nala  was  the  perilous  venture  gained  ;
Pushkara,  his  gold,  his  jewels,  at  one  hazard  all  was  won  !
Pushkara  in  play  thus  conquered,  with  a  smile  the  King

rejoined  :


APPENDIX  II— NALA  AND  DAMAYANTl       291

"  Mine    again    is    all    this    kingdom,    undisturbed,    its   foes

o'er  come.
Fallen  king  !     Vidarbha's  daughter  by  thine  eyes  may  ne'er

be  seen.
Fool !    thou'rt   now,   with   all  thy   household,   unto  abject

slavery  sunk.
Not  thyself  achieved  the  conquest  that  subdued  me  here-
tofore !
'Twas   achieved   by    mightier   Kali,    that   thou    didst    not,

fool,  perceive.
Yet  my  wrath,  by  him  enkindled,  will  I  not   'gainst  thee

direct ;
Live  thou  henceforth  at  thy  pleasure,  freely  I  thy  life  bestow,
And  of  thine  estate  and  substance  give  I  thee  thy  fitting

share.
Such  my  pleasure,  in  thy  welfare,  hero,  do  I  take  delight,
And  mine  unabated  friendship  never  shall  from  thee  depart.
Pushkara,  thou  art  my  brother,  may'st  thou  live  an  hundred

years !  "
Nala  thus  consoled  his  brother,  in  his  conscious  power  and

strength,
Sent  him  home  to  his  own  city,  once  embracing,  once  again.
Pushkara,  thus  finding  comfort,  answered  to  Nishadha's  lord,
Answered  he  to  Punyasloka,  bowing  low  with  folded  hands  :
"  Everlasting  be  thy  glory  !    may'st  thou  live  ten  thousand

years  !
That   my  life  to  me  thou  grantest,  and   a   city   for   mine

home !  "
Hospitably  entertained,  there  a  month  when  he  had  dwelt,
Cheered  in  spirit  to  his  city,  Pushkara,  with  all  his  kin,
With  a  well-appointed  army,  of  attendant  slaves  an  host,
Shining  like  the  sun,  departed,  in  his  full  meridian  orb.
Pushkara  thus  crowned  with  riches,  thus  unharmed,  when  he

dismissed,
Entered  then  his  royal  city,  with  surpassing  pomp,  the  king  :
As  he  entered,  to  his  subjects  Nala  spake  the  words  of  peace,
From  the  city,  from  the  country,  all,  with  hair  erect  with  joy,
Came,  with  folded  hands  addressed  him,  and  the  counsellors

of  state :
"  Happy  are  we  now,  O  monarch,  in  the  city,  in  the  fields,
Setting  forth  to  do  thee  homage,  as  to  Indra  all  the  gods."
Then  at  peace  the  tranquil  city,  the  first  festal  gladness  o'er,
With  a  mighty  host  escorted,  Damayanti  brought  he  home.


292  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

Damayanti  rich  in  treasures,  in  her  father's  blessings  rich,
Glad  dismissed  the  mighty-minded   Bhima,   fearful   in   his

strength.
With  the  daughter  of  Vidarbha,  with  his  children  in  his  joy,
Nala  lived,  as  lives  the  sovereign  of  the  gods  in  Nandana.
Reascended  thus  to  glory,  he,  among  the  kings  of  earth,
Ruled  his  realm  in  Jambudwipa,  thus  rewon,  with  highest

fame  ;
And  all  holy  rites  performed  he  with  devout  munificence.

The  following  bibliography  gives  the  chief  editions  and
translations  of  Nala  and  Damayanti : —

Nalus,  a  Sanskrit  Poem  from  the  Mahdbhdrata,  edited,  with
Latin  translation  and  notes,  by  F.  Bopp,  1819  ;  Nal  und
Damajanti.  Eine  indische  Geschichte,  (bearbeitet)  von  F.
Ruckert,  Zweite  Auflage,  Frankfurt  a/M,  1838  ;  Nalas  und
Damajanti,  eine  indische  Dichtung,  aus  dem  Sanskrit  ubersetzt
von  F.  Bopp,  Berlin,  1838 ;  Nala  und  Damajanti,  ubersetzt
und  erlautert  von  E.  Meier,  Stuttgart,  1847-1854;  Nala
och  Damayanti,  en  indisk  dikt  ur  Mahdbhdrata  frdn  originalet
ofversatt  och  med  forklarande  note?;  forsedd  af  H.  Kellgren,
Helsingfors,  1852 ;  Nala,  traduit  en  francais,  par  E.
Burnouf,  Nancy,  1856 ;  Nala  e  Damaianti,  tradotto  per
St  Gatti,  Napoli,  1858;  Nionde  och  tionde  sdngerna  af  Nala
och  Damayanti,  frdn  Sanskrit  bfversatte  och  kommenterade,
Akademisk  afhandlung  .  .  .  af  E.  G.  F.  Olbers,  Lund,  1862  ;
Die  GeschichU  von  Nala.  Versuch  einer  Herstellung  des
Textes,  von  C.  Bruce,  St  Petersburg,  1862  ;  Nodes  Indicce
sive  qucestiones  in  Nalum  Mahdbhdrateum,  L.  Grasberger,
Wirceburgi,  1868  ;  Naladamayantikathdnaka,  from  the  Nalo-
pdkhydna,  Lahore,  1871  ;  Nal  a  Damajanti.  Bdje  Indicia,
cesky  vypravuje,  J.  Libansk^,  etc.,  v  Olomouci,  1875 ;  Storia
di  Nalo,  M.  Kerbaker,  Torino  [printed],  Firenze,  1878 ;  The
Story  of  Nala  and  Damayanti  .  .  .  translated  .  .  .  into  English
Prose,  to  which  is  added  .  .  .  notes,  by  Pandita  Jaganatha,
St  Louis,  [1881] ;  Notes  on  the  Nalopdkhydnam  or  Tale  of  Nala
for  the  Use  of  Classical  Students,  3.  Peile,  University  Press,
Cambridge,  1881  ;  Nalopdkhydnam  or  The  Tale  of  Nala,  Text
and  Vocabulary,  Th.  Jarrett,  Cambridge,  1882  ;  77  Re  Nala  r
Trilogia  drammatica,  A.  de  Gubernatis,  Firenze  1883 ;  Nala
and  Damayanti:  A  Drama  in  Five  Acts  and  in  Prose  and
Verse,  etc.,  Scottish  Branch  Press,  Negapatam,  1894.


INDEX  I


SANSKRIT  WORDS  AND  PROPER  NAMES

The  ■  stands  for  "  note  ■  and  the  index  number  refers  to  the  number  of  the  note.     If  there
is  no  index  number  to  the  n  it  refers  to  a  note  carried  over  from  a  previous  page.


\bhayii.     wife     of     King

Dadhivahana.   105-107
ibrahmmirati     (unbroken

chastity),  105
mkoaryu,    one    of   the    four
priests  at  an  ahamedha,  14,
15
Aditya.  Aryaman  an. 80,  SOn11,;
Bhagaan,  80,  SOn1;  Pushan
originally  the  sun,  later  an,
80,  SOn1
Adityasarman,        father       of

Gunasarman,  96-98
Adityasena,      horse  -  sacrifice

performed  by,  14
Agneh  ("fire"),  263
Agni.  God  of  Fire,  113,  275,

276
Agnihotri,  the  ceremony  of,  15
Agni-Soma.  animals  sacrificed

to,  16
Agre{"  first"),  263
Aitareya  Brahmana,  the,  64ft1
Akbar,  attempts  to  suppress

tail  by,  263
Alankaravati  (Book  IX),  122-

251
Alankaravati,   Story  of,   123-

125
Alankaravati,  wife  of  Narava-
hanadatta,     123-126,     130,
136-140,    167,    168,    184,
190,  202,  219
Albuquerque,      attempt      to

abolish  sail  by,  263
Allahabad,  Agra,   Delhi  and
Oude,    the    modern    prov-
inces of  {i.e.  Madhyade.4a):
156,  156H1
Allahabad   (Prayaga,    -place

of  sacrifice"),  166k1
Amar   Das,   the  Sikh   Guru,
condemnation    of   sad    by
the,  263
Ambara  (the  sky),  2Unx
Ambika      (Parvati,       Durga,
Gauri,  etc.),  114,  118,  155

293


Amen-hetep    II    at   Thebes,
bodies  of  women  found  in
the  tomb  of,  256
Anangaprabha,  or  Anangarati,

149,  151-154,  156-167
Anangarati     and     her     four

Suitors,  Story  of,  144-167
Ananta    of   Kashmir,   sad  of
Queen    SuryavatI,     widow
of  King,  264-266
Anaryan   (F.  F.  Arbuthnot),
Early    Ideas:    A    Group  of
Hindoo  Stories,  48
Anuvrata     (the     five     lighter

vows),   105
Anyadehapravesako  yogah  (art
ofenteringanother'sbody),
46
Apollodorus,  Library,  256
Apsarases   given   to   Narava-

hanadatta,  187
Arbuthnot,  F.  F    (Anaryan),
Early   Ideas:    A    Group  of
Hindoo  Stories,  48
Argha   (an    oblation   to  gods
and    venerable   men),    18,
28
Arhats  (Jaina  Saviours),  107
Aristophanes,     Acharnians,

138H1
A  rtha  ( ' '  wealth  ' '  and  ' '  m  ean-

ing  "),  164n«
Arthavarman,  the  merchant,

196-198
Aryaman,  an  Aditya,  80,  SOn1
Aryaputra     ("noble    lord"),
form  of  address  from  wife
to  husband,  34,  34^
Aslkala,  the  horse,  209
Asokamala,  140-144
ASokavati,  wife  of  Mahasena,
85,  87,  91,  94,  95,  98,  100,
102,  104
Atramas    (the     four     ascetic
stages  of  student,  house-
holder,      anchorite       and
mendicant),  240n1,  241  n


Asura  ladies,  the  Paiupata
ascetic  and  the,  235,  236

Asura  Maya,  the,  3,  13,  17-
22,  25-29,  32,  37-39,  41-
45,  49-51,  56,  57,  59-61

Ahamedha  (horse-sacrifice),
9,  14-16,  18

Atala,  one  of  the  seven
underworlds,  21  n1

Atharva-Veda.  the,  95,  263

Atharva- Veda.  the.  trans.
W.  D.  Whitney,  ed.  C.  R.
I  ..in man.  263

Atkinson,  Himalayan  Gazet-
teer, 159nJ

Avadana  Sataka,  the,  229n*

Avichara  ("injustice"  and
"movement  of  sheep"),
174ni

Ayodhya,  126,  129,  285

"  Badart  or  jujube  tree.  Lord

of  the"  (Vishnu),  159nl
Badarika,   or   Badarinatha,  a

place    sacred    to    Vishnu,

159,  159^,  160n
Badarinatha,   or    Badarinarii-

yana,      manifestation      of

Vishnu.   159nl
Bahar-i- Danish,  the,  132nl
Biihuka,  or  Vahuka,  name  of

Nala    when    a   cook,    277,

284,  288
Balahaka,  the  mountain,  185
Bali    (East    Indies),    widow-
burning  still  practised  in,

257,  258
Balkash,  Lake,  185n2
Bandhumati.wifeofMahipala,

229,  234.  236,  250,  251,  275
Barbosa,  Duarte.  account  of

sad  by,  269,  270
Baring-Gould,  Curious  Myths

of  the  Middle  Ages,  185n«,

245n»
Barnett,    L.    D.,   92n*;  A*-

tiauities  of  India,  16,  258n»


294


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


Bartsch,    Sagen,    M'drchen    u.

Gebrauche  aus  Meklenburg,

93n«,  145n»,  227nl
Beal,    S.,    "The    Merchant

who  struck   his  Mother,"

Ind.  Ant.,  229t»2
Benfey,  PaHtschatanlra,  192ft1,

196ft1,  230n1,  245m1
Bengal,    Ganges  Valley  and

Rajputana,    salt    strongest

in.  263
Bentinck,      Lord      William,

abolition  of  salt  by,  263
Bevan,    £.     R-,     "India    in

Early    Greek    and     Latin

Literature,"  Cambridge

History  of  India,  261
Bhadrakali  (ParvatI,    Durga,

Uma,  etc.),  179
Bhaga,  an  Aditya,  80,  80ft1
Bhairava  (Siva),  225,  225n2,

227,  227ft1
Bhairon.     the    village     god,

225n2
Bhashajna,a  Vai£ya,  145, 147,

155
Bhavabhuti,  Malati  Mddhava,

149n!
Bhavani      (ParvatI,      Durga,

Uma,  etc.),  116
Bhima,  King  of  Vidarbha  and

father  of  DamayantI,  237-

240,    244,    246,   250,   276,

277,  278,  282-284,  288,  289
Bhogavarman,  the  merchant,

196-198
Bhumi,  the  soil,  177ft1
Bhutas,Nandin,  princeofthe,

20
Bhutasana,  the  magic  chariot,

3-6,  8,  9,  12,  13
Bijjala,     favourite     wife     of

King  Uchchala  of  Kashmir,

266,  267
Birlinger,  AusSchwaben,  93ft2,

145n2,  227ft1
Blagden,  C.  O.,  224ft1
Blocksberg,  dancing  with  the

Teutonic  Bhairava  on  the,

227ft1
Bloomfield,  M.,  "Joseph  and

Potipharin  Hindu  Fiction,"

Trans.  Amer.  Phil.  Ass.,  104,

107;    Life  and    Stories   of

Parcvanatha,  47;  "On  the

Art  of  entering  Another's

Body,"    Proc.   Amer.   Phil.

Soc.,  47
Boccaccio,  Decameron,  165n1,

183
Bohtlingk,  213ns


Bohtlingk  and  Roth,  Sanskrit

Dictionary,  33ft1,  41nx,  91n2,

122ft2,  168ft1
Bolte,    J.,   and    G.    Polivka,

Anmerkungen  su  den  Kinder

u    Hausm'drchen  der  Briider

Grimm,  117ft1, 129n,  132ft1,

145ft1
Bopp,  F. ,  Nalasund  Damajanti,

eine   indische   Dichtung    aus

dem  Sanskrit  iibersetzt,  292;

Xalus,  a  Sanskrit  Poem  from

the  Mahabharata,  292
Borneo  or  Sumatra  (Karpura-

dvipa),  224ft1
Bowrey,   T.,    Countries   round

the  Bay  of  Bengal,  ed.  R.  C.

Temple,  270
Brahma,  23,  49,  53,  63,  69,

75,  109,  180,  186,  213
Brahman,    one    of    the    four

priests  at  an  asvamedha,  14,

16
Brahmaudana,  a  kind  of  rice-
porridge     eaten     at      the

asvamedha,  15
Brahmodya,  or  asking  poetical

riddles,  16
Brand,     Popular     Antiquities,

99n2,  199W1
Brihaspati  (preceptor  of  the

gods),  63,  115
Briscoe,  J.  P.,  Nottinghamshire

Facts  and  Fictions,  99ft2
Brockhaus  text,  Sin1,  52ft1,

73ft1,   92ft1,    102ft1,    110ft1,

llln1,  133ft1
Brou  wer,  van  Limburg,  Akbar,

an  Eastern  Romance,  159ft1
Bruce,  C,  Die  Geschichle  von

Nala.  Versuch  einer  Herstel-

lung  des  Textes,  292
Brunhild    in    the    Nibelung

myth,  immolation  of,  255,

256
Budge,  E.   A.  Wallis,    Osiris

and  the  Egyptian   Resurrec-
tion, 257
Burnell,  A.  C,  H.  Yule  and,

"Suttee,"  Hobson  Jobson,

272
Burnouf,  E.,  Le  Lotus  de  la

Bonne  Loi,  23n2
Burnouf,  E.,  Nala,  traduit  en

Francois,  292
Burton,  R.  F.,   The  'Thousand

Nights   and   a  Night,    21ft,

90H1,  108n2,  132ft1,  192ft1,

249ft
Bushby,  H.  J ..Widow- Burning,

272


ing


Butterworth,  Zig-Zag  Journey
in  India,  48

Campbell,  J.  F.,  Popular  Ta

oj  the  West  Highland*,  fl
Camphor     Island     (Karpi

dvipa),  224ft1
Canace,   the    magic   ring

145w»
Capaneus,  suicide  of  Evadne

wife  of,  256
Cathaeans    (Greek    form    o

Kshatriyas),  261
Chakra  and  the  Iron  Wheel

229-231
Chakra,  the  mountain,  185
Chakrasena,  necklace  of

Princess,  191,  192
Chamarabala,  Story  of  King

194,  198-201
Chamunda    (ParvatI,     Gauri.

Uma]  etc.),  149,  179
Chandl  (ParvatI,  Gauri,  lina.

etc.),  179
Chandika,  human  sacrifices  to,

64ft1
C  h. ind  ras  vain  in.        his        son

Mahlpala  and  his  daughter

ChandravatI,  Story  of  the

Brahman,     220-225,     227-

229,     232-234,    236,    250,

251
ChandravatI,      daughter      of

Chandrasvamin,  220,   221,

229
Chapalekha,  daughter  of  the

hermit  Kapilajata,  155
Charana  ("foot  "and  "line  ''),

186:n*
Chaturyuga,  a  {i.e.  4,320,000

years),  240ft1
Chaucer,      Canterbury     Tales,

145ft1
Chauvin,  V.,  Bibliographic  des

Ouvrages  Arabes,  48,  132ft1,

235ft2,  249w
China,  custom  of  sati  in,  257
Chiradatri,  Story  of,  203,  204
Clouston,    Book  of  Sindibad,

132ft1 ;  A  Group  of  Eastern

Romances  and  Stories,  139n8,

182 ;     Popidar     Tales    and

Fictions,  192ft1
Coedes,     G.     [review     by],

Bulletin  de  I'Ecole  Vrancaise

a" extreme  Orient,  224ft1
Coelho,       Contos       Populares

Portuguezes,  132ft1
Coomaraswamy,  A.  K.,  Sail:

a   Vindication  of  the  Hindu

Woman,  272


INDEX  I— SANSKRIT  WORDS,  ETC.


295


Cosquin,     E.,     filudes     Folk-
loriques,  48

Crawl  urd,  J.,   History  of  the
Indian  Archipelago,  258

Crooke,  VV.  ["  Badarinath  "],
Hastings'  Ency.  Rel.  Eth.,
159-n1;  "  Dravidians  (North
India)."  Hastings'  Ency.
Rel.  Eth.,  llln1;  Popular
Religion  and  Folk-Lore  of
Northern  India,  55m1,  177ft1,
225^,  235n2,  245ft1,  271;
Tribes  and  Castes  of  the
Xorth-  Western  Provinces  and
Oudh,  160n

Cunningham,      A.,       Ancient
Geography  of  India,  144/t1

Dadhivahana,  King,  105,  106

Daityas,  19.  25,  28,  30.  33,  37,

42,51,63,76,111,113,115

'  Daiva  (fate),  182

Damayanti,    Nala   and,   237-

250
Damayanti,       Nala       and

(Appendix  II),  275-292
Dames,   M.   L.,   The  Book  of

Duarte  Barbosa,  269,  270
Damodara,      son      of      King

Ashadha,  10,  11,  18
Danava      Namuchi,     the

generous,  63-65
Danavas,  19-21,  27-29,  33,  42,

51.  63,  64,  108-115,  121
Danavas,  Maya;  King  of  the,

17
Danta,  white  bull  named,  241
Dante.  Purgatorio,  239n2
I    Danu,  mother  of  the  gods,  64
Darbha    grass,     Damayantl's

feet  cut  by,  242
Dasa    Kumdra    Charita,    the,

132ft1
Dasa  ("ten"  and   "bite"),

245,  245n3
Davies,      John,      trans,      of

Mandelslo's  Travels,  270
Dehantara-avesa  (art  of  enter-
ing another's  body),  46
Dellen,    Poyage    to    the    East

Indies,  271
Dervish  Makhlis  of  Ispahan,
Les   Mil  If  el  un   Jours,  48,
132/t1
Devamati,  wife  of  Chandras-

vamin,  220,  234
Devasiddhi,  one  of  the  four

heavenly  men,  185,  186
Dharma  (virtue),  240ft1
Dharmavati,  wife  of  Viravara,
174,  177-180


Dharmavyadha,    a    seller   of

flesh,  232.  233
Dharna,  sitting  in,  140, 140n1,

202,  202ft1
Dhavala,  229,  231
Dhrishyan  (rejoicing),  177n*
Dtksha,    consecration   of  the

king,  16
Dtksha  (the  Jaina  vow),  105
Diodorus,  256,  262
Dithmar     of     Merseburg,

Chronicon,  255n-
Dowson,    John,    A    Classical

Dictionary  of  Hindu  Myth-
ology, 23371'
Duarte  Barbosa,   account  of

sad  by,  269,  270
Duncan,  Jonathan,  question

of  salt  taken  up  by,  263
Dunlop,    History    of    Fiction

(Liebrecht's  trans.),  129w,

132ft1,  145ft12
Durga  (Parvati,  Gauri,  Uma,

etc.),  116,  120,  121,  149ft1,

151,    155,    156,    177-179,

195n3,  198,  217
Durgaprasad  text,  29ft3,  Sin1,

52ft1,    59ft1,    73ft1,    92ft1,

93ft1,  101  n1,  108ft1,  HOn1,

llln1,  151ft1,  188ft1,  200/t1,

201ft1,  203ft1,  207H1,  218w3
D  vapara  (demon  of  gambling) ,

240,  240m1,  241,  242,  250
Dvapara    (side    of    the    die

marked  with   two  points),

240H1
Dvapara  (the  third   Yuga  or

Age  of  the  World),  240»x
Dyaus,  the  Sky- Father,  177m1
Dyer,       Thiselton,       English

Fo/;t-Lore,93n2,99n2,116n2

Eggeling,  J.,  Satapatha  Brah-

mana.  Sacred  Books  of  the

East,  16
Ekanamsa    (Parvati.    Durga,

Uma',  etc.),  179
Empedocles,     passage    from

the  works  of,  150/11
Enthoven.    R.   E.,   Folk- Lore

of  Bombay,  70»,  94n,  122H1,

Hln1,  llln1
Eumenes,  a  salt  at  the  time

of,  261
Euripides,  Suppliants,  256
Europe,    widow -burning   in,

255,  256
Eustathius,       Hysmine      and

Hysminias,  128V,  145n8
Evadne,    wife   of   Capaneus,

suicide  of,  256


Fernao  Nuniz,  account  of  tati
by,  267,  268

Ft-rrand  ,G . .  V  Empire  sumatra-
nais  de  Cririjaya,  224n!

I  irdausl,  Yusuf  u  Zulaikhi,
104

Fitzedward  Hall  ["The
Source  of  Colebrooke't
Essay  '  On  the  Duties  of  a
Faithful  Hindu  Widow'  "1,
Joum   Roy.  As.  Soc.,  262n*

Frazer,  The  Golden  Bough,  16;
Pausanias'  Description  of
Greece,  14,  65n,  249n,  258

Frere,  M.,  Old  Deccan  Days,
48

Friederich,  R.,  "  Voorloopig
VerslagvanheteilandBali"
V erhandelingen  van  het  Bata-
viaasch  Genoolschap  van
Kunsten  en  Wetenschappen,
258

Fiihrer,  L.  A.,  Monumental
Antiquities  and  Inscriptions
of  the  North  Western  Prov-
inces and  Oudh,  166nx

Gaal,  Mdrchen  der  Magyaren,

213J11
Gdndliarva  form  of  marriage,

the,  32,  43
Ganesa,    son     of    Siva     and

Parvati,  119,  122,  213
Ganga  river,  166H1
Ganges  Valley  and  Rajputana,
salt   strongest    in    Bengal,
263
Gar  be,     R.,     Indien     u.     das
ChristentumASSn*;  "Yoga,"
Hastings'  Ency.  Rel.  Eth.,
39a1
Garhapatya  hearth,  the,  15
Garuda,  186,  247
Gaster,    M.,   Exempla  of  the

Rabbis,  192ft1
Gauri  (Parvati,  Durga.  Uma,

etc.),  144,  145
Gayatri( Parvati,  Durga,  Uma,

etc.),  179
Geldner,  K.,  "  Asvamedha,"
Hastings'  Ency.  Rel. Eth.,  16
Gibb,  E.  J.  W.,  and  Sheykh
Zada,  History  of  the  Forty
Vesirs,  48
Giles,  H.  A.,  Strange  Stories
from  a  Chinese  Studio,  25n»
Giles,    L.,  257;   Alphabetical
Index  to  the  Chinese  Encyclo-
pedia, 257n3
Goethe,  Faust  (trans.  Bayard
Taylor),  227U1


•jut;


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


Gomukha,  minister  of  Nara-

vahanadatta,  122,  130,  136,

167,    168,    172,   173,   181,

184,185,188-190,193,194,

201,203.204,213,219,220
Gonzenbach,     Sicilianische

Marchen,  248m1
Grasberger,  L..  Noctes  Indica-
tive    quastiones    in     Xalitm

Mahabharateum,  292
Greece,  human  sacrifices  in,

64»x ;    suicide    of   widows

in.  256
Grierson,  Sir  G.  A.,   185n2;

Stein  and,   Hatim's   Tales,

48,  104
Griffin,  Sir  Lepel,  264
Grimm,    J.    L.    C,    Deutsche

Rechtsaltertiimer,     255;

Kinder      u.     Hausin'drchen ;

129n,     145ft1;      Teutonic

Mythology     (trans.     J.     S.

Stallybrass),  23n2,  64ft1
(J roh man n.  J.  V.,  Sagen  aus

Bdhmen,  245ft1
Groot,    J.    J.    M.    de,    The

Religious  System  of  China,

257n2
Grossler,  Sagen  aus  der  Graf-

schaft  Mansfeld,  245ft1
Gubernatis,  A.  de,  //  Re  Nala  :

Trilogoa  drammatica,    292  ;

Zoological  Mythology,  249n
Guest,      Lady      C,      "The

Mabinogion  "  [Llyfre  Coch

0  Hergest],  21 3V
Guhyaka  (Yaksha),  227
Guna      ("excellence"      and

"thread"),  8ft1;  ("virtue"

and  "string"),  174ft1
Gunasarman.  King  Mahasena

and  his  virtuous  minister,

85-96,  98-102

Hagen,  F.  H.  v.  d.,  Altdeutsche

u.  altnordische  Helden-Sagen,

256  *

Hakluyt  Society,  269,  270
Halliday,     W.     R.    ["Snake

Stones"],  Folk-Lore,  245ft1
Hamsa      ("swan"      and

"supreme      soul"  —  i.e.

Vishnu),  186w2
Hanuman,  the  monkey-god,

126
Hari  (Vishnu),  185,  187
Harisikha.  minister  of  Nara-

vahanadatta,  190
Hari  vara,  a  king  named,  152-

154,  156-158
Harshavarman ,  King,  191


Hastinapura,  194

Hastings'     Encyclopaedia      of

Religion     and     Ethics,     16,

21ft1,    39ft1,    65»,    159ft1,

176ft1,  177ft1,   182,  225ft«,

240ft1
Hathasarman,  the  Brahman,

140,  144
Heliodorus.  jEthiopica,  239ft2
Henderson,    W.,    Folk-Lore

of  the  Northern  Counties  of

England,  93w2
Herodotus,  65w,  80ft1,  256
Herr  Urian  of  the  Walpur-

gisnacht,  227ft2
Heruli,    suicide    of    widows

among  the,  255
Hesiod,  Theogony,  212ft1
Hillebrandt,     A.,    Ritualliter-

utiir,    Grundriss    der    Indo-

Arischen  Phil.  u.   altertums-

kunde,  16
Himalayas,  the,  234
Himavat.  1
Hiranyagupta,    a    merchant,

158-161
Hitopadesa,     the     (Johnson's

trans.),  173ft1
Homer,  Iliad,  112ft1 ;  Odyssey,

58ft2,  120m1,  15bi2
Hopkins,        E.       Washburn,

"  Bhairava,"       Hastings'

Ency.  Rel.  Eth.,  225ft2
Horace,  Odes,  93ft2
Hotri,  one  of  the  four  priests

at  an  asvamedha,  14-16
Hrasvabahu,    name    adopted

by  Nala,  246-248
Hsiian-tsang,     the     Chinese

Buddhist  pilgrim,  185n2
Hunt,  Romances  and  Drolls  of

the  West  of  England,  93n2

India,  salt  in,  258-272

Indra.  15,  18,  19,  23,  24,  27-
29,  43-45,  63,  64,  69,  75,
83,  111-113,  115,  176,  187,
189,  231,  238-240,  275,
276

Indrasena,  daughter  of  Nala
and  Damayanti,  241,  287

Indrasena,  son  of  Nala  and
Damayanti,  241

Issyk-kul,  Lake,  185ft2

Isvara  (Siva),  182

Jacobi,  H.  ["On  SulasA"],
Ind.  Ant.,  69ft1 ;  "  Ages  of
the  World,"  Hastings'  Ency.
Rel.  Eth.,  240ft1;  "Cos-
mogony    and     Cosmology


Jacobi,  H. — continued

(Indian),"  Hastings'  7v«<t/.

Rel.  Eth.,  21ft1
Jaganatha,       Pandita.       The

Story  of   Nala    and    Daina-

yunt'i   .    .    .   trans,     into   .    .  .  i

English  Prose,  292
Jarrett,  Th..  Sulupakhyanam,  \

or  Tale  oj  Sul a.  292
Jawahir     Singh,     wives     ^H

forced    on     to    the     |

264
Jaya,  doorkeeper  of   Dur

116,  116ft1,  117
Jaya  (ParvatI,    Durgfi,    L'ra

etc.),  179
Jayamati,      wife     of     K

Uchchala  of  Kashmir,  266,  {

267
Jebb,  R.  C,  The  Characters  oj

Theophrastus,  94ft
Jerusalem,  golden  vine  over

the  gate  of  the  temple  at,

129ft
Jlvadatta,   a    Brahman.    J

149,  151,  153-155
Jnanasiddhi,  one  of  the  four

heavenly  men,  185
Johnson,    F.,    trans,    of    the

Hitopadesa,  173  ft1
Jolly,  J.,    "Fate    (Hindu),"

Hastings'  Ency.  Rel.  Eth.,

182
Joseph  and  Potiphar's  wife,

104
Jubbulpore,    persistence    of

a   would-be    sail    in,    271,

272
Junker  Voland,  the,  227ft1

Kailasa,    abode   of  Siva  and

ParvatI,  180
Kaitavandlaka     (a     deceptm-

trick),  106
Kala    and    his    Prayers,    the

Brahman,  23-25
Kala  (fate),  182
Kala    (Time,    Fate.    Death),

24ft1
Kala -a.  son  of  King  Ananta

of  Kashmir,  264,  265
Kalasapura,  191
Kalhana,      Rdjatarahgin'i      M

Chronicle   of  the   Kings   oj

Kasmir,    M.    Aurel   Stein's

translation,  264,  266
Kali    (demon    of  gambling),

240,  240rii,  241-243,  248,

250,  276,  278,  279,  291
Kali   (Durga,    ParvatI,   Uma,

etc.),  149ft1


INDEX  I— SANSKRIT  WORDS,  ETC.


297


Kali  enters  the  body  of  Nala,

241
Kali  (side  of  the  die  marked

with  one  point),  240n1
Kali    (the    fourth    Yuga,    or

Age  of  the  World),  240ft1
Kalpa  (measure  of  time),  2,

23,  23*1,  25,  106
Kamaiiastrartha     (science     of

love),  106
Kanakavarsha  and    Madana-

sundarl,     Story    of    King,

204-219
Kanchi  (girdle),  Sn1
Kandarpa  (God  of  Love),  106
Kapila     chaplain     of     King

Dadhivahana,  105
Kapila,  wife  of  Kapila.   105,

106
Kapilajata,     curse     of     the

hermit,  155
Kapur  Barus  (true  camphor),

224m1
Karkotaka,   the  snake,   245,

246,  248,  250
Karma  (fate),  182
Karpatika    (dependent    of   a

king),  168W1
Karpura,  224,  224nx
Karpura-dvipa     (Borneo     or

Sumatra),  224ft1
Karttikeya  (son  of  Siva  and

Parvati),  119,  212-214,  217
Kasyapa,  186
Kataha,  223,  224ft1
Kathakoca,     trans.     C.     H.

Tawney,  47,  174ft1
KatyayanI    (Parvati,    Durga,

Uma,  etc.),  179
KausambI,  122, 125, 130, 139,

188,  189
Kavaya  (artificial  poetry),  277
Kaya-vyuka  (division  of  per-
sonality), 4ft1
Kayotsarga  posture,  the,  106
Keith,  A.  B.,  "Om,"  Hast-
ings' Ency.  Rel.  Eth.,  176ft1
Kellgren,  H.,  Nala  och  Dama-
yanti,      en     indi.sk     dikt     ur

Mahabharata  fr'dn  originalet

bfversatt  .  .  .  ,  292
Kerbaker,  M.,  Storia  di  Nalo,

292
Kesini,  maid  of  Damayanti,

285-287
Khadga,    a    merchant's   son,

230,  231
Khadgadhara,    a    Kshatriya,

145-147,  155
Kharak  Singh,  lady  burned

against  her  will  with,  264


Knowles,  J.  H.,  Dictionary  of

Kashmiri  Proverbs,  48
Kosala,  243,  246-248,  250
Krishna,  80
Krita  (the  first  Yuga,  or  Age

of  the  World),  240ft1
Kshatriya      families,      safl

customary  in,  258
Kshatriyas,    Greek    form    of

(Cathaeans),  261
Ku   ("evil"  and   "earth"),

174  ft1
Kuhn,  Herabkunjl  des  Eeuers

u.  des  Gottertranks,  145»2
Kimi.ua     the    rain    of,    213,

213ft1
Kumaragupta   I ,   horse-sacri-
fice performed  by,  14
Kusa  grass,  155,   243 ;  babe

made  of,  128
Kusa,  son  of  Slta,  128,  129
Kuvera,  God  of  Wealth.  13,

110,  110n6,  128,  129,  160ft

Labdhadatta,  Story  of  King
Lakshadatta  and  his  De-
pendent, 168-172

Labdhavara,  a  dancing-
teacher  called,  156-158

Lakshadatta  and  his  Depen-
dent Labdhadatta,  Story  of
King,  168-172

Lakshmana,  brother  of  Rama,
126,  129

Lakshmi  (wife  of  Vishnu),
63,  186

La  mi.  Novelle  Letter arie  di
Firenze,  166ft

Lanka  besieged  by  Rama,
126

Lanman,  C.  R.,  ed.  of  W.  D.
Whitney's  trans,  of  the
Atliarva-Veda,  263

Lava,  son  of  Slta,  128-130

Lee,  A.  C,  The  Decameron,
its  Sources  and  Analogues,
166n,  183

Lev6que,  Les  Mythes  et
Legendes  de  Vlnde  et  de  la
Perse,  150/11

Libafisky,  J.,  Xal  a  Dama-
janti.  Bdje  Indickd,  Cesky
vypravuje,  292

Liebrecht,  P.,  trans,  of
Dunlop's  History  of  Fiction,
129n.  132nl,  145n12;  Zur
Volkskunde,  93n2

Livy,  23n*

Loeb,  E.  M.,  "The  Blood
Sacrifice  Complex,"  Mem.
Amer.  Anth.  Ass.,  65n


Lokapalas,  or  guardians  of
the  world,  the  eight,  43,
43n*.  45,  69,  112,  238

Longhurst,  A.  H.,  Hampi
Ruins,  268

Madanamanchuka,     wife     of

Naravahanadatta.  121
Madanasundarl,  Story  of  King

Kanakavarsha  and,  204-219
Madhyadesa     (the     modern

provinces     of     Allahabad,

Agra,    Delhi    and   Oude),

156,  156n!
Mahabharata,    the,     in1,    15,

47, 104, 166n,233nl,239n>,

240n!,  241n,  243ni,  249n,

258,  275,  276,  278
Mahalakshmi(  Parvati,  Durga,

Uma,  etc.),  179
Maharajni    (Parvati,     Durga,

Uma,  etc.),  179
Maha-satt-kal     (salt     stones),

260,  261
Mahdsattva        ("noble,"

"good,"   "virtuous."  and

"  full  of  great  monsters  "),

180n2
Mahasena   and    his    Virtuous

Minister    Gunasarman,

King,  85-96,  98-102
Mahatala,  one  of  the  seven

underworlds,  21  n1
Mahavaraha.  King,  144-146
Mahayuga,     a      (4,320,000

years),  240H1
Mahlpala,    son    of    Chandra-

svamin,  220-223.  228,  229,

232,  234,  251
Mainaka,  the  mountain.  185,

188
Malabar,   soft   forbidden    in,

263
MdUifi  Madhava,  Bhavabhuti,

149n!
Malavikdgnimilra,  trans.  C.  H.

Tawney,  15
Malet,    Sir    C,    question    of

sail  raised  by,  263
Mallinatha     Caritra,     Vijaya-

dharmasuri,  105
Manasa  lake,  the,  234
Mandnra,     one    of    the    five

trees    of    Paradise,     128,

128n2
Mandelslo,      Travels,      trans.

John  Davies,  270
Mangala     (Parvati,     Durga,

Uma,  etc.),  179
Manu,  202H1 ;  saft  not  alluded

to  in,  258


298


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


Marubhuti.  minister  of  Nara-
vahanadatta,  136, 139,  168,
802,  203,  220,  251

Matali,  charioteer  of  Indra,

44,  Un\  187-189

Mava.  the  Asura,  3,  13,  17-
22,  25-29,  32,  37-39,   41-

45,  49-51,  56,  57,  59-61
Meier,   E.,  Nala  und  Dama-

janii,  iibersetzt  u.  erlautert
von,  292

Melton,  Astrologaster,  199/11

Merseburg,  Dithmar  of,
Chronicon,  255n2

Meru.  Mount,  138,  138n*

Milman,  H.  H  trans,  of
Nalopdkhydnam ,  Story  of
Nala.  ed.  Monier  Williams,
278

Milton,  Cornus,  243»i2 ;  Para-
dise Lost,  80H1,  129«

Mitra.  R.  L.,  Account  of  the
Buddhist  Literature  of
Nepal,  229n2;  "Human
Sacrifices  in  India,"  Journ.
As.  Soc.  Bengal,  64n*

Monier  Williams,  Indian
Wisdom,  256;  ed.  Nalo-
pakhyanam, Story  of  Nala,
trans.  H.  H.  Milman,  278

Morris,  R.  ["Jataka  Stories
—the  Myth  of  the  Siren  "],
The  Academy,  229w2

Morse.  J.,  Report  [to  the  Secre-
tary of  War  of  the  United
States]  on  Indian  Affairs,  258

Mrishyatdm  ("  forgive  me,"
'be  patient"),  232w*

Muddra,  one  of  the  three
different  styles  of  music,
86n2

Muktipura,  the  island  of,
130,  131,  133,  134

Miiller,  C.|  History  of  the
Pseudo  Callisthenes,  120nx,
129n,  185nx

NagI  Ratnaprabha,  the,  212-

214,  217,  218
Naishadha,  Sri  harsh  a,  277
Nakshatra     of     Bhaga,     the

Uttara  Phalguni,  SOn1
Nala    and     Damayanti,    Ap-
pendix II,  275-292
Nala    and    Damayanti,   story

of,  237,  250
Nala-champii.  Trivikrama,  278
Naladamayanlikalhdndka,  from

the  Nalopakhydna,  292
Nala-Raja,  the  Tamil,  278
Nalodaya,  Vasudeva,  277


Na/opdkhydna,  or  "  Episode  of

Nala  '*  (Mahafihilrata),  275
Nalopdkhydnam ,  Story  of  Nala,

trans.   H.  H.  Milman,  ed.

Monier  Williams,  278
Namuchi,     the     generous

Danava,  63-65
Nandin,  prince  of  the  Bhutas,

20
Nao  Nihal  Singh,  two  ladies

burned  with,  264
Nara,  160n
Narada,   the   hermit.    17-19,

28,  29,  160w,  186-188,  238
Naravahanadatta,  son  of  the

King  of  Vatsa,  1,  2,  121-

123,    124,    130,    136-140,

167,    168,    173,    181,   184-

190,    193,    194,    201-203,

219,  220,  251
Narayana  (Vishnu),  113,  160ft
Nfiravani     (ParvatI,      Durga,

Uma,'  etc.),  179.  225,  227
Nigeria,     salt     of    forty-two

wives  of  a  king   of  Oyo,

Southern,  257
Nimbapuram,     near     Talari-

gattu,  place  of  cremation,

268
Nirriti    (i.e.     Destruction,     a

goddess     of     death      and

corruption),     110,      110w3,

113
Nishada    or    Nishadha,    241,

289
Nishadha,  Nala,  King  of,  241,

289
Nisumbha,  122
Nuniz,    account    of    salt    by

Fernao,  267,  268

CEnone,   suicide   of,    on   the

death  of  Paris,  256
Olbers,  E.  G.  F.,  Nionde  och

tionde  sangerna  af  Nala  och

Damayanti      fr&n     Sanskrit

iifversatt,  292
Oman.  J. C,  Brahmans,  Theists

and  Muslims  of  India,  272
Onesicritus  on  sail,  261
Oyo,  Southern   Nigeria,   saCt

of   forty-two    wives    of    a

king  of,  257

PadmavatI,  wife  of  the  King

of  Vatsa,  189
Pai  lou.  or  p'aifang  (honorary

gateways  erected  in  honour

of  Chinese  saRs),  257
Pa  I  a  g  a  I  i      (i.e.     low -caste

daughter  of  a  courier),  15


Palasa  ("cruel"  and  'un-
merciful "),  170nx

Pan  (betel-leaf),  271

Paflcanamaskrti    (the    fivefold  j
obeisance     to     the     Jaina
Saviours),  107

Panchaphuttika,aSudra.  1  1  i,
147,  155"

Pandita.  duenna  of  Queen
Abhaya,  105-107

Pandita  Jaganatha,  The
Story  of  Nala  and  Duma-
yanh,  trans,  into  English
Prose,  292

Pan  jab,  sad  rare  in  the,  263

Pafltschatanlra,  the,  Ben  fey,
192/11,  196H1,  230H1,  21.)''

Parakdyapravesa  (art  of  enter*
ing  another's  body),  46

Paranartsahodara  (sisters),  106

Parapurapravesa  (art  of  enter-
ing another's  body),  46

Parasarira-dvesa  (art  of  enter-
ing another's  body),  46

Paris,  suicide  of  OZnone  on
the  death  of,  256

Parjanya,  consort  of  Prithivl,
177n!

ParvatI  (Durga,  Gauri,  Uma,
etc.),  116,  125,  241,  276

Pas u pa ta  ascetic  and  King
Tribhuvana,  the  treacher-
ous, 234-236

Patala,  one  of  the  seven
underworlds,  20,  21m1,  22

Patalas,  collective  name  of  the
seven  underworlds,  2b;1

Patanjali,  teachings  of  the
Yogasutras  of,  46

Peile,  J..  Notes  on  the  Nalo-
pakhyanam, or  Tale  of  Nala,
292

Pertz,  G.  H.,  Monumenta  Ger~
mania;  historica,  255n2

Phalguna,  the  month  of.  1 4

Phutkarishyetardm  (wild  out-
cry), 107

Pingadatta,  minister  of
Vimala,  226

[Pioneer,  "Badrinath"
Indian  Notes  and  Queries,
160n

Plato,  Minos,  65n

Plautus,  Stichus,  138/11

Polivka,  G.,  J.  Bolte  and,
Anmerkungen  zu  den  Kinder-
u.  Hausmdrchen  der  Briider
Grimm,  Mnl,  129n

Ponce  de  Leon,  Juan,  search
by,  for  the  fountain  of  life,
145n2


INDEX  I— SANSKRIT  WORDS,  ETC.


299


Pota  sari  (a  sari  whose  four
corners  have  been  dipped
in  water  used  in  the
srdddha  ceremony),  259
*otiphar's  wife,  Joseph  and,
104

'owlett,    P.    W.,    "Satti
Worship    in     Rajputana "]
North     Indian     Notes     ana
Queries,  272
Prabandhacintdmani,  trans.

C.  H.  Tawney,  47
Prabhakara  and  Vidyadhari.

225-227
Prajd  ("  subjects  "  and  "  off-
spring"), 164nx
Prajapati,    horse    offered    to,

16
Pralambabiihu,     a     Brahman
servant     of      Naravahana-
datta,  173,  181,  184,  189
Pramanasiddhi.    one    of   the

four  heavenly  men,  185
Pratishthana,  130-132,  135
Prayaga       (Allahabad,       the
"  place  of  sacrifice"),  166,
166H1
Preller,  L.,  Griechische  Myth-
ologie,  65n.    230n2,  245W1 ;
Romische  Mythologie,    65n ;
Ritter  and.   Historia  Phil-
osophise, 150H1
Prester  John's  letter,  245n4
Prithivi,   the  earth  goddess,

'177/11
Prithvirupa.     story     of    the

handsome  king,  130-135
Procopius.     Bellum    Goticmn,

255
Propertius.  256
Prym     and     Socin,    Syrische
Mdrchen,      128n\      132?*1,
21 3n!
Pura  (Siva),  2,  2n3
Purdnas,  the,  64n*
Puroddsas  (offering  of  cakes),

15
Purodha  (chaplain),  105
Purushamedha   (human    sacri-
fice), 64,  64nx
Pushan.    originally  the    sun,

later  an  Aditya,  80,  80U1
Pushkara.    brother   of   Nala,
241.  242.  250,  276,  289-291
Pushkara,  the  holy  bathing-
place.  23
Pushymitra.     horse  -  sacrifice
performed  by.  14

Raghava.  author  of  a  Telugu
Nala  poem,  278


Raghunandana,  suggested
forgery  of  Rig-  Veda  passage
by,  262
Raja  Suchet  Singh,  three
hundred  and  ten  ladies
burned  with,  264

Rajadhiraja  Chola,  horse-
sacrifice  performed  by,  14

Rajatarangini,  or  Chronicle  of
the  Kings  of  Kasmir,  Kal-
hana,  trans.  M.  Aurel
Stein,  264,  266

Rajputana,  salt  strongest  in
Bengal,  Ganges  valley  and,
263

Rakshasas.  27  ;  Ravana,  chief
of  the,  126

Ralston,  Russian  Folk-Tales,
145n2.  230n2 ;  Songs  of  the
Russian  People,  255n2

Rama,  79  ;  and  Slta,  126-130

Ramanatha  Ayyar,  A.  S.,
"The  Authorship  of  the
Nalodaya,"  Journ.  Roy.  As.
Soc.,  277

Rdmdyana.  the,  211,  258

Rdndirdnda  (one  who  has
been  a  prostitute),  name
given  to  widows,  259

Ranjit  Singh,  four  ladies
burned  with,  264

Rasika  ("full  of  poetical
flavour"),  137H1

Ratnaprabha,  the  Nagi,  212-
214,  217,  218

Ravana,  chief  of  the  Rak-
shasas, 126

RevatI  (ParvatI,  Durga,  Uma,
etc.),  179

Rig-Veda,  the,    14,  95.   258,

"  262.  275

Rig-  VedaSanhitd,  Sunahsepha
hymns  of  the,  64nx

Ritter  and  Preller,  Historia
Philosophise-  ISOn1

Rituparna,     King,     246-250,

'  277,  282.  284,  285,  286

Rohde,  Der  Griechische
Roman,  132*1*,  185»l

Rose.  H.  A.,  A  Glossary  of
the  Tribes  and  Castes  of  the
Punjab  and  North  -  West
Frontier  Province,  272

Roth,  Bohtlingk  and,  San-
skrit Dictionary.  33nl,  41nx,
91  n2,  122n2,  168nl

Riickert,  F.,  Nal  und  Dama-
janli.  Fine  indische  Gex-
chichte.  bearbeitet  von,  292

Rudra,  a  merchant  named,
190


Rudra  (Siva),  18,  19,  19n2
Rupalata,  wife  of  Prithvirupa,

130-135
Rupasiddhi,  one  of  the  four

heavenly  men,  185,  187
Russell,  Tribes  and  Castes  of

the  Central  Provinces,  202nx,

272

Sadguna  ("good  quality"
and  "good  thread ''),  237n*

St  Gatti,  Nala  e  Damaianti,
tradotto  per,  292

Sakala  (the  Sangala  of  Alex-
ander), 2,  5,  7,  9,  13

Santa  Veda,  the,  95

Samkhya  and  Yoga,  magic
art  founded  on,  22,  46

Samudragupta,  horse-
sacrifice  performed  by,  14

Samudra£ura,  story  of  the
merchant,  191-193

Sangala  of  Alexander
(Sakala),  8*"

Sarabhanana,  adventure  of
the  witch,  82,  83

Saras vati  river,  the  supposed,
116n!

Sardar  Shan  Singh,  voluntary
burning  of  the  wife  of.  264

Sari  whose  four  corners  have
been  dipped  in  water  used
in  the  srdddha  ceremony
{pota  sari),  259

Satapatha-Brdhmana,  J.  Egge-
ling,  Sacred  Books  of  the
East,  16

Satapatha-Brdhmana.  the,  14,
64n\  245n2

San,  96,  96»»,  156;  antiquity
of,  258;  at  Surat,  a,  270;
customary  in  Kshatriya
families,  258;  early  attempt
to  suppress,  263;  forbidden
in  Malabar,  263;  ("good,"
"devout,"  "true  "),  258;
Greek  theory  to  account
for  the  custom  of,  262 ;
in  China,  custom  of,
257;  in  India,  258-272;
in  Kashmir,  a  double,  266,
267;  in  the  Atharva-Veda,
condemnation  of,  263 ;
modern  African  revival  of,
257 ;  murders  among  the
Sikhs  in  the  Panjab,
atrocious,  264;  not
acknowledged  in  the  Sutras
or  alluded  to  in  Maim.  258;
of  Queen  Suryavati,  widow
of  King  Ananta  of  Kashmir,


300


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


Sati — contin  ucd

264-266;  rare  in  the
Panjab,  263;  stones  (malm-
sat't-kal),  260,  Ml  J
strongest  in  Bengal,
Ganges  Valley  and  Raj-
putana,  263

Satis,  honorary  gateways  {p'ai
luu  or  p'ai  fang)  erected  in
honour  of  Chinese,  257 ;
inducementsofferedto.  260;
in  more  modern  times,  271,
272;  in  native  states,
recent,  264;  in  Vijaya-
nagar,  267,  268 ;  recent
occurrences  of,  264

Sattvarara  (possessing  pre-
eminent virtue),  177ft8

Sattvavara,  son  of  Viravara,
174,  177,  178,  180

Savitri.  offerings  to,  15

Schmidt.  Bernhard,  Griech-
ische  Marchen,  Sagen  u.
Volkslieder,  65n,  145ft2

Schrader,  O. ,  Prehistoric
Antiquities  of  the  Aryan
Peoples,  255ft1

Seneca,  Hercules  Furens,  65ft1

Sesha.  the  serpent,  186

Sewell ,  R. .  A  Forgotten  Empire,
267

Shabti  or  Ushabtiu  figures
buried  with  Egyptian  kings,
257

Shakespeare,  As  You  Like  It,
245nx ;  Merchant  of  Venice,
183  ;  Richard  III,  222ft1

Sheykh  Zada,  E.  J.  W.  Gibb
and,  History  of  the  Forty
Vezirs,  48

Siddha  (Parvati,  Durga,Uma,
etc.),  180

Sikes.  W.  Wirt,  British
Goblins,  213ft1

Sikh  Guru  Amar  Das.  con-
demnation of  sail  by  the,
263

Sikhs  in  the  Panjab,  atrocious
saCi  murders  among  the,  264

Simhala,  224.  224ft1

Simrock.  Die  Deutschen  Volks-
biichcr,  128ft1

Slta  and  Rama,  Story  of,  126-
130

Siva,  1,  2,  3,  17-20,  27-29,
33,  43,  44,  51,  54,  55,  58,
59,  69,  111-114,  116-125,
139,  144,  151,  174,  176,
179,  180,  187,  199,  199ft1,
221,  237,  241,  265,  275,
276


Siva  (Parvati,  Durga,  Uma,
etc.),  179

Sivas,  world  of  the  gods
called,  25,  25ft1

Sivaskandavarman,  horse-
sacrifice  performed  by,  14

Skaiula,  son  of  Siva  and
Parvati,  180,  215,  217

Skeat,  W.  W.,  "Snake-
stones,"  Folk-Lore,  245ft1

Sleeman,  Jiambfes  and  Recol-
lections, 271

Smith,  V.  A.,  Oxford  History
of  India,  264

Socin,  Prym  and,  Syrische
Marchen,  128ft1,  132ft1,
213ft1

Somadeva,  275,  276

Southey,  Thalaba  the  De-
stroyer, 129m

Speyer,  J.  S.,  "Studiesabout
the  Kathasaritsdgara,"
Ferhandelingen  der  Konink-
lijke  Akademie  MM  Weten-
schappen  te  Amsterdam,  8m2,
lOn,  13ft2,  30ft,  52ft1,  73ft1,
92ft1,  100ft1,  101ft1,  200ft1,
201ft1,  203ft1,  207ft1,  218ft3

Srdddha  ceremony,  sari  whose
four  corners  have  been
dipped  in  water  used
during  the  (pota  sari),  259

Srautasutras,  the,  14

Sri,  wife  of  Vishnu,  185

Srlharsha,  Naishadha,  277

Srinagar,  165

Srisundarapura  or  Sundara-
pura,  123,  138

Srutasarman,  an  emperor  of
the  Vidyadharas,  2,  17-19,
22,  29

Stallybrass,  J.  S.,  trans,  of
J.  L.  C.  Grimm's  Teutonic
Mythology,  23ft2,  64wJ

Stein,  M.  Aurel,  trans,  of
k a  1  liana's  Rajatarangint,  or
Chronicle  of  the  Kings  of
Kasmir.  264,  266 ;  and
G.  A.  Grierson.  Hatim's
Tales,  48,  104
Stevenson,  MrsS.,  Rites  of  the
Twice-Born,  259,  259ft1,  260
Sthulabhuja,   Story  of,    142-

144
Sthulasiras,   a    Yaksha,    226.

227
Strabo,  261
Subahu,  King,  244
Suchet    Singh,    Raja,    three
hundred    and    ten     ladies
burned  with,  264


Sudarsana,  105-107
Sudarsana,    a   gambler,    158,

159
Sukra,  spiritual  advisor  of  the

Danavas,  28,  64
Sumanas,  the  Brahman,  236,

275
Sumatra  or  Borneo  (Karpura-

dvipa),  224ft1
Sumeru.  Prince  of  the  V;

dharas,   17,   51-57.    61-62-

66-70,  82,  115-118,  120
Sumundika.  See  Suryaprabha
Sunahsepha    hymns    of    the

Rig- Fed  a  Sanhitti,  64ft1
Sundarapura,   or   Srisundara-
pura, 123,  138
Suprabha    and     his     Escape

from  Destiny,  178
Surasena,  King,  225,  226
Surat,  a  sati  at,  270
Suryaprabha,    and     how    he

attained  Sovereignty  over

the  Vidyadharas,  Story  of,

2-13,   17-22,  25-45,  49-62,

65-85,  102,  103,  108-121
Suryaprabha     (Book     VIII),

1-121
Suryavati  (SuryamatI),  widow

of  King  Ananta  of  Kashmir.

saCi  of  Queen,  264-266
Sutala,    one    of    the    seven

underworlds,  21m1
Sutras,  sati  not  acknowleged

in  the,  258
Suttee,  European  form  of  the

word  sati,  258
Suvarna,  224,  224ft1
Suvarnadvlpa,  190,  191
Suvena,     minister    of    King

Bhima,  244
Svarga,  abode  of  the  blessed

and  city  of  Indra,  119,  212
Svarnadvlpa,  229
Svayambhu  temple  of  Siva,  a,

122,  122ft2,  125
Svayamvara       (marriage      by
choice),  Damayantl's.  238-
240,  276  ;  the  false,  247
Svetadvipa,  185,  185ft2,  186

Taittiriya-Brdhmana,  the,  14,
64ft1

Talarigattu,  place  of  crema-
tion at  Nimbapuram  near,
268

Talatala,  one  of  the  seven
underworlds,  21ft1

Tantras,  the  64ft1

Tara,  one  of  the  three  dif-
ferent styles  of  music,  86n'


INDEX  I— SANSKRIT  WORDS,  ETC.


301


Taravarman,  King,  222,  228,
229

Tavemier,  Jean  Baptiste,
Travels,  270

Tawney,  C.  H..  29n»,  73ft1,
108m1,  185n2;  'The  Bha-
gavad  Gita  and  Christian-
ity," Calcutta  Review,  150ft1 ;
trans,  of  Kat/iakoca,  47 ;
trans,  of  M<~i/ariki~i«nimitra,
15  j  trans,  of  Prabandha-
cintamani,  47

Taylor,  Bayard,  trans,  of
Goethe's  Faint,  227ft1

Temple,  R.  C,  ed.  of  Thomas
Bowrey's  Countries  round
the  Bay  of  Bengal,  270;
ed.  of  Travels  of  Peter
Mundy  in  Europe  and  Asia,
270

Terence,  Phormio,  138m1

Thebes,  bodies  of  women
found  in  the  tomb  of
Amen-hetep  II  at,  256

Thurston,  E.,  Ethnographic
Notes  in  Southern  India,
122ft1,  171ns  245ft1

Tilottama      of     the      earth,

PDamayantI  the,  237,  237ft3
Traill,    Statistical   Account   of

Kumaun,  160n
Treta  (the  second  Yuga,  or

Age  of  the  World),  240ft1
Tribhuvana,  the  treacherous

Pasupata  ascetic  and  King,

234-236
Tripura       (Parvati,       Durga,

Uma,  etc.),  179
Tripura,  the  destroyer  (Siva),

19
Triveni  (triple  junction),  166ft1
Trivikrama,  Nala-champu,  278
Tunghwan,      golden      lotus

made     by     the      Chinese

emperor,  129ft
Tvashtri,  the  Vulcan  of  the

Hindus,  80,  80ft1
Tylor,  Primitive  Culture,  64ft1,

145ft1


Uchchaihsravas,    the    horse,

63,  115,  117
Uchchala.  King  of  Kashmir,

266,  267
Udara,     one    of    the    three

(different  styles  of  music,
86/1*
Udgatri.     one    of    the    four
priests    at    an    asvamedha,
15


Ujjayini,  85,  90,  91,  98,  100,

102,  205
Uma  (Parvati,  Durga,  Gauri,

etc.),  116,  139,  179
Urian  of  the  Walpurgisnacht,

Herr,  227ft1
Urva.41  and  Pururavas,  Story

of,  275-277
Ushabtiu     or     shabti     figures

buried     with     Egyptian

kings,  257
Uttara    PhalgunI,    the    Nak-

shatra  of  Bhaga,  80ft1


Vahuka,  or  Bahuka,  name  of
Nala   when   a   cook,   277,
284-288
Vajrakuta     (i.e.     "diamond-
peak'"'),  1
Vajraprabha,   a  king  of  the

Vidyadharas,  1,  2,  121
Vallee    Poussin,    L.    de    la,
"  Karma,"  Hastings'  Ency.
Bel.  Eth.,  182
Valmlki,  hermitage  of,   127-

130
Van   Limburg-Brouwer,   Ak-
bar,    an   Eastern    Bomance,
159ft1
Varuna,    the    divine    judge,

238,  275,  276
Vasati  (dwelling),  101ft3
Vasavadatta,  wife  of  the  King

of  Vatsa,  189
Vasishtha,  180
Vasudeva,  Nalodaya,  211
Vasuki,  king  of  the  snakes.

204,  212
VasumatI,  the  earth,  21ft1
Vatsa,    the    King    of,    1,    2,
121-122,  136-138,  140,  173,
184,  187-190,  251
Vayu    (God    of  the    Wind),

110,  110ft4,  113
Veckenstedt,     Wendische

Sagen,  245  ft1
Vetala  Panchavinsati,  the,  47,

145wa
Vibhlshana,     King     of    the

Rakshasas,  27,  126
Vidarbha,    Bhima.    King    of,
and  father  of  Damayanti,
237-240,    243,    246-248,
250
Vidhi  (fate),  182
Fidya ("science,"  "art"),  46
Vidyadharas,  1-4,  10,  17,  22,

28,  30  el  sea.
Vidyadharl,  Prabhakara  and,
225-227


Vigne,  G.  T.,  "  Widow-
Burning,"  Travels  in  Kash-
mir, 272

Vijayadharmasuri ,  Mallinatha
Caritra,  105

Vijayanagar,  sails  in,  267,
268

Vikramatunga,  King,  173,
175,  178-180

Vimala,  King,  225,  226

Viravara,  Story  of  the  Brah-
man, 173-181

ViravatI,  daughter  of  Vira-
vara, 174,  178,  180

Vishnu,  63,  70,  75,  159ft1,
174,  186,  187,  189,  199,
209,  213,  221,  275

Vitala,  one  of  the  seven
underworlds,  21  n1

Viveka  (discernment),  105

Vrislia  (i.e.  the  dice  known
as  the  "bull"),  276

Vrishabha,  the  mountain,
185,  188

Vulcan  of  the  Hindus,
Tvashtri  the,  80,  80ft1


Wadia,  P.  D.  H.  ["Folklore
in  Western  India"],  Ind.
Ant.,  182

Waldau,  A..  Bohmisches
Marchenbuch,  230»*

Walpurgisnacht.  Herr  Urian
of  the,  227ft1

Werner.  E.  T.  C,  China  of
the  Chinese,  257ft1

Westermarck,     History    of
Human     Marriage,     255»2
258 ;    Origin   and   Develop-
ment  of  the   Moral   Ideas,
202ft1

Wheeler.  W.  D.,  Noted  Names
of  Fiction,  145n2

Whiteman's  Land  of  the  Ice-
landic Chronicles,  identi-
fication of  Svetadvipa  with,
185n*

Whitney,  W.  D.,  trans,  of
Atharva-Veda,  ed.  C.  R.
I ..iiiin.iii.  263

Williams,  Monier,  Indian
Wisdom,  256  ;  ed.  of  Nalo-
pakhyanam,  Start/  of  Nala,
trans.  H.  H.  Milman,
278


Yajur  Veda,  the,  95
Yaksha    named    Sthulasiras,.
226,  227


302


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


Yama,    God    of    Death,    9,

9n»,  110,  110n«,  113,  213,

238,  275,  276
Yamuna  river,  166nl
Ya^ovarman    and     the     two

Fortunes,  195-198
Yoga  (magic),  4n*
Yoga,     magic     art    founded

on      Samkhya     and,     22,

46


Yogasutras  of  Pantafljali,
teachings  of  the,  46

Yogis,  magical  powers  ob-
tained by,  39,  39H1,  46-
48

Yojanas  (measures  of  dis-
tance), 32,  247

Yugas  and  dice,  connection
between  the,  240n1,  241  n

Yugas  or  Ages  of  the  World,


Yugas — continued

the     four    (Krita,     Treta

Dvapara,  and  Kali)    240n'
Yule,  H.,  and  A.  C    Bunnell,

"Suttee,"  Hobson  Jobson,

272

Zenobius,  Cent.,  256
Zimmer,      H.,      AltinduchM

Leben,  255n2


INDEX  II


GENERAL


Abode   of  Siva  and  Parvati,

Kailasa,  180
Abode  of  theblessed  (Svarga),

119
Abolish     sati,     attempt     by

Albuquerque  to,  263
Abolition    of    sati    by    Lord

William  Bentinck,  263
Academy,  The  ["  Jataka  Stories

—the  Myth  of  the  Siren  "],

R.  Morris,  229w2
Account  for   the   custom   of

sati,     Greek     theory     to,

262
Account  of  ritual  used  at  an

asvamedha,    14-16;    of  sad

by    Duarte    Barbosa,    269,

270 ;    of    sati    by    Fernao

Nuniz,  267,  268  ;  of  sati  by

Mandelslo,  270  ;  of  sati  by

Thomas  Bowrey,  270
Account      of      the      Buddhist

Literature  of  Nepal,  R.  L.

Mitra,  229n2
Acharnians,     Aristophanes,

138ft1
Acquiring  purity,  the  means

of,  233
"  Act  of  Truth  "  motif,  127ft1  ;

of  DamayantI,  239,  239w»,

288 ;    of   Manorama,    107  ;

of  Slta,  127
Active   method   of  entering

another's  body,  46,  47
Adventure     of     the     witch

Sarabhanana,  82,  83
Advisor    of     the     Danavas,

Sukra  the  spiritual,  28
Mthiopica,  Heliodorus,  239n2
African  revival  of  sati ,  modern ,

257
"Ages   of  the   World,"    H.

Jacobi,      Hastings'     Ency.

Rel.  Eth.,  240ft1
Ages  of  the  World,  or  Yugas,

the     four     (Krita,    Treta,

Dvapara  and  Kali),  240ft1
Air,  the  sword  which  enables

one    to    fly  through    the,

235,  236
Aitareya  Brahmana,  the,  64ft1

303


Akbar,    am    Eastern    Romance,

van      Limbourg  -  Brouwer,

159m1
Alphabetical  Index  to  the  Ch  ines

Encyclopaedia,      L.      Giles,

257w»
Altdeutsche    u.     altnordische

Helden-Sagen,   F.   H.    v.  d.

Hagen,  256
A  Itindisches  Leben ,  H .  Zim  m  er ,

255ft2
American    Indian     tribes,

widow-burning  among,  258
Anchorite,  one   of  the   four

ascetic     stages     (dsramas),

240m1,  241  n
Ancient    Egyptians,    suicide

of     widows     among     the,

256,    257;   Indo-Germanic

custom,  widow-burning  an,

255,  255wl
Ancient    Geography  of  India,

A.  Cunningham,  144ft1
Anger  of  Bhairava  with  the

Yaksha,  227
Angry  look,  reducing  a  bird

to  ashes  by  an,  232
Animal  divination,  selecting

a  king  by,  104
Animals   sacrificed   to   Agni-

Soma,  16
Anmerkungen  zu  den  Kinder-u.

Hausm'drchen     der     Briider

Grimm,   J.    Bolte    and   G.

Polivka,  117ft1, 129ft,  132ft1,

245nx
Antidote   to   poison,  a  lotus

that  is  an,  228,  229
Antiquities    of    India,    L.    D.

Barnett,  16,  258ft1
Antiquity    of    dsvamedha,    or

horse-sacrifice,  14;  of  saCt,

258;    of   the   use   of   the

lasso,  199ft8
Appendix  I:  Widow-Burning,

255-272
Appendix    II:    Nala   and

DamayantI,  275-292
Arrival  of  Nala  disguised  as

Bahuka,     or    Vahuka,    in

Vidarbha,  282,  283


Art  (vidya),  46 ;  founded  on
Samkhyaand  Yoga,  magic,
22,  46;  of  entering
another's  body  {jmrasarira-
avesa,  parapurapravesa,
par  okay  apravesa,  deluintara-
avesa,  or  anyadeliapravesako-
yogah),  46

"Art  of  Entering  Another's
Body,  On  the,"  M.  Bloom-
field,  Proc.  Amer.  Phil.  Soc.,
47

Artificial  poetry  (Kavya),  277

As  You  Like  It,  Shakespeare,
245ft1

Ascetic  and  KingTribhuvana,
the  treacherous  Pasupata,
234-236

Ascetic  stages  of  student,
householder,  anchorite  and
mendicant,  the  four
(asramas),  240/11,  241ft

Asceticism  practised  to  gain
magic  power,  46

Ashes,  reducing  a  bird  to,
by  an  angry  look,  232;
hunter  reduced  to,  by  the
power  of  Damayanti's
chastity,  244

Asking  poetical  riddles,
brahmodya,  16

Astrologaster,  Melton.  199ft1

"Asvamedha,"  K.  Geldner,
Hastings'  Ency.  Rel.  Eth.,
16

Atliarva-Veda,  the,  95,  263;
trans.  W.  D.  Whitney,  ed.
C.  R.  Lanman,  263

Atrocious  sati  murders  among
the  Sikhs  in  the  Panjab,  264

Attempts  to  suppress  salt,
early,  263

Aureole  or  halo,  23n2

AusSchwaben,  Birlinger,  93ft2,
145ft2,  227ft1

Authority  for  m*,  262,  263

"  Authorshipof  the  Nalodaya,
The,"  A.  S.  Ramanatha
Ayyar,  Joum.  Roy.  As.  Soc.,
277

Avadana  tiataka,  the,  229n2


304


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


Babe  made  of  Icusa  grass,  128
["  Badarinath  "]  W.  Crooke,

Hastings'  Ency.  Rel.  Eth.,

159,<l
["  Badrinath,"      Pioneer]

Indian    Soles    and    (Queries,

I60h

Bahar-i- Danish,  the,  132H1
Barbarism,    soft    a    relic    of

prehistoric,  258
Barbosa,     Book    of     Duarte,

If.  L.  Dames,  269,  270
Bathing-place,  Pushkara  the

holy,  23
Battle  of  King  Chamarabala,

199,  200
Beasts'  and  birds'  language

understood  by  Bhiishajna,

145
Belief    in   transmigration   of

souls,  Buddhism  and  the,

25n»
Bellum    Goticum,     Procopius,

255
Benefits   resulting  from   the

asvamedha,  14
Betel-leaf  (pan),  271
Bewildered  by  Destiny,  191
Bewildering  science,  the,  56
•Bhairava,"    E.    Washburn

Hopkins,   Hastings'    Ency.

Rel.  Eth.,  225n2
Biblical    version    of    Joseph

and  Potiphar  story,  104
Bibliographic     des      Outrages

Arabes,    V.    Chauvin,    48,

132/11,  235n2,  249n
Bite  (dasa),  245n3
Bite,  Nala  becomes  deformed

by  a  snake's,  245
Bitten  by  a  poisonous  snake,

Mahipala,  228,  229
Blessed,  abodeof  the  (Svarga),

119
"  Blood    Sacrifice    Complex,

The,"  E.   M.  Loeb,  Mem.

Amer.  Anlh.  Ass.,  65n
Bloodthirsty  rulers  of  early

Egyptian    dynasties,    cus-
toms connected  with,  256,

257
Bodies   of  women  found   in

the  tomb  of  Amen-hetep  1 1

at  Thebes,  256
Body,    charm    to    return    to

former,  20,21,25;  laid  by

in  case  of  need,  old,  26;

note  on  the  power  of  enter-
ing another's,  46-48
Bbhmisches    M'drchenbuch,    A.

Waldau,  230n*


Book  VIII  (Suryaprabha),
1-121

Book  IX  (AlankaravatI),  122-
251

Book  of  Duarte  Barbosa,  The,
M.  L  Dames,  269,  270

Book  of  Siudibad,  The,  Clous-
ton,  132n*

Boons,  the  choice  of  two,  195

Bow  obtained  by  Surya-
prabha^ a  magic,  55

Brahman  Kala  and  his
prayers,  the,  23-25

Br..  1 1 in. -m ic  rite;  satl  not  a,  258

Brahmans,  Theists  and  Muslims
of  India,  J.  C.  Oman,  272

Brass  Age  of  the  classics,
Dvapara  Hindu  equivalent
of  the,  240W1

British  Goblins,  W.  Wirt
Sikes,  213/11

Buddhism  and  the  belief  in
transmigration  of  souls,
25n3

Buddhist  pilgrim,  Hsiian-
tsang  the  Chinese,  185/i2

"Bull,"  dice  known  as  the
(i.e.  vrisha),  276

Bull  named  Danta,  a  white,
241

Bulletin  de  F  Ecole  Francaise
d' extreme  Orient,  [review  by]
G.  Coedes  [in],  224«J

Buried  with  early  Egyptian
kings,  living  slaves,  257 ;
with  Egyptian  kings,
Ushabtiu  or  Shabti  figures,
257

Burned  with  Kharak  Singh
against  her  will,  one  lady,
264;  with  Nao  Nihal
Singh,  two  ladies,  264 ;
with  Raja  Suchet  Singh,
three  hundred  and  ten
ladies,  264 ;  with  Ranjit
Singh,  four  ladies,  264

Burning  an  ancient  Indo-
Germanic  custom,  widow-,
255,  255n*

Burning  of  the  wife  of  Sardar
Shan  Singh,  voluntary,  264

["Burning  with  the  Dead
by  Men  and  Women — Sati-
Satu,"  W.  J.  D'Gruyther],
Indian  Notes  and  Queries,
272

Cakes,  offering  of  (pur-
dasas),  15

Calamity,  throbbing  indica-
tive of,  93,  93n2


Cambridge   History   of   India,
"  India  in  Early  Greek  and
Latin    Literature,"    1
Be  van,  261

Camphor,  the  true  (Kapur
Bams),  224n*

Canterbury     Tales,     Chauc-
145nl

Castes,  confusion  of.  in  the
Kali  Yuga,  240nJ

Cavern,  the  sword  concealed
in  a,  235

Celestial  swan,  the,  237,
238

Cell  of  iron,  Chakra  thrown
into  a,  230

Cemetery    (i.e.     "Grove    of  I
the  Fathers  "),  107

Cent.,  Zenobius,  256

Challenge  of  Pushkara  to
Nala,  242

Chaplain  (purodha),  105

Characterof  Bhairava,  modern
side  of  the,  225na

Characters  of  Theophrastus,
The,  R.  C.  Jebb,  94w

Chariot  Bhutasana.  the  magic,
3-6,  8,  9,  12,  13

Chariot-driving,  Nala's  skill
in,  247,  248

Chariot  in  the  form  of  a  white
lotus,  a,  57

Charioteer  of  Indra,  Matali,
44,  Un1,  187-189

Charm  to  propitiate  the
Yaksha,  the,  226;  to  re-
turn to  former  body,  20,
21,  25

Chastity,  might  of  Dama-
yantl's,  243,  244;  un-
broken (abrahmavirati),
105

Children  of  Chandrasvamin
found,  228

China  of  the  Chinese,  E.  T.  C.
Werner,  257/11

Chinese  Buddhist  pilgrim,
Hsiian-tsang  the,  185n2;
emperor  Tunghwan,  gol-
den lotus  made  by  the,
129n;  horse-sacrifices,  11;
satis,  honorary  gateways
(p'ai  lou  or  p\ii  fang)
erected  in  honour  of,  2
widows,  remarriage  of,  an
act  of  unchastity,  2
widows,  methods  of  suicide
of,  257

Chinese     Encye/o/xedia.      The
(Tu      Shu      Chi      Ck<
257


INDEX  II— GENERAL


305


Choice,  marriage  by  (svayarn-
vara),  Damayantl's,  238,
240,  276;  of  two  boons,
the,  195
Chronicle  of  the  Kings  of
Kasmir,  or  RajataraAgini,
Kalhana,  trans.  M.  Aurel
Stein,  264,  266
Chronicon,  Dithmar  of  Merse-

burg,  255na
Citron  filled  with  jewels,  the,

169-172
City  of  Indra  (Svarga),  119
Classical  Dictionary  of  Hindu
Mythology,    etc.,    A,    John
Dowson,  233  n1
Cleansed,    dresses   cast   into

flames  to  be,  246 n
Coins     struck     to     celebrate

horse-sacrifice,  14
Collective  name  of  the  seven
underworlds,  Patalas,  21m1
Collyrium,    the    magic    oint-
ment, or,  90,  90m1
Comfort  of  the  idol  at  Badari-

natha,  personal,  160n
Comparison,  phrases  of,  20/11,

21n
Compassion,   the  reward  of,

231
Comus,  Milton,  243n2
Concubine  strangled  on  the
pyre  of  Scythian  kings,  256
Condemnation  of  salt  by  the
Sikh  Guru  Amar  Das,  263  ;
in  the  Atharva-Veda,  263
Conduct  falls  into  neglect  in
the  Kali  Yuga,  good,  241w
Confession     of     Nala.     249,

250
Confusion   of   castes   in   the

Kali  Yuga,  240wl
Connection      between      the
Yugas    and    dice.    240m1,
241m
Consecration    of    the     king

(dtksha),  16
Contaminating      touch,       or

shadow,  of  a  widow,  259
Contemplation,    doctrine    of

mystic,  25,  25n2
Continual  strife  in  the  Kali

Yuga,  241n
Contos  Populares  Portuguezes,

Coelho,  132nx
Cook,  Nala  takes  service  with

King  Rituparna  as,  246
Cooking.  Nala's  skill  in,  246,

248,  249
Corn  oblation  offered  to  horse,
16

VOL.   IV.


Corruption,  Nirriti  a  goddess

of  death  and,"  108,  108n3
"  Cosmogony  and  Cosmology
(Indian),"       H.       Jacobi,
Hastings'  Ency.  Hel.   Eth.,

21m1
Countries    round    the    Bay    of

Bengal,    Thomas    Bowrey,

ed.  R.  C.  Temple,  270
Courier,  Palagati,  a  low-caste

daughter  of  a,  15
Cremation,  Nimbapuram  near

Talarigattu,  place  of,  268
Cremations,  a  grass  hut  used

for,   271;    in  a    pit,    270;

usually  held  on  a  pyre,  270
Crow,     raven     and     magpie,

superstitions         regarding

the,  93wa
Cruel  (palasa),  170nx
Cult    of   the    Earth-Mother.

177m1
Curious  Myths  of  the  Middle

Ages,  Baring-Gould,  185/t2,

245m1
Curse,  of  gambling,  the,  242  ;

of   the   dice   deities,   the,

240;    of  Karttikeya,   214;

of  the  hermit   Kapilajata,

155;     the    parent's,    230,

230n2,  231
Custom  of  safi  in  China,  257
Customs      connected       with

bloodthirsty  rulers  of  early

Egyptian    dynasties,    256,

257

Dancing-teacher  called
Labdhavara,  a,  156-158

Dancing  with  the  Teutonic
Bhairava  on  the  Blocks-
berg,  227m1

Dangers,  the  three,  216,  217

Dasa  Kumara  Charita,  the,
132m1

Date  of  introduction  of  salt
into  India,  256 ;  of  Nala
and  DamayantI  story,  early.
275

Dead  woman  to  life,  power
to  raise  a,  145,  145n2

Dead,  Yama  judge  of  the,  9,
9n»

Death  and  corruption,  Nirriti
a  goddess  of,  108,  10S/'i3;
Fate,  Time  (kala),  24m1  ;
God  of  (Yama),  108na;  of
Paris,  suicide  of  OZnone  on
the.  256;  of  the  king,  earth
laments  the  predestined,
175,  176


Debt,  sitting  in  dharna  used

to  retrieve  a,  102nx
Decameron,  Boccaccio,  165nx,

183
Decameron,     its    Sources    and
Analogues,  The,  A.  C.  Lee,
166n,  183
"Deceitful     Wives"     motif,

165m1,  166n
Deceptive  trick,  a  (kaitavand-

taka).  106
"  Deduction  "     or    "  Quint-
essence"   motif,    86,    87,
87m1
Deformed    by   snake's    bite,

Nala  becomes,  245
Deities,  dice  (Kali  and  Dva-

para),  240,  240m1
Delay  of  Bhairava,  reason  for

the.  225,  227
Demon    of    gambling    (Dva-
para),   240,   240m1  ;    (Kali),
240,  240m1
Demons  of  indigestion,  the,

196,  197
Dependent  of  a  king  (karpa-
tika),    168m1  ;     of    Narava-
hanadatta,  the,  168,  173
Description,   falling   in    love

by,  237,  238
Description     of     Greece.
Pausanias,     trans.     J.     G.
Frazer,  249  n
Desertion  of  Damayanti  by

Nala,  243,  278,  279
Destiny,  bewildered  by,  191
Destiny,    Suprabha    and    his

escape  from,  176
Destroyer  of  Tripura  (Siva),

19
Destruction  (Nirriti),  a  god-
dess of  death  and  corrup-
tion, 108,  108n8
Detectors,  poison,  228nx
Deutsche      Rechtsaltertumer,

J.  L.  C.  Grimm,  255
Deutschen     Volksbucher,     Die,

Simrock,  128m1
Devotion  to  a  husband,  virtue
of,  232 ;  to  parents,  virtue
of,  233
Devout  (saa),  258
Diamond -peak     (i.e.     Vajra-

kuta),  1
Dice,  connection  between  the
Yugas  and,  240nS  241n;
deities,  curse  of  the,  240;
deities  (Dvaparaand  Kali),
240,  240n» ;  in  the  form  of
swans,  242 ;  known  as  the
"bull"  (i.e.  vrisha),  276


306


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


Dice — continued

Nala    loses    all    at,    242;

Hituparna    exchanges    his

skill  in,  "247,  248
Dictionary  of  Hindu  Mythology,

etc.,   A    Classical,    John

Dowson,  233 ;»l
Dictionary   of  Kashmiri    Pro-
verbs. J.  H.  Knowles,  48
Die,  side  of  the,  marked  with

one    point    (Kali),    240H1 ;

side  of  the,  marked  with

two  points  (Dvapara),  240ft1
Discernment  (vivelca),  105
Diseases    afflict   mankind   in

the  Kali  Yuga,  241  n
Distance,    measures    of

[i/o /anas).  32,  274
Divination,  selecting  a  king

by  animal,  104
Divine    Mothers,    the,    225,

225ft1,  227
Divine     years    (360    human

years),  240ft1
Division  of  personality  (kdya-

vyuha),  4nx ;  of  personality

by  Suryaprabha,  4,  4ft1
Doctrine  of  mystic  contem-
plation, 25,  25n2
Double   sati   in   Kashmir,   a,

266,  267
"  Dravidians  (North  Indian),"

W.  Crooke,  Hastings'  Ency.

Rel,  Eth.,  177ft1
"  Drei       Sprachen,       Die,"

Grimm,     Kinder-u.     Haus-

mdrchen,  145  ft1
Dresses  cast  into  flames  to  be

cleansed,  246ft
Driving,  Nala  exchanges  his

skill  in,  247,  248
Dweller  in  the  Vindhya  hills

(Parvati,  Durga,  U  ma,  etc.),

179
Dwelling  (vasati),  101  n8


Early  attempts  to  suppress
salt,  263  ;  date  of  Nala  and
Damayant!  story,  275

Early  Ideas :  A  Group  of
Hindoo  Stories,  Anaryan
(F.  F.  Arbuthnot),  48

Earth  goddess,  the  (Prithivl),
177ft1

Earth  (hi),  174ft1;  laments
the  predestined  death  of
the  king,  175,  176;  Vasu-
mati,  the,  21ft1

East,  widow- burning  in  the
Far,  255,  257


Eastern  Romances  and  Stories,
A     Group    of,    Clouston,
139ft2,  182
Edda,  the,  145**1
Egyptian  dynasties,  customs
connected      with      blood-
thirsty rulers  of  early,  256,
257 ;     kings,     Ushabtiu    or
S/uibti  figures  buried  with,
257
Egyptians,  suicide  of  widows
among  the  ancient,  256,  257
Election,  garland  of,  cast  at

Nala,  239
Empire  snmatranais  de  Crivi-
jaya,  L' .  G.  Ferrand,  224ft1
Encyclopaedia  of  Religion  and
Ethics,  Hastings'  :  "  Ages
of  the  World"  H.  Jacobi,
240ft1;  " Asvamedha,"
K.  Geldner,  16;  ["  Badar-
Inath"]  W.  Crooke,  159ft1;
"  Bhairava,"  E.  Washburn
Hopkins,  225ft2;  "Cos-
mogony and  Cosmology
(Indian),"  H.  Jacobi,  21ft1;
"Dravidians  (North
Indian),"  W.  Crooke,
177ft1;  "Fate  (Hindu),"
J.  Jolly,  182;  "Human
Sacrifice,"  65ft  ;  "  Karma,"
L.  de  la  Vallee  Poussin,
182;  "Om,"  A.  B.  Keith,
176ft1;  "  Yoga,"  R.  Garbe,
39ft1
Energies  of  the  principal
deities,  personified  (the
Mothers),  69,  69ft1
English  Folk-Lore,   Thiselton

Dyer,  93n2,  99n2,  116n2
Enjoyment      preferable      to

wealth,  198
Entering  another's  body,  art
of  (parasarlra-dvesa,  para-
purapravesa,  parakdyapra-
vesa,  dehdntara-dvesa,  or
anyadehapravesakoyogah),  46
Entering  another's  body,  note

on  the  power  of,  46-48
"  Entering  Another's  Body,
On  the  Art  of,"  M.  Bloom-
field,     Proc.     Amer.     Phil.
Soc.,  47
"  Episode  of  Nala,"  or  Nalo-
pakhydna   (Mahdbhdrata),
275
Escape  from   Destiny,

Suprabha  and  his,  176
Ethnographic   Notes    in    South-
ern    India,     E.     Thurston,
122ft1,  171ft1,  245ft1


Etudes     Folkloriques,     E.
Cosquin,  48

Eunuch,      Prabhakara     dis-
covered    to     be     a,     226;
Yaksha    becomes    a,    224fl
227

European  form  of  the  word
sail,  suttee,  258

Evil    influence    of    Kali    on
Nala,  241,  242

Evil  (ku),  174ft1

Examples    of    entering     an-
other's body,  47

Excellence  (gttna),  8m1

Exempla    of   the   Rabbis,    M.J
Gaster,  192ft1

Faithful  wife,  the  hermit  and

the,  232,  233
Falling  in  love,  by  description,

237,  238  ;  with  a  painting,

131,  132,  132ft1,  207,  208
False  svayamvara,  the,  247
"  False  Virgin  "  motif,  166ft
Far  East,  widow-burning  in

the,  255,  257
Fate,     Death,    Time    (kdla),

24ft1 ;    (kala,  daiva,  karma,

vidhi,  etc.),  182 ;  or  Destiny,

note  on,  182,  183
"Fate    (Hindu),"    J.    Jolly,

Hastings'  Ency.  Rel.  Eth.,

182
"  Fathers,    Grove    of    the  I

(i.e.  cemetery),  107
Faust,  Goethe  (trans.  Bayard

Taylor),  227ft1
Fight  with  the  Vidyadharas,

the,  10.  11
Figures  buried  with  Egyptian

kings,    Ushabtiu   or  Shabti,

257
Fire  (agneh),  263
Fire,  God  of  (Agni),  108
"  Fire -bleached,"    the    pair

of  garments  named.    245,

245ft4,  250
First  (agre),  263
Five    lighter     vows,    the

(anuvrata),  105
Fivefold    obeisance    to    the

Jaina     Saviours     (pahcana-

maskrti),  107
Flames    of   its    own    accord,

wood     bursts     into,

248ft1  ;     to     be     cleansed,

dresses  cast  into,  246fl
"  Flavour,  full  of  (poetical)  I

(rasika),  137ft1
Flesh.    Dharmavy/idha   a

seller  of,  232,  233


Flowers     and     fruit  —  lucky

omens,  171m1
Fly    through     the    air,    the

sword   which    enables  one

to,  235,  236
Folk- Lore  ;  ["  Snake  Stones  "]

W.     R.     Halliday,    245m1;

"  Snakestones,"     W.     W.

Skeat,  245m1
["Folklore     in    Western
*    India"]    P.  D.  H.    Wadia,

Ind.  Ant.,  182
Folk-Lore  of  Bombay,    R.   E.

Enthoven,  70ft,  94ft,  122m1,

171ft1,  177ft1
Folklore      of     the      Northern

Counties     of     England,

Henderson.  93n2
Foot  (charana),  186»4
Forbidden    in   Malabar,   safi,

263
Forced  on  to  the  pyre,  wives

of  Jawfihir  Singh,  264
Forces    of    Suryaprabha,

gathering  of  the,  51,  52
Forest,  Nala  and  Damayanti

in  the,  278-280
Forgery  of  a  portion  of  the

Rig- Veda,  262,  263
Forgive      me       (mrishyatam),

232ft1
Forgotten     Empire,    A,     R.

Sewell,  267
Form  of  address  from  wife  to

husband,     "Noble    lord"

(aryaputra),  34,  34m1
Form  of  marriage,   the   gan-

dharva,  32,  34
Form  of  Nala,  gods  assume

the,  239
Former  body,   charm  to  re-
turn to,  20,  21,  25
Fountain  of  life.  145ft2
Four  ascetic  stages  of  student,

householder,  anchorite  and

mendicant  (dsramas),  241n
Fruit     and     flowers  —  lucky

omens,   171ft1 ;  and  leaves

of    jewels,    128m1,    129n,

139,  139n2
Full     of      great      monsters

(mahasattva),  180n2
"Full  of  (poetical)  flavour"

(rasika),  137ft1


Gambler  named  Sudarsana,
a,  158,  159

Gambling,  demons  of
(Dvapara  and  Kali),  240,
240m1 ;  the  curse  of,  242


INDEX  II— GENERAL

Garland  of  election  cast  at
Nala,  239

Garment,  swan  flies  off  with
Nala's,  242;  taken  by
Nala,  half  Damayanti's
upper,  243,  278

Garments  named  '-fire-
bleached,"  the  pair  of,
245,  245m*,  250

Gateways,  honorary  (p'ail  ou
or  p'ai  fang),  erected  in
honour  of  Chinese  satis,  257

Gathering  of  the  forces  of
Suryaprabha,  51,  52

Geographical  positions  of
islands  of  Karpura,  Su-
varna.  Sunhala,  etc.,  224m1

Geschichte  von  Nala,  Die,
Versuch  einer  Herstellung
des  Textes,  C.  Bruce,  292

Getting  rid  of  an  unwanted
widow,  methods  of,  260

Girdle  (kanchi),  8ft1

Glossary  of  the  Tribes  and
Castes  of  the  Punjab  and
North-  West  Frontier  Prov-
ince, H.  A.  Rose,  272

God  Bhairon,  the  village,
225m2

God  of  Death  (Yama),  110,
110m2;  of  Fire(Agni),  110,
238;  of  Love  (Kama),  1,
106,  152,  156,  187,  207,
209,  237;  of  the  Wind
(Vayu),  110ft«,  238;  of
Wealth  (Kuvera),  13,  110,
110m6,  113

Goddess  of  Death  and  cor-
ruption (Nirriti),  110,
110m3

Goddess,  Prithivi,  the  earth-,
177ft1

Gods  and  venerable  men,  an
oblation  to  (argha),  18,  28,
assume  the  form  of  Nala,
239  ;  called  Sivas,  world  of
the,  25,  25ft1 ;  king  of  the
(Indra),  176

Gold  Age  of  the  classics,
Krita,  the  Hindu  equiva-
lent of  the,  240m1

Golden  Bough,  The,  G.  Frazer,
15,  16

Golden  lotuses,  128,  129n;
vine  over  the  gate  of  the
temple  at  Jerusalem,  129n

Good  (sati),  258 ;  conduct
falls  into  neglect  in  the
Kali  Yuga,  241  n  ;  fortune,
throbbing  of  right  eye
indicates,     122,     122ft1;


307

Good— continued

(mahasattva),  180m2;  quality

(sadguna),     237m2 ;     thread

(sadguna),  237ft2
Grass,  Damayanti's  feet  cut

by  darbha,  242 ;   hut  used

for  cremations,  271 ;  kuia,

155,  243
Great   Mothers,    worship    of

the,  225/,  I
Greek    form    of    Kshatriyas

(Cathaeans),  261  ;  invaders

of  Northern  India,  view  of

the  custom  of  sati  by,  261  ;

theory  toaccountfor  custom

of  sad,  262
Griechische  Mdrchen,  Sagen  u.

V  olkslieder,     Bernhard

Schmidt,  65ft,  145»2
Griechische      Mythologie,      L.

Preller,  65w,  230m2,  245ft*
Griechische.       Roman,       Der,

Rodhe,  132ft1,  185ft1
Group  of    Eastern    Romances

and    Stories,    A,    Clouston,

139n2,  182
"Grove     of    the    Fathers"

(i.e.  cemetery),  107
Guardians  of  the  world,  the

eight    Lokapalas,    or,    43,

43ft2,  45


Half  Damayanti's  upper  gar-
ment taken  by  Nala,  243,
278

Halo  or  aureole,  23ft'

Hampi  Ruins,  A.  H.  Long-
hurst,  261,268

Handsome  King  Prithvirupa,
Story  of  the,  130-135

Happy,  healthy  or  well-fed,
widows  must  not  look,
259  ;  reunion  of  Nala  and
Damayanti,  the,  250,  291

Hard  lot  of  the  widow  in
India,  258-260

Hatitns  Tales,  M.  Aurel
Stein  and  G  A.  Grierson.
48,  104

Head,  light  from  the,  23,
23ft1

Helden-Sagen,  Altdeutsche  u.
altnordische,  F.  H.  v.  d.
Hagen,  256

Herabhinft  des  Fetters  u.  des
Gottertranks.  Kuhn,  145ft2

Herbs,  the  seven  magic,  62

Hercules  Furens.  Seneca,  65ft1

Hermit  and  the  faithful  wife,
the,  232,  233


308  THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY

Himalayan    Gazetteer,     Atkin-  IIhoh  uf   llortleaux,   I29n  Introduction      of     sad      into

Mm     l.V.oi1  Husband.   \irtuc  of  devotion  India,  date  of  the,  256

Hindus        human       sacrifices  to  a    232  Invaders  of   Northern   India,

anion;'  tin-    nl/!!  Hut    used    for   cremations,    a  view     of     the     custom    of

Hist   •    i     I'hiliuophur,     hitter  grass.  JT1  sail  by  Greek,  261

anil   I'reller,    l"-",!1  Ilvmn  of  praise  to  Durga,  1 79,  Iron      Age     uf     the     classics,

His!                   Futtttn.      Duulop  1 S| >  ;   to  (ianesa,  213,  211  Kali    Hindu    equivalent  of

I  I.iehreeht's    trans),    129/1,  Hvpnotism,    passive    method  the,  240  n'

I  •--    '     1  1"'  t1  :  of  entering  another's  hodv  Iron  Wheel,  (hakra  and  the,
//:«:,     >f  Human    Mamas!?.  a  kind  of.   IT  229-231

\N  estermarck.  -->>u:.  2.>S  Hysmine    and     Ut/sinintas,

Histum    of  the    Forty    le.irx.  Kustathius.   12S«l,   1  15;<-  Jaina  Saviours  (Arhats).   107;

F    .'    W    (iihh  and  Sheykh  fivefold    oheisance    to    the

/ill  i     Is  Identification   of  Svetadvipa,  {paiicanamaskrti),  107

Hist                 'he    Indian    Anhi-  1S5h-  Jaina    texts,    frequent   occur-

pelag"    •  '    t'rawfurd    2.">S  Idol      at      Badarinatha.      de-  rence  of     'scorned   love  of

History     of      the      I'xeudo-  scription     of     the.      159/j1,  women"  motif  in,   105

(       txtlienes.       ('        Midler,  loO/i  Jaina  vow  (diksna),   105

12",  '•.   129/1,   l^."),,1  //    He    S'ata  :     Triloba    dram-  "  Jataka    Stories      the    Myth

llitnttadiw'a.      the     (Johnson's  matiea,    A.   de    Gubernatis,  of  the  Siren."'    K.    Morris,

trans  |.   IT.-;/*1  292  Academy.  229m2

llidisun      Johxon.      "  Suttee."  Iliad.   Homer,    ill'/'1  Jewelled     crest,     the     snake

II  Yule  and  A   ('    Burnell.  Immolation  of  Brunhild  in  the  with  the,  245,  245/i1

272  Nibelung  myth,  255,  25(5  Jewels,  a  house  composed  of,

Holiness  of  Allahabad.   HWin1  Imperial    Gazetteer    of    India.  235;  a    water-melon    filled

Holv     bathing-place.      Push-  272  with.  182  ;   fruit  and  leave*

kara.  23  'India    in    Marly   (ireek   and  of,  128nl,  129/1,  139,  139*«]

Honorary   gateways   (p'ai   lou  Latin    Literature.''    K.     U.  the  citron  filled  with.  109-

or    p'ai    fans!),    erected    in  Bevan,    Cambridge    History  172

honour     of    Chinese     satis,  of  India,  2G1  "Joseph     and     Potiphar     in
-  ••  ■  Indian    Antiquary    [-Folklore  Hindu  Fiction."  M.  Bloom-
Horror  of  Indian  widowhood,  in         Western         India"],  field.     Trans.    Amer.     PhiL

->-'•/  P.     I).     II.     Wadia,      182;  Ass.,  104,  107

Horse      Asikala.     the.     209;  '-The        Merchant        who  Journ.       As.       Soc.       liengal,

offered    to    Prajapati.     1 »)  ;  struck      his     Mother."'     S.  Human       Sacrifices       in

sacrifice  (asramedha).  9,  14-  Beal.          229,/-  ;          ["On  India."  R.  L.  Mitra,  64/11

In.     I  ■*  ;    sacrifice,    sacrifice  Sulasa  '"  ]  Jacobi.  tilt/,1  Journ.    Hoy.    As.    Soc.:    "The

of   a  man  required  at  the,  Indian       Sates      and      Queries  Authorship    of    the    Nalo-

''1'  ';      the        vehicle"     of  [Burning  with  the   Dead  daya."    A.     S.     Ramnnatha

the  sun-god.  11  by      Men     and     Women —  Ayyar,        277;        ["The

House  composed  of  jewels,  a,  Sati-Satu."      D'Gruyther,  Source      of      Colebrooke's

'-'"'  W.T .].  272;  [••  Badrinath,"  Essay    'On   the   Duties  of

Householder,  one  of  the  four  Pioneer].  1*>"/,  a  Faithful  Hindu  Widow'"]

ascetic      stages     [asramas),  Indian      tribes      (American).  Fitzed ward  Hall,  2G2/11

-l11'       2il/i  widow-burning  among.  25iS  Judge  of  the  dead.  Yama  the,

'Human     Sacrifice  "      Hast-  Indian          Wisdom.          Monier  (.*.  9,,3

m_      I'.mi/    h'el.  Eth..  »)•")„  Williams    25*5  Jujube    tree,    lord    of    the

Hum. in      sacrifice      {purusha-  Indien    u.   dax   Ckristentum,    R.  ftadari  or  "  (Vishnu),  159nl

median    >' \    1. 1,,1  Garbe.  IS5n-  Junction, triple (triveni),  166*1

Human    .acrificc-,   in   Greece,  Indigestion,    the   demons    of,

:   prevalence  of.  01k'  ;  19*5,   197  "Karma."    L.    de    la   Vallee

to    ('fiamuiida      ll'.t/i1;     to  I  ndo-G ermanic        custom.  Poussin,     Hastings'    Ency.

Chandika.  t.l,.1  widow-burning  an  ancient.  lie/.  Eth.,  182

"  Human  Sacrifices  in  India  "  255,  255 />'  Kathakoca.       trans.      C.      H.

K    I.    Mitra    ./mini    ./.,    \,,r  Inducements        offered         to  Tawney.  47.   1  17/t1

Hrngal,  OIj  salts.  2*50  Kinder-und       Hausmarchem,

Human      year-,      .''>',"      (one  Influence    of    Kali    on    Nala,  (irimm.  129»,  145nJ

Divine  year)    2t*i  evil.  211.  242  King    of    the    gods    (Indra),

Hunter  reduced   to  ashes  by  Injustice  {avichara).  1 71  //l  17*5

the   power  of  Damayanti's  Innocent     man     accused     of  King  of  the  snakes,  Vasuki,

chastitv,  244  theft.  191.  192.  192/ti  201,  212


INDEX  n— GENERAL


309


King  of  Vatsa.  the,  1,  2, 121-

122,136-138,140,173,184,

187-190,  251
Kite  carries  awav  necklace,

192,  192ft1
Koranic  version  of  Joseph  and

Potiphar  story,  104


Ladies     burned     with     Nao

Xihal    Singh,     two,     264 ;

with    Raja    Suchet    Singh,

three    hundred    and    ten,

264 ;    with    Ranjit    Singh,

four,  264
Lady     burned     against     her

will    with    Kharak    Singh,

264
Lament  of  DamayantI,  243,

279
Language  of  beasts  and  birds

understood   by  Bhashajna,

145
Lasso,   antiquity  of  the   use

of  the,  199,  199ft*
Leaves  and  fruit  of  jewels,

128ft1,  129n,  139,  139»2
Library,  Apollodorus,  256
Life  and  Stories  of  Parcvandtha ,

M.  Bloomfield,  47
Life,     fountain     of,     145ft2 ;

grows  shorter  in  the  Kali

Yuga,  term  of,  241ft1 ;  on

the  next  world  a  reflex  of

this  life,  255
Light    from    the    head,    23,

23ft2
Lighter      vows,      the      five

(anuvraia),  105
Limb,      Siva      invoked      by

different    name   for    each,

199,  199ft1
Limbs  of  Jayamati  hurt  by

pilferers  in  ascending  the

pyre,  267
Line  (charana),  186ft4
Literature,  other  occurrences

of   the    story   of   Nala   in

Sanskrit,  277,  278
Living    slaves    buried    with

early  Egyptian  kings,  257
[Llyfre     Coch      0      Hergest]

"The  Mabinogion,"  Lady

C.  Guest,  213H1
Look,     reducing    a    bird    to

ashes  by  an  angry,  232
"  Lord     of    the     badari,     or

jujube      tree"      (Vishnu),

159ft1
Loss  of  self-restraint  of  Nala

owing  to  Kali,  141,  142


Lot  of  the  widow  in   India,

hard,  258-260
Lotus,  chariot  in  the  form  of

a  white,  57
Lotus  de   la    Bonne    Loi,    I  <  .

E.  Burnouf,  23n2
Lotus  that  destroys  poison,

the  unfading,  228,  229
Lotuses,  golden,  128,  129n
Love  by  description,  falling

in,   237,   238;    is   scorned,

women  whose,  91, 104-107  ;

science  of  (kamasdstrartha),

106;  the  God   of  (Kama),

1,  106,  152,  156,  187,  207,

209,  237 ;  with  a  painting,

falling  in,  131,  132,  132m1,

207,  208
Loves  of  Anangaprabha,  the

many,  152-162
Low-caste     daughter     of     a

courier  {Pdlagati),  15
Lucky    omens,    122,     122ft1,

171ft1
Lying  speech,  wicked  women

sprung  from,  93,  93ft1


"  Mabinogion,  The,"  Lady
C.  Guest  [Llyfre  Coch  O
Hergest],  213ft1

Madras  Soft  Regulation,  The,
272

Magic  art  founded  on
Samkhya  and  Yoga,  22,
46 ;  bow  obtained  by
Suryaprabha,  55 ;  chariot
Bhiitasana,  the,  3,  4,  6,  8,
9,  12,  13;  herbs,  the  seven,
62  ;  ointment  or  collyrium,
the,  90,  90ft1 ;  power,
asceticism  practised  to  gain,
46 ;  quiver  obtained  by
Suryaprabha,  54 ;  ring  of
Canace,  the,  145ft1;  {yoga),
4ft1

Magical  powers  obtained  by
Yogis,  the,  39,  39ft1,  46-48

Magpie,  raven  and  crow,
superstitions  regarding,
93ft2

Mahdbhdrala,  the.  4ft1,  15,
47, 104, 166ft,  233ft1, 239ft1,
240ft1,  241»,  243ft1,  249w,
258,  275,  276,  278

Mdlafi  Mddhava,  Bhavabhuti,
149ft1

Malavikagnimitra,  trans.  C.  H.
Tawney,  15

Mallindtha  Caritra,  Vijaya-
dharmasuri,  105


Mankind  afflicted  with  dis-
ease in  the  Kali  Yuga,
241  n

Many  bodies  taken  by  Surya-
prabha, 4,  4ft1

Miirchen  der  Magyaren,  Gaal,
213ft1

Marriage,  by  choice  (svayam-
vara),  Damayantl's.  238-
240,  276;  the  gandhana
form  of,  32,  34

Meaning  (artha),  164n*

Means  of  acquiring  purity,
200

Measure  of  time  (Kalpa),  2,
23,  23ft1,  25,  106

Measures,  of  distance  {yo-
janas),  32,  247 ;  the  six
kingly,  186,  186ft*

Melon  filled  with  jewels,  a
water-,  182

Mem.  Amer.  Anth.  Ass.,  "The
Blood  Sacrifice  Complex,"
E.  M.  Loeb,  65w

Memorial  stone  or  pillar
erected  to  satis,  260,  261

Mendicant,  one  of  the  four
ascetic  stages  (dsramas),
240ft1,  241ri

Merchant  of  Venice,  Shake-
speare, 183

"Merchant  who  struck  his
Mother,  The,"  S.  Beal,
Ind.  Ant.,  229ft2

Method  of  intended  suicide
(sitting  in  dharnd),  202ft1

Methodsof  entering  another's
body,  active  and  passive,
46,  47 ;  of  getting  rid  of
an  unwanted  widow,  260 ;
of  suicide  of  Chinese
widows,  257

Metrical  version  of  the  Story
of  Nala  and  DamayantI,
278-292

Might  of  Damayantl's  chas-
tity, 243,  244

Mille  et  un  Jours,  Les,  Dervish
Makhlis  of  Ispahan,  48,
132ft1

Minos,  Plato,  65»

Modern  African  revival  of
sad,  257  ;  side  of  character
of  Bhairava,  225m2;  times,
sads  in  more,  271,  272

Moles  on  the  human  body,
significance  of,  99,  99«2

Monkey-god,  Hanuman  the,
126

Monsters,  full  of  grea
{mahdsattva),  180w»


310


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


Month  of  Phalguna,  the,
14

Monumenta  Germania  historica,
G.  H.  Pertz,  255ft*

Monumental  Antiquities  and
Inscriptions  of  the  North-
Western  Provinces  and  Oudh,
L.  A.  Fuhrer,  166m1

Mother  of  the  gods,  Danu
the,  64

Mothers,  the  Divine,  225,
225k1,  226;  the  personified
energies  of  the  principal
deities,  69,  69m1;  the
planets  which  influence
the  unborn  child,  70n

Motif,  the  "Act  of  Truth,"
127ft1;  the  "Deceitful
Wives,"  165m1,  166n;  the
"  False  Virgin,"  166n;  the
"Quintessence,"  or  "De-
duction," 86,  87,  87m1

Mount  Meru,  138,  138m1

Movement  of  sheep  (avi-
chdra),  17 4m1

Mundy,  Travels  of  Peter,  in
Europe  and  Asia,  ed.  R.  C.
Temple,  270

Murder  of  King  Uchchala  of
Kashmir,  266

Murders  among  the  Sikhs  in
the  Panjab,  atrocious  sati,
264

Music,  the  three  different
styles  of,  86m2

Mystic  contemplation,  doc-
trine of,  25,  25n2 ;  syllable
Om,  the,  176,  176m1

Mythes  el  Legendes  de  l"  Inde  et
de  la  Perse,  Les,  L^veque,
150/11


Naishadha,  Sriharsha,  277

Sal  a  Damajanti.  Bdje  In-
dicted. Cesky  vypravuje,  J.
Libansky\  292

Nal  innl  Damajanti.  Eine  in-
dische  Gescktchte,  bearbeitet,
von  F.  Ruckert,  292

Nala  and  Damayanti :  a  Drama
in  Five  Acts,  292

Naladamay and/cat hanaka ,  from
the  Nalojxikhyana,  292

Nala  e  Damaianti,  tradotto
per  St  Gatti,  292

Nala  och  Damayanti,  en  indisk
dikt  ur  Mahabharata  fr'dn
originalet  bfversatt,  H.
Kellgren,  292

Nala-Raja,  the  Tamil,  278


Nala,  traduit  en  francais,  par.

E.  Burnouf,  292
Nala    mul    Damajanti,    iiber-

setzt   u.   erliiutert   von  E.

Meier,  292
Nalas  mul  Damajanti,  eine  in-

dische     Dichtung     aus    dem

Sanskrit  iibersetzt,  F.  Bopp,

292
Nalodaya,  Vasudeva,  277
Nalopakhyana,    or    "Episode

of    Nala"    (Mahabharata),

275
Nalopakhyanam,  Story  of  Nala,

trans.  H.   H.   Milman,  ed.

Monier  Williams,  278
Nalopakhyanam,    or    Tale    of

Nala, Text  and  Vocabulary,

Th.  Jarrett,  292
Nalus,  a  Sanskrit  Poem  from

the      Mahabharata,      Latin

trans.  F.  Bopp,  292
Native  states,  recent  satis  in,

264
Necklace     of    the     Princess

Chakrasena,  the,  191,  192
Neglect   in    the   Kali   Yuga,

good    conduct   falls    into,

241n
Next  world  a  reflex  of  this,

life  in  the,  255
Nibelung  myth,  the  immola-
tion  of  Brunhild   in   the,

255,  256
Nights,     The    Thousand     and

One,    R.    F.    Burton,   21n,

90ft1,  108n2,  132n1,  192ft1,

249ft1
Nimbus  of  Greek  divinities,

23ft2
Nionde  och  tionde  sangerna  af

Nala  och   Damayanti,  fran

Sanskrit  bfversatt,  E.  G.  F.,

Olbers,  292
"Noble    Lord"    (aryaputra),

form  of  address  from  wife

to  husband,  34,  34wx
Noble  (mahasattva),  180w2
Nodes    Indicoe  sive  qucestiones

in   Nalum    Mahabharateum,

L.  Grasberger,  292
North  Indian  Notes  and  Queries

["  Satti  Worship  in  Rajpu-

tana,"     P.    W.     Powlett],

272
Note   on    Fate    or   Destiny,

182,    183 ;    on   the   power

of  entering  another's  body,

46-48
Noted  Names  of  Fiction,  W.  D.

Wheeler,  145w2


Notes  on  the   Nalopakhyanam,

or  Tale  of  Nala,  J.  Peile,

292
Nottinghamshire  Facts  and  .F8H

tions,  J.  P.  Briscoe,  99n2
Novelle  Letterarie  <li   Fit

I  -.u  ii  i .  166ft
"  Nur  al-Dln  Ali  and  his  Son,

Story  of,"  Nights,  Burton,

249ft

Obedience  to  parents,  duty

of,  230,  231
Obeisance   to    the    Jaina

Saviours,  the  fivefold  (/;««-

canamaskrti),  107
Oblation  offered  to  horse,  a

corn,     16  ;     to    gods    and

venerable  men,  an  (argha)(

18,  28
Obscene  act  with  the  horse,

performed  by  the  queen,

16
Obstacles,      Vanquisher      of

(Ganesa),  119
Ocean  of  Story,  the,  14
Odes,  Horace,  93w2
Odyssey.  Homer,  58ft2,  120ftl,

i51ft2
Offering  of  cakes  (purodasai),

15
Offerings  to  Savitri,  15
Offspring  (praja),  164ft1
Ointment,  or  collyrium,  the

magic,  90,  90ft1
Old  body  laid  by  in  case  of

need,  26
Old  Deccan  Days,  M.  Frere,

48
"Om,"  A.  B.  Keith,   Hast-
ings' Ency.  Rel.  Eth.,  176ft1
Omens,    lucky,    122,    122nS

171ft1
Omens,     unfavourable,     93,

93ft2,  94w
One  point,  side   of  the  die

marked  with  (Kali),  240n'
Origin  and  Development  of  the

Moral  Ideas.  Westermarck,

202ft1
Osiris  and  the  Egyptian  Resur-
rection, E.  A.  Wallis  Budge,

257
Outcry,     wild     (phutkarishye-

taram),  107
Oxford     History     of     India,

V.  A.  Smith  ,'264

Painting,  falling  in  love  with
a,  131,  132,  132ft1,  207,
208


Pair     of    garments     named,

"fire-bleached,"  the,  245,

245n4,  250
Punjab  Sates  and  Queries.    See

Indian  Notes  and  Queries
Pantschatantra,    the,    Benfey,

192n>,  196ns  230^,  245nx
Paradise  Lost,  Milton,  80nl,

129n
Paradise,  mandara  one  of  the

five  trees  of,  128,  128n2
Parent's     curse,     the,     230,

230n2
Parents,  duty  to.  230,  231  ;

virtue  of  devotion  to,  233
Passive   method   of  entering

another's  body,  47
Patient,       be       (mrishyatdm),

232>,'
Pausanias's      Description      of

Greece.   J.   G.    Frazer,   14,

65,i,  249n,  258
Persian     Tales.      See     under

Mille  et  un  Jours
Persistency    of    a    would-be

safi    in    Jubbulpore,    271,

272
Personal  comfort  of  the  idol

at  Badarinatha,  160n
Personality  by  Suryaprabha,

division  of,  4,  4nx  ;  division

of  (kaya-vyuha) ,  4nx
Peter   Mundy  in    Europe   and

Asia,     Travels    of,     R.    C.

Temple,  270
Phonnio,  Terence.  138n*
Phrases  of  comparison.  20wx,

21n
Pilferers,  limbs  of  Jayamati

hurt  by,  in  ascending  the

pyre,  267
Pillar     or     memorial     stone

erected  to  satis,  260,  261
Pit,  cremations  in  a,  270
Place   of  cremation    Nimba-

puram     near    Talarigattu,

268
"  Place  of  sacrifice,"  Prayaga

(Allahabad),  166W1
Planets  which  influence  the

unborn  child,  mothers  the,

70/i
Poems   dealing   with    Nala's

adventures,  277,  278
Poetical       riddles,       asking

{brahmodya),    16
Poetry,  artificial  (Kavya),  277
Points  of  the  die,  symbolical

meaning  of  the,  240n*
Poison  detectors,  228nx ;  the

unfading    lotus    that    de-


INDEX  II— GENERAL

Poison — continued

stroys,  228,  229;  usual
mode  of  death  for  Chinese
satis,  257

Poisonous  snake,  Mahipala
bitten  by  a,  228,  229

Popular  Antiquities,  Brand,
99?(«,   199n

Popular  Religion  and  Folk-
Lore  of  Northern  India,
W.  Crooke,  55^,  177nS
225nS  235n2,  245nl,  271

Popular  Tales  and  Fictions,
Clouston,  192n*

Popular  Tales  of  the  West
Highlands,  J.  F.  Campbell,
67n*

Possessing  pre-eminent  virtue
(sattvavara),  177n3

Posture,  the  kayotsarga,  106

Power,  asceticism  practised
to  gain  magic,  46 ;  of
entering  another's  body,
note  on  the,  46-48 ;  of
parent's  curse,  230n2 ;  of
winking,  239 ;  to  raise  a
dead  woman  to  life,  145,
145n2

Powers  obtained  by  Yogis,
magical,  39,  39nx,  46-48

Prabandhacintamani,  trans.
C.  H.  Tawney,  47

Prayers,  the  Brahman  Kala
and  his,  23-25

Predestined  death  of  the
king,  earth  laments.  175,
176

Prehistoric  Antiquities  of  the
Aryan  Peoples,  O.  Schrader,
255  u1

Prehistoric  barbarism,  sati  a
relic  of,  258

Pride,  punishment  for,  142,
143

Priests  at  an  ahamedha,  four,
14,  15

Primitive  Culture,  Tylor,  64-n1,
145ni

Proc.  Amer.  Phil.  Soc.,  "  On
the  Art  of  Entering  An-
other's Body,"  M.  Bloom-
field,  47

Prostitute,  one  has  been  a
(Randiranda),  name  given
to  widows,  259

Pseud  o-Callisthenes,  the,
138nl,  145n2

Punishment  of  pride,  the,
142,  143

Puranas,  the,  64nl

Purgatorio,  Dante,  239n2


311

Purity,  the  means  of  acquir-
ing, 233

Pyre,  cremations  usually  held
on  a.  270  ;  wives  of  Jawahir
Singh  forced  on  to  the,
264


Queen  performs  an  obscene
act  with  the  horse,  16

"Quintessence."  or  "De-
duction "  motif,  the,  86,
87,  87n*

Quiver  obtained  by  Surya-
prabha, a  magic,  54

Rain   of   Kumara,   the,   213,

213n!
Raise  a  dead  woman  to  life,

power  to,  145,  145n2
Rajatarangini,  or  Chronicle  of

the  Kings  of  Kasmir,   Kal-

hana,  trans.  M.  AurelStein,

264,  266
Ramayana,  the,  211,  258
Rambles  and  Recollections,  W.

Sleeman,  271
Rare     in     the     Panjab,    sad,

263
Raven,    crow    and     magpie,

superstitions    regarding

the,  93n2
Reason    for     the    delay    of

Bhairava,  225,  227
Recent  satis  in  native  states,

264
Reducing  a  bird  to  ashes  by

an  angry  look,  232
Reflex  of  this  life,  life  in  the

next  world  a,  255
Rejoicing  (dhrishyan),  177n2
Relic  of  prehistoric  barbarism,

soft  a,  258
Religious    System     of    China,

The,   J.   J.    M.   de  Groot,

257n»
Remarriage  of  Chinese  widows

an  act  of  unchastity,  257 ;

of  widows  notcountenanced

in  India,  258
Report  to  the  Secretary  of  War

of  the  United  States  on  Indian

A  fairs,  J.  Morse,  258
Return  of  DamayantI  to  her

father,  244 ;  to  former  body,

charm  to,  21.  25
Reunion  of  Nala  and  Dama-
yantI, the  happy,  250
Revenge  of  Nala,  291
Revival      of     sail,     modern

African,  257


31L>


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


Reward  of  compassion,  the,

231  ;  of  Viravara.  180
Rice-porridge    eaten   at   the

asvamedha.    brahmaudana    a

kind  of,  15
Richard     III,     Shakespeare,

222ft1
Riddles,      asking     poetical,

brahmodya,  16
Rig-Veda,'  the,   14,  95,  258,

275
Rig-Veda  Sanhita,  Sunahsepha

hymns  of  the,  64ft1
Ring  of  Canace,  the  magic,

145ft1
Rites  of  the  Twice-Born,  Mrs

S.  Stevenson,  259,  259ft1,

260
Ritual  used  at  an  asvamedha,

account  of  the,  14-16
Ritualliteratur,    Gntndriss    der

Indo-Arischen    Phitologie  u.

Altertumskun.de,    Hille-

brandt,  16
Romances   and   Drolls   of  the

West    of    England,    Hunt,

93n2
Romische   My  thologie,    L.

Preller,  65n
Russian   Folk-Tales,    Ralston,

145n2,  230/t2
Russian  horse-sacrifices,  14

Sacred  Books  of  the  East,
Sat  a  pat  ha  Brahmana,  J.
Eggeling,  16

Sacred  to  Vishnu,  Badarinatha
a  place,  159ft1,  160n

Sacrifice,  horse-  (asvamedha),
9,  14-16,  18;  human-  (puru-
shamedka),  64,  64m,1  ;  of  a
man  required  at  the  horse-
sacrifice,  64ft1 ;  of  his  son
by  Viravara,  178

"Sacrifice,  place  of,"  Prayaga
(Allahabad),  166ft1

Sacrifices,  human,  in  Greece,
64ft1 ;  prevalence  of,  64ft1 ;
to  Chandika,  64nx

Sagen  aus  Bbhmen,  J.  V.
Grohmann,  245ft1

Sagen  aus  der  Grajschajt
Mansfeld,  Grossler,  245ft1

Sagen,  Mdrchen  u.  Gebrduche
aus  Meklenburg,  Bartsch,
93n2,  145n2,  227ft1

Salamanders,  worms  called,
245n«

Salary  of  Viravara,  174

Sama-Veda,  the,  95

Sanskrit  Dictionary,  Bohtlingk


Sanskrit  Dictionary — cont.

and  Roth,  33ft1,  41ft1,  91na,

122n»,  168ft1
Satapatha  BrShmana,  the,  14,
,  64ft1,  145n2
Satapatha     Bralnnnna,    J.

Eggeling,  Sacred  Books  of

the  East,  16
Sati :     a     Vindication    of   the

Hindu      Woman,      A.      K.

Coomaraswamy,  272
["Satti   Worship  in  Rajput-
ana,"      P.      W.     Powlett]

North     Indian     Notes    ana

Queries,  272
Saviours,  Jaina  (Arhats),  107;

fivefold    obeisance    to   the

(pancanamaskrti) ,  107
Scandinavians,       suicide      of

widows  among  the,  255
Science  (vidya),  46 ;    of  love

(kamasdstrartha),    106 ;    the

bewildering,  56
Scorned  love  of  woman,  91,

104-107
Scriptores  Erotici,  128ft1
Scythian     kings,     concubine

strangled  on  the  pyre  of,

256
Selecting  a  king  by  animal

divination,  104
Self-restraint,  loss  of  Nala's,

owing  to  Kali,  241,  242
Seller  of  flesh,  Dharmavyadha

a,  232,  233
Servants     of     the     idol     at

Badarinatha,  160n
Seven  underworlds,  the,  21ft1
"Seyf    ul     Mulk,"     Persian
Tales  (i.e.  Les  Mille  et  un

Jours),  132ft1
Shadow    of    a    widow,    con-
taminating, 259
Shadows  of  the  gods  person-
ating Nala,  239
Sheep,     movement     of

(avichdra),  174ft1
Sicilianische  M'drchen,  Gonzen-

bach,  248ft1
Side  of  the  die  marked  with
one    point    (Kali),    240ft1;
two  points  (Dvapara),  240ft1
Silver   Age   of  the   classics,
Tretathe  Hindu  equivalent
of  the,  240ft1
Sisters  (parandrtsahodara),  106
Site  of  Badarinatha,  159ft1
Sitting  in  dharna,  140,  140ft1,

202,  202ft1
Six    kingly    measures,    the,
186,  186n»


Skill,  in  cooking,  Nala's,  240,

248,249;  inchariot-driving,

Nala's,  247,  248;  in  dice,

Rituparna   exchanges   his,

247,  248;  in  driving.  Nala

exchanges  his.  247,  248

Sky,  the  (ambara),  244ft1

Sky- Father,  Dyaus  the.  177ft1

Slaves     buried     with      early

Egyptian  kings,  living.  261

Snake,  Mahipala  bitten  by  a

poisonous,  228,  229;  with

jewelled    crest,    the,    245,

245ft1

["Snake     Stones"]    W.     R.

Halliday,  Folk-Ijore.  245ft1

Snake's    bite,   Nala   becomes

deformed  by  a,  21"
Snakes,  Vasuki,  king  of  the,

204,  212
"Snakestones,"  W.  W.Skeat,

Folk-Lore,  245ft1
Soil,  Bhumi  the,  177/t1
"  Soldan  of  Babylon.  The,"
Boccaccio,     Decameron,
165ft1
Songs  of  the   Russian  People,

W.  R.  S.  Ralston.  255n2
["Source  of  Colebrooke's
Essay  '  On  the  Duties  of
a  faithful  Hindu  Widow,'
the "]  Fitzedward  Hall,
Journ.  Roy.  As.  Soc,  262ft1
Speech ,  wicked  women  sprung

from  lying,  93,  93ft1
Spies  sent  to  look  for  Nala,

244,  246
Spiritual      advisor     of     the

Danavas,  Sukra.  28
"Squire's   Tale.    The,"
Chaucer,   Canterbury  Tales,
145ft1
Srautasutras,  the,  14
Stages    of    student,    house-
holder,   anchorite    and
mendicant,  the  four  ascetic
(asramas),  240ft1,  241  n
States,  recent  sat'tx  in  native,

264
Statistical  Account  of  Kumaun,

Traill.  160n
Status  of  the  widow  in  India,

258-260
Stichus,  Plautus.  133ft1
Storia  di  Nalo,  M.  Kerbaker,

292
Story  of  AlankaravatI,  123-
125 ;  of  Anangarati  and
her  Four  Suitors.  144-167;
of  Asokamala.  140,  141;
ofChiradatri,  203,  204;  of


INDEX  II— GENERAL


313


Story — continued

King  Chamarabala,  194,
198-201  ;  of  King  Kanaka-
varsha  and  Madanasundari,
204-219  ;  of  King  Laksha-
datta  and  his  Dependent
Labdhadatta,  168-172;  of
Rama  and  Sita,  126-130;
of  Sthulabhuja,  142-144;
of  Suryaprabha  and  how  he
attained  Sovereignty  over
the  Vidyadharas,  2-13,  17-
22,  25-45,  49-62,  65-85,
102,  103,  108-121 ;  of  the
Brahman  Chandrasvamin,
his  son  Mahlpala  and  his
daughter  ChandravatI,  220-
225,  227-229,  232-234,  236,
250,  251 ;  of  the  Brahman
Viravara,  173-181 ;  of  the
handsome  King  Prith-
virupa,  130-135 ;  of  the
Merchant  Samudra^ura,
191-193

Story  of  Nala  and  Damayantl
.  .  .  trans,  into  English  Prose,
Pandita  Jaganatha,  292

Story  of  Nala,  Nalapakhyanam,
trans.  H.  H.  Milman,  ed.
Monier  Williams,  278

M  Story  of  Nur  al-Dln  All  and
his  Son,"  Nights,  Burton,
249/1

Strange  Stories  from  a  Chinese
Studio,  Giles,  25n3

Strangled  on  the  pyre  of
Scythian  kings,  concubine,
256

Strife  in  the  Kali  Yuga,  con-
tinual, 241w

String  (guna),  174n

Student,  one  of  the  four
ascetic  stages  (asramas),
240ns  241n

"Studies  about  the  Katha-
sariisagara,"  J.  S.  Speyer,
Verliandelingen  der  Konink-
lijke  Akademie  van  fVeten-
schappen  te  Amsterdam,  8w2,
10/*,  13n2,  30n,  52^,  73nl,
92n\  lOOn1,  lOln1,  200^,
201  /t1,  203W1,  207n1,  218n3

Styles  of  music,  the  three
different,  86n2

Subjects  (praja),  164nx

Suicide,  method  of  intended
(sitting  in  dharna),  202n* ;
of  Chinese  widows,  methods
of,  257 ;  of  (Enone  on  the
death  of  Paris,  256;  of
widows  among  the  ancient


Suicide — continued

Egyptians,    256,    257 ;    of

widows  among  the  Heruli,

255  ;  of  widows  among  the

Scandinavians,      255;      of

widows    in    Greece,    256 ;

of  widows,  Thracian  custom

of,  256
Suitors    of    Anangarati,    the

four,  144-149
["Sulasfi,  On"]  Jacobi,   Ind.

Ant.,  69nx
Sun-god,  horse  the  "vehicle  "

of  the,  14
Sun,   Pushan   originally  the,

later  an  Aditya,  80,  80m1
Superstitions    regarding    the

raven,    crow  and    magpie,

93n2
Suppliants,  Euripides,  256
Suppress  sad,  early  attempts

to,  263
Supreme  soul  (hamsa),  186w2
"Suttee,"  Yule  and  Burnell,

Hobson  Jobson,  272
Swan     (hamsa),    186»2 ;     flies

off   with    Nala's    garment,

242;    the    celestial,    237,

238
Swans,  dice  in  the  form  of,

242
Sword  which  enables  one  to

fly  through    the   air,   the,

235,  236
Syllable  "  Om,"  the  mystic,

176,  176wi
Symbolical  meaning  of  points

of  the  die,  240/11
Syrische  Marchen,   Prym  and

Socin,  128W1,  132m1,  213nx


Taittiriija-Brahmana,  the,   14,

64/11
Tamil  Nala-Rdja,  the,  278
Tantras,  the,  64/t1
Tantric  practices,  Chamunda

(Kali,    Durga,    Uma,    etc.)

connected  with,  149,  149nx
Teacher   of    dancing    called

Labdhavara,  a,  156-158
Teachings  of  the  Yogasutras

of  Patanjali.  46
Telugu  Nala  poem,  Raghava,

author  of  a,  278
Temple  at  Jerusalem,  golden

vine  over  the  gate  of  the,

129n
Ten  (das'a),  245n8
Term  of  life  grows  shorter  in

the  Kali  Yuga,  241n


Terrible    power    of   parent's

curse,  230n2
Teutonic    Bhairava    on    the

Blocksberg,   dancing  with

the,  227n*
Teutonic  Mythology,  J.  L.  C.

Grimm,  trans.  J.  S.  Stally-

brass,  23n2,  64H1
Thalaba      the     Destroyer,

Sou they,  129n
Theft,  innocent  man  accused

of,  191,  192,  192n»
Theogony,  Hesiod,  2 1 2  it1
Theory  to  account  for  custom

of  sad,  Greek,  262
Thousand  Nights  and  a  Night.

See  Nights
Thracian  custom  of  suicide  of

widows,  256
Thread  (guna),  8nl
Three     dangers,     the,     216,

217
Throbbing    indicative    of

calamity,  93,  93n2  ;  of  right

eye     indicative     of     good

fortune,  122,  122nx
Time,     Fate,     Death     (Icdla),

2inl ;    measure  of  (Kalpa),

2,  23,  23/11  25,  106
"Tochter    der    Sonne,    Von

der,"  Gonzenbach,  Sicilian'

ische  Marchen,  248nx
Tomb  of  Amen-hetep   II  at

Thebes,  bodies  of  women

found  in  the,  256
Touch    of   the   widow,    con-
taminating, 259
Tran.  Amer.  Phil.  Ass.  ' '  Joseph

and     Potiphar     in     Hindu

Fiction,"    M.    Bloomfield,

104,  107
Transferable  wheel,  the,  230,

230/i1,  231
Transmigration    of  souls,

Buddhism  and    the   belief

in,  25ns
Travels,  Jean  Baptiste  Taver-

nier,  270
Travels,      Mandelslo,     trans.

John  Davies.  270
Travels  in  Kashmir,  "  Widow-
Burning,"    G.    T.    Vigne,

272
Travels   of   Peter    Mundy    in

Europe  and  Asia,  ed.  R.  C.

Temple,  270
Treacherous  Paiupata  ascetic

and  Tribhuvana,  the,  234-

236
Tree-trunks  of  gold,   128n2,

129n,  139,  139n*


314


THE  OCEAN  OF  STORY


Trees  of  Paradise,  mandAra
one  of  the  five,  128,  128n2

Trees  which  always  bear
fruit.  120.  120nl

Tribes  and  Castes  of  the  Central
Pmmcm,    Russell,   202nl,

m

Tribes  and  Castes  of  the  Xnrth-

IVt'stern  Provinces  ami  Oitdh,

W.  Crooke.  IGOn
Trick,     a    deceptive     (kdita-

vana(aka),  106
Triple  junction  (trivent),  166H1
True  (sail),  258
"Truth,      Act     of,"     motif,

127U1 ;    Damayanti's.   239,

239 ns,  288  ;  Sita's,  127
Tu    Shu    Chi     Ch'eng    {The

Chinese    Encyclopaedia),

257
Two  points,  side  of  the  die

marked     with     (Dvapara),

240/*1

Unbroken  chastity  (abrahma-

viraii),  105
Unchastity,     remarriage     of

Chinese    widows    an    act

of,  257
Underworlds,      the      seven,

21*»

Unfading  lotus  that  destroys

poison,  the,  228,  229
Unfavourable      omens,      93,

93n2,  94n
'•Unlucky     Shoayb,     The,"

Clouston,     A      Group     of

Eastern       Romances        and

Stories,  182
Unmerciful  (paldsa),  170nx
Unwanted  widows,  methods

of  getting  rid  of,  260
Upper    garment    taken     by

Nala,     half     Damayanti's,

243,  278

Vanquisher  of  Obstacles
(Ganesa),  119

Vedic  gods  in  the  Nala  and
Damayantl  story,  275

"Vehicle"  of  the  sun-god,
the  horse  the,  14

Venerable  men,  an  oblation
to  gods  and  (argha),  18,
28

Verliandelingen  der  Koninklijke
Akademievan  JVetensc happen
te  Amsterdam,  "Studies
about  the  Kathasarit-
sagara,"  J.  S.  Speyer,  8n2,


Verhandelingen,  elc.—cont.
10/t,  13n*.  30n,  52nl,  73nl,
92n»,   lOOn1,    lOln1  200nl,
201  n1,  203nl,  207n1,  218n»

Verhandelingen  van  het  liata-
viaasch  Genootschap  van
K  u  nsten  en  Wetenschappen
["  Voorloopig  Verslag  van
het  eiland  Bali,"  R.
Friederich],  258

Versions  of  the  Joseph  and
Potiphar  story,  104

Vetala  Panchavimsali,  the,  47,
145u2

Village  god  Bhairon,  225w2

Virtue  (dharma),  240m1  ;
(guna),  1741 ;  of  devotion
to  a  husband,  232;  of
devotion  to  parents,  233  ;
reigns  paramount  in  the
Krita  Yuga,  240hx

Virtuous  (mahasattva),  \S0n2

Volkskunde,  Zur,  Liebrecht,
93  »'

Volsungasaga,  the,  256

Voluntary  burning  of  the
wife  of  Sardar  Shan  Singh,
264

"Von  der  Tochter  der
Sonne,"  Gonzenbach,
Sicilianische  M'drchen,  248nx

["  Voorloopig  Verslag  van  het
eiland  Bali,"  R.  Friederich]
Verhandelingen  van  het  Bata-
viaasch  Genootschap  van  Kun-
sten  en  Wetenschappen,  258

Vow,  the  Jaina  (diksha),  105

Vows,  the  five  lighter
(anuvrata),  105

Voyage  to  the  East  Indies,
Dellen,  271


Water  gushes  up  in  pots  and
pans  of  its  own  accord,  248,
248/11

Water-melon  filled  with
jewels,  the,  182

Wealth  (artha),  164w2 ;  en-
joyment preferable  to,
198;  Kuvera,  God  of.  13,
110,  110n*,  113

Weeping  woman,  the,  175

Wendische  Sagen,  E.  Vecken-
stedt,  245H1

Wheel,  Chakra  and  the  iron,
229-231

White  bull  named  Danta,
241

Wicked  women  sprung  from
Lying  Speech,  93,  93m1


Widow-burning,  Appendix  I,
255-272

Widow-burning       among
American    Indian     tribes.
258 ;     an     ancient     Indo-
Germanic     custom,     255,1
255nx ;     in    Europe,    255,

256  ;  in  the  Far  East

257  ;  still  practised  in  Bali
(East  Indies),  257,  258

Widow- Burning,  H.  J.  Bush  by,
272

"Widow-Burning,"  G.  T.
Vigne,  Travels  in  Kashmir,
272

Widow  in  India,  hard  lot  of
the,  and  status  of  the,
258-260 ;  methods  of  get-
ting rid  of  an  unwanted,
260;  must  not  look  happy.
healthy  or  well-fed.  259

Widows  among  the  ancient
Egyptians,  suicide  of.  266,
257 ;  among  the  Heruli,
suicide  of,  255  ;  among  the
Scandinavians,  suicide  of,
255  ;  in  Greece,  suicide  of,
256 ;  Thracian  custom  of
suicide  of,  256

"  Widows  who  Refuse  to
Marry  a  Second  Time,"
Chinese  Encyclopaedia,  257

Wife,  the  hermit  and  the
faithful,  232,  233

Wild  outcry  (phutkarishye-
taram),  107

Wind,  God  of  the  (Vavu),
110,  110n«,  238

Winking,  the  power  of.  239

Witch  Sarabhanana  adven-
ture of  the,  82.  83

Witches,  Bhairava  and  the,
227,  227n*

Wives  of  Jawahir  Singh
forced  on  to  the  pyre,  264;
of  Suryaprabha,  4

Women,  found  in  the  tomb
of  Amen-hetep  II  at
Thebes,  bodies  of,  -:>,;;
sprung  from  Lying  Speech,
wicked,  93,  93nx ;  whose
love  is  scorned,  91,  104-
107

Wood  bursts  into  flames
of  its  own  accord,  248,
248ni

Working  out  one's  Destiny,
182

World,  ages  of  the,  or  Yugas,
the  four  (Krita.  Treti,
Dvapara  and  Kali).  240nl ;


INDEX  II— GENERAL


315


World- — continued

of  the  gods  called   Sivas,

25,  25n*
Worms   called    Salamanders,

245n<
Worship       of      the      Great

Mothers,  225n*
Would-be  soft  in  Jubbulpore,

persistency  of  a,  271,  272
Wreck  of  Chakra's  ship,  230


Yajur-f'eda,  the,  95

Year,  the  horse  roams  for  a

year,  15,  16
Years,    Divine    (360    human

years),  240n*
11  Yoga.''  R.  Garbe,  Hastings'

Ency.  Rel.  Eth.,  39^
Yogasutras       of       Patanjali,

teachings  of  the,  46
Ysaie  le  Triste,  129n


Yiisuf  u    Zulatkha,    Firdausi,
104


Zig-Zag    Journeys    in     India

Butterworth,  48
Zoological   Mythology,    A.    de

Gubernatis.  249n
Zur     Volkskunde,     Liebrecht,

93ft1


Printed  in  Great  Britain

by  The  Riverside  Press  Limited

Edinburgh


jOF


W%.<


fSJra


M


Wjjte


^W"ftk.


oJ

E-<


h


>>-<*


-P    O
tQ    >


Cm
O


I?

pQ      ©


0
M

O    CD


«3  O  Q-i
>

T3  ^    rQ

Hi  E-<


o

CO


t3


B  o

CO  H
.J  CO


University  of  Toronto
Library


DO  NOT

REMOVE

THE

CARD

FROM

THIS

POCKET


Acme  Library  Card  Pocket
LOWE-MARTIN  CO.  limited


_3


•SiS^raS


raw


3®$  ■•'•  »i;  v':  •hi*'


KKKHV


H  :■  •  -;,H  Kg  ,  i..;i,':


V


iv^'


*w


JKf||Sffi^^^^S|}}i


iait!i»


W&m


wSksKKk


,v>!Vv;->':'':\'-,r


ifeliSIlS


■ftVflMji!,
