Mental Suggestion (Julian Ochorowicz, 1891)
===========================================
Julian Ochorowicz — The classic study of mental suggestion — the missing link between hypnotism and telepathy. Public domain. Scan via Internet Archive (mentalsuggestion00ocho) — 1891 first English edition.

m

KKQi
QGQC


BOB

no

BAM

M

BBS

BOM

era

tSiiiA

'&:..:/^;';~    ',:•.;„( /v.V;,

wu


S*



MENTAL  SUGGESTION

BY

Dr.  J.  OCHOROWICZ

SOMETIME   PROFESSOR   EXTRAORDINARIUS    OF   PSYCHOLOGY   AND    NATURE-PHILOSOPHY

IN  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  LEMBERG

WITH   A    PREFACE    BY

CHARLES    RICHET

TRANSLATED   FROM    THE  FRENCH  BY

J.  FITZGERALD,  M.  A.

NEW   YORK

THE    HUMBOLDT    PUBLISHING   CO.

19    ASTOR    PLACE

CorYRIGHT,    l8gi,

By  The  Humboldt  Publishing  Co.

PRESS  OF   F.    V.    STRAUSS,

108-H4   WOOSTES    ST.,   N.  Y

CONTENTS

Preface,

PAGE

PART  I.

Experiments  and  Observations  of  the  Author.

Chapter       I. — Apparent  Mental  Suggestion,
II. — Probable  Mental  Suggestion,
III. — True  Mental  Suggestion,
IV. — Experiments  at  Havre,
V. — New  Experiments,

10

42
60
81

97

PART  II.

Facts  observed  by  Others.     Evolution  of  Mental  Suggestion

Physical  Analysis.

Chapter        I. — Organic  Sympathism,       .....     105

II. — Sympathism  and  Contagion,    .         .         .         .118

III. — Transmission  of  Emotive  States,     .         .         .     146

IV. — Transmission  of  Ideas,     .         .         .         .         .161

V. — Direct  Will-Transmission,         .         .         .         .196

VI. — Will- Action  and  the  Question  of  "Rapport,"     212

VII. — Action     Unbeknown    to    the     Subject     and

Against  His  Will,  .         .         .         .         .231

VIII. — Deferred  Mental  Suggestion,  .         .         .     249

IX. — Mental  Suggestion  at  a  Distance,  .         .258

PART  III.

Theories.     Conclusions.     Applications.

Chapter        I. — The   Hypothesis  of  Exalted  Perception,        .  287
II. — The    Hypothesis    of    Brain    Exaltation,  with

Paralysis  of  the  Senses,       .         .         .         .292

III. — The  Hypothesis  of  Direct  Psychic  Action,    .  295
IV. — The  Hypothesis  of  Direct  Physical  Action,    .  299
V. — The  Hypothesis  of  a  Universal  Fluid,     .         .  303
VI. — The  Hypothesis   of    Psycho-Physical  Trans-
mission,          .         .         .         .         .         .  3 1 7

VII. — The  Elements  of  a  Scientific  Explanation,       .  320

VIII. — The  Law  of  Reversibility,        ....  332

IX. — Final  Suppositions,           .....  337

Appendix,     .         .         .         .     • 353

Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive

in  2012  with  funding  from

Open  Knowledge  Commons  and  Harvard  Medical  School

http://www.archive.org/details/mentalsuggestionOOocho

PREFACE.

This  book,  the  title  of  which  will,  perhaps,  scare  those  who  fear
novelty,  is  not  a  work  of  imagination,  but  of  experience.  A  multitude
of  facts  are  set  forth  herein,  that  have  been  observed  as  well  by  the
author  himself  as  by  sundry  experimenters.  It  is  a  collection  of  facts,
and  nowhere  else  can  you  find  brought  together  so  many  data.  But
it  is  not  enough  to  accumulate  facts — the  facts  must  be  rightly
observed.  In  this  respect  Mr.  Ochorowicz's  criticism  of  the  facts  he
has  witnessed,  or  that  he  cites  from  the  accounts  given  by  other
scientific  men,  is  as  rigorous  as  is  called  for  by  a  subject  so  difficult.
The  most  notable  thing  in  his  work  is  the  resolute,  unflagging  deter-
mination to  weigh  all  objections,  to  put  away  all  causes  of  bad  faith,
whether  conscious  or  unconscious,  to  take  note  of  the  difficulties  of
the  problem,  sometimes  magnifying  them,  and  not  to  be  content  till
every  possible  cause  of  illusion  has  been  removed.

The  task  was  difficult,  and  it  is  much  to  have  attempted  it  under
conditions  so  stringent.

To  demonstrate  mental  suggestion  it  suffices  to  eliminate  two  causes
of  error  :

First,  the  error  due  to  fraud.  And  when  I  say  fraud,  I  do  not  mean
willful  deception  plotted,  contrived,  studied  beforehand — that  is  very
rare  ;  but  unconscious,  automatic  fraud  (so  to  speak)  produced  by  the
natural  tendency  that  is  in  all  of  us  to  wish  to  make  an  experiment
successful  when  qnce  we  have  taken  it  in  hand.  Hence,  we  must  first
of  all  make  sure  that  no  involuntary  indication  can  have  been  given;
in  other  words,  that  there  has  been  no  word  or  gesture  or  touch  that
could  lead  the  person  that  answers  to  give  preferably  such  or  such
response.

The  second  cause  of  error  is  chance.  Chance  often  brings  about
amazing  coincidences.  Now,  mathematical  certitude  is  never  attain-
able in  cases  where  chance  may  play  a  part ;  nevertheless,  there  is  a
moral  certitude  resulting  from  the  continuous  success  of  many  experi-
ments, the  probability  of  any  one  of  which  is  weak.

Mr.  Ochorowicz  has  sought  to  eliminate  these  various  difficulties ;
he  finds  a  certain  number  of  cas'es  which  he  regards  as  conclusive —

6  PREFACE.

and  I  think  I  may  say  that  he  is  pretty  exacting  in  the  matter  of
proofs.  In  consequence  of  certain  decisive  experiments  he  has
reached  a  conviction,  and  naturally  he  strives  to  make  his  readers
share  it  with  him.

And  yet  I  do  not  think  that  his  book,  strong  as  it  is  in  proofs,  will
convince  all,  or  even  many  persons.  I  know  too  well  (from  my  own
experience)  how  difficult  it  is  to  believe  what  we  have  seen  when  it  does
not  accord  with  the  general  tenor  of  our  thoughts,  with  the  common-
places that  underlie  all  our  knowledge.  A  fortnight  ago  I  witnessed
such  or  such  an  astonishing  fact,  and  I  was  convinced.  To-day  I
toss  my  head  and  begin  to  doubt.  Six  months  hence  I  shall  no  longer
believe  it  at  all.  This  is  a  curious  anomaly  of  our  mind.  To  produce
conviction,  it  is  not  enough  that  a  fact  is  proven  logically  and  experi-
mentally; it  is  necessary,  furthermore,  that  we,  so  to  speak,  become
intellectually  habituated  to  it.  If  it  clashes  with  our  routine,  it  is
rejected,  spurned.

This  is  what  is  commonly  called  "  common  sense."  Common  sense
it  is  that  makes  us  reject  all  new  and  unexpected  thoughts  ;  that
regulates  our  conduct  and  governs  our  opinions.

And  yet  this  much-lauded  "  common  sense  "  is  little  better  than  a
routine  of  the  intelligence.  To-day's  common  sense  is  not  the  com-
mon sense  of  a  couple  of  hundred  years  ago,  or  of  a  couple  of  thousand
years  ago.  A  couple  of  thousand  years  ago  it  was  common  sense  to
believe  that  the  sun  revolves  round  the  earth  and  at  even  sinks  into
the  ocean.  A  couple  of  hundred  years  ago  it  was  common  sense  that
one  cannot  in  one  day  send  a  message  to  Pekin  and  receive  an  answer  ;
but  to-day  common  sense  says  that  one  can  send  a  telegram  thither,
answer  prepaid.  To-day  common  sense  commands  that  an  army  of  a
million  soldiers  be  maintained,  with  five  million  muskets.  Two  or
three  centuries  hence  will  not  this  common  sense  seem  astounding
absurdity  ?

Hence,  if  mental  suggestion  is  opposed  in  the  name  of  common
sense,  the  common  sense  of  the  present  year  is  meant,  for  the  common
sense  of  ten  years  hence  will  have  quite  other  tendencies.  It  is  only
a  question  of  time,  and  I  dare  say  that  after  a  few  years  this  idea,
having  made  its  way  into  people's  minds,  will  be  found  quite  matter-
of-course.  People  will,  perhaps,  even  marvel  that  we  should  have
found  so  much  difficulty  in  accepting  it.  Do  we  not  see  the  immortal
discoveries  of  our  great  Pasteur,  though  proved  by  a  superabundance
of  demonstrative  experiments,  nevertheless  meeting  an  astonishing
amount  of  opposition  ?  What  stronger  evidence  is  needed  of  our
incurable  routine  ?

Not  that  I  consider  mental  suggestion  as  rigorously  proven  once
for  all.  Certainly  not.  Strictly  demonstrative  experiments  are  rare.
In  general,  when  they  are  conclusive  (by  concordance  of  results)  they

PREFACE.  7

are  not  irreproachable  in  other  respects  ;  and  when  they  are  irreproach-
able, they  are  not  conclusive.  But  some  there  are  that  are  at  once
irreproachable  and  conclusive  ;  they  will  be  found  set  forth  in  this
book,  and  the  reader  will  be  able  to  judge  of  their  importance.

After  the  facts,  the  theories.  Of  these  there  are  many,  but  to  me
they  do  not  seem  to  be  of  any  great  importance.  The  essential
thing  is  to  establish  this  fact,  that  independently  of  any  phenomenon
appreciable  by  our  normal  senses,  or  by  our  normal  perspicacity,  how  quick
soever  it  may  be  supposed  to  be,  there  exists  between  the  thought  of  two  indi-
diduals  a  correlation  such  as  chance  cannot  account  for.

The  demonstration  of  this  proposition  is,  to  my  thinking,  the  funda-
mental point.  And  though  Mr.  Ochorowicz  and  others  before  him
have  amassed  proofs,  these  do  not  produce  absolute,  complete  convic-
tion, but  only  doubt  :  so  strong  in  its  action  upon  our  ideas  is  the
influence  of  routine  and  of  habit.

But  whatever  the  opinion  ultimately  formed  as  to  the  reality  of
mental  suggestion,  it  ought  not,  I  think,  to  influence  one's  judgment
as  to  Mr.  Ochorowicz's  book.  Everybody,  it  seems  to  me,  must
recognize  his  sincerity,  his  perseverance,  and  his  contempt  for  ready-
made  opinions.  One  feels  that  he  has  a  passionate  love  of  truth.
That  is  an  encomium  that  every  man  of  good  faith  will  appreciate.

Charles  Richet.

PART    I.

EXPERIMENTS  AND  OBSERVATIONS  OF  THE

AUTHOR.

"The  man  who,  outside  of  pure  mathematics,  pronounces  the  word   IMPOSSIBLE,  lacks

prudence." — Arago,  in  his  ttoge  of  Bailly.

THE    limits   of    the    possible   are    receding.      The    experimental
method,  after  having  founded  positive  psychology,  is    itself
introducing  us  into  the  domain  of  the  miraculous.

"  Hypnotism  "  is  henceforth  part  and  parcel  of  science,  and  "  sug-
gestion," which  produces  most  of  its  wonders,  no  longer  surprises  us ;
on  the  contrary,  we  constantly  refer  to  it  as  explaining  other  phe-
nomena still  harder  to  understand.

Yet  with  mental  suggestion  the  problem  grows  complicated.  The
explanation  offered  by  the  Commission1  of  1784,  viz.:  "imagination
and  imitation,"  no  longer  suffices.  One  loses  one's  way  ;  one  seems
ready  to  spurn  science  and  to  go  headlong  into  occultism.

This  limit  once  overpast,  and  mental  suggestion  accepted,  may  we
flatter  ourselves  with  the  thought  that  there  is  some  other  phenome-
non still  more  extraordinary  to  study  ?

But  what  matters  it  ?  Truth  has  nothing  in  it  to  make  science
afraid.  This  truth  may  even  be  absolutely  at  variance  with  current
opinions,  but  none  the  less  is  it  worthy  of  being  studied  with  care,
for  nothing  is  so  helpful  to  progress  as  a  discovery  that  contradicts
dominant  theories.

But — is  this  a  discovery  ?  Is  it  a  truth  ?  That  is  the  whole
question.

Let  us  for  the  nonce  put  away  scruples  ;  let  us  double  our  habitual
precautions,  our  tests,  and  let  us  examine  the  facts.     An  experiment

1  Appointed  by  the  French  Academy  to  investigate  "  Mesmerism." — Translator .

IO  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

is  always  instructive,  even  when  it  involves  an  illusion.  Saved  from
the  trouble  of  explaining  the  experiment,  we  shall  have  to  get  at  the
illusion  ;  and  if  we  succeed  in  accounting  for  that,  why  there  is  a
result  at  all  events.

And  now,  kind  reader,  if  we  are  agreed  as  to  principles,  let  us
begin  our  little  journey  in  search  of  a  phenomenon  in  Mental  Sug-
gestion.

CHAPTER  I.

APPARENT    MENTAL    SUGGESTION.

I  MUST,  first  of  all,  confess  that  a  year  ago  I  did  not  believe  in
mental  suggestion — not  only  did  not  believe  in  it,  but  the  ques-
tion did  not  to  me  appear  to  be  important  enough  to  warrant  a  special
study.  Yet  several  times  I  had  tested  the  alleged  action  of  thought
upon  a  certain  number  of  subjects.

First  at  Lublin,  in  1867,1  I  experimented  on  a  youth  of  seventeen,
one  pretty  difficult  to  endorm,2  but  who,  once  in  the  somnambulic
state,  presented  certain  interesting  phenomena.

For  example,  he  would  recognize  any  person  of  his  acquaintance
who  might  simply  touch  him  on  the  back  with  a  finger.  Once  he  dis-
tinguished in  this  way  as  many  as  fifteen  persons,  one  after  another  ;
and  I  must  add  that  some  of  these  persons  entered  after  he  had  been
endormed.

Though  he  showed  a  little  hesitation  with  regard  to  persons  that
did  not  belong  to  the  circle  of  his  habitual  acquaintance,  he  always
distinguished  my  touch  from  that  of  every  one  else  ;  and  once  he
recognized  a  lady  that  had  entered  unknown  to  him,  and  whom  he
had  seen  for  the  first  time  several  days  before.

How  could  he  do  it?

As  for  the  difference  between  the  magnetizer  and  a  stranger,  it  is
very  clearly  recognized  by  many  somnambules.  The  magnetizer's
touch  is  to  them  either  agreeable  or  indifferent,  while  the  touch  of
any  other  person  causes  them  pain.  Why  ?  Because  these  persons,
say  the  magnetizers,  are  not  "  in  rapport  "  with  the  subject.  But
that  phrase  does  not  tell  us  much.     What,  then,  is  "  rapport  ? "

To  state  the  question  clearly,  it  is  first  to  be  observed  that  this  phe-
nomenon does  not  exist  in  "  hypnotism  "  properly  so-called.  Let  an
hypnotized  subject  be  touched  by  whomsoever,  and  if  that  touch

'That  same  year  appeared  my  first  work  on  "  Magnetism"  (Warsaw,  1867,  Gazeta
Polskd).

2  In  French,  endormir — to  put  to  sleep ;  to  put  in  the  magnetic  or  the  hypnotic
sleep. —  Translator.

APPARENT  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.  n

causes  him  pain,  then  the  touch  of  all  other  persons  will  have  the  same
effect.  He  hears  either  everybody  or  nobody,  obeys  everybody,  and
can  be  awakened  by  any  one.

It  is  not  always  so  in  the  magnetic  sleep,  so-called,  produced  not
by  an  inanimate  object  (a  shining  button,  for  example),  but  by  a  mag-
netizer,  and  especially  by  passes.

Now,  every  person  has  his  own  way  of  touching,  and  when  one  is
accustomed  to  it,  one  readily  notices  the  contact,  the  warmth,  or  the
pressure  of  a  strange  hand.  Some  domestic  animals,  cats  especially,
will  not  suffer  strangers  to  fondle  them.  If  we  stroke  with  the  hand
a  sleeping  cat  that  shows  this  idiosyncrasy,  we  easily  recognize  the
fact  from  the  difference  in  the  reflex  movements.  The  cat  stretches
herself  out  at  full  length  languorously  if  it  is  her  mistress  that  strokes
her  ;  if  it  is  a  stranger,  she  awakes  dissatisfied  and  runs  away.

The  isolation  in  which  the  magnetized  subject  exists,  and  the  possi-
bility of  his  concentrating  his  attention  better  than  in  waking,  facilitate
this  differential  sensibility.  It  is  strengthened  by  exercise,  by  habit.
The  subject  takes  those  impressions  best  to  which  he  is  accustomed  ;
sometimes  even  they  become  for  him  a  need,  an  agreeable  necessity,
whereas  unexpected  and  unwonted  sensations  confuse  him.

But  when  there  is  question  of  distinguishing  between  strangers,  this
explanation  seems  no  longer  sufficient,  even  though  we  suppose  mole-
cular differences  of  touch — differences  probable  indeed,  but  not
proved ;  which,  besides,  would  have  to  be  known  beforehand,  through
habit,  so  that  the  subject  might  from  them  infer  correspondence
between  a  certain  physical  sensation  and  a  given  psychic  personality.

Have  we,  then,  here  mental  suggestion  ?

To  recognize  a  person  is  to  recognize  in  particular  his  psychic  person-
ality ;  that  is,  to  recognize  that  living  whole,  inwardly  active,  whereof
the  external  tactual  manifestations  are  but  a  weak  reflection.  If,  then,
it  were  proven  that  the  ego  of  a  person  can  act  upon  the  ego  of  the
subject,  that  were  a  direct  explanation,  and  it  would  be  relatively
adequate.  The  person  touching  thinks  of  himself  ;  his  mental  state
may  be  represented  by  an  affirmation  ( "  It  is  I " )  and  a  question
(  "  Do  you  recognize  me  ?  "  ).  All  the  persons  present  are  looking  at
him,  and,  of  course,  thinking  of  him  ;  hence,  the  whole  company
influences  the  subject,  and  this  influence  constitutes  suggestion.

But  if  such  an  explanation  is  to  be  accepted,  mental  suggestion
must  be  proved  to  exist,  while  these  experiments  are  far  from  proving
it  by  themselves.  Hence,  I  turned  to  another  explanation,  more
natural,  indeed,  though  rather  complex,  viz.,  that  there  was  suggestion
on  the  part  of  the  company,  but  not  mental  suggestion.  The  subject
was  blindfolded,  but  as  I  called  his  attention  to  the  people  around  him
he  could  hear  all  that  passed  ;  he  was  at  home,  habit  made  him
familiar  with  every  possible  noise  of  doors,  furniture,  floor  ;  he  was

I2  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

intimately  acquainted  with  the  eight  or  ten  persons  present  before  his
sleep  ;  those  who,  at  a  given  moment,  did  not  take  part  in  the  experi-
ment would  freely  exchange  a  few  words  in  a  high  voice,  while  the
others  would  request  silence  ;  the  hearing  of  familiar  voices  enables
one  pretty  accurately  to  determine  the  position  of  different  interlocu-
tors ;  and  the  noise  made  by  the  unavoidable  changes  of  place  helps
one  to  complete  or  to  correct  one's  judgments  as  occasion  may  require.

All  these  inductions  may  have  been  perfectly  unconscious.  In  some
respects  we  are  better  observers  in  dreams  than  in  the  waking  state.
The  imaginary  scenes  of  our  dreams  represent  persons  of  our  acquaint-
ance in  strict  accordance  with  their  characters  and  habits,  reproducing
their  favorite  sayings,  and  no  end  of  physiognomic  signs  that  our
conscious  observation  takes  no  note  of.  Hence,  it  well  may  be  that
a  somnambule,  who  has  no  distractions,  whose  whole  recollection  and
whose  every  sensation  contribute  to  one  single  perceptive  act,  can
make  out  better  than  we  the  connections  of  certain  signs.

The  only  fact  that  struck  me  as  rather  unaccountable,  was  the
somnambule's  recognition  of  the  lady  whom  he  had  seen  only  once  ;
but  that  incident  presented  some  peculiarities  of  a  kind  to  serve  as
pointers.  The  rustling  of  a  silk  robe  behind  his  chair  betokened  to
the  subject  a  woman,  and  she  a  stranger,  for  the  women  of  the  house
had  no  such  robe.  She  hardly  touched  him,  thus  plainly  showing
timidity  ;  ergo,  more  likely  a  spinster  than  a  married  woman  ;  of  the
young  ladies  likely  to  come  to  the  party  in  a  silk  gown,  Miss  W.  stood
among  the  first ;  ergo,  it  is  Miss  W.

Consequently,  in  the  facts  described,  we  have  only  suggestion  by
conjecture.1

Here  is  another  experiment  made  upon  the  same  subject,  and
apparently  still  more  extraordinary.  The  problem  was,  to  determine
whether  there  was  vision  without  the  aid  of  the  eyes.

I  take  up  a  book  at  such  distance  from  the  subject  that  he  cannot
see  what  it  contains,  and  I  open  it  anywhere.     I  then  bid  him  read.

"  I  do  not  see  clearly,"  he  answers.  I  suggest^  to  him  the  first  two
or  three  words  of  the  page,  and  ask  him  to  go  on  with  the  rest.
"That  is  in  the  middle  of  the  second  volume,"  says  he,  naming  the
chapter;  "it  is  Kraszewski's  novel  'The  World  and  the  Poet.'"
"Just  so,"  I  answer  ;  "  go  on,  then."  And  to  our  great  astonishment
he  goes  and  reads  a  whole  page,  with  hardly  a  slip.  Whenever  I  laid
the  book  aside  he  stopped  ;  he  "  read  "  fluently  when  I  kept  my  eyes
on  the  text.     I  turned  over  a  page  ;  still  he  read  well.

Some  of  the  persons  who  witnessed  this  experiment  thought  they
had  here  a  demonstration  of  "second  sight,"  despite  the  explanations
I  offered,  and  which  I  will  state  presently.

1  We  shall  see  later  that  the  explanation  of  "rapport "  given  here  is  in  many  cases
inadequate.

APPARENT  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.  13

But  if  it  was  no  "second  sight,"  do  we  need  a  better  proof  of  mental
suggestion  ?

Unfortunately,  we  do  !  For,  first,  he  "  read,"  though  less  well,  while
the  book  was  closed  ;  he  needed  only  to  have  the  opening  phrase  of  a
passage  given  him — therefore  it  was  not  thought-transference  ;  neither
was  it  second  sight,  for  without  that  suggestion  of  the  opening  words
he  could  not  even  read  the  number  of  the  page,  or  make  out  anything
whatsoever.

Here  is  the  explanation  of  the  mystery  :  The  youth  had  shortly
before  read  twice  over  the  novel  by  Kraszewski  already  mentioned —
had  read  it  as  people  used  to  read  in  Poland  in  those  days,  and
particularly  those  17  years  of  age.  He  knew  it  almost  by  heart.
Evidently  he  could  not  recite  page  after  page  verbatim  in  the  waking
state  ;  but  the  one  thing  that  our  experiment  proves  is,  the  astonishing
activity  of  recollection  in  somnambulism.  And  as  for  the  influence  of  my
thought,  that  is  a  very  simple  matter  ;  the  subject  "  saw  "  better  while
I  was  looking  in  the  book,  because  then  I  used  to  correct  his  little
errors.  It  was  these  errors  that  suggested  to  me  the  true  explanation
of  the  phenomenon  ;  for  instead  of  reading  faultily  a  word  in  the  text,
he  substituted  another  word  of  like  meaning,  but  totally  different  in
form.  The  regular  train  of  association  being  thus  interrupted,  he
used  to  come  to  a  stop  if  the  book  was  shut,  for  I  could  not  come  to
his  assistance.

In  spite  of  these  failures,  I  still  tried  to  obtain  direct  mental  sug-
gestion.

1.  The  subject  was  required  to  repeat  my  gestures,  made  in  an
adjoining  room,  with  the  door  ajar.  These  experiments  yielded  no
striking  result — merely  a  few  coincidences  from  time  to  time.

2.  With  eyes  blindfolded,  he  was  required  to  come  to  me,  passing
through  several  closed  rooms.

This  experiment  was  always  successful,  but  it  was  necessary  to
inform  him  in  a  general  way  that  it  was  about  to  be  performed.
Then,  always  after  a  delay  of  several  minutes,  he  would  find  me.
Quite  evidently  he  was  conscious  of  my  presence  as  soon  as  he  found
himself  in  the  same  room  ;  but  that  was  no  proof  of  mental  action,
more  particularly  because  all  tests  made  without  previous  notice —
ex  improviso- — gave  only  negative  results.

3.  He  was  required,  by  touching  my  hand,  to  find  out  the  thought
in  my  mind.  Result :  little  or  nothing,  though  there  were  a  few
successes.

I  account  for  a  certain  number  of  coincidences  as  follows  :

1.  He  and  I  were  comrades,  living  together  under  the  same  condi-
tions, and  not  seldom  did  it  happen  that  we  had  the  same  thoughts
simultaneously.

2.  The  gestures  that  were  repeated  at  a  distance  were  customary

i4  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

gestures  and  attitudes,  which  are  very  few  and  which  might  easily  have
been  guessed  at  random.  1  remember,  for  instance,  having  begun  the
experiments  by  an  order  "to  raise  the  right  arm."  Now  this  is  the
first  thought  that  occurs  to  one  who  wishes  to  experiment  on  mental
suggestion,  just  as  when  one  would  prove  free  will  one  usually  strikes
the  table  with  the  fist,  saying  "  I  can  strike  or  not  strike."

As  the  subject  did  raise  the  right  arm,  but  did  not  carry  out  the
orders  that  followed,  I  had  the  right  to  judge  that  simultaneously,
though  independently,  he  had  the  same  thought  that  I  had.  Be  it
added  that  he  was  notified  in  advance  that  he  was  to  perform  certain
movements  mentally  ordered  by  me.

In  1869  I  renewed  these  experiments  at  Warsaw  with  an  Italian
lady  said  to  be  "  lucid,"  and  whose  performances  were  much  talked
about.  One  thing  remarkable  about  her  was  the  almost  total  insensi-
bility of  the  pupils  of  her  eyes  to  light,  in  the  state  of  general  con-
tracture. Having  endormed  her  and  applied  tests,  I  was  surprised  to
observe  the  very  great  facility  with  which  she  recounted  her  som-
nambulic dreams ;  it  was  indeed  a  pleasure  to  hear  them.  As  for
"  lucidity,"  or  clairvoyance  properly  so-called,  it  was  very  obscure,
and  not  even  once  did  I  succeed  in  arresting  the  tide  of  her  eloquence
by  a  mental  order.

Further  on  it  will  be  seen  that  in  the  state  of  active  somnambulism,
when  the  somnambule  talks  much  of  herself,  mental  suggestion  is  not
possible.

The  same  year  I  made  also  some  "  spiritist  "  experiments,  which
have  a  bearing  upon  our  subject.

They  came  about  in  this  way :  A  sober-minded  man  one  day
attended  a  table-turning  seance.  Seeing  the  infatuation  and  the
ready  enthusiasm  of  the  company,  as  they  amused  themselves  with
unconsciously  pushing  the  table,  "I  will  believe  in  the  spirits,"  he
said,  "if  they  tell  me  the  forename  of  my  grandfather."

He  was  himself  advanced  in  years,  and  was  confident  that  no  one
in  the  company  knew  his  grandfather's  name.

"  It  may  be  that  the  spirits  themselves  do  not  know  it,"  gravely
remarked  a  spiritist  who  was  managing  the  experiments  ;  "  but  if  you
concentrate  your  thoughts  upon  the  name,  which  you  alone  know,
they  will  be  able  to  tell  it  you."

Some  one  recited  the  alphabet,  and  the  knocks  on  the  table  when
the  corresponding  letters  were  pronounced  made  up  the  fore-name
"  Adalbert  " — the  correct  name.

"  This  is  diabolism,"  said  the  serious-minded  one,  and  he  vowed  to
himself  that  never  again  would  he  witness  the  doings  of  spiritists.

When  he  told  me  the  story,  I  was  justified  in  supposing  the  case  to
be  one  of  mental  suggestion.     As  I  did  not  believe  in  the  spirits,  I

APPARENT  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.  15

must  needs  resign  myself  to  this  latter  hypothesis,  or  else  adopt  the
hardly  probable  explanation  that  it  was  all  mere  chance.  Neverthe-
less, considering  the  complexity  of  this  kind  of  experiments,  and  the
probability  of  some  sort  of  illusion,  I  decided  to  accept  nothing  save
what  should  be  proved  by  an  experiment  to  be  made  by  myself  under
well-known  and  clearly-defined  conditions.

Soon  an  opportunity  was  offered  to  apply  the  test.

Of  the  five  persons  (young  women  mostly)  seated  round  the  table,
none,  as  I  was  assured  by  all,  knew  the  name  of  the  grandmother  ot
a  certain  aged  lady,  who  took  no  part  in  the  experiment.  That  name
was  spelled  out.  But  on  investigation  I  found  that  one  of  the  girls
that  turned  the  table  must  often  have  heard  the  name  pronounced ;
she  herself  admitted  to  me' that  in  the  course  of  the  seance  she  had
recollected  the  name,  which  a  few  minutes  before  she  believed  she
had  never  known.

That  sufficed  to  justify  belief  in  a  more  or  less  involuntary  in-
fluence of  her  muscles.

I  then  thought  of  a  purely  fictitious  name  known  to  myself  alone.

The  table  answered  with  another  name  having  no  resemblance
whatever  to  the  one  in  my  mind.  I  pretended  to  write  a  word  on  a
bit  of  paper.  The  answer  of  the  table  was  "  louche  " — a  word  that
no  one  had  thought  of.  This  showed  that  the  unconscious  imagina-
tion of  the  mediums  was  bound  to  go  astray  when  it  was  not  guided
by  some  sort  of  suggestion.

Let  us  pass  to  another  experiment.  Before  coming,  I  had  prepared
a  photograph  of  one  of  my  friends,  putting  it  in  a  sealed  envelope.

"  What  is  in  this  envelope  ?  Is  it  a  letter,  a  bank  note,  or  a  photo-
graph ?"     (I  give  the  question  verbatim,  according  to  my  notes.)

"  It  is  a  photograph."

"  Of  a  man  or  of  a  woman  ?  "

"  A  man."     ■

"  How  old  ?"

The  table  gave  23  knocks,  which  was  correct.  The  believers  were
delighted  ;  but  on  reflection,  after  recalling  all  the  circumstances,  I
was  unable  to  agree  with  them.

First,  the  probability  of  the  correct  answer  being  made  was  very
great — for  the  first  question,  1  to  3  ;  for  the  second,  1  to  2  ;  as  for
the  third  question,  the  probability  there  was  considerably  less,  but —
I  had  made  a  slip  which  no  doubt  decided  the  result.  For  when  the
table,  after  giving  23  knocks,  stopped  for  a  moment,  I  hastily  ex-
claimed "  That's  it !  "  But  before  coming  to  the  twenty-third  knock
the  table  had  stopped  now  and  then,  and  I  had  said  nothing.  The
impression  left  upon  my  mind  was  that  had  the  knocking  not  been
stopped  by  my  exclamation,  the  table  almost  of  a  certainty  would
have  kept  on  knocking.

1 6  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

Next,  I  noticed  that  the  envelope  showed  pretty  plainly  the  shape
of  a  photograph  card,  slightly  curved,  and  manifestly  stiffer  than  a
letter  or  a  bank  note.

Finally — and  this  is  a  point  rtot  easy  to  make  plain — I  felt  dis-
tinctly that  in  that  company,  and  under  the  conditions  given,  a  pho-
tograph of  a  man  was  much  rather  to  be  expected  than  the  pho-
tograph of  a  woman.

Hence  this  was  a  case  of  suggestion  by  conjecture,  and  perhaps  a
matter  of  chance.

Here  is  another  instance  of  apparent  success  :

I  request  a  lady,  not  of  the  mediums'  set,  to  pass  to  ^another  room,
to  write  some  number  on  a  bit  of  paper,  and  not  to  show  it  to  any  one.

Upon  her  return,  I  ask  the  table  :

"  How  many  figures  are  there  ? "

"Two."

"What  is  the  first?"  I  then  name  all  the  numbers,  zero  included,
but  the  table  makes  no  sign.     I  begin  again  :

"  Is  it  one  ?  "

"Yes."  (It  had  been  agreed  with  the  "spirits"  that  one  knock
was  to  mean  yes,  two  knocks  no.)

"  And  the  second  figure  ?  "

The  table  gave  6  knocks.  But  we  had  hardly  come  to  the  sixth
when  the  lady  exclaimed  :     "  It  is  astonishing  ;  I  wrote  16  !  "

I  must  add  that  she  could  not  decide  what  number  to  choose.  "  Must
I  write  one  figure  or  two  ? "  she  asked  of  me  before  quitting  the  room.

"  Any  number  at  all,"  I  replied,  "  one  of  two  or  three  figures,  for
instance."  Thus  the  suggestion  of  two  figures  was  given  by  inadver-
tence.

We  began  again,  and  this  time  under  stringent  conditions.  I  alone
knew  the  number,  and  I  wrote  4  ;  the  table  guessed  346.

In  1872  a  young  German  lady  of  high  sensibility  and  delicate  con-
stitution, subject  to  hysterical  fainting  fits,  suggested  to  me  the
thought  of  a  new  trial.  I  had  made  a  series  of  observations  upon  her
pulse  changes  in  various  phases  of  somnambulism.  But  in  her  case
the  psychic  phenomena  were  of  little  moment,  while  mental  suggestion
would  not  work  at  all.

I  will  pass  over  a  multitude  of  experiments  made  with  persons  in
the  waking  state  unbeknown  to  them — making  a  person,  whose  back
is  toward  you,  turn  about  when  you  order  him  to  look  at  you.  These
experiments  have  now  and  then  been  successful,  but  never  under
stringent  conditions.  Once,  however,  the  appearances  surprised  me  a
good  deal.  I  was  in  a  ballroom.  A  young  woman  attracted  my
attention  by  her  peculiarities  of  feature  ;  so  I  often  looked  toward

APPARENT  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.  17

her,  and  fancied  that  whenever  my  gaze  was  fixed  upon  her  for  any
length  of  time,  she  would  turn  her  head  and  look  in  the  direction  of
me.  Still  she  could  not  see  me.  To  verify  the  phenomenon,  I  chose
a  less  favorable  moment  and  succeeded.  I  tried  once  again,  and  the
success  was  the  same.  Then,  being  in  an  adjoining  room,  I  said  to  a
friend  :  "  Let  us  make  a  curious  experiment.  Do  you  see  that  girl
in  the  corner  of  the  ballroom?  I  will  make  her  come  hither."  A
minute  afterward  the  young  lady  rose,  entered  the  room,  remained  for
a  moment  undecided,  cast  a  look  of  interrogation  upon  us,  and  then
went  back  to  the  ballroom.

I  made  her  acquaintance  a  few  weeks  later.  On  being  tested  with
the  hypnoscope  *  she  presented  only  a  slight  numbness  of  the  finger.
She  was  rather  hard  to  endorm  (15  minutes),  and  the  sleep  was  very
light  and  was  soon  over.  No  experiment  in  mental  suggestion  was  suc-
cessful.

Was  it  then  an  illusion  ?     I  believe  it  was.

Having  reflected  upon  the  case,  after  making  the  acquaintance  of
the  subject,  I  interpreted  quite  differently  my  prior  successes.  In  the
first  place,  it  was  nothing  surprising  that  she  turned  her  head  while  I
was  looking  at  her,  for  having  heard  of  me,  she  wished  to  make  my
acquaintance  ;  and  it  is  even  probable  that,  through  a  very  common
illusion,  I  fancied  that  I  had  first  noticed  her  "  because  of  her  pecu-
liarities of  feature,"  whereas,  in  fact,  she  had  for  a  good  while  been
observing  me,  and  so  had,  unconsciously,  perhaps,  given  direction
first  to  my  attention  and  then  to  my  experiments.

This  incident  gave  me  a  disgust  for  mental  suggestion,  and  many
remarkable  subjects  came  under  my  hands  without  awakening  any
desire  to  test  with  them  the  transmission  of  thought.

I  recall  another  discouraging  circumstance  :

I  went  to  an  "  extraordinary "  exhibition  given  by  a  certain
"  Vicomte  de  Caston,"  who  performed  feats  of  memory  and  praesti-
giation,  improvised  verses,  read  without  the  aid  of  the  eyes,  and
divined  thoughts.  ■  The  seance  was  highly  interesting  to  the  psycholo-
gist. I  say  nothing  of  tricks  of  the  common  sort;  albeit  here,  I  am
free  to  say,  is  a  study  that  I  heartily  commend  to  every  psychologist
who  is  curious  about  hypnotism  in  general  and  mental  suggestion  in
particular.  Sleight-of-hand  is  the  result  of  an  ingenious  application
of  the  psychology  of  attention,2  involuntary  associations,  illusion,
and  reflex  movements,  rather  than   of  psychic  power.     In  hypnotism

1  This  is  the  name  I  have  given  to  a  peculiarly  shaped  magnet,  which,  applied  to  a
finger,  serves  to  show  one's  hypnotic  sensibility.  With  few  exceptions,  this  instrument
always  gives  positive  results,  and  it  is  very  convenient  for  use,  for  its  application  lasts
only  two  minutes.     (See  Appendix  I.)

2  See  the  remarkable  work  of  Ribot  bearing  that  title  (Humboldt  Library,  No.  112).
—  Translator .

X8  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

the  great  praestigiator  is  Hartmann's  Unconscious  :  if  one  is  not  to  be
its  dupe,  one  must  be  "  up  to  its  tricks."

But  among  the  performances  of  this  "  vicornte  "  the  thing  worthy
of  mention  here  was  a  series  of  tricks  grounded  solely  on  the  associa-
tion of  ideas?  We  know  how  easy  it  is,  by  a  very  simple  ruse,  to
make  a  person  select  a  given  card  from  among  many.  You  have  only
to  exhibit  before  his  eyes  the  cards  of  the  pack,  one  after  another,
rapidly,  but  in  such  a  way  that  only  one  shall  be  fully  and  distinctly
visible.  You  thus  trick  the  subject's  vision,  and  he  selects  the  sug-
gested card  as  a  matter  of  course.  Our  psychologic  praestigiator  had
developed  this  method,  applying  it  to  operations  purely  mental.
Having  in  readiness  a  certain  number  of  envelopes,  sealed  and  con-
taining a  word  written  beforehand,  such  as  "  rose,"  "  diamond,"
"  negro,"  he  opened  a  lively  conversation  with  the  audience.  Dis-
coursing de  omnibus  rebus  et  quibusdam  aliis,  he  would  stop  just  at  the
moment  when  the  most  direct  and  the  most  inevitable  association
was  with  one  of  the  predetermined  ideas.  Then  by  a  clever  detour
he  came  round  again  to  the  same  association,  which  he  never  expressedt
and  suddenly  asked  a  person  he  deemed  to  be  absorbed  in  the  per-
formance, to  think  of  some  object.

The  object  thought  of  was  always  the  one  suggested.

All  he  had  to  do  now  was  to  ask  to  which  of  the  three  kingdoms,
mineral,  vegetal,  or  animal,  the  object  belonged,  to  insure  success,
and  to  prove  to  the  person  interested  that  his  thought  had  been
written  down  by  itself  in  a  sealed  letter.

As  the  experiment  just  described  is  but  a  conscious  utilization  of  a
mental  process  that  is  daily  and  hourly  repeated  in  ordinary  life,  it
follows  that  in  very  many  cases  the  psychic  atmosphere  of  a  company
suffices  to  account  for  unexpected  coincidences  of  thought  between
the  experimenter  and  his  subjects — coincidences  all  the  more  surpris-
ing the  less  one  knows  about  the  unconscious  mechanism  of  these
suggestions,  mental  suggestions,  if  you  please,  though  they  have
nothing  to  do  with  thought-transference.  Ever  since  that  time  I  have
held  that  in  a  successful  experiment  in  mental  suggestion  there  are
always  two  questions  to  be  settled.  The  question,  How  did  the  sub-
ject divine  the  thought  ?  is  but  the  second ;  while  the  first  is,  How
came  the  experimenter  to  Ghoose  one  thought  rather  than  another  ?
We  can  judge  of  the  scientific  value  of  an  experiment  only  according
to  the  intimate  relation  between  these  two  processes.

Whenever  several  persons  hold  a  conversation  for  any  length  of
time,  there  arises  between  their  minds  a  reciprocal  enchainment.  A
clever  observer  has  then  but  to  isolate  himself  from  this  involuntary
mechanism  and   to  grasp  it  mentally  in  a  general  view,  and  then

'See  "Diseases  of  Memory,"  by  Ribot,  (Humboldt  Library,  No.  46).—  Trans-
lator.

APPARENT  MENTAL  SUGGEST/ON.  19

sometimes  he  can  foresee  the  object  that  some  moments  later  will
occupy  the  attention  of  the  company.  It  is  this  same  mechanism
that  often  causes  two  persons  in  a  company  to  express  the  same
thought  or  to  raise  the  same  question.  The  better  one  knows  those
about  him,  the  greater  his  success  in  this  psychic  "clairvoyance."  I
remember  how  once,  being  secretary  of  a  society,  the  object  of  which
was  the  publication  of  an  encyclopaedia  of  the  sciences,  I  wrote  in
advance  the  notes  of  one  of  our  meetings.  The  question  before  the
society  was  whether  theology  should  be  reckoned  among  the  sciences,
that  were  to  be  treated.  There  were  two  priests  on  the  committee.
Knowing  the  members  and  their  views,  I  risked  the  experiment.  The
■"  minutes  "  were  written  out  ;  they  gave  an  account  of  the  general
discussion,  and  closed  with  this  resolution  :  "  Resolved,  that  theology
ought  not  to  be  treated,  save  as  constituting  a  part  of  the  history  of
religions."  I  had  to  change  only  a  few  words  in  order  to  submit  the
minutes  to  the  members  for  approval.

Of  course,  one  cannot  be  so  good  a  prophet  unless  he  is  in  some
degree  an  accomplice  ;  but  one  is  always  an  accomplice  when  one
orders  the  carrying  out  of  a  thought  that  comes  to  us  mechanically.
For  instance,  you  are  a  frequent  visitor  at  a  house.  You  do  not
recollect  the  fact  that  at  your  last  visit  the  conversation  was  about
colonial  policy,  and  that  immediately  after  it  was  over  a  lady  sat
down  at  the  piano.  The  talk  is  now  again  about  colonial  policy,  and
the  thought  occurs  to  you  to  make  an  experiment  in  mental  sugges-
tion. So  you  order  (mentally)  the  lady  to  go  to  the  piano — and  she
goes.  You  are  amazed  at  your  success — all  the  more  because  you
see  no  connection  whatever  between  colonial  policy  and  a  piece  of
piano  music,  and  because  your  chum  assures  you  in  all  sincerity  that
in  some  quite  inexplicable  way  the  idea  came  suddenly  to  him  to  take
a  seat  at  the  piano.

We  may  utilize  this  unconscious  process  with  deliberate  purpose  :
My  friend  P.,  a  man  no  less  absent-minded  than  he  is  keen  of  intel-
lect, was  playing-  chess  in  a  neighboring  room.  Others  of  us  were
talking  near  the  door.  I  had  made  the  remark  that  it  was  my  friend's
habit,  when  he  paid  closest  attention  to  the  game,  to  whistle  an  air
from  "  Madame  Angot."  I  was  about  to  accompany  him  by  beating
time  on  the  table.  But  this  time  he  whistled  something  else — the
march  from  "  Le  Prophete."

"  Listen,"  said  I  to  my  associates  ;  "  we  are  going  to  play  a  trick
upon  P.  We  will  mentally  order  him  to  pass  from  '  Le  Prophete  '  to
'  La  Fille  de  Madame  Angot.'  "

First  I  began  to  drum  the  march;  then,  profiting  by  some  notes
common  to  both,  I  passed  quickly  to  the  quicker  and  more  staccato
measure  of  my  friend's  favorite  air.  P.,  on  his  part  also  suddenly
changed  the  air  and  began  to  whistle  "  Madame  Angot."

20

MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

Every  one  burst  out  laughing.  My  friend  was  too  much  absorbed
in  a  check  to  the  queen  to  notice  anything.

''Let  us  begin  again,"  said  I,  "and  go  back   to  '  Le  Prophete."
And  straightway  we  had  Meyerbeer  once  more  with  a  special  fugue.

My  friend  knew  that  he  had  whistled  something,  but  that  was  all
he  knew.

One  who  knows  a  person's  habits  can  sometimes  imitate  mentai
suggestion,  even  without  any  suggestive  impression.

In  the  Medical  Faculty  of  X.,  we  had  a  professor  of  philosophy,
who,  in  giving  his  lectures  used  to  look  first  to  the  right,  then  to  the
middle  of  the  room,  then  to  the  left,  again  to  the  right,  and  so  on,
with  the  regularity  of  a  pendulum.  In  this  little  habit  there  was
nothing  offensive  to  any  one,  and  it  had  passed  unnoticed.  One  day
he  was  proving  to  us  the  psychic  liberty  of  man.

"  You  will  soon  see  his  freedom  of  will,"  said  I  in  pleasantry  to  my
fellow  students.  So  extending  a  finger,  I  began  to  give  orders  for  the
movements  his  head  was  to  make  to  the  right,  the  middle,  the  left.

Do  not  think  that  this  anecdote  has  no  bearing  upon  our  subject.
Of  course,  the  thing  was  but  a  piece  of  pleasantry  ;  but  had  it  been
taken  seriously  it  would  have  been  a  deception.  Now,  in  hypnotism,
physiologists  are  liable  to  just  such  deceptions,  involuntarily,  if  while
understanding  well  how  to  observe  external  facts,  they  do  not  know
how  to  observe  their  own  selves.  Here  is  an  instance  of  this  from  my
own  experience  :  it  comes  fully  within  the  class  of  apparent  suggestions.

I  was  treating  by  hypnotism  an  elderly  lady  suffering  from  chronic
arthritic  rheumatism.  I  put  her  asleep  very  readily,  and  absolute
repose  of  half  an  hour  (aideic1  state)  always  sufficed  to  calm  her
nerves,  and  to  improve  her  natural  sleep,  at  least  for  a  few  days.
There  was  no  means  of  producing  somnambulism,  properly  so-called,
or  of  making  the  subject  talk  {polyideic 1  state),  so  I  left  her,  and
occupied  myself  with  turning  over  the  leaves  of  a  book,  and  awaiting
the  time  of  her  awaking.  One  day  I  thought  I  should  awaken  her  by
a  mental  order.  "Awake,"  said  I  to  her  mentally,  and  at  once  there
were  contractions  of  the  face  muscles  ;  the  eyes  opened,  and  she  was
awake.

Some  days  afterward  I  tried  to  make  her  perform  certain  move-
ments, but  in  vain  ;  but  I  succeeded  in  awakening  the  subject  as
before,  though  not  so  promptly.  Still,  it  was  a  surprise.  But  why  did
she  awake,  and  yet  prove  insensible  to  other  suggestions  ?

The  reason  was  this  :  Here  were  two  habitudes  that  had  passed
unnoticed.  Continuing  the  treatment  for  several  weeks,  I  had  fallen
into  the  habit  of  awakening  her  just  half  an  hour  after  sleep  had

1  Aideic  (Greek,  a,  privative ;  idea,  idea,  thought),  without  thoughts.  Polyideic
(Greek,  polys,  pi.  polloi,  much,  many  ;  idea,  thought),  with  many  thoughts.  Monoideic
(Greek,  memos,  single  ;  idea,  thought),  with  one  thought  — Translator.

APPARENT  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.  21

become  manifest.  I  did  not  look  at  my  watch,  but  went  always  at
the  fixed  time  ;  and  as  that  was  one  hour  before  dinner,  my  stomach
took  the  place  of  my  watch  perfectly.

The  patient  too  had  acquired  the  habit  of  waking  almost  precisely
on  the  minute — a  phenomenon  familiar  to  magnetizers.  This  does  not
happen  in  every  case,  but  it  does  happen  very  often.

This  suspicion  occurring  to  me,  I  resolved  to  find  out  whether  it
was  correct.     I  readily  found

1.  That  I  was  unable  to  awaken  her  "  mentally  "  10,  15,  or  20  min-
utes after  she  was  sound  asleep.

2.  That  she  always  awoke  of  herself  after  30  or  35  minutes,  without
any  mental  suggestion.

Thus  we  were  in  just  the  condition  of  our  anecdote,  except  that  in
the  one  case  the  cause  of  the  coincidence  was  known  from  the  first,
in  the  other  it  was  not.

In  1881  I  attended,  in  Lemberg,  the  magnetic  seances  given  in  that
city  by  Donato.  Among  his  performances  was  one  which,  though  not
presented  as  an  instance  of  mental  suggestion,  nevertheless  wore  all
the  appearances  of  one.  Miss  Lucile,  who  was  blindfolded,  remained
upon  the  stage,  seated,  while  Donato  went  among  the  audience  and
invited  persons  to  name  to  him,  in  a  whisper,  a  certain  number  of  acts
for  the  somnambule  to  perform  afterward.  For  instance,  to  fan  her-
self with  Mrs.  N's  fan  ;  to  spread  Mr.  X's  opera  hat  and  put  it  on  his
head  ;  to  take  Mrs.  Y's  bracelet  and  put  it  on  the  arm  of  Miss  Z,  and
so  on.  It  is  to  be  remembered  that  the  choice  of  acts  to  be  done  is
very  restricted,  the  same  thing  pretty  nearly  all  the  time,  yet  there
was  no  trickery  ;  thepsychic  atmosphere  played  its  own  part.

Donato,  having  received  the  requests  that  were  made,  led  Miss
Lucile  toward  the  audience,  and  without  speaking  a  word,  solely  with
the  aid  of  gestures  made  at  the  distance  of  one  or  two  paces  from  her,
then  nearer,  he  conducted  the  "  medium  "  to  the  persons  in  question,
and  she  performed  perfectly  every  act  that  had  been  requested.

This  experiment  made  a  deep  impression,  for  it  was  evident  that
there  was  neitherany  understanding  with  the  subject  nor  any  collusion
with  the  audience.

How  was  Miss  Lucile  able  to  perform  these  interesting,  feats  ?

"  By  magnetic  education "  was  the  magnetizer's  answer.  It  was
vague,  and  yet  true.

There  exists  in  magnetism  a  phenomenon  little  studied  by  hypno-
tizers — that  of  magnetic  attraction,  so-called.  It  is  enough  to  bring
the  hand  near  the  arm  of  the  endormed  subject  :  at  once  that  arm
goes  out  in  the  direction  of  the  hand  and  follows  all  its  movements.
Though  the  magnet  produces  the  same  phenomenon,  one  must  not
suffer  himself  to  be  deceived  by  the  analogy.     This  attraction  has

22

MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

nothing  in  common  with  the  attraction  of  iron  by  the  magnet ;  it  is
not  of  a  physical  kind,  but  of  the  reflex  order.

But  that  is  a  distinct  question,  which  we  need  not  touch  at  present.
The  important  point,  the  one  that  has  to  do  with  the  matter  in  hand,
is  that  this  faculty,  possessed  by  very  many  somnambules,  may  be
cultivated  and  improved  by  magnetic  education.  Little  by  little  the
subject  becomes  sensible  to  various  attractions,  and  if  to  the  automatic
attractions  there  be  added  quick  understanding  of  gestures,  then  the
subject  possesses  everything  that  is  needed  for  a  marvelously  perfect
simulation  of  thought-transference.

At  first  the  subject  is  influenced  only  from  anear,  and  can  under-
stand only  simple  movements ;  later  he  grows  accustomed  to  his  mag-
netizer's  ways,  comprehends  his  inchoate  gestures,  and  an  automatic
association  is  formed  between  the  almost  unnoticeable  directions  of  the
experimenter  and  certain  reflex,  or  even  voluntary,  movements  of  the
subject.

Thus  was  Miss  Lucile  able  to  execute  the  unspoken  orders  of
Donato.

There  is  another  and  much  simpler  way  of  simulating  mental  sug-
gestion. Donato  himself  has  shown  that  by  making  certain  motions
with  his  fingers  at  Miss  Lucile's  ear,  he  could  produce  a  hyperacusia  '
sufficient  to  enable  the  subject  to  hear  words  spoken  so  low  and  with
lip-movements  so  slight  that  even  persons  on  the  watch  for  them
and  observing  attentively  were  unable  to  hear  anything.  I  have  re-
peated this  experiment  many  a  time,  in  one  case — to  mention  no
others — with  a  peasant  woman  of  Zakopane  in  Galicia,  who,  though
her  ears  were  plugged  and  her  head  wrapt  thrice  around  with  a  coarse
thick  kerchief,  repeated  words  spoken  as  low  as  possible  by  me  at  the
distance  of  13  feet.

Plainly  with  such  a  degree  of  hyperesthesia  the  subject  can  :

1.  Hear  direct  what  is  spoken  in  the  ear  of  the  magnetizer  ;

Or,  2,  hear  what  later  he  whispers  into  her  ear,  unheard  by  the  by-
standers.

Donato  kindly  held  for  my  behoof  a  private  seance,  at  which  I  had
an  opportunity  once  more  to  experiment  on  mental  suggestion.  The
magnetizer  himself  expressed  some  doubts  upon  that  head.  The
phenomenon  he  believed  possible,  and  he  had  once  demonstrated  it
in  the  presence  of  Mr.  Arkasof ;  but  according  to  him  the  experiment
is  but  seldom  successful — how,  no  one  knows  ;  in  most  cases  it  mis-
carries— why,  no  one  can  tell.

We  made  the  attempt,  nevertheless.

Miss  Lucile  stood  with  her  back  toward  us;  I  was  on  the  right  of
the  magnetizer,  between  6  and  7  feet  from  the  subject.     The  latter

'Hyperacusia:  Greek,  hyper,  over;  akoue,  hearing.  A  super-sensibility  of  the
sense  of  hearing. —  Translator.

APPARENT  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.  23

was  to  exteyid  the  left  arm.  After  a  minute  there  were  some  slight
movements  of  that  arm,  or  rather  of  the  whole  body — movements
that  may  have  been  produced  by  the  subject's  fatigue,  and  may  have
had  no  relation  to  the  intentions  of  the  magnetizer.  This  was  readily
admitted  by  Donate  "  I  should  be  more  sure  of  a  result,"  said  he  to
me,  "if  you  would  allow  me  to  act  by  gestures."  But  that  was  not
the  question;  undoubtedly,  he  could,  acting  by  attraction,  cause  the
the  arm  to  be  extended.

Other  attempts  had  no  better  result,  whether  it  was  I  that  gave  the
order  after  endorming  the  subject,  or  whether  it  was  Donato  himself.
I  simply  proved  again  what  I  had  already  proved  with  one  of  my  first
subjects,  to  wit :  the  subject's  power  cf  recognizing  the  person  that
touches  her  on  the  back  (through  the  clothing).  When  Donato  en-
dormed  her,  a  touch  from  me  caused  her  pain  ;  the  contrary  was  the
case  when  I  myself  magnetized  her,  but  she  always  bore  more  easily
the  touch  of  her  customary  magnetizer.

Care  was  taken  that  the  subject  should  not  be  able  to  tell  who
touched  her,  except  from  the  mere  act  of  simple,  slight  contact.

This  phenomenon  I  have  since  verified  in  nearly  all  highly-sensitive
subjects,  when  magnetized  (not  hypnotized),  and  so  I  have  been  obliged
to  postulate  an  individual  physical  action  not  found  in  Braid's  hyp-
notism.

This  physical  action  is  a  matter  of  no  slight  importance  in  the
problem  of  mental  suggestion,  as  will  be  seen  later,  but  evidently  the
one  does  not  imply  the  other.

Notwithstanding  this  evolution  of  my  views,  I  was  still  far  from
believing  in  thought-transference.  On  the  contrary,  the  foregoing
attempts  discouraged  me,  bringing  to  light  the  full  complexity  of  the
question  and  all  the  causes  of  error.

One  thing  I  had  learned,  to  wit :  that  a  skillful  magnetizer  who
has  a  suitably  trained  subject,  can  imitate  mental  suggestion  per-
fectly, or  may  himself  be  duped  by  unconscious  associations.  Wit-
nesses in  relating  the  performance,  transfigure  it,  embellish  it  invol-
untarily, in  virtue  of  the  psychic  faculty — of  great  value  in  art,  but
highly  dangerous  in  science — which  has  been  called  "  complementary
imagination." '

By  omitting  details  that  seem  insignificant,  and  magnifying  others
that  seem  essential  to  the  understanding  of  the  situation,  one  makes
up  in  his  own  mind  an  experimental  "  demonstration  "  that  in  reality
demonstrates  nothing  but  one's  own  personal  enthusiasm.  If  in  nar-
rating the  facts  for  the  first  time  one  adapts  them  just  a  little  "  in
usum  Delphini" 3  one  will  recount   them  the  second  time  pretty  nearly

1  Fantaisie  compUmentaire .

2  A  famous  annotated  edition  of  the  Latin  classics  was  prepared  in  the  reign  of
Louis  XIV.,  "  for  the  Dauphin's  use" — in  usum  Delphini. —  Translator.

24  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

as  at  the  first,  and  the  third  pretty  nearly  as  at  the  second ;  slight
modifications  then  go  on  accumulating  and  little  details  drop  out.
Thus,  persons  little  used  to  strict  scientific  method  in  the  end  will,  in
all  sincerity,  tell  of  things  that  never  were.  A  scientific  man  will  not
go  so  far  as  this,  yet  he  may  easily  permit  himself  to  be  fascinated  by
a  novel  and  unexpected  impression  received  under  conditions  that
either  cannot  be,  or  that  at  least  have  not  been,  ascertained  with  pre-
cision. That  is  enough  to  lead  to  an  erroneous  interpretation,  which
may  go  so  far  as  to  assert  the  existence  of  a  new  phenomenon  that
does  not  exist  at  all.  Lest  I  should  be  accused  of  exaggeration  I  give
an  example  :

Mr.  Hughes,  inventor  of  the  microphone,  the  printing  telegraph,
etc.,  a  noted  physicist  and  thinker,  believed  it  to  be  demonstrated  at
the  beginning  of  his  researches  that  the  microphone  increases  the
intensity  of  sounds.  That  was  an  error  of  interpretation,  caused  by
certain  illusive  effects.  No  microphone  has  ever  amplified  the  inten-
sity of  speech,  or  of  sounds  in  general  ;  on  the  contrary  there  is  always
a  notable  reduction  of  the  intensity.  How  comes  the  error,  then  ?
From  the  failure  to  distinguish  between  the  sounds  and  the  mechani-
cal vibrations  accompanying  them.  The  microphone  makes  audible
the  tread  of  a  fly  over  a  thin  planchette,  but  not  because  it  amplifies
the  sound — which,  indeed,  is  imperceptible  directly — but  because  it
transforms  into  sounds  the  mechanical  vibrations  of  the  fly's  tread.
Place  near  the  planchette  a  watch  that  makes  a  far  louder  sound,  and
you  will  hear  nothing  ;  but  set  it  upon  the  planchette  of  the  micro-
phone, and  you  will  hear  the  ticking  through  the  telephone  a  great
deal  better  than  you  can  directly,  because  in  the  latter  case  the
mechanical  vibrations  are  transformed  into  sounds,  and  these  are
added  to  the  real  sounds.  Now,  this  error  of  interpretation  has  cir-
culated so  widely  that  even  to-day  you  will  find  it  asserted  in  works
on  physics  that  sounds  are  amplified  by  the  microphone — in  other
words,  a  fact  is  said  to  exist  that  has  no  existence  at  all.

The  case  is  often  much  the  same  with  regard  to  mental  suggestion.
It  is  not  the  evidence  for  the  naked  fact  that  is  at  fault,  but  the  inter-
pretation of  the  fact — the  determination  of  the  causal  relation  between
two  phenomena  that  in  themselves  are  verified  easily  enough.  The
thought  of  one  brain  is  succeeded  by  a  like  thought  of  another  like
brain  :  is  the  case  here  like  that  when  two  telephones  influence  each
other  by  the  aid  of  undulatory  currents  ?  or  are  the  conditions  like
those  of  the  two  watches  supposed  by  Leibnitz,  which,  while  indicat-
ing the  same  hour,  were  mutually  independent  ?  That  is  the  question.
And  it  must  be  added  that  between  these  two  extreme  situations  there
is  plenty  of  room  for  an  intermediate  state  of  some  complexity  ;  for
while  independent  in  their  mechanism,  the  two  watches  may  be  imper-
ceptibly regulated  electrically  or  pneumatically.     Have  the  physicians

APPARENT  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.  25

who  like  Barrier,  Teste,  Bertrand,  Charpignon,  Garcin,  Despine,  et  al.y
vouch  for  us  the  reality  of  thought  transference — have  they  seen  an
actual  transmission  ?  They  have  seen  only  two  watches  that  some-
times indicate  the  same  hour.  I  was  therefore  justified  in  regarding
their  testimony  as  insufficient,  and  that  for  still  another  reason  :

In  order  to  judge  aright  of  such  a  fact  as  this,  one  must  of  neces-
sity have  in  mind  the  suggestion  theory  of  hypnotism  ;  one  must  ever
remember  that  all  hypnotic  phenomena  whatever  maybe  produced  by
imagination  alone,  by  ideoplasty.1  Consequently,  to  make  out  a  case  '
of  somnambulism  produced  from  a  distance,  for  example,  it  is  not
enough  simply  to  verify  the  fact ;  we  must  furthermore  have  absolute
certitude  that  it  has  not  been'possible  for  the  subject  by  a  combina-
tion of  the  circumstances  or  by  the  behavior  of  the  person  whose
business  is  to  observe  him,  to  presume  what  the  experiment  is  to  be.
Further,  this  presumption  itself  may  be  unconscious  even  while  it  brings
about  the  desired  result.  On  this  point  my  hypnotic  studies  leave  no
doubt.  In  fact,  even  when  the  subject  has  anticipated  nothing,  when
he  declares  that  he  has  suspected  nothing,  one  is  not  free  from  uncer-
tainties. Hence,  notwithstanding  all  that  has  been  published  by  the
priest  Faria,  by  Henin,  Cuvillier,  Bertrand,  Braid,  Durand,  Gros,
Morin,  Szokalski,  and  Liebeault,  the  theory  of  suggestion  was  really
not  known  and  recognized  till  the  publication  of  Dr.  Bernheim's
ingenious  work.  At  one  time  the  action  of  "magnetic  currents"  in
space  was  found  to  be  comprehensible,  but  it  was  held  to  be  improba-
ble that  somnambulism  might  be  produced  by  means  of  a  letter  (not
magnetized)  fixing  the  experiment  for  a  given  hour.  The  subject  fell
asleep  a  few  minutes  after  a  concentration  of  will  at  a  distance,  there-
fore it  was  the  thought  of  the  magnetizer  and  the  "  magnetic  fluid,"
its  agent,  that  produced  the  somnambulism  ;  post  hoc,  ergo  propter  hoc.

For  a  long  time  these  doubts  seemed  to  me  sufficient  to  withhold
me  from  new  experiments.    But  one  always  returns  to  his  first  love.

While  giving  at.  the  University  of  Lemberg  (i875-'8i)  a  course  of
lectures  on  physiological  psychology,  I  studied  the  different  questions
of  hypnotism  a  .good  deal.  Many  of  my  students  willingly  offered
themselves  for  all  sorts  of  researches,  and  then  it  was  that  I  began  to
see  my  way  a  little  better  in  this  mysterious  region.  One  day  I
brought  together  six  of  my  best  subjects  in  a  hall  of  the  Polytechnic
School,  from  which  every  ray  of  light  was  excluded,  in  order  to  test
the  alleged  discoveries  of  Baron  Reichenbach.2     We  remained  three

1  Ochorowicz,  Stir  I'id/oplastie:  classification  des  faits;  et sur  la  thforie  de  Tide'oplastie
(Comptes  rendus  de  la  Socie'te' de  biologie).     Ideoplasty  (Greek,  idea,  idea,  mental  image;

plattein  or  plassein,  to  shape,  whence  plastes,  modeler),  imagination,  or  the  power  of
conceiving,  or  forming,  mental  images.     See  Appendices  II.,  III. —  Translate?'.

2  Reichenbach  asserted  that  the  "  ^influence  "  of  a  magnetizer  upon  his  subject  is
manifested  in  a  dark  chamber  by  luminous  rays  emanating  from  him. —  Translator.

26  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

hours  in  absolute  darkness,  yet  were  unable  to  verify  any  of  the
statements  of  the  German  chemist.  But  to  make  amends,  we  discovered
a  new  fact  of  considerable  interest,  namely,  that  certain  hypnotizable
subjects  see  far  more  distinctly  the  phosphorescence  of  an  electric
machine  than  do  other  persons.  Threads  of  light,  quite  invisible  to
the  rest  of  us,  and  forming  a  prolongation  of  the  visible  rays,  were
described  perfectly  by  some  of  the  subjects,  and  were  objectively  veri-
fied in  divers  ways.

I  chose  two  of  these  subjects  for  an  experiment  in  mental  sug-
gestion. The  first,  a  youth  of  good  stature  and  remarkably  muscular,
in  good  health,  but  highly  sensitive  to  hypnotism  (hypnoscope  showed  :
irritation,  anaesthesis,  contracture)  presented  this  peculiarity,  that  it
was  impossible  to  produce  in  him  an  hallucination  or  any  word-sug-
gestion whatever.  Endormed  by  fixing  the  gaze,  or  by  other  equiva-
lent means,  he  showed  a  general  contracture  and,  psychically,  a  state  of
complete  aideism  (tetanic  aideia).  To  make  him  talk,  it  was  necessary
to  free  the  speech  muscles,  which  were  all  contractured  ;  and  once  a
reply  was  obtained,  he  did  not  fall  asleep  any  more  ;  a  certain  dizziness
and  a  general  contracture  alone  remained.  It  was  possible  to  awaken
one  hemisphere  alone,  and  one-half  of  the  body,  but  somnambulism
could  not  be  produced.  He  passed  straight  from  the  "  lethargic  "  state
to  waking  ;  but  in  waking,  as  well  as  in  the  lethargy,  it  was  possible
to  produce  by  localized  passes,  insensibility,  hyperesthesia,  attraction,
catalepsy  and  contractures,  but  hallucination  never.  So  pronounced
was  the  neuromuscular  hyperesthesia,  that  to  produce  a  local  contrac-
tion or  contracture  one  had  only  to  bring  near  to  any  part  of  his  body,
divested  of  clothing,  a  finger,  a  magnet,  or  to  project  a  ray  of  light,
or  even  to  look  fixedly  upon  it.

If  I  endeavored  to  influence  him  mentally  by  ordering  a  movement,
that  movement  was  not  performed,  but  the  member  on  which  I  looked
was  seized  with  contracture.  If  instead  of  acting'by  look  I  acted  by
gestures,  there  was  an  exceedingly  strong  attraction  of  the  whole
body,  and  he  performed  all  the  acts  indicated  by  the  attractions,  till  a
general  contracture  obliged  him  to  fall  rigid  or  to  stand  motionless.
The  rigidity  had  then  to  be  removed  by  gentle  massage  in  order  to
continue  the  experiment.

This  special  sensibility  was  developed  little  by  little.  The  attraction
did  not  manifest  itself  till  the  fifth  magnetization.  (All  these  experi-
ments were  reported  to  the  Medical  Society  of  Lemberg  in  1881.)  It
was  proven  to  my  satisfaction  that  he  was  capable  of  being  influenced
by  looks — though  the  experiments  were  not  always  successful  when
made  extempore  j  but  it  was  certain,  at  the  same  time,  that  mental
suggestion  by  itself  alone  was  always  without  result ;  there  was  no
trace  of  effect.  When  hypnotized,  he  obeyed  every  one ;  when  mag-
netized, he  followed  only  hismagnetizer ;  the  latter  alone  could  awaken

APPARENT  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.  27

him,  or  cause  the  contracture  to  disappear,  but  always  by  massage,
passes,  gestures,  by  blowing  on  the  subject,  not  by  a  mental  order.
Once  or  twice  only  did  I  succeed,  in  the  state  of  momentary  stupor  of
the  brain  prior  to  the  awaking,  in  transmitting  to  him  some  physical
sensations — as  a  painful  puncture,  a  bitter  taste — but  even  then  there
was  uncertainty  as  to  interpretation,  and  I  could  not  guarantee  the
value  of  a  few  successes.

My  other  subject  was  also  a  young  man,  tall  of  stature,  but  not
strong  ;  highly  intelligent,  rather  anaemic  and  consumptive.  He  was'
very  sensitive,  even  too  sensitive,  to  all  sorts  of  impulsions  (hypnos-
cope  showed  analgesia,  instantaneous  contracture  of  the  whole  arm).
The  application  of  the  hypnoscope  at  the  pit  of  the  stomach  produced
in  him  a  series  of  peculiar  phenomena — sensations,  contortions,  sharp
long-drawn  cries,  and  rotary  movements  of  the  arms,  the  head,  and
the  whole  body.  He  was  remarkable  also  for  somnambulic  and
suggestional  dreams  of  all  the  senses.

First  Experiment. — The  subject,  being  in  somnambulism  (polyideic
state),  counts  from  1  to  50.  His  counting  was  to  be  interrupted  by  a
mental  order  from  a  distance.  Result :  a  few  coincidences,  but  in  most
cases  the  paralysis  came  too  soon — it  preceded  the  mental  order  :  con-
sequently it  had  to  be  regarded  as  produced  by  ideoplasty.

Second  Experiment. — I  touch  the  nape  of  the  neck  with  my  finger,
and  mentally  order  him  to  arise  and  go  sit  on  a  bed.  The  subject
rises  partly,  slips  to  the  floor,  sits  down,  bows,  kneels.  One  of  the
company,  B,  an  engineer,  says  it  was  he  that  mentally  gave  him  the
order  to  kneel.  (Probably  the  slight  downward  pressure  of  my  finger
suggested  to  the  subject  the  idea  of  sitting  on  the  floor,  and  then  the
lowliness  of  his  position  produced  in  his  mind  the  image  of  an  attitude
lowly  par  excellence  and  more  convenient — that  of  kneeling  ;  while  at
the  same  time,  and  through  a  like  association,  B  got  the  idea  of  order-
ing that  posture).

Third  Experiment. — No  touch  and  no  gesture.  The  whole  company
think  on  making  him  raise  the  right  leg.

He  remains,  motionless,  but  says  he  wishes  to  dance.  (The  resem-
blance does  not  suffice  to  justify  a  conclusion.)

Fourth  Experiment. — I  alone  give  the  mental  order.  I  do  not  touch
the  subject,  but  I  use  gestures,  and  direct  my  looks  toward  the  mem-
ber in  question.  The  subject  is  blindfolded.  I  stand  in  front  of  him
at  distances  of  2,  3,  4  and  6  paces,  respectively.

He  performs  various  motions ;  rises,  walks  to  the  right,  to  the  left,
forward,  backward  (he  retreats  slowly  and  with  difficulty),  kneels,  sits.
I  order  him  to  extend  the  right  arm — and  he  raises  the  left,  that
being  the  only  act  in  this  experiment  that  failed  ;  at  that  time  I  was
distant  from  the  subject  six  paces.  When  repeated,  without  gestures,
these  experiments  gave  no  positive  result.     Repeated  with  gestures,

28  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

but  without  any  special  concentration  of  the  will,  they  gave  nearly  the
same  positive  result  as  at  first.

Fifth  Experiment  (a  few  days  later). — The  subject  being  in  som-
nambulism, his  eyes  bandaged,  his  ears  plugged,  I  stand  in  front  of
him  at  a  distance  of  from  thirteen  to  sixteen  feet,  and  make  gestures
of  attraction  and  repulsion.

For  more  than  an  hour  all  the  tests  of  this  fifth  experiment  were
successful.  The  principal  one  was  to  determine  whether  the  subject
really  had  a  sense  of  my  presence.  I  therefore  hid  in  remote  corners,
while  I  attracted  him  toward  me.  I  took  all  possible  care  to  make
no  noise.  I  changed  my  foot-gear  ;  another  person  imitated  my  tread.  I
tried  to  lead  the  subject  astray  by  speech,  etc.;  he  followed  me  every-
where and  found  me  always.  In  coming  toward  me  he  sniffed  like  a
hunting  dog  (of  all  the  persons  present  I  was  the  only  smoker,  and  my
clothing  was  impregnated  by  the  odor  of  tobacco).

Result :  the  subject  was  guided  :

i.  By  an  exceptional  sensibility  of  the  whole  surface  of  his  body
for  motions  of  the  air  (gestures  at  a  distance);

2.  By  an  exceptional  sensibility  for  warmth  (he  felt  the  warmth  of
my  hand  at  a  distance  of  thirty  inches);

3.  By  an  exaltation  of  the  sense  of  smell ;  but  not  at  all  by  mental
suggestion.

Sixth  Experhnent  (some  days  afterward). — The  sleep  not  perfect ;  he
partly  recollects  after  awaking  (this,  perhaps,  because  of  the  emotions
of  the  day).     Attraction  often  lacking.

One  of  my  pupils,  P.,  deceives  the  subject,  who  confounds  him  with
me.  The  movements  ordered  are  executed  badly.  The  subject  im-
provises, giving  his  dreaming  fancy  a  free  rein.  He  performs  move-
ments that  no  one  thought  of,  while  having  the  appearance  of  being
under  an  influence.     General  result  strictly  negative.

Here  is  another  negative  experiment,  performed  on  an  hysterical
young  woman  of  marked  sensibility.  (Hypnoscope  showed  paralysis,
contracture,  and  total  anaesthesia  of  the  finger.)  There  were  two
magnetizers,  Dr.  B.  and  myself.  We  each  touch  her  on  the  head
with  a  finger,  ordering  her  to  seize  some  object.  The  only  result  is
that  she  falls  asleep,  but  after  a  peculiar  fashion,  for  the  left  half  of
her  body  is  in  rapport  with  me,  the  right  with  Dr.  B.  She  hears  me
only  through  the  left  ear,  and  Dr.  B.  only  through  the  right.  So,
too,  with  regard  to  attraction.  If  I  touch  the  right  arm,  she  has  no
sensation  ;  it  is  the  same  if  I  touch  her  with  any  object,  a  stick,  for
instance.     Looks  have  no  effect,  neither  has  purely  mental  suggestion.

Here  are  some  experiments  upon  "  willing."

We  are  in  the  Count  D.'s  salon.  One  of  the  ladies  tells  me  how  she
several  times  has  succeeded  in  suggesting  to  her  friend  one  act  or

APPARENT  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.  29

another  by  placing  her  hands  upon  her  shoulders.  I  make  a  few
experiments  which  are  successful,  or  nearly  so.  But  in  this  sort  of
performances  mental  suggestion  plays  no  part.  Having  studied  the
unconscious  muscular  movements  that  cause  a  table  to  tip,  or  a  pen-
dulum to  sway,  as  explained  by  Chevreul,  I  knew  what  to  think  of
these  phenomena.  These  involuntary  movements  suffice  to  suggest
directions  to  the  subject,  who  is  thinking  of  nothing  and  whose  body
is  in  unstable  equilibrium.  Sometimes  he  divines  the  rest,  that  is,
even  acts  that  cannot  be  indicated  directly.

Yet  one  of  these  experiments  surprised  me.  The  Prince  C.  is
sitting  in  an  arm-chair — consequently  is  in  a  stable  position.  Two
ladies  kneel  before  him  and  fofm  a  circle  by  joining  hands  with  him.
The  order  is  for  him  to  cross  his  legs  and  to  dangle  the  right.  The
order  was  carried  out  after  a  few  minutes.  In  this  case  the  explana-
tion is  complex.  Involuntary  movement  of  the  legs  is  difficult  when
the  subject  is  in  a  fixed  position,  with  hands  held,  as  in  this  instance.
But  first,  just  because  of  that  position,  the  legs  alone  (and  the  head)
were  free,  and  hence  it  is  not  surprising  that  after  some  minutes  of
immobility  he  should  have  felt  the  need  of  moving  his  legs,  and  the
only  thing  he  could  do,  in  view  of  the  position  ot  the  ladies,  was  to
cross  them.  Then,  if  only  to  verify  the  experiment,  the  eyes  of  the
ladies  were  sure  to  turn  every  moment  to  the  right  foot  of  the  Prince,
who  more  or  less  automatically  directed  his  attention  to  that  point.
The  direction  of  attention  toward  a  given  point  of  the  body  always
produces  a  tendency  to  movement,  and  the  only  convenient  move-
ment was  the  one  he  performed.

I  must  add  that  before  this  he  made  several  movements  of  the  head,
which  were  disregarded  as  "  unimportant;"  but  had  one  of  these
movements  been  selected,  we  should  not  have  waited  for  the  others,
but  should  have  had  the  same  right  to  claim  a  success.

During  the  same  evening  I  made  still  another  experiment  simulat-
ing will-action  at  a  distance.  Having  noticed  the  sensibility  of  the
Countess  D.  (hypnoscopic  experiment :  heat,  numbness),  I  stand  facing
her  and  fix  my  jgaze  upon  her  for  two  or  three  minutes  ;  then  I  move
away,  walking  backward,  and  she  follows  me  ;  I  quicken  my  pace,
still  backward,  and  despite  the  laughter  of  the  company,  and  though
she  made  some  opposition,  she  is  obliged  to  follow.  This  experiment,
one  now  quite  familiar  through  Donato's  performances,  seems  to
prove  a  physical  action  of  the  will  and  of  the  eye.  That  is  not  so,
however.  The  fixing  of  the  gaze,  expectant  attention,  and  emotion
produce  a  sort  of  fascination  that  may  be  regarded  as  an  intermittent
monoideism.  Without  losing  consciousness  and  will  completely,  the
predisposed  subject  undergoes,  from  moment  to  moment,  the  inhibit-
ory influence  of  his  own  mind ;  he  is  not  paralyzed,  but  is  subject  to  the
visual  suggestions  that  dominate  his  will.

3o  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

Another  experience  in  "  willing "  tried  by  the  two  ladies  with  the
Count  P.  as  subject  was  unsuccessful,  and  yet  he  was  a  sensitive  sub-
ject (hypnoscopic  experiment :  prickling,  heaviness,  anaesthesia).  I
drove  a  pin  into  his  finger,  which  had  been  locally  "insensibilized  "
without  hypnotization.  This  proves  that  the  success  of  this  sort  of
experiments  is  not  always  in  proportion  to  the  sensibility  of  the  sub-
ject. We  shall  see  further  on  what  are  the  precise  relations  between
hypnotism  and  Cumberlandism.  I  modified  these  tests  in  experimenting
upon  other  persons.

Mrs.  Sch.,  robust,  but  anaemic,  subject  from  time  to  time  (under  the
influence  of  emotions)  to  cataleptoid  hysteric  fits  (hypnoscopic  expe-
riment :  anaesthesia,  localized  contracture),  is,  while  in  the  standing
posture,  put  in  the  state  of  fascination  by  fixing  the  gaze.  Mental
order  :  To  pull  me  by  the  beard.  She  slowly  raises  her  hand  in  the
direction  of  my  beard,  but  does  not  touch  it.

Mrs.  A.,  weak,  thin,  nervous,  but  in  fair  health  (hypnoscopic  experi-
ment :  no  result).  Mental  order  :  To  embrace  Mr.  S.  She  goes  in  the
direction  of  that  gentleman  and  says  :  "I  am  to  embrace  some  one."

Miss  R.,  lymphatic,  but  in  perfectly  good  health,  with  little  sensi-
bility (hypnoscopic  experiment  :  prickling,  heaviness).  Mental  order
(with  touch  of  the  hand  on  the  occiput)  :

i.  To  go  to  the  piano.  After  a  couple  of  minutes'  hesitation,  "I
must  play,"  said  she.

2.  To  embrace  Miss  E.  After  a  minute's  silence,  she  says  :  "  I  am
to  embrace  some  one.     It  is  you,  Marie.     No  ;  it  is  you,  Edvige."

3.  To  guess  whether  I  am  thinking  of  an  affirmation  or  of  a  nega-
tion. She  exclaims  almost  immediately,  "You  are  thinking  yes."
The  contrary  was  the  fact.

Barring  the  last  experiment,  which  might  be  regarded  as  the  result
of  a  mere  erroneous  conjecture,  all  the  rest  seem  to  indicate  a  real
action.  But  they  were  not  performed  under  faultless  conditions  ;  the
subjects  were  not  blindfolded,  and  the  rest  of  the  company,  being  in
the  secret,  may  have  influenced  them  by  their  attitude.  At  all  events,  I
remember  distinctly  that  my  individual  impression  derived  from  these
experiments  was  not  decisive.  The  first  two,  though  more  surprising
than  the  last,  because  of-  the  nature  of  the  injunctions,  which  could
not  be  easily  conjectured,  were  not  carried  out  fully.  The  others,  in
giving  which  I  touched  the  subject,  left  room  for  doubt,  as  is  always
the  case  when  that  method  is  employed  ;  and,  besides,  the  acts
enjoined  on  the  subject  may  have  been  selected  under  the  influence
of  the  psychic  atmosphere.  I  remember,  for  instance,  that  in  the  first
part  of  the  evening  on  which  the  last  three  experiments  were  made,
Miss  R.  was  asked  to  play  a  piece  on  the  piano  and  refused.  Little
wonder,  then,  that  when  later  she  had  to  execute  a  suggestion,  the
same  act  came  to  her  mind.

APPARENT  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.  31

Then,  the  number  of  acts  from  which  a  choice  has  to  be  made  on
such  occasions  is  very  small.  Indeed,  in  a  decorous  company  what  is
there  for  you  to  bid  a  young  woman  do  but  to  go  to  the  piano,  to
embrace  her  sister,  or  the  like  ?  And  if  the  order  is  merely  to  seize
some  object  or  to  go  to  a  place  indicated,  the  touch  of  the  hand  and
its  involuntary  pressures  guide  the  subject  very  well  indeed.  I  men-
tion these  petty  details  to  show  how  needful  it  is  to  be  circumspect
and  attentive  in  researches  of  this  kind.

Ik  was  about  this  time  that,  having  acquired  a  certain  acquaintance
with  hypnotism,  I  resolved  to  apply  it  to  the  treatment  of  diseases.
The  result  was  surprising,  and 'I  saw  not  only  that  the  assertions  of
magnetizers  might  be  true,  but  also  that  a  rational  and  methodical
application  would  probably  lead  to  the  establishment  of  facts  more
surprising  still.  To-day  we  are  beginning  to  take  steps  in  that  direc-
tion, and  certainly  it  is  time  that,  having  demoralized  a  number  of
hysteric  subjects,  we  should  restore  them  to  health  by  the  same  pro-
cess.

Being  absorbed  in  therapeutic  study,  I  had  neglected  the  problem
of  mental  suggestion  as  apparently  of  no  practical  value  ;  and  it  was
only  by  accident  that  I  had  occasion  to  observe  a  few  more  or  less
unexpected  phenomena  connected  with  it.  For  instance,  one  of  my
patients  could  always  tell,  as  soon  as  I  touched  her,  whether  my  im-
pressions during  the  day  had  been  pleasant  or  disagreeable.  She
suffered  from  a  complicated  disease,  which  I  might  be  tempted  to  call
chlorotic  ganglionic  neurosis,  and  had  been  for  thirty  years  bed-rid-
den. She  was  excessively  impressionable,  yet  was  insensible  to  hyp-
notism and  to  metalloscopy  (hypnoscopic  experiment :  no  result).  An
interesting  peculiarity  was  that  my  hand  seemed  to  her  always  warm,
even  when  it  was  of  much  lower  temperature  than  her  body.  As  my
attitude  toward  her  was  always  the  same,  I  marveled  not  a  little  at
this  faculty  of  discerning  my  mental  state.  But  there  are  a  thousand
ways  of  guessing  such  things,  as  from  the  expression  of  the  face,  or
from  the  tone  of  the  voice ;  and  there  is  no  need  to  suppose  a  direct
transmission.  True,  she  could  also  tell  whether  before  coming  to  her
I  had  touched  any  other  patient ;  but  she  might  have  inferred  that
from  certain  signs  of  fatigue,  or  from  my  coming  a  little  late ;  per-
haps, too,  she  was  aided  by  olfactory  sensations.

Another  patient  showed  a  like  gift  with  regard  to  the  persons  who
were  habitually  about  her.  She  was  hysterical,  very  easily  hypnotiz-
able  (hypnoscopic  experiment  :  anaesthesia  and  contracture  of  the
whole  arm),  and  manifested  this  aptitude  only  at  the  moment  of  awak-
ing, i.  e.,  in  a  state  intermediate  between  somnambulism  and  the  wak-
ing state.  She  would  then  say  of  her  own  accord  :  "  Oh  !  how  weary  X
is  of  his  work  !  "    "  Why  is  Y  so  worried  ? "    "  To-day  you  have  more

32  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

hope  of  curing  me,  and  you  are  very  much  pleased.  I  thank  you  for
that,"  etc.  All  this  she  would  say  before  opening  her  eyes,  and  often
without  a  single  suggestive  word  being  spoken.  Was  there  a  real
transmission  of  states  of  mind  ?  I  did  not  think  there  was.  The  same
people  were  always  around  her,  and  she  knew  them  well  enough  to  be
able  to  make  these  prejudgments.  But  there  were  a  few  strange
coincidences.

Finally,  a  third  patient,  a  Frenchwoman,  knowing  hot  a  word  of
Polish,  made  apt  reply  (in  somnambulism)  to  an  observation  made  in
the  latter  tongue.  There  was  no  analogy  between  the  words.  But
this  thing  did  not  occur  again,  all  further  experiments  in  mental
suggestion  having  failed,  so  I  set  the  occurrence  down  to  the  account
of  chance.  This  subject  was  easily  hypnotizable  (hypnoscopic  ex-
periment :  heaviness,  ansesthesia  and  contracture  of  the  whole  arm),
and  often,  in  the  waking  state,  divined  the  complaint  of  a  stranger  by
simply  touching  his  hand.

Having  heard  of  many  feats  of  this  sort,  I  decided  myself  to  in-
vestigate, so  I  asked  her  what  disease  she  found  in  me  ?

"  None  ;  you  are  never  ill  ;  a  slight  congestion  when  you  work  toO'
hard,  but  otherwise  your  health  is  perfect."

That  was  the  exact  truth.  As  a  second  test,  I  took  her  to  one  of
my  patients,  a  woman  whose  complex  malady,  though  it  presented
lesions  clearly  characterized,  still  was  not  easily  recognizable  from  the
appearance  of  the  patient.  She  had  formerly  had  an  attack  of  pneu-
monia, and  there  was  hepatization  of  the  right  lung,  chronic  inflam-
mation of  the  larynx,  dorsal  hyperesthesia,  frequent  headache,  several
defects  of  circulation,  dyspepsia,  and  intermittent  general  debility.
Despite  all  this,  the  patient,  thanks  to  her  exceptional  constitution,,
looked  well,  and  no  one  would,  on  first  seeing  her,  suspect  her  case  to
be  so  serious.

The  somnambule,  after  touching  the  patient's  hand,  named  pretty
nearly  all  her  maladies.  She  did  not  describe  the  lesions  in  sufficient
detail,  but  with  regard  to  the  symptoms  her  diagnosis  was  very  ac-
curate. And  more  accurate  still  was  her  capital  description  of  the
patient's  character  and  of  her  bad  habits.

"  On  what  do  you  base  your  inferences  ?  "  I  asked.  "  Do  you  think
that  you  see  the  organs  that  are  affected  ?  "

"  No,"  she  said  ;  "  rather  I  myself /<?*?/  the  symptoms  of  the  disease."

And,  in  truth,  I  have  seen  her  suffer  and  for  a  moment  present  cer-
tain morbid  phenomena  of  another  patient  that  she  examined,  but
whom  I  did  not  know.

Her  feeling  the  symptoms  might  be  explained  by  ideoplasty,  but  even
so,  she  would  have  to  know  them.  And  here  it  is  that  doubt  begins.
The  somnambule  did  know  the  symptoms.  But  she  was  a  very  well-
informed  midwife,  possessing  a  certain  amount  of  medical  knowledge

APPARENT  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.  33

and  a  good  deal  of  experience  :  hence  she  might  well  have  had  other
guidance  than  that  of  a  mystic  faculty.  After  all,  one  or  two  experi-
ments are  not  enough.  On  the  other  hand,  however,  I  must  admit
that  the  somnambule  then  saw  my  patient  for  the  first  time  ;  that  dur-
ing the  whole  consultation  she  kept  her  eyes  half-shut,  and  did  not
attempt  to  examine  the  patient  according  to  any  of  the  ordinary
methods.  As  for  the  influence  of  the  imagination  in  feeling  the  symp-
toms, that  explanation  becomes  doubtful  from  the  fact  that  the  som-
nambule was  not  suggesUonable  at  all,  whether  in  the  waking  state  or  in
somnambulism.  She  passed  rapidly  out  of  the  aideic  state  into  active
polyideism,  the  latter  resembling  the  waking  state  in  all  respects,  save
that  it  presented  anaesthesia  of  the  limbs.

I  may  cite,  in  connection  with  the  fact  here  observed,  a  passage
from  the  report  read  before  the  Paris  Academy  of  Medicine,  in  183 1,
by  Husson  :  "  We  have  found  a  somnambule  that  told  us  all  the
symptoms  of  the  illness  of  three  persons."

Was  the  case  I  have  described  one  of  mental  suggestion  ?  I  alone
could  know  the  condition  of  my  patient  ;  the  somnambule  may  have
read  it  in  my  mind.

This  hypothesis  did  not  to  me  seem  admissible,  for  the  reason  that
no  voluntary  suggestion  had  been  successful  ;  besides,  it  is  better  to
hold  to  an  explanation  of  a  less  extraordinary  character — a  transmis-
sion of  the  symptoms  of  a  disease.

Is  that  possible  ?  I  know  not.  I  do  not  think  we  can  hold  with
certitude  the  existence  of  a  faculty  whereby  we  directly  feel  all  the
peculiarities  of  another's  pathological  state  ;  and  yet,  a  Paris  physi-
cian has  assured  me  that  not  only  does  he  possess  that  faculty,  but
that  he  never  needs  any  other  means  of  diagnosis.

All  that  I  can  testify  from  my  own  experience  is,  that  there  exists
another  sort  of  nervic  transmission,  more  general  and  less  "  circum-
stantiated ;  "  '  and  this,  too,  for  a  long  time  seemed  to  me  untenable
and  absurd.

It  is  a  popular  belief  of  very  ancient  standing,  that  one  may  give
the  pain  he  suffers  to  another  person,  or  even  to  an  animal.  Many  a
case  of  this  kind  have  I  heard  of,  and  many  a  one  more  is  mentioned
in  the  writings  of  magnetizers  and  of  a  few  physicians,  but  I  will  teil
only  of  what  I  myself  have  seen  and  experienced.  Here  are  the  con-
clusions I  have  reached  in  my  own  practice  :

1.  The  act  of  magnetizing,  even  when  it  is  restricted  to  imposition
of  the  hands,  is  much  more  exhausting  than  an  act  mechanically
analogous.

2.  This  exhaustion  is  more  marked  when  one  magnetizes  a  sick
person  than  when  one  magnetizes  one  who  is  sound.

3.  This    nervous    exhaustion,    which    manifests    itself    by  certain

1  CirconstanciSe.

34  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

special    characters,   is    sometimes   accompanied   by   a    transmission
of  pain.

4.  The  kinds  of  pain  that  are  most  likely  to  produce  this  phenome-
non are  the  "  fulgurant "  pains  of  the  ataxic,  rheumatic  pains,  and
dorsal  hyperesthesia.

5.  Prolonged  contact  facilitates  this  phenomenon,  which,  though
more  rarely,  is  manifested  also  as  a  sequel  of  magnetization  without
contact.

6.  The  transmission  is  rarely  definite  and  immediate.  Sometimes,
not  often,  the  pain  visits  the  same  part  of  the  body,  and  this
occurs  particularly  when  one  has  to  do  with  several  patients,  all  pre-
senting the  same  symptoms.  But,  as  a  general  rule,  it  attacks  the
nodi  tninoris  resistentice,  and  manifests  itself  mostly  the  following
morning  at  awaking.

7.  Transmitted  pains  are  always  much  lighter  and  of  short  duration.

8.  Besides  pains,  certain  pathological  states,  as  congestions,  cold  in
the  head,  insomnia,  etc.,  may  also  be  transmitted  as  a  consequence  of
a  magnetization.  They  are  easily  distinguished  from  an  indisposi-
tion of  spontaneous  origin  in  the  magnetizer  himself,  by  their  sudden
appearance  and  disappearance,  as  also  by  their  superficial  character,
so  to  speak.  They  do  not  bring  with  them  the  other  consequences
that  belong  to  spontaneous  pathological  states.

9.  The  phenomenon  is  always  accompanied  by  a  notable  relief  to
the  patient  whose  disease  condition  is  communicated.  One  might
say  that  the  nervic  equilibrium  is  established  at  the  expense  of  another
organism  that  is  more  in  equilibrium.

Hence,  holding  as  I  do  that  there  is  a  more  or  less  general  trans-
mission from  the  patient  to  the  magnetizer,  I  cannot  deny  the  possi-
bility of  a  more  explicit  and  more  detailed  transmission  from  the
patient  to  a  hypnotizable  subject  or  one  made  hypersesthesic  by  the
methods  of  artificial  somnambulism.

Two  bodies  of  unequal  temperature  tend  to  equalize  their  tempera-
ture. Two  bodies  unequally  electrized  tend  to  equalize  their  elec-
tricity. Two  bodies  unequally  equilibrated  in  their  nerve  functions
tend  to  equilibrate  those  functions.

Comparison  is  not  demonstration  ;  yet  it  brings  out  an  analogy,  and
that  helps  our  ignorance  a  little.

And  as  for  thought,  does  not  that  correspond  also  to  a  nerve  state  ?
Undoubtedly;  nor  have- 1  ever  denied  the  theoretic  possibility  of
transmitting  a  psychic  state,  any  more  than  I  can  deny  the  theoretic
possibility  of  transmitting  the  human  voice  across  the  ocean — more
particularly  since  a  certain  lesson  in  circumspectness  I  once  got  my-
self. In  October,  1884,  I  was  still  fixed  in  the  belief  that,  because  of
the  radical  antagonism  existing  in  the  microphone  between  the  sensi-
bility of  its  constituent  parts  and  distinctness  of  utterance,  we  should

APPARENT  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.  35

never  succeed  in  reproducing  speech  in  a  loud  voice  ;  and  I  held  that
a  multitude  of  facts  and  strictly  logical  arguments  justified  that  con-
clusion ;  yet  in  October,  1885,  I  myself  invented  the  thermomicrophone,
which  reproduces  speech  in  a  loud  voice.  So,  then,  let  us  repeat  the
wise  remark  of  Arago,  quoted  at  the  beginning  of  this  work,  and  pro-
ceed with  our  investigation.

Coming  to  Paris  in  1882,  I  naturally  visited  everywhere,  wherever
anything  relating  to  hypnotism  was  to  be  seen.  One  day  I  witnessed
some  hypnotic,  experiments  at  the  house  of  a  physician.  After  exhibit-
ing all  the  wonderful  feats  of  an  hysterical  young  woman,  duly  trained,
the  physician  gave  me  a  surprise  in  the  shape  of  an  exhibition  of  men-
tal suggestion.     The  experiment  was  made  in  this  wise  :

The  somnambule  having  received  the  (verbal)  order  to  go  to  the
end  of  the  room,  she  went  thither,  her  eyes  half  shut,  with  the  air  of  a
school-boy  that  knows  his  lesson  perfectly,  then  stood  still,  facing  us.
Then  the  doctor  fixing  on  the  subject  a  look  of  stern  command,  "  men-
tally "  ordered  her  to  come  back  toward  us  (we  were  standing  beside
her  bed).  After  a  few  moments  of  hesitation  and  impatience,  the  sub-
ject came  back  to  us.  The  doctor  turned  to  me  with  a  smile  of
triumph,  as  though  he  were  to  say,  "  Isn't  that  astounding  ?  "  But  the
only  thing  that  astonished  me  in  the  matter  was  the  honesty  of  the
experimenter,  content  with  so  little.

If  when  he  questioned  the  subject  whether  she  felt  any  sensation
whatever  in  the  legs,  and  she  answered  that  she  did,  indeed,  feel  some-
thing, he  took  that  as  proof  that  this  something  was  the  result  of
"mental  suggestion."  Of  course,  these  experiments  could  serve  only
to  make  me  more  incredulous.

With  regard  to  "  demonstrative "  experiments,  repeated  for  the
benefit  of  the  curious,  I  must  here  lay  down  a  general  rule  that  will,
perhaps,  seem  over-rigorous  :

One  same  experiment  in  mental  suggestion,  repeated  under  the  same  ex-
ternal circumstances,  has  no  scientific  value.  When  first  made,  it  may
possess  the^  value  of  an  isolated  fact,  but  it  possesses  that  value  no
longer  when  it  is  made  a  second  time  in  the  same  way,  and  under  the
same  conditions.     Here  is  an  example  to  show  what  I  mean  :

A  curved  finger  may  signify  many  things,  or  nothing  at  all.  But  if
you  make  a  somnambule  in  the  state  of  suggestionable  hypnotism
believe  that  a  parrot  is  perched  on  that  curved  finger,  the  next  time
you  have  only  to  hold  the  curved  finger  out  toward  the  subject  in  the
same  way  in  order  to  make  her  at  once  see  the  parrot  perched  upon
it.

This  phenomenon  is  possible  in  the  polyideic  state  :  it  is  inevitable
in  monoideism,  for  then  control  is  out  of  the  question,  and  the  subject
does  not  think,  cannot  conceive  but  one  single  idea,  and  that  idea  you

36  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

inculcate  directly  or  indirectly.     In  the  case  under  consideration  it  is
the  inseparable  association  that  completes  the  direct  sensation.

Suppose  the  somnambule  that  comes  back  to  where  the  doctor  and
I  are  standing,  was,  in  the  first  instance,  moved  simply  by  impatience
and  a  wish  to  return  to  her  couch  ;  or  suppose  that  there  was  some
sort  of  real  action  ;  these  alternative  suppositions  are  of  no  account
when  the  experiment  comes  to  be  repeated  another  day  under  the
same  conditions.  There  is  already  formed  a  more  or  less  invincible
■association  between  the  thought  of  being  at  the  lower  end  of  the
room,  the  stern  look  of  the  doctor,  the  expectancy  expressed  by  the
faces  of  the  lookers-on,  and  the  intention  to  go  to  them.

This  remark  upon  the  importance  of  association  by  contiguity  first,
and  afterward  by  habit,  is  very  simple,  yet  it  is  too  often  lost  sight  of.
I  have,  indeed,  been  astonished  to  see  it  disregarded  by  distinguished
physiologists  who  have  not  the  knack  of  psychological  observation.
So  general  is  this  disregard  that  it  is  become  the  sole  cause  of  a  mul-
titude of  entirely  erroneous  generalizations,  which  nevertheless  are
accepted  in  hypnology  as  principles.

For  example,  there  is  absolutely  no  essential  relation  between
"  open  eyes "  and  catalepsy.  Catalepsy  can  be  produced  with  the
eyes  of  the  subject  open,  or  half  shut,  or  entirely  closed,  or  in  per-
fect darkness.  But  catalepsy  may  be  induced  by  any  sudden,  lively
impression  that  takes  the  subject  by  surprise.  Suppose  the  subject
on  lifting  his  eyes  is  met  by  a  bright  flash  of  light,  contrived  before-
hand by  the  "  impressioner."  He  suffers  the  nerve-shock  of  this
impression  and  instantly  falls  into  the  hypnotic  state  of  catalepsy,
and  has  not  time  even  to  close  the  eyes.  That  is  enough  ;  there  is
formed  an  ideorganic1  association  between  a  sudden  opening  of  the
eyelids  and  the  organic  state  of  catalepsy.  The  brain  being  momen-
tarily paralyzed,  other  ideas  there  are  none,  and  consequently  they
cannot  interfere  with  the  forming  of  this  association.

Lower  the  eyelids  and  the  limbs  grow  relaxed  :  by  suppressing  the
first  term  of  the  association  you  cause  the  other  to  disappear.  If  on
the  strength  of  this  experiment  you  announce  as  an  axiom  that  "cata-
lepsy is  produced  by  opening  the  eyes,"  or  that  "  the  subject  in
catalepsy  keeps  the  eyes  wide  open,"  you  make  a  statement  that  has
no  more  value  than  if  you  were  to  say  that  "in  catalepsy  the  subject
keeps  the  eyes  always  closed,"  on  the  strength  of  another  individual
habit  as  easily  producible.

To  verify  the  cataleptic  state  the  usual  way  is  to  raise  the  arm  of
the  subject :  if  it  falls,  he  is  no  longer  cataleptic,  else  the  arm  would
have  retained  the  position  you  gave  it.

Once  I  tried  to  produce  catalepsy   by  a   mental  order,  after  ascer-

1  Ideorganic  (idea  -|-  organ)  association  ;  an  association  between  a  thought  in  the
mind  and  the  action  of  a  bodily  organ—  Translator.

APPARENT  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.  37

taining  that  the  muscles  were  perfectly  lax.  Catalepsy  appeared  :
the  arm  stood  out  from  the  trunk.  I  removed  the  catalepsy,  to  begin
again;  the  arm  fell.  I  mentally  ordered  the  catalepsy  to  return;
again  it  appeared  ;  and  so  on.  Had  I  any  ground  to  infer  that  there
was  real  mental  action  in  this  case?  Not  at  all!  riere  is  the  true
explanation  of  the  phenomenon  :

When  experimenting  for  the  first  time  upon  the  subject  in  question,
I  had  produced  catalepsy  in  the  arm  by  lifting  it  with  one  hand  while
with  the  other  hand  I  made  a  few  passes  (gentle  massage)  from  above
downward.  It  took  several  minutes  to  produce  the  lightness  and
mechanical  flexibility  of  the  member  which  constitute  catalepsy.1
But  by  repeating  often  I  reached  this  result  much  more  speedily  ;
one  pass  along  the  arm  was  enough.

After  this  experiment  I  concluded  that  not  even  the  one  pass  was
necessary  ;  there  had  been  formed  an  ideorganic  association  between
the  act  of  lifting  the  arm  and  the  cataleptic  state.  The  one  called
forth  the  other  ;  hence  my  mental  suggestion  played  no  part,  and
J  produced  the  catalepsy  while  trying  to  find  out  whether  it  existed.

But,  you  will  say,  the  same  movement  of  the  arm  a  moment  ago
showed  a  complete  relaxation  of  the  muscles  ;  how,  then,  is  it  that
the  same  movement  suggests  at  one  time  simple  paralysis  (lethargy),
and  at  another  time  the  cataleptic  state?

The  reason  is  that  the  movement  is  not  the  same.  We  lift  the  arm
in  one  way  to  make  it  fall,  and  in  another  way  when  we  wish  to  see
if  it  will  not  stand  rigid.  A  slight  difference  in  our  state  of  mind
suffices  to  give  to  our  muscles  and  to  our  fingers  a  difference  of
motion  and  of  touch  that  in  hypnotism  is  quite  sufficient  to  reproduce
the  organic  association  of  catalepsy  in  one  case,  and  not  to  reproduce
it  in  another.

Our  touch  is  of  one  kind  when  it  is  entirely  without  purpose,  it  is
another  thing  when  we  wish  to  produce  an  effect  ;  of  one  kind  when
we  have  no  belief  in  its  efficacy,  of  another  when  we  have  unlimited
confidence.  "  Will  and  believe  " — but  you  will  then  find  phenomena
that  do  not  exist.

The  unconscious,  as  I  have  said,  is  the  great  praestigiator  in  hyp-
notism, and  many  a  trick  it  plays  upon  us.  But,  I  must  add,  it  rarely
does  so  dishonestly.  It  is,  on  the  other  hand,  perfectly  docile,  and
never  was  animal  more  easily  trained  than  it  is.  The  misfortune  is
that  we  train  it  all  unconsciously  and  without  appearing  to  do  so.

Then  it  is  that  the  unconscious  of  each  of  us  disports  itself  in  play-
ing tricks  on  each  other  one — and  upon  ourselves.

In  the  two  instances  just  cited,  I  postulate  a  really  active  interme-
diary— a  bright  flash  of  light  and  a  gentle  massage — but  these  are  not
essential  ;  the  unconscious  can  divine  your  thoughts  without  them,

1  Cette  Itlgerete  et  flexibility  me'canique  du  membre  qui  constitue  la  catalepsie.

38  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

provided  you  remain  steadfast  in  your  wish.  You  lift  the  subject's
arm,  and  it  falls  ;  try  again,  and  the  subject  will  perhaps  hesitate,  and
the  arm  will  drop  to  his  side  less  quickly  ;  keep  on,  and  probably  the
unconscious  will  say  to  itself  :  "  Evidently  they  want  me  to  maintain
the  posture  they  give,  to  the  arm.  I  am  willing."  And  you  will  get
your  "cataleptic  state"  without  any  accessory  manipulation.

It  is  in  this  way  that  certain  magnetizers  have  found  a  number  of
"  polarities "  in  the  human  body.  I  have  seen  their  experiments,
which  are  quite  convincing  :  the  thumb  attracts,  the  little  finger  repels,
and  so  on.  The  unconscious  having  learned  its  lesson,  no  longer
contradicts  itself.  Yet,  if  you  use  a  little  entreaty — albeit,  without
any  words — you  will  easily  obtain  the  opposite  result,  and  you  will
get  any  polarity  whatsoever,  according  to  whatever  fanciful  plan  you
may  lay  out  in  advance.  Three  seances  are  enough  to  produce  a  habit
of  re-action.

(Of  course,  these  remarks  do  not  settle  the  question  of  polarity  in
general.  Upon  that  question  I  do  not  mean  even  to  touch.  I  merely
say  that  it  is  possible  to  inculcate  into  the  subject  an  imaginary
polarity.)

Even  when  you  experiment  without  contact,  even  when  you  act
upon  a  sleeping  person,  who,  however,  has  already  been  magnetized  by  yon,
you  must  be  on  your  guard  against  unconscious  habitudes.

The  possibility  of  producing  somnambulism  in  a  person  that  is  in
natural  sleep,  and  who  has  no  suspicion  of  your  presence,  is  often
cited  as  proof  of  fiuidic  action,  or  mental  action  at  a  distance.  But  in
most  cases  this,  too,  is  an  illusion,  and  when  the  experiment  is  success-
ful, proves  one.  thing  only,  to  wit,  the  force  of  ideorganic  associations.

You  have  the  habit — perhaps  quite  unconscious — of  disturbing  the
air  in  front  of  the  subject's  face,  when  you  make  passes  in  a  peculiar
way  of  your  own.  The  subject,  or  rather  his  unconscious,  divines  your
presence,  feels  you  are  there,  obeys  you  ;  the  association  of  these  im-
pressions with  the  organic  state  of  somnambulism  produces  the  som-
nambulic state.  Try  some  nezu  method — one  that  would  have  been
equally  effectual  in  the  waking  state,  because  of  the  conscious  sug-
gestion— and  you  will  obtain  no  result.

In  purposely  employing  the  principle  of  association,  we  come  upon
curious  applications  of  it.  You  choose  whatever  link  of  association
you  please,  and  connect  that  with  one,  two,  three,  four  or  more  similar
links,  be  they  ideas,  sensations,  acts,  states  or  whatever  you  will.  It
is  net  necessary  that  there  be  any  logical  relation  at  all  between  the
first  link  and  the  ones  that  follow.

I  once  had  as  a  patient  an  insane  woman,  fully  bent  upon  suicide,
but  who  always  very  carefully  planned  in  advance  the  carrying  out  of
her  projects.  In  the  normal  state  she  never  would  tell  me  about  them,
and  by  degrees  she  became  mistrustful  even  in  somnambulism.     The

APPARENT  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.  39

monoideic  state,  which  is  always  characterized  by  absolute  submission,
it  was  almost  impossible  to  produce,  and  the  most  trivial  question
made  her  pass  straight  from  the  aideic  state  to  active  polyideismi  in
which  she  regained  her  independence.  Still  it  was  necessary  to  learn
her  secret  in  order  to  prevent  mischief.  To  this  end  I  contrived  the
following  ruse.  Having  been  in  the  habit  of  sitting  on  the  right  when-
ever I  talked  with  her,  one  day  I  sat  to  the  left  of  her,  and  taking
advantage  of  a  favorable  moment — a  sort  of  visional  delirium  akin  to
monoideism — I  changed  my  voice  slightly,  and  made  answer  to  her
raving,  taking  care  to  be  agreeable  to  her.  The  conversation  went
on,  and  I  saw  that  she  did  not  recognize  me,  though  now  she  was  fully
in  the  state  of  active  somnambulism.  She  began  to  unbosom  herself
to  me,  and  soon  she  confided  to  me  her  inmost  thoughts.

"  But  who  are  you  ? "  she  suddenly  asked,  "  and  what  right  have  you
to  question  me?"

"  Oh,  you  know  me  well.  I  am  your  old  friend  and  devoted  confid-
ant for  whom  you  have  no  secrets.  How,  have  you  forgotten  Mr.
Camille,  your  good  Mr.  Camille  ?  "

"That's  a  funny  name,"  said  she,  "but  no  matter."
Thenceforth  I  had  only  to  station  myself  on  her  left  in  order  to  possess
her  confidence.  There  I  was  called  Mr.  Camille,  while  on  her  right
I  was  still  her  "doctor."  The  thing  was  understood  and  there  was
no  longer  any  need  for  me  to  change  my  voice  or  my  position  in  any
respect.  I  was  transformed;  but  at  the  same  time  she  also  under-
went a  transformation,  and  she  was  no  longer  the  mistrustful,  circum-
spect person  she  was  before.  (She  was  saved  from  suicide  thrice  by
this  ruse.)

Suppose  now  that  I  had  wished  to  give  a  deceptive  demonstration
of  the  force  of  a  complex  mental  suggestion — changing  my  personal-
ity in  the  mind  of  the  subject,  without  a  gesture,  without  a  word;
changing  my  name  ;  changing  her  attitude,  her  feeling  toward  me;
"  mentally  "  ordering  her  to  confide  in  me.

To  perform  that  marvel,  all  I  should  need  to  do  would  be  to  stand
on  the  left  of  her.

Well,  these  things  happen  involuntarily  through  ignorance  of  the
mysteries  of  association.  We  believe  ourselves  to  be  candid  observers,
the  while  we  are  unconsciously  suggesting  the  phenomenon  that  is  to
be  verified.  Thus  it  is  that  the  somnambulic  subjects  of  the  "  fluidist  "
magnetizer  see  the  fluid  emanating  from  his  finger-tips,  while  the
somnambules  of  the  hypnotizer  see  nothing,  and  those  of  the  spiritist
discover  spirits  everywhere,  the  same  being  invisible  for  the  somnam-
bules of  the  materialist.  So  it  is,  once  more,  that  "  pressure  on  the
top  of  the  head  "  produces,  at  Paris,  the  "  somnambulic  ;  "  at  Breslau,
the  "  lethargic  "  state  ;  at  Manchester,  "  religious  ecstasy,"  and  so  on.
It  is  all  "the  story  of  Mr.  Camille!"

4o  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

Robert-Houdin  long  ago  contrived  a  means  of  imitating  "  second
sight."  He  trained  his  assistant — who  played  the  part  of  the  medium
— so  readily  to  understand  his  questions,  that  the  latter  always  "  saw  ''
from  a  distance  objects  held  in  the  hand,  even  when  the  hand  was
closed.  If  the  question  was  "  What  do  you  see  ? "  it  was  a  coin.  The
question  "  What  do  you  see  now  ? "  indicated  a  gold  coin,  and  so  on.
Robert-Houdin  could  even  convey  to  his  subject,  "  mentally,"  the
number  of  a  bank-note  simply  by  means  of  questions,  the  secret  import
of  which  was  understood  between  them.

One  often  imitates  this  trick  unconsciously  when  one,  in  thinking  of
a  given  phenomenon,  has  the  habit  of  questioning  the  subject  always
after  the  same  fashion.

Sometimes  habit  even  is  unnecessary,  and  one  succeeds  ex  tempore,
even  in  the  waking  state.  I  have  often  made  the  following  experiment  :
I  lay  a  walking-stick  on  the  ground,  and  say  to  a  person  that  is
hypnotizable,  though  not  hypnotized  :  "  Pass  this  limit  if  you  please."
The  subject  does  so.  "  Once  again  !  "  He  steps  over  the  cane
hesitatingly,  and  looks  at  me  with  mistrust.  "And  again!"  He
stands  stock-still  quite  unable  to  step  over  the  cane  ;  his  legs  refuse
to  carry  him.

Did  I  say  that  this  was  going  to  happen  ?  No  !  Did  I  make  any
gesture  whatever  ?  No  !  I  simply  willed  and  believed.  Then  it  is  a
case  of  mental  suggestion  ?     By  no  means — only,  a  suggestion  guessed.

Cumberland,  the  famous  "mind-reader,"  came  to  Paris  in  1884.  It
will  be  readily  understood  that,  after  having  made  the  experiments
already  described,  I  could  not  be  under  any  illusions  with  regard  to
the  apparent  thought-transference  exhibited  by  him.  Mental  sug-
gestion has  nothing  to  do  with  his  performances,  but  it  is  interesting
and  highly  instructive  to  read  the  first  reports  of  the  newspapers.
There  we  may  see  the  difference  between  the  experiments  as  per-
formed, and  as  described,  even  when  the  performances  are  described
by  scientific  chroniclers.  There,  too,  we  learn  how  small  is  the  value
of  testimony  when  there  is  a  question  of  a  new  and  unknown
phenomenon.

Having  clearly  perceived  that  the  true  medium  in  these  perform-
ances was  he  who  "  thought,"- not  he  who  guessed,  I  repeated  Cum-
berland's experiments,  and  I  published  a  series  of  articles  on  the
subject  in  the  Gazeta  Polska  ("Polish  Gazette"),  in  May,  1884.
Since  that  time  the  matter  has  been  sufficiently  eiuc'datedin  France,
by  the  researches  of  Messrs.  Gley  and  Ch.  Richet,  and  I  have  only  to
formulate  my  own  observations  in  order  to  complete  theirs,  without
recounting  the  experiments  in  detail.

It  is  certain,  then,  that  every  thought  having  any  relation  whatever
to  space  tends  to  produce  unconscious  movements  indicating  such
relations.     That  is  a  habit,  a  nerve  mechanism,  in  part  hereditary,  in

APPARENT  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.  41

part  acquired.  In  the  case  of  an  object  hidden  (to  be  found  by  the
"  mind-reader  "),  or  of  a  person  chosen  (whom  the  mind-reader  is  to
point  out),  one  is  thinking  of  the  place  where  the  object  or  the  per-
son is,  and  one  simply  leads  the  mind  reader  who  holds  one's  hand.
One  needs  only  to  practice  for  one  evening  to  perform  the  feats  of
the  famous  mind-reader  ;  for  notwithstanding  all  the  extravagant
stories  that  have  been  published  about  the  matter,  it  does  not  even
involve  any  special  fineness  of  touch,  no  nice  perception  of  pulse-
changes  or  of  imperceptible  vibrations.  One  must  be  able  to  go  whitUer
one  is  led ;  that  is  all.  The  comic  side  of  the  thing  is  that  one  has  not
the  slightest  suspicion  of  what  one  is  doing,  and  that  people  pay
twenty  francs  to  see  a  person  point  out  an  object  they  themselves
have  hidden.  The  melancholy  side,  on  the  other  hand,  is  that  our
contempt  for  the  "  occult  sciences "  has  rendered  us  ignorant  of
highly  remarkable  and  highly  instructive  physiological  phenomena,
to  that  degree  that  we  stupidly  cry  "  Fraud  !  "  when  some  simple,
common  fact  is  shown  to  us  that  ought  long  ago  to  have  been  studied
and  ascertained.

It  has  been  necessary  for  a  bold  professional  to  traverse  all  Europe,
playing  tricks  upon  diplomats  and  princes  of  blood  royal,  in  order  to
make  science  take  account  of  the  relations  between  "  the  physical
and  the  moral."  And  it  was  the  same  with  hypnotism,  which  would
to  this  day  not  have  been  recognized  by  science  had  it  not  been  for
the  public  exhibitions  given  by  Donato  and  Hansen.

In  these  experiments  the  one  who  leads  you  knows  not  what  he  is
doing,  the  while  thinking  himself  quite  master  of  himself.  I  have
known  a  very  intelligent  and  highly  educated  lady  with  whom  I  could
find  a  needle  in  a  haystack.  She  would  lead  me  with  such  certainty
and  with  such  force  that  resistance  was  out  of  the  question.  Once  a
little  note  was  hid  under  a  flowerpot.  She  indicated  to  me  the
flowerpot,  and  I  began  to  feel  about  within  it  ;  then,  with  her  hand,
which  I  held  loosely  in  my  own,  she  made  a  negative  gesture  per-
fectly intelligible,  and  then  another  which  said  :  Underneath  !

Now,  that  lady  not  only  was  entirely  unconscious  of  this  expressive
conversation,  but  she  never  would  believe  that  it  was  by  her  uncon-
scious motions  that  I  was  guided  in  the  search.

"  No,"  she  would  say,  "  that  is  impossible.  You  read  my  thought  ;
I  was  very  careful  this  time  not  to  make  any  motion  whatever."  She
was  a  person  easily  hypnotizable  (hypnoscopic  experiment  :  heavi-
ness, paralysis,  numbness).

There  are  some  60  persons  in  100  with  whom  Cumberlandism
succeeds  more  or  less  readily  ;  thus,  they  are  more  numerous  than
hypnotizable  subjects,  who  are  not  more  than  30  in  100.

Usually  the  experiments  a're  more  successful   with    hypnotizable

A-

MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

persons.  Nevertheless,  there  is  a  certain  number  of  the  latter — even
of  the  best  subjects — with  whom  you  never  will  succeed.  Why?
Because  the  conditions  of  success  in  Cumberlandism  are  twofold  :

i.  An  organic  tendency  to  a  duplication  between  the  voluntary
and  the  involuntary  movements,  which  characterizes  the  majority  of
hypnotizable  subjects.

2.  A  facility  in  concentrating  one's  thoughts  and  keeping  up  the
concentration,  which  quite  naturally  and  of  necessity  produces  in
every  one  this  duplication.

Now,  among  non-hypnotizable  persons  there  are  some  who  possess
this  latter  faculty  in  a  high  degree,  while,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is
sometimes  lacking  in  persons  easily  hypnotizable,  but  who  cannot
concentrate  their  attention.  When  they  pass  foment  a  person,  they
think  of  that  person  ;  but  when  they  perceive  a  mirror  they  think  of
the  mirror,  and  plainly  the  muscular  indications  become  confused.
Yes  ;  there  are  persons  easily  hypnotizable  who  are  incapable  of  con-
centrating their  attention — a  thing,  be  it  said  in  passing,  which  con-
tradicts Braid's  theory.

In  general,  Cumberlandism  rests  upon  the  same  physiological  basis
as  "  willing,"  though  the  external  conditions  are  altogether  different.
In  "willing"  it  is  by  the  will  that  we  seek  to  make  the  person  we
touch  perforin  a  given  movement,  and  then  we  involuntarily  impel
him  to  its  performance.  In  Cumberlandism,  on  the  contrary,  we  have
no  such  will,  we  simply  think  of  a  place — but  we  lead  the  subject  all
the  same.  At  bottom  the  same  principle  is  found  in  both  ;  an  ideo-
plasty  of  movements  (realization1  of  the  movements  we  think  about)
and,  from  the  point  of  View  of  the  one  who  guesses,  a  mechanical
suggestion.

It  is  still  a  long  way  to  mental  suggestion.  Yet  these  are  the
experiments  that  have  contributed  most  to  awaken  in  the  minds  of
some  physiologists  the  thought  of  studying  true  mental  suggestion.

CHAPTER   II.

PROBABLE    MENTAL    SUGGESTION.

SUCH  were  my  judgments,  such  my  doubts,  when,  in  the  month  of
March,  1 884,  I  received  from  a  well-known  physician  of  Nice  a
letter,  in  which  occurred  the  following  passage  :

"  To-day  I  met  a  young  man  of  24  years,  intelligent  and  educated,
who  wishes  to  be  of  service  to  science,  and  in  whom  can  be  produced,
in  the  waking  state,  suggestion   phenomena  by  word   and  by  thought.

1  Or  actualization. —  Translator.

PROBABLE  MENTAL  SUGGESTLON.  43

He  is  a  noctambule  from  childhood  ;  so  have  been  or  are  his  mother,
his  maternal  grandfather,  and  his  maternal  uncle.  I  have  been  able
to  make  a  few  experiments  with  him.  I  imagined  seeing  a  bird  flying
hither  and  thither  in  a  room  :  I  touched  him  and  he  saw  the  bird  flying
about  in  every  direction.  [Here  follows  an  experiment  in  color-
changes  by  verbal  suggestion,  which  does  not  concern  us.]  He
appears  to  be  a  little  more  sensitive  on  the  left  side  of  the  body  [than
on  the  right].  I  must  see  this  subject  again,  for  he  is  a  very  remark-
able one.

[Signed]  A.  Bar£ty.

>>

As  the  details  of  the  experiment  were  not  stated  with  precision,  I
was  justified  in  supposing  that  the  questions  of  the  experimenter,  and
his  attitude,  might  have  suggested  to  the  subject  the  hallucination
desired.  In  fact,  to  suggest  to  the  subject  the  idea  of  a  bird  flying,
one  need  but  look  round  the  ceiling  and  ask  if  he  does  not  see  some-
thing in  the  air.  And  had  details  of  what  he  saw  been  asked  for,  it
is  probable  that  the  bird  seen  by  the  subject  would  be  found  very
different  from  that  imagined  by  the  experimenter.  Some  weeks  later
I  received  a  second  letter,  containing  more  details  :

"  Since  my  last  letter  was  written,  I  have  seen  again  the  subject  of
whom  I  have  spoken  to  you.  He  is  in  the  hands  of  a  magnetizer,
with  whom  he  came  to  see  me.  I  have  on  my  desk  two  statuettes,
one  bronze,  the  other  ivory ;  these  I  placed  side  by  side,  three  or  four
inches  apart,  and  upright.  Then  I  said  to  the  subject  :  '  Look  at
these  two  statuettes  ;  what  is  their  color  ? '  He  answered  :  '  One  is
white  (that  on  the  right)  and  the  other  is  dark.'  Then  placing  my
left  hand  in  his  right,  I  asked  if  he  saw  anything  peculiar  in  looking
at  the  two  statuettes.  As  for  me,  I  had  imagined  or  strongly  con-
ceived the  thought  of  the  white  one  quitting  its  place  and  becoming  one
with  the  brown.  He  answered,  after  a  few  minutes,  that  the  white
statuette  left  its  place ;  that  it  transferred  itself  to  the  other  side  of
the  brown.     That  was  a  little  more  than  I  had  thought.

"  Next  I  imagined  (always  without  making  the  slightest  sign)  the
statuettes  growing  smaller,  and  (my  right  hand  being  placed  in  the
right  hand  of  the  subject)  I  asked  him  what  he  saw.  He  answered
that  he  saw  the  statuettes  growing  smaller  and  smaller,  till  they  were
no  bigger  than  a  pin-head.  In  reality,  they  are  each  about  five  inches
in  height.

"  Then  I  thought  of  them  growing  larger,  and,  without  my  questioning
him,  he  told  me  that  now  he  saw  them  growing  larger  and  larger.  He
even  lifted  his  head  to  follow  this  increase  in  their  size,  and  seemed
quite  surprised  at  it.  Imaging  to  myself,  then,  the  statuettes  grow-
ing smaller  till  they  resumed  their  proper  dimensions,  I  was  told  by
the  subject  that  he  saw  them  growing  smaller."

Here  I  interrupt  the  quotation  to  make  some  remarks.  This  experi-
ment is  certainly  a  good  deal  mOre  important  than  the  previous  one.  But
it  is  far  from  being  conclusive.  First,  the  thoughts  of  the  subject  were
fixed  in  advance,  and  limited  to  "  something  "  about  to  happen  to
the  statuettes.     What  could  happen  to  them  ?     A  change  of  color  ?

44  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

Experiments  on  color  changes  had  already  been  made  in  the  preceding-
seance.  The  statuettes  might  change  their  places.  The  subject  had
this  thought,  but  was  a  little  "  out  "  as  to  details.  They  might  grow
bigger.  This  the  subject  guessed.  What  association  comes  nearest
to  increased  size  ?  Diminution.  This,  too,  the  subject  guessed.  After
the  reality  is  falsified  in  two  opposite  respects  ;  one,  as  a  matter  of
course,  feels  the  need  of  restoring  the  true  state  of  things  as  they
appear  to  our  senses,  and  it  is  probable  that  the  experimenter  and  the
subject  had  this  thought  simultaneously.  We  need  to  know  not  only
the  details  of  the  experiment — which  has  been  described  carefully —
but  also  the  conversation  that  went  before,  and  all  the  conditions  of
the  moment,  in  order  to  be  sure  that  a  train  of  associations  and  the
psychic  atmosphere  were  not  the  sole  cause  of  the  successful  issue.

Such,  in  substance,  were  the  observations  that  I  made  to  the  experi-
menter, and  he  was  pleased  to  recognize  the  pertinency  of  a  certain
number  of  my  objections.     We  may  now  return  to  the  letter  :

"  After  this  experiment  (writes  Dr.  Bar^ty),  I  made  another  and
very  interesting  one  on  making  him  find  a  hidden  object.

"  Having  made  him  turn  his  head  away  entirely,  I  took  the  ivory
statuette  and  concealed  it  in  my  right  hand,  which  I  placed  upon  my
hip.  My  left  hand  was  not  at  this  time  in  contact  with  his  hand  as  it
was  before.

"  I  asked  him  to  face  about  and  look  at  the  statuettes,  which  he
immediately  did.  But,  as  he  showed  no  surprise,  I  asked  if  he  saw
them  both.  He  answered  yes.  Then,  I  said,  '  Well,  then,  take  the
white  one  in  your  hand  '  He  put  his  hand  forth  to  where  the  ivory
statuette  had  stood  before,  and  seemed  to  bring  it  toward  him  and  to
examine  it.  But  presently  he  moved  his  fingers  as  though  conscious
that  he  was  grasping  only  a  shadow,  or  that  the  object  was  vanishing.
'  Where  is  it  ?  What  is  become  of  it  ? '  Forthwith  he  directed  his  eyes
toward  my  closed  right  hand,  placed  on  my  hip  (a  position  in  which  I
had  held  that  hand  before  seizing  the  object),  and  said  to  me,  '  What
have  you  in  your  right  hand  ? '  "

So  far,  I  still  see  nothing  but  a  transient  hallucination,  and  an  infer-
ence that  easily  enough  may  have  been  suggested  by  the  immobility
of  the  experimenter's  closed  right  hand,  which  the  subject,  perhaps,
for  the  first  time  noticed  at  the  moment  of  his  search.  But  let  us
return  to  the  letter.

"  I  then  asked  him  to  turn  and  look  in  the  opposite  direction  [an
insufficient  precaution,  for  it  gives  assurance  to  the  subject  that  noth-
ing is  taken  to  any  distance  away],  and  then  rapidly  and  noiselessly  I
hid  the  statuette  in  my  waistcoat.  Then  I  again  placed  my  closed
hand  upon  my  hip  as  before.  I  bid  him  turn  round  and  tell  me  quickly
where  the  white  statuette  was,  and  to  get  it.  He  thereupon  made  his
right  hand  perform  a  most  singular  movement.  First  he  carried  his
hand  to  the  spot  where  the  statuette  had  originally  stood,  then,  always
slowly,  he  guided   it  toward  the  waistcoat,  passing  nigh  to   the  hip

PROBABLE  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.  45

(where  I   had   before   held  the  statuette  concealed  in  my  hand),  and
following  the  track  of  the  statuette.

"In  conclusion,  I  repeated  the  experiment  of  increasing  and  dimin-
ishing the  size  of  the  statuettes  without  my  hand  being  in  contact
with  the  subject's,  at  the  same  time  concealing  my  eyes.  It  was  a  complete
success.  This  last  experiment  seems  to  me  very  convincing.  What
think  you  of  it  ?  "

Yes  ;  more  convincing  than  the  first,  but  unfortunately  it  was  the
second,  repeated  under  the  same  conditions  ;  consequently  it  is  open
to  the  doubts  formulated  above  with  regard  to  repeated  experiments
in  general.

But  while  I  raised  these  objections  I  was  deeply  interested  in  Dr.
Barety's  experiments,  and  I  sent  to  him  a  great  many  questions  which
I  asked  him  to  resolve  experimentally.  As  for  the  experiments  in
finding  a  hidden  object,  when  the  subject  followed  exactly  the  track
of  the  object  itself,  I  frankly  told  the  doctor  that  I  did  not  under-
stand them  at  all.

What  was  needed  was  a  more  systematic,  a  more  rigorous,  study  of
the  matter.  This  Dr.  Barety  knew  as  well  as  I,  but  unfortunately
circumstances  were  adverse.  Then,  too,  perhaps  it  was  an  excess  of
incredulity  ;  but  when  there  is  question  of  an  experiment  in  mental
suggestion,  I  put  no  trust  in  anybody  but  myself.  Besides,  have  I
not  told  of  a  case  in  which  I  was  myself  deceived  by  an  unnoticed
circumstance  or  an  unsuspected  psychic  mechanism  ?  Nor  is  it  out
of  presumption  that  I  depreciate  the  testimony  of  others,  who  per-
haps have  taken  precisely  the  same  precautions  I  would  myself  have
taken  ;  but  in  matters  like  this  it  is  impossible  to  recount  all  the  little
details  that  are  essential  for  a  full  understanding  of  the  situation,  and
conviction  does  not  flow  from  the  final  result  nor  from  the  general
conditions  ;  what  produces  conviction  is  certain  peculiar  circum-
stances, the  impression  on  the  observer's  mind,  his  personal  sense  of
the  impossibility  of  explaining  the  thing  otherwise  than  by  a  direct
psychic  action'.

I  was  therefore  very  glad  to  learn  a  month  afterward  that  the  sub-
ject and  his  magnetizer  were  about  to  come  to  Paris.  I  gave  a  good
deal  of  time  and  study  to  planning  experiments,  and  a  seance  was
held  in  accordance  with  a  programme  drawn  up  jointly  by  Dr.  Barety
and  myself.

I  commenced  with  the  hypnoscopic  experiment.  It  showed  the  subject
to  be  a  person  of  enormous  sensibility  :  there  was  contracture  and
almost  instantaneous  insensibility  of  the  whole  arm.  And  this
phenomenon  could  be  produced  or  suppressed  purely  by  verbal  sug-
gestion.

I  wished  at  first  to  leave  his  habitual  magnetizer,  Mr.  B..,  entirely  at
liberty,  reserving  to  myself  the  right  to  make  the  experiments  again

46  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

under  different  conditions.  When  one  seeks  to  verify  a  phenomenon
about  which  he  knows  nothing,  one  must  not  impose  upon  it  at  first  a
lot  of  conditions  that  may  interfere  with  success,  and  yet,  for  all  that,
may  not  disprove  the  principle  one  is  investigating,  and  the  true
nature  of  which  one  does  not  know.

"  What  results  do  you  think  you  can  produce  with  your  subject  ?  "
I  asked  the  magnetizer.  He  recited  a  whole  litany  of  phenomena,
out  of  which  I  selected  the  following  three:  i. — Sympathic  and
attractive  action  on  the  right  side,  antipathic  and  repellant  action  on
the  left.  2. — Paralysis  produced  from  a  distance.  3. — Finding  hidden
objects.

"  Do  you  think  you  can  obtain  with  your  subject  any  direct  trans-
mission by  means  of  your  thought  alone  ?  "

Much  to  my  astonishment,  the  magnetizer  replied  in  the  negative.
Yet  that  was  the  object  of  our  meeting  !

"  I  must  use  gestures,"  he  said,  "  except  in  the  third  experiment,
which  can  be  performed  without  my  taking  any  part  in  it.  But  I  can-
not guarantee  thought-action  pure  and  simple  :  with  regard  to  that  I
am  not  at  all  sure."

What  matters  it  ?  We  will  make  the  attempt  all  the  same,  as  Dr.
Barety  thinks  he  has  succeeded  often.

I  shall  not  need  to  recount  the  details  of  the  first  experiment.
Evidently — and  R.  himself  shared  in  this  opinion — it  was  simply  the
result  of  hypnotic  training.  It  is  "the  story  of  Mr.  Camille"  once
more,  and  it  does  not  even  prove  the  independence  of  the  two  cerebral
hemispheres.

Second  Experiment. — The  subject  turns  his  back  to  the  magnetizer,
who  is  in  another  room  at  the  distance  of  about  25  feet.  Dr.  Barety
stays  with  the  subject,  I  watch  the  magnetizer.  The  subject  is  count-
ing aloud.  At  a  signal  from  me  the  magnetizer  "  projects  the  fluid  "
with  all  his  might.     The  subject  ceases  to  count — he  is  paralyzed.

This  experiment  succeeded  three  times  consecutively.  I  thought  I
noticed,  however,  that  the  magnetizer's  cuffs  were  too  noisy.

I  now  remained  in  the  room.  I  walked  up  and  down  to  prevent
the  subject  from  hearing  the  magnetizer's  gestures.  The  experiment
was  a  flash  in  the  pan,  that  is  to  say,  there  was  a  delay  of  several
numbers.

As  the  magnetizer  was  acting  in  perfect  good  faith,  I  asked  him  to
take  off  his  cuffs.  Check  again.  We  began  once  more,  and  now,
though  the  magnetizer,  at  my  request,  made  his  gestures  as  noise-
lessly as  possible,  the  experiment  was  successful.

Conclusion :  Direct  action  was  not  proved,  but  no  more  was  it  dis-
proved. But  if  direct  action  is  to  be  admitted,  there  was  reason  to
believe  that  the  auditive  impressions  assisted  in  producing  the  phe-
nomenon.

PROBABLE  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.  47

Third  experiment. — This  time  something  really  new  was  presented.
The  procedure  was  as  follows  :

In  the  first  place,  every  precaution  was  taken  to  avoid  illusions.

An  object  of  any  sort  was  chosen — a  book,  for  instance — which
was  placed  on  a  table.  (In  this  experiment  the  selection  of  the  ob-
ject is  not  important.)

The  subject  and  his  magnetizer  being  absent,  I  take  this  book  in  a
direction  chosen  by  myself,  and  hide  it  in  a  nook  in  the  room  not
easily  guessed.  (I  make  an  accurate  sketch  of  the  route  taken  by
me  in  removing  the  book.)  Barety  and  I  know  where  the  book  lies,
but  we  take  such  positions  in  the  room  as  to  prevent  our  influencing
the  subject  by  any  involuntary  sign.

The  subject  is  brought  in  blindfolded.  The  place  on  the  table
where  the  object  formerly  lay  is  indicated  to  him,  but  without  naming
to  him  the  object.  The  subject  is  not  asleep,  but  it  becomes  plain,
as  the  experiment  proceeds,  that  the  concentration  of  his  attention
produces  in  him  a  state  of  super-excitation  that  is  almost  hypnotic.
He  begins  by  feeling  of  the  spot  indicated.  He  knows  not  what  the
object  is,  does  not  guess  what  it  is,  yet,  strange  to  say,  his  fingers  as
they  grope  describe  the  contour  of  a  book.  One  might  say  that  the
ghost  of  the  book  offers  a  resistance  to  his  fingers.  Having  made
sure  of  the  form  of  the  object  and  of  the  place  it  occupied  before,  he
essays  two  or  three  directions,  always  groping  in  the  air,  and  takes
the  true  one.  This  he  follows  slowly,  misses  it  twice  or  thrice,
retraces  his  steps,  goes  on  with  greater  confidence,  and  in  three  min-
utes finds  the  book.  We  say  nothing,  but  he  assures  us  that  this  is
the  object  we  had  hidden.

I  made  a  sketch  of  the  path  he  took.  On  comparing  the  two  lines,
the  second  is  found  to  be  a  little  more  curved.

In  another  experiment  I  purposely  made  two  unexpected  declina-
tions ;  the  track  of  the  subject  was  straighter  than  mine.

Here,  again,  is  something  extraordinary  :  I  selected  as  the  object
to  be  hidden  a  powerful  magnet  (the  hypnoscope),  without  letting  the
subject  know.  He  comes  in,  feels  of  the  place  where  the  magnet  had
lain,  and  stands  motionless.  "  I  cannot  go  on,"  he  said  ;  "  my  fingers
are  become  stiff."  In  truth,  there  was  a  contracture  not  only  of  the
fingers,  but  of  the  whole  forearm.  I  was  much  surprised,  but  by
means  of  gentle  massage,  without  uttering  a  word,  I  freed  him  from
the  contracture  and  induced  him  to  proceed.  On  reaching  the  mantel-
shelf, on  which  was  the  magnet,  hid  in  a  vase,  the  same  phenomenon
was  seen.  "  It  is  there,"  he  said,  "  but  again  my  arms  are  stiff."  He
showed  great  fatigue  at  the  conclusion  of  each  experiment.

I  shall  now  be  asked,  What  is  the  solution  of  the  enigma  ?  All  that
I  can  say  is  :

1.  All  the  experiments  were  successful,'  or  neariy  so.

48  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

2.  There  was  no  mental  suggestion,  or  if  there  was,  it  played  a
secondary  part.

3.  The  principal  role  was  played  by  the  subject's  tactile  sensations,
which  were  exceedingly  acute.

4.  The  object  chosen  might  be  "  magnetized  "  or  not,  and  taken  to
the  hiding-place  by  an  unknown  person,  and  consequently  neither  the
individual  "  fluid  "  nor  certain  olfactive  emanations  come  here  into
play,  or  at  least  they  are  not  necessary.

5.  Unless  we  admit  mental  suggestion  or  the  reality  of  a  "dynamic
ghost "  {spectre  dynamique)  left  at  the  place  where  before  the  hypno-
scope  lay,  it  must  be  confessed  that  in  this  case  no  scientific  explana-
tion whatever  is  possible.

6.  Between  the  transfer  of  the  object  and  the  performance  of  the
experiment  it  was  essential  that  only  a  few  minutes  should  intervene  ;
else  the  "  trace  "  of  the  object  through  the  air  vanished.

I  may  mention  a  few  additional  points  of  interest  :

When  questioned  with  regard  to  his  own  sensations  or  opinions,  the
subject  told  me  that  he  considered  the  phenomenon  as  the  effect  of  a
special  tactile  sensibility  acquired  by  practice.  "  When  you  are  in  a  bath,"
said  he,  "  you  feel  distinctly  the  difference  in  density  of  the  two
media,  water  and  air.  The  water  offers  a  greater  resistance  to  your
movements  than  does  the  air.  Now,  I  have  very  much  the  same  sen-
sation in  the  air  that  an  object  has  traversed  ;  it  is  for  me  more  rare-
fied, it  offers  me  less  resistance,  and  it  is  this  less  resistance  mainly  that
guides  me.  I  cannot  tell  you  anything  more  about  it.  I  do  not  feel
quite  master  of  myself  in  making  this  experiment,  and  the  certainty
of  success  depends  precisely  upon  the  degree  of  this  peculiar  state.
I  then  feel  isolated  from  all  around  me,  I  hear  nothing,  I  exist  only  in
my  fingers,  which,  however,  work  without  me.  The  more  I  reason
the  less  do  I  succeed."

As  for  the  experiment  with  the  hypnoscope,  evidently  we  must  sup-
pose that  the  presence  of  the  instrument  magnetizes  the  air  for  a  certain
time,  or  at  least  produces  an  electric  change  that  we  are  unable  to
define.  This  supposition  accords  With  Reichenbach's  researches,  which
perhaps  are  worth  repeating  in  spite  of  the  non-success  of  the  experi-
ments mentioned  in  the  beginning  of  the  present  study.

We  decided  to  make  a  further  test  of  the  direct  action  of  thought
upon  the  subject.  Touching  him  with  my  hand,  I  imagined  to  myself
some  object — its  shape,  color,  feel.  In  this  case  the  subject  either
saw  nothing  at  all,  or  something  very  indefinite.

Setting  before  us  a  leaf  of  white  paper,  I  imagined  to  myself  a
round  yellow  spot.  The  subject  saw  something  gray.  Again  I  imag-
ined a  black  cross  ;  he  saw  a  round  spot.

It  appears  that  Dr.  Barety  was  more  fortunate  than  I,  and  that
with  him  the  subject  twice  or  thrice  guessed  the  color  that  the  doctor

PROBABLE  MENTAL  SUGGESTLON.  49

had  in  mind,  or  at  least  the  complementary  color.  But  there  was
nothing  decisive  in  these  experiments — such,  at  all  events,  was  my
personal  impression.

The  following  year  (1885)  Charles  Richet  published  his  remarkable
essay  in  Ribot's  Lievue  Philosophique.

He  was  inspired  by  an  idea  that  I  find  to  be  at  once  simple  and  in-
genious, and  which  may,  I  think,  be  stated  as  follows  :

There  are  in  physiological  phenomena,  no  absolute  limits — only  a
gradation.  Consequently,  if  mental  suggestion  exist6  in  an  excep-
tional degree  in  some  privileged  subjects — and  that  remains  to  be
proved — it  must  needs  exist  in  a  degree  more  or  less  inappreciable  in
everybody.  That  which  in  an  isolated  fact  is  inappreciable  may  be
rendered  appreciable  by  bringing  isolated  facts  together.  Statistic
may  light  up  an  effect  previously  not  noticed,  and  the  calculus  of
probability  readily  shows  how  much  belongs  to  chance  and  how  much
to  a  real  agent.  Thus  one  can  find  a  rational,  a  premonitory  (excuse
the  term  !) '  basis,  before  he  attains  direct  proof  of  an  extraordinary
fact.

Mr.  Richet  set  about  making  experiments  (easily  repeated  with
everybody)  and  grouping  them,  and  reached  the  interesting  conclusion
that  in  cases  where  mental  suggestion  possibly  was  added  to  chance,
there  was  always  a  slight  surplus  of  successes.    Here  is  a  summary  of

the  results  obtained  :

Successes.

Probable.  Actual.

1.  In  1833  experiments  with  playing-cards 458  510

2.  "     218  "  photographs,  etc 42  67

3.  "       98  "  a  rod 18  44

4.  "      124  spiritist  experiments,  so-called 3  17

2,273  521  638

That  is  to  say,  in  all  these  experiments  there  was  a  surplus  in  favor
of  suggestion.

I  have  repeated  the  experiments  with  playing-cards  with  four  non-
hypnotizable  persons,  and  found  the  results  very  much  the  same.  In
order  to  be  able  to  compare  them,  we  must  observe  that  for  Richet's
1833  experiments  the  calculated  probability  was  0.250,  and  the  actual
proportion  0.278 — a  surplus  of  0.028  in  favor  of  mental  suggestion.
Now  here  are  my  figures  :

Successes.  Proportion  of

Probable.  Actual.  Actual.

C.  R.     92  experiments 23  22  0.239

M.  K.    30            "           7  7  0.250

B.  A.      50           "           12  15  0.300

M.  A.  107           "          26  32  0.299

J.  O.      49           "           12  16  0.329

328  80  92  0.283

1  Premonitoire.  The  meaning  is  obvious.  The  author  it  is  that  begs  the  reader's
indulgence  for  using  the  word. —  Translator.

r    50X  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

N,  ThaY  is  to  say,  the  proportion  of  successes  was  0.283,  supposing

mental  suggestion,  while  it  was  but  0.250  according  to  the  calculus  of

^jprobajejfllity,  and  0.240  according  to  comparative  experiment  without

{jyjsugg&non — a  difference  of  0.033  in  favor  of  the  hypothesis.

OC    Th^e  figures,  it  is  seen,  are  even  higher  than  those  obtained  by

o

^pRich^w;  but  the  number  of  my  experiments  being  much  smaller,  it  is

probarole  that  were  it  increased  the  differences  would  be  equalized.

in  another  series  of  experiments  with    another  person  (also  non-

ypnotizable,    but    very   nervous   and    easily   impressionable),    upon

guessing  Only  the  color  of  the  cards,  I  obtained  a  difference  still  more

marked  in  favor  of  suggestion,  thus  :

Without  mental  suggestion 0.42.

By  calculus  of  probability 0.50

With  mental  suggestion 0.60

A  surplus  of  3*0".  Mr.  Richet  thinks  that  experiments  on  the  color  of
a  card  are  inconclusive,  because  of  a  large  influence  of  chance,  which,,
with  the  probability  of  \,  must  efface  the  very  slight  influence  of  sug-
gestion. That  would  be  true  if  the  suggestive  influence  were  absolutely
the  same  in  both  cases.     But  I  do  not  think  it  is  so.

The  difference  between  red  and  black  being  clearer  and  simpler  than
the  difference  between  spade  and  club,  or  between  heart  and  diamond,
the  imagination  of  the  subject  ought  to  receive  more  readily  a  sug-
gestion of  the  former  than  of  the  latter.  Does  not  Mr.  Richet  himself
say  that,  with  a  smaller  chance,  -£%  for  example,  for  a  full  designation
of  the  card  "  the  conditions  of  suggestion  are  bad,  as  if  the  selecting  from
among  52  cards  were  too  large  a  matter  for  suggestion  to  act  clearly?/'
The  remark  is  very  just  ;  but  then  a  fortiori  suggestion  ought  to  act
still  more  clearly  when  there  is  a  question  merely  of  a  color.

From  all  his  experiments,  Mr.  Richet  infers  the  probability  of  the
following  propositions  :

1.  The  thought  of  an  individual  is  transmitted  without  the  help  of
external  gestures  to  the  mind  of  an  individual  placed  near  hi-m.

2.  This  transmission  takes  place  in  different  degrees  in  different  indi-
viduals ;  it  is  also  extremely  variable  in  the  same  person.

3.  This  transmission  is  usually  unconscious,  in  that  it  acts  rather  on
the  unconscious  intelligence  than  on  the  conscious  intelligence  of  the
individual  perceiving  and  of  the  individual  transmitting.

4.  In  healthy  adults  who  are  not  hypnotizable,  the  degree  of  probability
of  this  transmission  hardly  exceeds  -fe  (we  have  seen  that  under  excep-
tional circumstances  it  may  amount  to  T\).

5 .  The  general  probability  in  favor  of  suggestion  may  be  represented  by

The  personal  impression  that  results  from  all  these  experiments  is
as  follows  :  the  method  is  not  of  a  kind  to  produce  conviction  ;  but
if  mental  suggestion  is  a  fact,  this  method  has  rendered  a  valuable

PROBABLE  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

5i

service  to  the  cause  by  establishing  for  it  a  basis  of  probability,  a  real
ground  to  stand  on,  and  by  awakening  the  curiosity  of  investigators.

Were  it  not  for  Mr.  Richet's  work,  I  should  probably  never  have
reverted  to  this  unfruitful  study  and  its  manifold  illusions.  What
induced  me  to  persevere  was  the  following  passage  :

"All  my  experiments  (says  Mr.  Richet)  were  made  upon  non-
sensitive  persons,  as  my  friends  and  myself  ;  it  will  be  interesting  to
know  what  effect  they  have  on  persons  really  sensitive,  hypnotized,
hypnotizable,  hysterical,  nervous,  or  trained  by  long  practice  in  the
perception  of  suggestions.  Unfortunately  I  have  had  no  opportunity
to  make  such  research,  as  I  have  not  had  at  command  a  sensitive
subject."

As  one  has  only  to  provide  himself  with  a  hypnoscope  and  to  enter
a  company  of  a  score  of  persons,  in  order  to  find  a  good  subject,  I
undertook  a  series  of  experiments  for  the  purpose  of  verifying  those
made  by  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research,  of  London.  Here  are
the  results  of  my  first  seance  :

The  subject,  Mrs.  D.,  is  60  years  of  age,  hypnotizable.  (Hypno-
scopic  experiment:  heaviness,  paralysis,  analgesia.)  Chronic  articular
rheumatism,  very  strong  constitution,  very  robust,  remarkable  intelli-
gence, accustomed  to  literary  work,  a  good  deal  of  erudition,  internal
impressionability,  without  external  signs  ;  psychically  active  tempera-
ment, but  quiet ;  of  exceedingly  gentle  disposition.  Her  back  is  turned
toward  us.  Mrs.  P.  and  myself  think  of  an  object  while  we  touch  the
subject ;  the  latter  is  informed  that  the  object  is

A  Playing  Card:

OBJECT   THOUGI-

rr  of

OBJECT    GUESSED

I.

Six  of  spades.     (Prob.

=  &).

Six  of  black.

2.

Ten  of  spades.

Red,  not  black,  a  ten-spot.

3-

Knave  of  hearts.

Red,  a  king?     A  queen?

A   Color  :

4.

White.

White.

5-

Yellow.

Yellow.

6.

Black.

Black.

*

Any  Object :

7.

A  lamp.

A  book,  a  cigar,  paper.   Result -0.

8.

A  silk  hat.

Something  blue,  light.

9-

An  armchair.

A  sugar-bowl,  bureau,  a  piece   of
furniture.     Result=o.

10.

Salt.

A  taste  of  salt.

A  Letter  :

11.

Z.     (Prob.=A)<.

|    I.  R.  S.     Result=o.
A  Person  :

12.

Valentine.

I    Valentine.

13.

Mr.  O.  (myself.)

1    Mr.  D.,  Mr.  Z.     Result=o.

1  Sic.

But  as  the  number  of

letters  in  the  French  alphabet  is  23,  the  probability

would  seem  to  be  one  in  23,

not  one  in  34.

—  Translator.

52  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

A  Portrait  :

OBJECT  THOUGHT  OF  •  OBJECT  GUESSED

14    The  Bishop.     (Prob  =|).  |    It  is  the  Bishop.

A  Digit :

15.  8.  I     7,  5,  2,  8.     Result=o.

An  Impression  :

16.  Joyful.  J    Sad.     Result— o.

Any  Figure  :

17.  A  black  cross.  A  tree, crossed  branches.  Result=iO.

18.  A  long-bearded  old  man.  A  man,  bearded,  white  beard.

A  Photograph  :

19.  Of  a  boy.     (Prob. =4).  |     A  girl,  children.     Result=o.

A  Name  :

20.  Marie.  Marie.

21.  Adam.  Jean,  Gustave,  Charles.    Result=a.

A  Number  :

22.  Ten.  I     Six,  twelve,  nine,  ten.

Any  Object :

23.  A  book  bound  in  blue  satin.

24.  Gold  pencil  case  on  a  blue

ground.

25.  Ace   of   spades   on  a  black

ground.

A  Musical  Instrument :

26.  A  trumpet.  |    The  violin.      Result=o.

A  Digit :

27.  Three.  |     2,  5.      Result=o.

An  Object  in  the  Dining-room  :

28.  A  plate  with  figure  on  it.  j     A  plate  with  figure.

A  Taste  :

Violet  color,  pink.      Result=o.
Something    black   on    blue.      Re-

sult=o
Something  black,  blue,  a  card,  ace

of  clubs.

29.  Of  salt.

30.  Of  sugar.

31.  Of  strawberries.

Sour,  bitter.     Result=o.

Sweet.

Of  an  apple,  grapes,  strawberries.

The  subject  was  visibly  fatigued,  and  we  interrupted  the  experi-
ments.

I  was  much  surprised.  Of  31  experiments  at  least  13  were  entirely-
successful,  though  often  the  probability  was  exceedingly  small  ;  even
the  misses  in  some  cases  presented  evident  analogies.  And  hardly  12
out  of  the  whole  31  could  be  regarded  as  absolute  failures.  The  first
three,  for  example,  though  not  entirely  exact,  plainly  uphold  the
probability  of  suggestion.

One  doubt  alone  troubled  me.  I  have  already  explained  what  I
call  the  psychic  atmosphere.  All  the  objects  thought  of,  except  a  few
cards  drawn  at  random,  were  chosen   during  the  seance  by  myself  or

PROBABLE  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.  53

by  Mrs.  P.  Now,  it  well  might  be  that  we  were  all  three  quite  un-
consciously borne  along,  so  to  speak,  by  a  current  of  associations.
This  supposition  may  seem  improbable,  but  in  making  it  I  had  in
mind  a  prior  experiment  of  my  own  that  was  truly  astonishing.

There  were  five  or  six  of  us  staying  with  friends  in  the  country.
We  amused  ourselves  as  we  could  ;  among  other  things  by  play-
ing tricks  with  cards.  Then  we  passed  to  guessing.  Having
by  chance  twice  or  thrice  guessed  a  number  chosen  between  o
and  6,  and  several  cards  chosen  mentally,  I  thought  I  noticed
that  after  repeated  experiments  there  was  set  up  in  our  minds
a  mechanical  series  of  cards  or  of  numbers,  based  on  contiguity,
likeness,  or  contrast,  and  that'  this  gave  me  a  presentiment  of  the
card  or  number  to  be  selected  immediately.  I  had  only  to  give  the
rein  to  this  unconscious  and  unreasoned  conjecture  in  order  to  per-
ceive in  my  imagination  the  image  of  a  card  that  was  in  the  air,  so  to
speak.  I  was  almost  certain  that  now  it  was  the  turn  of,  say,  the
king  of  diamonds,  and  I  would  ask  my  neighbor  to  think  of  a  card.
He  would  think  of  the  king  of  diamonds.

It  was  no  suggestion  from  my  neighbor,  for  before  he  chose  his  card
I  had  made  up  my  mind  to  say  "  king  of  diamonds."  And  often  in
such  cases  it  happened  that  another  person  would  remark  :  "  Well,
that  is  curious  !  I  thought  of  the  same  card  !  "  Thus,  it  was  in  the
air.

Sometimes  I  have  been  able  to  discover  the  probable  mechanism
of  this  enchainment.  Thus,  28  was  chosen  next  after  47  probably  be-
cause 4X7  =  28.  Again,  if  among  the  numbers  between  1  and  9  one
chose  8,  that  is,  a  number  near  to  9,  another  person  would  choose  2  or
3,  to  be  farthest  away  from  the  former  ;  2  and  3  would  lead  to  the
thought  of  6  ;  then,  in  order  not  to  take  again  the  numbers  already
used,  the  choice  would  fall  upon  4  or  5,  associated  to  3  and  6,  which
were  pronounced  more  aloud  than  the  others,  and  so  on.  It  is  impos-
sible to  foresee  all  these  relations  between  numbers  :  if  they  chanced
to  agree  in  several  persons  at  once  they  constituted  the  psychic  atmos-
phere, playing  the  part  of  a  prompter.

Evidently  the  mechanism  of  these  guesses  seldom  suffices  to  explain
certain  unexpected  coincidences  ;  but  being  a  determinist  in  psychol-
ogy as  in  other  matters,  I  have  said  to  myself  :  I  am  ignorant  of  this
mechanism  ;  therefore  I  cannot  justify  the  general  hypothesis  by
proofs  ;  yet,  all  things  being  determined  by  an  enchainment  of  causes
and  effects,1  it  is  conceivable  that  an  omniscient  intelligence,  know-
ing all  the  impresses  of  sensations  in  our  brains,  all  the  connections
of  our  thoughts,  all  our  habitudes,  weaknesses,  and   other  qualities,

1  This  clause  furnishes  a  definition  of  the  term  "determinist:"  One  who  holds
that  all  things  are  determined  by  an  enchainment  of  causes  and  effects.  "  Determi-
nism "   contradicts   "freewill." — Translator.

54  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

might  easily  calculate  or  foresee  not  only  our  choice,  but  also  the
answers  of  the  subject.  And  as  it  is  certain  that  the  unconscious
of  somnambules  is  a  Grand  Master  in  occultism,  who  is  there  that
may  boast  himself  to  know  the  limits  of  its  power?  The  fact  that
my  subject  was  not  in  somnambulism  was  no  obstacle,  for  I  have  long
been  convinced  that  all  the  phenomena  of  somnambulism  may  pre-
sent themselves  isolatedly  and  momentarily  in  the  waking  state.

I  beg  the  reader  not  to  be  surprised  at  these  rather  conjectural
speculations.  In  dealing  with  a  phenomenon  so  controverted,  so  extra-
ordinary, when  after  long  years  of  research  one  sees  that  all  his
convictions,  acquired  theoretically  and  experimentally,  are  shaken,  one
defends  himself  as  best  he  can.

But  to  return  to  the  facts.     Here  are  three  experiments  in  favor  of
the  psychic-atmosphere  hypothesis,  hastily  made  upon  another  per-
son, not  hypnotizable :  „  „  ,  <
3V                                   A  Color:

OBJECT  THOUGHT  OF  OBJECT  GUESSED

32.  Red.  I  Pink.

A  Flower  :

33.  Lilac.  I  Lilac.

A  Person  Present  :

34.  Mr.  J.  I  Mrs.  D.

The  general  outcome  of  these  three  experiments  seems  quite  favor-
able to  the  theory  of  transmission.  But  let  us  consider  the  circum-
stances. The  subject  is  told  that  there  is  question  of  some  color,  and
he  guesses  it  only  approximatively  ;  the  color  was  red ;  it  becomes
pink.

The  subject  is  told  that  the  test  is  some  flower.  A  bunch  of  lilacs
was  on  the  table  ;  every  one  noticed  it,  and  it  was  uppermost  in  the
minds  of  all.  Then,  the  question  being  about  a  matter  a  little  more
remote,  with  the  probability  still  strong,  only  some  dozen  persons
being  present,  there  was  a  check.  Not  only  does  the  subject  not
guess  the  person,  but  he  names  a  woman  instead  of  a  man.  Conse-
quently, these  three  experiments  are  almost  valueless — and,  when  I
say  almost,  that  is  solely  because  of  a  certain  resemblance  between  red
and  pink  ;  but  the  thought  of  pink  may  have  been  called  up  by  a  purely
fortuitous  cause,  that  is  to  say,  one  having  nothing  to  do  with  sug-
gestion.

Let  us  now  come  back  to  our  first  subject.  Here  is  a  second  series
of  experiments,  made  with  greater  precaution,  care  being  taken  to
avoid  the  enchainment  of  associations  (May  2,  1885).

Any  Object:

OBJECT  THOUGHT  OF  OBJECT  GUESSED

35.   A  bust  of  Mr.  N.

Portrait     .     .     .     of  a  man
a  bust.

PROBABLE  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

55

36.

37-

Any  Object:

OBJECT   THOUGHT   OF  OBJECT    GUESSED

A  fan.  Something  round.      Result

A  key.  Something  made  of  lead

38.  A  hand  wearing  a  ring.

39.  Acid.

o.

bronze    .      .     .     it  is  of  iron.
Something  shining,  a  diamond    .    ,
a  finger-ring.

A  Taste  :
I    Sweet.

Result  -=  o.

40.

A  Square

41.

A  circle.

42.

M.

43-

D.

44.

J-

45-

B.

46.

0.

47-

Jan.

o.

A  Shape  :

Something  irregular.      Result
A  triangle     ...      a  circle.

Letter  :
M.
D.

J-

A,  X,  R,  B.

W,  A  ;  no,  it  is  O.

J     .  (continue  !)  Jan.

Third  series,  May  6,  1885.  Twenty-five  experiments  were  made,
notes  of  which,  unfortunately,  I  have  not  kept,  except  as  to  the  follow-
ing, which  surprised  me  most.  (The  subject  has  her  back  turned
toward  us,  holds  a  pencil,  and  writes  the  thought  that  comes  to  her.
We  touch  her  back  lightly  while  looking  on  letters  written  by  our-
selves).

OBJECT  THOUGHT  OF  OBJECT  GUESSED

4S.   Brabant.

49.

Paris.

50.

Telephone.

irth  Series,  V.

5i.

Z.

52.

B.

53-

T.        '

54-

N.

55-

P.

56

Y.

57-

E.

58.

Gustave.

59

Duch.

60.

Ba.

61.

No.

62.

44-

63-

2.

Bra.  .  .  (I  strive  mentally  to
aid  the  subject,  saying  noth-
ing.)    Brabant.

P.
T.

ans.
elephone.

L,  P,  K,  J.      Result  =-  o.

B.

S,  T,  F.

M,  N.

R,  Z,  A.     Result  «=  o.

V,  Y.

E.

F,  J,  Gabriel.      Result  ■—

E,  O.     Result  =  o.
B,  A.

F,  K,  O.     Result  =  o.

A  Number  :

6,  8,  12.
7>  5,  9.

Result

o.
o.

56  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

(I  endeavor  to  have   represented  in  the  subject's  mind  the  written
numbers,  not  their  sound.)
64.  3.

65-  7-
66.   8.

»,  3-

7.

8:  no,  o,  6

Thirteen  experiments  followed  with  fantastically  drawn  figures,
only  five  of  which  presented  a  general  likeness,  without  much  exacti-
tude.

A  Person  Represented  Mentally  :

67.  The  subject.

68.  Mr.  D.

Mr.  O.      No,  it  is  myself.
Mr.  D.

Any  Image  (or  View)  Whatever:

69.  We  imagine  a  crescent  moon,
Mrs.  P.  representing  it  to
herself  with  a  background
of  clouds  ;  T,  with  one  of
deep  blue.

I  see  the  clouds  flitting  ...  A
light  .  .  .  (with  a  look
of  satisfaction)  it  is  the  moon.

If  after  these  experiments  any  one  had  asked  whether  I  believed  in
thought-transference,  I  should  have  answered  affirmatively.  From
the  point  of  view  of  conscious,  scientific  reasoning,  one  must  have
surrendered  to  the  evidence.  Chance  could  not  have  produced  so
many  fortuitous  hits.  For  example,  if  we  look  only  at  the  experi-
ments with  letters,  leaving  out  of  account  the  whole  words  guessed,  of  20
experiments  15  succeeded,  whereas  probability  allows  only  one  success
in  24,  or  o  in  20 — zero  against  fifteen  !  To  hit  the  chance  guess  of
the  three-letter  combination  Jan,  would  have  required  25s  (=15,625)
experiments  without  suggestion,  while  with  suggestion  one  sufficed.

Thus,  from  the  objective  standpoint,  my  skepticism  might  well  sur-
render before  the  eloquence  of  the  facts.  But — and  here  is  the  oddity
of  the  thing — in  problems  of  this  kind  the  observer's  subjective
i?npression  is  sometimes  worth  more  than  a  purely  empiric  showing.
Evidently  the  observer  must  have  a  general  scientific  routine  and  a
special  acquaintance  with  the  phenomena  belonging  to  it ;  but  then  it
is  upon  his  instinctive  subjective  impression  that  I  should  most  rely.
He  may  give  me  all  the  details — and  it  is  impossible  for  him  to  give
all  the  details  of  conditions  and  circumstances — but  if  I  do  not  see
that  inwardly,  subjectively,  he  is  not  merely  astonished,  but  convinced,
conquered  by  the  facts  observed,  without  having  his  reason  upset,  as
may  unfortunately  happen — it  was  so  with  Zollner1 — I  would  give  no
particular  credence  to  his  revelations.  I  should  prefer  an  almost
entirely    defective    experiment,    but    accompanied   by    that    personal

1  Slade,  the  American  spiritist,  succeeded  in  making  the  German  mathematician
Zollner  believe  in  a  fourth  dimension  of  space,  by  showing  to  him  a  knot  produced
on  a  single  cord  after  the  two  ends  of  it  had  been  tied  together  and  sealed  with  wax
bearing  the  impression  of  Zollner's  seal  ! —  Translator.

PROBABLE  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.  57

impression  of  an  instructed  and  honest  man  which  is  expressed  in  the
cautious  yet  decisive  phrase  :  "There's  something  in  that."

Now,  this  personal  impression  was  mine  when  I  made  those  hurried
experiments  ;  but  the  thing  that  was  always  lacking  was  that  other
impression,  subjective  also,  but  more  decisive  :  "  Here  is  direct  trans-
ference of  thought."

Singularly  enough,  nearly  every  time  that  the  subject  was  going  to
guess  our  thoughts,  I  had  a  presentiment  that  it  would  be  so.  It
seemed  to  me  that,  despite  all  precautions,  and  though  we  were  all  in
perfectly  good  faith,  there  was  a  certain  trickery  on  the  part  of  our
unconsciouses,  and  that  they  were  fooling  us.  It  seemed  to  me  that
even  in  choosing  the  objects  hardest  to  guess,  I  was  astutely  making
the  choice  that  most  facilitated  success  ;  that  even  when  a  card  was
drawn  at  random,  I  substituted  another  for  it  under  some  insufficient
pretext,  even  forgetting  this  manoeuvre,  and  remaining  quite  at  rest
in  my  conscience,  while  my  partner  (aide)  nothing  suspected.

I  fear  I  shall  be  misunderstood.  I  am  speaking  of  a  phenomenon
almost  inappreciable,  of  operations  infinitesimal,  transient,  more  or
less  unconscious,  caused  by  the  psychic  atmosphere.  I  have  been
long  used  to  make  psychological  observations  ;  they  have  been  the
principal  occupation  of  my  life,  from  early  childhood  I  might  say,  for
since  my  fifteenth  year  I  have  been  taking  daily  notes  (some  of  them
published  in  my  native  language),  and  I  was  but  seventeen  when  I
wrote  my  first  dissertation  on  "  Methods  of  Psychological  Study,"
published  in  1869,  wherein  I  showed  (for  the  first  time,  I  believe)  how
the  phenomena  of  hypnotism  may  be  exploited  under  the  form  of  a
special  method  by  positive  theoretic  psychology.

Consequently  I  do  not  wish  to  be  suspected  of  any  sort  of  mysti-
cism, and  I  think  I  have  the  right  to  claim  for  myself  the  routine  that
is  necessary  for  making  exact  observations.  But  just  because  of  this
long  practice  I  have  reached  some  empiric  subtilties  very  difficult  to
express.  Psychology  has  throughout  for  me  an  aspect  widely  differ-
ent from  what  one  sees  in  the  best  works  on  our  science.  The
psychology  of  the  day  seems  to  me  gross  and  crude  in  view  of  the
subtilties  of  real  life  as  I  see  it.  The  theory  of  association  of  ideas,
for  example,  which  has  been  made,  and  with  reason,  for  the  nonce,  the
sole  ground  of  the  whole  psychology  of  phenomena,  is  for  me  only  a
partial  and  quite  inadequate  expression  of  the  mechanism  of  psychic
life.  It  is  but  a  rough  draft  of  a  delicate  mechanism.  It  may
suffice  for  the  needs  of  instruction  in  the  elements  of  psychology,  but
not  for  a  finished  science.  I  am  free  to  confess  that  with  the  associa-
tion theory  of  to-day  I  do  not  even  see  why  our  ideas  associate,  and
in  general  why  they  live,  circulate  and  produce  sensible  effects.  And
yet  I  am  a  determinist,  and  it  is  no  faculty,  no  obscure  force,  that  I
would  add  to  the  association  theory  to  make  it  true  to  fact  and  life.

S8  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

The  question  is  one  of  details,  but  of  details  that  stand  related  to  the
current  theory  of  association  as  vision  through  a  microscope  is  related
to  direct  vision.

For  explaining  the  larger  phenomena  of  psychic  life  this  association-
anatomy  is  well  enough  ;  the  thing  we  need  is  a  microscopic  histology
of  association  when  we  have  to  do  with  rare  phenomena,  i.  c,  with
phenomena  rarely  noticeable  and  rarely  noticed — for  that,  too,  is  a  point
of  my  personal  separatism  in  psychology,  to  wit,  that  rare  phenomena
are  such  only  because  7ue  are  rarely  capable  of  seeing  them.  On  the  other
hand,  we  should  be  less  ready  to  discern  an  enchainment  through
contiguity,  likeness,  or  contrast,  in  time  or  in  space,  were  we  to  see
things  through  a  psychological  microscope  which  should  oftentimes
distinguish  like  phenomena,  assimilate  contrasts  and  dislocate  con-
tiguities, interposing  a  number  of  intermediate  links  and  agencies.

Unfortunately,  when  it  comes  to  setting  forth  details  precisely,  two
things  are  lacking:  first,  clear  vision  of  these  details,  and  then,  even
when  they  are  seen  passably  well,  the  possibility  of  expressing  them
correctly.  Here  we  may  call  to  mind  the  vicious  circle  of  the  sophist
Gorgias.  Plainly  our  skepticism  is  not,  like  his,  nihilistic.  We  do  not
see  clearly  to-day,  we  shall  to-morrow,  and  no  doubt  we  shall  little
by  little  find  new  words  for  new  ideas.  In  the  meantime  it  is  better
to  stand  still  where  we  are  than  to  create  an  incomprehensible  lan-
guage and  to  talk  Volapuk  under  pretense  of  propagating  a  universal
science.  We  have  had  plenty  of  Volapiikian  psychologies  which,
albeit  they  were  created  by  Rants  and  Hegels,  no  longer  exist  in  the
estimation  of  exact  science.  All  this  notwithstanding,  the  Kants  and
Hegels  may  have  had  profound  ideas  that  will  be  understood,  better
than  by  their  authors,  a  few  centuries  hence.

I  have  often  mentioned  the  unconscious.  I  have  even  personified
it  a  little,  without  any  back-thought,1  however.  I  concede  to  German
psychology  the  great  merit  of  having  brought  to  light  that  absolutely
true  and  fundamentally  necessary  theory.  But  see  what  happened
when  men  set  about  defining  it  prematurely  ;  see  what  it  has  come  to
be  in  the  deft  and  reckless  hands  of  Von  Hartmann  ;  a  fantastic
romance  of  the  unconscious,  an  Edgar  A.  Poe  story,  not  even  as  near
the  facts  as  a  story  of  Jules  Verne's  !

Hence  it  is  that  I  choose  to  content  myself  with  a  few  hints  that  to
me  seem  clear,  instead  of  plunging  into  subtilties  that  I  do  not  myself
quite  understand.  Later,  when  we  come  to  certain  details  of  the
question,  we  shall  see  what  it  may  be  possible  to  add.

So,  then,  I  was  convinced  of  the  reality  of  the  facts  of  mental  sug-
gestion, but  not  of  suggestion  itself.  It  remained  to  formulate  the
theory  of  the  facts,  and  that  theory  appeared  to  me  far  removed  from

1  Sit  venia  verba.  It  is  meant  to  translate  arribre  J>ens/e~the  thought  (or  intent)
that  is  behind,  or  lies  back  of,  an  overt  act  or  speech. —  Translator.

PROBABLE  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.  59

the  theory  of  direct  action  of  mind  upon  mind,  such  as  Mr.  Richet
received.

Finally,  here  perhaps  were  two  or  even  more  different  processes  to
be  discovered.

First,  a  concordance  between  two  unconscious  mechanisms,  as  between
Leibnitz's  two  watches,  a  concordance  resting  on  a  sort  of  harmony
preestablished  through  the  mutual  interchange  of  the  ordinary  con-
scious sensations,  and  in  which  the  object  chosen  as  well  as  the  object
guessed  is  determined  independently  the  one  of  the  other,  but  by  one
self-same  unconscious  determinant  set  of  works.1

Then,  in  some  cases,  a  true  perception  of  thought  by  intermediation
of  external  signs  that  may  easily'escape  us,  seeing  that  so  perceptible
a  sign  as  the  tension  of  the  muscles  in  the  direction  of  the  object
thought  of  has  taken  so  long  to  be  discovered.  There  would  thus  be
an  exaltation  of  perception,  but  of  the  normal  perception  for  physiog-
nomic, pathognomic,  and  ideognomic  signs,  that  usually  enable  us  only
to  distinguish  joy  from  sadness,  quiet  enjoyment  from  intense  pleasure;
sympathy,  distrust,  irony,  or  sincerity,  in  the  touch  of  a  hand  or  in  the
tone  of  a  voice  ;  whereas  here,  in  virtue  of  an  exceptional  percepti-
bility, those  signs  would  enable  us  furthermore  to  divine  whether  one
is  thinking  of  yellow  or  of  blue,  of  a  round  figure  or  a  square.

Finally,  over  and  above  all  normal  perceptibility  there  is  perhaps
ground  to  suppose  a  transmission,  always  indirect?  of  vibrations  pro-
duced by  the  thought  itself,  and  capable  of  reconstructing  the
thought,  like  as  the  human  voice  produces  undulatory  telephone  cur-
rents that  can  reproduce  speech  at  another  like  station.

Henceforth  all  this  was  possible,  and  it  behooved  to  look  forward
to  an  unheard-of  complexity  of  phenomena.  Consequently  it  was
my  wish  to  simplify  at  least  the  conditions  of  experiment.  In  the
experiments  already  recited  this  was  impossible.  The  subject  had
always  to  be  notified  in  advance  that  the  experiment  was  to  be  made,
consequently  his  unconscious  was  put  on  its  guard.  The  subject
could  take  for  granted  that  we  would  avoid  repeating  the  same  experi-
ments, and  that  if  at  the  seance  before  we  thought  oi  blue  and  yellow,
it  would  now  be  the  turn  of  red  and  green.

We  had  to  circumscribe,  and  that  pretty  narrowly,  the  category  of
objects  to  be  chosen,  and  then  the  thought  of  the  subject  was  also
circumscribed  in  advance,  and  had  to  rummage  in  only  one  of  the
receptacles  of  memory,  there  to  concentrate  all  the  perspicacity  of  his
divining  power.

1  Rouage — The  works  of  a  watch,  the  "movement."

2  The  meaning  of  indirect  here  is  gathered  from  the  author's  illustration.  The
human  voice  is  one  thing  ;  the  undulatory  current  another.  The  result  in  a  receiving
telephone  is  the  human  voice  indirectly  transmitted  :  it  has  suffered  transformation
and  retransformation  in  the  passage.  The  case  may  be  the  same  when  thought  is
supposed  to  be  transmitted  from  one  brain'to  another. —  Translator.

60  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

Of  objects  belonging  to  the  same  category,  only  a  very  small
number  will  be  in  sight  and  capable  of  being  chosen  for  the  experi-
ment. Suppose  the  thing  to  be  thought  of  is  a  flower,  assuredly  one
will  not  choose  Scrophularia  nodosa,  nor  Contrayerva  officinalis,  which
one  would  find  it  difficult  to  bring  clearly  before  his  imagination  :  one
will  choose  a  rose,  a  lilac,  a  violet,  and  then  from  time  to  time  he  will
meet  with  success.  The  subject  will  divine  (that  is  the  word)  our
thought.  But  that  is  not  what  I  want.  I  want  a  fact  of  actual
thought-transference  wherein  shall  be  nothing  to  be  divined,  and
wherein  the  unconscious  may  calculate  as  it  will  without  prejudicing
the  precision  of  the  experiment.

What  I  want  is  that  a  subject  in  nowise  forewarned,  nor  expecting
anything,  neither  seeing  nor  hearing  anything,  shall  manifest  the
action  of  my  thought  by  some  reflex  action  visibly  connected  with  that
psychic  impulse.  I  shall  be  content  with  any  sign  however  slight,  but
it  must  be  a  sure  sign  and  a  constant,  and  it  must  be  one  that  cannot
be  referred  to  any  other  cause  but  my  mental  action.  That  is  what  I
want  ;  and  till  I  have  in  my  hands  a  fact  of  that  sort  I  shall  not  have
subjective  impression  of  the  reality  of  a  mental  action  ;  but  till  then  it
will  not  be  worth  while  to  make  a  special,  thorough  study  of  the
matter  and  to  brave  the  prejudices  of  the  scientific.

The  fitting  occasion  for  that  decisive  experiment  was  not  long  in
coming.

CHAPTER  III.

TRUE    MENTAL    SUGGESTION.

I  WAS  attending  a  lady  suffering  from  hysterepilepsy,  whose
ailment,  already  of  long  standing,  was  aggravated  by  an  attack
of  suicidal  mania.  Mrs.  M.,  27  years  old,  strong,  and  of  good  consti-
tution, has  the  look  of  perfect  health  (hypnoscopic  exp.  :  insensibility
and  almost  instantaneous  contracture  of  the  entire  arm).  Convulsive
seizures  of  the  major  hysteria  dating  from  childhood,  almost.  Heredi-
tary influences  very  strong.  For  some  time  past,  besides  these  princi-
pal symptoms,  at  sundry  periods,  attacks  of  mental  alienation,  with
congestion  of  the  anterior  lobes  and  anaemia  of  the  posterior  lobes  of
the  brain  ;  paralytic,  nervous,  fainting  fits,  and  epileptic  seizures  of
brief  duration.  Transient  contractures  and  amblyopy,  more  marked
on  the  left  side.  A  single  hysterogenic  point  beneath  the  left  clavicle.
A  delirogenic  point  on  the  right  occiput  corresponding  to  the  superior
occipital  fossa.  No  anaesthesis.  Pressure  on  the  ovaries  arrests  the
attack  for  a  moment.  Sensitive  to  tin,  but  also  to  other  metals  in
different  and  varying  degrees.     Temperament  active  and  sprightly,

TRUE  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.  61

combined  with  extreme  inner  moral  sensibility,  that  is  to  say,  without
external  signs.  Character  eminently  truthfui,  kindliness  very  marked,
disposition  to  self-sacrifice.  Intelligence  remarkable,  many  talents,
capacity  of  observation.  Momentary  lack  of  will-power,  painful
indecision,  but  afterward  exceptional  firmness.  The  least  moral
fatigue,  an  unexpected  impression  of  small  importance,  whether
pleasant  or  painful,  is  reflected  on  the  vasomotors,  though  slowly
and  imperceptibly,  and  brings  on  an  attack  or  a  nervous  fainting
fit.

One  day,  or  rather  one  night,  her  attack  having  passed  away
(including  the  delirium  phase)  the  patient  was  sleeping  quietly.
Awaking  suddenly  and  seeing  us  (a  woman  friend  and  me)  beside  her
bed,  she  begged  us  to  go  and  not  to  tire  ourselves  for  her  sake  to  no
purpose.  She  was  so  pressing  that  in  order  to  save  her  a  nervous
crisis  we  left  her.  I  went  downstairs  slowly  (she  lived  on  the  third
floor),  but  halted  several  times  and  listened,  being  haunted  by  a  pre-
sentiment of  mischief  (she  had  given  herself  several  wounds  a  few
days  before).  Reaching  the  courtyard  I  halted  once  again,  consider-
ing whether  I  should  leave  or  not.  Suddenly  the  window  was  opened
noisily,  and  I  saw  the  patient  lean  out  with  a  rapid  movement.  I
sprang  to  the  spot  whereon  she  would  fall,  and  mechanically,  without
attaching  any  importance  to  what  I  did,  I  concentrated  my  will  to
withstand  her  fall.  It  was  a  silly  thought,  and  I  was  but  imitating
the  action  of  billiard  players,  who,  foreseeing  a  cara?nbolage,  strive  to
stop  a  ball  by  gestures  and  speech.

Yet  the  patient,  already  leaning  out  over  the  window  sill,  stopped
and  drew  back  slowly  and  by  degrees.

The  performance  was  repeated  five  times  in  succession,  and  at  last
the  patient,  as  if  fatigued,  stood  motionless,  her  back  resting  against
the  frame  of  the  window,1  which  remained  open.

She  could  not  see  me,  for  I  was  in  shadow  and  night  was  falling.
At  that  moment  Miss  X.,  the  patient's  friend,  ran  in  and  seized  her  by
the  arms.  I  heard'  them  struggling  and  hastened  upstairs  to  help.  I
found  the  patient  in  a  fit  of  insanity.  She  did  not  recognize  us,
taking  us  for  robbers.  I  succeeded  in  releasing  her  grip  on  the
window  frame  only  by  pressure  on  the  ovaries,  which  made  her  fall
upon  her  knees.  Again  and  again  she  tried  to  bite  me  and  only  with
much  difficulty  was  I  able  to  put  her  again  in  bed.  Keeping  up  with
one  hand  the  pressure  on  the  ovaries,  I  brought  about  the  contracture
of  the  arms,  and  at  last  endormed  her.

Once  in  the  somnambulic  state,  her  first  words  were,  "  I  thank  vou
and  beg  pardon."  Then  she  told  me  that  she  had  wished  to  throw
herself  out  of  the  window,  but  that  whenever  she  attempted  it,  she
felt  herself  "  lifted  from  beneath."

1  The  "  French  "  style  of  window,*  hinged  on  the  side. —  Translator.

62  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

"  How  so  ?  "  I  asked.

"  I  do  not  know."

"  Did  you  suspect  I  was  there  ?  "

"  No  ;  it  was  just  because  I  thought  you  had  gone  away  that  I
wanted  to  carry  out  my  plan.  Yet  it  seemed  to  me  now  and  again
as  if  you  were  beside  me  or  at  my  back,  and  that  you  did  not  want
me  to  fall."

This  experiment — or  rather  accident — was,  of  course,  not  enough  to
prove  action  at  a  distance.  But  it  suggested  to  me  the  thought  of
studying  the  question  anew.  As  there  was  an  appearance  of  action,
it  was  a  very  easy  matter  to  test  it  experimentally.  But  in  order  to
have  the  conditions  just  what  they  ought  to  be,  I  breathed  not  a  word
to  any  one  about  what  I  purposed  to  do,  and  I  even  resolved  to  wait
a  few  days,  so  as  to  arrange  the  details  of  the  experiment.

I  had  been  in  the  habit  of  endorming  the  patient  every  other  day,
and  I  used  to  leave  her  in  profound  slumber  (aideic  state)  while  I
made  my  notes.  Two  months'  experience  gave  me  the  assurance  that
she  would  not  stir  till  I  should  approach  her  in  order  to  induce  som-
nambulism proper.  But  this  day,  after  taking  a  few  notes  and  with-
out changing  my  attitude  (I  was  several  yards  distant  from  the  patient,
outside  of  her  field  of  vision,  with  my  note-book  on  my  knee  and  my
head  supported  by  my  left  hand),  I  pretended  to  be  writing,  making
the  pen  scratch  as  it  had  been  doing,  but  inwardly  I  concentrated  my
thought  upon  an  order  I  gave  her  as  follows  : '

December  2.
1.   Lift  the  right  hand  !
I  watch  the  patient, looking  through

the  fingers  of  my  left  hand

on      which      my     forehead

rested.

1st  minute  :  no  action.

2d  minute  :  agitation  in  the  right

hand.
3d   minute  :    agitation    increases,

patient  frowns  and  raises  the

right  hand.

This  experiment,  I  confess,  moved  me  more  than  any  other.

2.  Get  up  and  come  hither  !

(I  lead  her  back  to  her  place  with-
out uttering  a  word.)

3.  Take  off  bracelet  from  left  arm

and  hand  it  to  me  !
I  touch  her  on  the  right  arm,  and
perhaps  give  it  a  slight  push
in  the  direction  of  her  left
arm,  while  I  concentrate  my
thought  upon  the  order
given.

Patient  frowns,  stirs,  rises  slowly
and  with  difficulty,  comes  to
me  with  hand  outstretched.

No  action.

She  puts  forth  her  left  hand,  rises,
and  goes  in  the  direction  of

Miss ,    then   toward   the

piano.    She  sits  down  exhaust-
ed. She  takes  off  her  bracelet.
(Seems  to  be  reflecting. )  Gives
it  to  me.
1  Most  of  these  experiments  were  communicated  to  the  Society  of  Physiological

Psychology,  January  25,    1886.     Some  of  them  have  been  published   in  the  Revue

P hilosophique ,  August,  1886.

TRUE  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

63

4.  Get  up,  draw  the  armchair  up
to  the  table,  sit  beside  us  !

I  check  her  hand  thus  astray.

5.   Hold  out  the  right  hand  !

Stay  seated  !

Give  the  left  hand  !

Give  the  left  hand  !
Not  that  ;    the  other  ! ;

She  frowns,  gets  up,  and  comes
toward  me.

"  I  have  yet  something  to  do."
Seeking    something  ;    touches  the
stool  and  displaces  a  glass  of
tea.

She  steps  back,  seizes  the  arm-
chair, pushes  it  toward  tlie
table  with  a  smile  of  satisfac-
tion, and  sits  down,  dropping
into  the  chair  through  fatigue.

' '  They  tell  me  to  carry,  and  do
not  tell  me  what.  Why  do
they  speak  so  indistinctly  ?  "

She  stirs.

Holds  the  right  hand  out.

Tries  to  rise.

She  settles  herself  again  in  the
chair.

Movement  of  left  hand,  but  she
does  not  hold  it  out.  Rises
and  goes  to  the  sofa.

Gives  the  right.

Gives  the  left  hand.

It  is  to  be  remarked  that  even  in  the  waking  state  the  patient
often  mistakes  one  side  for  the  other.

During  experiment  5  active  somnambulism  manifests  itself  ;  the  pa-
tient converses  with  us  in  a  playful  vein.  She  no  longer  obeys  the
orders.-    "  I  am  now  going  to  sleep,"  she  said.

She  slept.  During  the  sleep  there  were  some  traces  of  an  hysteric
attack.  At  length  she  seemed  to  awake.  "  There  is  a  tingling  in  my
head,"  said  she,  "that  will  not  let  me  sleep.  I  don't  want  to  sleep
any  longer.  Sit  by  me."  "  Are  you  still  in  somnambulism  ? "  I  asked.
"Yes."  (This  patient  was  able  to  note  each  phase  of  her  state  with
wonderful  precision — a  very  rare  circumstance,  indeed.  I  often  pre-
tended not  to  recognize  the  state  she  was  in,  so  that  she  herself  might
describe  it.)

"  And  if  you  go  to  sleep  in  that  state,  is  it  all  the  same  as  if  you
were  in  the  waking  state  ? "  "  Oh,  no  ;  for  now  the  legs  and  the  body
go  to  sleep  first,  and  then  the  head.  The  head,  too,  awakes  first,  so
that  I  can  easily  tell  whether  I  have  slept  well  or  not  ;  whereas  when
I  go  to  sleep  from  the  waking  state,  I  go  to  sleep  in  the  head  and  I
know  nothing  more.  Then,  too,  when  I  converse,  being  magnetized,
I  am  resting  all  the  same  ;  whereas  if  I  were  to  converse  in  the  waking
state  my  head  would  be  tired  and  drowsy."

1  All    these   orders   were   given   mentally  and   without    gesture,
spoken.

No  word  was

64  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

December  3.

Mrs.  M.  is  endormed  by  the  process  of  gazing,1  and  falls  into  a
very  profound  slumber  {paralytic  aideid).

6.   Answer  whether  you  hear  me?    |     No  action.

I  put  the  same  question  viva  voce.  She  does  not  hear.  A  moment
later  she  stirs  slightly.

"You  did  not  hear  me  just  now?"  I  asked.  "No!"  "Why?"
"  Because  my  sleep  was  too  deep."  "Will  there  be  an  attack  this
evening?"     "No!"

I  therefore  left  her  to  herself,  and  a  few  minutes  afterward  began
the  experiments  again.

7.   Give  me  your  right  hand  !
Give  me  your  hand  !
No  matter  which  hand.

Frowning.
No  result.
-  Gives  the  left.

If  at  this  moment  I  speak  to  her,  touching  her  at  the  same  time,,
she  replies  ;  if  I  speak  to  her  without  touching  her,  she  hears  only
unintelligible  sounds.

I  tell  her  that  I  am  obliged  to  be  absent  fifteen  minutes  ;  once  out-
side, I  try  to  call  her  mentally  :

8.   Come  hither  !  Frowning.

General  agitation  of  the  body.

Here  the  experiment  is  interrupted  by  a  singular  accident.  The
action  from  a  distance  produces  in  her  a  general  hyperesthesia,  and
in  that  state  she  "  feels  incommoded  by  something  on  her  right ;  "
"  an  unbearable  stench  horrifies  her  ;  "  "  an  imaginary  noise,  produced
by  the  irritation  and  congestion  of  the  brain,  prevents  her  hearing  "
me.

"  It  seemed  to  me,"  she  said,  "  that  I  must  get  up  and  walk  about  ;
but  that  horrible  atmosphere  was  suffocating  me.  That  thing  (cela)
prevented  me  ;  that  thing  does  not  love  you,  but  that  thing  is  ashamed
to  confess  it."

"What  is  it,  pray?"  "I  do  not  know;  but  deliver  me  from  that
thing  " — and  she  made  .gestures  of  repulsion  toward  the  right.  We
saw  nothing  out  of  the  common  in  that  direction.  At  last  I  noticed
that  there  was  on  the  flower  stand  a  new  plant,  and  I  removed  it.
"  Ah,  at  last  !  "  said  the  patient ;  "  thank  you  ;  I  was  near  having  a
paroxysm."

The  new  plant  had  been  brought  that  day  by  one  of  her  friends,  a
lady  for  whom,  in  the  normal  state,  she  had  a  strong  liking,  but  whom
in  the  somnambulic  state  she  could  not  endure  even  at  the  distance
of  several  yards.     This  I  knew  already,  having  witnessed  a  terrible

1  Par  le  regard.

TRUE  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.  65

paroxysm  caused  solely  by  the  presence  of  this  lady ;  but  it  nevei
occurred  to  me  to  suppose  that  an  object  that  had  belonged  to  her
would  have  the  same  influence.  First  I  thought  the  patient's  abhor-
rence of  the  plant  might  be  due  to  its  odor,  but  it  was  nearly  odorless.
Then  I  made  several  experiments  with  objects  coming  from  the  lady,
mixed  with  other  objects.  For  instance,  I  placed  upon  the  couch
beside  the  patient,  yet  at  some  distance,  a  roll  of  music  brought  by
this  same  lady.  Having  just  touched  it  lightly  with  her  hand  in
making  a  gesture,  she  drew  herself  away  from  it  quickly,  asking  who
it  was  that  was  treating  her  so  ill.  So  with  other  objects.  She  never
made  out  what  was  the  matter,  but  she  always  was  conscious  of  an
antipathic  influence.  Even  a  playing-card  coming  from  the  lady,  and
shuffled  with  several  others,  was  rejected  as  "  disagreeable."  I  must
add  that  the  young  lady  in  question  was  a  great  friend  of  Mrs.  M.,
and  was  jealous  of  the  influence  I  exercised  over  my  subject.

December  5.

(Our  patient,  on  awaking,  passes  momentarily  through  a  transient
state  of  monoideism,  and  then  she  has  always  a  sense  of  the  mental  state
of  the  persons  around  her.  She  will  say :  "  Why  have  you  greater
confidence  to-day?"  "Why  is  she  so  worried  (or  so  happy)  to-day?"
And  so  on.     But  once  fully  awake,  she  no  longer  has  this  sense.)

9.  An  experiment  in  the  state  of
geniat
/ism.1

genial,     active     somnambu-

No  action.

(Patient  is  half  awake  )
"  Where  is  she — Mary  ?  She  must
have  a  wearisome  task  to  per-
form. I  believe  she  is  think-
ing of  nothing,  for  I  have  no
feeling  of  her. "

Wishing  to  sit  back  of  the  table  I  came  near  falling,  the  chair  being
lower  than  I  thought.  The  patient  uttered  a  cry.  "What  is  the  mat-
ter?" I  asked.  "It  seemed  to  me,"  she  answered,  "as  though  some-
thing were  giving  way  beneath  me."

If  any  one  pinches  me  she  complains  of  it,  yet  she  does  not  know  it
is  I  that  suffer.  I  tell  her  that  I  want  to  put  her  a  few  questions.
"  Then  endorm  me  a  little  more,"  she  said  ;  so  I  make  a  few  passes  in
front  of  her  eyes.  At  this  moment  she  is  in  passive  somnambulism,  i.  c.,
she  answers  easily  and  volubly  every  question  put  by  me  (and  by  me
alone),  but  does  not  of  her  own  accord  say  anything.

"Can  you  tell  me,"  I  ask,  "in  what  degree  of  sleep  you  undergo
the  action  of  my  thoughts  ?  "

"When  the  members  sleep  in   very  deep   slumber,"  (each   part  of

1  So7iina??ibulisme  actif  gai.  In  the  original  this  exp.  is  numbered  8,  and  the
"words  of  the  subject  are  given  in  the  text,  not  in  two  columns,  like  the  others.  The
author  forgot  to  state  the  order  given  to  the  subject. —  Translator.

66  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

her  body  can  be  put  to  sleep  and  awakened  separately),  "  and  when  I
cannot  think  by  myself."

"But  if,  then,  I  order  you  to  rise,  you  will  not  be  able  to  do  so  ?"
"Alone,  no  ;  but  if  you  will  it  strongly  something  will  lift  me."
"  Do  you  know  beforehand  what  I  require  of  you  ? "
"No,  but  it  gives  me  an  impulsion  ;  and  I  prefer  you  to  divide  your
thought.     I  cannot  take  it  in  all  at  once.     I  do  not  understand  the
words,  and  I  believe  that  you  might  think  in  any  language  whatever ;
I  feel  only  an  impulsion  that  comes  upon  me  and  at  last  controls  me."
(Here  I  gave  some  explanations  to  Marie.)     I  now  asked  :  "  Did  you
hear  what  I  said  ? "

"  I  heard  you  speaking,  but  understood  nothing,  for  you  had  not
the  intention  to  be  understood  by  me."

"  If  I  do  not  address  my  speech  to  you,  what  do  you  do  mentally  ?
Do  you  think  of  anything  ?  "

"When  I  am  in  light  sleep  as  now,  I  can  think  well  if  you  are  near
me  j  but  if  you  withdraw  there  is  a  veering  in  my  head1  as  though
you  were  to  leave  me  in  a  dark  room."

"And  if  I  were  to  put  you  in  a  deeper  sleep  ? "

"  In  that  case  I  should  know  nothing,  and  were  you  to  leave  me,  I
should  remain  just  so,  not  suffering  anything."

"  In  what  state,  then,  in  your  opinion,  is  thought-action  easiest  ?  "
"For  that  the  sleep  must  be  very  deep,  but  I  must  hear  you  all  the  same.
In  fact,  I  hear  you  always,  or  at  least  I  think  I  do  (plainly  the  som-
nambule  could  not  know  whether  she  heard  me  in  the  state  of  abso-
lute aideism)  ;  still,  sometimes  I  hear  only  detached  words;  for  ex-
ample, you  put  me  the  question,  '  Do  you  hear  me  at  this  moment  ? '
and  I  hear  only  '  hear  '  and  '  moment ; '  or  again,  I  hear  all  the  words,
but  each  word  isolated,  so  that  when  you  are  at  the  end  of  a  phrase  /
have  forgotten  the  beginning  ;  the  first  words  are  gone  from  me  (mon-
oideism).  Sometimes,  too,  I  hear  you  and  understand  you  well,  but
I  have  not  the  strength  to  answer."

"  And  in  the  state  you  are  in  at  this  moment  could  you  receive  my
thought  ?  "  "  No,"  she  said.  I  gave  her,  mentally,  the  order  "  Awake  !  "
No  result.  But  some  minutes  later  she  said  of  her  own  accord  :
"  Awaken  me  ;  "  and  then- 1  was  able  to  awaken  her  from  a  distance.
(A  simple  yea  never  sufficed  to  awaken  her.)

December  7.

The  patient  is  in  the  aideic  state  and  partly  tetanized — arms  in  con-
tracture, the  legs  a  little  stiff.

10.  Rise,  go  to  the  piano,  take  a
box  of  matches,  bring  it  to
me,  light  a  match,  go  back
to  your  place  !

She  rises  with  difficulty.

Comes  near  me.

1  77  se  fait  un  revirement  dans  ma  tete.

TRUE  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

67

11,

Go  to  the  piano !

Come  back  !
Still  farther !
I  stop  her  with  my  hand.

Lower  !

Lower  !

Take  the  match-box !

Take  the  match-box !

Come  to  me  !

Light  !

Light !

Light !

Go  back  to  your  place  !

Bring  the   right   hand  to  my

lips.
Raise  it  !
Raise  it  !
Give  it  to  be  kissed  !

Not  that  !  To  my  mouth  !

To  the  lips  !

Goes   to   the    piano,    but     passes

beyond.
Turns  back.
Goes  toward  the  door.
Returns  to  the  piano.
Seeks  too  high.
No  result.
Lowers  her  hand.
Touches  the  box,  then  retreats.
Touches  it  again,  and  takes  it.
Comes  to  me.

Wants  to  pass  the  match-box  to  me.
Takes  out  a  match.
Lights  it.

Returns  to  her  place.
Her  right  hand  stirs.

No  result.

Raises  the  hand.

Brings  the  right  hand  to  her  face ;

removes  her  cravat.
Brings    her    right  hand    near  my

head.
Brings  it  to  my  lips.

December  9.
The  patient  is  sleeping  well ;  aideic  state,  with  tendency  to  con-
tractures.

12.  Lie  on  the  right  side.

I  suppressed  the  contracture
by  means  of  a  light  mas-
sage. I  take  her  hand,  and,
at  a  given  moment,  try
mentally  to

Produce  contracture  in  the  left

13.

14.

No  result.  She  rises  and  stops  ;  her
whole  body  contractured,  perhaps
under  the  influence  of  my  gaze,
which  was  fixed  intently  upon  her.

arm.
Lie  down  !

The   left     arm     almost    instantly

becomes  stiff.
No  action.

At  this  moment  there  is  a  state  of  hyperacusia  :  the  slightest  noise
irritates  her  ;  then  she  falls  again  into  a  state  of  general  immobility.

Then  suddenly  :  "  I  do  not  hear  your  thoughts  well,  because  either
I  sleep  too  soundly  or  not  deeply  enough."

Opening  her  left  eye  produces  catalepsy  in  the  right  arm,  then  in
both  arms.     Opening  the  right  eye  produces  no  result  at  all.

15.  Ordered  to  scratch  her  cheeks.  |    No  action.

At  this  moment  a  flaming  match  held  before  one  of  her  eyes,  opened
for  the  purpose,  produces  no  re'fiex  action.     Even  the  contraction  of

68  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

the  pupil  is  not  as  great  as  usual,  though  but  a  moment  before  the
contraction  was  nearly  normal,  and  the  patient  said  she  saw  "  a  little
brightness."  Now  she  says  she  sees  nothing.  I  awaken  her  ;  she
seems  to  be  pretty  well,  but  little  by  little  a  paroxysm  comes  on.  I
stop  it  by  magnetizing  her  anew.

December  n.

(Experiments  made  in  presence  of  Mr.  Sosnowski,  engineer.)
The  patient   doing  well.     I  put  her  to  sleep  in  two  minutes,  and
show  the  three  principal  states,  viz.:

i.  A'ideia  (without  thought,  very  deep  sleep).

2.  Monoideia  (one  thought  alone  possible).

3.  Polyideia  (somnambulism  properly  so-called).

Then  by  means  of  a  few  passes  in  front  of  her  eyes,  I  deepen  the
sleep  to  the  transition  degree  betwixt  aideia  and  monoideism.  She
now  hears  me  even  without  touch,  but  she  is  totally  paralyzed  and
insensible.

16.  Come  to  me  !  She  rises  and  comes  straight  to  me.
I  change  position  and  hide  as  far

away  as  possible.

17.  Shake  hands  with  Mr.  S.!
(The  experiment  was  proposed  by

Mr.  S.)

At  this  moment  the  opening  of  her  eyes  did  not  produce  catalepsy.
The  touch  of  Mr.  S.,  as  of  every  stranger,  is  highly  disagreeable  to
her.     She  will  not  allow  them  even  to  come  within  two  feet  of  her.

December  18.

18.  An  experiment  in  the  state  of      No  action.

active    somnambulism,    be-       A  few  minutes  later  the  paroxysm
fore  the  paroxysm.  comes.     Then  I  put  her  into

deep  sleep  for  the  whole  night.

She  awoke  quite  well  the  next  day.

December  27.

In  endorming  the  patient  I  prolong  the  passes  beyond  the  usual  timey
for  without  the  passes  she  fell  asleep  with  difficulty.  The  sleep
becomes  very  deep.  She  no  longer  hears  me  at  all.  The  pulse  is
weak  and  uneven,  pulsations  80.  The  respiration  is  short  and  inter-
mittent.    I  quiet  her  by  laying  my  hand  upon  the  pit  of  the  stomach.

She   extends    the  right  hand  and
gives  it  to  Mr.  S.

19.  The  subject  is  to  go  to  the
table,  take  a  cake  and  give
it  to  me.  (Seeing  that  the
sleep  is  too  deep,  I  "  awak-
en "  her  arms  and  ears.
She  hears1  me  without  my
touching  her.)

No  result.

She  rises.
Comes  to  me.

1  "

Hears  "  his  thoughts. —  Translator.

TRUE  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.  69

I  stop  her.

Extend  the  arm  !

II  (C  II

Lower  !

Stands  hesitating  in  the  middle  of

the  room.
Approaches  the  table.
No  action.

She  extends  the  arm.
She  gropes  on  one  side.
She  touches  the  cake  and  starts.
She  takes  it  and  gives  it  to  me.

Take  it  and  give  it  to  me  !

She  is  evidently  fatigued  ;  her  eyelids  droop.  "Why,"  I  asked  her,
■"did  you  take  the  cake  and  give  it  to  me  ? "

"Because  all  the  other  objects  were  strange,  while  the  cake  seemed
to  me  well  known.  But  I  did.  not  know  it  was  a  cake.  I  knew  only
that  it  was  something  less  repellant  than  the  strange  objects.  I  was
not  sufficiently  asleep  (active  somnambulism.)  My  ears  should  not  be
awakened."

A  few  minutes  later  an  experience  was  had,  all  the  more  curious
because  unexpected.  I  was  absorbed  in  thinking  of  a  matter  of  per-
sonal concern  that  troubled  me  the  whole  day,  and  despite  its  inti-
mate nature  I  must  make  it  known  here  in  order  that  the  reader  may
understand  the  occurrence.

The  case  of  Mrs.  M.  taking  up  all  my  time,  I  neglected  several
affairs,  so  that  I  found  myself  greatly  straitened  for  money.  My
attendance  on  the  patient  was  wholly  gratuitous  and  I  did  not  wish
that  she  should  have  any  suspicion  of  my  embarrassment.  As  I
could  not  leave  her  because  of  the  seriousness  of  her  condition  (she
was  constantly  subject  to  fits  of  suicidal  mania)  my  thoughts  were
ever  returning  to  the  question  of  finance.

I  chatted  with  the  patient  pleasantly,  but  perhaps  my  voice  betrayed
my  unrest,  and  I  saw  that  she  divined  what  was  in  my  mind.  She
halted  in  the  conversation  and  became  pensive.  From  long-continued
observation  I  too  was  able  to  guess  the  thoughts  that  occupied  her
mind.  After  reflection  she  said  to  herself  :  "  He  is  in  trouble  ;  he
must  be  helped  ;  but  if  I  am  awakened  I  shall  forget  all.  What  shall
I  do  ? "

She  reflected' on  the  problem  and  hit  upon  a  plan.  She  took  off  a
finger  ring,  as  was  her  custom  whenever  she  desired  to  remember  any-
thing, and  her  face  showed  a  strong  resolution  not  to  forget  the  mean-
ing of  that  act.

"  You  must  not  think  about  that,"  I  said.

"  If  I  want  to  think  of  it,  you  will  not  hinder  me  " — and  she  made
pretense  of  not  caring  about  the  matter,  in  order  that  I  might  not
prevent.

Some  minutes  later  I  mentally  gave  her  the  order  to  forget  the  pro-
ject.    That  instant  she  suddenly  withdrew  her  hand.

"Do  not  touch  me,"  she  said,. "for  I  feel  my  thought  is  leaving
me."

7o

MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

"  It  will  leave  you  anyhow,''  I  said,  and  made  a  few  passes  to  make
her  sleep  deeper.

"  Do  not  put  that  out  of  my  head  !  Oh  !  you  have  no  pity.  What
was  I  thinking  of  just  now  ?  I  wished  to  remember  something.  I
have  quite  lost  it."  A  few  minutes  later  I  noticed  on  her  counte-
nance tokens  of  renewed  mental  action.  The  sleep  was  become  less
deep  ;  the  thought  had  come  back  to  her,  and  again  she  strove  to
evade  my  influence,  requesting  me  to  wake  her  as  slowly  as  possible
"■  for  fear  of  a  paroxysm."  I  awakened  her  very  gently,  suggesting
cheerful  thoughts  on  her  coming  out  of  sleep.  Once  awake  she  be-
came pensive  and  put  her  hand  to  her  forehead.

"It  seems  to  me,"  she  said,  "that  there  is  something  I  have  to  re-
member, but  I  don't  know  what."  She  examined  the  ring  again  and
again.     "  No,  I  do  not  remember  anything."

She  was  cheerful  and  talked  freely  with  us.

Here  are  two  more  experiments  in  the  waking  state.

20.  What  is  it  I  want  this  moment  ?

21.  And  now  ?    (My  wish  was  that
she  might  take  a  cake.)

It  is  true,  you  want  something.  She
looks  round  about  as  if  seek-
ing something.  Then  peering
into  my  eyes,  says  ;  ' '  You
want  a  little  wine  for  tea."
Correct.

No  ;  I  know  nothing  any  more  ;  I
feel  nothing.

December  28.

Endormed  in  the  morning,  she  recalls  her  memory  of  yesterday,  and
tries  once  again  to  fix  it  in  her  mind.  She  finds  a  new  means  of  doing
this.  Suddenly  she  uttered  an  exclamation — a  phrase  that  could  not
be  understood  by  us,  but  which,  when  recalled  at  waking,  would  call
up  in  her  mind  the  plan  contrived  the  evening  before.  Then,  to  guard
against  an  influence,  she  stops  her  ears  and  begins  to  mutter  so  as  not
to  hear  me.

22.  I  give  her  mentally  the  order  to  forget.  She  thinks  she  has
won  and  asks  to  be  awakened  slowly.  I  awaken  her.  The  mnemo-
technic  phrase  is  repeated  to  her.  "  What  does  it  mean  ? "  I  asked.
"  I  do  not  understand  it  all,"  she  replied  ;  and  she  thought  no  more
about  it.  In  the  evening  she  had  a  slight  attack  of  delirium.  She
had  an  hallucination  that  she  was  a  dead  person.  The  attack  ended
in  a  general  contracture  :  this  I  suppressed.  She  then  fell  back  upon
the  cushions  and  remained  motionless.

23.  Get  up  and  come  to  me  !

I     She  stirs  a  little.     Result=o.

At  this  moment  she  was  in  very  profound  sleep  (paralytic  aideia).
She  does  not  hear  me  unless  I  touch  her.

TRUE  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

n

She  hears  the  "  noise"  of  my  voice,
but  does  not  understand.

Same  imperfect  result.  I  cannot
make  myself  understood.  At
last,  after  several  minutes,  she
hears  me  clearly.

24.  I  want  you  to  hear  me  !

25.  Ditto.  I  excite  the  ears  a  little
by  movements  of  the  fingers,
which  usually  produce  hy-
peracusia.

26.  I  now  purposed  to  make  her
hear  the  voice  of  Miss  *  *  *,
which  she  does  not  hear  of
her  own  accord.  (Puyse-
gur's  experiment.)  Result  =  o.

I  touch  the  hand  of  Miss  *  **      She  hears  the  voice  like  a  whisper
while  she  is  speaking.  or  rather  as  pretty  loud  sounds,

but  not  understandable.  She
hears  the  voice  without  my
touching  Miss  *  *  *.  Again
I  touch  Miss  *  *  *,  but  the
patient  does  not  hear  the
words  spoken.

These  experiments  were   probably  spoiled   by  the  patient's  incon-
stant and  pathological  state.     After  some  minutes  :

27.  Give  the  other  hand  !
holding  the  left).

(I  was

28.  Ask  what  I  want !   (This  with-
out touching.)
What  is  it  ?  What  do  you  wish
to  say  ?     (Aloud.)

29.  Open  your  eyes  and  awake

The  right  hand  stirs.  (It  was  in
contracture.)

She  raises  it  a  little.

She  stretches  her  right  hand  toward
me  with  much  difficulty,  "  for
it  is  stiff."  She  gives  it  to
me,  then  falls  back  on  the  pil-
low very  much  fatigued.

Result  =  o.

Something  urged  me  to  put  a  ques-
tion— I  don't  know  what — I
have  forgotten.  Things  are
all  mixed  in  my  head.

Result  =  o.

She  moves  her  head  to  right  and
left,  then  the  right  arm,  but
does  not  awake.

At  this  moment  she  was  absorbed  by  a  somnambulic  reverie,  which
reduced  the  sensibility.  I  tried  to  awaken  her  by  spoken  order,  but
the  result  was  only  a  fatiguing  drowsiness,  and  after  several  minutes
I  was  obliged  to  have  recourse  to  passes.

Dece?nber  31.

The  patient  is  feeling  well.  I  produce  easily  whatever  states  I
wish,  and  halt  at  a  phase  intermediate  between  lethargy  and  monoide-
ism.  She  hears  me,  but  me  only,  and  she  cannot  answer  save  by
signs  or  by  detached  words.

72

MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

30.   Get  up,  go  to  your  brother,
and  kiss  him  !

Why  do  you  start  ?

vShe  gets  up.

Moves  toward  me,  then  goes  back

toward  her  brother.
Stops  before  him,  hesitating,  goes

slowly  up  to  him  and   kisses

him  on  the    forehead  with  a

start.
Because  it  is  something  strange.

(She  loves  her  brother  dearly.)

There  was  a  serious  paroxysm  that  evening ;  she  gave  herself
several  cuts  on  the  temple  with  a  knife.  I  came  in  time  to  prevent
suicide,  and  endormed  her  with  much  difficulty.  She  did  not  recog-
nize me.  She  begged  my  pardon  in  somnambulism,  at  the  same  time
complaining  that  the  knife  was  not  sharp  enough.

The  normal  state  did  not  return  till  after  two  hours  of  sleep.  The
hysterepileptic  seizures  do  not  recur  any  more,  but  the  paroxysms  of
mental  alienation  and  the  fainting-fits  are  still  frequent.

January  6.

The  patient  was  lying  on  the  couch  and  heard  nothing.  I  went
out  noiselessly  to  make  an  experiment  at  a  distance.

31.  Get  up  and    be    seated  till   I
come  back  !

She  frowns,  her  respiration  grows
rapid,  but  she  does  not  move.

The  experiment  had  lasted  hardly  a  minute  when  it  was  inter-
rupted. She  was  not  very  well,  so  I  gave  up  the  experiment  in
order  to  attend  to  the  patient.

January  10.

I  endormed  the  patient  by  passes  at  a  distance,   that  is,  without
touching  her.     Then  I  try  to

32.   Produce  deep  natural  sleep  in
artificial  somnambulism.

Some  seconds  after  the  beginning
of  the  mental  action,  I  hear
snoring,  the  lips  open  and  so
remain.

A  few  minutes  after,  this  state  ceases.     I  begin  anew.

33.   (As  above.)

Open  your  mouth !
Close  your  mouth !

She  slept  well  the  whole  night.

Same  signs,  minus  the  opening  of

the  mouth.
She  opens  her  mouth  and  sleeps  ;

respiration  rapid.
No  action,  probably  because  her

sleep  was  so  deep

TRUE  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.  73

January  1 1 .
State  of  aideic  lethargy,  with  tendency  to  contractures.

35.  Extend  the  right  arm.  Right  arm  stirs.

Same    phenomenon     seven    times

consecutively.
Slight  movement  of  left  arm.
She  rises  partly.
Falls  back.
Extends  the  right  arm.

At  this  moment  she  hears  me,  but  finds  difficulty  in  answering  me.

She  recognizes  an  object  belonging  to  me  among  four  like  objects,
pointing  it  out  as  "  best  known."  (She  sees  it  now  for  the  first  time,
but  so  she  always  speaks  of  what  belongs  to  me,  what  I  have  touched,
or  concentrated  my  thought  upon.)  She  rejected  one  object  among
five  that  were  alike — the  object  rejected  belonged  to  Miss  X.,  whose
presence  is  to  her  insupportable.  Three  different  fingers  touch  her,
she  recognizes  mine  ;  and  so  on.  She  asks  for  a  drink,  and  some  one
puts  a  glass  of  water  to  her  lips  ;  but  she  notices  nothing  and  keeps
asking  for  a  drink.  If  I  hold  the  glass  she  recognizes  it  at  once,  and
drinks  with  pleasure.     (This  phenomenon  is  of  daily  occurrence.)

January  14.

Mrs.  M.  falls  asleep  with  difficulty,  but  her  sleep  is  exceedingly
deep.  Even  after  half-an-hour  she  does  not  hear  me.  There  is  no
contracture.  The  head  is  not  very  hot.  The  members  are  not  cold.
The  pulse  is  pretty  regular,  80  pulsations.  From  time  to  time  some
slight  tremor  of  the  fingers.  The  nervomuscular  superexcitability
does  not  exist.  The  members  retain  the  posture  given  them.  Conse-
quently there  is  a  state  of  cataleptic  aideia.

36.  I  wish  you  to  hear  me.  No  action.     A  minute  later  seve-

ral fainting  spells.

Because  of  the  pathological  state,  no  conclusion  is  to  be  drawn
from  this  check  in  the  state  of  cataleptic  aideia.  Little  by  little  she
passes  of  her  own  accord  into  the  somnambulic  delirium.  An  hour
later,  acting  more  powerfully,  I  brought  about  a  calm  somnambulism.

37.  Sleep  well  the  whole  night !  She  does  sleep  well  the  whole  night.

She  awakes  quite  well,  barring  an  amblyopy  that  soon  passed
away.

January  18.

The  improvement  in  Mrs.  M.'s  health  permits  me  to  make  a  few
new  experiments.  I  endorm  her  as  usual.  Then  I  endormed  her
brother  also,  and  he  remained  motionless  in  an  armchair  in  the  mid-
dle of  the  room.  He  was  in  a  state  of  mild  paralytic  aideia,  easily
effaced,  but  from  which  he  could  riot  come  out  by  himself.     Mrs.  M.

74

MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

lay  on  the  couch  at  the  lower  end  of  the  room,  in  passive  somnam-
bulism. By  means  of  a  few  passes  I  put  her  into  a  deeper  sleep — a
little  too  deep  even — and  I  withdraw  to  begin  the  experiments.

38.  I  order  her  mentally  to    kneel
in  the  middle  of  the  room.

I  take  hold  of  her  hand.

Kneel  !

Result  =  o.

She  stirs.  (Afterward  she  said  that
she  was  sleeping  very  well,
when  something  awakened
her.)

She  gets  up  and  walks  toward  the
middle  of  the  room,  where  she
encounters  her  brother.  This
time  she  does  not  start  at  all;
on  the  contrary,  she  feels  of
him  with  a  certain  satisfaction
and  a  little  astonishment.

Then  she  goes  back  to  the  couch
and  sits  down.

After  two  minutes  of  hesitation  she
kneels.

She  told  us  afterward  that  it  was  her  brother  that  had  put  her  "off
the  scent."  "  I  knew  not  what  to  do,"  she  said  ;  "I  sensed  you  here
and  there.  That  confused  me.  There  was  'another  you' in  the
middle  of  the  chamber."

"  '  Another  me  ? '     How  is  that  ? "

"  Something  that  was  you.     I  don't  know.     But  that  confused  me."

January  24.
She  was  put  to  sleep  in  the  armchair  (aideia,  then  monoideism).

39.  Ordered  to  blow  out  a  lighted

wax  candle  on  the  piano.

She  stands  so  near  to  the  candle
that  I  blow  it  out  myself,
lest  her  gown  take  fire.

Give  me  the  candle  '

40.  Give  me  your  left  hand  !
(I  held  her  right.)

41.  Come  to  me.

(This  experiment  was  per-
formed with  many  precau-
tions ;  the  somnambule  was
not  aware  that  I  had  retired
and  was  acting,  at  a  distance
of  several  yards,  from  the
rear  end  of  the  hallway.)

She  rises.

Comes  toward  me,  then  goes
toward  the  piano.

Touches  the  music  as  she  gropes.

Removes  the  candlestick.

Takes  the  candle  out  of  the  can-
dlestick and  brings  it  to  me.

Raises  the  left  hand  and  gives  it
to  me.

Frowns.

She  rises.

Extends  the  right  arm,  advances,
opens  the  door,  and  goes
straight  into  the  hallway,
where  I  hasten  to  meet  her.

She  showed  pleasure  in  encounter-
ing my  hand,  then  she  returned
slowly  to  the  drawing-room.

That  same  evening  I  made  two  experiments  more,  to  test  my  per-
sonal magnetic  action.

TRUE  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.  75

As  I  have  already  said,  whenever  the  patient  touched  a  "strange"
object  or  person,  i.  e.,  outside  of  my  influence,  there  was  a  start  and
an  instinctive  repulsion.  This  I  wished  to  verify.  I  requested  her
brother  to  take,  unnoticed  by  her,  a  seat  not  far  from  her,  a  little
behind  where  she  was.  Then,  by  exerting  an  attractive  action  upon
her  arm,  I  so  guided  her  that  she  by  chance  touched  th»  arm  of  her
brother.  There  was  a  shudder  of  repulsion,  and  a  repetition  of  the
experiment  gave  the  same  result.  Then  I  endormed  the  brother,
unknown  to  the  subject,  where  he  sat,  and  began  the  attraction  again.'
She  was  obliged  to  touch  her  brother  several  times,  but  no  more  repul-
sion was  shown.

Another  comparative  experiment  was  made  during  normal  sleep.
Three  hands,  of  three  different  persons,  were  brought  within  a  few
inches  of  her  head.  After  a  minute  she  became  slightly  agitated,
raised  her  hand  above  her  head,  as  feeling  for  something,  pushed
away  the  other  two  hands,  and  drew  mine  to  her.  Almost  immediately
the  natural  sleep  was  transformed  into  somnambulism.  Not  knowing
that  I  was  there,  she  was  astonished  to  see  me  near  her

E'ebruary  4.

On  awaking  she  showed,  as  usual,  her  sensibility  with  regard  to  the

psychic  state  of  those  present.     "  I  am  very  angry  at  Marie,"  she  said.

"Why  so  ?"     "  Because  all  the  time  she  has  been  trying  to  keep  me,

and  it  is  absolutely  necessary  for  me  to  go."     (That  was  exactly  so.)

February  5.

The  hysterogenic  point  beneath  the  left  clavicle  no  longer  exists.
But  she  does  not  yet  feel  the  warmth  of  my  hand  at  the  back  of  *-he
head  (delirogenic  point).  In  somnambulism,  her  sensibility  is  already
normal.  Magnetization  checks  the  beginning  of  a  paroxysm  of
delirium.  Aideia,  82  pulsations.  After  thirty  minutes  of  this  state
the  head  grows  cooler.  A  few  minutes  later  passive  somnambulism
appears,  and  then  active  somnambulism.  Then  she  asks  me  to
awaken  "her  whole  body  except  the  front  of  the  head."  In  this
state  she  manifests  a  very  high  degree  of  sensibility.  She  notices
everything,  but  feels  a  difficulty  in  reflecting.  If  one  pinch  jne,  or  strike
me,  it  hurts  her.  She  describes  perfectly  my  mental  state,  or  rather
my  sensations.  The  touch  of  a  stranger  is  still  disagreeable  to  her.
I  give  myself  a  pinch.     "  I  do  not  like  that,"  she  said.

In  general  she  is  not  obedient  in  this  state,  in  spite  of  the  trans-
mission of  sensations ;  she  is  too  irascible  for  that.  She  undergoes
the  influence  of  my  sensations,  but  not  of  my  will.  The  memory
persists.

After  an  hour  this  state  disappears  and  she  falls  into  her  normal
sleep.

76  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

Here  I  stop.  The  history  of  this  patient  has  been  most  instructive
to  me.  I  have  with  regard  to  her  case  a  great  volume  of  notes  taken
on  the  spot,  and  having  a  bearing  upon  sundry  other  questions,
among  which  the  question  of  therapeutic  holds  the  foremost  place.
Next  comes  the  question  of  mental  suggestion,  that  of  physical
action,  that  of  hypnotic  phases,  and  a  few  others  of  less  importance.
I  have  purposely  left  out  whatever  was  not  directly  concerned  with
psychic  transmission,'  so  as  not  to  complicate  the  task  of  the  reader,
who  will  find  here  quite  enough  if  he  will  but  study  with  the  necessary
attention  the  details  given  above.

I  have  left  out  nothing — quite  the  reverse — that  had  to  do  with  our
principal  subject.  I  have  given  all  the  experiments,  even  those  which
of  necessity  had  to  be  inconclusive  and  resultless,  or  which  could  be
successful  only  in  part,  because  of  accidental  circumstances.  Hence,
the  general  effect  of  this  narrative  will  be  less  conclusive  for  the
reader  than  for  myself.  As  for  me,  I  am  free  to  confess  it,  these
experiments  were  decisive.  At  last  I  have  the  personal  Impression  I
sought  so  long,  of  a  true,  direct,  indubitable  action.  I  was  fully  sure
that  there  was  neither  chance,  coincidence,  nor  suggestion  by  attitude
or  gesture,  nor  any  other  possible  cause  of  error.  Wherever  these
influences  were  for  a  moment  added,  I  have  pointed  them  out,  and  the
reader  will  himself  be  able  to  appreciate  them  in  accordance  with  the
principles  already  set  forth.  But  a  point  that  may  have  escaped  the
reader,  just  because  of  the  strictly  objective  manner  of  this  account,
is  that  from  the  second  week  forward  I  was  already  master  of  the
phenomenon,  and  that  if  in  the  subsequent  experiments  there  still
were  checks,  that  was  solely  because  I  wished  to  verify  the  impossi-
bility or  difficulty  of  success  in  certain  hypnotic  phases.  Whenever  I
produced  the  phase  of  sleep  favorable  to  these  experiments,  they  were
always  successful.  The  reader  will  not  wonder  that  I  was  delighted
with  this  discovery.  For  me,  a  phenomenon  is  not  a  scientific  fact  if
one  is  obliged  to  accept  it  purely  and  simply  as  an  accident  distinctly
seen,  clearly  controlled,  but  which  has  come  about  one  knows  not  how,
and  which  is  not  repeated  one  knows  not  why.

And  that  was  just  the  case  with  all  the  experiments  in  mental  sug-
gestion hitherto  known,  even  with  those  cited  in  the  first  two  chap-
ters, and  which  so  astonished  me.  Mr.  D.  divined  several  letters,  and
even  whole  words,  one  after  another,  under  pretty  stringent  condi-
tions. But  what  annoyed  me  was  that  after  a  series  of  amazing  suc-
cesses, there  were  other  series  in  which  the  transmission  seemed
absolutely  in  default.  And  yet  the  subject  kept  on  divining,  and
divined  amiss,  wholly  amiss.  Why  ?  I  could  not  tell ;  but  this
inconstancy  of  the  phenomenon  discredited  in  my  eyes  results  the
most  astonishing.  This  all  the  more  that  on  some  occasions  I  suc-
ceeded in  mentally  representing   to   myself   the   object  with   great

TRUE  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.  77

distinctness.      For   example,   I    represent    to    myself    a  lamp,   and   I
almost  see  it  flaring  before  the  eyes  of  my  imagination.

"  It  is  a  book"  says  the  subject.  Seeing  that  I  do  not  confirm  this
conjecture,  "No,"  says  he,  "it  is  a  cigar."

Is  not  that  enough  to  disconcert  a  skeptic,  particularly  one  but
little  prepossessed  ?

Well,  I  now  understood  this  unevenness,  this  inconstancy  of  phe-
nomena :  Direct  mental  suggestion  is  possible  only  in  one  state,  and
that  a  transition  state  between  two  others.  Though  I  was  able  to
fix  that  state  for  a  few  moments,  by  graduating  the  sleep  almost  at
will,  that  was  not  possible  to  do  in  the  waking  state,  wherein  each
moment  brings  change,  without  which,  as  Bain  very  well  says,  there
is  no  consciousness,  and  wherein  this  change,  as  such,  is  not  appre-
ciable for  the  subject.  Thus  it  sometimes  happened  that  Mr.  D.
would  say  to  me :  "  I  feel  well  disposed  to-day."  Yet  the  experi-
ments would  be  unsuccessful,  while  on  another  day  they  would  pro-
ceed far  better,  despite  his  untoward  presentiments.

All  was  now  comparatively  cler.r  to  me;  we  must  regard  thought-
transference  as  a  sort  of  audition.

One  does  not  hear  who  is  deaf ;  one  does  not  hear  when  there  is
too  much  noise  ;  one  does  not  hear  when  one  is  absorbed  in  thought.

One  is  deaf  to  a  transference  of  thought  when  one  sleeps  so  soundly
that  the  brain  does  not  perform  its  functions.  How,  think  you,  can  a
subject  sunk  m  prof ound  paralytic  aideia  obey  your  thought  if  he  can-
not even  hear  the  living  voice  ?  He  is  deaf.  In  vain  will  you  shout
into  his  ear,  a  fortiori  in  vain  will  you  whisper  to  him  from  a  distance.
Hence  mental  suggestions  are  still  more  difficult  in  this  state  of  pro-
found aideia  than  in  the  waking  state,  and  therefore  those  who  think
that  all  that  is  needed  in  order  to  make  one  amenable  to  their  mental
action  is  to  put  one  into  the  magnetic  sleep,  are  mistaken.

One  does  not  hear  when  there  is  too  much  noise,  and  a  hypnotized
subject  will  not  "  hear  "  your  thought  because  he  is  at  the  mercy  of
everybody  ;  because  he  has  too  many  strong  and  different  sensations;
because  his  attention  is  not  directed  solely  to  you.  Consequently,
even  though  you  were  to  make  him  hypersesthesic  in  every  possible
way  by  fixing  the  gaze  on  a  shining  object,  or  other  inanimate  object,
you  will  not  make  him  easily  sensitive  to  exceedingly  slight  personal
influences,  such  as  thought-action.

One  does  not  hear  when  one's  mind  is  occupied  by  other  thoughts,
because  the  one  action  excludes  the  other.  One  that  is  talking  hears
badly.  The  dreams  of  active  somnambulism  being  more  vivid  than
those  of  normal  sleep  and  being  nearly  always  "spoken  "  dreams,  are
more  opposed  to  delicate  perception  than  is  the  waking  state  itself.
Consequently,  it  is  useless  to  attempt  direct  mental  suggestion  with  a
somnambule  that  is  talking  with  "vivacity,  or  who  is  carrying  out  any

78  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

somnambulic  project  whatsoever  ;  he  will  not  hear  you.  His  atten-
tion is  not  null,  as  in  an  hypnotized  subject;  but  what  is  worse  for
your  purpose,  it  is  turned  in  another  direction.  Hence,  despite  the
favorable  appearances — for  he  can  always  hear  you,  his  magnetizer
- — the  state  of  strongly  active  polyideia  is  no  better  for  experimental
purposes  than  that  of  paralytic  aideia.

Then,  as  regards  the  intermediate  states  :  Some  subjects  who  are
Capable  of  presenting  these  two  opposite  states — aideia  and  polyideia
— do  not  pass  directly,  or  at  least  may  not  pass  directly,  from  the  one
into  the  other.  They  tarry  for  a  longer  or  a  shorter  time  in  the  mo-
noideic  phase.  You  have  before  you  no  longer  an  inertia,  a  complete
paralysis  of  the  brain  ;  neither  have  you  a»reasoning  activity  more  or
less  like  that  of  the  waking  state  ;  but  you  have  to  do  with  a  brain
that  concentrates  all  its  functional  action,  and  that  cannot  but  con-
centrate it,  upon  a  single  idea  standing  alone  and  dominant.  It  is
dominant,  not  being  counterbalanced  by  any  other  thought.  It  is
hallucinational  for  the  same  reason  and  through  the  vivacity,  the
physiological  vitality,  of  a  brain  that  has  just  rested  itself  better  than
usually  (aideia),  and  which  asks  only  a  chance  to  work.  Hence  you
need  but  little  to  set  it  a-going.  A  nothing  moves  it,  a  nothing  con-
trols.

That  is  the  moment  for  suggestions.  Mental  suggestions  ?  Yes
and  no  !  This  state  is  still  far  more  complex  than  it  seems  to  be.  The
monoideic  state,  in  the  first  place,  may  be  two-fold — active  or  passive.

When  active,  it  approaches  polyideism  while  remaining  what  it  is.
It  is  akin  to  it  by  a  very  great  preponderance  of  one  idea  associated
with  a  few  others  that  are  very  faint.  This  is  the  state  of  somnambulic
monomania.  The  subordinate  ideas  belong  to  the  real  world,  the  domi-
nant one  to  imagination.  Consequently  the  subject  cannot  make  his
way  so  well  amid  the  surroundings  of  actual  life  as  can  an  active
somnambule  proper,  who  reflects,  perceives,  shuns  obstacles,  and  per-
forms a  difficult  task.  But  if  he  sees  (imperfectly)  any  object,  his  dream
may  easily  persuade  him  to  believe  it  a  book,  a  lantern,  or  a  bird,  and
then  he  will  do  a  certain  number  of  acts  meet  to  such  vision.

This  state,  the  state  of  spontaneous  hallucination,  is  no  more  favor-
able to  thought-transference  than  is  active  polyideism,  whereof  it  is
only  a  lower  grade  as  regards  lucidity,  but  more  advanced  and  more
isolated  as  regards  liveliness  of  sensations.

Passive  monoideism,  on  the  other  hand,  comes  nearer  to  aideia,  just
because  of  its  character  of  passivity,  inertia.  The  vividness  of  sensa-
tions is  the  same.  But  they  can  ?w  longer  arise  of  their  own  accord ;
they  must  be  suggested,  and  they  are  suggested  with  the  utmost  ease.
Whatever  you  say  is  law  to  the  subject.  He  is  under  obligation  to
divine  as  you  bid  him,  and  the  divination  is  done,  not  by  reflection,
but  by   unconscious,   imperceptible  associations  which  deceive  you,

TRUE  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.  79

which  appear  and  disappear  almost  before  their  task  is  done.  For
this  state  is,  so  to  speak,  still  more  monoideic  than  the  preceding  one.
The  faint,  accessory  ideas  are  almost  entirely  wanting.  And  it  is
always  a  state  of  tension,  even  violent  tension,  like  the  other,  with
this  difference,  that  the  tension  of  active  monoideism  comes  into  play
of  itself,  while  the  tension  of  passive  monoideism  always  awaits  an
external  stimulus  however  slight — a  breath,  a  hint,  a  nothing.  Bain
would  say  that  it  is  an  "  involuntary  energy  "  requiring  only  an  im-
pulsion to  show  itself.

Is   this    the    phase   for   mental    suggestions  ?     Almost  !     Anyway,
mental  suggestions  always  act  in  this  phase,  that   is  to  say,  you  have
only  to  concentrate  your  thought  strongly  and  the  subject  will  per-
ceive it.     There  will  be  first   a  corrugation  of   the   eyebrows,  an   ex-
pression of  attention  in  the  countenance,  an   agitation   of  the  mem-
bers, and  at  last  a  doing  of  your  will,  or  a  beginning  of  doing  it.    One
thing,  however,  may  mar  the  experiment  :  if  your  action  is  too  lively
in  the  beginning,  or  if  it  is  too  vividly  (albeit  indistinctly)  perceived
by  the  subject,  it  will  have  upon  him  an  awakening  influence — awak-
ening in  the  relative  meaning  of  the  word,  viz.,  the  subject,  though
he  executes  your  mental  order,  and  because  of  the  same,  will  pass  too
quickly  into  a  state  of  sleep  a  little  less  deep,  into  active  monoideism,
and  then  will  be  all  eagerness  to  execute  your  mental  order  without
having  grasped  it  fairly  ;  he  will  seek  you,  will  run  after  you,  and  will
even  "  insensibilize"  himself '  by  this  involuntarily  suggested  mono-
mania.    Or  else  he  will  pass  into  a  state  of  sleep  still  less  profound,
more  tranquil,  and  at  the  same  time  more  lucid,  a  state  of  active  poly-
ideism  j  he  will  begin  to  divine,  to   guess  by  his  own   reflection  what
he  can  no  longer  perceive  passively,  and  then  he  will  be  capable  of
doing  other  things  than  you  have  ordered.     Finally — and  this  hap-
pens seldomer,  but  does   happen  with  subjects  that  are  too  sensi-
tive— the  mental  impulse  you  give  him  produces  first  excitation,  after
the  manner  of  narcotics,  and  then  puts  him  to  sleep  ;  and  the  sub-
ject, after  making  a  beginning  of  carrying  out  the  order,  lapses  into
complete  aideia.     Thus  this  state  does  not  afford  us  the  best  guaranty
of  success  ;  fof  that  we  must  seek  a  little  deeper.

The  true  moment  for  mental  suggestion  is  the  state  betwixt  aideia  and
passive  monoideism.

But  if  that  is  so,  and  if  our  experiment  has  a  better  chance  here
than  in  outright  passive  monoideism,  the  cause  is  simply  that  it  has
more  time  at  its  command,  and  that  one  usually  makes  too  great
an  effort  in  beginning  the  mental  action — a  thing  helpful  this  side  the
threshold  of  aideia,  while  beyond  that  it  is  not  safe.  Could  we  be
certain  which  stage  we  had  before  us,  we  should  have  only  to  conform

x  S'  insensibilisera  I  that  is,  will  make  himself  insensible  [to  your  further  action].
—  Translator.

80  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

to  its  requirements;  we  would  act  with  some  forcefulness  in  aideia
(to  awaken  the  brain),  a  little  more  gently  in  monoideia  (not  to
awaken  it  too  much),  and  we  should  have  free  scope  up  to  the  very-
limits  of  both  states.  In  any  case  the  brain  should  be  "  regulated  ; "
it  should  be  regulated  for  nascent  ?nonoideia.  Permit  me  to  illustrate
by  a  comparison  with  the  telephone.

A  telephone,  unless  it  is  well  regulated,  does  not  reproduce  dis-
tinctly speech  at  a  distance.  But  in  telephony,  as  in  neurology,  all  is
relative.  A  telephone  is  well  regulated  when  the  vibrating  disk  is
very  nigh,  but  not  too  nigh,  the  magnetic  core  of  the  coil ;  you  may
then  shout  pretty  loud  without  impairing  the  distinctness  of  the
sounds  transmitted.  On  the  contrary,  the  louder  you  shout  the  better
they  hear  at  the  other  station.  And  they  would  hear  better  still,  com-
paratively, were  the  disk  still  nigher  the  core,  almost  touching ;  but
then,  in  speaking  too  loud  there  is  danger  of  the  disk  sticking  to  the
magnet  and  of  almost  complete  failure  to  transmit.  Medium  regu-
lation bordering  on  maximum  is  what  practice  requires,  herein  differing
slightly  from  theory.

But  how  "  regulate  "  a  somnambule  ?  Ah,  that  is  the  question  1.
Fortunately,  it  is  not  much  more  difficult  in  hypnology  than  is  that
other  question  in  telephony  ;  only  here  as  there  the  instrument  must
be  regulable.

Subjects  there  are  who  will  not  be  controlled  in  this  respect ;  they
can  be  employed  for.  other  purposes,  or  with  them  one  has  to  be
content  with  a  hurried  mental  action,  as  has  been  done  hitherto.
But  we  must  also  eschew  subjects  that  are  too  obedient  and  already
trained — subjects  worked  by  turning  a  crank,  so  to  speak.  But
again  one  must  learn  how  to  bring  about  the  degree  of  slumber  that
is  needed.  The  first  seances,  however,  must  have  for  their  one  end
purely  passive  observation  of  the  effect  produced  by  your  action,  in
order  to  learn  what  kind  of  a  subject  you  have.  You  shall  spend  hours,
if  needful,  waiting  for  the  subject  to  awake  of  his  own  accord,  unless
he  asks  to  be  awakened  sooner.  In  subjects  that  are  specially  sus-
ceptible of  sleep — for  some  there  are  with  whom  you  can  make  all
the  physical  experiments,  but  not  the  psychical — you  will  produce
two  principal  phases,  namely,  the  deep  sleep,  which  vanishes  by  de-
grees, and  the  lucid  sleep,  of  somnambulism  proper.  What  you  need  is
an  intermediate  state.  The  subject  must  not  be  allowed  to  become
too  much  awake  and  to  regain  his  spontaneous  activity,  nor  is  he  to
be  put  in  too  deep  a  sleep,  for  then  he  will  not  hear  you.  The  best
means  to  obtain  this  graduation  is  by  magnetic  passes,  so-called,  up-and-
down  and  crosswise,  for  the  depth  of  the  slumber  usually  increases
with  the  number  of  those,  and  lessens  with  the  number  of  these.  By
making  two,  three,  four  passes  right  before  the  subject  (without  con-
tact) you  obtain  a  little  less  or  a  little  more  of  sleep,  and  sometimes

EXPERIMENTS  AT  HAVRE.  81

one  is  able  to  graduate  at  will  the  intermediate  phases  just  mentioned.
Should  such  graduation  by  passes  be  impossible,  you  will  have  diffi-
culty in  obtaining  that  result  by  any  other  means.  And  above  all
one  must  be  careful  not  to  employ  different  means  for  the  different
phases,  for  so  one  establishes  an  artificial  ideorganic  association,  a  bad
habit  that  will  disorganize  the  subject.

It  is  understood  that  I  do  not  enter  here  upon  a  discussion  of  the
action  of  the  passes.  One  may  suppose  that  they  exercise  a  physical
action,  or  one  purely  suggestive  :  that  is  of  no  importance  for  the  end-
in  view.  I  simply  mention  the  oldest  and  best  known  process,  which
gives  the  most  constant  and  most  beneficial  results  as  regards  the
subject  (certain  hypnotic  processes  are  harmful)  and  which  serves
best  to  graduate  the  sleep  at  will  whenever  graduation  is  possible.

Once  master  of  your  subject,  you  have  only  to  avail  yourself  of  the
moment  when  he  hears  you  and  does  not  yet  give  answer  well.

Do  not  mistake  difficulty  of  speaking,  caused  by  a  contracture  of
the  voice-muscles,  for  an  aphasic  difficulty,  i.  e.,  one  of  purely  cerebral
origin.     The  latter  is  what  you  require.

We  will  enter  on  some  further  details  when  we  state  the  conclusions
of  our  study.

CHAPTER   IV.

EXPERIMENTS    AT    HAVRE.

IN  the  month  of  November,  1885,  Mr.  Paul  Janet,  of  the  Institute,
read  to  the  Society  of  Physiological  Psychology  a  communication
from  his  nephew,  Mr.  Peter  Janet,  professor  of  philosophy  in  the  Ly-
ceum at  Havre,  entitled  "  Upon  Some  Phenomena  of  Somnambulism."
This  title,  prudently  vague,  veiled  some  quite  extraordinary  revela-
tions. The  subject  was  a  series  of  experiments,  made  by  Messrs.
Gibert  and  Janet,  that  seemed  to  prove  not  only  mental  suggestion
in  general  but  also  mental  suggestion  from  a  distance  of  some  kilo-
meters, and  urrbeknown  to  the  subject.

That  I  followed  the  reading  of  this  communication  with  interest
was  matter  of  course :  everybody  did  the  same,  not  without  a  good
measure  of  incredulity.  Mr.  Janet  abstained  entirely  from  theorizing  ;
he  simply  stated  the  facts,  and  left  them  to  be  believed  or  not.  The
communication,  listened  to  in  silence,  was  passed  in  silence,  save  that
a  few  exceptions,  of  a  very  general  character,  were  taken  by  our
President,  Mr.  Charcot.  Positively  there  was  no  ground  for  argument,
but  one  might  examine  the  facts.  Having  decided  to  do  this.  I  took
the  first  favorable  opportunity  to  carry  out  my  purpose.

True,  I  had  already  made  maay  experiments  in  mental  suggestion,

82  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

and  on  that  point  I  no  longer  had  any  doubt :  I  must  needs  surrender
to  evidence.  But  the  facts  recounted  by  Messrs.  Janet  and  Gibert
presented  quite  another  character.  These  gentlemen  carried  out  no
experiments  like  those  we  have  been  observing  in  the  case  of  Mrs.  D.
in  the  waking  state  and  of  Mrs.  M.  in  the  state  of  sleep  ;  they  tried,
but  without  success;  whereas  they  did  attain  success  under  more
extraordinary  conditions,  giving  mental  suggestions  to  be  carried  out
much  later,  and  endorming  their  subject  at  a  distance.

To  me  this  seemed  noteworthy.  I  wished,  first  of  all,  to  verify  this
latter  phenomenon,  recognizing  its  importance  for  a  theory  of  sugges-
tion and  for  the  problem  of  magnetism  in  general.  It  was  evident
that  such  verification  would  be  the  death  of  the  exclusive  theory  of
contemporary  hypnotism,  which  was  boasting  itself  to  be  the  legitimate
successor  of  animal  magnetism,  deceased,  and  destined  hencefor-
ward to  take  a  very  modest  place  alongside  its  predecessor.  On  the
other  hand,  should  Messrs.  Gibert  and  Janet  have  been  duped  by  any
illusion,  we  must  once  again  retrace  our  steps  to  see  if  even  suggestion
from  anear  be  not  due  to  some  presently  incomprehensible  exaltation
of  the  perceiving  mind,  and  not  to  thought-transference  in  the  true
sense  of  the  word.

The  subject  of  these  experiments  was  Mrs.  B.,  a  countrywoman  of
Normandy,  50  years  old,  in  good  health,  honest,  very  timid,  intelligent,
but  quite  uneducated  (she  cannot  even  write  and  can  hardly  read).
She  is  of  robust,  sturdy  constitution  ;  when  young  was  hysterical,  but
was  cured  by  an  unknown  magnetizer.  Since,  only  in  somnambulism
do  some  traces  of  hysteria  appear,  when  she  is  crossed.  In  the  normal
state,  the  hysteria  has  disappeared,  but  the  hypnotic  sensibility  that
served  as  its  ground  persists,  as  usual.  Mrs.  B.,  ever  since  childhood,
has  been  subject  to  natural  somnambulism,  in  which  she  recounts  the
singular  hallucinations  she  experiences.  The  somnambulism  recurs
more  frequently  of  late.  The  woman  has  a  husband  and  children,  who
enjoy  good  health.  Several  physicians  have,  it  seems,  wished  to
experiment  with  her,  but  she  has  always  rejected  their  propositions.
Only  at  the  request  of  Mr.  Gibert  did  she  consent  to  spend  a  little
time  in  Havre.  She  is  endormed  very  easily  :  one  need  but  take  her
hand,  grasping  it  gently  for  a  few  moments,  intending  to  endorm  her  ;
otherwise  there  is  no  result.  After  a  longer  or  shorter  time — 2  to  5
minutes,  according  to  the  person  that  puts  her  asleep — her  look  becomes
vague,  the  eyelids  quiver  with  slight  motions  that  often  are  very  rapid,
till  the  eyeball  hides  itself  behind  the  lids.  At  the  same  time  the  chest
rises  laboredly  :  the  subject  is  evidently  ill  at  ease.  Very  often  a
shiver  agitates  the  body  for  an  instant,  then  she  gives  a  deep  sigh  and
throws  herself  backward,  plunged  in  deep  sleep.

Hypnoscopic  exp.:  anaesthesia,  general  contracture  almost  instan-
taneous, deep  sleep.

EXPERIMENTS  A  T  II A  VRE.  83

I  reached  Havre  August  21,  and  found  Messrs.  Gibert  and  Janet
so  convinced  of  the  reality  of  the  action  at  a  distance  that  they  will-
ingly assented  to  the  minute  precautions  suggested  to  them  by  me  so
that  I  might  be  able  to  test  the  phenomenon.

Mr.  F.  Myers  and  Dr.  Myers  (members  of  the  London  Society  for
Psychical  Research),  Mr.  Marillier  (of  the  Socidte'  de  Psychologie
Physiologique),  and  myself,  formed  a  sort  of  commission,  and  the
details  of  all  the  experiments  were  arranged  by  us  with  common
accord.

The  precautions  we  observed  in  experimenting  were  as  follows  :

1.  The  precise  hour  for  the  action  at  a  distance  was  fixed  by  lot.

2.  It  was  not  made  known  to  Mr.  Gibert  till  a  few  minutes  before
it  arrived,  and  forthwith  the  members  of  the  commission  went  to  the
pavilion.

3.  Neither  the  subject,  nor  any  occupant  of  the  pavilion,1  distant
nearly  a  kilometer,  knew  the  precise  hour,  or  even  the  kind  of  experi-
ment that  was  about  to  take  place.

4.  To  avoid  involuntary  suggestion,  neither  we  nor  any  of  those
gentlemen  entered  the  pavilion  except  to  verify  the  sleep.

First  Experiment. — Dr.  Gibert  must  endorm  the  subject  from  his
office,  51  St.  Quentin  Street,  and  mentally  order  her  to  go  out  into  the
street.  Action  begins  5:50  p.  m.  Probable  time  of  executing  the
order,  6:05.

At  6  o'clock  precisely  we  reach  No.  5  Ferine  Street,  where  the
pavilion  is,  but  we  stand  aloof,  so  that  no  one  might  suspect  our  pres-
ence. We  wait  a  quarter  of  an  hour  in  vain  ;  the  subject  does  not
come  down  into  the  street.  Consequently  the  experiment  was  a
failure  in  that  respect.

We  enter  the  pavilion,  ringing  the  bell  at  the  garden  gate,  and  go
up  to  the  first  floor,  but  find  no  one  there.

Two  of  us  go  down  to  the  kitchen,  on  pretext  of  inquiring  whether
Mr.  Gibert  has  yet  arrived,  and  find  the  subject  sitting  motionless  but
awake.  We  pass  to  a  chamber  on  the  first  floor,  and  there  talk  about
the  experiment,  which  we  regard  as  abortive.  A  few  minutes  there-
after the  subject  enters  the  parlor  (opposite  to  the  room  we  were  in),
and  there  we  find  her  reclining  on  an  easy  chair  in  lethargy.  That,  it
seems,  is  always  the  case  when  she  is  endormed  by  Mr.  Gibert.  Dr.
Gibert  is  at  this  moment  making  his  professional  calls,  and  cannot
join  us.

The  subject  makes  answer  to  questions  put  by  Mr.  Janet,  who  of
late  has  been  endorming  her  more  often  than  Mr.  Gibert.

Mrs.  B.,  in  somnambulism,  tells  of  how  toward  six  o'clock  she  felt
ill  at  ease,  and  was  about  to  go  to  sleep  when  a  ring  of  the  bell
awakened  her,  and  she  took  refuge  in  the  kitchen  ;  how  thereafter  she
1  Pavilion  :  the  house  at  which  the  subject  lodged.

84  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

was  unable  to  overcome  the  drowsiness,  and  so  went  up  to  the
parlor.  "  'Twas  Mr.  Gibert  played  me  that  trick,"  she  added  ;  "  you
torment  me  ;  I  don't  want  folks  to  endorm  me  without  giving  me
notice  !  "

We  profit  by  the  somnambulism  to  make  some  experiments,  which
the  subject  interrupts  continually,  asking  "Where  is  Mr.  Gibert?
Where  is  he  ?  I  must  go  and  Look  for  him."  She  tries  to  get  away
from  us  and  go  into  the  street.     We  hold  her  back.

After  an  hour  we  withdraw,  and  Mr.  Janet  awakens  her.  She  recol-
lects nothing,  but  she  has  headache,  and  at  evening  we  go  away  ;  she
is  all  the  time  restless,  falls  of  her  own  accord  into  somnambulism,
and  goes  down  into  the  garden  seeking  Mr.  Gibert.  They  hold  her
back  with  difficulty,  and  send  for  Mr.  Gibert,  who  comes  and  quiets
her.

Despite  these  unfavorable  conditions,  another  experiment  was-
arranged,  to  come  off  at  12:15  that  night.  Mrs.  B.  was  sure  to  be  then
in  her  natural  sleep.

Second  experiment. — "  From  a  distance  to  make  Mrs.  B.  pass  from  her
natural  sleep  into  somnambulism  and  go  find  Mr.  Gibert  in  his  office
in  St.  Quentin  Street."

The  success  of  this  experiment,  even  according  to  those  gentlemen,,
was  hardly  probable.  Besides,  this  was  the  first  time  they  ever  tried
to  act  during  the  subject's  natural  sleep.  So  it  failed  ;  the  somnam-
bule  did  not  come  down  stairs ;  and,  as  we  did  not  wish  to  disturb  the
inmates  of  the  house,  we  did  not  go  in  to  see  whether  there  were  any
indications  of  action.  So  much  at  least  is  certain,  that  Mrs.  B.  did  not
leave  her  chamber.  The  only  difference  noticed  in  her  behavior  on
this  day  as  compared  with  other  days  was,  that  instead  of  rising  very
early  as  her  custom  was,  she  slept  till  after  ten  o'clock,  and  she  got
up  with  a  headache.  She  went  down  to  the  kitchen  and  set  herself
to  work,  but,  the  headache  continuing,  she  went  again  up  to  her
chamber  toward  noon.

Then  came  the  third  experiment.  Mr.  Gibert  was  to  endorm  Mrs.  B.
from  his  own  house  at  10  minutes  before  12  o'clock,  exerting  mental
action  during  10  minutes.  Mrs.  B.  was  to  be  endormed  and  to  remain
in  the  parlor.  At  12.07  we  reach  the  pavilion  without  ringing  the  bell,
and  taking  care  to  make  no  noise.  Mrs.  B.  is  still  in  her  chamber.
So  as  not  to  influence  her  by  our  presence,  we  send  the  cook  to  her  to
ask  if  she  is  coming  down  to  breakfast.

Mrs.  B.  is  walking  briskly  up  and  down  the  room.  "  I  am  in  a  queer
way,"  says  she  to  the  cook  ;  "  I  don't  know  what  ails  me.  I  am
trembling ;  but  I  will  go  down  all  the  same."

She  did  not  come  down  till  10  minutes  afterwards.  We  watch  her
from  a  distance.  She  is  not  quite  endormed,  but  neither  is  she  in  her
normal  state.     She  seems  not  to  see  what  is  going  on  around  her  nor

EXPERIMENTS  AT  HA VRE.  85

to  know   what  she  wishes  to   do.     She   enters  one    room    and    then
another  ;  a  minute  later  she  falls  into  lethargy.

The  same  questions,  the  same  answers.  "  Again  it  is  Mr.  Gibert  that
plays  this  trick  upon  me.  But  I  have  made  you  wait  (smiling).  J  have  had
time  to  dip  my  hands  in  water,  and  that  kept  me  up  for  some  time.  But
where  is  Mr.  Gibert  ?  Why  does  he  not  come  ?  Why  torment  me  so  ?"
I  must  go  and  look  for  him  (applying  both  hands  to  her  forehead).
No  ;  he  does  not  want  me  to  go  in  search  of  him  (fretfully).  Why
doesn't  he  wish  me  to  go  ?"

Sundry  experiments  are  made,  in  the  course  of  which  I  remove  her
headache.

Mrs.  B.  recognized  all  the  persons  present  by  touching  their  thumb,
and  particularly  by  scratching  lightly  the  thumb  nail.  There  was  no
getting  an  explanation  of  this  trick,  which  to  her  seemed  quite
natural.  She  would  not  even  tell  us  how  she  hit  upon  it.  I  can  only
say  that  in  this  way  she  perceives  really  the  personality,  the  physical
state,  sometimes  also  the  mental  state  of  people.  After  touching  my
thumb  she  declared  that  I  should  have  great  influence  over  her  and
that  I  might  easily  control  her.  "  For  example,  I  should  not  dare  to
say  no  to  you,"  said  she  ;  and  so  on.

Thenceforward  she  seems  really  to  feel  my  presence,  and  to  be
subject  to  a  sort  of  attraction  for  me.  Wishing  to  test  the  reality  of
this  influence,  I  concentrate  my  thought  and  order  her  to  give  me
her  hand  ;  suddenly  I  see  her  start ;  she  grows  excited,  leans  toward
me,  and  holds  her  hand  out  to  me.  Thrice  I  made  this  experiment
with  the  same  success  while  she  was  in  a  state  more  or  less  proximate
to  monoideism.  When  she  was  in  the  aideic  state  the  effect  was  null,.
retarded,  or  incomplete ;  she  became  agitated,  but  did  not  execute
the  mental  order.

In  active  somnambulism  the  experiments  were  sometimes  successful,
if  I  took  care  to  select  a  moment  of  inaction.  In  acting  while  she
talked  animatedly  with  Mr.  Janet  or  another  person,  or  when  she  was
absorbed  in  her  own  thoughts,  I  obtained  no  result,  absolutely  none.
I  had  also  occasion  to  notice  that  too  great  concentration  of  my  own
thought  rather  marred  the  result  of  the  experiment ;  it  upset  her,
producing  spasms  and  general  tension,  interfering  with  the  exactness
of  the  transmission.  On  the  other  hand,  a  thought  formulated  with
precision  but,  so  to  speak,  in  passing  and  without  special  mental
pressure,  produced  an  action  whenever  the  subject  was  amenable  to
those  mysterious  influences.  Here  are  two  experiments  made  under
this  condition  of  tension,  which  were  unsuccessful.

I  was  at  the  lower  end  of  the  room,  hid  behind  Mr.  Janet,  and  I
ordered  the  somnambule  to  kneel.  She  manifested  strong  agitation,
seemed  to  be  looking  for  me,  her  eyes  opened  and  remained  open
without  intelligence.     The  state  in  which  she  was  at  this  moment  was

86  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

like  that  produced  by  Donato  when  he  makes  his  subject  follow  him.
It  was  thus  a  state  of  fascination,  with  a  noteworthy  difference,  how-
ever. The  state  of  fascination  is  a  monoideic  state.  It  is  passive,
eminently  passive,  when  you  hold  the  subject  fast  with  your  eye,
operating  upon  him  as  you  please.  This  state  is  sensitive  to  visual
influences,  to  the  imitation  of  gestures,  etc.,  when  it  is  calm.  If,  on
the  contrary,  the  subject,  drawn  by  your  eye,  follows  you,  the  calm
disappears,  a  sort  of  fever  seizes  him,  his  thought  is  too  absorbed,  too
tense  in  one  direction  to  allow  new  influences  to  act ;  the  subject
follows  you  madly,  he  is  infuriated  by  the  slightest  obstacle,  and  then
he  can  do  nothing  but  follow  your  eye  with  blind  obstinacy.  That  is
not  passive  monoideia,  it  is  active  monoideia,  hypnotic  monomania.

Acting  mentally  at  a  distance  and  unseen  by  the  subject,  I  produced
a  state  like  this,  but  more  agitated  and  less  clearly  defined,  less  fixed,
the  fixity  of  gaze  being  lacking  as  a  support  to  the  monomanial  tend-
ency of  the  subject.  She  was,  therefore,  upset,  agitated,  attracted,
but  indistinctly,  and  her  mental  state,  which  asked  only  to  be  domi-
nated by  one  thought,  was  at  the  same  time  too  much  on  the  strain
to  grasp  it.  It  was  an  almost  aideic  fever,  because  of  the  mingling
of  indistinct  ideas.

The  subject  began  with  rising  to  her  feet ;  then  I  thought  I  noticed
a  bending  of  her  body  as  though  she  were  about  to  kneel  ;  but  this
movement  ceased  and  Mrs.  B.  straightened  herself  and  for  a  moment
remained  standing.  Then  I  changed  my  thought  and  ordered  her  to
come  to  me  and  then  to  go  upon  her  knees  before  the  easy  chair.
She  stepped  tottering  toward  the  chair.  At  that  moment  I  pro-
nounced mentally  the  words  "  Kneel !  "  "  On  the  floor  !  "  The  latter
expression  caused  me  some  uneasiness  and  I  regretted  it.  "  Perhaps
she  will  fall  to  the  floor  and  hurt  herself,"  I  thought ;  so  I  began  anew
the  mental  order,  "  Kneel  !  "

At  that  instant  Mrs.  B.  fell  backward  in  lethargy  into  the  arms  of
Mr.  Janet.

Another  experiment,  suggested  by  Mr.  Frederic  Myers,  also  failed,
The  somnambule  was  to  take  in  her  hands  a  cushion  placed  to  the
left  of  her  on  the  couch.  This  experiment  took  a  good  deal  of  time,
for  the  different  states  of  the  subject  succeeded  one  another  rapidly.
At  times  there  was  no  action  ;  at  times  the  feverish  monomanial
agitation  interfered  with  the  distinctness  of  the  transmission.  Mrs.
B.  stretched  her  arms  forth  toward  the  cushion,  but  did  not  take  hold
of  it.  At  last  she  rose,  went  to  the  end  of  the  couch  where  the
cushion  was,  paying  no  attention  to  it,  and  went  down  upon  her  knees —
thus  executing  the  order  she  had  failed  to  execute  when  given  before,
and  which  I  was  not  then  thinking  of.

But,  I  must  add,  there  is  no  certainty  that  in  this  case  we  have
a  retarded  mentat  perception  of  the  first  order  ;   for,  inasmuch  as  I

EXPERIMENTS  AT  HAVRE.  87

considered  the  first  experiment  a  failure,  I  said  to  the  gentlemen  pre-
sent that  I  had  chosen  that  injunction  rather  than  another,  expressly
because  it  had  not  succeeded  definitely  with  my  former  subject.  At
that  moment  the  somnambulc  was  in  lethargic  aideia  and  could  not
hear  us  ;  but  we  must  never  trust  this  hypnotic  deafness,  for  though
it  is  absolute  as  regards  reflex  action,  it  may  be  that  it  does  not  ex-
clude latent,  unconscious  audition,  and  this  may  manifest  itself  in  a
subsequent  state.  I  may  even  say,  I  think,  that  the  habitual  over-
looking of  this  fact  by  experimenters  does  a  great  deal  toward-
making  their  observations  inexact.

Finally,  a  third  trial,  in  which  she  was  ordered  to  give  her  right
hand  while  I  was  on  her  left,- was  only  in  part  successful.  There  was
a  motion  of  the  right  arm  in  the  direction  of  me,  but  the  hand  was
not  given.

It  is  to  be  remarked  that  all  these  experiments  were  made  by
me  without  my  touching  the  subject,  who  never  was  magnetized
by  me.  She  was  at  this  moment  under  the  influence  of  Mr  Gibert
(absent),  and  of  Mr.  Janet,  who  awakened  her  at  length,  not  without
difficulty

Fourth  Experiment. — On  account  of  the  patient's  fatigue,  it  was
about  decided  to  suspend  experiment  till  the  morrow  ;  but  not  being
satisfied  with  the  first  three,  I  urged  Mr.  Gibert  to  allow  an  imme-
diate repetition  of  the  second,  which  had  failed  (Cagliostro's  experi-
ment— endorming  the  subject  from  a  distance  and  making  her  come
to  him  across  the  city).

It  was  half-past  8  in  the  evening.  Mr.  Gibert  consented.  The
precise  time  was  chosen  by  lot.  The  mental  action  was  to  begin  5
minutes  before  9  and  to  continue  till  9.10.  At  that  moment  there  was
no  one  in  the  pavilion,  besides  the  subject,  but  the  cook,  and  she  did
not  expect  that  anything  was  to  be  done  by  us.  No  one  went  to  the
pavilion.  Profiting  by  this  absence,  the  two  women  went  to  the
parlor,  and  amused  themselves  with  playing  on  the  piano.

We  reached  the  neighborhood  of  the  pavilion  past  9  o'clock.  Silence.
The  street  was  deserted.  Without  making  the  least  noise,  we  broke
up  into  twvo  parties  to  watch  the  house  from  a  distance.

At  9.25  I  saw  a  shadow  appear  at  the  garden  gate.  It  was  she.  I
hid  in  a  corner  to  listen  without  being  observed.  But  I  heard  nothing.
The  somnambule,  after  waiting  a  minute  at  the  gate,  went  back  into
the  garden.  (At  this  moment  Mr.  Gibert  was  no  longer  acting  ;  by
dint  of  concentrating  his  thought  he  had  a  sort  of  syncope  or  stupor,
lasting  till  9.35.)

At  9.30  the  somnambule  appeared  again  at  the  gate,  and  this  time
sprang  into  the  street  unhesitating.  She  hurried  along  like  one  who
is  late,  but  who  must  positively  reach  his  destination.  The  other
gentlemen,  who  were  on  her  route,   had  no  time  to  notify  us — Dr.

88  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

Myers  and  me  ;  but,  hearing  rapid  footfalls,  we  followed  the  somnam-
bule,  who  noticed  nothing  around  her  ;  or,  at  least,  did  not  recognize
us.  Reaching  Du  Bard  Street  she  began  to  stagger,  halted  a  moment,
and  came  near  falling.  Suddenly  she  started  forward  again  at  a  rapid
pace.  It  was  now  9.35.  (At  this  moment  Mr.  Gibert,  come  to  himself,
began  the  action  again.)  The  somnambule  hurried  on  regardless  of
surroundings.

In  ten  minutes  we  were  quite  near  Mr.  Gibert's  house,  when  he,
thinking  the  experiment  had  missed,  and  wondering  because  he  did
not  see  us  back  again,  steps  out  to  meet  us.  He  comes  across  the
somnambule,  who  keeps  her  eyes  still  closed.  She  does  not  recognize
him.  Absorbed  in  her  hypnotic  monomania,  she  rushes  to  the  stair-
case, followed  by  us  all.  Mr.  Gibert  wanted  to  enter  his  office,  but  I
take  him  by  the  hand  and  lead  him  to  a  room  opposite.  The  som-
nambule, highly  wrought  up,  looks  for  him  everywhere,  brushing  by
us,  but  not  noticing  anything.  She  enters  the  office,  feels  of  the  fur-
niture, repeating  in  a  tone  of  distress,  "Where  is  he?  Where  is  Mr.
Gibert  ? "

Meanwhile  the  magnetizer  was  seated,  making  not  the  least  motion.
The  subject  enters  the  room,  almost  touches  him  as  she  passes,  but  in
her  excitement  fails  to  recognize  him.  Again  she  rushes  through
other  rooms.  Then  the  thought  occurred  to  Mr.  Gibert  to  draw  her
to  him  mentally,  and  in  consequence  of  that  act  of  will,  or  by  simple
coincidence,  she  retraced  her  steps  and  seized  him  by  the  hands.

That  moment  an  insane  joy  took  possession  of  her.  She  springs
upon  the  sofa,  claps  her  hands  like  a  child,  and  cries,  "  There  you
are  !     There  you  are  at  last !     How  happy  I  am  !  "

Then  she  repeats  to  us  her  impressions.  The  two  women,  Mrs.  B.
and  the  cook,  were  amusing  themselves  in  the  parlor,  playing  and
singing,  profiting  by  the  absence  of  the  lady  of  the  house.  Then,
toward  9  o'clock — 9  o'clock,  she  said,  lacking  two  or  three  minutes?
"  being  seated  on  the  sofa,  I  felt  a  drowsiness  coming  upon  me."  "  It
was  you,"  said  she,  addressing  Mr.  Gibert,  "  that  did  that  to  me.  I
knew  these  gentlemen  were  waiting  in  the  street.  '  Well,'  said  I  to
myself,  '  let  them  wait ;  I  have  enough  of  this  nonsense.'  But  I  could
not  make  a  long  resistance,  and  I  ran  like  a  crazy  woman."

She  was  able  to  name  the  streets  she  had  traversed,  but  she  had
"met  nobody."

The  evening  was  a  very  interesting  one.  After  enjoying  for  a  good
half-hour  the  presence  of  her  "  dear  Mr.  Gibert,"  and  felt  of  the
thumb  of  Mr.  Janet,  whom  she  also  "  loves  dearly,"  she  suddenly
exclaimed  :  "  And  that  gentleman — the  other  gentleman — what's  his
name  ?  Where  is  he  ? "  She  reaches  forth  her  hand  in  the  direction  of
me,  groping  in  the  air.  I  give  her  my  hand.  She  examines  my
1  But  according  to  the  cook  the  parlor  clock  pointed  to  9.15.

EXPERIMENTS  A  T  HA  VRE.  89

thumb  after  her  own  fashion,  recognizes  me1  with  satisfaction,  but
continues  the  examination.  "What,  then,  is  your  name?  Mr.  Oko —
Goro — I  don't  know."  I  repeat,  mentally,  my  name,  but  she  cannot
yet  speak  it.

"You  are — you  are  not  English.  [The  first  day  she  took  me  for
Mr.  Frederic  Myers,  which  proves  that  she  did  not  see  persons.]  You
are  from  Paris — but  you  are  not  French  ;    you  have  come  only  for

France — you   are    from What    is    the    name    of   your   country  ?

Bre No  !     Po Poland,  isn't  that  it  ?     You  endorm  many,  a

good  many  people.  Why  ?  I  don't  want  you  to  endorm  so  many
people.  Listen  !  What  do  you  do  in  Paris  ?  [She  applies  her  fingers
to  her  forehead.]  A  factory,  you  make  ape — apa —  how  do  you  call
it?     Apparatus,  isn't  that  it?"

"What  are  those  apparatus  used  for?"  asked  Mr.  Gibert.

I  thought  of  telephones,  but  what  came  into  her  mind  was  the  hyp-
noscope  (she  had  seen  one  in  my  hands,  but  she  has  never  seen  a
telephone).

"  Oh,  it  works  so."  Here  she  imitated  general  contracture — a  re-
miniscence of  yesterday's  experiment.

We  pass  to  other  experiments,  but  the  somnambule's  thoughts  are
elsewhere,  she  is  preoccupied  about  me.  In  vain  do  I  hold  my  tongue,
withdraw,  hide  ;  she  seems  always  drawn  toward  me,  and  wants  to
go  and  find  me.  She  grows  angry  at  Mr.  Janet,  and  says  he  (men-
tally) forbids  her  to  keep  her  thoughts  fixed  upon  me.

Seeing  this  strange  influence,  Mr.  Gibert  proposed  that  I  should  take
his  place,  judging  that  I  could  obtain  results  still  more  remarkable.
But  I  decline.  "  It  is  a  sympathy,"  I  said,  "  a  somnambulic  passion
such  as  we  sometimes  see,  rather  than  a  really  stronger  influence.  I
do  not  know  the  subject  well  enough,  and,  besides,  in  delicate  experi-
ments it  is  not  well  to  multiply  influences.  I  trust  more  your  con-
versance with  the  subject  than  my  personal  power.  Finally,  inasmuch
as  it  is  a  question  of  facts  that  I  have  not  yet  verified,  and  which  I  am
trying  to  study,  I  prefer  to  retain  my  independence  as  an  observer."

Consequently,  Mr.  Gibert  was  requested  to  continue  the  experi-
ments and  in  particular  to  attempt  transmission  of  sensations.

To  the  end  that  the  attraction  that  my  presence  seemed  to  exert
upon  Mrs.  B.  might  not  become  a  hindrance,  I  asked  Mr.  Janet  to
suggest  to  her  the  thought  that  I  was  gone  away.

"  Mr.  Ochorowicz  is  gone  ;  he  will  not  return.  I  forbid  you  to  think
of  him!"

This  order,  several  times  repeated  in  view  of  the  opposition  made
by  the  subject,  secured  for  us  a  quiet  time  for  nearly  an  hour.  Dur-
ing that  time  she  spoke  no  more  of  me  and  I  was  able  to  stand  quite
near  her  and  to  watch  the  experiments.

1  That  is,  recognizes  that  I  ani  the  one  whose  power  she  lauded.

9o  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

It  was  necessary  to  select  the  favorable  moment  for  the  transmis-
sion of  sensations,  for  that  phenomenon,  as  well  as  mental  suggestion
in  general,  succeeds  only  in  an  intermediate  state  betwixt  aideic
lethargy  and  regular  monoideism.  I  was  glad  to  be  able  to  verify  in
this  remarkable  subject  the  same  physiological  conditions  which  were
first  formulated  by  me  before  the  Society  of  Physiological  Psychology,
January  25,  1886,  and  which  were  based  upon  a  detailed  study  of  the
phenomena  presented  by  Mrs.  M.

Verification  of  the  state  needful  for  transmission  was  made  in  the
following  manner  :  Mr.  Gibert  drank  slowly  alongside  Mrs.  M.  a
glass  of  water.  Immediately  she  exhibited  the  movements  of  swal-
lowing.

After  this  preparatory  trial,  Mr.  Gibert,  followed  by  Mr.  Marillier,
retired  to  a  remote  apartment.  On  the  threshold  of  the  chamber  I
whisper  in  the  ear  of  Mr.  Marillier  :     "  Pinch  his  right  hand."

Two  minutes  after,  Mrs.  B.  manifests  the  signs  of  suffering  sharp
pain.  Both  her  hands,  but  the  right  in  particular,  are  in  a  quiver.
"  Don't,"  she  cried.     "  Don't  do  that,  wretch."

The  second  experiment  was  proposed  in  writing  :  "  Puncture  the
middle  of  his  forehead."

In  the  subject,  general  agitation,  less  marked  in  the  arms.  The
somnambule  raises  her  hands  toward  her  forehead,  complaining  of  the
hurt  they  are  causing  her,  and  continually  repeating  :  "  You  wretch  !
Don't  do  that  !  Wretch  !  "  Her  agitation  continued  for  a  minute
after  the  return  of  the  two  gentlemen.

Then  came  the  last  experiment — one  that  I  had  never  witnessed
before — namely,  mentally  to  order  an  act  that  was  not  to  be  per-
formed till  the  following  morning.  At  the  stroke  of  11  o'clock  Mrs.
B.  was  to  go  to  the  parlor,  take  up  a  photograph  album  that  lay  on  the
table,  open  it  and  examine  the  portraits.  (This  order  was  proposed
in  writing  by  Mr.  Frederic  Myers.)

To  communicate  the  order  mentally,  Mr.  Gibert  seized  Mrs.  B.'s
hands  and  applied  his  forehead  to  her's.  I  stood  quite  close  to  them:
he  made  no  movement  of  the  lips.  He  merely  attracted  the  subject's
attention  by  saying,  "  Listen,  Leonie  !  "

At  the  moment  of  transmission  Mrs.  B's  countenance  assumed  a
peculiar  expression  ;  one  would  say  she  was  listening  with  all  her
powers  of  attention.  But  at  the  same  time  it  was  plain  that  Mr.
Gibert  did  not  act  auditive  sensations  for  her,1  for  while  still  retain-
ing this  expression  she  began  to  be  agitated,  to  writhe  in  strong  con-
vulsions. There  was  a  true  paroxysm  of  hysterepilepsy,  with  grind-
ing of  the  teeth,  clonic  movements  and  contractures.  After  barely
two  minutes  the  communication  was  at  an  end,  and  Mrs.  B.  grew
quiet  little  by  little,  giving  no  sign   that  she  knew  what  had  passed.

1  JV' 'agissait  pas  pour  elk  des  sensations  auditives.

EXPERIMENTS  AT  HAVRE.

9«

Messrs.  Gibert  and  Janet  even  assured  me  that  she  could  not  tell
what  was  asked  of  her,  and  that  orders  given  in  this  way  to  be  carried
out  in  the  sleep  itself  had  never  succeeded.  Hence,  it  appears  that  this  is
a  transmission  eminently  unconscious,  and  that  the  subject's  uncon-
scious requires  a  certain  time  to  crystallize,  so  to  speak,  the  impres-
sions received,  and  to  excite  the  corresponding  muscles.

This  phenomenon  is  not  an  isolated  one  in  psychology.  It  some-
times happens  to  one,  as  he  lies  abed,  that  the  thought  of  getting  up
comes  to  him,  but  without  sufficient  force  to  overcome  his  indolence.
This  thought  returns  once  or  twice  without  result.  Then,  while  his
mind  is  occupied  with  quite  other  things,  he  feels  himself  raised  sud-
denly, as  by  a  stranger  force,  and  is  up  with  a  bound  without  making
up  his  mind  to  act.

So,  with  regard  to  waking  at  a  set  hour.  I  must  take  the  train  very
early.  I  know  that  there  will  be  somebody  to  awaken  me,  and  so  my
consciousness  may  sleep  tranquilly.  But  the  unconscious  has  received
communication  of  this  decision,  though  the  Me  did  not  at  all  count
on  the  unconscious.  So  the  unconscious  watches,  is  so  wakeful,  calcu-
lates time  so  exactly,  that  at  the  approach  of  the  fixed  hour  it  rouses
us  and  recalls  the  Me  to  consciousness.

The  following  morning,  at  5  minutes  before  11  o'clock,  Mr..  Marillier
and  I  were  in  the  garden.  The  clock  struck  n,  and  we  saw  Mrs.  B.
coming  down-stairs  from  her  chamber.  She  enters  the  parlor,  looking
for  something.  She  touches  several  objects,  without  taking  them  in
hand.  She  opens  the  wall  closet,  and  shuts  it  again.  Mr.  Janet  comes
and  bids  her  good  morning  ;  she  makes  reply,  and  then  goes  on  with
her  indeterminate  task,  while  walking  up  and  down  the  parlor.  Mr.
Janet  returns  to  us,  and  proposes  to  us  to  endorm  the  subject  from  a
distance,  thinking  the  experiment  has  failed.  I  object,  saying  that
Mrs.  B.,  not  being  quite  in  her  normal  state,  might  fall  asleep  of  her
own  accord,  and  that  we  ought  to  wait  and  see  what  she  would  do.
And  all  agreed  that  I  was  in  the  right ;  for,  a  few  minutes  later,  at
11.30,  Mrs.  B.  takes  up  an  album,  then  another,  opens  it,  sits  on  the
sofa  ;  and,  now  visibly  quieted,  begins  to  turn  the  photographs  over.
As  she  told  us  afterward,  she  was  looking  for  the  portrait  of  Mr.
Gibert.  "Why?"  she  was  asked.  "Because  it  gives  me  pleasure  to
see  it."  (That  photograph  had  been  taken  out  after  it  was  found
that  once  she  was  endormed  spontaneously  while  looking  at  it.)

We  go  to  the  panor  and  find  Mrs.  B.  still  engaged  in  thumbing
the  album,  but  she  was  in  a  state  of  active  somnambulism.  She  did  not
this  time  say  it  was  Mr.  Gibert  that  endormed  her  :  she  did  not  even
know  she  was  endormed.

Naturally  we  profited  by  the  occasion  to  make  a  few  experiments.
She  again  touched  the  thumbs  of  all  present  and  recognized  us
easily.    Mr.  Janet  asked  her  to  continue  her  revelation  about  me.  She

92  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

repeated  her  remarks  of  the  other  day  :  "  He  has  a  good  deal — I  don't
know  how  to  speak  it — well,  he  has  that  which  is  needed  to  endorm."
"A  good  deal  of  will-power?"  asked  Mr.  Janet.  "  Yes,  yes,  a  will-
power— but  I  don't  know  how  to  call  it — he  thinks  well.  When  one
means  to  endorm  me  he  must  think  well — else  it  torments  me — some
one  wants  to  endorm  me  and  thinks  of  something  else  ;  that  annoys
me.  He  has — I  don't  know — but  I  should  not  dare,  for  instance,  to
say  nay  to  him — Oh,  there  !  He  could  make  me  walk — make  me  walk
into  the  sea."

"You  want  to  leave  us,  then — Mr.  Gibert  and  me?"  "No;  you
are  mine."  "Then  forget  him!"  "I  will  not."  But  at  last  she
gives  way,  and  we  are  able  to  proceed  with  the  experiments.

I  have  forgotten  to  say  that  after  the  seance  at  Mr.  Gibert's  she
was  taken  home  in  a  carriage  and  awakened  on  her  arrival,  so  that
she  retained  no  recollection  of  her  night-wandering.  While  on  the
way  home  she  said  to  the  gentlemen  that  were  with  her  that  I  had
something  in  my  pocket  which  attracted  (the  hypnoscope).  Wishing  to
verify  the  fact  I  passed  the  magnet  to  Dr.  Myers,  who,  according  to
the  somnambule,  had  no  influence  over  her.  He  put  it  in  his  pocket ;
while  on  the  other  side  Mr.  Frederic  Myers,  who  was  equally  indiffer-
ent for  Mrs.  B.,  had  another  magnet.

Almost  instantly  Mrs.  B.  stretched  forth  her  arms,  attracted  in  two
opposite  directions.  This  attraction  ceased  in  the  state  of  active
somnambulism,  and  then  reappeared  in  one  of  the  phases  of  lethargy
that  I  was  unable  to  define.

But  little  by  little  the  order  to  forget  me  was  blotted  out  of  the
subject's  mind,  and  she  showed  again  an  attraction  toward  me,  though
now  I  had  not  the  hypnoscope  in  my  pocket.  She  rose  twice  and
wanted  to  follow  me.  I  went  into  the  garden  so  as  not  to  spoil  the
experiment,  and  Mr.  Janet  was  obliged  to  repeat  the  order  to  forget.
Finally,  toward  2  o'clock,  in  the  street  I  stopped. the  gentlemen  to  say
to  them  this :

"  You  know  I  came  to  Havre  mainly  to  verify  the  fact,  till  then
unknown  to  me,  of  somnambulism  at  a  distance.  Now,  the  experi-
ments we  have  made  do  not  convince  me.  They  are  acceptable  as
regards  action  at  a  distance,  but  then  they  may  also  be  explained  by
involuntary  suggestions.  In  the  first  experiment  Mrs.  B.  was  not
endormed  till  after  she  had  seen  that  we  were  come.  The  second
failed  entirely  ;  true,  it  was  performed  under  exceptional  difficulties,
but  at  all  events  it  proves  nothing.  The  third  seems  conclusive  ;  the
subject  came  across  town  endormed.  But  for  me  there  is  a  serious
doubt.  Mr.  Gibert  began  the  action  at  5  minutes  before  9  o'clock,
whereas  according  to  the  cook  Mrs.  B.  seemed  to  be  already  endormed
15  minutes  before  9.  I  have  ascertained  that  my  watch  keeps  time
with  the  clock  in  the  parlor,  and  Mr.  Gibert's  is  regulated  according

EXPERIMENTS  AT  HAVRE.  93

to  mine.  Consequently  we  may  suppose  that  Mrs.  B.  fell  asleep  of
her  own  accord  some  minutes  before  Mr.  Gibert  began  to  act.  After-
ward she  came,  it  is  true,  but  I  saw  her  at  the  garden  gate,  and  it  may
be  that  she  perceived  one  of  us  and  that  this  circumstance  suggested
to  her  the  thought  of  going  out  a  few  minutes  after.  In  short,  if  we
reject  the  testimony  of  the  somnambule  herself,  certain  doubts  arise.
To  be  absolutely  convinced,  I  request  Mr.  Janet  to  endorm  the  sub-
ject now.  The  conditions  are  as  perfect  as  can  be.  I  noticed  Mrs.
B.  from  a  distance  and  am  perfectly  certain  that  she  is  in  her  normal
state,  without  any  tendency  to  spontaneous  somnambulism.  No  one
is  at  this  moment  expecting  an  experiment.     "  Will  you  try  it  ? "

It  was  cruel  on  my  part,  for  we  were  all  both  tired  and  hungry;  but
I  did  not  wish  to  go  away  without  a  clear  conscience,  and  without  being
able  to  subscribe  to  the  report  that  Mr.  Marillier  was  to  make  to  the
Society  of  Physiological  Psychology.  Mr.  Janet  replied  that  he  never
had  tried  to  act  in  the  public  street,  that  it  would  be  impossible  for
him  sufficiently  to  concentrate  his  thought,  and  that,  on  the  whole,  he
preferred  that  the  experiment  should  be  made  by  Mr.  Gibert.  But
.at  last  he  consented,  provided  he  were  permitted  to  act  from  his  own
house,  i.  e.f  from  a  much  greater  distance,  but  where  he  would  have
the  necessary  quietude.  I  accepted  the  conditions,  and  it  was  agreed
that  we  should  first  go  to  lunch  together,  to  fix  the  exact  time,  and
then  try  the  experiment.

The  matter  was  arranged  as  follows  :  I  asked  Mr.  Marillier  to  go
to  the  pavilion  and  watch  Mrs.  B.  He  did  not  act  upon  her,  and  so
his  presence  could  not  have  a  disturbing  effect.  He  was  an  habitui
of  the  house,  and  therefore  his  presence  could  not  awaken  any  sus-
picion. He  did  not  know  the  precise  time  of  the  experiment,  conse-
quently he  could  not  by  his  behavior  influence  the  subject  at  the
given  moment.  The  precise  time,  fixed  by  lot  after  the  departure  of
Mr.  Marillier,  was  4.30.

"We  have  still  a  good  hour  before  us,  but  I'll  not  let  you  slip
from  me,"  said  I  to  Mr.  Janet,  laughing.  So  we  went  together  to
take  a  cup  of  coffee,  and  then  to  have  a  stroll  on  the  beach  ;  at  last,
we  went  back  to*  Mr.  Janet's  house,  No.  3  Robert  Alley.  I  kept  up  a
lively  conversation  all  the  time  with  Mr.  Janet,  to  keep  him  from
thinking  of  Mrs.  B.,  and  so  that  there  might  be  no  excuses  if  by
chance  Mrs.  B.  should  be  endormed  before  the  hour.

At  4.30  I  withdrew  to  the  little  garden  plot  of  his  house,  to  give
him  entire  freedom  of  action.

He  sat  in  his  armchair,  his  head  between  his  hands,  and  concen-
trated his  will  so  as  to  order  Mrs.  B.,  about  half  a  mile  away,  to  fall
into  somnambulism.     This  mental  action  lasted  18  minutes.

At  4.48  I  enter  Mr.  Janet's  study.  He  puts  on  his  hat,  and  we  go
out  to  join  the  Messrs.  Myers  and  proceed  to  the  pavilion.     Before

94  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

entering  I  asked  Dr.  Myers  to  go  upstairs  alone  and  call  Mr.  Marillier
down.  The  latter  said  he  had  seen  nothing.  "  All  that  I  can  certify,"
he  declared,  "  is  that  since  my  arrival  nobody  entered  the  pavilion.
As  for  Mrs.  B.,  she  probably  is  busy  sewing  in  the  parlor,  but  I  did
not  enter  the  parlor  for  fear  of  exciting  her  suspicions."  Before  going
in,  I  begged  Mr.  Janet  to  permit  me  to  put  the  questions  to  Mrs.  B.
in  case  we  should  find  her  endormed.

Then  we  enter  without  ringing,  as  noiselessly  as  possible,  and
notice,  through  the  door  of  the  parlor,  which  was  ajar,  Mrs.  B.
engaged  in  sewing,  but  in  active  somnambulism.  She  did  not  hear  us.
She  anszvered  only  the  questions  put  by  Mr.  Janet.

"  Well !  You  are  tormenting  me  again  !  Do  I  look  like  a  fool  ?
It  is  you  that  are  playing  this  trick  upon  me  !  "

"  Perhaps  it  is  Mr.  Gibert."

"  It  is  not  Mr.  Gibert  at  all,  'tis  you."

"  When  did  you  fall  asleep  ?  "

"Just  at  half-past  four."

"Did  you  look  at  the  watch  ?"

"  What  need  to  look  at  the  watch  ?     I  tell  you  it  was  half-past  four."

I  compared  Mrs.  B.'s  watch  with  mine.  It  was  3'  30''  slow  ;  conse-
quently, if  she  noted  the  time  correctly,  the  effect  was  produced  from  a
distance  in  about  4  minutes  after  the  commencement  of  the  action.

"  Tell  us  what  you  have  been  doing  since  we  left."

She  then  told  us  that  first  she  went  down  to  the  kitchen  for  lunch,
that  she  talked  awhile  with  the  cook,  and  then  went  up  to  the  first
floor  to  dress  ;  that  at  last  she  took  up  her  sewing  and  suddenly  found
herself  paralysed,  so  that  when  the  bell  rang  (on  Mr.  Myers  entering)
she  was  unable  to  rise.

She  did  not  speak  of  Mr,  Gibert  this  time  as  she  had  done  always
before.

Another  point  worthy  of  notice  is  that,  as  thess  gentlemen  assured
me,  when  Mr.  Gibert  endorms  her  from  a  distance,  she  is  always
found  in  lethargy  ;  when  Mr.  Janet  is  the  operator  she  fails  into  a  less
profound  somnambulic  state.  The  cook  confirmed  the  somnambule's
statements.

"  Now,  then,  are  you  satisfied  ?  "  asked  Mr.  Janet,  addressing  me.

"Yes  ;  this  time  the  experiment  is  clear.  One  thing  only  I  regret
— that  'Mr.  Marillier  could  see  nothing.  Thereupon  we  proceed  to
experiment.

From  the  beginning  of  our  seances  she  had  shown  a  certain  repul-
sion toward  Mr.  Marillier,  a  purely  physical  repulsion  against  being
touched  by  him  ;  yet  she  would  talk  with  him  and  show  no  sign  of
dislike.  We  ask  the  reason  of  this.  She  examines  his  thumb  ;  then,
letting  go  his  hand,  she  says  :  "  He  makes  me  ill.  Oh,  not  me — but
- — that  does  not  concern  you."     Mr.  Janet  insists.     Again  she  seizes

EXPERIMEN TS  AT  II A VRE.  95

Mr,  Marillier's  thumb,  touches  his  chest,  then  her  own,  with  an  expres-
sion of  pain,  and  makes  answer:  "I  do  not  wish — that  does  not  con-
cern you."     All  that  can  be  got  from  her  is  that  he  is  ill.

Mr.  Marillier  took  me  aside,  and  admitted  that  he  had  an  affection
of  the  heart,  and  but  a  few  days  before  had  suffered  a  good  deal
from  it.     The  fact  is  mentioned  in  his  study  on  Hallucinations.

With  her  habitual  vivacity — habitual  only  when  she  is  in  the  state
of  active  somnambulism — Mrs.  B.  passes  to  other  matters,  amuses
herself  like  a  child,  touches  the  hands  of  those  present,  always  in  the
same  way  and  with  the  eyes  shut.

While  she  was  holding  a  lively  conversation  with  Mr.  Janet,  I  made
an  experiment  in  mental  action.  It  was  without  result.  At  that
moment  there  was  hyperesthesia  of  the  sense  of  smell,  for  a  cigarette
mouthpiece,  held  some  twenty  inches  away,  produced  coughing  and
discomfort.

As  she  showed  such  marked  impressionableness  with  regard  to  me,
and  as  she  believed  I  had  left  the  house,  I  wished  to  find  out  whether
she  could  recognize  an  object  belonging  to  me.  So  I  remove  my
cravat  and  pass  it  secretly  to  Mr.  Janet  by  the  hand  of  Mr.  Marillier.
Being  at  the  moment  occupied  with  other  questions,  Mr.  Janet  laid
the  cravat  on  the  table.  A  few  seconds  afterward,  the  somnambule
rose  of  her  own  accord,  took  the  cravat,  went  straight  to  me.  dropped
the  cravat  into  my  lap,  and  went  back  to  her  place,  acting  through-
out like  an  automaton.  Was  this  an  instance  of  thought-action  on  my
part  ?  At  all  events  Mrs.  B.  did  not  recognize  me  ;  she  merely  carried
out  my  thought,  which  had  not  been  formulated  as  a  mental  order,
and  this  she  did  mechanically,  as  though  not  knowing  what  she  did.
But  the  somnambule,  despite  her  apparent  inability  to  see,  might  have
noticed  my  not  having  on  the  cravat.  I  therefore  decided  to  make
the  same  experiment  over  again  with  another  object,  and  for  this
purpose  I  chose  a  bit  of  black  ribbon  that  no  one  had  seen  me  wear  :
this,  too,  I  passed  to  Mr.  Janet  by  the  hand  of  a  third  person,  not
a  word  being  spoken.  Mr.  Janet  held  the  ribbon  in  his  closed  hand.
Suddenly  the  somnambule  opened  his  hand,  took  the  ribbon,  and  as
soon  as  she  had  touched  it  danced  with  joy  like  a  child,  saying  :  "  He
is  there  !  He  is  there  !  He  is  not  gone  !  "  Then  she  asked  for  a
piece  of  paper,  and  it  was  given  to  her.  She  wrapped  the  ribbon  in
this  and  held  it  out  in  the  direction  of  me,  to  give  it  to  me.  I  did  not
stir,  and  she  grew  impatient.  Mr.  Janet  tried  to  take  the  little  parcel
from  her,  and  her  irritation  increased.  Then  I  took  up  a  broad-
brimmed  hat,  and  with  that  concealed  my  hand  and  Mr.  Janet's.  The
instant  the  parcel  touched  my  hand,  Mrs.  B.  smiled  and  tried  to  give
it  back  to  me  ;  but  when  she  found  Mr.  Janet's  hand  she  withdrew  the
parcel,  and  showed  signs  of  displeasure.  After  many  experiments  of
this  kind  her   agitation  increased,- and  she  had  a  real   paroxysm  of

96  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

hysteria,  which  Mr.  Janet  tried  to  quiet  by  applying  his  fore-
head to  hers.  (It  seems  that  ovarian  pressure  has  not  this  effect  upon
Mrs.  B.,  who,  I  repeat,  presents  no  symptom  of  hysteria  in  her  normal
state.)

To  elucidate  the  question  of  her  discernment  of  objects,  I  pro-
posed to  Mr.  Janet  to  take  three  similar  leaves  of  paper,  touched  by
three  different  persons  and  marked  by  them.  It  was  done,  and  aa
effort  made  to  pass  the  papers  to  Mrs.  B.  But  she  objected  strenu-
ously, struggled,  and  would  not  touch  them.  She  brushed  them  aside
with  her  handkerchief,  and  was  not  quieted  till  she  saw  them  on  the
floor.  Then  she  threw  the  handkerchief  on  the  sofa,  and  started
when  she  chanced  to  touch  it.  When  the  three  sheets  of  paper  were
by  force  laid  in  her  lap,  she  struggled,  threw  herself  back,  and  felt
into  lethargy.     The  experiment  had  therefore  to  be  given  up.

I  was  obliged  to  return  to  Paris,  but  one  more  experiment  in  en-
dorming  from  a  distance  took  place,  under  the  direction  of  Mr.  F.
Myers.  The  details  were  communicated  to  me  by  Mr.  Janet,  as  fol-
lows :

"  On  Saturday,  after  you  left,  nothing  of  real  interest  occurred,
save  an  experiment  in  somnambulism  produced  from  a  distance,  under
precisely  the  same  conditions  as  on  the  day  before.  The  Messrs.
Myers  had  me  to  lunch  with  them,  and  suddenly  requested  me  to
endorm  Leonie  at  an  hour  they  had  agreed  upon — a  little  before  3.
o'clock.  I  thought  upon  it  for  a  little  less  time  than  the  previous
day — about  ten  minutes — and  we  went  forthwith  to  the  pavilion,  with-
out waiting.  Leonie  was  asleep  over  her  work,  as  on  the  preceding
day  ;  she  had  been  endormed  just  about  3:15.  All  that  is  known
with  precision  is  that  she  had  gone  upstairs  to  her  work  hardly  a
quarter  of  an  hour  before  (at  2:45).  It  is  further  to  be  noted  that  no
one  had  endormed  her  since  the  preceding  da}',  and  that  I  had  not
seen  her  that  morning.

"  Leonie  said  it  was  I  that  had  endormed  her.  It  seems  that  at
that  moment  she  had  an  hallucination — such,  at  least,  is  Mr.  Myers's-
opinion.     She  kept  saying  that  she  saw  me  endorm  her.

"  During  the  sleep  we  did  little  more  than  repeat  what  you  have
seen  already.  .  .  .  The  sleep  was  disturbed  by  a  storm  which
caused  very  violent  paroxysms  (crises)  such  as  J  had  not  seen  before.

"  The  Messrs.  Myers  left  Saturday  evening.  I  endormed  the  sub-
ject once  more  Sunday  morning,  but  I  did  it  all  alone  in  continuation
of  my  researches.

"  As  soon  as  I  shall  see  Leonie  in  her  second  state,  which  is  for  us.
the  true  one,  I  will  convey  to  her  your  compliments.

"  I  am,  etc.,

"  P.  Janet.

"  Havre,  May  4,  1886."

I  left  Havre  with  a  profound  emotion.  I  had  at  last  witnessed  the
extraordinary  phenomenon  of  action  from  a  distance,  which  upsets  all
the  opinions  currently  received.  I  summoned  up  my  recollections,  I
questioned  my  notes  a  hundred  times,  to  make  sure  of  the  reality  of

NEW  EXPERIMENTS.  97

what  I  had  just  witnessed.  I  examined  the  facts  from  the  skeptic's
point  of  view,  if  perchance  they  might  be  pure  accidence  and  coinci-
dence, then  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  magnetizer  ;  finally,  I  looked
at  them  in  the  light  of  the  suggestional  theory  and  of  other  inter-
mediate theories,  possible  or  fanciful  ;  and  I  came  to  the  conclusion
that  leaving  out  the  first  three  experiments,  which  were  inconclu-
sive, the  fourth  stands  and  cannot  be  explained  save  by  a  causal
connection  between  an  act  of  will  and  an  effect  produced  at  a  distance.  But
as  I  have  already  said,  in  questions  of  this  kind  one  must  himself
make  the  experiments  ;  one  must  himself  have  brought  out — and  that
again  and  again — the  phenomenon,  with  a  subject  and  amid  surround-
ings that  he  knows  thoroughly;  if  he  is  to  give  a  definitive  judgment.
Now,  with  regard  to  the  action  from  a  distance  in  this  case,  I  was  but
a  passive  observer,  and  therefore  I  must  have  my  reserves  upon  the
matter.  I  have,  however,  verified  mental  suggestion  from  anear,  but
I  saw  only  one  experiment  from  a  distance  that  to  me  seemed  to  meet
all  the  requirements.

CHAPTER   V.

NEW    EXPERIMENTS.

A  FEW  days  after  my  return  to  Paris  I  had  occasion  to  make
some  further  experiments  upon  two  hysteric  patients  whom  it
was  my  duty  to  treat  under  like  conditions.

Miss  Z.  was  magnetized  by  me  for  hysteric  paroxysms,  complicated
by  physical  exhaustion  and  marked  anaemia.  (Hypnoscopic  exp.  :
sensation  of  cold  and  slight  analgesia.)  The  first  seance  gave  no
positive  result,  except  that  my  hands  were  chilled  in  quite  an  extra-
ordinary degree.  The  patient,  having  passed  through  a  torpor  hardly
perceptible  to  her;  felt  a  little  better,  but  did  not  admit  that  the  mag-
netism had  had  any  effect.  The  second  seance  produced  magnetic
sleep,  and  then  *a  rather  protracted  paroxysm,  but  the  transition  from
waking  to  sleep  and  from  sleep  to  the  normal  state  took  place  so
imperceptibly,  that  she  would  not  believe  in  the  sleep,  and  was  almost
quite  unconscious  of  having  had  the  paroxysm.

At  the  third  seance,  she  told  me  that  she  did  not  at  all  believe  in
the  sleep  produced,  and  said  that  I  should  never  succeed  in  endorm-
ing  her  ;  that  if  she  remained  for  a  time  motionless  that  was  because
such  was  her  good  pleasure,  but  that  should  she  only  try  to  make  a
little  resistance,  I  should  have  no  influence.  I  advised  her  not  to
open  a  discussion  that  led  to  nothing,  and  said  that  if  she  persisted
in  her  resistance  I  should  prefer  doing  nothing,  lest  I  should  produce

98  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

useless  excitation.  But  my  efforts  to  persuade  were  in  vain  ;  on  the
contrary,  Miss  Z.  was  set  in  her  purpose  to  convince  me,  and  posi-
tively asked  me  to  endorm  her  against  her  will.  As  that  experiment
could  not,  in  the  present  case,  cause  serious  mischief,  I  at  last  con-
sented.

After  a  few  minutes  she  was  endormed  by  fixing  the  gaze,  but
straightway  passed  into  somnambulic  delirium,  constantly  repeating  :
"  No  !  I  won't !  You  shall  do  nothing  with  me  !  "  Little  by  little
the  delirium  became  a  spoken  dream  lasting  more  than  an  hour.
The  patient  remained  seated  and  quiet,  heard  only  me,  but  was  not
quite  obedient.  I  told  her  to  go  to  bed,  the  hour  being  late.  She
refused,  saying  she  was  very  well  as  it  was,  and  that  she  wanted  to
be  left  undisturbed.

I  might  have  awakened  her,  but  from  what  I  had  seen  I  was  almost
sure  that  the  awaking  would  bring  about  an  hysterepileptic  paroxysm
in  the  normal  state,  contrarily  to  the  therapeutic  principle  of  magnet-
ism. (My  treatment  of  hysterepilepsy  by  magnetism  consists  in  this :
I  transfer,  so  to  speak,  the  paroxysms  to  the  magnetic  sleep,  and  thus
suppress  them  by  degrees  in  the  normal  state.  The  cure  is  complete
when  a  paroxysm  can  no  longer  be  produced  even  in  the  somnambu-
lic state.)

At  this  moment  a  young  lady  companion  entered  the  parlor  quite
noiselessly  and  looked  with  astonishment  at  Miss  Z.  "  Do  not  look
at  me,"  said  the  latter.  "You  make  me  ill."  (The  patient's  eyes
were  shut,  and  she  was  some  twenty-five  feet  distant  from  the  visitor.)
Miss  Marie,  the  caller,  withdrew  frightened.  But  the  patient  still
kept  crying  out  to  her  :  "Do  not  think  on  me  !     You  make  me  ill."

These  words,  which  might  have  been  dictated  by  a  presumption
and  not  by  a  real  psychic  action,  recalled  to  my  mind  Mr.  Gibert's
experiment.  Wishing  by  hook  or  by  crook  to  get  the  patient  to  bed
so  that  I  might  leave,  I  tried  unconscious  psychic  inoculation.  I
applied  my  forehead  to  hers,  saying  mentally  :  "  In  five  minutes  you
will  want  to  go  to  bed."  The  patient  continued  to  rave,  and  seemed
in  no  wise  influenced  by  my  action.  Five  minutes  passed  and  she
said  nothing  to  me.  Then  I  advised  her,  for  the  tenth  time  at  least,
to  go  to  bed.  "As  you  -wish,"  she  answered.  She  went  to  bed  and
perforce  believed  in  magnetism  now,  for  the  next  day  she  was  unable
to  account  for  her  being  there.

Mr.  Gibert  believed  strongly  in  the  efficacy  of  mental  action  by
contact  of  foreheads.  He  has  told  me  that  often  he  has  in  this  way
arrested  violent  hysteric  paroxysms.  I  wished  to  test  the  matter,  and
an  opportunity  soon  presented  itself.

Miss  S.,  to  all  appearance,  sound,  strong,  not  at  all  anaemic,  was
subject  to  attacks  of  the  major  hysteria  of  great  violence,  but  very
infrequent.     One  might  even  say  that  hers  was  latent  hysteria,  for  it

NEW  EXPERIMENTS.  99

manifested  itself  only  under  the  influence  of  moral  causes  at  intervals
of  several  months,  or  even  of  several  years.  Still,  it  was  the  greater
hysteria,  a  very  serious  case,  presenting  all  the  chief  phases  so  well
analyzed  by  Mr.  Charcot,  including  the  period  of  delirium  at  the  end
of  the  attack.  This  always  lasted  several  hours,  nay,  a  whole  night.
Miss  S.  was  very  sensitive  to  hypnotism,  and  that  explains  the  intensity
of  the  attacks.  (Hypnoscopic  exp.  :  insensibility  and  torpor  soon  ex-
tending to  the  whole  nervous  system,  producing  an  hypotaxic  state
very  much  like  sleep.)

Once  I  made  with  her  some  experiments  in  mental  suggestion  with
playing-cards.  The  result  was  rather  remarkable.  She  never  divined
quite  aright,  but  she  always  had  a  perception  correct  in  part,  and
always  in  accord  with  the  visual,  but  not  the  auditive  characters.  For
example  :  I  thought  of  the  deuce  of  spades,  she  divined  tray  of  spades  ;
I  thought  of  the  queen  of  hearts,  she  divined  jack  of  hearts  ;  ten  of
clubs,  she  said  nine  of  spades  ;  and  so  on.  In  divining,  she  shut  her
eyes,  bowed  her  head,  and  remained  absorbed  in  a  visibly  monoideic
state  that  struggled  with  the  ordinary  impressions.  After  a  quarter  of
an  hour  of  this  exercise  her  countenance  was  changed,  and  gave
tokens  of  great  fatigue.  I  interrupted  the  experiments,  and  to  bring
her  back  to  herself  made  a  few  awakening  passes.  I  was  wrong  ;  I
ought  rather  to  have  endormed  her  completely,  and  allowed  her  to
take  repose  in  that  state.  For  a  moment  she  was  freed  from  her  ener-
vation, and  seemed  entirely  well.  But  the  shock  had  been  produced,
and  the  partial  disturbance  of  the  normal  equilibrium  brought  about
an  attack.

We  were  at  table  when  I  was  notified  that  Miss  S.,  who  had  gone  to
her  chamber,  was  writhing  in  convulsions.  I  hastened  thither  and
found  her  on  the  floor  in  a  fearful  paroxysm.  She  was  rolling  on  the
floor  so  violently  that  I  had  all  that  I  could  do  to  hold  her  by  the
arms  ;  but  restrain  her  I  must,  for  she  was  dead  set  upon  dashing
her  head  against  any  hard  object  whatever,  or  throwing  herself  out  of
the  window.  Then  I  tried  Mr.  Gibert's  plan  ;  but  it  was  without  re-
sult, whereas  ovarian  pressure  stilled  the  paroxysm  a  little,  at  least
for  a  few  momefits.  In  such  cases  it  is  difficult  to  endorm  the  sub-
ject. The  struggle  lasted  three  hours.  After  the  first  hour  she  was
already  a  little  influenced,  and  about  every  ten  minutes  she  fell  into  a
somnambulic  dream,  with  rapport ;  but  by  reason  of  the  quite  surpris-
ing force  of  her  convulsed  muscles,  and  of  the  necessity  of  keeping  her
in  restraint  unaided  (she  could  not  brook  the  touch  of  another  person),
I  found  myself  exhausted,  and  every  time  I  brought  about  a  begin-
ning of  sleep,  it  was  broken  by  frightful  convulsions.  At  last,  after  a
dozen  attempts  at  suicide,  a  quiet  delirium  appeared  ;  she  became
voluble  in  speech,  passed  again  in  imagination  through  divers  episodes
of  her  life,  but  remained  calm  by  my  side,  answered  my  questions,  and

ioo  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

was  beginning  to  obey  me.  I  induced  her  to  rest  on  a  bed,  and  there
little  by  little  lucid  somnambulism  got  the  better  of  the  attack.  The
rapport  was  well  defined  ;  she  heard  only  me,  and  that  only  when  I
wished  her  to  hear,  so  that  we  talked  about  her  all  the  time,  aloud,
without  her  knowing  it.  The  slighest  touch  by  a  stranger,  even
through  the  bed  clothes,  even  when  the  sense  of  touch  could  give  her
no  information,  produced  irritation  and  threatened  her  with  a  new  at-
tack. While  speaking  in  somnambulism  she  always  addressed  me  in
the  familiar  form  of  speech — thee,  thou  j1  consequently  I  did  the  same.
"  Go  and  rest  now,"  she  said  :  "  I  shall  sleep  quietly  till  10  o'clock  to-
morrow morning.  At  that  hour  you  will  come  and  awaken  me."  I
went  home  and  slept  like  a  marmot.  On  the  morrow  at  9:30  I  entered
her  chamber.

"  I  heard  you  coming  along  the  street,"   she  said,  "  but  do  not
awaken  me  yet.     It  is  not  yet  10  o'clock."
"  Did  you  sleep  well  ?"
"  Yes  ;  because  you  did."

I  found  that  the  head  was  still  a  little  hot,  and  offered  to  endorm
her  a  little  more  deeply,  to  calm  her.  She  assented.  I  made  several
passes  without  contact,  and  then  went  to  the  parlor  and  waited,  read-
ing a  newspaper  at  a  window.  Suddenly  I  heard  a  noise  like  that  of
a  falling  body.  The  noise  came  from  the  street,  but  I  fancied  it
came  from  her  chamber,  and  for  a  moment  I  feared  she  had  been
seized  by  a  new  paroxysm.  But  that  alarm  shot  through  my  mind
like  a  flash,  and  lasted  hardly  one  second  ;  immediately  the  reflection
came  to  me  that  there  was,  at  that  moment,  nothing  to  fear,  and  I
did  not  even  stir  from  my  place  nor  change  my  position,  but  kept  on
reading.

After  a  quarter  of  an  hour  I  went  to  the  patient's  room,  between
which  and  the  parlor  was  another  large  room  looking  into  the  court-
yard, not  upon  the  street.

I  touched  the  patient's  head  and  found  it  hotter  than  before.  "  Why  ? "
"Because  you  are  alarmed  about  something,"  was  her  answer.  "  Not
at  all,"  I  replied,  forgetting  at  first  the  trifling  occurrence  in  the
parlor ;  "  why  should  I  be  alarmed  ?  "  "I  don't  know,  but  you  are
alarmed,  and  that  has  given  me  a  congestion."

At  this  moment  she  was  in  an  inert  polyideic  state  (she  exercised
thought,  but  made  no  spontaneous  movement).

I  calmed  her  head  by  laying  my  hand  upon  it,  and  then  tried  men-
tally to  suggest  to  her  some  movements,  but  without  success.  A  little
after  I  spoke  quite  near  to  her,  addressing  her,  but  intending  not
to  be  heard.  She  answered,  nevertheless.  I  now  formulated  the
order  that  I  was  not  to  be  heard,  and  then  recommenced  the  same

1  The  English  language  has  lost  the  faculty  of  exhibiting  this  distinction. —  Trans-
lator .

NEW  EXPERIMENTS.  101

experiment  in  other  words,  and  without  any  possible  verbal  sugges-
tion.    She  did  not  hear.

"You  will  awaken   me   soon   and  I  shall  not   have  any  more  par-
oxysms."
"No  more?"

"  No  more.  I  shall  recollect  nothing,  and  you  must  not  tell  me
what  passed  during  the  night.  Furthermore,  you  will  give  me  your
word  that  you  will  never  try  to  act  upon  me  from  a  distance."

"  And  do  you  think  that  would  be  possible  for  me — to  act  from  a
distance?"

"  Yes  ;  but  you  must  not  do  it,  for  that  would  make  me  ill  ;  I  should
be  worried  all  the  time."

"  And  if  I  promise  you  that,  you  will  be  no  more  made  nervous  by
my  presence?"
"  No  ! "

"  How  do  you  recognize  the  touch  of  a  third  person  ? "
"  Because  it  is  disagreeable — strange — different — unbearable."
Miss  S.  was  serious-minded  in  the  sleep.  She  was  always  grave
and  laconic  in  somnambulism,  and  never  laughed,  a  fact  which  gave
a  peculiar  air  to  that  state.  She  said  that  it  would  be  preferable  to
endorm  her  entirely,  instead  of  wanting  to  awaken  her  quickly.  "  But
that  makes  no  difference,"  she  added  ;  "  I  shall  not  have  a  further
attack,  because  you  have  let  me  have  a  long  sleep."  In  reality  she  slept
fourteen  hours  consecutively.

"  Awaken  me  now,  but  quite  gently."  (A  request  often  made  to  me
by  somnambules  in  like  cases.)  So  I  awakened  her  very  slowly,
taking  some  twelve  minutes  to  do  it,  by  means  of  transverse  passes
without  contact.  At  length  she  smiled,  opened  her  eyes,  and  looked
around  surprised.  She  asked  what  meant  my  presence  at  her  bed-
side, and  recollected  nothing.

During  the  following  days  there  was  only  general  fatigue  and  a
little  pain  in  the  spleen,  and  that  disappeared  by  degrees.  In  the
evening  she  had  headache.  I  removed  this  pain  by  imposition  of
hands,  but  on  leaving  I  had  a  slight  headache  myself.  I  went  to  see
another  patient,  who  never  had  had  headache — at  least  so  she  assured
me  many  times.  This  patient  I  put  to  sleep  (it  was  very  difficult  to
endorm  her,  but  the  sleep  was  very  deep).  My  headache  disap-
peared.    I  awoke  the  patient  after  half  an  hour.

"  I  am  doing  very  well,  don't  you  think  so  ?  "  she  said  (she  is  ataxic).
"  But  this  is  odd,  my  head  pains  me  a  little  ;  something  that  has  never
occurred  before  to  me."  I  removed  her  headache,  which  disappeared
for  good.

I  smile  as  I  write  this  narrative,  so  strange  and  incredible  does  it
seem  to  me.  But  to  proceed  ;  I  have  not  yet  exhausted  my  casket
of  surprises  :

102  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

I  saw  Miss  S.  again  that  evening.  She  has  headache  again,  and
my  hands  are  exhausted,  my  skin  burning.  I  feel  a  disagreeable
moisture  (moiteur).  I  dip  my  hands  in  cold  water,  but  all  I  can  do  is
to  allay  her  headache  for  a  few  moments.  So  with  regard  to  the  pain
in  the  spleen.  A  cold  compress  cools  her  head,  but  does  not  banish
the  pain.

The  following  day  I  felt  refreshed,  and  easily  banished,  in  the  case
of  another  patient,  a  very  intense  headache  attending  an  attack  of
fever  and  lasting  three  days.  After  this  I  found  a  fourth  patient
suffering  from  a  slight  headache.  I  may  remark  that  I  am  unable  to
fix  the  precise  moment  at  which  my  hands  regained  their  force.  I
was  reading  a  book  that  pleased  me-  much,  and  suddenly  I  felt  the  dis-
agreeable dryness  (se'cheresse)  of  my  hands  disappear,  and  regained
my  wonted  feeling  of  a  certain  agreeable  freshness.

I  will  cite  one  more  complementary  observation,  since  all  this  helps.
to  throw  light  upon  our  problem.

When  I  find  my  eyes  fatigued  from  reading  I  go  to  the  theatre,,
and  there,  looking  at  things  from  a  distance  serves  to  give  them  rest-
But  sometimes,  in  order  to  refresh  the  eyes,  I  press  the  palms  of  my
hands  upon  the  lids.

Now,  when  the  hands  are  exhausted  I  experience  no  relief,  but  if
only  some  scene  in  the  play,  or  a  well-spoken  phrase  produces  in  me
an  agreeable  emotion,  my  hands  at  once  regain  their  therapeutic
quality,  and  then  if  I  apply  them  to  the  eyelids,  the  fatigue  of  the;
eyes  disappears.

I  reached  the  house  of  Miss  S.  "  What  were  you  doing  last  night
at  ii  o'clock?"  she  asked,  abruptly.  Inferring  some  somnambulic
eccentricity,  I  said  to  her  :  "  Ah,  no  !  You  shall  first  tell  me  what
you  know,  and  I  will  tell  you  whether  it  is  correct."

"  So  be  it.  You  were  writing  the  whole  evening,  and  it  was  not
letters,  for  I  saw  big  sheets  of  paper.  You  did  not  read  a  book,  but.
you  wrote  all  the  time,  and  then  at  n  o'clock  went  to  bed,  but  were
unable  to  sleep,  and  so  got  up  again  and  walked  up  and  down  your
room,  smoking  a  cigarette."

Here  a  person  who  was  with  Miss  S.  the  preceding  night  informed
me  that  after  going  to  bed  she  did  nothing  but  repeat  continually  :
"  Oh,  my  God  !  When  will  he  go  to  sleep  ?  He  prevents  me  from
sleeping."     I  said  nothing,  and  Miss  S.  continued  her  story  :

"  Then,  at  last,  toward  i  o'clock,  you  fell  asleep,  and  woke  just  at
7  in  the  morning.     Is  that  so  ? "

It  was  all  precisely  so,  barring  a  constant  slowing  of  the  time-
That  is  to  say,  she  "saw"  me  still  writing  at  n  o'clock,  whereas  I
quit  writing  about  10.45.  But  it  is  precisely  so  that  I  did  not  read
any  book,  that  the  whole  evening  I  wrote  on  large  sheets  of  paper,
that,  unable  to  sleep  (my  mind  being  preoccupied),  I  got  up  again

NEW  EXPERIMENTS.  103

(quite  exceptional  this,  for  I  never  have  had  that  habit),  and  so  forth.
The  hour  of  rising  was  also  stated  correctly,  within  a  few  minutes,
though  about  that  time  I  was  accustomed  not  to  get  up  till  8  o'clock.
I  add  that  Miss  S.  had  no  knowledge  either  of  my  domicile  or  of
my  habits,  and  that  I  lived  about  half  a  mile  away.

It  was  difficult  to  accept  mere  chance  as  an  explanation,  but  then
what  did  this  mean  ?     Here  is  all  that  I  can  say  :

Until  that  evening  I  had  not  had  time  to  take  notes  upon  Miss  S.'s
case.  Without  any  thought  of  acting  upon  her,  having  indeed  promised
that  I  would  not,  I  began  to  recall  to  mind  exactly  all  that  had
occurred  the  other  day,  and  it  is  my  custom  to  make  my  notes  very
circumstantial.  Consequently  /  thought  of  Miss  S.  the  whole  evening.
As  the  matter  involved  certain  rather  interesting  details  from  the
theoretic  standpoint,  this  mental  occupation  kept  me  from  sleeping
and  all  the  time  my  thoughts  dwelt  upon  questions  in  which  she
played  the  chief  part.

As  for  Miss  S.,  she  retired  to  bed  early  and  in  a  half-sleep  believed
she  saw  all  that  took  place  with  me,  but  she  declared  that  my  mental
occupation  prevented  her  from  sleeping  and  that  she  was  angry  at
me,  feeling  a  sense  of  strange  dependence  which  she  could  not  rid
herself  of.  At  last  on  awaking  at  7  o'clock  she  felt  as  though  I  also
had  awaked.

The  day  following,  also,  she  had  a  similar  sensation,  less  clear,
however,  and  then  this  rapport  disappeared.

The  case  then  probably  was  one  of  "  veridical  hallucination."

I  know  other  facts  of  this  kind,  but  I  do  not  wish  to  raise  this
question  here.  It  seems  to  me  as  yet  too  difficult  and  premature.  I
give  this  narrative  only  as  a  simple  piece  of  evidence,  and  I  shall  be
•content  in  the  sequel  with  analyzing  the  direct  experiments,  which
seem  to  me  more  palpable.

The  reader  will  find  in  the  work  compiled  by  Messrs.  E.  Gurney,
Frederic  Myers  and  F.  Podmore,  under  the  auspices  of  the  London
Society  for  Psychical  Research,  several  hundred  similar  cases,  well
attested  and  collected  for  many  years.  Its  title  is  "  Phantasms  of  the
Living"  (2  vols.     London,  1886).

I  will  add  only  that  Mrs.  M.,  too,  believed  she  saw  me  on  the  occa-
sion of  my  address  to  the  Society  of  Physiological  Psychology,  Janu-
ary 25,  1886,  in  which  I  spoke  of  experiments  made  upon  her;  but  she
was  informed  of  it  beforehand.  Still  there  were  some  details  of  which
she  was  ignorant  but  which  she  saw  in  her  dream,  to  wit,  that  while
I  spoke  "  I  was  concealed  as  high  as  the  chest  by  a  green  table."

Was  that  thought-transference?     Perhaps  it  was.

PART  II.

FACTS  OBSERVED  BY  OTHERS.

EVOLUTION   OF  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

PHYSICAL  ANALOGIES.

CHAPTER   I.

ORGANIC    SYMPATHISM.

IS  the  surface  of  one  body  capable  of  transmitting,  whether  with  or
without  contact,  certain  of  its  organic  states  to  another  body  ?
Such  is  the  question.  We  will  begin  with  an  examination  of  the  physi-
cal states,  passing  thence  to  isolated  sensations,  and  finally  to  thoughts.
We  shall  therefore  have  to  study  :

A.  Physical  nervous  transmission  of  diseases.

B.  Transmission  of  emotive  states.

C.  Transmission  of  sensations.

D.  Transmission  of  ideas.

E.  Transmission  of  will.
Then  we  will  study  separately.

A.  Suspended  mental  suggestion.1

B.  Mental  suggestion  from  a  distance.

The  history  of  magnetism  contains  many  facts,  more  or  less  ill-ob-
served, more  or  less  ill-attested,  appertaining  to  the  foregoing  cate-
gories, but  they  contain  also  a  certain  number  of  positive  observations
that  ought  to  count.

Hitherto  I  have  restricted  myself  to  telling  of  what  I  have  myself
seen,  judging  that  in  this  sort  of  phenomena  one  must  himself  be  ob-
server, actor  and  critic,  in  order  to  accept  others'  testimony.  Other-
wise one  would  have  simply  to  accept  all  the  alleged  facts  of  magnet-
ism, for  all,  or  nearly  all  of  them,  are  vouched  for  by  respectable
witnesses.     Besides,  no  man   can  boast  of  such  authority  in  science,

1  That  is,  suggestion  to  be  executed  at  a  future  time.  I  know  not  how  to  translate
otherwise  the  convenient  French  phrase  suggestion  mentale  a  e'che'ance.^-  Translator.

106  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

that  he  can  introduce  into  the  scientific  domain  an  entirely  new  fact„
theoretically  isolated  from  all  other  facts,  in  short,  unexplainable.
Hence  the  precaution  I  imposed  upon  myself  and  on  the  reader  had
no  aim,  no  significance,  other  than  to  make  the  latter  a  witness  of  the
course  of  my  studies,  of  the  progressive  development  of  my  convic-
tions, and  hence  of  my  methods.  Plainly  I  do  not  hold  that  my  testi-
mony is  worth  more  than  that  of  other  physiologists.  I  only  say —
excuse  my  egoism,  if  egoism  it  be — that  it  was  worth  more  for  me.
And  since  one  must  be  answerable  for  a  book  as  for  an  act  that
endures,  I  do  wish  to  have  a  clear  conscience.  That  will,  perhaps,  not:
prevent  the  skeptics  of  scientific  officialdom  from  taxing  me  with
credulousness,  and  I  shall  be  the  first  to  understand  and  to  make
allowance  for  their  skepticism  ;  but  it  certainly  will  save  me  from,
self-reproach  in  the  future.  That,  I  take  it,  is  all  that  a  writer  can  do..
Unfortunately,  authors  have  not  always  taken  this  precaution.

You  wish  to  study  in  the  history  of  magnetism  the  phenomenon  of
mental  suggestion  and  you  are  looking  for  testimony  of  real  weight..
You  open  a  book  on  hypnotism  and  in  it  find  banter  about  mental
suggestion  ;  those  worthies  never  have  studied  it,  but  they  assure  you
of  the  exactness  of  their  negative  judgments,  based  on  the  witness  of
other  men  of  science,  who  in  turn  have  not  studied  it  either.  At  last
you  find  a  grave  author  who  believes  in  mental  suggestion.

Take  Dr.  P.  Despine  the  younger,  author  of  a  big  treatise  in  three
volumes  on  "  Natural  Psychology  " — a  work  very  little  known  in  France,
but  abroad  justly  prized.  Mr.  Despine  has  also  published  during  the
last  few  years  a  book  on  somnambulism.  He  believes  in  mental  sug-
gestion, even  proposes  a  theory  of  it ;  but  as  for  facts,  he  has  himself
seen  none.  He  refers  to  other  respectable  authors  and  especially  to
Dr.  A.  Bertrand,  an  excellent  observer  who  published  (1823  and  1826)
two  volumes  on  somnambulism  and  magnetism,  wherein  he  treats  at
considerable  length  the  phenomenon  in  question,  but  declares  that  he
has  no  positive  evidence  drawn  from  his  personal  experience.  He
merely  says  that  the  number  of  testimonies  that  presented  themselves-
in  favor  of  the  existence  of  this  phenomenon  in  the  different  works-
wherein  he  sought  information  about  ecstasy,  compelled  him  to  be-
lieve in  spite  of  himself  and  obliged  him  to  give  more  attention  to  the
testimonies  of  the  believers  in  animal  magnetism.  And  he  refers-
chiefly  to  authors  of  past  times,  to  Father  Surin,  "  a  man  of  genuine
piety,  to  whom  the  majority  of  his  enemies  did  not  refuse  to  do
justice,  but  credulous  beyond  all  possible  imagination."  He  refers  to
Poncet,  author  of  religious  books,  an  equally  estimable  personage,
and  to  Madame  Guyon,  the  best  possible  witness,  for  she  "  read  the
thoughts  of  Father  Lacombe,  her  confessor,  as  he  read  hers."

I  am  only  half  in  play.  Bertrand,  too,  was  but  half  serious  when
he  said  that  he  had  not  met  with  facts  of  mental  suggestion  in  his

ORGANIC  S YMPA  THISM.  1 07

practice.  He  met  with  a  few,  and  I  will  quote  them  in  due  time  and
place,  as  I  shall  also  cite  the  facts  observed  by  Father  Surin  and  by
Mr.  Poncet,  for  they  possess  a  certain  value  because  of  special  cir-
cumstances.

But  had  I  no  other  evidence  than  the  testimony  of  Father  Surin,
Mr.  Poncet,  and  Mme.  Guyon,  think  you  I  would  have  published  a
book  on  mental  suggestion,  or  so  much  as  mentioned  the  existence
of  that  phenomenon  ?  Not  I  !  Neither  assuredly  would  I  have  denied
it,  for  I  never  deny  what  I  am  ignorant  about ;  but  from  that  to  a
scientific  affirmation  of  so  strange  a  fact  is  a  long  way.

That  is  why  I  took  care  not  to  begin,  as  is  the  wont,  with  the  his-
tory of  the  subject,  and  therefore  with  ancient  testimonies  ;  but  now
things  are  different.  I  have  seen,  myself  clearly  seen,  and  therefore
I  can  have  faith  in  the  testimony  of  those  who  have  seen  the  same
thing,  and  it  would  not  be  fair  for  me  to  hide  from  the  reader  obser-
vations not  my  own.  On  the  contrary,  I  wish  to  quote  them  all ;  that
is  to  say,  all  that  have  the  appearance  of  truthfulness,  that  have  been
well  proved,  and  that  are  clearly  analogous  to  those  observed  by
myself.  This  latter  proviso  will  be  pardoned  me,  for  without  it  I
should  be  obliged  to  quote  also  things  incredible,  at  least  just  now,
and  it  is  always  prudent  to  advance  slowly  over  unfamiliar  ground  in
the  dark.

I  will  array  the  subjects  according  to  the  classification  given  above,
adding  my  comments,  so  as  to  present  a  full  inventory  of  the  known
facts  of  mental  suggestion,  upon  which  will  be  based  the  theory,  or
rather  the  beginnings  of  the  theory  of  the  future.  We  will  begin  with
a  phenomenon  seemingly  foreign  to  our  inquiry,  often  found  in  the
writings  of  magnetizers,  to  wit  :  the  appreciation  of  diseases  by  somnam-
hules,  and  the  alleged  power  of  seeing  the,  diseased  organs.  Let  not  the
reader  be  surprised  at  finding  the  matter  considered  here.  It  is
essential,  as  will  presently  appear.

1.  "  I  observed  (writes  Dr.  Bertrand)  a  somnambule  who,  I  was
told,  possessed  the  faculty  of  discerning  diseases.  .  .  .  But  not
content  with  what  they  told  me  about  her,  I  wished  to  test  her  with
regard  to  a  patient  whose  state  I  knew  beforehand.  So  I  brought
her  into  rapport  with  a  young  lady  whose  chief  malady  was  an  attack
of  asthma,  which  afflicted  her  very  often.  When  the  patient  came,  the
somnambule  was  already  endormed,  and  I  was  sure  that  she  could  not
know  the  person  I  brought  to  her.  Nevertheless,  after  contact  for  a
few  minutes,  she  seemed  to  respire  with  difficulty,  and  soon  she  expe-
rienced all  the  symptoms  that  attend  a  violent  fit  of  asthma  ;  her
voice  was  suppressed,  and  with  much  effort  she  told  us  that  the
patient  was  subject  to  the  kind  of  oppression  that  her  coming  had
imparted  to  herself.  Nor  did  she  limit  herself  to  that,  but  added  to
what  she  had  just  said  details  of  several  local  complaints  and  pains
to  which  the  patient  was  subject,  and  which  she  recognized  with  the
greatest  precision  by  means  of  the  sufferings  she  herself  experienced  in

108  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

the  corresponding  parts  of  her  body  ;  but  what  in  the  most  unmistakable
way  showed  the  somnambule's  faculty  was  the  discovery  she  made  of
an  herpetic  affection  with  which  the  patient  was  troubled  in  the  geni-
tal parts.  None  of  us  had  knowledge  of  this,  and  the  patient  alone
could  tell  us  how  correctly  the  somnambule  had  hit  it  off  in  this  re-
spect."1

Bertrand  adds  to  this  observation  the  following  remarks  :

"In  general  we  must,  in  consultations  with  somnambules,  distin-
guish what  they  say  they  experience  through  contact  with  the  patients
from  what  they  fancy  they  see  within  their  bodies.  What  they  say
they  feel  is  worthy  of  credit,  while  what  they  infer  from  what  they
believe  they  see  never  presents  aught  but  baseless  conjectures,  often
quite  absurd."

2.  "I  showed,"  says  the  same  author,  "to  another  somnambule  a
female  child  of  4  years,  one  of  whose  arms  was  crippled  in  consequence
of  a  fall  which  had  produced  a  deposit  in  the  shoulder-joint ;  further,  a
vice  of  constitution  made  her  gait  awkward,  and  she  swayed  from
one  leg  to  the  other.  The  child  was  brought  to  the  somnambule,
and,  during  the  whole  time  of  the  consultation,  was  held  in  the  lap  of
the  person  who  carried  her.  Thus,  nothing  could  have  taught  the
somnambule  in  advance  what  she  should  say.  Yet,  this  is  what  hap-
pened. When  the  child  was  presented  to  her,  the  somnambule  raised,
with  difficulty,  her  own  flexed  arm,  seemed  to  make  vain  efforts  to
raise  it  to  her  head,  and  exclaimed  :  '  Oh,  the  poor  child,  she  is  crip-
pled !'  On  being  asked  what  had  caused  the  trouble  she  had  just
found  out,  she  answered, '  A  fall '  (and  that  was  the  fact).  After  this,
first  remark  she  said  nothing  for  a  little  while,  and  then  continued  :
'  Oh,  my  God  !  how  weak  she  is  in  the  loins !  She  must  have  much
trouble  in  walking.'  "2

3.  "  I  was  with  the  somnambule,  whom  I  was  magnetizing  as  she
lay  on  her  bed  asleep,  when  I  saw  coming  in  a  friend  of  mine  accom-
panied by  a  poor  fellow  wounded  a  little  before  in  a  duel,  a  ball  having
entered  the  skull.  I  put  the  somnambule  in  rapport  with  the  wounded
man,  and  limited  myself  to  asking  her  to  say  what  ailed  him.  She
seemed  for  a  moment  to  be  trying  to  find  out,  and  then,  addressing
herself,  said  :  '  No,  no !  It  is  impossible.  If  a  man  had  a  ball  in  his.
head  he  would  be  dead.'  \  Well,'  said  I,  *  what  then  do  you  see  ? '  Said
she:  ' He  tells  me  that  the  gentleman  has  a  ball  in  his  head.'"  {He
was,  according  to  the  somnambule,  a  distinct  being,  separate  from
herself,  and  whose  voice  came  from  the  pit  of  the  stomach  ;  a  sort  of
guardian  angel,  scilicet,  the  Unconscious.  It  is  probable  that  this
notion  of  a  revealer  was  suggested  to  her  by  some  spiritist  magnet-
izer.)  "  I  assured  her  (continues  Bertrand)  that  what  she  had  said  was
true,  and  asked  her  if  she  could  see  where  the  ball  had  entered  and
what  direction  it  had  taken.  The  somnambule  reflected  a  moment,
then  opened  her  mouth,  and  with  her  finger  indicated, that  the  ball
had  entered  through  the  mouth  and  penetrated  to  the  posterior  part  of
the  neck.  This,  too,  was  correct.  Finally,  she  carried  exactitude  so
far  as  to  point  out  some  of  the  teeth  that  were  lacking  in  the  mouth,
and  which  the  bullet  had  broken.  The  somnambule  had  not  opened
her   eyes   since   the   moment  when   the  wounded  man    entered  the

'Bertrand,   "  Traite  du  Somnambulisme,"  etc.,  p.  229.     Paris,  1823.
iId.t  p.  232.

ORGANIC  S  YMF  A  Til  ISM.  1 09

chamber.     There  was  no  lesion  of  the  external  integuments  of  the
mouth."1

In  his  second  work*  Dr.  Bertrand  expresses  himself  in  these  terms:

"We  find  in  the  works  of  magnetizers  very  many  instances  of  this
phenomenon,  and  I  myself  have  had  occasion  to  verify  it  several
times  in  such  a  way  as  to  leave  no  doubt.  There  is  no  one,  I  believe,
who  has  made  any  little  observation  of  a  few  somnambules,  but  that
has  often  seen  them  by  simple  contact  feel  the  pains  of  the  patients
with  whom  they  have  been  put  in  rapport."  (Bertrand  employs  this
term,  consecrated  by  its  use  among  magnetizers,  but  he  attaches  to  it
no  other  meaning  but  that  of  contact ;  he  does  not  accept  the  "  mag-
netic fluid"  hypothesis.)  "The  impression  thus  received  is  commonly
but  momentary,  and  very  rarely  do  they  on  awaking  retain  the  symp-
toms communicated  to  them  during  the  sleep.  A  few  exceptions  to
the  rule  may  be  met,  however,  and  in  order  that  the  somnambule
retain  the  disease  for  a  considerable  time,  he  needs  but  to  be  con-
vinced, from  what  he  experiences,  that  he  has  really  caught  it  from
the  patient.  .  .  .  That,  apparently,  is  what  happened  to  some  of
the  '  Convulsionaries'  of  Saint-Medard,  who  thought  that  God  ac-
cepted them  as  victims  and  permitted  them  to  take  the  diseases  of
those  who  came  to  consult  them.  '  It  often  happened  to  the  Convul-
sionaries,' says  Carre  de  Montgeron,  '  to  take  diseases  without  knowing
w/iet/ier  the  persons  were  ill  and  in  ignorance  of  the  nature  of  their  ail-
ments. They  were  informed  of  these  things  by  the  sense  of  pain  they
felt  in  the  same  parts.  It  appears  also  that  then  the  sick,  witnesses
of  the  singular  phenomenon  before  their  eyes,  believed  themselves  to  be
freed  from  their  ailments  as  soon  as  those  ailments  had  passed  into
the  bodies  of  the  Convulsionaries.  Thus  we  see  one  Chevalier  Deyde
relieved  of  his  fits  of  dizziness  afte-r  Sister  Jane  had  taken  them.'
Among  the  possessed,  when  the  exorcization  was  protracted  for
a  sufficient  time  to  accustom  them  to  the  terrible  situation  in
which  they  were,  many  likewise  believed  themselves  supernaturally
(  informed  as  to  the  diseases  of  the  persons  present,  and  thus  they
presented  the  strongest  resemblance  to  the  Saint-M6dard  Convulsion-
aries and  to  somnambules

4.  "  The  documents  concerning  the  trial  of  a  (hysterepileptic)  '  pos-
sessed '  person  named  Mary  Bucaille,  in  1699,  contain,  with  other
matter,  proofs  of.  the  phenomenon  of  the  transmission  of  diseases.
These  proofs  are  the  more  worthy  of  attention  because  the  prosecu-
tion confirms  them  as  well  as  the  defense,  with  the  difference  that
according  to  the  latter  the  phenomenon  proceeds  from  a  gift  of
miracle-working  accorded  by  God  himself,  while  according  to  the
former  it  is  of  the  devil's  doing.  Now,  this  Mary  Bucaille  had  suf-
fered in  her  person  the  ailment  of  Ann  Seville,  and  evidently  she
must  be  a  witch  and  a  sorceress,  '  it  being  the  way  of  sorcerers  to  cure
people  by  taking  upon  themselves  their  diseases.'  The  counsel  for
defense  regards  this  assertion  as  proof  of  great  ignorance  on  the
judge's  part,  for  '  he  has  always  heard  it  said  that  a  sorcerer,  in  cur-
ing a  sick  person,  oftentimes  casts  the  maleficium  upon  another  per-
son ;  but  no  one  ever  has  heard  it  said  that  the  sorcerer  takes  the  ail-
ment upon  himself ;  and  thus,  in  the  cures  that  God  has  wrought  by

1  Bertrand,  ib.

*  "  Du  Magnetisme  Animal  en  France,"  etc.,  pp.  428-430.     Paris,  1826.

no  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

the  said  Bucaille,  if  she  has  in  truth  taken  upon  herself  the  ailments
of  the  sick,  as  is  proved  as  well  with  regard  to  the  present  case
as  with  regard  to  the  aged  parish  priest  of  Golleville  and  other  per-
sons that  have  been  mentioned,  then  this  way  of  curing  others  is
something  greater  and  nobler  than  other  miraculous  cures,  which  are
performed  by  a  single  word,'  "  et  cetera}

What  the  possessed  and  the  Convulsionaries  did  of  themselves,
under  the  influence  of  disease,  somnambules  did  under  the  influence
of  magnetizers.  The  first  fact  of  this  kind  known,  being  one  of  the
experiments  of  the  Marquis  de  Puysegur,  is  given  by  Clocquet,  in  a
letter  dated  Soissons,  July  13,  1784,  hence  prior  to  the  publication  of
Puysegur's  own  narrative,  which  did  not  take  place  till  toward  the
close  of  the  same  year.2  Clocquet  went  as  an  impartial  curiosity-
seeker  to  witness  the  Busancy  miracles.

"Attracted  like  others  to  this  spectacle  [he  says],  I  took  thither
merely  the  dispositions  of  a  quiet  and  impartial  observer ;  fully
resolved  to  be  on  my  guard  against  the  illusions  of  novelty  ;  fully
resolved  to  make  good  use  of  eyes  and  ears."

But  here  is  what  he  tells  :

5.  "  Mr.  de  Puysegur  chose  from  among  his  patients  several  sub-
jects whom,  by  touching  them  with  his  hands  and  holding  toward
them  his  wand  (an  iron  rod  about  fifteen  inches  in  length),  he  caused
to  fall  into  a  regular  crisis.  The  complement  of  this  state  is  an
apparent  sleep,  during  which  the  physical  faculties  seem  suspended,
but  to  the  profit  of  the  intellectual  faculties.  The  eyes  are  shut,  the
sense  of  hearing  is  null,  and  awakes  only  at  the  master's  call."  (This
is  the  phenomenon  of  isolation  peculiar  to  the  magnetic  sleep,  as  dis-
tinguished from  the  hypnotic  state,  produced  by  an  inanimate  object.)
"  One  must  be  careful  not  to  touch  the  patient  in  the  crises,'  nor  even
the  chair  he  sits  in."  (I  have  often,  since  1867,  observed  and  verified
that  fact.)  "Were  one  to  do  so  it  would  cause  great  suffering  ;  con-
vulsions that  only  the  master  can  allay.  These  patients  in  the  crisis,3
who  are  called  medecins  (doctors),  have  a  supernatural  power  whereby,
on  touching  a  sick  person  presented  to  them,  or  on  laying  the  hand
upon  him,  even  outside  the  clothes,  they  know  what  internal  organ  is
affected,  the  part  of  the  body  that  is  ailing.  They  name  it  and  give
pretty  correct  advice  as  to  the  proper  remedies.  I  had  myself  touched
by  one  of  the  medecins — a  woman  of  about  fifty  years.  I  certainly
had  not  told  anybody  the  nature  of  my  complaint.  After  giving
some  time  to  my  head  in  particular,  she  said  that  I  often  had  pain
therein,  and  that  I  habitually  had  a  loud  buzzing  in  the  ears,  which

1  "  Du  Magnetisme  Animal  en  France,"  etc.,  p.  430,

2  To  the  Marquis  de  Puysegur  is  usually  attributed  the  discovery  of  artificial  {pro-
voqud)  somnambulism  and  of  the  faculty  of  which  we  are  speaking  ;  but  one  has  but
to  read  Mesmer's  second  "  Memoire  "  to  be  convinced  that  the  founder  of  mesmerism
knew  of  both  phenomena.    It  is  certain  that  he  kept  secret  a  portion  of  his  experience,

3  The  word  crisis  has  here  the  same  meaning  that  Mesmer  gave  it.  In  general  it
signifies  any  nervous  state  different  from  the  normal  brought  about  by  the  processes
of  magnetization  or  by  the  patient's  imagination.

ORGANIC  SYMPATHISM.  m

is  quite  true.  A  young  man  who  witnessed  this  experiment  with
incredulity,  submitted  to  it  himself  afterward,  and  was  told  that  he
had  trouble  with  his  stomach,  that  he  had  engorgements  in  the  lower
abdomen — this  since  the  occurrence  of  a  fit  of  sickness  a  few  years
before.  This,  he  confessed,  was  in  accordance  with  the  facts.  Not
contented  with  this  divination,  he  forthwith  went  and  had  himself
touched  by  another  'doctor,'  twenty  paces  away  from  the  first,  and
got  the  same  answer.  I  never  saw  a  man  so  dumbfounded  as  this
one,  who  surely  had  come  to  contradict,  to  jeer,  and  not  to  be  con-
vinced." '

In  a  book  published  the  same  year  (1784)  under  the  title  "Reflex-
ions Impartiales  sur  le  Magnetisme  Animal,"  2  we  find  the  following
remarks  upon  the  report  of  the  royal  commission  :

6.  "While  the  commission  were  making  so  many  experiments,  I
wish  they  had  extended  their  observations  to  one  of  those  somnam-
bules, made  such  by  magnetic  action,  and  subjected  him  to  the  follow-
ing tests.  After  blindfolding  him  with  the  bandage  employed  in  the
other  experiments,  I  should  have  liked  to  see  them  bring  before  him
different  persons  whose  ailments  they  knew,  and  ask  him  to  tell  what
the  ailments  were.  If  this  new  style  of  doctor  should  discover  the
seat  of  diseases  merely  by  contact,  I  rather  think  it  would  not  be
possible  for  the  members  of  the  commission  to  say  that  touching  the
patients  produced  the  ailment,  and  that  imagination  or  touch  had  any-
thing to  do  with  it.  This  experiment  is  decisive.  //  has  been  made
before  my  own  eyes  in  Mr.  Mesmer's  practice  ;  and  since  then  I  have  seen
it  repeated  at  Lyons  many  times  with  success,  every  precaution  being  taken
to  prevent  trickery.  The  different  somnambules  that  served  in  the
experiments  were  young  women  of  the  people.  To  them  were  brought
sick  persons  unknown  to  them  :  they  pointed  out  with  the  greatest
exactitude  the  ailments  with  which  these  were  affected.  I  have  seen
them  feel  sharply  the  ailments  of  those  whom  they  magnetized,  and
make  those  ailments  known  by  pointing  toward  the  region  of  the
disease  in  their  own  body."

In  August,  1825,  Dr.  Foissac  addressed  to  the  Paris  Academy  of
Medicine  a  letter  in  which  he  announced  in  the  following  words  the
phenomenon  of  the  transmission  of  aches  :

"  By  placing  the  hand  successively  on  the  head,  the  chest,  and  the
abdomen  of  an. unknown  patient,  the  somnambules  discover  instantly
his  complaints  and  aches,  and  the  various  symptoms  these  occasion."

Here  follows  an  account  of  the  instinct  for  remedies,  which  does  not
concern  us.  Foissac  exaggerates  this,  as  he  exaggerates  also  the
diagnostic  instinct,  presenting  as  a  general  rule  what  is  only  a  phe-
nomenon more  or  less  rare.  The  few  somnambules  he  chanced  to
meet  inspired  him  with  unlimited  confidence,  which  soon  disappeared
as  his  experience  grew  a  little  larger.     He  continues  :

"  There  is  no  disease,  acute  or  chronic,  simple  or  complicated — and
I  except  none  of  those  which  have  their  seat  in  either  of  the  three

1  Quoted  by  Bertrand,  id.,  p.  222.        '  3  Page  228.

ii2  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

splanchnic  cavities — that  the  somnambules  cannot  discover  and  treat
suitably  ;  for  the  case  is  not  the  same  with  those  which  are  seated  in  the
members  and  at  the  surface  of  the  body,  if  they  produce  no  general  reac-
tion, or  do  not  disturb  any  essential  function."

This  restriction  is  important,  especially  when  made  by  a  competent
enthusiast.  Foissac,  then,  sees  that  if  communication  of  symptoms
is  to  take  place  they  must  proceed  from  a  rather  pronounced  and
rather  profound  disturbance  of  the  vital  equilibrium.  And  if  somnam-
bules do  not  judge  equally  well  of  local  disorders  "  in  the  members  and
on  the  surface  of  the  body,"  the  reason  is  that  the  faculty  here  in
question  does  not  consist  in  seeing,  or  as  Foissac  himself  puts  it,  in
"  reading  the  inmost  structure  of  the  most  hidden  organs,"  but  that  it  is
rather  the  faculty  of  feeling  the  disordered  state  of  a  disequilibrated
nervous  system.  This  disorder  must  be  pretty  considerable  in  order
to  react  upon  the  somnambule  as  an  electric  charge  in  a  conductor
body  acts  on  a  distant  galvanometer.

Full  of  confidence,  Foissac  proposed  to  the  Academy  a  scientific
investigation  :

"  Take  (said  he)  in  this  city — at  the  Central  Bureau  or  in  one  of
the  hospitals — three  or  five  of  the  most  pronounced  or  most  charac-
teristic cases  of  disease,  and  let  these  form  the  subject  of  the  first
test ;  for  the  second  test  you  shall  select  the  most  obscure  or  the  most
complicated  cases.  The  somnambules,  I  pledge  my  word  for  it,  will
give  all  the  more  convincing  proof  of  their  sagacity  as  the  difficulties
shall  be  greater.  These  experiments  shall  be  repeated  as  often  as
may  be  agreed  upon  in  order  to  convince  you  fully.  A  commission
named  by  you  shall  observe  all  the  details,  and  will  render  to  you
their  report  thereupon,  and  to  that  I  will  add  my  report.  If  you  are
not  satisfied  with  their  operations,  you  shall  select  others.  Should
I  have  any  complaint  to  make  against  any  of  them,  I,  too,  should
have  the  right  to  name  others.  The  truth  could  not  fail  to  be  ar-
rived at  by  So  rigorous  an  investigation."

True,  but  it  is  a  rare  occurrence  for  an  academy  to  take  an  interest
in  a  new  truth.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  matter  of  frequent  observation
that  academies  care  more  for  professional  dignity  than  for  the  ad-
vance of  science.  This  is  a  psychological  phenomenon  no  less  inter-
esting than  several  others,  but  we  mention  it  only  in  passing.  The
fact  is  that  Dr.  Foissac's  letter  was  not  even  read  to  the  academy,
and  that  Mr.  Adelon,  the  Secretary,  judged  it  sufficient  to  acquaint
the  academicians  with  its  purport.  After  a  long  and  noisy  discussion,
the  academy  named  a  commission  whose  duty  was  to  report  "  whether
it  is  fitti?ig,  yea  or  nay,  that  the  academy  take  up  the  question  of
animal  magnetism."

Adelon,  Pariset,  Marc,  Husson,  and  Burdin  were  on  the  commis-
sion.    Husson  was  named  Secretary.

After  four  months,  December  13,  1825,  the  report  was  read  to  the

ORGANIC  SYMPATH1SM.  113

academy.  It  was  a  thunderbolt.  Taking  the  works  of  Bertrand,
Deleuze,  and  Georget  for  a  basis,  the  commission  decided  in  favor
of  the  examination.  Still,  not  till  after  several  indecisive  sessions
was  a  commission  of  eleven  members,  nearly  all  unbelievers,  author-
ized to  begin  the  investigation.  That  was  on  February  14,  1826.
The  question  of  fittingness  was  decided  by  a  vote  of  35  yeas  against
25  nays.

The  commission  experimented  for  five  years,  and  its  report  was
presented  to  the  academy  by  the  same  Dr.  Husson,  June  28,  1831.  It
was  entirely  in  favor  of  magnetism,  and  even  confirmed  the  idea  of
action  from  a  distance.  As  for  the  question  which  specially  interests
us,  here  is  what  the  report  says  :

"  There  is  not  one  of  you,  gentlemen,  who  in  all  that  has  been  said
to  him  about  magnetism  has  not  heard  tell  of  the  faculty  possessed
by  certain  somnambules,  not  only  of  defining  the  kind  of  diseases
with  which  they  are  affected,  the  duration  and  the  issue  of  those  dis-
eases, but  also  the  kind,  duration  and  issue  of  the  ailments  of  persons
with  whom  they  are  brought  into  rapport.  The  following  three
observations  have  seemed  to  us  so  important  that  we  have  believed
it  our  duty  to  make  them  known  to  you  in  their  entirety,  as  pre-
senting very  remarkable  examples  of  this  intuition  and  this  fore-
sight :     .     .     .

7.  "  The  commission  found  (says  the  report)  among  its  members
one  who  agreed  to  offer  himself  for  the  purpose  of  having  his  ailment
pointed  out  by  the  somnambule  (Miss  Celine  Sauvage).  This  was
Mr.  Marc.  Miss  Celine  was  asked  to  examine  attentively  the  state  of
health  of  our  colleague.  She  applied  her  hands  to  the  forehead  and  the
region  of  the  heart,  and  in  three  minutes  said  that  the  blood  was  tend-
ing to  the  head  ;  that  at  that  moment  Mr.  Marc  had  trouble  with  the
left  side  of  that  cavity ;  that  he  often  had  a  feeling  of  oppression,
particularly  after  eating;  that  he  must  often  have  a  light  cough  ;  that
the  interior  part  of  the  chest  must  be  gorged  with  blood  ;  that  some-
thing interfered  with  the  passage  of  the  food  ;  that  this  part — desig-
nating the  region  of  the  xiphoid  appendage — was  contracted

We  were  longing  to  learn  from  Mr.  Marc  whether  he  felt  all
that  the  somnambule  had  declared.  He  told  us  that  in  fact  he
had  a  sense  of  oppression  when  he  walked  after  meals  ;  that  often,  as
she  said,  he  hada  cough  ;  and  that  before  the  experiment  he  had  an
ache  in  the  left  side  of  the  head,  but  that  he  was  unconscious  of  any
interference  with  the  passage  of  his  food

8.  "  There  was  another  woman,  23  to  25  years  of  age,  suffering  for
the  last  two  years  with  ascitic  dropsy  accompanied  by  numerous
obstructions,  some  the  size  of  a  hen's  egg,  others  the  size  of  the  fist,
some  as  big  as  a  babe's  head,  the  large  ones  having  their  seat  in  the
left  side  of  the  abdomen.  The  exterior  of  the  abdomen  was  uneven
and  lumpy,  and  these  inequalities  corresponded  to  the  obstructions,  the
seat  of  which  was  in  the  abdominal  cavity.  Mr.  Dupuytren  had
already  ten  or  twelve  times  performed  puncture  on  the  patient,  and
had  always  drawn  off  a  large  quantity  of  albumen,  clear,  limpid,  odor-
less, and  without  any  admixture.  Relief  followed.  The  writer  was
present  thrice  at  this  operation,  and  it  was  easy  for  Mr.  Dupuytren

ii4  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

and  him  to  ascertain  the  volume  and  hardness  of  these  tumors  and
consequently  to  see  their  own  powerlessness  to  cure  the  patient.
They  prescribed,  nevertheless,  different  remedies,  and  they  attached
some  importance  to  this,  that  Miss  .  .  .  (the  patient)  should  use
the  milk  of  a  goat  rubbed  with  mercury.  February  21,  1827,  the
writer  went  in  search  of  Mr.  Foissac  and  Miss  Celine,  and  took  them
to  a  house  in  the  Faubourg  du  Roule,  without  telling  them  the  name,,
the  dwelling  place,  or  the  nature  of  the  malady  of  the  person  whom
he  wished  to  submit  to  the  somnambule  for  examination.  The  patient
did  not  make  her  appearance  in  the  chamber  where  the  experiment
took  place,  until  Mr.  Foissac  had  endormed  Miss  Celine,  and  then,
after  taking  one  of  the  patient's  hands  in  her  own,  Miss  Celine  examined
her  for  ten  minutes,  not  as  a  physician  would,  by  pressing  on  the
abdomen,  percussing  it,  scrutinizing  it  in  every  way,  but  merely  applying
the  hand  again  and  again  to  the  belly,  chest,  back,  and  head.  Asked  what
she  had  observed  in  Miss  .  .  .  ,  she  replied  that  the  whole
abdomen  was  diseased,  that  there  was  a  schirrus  and  a  great  quantity
of  water  in  the  region  of  the  spleen,  that  the  intestines  were  much
distended,  that  there  were  pouches  containing  worms  ;  that  there
were  tumors  as  big  as  an  egg  in  which  was  contained  pus-like  matter,
and  that  these  tumors  must  be  painful ;  that  at  the  bottom  of  the
stomach  was  an  engorged  gland  the  bigness  of  her  three  fingers,  that
this  gland  was  in  the  interior  of  the  stomach  and  must  needs  impair
the  digestion  ;  that  the  disease  was  of  long  standing;  and  finally  that
Miss  .  .  .  must  have  headaches.  She  advised  the  use  of  an  in-
fusion of  borage  and  of  nitrated  triticum  caninum,  5  ounces  of  the
juice  of  pellitory,  taken  every  morning,  and  a  very  little  mercury
taken  in  milk.  She  added  that  the  milk  of  a  goat  that  had  been  rubbed
with  mercurial  ointment  half  an  hour  before  milking  would  be  better.1
The  nourishment  should  consist  of  white  meats,  gruel  with  milk,  but
no  lemons.  She  allowed  very  little  wine,  a  little  rum,  a  la  fleur
d'oranger,  or  peppermint  liqueur.  This  treatment  was  not  observed,
and  had  it  been  it  would  not  have  saved  the  patient.  She  died  a
year  afterward.  As  the  body  was  not  opened  it  was  not  possible  to
verify  what  the  somnambule  said.  .......

9.  "  In  a  case  of  some  delicacy  wherein  very  skillful  physicians  had
prescribed  mercurial  treatment  for  an  engorgement  of  the  cervical
glands,  which  they  attributed  to  venereal  disease,  the  family  of  the
patient  that  was  so  treated,  seeing  grave  symptoms  supervening,
wished  to  have  the  advice  of  a  somnambule.  The  writer  was  called
to  attend  this  consultation,  and  did  not  fail  to  profit  by  this  new
opportunity  to  add  to  what  the  Commission  had  seen.  He  found  a
young  woman,  Mrs.  La  C,  with  the  whole  right  side  of  her  neck  pro-
foundly engorged  by  a  great  mass  of  glands  lying  close  together.
One  was  open,  and  from  it  issued  a  yellowish  purulent  matter.

"  Miss  Celine,  whom  Mr.  Foissac  magnetized  in  the  presence  of  the
writer,  put  herself  in  rapport  with  the  patient,  and  declared  that  the
stomach  had  been  attacked  by  a  substance  like  a  poison  j  that  there  was

1  "  Without  attaching  great  importance  to  this  singular  coincidence  of  the  som-
nambule's  prescribing  the  use  of  the  milk  of  a  goat  rubbed  with  mercurial  ointment,
and  the  prescribing  of  the  same  by  Mr.  Dupuytren  and  the  writer,  the  Commission
must  in  its  Report  note  it  ;  it  is  presented  as  a  fact  the  authenticity  of  which  the
writer  guarantees,  but  of  which  neither  he  nor  the  Commission  can  give  any  explana-
tion."    [Note  by  the  Secretary  of  the  Commission.]

ORGANIC  SYMPATHISM.  115

slight  inflammation  of  the  bowels  ;  that  there  was  in  the  right  upper  part
■of  the  neck  a  scrofulous  malady,  which  must  have  been  more  extensive
than  it  was  then  ;  that  by  the  adoption  of  a  soothing  treatment,  which
she  prescribed,  there  would  be  betterment  in  two  or  three  weeks.  She
followed  this  treatment  for  a  little  while,  and  there  was  a  notable
improvement.  But  the  impatience  of  the  sick  woman,  who  found  the
return  to  health  not  speedy  enough,  determined  the  family  to  call
another  council  of  doctors.  There  it  was  decided  that  the  patient
should  again  be  subjected  to  mercurial  treatment.  The  writer  there-
after saw  the  patient  no  more,  but  learned  that  in  consequence  of  the
administration  of  mercury  she  had  had  very  serious  stomach  troubles,
which  carried  her  to  the  grave  after  two  months  of  great  suffering.  A
minute  of  the  autopsy,  signed  by  Messrs.  Fouquier,  Marjolin,  Cruveillier
and  Foissac,  showed  that  there  was  a  scrofulous  or  tubercular  engorge-
ment of  the  glands  of  the  neck,  two  small  cavities  filled  with  pus,
resulting  from  the  discharges  of  the  tubercles  at  the  top  of  each  lung,
and  that  the  mucous  membrane  of  the  great  cul-de-sac  of  the  stomach
was  almost  entirely  destroyed.  These  gentlemen  ascertained,  further,
that  there  was  nothing  indicative  of  venereal  disease,  whether  recent  or  of
long  sta?idi?ig."

The  report  ends  with  these  conclusions  :

"  1.  That,  in  the  state  of  somnambulism,  Miss  Celine  indicated  the
diseases  of  three  persons  with  whom  she  had  been  put  in  rapport.

"  2.  That  the  declaration  of  one  of  these,  the  examination  made  of
another,  after  three  punctures,  and  the  autopsy  held  on  the  third,
were  found  to  agree  with  what  the  somnambule  had  declared.

"  3.  That  the  several  treatments  prescribed  by  her  are  not  of  the
class  of  remedies  that  she  might  have  known,  and  not  such  as  she
might  reasonably  be  expected  to  recommend.

4.  That  she  applied  them  with  some  discernment."

u

Mr.  Foissac  had  the  luck  to  be  able  to  keep  his  word.

We  may  imagine  the  emotion  produced  in  the  Academy  by  the
reading  of  the  report,  only  a  few  pages  of  which  we  have  quoted.
Seldom  has  so  impartial,  so  clear,  or  so  discreet  an  account  been  given
of  so  great  a  number  of  observations.

Applause  was  frequent,  but  when  the  question  arose  about  printing
the  report,  members  began  to  have  fears  for  the  prestige  of  the
Academy.

"  Were  most  of  the  things  recounted  in  this  report  real  facts,"  said
Mr.  Castel,  "they  would  upset  one-half  of  our  physiological  knowl-
edge, and  it  would  be  dangerous  to  propagate  these  facts  by  means
of  the  press."  The  Academy  had  almost  decided  to  follow  this  ad-
vice when  Mr.  Roux  had  the  happy  thought  to  propose  a  via  media  j
hence  the  report  was  not  printed,  but  it  was  autographed.

It  will  be  readily  seen  that  despite  a  seeming  exactitude  "  con-
firmed by  the  autopsy  "  in  determining  the  lesions,  this  exactitude
has  regard  only  to  the  general  functions,  and  that  the  remarks  we
have  already  made,  as  well  as  those  of  Dr.   Bertrand,  lose  none  of

n6  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

their  value.  It  is  not  vision  of  the  organs  that  the  commission  found,
but  a  sympathic  perception,  more  or  less  precise,  of  the  ailments  of
the  patients.  I  remark  further  that  these  consultations  of  Miss
Celine  are  slightly  different  from  those  of  other  somnambules  already
mentioned.  She  does  not  suffer  the  pains  and  aches  she  is  examining  ;.
she  simply  perceives  them  as  though  they  were  something  palpable  ;:
she  feels  of  them  (tdte),  so  to  speak,  but  does  not  "  catch "  them.,
We  shall  see  further  on  that  this  difference  springs  from  the  existence
of  two  slightly  different  types  of  somnambulic  perception.  But  the
basis  is  the  same,  and  it  is  always  constituted  by  a  possibility  of
nervic  transmission  ;  only  we  must  distinguish  between  imitative  or
imaginative  transmission,  which  has  no  relation  to  .mental  suggestion,
and  physical  transmission,  which  serves  as  the  basis  of  mental  sugges-
tion, and  which  may  be  more  or  less  pronounced.

"  Most  somnambules,"  says  Dr.  Charpignon,1  "  feel  the  pains  of  the
persons  with  whom  they  are  put  in  rapport.  This  sensation  is  tran-
sitory, and  leaves  no  trace  on  awaking  if  we  take  care  duly  to  break
the  rapport.  If  it  is  the  magnetizer  that  suffers,  the  sensation  is  most
vivid,  and  often  persists  after  awaking.  If  one  in  a  state  of  ill  health
goes  on  magnetizing  for  several  days,  these  impressionable  somnam-
bules become  affected  with  the  same  complaint.  Hence  we  must  be
very  careful  with  regard  to  this  point,  and  must  exercise  this  pru-
dence even  with  respect  to  psychic  affections,  for  one  can  hardly
conceive  how  serious  is  the  influence  of  an  agitated  mind  upon  some
somnambules.  This  identification  [he  adds]  of  the  two  nervous  sys-
tems produces  sometimes  the  phenomenon  of  imitation,  so  that  if  the
magnetizer  uses  his  handkerchief,  or  coughs,  the  somnambule  repeats
the  acts  ;  if  he  takes  snuff,  the  somnambule  sneezes  ;  prick  the  mag-
netizer or  give  him  a  burn,  and  the  somnambule  feels  the  same  pains
in  the  same  parts  of  the  body."

In  this  passage  three  different  phenomena  are  confounded  :
i.  Imitation  of  movements — a  subject  studied  of  late  by  Heiden-
hain.

2.  Hyperesthesia  of  the  sense  of  smell  (the  magnetizer  takes  snuff,,
the  somnambule  sneezes).

3.  Transmission  of  sensations.

But  evidently  in  practice  these  phenomena  are  usually  associated,,
and  that  constitutes  one  of  the  difficulties  of  experimentation,  and  is.
at  the  same  time  a  pretty  strong  argument  for  the  theory  of  "  sym-
pathism,"  as  we  shall  see.

This  word  sympathism,  employed  sometimes  by  Charpignon,  seems
to  me  well  chosen,  and  I  shall  accept  it,  giving  to  it,  however,  a  more
precise  meaning.  I  will  use  it  to  signify  the  phenomenon  of  direct
and  instantaneous  communication  of  the  sense  of  pain  and  of  other
subjective  sensations,  of    feelings,   and   of    emotive  states  ;  but    not

1  "  Physiologie,  M6decine,  Mdtaphysique  du  Magnetisme,"  p.  72.

ORGANIC  SYMPATHISM.  117

facts  of  observation  through  eye  and  ear  ;  these  might  be  comprised
under  the  term  "mimism.''1  Mimism,  as  related  to  diseases  and  to
acts,  will  take  the  name  of  psychic  contagion,  while  facts  of  disease-
transmission  (which  is  nearly  always  mediate  and  retarded)  by  touch
alone,  unbeknown  to  the  one  who  undergoes  the  action,  may  be  con-
sidered as  coming  under  the  head  of  nervic  contagion,  properly  so-
called,  ox  physical  nervic  contagion.

Physical  sympathism  may  be  subjective  or  objective.  It  is  sub-
jective in  somnambules  who  themselves  feel  the  symptoms  they
discover.  In  Miss  Celine  and  in  the  two  following  cases  observed
by  Dr.  Pigeaire,  it  was  objective  only.

10.  "  The  lady  put  her  hand  in  that  of  the  somnambule,  who  forth-
with said  :  '  Madame,  you  have  a  headache  ? '  '  That  is  true,'  the
lady  answered  ;  'since  this  morning  I  have  had  a  pain  in  the  head.'  "a

11.  "Some  time  after,  Prof.  Lallemand  told  me  that  a  patient
wanted  to  consult  a  somnambule.  Wishing  to  be  assured  of  the  ex-
istence of  this  magnetic  faculty,  which,  so  to  speak,  senses  ailments,
we  know  not  how,  I  once  more  tried  my  somnambule.  [Pigeaire's
own  young  daughter.]  Hardly  had  she  touched  the  sick  man's  hand,
when  she  said  :  'Your  legs,  sir,  are  dead-like.'  '  Tell  me,'  said  I,  'are
you  a  paralytic  ;  can  you  not  move  your  legs  ? '  '  No,  sir.'  '  You  were
ill  after  your  coming  to  France,' added  the  somnambule,  'but now  you
are  much  better.'     The  old  man  made  a  sign  of  affirmation  "  (p.  61).

12.  "  Mrs.  Ch.  had  for  some  time  been  suffering  in  her  left  jaw  .  .  .
The  lancinating  pains  were  concentrated  in  the  temple  and  in  the
branch  of  the  lower  jawbone.  The  patient  indicated  the  track  of  the
pain,  and  the  track  was  along  the  dental  canal.  The  somnambule
taking  Mrs.  Ch.'s  hand,  brought  her  own  hand  to  her  own  face,
touched  with  a  finger  the  dental  nerve,  then  the  temple  and  the  jaw.
At  last  she  said  :  '  This  nerve  (the  dental)  is  attached  to  a  blood
vessel  (the  dental  artery)  ;  it  is  the  same  here  (at  the  temple).  Well,
the  vessels  are  so  distended  with  blood,  and  their  tissue  so  inflamed,
that  they  compress  the  nerves  and  irritate  them.'  "  3

This  last  observation  presents  an  intermediate  type.  The  somnam-
bule does  not  suffer,  but  yet  she  seems  to  feel  the  effect  of  the  con-
sultation, since  it  is  upon  herself  that  she  shows  the  track  of  the
pain.

Two  observations  with  which  we  are  already  familiar,  that  of  Mrs.
R.,  who  clearly  defined  the  ailments  of  one  of  my  patients,  selected
purposely  for  this  test  [p.  32,  supra],  and  that  of  Mrs.  B.,  who  divined
Mr.  Marillier's  complaint  [p.  95,  supra],  belong  to  the  first  category.
These  two  somnambules  felt  distinctly  in  themselves  the  ailments
diagnosed  by  them,  and  I  remember  another  consultation  of  Mrs.
R.'s,  after  which  she  took  a  full  quarter  of  an  hour  to  recover  from
an  illness  communicated  to  her  by  a  patient.     In  the  course  of  a  few

1  The  author  uses  here  the  hybrid  and  bastard  word  "imitatisme." — Translator.
s  J.  Pigeaire,  "  Puissance  de  l'Electricite  Animale,"  p.  61.     Paris,  1839.
3  Charpignon,  op.  at.,  pp.  251,  252.

n8  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

minutes  her  abdomen  became  hard  and  swollen,  as  happens  in  cases  of
hysteria.  Almost  of  a  certainty,  had  she  been  awakened  at  that
moment,  the  ailment  would  have  persisted  many  hours.

I  add  that  then  for  the  first  time  did  Mrs.  R.,  magnetized  by  me,
make  a  diagnosis  in  the  somnambulic  state.  She  was  in  the  habit  of
doing  so  in  the  waking  state.  One  might  say  that  in  somnambulism
she  is  too  sensitive.

But  as  there  are  somnambules  that  recognize  the  ailments  of
patients  without  appearing  to  be  affected  by  them,  it  is  well  to  ex-
amine what  the  process  is  that  guides  them,  and  to  this  end  I  must
touch  on  a  phenomenon  not  less  extraordinary,  which,  for  a  long
time,  I  durst  not  publish.

CHAPTER  II.

SYMPATHISM    AND    CONTAGION.

SOMNAMBULES  of  the  second  category  are  not  satisfied  with
"  entering  into  rapport  "  with  the  patient  by  touching  his  hand,
or  simply  by  remaining  a  few  moments  in  his  presence,  as  is  often
the  case  with  Mrs.  R.:  they  touch  the  patient  at  sundry  points,  and
pass  their  hands  over  his  body,  intent  upon  what  they  are  doing.
Can  it  be  that  this  performance  gives  them  any  indications  as  to  his
pathological  state  ?

That  is  the  question.  Its  importance  is  seen  ;  for  could  it  be  proved
that  on  the  surface  of  the  body,  and  even  at  a  certain  distance,  ail-
ments more  or  less  deep-seated  manifest  themselves  in  a  way  as  yet
unknown,  science  must  seize  upon  so  valuable  a  discovery,  and  seek
to  profit  by  it.

m  Now,  for  the  first  time,  do  I  venture  to  speak  of  this  phenomenon,
though  I  have  known  it  five  or  six  years.  And  here  is  the  history  of
my  opinions  :

Some  seven  years'  ago  an  old  magnetizer,  who  was  no  longer  in
practice,  for  he  was  himself  a  sufferer,  said  one  day  to  me  :  "  Are  you
not  afraid  of  doing  yourself  hurt  by  magnetizing  so  many  people  ? "

"  Why  should  I  ?  I  am  always  in  good  health  and  can  stand  a  good
deal  of  fatigue."

"  I  was  not  thinking  of  fatigue,"  said  he.  "  But  you  take  to  your-
self all  the  emanations  of  the  patients,  all  the  7norbific  fluids  "  (fluides
ma/sains) .

I  laughed  in  his  face.  I  did  not  believe  in  his  "  fluid,"  nor  do  I
yet.  But  now  I  do  believe  in  a  certain  physical  action,  whereas  then
I  confounded  magnetism  with  hypnotism,  as  people  do  to  this  day.

SYMPA  THISM  AND  CONTA GJON.  1 1 9

It  is  true  that  at  that  time  I  magnetized  very  few  sick  persons,
hardly  any  at  all  ;  I  made  my  experiments  on  healthy  persons,  and
not  till  a  few  months  afterward  did  I  come  to  recognize  the  thera-
peutic value  of  magnetism,  and  undertook  to  make  research  in  that
direction.

But  during  the  whole  of  the  following  year,  though  I  magnetized
many  a  patient,  I  observed  nothing  of  the  kind  the  magnetizer  had
spoken  of,  nothing  such  as  I  remembered  to  have  read  of  in  certain
books,  giving  no  credence  at  all  to  the  stories.

In  fact,  it  was  not  upon  a  sick  person  that  I  made  my  first  observa-
tion of  this  kind.  We  were  in  the  country.  The  Count  de  P.,  who
had  witnessed  my  experiments  with  peasants,  asked  me  to  make  trial
upon  him.

I  was  unable  to  endorm  him,  but  he  believed  he  felt  several  very
definite  sensations.  I  did  not  speak  a  word  to  him,  so  as  not  to  influ-
ence his  imagination,  but  I,  too,  while  magnetizing  him,  had  a  very
peculiar  sensation  in  my  hands,  never  observed  by  me  before — a
breath  of  cool  air,  very  distinctly  felt  when  I  held  my  hand  above  his
at  the  distance  of  a  few  centimeters,  or  when  I  passed  my  hand  about
over  his  body.  This,  sensation  was  not  always  of  the  same  intensity,
but  sometimes,  now  and  then,  it  was  so  distinct  that  it  was  like  a  per-
son's breath  blown  between  my  fingers.  Once  the  count  exclaimed,
"  Oh,  what  a  funny  current !  "

Only  on  finding  that  my  sensations  coincided  with  his,  did  I  acquaint
him  with  mine,  and  we  spent  many  hours  in  studying  them.

I  must  mention  that  the  count,  though  in  good  health,  had  just
passed  many  sleepless  nights  with  his  cousin,  who  was  seriously  ill,
and  that  he  was  very  much  exhausted.  It  was  in  order  to  recuperate
from  this  fatigue  that  he  had  come  into  the  country.

The  sensation  I  felt  much  resembled  another  one  that  was  familiar
to  me.  Any  one  may  experience  it  by  bringing  the  hand  near  to  an
electrostatic  machine  in  action,  but  not  so  near  as  to  receive  a  spark.
But  in  spite  of  this  analogy,  I  was  inclined  to  think  that  it  was  noth-
ing but  a  rapid  absorption  of  heat,  though  I  was  aware  that  the  phe-
nomenon was  not  always  in  proportion  to  the  temperature  of  our
hands.  At  the  same  time  I  thought  it  might  be  all  a  subjective  illu-
sion, and  now  I  regret  my  skepticism  of  that  time,  for  because  of  it
I  neglected,  in  that  case,  as  in  a  few  others,  to  take  detailed  notes.

But  my  attention  was  won,  and  I  began,  little  by  little,  to  see  in
this  phenomenon  a  real  cause.  First  I  was  forced  to  recognize  that  it
is  more  or  less  independent  of  heat.

I  had  a  patient,  anaemic  in  the  highest  degree,  who  always  found
my  hand  hot,  even  when  it  was  numb  with  cold  (it  was  winter),  while
she  gave  me  a  sensation  of  cold,  despite  the  heat  of  her  skin  upon
direct  contact.

i2o  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

Another  patient,  a  man,  who  was  also  highly  ansamic,  gave  me  the
same  sensation,  and  in  this  case  there  was  actual  loss  of  heat,  for  my  •
hands  became  very  cool  in  a  few  minutes.

Usually  the  contrary  is  the  fact  :  my  hands  grow  warmer  during
magnetization  and  I  have  a  distinct  feeling  of  dryness,  not  always  in
direct  proportion  to  the  actual  dryness  of  the  skin.

Still  another  patient,  a  man  suffering  from  phthisis,  caused  me  the
sensation  of  a  cool  draught,  but  only  from  the  level  of  the  lungs;  and
an  ataxic  patient  had  a  cold  sensation  in  the  left  side,  a  hot  in  the
right.  The  magnet  produced  exactly  the  same  effect  (without  any
distinction  of  poles),  whereas  I  felt  nothing.  Finally,  in  other  ataxic
patients  the  case  was  reversed  :  they  felt  nothing,  while  I  had  a  very
clear  sensation  on  one  side,  for  one  leg  of  the  patient  drew,  as  it  were,
a  current  of  air  from  n^  hands  (either  hand),  while  the  other  leg  did
not  draw  at  all,  or  did  so  less  sensibly.

By  degrees  I  found  that  this  phenomenon  occurs  in  many  other
persons,  sick  or  exhausted,  and  thus  I  am  sometimes  able  to  determine
the  degree  of  exhaustion  of  a  single  organ  even.  I  must  add  that
when  there  is  complete  paralysis  of  long  standing,  I  feel  nothing — at
least  so  it  has  been  hitherto — and  that  sometimes  the  sensation  is
lacking  despite  exhaustion.

I  have  made  some  very  curious  observations  on  the  feeling  of  a
breath  or  faint  current  of  air  restricted  to  the  track  of  a  single  affected
nerve,  but  I  have  not  yet  arranged  the  facts  in  logical  order.

But  then,  to  make  amends,  I  have  found  another  kind  of  sensation
that  has  given  me  more  positive  results.  I  have  relieved  hundreds  of
persons  of  headache  by  simple  imposition  of  hands.  Simple  though
the  process  is,  the  phenomenon  is  complex,  and  I  have  no  intention
just  at  present  to  theorize  upon  it.  Still,  two  things  are  certain:  1,
that  by  this  method  (which  is  as  old  as  the  world)  I  remove  the  head-
ache in  60  cases  out  of  100  within  a  few  minutes  ;  and  2,  that  very
often  I  can  tell  the  precise  instant  at  which  the  pain  grows  less  and
disappears  under  my  hand.

And  this  is  how  I  notice  the  change  :  The  aching  head  may  be  hot
or  cool,  and  everybody  knows  that  headache  may  be  produced  by
several  different  causes.  But  independently  of  these  differences,  one
character,  perceptible  only  to  him  who  holds  his  hand  upon  the  head,
and  who  is  in  the  habit  of  observing,  is  almost  constant,  to  wit,  a  sen-
sation of  increased  warmth  under  the  hands  if  the  pain  is  disappearing,
but  a  lack  of  this  sensation  if  the  ache  continues.

This  phenomenon  may  be  observed  not  only  in  the  head  but  over
the  whole  surface  of  the  body,  and  particularly  at  the  epigastrium.
If  a  given  surface  of  the  skin  overlies  a  sound  organ,  the  subjective
sense  of  increasing  warmth  should  begin  immediately  after  the  im-
position of  the  hands,  and  should  attain  maximum  after  a  few  minutes.

S  YMPA  THISM  AND  CONTA  GION.  1 2 1

■  Some  persons  to  whom  I  communicated  this  observation  have  more
or  less  easily  confirmed  it ;  but  I  cannot  guarantee  that  the  phenom-
enon will,  with  everybody,  present  the  same  character  or  the  same
definiteness.  I  would  add  that,  acting  without  contact,  at  the  dis-
tance of  a  few  centimeters,  I  sometimes  obtain  the  same  results  and
the  same  sensations.

As  I  am  not  writing  a  medical  treatise,  I  pass  over  details  and  ex-
ceptions, and  merely  remark  that  henceforth  it  becomes  theoretically
possible  to  diagnose  an  invisible  malady  by  the  touch  of  the  hand.
This  power  may  depend  simply  on  a  heat  reaction  hitherto  overlooked
in  medical  thermometry.  The  details  I  have  given  will,  perhaps,  have
some  interest  for  Professor  Grasset,  who  has  just  published  an  essay
on  the  rapidity  of  the  action  of  animal  heat  upon  a  thermometer  as  a
diagnostic  character,1  and  who  holds  that  "  the  emissive  power,  often
in  contradiction  to  the  patient's  temperature,  is,  on  the  other  hand,
proportioned  to  the  sensation  had  on  touching  the  body."

We  know  what  close  relations  subsist  between  certain  diseases  and
the  peripheric  temperature  ;  Mantegazza's  studies  show  that,  as  a
rule,  pain  reduces  the  body's  temperature  ;  Mr.  Charcot's  researches
have  taught  us  to  distinguish  cerebral  haemorrhage  from  softening  of
the  brain,  simply  with  the  aid  of  thermometric  readings  ;  and  Mr.
Williams  asserts  that  he  can  tell  from  the  degree  of  temperature  ob-
served to  what  category  of  patients  an  idiot  belongs.  Even  Hippo-
crates declared  that  "  the  expired  air  that  issues  cold  from  the  mouth
and  the  nostrils  is  a  death  sign,"  etc.*

If  it  is  so  as  regards  rough  general  indications,  it  becomes  probable
that  more  detailed,  more  specific  indicia  might  give  a  more  or  less
exact  idea  of  the  pathological  state  of  the  organism — the  more
because  the  thermometric  signs  do  not  stand  alone.  Electric  reactions
come  of  necessity  into  play,  and  the  already  old  observations  of  Frank,
Nieszkowski  and  Sniadecki  prove  that  some  hysteric  subjects  are
conscious  of  them.  I  have,  myself,  made  some  researches  on  this
point,  but  cannot  yet  state  the  results  with  precision.  These  questions
are  too  obscure,  though  some  physicians  think  they  find  in  electric  re-
actions the  prinefpal  causes  of  diseases.3

A  subject  a  little  better  known,  and  one  closely  connected  with  the
diagnostic  of  diseases  by  somnambules,  is  that  of  odoriferous  material
exhalations.

We  must  not  be  led  astray  by  appearances.  Somnambules  seem-
ingly employ  only  the  touch  or  tactile  transmission  from  a  distance,

1  "  Un  Nouvel  Element  de  Thermometrie  Clinique."  Pub.  in  La  Semaine  M/dicale,
•August,  1885.

2  A  detailed  analysis  of  these  questions  will  be  found  in  Redard's  ' '  Etudes  de
Thermometrie  Clinique."     Paris,  1874.

3  See  Scoutetten,  "  Evolution  Medicale,  ou  de  l'lilectricite  du  Sang,"  etc.  Metz,
1870.

T22  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

but  I  have  repeatedly  found  that  they  are  also  guided  unconsciously
by  olfactive  sensations.  Cut  them  off  from  these,  and  you  will  in
many  cases  see  the  appreciation  and  communication  of  symptoms
sensibly  lessened.  Smell  is  the  unconscious's  own  sense,  just  as  sight
is  the  sense  of  the  consciousness,  and  touch  their  common  master.

Civilization  has  suppressed  in  us  the  science  at  once  deep  and  wide
which  animals  possess,  and  for  which  they  are  indebted  to  the  sense
of  smell;  but  somnambulism  and  certain  morbid  states  give  it  back  its
true  value.  We  must  not  forget  that  if  the  hypnotized  subject  can
remain  insensible  while  inhaling  ammonia,  he  may  also,  a  moment
later,  distinctly  sense  the  odor  of  apples  by  sniffing  at  several  yards'
distance  the  paper  in  which  apples  were  wrapped  some  days  previously.
Now,  it  is  certain  that  our  individualities,  our  pathological  states,
our  feelings  even,  betray  themselves  by  a  specific  odor  which  we  do
not  knowingly  perceive,  but  which  none  the  less  acts  upon  smell,
leaving  on  the  brain  unconscious  traces  that  in  turn  associate  themselves
-with  the  state  that  produced  them.  And  by  virtue  of  the  law  of  psychic
reversibility,  the  sensation  a,  belonging  to  the  state  A,  may  reproduce
the  latter,  just  as  the  state  may  reproduce  the  sensation.  (See  Part
III.,  Chapter  viii.)

That  which  is  quite  easy  in  a  state  of  exceptional  exaltation  of
smell  and  exclusive  concentration  of  the  attention  upon  one  object  ("  rap-
port "),  of  course,  is  hardly  possible  in  the  normal  state,  and  some-
times incomprehensible.  But  it  is  not  to  be  forgotten  that,  as  Dr.
Monin  says  in  his  remarkable  semeiological  monograph,1  "  Odorant
waves  always  reveal  important  chemic  changes  .  .  .  and  in  all
biological  phenomena  play  a  leading  part."

Most  diseases  have  their  specific  smells,  and  these,  by  marking  the
stage  of  the  pathologic  evolution,  may  even  guide  us  often  to  a  sure
prognosis.  "  In  the  chamber  of  a  lying-in  woman,  the  sour  smell
betokens  to  the  practiced  nose  that  all  is  going  on  well,  that  the  work
of  milk  secretion  is  beginning.  On  the  contrary,  an  ammoniacal  smell
will  make  the  physician  fear  the  imminence  of  the  morbid  syndromus
known  as  puerperal  fever."  Dr.  Vidal,  of  Cassis,  records  in  his
■"  Treatise  on  Surgery,"  that  J.  H.  Petit,  while  traveling  in  Germany,
■distinguished  the  smell  of  gangrene  among  other  smells  not  less  dis-
agreeable, and  so  was  able  to  cure  a  man  dying  of  strangulated  hernia
(p.  6).  The  cutaneous  perspiration  and  the  various  secretions  of  the
skin  diffuse  round  about  each  individual  a  special  odor.  This  odor,
commonly  but  little  sensible,  is  very  distinctly  sensed  by  certain  per-
sons of  highly  developed  sense  of  smell.  Cadet  de  Gassicourt  ("  Diet,
des  Sciences  Med.,"  vol.  iv.,  p.  196)  tells  of  a  young  matron  who  by
the  smell  alone  distinguished  men  and  women.  She  could  not  endure
the  smell  of  her  bed  clothes  when  touched  by  any  one  but  herself.
1  "  Les  Odeurs  du  Corps  Humain,"  p.  4.     Paris,  2d  ed.,  1886.

SYMPATHISM  AND  CONTAGION.  123

The  Journal  des  Savants,  1864,  relates  that  a  monk  in  Hungary  could
by  olfaction  tell  a  chaste  woman  from  one  not  chaste.  Perty  cites
many  cases  of  this  kind.  It  appears  that  the  Cardinal  Alexander
Albani,  after  losing  his  sight,  distinguished  by  olfaction  young  women
from  old.1  Debay  reports  an  observation  of  a  somnambule  who,
after  examining  by  smell  a  score  of  different  objects,  apparently
inodorous,  as  rings,  pins,  brooches,  etc.,  belonging  to  ten  different
persons,  sorted  them  and  distributed  them  to  their  owners  without
making  a  mistake.8

It  is  even  not  impossible  that  certain  psychic  states  may  reveal
themselves  in  the  same  manner,  for  certainly  the  odor  of  the  cutan-
eous exudations  undergoes  marked  changes  under  the  influence  of
sundry  emotions.     Says  Dr.  Monin  :

"  The  action  of  the  nervous  system  on  the  odor  of  the  cutaneous
exudations  is  highly  important ;  not  infrequently  it  is  heightened  or
modified  by  moral  excitement,  depressing  passions,  and  neuroses.
Gamberini  (Annali  Universali,  1854)  cites  the  case  of  a  young  man,
who,  in  consequence  of  being  crossed  in  love  and  of  a  violent  fit  of
jealousy,  gave  out  from  his  whole  body  a  fetid  smell,  nauseating  and
very  lasting.  Dr.  Hammond,  of  New  York,  lately  reported  (Med.
Rec,  June  21,  1887)  the  case  of  a  young  hypochondriac  whose  skin
gave  out  the  odor  of  violets  ;  of  a  victim  of  chorea  who  exhaled  the
odor  of  pines  ;  of  an  hysteric  woman,  who,  in  her  crises,  emitted  the
smell  of  bananas ;  he  tells  of  another  hysterical  woman  whose  trans-
piration was  restricted  to  the  left  anterior  half  of  the  chest,  exhaling
the  odor  of  iris.  In  the  latter  case  a  chemical  examination  of  the
sweat  was  made  and  showed  the  presence  of  butyric  ether."

I  have  myself  observed  an  hysterical  woman  in  whom  the  approach
of  a  paroxysm  was  announced  by  an  odor  of  Gruyere  cheese,  or  rather
by  an  odor  that  recalled  the  taste  of  Gruyere.  In  another  case  a
metalloscopic  plate  of  tin  applied  to  the  patient  for  a  few  days
acquired  a  very  strong  smell  resembling  that  of  petroleum,  despite
the  patient's  scrupulous  neatness.

"  In  localized  perspiration  (continues  Dr.  Monin)  these  odd  osphre-
siologic  anomalies  are  by  no  means  rare.  Schmidt  knew  a  man  sub-
ject to  a  hyperhydrosis  limited  to  the  hands,  and  who  smelt  of  sulphur.
Orteschi  observed  a  young  girl  who  without  any  trickery  gave  out  a
strong  odor  of  vanilla  from  the  commissures  of  the  fingers.  All  these
phenomena  result  from  disorders  of  innervation.  According  to
Hammond  the  odor  of  sanctity  is  not  a  mere  rhetorical  figure,  it  is  the
expression  of  a  holy  neurosis3  perfuming  the  skin  with  effluvia,  more
or  less  agreeable,  at  the  moment  of  the  ecstatic  religious  paroxysm  "
(p.  17).    "  In  lethargy  (which  hardly  ever  occurs  in  hysteric  subjects4)

1  Perty,  "  Anthropologic,"  I.,  187.     Leipsic,  1874.
9  A.  Debay,  "  Hygiene  des  Douleurs,"  p.  32.     Paris,  1877.

3  Sainte  nevrose  is  Dr.  Monin's  rendering  of  Hammond's  phrase,  whatever  that
may  have  been. —  Translator.

*  Or  rather  in  hypnotizable  subjects.

i24  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

the  cutaneous  exudation  emits  a  cadaveric  smell,  thus  adding  to  the
picture  of  death,  already  so  realistic.  This  odor  must  doubtless  have
been  the  cause  of  frightful  mistakes  :  such  at  least  is  the  opinion  of
Berniitz."

According  to  the  researches  I  have  made  in  cholera  times,  hyp-
notizable  persons  constitute  the  greater  part  of  the  quickly  fatal
cases  ;  but  such  persons  are  the  ones  liable  to  fall  into  true  lethargy
(profound  paralytic  aideia),  presenting  all  the  appearances  of  death.
It  would  be  well,  therefore,  in  such  cases  to  have  recourse  to  mag-
netism, which  might  transform  this  state  into  somnambulism  ;  or  to
call  in  a  somnambule  who  presents  the  phenomenon  of  sympathism,
and  who  doubtless  will  know  better  than  we  how  to  distinguish
apparent  death.  At  all  events  one  must  not  laugh  at  this  means
before  one  has  tried  it.

As  the  different  mental  states  find  expression  by  means  of  a  trophic
action  of  the  nervous  system,  they  may  produce  a  special  cutaneous
odor.  The  odor  exhaled  from  the  skin  in  mental  diseases,  an  odor
noted  in  1862  by  Dagonet,  has  been  studied  particularly  by  Fevre  of
Toulouse  in  his  work  "  Les  Alterations  du  Systeme  Cutane  dans  la
Folie"  (Paris,  1876).     He  there  says  (p.  19)  :

"  The  sweat  of  insane  persons  has  special  sui  generis  emanations,
penetrant  and  infectant,  like  those  of  hands  that  are  kept  constantly
shut,  something  like  the  smell  of  mice  or  of  the  fallow  deer.  This
smell  is  found  especially  in  general  paralytics  and  confirmed  dements.1
It  impregnates  the  clothing,  bedding,  furniture,  as  well  as  the  rooms
occupied  by  the  insane  ;  and  it  is  very  lasting,  in  spite  of  soap  and
water.  This  odor  is  so  characteristic  in  simple  insanity  [folie)  that
Burrows  declares  that  were  he  to  find  it  given  out  by  any  one  he
*  would  not  hesitate  to  pronounce  the  person  insane,  even  if  there
were  no  other  evidence.'  An  English  psychiater  goes  further :
Knight  declared  that  he  could  detect  pretended  insanity  by  the  ab-
sence of  this  physiognomic  odor."

This  pathological  exhalation  may  even  be  localized  and  may  oc-
cupy a  region  of  the  skin  corresponding  to  the  inward  disorders.
S.  Weir  Mitchell  has  noticed  that  in  nerve  lesions  the  corresponding
cutaneous  region  emits  a  smell  resembling  that  of  stagnant  water.
Mr.  Monin  is  of  the  opinion  that  in  such  cases  we  have  an  epithelial
dystrophy  rather  than  actual  changes  in  the  physiological  secretion —
but  that  is  no  reason  why  an  hypersesthesic  sense  should  not  be  able
to  detect  by  this  means  the  state  of  the  disease  and  its  area.

That  most  occupations  may  have  their  specific  odors  we  can  under-
stand. Mr.  Monin  sees  nothing  out  of  the  way  in  the  saying  of  the
famous  Vidocq  :  "  Place  me  in  a  crowd  and  there  I  will  pick  out
from  among  a  thousand  a  galley-bird  by  the  smell  alone."     Chomel

1  French  de'ment,  Latin  demetis.  The  meaning  is  plain — a  victim  of  dementia. —
Translator.

SYMPATHISM  AND  CONTAGION.  125

observed  for  six  weeks  a  groom  suffering  from  pneumonia,  whose
sweat  retained  during  all  that  lapse  of  time  the  smell  of  the  stable.1
Again,  Monin  writes  :

"  In  enuresic  patients,  a  urinous  smell,  or  a  mousy  smell,  penetrant
and  which  nothing  can  suppress,  has  often  been  of  use  to  military
surgeons  in  detecting  the  simulation  of  incontinence  of  urine.  So,
too,  in  constipation  there  is  an  odor  from  the  skin  like  that  of  faeces  ;
often  we  have  found  that  this  odor  perceived  by  the  patients,  con-
tributes to  bring  on  hypochondria,  which  is  ever  lying  in  wait  for
iiufferers  from  this  complaint"  (p.  25).

In  gout  the  skin  secretions  take  a  special  odor,  which  Sydenham
compares  to  that  of  whey.  In  jaundice  the  odor  is  of  musk  ;  in
oppilation,  of  vinegar  ;  in  syphilis,  of  honey  ;  urinous  in  urinary  dis-
orders (cystitis)  ;  of  sour  beer  in  scrofula  (Stark  apud  Hebra)  ;  of
warm  bread  in  intermittent  fever  (Heim)  ;  in  diabetes  when  there  is
perspiration  the  smell  is  of  hay  (Latham),  or  rather  of  acetone  (Picot),
but  according  to  Bouchardat,  midway  between  aldehyde  and  acetone,
being  due  to  mixture,  in  variable  proportions,  of  these  two  bodies.
In  cholera  the  odor  is  ammoniacal  (Drasch,  Parker)  ;  it  is  acid  in
what  is  called  milk  fever  ;  sweet  in  the  onset  period  of  the  plague
(Diemerbroeck),  or  honey-like,  according  to  Doppner,  who  observed
the  plague  at  Vetlanka  {Lancet,  February  1,  1879)  ;  aceto-formic  in
rheumatism,  particularly  in  the  region  of  the  engorged  articulations
(Monin)  ;  of  new-plucked  feathers  in  measles  (rougeole)  ;  of  new-
baked  bread  in  scarlatina  ;  in  small  pox  the  odor  is  that  of  the  fallow
deer;  in  typhoid  fever  it  is  that  of  blood  (Behier).  Frederic  Berard
goes  so  far  as  to  say  that,  apart  from  the  secretions,  the  cutaneous
odor  draws  files  to  a  still  living  body.  However  little  noticeable  it
may  be,  it  says  plainly  that  death  is  near:  a  sweat  having  a  cadaveric
odor  precedes  death,  says  Bcerhaave  (Aphorism  728  of  the  edltio  pri?i-
ceps).  Dr.  Althaus  tells  us  that  Skoda  hardly  ever  was  led  into  error
by  this  indication,  and  Crompton,  of  Birmingham,  also  laid  great  stress
upon  this  as  an  important  clinical  symptom.  But  the  smell  given  out
at  the  death  agony  is  .totally  different  from  the  death-odor  :  it  is
universally  admitted  to  be  specific,  and  it  differs  entirely  from  the
odor  of  putridity.2

It  would  be  difficult  to  insure  the  exactitude,  or,  at  least,  the  prac-
tical value  of  all  these  assertions.  But  they  suffice  to  show  that  there
is  ground  in  facts  for  the  occult  judgments  of  somnambules,  not  only
from  the  diagnostic,  but  also  from  the  prognostic,  point  of  view.
Clearly,  disease  is  not  bounded  by  the  surface  of  the  body;  it  goes
beyond  it.

The  reader,  doubtless,  has  heard  tell  of  extraordinary  diagnoses  made
by  somnambules  at  a  distance,  by  means  of  some  object  belonging  to
1  Monin,  op.  cit.,  p.  25.  -  2  Monin,  op.  cit.,  p.  27.

i26  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

the  patients,  especially  by  means  of  a  lock  of  hair.  Why  by  a  lock
of  hair  in  particular?  Perhaps  because  the  hair,  because  of  its
odors,  manifests  better  than  any  object  the  patient's  pathological
state.1  Dr.  Charpignon  cites  many  facts  of  this  sort,  and,  like  all
magnetizers,  attributes  this  form  of  transmission  to  the  magnetic
fluid.  These  facts  I  do  not  bring  forward  here  because  I  have  never
had  cognizance  of  anything  of  the  kind.  Once  only,  some  fifteen
years  ago,  wishing  to  experiment  upon  this  point,  I  took  a  lock  of
my  grandmother's  hair  and  handed  it  to  a  somnambule.  She  told  me
that  it  belonged  to  a  beautiful  lady  with  whom  I  was  in  love,  and
that  my  love  for  her  had  not  cooled  much  of  late.  True,  my  grand-
mother's hair,  despite  her  age,  is  still  black.  This  somnambule,  like
all  extra-lucid  somnambules,  had  her  "  professor,"  who  turned  her
doings  to  profit  for  himself.  To  make  sure  of  her  lucidity,  usually
he  did  not  endorm  his  subject ;  he  simply  bandaged  her  eyes,  which
gave  to  the  consultations  an  air  of  serenity.  But  the  woman  was
sensitive  and  well  endormed  when  I  consulted  her.  Her  state,  how-
ever, was  one  in  which  sensibility  offers  nothing  out  of  the  common.
She  would  doubtless  have  divined  better  in  the  waking  state.

So  I  have  not  verified  this  phenomenon,  but  it  appears  to  me  to  be
not  at  all  impossible.  The  hair  itself  possesses  an  odor  peculiar  to-
each  individual,  and  which  varies  according  to  sex,  race,  age  and
pathological  state.  We  are  told  that  the  hair  of  the  Chinese  retains
its  musky  odor  even  after  it  has  been  washed  with  potash  (Galippe,
paper  read  at  the  Societe  de  Biologie,  January  25,  1879).  "  Hair-
dressers [wig  makers  ?]  can  tell  easily,"  says  Mr.  Monin,  "  simply
from  the  smell,  whether  a  bunch  of  hair  was  cut  from  the  head  of  a
living  person,  or  whether  it  is  made  up  of  hairs  that  have  fallen
out."

There  are  also  wide  differences  with  regard  to  the  tactile  sensations
produced  by  a  bunch  of  hairs.  Their  thickness,  their  elasticity,  their
smoothness,  the  rustle  they  make  when  rolled  between  the  fingers,
vary  widely.  And  there  is  no  doubt  that  there  subsists  a  very  close
relation  between  the  quality  of  the  hair  and  the  psychic  states.  Every-
body knows  the  injurious  effect  of  grief,  which  may  be  produced  in  a
very  short  time.  I  have  observed  in  myself  that  my  hair  becomes
less  supple  under  the  influence  of  worry,  softer  under  agreeable  con-
ditions. Gratiolet  makes  the  observation  that  melancholy  makes  the
skin  dry  and,  consequently,  the  hair  too.

At  the  same  time  the  odor  changes  perceptibly  with  the  dominant
state  of  the  nervous  system.     "  In  hysterepilepsy,"  says  Monin,  "  the

1  Dr.  E.  Louis  de  Sere  prefers  a  shirt  or  a  flannel  vest  that  has  been  worn  by  the
patient.  In  his  book  are  found  thirty-five  more  or  less  extraordinary  observations  of
this  kind.  Its  title  is  "Application  du  Somnambulisme  Magnetique  au  Diagnostic
et  au  Traitement  des  Maladies."     Paris,  1855.

■S* YMPA  THISM  AND  CONTA  GION.  1 2 7

hair,  at  the  moment  of  the  paroxysms,  has  a  special  odor,  always  the
same,  resembling  the  smell  of  ozone,  or  of  an  electrical  machine
operated  in  dry  weather"  (p.  $$).

Hence,  it  may  be  that  a  hypersesthesic  sensibility  can  detect  in  a
lock  of  hair  a  certain  number  of  true  symptoms.  "  But,"  some  one
will,  perhaps,  say,  "  your  whole  explanation  is  rather  obscure.  A
somnambule  may  have  sensations  that  we  never  receive ;  nothing
more  likely  than  that.  But  to  find  the  smell  of  ozone  in  a  lock  of
hair  and  to  divine  hysterepilepsy,  are  two  things.  So  with  regard  to
all  the  other  objective  explanations.  It  remains  yet  to  be  proved  that
somnambules  know  the  meaning  of  these  signs.  Granted  that  each
•disease,  each  emotion — why  not  each  thought  ? — is  manifested  out-
wardly by  a  modification  of  our  material  emanations  :  that  is  quite
possible  ;  but  the  bond  that  connects  these  modifications  to  these
states,  the  inmost  relations  between  them — where  may  the  somnambule
learn  these  ? "

I  answer  :  First,  we  must  not  exaggerate  the  phenomenon  we  are
trying  to  explain.

Sympathism  exists,  but  it  is  a  rare  fact.  In  a  hundred  somnambulic
diagnoses  you  will  hardly  find  a  dozen  that  are  entirely  exact.  That
suffices  to  exclude  the  hypothesis  of  bare  chance,  but  it  does  not
suffice  for  the  formulation  of  a  simple,  precise  theory,  always  applic-
able. It  is  not  well  to  prove  too  much,  and  to  make  that  appear
simple  which  is  not  simple.  We  must  allow  a  little  for  chance,  for
natural  acuteness,  for  involuntary  suggestions,  for  the  vagueness  of
most  sympathic  communications.  Then  the  difficulty  of  finding  a
causal  bond  between  a  sensation  felt  and  its  physiological  meaning  is
not  so  enormous  as  it  seems.  That  bond  exists,  and  it  is  formed  in
this  way  :

Our  experience  is  twofold  :  conscious  and  unconscious.  The  latter
is  the  larger — by  far  the  larger  ;  it  is  the  first,  has  a  basis  in  heredity  ;
it  is  ever  growing  richer  at  the  expense  of  conscious  experience  ;  it  is
ever  insensibly  completing  the  latter  by  generalizations,  impulsions,
presentiments.  We  have  much  more  in  our  brains  than  we  suppose —
much  science'we  little  think  we  have ;  and  Socrates  was  right  when  he
said  that  we  give  birth  to  ideas,  but  do  not  create  them.  Ask  a  man
"what  was  the  color  of  the  walls  of  a  room  he  lived  in  last  year — he
will,  perhaps,  be  stalled  ;  but  take  him  to  that  room  and  he  will
readily  see  whether  any  change  has  been  made.  You  may  fail  to
recognize  an  old  friend,  but  his  face  will,  perhaps,  suggest  to  you  a
series  of  recollections.  You  have  never  thought  of  defining  the
"cutaneous  odor"  of  a  loved  person,  but  a  like  odor  will  make  you
think  of  her,  and  you  will  not  even  know  why.  What  one  of  us  has
not  been  for  a  longer  or  shorter  time  with  a  number  of  sick  persons
that  exhaled  an  odor  or  exerted  "some  other  sort  of  action  upon  us,

i28  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

that  to  us  was  entirely  unconscious  ?  But  nevertheless  there  was  then
formed  in  our  brains  a  close  association  between  the  presence  of  a
sick  person  and  that  particular  reaction.  We  do  not  feel  our  own
cutaneous  odor,  but  were  it  to  be  changed  suddenly  we  should  surely
note  the  difference.  And  these  associations  are  ever  forming,  and  they
persist.  We  are  not  aware,  but  our  unconscious  knows  very  well,  that
in  a  moment  of  fear,  joy,  pain,  hope,  anger,  love,  as  well  as  in  patho-
logic states  that  we  ourselves  have  been  in,  our  individual  atmosphere
changes,  and,  recognizing  this  change  in  another  individual,  it  may
infer  these  several  states,  and  even  may,  under  exceptionally  favorable
conditions,  make  them  sensible  to  ourselves.  Now  the  conditions  can
nowhere  be  more  favorable  than  in  the  state  wherein  :
i.  All  extrane  sensations  are  shut  out ;

2.  The  attention  is  wholly  set  in  one  direction  ;

3.  All  the  senses  may  be  in  a  state  of  exaltation.

And  if  sometimes  sympathism  attains  a  surprising  degree  of  force,
if  the  symptoms  we  discover  appear  in  ourselves,  or  rather  reveal
themselves  by  this  apparition,  that,  again,  is  an  effect  that  is  not  of
necessity  physical ;  it,  too,  may  be  the  product  of  a  psycho-nervic  re-
flex action.  But  to  understand  it  we  must  know  that  the  association
theory,  as  set  forth  in  psychology,  is  very  incomplete,  in  essential  par-
ticulars incomplete.  Psychologists  think  they  have  said  all  when  they
admit  associations  between  thoughts,  feelings,  sensations,  volitions
and  movements.

Well,  if  that  were  all,  our  psycho-physical  mechanism  would  be
utterly  incomprehensible.  We  could  not  even  tell  why  these  associa-
tions are  not  a  dead  letter,  why  they  live  and  are  operative.  Bain  long
since  felt  the  necessity  of  postulating  an  involuntary  energy  beyond  the
known  associations.  The  theory  of  association  is  not  false  ;  it  is  only
incomplete.  Psychological  association  is  but  a  special  case  of  biologi-
cal association  in  general,  and  physiology  will  not  be  a  comprehensible
science — one  comprehensible  in  its  details — until  we  apply  to  it  the
same  association  principle  that  has  been  of  such  service  to  modern
psychology.  We  will  here  dwell  upon  only  one  point  of  this  applica-
tion :  there  are  associations  between  ideas  (emotions,  sensations,  etc.),
but  there  are  also  associations  between  ideas  and  states  that  seemingly
have  nought  to  do  with  psychology — bodily,  organic  states  :  there  are
ideorganic  associations.1  An  idea  may  be  associated  with  an  inflamed
finger,  a  skin  secretion,  a  paralysis  of  the  right  arm,  a  sore  on  the  left
jaw,  the  quantity  of  adipose  in  the  tissues,  a  neuralgia,  an  attack  of
cholera,  of  rabies,  and  so  on ;  and  these  associations  may  be  so  defi-
nite and  real,  that,  as  the  thought  of  Peter  produces  the  thought  of
Paul,  the  thought  of  an  haemorrhage  shall  produce  haemorrhage,  the
thought  of  a  cicatrization   produce  cicatrization,  of  a  disease   that

1  See  Appendices  II.  and  III.

SYMPATHISM  AND  CONTAGION.  129

identical  disease.  I  have  seen  haemorrhages  stopped  by  the  act  of  the
imagination  ;  I  have  seen  sores  healed  rapidly  by  suggestion  ;  I  have
seen  a  fat  hysteric  woman  grow  thin  in  the  course  of  a  few  weeks  by
somnambulic  order  ;  I  have  seen  cases  of  cholera  brought  about
simply  by  thought-influence,  apart  from  any  epidemic  action.

Hence,  it  is  nothing  surprising  if  the  recollection  of  some  ailment
should  itself  produce  that  ailment.

Finally — and  here  ends  my  answer  to  the  objection  stated  above —
I  do  not  at  all  intend  to  explain  everything  by  one  theory.  A  theory
that  is  simple  is  rarely  a  correct  theory,  particularly  in  biology,  par-
ticularly in  hypnotism  ;  and  the  tendency  to  refer  unknown  things  to
things  known  must  not  blind  us  to  new  and  complex  facts.  Objective
sensations,  unconscious  perception,  ideorganic  associations  do  not
account  for  all  the  facts  of  sympathism  and  nervic  contagion.  We
must  have  the  courage  to  make  that  confession,  and  must  look  in
other  directions.

I  have  already  mentioned  the  sensations  the  magnetizer  sometimes
feels  on  touching  the  patient.  I  was  not  the  first  to  observe  them.
There  is  nothing  new  in  "  hypnotism  "  !  A  hundred  years  before  me,
these  sensations  were  discovered  and  studied  with  special  care  by  a
physiologist  and  physicist  now  quite  forgotten.  His  name  was  De
Bruno,  and  he  was  the  introducer  of  ambassadors  to  the  Count  d'Ar-
tois,  brother  of  the  Iting  of  France.  His  first  book  was  on  mineral
magnetism  ;  then,  Mesmer's  "  animal  magnetism  "  having  attracted
his  attention,  he  devoted  himself,  1 785-1805,  to  a  series  of  original
researches,  the  results  of  which  would  have  filled  two  volumes.  He
died  in  1818,  leaving  them  unpublished.  At  that  period,  animal  mag-
netism having  been  discredited  by  the  legitimists  of  science,  the
family  of  the  deceased  did  not  care  to  authorize  the  publication  of
the  work  ;  it  was  handed  over  to  the  Societe  de  Magnetisme  and
appeared  only  in  extracts  under  the  name  of  Mr.  de  Lausanne.1  This
book  had  but  a  feeble  echo.  It  was  the  further  extracts  quoted  by
Mr.  Aubin  Gauthier*  in  his  "Practical  Treatise"  that  made  it  a  little
better  known,  though  without  rescuing  the  author  from  oblivion.

There  are  extraordinary  things  in  Bruno's  experiences  that  I  can-
not guarantee.  He  himself,  it  seems,  had  great  sensibility,  and  per-
haps "  complementary  imagination  "  was  not  altogether  a  stranger  to
him  ;  but  as  there  is  a  certain  analogy  between  his  observations  and
mine,  albeit  I  am  not  at  all  hypnotizable,  I  will  give  a  few  quotations:

"  If  Nature  (says  this  author)  has  endowed  the  one  who  magne-
tizes with  a  nerve  sensibility  of  some  little  delicacy,  he  will  feel
externally  many  of  the  irregular  movements  that  take  place  in  the

1  Lausanne,  "  Des  Principes  et  des  Precedes  du  Magnetisme,"  etc.  2  vols.  Paris,
1819.     The  first  volume  contains  the  extracts  from  Bruno.

2  A.  Gauthier,  "  Traite  Pratique  du  Magnetisme,"  etc.,  pp  233-289.      Paris,  1S45.

i3o  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

magnetized  person  ;  sensations  will  be  for  him  sure  indications  of  the
work  that  Nature,  aided  by  his  action,  is  doing  in  the  patient.  It  is
true  that  all  persons  are  not  gifted  with  this  sensibility,  and  that  it  is
not  always  of  the  same  degree  of  delicacy  in  the  same  person;  but  some
there  are  to  whom  this  property  becomes  sometimes  burdensome  ;  and
there  are  others  who,  in  a  state  of  crisis,  have  such  sensibility  as  ren-
ders incredible  the  degree  to  which  the  delicacy  of  their  organs  makes
them  capable  of  distinguishing.  To  my  natural  organization  I  must
refer  a  sensibility  that  has  been  perfected  by  the  habitual  use  that  I  make
of  this  property  of  my  senses.  I  owe  much  to  this  use  and  to  the
attention  with  which  I  note  my  sensations.  Were  everybody  to  do  as
much,  this  property  would  become  very  common,  and  there  might  be
developed  in  some  individuals  a  delicacy  of  sensations  that  would
seem  far  more  extraordinary  still  than  anything  I  may  report  about
my  own  in  the  sequel "  (pp.  86,  94).

Let  us  observe,  in  the  first  place,  that  we  find  in  Mesmer  the  follow-
ing passage:     "  Touch  at  a  little  distance  from  the  part  is  more  power-
ful, because  there  exists  a  current  between  the  hand,  or  the  conductor,
and  the  patient.     .     .     .     .     .     .     We  observe   the  flow  of  a  matter

{fcoulement  d'une  mature)  the  subtility  of  which  penetrates  all  bodies"
(Prop,  xxiii).

It  is  perhaps  this  subjective  sensation  that  led  him  to  adopt  the
theory  of  a  fluid.

"  There  is  no  doubt,"  says  Bruno,  "  that  Mesmer  formally  desig-
nated the  currents  (he  even  gives  them  a  special  name — tonic  currents),
and  that  he  recognized  their  existence  ;  but  there  is  nothing  to  show
that  he  explained  the  subject  to  his  disciples."

Bruno  distinguishes  sensations  of  currents  from  etitrainments  (attrac-
tions) of  currents.  Apart  from  the  sensation  of  a  current,  he  further
believed  that  he  felt  attractions  toward  certain  parts  of  the  patient's
body.  He  communicated  these  experiences  to  Dr.  Deslon,  who  no-
ticed something  similar  on  holding  the  hands  an  inch  or  two  away
from  the  stomach  of  a  patient.  He  felt  peculiar  sensations  "  in  the
flesh  around  the  root  of  the  nails."

"  The  sensations  (says  De  Bruno)  vary  according  to  the  person  you
magnetize.  You  feel,  for  example,  that  the  breath  [souffle)  that  blows
upon  your  hands  is  warm.  This  warmth  has  differences  that  habit
will  teach  you  to  distinguish  ;  the  warmth  is  greater  or  less,  more  or
less  dry.  Sometimes  it  makes  the  hands  dry.  I  am  accustomed  to  wet
my  hands,  and  not  to  wipe  them  ;  the  current  soon  removes  the  ex-
cess of  humidity.  I  wet  the  hands  to  retain  the  sensibility,  which  is
reduced  by  dryness."

It  is  seen  that  these  sensations  are  nearly  the  same  as  those  I  expe-
rienced before  I  knew  of  Bruno's  works.  As  regards  the  influence  of
humidity,  I  made  use  of  it  in  the  Infant  Jesus  Hospital  at  Warsaw,  in
1881,  not  to  increase  the  sensibility  of  my  hands,  but  to  increase
their  curative  action  (gentle  massage)   in    a    very  obstinate   case  of

SYMPA  THISM  AND  CONTA  GION.  1 3 1

hemianesthesia.  The  thought  to  do  so  came  to  me  instinctively,  and
the  effect  was  very  favorable,  for  the  patient's  sensibility  came  back
under  my  hands,  and  I  gained  ground  far  more  rapidly  than  if  the
hands  had  remained  dry.  Four  seances  sufficed  (with  the  aid  of  som-
nambulism and  hypnotic  metalloscopy)  to  restore  the  patient's  sensi-
bility.

"  In  other  circumstances  (continues  Bruno)  you  have  sensations  of
cold,  and  this  cold,  too,  shows  differences.  Sometimes  there  is  a  very
faint  tingling  at  the  tips  of  the  fingers  ;  again  there  is  a  prickling  and
a  numbness.  One  experiences  also  a  nervous  shudder.  A  feeling  of
cold  nearly  always  betokens  an  obstruction,  an  engorgement,  or  some
atony  "  (pp.  76-79).  "  A  dry,  burning  heat  betokens  a  tension  of
the  fibers  ;  a  gentle,  moist  heat  is  a  favorable  symptom,  which  tells  of
a  freer  circulation,  and  sometimes  an  evacuation"   (Deslon,  Aph.  14).

Formication  at  the  finger  tips  indicates  the  existence  of  bile  and  of
acrid  blood,  especially  if  it  is  felt  when  the  head  or  the  arms  are
magnetized  (Bruno,  p.  79).  The  benumbing  of  the  hand,  the  fingers
and  their  extremities,  shows  a  defect  in  circulation  (p.  77).  The
magnetizer  sometimes  feels  a  fluctuating  motion  in  the  fingers,  which
tells  him  that  a  movement  of  the  blood  is  going  on  (un  mouvcment
sanguin  s'effectue)  in  the  patient  (p.  78).  When  there  is  slime  (des
glaires)  in  the  stomach  or  chest,  the  fingers  seem  to  become  clumsy
and  stiff  ;  sometimes  one  feels  in  the  fingers  a  circular  pressure  as
though  a  silk  thread  were  wound  around  them  (Mainduc,  Deleuze,
"Instr.  Prat.,"  342).  This  pressure  sometimes  appears  as  high  up  as
the  wrist,  which  feels  as  though  a  bracelet  were  tightly  clasped  about
it  (Deslon,  Aph.  10  ;  Bruno,  77).  When  there  is  nervous  relaxation,
the  hand  is  quickly  wearied  ;  there  is  a  degree  of  weakness  in  the
fingers  and  wrist  (Bruno,  78  ;  Deleuze,  343  ;  Gauthier,  11,  12).

Besides  these  sensations  in  the  hands,  Bruno  had  also  sympathic
sensations  all  over  the  body.  "  When  I  am  very  near  and  face  to
face  with  a  patient,"  he  says,  u  I  feel  the  reaction  of  his  worh1  in  the
part  opposite,  so  that  an  ache  in  the  liver  makes  itself  felt  in  the
spleen,  or  parts  adjacent ;  and  one  in  the  spleen,  in  the  liver.  But
when  I  am  at  a  distance  from  the  patient,  the  pains  are  felt  in  the
same  viscera  as  are  affected.  These  observations,  repeated  almost
daily  for  three  years,  confirm  me  in  the  belief  that  like  parts  in  each
individual  exert  upon  one  another  reciprocal  action."

An  English  author,  Dr.  Mainduc,  quoted  by  Deleuze  ("  Inst.  Prat.,"
342),  gives  some  indications  that  do  not  agree  always  with  those  of
Bruno.  For  the  latter  cold  indicated  obstruction  ;  while,  according  to
Mainduc,  in  obstructions  one  feels  a  sensation  of  acridity,  dryness,
contraction  and  formication,  if  there  is  no  inflammation,  and  of
warmth   if   there   is   inflammation.     Contusions    produce   a  sense  of

'  Physiological  work  ;  the  work  of  his  organs. —  Translator.

1 32  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

heaviness  and  numbness  in  the  hand.  The  presence  of  worms  pro-
duces formication  or  a  pinching  sensation  (pincement)  in  the  fingers.
In  nervous  relaxation  there  is  a  feeling  of  weakness  in  fingers  and

wrist.

"  I  know  a  man,"  says  Deleuze,1  "  who  was  very  closely  associated
with  the  one  whose  work  I  have  quoted.  He  feels  the  disease  of  those
he  magnetizes  ;  he  experiences  in  advance,  and  sometimes  in  a  very  pain-
ful way,  the  crises  they  are  soon  to  have."  "  I  know  (says  Gauthier)
a  lady  of  about  50  years,  a  grandmother  ;  she  has  been  present  at  the
several  child-births  of  her  daughter-in-law  ;  and  placing  her  hands  on
the  seat  of  the  pains,  she  felt  and  announced  in  advance  the  crises
that  were  about  to  come  "  (p.  278).

I  shall  not  go  so  far ;  but,  as  I  have  already  said,  by  putting  my
hands  on  the  suffering  organ,  I  can,  not  always,  but  very  often,  tell
the  moment  when  the  trouble  is  disappearing,  for  then  it  is  that  I
have  the  inward  impression  of  a  gentle  warmth,  ot  a  warm  shiver.2
According  to  Bruno,  such  a  sensation  announces  that  the  circulation  is
in  equilibrium.  On  the  contrary,  if  the  hands  grow  cold,  instead  of
warm,  I  begin  to  have  doubts  of  success.  "I  know  a  lady,"  says
Deleuze  again,  "  who  when  she  begins  to  magnetize  feels  much  heat  in
her  hands.  After  a  seance  of  three-quarters  of  an  hour,  her  hands
become  quite  cold  ;  she  then  no  longer  acts  "  (p.  334).     "  I  also  know

1  "  Instruction  Pratique,"  etc.,  p.  344.

2  A  lady  of  my  acquaintance  whom  I  taught  to  magnetize,  though  without  com-
municating to  her  the  phenomenon  in  question,  being  elated  by  the  successful  result
of  her  first  experiment,  wrote  to  me  as  follows  :  "As  I  announced  to  you  in  my  last
letter,  1  have,  by  the  aid  of  the  hypnoscope,  found  three  persons  of  sensibility.  One
of  them  is  Mrs.  A.'s  daughter,  a  girl  of  18  years.  One  day,  seeing  her  suffering
from  a  severe  headache,  which  never  lasts  less  than  two  or  three  days,  I  began  by
touching  her  forehead  and  head,  as  you  taught  me  to  do,  and  as  I  learned  in  the  little
book  "  Le  Magnetisme  Curatif."  In  ten  minutes  the  ache  was  over  ;  it  came  back  the
next  day,  weaker,  at  the  same  hour,  and  did  not  return  on  the  following  days.  I  can-
not express  to  you  my  gladness  and  astonishment.  But  that  is  nothing  compared
with  what  remains  to  be  told.  The  same  young  lady  has  for  some  years  suffered  fear-
fully on  the  first  and  the  third  day  of  her  period.  She  was  suffering  in  this  way  a  few
days  since  ;  she  was  bathed  in  perspiration  and  did  nothing  but  cry  for  pain.  The
thought  occurred  to  me  to  try  the  same  means,  for  all  the  remedies  ordered  by  the
doctors  had  been  without  effect.  Thinking  that  anyway  this  could  not  do  her  any
harm,  I  laid  my  hands  upon  her  stomach  and  then  made  passes.  In  10  or  15  minutes
my  patient  was  sleeping  quietly,  and  she  slept  for  nearly  two  hours.  Upon  being
awakened  she  was  entirely  well,  and  the  third  day  of  the  period  passed  without  any
pain.  Can  it  be  that  my  action  produced  this  result  ?  I  can  hardly  believe  it,  for  she
fairly  writhed  in  agony.  Tell  me  what  you  think  about  it.  And,  strange  to  say,  /
felt  the  pain  going  away,  as  though  something  was  becoming  assuaged  [auelaue  chose
s'apaisaii]  under  my  hands.  (Is  that  an  illusion  of  mine  ?)  I  felt  a  strange  pulsation
in  my  hands,  and  particularly  in  the  fingers.  After  every  treatment  of  this  kind,  I
find  myself  horribly  fatigued  ;  it  was  as  though  1  were  losing  part  of  my  strength.  (Is
that,  too,  an  effect  of  my  imagination?)  Please  explain  all  this  to  me,  and  advise  me
what  I  am  to  do  in  other  cases."

SYMFATH1SM  AND  CONTAGION.  133

several  magnetizers  who,  when  they  lay  their  hand  upon  the  seat  of
an  internal  ailment,  feel  a  pain  extending  to  the  elbow  ;  the  hand
grows  numb  and  even  becomes  swollen.  This  effect  grows  less  with
the  disease  ;  it  ceases  with  the  cure,  and  this  cessation  shows  that  the
magnetism  is  no  longer  needed."  "I  have  known  a  physician  to
experience  this  sensation  the  first  time  he  tried  to  magnetize.  In
other  persons  it  does  not  appear  till  after  repeated  trials.  I  have  not
experienced  it  myself.  Yet  some  effects  that  I  have  experienced
under  sundry  circumstances  lead  me  to  believe  that  I  should  have
acquired  it  had  I  taken  pains  to  study  the  cause  that  produced  them"

<PP-  33°,  331)-

As  for  me,  I  never  have  felt  any  direct  and  immediate  painful  sen-
sations. As  an  immediate  effect,  I  have  often  felt  simply  fatigue,  an
exhaustion  of  a  peculiar  kind  not  in  proportion  either  to  the  move-
ments performed  or  to  the  emotion  or  the  psychic  concentration.

We  must  distinguish  between  these  phenomena.

The  action  of  the  magnetizer  in  making  passes  produces  fatigue,
like  all  monotonous  movements,  though  they  be  slow.  But  this
fatigue  is  something  well  known  ;  it  is  muscular  fatigue.  We  can
fatigue  in  this  way  the  arms,  but  not  the  legs,  for  we  do  not  magne-
tize with  the  legs,  and  in  most  cases  of  magnetizing  persons  in  good
health  one  has  no  other  sensation  but  that  of  fatigue  of  the  muscles.

With  novices  in  magnetism  in  certain  important  circumstances,  and
particularly  in  dealing  with  patients  that  are  seriously  ill,  another
sort  of  fatigue  is  added  to  the  first — that  of  exhaustion  by  emotion.

The  sufferings  of  others  cause  us  suffering  through  sympathy.
Now,  every  suffering,  every  painful  emotion,  causes  exhaustion,  espe-
cially when  prolonged.  This  fatigue  is  not  localized  in  the  muscles.
On  the  contrary,  the  muscles  may  be  exceptionally  excited  under  the
influence  of  such  an  emotion.  Persons  who  are  feeble  and  ill  regain
their  strength  when  called  upon  to  care  for  a  person  dear  to  them,
who  is  ailing  worse  than  themselves.  But  at  last  an  emotion  may
produce  exhaustion  in  an  instant  and  give  a  sense  of  prostration,  of
moral  fatigue.  -

Finally,  there  is  still  another  sort  of  fatigue,  known  only  to  those
who  have  practiced  magnetism  for  a  long  time.  This,  too,  is  an
exhaustion,  even  an  exhaustion  more  lasting  than  that  caused  by  an
emotion,  but  it  is  of  a  different  character.  This  I  will  call  external
exhaustion,  for  it  produces  a  feeling  as  though  the  surface  of  the  body
chiefly  were  fatigued.  Especially  in  the  hands,  one  has  a  very  un-
pleasant feeling  of  dryness.  The  surface  of  the  body  seems  to  us
void  ; '  we  are  no  more  master  of  the  ambient  air  ;  it  presses  upon  us
and   weighs  upon   us.     And  this  sense  of  exhaustion,   if  due  to   an

1  In  the  original  vide,  empty,  void,  etc.  The  sense  is  by  no  means  obvious. —
Translator.

i34  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

important  cause,  is  not  easily  removed.  Rest  acts  very  slowly — far
more  slowly  than  in  muscular  or  in  psychic  fatigue.  There  is  only
one  way  of  working  the  miracle  of  reconstitution,  and  that  is  mas-
sage.1

The  state  of  the  hands  is  sensibly  bettered  by  dipping  them  in  cool
water,  and  the  state  of  the  whole  body  by  a  vapor  bath,  but  massage
is  needed  for  complete  restoration.  I  recommend  to  all  who  magnetize
many  patients  these  three  processes  :  First,  immediately  after  a  mag-
netization, dipping  the  hands  in  water,  and  in  case  of  need,  or  from
time  to  time,  a  vapor  bath,  then  massage.

Once,  when  in  this  sort  of  state,  I  laid  my  hand  upon  the  forehead
of  a  patient  in  somnambulism  suffering  from  headache.  She  allowed
the  hand  to  remain  for  a  few  minutes,  then  put  it  away  without  say-
ing a  word.  "  Why  did  you  remove  my  hand?"  I  asked  :  "  it  always
soothes  you."     "Yes;  but  it  is  spoilt."

When,  after  having  dipped  my  hand  in  cool  water,  and  taken  some
rest,  I  visited  her  again,  she  no  longer  put  my  hand  away.  "  Why  do
you  allow  it  to  remain  now?"  I  asked.  "Because  it  is  better"  was
the  reply.  She  could  not  tell  me  what  she  meant  by  saying  that
a  hand  is  "  better,"  "  good,"  or  "  spoilt,"  but  subjectively  I  was  forced
to  recognize  these  differences,  for  my  "  spoilt  "  hand  was  spoilt  for  me
too,  because  of  a  sense  of  weakness  and  disagreeable  dryness  (a  sub-
jective impression  this,  for  the  hand  was  not  dryer  than  usual)  and  of
an  enervating  heat.  But  the  conditions  must  be  exceptional  for  this
effect  to  be  produced  in  me  in  such  a  degree.

The  prediction  of  the  old  magnetizer  was  fulfilled  for  the  first  time
under  the  following  circumstances  :  I  was  attending  a  consumptive
patient,  whose  fulgurant  pains  came  on  by  paroxysms  and  lasted  for
hours.  There  was  only  one  way  of  allaying  them — imposition  of
hands.  The  reader  will  laugh  at  the  remedy,  yet  the  fact  was  so,,
nevertheless.  Taking  a  seat  by  the  bedside  of -the  patient,  I  laid  one
hand  on  his  thigh  and  waited  for  the  thermic  reaction.  It  did  not
come  till  after  10  or  15  minutes  :  the  pains  grew  less  by  degrees,  and
at  the  end  of  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  sometimes  later,  they  would  end.
As  for  me,  I  would  be  quite  fatigued.

And  yet  neither  the  physical  fatigue  nor  the  emotion — I  had  grown
accustomed  to  these  crises — could  account  for  this  general  sense  of

1  The  phenomenon  of  exhaustion  seems  to  have  been  observed  when  the  magnetic
treatment  was  first  used  in  France,  for  Jussieu  mentions  it  in  his  report  to  the  King  :
"  The  treatment,  especially  treatment  by  contact,  may  fatigue  those  who  administer
it.  I  have  never  experienced  this  myself,  but  I  have  seen  many  magnetizers,  worn
out  after  protracted  seances,  have  recourse  to  the  tub  [in  the  original,  baquet,  a  tub  of
water  employed  by  Mesmer  in  his  seances. —  Translator^  and  to  contact  with  another
man,  and  regain  their  power  by  the  use  of  these  two  means."  ("  Report  of  one  of
the  Commissioners  appointed  by  the  King  to  investigate  Animal  Magnetism."  Paris,
1784.)

SYMPATHISM  AND  CONTAGION.  135

exhaustion.  I  had  not,  however,  any  painful  sensation.  But  the  fol-
lowing morning,  and  sometimes  in  the  night,  I  used  to  feel  in  the
back  or  in  the  arms  pains  of  a  peculiar  kind.  At  first  they  did  not
last  long,  and  though  they  were  pretty  sharp  they  impressed  me  as
counterfeit  pains,  superficial,  extraneous.  They  were  but  an  echo  of
the  fulgurant  pain  of  the  patient.

This  phenomenon  was  repeated  rather  often  without  any  injurious
effect.  I  have  since  then  observed  other  cases  where  transmission
seemed  unquestionable — in  fact  I  have  observed  many  cases  of  double
transmission,  that  is,  of  transmission  to  a  third  person  unbeknown  to
him.

I  would  catch  a  headache,  say,  or  some  rheumatic  affection,  from  a
patient,  and  involuntarily  would  transmit  it  to  another,  though  with  de-
creased violence  and  with  some  retardation.  A  pain  thus  doubly  trans-
mitted I  have  always  been  able  to  remove  so  that  it  would  not  return.
Twice  only  have  I  observed  in  myself  almost  immediate  transmission.
In  the  first  instance  there  was  nervous  aphonia  that  had  to  be  cured  as
speedily  as  possible,  for  the  patient  was  to  deliver  an  address  in  pub-
lic. The  voice  was  restored  for  the  whole  time  of  the  address,  but  I
was  hoarse  for  a  full  quarter  of  an  hour.  The  second  instance  was
one  of  cold  in  the  head,  which  was  communicated  to  me  almost  in-
stantaneously by  one  of  my  patients.  She  experienced  a  little  relief
(though  I  had  magnetized  her  for  an  entirely  different  ailment).  As
for  me,  the  cold  in  the  head  lasted  the  whole  evening,  disappearing  the
next  morning.  In  other  cases  the  "communicated"  cold  in  the  head
would  appear  only  in  the  night.  I  would  awake  feeling  really  ill  and
hardly  able  to  breathe ;  then  I  would  sleep  again,  and  it  was  all  over.

So  curious  are  these  phenomena  of  nervous  contagion  that  it  needs  a
little  courage  to  speak  of  them  ;  but  we  must  speak  of  them,  for
assuredly  in  this  transmission  we  recognize  the  first  stage  in  mental
transmission.  Organic  states  can  be  transmitted  from  one  individual
to  another,  and  hence  thought  transmission  is  only  a  question  of  de-
grees, for  a  thought  always  ansv/ers  to  a  special  organic  state.

Nervous  contagion  is  a  rather  frequent  phenomenon,  provided  one
takes  the  trouble  to  notice  it.  For  me  it  was  an  easy  thing  to  find,
for  ever  since  my  fourteenth  or  fifteenth  year  I  have  been  in  the
habit  of  observing  whatever  goes  on  within  myself  and  the  effects
produced  by  different  influences.  In  the  meantime  I  never  have
been  seriously  ill,  but  if  I  suffer  from  any  indisposition  I  am  able
readily  to  say  what  is  the  cause.  The  transmitted  ailments  were  the
only  ones  that  I  was  unable  to  refer  to  any  common  or  ordinary
cause,  and  little  by  little  I  was  forced  to  succumb  to  the  evidence
and  to  admit  the  phenomenon  in  question.

Still — and  this  I  never  have  thought  of  denying — the  influence  of
the  imagination  may  play  a  part  in  many  of  these  phenomena.

136  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

When  you  take  a  headache  without  any  suspicion  that  the  person
you  are  magnetizing  has  one,  and  it  disappears  in  him  the  moment  it
appears  in  you,  there  is  reason  to  infer  physical  nervous  contagion.
In  most  cases  the  magnetizer  knows  of  the  ailment,  and  if  so,  then
quite  likely  psychic  nervous  contagion  by  ideoplasty  is  added  to  the
direct  action.  Here  are  a  few  highly  instructive  facts  upon  this
point,  that  have  been  confirmed  by  the  experience  of  many  persons.
Several  Brussels  newspapers  mentioned  them  at  the  time  of  their
occurrence.  The  following  narrative  is  written  in  the  form  of  a
feuilleton  by  A.  Lebrun,  a  clerk  in  the  (Belgian)  Ministry  of  Justice,
a  neophyte  in  magnetism,  and  therefore  an  ardent  apostle  :

.  .  .  "Another  day  I  met  two  poets  and  a  prose  writer;  and  as  one
is  required  to  give  names  when  one  speaks  of  magnetism,  I  may  say
that  the  poets  were  Messrs.  Adolphe  Mathieu  and  Van.  Hascelt,  and
the  prose  writer  Mr.  Deschamps.  The  first-named  and  the  last  were
strong  unbelievers  ;  Mr.  Van  Hasselt  was  already  well  along  in  the
road  of  the  faith  ;  he  was  a  catechumen,  asking  only  for  full  illumina-
tion. I  noticed  my  three  men  right  on  Cannes  Street.  I  had  notified
Mr.  Montius,  the  magnetizer  ;  we  found  him  at  home,  in  company
with  a  female  somnambule,  and  he  set  to  work  at  once.  The  odd-
ness  of  the  mimicry  of  magnetism  caused  the  two  unbelievers  to
chuckle.  As  for  Mr.  Van  Hasselt,  he  was  as  solemn  and  thoughtful
as  one  of  Lamartine's  "  Meditations."  Mr.  Montius,  noticing  this,
conceived  forthwith  a  favorable  opinion  of  the  poet,  and  wanted  to
make  an  experiment  upon  him.  But  now  the  somnambule  complained
of  a  violent  headache  that  had  come  upon  her  suddenly.  Mr.  Montius
smiled  with  an  air  of  satisfaction.  We  asked  him  why  he  smiled.
'  Why,'  he  answered  in  a  whisper,  '  I  gave  her  that  headache  on  pur-
pose It  was  now  the  turn  of  our  unbelievers  to  smile.  But  the
somnambule  having  heard  what  Mr.  Montius  had  said,  exclaimed  :
'  Since  'tis  you  that  gave  it  me,  you  can  take  it  away  !  Take  it  away,
then  ;  I  pray  you,  take  it  away  ! '  '  One  moment,'  said  Mr.  Montius  ;
and  applying  one  hand  to  the  somnambule's  forehead  and  the  other
to  Mr.  Van  Hasselt's,  he  made  him  a  gift  of  the  somnambule's  head-
ache, she  exclaiming  with  glee:  'Thanks!  My  headache  is  gone.'
'Yes,  gone,  but  I  have  got  it,'  cried  Mr.  Van  Hasselt,  with  a  woful
expression  of  countenance.  The  rest  of  us  burst  out  laughing  up-
roariously, with  the  exception  of  the  patient,  whose  pain  grew  more
and  more  intense.  He  begged  Mr.  Montius  to  make  the  headache
pass  to  another  head.  .'Well,  here  is  mine,'  said  Mr.  Deschamps;
'  and  if  you  succeed  in  introducing  into  it  what  is  in  Mr.  Van  Has-
selt's, I  pronounce  you,  not  in  verse,  but  in  correct  and  polished
prose,  a  being  such  as  fancy  paints,  a  very  wizard  ! '  'I  will  try,'  the
magnetizer  answered,  '  but  I  do  not  guarantee  success  ;  unbelief  is  a
force  that  repels  magnetism.'  At  the  same  time,  raising  his  arms,  he
laid  one  hand  on  the  head  of  Mr.  Van  Hasselt,  and  the  other  on  that
of  Mr.  Deschamps.  I  observed  attentively  the  face  of  the  latter  ;
the  two  corners  of  his  mouth,  at  first  kept  wide  apart  by  a  sardonic
smile,  insensibly  came  together  so  that  soon  his  mouth  made  a  per-
fect letter  O,  proving  that  the  serious  mood  of  Mr.  Van  Hasselt  was
gaining  on  our  friend.    Suddenly  he  freed  himself  from  Mr.  Montius's

SYMPATHISM  AND  CONTAGION.  137

hands,  saying :  '  Enough  ;  I  surrender.  The  devil  take  me  if  I
haven't  an  able-bodied  headache!'  'Yes,  but  1  am  beginning  to
think  that  you  have  all  conspired  to  act  a  comedy  at  my  expense,'
said  Mr.  Mathieu,  who  till  now  had  looked  on,  seemingly  meditating
deeply.  '  Pa»s  my  headache  to  him  to  convince  him,'  said  Mr.  Des-
champs  to  the  magnetizer.  'With  pleasure,'  Mr.  Montius  replied  ;  so
he  operated  on  Mr.  Mathieu  as  upon  the  two  others.  Again  the
experiment  was  entirely  successful,  so  that  the  new  patient  shook  his
head  repeatedly  as  though  to  make  sure  of  the  tenacity  of  the  ache
he  felt.  He  wanted  to  keep  his  megrim  for  some  time,  for  fear  lest
conviction  should  vanish  suddenly  with  the  ache.

"  Such,  reader,  is  the  story  I  had  to  tell  you  for  your  convince-
ment,  for,  I  do  confess  to  you,  they  that  believe  in  these  phenomena
have  a  mania  for  sharing  their  conviction  with  everybody."  '

It  is  probable  that  in  these  experiments  the  first  transmission —
from  magnetizer  to  somnambule — was  effected  by  a  physical  nervous
contagion,  but  in  the  cases  that  follow  ideoplasty  plays  the  principal,
if  not  the  only,  role  ;  else  the  ailment  would  be  considerably  lessened
at  each  transmission.

Du  Potet,  one  of  the  most  experienced  practitioners,  advised  his
pupils  always  to  magnetize  without  contact,  and  the  reason  he  gives
is  this  :

"Inoculation  by  Contact. — Among  the  facts  I  have  ascertained  I
may  quote  these :  A  woman  suffering  from  a  gouty  arthritic  affection,
whose  joints  had  become  solidified,  whose  limbs  had  lost  their  flexi-
bility, whose  jaws,  even,  could  not  open  fully,  was  put  in  rapport  with
one  of  my  somnambules.  This  somnambule,  after  having  seen  the
ailment  perfectly  and  indicated  the  thermal  waters  that  would  cure  it,
complained  of  suffering  in  the  same  parts  that  were  affected  in  the
patient.  I  paid  little  attention,  for  it  had  been  just  so  with  respect  to
other  ailments,  and  no  ill  results  had  followed.  I  awakened  her,2  but,
much  to  my  surprise,  she  was  unable  to  stir  ;  she  could  not  open  her
mouth.  In  vain  I  tried  to  stay  the  trouble,  which  I  supposed  to  be
momentary.  .  .  .  She  remained  in  this  state  three  days.  During
that  time  we  had  to  feed  her  like  a  baby,  giving  her  broth  in  small
spoonfuls,  her  mouth  being  three-quarters  shut.  Little  by  little  the
trouble  left  her.

"  Another  somnambule,  after  touching  a  patient  whose  blood  was
doubly  corrupt — by  syphilitic  and  by  scrofulous  virus — lost  all  her
hair  a  few  hours  after  the  mere  contact.

"  A  convulsive  hiccough,  a  cough,  a  stitch  in  the  side,  were  trans-
mitted by  contact  to  another  sleeper.

"  Another,  from  holding  for  some  time  the  hand  of  an  idiot,  re-
mained stupid  for  some  days."

Here  are  facts  it  will  be  easy  to  make  merry  over.     Idiocy,  it  will,

perhaps,  be  said,  is  contagious — for  magnetizers  !    Say  what  you  will,

1  F.  Lebrun,  "  Transmission  des  Douleurs  d'une  Personne  a  une  Autre  (L'£-
mancipation,  Aug.  4,  1838)  ;  Lafontaine,  "  Memoires,"  vol.  i.,  p.  87.

2  The  somnambule  should  never  be  awakened  till  all  these  symptoms  have  been
done  away. — Du  Potet' s  Note,

138  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

the  thing  will  remain  true  nevertheless.  I  have  myself  observed  a
like  case  with  respect  to  another  disease,  though  in  a  less  degree.
But  I  do  not  wonder  at  the  incredulity  these  facts  may  meet  with.
With  shame  do  I  confess  that  after  having  read,  hardly  four  years
ago,  the  passage  I  have  quoted  from  Du  Potet,  I  made  a  big  interro-
gation point  and  two  big  exclamation  points  on  the  margin  of  his
book.     These  I  now  blot  out  and  go  on  transcribing :

"  Here  is  what  Puysegur  says  about  this  matter :  '  The  suscepti-
bility of  patients  in  crises  for  catching  {susceptibility  ....  de  gagner)
readily  certain  maladies,  has  many  times  been  demonstrated  for  me.
I  have  seen  magnetic  somnambules,  in  the  midst  of  a  swarm  of  many
patients,  ask  [leave]  to  quit  their  place,  saying  that  their  neighbors
made  them  ill  j  and  others  to  withdraw  precipitately.  And  often  I
have  had  to  repair  the  mischief  caused  by  the  approach  of  certain
individuals."'

I  observed  lately  a  similar  case.  A  young  person,  in  good  health
at  the  time,  produced,  simply  by  her  presence,  an  exceedingly  violent
paroxysm  in  an  endormed  lady.  Some  weeks  later  this  young  person
fell  gravely  ill  of  typhoid  fever,  aggravated  by  an  old  heart  complaint.
Was  it  the  influence  of  this  on-coming  pathological  state  that  caused
the  mischief,  or  was  it  the  girl's  own  individuality?  Anyway,  there
was  no  suggestion  :  the  girl  had  no  thought  of  the  disease,  and  she
loved  the  lady  well.

"  One  day  (continues  Du  Potet)  I  consulted  my  somnambule,  Vielet,,
upon  the  kinds  of  diseases  most  readily  communicable  to  somnam-
bules ;  he  had  himself  twice  or  thrice  had  a  sad  experience  in  that
way.  His  answer,  which  he  gave  in  writing,  and  which  I  still  have,
was,  that  the  most  dangerous  are  epilepsy,  scurvy,  diarrhoea,  cold
paralysis,  sciatic  gout,  catalepsy,  itch,  cold  humors,  and  all  venereal
diseases.

"  As  for  myself,  I  never  have  magnetized  a  consumptive  or  a
patient  who,  having  taken  [has  been  taking]  mercury,1  without  expe-
riencing, in  the  former  case,  pains  in  the  chest,  and  without  feeling,
in  the  latter,  pains  in  the  bones,  and  particularly  in  the  finger-joints
and  the  wrists.

"While  magnetizing  a  young  man  who  had  a  luxation  of  the  femur
in  consequence  of  a  lymphatic  deposit  in  the  joint,  I  was  seized,  on
leaving  his  house,  with  very  sharp  pains  in  the  limb  on  the  same  side.
Believing  this  to  be  personal  to  me,  I  at  first  did  not  give  it  much
attention  ;  the  trouble  passed  away  quickly,  but  on  the  next  day  it
was  the  same.  Yet,  at  entering  the  patient's  house,  I  was  not  suffer-
ing at  all  ;  I  could  not  believe  in  this  singular  phenomenon,  and
wished  to  make  sure  of  its  reality,  so  for  two  days  I  suspended  the
treatment,  and  felt  nothing.  I  resumed  the  treatment,  my  joint  was
ailing  again,  and  I  began  to  drag  the  leg.  I  found  a  pretext  for  not
attending  to  the  case.     I  did  not  at  that  time  know  that  in  magnetizing

1  .SiV  in  the  original :  un  malade  qui,  ayant  pris  du  mercure.  Instances  of  simi-
lar defective  grammatical  construction  are  rather  frequent  in  these  quotations  from
authors,  and  the  translator  has  for  the  most  part  retained  them  in  the  English  version.

SYMPATHISM  AND  CONTAGION.  139

without  contact  the  action  is  of  the  same  efficacy,  and  that  this  inoculation  '
might  have  been  avoided.

"  One  day,  while  making  some  experiments  upon  a  young  man
suffering  from  a  syphilitic  malady  (of  the  existence  of  which  I  was
unaware),  I  held  his  knees  between  mine  (according  to  Deleuze's
method).  After  about  a  quarter  of  an  hour  I  felt  sharp  pains  in  my
legs.  I  asked  the  patient  to  tell  me  whether  he  himself  had  pains  in
the  same  region  ;  he  answered  that  just  then  he  did  not  suffer  pain,
but  that  usually  his  suffering  was  unbearable.  I  desisted  from  my
experiments,  and  the  pains  I  had  thus  '  caught '  persisted  for  a  part
of  the  day.

"  In  consequence  of  this  discovery  I  have  many  a  time  said  to
patients  that  I  was  magnetizing  :  You  have  pain  in  such  a  part  of
your  body  ;  and  every  time  this  proved  to  be  true.

"  Having  never  had  any  disease,  and  never  having  suffered  from
pain  or  ache,  when  I  feel  some  pain  in  magnetizing  I  know  it  comes
not  from  me,  and  I  hold  myself  sufficiently  aloof  from  the  patient  to
discontinue  the  facts  of  this  inoculation.

"  Other  magnetizers  have  told  me  of  facts  of  the  same  kind.  I  con-
fess that  for  a  long  time  I  refused  to  believe  their  testimony  and  my
own  as  well.  This  is  no  longer  possible  for  me,  for  I  have  observed
too  much  to  harbor  a  doubt.

"  In  order  to  avoid  these  mishaps  I  advise  the  practitioner  to  mag-
netize by  touch  as  seldom  as  possible."  5

But  the  absence  of  contact  is  no  absolutely  sure  guaranty.  Some-
times, though  rarely,  transmission  takes  place  at  some  distance  in
case  there  has  been  established  between  two  persons  the  close  and
strange  relation  which  we  have  not  yet  explained,  known  as  the
"  magnetic  rapport."     Du  Potet  himself  cites  some  cases  of  this  sort :

'■'■Inoculation  without  Contact. — By  a  singular  play  of  the  magnetic
forces,  and  perhaps  because  of  the  analogy  of  two  nervous  systems,
unexpected  phenomena  sometimes  occur.  Thus  I  have  many  times
seen  a  rapport  set  up  between  magnetized  subjects  that  did  not  know
each  other,  and  what  one  felt  was  felt  by  the  other,  though  often  they
were  separated  by  walls.  This  makes  a  good  deal  of  trouble  for  you,
for  while  you  are  giving  all  your  care  to  the  patient  that  is  affected
sympathically,  the  other,  whom  you  have  left  at  rest,  becomes  agitated
again  and  the  paroxysm  returns,  and  vice  versa.  In  this  way  hours
pass  in  useless  .and  very  fatiguing  work  ;  then  the  hours  have  to  be
changed,  or  you  must  find  some  one  to  take  your  place  with  one  of
the  two  patients.  Do  not  think  that  in  these  cases  imagination  plays
a  part.  In  a  hospital  in  St.  Petersburg3  where  two  epileptiform
nervous  affections  were  given  to  me  for  treatment — complaints  that  I
cured,  though  they  were  serious  and  of  long  standing — well,  though
the  patients  were  separated  by  a  great  distance,  and  one  was  on  the
first  floor,  the  other  on  the  second,  the  moment  I  magnetized  the  one
the  other  had  a  crisis,  yet  there  was  nothing  to  convey  intelligence  to
the  one  I  did  not  magnetize  ;  and  not  once  only,  but  twenty  times,

1  Transfer  of  disease  to  the  magnetizer.

s  Du  Potet,  "  Manuel  de  1'^tudiant  Magnetiseur, "  pp.  251-256.      Paris,  1S68.

3  See  Journal  d 'u  MagnMsme,  vol.  i.,^).  289.

i4o  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

both  at  night  and  in  daytime,  have  we  been  able  to  observe  this
singular  phenomenon.  My  entry  was  unannounced,  made  without  any
noise  whatever ;  often,  indeed,  the  two  patients  would  be  in  natural
sleep  ;  yet,  no  matter  which  one  I  magnetized  first,  the  one  I  was  not
thinking  of  at  all  soon  would  come  out  of  her  sleep  and  utter  fearful
shrieks.  I  permitted  this  sympathy  to  go  on  for  a  while,  for  my  own
instruction,  but  then  I  broke  it  up  by  producing  several  artificial
crises  in  succession.  Thus  I  removed  the  too  acute  sensibility  of
their  nervous  systems."

There  was  a  simpler  way,  viz. :  forbidding  the  somnambule  by
verbal  suggestion  to  undergo  any  involuntary  action.  This  recourse
is  always  successful,  provided  it  be  availed  of  in  a  state  approaching
monoideism.

"  Here  is  a  fact  more  incredible  still,  yet  no  less  true.  Magnetism
is  bound  for  a  long  time  to  come  to  exercise  the  mind  of  the  physi-
ologist and  the  psychologist.  Facts  novel  and  incomprehensible  are
coming  into  notice  every  moment,  owing  to  the  singular  properties  of
the  agent  employed.  I  was  attending  a  patient  living  in  the  street
des  Mauvaises-Paroles,  in  Paris.  He  was  but  little  sensitive  to  mag-
netism. But  one  evening  he  experienced  pretty  violent  commotions
{dprouva  des  commotions  assez  violentes).  I  left  him  resting  quietly.  The
next  evening  the  same  phenomenon  ;  but  another  patient  whom  I  was
attending,  and  who  did  not  know  the  first  at  all,  had  set  out  for  Fon-
tainebleau  a  few  days  before.  This  man,  too,  was  very  little  sensitive
to  magnetism.  But  what  was  my  astonishment,  when  after  three  days
he  came  back  to  Paris,  to  learn  from  him  that  he  had  experienced
violent  jerks  (secousses)  at  the  same  hour,  the  same  minute,  and  for
the  same  length  of  time.  At  the  moment  I  made  no  remark,  but  that
very  evening  I  magnetized  this  patient.  He  lived  in  the  street  Coq-
He'ron ;  the  other  patient,  he  of  Mauvaises-Paroles  street,  had  the
same  nervous  symptoms.  I  ceased  and  the  nervous  affection  stopped.
I  resumed  the  magnetization  at  other  hours,  and  this  singular  rapport
was  broken  up.  I  repeat,  these  men  did  not  know  each  other  at  all,
and  knew  nothing  of  the  curious  observation  they  afforded  me  in  this
way."

This  last  fact  is  not  conclusive.  If  the  change  of  time  sufficed  to
break  up  the  rapport,  then  no  rapport  existed.  When  a  phenomenon,
apparently  inexplicable,  manifests  itself  at  a  fixed  hour,  it  is  nearly
always  explainable  by  imagination,  conscious  or  unconscious.  Mr.
Du  Potet  does  not  say  expressly  that  he  magnetized  his  second
patient  at  the  same  hour  at  which  he  had  been  in  the  habit  of  magnet-
izing the  first,  but  that  seems  to  have  been  the  case.  Now,  nothing
is  more  common  than  the  coming-on  of  a  nervous  trouble  at  the
habitual  time  of  hypnotization.  Anyway,  Du  Potet's  observation  is
recounted  too  vaguely  to  be  of  any  service  as  proof.  I  have  cited
it,  therefore,  only  to  show  the  possibility  of  facile  illusion  in  similar
cases.

The  following  is  an  observation  of  Charpignon's  :

SYMPATHISM  AND  CONTAGION.  141

"  We  have  had  occasion  (he  writes)'  to  operate  in  a  case  of  acute
arthritic  rheumatism  on  the  second  day  of  the  attack.  It  is  needless
to  speak  of  the  sharpness  of  the  pains  and  their  continuance  for  five
or  six  weeks.  A  few  days  of  magnetization  brought  about  a  grati-
fying alleviation,  and  the  relief  would  soon  have  been  complete  had
not  we  ourselves  been  seized  with  symptoms  of  the  same  disease.  This
accident  taught  us  the  value  of  the  advice  given  by  magnetizers,  to
demagnetize  oneself  after  having  operated  in  certain  maladies.  We
had  to  suffer  then,  as  on  many  another  occasion,  for  this  careless-
ness."

The  fact,  then,  is  vouched  for  by  many  practitioners  ;  still,  we  must
not  exaggerate  it.  It  is  rather  rare,  and  depends  upon  a  multitude  of
conditions  that  make  the  studying  of  it  difficult.  In  the  first  place,
there  are  magnetizers  that  never  have  witnessed  it.  The  person  that
experiences  this  contagion  from  time  to  time,  may  not  experience  it
in- the  case  of  a  very  serious  malady,  but  may  undergo  its  action  very
distinctly  indeed  in  some  case  of  little  consequence.  It  seems  that
here,  as  in  all  instances  of  contagion,  individual  predisposition  counts
for  more  than  the  agent  itself.  And  in  the  present  instance  this  pre-
disposition is  itself  conditional,  depending  as  it  does  on  a  certain  mo-
mentary rapport  between  the  patient  and  the  magnetizer.  So  to  speak,
the  two  must  be  tuned  in  one  key.  Magnetizing  by  passes  facilitates
this  "  tuning,"  but  it  seldom  attains  the  degree  of  concord  that
brings  about  communication  of  pains,  more  rarely  produces  transmis-
sion of  objective  sensations,  and  more  rarely  still  thought-transfer-
ence.

It  is  generally  thought  that  contagion  is  always  material.  That  is
an  error.     There  are  two  kinds  of  contagion,  to  wit  :

1.  Material  contagion,  which  might  be  subdivided,  but  which  is  not
of  interest  to  us  here.  Its  agents  are  visible  parasites,  microbes,
virulent  liquids,  and  miasmata.  (I  should  be  much  embarrassed  were
I  asked  what  a  miasma  is,  but  I  suppose  it  is  some  deleterious  gas.2)

Barring  cases  of  direct  communication  of  the  parasite,  or  cirect
introduction  of  the  virus  into  the  blood,  this  contagion  is  never
inevitable  ;  but  non-hypnotizable  persons  are  liable  to  it  in  the  same
degree  as  the  hypnotizable  ;  and  if  anything  makes  resistance  against
it,  it  is  the  general  state  of  the  individual's  strength  and  health
(physiological  resistance),  without  regard  to  his  sensitivity.  It  mani-
fests itself,  however,  only  in  a  few  categories  of  diseases  known  as
contagious.

2.  Nervous  Contagion. — This  is  twofold  :

1  Op.  cit.,  p.  179.

2  This  is  not  exactly  Mr.  Bechamp's  definition,  who  says  that  miasmata  are  "agents
whether  ponderable  or  imponderable,  diffusible,  without  definite  form,  of  a  physical  or
a  chemical  nature,  which,  transported  by  the  air,  are  able  to  modify  at  many  points  at
once  the  functionment  of  that  which  is  anatomically  alive  in  us,  the  microzjrma."—
Bulletin  de  VAcad.  de  Aftfd.,  p.  1727.     1884.

i42  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

a.  Psychic  nervous  contagion  (imagination,  imitation,  ideoplasty),
from  which  very  many  persons  are  exempt — some  70  per  cent. — but
which  manifests  itself  in  a  larger  number  of  diseases  (contagious  or
non-contagious),  but  particularly  in  nervous  maladies  of  the  cerebro-
spinal and  ganglionary  systems.  It  is  more  widespread  than  one  sup-
poses, but  it  does  not,  any  more  than  material  contagion,  enter  into
the  plan  of  our  present  study.

b.  Physical  nervous  contagion  (communication  nearly  always  by  con-
tact, but  almost  solely  in  consequence  of  a  magnetic  rapport,  so-
called).  It  may  apply  to  different  diseases,  mostly  those  not  mate-
rially contagious,  but  especially  to  states  of  exhaustion,  general  indis-
position and  pain,  and  these  usually  in  a  very  mild  form.

These  three  kinds  of  contagion,  and  the  first  two  in  particular,  of
course,  in  practice,  come  together.  The  third  may  be  considered  as
comparatively  unimportant  in  everyday  practice.  Nevertheless,  it
possesses  for  us  the  highest  theoretic  value,  since  from  that  point  of
view  it  constitutes  the  basis  of  sympathism  in  general,  and  of  mental
suggestion  in  particular.

But,  unfortunately,  we  are  still  far  from  understanding  this  basis,
on  which  rest  other  phenomena  still  more  recondite.  Nevertheless,  we
must  do  what  we  can  to  obtain  some  sort  of  a  conception  of  it.

To  this  end  let  us  look  at  the  question  on  the  reverse  side.  If  dis-
ease is  transmitted  by  contagion,  health  should  be  transmissible  in  the
same  way.  In  truth,  both  express  only  a  relation  :  they  are  not
things,  only  states.  Health  represents  harmony  of  the  functions,
these  being  in  equilibrium  with  the  influences  of  the  world  without.
Disease  means  the  opposite  of  this  :  it  is  dysharmony  of  the  functions,
these  not  sufficiently  withstanding  the  influences  of  the  environment.
If  this  be  so,  then  health  must  be,  so  to  speak,  more  contagious  by
bodily  contact  than  is  disease,  being  more  expansive,  in  that  it  re-acts
better  outward.  Only  it  must  not  be  forgotten  that  we  are  looking
at  things  from  the  physical,  the  dynamic  standing-point.

Now,  taking  this  point  of  view,  that  is  what  we  actually  see.  Apart
from  material  and  psychic  nervous  contagion,  a  person  that  enjoys
health  and  strength  gives  more  of  good  than  a  person  weak  and
sickly  gives  of  ill.  What  they  call  animal  magnetism,1  so  far  as  it  is
physical  action,  is  nothing  but  a  contagion  of  health  and  of  force.
And,  on  the  whole,  the  one  that  is  magnetized  gains  more  than  is  lost
by  the  one  that  magnetizes.  Here  the  analogy  with  the  loadstone  is
perfect,  and  it  is  pretty  evident  in  the  phenomena  of  attraction,  of
specific  {sfie'cifie'e)  affinity,  and  action  from  a  distance.

1  We  shall  not  dispute  about  words.  The  word  "electricity"  (rfktKTpov,  amber)
has  no  more  to  do  with  the  batteries  and  dynamos  of  to-day  than  the  word  "  magnet-
ism" with  certain  physiological  actions — rather  less.  But  all  words  change  their
meaning  with  the  march  of  progress,  and  of  this  we  need  not  complain.

S  YMPA  THISM  AND  CONTA  GION.  1 43

And  if  magnetic  action  in  general  may  be  considered  as  contagion,
mental  suggestion  is  contagion  also,  in  a  still  more  striking  way.

Bodies  when  brought  together  tend  to  equilibrium  of  their  molecular
motions.  That  is  an  intelligible  law,  consistent  with  all  our  knowledge,
and  easily  verified  in  sundry  classes  of  phenomena.  Why  should
organic  bodies  not  come  under  it,  seeing  they  are  far  more  active,  far
more  expansive  centers  of  force  than  dead  matter  ?  In  fact,  among
these  molecular  movements  produced,  that  is,  transformed  within  the
organism,  there  are  some  with  respect  to  which  doubt  is  impossible.
Such  is  heat ;  electricity  also,  though  less  evidently.  These  two
forces,  i.  e.,  these  two  kinds  of  molecular  motion,  cannot  be  circum-
scribed by  any  superficies.  Heat  and  electricity  are  ever  escaping  at
every  point,  and  it  were  foolish  to  suppose  that  though  they  re-act
upon  the  ambient  atmosphere,  they  shun  other  organic  bodies  and  are
indifferent  for  them.

Now,  animal  heat  and  animal  electricity,  themselves  alone,  suffice
to  account  for  very  many  magnetic  phenomena.  Their  weakness,
physically,  has  long  deceived  us.  People  have  thought  that  to  pro-
duce a  physiological  effect  there  must  be  actual  fire,  or  electric  bat-
teries contracting  the  muscles.  But  the  warmth  of  the  hand  is  much
more  effective  than  a  blaze,  and  metalloscopy,  the  action  of  the  mag-
net and  of  very  weak  electric  currents,  much  more  effective  than  that
of  strong  currents.  The  more  like  a  remedy  is  to  the  normal  agencies
of  the  organism,  the  better  it  is.  And,  plainly,  nothing  more  resem-
bles the  internal  currents  that  keep  up  the  harmony  of  the  functions
than  those  very  currents  themselves  in  a  like  organism,  but  one  in
better  equilibrium.  On  the  other  hand,  we  should  be  surprised  were
the  presence  of  a  living  body,  /.  <?.,  of  a  complexus  of  vibrations  and
currents,  to  have  no  influence  upon  another  like  complexus.  A  matter
less  clear,  in  the  present  state  of  our  knowledge,  is  this  specific  affinity
of  certain  vibrations  of  certain  organs  for  those  organs  only,  the
transmission  from  a  nerve  to  a  like  nerve  in  another  body.  But  that
is  chargeable  only  to  our  ignorance.  Then,  in  two  pianofortes  that
stand  side  by  side,  do  not  two  like  strings  act  in  the  same  way  ?  And
when  two  wires  lie  side  by  side  and  an  electric  current  is  passed  over
one,  is  not  a  like  current,  in  the  reverse  direction,  produced  in  the
other  by  induction,  whereas  you  see  nothing  of  the  kind  in  a  rod  of
wood  or  of  glass?  Thus,  there  is  an  affinity. of  nature,  and  there
exists  no  reason  why  a  nerve  that  is  disordered  in  its  molecular  state
should  not  act  by  induction  mainly  upon  a  like  nerve.

Not  to  enter  upon  these  questions  of  elective  sympathism  of  parts,
it  is  plain,  as  all  organic  changes  may  be  reduced  to  changes  plus  or
minus,  that  the  energy  whose  intensity  is  normal,  acting  upon  several
associated  parts,  whereof  some  have  an  excess  and  others  a  lack  of
energy,  will  tend  to  equalize  their  tensions — that  is,  to  restore  their

i44  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

equilibrium  ;  and  inversely,  an  association  of  unequal  energies  will
produce  a  like  break-up  of  equilibrium  in  a  like  association.

"  Every  living  being  (says  Jussieu,  in  his  interesting  report  upon
mesmerism)  is  a  true  electric  body,  constantly  impregnated  by  this
active  principle,  but  not  always  in  the  same  proportion.  Some  have
more  of  it,  others  less.  .  .  .  Hence  we  see  why  by  some  it  must
be  given  out,  and  taken  in  or  eagerly  imbibed  by  others  ;  that  near-
ness to  the  one  in  which  it  abounds  is  of  advantage  to  the  one  in
which  it  is  deficient.  The  sleeping  of  a  child  with  an  aged  person  is
good  for  the  latter,  bad  for  the  former.  Plants,  when  brought  to-
gether in  a  seed-plot,  are  strong  and  healthy  ;  but  in  the  neighbor-
hood of  a  large  tree  they  wither  and  perish."

The  latter  fact  has  been  confirmed  by  recent  researches,  and  it  is
certain  that  Jussieu  judged  it  aright  when  he  attributed  the  effects
mentioned  to  absorption  of  electricity.  But  what  he  says  of  electric-
ity applies  equally  to  all  molecular  motions  and  to  all  organic  states,
though  this  influence  may  not  be  visible  save  after  manifold  trans-
formations, due  to  the  influences  of  the  media.

Is  the  fact  of  physiological  transmission  between  a  child  and  an
aged  person  empirically  ascertained  ?  Hitherto  modern  science  has
not  concerned  itself  with  these  questions ;  but  science  in  former
times  looked  on  the  fact  as  quite  natural,  and  it  has  a  place  in  popular
beliefs.  I  have  heard  of  many  instances  of  cure,  particularly  of
rheumatic  complaints,  effected  solely  by  contact  with  young  and
healthy  persons,  or  even  with  young  and  healthy  animals.  In  one
case,  too  extraordinary  to  be  quoted  as  evidence,  fowls  served  as  the
remedy,  and  they  died  after  curing  the  patient !  I  cite  this  merely  to
direct  the  attention  of  observers  upon  a  fact  of  everyday  occurrence
in  rural  districts  ;  and  physicians  are  perhaps  in  the  wrong  when  they
treat  such  stories  with  contempt.  Facts  of  the  kind  are  found  in  the
history  of  Hungary.     I  find  the  following  in  Cabanis :

"  In  general,  the  emanations  of  young,  vigorous  animals  are  benefi-
cial ;  consequently  they  produce  agreeable  impressions,  more  or  less
distinctly  noticed.  Hence  the  instinctive  attraction  whereby  we  are
drawn  to  them,  and  which  gives  us  to  feel  an  organic  pleasure  in  see-
ing them,  being  near  them,  even  before  any  thought  of  a  relation  of
affection  or  of  utility  intervenes.  The  air  of  stables  that  contain
cows  and  horses,  if  they  are  kept  clean,  is  both  agreeable  and  whole-
some ;  it  is  even  believed — and  the  opinion  is  not  altogether  without
foundation — that  in  certain  diseases  this  air  may  be  employed  as  a
remedy  and  contribute  to  the  cure.  Montaigne  tells  that  a  physi-
cian of  Toulouse,  having  met  him  in  the  house  of  an  aged  cacochy-
mic  patient  whose  health  he  was  caring  for,  being  struck  with  the
young  man's  hearty,  vigorous  looks  (for  the  philosopher  was  then
hardly  twenty  years  old)  bade  his  patient  keep  around  him  persons  of
that  age,  whom  he  deemed  to  be  no  less  of  service  in  re-animating
the  old  man  than  in  cheering  him.  The  ancients  knew  how  useful  it
is  for  languid  age  and  for  patients  exhausted  by  the  pleasures  of  love

SYMPATH1SM  AND  CONTAGION.  145

to  live  in  an  atmosphere  filled  with  the  restorative  emanations  given
out  by  bodies  young  and  full  of  vigor.  We  see  in  the  third  book  of
Kings1  that  David  lay  with  comely  damsels  to  warm  him  and  to  get
back  a  little  strength.  According  to  Galen,3  Greek  doctors  had  long
recognized  in  the  treatment  of  sundry  consumptions,  the  advantage
of  making  the  patients  take  nourishment  from  the  breasts  of  young,
healthy  nurses  ;  and  experience  had  taught  them  that  the  effect  is  not
the  same  when  the  milk  is  given  after  being  caught  in  a  vessel.  Cappivac-
cius  saved  the  heir  of  a  great  house  in  Italy,  fallen  into  marasmus,
by  making  him  lie  betwixt  two  vigorous  young  girls.  Forestus  tells
how  a  young  Pole  was  cured  of  marasmus  by  spending  the  days  and
nights  with  a  nurse  of  twenty  years  ;  and  the  effect  of  the  remedy
was  so  prompt  that  soon  there  was  reason  to  fear  that  the  convales-
cent would  again  lose  his  strength  with  the  person  that  had  restored
it  to  him.  Finally,  to  bring  this  subject  to  an  end,  Boerhaave  used  to
tell  his  disciples  of  having  seen  a  German  prince  cured  by  this  means,
employed  in  the  same  way  which  had  succeeded  so  well  for  Cappivac-
cius."3

"  There  is  not  a  housewife  but  knows  that  it  is  not  good  for  a
child  to  make  it  sleep  with  an  aged  person,  though  the  latter  enjoy
perfect  health.  In  other  times  there  existed  in  the  mountains  of
Auvergne  a  custom  that  may  well  be  mentioned.  When  any  traveler
arrived  at  an  hostelry,  feeble,  sickly,  or  benumbed  by  cold,  they
asked  him  whether  he  wished  a  warmed  or  a  brasiered  bed;  naturally
his  answer  would  be  :  '  I  want  a  good  warm  bed.'  When  about  to
get  into  the  bed  he  would  be  much  surprised  to  see  a  chubby,  hearty,
well-complexioned  fellow  leave  it,  enveloped  from  head  to  foot  in  a
clean  linen  shirt.

"  The  next  morning  our  man  would  be  sure  to  inquire  if  it  was  the
custom  to  give  one  a  bed  in  which  another  had  slept.  '  Sir,  you
asked  that  your  bed  should  be  warm,  and  we  warmed  it  for  you.  If
you  had  wished  it  brasiered,  we  would  have  heated  it  with  a  brasier.'
'  What  difference  is  there  between  these  two  methods  ? '  '  O  sir,
much  difference  ;  the  bed  warmed  by  a  young,  strong,  healthy  person
is  far  more  restorative  and  strengthening.'  "4

"  When  we  observe,"  sa}rs  Hufeland,  "  the  effect  produced  by  plac-
ing newly-killed  animals  on  paralyzed  members,  and  live  animals  on
parts  of  the  body  that  are  suffering  pain,  it  does  seem  that  this  thera-
peutic method  ought  not  to  be  spurned."  5

Let  us  enumerate  the  facts  we  have  been  examining  :
1.  Transmission  of  exhaustion,  of  a  nervous  fatigue  caused  by  any
serious   illness  or  the   like.     This    transmission    is    rather    common,
always   more    or    less   weakened,    often    to    the    advantage    of    the
patient.

1  Our  author  quotes  the  Bible  according  to  the  LXX  and  the  Vulgate,  wherein  I.
and  II.  Samuel  are  reckoned  I.  and  II.  Kings,  while  I.  and  II.  Kings  (as  reckoned
in  the  Protestant  canon)  are  III.  and  IV.  Kings. —  Translator.

8  "  Methodus  Medendi,"  lib.  iii.,  cap.  12.

3Cabanis,  "  Rapports  du  Physique  et  du  Moral  de  l'Homme,"  3d  ed.,  vol.  ii.,  p.
340.     Paris,  181 5.

4  Dr.  Pigeaire,  "  Puissance  de  l'Electricite  Animale,"  p.  231.     Paris,  1839.

6  Hufeland,  "  Die  Kunst  das  Menschliche  Leben  zu  Verlangern,"  p.  7.  Jena,  1798,

t46  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

2.  Transmission  of  health  and  strength,  regulative  action  of  a  well
equilibrated  organism  upon  another  organism  that  is  not  well  equili-
brated. This  action  is  still  more  common,  and  takes  place  sometimes
at  the  expense  of  the  transmitter.

3.  Weak  transmission  of  pain  and  other  like  symptoms,  which  ena-
bles one  to  appreciate  the  state  of  the  patient,  sometimes  through  an
exceptional  sensibility  of  touch  and  smell,  sometimes  by  analogous
sympathic  sensations  in  analogous  organs.

4.  Strong  transmission  of  pain  and  other  pathologic  symptoms,
communicating  an  analogous  complaint  to  subjects  that  are  moment-
arily hyperaesthesic,  so  as  to  produce  a  more  or  less  lasting  pathologic
state.  This  transmission  is  rare,  except  where  there  is  material  or
psychic  nervous  contagion.

CHAPTER  III.

TRANSMISSION   OF   EMOTIVE    STATES.

COME  we  now  to  the  fifth  group — transmission  of  feelings  and
emotive  states  generally.  These  kinds  of  transmission  are  rather
common,  but  they  are  seldom  produced  by  simple  "  influence,"  in  the
electro-technic  sense  of  the  word.  In  most  cases  the  ordinary  sense-
perceptions,  those  of  sight  and  hearing,  aid  the  direct  communication
with  their  automatic  inductions,  more  or  less  unconscious.  We  know
how  easy  it  is  to  divine  the  mental  state  of  a  person  we  know  from
the  expression  of  his  face  and  the  tone  of  his  voice.

As  direct  transmission  alone  is  what  interests  us  just  now,  we  will
examine  particularly  instances  where  other  influences  are  more  or  less
thoroughly  eliminated.

In  the  following  case  the  influence  of  imagination  is  not  excluded,
but  there  is  little  probability  that  there  was  any.  "  One  day,"  says
Lafontaine,  the  man  whose  experimental  lectures  at  Manchester  sug-
gested to  Braid  the  first  thought  of  his  discoveries —

"  One  day,  in  magnetizing  a  friend  of  mine,  Mr.  Devienne,  a  painter,
I  obtained  a  result  of  a  kind  to  show  the  uncertainty  of  the  existence
and  communication  of  the  vital  fluid.  Mr.  Devienne  was  suffering
from  a  headache  that  prevented  him  from  working,  and  he  suggested
that  I  should  remove  it.  I  agreed,  but  on  the  condition  that  he  should
give  me  a  glass  of  Bordeaux  wine,  for  I  was  exhausted  and  ready  to
drop  from  fatigue  ;  I  had  been  magnetizing  all  the  time  ever  since
the  morning.  He  hastened  to  gratify  my  wish  ;  I  ate  a  biscuit,  drank
a  glass  of  wine,  and  commenced  the  magnetization.  I  directed  all  my
action  to  the  brain  and  the  stomach,  imposing  hands  on  both  organs,
and  while  magnetizing  I  took  a  second  glass  of  wine.  My  patient's
eyes  were  shut  and  he  was  unable  to  open  them,  but  he  was  not  asleep.

TRANSMISSION  OF  EMOTIVE  STATES.  147

After  an  hour's  magnetizing  the  headache  was  gone  entirely,  but  my
friend's  gayety  was  delightful  ;  he  talked  incoherently  as  if  he  had
been  drinking.  I  promptly  took  him  out  of  the  magnetic  state,  and,
to  my  great  astonishment,  the  effect  remained  ;  Mr.  Devienne  was
quite  drunk,  he  could  hardly  stand.  He  had  taken  nothing,  and  I
had  drunk  only  two  glasses  of  wine,  of  which  I  felt  no  effect.  My
fluid,  therefore,  had  become  charged  with  the  spirituous  parts  con-
tained in  the  wine,  and  had  transmitted  them  to  the  patient,  leaving  no
trace  of  them  in  me."

Alongside  this  narrative  I  also  set  an  exclamation  point  some  years
since.  To-day  the  fact  does  not  seem  to  me  impossible.  The  case  is
an  interesting  one  in  that  the  action  of  the  alcohol  was  transmitted
directly  without  producing  any  marked  effect  on  the  magnetizer.

"  Since  then  (continues  Mr.  Lafontaine)  I  have  many  a  time  in  my
own  practice  and  in  that  of  other  magnetizers  come  upon  this  fact  of
the  transmission  of  physical  sensations.  I  have  also  seen  transmis-
sions of  moral  sensations  {sensations  ?norales)  ;  the  patient  would  be-
come downcast  or  joyous,  just  as  he  became  a  sufferer  if  the  magne-
tizer was  indisposed  or  preoccupied.  It  was  not  even  essential  that
the  patients  should  be  endormed  to  experience  these  different  physical
and  moral  effects,  it  sufficed  if  they  were  powerfully  magnetized  ;
nevertheless,  it  must  be  understood  that  these  were  rare  instances,
very  rare  indeed,  and  they  were  developed  only  in  the  case  of  ex-
ceptional individuals."  x

I  would  observe  that  in  the  case  of  Mr.  Devienne  transmission  took
place  in  a  state  intermediate  between  sleep  and  waking.  Now,  it  will
be  remembered  how  in  the  case  of  Mrs.  M.,  who  discerned  the  moral
state2  of  persons  around  her,  this  phenomenon  manifested  itself  always
at  the  moment  of  awaking.  Nevertheless,  somnambulism  being  a
highly  variable,  a  highly  elastic  state,  the  conditions  of  monoideism
may  be  realized  therein  momentaneously,  and  then  the  same  phe-
nomenon may  occur.

Baragnon  gives  a  case  in  all  respects  like  the  foregoing,  and  in
which  the  subject  was  in  perfect  somnambulism.

"  On  leaving  the  table  after  a  dinner  at  which  I  had  become  a  little
heated  [with  wine],  I  was  invited  to  magnetize  a  young  person  who
was  passing  the  evening  at  the  same  party.  I  brought  about  sleep
with  singular  energy  of  action.  This  I  attributed  to  my  excitement,
though  that  seemed  to  me  to  be  very  slight.  I  was  still  more
astonished  to  discover  in  the  magnetized  person,  when  she  was  in  the
somnambulic  state,  the  most  unmistakable  signs  of  intoxication.  No
one  guessed  the  cause,  as  I  seemed  perfectly  sober  ;  but,  surprised  as

1  Ch.  Lafontaine,  "  Memoires  d'un  Magnetiseur,"  vol.  i.,  p.  96.     Paris,  1S66.

s  I  doubt  whether  "  moral  state  "  expresses  the  meaning  of  dtat  moral.  But  let  the
reader  attach  the  same  meaning  to  "moral"  in  this  phrase  that  it  bears  in  "  moral
courage."  The  word  is  used  as  the  antonym  of  "physical."  "  Moral  state  "  here
means  the  thoughts,  sensations,  emotions,  etc  ,  preseat  in  one's  mind  at  a  given
moment. —  Translator.

148  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

I  was  myself,  I  explained  this  wonderful  effect  of  transmission,  pro-
ducing intoxication  in  a  delicate  woman,  who  was  incomparably  more
sensitive  than  a  man  could  be  to  the  effects  of  spirituous  liquor." '

Here,  then,  is  another  case  of  involuntary  transmission,  with
apparent  amplification  due  to  the  sensibility  of  the  subject.  But  it  is
probable  that  in  these  cases  psychic  contagion  played  a  certain  part ;
in  other  words,  that  the  subject  thought  to  herself  that  she  was  deal-
ing with  an  intoxicated  man,  judging  by  some  symptoms  more  or  less
faint,  and  that  in  a  moment  of  monoideism  this  idea  was  realized  in
herself  by  ideoplasty.

"  Transmission  of  sensations  (says  the  same  author)  extends  over
the  two  beings  through  a  general  and  sympathic  harmony.  The
moral  impressions  of  vexation,  anger,  joy,  will  be  perceptible  to  the
second  party  as  physical  re-action,  if  they  affect  the  first  party.  This
organism,  wholly  controlled  in  body  and  mind,  will  note  far  better  than
I  who  am  in  control,  the  slightest  differences  in  opinion  of  the  persons
around  me  with  regard  to  myself  and  my  experiments  and  to  mag-
netism. Is  this  so  because,  receiving  one  after  another  all  my  sensa-
tions, she  analyzes  them  better  than  I  could  do,  in  the  recollectedness  *
which  this  demi-separation  from  matter  always  procures  for  her  ? "

To  say  nothing  of  the  "  separation  from  matter,"  which  is  only  a
phrase,  we  can  understand  why  the  subject  should  perceive  relatively
better,  and  that  for  two  reasons  :  first,  because  the  subject  is  hyper-
cesthesic  ;  and  secondly,  because  the  subject  is  isolated.  The  subject
is  hypemsthesic,  that  is  to  say,  an  excitant  insufficient  for  the  mag-
netizer  may  be  overpowering  to  the  subject.  There  is  no  real  ampli-
fication in  nervous  transmission,  as  there  is  none  in  any  other  sort
of  transmission  ;  but  sometimes  there  is  apparent  amplification,  as
for  instance  in  the  case  last  cited  of  transmitted  intoxication.  It
is  as  though  we  were  to  transfer  a  burden  that  we  can  bear  very
easily,  to  the  shoulders  of  another  person  who  is  too  weak  to  bear  it.
The  subject  is  isolated,  that  is,  his  mind  is  not  distracted  ;  he  per-
ceives better  whatever  is  in  rapport  with  the  sphere  of  his  occupa-
tion for  the  moment,  and  he  takes  in  better  than  we  do  the  meaning
of  a  tone  of  voice,  of  a  laugh,  of  a  word  that  escapes  from  the  lips  of
one  in  the  company.  He  need  not  "  analyze  "  his  sensations,  it  is
enough  that  he  is  under  the  action  of  associations  based  on  unconscious
experience.

1  P.  Baragnon,  "  Etude  de  Magnetisme  Animal  sous  le  point  de  vue  d'une  exacte
Pratique,"  p.  136.     Paris,  Toulouse,  1855.

2  Recueillement.  Webster  gives  to  the  word  "recollection"  as  its  fourth  meaning
a  sense  very  nearly  the  same  as  that  of  the  French  word,  but  he  marks  it  "  rare."
The  term  comes  from  the  theology  of  the  Mystics  and  of  writers  on  the  "  spiritual,
life,"  and  with  them  means  a  state  of  abstraction  of  the  faculties  of  the  soul  from  alL
created  things  and  their  concentration  upon  the  objects  of  religious  contemplation. —
Translator.

TRANSMISSION  OF  EMOTIVE  STATES.  149

Baragnon,  I  am  aware,  would  object  that  the  subject  being  isolated
cannot  hear  "  strangers." '  But  the  phenomenon  is  a  complex  one.
The  subject  hears  only  his  magnetizer,  that  is  to  say,  answers  the
questions  of  his  magnetizer  only,  and  it  may  be  said  that  he  does  not
really  hear,  in  the  proper  sense  of  the  word.  But  it  is  a  mistake  to
suppose  that  extrane  auditory  sensations  are  totally  inactive.  They
enter  the  brain,  and  then  results  a  phenomenon  that  I  may  call  latent
hearing ;  impressions  entering  thus  (I  do  not  say  perceived)  form
associations  as  all  other  impressions  do,  combine  together,  and  give
resultants  that  may  at  a  given  moment  make  their  appearance  amid
other  and  more  intense  states.

If  lucidity  (I  do  not  say  clairvoyance,  but  lucidity  as  the  faculty  of
reflecting),11  the  lucidity  that  belongs  to  active  somnambulism,  must
be  regarded  as  unconscious  because  of  the  total  forgetfulness  on
awaking,3  then  the  latent  sensations  that  are  not  perceived  in  som-
nambulism, but  which  enter  the  brain  and  there  produce  an  action  in
all  respects  resembling  the  habitual  actions,  though  unaccompanied
by  reflex  acts  ;  these  actions,  I  say,  must  be  regarded  as  a  second  grade
of  unconsciousness.  Below  consciousness  are  even  several  strata  of  un-
consciousness.

This  is  proved  by  a  long  series  of  facts,  and  I  go  so  far  even  as  to
say  that  hypnotic  phenomena  in  general  would  be  more  or  less  incom-
prehensible without  this  graduation  of  the  intelligence.  Let  it  for
the  time  being  suffice  that  we  derive  from  these  reflections  a  practical
lesson,  to  wit :

Whoever  would  experiment  to  any  purpose  must  always  con-
sider the  endormed  subject — even  in  the  state  of  profound  aideia,  and
despite  all  ordinary  evidences  of  total  deafness  or  blindness — as  though
awake.

And  "  beware  of  suggestion  !  "  This  counsel  of  Mr.  Bernheim
ought  to  be  writ  in  big  letters  on  the  walls  of  all  hypnotic  laborato-
ries. Mr.  Bernheim,  however,  does  not  believe — at  least  did  not  yet
believe  in  mental  suggestion  when  he  wrote  his  treatise.  Scientific
hypnotizers  little  think  that  when  they  experiment  on  a  highly  sensi-
tive subject  they  inculcate  into  him  their  theories,  their  knowledge
(connaissances),  their  fears,  even  their  guesses,  and  that  thus  they  are
tricking   themselves  while  they  think   they   are  making  discoveries.

1  For  the  somnambule  strangers  are  all  persons  with  whom  he  is  not  "  in  rapport."
In  this  translation  the  word  extrane  will  be  used  to  express  the  French  adjective
stranger,  as  a  technical  term  in  magnetism. —  Translator.

2  Rtfle'chir.  This  ambiguous  word  seems  to  be  used  here  in  the  sense  of  ' '  giving
back"  (after  the  manner  of  a  mirror) ;  not  in  the  sense  of  "  considering,"  "ponder-
ing."—  Translator.

3  We  have  no  other  criterion  for  determining  whether  a  thought  or  an  action  was
unconscious  or  not,  save  the  possibility  of  recollecting  a  few  minutes  after.  It  is  vain
to  look  for  any  other.

150  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

Phenomena  are  summoned  as  the  exorcists  of  Loudun  summoned  the
devil.     So,  then,  beware  also  of  mental  suggestion  !

Mr.  Baragnon,  who  was  an  excellent  practitioner  and  often  a  very
clear-sighted  observer,  himself  points  out  certain  illusions  of  this
kind,  and  we  will  quote  his  remarks  presently,  when  we  treat  of  trans-
mission in  detail.

A  state  very  favorable  to  transmission  of  feelings  and  emotions  is
also  easily  produced  in  the  hypotaxic  phase — that  is,  in  the  state
which  results  from  passive  concentration  of  the  attention  before
hypnosis,  properly  so-called,  makes  it  appearance.  So  this,  too,  is  a
state  intermediate  between  sleep  and  waking.  It  is  often  brought
about  in  persons  who,  while  holding  their  hands  upon  a  table,  wait
patiently  for  it  to  begin  tipping.  Again,  people  amuse  themselves  in
company  by  putting  to  the  "  spirit  "  (/'.  <?.,  to  the  medium's  uncon-
scious) questions  touching  the  psychic  state  of  those  who  are  present,
and  thus  are  discovered  not  only  the  good  or  bad  humor,  the  fears,  the
cares,  the  trustfulness  or  the  incredulity  of  those  who  are  in  the  com-
pany, but  also  their  inclinations,  their  sympathies,  their  antipathies.

This  phenomenon  was  very  common  in  the  possessed  and  the
demoniacs  of  past  times,  and  of  course  was  then  explained  by  the
intervention  of  the  devil.  Here  are  some  instances  from  the  history
of  the  nervous  epidemic  of  the  Shakers  [Trembleurs)  of  the  Cevennes
— an  epidemic  that  broke  out  among  the  Protestant  fanatics  in  that
mountain  region  of  France  after  the  revocation  of  the  Edict  of
Nantes.

a.  "  Two  boys  in  ecstasy  discerned  down  to  the  smallest  circum-
stances what  John  Cavelier  had  in  his  mind.  It  was  just  these  facts
that  won  him  for  the  revolutionary  cause,  and,  as  we  know,  John
Cavelier  became  thereafter  the  principal  leader  of  the  Shakers.

b.  "A  crisiac1  discovers  that  a  man  present  in  the  assembly  has
betrayed  them  for  a  sum  of  money.  He  goes  straight  to  the  culprit
and  indicates  that  he  has  poison  hid  in  the  sleeve  of  his  jacket.  All
this  proved  to  be  true;  '  I  was  there,'  adds  the  person  who  tells  the
story,  '  and  I  saw  it  all.'

c.  "  Another  crisiac  discovers  in  the  midst  of  a  meeting  of  400  or  500
Protestants,  two  spies,  who  confess  their  crime.  His  name  was  Clary,
and  to  prove  the  truth  of  what  he  had  said,  he  offered  to  go  through
the  ordeal  of  fire,  and  in  fact  did.  Thus  he  gave  proof  of  insensibility
after  giving  proof  of  hyperesthesia."  2

"  As  for  the  Convulsionaries  of  Saint-Medard  (victims  of  another
nervous  epidemic  appearing  about  the  year  1770,  among  the  Jan-
senists,  at  the  grave  of  Deacon  Paris),  this  is  what  is  said  of  them  by
Mr.  Poncet,  one  of  the  ablest  writers  on  their  side  (Poncet  was  so
moderate  in  his  assertions  that  even  his  opponents  said  he  wrote  pro
and  contra  the  Convulsionaries) :  '  You  would  have  much  less  difficulty,'

1  Crisiaque  (from  crisis),  one  that  is  in  the  magnetic  or  hypnotic  crisis,  or  in  som-
nambulism, etc.

9  "  Theatre  Sacre  des  Cevennes,"  pp.  38,  45.

TRANSMISSION  OF  EMOTIVE  STATES.  151

he  says,  in  replying  to  the  author  of  '  Nouvelles  Observations,'  '  had
you  witnessed  the  facts  ;  if  being  in  the  company  of  a  Convulsionary,
he  had  told  you  the  most  secret  thoughts  of  your  heart  ;  if  he  had
warned  you  against  some  serious  mis-step  and  you  had  taken  it  ;  if  he
had  pointed  out  to  you  just  the  moment  for  electing  the  better  part,
and  you  had  preferred  a  less  suitable  course  :  if  this  thing  and  other
things  equally  well  defined  in  detail,  had  happened  to  yourself,  you
would  have  been  upset  and  could  not  have  refrained  from  acknowl-
edging that  such  warning  came  from  God.'  The  author  of  '  Lettres  d'un
Ecclesiastique  de  Province,'  whose  work  bears  the  unquestionable
stamp  of  truth,  also  declares  that  '  there  are  innumerable  instances  of
Convulsionaries  discovering  in  fullest  detail  the  secrets  of  hearts.'  In
a  writing  entitled  '  Coups  d'ceil  sur  les  Convulsionnaires  '  (p.  8),  we  read
that  in  many  crisiacs  the  supernatural  and  the  divine  are  manifested
by  indubitable  signs  ;  among  these  signs  is  matiifestation  again  and
again  of  the  secret  conscience.  So  we  find  in  the  heart  of  Paris,  among
cultivated  theologians,  30  years  after  the  scenes  in  the  C6vennes,  the
selfsame  marvels  that  had  before  been  attested  by  uneducated  peas-
ants ;  and  these  Jansenist  theologians  assuredly  did  not  seek  to  liken
themselves  to  persons  possessed,  or  to  Protestants,  heretics."1

In  the  facts  just  cited,  transmission  of  thoughts  is  blended  with
transmission  of  feelings  ;  the  latter  is  by  far  the  more  common.

A  case  similarly  complicated  was  observed  by  Charpignon.  He
was  attending  a  married  lady  and  encountered  sundry  remarkable
phenomena  :

"  The  lady's  husband,  at  first  unbelieving,  took  so  to  heart  the
extraordinary  phenomena  he  witnessed  that  he  became  morose.  He
now  thought  only  about  the  great  questions  of  man's  destiny,  and
evidently  having  a  tendency  to  melancholia,  he  fell  into  a  state  of
profound  excitation,  and  even  thought  of  blowing  out  his  brains,  the
more  quickly  to  attain  full  knowledge  of  things.  He  had  sense
enough,  however,  to  conceal  from  his  wife  and  family  the  thoughts
that  possessed  him  ;  he  even  retired  to  another  apartment.

"  All  this  time  the  thoughts  of  the  somnambule  reflected  the  mental
troubles  of  her  husband.  Excitation  followed  depression,  and  she
suddenly  exclaimed,  'Yes,  if  I  had  a  pistol  I'd  blow  my  brains  out  !  '
The  husband  having  entered  on  hearing  the  cries  of  distress,  'Listen,'
said  the  somnambule  to  him  ;  '  you  must  live,  and  you  have  been
cowardly  enough  to  wish  to  die.'  "  The  author  adds  the  following
reflections  :  "  Serious  worry  or  deep  grief  may  have  the  same  dis-
astrous results  as  a  disease.  The  patient  feels  the  sufferings  of  the
magnetizer  with  all  the  more  pain  as  he  knows  not  to  whom  to  attribute
the  frightful  overturning  that  oppresses  him."'

It  is  to  be  remarked  that  in  this  case  it  was  not  the  magnetizer,  but
a  third  person,  that  was  the  cause  of  the  trouble — a  third  person  united

1  Bertrand,  "  Du  Magnetisme  Animal,"  p.  436.

*  Le  bouleversement  affreux  qui  Vopprime.  Dr.  Ochorowicz  gives  no  foot-note
reference  to  show  where  the  passage  is  to  be  found  ;  and  though  the  whole  is  en-
closed between  quotation  marks  by  him,  some  of  the  remarks,  for  instance,  "  The
author  adds  the  following  reflections, *  would  seem  to  be  his  own. —  Translator.

152  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

only  to  the  somnambule  by  the  ties  of  sympathy  and  of  life-associa-
tion.    On  this  point  Deleuze  says  :

"  The  action  of  one  individual's  thought  upon  another  is  still  an
inexplicable  phenomenon,  but  our  thoughts  are  communicated  by
speech  and  by  gesture — that  is,  by  sound  and  light.  How  know  we
but  that  the  modifications  of  our  soul  may  be  made  sensible  by  other
•means  ?  Whence  the  feeling  inherent  in  human  nature,  that  makes  us
wish  that  an  absent  friend  shall  think  of  us?  Magnetism  gives  to
this  wish  a  new  motive  ;  even  explains  to  us  how  he  who  is  thinking
of  another  and  for  his  good,  acts  upon  him  ;  and  how,  rapport  once
set  up,  whether  by  affections  and  habitudes,  or  by  physical  means,  there
may  exist  communication  between  two  beings  that  are  compelled  to
lire  apart  from  each  other.  And  again,  must  we  not  seek  in  a  like
principle  for  the  origin  of  the  opinion  diffused  through  all  peoples,
that  wishes  have  an  influence  on  the  health,  the  well-being  of  those
who  are  the  objects  of  them  ;  as  also  for  the  origin  of  the  opinion  so
dear  to  sensitive  souls,  which  leads  children  to  desire  and  to  receive
their  father's  blessing?  I  do  not  want  to  urge  these  thoughts  too  far;
I  hold  that  though  they  please  the  imagination  and  the  heart,  and
though  they  account  for  many  of  our  inclinations,  they  are  not  suffi-
ciently proven  to  be  proposed  to  the  reason.  I  will  simply  remark
that  philosophy  would  gain  a  good  deal  could  we  reduce  under  natu-
ral and  physical  laws,  facts  that  have  the  appearance  of  the  marvel-
ous, and  which,  nevertheless,  are  attested  by  enlightened  men.  It  is
not  the  belief  in  these  facts,  but  the  consequences  we  draw  from
them,  that  are  the  cause  of  superstition.  Say  what  you  will,  you
never  will  persuade  those  who  are  convinced  of  the  reality  of  these
phenomena,  whether  by  experience  or  by  trustworthy  testimony,  that
they  are  dupes  of  an  illusion.  Compel  them  to  keep  silence  for  fear
of  ridicule,  and  they  will  be  none  the  less  ready  to  attribute  these
things  to  a  supernatural  cause  ;  they  will  then  look  on  the  principles
of  the  sciences  and  on  those  who  measure  everything  by  those  princi-
ples, as  a  system  and  as  men  who  see  only  the  rind  of  things.  Better
were  it  to  bring  all  the  wonder  phenomena  within  the  physical  order,
and  to  distinguish  clearly  what  truth  they  may  contain  from  what  is
actually  inadmissible."1

These  very  just  remarks  may  well  give  matter  for  reflection  to
those  who  understand  one  thing  only — the  inviolability  of  accepted
truths.  As  for  Deleuze's  suppositions  with  regard  to  popular  opin-
ions, they  are  equally  just  in  principle.

I  venture  to  go  further,  and  to  say  that  the  human  mind  is  too  little
inventive  to  originate  any  prejudice2  whatever,  with  no  empiric  basis.
The  question  simply  is,  where  does  the  basis  end  and  where  is  the
beginning  of  the  complementary  imagination  and  of  the  errors  that
come  from  our  forgetting  the  origin  of  it  all  ?  But  as  for  the  practi-
cal  importance   of  these  real   facts,  it  can    by  no  means  satisfy  the

1  Deleuze,  "  Histoire  Critique,"  etc.,  vol.  ii.,  p.  327.     Paris,  1813.

2  The  word  is  us"ed  here  in  its  etymological  sense — a  judgment  formed  before  know-
ledge is  had.  Prajudicium — forejudgment.  Just  above  I  have  rendered  prdjuge's,
"  popular  opinions."—  7'ranslator.

TRANSMISSION  OF  EMO  TIVE  ST  A  TES.  1 5  3

aspirations  of  "  sensitive  souls."  The  facts  of  unconscious  commu-
nication, which  may  be  frequent  enough,  are  quite  lost  in  the  torrent
of  normal  impressions  and  associations  ;  and  the  facts  of  definite,
experimental  communication  are  so  rare  that  they  cannot  have  any
practical  value  till  we  shall  discover  all  the  precise  conditions  of  their
physiological  manifestation.

But  we  return  to  the  facts.  One  must  never  be  troubled  about  ap-
plications when  there  is  question  of  a  new  theoretic  truth.  Let  us
accumulate  facts  in  order  to  frame  a  sound  theory  ;  the  application
will  come  of  itself.     Meanwhile  this  truth  embarrasses  us  sometimes.

"  It  has  happened  often  to  me  (writes  the  Count  de  Maricourt)  to
be  flustered  and  embarrassed  by  the  clairvoyance  of  somnambules  in
perceiving  impressions  or  divining  feelings  that  I  should  have  wished
hidden  from  them."

I  do  not  question  the  fact,  but  the  adverb  "  often  "  is  perhaps  too
strong  in  this  passage.

I  might  quote  several  facts  of  the  same  kind  ;  but  because  of
their  personal  and  complicated  character  it  were  difficult  to  tell  the
tale  without  entering  upon  many  explanatory  details  that  would  over-
load our  study  and  perhaps  add  nothing  that  would  be  convincing  to
the  unbeliever.

This  sort  of  facts  one  must  observe  for  himself  and  keep  for  his
own  instruction.  It  .is  not  to  be  supposed  that  a  "  clairvoyant  "  som-
nambule  is  all  the  time  discovering  or  reproducing  your  sensations.
In  the  first  place,  the  somnambules  that  discover  them  are  rare,  and
they  cannot  do  this  thing  every  day.  As  with  all  transmission  phe-
nomena, there  are  moments — quarter  hours  at  most — during  which
transmission  takes  place.

This  is  true  particularly  of  clear,  experimental  transmissions  and  of
detailed  sensations.  We  are  already  familiar  with  some  of  these  facts,  as
observed  in  Mrs.  M.  and  Mrs.  B.  Let  us  now  look  at  observations
made  by  other  experimenters.  We  begin  with  some  remarks  from
Baragnon  :

"  Before  devoting  oneself  to  the  study  of  the  moral  and  mysterious
union  that  is  formed  by  the  nerve-fluid  between  two  beings,  it  is  well
to  apply  oneself  to  the  observation  of  facts  which  disclose  a  no  less
abnormal  and  miraculous  closeness  of  relation  (intimite')  between  two
bodies.

"  Profoundly  attached  to  the  physical  facts,  because  I  believe  it  is
they  that  will  save  magnetism  from  the  destruction  that  time  works,
till  the  minds  of  men  are  opened  to  it  [Baragnon  wrote  in  1853],  I
see  in  the  fact  of  the  transmission  of  sensation  a  new  lever  against
resistance.

"  What  is  this  intimate  communion  of  two  natures  so  that  the  slight-
est pains,  the  most  diverse  physical  impressions,  being  felt  by  the  one
are  echoed  by  the  other    .     .    *    by  the  other,  whose  senses  are  in

i54  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

abeyance,  whose  means  of  perception  are  effaced  ?  [This  effacement
is  only  relative.]  We  cannot  explain  such  facts ;  they  are  found  to
exist,  and  that  is  all.  If  the  magnetizer  feels  an  impression,  that
instant  the  somnambule  feels  a  like  commotion.  If,  for  instance,
you  prick  the  operator's  arm  so  as  to  cause  him  pain,  the  subject  will
show  signs  of  pain,  and  will  always  tell  correctly  the  part  that  was
hurt,  whether  by  burning,  or  by  pricking,  or  by  a  blow.

"  If  the  magnetizer  is  sufficiently  stoical  to  withstand  every  painful
impression,  the  subject  feels  nothing  or  next  to  nothing.  So,  as  re-
gards smell  and  taste.  If  I  find  the  odor  of  ammonia,  ether,  or  any
other  smell,  the  endormed  person  will  name  the  odor,  for  he,  in  fact,
will  sense  it  too.  Still,  this  is  a  fact  that  must  not  be  confounded  with
thought-transference."

That  is  a  just  remark.  There  are  subjects  that  take  the  sensations
of  the  operator  without  being  influenced  by  his  thoughts,  and  in-
versely ;  and  with  the  same  subject  one  of  the  two  phenomena  may
show  itself  without  the  other.  Sensations  are  generally  transmitted
in  a  monoideic  state,  in  which  imitaticm  of  movements  exists  also,  while
transmission  of  thoughts  seems  to  require  a  monoideism  a  little  more
passive  and,  at  the  same  time,  a  little  more  absorbed  ;  it  is,  perhaps,
a  little  nearer  than  the  other  to  polyideism,  while  the  state  that  favors
will-transmission  seems  more  passive  still  and  nigher  to  aideism.

The  same  author  makes  another  just  remark  with  regard  to  mental
influence  during  experiments  in  general :

"  Let  us  say  upon  this  point,  that  if  we  are  trying  tests  of  insensi-
bility upon  the  magnetized  person,  and  while  we  are  making  burns
(opfrons  brulures),  suppose  we  feel  some  impression  of  what  we  are
doing — a  feeling  of  repugnance  and  dislike  for  committing  such  cruel-
ties— the  patient,  in  virtue  of  the  transmission  of  sensation,  will  shud-
der, too,  not  from  pain,  for  there  is  none,  but  because  of  the  senti-
ment of  pain  in  us.  From  this  one  can  judge  whether  our  advice,  so
often  repeated,  to  keep  calm  and  cool,  is  of  much  importance.  The
re-action  of  the  magnetizer  on  the  subject,  in  these  conditions,  is  the
prime  source  of  the  cure,  as  in  the  opposite  state  it  is  the  mainspring
of  the  disturbing  principle"  (p.  134).

A  very  just  remark.  At  the  time  (1845)  a  sharp  controversy  was
proceeding  in  journals  devoted  to  magnetism,  upon  experiments  in
insensibility,  in  particular  between  Mr.  Lafontaine,  who  gave  public
exhibitions  of  such  experiments,  and  Mr.  Brice  de  Beauregard,  who
held  them  to  be  infamous,  among  other  reasons,  because  of  the  suffer-
ing endured  by  the  somnambules  at  awaking  or  afterward.  Till
lately  I  have  been  unable  to  understand  this  polemic.  I  have  many
a  time  experimented  upon  the  insensibility  of  somnambules  ;  on  many
persons  I  have,  with  their  permission,  inflicted  all  manner  of  seeming
tortures — punctures,  burning  with  melted  wax,  etc.  With  punctures,
even  deep  punctures,  I  have  never  had  the  least  mishap  ;  in  two  cases
of    burning,    where    a    surface    of    several    square    centimeters    was

TRANSMISSION  OF  EMO  TIVE  ST  A  TES.  1 5  5

involved,  melted  wax  being  used  in  one,  red-hot  iron  in  the  other,  the
process  of  inflammation  took  the  usual  course,  but  without  any  suffer-
ing at  all  either  during  the  sleep  or  after.  Hence  it  was  with  great
astonishment  I  learned  that  some  magnetizers  find  their  patients  suf-
fering more  or  less  pain  after  awaking.  Now  I  know  why.  After  my
first  experiment,  which  succeeded  perfectly,  I  felt  fully  assured  that
the  subject  could  not  suffer  at  all,  and  this  assurance  I  suggested
effectively  to  my  subjects  ;  whereas  operators  who  have  begun  with
a  mishap  always  thereafter  have  a  fear,  an  emotion,  an  uneasiness,  a
needless  compassion,  which  influence  their  subjects.  Nay,  more  ;  the
most  humane  man  of  all  magnetizers,  the  man  morally  most  suscep-
tible, namely,  Deleuze,  never  could  produce  insensibility  ;  and  yet,  ac-
cording to  Esdaile,  Baragnon,  Lafontaine,  Du  Potet,  and  others,
anaesthesia  is  one  of  the  most  constant  characters  of  nervous  sleep  !
Deleuze,  after  quoting  several  cases  of  insensibility  vouched  for  by
physicians,  says :

"My  somnambules  never  presented  it  j  their  sensibility  was,  on  the
contrary,  more  delicate  than  in  the  waking  state  ;  the  contact  of  a
body  not  magnetized  was  disagreeable  to  them,  and  the  touch  of  an
extrane  person  gave  them  much  annoyance.  I  even  know  for  certain
of  patients  falling  into  convulsions  and  awaking  because  of  being  touched
suddenly  by  someone  not  in  rapport."  1

All  this  is  true,  but  the  opposite  side  is  in  the  right  also.

One  produces  insensibility  when  one  is  sure  that  it  will  be  produced.
And  so  with  respect  to  all  other  phenomena,  symptoms,  states — ac-
count, of  course,  being  made  of  the  subject's  hypnotic  sensibility.

"  One  day,"  says  Perronet,  "I  fancied  that  a  subject  was  fatigued
and  that  the  attitudes  taken  by  him,  counter  to  the  laws  of  gravity,
must  exhaust  his  muscular  strength.  Straightway,  at  the  very  instant
of  this  reflection — an  erroneous  one,  no  doubt — I  saw  his  limbs  relax
and  become  inert  and  flabby  ;  when  raised  and  let  go,  they  fell  like
lifeless  masses,  or  like  the  arms  and  legs  of  Policinello.  .  .  .  After
four  or  five  minutes,  in  a  moment  of  ill  humor,  I  had  a  strong  will  to.
revive  in  the  subject  the  properties  belonging  to  the  cataleptic  state  ;
and  I  had  the_  satisfaction  of  succeeding.  From  this  experience  I
concluded  that  in  the  phenomena  of  catalepsy  all  depends  on  volitive
or  intuitive  direction  on  the  part  of  the  operator,  regard,  however,
being  had  to  the  subjective  predisposition  of  the  catalepsied  subject."2

It  may  be  remarked  that  Mesmer,  a  man  of  nervous,  irascible  tem-
perament, and  who  despised  somnambulism,  seldom  produced  it,  while
he  nearly  always  produced  the  convulsive  crises,  which  he  regarded  as
necessary  ;  that  Puysegur,  calm  and  of  a  kindly  disposition,  rarely
produced  spasms,  and  nearly  always  somnambulism  ;  that  the  force-
ful  Lafontaine  produced  profound  and    lasting  states  ;  that  if    the

1  Deleuze,  "  Instr.  Pratique,"  p.  139..

a  Perronet,  "Du  Magnetisme  Animal,"  p.  15.     Paris,  1884.

156  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

credulous  Billot  did  but  obey  the  spontaneous  divagations  of  his  som-
nambules,  Donato,  full  of  self-confidence,  controls  them  like  trained
animals  ;  that  if  many  magnetizers  recommend  the  deepest  stillness,
so  as  not  to  delay  the  coming  on  of  the  sleep,  the  priest  Faria  and
General  Noizet  brought  it  on  by  shouting  "  Sleep ! "  ;  that  if  some
magnetizers  fail  to  produce  suggestions,  the  Nancy  school  acts  solely
by  suggestion  ;  that  if  the  regulation  three  states1  exhibit  themselves
daily  at  the  Salpetriere,  that  happens  rarely  elsewhere  ;  that  "  the
cause  that  makes,  unmakes,"  rarely,  however,  anywhere  save  at  the
Pitie.

It  is  as  with  new  remedies,  which  act  efficaciously  only  while  they
are  the  fashion — "  Hurry  up,  for  it  is  curing  folks  now  !  "

But,  then,  is  it  all  illusion,  and  does  it  all  depend  on  the  sensations,
feelings,  beliefs  of  the  operators?

No  ;  there  is  truth  in  all  these  conflicting  observations  ;  only  one
must  not  generalize  too  much ;  we  must  not  give  way  to  a  first  im-
pression, or  work  ourselves  into  an  enthusiasm  for  an  impossible  idea,
for  an  observation  that  perhaps  has  no  better  foundation  than  chance
or  peculiar  circumstances.

One  needs  to  preserve  in  the  current  of  research  neutrality  of  feeling,
for  all  your  rather  bold  guesses  have  an  echo  in  the  highly  sensitive
subject,  and  they  lead  you  astray.  Do  not  forget  that  you  are  not
dealing  with  a  comet,  which  does  not  trouble  itself  about  your  tele-
scope, nor  with  a  chemic  combination,  which,  while  undergoing  the
action  of  your  reagents,  is  concerned  no  further  with  them.

What  would  be  thought  of  a  physicist  who,  wishing  to  make  a  nice
galvanometric  test,  should  load  his  pockets  with  chunks  of  iron  or
with  magnets  ?

Let  us  go  back  now  to  our  sheep.  Here  is  an  observation  of
Mr.  Peter  Janet :

"  Mrs.  B.  seems  to  feel  most  of  the  sensations  felt  by  the  person
that  has  endormed  her.  She  believed  she  herself  was  drinking  when
that  person  drank.  She  always  knew  exactly  the  substance  I  put  in
my  mouth,  and  distinguished  perfectly  whether  I  was  tasting  of  salt,
or  pepper,  or  sugar."8

And  in  his  last  note3  he  adds  the  following  :

"We  have  noticed  that  the  phenomenon  keeps  on,  even  though  I
be  in  another  room.  ...  If,  even  in  another  chamber,  I  pinch
myself  strongly  on  the  arm  or  the  leg,  she  cries  out  and  is  angry  be-
cause she,  too,  is  pinched  on  the  arm  or  on  the  calf.  Finally,  my
brother,  who  was  present  at  the  experiments,  and  who  had  a  peculiar
influence  over  her,  for  she  confounded  him  with  me,  tried  a  curious
experiment.     Going  into  another  room,  he  made  a  severe  burn  on  his

1  Catalepsy,  somnambulism,  lethargy. —  Translator.

9  P.  Janet,  "  Note  sur  quelques  Faits  de  Somnambulisme  "  {Bull,  de  la  Soc.  de
Psych.  Physiol,  1885,  1  fasc).  3  Revue  Philosophique,  No.  8,  Aug.,  1886.

TRANSMISSION  OF  EMOTIVE  STATES.  157

arm,  Mrs.  B.  being  at  the  time  in  that  state  of  lethargic  somnambulism '
in  which  she  takes  mental  suggestions.  Mrs.  B.  was  crying  out  wildly,
and  I  had  difficulty  in  restraining  her.  She  had  hold  of  her  right
arm  above  the  wrist,  and  complained  of  suffering  greatly  there.  Now,
I  did  not  myself  know  exactly  the  spot  at  which  my  brother  had  in-
tended to  make  the  burn.  //  was  at  that  part.  When  Mrs.  B.  was
awakened,  I  noticed  with  astonishment  that  she  still  held  her  right
wrist  and  complained  of  suffering  greatly  therein,  though  she  knew
not  why.  The  next  day  she  was  still  treating  her  arm  with  cold-water
compresses,  and  in  the  evening  I  found  a  swelling  and  a  redness,  both
very  apparent,  at  the  exact  place  on  which  my  brother  had  made  the
burn  on  his  arm  ;  but  it  must  be  remarked  that  during  the  day  she
had  touched  and  rubbed  the  arm.  .  .  .  This  phenomenon  of  com-
munication of  sensations  appeared  only  after  a  long  series  of  seances
and  at  the  end  of  one  that  lasted  several  hours  ;  therefore  I  have  never
seen  it  again  presented  with  the  same  definiteness."

I  was  not  present  at  this  experiment,  but  I  saw  the  burn  on  Mr.  J.
Janet's  arm — a  large  burn  and  one  that  must  have  been  very  painful.
Similar  facts  have  long  been  observed  by  magnetizers,  for  example  :

"  The  phenomenon  of  transmission  of  sensations  from  the  magnet-
izer  to  the  magnetized  (says  Lafontaine)  was  one  day  manifested  at
Clarisse's.  I  then  went  down  to  the  floor  below  with  two  persons,
who  inflicted  a  thousand  little  tortures  on  me — pulling  my  hair,  tick-
ling, pricking,  and  so-forth.  When  we  went  upstairs  again,  we  were
told  that  the  somnambule  had  indicated  all  these  sufferings  in  the
order  in  which  they  had  been  inflicted  on  me.  This  is  one  of  the  phe-
nomena I  have  seldomest  come  across."  2

Among  recent  experiments  are  to  be  mentioned  those  made  by  the
London  Society  for  Psychical  Research,  which  has  done  so  much  to
advance  the  study  of  these  delicate  questions  of  psychology,  hitherto
entirely  neglected  :

"  Community  of  Sensations. — We  come  now  to  a  question  much  de-
bated and  very  open  to  discussion.  We  hold — and  here  we  have  the
support  of  the  previous  experimenters — that  we  have  often  observed
a  truly  remarkable  community  of  sensations  between  the  operator  and
his  subject — a  phenomenon  that  perhaps  might  more  correctly  be
called  transmission  of  sensations.  This  phenomenon  is  nearly  allied
to  those  with  which  the  committee  on  thought-transference  is  con-
cerned. But  our  experiments  differ  from  those  made  by  the  latter
committee  in  this,  that  the  subject  is  not  in  his  normal  state,
but  is  in  the  'mesmeric  sleep.'  The  experiments  were  conducted
as  follows :  Frederic  Wells  (the  somnambule,  a  young  man  of
twenty  years)  sat  in  a  chair  with  his  eyes  bandaged,  and  Mr.  Smith
stood  behind  him.  The  subject  was  put  to  sleep  by  Mr.  Smith  by  the
use  of  passes.  Mr.  Smith  was  then  pricked  or  pinched  pretty  hard
on  different  parts  of   the   body,  this    operation    lasting  generally  a

1  "Lethargic  somnambulism"  is  a  contradiction.  The  state  in  question  was  one
intermediate  between  aideia  (lethargy)  and  polyideia  (somnambulism) ,  in  other  words  a
monoideic  state. — Note  by  Dr.  Ochorowicz.

5  Lafontaine,  "  Memoires,"  vol.  i.,  p.  157.

158  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

minute  or  two.  Absolute  silence  was  observed,  barring  the  necessary-
question,  '  Do  you  feel  anything  ? '  This  question  was  pronounced
by  Mr.  Smith,  for  the  subject  seemed  not  to  hear  the  other  persons.
In  the  first  set  of  experiments  Mr.  Smith  held  one  of  the  subject's
hands,  but  that  precaution  having  afterward  been  found  useless,  all
contact  between  operator  and  subject  was  broken  off  in  the  subse-
quent experiments."

First  series,  January  4,  1883  :

1.  The  upper  part  of  Mr.  Smith's  right  arm  was  pinched  several
times.  About  two  minutes  after,  Mr.  Wells  began  to  rub  the  corres-
ponding part  of  his  body.

2.  Back  of  neck  pinched.     Same  result.

3.  A  blow  on  the  calf  of  left  leg.     Same  result.

4.  Lobe  of  left  ear  pinched.     Same  result.

5.  Back  of  left  hand  pinched.     Same  result.

6.  A  blow  on  the  upper  part  of  the  back.     Same  result.

7.  Hair  pulled.     Wells  locates  the  pain  in  his  left  arm.

8.  A  blow  on  the  right  shoulder.  The  corresponding  part  indicated
exactly.

9.  Back  of  left  hand  pricked.     Same  result.

10.  Back  of  neck  pricked.     Same  result.

11.  Left  great  toe  squeezed.     No  action.

12.  Left  ear  pricked.     Corresponding  part  indicated  exactly.

13.  Back  of  left  shoulder  struck.     Same  result.

14.  Calf  of  right  leg  pinched.     Wells  touches  his  arm.

15.  Palm  of  left  hand  pricked.  Corresponding  part  indicated  ex-
actly.

16.  Neck  below  right  ear  pricked.     Same  result.

Thus  we  find  in  16  experiments  13  successes  and  3  failures.

In  the  second  series  of  experiments,  Wells's  eyes  were  bandaged  as
before ;  but,  furthermore,  there  was  a  screen  between  him  and  Mr.
Smith.  For  a  while  during  the  experiments  Mr.  Smith  was  in  a
neighboring  room,  separated  from  his  subject  by  a  thick  curtain.

Secend  series,  April  10,  1883  :

17.  Upper  portion  of  Mr.  Smith's  left  ear  pinched.  After  about
two  minutes  Wells  exclaimed:  "Who  is  pinching  me?"  and  began  to
rub  the  corresponding  part.

18.  Upper  portion  of  left  arm  pinched.  Wells  indicates  the  spot
almost  immediately.

19.  Right  ear  pinched.  -After  about  one  minute  Wells  struck  his
own  right  ear,  as  though  brushing  away  a  fly,  exclaiming,  "  Won't  you
leave  me  alone  ? "

20.  Chin  pinched.     Wells  indicated  the  place  almost  immediately.

21.  Hair  pulled.     No  action.

22.  Back  of  neck  pinched.  Wells  pinched  the  corresponding  part
soon  after.

23.  Left  ear  pinched.     Same  result.

24.  Salt  put  in  Mr.  Smith's  mouth.  Wells  exclaimed  :  "  I  don't
like  to  eat  wax  candles" — an  idea  no  doubt  suggested  to  him  by
the  words  "wax  candles"  uttered  in  his  hearing  a  few  minutes  pre-
viously.

TRANSMISSION  OF  EMO  TIVE  S  TA  TES.  i 5  9

25.  Some  ground  ginger  given  Mr.  Smith.  "  I  don't  like  things
that  burn.     Why  do  you  give  me  pepper  that  way  ?  "

26.  Some  salt.     "What  disgusting  stuff  is  this?"

27.  Some  wormwood.  "  You  hurt  my  eyes  ;  I  do  not  like  mus-
tard."

(It  is  to  be  remarked  that  in  the  last  two  experiments  the  taste  of
the  ginger  continues,  and  is  confounded  with  the  new  sensations.)

28.  The  calf  of  the  right  leg  pinched.  Wells  becomes  angry  and
refuses  to  speak.  At  last  he  stretches  forth  the  right  leg  violently
and  rubs  the  calf.

After  this  experiment  Wells  becomes  quite  angry  and  will  no  longer
answer  any  questions,  saying  that  were  he  to  answer  people  would
keep  on  pinching  him.  (During  this  time  the  calf  of  Mr.  Smith's  left
leg  was  continually  pinched.)  '

Thus  in  twenty-four  experiments  on  touch  there  were  twenty  suc-
cesses. Of  the  four  checks  two  might  have  been  foreseen,  for  trans-
ference is  seldom  produced  by  pulling  the  hair.  Once  the  response
was  not  given,  and  once  only  was  it  false.

The  report  is  signed  by  Messrs.  W.  F.  Barrett,  Edmond  Gurney,
Frederic  W.  H.  Myers,  Henry  N.  Ridley,  W.  H.  Stone,  George  Wyld
and  Frank  Podmore.1

To  this  report  it  might  be  objected  that  for  a  good  deal  of  the
time  the  co-operation  of  the  hearing  of  the  subject  was  not  excluded.
But  that  objection  cannot  weaken  the  general  impression  made  by
the  experiment ;  that  is  fairly  conclusive.  Besides,  other  series  of
experiments  were  made  for  three  years,  and  always  gave  similar
results.

But  how  is  it  possible  for  the  pain  of  the  operator  not  only  to  be
felt  by  the  subject,  but  even  to  be  localized  so  exactly  ?  However
extraordinary  this  may  seem,  it  is  not,  I  believe,  unintelligible.

If,  in  order  that  the  transference  may  take  place  at  all,  there  must
be  a  sort  of  regulating;  if  the  tonic  movement  of  the  subject's  organism
has  to  be  brought  into  accord  with  the  tonic  movement  proper  to  the
organism  of  the  operator — this  by  means  of  repeated  touching,  passes,
etc. — the  special  regulating  of  the  corresponding  nerves  is  given  in
advance.  We  jnay  suppose  that  there  are  differences  among  the
several  parts  of  the  organ  of  touch,  and  that  one  part,  a,  accords
better  with  a  corresponding  part,  a',  of  another  organism  than  with
the  parts  b',  c\  etc.  We  do  not  know  wherein  this  difference  consists —
it  may  be  very  complex — but  suppose  there  exists  in  the  analogous
part  only  one  analogous  character  :  that  of  a  determinate  resistance
for  certain  currents.  Now,  there  are  found  among  physical  phenomena
dependences  of  this  kind.

Remember,  first,  that,  as  here  in  physiological  sympathise,  so  in
physical  sympathism,  direct  contact  is  not  necessary.  A  magnet  will
magnetize  from  a  distance  a  piece  of  steel,  without  producing  any
1  "  Proceedings  of  the  Soc.  for  Psych.  Res.,"  vol.  i.,  part  3.,  July,  1883.

160  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

perceptible  action  on  other  metals.  Soft  iron,  too,  is  magnetized,  but
only  for  the  moment.  We  might  say  that  if  we  liken  the  magnetizer
to  a  magnet,  somnambules  that  feel  his  action  slightly  are  comparable
to  iron,  while  those  that  are  affected  by  it  for  a  certain  time  may  be
compared  to  steel.  We  know  that  if  a  magnet  undergoes  a  change
in  its  molecular  energy,  its  armature,  at  a  greater  or  less  distance,
feels  the  change  in  the  same  degree.

Then,  it  is  known  that  as  there  are  electrostatic  machines  that  pro-
duce electricity  by  direct  friction,  so  there  are  others  that  charge
themselves  and  produce  electricity  "  by  influence " — /.  e.,  without
contact.  The  comparison  is  not  entirely  exact.  But  substitute  gal-
vanism in  place  of  electricity.  In  galvanism  not  only  is  contact  not
necessary,  but  no  poor  conductor  can  prevent  the  phenomena  of  in-
duction— that  is,  of  physical  sympathism.  A  wire  insulated  as  thoroughly
as  possible,  and  even  at  some  distance  from  another  wire,  will  produce
in  the  latter  a  corresponding  current  so  soon  as  it  is  itself  traversed
by  a  current.  So  inevitable  is  this  phenomenon  that  it  forms  the
principal  obstacle  to  telephonic  communication.  If  upon  the  same
poles  are  suspended  telegraph  wires,  though  a  meter  or  more  distant,
there  will  be  heard  strokes  {coups)  in  the  telephone  at  each  interrup-
tion of  the  telegraphic  current  ;  and  even  telephonic  currents  them-
selves alone,  when  brought  together  on  many  wires  in  a  central
station,  get  mixed  by  induction.

Suppose,  now,  that  the  wires,  instead  of  being  stretched  in  a  right
line,  are  coiled  as  though  wound  on  a  bobbin.  A  bobbin  having  a
certain  number  of  coils  presents  greater  or  less  resistance.

The  bobbin  constitutes  the  essential  part  of  a  telephone.  Take  a
telephone  circuit,  longer  or  shorter,  uniting  two  stations.  At  each
station  are  two  telephones  interposed  in  the  circuit,  but  while  the
bobbin  of  telephone  a  has  a  resistance  of  300  ohms,  that  of  telephone
b  has  only  3  ;  so,  too,  telephone  a'  has  high  resistance,  and  telephone
b'  very  low  resistance.  You  employ  as  transmitter  telephone  a,  into
which  you  speak  ;  your  words  will  be  transmitted,  and  you  will  be
heard  distinctly  at  the  other  station,  but  only  through  receiver  a! —
receiver  b'  will  be  mute  or  nearly  so,  according  to  the  degree  of  differ-
ence in  quality  of  the  wire,-  the  number  of  coils,  etc.  So,  too,  if  the
answer  is  given  through  a'  you  will  hear  only  through  a.

And  yet  all  four  telephones  are  on  the  line.

They  may  also  not  be  in  contact  ;  the  bobbins  may  be  simply
placed  side  by  side,  and  you  will  obtain  by  induction  the  same  result.

I  do  not  mean  to  force  the  analogy,  which  is  but  partial.

The  phenomenon  is  always  comparatively  much  more  simple  in  a
complex  of  bobbins  than  in  an  aggregation  of  cells.

The  currents  in  the  organism  may  not  be  all  alike.  They  may  even
present  a  great  number  of  differences  as  regards  their  nature,  velocity,

TRANSMISSION  OF  IDEAS.  161

amplitude,  intermittence,  etc.  But  it  is  none  the  less  comprehensible
that  the  excitation  of  a  certain  determinate  modus  will  be  more  easily
echoed,  and  chiefly  by  an  organ  susceptible  of  like  vibrations.

Not  to  enter  into  details  concerning  these  nerve-vibrations,  of  which
we  are  ignorant,  we  may  state  the  question  thus  :

Are  there  electric  currents  in  the  nerves  ?  Yes  !  Have  the  electric
currents  the  property  of  self-induction  at  a  distance  despite  all  sorts
of  obstacles?  Yes!  Is  this  induction  always  palpable?  No!  For
that  purpose  we  require  instruments  of  extreme  sensibility  :  to  wit,
good  subjects.  Is  there  a  constant  relation  between  excitations  of
nerves  and  the  electric  currents  of  those  nerves  ?     Yes  !

Well,  it  is  enough  that  a  given  excitation  of  nerve  A,  accompanied
by  electric  change  a,  produce  by  induction  a  like  change  a'  in  a  dis-
tant nerve  A',  to  make  that  nerve  reproduce  the  given  excitation,  in
virtue  of  the  principle  of  inter-organic  associations  mentioned  above.

Nor  is  it  contrary  to  reason  to  hold  that  this  transmission,  or  this
induction,  may  also  be  direct,  that  is,  even  without  the  intervention
of  electric  currents  ;  the  nerve-currents  may  equally  induce  them-
selves.

Hence,  there  is  no  need  of  supposing  a  new  force  to  make  these
phenomena  comprehensible  ;  we  have  only  to  broaden  and  to  subtilize
a  little  the  properties  of  known  forces  and  the  laws  of  re-action,  which
are  probably  inherent  in  all  natural  motions.

Finally,  we  must  not  forget  that  precise  localization  is  very  rare.
There  are  subjects  that  distinctly  feel  the  pain  in  a  corresponding
organ,  but  not  on  the  same  side.  It  seems  that  in  that  case  induction
acts  on  the  more  sensitive  side,  or  on  the  nodi  minoris  resistentice.

CHAPTER  IV.

TRANSMISSION     OF    IDEAS.

WITH  the  transference  of  sensations  we  quit  the  region  of  sym-
pathic  localization.     Ideas  are  not  localized.

Here,  of  course,  as  everywhere,  there  are  degrees.

Sensations  of  sight  and  hearing  have  less  local  relation  with  their
organs  than  have  sensations  of  touch,  but  they  are  so  akin  to  ideas
properly  so-called  that  there  is  no  use  in  treating  them  separately.  If
I  transmit  the  sense-image  of  the  king  of  diamonds  while  gazing  at
it  or  simply  imagining  it,  there  will  be  only  a  difference  in  the  degree
of  clearness  of  the  representation,  whereas  in  tactile  sensations,
which  we  have  been  considering,  the  emotional  element  made  a  marked
difference.

l62

MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

In  the  sphere  of  ideas,  therefore,  we  shall  look  for  a  more  subtile
action,  and  we  may  expect  that  direct,  clear  transmission  will  be  still
rarer  there.

The  reader  will  recall  the  experiments  made  with  Mrs.  D.  (p.  51,  seq.y
supra),  but  it  is  to  the  English  Society  for  Psychical  Research  in  par-
ticular that  the  honor  belongs  of  having  conducted  a  great  number
of  studies  of  this  kind,  made  with  remarkable  precision  and  perse-
verance. These  must  be  regarded  not  only  as  the  starting-point  in
the  study  of  mental  suggestion,  but  in  general  as  a  new  impulsion
given  to  psychological  science  as  a  whole.  There  is  no  doubt  that
they  mark  a  new  era  in  modern  psychology.

In  sundry  of  my  works  in  the  Polish  language,  and  particularly  in
a  study  upon  the  actual  state  of  psychology,  published  in  1881  in
Mr.  Ribot's  Revue  Philosophique,  I  showed  the  absolute  necessity  of
collective  work  in  psychology.  The  English  Society  was  the  first  to
undertake  it,  and  we  see  what  enormous  strides  we  have  made  in  these
last  years  !

The  results  of  the  English  Psychical  Research  Society  upon  mental
suggestion  are  contained  in  four  reports  of  a  special  committee,  on
which  were  Messrs.  Edmond  Gurney,  F.  W.  H.  Myers,  F.  Podmore,
and  W.  F.  Barrett,  Professor  of  Physics  in  the  Royal  College  of  Science
for  Ireland.  Experiments  have  also  been  made  by  Mr.  Henry  Sidg-
wick  and  Professor  Balfour  Stewart.  They  were  carried  on  at  Buxton,
Cambridge,  Dublin,  Liverpool,  etc.  Everywhere  the  result  was  the
same  :  verification  of  the  existence  of  the  phenomenon.  The  follow-
ing table  shows  the  ratio  of  successes  in  the  early  series  :

WITH    MENTAL   SUGGESTION.

i  success  in 1  ^  exp.

3%
13

10

3%
2

Mean.

1  in

WITHOUT   MENTAL    SUGGESTION.

success  in 52  exp.

"      90  "

52
90
52
12

4

Mean 1  in  46

The  experiments  were  made  with  playing-cards,  objects  of  different
kinds,  names,  and  numbers.  But  the  most  interesting  results  were
obtained  with  drawings.  In  volume  i.,  part  3,  is  given  a  series  of
demonstrative  tables.

My  experiments  with  drawings  have  been  much  less  striking,  and  I
believe  that  in  this  and  in  other  respects  there  are  great  individual
differences,  particularly  between  subjects,  but  also  between  operators.

1  "  Projet  d'un  Congres  International  de  Psychologic"  {Rev,  Phil.,  vol.  xii.,
pp.  1-17,  1881.)

TRANSMISSION  OF  IDEAS.  163

For  example,  I  have  observed,  I  think,  that  an  almost  hallucinational
image  is  transmitted  better  than  an  image  really  seen,  despite  the
greater  apparent  distinctness  in  the  latter  case.  But  it  is  certain  that
an  hallucinational  mental  image  is  more  moiwideic  than  an  image
merely  seen.  There  are  also  differences  with  regard  to  the  subject ;
some  subjects  are  influenced  most  by  visual  images,  others  by  mental
sounds,  others  by  motor  images.1  Transmission  would  seem  to  be
appreciably  helped  when  two  persons  that  are  able  strongly  to  con-
centrate their  thoughts  act  together,  and  when  one  thinks  with
the  aid  of  visual  images  and  the  other  with  the  aid  of  the  sounds  of
the  same  images  mentally  produced.

But  one  fact  specially  worthy  of  attention,  and  one  positive  result
of  my  experiments,  is,  that  successes  come  by  series — that  is  to  say,
there  are  fluctuations  in  the  state  of  the  subject  which  either  help  or
hinder  transmission.  These  series  are  perhaps  more  constant  in  som-
nambulism than  in  the  waking  state,  but  the  principle  of  sympathic
impressibility  is  ever  the  same.  If  there  is  to  be  transmission  the
brain  ought  not  to  be  too  torpid  (aideia),  nor  too  distracted  (polyi-
deia),  nor  too  absorbed  in  its  own  thoughts  (active  monoideia)  ;  it
ought,  on  the  contrary,  to  be  passive,  but  capable  of  functioning  with
absorption  (passive  nascent  monoideia).  The  nearer  the  momentary
state  comes  to  this  limit  the  better  is  the  chance  of  successful  trans-
mission

But  besides  immediate  transmission  there  is  latent  transmission,  and
retarded  transmission.  The  subject's  state  may  not  permit  direct  com-
munication (on  account  of  the  pressure  of  the  thoughts  that  occupy
him,  or  because  of  the  torpor  of  the  brain),  but  communication  is
effected  all  the  same  insensibly,  and  the  idea  taken  in  unawares
makes  its  appearance  unexpectedly  in  a  subsequent  experiment,  or
apart  from  experiments.  Mr.  Richet  makes  the  highly  important  ob-
servation, that  transmission  is  made  more  easily  from  the  conscious  to
the  unconscious'  than  between  two  conscious  states.  Is  it  easier  still
between  two  unconscious  states  ?  We  are  unable  at  the  moment  to
decide  the  question.  It  may  be  that  the  transmissor  state  must  be
the  stronger,  and  usually  (not  always)  the  conscious  states  are  the
stronger ;  but  perhaps  also  between  two  unconscious  states,  despite
their  habitual  weakness,  mutual  sympathic  adjustment  is  easier.

1  Perhaps  the  reader  will  have  some  difficulty  in  understanding  the  terms,  visual
images,  mental  sounds,  and  motor  images.  Their  meanings  can  be  readily  seen  from
an  illustration  :  A  sees  a  piece  of  piano  music,  knowing  nothing  at  all  about  musical
notation.  The  impression  on  his  sensorium  or  brain  is  a  purely  visual  image.  B  sees
the  same  piece,  but  he  can  "  read  "  music,  and  can  imagine  how  it  sounds  when  played
on  the  piano  ;  that  imagination  is  mental  sound.  C  also  reads  music,  and  in  particu-
lar is  a  performer  on  the  piano  :  as  he  reads  he  imagines  himself  playing  the  piece —
*'.  <?.,  putting  in  action  the  muscles  concerned  in  performing  on  the  piano.  The  piece
of  music  impresses  motor  images  on  C's  sensorium. —  Translator.

T6/p  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

However  that  may  be,  the  best  conditions  for  such  transmissions  as
we  know  of  are  these  :

On  the  part  of  the  operator,  the  state  of  definite  (de'clare')  active
monoideism  ;

On  the  part  of  the  subject,  the  state  of  passive  nascent  monoideism.

The  first  is  akin  to  polyideism,  the  second  to  aideia.

Consequently,  the  receiver-subject  is  not  to  reflect  nor  to  divine,
but  to  undergo,  the  action  of  the  thought  transmitted.  It  may  be  said
almost  without  hesitation  that  this  transmission — even  when  it  takes
place  in  a  conscious  state — is  always  effected  by  the  unconscious
strata  of  the  mind  as  an  intermediary.  Hence  it  is  that  the  subject
can  but  seldom  tell  whence  the  transmitted  thought  comes  to  him,
and  he  inclines  to  consider  it  as  a  spontaneous  act  of  his  own  mind
rather  than  as  a  suggestion  from  others.  Two  or  even  many  thoughts
may  be  transmitted  simultaneously  by  two  or  more  transmitters,  but
then  they  are  still  more  subject  to  the  influence  of  the  individual
medium1  that  receives  them,  and  generally  combine  to  produce  a
resultant,  a  complexus  modified  and  accommodated  to  the  associations
personal  to  the  subject.

It  is  probable  that  most  of  the  transmissions  that  take  place  in
ordinary  life  are  always  unconscious,  though  made  manifest  in  their
effects.  They  partly  account  for  the  undoubted  phenomenon  of  the
history  of  civilization,  that  certain  ideas,  certain  tendencies  and  aspi-
rations become  dominant  in  certain  epochs,  and  that  reforms  and  rev-
olutions often  come  to  the  front  simultaneously  in  countries  widely
separated  from  one  another,  and  between  which  there  are  hardly  any
mutual  relations.

The  first  ages  of  Christianity,  the  period  of  the  Crusades,  that  of
the  Renaissance,  of  the  French  Revolution,  present  striking  examples
in  illustration  of  this  remark.  It  is  also  worthy  of  note  that  the
literary  movement  known  as  Romanticism  had  its  evolution  almost
simultaneously  everywhere — even  Japan  shared  in  it  ;  that  the  years
1830-31  and  1846-48  were  much  alike  in  different  countries,  and  so-
forth.

There  are,  beyond  a  doubt,  epidemics  of  ideas.  But  with  these,  as
with  the  foregoing  classes  of  transmissions,  imitation  has  much  more
to  do  than  direct  communication,  and  we  must  not  let  ourselves  be  car-
ried away  by  fanciful  conjectures.  Suffice  it  to  note  one  element  more
to  be  employed  for  the  positive  explication  of  a  certain  community  of
minds — an  element,  by  the  way,  hardly  noticeable  in  the  general
mechanism  of  history.

1  Milieu.  This  word  can  generally  be  translated  "atmosphere;"  it  never  means
"  medium  "  in  the  spiritist  sense.  In  the  present  instance  "  individual  medium"
means  the  totality  of  psychic  states,  habits,  psychorganic  associations,  etc.,  peculiar  to
the  recipient  subject. —  Translator.

TRANSMISSION  OF  IDEAS.  165

When  one  comes  to  recognize  the  possibility  of  thought-transfer-
ence, one  naturally  seeks  traces  of  it  even  in  antiquity.  Rare  it  may
be,  yet  that  phenomenon  cannot  have  escaped  the  attention  of  authors
who  have  scrupulously  noted  extraordinary  manifestations  of  human
faculty.  I  shall  be  content  with  a  few  examples  ordy,  seeing  the
slight  scientific  value  of  these  observations  of  the  remote  past.

St.  Augustin  relates  that  while  he  was  a  Manichaean  he  consulted
soothsayers.  Licentius,  whom  he  introduces  in  his  books  against
the  Academicians,  reminds  him  of  the  lucidity  of  a  certain  sooth-
sayer named  Albicerius.  One  Flaccianus  went  in  search  of  Albicerius,
.after  having  planned  to  win  an  inheritance,  and  entertained  the  sooth-
sayer with  the  intent  to  make  him  reveal  this  secret  design,  that  so  he
might  judge  of  the  man's  skill.  The  soothsayer  straightway  told
him  the  nature  of  the  business  in  question;  nay,  more  —  and  this
heightened  the  wonderment  of  Flaccianus — specified  to  him,  without
any  hesitation,  the  name  of  the  inheritance — a  name  so  barbarous  and
so  difficult  that  Flaccu  nus  himself  could  hardly  remember  it.  Fur-
thermore, Albicerius  divined  the  thoughts  of  those  who  asked  him
questions.1

"  The  remarkable  thing  in  this  narrative,"  says  Morin,  "  is  that  the
lucidity  of  the  soothsayer  is  not  at  all  attributed  to  a  revelation  from
Cod  or  his  auxiliaries,  for  St.  Augustin,  become  a  Christian,  is  re-
counting the  doings  of  a  Manichaean."

Similar  facts  are  found  in  the  lives  of  saints  and  among  ecstatici  of
all  religions.

"Thus,  the  parish  priest  of  Ars,  who  died  quite  recently  (1876),  and
whom  they  already  talk  of  canonizing,  read  (so  they  say)  the
thoughts  of  those  who  came  to  consult  him,  and  by  the  infallible
accuracy  of  his  vision  disconcerted  the  skeptics  that  approached  him
to  test  and  baffle  him.  Joseph  de  Cupertius,  canonized  under  the
name  of  Saint  Cupertinus,2  famous  for  his  many  ascensions,  had  the
gift  of  reading  the  thoughts  of  penite?its  who  did  not  dare  to  confess  to  him
certain  big  sins."

"  Of  course-,"  continues  Morin,  "we  cannot  accept,  without  verifica-
tion, all  these  wonderful  tales.  It  is  a  pity  they  were  not  subjected
to  strict  and  judicious  critical  tests.  But  in  examining  facts  like
these  we  may  draw  comparisons  that  will  throw  some  light  on  a
subject  of  much  difficulty."

Thanks  to  one  of   those  vulgar  errors  imposed  upon  mankind  by

1  Augustini  "Contra  Academicos,"  lib.  i.,  cap.  6,  Nos.  17,18;  Abbe  Flottes,
"Etudes  sur  Saint  Augustin,"  p.  19  et  seq.  ;  A.  S.  Morin,  "  Les  Lucides  d'autre-
fois"  (Union  Magnit.,  p.  640,  1867).

2  The  name  Joseph  de  Cupertius  has  a  suspicious  look  ;  and  of  a  certainty  no
worthy  was  ever  canonized  "  under  the  name  of  Saint  Cupertinus."  In  the  original
the  whole  paragraph  is  printed  in  small  type  and  stands  between  quotation  marks,
but  no  author  is  named. —  Translator.

1 66  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

fate,1  some  almost  certain  proofs  of  thought-transference  were  col-
lected in  the  seventeenth  century.  I  speak  of  the  belief  in  the  exist-
ence of  demons  and  their  incarnation  in  the  bodies  of  certain  un-
fortunates. This  forejudgment,  like  all  others,  is  not  altogether
groundless  ;  the  facts  upon  which  it  originally  stood  were  real  facts.
It  was  the  interpretation  of  them  alone  that  was  erroneous,  and  that
showed  a  deplorable  ignorance.  The  eccentricity  of  a  terrible  dis-
ease, which  to-day  no  longer  frightens  us,  thanks  particularly  to  the
celebrated  researches  of  Mr.  Charcot,  and  which  often  makes  its
appearance  amid  the  favoring  conditions  of  great  hypnotic  sensibility?
led  observers  in  the  past  to  believe  that  a  force  outside  of  man,  a
demonic  power,  was  required  to  explain  these  manifestations.  And
since  the  devil  cannot  take  possession  of  a  baptized  body  save  by
consent  of  its  soul,  these  wretches  were  burnt  to  make  easier  for  them
the  expiation  of  their  offense.

In  this  way  our  neuropathic  heritage  has  been  diminished,  but  at  the
same  time  we  have  lost  a  great  number  of  excellent  hypnotic  subjects.

But  we  must  not  suppose  that  our  forefathers  would  proceed  heed-
lessly to  condemn  man  or  woman  charged  with  demonolatry.  On  the
contrary,  one  was  declared  to  be. possessed  only  after  a  strict  examina-
tion.

A  regular  code  fixed  the  conditions  of  the  inquiry.  According  to
the  Ritual,  the  priest  that  was  called  on  to  exorcize  was  required,
after  having  prepared  himself  by  fasting,  prayer  and  other  good
works,  on  leaving  the  altar  after  the  mass,  to  take  his  seat,  and  with
covered  head  inwardly  to  command  the  demon  to  give  him  a  sign,  and
the  demon,  constrained  to  obey,  had  to  reveal  his  name.  Thus,
according  to  the  Ritual,  the  priest  had  to  exorcise  only  patients  that
possessed  the  marvelous  faculty  of  reading  unspoken  thoughts.

1  Un  pre'jugS  fatal  de  I' humanity.

2  "  It  is  rational  to  suppose,"  says  Mr.  Paul  Richer,  "  that  the  phenomena  of  hyp-
notism which  always  depend  on  a  disturbance  of  the  regular  functionment  of  the
organism,  require  for  their  development  a  special  predisposition  which,  with  one
accord,  authors  place  in  the  hysteric  diathesis"  ("Etudes  Cliniques  sur  l'Hystero-
Epilepsie,"  p.  361.  Paris,  1881).  True,  there  is  almost  unanimous  agreement  on
this  point,  but  the  authors  are  mistaken,  I  believe.  It  is  not  hysteria  that  constitutes
a  favorable  ground  for  hypnotism,  but  it  is  hypnotic  sensibility  that  affords  a  favor-
able ground  for  hysteria.  Maximum  hypnotic  sensibility  may  exist  without  hysteria.
Hysteria  is  a  malady  that  develops  at  a  certain  age,  and  that  may  either  disappear  or
become  much  modified,  while  hypnotic  sensibility  is  an  innate  property  that  is  nearly
constant  and  as  a  rule  persists  through  life.  It  is  a  question  of  temperament,  of  physi-
ological constitution.  If  hysterepilepsy  appears  in  this  favorable  soil — favorable  not
only  to  it,  but  also  to  many  another  disease,  cholera,  for  example — the  hysterepilepsy
is  easily  curable  by  "  hypnotism."  I  cannot  give  here  the  proofs  of  what  I  assert,
and  the  assertion  may  seem  strange  and  rash.  It  is  based  on  long  experience,  and
one  will  perhaps  not  take  the  trouble  to  verify  it.  Meanwhile,  the  reader  may  regard
these  few  lines  as  a  simple  note  not  related  to  the  matter  in  hand,

TRANSMISSION  OF  IDEAS.  167

Of  course,  that  was  not  the  interpretation  the  exorcists  gave  of  the
words  of  the  Ritual.  On  the  contrary,  they  believed  transmission  of
thought  to  be  impossible ;  and  if  nevertheless  the  patient  answered
the  mental  questions,  being  in  an  hysterepileptic  paroxysm,  or  in  the
state  of  spontaneous  somnambulism,  that  was  proof  that  his  case  was
•one  not  of  disease,  but  of  possession.  It  was  believed  that  the  devil,
who  is  a  spirit  and  an  evil  spirit,  could  discern  thoughts,  but  that  a
person  that  was  merely  ill  could  not.

Father  Surin,1  in  recapitulating  the  proofs  of  possession  in  the  case
of  the  Ursuline  Nuns  of  Loudun,  presents  as  one  of  the  most  indis-
putable the  fact  that  they  told  the  most  secret  thoughts.  Of  the  many
examples  he  gives  of  this  faculty,  I  will  quote  only  these  two  :

"The  day  after  my  arrival  (he  says),  there  was  present  at  the
exorcism  a  man  who  expressed  to  me  a  desire  to  see  whether  the
demon  knows  our  thoughts.  I  bade  him  make  an  order  in  his  heart ;
and  after  he  had  done  so,  I  constrained  the  demon  to  do  what  the
man  had  ordered  him.  After  giving  me  a  few  refusals  he  went  to
take  from  the  altar  the  card  on  which  is  the  gospel  of  St.  John,  and
this  man  declared  that  he  had  in  his  heart  ordered  the  demon  to  show
the  last  gospel  that  had  been  read  at  the  mass.

"  One  of  our  Fathers  wishing  to  find  if  it  were  true  that  the  demons
know  our  thoughts,  gave  an  inward  order  to  the  demon  on  duty  (en
faction),  and  then  gave  another  ;  in  short,  in  the  space  of  an  instant
he  gave  five  or  six  orders,  and  recalling  them  one  after  another,  tor-
mented the  demon,  saying,  '  obediat  ad  mentem?  The  demon  repeated
aloud  all  the  orders  the  Father  had  given  him.  He  began  with  the
first,  then  he  said  :  '  But  Monsieur  does  not  wish.'  Being  at  the
seventh,  he  said:  'We  shall  see  whether  we  shall  do  this,  on  which
he  has  at  last  settled.'  "

Among  the  other  witnesses  that  affirmed  the  existence  of  thought-
communication  on  the  part  of  the  Nuns  of  Loudun,  we  must  quote
the  King's  brother,  who  signed  a  certificate  in  which  he  declares  that
for  several  reasons  he  dare  not  doubt  the  possession.  Among  his
reasons  was  the  fact  that  a  nun  obeyed  an  order  given  by  him
mentally,  without  uttering  a  word  or  making  any  sign.  Here  is  the
passage  in  question  :

"  We,  Gaston,  son  of  France,  Duke  of  Orleans,  certify

And  having  wished  once  more  to  have  a  perfect  sign  of  the  possession
of  these  women,2  we  concerted  in  secret  and  in  a  low  voice  with
Father  Tranquille,  Capuchin,  to  order  the  demon  Sabulon,  who  then
possessed  the  said  Sister  Claire,  to  go  and  kiss  the  right  hand  of  Father
Flyse'e,  his  exorcist ;  the  said  demon  obeyed  strictly  according  to  our
desire,  the  which  made  us  believe  for  certain  that  what  the  religious
men  laboring  in  the  exorcisms  of  the  said  women  had  said  to  us  of
their  possession  is  true,  there  being  no  appearance  that  such  move-
ments and  knowledge  of  things  secret  could  be  attributed  to  human

1  Bertrand,  "  Du  Magnetisme,"  p.  321.     Paris,  1826.

2  Filles — unmarried  women  of  any  age. —  Translator.

168  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

power.  Whereof  wishing  to  render  testimony  to  the  public,  we  have
granted  this  present  attestation,  which  we  have  signed  with  our  own
name,  and  had  countersigned  by  the  Secretary  of  our  Commands,
House  and  Finances  of  France  this  nth  May,  1635.

{Signed')  Gaston."1

Prince  Gaston,  then,  has  this  title  to  our  gratitude — his  only  one,
doubtless — that  he  made  one  of  the  first  experiments  in  mental  sug-
gestion.

The  Jesuit  Surin  made  a  good  many  more.  He  was  able  to  declare,
upon  his  conscience,  that  possession  was  a  fact,  and  to  swear  before
God  and  the  Church  that  "  more  than  two  hundred  times  "  demons  had
discovered  to  him  "  very  secret  things,  hidden  in  his  thoughts  or
about  his  person."

This  revelation  it  was  that  decided  the  conviction  of  those  hapless
nuns,  when  proofs  were  no  longer  to  be  had,  the  devils  refusing  to  do
miracles.

Evidently  the  phenomenon  of  transmission  was  not  manifested  at
all  times,  and  it  took  a  good  deal  of  assiduous  work  on  the  part  of
Father  Surin  to  obtain  so  imposing  a  lot  of  proofs.  The  exorcist — read
magnetizer — thus  acquired  a  personal  influence  over  these  subjects,  an
influence  that  prevented  that  of  other  persons  from  being  exercised.
The  ecstaticas  sometimes  divined  thoughts,  but  Father  Surin  must
know  beforehand  what  the  thoughts  were  ;  else  the  thing  did  not
work.

The  Duke  and  Duchess  de  la  Tremouille  wished  to  repeat  the
experiment  of  the  Duke  of  Orleans,  only  they  took  care  not  to  com-
municate in  advance  to  the  exorcist  the  thought  they  wished  to  have
divined.  Three  long  hours  they  waited,  but  the  demon  did  not  divine
anything.  The  same  experiment  was  tried  by  two  counselors  of  the
parliament  :  the  demon  could  not  succeed  in  discovering  their  thought.
To  account  for  this,  a  pact  of  silence  was  alleged,  shutting  the  demon's
mouth.3

But  in  addition  to  these  set  experiments,  there  was  a  number  of
others  that  succeeded.  The  exorcists,  who  had  got  into  their  heads  a
whole  hierarchy  of  demons,  and  who  had  adopted  a  preconceived
theory,  accusing  the  handsome  priest,  Urban  Grandier  (who  was  loved
platOnically  by  the  nuns  and  most  of  his  female  parishioners),  of  hav-
ing given  up  to  the  devil  his  own  soul,  and  those  of  the  sisters,  invol-
untarily communicated  their  a  priori  notions  to  the  ecstaticas ,  who  did  all
they  could  to  confirm  them.  The  following  interrogatory  may  serve
as  an  example  of  this  kind  of  suggestion  :

"  Hardly  had  Jane  de  Belciel  noticed  the   magistrates  when    she

1  "  Relation  de  ce  qui  s'est  passe  aux  Exorcismes  de  Loudun,  '  etc.    See  L.  Figuier,
"  Hist,  du  Merveilleux,"  vol.  i..  No.  205.     Paris,  1873.
8  Figuier,  op.  cit.,  i.,  218.

TRANSMISSION  OF  IDEAS.  169

fell  into  violent  convulsions.  She  acted  in  the  most  extravagant
fashion,  writhing  on  her  bed,  gesticulating,  uttering  plaintive  cries.  A
Carmelite  stood  at  the  right  of  the  possessed  :  Mignon  (the  Canon),
who  was  on  the  left,  began  his  exorcisms.  Here  is  his  first  dialogue
with  the  demon"  (that  is  to  say,  with  the  patient's  Unconscious)  :

" '  Propter  quant  causarn  ingressus  es  in  corpus  hujus  virginis  ? '
(Wherefore  did  you  enter  the  body  of  this  virgin  ?)

" '  Causa  animositatisj  answered  Jane  de  Belciel,  still  a  victim  of
the  convulsions.     (Out  of  animosity.)

"  '  Per  quod pacttim  ? '     (By  what  means  ?)

"'  Per  flores?     (By  flowers.)

"  '  Quales  ?  '     (What  flowers  ?)

"'Rosas.'     (Roses.)

"  '  Quis  misit?  '     (Who  sent  them  ?)

"  '  Urbanus:     (Urban.)

"  ' Die  cognomen.'     (Tell  his  surname.)

"  '  Grandier.'

"  '  Die  qualitatem.'     (Tell  his  station.)

"  '  Sacerdos.'     (Priest.)

"  '  Cujus  eeelesice  ?  '     (Of  what  church  ?)

"  «  Sancti  Petri:     >(St.  Peter's.)

"  '  Quce  persona  attulit  flores  ?  '     (What  person  brought  the  flowers  ?)

"  '  Diabolica:     (A  diabolic  one.)

"  It  is  evident  that  there  were  in  this  interrogatory  suggestions,  and
they  not  mental  only,  and  that  on  the  other  hand  the  examiner  had
neglected  to  clear  up  certain  answers  of  the  patient ;  so  the  proceed-
ings did  not  seem  entirely  correct  to  the  magistrates  present  at  the
exorcism.

" '  It  would  have  been  well,'  said  the  civil  lieutenant,  'had  the  pos-
sessed been  interrogated  as  to  the  cause  of  the  animosity  of  which
she  has  spoken.'

" '  I  am  not  allowed,'  answered  the  priest, '  to  put  indiscreet  questions.'

"  '  But  it  seems  to  me,'  the  lieutenant  made  bold  to  say,  '  that  that
question  would  not  have  been  more  indiscreet  than  the  others — than
that,  in  particular,  whereby  you  procured  the  name  and  surname  of
Urban  Grandier  to  be  given  to  you.'

"  Thus,  then,  did  the  devil  in  the  first  interrogatory  reveal  his  pres-
ence. But  such  .was  not  always  the  exorcist's  thought,  or  at  least  the
£cstatica  did  not  always  divine  just  what  he  wanted  her  to  say.  From
this  resulted  some  amusing  contradictions.  Here  is  another  inter-
rogatory conducted  by  another  exorcist,  named  Barre,  in  presence  of
the  bailli  and  four  physicians.

"  The  mass  having  been  performed,  Barre  came  forward  to  give
the  communion  and  thereafter  to  exorcize.  Holding  in  both  hands
the  blessed  sacrament,  he  said  to  the  possessed  :

"  lAdoraDeu??i  tuum,  Creatorem  tuum.'  (Adore  thy  God,  thy  Creator.)

"  She  answered  :

"  lAdoro  te.'  (I  adore  thee.)

"  The  exorcist,  a  little  taken  aback  by  this  answer,  resumed  his
questioning.

'' '  Quern  adoras  ? '  (Whom  do  you  adore  ?)

"■'Jesus  Christus,'  she  answered  with  a  solecism.

"Whereupon  one  of  the  assessors  of  the  provost,  Daniel  Drouin,
could  not  help  saying  quite  aloud  :

i7o  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

"'There's  a  devil  that  is  not  grammatical.'

"  The  exorcist,  a  little  disconcerted,  repeated  the  question,  taking-
care,  however,  to  modify  his  phrase  so  as  to  bring  the  nominative
case  (which  had  just  been  employed  amiss)  into  the  answer.

"  '  Quis  est  quern  adoras  ?  '

"  But  the  possessed,  conscious  that  she  had  made  a  slip  in  gram-
mar, chose  to  set  matters  right  by  employing  the  vocative  case —
which  came  in  no  less  amiss.

"  iJesu  Christe'  she  answered.

"'There's  bad  Latin,' exclaimed  several  persons  present,  but  the
exorcist  held  that  the  answer  was  iAdoro  te,  Jesu  Christe,'  and  the
grammatical  dispute  was  not  carried  any  further."1

But  if  the  devil  was  not  quite  correct  in  his  Latin,  still  he  was
rather  accommodating,  for  he  recognized  Jesus  Christ  as  his  master.

Someone,  perhaps,  will  be  surprised  to  find  these  nuns  speaking
Latin,  but  they  had  some  little  knowledge  of  it,  being  obliged  to
explain  the  creed  and  the  paternoster  to  the  novices  ;  they  heard
Latin  every  day  all  around  them  ;  and  in  ecstatic  states  the  memory
is  often  highly  developed.  Sick  patients  and  somnambules  have  been
known  to  pronounce  several  phrases  in  languages  of  which  they  knew
nothing  in  the  normal  state,  but  which  they  heard  spoken  in  their
childhood.  Finally,  the  transmission  of  thoughts  was  sometimes
added  to  other  causes.  When  that  failed  and  the  possessed  knew
not  what  reply  to  make  to  a  question  put  in  Latin,  she  would  say
"  Deus  non  volo,"  instead  of  "  Deus  nonvult."

When  a  question  was  asked  in  Greek  or  Hebrew,  there  was  no
answer.  Sometimes,  however,  thought-communication  helped  in  such
cases.

Finally,  there  was  still  another  phenomenon  that  led  people  to
believe  in  the  gift  of  strange  tongues  :  the  ecstaticas  sometimes  spoke-
a  language  entirely  unknown.

It  is  known  that  now  and  then,  particularly  in  spells  of  good
humor,  one  will  utter  odd  sorts  of  words,  senseless  combinations  of
syllables.  This  tendency  is  seen  in  the  argot  of  students  and  children^
Some  ecstatic  and  convulsive  states  exhibit  this  caprice  of  our  auto-
matism in  a  peculiar  way.  The  ecstaticas  of  early  Christian  times  also^
spoke  unknown  tongues.  -

"  I  have  already  observed  (says  Carre  de  Montgeron)  that  it  is  in
the  height  of  their  ecstasy  that  many  convulsionaries  pronounce  those
discourses  in  unknown  or  foreign  languages.  I  must  add  that  they  do
not  themselves  understand  the  purport  of  them  save  at  the  moment,
while  they  are  pronouncing  them,  and  that  they  remember  them  no
more,  or  at  best  only  in  a  general  way,  the  instant  their  discourse  is
over."  3

"  The  same  phenomenon  was  seen  among  the.  first  Christians.  St.
Paul   shows   this   plainly   in   sundry   places :     '  He  that   speaketh  a

1  Figuier,  op.  cit.,  108.

4  Montgeron,  "  Idee  de  l'Etat  des  Convulsionnaires,"  p.  89.

TRANSMISSION  OF  IDEAS.  171

tongue,'  says  he  (1  Cor.  xiv.),  '  speaketh  not  to  men  but  to  God,  for
none  understandeth.'  Elsewhere  he  says  in  effect  that  these  tongues
are  but  signs  to  procure  the  conversion  of  unbelievers."  (Bertrand,  325.)

But  sometimes  one  cannot  explain  the  answers  of  the  possessed,
except  by  thought-transference.  Here  are  some  instances  of  this
sort,  taken  from  Lamenardiere's  "  Demonomanie  de  Loudun  :  "

"  Mr.  Launay  de  Barille,  who  had  lived  in  America,  declared  that,
on  a  visit  he  made  to  Loudun,  he  had  spoken  to  the  nuns  the  language
of  certain  savages  in  that  country,  and  that  they  had  answered  him
very  aptly."

We  are  not  told  what  words  these  were.  If  they  were,  as  is  prob-
able, only  such  expressions  as  "  Good-day,"  "  How  do  you  do  ?  "  the
very  tone  of  the  phrase  might  betray  the  meaning.  But  here  is  a
more  detailed  narrative  :

"  The  Bishop  of  Nimes  having  put  questions  in  Greek  and  in  Ger-
man, got  satisfactory  answers  to  both.  He  ordered  (in  Greek)  Sister
Claire  to  lift  her  veil  and  to  kiss  the  grille1  at  a  spot  he  designated.
She  obeyed  him,  and  did  several  other  things  that  he  desired  of  her.
On  this  occasion  it  was  said  publicly  of  this  prelate  that  he  must
needs  be  either  an  atheist  or  an  idiot  if  he  did  not  believe  in  posses-
sion.

"  Some  physicians,  too,  questioned  them  in  Greek  upon  the  terms
of  their  science — terms  very  difficult  and  known  only  by  the  learned
in  their  profession  ;  the  nuns  explained  them  clearly.

"  Some  gentlemen  of  Normandy  certified  in  writing  that  they  had
interrogated  Sister  Claire  de  Sazilly  in  Turkish,  Spanish  and  Italian,
and  that  her  replies  were  quite  apt."8

Carre  de  Montgeron3  speaks  of  a  young  lady,  Dancogne,  who.
though  she  never  had  any  voice,  used  to  sing  canticles  in  an  unknown
tongue.  (I  have  myself  observed  similar  facts  in  the  state  of  som-
nambulic delirium.)  "  But,"  says  Montgeron,  "  what  is  more  surprising
is,  that  it  often  happens  to  her,  in  certain  times  of  ecstasy,  to  under-
stand the  meaning  of  all  that  is  said  to  her  in  whatever  language  it
may  be  spoken,  and  to  make  reply  in  a  perfectly  apt  way  to  all  ;  a
multitude  of  .people  have  witnessed  this."

Bertrand  justly  remarks  that  very  few  cases  indeed  are  recorded  in
which  the  answer  is  given  in  the  same  language,  and  in  those  cases
the  foreign  tongue  was  more  or  less  known  by  the  patient,  whereas
in  the  great  majority  of  cases  the  patient  understands  the  language
(that  is  to  say,  the  thought)  but  does  not  speak  it.

Evidently  it  is  easier  to  get  at  or  divine  the  meaning  of  a  phrase
spoken  with  a  certain  intonation,  than  to  fish  out  foreign  words  in  the

1  The  grating  that  separates  the  outer  reception  room  from  the  cloistered  portion
of  a  nunnery. —  Translator.

2  Pilet  de  Lamenardiere,  "  La  Demonomanie  de  Loudun,"  etc.,  p.  26.  2d  ed.,  La
Fleche,  1634.  3  Op.  cit.,  p.  53.

1 72  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

mind  of  one  that  knows  that  foreign  tongue,  in  order  to  reply  to  him
in  the  same.

"As  for  somnambules  (says  Bertrand),  magnetizers  are  not  wont  to
exercise  them  in  giving  replies  in  unknown  languages,  and  I  can  quote
only  one  fact  of  that  kind.  It  was  reported  to  me  by  an  estimable
man,  a  physician  of  great  learning,  too  early  taken  from  science  and
his  friends.  He  had  a  somnambule  that  presented  to  him  the  most
marvelous  phenomena,  and  who  understood  him  when  he  spoke  Greek,
Latin,  or  English.  One  day  he  decided  to  read  to  her  a  few  lines  in
English.  '  Do  you  expect  me  to  understand  your  gibberish?'  she
asked.  '  But,'  the  doctor  replied,  '  I  spoke  to  you  a  moment  ago  in
the  same  tongue  and  you  understood  me.'  '  Then  it  was  5<our  thought
I  understood,'  answered  the  somnambule,  '  and  not  your  language.'  "

"August  6,  1634  (writes  Lamenardiere)  John  Chiron,  Prior  of
Maillerais,  wishing  to  be  confirmed  in  the  belief  he  had  in  'possession,'
said  in  a  low  voice  in  the  ear  of  Blaise  de  Fernairon  (Canon)  that  he
wished  the  nun  to  open  the  Missal  that  was  by  the  grille,  and  to  put
her  finger  on  an  introit  beginning  with  the  words  '  Salve,  sancta
parens.'  The  exorcist  bade  her  to  obey  according  to  the  intention  of
the  said  Sieur  Chiron.  She  fell  into  strange  convulsions?-  and  uttered
several  blasphemies,  and  though  she  had  never  seen  the  said  Sieur,  she
called  him  Prior  of  Maillerais,  and,  after  several  orders  reiterated  for
an  hour,  she  took  the  Missal,  which  lay  on  a  shelf  by  the  grille,  and
said,  '  I  wish  to  pray  to  God,'  and  turning  her  eyes  in  another  direc-
tion, she  put  her  finger  on  a  large  S,  at  the  beginning  of  the  introit  of
a  Mass  of  the  Virgin,  the  opening  words  of  which  are  '  Salve,  sancta
parens,'  which  the  said  Prior  seeing,  he  said  that  was  the  sign  he  had
asked  for." a

"June  20,  1633,  a  priest  of  Saint-Jacques-de-Fouars,  desiring  to
make  proof  of  divination  of  thought,  in  a  low  voice  asked  the  exor-
cist to  make  the  possessed  bring  five  leaves  of  a  rosebush.  The
exorcist  ordered  Claire  de  Sazilly  to  obey.  The  nun  went  out  and
into  the  garden,  whence  she  brought  first  a  marigold  and  some  other
herbs,  and  presented  them  at  the  grille,  with  much  crying,  saying  to
the  Sieur  de  Morans  :  'Is  that,  Father,  what  you  ask?  I am  no  devil,
to  know  your  intentions'  Whereto  he  replied  simply,  '  Obedias ! '
(obey  !)  She  went  back  to  the  garden,  and,  after  many  repeated
orders,  presented  at  the  grille  a  small  sprig  of  rosebush  on  which
were  six  leaves.  The  exorcist  said  to  her,  '  Obedias  punctualiter  sub
pcena  maledictionis  !'  (obey  precisely  under  pain  of  a  curse  !)  She  now
broke  off  one  leaf,  and  presented  the  sprig  to  him,  saying,  '  I  see  that
you  want  only  five,  the  other  was  not  of  the  number.'  The  Prior  was
so  content  with  what  he  saw,  and  so  moved,  that  he  went  away  with
tears  in  his  eyes."  3

In  the  same  work  we  find  recorded  many  similar  cases.  For
instance,  Sister  Claire  kneels  by  mental  order  of  her  magnetizer
exorcist ;  she  divines  the  day  when  the  Chevalier  de  Mere  last  con-
fessed, and  repeats  words  that  were  heard  by  the  exorcist  alone  ;  and
so  on.

1  See  Mr.  Gibert's  experiment,  p.  90,  supra.

a  Pilet  de  Lamenardiere,  "  La  Demonologie,"  etc.,  p.  26.

8 Id.,  p.  27.

TRANSMISSION  OF  IDEAS.  173

The  latter  class  of  facts,  namely,  suggestion  or  penetration  of
thoughts,  seemed  impossible  to  Aubin  (author  of  the  "  Histoire  des
Diables  de  Loudun  " ),  who  was  overmuch  afraid  lest  he  should  be
forced  to  believe  in  Daemonomania.  He  gives  only  one  instance  of
suggestion,  the  one  witnessed  by  Prince  Gaston,  May  10,  1635.

Another  author,  Dr.  Calmeil,  no  less  scrupulous,  but  more  impartial,
after  having  seen  that  artificial  somnambulism  produced  some  of  the
effects  for  which  people  wanted  to  hold  the  demons  answerable,  adds  :
"  On  a  hundred  occasions  indeed,  we  may  believe,  the  energumens
(the  possessed)  read  the  thoughts  of  the  religious  men  charged  with
the  duty  of  fighting  the  demons."1  "  Read  the  thoughts  of  the
religious  men,  who  gained  a.  powerful  influence  over  them,"  remarks
Figuier,  "and  not  the  thoughts  of  other  persons."

This  remark  is  applicable  in  the  majority  of  cases.  We  may,  how-
ever, recall  some  experiments  in  mental  suggestion  made  by  me  upon
Mrs.  B.  (magnetized  by  Mr.  Janet),  and  who  had  not  seen  me  while  she
was  in  the  waking  state  (p.  85,  supra).

We  find  the  same  phenomenon  among  the  prophets  of  the  Ceven-
nes  ;  so,  too,  among  the  Convulsionaries  of  Saint-Medard.  "Add,"  says
Dr.  Bertrand,  "  that  Madame  Guyon,  that  mystic  devotee,  famous  for
the  admiration  that  the  virtuous  Fenelon  professed  to  have  for  her,
tells  in  the  history  of  her  life,  that  often  she  used  to  read  the  thoughts
of  Father  Lacombe,  her  confessor,  as  he  read  hers  ;  '  I  saw,'  she  says,
'  that  men  might,  in  this  life,  learn  the  language  of  the  angels  ;  little
by  little  I  was  reduced  to  speaking  to  him  only  in  silence.'  "

It  is  to  be  remarked  that  the  conversations  of  these  two  pious  souls
probably  were  ever  about  the  same  questions,  and  that  consequently
the  divination  was  not  always  difficult.

Let  us  now  turn  to  the  somnambules  :

"  Among  the  somnambules  that  I  have  magnetized  (says  Bertrand),
I  never  found  one  that  presented  communication  of  thought  in  any
high  degree.  Nevertheless,  I  can  cite  two  facts  of  which  I  am  per-
sonally cognizant.  The  first  is  found  recorded  in  my  '  Traite  du  Som-
nambulisme '  (p.  247).  The  case  was  that  of  my  first  somnambule,  on
whom  I  was  performing  the  processes  by  which  I  had  been  accustomed
to  awaken  Her,  while,  at  the  same  time,  I  willed  strongly  that  she
should  not  awake.  Instantly  she  had  violent  convulsive  movements.
'  What  is  the  matter  ? '  I  asked  her.  '  How  is  this  ? '  she  replied  ;  '  you
tell  me  to  awake,  and  you  want  me  not  to  awake.'  "

This  experiment  is  very  conclusive,  but  it  is  rarely  successful,  for
the  ideorganic  association  formed  between  certain  gestures  and
sleep,  produces  sleep  by  force  of  habit,  the  weak,  purely  mental  oppos-
ing influence  notwithstanding.

"  The  other  instance  coming  under  my  personal  observation  is
found  at  page  279  of  the  same  work.  A  poor  woman,  uneducated,  not

1  Calmeil,  .'iDe  la  Folie,"  vol.  ii.

174  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

able  to  read,  could,  I  was  told,  understand  in  somnambulism  the
meaning  of  words  the  signification  of  which  was  unknown  to  her  in
the  waking  state  ;  and,  in  fact,  she  explained  to  me  most  accurately
and  most  ingeniously  what  we  were  to  understand  by  the  word
encephalon,  which  I  proposed  to  her  :  a  phenomenon  which,  if  you  do
not  wish  to  regard  it  as  chance — a  supposition  as  hard  to  admit,  per-
haps, as  the  faculty  itself,  that  the  phenomenon  supposes — can  only
be  explained  by  recognizing  that  this  woman  read  in  my  very  thoughts
the  signification  of  the  word  about  which  I  had  questioned  her."

This  fact,  too,  is  worthy  of  attention,  and  for  this  reason  :  If  we
compare  the  diagnostic  pronouncements  of  somnambules  recorded  in
the  writings  of  magnetizers  who  themselves  did  not  possess  compe-
petent  knowledge  of  anatomy,  with  the  pronouncements  of  somnam-
bules directed  by  a  physician  (for  example,  the  35  observations  of
Dr.  E.  Louis  de  Sere),1  we  find  a  great  difference  as  regards  precision.
The  same  is  to  be  said  of  psychological  and  other  questions.

Unless  we  hold  that  none  of  the  physicians  that  made  these  experi-
ments could  refrain  from  verbal  suggestions,  even  while  his  precise
object  was  to  get  at  the  truth,  we  must  admit,  here  and  there,  trans-
missions of  thought  like  those  we  have  quoted  from  Bertrand.

The  first  person  to  call  the  attention  of  observers  to  the  phenome-
non of  mental  suggestion  in  artificial  somnambulism,  was  the  Marquis
de  Puysegur.  In  his  writings  we  find  a  great  number  of  facts.  Here
is  how  he  relates  his  first  experience,  in  a  letter  of  March  8,  1784,  ad-
dressed to  a  member  of  the  Harmony  Society.  In  the  first  place,  he
apologizes  for  the  enthusiasm  awakened  in  him  by  his  first  attempts
at  magnetic  treatment,  begun  "  in  play  "  (en  plaisantanl)  and  which
had  surprising  results.  ■  Then  he  continues  thus  :

"  These  trifling  successes  led  me  to  try  whether  I  might  be  of
service  to  a  peasant,  a  man  of  23  years,  who  for  four  days  had  been
confined  to  his  bed  by  an  attack  of  pneumonia.  I  went  therefore  to
see  him  :  it  was  last  Tuesday,  the  4th  of  this  month,  at  8  o'clock  in  the
evening.  The  fever  was  growing  less.  After  having  him  taken  out
of  bed  I  magnetized  him.  What  was  my  surprise  to  see  him,  after
half  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  fall  asleep  quietly  in  my  arms,  without  con-
vulsions, without  any  pain.  I  pushed  the  crisis  [/.  e.,  he  kept  on
magnetizing],  and  that  produced  vertigo.  The  man  talked,  speaking
in  a  loud  voice  about  his  affairs  [somnambulic  ravings].  Judging  that
these  thoughts  might  affect  him  injuriously,  I  sought  to  inspire  him
with  more  cheering  thoughts.  [The  somnambulism  therefore  was  not
very  active,  and  was  akin  to  aideia  and  to  a  suggestionable  state  inter-
mediate between  aideia  and  polyideia.]  To  do  this  needed  no  great
effort ;  then  I  saw  him  satisfied,  imagining  himself  to  be  drawing  for
a  prize,  dancing  at  a  festival,  etc.

"  These  thoughts  I  encouraged  in  him,  and  so  forced  him  to  take  a
good  deal  of  exercise  in  his  chair,  as  though  dancing  to  an  air  which,
by  singing  it  (menially),  I  made  him  repeat  aloud.  By  this  means,
from  that  day  on,  I  occasioned  in  the  patient  an  abundant  perspiration.

1  "  Application  du  Somnambulisme  Magnetique  au  Diagnostic,"  etc.     Paris,  1855.

TRANSMISSION  OF  IDEAS.  175

"  After  an  hour  of  crisis,  I  quieted  him  [that  is  to  say,  awakened
him],  and  left  the  chamber.  A  drink  was  given  him.  Having  pro-
cured for  him  some  bread  and  bouillon,  I  made  him  eat  that  very
evening  a  soup — a  thing  he  had  not  been  able  to  do  for  five  days.  He
slept  soundly  the  whole  night  [amelioration  of  the  natural  sleep  is  an
almost  constant  phenomenon  in  magnetism],  and  the  following  morn-
ing had  no  recollection  of  my  visit  of  the  evening  before  ;  he  told  me  of  his
bettered  state  of  health."

That  experience  was  the  starting-point  of  modern  somnambulic
magnetism.  Some  time  after,  Puysegur,  always  enthusiastic  about  his
successes,  wrote  as  follows  to  his  brother  concerning  Vielet :

"  When  he  is  in  the  magnetic  state,  he  is  no  longer  a  simple  hind
scarcely  able  to  phrase  an '  answer,  but  a  being  I  know  not  how  to
describe.  I  have  no  need  to  speak  to  him  ;  I  think  foment  him,  and  he
understands  me,  answers  me.  When  anyone  enters  his  chamber,  he  sees
him  if  I  will  it  j  talks  to  him,  tells  him  the  things  I  will  that  he  tell  him,
not  always  as  I  dictate  them  to  him,  but  as  truth  requires.  When  he
wishes  to  say  more  than  I  deem  it  prudent  that  people  should  hear,
then  I  stay  his  thoughts,  his  phrases,  in  the  middle  of  a  word,  and  change
his  thought  completely."  1

He  did  not  find,  it  seems,  many  somnambules  of  this  stamp,  for  he
has  less  to  say  about  them  in  his  two  later  writings  :  "  Du  Magne-
tisme  Animal  considere  dans  ses  rapports  avec  diverses  Branches  de
la  Physique  generale,"  Paris,  1807  ;  and  "  Recherches,  Experiences,
et  Observations  Physiologiques  sur  l'Homme,"  Paris,  181 1.  But  he
laid  the  more  stress  upon  the  appreciation  of  diseases,  and  he  still
believed  that  his  will  was  the  one  sole  agent — plainly  an  exaggera-
tion.

The  fact  is,  one  always  feels  the  effect  of  a  first  experiment  ;  and
this  time  a  school  was  formed  under  the  influence  of  this  first  im-
pression of  the  master.

It  is  so  in  our  day,  and  I  hardly  find  more  of  prudence  or  of
circumspection  in  the  writings  of  medical  men  who,  after  having
sophisticated  an  hysteric,  believe  themselves  competent  to  lay  down
physiological  "  laws,"  and  to  settle  in  accordance  with  their  individual
convictions  the  most  delicate  and  most  complicated  questions.

As  for  the  old-time  magnetizers,  who  spent  their  lives  in  studying
these  problems,  sometimes  without  sufficient  preparation,  but  at  the
same  time  without  presumption,  we  do  not  read  them  nowadays  ;  we
just  append  to  their  names  the  epithet  "charlatans."  Some  have
adopted  a  more  profitable  method  :  they  glean  here  and  there  an
observation  made  by  some  old-time  magnetizer,  and  having  sophis-
ticated it,  and,  above  all,  put  their  own  brand  upon  it,  take  to  them-
selves the  credit  of  discovery.     But  let  us  proceed.

1  Puysegur,  "  M6moires  pour  servir  a  l'6tablissement  du  Magn6tisme,"  pp.  22,
29,  et  seq.

i76  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

Some  time  after  Puysegur,  a  distinguished  physician  of  Lyons,
President  of  the  Medical  Society  of  that  city,  was  led  to  investigate
the  more  striking  phenomena  of  magnetism.  He  was  skeptical,  and
an  opponent  of  mesmerism,  but  it  so  chanced  that  he  was  forced  to
recognize  a  series  of  facts  far  more  extraordinary  than  anything
announced  by  Mesmer.  His  researches  on  catalepsy,  on  the  action
of  the  magnet,  of  electricity  and  of  metals,  on  the  phenomenon  known
as  "transposition  of  the  senses,"  etc.  ;  finally,  on  the  subject  that
engages  our  attention  here,  mark  an  epoch  in  magnetism.  They  are
to-day  absolutely  unknown  ;  but  as  already  just  a  century  has  elapsed
since  he  observed  certain  facts,  I  have  no  doubt  that  some  fine  morn-
ing they  will  tell  you  that  a  hypnotizer  in  Lyons  or  in  Paris  has  dis-
covered them  anew,  and  that,  thanks  to  his  ingenuity,  his  authority,
and  the  general  ignorance  of  history,  a  new  "  hypnotic  "  school  has
sprung  up.

In  the  meanwhile  let  us  note  the  facts  that  concern  our  subject.
This  is  how  Petetin1  was  led  to  employ  magnetism  for  the  first  time:

"The  patient  was  sinking  day  by  day.  She  had  hardly  two  hours'
sleep  in  a  night ;  she  could  take  no  nourishment  except  chicken
broth,  milk,  and  pounded  ice.  Petetin,  her  physician,  possessed  by
the  idea  that  the  excitation  of  brain  and  nerves  was  caused  by  super-
abundant electricity,  bethought  him  of  making  very  strong  aspira-
tions foment  the  patient's  nostrils,  to  abstract  this  excess  of  elec-
tricity ;  but  that  method  had  no  effect.  Then,  laying  one  hand  on  the
forehead  and  the  other  on  the  epigastrium,  he  made  another  aspiration.
Mrs.  X.  opened  her  eyes,  but  they  were  dull  and  fixed  ;  at  a  second
aspiration  they  resumed  their  brightness  ;  a  few  minutes  later,  the  fit,
which  used  to  last  two  hours,  was  over.  At  his  subsequent  visits  the
doctor  substituted  expiration  for  aspiration,  and  in  eight  days  all  the
symptoms  of  this  extraordinary  malady  had  disappeared  through  this
simple  means,  '  the  effects  of  which,'  says  he,  '  are  as  evident  as  the
cause  is  hidden.'

"  He  adds  that  as  the  cure  progressed,  the  faculties  of  the  cata-
leptic patient  acquired  a  new  power.  '  Not  only  did  she  foresee  what
was  about  to  happen  to  her,  but  if  one  conceived  a  thought  without
manifesting  it  by  speech,  she  was  cognizant  of  it  at  once,  and  did  what-
ever one  had  the  intention  to  bid  her  do,  as  if  the  decision  had  come  of
itself ;  sometimes,  however,  she  would  ask  that  the  mental  order
might  be  suspended  or  revoked,  when  the  act  ordered  was  beyond
her  strength,  or  if  she  was  fatigued. '  " 2

Petetin  made  upon  another  cataleptic,  Mrs.  de  Saint-Paul,  a  great
number  of  experiments,   and   he  invited,   to  be  witnesses  of  these,

1  Dr.  Petetin,  "  Memoire  sur  la  Decouverte  des  Phenomenes  que  presentent  laCata-
lepsie  et  le  Somnambulisme. "  Lyons,  1787.  "  Electricite  Animale  prouvee  par  la
Decouverte  des  Phenomenes  Physiques  et  Moraux  de  la  Catalepsie  Hysterique."
Paris,  1808.

2  Foissac,  "Rapports  et  Discussions  sur  le  Magnetisme  Animal,"  p.  369.  Paris,
1353.    Figuier,  "  Hist,  du  Merveilleux,"  vol.  iii.,  p.  292.

TRANSMISSION  OF  IDEAS.  177

several  of  his  professional  associates  and  other  persons,  as  Messrs.
Eynard,  Colladon,  of  Geneva ;  Domenjon,  Dolomieu,  brother  of
the  naturalist,  and  Jacquier,  administrator  of  the  Lyons  hospitals.
Eynard,  the  most  incredulous  of  them  all,  came  one  day  to  the  lady's
house  and  found  her  in  one  of  her  fits,  alone  with  a  nurse.  He  had
with  him  several  drawings  that  he  had  made  by  electricity.1  He  held
near  the  epigastrium  of  the  patient  the  portrait  of  Louis  XIV.,  and
asked  whether  she  recognized  it.  She  gave  an  affirmative  movement
of  the  head.  "Is  it  Francis  I.?"  Negative  sign.  "Louis  XV.?"
Same  response.  After  several  other  names  he  pronounced  that  of
Louis  XIV.  ;  she  answered  "Yes."  Mr.  Eynard  having  been  assured
that  cataleptics  are  able  to  read  the  thoughts  of  persons  in  rapport
with  them,  he  asked  her  once  more,  in  order  to  verify  the  fact,
whether  she  knew  the  author  of  the  drawing.  Affirmative  sign.  He
tried  to  mislead  her  by  naming  sundry  persons,  but  she  did  not  answer
"Yes"  till  he  had  named  himself.  Say  what  he  would  about  his
being  unable  to  draw,  the  patient  only  shrugged  her  shoulders  ;  the
more  he  denied,  the  more  strongly  she  showed  her  impatience  by
characteristic  gestures.  Asked  at  last  by  what  means  he  had  pro-
duced the  portrait,  she  pointed  toward  an  electrical  machine  that
was  near  her  bed  and  which  Petetin  employed  in  treating  her  com-
plaint.2

Soon  people  at  Lyons  talked  of  nothing  else  but  the  wonders  of
somnambulism,  and  no  doubt  Petetin's  researches  would  in  the  end
have  won  the  attention  of  men  of  science,  had  not  the  Revolution
broken  out.  "  Nothing  short  of  the  cannon  of  the  Revolution,"  says
Figuier,  "  could  have  silenced  in  that  town  the  discussions  on  mag-
netism. But  at  the  time  all  this  hubbub  subsided,  in  Lyons  as  else-
where, not  because  magnetism  was  forgotten,  but  because  its
adherents  were  scattered."

Petetin  was  forgotten,  and  died  in  1808,  without  so  much  as  print-
ing his  important  treatise  on  "Animal  Electricity,  "  which  appeared
some  months  later.     The  work  is  now  very  hard  to  find.

The  priest  Faria,3  a  bold  and  truly  original  experimenter,  held  the
attention  of  the  public  for  a  while  about  1815.  He  is  the  father  of  the
Suggestionists  of  to-day.  He  acted  only  by  verbal  suggestion  and  did
not  believe  in  will-transmission  :  thus  he  was  in  absolute  opposition  to
the  Voluntists  of  the  Puysegur  school.  As  his  one  purpose  was  to
produce  effects  in  public,  it  is  not  surprising  that    he    should  have

1  Our  author  prints  this  paragraph  in  brevier,  but  without  quotation  marks,  so
indicating  that  the  statements  it  contains  are  given  on  the  authority  of  the  writers
named  in  the  next  foot-note. —  Translator.

2  See  Petetin,  "  Electr.  Anim.,"  p.  127;  Foissac,  "Rapports,  etc.,"  p.  310;
Figuier,  "  Hist,  du  Merv. ,"  vol.  iii.,  p.  292.

3  "  De  la  Cause  du  Sommeil  Lucide,"  'etc.     Paris,  1819.

178  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

failed  to  obtain  a  phenomenon  that  requires  long  and  patient  research
in  seclusion.

A  third  school,  one  more  directly  connected  with  Mesmer,  was  that
of  the  Fiuidists,  represented  by  the  learned  librarian  of  the  Paris  Jardin
des  Plantes,  a  most  conscientious  worker,  cautious  and  reserved,  whose
principal  work,  the  fruit  of  twenty-five  years'  observation  (I  do  not
mention  this  detail  to  frighten  the  hypnotizers  of  to-day),  appeared
in  1813.1

Deleuze,  as  we  know  already,  was  familiar  with  the  phenomena  of
transmission  ;  he  even  glimpsed  the  benefit  that  might  accrue  to
science  from  bringing  into  the  domain  of  positive  knowledge  a  great
number  of  facts  previously  incomprehensible,  and  of  a  kind  to  lend
support  to  vulgar  errors  {prejuge's).  But  he  does  not  concern  himself
much  with  these  phenomena,  for  two  reasons :  First,  he  wished,
especially  in  this  first  edition,  to  avoid  everything  that  could  offend
the  incredulity  of  the  academic  bodies  ;  and  then  he  regarded  as  unfit-
ting all  experiments  made  for  curiosity'  sake,  i.  e.,  whatever  has  not  for
its  principal  end  the  cure  of  diseases.  But  so  strongly  did  he  believe
in  the  community  of  thoughts  between  themagnetizer  and  his  subject,
that  he  says  with  a  charming  simplicity:  "When  one  wishes  to  ask
anything  of  the  somnambule,  he  must  express  his  wish  in  words.
Good  somnambules  understand  what  you  wish  without  your  speaking.
But  why  employ  that  means  without  necessity  ?  It  is  an  experiment,
and  we  ought  to  have  it  made  a  law  to  deny  ourselves  all  experi-
ments."2

The  reader  will  perhaps  be  surprised  to  see  that  in  Deleuze's  time
this  prohibition  of  experimentation  was  scrupulously  respected  by  very
many  observers.  Volumes  were  published  upon  the  therapeutic  appli-
cation of  magnetism,  but  the  scientific  experimental  part  made  no
progress.  There  were  cures,  that  is  all.  It  was  only  by  accident,,
therefore,  that  mental  suggestion  was  observed.

But  certain  magnetizers  studied  the  question  a  little,  and  have  left
some  interesting  observations.  I  will  quote  all  of  these  that  have  a
right  to  our  confidence,  trying,  as  far  as  possible,  to  separate  thought-
transference  from  will-transference,  which  will  be  considered  later.

Transmission  of  ideas  and  words,  or  of  thoughts  in  general,  presents
itself  in  several  forms  :

1.  Direct  Experiments. — These  are  least  numerous.  To  this  class
belong  the  experiments  of  Drs.  Teste,  Puel,  Comet,  Barrier,  Perronet,
and  of  Messrs.  Lafontaine,  Maricourt  and  Souchere.  But  it  is,  above
all,  the  quite  recent  experiments  of  Professor  Barrett,  of  the  English
Society  for  Psychological  Research,  that  have  revealed  this  phenom-
enon to  us.

1  Deleuze,  "  Histoire  Critique  du  Magnetisme  Animal."     Paris,  1813.

2  Deleuze,  "  Instruction  Pratique  sur  le  Magnetisme  Animal,"  p.  135.     Paris,  1825,

TRANSMISSION  OF  IDEAS.

179

2.  Experiments  in  Apparent  Vision,  which  have  been  much  more
numerous,  and  in  which  thought-transference  and  transmission  of
recollections  have  been  confounded  with  actual  vision  of  near  or  dis-
tant objects.  Under  this  head  we  will  cite  the  observations  of  Dr.
Charpignon,  of  Messrs.  Tissot,  Jolly,  Baragnon,  Lafontaine,  Robert-
Houdin,  and  General  Noizet.

3.  Finally,  we  shall  have  occasion  to  mention  the  fact  that  thought-
transference  is  by  accident  associated  with  other  classes  of  facts,
especially  in  pseud-hypnotism.

Let  us  begin  with  the  experiments  of  the  English  Committee,  which
are  quite  recent  and  which  were  the  best  controlled.  The  reports
upon  these  researches  already  fill  a  volume,  and  I  can  reproduce  only
a  few  instances.  I  will,  however,  give  in  full  the  report  of  the  experi-
ments of  December  6,  1884.  They  were  made  in  presence  of  Mr.
Guthrie  and  Professor  Herdman.

Mrs.  Relph,  the  subject,  is  seated,  and  the  objects  chosen  for  the
experiments  are  concealed  by  a  screen  behind  her  back.  The  experi-
ments take  place  without  contact.

OBJECT  THOUGHT   OF.

1.  Piece  of  red  paper  cut  in  the

form   of    a    small   egg-cup
with  white  egg  in  it.

2.  Blue    paper    in    shape    of    a

pitcher.

3.  Red  paper   cut  in  form  of  a

vase.

4.  A  new  rasp.

»

5.  A   wooden    disc    on    a   dark

ground.

6.  A  red  disc.

7.  Same  object  as  in  No.  5.

8.  Silvered  paper  cut  in  shape  of

a  teapot.

9.  A  yellow  oblong  rectangular

figure.

10.  A  sovereign.

11.  Three  of  hearts.

12.  Five  of  clubs.

13.  Eight  of  diamonds.

14.  A  card  with  two  red  crosses.

15.  No  object.  We  think  of  a
white  cross  on  a  black
ground.

OBJECT   DIVINED.

Something  red  ;  longer  than  it  is
broad.

'Tis  blue.  'Tis  wider  at  top  than
in  the  middle,  then  wider
again.  'Tis  like  a  pitcher
(draws  figure  of  a  pitcher).

'Tis  red.    I  can  see  only  the  color.

Something  shining — silver  or  steel

— long   and   thin.
I  cannot  make  that  out.

'Tis  red  ;  'tis  round  and  red.

Is  it  something  red  all  around  ? —

reddish     yellow  —  something

light.
'Tis  of  bright  silver,  like  a  boiler

— 'tis  a  teapot.
It  is  longer  than  wide.

Is  it  bright  yellow  ? — gold  ? — is  it

round  ?
Is  it  a  card  with    red  spots?     A

tray  or  something  like  that.
Another    card,    with    five     black

spots  ?
A  card  with  a  good  many  spots?

Red — a  ten.
Something  yellow  and  bright.     I

don't  see  well.     Is  it  a  card

with  red  spots  ?     I  do  not  see.
I  see  something  white  and  black

— I  see  two  lines.

180  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

1  commend  this  series  to  the  attention  of  Mr.  Preyer,  and  invite
him  to  do  the  same  thing  by  drawing  lots.1

Let  us  now  see  what  the  magnetizers  say:

"At  Tours  (says  Mr.  Lafontaine)  I  had  a  somnambule  that  was
gifted  with  great  lucidity.  Mr.  Renard,  steward  (proviseur)  of  the
college,  a  man  strongly  skeptical,  came  each  day  bringing  objects  care-
fully wrapped  up,  and  which  he  kept  in  his  pockets.  No  sooner  was
he  in  rapport  with  Clarissa,  the  somnambule,  than  she  named  to  him
the  object  he  had  so  carefully  concealed.  To  prove  to  him  that  it
was  really  thought-transmission  and  not  sight,  I  had  a  mental  order
executed,  that  is,  without  my  uttering  a  word  or  making  any  sign  ;
but  concentrating  my  thought  upon  any  act  the  performance  of
which  I  wished,  the  somnambule  rose  from  the  chair  and  did  what  I
willed."2

2.  "  Dr.  Thomas  presented  to  Clarissa  his  small  lancet  case,  asking
her  what  was  inside.  The  somnambule  answered  that  it  contained
only  three  instruments,  and  told  him  where  he  had  left  the  fourth."  s

3.  "  Sometimes  Mr.  Renard  would  fasten  the  doors  and  the  shutters
of  his  study,  stopping  the  keyholes  so  that  no  one  might  see  him ;
then  he  would  light  a  candle  and  write  a  few  words,  and  wrap  several
papers  around  what  he  had  written.  He  would  come  with  an  air  of
triumph,  hoping,  after  all  the  precautions  he  had  taken,  that  the  som-
nambule would  not  be  able  to  see  what  he  had  written.  But  the  in-
stant he  had  put  the  paper  in  the  girl's  hand,  sometimes  even  before  he
had  taken  it  out  of  his  pocket,  Clarissa  would  tell  him  what  he  had
written."4

4.  "  Mr.  de  la  Souchere,  educated  at  the  Polytechnic  School,  an
able  chemist  of  Marseilles,  had  as  a  domestic  servant  a  country
woman  in  whom  somnambulism  and  several  of  its  noteworthy  phe-
nomena were  produced  with  great  ease.  '  In  magnetic  somnambulism/
says  he,  '  Lazarine  entered  into  most  complete  communication  of
thought  with  me,  and  so  insensible  was  she  that  I  used  to  drive  needles
into  her  flesh,  into  the  roots  of  the  nails,  yet  she  would  not  suffer  the
slightest  pain,  nor  would  there  be  a  drop  of  blood.  [This  phenome-
non is  very  common  ;  there  is  produced  often  in  somnambulism  a
notable  contraction  of  the  small  vessels.]  In  presence  of  the  engineer,
Gabriel  and  some  friends  I  have  made  the  following  experiments  :  I
would  make  her  drink  pure  water,  and  she  would  tell  me  it  had  the
taste  of  whatever  liquid  I  was  thinking  of — lemonade,  syrup,  wine,  etc.
It  was  proposed  that  I  should  make  her  drink  sand.  She  was  unable
to  divine  [the  order].  Then  I  put  sand  in  my  mouth,  and  straight-
away she  began  to  spit,  saying  that  /  was  giving  her  sand.  [Transfer-
ence of  sensation.]  I  was  then  behind  her  and  it  was  impossible  for
her  to  see  me.  [A  similar  experiment,  but  still  more  striking,  is
quoted  by  the  Count  de  Maricourt :  the  subject,  having  drank  in  the

1  Mr.  Preyer,  professor  of  physiology  at  Jena,  has  criticised  the  researches  of  Mr.
Ch.  Richet,  declaring  that  he  obtained  by  simple  chance  the  same  results.  (' '  Die
Erklarung  des  Gedankenlesens  nebst  Beschreibung  eines  neuen  Verfahrens  zum  Nach-
weise  unwillkurlicher  Bewegungen."     Leipsic,  1886  )

2  Ch.  Lafontaine,  "  L'Art  de  Magnetiser,"  p.  98,  5th  ed.     Paris,  1886.

3  Ch.  Lafontaine,  "  Memoires  d'un  Magnetiseur,"  vol.  i.,  p.  154.     Paris,  1866.
*I,b.

TRANSMISSION  OF  IDEAS.  181

waking  state  a  glass  of  water,  under  mental  suggestion  of  a  glass  of
kirschwasser,  manifested  all  the  signs  of  intoxication  for  several  days,
I  would  remark  that  when  such  phenomena  are  produced  in  the  wak-
ing state  it  is  harder  to  do  them  away  than  when  they  are  produced  in
somnambulism.  It  is  phenomena  of  this  sort  that  lead  magnetizers  to
believe  that,  by  magnetizing  a  glass  of  water  or  any  other  object,  they
can  impregnate  their  "  fluid  "  with  different  physical  and  chemical
properties.  The  magnetization  is  of  no  effect  in  such  case,  for  it  is
the  thought  that  acts,  and  not  upon  the  object,  but  upon  the  brain  of
the  subject.]  Some  one  sends  me  a  book  (Robinson  Crusoe.)  I  open
it  and  examine  an  engraving  representing  Robinson  in  a  canoe.  Laza-
rine,  being  asked  what  I  was  doing,  answered  :  '  You  have  a  book  ;
you  are  not  reading  ;  you  are  looking  at  a  picture  ;  there  is  a  boat
and  a  man  in  it.'  I  bade  her  describe  to  me  the  furniture  of  a  chamber
that  she  did  not  know,  and  she  described  the  articles  of  furniture
precisely  as  I  represented  them  to  myself.  I  have  not  been  able
to  see  in  my  domestic  transposition  of  the  senses.  Different  objects
would  be  applied  over  the  epigastrium  :  if  I  knew  what  they  were,
she  7vould  describe  them  ;  if  I  did  not  know  what  they  were,  she  was
unable  to  name  them.  It  is  possible  that,  in  certain  cases,  what  has
been  accounted  transposition  of  the  senses  is  only  transmission  of
thought."1

5.  Dr.  Teste2  has  again  and  again  found  that  the  somnambule  can
follow  the  magnetizer's  thoughts.  "Miss  Diana,"  says  he,  "had  a
conversation  with  me  in  which  I  spoke  only  mentally."  He  cites,
furthermore,  an  extraordinary  experiment  wherein  mental  suggestion
appeared  as  an  hallucination.

"One  day,"  he  writes,  "I  imagined  a  wooden  railing  round  about
me,  but  spoke  not  a  word.  I  put  in  the  somnambulic  state  Miss  H.,
a  very  nervous  young  person,  and  asked  her  to  fetch  me  my  books.
Coming  to  where  I  imagined  the  railing  to  be,  Miss  H.  halted,  saying
they  had  set  up  a  railing  there.  'What  a  singular  idea,'  she  said,  'to
have  put  a  railing  in  this  place ! '  If  you  take  her  by  the  hand  to
make  her  go  beyond,  her  feet  are  riveted  to  the  floor,  the  upper  por-
tion of  her  body  alone  is  projected  forward,  and  she  says  you  make
her  stomach  press  against  the  obstacle."

And  here  is  a  highly  interesting  fact  recorded  by  Dr.  Bertrand  in
one  of  his  lectures  on  magnetism,  reproduced  by  Noizet :

6.  "  A  magnetizer  deeply  imbued  with  mystic  ideas  had  a  somnam-
bule who,  in  hrs  sleep,  saw  nothing  but  angels  and  sprites  of  all  kinds.
These  visions  served  more  and  more  to  strengthen  the  magnetizer's
religious  belief.  As  he  was  always  quoting  his  somnambule's  dreams
in  support  of  his  system,  another  magnetizer  undertook  to  undeceive
him  by  showing  to  him  that  no  somnambule  has  such  visions  as  he
told  of,  except  so  far  as  they  existed  first  in  the  magnetizer's  brain.'
To  demonstrate  this  assertion,  he  proposed  to  make  the  same  som-
nambule see  all  the  angels  of  heaven  at  table  together,  and  eating  turkey.
So  he  endormed  the  somnambule,  and  after  a  while  asked  him  if  he
did  not  see  something  extraordinary  ;  the  somnambule  replied  that

1  Dr.  Despine,  "  Etude  Scientifique  sur  le  Somnambulisme,"  p.  221.      Paris,  i58o.
8  Teste,  "  Manuel   Pratique  du   Magnetiseur,"  4th  ed.,  1854  ;  and  "  Le  Magn.
Anim.   Explique,"  p.  243,  1845.

1 82  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

he  saw  a  great  company  of  angels.  'And  what  are  they  doing?'
'  They  are  around  a  table  and  are  eating.'  But  he  could  not  tell  what
dishes  they  had  before  them." '

In  general,  if  the  somnambule  thinks  he  sees  something  out  of  the
ordinary  course  of  things,  the  first  question  is,  whether  that  is  not  due
to  simple  involuntary  suggestion  on  our  part.

7.  "A  student  of  medicine  asks  one  of  my  somnambules  what
patients  the  jury  will  give  him  for  examination  as  his  test  for  the
doctorate.  She  described  very  accurately  three  patients  in  the  Hotel
Dieu  who  had  more  particularly  attracted  the  attention  of  the  student,
and  whom  he  would  have  wished  to  be  made  the  subjects  of  his
examination.  She  even  added — a  characteristic  detail — with  regard
to  one  of  the  patients  :  '  Oh,  what  a  bright  eye  that  woman  has — and
fixed  !  It  makes  me  afraid,  that  eye  ! '  '  Does  she  see  with  that
bright  eye  ? '  asked  the  student.  '  Hold  !  I  do  not  know — it  is  hard.
It  is  not  natural.  What  is  it  made  of  ?  Something — something  that
breaks — and  shines.  Oh,  she  is  taking  it  out — putting  it  in  water,'  and
so  on.  The  patient  had  a  glass  eye  ;  this  fact,  of  which  I  was  quite
ignorant  (for  I  did  not  know  the  patients  in  question),  but  which  was
known  to  the  student  that  was  questioning  the  somnambule,  was
described  accurately  by  her.  Whence  did  she  get  the  image  ?  From
the  questioner's  psychism,  which,  through  mine  as  an  intermediary,
was  reflected  in  her.

"  It  is  right  to  add  that  the  somnambule's  predictions  were  not
fulfilled  ;  that  on  the  day  of  his  test  the  student  had  to  examine  other
patients,  and  that  those  described  by  the  somnambule  were  not  even
mentioned."3

"As  a  rule,"  says  Dr.  Charpignon,  "  second-sight  is  confounded  with
the  phenomenon  of  thought-transmission.  Thus,  most  of  the  experi-
ments that  are  cited  consist  in  asking  the  somnambule  to  go  to  your
home  or  to  a  place  known  to  you.  You  are  in  rapport  with  him  and  he
usually  describes  to  you  places  or  objects  with  the  utmost  precision.
Now,  in  all  this  there  is,  as  a  rule,  no  real  vision  :  the  somnambule
sees  in  your  thoughts  the  images  you  trace  therein.  The  more
attentively  you  follow  him  and  direct  his  descriptions  (namely,  by
helping  him  with  verbal  suggestions),  the  more  perfect  they  will  be."  *

But  this  is  of  rather  rare  occurrence.  I  have  observed  only  one
case  of  this  kind.  That  was  some  time  ago,  and  as  I  did  not  believe
in  mental  transmission,  I  regarded  the  fact  as  the  result  of  circum-
stances that  it  was  impossible  to  verify.  According  to  the  person
that  consulted  the  somnambule,  the  latter  had  described  exactly  to
him  his  house  and  garden.  But  Charpignon  is  quite  right  in  saying
that  if  there  be  such  a  thing  as  vision  at  a  distance,  it  has  usually
been  apparent  only,  leading  astray  magnetizers  that  were  not  exacting.

1  Noizet,  "  M6moire,"  p.  128.

2  Perronet,  "  Du  Magn.  Anim.,"  p.  34,  1884.

3  Dr.  Charpignon,  "  Physiologie,  M6decine,  et  Metaphysique  du  Magn4tisme,"
p.  90.

TRANSMISSION  OF  IDEAS.  183

They  wrote  a  few  words,  for  instance,  on  a  bit  of  paper,  then  folded
this  carefully  ;  the  somnambule  clapped  it  on  his  own  person  any-
where, and  "read"  the  contents.  It  was  Dr.  Teste,  I  believe,  who,
believing  he  had  a  case  of  second  sight,  broke  down  completely
in  his  experiments  before  the  Academic  Commission  of  1840,  when  a
bit  of  writing  shut  up  in  a  box,  and  the  contents  of  which  he  did  not
know,  was  to  be  "  read  "  by  the  somnambule.  It  need  not  be  added
that  certain  bona  fide  magnetizers,  among  them  Mr.  Hublier,  have
been  simply  tricked  by  their  somnambules.1

Mr.  Henry  Joly,a  who  does  not  believe  in  clairvoyance,  nor  in
thought-transference,  relates  the  following  :

8.  "  We  have  from  an  honorable  magistrate,  one  of  the  most  sym-
pathetic auditors  of  our  courts,  the  minutes  of  an  inquiry  or  expertise
made  by  him  in  the  case  of  a  somnambule,  whose  practices  had  been
brought  under  the  notice  of  the  officers  of  the  law.  This  magistrate
was  of  the  opinion  that  the  somnambule  was  honest  and  that  she  was
really  endormed.  Monday,  July  4,  1859,  he  said,  I  repaired  at  8.40
a.  m.  to  the  house  of  the  B's.,  husband  and  wife,  living  in  C.  S.  S.,
St.  G.  Street.  I  asked  Mr.  B.  to  put  his  wife  in  the  state  of  magnetic
sleep.  The  woman  has  been  blind  for  2  years,  does  not  d'stinguish
objects,  and  has  but  a  dim  perception  of  light  through  the  left  eye.
Mr.  B.  had  told  me  that  I  might  interrogate  his  wife  ;  I  put  into  her
hands  a  white  handkerchief,  and  the  following  dialogue  took  place :
'Can  you  tell  me  what  mark  is  on  this  handkerchief?'  'Very  easily;
but  who  gave  you  this  handkerchief  ? '  '  Answer  my  question.  This
handkerchief  is  mine  ;  I  bought  it.'  iThe  mark  that  I  have  under  my
fingers  is  pretty  hard  to  read.  But  I  see  an  M.;  I  cannot  read  the
letter  that  is  before  it '  (the  mark  on  the  handkerchief  is  J.  M.,  on  red
cotton,  in  Gothic  letters)

"  '  What  is  the  age  of  the  person  to  whom  this  lock  of  hair  belongs  ? '
'  It  is  a  young  person.'  '  Can  you  conduct  me  to  that  person  ?'  '  No ;
for  the  person  is  no  more.'  '  You  have  divined  aright.  Can  you  read
the  letters  written  on  the  inside  of  this  medallion  ?'  *  It  is  pretty  hard.
I  will  try.     .     .     .     No  ;  I  cannot  read.'

"  '  Could  you  tell  me  whether  I  have  on  my  body  a  fresh  wound,
and  where  ?'  '  Yes  ;  you  have  one  on  the  leg,  or  rather  not  a  wound,
for  it  is  closed.'  'On  which  leg?'  'It  is  on  the  left.'  (That  was
correct,  but  she  was  in  error  as  to  the  precise  place.)  '  I  hand  you
this  lock  of  hair  wrapped  in  paper.  Examine  it.'  '  It  is  not  blond
like  that  you  showed  me  a  while  ago  ;  it  is  very  dark  brown.  What  do
you  mean  to  do  with  it  ?  Take  it  to  my  neighbor,  R. ;  he  makes  hair-
work  mementoes  in  very  fine  style.1  '  Tell  me  whose  hair  it  is.'  (The
somnambule  is  much  fatigued  ;  she  hesitates  for  a  good  while  without
replying.)  '  Does  it  belong  to  a  man  or  to  a  woman  ? '  '  To  a  woman/
'You  are  mistaken.'  'Yes,  I  was  mistaken.  I  thought  you  intended
this  hair  to  be  worn  by  a  woman  ;  that  is  what  I  meant  to  say.'  '  Tell
me  whether  I  have  much  love   for   the  person  to  whom  this  hair

1  Burdin  and  Dubois,  "  Histoire  Academique  du  Magnetisme  Animal,"  p.  584,
et  seq.     Paris,  1841.

2  H.  Joly,  "  L'Imagination,  Etude  Psychologique,"  p.  60.     Paris,  1877.

1 84  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

belongs.'  '  So  much  that  one  cannot  have  more.'  '  Do  you  know
what  that  person  is  to  me  ? '  With  a  little  impatience  :  '  I  have  told
how  you  loved  the  person.  It  is  with  family  affection,  that  is  plain  ;
it  is  the  bond  of  blood  ;  I  cannot  say  anything  else.'  The  hair  was
very  dark  brown ;  it  was  a  lock  cut  from  the  head  of  my  only  son  by
his  mother,  who  intends  to  have  a  bracelet  made  of  it  for  herself."

The  author  from  whom  this  observation  is  taken  does  not  believe
in  clairvoyance,  and  plainly  there  is  in  this  instance  no  clairvoyance
proper  ;  but  it  were  difficult,  I  think,  to  explain  the  facts  unless  there
were  some  traces  of  thought-transference  in  spite  of  the  verbal  sug-
gestions, which  are  not  wanting.

Another  skeptic,  Mr.  Tissot,1  gives  his  own  experience :

9.  "  Seance  of  Sept.  4. — Sixty  pulsations  a  minute,  before  the  sleep
as  after ;  but  at  the  moment  of  sleep  and  before  the  feigned  or  real
convulsion  (there  was  no  convulsive  movement  in  the  two  latest
seances)  sudden  weakening  of  pulse,  without  slowing  ;  after  the  con-
vulsive movement  the  pulse  regains  its  intensity.  The  somnambule,
who,  according  to  all  appearances,  knew  not  the  localities  I  made  her
traverse  and  visit,  though  she  was  of  Franche  Comte  and  Haute-
Saone,  betakes  herself  to  the  village  where  I  was  born,  the  name  of
which  I  withhold  from  her,  and  which  she  names  of  her  own  accord.
But  in  passing  by  way  of  Pontarlier  she  gives  the  name  of  that  town  ;
tells  the  direction  in  which  lies  Les  Fourgs — the  village  in  question  ;
describes  the  road  leading  thither  from  the  Department  highway  ;
assigns  the  position  of  the  church  outside  the  village,  and  gives  almost
the  number  of  my  father's  house  ;  adds  remarkably  correct  particulars
about  my  mother,  the  sequels  of  her  lying-in,  her  ailment,  the  treat-
ment, her  death.  But  she  is  mistaken  as  to  my  age  at  the  time
of  the  death,  and  on  the  make-up  of  the  family.  She  hits  it
exactly  with  regard  to  sundry  details  of  the  life  of  my  father  and  my
mother,  and  is  mistaken  as  to  some  others.  She  describes  with  great
precision  the  features  of  the  country  as  one  observes  them  in  following
the  path  leading  from  the  village  to  the  hamlet  of  La  Beuffarde  ;
makes  two  mistakes  with  regard  to  the  house  I  used  to  live  in  ;  then
describes  its  parts  precisely ;  is  mistaken  as  to  the  cause  of  the  ruin
of  a  neighboring  house.  She  gives  correct  details  about  my  early
years  ;  follows  me  elsewhither;  is  only  half-way  mistaken  with  respect
to  my  situation  at  Pontarlier  from  1815  to  1819  ;  is  more  exact  as  to
my  life  and  occupation  at  Besangon  ;  but  her  intuition  of  the  remainder
of  my  life  is  a  little  more  obscure,  though  a  pretty  large  number  of
the  particulars  are  true."

In  this  narrative  we  have  a  somnambulic  dream,  fed  by  verbal  sug-
gestions, but  also  by  communication  of  recollections,  especially  recol-
lections of  early  childhood,  which  are  wont  to  be  vivid.

Mr.  Tissot's  somnambule,  as  also  Mr.  Joly's,  was  deaf  to  impres-
sions not  proceeding  from  the  person  with  whom  she  was  in  rapport.

Mr.  Tissot  presents  his  manner  of  making  notes  as  a  model.     But

1  J.  Tissot,  "  L'Imagination,  ses  Bienfaits  et  ses  Egarements,"  p.  119.  Paris,
i860.

TRANSMISSION  OF  IDEAS.  185

it  is  far  from  being  satisfactory.  He  has  noted  all  the  errors  of  the
somnambule,  but  that  is  not  enough.  The  entire  dialogue  must  be
noted.     Hence  I  prefer  General  Noizet's  narrative.

General  Noizet,  author  of  several  philosophical  works,  and  whose
volume  on  somnambulism  was  praised  at  the  Academy  of  Sciences  by
Flourens,  recounts  the  following  fact :

10.  "I  reached  my  friend's  place  before  the  magnetizer  and  his
somnambule,  and  the  master  of  the  house  told  us  that  among  the  ex-
traordinary powers  she  was  credited  with  was,  that  she  could  tell
what  a  person  with  whom  she  was  put  in  rapport  had  been  doing
throughout  the  day.  Now,  on  that  very  day  it  chanced  that  I  had
done  something  quite  out  of  the  common — I  had  gone  to  the  Hotel
des  Invalides  with  the  Duke  de  Montpensier,  to  show  him  the  gallery
of  relief-plans  of  the  fortifications.  I  proposed  to  test  on  myself  the
somnambule's  power,  and  this  proposition  was  accepted  by  my  two
friends.  The  somnambule  having  arrived  and  having  been  endormed,
I  forthwith  put  myself  in  rapport  with  her,  and  asked  if  she  was  able
to  see  what  I  had  been  doing  that  day.  After  some  details  of  little
consequence,  and  obtained  with  difficulty,  as  to  how  I  had  passed  the
morning,  I  asked  whither  I  had  gone  for  breakfast.  She  answered,
without  much  hesitation,  'To  the  Tuileries.'  That  might  mean  a
simple  stroll  thither,  so  I  persisted  and  asked  at  what  point  I  had
entered.  'By  the  wicket  on  the  quay  hard  by  the  Pont-Royal.'
'  And  then  ? '  '  You  went  up  into  the  chateau.'  '  By  which  steps,  the
middle  ones  ? '  '  No  ;  by  those  at  the  corner,  near  the  wicket.'  Here
she  lost  herself  among  the  different  sets  of  steps — and  well  she
might,  for  there  are  many  of  them.  Finally  she  set  me  down  in  a
large  hall  where  some  officers  were.  It  was  a  reception  hall  on  the
ground  floor.  '  You  waited,'  said  she  to  me.  '  And  then  ? '  '  A  tall  young
man  came  and  spoke  to  you.'  'Who  was  that  young  man?'  'I  do  not
know.'  'Try  hard  to  find  out.'  'Oh,  it  is  the  King's  son.'  'Which?'  'I
do  not  know.'  (I  tell  her  it  was  the  Duke  de  Montpensier.)  'Afterward?'
'You  entered  a  coach.'  'Alone?'  '  No  ;  with  the  prince.'  'Where  was  I
placed  ? '  '  In  the  rear,  to  the  left  of  him.'  '  Were  we  two  alone  in  the
coach  ? '  '  No  ;  there  was,  further,  in  front,  a  stout  gentleman  ? '  '  Who
was  that  gentleman  ?'  'I  do  not  know.'  'Try.'  (After  reflecting)
'  'Twas  the  King..'  '  How,'  said  I,  '  I  on  the  rear  seat  and  the  King  on
the  front  ?  You  see  that  is  not  reasonable.'  '  I  can't  say  ;  I  do  not  know
that  gentleman.'  '  Well,  it  was  the  Prince's  aide-de-camp.'  '  I  do  not
know  him.'  '  Where  did  we  go  ? '  '  Along  the  riverside.'  '  And  then  ?  '
'  You  entered  a  large  chateau.'  '  What  chateau  ? '  '  I  do  not  know  ;
there  are  trees  before  you  come  to  it.'  'Take  a  good  look  ai  it,
you  must  know  it.'  'No;  I  don't  know.'  (I  drop  this  question  and
tell  her  to  continue.)  'You  were  in  a  large  hall.'  (Here  she  gives
me  an  imaginative  description  of  the  hall,  where  she  see  stars  glitter-
ing on  a  white  ground.)  At  last  she  said  to  me:  '  There  were  long
tables.'  '  And  what  was  on  the  tables  ? '  'It  was  not  high  nor  was  it
entirely  flat.'  (I  could  not  bring  her  to  tell  me  that  it  was  relief-
plans — things  that  she,  no  doubt,  had  never  seen.)  '  What  did  we  do
then,  at  those  tables?'  'You  got  on  a  bench,  and  with  a  long  rod
pointed  out  something?'  (This  remarkable  specification  was  per-
fectly exact.)  At  last  she  had  us  in  the  coach  again  and  away.  I
then  said  to  her :  '  But  just  look  back  ;  you  must  recognize  the  place

1 86  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

we  are  leaving.'  '  Ah  ! '  she  said,  as  though  astonished  and  confused,
'  'tis  the  Hotel  des  Invalides.'  She  said,  furthermore,  that  the  Prince
quitted  me  at  the  door,  which  was  the  fact.

"  Though  familiar  with  the  phenomena  of  somnambulism,  this
scene  nevertheless  impressed  me  much,  and  I  could  not  reasonably
attribute  to  any  cause  save  the  faculty  of  reading  my  thoughts  or  of
deciphering  impressions  still  existing  in  my  brain,  the  kind  of  divina-
tion exhibited  by  the  somnambule.  That  is  the  only  explanation  I
can  give  even  to-day."

This  observation  is  curious,  indeed,  in  that  it  proves  :

a.  That  till  the  moment  when  the  General  had  fixed  his  atten-
tion on  some  detail  of  his  recollections,  the  somnambule  divined
nothing.

b.  That  sometimes  she  spoke  according  to  verbal  suggestions  made
by  the  General,  and  that  then  either  she  wandered  abroad  in  con-
jecture, or  else  complemented  these  verbal  suggestions  with  details
mentally  transmitted.

c.  That  she  "  saw  "  best  the  details  that  had  left  the  most  vivid
traces  on  the  mind  of  the  General.

d.  That  the  traces  partially  transmitted  were  completed  little  by
little,  till  they  formed  a  more  distinct  image  (the  Invalides).

e.  That  sometimes  reflective  conjecture  failed  completely,  and  then
the  somnambule  guided  herself  by  images  passing  spontaneously
through  her  mind  (the  King).

ii.  "Professor  Barrett,  of  Edinburgh,  tells  of  a  young  Irishwoman
who,  though  she  never  had  been  away  from  her  native  village,  was
able  to  describe  Regent  Street,  London,  which  street  he  was  thinking
of  when  he  magnetized  her.  From  this  fact  and  from  other  facts
like  it,  Professor  Barrett  concludes  that  any  idea  upon  which  the
operator  concentrates  his  thoughts  produces  its  like  in  the  mind
■of  the  magnetized  subject."  '

12.  Mr.  Ch.  Richet  has  recently  collected  many  observations  of
this  kind  (not  yet  published).  The  subject,  when  questioned  by  the
operator,  describes  a  chamber,  a  house,  etc.,  according  to  the  mag-
netizer's  recollections.  These  observations,  made  with  exactness,
possess  a  special  interest,  for  they  may  help  us  to  determine  the  role
of  unconscious  recollections  in  the  act  of  transmission.  We  may  in  this
way  decide  whether,  and  in  what  proportion,  the  knowledge  one  pos-
sesses, but  which  at  the  moment  is  not  present  in  the  mind,  can  be
transmitted  to  the  subject.  All  that  is  needed  for  attaining  this
object  is  carefully  to  note  and  describe  in  detail  the  operator's  men-
tal state.

13.  Mr.  William  Gregory,  ex-Professor  of  Ghemistry  in  the  Uni-

1  I  quote  the  passr.ge  from  P.  Despine  {op.  cit.),  only  correcting  the  name  of  the
operator  from  Bennet  (as  given  by  Dr.  Despine)  to  Barrett.  Prof.  W.  F.  Barrett,
no  doubt,  is  meant,  for  this  experiment  is  described  in  an  article  by  him  "  On  Some
Phenomena  Associated  with  Abnormal  Conditions  of  Mind,"  published  in  the  "  Proc.
Soc.  Psych.  Res.,"  p.  238.     July,  1883. — Author's  note.

TRANSMISSION  OF  IDEAS.  187

versity  of  Edinburgh,  quotes  a  similar  case,  but  I  have  not  his  book
at  hand.1

14.  The  Count  de  Maricourt,3  from  whom  we  have  already  quoted
a  few  lines,  gives  the  following  narrative  :

"  It  has  often  happened  to  me  to  be  staggered  and  nonplussed  by
the  clairvoyance  of  somnambules,  who  told  of  impressions  or  divined
sentiments  that  I  could  have  wished  to  keep  secret  from  them.  As  I
lived  in  association  with  these  persons,  the  fact  may  be  accounted  for
by  the  habitual  community  of  thought  existing  between  us.  To  put
aside  this  cause  of  illusion,  I  tried  an  experiment  upon  a  person  entirely
unknown  to  me.  A  professional  magnetizer  was  at  the  time  exhibit-
ing in  Paris  a  certain  somnambule,  about  whose  performances
marvelous  stories  were  told.  She  knew  the  past,  the  present  and  the
future,  understood  all  languages,  and  above  all  divined  the  most
secret  thoughts.  The  seances  were  held  in  ■  a  large  hall  on  the
boulevards.  You  had  only  to  give  her  your  hand  and  concentrate
your  thought  upon  any  object  whatever,  and  she  would  tell  you,
following  your  thought,  what  the  object  was.  I  saw  several  gentle-
men interrogate  her  thus  tacitly.  One  of  them  thought  of  a  murder,
of  a  duel  he  had  witnessed  ;  another  made  her  a  witness  of  some
battle  scene,  of  a  shipwreck,  or  of  a  fire.  The  somnamibule's
descriptions  seemed  fully  to  convince  her  patrons.  As  I  did  not
believe  in  the  supernatural,  I  did  not  wish  to  be  fooled  by  jugglers.
These  gentlemen,  who  were  unknown  to  me,  might  easily  enough  be
accomplices.  '  It  is  not  necessary  (said  the  Barnum  of  the  establish-
ment) to  entertain  the  somnambule  with  tales  of  horror  and  disaster
only.  On  the  contrary,  I  should  say  you  fatigue  her  by  occasioning
painful  emotions.'

"  I,  too,  wished  to  experiment  in  my  turn  ;  in  accordance  with  the
advice  of  the  manager,  I  called  up  a  pleasant  memory  inwardly,  going
back  to  a  remote  place  in  the  country,  and  to  a  time  some  few  years
before."

The  author  here  recounts  the  whole  story  of  a  feast  in  which  the
dominant  figure  is  a  drunken  man,  with  red  nose  and  a  very  comical
face,  whom  he  describes  in  detail.

"  I  said  not  a  word  (he  continues)  to  the  somnambule,  but  to  this
vision  of  the  past  I  strove  to  give,  in  my  mind,  the  luminous  distinct-
ness of  a  photograph.  '  Oh,  what  a  ridiculous  phiz  !  (exclaimed  the
seeress  after  a  few  moments).  What  a  phiz,  what  a  phiz,  my  God  ! '
Her  almost  convulsive  laugh  had  in  it  something  so  infectious  that
the  whole  company  shared  her  jollity.

"This  time  I  had  to  confess  myself  entirely  convinced.  To  the
faculty — unexplainable  by  the  play  of  the  organism — of  seeing  thus
into  the  minds  of  others  must  be  attributed  the  alleged  facts  of
somnambulic  polyglotism."

This  experiment  is  not  quite  conclusive,  for  jollity  being  the  order
of  the  day  after  the  magnetizer's  speech,  the  somnambule  divined
only  the  mental  image  of  a  phiz.     But  granting  this  not  to  have  been

1  Gregory,  "  Letters  on  Mesmerism  and  Clairvoyance,"  Edinburgh,  1852  ;  Morin,
op.  cit.,  p.  168.

2  R.  Comte  de  Maricourt,  "  Souvenirs  d'un  Magnetiseur,"  p.  96  et  seq.    Paris,  18S4.

1 88  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

pure  chance,  the  experiment  is  instructive  in  this,  that  the  humorous,
comic  element,  being  transmitted,  to  the  somnambule  and  producing
laughter,  hindered  the  transmission  of  all  the  objective  images  that
were  in  the  mind  of  the  Count.

Another  experiment  that  I  find  in  the  same  book  is  more  con-
vincing :

15.  "I  was  walking  with  a  patient  whom  I  had  endormed  before-
hand. [There  is  nothing  unusual  in  this  walk.  In  active  somnam-
bulism the  subject  presents  all  the  appearances  of  a  waking  person.
If  the  somnambulism,  however,  is  not  deep  enough,  the  subject  may-
be awakened  by  a  current  of  air.  In  other  cases  you  might  throw  the
subject  into  water  or  into  a  fire  without  awakening  him.]  She  was
paralyzed  in  the  legs  and  could  walk  only  in  the  magnetic  sleep.
[This,  too,  is  seen  often  enough  in  hysteric  paralysis.]  As  we  passed
in  front  of  a  field,  the  owner  of  which  I  knew,  I  asked  her  to  tell  me
Ms  name,  and  at  the  same  time  pronounced  the  name  inwardly  ;  I  had
some  difficulty  in  obtaining  a  satisfactory  reply.  [Observe,  the
patient  was  in  an  active  polyideic  state.]  The  subject  declared
that  she  could  not  tell  it  to  me  ;  I  insisted,  and  the  name  was  pro-
nounced as  I  wished.  It  is,  you  see,  a  hard  job  (fait  brutal),  for  the
subject  has  to  see  what  you  think  and  what  she  cannot  guess.  No
more  striking  instance  of  thought-reading  can,  I  think,  be  found "

(P-  I23)-

16.  Dr.  Puel,  author  of  a  memoir  on  catalepsy  that  was  "crowned"

by  the  Academy,  also  made  one  of  his  cataleptics  divine  words  he
thought  of  ;  only  he  made  the  task  light  by  indicating  the  termi-
nations.    He  would  say  to  the  patient :     "  Tell  me  the  word  I  am

thinking  of;    it  rhymes  with "   (clairvoyance,  for  example),  and

the  subject  gave  it  without  hesitation.1

17.  Dr.  Comet,  editor  of  medical  journals  and  a  distinguished  writer,
was  a  thorough  unbeliever  in  somnambulism,  and  had  often  amused
his  readers  by  ridiculing  the  wonders  of  lucidity  as  reported  by  mag-
netizers.  In  1839,  his  wife,  having  fallen  ill,  had  a  fit  of  natural  som-
nambulism, and  became  lucid.  Mr.  Comet  (whose  testimony  has  the
more  weight,  inasmuch  as  it  dealt  with  facts  that 'he  had  considered
impossible)  sent  to  the  Academy  of  Medicine  a  detailed  report  and
published  the  same  in  the  journal  L'Hygie.  To  mention  but  two  of
Mrs.  Comet's  feats,  she  would  describe  every  little  object  held  in  the
closed  hand  and  divined  thoughts  that  related  to  her.

I  pass  over  other  feats  that  have  to  do  with  another  question,  that
of  clairvoyance,  that  is,  when  the  subject  sees  or  divines  things  that
cannot  be  known  to  the  persons  around  her.  After  quoting  the
description  of  these  curious  facts  as  found  in  Dr.  Comet's  "  Report,"
another  physician,  Mr.  Frappart,  adds  :  "  Surely  it  must  have  cost
its  author  dear,  for  but  the  other  day  he  was  one  of  the  most  deter-
mined opponents  of  magnetism."  But  Mr.  Comet  "  did  not  go  there
by  four  roads,"  and  here  is  what  he  himself  wrote  in  his  "  Report  :  "

"  The  unfortunate  ailment  of  my  wife  carries  with  it  a  consolation,
for  it  will  bring  to  unappealable  judgment  a  question  that  has  been
the  subject  of  much  discussion  in  this  Academy  and  in  the  press,
wherein  I  have  taken  an  active  part — I  speak  of    the   lucidity  and

1  A.  S.  Morin,  "  Du  Magnetisme  et  des  Sciences  Occultes,"  p.  177.     Paris,    i860.

TRANSMISSION  OF  IDEAS.  189

clairvoyance  of  somnambules  and  the  wonderful  things  they  do.
Three  months  ago  I  myself  did  not  believe  them,  and  to-day  I  regret
my  having  characterized  them  publicly  as  fraudulent  devices  and
catchpenny  tricks."

There  is  a  piece  of  advice  for  hypnotizers  who  are  doing  the  same
thing  to-day  !

But  as  for  the  hope  that  Dr.  Comet  fostered,  in  the  belief  that  the
Academy  would  profit  by  this  occasion  and  decide,  as  the  highest
court,  a  question  that  so  profoundly  concerns  the  progress  of  science
— what  an  illusion  !

The  Academy  could  not  refuse  to  name  a  commission  that  was
asked  for  by  an  esteemed  member.  The  commission  even  went  twice
to  visit  Mrs.  Comet ;  but  after  remarking  that  the  case  had  some
extraordinary  features,  in  dealing  with  which  they  might  compromise
either  their  sagacity  or  their  renown,  they  hesitated  about  going  on.

"  I  notified  all  of  them  this  morning,"  wrote  Mr.  Comet,  "  and  I
count  upon  them  for  this  evening  " — the  business  being  to  verify  a
prediction  made  by  the  patient.  "  The  fact  is  of  sufficient  interest  to
science  and  humanity  for  them  to  take  cognizance  of  it."  "  Be  not
deluded,"  answered  Dr.  Frappart,  "  not  one  of  them  will  come,  either
to-night  or  to-morrow,  or  later,  for  a  man  carefully  holds  aloof  from
the  truth  that  hurts  him."

In  fact,  no  member  of  the  commission  went.1

18.  A  well-known  physicist-prestigiator,  Mr.  Robert-Houdin,  took
a  greater  interest  in  these  questions.  We  have  already  mentioned  his
imitating  second-sight  and  thought-transmission,  by  means  of  a  very
ingenious  trick.  At  the  outset  he  was  very  incredulous  about  somnam-
bulism. Nay,  accustomed  as  he  was  to  perform  wonderful  feats,  he
made  light  of  marvels,  and  believed  he  held  the  secret  of  them  all ;
and  he,  too,  regarded  the  extraordinary  performances  of  lucid  som-
nambules as  clever  tricks.  In  many  towns  where  somnambules  had
been  successful,  he  amused  himself  by  counterfeiting  their  doings,
and  even  surpassing  them.  Mr.  de  Mirville,  the  famous  demonologist,
who,  in  his  system,  has  need  of  somnambulism,  thereby  to  do
honor  to  the  -spirits  infernal,  conceived  the  ambitious  project  of
converting  so  doughty  an  adversary.  With  good  reason  he  judged
that  should  he  succeed  in  proving  to  Robert-Houdin  that  lucidity
belongs  to  a  class  of  things  entirely  foreign  to  his  studies  and  his
practice,  the  testimony  of  so  expert  a  judge  would  be  of  great  service
to  the  cause  of  magnetism.  So  he  took  him  to  see  the  somnambule
Alexis.   Mr.  de  Mirville,  in  his  book  on  "  Spirits,"  describes  the  scene.

Mr.  Morin,  from  whom  I  borrow  this  passage,  and  who  wrote  a
spiritnel 'but  skeptical  book  on  magnetism,  declares  that  Robert-Houdin
assured  him  of  the  exactitude  of  Mr.  de  Mirville's  narrative.

"  I  was  amazed,  confounded  (says  the  prestigiator).  Here  was
neither  trick  nor  jugglery.     I  was  witness  of  the  exercise  of  a  higher,

1  Dr.  Frappart,  "  Lettres  sur  le  Magnetisme,"  1839,  1840  ;  Dr.  Comet,  "  LaVerite
aux  Medecins,"  1869;  Dr.  Charpignon,  "  Physiologie,"  etc.,  p.  116,  1848;  Morin,
"  Du  Magnetisme,"  p.  176,  1800.

i9o  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

an  inconceivable  faculty  whereof  I  had  not  the  slightest  notion,  and
in  which  I  would  have  refused  to  believe,  had  not  the  facts  come
under  my  own  eyes.  So  great  was  my  emotion  that  the  perspiration
streamed  down  my  face."  With  other  experiments  he  mentions  the
following  :

19.  "  Alexis,  seizing  the  hands  of  my  wife,  who  accompanied  me,
spoke  to  her  about  past  occurrences,  and  in  particular  about  the  very
painful  loss  of  one  of  our  children  ;  all  the  circumstances  were  re-
counted accurately."  [In  this  case,  the  somnambule  read  in  the  mind
of  Mrs.  Houdin  her  recollections  and  her  sentiments,  which  were  more
or  less  vivid  in  her  consciousness.]

Another  feat  of  the  same  somnambule  simulates  vision  and  clair-
voyance at  the  same  time,  as  in  the  case  last  mentioned,  by  trans-
mission of  recollections.

20.  "  We  had  with  us  a  physician,  a  strong  unbeliever,  Dr.  Chomel,
who,  desiring  also  to  study  the  matter  for  himself,  presented  to  Alexis
a  little  box.  The  somnambule  felt  of  it  without  opening  it,  and  said,
'  It  is  a  medal  ;  it  was  given  you  under  rather  singular  circumstances.
You  were  then  a  poor  student,  living  at  Lyons  in  an  attic.  A  work-
man to  whom  you  had  rendered  some  services  found  this  medal  among-
refuse,  and  thinking  it  might  be  of  some  interest  to  you,  climbed
your  six  flights  of  stairs  to  offer  it  to  you.'  This  was  all  true.  Certainly
here  are  facts  that  one  can  neither  guess  not  hit  on  by  chance.  The
doctor  shared  our  admiration  for  the  feat.  I  gave  to  Mr.  de  Mirville
the  certificate  he  asked  of  me,  stating  that  the  facts  I  had  witnessed
surpassed  all  that  can  be  done  by  sleight-of-hand."

Another  quotation  from  the  same  author  will  be  found  interesting  for
the  very  reason  that  it  mentions  some  mistakes  made  by  the  somnam-
bule :

19.  "  Some  months  after,  I  went  a  second  time  to  consult  Alexis.  I
did  not  find  him  as  lucid  as  at  first.  I  was  specially  impressed  by  one
feature.  I  presented  to  him  a  letter  I  had  just  received,  and  which
had  not  yet  been  opened.  [But  Mr.  Houdin  knew  whom  it  was  from.]
It  bore  the  Boulogne  post-mark.  Alexis  told  me  it  had  come  from
England,  which  was  true,  and  gave  me  a  pretty  correct  description  of
the  writer.  He  made  a  mistake  in  saying  he  was  a  book-seller  ;  I
took  him  up,  and  then  he  said  he  saw  him  in  a  room  filled  with  books
and  like  a  book-seller's  shop  ;  and  such  in  fact  was  the  appearance  of
the  sitting-room  of  my  correspondent."  *

When  we  recall  a  person  to  mind,  we  automatically  (inachinalement ')
recall  also  his  surroundings,  the  background. on  which  his  silhouette
is  limned  by  memory  ;  and  doubtless  it  is  this  fleeting  image  that  was
communicated  to  the  somnambule  and  led  him  to  say,  conjecturally,  that
the  writer  of  the  letter  was  a  book-seller.  Note  again,  that  the  seer
did  not  tell  Mr.  Houdin  what  was  in  the  letter  :  that  was  a  detail  of
which  Houdin  himself  was  ignorant.

Facts  like  these  last  are  usually  classed  as  feats  of  clairvoyance,  or

'A.  S.  Morin,  op.  cit.,  p.  180.

TRANSMISSION  OF  IDEAS.  191

are  confounded  with  others  which,  if  they  are  correctly  reported,  seem
really  to  exhibit  a  faculty  different  from  the  one  we  are  considering
here.

And,  strange  to  say,  there  are  in  the  history  of  magnetism,  even
though  we  restrict  ourselves  to  observations  made  by  scientific  men,
more  facts  of  clairvoyance,  relating  in  particular  to  questions  of  the
health  of  patients,  than  there  are  facts  of  mental  suggestion  properly
so-called.  It  is  true  that  in  many  cases  of  somnambulic  consultation,
we  must  absolutely  presuppose  the  mental  influence  of  the  physician,  un-
less we  are  willing  to  accept  explanations  more  extraordinary  still,  or
totally  inadequate.

Baragnon  distinguishes  mental  transmission  from  lucidity  ;  he  is
right,  for  what  is  called  "  clairvoyance  "  (I  do  not  mean  to  discuss
here  the  value  of  that  "  faculty,"  not  having  studied  it  sufficiently)
presupposes  a  state  rather  more polyideic  than  the  one  that  favors  pas-
sive transmission.  Lafontaine,  too,  had  too  much  experience  not  to
have  noticed  that  the  transmission  of  sensations  of  thought  and  of
will  does  not  imply  lucidity.  He  even  observes  that  often  they  who
consult  somnambules  do  in  reality  consult  themselves,  the  somnam-
bule  merely  reproducing  their  thoughts.  But  Baragnon  is  more
explicit.  "  There  may  be,"  says  he,  "  thought-transference  without
clairvoyance,  just  as  there  may  be  clairvoyance  without  thought-
transference  :  the  two  phenomena  are  independent."  He  names  as
conditions  favoring  thought-transference  these  :

1.  "  A  close  sympathy  of  the  magnetizer  with  the  subject.

2.  "A  sleep  cheerful  (gai),  free;  highly  developed  magnetic
vision.

3.  "  Transmission  of  sensations  as  a  basis."

As  for  the  first  condition,  nothing  more  needs  to  be  said.  Plainly,
sympathism  is  more  facile  where  sympathy  already  exists.

With  regard  to  the  second,  I  am  a  little  surprised  to  find  that  the
sleep  must  be  cheerful  and  free,  for  to  me  such  sleep  seems  less  favor-
able to  true  transmission,  though  it  is  highly  favorable  to  divination
by  conjecture.1

By  "  magnetic  vision  "  Baragnon  understands  the  faculty  that  many
somnambules  possess  of  making  their  way  about  and  finding  their
bearings  though  their  eyes  be  closed,  even  in  places  unfamiliar  to
them,  or  in  the  dark.  It  is  far  less  exact  in  details  than  ordinary  vis-
ion, but,  according  to  this  author,  it  becomes  very  accurate  when  an
organism  is  put  in  rapport  with  the  somnambule.

1  "  Cheerful  and  free  sleep  "  is  not  a  happy  phrase,  and  does  not  render  with  pre-
cision the  French  sommeil gai  et  libre.  The  meaning  of  "  gay,"  "  free  "  sleep,  is  per-
haps best  obtained  by  looking  at  its  opposite,  namely,  magnetic  sleep  in  which  the
somnambule  is  more  or  less  inert  mentally,  say,  withotit  initiative,  and  is  restricted  in
his  psychic  action.     In  other  words,  "  gay,  free,"  =  polyideic. —  Translator.

1 92  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

We  must  not  be  too  ready  to  ridicule  this  magnetic  vision.  I  cannot
analyze  here  the  question  of  vision  with  closed  eyes,  which,  indeed,  I
have  studied  but  little,  and  I  do  not  yet  admit  the  existence  of  such
faculty.  I  believe  that  in  the  cases  in  which  it  has  been  supposed  by
competent  observers  to  exist,  for  example,  the  case  reported  by  the
Academy  Commission,  it  may  be  regarded  as  an  exaltation  of  vision,
that  is  to  say,  vision  through  the  eyelids.  But  what  Baragnon  calls
"  magnetic  vision  "  is  a  complex  phenomenon,  sometimes  independent
of  the  visual  organs — rather  an  exaltation  of  touch  or  more  probably
an  elective  and  limited  exaltation  of  all  the  senses,  sometimes  of  those  of
touch  and  hearing,  sometimes  of  sight  and  smell,  etc.  That  is  what  I
mean  by  elective,  or  specificated  hyperesthesia.

When  the  magnetic  sleep  is  thorough,  the  subject  is  insensible,  deaf,
and  blind  to  all  that  takes  place  outside  of  the  magnetic  "  rapport. '"
But  in  turn  his  senses  are  hyperaesthesic  with  respect  to  the  magnetizer,
or  of  any  object  upon  which  he  fixes  his  attention.  The  apparent  con-
tradiction must  not  shock  us.  The  senses  are  unchanged,  but  the
state  of  the  brain  may  modify  their  action  in  the  direction  of  plus  .or
of  minus.  In  the  first  place,  the  same  quantity  of  nervous  energy
may,  instead  of  being  expended  on  all  the  senses,  be  concentrated
upon  one  at  the  expense  of  the  rest  ;  then,  in  the  same  sense  (touch
in  particular),  it  may  be  concentrated  in  one  region,  in  a  single  point,
at  the  expense  of  the  rest  (the  hysterogenic  zones  belong  to  this
class)  ;  finally,  this  displacement  may  be  still  further  specificated  by
a  brain-adjustment.  A  mother  that  is  not  awakened  by  a  loud  knock-
ing at  night,  is  up  with  a  leap  at  the  faintest  cry  of  her  babe,  because
her  brain  is  adjusted  for  that  kind  of  impressions  only.  There  is  an
unconscious  attention  that  watches  without  interfering  with  sleep.  One
forms  the  intention  of  awaking  at  5  o'clock  in  the  morning,  and  at
the  stroke  of  five  awakes  ;  and  so  on.

Somnambulism  shows  us  magnified  what  is  exhibited  on  a  small
scale  every  day  of  our  lives.  The  magnetizer  is  for  his  subject  like
the  figures  at  the  opera  that  are  illumined  by  an  electric  light.  He
alone  is  visible,  around  him  all  is  darkness  ;  but  he  it  is  that  holds  the
reflector,  and  he  can  project  the  light  whither  he  will.

The  somnambule  "  sees "  with  closed  eyes  his  magnetizer,  or  at
least  translates  by  the  term  "  vision  "  all  his  concentrated  and  exalted
sensations,  which  come  from  the  magnetizer.  He  feels  his  presence,
knows  whether  he  is  to  the  right  or  the  left,  whether  he  is  walking  or
motionless  ;  to  a  certain  extent,  he  senses  even  his  gestures  ;  all  this
through  perception  of  air-movements,  of  warmth,  of  cutaneous  odor,
of  noises  made,  of  tones  of  voice,  etc.;  and  these  impressions  being  by
habitude  associated  with  visual  images,  the  somnambule  translates
them  into  terms  of  vision.

"  Magnetic  vision,"  in  this  sense,  is,  of  course,  a  favorable  condition

TRANSMISSION  OF  IDEAS.  193

for  mental  communications  ;  yet  it  implies  a  theory  of  divination
rather  than  a  theory  of  direct  transmission.  Baragnon  leaves  the
question  undecided.

Finally,  the  third  condition,  too,  is  consistent  with  physiology.
Thoughts  are  only  sensations  cerebralized  (excuse  the  word  I).1

Not  only  are  sensations  the  sole  springs  of  ideas  in  their  primitive
form,  but  every  fully  elaborated  idea,  so  far  forth  as  it  is  active,  is  ac-
companied by  unmodified  sensations,2  unconscious  for  the  most  part,
but  which  sustain  the  consciousness.  So,  too,  it  is  accompanied  by
the  inchoate  reflex  movements  proper  to  it  (Sietschenoff),  and  Campa-
nula, perhaps,  was  in  the  right  when  he  said  that  if  he  could  imitate
precisely  the  attitude3  of  a  man  that  is  thinking  of  anything,  he
could  at  once  divine  his  thought.

"  There  is  no  doubt,"  says  Baragnon,  "  but  that  transmission  of  sen-
sations has  much  to  do  with  thought-transference."  He  holds  that
the  reciprocal  sensations  of  two  organisms,  in  the  state  of  erethism
that  conditions  that  phenomenon,  awaken  in  the  mind  the  same
thoughts,  precisely  as  in  ordinary  perception,  in  which  the  words
uttered  enable  us  to  know  the  thoughts.

In  that  sense,  properly  speaking,  there  would  be  no  transmission  of
thought,  but  only  of  sensations.  The  theory  is  tenable,  but  not  in
every  instance,  for  mental  suggestion  may  exist  without  transmission
of  sensations,  at  least  without  perceptible  transmission.

The  following  fact  would  seem  to  have  supplied  a  basis  for  the
views  of  Baragnon  :

"  I  was  smoking  quietly  in  company  with  some  gentlemen  in  an
apartment  adjoining  a  parlor  where  that  evening  I  had  made  some
experiments,  when  the  request  was  made  unexpectedly  that  I  should
endorm  from  a  distance  my  subject,  who  had  remained  in  the  parlor
with  the  ladies  ;  I  did  so  without  knowing  that  he  was  dancing.  The
fluid  came  upon  him  like  a  lightning-stroke,  and  with  the  sleep  he  had
a  crisis.  I  was  summoned.  The  somnambule  was  surrounded  by  a
ring  of  spectators  standing  so  close  that  I  had  difficulty  in  getting
through.  '  Hey  !  Get  out  of  there,  if  you  want  to  have  him  recover,'
said  I,  gruffly,  to  a  young  officer  that  kept  me  back,  not  knowing  me  ;
for  I  was  thinking  only  of  my  patient,  and  had  put  politeness  in
quarantine.  The  crisis  was  checked  straightway.  I  let  the  subject
sleep  for  a  few  minutes  in  quiet,  and  thought  of  everything  but  the
young  officer.     The  latter  after  a  few  moments  came  up  to  me,  no

1  But  the  term  admits  of  no  apology  !  Moreover,  it  is  unnecessary,  for  a  perfectly
legitimate  one  might  have  been  coined  to  express  the  idea,  to  wit,  encephalized. —
Translator.

2  Sensations  brutes  =  sensations  "  in  the  raw  state." — Translator.

3  The  word  appears  to  be  used  in  a  larger  sense  than  attaches  to  it  commonly  in
English.  Doubtless  it  denotes  here  the  whole  nervo-muscular  action  of  the  man,  in-
ternal no  less  than  external,  not  merely  his  pose,  the  direction  of  his  eyes,  etc. ;  not
simply  his  outward  action  and  bearing,  as  a  good  mimic  might  render  the  same. —
Translator .

i94  MENTAL  SUGGESTION

doubt  to  demand  an  explanation  of  my  rudeness  ,  my  subject  rose  to
his  feet,  went  toward  the  officer,  stopped  him,  took  hold  of  his  hands,
and  said  :  '  You  are  offended  He  is  in  the  wrong,  excuse  him  ,  he  is
quick-tempered,  but  he  is  kindly/  On  learning  what  was  the  matter,
I  hastened  to  offer  my  apologies,  which  were  courteously  accepted.  I
then  questioned  myself  as  to  the  purport  of  this  phenomenon.  No-
body, in  the  confusion  of  the  moment,  had  heard  me  speak  to  the
officer  I  had  no  recollection  of  having  said  a  word  to  him.  Som-
nambules  hear  nobody  but  their  magnetizer,  and  my  subject  was  in
the  crisis."  *

The  author  gives  the  story  without  comment,  but  comment  is
necessary.

i.  We  have  here  a  pretty  clear  case  of  will-action  from  a  distance.
The  crisis  came  on  in  consequence  of  a  collision  between  the  subject's
activity  (dancing)  and  the  magnetizer's  unexpected  action.  This
action  is  at  present  unexplained,  unless  we  are  content  with  the  ex-
planation given  by  Baragnon — fluid-projection.  But  we  pass  that  by  ;
we  will  return  to  it  later.

2,  The  magnetizer  could  not  transmit  his  sensations,  for  he  took  no
notice  of  anything,  being  occupied  with  his  patient.  The  only  sup-
position would  be  that  he  had  unconscious  sensations,  and  that  they
were  transmitted  unconsciously — a  supposition  impossible  to  verify.

3  But  what  maybe  considered  certain  is,  that  thesomnambule  heard
his  magnetizer  when  the  latter  said  to  the  officer  "  Hey,  get  out,"  etc.
His  attention  was  attracted,  and  it  is  probable  that  the  officer  muttered
some  words  that  the  subject  heard  likewise.  He  divined  the  situation  ,
his  attention  remained  fixed  on  the  impressions  coming  from  the
officer  ,  and  sympathy  determined  his  course.

It  is  true  that,  as  a  rule,  somnambules  do  not  hear  strangers,  nor
even  their  magnetizer  when  he  addresses  his  speech  to  other  persons  ,
but  in  this  instance  the  voice  indicated  the  coming  of  the  magnetizer,
and  when  that  is  the  case  it  is  often  heard.  Then,  recall  what  we  have
said  above  concerning  unconscious  sensations,  not  perceived  directly,
but  which  enter  the  brain,  there  to  manifest  themselves  afterward  at  a
favorable  moment.

Consequently,  this  observation  does  not  even  prove  the  transmission
of  sensations.

We  have  already  quoted  Dr.  Teste,  who  believed  that  he  could  hold
a  mental  conversation  with  his  somnambule,  as  Madame  Guyon  used
to  converse  with  her  confessor.  Puysegur  mentions  several  facts  of
this  kind,  among  others  the  feat  of  a  cataleptic  who,  being  deaf,  an-
swered for  some  moments  very  detailed  questions  put  mentally  "  with-
out words  and  without  any  expression  of  the  face-muscles."  He
quotes  the  answers  word  for  word.

General  Noizet  gives  the  following  narrative  :
'Baragnon,  op.  tit.,  pp.  137,  301.

TRANSMISSION  OF  IDEAS.  195

"  One  of  my  friends,  a  young  physician,  employed  in  a  Paris  infirm-
ary, did  not  believe  in  the  surprising  facts  of  somnambulism.  I  in-
duced him  to  make  experiments  on  one  of  his  patients.  He  followed
my  advice,  and  soon  he  had  a  somnambule.  He  had  heard  that  these
singular  beings  can  answer  questions  put  to  them  mentally.  He  ques-
tioned his  somnambule  in  this  way  on  behalf  of  another  woman  that
was  present,  to  whom  he  did  not  wish  his  question  to  be  known,  and,
as  luck  would  have  it,  the  somnambule  answered  with  such  correct-
ness that  he  did  not  easily  recover  from  the  emotion  caused  by  so  ex-
traordinary a  feat."  '

I  never  have  observed  anything  of  this  sort,  save  for  a  moment
with  regard  to  a  few  detached  questions.  But  there  once  was  a  physi-
cian who  declared  that  this  phenomenon  was  of  constant  occurrence
with  a  patient  of  his.  This  was  Dr.  Barrier,  of  Privas,  who,  in  a  me-
moir addressed  to  Cuvier  and  to  the  Academy,  in  1835,  mentions  the
following  facts,  observed  in  the  case  of  a  patient,  Euphrasia  Bonneau  :

1.  "  Complete  insensibility,  except  at  the  epigastrium,  where  life  is
concentrated."  (This  often  is  the  case  with  magnetized  hysteric  sub-
jects. "  Life  concentrated  at  the  epigastrium  "  means  simply  that  the
epigastrium  is  the  only  sensitive  part,  and  that  only  through  that  part
of  the  body  "  rapport "  could  be  maintained.  We  find  similar  facts  in
Petetin,  Frank  and  others.)

2.  "  The  gift  of  divining  the  thoughts  of  a  person  who  comes  into
rapport  with  her :  so  pronounced  is  this  faculty,  that  Euphrasia
holds  a  conversation  in  which  the  interlocutor  speaks  mentally  only."

3.  "  Production  of  very  remarkable  electro-magnetic  phenomena."

4.  "Abolition  of  sight,  taste  and  smell  in  the  organs  of  those
senses,  and  their  transfer  to  the  epigastrium."  (We  need  not  consider
this  phenomenon  here  ;  it  can  be  studied  in  Petetin,  Frank,  Teste  and
Despine.)

5.  "  Prevision  of  future  events  with  regard  to  her  ailment."
(There  was  a  good  deal  of  amusement  recently  at  the  Academy  of

Sciences  apropos  of  a  communication  of  this  kind.  The  faculty  never-
theless exists,  and  is  in  nowise  extraordinary.  An  hysterepileptic
patient  sometimes  foresees  a  paroxysm,  knowing  by  the  aura  hysterica
that  it  is  coming  on  ;  a  magnetized  hysteriac,  whose  whole  attention
is  concentrated  inwardly,  may  foresee  it  several  days  in  advance.
Finally,  it  is  to  be  observed  that  the  unconscious  sometimes  foresees
what  it  is  itself  going  to  produce.)

6.  "  Appreciation  of  the  value  of  remedies  proposed  ;  feeling  others''
sufferings''

7.  "  Strong  inclination  to  act  the  part  of  prophetess."  a

I  quote  this  communication  only  as  part  of  the  record.

1  Noizet,  "  Memoire  sur  le  Somnambulisme,"  p.  127.     Paris,  1854.
2 1  have  not  been  able  to  obtain  this  memoir  ;  I  merely  find  it  mentioned  by  Char-
pignon  ("  Phys.,  Med.  et  Met.,  p.  397).

196  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

CHAPTER   V

DIRECT    WILL-TRANSMISSION.

WE  come  now  to  will-transmission.  I  begin  with  a  narrative  by
a  very  good  observer,  now  almost  utterly  forgotten.  Four-
nel  *  tells  us  of  a  somnambule  whom  he  ordered  to  take  a  hat  that  lay
on  a  table  in  the  middle  of  his  sitting-room,  and  to  go  and  put  it  on

the  head  of  one  of  the  company.

i
"  This  will  (he  writes)  I  did  not  express  in  speech,  but  only  by  a

sign,  which  traced  the  lines  I  wanted  him  to  go  over,  and  which  ended

at  the  hat.     The  somnambule,  whose  eyes  were  bandaged,  rose  from  his

chair,  followed  the  direction  indicated  by  my  finger,  advanced  toward

the  table,  took  the  hat  from  among  several  objects,  and  went  and  put

it  on  the  head  of  the  person  indicated."2

It  is  to  be  remarked  that  the  gestures  of  the  magnetizer  help  the
experiment,  even  when  they  are  not  seen  by  the  subject.  Sundry
agents  contribute  to  this  result,  i.  Air-currents,  often  very  clearly
perceptible  at  a  distance.  2.  Auditive  impressions  accompanying  the
gestures.  3.  Attractions,  very  active  in  some  subjects.  4.  The  mental
concentration  itself  of  the  operator,  which  is  much  facilitated  by  his
mimetic  gestures.

Fournel's  work  appeared  in  1785,  that  is,  a  year  after  Puysegur's
classic  memoir.  I  have  begun  with  this  little  observation  of  Fournel's
because,  though  it  is  not  altogether  demonstrative  with  regard  to
mental  suggestion,  it  yet  presents  the  most  usual  type  of  experiments
in  will-transmission  as  ordinarily  practiced.

But  we  must  not  forget  that  Puysegur  was  the  first  to  propose  this
kind  of  researches.  He  it  was  that  first  proclaimed  the  reality  of  the
fact  and  met  the  cavils  of  his  contemporaries.

One  often  wonders  that  certain  studious  observers  should  have  re-
tained the  term  "  magnetic  sleep,"  given  by  Mesmer  and  Puysegur  to
a  certain  form  of  artificial  somnambulism,  confounded  nowadays  with
hypnosis.  The  passages  I  am  about  to  quote  will  give  the  reason  for
so  denominating  it,  and  will  show  a  close  relation  between  it  and  will-
transmission.  The  analogies  that  Puysegur  believes  he  finds  subsisting
between  certain  electrical  and  magnetic  phenomena,  and  the  aptitudes
of  somnambules,  may  seem  to  us  in  these  days  inexact  and  superficial  ;
but  neither  must  it  be  forgotten  that  even  he  considers  them  only  as
analogies,  and  not  as  proofs  of  identity.

1  Fournel,  the  advocate,  was  the  author  of  three  remarkable  writings ;  *'  Essai  sur
les  Probabilites  du  Somnambulisme,"  Amsterdam  and  Paris,  1785  ;  "  Memoire  pour
le  Docteur  Vernier,"  1785 — a  defense  of  Dr.  Vernier  whose  name  was  dropped  from
the  rolls  of  the  Faculty  for  having  practiced  magnetism  ;  and  "  Remontrance  des
Malades,''  etc.,  1785.

2  "  Ess.  sur  les  Prob.,"  p.  48.

DIRECT  WILL-TRANSMISSION.  197

The  following  narrative  has  reference  to  an  epileptic  (probably
hysterepileptic)  girl,  of  whom  the  author  speaks  in  his  second
u  Mdmoire  : "

"  This  girl,  in  the  somnambulic  state,  showed  the  utmost  magnetic
mobility  ;  and  as,  barring  her  nervous  disorder,  she  was  of  very  strong
constitution,  I  had  no  fear  lest  I  should  injure  her  health  by  subjecting
her  to  all  the  experiments  for  which  she  was  fitted.  Of  all  those  who
at  the  time  came  to  my  house  to  satisfy  their  curiosity,  there  must
doubtless  be  still  many  who  will  recall  the  hours  they  passed  there,
and  the  details  I  am  about  to  enter  upon.

"  Before  presenting  Magdeleine  before  the  company,  I  always  began
by  announcing  to  the  spectators  not  only  what  I  was  about  to  perform,
but  also  what  each  one  might  perform  to  convince  himself.  '  The  girl
once  in  the  somnambulic  state,'  I  used  to  say  to  all,  '  will  present  to
you  all  the  phenomena  of  electricity  and  of  the  magnet ;  comparable
at  first  in  all  respects  to  an  insulated  body  charged  with  electric  fluid \
she  will  be  in  communication  with  me  alone,  so  that  to  touch  her
without  risk  of  doing  her  hurt,  and  to  make  yourself  heard  by  her,  I
must  put  you  in  rapport  with  her.  Then,  regardless  of  rest  or  of
motion,  she  will  obey  all  the  intimations  of  your  will,  as  readily  as  a
magnetic  needle  obeys  the  iron  held  out  to  it.'

"  As  can  be  understood,  an  announcement  so  extraordinary  prepared
the  minds  of  the  majority  of  the  audience  for  an  illusive  performance,
rather  than  for  a  real  exhibition  of  unwonted  powers  ;  but  my  subject
was  so  well  fitted  to  re-assure  the  audience  by  the  passive  state  of  all
her  sensations,  that  I  felt  sure  I  should,  by  her  means,  triumph  over
all  uncertainties  and  over  all  the  cavils  of  incredulity.

"  Magdeleine  having  entered,  I  performed  upon  her  what  I  used  to
hear  called,  ironically,  '  the  great  work,'  or  '  the  mystery.'  In  two
or  three  minutes,  though  no  movement,  no  change,  could  be  observed
in  her,  she  closed  her  eyes  and  was  in  the  electro-magnetic  state.  I
then  invited  the  two  or  three  persons  named  in  advance  by  the  com-
pany, to  begin  the  experiments.  If  one  touched  the  arm,  or  even  only
the  apron  of  the  girl,  she  was  seen  to  quiver  and  to  suffer  ;  a  bit  of
paper  laid  unawares  upon  her  head  weighed  her  down  as  though  she
were  bearing  a  heavy  burden  hard  to  sustain.  I  have  to  say  that  at
each  shock  {commotion)  thus  given  her  (for  such  in  truth  it  was),  I
made  haste  by  my  touch  to  put  her  nerves  at  rest  again,  and  the  mis-
chief done  her  was  at  once  repaired.  ...  If  anyone  spoke  to  her,
she  made  no  reply,  and  whatever  noise  might  be  made  at  a  little  dis-
tance from  her,  she  seemed  to  be  insensible  to  it.  I  then  made  a  sign,
for  I  did  not  speak,  fearing  lest  people  might  suspect  some  understand-
ing between  the  girl  and  me — I  proposed,  I  say,  to  somebody  to  give
me  his  hand  ;  immediately  she,  grown  indifferent  to  the  approach  [of
the  stranger],  answered  him  as  she  would  have  done  in  her  natural
state.  Eight  or  ten  persons  joined  hands,  and  provided  they  were  in
communication  with  me,  the  last,  or  the  one  nearest  to  her,  repeated
the  experiments  with  the  same  success.  When  I  thought  I  had  proved
sufficiently  the  analogy  of  the  phenomena  she  presented,  with  those
of  electricity,  I  proceeded  to  the  experiments  designed  to  prove  the
same  analogy  with  the  magnet.  To  this  end,  I  took  a  position  face
to  face  with  her,  and,  without  speaking,  made  her  rise  from  her
chair,  and,  by  a  sign,  or  even  without  any  sign,  with  the  hand  (which,

198  MENTAL  SUGGESTION

indeed,  she  could  not  have  seen,  for  her  eyes  were  shut),  I  directed
her  to  a  given  part  of  the  room,  or  to  a  given  chair  in  which  I  willed
her  to  sit ;  I  then,  still  mentally;  made  her  touch,  take  up,  and  fetch
me  any  object ;  but,  because,  seeing  that  she  did  not  act  save  by  my
direction,  people  might  think  with  some  show  of  reason,  that  I  had  an
understanding  with  her,  I  used  to  say  to  the  spectators  :

"'  I  have  made  the  experiments  you  have  just  seen,  only  to  show
you  in  what  way  you  are  to  act  in  order  to  repeat  them  yourselves  :
the  one  among  you  with  *diom  I  am  about  to  put  this  young  lady  in
harmony,  will  make  her  obey,  as  I  have  done,  all  the  indications  he
may  have  in  his  mind.  I  ask  of  you  one  thing  only,  namely,  that  once
your  will  is  decided,  it  shall  remain  firm  and  constant,  and  shall  not
again  change  in  direction.  Imagine  some  one  that  never  has  seen  a
mariner's  compass,  to  whom  is  given  an  iron  rod,  with  the  remark  that
by  means  of  the  same  he  can  guide  the  needle  at  his  will ;  if  every
time  he  saw  it  going  in  one  direction  he  should  forthwith  move  the  tip
of  the  iron  rod  back  again,  you  know  that  he  would  then  produce  only
an  oscillation,  and  might  thence  draw  the  conclusions  most  favorable
to  his  ignorance  or  his  prejudices.  It  were  worse  still  if,  his  self-
opinionatedness  revolting  at  the  sort  of  doggedness  with  which  the
needle  followed  his  indications,  he  should  jump  from  one  pole  straight
to  the  other,  for  then  the  needle,  resuming  of  necessity  its  first  position,
would  make  him  dead-set  in  his  incredulity.  You,  gentlemen,  will
stand  in  the  same  relation  toward  this  young  woman  as  the  iron  rod
toward  the  needle  ;  it  will,  therefore,  be  your  fault,  not  hers,  if  you  see
her  for.one  moment  vacillate  in  following  the  guidance  of  your  will.'

"  I  cannot  but  laugh  even  now  when  I  recall  the  little  eagerness
shown  to  make  this  last  and  conclusive  experiment :  if  people  had
shown  indifference  toward  trying  the  experiment  of  electrical  com-
munications, they  refused  to  put  themselves  to  the  test  in  this.  True,
one  had  to  begin  with  an  act  of  faith,  a  thing  always  hard  to  do,  and
then  to  behave  consistently  with  it,  perhaps  a  more  difficult  thing
still.  Yet  there  was  never  a  seance  at  which  seven  or  eight  persons
at  least  did  not  make  trial  of  their  will-power,  or  in  which  that  did
not  happen  which  I  have  already  described.  If  a  person  fixed  his
thoughts  fast  upon  an  object,  and  designated  it  with  the  hand  or  only
with  the  eyes,  the  girl  went  to  that  object  and  touched  it  or  took  it  in
hand  without  hesitating  ;  but,  if  a  person  through  want  of  confidence
or  through  timidity  ceased  to  fix  his  thought,  the  girl  would  follow
the  oscillations  of  the  man's  mind  ;  if  the  thought  was  turned  in
another  direction,  in  the  hope  of  putting  her  out,  she  was  seen  to
vacillate,  and  then  to  stop  short  and  stand  still.  A  weak  will,  one
but  little  set  upon  a  purpose,  was  with  respect  to  her  what  the  iron
rod  is  with  respect  to  the  needle  when,  being  at  too  great  a  distance,
it  receives  therefrom  too  slight  an  influence.

"  Though,  when  the  girl  was  in  the  magnetic  state,  her  eyes  were
always  shut,  and  she  could  not  open  them,  nevertheless,  in  order  to  do
away  with  all  suspicion  of  trickery  or  subterfuge  on  her  part,  I  used,
whenever  anybody  desired  it,  to  put  a  thick  bandage  over  her  eyes,  a
thing  equally  indifferent  to  her  and  to  myself,  and  the  results  of  her
magnetic  mobility  were  the  same.    .

"  How  many  persons  on  whose  esteem  I  had  some  claim,  and  how
many  others  whom,  in  view  of  the  respect  they  enjoyed  in  the  world,
it  would  have  been  an  honor  to  me  to  convince  of  the  reality  of  the

DIRECT  WILL-TRANSMISSION.  199

phenomena,  nevertheless  left  my  house,  not  only  not  believing  in  what
they  had  seen,  and  what  they  had  themselves  performed,  but  with  more
than  a  doubt  of  my  good  faith  !  That  I  should  appear  in  their  eyes,
if  not  exactly  as  a  sleight-of-hand  trickster,  at  least  as  a  deluded
enthusiast,  is  still  a  painful  thought  for  me.  But  how  great  is  the
power  of  prejudice,  if  the  purest  truth,  presented  by  the  being  who  is
least  interested  in  making  it  known,  is  unable  to  overthrow  its  baleful
prestige  !

"  Though  I  have  made  it  a  law  for  myself  not  to  name  any  of  the
persons  who  for  two  months  came  in  succession  to  take  part  in,  and  to
be  witnesses  of  my  experiments,  still  I  think  I  may,  without  indiscre-
tion, name  one  of  the  more  notable.     The  Baron  de  Bezenval  wrote
to  me  to  express  the  desire  that  I  would  go  on  a  certain  evening  with
my  somnambule  to  the  house  of  Mr.  Mitonard,  a  well-known  pharma-
cist and  an  able  chemist.     There  was  a  numerous  company  present,
but  very  few  of  the  people  were  known  to  me.     After  having  called
into  play,  with  my  wonted  good  faith,  the  electro-magnetic  powers  of
Magdeleine,  and   observed  very  clearly  that  the  company  had  little
faith   in  their  reality,  I  begged   Mr.  Mitonard  himself  for  a  moment
kindly  to  suppose  that  what  I  wished  to  persuade  him  was  true.     '  In
any  event,'  said  I  to  him,  '  there  would  be  some  mystery  in  what  I  am
proposing  to  you  ;  and  though  the  facts  you  have  witnessed  should  be
referable  to  a  different  cause  from  the  one  I  assign,  it  will  still  be
interesting  to  you,  even  should  you  be  unable  to  tell  why,  to  see  this
girl    act   in   accordance  with   your   thoughts  alone  ;  but,  give  your
thoughts  a  fixed  direction,  and  will  strongly  the  execution  of  them.'
Mr.  Mitonard   having  agreed  to  this,  made  known  to  a  few  persons
what  he  intended  mentally  to  demand  of  the  somnambule  ;  and  this
preliminary,  which  assured  me  of  the  fixedness  of  his  thoughts  in  a
definite  direction,  left  in  my  mind  no  doubt  as  to  the  success  of  the
experiment.     So,  having  put  the  young  woman   in    communication
with  him,  I  left  her  entirely  at  his  disposal,  and  withdrew  to  a  corner
of  the  room.     Mr.  Mitonard,  after  having  made  her  walk  about  and
sit  down,  and  take  different  objects  in  hand,  as  well  from  the  mantel-
piece as  from  the  table,  acts  which,  in  view  of  the  promptitude  with
which  she  carried  out  his  intentions,  were  to  me  proof  that  his  thoughts
were  strongly  fixed,  now  stopped,  and  standing  straight  before  her>
without  making  any  movement  whatever,  remained  in  an  attitude  of
deep  thought.  Instantly  the  somnambule  moves  her  hand  toward  one  of
his  coat-pockets,  thrusts  it  into  the  bottom,  and  takes  out  three  small
screws  that  he  had  put  there,  and  which  he  had  had  the  intention  that
she  should  go  to  the  pocket  for  and  take  out  of  it.     .     .     Mr.  Mito-
nard's  astonishment,  and  the  assurance  everyone  had  of  the  execu-
tion of  his  thought,  for  a  moment  overcame  their  incredulity  ;  but
soon,  How  is  it  done  ?  and  That  is  incredible,  and  The  thing  is  impossible,
put  a  stop,  I  fancy,  to  the  current  of  the  reflections  that  each  one
must  have  been  making,  for  I  have  not  heard  of  them  since.

"  From  this  narrative  it  is  seen  that  I  did  my  best  to  open  the  eyes
of  educated  men  of  all  classes  and  all  conditions,  to  the  interesting
discovery  of  animal  magnetism ;  and  my  confessed  incapacity  to
explain  to  them  all  its  phenomena  ought  not,  I  think,  to  be  to  them  a
reason  for  denying  its  reality."  '

'See  p.  II  of  the  "Suite  de  Memoires  pour  servir  a.  l'Histoire  du  Mag-netisme
Animal."

200  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

Let  us  now  consider  a  few  more  recent  observations  :

"  It  was  (says  Lafontaine)  at  one  of  the  seances  held  at  the  house
of  the  learned  and  very  incredulous  Dr.  Bretonneau,  that  I  was  so
fortunate  as  to  see  and  hear  Beranger,  our  celebrated  balladist.  Ber-
anger  having  witnessed  several  experiments  on  thought-transference,
wished  to  make  some  himself,  in  order,  as  he  said,  to  convince  the
doctor,  who  could  not  mistrust  him.  After  some  directions  given  by
me,  he  took  the  somnambule's  hand,  telling  her  to  do  what  he  would
order  her  mentally.  He  exerted  such  will-force  in  the  experiment  that
his  other  hand  caused  the  table  on  which  it  rested  to  tremble.  Soon
the  somnambule  was  seen  to  rise,  go  toward  Dr.  Bretonneau,  take  him
by  the  hand,  and,  in  spite  of  his  resistance,  lead  him  to  Beranger,
who  declared  that  such  had  been  his  mental  order." '

"  At  another  seance  the  name  of  a  lady  was  written  on  a  piece  of
paper  ;  the  paper  was  passed  to  me,  and  immediately  the  somnambule
was  seen  to  rise,  take  a  bouquet,  and  carry  it  to  the  lady  indicated."2

An  eminent  physiologist,  Mr.  H.  Beaunis,  Professor  at  the  Faculty
of  Nancy,  said  recently  :  "  I  have  never  been  able  to  find  in  the  sub-
jects I  have  observed,  the  wondrous  phenomena  spoken  of  by  some
magnetizers.  Whenever  the  suggestion  I  wanted  to  produce  was
simply  thought,  and  not  expressed  in  one  way  or  another,  it  never  has
been  carried  out  I  do  not  wish,  however,  absolutely  to  deny  those
facts,  in  the  face  of  the  affirmative  testimony  given  by  scientific  men  ;
what  I  can  say  is,  that  I  never  have  observed  them."  3

That  is,  indeed,  the  language  of  a  man  of  science  ;  and  if  Mr.  Beau-
nis had  not  found  anything  of  this  kind,  he  would  have  the  right  to
make  all  reservations  with  regard  to  other  observers.  But  chance
willed  that  it  should  be  otherwise  ;  here  is  what  he  himself  published
a  little  later:

"  Mr.  Janet's  communication  gives  me  an  opportunity  to  mention  a
fact  of  mental  suggestion  that  I  observed  a  few  days  ago  with  Dr.
Liebeault.  The  subject  is  a  young  man,  a  very  good  somnambule,  in
good  health,  a  little  timid.  He  accompanied  his  cousin  to  Dr.  Lie-
beault's.  The  cousin  is  also  a  very  good  somnambule  ;  she  is  under
treatment  by  hypnotism  for  a  nervous  affection.  Dr.  Liebeault  en-
dormed  the  subject,  and  said  to  him  during  the  sleep  :  '  On  awaking,
you  will  do  the  act  that  the  persons  present  will  mentally  order  you  to
do.'  I  then  wrote  in  pencil  on  a  piece  of  paper  these  words  :  '  To  kiss
his  cousin.'  I  showed  the  paper  to  Dr.  Liebeault  and  to  the  few  per-
sons present,  asking  them  to  read  it  with  the  eyes  only,  without  pro-
nouncing even  with  the  lips  a  single  one  of  the  words  written  on  it,
and  added  :  '  When  he  awakes,  you  are  to  think  intently  upon  the  act
he  is  to  perform,  but  you  are  not  to  speak  a  word  or  to  make  any  sign
that  might  put  him  on  the  track.'  The  subject  was  then  awakened,
and  we  awaited  the  outcome  of  the.  experiment.     Shortly  after  he

•Lafontaine,  "  Memoires,"  vol.  i.,  p.  155.

2  Lafontaine,  "  L'Art  de  Magnetiser,"  5th  ed.,  p.  99.     Paris,  1886.

3  H.  Beaunis,  "  Recherches  Experimentales  sur  les  Conditions  de  l'Activite  Cere-
brale,"  etc.,  ii.,  p.  90.      Paris,  18S6.

DIRECT  WILL- TRANSMISSION.  201

awoke,  we  saw  him  laughing  and  hiding  his  face  in  his  hands,  and  this
play  went  on  for  some  time  without  other  result.  I  then  asked  him  :
'  What  is  the  matter  ? '  '  Nothing  ! '  '  What  are  you  thinking  about  ? '
(No  reply.)  '  You  know,'  I  said,  '  that  you  have  to  do  something  we
are  thinking  on.  If  you  are  unwilling  to  do  it,  at  least  tell  us  what
we  are  thinking  about.'  '  No  ! '  '  Then,'  said  I,  '  if  you  won't  tell  us
aloud,  whisper  it  in  my  ear,'  and  I  went  up  close  to  him.  '  To  kiss
my  cousin,'  he  said.  The  first  step  once  taken,  the  rest  of  the  mental
suggestion  was  executed  with  a  good  grace.

"  Have  we  here  simple  coincidence?  That  were  surprising,  indeed.
Was  it  possible  for  the  subject,  during  his  sleep,  to  learn  the  meaning
of  the  words  I  wrote  on  the  paper,  or  could  he  have  seen  them  ?  That
is  hardly  supposable.  Again,  I  am  sure  that  none  of  the  persons
present  could  in  anywise  have  put  him  in  the  way  of  finding  out  the
act  he  was  required  to  perform.  Here  plainly  is  something  that
upsets  the  received  theories  of  brain-function,  and,  as  for  myself,  till
lately  I  was  an  unbeliever  in  facts  of  this  kind.  To-day  I  am  con-
vinced that  they  must  not  be  rejected,  successes  being,  though  rare,
far  too  numerous  to  be  the  result  of  mere  chance ;  and  from  the
moment  that  the  question  of  mental  suggestion  was  brought  before
the  Society,  I  have  believed  that,  strange  as  these  phenomena  might
appear,  I  could  contribute  my  quota." '

The  transmission  of  a  simple  act  of  the  will,  /.  <?.,  of  a  purely  me-
chanical one,  is  easily  performed  if  the  subject  manifests  the  phenom-
enon of  attraction  in  a  high  degree.

"  At  Nottingham  (says  Lafontaine)  I  obtained  the  phenomenon  of
attraction  in  a  young  woman  during  somnolence,  and  from  the  first.
Dr.  Lightfoot,  who  was  very  incredulous,  brought  to  a  public  seance
a  young  woman  to  have  her  magnetized.  In  the  course  of  a  few
minutes  the  girl  was  put  in  the  state  of  somnolence  ;  there  was  insen-
sibility. Suddenly  I  perceived  that  there  was  attraction  in  my  hand  ;
I  made  her  rise  and  walk  toward  Dr.  Altenburow  [sic].  While  she
walked  I  was  ten  paces  behind  her.  I  tried  to  attract  her,  and
speedily  she  halted ;  her  body  swayed ;  then,  though  the  doctor
called  her  forward,  she  turned  back  toward  me.  I  quit  attracting
her,  and  immediately  she  walked  forward.  When  I  again  attracted
her  the  same  result  followed  —  she  halted,  wavered,  and  turned
back." 2

Had  Dr.  Altenburow  been  a  magnetizer  he  would  have  been  able
to  thwart  this  influence  by  attracting  the  subject  on  his  side.  I  made
that  experiment  in  Paris  at  the  Pitie  in  1882.  Dr.  Dumontpailler
having  endormed  his  subject,  Miss  Marie,  since  so  famous,  attracted
her  on  one  side,  and  her  body  would  incline  toward  him  at  the  risk  of
her  falling  out  of  her  chair  ;  then,  after  having  made  a  few  passes  with-
out contact  (in  order  to  enter  into  rapport,  i.  e.,  to  have  the  right  to
act)  I  attracted  her  on  the  other  side,  and  thus  we  were  able  to  bal-
ance her  as  though  with  cords,  each  of  us  attracting  in  turn.

1  H.  Beaunis,  "  Un  Fait  de  Suggestion  Mentale"  {Rev.  P/iilos.,  No.  2,  p.  204.
1886  ;  Bulletin  de  la  Soc.  de  Psych.  Physiol.,  1  fascicule).

2  Lafontaine,  "  L'Art  de  Magnetiser,"  3d  ed.,  p.  90,      Paris,  1886.

202  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

The  phenomenon  of  attraction  presents  many  shades  of  difference •
these  we  will  throw  a  little  light  upon  when  we  treat  of  action  at  a
distance.

Let  us  now  consider'  purely  mental  will-transmissions,  that  is,  ex-
periments made  without  contact,  without  gestures  and  without  attrac-
tion, sometimes  even  without  a  look  {le  regard).

A  tentative  demonstration  of  this  delicate  phenomenon  was  made
in  1837  by  Dr.  Berna  before  an  academic  commission,  but  it  failed
utterly;  at  least  so  says  the  report  of  Mr.  Dubois  of  Amiens,  a  master-
piece of  ill-will.  The  members  of  the  Commission  were  unable  even
to  find  any  proof  of  the  existence  of  somnambulism !  Here  is  an
extract  from  the  report,  referring  to  will-action :

"  Third  Conclusion. — The  magnetizer  had  to  prove  to  the  Commis-
sion that,  simply  by  the  intervention  of  his  will,  he  had  the  power  of
restoring,  either  locally  or  generally,  the  somnambule's  sensibility.
But  as  it  was  impossible  for  him  to  prove  to  us  experimentally  that
he  had  taken  away,  done  away,  the  girl's  sensibility,  it  was  for  that
very  reason  impossible  for  him  to  prove  the  restoration  of  the  same ;
and,  besides,  it  results  from  the  facts  by  us  observed  that  all  the
attempts  made  to  that  end  failed  completely."

This  experiment  is  a  very  difficult  one.  In  fact  it  involves  not
only  a  mental  suggestion  but,  at  the  same  time,  a  trophic  ideoplasty, '
and  it  is  matter  for  surprise  that  Dr.  Berna  should  risk  such  an  experi-
ment before  men  that  knew  nothing  about  magnetism,  and  who  could
not  distinguish  somnambulism  from  the  waking  state.  The  report
goes  on  to  say  :

"  One  of  the  paragraphs  of  the  program  had  this  heading  :  '  Obe-
dience to  the  mental  order  that  the  subject  cease,  in  the  middle  of  a
conversation,  from  answering,  verbally  or  by  signs,  a  given  person.*
The  magnetizer  sought  to  prove  to  the  Commission  that  the  silent
power  of  his  will  could  produce  that  effect.  But  the  facts  of  the
seance  show  that,  far  from  producing  these  results,  his  somnambule
did  not  hear,  even  when  he  had,  as  yet,  no  intention  of  preventing
her  from  hearing,  and  that  she  appeared  (!)  to  hear  again  when  he
positively  willed  her  not  to  hear.  So  that,  according  to  the  assertions
of  this  somnambule,  the  faculty  of  hearing  or  not  hearing  was  com-
pletely in  revolt  against  the  magnetizer's  will.  But,  weighing  the
facts  carefully,  the  Commission  no  more  conclude  that  there  was
revolt  than  that  there  was  submission  ;  they  found  complete  inde-
pendence, and  that  is  all."8

As  for  the  phenomenon  announced  by  Dr.  Berna,  and  first  described
by  Puysegur,  that  we  will  examine  in  the  sequel.  For  the  present  we
would  only  remark  that,  despite  its  apparent  simplicity,  this  experiment

1  See  Appendices  II.,  III.

2  For  details  see  "  Experiences  et  Considerations  a.  l'Appui  relatives  au  Magnetisme
Animal,  These  presentee  et  soutenue  a  la  Faculte  de  Paris,"  1834;  also  "  Examen  el
Refutation  du  Rapport  fait  par  M.  Dubois."     Paris,  1838.

DIRECT  WILL-TRANSMISSION.  203

is  exceedingly  difficult.  As  I  have  already  observed  elsewhere,  when
the  subject  converses  with  anyone,  i.  e.f  when  he  is  in  the  state  of
active  polyideism,  it  is  very  hard  to  act  upon  him  mentally,  first,  be-
cause his  "  rapport  "  with  the  magnetizer  is  weakened  by  being  shared
with  another  person  ;  secondly,  and  mainly,  because  in  order  that  so
slight  an  action  may  be  felt,  no  other  action  must  oppose  it.  Often-
times persons  engaged  in  conversation  with  one  another  do  not  hear
those  outside  of  their  circle.  The  same  phenomenon,  comparatively,
occurs  in  mental  speech  :  several  thoughts  simultaneously  occupy  the
mind  of  the  subject ;  hence  it  is  difficult  for  a  new  thought  to  find  ad-
mission.

On  the  whole,  I  admire  the  robust  faith  of  the  physicians  who,
without  knowing  the  conditions  of  so  fleeting  a  phenomenon,  were
willing  to  run  the  risk  of  a  set-back  before  a  committee  of  unbelievers.

Magnetizers  nowadays  are  more  prudent.  The  reader  will  recall
what  Donato  said  to  me  when  I  asked  him  if  he  believed  in  mental
suggestion.  It  seems,  however,  that  he  succeeded  several  times  in
presence  of  Messrs.  Aksakof  and  Flammarion.  First  let  us  hear  what
he  tells  us  himself  :

"  One  day,  at  Paris,  Mr.  Aksakof  requested  of  me  a  private  seance.
I  consented,  as  I  always  do.  Mr.  Aksakof  did  not  apprise  me  in  ad-
vance of  what  he  wanted  to  obtain,  and  I  expected  that  I  should  have
to  reproduce  my  ordinary  experiments.

"  He  required  of  me  something  totally  different  from  what  I  had
been  accustomed  to  do.  If  I  recall  this  circumstance,  that  is  because
it  possesses  an  importance  that  will  be  patent  to  everyone.  In  fact,
Mr.  Aksakof  wanted  thought-transmissions — experiments  that  I  never
had  made,  whether  publicly  or  in  private.  A  little  while  after,  Mr.
Flammarion  unexpectedly  made  the  same  request.  I  tried  the  experi-
ment to  gratify  a  thoroughly  scientific  curiosity,  and  all  the  thought-
transmissions  that  were  asked  for  were  as  successful  as  I  could  have
desired.  Had  this  experiment  been  habitual,  one  might  have  sus-
pected the  existence  of  an  understanding,  of  a  secret  telegraphy  be-
tween my  subject  and  myself.  But  to  say  nothing  of  the  minute
precautions  taken  to  prevent  all  subterfuge,  I  was  asked  for  some
new  experiments  to  be  performed  on  the  instant.  At  first  I  refused  to
make  the  attempt ;  then,  uppn  iterated  insistance,  I  agreed  to  try,  and
though  they  were  successful,  they  were  so  almost  in  spite  of  me.  I
brought  no  egoism  into  the  thing  ;  it  is  without  vanity,  and  even  with-
out pleasure,  that  I  declare  my  complete  success,  for  I  know  that  it
will  be  impossible  to  content  everybody  always,  and  in  particular  al-
ways to  satisfy  myself  in  this  class  of  phenomena,  as  fugitive  as  they
are  eminently  curious."

Mr.  Aksakof,  in  his  report  of  the  experiments,  which  he  drew  up
with  great  care,  says  :

"  It  is  known  that  one  of  the  most  widely  heralded  aphorisms  of
modern  physiology  is,  that  psychic  activity  does  not  extend  beyond  the
periphery  of  the  nerves.    If,  then*  we  could  prove  that  man's  thought  is

2o4  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

not  circumscribed  by  the  limits  of  the  body,  but  that  it  can  overstep
them,  and  act  upon  another  human  body  at  a  distance,  be  transmitted
to  its  brain,  without  any  visible  or  any  known  process,  and  be  repro-
duced by  speech,  movement,  or  other  means,  that  were  a  fact  of  vast
importance,  before  which  materialistic  physiology  would  have  to  bend,  and
which  psychology  and  philosophy  would  have  to  take  possession  of,
in  order  to  give  fresh  support  and  a  new  development  to  their  meta-
physical speculations."

Mr.  Aksakof  is  mistaken.  There  is  no  relation  between  mental
suggestion  and  the  question  of  materialism  or  spiritualism.  Mental
suggestion  is  a  fact  of  action,  not  of  the  recondite  nature  of  things,
whereof  we  know  nothing.  Action  at  a  distance  is  not  a  character
peculiar  to  immaterial  things — if  immaterial  things  there  be,  and  of
such  I  know  nothing.  Electricity  did  not  become  a  "  spiritual  "  thing
when  the  telegraph  was  invented.

"November  17,  1878,  I  went  to  see  Mr.  Donato  at  2  o'clock,  and
after  a  few  minutes'  conversation  we  set  to  work.

"  First  Experiment. — I  asked  Mr.  Donato  to  endorm  Miss  Lucile.
He  placed  an  armchair  between  the  two  windows  of  the  room,  a  few
paces  from  the  wall ;  Miss  Lucile  seated  herself  in  it,  and  within  a
few  moments  was  endormed.  We  station  ourselves  at  the  lower  end
of  the  room,  facing  Miss  Lucile.  Then  I  take  from  my  pocket  a
memorandum  book  and  from  it  take  a  card,  which  I  hand  to  Mr.
Donato,  requesting  him  to  make  Miss  Lucile,  solely  by  fixing  his  eyes
upon  her,  to  execute  the  movement  indicated  on  the  card.  The
writing  on  the  card  was  :  'Etendre  le  bras  gauche'  (extend  the  left  arm).
Mr.  Donato  takes  the  card,  rises,  stands  alongside  of  me  without  a
motion,  and  gazes  on  Miss  Lucile.  Instantly  her  left  arm  begins  to
stir,  slowly  quits  the  body,  is  held  out  horizontally,  and  so  remains
till  Mr.  Donato  puts  it  back  in  the  normal  position.

"  Second  Experiment. — I  hand  to  Mr.  Donato  a  white  handkerchief
that  I  had  brought  with  me,  and  ask  him  to  cover  with  it  the  eyes
and  the  head  of  Miss  Lucile.  The  borders  of  the  handkerchief  reach
her  shoulders.  We  take  our  places  again.  I  hand  to  Mr.  Donato  in
perfect  silence  a  second  card  on  which  is  written  :  'Lever  le  bras  droit
verticalement '  (raise  the  right  arm  vertically).  Mr.  Donato  fixes  his
gaze  on  the  motionless  body  of  Miss  Lucile,  and  soon  her  right  arm,
docile  to  the  thought  that  directs  it,  executes  the  desired  movement,
always  slowly,  gently,  stopping  immediately  when  Mr.  Donato  turns
his  head  to  put  a  question  to  me  with  a  look.

"  I  congratulated  Mr.  Donato  on  the  success  and  asked  him  to  re-
move the  handkerchief  from  Miss  Lucile's  head  and  awaken  her,  so  as
to  prevent  all  fatigue.  [It  would  have  been  better  to  let  her  sleep
quietly.]

"  Third  Experiment. — After  ten  minutes'  conversation,  Miss  Lucile  is
endormed,  and  her  head  again  covered  with  the  handkerchief.  We
take  our  places  and  I  hand  to  Mr.  Donato  a  third  card  on  which  I  had
written  :  ' Mettre  les  deux  mains  sur  la  tete'  (put  both  hands  on  the
head),  and  ask  him  this  time  to  operate,  not  from  in  front  of  the  sub-
ject, but  from  behind  her.  Mr.  Donato  expressed  some  doubts  whether
he  would  succeed  under  these  conditions  ;  nevertheless,  he  stood  be-
hind Miss  Lucile  and  made  the  attempt,  but  in  vain.     That  did  not

DIRECT  WILL-TRANSMISSION.  205

surprise  me,  the  general  rapports  of  polarity  between  the  operator
and  his  subject  having  been  reversed."

We  must  not  call  in  an  unknown  cause.  Has  the  spiritual  soul,
then,  a  right  side  and  a  left  ?  Besides,  in  acting  from  a  great  distance
one  cannot  know  what  is  the  position  of  the  subject.  With  regard  to
this  check  Donato  writes  :

"Without  discussing  the  question  of  polarity,  I  would  remark  that
my  objection  was  not  based  on  that  phenomenon.  The  objection
simply  was  that,  stationed  behind  Miss  Lucile,  I  could  not  through
her  body  give  action  {actionner)  to  her  arms,  placed  out  of  sight  for  me.
It  is  as  though  a  sharpshooter  were  required  to  hit  a  mark  behind  a
wall,  and  at  which,  therefore,  he  could  not  take  aim."

From  this  remark  it  follows  that  Mr.  Donato  believes  rather  in
direct  action  upon  the  member  aimed  at  than  in  action  through  the
brain  as  an  intermediary.  I  cannot  say  that  the  theory  is  erroneous,
for  I  myself  have  witnessed  the  excitative  action  of  the  eye  {regard).
But  even  should  light-rays  reflected  from  the  eye  of  the  operator,  or
should  any  other  cause  unknown,  by  irritating  the  organ  directly,
facilitate  the  local  action,  still  they  are  not  absolutely  necessary,  and
the  reader  will  remember  that  most  of  my  experiments  with  Mr.
M a1  were  made  without  the  physical  action  of  the  eye,  and  with-
out gestures.     But  to  return  to  Mr.  Aksakof  :

"  At  this  moment  I  came  up  to  Mr.  Donato,  and  a  remarkable  phe-
nomenon occurred.  Wishing  to  ask  Mr.  Donato  to  concentrate  his
thought  upon  the  occiput  of  Miss  Lucile,  my  hand,  while  I  was  stand-
ing behind  her,  was  inadvertently  brought  toward  her  back  to  point
out  the  place  I  spoke  of.  As  soon  as  my  hand  had  come  near  her
back  (it  was  still  some  inches  away  from  it)  the  body  of  the  subject
bent  forward  with  a  sudden  movement.  Thus  did  I  obtain,  in  a  way
as  unexpected  as  it  was  conclusive,  confirmation  of  the  phenomenon
of  polarity,  or  of  attraction  and  repulsion,  which  I  had  already  ob-
served in  the  public  exhibition."

This  phenomenon  proves  nothing  in  favor  of  polarity.  Any  person
not  in  rapport  who  should  touch  her  with  either  left  hand  or  right,  or
who  should  bring  his  hand  near  to  her,  would  have  obtained  the  same
repulsional  effect.  The  subject  recoils  because  nearness  of  one  not
in  rapport  causes  her  discomfort.  The  phenomenon  proves  only  that
what  is  called  magnetic  rapport  does  not  consist  solely  in  concentra-
tion of  attention,  but  rests  also  on  a  physical  basis.

We  might  say  that  the  act  of  the  magnetizer  sets  up  in  the  molecu-
lar motions  of  the  subject's  nerves  a  special  tonality  in  accord  with
that  of  the  magnetizer,  and  that  then  a  person  who  does  not  possess

1  Doubtless  "  Mr.  M a"  (AT.  M d)  is  an  error  of  the  printer  or  a  lapsus  of

the  author's  pen.     We  know  Mrs.  M a,  but  who  is  Mr,  A.  ?     A  little  further  on

a  probable  misprint  of  "  Mr.  L"  is  changed  to  "  Miss  L." — Translator.

206  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

this — that  is  to  say,  who  presents  a  different  tonality — makes  upon
the  subject  a  disagreeable  impression.  In  that  case  it  suffices  to  make
a  few  passes  foment  the  point  in  question,  in  order  to  have  the  right
to  touch  it.

I  have  observed  one  case,  and  only  one,  among  hundreds,  where
the  magnetizer  himself  durst  not  touch  the  subject  without  giving  the
latter  a  disagreeable  shock.  I  was  much  surprised,  and  sought  to
verify  the  fact.  The  cause  of  the  phenomenon  was,  that  the  mag-
netizer always  endormed  his  subject  from  a  distance  of  several  paces,
never  beginning  with  contact  or  with  passes  made  anear.

That  would  not  have  sufficed  with  other  subjects,  but  it  sufficed
with  Miss  L.,  who  was  remarkably  impressionable.  I  myself  endormed
her  by  touching  her  hands  and  by  making  passes  anear,  and  the  gen-
eral hyperesthesia  was  not  manifested.  I  communicated  to  her  a
dynamic  state  like  that  of  my  own  body.  (The  terms  I  employ  here
I  am  unable  to  define  more  accurately,  but  the  thing  seems  to  me  to
be  not  improbable.)  Anyhow,  the  attention  [of  the  subject]  does  not
alone  suffice  to  explain  this  phenomenon,  for  it  may  take  place  with-
out the  possibility  of  the  subject's  guessing  who  touched  him,1  and
there  are  other  phenomena  of  this  kind  that  attention  cannot  explain.

" '  If  you  will  let  me  act  with  my  hands,'  said  Mr.  Donato  to  me,  '  I
am  confident  I  shall  succeed.'  '  Act,  then,'  I  replied.  And,  indeed,  as
soon  as  he  (still  behind  the  subject)  brought  his  hands  near  Miss
Lucile's  shoulders,  making  a  few  passes  toward  the  elbows,  the  arms
began  to  move  upward  and  both  hands  were  laid  upon  the  head."

But,  then,  there  was  no  longer  mental  suggestion,  only  the  effect  of
magnetic  attraction.

"  Fourth  Experiment. — Miss  Lucile  still  endormed,  with  the  hand-
kerchief over  her  head.  I  give  to  Mr.  D.  (Donato)  a  fourth  card,  on
which  I  had  written  this  :  '  Reunir  les  deux  mains  co?nme  en  priant'  (join
the  two  hands  as  in  prayer),  and  I  take  a  place  on  a  sofa  to  the  left
of  Miss  L.,  the  better  to  observe  all  Mr.  D.'s  movements.  He  stood
motionless  five  or  six  paces  away  from  Miss  L.,  facing  her,  and  with
his  eyes  fixed  upon  her.  Her  hands,  which  had  been  restored  to  their
natural  posture  by  Mr.  D.,  were  raised  slowly,  were  brought  together,
even  the  fingers  were  crossed — in  a  word,  took  the  pose  of  prayer.
The  experiment  performed,  Mr.  D.  removed  the  handkerchief  and
awakened  the  subject.

"Fifth  Experiment. — After  resting  ten  minutes,  Miss  L.  again  takes
her  seat  in  the  armchair,  and  Mr.  D.  endorms  her  anew.  I  pass  to
Mr.  D.  a  fifth  card  :  '  Faire  un  nceud  avec  un  mouchoir '  (make  a  knot
on  a  handkerchief).  'See  how  we  are  going  to  work  this  time,'
said  Mr.  Donato,  and  stationing  himself  a  little  behind  Miss  L.,  he
stretched  his  handout  above  her  head,  but  without  touching  her.  She
rose  from  her  chair.  Mr.  D.  directed  her  toward  the  table  on  which,
unbeknown  to  her,  the  handkerchief  had  been  laid  by  me.  Miss  L.,
obeying  the  attraction  of   the   hand,   approaches  the  table,  Mr.  D.

1  See  the  experiments  mentioned  on  p.  23.

DIRECT  WILL-TRANSMISSION.  207

approaching  also,  while  keeping  still  at  the  same  relative  distance
behind  Miss  L.  I  was  alongside  Mr.  D.,  and  we  both  followed,  with
increasing  interest,  the  movements  of  the  subject.  Little  by  little
her  hands  steadily  approach  the  handkerchief,  take  it  by  one  cor-
ner, fold  it,  turn  the  ends  over  each  other,  and,  lo  !  the  knot  is  made.
Mr.  D.  himself  was  amazed.  This  time  there  was  no  simple  effect  of
will,  but  a  thought  transmitted  and  executed.

"  Sixth  and  last  Experiment. — It  was  almost  useless  to  continue  ;  but
as  Mr.  Donato  insisted,  I  once  more  passed  to  him  a  card.  On  it  was
written  :  '  Toucher  Voreille  gauche  avec  la  main  droite '  (touch  the  left
ear  with  the  right  hand).  Without  moving  a  muscle  and  without  a
sound,  Mr.  D.  fixes  his  gaze  on  Miss  L.,  a  few  paces  distant.  I  was
alongside  of  Miss  L.  and  nearly  facing  Mr.  D.,  so  as  to  observe  his
slightest  movements.  Soon  the  subject's  right  arm  leaves  her  side  and
executes  the  order  in  three  successive  movements  ;  first  it  is  brought
toward  her  breast,  then  moves  toward  the  ear,  and  up  to  it,  finally
one  finger  is  extended  and  touches  the  ear."

No  details  are  given  as  to  the  state  in  which  Miss  Lucile  was  dur-
ing these  experiments.  But  from  the  record  it  would  appear  that  she
neither  spoke  nor  acted  of  herself  ;  hence  she  was  not  in  active
polyideia.

On  the  other  hand  her  state  was  not  one  of  profound  paralytic
aideia,  for  she  did  not  fall  inert.  It  was  therefore  an  intermediate
state.

I  take  occasion  from  Mr.  Aksakof's  excellent  account  to  raise  the
following  question  :

Must  one  distinguish  between  will  transmission  and  thought  trans-
mission ?

In  the  quotations  just  given  it  has  been  impossible  for  me  to  do  so.
I  was  compelled  to  treat  the  two  phenomena  as  one.  But  are  they  in
fact  distinct  ?  Can  we  transmit  and  cause  the  execution  of  an  act  of
the  will  without  at  the  same  time  transmitting  a  thought  or  a  number
of  thoughts  ?

The  question  is  a  very  complex  one.  Take  for  example  Mr.  Don-
ato's  experiment  last  cited.  Miss  Lucile  was  to  touch  her  left  ear  with
her  right  hand.  Had  this  movement  been  executed  by  attraction
through  gestures,  as  in  the  first  portion  of  the  fifth  experiment,  there
would  have  been  no  communication  of  thought,  but  no  more  would
there  have  been  transmission  of  will.  The  act  would  have  been  purely
physical,  even  though  we  should  grant  that  somnambulic  attraction  is
not  a  direct  but  a  reflex  fact.  But  as  this  experiment  was  made  at  a
distance  and  without  gestures,  Miss  Lucile  must  needs  have  divined
what  was  required  of  her,  the  more  because  though  the  movement
was  executed  slowly,  it  was,  nevertheless,  executed  well,  and  without
hesitation,  not  after  the  manner  of  one  who  gropes  in  the  dark.  Only
one  influence  from  without  was  possible,  that  of  the  eye  of  the  opera-
tor.    We  know  that  a  fixed,  regard   directed   upon  a  portion  of  the

2o8  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

hypersesthesic  body  calls  forth  in  certain  subjects  and  in  certain  states
a  local  action  that  now  is  inhibitive  (insensibility  and  contracture),
■anon  dynamogenic  (excitative).  Consequently,  Mr.  Donato  could,  by
fixing  his  gaze  upon  his  subject's  right  arm,  produce  therein  an  exci-
tation, an  agitation,  in  short  an  impression  of  whatever  sort,  which,
being  felt  by  Miss  Lucile,  would  lead  her  to  guess  that  she  had  to
perform  a  movement  with  the  arm.  But  there  the  action  of  the  eye
ends.  Mr.  Donato  could  not  by  a  look  cause  the  arm  to  extend  itself,
nor  could  he  with  the  eye  indicate  the  movement  ordered.  Conse-
quently we  must  concede  the  fact  of  transmission.  But  transmission
of  what  ?  Of  will  or  of  a  thought  ?  A  thought  was  not  of  itself
enough.  Were  the  thought  alone  transmitted,  the  subject  would  have
the  mental  image  of  an  ear  touched  by  a  finger,  just  as  she  might
have  the  image  of  a  bird  flying,  of  the  ace  of  spades,  etc.  She  must
needs  at  the  same  time  feel  desire,  impulsion  to  realize  that  image.  On
the  other  hand,  is  the  impulsion  by  itself  sufficient  ?  Yes  !  There  is
no  doubt  that  subjects  can  feel  by  transmission,  by  sympathism,  by
mental  imitation,  an  impulse  to  perform  a  movement,  without  knowing
either  why  they  do  it,  or  what  it  means,  or  what  it  will  result  in.  In
such  a  case  there  is  simple  will-transmission.  It  is  only  the  mental
impulse,  the  tendency,  the  volition,  that  is  transmitted.  And  I  even
believe  that  this  is  what  occurs  oftenest.  Were  the  subject  to  be
asked,  say  at  the  beginning  of  the  fifth  experiment,  she  could  not  tell
what  she  wanted  to  do  ;  but,  little  by  little,  driven  by  impulses  coming
one  after  another,  she  finally  performs  the  action  willed,  perhaps  with-
out even  knowing  what  she  does  (for  the  monoideic  state  is  unfavor-
able to  a  generalization  of  acts  or  of  ideas).  Suppose,  for  example,
the  order  is  to  take  some  object  and  give  it  to  somebody  ;  the  subject
will  do  what  is  required,  and  then,  if  you  ask  him  what  he  has  done,
he  will  say  that  he  had  to  take  up  something  and  carry  it  to  somebody,
knowing  neither  to  whom,  nor  wherefore.  If,  in  such  a  case  there  is
transmission  of  thought,  it  belongs  among  the  unconscious  phenomena
of  secondary  rank,  and  only  the  will  is  perceived  under  the  form  of
unconscious  tendencies  of  prime  rank.

In  short,  though  the  two  transmissions  may  be  manifested  sepa-
rately, usually  they  are  combined.

And  is  transmission  of  sensations  a  necessary  concomitant  in  these
two  phenomena  ?

Not  a  necessary  one,  but  useful.

I  have  many  a  time,  for  example,  observed  (though'  in  most  in-
stances this  phenomenon  lags  a  little)  that  a  strong  action  of  will
directly  produces  in  the  subject  sensations  analogous  to  itself.  An
act  of  will  that  is  strongly  affirmative  or  strongly  negative  is  always
accompanied  by  certain  agreeable  sensations  in  the  first  case,  disa-
greeable in  the  second,  to  which  are  added  also  sensations  resulting

DIRECT  WILL-TRANSMISSION.  209

from  inchoate  gestures  of  affirmation  or  negation.  The  former  are
by  their  nature  attractional,  the  latter  repulsional.  Now,  the  subject
often  feels  these  sensations.  You  mentally  exclaim  to  him  :  "  No,
not  that !  "  and  he  halts  or  he  retreats.

We  will  bring  this  chapter  to  a  close  with  two  interesting  observa-
tions by  Dr.  Perronet.  There  will  be  found  direct  will-transmission
combined  with  facts  of  mental  suggestion  of  ideas.  I  invite  the
attention  of  the  reader  particularly  to  the  details  of  an  apparent
fihrenhypTiotic  action  ;  they  will  help  us  to  appreciate  in  the  next
chapter  Braid's  illusions.

First  Observation. — "On  the  night  of  May  2-3,  1883,  I  was  called  to
attend  a  person  of  eighteen,  years.  Nervous,  impressionable,  frivol-
ous, she  had  been  angered  during  the  day.  I  found  her  stark —
absolutely  rigid  and  insensible.  I  applied  my  fingers  over  the  eye-
balls ;  first  there  was  a  slight  tremulation,  and  then  the  lids  were
opened.  The  members  now  became  limp,  did  not  retain  the  postures
given  them  ;  if  raised  and  let  go  they  fell  inert.

"  After  a  brief  period  of  waking,  during  which  the  subject  spoke  a
few  words  consciously,  the  rigidity  returned  ;  application  of  the  fin-
gers over  the  eyeballs  did  not  overcome  it  till  after  a  morphine  injec-
tion ;  the  members  retained  the  postures  given  to  them.

"  Then  were  performed,  at  my  order,  the  most  varied  movements  :
applying  the  fingers  to  the  right  side  of  the  cranium  I  obtained  the
movements  ordered  for  the  members  of  the  left  side,  and  vice  versa.

"  This  I  attributed  to  the  decussation,  in  the  pyramids,  of  the
nerve-tubes  coming  from  the  cerebral  hemispheres,  in  virtue  of
which  a  nerve-tube  belonging  to  the  left  hemisphere  of  the  brain
passes  to  the  right  in  the  medullary  fasciculus,  and  consequently
controls  movements  and  sensations  in  the  right  side  of  the  body.
Of  course,  the  inverse,  is  true  of  the  nerve-tubes  that  have  their  rise
in  the  right  hemisphere  of  the  brain.

"  I  made  the  subject  talk  by  touching  the  left  half  of  the  cranium  ;
in  so  doing  I  was  governed  by  the  idea  that  the  third  left  frontal
convolution  is  the  seat  of  articulate  speech.  When,  being  under
the  influence  of  this  idea,  I  touched  the  right  half  of  the  cranium,  I
obtained  no  response,  for  the  reason  that,  in  my  innermost  thoughts,
subjectively,  theoretically,  I  expected  none.  But  once  I  mistook  one
side  for  the  other,  and  the  subject  made  answer  to  me  though  my
finger  was  placed  on  the  right  side  of  the  cranium,  to  wit,  the  side
opposite  to*  that  of  the  convolution  that  Broca  assigns  as  the  seat  of
articulate  speech.

"  Speech  ceased  as  soon  as  I  recognized  my  error.  I  inferred
directly  that  my  thought  alone  was  active  in  the  producing  of  these
phenomena,  and  that  to  apply  my  fingers  at  such  or  such  a  point  of
the  cranium  to  obtain  this  or  that  result,  was  an  act  of  supereroga-
tion.

"  Having,  then,  obtained  the  shutting  or  opening  of  the  eyelids,
pouting,  smiling,  etc.,  by  placing  my  fingers  on  the  muscles  that
govern  those  actions,  it  occurred  to  me  to  avoid  all  contact  with  the
subject,  and,  stationing  myself  several  yards  away,  to  ask  of  her  a
repetition  of  the  acts  and  speeches  before  obtained  by  the  aid  of  digi-
tal contact.     The  subject  obeyed  all  my  orders  orally  expressed.

210  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

"  I  then  bethought  me  of  communicating  my  orders  to  her  mentally;
I  was  much  surprised  to  find  them  executed  punctually.  And  I  was
more  surprised  when,  on  requesting  the  persons  present  to  take  my
hand  and  think  in  turn  of  some  act,  that  act  was  performed  by  the
subject  automatically.

"  A  whiff  of  illuminism  and  of  spiritism  at  that  moment,  I  confess,
entered  my  brain,  so  I  thought  it  best  to  let  my  ideas  upon  this  ques-
tion lie  over  for  a  year  before  I  should  give  them  to  the  public.

"  At  last,  after  having  prolonged  the  experiment  for  four  hours,  I
awakened  the  subject  by  blowing  into  her  eyes  ;  the  awaking  was  in-
stantaneous, and  left  no  consciousness  of  the  phenomena  that  arose
or  were  produced  during  the  crisis.

"  Second  Observation. — July  4,  1883,  MissX.,  hysterical,  chloransemic,
aged  21  years,  who  had  witnessed  the  facts  contained  in  the  foregoing
observation,  and  whom  I  was  treating  for  lymphangitis  of  the  arm,
had  just  taken  a  pretty  strong  dose  of  syrup  of  codein.

"At  this  juncture  I  arrived  and  this  is  what  I  observed  :  Eyes
surrounded  by  dark  rings,  drooping  upper  eyelids,  contraction  of  the
pupils,  laughing  and  crying  without  cause,  clonic  agitation  of  the
members  ;  then  after  three  or  four  minutes  a  strange  stare,  complete
rigidity  and  insensibility.  The  rigidity  disappeared  after  application
of  the  fingers  over  the  eyeballs  (phenomenon  of  hypnotization),  and
was  succeeded  by  a  limpness  of  the  muscles  which  allowed  postures
imposed  on  the  members  to  be  retained.

"  When  I  press  upon  one  eye  only,  the  rigidity  is  retained  in  the
corresponding  half  of  the  body,  and  the  members  of  the  other  half
take  and  keep  all  the  poses  determined  by  my  impulsion  ;  the  subject
replies  to  all  my  questions  if  the  rigidity  disappears  in  the  right  side
of  the  body,  consequently,  if  I  have  compressed  the  left  eye  ;  when
pressure  is  on  the  right  eye  alone  I  obtain  no  reply.

"  Laughter,  tears,  walking,  singing,  calculating,  statuesque  poses,
and  other  phenomena  were  produced  at  my  order  with  mathematical
precision.

"  The  subject  cannot  play  the  piano  ;  I  made  her  play  on  that  in-
strument airs  from  "  L'Ombre,"  "  Le  Chalet,"  "  La  Traviata,"  etc.
To  obtain  this  result  I  placed  my  left  hand  on  the  left  side  of  the
cranium,  played  the  airs  with  my  right,  and  ordered  the  subject  to
repeat  them  ;  the  whole  was  reproduced  note  for  note.  I  had  the  same
success  when  I  asked  for  an  air  already  played  in  a  different  key  ;  to
this  end  it  sufficed  for  me  to  give  the  first  note  in  the  new  key.

"  My  hand  being  applied  to  the  right  side  of  the  cranium  with  the
preconceived  idea  that  the  seat  of  articulate  speech  is  situate  in  the
left  cerebral  hemisphere,  the  subject  was  deaf  to  all  excitation,
whether  verbal  or  musical.  In  the  midst  of  a  series  of  quadruple
quavers,  I  suddenly  broke  the  contact  of  my  hand  with  the  left  half
of  the  cranium  ;  then  the  fingers  of  the  cataleptic  pianist  stood  sus-
pended over  the  next  note,  which  was  sounded  when  I  gave  the  order
to  do  so  by  putting  my  hand  on  that  side  of  the  cranium  again  ;  the
remainder  of  the  piece  was  played  without  any  modification.

"  Finally,  making  an  effort  of  will  to  free  myself  from  the  idea  that
such  or  such  contact  is  necessary  to  obtain  such  or  such  act,  I  asked
her  in  an  imperative  tone,  from  a  distance,  to  go  on  with  an  air  she
had  begun  to  play.  At  the  end  of  the  piece  she  stopped  and  was  like
a  statue,  fixed  in  the  pose  necessary  for  sounding  the  last  note.    '  You

DIRECT  WILL-TRANSMISSION.  211

are  going  to  play  Quand  je  monte  Cocotte,'  I  said,  'till  I  tell  you  to
stop  ;  put  a  little  expression  into  it,  a  little  soul.'

"  Then  came  some  horrible  music  ;  she  repeated  a  couplet  over  and
over.  All  that  the  company  present  could  do  to  drag  her  away  from
the  piano  and  to  put  a  stop  to  the  air  I  had  suggested  to  her  was
futile.  Like  the  broom-handle  Lucian  of  Samosata  tells  of,  which
being  set  to  work  by  a  magic  word,  could  never  cease  working  till
another  more  or  less  cabalistic  phrase  was  spoken,  the  subject  played,
played,  played.

"At  last,  judging  that  the  experiment  had  been  carried  far  enough,
I  gazed  sternly  at  her,  with  strong,  decisive  will  to  put  a  stop  to  the
music  :  I  gave  forth  no  sound,  made  no  movement ;  I  was  several
paces  back  of  the  cataleptic  subject.  As  soon  as  my  will  was  clear
in  my  consciousness,  without  any  need  of  word  or  sign,  the  subject
came  to  a  full  stop  in  the  very  middle  of  a  musical  phrase.  The  like
of  this  may  be  seen  in  the  phenomenon  of  supersaturation  ;  the  slight-
est disturbance  in  the  supersaturated  solution  produces  sudden  crys-
tallization.

"  '  What  is  the  name  of  the  state  in  which  you  are  ? '  '  Ca — ca — ca —
ta — lepsy.'  (N.  B. — When  awake  she  does  not  know  what  'catalepsy'
means.)  '  Is  it  anything  serious? '  '  No  ! '  '  Can  any  one  put  you  in
that  state?'  'No;  only  the  doctor.'  'What  is  this  power  that  he
has  over  you?'  'Something  that  I  do  not  understand.'  '  Explain  ! '
'  I  don't  know  what ;  it  is  the  force  of  the  blood.'

"  I  tell  her  to  say  how  many  persons  are  present,  and  to  give  their
names.  Having  myself  reckoned  the  number  amiss,  she  gave  the
number  I  had  in  my  mind  ;  as  soon  as  I  had  rectified  my  error  she
gave  the  correct  number.

"  A  lady  having  come  to  ask  money  of  her,  I  requested  the  cata-
leptic to  give  her  some.  She  went  straight  to  the  piece  of  furniture  in
which  she  had  been  accustomed  to  keep  her  purse  ;  not  finding  it  she
was  worried  ;  when  some  one  whispered  in  my  ear  that  it  was  on  the
piano,  the  subject  knew  it  as  quickly  as  I  did,  and  suddenly  changing
her  expression  of  ill-humor  to  an  air  of  satisfaction,  she  ran  to  the
piano,  took  the  purse,  and  took  out  ten  francs  to  give  to  her  creditor.
I  begged  the  latter  to  call  the  next  day,  for  I  did  not  wish  to  make  use
of  a  scientific  experiment  to  force  the  subject  to  pay  automatically ;
I  gave  the  lady  to  understand  that  it  was  hardly  right  for  her  to  pay
herself.  She  gave  the  money  back,  but  my  experiment  was  made.  I
awakened  the  subject  by  blowing  on  her  eyes.

"  From  the  foregoing  facts  I  inferred  that  the  cataleptic  traced  '  her
answers  on  -my  thoughts  rather  than  on  the  reality  ;  that  she  was
more  impressed  by  the  psychic  phenomena  of  my  brain  than  by  those
of  the  outer  world  ;  in  short,  that  whether  she  perceived  aright  or  amiss,
she  was  quite  insensible  to  all  excitations  save  such  as  came  from  me  ;
that  she  was  as  it  were  an  extension  of  my  own  consciousness.

"  I  observed  this  subject  many  times.  In  the  state  of  catalepsy  she
was  ever  deaf  to  all  impulsions  not  given  to  her  by  me  directly  or  by
me  delegated  to  others  ;  her  personality  was  lost  in  mine,  as  the  per-
sonality of  the  Fakir  is  lost  in  Nirvana.

"  Of  all  the  subjects  observed  by  me  none  presented  this  disposi-
tion in  anything  like  the  same  degree."2

1  Calquait — As  when  one  copies  outlines  on  tracing-paper. —  Translator.
s Claude  Perronet,  "  Du  Magnetisme  Animal."     Louis-le-Saunier,  1884.

2i2  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

Mr.  Perronet's  experiments,  which  were  so  successful,  were  made
on  cataleptics.  Those  of  Dr.  Puel,  too,  were  on  cataleptics.  Those  of
Drs.  Comet  and  Despine  were  likewise  made  on  cataleptics.  Finally,
we  may  remark  that  it  was  in  catalepsy  that  Dr.  Petetin  came  un-
awares upon  the  phenomenon  of  mental  suggestion.  It  would  seem
therefore  that  there  is  some  sort  of  relation  between  catalepsy  and
suggestion.     What  is  it  ?

As  we  have  seen,  the  psychic  state  most  favorable  to  mental  sug-
gestion is  monoideism.  Now  catalepsy,  as  an  outward  phenomenon,  is
simply  a  muscular  manifestation  of  a  monoideic  tendency  in  the  brain.
The  subject  keeps  the  one  selfsame  position,  for  he  is  capable  of  but
one  selfsame  thought  at  a  time.  The  idea  of  a  given  attitude  domi-
nates his  brain  without  limitation.     "There  it  is,  there  it  remains."

CHAPTER   VI.

WILL-ACTION    AND    THE    QUESTION    OF    "  RAPPORT."

WE  jind  very  few  experiments  of  the  kind  here  referred  to  in  the
history  of  magnetism  ;  not  only  because  they  seldom  were
successful,  but  because,  thanks  to  Deleuze's  influence,  all  experiments
whatever  were  banned — that  is  to  say,  all  that  were  foreign  to  the
question  of  treatment.  Aubin  Gauthier,1  who  wrote  a  sort  of  ency-
clopaedia of  magnetism,  says  upon  this  matter  :

"  There  are  somnr.mbules  that  hear  their  magnetizer  without  any
need  on  his  part  to  address  them  in  words  ;  indeed,  there  are  many
such.  As  a  rule,  a  somnambule  that  has  had  rapport  only  with  one
magnetizer,  understands  him  without  his  speaking.  One  may  test  this,
not  for  the  sake  of  the  experiment,  but  because  there  are  cases  in
wnich  this  faculty  is  very  useful.  If  it  is  feared- that  the  somnambule
will  tell,  in  presence  of  a  third  person,  things  that  the  latter  ought  not
to  know,  he  is  mentally  made  to  understand  that  he  must  keep  silence,
just  as  in  ordinary  life  one  speaks  with  the  eyes  or  with  a  gesture.
So,  too,  if  it  is  feared  lest  in  the  course  of  a  consultation  given  to  a
patient  whose  case  affords  no  hope  of  a  recovery,  the  somnambule
may  be  indiscreet ;  again,  the  will  is  employed,  and  the  somnambule
understands,  unbeknown  to  the  patient.  Otherwise,  this  means  is  not
to  be  used  without  necessity."

This  humanitarian  purpose  was  predominant,  as  has  already  been
observed,  in  the  first  two  periods  of  magnetism — that  of  Mesmer's
"  baquet "  2  and  that  of  somnambulism.     Puysegur  also  forbade  use-

1  A.  Gauthier,  "  Traite  Pratique  du  Magnetisme  et  du  Somnambulisme,"  p.  594.
Paris,  1845.

2  See  Humboldt  Library,  No.  113,  "Hypnotism,"  p.  6.

WILL-ACTION  AND   "RAPPORT."  213

less  experiments  ;  but  enchanted  as  he  was  by  the  mental  sensibility
of  his  first  somnambules,  Victor,  Magdeleine,  and  a  few  others,  he
authorized  the  experiment  mentioned  by  Gauthier,  and  in  his  en-
thusiasm even  maintained  that  we  can  always  make  the  somnambule
cease  talking  and  that  we  can  make  or  break,  mentally,  the  rapport
of  a  somnambule  with  a  third  person.  I  will  quote  in  full  the  passage
relating  to  this.

Puysegur  recognizes  three  principal  characters  as  distinctive  of
complete  somnambulism  :

1.  "  Isolation  "  (rapport  with  the  magnetizer  exclusively,  insensi-
bility to  all  the  subject's  surroundings) ;

2.  "  Concentration  "  (meaning  that  all  the  activity  of  the  subject  is
concentrated  inwardly).  Puysegur  knew  nothing  of  spontaneously
active  magnetic  somnambulism  ; '

3.  "Magnetic  mobility"  (mental  suggestibility  and  attraction  at  a
distance).

"  The  third  character  of  complete  somnambulism  (he  writes)  is
magnetic  mobility  ;  that  is  to  say,  a  patient  in  this  state  is  always
more  or  less  sensible  to  the  very  thought  of  the  magnetizer.  I  say
'  more  or  less,'  because  there  are  patients  whose  muscles  sometimes
grow  numb  in  somnambulism,  so  that  they  cannot  stir  save  with
much  difficulty  ;  and  there  are  others  whose  drowsy  concentration  is
so  profound  that  it  is  no  easy  thing  to  rouse  them.  Hence,  you  will
not  make  them  all  alike  get  up,  walk,  follow  you,  sit  down,  take  a  cup
off  a  table,  or  accept  what  you  may  offer  them  mentally  and  by  the
simple  act  of  your  will.  But  what  you  will  always  succeed  in,  without
any  need  of  touching  them  or  speaking  to  them,  is  the  putting  them
in  rapport  with  persons  that  you  wish  them  to  hear.  The  success  of
experiments  of  this  kind,  depe7ids,  however,  solely  on  the  magnetizers,  not
at  all  on  the  magnetized,  who,  like  compass-needles  on  their  pivot,  are
quite  indifferent  as  to  what  directions  you  may  wish  to  give  them,
provided  the  influence  is  good."  2

How  could  so  good  an  observer  speak  with  so  much  confidence  of
so  delicate  a. phenomenon  ?

For  many  reasons  :

1.  It  appears,  whatever  the  hypnotizers  may  say,  that  he  was  not
mistaken  in  saying  there  are  differences  between  individuals.  Not
only  is  it  conceivable  that  some  persons  may  not  be  able  to  concentrate
their  thought  (this  phenomenon  may  be  easily  observed  by  making  an
experiment  in  Cumberlandism);  but  further,  it  seems  to  result  from  the
differences  in  the  character  of  the  somnambulism  obtained  by  different

1  Magnetic  sleep  with  rapport  and  spontaneously  active  is  rather  rare.  It  mani-
fests itself  only  when  the  subject  is  magnetized  in  spite  of  himself,  or  when  there  is  a
somnambulic  awaking  out  of  a  state  of  profound  aideia,  the  awaking  being  occasioned
by  a  thought  dominant  in  the  waking  state.

s  A.  M.  J.  Chasnet  de  Puysegur,  "  Recherches,  Experiences,  et  Observations
Physiologiques,"  etc.,  p.  45.     Paris,- 1811.

214  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

observers,  that  the  psycho-physiological  individuality  of  the  oper-
ator counts  here  for  something.  I  know,  for  instance,  a  person
who,  without  willing  it,  obtains  nearly  always  paralysis-phenomena  ;
others  who  bring  about  hypersesthesia  mostly  ;  others  who  cannot
obtain  more  than  a  slight  drowsiness  ;  others  who  always  determine
a  disagreeable  state — a  fact  that  for  a  long  time  surprised  me  ;  for
in  all  my  observations,  except  the  cases  of  two  or  three  epileptics
and  one  or  two  hysteriacs,  I  have  always  obtained  a  state  highly
agreeable  to  the  subjects ;  indeed,  this  it  is  that  has  brought  to  me  so
many  amateurs,  so  that  I  never  have  needed  to  seek  for  subjects.  In
a  word,  there  are  personal  differences,  and  if  I  have  not  succeeded  in
repeating  Puysegur's  experiment,  or  anything  like  it,  that  may  be  due
to  an  individual  difference  or  to  some  irregularity  inherent  in  my  way
of  experiment  in  that  particular  case.

I  do  not  wish  to  exaggerate  the  importance  of  these  observations.
The  individuality  of  the  subject  is,  after  all,  the  principal  cause,  the
most  obvious  cause,  of  these  phenomena.

A  person  that  is  distinctly  sensitive  to  the  hypnoscope  can  be  hyp-
notized by  anyone.1  Differences  begin  to  appear  only  in  the  vital
action,  and  are  seldom  sharply  defined.

2.  As  we  have  seen,  Puysegur  knew  nothing  about  active  somnam-
bulism, that  is  to  say,  a  polyideic  state  that  usually  withstands  mental
action.  Hence  he  saw  no  obstacles  except  such  as  are  presented  by
too  profound  a  state,  with  drowsiness,  torpor,  rigidity  ;  that  is,  the
state  of  paralytic  or  tetanic  aideia,  which,  when  it  has  a  strong  hold,
also  withstands  mental  action.  Consequently,  he  acted  only  on  states
more  or  less  akin  to  monoideism.

3.  Finally,  we  must  not  forget  that  he  speaks  only  of  complete
somnambulism  with  rapport,  and  that  it  was  his  luck  from  the  begin-
ning to  find  excellent  subjects  :  that  may  have  increased  his  confi-
dence.

However  that  may  be,  this  fact  has  been  noticed  by  an  excellent
observer,  whose  book  recommends  itself  to  the  inventors  of  hypnotic
novelties.

"  About  the  same  time  (says  Dr.  Despine,  Sr.)  there  arrived  at  Aix
the  Count  Paul  D.,  a  superior  officer  of  the  Russian  Imperial  Guard,
who,  having  heard  of  my  patients,  showed  a  desire  to  see  them.  He
had  previously  given  some  attention  to  magnetism  in  company  with
Dr.  Pizzati,  who  wrote  to  me  from  Florence,  introducing  him.
Though  he  no  longer  made  magnetism  the  subject  of  his  studies,  he
remembered  his  former  great  magnetic  power  and  spoke  of  it  with
some  satisfaction.  He  was  curious  to  know  to  what  extent  he  still
possessed  it.  I  cheerfully  complied  with  Mr.  D's.  wishes,  and,  with
the  consent  of  my  two  patients  and  of  their  family,  I  put  them  in

1  Yet  I  have  been  assured  that  a  hospital  doctor  in  Paris  never  could  obtain  sleep,
even  in  patients  that  were  exceedingly  easy  to  endorm.

WILL-ACTION  AND   "RAPPORT."  215

rapport.  From  the  first  I  was  amazed  at  the  enormous  magnetic
power  he  exercised  over  them.  His  gaze  alone  '  petrified  '  Estelle,
and  a  few  quieting  passes  round  about  the  prsecordial  and  epigastric
region,  at  the  distance  of  five  or  six  inches,  were  enough  to  relieve
Miss  Isaure  of  her  terrible  suffering,  the  seat  of  which  was  the  pneu-
mogastric  nervous  system,  and  which  for  many  months  never  ceased,
save  during  the  state  of  catalepsy  or  of  ecstasy,  or  perhaps  during
her  natural  sleep,  which  was  rare  and  nearly  always  troubled  by
dreams  and  visions.  What  astonished  me  most  in  the  Count  D.'s
magnetic  power  over  the  latter  patient  was,  that  he  was  able  by  sole
act  of  his  will  to  suspend  in  her  the  magnetic  rapports  already  existing
between  her  and  me,  when  he  wished  to  act  upon  her  by  the  will  alone,
and  to  re-establish  them  at  his  own  will  or  the  will  of  others.  I  had
been  Miss  Isaure's  physician  from  the  time  of  her  coming  to  Aix,  and
I  seemed  to  have  her  entire  confidence,  but  Mr.  D.  soon  deprived  me
of  that,  and  so  the  case  stood  till  he  went  away.  Whence  this  power
of  sympathy  ?  I  know  not,  but  the  fact  nevertheless  remains.  I
have  seen  it  repeated  many  times,  and  Miss  Isaure  heard  me  or  heard
me  not  according  to  Mr.  D.'s  good  pleasure.  And  quite  certainly  this
could  only  have  been  produced  by  act  of  the  said  Mr.  D.'s  will,  for  he
did  not  touch  her  either  directly  or  indirectly.  I  have  seen  the
phenomenon  again  and  again.  He  and  I  even  communicated  in
writing,  to  remove  from  the  minds  of  those  present  all  suspicion  that
perhaps  the  patient,  albeit  her  eyes  were  completely  shut  during  the
whole  time  of  her  crises,  could  hear  us,  could  know  by  signs,  and  so
conform  out  of  complaisance  to  the  will  of  her  magnetizer.  The
Count  D.,  furthermore,  varied  the  phenomena  absolutely  according  to
my  good  pleasure.  He  spoke  not  a  word,  yet  when  I  handed  to  him
my  orders  in  writing,  he  was  able  to  have  them  executed  by  the
patient  at  the  moment  willed  and  fixed  by  me  then  a?id  there  j  and  if  I
changed  the  orders,  after  first  giving  them  in  another  shape,  Miss
Isaure  executed  them,  not  as  first  given,  but  as  given  just  a  moment
before.  Mr.  D.  had  told  me  of  this  feat,  saying  he  had  performed  it
often  already.  I  was  very  curious  to  see  how  he  would  carry  out  such
a  program,  for  I  did  not  believe  it  possible  then,  and  even  still  I
have  a  difficulty  in  believing  that  the  thing  can  be  done,  in  spite  of
all  that  the  magnetizers  have  said  about  it,  of  all  that  has  been
written  about  will-force,  and  all  that  I  myself  have  witnessed  time
and  time  again.

"  From  all  this  the  reader  will  naturally  infer  that  I  brought  to  the
experiment  all  possible  attention,  to  see  clearly  what  should  take
place  so  as  to  discover  the  law  that  governed  it,  and  to  make  such  in-
ductions as  would  help  me  to  appreciate  justly  the  cause  of  the  modi-
fications to  which  it  unquestionably  must  be  exposed  in  the  various
somnambules.  I  was  therefore  all  eyes  and  all  ears,  and  no  one  could
give  closer  attention  than  I  to  the  gestures,  the  looks,  the  slightest
movements  of  both.  And  yet,  beyond  the  possibility  of  doubt,  and,
I  confess,  much  to  my  surprise,  I  saw  Mr.  D.  do  away  the  rapports
subsisting  between  the  patient  and  me  ;  I  saw  these  rapports,  these
sympathies,  renewed,  again  suspended,  and  so  on,  and  that  by  a
single  act  of  his  will — or  perhaps,  if  you  will,  by  a  fascination  the
nature  and  modus  operandi  of  which  were  absolutely  unknown  to  me
then  as  they  still  are — and  it  constantly  produced  its  effect  when  my
thought  or  the  thought  of  any  other  person  in  the  company  passed  [to

216  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

the  patient]  by  the  will  of  Mr.  D.  This  phenomenon  cannot  be  ex-
plained as  many  other  phenomena  can,  by  the  mere  reading  of  the  mag-
netized s  thought,  done  by  a  magnetized  subject  (a  phenomenon  that  is
much  more  common  than  people  think,  in  the  nervous  state  of
crisiacs,  whether  magnetic  or  spontaneous).  Indeed,  to  produce  it,  not
only  must  Miss  Isaure  have  been  able  to  read  the  thought  of  the  per-
son acting  upon  her,  but,  furthermore,  the  magnetizer  must  have  by
his  will  paralyzed  the  organ  which  maintained  the  neuropathic  rap-
port between  her  and  me,  and  all  this  must  have  been  simultaneous.
Without  the  concurrence  of  these  two  conditions  the  solution  of  the
problem  would  have  been  incomplete.  However  that  may  be  and
whether  the  explanation  here  given  of  the  phenomenon  is  satisfac-
tory or  not  [plainly,  it  is  not  a  sufficient  one],  it  is  a  positive  fact
that  so  soon  as  the  will  of  Mr.  D.  had  re-established  the  rapport
between  Miss  Isaure  and  me,  if  I  said  to  her,  'But  why,  madam,  did
you  not  answer  me  when  I  addressed  you  a  while  ago  ? '  she  replied
at  once,  '  For  a  very  simple  reason,  sir  ;  you  did  not  ask  me  any
question.' "  1

Thus  Puysegur  observed  correctly,  and  the  phenomenon  is  possible.
We  may  suppose  that  a  concentration  of  the  will  on  the  part  of  Mr.
D.,  directed  toward  Miss  Isaure,  in  the  first  place  diverted  the  exist-
ing rapport  with  Mr.  Despine  toward  Mr.  D.,  that  is  to  say,  toward  a
more  powerful  dynamic  center,  and  then  by  successive  efforts  communi-
cated to  the  subject  such  impulsions  as  Mr.  D.  willed.  The  staying
of  these  efforts,  the  displacement  of  this  center,  freeing  the  nervous
system  of  Miss  Isaure  from  its  leading-strings,  re-established  the  rap-
port with  her  habitual  magnetizer.  It  is  as  if  two  telegraphers  were
to  snatch  from  each  other  the  conducting  wire  upon  which  transmis-
sion depends.

Imagine  a  highly  sensitive  galvanometer  connected  separately  with
two  coils,  A  and  B,  of  heavy  wire ;  both  have  a  magnetic  core,  but
the  magnet  of  coil  A  is  weak,  while  the  magnet  of  coil  B  is  strong.
If  these  magnets  are  at  rest  there  is  no  action,  and  the  galvanometer
will  not  stir.  But  the  first,  by  a  series  of  displacements,  induces  in
its  coil  a  series  of  alternating  currents.  The  galvanometer  needle
oscillates,  and  it  will  be  in  a  constant  state  of  wavering  so  long  as
the  movement  of  the  weak  magnet  in  coil  A  continues.  But  now  the
other  begins  to  vibrate  ;  its  displacement  changes  the  molecular  ten-
sion of  the  spirals  of  coil  B  ;  currents  are  produced,  and  these,  being
stronger  than  those  others,  determine  a  more  considerable  re-action  of
the  needle  and  predominate  over  the  influence  of  coil  A,  causing  the
galvanometer  needle  to  go  through  all  the  corresponding  movements.
The  very  sensitive  galvanometer  represents  the  subject,  and  the  two
coils  correspond  to  the  two  magnetizers,  in  whom  the  intense  interior
action  produces  intense  molecular  vibrations,  which  radiate  outward.

1  Dr.    Despine,    pere,    "  Observations    de    Medecine    Pratique,"    p.    176    et  seq.
Annecy,  1838.

WILL-ACT/ON  AND   "RAPPORT."  217

The  wires — here  the  analogy  is  less   patent — represent  the  rapport.
Cut  the  wires,  and  the  galvanometer  is  stock-still.

It  is  much  the  same  in  the  magnetic  action,  a5;  it  is  called,  of  a
living  organism.  If  rapport  is  not  set  up  by  preparatory  magnetiza-
tion, or  at  least  by  prior  magnetizations,  I  believe  mental  action
will  have  no  result.

There  are  some  facts  that  seem  opposed  to  this  view.  Thought-
transference  has  sometimes  been  obtained  with  a  few  persons  that
never  were  magnetized.  But  when  we  examine  the  facts  closely,  we
find  that  in  the  first  place  the  subject  was  always  advised  beforehand,
that  always  his  expectant  attention  placed  him  in  a  more  or  less  abnor-
mal state,  and  that  always,  prior  to  obtaining  any  result  whatever,  the
operator  was  obliged  to  concentrate  his  thought  with  the  purpose  of
influencing  the  subject — and  that  is  pretty  nearly  equivalent  to  a  mag-
netization.

Hence  I  believe  that  Despine  observed  the  phenomenon  well  ;  there
is  no  mental  suggestion  without  magnetic  rapport.  He  observed  that  Mr,
D.,  if  he  would  act  on  Miss  Isaure,  had  first  to  break  the  rapport  with
Mr.  Despine,  and  then  establish  his  own.  That  observation  no  doubt
seemed  to  the  reader  insignificant,  yet  it  possesses  an  importance  of
its  own.

"  But,"  it  will  be  said,  "  it  all  amounts  to  the  same  thing,  for  Mr.  D.
acted  in  the  same  way  in  order  to  set  up  rapport  as  he  did  to  make
the  subject  obey  an  order."

Yes  and  no  !  He  acted  in  the  same  way,  for  he  acted  mentally,  but
the  action  is  not  altogether  the  same.  To  establish  rapport  you  call
the  subject  mentally,  you  attract  him,  that  is,  you  draw  his  attention
by  an  effort,  which,  causing  the  particles  of — I  know  not  what — to
vibrate,  is  propagated  and  reaches  a  sufficiently  sensitive  galvanome-
ter ;  while  to  carry  out  an  order,  you  represent  it  to  yourself  inwardly
and  you  press  [on  pousse)  the  subject  on,  mentally,  in  the  direction  you
will,  striving  the  while,  above  all,  to  think  clearly,  of  what  you  want  to
obtain.  The' difference  is  much  like  the  difference  between  the
"  hallo-o "  you  shout  into  a  telephone  to  attract  the  attention  of
whomever'you  wish  to  address,  and  the  tones  of  ordinary  conversa-
tion.

"  Yet  there  is  a  mental  action  in  both  cases  ;  and  if  there  is  no
mental  action  without  rapport,  it  must  also  be  admitted  that  there  is
no  rapport  without  mental  action."

Yes ;  there  is  rapport  without  mental  action.  The  very  presence
of  an  organism  endowed  with  a  high  nerve-tension,  a  well-balanced
vitality  of  the  molecular  movements,  can  act  physically  on  a  subject
eager  for  such  a  vital  energy,  and  may  prepare  the  way  for  a  purposed
mental  action.  Catalytic  actions  of  this  sort  are  seen  even  in  inor-
ganic chemistry.

218  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

The  vicious  circle,  then,  is  apparent  only.  It  is  due  simply  to  the
imperfectness  of  our  speech.

Certain  German  psychologists  who  love  useless  questions,  have
worried  much,  thinking  how  it  is  that  a  sleeping  man  may  be
awakened  by  an  impression,  while  he  is  insensible  to  impressions.

Of  course  if  you  define  sleep  "  a  non-impressionable  state,"  you
never  will  understand  awakening  by  an  impression.

Fortunately,  all  things  are  relative.  The  sleeper  does  not  perceive,
but  his  unconscious  does  perceive  perfectly  well,  and  there  is  no
boundary  between  the  conscious  and  the  unconscious.

In  a  state  of  profound  aideia  mental  suggestion  fails  ;  but  if  the
state  be  less  profound,  it  succeeds  in  doing  one  thing,  to  wit,  in
nudging '  the  subject  and  producing  a  comparative  awaking,  a  tran-
sition to  a  state  of  more  sensibility,  and  then,  by  persistence,  the
suggestion  may  succeed  absolutely.

In  short,  we  see  the  importance  of  rapport  for  the  manifestation  of
the  phenomenon  we  are  considering  ;  and  though  we  desire  to  touch
as  little  as  possible  upon  questions  that  are  beyond  the  scope  of  our
work,  we  shall  be  obliged  to  elucidate  it  somewhat.

What  is  meant  by  this  "  magnetic  rapport  ?  "

The  phenomenon  so  called  is  a  very  complex  one.  In  it  is  involved
the  whole  question  of  magnetism.  For  hypnotism  it  has  no  meaning.
A  hypnotized  subject  hears  everybody.  A  magnetized  subject  hears
only  his  magnetizer.  Nay,  more  ;  he  hears  his  magnetizer  only  when  his
magnetizer  addresses  him.

Standing  beside  a  somnambule,  and  conversing  with  him,  you  may
freely  answer  other  persons,  address  them,  speak  to  them  about  the
somnambule,  ridicule  him.  He  hears  nothing.  But  when  you  yourself
shall  address  him  he  will  reply  to  you,  and  will  execute  your  orders.

Why?  How  comes  it  that  another  impression,  in  all  respects  iden-
tical, at  the  physical  point  of  view,  is  not  noted  by  the  somnambule,
when  it  is  not  accompanied  by  a  certain  intention  ?

Is  the  thing  lacking  in  the  latter  case  a  mental  action  ?  Doubtless  !
But  the  case  is  not  so  simple  as  it  seems.  We  cannot  affirm  mental
action  simply  on  the  basis  of  this  phenomenon.  In  most  cases  mental
action  is  absent  from  the  phenomenon,  at  least  in  the  sense  of  will-
transmission.  Yes,  the  intention  makes  all  the  difference  ;  but  if  we
observe  closely  we  see  that  we  change  our  attitude  perceptibly  when
addressing  other  persons.  Usually  we  turn  about ;  above  all,  we  give
a  different  intonation  to  the  voice,  and  the  brain  of  our  subject  is  not
regulated  for  that  intonation.

From  this  we  may  see  the  importance  of  involuntary  suggestions.

1  French,  exciter.  But  the  words  excite,  excitement,  etc.,  seem  to  denote  a  higher
degree  of  commotion  than  is  always  implied  by  exciter.  Nudge  is  an  appropriate  verb
here — and  a  picturesque.      Stet ! — Translator.

WILL-ACTION  AND   "RAPPORT."  219

A  mass  of  valueless  observations  in  hypnology  might  have  been
spared  had  it  been  known  :

1.  That  hypnotism  is  not  to  be  confounded  with  magnetism  ;

2.  That  the  magnetized  subject  divines  our  intentions  up  to  the
point  of  ansesthesis  or  to  that  of  hyperesthesia,  according  to  the  in-
tonation of  our  voice.

All  this,  again,  without  mental  suggestion.  Now  add  the  action  of
suggestion  that  manifests  itself  from  time  to  time,  at  least  indirectly,
by  unconscious  perceptions  of  tJie  secondary  order,  and  you  will  see  how
great  is  the  chance  of  error  in  a  study  made  under  such  conditions.

Rapport  results  :

1.  From  a  concentration  of  the  subject's  attention,  directed  solely
toward  the  magnetizer.  (This  is  the  more  usual  case,  and  very  often
this  explanation  suffices.)

2.  From  a  special  psychic  adjustment  (reglage),  partly  obtained
through  this  concentration,  but  principally  brought  about  by  the
magnetizing  processes,  and  kept  up  by  involuntary  indications  con-
veyed by  the  attitude  of  the  magnetizer,  his  voice,  etc.  (This  case
is  less  frequent.)

3.  From  an  individual  physical  action  (which  we  will  describe  in  the
sequel,  but  which  is  seldom  evident).

4.  From  a  mental  suggestion.

There  we  have  magnetism  at  flood  !  A?i  individual  physical  action  :
that  is  magnetism,  whether  fluid  or  not.  When  the  operator  comes
into  play,  not  as  a  bright  button,1  but  as  a  live  body,  as  a  dynamic
center  whose  presence  is  not  indifferent,  that  assuredly  is  magnetism.

Well,  yes  !  That  must  be  admitted,  else  we  must  renounce  the  un-
derstanding of  certain  facts.

An  eminent  professor  in  the  College  de  France,  whose  originality
of  views  and  exactitude  of  experimentation  I  esteem  highly,  has  said
concerning  this  subject  :

"  Science  is  indebted  to  Braid  for  having  drawn  the  line  sharp  be-
tween the  erroneous  pretensions  of  those  who  believe  more  or  less  in
what  purports  to  be  animal  magnetism  or  neuric  force,  that  may  issue
from  the  nerves  of  one  individual  and  enter  those  of  another,  and  the
very  interesting  facts  that  may  be  produced  in  sundry  parts  of  the
nervous  system  of  an  individual,  under  the  influence  of  a  special  irri-
tation coming  from  another  part  of  that  system."

This  disposition  to  substitute,  as  far  as  possible,  the  positive  for
the  mysterious,  I  understand  and  approve  ;  but  why  be  more  Braidian
than  Braid  ?  That  excellent  observer  could  not  abide  long  in  the
erroneous  belief  that  the  phenomena  he  produced  and  those  produced
by  magnetizers   are   identical.     He    rejects    the    concurrence    of  the

1  Bouton  brillant — a  button,  or  knob,  of  polished  metal,  or  the  like,  used  in  pro-
ducing hypnosis. —  Translator,

22o  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

"  fluid  "  in  his  experiments,  and  strives  to  substitute  for  an  impalpa-
ble objective  action  a  verified  subjective  one,  and  he  is  right :  every
one  ought  to  refuse,  as  far  as  possible,  to  admit  new  forces  ;  but
Braid  does  not  say,  like  the  hypnotizers  of  our  time,  that  magnetism
does  not  exist,  and  that  hypnotism  takes  its  place  completely.  He
says  only  this  :  "  We  were  unable  to  discover  the  sympathetic  influ-
ence that  other  experimenters,  'tis  said,  have  found."  These  are  the
words  of  the  true  man  of  science.  But  there  is  something  more  :
despite  his  dominant  disposition,  which  was  eminently  scientific,  to
eliminate  magnetism  from  hypnotic  action,  he  came  to  recognize  the
error  of  supposing  that  the  one  took  the  place  of  the  other  com-
pletely.    He  says  :

"The  following  remarks  of  Mr.  M.  Brookes,  the  well-known
lecturer,  on  animal  magnetism,  will  throw  still  more  light  on  this  con-
troversy. On  learning  that  I  had  changed  my  opinion  upon  the  subject
of  identity,  he  said  :  '  I  am  very  glad  you  have  believed  it  your  duty
to  change  your  original  view  as  to  the  identity  of  your  phenomena
with  those  of  mesmerism.  From  the  first  day  I  admitted  the  value
and  importance  of  your  discovery,  but  I  could  not  accept  this  identity,
and  I  found  fault  with  you  for  the  violence  with  which  you  condemned
the  partisans  of  animal  magnetism,  because  they  could  not  agree
with  you.  I  believed,  and  still  believe,  that  you  were  in  the  wrong  in
that  controversy,  and  that  in  fact  you  were  unfair  to  yourself,  for  you
have  in  fact  discovered  a  new  agent,  and  not  simply  a  modification  of
an  agent  already  known.'  "

Leave  therefore  to  Braid  the  things  that  are  Braid's,  and  to  Mesmer
the  things  that  are  Mesmer's.

Mesmer  was  in  the  wrong  (he  was  often  in  the  wrong,  but  in  this
case  was  particularly  in  the  wrong),  in  that  he  came  first,  and  one  is
seldom  received  kindly  who  comes  too  early.  Braid  rendered  great
service  to  science  by  verifying,  according  to  exact  methods,  a  certain
number  of  facts  already  discovered  by  the  magnetizers,  already
authenticated  by  an  academic  commission,  already  explained  sub-
jectively by  Faria,  Bertrand  and  Henin  de  Cuvilliers,  merely  pre-
sented by  him  in  a  more  positive  and  more  scientific  light.  That  is
all  he  did,  and  that  is  enough.  But  it  is  not  enough  for  those  in  our
day  who  continue  his  labors.

"  To-day,"  says  Dr.  Bottey, 1  "  the  mysterious  is  dead,  and  with  it
animal  magnetism,  which  has  ceased  to  exist  since  Braid,  in  1843,
gave  to  mesmerism  and  fluidism  the  decisive  blow  that  killed  them
forever."

Such  is  Dr.  Bottey's  opinion,  but  such  was  not  Braid's.    He  said  :  "  I

long   believed  in  the  identity   of    the  phenomena  produced    by    my

method  and  by  that  of  the  believers  in  mesmerism.     .     ...     I  still

believe  at  least  in  the  analogy  of  the  actions  exercised  upon  the  nervous

1  Dr.  J.  Bottey,  "  Le  Magnetisme  Animal,"  etc.,  p.  I.     Paris,  1884.

WILL-ACTION  AND   "RAPPORT."  221

system  " — a  very  just  remark.  "  Nevertheless,  judging  from  what
the  magnetizers  declare  that  they  produce,  in  certain  cases,  there
seems  to  be  sufficient  difference  to  regard  hypnotism  and  mesmerism
as  two  distinct  agents."  '

Braid,  therefore,  has  killed  nothing,  and  it  would  perhaps  be  wellif
writers  would  read  him  before  they  assign  him  any  part  to  play.

Let  us  proceed  to  the  facts  :

Instead  of  entering  into  details  upon  the  question  of  rapport,
which  would  require  a  separate  volume,  let  us  simply  point  out  a
few  facts  which  prove  the  insufficiency  of  the  two  psychic  causes
mentioned  above,  to  explain  the  phenomena  of  rapport.

In  a  person  sunk  in  the  magnetic  sleep  the  sense  of  touch  presents
peculiarities  that  are  quite  astonishing.  There  are  many  shades  of
difference  in  the  phenomenon,  but  we  may  consider  it  in  its  simplest
and  most  definite  form  ;  to  verify  it  we  shall  have  but  to  select  a  sub-
ject that  has  been  magnetized  by  one  person  only,  and  that  many
times,  for  this  phenomenon  is  seldom  manifested  in  a  first  or  a  second
seance.

The  subject  feels  and  takes  kindly  the  touch  of  his  magnetizer.  If
extranes  touch  him,  either  of  two  results  may  follow,  according  to
the  state  the  subject  is  in  :  either

1.  The  touch  will  cause  him  visible  annoyance,  which  may  be  so
great  as  to  produce  a  paroxysm  ;  or

2.  He  will  not  feel  it  at  all.

In  the  former  case,  it  is  not  necessary  that  the  touch  be  direct ;
touch  his  clothes,  pillow,  bed-covering,  bed,  chair,  etc.,  and  though  the
subject  does  not  see  the  act,  he  will  shudder,  start  and  complain  of
the  unpleasant  sensation.  I  have  made  many  experiments  with  a  view
to  eliminate  the  influence  of  imagination,  and  am  fully  convinced  that
the  phenomenon  is  real.  Besides,  it  was  noticed  long  ago  by
Puysegur.  Sometimes  this  elective  anesthesia  is  so  pronounced  that
the  subject  cannot  endure  even  the  presence  of  an  individual  though
the  latter  be  some  yards  distant  from  him.  But  we  may  suppose  that
in  this  case  olfactive  sensations  have  some  influence.  In  other  cases
he  will  endUre  the  presence  of  a  person  even  alongside  him,  but  only
on  condition  that  the  person  shall  not  touch  him  either  directly  or  in-
directly. In  this  phenomenon  there  is  a  regular  scale  of  sensibility  :
some  subjects  are  influenced  only  by  direct  contact,  others  are  in-
fluenced at  the  distance  of  two  or  three  inches,  others  at  the  distance
of  several  yards.  I  have  not  noticed  any  difference  with  respect  to
covered  or  exposed  parts  of  the  body  ;  when  the  touch  is  disagreeable
it  is  so  whether  the  body  is  touched  directly  or  through  the  clothing,
only  the  effect  is  perhaps  a  little  more  obnoxious  when  one  touches  a

1  J.  Braid,  "  Neurypnology. "  [The  quotation  is  from  Brown-Sequard's  French
translation  of  the  work,  p.  27.]

222  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

srarment  that  comes  in  close  contact  with  the  skin  than  when  one
touches,  for  example,  the  hem  of  a  long  robe  ;  but  the  difference  is
neither  constant  nor  certain.

I  anticipate  the  objections  of  observers  who  will  bring  forward  the
fact  that  in  some  subjects,  those  of  little  sensibility,  this  phenomenon
does  not  occur  ;  that  with  others,  in  light  somnambulism,  the  touch  of
a  third  person  simply  awakens  the  subject ;  finally,  that  with  others
only  the  first  contact  gives  the  subject  a  shock  and  that  thereafter
there  is  no  effect.  But  there  are  a  good  many  subjects  on  whom  the
experiment  can  be  made  successfully.

A  physician  of  my  acquaintance,  refusing  to  believe  in  this  phe-
nomenon, once  asked  me  to  exhibit  it  to  him.  The  experiment  was
made  on  a  young  woman  whom  he  knew  well,  and  who  was  magnet-
ized by  me  for  the  fifth  time.  Her  eyes  were  blindfolded  and  we  sta-
tioned ourselves  behind  her,  touching  with  one  finger  her  hair  or  her
back,  according  as  the  doctor  indicated  by  signs.  She  never  once
made  a  mistake  in  telling  which  of  us  two  had  touched  her  ;  indeed,
the  thing  was  visible,  for  there  was  a  reflex  movement  of  repulsion
when  she  was  touched  by  other  than  me.

There  is  a  physical  action,  then  ;  but  of  what  sort  ?

It  is  of  two  kinds — i,  pathological  ;  2,  physiological.

1.  A  person  that  is  ill — that  is  to  say,  disequilibrated,  suffering,  and
debilitated — re-acts  upon  the  sensitive  subject  by  disturbing  her  mole-
cular equilibrium,  by  communicating  to  her  his  suffering  by  influence,
or  by  depriving  her  of  a  part  of  her  general  molecular  energy.

2.  A  person  in  good  health,  but  extrane,  acts  less  strongly,  as  a
rule ;  his  touch  is  not  so  disagreeable,  but  is  more  or  less  so  on
account  of  the  difference  between  his  dynamic  state  and  that  pro-
duced or  communicated  to  the  subject  by  the  magnetizer.  We  are
unable  to  state  definitely  wherein  this  difference  consists,  but  we
must  needs  accept  it,  even  outside  of  magnetism.

If  we  do  not  perceive  it  in  the  normal  state,  that  does  not  prove
that  it  does  not  exist ;  we  do  not  see  the  stars  by  day,  though  they
are  ever  shining  with  the  same  luster.  With  respect  to  this  matter,
the  somnambule  is  an  exceedingly  sensitive  apparatus  that  is  influ-
enced by  causes  which  in  the  normal  state  are  insignificant.

In  the  second  case — to  wit,  when  the  subject  feels  not  at  all  the
touch  of  the  extrane — the  following  experiment  can  be  made  :  Instead
of  touching  directly,  one  may  touch  with  a  pencil,  for  example.  If
one  were  to  touch  directly,  as  with  a  finger,  differences  of  tempera-
ture, etc.,  might  be  supposed  to  indicate  to  the  subject  who  it  was
that  touched  her.  But  that  supposition  has  no  weight  in  the  case  of
indirect  contact.  But  now,  in  spite  of  that,  the  subject  will  feel  the
magnetizer's  pencil,  and  will  not  feel  the  same  pencil  when  it  is  held
by  the  hand  of  a  third  person

WILL-ACTION  AND   "RAPPORT."  223

I  beg  the  opponents  of  magnetism  to  reflect  upon  this  experiment.
It  may  be  varied  in  several  ways.  The  subject  does  not  feel  the
pencil,  but  let  the  magnetizer  touch  the  hand  of  the  person  holding
it,  and  now  it  is  felt  again.  Nay,  more.  Let  us  take,  instead  of  the
pencil,  a  long  rod,  and  let  the  magnetizer  grasp  it  first  at  the  distance
of  five,  then  of  ten,  finally  of  twenty-five  inches.  The  pressure  of
the  rod  and  its  contact  with  the  skin  of  the  subject  will  become  more
and  more  confused,  more  and  more  uncertain,  till  at  last  at  the  dis-
tance of  some  yards,  according  to  the  force  of  the  individual  physical  .
action,  and  the  subject's  sensibility,  the  latter  will  feel  nothing.
Nevertheless  the  mechanical  pressure  is  ever  the  same !

Is  it  imagination  that  does  this  ?  Is  it  faith  ?  Explain  this  experi-
ment to  me  without  physical  action,  and  I  will  renounce  magnetism  ;
but  not  till  then.

There  are  several  other  evidences  of  physical  action,  but  this  one
will  suffice  for  the  present.  It  proves  that  ??wlectilar  dytiamic  differ-
ences pass  beyond  the  surface  of  the  body  ;  that  a  certain  vibratory  tonic
movement  peculiar  to  a  given  organism  is  propagated  beyond  its
periphery,  and  can  influence  the  subject  so  definitely,  so  palpably,
that  there  is  a  real  action.

There  is,  then,  an  individual  physical  action.  The  hypnotizers  may
make  as  much  sport  of  that  as  they  wish  :  "  He  laughs  best  who
laughs  last."

Personal  dynamic  action  is  one  of  the  causes  of  rapport.  The  sub-
ject is  insensible,  but  he  feels  better  than  ever  the  hand  of  his  mag-
netizer. He  is  deaf,  but  he  hears  better  than  ever  his  magnetizer's
voice.     And  this  it  is  that,  with  other  things,  constitutes  rapport.

The  fourth  and  last  agent  remains — mental  suggestion.

The  magnetizer's  organism,  already  active  by  its  very  presence,  be-
comes more  active  when,  in  the  dynamic  mass  that  constitutes  his
personality,  there  is  developed  by  concentration  of  thought  and
tension  of  will  a  center  of  force,  strengthening  the  invisible  but  most
real  bond  that  unites  the  two  organisms.

And  now,  lest  the  reader  should  think  we  are  leading  him  into  a
world  of  fancy,  let  us  glance  at  the  sum  of  the  phenomena  common
to  the  two.

In  hypnotic  states  these  agents  are  inactive,  for  in  hypnotism  there
is  no  rapport ;  but  in  magnetic  states  they  manifest  themselves  in
every  possible  degree.  In  most  instances  the  first  of  the  four  agents
(the  subject's  expectant  attention)  suffices  to  explain  the  facts.  This
explanation  is  made  more  complete  by  the  concurrence  of  the  second
agent :  ordinary  suggestions  are  associated  with  the  magnetizing  pro-
cesses and  the  attitude,  gestures,  etc.,  of  the  magnetizer.  In  a  few
cases  physical  action  becomes  evident.  In  fine,  exceptionally  (per-
haps once  in  several  hundred  cases),  mental  suggestion  overrules  all

224  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

other  influences,  and  then  only  is  the  theory   of  the  Voluntists  con-
firmed.

But  those  who,  lightly  dismissing  the  facts,  deny  physical  action
and  mental  suggestion,  simply  prove  one  or  other  of  two  things :
either  that  they  have  not  studied  the  question  sufficiently — i.  e.,  have
not  experimented  on  a  great  number  of  persons ;  or  that  they  are  in-
capable of  making  delicate  experiments.  But  I  forgot — there  is  a
third  class — bona-fide  observers,  capable  and  familiar  with  the  results
of  experiment,  but  who  have  preconceived  opinions.

They  wear  colored  spectacles,  and  for  them  all  things  are  of  the
color  of  their  glasses.  The  result  is  often  ludicrous.  I  will  give
three  instances  :  First,  the  case  of  a  distinguished  savant  who,  in  order
not  to  accept  physical  action,  concedes  mental  suggestion  ;  then  the
case  of  a  very  ingenious  but  very  skeptical  analyst,  who,  unwilling  to
recognize  a  physical  action,  admits  mental  suggestion  and  second
sight ;  finally,  an  excellent  observer  and  discreet  innovator  who,  in  his
efforts  to  dispute  both  physical  action  and  mental  suggestion,  in  spite
of  himself  demonstrates  them  both,  and  besides  gives  the  weight  of
his  authority  to  an  utterly  prseter-scientific  opinion.

Let  us  begin  with  the  last.  The  question  is  about  Braid.  Dr.
Bottey,  in  whose  eyes  thought-transference  is  "  only  a  piece  of  jug-
glery having  its  place  in  the  domain  of  charlatanism,"  is  right,  how-
ever, when  he  says  that  "  the  only  fault  one  can  find  with  Braid  is,
that  he  wished  to  make  his  discovery  promote  the  doctrines  of  phre-
nology." But  Mr.  Bottey  does  not  know  that  it  is  just  the  phrenhyp-
notic  studies  of  Braid  that  prove  thought-transference.

The  matter  stands  thus  :  Dr.  Gall  conceived  a  theory,  based  appa-
rently on  experiment,  and  in  which  is  some  truth,  but  which  in  many
respects  runs  counter  to  the  data  of  physiology,  and  is  entirely  wrong
in  its  details.  According  to  this  theory,  the  whole  gray  matter  of  the
brain  is  divided  into  27  small  regions,  called  organs,  which  are  the
seats  of  the  several  faculties.

Thus,  according  to  Gall,  we  have  in  the  brain  a  special  organ  for
Industry,  one  for  Friendship,  Quarrelsomeness,  Theft,  Self-esteem,
Metaphysic  Penetration,  Veneration  (the  same  which  at  La  Salpetriere
determines  somnambulism  -.pressure  on  the  vertex),  and  so  on.

Several  magnetizers  amused  themselves  with  practicing  phreno-
magnetism,  i.  e.,  applying  magnetism  to  the  phrenology  of  Gall,  Spurz-
heim,  and  other  craniologists.  They  acted  by  contact,  pressing  upon
a  point  on  the  cranium  corresponding  to  some  phrenological  organ,
and  thus  sometimes  obtaining  in  sensitive  subjects  a  manifestation  of
the  corresponding  sentiments,  dispositions,  or  ideas.

Braid  tried  to  verify  their  assertions,  and  had  such  success  that  he
was  quite  surprised  at  the  result.  Every  few  pages  of  his  book  he
reverts  to  this  subject,  and  it  is  highly  instructive  to  see  him  at  the

WILL-ACTION  AND   "RAPPORT."  225

same  time  enthused  and  embarrassed  by  the  strangeness  of  these
phenomena.

In  truth,  it  was  a  little  too  much  for  a  mind  so  positive  as  his,
especially  when  the  man  had  got  it  into  his  head  that  all  hypnotic
phenomena  result  from  fatigue  of  the  visual  organs.  The  thing,
nevertheless,  was  true.  Braid  doubts,  experiments  again,  raises  every
possible  objection  ;  but  the  reality  remains,  mysterious,  but  unde-
niable. The  subject  steals  a  ring  if  you  press  on  the  organ  of  Theft ;
shamefaced,  he  gives  it  back  if  you  press  on  the  organ  of  Conscien-
tiousness ;  begins  to  pray  when  you  touch  Veneration,  and  fights  his
magnetizer  if  the  latter  bears  a  little  heavily  on  Combativeness,  and
so  on.  Nay,  more.  Some  subjects  do  not  need  to  be  touched ;  by
simply  pointing  his  finger  at  an  organ  Braid  got  nearly  the  same
result.  Certain  individual  differences  were  noticed  :  one  person  could
act  better  than  another,  and  always  the  best  operator  is  the  one  that
knows  more  about  phrenology.  Braid,  ever  more  and  more  embarrassed,
experiments  on  forty-five  persons  one  after  another,  hardly  any  of
whom  had  any  notion  of  phrenology,  and  who,  therefore,  could  not
simulate.  He  substituted  in  place  of  the  finger  a  glass  rod,  glass
being  a  bad  conductor  of  electricity  and  magnetism  (!),  and  then,  in
place  of  the  glass  rod,  he  used  a  cork.  But  the  results  were  the  same,
the  subjects  still  underwent  the  action  of  the  organ  that  was  touched  !

What  was  to  be  done  ?  Physical  action  was  deemed  impossible,
a  fortiori  mental  action.  So  Braid  contrives  a  highly  ingenious  but
quite  gratuitous  theory  :  he  supposes  a  sympathic  correspondence
between  certain  points  of  the  scalp  and  the  expression  of  certain
states  of  mind.

At  length,  seventeen  years  later,  he  recognized  a  certain  action  upon
the  subject's  intelligence,  produced  by  contact,  but  was  unable  to
account  fully  for  so  many  successes  obtained.

As  for  us,  while  we  admit  that  there  were  several  influences  at  work
in  Braid's  experiments,  we  do  not  hesitate  to  say  that  the  latter
demonstrate  a  physical  action  of  the  magnetizer  (whether  direct  or
through  the  glass  rod),  and  above  all  that  they  demonstrate  in  a  very
remarkable' way  the  fact  of  mental  suggestion.

All  the  details  given  by  Braid  as  to  his  mode  of  operation  and  the
state  of  the  subjects  with  whom  his  experiments  were  successful,  con-
firm our  view.  Braid  was  practicing  magnetism  as  Monsieur  Jourdain
wrote  prose.

The  second  observer  is  Morin.  His  whole  book,  a  very  interesting
one,  is  devoted  to  a  refutation  of  the  "  fluid  "  theory  and  of  the
hypothesis  of  any  physical  action  whatever,  but  it  confirms  the  facts
of  mental  suggestion  and  even  of  vision  at  a  distance.  We  will  return  to
this  point  when  we  come  to  speak  of  theories,  for  Morin  gives  a  theory
of  mental  suggestion.

226  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

The  third  is  Bertrand.  I  am  reluctant  to  find  fault  with  this
eminent  observer.  Like  Braid,  Bertrand  was  led  simply  by  a  sincere
love  of  truth,  and  had  he  had  evidence  sufficiently  strong  to  meet  his
requirements,  he  no  doubt  would  have  .been  quick  to  recognize  a
physical  action,  no  matter  what  the  cost  in  the  scientific  world.  But
he  had  only  negative  results.  Twice,  however,  he  was  much  em-
barrassed ;  once  when  he  was  obliged  to  sign  the  report  of  Du  Potet's
experiments  made  at  the  Hotel-Dieu  in  presence  of  Husson  and
several  other  physicians,  and  which  went  to  prove  action  at  a  distance.
He  had  signed  the  document,  and  then  retracted  his  signature,  not
without  reason  ;  for  Mr.  Husson,  who  was  not  as  familiar  as  Bertrand
was  with  the  suggestion  theory  of  the  magnetizers,  had  not  taken  all
the  needed  precautions.  It  was  Bertrand's  ill-luck  to  call  for  a  new
experiment,  for  that  confirmed  Du  Potet's  theory  rather  than  his  own.
But  at  all  events  he  was  within  his  right  as  a  skeptical  observer  ;  he
was  seeking  evidence  that  could  not  be  questioned.

On  another  occasion — but  let  us  hear  Bertrand  himself  :

"  I  have  seen  (he  says)  *  a  somnambule  (Mrs.  Chevalier)  whom  I  did
not  magnetize,  but  whose  treatment  I  had  long  been  observing,  and
upon  whom  the  person  that  magnetized  her  had  acquired  an  extraor-
dinary influence.  He  could  at  will  deprive  her  of  any  one  of  her
senses,  making  her  for  a  moment  blind,  dumb,  deaf,  etc.  ;  could
paralyze  a  portion  of  her  body,  or  even  throw  her  into  a  state  of  per-
fect lethargy,  which  ceased  only  when  the  magnetizer  was  pleased  to
bring  her  to  herself  again  by  ?neans  of  a  peculiar  gesture.  This  latter  fact
is  the  more  remarkable  because  the  somnambule  was  absolutely  deprived  of  the
use  of  her  senses,  as  I  often  had  occasion  to  verify.  (A  witness  one  day,
to  make  sure  of  the  somnambule's  insensibility,  pinched  her  so  hard  as
to  cut  out  with  his  nails  a  small  portion  of  flesh,  so  producing  a  bleed-
ing wound  which  she  perceived  on  awaking,  and  which  for  some  time
caused  her  to  suffer.)  There  was  nothing  that  could  give  her  notice
of  the  moment  when  the  accustomed  sign  was  to  be  given."

There  Bertrand  is  mistaken.  General  insensibility  though  verified
objectively  in  every  way,  is  in  no  wise  inconsistent  with  even  very
great  sensibility  with  respect  to  excitations  coming  from  the  magne-
tizer.

Apart  from  cases  of  very  profound  paralytic  aideia  (which  are  very
rare)  and  from  certain  active  ecstatic  states  wherein  the  subject
ceases  momentarily  to  hear  and  to  sense  his  magnetizer,  he  always
does  sense  him,  and  that  very  clearly  too,  even  at  a  distance,  despite
the  general  anaesthesia.  He  feels  the  gesture  made  anear,  even  while
he  is  sleeping  naturally,  without  ever  a  suspicion  of  the  magnetizer's
presence.     Consequently,  the  fact  cited  proves  only  the  individualiza-

1  See  the  details  in  Husson's  report,  also  in  Morin,  and  in  Bertrand,  "  Du  Magn.,"
p.  259.  See  also  Du  Potet,  "  Experiences  Publiques  sur  le  Magnetisme  Animal,"  etc.
Paris,  1821.

WILL-ACTION   AND    "RAPPORT."  227

tion  of  the  sensibility,  and  not  mental  suggestion,  nor  direct  physical
action.     This  appears  from  the  further  details  following  :

"  This  sign  consisted  in  a  rapid  movement  inward  of  the  out-
stretched hand  (consequently  there  was  a  current  of  air).  At  this
sign  she  started  and  came  to  herself  ;  but  usually  one  sign  was  not
enough  ;  many  signs  had  to  be  made  one  after  another,  and  at  each
there  would  be  a  start,  a  commotion  of  her  whole  body,  as  though
she  had  received  a  powerful  galvanic  charge  ;  after  four  or  five
shocks  she  would  open  her  eyes,  sit  up,  and  come  to  herself."

Experiments  for  producing  paralysis  of  any  one  sense,  purely  by
means  of  gestures,  are  rather  easy  to  make.  This  I  demonstrated
upon  four  subjects  to  the  Warsaw  Medical  Society  in  1881.

They  do  not  suffice  to  demonstrate  mental  action,  nor  even  physical
action  of  the  hand,  but  they  prove  the  existence  of  ideorganic  associa-
tions produced  by  habit,  between  a  sign  and  an  organic  state.  The  ex-
periment is  more  conclusive  when  it  is  performed  on  a  person  in  his
natural  sleep,  whom  you  never  have  magnetized,  who  is  not  expecting
the  magnetizer,  and  whom  you  magnetize  without  contact.  I  once
made  this  experiment  under  favorable  conditions,  and  was  successful.
But  here  again  mental  action  is  not  proven,  if  one  acts  as  I  did,  by
making  passes  at  but  a  little  distance,  for  with  sensitive  subjects  air-
movements  many  times  repeated  before  the  subject's  face  may  pro-
duce somnambulism  without  the  intervention  of  special  physical
action.

On  this  point  Bertrand  remarks  :

"  I  found  it  always  impossible  by  a  simple  act  of  my  will  to  make
the  waking  patient  lose  consciousness  [as  we  have  seen,  this  phen-
omenon does  occur,  but  it  is  very  rare],  and  when  I  made  the  sign
without  any  act  of  will,  I  produced  the  same  effect  as  though  I  had
willed  to  act ;  so  that  my  will,/^r  se,  was  without  action  while  I  sought
to  act  upon  the  patient  in  the  waking  state  ;  but  it  was  not  so  when  she
was  in  somnambulism  or  in  paralysis,  for  then  my  will  of  itself  sufficed
to  make  her  come  to  herself  [as  for  me,  I  never  have  been  able
to  awaken  a  somnambule  by  a  simple  act  of  will,  at  least,  not  under
strict  conditions,  i.  e.,  under  conditions  excluding  involuntary  habit-
ual suggestion.  It  would  seem  that  in  this  respect  individuals
differ].  Still  the  latter  result,  it  must  be  confessed,  was  not  as  clear
as  the  former,  for,  as  though  to  prevent  accidents  that  might  result
the  somnambule  was  never  left  more  than  three  or  four  minutes  in  uncon-
sciousness, it  was  difficult,  in  so  short  a  time,  to  make  any  conclusive
experiments."

Of  course ;  and  it  seems  to  me  that  Bertrand  is  self-illusioned  with
regard  to  his  mental  action  ;  that  the  somnambule,  accustomed  to
sleep  only  three  or  four  minutes,  would  have  awaked  of  her  own
accord.  (See  p.  20,  supra.)  Bertrand,  however,  declares  (though  at
the  same  time  himself  raising  some  objections)  that  in  order  to  con-
vince himself  he  made  the  following  experiment  :

228  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

"  I  placed  myself  in  a  part  of  the  chamber  where  I  was  hidden  by
a  corner  of  the  mantelpiece.  I  repeated  seven  times  (when  I  made
the  gesture  anear  the  patient,  she  usually  came  to  herself  at  the  third
or  fourth) — I  seven  times  repeated  the  customary  gesture  while  she
was  unconscious,  and  seven  times  she  felt  at  the  same  instant  the
shocks  (secousses)  that  this  gesture  is  wont  to  produce  ;  then  she  came
to  herself  completely.  According  to  what  was  told  me,  the  shocks
were  in  number  the  same  as  my  gestures  ;  they  took  place  at  the
same  moment  with  my  gestures,  and  the  awaking  came  progressively,
as  when  I  stood  close  by  her  ;  in  a  word,  nothing  is  wanting  to  this
observation."

On  the  contrary,  there  is  wanting  to  it  the  certainty  that  the  pa-
tient could  not  hear  these  gestures,  or  feel  the  currents  of  air  they
occasioned.

A  strange  fact,  but  one  repeated  every  day  in  works  on  hypnotism  :
Bertrand,  who  was  so  exacting  when  judging  the  experiments  of
others,  and  who  did  not  believe  in  the  magnetic  fluid,  does  not  seem
very  scrupulous  in  his  own  experiments  upon  so  complex  a  question.

He  is  even  astonished  to  find  that  the  signs  or  gestures  that  always
produced  the  desired  effect  in  the  state  of  somnambulism  and  while
the  somnambule  did  not  see  them,  were  insufficient  in  the  waking
state.  That,  again,  was  an  effect  of  ideorganic  association.  The
somnambule  was  trained  in  somnambulism,  and  not  in  the  waking
state  ;  consequently,  the  associations  formed  in  that  state  could  not
spring  up  again  in  a  state  totally  different.  They  were  related  to  a
special  organic  state  as  follows  :

Sign  a  plus  Somn.  =  Effect  a'  plus  Somn.

I  I  -L  t  I  ft  ^__  f  I  I.  /  I  t  II

II  I  (  II  __  II  „/  »  I  tC
II             J             II                          II                    __                  I  «                    J  /           «  t  ♦  •

and  that  does  not  mean  that

Sign  a  plus  Waking  =  Effect  a'  plus  Waking.

II         1^         It  II  It  1_V         it  II

It  ■  c        II      It     __    II    „/   II       <«
It    J        It       It     __    tl    J/   It       II

for  there  is  no  continuity  between  complete  somnambulism  and
waking.  But  the  signs  used  in  the  waking  state  may  have  influence
in  somnambulism,  for  there  is  continuity  between  waking  and  som-
nambulism— the  somnambule  remembers  things  happening  to  him  in
the  normal  state.

This  complex  ideorganic  association  may  apply  equally  and  solely
to  distinct  phases  of  the  sleep.  Thus  it  is  that  at  La  Salpetriere
catalepsy  is  obtained  by  opening  the  eyes  of  the  subject,  lethargy  by
closing  the  eyes,  somnambulism  by  friction  on  the  top  of  the  head.
These  are  mere  accidental  associations  that  have  no  scientific  value,
and  which  have  only  brought  confusion  into  the  domain  of  hypnotism

WILL-ACTION  AND   "HAP  PORT."  229

and  the  magnetic  sleep,  where  already  there  was  confusion  enough.
Observers,  confident  of  the  exactitude  of  their  researches,  have  made
it  their  business  to  find  the  three  states  where  they  did  not  exist,  and
have  sometimes  succeeded — with  suggestionable  subjects.  Proceeding
on  the  same  principle,  one  might  produce  lethargy  by  pressure  on  the
vertex,  catalepsy  by  occlusion  of  the  eyelids,  and  somnambulism  by
friction — on  the  ankle.  It  is  time  to  make  an  end  of  illusions  that
have  already  produced  a  lot  of  valueless  observations.

I  have  just  said  that  I  never  succeeded  in  awakening  a  subject  by
simple  mental  suggestion.  That  phenomenon,  however,  was  verified
by  the  academic  commission  of  1826.

"  At  an  agreed  signal,  given  by  Mr.  Fouquier,  Mr.  Foissac,  whose
presence  was  unknown  to  Cazot,  awakened  the  latter,  as  he  had  en-
dormed  him,  by  the  force  of  his  will  alone,  despite  the  questions  the
company  were  addressing  to  the  somnambule  with  the  sole  purpose
of  keeping  from  him  all  knowledge  of  the  instant  at  which  he  was  to
be  awakened.     .     .     .

"September  10,  at  7  o'clock  in  the  evening,  the  commission  met  at
Mr.  Itard's  to  continue  their  experiments  on  Cazot.  The  latter  was
in  the  sitting-room  and  a  conversation  was  opened  with  him,  and  kept
up  till  half-past  seven,  the  moment  when  Mr.  Foissac,  who  arrived
after  him  and  had  remained  in  the  antechamber,  separated  from  him
by  two  locked  doors,  and  distant  from  him  twelve  feet,  began  to
magnetize  him.  Three  minutes  after,  Cazot  said  :  '  I  believe  Mr.
Foissac  is  here,  for  I  feel  dazed.'  In  eight  minutes  he  was  completely
asleep.     .     .

"  Though  the  commission  could  not  have  any  doubt  as  to  the  real
action  produced  by  the  magnetism  upon  Cazot,  even  unbeknown  to
him,  we  wished  to  have  one  more  proof  nevertheless.  The  com-
mission therefore  went  to  Mr.  Bourdois's  study,  Oct.  5,  at  noon,  at
which  hour  Cazot  came  there  with  his  child.  Mr.  Foissac  had  been
invited  for  half-past  twelve,  and  arrived  at  the  hour  named  (the  time
when  Cazot  withdrew  to  the  parlor)  without  any  communication  with
us.  He  was  told,  however,  that  Cazot  was  sitting  on  a  sofa  six  feet
distant  from  a  closed  door,  and  that  the  commission  wished  him  to
endorm  the  subject  and  to  awaken  him  at  that  distance,  he  being  in
the  parlor  and  Cazot  in  the  study.

"  At  thirty-seven  minutes  past  twelve,  while  Cazot  was  engaged  in
the  conversation  that  we  were  carrying  on,  and  examining  the  pictures
that  adorn  the  study,  Mr.  Foissac  began  his  magnetic  manoeuvres,
and  we  observed  that  at  the  end  of  four  minutes  Cazot  was  winking
slightly,  that  he  appeared  restless  ;  finally,  that  he  fell  asleep  in  nine
minutes."  '

Other  similar  experiments  were  made  by  the  commission,  and  were
equally  successful,  but  they  were  conducted  under  less  stringent  con-
ditions.    Hence,  it  is  needless  to  quote  them.

As  regards  simultaneous  will-transmission  and  thought-transmission,
experiments  of  that  sort  were  less  successful.

1  This  narrative  appears  to  be  incpnsistent  with  regard  to  the  locations  of  Foissac
and  Cazot. —  Translator.

23o  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

"  Mr.  Gueneau  wrote  on  a  bit  of  paper  the  following  words  :  '  Go
sit  on  a  stool  that  is  in  front  of  the  piano.'  Mr.  de  Geslin,  making
this  will  possess  him  wholly,  bade  the  somnambule  do  what  he
mentally  required  of  her.  She  arose  from  her  place,  and  going  in
front  of  the  clock  said,  '  It  is  half-past  nine  o'clock.'  Mr.  de  Geslin
told  her  that  was  not  what  he  had  asked.  Then  she  went  into  the
neighboring  chamber  ;  again  she  was  told  that  she  was  mistaken,  so
she  went  back  to  her  place.  The  next  act  willed  was  that  she  should
scratch  her  forehead  :  she  held  out  her  right  hand,  but  did  not  per-
form the  desired  movement.  [It  is  always  wrong  to  tell  the  subject
that  an  experiment  is  to  be  made,  for  then  emotion  awakens  her  partly,
/.  e.y  causes  her  to  pass  into  an  active  state — active  polyideia — and  then
she  reflects  too  much,  and  tries  to  divine  what  is  demanded  of  her,
instead  of  submitting  passively  to  influence.  When,  under  such  con-
ditions, the  subject  is  mistaken  twice  in  succession,  it  is  best  to  suspend
the  experiment,  and  to  make  the  sleep  a  little  deeper  by  the  aid  of  a
few  passes  before  the  face.]  The  will  is  that  she  sit  down  at  the
piano,  and  she  goes  to  a  window  six  feet  away  from  the  instrument.
The  magnetizer  complains  that  she  does  not  do  what  is  enjoined  on
her  by  his  thought  ;  she  rises,  and  changes  chairs.  We  ask  that  when
Mr.  de  Geslin  lifts  his  hand  she  shall  lift  hers,  and  keep  it  raised  till
the  magnetizer's  hand  is  lowered.  She  raises  her  hand,  and  it  remains
motionless,  not  falling  till  five  minutes  after  Mr.  de  Geslin  has  lowered
his  hand."

After  these  unsuccessful  experiments,  the  commission  declared  that
thought-transference  had  not  been  verified,  but  admits  the  fact  of
will-action  at  a  distance.  That  was  the  opposite  of  what  Bertrand
held,  for  he  believed  that  there  is  no  will-action  at  a  distance,  but  that
the  subject  can  divine  the  will  of  the  operator  by  a  communication  of
thoughts.  That  was  rather  curious  hair-splitting,  but  we  must  add
that  Bertrand  had  in  mind  action  of  will  directly  upon  the  organs  of  the
subject  that  are  to  be  put  in  motion,  and  that  is  what  he  denied,  while
he  admitted  the  fact  of  thought-communication,  and  consequently  the
possibility  of  a  movement  that  is  ordered  being  executed,  if  the  subject
perceives  our  thought  and  is  willing  to  conform  to  bur  desires.

The  commission  reached  the  following  conclusions  with  regard  to
mental  action  :

"  When  once  we  put  a  person  in  the  magnetic  sleep  we  do  not
always  need  to  have  recourse  to  contact  and  passes  to  magnetize  him
again.  We  can  not  only  act  upon  the  magnetized  person,  but  we  can  put
him  fully  in  somnambulism  and  take  him  out  of  it  unbeknown  to  him,
while  we  are  out  of  his  sight,  some  distance  away,  with  doors  between  him
and  us."     ("  Report  of  the  Academy  of  Medicine,"  June  28,  1831.)

The  report  was  signed  by  Messrs.  Bourdois  de  la  Motte  (President),
Fouquier,  Gueneau  de  Mussy,  Guersent,  Husson  (Secretary),  Itard,
J.  J.  Leroux,  Marc,  Thillaye.  Messrs.  Double  and  Magendie,  having
been  unable  to  be  present  at  the  experiments,  thought  they  ought  not
to  sign.

ACTION  UNBEKNOWN  TO   THE  SUBJECT.        231

CHAPTER   VII.

ACTION    UNBEKNOWN    TO    THE    SUBJECT    AND    AGAINST    HIS    WILL.

THUS  will-action  unbeknown  to  the  subject  has  been  verified  by
an  academic  commission,  but  that  does  not  prevent  Mr.  Bern-
heim  from  pronouncing  the  following  judgment  in  a  memoir  addressed
to  Mr.  Paul  Janet :

"  There  is  not  a  magnetizer  in  existence  ;  there  is  no  magnetic
fluid.  Neither  Donato  nor  Hansen  possesses  any  special  hypnotic
powers.  The  sleep  produced  does  not  depend  on  the  hypnotizer,  but
on  the  subject  ;  it  is  his  own  faith  that  endorms  him  ;  no  one  can  be
hyp7iotized  against  his  will,  if  he  withstands  the  injunction.  I  am  happy
to  join  you  in  assuring  the  public  against  all  the  chimerical  fears  that
a  false  interpretation  of  facts  might  engender."  '

The  public  is  re-assured  ;  but  I  am  astonished  that  so  eminent  an
observer  could  bring  together  so  many  inexactitudes  in  the  compass
of  a  few  lines.

We  may  set  aside  the  question  of  a  special  fluid,  for  a  fluid  is  not
necessary  for  an  explanation  of  the  facts ;  we  would  simply  remark
that  those  who  have  believed  in  a  fluid  have  always  regarded  it  as  a
general,  not  an  individual  property,  presenting  only  some  differences
of  degree.

"  The  sleep  produced  does  not  depend  on  the  hypnotizer."  On  the
hypnotizer,  no  ;  on  the  magnetizer,  yes ;  that  is  to  say,  it  does  depend
on  those  who,  instead  of  being  simply  water-bottle  stopples,  employ
their  own  bodies,  their  minds,  and  their  wills  in  the  act  of  hypnotiza-
tion.

"  It  is  the  subject's  own  faith  that  endorms  him."  Have  frogs,
lobsters,  ducks,  hens,  guinea-pigs  the  same  faith  in  magnetism  that
Donato's  subjects  have?

"  No  one  can  be  hypnotized  against  his  will,  if  he  withstand  the
injunction."  Nevertheless  I  have  many  a  time  endormed  persons
that  resisted  with  all  their  might.  Mr.  Bernheim  is  doubly  mistaken
here,  for  hi  most  cases  this  phenomenon  can  be  explained  by  his
suggestional  theory,  without  any  direct  influence,  physical  or  psy-
chical. There  is  not  even  any  need  to  cite  the  facts  of  somnambulism
produced  at  a  distance,  by  a  direct  physical  or  psychic  action.

Ideoplasty  may  be  two-fold — conscious  and  unconscious.  There
are  persons  who  in  all  sincerity  declare  that  they  are  free  from  a  given
prejudice,  but  who,  nevertheless,  are  influenced  by  it  involuntarily.
There  is  a  conscious  submission  and  an  unconscious.  Provided  a  sub-
ject has  sensibility,  if  you  suggest  sleep  to  him  that  idea  may  realize
sleep  despite  his  opposition.

1  Bernheim,   "  De  la  Suggestion  dans  1'Etat  Hypnotique,"  p.  13.     Paris,  1884.

232  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

The  same  is  to  be  said  of  other  ideas  suggested.

After  all,  is  it  wise  to  cut  short  in  half  a  dozen  words  a  delicate
question  that  one  has  not  studied  sufficiently  ?  That  seems  to  be  the
fashion  nowadays.  Here  is  the  author  of  a  book  in  other  respects
highly  interesting,  who  says  :  "  The  question  of  thought-reading,  of
lucidity,  of  second-sight,  is  decided  once  for  all."  1

By  whom  decided  ?  It  would  no  doubt  be  no  easy  thing  to  say.
When  one  is  in  such  a  situation  'twere  best  he  should  say,  "  I  have  not
studied  that  question  ;  "  or,  "  My  studies  have  yielded  me  only  nega-
tive results  ;  "  or,  "  The  results  I  have  obtained  do  not  authorize  me
to  decide  the  question  ; "  but  not,  "  This  thing  does  not  exist,  that
thing  is  false,  because  I  do  not  believe  in  it."

Let  us  now  look  at  the  facts :

i.  Mr.  S.  had  a  somnambule,  Miss  X.,  who  was  also  his  mistress.
She  is  at  his  house,  sitting  at  a  table  ;  he  is  walking  about  the  rooms.
Suddenly  he  sees  in  the  court-yard  another  young  woman  coming,
and  he  wants  above  all  things  to  prevent  the  women  from  meeting.
Without  any  long  reflection,  while  still  walking,  he  makes  a  gesture
behind  Miss  X.'s  head,  and  she  forthwith  falls  asleep,  and  enters  the
state  of  paralytic  aideia.  He  then  receives  the  other  woman  and
talks  with  her  in  presence  of  Miss  X.,  who  notices  nothing.  He  did
not  awaken  her  till  after  the  other  was  gone,  then  he  awakened  her
with  one  puff  of  breath,  and  so  rapidly  that  she  did  not  even  know
she  had  been  endormed.     Mr.  S.  was  still  walking  about  the  room.

This  fact  proves  neither  physical  action  of  gestures  nor  mental
action  of  the  will,  but  it  does  prove  that  one  may  be  endormed  unbe-
known to  himself.  Miss  X.  was  exceptionally  sensitive,  not  to  the  more
refined  influences  (mental  suggestion  did  not  succeed  with  her),  but  as
concerns  the  rapidity  of  the  phenomena.  The  impression  of  an  hyp-
notizing gesture  (auditive  and  tactile)  produced  sleep  by  ideoplasty,
that  is,  by  an  ideorganic  association  based  on  habitude,  before  she
had  time  to  think  about  it.

I  knew  this  person  myself  and  I  even  made  on  her  a  similar  experi-
ment :

2.  Not  having  been  magnetized  in  a  long  while  by  Mr.  S.,  she  be-
lieved she  had  lost  sensibility,  and  one  day,  in  society,  she  told  me  she
now  felt  so  strong  that  she  would  like  to  try  and  magnetize  me.  I
agreed  for  the  fun  of  the  thing,  and  let  her  have  her  way.  Delighted
because  I  consented,  she  seized  my  thumbs  and  fixed  my  gaze.  To
humor  her  the  more  I  pretended  to  be  overpowered  by  sleep  ;  then
suddenly  I  opened  my  eyes  and  fixed  her  gaze,  intending  to  endorm  her,
and  she  was  asleep  after  a  few  seconds.  We  experimented  on  her  for
at  least  three  quarters  of  an  hour.  Then  I  resumed  my  position
before  her,  awakened  her  with  a  puff  of  breath,  and  continued  my
pretended  sleep.  Believing  me  to  be  really  endormed,  she  began  to
?lap  her  hands  in  triumph,  and  could  not  understand  why  everyone

•Cullere,  "  Magnetisme  et  Hypnotisme,"  p.  239.     Paris,  1886.

ACTION  UNBEKNOWN  TO   THE  SUBJECT.        233

burst  out  laughing.     She  would  not  believe  it  was  herself  that  was
the  sleeper.

3.  A  girl  of  14  years  was  magnetized  by  me  five  or  six  times  ;  she
was  highly  sensitive,  though  less  so  than  the  preceding  subject  (hyp.
exp.,  insensibility  and  contracture  of  the  finger,  whereas  in  the  other
the  whole  arm  was  contractured)  ;  in  very  good  health  (as  was  the
other,  too)  ;  she  was  magnetized  only  for  the  sake  of  some  experi-
ments designed  to  convince  an  acquaintance  of  mine,  a  physician.
The  only  effect  of  these  seances  was  that  she  slept  a  little  longer  in
the  night  in  natural  sleep,  and  that  magnetism  made  her  prettier — so
at  least  thought  her  girl  friends.  But  her  companions  persuaded  her
to  believe  that  if  she  should  go  on  letting  herself  be  endormed  she
would  lose  her  will-power,  and  she  would  not  be  allowed  to  marry  her
cousin,  whom  she  loved — as.  one  loves  at  14  years.  In  short,  my
somnambule  refused  to  obey  me,  without  giving  any  reasons.  She  did
not  wish  to  be  magnetized  any  more.  She  was  entreated,  ordered
even,  not  to  be  whimsical,  but  in  vain.

"  And  you  are  not  afraid  that  I  shall  endorm  you  in  spite  of  your-
self ?  "

"  Oh,  no,  for  I  won't  even  sit  by  you."

I  was  asked  to  try,  and  her  parents  authorized  me  to  make  the
experiment,  angry  as  they  were  at  the  disobedience  of  their  daughter.

I  then  took  a  handkerchief  that  she  had  left  on  the  table  and  threw
it  into  her  lap,  saying  :

"Well,  now  'tis  done.  You  will  be  asleep  in  five  minutes."  "That
will  have  no  effect  whatever  on  me,"  she  said.  But  all  the  same  she
hastened  away  to  avoid  my  gaze.  "  No  use  in  running  away,  you
will  come  back  of  your  own  accord."

Half  an  hour  later  she  returned  in  somnambulism.

Consequently  one  can  be  endormed  "  against  his  will "  and  though
he  "  withstands  the  injunction."  But  here  ideoplasty  plays  again  the
principal  part.

I  might  cite  three  or  four  others  facts  of  the  same  sort — skeptics
themselves  asking  me  to  make  the  attempt  to  overcome  their  resist-
ance and  incredulity.  Credulousness  without  sensibility  is  of  no  avail j
incredulity  is  ?io  hindrance  where  sensibility  exists.  The  will  may  retard
the  action,  but  it  can  only  retard.  Most  of  those  who  think  them-
selves hypnotizable  are  not,  and  some  of  those  who  hardly  suspect
themselves  of  sensibility  may  be  hypnotized  without  difficulty.

Here  is  a  narrative  of  occurrences  that  took  place  in  France ;  it
has  been  published  over  and  over  again.  The  matter  came  before
the  courts  of  law,  and  all  the  facts  have  been  verified.

4.  "March  31,  1865,  came  to  the  hamlet  of  Guiols  a  mendicant.
He  was  about  25  years  of  age  ;  was  crippled  in  both  legs.  He  begged
hospitality  of  one  H.,  who  lived  in  the  hamlet  with  his  daughter.  She
was  26  years  old,  and  her  moral  character  was  of  the  best.  The  beg-
garman,  whose  name  was  Castellan,  pretending  to  be  deaf  and  dumb,
gave  them  to  understand  by  signs  that  he  was  hungry,  and  he  was
bid  to  supper.  During  the  meal  he  acted  strangely,  and  so  attracted
the  attention  of  his  hosts  ;  he  would  not  let  his  glass  be  filled  again

234  MENTAL  SUGGESTION,

without  first  making  over  it  and  on  his  own  face  the  sign  of  the  cross.
During  the  evening  he  signified  that  he  was  able  to  write.  Then  he
wrote  the  following  phrases  :  '  I  am  the  Son  of  God  ;  I  come  from
Heaven  and  my  name  is  Our  Lord  ;  for  you  see  my  little  miracles,
and  later  you  shall  see  greater  ones.  Do  not  fear  me  at  all,  I  am  sent
from  God.'  Then  he  offered  to  remove  the  film  that  overspread  the
eye  of  a  woman  then  present.  He  pretended  that  he  knew  the  future
and  predicted  that  war  would  break  out  in  six  months.

"  These  absurd  actions  made  an  impression  on  those  present,  and
Josephine  H.  was  particularly  stirred  by  them.  She  slept  all  dressed,
out  of  fear  of  the  beggarman.  The  latter  spent  the  night  in  the  hay-
loft, and  on  the  morrow,  after  he  had  breakfasted,  quit  the  hamlet.
Soon  he  returned,  after  having  made  sure  that  Josephine  would  be
alone  the  whole  day.  He  found  her  busied  with  household  cares,  and
for  a  while  conversed  with  her  by  signs.  The  forenoon  was  spent  by
Castellan  in  exerting  upon  the  young  woman  all  his  fascination.  A
witness  declares  that  while  she  leaned  over  the  fire  on  the  hearth,
Castellan,  bent  over  her,  kept  making  on  her  back  circular  signs  and
the  sign  of  the  cross  ;  at  those  times  her  eyes  were  wan.  At  noon  they
sat  at  table  together.  Hardly  was  the  meal  begun,  when  Castellan
made  a  gesture  as  though  to  throw  something  into  Josephine's  spoon.
Immediately  the  girl  fainted.  Castellan  seized  her,  took  her  to  her
bed,  and  committed  the  uttermost  outrages  upon  her.  Josephine  was
conscious  of  what  took  place ;  but,  restrained  by  an  irresistible  force,  she
could  not  make  any  movement,  nor  utter  a  cry,  though  her  will  pro-
tested against  the  assault  committed  upon  her.  Evidently  she  was  in
lethargy  [in'the  state  of  fascination  rather].  Having  come  to  herself
again,  she  did  not  cease  to  be  under  the  power  of  Castellan,  and  at
4  o'clock  p.  m.,  when  the  man  was  going  away  from  the  hamlet,  the
wretched  girl,  drawn  by  a  mysterious  influence,  which  she  strove  in  vain
to  withstand,  left  her  father's  house  and  blindly  followed  this  beggar-
man,  toward  whom  she  had  feelings  only  of  fear  and  loathing.  They
passed  the  night  in  a  hayloft,  and  on  the  morrow  directed  their  steps
toward  Collobrieres.  One  Mr.  Sauteron  met  them  in  a  wood  and  took
them  to  his  house.  Castellan  told  him  that  he  had  abducted  the
young  woman  after  having  won  her  favors  by  device.  Josephine,  too,
told  him  of  her  misfortune,  adding  that  in  her  despair  she  had  wished
to  drown  herself.  April  3,  Castellan,  followed  by.  the  girl,  stopped  at
the  house  of  a  Mr.  Coudroyer,  farmer.  Josephine  ceased  not  to
lament  and  deplore  the  unfortunate  situation  in  which  she  was  held
by  the  irresistible  power  of  this  man.  '  Bring  the  strongest  and
tallest  woman,'  said  she ;  *  you  will  see  if  Castellan  will  not  cause  her
to  fall.'  [The  poor  girl  judged  from  her  own  impressions.  Not  more
than  about  5  persons  in  100  are  capable  of  being  brought  under  such,
an  influence,  that  is  to  say,  unless  they  have  been  already  hypnotized.]
Josephine,  dreading  outrages  that  she  feared  might  yet  be  per-
petrated upon  her,  asked  that  she  might  be  allowed  to  sleep  in  a
neighboring  house.  Castellan  came  up  to  her  at  the  moment  when
she  was  about  to  go,  and  seized  her  round  the  hips  ;  she  fainted.
Then,  though  according  to  the  testimony  of  witnesses  she  was  like
one  dead,  she  was  seen,  by  order  of  Castellan,  to  go  up  the  steps
of  the  stairway,  counting  them  without  a  mistake,  then  laughing
convulsively.  It  was  found  that  she  was  at  the  time  completely
endormed.

ACTION  UNBEKNOWN  TO  THE  SUBJECT.        235

"The  next  day,  April  4th,  she  fell  into  a  state  like  that  of  simple
insanity  (somnambulic  delirium).  She  was  out  of  her  head  and  re-
fused all  food.  She  invoked  God  and  the  Virgin  by  turns.  Castellan,
wishing  to  give  a  new  proof  of  his  ascendancy  over  her,  ordered  her
to  go  all  round  the  room  on  her  knees,  and  she  obeyed.  Touched
by  the  sorrows  of  the  wretched  girl,  provoked  by  the  boldness  with
which  her  seducer  abused  his  power  over  her,  the  inmates  of  the  house
drove  the  beggar  away,  despite  his  resistance.  Hardly  was  he  out-
side the  door  when  Josephine  dropped  to  the  floor  as  if  dead.  Castellan
was  called- back  ;  he  made  sundry  signs  over  her  and  restored  to  her
the  use  of  her  senses.  On  the  next  day  they  went  away  together.
The  people  dared  not  prevent  Josephine  from  following  the  man;
Suddenly  they  saw  her  coming  back  on  the  run.  Castellan  had  fallen
in  with  some  hunters,  and  while  he  talked  with  them  she  took  flight.
With  tears,  she  begged  that  they  would  hide  her,  that  they  would
rescue  her  from  that  influence.  She  was  taken  back  to  her  father's
house,  and  since  then  she  seems  not  to  have  full  use  of  her  reason."
[That  was  quite  natural ;  for  with  highly  sensitive  persons  who  are
not  thoroughly  demagnetized1  a  nervous  derangement  persists  for  a
good  while.  If  they  be  thoroughly  demagnetized  the  effect  of  the
magnetism  must  in  all  cases  be  beneficial.]

"  Castellan  was  arrested  April  14.  He  had  already  been  convicted
on  a  correctional  process  (correctionnellement).  Nature  appears  to
have  gifted  him  with  very  extraordinary  magnetic  power.  [Every-
body can  magnetize,  but  there  are  differences  both  in  the  degree  and
in  the  nature  of  the  action.]  To  that  cause  is  to  be  attributed  the
mysterious  influence  he  possessed  over  Josephine  [to  that  cause  in  part
only,  for  ideoplasty  also  acted  a  part],  whose  constitution  lent  itself
marvelously  well  to  magnetism,  as  appeared  from  sundry  experiments
made  upon  her  by  physicians.  Castellan  admitted  that  it  was  by
magnetic  passes  that  he  produced  the  fainting  fit  that  preceded  the
rape.  He  even  confessed  that  twice  he  had  intimacy  with  her  while
she  was  neither  endormed  nor  in  the  fainting  fit,  though  she  was  in-
capable of  giving  free  consent  to  his  criminal  acts.  The  relations  he
had  with  her  the  second  night  they  spent  at  Capelude  were  under
different  conditions,  for  on  that  occasion  Josephine  had  no  conscious-
ness of  the  criminal  act  of  which  she  was  the  victim  [paralytic  aideia~\,
and  it  was  Castellan  himself  that  told  her  in  the  morning.  On  two
other  occasions  the  conditions  were  the  same.

"  On  his  trial,  Castellan  exhibited  the  utmost  coolness  and  auda-
city. He  specially  paraded  his  magnetic  powers.  He  had  the  impu-
dence to  offer  to  give  proof  of  his  skill  in  an  experiment  on  the  Presi-
dent of  the  court.  While  undergoing  examination  by  the  Procureur
Imperial  he  went  further,  for  by  the  fixedness  of  his  gaze  he  threat-
ened to  magnetize  that  officer,  and  the  latter  had  to  require  him  to
lower  his  eyes.

"  Josephine,  since  she  was  taken  from  under  the  influence  of  this
man,  has  nearly  recovered  her  reason.  In  her  deposition  before  the
court  she  says  :  '  He  exercised  such  power  over  me  by  his  gestures
and  his  passes  that  several  times  I  fell  in  a  dead  faint.  He  might  do
with  me  then  as  he  would.  I  know  what  things  I  suffered  ;  but  I
could  neither  speak  nor  act,  and  I  underwent  the  most  cruel  tortures.'

1 1  beg  the  reader  to  take  this  word  in  its  empiric  sense,  apart  from  all  theory  ;  I
cannot  here  enter  upon  explanatory  details.

236  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

"  Three  physicians,  Drs.  Heriart,  Poulet  and  Theus,  were  sum-
moned to  enlighten  the  jury  as  to  the  effects  of  magnetism.  By  their
declarations  they  corroborated  the  conclusions  of  Drs.  Auban  and
Roux  (of  Toulon).  Castellan  was  condemned  to  twelve  years  of
hard  labor."1

"  Extraordinary  as  these  facts  may  appear,"  adds  Mr.  Liegeois  to
this  narrative  ;  "  strange  as  seems  the  power  exercised  by  Castellan
over  his  victim,  we  must  not  regard  this  as  a  unique  occurrence.  I
could,  I  dare  say,  find  among  the  clientage  of  Dr.  Liebeault  not  one
only,  but  ten  persons,  that  under  the  conditions  given  would  be  as
powerless  to  resist  criminal  assaults  as  Josephine  H.  was.  The  facts
developed  are  of  great  importance."8

Now  we  see  why  Mesmer  insisted  on  not  divulging  the  methods  of
obtaining  somnambulism.  He  states  the  reasons  himself :  "  Since
my  method  of  treating  and  observing  disease  came  into  practice  in
different  parts  of  France,  several  persons,  whether  from  indiscreet
zeal  or  from  a  vanity  that  is  out  of  place,  have,  without  any  regard
for  the  reserves  and  the  precautions  that  I  judged  necessary,  given  a
premature  publicity  to  the  effects,  and  above  all  to  the  explanation
of  this  crisis-sleep  ;  /  know  that  abuses  have  resulted  from  this,  and  I
see  with  pain  old-time  prejudices  coming  back  with  big  strides."  3

In  the  foregoing  cases  the  subject  was  aware  of  the  magnetizer's
intention,  or  at  least  of  his  presence.  But  this  is  in  no  wise  essential.
A  person  in  a  deep  natural  sleep,  who  never  has  seen  the  magnetizer
and  who  has  no  thought  of  his  presence,  may  be  subjected  to  the
influence  of  his  passes  and  of  his  will,  may  be  put  in  the  somnam-
bulic state,  execute  the  magnetizer's  orders,  and  wake  again  on  the
morrow,  remembering  absolutely  nothing,  not  even  in  another  period
of  somnambulism,  not  even  under  the  influence  of  another  magnetizer.

Still,  I  make  haste  to  add  that  such  cases  must,  of  necessity,  be
exceedingly  infrequent — for  they  require  not  only  an  exceptional
hypnotic  sensibility,  but  also  a  sleep  accompanied  by  complete  insensi-
bility— and  that  while  magnetism  may  produce  such  serious  effects,  it
at  the  same  time  supplies  the  means  of  guarding  against  them.  Only
it  has  to  be  remembered  that  hypnotism,  which  cannot  produce  these
effects,  is  but  an  imitation  of  magnetism.

Let  us  return  to  the  facts  :

5.  I  was  attending  a  lady  patient  who  was  not  easily  endormed.
Once  coming  to  her  house  a  little  late,  I  found  her  sleeping  her  natural
sleep  over  a  tiresome  novel.  I  endormed  her  magnetically,  left  her
as  usual  for  a  quarter  of  an  hour  in  paralytic  aideia,  then  held  con-

1  Dr.  P.  Despine,  "  Psychologie  Naturelle,1'  vol.  i.,  p.  586.     Paris,  1868.

2  Liegeois,  "  De  la  Suggestion  Hypnotique,"  p.  48.  Paris,  1884.  I  notice  with
surprise  that  in  the  new  edition  of  his  work  Dr.  Bernheim  cites  the  same  narrative,
without  perceiving  that  it  contradicts  his  opinions.

3  F.  A.  Mesmer,  "  Memoire,"  new  edition,  with  notes  by  Dr.  Picher  Grandchamp,
p.  56.     Paris,  1826.

ACTION  UNBEKNOWN  TO  THE  SUBJECT.        237

versation  with  her  in  somnambulism  ;  at  last,  as  my  time  was  short,  I
awakened  her.

"Ah,  so  you  are  come,"  she  said.  "Well,  endorm  me  quick,  for  my
legs  are  paining  me."

"But  I  have  already  endormed  you,  and  you  have  no  more  pain."
"That  is  true  ;  it  seems  to  me  that  I  do  not  suffer  now."
But  she  would  not  believe  that  she  had  already  been  magnetized.
Another  time  she  was  worse.     The  pains  were  excruciating,  and  I
was  summoned  by  telegraph.     I  was  away  from  home,  and  did  not
call  on  the  patient  till  near  midnight.     I  found  her  out  of  her  mind,
raving,  groaning,  and  writhing  in  pain.     I  spoke  to  her  ;  she  made  no.
answer.     I  then  laid  my  hand  upon  her  head,  and  endormed  her  within
five  minutes  at  the  longest.     She  always  fell  asleep  more  readily  when
she  did  not  know  I  was  present.      (There    was    a   peculiar    individual
cause  for  this,  not  easily  explained  here.)     The  pain  ceased  instantly,
the  fever  grew  less  by  degrees  ;  I  gave  her  the  order  to  sleep  quietly
the  whole  night,  and  left  her.     The  next  morning  she  was  much  sur-
prised to  find  she  had  slept  so  well,  and  only  from  her  husband  did
she  learn  that  I  had  come  and  endormed  her.

Finally,  I  have  often  endormed  patients  in  a  fit  of  insanity — a  more
difficult  thing,  because,  unable  to  recognize  the  magnetizer,  they  resist
with  all  their  might ;  but  by  acting  at  first  from  a  distance  and  then
coming  gradually  nearer,  one  can  always  attain  the  end  with  patients
sufficiently  sensitive,  that  one  has  endormed  before.  As  the  fit  of  insanity
usually  ceases  in  the  magnetic  sleep,  if  the  patient  is  then  awakened
he  is  surprised  to  see  us.

6.  I  myself  had  occasion  lately  to  endorm  an  insane  woman,  abso-
lutely unconscious,  having  no  suspicion  of  what  I  was  about  to  do,
and  who  had  never  been  hypnotized.  The  patient,  a  woman  named
Fier  (excited  melancholia,  mania  of  persecution,  thoughts  of  suicide,
mutism),  was  under  the  care  of  Mr.  Auguste  Voisin  at  La  Salpetriere.
June  29,  Mr.  Voisin  requested  me  to  examine  with  the  hypnoscope  a
number  of  his  patients.  They  were  brought  to  me,  and  I  made  my
notes.  When  the  turn  of  the  patient  referred  to  came,  the  woman
attendant  told  me  that  it  would  be  difficult  to  fetch  her,  for  she  was
strapped  in  an  armchair,  and  she  could  not  be  brought  to  me  save  by
carrying  her  in  the  chair.  So  I  went  to  the  compartment  for  violent
patients  and  found  a  woman  of  some  45  years,  whose  face  and  whose
fetid  breath  betokened  inanition.  She  refused  all  food,  and  had
taken  almost  nothing  for  eight  days.  A  rational  word  or  sign  was
not  to  be  got  from  her,  and  as  she  had  made  two  attempts  to  hang
herself,  it  had  been  necessary  to  put  her  in  the  camisole  or  strait
waistcoat,  and  to  strap  her  down.  I  had  the  camisole  taken  off  and
applied  the  hypnoscope.  On  pricking  her  finger  with  a  pin  I  thought
I  observed  a  diminution  of  sensibility,  judging  from  the  weakness  of
the  reflex  movements,  and,  without  more  ado,  I  laid  my  hand  upon  her
head  with  the  intention  of  endormiug  her.  After  three  or  four  minutes
her  eyelids  fell  and  she  slept.  She  replied  to  me  rationally,  making
signs  with  the  head.  I  ordered  her  to  sleep  till  I  should  come  again,
and  went  to  apprise  Mr.  Voisin,  who  was  much  pleased  with  this
result,  for  he  was  beginning  to^be  troubled  about  the  patient's  state.

238  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

Half  an  hour  afterward,  we,  Mr.  Voisin  and  myself,  found  her  still  in
somnambulism.  It  was  proposed  to  move  her  into  her  bed.  I  said
that  she  was  able  to  go  herself.  She  was  unstrapped  from  the  chair,
and  I  ordered  her  to  rise.  She  rose  and  bent  forward,  but  her  legs
were  fixed  where  she  stood.  They  were  stiff.  A  slight  massage  re-
moved the  stiffness,  and,  assisted  by  us,  the  patient  crossed  the  court
to  go  to  her  bed.  From  that  moment  forth  the  improvement  was
noticeable  from  day  to  day.  She  began  to  speak,  to  eat  and  to  sleep
quietly  of  nights.  For  the  first  few  days  I  tried  to  keep  her  nearly  all
the  time  in  somnambulism,  and,  in  fact,  the  sleep  was  interrupted  only
now  and  then  by  the  return  of  the  fit  of  insanity.  She  had  no  recol-
lection either  of  this  first  magnetization  or  of  the  period  of  derange-
ment. She  is  still  in  the  hospital,  for  as  yet  there  can  be  no  certitude
of  a  definitive  cure,  but  she  is  perfectly  rational  and  does  sewing  in
the  workroom.  This  observation  is  worthy  of  a  detailed  account,
but  at  present  I  wish  only  to  prove  that  an  insane  person  can  be  en-
dormed  without  any  expressed  suggestion.

7.  And  here  is  an  instance  to  prove  that  it  is  possible  to  endorm  an
insane  patient  in  spite  of  his  opposition.  I  take  it  from  a  memorable
observation  of  Mr.  Voisin:  "June  1. — The  agitation  had  not  ceased.
Mr.  Voisin  wanted  to  hypnotize  her;  she  showed  fight,  spat  in  his  face  ;
he  succeeded  only  with  difficulty.  The  sleep  was  deep,  lasted  twenty-
five  minutes.  In  the  afternoon  and  all  the  next  day  she  was  more
calm."1

Consequently,  it  is  inexact  to  say  that  "  No  one  can  be  hypnotized
against  his  will,  if  he  withstand  the  injunction."  In  the  new  edition
of  his  book,  Mr.  Bernheim  reproduces  the  same  assertion.  But  I  find
this  at  the  end  of  the  volume  :

"  Before  applying  the  suggestional  therapeutic,  here  are  the  rules  I
consider  myself  bound  to  observe,  and  which  every  physician  must
observe,  to  safeguard  his  conscience  and  his  professional  honor  :

"  First,  never  to  endorm  any  subject  without  his  formal  consent"  etc.

It  is  possible,  then,  to  endorm  him  without  his  formal  consent  ?

In  view  of  the  importance  of  this  matter,  I  will  cite  a  few  more
evidences  of  real  action,  physical  or  psychic,  exercised  unbeknown  to
the  subject.

8.  "  March  15,  1826,  Mr.  J.  Dupotet  brought  together  at  Mr.  Bouil-
let's  (No.  4  Dragon  Street)  several  persons,  to  enable  them  to  witness
some  of  the  phenomena  of  magnetism  and  somnambulism.  Mr.
Petit,  primary  instructor  (instituteur  primaire)  at  Athis,  near  Fromen-
teau,  who  in  1818  had  been  cured  by  Mr.  Dupotet,  by  means  of  the
magnetic  treatment,  of  several  deposits,2  and  who,  having  then  be-
come a  somnambule,  has  ever  since  shown  much  sensibility  to  mag-
netism, kindly  consented  to  offer  himself  for  the  following  experi-
ments :     .     .     .     .

"  Mr.  Dupotet,  having  bandaged  the  somnambule's  eyes,  repeatedly
held  his  fingers  pointed  toward  him,  at  the  distance  of  about  two
feet ;  immediately  there  appeared  in  the  hands  and  the  arms,  toward

1  Voisin,  "  Etude  sur  l'Hypnotisme  et  sur  les  Suggestions  chez  les  Alienes,"  p.  7.
Paris,  1884.  i  DQAts.

ACTION  UNBEKNOWN  TO  THE  SUBJECT.        239

which  the  action  was  directed,  a  violent  contraction.  .  .  .  Mr.
Bourdin  tried  to  produce  the  same  effects  ;  he,  too,  obtained  them,
but  less  promptly,  and  in  a  milder  form.  These  experiments  were
repeated  to  satiety.  .  .  .  While  Mr.  Petit  was  playing  piquet  [in
somnambulism]  Mr.  Dupotet,  at  the  instance  of  Mr.  Ribes,  brought
his  hand,  from  behind,  near  his  [Petit's]  elbow  :  the  contraction  previ-
ously observed  took  place  anew.  Then,  by  request  of  Mr.  Bourdois,
he  magnetized  him  from  behind,  still  at  the  distance  of  more  than  a
foot,  with  the  intention  of  awakening  him  ;  the  keenness  of  the
somnambule's  interest  in  the  game  countered  this  action,  so  that  in-
stead of  awakening  him,  it  incommoded  and  annoyed  him  ;  several
times  he  raised  his  hand  to  the  back  of  his  head,  as  though  he  had  a
pain  there  ;  at  last  he  fell  into  a  doze  that  seemed  to  be  a  rather  light
natural  sleep,  and  some  one  having  spoken  to  him  in  that  state,  he
awoke  with  a  bound,  as  it  were.

"  A  few  minutes  afterward  Mr.  Dupotet,  still  behind  him  and  at
some  distance,  put  him  again  in  the  magnetic  sleep,  and  the  experi-
ments began  anew.  Mr.  Bourdois  directed  his  hand  toward  one  of  the
somnambule's  arms,  intending  to  make  it  perform  a  certain  movement.
After  a  few  moments  there  was  produced  in  the  arm,  and  especially
in  the  hand,  a  very  marked  agitation,  which  became  so  violent  that
Mr.  Dupotet  felt  called  upon  to  allay  it.

"  Mr.  Bouillet,  lest  there  should  rest  any  shadow  of  doubt  upon  the
reality  of  a  physical  action  exercised  at  will,  proposed  to  blindfold
Mr.  Petit  with  as  many  bandages  as  anyone  might  wish,  and  to  act
upon  him  in  that  state.  So  his  face  was  wrapped  about  down  to  the
nostrils  with  several  cravats,  the  chink  left  on  each  side  of  the  nose
was  stuffed  with  gloves,  and  the  whole  was  then  covered  with  a  black
cravat,  falling  like  a  veil  down  to  the  neck.  Then  we  began  once
more  to  make  all  sorts  of  experiments  on  action  from  a  distance,  and
the  same  movements  were  in  every  case  manifested  in  the  parts  of
the  somnambule's  body  toward  which  the  hand  or  the  foot  was
pointed.  After  these  new  tests,  Mr.  Dupotet  having  taken  off  the
bandages  from  Mr.  Petit,  played  a  game  of  ecarte  with  him,  to  occupy
his  attention  and  to  amuse  him.  The  somnambule  played  with  the
same  skill  and  still  won.  He  played  with  such  ardor  that  he  was
insensible  to  the  influence  of  Mr.  Bourdois,  who  tried  in  vain  to  act
upon  him  from  behind  and  to  make  him  execute  an  order  of  his  will.
The  play  ended,  the  somnambule  rose,  walked  across  the  parlor,
pushing  aside  the  chairs  that  were  in  his  way,  and  went  and  sat  apart
to  rest  himself  at  a  distance  from  the  quidnuncs  and  experimenters
that  had  wearied  him.  There  Mr.  Dupotet,  who  was  several  feet
away  from'  him,  awakened  him  ;  but  apparently  the  awakening  was
not  complete,  for  a  few  moments  afterward,  while  in  the  company  of
the  Count  de  Gestas,  he  dozed,  and  a  new  effort  had  to  be  made  to
awaken  him  fully.  When  awake,  he  had  no  recollection  of  what  had
taken  place  during  his  sleep."

The  minutes  were  signed  by  Messrs.  Bourdin,  M.  D.,  member  of
the  Academy,  President  of  the  Commission  appointed  to  investigate
magnetism  ;  Ribes,  M.  D.,  member  of  the  Academy  of  Medicine  ;  the
Count  de  Gestas,  Deputy  ;  Deleuze,  Assistant  Naturalist  of  the  Jar-
din  des  Plantes  (he  did  not  arrive  till  the  middle  of  the  seance)  ;
Raynal,  ex-Inspector-General  of  the  University  ;  Raynal,  Jr.,  student
of  law  ;  Lachevardiere,  printer  ;  Binet,  Professor  of  Mathematics  in

24o  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

the  Ste.  Barbe  College  ;  Bouillet,  Professor  of  Philosophy  in  the  same
college,  and  Corbin,  Assistant  Professor  of  Rhetoric  in  the  College  of
Lyons.1

9.  In  another  seance,  January  26,  1826,  after  having  awakened
Mr.  Petit,  Mr.  Dupotet  endormed  him  again  at  the  request  of  several
persons.  He  was  then  distant  from  Mr.  Dupotet  the  whole  length  of
the  parlor,  had  his  back  turned  to  him,  and  was  talking  with  one  of
the  company.  Present  at  this  experiment  were,  with  others,  Mr.
Ampere,  of  the  Academy  of  Sciences,  and  Messrs.  Adelon  and  Ribes,
of  the  Academy  of  Medicine.8

10.  All  means  have  been  employed  against  magnetism — even  lying.
A  certain  young  woman  named  Samson  was  cured  by  Mr.  Dupotet.
Mr.  Recarmier,  in  order  to  destroy  the  effect  of  this  cure,  bethought
him  to  announce  in  full  Academy  that  Miss  Samson  had  since  re-en-
tered the  Hotel  Dieu  and  there  died.  Mr.  Dupotet  having  met  her  in
the  street,  took  her  to  the  house  of  Mr.  Husson,  Secretary  of  the
Academic  Commission,  where  everybody  recognized  her.  The  only
thing  to  be  done  was  to  verify  by  new  experiments  the  phenomena
she  had  presented  six  years  before,  but  she  refused  obstinately,  and
her  refusal  suggested  to  the  members  of  the  Commission  the  idea  of
trying  the  action  of  magnetism  in  spite  of  the  subject.  "  I  felt  that
this  was  a  sort  of  indirect  challenge,"  says  Mr.  Dupotet,  "  and  I  made
ready  to  honor  it.  So  I  began  to  act  upon  her  unbeknown  to  her,
and  then  came  a  sort  of  struggle  between  her  and  me,  in  which  she
was  seen  to  put  forth  all  her  efforts  to  keep  herself  aloof  from  my
influence.  She  showed  violent  agitation,  and  this,  after  being  sus-
pended during  a  moment  of  exhaustion  and  absolute  immobility,
reappeared  with  most  curious  characters.  She,  in  fact,  presented  a
most  striking  image  of  the  ancient  Sibyls  ;  controlled  as  she  was  by
an  irresistible  force,  she  sprang  suddenly  from  her  armchair  as  those
prophetesses  from-  their  tripods  ;  nothing  could  divert  her  from  this
frenetic  enthusiasm.  [In  magnetizing  a  subject  against  his  will  we
always  produce  a  sort  of  somnambulic  delirium  ;  the  subject  talks
incessantly,  or  else  is  seized  by  nervous  spasms — in  the  latter  case  he
must  not  be  awakened  till  he  is  calm.]  After  having  exhausted  every
kind  of  physical  excitation,  it  occurred  to  us  to  address  to  her  aloud
the  most  aggravating  speeches — such  as  women  feel  most  keenly  ;
but  her  complete  impassibility  plainly  showed  that  she  heard  nothing.
As  for  me,  standing  at  a  certain  distance  from  her, 'I  spoke  to  her  and
made  myself  heard  ;  I  touched  her  and  she  was  conscious  of  my
touch  ;  it  was  the  same  when  there  was  question  of  awakening  her ;
the  others  made  a  noise,  one  might  say  a  most  deafening  uproar,  in  try-
ing to  rouse  her,  but  it  was  in  vain  ;  then  it  was  that,  receiving  from
them  a  request  to  awaken  her,  all  that  was  needed  for  me  to  succeed
instantly  was  a  simple  act  of  my  will."  s  (The  subject  who  is  in  the
magnetic  sleep  cannot  be  awakened  save  by  the  one  who  has  en-
dormed him,  or  who  has  been  able  to  enter  into  rapport  with  him —
another  difference  between  magnetism  and  hypnotism,  for  the  hypno-
tized subject  can  be  awakened  by  anybody.)

Readers  will  perhaps  be  surprised  that  I  quote  magnetizers  as  one
quotes  scientific  observers.     It  is  true  that  I  would  not  have  done  so

1  "  Le  Propagateur  du  Magnetisme  Animal,"  etc.,  p.  32.     Paris,  1827.

*  Id.,  p.  30.  3  II,    p.  52.

ACTION  UNBEKNOWN  TO  THE  SUBJECT.        241

ten  years  ago  ;  but  since  then  I  have  found  out  that  magnetizers  are
at  least  as  worthy  of  confidence  as  hypnotizers,  and  that  if  there  are
among  them  some  credulous  folk  who  have  mal-observed  and  mis-
interpreted certain  extraordinary  phenomena,  there  are  among  hypno-
tizers, too,  many  who  have  mal-observed  and  misinterpreted  certain
very  ordinary  ones.

Incomplete  instruction  is  sometimes  preferable  to  science  sophisti-
cated by  prejudices.

That  the  will  takes  part  in  magnetizing  action  can  no  longer  be
denied.  True,  when  one  employs  passes,  the  eyes,  verbal  suggestion,
etc.,  simultaneously  with  will  power,  the  latter  may  be  superfluous,  or
at  least  its  action  is  doubtful.  In  most  cases  it  is  certainly  useless,
for  the  subjects  influence  themselves,  or  else  the  physical  action  of
the  hand  dispenses  with  mental  action.  But  one  subject  that  is  ex-
ceptionally sensitive  suffices  to  prove  the  existence  of  this  action,
provided  you  can  influence  him  without  passes,  without  the  eye  {sans
regard},  without  words,  and  without  involuntary  suggestion.  As  we
eliminate,  one  after  another,  the  accessory  agents,  we  come  upon  the
true  one.  Hear  what  is  said  on  this  head  by  a  contemporary  Voluntist,
Dr.  Perronet,  taking  care  to  reduce  to  their  true  value  the  author's
generalizations  :

11.  "I  have  employed  several  processes,"  says  he,  "  to  obtain  cata-
lepsy artificially.  Whatever  the  processes — magnetic  passes  or  odd
gestures  made  for  the  purpose  of  discharging  an  alleged  fluid — they
all  have  the  same  results  ;  whatever  value  they  have  they  derive
from  theories  or  from  beliefs  subjectively  preconceived.

"  Eschewing,  therefore,  all  mimic  ceremony,  I  was  content  to  say,
'  Sleep  ! '  and  forthwith  the  catalepsy  appeared.  Nay,  I  dispensed  with
that  formula,  trifling  though  it  was  ;  I  concentrated  all  the  power  of
my  will  within  itself,  I  stripped  it  of  every  symbol  whether  mimic  or
phonic  ;  I  condensed  it,  so  to  speak,  with  a  view  to  obtain  the  mag-
netic sleep  in  a  predisposed  person  ;  the  latter  without  being  prepared
by  any  previous  conversation,  by  any  sign,  or  by  any  act  that  might
physiologically  account  for  the  fact,  stopped  short  in  the  middle  of  a
phrase,  his  members  and  his  eyes  fixed  in  cataleptic  immobility  and
insensibility.

"  'Why  dp  you  sleep  ?  Come,  awake,'  said  I  to  the  subject,  in  order
to  intimate  to  the  persons  present  the  true  cause  of  the  crisis.  '  You
know  well  that  I  cannot  awake,'  answered  the  subject.  '  Why  ? '  '  Be-
cause you  want  me  to  sleep.'  'What  you  say  is  false  ;  how  do  you
know  that  I  want  you  to  sleep  ?  Did  I  tell  you  to  go  to  sleep  ? '  'You
did  not  tell  me  ;  you  say  the  contrary  to  tease  me,  but  I  know  well
that  you  want  me  to  sleep.'  'What  must  be  done  to  awaken  you?'
'Will  it  you.'

"I  willed  the  subject  to  awake,  as  I  had  willed  him  to  sleep,  that  is
to  say,  without  manifesting  outwardly  by  gesture  or  word  the  essence
of  my  willing  ;  the  awaking  was  effected  rapidly.

"  I  succeeded  often  with  this  experiment,  and  hence  I  infer  that  the
will  of  the  operator  is  the  sole,  or  at  least  the  preponderant,  instrument

242  MENTAL  SUGGESTION

in  producing  artificial  catalepsy  ;  that  in  a  word  the  stage  business  of
passes,  cabalistic  gestures,  commanding  or  mysterious  looks  {regards)
is  a  supererogation.  [The  author  forgets  that  all  subjects  are  not
mentally  suggestionable.]  Though  I  would  not  deny  utterly  the
utility  of  passes,  etc.,  I  hold  that  they  derive  their  power  from  the
direction  given  by  the  will ;  that  being  backed  by  a  firm,  energetic
will,  they  concur  in  making  the  experiment  successful,  but  not  with-
out the  will-power  :  in  short,  that  will-power  alone,  unaided  by  any
outward  act,  suffices  to  produce  catalepsy  artificially.

"  The  same  is  to  be  said  of  all  the  acts  performed  by  the  operator
with  a  view  to  obtain  such  or  such  a  result.  The  will  alone  gives
efficacy  to  the  act.  Thus,  for  example,  in  virtue  of  a  priori  ideas,  I  have
believed  that  pressure  exerted  by  me  on  the  pit  of  the  stomach  of  a
catalepsied  person  will  produce  manifestations  of  ecstatic  enjoyment ;
the  result  corroborated  my  hypothesis.  I  asked  a  friend  of  mine  to
exert  the  pressure  instead  of  me.  At  once  clonic  spasms  that  were
subjectively  looked  for  by  me,  agitated  the  subject,  and  ceased  the
moment  I  myself  touched  the  person  that  was  exerting  the  pressure  ;
they  began  again  when  my  contact  was  interrupted.

"  Another  time,  influenced  by  a  theory  of  the  movement  of  fluids
in  living  organisms,  I  believed  that  on  touching  the  feet  of  a  catalep-
sied subject,  I  should  produce  in  him  sudden  contractures,  and  that  I
could  make  these  disappear  by  touching  the  head  and  the  feet  simul-
taneously. Everything  happened  as  I  had  anticipated,  but  that  is  no
proof  that  the  physiological  effects  are  indissolubly  connected  with
these  manipulations  ;  any  other  processes  whatever  would  have  suc-
ceeded, provided  I  had  believed  in  their  efficacy.

"  The  formula  is  of  small  account ;  will-force  is  all.  Here  we  may
ponder  that  word  of  the  gospel :  '  The  letter  killeth,  the  spirit  makcth
alive  r ,l

Thanks  to  the  impulse  given  to  scientific  research  by  the  Society  of
Physiological  Psychology,  of  which  Mr.  Charcot  is  President,  these
old  discoveries  of  the  magnetizers  have  been  corroborated  by  many
savants,  and  now  men  are  zealously  collecting  well-observed  cases
with  a  view  to  draw  therefrom  theoretic  conclusions.  The  magnet-
izers, and  in  particular  the  Voluntists,  have  been  treated  with  derision
long  enough  ;  it  is  time  now  to  make  the  amend  of  honor  to  them,
and  to  give  cuique  suum.  Let  us  see  what  has  been  published  by  mem-
bers of  the  society  upon  the  part  played  by  the  will  in  magnetic
experiments.

In  striving  to  determine  under  what  conditions,  and  by  what  in-
fluence sleep  was  produced  in  the  case  of  Mrs.  B.,  Mr.  Peter  Janet
finds :  .    -

a.  That  fixation  of  gaze  {fixation  du  regard)  was  useless.

/;.  That  pressing  the  hand  favored  the  sleep  a  little  and  made  it
deeper.

c.  That  the  production  [of  sleep]  was  still  more  prompt  if,  instead
of  simply  pressing  the  hand,  the  thumb  was  laid  exactly  against  the
thumb  of  the  subject ;  but

1  Perronet,  "  Du  Magnetisme  Animal,"  pp.  15-17.     Paris,  1884.

ACTION  UNBEKNOWN  TO   THE  SUBJECT.        243

d.  That  none  of  these  processes  has  any  influence  if  the  thought  is
wandering,  and  if  the  will  does  not  intervene.

Let  us  make  haste  to  say  that  we  have  to  do  with  a  monograph,  not
with  a  general  theory.     Unfortunately,  this  difference  is  too  oft  for-
gotten.    It  is  truly  astonishing  that  physiologists  that  know  how  to
generalize  prudently  when  there  is  question  of  ordinary  researches,
lose   their   head  when   they  deal  with   hypnotism.     And  not  only  lose
their  head,  but  believe  themselves  dispensed  from  all  circumspection
with  regard  to  facts  affirmed  by  magnetizers.    "Magnetizers  have  ob-
served  this  or  that  in  a  thousand  cases,  therefore  it  is  fudge  ;  I  have
seen  this  or  that  in  Mr.  X.  or  Miss  Z.,  therefore  hypnotized  persons
behave  thus  and  so."     Hypnotism  is  taken  to  be  synonymous  with
magnetism,  and,  lo  !  there  you  have  a  generalized  observation,  put  for-
ward   under   the   observer's   authority,   but  which  positively  has  no
scientific  value,  not  even  an  individual  value,  for  the  reason  that  the
individual's  peculiarities  are  not  pointed  out,  and  that  it  is  not  said
whether  the  sleep  was  procured  by  a  shining  button  or  by  passes.
Hand  a  magnetizer  that  is  familiar  with  experimentation  Heidenhain's
unfortunate  little  book,  for  example,   and  he  will  simply  shrug  his
shoulders  ;  and  yet  Heidenhain  is  an  eminent  physiologist.     There  is
a  good   deal  more  truth  in  Mr.  Dupotet's  exaggerations  than  in  the
scientific  observations  of  Mr.  Heidenhain.     I  should  be  embarrassed
were  I  asked  to  point  to  a  single  page  in  Heidenhain  that  could  be
accepted  without  reservation.  Think  you  that  when  he  writes  a  treatise
on  hypnotism  or  "  self-styled  magnetism,"  he  at  least  was  careful  to
read  Braid  ?    Not  a  bit  of  it,  nor  Mesmer  either  !    Yet,  if  the  question
were  the  action  of  cocaine,  or  of  narceine,  he  would,  no  doubt,  read
up  his  predecessors.      Such  is  the  Fluch  der  bosen  That,  as  the  Ger-
mans say.    Science  has  spurned  and  ridiculed  magnetism  ;  magnetism
now  sends  the  curse  back  home.

So  then,  without  generalizing,  for  it  is  certain  that  in  most  cases  we
shall  not  be  able  to  demonstrate  the  mental  action  of  the  will,  let  us
see  what  has  been  observed  by  unbiased  experimenters  in  some
privileged  subjects  :

12.  "  One  day  Mr.  Gibert  was  holding  Mrs.  B.'s  hand  to  endorm
her  ;  but  he  was  visibly  preoccupied  and  thinking  of  something  other
than  the  business  in  hand  ;  sleep  did  not  come  at  all.  This  experi-
ment, repeated  by  me  many  a  time  in  various  ways,  has  shown  us  [says
Mr.  Janet]  that  to  endorm  Mrs.  B.  o?ie  must  concentrate  his  thought
strongly  upon  the  order  to  go  to  sleep  that  one  gives,  and  that  the  more  the
thought  of  the  operator  is  distracted  the  more  difficult  it  is  to  produce  sleep.
This  influence  of  the  operator's  thought,  extraordinary  as  it  may  seem,
is  here  absolutely  predominant,  so  that  in  fact  it  may  take  the  place  of
all  other  influences.  If  you  press  Mrs.  B.'s  hand  without  any  thought
of  endorming  her,  you  do  not  produce  sleep  ;  on  the  other  hand  if
you  think  of  endorming  her  without  pressing  her  hand,  you  will
succeed  perfectly.     So  we  left  Mrs.  B.  seated  at  the  lower  end  of  the

244  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

room  ;  then,  without  touching  her  or  saying  a  word,  Mr.  Gibert,  who
was  at  the  other  end,  held  his  thought  upon  willing  to  make  her  sleep;
in  three  minutes  lethargic  sleep  appeared.  I  repeated  the  same  ex-
periment many  times  with  the  utmost  ease  ;  all  that  was  needed  was
that  (remaining,  it  is  true,  in  the  same  room)  I  should  think  strongly
upon  my  will  to  endorm  her.  Once  I  succeeded  in  endorming  her
even  in  spite  of  herself  and  though  she  was  in  great  agitation,  but  it
required  five  minutes  of  effort.  It  has  often  happened  that  while
waiting  for  Mr.  Gibert,  I  would  remain  by  Mrs.  B.,  in  the  same  atti-
tude of  meditation,  in  the  same  silence,  without  any  thought  of
endorming  her,  and  then  the  sleep  would  not  even  begin.  On  the
other  hand,  so  soon  as,  without  any  change  of  attitude,  I  thought  upon
the  order  to  her  to  sleep,  the  eyes  of  the  subject  would  become  set
and  soon  lethargy  began.  In  the  second  place,  if  the  attitude  of  the
persons  present  had  suggested  the  sleep,  I  cannot  explain  why  only
the  person  that  had  produced  it  by  thought,  could,  in  the  lethargy,
produce  the  characteristic  phenomena  of  contracture  and  attraction."1
[That,  too,  is  a  character  of  the  magnetic  sleep  that  does  not  exist  in
hypnotism.  Consequently,  they  who  confound  the  two  phenomena
and  after  having  obtained  the  magnetic  sleep,  without  knowing  it,
say  that  a  pressure,  or  a  mechanical  excitation,  produces  this  or  that,
are  mistaken,  for  pressure,  or  excitation,  as  such,  produces  absolutely
no  effect.     The  literature  of  hypnotism  is  full  of  such  inexactitudes.]

13.  "In  the  course  of  the  year  1873  [says  Mr.  Richet],  being  then
interne  of  the  Beaujon  Hospital,  I  made  many  experiments  in  som-
nambulism. In  only  one  of  the  subjects  endormed  by  me  was  I  able
to  produce  somnambulism  at  a  distance.  [At  present  I  quote  only
the  experiments  that  were  made  in  the  same  room,  and  which  prove
only  will-action.]  It  was  a  young  married  woman  of  some  25  years,
who,  being  at  first  with  difficulty  accessible  to  sleep,  at  last,  from  having
been  trained  to  the  process,  could  be  endormed  with  very  great
facility.  At  first  I  endormed  her  by  passes  ;  then  by  touching  her
hand  ;  at  last  simply  by  entering  the  ward  in  which  she  was.  Morn-
ings, when  I  entered  the  ward  with  Professor  Le  Fort,  chief  of  my  de-
partment in  the  hospital,  I  would  see  her  at  the  opposite  end  of  the
ward  immediately  falling  asleep.  But  as  I  did  not  wish  her  to  be  in
that  state  when  Mr.  Le  Fort  should  reach  her,  I  would  make  every
effort  mentally  to  awaken  her,  and  in  fact  she  always  used  to  awake
a  few  moments  before  Mr.  Le  Fort  came  to  her  bedside."8

14.  "  The  observation  I  report  here  [Dr.  Hericourt  is  speaking]
dates  from  the  year  1878,  and  I  communicated  it  at  the  time  to  my
friend  Mr.  Charles  Richet,  who  has  kept  it  faithfully  and  prudently
among  his  papers  for  reasons  easily  understood.  The  case  was  that
of  a  young  woman  of  24  years,  of  Spanish  descent,  a  widow,  and
mother  of  a  little  girl  of  5  years.  Mrs.  D.  is  small,  thin,  very  brown,
has  the  pilose  system  greatly  developed.  The  most  thorough  investi-
gation developed  no  trace  in  her  of  hysteria,  whether  hereditary  or
individual.  When  I  tried  to  produce  hypnotism  [magnetism  is  meant]
in  Mrs.  D.,  she  never  had  undergone  any  experiment  of  the  kind.
The  first  attempt,  however,  succeeded  fully  after  some  twelve  minutes
spent  in  gazing  at   her  fixedly  and  holding  her  thumbs  fast  in  my

1  P.  Janet,  "  Notes  sur  quelques  Phenomenes  du  Somnambulisme."  (Bull,  de  la
Soc.  Psych.  Phys.,  1885.)

2  Ch.  Richet,  "  Un  Fait  de  Somnambulisme  a  Distance."

ACTION  UNBEKNOWN  TO  THE  SUBJECT.        245

hands.     In  the  sequel  the  same  result  was  obtained  by  simply  gazing
at  her,  or  touching  her  head  or  her  hand  for  not  more  than  a  few
seconds  ;  at  last,  with  still  less  ado,  as  will  presently  be  seen.     The
state  of  Mrs.  D.  was  then  from  the  first  moment  one  of  lucid  somnam-
bulism ;  she  was  fluent  in  conversation,  her  intelligence  was  quick,
her  sensibility  seemed  heightened,  her  memory  was  remarkable  ;  every
image  evoked  produced  an  hallucination,  but  this  phenomenon  never
appeared  spontaneously.     [The  state  then  was polyideic,  with  tendency
to  passive  ?nonoideis?n.~\     At  the  same  time  there  was  total  insensibility
to  pain,  and  the  members  which  were  the  seat  of  a  very  definite  mus-
cular superexcitability  were  put  in  catalepsy  by  a  simple  touch,  without
modifying  in  the  least  the  psychic  state.     [That  is  a  very  common
phenomenon  in  magnetism,  and  it  proves  :   1 — That  it  is  not  necessary
to  open  the  subject's  eyes  to  produce  catalepsy ;  and,  2 — That  cata-
lepsy may  co-exist  with  somnambulism,  and  that,  therefore,  it  is  incor-
rect to   regard  these  two  states  as  distinct  phases.     In  general,  all
classifications  based  solely  on  external  characters  must  necessarily
be  defective,  for  all  the  external  characters  may  be  produced  in  all
hypnotic  states  and  even  in  the  state  of  waking.     Only  the  psychic
characters  can  serve  as  a  basis  for  a  valid  classification.     Somnam-
bulism is  a  cerebral  phenomenon  first  of  all,  and  therefore  we  must  not
seek  elsewhere  but  in  the  brain  the  differentiating  characters  of  its
phases.     We  may  only  say,  for  example,  cataleptic  or  simply  paralytic
aideia,  or  polyideia,  to  indicate  the  cases  where  the  members  are  limp,
or  where  they  keep  the  posture  given  them.]     At  the  awaking,  which
I  produced  by  drawing  my  finger  over  the  upper  lids,  the  memory  of
what  had  taken  place  was  wholly  lost ;  but  in  the  second  state  it  made
an  unbroken  chain  of  the  facts  of  her  waking  state  and  those  of  her
state  of  sleep.

"As  I  have  said,  I  endormed  Mrs.  D.  with  greater  facility  each  suc-
ceeding day.  In  fact,  after  a  fortnight  or  so  of  this  special  training,
I  no  longer  needed,  in  order  to  obtain  that  result,  either  contact  or
the  power  of  the  eye.  I  had  only  to  will,  using  no  sort  of  gesture
whatever  that  might  betray  my  intention.  If  she  were  engaged  in
animated  conversation  with  a  number  of  persons  while  I  was  in  some
corner  in  an  attitude  of  the  utmost  indifference,  I  would  soon  see  her,
as  I  willed,  trying  to  ward  off  the  sleep  that  was  coming  upon  her,
and  at  last  succumbing,  or  taking  up  again  the  thread  of  her  thoughts,
accordingly  as  I  either  continued  or  ceased  to  apply  my  thought  to
the  result  to  be.  obtained.  And  I  might  even  gaze  fixedly  on  my  sub-
ject, hold  her  fast  by  the  thumbs  or  the  wrists,  and  make  all  imagin-
able passes  of  the  sort  used  by  professional  magnetizers,  yet  if  it  was
not  my  will' to  endorm  her  she  remained  wide  awake  and  conscious
of  my  powerlessness."  1

15.  Finally,  a  fourth  observation  of  this  kind  was  communicated  to
the  Society  by  Mr.  Glay.  It  was  made  by  Mr.  Desart,  sometime  interne
of  the  Paris  hospitals,  and  was  published  in  the  Tribune  Me'dicale
(May  16  and  30,  1875):  "The  case  was  that  of  a  girl  of  14  years
whom  Mr.  Desart  was  called,  in  1869,  to  treat  for  a  serious  hysteric
affection — paralysis  of  sight  and  smell,  perversion  of  taste,  loss  of
power  of  movement  and  of  sensibility  in  the  right  arm  and  both  legs,
cesophagism,  rachialgia,  suicidal  tendency.  Mr.  Desart  tells  how  he
came  to  think  of  endorming  her.     The  spasm  of  the  oesophagus  was

1  J.  Hdricourt,  Bull,  de la  Soc.  de  Psych.  Physiol.,  1885.

246  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

such  that  she  had  to  be  fed  with  a  tube ;  but  swayed  as  she  was  by
the  thought  of  suicide,  she  every  time  had  a  fierce  struggle  with  us
to  prevent  the  introduction  of  food.  It  took  three  of  us,  often  four,
to  overcome  her  resistance.  After  the  food  was  introduced,  the
patient  would  strive  in  every  way  to  bring  on  vomiting,  would  keep
expectorating  and  shouting  for  hours  at  a  time.

"  Her  parents,  whose  intelligence  was  below  the  average,  and  who
were  full  of  prejudices,  were  opposed  to  the  employment  of  narcotics
or  any  agent  capable  of  quieting  her.  In  these  circumstances  the
patient  was  failing  rapidly  and  giving  us  much  anxiety.  The  strug-
gle for  the  introduction  of  nourishment  lasted  from  early  in  June  till
the  end  of  October.  Then  it  was  that  I  proposed  to  the  parents
a  method  I  had  for  some  time  had  in  mind — magnetic  sleep.  All  my
knowledge  of  magnetism  was  limited  to  a  few  recollections  of  what  I
had  seen  when  I  was  an  interne  under  Aran.  I  had  often  seen  that
physician  endorm  an  hysteriac,  and  I  said  to  myself  that  I  might
doubtless  greatly  improve  the  condition  of  Miss  J.  if  I  could  make
sure  of  her  digesting  her  food,  by  producing  after  each  meal  a  state
of  sleep,  or  at  least  a  sufficient  calm."

So  Mr.  Desart  tried  to  endorm  her  by  means  of  passes,  as  he  had
seen  Aran  do.  He  was  successful  and  fed  his  patient  without  diffi-
culty. In  trying  to  discover  how  the  sleep  was  produced  he  was  led
to  observe  the  following  phenomena  :

"  I  observed,"  he  says,  "  that  when,  in  making  passes,  I  allowed
myself  to  be  distracted  by  the  parents'  conversation,  I  never  was  able
to  produce  sufficiently  deep  sleep,  even  after  trying  for  a  long  time.
So,  then,  the  intervention  of  my  will  had  to  count  for  a  good  deal.
But  was  that  sufficient  without  the  aid  of  any  outward  manifestation  ?
That  was  what  I  wished  to  know.  I  therefore  came  one  day,  before
the  hour  set  for  her  awaking,  and,  without  looking  at  the  patient,
without  making  any  gesture,  I  mentally  ordered  her  to  awake.  I  was
obeyed  instantly.  As  I  had  willed,  the  delirium  and  the  outcries
began.  I  then  sat  before  the  fire,  my  back  to  the  bed  of  the  patient,
whose  face  was  turned  toward  the  door  of  the  chamber,  and  talked
with  the  persons  present,  without  appearing  to  pay  any  attention  to
Miss  J.'s  cries.  Then,  at  a  given  moment,  no  one  noticing  what  was
going  on  in  my  mind,  I  gave  the  mental  order  to  sleep,  and  sleep
followed.  More  than  one  hundred  times  was  the  experiment  made,
and  modified  in  various  ways  ;  the  order  used  to  be  given  at  a  sign
made  to  me  by  Dr.  X.,  and  the  effect  was  always  produced.  One  day
I  arrived  when  the  patient  was  awake  and  in  full  delirium  ;  she  con-
tinued her  outcries  and  her  agitation  regardless  of  my  presence.  So
I  sat  down  and  awaited  the  signal  from  Dr.  X.  That  given  and  the
mental  order  formulated,  the  patient  grew  quiet  and  fell  asleep.
*  You  knew  that  I  was  in  the  room  for  some  time  ? '  '  No,  sir  !  I
knew  of  your  presence  only  when  I  felt  sleep  coming  upon  me.  Then
I  was  conscious  that  you  were  in  front  of  the  fire.' " '

This  last  remark  explains  how  mental  transmission,  following  a  con-
centration of  thought,  may  simulate  vision.  At  the  same  time,  with
the  act  of  will,  some  sensations  are  also  transmitted,  and  produce  in

1  E.  Glay,  "A  propos  d'une  Observation  de  Sommeil  provoque  a  Distance."  {Bull,
Soc.  P.  P.   1885.)

ACTION  UNBEKNOWN  TO  THE  SUBJECT.        247

the  mind  of  the  subject  a  visual  image  of  the  operator  and  his  sur-
roundings—  a  veridical  hallucination,  as  Mr.  Frederic  Myers  well
calls  it.

Oftener  still  the  will-action,  though  not  transmitted  as  such,  simply
strengthens  the  physical  action  of  the  magnetism,  which  can  be  exerted
without  this  special  concentration  ;  and  there  are  all  possible  degrees
— purely  ideoplastic  action,  ideoplastic  and  physical,  purely  physical
and  physical  and  mental.  The  first  (purely  ideoplastic  action)  is  the
most  common,  the  last  (action  physical  and  mental)  the  rarest.
Physical  action  holds  the  middle  place  as  regards  frequency,  but  it
comes  in  so  often,  or  rather  is  so  often  perceptible,  that  it  is  easily
verified.

I  wish  to  speak  of  this  latter  category  of  mediate  will-transmission
before  I  pass  on  to  the  more  extraordinary  phenomena  of  suggestion.

When  your  hand  acts  upon  a  waking  patient,  the  concurrence  of
ideoplasty  is  always  to  be  supposed,  but  one  can  experiment  on  sleeping
infants,  and  in  that  case  it  is  not  easy,  especially  if  it  is  a  first  experi-
ment, to  show  that  imagination  is  the  sole  cause  of  the  action.  Such
experiment  does  not  demonstrate  (at  least  not  directly)  mental  action
of  the  will,  but  it  does  demonstrate  physical  action,  and  the  former
is  not  comprehensible  without  the  latter.  I  mention  these  experi-
ments with  the  more  pleasure  because  they  have  brought  about  the
conversion  of  an  old  sinner,  a  man  highly  respected  and  of  great
worth — I  mean  Dr.  Liebeault,  apostle  of  the  theory  of  suggestion  and
father  of  the  hypnotic  school  at  Nancy.  For  many  years  he,  like
everybody,  confounded  hypnotism  with  magnetism,  and  rejected  the
theory  of  physical  action.  It  was  the  little  children  that  converted
him,  and,  singularly  enough,  a  suggestion  from  Mr.  Bernheim  made
the  conversion  complete.

"  We  sought,"  writes  Mr.  Liebeault,  "  to  repeat  our  experiments  upon
a  still  younger  child,  according  to  the  advice  given  by  Professor  Bernheim.
And  at  bottom  this  is  the  same  mode  of  experimenting  long  ago
employed  with  advantage  by  Dupotet  and  Dumont  upon  three  juvenile
subjects,  with  a  purely  physiological  end  in  view,  though  they  acted
at  a  distance,  in  this  differing  from  us.  A  little  child,  Louise  Meyer,
one  year  old,  was  presented  to  us  in  such  condition  as  we  wanted.
For  four  weeks  the  child  had  cried  night  and  day,  and  in  spite  of  the
care  bestowed  upon  her  by  a  very  excellent  physician,  no  change  for
the  better  had  yet  appeared.  To  us  she  seemed  to  have  continuous
colic  pains,  the  result  of  obstinate  constipation.  Now  and  then,  per-
haps, she  would  sleep  five  or  six  minutes  at  a  time.  During  one  of
these  naps,  consequently  unbeknown  to  the  babe,  we  prolonged  that  state
and  kept  her  twenty  minutes  under  our  hands,  till  there  was  a  sign  of
awaking.  From  that  moment,  as  by  enchantment,  she  cried  no  more,
slept  even  a  good  part  of  the  night,  and  was  brought  back  to  us  the
following  day  quiet  and  beginning  to  have  stools.  Three  seances
during  the  following  days,  but  without  her  sleeping,  completed  the
cure."

248  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

This  fact  may  seem  extraordinary  to  a  physician  who  knows  only
drugs,  but  for  magnetizers  it  is  an  everyday  matter,  and  I  have  verified
it  over  and  over  again.  And  there  is  no  need  to  suppose  that  a  one-
year  old  baby  has  read  the  works  of  Dupotet,  or  attended  one  of
Mr.  Donato's  seances,  to  acquire  the  robust  faith  that  is  indispensable
for  hypnotic  action :  all  the  same,  it  can  be  cured.

Mr.  Liebeault  cites  forty-five  similar  observations,  and,  like  an  honest
man  and  one  that  knows  how  to  observe,  he  concludes  thus  :  "  In
view  of  the  curative  effects  we  have  just  recounted,  we  are  led  to
admit  a  direct  action  of  the  neurility — [but  why  of  the  neurility
alone  ?  The  whole  body  acts  physically  ;  nerve-action  and  mind-
action  do  but  emphasize  and  confirm  that  action.  Among  the  facts  I
have  verified  is  this,  that  the  speediness  of  the  curative  action  depends
largely  upon  the  agreeable  impressions  received  just  before  by  the  mag-
netizer,  but  it  is  always  exercised  more  or  less  when  an  ailing  organism
is  magnetized  by  a  man  that  is  in  sound  health,  even  though  his  will
be  not  specially  intense] — we  are  led  to  admit  a  direct  action  trans-
mitted from  man  to  man,  and  possessing  this  essential,  irreducible,
sui-generis  character,  that  it  can  re-establish  the  physiological  func-
tionment  of  organs.  A  nerve-undulation  was,  in  the  cases  of  all  our
patients,  transmitted  from  us  to  their  nervous  systems,  and  conse-
quently, though  in  what  way  we  know  not,  gave  a  beneficial  impulse
to  the  diseased  organs.  Though  as  regards  magnetism  I  am  a  psycho-
logist, and  for  a  long  time  have  been  opposed  to  the  theory  of  the
fluid  by  externation,1  I  can  no  longer  deny  that  certain  phenomena
are  due  to  the  action  of  one  organism  on  another,  without  any  con-
scious intervention  of  the  subject  under  experiment.  ...  It
were  no  inconsiderable  advance  were  these  two  different  views  both
accepted,  for  they  enable  us  to  account  for  many  facts  which  before
seemed  inexplicable  by  either  of  them  alone.  ...  In  the  mean-
time we  invite  the  true  friends  of  science,  those  who,  being  independent,
do  not  believe  in  the  infallibility  of  academicians — we  invite  them  to
verify  our  experiments.  The  work  is  easy,  and  we  are  sure  that  they
will  confirm  our  conclusions,  even  as  we  have  confirmed  those  of  the
Liege  magnetizer,  Mr.  Longpretz."2

These  words  were  written  three  years  ago.  Since  then  not  a  single
savant  has  tried  to  verify  Mr.  Liebeault's  assertions:  There  has  been
a  hundred  years  of  waiting,  and  we  can  wait  a  while  longer.  Unfor-
tunately, the  matter  involves  a  difficulty — that  of  finding  an  inde-
pendent medical  man.

Rara  avis!

1  Du  fuide  par  externation.

2  Dr.  Liebeault,  "Etude  sur  le  Zoomagn6tisme,"  pp.  4,  24,  28.  Paris,  Nancy,
1883.

DEFERRED  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.  249

CHAPTER  VIII.

DEFERRED    MENTAL    SUGGESTION.

THE  phenomenon  next  to  be  considered  constitutes  a  special
case  of  will-transmission — a  deferred  transmission  with  time
fixed.  In  reality  it  is  not  the  transmission  that  is  deferred  or  re-
tarded, but  only  the  execution  of  the  order  given  ;  the  action  is  men-
tal suggestion  "  with  a  long  time  to  run  "  {a  tongue  eche'ancc).1

Everybody  has  heard  of.  deferred  mental  suggestions  with  a  long
time  to  run  ;  they  have  become  commonplace.  You  order  an  hypno-
tized or  a  magnetized  subject  to  perform  some  act  after  he  awakes —
to-morrow,  the  day  after,  a  week,  even  some  months  hence.  Awakened,
he  will  have  no  thought  whatever  of  the  matter  ;  but  when  the  hour
comes  he  will,  perforce,  carry  out  your  order,  knowing  neither  how
nor  why  the  thought  has  come  to  him.  Generally  the  subject  assimi-
lates the  thought,  so  to  speak,  and  thinks  he  is  acting  of  his  own
accord,  as  if  to  prove  the  truth  of  Spinoza's  dictum,  that  "  we  know
not  the  causes  that  determine  our  actions."

Dr.  Gibert  has  employed  mental,  as  others  have  employed  verbal,
suggestion  in  producing  this  phenomenon,  and  he  has  obtained  no  less
satisfactory  results.

Not  the  least  surprising  thing  in  this  class  of  facts,  of  themselves
surprising  enough,  is,  that  certain  somnambules  with  whom  the  trans-
mission of  orders  to  be  executed  at  once  is  unsuccessful  or  difficult,
are  highly  susceptible  to  long-interval  suggestions.

To  explain  this  fact  as  far  as  it  may  be  explained,  we  must  recall
what  we  have  already  said  about  two  different  unconscious  strata —
one  strong,  manifesting  itself  in  somnambulism  ;  the  other  weak,  over-
borne by  the  first,  not  subject  to  our  direct  investigation,  but  ready
at  the  propitious  moment  to  re-acquire  its  right  to  act.  Transmission
seems  to  be  more  easy  in  this  latter  stratum,  and  seems  even  to  take
place  very  often,  yet  can  give  us  no  plain  proof  of  its  existence.
This  is  the  domain  of  Leibnitz's  "  imperceptible  sensations."  These
cannot  manifest  themselves  immediately,  but  give  them  the  time
needed  in  order  to  work  up  into  the  higher  strata,  and  they  will
appear  at  the  surface.

"  Mental  suggestions,"  says  Mr.  Janet,  "  may  be  given  to  Mrs.  B.
in  another  way,  and  have  quite  other  success.  The  result  is  uncer-
tain when  you  bid  her  execute  the  order  immediately,  during  the
sleep  ;  it  is  much  surer  when  you  mentally  order  her  to  execute  the
order  later,  some  time  after  awaking."

1  £ck^ance,  the  falling  due  of  a  promissory  note,  etc. —  Translator.

250  MENTAL  SUGGESTION

i  "  October  8,  Mr.  Gibert  gave  a  suggestion  in  this  way  :  without
uttering  a  word,  he  brought  his  forehead  near  that  of  Mrs.  B.  during
the  lethargic  sleep  [thus  it  was  a  state  more  or  less  aideu],  and  for  a
few  moments  concentrated  his  thought  on  the  order  he  gave  her.
Mrs.  B.  seemed  to  experience  a  painful  impression,  and  uttered  groans
[as  we  have  seen,  p.  90  supra,  this  impression  may  be  so  strong  as  to
bring  on  an  attack  of  hysteria]  ;  in  other  respects  the  sleep  seemed
not  in  the  least  disturbed.  Mr.  Gibert  told  no  one  the  order  he  had
given,  but  simply  wrote  it  on  a  piece  of  paper  which  he  put  in  an  envel-
ope. The  next  day  I  came  back  to  Mrs.  B.  to  see  the  effect  of  this
suggestion,  which  was  to  be  executed  between  11  and  12  o'clock.  At
11:30  the  woman  showed  the  greatest  agitation,  left  the  kitchen
where  she  had  been,  entered  a  room  and  took  away  a  tumbler  ;  then,
overcoming  her  timidity,  she  decided  to  enter  the  parlor,  where  I  was,
and  excitedly  asked  if  I  had  not  called  her.  Upon  my  replying  in
the  negative,  she  went  away,  and  kept  going  up  stairs  and  down
several  times  between  the  kitchen  and  parlor,  though  she  brought  noth-
ing. That  day  she  did  nothing  more,  for  soon  she  fell  into  a  sleep,
being  endormed  by  Mr.  Gibert  at  a  distance.  During  her  sleep  she
said  :  '  I  trembled  when  I  came  and  asked  you  if  anyone  had  called
me  ;  I  had  to  come — it  was  rather  inconvenient  to  come  with  this
tray — why  am  I  asked  to  carry  glasses  ?  What  was  I  going  to  say  ?
Wasn't  it  that  I  don't  want  you  to  do  that  ? — I  was  to  say  something
to  you  on  coming.'

"  On  opening  the  envelope,  I  saw  that  Mr.  Gibert  had  the  day
before  ordered  Mrs.  B.  '  to  offer  a  glass  of  water  to  each  of  those
gentlemen.'  Here  again  it  must  be  acknowledged  that  the  experi-
ment was  not  a  complete  success.  The  suggestion  was  not  executed  ;
but  can  it  be  denied  at  least  that  it  was  taken  in  ?  "

2.  "  Here  is  a  more  significant  experiment.  October  10,  we,  Mr.
Gibert  and  I,  agreed  to  make  the  following  suggestion  :  '  To-morrow
at  noon  lock  the  doors  of  the  house.'  I  wrote  the  suggestion  on  a  piece
of  paper,  which  I  kept  about  me  and  which  I  would  not  show  to  any-
one. Mr.  Gibert  made  the  suggestion  as  before,  bringing  his  fore-
head near  that  of  Mrs.  B.  The  next  day  when  I  arrived,  a  quarter
before  12  o'clock,  I  found  the  house  barricaded  and  the  door  locked.
I  learned  on  inquiry  that  Mrs.  B.  had  just  locked  it.  When  I  asked
why  she  had  done  that  singular  act,  she  answered:  'I  felt  much
fatigued,  and  did  not  wish  you  to  be  able  to  enter  in  order  to  endorm
me.'  Mrs.  B.  was  at  the  moment  much  excited.  She  kept  roaming
about  in  the  garden,  and  I  saw  her  pluck  a  rose  and  go  to  the  letter-
box at  the  entrance  gate.  These  acts  are  unimportant,  but  it  is
curious  to  observe  that  they  were  just  the  acts  that  the  evening  before
we  had  thought  of  ordering  her  to  do.  But  we  decided  to  order
another  act,  that  of  locking  the  doors  ;  yet  the  thought  of  those  other
acts  doubtless  occupied  Mr.  Gibert's  mind  while  he  was  giving  the
order  and  she  too  was  influenced  thereby."  Rather  in  this  case  the
transmission  was  doubly  unconscious;  transmission  of  the  uncon-
scious of  the  first  order  (in  the  operator)  to  the  unconscious  of  the
second  order  (in  the  subject).

3.  "  October  13,  Mr.  Gibert  ordered  her,  still  mentally,  the  next  day
at  noon  to  take  a  spread  umbrella  and  twice  to  go  the  round  of  the
garden.  That  next  day  she  was  much  excited  at  noon,  twice  made
the  round  of  the  garden,  but  did  not  spread  the  umbrella.     A  little

DEFERRED  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.  251

while  afterward  I  endormed  her  to  quiet  her  agitation,  which  was
becoming  greater  and  greater.  The  first  words  she  spoke  were
these:  'Why  did  you  make  me  walk  round  the  garden?  I  looked
like  a  fool.  If  only  the  weather  were  like  yesterday's,  though.  But
to-day  I  should  have  been  a  laughing-stock.'  It  was  a  very  fine  day,
the  day  before  it  rained  heavily.  She  did  not  wish  to  spread  the
umbrella  for  fear  of  being  laughed  at."

In  what  state  (of  the  subject)  were  these  deferred  suggestions
possible  ?     We  shall  soon  see  ;  but  it  is  a  long  story.

In  the  beginning  of  the  experiments  Mrs.  B.  presented  only  two
quite  distinct  states  :  deep  sleep  (aideia)  and  light  sleep,  i.  e.,  som-
nambulism properly  so-called  (polyideia,  passive  or  active).  The
former  state  was  usually  characterized  by  complete  muscular  immo-
bility (paralytic  aideia)  ;  the  latter  by  excessive  sensibility,  with
facility  of  movement,  and  with  intelligence.

These  two  states  alternated  indefinitely,  that  is  to  say,  after  having
manifested  a  certain  intelligent  spontaneity,  the  subject,  as  though
fatigued,  relapsed  into  aideic  immobility,  passing  thence  anew  into
the  lucidity  of  somnambulism.  That  was  a  sign  of  maximum  hyp-
notic sensibility,  for  at  a  slightly  lower  degree  the  subject  does  not
return  again  to  aideia,  but  passes  little  by  little  from  sleep  to  the
waking  state,  or  rests  a  little  while  in  a  state  very  like  normal  sleep
(with  only  this  difference,  that  rapport  continues),  then  awakes.
This  transition  may  last  several  hours,  but  it  is  always  accompanied
by  sensibility,  whereas  subjects  that  are  in  the  state  of  maximum
sensibility  pass  to  and  fro  between  these  two  principal  states,  without
waking  of  their  own  accord  till  they  have  had  a  night's  natural  sleep,
and  sometimes  even  they  do  not  come  to  themselves  the  following
day.

Probably  there  was  between  these  two  principal  states  an  inter-
mediate monoideic  state  of  longer  or  shorter  duration.

Not  to  enter  into  details,  we  may  affirm,  on  the  basis  of  Mr.  Janet's
own  account,  that  not  one  of  the  three  well-known  states — catalepsy,
lethargy  and  somnambulism — as  described  by  Mr.  Charcot,  existed  at
this  period.

But  sometime  after,  Mr.  Janet  went  to  the  Salpetriere  to  study  the
hypnotic  triad,  and  took  it  away  in  his  head,  slightly  confused  (as  he
himself  confessed  to  me)  ;  so  he  set  to  work  to  discover  the  three
phases  in  Mrs.  B.  "  If  these  states  did  not  exist  in  her,"  said  he,
"  might  not  one  try  to  produce  them  ?  "  But  that  was  not  the  work  of  a
moment.  Mr.  Janet  had  to  be  "  infinitely  persistent,"  to  experiment,
to  verify;  above  all  as  regards  the  "lethargy,"  the  production  of
which  was  a  "  a  very  laborious  "  task.  At  last  he  succeeded  in  pro-
ducing (that  is  the  word)  six  different  states.

"  New  studies  undertaken  with   the  same  end  in  view,"  says  Mr.

252  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

Janet,  "verified  the  preceding  results,  complicating  them  a  little,  how-
ever, I  must  say."     A  little  is,  perhaps,  not  the  word.

However  that  may  be,  Mrs.  B.  at  that  time  presented,  over  and
above  the  three  principal  phases — catalepsy,  lethargy  and  somnam-
bulism— three  intermediate  phases,  lethargic  catalepsy,  lethargic
somnambulism  and  somnambulism  with  the  eyes  open,  or  cataleptic
somnambulism.

Plainly,  the  subject,  restrained  in  her  natural  tendencies,  defended
herself  as  she  could.

But  Mr.  Janet,  to  bring  more  order  into  this  vicious  circle  "  made
the  subject  go  through,  in  one  direction  or  in  the  other,  the  whole
series  of  these  states."  And  then,  the  subject  defended  herself
so  well  that  she  manifested  a  seventh  phase,  called  by  Mr.  Janet
lethargic  catalepsy ;  then  an  eighth,  som?iambulic  lethargy  (that  is  .as
though  we  were  to  speak  of  a  black  white),  which  was  added  to  the
lethargic  somnambulism  already  mentioned.

The  latter  state  has  special  interest  for  us,  for  it  was  in  that  state
that  the  deferred  mental  suggestions  were  given  (by  bringing  the
foreheads  of  the  magnetizer  and  the  subject  together).  These  sug-
gestions could  not  be  carried-  out  immediately,  but  they  could  be  in  a
subsequent  more  active  phase.  It  is  important  that  we  understand
what  that  phase  was.

In  lethargic  somnambulism  there  is  still  relaxation  of  the  muscles,  as
in  the  deeper  state  preceding  it  ;  there  is  still  insensibility,  but
already  certain  moral  phenomena  come  into  view  which  were  absent
in  the  preceding  state.  The  subject  begins  to  dream  aloud  {somnam-
bulic dreaming,  which  sometimes  deserves  to  be  called  somnambulic
delirium);  he  regains  sensibility  and  complains  if  he  is  hurt  in  any
way  physically,  or  should  he  seem  not  to  notice  hurts  he  will  recollect
them  soon  in  the  state  that  follows.

This  remark  of  Mr.  Janet's  is  a  very  ingenious  one,  for  this  is  pre-
cisely the  moment  for  the  latent  perceptions  of  the  second  order,
which  await  a  more  mobile  state  (the  lucid  somnambulism  of  Mr.
Janet)  in  order  to  be  able  to  manifest  themselves.  Once  the  lucid
somnambulism  (polyideia)  has  appeared  "  new  suggestions  are  nearly
impossible."

Lethargic  somnambulism,  then,  is  strictly  the  same  state  described
by  me  in  the  case  of  Mrs.  M.  as  monoideic,  only  it  is  a  little  more
advanced,  a  little  more  polyideic  (dreaming  aloud:  dreams  are  always
hallucinational),  and  a  little  more  active  (the  subject  complained  of
hurts) ;  that  is  to  say,  I  acted  on  Mrs.  M.  in  the  state  of  nascent  mono-
ideism,  in.  which  she  was  more  passive,  whereas  Mr.  Janet  acted  on
Mrs.  B.  in  a  state  of  definite  monoideism.  Therefore  I  was  able  to  act
immediately,'  whereas  Messrs.  Janet  and  Gibert  were  obliged  to  in-

1  I.  e.,  to  act,  and  make  the  subject  act,  immediately. —  Translator.

DEFERRED  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.  253

fluence  the  unconscious  of  the  second  order,  already  overborne  by  the
unconscious  of  the  first  order,  and  which,  consequently,  had  to  await
its  turn  to  be  raised  to  a  higher  grade.

These  distinctions  are  fine-drawn,  I  know,  but  we  cannot  do  with-
out them.  But  I  may  remark  that  it  is  difficult,  if  not  impossible,  to
obtain  all  these  gradations  in  one  subject ;  subjects,  in  fact,  are  char-
acterized by  predominant  tendencies  toward  such  or  such  a  state,
and  it  is  enough  if,  with  a  little  persistence,  one  can  obtain  just  a
glimpse  of  these  flitting  phases.  Hence,  I  am  not  raising  objections
against  Mr.  Janet,  who  is  a  very  conscientious  observer ;  I  am  only
verifying  the  shades  of  difference  between  states.

I  myself  reached  the  conviction,  by  experimenting  on  Mrs.  B.,  that,
with  her,  immediate  suggestions  l  seldom  or  never  came  to  anything,
because  a  direct  mental  order2  excited  her  overmuch  and  produced  a
kind  of  somnambulic  monomania,  which  always  interferes  with  immedi-
ate transmission.  Hence  it  was  that  we  have  seen  her  brine  to  an
end  on  the  following  day,  on  the  occasion  of  another  suggestion  that
failed,  the  execution  of  an  order  given  her  by  me.

As  for  the  phases,  Mr.  Janet  obtained  even  a  ninth — somnambulic
catalepsy — and  that  completed  the  series  for  the  time  being.  After  that
ninth  state,  the  first  state  came  back,  and  so  on.  The  succession  be-
came more  and  more  rapid,  till  at  last  it  was  no  longer  a  somnambule,
but  a  hurdy-gurdy.  At  first  the  crank  had  to  be  turned — excuse  me  !
— the  thumb  had  to  be  pressed  to  make  the  subject  pass  through  all  the
states  in  succession,  from  lethargy  to  catalepsy,  or  one  had  to  blow
upon  her  eyes  to  make  her  traverse  them  in  the  reverse  order  ;  but
later  these  means  were  no  longer  needed,  for  the  subject  went  like  a
mill-wheel.

Here,  observe,  pressing  on  the  thumb  takes  the  place  of  "  pressure
on  the  top  of  the  head,"  or  blowing  on  the  subject  ;  but  an  air  from
an  opera  would  have  dene  as  well.  "  The  cause  of  this  procession  of
states  is  still  obscure,"  says  Mr.  Janet.  For  me  it  is  very  clear.  All
the  states  that  have  been  imagined,  or  that  will  yet  be  imagined,  pre-
sent to  us  one  thing  only — sleep  more  or  less  profound.  More  or  less
profound  sleep  means  :

a.  Partial  paralysis  of  the  brain  (polyideia)  ;  or

b.  Incomplete  paralysis  of  the  brain  (monoideia); s  or

c.  Total  paralysis  of  the  brain  (aideia).

But  as  the  paralysis  we  observe  in  hypnotism  (I  use  the  word  in  its

1  P.  e.,  suggestions  to  be  executed  immediately. —  Translator.

s7.  e.,  an  order  to  be  executed  straightway. —  Translator.

3  In  the  original  the  first  two  phases  of  paralysis  are  called  paralysie partiellc,  and
paralysie  incomplete.  The  difference  is  that  in  partial  paralysis  a  part,  some,  of  the
cerebral  organs,  or  centers,  are  paralyzed,  others  not ;  while  in  incomplete  paralysis
all  the  cerebral  organs  are  paralyzed, "but  not  completely. —  Translator.

254  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

broadest  sense)  is  not  a  strictly  pathological  paralysis,  but  a  physi-
ological state  of  inhibition,  this  inhibition,  or  relative  paralysis,  must
always  be  accompanied  by  an  evolution  of  force,1  that  is  to  say,  by  a
relative  exaltation,  which  equilibrates  it.  The  sum  of  the  nerve-
energy  remains  about  the  same,  but  one  portion  of  the  brain  loses
what  another  portion  wins.  Consequently,  though  the  psychic  field 'is
always  more  or  less  narrowed  in  somnambulism,  and  even  because  of
this  narrowing,  the  psychic  functions  may  gain  in  quality  what  they
have  lost  in  quantity.

Every  inhibitive  cause — and  the  inhibitory  power  of  a  cause  does
not  depend  upon  that  cause  solely,  but  on  a  relation  between  it  and
the  field  of  action  and  the  surroundings  for  the  time  being — every
inhibitive  cause,  I  say,  will  make  the  subject  advance  from  polyideia
toward  aideia,  and  every  dynamogenic  cause  will  make  it  advance
in  the  contrary  direction.

Now,  it  must  be  remembered  that  the  brain  is  not  the  only  nerve-
center  of  the  organism.

The  new  distribution  of  the  vital  energy,  the  apparition  of  the
plus  or  the  minus,  is  seldom  restricted  to  the  brain  alone  ;  it  extends
to  other  centers — cerebellum,  bulb,  spinal  cord,  ganglia.  If  the  brain
loses,  all  these  are  the  gainers,  and  that  according  to  the  relations,
whether  hereditary  or  acquired,  that  attach  to  those  centers.  Now,
by  the  very  nature  of  this  admirable  organization  of  our  economy,
there  exists  a  certain  physiological  antagonism  between  the  action  of
the  brain  and  that  of  the  automatic  centers — cerebellum,  bulb  and
spinal  cord — and,  on  the  other  hand,  between  the  cerebro-spinal  sys-
tem and  the  ganglionary.

Besides  these  primary  antagonisms,  there  are  partial  antagonisms
characteristic  of  the  individual  or  of  the  moment,  and  from  this  we
can  see  the  complexity  of  the  phenomena  that  may  result.

Suppose  the  action  of  the  brain  to  be  for  a  moment  done  away
(aideic  state),  then  the  automatic  centers  will  profit  by  this :  there  will
be  an  exaggeration  of  the  reflex  actions,  as  in  a  decapitated  frog.  But
the  vital  energy,  having  left  the  brain  more  or  less  completely,  may
withdraw  into  the  cerebellum  rather  than  into  the  cord,  and,  then,
instead  of  inanimate  reflex  action,  so  to  speak,  we  shall  have  a  series
of  coordinated  automatic  movements,  we  shall  have  a  somnambulism
exteriorly  active,  and  more  or  less  intelligent,  in  proportion  to  the  con-
currence yielded  by  the  brain  to  the  cerebellum.  Again,  if  the  energy
goes  chiefly  to  the  cord,  it  may  by  preference  seek  the  anterior  fasci-
culi, and  in  that  case  there  will  be  an  enhancement  of  contractions
(lethargic  aideia,  or  lethargy  as  defined  by  Mr.  Charcot),  with  pro-
found and  mechanical  neuro-muscular  excitability  that  may  take  the
more  durable  form  of  general  contracture — that  is,  of  tetanic  aideia

'  Dynamog/nie.

DEFERRED  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.  255

— or  the  evolution  of  force  (dynamogc'nie)  may  manifest  itself  in  the
posterior  fasciculi  and  give  rise  to  reflex  hyperaesthesia,  in  which  the
slightest  superficial  excitations  will  be  enough  to  bring  about  con-
tracture (Charcot's  somnambulic  contracture,  which,  however,  is  by
no  means  peculiar  to  the  somnambulic  state  alone).  This  hyperses-
thesia may  be  followed  by  complete  anaesthesia,  if  inhibition  should
give  place  to  the  state  of  exaltation  ;  and,  supposing  a  like  thing  to
take  place  in  the  anterior  fasciculi,  we  shall  have,  furthermore,  com-
plete paralysis  with  relaxation  of  the  muscles — that  is,  simply  para-
lytic aideia.

Each  part  of  the  nervous  system — every  ganglion,  every  fasciculus,
each  cell,  one  might  say,  may  be  excited  or  paralyzed  momentarily  ;
no  rigorous  order,  no  regular  and  inflexible  classification  of  these
several  complexus  is  to  be  thought  of.  All  the  external  characters  of
somnambulism  in  general — anaesthesia,  hyperaesthesia,  catalepsy,  con-
tracture, neuro-muscular  excitability — can  be  produced  in  degrees
corresponding  to  the  general  conditions  of  the  moment,  in  all  hypnotic
phases — nay,  in  the  waking  state.

Consequently,  it  is  a  waste  of  time  to  define  over-nicely  in  detail
the  combinations  of  the  external  signs  ;  we  add  one  to  another  pretty
much  as  we  please  ;  we  modify  them,  change  them  about  at  will,  and
if  there  is  in  these  combinations  anything  essential  or  fundamental,
that  surely  is  the  psychic  state,  the  state  of  the  brain  itself,  and  that
state  is  just  a  sleep,  more  or  less  deep — polyideia,  monoideia,  aideia.1

On  this  canvas  (with  very  highly  sensitive  subjects)  you  may  broider
what  you  will.

Sketch  me  any  state  you  choose  ;  bring  together  at  random  the
most  contradictory  characters  ;  let  the  sketch  be  fantastical — a  state
somnambulo-lethargo-catalepti-tetanic — and  I  will  show  it  you  real-
ized within  three  days.

If  right  after  any  excitation  the  hypnotic  phase  changes,  that  is
because  the  excitation  acted  either  to  endorm  more  profoundly,  or  to
bring  the  subject  nearer  to  wakefulness,  and  that  natural  change
carries  with  it  a  host  of  accidental  characters  that  you  have  impressed
upon  the  subject  by  passes  and  on-breathings  {souffles),  the  physical
action  of  which  you  deny  ;  by  verbal  suggestion,  by  habitude,  by
ideorganic  association  ;  finally,  sometimes  by  mental  suggestion.
Thus  have  Braid  and  his  successors  sometimes  practiced  magnetism
unawares  and  without  seeming  to  do  so.

Mr.  Janet  has  done  so  in  perfect  good  faith,  though  he  still  con-
founds hypnotism  with  magnetism,  calling  Mrs.  B.'s  sleep  hypnotic,
though  she  never  has  been  hypnotized.

1  The  question  of  the  phases  is  too  complex  to  be  cleared  up  by  a  few  remarks  ;
nor  was  it  my  intention  to  do  so.  I  wished  only  to  define  a  few  points  relating  to  our
main  object.

25 6  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

"  Inasmuch  as  mental  suggestion,"  says  he,  "  sufficed  to  endorm
Mrs.  B.,  it  must  needs  also  suffice  to  transfer  her  from  one  phase  of
the  sleep  to  another.  The  supposition  was  easily  verified.  Mrs.  B.
was  in  lethargic  somnambulism.  While  making  mental  suggestion,
without  touching  the  subject,  I  kept  thinking  simply  this:  'I  will
that  you  sleep.'  In  a  few  moments  she  was  in  somnambulic  lethargy
[that  is  to  say,  in  a  sleep  a  little  deeper].  I  repeat  the  same  mental
order  ;  she  sighs,  and  forthwith  is  in  lethargy,  then  in  cataleptic  lethargy,
and  every  time  that  I  take  up  that  thought  again,  she  thus  enters  a
new  state.

"  She  passes  thus  through  all  the  phases,  and  comes  back  to  her
first  state.  One  thing  to  be  noted  is,  that  the  mental  order  always
made  the  subject  advance  in  the  same  direction.  She  was  once
more  in  lethargic  somnambulism,  and  I  essayed  to  make  her  revert
to  lucid  somnambulism.  Instead  of  thinking  '  Sleep  on  ! '  I  thought
'  Awake  ! '  "

In  the  beginning  Mr.  Janet  did  not  succeed  ;  by  a  force  of  habit
that  we  can  understand,  the  subject  passed  into  a  profounder  state ;
but  little  by  little  the  unconscious  grasped  her  master's  thought,  and
the  succession  of  the  phases  proceeded  according  to  the  unuttered
wish  of  the  magnetizer.  "  The  magnetizer's  thought,  then,"  concludes
the  author,  "  may  by  an  inexplicable  influence,  directly  verifiable,
however,  make  the  subject  pass  through  the  several  phases  in  either
direction."

So,  then,  here  is  proof  direct  that  the  phases  can  be  elicited  men-
tally, as  were  the  several  psychic  states  in  Braid's  "  phrenhypnotism."

I  would  not  have  anyone  suppose  that  my  criticism  is  an  attack
upon  Mr.  Janet.  In  fact,  the  question  is  not  about  Mr.  Janet's
opinions  at  all.  »His  conclusions  are  very  moderate,  very  discreet,
and  cannot  be  attacked.  I  have  simply  profited  by  the  occasion
offered  and  analyzed  the  facts  published  by  this  author — facts  which
I  regard  as  furnishing  the  strongest  arguments  against  the  schematic
tendencies  of  Mr.  Charcot's  school.  These  Mr.  Janet  has  involun-
tarily reduced  ad  absurdum,  while  meaning  to  serve  them.

As  for  his  own  conclusions,  they  are  as  follows  :

First,  he  admonishes  the  reader  that  ''one  must  not  draw  any
general  conclusion  from  a  monograph  ;"  then  he  explains  himself
more  clearly  :  "  Some  lay  great  stress  upon  the  phases  of  hypnotism,
and  regard  them  as  states  entirely  distinct  from  one  another  ;  others
see  in  them  only  phenomena  without  significance,  produced  by  the
operator  artificially.  The  facts  that  I  have  stated,  and  in  particular
the  manner  in  which  they  were  observed,  do  not  agree  with  either  of
these  extremes.  They  show  that  the  three  primary  states  have  no
such  high  importance,  for  we  can  call  forth  several  other  states  as
well  characterized  and  as  lasting.     The  number  of  these,  I  believe,  is

DEFERRED  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.  257

in  no  wise  fixed j  at  first  I  observed  six,  and  later  nine.  The  number
of  these  phases  remained  the  same  through  some  fifteen  seances,  but  in
the  later  seances  I  was  forced  to  recognize  the  existence  of  a  new
state,  as  yet  rather  indistinct,  but  plainly  forming.  .  .  .  No  doubt,
with  more  practice  on  the  part  of  the  subject  and  greater  skill  on  the
part  of  the  operator,  other  states  still  may  be  determined."1

But  neither  does  Mr.  Janet  view  these  phases  as  merely  accidental
phenomena,  and  he  is  right.  A  state  artificially  produced  is  always  a
resultant  of  the  operator's  personal  influences  and  of  the  subject's
physiological  nature  or  idiosyncrasy.  But  the  more  mobile  the  subject
(in  the  Puysegurian  sense  of  the  word),  the  more  do  these  first
influences  prevail.  Here  is  an  experiment  I  made  in  presence  of
Mr.  Janet  and  the  other  gentlemen  at  Havre  :  I  asked  Mr.  Janet  to
mention  a  state  in  which  catalepsy  of  the  arm  is  impossible.  He
instanced  one  of  those  lethargic  states  with  complete  relaxation  of
the  muscles.  Without  a  word,  I  seized  the  arm  of  the  subject  (who,
however,  had  not  been  endormed  by  me)  ;  I  raised  it,  and  it  fell ;
thus,  no  catalepsy.  I  began  again  with  a  little  insistence ;  again  the
arm  dropped,  but  slowly.  I  raised  it  the  third  time,  with  intention  to
see  catalepsy  make  its  appearance,  and  the  arm  remained  outstretched,
and  retained  the  position  given  to  it.  I  was  not  successful  in  a  second
experiment,  wherein  it  was  attempted  to  produce  the  continuation  of
movements  begun  and  not  belonging2  to  a  given  phase ;  but  Mr.  Janet,
too,  did  not  succeed  at  the  first  attempt.  At  last,  when  Mr.  Janet's
faith  with  regard  to  the  value  of  the  phases  began  to  be  unsettled,
the  subject,  too,  or  rather  her  unconscious,  became  rattled  ;  states  got
mixed,  were  passed  over  two  or  three  at  a  bound,  so  to  speak  ;  and  I
do  believe  that  to-day  this  whole  edifice,  so  patiently  built  up,  is  in
ruins  for  the  want  of  a  foundation.

Were  these  facts  not  sufficient  to  make  an  end  once  for  all  of  this
tangled,  idle  question,  I  might  add  that  when  Mr.  Gibert  (who  did  not
believe  in  the  phases)  endormed  the  subject,  the  phases  did  not  ap-
pear.    Moral' — Beware  of  mental  suggestion  !

Is  contact  necessary  for  deferred  mental  suggestion  ?  Hand-con-
tact seems  indifferent ;  contact  of  the  forehead  facilitates,  perhaps,
the  inoculation,  according  to  Mr.  Gibert.  But  the  interesting  fact
— observed,  as  I  believed,  by  me  in  the  case  of  Mrs.  B. — is  that
"  psychic  inoculation  "  seems  painful  to  the  subject.  She  always  sub-
mits to  it  with  difficulty,  struggling  and  re-acting  with  a  sort  of  con-
vulsion. Then  the  "psychic  virus"  becomes,  little  by  little,  assimi-
lated,   and    the    subject    grows    calm.       Could    the    subject    tell    us

1  Pierre  Janet,  "  Les  Phases  Interme'diaires  de  l'Hypnotisme"  {Rev.  Sclent.,  May
8,  1S86,  pp.  577-S7).

2  Continuation  des  moiwements  commences  et  etrangere  a  une phase  donne'e.  £tran-
gere  is  no  doubt  a  misprint  for  Strangers.- — Translator.

258  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

straightway  what  has  just  been  inculcated  into  her  ?  I  think  not !
Her  bearing  does  not  betray  it,  and,  indeed,  were  it  otherwise  she
would  be  capable  of  carrying  out  at  once  the  order  given,  and  that  is
not  the  case.  Consequently  there  is  reason  to  believe  that  the  inocu-
lation takes  place  from  the  conscious  to  the  unconscious  of  the  second
order  j  that  the  traces  impressed1  are  too  faint  to  appear  at  once  upon
the  scene  of  the  cerebral  life,  but  that  they  persist  and  are  retained  in
the  lower  strata  of  memory,  not  to  reappear  till  the  moment  when
the  hour  associated  with  them  shall  have  struck.  Then  the  dynamic
virus  frees  itself  from  the  oppression  of  conscious  thoughts  that  have
been  keeping  it  confined  in  shadow  ;  the  suggested  thoughts  take  pos-
session of  the  psychic  field,  and  bring  about  a  sort  of  almost  somnam-
bulic monomania  which  struggles  for  a  time  with  the  normal  polyideia.
Then,  sometimes  the  definiteness  of  the  suggested  ideas  is  effaced  in
the  tussle  with  the  normal  state  ;  sometimes  they  succeed  more  or
less  in  getting  in  among  the  conscious  thoughts  and  in  being  realized
outwardly.2

If  the  struggle  is  a  long  one,  and  the  subject,  excited,  disturbed,
irritated,  grows  more  and  more  absorbed  in  his  monomania,  without
getting  as  far  as  a  precise  and  immediate  execution  of  the  order,  then
what  happens  is  what  happened  during  my  stay  at  Havre — the  sub-
ject falls  asleep  by  automatic  psychic  influence.

And  then  calm  is  restored.  The  brain  takes  repose  in  a  transient
state  of  aideia.

CHAPTER  IX.

MENTAL    SUGGESTION    AT    A    DISTANCE.

THERE  remains  for  us  only  one  more  class  of  facts — that  com-
prising cases  of  action  at  a  distance.  These  phenomena  surely
are  the  most  extraordinary  and  the  hardest  to  explain.  True,  when
once  you  grant  mental  action,  i.  e.,  the  influence  of  human  thought
neighbor  to  our  own,  the  question  of  distance  becomes  secondary.
They  who  are  content  with  mystic  notions  might  even  hold  that
thought,  being  independent  of  matter  (unfortunately  it  is  not),  can
act  through  the  distance  hence  to  the  moon  as  well  as  it  can  forehead
to  forehead.  But  the  method  of  positive  science  does  not  allow  us  to
go  beyond  experience,  save  step  by  step.     It  is  well  to  recall  with

1  Perfttes.

2  The  many  bold  and  some  times  rather  odd  metaphors  of  this  paragraph  are  the
author's  own. —  Translator.

MENTAL  SUGGESTION  AT  A  DISTANCE.  259

regard  to  this  subject  the  wise  words  of  the  "Hippocrates  of  Mag-
netism : "

"The  impressions,"  says  Deleuze,  "  produced  by  objects  are  fainter
in  the  ratio  of  the  distance  at  which  the  objects  are  situate.  The
farther  we  are  from  an  object,  the  fewer  rays  of  light  does  it  send  to
our  eyes.  The  sound  of  a  bell  is  reduced  in  proportion  as  we  increase
our  distance,  till  at  last  it  is  no  longer  perceptible.  Impressions  made
upon  somnambules  must  in  like  manner  be  weakened  by  distance.
Hence,  from  this,  that  a  somnambule  feels  the  action  of  his  magnetizer
20  paces  away,  it  does  not  follow  that  he  will  feel  it  in  like  manner  at
20,000.  .  .  .  These  limits  are  not  known  ;  they  are  far  or  nigh,
according  to  the  measure  of  the  somnambule's  sensibility  ;  but  there
they  are,  and  we  must  take  care  not  to  set  them  further  back  than  is
warranted  by  decisive  experience."1

There  is  still  another  source  of  possible  error,  in  view  of  which
we  must  exercise  the  utmost  discretion,  not  only  as  regards  a
greater  or  less  range,  but  also  with  respect  to  action  from  a  distance
in  general.

We  must  needs  allow  that  certain  subjects  are  able  to  perceive
others'  thoughts  ;  but  we  do  not  yet  know  how  this  is  done.  Now  if,
as  Morin  holds,  mental  suggestion  proves  only  an  extraordinary
exaltation  of  the  perceptive  faculties,  that  perception  may  be  had  at
two  paces  or  at  twenty  in  one  room,  but  not  through  a  partition,  and
completely  unbeknown  to  the  subject.  Here  doubt  is  quite  in  place,
and  we  see  that  the  contrary  supposition  is  not  to  be  admitted  without
sufficient  experimental  evidence.  Hence  it  is  that,  having  already
verified  in  a  way  that  left  no  doubt  in  my  mind,  mental  suggestion
from  anear,  even  unbeknown  to  the  subject,  I  did  not  feel  at  all
justified  in  accepting  the  facts  published  by  Messrs.  Gibert  and  Janet;
so  I  went  to  Havre  to  make  sure  of  them.  Here,  undoubtedly,  is  the
question's  coie:  all  depends  on  action  at  a  distance.  We  can  have
no  decisive  idea  of  the  process  of  transmission  from  anigh  until  we
know  whether  this  transference  is  possible  only  under  conditions  of
ordinary  perception,  or  whether  it  can  manifest  itself  even  beyond  the
probable  range  of  our  senses.  And  at  the  same  time  the  whole  theory
of  magnetism  must,  of  necessity,  take  a  new  shape.2

But  on  the  other  hand  it  is  to  be  remarked  that  once  we  concede
transmission  from  anear,  independent  of  all  normal  perception,  the  ques-
tion of  distance  becomes  secondary,  inasmuch  as  action  at  a  kilo-
meter's distance  will  not  surprise  us  much  more  than  action  at  the
distance  of  a  meter,  and  that  because  of  the  very  nature  of  the
phenomenon,  which  in  that  case  assumes  the  special  character  of  a

1  Deleuze,  "Hist.  Crit.  du  Magnetisme  Animal,"  i.,  p.  iSo.      Paris,  1S13.

2  This  point  is  elucidated  by  Dr.  H6ricourt  in  his  article  "  Somnambulisme  aa
dehors  de  l'Hysterie  "  {Rev.  Scientijique ;  June  28,  1884).

26o  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

transmission  sui  generis,  like  telephonic  and  radiophonic  transmission,
and  independent  of  direct  sense-perception.

Of  course  Deleuze's  reservations  still  retain  their  validity,  and  we
must  advance  slowly,  step  by  step,  as  experience  shall  warrant.

Mesmer  was  familiar  with  the  fact  of  mental  transmission  at  a  dis-
tance. As  we  shall  see,  he  even  offers  an  ingenious  theory  to  account
for  it,  and  it  is  very  probable  that  what  gave  most  offense  to  his  con-
temporaries— to  wit  :  his  breadth  of  view,  his  universal  fluid,  etc. —
was  attributable,  above  all,  to  his  profound  belief  in  action  at  a
distance.  But  just  as  with  regard  to  somnambulism  in  general,  he
thought  he  must  be  reticent  about  this  portion  of  his  studies,  which
he  communicated  only  to  a  few  favored  friends  under  the  seal  of
secrecy.  Mesmer  generally  experimented  a  good  deal  more  than  he
wrote,  stated  his  results  very  briefly,  and  even  the  fundamental  prin-
ciples of  his  teaching,  of  which  a  small  number  of  copies  was  printed,
were  distributed  only  among  chosen  disciples  and  nearly  always
under  the  pledge  of  secrecy.  Consequently  we  possess  very  meager
details  as  to  what  took  place  in  the  "  chamber  of  crises,"  to  which  the
profane  were  never  admitted.

Still,  as  regards  action  from  a  distance,  a  little  distance  indeed,  but
from  another  room,  we  are  able  to  quote  an  interesting  experiment,
reported  by  a  judicious  observer,  the  Austrian  savant  Seifert,  who  at
first  treated  Mesmer  as  a  charlatan,  but  who  afterward,  mainly  under
the  influence  of  the  facts  I  am  about  to  recount,  accepted  the  mesmer-
izer's  theory.

i.  The  occurrence  took  place  in  1775,  at  Rochow,  Hungary,  in  an
old  castle  of  the  Baron  Horetzky,  of  Horka.  Mesmer  was  treating
the  Baron  with  magnetism,  and  at  the  same  time  had  under  his  care
several  other  patients  who  came  from  the  vicinage  to  consult  him.
Seifert  looked  on  all  this  as  humbuggery.

One  day  newspapers  were  brought,  and  in  one  of  them  was  found
an  account  of  Mesmer's  doings,  according  to  which  the  magnetizer
had  produced  convulsions  in  some  epileptics  that  had  been  apparently
cured  by  the  exorcist  Gassner,  Mesmer  being  concealed  in  a  neigh-
boring room  and  there  simply  making  his  finger  move  in  the  direction
of  the  patients.  Seifert  arrived  at  the  castle,  newspaper  in  hand,  and
finds  Mesmer  surrounded  by  gentlemen.  He  asked  him  if  what  the
paper  said  was  true,  and  Mesmer  confirmed  the  story.  Then  Mesmer
was  asked  to  give  experimental  proof  of  action  through  a  wall.  At
first  he  refused,  but  the  company  urged  him  so  hard — not  without  a
purpose — that  finally  he  accepted  the  test.  From  among  the  most
sensitive  of  his  patients  he  selected  a  young  Jew,  suffering  from  dis-
ease of  the  chest.  He  placed  him  in  a  room  separated  from  the  side
drawing-room,  in  which  the  experiment  was  to  be  made,  by  a  wall
two  and  one-half  feet  thick.  Under  these  conditions  the  experiment
could  not  be  altogether  conclusive,  as  the  subject  looked  for  an
experiment  of  some  sort ;  but  it  is  interesting  because  of  the  peculiar
circumstances  that  we  will  recount  presently.

Mesmer  stood  three  paces  away  from  the  wall,  while  Seifert,  as  an

MENTAL  SUGGESTION  AT  A  DISTANCE.  261

observer,  stationed  himself  at  the  partly  open  door,  so  that  he  might
be  able  to  observe  both  the  magnetizer  and  the  patient.  This  is  what
he  witnessed  :

At  first  Mesmer  made,  with  the  index  finger  of  the  left  hand,  several
horizontal  motions  in  the  supposed  direction  of  the  patient.  The  latter
soon  began  to  complain,  felt  of  his  sides,  and  seemed  to  be  suffering.
"What  ails  you?"  asked  Seifert.  "  I  don't  feel  well,"  he  answered.
Not  content  with  this  reply,  Seifert  demanded  a  clearer  description  of
what  he  felt.  "I  feel,"  said  the  Jew,  "as  if  all  my  inwards  were
balancing  right  and  left."

In  order  to  avoid  asking  questions,  Seifert  told  the  patient  to  let
him  know  of  any  changes  he  might  be  sensible  of,  without  waiting  to
be  asked.  A  few  minutes  afterward  Mesmer  moved  his  finger  in  an
oval.  "  Now  everything  is  going  round  in  me  as  in  a  circle,"  said
the  patient.  Mesmer  then  ceased  to  act,  and  almost  immediately  the
patient  declared  that  he  felt  nothing  more ;  and  so  on.  All  these
declarations  agreed  fully,  not  only  with  the  moments  of  action  and
the  intervals,  but  also  with  the  sensations  that  Mesmer  wished  to
to  excite.1

2.  The  same  author  describes  another  experiment  not  less  extraor-
dinary. Mesmer,  as  we  know,  held  that  the  physical  transmission  is
aided  by  sound,  and  that  sound-waves  may  be,  so  to  speak,  charged
with  the  fluid  and  may  transmit  it  to  a  distance.  Now,  it  was  custom-
ary in  the  Baron  Horetzky's  castle  for  two  musicians  from  time  to
time  to  blow  a  huntsman's  horn  in  a  kiosque  in  the  garden.  The
patients,  who  were  awaiting  the  coming  of  Mesmer,  and  who  were
separated  by  several  walls  from  the  garden,  listened  with  pleasure  to
this  music.  One  day  Mesmer,  wishing  to  make  the  experiment,
visited  the  kiosque.  Seifert  went  to  the  hall  where  the  patients  were
to  see  Mesmer.  He  did  not  find  him,  but  to  his  surprise  observed
that  some  of  the  patients,  instead  of  enjoying  the  music  as  usual,
were  becoming  uneasy,  and  even  showed  more  serious  nervous  symp-
toms. Seifert  ran  to  look  for  Mesmer  and  found  him  in  the  kiosque,
his  right  hand  holding  the  flange  of  the  hunting-horn  the  musician
was  blowing.  He  told  what  had  happened  ;  Mesmer  smiled  as  he
heard.  "  I  expected  that,"  he  said.  Then  he  touched  the  instrument
with  his  left  hand,  and  lastly  let  it  go  entirely,  saying:  "  Now,  or  pre-
sently, the  patients  will  grow  quiet."  They  went  back  to  the  hall  and
found  the  patients  coming  to  themselves  by  degrees.3

Can  we  admit  the  reality  of  such  action  ?  Experiment  is  needed  in
order  to  decide  the  question.  But  is  there  not  some  analogy  between
this  phenomenon  and  the  phenomena  of  Bell's  radiophone,  by  means
of  which  a  light-ray  transmits  the  voice?  Who  would  have  ventured
to  believe  in  such  a  thing  ten  years  ago?  It  is  a  fact,  nevertheless.
And  here  is  another  phenomenon  that  I  have  observed  once  only,
and  which  consequently  still  needs  verification  :

Mrs.  M.  was  in  the  magnetic  sleep.  While  awaiting  the  time  of
her  awaking,  I  struck  a  few  accords  on  the  piano.     Immediately  the

1  Dr.  J.  Kerner,  "Franz  Anton  Mesmer  aus  Schwaben,"  p.  28.  Frankfort-on-
Main,  1856.

2  Id.,  p.  44.

262  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

somnambule,  who  just  before  was  in  the  state  of  moderate  (fteu pro-
fonde)  paralytic  aideia,  gave  signs  of  attention  and  seemed  to  be
pleased  by  the  sounds.  As  she  never  heard  anyone  but  myself,  I
wished  to  ascertain  what  might  be  the  action  of  sounds  produced  by
another  person.  So  I  motioned  to  Miss  B.,  and  she  went  to  the  piano
and  played  the  same  accords.  Mrs.  M.  gave  no  sign  of  sensation.
I  played  again  ;  she  heard.  Miss  B.  played  once  more  and  fortissimo;
no  action.  "  You  heard  me  playing  ?  "  I  asked  the  somnambule,  try-
ing to  deceive  her.     "  No,"  said  she  ;  "  I  did  not  hear  anything."

That  is  a  special  case  of  rapport  and  probably  a  very  rare  one,  for
usually  somnambules  more  or  less  distinctly  hear  music,  and  singing
in  particular.  Can  it  be  that  there  is  such  physical  difference  be-
tween sounds  produced  by  the  magnetizer  and  the  same  sounds
produced  by  another  person  ?  Can  it  be  that  sonorous  vibrations
transmit  the  personal  tonic  movement  upon  which  depends  the  som-
nambule's  perception  ?     That  is  a  matter  yet  to  be  studied.

3.  Experiments  in  action  at  a  distance  would  seem  to  have  been
very  frequent  in  France  about  1784,  for  in  a  pamphlet  attributed  to
the  Marquis  de  Dampierre,  we  find  this  :

"  The  following  experiment  has  been  made  repeatedly  :  A  highly
susceptible  person  was  left  with  other  persons  who  were  in  the  secret
and  who  tried  to  occupy  her  attention.  In  the  meantime  she  was
magnetized  unbeknown  to  her  from  the  adjoining  room,  and  the  effect
was  nearly  as  prompt  and  nearly  as  manifest  as  though  the  operator
had  been  nigh.  The  only  difference  noted  was  that,  not  knowing
that  she  was  being  magnetized  without  her  co-operation,  she  at  first
held  herself  in  check  (se  co?itrctignait),  mistaking  what  she  felt  for  a
natural  indisposition,  and  did  not  cease  to  resist  till  the  action,  bear-
ing upon  her  with  force,  put  it  out  of  her  power  to  conceal  from  her-
self that  she  was  magnetized.  One  experiment  would  not  have  been
decisive,  so  several  were  made.  Results  were  obtained  more  or  less
marked  according  to  the  degree  of  sensibility  possessed  by  the  person
magnetized."1

4.  But  we  find  earlier  traces  still.  Action  at  a  distance  was  suc-
cessfully tried  in  the  case  of  the  possessed  nuns  of  Loudun  :

"  Many  times  the  exorcists  [/.  e.,  the  magnetizers  unknown  to
themselves]  called  secretly  this  same  nun  [Elizabeth  Bastard],  some-
times mentally  and  by  their  thought  only,  again  in  a  low  voice,  but
without  being  heard  by  the  persons  present.  This  woman  felt  herself
drawn  to  the  places  whence  they  called  her,  and  suspecting  the  pur-
pose, lay  down  upon  the  floor  to  withstand  her  inclination,  and  never-
theless on  these  occasions  she  usually  obeyed."2

5.  Van  Helmont,  the  great  physician  and  great  dreamer  of  the
16th  century,  must  have  studied  this  question,  so  explicit  is  he  with

1  "  Reflexions  Impartiales  sur  le  Magnetisme  Animal."     Geneva-Paris,  1784.

2  "  Relation  de  ce  qui  s'est  passe  aux  Exorcismes  en  Presence  de  Monsieur,  Frere
du  Roi,"  p.  39.

MENTAL  SUGGESTION  AT  A  DISTANCE.  263

regard  to  it.  He  believed  that  everyone  is  capable  of  influencing  his
fellowmen  from  a  distance,  but  that  generally  this  force  lies  dormant
in  us  and  oversloughed  by  "the  flesh."  If  it  is  to  be  exercised  there
must  be  a  certain  harmony  between  the  operator  and  the  subject.
The  latter  must  be  sensitive,  and  his  sensibility  must  be  trained  so
that,  under  the  influence  of  the  "  inner  imagination,"  it  may  meet  the
action  of  the  magnetizer  half-way.  This  magic  action  is  felt  particu-
larly at  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  for  "  the  sense  at  the  pit  of  the
stomach  is  more  delicate  than  in  the  fingers  or  even  in  the  eyes'.
Sometimes  the  subject  cannot  even  bear  the  laying  of  one's  hand  upon
that  region."  '  The  observation  that  the  magnetic  action  makes  itself
felt  first  at  the  pit  of  the  stomach  is  an  interesting  one,  and  should
be  considered  in  the  light  of  Petetin's  discoveries  and  of  a  recent
observation  of  Dr.  Hericourt,  who  writes  :  "  Mrs.  D.  declared  that
whenever  I  was  thinking  of  her  she  felt  a  sharp  pain  in  the  prsecordial
region  ;  in  fact,  the  same  pain  she  felt  when  the  somnambulic  seances
were  protracted,  and  which  decided  me  to  bring  them  to  an  end."
"  Hitherto,"  says  van  Helmont, 2  "  I  have  hesitated  to  unveil  a  great
mystery,  namely,  that  there  is  in  man  an  energy  in  virtue  of  which  he
can,  by  his  mere  will  and  by  his  imagination,  act  outside  of  himself,
and  impress  a  lasting  influence  upon  a  very  remote  object.  This  one
mystery  illumines  with  a  sufficient  light  sundry  facts  hard  to  under-
stand, bearing  upon  the  magnetism  of  all  bodies,  upon  man's  mental
power,  and  upon  all  that  has  been  said  regarding  man's  magic  and  his
mastery  of  the  universe."3

This,  remember,  was  written  two  hundred  years  ago  !

6.  The  comparison  of  the  sensitive  subject  with  the  compass-needle
is  ever  recurring  in  these  old  authors.  It  is  justified  by  the  undoubted
analogy  that  subsists  between  the  physical  action  of  a  hand  and  that  of
the  magnet  in  general  ;4  but  especially  is  it  justified  by  the  attractive
action  of  the  magnetizer  on  the  magnetized.    This  is  a  very  complex

1  "Persabe  os  stomachi  non  fert  maniim  oppositam  ;  ibidem  esse  sensum  acutissimum
ac prtzcisum,  qui  alioqui  magis  in  digitis  extremis  requiri  videbatur."  J.  B.  von  Hel-
mont, "  Opera  Omnia,"  p.  278.  Frankfort,  1682.  Our  author  s  translation  of  van  Hel-
mont's  wordsns  slightly  inaccurate.  No  comparison  is  made  between  the  "sense  at
the  pit  of  the  stomach  "  and  touch  and  sight  ;  it  is  only  said  that  a  very  acute  sense  is
manifested  at  os  stomachi,  such  sense  as  under  other  conditions  (alioqui)  we  look  for  in
the  finger-tips  and  the  eyes ;  the  pit  of  the  stomach  becomes  a  tact-organ  and  a  visual
organ. —  Translator.

2  Id.,  p.  731.

8  lb.  See  also  "  De  l'Opinion  de  van  Helmont  sur  la  Cause  et  les  Effets  du  Mag-
netisme,"  by  Deleuze,  in  "  Bibl.  Magn.  Animal,"  vol.  i.,  p.  45,  vol.  ii.,  p.  19S  ;  and
Dr.  Ennemoser,  "  Der  Magnetismus  nach  der  allseitigen  Beziehung,"  p.  616.  Leipsic,
1819.

4  This  subject  I  have  treated  in  an  article  in  Polish,  "  The  Magnet  and  the  Hand,"
which  appeared  in  the  scientific  magazine  Niwa,  published  in  1S81  at  Warsaw,  and
of  which  I  was  editor.

264  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

question,  for  it  assumes  many  different  forms:  i.  Attraction  by
ideoplasty,  fascination,  imitation  of  movements.  2.  Reflex  physical
attraction  by  the  approximation  of  the  hand.  3.  Direct  physical  and
mental  attraction,  i.  e.,  attraction  without  intermediation  of  ordinary
perception,  from  a  distance.  The  magnetized  subject  is  always  drawn
toward  the  operator,  seeks  him,  tends  to  come  nearer  to  him  ;  hence,
the  mental  suggestion  experiment  that  succeeds  most  readily  is  one
that  makes  the  subject  come  to  the  operator.  The  subject  will  always
incline  toward  the  magnetizer,  and  Mr.  Janet  has  observed  that,  after
having  endormed  Mrs.  B.  from  a  distance,  he  found  her  head  leaning
in  the  direction  of  his  action.  But  the  most  striking  fact  of  this  kind
is  recorded  by  Bruno  :

"The  phenomenon  that  surprised  me  most,"  he  says,  "because  it
was  the  first  that  came  under  my  notice,  is  the  one  I  am  about  to
relate.  A  young  woman  18  or  19  years  of  age  had  been,  for  five
or  six  months,  dying  of  consumption.  After  three  or  four  days  of
treatment  she  slept.  Her  sleep  became  very  deep  in  a  few  days.
When  I  magnetized  her,  her  head  leaned  toward  me  ;  I  was  obliged
to  push  her  back  gently  in  her  chair,  to  prevent  her  falling  on  me.
As  that  is  a  usual  effect  of  sleep  I  paid  no  attention  to  it  ;  after  mag-
netizing her  I  left  her  sleeping  quietly  and  went  to  another  patient.
But  now  new  trouble :  the  girl  leaned  to  one  side,  sometimes  fell  on
her  next  neighbor,  and  some  one  had  to  be  continually  holding  her
up.  I  had  a  large  armchair  provided  for  her  in  which  she  might
sleep  comfortably.  Vain  precaution  !  Her  head  leaned  quite  slowly,
but  by  jerks,  and  all  that  portion  of  her  body  which  was  not  held
back  by  the  armchair  followed  this  movement.  At  last  a  thought
struck  me:  that  her  head  always  leaned  toward  the  side  on  which  I
was.  I  changed  my  position  gradually,  and  what  was  my  astonish-
ment to  find  that  her  head,  like  a  veritable  compass-needle,  followed
the  curve  I  slowly  made  around  her  at  the  distance  of  five  or  six  feet.
It  stopped  when  I  stopped,  always  leaning  toward  me.  ...  In
vain  I  went  to  a  greater  distance,  the  effect  was  the  same.  I  left  the
room,  went  down  into  the  courtyard,  placed  myself  in  different  direc-
tions. I  went  and  placed  myself  at  a  very  great  distance  in  the  angle
of  a  second  courtyard  of  my  house,  which  faces  on  two  intersecting
streets;  my  'compass'  always  showed,  with  the  utmost  exactitude,
the  point  of  the  horizon  at  which  I  stood.  She  had  to  be  supported
or  she  would  have  fallen  out  of  the  chair.

"  This  experiment  was  very  successful  when  I  made  it  in  presence
of  a  physician,  to  whom'I  left  the  choice  of  the  places.  After  having
had  me  placed  at  different  points  outside  of  the  chamber,  while  he
remained  in  it  himself,  in  order  to  observe  the  directions  in  which  the
young  woman  would  turn,  he  proposed  to  me  to  go  into  the  street.
He  himself  led  me  to  a  corner  of  the  court-yard  very  far  from  the
house.  I  had  ordered  that  no  one  should  touch  the  girl,  so  that  her
direction  might  be  seen  on  our  return.  As  soon  as  I  was  in  place,  the
physician  went  back  promptly,  and  hurried  upstairs  witn  all  speed.
He  found  the  girl  had  fallen  on  the  floor.  I  had  seated  heron  a  very
low  chair,  telling  the  attendants  to  see  that  her  fall  should  be  very
gentle,  and  to  assist  her  in  falling  by  helping  her  with  their  arms  to

MENTAL  SUGGESTION  AT  A  DISTANCE.         265

the  floor.  The  direction  of  her  body  was  not  exactly  toward  my
place,  the  back  of  the  chair  having  hindered  that,  but  she  had  fallen
to  that  side.  Her  sleep  was  not  disturbed  by  the  occurrence.  The
next  day  the  same  physician  had  some  doubts  as  to  the  direction  of
the  fall,  which  did  not  seem  to  him  to  be  exactly  toward  where  I  had
stood,  and  he  was  not  willing  to  accept  the  explanation  I  had  given.
So  he  asked  me  to  repeat  the  experiment.  When  I  had  gone  down
into  the  street  he  desired  that  I  should  go  around  the  neighboring
house,  situated  to  the  west  of  mine.  He  went  upstairs  immediately
to  observe  what  might  take  place.  It  was  agreed  between  us  that
the  attendants  should  prevent  the  girl's  falling.  He  returned  in  time
to  witness  the  prodigy,  and  it  produced  conviction  in  him.  I  walked
very  slowly,  always  thinking  of  the  girl,  and  that  without  knowing  the
full  importance  of  that  operation.  The  head  of  the  patient  indicated
to  him  perfectly  the  direction  in  which  I  went ;  he  also  perceived  the
action  I  exerted  {Faction  que  je  fis)  from  the  position  of  her  body,
which  was  in  danger  of  falling  soon.  A  young  woman  who  was  in
the  custom  of  assisting  her  when  in  this  state  kept  her  from  falling
But  soon  that  was  no  longer  necessary.  The  girl  straightened  herself
up,  and  the  new  direction  of  her  head,  which  described  a  curve  from
east  to  west,  announced  my  return."1

This  observation  possesses  interest  for  us,  for  it  shows  how  a
physical  phenomenon  of  bodily  attraction  produced  by  the  mere
presence  of  the  magnetizer  may  be  accentuated  by  the  concurrence
of  mental  action.  But  it  is  of  very  rare  occurrence,  and  generally  the
attraction  is  purely  reflex  (sensation  of  warmth  and  of  air-currents)  ;
or,  if  it  be  direct,  it  is  exerted  only  at  a  very  small  distance.  It  is
also  to  be  remarked  that  Bruno's  somnambule  tolerated  the  attouch-
ment  of  a  third  person,  that  is  to  say,  there  was  no  hyperesthesia,
properly  called.  This  point  is  one  that  we  shall  not  fail  to  consider
from  the  view-point 'of  theory.  Strong  attraction  is  always  accom-
panied by  rigidity  of  the  members.  It  ceases  sometimes  at  the
moment  of  a  general  contracture,  but  there  is  always  a  tendency  to
contracture  wherever  attraction  manifests  itself.  After  Bruno,  and
often  without  knowing  of  his  researches,  several  magnetizers  have
noted  the  same  phenomenon.  It  is  to  be  regarded  as  an  aid  to  mental
suggestion  when  one  calls  to  him  the  subject.

7.  "  We  sometimes,"  says  Dupotet,3  "  find  subjects  of  such  mobil-
ity, that  you  may  act  upon  them  through  partitions  or  walls  at  a
moment  when  it  is  not  possible  that  they  should  be  cognizant  of
your  intention.     They  sense  your  coming,  perceive  your  going  ;   they

1  De  Lausanne,  "  Des  Principes,  etc.,  du  Magn.  Anim."  (2  vols.  Vol.  i.  is  by
Bruno),  pp.  123-128.  Paris,  1819.  As  the  house  around  which  the  walk  was  made
lay  west  from  Bruno's  house,  the  return  walk  was,  of  course,  from  west  to  east,  and
the  girl's  head  must  have  moved  in  the  same  direction.  The  whole  narrative  leaves
much  to  be  desired  in  respect  of  clearness  and  precision.  The  exceeding  awkwardness
of  the  style  is  reflected  in  the  English  version. —  Translator.

2  "  De  l'Art  d'Appliquer  le  Magnetisme  Animal  a  la  Therapeutique  "  {Lc  Propaga-
teur,  p.  277.      1827).

266  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

fall  asleep  to  awake,  and  then  to  sleep  again,  all  at  your  will."
Here  are  the  experiments  Dupotet  had  in  mind  when  he  wrote  that
passage :  »

"  Experiments  at  the  Hotel  Dieu  (Nov.  i,  1820). — We  were  all  assem-
bled in  the  hall  used  for  our  seances,  the  patient  alone  excepted.  Mr.
Husson,  physician  of  this  hospital,  said  to  me:  'Will  you  endorm  the
patient,  and  that  very  speedily,  without  touching  her?  I  wish  you
would  try  to  obtain  sleep  without  her  seeing  you  or  being  apprised
of  your  coming  hither.'  I  answered  that  I  would  try,  but  that  I
could  not  guarantee  the  success  of  this  experiment,  because  action  at
a  distance,  through  intervening  bodies,  depends  on  the  special  sus-
ceptibility of  the  individual.  We  agreed  upon  a  signal  that  I  should
be  able  to  hear.  Mr.  Husson,  who,  at  the  moment,  held  in  Lis  hand
a  pair  of  scissors,  chose  the  throwing  of  them  upon  the  table  as  the
signal.  It  was  proposed  that  I  should  enter  a  closet  separated  by  a
thick  partition  from  the  apartment  we  were  in,  and  the  door  of  which
was  secured  by  a  strong  lock.  I  did  not  hesitate  to  shut  myself  up
in  that  closet,  being  unwilling  to  elude  any  difficulty,  to  leave  any
doubt  in  the  minds  of  honest  men,  or  to  afford  any  occasion  for  ma-
levolent criticism.  The  patient  was  brought  in  and  was  placed  with
her  back  turned  toward  the  place  where  I  was  concealed  and  some
three  or  four  feet  distant.  The  persons  present  wondered,  with  the
patient,  that  I  had  not  yet  come,  and  from  my  delay  concluded  that
perhaps  I  was  not  coming ;  it  was  wrong  for  me  to  keep  people  wait-
ing— in  short,  the  make-believe  that  I  had  failed  to  come  was  acted
very  plausibly.  At  the  appointed  signal,  though  I  knew  not  where
nor  at  what  distance  Miss  Samson  was  placed,  I  began  magnetizing,
keeping  the  strictest  silence  and  avoiding  the  slightest  movement
that  might  give  her  notice  of  my  presence.  It  was  then  35  minutes
past  9  o'clock.  Three  minutes  later  she  was  asleep,  and  from  the
moment  that  I  began  to  direct  my  will-action  the  patient  was  seen  to
rub  her  eyes  and  to  show  signs  of  drowsiness,  and  at  last  fell  into  her
ordinary  somnambulism.  I  repeated  this  experiment  November  7,  in
presence  of  Professor  Recarmier.  He  took  all  possible  precautions,
and  the  result  was,  in  all  respects,  the  same  as  in  our  first  attempt.
The  particulars  of  this  second  experiment  are  as  follows :  Upon  my
arrival,  at  9.15,  at  the  place  of  our  seances,  Mr.  Husson  came  to  tell
me  that  Mr.  Recarmier  wished  to  be  present  to  see  me  endorm  the
patient  through  the  partition.  I  promptly  consented  to  the  imme-
diate admission  of  so  respectable  a  witness.  Mr.  Recarmier  entered
and  talked  with  me,  in  particular  about  his  belief  as  to  magnetic  phe-
nomena. We  agreed  upon  a  signal  ;  I  went  into  the  closet  and  was
locked  in.  Then  Miss  Samson  was  brought,  and  Mr.  Recarmier  placed
her  more  than  six  feet  from  the  closet  — I  not  knowing  where  she  sat
— with  her  back  turned  toward  it.  He  conversed  with  her  and  found
her  better.  They  told  her  I  was  not  coming,  and  she  wanted  absolutely
to  withdraw.  The  moment  that  Mr.  Recarmier  asked  her  whether  she
digested  meat  (these  words  were  the  signal  agreed  upon  by  Mr.  Recar-
mier and  me),  I  began  magnetizing  her.  It  was  then  9.32;  three  min-
utes later  Mr.  Recarmier  touched  her,  raised  her  eyelids,  shook  her
by  the  hands,  questioned  her,  and  so  we  obtained  proof  that  she  was
fully  endormed.  But  these  two  facts  did  not  suffice  to  demonstrate
so  strange  a  phenomenon."

MENTAL  SUGGESTION  AT  A  DISTANCE.  267

In  fact,  this  second  experiment  was  very  ill-contrived.  The  same
hour  was  selected— 9.35,  9.32 — the  same  place,  the  same  subterfuge
to  hoodwink  the  patient.  All  this  was  anything  but  ingenious,  and
this  second  experience,  qua  second  (p.  35,  supra)  was  positively
of  no  value  whatever.  Bertrand  had  good  right  to  retain  his  doubts.
As  for  Recarmier,  when  Mr.  Dupotet  asked  him,  "Well,  are  you  con-
vinced now  ? "     "  Convinced  ?     No,"  he  replied,  "  but  staggered."

"  So  we  resolved  to  multiply  the  experiments,  varying  them,  chang-
ing the  hour  and  the  wonted  circumstances.  What  we  did  was  this  :
I  went  one  evening,  accompanied  by  Mr.  Husson  and  other  physicians,
to  the  ward  where  the  patient  was.  [A  new  imprudence  !]  They
placed  me  at  the  distance  of  several  beds  away  from  the  patient,
observing  the  strictest  silence,  so  that  my  coming  might  not  be  noticed.
At  7.08  o'clock  I  magnetized  the  patient;  at  7.12  we  all  approached
her,  and  were  convinced  that  the  sleep  and  the  insensibility  that
habitually  characterized  her  existed  in  the  highest  degree.  I  need
not  say  that  the  day  for  the  experiment  was  chosen  by  the  physician -
in-chief,  not  by  me ;  that  the  observers  had  made  sure  in  advance
that  the  patient  was  not  sleeping  [it  was  upon  this  point  that  Ber-
trand's  objections  mainly  bore  :  he  declared  that  Mr.  Husson,  by  his
simple  presence,  might  suggest  the  thought  of  an  experiment]  ;  and,
finally,  that  my  action  was  directed  from  a  distance  of  about  20  feet.
To  put  an  end  to  all  uncertainty  as  to  the  result  of  this  wonderful
(prodigieuse)  action,  this  is  what  we  did,  or  rather  what  I  was  ordered
10  do  :  Mr.  Bertrand,  doctor  of  medicine  of  the  Paris  Faculty,  had
witnessed  the  seances.  He  said  that  to  him  it  did  not  appear  strange
that  the  magnetized  patient  should  fall  asleep,  the  magnetizer  being
placed  in  the  closet ;  he  believed  that  the  concurrence  of  the  same
environing  circumstances  would,  without  my  presence,  bring  about  a
like  result ;  that,  in  fact,  the  patient  might  be  naturally  predisposed.
He  therefore  proposed  the  experiment  I  am  about  to  describe  :

"  The  patient  was  to  be  made  to  come  to  the  same  place,  to  sit  in  the
same  chair  at  the  same  spot,  and  the  same  sort  of  conversation  was  to
be  carried  on  with  her  and  around  her  ;  it  seemed  certain  to  him  that
sleep  must  follow.  Consequently,  I  agreed  not  to  come  till  a  quarter
of  an  hour  after  the  usual  time.  At  9.45  began,  in  presence  of
Miss  Samson,  the  pre-arranged  proceedings.  She  was  seated  in  the
same  armchair  she  usually  occupied,  and  in  the  same  position.  She
was  asked  various  questions,  then  she  was  left  in  quiet.  A  pretense
was  made  of  giving  signals,  as  on  former  occasions,  by  dropping  the
scissors  and  the  like;  in  short,  the  customary  practices  were  repeated
exactly.  But  in  vain  did  the  observers  look  for  the  magnetic  state  to
make  its  appearance  in  the  patient.  She  complained  of  her  side,  was
restless,  rubbed  her  side,  changed  her  place,  and  gave  no  sign  of  a
need  for  sleep,  whether  natural  or  magnetic.  The  delay  of  a  quarter
of  an  hour  being  at  an  end,  I  repaired  to  the  Hotel  Dieu,  entering  at
10.05.  The  patient  said  she  had  no  inclination  to  sleep,  nodded,  and
in  one  minute  and  a  half  was  asleep,  but  did  not  respond  till  half-an-
hour  later." '

Such  is  the  story  told  by  the  party  most  interested   in   the  affair.
'   Dupotet,  "  Traite  Complet  du  Magn.  Anim.,"  4th  ed.,  p.  182.     Paris,  1879.

268  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

Let  us  now  see  what  is  said  of  it  by   the  unbelieving  intransigentes7
Messrs.  Burdin  and  Dubois  : '

"  In  the  first  place,  Mr.  Husson  visited  the  ward  unexpectedly  at  7
o'clock  in  the  evening,  an  occurrence  quite  unwonted  and  out  of  keep-
ing with  the  habits  of  so  precise,  so  punctual  a  chief  of  service.  Mr.
Husson  did  not  hide,  but  went  straight  to  Miss  Samson's  bed,  and  to
put  her  on  the  wrong  scent  [as  though  it  were  an  easy  thing  to  do
with  a  somnambule],  he  addressed  her  next  neighbor,  saying  to  her  :
'  It  is  on  your  account  I  come  this  evening  ;  I  was  anxious  about  you
this  morning,  but  I  find  you  are  better  ;  be  not  alarmed  and  all  will
be  well'  It  was  the  somnambule  that  should  have  said,  '  All  will  be
well,'  for  now  she  is  fore-advised.  Nor  is  that  all.  Very  adroitly
the  magnetizer  is  placed  at  the  distance  of  one  bed  from  his  subject ;
a  lamp,  says  Bertrand,  lighted  the  ward,  and  stood  behind  the  said
magnetizer,  so  that  he  might  make  a  Chinese  shadow-picture  of  him-
self ;  and  Mr.  Husson,  also  at  a  short  distance  from  the  subject,  had
his  eyes  fixed  on  her.  ■  Now,  was  not  that  a  neatly  contrived  experi-
ment? .  .  .  So  then,  what  happened  ?  Why  this,  that  Mademoi-
selle, once  the  preliminaries  were  settled,  exclaimed  aloud  for  the
edification  of  the  experimenters  :  '  It  is  astonishing  what  trouble  I
have  with  my  eyes  ;  I  can't  keep  awake.'     And  lo  !  she  is  asleep  !  "

But  Messrs.  Burdin  and  Dubois  were  not  present  at  the  experiment.
Let  us  see,  then,  what  is  said  of  it  by  Bertrand,  to  whom  the  academic
authors  refer  :

"  Mr.  Husson  [says  Dr.  Bertrand]  was  so  good  as  to  consider  my
objections  and  to  agree  to  an  experiment  which  would  serve  as  a
counter-proof  by  showing  to  what  extent  the  accessory  circumstances
I  have  just  pointed  out  might  act  in  the  absence  of  the  experimenter.
It  was  proposed  to  have  the  patient  come  at  the  usual  hour  to  the
same  room  ;  she  was  to  sit  in  the  same  chair  ;  a  show  of  giving  a  sig-
nal was  to  be  made  ;  in  short,  in  the  absence  of  the  magnetizer,  we
were  to  act  precisely  as  we  had  been  in  the  habit  of  acting  when  he
was  present.  All  this  was  done  as  I  requested,  and  contrary  to  my
anticipations  the  patient  was  not  endormed.  As  this  experiment  had  not
the  result  I  had  expected,  I  proposed  a  second  one  that  seemed  more
conclusive  still.  This  consisted  in  directing  the  magnetic  action
upon  the  patient  not  only  unbeknown  to  her,  but 'also  at  an  hour  when
she  would  not  be  likely  to  suspect  that  any  one  was  trying  to  magne-
tize her  ;  this  might  be  done  by  entering  her  chamber  at  night  when
all  were  in  bed,  and,  after  making  sure  that  she  was  not  asleep,  then
magnetizing  her  from  a  distance  unbeknown  to  her.  .  .  .  Not  till
we  had  ail  retired  to  a  corner  of  the  ward  at  a  certain  distance  was
the  place  of  the  experiment  chosen.  Several  circumstances  conspired
to  render  this  experiment  more  than  doubtful  to  me.  A  lamp  that
lighted  the  ward  stood  back  of  the  magnetizer  and  at  a  small  distance
from  him,  so  that  his  body,  even  though  he  did  not  stand  erect,  might
easily  perhaps  have  been  seen  by  the  patient.  Another  cause  of
uncertainty  resulted  from  the  very  exactitude  with  which  it  was
attempted  to  perform  the  experiment,  for  Mr.  Husson,  wishing  to
make  sure  that  the  patient  was  not  asleep,  was  obliged  to  let  himself
be  seen  by  her  ;  and  do  what  he  might  to  lead  her  to  believe  that  she

1  "  Histoire  Academique,"  p.  260.

MENTAL  SUGGESTION  AT  A  DISTANCE.  269

herself  was  not  the  object  of  his  night-call,  she  must  at  least  have
had  some  doubts,  enough  to  awaken  her  attention — all  the  more  be-
cause for  a  fortnight  she  had  been  day  after  day  the  subject  of  a
multitude  of -experiments,  very  many  of  which,  as  we  have  seen,  were
tried  for  the  purpose  of  exerting  some  action  or  other  upon  her
unawares."

Bertrand  concludes  his  analysis  by  declaring  that  he  did  not  con-
test the  facts,  but  that  when  he  signed  the  report  he  was  far  from
confirming,  thereby,  the  reality  of  the  magnetic  agent  and  from  offer-
ing these  experiments  as  conclusive.1

I  am  positively  of  the  same  opinion.  They  are  not  conclusive,  but
neither  are  they  altogether  valueless,  as  Messrs.  Burdin  and  Dubois
would  have  us  believe.  They  were  the  first  public  experiments  of  the
kind,  and  to  Dupotet  belongs  the  credit  of  having  ventured  to  make
the  first  step.

"  Shortly  afterward  [says  Bertrand]  similar  experiments  were  made
at  the  Salpetriere  by  men  versed  in  the  study  of  medicine  and  by  dis-
tinguished students  who  have  become  physicians  of  repute.  The
result  was  to  convert  to  a  belief  in  the  phenomena  of  somnambulism
the  author  of  the  "  Physiologie  du  Systeme  Nerveux,"  Dr.  Georget,
who  in  1 82 1  recorded  in  that  very  work  the  result  of  his  researches.
These  experiments  commanded  also  the  belief  of  Dr.  Rostan,  author
of  several  excellent  works,  and  of  a  great  number  of  articles  in  the
new  "  Dictionnaire  de  Medicine,"  a  compilation  in  which  he  has  just
published  an  article  on  "  Animal  Magnetism,"  wherein  he  sets  forth
the  observations  that  wrought  conviction  in  him.  Mr.  Georget,  as
well  as  Mr.  Rostan,  declares  the  existence  of  a  special  agent,  and  in
particular  believes  in  the  influence  of  the  will  of  the  magnetizer,  to
which  he  assigns  a  role  as  important  as  that  assigned  to  it  by  Messrs.
Deleuze  and  Puysegur.  But  that  is  not  much  to  be  wondered  at,  so
easy  is  it  to  be  illuded,  when  one  observes  creatures  for  whom  the
most  baseless  belief  becomes  the  source  of  real  phenomena.  I  have
passed  through  the  illusion  under  which  the  distinguished  men  I  have
named  still  remain.  May  I  be  permitted  to  hope  that  they  one  day
will  adopt  the  point  of  view  at  which  I  stand  ?  For  the  rest,  the
important  thing  is,  the  testimony  they  have  given  as  to  the  reality  of
the  phenomena  ;  it  came  at  an  opportune  season  to  strengthen  the
testimony  already  given  by  men  whom  no  one  can  reasonably  suspect
of  an  intention  to  deceive,  and  it  will  no  doubt  help  to  win  the  belief
of  the  scientific  world.

"  Other  experiments  were  made  at  the  Pitie,  at  the  Charite,  under
the  direction  of  Mr.  Fouquier,  at  the  Hospital  of  St.  Louis,  and  every-
where results  more  or  less  noteworthy  were  obtained  ;  but  officialdom,
which  ought  not  to  have  remained  a  stranger  to  researches  conducted
under  the  direction  of  enlightened  physicians  and  that  could  not  have
any  untoward  effect  on  the  patients,  opposed  them  blindly,  and  hin-
dered them  in  every  way."2

Bertrand  was  mistaken  as  to  the  definitive  outcome  of  the  experi-
ments made  at  a  distance.     Five  years  after  the  publication  of  his

'  Bertrand,  "  Du  Magnetisme,"  pp.*  259-265.    Paris,  1826.  ^  Id.,  p.  266.

270  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

book,  new  proofs  were  brought  forward  by  the  academic  commis-
sion that  was  appointed  about  the  time  when  the  work  appeared.
Dr.  Foissac  repeated  Dupotet's  experiments  with  entire  success  and
■under  the  best  conditions.1  Morin,  another  unbeliever,  in  reporting
these  facts,  is  able  to  raise  but  one  objection,  viz.  :  that  there  might
have  been  collusion  between  Dr.  Foissac  and  the  patient.  It  is
difficult  to  accept  the  supposition  of  Mr.  Morin,  or  rather  of  Messrs.
Burdin  and  Dubois.  And,  in  fact,  those  gentlemen  did  not  make  it
seriously  ;  but  they  are  in  the  right  when  they  say  that  in  handling  this
sort  of  question  all  delicacy  must  be  laid  aside,  and  that  Mr.  Foissac
ought  not  to  have  known  beforehand  the  precise  time.

9.  "  Sleep  at  a  distance  [says  Lafontaine]  is  not  produced  save
upon  persons  that  have  been  magnetized  repeatedly.  At  Renner,
Mr.  Dufihol,  rector  of  the  academy,  and  Mr.  Rabusseau,  inspector,
came  one  day  with  several  physicians  to  the  hotel  where  I  lodged.
After  we  had  conversed  for  a  good  while,  Mr.  Dufihol  asked  me  to
accompany  him  home,  saying  that  a  lady  wished  to  talk  with  me.  I
took  my  hat  and  went  with  Mr.  Dufihol.  After  crossing  the  court
yard  we  entered  one  of  the  parlors  of  the  hotel,  and  Mr.  Dufihol  began
a  conversation,  the  purpose  of  which  I  did  not  see.  After  a  quarter
of  an  hour  he  said  to  me  :  'You  have  maintained  that  you  are  able  to
endorm  your  subject  at  a  distance  without  his  being  fore-advised  ;  will
you  now  try  that  experiment?'  I  agreed.  'How  much  time  will  it
take  ?'  '  Four  or  five  minutes.'  '  Begin.'  Three  minutes  after  I  told
Mr.  Dufihol  that  the  subject  must  be  asleep.  He  requested  me  to
remain  in  the  parlor,  crossed  the  court-yard  himself,  went  upstairs,
and  as  he  neared  the  door,  he  heard  the  other  gentlemen  say  to
the  subject:  'Well,  you  are  sleeping?  Awake!  He  is  asleep!'
Mr.  Dufihol  entered  hastily  and  found  the  subject  endormed ;  then  he
called  me,  and  said  :  '  In  the  face  of  facts  like  these,  gentlemen,  we
must  believe  ;  it  was  I  that  asked  Mr.  Lafontaine  to  endorm  the  sub-
ject from  the  large  parlor  of  the  hotel."

•  That  experiment  was  well  contrived.     Here  are  two  more,  arranged
ex  improviso  likewise  :

"  The  seance  ended,  many  persons  surrounded  Mr.  Lafontaine  and
discussed  with  the  liveliest  interest  the  different  effects  of  magnetism.
Just  then  took  place  the  most  conclusive  experiment  of  the  evening.
The  subject  had  withdrawn,  and  was  talking  with  some  gardes  de  ville
at  one  of  the  braziers  in  which  fire  had  been  made  to  warm  the  hall.
'Could  you  endorm  him  f-rom  here  ?'  some  one  asked  Mr.  Lafontaine.
'  Undoubtedly,'  was  his  reply  ;  '  stand  around  me,  so  that  he  may  not
see  me.'     After  a  few  moments  the  subject  was  sound  asleep.     .     .     .

"  At  Cinq-Mars-la-Pile,  two  hours  before  giving  a  public  seance,  I
happened  to  be  at  the  house  of  Dr.  Renaud.  A  dozen  persons  were
present ;  the  talk  was  about  magnetism,  and  it  was  proposed  that  I
should,  from  the  doctor's  house,  endorm  my  subject  at  the  hall  of  the
Mairie,  where  I  was  to  give  the  seance.  I  agreed.  The  conditions
were  that  I  should  not  leave  the  house  ;  that  two  of  the  gentlemen  in
the  company  should  remain  with  me  and  should  tell  me  the  moment

1   "  L'Art  de  Magnetiser,"  5th  ed.,  corrected,  p.  92.

MENTAL  SUGGESTION  AT  A  DISTANCE.  271

when  I  was  to  commence;  that  two  others  were  to  go  and  find  the
somnambule,  who  was  at  the  hotel,  and  conduct  her  to  the  Mairie,
telling  her  nothing  about  what  was  to  be  done.  From  the  doctor's
residence  to  the  Mairie  was  about  half  a  kilometer.  The  hour  having
come,  and  the  two  persons  that  had  remained  with  me — one  of  whom
was  Mr.  de  la  Berandiere — having  told  me  that  I  might  begin,  1
thought,  four  minutes  later,  I  could  assure  them  that  the  subject  was
asleep.  We  then  set  out  for  the  Mairie,  and  when  we  arrived  there
the  subject  was  sleeping.  Not  till  five  minutes  [after  the  operation
began]  had  the  sleep  been  perfect.  In  the  second  minute  the  first
effects  had  been  noticed,  such  as  winking  and  drowsiness."

We  may  add  that  Lafontaine  did  not  believe  in  direct  will-action  or
will-transmission,  but  only  in  the  emission  of  a  fluid,  under  the  control
of  the  will.

10.  Dr.  Dusart  completes  as  follows  his  observation  on  Miss  J.  :
"  Each  day  [he  says]  before  leaving  I  gave  the  order  to  sleep  till  a
fixed  hour  of  the  next  day.  One  day  I  came  away,  forgetting  that
precaution,  and  had  gone  700  meters  away  when  I  adverted  to  it.  I
therefore  formulated  the  order  to  sleep  till  eight  o'clock  the  next  day,
and  went  my  way.  On  the  morrow  I  arrived  at  half-past  seven  o'clock.
The  patient  was  asleep.  '  How  comes  it,'  I  asked,  '  that  you  are  still
sleeping  ? '  '  Sir,  I  am  obeying  you.'  '  You  are  mistaken  ;  I  left  with-
out giving  you  any  order.'  True,  but  five  minutes  afterward  I  dis-
tinctly heard  you  tell  me  to  sleep  till  eight.     Now,  it  is  not  yet  eight.'

"  The  latter  hour  was  the  one  I  usually  set  for  her  to  awake.  Pos-
sibly habit  produced  an  illusion,  and  there  may  have  been  simply  a
coincidence.  In  order  to  satisfy  my  mind  as  to  that  and  to  leave  no
room  for  doubt,  I  commanded  the  patient  to  sleep  till  she  should
receive  the  order  to  awake.

"  In  the  course  of  the  day,  having  found  a  moment  of  free  time,  I
resolved  to  complete  the  experiment.  I  left  my  home  (seven  kilo-
meters distant),  giving  at  the  same  time  the  order  to  awake.  I  reached
the  house  of  the  patient  and  found  her  awake.  Her  relatives  had,  at
my  request,  noted  the  precise  moment  of  her  awaking  ;  it  was  exactly
the  moment  at  which  I  had  given  the  order.  This  experiment,  re-
peated many  times,  at  different  hours,  always  had  the  same  result."

It  is  really  an  interesting  one.  First,  because  it  seems  to  prove  that,
not  only  is  forehead-contact  not  necessary,  but  that  the  action  can  be
exercised  at  the  distance  of  seven  kilometers;  and  then  because  it  proves
that,  under  these  conditions,  the  influence  may  have  a  bearing  not  only
on  the  fact  of  sleeping,  but  on  that  of  awaking  also,  probably  with
specialization  of  a  particular  thought — that  of  a  stated  hour.

But  here  is  something  that  will  seem  more  extraordinary  still :

"  January  1,  I  suspended  my  visits  and  ceased  to  have  any  relations
with  the  family.  1  had  heard  nothing  more  about  them  when,  on  the
12th  day  of  the  month,  while  I  was  going  my  round  in  the  opposite
direction  and  ten  kilometers  distant  from  the  patient,  I  asked  myself
whether,  in  spite  of  the  distance,  the  suspension  of  all  relations,  and
the  intervention  of  a  third  person  (for  the  patient's  father  magnetized

272  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

her  then)  it  would  be  still  possible  for  me  to  make  her  obey  me.  I
foi'bade  the  patient  to  allow  herself  to  be  endormed ;  then,  half  an  hour
afterward,  reflecting  that  if,  by  an  extraordinary  chance  I  should  be
obeyed,  that  might  prove  injurious  to  the  afflicted  girl,  I  lifted  the
prohibition  and  thought  no  more  about  it.  I  was  much  surprised
when,  the  next  day,  at  six  o'clock  in  the  morning,  a  messenger  came
•express  to  my  house  bearing  a  letter  from  Miss  J.'s  father.  He  wrote
that  the  day  before,  at  10  o'clock  a.  m.,  he  had  succeeded  in  endorming
his  daughter  only  after  a  prolonged  and  very  painful  struggle.  The
patient,  once  endormed,  had  declared  that  if  she  had  made  resistance
it  had  been  by  my  order,  and  that  she  had  not  fallen  asleep  till  I  per-
mitted. These  declarations  were  made  in  the  presence  of  witnesses,
whom  the  girl's  father  got  to  sign  the  notes  of  them  made  at  the
moment.  This  letter  I  have  preserved  ;  its  contents  were  confirmed
to  me  later  by  Mr. ,  who  added  some  circumstantial  details."

Thus  it  becomes  probable  that  with  an  exact  knowledge  of  the  con-
ditions of  the  phenomenon  we  may  be  able  to  communicate  our
thoughts  at  a  distance,  as  we  now  converse  by  telephone.

Dr.  Glay  adds  to  this  observation  a  remark  having  a  bearing  on
experiment.  "  It  seems,"  he  says,  "  that  Dr.  Dusart  succeeded  in  en-
dorming his  patient  at  a  distance  only  after  subjecting  her  to  an
education  process.  Thus,  he  says  that  at  first  he  endormed  her  very
many  times  by  mental  order,  but  that  the  order  was  given  from  very
near.  Evidently  we  have  no  very  clear  understanding  as  to  what  may  be
the  influence  of  such  education  ;  it  may  be,  nevertheless,  that  here  is  a
condition  favorable  to  the  development  of  these  phenomena,  should
they  be  proved  real."

We  can,  I  believe,  get  a  pretty  fair  notion  of  the  influence  of  this
education  :

a.  In  the  first  place,  such  influence  need  not  cause  us  any  surprise,
for  it  is  observed  in  all  hypnotic  and  magnetic  phenomena,  without
exception  :  the  subject's  sensibility  grows  in  proportion  to  the  experi-
mentation. The  hypnoscope  enables  us  to  determine  this  fact  ;  and,
as  I  observed  in  a  note  :  communicated  to  the  Societe  de  Biologie  in
1884,  there  exists  with  respect  to  this  point  a  very  sharp  contrast  be-
tween imaginary  and  real  sensibility.  Persons  who  think  themselves
highly  sensitive,  very  "  nervous,"  who  have  faith  in  magnetism,  but
who  do  not  possess  this  special  sensibility,  which  does  not  depend  at
all  on  the  will  or  on  faith,  experience  various  sensations,  more  or  less
strong,  at  the  moment  of  a  first  hypnoscopic  test.  These  sensations
are  produced  by  fear,  by  expectant  attention — in  a  word,  by  the  imag-
ination. Make  the  test  a  second  time,  and  you  will  see  these  sensations
rapidly  grow  less  and  disappear,  whereas  the  effects  due  to  real  sensi-
bility persist  and  grow  more  pronounced  with  each  application.

If,  after  a  first  hypnoscopic  test,  you  hypnotize  or  magnetize  the
subject,  say  for  a  month,  and  then    apply  the  test  again,  you  will

1  See  Appendix  I.

MENTAL  SUGGESTION  AT  A  DISTANCE.  273

always  find  evidence  of  greater  sensibility.  Why?  Because  the
action,  consisting  of  a  reflex  influence  between  the  brain  and  the
ganglia,  must  needs  present  the  phenomena  proper  to  reflex  action  in
general,  which  is  a  thing  that  is  learned,  that  strikes  root,  and  that
becomes  more  and  more  easy.  Any  nerve-route  whatever,  traversed
once  by  any  excitation,  no  matter  what,  will  present  less  resistance  at
the  second  passage  of  the  same  excitation.  Herein  consists  the  differ-
ence between  a  wire  and  a  nerve-fiber,  particularly  when  the  fiber  is
connected  with  living  cells.  This  is  what  Ribot  has  called  organic
memory,1  and  this  memory  must  be  no  less  favorable  to  slight  excita-
tions than  to  the  ordinary  mechanic  actions.

b.  We  must  not  forget  that  though  hypnotic  sensibdity  is  inde-
pendent of  the  subject's  conscious  will,  it  is  not  so  with  his  uncon-
scious. The  unconscious  may  be  regarded  almost  as  a  privy  govern-
ment, often,  if  not  always,  more  powerful  than  that  which  under  the
style  of  Ego  I.  reigns  in  the  light  of  publicity,  but — governs  not.  With
this  Ego  I.,  more  pompous  than  puissant,  you  may  treat  of  matters
of  a  superficial  sort,  but  with  Ego  II.  you  can  conclude  treaties  with
regard  to  all  vital  functions.

To  it  you  may,  for  example,  say  :  "  While  Ego  I.  is  sleeping  you
will  watch,  reckoning  the  hours  and  minutes,  and  you  will  wake  him
at  such  an  hour  ;  you  are  to  have  an  eye  upon  your  first  minister,  who
is  called  '  Exchange  of  Matter,'  so  that  he  shall  not  hurry  his  work  ;
you  will  carry  on  and  equalize  the  life-movement  in  all  the  provinces
of  your  realm,  guard  the  frontier  against  invasion,  expel  foci  of
disease  that  break  your  rest,"  etc.,  and  he  will  obey  you  ;  he  has  the
power  to  obey  you.  Consequently  the  will  of  Ego  II.  can  go  out  to
meet  us,  can  aid  us,  can  facilitate  more  and  more  our  task.

c.  There  must  be  a  strong  analogy  between  a  spoken  voice  and  a
mental  voice.2  Now,  we  sometimes  have  difficulty  in  understanding
what  is  said  by  one  who  is  a  stranger  to  us  ;  he  speaks  too  rapidly,  or
in  too  low  a  voice,  or  with  faulty  pronunciation  ;  but  little  by  little  we
grow  used  to  this  ;  associations  are  formed,  and,  as  a  mother  under-
stands the  babble  of  her  child,  we  learn  to  associate  the  more  or  less
jumbled  sounds  with  definite  ideas.  Probably  the  vibrations  that
transmit  thought  and  will  are  no  less  confused,  no  less  imperfect ;
consequently  we  must  have  them  repeated  to  us  over  and  over,  in
order  that  we  may  perceive  their  differences  ;  and  it  is  easy  to  see
how  habit,  training  and  exercise  help  us  to  perceive  them.

d.  Finally,  as  we  have  already  observed,  the  action  upon  the  subject
of  a  center  of  radiation  from  without,3  and  an  adjustment  in  conform-
ity with  the  dynamic  nature  of    that    center,   are  effected  little  by

1  Ribot,  "  Diseases  of  Memory."     (Humboldt  Library  No.  46.)

2  Une  voix  par  lee,  tine  voix  mentale.

3  L' envahissement  dti  sujet  par  tin  foyer  rayonnant  exte'rieur.

274  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

little,  and  constitute  what  is  called  "rapport."     And  this  rapport  is
a  necessary  condition  of  all  mental  transmission.

ii.  "One  day  [says  Mr.  Richet],  being  at  breakfast  with  my  col-
leagues, among  them  our  confrere  Mr.  Ladouzy,  then,  like  myself,  an
interne  of  the  Beaujon  Hospital,  I  affirmed  that  I  could  endorm  a
patient  at  a  distance,  and  that  I  would  simply,  by  an  act  of  my  will,
make  her  come  to  where  we  were.  Bur  after  waiting  ten  minutes,  no
one  having  come,  the  experiment  was  considered  to  be  a  failure.  In
fact,  it  was  not  a  failure,  for  after  a  while  word  was  brought  to  me
that  the  patient  was  walking  up  and  down  the  corridors  endormed,
trying  to  have  a  talk  with  me,  and  not  finding  me.  So  in  fact  it  was,
and  I  could  get  from  her  no  explanation  of  her  sleep  and  of  her  wan-
dering about  but  this,  that  she  wanted  to  talk  with  me."

Here  we  see  a  lack  of  magnetic  training.  Had  this  patient  been
accustomed  to  the  experiments,  like  the  somnambules  of  Dupotet  and
Foissac,  or  even  like  Mr.  Gibert's  subject,  Mrs.  B.,  she  would  doubtless
have  known  the  reason  of  her  promenade.  Another  point  is  worthy
of  mention  :  the  somnambule  did  not  find  Mr.  Richet,  and  that  for
sundry  reasons.  First,  because  Mr.  Richet  had  ceased  to  influence
her;  then,  because  where  physical  attraction  does  not  combine  with
the  mental  action  (as  in  Bruno's  experiment),  the  subject  cannot  find
his  way  ;  he  knows  he  must  go  somewhere,  but  whither  he  knows  not ;
finally,  it  is  probable  that  this  dominant  thought  of  going  to  see
Mr.  Richet  developed  in  her  a  somnambulic  monomania,  which,  like  all
monomanias,  hinders  clear  vision.  Often  it  happens  that  one  will  be
searching  for  a  knife,  for  instance,  that  lies  before  his  eyes  on  the
table  ;  the  more  persistently  he  searches  the  blinder  does  he  become
to  the  object.  At  last  he  gives  up  looking  for  it,  and  then  finds  it.
We  may  recall  an  occurrence  of  this  sort  in  our  third  experiment  at
Havre,  where  Mrs.  B.  was  looking  for  Mr.  Gibert,  but  could  not  find
him.  Nevertheless,  she  had  come  from  the  distance  of  a  kilometer  in
obedience  to  the  mental  order.  This  explains  for  us  the  unsuccess  of
many  magnetizers,  who,  after  having  mentally  attracted  their  subject,
cannot  make  him  come  to  them  after  they  change  their  place.  The
subject  grows  impatient,  stubborn,  and  has  no  sense  for  anything
more.

"Another  time  [writes-the  same  author]  I  repeated  this  experiment,
varying  it  in  the  following  way  :  I  asked  two  of  my  colleagues  to  visit
the  ward  under  pretense  of  examining  some  patient  or  other,  but
really  in  order  to  observe  how  No.  n  would  act,  it  being  my  intention
to  endorm  her  at  that  moment.  A  little  afterward  they  came  and  told
me  that  the  experiment  had  failed.  But  this  time  also  it  was  success-
ful, for  they  had  mistaken  for  No.  u  the  patient  in  the  next  bed  to
hers,  who,  of  course,  had  remained  awake,  while  No.  n  had  been  put
in  a  sound  sleep.

"  I  ought  [he  adds]  to  have  repeated  this  interesting  experiment,  to
have  varied  it,  and  to  have  made  the  conditions  more  precise ;  but  in

MENTAL  SUGGESTION  AT  A  DISTANCE.  275

matters  of  this  sort  one  cannot  do  all  that  he  fain  would  do,  and  only
those  who  have  experimented  know  what  difficulties  of  all  kinds,  moral
and  otherwise,  beset  the  path  of  methodical  experimentation.  After  a
few  weeks  the  patient  went  back  to  her  own  district,  to  Bezicrs,  1
believe,  and  I  have  not  heard  of  her  since.  Since  that  time  (1873)  I
have  not  been  able  in  one  single  case  to  produce  this  phenomenon  of
somnambulism  at  a  distance.  If,  then,  the  phenomenon  exists — and
it  were  not  easy,  I  think,  absolutely  to  deny  it — it  is  extremely  rare,
and  occurs  only  under  special  circumstances  that  hitherto  have  escaped
scientific  verification."

We  shall  endeavor  to  define  these  special  circumstances  with  the
aid  of  recent  research.  But  first  let  us  continue  our  record  of  experi-
ments.

12.   Mr.  Hericourt  completes  his  note,  already  cited,  as  follows:

"  Soon  my  thoughts  were  no  longer  about  exerting  my  action  from
one  end  of  a  room  to  another ;  the  same  results  were  obtained  in  act-
ing from  one  part  of  a  house  to  another,  and  from  one  house  to  another
house  in  a  more  or  less  distant  street.  The  circumstances  amid  which
I  thus  exerted,  for  the  first  time,  this  long-distance  action,  are  worth
stating  in  some  detail.  Being  one  day  in  my  study  (I  lived  then  in
Perpignan),  the  thought  occurred  to  me  to  endorm  Mrs.  D.,  who,  I
had  every  reason  to  believe,  was  at  home,  and  who  lived  in  a  street
some  300  meters  distant  from  mine.  By  the  way,  I  was  far  from
believing  that  the  experiment  would  succeed.  It  was  3  o'clock,  p.  m.,
and  I  kept  walking  to  and  fro,  thinking  very  intently  of  the  result  I
wished  to  produce ;  and  I  was  fully  occupied  with  this  exercise  when
I  was  called  to  see  some  patients.  As  the  cases  were  urgent,  1,  for
the  moment,  forgot  Mrs.  D.,  whom  I  was  to  meet  toward  half-past
four  on  a  public  promenade.  Having  repaired  thither  at  that  hour,  I
was  much  surprised  not  to  see  her  there,  but  thought  that,  after  all,
my  experiment  might  have  been  successful ;  so  about  5  o'clock,  lest
anything  should  be  amiss,  and  to  restore  things  to  their  normal  state,
in  case  that  state  had  been,  in  fact,  disturbed,  I  bethought  me,  to  ease
my  conscience,  to  awaken  my  subject  with  the  same  strong  effort
with  which  I  had  shortly  before  sought  to  endorm  her.  I  happened  to
see  Mrs.  D.  that  evening,  and  this  is  what  she  told  me,  purely  of  her
own  accord,  and  without  any  allusion  whatever,  on  my  part,  to  her
absence  from  the  promenade.  Toward  3  o'clock,  being  in  her  bed-
chamber, she  was  suddenly  possessed  by  an  irresistible  desire  to  sleep  ;
her  eyelids- were  leaden,  her  legs  refused  to  support  her — she  never
had  been  in  the  habit  of  sleeping  in  the  daytime — so  that  she  was
hardly  able  to  go  to  her  drawing-room  and  there  throw  herself  upon
a  sofa.  Her  maid  having  come  in  to  speak  to  her,  found  her  mistress,
as  she  afterward  told  her,  pale,  motionless,  her  skin  cold,  corpse-like,
to  use  her  own  expression.  Justly  alarmed,  the  servant  began  to
shake  her  vigorously,  but  with  no  success  beyond  making  her  open
her  eyes.  At  that  moment  Mrs.  D.  was  conscious,  as  she  told  me,
only  of  a  violent  headache,  but  that,  it  seems,  disappeared  suddenly
toward  5  o'clock.  That  was  just  the  moment  when  I  thought  of
awakening  her.

"  This  narrative,  I  repeat,  having  been  spontaneous,  no  further
doubt   remained ;    my  experiment   had   surely  been    successful.      In

276  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

order  to  repeat  it  under  conditions  as  stringent  as  might  be,  I  did  not
acquaint  Mrs.  D.  with  what  I  had  done,  and  I  set  on  foot  a  whole
series  of  experiments,  bringing  as  witnesses  a  number  of  persons  who
consented  to  fix  the  conditions  and  to  verify  the  results.  Among
these  witnesses  I  may  mention  the  surgeon-major  and  a  captain  in
the  battalion  of  chasseurs  in  which  I  was  aide-major.  All  these  ex-
periments are  ultimately  reducible  to  the  following  type :  Being  in  a
drawing-room  with  Mrs.  D.,  I  told  her  I  would  try  to  endorm  her
from  a  neighboring  apartment,  the  doors  being  closed.  I  then  pro-
ceeded to  that  apartment  and  there  remained  a  few  minutes,  my
thought  being  distinctly  to  let  her  remain  in  the  waking  state.  When
I  went  back  to  the  drawing-room  I,  in  fact,  found  Mrs.  D.  in  her  nor-
mal state,  and  making  merry  over  my  want  of  success.  A  moment
afterward,  or  on  another  day,  I  would  enter  the  same  neighboring
apartment  on  one  pretext  or  another,  but  now  with  the  set  purpose
of  producing  sleep,  and  almost  within  a  minute  the  most  complete
result  would  be  obtained.  Here  no  other  suggestion  than  the  mental
one  is  to  be  thought  of,  for  expectant  attention  when  brought  to  bear
with  full  force  in  the  preceding  experiment,  had  been  absolutely  with-
out effect.  The  conditions  of  these  experiments  controlling1  one
another  as  they  do,  are  so  simple  and  so  effective,  that  I  call  attention
to  them  as  constituting  a  sort  of  schematism  for  use  in  demonstra-
tion."

This  observation  is  highly  instructive.  In  fact,  negative  control-
experiments  are  of  special  interest.  We  recall  a  counter-proof  of  this
kind  demanded  by  Bertrand,  and  which  was  successfully  made  by
Dupotet.  Similar  facts  are  found  in  Mr.  Peter  Janet's  narrative,  and
in  most  of  the  cases  wherein  an  action  purely  mental  is  alleged.  The
subject  may  be  touched,  passes  may  be  made,  we  may  pretend  that  it
is  our  purpose  to  endorm  him,  and  no  result  will  follow.

But  this  is  of  very  rare  occurrence  ;  the  majority  of  very  highly
sensitive  subjects  undergo  ideoplastic  action,  and  I  even  believe  that
some  of  those  who  are  capable  of  being  influenced  at  a  distance  will
not  withstand  an  imaginary  action  ;  and  that  consequently  Mr.  Heri-
court's  negative  test  cannot  be  decisive.  But  what  appears  to  be
certain  is,  that  subjects  that  are  suggestionable  mentally,  or  from  a
distance,  are  less  suggestionable  verbally.  They  feel  the  real  action,
however  weak  it  may  be,  but  do  not  influence  themselves.  True,  this
may  be  due  to  training  rather  than  to  any  positive  difference  in  sensi-
bility. In  these  latter  times  suggestion  is  the  fashion  ;  practitioners
are  suggesting  all  sorts  of  hallucinations  to  their  subjects  ;  and  the
Nancy  school  has  for  a  long  time  been  doing  nothing  else.  Such
being  the  case,  it  is  no  wonder  that  there  should  be  plenty  of  subjects
to  afford  rich  amusement,  though  they  be  quite  unsuited  for  a  serious
study.  Where  all  is  imagination,  true  action  remains  unperceived.
Quite  different  was  the  practice  of   sober-minded    magnetizers    like

1  The  word  is  used  in  its  original,  etymological  sense  of  "  checking  by  a  double
register  or  double  account."  Webster  marks  "  control,"  in  this  sense,  obsolete.  But
multa  renascentur  qua  iam  cecidere  ! — Translator.

MENTAL  SUGGESTION  AT  A  DISTANCE.  277

Bruno,  Puysegur,  Deleuze,  etc.  They  took  pains  to  lead  their  som-
nambules  without  driving  them,  and  to  develop  their  simple  faculties
rather  than  their  suggestional  mobility.  Verbal  suggestion  is  not  to
be  disregarded,  for  it  may  render  great  service  to  therapeutic ;  but  we
must,  above  all,  develop  the  native  properties  {propridte's  sinceres)  of
this  extraordinary  sensibility  if  we  would  make  real  progress  as
regards  theory.  Little  wonder  that  with  suggestion  run  mad,  mag-
netism has  been  made  a  laughing-stock  and  somnambules  have  been
replaced  by  hurdy-gurdies.

13.  Let  us  again  consider  the  experiments  made  from  a  distance
upon  Mrs.  B.

a.  "  Without  advising  her  of  what  he  intended  to  do,  Mr.  Gibert  shut
himself  up  in  a  neighboring  room,  at  the  distance  of  18  or  20  feet,  and
there  tried  mentally  to  give  her  the  order  to  sleep.  I  remained  with
the  subject  [says  Mr.  Janet]  and  observed  that,  after  a  few  moments,
the  eyes  closed  and  sleep  began.  But  what  seemed  to  me  specially
curious  was,  that  in  the  lethargy  she  was  not  at  all  under  my  influence.
I  was  unable  to  produce  in  her  either  contracture  or  attraction,  though
I  remained  beside  her  while  she  was  entering  the  sleep.  On  the  other
hand,  she  was  entirely  obedient  to  Mr.  Gibert,  though  he  had  not
been  present ;  finally,  it  was  Mr.  Gibert  that  had  to  awaken  her,  and
that  proves  that  he  had  endormed  her.  There  may  be  some  doubt,
however,  as  to  this  point.  Mrs.  B.  certainly  was  not  unaware  of  the
presence  of  Mr.  Gibert  in  the  house  ;  so,  too,  she  knew  he  had  come  to
endorm  her;  hence,  though  the  supposition  seems  to  me  to  be  hardly
probable,  one  might  say  that  she  put  herself  to  sleep  by  suggestion
at  the  very  instant  when  Mr.  Gibert  was  giving  the  order  from  the
neighboring  room.

b.  "October  3,  1885,  I  called  on  Mr.  Gibert,  at  his  residence,  at
half-past  eleven  o'clock  in  the  forenoon,  and  asked  him  to  endorm
Mrs.  B.  by  a  mental  order  without  quitting  his  study.  The  woman
was,  on  this  occasion,  in  nowise  forewarned,  for  we  had  never  en-
dormed her  at  that  hour.  She  was  in  another  house  at  least  500
yards  distant.  I  forthwith  repaired  to  where  she  was,  to  note  the
result  of  this  singular  command.  As  I  expected,  she  was  not  at  all
asleep.  I  then  endormed  her  myself  by  touching  her,  and  when  she
was  in  somnambulism,  before  I  had  addressed  any  question  to  her,
she  began  to  talk  as  follows :  '  I  know  Mr.  Gibert  wanted  to  endorm
me  .  .  ..  but  as  soon  as  I  noticed  that,  I  went  and  got  some
water  and  dipped  my  hands  in  the  cool  water,  .  .  .  I  do  not  wish  to
be  endormed  in  that  way.  ...  I  might  become  talkative  .  .  .
that  puts  me  out  and  makes  me  ridiculous.'  It  turned  out  that  she
had,  in  fact,  dipped  her  hands  in  cold  water  before  my  arrival.  I
record  this  experiment  though  it  failed,  because  it  seems  to  me  inter-
esting from  many  points  of  view.  Mrs.  B.,  then,  appears  to  be  con-
scious, even  in  the  waking  state,  of  the  influence  that  controls  her  ;
she  is  able  to  withstand  the  sleep  by  dipping  her  hands  in  cold  water  ;
finally,  she  did  not  lend  herself  kindly  to  the  experimentation,  and
that  fact  may  be  regarded  as  a  guarantee  of  her  honesty.

c.  "  October  9,  I  again  visited  Mr.  Gibert  and  asked  him  to  endorm
Mrs.  B.,  not  immediately,  but  at  twenty  minutes  before  12.     I  went

278  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

straight  to  her  unaccompanied  by  Mr.  Gibert,  who  I  am  certain  could
not  have  had  any  communication  with  her  ;  I  expected  to  be  able  to
prevent  her  from  putting  her  hands  in  cold  water  should  she  attempt
to  do  so  again.  I  was  unable  to  watch  her  as  I  had  intended,  for  she
had  gone  to  her  chamber  a  quarter  of  an  hour  before  and  closed  the
door,  and  I  thought  it  best  not  to  put  her  on  her  guard  by  having  her
called  down-stairs.  At  fifteen  minutes  before  12  I  went  up  to  her
room  with  some  other  persons  who  accompanied  me.  Mrs.  B.  was
reclining  in  a  chair  in  a  very  uncomfortable  posture  and  in  deep
sleep.  It  was  not  natural  sleep,  for  she  was  totally  insensible  and  it
was  absolutely  impossible  to  awaken  her.  I  remark  again  that  neither
I  nor  any  one  of  those  present  had  any  influence  upon  her  or  was  able
to  produce  any  contracture  whatever.  The  first  words  she  uttered
as  soon  as  the  somnambulism  appeared  spontaneously  were  these  :
'  Why  send  them  so  ?  I  don't  want  you  to  make  me  act  foolishly.
Do  I  look  like  a  fool  ?  Why  does  he,  Mr.  Gibert,  endorm  me  from
his  house  ?  I  didn't  have  time  to  dip  my  hand  in  my  basin.'  As  I
had  no  influence  over  her,  it  was  impossible  for  me  to  awaken  her,
and  as  we  could  not  leave  her  so  we  had  to  go  and  fetch  Mr.  Gibert.
As  soon  as  he  came  he  produced  all  the  phenomena  which  on  that  day
I  was  not  able  to  produce,  and  at  last  awakened  her  with  the  greatest
ease.  Is  it  to  be  supposed  that  my  presence  in  the  house  and  the
knowledge  I  had  of  the  time  set  by  myself  for  the  sleep  to  come  on,
had  any  influence  upon  her  and  put  her  to  sleep  ?  I  think  not,  but
still  the  supposition  is  not  unreasonable.  We  resolved  to  make  the
experiment  in  a  different  way.

d.  "  October  14,  Mr.  Gibert  promised  me  that  he  would  endorm
Mrs.  B.  at  some  hour  of  the  day  to  be  set  by  him  or  by  a  third  per-
son, but  which  I  was  not  to  know.  I  came  to  the  pavilion  where
Mrs.  B.  was  about  half-past  4  o'clock.  She  had  already  been  asleep
for  fifteen  minutes,  and  consequently  I  had  nothing  to  do  with  that
sleep,  and  all  I  did  was  to  ascertain  its  existence.  I  observed  the
same  insensibility,  the  same  characters  as  before,  save  that  the  leth-
argy seemed  still  more  profound,  for  there  was  no  state  of  somnam-
bulism at  all.  *  Still,  there  were  produced  on  that  day  other  phe-
nomena, but  these  belong  to  another  order  of  ideas  of  which  I  will
speak  presently.  Mr.  Gibert  did  not  come  till  half-past  5.  He  then
told  me  that  at  the  suggestion  of  Mr.  B.,  he  had  given  thought
to  the  endorming  of  the  subject  about  fifteen  minutes  after  4  o'clock,
and  that  he  was  then  at  Graville,  that  is  to  say,  at  least  two  kilometers
distant  from  her.  He  had  no  difficulty  in  producing  contracture  or
in  awakening  the  subject.  It  were  well  could  this  experiment  have
been  repeated  many  times,  and  it  is  to  be  regretted  that  the  depart-
ure of  Mrs.  B.  prevented  us  from  making  it  again.  Nevertheless  to
me  it  seems  decisive,  considering  that  it  is  but  the  complement  of
prior  experiments  and  that  it  is  connected  with  other  facts  of  the
same  kind  that  we  must  now  set  forth.

e.  "  October  14,  the  same  day  that  Mrs.  B.  was'  endormed  from
Graville,  I  observed  during  her  sleep  the  following  phenomena  :  At
five  o'clock  precisely  Mrs.  B.,  while  asleep,  began  to  moan  and  to
tremble,  and  then  to  mutter  these  words  :  '  Enough,  enough,  it  is  very
unkind  of  you.'  She  sat  up,  and,  moaning,  rose  to  her  feet  and  made
a  few  steps  ;  then  laughing  aloud,  she  threw  herself  backward  into  the
armchair  and  fell  into  deep  sleep.     At  five  minutes  past  five  the  same

MENTAL  SUGGESTION  AT  A  DISTANCE.  279

scene  precisely  was  enacted  :  she  rose,  stood  up,  and  seemed  inclined
to  walk  ;  after  a  few  moments  she  said,  laughing  :  '  You  cannot.  Let
your  thought  wander  ever  so  little,  and  I  am  myself  again  ;'  and,  in
fact,  she  lay  down  again  and  once  more  was  asleep.  The  same  scene
was  repeated  at  ten  minutes  past  five.  When  Mr.  Gibert  arrived,  at
half-past  five,  he  showed  me  a  card  that  had  been  sent  to  him  by  a  third
person,  Mr.  D.  ;  he  could  not  have  had  any  eommunication  whatever
with  Mrs.  B.  from  the  time  when  the  card  had  been  sent.  It  was
suggested  that  Mr.  Gibert  should  order  Mrs.  B.  to  perform  different
acts  of  some  complexity  at  intervals  of  five  minutes,  after  five  o'clock.
These  acts,  plainly  because  they  were  too  complex,  were  not  per-
formed ;  but  at  the  very  moment  when  Mr.  Gibert,  at  Graville,  was
ordering  them  to  be  done,  I,  at  the  distance  of  two  kilometers,  with
my  own  eyes,  saw  the  effect  those  orders  produced  and  a  beginning
made  toward  carrying  them  out.  Mrs.  B.,  in  fact,  seemed  to  have
cognizance  of  the  orders,  to  withstand  them,  and  to  be  able  to  dis-
obey them  only  because  of  a  sort  of  distraction  on  the  part  of  Mr.
Gibert.  We  began  this  experiment  again,  placing  ourselves  this  time
beside  her  during  the  lethargic  sleep.  Strange  to  say,  the  result,  con-
trary to  what  might  have  been  expected,  was  not  more  noteworthy.
The  person  who  endorms  Mrs.  B.  can  easily  enough,  by  a  mental
order,  make  her  sit  up,  and  even  rise  to  her  feet ;  but  whether  be-
cause the  concentration  of  thought  does  not  last  long  enough,  or
whatever  the  cause  may  be,  Mrs.  B.  is  not  slow  to  '  get  herself  back
again,'  as  she  says,  and  to  resume  the  reclining  posture.  The  order
mentally  given  has  an  influence  that  seems  immediate,  but,  as  far  as
we  have  been  able  to  see,  that  influence  seems  not  to  be  greater  anear
than  from  afar."1

"  Later,  in  a  new  series  of  experiments,  after  a  rather  lengthy  train-
ing of  the  subject,  I  myself  succeeded  in  producing  at  will  this  curious
phenomenon.  Eight  times  consecutively  I  essayed  to  endorm  Mrs.  B.
from  my  own  house,  taking  every  possible  precaution  so  that  nobody
might  be  aware  of  what  I  intended  to  do,  and  each  time  changing  the
hour  of  the  experiment,  and  in  every  instance  Mrs.  B.  was  put  in  the
hypnotic  sleep  [hypnotism  from  a  distance  !]  a  few  minutes  after  the
time  of  my  beginning  to  fix  my  thought  upon  the  matter."2

The  details  of  these  new  experiments  will  be  read  with  interest.  I
take  them  from  Mr.  Janet's  second  note  presented  to  the  Society  for
Physiological  Psychology,  May  31,  1886  :

"  These'new  researches  have  had  to  do  particularly  with  sleep  pro-
duced by  action  at  a  distance,  for  that  phenomenon  is  of  the  highest
importance  and  seems  to  be  easily  verifiable.  As  I  was  resolved  to
make  sure  of  the  reality  of  the  phenomenon,  I  sought  to  produce  it
myself  repeatedly  and  with  all  possible  precision,  and  will  begin  with
an  account  of  these  experiments.

"  Mrs.  B.  had  been  back  in  Havre  since  February  10;  her  health  had
continued  to  be  very  good,  and  she  had  had  no  nervous  attack  since
her  last  journey.  Once  only  had  she  been  indisposed,  she  said,  and
the  circumstances  of  her  indisposition  were  these  :  A  person  living  in

1  Bull,  de  la  Soc.  de  Phys.  Psych.,  1885,  vol.  i.     Paris,  1886.

2  P.  Janet,  "  Les  Phases  Intermediaires  de  l'llypnotisme."     Rev.  Scientif.,  May

8,   1886.

28o  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

the  part  of  the  country  where  she  was,  and  who  at  other  times  used
to  endorm  her  with  the  greatest  ease,  had  tried  again  to  produce  in
her  the  magnetic  sleep.  He  made  the  attempt  repeatedly  during
three  consecutive  hours,  yet  did  not  succeed  in  endorming  her.  As  a
consequence  of  this  experiment  Mrs.  B.  had  a  severe  headache,  and
was  indisposed  for  some  days.  She  did  not  understand  the  matter  at
all ;  in  her  simplicity  she  believed  that  she  could  not  be  endormed
any  more,  and  that  even  we  could  no  longer  succeed.  But  we  were
not  at  all  concerned,  for  we  remembered  how,  on  the  eve  of  her  leav-
ing Havre,  at  the  last  somnambulic  seance  on  October  14,  Mr.  Gibert
had  forbidden  her  to  be  endormed  by  anybody  outside  of  Havre.
The  suggestion  had  been  made  mentally,  that  is  to  say,  Mr.  Gibert
had  done  nothing  but  simply  to  think  upon  that  command  while  near-
ing  his  forehead  to  the  forehead  of  Mrs.  B.  Still,  I  cannot  cite  this
fact  as  a  clear  case  of  mental  suggestion,  for  I  am  not  sure  that  we
did  not  discuss  in  her  presence,  during  the  sleep,  the  possibility  of
such  suggestion.  In  any  case,  it  is  seen  that  the  suggestion  was  per-
fectly effective  during  four  months.  As  soon  as  Mrs.  B.  was  with  us
again,  Mr.  Gibert,  without  a  word  of  explanation,  pressed  her  hand  as
he  had  been  wont  to  do  before,  and  in  two  minutes  she  was  asleep  ;
the  following  day  I  endormed  her  with  the  greatest  ease  in  a  few
minutes.

"I  tried  by  endorming  her  often  myself  to  acquire  over  this  woman
an  influence  sufficiently  strong  to  warrant  me  in  essaying  with  some
prospect  of  success  to  give  her  from  a  distance  the  order  to  sleep.  At
first  I  would  endorm  her  by  holding  her  hand  or  seizing  her  thumb,
without  trying  any  other  procedures.  After  a  few  days  I  was  able  to
bring  about  sleep  much  more  speedily.  Previously  it  took  me  three
or  four  minutes,  and  sometimes  longer,  to  endorm  Mrs.  B.  I  produced
the  sleep  now  in  half  a  minute.  To  endorm  Mrs.  B.  it  was  no  longer
necessary  to  fix  the  mind  on  the  order  to  sleep  ;  physical  action  exerted
upon  her  hypnogenic  point  on  the  thumb  superseded  all  other  kinds
of  influence.  The  mental  command  retained  its  importance  when  the
subject  was  not  touched,  when  she  was  endormed  by  mental  sugges-
tion exercised  in  the  room  where  she  was.  That  experiment  was  still
performed  very  readily,  but  there  was  no  certainty  that  the  attitude
of  the  magnetizer  did  not  play  a  greater  part  in  producing  the  sleep
than  his  mind  did.

"  After  a  dozen  seances,  at  which  I  myself  had  endormed  Mrs'.  B.
six  times,  I  essayed  to  give  her  the  order  to  sleep,  I  not  being  beside
her,  but  in  a  neighboring  room.  The  experiment  was  successful.
After  thinking  for  five  minutes  upon  endorming  her,  I  entered  her
room  and  saw  her  completely  endormed,  her  head  and  her  body  lean-
ing in  the  direction  of  where  I  had  been.  The  experiment,  however,
is  not  conclusive,  for  Mrs.  B.  evidently  suspected  my  intention.

"February  22,  after  fourteen  somnambulic  seances,  and  after  en-
dorming her  myself  eight  times,  I  for  the  first  time  attempted  to  give
her  from  a  distance  the  order  to  sleep.  I  was  at  my  house,  some  400
or  500  meters  away  from  the  pavilion  where  Mrs.  B.  was,  when  I
essayed  to  concentrate  my  mind  upon  the  order,  'Sleep,'  as  I  had
many  a  time  done  when  she  was  present.  I  did  not  perhaps  bring  the
necessary  conviction,  nor  did  I  spend  the  necessary  time,  for  I
'  thought '  hardly  more  than  five  minutes.  At  all  events,  I  did  not
visit  her  till   an    hour   later,   being   persuaded    beforehand   that  my

MENTAL  SUGGESTION  AT  A  DISTANCE.  281

attempt  was  a  failure.  To  my  great  astonishment,  the  people  of  the
house  told  me  that  Mrs.  B.  had  been  much  indisposed  for  an  hour;  that
she  had  had  spells  of  drowsiness  and  been  forced  to  suspend  her  work  ;
that  to  free  herself  from  this  feeling  she  had  had  to  drink  a  glass  of
water  and  to  bathe  her  face  and  hands.  Mrs.  B.  herself  told  me  of
her  indisposition,  which  she  did  not  explain.  It  is  well  to  remark
here  that  in  the  waking  state  she  has  not  the  slightest  suspicion  that
she  may  be  endormed  from  a  distance.  This  coincidence — which,  to
say  the  least,  is  a  singular  one — showed  two  things  :  (1)  That  proba-
bly I  exercised  from  a  distance  a  certain  action  upon  this  woman,  and
that  there  was  good  reason  for  trying  again  ;  and  (2)  that,  for  what-
ever reason,  whether  for  want  of  accustomance  or  because  of  the
action  of  the  cool  water,  Mrs.  B.  was  able  still  to  withstand  that
action  and  so  was  not  endormed.

"  For  two  days  more  I  endormed  her  from  anear  by  touching  her.
During  her  waking  state  I  asked  her  not  to  put  her  hands  in  water
again  ;  without  giving  her  any  reason,  I  persuaded  her  to  believe —
what  was  not  without  truth — that  she  was  doing  herself  great  harm
by  struggling  so  against  a  transient  drowsiness.  In  the  state  of  som-
nambulism 1  repeated  the  prohibition,  so  reinforcing  my  recommen-
dations with  the  power  of  suggestion  ;  and  February  25,  without
acquainting  any  one  with  my  intention,  I  made  the  same  experiment
again.  Under  the  same  conditions  as  before,  about  five  o'clock  in
the  evening,  I  gave  thought  to  endorming  her,  fixing  my  mind  as  in-
tently as  possible,  and  almost  without  distraction,  upon  that  object
for  eight  minutes  ;  then  I  went  straight  to  her.  She  lay  upon  a  sofa
in  deepest  sleep  ;  no  shaking  could  arouse  her.  But  if  I  but  pressed
her  fingers,  or  touched  her  lightly  on  the  arm,  the  subjacent  muscles
underwent  strong  contracture  ;  if  I  opened  her  eyes  to  the  light  she
went  into  true  catalepsy,  with  the  characteristic  immobility  of  atti-
tudes ;  if  I  closed  her  eyes,  she  reverted  to  the  prior  state.  Thus  she
was  plainly  in  the  hypnotic  sleep,  which,  by  a  strange  coincidence,
had  set  in  just  a  few  minutes  before  my  coming.  She  was  not  slow
to  bestir  herself  (s'agiter)  and  to  talk  in  the  lucid  somnambulism  ;  she
showed  great  joy  on  finding  me  near  her,  and  was  perfectly  aware
that  it  was  I  that  had  endormed  her  at  five  o'clock.

"  Two  further  experiments,  one  on  February  26,  and  the  other  on
March  1,  were  not  entirely  successful  ;  Mrs.  B.  only  felt  an  indis-
position, and  was  distracted  in  her  mind  by  persons  who  were  talking
to  her  at  the  moment  when  she  was  about  to  fall  into  the  sleep.

"  But  March  2,  at  my  house,  I  began  at  3  o'clock  p.  M.  to  give  the
same  order:  I  did  not  see  Mrs.  B.  till  an  hour  later  and  found  her  in
a  singular  attitude.  She  was  seated  and  was  hemming  a  napkin  ;
her  eyes  were  open  ;  the  motion  of  sewing  went  on  with  great  regu-
larity but  with  extraordinary  slowness — she  took  no  more  than  three
or  four  stitches  a  minute.  Without  speaking  a  word,  I  seized  her
arm  and  left  it  in  the  air  ;  it  stayed  there  motionless.  She  was  in
true  catalepsy,  and  that  state  continued,  to  the  amazement  of  the
persons  present,  for  one  hour.  Little  by  little  she  had  ceased  to
answer  questions,  and  had  remained  thus  motionless.  I  lowered  her
eyelids,  and  forthwith  she  fell  back,  and  in  that  state  of  somnam-
bulism, in  the  lethargic  form,  kept  repeating,  '  Oh  !  I  am  sleepy.  You
make  me  ill  by  talking  to  me.  I  am  sleepy  ;  I  am  ready  to  drop.
Mr.  Janet  does  not  wish     .     .-    .     .     when  will    he    come  ? '      In  a

282  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

moment  of  lucidity  she  recognized  me,  took  me  by  the  hand,  with  an
exclamation  of  satisfaction,  and  then  fell  into  quiet,  dreamless  sleep.

"  On  the  next  day,  March  3,  Mrs.  B.  was  not  endormed  and  was
very  well.

"  On  the  4th  a  curious  incident  occurred.  I  wanted  to  endorm
Mrs.  B.  from  my  house  by  means  of  the  usual  mental  order,  and  had
been  giving  thought  to  the  act  for  three  or  four  minutes,  when  several
persons  coming  in  interrupted  my  singular  occupation.  To  begin
again  was  impossible,  and  when,  an  hour  later,  I  visited  the  pavilion
where  Mrs.  B.  was,  I  supposed  the  experiment  had  failed  utterly.
Mrs.  B.  was  in  a  chair,  apparently  asleep  since  three-quarters  of  an
hour  before  ;  in  accordance  with  directions  from  me  no  one  had  dis-
turbed her.  I  wished  to  take  her  hand  to  produce  the  characteristic
contractures,  but  she  at  once  started,  opened  her  eyes,  and  rose  to
her  feet,  saying  that  she  was  not  at  all  asleep.  Nevertheless,  her
eyes  were  dull,  her  walk  unsteady,  and  I  had  to  support  her  in  order
to  conduct  her  to  another  room.  But  she  soon  was  sound  asleep
after  touching  my  hand.  Is  there  not  something  curious  in  this
drowsiness,  this  half-sleep,  coming  just  on  the  day  and  at  the  hour
when  my  thought  was  fixed  upon  endorming  her,  though  I  had  not
sufficient  time  ?

"  March  5,  under  the  same  conditions,  this  time  about  5  o'clock
p.  m.,  for  ten  minutes  I  gave  thought  to  endorming  her  ;  a  few  min-
utes later  I  found  her  in  the  same  cataleptic  state  already  described.

"  March  6,  Mr.  Gibert  essayed  to  endorm  her  from  his  house  at  a
quite  different  hour — 8  p.  m.  He  was  entirely  successful,  though  he
had  not  endormed  the  subject  for  eight  days.  We  may  remark  that
on  this  day  a  third  person  had  regulated  his  watch  by  Mr.  Gibert's,
and  observed  Mrs.  B.  closely.  It  was  found  that  she  fell  asleep  at
three  minutes  past  8  exactly.  Such  precision  makes  chance  coinci-
dence highly  improbable.

"  For  a  few  days  following  we  made  no  attempt  at  producing  sleep
from  a  distance,  and  on  March  9,  when  I  tried  to  recommence  the
experiments,  I  failed.

"  March  10,  Mr.  Gibert  endormed  her  from  his  house.  The  same
day  he  made  a  very  interesting  experiment.  But  as  I  was  unable  to
be  present  when  it  was  made,  and  as  it  was  repeated  later,  I  defer  the
description  of  it.  On  the  nth  and  12th  no  experiment.  On  the  13th
I  endormed  her  from  my  house  at  4  p.  M.;  at  4:15  I  found  her  in  the
cataleptic  state.  She  was  sewing,  with  the  same  automatic  movement
as  before  ;  her  task  was  a  rather  complicated  one,  and  she  performed
it  well,  but  very  slowly.  Without  speaking  a  word,  without  touching
her,  I  simply  gave  her  the  mental  order  to  sleep  on  and  more  deeply.
She  gave  a  sigh,  the  movements  of  the  hands  ceased,  and  she  re-
mained motionless  in  the  last  position  assumed.  I  persisted,  and  she
leaned  back  in  the  state  of  complete  muscular  relaxation.  A  tap
on  the  tendons  of  the  wrist  now  produced  the  contractures  special  to
lethargy.

"  March  14,  at  3  p.  m.,  I  again  endormed  her  in  the  same  way,  and
found  her  in  the  state  of  lethargic  somnambulism,  motionless.

"March  16,  it  was  agreed  between  us  that  Mr.  Gibert  should  en-
dorm Mrs.  B.  by  mental  action  from  his  house,  and  that  he  should
endeavor,  while  still  at  home,  to  make  her  get  up  and  come  to  us.
My  brother,  Julius  Janet,  interne  of  the  Paris  hospitals,  who  happened

MENTAL  SUGGESTION  AT  A  DISTANCE.  283

then  to  be  in  Havre,  was  to  go  wit'i  me  to  Mr.  Gibert's  before  8  p.  m.,
at  which  hour  it  was  our  intention  to  begin  the  experiment.  An  un-
foreseen delay  prevented  us  from  going  to  Mr.  Gibert's  early  enough,
and"  the  experiment  could  not  begin  till  9  o'clock.  1  note  this  insignifi-
cant incident,  because  if  by  any  extraordinary  chance  Mrs.  B.  had  been
advised  of  our  intention,  she  would  have  fallen  asleep,  perhaps,  and
have  started  out  at  8  o'clock,  and  not  at  9.  Now  see  what  did  hap-
pen. As  I  did  not  wish  to  have  the  sleeping  woman  walk  through
the  streets  unattended,  I  left  Mr.  Gibert  and  went  toward  the  pavilion
where  she  was.  I  did  not  enter,  lest  my  presence  should  produce  a-
suggestion,  but  remained  on  the  street  at  some  distance.  A  few  min-
utes past  9  o'clock  Mrs.  B.  came  briskly  out  of  the  house.  She  was
bareheaded  and  walked  at  a  rapid  pace.  I  went  up  to  her  and  saw
that  her  eyes  were  fast  shut,  and  that  she  manifested  all  the  signs  of
her  somnambulic  state.  She  avoided  all  obstacles  so  deftly  that  I
was  reassured,  but  she  was  very  slow  to  recognize  me.  At  first  she
repulsed  me — she  did  not  wish,  she  said,  to  be  accompanied.  After
going  some  200  meters  she  knew  who  I  was  and  seemed  to  be  pleased
that  I  was  with  her.  But  I  was  worried  a  good  deal  by  her  frequent
halts.  She  would  stop  and  sway  to  and  fro  as  though  about  to  fall.
I  was  afraid  lest  she  should  suddenly  fall  into  a  state  of  lethargy  or
of  catalepsy,  which  would  have  made  the  walk  difficult.  But  nothing
of  the  kind  happened  ;  she  righted  herself  and  reached  the  house
without  a  mishap.  Hardly  had  she  entered  when  she  dropped  into
an  armchair  in  profoundest  lethargy.  This  lethargy  was  interrupted
only  for  an  instant  by  a  period  of  somnambulism,  during  which  she
murmured  :  'I  am  come  ;  I  saw  Mr.  Janet.  I  considered  that  I  must
not  come  by  way  of  Etretat  Street — too  many  people  there.'  (She
of  her  own  accord  took  another  street.)  '  A  man  came  up  tome,
said  I  was  blind,  the  fool.'  Then  she  remained  for  a  good  while
asleep.  Later  she  was  somnambulic  again  and  said  that  she  had  felt
much  fatigue  and  hesitation  during  the  walk  because,  as  she  said,  Mr.
Gibert  had  not  thought  continuously  enough  upon  making  her  come.
She  had  been  endormed,  as  I  was  informed  afterward,  a  few  minutes
before  9  o'clock,  that  is  to  say,  at  the  time  when  Mr.  Gibert  had  been
'  thinking,'  but  she  had  not  set  out  for  his  house  till  five  or  six  min-
utes later.

"This  experiment  was  repeated  with  the  same  success,  once  in
presence  of  Mr.  Paul  Janet  on  April  20,  and  another  time  in  presence
of  Messrs.  Myers,  Marillier,  and  Ochorowicz,  on  the  22d.  We  may
remark  that  Mrs.  B.  does  not  sleep  so  evenings,  and  does  not  walk  in
somnambulism.1

"  Such  is  the  history  of  the  experiments  upon  the  producing  of
sleep  from  a  distance,  made  during  this  second  series  of  researches.
Mrs.  B.  had  left  us  March  18  ;  but  several  persons,  among  them  my
uncle  Mr.  Paul  Janet,  Dr.  Charles  Richet,  the  Messrs.  Myers  (of
Cambridge),  Dr.  Ochorowicz  and  Mr.  Marillier,  having  expressed  a
desire  to  witness  a  few  of  these  experiments,  we  induced  her  to  return
to  Havre,  April  11.

"  I  was  much  concerned  about  the  success  of  the  experiments,  for
in  my  opinion  they  were  made  under  faulty  conditions.  Till  then  I
had  not  been  able  to  produce  sleep  from  a  distance,  save  after  train-
ing the  subject  for  a  considerable  time — an  hour  a  day,  for  14  or  15

1  See  Part  I,  chapter  iv.

284  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

days  at  least.  Now,  these  gentlemen  were  to  be  in  Havre  two  or
three  days  after  the  arrival  of  the  somnambule,  and  she  must  needs
have  lost  in  a  month  a  good  deal  of  her  hypnotic  habitude.  To  make
good  this  deficiency,  I  endormed  the  subject  several  times  a  day.  In
this  way  I  attained  my  object — that  is,  I  produced  a  higher  degree
of  sensibility,  but  at  the  same  time  brought  about  an  untoward  result.
Mrs.  B.  was  exceedingly  fatigued  ;  she  had  frequent  headaches,  which
completely  spoiled  the  normal  phenomena.1  Finally,  after  a  few  days
it  befell  that  she  was  in  a  state  of  almost  continual  drowsiness.  Once
she  fell  spontaneously  into  catalepsy,  without  any  suggestion,  two  hours
after  having  been  awakened.  It  is  my  opinion  that  on  that  day,  after
two  very  protracted  hypnotic  seances,  she  was  wakened  awrong.

"  However  that  may  be,  here  is  the  simple  record  of  the  experi-
ments in  producing  sleep  at  a  distance,  made  during  this  third  sojourn
of  Mrs.  B.  at  Havre.  April  14,  being  alone  with  her,  I  endormed  her
without  touching  her,  but  being  in  the  same  room.  Sunday,  the  18th,
I  was  still  alone,  and  for  the  first  time  in  this  series  of  experiments
tried  to  endorm  her  from  my  house.  I  succeeded  perfectly  ;  she  was
asleep  10  minutes  after  I  began  'thinking.'  Monday,  19th,  my  uncle,
Mr.  Paul  Janet,  arrived  in  Havre  I  wanted  him  to  see  the  subject
previous  to  making  any  experiments,  but  he  chose  rather  to  ask  Mr.
Gibert  to  endorm  her  immediately  from  his  house,  for  then  nobody
would  be  forewarned.  Taken  unawares,  Mr.  Gibert  made  the  attempt
at  4  o'clock  ;  we  found  Mrs.  B.  completely  endormed  at  4.15.  Tues-
day, the  20th,  Mr.  Gibert  again  endormed  her  from  afar  at  8  o'clock
p.  m.,  in  presence  of  Mr.  Paul  Janet,  and  by  mental  suggestion  made
her  come  to  his  house,  as  I  will  relate  presently.  Unfortunately,  on
the  two  days  following,  the  21st  and  2 2d,  for  sundry  reasons,  among
which  the  subject's  fatigue  and  her  headaches  counted  for  a  good
deal,  two  experiments  by  Mr.  Gibert  to  produce  sleep  at  a  distance
were  but  partially  successful  ;  the  subject  was  not  endormed  till  half
an  hour  later  after  a  long  resistance.  But  the  same  day,  April  22,
Mr.  Gibert  endormed  her  much  more  promptly  in  the  evening,  and  on
Friday  and  Saturday,  at  times  set  by  Messrs.  Myers,  Ochorowicz  and
Marillier,  I  endormed  the  subject  from  a  distance  with  full  success
and  great  precision.

"  The  gentlemen  named  left  us  on  Easter  Sunday,  and  it  was  abso-
lutely necessary  that  the  subject  should  be  allowed  to  rest.  I  did  not
resume  the  experiments  till  May  4,  when  I  endormed  the  subject  from
anear  ;  but  on  the  two  days  next  following  I  again  obtained  sleep
from  a  distance.  A  recital  of  these  experiments  would  possess  no
interest,  for  it  would  be  the  same  as  the  foregoing  ones."

Mr.  Janet  concludes  with  a  summary  of  the  experiments  on  pro-
duction of  sleep  at  a  distance,  made  whether  by  himself  or  by  Mr.
Gibert.

Of  twenty-two  experiments  six  failed  ;  and  of  these  six,  three  were
made  at  the  very  beginning,  when  the  somnambulic  habit  was  not  yet
sufficiently  strong  ;  one  was  made  later,  but  after  an  interruption  of
the  seances  for  a  few  days  ;  and  two  when  the  subject  had  held  out

1  These  headaches  could  have  been  cured  in  a  few  minutes  by  imposition  of  the
hands  and  by  suggestion.     [This  note  is  apparently  added  by  Dr.   Ochorowicz. —

Translator  ,~\

MENTAL  SUGGESTION  AT  A  DISTANCE.  285

for  more  than  half-an-hour  before  she  fell  asleep.  In  short,  sixteen
successes,  "definite  and  complete."

"  Are  we  to  suppose,"  asks  Mr.  Janet,  "  that  the  coincidence  in
these  sixteen  cases,  though  precise,  was  the  result  of  chance  ?  The
supposition  is,  perhaps,  slightly  improbable.  Was  there  all  the  time
an  involuntary  suggesting  on  our  part  ?  The  only  answer  I  can  give
is,  that  with  perfect  honesty  we  took  every  possible  precaution  to
guard  against  it."

All  these  experiments  tend  to  prove  not  only  action  at  a  distance,
but  also  :

1.  The  importance  of  "rapport,"  a  relation  that  is  brought  about
only  by  several  consecutive  magnetizations,  and  which  puts  the  stamp
of  individuality  on  every  successful  experiment  (the  subject  always
knows  whether  it  is  Mr.  Gibert  or  Mr.  Janet  that  has  endormed  her
from  a  distance,  and  the  profundity  of  the  state  produced  depends  on
the  closeness  of  the  "  rapport  ")  ;

2.  The  importance  of  sustained  concentration  of  thought  on  the
part  of  the  magnetizer  ;

3.  The  absence  of  any  perceptible  difference  in  the  degree  of  mag-
netization between  action  at  the  distance  of  a  few  paces  and  of  a  few
kilometers.

(The  same  thing  is  seen  in  telephonic  communications.  The  voice
grows  faint  only  when  the  distance  is  considerable,  and  even  in  that
case  the  difference  is  determined  by  thickness  of  wires  and  by  second-
ary circumstances — induction,  electro-static  capacity,  etc. — rather
than  by  the  essential  nature  of  the  transmission.  With  a  wire  of  cop-
per instead  of  iron,  with  large  diameter  and  well  insulated,  speech
might  be  transmitted  over  thousands  of  kilometers.  For  us,  the  wire
represents  the  "  rapport.")

But  the  question  of  limits  is  as  yet  rather  premature.  Let  us  simply
note  the  fact  that  the  greatest  distance  mentioned  in  the  foregoing
experiments  is  ten  kilometers.

If  we  suppose  the  phenomenon  to  be  real,  it  is  interesting  to  know
what  conditions  are  favorable  or  unfavorable  to  transmission  from  a
distance.  Mr.  Aubin  Gauthier1  is  the  only  magnetizer  that  has  ven-
tured to  formulate  them.     According  to  him —

1.  Inanimate  bodies  do  not  interrupt  action  from  a  distance;

2.  Plants  assist  it ;

3.  Certain  animals  interfere  with  it ;

4.  A  number  of  men  may  hinder  it.

Finally,  he  adds  that  "in  stormy  weather  it  is  difficult  to  magnetize

not  only  from  a  distance,  but  even  in  presence  of  the  subject."

It  need  not  be  said  that  I  quote  these  assertions  only  as  a  matter  of

curiosity.

1  "  Traite  Pratique  du  Magnetisme,"  p.  531.      Paris,  1S45.

PART  III.

THEORIES,  CONCLUSIONS,  APPLICATIONS.

CHAPTER   I.

THE    HYPOTHESIS    OF    EXALTED    PERCEPTION.

AS.  MORIN,  in  his  interesting  study,1  says  :  "  Communication
.  of  thoughts  is  one  of  the  faculties  oftenest  noticed  in  lucid
subjects,  and  often  even  it  underlies  several  other  kinds  of  lucidity
that  the  observer  fancies  he  finds,  though  in  reality  they  do  not
exist.  .  .  .  There  are  very  few  somnambules  that  can  discover
your  thoughts  as  they  exist  connected  and  formulate  them  in  the  self-
same expressions  that  you  have  in  your  mind.  Usually  the  somnam-
bule  takes  some  fragments  of  your  thoughts  while  you  are  bidding
him  discover  either  matters  in  the  past  or  occurrences  at  a  distance,
and  then  the  lucid  subject  fancies  that  he  has  actually  seen  these
things,  though  he  has  only  read  them  in  your  mind.  If  after  this  you
wish  him  to  read  your  thoughts,  however  much  you  may  concentrate
your  attention  on  what  you  mean  to  make  him  see,  you  will  not  suc-
ceed. Thus,  the  lucid  subject  steals  your  thoughts  unbeknown  to
himself  and  to  you,  and  when  you  propose  to  him  as  a  performance  to
read  your  thought,  he  cannot  do  it.  As  regards  this  latter  point  there
are  some  exceptions,  notably  the  case  of  a  cataleptic  patient  recorded
by  Mr.  Puel  ;  but  they  are  very  rare.  [Morin,  who  wrote  in  i860,
could  not,  of  course,  know  of  the  experiments  recently  made  by  the
English  Psychical  Research  Society,  and  by  others.]  And,  above  all,
let  not  the  reader  jump  to  the  conclusion  that  with  a  good  somnam-
bule  he  can  at  will  penetrate  the  secrets  of  hearts.  In  case  a  lucid
subject  does  read  a  few  thoughts,  he  does  so  only  with  regard  to  persons
with  whom  he  is  in  rapport,  and  even  that  faculty,  thus  restricted,  is

1   "  Du  Magnetisme  et  des  Sciences  Occultes,"  pp.  185-188,  and  283-289.    Paris,
i860.

288  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

variable,  intermittent,  subject  to  illusion,  so  that  the  subject  fancies
that  he  possesses  it  when  he  does  not,  and  flatters  himself  that  he
penetrates  your  thoughts,  though  he  has  discovered  nothing,  and  gives
out  as  a  discovery  the  vagaries  of  his  imagination."

Morin  does  not  point  out  the  probable  causes  of  this  variability.
But  these  general  observations  are  just,  with  this  exception,  that  a
well-behaved  somnambule  will  never  say  that  he  sees  this  or  that
when  he  does  not  see  anything.  However,  it  is  not  difficult  to  test
what  he  says.

Morin  refers  to  thought-communication  the  apparent  action  of  the
will.  He  does  not  believe  in  a  fluid,  nor  in  any  physical  action,  nor
in  direct  will-action  upon  the  organs  of  the  subject.  If  the  latter
permits  a  limb  to  be  cataleptized,  or  a  sense  to  be  paralyzed  or
hyperaesthesiated,  that  is  because,  after  having  divined  the  thought
of  his  magnetizer,  he  himself  influences  his  own  body.

But  Morin  also  rejects  the  hypothesis  of  a  real  transmission  of
thought ;  according  to  him  thought  is  transmitted  only  by  the  usual
signs.  And  to  prove  this  divination  by  the  outward  signs  of  thought,
he  invokes  in  turn  phrenology,  physiognomy  and  chiromancy.  As
for  phrenology,  I  really  do  not  see  what  it  has  to  do  here,  for  no
phrenologist  hitherto  has  ever  held  that  by  touching  the  correspond-
ing organs  on  the  skull,  one  may  divine  thoughts  j  and  besides,  som-
nambules  who  divine  thoughts  do  not  touch  the  phrenological  organs.
Then,  as  phrenology  itself  is  not  a  demonstrated  science,  we  have  a
right  to  leave  it  out  of  account.

The  same  remarks  apply  to  chiromancy.  But,  as  regards  physiog-
nomy, or  rather  pathognomy  (expression-signs  in  general),  the  com-
parison here  is  worthy  of  attention.  There  is  no  doubt  that  our
thoughts,  and  still  more  our  feelings  and  our  character  in  general,
are  reflected  on  our  countenance,  that  " mirror  of  the  soul."  "Among
the  signs  and  tokens  that  the  exterior  of  the  human  body  may  thus
manifest,  there  are  some  that  strike  every  observer  ;  the  man  addicted
to  drunkenness,  for  example,  does  he  not  bear  upon  his  face  the  shame-
ful tokens  of  his  habits  ?  There  are  other  signs,  the  reading  of  which
requires  a  good  deal  of  sagacity.  Lavater  was  gifted,  in  this  respect,
with  a  perspicacity  that  one  might  be  tempted  to  regard  as  divina-
tion ;  he  read  faces  as  one  reads  a  book.  If  the  rules  he  laid  down
failed  to  constitute  the  science  of  physiognomy,  or  to  develop  physi-
ognomists as  clever  as  himself,  the  principles  on  which  he  based  his
system  are  none  the  less  true,  and  the  results  he  reached  prove  that
all  that  is  needed  to  complete  his  work  is  to  formulate  the  method
that  instinctively  guided  him  with  admirable  certitude."

Here  I  agree  entirely  with  Morin.  Physiognomy  has  a  positive
basis  in  a  general  determinism  that  applies  no  less  to  the  development
of  organisms  than  to  their  stable  characters,  and  which,  with  regard

HYPOTHESIS  OF  EXALTED  PERCEPTION.         289

to  the  matter  in  hand,  may  be  thus  stated  :  Nothing  in  the  exterior  of
a  living  organism  is  accidental.  We  need  but  to  know  the  causal  rela-
tions that  indubitably  exist.  But  we  are  still  far  from  that  consum-
mation, and  I  even  believe  that,  the  sooner  to  reach  it,  it  were  well,
instead  of  formulating  the  laws  of  physiognomies — it  is  yet  too  early
for  that — to  continue  the  study  of  pathognomy,  to  the  revival  of  which
Darwin  lent  the  weight  of  his  high  authority.

The  expression  of  states  more  or  less  fleeting,  of  diseases,  pains,
emotions,  attention,  and  will-tendencies,  is  a  far  more  convenient
subject  of  experimental  research  than  the  expression  of  characters  by
fixed  traits,  which  for  a  long  time  to  come  we  shall  be  able  to  judge
of  only  by  a  sort  of  intuition  based  on  unconscious  experience.

It  is  nevertheless  certain  that  they  who  from  childhood  have  been
in  the  habit  of  observing,  are  able  to  read  with  close  approximation
to  the  truth  a  man's  character  in  his  physiognomy.  In  the  case  of
sharp  contrasts  error,  indeed,  is  almost  impossible.  The  somnambule
might  possess  the  same  faculty,  and  turn  it  to  account  in  divining
feelings,  tendencies  and  habits.

And  here  is  another  point  worthy  of  notice  with  regard  to  the  divi-
nation of  diseases.  There  is  a  certain  work,  now  very  rare  and  quite
forgotten,  that  is  unique  in  its  kind.  Its  author  was  a  distinguished
physician,  professor  in  the  University  of  Freiburg,  Dr.  K.  N.  Baum-
gartner,  and  its  title  is  "  Physiognomice  Pathologica:  Kranken-Physi-
ognomik  "  (Stuttgart  and  Leipsic,  1839).  It  is  a  big  quarto  volume,
with  an  atlas  giving  the  physiognomic  types  of  all  the  chief  diseases.
The  figures,  which  are  nearly  of  life  size,  are  painted  by  hand  and  after
nature,  by  excellent  artists.  Highly  interesting  to  the  physician  is  this
crystallization,  so  to  speak,  of  pathological  signs  that  enable  you  to
distinguish  by  the  countenance  a  disease  of  the  heart,  for  instance,  from
a  disease  of  the  uterus,  and  which  thus  prove  that  all  is  reflected  in  the
face.  Many  experienced  physicians  possess  this  faculty  of  apprecia-
tion. It  may  be  possessed  in  a  certain  degree  by  somnambules,  in
virtue  of  their  lifelong  unconscious  experience,  which,  though  in  the
waking  state,  amid  the  pressure  of  conscious  acts,  they  perceive  it  not,
may  manifest'  itself  in  the  psychic  isolation  of  somnambulism.

So,  too,  with  regard  to  the  signs  of  emotions  ;  and  Morin  should
have  noted  in  particular  the  modifications  of  the  voice,  which,  even
against  our  will,  betray  our  sentiments,  and  especially  our  approval
and  our  doubts.  Divination  of  a  thought  depends  sometimes  upon
these  faint  signs.  "  The  physical  is  the  expression  of  the  moral,"
justly  observes  Morin  ;  then  he  concludes  :

"The  lucid  subject  that  penetrates  one's  thoughts  does  only  what
is  done  by  the  phrenologist,  the  physiognomist,  or  the  chirognomist,
only  he  sees  a  host  of  material  signs  that  elude  our  sight  and  that  are
the  complement  of  the  indication's  furnished  by  examination  of  the

29o  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

skull,  the  visage,  or  the  hands.  The  lucid  subject  therefore  possesses
only  means  like  those  we  possess,  but  his  are  much  more  extensive.
Observation  of  the  organs  is  everything.  He  is  unable  to  explain,
either  to  us  or  to  himself,  the  value  of  each  sign  ;  it  is  a  sort  of  lan-
guage that  he  comprehends  instinctively  without  knowing  its  princi-
ples ;  nor  need  that  surprise  us,  for  we  all  are  acquainted  with  the
first  elements  of  that  language,  without  having  learned  them,  and
though  we  are  unable  to  formulate  its  rules.  .  .  .  Suppose  that
at  a  party  some  one  happens  to  talk  of  matters  the  mention  of  which
angers  one  of  the  persons  present,  and  that  the  latter  lets  his  feelings
find  expression  in  his  countenance ;  everyone  will  notice  it,  and  it  will
be  said,  for  example,  that  the  man  is  angry,  or  meditating  revenge,
or  that  his  hate  is  restrained  by  fear,  and  so  on.  But  ask  the  com-
pany what  were  the  physical  signs  that  revealed  so  many  things  to
them,  and  they  will  answer  that  they  do  not  know,  but  that  they  are
sure  of  the  correctness  of  their  judgment,  and  that  the  sentiments  in
question  were  manifested  in  such  a  way  as  to  leave  no  room  for
doubt.  In  like  manner,  the  somnambule  that  reads  the  thoughts  of
others  cannot  tell  how  they  are  manifested  to  him  ;  all  that  he  knows
is  that  he  sees  them."

In  short,  as  Morin  himself  puts  it,  "  the  question  is  simply  one  as  to
the  way  in  which  somna??ibules  see  material  objects."

Precisely  here  is  the  weak  point  of  the  theory.

In  the  first  place,  it  is  not  well  to  leave  out  of  view  the  sensations
of  hearing  and  smell ;  then,  as  the  somnambule's  eyes  are  shut,  or,  at
least,  he  does  not  use  them  to  divine  thoughts,  Morin's  theory  does
but  refer  back  an  unsolvable  problem  to  another  not  less  so — "  How
do  somnambules  see  material  objects  ? "  But  that  is  another  question.
As  for  us,  we  do  not  care  even  to  touch  it ;  yet  one  might  be  tempted
to  suppose  that  Morin,  who,  to  explain  thought-communication,  refers
it  to  somnambulic  vision,  is  able  to  explain  for  us  the  latter.  But  no  !
He  rejects  all  known  hypotheses  and  "confesses  his  ignorance."1

So  we  are  back  at  our  starting-point.

We  would  add  that  Morin's  theory  (though  it  may  apply  in  certain
cases)  does  not  explain  the  experiments  wherein  the  subject  turns  his
back  to  the  operator,  and  has  his  eyes  blindfolded  ;  and  a  fortiori  it
does  not  explain  any  action  from  a  distance.

Mr.  L.  Figuier2  has  broadened  this  theory,  still  accepting  the  same
principle.  According  to  Figuier,  all  is  explained  by  an  exceptional
exaltation  of  the  senses  and  of  the  intelligence  in  the  state  of  sleep.
The  somnambule  has  no  other  sensations  but  those  of  our  senses ;  but
his  perception  being  exalted,  he  perceives  the  faintest  signs,  voluntary
or  involuntary,  proceeding  from  the  magnetizer,  and  through  these

1  "  Du  Magnetisme  et  des  Sciences  Occultes,"  p.  271.

9  "Hist,  du  Merveilleux,"  vol.  iii.,  pp.  408-11.      3d  ed.      Paris,  1881.

HYPOTHESIS  OF  EXALTED  PERCEPTION.        291

divines  the  magnetizer's  thoughts.  "  The  transient  exaltation  of  the
senses  of  the  magnetic  somnambule,"  says  he,  "  explains,  we  think,
the  phenomenon  called  by  the  magnetizers  suggestion  or  penetration  of
thought.  When  a  magnetizer  announces  that  his  somnambule  is  going
to  obey  an  order  mentally  expressed  by  him,  and  when  the  somnam-
bule performs  that  feat — a  thing,  by  the  way,  that  is  pretty  rare — it  is
not  impossible  to  account  for  the  seeming  miracle  which,  were  it  real,
would  upset  all  our  physiological  notions,  and,  indeed,  all  the  known  laws
of  animated  nature.  In  this  case,  a  sound,  a  bodily  movement,  a  sign  of
whatever  kind,  an  impression  imperceptible  to  the  rest  of  the  company,
suffices,  in  view  of  the  extraordinary  tension  of  the  somnambule's
principal  senses,  to  enable  him  to  understand,  without  any  supernatural
means,  the  thought  that  the  magnetizer  wishes  to  communicate  to
him.  Thus,  no  more  in  this  case  than  in  others,  is  the  magnetized
individual  privileged  to  break  through  the  common  barriers  with  which
nature  has  hemmed  in  our  powers."

Of  course;  "  Ad id  sufficit  natura  quod  poscit,"  as  Seneca  said.  But
since  that  Stoic's  day  "  the  common  barriers  of  nature,"  though  they
have  not  been  broken  through,  have  been  set  pretty  well  back,  and
besides,  if  there  is  any  theory  which  might  have  checked  the  develop-
ment of  all  the  notions  of  modern  physiology,  assuredly  it  is  the  theory
of  insuperable  barriers,  had  it  been  accepted  before  those  notions  were
acquired.  Who  shall  say  just  where  those  barriers  stand  ?  A  metallic
plate,  for  instance,  can  that  talk  like  a  human  being  ?  yea  or  nay  ?
Mr.  Bouilland — and  he  was  no  common  man — said  no  ;  to  accept  such
a  fact  were  to  upset  all  our  notions  of  physiology.  So  said  Mr.
Bouilland  right  in  the  face  of  Edison's  phonograph  in  full  Academy,
and  he  throttled  the  luckless  interpreter  of  the  famous  American  in-
ventor, accusing  it  of  ventriloquism.

But  why  and  how  must  mental  suggestion  upset  all  our  notions  of
physiology  ?

Not  all  of  them,  surely!  I  hope  the  theory  of  digestion,  at  least,  for
one  thing,  may  stand  unmoved.  So,  too,  the  theory  of  blood  circula-
tion, as  well  as  the  theories  of  respiration,  reproduction,  etc.

The  theory  of  perception  alone  is  at  stake.  But  can  it  be  that  the
existence  of  some  subtile  mode  of  transmission  does  away  with  the
facts  and  the  laws  of  a  transmission  that  is  visible  and  palpable  ?
Did  the  invention  of  the  electric  telegraph  do  away  with  railroads  ?

No,  we  must  not  overstrain  the  maxim — a  very  wise  one  in  its  way
— which  recognizes  certain  natural  limitations  of  all  science.  Let  us
not  be  more  naturalistic  than  nature  herself ;  let  us  leave  to  her  the
initiative  of  opposition.

In  short  the  theory  of  Morin  and  Figuier,  though  these  admit  the
facts  of  mental  suggestion,  does  not  account  for  those  facts  as  a
whole,  and  is  hardly  applicable  -to  cases  where  there  is  anything  like

292  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

definite  transmission,  many  of  which  are  cited  by  those  authors  them-
selves. Still,  it  is  not  to  be  denied  that  their  theory  might  to  advan-
tage be  developed  so  as  to  help  explain  a  great  number  of  mixed
cases  in  which  the  normal  perception  exalted  is  combined  with  true
transmission.  Further,  it  must  be  allowed  to  possess  this  advantage,
that  it  rests  on  an  eminently  scientific  principle,  that  of  referring  the
unknown  to  the  known  as  far  as  possible.  Only,  I  think  it  applies  it
amiss.

Anyhow,  it  is  an  evasive  hypothesis.  It  turns  the  difficulty  round
instead  of  facing  it.

Come  we  to  theories  that  frankly  accept  the  phenomenon.

CHAPTER  II.

THE     HYPOTHESIS     OF     BRAIN-EXALTATION     WITH     PARALYSIS     OF     THE

SENSES.

IN  the  first  place,  we  have  to  quote  Bertrand.  That  eminent  analyst
did  not,  it  is  true,  develop  a  complete  theory  of  suggestion,  but
he  did  publish  many  clear  ideas  upon  the  subject  that  deserve  to  be
mentioned.

Bertrand,  too,  does  not  believe  in  action  at  a  distance,  nor,  in
general,  in  any  physical  action  whatever  ;  he  is  the  scientific  father
of  the  suggestional  theory  of  magnetism.  According  to  him,  it  is  the
subject  that  influences  himself  by  imagination  ;  but  the  subject's  imagina-
tion may  be  influenced  by  an  extrane  thought,  even  without  any  outward
sign.  Thought  is  transmitted  ;  will,  not.  Consequently,  if  the  subject
executes  the  order  given,  the  reason  is  not  that  the  magnetizer's  will
has  acted  on  the  subject's  members,  but  that,  having  perceived  the
magnetizer's  thought,. the  subject  consents  to  execute  it.  "The  Count
of  Lutzelburg,  wishing  to  get  light  upon  this  subject,  made  the  fol-
lowing experiment :  He  whispered  in  the  ear  of  a  witness  that  which
he  wished  a  somnambule  to  execute,  and  asked  the  patient  if  his
thought  determined  her  to  act.  '  I  know  it,'  [the  thought]  she
answered,  '  and  I  execute  that  which  you  will.  You  willed,  without
telling  me  so,  that  I  should  sit  down,  and  I  obeyed.'  ...  In
general,"  adds  Bertrand,  "  magnetizers  nowadays  [1823]  seem  to  me
to  accept  with  inconceivable  levity  the  opinion  that  the  will  of  one
man  influences  another  man  directly  ;  but  I  know  not  any  notion  that

HYPO  THESIS  OF  BRA  TN-RXAL  TA  TION.  2  93

is  more  easy  to  overturn  if  one  will  but  reflect  upon  it  with  some
little  attention.  In  the  first  place,  there  is  nothing  that  is  so  inward
to  us  as  our  will  ;  will  alone  constitutes  personality,  the  Ego."  (Ber-
trand  confounds  here  several  phenomena.  Personality  is  not  the  Ego,
nor  is  the  Ego  the  will ;  personality  is  a  complex  of  all  the  psychic
characters  proper  to  the  individual  ;  the  Ego  is  but  a  focus,  a  central
point  of  this  complex  whole  ;  the  will  is  but  a  resultant  of  tendencies.)
"  And  if  the  magnetizer's  will  took  possession,  as  is  supposed,  of  the
person  of  the  somnambule,  the  latter  would  be  but  an  automaton
actuated  by  springs  extraneous  to  the  magnetizer's  second  body."

Well,  yes  !  It  does  often  happen  that  the  somnambule  is  nothing
but  an  automaton.  .  Bertrand,  taught  in  the  humanitarian  school  of
Puysegur  and  Deleuze,  knew  nothing  of  our  modern  magnetizers  with
their  hurdy-gurdies.  Furthermore,  he  was  one  of  those  who  asked  of
patients  the  permission  to  do  them  good.  "  For  the  rest,"  he  adds,
"  I  know  not  how  it  is  that  the  believers  in  this  influence  of  the  will
are  not  appalled  by  the  consequences  to  which  it  leads.  According  to  them,
a  heedless  somnambule,  an  agent  actuated  by  an  impulsion  from  with-
out, may  seize  a  dagger  and  bury  it  in  the  breast  of  his  own  brother,
being  powerless  to  withstand  the  will  that  dominates  him,  and  being
unconscious  of  his  act  till  after  the  crime  has  been  perpetrated.  For-
tunately, the  case  is  not  thus,  and  all  the  facts  that  have  given  rise  to
the  strange  opinion  I  am  arguing  against  are  powerless  to  prove  more
than  communication  of  thought  and  the  limited  influence  that  such
communication  may  have  upon  the  determinations  of  the  somnam-
bule."

Here,  again,  Bertrand  is  in  error.  The  experiment  has  not  been
made  with  mental  suggestion,  but  many  a  time  with  verbal  suggestion,
and  it  is  entirely  certain  that  in  states  more  or  less  near  to  monoideism
the  subject  may  commit  a  crime  he  is  ordered  to  commit,  and  that
without  a  suspicion  of  what  he  does,  even  after  he  has  done  the  act
ordered.  Resistance  is  not  possible  save  in  full  somnambulism,  and
may  be  suppressed  by  a  few  passes.  About  five  persons  in  100  will
be  unable  to  make  any  resistance.  But  the  question  of  morality  must
not  be  mixed  with  questions  of  fact.  What's  true  is  true,  and  that  is
all.  If  we  were  to  be  "  appalled  by  the  consequences  "  in  studying  a
problem,  we  should  never  reach  new  results,  for  everything  that  is
new  appals  the  conservative.  Was  not  Jesus  Christ  crucified  on  ac-
count of  his  "dangerous  novelties?"  Neither  Socrates  nor  Kopernik
dreaded  the  consequences  of  a  truth  :  they  left  to  others  the  trouble
of  condemning  them.

Fortunately,  times  are  changed.  To  Mr.  H.  A.  Taine  is  credited
the  following  reply  when  some  one  reproached  him  with  publishing
doctrines  that  might  be  dangerous  :  "  I  never  have  thought  that  a
truth  may  serve  for  anything."  -

294  MENTAL  SUGGESTION

But  It  may  serve  for  something,  only  we  must  not  trouble  ourselves
about  it  in  advance.  And  I  am  certain  that  the  sway  of  the  magnet-
izer's  will  over  the  magnetized  subject,  when  it  is  rightly  understood,
will  be  productive  of  far  more  good  than  evil.

"  So  to  sum  up,"  concludes  Bertrand,  "  I  think  it  absurd  to  suppose
that  in  any  case  an  extraneous  will  can  act  directly  upon  the  organs  of
somnambules,  and  still  less  upon  their  determinations  [the  first  phrase
is  correct,  the  second  erroneous]  ;  but  it  seems  to  me  that  a  number
of  facts  sufficient  to  produce  conviction  prove  that  not  seldom  som-
nambules have  cognizance  of  the  will,  or  the  thoughts,  of  those  with
whom  they  are  in  rapport,  and  that  this  cognizance  may  determine
them  to  act  and  produce  upon  them  the  same  effects  as  though  one
had  spoken  to  them.  I  will  add  that  as  this  phenomenon  results
from  the  sympathic  communication  of  the  brain-movements  of  him
who  gives  the  order,  the  somnambule  will  all  the  more  easily  know
the  order  given  to  him  if  it  be  accompanied  by  some  gesture,  which,
as  it  cannot  be  made  without  a  greater  movement  of  the  cerebral  fibers,
will  help  the  communication  :  this  is  what  is  confirmed  by  experience
in  every  case,  and  this  is  what  I  myself  have  observed.  Besides,  the
opinion  I  express  has  been  adopted  by  many  magnetizers."

It  is  readily  seen  that  the  sharp  distinction  drawn  by  Bertrand  be-
tween thought-transmission,  which  he  accepts,  and  will-transmission,
which  he  rejects,  is  a  rather  idle  distinction.  He  had  need  to  make
yet  another  in  order  to  be  entirely  right,  namely,  a  distinction  between
direct  action  of  will  upon  the  peripheric  organs,  and  transmission  of
will  to  the  brain.  As  for  the  muscles,  for  example,  it  is  nearly  certain
that  without  a  local  physical  excitation  of  the  tendons  or  the  nerves,
it  is  impossible  to  set  them  in  motion  by  the  act  of  an  extraneous
will  ;  but  that  is  not  what  is  implied  by  the  phrase  "  suggestive  will-
action."  And  once  thought-transmission  is  granted,  there  is  no  reason
for  an  outcry  against  those  who  believe  that  the  tendency  to  any
movement  whatever  may  be  transmitted  as  well  as  a  purely  passive
and  objective  idea.  As  soon  as  you  awaken  a  sentiment,  you  awaken
also  a  tendency  that  is  proper  to  it.  Now,  Bertrand  does  not  deny
the  transmission  of  sentiments.  Consequently,  it  being  understood
that  the  phenomenon  cannot  occur,  save  by  a  reflex  action  of  the  brain,
there  is  no  longer  any  need  of  drawing  a  hard  and  fast  line  of  dis-
tinction between  will  and  thought.

Bertrand  has  always  in  view  a  polyideic  state  of  the  brain,  and  that
is  what  leads  him  astray.  When  there  are  man)''  thoughts,  they  may
resist  the  execution  [of  the  order],  and  if  it  is  executed,  it  is  so
only  through  the  consent  of  those  thoughts.  But  what  if  there  are
not  many  thoughts  ?  When  all  opposition  is  done  away  by  the  state
of  aideia  or  of  nascent  monoideism,  will  not  the  thought  "  inoculated  "
[into  the  subject's  mind]  and  made  dominant  by  the  very  fact  of  its

HYPOTHESIS  OF  DIRECT  PSYCHIC  ACTION.      295

isolation,  determine  execution?  And  it  is  just  in  that  state  that  we
must  make  direct  experiments.

As  to  the  how  of  the  transmission  Bertrand  has  hardly  anything  to
say.  But  he  seems  to  regard  exaltatio?i  of  the  brain  with  paralysis  of
the  external  senses  as  an  essential  condition,  and  he  very  justly  compares
the  sympathism  of  diseases,  which  he  verified  many  times,  with  sym-
pathism  of  ideas,  which  is  more  rare.

"  Communication  of  ideas,"  he  says,  "  is  oftenest  presented  by
ecstatic  somnambules,  and  that,  I  think,  is  due  to  the  fact  that  their
state  of  moral  exaltation  could  never  have  been  produced  without  a
considerable  augmentation  of  the  brain's  sensibility,  an  augmentation
that  promotes,  betwixt  the  brain  of  the  somnambule  and  the  brains  of
those  around  him,  a  sympathic  communication  like  to  that  in  virtue  of
which  he  feels,  in  other  portions  of  his  body,  the  pains  of  those  in
rapport  with  him."  In  another  place  Bertrand  adds  :  "  It  has  been
seen  that  my  will,  though  not  expressed,  had  a  true  action  upon  the
patient  in  the  state  of  paralysis,  and  had  no  action  that  was  instan-
taneously perceptible  in  the  waking  state."  '

We  shall  see  further  on  the  importance  of  this  simple  remark.

CHAPTER  III.

THE    HYPOTHESIS    OF    DIRECT    PSYCHIC    ACTION.

BERTRAND'S  sympathism,  while  it  is  not  clear,  has  nothing  mys-
tical. It  was  a  sort  of  induction,  in  the  electrical  sense  of  the
word.  A  thought  was  supposed  to  induce  a  like  thought,  as  an
electric  current  induces  a  like  electric  current.  Nothing  passed  from
one  brain  to  another  brain.  Was  that  an  action  at  a  distance — a  very
small  distance  (for  Bertrand  did  not  believe  in  anything  else)  ?
Doubtless  it  was,  but  Bertrand  has  not  pronounced  any  judgment  on
the  question.     The  transmission  has  not  been  explained.

Several  magnetizers  have  tried  to  fill  the  gap  by  supposing  some-
thing that  passes  from  brain  to  brain,  and  naturally  have  attributed  to
this  intermediary  qualities  now  [psychical,  again  physical,  according
to  the  bias  of  their  several  minds.

Let  us  consider  for  a  moment  the  first  hypothesis.  My  soul  acts
upon  another  soul.     What  more  natural  than  to  suppose  a  real  trans-

1  "  Trait6  du  Somnambulisme,"  etc.,  pp.  246-283.     Paris,  1823.

296  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

ference  of  my  thoughts  ?  Such  a  supposition  would  cause  no  em-
barrassment to  a  spiritist.  If  my  thought  is  able  to  move  my  body,
and  if  my  subject's  thought  can  move  his  body,  then  to  explain  all  I
have  only  to  suppose  my  thought  to  pass  into  his  brain.     How  clear  !

When  the  problem  was  to  account  for  vision  at  a  distance,  the
solution  was  simply  that  the  soul  of  the  subject,  after  quitting  his
body  for  a  moment,  went  forth  to  see  what  was  going  on  a  hundred
leagues  away,  and  then  came  back- and  told  what  it  had  just  seen.

It  was  a  little  awkward  to  leave  the  body  so,  without  a  soul.  But
the  spiritists  found  a  way  out  of  that  difficulty  :  the  soul  remained,
the  mind  it  was  that  made  the  excursion.

So  with  regard  to  transmission  of  thought.  The  soul  (or  mind  if
you  will)  not  having  any  limits,  as  the  body  has,  could  easily  stretch
itself  a  little,  so  as  to  occupy  for  a  moment  an  extraneous  position,
there  perform  whatever  act  was  to  be  performed,  and  then  double  itself
up  and  get  back  into  its  shell.  Descartes  recognized  the  impossibility
of  an  action  of  thought  upon  extension  (matter),  but  not  upon  another
thought.

Consequently  they  might  intermingle  ;  and  could  anything  surprise
us  in  this  affair,  our  surprise  would  be  that  this  happened  so  seldom.
We  should  rather  look  for  a  universal  interchange.  "  Pass  over  to  me
your  experiences  and  I  will  pass  to  you  my  hopes  " — that  would  be  a
convenience  !  One  man  might  go  to  school  for  the  benefit  of  all,  and
then  sell  his  ideas  at  so  much  a  lot.

Unfortunately,  the  time  is  not  yet  come  for  this  kind  of  commerce.
We  are  even  not  quite  sure  whether  a  soul  or  a  soul's  thought  can
leave  its  body  ;  or  whether  after  it  has  quit  the  body  it  becomes  more
potent  than  it  was  just  before.  But  that  would  have  to  be  proved
first  of  all.

Instead  of  supposing  a  direct  passage  [of  thoughts],  some  spiritual-
ists are  pleased  to  allege  an  action  equally  mystical,  but  still  more
vague.  "  We  know,"  (?)  says  Chardel, !  "that  obstacles  and  distances
vanish  for  a  lucid  soul.  It  troubles  itself  no  more  about  them  :  it
gives  itself  up  naturally  to  this  new  mode  of  investigation,  and  therein
seems  only  to  recover  its  manner  of  action  that  is  proper  to  it  [Chardel
does  not  indicate  the  source  of  his  knowledge],  and  which  the  loosen-
ing of  the  bonds  of  life  has  just  given  back  to  it."

It  is  as  easy  as  to  say,  "  Good  morning  !  "

Others,  without  supposing  a  translocation  or  a  mystical  enlargement
of  the  faculties,  give  us  a  glimpse  of  an  almost  physical  "radiation."

"  The  mind,"4  says  the  Grand  Master  of  Spiritism,3  "is  not  shut  up
in  the  body  as  in  a  casket ;  it  radiates  all  around  ;  therefore  it  can

1  C.  Chardel,  -'Essai  de  Psychologie  Physiol.,"  p.  286.     Paris,  1838.

2  Or  "spirit,"  esprit. —  Translator.

3  Allan  Kardec,  "  Le  Livre  des  Esprits,"  p.  185.     Paris,  1862.

HYPOTHESIS  OF  DIRECT  PSYCHIC  ACTION.      297

communicate  itself  to  other  minds, '  even  in  the  waking  state,  though
more  difficultly  than  in  sleep."

That  is  pretty  ;  but  it  would  have  to  be  proved  that  there  exists  an
analogy  between  a  soul  and  a  lantern.  And  even  that  would  not  be
enough,  for  a  lantern  only  gives  light,  whereas  a  soul  can  command
movements.  True,  a  ray  of  light  can  make  a  Crookes  radiometer  to
go  round,  but  no  one  has  yet  determined  what  a  ray  of  the  mind  is,
nor  what  it  can  do.

The  necromantic  spiritists, 2  as  we  know,  believe  in  a  transmission
of  thought  between  embodied  souls  and  disembodied  spirits.  "  Spirits
have  only  the  language  of  thought  ;  they  have  no  articulate  lan-
guage," we  are  assured  by- Allan  Kardec,3  and  we  may  take  his  word
for  it.

So,  if  a  spirit  has  anything  to  say  to  us,  it  must  needs  employ  an
interpreter.     The  medium  is  the  interpreter.

"It  is  the  medium's  spirit  that  is  the  interpreter,  because  it  is  con-
nected with  the  body  that  serves  to  speak."4  But  in  most  cases  this
one  intermediary  is  insufficient.  "  The  familiar  spirit  is  nearly  always
the  one  that  acts  as  interpreter,  to  communicate  to  the  medium  the
thought  of  the  spirit  evoked,  when  the  latter  is  so  exalted  as  not  to
deem  it  proper  that  he  should  come  in  person,  or  when  other  occupa-
tions hinder.  Thought  is  communicated  between  spirit  and  spirit
directly,  and  without  the  aid  of  spoken  language.  If  you  evoke  a
spirit  that  knows  not  your  language,  he  transmits  his  thought  directly
to  your  familiar  spirit,  who  translates  it  into  the  language  that  you
know  and  that  is  familiar  to  you."  5

Certain  spiritualists  have  gone  further  still.  They  believe  in  the
need  of  spiritual  interpreters  not  only  for  a  communication  between  a
living  man  and  an  evoked  spirit,  but  even  between  the  magnetizer
and  his  subject.  "  The  influence  that  is  exercised  by  one  man  on
another  man  through  the  action  of  magnetism,"  says  Dr.  Billot,8
"  comes  from  an  auxiliary  either  unknown  or  misknown,  and  only  its
presence  can  give  the  solution  of  the  phenomena  of  magnetism."

This  auxiliary  is  the  world  of  spirits,  good  or  evil — evil  spirits  par-
ticularly, the  Marquis  of  Mirville  assures  us.

These  authors  take  the  exorcists'  point  of  view  :  man  cannot  per-
ceive the  thoughts  of  men  ;  therefore,  if  he  seems  to  perceive  them,  it

1  Or  "spirits."

2  Spirites.  Here  the  author  is  speaking  of  spiritists  of  the  Rochester-knockings
sort :  so  to  make  the  meaning  clear  I  render  the  word  as  above,  necromantic  spiritists. —
Translator.

3  "  Le  Livre  des  Mediums,"  p.  271.

4  Id.,  p.  268.

5  J.  Roze,  "  Revelations  du  Monde  des  Esprits,"  p.  18.  Second  series.  Paris,
1862.

6  Billot,  "  Recherches  Psychologiqnes,"  etc.,  vol.  i.,  12.     Paris,  1839.

298  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

is  because  his  guardian  angel — or  the  devil — has  whispered  them  to
him.

We  will  not  waste  our  time  in  examining  these  extra-scientific  fan-
cies. We  would  only  remark  that  even  if  credulousness  can  carry-
men  to  these  lengths,  reckless  incredulity  is  not  a  whit  better.
"  Doubt,"  says  Arago,  "  is  proof  of  modesty,  and  has  seldom  hindered
the  progress  of  science.  We  cannot  say  as  much  of  incredulity."  For
a  striking  proof  of  the  result  of  a  diseased  skepticism,  one  need  but
read  Mr.  Mabru,  "  Laureate  of  the  Academy  of  Sciences."  That
author  wrote  a  book  of  560  pages1  to  say  that  he  sees  nothing  in
magnetism  (p.  5)  in  spite  of  all  the  letters  he  has  written  and  all  the
conferences  he  has  held.  For  him  "  magnetic  somnambulism  so-called
does  not  exist  any  more  than  the  fluid,  and  the  phenomena  that  are
attributed  to  somnambulism  are  nothing  but  pure  illusion."2  Puy-
segur  was  fooled  by  his  maid-servants,  who  simulated  clairvoyance
"to  get  higher  wages,"  and  so  on.

He,  too,  supposes  an  interpreter  for  the  phenomena  of  transmission,
to  wit,  a  colluder.  "  In  order  not  to  be  duped  by  the  clever  tricks  so
often  repeated  in  certain  magnetic  parlors,  all  that  we  have  to  do,"
says  he,  "  is  to  eliminate  the  colluder.  .  .  .  There  is  no  animal  fluid,
no  artificial  somnambulism,  no  magic,  no  sorcery  ;  these  pretended
sciences  possess  in  reality  no  scientific  fact  ;  and  when,  by  means  of
immobility  of  body  and  strained  attention,  somnolence  is  produced  in
a  sick  patient  or  in  a  subject  that  is  fatigued  [but  in  fact  this  is  done
with  healthy  persons  and  persons  whose  senses  are  alert],  the  sleep  is
only  common  sleep.  It  possesses  none  of  the  miraculous  properties
of  the  so-called  magnetic  sleep.  Often  there  are  tricks  of  collusion ;
but  these  apart,  it  is  utterly  false  that  there  exists  between  the  endormer
and  his  subject  any  relation,  or  any  psychic  state,  except  the  ordinary
relations  of  everyday  life.  Not  only  does  the  thing  not  exist,  but  it
cannot  exist."  s

"There  are  errors,"  say  Cabanis,  "to  which  only  wits  are  liable."
Mr.  Mabru  has  not  this  excuse,  but  he  has  another.  La  Bruyere  says  :
"  All  the  wit  in  the  world  is  of  no  use  for  him  that  has  none."

The  other  day  Mr.  Mabru  was  surpassed  by  a  member  of  the
Academy  of  Political  and  Moral  Sciences.  Mr.  Mabru  wished  at  least
to  learn  ;  he  asked  for  demonstrative  facts.  Mr.  Desjardins,  for  his
part,  does  not  want  to  see  anything,  and  will  not  suffer  others  to  see.
He  condemns  the  study  of  hypnotism.  He  has  not  studied  anything
— that  need  not  be  said — but  he  is  fully  convinced  that  all  the  experi-
ments in  suggestion,  whether  of  a  therapeutic,  a  pedagogic  or  other
nature,  have  been  "  pitiful  failures."  But  they  are  hurtful  and  criminal,
nevertheless.  Not  only  the  hypnotizers,  but  the  hypnotized  also,  should

1  E.  Mabru,  "  Les  Magn6tiseurs  Jug6s  par  Eux-memes."     Paris,  1885.

2  Id.,  p.  356.  3  /*,  P-  483.

HYPO  THESIS  OF  DIRECT  PH  YSICAL  ACTION.      2 99

be  punished,  for  "man  has  no  right  to  abdicate  his  humanity  and  his
free-will."

It  is  to  be  hoped  that  the  honorable  jurisconsult  will  not  rest
there.  He  ought  to  propose  an  enactment  against  those  that  sleep
o'  nights,  seeing  that  it  must  not  be  permitted  to  a  man  to  transform
himself  voluntarily  into  an  inert  mass  and  to  abdicate  his  free-will.
"As  we  might  well  expect,"  says  Mr.  P.  Fauvreuil,  "this  eloquent
protest  has  been  approved  unanimously  and  its  author  has  been
warmly  felicitated.  Mr.  Arthur  Desjardins  has  dealt  hypnotism  a
stunning  blow  from  which  we  hope  it  will  not  recover."  '

Time  will  tell.  Be  it  noted  only  that  this  took  place  August  13,
1886,  thus  in  the  19th  century,  in  France,  in  Paris,  at  the  Academy.

M

CHAPTER   IV.

THE    HYPOTHESIS    OF    DIRECT    PHYSICAL    ACTION.

OST  magnetizers  believe  in  the  existence  of  a  vital  or  magnetic
nerve-fluid.  A  good  deal  of  sport  has  been  made  of  this  fluid,
and  the  subject,  we  must  confess,  invites  such  treatment.  But  those
who  have  made  many  experiments  are  alone  qualified  to  decide  the
question,  and  they  tell  us  that  often  appearances  are  as  though  some-
what passed  from  the  magnetizer  over  to  the  subject.

This  subtile  fluid  is  supposed  to  serve  as  an  intermediary  between
mind  and  body.  This  it  is  that  excites  the  muscles  and  transmits
sensations  to  the  brain  ;  this,  too,  it  is  that,  under  the  impulsion  of
the  will,  projects  itself  outward  and  affects  the  nerves  of  the  subject.
Being  of  an  eminently  motile  nature,  if  it  is  influenced  by  the  environ-
ment as  Well  as  by  the  impulsions  of  the  mind  [or  thought,  pense'e\  it
must  reflect  the  man's  personality,  his  feelings  and  sentiments,  his
will — it  must  be  impregnated,  so  to  speak,  with  the  modifications  of
his  mind.  On  uniting  with  another  like  fluid,  though  the  same  be  in-
dividually different,  it  may  transmit  to  it  the  same  modifications.  It
is  the  fluid,  then,  that  transmits  thought,  and  the  latter  need  not  quit
its  body  to  act  on  another  body.

This  theory  was  first  expounded  by  Lecat,3  doctor  of  medicine  and
professor  of  physiology.     His  fluid  is  called  the  animal  fluid,  and  it  is

1  Soleil  newspaper  of  August  15,  1886.

2  Lecat,  "  Traite  des  Sensations,"  pp.  154,  242.     Paris.  1767.

3oo  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

interesting  to  find  that  as  early  as  1767  there  was  an  effort  made  to
account  for  certain  mysterious  transmissions.  "This  fluid,"  says
Lecat,  "  being  affected  with  the  special  character  of  a  passion,  carries
the  impression  of  it  into  the  animal  fluid  of  other  individuals," '  for
"  sensations  and  impressions  [or  impresses — pressions\  consist  of  modi-
fications of  the  animal  fluid,  and  these  characters  are  communicated  to
fluids  of  the  same  sort,  and  are  susceptible  of  change  at  every  in-
stant."2 This  fluid  is  an  emanation,  which  the  author,  like  most
magnetizers,  often  confounds  with  odoriferous  emanations.  We  quote
one  more  passage  :

"  Once  we  recognize  the  evident  facts  that  prove  that  the  different
characters  of  the  animal  fluid  and  of  the  vegetal  fluids  produce  in  the
fluids  of  other  individuals  emotions,  changes  of  characters,  considerable
revolutions,  according  to  their  consonance  or  dissonance,  we  shall  have
no  difficulty  in  conceiving  all  the  effects  that  result  from  their  natural
concurrence  or  from  their  conflict,  of  whatever  sort  they  may  be —
intellectual,  animal,  or  animo-vegetal."  3

Such,  in  few  words,  is  the  theory  of  the  magnetic  fluid.

But  why  magnetic  ?

To  answer  that  question,  let  us  hear  what  is  said  of  it  by  the  chief
advocate  of  this  theory,  J.  P.  F.  Deleuze  :

"  A  somnambule  is  sensible  of  [saisit']  the  will  of  his  magnetizer,  he
executes  what  is  mentally  demanded  of  him.  To  understand  this
phenomenon  we  must  consider  somnambules  as  infinitely  mobile  mag-
nets ;  no  movement  occurs  in  the  brain  of  their  magnetizer  but  is
repeated  in  them,  or  at  least  they  perceive  it."  4

But  it  was  the  more  patent  and  more  frequent  phenomenon  of
attraction  that  suggested  this  analogy.  Let  the  reader  recall  Bruno's
experiment,  which  exhibits  this  phenomenon  in  an  exceptional  degree  ;
but  it  is  very  common  to  see  the  subject's  hand  attracted  by  the  ap-
proach of  the  magnetizer's  hand,  and  following  its  movements.  A
magnet  brought  near  to  the  subject  produces  the  same  phenomenon  ;
and,  though  this  action  is  not,  properly  speaking,  magnetic,  we  know
that  such  phenomena  may  well  have  determined  the  choice  of  the
term  "  animal  magnetism,"  which  is  not  any  worse  than  the  term
"  electricity,"  as  applied  to  certain  well-known  phenomena  that  have
nothing  to  do  with  electron  (amber).

Puysegur,  too,  was  struck  by  the  analogy  existing  between  a
compass-needle  and  a  mentally-suggestionable  subject  ;  but,  as  we
shall  see,  he  laid  no  stress  upon  this  seeming  analogy.'

Deleuze  makes  yet  another  comparison  :  "  We  know,"  says  he,
"  that  if  we  place  side  by  side  two  stringed  musical  instruments  that
are  in  unison,  and  twang  the  strings  of  the  first  one,  the  corresponding

1  "Trait6  des  Sensations,"  p.  154.  2  Id.,  p.  549.  3  Id.,  p.  242.

4  Deleuze,  "  Hist.  Critique  du  Magnetisme,"  p.  181.     Paris,  1813.

HYPOTHESIS  OF  DIRECT  Til  YSICAL  ACT /ON.      301

strings  of  the  second  sound  of  their  own  accord.     This  physical  phe-
nomenon is  like  that  which  takes  place  in  magnetism."  '

According  to  this  last  analogy,  the  magnetic  fluid  carries  the
psychic  vibrations  as  sound-vibrations  are  carried  by  the  air.

And  here  is  what  this  author  says  of  action  at  a  greater  distance  :

"  Though  it  is  very  difficult  to  explain  how  the  magnetic  fluid  can
act  from  one  apartment  to  another,  most  magnetizers  are  convinced
of  the  reality  of  such  action.  I  myself  have  made  experiments  that
go  to  prove  it.  Nevertheless,  that  phenomenon  being  one  of  those
that  to  me  seem  inconceivable,  I  invite  magnetizers  to  examine  it
anew  (1813),  refusing  to  believe  in  it  until  they  have  verified  it  by
their  own  experience.  But  light  and  sound  travel  to  great  distances,
yet  we  cannot  see  in  the  motor  agent  that  gives  them  forth  a  force
sufficiently  great  to  propel  them  rapidly,  even  through  bodies.
Whether  light  is  an  emanation  from  luminous  bodies,  or  whether  it  is
an  undulation  of  ether,  it  is  not  easy  to  understand  how  the  light  of
a  coal  or  the  flame  of  a  candle  makes  itself  visible  instantaneously  at
a  great  distance  through  transparent  bodies,  or  how  the  light  of  a  star
comes  to  us.  Perhaps  phenomena  that  we  refuse  to  believe,  because
we  have  not  observed  them,  are  no  more  incomprehensible  than  other
phenomena  that  do  not  astonish  us  at  all,  because  we  see  them  every
day."  s

He  then  adds  this  with  regard  to  the  conditions  of  magnetic  action  :

"  In  order  that  the  fluid  that  goes  out  from  me  may  act  upon  that
of  the  man  I  magnetize,  the  two  fluids  must  needs  unite,  must  needs
have  the  same  tone  of  motion.  If  I  touch  with  purpose  and  attention,
and  the  one  upon  whom  I  wish  to  act  is  in  a  passive  state  or  state  of
inaction,  my  fluid  will  determine  the  movement  of  his.  There  occurs
then  something  like  what  takes  place  between  a  magnetized  bar  of
iron  and  one  not  magnetized  ;  when  you  pass  many  times,  always  in
the  same  direction,  one  over  the  other,  the  one  communicates  to  the
other  its  motion  or  its  virtue.  That  is  not  an  explanation,  but  a
comparison."- 3

"  Once  the  nerves  are  permeated  by  a  certain  quantity  of  fluid,  they
acquire  a  susceptibility  of  which  we  have  no  conception  in  the  ordinary
state.  Regard  the  magnetized  individual  as  in  some  sense  a  part  of  his
magnetizer,  and  you  will  not  be  astonished  that  the  will  of  the  latter
should  act  upon  him  and  determine  his  movements.  That  is  all  that
I  can  say  about  the  principle  of  magnetic  action  and  will-influence." '

Evidently  it  is  not  an  explanation.  But,  then,  neither  Deleuze  nor
any  of  his  successors  ever  flattered  themselves  that  they  had  explained
the  whole  mystery.  They  have  merely  insisted  upon  the  necessity  of
accepting   a  physical    action — in   their   language    "  emission    of   the

1  "  Hist.  Critique  du  Magnetisme,"  p.  180.

s/rf,p.  85.  */</-,  P-  91-  *M,p.  93-

302  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

fluid  " — in  order  to  understand  as  well  as  ma)'  be  possible  the  different
phenomena  of  transmission.  "The  will,"  says  Lafontaine,  "cannot
act  upon  another  body  materially.  Our  will  acts  only  upon  ourselves
by  producing  a  more  active  secretion  in  the  brain  and  contractions  in
the  plexus  :  hence  the  emission  of  a  greater  quantity  of  the  fluid,  and
greater  intensity  in  the  action.  .  .  .  We  can,  therefore,  justly  say
that  the  magnetic  phenomena  have  one  sole  cause,  the  vital  fluid,  and
that  here,  as  everywhere,  the  will  is  but  an  accessory.  .  .  .  The
belief  that  the  will  acts  upon  the  magnetized  individual  is  founded  on
one  of  the  effects  presented  in  the  somnambulic  state.  A  somnambule
of  developed  lucidity  sees  his  magnetizer's  thought  and  obeys  the
mental  order.  That  is  a  transmission  of  thought ;  from  it  the  infer-
ence has  been  drawn  that  the  will  to  which  the  subject  is  thus  obedient
is  the  cause  ;  but  that  is  a  mistake :  cause  is  confounded  with  effect.
The  transmission  of  thought  is  but  the  result  of  the  special  state  in
which  the  subject  is.  If  the  magnetizer  is  not  in  the  proper  state  of
health  and  strength  ;  if  he  is  tired,  exhausted  by  any  overdoing  or
excess  whatever,  he  will  be  able  to  do  nothing,  or  next  to  nothing  [he
can  hypnotize,  however],  even  though  he  bring  to  bear  all  the  will-
power he  has.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  magnetizer  is  perfectly
sound  and  vigorous,  and  magnetizes  perfunctorily,  distractedly,
without  clearly  defined  intention,  he  will  prodiice,  nevertheless,  positive
effects.  '.  .  .  To  end  the  magnetic  state,  one  must  demagnetize,
must  free  the  subject  or  the  member  on  which  one  has  acted,  of  all
the  fluid  one  has  transmitted  to  him,  and  however  much  the  magnetizer
may  will  the  member  or  the  magnetized  individual  himself  to  be
restored  to  the  normal  state,  that  willing  of  itself  is  insufficient  ;  one
has,  furthermore,  to  act  physically,  and  if  one  does  not  that,  or  does  it
slightingly,  the  result  often  is  distress  that  may  involve  serious  con-
sequences."

That  last  remark,  apart  from  the  theory  of  the  fluid,  is  fully  justified.
We  often  hear  of  the  injurious  consequences  following  a  magnetiza-
tion. Now,  never — and  I  bottom  my  remark  upon  an  experience  of
19  years — never  can  a  magnetization  do  any  harm  if  the  conditions
are  duly  observed ;  on  the  contrary,  it  must  always  be  more  or  less
beneficial ;  the  least  favorable  case  is  where  the  effect  is  null.  But
experiments  made  hurriedly,  for  the  sake  of  the  effect,  by  strolling
magnetizers  or  by  hypnotizers  that  have  not  studied  the  literature  of
the  subject,  are  very  often  harmful,  and  the  main  cause  of  the
untoward  results  is  an  i?isufficient  demagnetization.  The  beneficial
effect  of  the  magnetization  is  reduced  by  one-half,  and  sometimes
serious  mischief  is  done,  by  a  premature,  a  too  sudden,  or  an  imperfect
awakening.

"The  advocates  of  will-influence,"  says  the  same  author,  "seem
to  rely  upon   another  example  to  strengthen  their  cause.     When  a

HYPOTHESIS  OF  A   UNIVERSAL  FLUID.  303

magnetizer,  from  a  distance  and  without  any  movement,  endorms  a
subject  that  he  is  in  the  habit  of  magnetizing,  or  even  when  he  mag-
netizes a  person  for  the  first  time,  they  assume  that  the  will  alone
acts.  That  is  a  mistake.  The  magnetizer,  by  concentrating  himself
in  himself,  produces  the  emission  of  the  fluid,  which  hits  [frappe]  the
subject  and  endorms  him.  Here,  as  everywhere,  there  is  simply  a
projection  of  the  vital  fluid."1

This  theory  is  simple,  indeed.  Were  there  such  a  fluid  it  would  be
very  convenient  for  explaining  facts  ;  and  oftentimes,  especially  in  the
therapeutic  application  of  magnetism,  we  must  act  as  if  the  fluid  existed.
But,  in  the  first  place,  it  is  certain  that  in  very  many  cases  the  inter-
vention of  the  fluid  is  theoretically  of  no  use  ;  and  that  even  where  we
are  compelled  to  recognize  a  physical  action,  it  does  not  prove  the
transmission,  nor  even  the  existence  of  a  special  fluid.  In  a  word,  the
theory  of  the  fluid  is  too  simple  in  view  of  the  complex  facts,  and  too
complicated  in  view  of  the  simpler  ones.

But  herein  Lafontaine  is  perfectly  right,  to  wit :  in  maintaining  that,
action  at  a  distance  once  admitted,  a  physical  action  must  be  assumed.
Thought,  as  such,  can  neither  walk  abroad  nor  radiate  elsewhither  than
in  a  brain  to  it  belonging,  or  to  which  it  belongs.  But  since  the  emis-
sion or  transference,  as  well  as  the  very  existence  of  a  special  vital
fluid,  is  incapable  of  demonstration,  we  must  seek  a  more  positive
principle  to  elucidate  our  problem.

CHAPTER   V.

THE    HYPOTHESIS    OF    A    UNIVERSAL   FLUID.

THE  general  belief  is  that  Mesmer  was  the  propounder  of  the
thepry  of  a  nervic,  vital,  or  magnetic  fluid,  which,  becoming
detached  from  our  body,  is  projected  outward,  is  borne  at  need
through  space,  and  so  on.  That  is  an  error  propagated  by  those  who
have  not  read  Mesmer,  or  have  been  unable  to  understand  him.  The
theory  we  have  sketched — and  it  is  a  very  ancient  one — was  elaborated
by  the  collective  efforts  of  several  of  his  i?idirect  disciples,  and  in  par-
ticular by  the  revelations  of  somnambules,  who  explained  things  as
best  they  could.  Finally,  the  authority  of  Deleuze,  who  himself  points
out  this  source,  easily  won  popularity  for  a  theory  that  anyone  could
grasp,  that  was  comprehensible  to  the  uncultured  imagination,  and

1   "  L'Art  de-Magn6tiser,"  pp.  25-34.

304  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

that  seemed  to  explain  all.  But  it  was  in  flat  contradiction  to  Mes-
mer's  doctrine,  which  was  known  only  to  his  direct  disciples.  His
course  of  instruction  has  never  been  published  entire  ;  but  the  extracts
from  it  that  were  published  by  Puysegur,  as  well  as  his  Aphorisms,
his  Memoirs,  and  certain  fragments  that  lay  long  unpublished,  prove
sufficiently  how  inexact  is  all  that  is  said  about  him.

They  show  him  to  have  been  a  mind  profound  as  well  as  original,
that  may  well  have  parted  with  the  qualities  of  modesty  and  disin-
terestedness that  characterized  him  at  first,  for  he  had  to  face  a  univer-
sal outburst  of  derision,  the  like  of  which  surely  never  has  been  heard.
Mesmer  understood  somnambulism  better  than  Puysegur,  who  in  his
enthusiasm  exaggerated  its  value ;  in  some  respects  he  understood  it
better  than  the  hypnotizers  of  our  day,  who  do  not  know  even  Mes-
mer's  disciples.  At  first  people  were  fain  to  call  him  charlatan  ;  then
little  by  little  they  began  to  discover  what  he  had  discovered ;  they
merely  altered  names  so  as  not  to  compromise  themselves,  but  they
left  to  him  the  title  of  charlatan.     Tis  brutal,  but  the  fact  is  thus.

I  will  state  Mesmer's  theory  as  far  as  it  concerns  the  problem  in
hand  :

Whatever  is  amenable  to  investigation  may  be  expressed  in  two
words  :  matter  and  motion.  But  to  reach  this  conclusion  we  must
efface  from  our  cognitions  the  superficial  impress  given  to  them  by
the  senses.  "  We  acquire  all  ideas  through  the  senses  :  the  senses
convey  to  us  only  properties,  characters,  accidents,  attributes  ;  the
ideas  of  all  these  sensations  are  expressed  by  an  adjective  or  epitheton,
as  hot,  cold,  fluid,  solid,  heavy,  light,  shining,  sonorous,  etc.  For  these
epitheta  substantives  have  been  for  convenience'  sake  substituted  ;
soon  the  properties  were  substantified  ;  we  say  heat,  gravity,  light,
sound,  etc.,  and  lo ! — the  origin  of  metaphysical  abstractions."1

These  substances 2  were  multiplied,  personified.  Hence  ghosts,
divinities,  demons,  genies,  archei,  and  so  on.  "  We  still  retain  a  cer-
tain number  of  these  entities,  which  we  must  eliminate  in  order  to  get
a  clear  view  of  phenomena.  That  is  in  general  terms  the  end  I  pur-
pose to  attain  "  (p.  18).

Matter  presents  several  degrees  of  fluidity.  Water  is  more  fluid
than  sand,  for  it  can  fill  the  interstices  between  the  grains  of  sand  ;
air  is  more  fluid  than  water,  for  it  can  be  diffused  through  it ;  ether  is
more  fluid  than  air.  It  is  difficult  to  determine  where  this  divisibility
ends,  but  we  may  suppose  there  are  still  many  degrees  of  this  kind,
and  that  there  exists  a  universal  primitive  matter,  the  graduated  con-
centration of  which  constitutes  all  the  states  of  matter.  However
that  may  be,  it  must  be  allowed,  according  to  Mesmer,  that  all  space

1  "  Memoire  de  F.  A.  Mesmer,  Docteur  en  Medecine,  sur  ses  Decouvertes  "  (1778).
Nouv.  ed.  avec  des  notes  du  Dr.  Picher  Granchamp,  p.  17.     Paris,  1828.

2  That  is,  these  substantified  adjectives. —  Translator.

HYPOTHESIS  OF  A    UNIVERSAL  FLUID.  305

is  filled,  and  we  may  well  call  the  fluid  which  fills  all  the  universal  fluid.
"  Some  physicists  have  already,"  says  he,  "  recognized  the  existence
of  a  universal  fluid,  but  they  have  erred  in  defining  its  characters,  in
overloading  it  with  properties  and  specific  powers  [vertus]  that  we
cannot  have  cognizance  of"  (p.  22).  This  fluid  exists  though  we  feel
not  its  presence.  It  is  all  around  us,  and  with  regard  to  it  we  are
nearly  in  the  same  situation  as  fishes,  which  no  doubt  would  be  much
surprised  were  one  of  themselves  to  declare  that  all  the  space  between
the  bottom  of  the  sea  and  the  surface  is  filled  with  a  fluid  in  which
they  live  ;  that  in  this  medium  alone  do  they  come  together  and  go
apart,  and  that  it  is  the  one  means  of  their  reciprocal  relations  (p.  22).
"  The  universal  fluid  is  simply  the  sum  of  all  the  series  of  matter  in
the  highest  state  of  division  through  the  movement  of  its  particles."  '
By  it  the  universe  is  fused  and  reduced  to  one  mass.  Ail  that  can  be
predicated  of  it  is,  that  it  is  fluid  by  pre-eminence,  and  consequently
that  it  must  in  particular  govern  transmissions  of  motion  more  subtile
than  those  effected  by  other  and  better  known  fluids.  Water  can  give
motion  to  a  mill  ;  the  air  transmits  sound-vibrations,  the  ether  light
vibrations,  the  universal  fluid  transmits  life- vibrations.  Each  of  these
series  answers  to  a  degree  of  phenomena,  and  the  vibrations  of  each
of  these  series  cannot  be  perceived  save  in  a  corresponding  degree  of
the  organization  (/.  e.,  of  the  aggregation)  of  matter  (p.  24).  Neither
heat,  nor  light,  nor  electricity,  nor  magnetism,  is  a  substance,  but  they
are  effects  of  motion  in  the  different  series  of  the  universal  fluid.
While  it  is  neither  heavy,  nor  elastic,  etc.,  this  fluid  determines  the
phenomena  of  gravity,  of  cohesion,  of  attraction,  etc.,  as  results  of
the  re-actions  of  the  motion  communicated.

Properly  speaking,  there  is  in  nature  no  attraction  ;  it  is  only  a
seeming  effect  of  communicated  movements,  and  in  general  all  prop-
erties, all  so-called  forces,  are  but  a  combined  result  of  the  organization
of  bodies,  and  of  the  movement  of  the  fluid  in  which  they  exist  (p.  25).
This  fluid  it  is  that  governs  the  mutual  influences  of  all  bodies  ;  and
as  these  actions  and  re-actions  are,  so  to  speak,  symbolized  in  the
mutual  influence  of  the  magnet  and  iron,  we  may  give  the  name  of
universal  magnetism  to  this  general  mutual  influence.  Nothing  is
exempt  from  this  influence,  which  may  be  more  or  less  inappreciable,
but  which  theoretically  has  no  limits.  The  heavenly  bodies  act  upon
us  and  we  re-act  upon  the  heavenly  bodies,  as  well  as  upon  the  bodies
around  us.  The  property  of  the  animal  body  that  makes  it  capable
of  such  action  and  re-action  may  be  called,  by  analogy  with  the  mag-
net, animal  magnetism  (Aphorism  8).  Consequently,  magnetism,
whether  the  universal  or  the  animal  magnetism,  is  not  a  fluid,  but  an
action  j  motion,  not  matter ;  transmission  of  motion,  not  an  emanation

1  L 'ensemble  de  toutes  les  series  de  la  matiere  la  phis  divise'e,  par  le  mouvement  de  ses
particules.  »

3o6  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

of  any  kind.  No  displacement  can  take  place  without  replacement,  for
all  space  is  filled  (p.  39),  and  that  presupposes  that  if  a  motion  of
the  subtile  matter  is  produced  in  one  body  there  is  forthwith  pro-
duced a  like  motion  in  another  similar  body  capable  of  receiving  it,
whatever  the  distance  between  them  (p.  39).

"Considering,"  adds  Mesmer,  "that  reciprocal  action  is  general
between  bodies,  that  the  magnet  furnishes  us  with  the  model  of  this
general  law,  and  that  the  animal  body  is  susceptible  of  properties
analogous  to  those  of  the  magnet,  I  hold  the  term  animal  magnetism,,
which  I  have  adopted,  to  be  fully  justified.  ...  I  see  with  regret
that  this  phrase  is  thoughtlessly  abused  ;  when  one  has  familiarized
himself  with  it,  he  flatters  himself  that  he  possesses  the  idea  of  the
thing,  whereas  he  has  only  an  idea  of  the  word.  As  long  as  my  dis-
coveries were  regarded  as  chimaeras,  the  incredulity  of  some  savants
left  to  me  all  the  glory  of  the  discovery  ;  but  since  they  were  com-
pelled to  recognize  its  reality,  they  have  taken  to  quoting  against  me
the  writings  of  the  ancients,  in  which  occur  the  phrases,  '  universal
fluid,'  '  magnetism,'  '  influence,'  and  so  on.  We  have  to  do  not  with
words,  but  with  the  thing,  and,  above  all,  with  the  usefulness  of  its
application  "  (47).

Life  is  but  a  manifestation  of  a  subtile  motion,  the  stoppage  of
which  is  death.  Among  these  subtile  motions,  sensations  hold  a  chief
place  ;  all  actions  are  the  results  of  sensations  (p.  49).  The  sense-
organs  correspond  to  different  degrees  of  subtility  in  the  vibrations
that  influence  usf  and  they  are  not  capable  of  being  influenced  save
by  a  special  sort  of  vibrations.  But  nerve-matter  itself,  as  the
supreme  product  of  organization,  is  capable  of  being  influenced
directly  by  the  most  subtile  vibrations  of  the  most  subtile  matter :  to
wit,  the  universal  fluid.  This  faculty,  hitherto  overlooked  or  mis-
conceived, Mesmer  calls  the  inner  sense  (sens  inte'rieur).

Here  I  remark  that  this  term  recurs  oft  in  the  history  of  psychol-
ogy, but  in  a  different  sense.  Even  Aristotle  deals  with  this  question.
After  him  Albertus  Magnus,  Occam,  Giordano  Bruno,  Cremonius,
and  many  others,  speak  of  a  sensus  interior,  or  even  of  sensus  interni.
But  the  term  has  been  employed  either  in  the  sense  of  a  sensus  com-
munis, bringing  together  all  sensations,  or  in  the  sense  of  perception
and  consciousness  of  oneself.

Commonly  the  psychologists  did  but  travesty  the  problem  posed
by  Aristotle  :  "  Must  we  suppose  a  sixth  sense  to  see  what  the  eye
sees,  to  hear  what  the  ear  hears,  etc.,"  or  else  (as  in  modern  psychol-
ogy) they  gave  the  name  "  inner  sense  " l  to  the  faculty  of  perceiving

1  This  faculty  is  what  Sir  William  Hamilton  calls  the  vital  sense,  synonyms  of
which  are  "  subjective  sensation"  (Huxley),  "  ccenoesthesis,"  "vital  feeling."  It  is,  I
believe,  called  by  French  physiologists  le  sens  de  la  vie — the  sense  of  life  ;  the  feeling
we  have  of  our  own  vital  processes. —  Translator.

HYPOTHESIS  OF  A   UNIVERSAL  FLUID.  307

the  inward  bodily  sensations  {Selbstempfindungcn).  The  meaning  given
to  it  by  Mesmer  is  different.  He  believes  that  nerve-substance  in
general  and  the  gray  matter  in  particular  can  be  affected  directly  by
the  vibrations  of  the  universal  fluid.  Herein  he  sees  a  source  of
vague  cognitions,  commonly  inappreciable,  particularly  by  man,  in
whom  the  sense-impressions  and  the  development  of  reflection  smother
these  faint  perceptions  ;  but  in  the  animals,  whose  senses  are  less
perfected,  this  purely  cerebral  sensibility  makes  up  for  the  imperfec-
tion of  the  senses,  and  in  many  ways  takes  their  place.  It  puts  them
in  relation  with  all  nature,  enables  them  to  divine  directions  in  space,
to  forefeel  terrestrial  or  atmospheric  changes,  and  in  general  forms
the  sort  of  unconscious  experience  to  which  we  give  the  title  instinct.
In  man  this  faculty  manifests  itself  only  exceptionally,  in  normal
sleep  and  especially  in  somnambulism,  when  the  ordinary  senses  are
in  abeyance  and  there  are  no  conscious  thoughts  to  overpower  it.
"  If  it  be  true,"  says  he,  "  as  I  shall  endeavor  to  show,  that  we  are
affected  by  the  enchainment  of  things  and  of  events  that  succeed  one
another,  we  may  see  the  possibility  of  presentiments  and  other  like
phenomena  "  (p.  50).

In  the  state  of  "crisis  "  the  somnambule's  senses  may  extend  to  any
distance.  All  nature  seems  to  be  present  to  them.  Even  dictates  of
will  are  communicated  to  them  without  regard  to  any  of  the  con-
ventional means.  These  faculties  differ  according  to  the  individual
(p.  52)  ;  the  most  usual  phenomenon  is  for  a  somnambule  to  see  the
interior  of  his  own  body,  or  even  of  others'  bodies.  But  it  is  a  rare
thing  to  find  all  these  faculties  in  the  same  person.

"  How  can  a  man  receive  the  impress  of  a  will  not  his  own  ? "

"  This  communication  can  take  place  between  two  individuals  in  the
normal  state  only  when  the  movement  resulting  from  their  thoughts  is
propagated  to  the  vocal  organs,  and  to  the  parts  that  serve  to  express
the  natural  or  the  conventional  signs  ;  these  movements  are  then
transmitted  to  the  air  or  to  the  ether  as  intermediaries,  and  are  received
and  sensed  by  the  external  sense-organs.  These  same  movements,  thus
modified  by  thought  in  the  brain  and  in  the  nerve-substance,  being
communicated  at  the  same  time  to  the  series  of  a  subtile  fluid  with
which  that  nerve-substance  is  in  continuity,  can,  independently  and
without  the  aid  of  air  and  ether,  extend  to  an  indefinite  distance  and
report  direct  to  the  inner  sense  of  another  individual."

"  From  this  a  notion  may  be  had  of  how  the  wills  of  two  individuals
can  communicate  by  their  inner  senses,  and  consequently  of  how  there
may  exist  a  reciprocity,  an  accord,  a  sort  of  understanding  between
two  wills,  which  relation  we  may  designate  as  rapport"  (p.  75).

"  As  this  sort  of  sensations  are  not  to  be  had,  save  through  the
mediation  of  fluids  as  far  excelling  ether  in  subtility  as  ether  excels
common  air,  the  means  of  expres'sion  fail  me  :  it  is  as  though  I  wished

308  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

to  explain  colors  in  terms  of  sound.  I  therefore  must  needs  supply
the  deficiency  with  the  reflections  that  may  be  made  upon  the  con-
stant pre-sensations  of  human  beings,  and  more  particularly  of  animals,
with  regard  to  the  great  occurrences  of  nature  at  distances  all  too  great
to  be  spanned  by  their  ostensible  organs  ;  upon  the  irresistible  attrac-
tion that  causes  birds  and  fishes  to  make  their  periodic  migrations  ;
finally,  upon  all  the  relevant  phenomena  furnished  to  us  by  the  crisis-
sleep  \_sommeil  critique]  of  man  "  (p.  77).

These  pre-sensations  may  relate  also  to  the  past  or  to  the  future,  for
to  see  the  past  is  simply  to  perceive  the  causes  in  the  effects,  and  to
see  the  future  is  to  divine  the  effects  from  the  causes.  Whatever  has
been  has  left  traces  ;  so,  too,  whatever  is  to  be  is  already  determined  by
the  concatenation  of  causes  (p.  76).

But  why  is  the  state  of  sleep  better  fitted  than  the  waking  state  to
manifest  these  different  transmissions  ?  Mesmer  answers  that  ques-
tion with  the  utmost  precision.     The  reason  is  twofold :

1.  Because  in  sleep  the  sense-functions  are  suspended  (p.  77),  and
the  continuity  of  the  common  sensorium  with  the  external  organs
more  or  less  broken.  "The  impressions  of  circumjacent  things,
therefore,  are  made,  not  upon  the  external  organs  of  sense,  but  di-
rectly and  immediately  upon  the  very  substance  of  the  nerves.  The
inner  sense  thus  becomes  the  sole  organ  of  sensations"  (p.  78).

2.  Because,  in  consequence  of  the  senses  being  in  abeyance,  the
psychic  functions  of  conscious  memory,  of  imagination,  reflection,
etc.,  which  depend  upon  the  senses  directly  or  indirectly,  are  also
suspended,  and  consequently  the  impressions  made  direct  upon  the
cerebral  substance  "  become  perceptible  by  the  very  fact  that  they
stand  alone"  (monoideism).  "As  it  is  the  immutable  law  of  sensa-
tions that  the  stronger  effaces  the  weaker,  the  latter  may  be  percepti-
ble in  the  absence  of  the  former.  If  the  impression  of  the  stars  is
not  perceptible  to  our  vision  in  daytime  as  it  is  at  night,  though  their
action  is  the  same,  the  reason  is,  that  in  the  day  it  is  effaced  by  the
superior  impression  made  by  the  presence  of  the  sun"  (p.  78).

For  individual  transmissions  from  man  to  man  we  have  to  recog-
nize two  other  conditions :

1.  That  of  rapport.  .The  special  action  between  two  individuals  is
facilitated  by  a  sort  of  accord,  by  the  production,  natural  or  artificial,
of  a  like  tone  of  motion  or  of  a  like  tonic  motion,  which  makes  a  brain
more  susceptible  of  a  vibration  belonging  to  the  same  category  (pp.

24,  75)-

2.  That  of  education.  For  the  perfection  of  this  crisis-sleep  not
only  varies  according  to  the  process  [marc/ie]  of  the  crisis,  and  the
temperaments  and  habitudes  of  subjects,  but  also  depends  very  much
upon  a  sort  of  education  that  can  be  given  them  in  that  state,  and  on
the  way  in  which  you  direct  their  faculties;  in  this  respect  the  sleep

HYPOTHESIS  OF  A   UNIVERSAL  FLUID.  309

may  be  compared  to  a  telescope,  the  action  of  which  differs  accord-
ing to  the  means  of  adjustment  (p.  81).

In  a  state  favorable  to  transmissions  of  all  sorts  man  enters  into
relation  with  all  nature,  and  we  might  compare  him  to  a  liquid  whose
surface,  being  in  perfect  equilibrium,  reflects  like  a  mirror  everything
in  the  universe,  faithfully  pictures  all  objects.  But  fancy  that  surface
ruffled  by  all  sorts  of  shocks  (impressions  made  upon  the  ordinary
senses),  and  you  shall  see  the  liquid  agitated  by  innumerable  undula-
tions and  re-actions,  and  the  reflection  of  objects  will  disappear.

But,  plainly,  it  is  but  seldom  that  all  these  conditions  of  cerebral
perceptivity  are  combined.  Sundry  observers,  impressed  by  what
they  saw  in  exceptional  case's,  have  supposed  that  they  could  at  will
develop  lucid  somnambules.  They  forgot  that  it  is  always  in  the
state  of  sleep  that  dreams  are  commingled  with  true  sensations.
They  confounded  together  magnetism  and  somnambulism,  and  so
exposed  both  to  the  ridicule  of  men  of  sense.1

Mesmer  does  not  hide  from  himself  the  fact  that  in  spite  of  all  the
reserve  one  may  exercise  with  regard  to  so  delicate  a  subject  it  will
be  hard  to  convince  those  who  have  not  themselves  verified  the  phe-
nomena. "  Suppose,"  he  says,  "a  people  that  of  necessity  must  fall
asleep  at  sundown,  and  that  never  awake  till  sunrise  :  such  a  people
would  have  no  conception  of  the  magnificent  spectacle  of  the  night.
Were  one  to  tell  them  that  there  are  among  them  men  in  whom  this
wonted  ordering  of  sleep  and  waking  is  disarranged,  and  who,  awak-
ing in  the  night,  have  descried  at  infinite  distances  innumerable
luminous  bodies,  new  worlds,  so  to  speak,  one  would  doubtless  be
treated  as  a  visionary  because  of  the  vast  difference  between  the
opinions  held  on  the  one  side  and  on  the  other.  Such  to-day,  in  the
estimation  of  the  multitude,  are  those  who  maintain  that  in  sleep  man
has  the  faculty  of  broadening  his  sensations  "  (p.  80).

"In  the  memoir  I  published  in  1779,"  says  Mesmer  again,  "  I  made
known  the  reflections  I  had  made  many  years  previously  upon  the
universality  of  certain  popular  opinions,  which,  as  I  believe,  are  the
results  of  the  most  widespread  and  the  most  constant  observation.
Thereanent  I  said  that  I  had  undertaken  the  task  of  inquiring  what
of  useful  and  true  might  be  contained  in  old-time  errors  ;  and  I  felt
warranted  in  asserting  that  among  the  vulgar  opinions  of  all  times
[as  imposition  of  hands,  visions  and  oracles,  influence  of  certain  metals,
mystic  action  of  man  on  man,  evil  eye,  power  of  taming  animals,  com-
munication at  a  distance,  presentiments  and  simultaneous  sensations,
influence  of  yearning  and  of  prayer,  transmission  of  health,  strength,
disease,  etc.]  there  are  few,  however  ridiculous,  however  extravagant
they  may  seem,  that  may  not  be  regarded  as  remnants  of  truths
primitively  recognized  "  (p.  3).

1  "  F.  A.  Mesmer,"  p.  79.     By  Dr.  Kerner.     Frankfort-on-Main,  1856.

3io  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

And  as  certain  of  these  processes,  by  a  too  scrupulous  observance
(p.  44),  by  a  blind  application  (p.  44),  seemed  to  recall  ancient
opinions,  ancient  practices  that  have  justly  been  regarded  as  errors
(p.  89),  "  most  of  the  men  devoted  to  science  and  the  healing  art  have
considered  my  doctrine  only  from  this  point  of  view  :  carried  away  by
these  first  impressions,  they  have  neglected  to  study  it  thoroughly.
Others,  actuated  by  personal  motives,  by  professional  interest  [interet
de  corps],  have  refused  to  see  in  me  aught  but  an  adversary  that  they
must  crush.  To  that  end  they  employed  first  the  so  powerful  weapon
of  ridicule,  and  the  no  less  effective  and  more  hateful  one  of  calumny;
at  last  they  spread  broadcast  copies  of  a  report '  that  is  destined  to
stand  for  all  time  as  a  monument  that  will  insure  little  of  honorable
fame  to  the  men  that  dared  to  sign  it.  Other  persons,  convinced  at
last,  whether  by  their  own  experience  or  by  that  of  others,  have  be-
come enthusiasts,  and  have  indulged  in  such  exaggerations  as  to  render
all  the  facts  unworthy  of  belief.  Hence  have  resulted,  for  the  weak
and  uneducated  multitude,  illusions  and  groundless  fears.  Such  hith-
erto have  been  the  sources  of  public  opinion  adverse  to  my  doctrine  "
(pp.  89,  90).

Hitherto  !    Yes,  as  late  as  1886.

"  I  willingly  submit  my  theory  to  criticism,  declaring  that  I  have
neither  the  time  nor  the  will  to  reply.  I  should  not  have  anything  to
say  to  those  who,  incapable  of  crediting  me  with  straightforwardness
and  disinterestedness,  would  think  only  of  attacking  me  with  purely
hostile  intent  ;  and  I  should  be  pleased  to  see  men  of  greater  talent
discover  principles  more  solid,  more  luminous,  men  of  larger  mental
endowment  than  myself  develop  new  facts  " — they  have  discovered
new  names — "  and  by  their  ideas  and  their  researches  render  my  dis-
covery more  interesting  still.  It  will  be  enough  for  my  fame  that  I
have  been  able  to  open  a  vast  field  for  science,  and  that  I  have  in
some  measure  traced  the  route  of  this  new  career"  (p.  92).

Such  were  the  opinions  of  the  illustrious  "  charlatan."

We  may  take  exception  to  several  points  of  this  hypothesis,  and,
indeed,  I  shall  endeavor  later  to  present  the  facts  in  a  slightly
different  aspect ;  but  it  will  be  allowed,  I  think,  on  comparing  Mes-
mer's  ideas  with  those  of  his  successors,  that  his  is  the  only  theory
worthy  of  the  name.

How  far  removed  we  are  here  from  the  crudities  of  the  magnetizers
with  their  fluid  running  hither  and  yon  !  which  goes  around  walls  and
floats  through  the  air  to  hit  the  predestined  subject  and  to  set  itself
up  within  his  body  !  Heedless  of  their  master's  admonitions,  they
have  hypostasized,  substantized  an  action,  creating  a  new  metaphysical
entity,  whereas  he  wanted  to  free  us  from  the  ancient  ones.

But  how  far  removed  we  are  also  from  the  academic  commonplaces

1 1784.

HYPOTHESIS  OF  A   UNIVERSAL  FLUID.  311

that  attributed  all  the  phenomena  of  magnetism  to  imagination,  imita-
tion, and  jugglery  !  Fortunately,  prejudices  pass  away,  and  experience
remains.  Undoubtedly  we  are  beginning  to  go  back  to  the  fountain-
head.  Dr.  Despine,  Jr.,  '  published  in  1880,  that  is  200  years  after
Mesmer,  the  following  reflections  :

"  Explanation  of  the  phenomenon  of  thought-transmission.  Action  from
a  distance  upon  the  psychic  phenomena  of  somnambules  being  no
longer  matter  of  doubt,  let  us  try  to  explain  it  by  means  of  natural
agencies.  Let  us  remark,  in  the  first  place,  that  the  expression  '  action
at  a  distance '  comes  from  the  belief  that  there  is  vacuum  in  nature.
Now,  that  is  not  so  at  all."

Before  I  proceed  with  the  exposition  of  Mr.  Despine's  views,  I  will
observe  that  though  he  is  perfectly  right  in  rejecting  action  at  a  dis-
tance in  the  absolute  sense  of  the  term,  that  is,  across  a  vacuum,  he
goes  a  little  too  far  in  affirming  the  non-existence  of  a  vacuum.  That
was  Mesmer's  error,  for  he,  too,  regarded  the  universe  as  absolutely
full.  That  supposition  is  incompatible  with  the  idea  of  motion  such
as  is  necessary  for  explaining  any  transmission  whatever.  One  can,
indeed,  conceive  the  motion  of  a  sphere  turning  on  its  axis  without  dis-
placement ;  but  when  there  is  question  of  transmitting  any  motion,  we
must  postulate  a  free  space,  a  shock  communicated  through  this  free
space,  consequently  a  vacuum.  To  assume  a  medium  more  and  more
elastic,  and  which,  because  of  this  elasticity,  opposes  no  obstacle,  will
not  serve ;  for  when  you  assume  a  matter  to  the  last  degree  subtile,
you  still  must  ascribe  to  it  particles  separated  from  one  another  by
empty  spaces.  Either  a  vacuum  exists  or  there  is  no  motion.  Motion
being  change  of  place,  there  must  be  a  place  in  order  that  place  may
be  changed.  From  this  there  is  no  escape.  Whether  it  is  thus  with
"the  thing  in  itself"  of  Kant,  I  know  not;  but  what  I  do  know  is,
chat  one  puts  himself  under  an  illusion  if  he  thinks  he  can  comprehend
motion  without  a  vacuum ;  a  motionless  movement,  if  I  may  be
allowed  the  expression,  there  may  be — but  that  does  not  help ;  a
transmission  of  motion,  no.

But  that  is  a  question  that  is  independent  of  the  mystic  action  at  a
distance.  Vacuum  may  exist,  and  action  at  a  distance  across  vacuum
may  not  exist.

Mathematicians  have  often  puzzled  their  brains  calculating  the
actions  and  re-actions  that  must  take  place  between  two  material
points  separated  by  vacant  space.  It  is  labor  lost.  Between  two
material  points  separated  by  vacant  space  there  is  neither  action  nor
re-action.  Universal  attraction  as  an  occult  property  of  bodies  is  a
senseless  idea,  infinitely  more  difficult  to  comprehend  than  the  trans-
mission of   thought.     It  is  not  I  who  say  this :    it  is  Newton.     The

1  Dr.  P.  Despine,  fils,  "Etude  Scientifique  sur  le  Somnambulisme,"  pp.  222-229.
Paris,  1880.

312  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

theory  of  Newton  has  been  brutalized,  idiotized,  as  that  of  Mesmer
has  been,  by  men  who  could  not  understand  the  necessity  of  subtile
ideas  for  subtile  causes.  Newton  himself — and  here  Mr.  Despine  is
perfectly  right  in  quoting  him — rejected  action  at  a  distance  :  "That
brute  matter  (or  matter  of  any  sort)  should,  without  the  intermediary
of  any  other  thing  that  is  not  material,  be  able  to  act,  to  operate
upon  other  matter  without  mutual  contact,  is  incomprehensible.  That
gravitation  should  be  inherent,  essential  to  matter,  so  that  a  body  may
act  upon  another  body  at  a  distance  in  space,  without  the  intermediary
of  something  whereby  their  activity  " — in  other  words,  their  motion —
"  may  be  transmitted  from  the  one  to  the  other,  seems  to  me  so  great
an  absurdity,  that  no  man,  I  believe,  who  is  competent  to  think
of  philosophic  matters,  can  ever  fall  into  it." '

And  yet  that  is  the  opinion  of  the  majority  of  scientific  men  nowa-
days.    But  let  us  go  back  to  Despine's  analysis  :

"  The  researches  of  modern  physicists  confirm  Newton's  view  in  so
far  as  they  prove  that  there  is  no  vacuum  [again  the  same  confusion];
that  space  is  full  of  a  matter  that  is  eminently  subtile,  called  ether,
whose  attributes  are  not  only  transmission  of  electricity,  and  trans-
mission of  terrestrial  magnetism,  but  also  transmission  of  light  and
heat.  [A  matter  eminently  subtile  means  a  matter  eminently  rarefied,
and  if  a  thing  is  rarefied  that  means  that  there  is  vacuum  between
its  particles.]  The  vast  interstellar  spaces  then  are  not  regions  of
vacuum  and  of  isolation.  We  find  them  filled  with  this  medium  which
extends  everywhere,  so  that  when  a  molecule  of  hydrogen  vibrates  in
Sirius,  the  medium  receives  therefrom  an  impression  ;  but  so  great  is
the  distance  of  that  star  that  this  impulsion  takes  three  years  to  reach
the  earth.  And  yet  that  distance  in  no  wise  alters  the  vibrations
transmitted."  [That  is  another  question.  No  one  has  been  in  Sirius
to  compare  them.]

Mr.  Despine  then  quotes  from  Herbert  Spe.ncer  a  passage  of  which
I  will  repeat  a  part :

"  The  discovery  that  matter,  apparently  so  simple,  is,  in  its  inmost
structure,  astoundingly  complex ;  and  that  other,  that  its  molecules,
oscillating  with  almost  infinite  rapidity,  propagate  their  impulsion  to
the  surrounding  ether,  which  transmits  them  to  inconceivable  dis-
tances in  times  infinitely  small,  lead  us  to  this  still  more  wonderful
discovery,  that  molecules  of  each  kind  are  affected  in  a  special  way  by
molecules  of  the  same  kind  that  exist  in  the  remotest  regions  of  space."
That  is  Mesmer's  idea.

1  Our  author  does  not  locate  the  passage  in  Newton's  works,  and  the  above  is  but
a  version  of  the  French  version. —  Translator.

2  Diligent  search  has  failed  to  discover  the  original  of  this  passage  in  H.  Spencer's
"  First  Principles  ;"  the  translator  must  therefore  content  himself  with  a  version  of
the  French  translation  of  it.

HYPOTHESIS  OF  A   UNIVERSAL  FLUID.  313

Mr.  Despine  quotes  also  Mr.  Bertrand,  of  the  French  Academy,  with
regard  to  the  existence  of  ether  and  its  action  upon  the  phenomena  of
light,  electricity,  etc.     Then  he  adds  :

"Why  should  it  not  be  of  equal  importance  in  organic  nature?
May  we  not  reasonably  suppose  that  that  which  in  this  universal
medium  is  the  principle  of  light,  electricity  and  heat,  may  also,  when
united  with  nerve-matter,  be  the  principle  of  life  in  animals  possess-
ing a  nervous  system,  and  consequently  the  principle  of  activity  of
that  system  and  of  its  various  functions?  When  we  reflect  that  this
system  is  not  absolutely  necessary  to  life,  inasmuch  as  plants  and  the
lowest  animals  are  without  it ;  when  we  reflect  that  light,  heat  and
electricity,  that  is,  the  principal  manifestations  of  the  ether,  are  nec-
essary to  life,  seeing  that  wherever  they  are  insufficient  vegetal  life
and  animal  life  are  impossible,  and  that  life  is  all  the  more  active  the
more  potent  these  manifestations  are  ;  when  we  reflect  upon  all  this,
have  we  not  a  right  to  conclude  that  the  principle  of  life  in  organized
bodies  really  consists  in  these  three  manifestations  of  the  ether,  and
that  the  nervous  system  is  needed  only  to  regulate  [pre'sider  a\  the
specialty  of  each  function  as  the  ether  puts  the  same  in  action  ?  This
hypothesis  seems  to  us  so  reasonable  that  we  take  the  liberty  of  sub-
mitting it  for  the  judgment  of  the  learned." '

I  do  not  well  see,  I  confess,  the  advantage  of  this  transfer  to  the
ether  of  the  principle  of  nervic  and  of  general  organic  activity  ;  I  do
not  think  it  is  made  thereby  more  comprehensible.  So  many  things
are  saddled  upon  that  long-suffering  intermediary !  Mr.  Despine
attributes  to  the  ether  light,  heat,  electricity,  terrestrial  magnetism,
gravitation,  molecular  attraction,  chemical  affinity,  the  functions  of
organic  life  and  those  of  automatism,  finally,  the  functions  of  the
brain.  There  remains  little,  I  think,  to  dispose  of.  Yes,  there  is
Providence;  but  that  has  been  attended  to.  Spiller2  attributes  to
the  ether  not  only  all  these  things,  but  Godhead  too.  "  The  Ether  is
God,"  says  Spiller.  I  see  no  difficulty  in  going  so  far,  but  why  halt
there?  Let  us  call  light  the  Son  and  electricity  the  Holy  Ghost,
and  everything  will  be  explained.  The  only  thing  to  be  accounted
for  then  win  be  how  the  Ether  formed  organisms  and  watches  over
the  human  race.

Let  us  return  to  mental  suggestion.

"From  these  data,"  continues  Mr.  Despine,  "we  see  how  brain
activity,  which  governs  psychic  manifestations,  may,  under  certain
conditions  of  impressionableness  [what  are  they?  a  theory  of  trans-
mission ought  to  define  them],  be  echoed  in  an  effective  way  in  the
brain  of  another  individual  by  means  of  the  ether,  may  therein  de-
termine an  activity  of   the  same  kind,  and  therein  call  out  similar

1  "  Etude  Scientifique  sur  le  Somnambulisme,"  p.  285.

2  "  Gott  im  Lichte  der  Naturwissensdiaften."

3i4  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

instinctive  elements,  thoughts,  mental  representations  and  volitions.
Every  psychic  act,  unquestionably,  has  for  cause  a  cerebral  modifica-
tion of  vibrations,  a  special  mode  of  activity  in  the  gray-matter  cells
of  the  brain.  True,  these  vibrations  are  not  capable  of  impressing,
by  the  intermediation  of  the  ether,  similar  vibrations  on  neighboring
sound  [?]  brains.  Yet,  however  faint  these  vibrations,  they  neverthe-
less are  propagated  outwards,  though  they  hit  [frappent]  those  brains
without  effect.  But  suppose  that  among  these  brains  there  is  one
that  is  in  such  a  state  of  impressionableness  as  to  be  influenced  by
the  ether-vibrations  produced  by  the  activity  of  a  sound  brain,  and
suppose  that  these  vibrations  produce  in  this  impressionable  brain
identical  vibrations,  then  the  activity  of  this  organ  will  certainly  give
rise  to  similar  thoughts.  Thus  is  explained  naturally  thought-trans-
mission and  transmission  of  will  from  one  individual  to  another,  with-
out external  signs.  If  this  action  is  rare,  that  is  not  because  of  the
mode  of  action  of  the  ether  fluid  nor  of  the  laws  governing  that  mode
of  action — two  things  that  do  not  change  ;  it  is  because  of  the  special
state  in  which  the  nervous  system  may  be  influenced  by  this  faint
action — a  state  consisting  particularly  in  an  extreme  sensibility  of  that
system,  and  which  is  abnormal,  pathological  [?],  and,  fortunately,
rare.  The  action  of  the  agent  is  always  the  same ;  the  thing  that
varies  and  that  makes  the  phenomenon  rare  is  the  state  of  the  nerve-
organs  that  receive  the  action  of  the  agent."

True,  but  rather  vague.

"  By  this  cause  of  transmission  from  a  distance — a  transmission  that
is  undoubted,  and  which  has  to  be  held  in  reserve  simply  because  it
has  not  yet  found  popular  acceptance — is  explained  not  only  the
transmission  of  thought  in  somnambules,  but  also  the  fact  that  per-
sons whose  nervic  constitution  is  vigorous,  whose  cerebral  activity  is
energetic,  and  whose  will  is  strong,  are  better  magnetizers  than  per-
sons of  feeble  constitution.  So,  too,  we  explain  nervic  contagion,
which  Bouchut '  believed  to  be  a  fact — a  contagion  that  under  certain

1  Here  is  a  significant  passage  from  this  eminent  observer  :  ' '  One  might  say  that
in  certain  cases,  notably  with  regard  to  convulsive  neuroses,  there  exists  a  direct
physical  action  of  the  patient  upon  the  man  in  health,  by  a  nervic  emanation  the  in-
fluence of  which  produces  at  a  distance  the  convulsive  state,  for  it  is  difficult  always  to
explain  the  fact  .by  imitation,  as  imitation  is  commonly  understood.  However  that
may  be,  contrariwise  to  what  we  see  in  other  modes  of  contagion  which  we  think  we
understand,  attributing  them  to  miasmata,  cholera  for  example,  .we  know  nothing  of
the  cause  of  epidemic  neuroses,  as  chorea  or  hysteria  ;  we  know  no  more  about  their
contagional  principle,  if  so  be  that  there  is  one,  than  we  do  about  the  vehicle  in  which
it  is  conveyed.  It  is  easy  to  frame  hypotheses  about  it,  but  impossible  to  demonstrate
the  nature  of  the  contagion  principle.  .  .  .  The  action  of  this  nervic  contagion
is  exceedingly  powerful  and  almost  without  bounds.  It  acts  upon  men  and  upon
animals,  at  every  period  of  life,  but  particularly  in  youth,  and  'its  influence  is  greater
on  woman  than  on  man.     It  shares  at  once  the  properties  of  contagion,  in  that  there

HYPOTHESIS  OF  A   UNIVERSAL  FLUID.  315

conditions  propagates  afar  the  phenomena  somatic  and  psychic  that
characterize  the  different  epidemic  insanities  ;  so  we  explain  moral
contagion,  as  also  the  ascendant  that  strong  minds  exercise  over
weak."  [But  if  they  "hit  without  effect"  sound  brains,  how  can  the
vibrations  of  the  ether  transmit  all  this?]  "So  we  explain  why  the
processes  of  magnetization — passes  made  whether  in  contact  or  at  a
distance — are  able  to  produce  the  different  phenomena  called  mag-
netic. So  we  explain  why  it  is  that  the  organs  that  have  been
rendered  highly  impressionable  by  disease,  and  the  organs  best  sup-
plied with  ganglia  and  nerves,  as  the  head,  epigastrium,  neck,  arms,
finger-tips,  are  the  parts  most  readily  impressed  by  passes  "  [but  then
it  is  the  number  of  nerve  fibers  that  explains  all  this,  not  the  ether
theory].  "  Finally,  so  we  explain  the  very  remarkable  action  of  certain
individuals'  will  upon  other  individuals,  without  any  outward  sign —
an  effect  that  we  see  exhibited  very  strikingly  in  the  case  of  Castellan,
condemned  at  the  assizes  of  Draguignan  "  (227).

A  little  farther  on  the  author  gives  as  the  cause  of  this  special
impressionableness  of  mentally-suggestionable  subjects,  "  neuropathic
and  hysteric  affections  and  anaemia."

It  is  usual  for  hypnotizers  to  confound  these  conditions  with  hyp-
notic sensibility,  which  is  a  primordial  character  independent  of  all
disease.  A  person  may  be  eminently  sensitive  and  yet  entirely
healthy.  Only  it  is  easier  for  a  hypnotizable  person  to  become  hys-
terical than  for  another  person  ;  or  at  least  in  the  case  of  the  former
the  hysteria  assumes  the  convulsional  character  of  the  major  hysteria.
Neuropathies  generally  have  no  greater  sensibility  than  healthy
persons.  Among  the  patients  under  the  care  of  Dr.  Aug.  Voisin  at
the  Salpetriere,  Paris,  we  found  but  28  per  cent,  sensitive :  among
persons  in  health  the  proportion  is  30  per  cent.  As  for  anaemia
(another  error  propagated  by  Prof.  Heidenhain  ! )  it  is  rather  an  un-
favorable condition  :  at  all  events,  an  anaemic  brain  is  not  necessarily
more  impressionable  than  an  hyperaemic  one  ;  I  am  inclined  to  hold

that  it  is  less.

Mr.    Despine    closes   with    the    following   reflection  :    "  If    neither

nervic  fluid-nor  magnetic  fluid  intervenes  in  the  phenomena  of  animal

is  apparently  a  contagional  agent,  and  of  imitation  by  reason  of  its  moral  and  mental
character."     (Bouchut,  "  De  la  Contagion  Nerveuse,"  etc.,  p.  14.     1862.)

I  quote  the  above  passage  from  J.  Rambossom's  "  Phenomenes  Nerveux,  Intel-
lectuels,  et  Moraux,  leur  Transmission  par  Contagion,"  pp.  200,  201.  Paris,  1883.
This  author  does  not  speak  of  mental  suggestion,  but  he  formulates  a  law  of  the
transmission  of  expressive  motion  {inouvement  exp7-essif)  in  the  following  terms  :  "A
cerebral  or  psychic  motion  may,  in  traversing  different  media,  became  purely  physio-
logical, then  physical,  once  more  physiological,  and  finally  cerebral  or  psychic,  with-
out changing  its  nature,  i.  e  ,  while  still  retaining  the  power  of  reproducing  all  the
phenomena  that  are  appurtenant  to  it "  (p.  187).  This  law  may  be  regarded  as  the
generalized  formula  of  psycho-physical  theories.     See  the  next  chapter.

3i6  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

magnetism  so-called,  as  the  old  theory  had  it,  the  universal  fluid  does
positively  intervene,  if  not  as  the  direct  cause  of  the  phenomena,
then  at  least  as  the  agent  for  transmitting  the  mode  of  activity  of
one  person's  nervous  system  to  the  nervous  system  of  another
person."

In  short,  between  the  theory  of  Mr.  Despine  and  that  of  Mesmer,
which  he  knows  not,  there  are  only  a  few  differenced  of  detail,  to  the
advantage  of  the  latter  if  I  am  not  mistaken.

Mesmer  held,  like  Spencer,  that  the  particles  of  a  given  matter  are
affected  principally  by  particles  having  like  motions,  and,  guided  by
this  thought,  he  conceived  a  series  of  motions  of  progressive  sub-
tility,  and  a  series  of  states  of  matter  of  progressive  rarefaction —
solid,  liquid,  gaseous,  etheric,  more  subtile  still,  the  state  of  the  uni-
versal fluid  or  primordial  matter,  and  that  too,  presents  degrees,  but
to  us  they  are  unknown.  In  short,  he  made  a  division  of  Nature's
work,  and  distinguished  the  universal  fluid,  which  he  regarded  as  the
medium  of  life-vibrations,  from  the  ether,  to  which  he  assigned
mainly  the  light-vibrations.  In  sooth  we  know  nothing  about  this
whole  organization,  but  as  the  matter  is  entirely  under  our  own  con-
trol, we  can  allow  ourselves  the  luxury  of  several  series  ;  that  is  at
least  fairer  than  to  lay  the  whole  burden  upon  the  back  of  one  fluid.
Then,  I  believe  that  there  are  in  nature  no  absolute  limits,  and  I
prefer  Mesmer's  graduation  to  the  fluid,  doubtless  imponderable,  of
Mr.  Despine,  that  is  to  say,  of  the  majority  of  modern  physicists.
That  fluid,  which  is  but  an  absolute  negation  of  "  ponderable  "  mat-
ter, constitutes  a  species  of  matter  absolutely  the  reverse  of  every-
thing we  know  of  ordinary  matter,  and,  let  us  say  it  frankly,  incon-
sistent with  common  sense.  The  particles  of  ordinary  matter  attract
one  another,  those  of  the  ether  repel,  and  so  on.  It  is  a  tissue  of
phantasy.  The  ether  is  an  imponderable  fluid.  But  if  "  fluid  "  means
anything,  then  "  imponderable  fluid "  is  nons_ense.  A  fluid,  that  is,
something  that  can  flow,  must  be  impelled  by  something,  and  conse-
quently must  weigh  upon  something.  Again,  the  molecules  of  the
ether,  we  are  told,  are  attracted  by  ordinary  matter,  and  when  one
body  is  attracted  by  another  body,  it  weighs  upon  it.  Then,  the
ether  cannot  fill  all  space,  precisely  because  it  is  rarefied.  Finally,  if
this  is  to  explain  for  us  attraction  and  ponderability,  it  cannot  itself
be  either  ponderable  or  imponderable,  since  it  is  only  by  a  relation
between  it  and  ordinary  matter  that  these  qualities  are  manifested.

In  a  word,  I  understand  the  necessity  of  a  gas  more  rarefied  than
the  gases  we  now  know,  i.  e.,  more  rarefied  than  hydrogen  (there
are  perhaps  many  such,  for  all  I  know);  but  I  do  not  understand  a
matter  that  is  not  matter,  a  rarefied  body  that  does  away  with  vacu-
um, a  deus  ex  machina  explaining  everything,  himself  incomprehen-
sible.    I  prefer  my  ignorance  to  such  science.     And  I  beg  the  mathe-

PSYCHO-PHYSICAL   TRANSMISSION.  3.7

maticians  not  to  imagine  that  they  can  discover  anything  outside  of
the  relations  founded  on  experience.  A  psychologist  can  understand
this.  He  can  value  as  highly  as  you  please  the  four,  five,  or  n  dimen-
sions shown  him  by  means  of  abstract  symbols,  but  he  confesses
frankly  that  three  dimensions  he  can  indeed  imagine  for  himself,  but
no  more.  Were  Zollner  still  alive,  he,  no  doubt,  would  explain
thought-transmission  by  saying  that  it  takes  place  across  the  fourth
dimension,  and  we  should  have  one  theory  additional.

In  the  lack  of  that,  it  only  remains  -that  we  mention  one  theory
more,  and  that  simply  in  order  to  make  a  transition  from  the  fore-
going hypothesis  to  our  own.  This  transition  we  find  in  Puys^gur's
theory.

CHAPTER  VI.

THE    HYPOTHESIS    OF    A    PSYCHO-PHYSICAL    TRANSMISSION.

THE  sympathetic  wizard  {sorrier)  of  Busancy,  who  was  so  deeply
interested  in  mental  suggestion,  is  worthy  of  mention  here.  He
was  a  soldier,1  and  disposed  to  cut  the  knot  of  a  problem.  The  series
of  Mesmer's  universal  fluid  had  some  difficulty  in  effecting  a  lodgment
in  Puysegur's  cranium,  but  he  was  a  marquis  all  too  courteous  to  bear
a  grudge  against  his  master  on  that  score.  Rather  does  he  charge
himself  with  incapacity  for  metaphysics,  and  confess  that,  after
having  for  two  months  attended  Dr.  Mesmer's  theoretic  course,  he
knew  about  as  much  of  magnetism  as  before  (p.  30).  But  theory
mattered  little  to  him.  "  Increase  the  number  of  experiments,"  says
he,  "  and  you  will  come  upon  a  theory ;  else  you  will  lose  your  time.
Had  we  been  obliged,  in  order  to  recognize  the  well-known  phenomena
of  electricity,  of  the  magnet,  and  of  galvanism,  to  wait  till  we  should
agree  as  to  their  causes,  there  is  reason  to  believe  that  we  should
to-day  have  neither  lightning-rods,  nor  compass,  nor  Voltaic  pile.  Is
there  an  electric  fluid,  a  magnetic  fluid,  a  galvanic  fluid  ? "  (p.  26.)
He  does  not  know  whether  there  is  or  not ;  but  what  he  does  know  is,
that  in  order  to  act  upon  Victor  or  Magdeleine  he  did  not  need  to
have  any  knowledge  of  poles,  or  even  to  believe  in  the  existence  of  a
fluid.     "  So  I  took  care  to  choose  rather  a  certitude  gained  through

'  Puysegur  was  marechal  de  camp  of  the  royal  artillery  corps.  The  quotations  that
follow  are  from  the  work  published  in  1807,  entitled  "  Du  Magnetisme  Animal  Con-
sidere  dans  ses  Rapports  avec  diverses* Branches  de  la  Physique  Generate. "

318  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

experience  than  the  hypothetic  probability  of  a  magnetic  fluid,  the
existence  of  which  no  physicist  has  ever  been  able  to  verify"  (p.  35).

Then  he  passes  in  review  the  phenomena  of  heat,  of  fire,  of  the
electric  machine,  of  light,  of  the  Voltaic  pile  and  of  galvanism,  of  the
magnet,  and  of  the  sorciers,1  and  by  a  series  of  comparisons  and
reflections  of  the  utmost  lucidity,  comes  to  the  conclusion — quite
opposed  to  the  dominant  ideas  of  his  time — that  heat  is  but  the  effect,
perceptible  to  the  senses,  of  the  transmission  of  a  motion  (p.  37)  ;  and  that,
consequently,  "  caloric  has  no  existence  "  (p.  38)  ;  that  the  cause  of
the  magnetic  properties  of  the  loadstone  results  solely  from  a  "  tonic
inner  motion  {tnouvement  tonique  et  intestin)  in  the  iron,  of  a  kind
much  like  that  recognized  as  existing  in  the  Voltaic  pile"  (p.  71).
Ampere's  theory  !     Finally,  that  it  is  all  "transmission  of  motion."

Puysegur  is  incomparable  in  his  deductions  from  an  experiment  in
thought  transference  compared  to  an  experiment  with  an  electrostatic
machine.  He  poses  two  problems  :  To  light  at  a  distance  a  bit  of
amadou  by  the  aid  of  the  electric  spark  ;  and  to  act  mentally  from  a
distance  upon  his  brother,  who  is  at  Versailles.  "  I  performed  an
action,  that  of  turning  the  crank  of  the  machine,  I  not  stirring  from
where  I  stood  ;  the  action  of  necessity  had  its  indispensable  result,
which  is,  to  communicate  motion  ;  from  this  I  concluded  that  no  bit
of  amadou  in  the  world  can  be  set  on  fire  save  by  the  transmission  of  a
communicated  motion'"  (p.  46).  "  My  brother  is  four  leagues  away,  at
Versailles.  Let  us  see  how  I  may  transmit  motion  to  him.  Nothing
can  be  simpler.  I  recall  his  image  and  I  think  of  him.  '  Mysticism
and  witchcraft  ?  '  By  no  means  :  it  is  the  sanest  kind  of  physics.  Is
not  every  human  act  preceded  by  the  volition  to  execute  it  ?  Is  not
the  volition  itself  preceded  by  the  thought  that  it  can  be  carried  out  ?
That  thought  then  is  the  motor  ;  hence  it  is  as  regards  me  what  the
glass  plate  is  as  regards  the  electric  machine.  '  And  you  think  you
can  produce  some  effect  upon  your  brother  by  the  action  of  your
mind  ? '  Certainly  not.  He  would  in  that  case' be  less  sensible  of  the
action  of  my  mind  than  you,  not  being  insulated,  would  be  of  the
action  of  the  revolving  plate  of  an  electric  machine  "  (p.  53).

So,  then,  one  must  be  "insulated"  in  order  to  feel  a  transmission  of
motion  otherwise  imperceptible.  Imagine  a  series  of  ivory  balls  sus-
pended by  threads  and  contiguous  to  one  another.  If  I  hit  the  first,
the  last  that  very  instant  leaps  out.  If  I  strike  the  end  of  a  bar  of
steel  with  a  hammer,  it  becomes  magnetized.  The  particles  cannot
leap  out,  nevertheless  they  are  put  in  motion  ;  this' "  inner  motion  "
{tnouvement  intestin)  is  accelerated  and  regulated  in  some  unknown
way,  and  lo  !    the  bar  is  magnetized.     In  like  manner,  by  producing  an

1  ProbaDly  practicers  of  "Bletonism,"  named  from  Bleton,  a  Frenchman,  who
claimed  to  possess  the  faculty  of  perceiving  subterranean  waters  by  sensation. —
Translator.

PSYCHO-PHYSICAL  TRANSMISSION.  319

inward  shock  of  rny  will  {en  effectuant  un  choc  interieur  de  ma  volonti),
I  transmit  motion  that  may  be  reverberated  by  a  being  at  a  distance

(PP.  33,  52)-

This,  it  is  seen,  is  Mesmer's  theory  simplified  and  popularized,  minus

the  universal  fluid,  which  Puysegur  cares  little  about,  and  minus  the

remarkable  precision  of  the  founder  of  magnetism.

This  theory  was  lately  propounded  by  Dr.  Perronet  under  the  name
of  undulationism.     He  formulates  it  very  briefly,  thus  :

"Suggestion  is  a  phenomenon  whereby  an  individual  transmits  to
one  or  to  many  other  individuals  his  own  thoughts,  whether  conscious
or  unconscious,  by  materializing  them  in  the  forms  of  the  objects
represented  by  them,  and  passing  through  this  series  of  interme-
diate phenomena  :

"  1.  Nerve-undulations  of  central  origin  and  centrifugal  in  direction,
which  undulations  are  produced  by  an  unknown  mechanism  in  the
organs  that  serve  as  a  ground  for  his  psychic  faculties  ;

"2.  Undulations  at  the  periphery  of  his  body,  fibrillary  contrac-
tions or  other  kinetic  phenomena  that  are  usually  unconscious  ;

"  3.  Undulations  produced  in  the  cosmic  medium  by  the  foregoing
motions  ;

"  4.  Shock  to  the  nerve-extremities  of  the  recipient  individuals
from  these  cosmic  undulations,  which  produce  in  the  psychic  centers
of  those  recipients  the  final  undulatory  phenomenon,  translated  by  the
real  perception  of  the  object  signified  by  the  thought."  '

And  now  let  us  put  all  these  theories  aside  and  attend  only  to  the
facts.  I  will  endeavor  to  make  them  intelligible  as  far  as  may  be  in
the  present  stage  of  our  researches.  And  you,  gentle  reader,  keep  an
eye  upon  me,  lest  I  broach  some  absurdity — a  thing  quite  possible  in
so  perplexed  a  question,  and  that  happens  oft  to  those  who  do  not  spare
others.

1  Claude  Perronet,  "  Du  Magnetisme  Animal,"  pp.  60,  61.      1884.

32o  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

CHAPTER  VII.

THE    ELEMENTS    OF    A    SCIENTIFIC    EXPLANATION.

BE  it  observed  at  the  outset  :
i.  That  the  suggestion  called  mental  is  a  highly  complex   phe-
nomenon, which  for  that  reason  cannot  be  explained  by  one  simple
principle ;

2.  That  even  with  regard  to  a  determinate  and  isolated  fact,  the
theory  must  necessarily  be  bifarious :  psychological  and  physical  ;

3.  That  in  all  phenomena  of  this  sort  we  must  consider,  on  the  one
hand,  the  conditions  pertaining  to  the  operator,  on  the  other  the  con-
ditions pertaining  to  the  subject.

This  stated,  let  us  have  an  understanding  as  to  the  general  purport
of  a  scientific  explanation.

Explaining  means  nothing  else  but  reducing  the  unknown  to  the
known  ;  and  there  is  but  one  way  of  doing  that,  to  wit,  by  pointing
out  the  conditions  on  which  the  phenomenon  appears,  and  without  which  it
cannot  appear.  That  is  all  that  one  can  do  ;  It  is  also  all  that  is  re-
quired. We  must  not  suffer  ourselves  to  be  under  the  illusion  that
adequate  knowledge  is  attainable  of  anything.  We  ascertain  the  con-
ditions of  phenomena,  we  state  these  as  well  as  may  be  in  laws  that
are  simply  a  generalization  of  our  observations  :  that  is  all.  That  is
the  whole  of  science.

If  we  would  define  the  conditions  of  a  phenomenon,  we  must  first
describe  it,  analyze  it,  so  as  to  circumscribe  its  contents  and  assign  it  a
suitable  place  among  other  phenomena.  This  we  have  endeavored  to
do  by  treating  separately  the  different  kinds  of  psycho-physical  trans-
mission. It  follows  that  mental  suggestion  proper  must  be  studied  in
connection  with  sundry  phenomena  of  physical  transmission,  which,
by  approaching  it  step  by  step,  elucidate  it.  Furthermore,  as  we
have  seen,  very  many  phenomena  that  have  been  attributed  to  physi-
cal or  mental  transmission,  are  only  facts  of  apparent  transmission.

This  apparent  transmission  may,  according  to  the  nature  of  the  case,
be  explained  :

1.  By  a  pre-established  harmony  between  two  associational  mechan-
isms mutually  independent,  but  depending  upon  a.  psychic  medium;

2.  By  a  presumption1  based  on  the  ordinary  sensations  of  sight,
hearing,  smell,  and  touch.

These  sensations,  which  betray  our  organic  or  our  psychic  state,
can  be  perceived  or  even  realized  by  the  subject  in  proportion  to :

1  On  the  part  of  the  subject.  From  the  sense-impressions  received  by  him  in
any  way  from  the  magnetizer  or  the  bystanders,  he  infers  the  purport  of  the  intended
mental  suggestion. —  Translator.

RLEMEN  TS  OF  A  SCI  EN  TIFIC  EX  PI  ANA  Tl ON.     3  2 1

1.  His  unconscious   experience,  a   faculty   belonging   to   us   all,   and
which  tells  especially  when  conscious  reflection  is  in  abeyance  ;

2.  His  ideorganic  associations ;  these  may  reveal  the  signification  of
influences  more  or  less  unnoticed  in  the  normal  state ;

3.  His  ideoplasty,  which  realizes  the  thought  suggested  by  uncon-
scious* experience  and  by  ideorganic  associations  ;

4.  His  hypnotic  and  magnetic  training,  which  facilitates  the  co-
operation of  all  the  foregoing  agencies.

It  follows  that  apparent  transmission  will  be  favored  :

1 .  By  exaltation  of  the  senses  ;

2.  By  exaltation  of  the  intelligence  ;

3.  By  isolation  of  the  senses  and  the  intelligence,  which  allows  the
whole  power  of  attention  to  be  concentrated  in  one  chosen  direction.

But  this  whole  theory  falls  short  when  we  have  to  explain  the
phenomena  wherein  the  involuntary  tokens  furnished  by  the  principle
of  the  expressional  exterior atio n  of  every  state,  psychic  or  organic,  no
longer  come  into  play.  Unless  we  are  ready  to  extend  sensorial
perceptivity  beyond  all  reasonable  bounds,  and  to  make  it  as  incom-
prehensible as  the  phenomenon  of  transmission  itself,  we  must  have
recourse  to  another  principle,  which  shall  explain  for  us,  not  apparent
transmission,  but  true  transmission.

True  transmission  means  that  the  state  a  of  brain  A  is  reproduced
by  brain  B,  without  the  intermediation  of  signs,  whether  visual,
auditive,  olfactive,  or  tactual.

Of  course  in  practice  these  two  kinds  of  transmission  must  com-
monly be  confounded,  and  only  in  experiments  made  expressly  for
the  purpose  and  at  a  certain  distance  can  we  be  sure  that  true  trans-
mission alone  is  in  play.

Though  thought  is  purely  a  phenomenon  of  the  brain,  in  the  sense
that  it  cannot  be  produced  by  any  other  organ,  still  it  is  never  restricted
to  the  brain  alone  as  regards  the  manifestations  that  accompany  it.
There  is  no  thought  without  expression  ;  we  might  even  say  with  Sietsh-
enof  that  there  is  no  thought  without  muscular  contraction  ;  but  I
prefer  the  first  formula,  which  is  the  more  general  one,  inasmuch  as
it  includes  also  the  secretions,  the  emanations,  the  direct  production  of
heat  and  electricity.  One  may  stand  absolutely  motionless  and  think
of  all  manner  of  things,  yet  on  analyzing  our  attitude  attentively
we  find  :

1.  That  if  we  are  reflecting  with  any  degree  of  intensity,  there  is
always  an  inchoation  of  speech  ;  the  larynx,  the  tongue,  even  the
maxilla  executes  slight  movements  ;'

2.  That  if  our  thinking  presents  a  visual  rather  than  an  auditive
character,  then  the  eye,  though  shut,  follows  the  movements  of  the

1  I  called  attention  to  this  fact  in  my  work  on  Method,  "  Methode  des  Recherches
Psychologiques,"  1869.

322  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

■

imaginary  objects  and  the  pupil  is  dilated  or  contracted  according  to
the  brightness  or  the  remoteness  of  those  objects ;

3.  That  the  respiration  is  governed,  accelerated  or  slowed,  accord-
ing to  the  course  of  our  thoughts  ; '

4.  That  in  the  muscles  of  the  members  there  is  always  an  internal
contraction  answering  to  the  unexecuted  movements  we  think  about,
or  appropriate  to  the  sense-images  in  our  mind  ;

5.  That  all  emotive  states  are  accompanied  by  a  corresponding
change  in  the  circulation  ;

6.  That  a  concentration  of  the  will  is  reflected  in  a  corresponding
contraction  of  the  diaphragm  ;

7.  That  all  these  phenomena  must  determine  a  modification  in
the  functions  of  the  vegetative  life,  in  the  exchange  of  matter,  and
consequently  in  the  production  of  the  various  secretions  and  emana-
tions ;

8.  That  all  psychic  work  determines  a  production  of  heat,  and  that
probably  there  is  a  direct  transformation  of  psychic  work  into  radiant
heat.

The  effect  of  these  actions  cannot  be  restricted  to  the  surface  of
our  body,  and,  consequently,  even  at  a  certain  distance,  these  changes
may  imperceptibly  influence  the  senses  of  some  other  organism  and
make  themselves  felt,  more  or  less  distinctly,  by  an  exceptionally
impressionable  organism.

By  having  regard  to  but  one  class  of  sensations  one  may  reach
partial,  incomplete  explanations.     One  might,  for  instance,  say  :

1.  That  the  subject  reads  the  operator's  thought  in  the  visual  pa-
thognomic signs,  and  that  therefore  the  theory  of  mental  suggestion
resolves  itself  into  a  theory  of  an  exalted  visual  sense  ;

2.  That  as  thought  is  habitually  expressed  in  speech,  and  as  the
subject  may  present  an  extraordinary  hyperacusia  (be  it  said  in  pa-
renthesis that  this  hyperacusia  never  extends  more  than  some  yards'
distance  for  words  really  pronounced),  we  may  regard  mental  sugges-
tion as  an  exalted  audition  of  the  inward  speech  and  of  the  respiration-
sounds  ;

3.  That  inasmuch  as  it  has  been  proved  that  emotions  are  accom-
panied by  a  modification  of  the  cutaneous  odor,  we  may  magnify  the
value  of  these  indicia  and  hold  that  every  thought  that  is  in  any
degree  concentrated  and  persistent,  especially  the  thought  of  ap-
proval or  of  negation  (and  perception  of  these  two  thoughts  may
greatly  assist  a  subject  who  seeks  to  execute  an  order  given  him),
that  each  such  thought  is  characterized  by  a  perceptible  olfactive
modification  ;

4.  That  the  heat  given  out  because  of  a  mental  effort,  as  modified
by  the   approach  of  the   operator's  body  and   by  his  gestures   (air-

1  See  my  work  "  Bedingungen  des  Bewusstwerdens."     Leipsic,  1874.

ELEMENTS  OF  A  SCIENTIFIC  EXP  LAN  A  TION.     3  2  3

currents),  may  guide  the  subject,  may,  in  particular,  enable  him  to
perceive  the  inception  and  the  direction  of  the  action,  and  may  thus
account,  upon  grounds  purely  of  caloric  action,  for  influences  said  to
be  mental ;

5.  That  in  experiments  with  direct  contact  all  the  expressive  vibra-
tions and  tensions  of  the  muscles  may  serve  as  unmistakable  pointers
to  an  interpretation  of  our  thoughts :  this  would  be  a  mechanical
theory  of  suggestion  ;

6.  That  as  the  phenomenon  of  reflex  attraction,  based  on  an  exalted
cutaneous  sensibility,  can  be  developed  very  highly  so  that  the  sub-
ject shall  be  attracted  by  gestures  that  are  hardly  made  at  all,  one
might  adopt  a  purely  attractional  theory  of  suggestion,  and  say  that
all  the  movements  mentally  ordered  are  executed  because  of  a  reflex
physical  attraction  j

7.  That  the  phenomenon  of  the  imitation  of  movements  being  a
common  one  and  capable  of  being  largely  developed,  we  may  suppose
that  if,  even  with  the  eyes  closed,  the  subject  can  repeat  the  move-
ments of  the  operator,  the  same  phenomenon,  in  a  slightly  higher
degree,  might  be  presented  with  regard  even  to  incomplete  move-
ments ;  that  would  be  a  purely  mutational  theory.

All  these  considerations  taken  separately,  or  even  taken  together,
can  apply  only  to  a  certain  number  of  facts  ;  but  we  have  to  bear  them
in  mind  wherever,  according  to  the  case  emergent,  any  one  or  more
of  the  principles  stated  can  fairly  be  appealed  to.

A  few  controlled  experiments  alone  can  decide  whether  or  not  they
apply  in  any  given  case.

In  general,  as  regards  experiments  made  from  anear,  it  appears
certain  that  there  is  a  graduation  of  the  facility  with  which  they  may
be  performed.     The  scale  is  about  as  follows  :

1.  Experiments  made  with  contact,  gestures,  and  looks;

2.  Experiments  made  with  gestures  and  looks;

3.  Experiments  made  without  gestures,  with  looks  ;

4.  Experiments  made  without  contact,  gestures,  or  looks.
Starting  from  this  last  degree,  the  influence,  up  to   an   unknown

limit,  no  longer  decreases  with  the  distance.  If  action  can  be  exerted
from  the  farther  end  of  a  room  unbeknown  to  the  subject,  it  can  be  exerted
equally  well  from  another  room,  from  another  house,  and  so  forth.

The  fact  that  a  small  distance  often  makes  a  noticeable  difference,
and  that  a  great  distance  makes  no  perceptible  difference,  proves  :

1.  That  in  certain  cases  contact,  gestures,  and  looks  have  their  share
in  the  action  ;

2.  That  neither  this  action  of  theirs  nor  the  action  of  olfactive  sen-
sations suffices  to  explain  certain  other  cases.

Furthermore,  contact  is  very  often  indifferent,  gestures  useless,  and
looks  exert  no  distinct  action  ;  therefore,  if  fhese   agents  have  any

324  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

action  at  a  distance,  it   must  be  a  subjective  one  :  to  wit,  it  simply
helps  the  operator  to  concentrate  his  thought.

On  the  side  of  the  operator  the  conditions  have  been  very  little
studied.     But  it  is  probable  :

i.  That  there  are  personal  differences  ;

2.  That  these  differences  may  be  due  not  only  to  the  degree  of
thought-intensity,  but  also  to  the  nature  of  the  thought  itself,  accord-
ing as  it  is  visual,  or  auditive,  or  motorial ;

3.  That  some  account  has  to  be  taken  of  a  sort  of  accord,  of  con-
cordance between  the  natures  of  the  two  intelligences ;

4.  That  excessive  will-effort  impairs  the  definiteness  of  the  trans-
mission, without  much  enhancing  its  intensity  ;

5.  That  strong,  persistent,  prolonged  thinking,  or  a  thought  repeated
for  a  longer  or  shorter  time,  constitutes  a  condition  in  the  highest
degree  favorable ;

6.  That  any  distraction  that  causes  the  thought  to  disappear  for  a
moment,  or  that  makes  it  cease  to  be  isolated,  seems  eminently
unfavorable  to  the  mental  action  ;

7.  That,  nevertheless,  thoughts  that  are  not  intense,  and  even
thoughts  that  are  at  the  moment  unconscious,  may  be  transmitted
involuntarily  ;

8.  That  the  muscular  efforts  that  always  accompany  an  exertion  of
will  are  more  or  less  indifferent  ;  but  that  the  muscle-expression  of
the  operator  may  be  useful,  subjectively,  by  reason  of  the  habitude
that  connects  thought  with  these  expressional  signs.

It  follows  from  these  considerations  that  the  operator  should  insist
less  upon  the  "  I  will  it  "  than  upon  the  content  of  that  willing  ;  and
hence  it  is  probable  that,  properly  speaking,  it  is  not  the  strong  will
that  helps  suggestion  so  much  as  the  clear  thinking.

As  regards  the  subject,  to  find  the  bearings  in  this- question  we  may
consider  one  after  another  the  four  principal  states  :

1.  In  the  state  of  profound  aideia,  transmission  is  never  immediate,
but  it  may  sometimes  be  latent  ;

2.  In  the  state  of  nascent  monoideism,  it  may  be  immediate  and
perfect ;

3.  In  the  state  of  passive  polyideism,  it  may  be  either  mediate  l  or
immediate,  but  always  weaker  ;

4.  In  the  state  of  active  polyideism,  the  conditions  are  complex,  and
they  must  be  considered  separately  :

a.  Transmission  may  be  direct  if  the  subject  helps  by  voluntary
self-absorption  in  a  concentration  of  mind  mo/e  or  less  monoideic  :

1  Mediate — with  a  lapse  of  time  intervening  between  the  mental  action  and  the
action  of  the  subject. —  Translator.

ELEMENTS  OF  A  SCJEN TIFIi '  EXPLANA  T/ON.     325

he  lends  himself  to  the  action,  he  listens  mentally,  he  seeks,  sometimes
he  finds.

/;.  It  may  be  indirect,  that  is,  latent,  this  time  also  with  some  con-
currence on  the  part  of  the  subject  ;  this  case  seems  more  frequent.

c.  Finally,  it  may,  in  exceptional  instances,  be  either  mediate  or
immediate,  even  without  the  subject's  being  advised  beforehand  of
the  action.  Here  we  touch  the  question  of  mental  action  upon  a  sub-
ject in  the  waking  state,  and  that  calls  for  some  explanations.  The
somnambulic  state  of  active  polyideia  differs  from  the  waking  state
only  by  two  characters,  of  which  one  is  absolute,  the  other  relative  :

1.  The  absolute,  i.  c,  the  constant,  necessary  difference  is  quantita-
tive only:  waking  is  a  state  mdre  polyideic  than  somnambulism.   In  the
latter  there  is  always  a  narrowing  of  the  psychic  field.     In  the  waking
state,  despite   the   apparent    monoideism  which  has    deceived  many
psychologists  (Bain,  Wundt,  Morell,  Horwicz,  et  a/.),  our  thought  is
always  very  complex  ;  we  have  simultaneously  a  multitude  of  con-
tending sensations,   and   a   multitude   of  recollections  that  are  ever
striving  to  free  themselves  from  the  pressure  of  the  dominant  ideas
(Herbart).     In  somnambulism  their  number  is  much  smaller  ;  most  of
the  usual  sensations  are  wanting  (anaesthesia)  ;  most  of  our  recollec-
tions are  paralyzed  ;  but  what  may  lead  one  astray,  and  what  (despite
the   general   narrowing  of   the   psychic  field)   constitutes  a  peculiar
character  of  this  state  is,  that  the  sensations  and  recollections  belong-
ing to  a  given  idea  may  be  more  numerous  in  somnambulism  than  in
the  waking  state  ;  the  perception  is  more  detailed,  though  only  with
regard  to  one  idea,  and  the  associational  reproduction  more  complete,
though  always  strictly  in  one  direction.     Hence  it  follows  that  the
somnambulic  state  of  polyideia  is  more  favorable  to  mental  sugges-
tion, if  the  subject  is  fore-advised  of  the  action  j  but  if  he  is  not,  then  the
waking   state   will    have    the    preference.     It    is    easier   to    influence
unbeknownst  a  waking  subject  than  one -clearly  in  the  state  of  active
somnambulism.     In  the  latter  case   the  subject  is  more  absorbed  and
hence  less  accessible.     The  normal  state  is  in  general  less  sensitive  be-
cause of  the  resistance  of  a  multitude  of  thoughts  that  are  struggling
for  life,  but  i't  is  less  concentrated,  more  elastic,  more  diversified,  and
hence  more  accessible.    •  What  I  meant  to  express  when  I  said  "  more
elastic,"  is,  that  in  the  normal  state  our  thoughts  launch  out  more
freely  right  and  left,  without  losing  the  clue  that  guides  them  ;   but  I
used  the  term  chiefly  because  of  this  peculiarity — one  that  is  of  inter-
est for  us  on  other  accounts — that  in  fact  the  normal  state  is  not  a
state  out  and  out  polyideic  ;  it  is  rather  a  fluctuating  [mobile)  aggre-
gate of  all  possible  states,  with  preponderance  of  polyideia.     There
are  unquestionably  moments  of  monoideism  in  its  every  grade,  and
even  intervals  strictly  monoideic.     Only,  all  these  phases  are  com-
mingled,  following  one   another   with   inconceivable   rapidity.       But

326  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

that  is  what  makes  this  state  amenable  to  faint  influences,  particu-
larly in  hypnotizable  subjects,  whose  minds  are  generally  character-
ized by  a  constant  tendency  to  monoideism.

2.  The  second  difference  between  the  somnambulic  state  and  the
normal  is  only  a  relative  one,  but  it  is  of  still  greater  importance  for
the  matter  in  hand.  It  is  a  relative  one  in  that  it  does  not  exist  in  the
hyptiotized :  a  hypnotized  subject  is  not  in  rapport  with  any  one.  It  is
relative  also  from  another  point  of  view,  in  that,  though  in  magnetic
somnambulism  there  is  isolation  of  the  subject,  the  isolation  differs
only  in  degree  from  that  of  a  normal  state  in  which  suggestion  can
succeed.  In  fact  it  never  does  succeed — at  least  immediate  suggestion
does  not — in  a  normal  state  in  which  there  is  no  trace  of  rapport.  This
rapport  must  be  established,  either  by  repeated  magnetizations,  by  a
tie  of  blood,  of  sympathy,  of  daily  association,  or  by  some  exceptional
influence  of  the  moment.

This  detail  brings  us  to  the  very  heart  of  the  subject.  Rapport
being  a  conditio  sine  qua  non  of  distinct  mind  action,  let  us  strive  to
define  what  it  is.

As  we  have  already  observed  in  the  opening  of  this  study,  and  then
in  remarking  upon  Despine's  experiments,  the  nature  of  this  phenome-
non is  essentially  two-fold — psychic  and  physical.  We  already  know
the  psychic  elements,  which  are  the  predominant  ones  in  regard  of  the
frequency  of  their  plain  manifestation,  but  we  have  now  to  analyze
the  physical  cause  of  the  phenomena  of  rapport.

"There's  the  rub!"  Are  we  justified  in  asserting  that  "animal
magnetism  "  has  a  physical  cause  ?

Observe  in  passing  that,  considering  the  general  aspect  of  the  phe-
nomena hitherto  lumped  together  under  the  one  denomination  of
"  hypnotic  "  phenomena,  this  cause  is  not  necessary  save  for  certain
classes  of  facts  ;  the  rest  can  do  without  it.  But  that  does  not  remove
the  difficulty  :  it  remains,  though  in  shadow.  And  what  shocks  the
"  regulars  "  is,  that  this  physical  action  "  upsets  every  notion  of  phy-
siology."

"  I  never  could  understand,  "  says  Mr.  Brown-Sequard,  "  how  an
intelligent  man,  acquainted  with  the  ground  principles  of  physiology,
can  believe  in  such  transmission  (a  transmission  of  nerve-force  from
one  individual  to  another),  seeing  that  the  student  who  has  learned
ever  so  little  knows  how  vain,  after  a  motor  nerve  has  been  severed,
is  the  effort,  the  wish,  the  will  to  move  the  paralyzed  part  "l

I  should  not  like  to  pass  for  the  most  uninstructed  student,  still  less
should  I  care  to  set  up  as  teacher  of  my  honored  master,  to  whom  I
am  indebted  for  more  than  one  excellent  idea,  but — amicus  Plato,  magis
arnica  Veritas — I  venture  to  say  that  even  I  see  how  the  paralyzed  part
might  be  moved.

'  Preface  to  Simon's  French  translation  of  Braid's  "  Neurypnology."

ELEMENTS  OF  A  SCIENTIFIC  EXFLANA  TION.     327

The  will,  says  Mr.  Brown-Sequard,  cannot  reach  a  muscle  the  motor
nerve  of  which  is  severed,  whereas  it  seems  to  him  quite  natural  that
it  should  be  able  to  reach  a  muscle  whose  motor  nerve  is  not  severed.
Now  to  me  that  does  not  seem  natural  at  all.  I  agree  that  it  cannot
reach  a  muscle  whose  motor  nerve  is  severed,  but  at  the  same  time  I
do  not  believe  that  it  can  reach  a  muscle  whose  motor  nerve  remains
intact.  The  will  is  a  cerebral  phenomenon,  that  never  has  been  found
{constati}  outside  of  the  brain,  and  that  cannot  outstep  the  brain.  It
is  not  even  transmitted  to  the  motor  nerve  that  issues  from  the  brain
and  terminates  in  a  muscle.  So,  too,  the  mechanical  motion  of  a  muscle
is  not  transmitted  to  the  sensor  nerve  to  reach  the  brain,  but  it  may,  it
necessarily  must,  give  rise  to  a  molecular  current ;  that  current  is  trans-
mitted to  the  brain,  and  therein  calls  out  another  dynamic  phenomenon
the  nature  of  which  is  unknown,  but  which  we  distinguish  quite  clearly
as  sensation  or  idea.  It  is  the  same  with  the  will.  To  reach  a  muscle,
the  will  absolutely  requires  a  molecular  intermediary  which  shall
traverse  the  nerve,  and  it  is  entirely  true  that  this  intermediary  cannot
leap  over  where  the  nerve  is  cut  in  two.  Neither  can  a  telephonic
current,  though  less  capricious,  overleap  a  break  in  a  wire  :  the  tele-
phone will  be  dumb.  And  were  we  to  stand  still  at  this  experiment  we
should  be  fully  justified  in  saying  of  the  telephone  what  Mr.  Brown-
Sequard  says  of  the  muscle.

Fortunately,  our  science  does  not  stand  still  there.  Mr.  Brown-
Sequard,  in  proclaiming  two  indisputable  truths,  makes  two  mistakes.
The  two  truths  are  these  :

1.  Nerve-force  cannot  traverse  a  severed  nerve ;

2.  Nerve-iorce  cannot  pass  into  another  nervous  system.
Very  true ;  nor  do  I  believe  in  any  passage  of  any  nerve-fluid.

But  does  that  mean  that  nerve-force,  or  any  force  whatsoever,  acts
only  where  it  is,  and  that  its  action  is  absolutely  restricted  within  the
body  in  which  it  manifests  itself  visibly  ?

Here  the  error  begins.     It  is  twofold,  for —

1.  Such  force,  thus  absolutely  limited  to  any  material  point  what-
ever, does  not  exist ;

2.  If  it  did  exist,  the  most  fundamental  principles  of  physiology,
among  them  Mr.  Brown-Sequard's  principles  of  inhibition  and  of
dynamogeny,  would  be  upset.

The  normal  action  of  a  telephone  ceases  when  the  wire  is  broken.
It  is  equally  null  for  us  when,  though  the  wire  is  not  broken,  the
circuit  contains  only  one  telephone.  Is  it  possible  to  transmit  speech
with  one  telephone  ?  No  ;  and  yet  the  telephone  works.  The  whole
length  of  the  wire  is  traversed  by  a  current  which  is  not  speech  itself,
but  which  is  its  correlative,  though  it  is  dumb.

Take  another  telephone  having  also  a  closed  circuit,  and,  like  the
first,  dumb.     Bring  it  near  the  other,  or  only  near  the  wire  of  the

328  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

first  telephone,  or  even  simply  bring  the  wire  of  the  first  near  the  wire
of  the  second,  and  the  latter  will  talk,  will  reproduce  speech,  though
there  is  no  material  contact  between  the  two.  It  will  talk  by  induction.
It  is  this  transmission,  not  that  which  takes  place  between  muscle  and
brain,  that  corresponds  to  mental  transmission.  My  brain  does  not  act
upon  the  muscles  of  the  subject,  but  it  may  act  upon  his  brain.  If  instead
of  a  second  telephone  we  were  to  place  alongside  of  the  first  telephone
a  different  sort  of  instrument,  an  electroscope,  for  example,  there
would  be  no  result ;  but  we  must  not  by  any  means  infer  that  therefore
there  is  no  electric  action  all  around  the  telephone,  for  in  order  to  get
a  specific  action  we  must  employ  a  specific  instrument,  a  telephone
for  a  telephone,  a  brain  for  a  brain.

I  do  not  at  all  mean  to  strain  the  analogy;  comparison  is  not  proof  ;
and  were  there  not  other  evidences  of  inductive  physical  action  this
would  be  of  no  avail.  But  the  case  is  not  so.  Apart  from  all  theory,
facts  compel  us  to  admit  a  physical  action  :  we  should  have  to  admit
it  even  were  there  no  other  analogous  phenomenon.

Here  are  the  facts  in  brief.  Of  course  I  cannot  here  prove  their
reality,  but  shall  merely  mention  them,  believe  them  who  will  :

i.  Sometimes  the  magnetized  subject  discerns  the  presence  of  his
magnetizer  independently  of  the  ordinary  sensations.  His  touch  he
distinguishes  from  that  of  others — distinguishes  it  even  though  it  be
applied  by  means  of  an  inert  body  (a  rod,  for  instance),  which  of  itself
cannot  influence  him  differently.  If,  therefore,  the  subject  distin-
guishes his  magnetizer's  touch  as  well  through  a  rod  as  directly,  it
must  be  that  there  exists  a  molecular  current  of  some  sort  peculiar  to
the  organism  of  the  magnetizer,  and  which  indicates  his  presence  in
much  the  same  way  that  a  galvanic  current,  through  the  intermedia-
tion of  a  wire  in  contact  with  us,  indicates  the  presence  of  a  pile.
The  objection  that  most  subjects  feel  nothing  of  this  action  is  of  no
weight,  for  so,  too,  with  a  current  from  a  we'ak  galvanic  element  we
shall  feel  nothing,  while  the  magnetic  needle  will  clearly  prove  its
presence,  and  with  a  current  weaker  still,  from  a  telephone  or  from  a
frog,  the  magnetic  needle  will  show  no  result  whatever  :  an  excep-
tionally sensitive  galvanometer  would  be  necessary  in  such  a  case.
Suppose  that  40  years  "ago,  when  Mr.  Du  Bois-Reymond  published  his
discoveries  in  electricity,  some  one  had  challenged  his  assertions,
saying  that  no  galvanometer  had  shown  the  presence  of  the  currents
he  declared  to  exist :  the  assertion  would  have  been  true,  but  never-
theless unjust,  for  at  that  time  Du  Bois-Reymond  alone  possessed  a
multiplier  capable  of  showing  their  presence.

2.  We  can  obtain  marked  results  of  a  therapeutic  kind  by  acting
without  contact  and  unbeknown  to  the  patients  operated  upon,
sleeping  children,  for  example.  Hence,  there  is  an  inductive  action
that  overpasses  the  superficies  of  the  body.

ELEMENTS  OF  A  SCIENTIFIC  EXP  LAN  A  T/ON.     329

3.  We  find  marked  differences  in  the  so-called  magnetic  action  of
different  persons — differences  not  to  be  explained  by  moral  action.
One  hand  acts  differently  from  another  hand.  Hence,  there  is  a
physical  action,  and  a  personal  physical  action.

4.  Finally,  inasmuch  as  facts  compel  us  to  accept  action  from  afar,
we  must  needs  admit  real '  action  from  anear.

Though  we  cannot  define  with  precision  the  nature  of  this  action,
we  can  nevertheless  affirm  that :

1.  Every  living  being  is  a  dynamic  focus  ;

2.  A  dynamic  focus  tends  ever  to  propagate  the  motion  that  is
proper  to  it ;

3.  Propagated  motion  becomes  transformed  according  to  the  me-
dium it  traverses.

Let  us  enter  a  little  into  details.

Whether  forces,  as  such,  exist  in  nature,  I  know  not ;  a  fortiori  I
do  not  know  whether  they  exist  outside  of  nature  ;  what  I  do  know
is,  that  so  far  as  it  is  knowable,  force  is  nothing  but  motion.  We
say  "motion,"  when  we  see  motion;  we  say  "force,"  when  the  mo-
tion is  invisible.  A  sleeping  animal  possesses  the  "  force  "  to  rise,  for
there  exists  in  it  1  latent,  hidden  molecular  motion  that  may  be
transformed  into  visible  mechanical  motion.  When  the  animal  is
dead  it  possesses  this  force  no  longer,  for  the  inner  molecular  motion
constituting  the  biological  exchange  of  matter  is  no  more.  Hence,
we  may  regard  this  force  as  molecular  motion.

Motion  tends  always  to  propagate  itself.

Why  does  it  seem  sometimes  to  disappear?  Can  it  annul  itself?
No ;  as  motion  is  not  self-produced,  so  it  is  not  self-destroyed.
Therefore,  when  we  see  work  of  any  kind — mechanical,  electrical,
nervic  or  psychic — disappear  without  visible  effect,  then  of  two  things
one,  either

1.  A  transmission  ;  or

2.  A  transformation.

In  a  medium  that  opposed  no  resistance,  a  motion  would  be  trans-
mitted indefinitely.  Imagine  a  universe  consisting  of  a  medium
motionless,  but  capable  of  being  set  in  motion,  and  presenting  no
resistance,  and  to  set  that  whole  universe  in  motion,  we  should
need  only  to  give  an  impulse  to  one  single  atom.  And  were  that
atom  alone,  it  would  move  on  for  all  eternity.  It  would  proceed
in  a  right  line,  according  to  the  old  law  of  mechanics,  but  in  an
infinite  circle  according  to  the  new — and  that  is  the  beginning  of  the
scientific  farces.2  Suffice  it  to  say  that  there  would  then  be  no  reason
why  the  motion  should  cease.

But  the   universe  is  not   like  that  ;   there  is  resistance.     What  is

'  Re'elle,  physical,  opposed  to  moral,  in  par.  3. —  Translator.
2  C'est  ici  que  commencent  les  farces  scientifiques.

33o  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

the  meaning  of  this  resistance  ?  To  explain  it  we  have  done  as
savages  do — have  endowed  matter  with  the  qualities  that  belong
to  ourselves.  After  having  "  objectivated "  a  subjective  muscular
feeling  in  the  notion  of  "  force,"  we  proceeded  to  do  the  same
for  that  which  "  opposes  "  force,  giving  to  matter  our  own  "  inertia,"
our  own  indolence.  Inertia  has  no  existence  any  more  than  force,
any  more  than  absolute  rest.  But  what  does  surely  exist  is  motion,
which  opposes  another  motion,  if  it  is  not  of  the  same  nature.

What  happens  then  ?     The  initial  motion  is  transformed.

Such  is  the  great  principle  of  the  universe  ;  not  merely  "  trans-
mission," as  Puysegur  held,  but  transformation.

Where  does  the  first  end  and  where  does  the  second  begin  ?  Phys-
ical philosophy  gives  us  a  very  clear  idea  with  regard  to  that  point :

a.  In  an  identical  medium  there  is  only  transmission  ;

b.  In  a  different  medium  there  is  transformation.

A  dynamic  nucleus,  in  propagating  its  motion,  sends  it  out  in  every
direction  ;  but  this  transmission  becomes  perceptible  only  on  the  lines
of  least  resistance.  Hence  we  say  that  magnetism  chooses  iron  ;  that
heat,  like  sound,  chooses  good  conductors  ;  that  a  galvanic  current
gives  the  preference  to  a  thick  wire  among  many  fine  wires,  as
lightning  chooses  the  line  of  its  route,  as  a  light-impression  chooses
the  nerve  that  suits  it,  as  the  will  chooses  the  fiber  that  serves  its
purpose  ;  and  so  on.

But  in  reality  nothing  chooses  anything.  We  it  is  that  do  this
choosing,  subjectively,  owing  to  our  inability  to  see  invisible  things.
The  pressure  exerted  by  a  liquid  confined  .in  a  vessel  is  the  same
when  its  wall  is  intact  as  when  a  hole  is  pierced  in  it.  But  the  liquid
does  not  escape  save  when  the  wall  is  pierced,  and  then  the  other
pressure  concerns  us  little.  Instead  of  a  substance  let  us  take  a
force.  Cast  a  stone  into  a  lake  not  far  from  the  shore.  The  shock
will  produce  a  series  of  waves.  These  are  visible  on  the  surface  of
the  water.  Do  they  end  at  the  shore  ?  No  !  The  land  receives  the
shock  like  the  water,  and  propagates  it ;  only,  it  propagates  it  in  its
own  way,  invisibly.  What  does  a  force  do  that  strikes  a  medium  un-
suitable to  its  kind  of  motion  ?  It  becomes  transformed,  that  is  all.
It  is  so  always,  and  -there  are  no  other  causes  of  transformation.
Transformation  implies  resistance.  You  send  an  electric  current
through  a  thick  wire.  You  have  the  current,  but  you  do  not  per-
ceive any  other  force.  But  cut  that  thick  wire  and  connect  the  ends
by  means  of  a  fine  wire :  the  fine  wire  will  grow  hot ;  there  will  be  a
transformation  of  a  part  of  the  current  into  heat.  Carry  the  experi-
ment further.  Take  a  pretty  strong  current  and  interpose  a  wire  still
more  resistent,  or  a  very  thin  carbon  rod.  The  carbon  will  emit
light,  and  the  light  will  be  still  more  intense  if  you  cut  the  carbon  in
two,  introducing  a  conductor  still  more  resistent — air.     A  part  of  the

ELEMENTS  OF  A  SCIENTIFIC  EXT  LAN  A  TION     33  [

current  then  is  transformed  into  heat  and  light.  Think  you  that  this
light  acts  only  as  light,  and  only  in  the  lamp?  Not  so!  It  acts  in
every  direction  round  about,  first  visibly  as  light,  then  invisibly  as
heat  and  as  electric  current.  Hold  a  magnet  near  it.  If  the  magnet
is  weak  and  movable,  in  the  form  of  a  magnetic  needle,  the  beam  of
light  will  cause  it  to  deviate  ;  if  it  is  strong  and  immovable,  it  will  in
turn  cause  the  beam  of  light  to  deviate.  The  rays  of  light  that
impinge  on  the  non-transparent  vanes  of  a  Crookes  radiometer  make,
the  mill  go  round.  And  all  this  from  a  distance,  without  contact,
without  special  conductors.  And  all  this1  because,  somewhere  far
away,  somebody  turns  a  crank,  or  because  an  almost  imperceptible
chemical  process  is  going  on  in  a  battery  !

A  process  that  is  at  once  chemical,  physical  and  psychical,  goes  on
in  a  brain.  A  complex  action  of  this  kind  is  propagated  through  the
gray  matter,  as  waves  are  propagated  in  water.  These  phenomena
are  intense  in  a  different  way  :  their  intensity  is  not  mechanical,  it  is
more  subtile  and  more  concentrated.  What  we  call  an  idea  is  a
strictly  localized  phenomenon.  But  we  must  not  forget  that  to  pro-
duce an  idea,  thousands  of  repeated  impressions  were  necessary,  and
every  one  represents  a  force.  That  force  is  accumulated,  condensed,
as  it  were,  in  an  idea.  Regarded  on  its  physiological  side,  an  idea
is  only  a  vibration,  a  vibration  that  is  propagated,  yet  which  does
not  pass  out  of  the  medium  in  which  it  can  exist  as  such.  It  is
propagated  as  far  as  other  like  vibrations  allow.  It  is  propagated
more  widely  if  it  assumes  the  character  which  subjectively  we  call
■emotive.  An  emotion  is  more  expansive  than  an  indifferent  idea  :  it
may  occupy  the  whole  brain  to  the  disadvantage  of  all  other  ideas.
But  it  cannot  go  beyond  without  being  transformed.  Nevertheless,
like  force  in  general,  it  cannot  remain  in  isolation,  it  escapes  in
•disguise.  The  official  world  of  science  allows  it  only  one  route —
through  the  motor  nerves.  These  are  the  openings  in  a  dark  lantern
through  which  the  luminous  rays  pass.  But  thought  does  not  radiate
like  a  flame,  nor  even  like  the  heat  of  a  flame,  though  that  makes
little  account  of  the  opaque  walls  that  are  impermeable  to  light.

Thought  stays  at  home,  as  the  chemical  action  of  a  battery  re-
mains in  the  battery ;  it  is  represented  abroad  by  its  dynamic
correlate,  called,  in  the  case  of  the  battery,  a  current,  and  in  the  case
of  the  brain — 1  know  not  what :  but  whatever  its  name  may  be,  it  is
the  dynamic  correlate  of  thought.  This  dynamic  correlate  is  not,  nor
can  be,  restricted  to  the  nervic  currents  of  the  motor  fibers.  It
represents  all  the  transformations  of  cerebral  motion — transformations
all  the  more  subtile  and  all  the  more  radical,  as  the  difference  is
greater  between  the  anatomic  medium  of  thought  and  the  environing

1  The  electrical  and  magnetic  phenomena  mentioned,  not  the  revolution  of  the
iight-mill. —  Translator,

332  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

media  :  bodies  solid,  liquid,  or  gaseous,  with  the  ether  considered  as
the  fourth  state  of  matter  and,  relatively,  filling  the  universe.

Let  us  halt  for  a  moment.  We  have  reached  the  conclusion  that
the  motion  that  answers  to  thought  cannot  be  exceptional  in  nature,
and  that  like  all  force  it  is  transformed  into  other  forms  of  motion,
logically  necessary  though  for  the  most  part  unknown.

"  No  displacement  of  matter,"  says  Mr.  de  Parville,  "  takes  place  in
inanimate  nature,  no  act,  voluntary  or  unconscious,  takes  place  in
living  nature,  but  that  there  is  a  production  of  electricity  in  exact
ratio  to  the  energy  of  the  work  expended."1  Besides  electricity,
there  is  production  of  heat,  production  of  mechanical  motion,  and,
perhaps,  production  of  light.  But  I  do  not  intend  to  go  into  par-
ticulars. I  believe  we  do  not  know  one  thousandth  part  of  the
molecular  changes  that  a  thought  may  produce,  and  we  must  content
ourselves  with  simply  noting  the  facts :  here,  as  elsewhere,  energy  is
transmitted  and  transformed.

CHAPTER  VIII.

THE    LAW    OF    REVERSIBILITY.

SO  then  we  must  regard  thought  as  a  dynamic  act.  That  dy-
namic act  is  developed  at  the  center  of  a  larger  dynamic  focus
which  is  called  nerve-action  ;  and  the  latter  must  be  considered
as  a  special  mechanic  action  resting  on  a  basis  wider  still — the  whole
vital  aggregate.  The  entire  organism  has  a  dynamic  tone  peculiar
to  itself  and  dependent  on  the  individual's  general  anatomical  and
physiological  nature,  as  well  as  on  his  state  of  equilibrium  at  the
moment.  This  equilibrium  is  governed  by  the  nerve-tension,  and
the  latter  by  the  individual's  psychic  mobility.  This  triple  dynamic
microcosm  acts  upon  a  medium,  first  by  its  presence  only,  as  a  liv-
ing mechanism,  next  by  its  state,  as  a  nerve-system,  finally  by  its
thought,  as  a  psychic  center.

Motion  being  contagious,  we  can  see  that  a  tone  that  is  sufficiently
pronounced  may  be  communicated  to  surrounding  objects,  and  espe-
cially to  another  organism  whose  individual  tone  is  less  masterful,
and  which  is  distinguished  by  passive  mobility  and  readiness  to
be  modified.  The  influence  no  doubt  is  reciprocal,  but  it  is  the
1  H.  de  Parville,  "  L'Electricite  et  ses  Applications,"  p.  17.     Paris,  1882.

THE  LA  IV  OF  R  El  'ERSIBILITY.  333

stronger,  the  more  largely  constant,  the  more  invasive  modality
that  gives  the  tone.  And  then  an  extrane  contact  will  produce
either  a  dissonance  unpleasant  to  the  subject,  or  no  effect  at  all,
according  to  the  firmness  (soliditc)  of  the  dominant  tone.  When
the  effect  is  nil,  we  have  to  do  with  a  strong,  decisive  current  that
withstands  all  interruption.  The  more  the  dynamic  union  is  insured
by  contact,  by  repeated  passes,  by  the  physiological  submission  of
the  subject,  the  less  is  transmission  balked  and  the  less  resistance
it  meets.  Some  kinds  of  motion — heat,  electricity — can  be  commu-
nicated without  perceptible  modification  ;  others  are  transformed.

But  neither  the  principle  of  communication  nor  that  of  trans-
formation would  be  of  much  use  in  explaining  mental  suggestion,
were  they  not  complemented  by  another  principle  which  may  be
stated  in  a  general  law  of  physics.

This  we  call  the  law  of  reversibility}

We  already  know  that  all  motion  propagates  itself  (law  of  trans-
mission); that  all  propagated  force,  when  it  meets  resistance,  is
transformed  (law  of  transformation);  but  we  do  not  know  what
comes  to  pass  on  a  second  or  a  third  transformation.  Now  it  may
happen  that  a  motion  twice  transformed  shall  regain  its  original  char-
acter. Under  what  circumstances  might  that  happen  ?  It  might
happen  if  the  communicated  motion  were  to  find  a  medium  of  the
same  kind  as  at  its  starting-point.     Such  is  the  law  of  reversibility.

According  to  that  principle  a  transformation  is  always  reversible.

The  thing  seems,  in  theory,  quite  natural,  but  we  must  not  forget
that  it  is  less  evident  in  practice,  for  but  rarely  do  the  same  con-
ditions accompany  a  reiterated  transformation.  Electricity  was  for
a  long  time  produced  by  friction  without  ever  a  thought  that  fric-
tion, in  turn,  can  be  produced  by  electricity.  The  phonautograph,
/.  <?.,  the  mechanical  action  of  speech,  was  long  known  before  men
suspected  that  a  mechanical  action,  in  turn,  may  reproduce  speech
in  Edison's  phonograph.

Years  ago  it  was  known  that  under  the  influence  of  electricity  the
conductivity  of  glass  as  regards  light  may  be  changed  ;  but  it  is  not
long  since-it  was  found  that,  inversely,  light  can  alter  the  electric
conductivity  of  selenium.

Hence  may  be  seen  the  utility  of  a  law  which  assures  us  in  advance
that  if  the  effect  A  can  be  produced  by  the  cause  B,  then,  inversely,  the  effect
Btcan  be  produced  by  the  cause  A.

If  mechanical  work  produces  heat,  inversely  heat  can  produce
mechanical  work.  Savages  turned  the  first  of  these  facts  to  account,
the  second  was  never  seriously  applied  till  the  invention  of  the  steam-
engine.

If  electricity  in  motion  can  produce  a  magnet,  a  magnet  in  motion
1  See  my  essay,  "  Force  as  Motion  "  (in  Polish).     Warsaw,  1879.

334  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

can  produce  an  electric  current ;  and  if  we  obtain  a  current  by
mechanical  rotation,  so,  inversely,  a  current  can  produce  mechanical
rotation.

If  a  chemical  action  can  develop  light,  light,  in  turn,  can  develop
chemical  action  ;  and  if  this  chemical  action  encounters  certain  special
conditions,  it  will  reproduce  for  us  an  image  that  was  visible  before
chemical  action,  and  which  after  chemical  action  becomes  visible
again  in  a  photograph.

The  magic  of  science  does  not  cease  there.  Do  you  want,  by  the
help  of  an  ordinary  lamp,  to  light  another  lamp  miles  away  ?  To  do
so,  you  have  only  to  set  up  a  series  of  transmissions.  You  use  your
lamp  to  heat  a  Clamond  thermelectric  battery.  The  difference  of
temperature  between  two  metals  gives  you  a  current.  This  current,
you,  being  in  Paris,  send,  say,  to  Versailles.  There  you  oppose  resist-
ance to  it  by  means  of  a  very  slender  platinum  wire.  The  platinum
wire  grows  hot,  and  on  touching  the  wick  of  a  lamp,  lights  it.

But  you  needed  to  have  a  special  conductor  reaching  from  Paris  to
Versailles.  You  must  have  a  conductor  also  to  produce  a  reversed
transformation  of  mechanical  motion  in  a  dynamo  connected  with  an
electric  motor.  One  is  needed  also  for  reversed  telephonic  transmis-
sion. But  a  more  surprising  thing  is,  that  there  is  a  way  of  reproduc-
ing speech  at  a  distance  without  conducting  wires.

You  substitute  for  the  wire  a  ray  of  light.

Here  is  the  principle  of  the  photophone  :  A  ray  of  light  is  reflected
by  a  very  thin  mirror  and  projected  to  a  distant  point.  Back  of  the
mirror  is  fixed  a  mouthpiece.  By  speaking  into  the  mouthpiece  you
cause  the  mirror  to  vibrate.  A  vibrating  mirror  modifies  the  reflection
of  light.  The  light  that  reaches  the  other  station  is  modified  by  your
speech,  has  your  speech  to  carry,  not  as  speech,  but  as  represented  in
its  mechanical  correlate.  It  reaches  the  station  and  impinges  on  a
lamina  of  selenium.  The  selenium  is  traversed  by  a  local  current.
But  the  lamina  of  selenium  offers  to  this  current  a  resistance  greater
or  less  in  proportion  to  the  brightness  of  the  ray  that  impinges  upon
it.  This  constantly  modified  current  you  pass  into  a  telephone  ;  it
causes  the  disk  of  the  telephone  to  vibrate  according  to  the  modifica-
tions it  undergoes — and  it  reproduces  your  speech.

Is  it  possible  that  a  ray  of  light  may  transmit  speech  ?  Most
assuredly,  for  the  thing  has  been  done  by  Bell  and  Tainter.  But
what  physicist  20  years  ago  would  have  admitted  it?

Let  us  note  what  takes  place  when  this  experiment  is  performed.
Your  brain  gives  your  thought,  transformed,  to  the  nerves ;  the
nerves  transmit  it  to  the  muscles  and  the  vocal  chords,  they  to  the
atmosphere,  the  atmosphere  to  the  mirror,  the  mirror  to  the  beam  of
light,  i.  e.,  to  the  ether,  the  ether  to  the  selenium,  the  selenium  to  the
battery  current,  the  current  to  the  electro-magnet  of  the  telephone,

THE  LAW  OF  REVERSIBILITY.  335

the  electro-magnet  to  the  vibratory  disk,  the  disk  to  the  air,  the  air  to
the  tympanic  membrane,  the  tympanic  membrane  to  the  ossicles  of  the
middle  ear,  these  to  the  membrane  of  the  labyrinth,  that  membrane  to
the  liquid  of  the  inner  ear,  that  to  the  terminal  organs  of  the  auditory
nerve ;  and,  finally,  that  nerve  conveys  it  to  the  brain.  And  that
brain  reproduces  the  thought  of  another  brain.  Why  ?  Because  the
latest  transmission  has  found  a  medium  of  the  same  kind  as  at  its
starting-point.

Think  you  that  this  was  never  done  before  Bell  and  Tainter's
time  ?  Why  not  ?  Everybody  that  ever  spoke  before  a  mirror — and,
in  a  certain  sense,  everything  is  a  mirror — sent  his  speech  out  into
the  whole  world.  And  let  us  not  forget  that  this  is  but  one  applica-
tion of  a  general  law.  Everything  is  transmitted,  everything  is  trans-
formed, everything  may  be  reproduced.

If  anything  is  not  reproduced  visibly,  palpably,  the  reason  is  that
the  conditions  of  reproduction  are  more  or  less  remote  from  perfect
likeness  between  the  media.  Find  you  a  receiver  that  is  sufficiently
sensitive  and  you  will  have  reproduction.  In  vain  have  you  a  tele-
phone unless  there  is  another  telephone  to  act  as  receiver.  But  the
telephone  is  but  a  coarse  type  of  a  biological  reversed  transmission.
The  photophone  is  a  more  delicate  instrument  :  it  does  without
wires  ;  a  ray  of  light  serves  its  purpose.  Some  day  we  shall  dispense
with  that  one  reflected  ray,  and  will  employ  any  intermediary  what-
ever, a  jet  of  water,  a  current  of  air.  Inventions  are  ever  advancing
from  the  complex  to  the  simple  as  regards  fundamental  principles,
though  in  the  details  there  may  be  greater  complexity.

But  observe  what  results  from  this  experiment,  to  wit,  among  other
things  this,  that  light  may  be  made  a  vehicle  of  speech.  Well,  in
like  manner  the  warmth  of  the  hand  may  be  made  a  vehicle  of  health
or  of  a  good  intention.

The  cry  will  be  raised,  Mysticism /  So  much  worse  for  those  that
raise  it :  they  will  miss  the  opportunity  for  learning  a  grand  truth  !
It  matters  little  to  me  that  the  truth  has  been  propagated  by  an
ignorant  crowd  ;  forasmuch  as  it  is  truth  let  us  give  thanks  to  the
crowd.  Yes^  as  the  la  of  a  musical  instrument  is  not  the  la  of  the
vocal  chord  of  a  man  or  a  woman,  of  an  individuality,  so  the  warmth
of  a  hand  is  not  the  warmth  of  a  poultice.  Do  not  call  in  the  ther-
mometer to  decide  !  A  thermometer  has  no  business  to  be  the  arbi-
ter of  such  a  difference,  any  more  than  a  barometer  has  to  judge  the
purity  of  the  atmosphere,  or  a  pair  of  scales  to  judge  the  quality  of
two  wines.  Let  us  be  less  boastful  of  our  science,  so  our  science
may  be  more  boastful  of  us.  If  everything  could  be  learned  in
school,  what,  I  ask  myself,  would  be  the  use  of  the  science  that
investigates  ?

One  remark  more.     While  availing  ourselves  of  the  law  of  transfor-

336  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

mation,  we  must  not  forget  that  the  transformation  is  never  total.  I
say  never,  and  I  mean  it.  In  another  place  I  have  endeavored  to
prove  that  a  force  A  is  always  transformed  into  more  than  a  force  B,
C,  D,  etc.  A  blow  with  a  hammer  produces  not  only  a  mechanical
concussion,  but  also  heat,  electricity,  a  sound,  a  magnetic  change,
sometimes  a  spark,  and  so  on.  Never  is  a  force  A  transformed  in-  its
entirety  into  a  force  B.  That  is  why  the  mechanical  equivalent  of
heat  cannot,  in  practice,  be  an  absolutely  constant  quantity,  and
therefore  it  is  that,  instead  of  the  word  equivalent,  I  have  chosen
rather  to  use  the  term  dynamic  correlate.  There  is  something  more
than  that  :  the  universe  is  neither  void  nor  dead.  A  force  that  is
transmitted  meets  other  forces,  and  if  it  is  transformed  only  little  by
little,  it  usually  limits  itself  to  modifying  another  force  at  its  own  cost,
though  without  suffering  perceptibly  thereby.  This  is  the  case  par-
ticularly with  forces  that  are  persistent,  concentrated,  well  seconded
by  their  medium  :  it  is  the  case  with  the  physiological  equilibrium,
nervic  force,  psychic  force,  ideas,  emotions,  tendencies.  These
modify  environing  forces  without  themselves  disappearing  ;  they  are
but  imperceptibly  transformed,  and  if  the  next  man  is  of  a  nature
exceptionally  well  adapted  to  them,  they  even  gain  in  inductive
action,  as  the  magnet  gains  by  contact  with  an  armature  of  soft  iron,
to  which,  nevertheless,  it  communicates  its  force.  A  sentiment  that
is  communicated  loses  nothing ;  on  the  contrary,  a  polar  induction
oftentimes  strengthens  it.

We  should  have  to  write  a  whole  psychology  and  a  whole  philos-
ophy of  nature  to  elucidate  sufficiently  these  subtile  questions.  Let
it  suffice  to  say  that  in  "  dead  "  nature  there  are  found  like  phe-
nomena. A  spark  produces  a  conflagration,  but  neither  the  confla-
gration itself  nor  even  the  first  flicker  is  to  be  regarded  as  the
mechanical  equivalent  of  the  spark.  The  latter  does  but  set  free
a  series  of  latent  forces.  If  the  magnetic  telephone  of  itself  produces
the  current  which  transmits  speech,  the  same  is  not  true  of  a
microphonic  transmitter.  The  latter  requires  a  battery,  and  speech
only  modifies  an  existing  current,  impresses  modifications  upon  it,
charges  it  with  a  mission,  without  being  thereby  weakened.  It  is
so  with  the  magnetizer's  thought.

FINAL  SUPPOSITIONS.  337

CHAPTER  IX.

FINAL     SUPPOSITIONS,

LET    us    now  betake    ourselves   to   another    station    and    observe
what    passes  there.     Let   us  take  the  case  of  sleep  produced
from  a  distance  and  strive  to  explain  it.

Magnetizers  tell  us  that  their  will  concentrates  the  fluid  and  then
projects  it  outward,  approximately  in  a  given  direction,  like  a  pack-
age of  opium.  So  intelligent  is  this  fluid,  so  complaisant,  that  it
hies  away  with  all  speed,  finds  its  road,  goes  round  obstructions,
and  hits  the  subject.  It  enters  the  subject,  and  the  moment  it  has
duly  saturated  him  sleep  appears,  brought  on  by  action  from  afar
or  anear.  All  very  clear,  and  in  fact  rather  more  rational  than  the
old-time  explanation  of  the  action  of  opium,  according  to  which  the
drug  endorms  one  because  of  its  somniferous  power.

But  in  the  first  place  the  existence  of  the  fluid  needs  to  be  proved  ;
then  that  it  can  be  shot  forth,  and  that  it  can  find  its  way  ;  finally,
that  it  will  stop  just  when  it  has  entered  the  nervous  system  of  the
subject ;  in  short,  the  theory  is  not  of  much  help  to  us.  It  describes
the  action  by  substantializing  it,  as  Mesmer  used  to  say.

Let  us  look  at  the  matter  from  another  side.  Suppose  for  a  mo-
ment the  suggestional  theory  alone  to  be  true,  i.  <?.,  that  if  the  sub=
ject  is  put  to  sleep,  he  endorms  himself  by  the  act  of  his  own  imagi-
nation, by  ideoplasty.  The  thought  of  sleep  presents  itself  to  his
mind,  finds  a  monoideic  moment,  and  is  realized.  In  that  case  it
is  enough  that  the  imperative  thought  of  sleeping  be  transmitted
to  the  subject  to  cause  him  to  sleep.  This  thought  cannot  come
to  him  as  a  thought.  Thoughts  do  not  travel  abroad,  but  we  already
know  that  thoughts  send  forth  in  every  direction  their  dynamic
correlate.  There  is  no  substance  carried  hither  or  thither,  but  a
wave  is  propagated  and  modified  more  and  more  according  to  the
different  natures  and  the  different  resistances  of  the  media  it  trav-
erses. It  may  impinge  on  all  manner  of  bodies  without  any  sensible
action  ;  and  I  say  sensible  (that  is  perceptible  by  the  senses)  because
it  were  contrary  to  the  mechanical  ground-principle  of  the  universe
to  say  that  it  has  no  action.  (True,  we  are  guilty  every  day  of
such  inexactitudes.  We  say,  for  example,  that  the  moon  causes
the  flux  and  reflux  of  the  ocean,  but  that  it  has  no  action  upon  the
atmosphere  or  upon  man.)  The  action,  therefore,  is  general,  but
it  is  more  or  less  imperceptible  till  the  undulation  finds  a  medium
like  the  original  one,  and  all  the  conditions  requisite  for  a  reversed

338  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

transformation.     A  brain  B  presents  these  conditions  ;  in  it  the  cor-
responding thought  awakes,  and  brain  B  falls  asleep.

"  But  then  all  the  sensitive  brains  within  the  sphere  of  the  action
must  be  endormed  also?"

Not  so,  for  all  those  brains  are  not  regulated,  are  not  in  rapport
with  the  operator.  I  do  not  think  it  possible  to  act  at  a  distance
without  rapport.  And  rapport  consists  in  this,  that  the  dynamic  tone
of  the  subject  corresponds  to  that  of  the  operator  ;  that,  through
habit  and  training,  the  subject's  brain  has  become  quite  specially-
sensitive  to  the  slightest  influences  of  the  magnetizer.

Allowing  that  mental  action  from  a  distance  is  a  fact,  is  it  con-
scious or  is  it  unconscious  ?  That  is  to  say,  has  the  subject  any  inti-
mation of  it  before  he  submits  to  it  entirely  ?

Usually  he  has  not.  The  transmission  is  mediate — from  the  con-
scious to  the  unconscious.  The  thought  suggested  does  not  enter
into  the  normal  polyideia  ;  but,  having  found  a  moment  of  monoideia
— a  moment  of  absolute  monoideia  is  never  a  moment  of  consciousness  :
who  says  consciousness  says  polyideia  —  it  is  realized  forthwith  by
ideoplasty.  It  is,  then,  only  in  the  somnambulic  state  that  the  sub-
ject can  perceive  the  process  of  the  influence  and  divine  its  cause.
Often  in  such  case  the  image  of  the  operator  is  suggested  at  the
same  time,  producing  a  veridical  hallucination.

But  it  also  happens  that  the  subject  divines  the  action  before  he
submits  completely  to  it.  Sometimes  even,  particularly  when  the
operator  falters  for  a  moment,  the  subject  gets  time  to  make  resist-
ance. In  that  case  we  have  to  do  with  an  immediate  suggestion  that
is  insufficient  either  because  of  the  operator  or  of  the  subject.  But
then,  as  a  rule,  the  balked  immediate  suggestion  is  transformed  into
a  mediate,  a  retarded  suggestion,  and  that  may  later  find  its  favor-
able moment.

The  action  may,  therefore,  be  conscious  or  unconscious;  but  is  it
always  purely  cerebral  ?  In  other  words,  is  transmission  effected  in
the  subject  through  the  brain  acting  on  the  organism,  or  through
the  organism  acting  upon  the  brain  ?

According  to  Baragnon's  hypothesis,  that  the  transmission  of  sen-
sations is  the  foundation  of  all  mental  suggestion,  the  nerves,  they
being  affected  first,  re-act  upon  the  brain.

Viewed  from  the  ground  of  general  physiology,  this  hypothesis  is
not  without  foundation.  The  law  of  reversibility  applies  no  less  to
the  physiology  of  the  nervous  system  than  to  physics.  If  an  emotion
finds  expression  in  a  muscular  attitude,  that  muscular  attitude,  when
impressed  upon  a  subject  from  without,  may  conversely  produce  an
emotion.  This  is  proved  by  Braid's  muscular  suggestions.  So,  too,
transmitted  sensations  might  reproduce  the  thoughts  that  accom-
panied them  in  the  mind  of  the  operator.     But,  in  the  first  place,  has

FINAL  SUPPOSITIONS.  339

the  operator  actually  in  his  mind  the  sensations  of  sleep  when  he
produces  sleep  ?  To  say  that  he  has  would  be  to  do  some  violence
to  the  facts.  He  has  only  the  idea  of  sleep  ;  and  then  I  think  that,
at  least  as  regards  experiments  made  at  a  distance,  the  sympathic
action  of  two  brains  is  more  easily  conceivable  than  the  sympathic
action  of  nerves  ;  and,  since  the  brain  itself  suffices  to  produce,  by
centrifugal  action,  all  possible  sensations,  it  is  best  to  regard  the
brain  as  the  direct  recipient  of  the  mental  action.

Hence  I  hold,  or  rather  suppose,  that  an  action  at  a  distance  may
be  exerted  solely,  or  principally,  through  the  intermediation  of  the
brain.

True,  we  have  admitted  a  physical  action ;  nay,  a  local  physical
action.  But  it  is  almost  impossible  in  hypnology  in  general  to  elim-
inate the  co-operation  of  the  brain,  that  is,  of  ideoplasty  or  of  sen-
sorial reflex  action.  You  may,  indeed,  act  upon  one  member  sepa-
rately ;  you  may  paralyze  a  single  finger,  or  a  single  ear ;  but  we
must  not  be  led  astray  by  an  apparent  local  action  produced  by
passes,  or  by  the  hand,  a  magnet,  metals,  or  sundry  medicinal  sub-
stances when  brought  near  to  the  subject :  even  when  the  brain
seems  to  be  in  deep  sleep  it  may  re-act  through  reversed  ideorganic
associations.  Only  one  kind  of  local  physical  action  seems  to  be
admissible — the  kind  analogous  to  the  communication  of  heat.  I
can  warm  a  cold  hand  by  holding  it  between  my  own  warm  hands,
and  then  the  action  is  not  reflex,  but  purely  physical.  Probably
there  are  other  physical  transmissions  of  the  same  sort.  It  is  prob-
able that  a  hand  well  supplied  with  blood,  well  fed  by  the  normal
currents  of  the  muscles  and  nerves,  a  hand  that  transpires  in  the
normal  way,  that,  in  short,  is  perfectly  equilibrated  in  the  sum  of  its
molecular  vibrations — it  is  theoretically  probable,  and  true  in  fact,
that  such  a  hand  can  communicate  its  tone  to  a  diseased  part  ;  can,
by  induction,  revive  a  slowed  molecular  motion  or  a  languid  physio-
logical exchange  of  matter  ;  can  stay  dynamic  excess  of  the  vital
processes,  and 'can  restore  equilibrium  when  it  is  disturbed.

I  can  understand  how  all  this  may  be  done,  even  at  a  little
distance,  if'  the  hand  be  directed  toward  the  part  affected.  But  I
cannot  well  see  how  similar  action  can  be  performed  from  a  great
distance  or  from  the  opposite  side  of  a  wall  ;  and  I  think  that  in
such  case  there  is  no  longer  direct  physical  communication,  but
rather  cerebral  suggestion  ;  and  if  Mesmer's  subject  (p.  260  supi-d)
sensed  at  the  other  side  of  a  wall  the  movements  of  the  magnetizer's
arms,  he  perhaps  did  so  in  virtue  of  a  transformed  and  reversed
thought-transmission  and  of  mentally  suggested  ideoplasty,  rather
than  of  local  physical  action.  But  we  will  not  dwell  upon  this  ques-
tion, for  as  yet  it  is  not  susceptible  of  thorough  discussion.  Never-
theless here  are  some  inferences  that  I  think  may  be  drawn  from  several

34o  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

of  my  experiments  as  well  as  from  the  experiments  of  Bertrand  and
other  authors.

Contrary  to  what  we  should  expect  according  to  the  theory  of  the
exaltation  of  the  senses,  mental  suggestion  seems  to  be  most  success-
ful when  the  senses  are  paralyzed.  Then,  too,  we  are  certainly  in
presence  of  true  thought-transmission.  There  is  an  exaltation  of  the
brain — a  quite  special  exaltation  that  we  shall  presently  endeavor  to
make  clear  ;  but  there  is  no  exaltation  of  the  senses.

The  question  here  mooted  is  full  of  difficulty,  and  I  present  my
hypotheses  concerning  it  with  all  reserve.

Mesmer,  it  seems  to  me,  was  once  again  right  in  regard  to  this.
He  held  that  the  subject  whose  senses  are  absolutely  paralyzed  (as
happens  now  and  then  in  catalepsy  and  in  ectasy),  nevertheless  hears
his  magnetizer,  hears  him  by  mental  suggestion}  Speech,  though
uttered  viva  voce,  directly  impresses  his  brain,  not  his  ear.  It  might
happen  that  thought  without  speech  would  be  insufficient  to  influence
the  subject,  but  even  so  the  hypothesis  would  stand,  for  the  trans-
mission might  be  too  weak  unless  aided  by  speech.

Mesmer  was  partly  in  error  :  he  made  too  wide  a  generalization.
He  believed  that  in  all  cases  whenever  the  subject  hears  only  his  mag-
netizer, he  hears  him  mentally.  But  as  we  have  seen,  the  phenome-
non of  rapport  can  in  some  measure  be  explained  by  a  specific
impressionability,  by  an  elective  perception,  and  we  must  always  recur
to  influences  that  are  known  before  we  have  recourse  to  an  essen-
tially new  hypothesis.  And  yet,  if  instead  of  a  relative  anaesthesia
we  find  absolute  and  general  insensibility,  so  that  a  pistol  fired
suddenly  alongside  the  ear  of  the  subject  produces  no  impression,  no
reflex  motion,  it  is  difficult  indeed  to  understand  how  a  word  from
the  magnetizer,  spoken  also  unexpectedly,  and  even  with  a  change  of
voice,  is  heard  perfectly  well.

It  is  probable,  then,  that  there  are  two  kinds  of  mental  suggestion  :
one  conditioned  on  an  exaltation  of  the  senses — an  exaltation  with
respect  to  sensations  coming  from  the  part  of  the  magnetizer,  consti-
tuting rapport  ;  and  another  conditioned  on  complete  paralysis  of  the
senses,  with  a  quite  exceptional  exaltation  of  the  brain.

In  the  latter  case  there  is  always  a  sort  of  fever  localized  in  the
brain  alone.  The  head  is  hot.  One  would  say  that  all  the  nerve
force  is  concentrated  in  the  hemispheres.  There  is  hyperemia,  but
hyperemia  of  a  special  sort — hyperemia  from  electric  tension,  one
might  call  it  ;  it  does  not  oppress  the  brain,  it  only  gives  it  an  excess
of  available,  but  latent  vitality.  The  circulation  is  not  rapid,  but
it  may  at  any  moment  become  more  rapid  than  usual  under  the
influence  of  the  slightest  excitation.

1  Puysegur,  it  will  be  remembered,  mentions  the  case  of  a  deaf  patient  who  made
answer  to  mental  questions.

FINAL  SUPPOSITIONS.  341

If  it  is  the  action  of  the  vaso  constrictors  that  regulates  the  capillary
circulation,  then  in  this  case  we  must  concede  to  them  an  extraordi-
nary mobility  of  excitation  and  relaxation.  As  for  the  electrical
phenomena,  they  might  be  explained  as  follows  :  The  classic  researches
of  Du  Bois-Reymond  have  shown  that  the  currents  proper  to  the
nerves  as  well  as  to  the  muscles  undergo  a  reduction  of  tension
(affaiblissement)  during  nerve-action  proper ;  that  is,  that  a  given
quantity  of  energy  manifests  itself,  now  under  the  form  of  nerve-
action,  anon  under  the  form  of  electric  action.  In  the  case  we  are
considering  the  psychic  nerve-action  is  null  ;  but  it  may  become  very
intense.  Consequently,  there  must  exist  in  the  brain  an  exceptional
electric  tension,  which,  however,  may  disappeai  rapidly,  and  which
in  general  is  subject  to  great  momentary  changes.  When  the  brain
is  in  aideia  the  electric  tension  is' high,  and  it  excites  the  vasomotors,
which  contract  the  arteries.  But  because  of  the  relative  hyperemia
and  the  consequent  tension  of  the  blood,  particularly  of  the  arterial
blood,  the  slightest  reduction  of  the  electric  tension  may  increase  the
work  of  the  nerves  and  cause  a  dilatation  of  the  arteries.  Hence  we
need  only  suppose  that  the  electric  currents  of  the  atmosphere,  modi-
fied by  a  psycho-physical  transmission  (as  in  the  case  of  the  photo-
phone  the  ray  of  light  is  modified  by  speech),  transmit  that  modifica-
tion to  the  electric  currents  of  the  brain,  which  is,  by  the  sum  of  these
conditions,  made  amenable  to  the  slightest  influences,  in  order  to
understand  the  reproduction  of  a  mental  phenomenon  transformed
into  its  dynamic  correlate.

I  beg  the  reader  not  to  be  over-critical  of  this  little  excursion  into
the  region  of  the  invisible.  It  may  be  that  things  are  quite  otherwise  ;
in  particular  it  may  be  that  this  inward  process  is  far  more  complex
than  it  would  seem  to  be  from  my  conjectural  sketch.  One  does  the
best  one  can  so  as  not  to  seem  awkward  in  the  presence  of  a
phenomenon  that  "upsets  all  the  notions  of  physiology."  Let  us
hope  that,  after  all,  it  will  not  upset  anything,  and  that  it  will  shed  a
clear  light  upon  many  an  obscure  fact.1

To  that  end,  we  have  to  show  that  the  phenomenon  is  closely  con-
nected with  other  phenomena  that  are  near  at  hand  and  more  or  less
known.  If  the  law  of  reversibility  explains  action  at  a  distance,  it
must  also  explain  action  from  anear,  and  that  should  have  its  ana-
logues in  facts  still  more  rudimentary.

As  we    have    already   remarked,    mental    action    at   a   distance    is

1  On  the  question  of  the  state  of  the  brain  in  natural  sleep,  see  the  excellent  work
of  Dr.  A.  M.  Langlois  :  "  Contributions  a  l'Etude  du  Sommeil  Naturel  et  Artificiel,"
Dijon,  1877;  an  interesting  essay  by  Dr.  H.  Haan :  "  Ueber  die  Beziehungen
zwischen  Hypnotismus  und  Cerebraler  Blutfullung,"  Wiesbaden,  1S85  ;  and  a  recent
descriptive  work,  full  of  quotations,  by  Dr.  Barth  :  "  Du  Sommeil  Non-naturel."
Paris,  1886.

342  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

closely  associated  with  physical  action  from  anear  and  with  several
phenomena  of  sympathism  and  of  nervic  contagion.  Let  us  now
descend  still  lower,  to  the  very  bottom  of  the  scale,  in  order  to
discover  the  connection  between  the  two  series  of  phenomena.

Action  at  a  distance  exists  within  the  individual  organism.  "It  is,"
says  Maudsley,  "  a  characteristic  property  of  the  nervous  system,
that  a  local  excitation  is  immediately  transmitted  to  distant  parts.
How  is  this  done  ?  We  know  not.  We  may  therefore  designate
the  phenomenon  either  as  sympathy  or  consensus  of  parts,  induc-
tion, infection,  or  reflex  action,  or  by  any  other  name  that,  like  an
algebraic  symbol,  may  express  an  unknown  quantity."  "How  are
we  to  account  for  the  fact,"  says  Mr.  D.  Whyte,  "  that  sometimes
the  amputation  of  an  arm  or  a  leg  produces  contraction  of  the  mus-
cles of  the  jaw,  rather  than  of  any  other  organ?"  Our  ignorance
thereanent  need  not  surprise  us  ;  nobody  knows  why,  in  a  sensitive
plant,  Mimosa  pudica  for  example,  excitation  applied  at  one  point
is  propagated  throughout  a  whole  leaf,  and  sometimes  even  to  the
neighboring  leaves,  which  contract ;  in  fact  no  one  knows  how  elec-
tric induction  is  produced,  nor  why  a  single  point  of  an  excited
muscle  transmits  the  excitation  through  the  entire  length  of  the
fibers,  nor  how  the  substance  of  a  nerve  is  transformed  in  the
electro-tonic  state.

But  in  order  to  understand  the  principle  there  is  no  need  to  know
all  this  in  detail.  The  principle  is  manifestly  contained  in  the  laws
we  have  just  pointed  out.

Any  excitation  caused  by  an  anatomical  or  a  purely  dynamical
change,  whether  spontaneous  or  induced,  always  constitutes  a  center
of  motion.  This  motion,  like  all  motions  in  nature,  is  propagated.
If  it  is  propagated  through  an  identical  medium  (nerve-fibers  of
the  same  kind),  there  is  only  transmission.  If  it  enters  a  different
medium  there  is  transformation ;  and  then  it  is  that  there  is  mani-
fested, in  the  same  individual,  the  phenomenon  of  sympathism.

An  inflammatory  state  of  the  pituitary  gland  may  be  transmitted
to  the  mucous  membrane  of  the  eyelids,  larynx,  lungs,  intestines,
anus,  etc.,  in  whole  or  in  part,  and  then  there  is  only  transmission.
But  it  may  take  place  athwart  the  intermediate  mucous  membranes
without  affecting  them,  and  then  attack  a  remote  point  that  individ-
ually constitutes  a  nodus  minoris  resistentice,  for  here,  as  elsewhere,  the
transmission  becomes  evident  only  along  the  routes  of  less  resist-
ance.

There  will  be  complete  transformation  if  two  different  organs  re-
act upon  each  other  from  a  distance.  Thus  a  displacement  of  the
uterus  may  bring  on  an  attack  of  melancholia,  which  disappears  when
the  organ  is  restored  to  its  place  (Schroder  van  der  Kolk)  ;  if  the
action  goes  to  the  brain,  the  reason  is  that  the  brain  was  specially

•      FINAL  SUPPOSITIONS.  343

predisposed.  I  have  noticed  another  sympathism  of  this  sort.  In  an
ataxic  patient  a  displacement  of  the  uterus  produced  sciatic  pains
that  ceased  directly  after  the  organ  was  put  in  place.  In  this
instance  the  sciatic  nerves  presented  a  favorable  field  (on  account  of
the  ataxy),  while  the  brain  resisted  all  influence.  I  have  also  seen
dorsal  anaesthesia  transformed  into  nervous  hepatic  colic.  The
malady  changed  its  place  as  well  as  its  character  from  one  day  to  the
next,  and  I  obtained  a  rapid  cure  by  a  series  of  those  "  transfers."

The  state  of  pregnancy  not  infrequently  produces  mental  aliena-
tion, but  again  it  may  restore  sanity,  so  that  a  patient  will  be  sane
only  during  that  period  (Guislain,  Griesinger).  A  pessary  will
instantly  suppress  melancholia  in  certain  cases  (Fleming,  Maudsley),
just  as  pressure  on  the  ovaries  may  arrest  an  hysterical  attack
(Charcot),  and  in  the  male  pressure  on  a  testicle  may  arrest  an  attack
of  hysterical  epilepsy  (Abbe).  It  is  known  that  the  presence  of
worms  in  the  intestine  may  cause  nasal  pruritus  and  other  sympathic
phenomena,  and  that  a  needle  in  the  same  region  may  produce
convulsions.

But  of  special  interest  is  total  transmission  with  total  transforma-
tion, seen  in  many  complaints,  and  which  has  been  observed  by  Dr.
Darwin,  and  lately  by  Maudsley.  There  is  a  certain  antagonism
between  convulsions  and  delirium.  Very  often  delirium  makes  its
appearance  the  moment  the  convulsions  cease,  and  conversely.  In
such  case  the  excitation  of  the  spinal  cord  is  transferred  to  the  brain,
and  there  is  transformed  under  the  influence  of  the  medium.

On  the  other  hand,  when  transmission  takes  place  in  a  transverse
direction,  i.  e.,  from  one  side  of  the  body  to  the  other,  it  usually
meets  an  homologous  organ,  and  therefore  does  not  change  in  char-
acter. Thus  a  headache,  any  neuralgia,  a  contraction  or  a  contrac-
ture, an  anaesthesia  or  a  hyperesthesia,  passes  from  right  to  left,  and
the  phenomenon  of  hypnotic  "  transfer  "  shows  that  all  unilateral
phenomena,  sensations  and  hallucinations  (F^re)  may  be  transferred.

This  phenomenon  is  well  known  in  its  essential  features  from  the
report  of  the  commission  appointed  by  the  Biological  Society  (of
Paris)  to  investigate  Dr.  Burq's  metallotherapy.  But  sometimes  the
"  transfer  "  presents  peculiar  characters.  Here,  for  example,  is  an
interesting  fact  observed  by  Ollivier  :  In  a  case  of  left  hemianes-
thesia, by  puncturing  the  numb  leg,  that  author  produced  a  sense  of
pain  at  the  corresponding  point  in  the  opposite  one.  I  observed  a
similar  fact  in  the  case  of  a  healthy  young  man,  one  of  my  pupils  in
the  University  of  Lemberg.  I  could  produce  in  B.  a  clearly  localized
anaesthesia  in  the  waking  state.  I  would  draw  on  his  forearm,  e.  g.,  a
square  or  a  triangle,  and  with  my  finger  would  give  the  spot  a  slight
massage  ;  after  a  couple  of  minutes  the  square  or  the  triangle  of
skin  would  be  numb,  but  sometimes  I  could,  by  puncturing  the  arm,

344  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

produce   in   precisely  the  corresponding  part   of  the   other  arm   the
painful  sensation  of  pricking.

There  exist  therefore  in  the  same  organism  :

a.  An  action  at  a  distance  (excitation  reflected  in  a  remote  organ).
Note  that  the  excitation  may  be  of  psychic  origin,  and  that  all  cases
of  trophic  or  ?naterial  ideoplasty  may  be  regarded  as  phenomena  of
mental  action  at  a  distance  within  the  same  organism  ; '

b.  A  transmission  with  partial  transformation  apparently  entire
(transmission  and  transformation  of  the  disease  of  one  organ  to
another  different  one).    Here,  too,  the  starting  point  may  be  psychic  ; 2

c.  A  transfer  of  symptoms  (that  is,  a  reversed  psychical  or  physical
transmission  to  analogous  bilateral  organs).

Rising  a  step  higher,  we  observe  a  transmission  from  one  organism
to  another  that  is  connected  with  it  only  by  community  of  nutrition.
I  allude  to  the  mother's  influence  on  the  foetus.  The  foetus  is  chloro-
formed when  the  mother  is  ;  it  undergoes  the  influence  of  all  her
sensorial  excitations  (Fere),  and  seemingly  in  some  cases  even  moral
action  is  shown.  Theoretically  I  have  ever  held  this  fact  to  be  one
of  necessary  sequence,  and  I  might  even  cite  some  convincing  obser-
vations of  my  own  ;  but  the  question  has,  on  the  whole,  received  so
little  serious  study  that  I  purposely  leave  it  out.3

Another  kind  of  transmission,  a  little  more  remote  still,  is  hereditary
transmission,4  which  is  psychical  as  well  as  physical.  A  strange  fact !
Hereditary  transmission  is  generally  accepted,  because  there  is  a  drop
of  albumen  to  be  its  vehicle  and  to  afford  a  sort  of  basis  for  our
imagination,  while  people  refuse  to  believe  in  transmission  by  con-
tact ;  as  though  it  were  easier  to  conceive  of  a  series  of  moral  tenden-
cies and  aptitudes  being  locked  up  in  a  drop  of  matter!  Take,  for
instance,  the  case  observed  by  Mr.  Brown-Sequard  :  it  will  at  the
same  time  serve  as  an  example  of  the  inverse  action  of  the  foetus  on
the  mother  :

"  The  fact  recorded  by  Dr.  Harvey,  of  Edinburgh,  as  having
been  observed  in  man  and  in  certain  animals,  was  very  clearly  pre-
sented in  the  guinea-pig.  The  mother  was  modified  physically  so
as  to  resemble  the  father.      Male  guinea-pigs  in  which  the  cervical

1  See  Notes  on  Ideoplasty  in  the  Appendix.

2  For  the  influence  of  the  "brain  on  the  other  organs,  see  the  excellent  work  of  Dr.
Hack-Tuke,  "  Body  and  Mind."

3  Certain  pointers  are  to  be  found  in  two  interesting  works,  one  written  by  a  dis-
tinguished physician  and  strong  scientific  skeptic,  Dr.  J.  B.  Demangeon :  "  De
l'lmagination  Consideree  dans  ses  Effets  Directs  sur  l'Homme  et  les  Animaux,"  2d
ed.,  Paris,  1829  ;  the  other  by  an  enthusiastic  but  sfiirituel  schoolmaster,  Frariere  :
"Education  Anterieure,  Influences  Maternelles,"  etc.  Paris,  1862.  See  also  the
chapter  devoted  to  this  question  in  Dr.  Liebeault's  excellent  and  classic  essay,  "  Du
Sommeil  et  des  Etats  Analogues,"  Paris,  1866.

4 See  Ribot,  "  Psychological  Heredity."  2d  ed.  [Ribot's  "  Heredity  "  was  done
into  English  by  the  translator  of  the  present  work.]

FIN. 4£  SUPPOSITIONS.  345

sympathic  nerve  had  been  cut  begot  young  that  presented  the  effects
of  the  severing  of  that  nerve,  and  the  mother,  too,  at  the  time  of  lit-
tering and  afterward,  showed  the  same  effects."

So,  then,  the  operation  was  performed  on  the  sire,  but  the  dam
underwent  the  action  !  Is  that  in  any  degree  less  astonishing  than
nervic  contagion  or  mental  transmission  ?

At  bottom  all  these  phenomena  are  one.  A  drop  of  albumen  as  an
intermediary  is  not  more  comprehensible  than  mere  contact,  or  the
environing  media  as  intermediaries.  In  nature  there  are  no  absolute
limits,  all  things  are  linked  together  in  a  gradual  evolution.  If  the
dam  can  become  like  to  the  sire  through  a  physiological  transmission  ;
if  the  embryo,  after  inheriting  from  the  sire,  can  communicate  its
malady  to  the  dam  ;  if  nervous  diseases  are  heritable,  whether  with
or  without  transformation  ;  if  epilepsy  in  the  child  can  be  the  sequel
of  insanity  in  the  parents,  or  insanity  in  the  child  the  sequel  of
epilepsy  in  the  parents,  then  why  should  not  the  case  be  the  same
with  regard  to  a  close  contact  between  two  individuals — a  contact
much  broader  and  much  more  direct  than  that  of  a  spermatic  cor-
puscle, which,  after  all,  is  not  absorbed  by  the  dam,  but,  on  the
contrary,  is  nourished  and  is  transformed  at  her  expense.

And  nervic  contagion  once  accepted,  we  are  in  the  region  of  mental
suggestion,  and  we  reach  it,  as  has  been  seen,  by  a  series  of  interme-
diate phenomena :  transmission  of  healthiness,  of  sensations  of  the
magnetizer,  of  sensations  of  the  subject,  transmission  of  the  sense  of
exhaustion,  of  aches  and  pains,  of  objective  sensations,  of  emotions,
of  thoughts,  and  of  will.  Will-action  at  a  distance  is  but  the  last
term  of  a  long  evolutional  series.

And  at  the  bottom  of  all  this  there  is  but  one  thing,  the  same  thing
that  underlies  the  relation  of  the  magnet  to  iron,  of  the  sun  to  the
earth  :  transmission  and  transformation  of  motion.  It  remains  only
that  we  point  out  the  applications.

What  ?  Can  mental  suggestion  have  any  practical  application  ?
When  I  began  this  study,  I  little  thought  myself  that  it  could  have  ;
I  supposed 'I  was  dealing  only  with  questions  of  pure  theory,  and  so,
in  accordance  with  Mr.  Taine's  dictum,  when  I  came  upon  a  new  truth
I  cared  but  little  to  know  whether  it  was  of  any  use  or  not.  But
certain  facts  lately  observed  seem  to  be  of  a  sort  to  justify  an  imme-
diate application.

First,  I  would  remark  that  the  moment  you  admit  the  reality  of
mental  suggestion  you  must  make  amend  of  honor  to  the  magnetizers
and  reserve  to  that  influence  a  certain  part  in  the  general  practice  of
magnetism.  One  must  not  act  like  a  machine,  but  must  superadd  to
the  suggestive  or  the  physical  action  the  influence  of  a  concentrated
thought  and  a  firm  will.  True,  -the  act  is  performed  habitually  with-
out attaching  any  importance  to  this  point,  even  without  thinking  of

346  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

it.  But  they  who  hypnotize  often,  or  who  parade  their  own  purely
subjective  theories,  neglect  this  resource,  and  then  it  happens,  as  it
has  happened  to  me,  that  they  do  not  obtain  all  the  results  they  might.
For  example,  I  put  a  question  to  an  endormed  patient  that  has  always
answered  me  readily.  But  it  happens  that  to-day  she  is  in  a  pro-
founder  sleep  than  usual ;  so,  despite  my  reiterated  questioning,  she
makes  no  reply.  Supposing  that  there  might  be  some  contracture  of
the  vocal  muscles,  I  set  them  free  by  a  few  passes,  but  the  patient
still  made  no  answer.  The  patient's  right  arm  stirred,  as  though
she  wanted  to  write,  so  I  set  the  arm  free  and  gave  her  a  pen.  She
wrote  this  word  :  "Veziillez.'"  1  I  did  not  understand  her  meaning  and
was  annoyed,  as  she  was  also,  still  remaining  aphasic.  At  length
I  said  to  her  with  more  psychic  energy  :  "  Answer  me  ;  I  want  you
to  answer."  She  then  replied  and  explained  to  me  that  she  had
been  powerless  to  speak  because  I  had  not  willed  it  with  sufficient
firmness.

On  another  occasion  I  had  a  patient  whom  it  was  very  difficult  to
hypnotize,  and  in  whom  somnambulism  did  not  manifest  itself  till
after  three  months'  treatment.  After  a  few  days  some  progress  was
made  in  endorming  her,  but  thereafter  for  a  whole  year  her  sensibility
remained  in  statu  quo.  It  always  took  ten  or  fifteen  minutes  to  endorm
the  patient.  It  was  tiresome  work,  but  I  resigned  myself  to  it
and  performed  the  passes  listlessly.  When  a  year  had  passed  it
occurred  to  me  to  add  to  the  action  of  the  "regard  "  not  only  a  show
of  will  but  a  positively  stronger  exercise  of  will-power,  and  in  less
than  half  the  time  the  patient  was  endormed.

True,  in  this  particular  case,  had  I  employed  the  same  means
earlier,  I  should  probably  have  had  no  better  success.  The  patient
was  insensible  to  all  the  finer  magnetic  agencies.  But  about  the
time  referred  to  I  noticed  with  astonishment  that  she  was  becoming
sensitive  to  the  magnet  (sensitive,  I  mean,  apart  from  the  influence  of
the  imagination,  for  under  that  influence  she  was  from  the  first  slightly
sensitive  to  the  hypnoscope).  The  magnet,  when  placed  near  her  arm
while  she  was  in  lethargic  aideia,  produced,  for  the  first  time,  a  gen-
eral contracture.  This  it  was  that  gave  me  the  idea  of  trying  mental
action,  which,  by  itself,  never  had  any  effect  upon  her,  but  which  ma-
terially assisted  the  action  of  the  hand  or  of  the  eye.

I  know  that  in  the  great  majority  of  cases  mental  action  will  be  of
little  avail ;  but  as  one  never  knows  when  it  may  begin  to  be
efficacious,  one  will  do  well  to  try  it.

So,  too,  we  must  make  use  of  it  in  therapeutic  applications,  and  not
make  light  of  the  advice  of  magnetizers,  who  require  of  the  operator
a  certain  moral  sympathy  with  the  patient,  and  a  strong  desire  to  do
him  good.     We  must  take  account  of  our  physical  and  psychic  state

1  Imperative  mode  of  the  verb  meaning  to  will,  "  exert  will." — Translator.    '

FINAL  SUPPOSITIONS.  347

at  the  moment,  so  as  not  to  transmit  to  the  patient  an  indisposition  or
a  sense  of  depression.

Such  are  the  general  applications,  but  these  are  not  all.  Certain
other  facts  have  suggested  to  me  a  more  special  application.

At  first  I  supposed  (and  the  supposition  seems  entirely  logical)  that
where  verbal  suggestion  fails,  mental  suggestion  will,  a  fortiori,  be  of
no  use.

That  is  a  mistake.  Mental  suggestion  may  be  of  use,  and  even  of
great  use.

It  happens  sometimes,  particularly  in  nervous  and  mental  com-
plaints, that  some  subjection  being  recalled  to  the  patient's  mind,
produces  untoward  results.  Yet,  in  some  way  or  other,  the  matter
has  to  be  settled.  A  sensible  physician  knows  how  to  deal  with  the
natural  or  the  morbid  susceptibilities  of  his  patient,  and  goes  to  work
in  a  roundabout  way.  He  brings  the  patient  round  by  degrees.  But
very  often  this  is  of  no  avail,  especially  in  somnambulism  ;  the  recol-
lection of  the  most  trivial  circumstance  may  precipitate  a  paroxysm,
the  most  trifling  order  looking  in  a  given  direction  may  excite  opposi-
tion. Now,  it  is  just  in  such  cases  that  I  have  found  mental  sugges-
tion of  great  use.  I  would  add  that  the  two  subjects  on  whom  I
tried  this  experiment  were  not  suggestionable  directly,  whether  by
speech  or  by  mental  action.  In  one  case  the  question  was  about
removing  the  patient's  bed  to  another  apartment.  For  certain  reasons
it  was  impossible  to  make  the  patient  consent  to  the  change,  which,
nevertheless,  was  intended  for  her  own  good.  One  day  as  I  sat  by
her,  she  being  endormed,  I  kept  thinking  for  ten  minutes  at  least,
"You  are  going  to  have  the  bed  taken  into  the  other  apartment;"
"  The  bed  must  be  taken  into  the  other  apartment,"  and  so  on.  A
few  minutes  afterward  she  began  to  talk  with  me  about  different
things,  and  then  suddenly,  of  her  own  accord,  brought  up  the  question
of  the  bed  without  any  excitement  at  all ;  for  ten  minutes  she  dis-
cussed the  matter,  and  at  last  showed  a  disposition  to  agree  to  the
change.  Knowing  as  I  did  the  conditions,  I  was  almost  sure  that
mental  suggestion  had  had  something  to  do  with  her  sudden  change
of  mind  ;  but,  to  remove  all  doubt,  I  made  another  experiment.  So
again  for  about  ten  minutes  I  kept  thinking,  "You  are  going  to  put
your  right  hand  on  your  head  ;  "  "  Put  your  right  hand  on  your  head,"
and  so  on.  Immediate  action  there  was  none  ;  but  a  quarter  of  an
hour  afterward  she  put  her  right  hand  on  her  head  and  kept  it  there
for  ten  minutes,  without  any  reasonable  cause.

The  reader  recalls  another  case  like  this  one,  that  of  Miss  Z.  (p.  97
supra),  who  would  not  go  to  bed,  and  who,  after  withstanding  all  sorts
of  verbal  persuasion,  succumbed  to  a  suggestion  not  expressed  in
words,  to  a  retarded  mental  suggestion.

On  the  whole,  my  latest  observations  seem  to  prove  that  retarded

348  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

mental  suggestion  is  far  more  common  than  one  might  suppose,  i.  e.,
that  it  may  succeed  where  immediate  direct  action  is  absolutely  null.

That  is  a  result  that  assuredly  will  have  weight,  should  it  be  con-
firmed by  wider  observation.

Finally,  we  may  remark  that  with  subjects  with  whom  direct  sug-
gestion is  possible,  the  therapeutic  application  may  be  made  when-
ever a  train  of  mental  associations  is  to  be  broken  or  another  train  to
be  set  up  without  the  subject  suspecting  your  intention,  for,  as  we
know,  the  mental  suggestion  may  be  entirely  unnoticed  :  the  subject,
though  he  obeys  it,  still  thinks  he  is  acting  from  his  own  personal
motives.

Shall  I  say  anything  about  theoretical  applications  ?  They  are
very  many.  A  multitude  of  facts  hitherto  inadmissible  may,  nay
must,  henceforward  be  examined  seriously.  In  short,  psycho-physi-
cal transmission  may  be  able  to  account  for  :

i.  Certain  cases  of  instinctive  appreciation  of  diseases  ;

2.  Certain  cases  of  direct  nervic  contagion  ;

3.  Certain  illusions  of  observers  that  have  not  guarded  against  a
mental  influence  ;

4.  Certain  cases  of  alleged  second-sight  ;

5.  Certain  phenomena  of  veridical  hallucination,  hard  to  believe,
but  in  some  instances  well  attested  ;

6.  Communication  of  certain  sensations  in  the  dreams  of  normal
sleep  ;

7.  The  alleged  divinations  of  "  rapping  spirits  ;  "

8.  The  mysterious  influence  of  certain  personages  ;

9.  The  difference  between  one  "  hypnotizer  "  and  another  ;

10.  Sundry  facts  recorded  in  the  history  of  civilization  and  credited
to  demons,  oracles,  sorcerers,  obsessed  persons,  etc.1

1  Here  is  an  alleged  case  of  psycho-physical  transmission  of  a  kind  not  mentioned
by  our  author,  and  the  reader  may  set  a  big  interrogation  point  over  against  it,  but
let  him  recall  Arago's  dictum  :

"  The  strange  case  of  a  north-westerfi  Kansas  girl  is  attracting  much  attention.
Her  life  will  be  studied  at  the  summer  meeting  of  the  English  Psychical  Society.
She  is  Mary  Vennum,  a  resident  of  Rawlins  County,  and  it  is  believed  that  she  has
lived  two  lives.

"  The  Vennum  family  lived  near  a  family  named  Koff.  The  latter  had  a  daughter
about  the  age  of  Mary,  who  "died  of  epilepsy.  Mary  Vennum  was  also  subject  to
this  disease.

' '  While  she  was  suffering  from  an  attack  the  Koff s  called  on  her,  and  were  startled
to  see  how  closely  she  resembled  their  daughter.  After  many  hours  of  suffering  Mary
came  out  of  her  fit,  and,  although  she  was  not  changed  in  feature,,  she  seemed  entirely
changed  in  mind.

"  To  all  intents  and  purposes  she  became  Mary  Koff.  Where  the  latter's  life  was
broken  off  she  took  it  up,  and  she  was  allowed  to  go  and  live  with  the  Koffs,  her
family  hoping  it  would  cure  her.  She  was  perfectly  content  in  her  new  home,  and
from  the  moment  she  stepped  inside  the  door  seemed  familiar  with  the  household.
Though  she  had  never  visited  the  house  before,  she  seemed  to  recognize  the  belong-
ings of  the  dead  girl  as  her  own.  On  one  occasion  she  ran  through  the  house,
saying :

' '  '  Mother,  where  is  my  pink  cape  ? '

FINAL  SUPPOSITIONS.  349

"But  will  not  that  be  simply  a  revival  of  occultism  and  magic?"

Precisely  so.  Nor  shall  I  complain,  for  this  occultism  and  this
magic  come  back  as  a  science.  They  may  regenerate  science.  Latter-
day  science  is  slightly  at  fault  for  lack  of  imagination.  She  has
become  "routinized,"  has  shut  herself  up  in  a  bleak  and  arid  region,
has  puttered  with  petty  details,  petty  measures,  and  petty  formulas,
all  highly  useful  and  necessary  ;  but  they  never  can  constitute  a
science.  A  science  is  not  complete  without  a  general  conception,  that,
is,  a  philosophical  conception.  In  the  past  the  philosophical  imagi-
nation was  so  misused,  we  think  it  our  duty  to  do  entirely  without  it.
Men  think  that  the  scientific  positivism  that  debars  the  study  of
"efficient"  causes  and  "final  "  causes  as  in  fact  beyond  our  ken  in
our  present  stage  of  evolution,  must  debar  such  study  forever,  and  not
only  that,  but  the  study  of  every  alleged  phenomenon  that  seems
visibly  to  lie  beyond  the  boundary  of  our  knowledge.

Such  prejudice  is  to  be  condemned.  The  old  unscientific  systems
are  dead,  and  that  is  well  ;  but  it  is  not  well  that  no  better  system
has  come  to  take  their  place.  We  must  advance  with  all  caution,
but  we  must  advance,  not  only  with  regard  to  minor  observations,  but
also  with  regard  to  a  philosophic  conception  that  shall  steadily  become
broader,  bolder  and  more  profound.

Now,  we  shall  never  attain  a  view  of  the  sum  of  phenomena  unless
we  free  ourselves  from  the  routine  of  the  schools,  and  unless  we
attack  manfully  the  problems  of  occultism  and  magic.

For,  take  note,  the  sensist  doctrine  itself  holds  that  man  does  not
invent  problems,  but  derives  them  from  his  experience.  Magic  is
only  an  experimental  science  set  on  a  wrong  basis,  distorted,  incom-
plete, degenerated — what  you  will  :  yet  a  science  in  its  beginnings
experimental.  Let  us  take  up  anew  these  studies  with  the  improved
instrumentalities  that  we  possess,  with  the  precise  methods  we  are  so
proud  of,  and  we  shall  see  a  progress  we  look  not  for  take  its  start
from  this  alliance  between  the  past  and  the  present — we  shall  see  a
new  Renascence.     I  am  mistaken  or  it  is  already  begun.

The  great  discoveries  and  inventions  of  these  latter  years  bear  the
stamp  of  the  marvelous  as  well  as  of  strict  method  :  disks  of  metal
and  light-rays  are  made  to  speak,  we  make  chemical  analysis  of  the
heavenly  bodies,  we  attack  the  problem  of  electric  vision  at  a  distance,
we  bring  to  the  front  again  the  medical  lore  of  the  exorcists  and  the
miracles  of  the  stigmatizati,  we   exhume  the  ancient  spiritism,  we  go

"  '  What  do  you  mean  ? '  asked  Mrs.  Koff,  and  then  she  rembered  that  her  daugh-
ter had  had  a  pink  calico  cape,  which  she  wore  before  she  died.     Again  she  inquired:

"' Where  is  Gyp  ?  I  want  to  see  him.  I  am  afraid  he  has  not  been  properly
cared  for.'

"  Gyp  had  been  the  favorite  dog  of  Mary  Koff,  and  had  been  dead  for  six  years.
His  name  had  never  been  mentioned  before  Mary  Vennum,  and  Mrs.  Koff  does  not
remember  having  ever  spoken  of  him  singe  their  acquaintance  with  the  Vennums." —
Newspaper  telegram,  dated  Abilene,  Kan.,  July  3,  1891.

35 o  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

back  to  the  amulets  of  metallotherapy,  to  the  massage  of  olden  priest-
craft, to  the  magic  formularies  of  the  Orient.

So  much  the  better  !  I  like  well  to  see  this  awaking  of  a  spirit
mature  and  strong  to  the  phantasies  of  youth.  Can  it  be  that  we  are
not  quite  so  sure  of  the  soundness  of  our  logic,  of  our  mental  equi-
librium, and  of  our  positive  tendencies,  rooted  as  they  are  by  the  ex-
perience of  a  century,  as  not  to  be  afeared  of  an  outbreak  of  mys-
ticism ?

No  !  Occultism  is  not  a  source  of  danger  to  civilization  in  that  it
exists,  but  in  that  it  has  possessed  itself  of  some  rays  of  light  which
science  does  not  strive  to  regain  for  itself.

Clearly  there  will  ever  be  unkempt  enthusiasts  whose  delight  it  is
to  contemplate  the  vague  and  the  obscure.  But  it  is  not  such  as  these
that  keep  alive  popular  errors  and  prejudgments.  Those  errors  are
kept  alive  by  the  aspirations  of  those  who,  dissatisfied  with  a  science
that  only  makes  darkness  visible,  look  for  a  clearer  light,  and  seek  it
after  the  manner  of  night-flitting  moths  :  they  singe  their  wings.

An  intelligent  physician,  of  lively  imagination,  a  sincere  inquirer,
but  a  skeptic  from  scientific  routine,  attended  a  spiritist  seance.  He
went  there  to  oblige  a  friend,  not  even  out  of  curiosity,  being  con-
vinced that  the  whole  thing  was  "  imposture  or  illusion."  With  a
smile  on  his  lips  he  put  a  few  questions  to  the  "  spirits,"  just  to
expose  the  stupidity  of  mankind.  But  the  "  spirit  "  took  his  revenge.
The  medium's  unconscious  divined  his  thoughts,  and  our  skeptic  was
confounded,  amazed,  and  like  an  honest  man  published  the  truth.  In-
asmuch as  science  has  never  troubled  itself  about  the  phenomenon  of
mental  suggestion,  he  knew  nothing  about  it,  and  believed  it  impos-
sible ;  so  he  fell  into  mysticism,  became  a  spiritist,  and  is  engaged  in
propagating  the  contagion.

Science  lost  a  useful  man.  Why  ?  Because  from  vanity,  or  from
over-confidence,  it  disregarded  the  discoveries  of  its  fallen  rival.

No  ;  mental  suggestion  does  not  favor  occultism,  on  the  contrary  it
banishes  it.  And  once  recognized,  once  regenerated  by  positive
science,  it  will  interpret  to  us,  in  language  more  forceful  and  more
worthy  of  our  age,  the  mysterious  echo  of  ancient  truths.

APPENDIX.

I.

Note  on  a  Criterion  of  Hypnotic  Sensibility  ;  The  Hypnoscope  ;
A  New  Method  of  Diagnosis.  By  J.  Ochorowicz.  Presented
to  the  (Paris)  Biological  Society  by  Mr.  Ch.  Richet,  May  17,
1884.

I  have  the  honor  to  present  to  the  Society  .the  results  of  my  re-
searches made  in  1880-82  in  the  University  of  Lemberg,  in  Cracow,  in
Warsaw,  in  the  Tatra  mountains,  and  during  the  last  two  years  in
Paris.  As  I  consider  them  to  be  of  some  practical  value,  I  propose  to
give  a  brief  account  of  them  before  publishing  the  observations  in
detail.  I  will  point  out  the  advantages  to  be  gained'  for  physiology
and  medicine  from  the  physiological  action  of  the  magnet.  That
action,  as  I  am  well  aware,  is  by  no  means  accepted  by  all ;  but  from
the  empiric  point  of  view,  which  I  am  at  this  moment  taking,  I  can
leave  to  the  reader  the  liberty  of  looking  on  this  action  as  purely
psychic  or  suggestional  :  the  results  will  be  none  the  less  true,  none
the  less  important.

The  form  of  magnet  that  I  have  definitively  settled  upon  as  the  best
for  practical  use,  is  much  like  Joule's  electro-magnet,  differing  from  it
in  that  in  mine  the  lines  of  force  are  inside  instead  of  outside  of  the
magnetized  tube.  To  distinguish  the  style  of  magnet  that  I  employ
from  all  others,  to  avoid  repetition,  and  to  indicate  the  purpose  for
which  it  is  used,  I  call  this  little  apparatus  a  "hypnoscope."  I  hope
it  will,  before  long,  find  its  place  in  medical  practice  alongside  Weber's
a^sthesiometer.

The  advantage  gained  by  the  use  of  the  hypnoscope  is  twofold  :

1.  It  gives  us  the  criterion  of  hypnotic  sensibility,  i.  e.,  facilitates
greatly  investigation  of  the  phenomena  of  hypnotism  ;

2.  It  gives  to  the  physician  a  new  means  of  diagnosis  in  nervous
disorders.

The  mode  of  applying  it  is  as  follows :  the  index  finger  of  the
person  to  be  tested  is  introduced  into  the  tube  of  the  hypnoscope  so
as  to  touch  both  poles  at  once  ;  after  two  minutes  the  finger  is  with-
drawn and  the  effects  produced  in  the  finger  are  examined.

352  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

In  seventy  persons  in  one  hundred  taken  at  random  no  change  will
be  observed.  In  about  thirty,  two  kinds  of  effects  will  be  noticed  :
subjective  effects  and  objective.  The  former  consist  of  subjective
sensations,  chiefly  these :  a  feeling  as  of  a  breath  of  cool  or  warm  air,
a  tingling  or  pricking  sensation,  a  feeling  as  if  the  skin  were  puffed
out,  numbness  of  the  muscles,  pains  of  different  kinds,  a  sense  of
heaviness  in  the  finger  or  in  the  whole  arm,  etc.  The  objective  effects
belong  to  one  or  other  of  these  three  categories  ;

i.  Involuntary  movements :  uncontrollable  tremor  of  the  index
finger,  or  of  the  whole  arm  ;

2.  Insensibility  more  or  less  pronounced,  analgesia,  anaesthesia,
especially  in  the  tip  of  the  finger,  sometimes  in  the  whole  arm  ;

3.  Paralysis  and  contracture,  more  or  less  manifest,  amounting  some-
times to  complete  rigidity  ;  elastic  rigidity  (what  Nelaton  calls  doigt  a
ressort).1

The  phenomena  thus  produced  disappear  after  a  few  minutes  under
very  gentle  massage  ;  without  massage  they  may  continue  for  several
minutes,  or  even  for  several  hours.

There  is  a  constant  parallelism  between  this  faculty  of  being
influenced  by  a  magnet  and  hypnotic  sensibility.  All  persons  who  show
sensibility  to  the  magnet  are  more  or  less  hypnotizable  ;  all  other
persons  are  refractory.

The  number  and  the  degree  of  the  effects,  subjective  and  objective,
correspond  to  the  degree  of  the  person's  hypnotic  sensibility.  Whenever
the  subjective  and  objective  phenomena  are  easily  produced,  one  may
infer  a  high  degree  of  sensibility  ;  the  sensibility  is  small  when  but
one  of  the  three  classes  of  effects  is  exhibited,  or  when  the  effects  are
but  little  marked.  But  one  must  be  on  his  guard  against  purely  acci-
dental sensations  produced  by  emotion.  These  are  easily  recognized,
for  the  true  sensations  always  reappear  when  the  test  is  repeated,
while  the  imaginary  ones  disappear,  or  change  their  character  at  the
second  trial.

The  few  exceptions  to  the  above-mentioned  general  rule  can  always
be  traced  to  secondary  causes,  and  rather  confirm  the  rule.  It  is
known,  for  instance,  that  the  habit  of  being  influenced  by  stimuli  of
a  definite  kind  enhances  the  sensibility  for  that  sort  of  stimuli,  and  so
it  may  be  that  a  person  that  has  been  frequently  hypnotized  by  a
given  method  will  be  relatively  less  sensitive  to  the  magnet  on  the
first  trial  ;  but  we  have  only  to  take  the  same  course  with  the  magnet
in  order  to  bring  out  the  normal  parallelism,  as  is  seen  when  after  the
hypnoscopic  test  hypnotization  is  tried  for  the  first  time.

I  would  remark  further  that  hypnotic  sensibility  on  the  one  hand,
and  magnetic  sensibility  on  the  other,  may  be  modified,  or  even  done

1  Literally  "  finger  with  a  spring,"  i.  <?..  one  that  when  bent  springs  back  to  its
original  posture,  as  if  it  were  actuated  by  a  spring. —  Translator.

APPENDIX.  353

away  by  suggestion  in  the  monoideic  state.  Nor  must  it  be  forgotten
that  "hypnotic  sensibility"  is  not  synonymous  with  "somnambulism
with  loss  of  memory."  The  latter  phenomenon  cannot  be  produced  in
more  than  about  15  per  100  of  subjects,  while  with  15  per  cent,  more
several  phenomena  can  be  obtained  without  complete  sleep.

It  happens  even  that  we  may  by  the  aid  of  the  hypnoscope  discover
a  very  high  degree  of  sensibility,  restricted,  however,  to  inhibitory
phenomena  of  muscles,  and  in  that  case  the  subject  will  be  readily
hypnotizable  in  the  sense  that  it  will  be  possible  to  tetanize  him  com-
pletely, though  we  may  be  unable  to  endorm  him.  More  rarely  we
observe  with  the  aid  of  the  hypnoscope  insensibility  alone,  and  then,
too,  it  is  difficult  to  produce  sleep,  and  impossible  to  produce  con-
tractures.

In  short,  the  hypnoscope  reveals  to  us  a  special  nervic  aptitude
peculiar  to  a  relatively  large  number  of  persons  who  enjoy,  or  seem
to  enjoy,  perfect  health.  This  aptitude  is  not  synonymous  with
general  nervousness,  for  a  good  many  exceedingly  nervous  persons
are  refractory  to  the  action  of  the  magnet  and  to  hypnotization,  while
we  find  excellent  subjects  among  those  who  are  not  at  all  "  nervous."
Women  in  vigorous  health  have  in  general  less  sensibility  than  men,
but  among  persons  suffering  from  disease  the  women  have  by  far
the  greater  sensibility.  Sometimes  the  proportion  is,  for  women,  45
per  cent.;  for  men,  35  per  cent.  But  it  is  certain  that  in  nervous  dis-
orders the  hypnotic  sensibility  is  great,  and  that  of  the  victims  of  the
major  hysteria  but  few  are  refractory.

Nevertheless,  we  must  not  confound  hysteria,  epilepsy,  neurasthenia,
still  less  anaemia,  with  hypnotic  sensibility,  which  is  a  complex  aptitude,
but  sui  generis.  It  probably  depends  on  special  reflex  relations  sub-
sisting between  the  cerebro-spinal  system  and  the  ganglionic  system,
and,  above  all,  between  the  brain  and  the  vasomotor  nerves.

It  remains  that  I  make  a  few  observations  upon  the  use  of  the
magnet  as  an  instrument  of  diagnosis.  A  simple  hypnoscopic  experi-
ment of  itself  gives  us  a  deep  insight  into  the  mysteries  of  the  patient's
nervous  system.  It  brings  out  in  a  minute  all  the  weak  points  of  his
nervous  organization,  one  after  another.  If  there  is  any  functional
anomaly  whatever,  the  patient  will  for  a  moment  feel  pains,  or  will  be
seized  with  convulsions ;  complaints  that  are  past  and  gone,  and  that
for  years  have  made  no  sign,  make  their  appearance  for  an  instant  in
miniature  ;  the  tendencies  of  nascent  diseases  are  revealed  ;  epileptics
feel  the  oncoming  of  an  attack  (but  the  actual  attack  is  even  thereby
deferred  and  made  milder)  ;  we  are  enabled  readily  to  distinguish
functional  anaesthesis  or  paralysis  from  organic,  for  the  former  begins
to  disappear  under  the  magnet,  and  where  the  complaint  is  clearly
organic  there  is  always  hope  of  betterment  when  the  hypnoscope
produces  any  effect  at  all.     In  many  cases  of  paraplegia  we  are  able

354  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

to  determine  exactly  the  limits  of  the  spinal  lesion  by  passing  a
magnet  along  the  vertebral  column.  In  some  cases  of  neuralgia  and
of  paresis,  the  magnet  produces  heat  on  one  side  and  intense  cold  on
the  other,  thus  indicating  exactly  the  sensor  or  the  motor  nerves
affected  by  the  disease,  and  so  on.  Hence  it  would  be  an  unpardon-
able negligence  were  one  obstinately  to  reject  this  harmless  agency —
one,  too,  so  instructive — on  the  pretext  that  the  physiological  action
of  the  magnet  is  as  yet  unknown.  In  the  revelations  of  the  hypno-
scope  I  see  the  necessity  of  a  discrimination  in  therapeutic.  It  begins
to  be  seen  that  it  is  useless,  or  even  imprudent,  to  apply  the  self-
same remedies  to  sensitive  patients  as  to  those  without  sensibility.
With  very  many  hypnotizable  patients  remedies  are  all  equally  good
or  equally  bad,  according  to  the  particular  nervic  influences.  We  can
by  suggestion  neutralize  the  strongest  doses  of  the  most  typical  medi-
cines, and  again  by  suggestion  we  can  produce  their  typical  effects  in
the  most  unmistakable  way.  With  sensitive  patients  we  often  bring
about  a  change  for  the  better  in  an  instant  by  means  of  a  number  of
simple  operations  that  hypnotism  and  magnetism  place  at  our  disposal.
Will  physicians  still  insist  on  administering  poisons  which  do  injury
even  when  they  cure  ?

II.

On  Ideoplasty  ;  The  Facts  Classified.  Note  by  Dr.  Julian
Ochorowicz,  presented  to  the  (Paris)  Biological  Society,  June  21,
1884.

Ideoplasty J  signifies  physiological  realization  of  an  idea.  It  in-
cludes all  the  phenomena  that  come  under  the  term  (vocal)  "  sug-
gestion," and  also  all  similar  phenomena  produced  without  the
intervention  of  a  second  party,  i.  e.,  all  the  phenomena  of  "self-
suggestion,"  or  "spontaneous  suggestion."  Thus  we  have  ideoplasty
whenever  the  thought  alone  of  any  functional  modification  determines
such  functional  modification.

The  phenomena  of  ideoplasty  are  but  instances  of  the  action  of  a
general  law,  to  wit,  the  law  of  reversibility.  All  transformations  of
force  are  reversible.  -  If  heat  can  produce  mechanical  motion,  so
mechanical  motion  can  produce  heat.  If  electricity  produces  mag-
netism, magnetism  too  can  develop  electric  currents.  If  the  voice
can  cause  undulatory  currents,  so  can  such  currents  reproduce  the
voice ;  and  so  on.  This  law  is  of  the  highest  philosophic  importance,
because  it  enables  us  to  foresee  the  inverse  transformation  once  the
direct  transformation  is  verified  ;  and  it  often  happens  that  the  trans-
formation of  a  into  b  is  fully  known,  while  the  transformation  of  b

1  The  word  was  first  employed  by  Dr.  Phillips  in  a  slightly  different  sense.  See
his  "  Cours  Theorique  et  Pratique  de  Braidisme,"  p.  44,  sqq.      Paris,  1868.

APPENDIX.  355

into  a  has  yet  to  be  made  out.  For  example,  the  phonautograph
(mechanical  motion  caused  by  speech)  was  known  for  a  long  time
before  any  one  dreamed  of  the  possibility  of  an  inverse  transforma-
tion, i.  e.y  the  reproduction  of  speech  by  mechanical  motion  (the
phonograph).

So  then  ideoplasty  is  an  instance  of  the  operation  of  this  universal
law  of  nature.  Commonly  it  is  the  sensation  that  gives  rise  to  the
thought  ;  in  ideoplasty  it  is  the  idea  that  gives  rise  to  the  sensation..
This  inverse  transformation  is  called  hallucination  when  it  occurs
spontaneously,  and  we  have  habitually  given  to  suggestion  the  name
of  artificial  (provoque'e)  hallucination.  In  both  forms  there  is  ideo-
plasty of  sensations,  or  passive  ideoplasty.  This  may  be  either  positive
or  negative.  It  is  positive  when  it  determines  perception  of  an
excitant  that  does  not  exist ;  it  is  fiegative  when  it  renders  perception
of  a  real  agent  impossible.  Phenomena  of  the  former  class  are  well
known,  those  of  the  latter  class  not  so  well,  but  I  have  many  a  time
had  evidence  that  it  is  possible  for  example  to  render  invisible  to  the
subject,  even  in  the  waking  state,  a  person,  an  object,  or  a  portion  of
an  object  or  of  a  person  ;  so  that  the  retina  of  the  hypnotizable  sub-
ject, even  when  awake,  shall  be  absolutely  insensible  to  a  given
object.  And  if,  for  instance,  the  magnetizer  renders  invisible  a  per-
son that  is  smoking  a  cigarette,  the  person,  the  cigarette  and  the
smoke  will  be  invisible  to  the  subject  ;  but  if  the  person  lights
another  cigarette  that  has  not  been  bewitched  by  negative  ideoplasty,
the  subject  will  be  amazed  to  see  a  lighted  cigarette  moving  through
the  air.

Besides  ideoplasty  of  sensations  there  is  another  kind  of  ideoplasty,
which  we  shall  call  ideoplasty  of  movements,  or  active  ideoplasty.  Like  ideo-
plasty of  sensations,  it  may  be  either  positive  or  negative.  Examples  :
i.  The  thought  of  yawning  of  itself  produces  yawning;  or  one  suggests
to  a  somnambulic  subject  any  movement,  and  it  is  impossible  for  him
to  refrain  from  performing  it.  In  this  way  we  can,  for  instance,  com-
mand the  writing  of  a  testament,  or  even  the  commission  of  a  murder,
nay,  even  suicide.  In  the  state  of  monoideism,  the  object  of  the
suggestion  is  indifferent,  for  the  subject  is  totally  incapable  of  resist-
ing. Recent  experiments  have  proved  this,  and  the  fact  is  beyond
question.  2.  So,  too,  we  can  hinder  the  performance  of  certain
voluntary  movements.  You  draw  an  imaginary  line,  for  instance,  and
the  subject  finds  it  impossible  to  overstep  it,  not  because  of  any
momentary  paralysis  of  the  muscles,  for  they  may  remain  supple,  but
because  of  a  momentary  amnesia  of  the  bodily  movements  at  a  given
instant ;  for  there  is  psychic  amnesia  of  ambulation  just  as  there  is
amnesia  of  words.  But  it  is  the  thought  of  the  impossibility  of
movement  that  renders  it  impossible  :  this,  therefore,  is  negative
active  ideoplasty.

3  5  6  MENTAL '  S  UG  GES  TION.

The  two  categories  just  mentioned  do  not  include  all  the  phenomena
of  ideoplasty.  There  is  a  third,  which  embraces  facts  that  are  truly
surprising  :  this  we  shall  call  material  (or  trophic)  ideoplasty.  We  have
to  do  now,  not  with  a  subjective  sensitivo-motor  effect,  but  with  a  real,
an  objective  change  in  the  vital  functions,  and  in  particular  of  the
vegetative  functions.  Material  ideoplasty  may  also  be  either  positive
or  negative.  It  is  a  common  thing  for  a  person  after  receiving  a  burn
mentally  to  represent  to  himself  the  pain  of  a  burn,  but  is  it  possible
for  the  idea  of  a  burn  to  produce  an  actual  local  inflammation  ?

However  improbable  that  may  seem,  it  is  none  the  less  true.  By
dint  of  protracted  passive  ideoplasty,  local  inflammation  may  some-
times be  produced,  or  even  a  blister  ;  and  inversely  I  have  in  one  case
succeeded  in  dissipating,  by  means  of  suggestion  in  the  hypnotic  state,
a  very  definite  dental  fluxion  of  two  days'  standing.  Beginning  with
passive  hallucinative  ideoplasty  I  procured  the  complete  disappear-
ance of  the  boil  in  25  minutes.  These  experiments  account  for  the
extraordinary  fact  of  stigmata,  and  they  are  well  worthy  of  being  re-
peated by  other  magnetizers.  Again,  we  can,  by  prolonged  sugges-
tion, produce  not  only  the  sensations  of  heat  and  cold,  but  also  an
actual  increase  of  the  surface  temperature.  In  one  instance  I  obtained
a  diminution  of  0.90,1  and  the  diminution  lasted  several  hours.  So,
too,  we  can  lessen  or  increase  the  rate  of  pulsation,  the  secretions,
and  in  general  the  physiological  exchange  of  matter.  We  can  give
the  subject  a  prodigious  appetite  and  cram  him  for  hours.  We  can
at  pleasure  fix  with  precision  the  duration  of  natural  sleep,  and  can
cure  insomnia.  Finally,  we  can  alter  for  several  weeks  the  appe-
tences and  the  moral  character  of  a  subject.  It  is  impossible  to  cite
here  all  the  facts  observed  by  me,  but  these  will  suffice,  I  hope,  to
win  the  attention  of  physiologists.

And  just  as  we  can  produce  material  modifications  in  the  functions
of  the  subject,  so,  too,  we  can  save  him  from  influences  that  else  would
produce  certain  functional  modifications.  This  is  an  instance  of
negative  material  ideoplasty.  It  is  possible,  for  example,  by  simple
suggestion  in  the  state  of  monoideism,  to  render  the  subject  totally
refractory  to  a  strong  dose  of  alcohol,  opium,  morphine,  or  the  like.
I  venture  even  to  hold-  the  opinion  that  the  effect  of  a  lethal  dose  of
poison  might  at  least  be  reduced  ;  and  it  would  be  well  to  try  this
method  of  psychic  inoculation  in  cases  of  hydrophobia  and  of  cholera
when  the  patients  happen  to  be  hypnotizable  subjects.

In  general,  in  all  the  three  categories  of  ideoplasty,  just  as  it  is
possible  to  produce  certain  pathologic  functional  changes,  so  it  is
often  possible,  too,  to  cause  them  to  disappear  when  they  arise  spon-
taneously as  diseases.  This  is  mind-cure,  and  it  has  been  unjustly
neglected.

1  Centigrade.

APPENDIX.  357

Persons  who  are  sensitive  to  ideoplastic  influences  are  keenly  sensi-
tive to  the  hypnoscope.

I  reserve  for  a  future  communication  a  sketch  of  a  psycho- physio-
logical theory  of  ideoplasty.

III.

On  the  Theory  of  Ideoplasty.     Note  by  Dr.  J.  Ochorowicz,  pre-
sented to  the  (Paris)  Biological  Society,  June  28,  1884.

According  to  the  classification  set  forth  in  my  preceding  communi-
cation, three  categories  of  ideoplastic  phenomena  may  be  distinguished,
viz.  :

1.  Ideoplasty  of  sensations  :  positive  and  negative;  ,

2.  Ideoplasty  of  movements  :  positive  and  negative  ;

3.  Material  or  trophic  ideoplasty  :  positive  and  negative.

It  remains  for  us  now  to  explain  the  facts.  Explaining  means
reducing  an  isolated  fact  to  known  conditions  that  suffice  and  that
are  necessary.  The  conditions  of  ideoplasty  are  twofold  :  psychic
and  physiological.

Psychic  Conditions.  Ideas  may  be  regarded  as  in  a  certain  sense
forces.  They  are  linked  together  by  associations,  and  their  action,  as
a  rule,  is  manifested  inwardly  only.  If  they  are  to  produce  an  effect
external  with  respect  to  the  brain,  there  must  be  either  an  excitation
from  without  or  an  act  of  will.  In  ideoplasty  it  is  otherwise,  the  idea
producing  an  effect  without  any  sufficient  external  excitation,  and
independently  of  any  act  of  will,  sometimes  even  counter  to  excitations
and  will.  Whence  this  autonomy  of  ideas  ?  It  comes  of  an  increase
of  their  intensity.  The  idea  of  a  source  of  light,  as  that  idea  grows
in  intensity,  becomes  transformed  into  a  sensation  of  light.  The
representation1  of  a  movement,  by  becoming  more  intense,  produces
that  movement ;  and  so  on.  And  what  is  the  cause  of  this  increase
of  intensity  ?  This  :  ordinarily  an  idea  never  presents  itself  alone,
but  is  always  associated  with  a  group  of  other  ideas.  While  I  am
thinking  of  a  lion  that  I  do  not  see,  I  see  the  paper  on  which  I  am
writing  these  words  ;  I  see  my  hand,  the  pen,  the  writing ;  I  am  con-
scious of  the  position  of  my  members ;  I  hear  the  noises  of  the  street ;
and  so  on.  All  these  ideas,  sensations,  and  representations  are  pic-
tured in  my  mind  with  more  or  less  distinctness.  The  greater  their
number,  the  less  distinct  are  they,  for  they  rub  one  another  out,
paralyze  one  another.  When  I  concentrate  my  thought  upon  a  dis-
tant sound,  I  catch  that  sound  more  clearly  ;  but  at  the  same  time  I

1  Representation  here  =  idea  above.  Both  terms  are  used  by  the  author  to  mean
the  residuum  of  a  sense-impression  in  the  mind  when  the  outward  object  no  longer
presents  itself  actually  to  the  senses. —  Translator.

358  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

am  relatively  insensible  to  other  sounds  ;  and  often  while  we  wait
impatiently  for  a  signal  that  has  been  agreed  upon  to  be  given,  we
get  it  through  ideoplasty  before  it  has  really  been  given.  Hence  it  is
through  an  isolating  of  the  attention,  by  elimination  of  extrane  ideas,
that  the  dominant  idea  gains  its  exceptional  intensity.  It  is  stronger
than  usual  because  it  stands  alone,  and  because  it  meets  no  obstacles
within.  I  may,  while  writing,  represent  to  myself  the  act  of  yawning,
and  the  representation  will  rest  in  my  mind  as  a  mere  recollection  of
a  reflex  movement,  being  counterbalanced  by  other  ideas ;  but  if,
having  nothing  to  occupy  my  thoughts,  I  contemplate  passively  a
person  that  is  yawning,  I  myself  shall  begin  to  yawn  through  imitative
ideoplasty.  In  all  cases  of  ideoplasty  one  psychic  condition  is  essen-
tial :  to  wit,  there  must  be  a  marked  tendency  toward  monoideism,  i.e.,
toward  isolation  of  the  dominant  idea.  Otherwise  that  idea  will
remain  weak,  and  will  be  unable  to  translate  itself  into  a  sensation  or
a  motion.  Material  ideoplasty  betokens  a  still  more  pronounced  state
of  monoideism.  Material  ideoplasty  cannot  be  produced  save  in  the
perfect  hypnotic  state  (though  that  be  but  momentary),  and  by  vig-
orous and  prolonged  monoideic  action.  Then  it  is  that  the  idea  attains
the  maximum  of  its  potency,  and  reigns  supreme.  All  extrane  sensa-
tions are  done  away,  and  the  mind  is  become  tabula  rasa  whereon  the
suggested  idea  is  reflected  with  unwonted  intensity.  The  dominant
idea  then  controls  the  entire  nervous  system.

But  how  can  the  idea  of  a  haemorrhage,  for  example,  which  is
simply  something  subjective,  mental,  produce  actual  haemorrhage,
which  is  an  objective,  material  fact  ?  To  understand  that  we  must
consider  the  physiological  conditions.

Physiological  Conditions. — Doubtless  the  trophic  changes  produced
by  material  ideoplasty  are  brought  about  by  the  agency  of  the
vasomotor  nerves.  A  super-excitation  or  a  paralysis  of  these  nerves
in  their  different  combinations,  might  account  for  them  more  or  less
fully.  But  how  comes  an  idea  to  influence  the  vasomotor  nerves  ?
Strictly  speaking,  it  is  not  the  idea  as  such  that  determines  these
changes.  The  idea  is  but  the  starting-point  of  an  action,  not  the
agent  properly  so-called.  And  here  I  desire  to  call  attention  to  a
class  of  associations  highly  important,  but  not  much  studied.  It  is
not  to  be  supposed  that  only  ideas  associate  with  one  another.  There
are  also  psycho-physical  associations  between  ideas  on  the  one  hand,
and  certain  organic  states  on  the  other.  These  stales,  which  are
physiological  complexes  of  great  diversity,  never  reach  the  conscious-
ness :  we  can  move  one  finger  or  another,  albeit  we  have  no  notion
either  of  the  nerves  or  of  the  muscles,  or  of  the  nerve  currents  that
have  to  come  into  play  to  produce  such  movements,  It  is  ideorganic
association  that  sees  to  the  execution  of  our  will.     This  association   is

APPENDIX.  359

partly  hereditary,  partly  acquired,  but  even  so  far  as  it  is  acquired,  it
is  still  unconscious  ;  only  the  first  link  of  the  chain,  to  wit,  the  idea,
reaches  the  conciousness.  Now,  in  material  ideoplasty  we  have  to  do
with  associations  of  this  sort.  On  the  one  side  is  the  idea  of  a  change  ;
on  the  other  an  organic  complexus  that  effects  the  change.  And  as,
in  the  reproduction  of  ideas,  the  idea  that  is  present  awakens  a  past
sensation  or  a  past  movement,  so  here  the  dominant  idea  calls  up
some  particular  organic  state  wherewith  it  is  in  unconscious  associa-
tion. We  have  here  a  sort  of  memory,  but  an  unconscious,  a
materialized  memory.

And  a  right  strong  memory  it  is.  If,  on  the  one  hand,  pathological
states  of  organs  may  determine  morbid  ideas  in  the  brain,  on  the  other
hand,  in  virtue  of  the  law  of  reversibility,  ideas  favorable  or  unfavor-
able to  health  may  mend  or  mar  the  general  state  of  the  organism.
The  influence  is  perfectly  mutual,  for  it  is  exerted  between  two  links  of
o-ne  same  chain  of  association.  Sometimes  a  mere  change  of  surround-
ings suffices  to  produce  a  betterment ;  for,  in  a  given  place,  every-
thing, however  indifferent  in  itself,  is,  in  an  unconscious  way,  asso-
ciated with  a  morbid  state,  and  tends  to  produce  it,  to  maintain  it,
favors  its  continuance  through  ideorganic  association.  There  are  per-
sons (the  fact  has  been  noted  by  Boerhaave)  in  whom  the  idea  of  a
disease,  the  exact  representation  of  its  symptoms,  suffices  to  deter-
mine the  disease  itself — the  real  ailment.  That  is  an  extreme  case,
but  the  agency  that  there  comes  into  play  remains.  When  some  one
tells  us  of  a  "  stifling  heat,"  we  understand  well  what  he  is  talking
about,  for  the  idea  of  heat  calls  up  in  us  the  physiological  state  of
being  heated.  Suppose  a  greater  degree  of  sensibility,  an  exceptional
power  of  ideorganic  reproduction,  and  you  shall  see  an  actual  rise
of  the  subject's  temperature.  If  it  is  true,  as  has  been  well  remarked
by  Mr.  Brown-Sequard,  that  the  phenomena  of  hypnotism  are  but
manifestations  of  inhibition  or  of  dynamogeny,  then  the  phenomena
of  ideoplasty  are  only  facts  of  inhibition  or  of  dynamogeny  condi-
tioned by  an  ideorganic  association,  while  the  other  cases  of  inhibi-
tion and  dynamogeny  depend  on  associations  purely  physiological —
inter-organic.  If,  for  example,  excitation  of  the  splanchnic  nerve
arre§ts  movements  of  the  intestine,  that  is  because  these  two  phe-
nomena apparently  so  far  apart — irritation  of  the  splanchnic  nerve
and  paresis  of  the  muscles  of  the  ccecum — are,  in  some  way  more
or  less  unknown,  physiologically  associated,  as  a  given  feeling  or
sentiment  is  associated  with  certain  expressional  movements.  The
theory  of  inter-organic  and  ideorganic  associations  do  not,  it  is
true,  explain  what  unfortunately  remains  unexplainable  in  the  pre-
sent state  of  our  knowledge,  to  wit,  the  real  cause  of  most  of  these
associations  ;  still  it  may,  at  all  events,  I  hope,  contribute  to  bring
a    number  of    highly  diverse    facts    under    one    law    and    into    one

360  MENTAL  SUGGESTION.

associational  mechanism.  Psychology  and  physiology  are  thus  brought
together,  and  we  can  henceforth  investigate  the  laws  of  physiological
as  we  have  already  studied  those  of  psychic  associations.  It  is
tvhen  it  loses  its  psychic  associates  in  the  state  of  monoideism,  that
the  idea  recovers  its  organic  associations,  that  it  links  itself  to  them,
that  it  produces  modifications  in  the  organs  with  a  force  the  more
decisive  and  irresistible  as  it  is  itself  potent  and  irresistible.  It
becomes  confounded,  so  to  speak,  with  the  state  it  represents ;  it
realizes  it.  One  might  say  that  cases  of  inter-organic  inhibition  are,
for  the  most  part,  associations  by  contrast,  wherein  excitation  of  a  is
associated  with  inhibition  of  b  j  while  cases  of  dynamogeny  are. asso-
ciations by  likeness,  wherein  an  excitation  a  is  followed  by  excitation
b.  And  these  associations  may  be  causal,  indissoluble,  or  they  may
be  merely  accidental ;  for,  just  as  between  ideas,  so  there  are  physio-
logical associations  by  contiguity,  that  is,  associations  brought  about
by  simple  proximity  in  space  or  time.  The  morbid  state  a  becomes
associated  with  another  morbid  state  b,  through  the  mere  fact  that
accidental  causes  have  produced  them,  either  simultaneously  or  one
after  the  other.  Thenceforth  to  call  out  b  all  that  is  needed  is  the
presence  of  a.  Such  ideorganic  associations  by  ■  contiguity  are  often
mistaken  for  causal  associations.  It  is  supposed,  for  example,  that
"  the  somnambulic  state  is  induced  by  pressure  on  the  top  of  the
head,"  whereas  between  the  two  phenomena  there  is  no  causal
relation.

In  this  brief  notice  I  have  had  no  other  intention  save  to  sketch
roughly  the  general  principles  of  a  theory  of  ideoplasty.  I  have,
therefore,  purposely  omitted  any  analysis  of  the  special  physiological
conditions,  as  also  any  comparison  of  these  general  remarks  with  the
theories  of  ideoplastic  phenomena  put  forth  by  Braid,  Durand,  Char-
pignon,  Liebeault  and  Bernheim.

IV.
Note  to  Chapter  VII.,  Part  II.

Mr..  Bernheim  makes  this  reply  to  my  criticism  :

"  I  said,"  he  writes,.  " '  No  one  can  be  endormed  against  his  will.'
Mr.  Ochorowicz  hotly  contests  that  proposition.  Probably  he  has
not  quite  grasped  my  meaning.  It  is  certain  that  a  subject  that  is
unwilling  to  be  hypnotized,  and  who  knows  that  he  cannot  be  hypnotized
if  he  is  unwilling,  successfully  resists  all  efforts.  It  is  true,  also,  that
certain  subjects  are  unable  to  resist,  because  their  will  is  weakened  by
fear  or  by  the  thought  of  a  superior  force  that  influences  them  in  spite  of
themselves."  (Bernheim,  "De  la  Suggestion,"  preface,  p.  iv.,  2d  ed.,.
1888.)

APPENDIX.  36 1

Now,  these  provisos  suffice  to  show  that  the  exactitude  of  the  pro-
position "  No  one  can  be  endormed  against  his  will,"  may  rightfully
be  challenged.  For,  first,  "  the  will  may  be  weakened  by  fear,  and
consequently  may  be  insufficient ;  and,  secondly,  the  subject  may  not
know  that  he  cannot  be  hypnotized  if  he  resists."

Now,  we  find  exactly  these  two  conditions  in  most  cases  of  hypnotic
constraint.  A  subject  wants  to  resist,  but  has  not  the  strength  to  re-
sist. Or,  one  wants  to  resist,  but  is  not  quite  certain  that  he  can
resist,  and  so  he  undergoes  the  action  against  his  will.  There  is  the
principal  condition  !  Faith,  submission,  the  best  will  in  the  world  to
be  hypnotized,  are  all  of  no  avail  in  the  absence  of  predisposition,
of  hypnotic  sensibility ;  and  incredulity  and  opposition  do  not  suffice
to  safeguard  the  subject  when  there  is  predisposition,  when  he  pos-
sesses in  a  high  degree  hypnotic  sensibility.

One  is  not  a  somnambule  because  he  wants  to  be  ;  but  those  who
are  somnambules  may  be  unable  to  resist,  unless  they  have  in  their
mind  a  sufficiently  strong  counter-suggestion.  Unfortunately,  the
Nancy  School  confounds  hypnotic  sleep  with  normal  sleep,  and  con-
sequently overlooks  the  main  rdle  of  predisposition.

Mr.  Bernheim  sums  up  by  saying  :  "  No  one  can  be  hypnotized,
unless  he  has  the  idea  that  he  will  be  hypnotized.  Thus  expressed,
my  proposition  is  impregnable."

By  no  means.  The  proposition  is  now  nearer  the  truth,  inasmuch
as  it  covers  a  larger  number  of  facts,  but  still  it  is  inexact.  Miss  X.
(chap,  vii.,  part  ii.,  obs.  1  and  2)  did  not  know  that  she  was  going  to
be  hypnotized.     Hypnotized  she  was,  nevertheless.

The  same  conditions  are  found  in  cases  4,  5,  6,  9,  etc.  It  were
nearer  the  truth  to  add  that  the  idea  of  which  Mr.  Bernheim  speaks
may  be  unconscious.  Thus  filled  out,  is  the  proposition  at  last  flaw-
less? Possibly,  but  without  entering  on  theoretic  subtilities,  we  are
obliged  to  affirm  this  much  ;

The  facts  prove  that,  given  a  sufficient  hypnotic  sensibility,  an  in-
dividual may  be  hypnotized  in  spite  of  himself  and  even  unbeknown
to  himself.

/

INDEX.

A.,  Mrs.,  magnetic  subject,  30

Academic  de  Mddecine,  report  to,  on  som-
nambulic perception  of  disease,  33

Academies,  their  besetting  weakness,  112

Academy  of  Med.  of  Paris,  and  magnet-
ism, 112

Action,  mental,  at  a  distance,  62  ;  at  10
kilometers'  distance,  271  ;  unbeknown
to  the  subject,  231  ;  on  an  unwilling
subject,  360

Aideia,  20  ;  profound,  suggestion  impos-
sible in,  77

Active  somnambulism,  65  ;  unfavorable
to  mental  suggestion,  77

Angels  eating  turkey,  181

"  Animal  fluid,"  299

Animals,  emanations  from,  beneficial,  144

Anxiety  of  the  magnetizer  divined  by  the
subject,  69

"  Appalled  by  consequences,"  293

Apparent  transmission  explained,  320

Arago,  the  word  "  Impossible,"  9  ;  on
doubt  and  incredulity,  298

Aristotle's  question  as  to  a  sixth  sense,
306

Ars,  the  Cure  of,  165

Association  of  ideas  in  tricks  of  prassti-
giation,  18  ;  theory  of,  as  yet  very
incomplete,  36,  57,  128

Attention,  concentrated  in  magnetic
sleep,  11  ;  psychology  of,  17

Attraction,  magnetic,  21,  26;  suggesting
the  idea  of  "  animal  magnetism,"  300  ;
Bruno's  case  of,  264  ;  attractions,  op-
posite, 203

Augustin,  St  ,  on  soothsaying,  165

Authors  Quoted.

Aksakof,  204.  Anonymous,  Reflexions sur
la  Magnet  A  mm.,  ill;   Propagateur  dt'e

Magnet.   Anim.,   240;    Suite  de  Me"m~
oires  pour  servir  a  I' I/is t.  du  Magnet. ,
199  ;   Relation  (of  occurrences  at  Lou-
dun),  262  ;  Tk/dtre  Saire"  des  Ce'vennes,
1 50.      Arago,  £loge  de  Bailly,  9.      Au-
gustinus,  Contra  Academicos,  165.   Bar-
agnon,   P.,  Magnet.  Anim.,  148,  153,
194.     Barrier,  apud  Charpignon,   195.
Barth,      Sommeil     Non-naturel,      341.
Baumgartner,     K.    N.,    Physiognomice
Pathologica,   289.      Beaunis,    H.,    Con-
ditions de  I  'Activite  Cerebrate,  200;    Un
Fait  de  Suggestion  Mentale,  201.   Berna,
Experiences  et  Considerations,  202  ;  Re-
futation du  Rapport  fait  par  Dubois,
id.     Bernheim,  Suggestion  dans  I  'Ftat
Hypnot.,  231,  360.   Bertrand,  A.,  Mag-
net. Anim.  en  France,    109,    III,    151,
167,   269,   290;    Traite  du  Somnamb.,
108,  294.      Billot,  Recherches  Psychol.,
297.     Bottey,  J  ,  Magnet.  Anim.,  220.
Bouchut,     Contagion     Nerveuse,     314.
Braid,  Neurypnology,  221.     Brown-Se-
quard,  in  pref .  to  Neurypnology.  Bruno,
apud  Gauthier,  130;  apud  Deslon,  131;
apud  Lausanne,  264.     Burdin  and  Du-
bois,  Hist.  Academ.  du  Magnet.  Anim.,
183,  268.      Cabanis,  Rapports  du  Phy-
sique et  du  A/oral,  145.   Calmeil,  Folie,
173.      Chardel,    Essai    de    Psychologic
Physiol.,   296.     Charpignon,   Physiol.,
Mdd.,  etc.,  du  Magn/t.,  116,  141,   182.
Comet,   Dr  ,  Report  to  Acad,  of  Med. ,
188  ;       Verite    aux     Medecins,      189.
Cullere,  Magnetisme  et  Hypnot.,   232.
Dampierre,       Marquis     de,      Magnet.
Anim.,  262.      Debay,  A.,  Hygihne  des
Douleurs,    123.      Deleuze,    Hist.    Cri-
tique, etc.,   152,   178,   259,  300;  Instr.
Prat.,   132,  155,  178;   Opinion  de  van
Helmont  sur  la  Cause  du  Magnet.,  263.

364

INDEX.

Demangeon,  J.  B.,  Imagination  Con-
side're'e  dans  ses  Effets,  344.  Despine,
P.,  Jr.,  Etude  sur  le  Somnamb.,  181,
311,  313  ;  Psychologie  Naturelle,  236.
Despine,  P.,  Sen.,  Observations de MM.
Pratique,  216.  Dupotet,  Art  d'Appli-
quer  le  Magn.  Anim.  a,  la  Therapeu-
tique,  265  ;  Experiences  Publiques  sur
le  Magn.  Anim.,  226  ;  Manuel  de
I  Etudiant  Magne'tiseur,  138  ;  Traite'
Coniplet  du  Magn.  Anim.,  267.  Du-
sart,  271.  Ennemoser,  Der  Magnetis-
mus  nach  der  allseitigen  Beziehung,  263.
Faria,  Sommeil  Lucide,  177.  Fevre,
Alterations  du  Syst.  Cutand  dans  la
Folie,  124.  Figuier,  L.,  Hist,  du  Mer-
veilleux,  168,  176,  290.  Foissac,  Pap-
ports  et  Discussions,  176.  Fournel,
Probability  du  Somnambuiisme,  196.
Frappart,  Lettres  sur  le  Magne't.,  189.
Galen,  Methodus  Medendi,  145.  Gas-
sicourt,  Cadet  de,  122.  Gauthier,  A.,
Traite'  du  Magne't.,  129,  212,  285.
Glay,  E.,  Sommeil  Provoqtte'  a  Dis-
tance, 246.  Grasset,  Thermometrie
Clmique,  121.  Gregory,  Wm.,  Mes-
merism, etc.,  187.  Haan,  H.,  Bezie-
hungen  zwischen  Hypnotismus  und  Ce-
rebraler  Blutfiilhing,  341.  Hack-Tuke,
Body  and  Mind,  344.  Hammond,  Wm.
A.,  123.  Hericourt,  Somnamb.  au  de-
hors de  THysterie,  259,  275.  Hippo-
crates, 122.  Huf eland,  Kunst  das
Mensehl.  Leben  zu  Verldngern,  145.
Janet,  Pierre,  sundry  Arotes,  156,  244,
257.  277-  Joty)  H.,  L'ltji agination,
183.  Jussieu,  144.  Kardec,  Allan,
Livre  des  Esprits,  296  ;  Livre  des  Me-
diums,  297.  Kerner,  J.,  Franz  Anton
Mesmer,  261,  309.  Lafontaine,  Art  de
Magndtiser,  180,  200,  201,  270,  302  ;
Mt/moires,  139,  146,  157,  180,  200.
Lamenardiere,  Pilet  de,  De"monomanie
de  Loudttn,  171,  172.  Langlois,  A.  M.,
Sommeil  Naturel  et  Artificiel,  341.
Lausanne,  Principes  du  Magnet.,  129.
Lebrun,  F.,  Transmission  des  Dou-
leurs,  137.  Lecat,  Traite1  des  Sensa-
tions, 299.  Liebeault,  Etude  sur  le
Zoomagne'tisme,  248  ;  Sommeil  et  Etats
Anal.,  344.  Liegeois,  Suggestion  Hyp-
not.,    236.      Mabru,    E.,   Les  Magne'ti-

seurs  Juge"s  par  Eux-memes,  299.
Mainduc  apud  Deleuze,  131.  Mari-
court,  Count  de,  Souvenirs  d'un  Mag-
ne'tiseur, 153,  187.  Mesmer,  F.  A.,
Mfaioire,  236,  304.  Montgeron,  Carre
de,  Idtfe  de  TEtat  des  Convulsionnaires ,
170.  Monin,  Dr.,  Odeurs  du  Corps
Hum.,  122,  125.  Morin,  A.  S.,  Les
Lucides  d' autrefois,  165  ;  Magn^tisme,
etc.,  188,  287.  Noizet,  le  Gen.,  Me"m-
oires  sur  le  So?nnambulis7ne,  182,  184,
195.  Ochorowicz,  J. ;  Force  as  Motion,
333  ;  Me'thode  des  Recherches  Psychol.,
321  ;  Projet  d'un  Congres  de  Psychol.,
162  ;  The  Magnet  and  the  Hand,  263.
Parville,  H.  de,  Z' Electricity  et  ses  Ap-
plications, 332.  Perronet,  Claude,  Mag-
ne"t.  Anim.,  155,  182,  211,  242,  319.
Perty,  Anthropologie,  123.  Petetin,
Electricite'  Animate,  176,  177 ;  Phe-
nomhtes  que  presente  la  Catalepsie,  etc.,
lib.  Phillips,  Cours  The'orique  et  Pra-
tique de  Braidisme,  354.  Pigeaire,
Puissance  de  VElectr.  Anim.,  117,  145,
Poncet,  apud Bertrand,  150.  Preyer,
Erkldrung  des  Gedankenlesens,  180.
Proc.  Soc.  Psych.  Research,  159.  Puy-
segur,  Magne't.  Anim.,  175,  317;  Mem-
oir es,  175  ;  Recherches,  Expediences,
etc.,  175,  213.  Rambosson,  J.,  Phe-
nomenes  Nerveux,  Intellectuels ,  etc.,
315.  Redard,  Thermometrie  Clinique,
121.  Report  of  Com.  of  Acad,  of  Med.,
113.  Ribot,  Th.,  Diseases  of  Memory,
273  ;  Psychological  Heredity,  344.
Richer,  Paul,  Hyste'ro-Epilepsie,  166.
Richet,  Uri  Fait  de  Somnamb.  a  Dis-
tance, 244.  Roze,  J.,  Pe've'lations  du
Monde  des  Esprits,  297.  Scoutetten,
Evohition  Mddicale,  121.  Sere,  E.  L.
de,  Application  du  Somnamb.  Magne't.
au  Diagnostic,  126,  174.  Spiller,  Gott
im  Lichte  der  Naturwissenschafte7t,
313.  Teste,  Manuel  Prat,  du  Magne't-
iseur, 181;  Magne't.  Anim.,  181.  Tis-
sot,  J.,  L' Imagination,  184.  Van  Hel-
mont,  J.  B.,  Opera,  263.  Vidal,  Sur-
gery, 122.  Voisin,  Suggestion  chez-  les
Alien/is,  238.
Automaton,  the  somnambule  is  an,  298
Awakening  a  subject  by  mental  sugges-
tion, 229

INDEX.

365

B.  Mrs.,  subject  of  experiments  at  Havre,
82-90  ;  crosses  the  town  at  the  mental
order  of  Dr.  Gibert,  87-88  ;  other  ex-
periments with,  156,  247,  249  et  seq.,
277  et  seq.;  how  magnetized,  243.

Ballroom,  experiment  in  a,  16

Barety,  Dr.  A.,  his  experiments,  42  et
seq.

"  Barriers  of  nature,"  291

Beaunis,  Prof.  H.,  how  he  came  to
believe  in  animal  magnetism,  200

Beds  warmed  and  beds  braziered,  145

Bernheim  denies  that  one  can  be  mag-
netized against  his  will,  331,  360

Bertrand,  Dr.  A.,  on  somnambulism  and
magnetism,  106

Beware  of  suggestion,  149

Bi-lateral  rapport,  28

Bouilland  suspects  trickery  in  Edison's
phonograph,  291

Braid  on  difference  between  hypnotism
and  magnetism,  220  ;  his  researches  on
phrenology,  224

Brain,  action  of,  on  brain,  338

Brown-Se'quard's  criticism  of  mental  sug-
gestion, 326  ;  transmission  of  accidental
lesions,  344

Bruno,  his  study  of  magnetism,  129  et
seq.;  on  magnetic  attraction,  264

Bucaille,  Mary,  109

C,  Prince,  a  magnetic  subject,  29

Cabanis's  dictum,  298

Capivaccius,  145

Castellan,  story  of,  233  et  seq.

Caston,  Vicomte  de,  17

Catalepsy  and  lethargy,  36-7

Cats,     sleeping,     discern    differences    in

touch,  11
Cazbt,  a  magnetic  subject,  229
Celine,  a  magnetic  subject,  1 13
Cevennes,  Shakers  of  the,  150
Chance,  brings  amazing  coincidences,  5
Charcot,  his  "three  phases,"  251
Chevalier,  Mrs.,  a  magnetic   subject,  226
Cholera,  most  fatal  to  hypnotizable  per-
sons, 124
Clairvoyance,  31

Clarissa,  somnambulist,  her  feats,  180
Collusion,  Mabru's  explanation  of  som-
nambulism, 298

Comet,  Dr.,  how  convinced  of  the  reality

of  animal  magnetism,  188
Common    sense,    a   variable   quantity,  6  ;

proved  fallacious,  (>
Communication  between  minds,  152
Community  of  sensations,  157  et  seq  ;  of

minds,  164.
Complementary  imagination,  23
Concentration,    a    character  of  magnetic

somnambulism,  213
Conjecture,  suggestion  by,  12,  16
Consequences  must  not  arrest  the  search

for  truth,  293
Contagion,      psychic,      nervic,      physical

nervic,  117,  135.  !4i-2
Convulsionaries    of     Saint-Medard,    109,

150
Crime,    somnambules    ordered     to    com-
mit, 293
Crisis  in  magnetism,  1 10
Cumberland  and  "mind-reading,"  40
Cumberlandism,  factors  of  success  in,  42
Currents,   magnetic,   25  ;   tonic,    130  ;  of
air,  sensation   of,  in  presence  of  some
patients,  120

D.,  Count  Paul  de,  a  magnetic  subject,
28,  215

D.,  Countess,  a  magnetic  subject,  eg

D.,  Mrs.,  a  magnetic  subject,  51-6,    244

Dampierre,  Marquis  de,  on  magnetizing
an  unwilling  subject,  262

David,  King,  145

Deferred  suggestions,  249

Deleuze,  opposed  to  magnetic  experi-
ments, 178

Demagnetization,  302

Descartes  on  action  of  mind  on  matter,
296

Desjardins,  his  condemnation  of  hypnot-
ism, 298

Despine,  Jr.,  Dr.  P.,  his  "Natural
Psychology,"  106;  his  theory  of
thought-transmission,  311  ;  his  uni-
versal fluid,  314

Despine,  Sr. ,  his  experiments,  214,  et  seq.

Determinism,  53

Diagnosing  diseases,  118  ;  by  the  coun-
tenance, 289

Discoverers  of  forgotten  facts,  175

Disease,  divined  by  touch,  32  ;  symptoms
of,  transmitted,    34  ;     diseased    organs

366

INDEX.

betokened  by  sensations  of  heat  or  cold
and  otherwise,  120,  131  etseq.;  diseases
"caught"  by  magnetizers,  118,137;
divined  by  somnambules,  107  et  seq. ,
produced  by  ideorganic  association,  128;
specific  odors  of,  122  ;  sympathism  of,

295
Donato,    and   his    subject,   Lucile,   21  et
seq. ;  experiment  in  mental  suggestion,
203  et  seq
Dreaming  and  the  waking  state,  12
Du  Bois-Reymond's  multiplier,  328
Du  Potet  on  magnetization  by  contact,
137-8  ;    without  contact,    139  ;  experi-
ments by,  238  et  seq.;  on  action  at  a
distance,  265-7
Dynamic  ghost,  48  ;  correlate,  331,  336

Education,  magnetic,  21,  272  et  seq.

Elective  anaesthesia,  221

Electricity,  development  of,  accompanies
every  action  in  Nature,  332 ;  and
galvanism,  their  analogies  in  animal
magnetism,  160

Envelope  trick,  18

Equilibration  between  organisms,  143

Equilibrium,  nervic,  34

Errors,  popular,  often  based  on  truth,  309

Exaltation  of  senses  unfavorable  to  men-
tal action,  338  ;  exalted  perception,
286,  322

Exhaustion,  fatigue,  etc.,  of  the  magne-
tizer,  133-4

Explanation,  scientific,  meaning  of,    320

Experiments  always  instructive,  10

Expression,  natural  and  involuntary,  of
thought,  321

Extranes,  action  of,  not  perceived  by
magnetic  subject,  149,  222

Familiar  spirit,  297

Faria,  his  method,  177

Fascination,  29,  86

Fluid,  magnetic,  25  ;  universal,  theory
of  a,  303  ;  vital,  302  ;  fluid-emission
theory  of  magnetism,  301  ;  fluidic  ac-
tion, 38

Foissac,  challenge  to  the  Acad,  of  Med.,
112  ;  experiments,  229

Force,  molecular  motion,  329 ;  and  in-
ertia, the  terms,  330

Fraud,     unconscious,     vitiating    experi-
ments, 5

Gall's  phrenology,  224

Gaston,  Prince,  what  he  witnessed  at
Loudun,  167

Georget,  converted  to  belief  in  magnet-
ism, 269

Gestures,  use  of,  in  magnetism,  196

Ghost  of  a  book,  47

Gibert,  see.  Janet

Giving  one's  aches  to  another,  33

Grandier,  Urban,  convicted  of  sorcery,
168  et  seq.

Guyon,  Mme.,  106  ;  as  a  mind-reader,  173

Habit,  effects  of,  passing  for  effects  of
suggestion,  19-21

Hair,  diagnosis  by,  126

Hands,  exhaustion  of  the,  102

Hartmann's  Unconscious,  the  great  praes-
tigiator,  18

Havre,  experiments  at,  81-97  ;  conditions
of,  83

Headache  transmitted  and  retransmitted,
101

Health  transmissible,  142

Hereditary  transmission,  344

Hericourt's  action  from  a  distance,  276

Hughes,  and  the  microphone,  24

Husson's  report  to  the  Acad,  of  Med.  on
magnetism,  113

Hyperacusia,  22

Hypnoscope,  a  means  of  diagnosis,  351
et  seq.

Hypnotic  monomania,  86 ;  sensibility,
not  conditioned  on  hysteria,  166

Hypnotism,  different  from  animal  mag-
netism, 10,  11,  26,  223,  302,  326  ;  as
a  medical  agent,  31

Hysteria  not  a  condition  of  hypnotic  sen-
sibility, 166

Ideas,  association  of,  with  physical  states,
128;  see  Association;  producing  sensa-
tions, 357

Ideoplasty,  25  ;  defined,  354  ;  passive,
353  ;  positive  and  negative,  355  ;  of
movements,  355  ;  material,  or  trophic,
356  ;  of  sensations,  357

INDEX.

s(n

Ideorganic  associations,  128
Imagination,  complementary,  23
Imponderable  (luid,  a  contradiction,  316
Impossible,  9

Induction  of  states  in  a  somnambule,  160
Infants,  sleeping,  magnetizable,  247
Inoculation    by    contact,    137 ;     without

contact,   139
Insane,  endorming  the,  237
Insensibility      of      somnambules,      154;
depends   on    the   temperament   of   the
magnetizer,  155
Instruments,  stringed,  analogy  between,

and  nerves,  301
Intoxication  transmitted,  146  et  seq.
Isaure,  Miss,  a  magnetic  subject,  214
Isolation,  of  the  magnetized  subject,  n,
148  ;  a  character  of  magnetic  somnam-
bulism, 213

J.,  Miss,  Dusart's  magnetic  subject,  271

La  Bruyere,  saying  of,  298

Lacombe,  Father,  106

Lafontaine,  exhibits  action  at  a  distance,

270  ;    theory  of  mental  action,  302
Language,     imperfection    of,     58  ;     lan-
guages, strange,  understood  and  spoken
by     energumens     and     somnambules,
170-2
Latent  sensations,  149  ;  transmission,  163
"Legitimists"  of  science,  129
Leibnitz's  two  watches,  24
Lemberg,  experiments  at,  21,  25
Liebeault.  on  magnetizing  infants,  247
Light  and  heat  compared  to  the  ' '  mag-
netic fluid,"  301
Loudun,  nuns  of,  167  et  seq.,  262
Lucile  and  Donato  :  see  Donato

M.,    Mrs.,    a    magnetic    subject,    60-76,

261  ;   attempts  suicide,  61
Magdeleine,  Puys6gur's  somnambule,  197
Magnetic  attraction,  21,  26 ;  currents,  25  ;

fluid,  25  ;  mobility,  according  to  Puy-

segur,  213  ;  passes,  80  ;   sleep,  11,  no
Magnetism  and  hypnotism  differentiated:

see  Hypnotism
Magnetized  subject,  isolation  of,  n
Magnetizer  and   stranger,  difference  be-

tween, for  the  subject,  10;  and  sub-
ject, 328  ;  magnetizer' s  personality  as  a
factor  in  magnetism,  324

Maricourt,  Count  de,  and  the  somnam-
bule, 187

Midecins,  no

Medical  men's  bigotry,  248

Mental  action,  conditions  of,  on  part  of
operator,  324  ;  on  part  of  subject,  ib.;
on  a  waking  subject,  325  ;  mental
sounds,  163  ;  suggestion  simulated,  23;
suggestion,  direct,  possible  only  in  one
special  somnambulic  state,  77

Mesmer,  his  theory,  304  ;  on  metaphysi-
cal abstractions,  ib.;  different  states  of
matter,  ib.;  the  universal  fluid,  305  ;
why  he  used  the  term  "animal  magnet-
ism," 306  ;  inner  sense,  ib.;  theory  of
will-transmission,  307  ;  pre-sensation,
308

Microphone,  its  real  action,  24

Mimosa  pudica,  343

Mind-reading,  40

Minutes  of  a  meeting,  written  in  ad-
vance, 19

Mr.  Camille,  the  story  of,  39

Monoideism,  20  ;  two  phases  of,  78  ;  pas-
sive, favorable  to  mental  suggestion,  78

Morin's  theory  of  thought  communica-
tion, 287

Mother  and  foetus,  sympathism  of,  344

Motion  transformed  according  to  the
medium  traversed,  329  ;  transformation
of,  330

Motor  images,  163

Muscles,  tension  of,  betrays  thought,
emotion,  etc.,  59

Muscular  suggestions,  338

Musical  notes  "  magnetized,"  262

Myers  brothers,  83-90

Nascent  monoideia,  favorable  to  mental

suggestion,  80
Nerve-action,  producing  electric  currents,

341  ;     currents,    interaction     of,    161  ;

fluid,  vital  or  magnetic,  299
Nervic contagion,  117,  135  ;    equilibrium,

34
Nervous    affections,    contagiousness    of,

314  note
Nervousness,   not   a   condition   favorable

to  magnetic  action,  353

368

INDEX.

Newton,  Isaac,  on  action  at  a  distance,

312
Noizet,  Gen.,  and  the  somnambule,  185
Nuns  of  Loudun,  167  et  seq.,  262

Occultism  and  magic,  sciences  gone
astray,  349

Ochorowicz,  only  of  late  a  believer  in
mental  suggestion,  10  ;  experiments  at
Lublin,  10-14;  at  Warsaw,  15-20;  at
X.,  20;  at  Lemberg  (with  Dona  to)  21

Odoriferous  exhalations,  121

Odors,  specific,  of  occupations,  124  ;  of
diseases,  122-126

Organic  sympathism,  its  phases,  105

P.,  Count  de,  experiment  with,  119

Pain,  transmission  of,  90,  135,  156

Passive  somnambulism,  65

Perronet,  Dr. ,  observations  on  will-trans-
mission, 209

Personality,  alleged  transfer  of,  348,  note

Petetin,  how  he  was  led  to  study  magnet-
ism, 176

Phonautograph,  333

Photophone,  334

Phrenomagnetism,  224

Physical  action,  direct,  hypothesis  of,
299  ;  equivalents  of  psychic  action,  322

Physiognomic,  pathognomic  and  ideog-
nomic  signs,  59

Physiological  transmission,  144

Piano  played  in  catalepsy,  210

Playing  cards,  tricks  with,  18

"  Polarities,"  38

Polyideism,  20

Poncet,  106

Popular  opinions,  152

Prsestigiation,  17

'  Pre-sensation,"  presentiment,  etc.,  308,

Psychic  atmosphere,  18,  21,  30,  44,  57,
320  ;  contagion,   117

Psychic  action,  direct,  295  ;  action,  phy-
sical equivalents  of,  322  ;  personality,
11  ;  states,  theoretically  transmissible,
34  ;  states,  revealed  by  odors,  123

Psychical  Research  Soc,  experiments  by,
157  et  seq.

Psychology  as  yet  an  inchoate  science,  57

Psycho-physical  transmission,  hypothesis
of,  317

Puysegui,  his  subjects,  no  ;  his  first  ex-
perience of  mental  suggestion,  174  ;  his
theory  of  mental  suggestion,  317  ;  his
prevision  of  modern  theories  of  physics,
318  ;  compares  thought-transference  to
the  action  of  an  electric  machine,  318

R.,  Miss,  a  magnetic  subject,  30

R.,  Mr.,  a  magnetizer,  and  his  subject,

45-47

Radiophone,  261,  334

Rapport,  10  ;  bi-lateral,  28  ;  will-action
and,  212  et  seq. ;  diverted  from  the
magnetizer,  215  ;  does  not  exist  in  hyp-
notism, 218;  what  it  means,  326;
necessary  for  action  at  a  distance,  338

Reading  a  book  without  aid  of  the  eyes,
12-13

Reciprocal  enchainment,  18

Recognition  of  a  person,  meaning  of,  1 1

Recollectedness,  148

Recollection,  activity  of,  in  somnambul-
ism, 13

Reichenbach,   25,  48

"  Regulating  "  a  somnambule,  80,  159

Repetition  of  an  experiment  destroys  its
scientific  value,  35,  45

Retarded  transmission,  163

Reversibility,  law  of,  332  et  seq.

Richet,  Ch.,  his  experiments  compared
with  the  author's,  49,  50

Robert-Houdin,  his  prsestigiations,  40 ;
his  study  of  magnetism,  189

Routine,  force  of,  6,  7

S.,  Miss,  a  magnetic  subject,  98-103  ;
how  restrained  from  suicide,  99

Saint-Medard,  convulsionaries  of,  150

Sch.,  Mrs.,  as  a  magnetic  subject,  30

Scientific  men,  attitude  of,  toward  mag-
netism, 243

Second-sight,  12;  spiritualist  theory  of,
296  ;  and  thought-transference,  183

Self-suggestion,  354  .

Seneca,  291

Sense-perception,  heightened  in  somnam-
bules,  122,  290  ;  impaired  in  civilized
man,  122

Shakers  (trembleurs)  of  theCevennes,  150

Sleep,  why  favorable  to  mental  trans-
mission, 308

INDEX.

369

Sleight-of-hand,  17
Smells,  specific,  of  diseases,  122
Somnambules,  keen  observers,  12
Somnambulism,        complete,       principal

characters  of,  213
Spencer,   H.,  on  transmission  of  motion,

312
Spiritism,  297  ;  experiments  in,  12,  14
"  Story  of  Mr.  Camille,"  39
"Stranger,"  10;  see  Extreme
Subjective  impression,  56,  60,  76,  106
Suggestion,  idea  of,  coming  into  general

acceptation,   9;  by  conjecture,  12,  16;

by  signs,  often  given  unconsciously,  11
Suicide,  a  would-be,   38  ;   attempted,  of

the  subject,  Mrs.  M.,  61
Superstition,  the  essence  of,  152
Surin,   Father,    106 ;   his  account  of   the

possessed  nuns  of  Loudun,  167
Suspended  mental  suggestion,  90
Sympathism,  116
Symptoms,  transmission  of,  33

Tactile  sensations,  48

Taine,  H.  A.,  reported  dictum  of,  293

"  Taking"  ailments,  109

Telephone,  phenomena  of  the,  160  ;  and
thought-transference,  328  ;  regulating
a,  and  "regulating"  a  somnambule,
So

Temperature,  diagnosis  by,  121

Theoretic  applications  of  mental  sugges-
tion, 348

Thermomicrophone,  invented  by  the
author,  35

Thought,  inseparable  from  expression,
320 ;  a  dynamic  act,  332 ;  dynamic
correlate  of,  331  ;  thought-transference,
a  sort  of  audition,  77 ;  transference
compared  to  the  action  of  electric  ma-
chine, 318 ;  transference,  author's
theory  of,  340

Thoughts,  identical,  occurring  to  two  or
more  persons,  19

"Three  phases"  of  hypnotism  increased
to  nine,  251

Touch,  differences  of,  11  ;  peculiarities  of,
under  magnetization,  221

Transformation  of  motion,  330

Transmission,  mental,  conditions  of,
164  ;  between  homologous  and  different
organs,  343  ;  of  maladies,  135  ;  double
transmission,  ib.j  and  transformation
of  motion,  330

Truth,  science  need  not  fear,  9

Unconscious,  experience,  127,  321;  strata,
164  ;  the,  a  great  prcestigiator,  18  ;  the,
Grand  Master  of  Occultism,  54 ;  the,
its  tricks,  37,  57

Undulationism,  319

Universal  fluid,  theory  of  a,  303

Vacuum  and  motion,  311

Van  Helmont  on  magnetism,  263

Vibrations,  produced  by  thought,  59

"  Vicomte  de  Caston,"  17

Vision  without  aid  of  the  eyes,  12

Visual  images,  163

Vital  fluid,  302

Waking  at  a  set  hour,  mechanism  of,  91 ,
waking  state  and  polyideic  somnambul-
ism, 325

Warsaw,  experiments  at  (subject,  an  Ital.
lady),  14 ;  spiritist  experiments,   14-16

Will-action,  denied  by  Bertrand,  294  ;
denied  by  Lafontaine,  302  ;  and
"  Rapport,"  212  et  seq.;  will-transmis-
sion, 196  et  seq. ;  and  thought-trans-
mission, 207,  294

"  Willing,"  experiments  on,  28-31

Wits,  errors  of,  298

Z.,  Miss,  a  magnetic  subject,  97  ;    en-

dormed  nolens,  98
Zollner,  Prof.,  how  he  was  duped,  56

THE

Humboldt  Library  of  Science

is  the  only  publication  of  its  kind, —  the  only  one  containing  popular
scientific  works  at  low  prices.  For  the  most  part  it  contains  only
works  of  acknowledged  excellence,  by  authors  of  the  first  rank
in  the  world  of  science.  Such  works  are  landmarks  destined  to
stand  forever  in  the  history  of  Mind.  Here,  in  truth,  is  "  strong
meat  for  them  that  are  of  full  age."

In  this  series  are  well  represented  the  writings  of

DARWIN,  HUXLEY,  SPENCER,  TYNDALL,  PROCTOR,  CLIFFORD,

CLODD,  BAGEHOT,  BAIN,  BATES,  WALLACE,  TRENCH,

ROMANES,  GRANT  ALLEN,  BALFOUR   STEWART,

GEIKIE,  HINTON,  SULLY,  FLAMMARION,

PICTON,  WILLIAMS,  WILSON,

and    other   leaders   of   thought   in   our  time.     As  well   might   one  be  a

mummy  in  the  tomb  of  the  Pharaohs  as  pretend  to  live  the  life  of  the

nineteenth  century  without  communion  of  thought  with  these  its

Master  Minds.

Science  has  in  our  time  invaded  every  domain  of  thought  and  research,
throwing  new  light  upon  the  problems  of

PHILOSOPHY,  THEOLOGY,   MAN'S    HISTORY,
GOVERNMENT,  SOCIETY,   MEDICINE.

In  short,  producing  a  revolution  in  the  intellectual  and  moral  world.
No  educated  person,  whatever  his  calling,  can  afford  to  keep  himself  out
of  the  main  current  of  contemporary  scientific  research  and  exposition.

The  price  of  the  several  numbers  is  fifteen  cents  each  (double
numbers  thirty  cents),  which  is  less  than  one  tenth  what  is  charged
by  London  and  New  York  publishers  for  exactly  the  same  reading-
matter.

THE    HUMBOLDT    LIBRARY   is   published    semi-monthly,

and  mailed  free  to  any  address  in  the  United  States,  Canada,  or  Mexico,
on  receipt  of  $3.    To  Great  Britain,  France,  Japan,  &c,  $4.00  a  year.

Subscribers  get  24  numbers  as  they  appear,  single  or  double.  Sub-
scriptions can  commence  at  any  time  within  the  current  year.

THE    HUMBOLDT  PUBLISHING    CO.

28   Lafayette   Place,  New  York.

CATALOGUE

or

THE   riwMBOLBT  LlBR^Y

OF

Popular  Science.

Containing  the  works  of  the  foremost  scientijic  writers  of  the  age. —  The  Great
Classics  of  Modern  Thought. — Strong  meat  for  them  that  are  of  full  age.

Price,  Fifteen.  Cents  per  number,  except  as  otherwise   noted  in  this   catalogue.
No.  l.

LIGHT    SCIENCE    FOR    LEISURE    HOURS.-A  Series  of  Familiar
Essays    on    Scientific    Subjects,   Natural    Phenomena,   Ac  — By

Eichard  A.  Proctor,  B.A.,  Camb.,  F.R.A.S.,  author  of  "The  Sun,"  '■  Other
Worlds  than  Ours,"  "Saturn,"  &c.

Strange  Discoveries   respecting

the  Aurora.
The  Earth  a  Magnet.
Our  Chief  Timepiece  losing

Time.
Encke  the  Astronomer.
"Venus  on  the  Sun's  Face.
Recent  Solar  Researches.
Government  Aid  to  Science.
American  Alms   for  British

Science.
The  Secret  of  the  North  Pole.
Is  the  Gulf  Stream  a  Myth?
Floods  in  Switzerland.

CONTENTS.

The  Tunnel  through  Mont  Cenis.
The    Greatest    Sea -Wave    ever

known.
The  Usefulness  of  Earthquakes.
The  Earthquake  in  Peru.
A  Great  Tidal  Wave.
Deep-Sea   Dredgings.
Tornadoes.
Vesuvius.

The  Forcing  Power  of  Rain.
A  Shower  of  Snow-Crystals.
Long  Shots.
Influence  of  Marriage  on  the

Death-Rate.

The   Topographical   Survey  of
India.

A  Ship  Attacked  by  a  Sword-
fish.

The  Safety-Lamp.

The  Dust  we  have  to  Breathe.

Photographic  Ghosts.

The   Oxford   and    Cambridge
Rowing  Styles.

Betting  on  Horse-Races;    or,
the  State  of  the  Odds.

Squaring  the  Circle.

The  New  Theory  of  Achilles*
Shield.

No.  2.

THE   FORMS  OF  WATER   IN   CLOUDS  AND   RIVERS,  ICE  AND

GLACIERS.— By  John  Tyndall,  LL.D.,  F.E.S.,  Professor  of  Natural  Philos-
ophy in  the  Royal  Institution,  London. —  With  nineteen  illustrations  drawn
under  the  direction  of  the   author.

Clouds,  Rains,  and  Rivers.
The  Waves  of  Light.
Oceanic  Distillation.
Tropical  Rains.
Architecture  of  Snow.
Architecture  of  Lake  Ice.
Ice  Pinnacles,  Towers,  and
Chasms.

CONTENTS.

The  Motion  of  Glaciers.
Likeness  of  Glacier  Motion  to

River  Motion.
Changes   of  Volume  of  Water

by  Heat  and  Cold.
The   Molecular  Mechanism  of

Water-congelation .
Sea  Ice  and  Icebergs.

Ancient  Glaciers  of  Switzer-
land.

Ancient  Glaciers  of  England,
Scotland. Wales, and  Ireland.

The  Glacial  Epoch.

Glacier  Theories.

The  Blue  Veins  of  Glaciers.

Crevasses.

No.  3.

PHYSICS    AND    POLITICS:    An   Application    of   the    Principles   of
Natural  Selection  and  Heredity  to  Political  Society.— By  Walter

Bagehot,  author  of  "The  English  Constitution."

Chapter     I.— The  Preliminary  Age.
Chapter   II.— The  Use  of  Conflict.
Chapter  III. — Nation-making.
Chapter  IV. —  Nation-making.

CONTENTS.

Chapter    V. —  The  Age  of  Discussion.
Chapter  VI.— Verifiable  Progress  Politically  Con>
sidered.

THE   HUMBOLDT  PUBLISHING  CO.,  28  Lafayette  Place,  New  York.

THE     HUMBOLDT    LIBRARY

No.  4.

EVIDENCE    AS    TO    MAN'S    PLACE    IN    NATURE.-

Huxley,   F.li.S.,  F.L.S. —  With   numerous   illustrations.

■By  Thomas   H.

CONTENTS.

Chapter  I. — The  Natural  History  of  the  Manlike
Apes.

Chapter   II.— The  Relations  of  Man  to  the  Lower

Animals.
Chapter  III. —  Some  Fossil  Remains  of  Man.

No.  5.

EDUCATION:    INTELLECTUAL,

Herbert  Spencer.

MORAL,   AND    PHYSICAL.-By

Chapter   I.
Chapter  II.

CONTENTS.
-What  Knowledge  is  of  Most  Worth  ?    |    Chapter  III.

-Intellectual  Education.

Moral  Education.
Chapter  IV. — Physical  Education.

No.  6.

TOWN     GEOLOGY.— By  tlie  Rev.  Charles  Kingsley,  F.L.S.,  F.G.S.,  Canon  of
Chester.

Chapter     I.— The  Soil  of  the  Field.
Chapter   II.— The  Pebbles  in  the  Street.
Chapter  III.— The  Stones  in  the  Wall.

CONTENTS.

Chapter  IV.— The  Coal  in  the  Fire.
Chapter    V. —  The  Lime  in  the  Mortar.
Chapter  VI.— The  Slates  on  the  Roof.

No.  7.

THE  CONSERVATION  OF  ENERGY.- By  Balfour  Stewart,  LL.D.r
F.R.S.,  Professor  of  Natural  Philosophy  at  the  Owens  College,  Manchester,  Eng.
With  an  Appendix — "The  Correlation  of  Nervous  and  Mental  Forces,"  by  Prof.
Alexander  Bain.

contents.

Chapter     I. — What  is  Energy?

Chapter  II.— Mechanical  Energy  and  its  Change

into  Heat.
Chapter  III.— The  Forces  and  Energies  of  Nature :

the  Law  of  Conservation.
Chapter  IV.—  Transmutations  of  Energy.

Chapter   V.— Historical  Sketch:  the  DissipatioA

of  Energy.
Chapter  VI.— The  Position  of  Life.

Appendix. —  The  Correlation  of   Nervous  and
Mental  Forces.

No.  8.

THE     STUDY    OF     LANGUAGES     BROUGHT     BACK     TO     ITS

TRUE    PRINCIPLES.— By  C.  Marcel,  Knt.  Leg.  Hon.,  author  of  "Language
as  a  Means  of  Mental  Culture,"  &c.

contents.

Chapter     I.— Subdivision  and  Order  of  Study.
Chapter   II.— The  Art  of  Reading.
Chapter  III.—  The  Art  of  Hearing.
Chapter  IV.— The  Art  Speaking.

Chapter  V— The  Art  of  Writing.
Chapter  VI.— On  Mental  Culture.
Chapter  Vn.— On  Routine.

No.  9.

THE    DATA    OF    ETHICS.- By  Herbert  Spencer.

contents.

Chapter        1. —  Conduct  in  General.
Chapter       II.— The  Evolution   of   Conduct.

Chapter  HI.— Good  and  Bad  Conduct.

Chapter  IV — Ways  of  Judging  Conduct.
Chapter      V. —  The"  Physical  View.

Chapter  VI.— The  Biological  View.

Chapter  VII.— The  Psychological  View.
Chapter  Vin.— The  Sociological  View.

Chapter  IX.-
Chapter  X.-
Chapter  XI.
Chapter  XII.-
Chapter  XIII.-
Chapter  XIV.-
Chapter  XV-
Chapter  XVI.-

-  Criticisms  and  Explanations.
-The  Relativity  of  Pains  and  Pleas-

-  Egoism  versus  Altruism.      (ures.
-Altruism  veisus  Egoism.

-  Trial  and  Compromise.
-Conciliation.

-Absolute  Ethics  and  Relative  Eth-
-The  Scope  of  Ethics.  lies.

Published    semi-montnly.—  $3  a  year.—  Single    numbers,  15  cents.

OF    POPULAR     SCIENCE.

No.  10.

THE   THEORY  OF  SOUND   IN    ITS    RELATION  TO   MUSIC.-By

Professor  Pietro  Blaserna,  of  the  Royal  University  of  Rome.— With  numerous
woodcuts.

CONTENTS.

Chapter  I. —  Periodic  Movements:  Vibration. —
Sonorous  Vibration. — Vibration  of  a  Bell. — Vibra-
tion of  a  Tuning-fork. — Vibration  of  a  String. — Of
Plates  and  Membranes. —  Vibration  of  Air  in  a
Sounding  -  pipe.  —  Method  of  the  Monometric
Flame. —  Conclusion.

Chapter  II. — Transmission  of  Sound. — Propaga-
tion in  Air. —  In  Water  and  Other  Bodies. —  Ve-
locity of  Sound  in  Air.-  In  Water  and  Other  Bodies.
Reflection  of  Sound. —  Echo.

Chapter  III. — Characteristics  of  Sound,  and  Dif-
ference between  Musical  Sound  and  Noise. — Loud-
ness of  Sound,  and  the  Various  Causes  on  which
it  depends. —  Principle  of  the  Superpciition  of
Sounds. —  Sounding-boards  and  Resonators.

Chapter  IV. —  Measure  of  the  Number  of  Vibra-
tions.— Pitch  of  Sounds :  Limit  of  Audible  Sounds,
•of  Musical  Sounds,  and  of  the  Human  Voice. —
The  "Normal  Pitch." — Laws  of  the  Vibrations  of
a  String,  and  of  Harcnonics.

Chapter  V.— Musical  Sounds. —  Law  of  Simple
Ratio. —  Unison:  interference. —  Beats:  their  ex-
planation.—  Resultant  Notes. — Octaves,  and  other
Harmonics. — Consonant  Chords  and  their  limits.
— The  Major  fifth,  fourth,  sixth,  and  third:  the
Minor  third  and  sixth. — The  Seventh  Harmonic.

Chapter  VI.— Helmholtz's  Double  Siren. —Appli-
cation of  the  Law  of  Simple  Ratio  to  three  or
more  notes. —  Perfect  Major  and  Minor  Chords:
their  nature. —  Their  inversion.

Chapter  VII. —  Discords.— The  Nature  of  Music
and  Musical  Scales.  —  Ancient  Music.  —  Greek
Scale. — Scale  of  Pythagoras. — Its  decay. — Ambro-
sian  and  Gregorian  Chants. —  Polyphonic  Music:
Harmony. — The  Protestant  Reformation.— Pales-
trina. —  Change  of  the  Musical  Scale. —  Tho  Tonic
or  Fundamental  Chord.  —  The  Major  Scale. —  Mu-
sical Intervals. — The  Minor  Scale. — Key  and  Trans-
position.—  Sharps  and  Flats. —  The  "  Temperate
Scale:  its  inaccuracy. —  The  Desirability  of  aban-
doning it.

Chapter  VIII. —  Quality  or  timbre  of  Musical
Sounds. —  Forms  assumed  by  the  Vibrations. —
Laws  of  Harmonics. —  Quality  or  timbre  of  Strings
and  of  Instruments. —  General  Laws  of  Chords. —
Noises  accompanying  Musical  Sounds. —  Quality
or  timbre  of  Vocal  Musical  Sounds.

Chapter  DC — Difference  between  Science  and
Art. —  Italian  and  German  Music. —  Separation  of
the  two  Schools. — Influence  of  Paris. — Conclusion.

Nos.  11  and  12.

Double   number,  30  cents.

THE  NATURALIST  ON  THE  RIVER  AMAZONS.-A  Record  of
Adventures,  Habits  of  Animals,  Sketches  of  Brazilian  and
Indian  Life,  and  Aspects  of  Nature  under  the  Equator,  during
eleven  years  of  travel.—  By  Henry  Walter  Bates,  F.L.S.,  Assistant
Secretary  of  the  Royal  Geographical  Society  of  England.

CONTENTS.

(In

Chapter  I.  —  Arrival  at  Para — Aspect  of  the
•country — First  walk  in  the  suburbs  of  Para — Birds,
lizards,  and  insects — Leaf-carrying  ant — Sketch  of
the  climate. history.and  present  condition  of  Para.

Chapter  II. — The  swampy  forest  of  Para— A  Por-
tuguese landed  proprietor  —  Life  of  a  Naturalist
under  the  Equator — The  dryer  virgin  forests — Re-
hired creeks — Aborigines.

Chapter  III. — The  Tocantins  River  and  Cameta
— Sketch  of  the  RiveT — Grove  of  fan-leaved  palms
— Native  life  on  the  Tocantins.

Chapter  V. —  Caripi  and  the  Bay  of  Marajo —
Negro  observance  of  Christmas — A  German  family
— Bats  — Ant-eaters — Humming-birds — Domestic
life  of  the  inhabitants— Hunting  excursion  with
Indians — White  ants.

Chapter  VI. —  The  Lower  Amazons  —  Modes  of
traveling  on  the  Amazons — Historical  sketch  of  the
early  explorations  of  the  river — First  sight  of  the
great  river — Flat-topped  mountains.

Chapter  VII. — Ville  Nova,  its  inhabitants,  forest,
and.  animals — A  rustic  festival — River  Madeira —
Mura  Indians — Yellow  Fever.

Chapter  VHI. — Santarem — Manners  and  customs

part.)

of  the  inhabitants — Sketches  of  Natural  History —
palms,  wildf ruit-trees,  mining- wasps,  mason-wasps,
bees,  and  sloths.

Chapter  IX. — Voyage  up  the  Tapajos — Modes  of
obtaining  fish — White  Cebus.and  habits  and  dispo-
sitions of  Cebi  monkeys — Adventure  with  anaconda

—  Smoke-dried  monkey  —  Boa-constrictor  —  Hya-
cinthine  macaw — Descent  of  river  to  Santarem.

Chapter  X. — The  Upper  Amazons — Desolate  ap-
pearance of  river  in  the  flood  season — Mental  con-
dition of  Indians  —  Floating  pumice-stones  from
the  Andes — Falling  banks — Ega  and  its  inhabitants
— The  four  seasons  of  the  Upper  Amazons.

Chapter  XI. — Excursions  in  the  neighborhood  of
Ega — Character  and  customs  of  .the  Passe  Indians
—Hunting  rambles  with  natives  in  the  forest.

Chapter  XII. —  Animals  of  the  neighborhood  of
Ega— Scarlet-faced  monkeys- Owl-faced  night-apes

—  Marmosets —  Bats —  Birds —  Insects —  Pendulous
cocoons — Foraging  ants — Blind  ants.

Chapter  Xnl. — Excursions  beyond  Ega — Steam-
boat traveling  on  the  Amazons — Various  tribes  of
Indians — Descent  to  Para — Great  changes  at  Para
— Departure  for  England.

***  This  is  one  of  the  most  charming  books  of  travel  ever  written,  and  is  both  interesting  and  in-
structive. It  is  a  graphic  description  of  "a  country  of  perpetual  summer, — where  trees  yield  flower  and
fruit  all  the  year  round," — "a  region  where  the  animals  and  plants  have  been  fashioned  in  Nature's
choicest  moulds."

THE   HUMBOLDT  PUBLISHING  CO.,  28  Lafayette  Place,  New  York,

THE     HUMBOLDT     LIBRARY

No.  13.

MIND    AND    BODY:  The  Theories  of  their  Relation.— By  Alexander

Bain,  LL.D.,  Professor  of  Logic  in  the  University  of  Aberdeen.

CONTENTS.
Chapter     I. —  Question  Stated.
Chapter   II. —  Connection  of  Mind  and  Body.
Chapter  III. — The  Connection  Viewed  as  Corre-
spondence, or  Concomitant  Variation.

Chapter  IV. —  General  Laws  of  Alliance  of  Mind!

and  Body. —  The  Feelings  and  the  Will.
Chapter     V.— The  Intellect.
Chapter   VI. —  How  are  Mind  and  Body  united?
Chapter  VII.—  History  of  the  Theories  of  the  SouL

No.  14.

THE  WONDERS  OF  THE  HEAVENS.-By  Camille  Flammarion.-
Translated  from  the  French  by  Mrs.  Norman  Lockyer.— With  thirty-two
Actinoglyph  Illustrations.

CONTENTS.

BOOK    FIRST.

Chapter    I. —  Night.

Chapter  II. —  The  Heavens.

Chapter  III.— Infinite  Space.  [verse.

Chapter  IV. —  General  Arrangement  of  the  Uni-

Chapter    V. —  Clusters  and  Nebulae.

Chapter  VI.— The  Milky  Way.

BOOK    SECOND.

Chapter     I.— The  Sidereal  World.

Chapter   II. —  The  Northern  Constellations.

Chapter  III.— The  Zodiac.

Chapter  IV. —  Southern  Constellations.

Chapter  V. — The  Number  of  the  Stars. —  Their
Distances.

Chapter  VI. — Variable  Stars. — Temporary  Stars.
Stars  suddenly  visible  or  invisible.

Chapter  VII.— Distant  Universes.— Double,  Mul-
tiple, and  Colored  Suns.

BOOK   THIRD.

Chapter     I. — The  Planetary  System.
Chapter   II.— The  Sun.

Chapter    III. — The  Sun  (continued).

Chapter     IV. —  Mercury.

Chapter       V. —  Venus.

Chapter     VI. —  Mars.

Chapter    VII. —  Jupiter.

Chapter  VIII.—  Saturn.

Chapter      IX. —  Uranus.

Chapter       X. — Neptune.

Chapter     XI. —  Comets.

Chapter    XII. —  Comets  (continued).

BOOK   FOURTH.

Chapter     I. — The  Terrestrial  Globe.

Chapter    II. —  Proofs  that  the  Earth  is  round. —

That  it  turns  on  an  axis,  and  revolves  round

the  Sun.
Chapter  III.— The  Moon.
Chapter  IV. — The  Moon  (continued).
Chapter    V. —  Eclipses.

BOOK   FIFTH.

Chapter   I. — The  Plurality  of  Inhabited  Worlds-
Chapter  II. —  The  Contemplation  of  the  Heavens-

No.  15.

LONGEVITY:    THE    MEANS    OF    PROLONGING
MIDDLE     AGE.— By  JoHN  Gardner,  M.D.

LIFE    AFTER

CONTENTS.

What  is  the  Natural  Duration  of  Human  Life  ?

Is  the  Duration  of  Life  in  any  degree  within  our
power  ?

Some  General   Considerations    respecting   Ad-
vanced Age.

Causes  of  Neglect  of  Health.

Is  Longevity  Desirable  1

Physiology  of  Advanced  Age.

Heredity.

The  Means  of  Ameliorating  and  Retarding  the
Effects  of  Age.

Recuperative  Power. — What  is  Life?

Water :  its  bearing  on  Health  and  Disease.

Mineral  Waters.

Stimulants  —  Spirituous  and  Malt  Liquors  and
Wine.

Climate,  its  Effects  on  Longevity.

Disregarded  Deviations  from  Health  in  Aged
Persons.— (a).  Faulty  Nutrition— General  At-
tenuation.—  (6).  Local  Failure  of  Nutrition. —
(c).  Obesity.

Pain— the  Use  and  Misuse  of  Narcotics. —  (a).
Dolor-Senilis.—  (b).  Narcotics.—  (c).  Sarsapa-
rilla  and  other  Remedial  Agents.

Gout — New  Remedies  for.

Rheumatism. —  Lumbago.

Limit  to  the  Use  of  Narcotics.

The  Stomach  and  Digestion.

The  Liver.

The  Kidneys  and  Urine. —  Simple  Overflow. — Al-
buminous Urine. —  Bright's  Disease. — Muddy
Urine,  Gravel,  Stone. —  Irritable  Bladder. —
Diabetes.

The  Lower  Bowels.

The  Throat. — Air-passages.— Lungs. —  Bronchitis.

The  Heart.

The  Brain — Mind,  Motive  Power,  Sleep,  Paralysis.

Established  Facts  respecting  Longevity.

Diseases  Fatal  after  Sixty.

Summary. —  An  Experiment  Proposed.

Appendix. —  Causes  of  Premature  Death.

Notes  on  some  Collateral  Topics. —  (a).  Longevity
of  the  Patriarchs  and  in  Ancient  Times. —  (6).
Flourens  on  Longevity.— (c).  Popular  Errors
respecting  Longevity.—  (d).  Waste  of  Human
Life. —  (e).  Moral  and  Religious  Aspects  of
Longevity. — (/).  Importance  of  Early  Treat-
ment of  Disorders.—  (g).  The  Bones  of  Old
People  Brittle.— (A).  Condition  of  very  Old
People.—  (i).  One  Hundred  and  Five  Years  the
Extreme  Limit  of  Human  Life. —  (j).  A  Case
of  Recuperation.—  (k).  On  the  Water  used  in
Country  Towns.— (J).  Pure  Aerated  Water.—
—  (mi).  Anticipations. —  (n.)  Adulteration  of
Food.  &c.  its  Effects  on  Human  Life. —  (o).
Cases  of  Prolonged  Life.—  (p).  Appliances
Useful  to  Aged  Persons  for  Immediate  Relief
of  Suffering.

Published    semi-montnly.—  $3  a  year.—  Single    numbers,  15  cents.

OF    POPULAR     SCIENCE.

No.  Hi.

ON  THE   ORIGIN   OF  SPECIES;  or,  The  Causes  of  the  Phenomena

of  Organic  Nature.— A  Course  of  Six  Lectures.— By  Thomas  H.  HUXLEY,
F.R.S.,  F.L.S.,  Professor  of  Natural  History  in  the  Jermyn  Street  School  of
Mines,  London.

CO  NT

Chapter  I.  — The  Present  Condition  of  Organic
Nature.  [ture.

Chapter    II. — The  Past  Condition  of  Organic  Na-

Chapter  III.  — The  Method  by  which  the  Causes  of
the  Present  and  Past  Conditions  of  Organic
Nature  are  to  be  discovered. — The  Origination
of  Living  Beings.

Chapter  IV. — The  Perpetuation  of  Living  Beings.
Hereditary  Transmission  and  Variation.

ENTS.

Chapter  V.— The  Conditions  of  Existence  as  af-
fecting the  Perpetuation  of  Living  Heings.

Chapter  VI.— A  Critical  Examination  of  the  Po-
sition of  Mr.  Darwin's  work  on  "The  Origin
of  Species,"  in  relation  to  the  Complete  The-
ory of  the  Causes  of  the  Phenomena  of  Organic
Nature.

Appendix. — Criticisms  on  Darwin's  "Origin  of
Species."

No.  17.

PROGRESS:  ITS  LAW  AND  CAUSE- With  other  Disquisitions,  viz.,
The  Physiology  of  Laughter. —  Origin  and  Function  of  Music. —  The  Social
Organism. —  Use  and  Beauty. — The  Use  of  Anthropomorphism. —  By  Herbert
Spencer.

No.  18.

LESSONS    IN    ELECTRICITY.    To  which  is  added  an   Elementary

Lecture  on  Magnetism.— By  John  Tyndall,  D.C.L.,  LL.D.,  F.R.S.,  Pro-
fessor of  Natural  Philosophy  in  the  Eoyal  Institution  of  Great  Britain. — With
Sixty  Illustrations.

CONTENTS.

Introduction.

Historic  Notes.

The  Art  of  Experiment.

Electric  Attractions.

Discovery  of  Conduction  and  Insulation.

The  Electroscope.

Electrics  and  Non-Eleetries.

Electric  Repulsions.

Fundamental  Law  of  Electric  Action.

Double  or  "Polar"  Character  of   the   Electric

Force.
What  is  Electricity?
Electric  Induction.
The  Eleetrophorus.
Action  of  Points  and  Flames.

The   Electrical  Machine.
The  Leyden  Jar.
Franklin's  Cascade  Battery.
Leyden  Jars  of  the  Simplest  Form.
Ignition  by  the  Electric  Spark.
Duration   of  the  Electric  Spark.
Electric  Light  in  Vacuo.
Lichtenberg's  Figures.
Surface   Compared  with  Mass.
Physiological  Effects  of  the  Electrical  Discharge.
Atmospheric   Electricity.
The  Returning  Stroke.
The  Leyden   Battery.
Appendix.  —  An  Elementary  Lecture  on  Mag-
netism.

No.  19.

FAMILIAR    ESSAYS    ON    SCIENTIFIC    SUBJECTS,  viz.,  Oxygen  in

the  Sun. —  Sun-spot,  Storm,  and  Famine. —  New  Ways  of  Measuring  the  Sun's
Distance. — Drifting  Light-waves. —  The  New  Star  which  faded  into  Star-mist. —
Star-grouping,  Star-drift,  and  Star-mist. — By  Richard  A.  Proctor.

No.  20.

THE  ROMANCE  OF  ASTRONOMY.-By  R.  Kalley  Miller,  M.A.,  Fel-
low and  Assistant  Tutor  of  St.  Peter's  College,  Cambridge,  England.  — With  an
Appendix  by  Richard  A.  Proctor.

The  Planets.
Astrology.
The  Moon.
The   Sun.

CONTENTS.

The  Comets.

Laplace's  Nebular  Hvpothesis.
The   Stars.
The   Nebulae.

Appendix.

The  Past   History  of  our  Moon.
Ancient   Babylonian  Astrogony.

THE  HUMBOLDT  PUBLISHING  CO.,  28  Lafayette  Place,  New  York.

THE    HUMBOLDT    LIBRARY

No.  21.

ON  THE  PHYSICAL  BASIS  OF  LIFE.-With  Other  Essays,  viz.,
The  Scientific  Aspects  of  Positivism.— A  Piece  of  Chalk.— Geo-
logical   Contemporaneity.— A   Liberal    Education.— By  Thomas  h.

Huxley,  F.R.S.,  F.L.S.

No.  22.

SEEING  AND  THINKING.— By  William  Kingdon  Clifford,  F.R.S.,  Pro-
fessor of  Applied  Mathematics  and  Mechanics  in  University  College,  London,
and  sometime  Fellow  of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.

CONTENTS.

The  Eye  and  the  Brain.
The  Eye  and  Seeing.

The  Brain  and  Thinking.
Of  Boundaries  in  General.

No.  23.

SCIENTIFIC    SOPHISMS.     A  Review   of   Current   Theories    con-
cerning  Atoms,   Apes,   and    Men.— By  Samuel  Wainwright,   d.d.,

author  of  "Christian  Certainty,"  "The  Modern  .Avernus,"  &c.

CONTENTS.

Chapter      I.— The  Right  of  Search.

Chapter     II. —  Evolution.

Chapter  III.— "A  Puerile  Hypothesis."

Chapter   IV. —  "Scientific  Levity."

Chapter     V. —  A  House  of  Cards.

Chapter   VI. —  Sophisms.

Chapter  VII. —  Protoplasm.

Chapter  VIH. —  The  Three  Beginnings.
Chapter     IX. — The  Three  Barriers.
Chapter       X. — Atoms.
Chapter     XI. — Apes.
Chapter   XH.— Men.
Chapter  Xin. —  Animi  Mundi.

No.  24.

POPULAR  SCIENTIFIC  LECTURES,  viz.,  On  the  Relation  of  Optics
to  Painting.— On  the  Origin  of  the  Planetary  System.— On
Thought  in  Medicine.— On  Academic  Freedom  in  German  Uni-
versities.—  By  H.  Helmholtz,  Professor  of  Physics  in  the  University  of
Perlin.

No.  25.

THE  ORIGIN  OF  NATIONS.- In  two  parts.- On  Early  Civiliza-
tions.-On  Ethnic  Affinities,  &c— By  George  Rawlinson,  M.A.,
Camden  Professor  of  Ancient  History,  Oxford.

CONTENTS.

PART  I.— Eably  Civilizations.

Chapter        I. — Introduction.

Chapter       II.— On  the  Antiquity  of  Civilization

in  Egypt.
Chapter     III.— On  the  Antiquity  of  Civilization

at  Babylon.
Chapter     rV—  On   the   Date   and  Character  of

Phoenician  Civilization.
Chapter  V.—  On  the  Civilizations  of  Asia  Minor
—  Phrygia,  Lydia,  Lycia,  Troas.
Chapter  VI.— On  the  Civilizations  of  Central  Asia
— Assyria,  Media,  Persia,  India.
Chapter  VII.— On  the  Civilization  of  the  Etruscans
Chapter  VIII.— On  the  Civilization  of  the  British

Celts.
Chapter      IX.— Results  of  the  Inquiry.

PART  II.— Ethnic  Affinities  in  the
Ancient  World.

Chapter      I. —  The  Chief  Japhetic  Races.
Chapter     II. —  Subdivisions  of  the  Japhetic  Races,

Gomer  and  Javan.
Chapter  III.— The  Chief  Hamitic  Races.
Chapter   IV. — Subdivisions  of  Cush.
Chapter     V. — Subdivisions  of  Mizraim  and

Canaan.
Chapter   VI. —  The  Semitic  Races.
Chapter  VII.— On  the  Subdivisions  of  the  Semitic

Races.

Published    semi-monthly.—  $3  a  year.—  Single    numbers,  15  cents.

OF    POPULAR     SCIENCE.

No..  26.

THE    EVOLUTIONIST   AT    LARGE- By  Grant  Allen.

CONTENTS.

Chapter

I. —  Microscopic  Brains.

( 'hapter

xn.

-•Speckled  Trout.

Chapter

II. —  A  Wayside   Berry.

( 'hapter

XIII.

—  Dodder  and   Broomrape.

—  Dog's   Mercury  and   Plantain.

Chapter

III. —  In  Summer  Fields.

t  'hapter

XIV.

Chapter

IV.— A  Sprig  of  Water  Crowfoot.

Chapter

XV.

—  Butterfly  Psychology.

Chapter

V. —  Shifts   and   Snails.

Chapter

XVI.

—  Butterfly  ^Esthetics.

—  The   Origin   of  Walnuts.

Chapter

VI.— A  Study  of  Bones.
VII.— Blue  Mud.

Chapter

XVII.

Chapter

Chapter

XVIII.

—  A  Pretty  Land-shell.

Chapter  VIII. —  Cuckoo-pint.

Chapter

XIX.

—  Dogs  and  Masters.

Chapter

IX. —  Berries   and   Berries.

Chapter

XX.

—  Blackcock.

Chapter

X. —  Distant   Relations.

Chapter

XXI.

—  Bindweed.

Chapter

XI. —  Among  the  Heather.

Chapter

XXII.

—  On  Cornish  Cliffs.

No.  27.

THE

HISTORY    OF    LANDHOLDING

IN

ENGLAND.- By  Joseph

Fisher,   F.E.H.S.

CONTENTS.

I.- The

Aborigines.

IV. —  The  Normans.

1

VII.— The  Stuarts.

II.— The

Romans.

V. — The  Plantagenets.

VIII. — The  House  of    Hanover.

III— The

Scandinavians.

VI.— The  Tudors.

1

No.  28.

FASHION  IN  DEFORMITY,  AS  ILLUSTRATED  IN  THE  CUS-
TOMS  OF  BARBAROUS  AND  CIVILIZED   RACES -By  William

Henry  Flower,  LL.D.,  F.B.S.,  F.E.C.S.,  P.Z.S.,  &c,  Hunterian  Professor  of
Comparative  Anatomy,  and  Conservator  of  the  Museum  of  the  Eoyal  College  of
Surgeons  of  England. —  With  illustrations.

TO   WHICH    IS    ADDED

MANNERS    AND     FASHION.-By  Herbert  Spencer.

No.  29.

FACTS  AND  FICTIONS  OF  ZOOLOGY -By  Andrew  Wilson,  Ph.D.,
F.R.P.S.E.,  &c,  Lecturer  on  Zoology  and  Comparative  Anatomy  in  the  Edin-
burgh Medical  School;  Lecturer  on  Physiology,  Watt  Institution  and  School
of  Arts,  Edinburgh,  &c. — With  numerous  illustrations.

.'Zoological  Myths.

The  Sea-serpents  of  Science.

■Some  Animal  Architects.

CONTENTS.

Parasites  and  their  Development.
What  I   Saw  in   an  Ant's   Nest.

No.  30.  and  No.  31.  [15  cents  each   number.

ON     THE     STUDY    OF    WORDS.— By  Richard  Chenevix  Trench,  D.D.,
Archbishop  of   Dublin.

,  Lecture     I. — Introductory  Lecture.
Lecture   n. —  On  the  Poetry  in  Words.
Lecture  ni. —  On  the  Morality  in   Words,
Lecture  TV. —  On  the  History  in  Words.

CONTENTS.

Lecture      V. — On  the  Rise  of  New  Words.
Lecture    VI. —  On  the  Distinction  of  Words.
Lecture  VII. —  The  Schoolmaster's  Use  of  Words.

Xo.  32.

HEREDITARY  TRAITS,  AND  OTHER  ESSAYS -By  Richard  a.
Proctor.  B.A.,  F.R.A.S.,  author  of  "The  Sun,"  "Other  Worlds  than  Ours,"
"Saturn,"  &c.

I.— Hereditary  Traits.
H. —  Artificial  'Somnambulism.

CONTENTS.

III. — Bodily  Illness  as  a  Mental  Stimulant.
IV. — Dual  Consciousness.

THE   HUMBOLDT  PUBLISHING  CO.,  28  Lafayette  Place,  New  York.

THE     HUMBOLDT     LIBRARY

No.  33.

VIGNETTES    FROM

tionist   at   Large."

NATURE.— By  Grant  Allen,  author  of  "The  Evolu-

I. —  Fallow  Deer.

II. —  Sedge  and  Woodbrush.
III. — Red  Campion  and  White.
IV. —  Butterfly-Hunting  Begins.

V. —  Red  Campion  Again.
VI.— The  Hedgehog's  Hole.
VII. —  On  Musbury  Castle.
VIII.— A  Big  Fossil  Bone.
IX. — Veronica.

X. —  Guelder  Rose.
XI.— The  Heron's  Haunt.

CONTENTS.

XII.—  A  Bed  of  Nettles.
XIII. — Loosestrife  and  Pimpernel.
XIV.— The  Carp  Pond.
XV.— A  Welsh  Roadside.
XVI.— Seaside  Weeds.
XVII.— A  Mountain  Tarn.
XVIIL— Wild  Thyme.

XIX. — The  Donkey's  Ancestors.
XX. —  Beside  the  Cromlech.
XXL— The  Fall  of  the  Leaf.
XXIL— The  Fall  of  the  Year.

No.  34.

THE  PHILOSOPHY  OF  STYLE.— By  Herbert  Spencer,  author  of  "First
Principles  of  Philosophy,"  "Social  Statics,"  "Elements  of  Psychology,"  "Ele-
ments of  Biology,"  "Education,"  &c.

contents.

Part  I. —  Causes  of  Force  in  Language  which  depend  upon  Economy  of  the  Mental

Energies.

I. —  The    Principle    of    Economy    applied    to

Words.
II. — The   Effect   of  Figurative  Language  Ex-
plained.

III. —  Arrangement  of  Minor  Images  in  Build-
ing up  a  Thought.

IV. —  The  Superiority  of  Poetry  to  Prose-
Explained.

Part  II. —  Causes  of  Force  in  Language  which  depend  upon  Economy  of  the  Mental

Sensibilities.

TO   WHICH    IS    ADDED

THE    MOTHER    TONGUE.— By  Alexander  Bain,  LL.D.,  Professor  of  Logie
in  the  University  of  Aberdeen.

CONTENTS

Conditions   of  Language  Acquisition  Generally.
The  Mother  Tongue.
Teaching  Grammar.

The  Age  for  Commencing  Grammar.
The  Higher  Composition.
English  Literature.

No.  35.

ORIENTAL     RELIGIONS.— By  John  Caird,  S.T.D.,  President  of  the  Univer-
sity of  Glasgow,  and  other  authors.

Religions  of  India

In

CONTENTS.
. —  Brahmanism.
-Buddhism.
By  John  Caird,  S.T.D.

Religion  of  China. —  Confucianism.

By  Rev.  George  Mathesof.

Religion  of  Persia. — Zoroaster  and    the  Zend!

Avesta.  By  Rev.  John  Milne,  M.A.

No.  36.

LECTURES    ON    EVOLUTION.-With  an  Appendix   on  The   Study
of    Biology. — By  Thomas  H.  Huxley.

contents.

I.— Three  Lectures  on  Evolution.
Lecture   I. — The    Three    Hypotheses    respecting

the  History  of  Nature.
Lecture  II.— The  Hypothesis  of  Evolution.— The

Neutral  and  the  Favorable  Evidence.

Lecture  III.  —  The   Demonstrative    Evidence    of
Evolution.

II. — A  Lecture  on  the  Study  of  Biology..

No.  37.

SIX    LECTURES    ON    LIGHT.

By  Prof.  John  Tyndall,,  F.R.S.

Lecture     I. — Introductory.
Lecture   II.— Origin  of  Physical  Theories.
Lecture  III. —  Relation  of  Theories  to  Experience.
Lecture  IV.— Chromatic  Phenomena  produced  by
Crystals  on  Polarized  Light.

CONTENTS.

Lecture   V

Range    of  Vision    incommensurate-
with  Range  of  Radiation.
Lecture  VI.— Principles    of    Spectrum   Analysis.
— Solar  Chemistry. —  Summary
and  Conclusions.

Published    semi-montnly.—  $3  a  year.—  Single    numbers,  15  cents.

OF    POPULAR     SCIENCE.

No.  38  and  No.  39.  [15   cents   uju-Ii    inirnln-r.

GEOLOGICAL    SKETCHES    AT    HOME   AND   ABROAD- By  Arch-

ibald  Geikie,  LL.D.,  F.R.S.,  Director-Geiieral  of  the  Geologiciil    Surveys  nf
Great  Britain  and  Ireland. — In   Two  Parts,  each  complete  in  itself.

CONTENTS
Part  I.— No.  38.

I. — My  First  Geological  Excursion.  I. —

II.— "The  Old  Man  of  Hoy."  II.—

III.— The  Baron's  Stone  of  Killochan.  HI.

IV.— The  Colliers  of  Carrick.  IV—

V. — Among  the  Volcanoes  of  Central  France.  V. —

VI.— The  Old  Glaciers  of  Norway  and  Scotland.  VI.—

VII. —  Rock- Weathering  Measured  by  the  Decay  VII. —
of  Tombstones.

Part  II.— No.  39.
A   Fragment  of  Primeval   Europe.
In   Wyoming.

The  Geysers  of  the  Yellowstone.
The  Lava  Fields  of  Northwestern  Europe.
The   Scottish   School   of  Geology.
Geographical   Evolution.
The  Geological  Influences  which  have,  affect-
ed the  Course  of  British  History.

No.  40.

THE    SCIENTIFIC    EVIDENCE    OF    ORGANIC    EVOLUTION.-By

George  J.  Romanes,  M.A.,  LL.D.,  F.R.S.,  Zoological  Secretary  of  the  Linnean
Society,  London.

CONTENTS.

I. —  Introduction.

II. —  The  Argument  from  Classification.  [ure.
m. —  The  Argument  from  Morphology  or  Struct-
IV. —  The  Argument  from  Geology.

V. — The  Argument  from  Geographical  Distribu-
VI. —  The  Argument  from  Embryology.         [tion.
VII. —  Arguments    drawn    from   Certain   General
Considerations.

TO   WHICH    IS    ADDED

PALEONTOLOGY    AND    THE    DOCTRINE    OF    EVOLUTION.-By

Prof.  Thomas  H.  Huxley.

NATURAL   SELECTION   AND   NATURAL  THEOLOGY -By  Eustace

R.   Conder,  D.D.
No.  41.

CURRENT  DISCUSSIONS  IN  SCIENCE -By  W.  Mattieu  Williams,
F.R.A.S.,  F.C.S.,  author  of  "The  Fuel  of  the  Sun,"  "Through  Norway  with  a.
Knapsack,"  "A  Simple  Treatise  en  Heat,"  &c.

CONT
I. —  Meteoric  Astronomy.
II. —  Dr.  Siemens's  Theory  of  the  Sun.
III. —  Another  World   Down   Here.
IV. — The  Origin  of  Volcanoes.
V. — Note  on  the  Direct  Effect  of  Sun-Spots  on

Terrestrial  Climates.
VI. —  The  Philosophy  of  the  Radiometer  and  its
Cosmical  Revelations.
VII.— The  Solidity  of  the  Earth.
Vni. — Meteoric  Astronomy.

ENTS.

IX.-

X-

XI.-

XII.-

xin.-

XIV.-

XV-

XVI.-

-  Aerial  Exploration  of  the  Arctic  Regions.
-"Baily's  Beads."

•  World-smashing.

■  On   the    so-called   "Crater-Necks"  and
"Volcanic  Bombs"  of  Ireland.

-  Travertine.

-Murchison  and  Babbage.
-The  "Consumption  of  Smoke."
-The  Air  of  Stove-heated  Rooms.

No.  42.

HISTORY      OF     THE      SCIENCE      OF      POLITICS.- By   Frederick
Pollock.

cont

Chapter  I. —  Introductory. —  Place  of  the  Theory
of  Politics  in  Human  Knowledge.

Chapter  II. — The  Classic  Period:  Pericles — Soc-
rates—Plato— Aristotle. — The  Greek  Ideal  of
the  State.

Chapter  in. —  The  Mediasval  Period  :  The  Papacy
and  the  Empire. — Thomas  Aquinas — Dante —

,       Bracton — Marsilio  of  Padua.

Chapter  IV. — The  Modern  Period:  Machiavelli —
Jean  Bodin — Sir  Thomas  Smith — Hobbes.

ENTS.

Chapter  V. —  The  Modern  Period  (continued)  t
Hooker — Locke — Rousseau — Blaekstone.

Chapter  VI. —  The  Modern  Period  (continued):
Hivme — Montesquieu — Burke.

Chapter  VII.— The  Present  Century:  Political
Sovereignty — Limits  of  State  Intervention —
Bentham  — Austin — Maine — Bagehot — Kant  —
Ahrens  —  Savigny  —  Coruewall  Lewis  —  John
Stuart  Mill — Herbert  Spencer — Laboulaye.

No.  43.

DARWIN    AND    HUMBOLDT.-Their    Lives    and    Work.- By  Prof.
Huxley  and  others.

contents.

CHARLES    DARWIN.

I.— Introductory  Notice.— By  Th.  H.  Huxley.

II.— Life  and  Character.— By  Geo.  J.  Romanes.

III.— Work  in  Geology.— By  Archibald  Geikie.

IV.— Work  in  Botany.-ByW.T.THiSELTON  Dyer.

V.— Work  in  Zoology.— By  Geo.  J.  Romanes.

VI.— Work  in  Psychology.— By  Geo.  J.  Romanes.

ALEXANDER  VON    HUMBOLDT.

I. —  An  Address  delivered  by  Louis  Agass:iz  at
the  Centennial  Anniversary  of  the  birth  of  Alex
ander  von  Humboldt,  under  the  auspices  of  the
Boston  Society  of  Natural  History,  Sept.  14. 1869.

II.— Remarks  by  Prof.  Fkedekic  H.  Hedge,  of
Harvard  University.

THE   HUMBOLDT  PUBLISHING  CO.,  28  Lafayette  Place,  New  York.

THE     HUMBOLDT     LIBRARY

"No.  44  and  No.  45.

[15   cents   each   number.

THE     DAWN     OF     HISTORY.- An     Introduction     to     Prehistoric

Study.  — Edifced    by  C.  F.  Keary,  M.A.,  of    the   British  Museum. —  In  Two
Parts,  each  complete  in  itself.

CONTENTS.

Part  I.— No.  44.
-The  Earliest  Traces  of  Man.
-The  Second  Stone  Age.
-The  Growth  of  Language.
-Families  of  Language.
-The  Nations   of  the  Old  World.
-Early  Social  Life.
"Chapter  VII. —  The  Village  Community.

Chapter  I

Chapter  II

Chapter  III

Chapter  IV
Chapter
Chapter

V.-

VI.-

Part  II.— No.  45.
Chapter  VIII.—  Religion.
Chapter     IX. —  Aryan  Religions.
Chapter      X.— The  Other  World.
Chapter     XI.— Mythologies  and  Folk-Tales.
Chapter   XII. — Picture- Writing.
Chapter  XIII. — Phonetic  Writing.  [ities.

Chapter  XIV. —  Conclusion. — Notes  and  Author-

No.  46.

THE     DISEASES     OF     MEMORY.-By  Th.  Eibot,  author  of  "Heredity,"
"  English  Psychology,"  &c. —  Translated  from  the  French  by  J.  Fitzgerald,  A.M.

CONTENTS.

Chapter  I.— Memory  as  a  Biological  Fact.
Memory  essentially  a  biological  fact,  incident-
ally a  psychic  fact. —  Organic  memory. —  Mod-
ifications of  nerve-elements;  dynamic  associa-
tions between  these  elements. — Conscious  mem-
ory.—  Conditions  of  consciousness:  intensity;
duration.  —  Unconscious  cerebration.  —  Nerve-
action  is  the  fundamental  condition  of  memory;
consciousness  is  only  an  accessory. —  Localiza-
tion in  the  past,  or  recollection. —  Mechanism
of  this  operation. — It  is  not  a  simple  and  instan-
taneous act;  it  consists  of  the  addition  of  sec-
ondary states  of  consciousness  to  the  principal
state  of  consciousness. —  Memory  is  a  vision  iu
time. — Localization,  theoretical  and  practical. —
Reference  points. —  Resemblance  and  difference
"between  localization  in  the  future  and  in  the
past. — All  memory  an  illusion.  —  Forgetfulness
a  condition  of  memory. — Return  to  the  starting-
point:  conscious  memory  tends  little  by  little  to
become  automatic.

Chapter  II.— General  Amnesia.

Classification  of  the  diseases  of  memory. —  Tem-
porary amnesia. — Epileptics. — Forgetfulness  of
certain  periods  of  life. —  Examples  of  re-educa-
tion.— Slow  and  sudden  recoveries. — Case  of  pro-
visional memory. —  Periodical  or  intermittent
amnesia. — Formation  of  two  memories,  totally
or  partially  distinct. —  Cases  of  hypnotism  re-
corded byMacnish.Azam,  and  Dufay. — Progress-
ive amnesia. — Its  importance. — Reveals  the  law
which  governs  the  destruction  of  memory. — Law
of  regression :  enunciation  of  this  law. — In  what

order  memory  fails. — Counter-proof:  it  is  recon-
stituted in  inverse  order. — Confirmatory  facts. —
Congenital  amnesia. — Extraordinary  memory  of
some  idiots.

Chapter  III.— Partial  Amnesia.

Reduction  of  memory  to  memories. — Anatomical
and  physiological  reasons  for  partial  memories.
— Amnesia  of  numbers,  names,  figures,forms,&c.
— Amnesia  of  signs. — Its  nature :  a  loss  of  motor-
memory. — Examination  of  this  point. — Progress-
ive amnesia  of  signs  verifies  completely  the  law
of  regression.  —  Order  of  dissolution  :  proper
names;  common  nouns;  verbs  and  adjectives;
interjections,  and  language  of  the  emotions;
gestures. — Relation  between  this  dissolution  and
the  evolution  of  the  Indo-European  languages. —
Counter-proof :  return  of  signs  in  inverse  order.

Chapter  IV. —  Exaltation  of  Memory,  or
Hypermnesia.
General  excitation. — Partial  excitation. —  Return
of  lost  memories.  —  Return  of  forgotten  lan-
guages.— Reduction  of  this  fact  to  the  law  of  re-
gression.—  Case  of  false  memory. —  Examples,
and  a  suggested  explanation.

Chapter  V.—  Conclusion.
Relations  between  the  retention  of  perceptions
and  nutrition,  between  the  reproduction  of.  rec-
ollections and  the  general  and  local  circulation.
—  Influence  of  the  quantity  and  quality  of  the
blood. —  Examples. —  The  law  of  regression  con-
nected with  a  physiological  principle  and  a  psy-
chological principle. —  Recapitulation.

No.  47.

THE   CHILDHOOD   OF  RELIGIONS.-Embracing  a  Simple  Account
of  the   Birth   and   Growth   of  Myths  and   Legends.— By  Edward

Clodd,  F.R.A.S.,  author  of  "The  Childhood   of   the  World,"  "The   Story  of
Creation,"  &c.

CONTENTS.

Chapter  I.-
Chapter  II.-
Chapter  III.-
Chapter  IV-
Chapter  V.-
Chapter  VI.-
ChapterVII.-

Introductory.  ftion.

■  Legends  of  the  Past  about  theCrea-

•  Creation  as  told  by  Science.

■  Legends  of  the  Past  about  Mankind.

•  Early  Races  of  Mankind.  [tions.
-The  Aryan,  or  Indo-European  na-
-The  Ancient   and    Modern   Hindu

Religions.

Chapter  VEIL— Zoroastrianism,  the  Ancient

ligion  of  Persia.
Chapter     IX. — Buddhism.
Chapter       X. —  The  Religions  of  China.
Chapter     XI. —  The  Semitic  Nations.
Chapter   XII. —  Mohammedanism,  or  Islam.
Chapter  XIII.— On  the  Study  of  the  Bible.

Re-

Published    semi-monthly.-  $3  a  year.—  Single    numbers,  15  cents.

OF    POPULAR     SCIENCE.

No.  48.

LIFE

IN     NATURE.— By  James  Hinton,  author  of  "Man  and    his   Dwelling-

Place,"   "The  Mystery  of  Pain,"  &e.

CONTENTS.

Chapter      I. —  Of  Function;   or,  How  We  Act.
Chapter     II. — Of  Nutrition;   or,  Why  We  Grow.
Chapter  III.— Of  Nutrition;    The  Vital  Force.
Chapter  IV. —  Of  Living  Forms;  or,  Morphology.
Chapter     V. —  Living  Forms. —  The  Law  of  Form.
Chapter  VI.— Is  Life  Universal?
Chapter  VII.— The  Living  World.

Chapter  VIII.— Nature  and  Man.

Chapter     IX.— The  Phenomenal   and   the  True.

(')iapter       X. —  Force.

Chapter     XI.—  The  Organic   and   the   Inorganic.

Chapter    XII.  — The  Life  of  Man.

Chapter  XIII. —  Conclusion.

No.  49.

THE    SUN:    Its    Constitution;    Its    Phenomena;    Its    Condition.—

By  Nathan   T.  Carr,  LL.D.,  Judge  of  the  Ninth  Judicial  Circuit  of  Indiana.
With  an  Appendix  by  Richard  A.  Proctor  and  M.  W.  Williams.

contents.

Section       I. —

Section

n

Section

hi

Section

rv.

Section

V

Seetion

VI.

Section

VII.

Seetion  VIII.

Section

IX.

Section

X

Section

XI

Section

XII

Seetion  XIII

Section  XIV

Section

XV

Purpose  of  this  Essay. — Difficulties
or  the  Subject.

Distance  from  the  Earth  to  the  Sun.

The  Diameter  of  the  Sun.

The  Form  of  the  Sun.

Rotary  Motion  of  the  Sun.

Perturhating  Movement.

The  Sun's  Orbital  Movement.

The  Sun's  Attractive  Force. — Den-
sity of  the  Solar  Mass.

The  Sun's  Atmosphere.

The  Chromosphere.

Corona,  Prominences,  and  Faculse.

The  Photosphere.

The  Sun's  Heat.

Condition  of  the  Interior.

Effects  of  Heat  on  Matter.

Section  XVI.—
Section  XVII.—
Section  XVIII.—
Section  XIX.—
Section  XX.—
Section     XXL—

Section  XXII.—
Section  XXIII. —
Section  XXIV.—
Section  XXV.—
Section  XXVI. —

Section  XXVII. -

Section  XXVUL-

The  Expansive  Power  of  Heat.

The  Sun's  Crust.

The  Gaseous  Theory.

The  Vapor  Theory.

The  "  Cloud-like  "'  Theory.

Supposed  Supports  of  the  Fore-
going Theories.

The  Crust  in  a  Fluid  Condition.

Production  of  the  Sun-Spots.

The  Area  of  Sun-Spots  Limited.

Periodicity  of  the  Spots.

The  Spots  are  Cavities  in  the
Sun.

•How  the  Heat  of  the  Sun  reaches
the  Earth.

-  The  Question  of  the  Extinction
of  the  Sun.

Appendix. —  First. — The  Sun's  Corona  and  his  Spots. —  By  Richard  A.  Proctor.
Second.—  The  Fuel  of  the  Sun.— By  Richard  A.  Proctor.
Third.— The  Fuel  of  the  Sun.— A  Reply,  by  W.  M.  Williams.

No.  56  and  No.  51.  [15  cents  each   number.

MONEY   AND   THE    MECHANISM   OF   EXCHANGE.-ByW.  Stanley

Jevons,  M.A.,  F.R.S.,  Professor  of  Logic  and  Political  Economy  in  the  Owens
College,  Manchester,  England. —  In  Two  Parts.

I.

n.
in.

IV.-

v.-

VI.
VII.-

Chapter

Chapter

Chapter

Chapter

Chapter

Chapter

Chapter

Chapter  VIII.  ■

Chapter     IX.-

Chapter      X.-

Chapter  XI.-
Chapter  XII.-
Chapter  XIII.-

Chapter  XIV.-

CONTENTS.

Barter.

Chapter

XV

Exchange.

Chapter

XVI

The  Functions  of  Money.

Chapter

XVII

Early  History  of  Money.

Qualities  of  the  Material  of  Money

Chapter

XVIII.

The  Metals  as  Money.

Coins.    '

Chapter

XLX.

The  Principles  of  Circulation.

Chapter

XX.

Systems  of  Metallic  Monev,

Chapter

XXI.

The  English  System  of  Metallic

Chapter

XXII

Currenev.

Chapter

XXIII

Fractional  Currency.

Chapter

xxrv

The  Battle  of  the  Standards.

Technical     Matters     relating     to

Chapter

XXV.

Coinage.

Chapter

XXVI.

International  Money.

-The  Mechanism  of  Exchange.

-Representative  Money.

-The    Nature    and   Varieties    of

Promissory  Notes.
-Methods  of  Regulating  a  Paper

Currency.
-Credit  Documents.        [System.
-Book   Credit   and    the  Banking
-The  Clearing-House  System.
-The  Check  Bank.
-Foreign  Bills  of  Exchange.
-The  Bank  of  England  and  the

Money  Market.
-A  Tabular  Standard   of  Value.
-The  Quantity  of  Money  needed

by  a  Nation.

No.  52.

THE    DISEASES    OF

eases  of  Memory,"  &c-

THE     WILL— By  Th.  Eibot,  author  of  "The  Dis-
-  Translated  from  the  French  by  J.  Fitzgerald,  A.M.

CONTENTS.

Chapter     I. —  Introduction. -The  Question  Stated.
Chapter   II. — Impairment  of  the  Will. —  Lack  of

Impulsion.
Chapter  in. —  Impairment  of  the  Will. —  Excess  of

Impulsion.

Chapter   rv. — Impairment  of  VoluntaryAttention.
Chapter     V. — The  Realm  of  Caprice.
Chapter  VI.— Extinction  of  the  Will.
Chapter  VII. — Conehision.

THE   HUMBOLDT  PUBLISHING  CO.,  28  Lafayette  Place,  New  York.

THE     HUMBOLDT     LIBRARY

No.  53.

ANIMAL    AUTOMATISM,

Henry  Huxley,  LL.D.,  F.R.S.

AND     OTHER     ESSAYS.- By  Thomas

I. —  On    the    Hypothesis    that    Animals    are

Automata,  and  its  History.
II. —  Science   and   Culture.
HI. — On  Elementary  Instruction  in  Physiology.

CONTENTS.
IV.-

V.-

On    the    Border    Territory    between    the
Animal  and  the  Vegetable  Kingdoms.
Universities :  Actual  and  Ideal.

No.  54.

THE     BIRTH     AND     GROWTH     OF     MYTHS.- By  Edward   Clodd,

F.R.A.S.,  author  of  "The  Childhood   of  the  World,"  "The  Childhood  of  Re-
ligious," "The  Story  of  Creation,"  &c.

CONT

I. —  Nature  as  Viewed  by  Primitive  Man.
II. — Personification  of  the  Powers  of  Nature.
III. — The   Sun   and  Moon   in   Mythology.
IV. — The    Theories    of    Certain    Comparative

Mythologists.
V. —  Aryan  Mythology.

VI. —  The  Primitive  Nature-Myth  Transformed.
VII.— The  Stars  in  Mythology.
VIII. —  Myths  of  the  Destructive  Forces  of  Nature.
IX.—  The  Hindu  Sun-and-Cloud  Myth.
X. —  Demonology.

ENTS.

XI. — Metempsychosis  and  Transformation.
XH. — Transformation   in  the   Middle  Ages.
XIII. — The  Belief  in  Transformation  Universal.
XIV.—  Beast-Fables.
XV.— Totemism.
XVI. — Heraldry:  Ancestor-worship.  [tives.

XVII. —  Survival  of  Myth  in  Historical  Narra.
XVIII. — Myths  of  King  Arthur  and  Llewellyn.
XIX  — Semitic  Myths  and  Legends.
XX. —  Conclusion.
Appendix. — An  American   Indian  Myth.

No.  55.

THE    SCIENTIFIC    BASIS  OF  MORALS,  AND  OTHER   ESSAYS.

By  William  Kingdon  Clifford,  F.R.S.

CONTENTS.

I. —  On  the  Scientific  Basis  of  Morals.
II. —  Right    and  Wrong:    the  Scientific  Ground
of  their  Distinction.

III.— The  Ethics  of  Belief.
IV.—  The  Ethics  of  Religion.

No.  56  and  No.  57.  [15  cents  each   number.

ILLUSIONS:    A    PSYCHOLOGICAL    STUDY.- By  James  Sully,  author
of  "Sensation  and  Intuition,"  "Pessimism,"  &c. —  In  Two  Parts.

CONTENTS.

Chapter      I.— The  Study  of  Illusion.
Chapter    II.— The  Classification  of  Illusions.
Chapter  IH  — Illusions  of  Perception:  General.
Chapter  IV. — Illusions  of  Perception  (continued).
Chapter    V.— Illusions  of  Perception  (continued).
Chapter  VI.— Illusions  of  Perception  (continued).
Chapter  VII. —  Dreams.

Chapter  VIII.
Chapter     IX.

Chapter
Chapter
Chapter

Illusions  of  Introspection.
Other    Quasi-Presentative    Illu-
sions:   Errors  of  Insight.
X. —  Illusions   of  Memory.
XI. — Illusions  of  Belief.
Xn.—  Results.

No.  58  and  No.  59.

Two  double  numbers,  30  cents  each.

THE    ORIGIN    OF   SPECIES    BY  MEANS  OF  NATURAL  SELEC-
TION, or  the  Preservation   of  Favored    Races   in  the   Struggle

for   Life. —  By  Charles  Darwin,  M.A.,  F.R.S. —  New  edition,  from  the  sixth
and  latest  English  edition,"with  additions  and  corrections. — Two  double  numbers.

Chapter        I. — Variation  under  Domestication.

Chapter      II. — Variation  under  Nature.

Chapter    in. —  Struggle  for  Existence.

Chapter  IV.— Natural  Selection;  or,  the  Sur-
vival of  the  Fittest.

Chapter      V. —  Laws  of  Variation.

Chapter     VI.— Difficulties  of  the  Theory.

Chapter  Vn.— Miscellaneous  Objections  to  the
Theory  of  Natural  Selection.

Chapter  VHI. — Instinct.

Chapter     LX.— Hybridism.

CONTENTS.

Chapter

X. —  On  the  Imperfection  of  the  Geo-
logical .  Record.
Chapter     XI.— On  the  Geological  Succession  of
Organic  Beings.
XII. —  Geological  Distribution.
XIII. —  Geological  Distribution  (contin'd).
XIV.— Mutual  Affinities  of  Organic  Be-
ings: Morphology:  Embryology:
Rudimentary  Organs.
XV. —  Recapitulation  and  Conclusion.
Glossary  of   Scientific   Terms.

Chapter
Chapter '
Chapter

Chapter
Index.-

Published    semi-monthly.—  $3  a  year.— Single    numbers,  15  cents.

OF    POPULAR     SCIENCE.

*No.  «0.

THE   CHILDHOOD   OF  THE   WORLD.-A  Simple  Account  of  Man

in    Early  Times.—  By  Edward  CLODD,  F.R.A.S.,  author  of  "The  Childhood
of  Religions,"  "The  Story  of  Creation,"  &e.

CONTEN  T  S.

I.-

II.-
III.-

IV-

V.-

VI.-

VII.-

VIII.-

IX.-

X.-

XI.-

XII.-

XIII.-

XIV.-

XV.-

XVI.-

XVII.-

XVIII.-

Part  I.
-Introductory.
-Man's  First  Wants.
-Man's  First  Tools.
-Fire.

-Cooking  and  Pottery.
-Dwellings.

-  Use  of  Metals.
-Man's  Great  A|
-Mankind    as    SI

Traders.
-Language.

-  Writing.

-  Counting.

-Man's  Wanderings  from  his  first  Home.

-  Man's  Progress  in  all  things.

-  Decay  of  Peoples.

e  on  the  Earth.
epherdS)   Farmers,   and

Part  II.
-  Introductory.
-Man's  First  Questions.
•  Myths.

XIX-

XX.-

XXI.-

XXII.-

XXIII.-

XXIV.-

XXV.-

XXVI.-

XXVIL-

XXVIII.-

XXIX.-

XXX.-

XXXI.-

XXXII.-

XXXIII.

xxxrv-

XXXV.-
XXXVI.-

xxxvu.

Myths  about  Sun  and  Moon.
•  Myths  about  Eclipses.
■Myths  about  Stars.
■Myths  about  the  Earth  and  Man.
■  Man's  Ideas  about  the  Soul.  .
-Belief  in  Magic  and  Witchcraft.
-Man's  Awe  of  the  Unknown.

-  Fetish  -Worship.
-Idolatry.

-  Nature  -Worship.

1.  Water -Worship.

2.  Tree -Worship.

3.  Animal -Worship.
-Polytheism,  or  Belief  in  Many  Gods
-Dualism,  or  Belief  in  Two  Gods.

-  Prayer.

-  Sacrifice.

-Monotheism,  or  Belief  in  One  God.
-Three  Stories  About  Abraham.
-Man's  Belief  in  a  Future  Life.
-Sacred  Books.

-  Conclusion.

No.  61.

MISCELLANEOUS

ESSAYS.  — B.v  Richard  A.  Proctor,  B.A.,  F.R.A.S.,

author  of  "The  Sun,"  "Other  Worlds  than  Ours,"  "Saturn,"  &c.

I. —  Strange  Coincidences.
II.  —  Coincidences  and   Superstitions.
HI. —  Gambling   Superstitions.
rV. —  Learning  Languages.

CONTENTS.

V. —  Strange  Sea  Creatures.
VI.— The  Origin  of  Whales.
VII. — Prayer  and  Weather.

No.  62.  [Double  number,  oO  cents.

THE    RELIGIONS    OF  THE   ANCIENT   WORLD,  including   Egypt,
Assyria  and  Babylonia,  Persia,  India,  Phoenicia,  Etruria,  Greece,

Rome.— By  George  Rawlinson,  M.A.,  Camden  Professor  of  Ancient  History,
Oxford,  and  Canon  of  Canterbury. —  Author  of  "The  Origin  of  Nations,"  "The
Five  Great  Monarchies,"  &c.

CONTENTS.

Chapter      I.  —  The    Religion    of    the   Ancient

Egyptians.
Chapter    H.  —  The  "Religion  of  the  Assyrians

and  Babylonians.
Chapter  III.  —  The    Religion    of    the    Ancient

■Chapter  IV.  — The     Religion     of     the     Early
Sanskritic    Indians.

Chapter  V. — The  Religion  of  the  Phoenicians
and  Carthaginians.

Chapter      VI. —  The   Religion   of    the   Etruscans.

Chapter  VII. —  The  Religion  of  the  Ancient
Greeks.

Chapter  VIII. —  The  Religion  of  the  Ancient
Romans.

Concluding  Remarks.

No.  63.

PROGRESSIVE    MORALITY.-An    Essay   in    Ethics.-By  Thomas

Fowler,  M.A.,  LL.D.,  F.S.A.,  President  of  Corpus  Christi  College,  Wykeham
Professor  of  Logic  in  the  University  of  Oxford.

CONTENTS.

Chapter      I.  —  Introduction. —  The    Sanctions    of

Conduct.
Chapter    II.  —  The    Moral    Sanction    or    Moral

Sentiment. — Its   Functions,  and

the  Justification  of  its  Claims  to

Superiority.

Chapter  III.  —  Analysis  and  Formation  of  the
Moral  Sentiment. — Its  Educatioii
and  Improvement.

Chapter.  IV. —  The  Moral  Test  and  its  Justification.

Chapter  V.— The  Practical  Application  of  the
Moral  Test  to  Existing  Morality.

THE   HUMBOLDT  PUBLISHING  CO.,  28  Lafayette  Place,  New  York.

THE     HUMBOLDT     LIBRARY

No.  64.  ""'

THE    DISTRIBUTION    OF   LIFE,  Animal   and  Vegetable,  in  Space
and  Time.— By  Alfred  Eussel  Wallace  and  W.  T.  Thiselton  Dyer.

CONTENTS.

Section  I.— Distribution  of  Animals.
Geographical  Distribution  of  Land  Animals.
A. —  Vertical  Distribution  of  Animals.
B. —  Powers  of   Dispersal  of  Animals.
C. —  Widespread  and  Local  Groups.  [mals.

D.— Barriers  which  Limit  the  Distribution  of  Ani-
E.— Zoological  Regions.

The  Palaearctic  Region.

The  Ethiopian  Region.

The  Oriental  Region.

The  Australian  Region.

The  Neotropical  Region.

The  Nearctic  Region.

Distribution  of  the  Higher  Animals  during  the
Tertiary  Period.

A.— Tertiary  Faunas  and  their  Geographical  Rela-
tions to  those  of  the  six  Zoological  Regions.

B. —  Birthplace  and  Migrations  of  some  Mamma-
lian Families  and  Genera.

Distribution  of  Marine  Animals.

Foraminifera.  Cirrhipedia.

Spongida.  Mollusca.

Actinozoa.  Fishes.

Polyzoa.  Marine  Turtles.

Echinodermata.  Cetacea.

Crustacea.

General   Relations    of    Marine   with   Terrestrial

Zoological  Regions.
Distribution  of  Animals  in  Time.

Section  II.— Distribution  of  Vegetable  Life..

The  Northern  Flora.
The  Arctic-Alpine  Flora.
The  Intermediate  or  Temperate  Flora.
The  Mediterraneo-Caucasian  Flora.

The  Southern  Flora.

The  Antarctic-Alpine  Flora.

The  Australian  Flora.

The  Andine  Flora.

The  Mexico-Californian  Flora.

The  South-African  Flora.

The  Tropical  Flora.

The  Indo-Malayan  Tropical  Flora.
The  American  Tropical  Flora.
The  African  Tropical  Flora.

No.  65.

CONDITIONS    OF   MENTAL   DEVELOPMENT,  and   Other   Essays.

By  William  Kingdon  Clifford,  F.R.S.,  late  Professor  of  Applied  Mathematics
in  University  College,  London.

CONTENTS.

I.  —  On    some    of    the    Conditions    of    Mental

Development.
II.  —  On  the  Aims  and  Instruments  of  Scientific
Thought.

III. —  A  Lecture  on  Atoms.

IV. — The  First  and  the  Last  Catastrophe. — A  crit-
icism on  some  recent  speculations  about,
the  duration  of  the  universe.

No.  66.

TECHNICAL     EDUCATION,

Thomas  Henry  Huxley,  F.R.S.

AND     OTHER     ESSAYS.-By

CONTENTS.

I. — Technical  Education.

II. — The  Connection  of  the  Biological  Sciences
with  Medicine.
III. — Joseph  Priestly.

IV. —  On  Sensation  and  the  Unity  of  Structure  of

Sensiferous  Organs.
V. —  On  Certain  Errors  respecting  the  Structure
of  the  Heart  attributed  to  Aristotle.

No.  67.

THE    BLACK    DEATH:    An   Account  of  the   Deadly  Pestilence  of

the  Fourteenth  Century.— By  J.  F.  C.  Hecker,  M.D.,  Professor  in  the
Frederick  William  University,  Berlin;  Member  of  various  learned  societies  in
London,  Lyons,  New  York,  Philadelphia,  &c — Translated  for  the  Sydenham
Society,  of  London,  by  B.  G.  Babington,  M.D.,  F.E.S.

Chapter      I.— General   Observations.
Chapter    II. — The  Disease.
Chapter  III.  —  Causes.  —  Spread.
Chapter  IV. — Mortality.
Chapter    V.— Moral  Effects.
Chapter  VI.—  Physicians.

CONTENTS.

Appendix.

I. —  The  Ancient  Song  of  the  Flagellants.
II. —  Examination  of   the  Jews    accused  of
Poisoning  the  Wells.

Published    semi-montnly.—  $3  a  year.—  Single    numbers,  15  cents.

OF    POPULAR     SCIENCE.

No.  68.

Special   number,  lO  cents.

LAWS   IN   GENERAL,  AND  THE  ORDER  OF  THEIR  DISCOVERY.
THE    ORIGIN    OF  ANIMAL  WORSHIP.- POLITICAL   FETICHISM.

Three  Essays  by  Herbert   Spencer.

No.  69.  [Douhlo  number,  30  cents.

FETICHISM.— A  Contribution   to  Anthropology  and   the   History  of

Religion.— K.v  Fritz   Schultze,  Dr.  Phil.— Translated  from  the  German  by

J.  Fitzgerald,  M.A.

contents.

Chapter      I. — Introductory.

Chapter    II.— The  Mind  of  the  Savage  in  its  In-
tellectual and  Moral  Aspects.

1.  The  Intellect  of  the  Savage.

2.  The  Morality  of  the  Savage.   •

3.  Conclusion.

Chapter  III. —  The  Relation  between  the  Savage
Mind  and  its  Object.

1.  The  Value  of  Objects.  Meets.

2.  The  Anthropathic  Apprehension  of  Ob-

3.  The  Causal  Connection  of  Objects.
Ciiapter  IV. —  Fetiehism  as  a  Religion.

1.  The  Belief  in  Fetiches.

2.  The  Range  of  Fetich  Influence.

3.  The  Religiosity  of  Fetich  Worshipers.

4.  "Worship  and  Sacrifice.

5.  Fetich  Priesthoods.

6.  Fetiehism  among  Non-Savages.

Chapter    V.— The  Various  Objects  of  Fetich  Wor-

1.  Stones  as  Fetiches.  (ship.

2.  Mountains  as  Fetiches.

3.  Water  as  a  Fetich.

4.  Wind  and  Fire  as  Fetiches.

5.  Plants  as  Fetiches.

C.   Animals  as  Fetiches.
7.    Men  as  Fetiches.
Chapter  VI.— The  Highest  Grade  of  Fetiehism.

1.  The  New  Object.

2.  The  Gradual  Acquisition  of  Knowledge.

3.  The  Worship  of  the  Moon.

4.  The  Worship  of  the  Stars.

5.  The  Transition  to  Sun -Worship.

6.  The  Worship  of  the  Sun.

7.  The  Worship  of  the  Heavens.
Chapter  VII.— The  Aim  of  Fetiehism.

1.  Retrospect.— 2.  The  New  Problem.

No.  70.

ESSAYS,   SPECULATIVE

AND     PRACTICAL.— By  Herbert  Spencer.

I. —  Specialized  Administration.
II.— "The  Collective  Wisdom."
III. —  Morals   and  Moral  Sentiments.

CONTENTS.

TV— Reasons  for  Dissenting  from  the  Philosophy

of  Comte.
V.— What  is  Electricity?

No.  71.

ANTHROPOLOGY.

By  Daniel  Wilson,  LL.D.,  author  of  "Prehistoric  Man."

CONTENTS.

Chapter     I. —  Scope  of  the  Science.
Chapter   II. —  Man's  Place  in  Nature.
Chapter  III. — Origin  of  Man.
Chapter  rV. —  Races  of  Mankind.

Chapter     V. —  Antiquity  of  Man.

Chapter    VI. —  Language.

Chapter  VII. — Development  of  Civilization.

TO   WHICH    IS    ADDED

ARCHEOLOGY.  — By  E.  B.  Tylor,  F.R.S.,  author  of
Mankind,"  '.'Primitive   Culture,"  &e.

'The    Early  History  of

No.  72.

THE    DANCING     MANIA    OF    THE     MIDDLE    AGES.- By  J.  F.  c.

Hecker,  M.D.,  Professor  in  the  Frederick  William  University,  Berlin;  author  of
"The  Black  Death."— Translated  by  B.  G-.  Babington,  M.D.,  F.R.S.

CONTENTS.

Chapter   I. —  The  Dancing  Mania  in  Germany  and
the  Netherlands.
Sect.  1. —  St.  John's  Dance.
Sect.  2.—  St.  Vitus's  Dance.
Sect.  3. —  Causes.

Sect.  4. —  More  Ancient  Dancing  Plagues.
Sect.  5. — Physicians.

Sect.  6.— Decline  and  Termination  of  the
Dancing  Plague.

Chapter  n. —

Sect.

Sect.

Sect.

Sect.

Sect.

Sect.
Chapter  III.-

Sect.
Chapter  IV-

The  Dancing  Mania  in  Italy.
1. —  Tarantism.

2. —  Most  Ancient  Traces. —  Causes.
3. — Increase.

4. —  Idiosyncracies. —  Music.
5. —  Hysteria.
6. —  Decrease.

-The  Dancing  Mania  in  Abyssinia.
1. — Tigretier.
-Sympathy.

THE  HUMBOLDT  PUBLISHING  CO.,  28  Lafayette  Place,  New  York

THE     HUMBOLDT     LIBRARY

EVOLUTION    IN    HISTORY,   LANGUAGE,  AND    SCIENCE.

Four  addresses  delivered  at  the  London  Crystal  Palace  School  of  Art,  Science,
and  Literature.
1.
Past   and     Present    in   the    East.—  A  Parallelism  demonstrating  the  principle
of   Causal   Evolution,    and   the   necessity   of    the  study   of  General   History. —
By  G.  G.  Zerpfi,  D.Ph.,  Fellow  of  the  Eoval  Historical   Society  of  London.
II.

A  Plea  for  a   More   Scientific   Study  of  Geography.  — By  Rev.  w.  A.

Hales,  M.A.,  formerly  Exhibitioner  of  Caius  College,  Cambridge.
III.

Hereditary  Tendencies    as    Exhibited    in     History.  — By  Henry  Elliot

Malden,  M.A.,  F.R.H.S.,  Trinity  Hall,  Cambridge.
IV.
Vicissitudes    of    the     English     Language.  — By  Rev.  Robinson  Thornton,
D.D.,  F.R.H.S.,  formerly  Fellow  of   St.  John's   College,  Oxford.

Nos.  74,  75.  76,  77  (double  number).

THE     DESCENT    OF    MAN,    AND    SELECTION

TO     SEX.  — By  Charles    Darwin. — With  Illustrations,
vised   and   Augmented.

CONTENTS.
Part  I.  Chapter

The  Descent  oe  Origin  of  Man.

Chapter  I. —  The  Evidence  of  the  Descent  of
Man  from  some  Lower  Form.

Chapter  II. —  On  the  Manner  of  Development  of
Man  from  some  Lower  Form.

Chapter  III. —  Comparison  of  the  Mental  Powers
of  Man  and  the  Lower  Animals.

Chapter  IV. —  Comparison  of  the  Mental  Powers
of  Man  and  the  Lower  Animals
{continued) .

Chapter  V. —  On  the  Development  of  the  Intel-
lectual and  Moral  Faculties  dur-
ing Primeval  and  Civilized  Times

Chapter   VI. —  On  the  Affinities  and  Genealogy  of

IN     RELATION

—  New  Edition,  Re-

Chapter  VII.

Man.
•On  the  Races  of  Man.

Part  II.

Sexual  Selection.
•Chapter     VIII.— Principles  of  Sexual   Selection.
Chapter         IX. — Secondary  Sexual  Character  in
the  Lower  Classes  of  the  An-
imal Kingdom.
***  Numbers  74,  75,  76,  are  single  numbers  (15  cents  each) ;
Price  of  the  entire  work  75  cents.

X. — Secondary  Sexual  Characters  of

Insects.
XI. — Insects  (continued) — Order  Lepi-
dopterafbutterflies  and  moths)
XII. — Secondary  Sexual  Characters  of
Fishes,  Amphibians,  and  Rep-
tiles.
XIII. —  Secondary  Sexual  Characters  of

Birds.
XIV. —  Birds  (continued).
XV. — Birds  (continued).
XVI-  —  Birds  (concluded) .
XVII. —  Secondary  Sexual  Characters  of
Mammals.
Chapter  XVIII. —  Secondary  Sexual  Characters  of
Mammals  (continued).

Chapter
Chapter

Chapter

Chapter
Chapter
Chapter
Chapter

Part  III.
Sexual  Selection  in  Relation  to  Man,
and  Conclusion.
XIX. —  Secondary  Sexual  Characters  of
Man.
XX. —  Secondary  Sexual  Characters  of
Man  (continued).  [sion.

Chapter      XXI. —  General  Summary  and  Conclu-
Nuinber  77  is  a  double  number  (30  cents) .

Chapter
Chapter

No.  78.

HISTORICAL  SKETCH    OF  THE    DISTRIBUTION    OF  LAND    IN
ENGLAND,  with  Suggestions  for  some  Improvement  in  the  law.

By  William  Lloyd  Birkbeck,  M.A.,  Master  of  Downing  College,  and  Downing
Professor  of  the  Laws  of  England  in  the  University  of  Cambridge.

CONTE
Part  I.
I. — Anglo-Saxon  Agriculture. —  Geneats    and

Geburs . — Vill  ani.
H. —  Agriculture  after  the  Conquest,  — r Villein-
age.— Copyholders.— Continental  Serfs.
III.— Origin  of  Large  Properties.— Estates  of
Anglo-Saxon    Nobility.  —  Evidence    of
Domesday.
IV— The  Soke.— Socage  Tenure.
V. —  Agricultural  Communities.
VI.— Mr.  S9ebohm.

VII.— The  First  Taxation  of  Land.— The  Hide.
VIII.— Saxon  Law  of  Succession  to  Laud.

IX.— Effect  of  the  Norman  Conquest   on  the

Distribution  of  Land.
X. — Norman  Law  of  Succession.
XL— Strict  Entails.— The  Statute  "De  Donis

Conditionalibus. ' '
XII.  — Effects  of  Strict  Entails.— Scotch  Entails.

NTS.

XIII. —  Relaxation  of  Strict  Entails.— Common

Recoveries.
XIV— Henry  VH.  and  his  Nobles.— The  Statute

of  Fines.
XV— Strict   Settlements.
XVI.— Effect  of  Strict  Settlements  of  Land.—

Mr.  Thorold  Rogers.
XVIL— Trustees    to    Preserve    Contingent    Re-
mainders.
XVIIL— Powers  of  Sale.
XIX— Inclosure   of  Waste   Lands.  —  Mr.  John
Walter. — Formation  of  a  Peasant  Pro-
prietary.

Part  II.
I.— Amendment  of  Law  of  Primogeniture.
II. —  Proposed  System   of   Registration.
III. — Modern   Registration  Acts.
IV.— The  Present  General  Registration  Act

Published    semi-monthly.-  $3  a  year.—  Single    numbers,  15  cents.

OF    POPULAR    SCIENCE.

Nc,

SCIENTIFIC    ASPECTS    OF    SOME     FAMILIAR    THINGS.-By  w.

M.  Williams,  F.R.S.,  F.C.S.

CONTENTS.

I. —  On  the   Social  Benefits  of  Paraffin.

II. — The  Formation  of  Coal.
III. — The   Chemistry   of   Bog  Reclamation.
IV.— The  Coloring  of  Green  Tea.

V. —  "Iron-Filings''  in   Tea.
VI. — The  Origin"  of  Soap.

VII. — The  Action  of  Frost  in  Water-Pipes  and
on    Building   Materials.
VIII. —  Fire-Clay  ami   Anthracite.

IX. —  Count    Kumf'ord's   Cooking-Stoves.
X.  —  The  Air  of   Stove- Heated   Rooms.
XI. — Domestic  Ventilation.

No.  80.  Douhle  numher,  30  cents.

CHARLES    DARWIN:    HIS     LIFE    AND    WORK.- By  Grant  Allen.

CONTENTS.

Chapter     I. —  The  World  into  which  Darwin  was

born.
Chapter  II.  — Ch  arl  es  Dnr wi  n  and  his  Antecedents.
Chapter  III.— Early  Days.
Chapter  IV. — Darwin's  Wander- Years.
Chapter    V. —  The   Period   of  Incubation.
Chapter  VI. —  "The  Origin  of  Species."

Chapter    VII. — The  Darwinian  Revolution  begins.
Chapter  VIII.—  The  Descent  of  Man.
Chapter      IX.— The  Theory  of  Courtship.
Chapter       X. — Victory  and  Rest.
Chapter      XI. — Darwin's  Place  in  the  Evolution-
ary Movement.
Chapter    XII.— The  Net  Result.

No.  81.

THE
THE

MYSTERY    OF     MATTER:     and
PHILOSOPHY    OF    IGNORANCE.

•By  J.  Allanson  Picton.

No.  82.

ILLUSIONS     OF    THE     SENSES:    AND     OTHER     ESSAYS.-By

Eichard  A.  Proctor.

I. —  Illusions  of  the  Senses.
II. — Animals  of  the  Present  and  the  Past.
III.— Life  in  Other  Worlds.
IV. —  Earthquakes.

CONTENTS.

V. —  Our  Dual  Brain.
VI.— A  New  Star  in  a  Star-Cloud.
VII. —  Monster  Sea-Serpents.
VIII.— The  Origin  of  Comets.

No.  83.

PROFIT-SHARING   BETWEEN   CAPITAL  AND   LABOR.-Six  Essays.

By  Sedley  Taylor,  M.A.,  late  Fellow  of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge,  Eng.

CONTENTS.

Essay     I. — Profit-Sharing  in  the  Maison  Leclaire.
Essay   II. —  Profit-Sharing  in  Industry.
Essay  III. — Profit-Sharing  in  Industry  (continiied).
*5ssay  IV. — Profit-Sharing  in  the  Paris  and  Orleans
Railway  Company.

Essay  V. —  Profit-Sharing  in  Agriculture.

Appendix  to  Essay  V.  —  Mr.  Vande-
leur's   Irish   Experiment.
Essay  "ST!. — Profit-Sharing  in  Distributive  Enter-
prise.

No.  84.

STUDIES     OF     ANIMATED     NATURE.-Four  Essays,  viz.,

I.

Bats.  — By  W.  S.  Dallas,  F.L.S.

II.
Dragon-Flies.  — By  W.  S.  Dallas,  F.L.S..

.  in  5

The  Glow-worm   and   other  Phosphorescent  Animals.— By  G.  G.  Chis-

holm,  M.A.,  B.Sc.
IV.
Minute    Organisms.  — By  Frederick  P.  Balkwill.

No.  85.

THE    ESSENTIAL  NATURE    OF   RELIGION.- By  J.  Allanson  Picton,
author  of  "The  Mystery  of  Matter,"  &c.

CONTENTS.

I. —  Religion  and  Freedom  of  Thought.
II. — The  Evolution  of  Religion. — Fetichism.
III. — Nature -Worship.

IV. — Prophetic  Religions.
V. —  Religious  Dogma. — The  Future  of  Religion.

THE   HUMBOLDT  PUBLISHING  CO.,  28  Lafayette  Place,  New  York.

THE     HUMBOLDT     LIBRARY

No.  86.

THE     UNSEEN     UNIVERSE.— By  William  Kingdon  Clifford,  F.R.S.

TO   WHICH    IS    ADDED

THE     PHILOSOPHY   OF  THE    PURE    SCIENCES -By  William  King-
don  Clifford,  F.R.S.

CONTENTS.

I. —  Statement  of  the  Question.
II. —  Knowledge  and  Feeling.

III. —  The  Postulates  of  the  Science  of  Space.
IV. —  The  Universal  Statements  of  Arithmetic.

No.  87.

THE      MORPHINE     HABIT    (MORPHINOMANIA).- Three  Lectures  by
Professor  B.  Ball,  M.D.,  of  the  Paris  Faculty  of  Medicine.

CONTENTS.

HI. —  Morphinomania. — Diagnosis,  Prognosis,  and
Treatment.

I. — Morphinomania.  —  General     Description. —

Effects  of  the  Abuse  of  Morphine.
II. —  Morphinomania.  —  Effects     of    Abstinence
from  Morphine.

To  which  is  appended  four  other  lectures,  viz.,

I— The  Border-Land  of  Insanity.         ill.—  Prolonged    Dreams.
II.— Cerebral   Dualism.  IV  — Insanity   in   Twins.

No.  88.

SCIENCE  AND  CRIME,  AND    OTHER    ESSAYS -By  Andrew  Wilson,
F.R.S.E.

CONTENTS.

I. —  The  Earliest  Known  Life-Relic.
II. —  About  Kangaroos.
III.— On   Giants.

IV.— The  Polity  ef  a  Pond.
V. —  Skates  and  Bays.
VI. —  Leaves.

No.  89.

THE     GENESIS    OF    SCIENCE.-By  Herbert  Spencer.

TO   WHICH    IS    ADDED

THE    COMING    OF  AGE    OF  "THE    ORIGIN    OF  SPECIES."-By

Professor  Thomas  Henry  Huxley,  F.R.S.

No.  90.

NOTES  ON    EARTHQUAKES:  with  Thirteen  Miscellaneous  Essays.

By  Richard  A.  Proctor.

contents.

I. — Notes   on  Earthquakes.
II. — Photographing  Fifteen   Million   Stars.
III.— The  Story  of  the  Moon.
IV.— The   Earth's  Past.
V.— The  Story  of  the  Earth.
VI.— The  Falls  of  Niagara.
VII.— The  Unknowable.

Vni.— Sun  -Worship.
IX. —  Herbert  Spencer  on  Priesthoods.
X. — The  Star  of  Bethlehem  and  a  Bible  Comet.
XI. — An  Historical  Puzzle.
XH. —  Galileo,  Darwin,  and  the  Pope.
XDII. —  Science   and  Politics.
XTV. — Parents   and  Children.

No.  91.  Double  number,  30  cents.

THE     RISE     OF    UNIVERSITIES.— By  S.  S.  Laurie,  LL.D.,  Professor  of  the
Institutes  and  History  of  Education  in  the  University  of  Edinburgh.

CONT

I. —  The  Romano-Hellenic  Schools  and  their

Decline.
II. — Influence  of  Christianity  on  Education,  and

Rise  of  Christian  Sehools.
III. —  Charlemagne  and  the  Ninth  Century.
IV.— InnerWork  of  Christian  Schools  (450-ilOO).
V. —  Tenth  and  Eleventh  Centuries.
VI.— The  Rise  of  Universities  (A.  D.  1100).
VII.— The  First  Universities.— The  Schola  Saler-

nitana  and  the  University  of  Naples.
VIII. —  The  University  of  Bologna.

ENTS.

IX  —  The  University  of  Paris.
X. — The  Constitution    of  Universities.  —  The
terms  "Studium  Generale"  and  "Uni-
versitas."
XI. —  Students,  their  Numbers  and  Discipline. —
Privileges  of  Universities. — Faculties.
XII. —  Graduation.
XIII. —  Oxford  and  Cambridge.
XTV. — The  University  of  Prague.
XV. —  University  Studies  and"  the  Conditions  of
Graduation.

Published    semi-montnly.—  $3  a  year.—  Single    numbers,  15  cents.

OF    POPULAR     SCIENCE.

No.  92.  Doulili"    iiiimliiT,   '.iO   cent*.

THE    FORMATION    OF   VEGETABLE    MOULD    THROUGH    THE
Action    of    Earthworms,  with   Observations    on    their   Habits.—

By  Chakles  Darwin,  LL.D.,  F.R.S.

CONT  E  N  T  8.

■Chapter     I. —  Habits  of  Worms.

Chapter    II.— Habits  of  Worms  (continued).

Chapter  III. — The  Amount  of  Fine  Earth  brought
up  by  Worms  to  the  surface.

Chapter  IV. —  The  Part  which  Worms  have  played
in  the  Burial  of  Ancient  Build-
ings.

Chapter      V. — The  Action  of  Worms  in  the  Denu

dation  of  the  Land.
Chapter    VI. —  The  Denudation  of  the  Land  lam-

tinned).
Chapter  VII. —  Conclusion.

V. — Death  by  Chloroform.
VI. —  Death   by  Prussic  Acid.
VII.  —  Objections   Considered.

No.  91!.  Special   number,   lO   cents.

SCIENTIFIC      METHODS      OF     CAPITAL     PUNISHMENT.-By  J.

Mount  Bleyer,  M.D.

CONTENTS.

I.  — General  Review  of  the  Subject.
11— Death  by  Hanging.
III.— Death  by  Electricity.
IV. —  Death  by  Morphine   Injection.

TO    WHICH    IS    ADDED

INFLICTION    OF    THE    DEATH    PENALTY -By  Park  Benjamin.

"No.  94.

THE     FACTORS     OF   ORGANIC     EVOLUTION  -By  Herbert  Spencer.

No.  95.

THE     DISEASES     OF    PERSONALITY —By  Th.  Ribot.— Translated  from
the  French  by  J.  Fitzgerald,  M.A.

contents.

Chapter     I. —  Introduction.
Chapter   II. — Organic  Disturbance.
Chapter  III. — Affective  Disturbance.

Chapter  IV. —  Intellective  Disturbance.
Chapter    V. — Dissolution  of  Personality.
Chapter  VI. —  Conclusion.

So.  96.

A    HALF-CENTURY    OF    SCI ENCE- By  Thomas  Henry  Huxlet,  F.R.S.

TO    WHICH    IS    ADDED

THE    PROGRESS  OF  SCIENCE  from  1836  to  I886.-By Grant  Allen.

.No.  97.

THE     PLEASURES     OF     LI  FE.  —  By  Sir  John    Lubbock,  Bart.,  M.P.,
F.R.S.,  D.C.L.,  LL.D.

Part  First.

Chapter     I. — The  Duty  of  Happiness.
Chapter    II. — The  Happiness  of  Duty.
Chapter  III. — A  Song  of  Books.
Chapter  IV.— The  Choice  of  Books.
Chapter    V. —  The  Blessing  of  Friends.

CONTENTS.

Chapter     VI.— The  Value  of  Time.
Chapter    VII. — The  Pleasures  of  Travel.
Chapter  VII  I. —  The   Pleasures  of  Home.
Chapter     IX. —  Science.
Chapter       X. —  Education.

%  Part  Second.— For  the  contents  of  Part  Second  see  No.  Ill  of  this  Catalogue.

No.  98.  [Special   number,    lO   cents.

COSMIC    EMOTION. -Also,  THE    TEACHING    OF    SCIENCE.-By

William  Kingdon  Clifford,  F.R.S.
No.  99.  ~  "

NATURE-STUDIES.  —  Four  Essays  by  various  authors,  viz.,

1  — FlameD— By  Prof.  F.  R.  Eaton  Lowe.
H  — Birds    of   Passage.— By  Dr.  Robert  Brown,  F.L.S.
III.— Snow.— By  George  G-.  Chisholm,  F.R.G.S.
IV — Caves.— By  James  Dallas,  F.L.S.

THE   HUMBOLDT  PUBLISHING  CO.,  28  Lafayette  Place.  New  York.

THE     HUMBOLDT     LIBRARY

No.  100.

SCIENCE     AND      POETRY,    AND     OTHER      ESSAYS.-By

Andrew  Wilson,  F.E.S.E.

I. —  Science     and     Poetry. —  A  Valedictory  Address  to  a  Literary  Society.

n.— The    Place,   Method,   and   Advantages   of   Biology   in    Ordi-
nary  Education.

HI— Science -Culture      for     the      Masses.  — An  Opening    Lecture   at  a
"People's   College."

iv.— The    Law   of    Likeness,   and    its    Working.

No.  101.

AESTHETICS- By  James  Sully,  M.A.

(A). —  Metaphysical  Problems.
(B). —  Scientific   Problems.
(C).—  History  of  Systems.

CONTENTS.

II. —  German  Writers  on  ^Esthetics.
III. — French  Writers  on  ^Esthetics.
IV. — Italian  and  Dutch  Writers  on  ^Esthetics.

V. —  English  Writers  on  ^Esthetics.

DREAMS.—  By  James  Sully,  M.A.

CONTENTS.

The  Sources  of  Dream-Materials.
The  Order  of  Dream-Combinations.
The  Objective  Reality  and  Intensity  of  Dream-
Imaginations.

The  Dream  as  Immediate  Objective  Experience.
The  Dream  as  a  Communication  from  a  Super-
natural Being.
Modern  Theory  of  Dreams.

TO   WHICH    IS    ADDED

ASSOCIATION     OF    IDEAS.— By  Prof.  George  Croom  Robertson.

No.  102.

ULTIMATE     FINANCE.— A  True  Theory   of   Co-operation.

William   Nelson   Black.

Part  First.

contents.

By

Chapter     I. —  The   Origin   of    Social    Discontent.

Chapter    II. — Definition  of   Capital.

Chapter  III. —  Men   not   Capitalists    because    not

Creators   of  Capital.
Chapter  IV. —  Social  Results   Considered.
Chapter    V. —  The   Evolution  of  Finance.
Chapter  VI. — Every  Man  his  own  Householder.

Chapter   VII. — Illustrations   from  Real   Life.
Chapter  VIII.—  Effects   of  Material   Growth.
Chapter      IX. — Objections   Answered.
Chapter       X. —  Some  Political  Reflections.

Appendix. —  An  Act  for  the  Incorporation  ot
Bond  Insurance  Companies.

,**  Paet  Second.  —  For  the  contents  of  Part  Second  see  No.  107  of  this  Catalogue.

No.  103.

I- The   Coming  Slavery.— 2-  The   Sins  of  Legislators.— 3.  The   Great
Political    Superstition.—  Three  Essays  by  Herbert  Spencer.

No.  104.

TROPICAL     AFRICA.— By  Henry   Drummond,   LL.D.,   F.R.S.E..   L.G.S,.

contents.

Chapter     I.— The  AVater-Route  to  the  Heart  of

Africa.  —  The    Rivers    Zambesi

and  Shire.
Chapter    II. —  The  East  African  Lake  Country.—

Lakes  Shirwa  and  Nyas'sa.
Chapter  III.— The  Aspect  of  the  Heart  of  Africa.

The  Country  and  its  People.
Chapter  IV.— The  Heart-Disease  of  Africa.— Its

Pathology  and  Cure.

Chapter  V. — Wanderings  on  the  Nyassa-Tangan-
yika  Plateau.  —  A  Traveler's
Diary.

Chapter      VI.— The  White  Ant,— A  Theory.

Chapter  VII.— Mimicry.— The  Ways  of  African-
Insects.

Chapter  VIII.— A  Geological   Sketch.

Chapter     IX. — A  Political  Warning.

Chapter       X.  —  A  Meteorological  Note.

Published    semi-monthly.—  $3  a  year.—  Single    numbers,  15  cents.

OF    POPULAR     SCIENCE.

No.  105.

FREEDOM  IN  SCIENCE  AND  TEACHING.- By  Ernst  Haeckki,
Professor  in  the  University  of  Jena.  —  With  a  Prefatory  Note  by  Professor
Thomas   Henry  Huxley,  F.R.S.

Chapter     I. —  Development  and  Creation.
Chapter    II. — Certain  Proofs  of  the  Doctrine  of

Descent.
Chapter  III.— The    Skull    Theory  and    the    Ape

Theory.
Chapter  IV.— The    Cell-Soul    and    the    Cellular

Psychology.

CONTENTS.

Chapter

V. —  The    Genetic    and    the    Dogmatic:
Methods  of  Teaching.

The    Doctrine    of    Descent    audi
Social  Democracy.

Chapter     VI.

Chapter    VII. —  Ignorabimus   et   Restringamur

No.  106.

FORCE    AND    ENERGY.-A  Theory  of  Dynamics.- By  Grant  Allen.

CONTENTS.
Part  I.— Abstract  or  Analytic.

Chapter  L-

Chapter  II.-

Chapter  III.-

Chapter  IV.-

Chapter  V-

Chapter  VI.-

Chapter  VII.-

Chapter  VIII.-

Chapter  IX.-

■  Power.

■  Force.

•  Energy.

-The  "Species  of  Force.
-The  Species  of  Energy.
-The  Modes  of  Energy.
-The   Kinds   of  Kinesis.
•The   Persistence   of  Force.
-The  Conservation  of  Energy.

Chapter         X.-
Chapter       XL-

Chapter     XII
Chapter  XIII
Chapter
Chapter
Chapter

XIV-

XV-

XVI..

Chapter  XVII.-

-The  Indestructibility  of  Power.
-The     Mutual     Interference     of

Forces.
-The  Suppression  of  Energies.
-Liberating  Energies.
-  Miscellaneous   Illustrations.
-The  Dissipation  of   Energy.
-The  Nature  of  Energy.
-The  Nature  of  Motion.

Part  II. —  Concrete  or  Synthetic.

Chapter  I. — Dynamical  Formula  of  the  Uni-

Chapter  II. —  The  Sidereal   System.         [verse.

Chapter  III.— The  Solar  System.

Chapter  IV.— The  Earth.

Chapter       V. —  Organic  Life.
Chapter     VI. —  The  Vegetal  Organism.
Chapter    VII. — The  Aiiimal   Organism.  fgies.

Chapter  VIII. — General  View  of  Mundane  Ener-

of     Wealth.- By

No.  107.

ULTIMATE        FINANCE.- A    True    Theory

William    Nelson   Black.

Part    Second.

contents.

Chapter     I.— The  Origin  of  Property.

Chapter    II.— The   Evolution   of  Wealth.

Chapter  III.  — Banking,  and  its  Relation  to  Accu-
mulation.

Chapter  IV. — The  Relation  of  Insurance  to  Accu-
mulation.

Chapter  V.— The  Creative  and  Benevolent  Feat-
ures of  Fortune-Htvnting.

Chapter  VI.— Wealth  an  Enforced  Coutributoi-
to  the  Public  AYelfare.

Chapter  VII. — The  Impairment  and  Destruction-
of  Property.

Part  First.— For  the  contents  of  Part  First  see  No.  102  of  this  Catalogue.

No.  108  and  No.  109.  No.  108  is  a  double  number.  30  cents-

ENGLISH:     PAST    AND     PRESENT- A  Series  of  Eight  Lectures  by
Richard    Chenevix    Trench,  D.D.,  Archbishop  of  Dublin.

Lectitre     I.— The   English  Vocabulary.
Lecture    II. —  English   as   it   might    have  been.
Lecture  III. —  Gains  of  the   English   Language.
Lecture  rV — Gains   of  the  English   Language

(continued).
Lecture    V. — Diminutions  of  the  English  Lan-
guage.

CONTENTS.

Lecture

VI. —  Diminutions  of  the  English  Lan-
guage (continued).

Lecture  VII.— Changes  in  the  Meaning  of  English
Words.

Lecture  VIII.— Chansres  in  the  Spelling  of  English
Wor#.

Index  of  Subjects.— Index  of  Words  and  Phrases.

THE   HUMBOLDT  PUBLISHING  CO.,  28  Lafayette  Place,  New  York.

THE    HUMBOLDT     LIBRARY

No.  110.  Double   number,  30  cents.

THE    STORY   OF   CREATION.-A  Plain  Account  of  Evolution.

By  Edward  Clodd,  author  of  "The  Childhood  of  the  World,"  "The  Childhood
of  Religions,"  "The  Birth  and  Growth  of  Myths,"  &c. — Eighty  Illustrations.

CONTENTS.

Chapter     I.— The  Universe:   its  Contents.

1.  Matter.  a.  Force.

2.  Power.  b.  Energy.

Chapter   II.— Distribution    of    Matter    in
Space.

Chapter  III.— The  Sun  and  Planets.
The  Earth :    General  Features.

Chapter  TV. —  The  Past  Life-History  of  the
Earth.
Character  and  Contents  of  Rocks  of

1.  Primary  Epoch.  3.  Tertiary  Epoch.

2.  Secondary  Epoch.         4.  Quaternary  Epoch.

Chapter     V.— Present  Life-Forms.

Physical  Constituents  and  Unity.

A.  Plants.

1.  Flowerless.  2.  Flowering.

B.  Animals.

1.  Protozoa.  4.  Annulosa.

2.  Ccelenterata.  5.  Mollusca.

3.  Echinodermata.

6.  Vertebrata.

Chapter     VI.— The   Universe:    Mode    of   its
Becoming  and  Growth.

1.  Inorganic  Evolution.        3.  Evolution    of    the

2.  Evolution  of  the  So-  Earth.

lar  System.

Chapter   VII.—  The  Origin  of  Life.
Time.— Place.— Mode.

Chapter  VIII.— The  Origin  of  Life-Forms.
Priority  of    Plant   or  Animal.
Cell-Structure  and  Development.

Chapter     IX.— The  Origin  of  Species.
Argument :

1.  No  two  individuals  of  the  same  species  are  alike.

Each  tends  to  vary.

2.  Variations  are  transmitted,  and  therefore  tend

to  become  permanent.

3.  Man  takes  advantage  of  these  transmitted  un-

likenesses  to  produce  new  varieties  of  plants
and  animals.

4.  More  organisms  are  born  than  survive.

5.  The  result  is  obvious :  a  ceaseless  struggle  for

place  and  food.

6.  .Natural  selection  tends  to  maintain  the  balance

between  living  things  and  their  surround-
ings. These  surroundings  change ;  therefore
living  things  must  adapt  themselves  thereto,
or  perish.

Chapter    X.— Proofs  of  the  Derivation  of
Species.

1.  Embryology.  4.  Succession  in  Time.

2.  Morphology.  5.  Distribution  in  Space.

3.  Classification.  Objections.

Chapter    XL— Social  Evolution.

1.  Evolution  of  Mind.        4.  Evolution  of  Morals.

2.  Evolution  of  Society.     5.  Evolution   of  Theol-

3.  Evolution  of  Language,  ogy.

Arts,  and  Science.         Summary.

No.  111.

THE     PLEASURES

F.B.S.,   D.C.L.,   LL.D.

Chapter      I. — Ambition.

Chapter  II.— "Wealth.

Chapter  III.— Health.

Chapter  IV. — Love.

Chapter  V. — Art.

Chapter  VI. — Poetry.
Chapter  VII— Music.

OF     LIFE.  — By  Sir  John   Lubbock,  Bart.,  M.P.

Part    Second,
contents.

Chapter  VIII.— The  Beauties  of  Nature.
Chapter     IX.— The  Troubles  of  Life.
Chapter       X. — Labor  and  Rest.
Chapter     XI. —  Religion.
Chapter    XII. —  The  Hope  of  Progress.
Chapter  XIIL— The  Destiny  of  Man.

Part  First.— For  the  contents  of  Part  First  see  No.  97  of  this  Catalogue.

No.  112.

PSYCHOLOGY  OF  ATTENTION.

French  by  J.  Fitzgerald,  M.A.

-By  Th.  Ribot. —  Translated   from  the

CONTENTS.

Chapter  I. —  Purpose  of  this  treatise:  study  of
the  mechanism  of  Attention. —
Attention  defined.

Chapter  II. —  Spontaneous  or  Natural  Attention.
Its  cause  always  affective  states.
Its  physical  manifestations. —
Attention  simply_  the  subjective
side  of  the  manifestations  that
express  it.  —  Origin  of  Sponta-
neous  Attention.

Chapter  III. — Voluntary  or  Artificial  Attention.
How  it  is  produced.— The  three
principal  periods  of  its  genesis:

Chapter  IV.-
Chapter    V.-

action  of  simple  feelings,  complex
feelings,  and  habits. — Mechanism
of  Voluntary  Attention. — Atten-
tion acts  only  upon  the  muscles
and  through  the  muscles. —  The
feeling  of  effort.

-Morbid  States  of  Attention. — Dis-
traction.— Hypertrophy  of  Atten-
tion. —  Atrophy  of  Attention. —
Attention  in  idiots.

-  Conclusion. — Attention  dependent
on  Affective  States.  —  Physical
Condition   of  Attention.

Published    semi-monthly.-  $3  a  year.—  Single    numbers,  15  cents.

OF    POPULAR     SCIENCE.

No.  113.  Double   number,  :»o     .  nu.

HYPNOTISM:    ITS    HISTORY  AND    PRESENT   DEVELOPMENT.

By  Fredrik  Bjornstrom,  M.D.,  Head  Physician  of  the  Stockholm  Hospital,
Professor  of  Psychiatry,  late  Boyal  Swedish  Medical  Councillor. —  Authorized
Translation  from  the  Second  Swedish  Edition,  by  Baron  Nils  Possk,  M.G.,
Director  of  the  Boston  School  of  Gymnastics.

CONTENTS.

I. —  Historical  Retrospect.

II. —  Definition  of  Hypnotism. —  Susceptibility  to

lfj'pnotism.
III. —  Means  or  Methods  of  Hypnotizing.
IV. —  Stages  or  Degrees  of  Hypnotism.

V. —  Unilateral  Hypnotism.
VI.—  Physical  Effects  of  Hypnotism.

VII.— Psychical  Effects  of  Hypnotism.
VIII. —  Suggestion.

IX. —  Hypnotism  as  a  Remedial  Agent.
X. —  Hypnotism  as  a  Means  of  Education,  or
as  a  Moral  Remedy.
XI. —  Hypnotism   and   the  Law.
XII. —  Misuses   and   Dangers   of  Hypnotism.
Bibliography  of  Hypnotism.

No.  114.  Double  number,  30   cents.

CHRISTIANITY   AND    AGNOSTICISM.-A   Controversy- Consisting

of  papers  contributed  to  The  Nineteenth  Century  by  Henry  Wace,  D.D.,  Prof.
Thomas  H.  Huxley,  The  Bishop  of  Peterborough,  W.  H.  Mallock,  Mrs.
Humphry  Ward.

contents.

I.  — On   Ajjnosticisni.  —  By   Henry    Wace,
D.D.,   Prebendary  of   St.  Paul's   Cathe-
dral ;  Principal  of  King's  College.London.
II.—  Agnosticism.—  By  Professor  Thomas  H.

Huxley.
III.— Agnosticism.— A  Reply  to  Prof.  Huxley.

By  Henry  Wace,  D.D.
IV.— Agnosticism.— By  W.  C.  Magee,  D.D.,
Bishop  of  Peterborough.
V. — Agnosticism.  —  A  Rejoinder.  —  By   Prof.

Thomas  H.  Huxley.
VI. —  Christianity    and    Agnosticism. —  By
Henry  Wace,  D.D.

VII.

VIII.-

IX.-

X.-

XI.

-An  Explanation  to  Prof.  Huxley. —

By  W.  C.  Magee,  D.D.,  Bishop  of  Peter-
borough.
-  The  Value  of  Witness  to  the  Mirac-
ulous.—By.  Prof.  Thomas  H.  Huxley.

-Agnosticism    and   Christianity. —  By

Prof.  Thomas  H.  Huxley.

-"Cowardly    Agnosticism." — A  Word
with  Prof.  HuxLEY.-By  W.H.Mallock.

-The    New    Reformation. —  By    Mrs.
Humphry  Ward.

No.  115  and  No.  116.  Two  double  numbers,  30  cents  each.

DARWINISM:  AN  EXPOSITION  OF  THE  THEORY  OF  NATURAL
SELECTION,  with   some  of  its  applications.— By  Alfred  Eussel

Wallace,  LL.D.,  F.L.S.,  &c— With  Portrait  of  the  Author,  Colored  Map,  and
numerous  illustrations.

CONTENTS.

Chapter  I. — What  'are  "Species,"  and  what  is
meant  by  their  "Origin."

The  Struggle  for  Existence.

The  Variability  of  Species  in  a
State  of  Nature.

Variation  of  Domesticated  Animals
and  Cultivated  Plants.

■Natural  Selection  by  Variation  and
Survival  of  the  Fittest.

Difficulties  and  Objections.

On  the  Infertility  of  Crosses  be-
tween Distinct  Species,  and  the
usual  Sterility  of  their  Hybrid
Offspring.

•Chapter     II.-
Chapter  III.-

/Chapter   IV.-

■Chapter     V.-

•Chapter   VI.-
•Chapter  VII-

Chapter  Vm.—

Chapter     IX.-
Chapter       X.-

Chapter     XI.-

Chapter   XII.-

Chapter  XHL-

Chapter  XIV.-

Chapter    XV.-

The  Origin  and  Uses  of  Color  in
Animals.

Warning  Coloration  and  Mimicry.

Colors  and  Ornaments  character-
istic of  Sex.

The  Special  Colors  of  Plants. —
Their  Origin  and  Purpose.

The  Geographical  Distribution  of
Organisms.

The  Geological  Evidences  of  Evo-
lution.

Fundamental  Problems  in  Rela-
tion to  Variation  and  Heredity.

Darwinism  applied  to  Man.

The  present  work  treats  the  problem  of  the  Origin  of  Species  on  the  same  general  lines  as  were
adopted  by  Darwin;  but  from  the  standpoint  reached  after  nearly  thirty  years  of  discussion,  with  an
abundance  of  new  facts  and  the  advocacy  of  many  new  or  old  theoiies.

While  not  attempting  to  deal,  even  in  outline,  with  the  vast  subject  of  evolution  in  general,  an
endeavor  has  been  made  to  give  snch  an  account  of  the  theory  of  Natural  Selection  as  may  enable  any
intelligent  reader  to  obtain  a  clear  conception  of  Darwin's  work,  and  to  understand  something  of  the
power  and  range  of  his  great  principle. — Extract  from   the  Preface.

THE    HUMBOLDT   PUBLISHING   CO.,  28  Lafayette  Place,  New  York.

THE     HUMBOLDT     LIBRARY

No.  117.  [Double  number,  30   cents.

MODERN  SCIENCE  AND  MODERN  THOUGHT.-A  Clear  and!
Concise  View  of  the  Principal  Results  of  Modern  Science,
and  of  the  Revolution  which  they  have  effected  in  Modern
Thought.— By  S.  Laing.

Part    I.

MODEEN      SCIENCE.

CONT
Chapter  I. —  Space.

Primitive  Ideas— Natural  Standards— Dimensions  of  the
Earth— Of  Sun  and  Solar  System— Distance  of  Fixed  Stars—
Their  Order  and  Size— Nebula?  and  Other  Universes— The
Telescope  and  the  Infinitely  Great— The  Microscope  and  the
Infinitely  Small— Uniformity  of  Law— Law  of  Gravity— Acts
through  all  Space— Double  Stars,  Comets,  and  Meteors— Has
acted  through  all  time.

Chapter  II.— Time.
Evidence  of  Geology — Stratification — Denudation — Strata
identified  by  Superposition— By  Fossils— Geological  Record
shown  by  Upturned  Strata — General  Result; — Palaeozoic  and
Primary  Periods  —  Secondary — Tertiary— Time  required —
Coal  Formation— Chalk— Elevations  and  Depressions  of  Land
— Internal  Heat  of  the  Earth — Earthquakes  and  Volcanoes —
Changes  of  Fauna  and  Flora — Astronomical  Time — Tides  and
the  Moon — Sun's  Radiation— Earth's  Cooling— Geology  and
Astronomy — Bearings  on  Modern  Thought.

Chapter  m. —  Matter.
Ether  and  Light — Color  and  Heat — Matter  and  its  Elements
— Molecules  and  Atoms — Spectroscope — Uniformity  of  Matter
throughout  the  Universe— Force  and  Motion — Conservation
of  Energy— Electricity,  Magnetism,  and  Chemical  Action-
Dissipation  of  Heat — Birth  and  Death  of  Worlds.

Chapter  IV.— Life,
Essence  of  Life— Simplest  form,  Protoplasm — Monera  and
Protista— Animal  and  Vegetable  Life— Spontaneous  Genera-
tion— Development  of  Species  from  Primitive  Cells — Super-
natural Theory— Zoological  Provinces— Separate  Creations —
Law  or  Miracle — Darwinian  Theory— Struggle  for  Life — Sur-
vival of  the  Fittest— Development  and  Design— The  Hand —
Proof  required  to  establish  Darwin's  Theory  as  a  Law — Species
— Hybrids — Man  subject  to  Law.

ESTS.

Chapter  V. —  Antiquity  of  Man.

Belief  in  Man's  Recent  Origin— Boucher  de  Pertlns'  Dis-
coveries— Confirmed  by  Prestwich — Nature  of  Implements —
Celts,  Scrapers,  and  Flakes— Human  Remains  in  River  Drifts
— Great  Antiquity— Implements  from  Drift  at  Bournemouth
Bone-caves — Kent's  Cavern — Victoria. Gower,and  other  CaveK
—Caves  of  France  and  Belgium — Ages  of  Cave  Bear,  Mam-
moth^and  Reindeer — Artistic  Race— Drawings  of  Mammoth-
&c— Human  Types— Neanderthal,  Cro-Magnon,  Furfooz.  &c.
— Attempts  to  fix  Dates — History — Bronze  Age— Neolithic —
Danish  Kitchen-middens— Swiss  Lake-dwellings— Glacial  Pe-
riod—Traces of  Ice — Causes  of  Glaciers— Croll's  Theory — Gulf
Stream — Dates  of  Glacial  Period— Rise  and  Submergence  ofi
Land — Tertiary  Man— Eocene  Period— Miocene— Evidence
for  Pliocene  and  Miocene  Man — Conclusions  as  to  Antiquity-

Chapter   VI. —  Man's   Place  in  Nature.

Origin  of  Man  from  an  Egg— Like  other  Mammals— Devel-
opment of  the  Embryo  —Backbone — Eye  and  other  Organs  of~
Sense — Fish,  Reptile,  and  Mammalian  Stages— Comparison
with  Apes  and  Monkeys— Germs  of  Human  Faculties  in  An-
imals— The  Dog — Insects— Helplessness  of  Human  Infants —
Instinct — Heredity  and  Evolution — The  Missing  Link — Races
of  Men — Leading  Types  and  Varieties — Common  Origin  Dis-
tant— Language — How  Formed — Grammar — Chinese,  Aryan.
Semitic,  &c— Conclusions  from  Language — Evolution  and
Antiquity — Religions  of  Savage  Races— Ghosts  and  Spirits-
Anthropomorphic  Deities — Traces  in  Neolithic  and  Palaeo-
lithic Times — Development  by  Evolution — Primitive  Arts —
Tools  and  Weapons— Fire— Flint  Implements — Progress  from
Palaeolithic  to  Neolithic  Times— Domestic  Animals— Clothing-
—Ornaments— Conclusion,  Man  a  Product  of  Evolution.

No.  118.  [Single  number,  15  cents-

MODERN  SCIENCE  AND  MODERN  THOUGHT.-With  a  Sup-
plemental Chapter  on  Gladstone's  "Dawn  of  Creation"  and
"Proem  to  Genesis,"  and  on  Drummond's  "Natural  Law  in*
the   Spiritual   World."- By  S.  Laing.

Part    II.

MODEEN      THOUGHT.

Chapter  VII.— Modern  Thought.

CONTENTS.

Chapter  LX. —  Christianity  Without  Miracles.

Lines  from  Tennyson— The  Gospel  of  Modern  Thought —
Change  exemplified  by  Carlyle,  Renan.  and  George  Eliot —
Science  becoming  universal — Attitude  of  Orthodox  Writers —
Origin  of  Evil — First  Cause  unknowable — New  Philosophies
and  Religions — Herbert  Spencer  and  Agnosticispi — Comte
and  Positivism — Pessimism  —  Mormonism — Spiritualism  —
Dreams  and  Visions— Somnambulism — Mesmerism — Great
Modern  Thinkers — Carlyle — Hero-worship.

Chapter  VILT. —  Miracles.

Origin  of  Belief  in  the  Supernatural — Thunder — Belief  in
Miracles  formerly  Universal— St.  Paul's  Testimony— Now  In-
credible—Christian Miracles — Apparent  Miracles— Real  Mir-
acles— Absurd  Miracles — Worthy  Miracles — The  Resurrection
and  Ascension — Nature  of  Evidence  required — Inspiration —
Prophecy— Direct  Evidence— St.  Paul— The  Gospels— What
is  Known  of  Them— The  Synoptic  Gospels— Resemblances
and  Differences— Their  Origin— Papias— Gospel  of  St.  John-
Evidence  rests  on  Matthew,  Mark,  and  Luke— What  each
states— Compared  with  one  another  and  with  St.  John —
Hopelessly  Contradictory— Miracle  of  the  Ascension — Silence
of  Mark— Probable  Early  Date  of  Gospels— But  not  in  their
Present  Form.

Supplemental.  Chapter. —  Gladstone's  "Dawn  of  Creation"  and
mond's  "Natural  Law  in  the   Spiritual  World."

Practical  and  Theoretical  Christianity  —  Example  and'
Teaching  of  Christ — Christian  Dogma — Moral  Objections— In-
consistent with  Facts — Must  be  accepted  as  Parables— Fall
and  Redemption — Old  Creeds  must  be  Transformed  or  Die —
Mohammedanism — Decay  of  Faith — Balance  of  Advantages —
Religious  Wars  and  Persecutions— Intolerance— Sacrifice —
Prayer — Absence  of  Theology  in  Synoptic  Gospels— Opposite
Pole  to  Christianity — Courage  and  Self-reliance — Belief 'in
God  and  a  Future  Life — Based  Mainly  on  Christianity — Sci-
ence gives  no  Answer — Nor  Metaphysics— So-called  Institu-
tions— Development  of  Idea  of  God — Best  Proof  afforded  by
Christianity— Evolution  is  Transforming  it — Reconciliation
of  Religion  and  Science.

Chapter  X. —  Practical  Life.

Conscience  —  Right  is  Right  —  Self-rev»rence  —  Courage-
Respectability — Influence  of  Press— Respect  for  Women —
Self-respect  of  Nations — Democracy  and  Imperialism — Self-
knowledge — Conceit  —  Luck  —  Speculation — Money-making —
Practical  Aims  of  Life — Self-control— Conflict  of  Reason  and
Instinct — Temper — Manners — Good  Habits  in  Youth — Suc-
cess in  Practical  Life — Education — Stoicism — Conclusion.

'Proem  to  Genesis."— Drum-

Published    semi-monthly.—  $3  a  year.—  Single    numbers,  15  cents.

OF    POPULAR     SCIENCE.

No.  119.

THE    ELECTRIC    LIGHT.- How  the  Electric  Current  is  Produced.
How  the  Electric  Current  is  made  to  yield  the  Electric  Light.

By  Gerald    Molloy,    D.D.,    D.Sc,    Fellow   of    the    Royal    University.—  Willi
numerous    illustrations.

CONTENTS.

I. —  How  the    Electric  Current  is   Produced.

First  Discovery  of  Induced  Currents— Faraday's  Exper-
iments describe!  mid  repeated — First  machines  founded  on
Faraday's  discovery  —  1'ixii,  Saxttni,  Clarke  —  New  form  of
Armature  invented  by  Siemens — Machines  of  the  Alliance
Company  ill  France  Hint  of  Holmes  in  England  —  Wilde's
machine — \  new  principle  discovered  —  Land's  machine —
The  machines  of  Gramma  and  Siemens— Ideal  skeleton  of
(iraunne's  machine— The  principle  of  its  action  explained—
Details  of  construction— The  Volta  Prize  awarded  to  Gramme
for  his  invention— The  machine  of  Siemens,  how  it  differs
from  that  of  Gramme — Most  other  machines  constructed  on
one  or  other  of  these  two  types— The  dynamo  does  not  create
energy,  but  converts  mechanical  energy  into  electrical  energy.

II. —  How  the  Electric  Current  is  made  to  yield
the  Electric  Light.
simplest  form  of  Electric  Light— Principle  of  the  Electrii
Light— sir  Humphry  Havy's  experiment— Two  types  of  Elec-
tric Light  —  The  Arc  Light —  Duhoscq'fl  Lamp  .New  forms  of
Arc  Lamp — The  Jabiochkoft' Candle— The  Incandescent  Light
—Platinum  Spiral— Why  Carbon  is  preferred  to  Platinum
A  perfect  vacuum — Elements  of  Incandescent  Lamp — Prep-
aration of  the  filament— Edison's  process — Swan's  process -
Carbonization  of  the  filament— Exhaustion  of  the  glass  globe-
— Light  without  heat— The  Arc  Light  and  the  Incandescent
Ligiit  compared— Comparison  with  other  kinds  of  light  — How-
far  tile  Electric  Light  is  now  available  for  use — Transforma-
tions of  Energy  illustrated  by  the  Electric  Light.

TO    WHICH    IS    ADDED

THE    STORING    OF   ELECTRICAL    ENERGY.-The    Recent
Progress    and    Development    of   the    Storage    Battery.— By  the

same   author. —  With   numerous    illustrations.

CONTENTS.

A  "marvelous  box  of  electricity"— What  is  meant,  by  the
storing  of  energy— Examples  of  energy  stored  up— A  sus-
pended weight— A  watchspring  wound  np — A  stretched  cross-
bow— A  flywheel — Energy  stored  up  in  clouds  and  rivers-
Energy  stored  up  in  a  coal-mine — Energy  stored  up  in  sep-
arated gases — Storing  of  electrical  energy  not  a  new  idea —
Energy  stored  up  in  a  Leyden  jar— In  a  thunder-cloud— In  a
voltaic  battery— Principle  of  the  storage  battery — Experiment
showing  production  of  secondary  current— Gradual  develop-

ment of  the  principle— Eitter's  secondary  pile — Grove's  gas-
battery — Experiments  of  Gaston  I'lante — Toe  Plante  second-
ary cell— Faure's  improvement — What  a  storage  battery  can
do— Practical  illustrations— Convenience  of  the  storage  bat-
tery for  the  production  of  the  electric  light — The  storage  bat-
tery as  a  motive  power— Application  of  the  storage  battery  to
tram-cars  and  private  carriages— The  storage  battery  on  its
trial.

RECENT  PROGRESS  AND  DEVELOPMENT  OF  THE  STORAGE  BATTERY.

Unexpected  difficulties— Modifications  of  the  Faure  cell —
Internal  resistance  diminished— New  mode  of  preparing  the
plates — An  alloy  substituted  for  pure  lead— The  paste  or  lead
oxide— Improved  method  of  maintaining  insulation  of  the

plates — Newest  form  of  cell — Buckling  of  the  plates — The
available  energy  of  a  cell — Kate  at  which  the  energy  can  be
drawn  off—  Application  to  tram-cars  and  to  electric  lighting.

No.  120.

THE    MODERN    THEORY   OF   HEAT,  as   Illustrated   by  the   Phe-
nomena  of   the    Latent    Heat   of   Liquids    and    of  Vapors.— By

Gerald    Molloy,    D.D.,  D.Sc.,  Fellow  of    the    Royal    University. —  With  nu-
merous   illustrations.

CONT
I. — The  Latent  Heat  of  Liquids.

Modem  theory  of  heat— Heat  a  form  of  Energy — Familiar
illustrations  —  Count  Kumford's  experiment  —  Argument
founded  on  the  experiment— Heat  produced  by  expenditure
of  Electrical  Energy— Latent  Heat— Black's  experiments —
Heat  disappears  when  ice  is  melted— Explanation  of  this  fact
according  to  the  old  theory— Explanation  offered  by  the  mod-
em theory — Latent  Heat  varies  for  different  liquids— Freezing
mixtures — Heat  developed  when  a  liquid  becomes  solid —
Water  heated  in  freezing— Experiment  with  solution  of  sul-
phate of  soda — Latent  Heat  in  the  economy  of  Nature.

ENTS.

II.— The  Latent  Heat  of  Vapors.

Heat  expended  when  water  is  boiled — This  fact  considered
tn  the  light  of  the  modern  theory— Method  of  measuring  the
quantity  of  heat  so  expended — Heat  developed  when  steam  is
condensed— Experimental  illustration — Heating  of  buildings
by  steam — Heat  expended  in  evaporation — Various  illustra-
tions— Cold  produced  by  evaporation  of  ether— Water  frozen
by  evaporation — Leslie's  experiment — Carre's  apparatus— Pro-
duction of  solid  carbonic  acid — Freezing  of  mercury — Latent
Heat  of  clouds — Effect  in  the  economy  of  Nature— Summary.

TO    WHICH    IS    ADDED

THE    SUN    AS    A    STOREHOUSE    OF    ENERGY.- Immensity  of
the  Sun's   Energy.— Source   of  the  Sun's   Energy.— By  the  same

author. —  With   numerous    illustrations.

I. —  Immensity  of  the   Sun's   Energy.

Nearly  all  the  energy  available  to  man  is  derived  from  the
sun  — "Water-power — Wind-power  —  Steam-power  —  Muscular
power — Electrical  power — Tidal  power  an  exception— Energy
of  the  tides  derived  from  rotation  of  the  earth  on  its  axis-
Only  a  small  fraction  of  the  energy  which  the  earth  derives
from  the  sun  is  used  by  man — And  the  energy  which  tin1
earth  receives  is  only  a  small  fraction  of  what  the  sun  sends
forth — Measurement  of  energy  sent  out  by  the  sun— Exper-
iments of  Pouillet  and  Hersrhel  —Apparatus  employed  —
Method  of  adjustment— Observations  made— Corrections —
Practical  estimate  of  the  energy  sent  out  by  the  sun— What
a  wonderful  storehouse  of  energy  the  sun  must  be — How  is
this  storehouse  supplied?

CONTENTS.

II. —  Source  of  the   Sun's  Energy.

The  sun  is  not  a  great  tire— Such  a  fire  would  be  choked  by
the  products  of  combustion— And  besides  it  would  be  burned
out  in  course  of  time— Difference  between  incandescence  and
combustion— Practical  illustrations — flow  the  sun  is  main-
tained in  a  state  of  incandescence — Theory  of  Sir  William
Thomson— Meteors  or  Falling  Sters—  Heat*  developed  when
such  bodies  fall  into  the  sun— illustration  from  a  bullet  strik-
ing a  target — This  theory  now  abandoned — Theory  of  Flrlm-
hcutz— Heat  of  the  sun  produced  bv  compression  of  his  mass —
Heat  lost  by  radiation  is  restored  by  further  compression  —
This  theory  probable  and  sufficient— Bearing  of  the  Nebular
Hypothesis— The  past  energy  of  the  sun— Summary.

THE   HUMBOLDT  PUBLISHING   CO.,  28  Lafayette  Place,  New  York.

THE     HUMBOLDT     LIBRARY

No.  121.

UTILITARIANISM.— By  John   Stuart  Mill,  author  of  "A  System  of  Logic,"

••Principles  of  Political  Economy,"  "On  Liberty,"  &c.

CONTENTS

Chapter      I. —  General  Remarks.
Chapter    II. —  What  Utilitarianism  is.
Chapter  III. —  Of  the  Ultimate  Sanction  of  the
Principle  of  Utility.

Chapter  IT.— Of  what  sort  of  Proof  the  Principle
of  Utility  is  susceptible.

Chapter  V. — Of  the  Connection  between  Justice
and  Utility.

No.  122  and  No.  123.

UPON   THE    ORIGIN
UPON    GLACIAL

[No.  122  is  a  double  number,  30  cents.

OF   ALPINE    AND    ITALIAN    LAKES;    AND

EROSION.— By  Sir  A.  C.  Ramsay,  F.R.S.,  President

of  the  Geological  Society. — John  Ball,  M.R.I. A.,  F.L.S.,&c. — Sir  Roderick  I.
Murchison,  F.R.S.,  D.C.L.,  President  of  the  Royal  Geographical  Society. —
Prof.  B.  Studer,  of  Berne. —  Prof.  A.  Favre,  of  Geneva. —  Edward  Whtmper. —
With  an  Introduction  and  Notes  upon  the  Origin  and  History  of  the  Great  Lakes
of  North  America,  by  Prof.  J.  W.  Spencer,  State  Geologist  of  Georgia.

contents.

Introduction,  with  Notes  upon  the  Origin  and
Historv  of  the  Great  Lakes  of  North  America. —
By  J.  W.  Spencer,  Ph.D.,  F.G.S.,  State  Geologist
of  Georgia.    •

I. —  On  the  Glacial  Origin  of  Certain  Lakes  in
Switzerland,  the  Black  Forest,  Great  Britain,
Sweden,  North  America,  and  Elsewhere. —  By  Sir
A.  0.  Ramsay,  F.R.S.,  President  of  the  Geological
Society.

II. —  On  the  Formation  of  Alpine  Valleys  and
Alpine  Lakes. —  By  John  Ball,  M.R.I. A.,
F.L.S.,  &c.

III. —  Glaciers  of  the  Himalayan  Mountains  and
New  Zealand  compared  with  those  of  Europe. —
On  the  Powers  of  Glaciers  in  Modifying  the  Sur-

face of  the  Earth,  and  in  the  agency  of  Floating
Icebergs.  —  Bv  Sir  Roderick  I.  Murchison.
K.C.B.,   D.C.L.,   F.R.S.,  &c.

IV. —  On  the  Origin  of  the  Swiss  Lakes. — By
Prof.  B.  Studer,  of  Berne.

V. —  On  the  Origin  of  the  Aipine  Lakes  and
Valleys.  A  letter  addressed  to  Sir  Roderick  I.
Murchison,  K.C.B.,  D.C.L..  &c  by  M.  Alphonse
Favre,  Professor  of  Geology  in  the  Academy  of
Geneva,  author  of  the  Geological  Map  of  Savoy.

VI.— The  Ancient  Glaciers  of  Aosta.—  By  Ed-
ward Whtmper.

VII. —  Glacial  Erosion  in  Noi'way  and  in  High
Latitudes. —  By  Professor  J.  W.  Spencer,  Ph.D.,
F.G.S.,  State  Geologist  of  Georgia.

No.  124.

THE     QUINTESSENCE     OF    SOCIALISM.- By  Dr.  A.  ScHAFFLE.-Trans-

lated  from  the  eighth  German  edition  under  the  supervision  of  Bernard  Bosan-
■QUET.  M.A.,  formerly  Fellow  of  University  College,  Oxford.

CONTENTS
FUNDA-

Chapter  L— First   Outlines    of  the
mental  Idea  of  Socialism.

Chapter  II.— The  Means  of  Agitation.

The  Socialistic  criticism  of  capital. —  Profit  as
"appropriation  of  surplus  value." — Property  as
theft. —  False  interpretations  of  these  allegations
refuted. —  Ultimate  buying-out  of  the  modern
plutocrats.

Chapter  III.  —  Proposed  Transformation  of
the  several  Fundamental  Institutions  of
Modern  National  Economy.

Determination  of  demand. — Freedom  of  demand.
Organization  of  labor  and  capital  into  a  System  of
collective  production. —  False  interpretations  re-
futed.—  The  doctrine  of  value  as  depending  on
sheer  labor-coet  useless  for  a  practical  organiza-
tion of  labor  and  capital.

Chapter  IV.  —  Transformation   of  Institu-
tions (continued).
Abolition  of  all  loan-capital,  of  credit,  of  lease,
of  hire,  and  of  the  exchange.

of  Institu-
and  of  the

Chapter  V.  — Transformation
TIONS  (continued).

Abolition  of  trade  in  "commodities

market  for  them,  and  of  the  system  of  advertise-
ment and  of  display  of  wares.

Chapter  VI.  —  Transformation   of  Institu-
tions (continued.)
Abolition  of  metallic  money  as  the  medium  of
exchange,  and  its  replacement  as  "standard  of
value''  by  units   of  "social  labor-time"  ("labor-
money").     The  value-estimate  of  the  Socialistic
State  compared  with  the  present  market-price-
Chapter  vn. —  Transformation  of  Institu-
tions (continued.)

The  Socialistic  determination  of  value  in  ex-
change, and  freedom  of  labor  in  the  Socialistic
State.

Chapter  VIII.—  Transformation  of  Institu-
tions (continued).
Income,  and  the  use  of  income  in  the  formation
of  property,  and  in  consumption. —  Private  prop-
erty and  the  law  affecting  it. —  Family  life  and
marriage. —  Savings-banks  and  insurance  system.
Expenditure  on  charitable,humanitarian,religious,
and  other  ideal  purposes.

Chapter  IX.—  Conclusion.
Summary  of  criticisms.

Published    semi-monthly.—  $3  a  year.—  Single    numbers,  15  cents.

OF    POPULAR     SCIENCE.

No.  125.

DARWINISM    AND    POLITICS- By  David  G.  RitchhL,  M.A

Tutor  of  Jesus  College,  Oxford.

Fellow  and

CONTENTS.

"The  Struggle  for  Existence"  in  Malthus  and
Darwin. —  How  the  idea  is  applied  to  politics. —  Is

the  struggle  "beneficent"  !

The  Evolution  Theory  as  applied  to  Human  So-
ciety by  Darwin,  Strauss,  Spencei-,  Maine,  Clodd.

Ambiguity  of  the  phrase  ' '  Survival  of  the  Fit-
test."—  Complexity  of  Social  Evolution.

Huxley  and  Strauss.— Ambiguity  of  "Nature.'"  -
Conscious  "Variations."

Why  fix  ideas  in  institutions?  —  Custom:  its  us*
and  abuse. —  Institutions  and  "the  social  factor

generally  are  neglected  in  |he  [jiipiilnr  acri-ptat.io-i

of  the  doctrine  of  Heredity. —  Mr.  Gnlton's  view.

considered. —  Darwin's  own  opinion.

Are  the  Biological  Formula;  adequate  to  express
Social  Evolution?

Applications— (1)  The  Labor  Question.— (2)  Tin
Position  of  Women. — (3)  The  Population  Question.

Does  the  Doctrine  of  Heredity  support  Aristoc-
racy 1

Does  the  Evolution  Theory  justify  Laissez  fai re  ?
Struggle  between  ideas  for  survival. —  Conscious-
ness as  a  factor  in  Evolution. — Testimony  of  Prof.

TO    WHICH     IS    ADDED

ADMINISTRATIVE     NIHILISM.- By  Prof.  Thomas  Henry  Huxley,  F.R.S.

No.  126  and  No.  127.  [Two  double  numbers,  30  cents  each.

PHYSIOGNOMY  AND  EXPRESSION-  By  Paolo  Mantegazza,  Senator;
Director  of  the  National  Museum  of  Anthropology,  Florence ;  President  of  the
Italian  Society  of  Anthropology.

Part  I.

contents.
■The  Human  Countenance.

Chapter  I. —  Historical  Sketch  of  the  Science
of  Physiognomy  and  of  Human
Expression.

Chapter    II. —  The  Human  Face.

Chapter  III. —  The  Features  of  the  Human  Face.

Chapter  TV.— The  Hair  and  the  Beard.

Wrinkles.

-  Moles.

Chapter    V. —  Comparative    Morphology    of    the
Human  Face.

Part  II. —  The  Expression  of  Emotions.

Chapter  VI.
Chapter  VII.
Chapter  VIIL-

Chapter  IX.-
Chapter  X.-
Chapter  XL-
Chapter  XII.-
Chapter  XIIL-
Chapter  XIV.-

-The  Alphabet  of  Expression.

-The  Darwinian  Laws  of  Expression

-Classification  of  Expressions. —
General  View  of  all  Phenomena
of  Expression.

-The  Expression  of  Pleasure.

-The  Expression  of  Pain.

-  Expression  of  Love  and  of  Benev-
olence.

-Expression  of  Devotion,  of  Ven-
eration, and  of  Religious  Feeling.

-  Expression  of  Hatred,  of  Cruelty,
and  of  Passion.

-  The  Expression  of  Pride.  Vanity,
Haughtiness,  Modesty,  and  Hu-

miliation.

Chapter  XV. —  Expression  of  Personal  Feelings,
Fear,  Distrust. — Descriptionof
Timidity,  according  to  the  old
Physiognomists.

Chapter     XVI.—  The  Expression  of  Thought.

Chapter  XVII. —  General  Expressions. —  Repose
and  Action,  Disquietude.  Im-
patience, Expectation,  Desire.

Chapter  XVIII. —  Racial  and  Professional  Ex-
pression.

Chapter  XIX. —  The  Moderaters  and  Disturbers
of  Expression.

Chapter  XX. —  Criteria  for  the  Determination
of  the  Strength  of  an  Emotion
by  the  degree  of  the  Expression

Chapter  XXI. — The  Five  Verdicts  on  the  Human
Face.

Chapter  XXII. —  Criteria  forjudging  the  Moral
Worth  of  a  Physiognomy.

Chapter  XXIII. —  Criteria  forjudging  the  Intel-
lectual Value  of  a  Face.

Chapter  XXIV. —  The  Physiognomy  of   Gestures

and  the  Expression  of  Clothes.

Appendix.—  The  Eyes,  Hair,  and  Beard,  in  the

Italian  Races.

This  work,  by  Professor  Mantegazza,  a  brilliant  and  versatile  author,  and  the  leading  Italian  anthro-
pologist, has  already  been  translated  into  several  European  languages.  Professor  Mantegazza.  whose
name  is  well  known  to  readers  of  Darwin,  has  cooperated  in  the  present  English  edition  of  his  work  by
writing  a  new  chapter  specially  for  it.

THE  HUMBOLDT  PUBLISHING   CO.,  28  Lafayette  Place,  New  York.

THE     HUMBOLDT     LIBRARY

No.  128  and  No.  129.

[Two  double  numbers,  30  cents  each.

THE      INDUSTR5AL     REVOLUTION      OF     THE      EIGHTEENTH

CENTURY  IN  ENGLAND.—  Popular  Addresses,  Notes,  and  other  Frag-
ments.—  By  the  late  Arnold  To'ynbee,  Tutor  of  Balliol  College,  Oxford. —
Together  with  a  short  memoir  by  B.  Jowett,  Master  of  Balliol  College,  Oxford.

CONTENTS.

I.

RlCAEDO    AND    THE    OLD    POLITICAL    ECONOMY.

The  change  that  has  come  over  Political  Econ-
omy.—  Ricardo  responsible  for  the  form  of  that
Science. — The  causes  of  his  great  influence. — The
economic  assumptions  of  his  treatise. —  Ricardo
ignorant  of  the  nature  of  Ms  own  method. —
Malthus's  protest. — Limitations  of  Ricardo's  doc-
trine recognized  by  Mill  and  Senior. — Observation
tliscouraged  by  the  Deductive  Method. — The  effect
of  the  Labor  Movement  on  Economics. — Modifica-
tions of  the  Science  by  recent  writers. —  The  new
method  of  economic  investigation.

II.

The  jthilosophic  assumptions  of  Ricardo. — They
are  derived  from  Adam  Smith. —  The  worship  of
individual  liberty. —  It  involves  freedom  of  com-
petition and  removal  of  industrial  restrictions. —
The  flaw  in  this  theory. —  It  is  confirmed  by  the
doctrine  of  the  identity  of  individual  and  social
interests. —  Criticism  of  this  doctrine. —  The  idea
of  invariable  law. — True  nature  of  economic  laws.
Laws  and  Precepts. —  The  great  charge  brought
against  Political  Economy. —  Its  truth  and  its
falsehood.

The  Industrial  Revolution.

I. —  Introductory.

II.— England  in  1760.-

III.—  England  in  1760.-

IV.— England  in  1760.-

V.— England  in  1760.-

Yeomanry.
VI.— England  in  1760.— The   Condition  of   the
Wage-earners.

-  Population.

■  Agriculture.       [Trade.

-  Manufactures   and
-The  Decay  of  the

VII. —  The  Mercantile  System  and  Adam  Smith.
VIII.— The  Chief  Features  of  the  Revolution.
IX. —  The  Growth  of  Pauperism.
X. —  Martinis  and  the  Law  of  Population.
XI.— The  "Wage-fund  Theory.
XII. —  Ricardo  and  the  Growth  of  Rent.
XIII. — Two  Theories  of  Economic  Progress.
XIV.—  The  Future  of  the  Working  Classes.

Popular  Addresses.

1.  Wages  and  Natural  Law.

2.  Industry  and  Democracy.

3.  Are  Radicals  Socialists?

The  Education  of  Co-operators.

The  Ideal  Relation  of  Church  and  State.

Notes  and  Jottings.

No.  130  and  No.  131.  [Two  double   numbers,  30  cents,  each.

THE      ORIGIN      OF      THE      ARYANS.— An    Account    of    the    Prehistoric

Ethnology  and  Civilization  of  Europe. —  By  Isaac  Taylor,  M.A.,  Litt.  D.,  Hon.

L.L.D.—  Illustrated.

CONTENTS.

Chapter  I.  —  The  Aryan  Controversy.

Chapter  II. —  The   Prehistoric  Races  of  Europe.

1.  The  Neolithic  Age.  4.  The  Celts.

2.  The  Methods  of  An-        5.  The  Iberians.

thropology.  6.  The  Scandinavians.

3.  The  Races  of  Britain.       7.  The  Ligurians.

Chapter  III.— The  Neolithic  Culture.

1.  The  Continuity  of  De-      7.  Dress.

velopment.

2.  Metals.

3.  Weapons.

4.  Cattle.

5.  Husbandrv.

6.  Food.

8.  Habitations.

9.  The  Boat.

10.  The  Ox-Wagon.

11.  Trades.

12.  Social  Life.

13.  Relative  Progress.

Chapter  IV.— The  Aryan  Race.

1.  The  Permanence  of  Race.

2.  The  Mutability  of  Language.

3.  The  Finnic  Hypothesis.

4.  The  Basques.

5.  The  Northern  Races.

Chapter  V. — The  Evolution  of  Aryan  Speech.

1.  The  Aryan  Languages.

2.  Dialect  and  Language.

3.  The  Lost  Aryan  Languages.

4.  The  Wave-Theory.

5.  Language  and  Race.

6.  The  Genesis  of  Aryan  Speech.

Chapter  VI. —  The  Aryan  Mythology.

The  last  ten  years  have  seen  a  revolution  in  the  opinion  of  scholars  as  to  the  region  in  which
the  Aryan  race  originated,  and  theories  which  not  long  ago  were  universally  accepted  as  the  well-
established  conclusions  of  science  now  hardly  find  a  defender.  The  theory  of  migration  from  Asia
lias  been  displaced  by  a  new  theory  of  origin  in  Northern  Europe.  In  Germany  several  works  have
been  devoted  to  the  subject ;  but  this  is  the  first  English  work  which  has  yet  appeared  embodying  the
results  recently  arrived  at  by  philologists,  archaeologists,  and  anthropologists.  This  volume  affords  a
fresh  and  highly  interesting  account  of  the  present  state  of  speculation  on  a  highly  interesting  subject.

Published    semi-monthly.—  $3  a  year.—  Single    numbers,  15  cents.

OF    POPULAR     SCIENCE.

No.  1X2  and  No.  133.  [Two  double   numbers,  30  cents  each.

THE     EVOLUTION     OF    SEX.—  By  Prof.  Patrick  Geddes  and   J.  Arthur

Thomson. —  With   104  illustrations.

Chapter

CONTENTS.

Book  I.— Male  and   Female

I.— The  Sexes  and  Sexual   Selection.

Chapter    II. —  The  Sexes,  and  Criticism  of  Sexual
Selection.

Chapter  III.— The  Determination  of  Sex  (Hy-
potheses  and   Observations.

Chapter  IV. —  The  Determination  of  Hex  (Con-
structive Treatment).

Book  II. —  Analysis  of  Sex.— Organs,  Tissues,  Cells.

Chapter  VIII.— The  Egg-cell  or  Ovum.
Chapter     IX. —  The   Male-cell  or  Sperm.
Chapter       X. —  Theory  of  Sex:    Its  Nature  and
Origin.

Chapter     V. —  Sexual  Organs  and  Tissues.
Chapter    VI. —  Hermaphroditism.
Chapter  VII. —  The    Sex-elements    (General    and
Historical.

Chapter     XL — Sexual  Reproduction.
Chapter   XII. —  Theory  of  Fertilization.
Chapter  XIII. —  Degenerate  Sexual  Reproduction,
or  Parthenogenesis.

Book  III. —  Processes  of  Reproduction.

Chapter  XIV. —  Asexual  Reproduction.
Chapter    XV. —  Alternation  of  Generations.

Book  IV. —  Theory  of  Reproduction

Chapter     XVI. —  Growth  and  Reproduction.

Chapter   XVII. —  Theory  of    Reproduction   (con-
tinued).

Chapter  XVIII. —  Special  Physiology  of  Sex  and
Reproduction.

Chapter     XIX. —  Psychological    and   Ethical  As-
pects.

Chapter       XX. —  Laws  of  Multiplication.

Chapter     XXI. —  The    Reproductive    Factor    in
Evolution.

A  work  which,  for  range  and  grace,  mastery  of  material,  originality,  and  incisiveness  of  style  and
treatment,  is  not  readily  to  be  matched  in  the  long  list  of  books  designed  more  or  less  to  popularize
science. —  Scottish  Leader.

A  model  of  scientific  exposition. —  Scotsman.

No.  134.  [Double   number,  30   cents.

THE  LAW  OF  PRIVATE  Rl  GHT-  By  George  H.  Smith,  author  of
"Elements  of  Right,  and  of  the  Law,"  and  of  Essays  on  "The  Certainty  of  the
Law,  and  the  Uncertainty  of  Judicial  Decisions,"  "The  True  Method  of  Legal
Education,"  &c,  &e.

L-

II.-
III.-

Introduction.

■  Explanation  of  the  Design  and  Scope  of  the
Work.

-Of  the  Definition  of  the  Law.
-Of  the  Division  of  the  Law.

CONTENTS.

Chapter  II.
Historical  Development  of  the  Law  (as  opposed
to  Equity).

.  Chapter   III.
Historical   Development  of  Equity.

Part  I.

Of   the   Nature   of   the   Law   of  Private
Right.

Chapter  I.
Analytical  Outline  of  the  Law  of  Private  Right.

Chapter  II.
Of  the  Nature  of  Right,  and  of  the  Law  of  Private
Right,  and  their  Relation  to  Each  Other.

Part  II.

Of  the  Law  of  Private  Right  as  Histor-
ically Developed.

Chapter  I.
Of  the  Historical   Development  of  Jurisdiction.

Part  III.

Of  the  Nature   and  of  the  Method   and
Principles   of  Right.

Chapter  I.
Definition  of  Rights.

Chapter  II.
The  Same  Subject  Continued,  and  herein,  of  the
Standard  of  Right  and  Wrong.

Chapter  III.
Of  the  Method  and  First  Principles  of  Right.

Chapter  TV.
Of  the  Limit   to  the   Liberty  of  the  Individual.
Imposed  by  the  Rights  "of  the  State.

Chapter  V.
Natural    Rights    Demonstrated    from  the  Above
Principles.

THE   HUMBOLDT  PUBLISHING   CO.,  28  Lafayette  Place,  New  York.

THE     HUMBOLDT     LIBRARY

Nos.  135,  136,  137,  138.

[Four  double  numbers,  30  cents  each.

CAPITAL:    A    Critical    Analysis    of    Capitalist     Production.— By

Karl  Marx. —  Translated  from  the  third  German  edition  by  Samuel  Moore

and  Edward  Aveling,  and  edited  by  Frederick  Engels.— The  only  American
Edition. —  Carefully  Revised.

Part  I.

COMMODITIES     AND    MONEY.

Chapter    I. —  Commodities.

(a)  Elementary  or  Accidental  Form  of  Value.

(b)  Total  or  Expanded  Form  of  Value.

(c)  The  General  Form  of  Value.

(d)  The  Money  Form.
Chapter    II. —  Exchange.

Chapter  III.— Money,  or  the  Circulation  of  Com-
modities.

1.  The  Measure  of  Values.

2.  The  Medium  of  Circulation.

3.  Money:  hoarding,  means  of  payment,  uni-

versal money.

THE

Part   II.

TRANSFORMATION    OF    MONEY    ENTO     CAPITAL.

Chapter  TV. —  The  General  Formula  for  Capital.
Chapter  V. —  Contradictions  in  the  General  Form-
ula of  Capital.

Chapter  VI.—  The  Buying  and  Selling  of  Labor-
power.

THE

Part  III.

PRODUCTION    OF    ABSOLUTE

SURPLUS     VALUE.

Chapter  VII. —  The  Labor-process  and  the  Process

of  Producing  Surplus  Value.
Chapter  VIII. —  Constant    Capital   and  Variable

Capital.

Chapter  IX. —  The  Rate  of  Surplus  Value.

Chapter     X.— The  "Working  Day.

Chapter  XI. —  Rate  and  Mass  of  Surplus  Value.

Chapter    XII.

Value.

Chapter  XIII.

SURPLUS    VALUE.

Chapter  XTV. —  Division  of  Labor  and  Manufac-
ture.
Chapter     XV. —  Machinery  and  Modern  Industry.

Part  IV.

THE  PRODUCTION  OF  RELATIVE

■  The  Concept  of  Relative  Surplus
Co-operation.

Part  V.

THE  PRODUCTION  OF  ABSOLUTE  AND  OF  RELATIVE  SURPLUS  VALUE.

Chapter  XVIII. —  Various  Formulae  for  the  Rate
of  Surplus  Value.

Chapter    XVI. —  Absolute  and  Relative  Surplus

Value.
Chapter  XVII. — Changes  of  Magnitude  in  the  price

of  Labor-power  and  in  Surplus  Value.

Part  VI.

WAGES.

Chapter  XIX. — The  Transformation  of  the  Value
(and  respectively  the  Price)  of  Labor-
power  into  Wages.

Chapter  XX. — Time-wages.
Chapter  XXI. —  Piece- wages.
Chapter  XXII. — National  Differences  of  Wages.

Part  VII.

THE    ACCUMULATION     OF     CAPITAL.

Chapter  XXIII. —  Simple  Reproduction.
Chapter  XXIV. —  Conversion    of   Surplus   Value
into  Capital.

Chapter     XXV. —  The  General  Law  of  Capitalist
Accumulation.

Part  VIII.

THE     SO-CALLED     PRIMITIVE     ACCUMULATION.

Chapter  XXVI. —  The  Secret  of  Primitive  Accu-
mulation.

Chapter  XXVIL—  Expropriation  of  the  Agricul-
tural Population  from  the  Land.

Chapter  XXVIII. —  Bloody  Legislation  against  the
Expropriated  from  the  End  of  the  15th
Century.  Forcing  down  of  Wages  by  Acts
of  Parliament.

Chapter  XXIX. — Genesis  of  the  Capitalist  Farmer.

Chapter  XXX. —  Reaction  of  the  Agricultural
Revolution  on  Industry.  Creation  of  the
Home  Market  for  Industrial  Capital.

Chapter  XXXI. —  Genesis  of  the  Industrial  Cap-
italist.

Chapter  XXX1L—  Historical  Tendency  of  Cap-
italistic  Accumulation.

Chapter  XXXIII.— The  Modern  Theory  of  Col-
onization.

Published    semi-monthly.  -  $3  a  year.— Single    numbers,  15  cents.

THE     HUMBOLDT     LIBRARY

No.  139.

LIGHTNING,   THUNDER,   AND     LIGHTNING-CONDUCTORS.

Gerald    Molloy,   D.D.,   D.Sc — Illustrated.

By

CONTENTS.

Lecture   I.

LIGHTNING    AND    THUNDER

Identity  of  Lightning  and  Electricity— Frank-
lin's Experiment — Fatal  Experiment  of  Richman —
Immediate  Cause  of  Lightning — Illustration  from
Electric  Spark — What  a  Flash  of  Lightning  is —
Duration  of  a  Flash  of  Lightning — Experiments
of  Professor  Rood— Wheatstone's  Experiments-
Experiment  with  Rotating  Disk— Brightness  of  a

Flash  of  Lightning— Various  Forms  of  Lightning
—Forked  Lightning,  Sheet  Lightning,  Globe  Light-
ning—St. Elmo's  Fire — Experimental  Illustration
—Origin  of  Lightning— Length  of  a  Flash  of  Light-
ning—Physical Cause  of  Thunder  — Rolling  of
Thunder— Succession  of  Peals— Variation  of  In-
tensity— Distance  of  a  Flash  of  Lightning.

Lecture    II.

LIGHTNING-CONDUCTORS.

Destructive  Effects  of  Lightning— Destruction
of  Buildings— Destruction  of  Ships  at  Sea — De-
struction of  Powder  Magazines  —  Experimental
Illustrations — Destruction  of  Life  by  Lightning —
The  Return  Shock — Franklin's  Lightning-rods —
Introduction  of  Lightning-rods  into  England — The
Battle  of  Balls  and  Points — Functions  of  a  Light-

ning-conductor—Conditions of  a  Lightning-con-
ductor—Mischief Done  by  Bad  Conductors— Evil
Effects  of  a  Bad  Earth  Contact — Danger  from  Rival
Conductors — Insulation  of  Lightning-conductors —
Personal  Safety  in  a  Thunder-storm— Practical
Rules — Security  afforded  by  Lightning-rods.

RECENT

Theory  of  Lightning-conductors  Challenged —
Lectures  of  Professor  Lodge — Short  Account  of
his  Views  and  Arguments — Effect  of  Self-induction
on  a  Lightning-rod — Experiment  on  the  Discharge
of  a  Leyden  Jar — Outer  Shell  only  of  a  Lightning-
rod  acts  as  a  Conductor — Discussion  at  the  Meet-
ing of  the  British  Association,  September,  1888 —

Appendix.

CONTROVERSY    ON    LIGHTNING-CONDUCTORS.

Statement  by  Mr.  Preece— Lord  Rayleigh  and  Sir
William  Thomson— Professor  Rowland  and  Pro-
fessor Forbes — M.  de  Fonvielle,  Sir  James  Doug-
lass, and  Mr.  Symons — Reply  of  Prof  essor  Lodge —
Concluding  Remarks  of  Professor  Fitzgerald,  Pres-
ident of  the  Section — Summary  Showing  the  Pres-
ent State  of  the  Question.

No.  140.

WHAT     IS     MUSIC?  —  With  an  Appendix  on  How  the  Geometrical  Lines  have
their  Counterparts  in  Music. —  By  Isaac  L.  Rice.

contents.
Part  I.

I. —  Chinese  Theory.

II. —  Hindoo  Theory.
IH.—  Egyptian  Theory.
IV. —  Grecian  Theories.

V. —  Arabic-Persian  Theory.

I.— Space  and  Time  (Rest  and  Motion).
II. —  Vibrations.
III.— Colors  and  Forms?

VI. —  Scholastic  Theories.
VII.— Euler's  Theory.
VIII.— Herbert   Spencer's  Theory.
IX.— Helmholtz's  Theory.

Part  II.

IV. —  Internal  Government.
V.— States  of  Mind.
Conclusion.

As  the  final  result  of  his  speculations,  Mr.  Rice  denies  that  music  is  an  invention  by  man.  and  holds
that  it  exists  in  Nature ;  that  it  is  "not  accidental  and  human,  but  dynamical  and  cosmical."  His  view
seems  to  me  to  be  sustained  by  all  the  physical  facts  of  Nature  and  all  the  experience  of  man. —  Richard
Grant  White.

Published    semi-monthly.-  $3  a*  year.—  Single    numbers,  15  cents.

OF    POPULAR     SCIENCE.

No.  141.

ARE    THE     EFFECTS     OF    USE    AND     DISUSE     INHERITED?

An   Examination   of    the   View   held    by   Spencer    and    Darwin. —  By  William
Platt  Ball.

contents.

Importance  and  Bearing  of  the  Inquiry.

Spencer's  Examples  and  Arguments.

Diminution  of  the  Jaws.

Diminished  Biting  Muscles  of  Lapdogs.

Crowded  Teeth.

Blind  Cave-Crabs.

No  Concomitant  Variation  from  Concomitant
Disease.

The  Giraffe,  and  Necessity  for  Concomitant
Variation.

Alleged  Ruinous  Effects  of  Natural  Selection.

Adverse  Case  of  Neuter  Insects.

^Esthetic  Faculties.

Lack  of  Evidence.

Inherited  Epilepsy  in  Guinea-pigs.

Inherited  Insanity  and  Nervous  Disorders.

Individual  and  Transmissible  Type  not  Mod-
ified Alike.

Darwin's  Examples.

Reduced  Wings  of  Birds  of  Oceanic  Islands.

Drooping  Ears  and  Deteriorated  Instincts.

Wings  and  Legs  of  Ducks  and  Fowls.

Pigeon's  Wings.

Shortened  Breastbone  in  Pigeons.

Shortened   Feet  in  Pigeons.

Shortened  Legs  of  Rabbits.

Blind  Cave-Animals.

Inherited  Habits.

Tameness  of  Rabbits.  [tion.

Modifications  Obviously  Attributable  to  Selec-

Shnilar  Effects  of  Natural  Selection  and  of

Use-Inheritance.
Inferiority  of  Senses  in  Europeans.
Short-sight  in  Watchmakers  and  Engravers.
Larger  Hands  in  Laborers'  Infants.
Thickened  Sole  in  Infants.
A  Source  of  Mental   Confusion.
Weakness  of  Use-inheritance.

Inherited  Injuries.

Inherited  Mutilations.

The  Motmot's  Tail.

Other  Inherited  Injuries  Mentioned  by  Darwin .

Quasi-Inheritance.

Miscellaneous  Considerations.

True  Relation  of  Parents  and  Offspring.

Inverse  Inheritance.

Early  Origin  of  the  Ova.

Marked    Effects  of  Use  and  Disuse  on  the
Individual.  [ance  ?

Would  Natural  Selection  Favor  Use-Inherit-

Use-Inheritance  an  Evil.

Varied  Effects  of  Use  and  Disuse.

Use-Inheritance   Implies  Pangenesis.

Pangenesis   Improbable.

Spencer's  Explanation  of  Use-Inheritance.
Conclusions.

Use-Inheritance  Discredited  as  Unnecessary,
Unproven,  and  Improbable.

Modern  Reliance  on  Use-Inheritance  Mis-
placed.

No.  142  and  No.  143.  Two  double  numbers,  30  cents  each.

A  VINDICATION    OF  THE    RfGHTS    OF  WOMAN.-With  Strictures

on  Political  and  Moral  Subjects. —  By  Mary  "Wollstonecraft. —  New  Edition,
with  an   Introduction  by  Mrs.  Henry  Fawcett.

CONTENTS.

Chapter  I.— The  Rights  and  Involved  Duties  of
Mankind  Considered.

Chapter  II.— The  Prevailing  Opinion  of  a  Sexual
Character  Discussed.

Chapter  III.— The  Same  Subject  Continued.

Chapter  IV. —  Observations  on  the  State  of  Deg-
radation to  which  Woman  is  Reduced  by  Va-
rious Causes.

Chapter  V. —  Animadversions  on  Some  of  the
Writers  who  have  Rendered  Women  Objects
of  Pity,  bordering  on  Contempt.

Chapter  VI.—  The  Effect  which  an  Early  Asso-
ciation of  Ideas  lias  upon  the  Character.

Chapter  VII. —  Modesty. —  Comprehensively  Con-
sidered, and  not  as  a  Sexual  Virtue.

Chapter  VIII. —  Morality  Undermined  by  Sexual
Notions  of  the  Importance  of  a  Good  Repu-
tation.

Chapter  IX. —  Of  the  Pernicioiis  Effects  which
arise  from  the_  Unnatural  Distinctions  estab-
lished in  Society.

Chapter       X. —  Parental  Affection.

Chapter      XI. —  Duty  to  Parents.

Chapter   XII. —  On  National  Education.

Chapter  XIII. — Some  Instances  of  the  Folly  which
the  Ignorance  of  Women  generates ;  with  Con-
cluding Reflections  on  the  Moral  Improvement
that  a  Revolution  in  Female  Manners  might
naturally  be  expected  to  produce.

This  edition  is  a  reprint  of  the  first  edition,  which  appeared  nearly  one  hundred
years  ago.

Women    at  the   Present   Time   and   Women   a  Hundred   Years  Ago.

The  women  of  today  can  scarcely  realize  the  conditions  their  sex  had  to  confront  in  those  old  times;
but  the  degradation  was  very  real,  and  the  protest  against  it  was  very  much  needed.  Mrs.  Fawcett's
introduction  loiU  be  found  highly  interesting  and  helpful.— New  York  Tribune.

THE   HUMBOLDT  PUBLISHING   CO.,  28  Lafayette  Place,  New  York

LIST    OF    BOUND     BOOKS

IN

THE    HUMBOLDT    LIBRARY   SERIES.

The  prices  here  given   include    postage,  or  express    charges,  to  any  country  in   the   Postal   Union.

Complete  sets  of  The  Humboldt  Library,  from  No.  1  to  No.  139,  can  be  obtained
uniform  in  size,  style  of  binding,  &e.  The  volumes  average  over  600  pages  each,
and  are  arranged  thus: —

Vol.       I.

contains

•                                              *

"        II.

<<

•                       *

i            «

"       III.

c<

*                       (f                      •

"       IV.

u

ft                       •

k                         ft

V.

a

ft                      «                       ft

"       VI.

n

•                           •                            4

ft

"     VII.

a

■                     a                     •

■"   VIII.

tt

*                     •                     <

ft

"      IX.

it

ft                     •                     •

X.

tt

•                     •                     (

•

'•'      XI.

a

•                     •                     •

"     XII.

it

•                     •                     ■

,

■"   XIII.

a

•                     •  '                  •

"   XIV.

a

.

•

Cloth,

extra,  $2  per  vol.,

or  $28  pei

Numbers     1—12

a

13—24

a

25—36

a

37—48

tt

49—59

a

60—70

ii

71—80

tt

81—91

a

92—103

it

104—111

a

112—118

it

119—127

it

128—133

tt

134—139

Sold  in  separate  vols.,  or  in  sets.

#  #

We  have  some  sets  bound  in  finer  bindings, —  half  seal  and  half  morocco,
marble  edges, —  which  are  sold  only  in  complete  sets  (not  odd  volumes).  Prices
furnished  on  application.

Additional  bound  volumes  of  600  pages  (average)  are  added  when  the  semi-monthly
numbers  -will  make  a  volume  of  the  usual  size.

WORKS    BY    CHARLES    DARWIN.

The  Origin  of  Species  by  Means  of  Natural  Selection,  or  the  Preserva-
tion of  Favored  Eaces  in  the  Struggle  for  Life. —  New  edition,  from  the  latest
English  edition,  with  additions  and  corrections.     Cloth.         .        .         .        $1.25

The  Descent  of  Man,  and  Selection  in  Relation  to  Sex.— With  illustra-
tions.—  New  edition,  revised  and  augmented.     Cloth.     .        ...        .        $1.50

The  Formation  of  Vegetable  Mould  through  the  Action  of  Earth-
worms, with  Observations  on  their  Habits. —  Illustrated.     Cloth.       75  cents.

A    COMPANION-BOOK    TO    DARWIN'S    WORKS,

Charles  Darwin:    His  Life  and  Work.— By  Grant  Allen.  Cloth.  75  cents.

Published    semi-monthly.  —  $3  a  year.—  Single    numbers.  15  cents.

THE     HUMBOLDT     LIBRARY

WORKS    BY    PROFESSOR    HUXLEY.
Evidence   as   to    Man's    Place   in    Nature.— With  numerous  illustrations.
On   the  Origin   of  Species;   or,  the  Causes  of  the  Phenomena  of
Organic   Nature.

Two  books  in  one  volume.     Cloth 75  cents.

The     Physical     Basis    of    Life.— With  other  Essays.

Lectures     On     Evolution.— With  an  Appendix  on  the  Study  of  Biology.

Two  books  in  one  volume.     Cloth 75  cents.

Animal   Automatism,  and   other   Essays.
Technical    Education,  and   other   Essays.

Two  books  in  one  volume.     Cloth 75  cents.

SELECT  WORKS    OF    PROFESSOR   JOHN    TYNDALL.
Forms  of  Water  in  Clouds  and   Rivers,  Ice  and   Glaciers.— Nineteen

Illustrations.

Lessons  in   Electricity.— Sixty  illustrations.
Six   Lectures  on   Light.— illustrated.

Three  books  in  one  volume.     Cloth $1.00

WORKS    BY   HERBERT    SPENCER.
The  Data  of  Ethics.— Cloth 75  cents.

Education:  Intellectual,  Moral,  and   Physical.

Progress:     Its    Law    and    Cause.— With  other  Disquisitions.

Two  books  in  one  volume.     Cloth 75  cents.

The  Genesis  of  Science.  ,

The  Factors  of  Organic   Evolution.

Two  books  in  one  volume.     Cloth.        .......     75  cents.

SELECT  WORKS    OF   GRANT   ALLEN.
The   Evolutionist  at   Large.  Vignettes  from    Nature.

Force    and    Energy.— A  Theory  of  Dynamics.

Three  books  in  one  volume.     Cloth $1.00

SELECT   WORKS    OF  1RICHARD    A.   PROCTOR,   F.R.AS.

Light    Science   for  Leisure    Hours.

Familiar    Essays    on    Scientific    Subjects.

Hereditary  Traits,   and    other    Essays.

Miscellaneous    Essays.

Illusions    of  the    Senses,   and    other    Essays.

Notes    on    Earthquakes,  with    fourteen    Miscellaneous    Essays.

Six  books   in   one   volume $1.50

Published    semi-montlily.—  $3  a  year. —  Single    numbers,  15  cents.

OF    POPULAR     SCIENCE.

SELECT   WORKS    OF   WILLIAM    KINGDON    CLIFFORD,  F.R.A.S.

Seeing    and    Thinking.

The    Scientific    Basis    of    Morals,   and    other    Essays.

Conditions    of   Mental    Development,   and    other    Essays.

The  Unseen   Universe.— Also,  The  Philosophy  of  the  Pure  Sciences.

Cosmic    Emotion.— Also,  The   Teachings  of  Science.

Five  books  in  one  volume.     Cloth $1.25

SELECT   WORKS    OF   EDWARD    CLODD,    F.R.A.S.

The    Childhood    of    Religions.

The    Birth    and    Growth    of    Myths    and    Legends.

The    Childhood    of  the    World.

Three   books   in   one   volume.     Cloth $1.00

SELECT   WORKS    OF  TH.   RIBOT.

Translated   from  the   French   by  J.  Fitzgerald,  M.A.

The  Diseases  of  Memory.
The  Diseases  of  the  Will.
The    Diseases    of   Personality.

Three   books   in   one   volume.     Cloth .        .        .     $1.00

THE    MILKY    WAY.

CONTAINING

The  Wonders  of  the  Heavens.— With  thirty-two  Actinoglyph  Illustrations.
By  Camille  Flammarion.

The    Romance    of   Astronomy— By  R.  Kalley  Miller,  m.a.

The    Sun:    Its    Constitution;    Its    Phenomena;    Its    Condition.— By

Nathan  T.  Carr,  LL.D.

Three  books  in   one   volume.     Cioth $1.00

POLITICAL    SCIENCE.

CONTAINING

Physics  and  Politics. —  An  Application  of  the  Principles  of  Natural  Selection
and  Heredity  to  Political  Society.  —  By  Walter  Bagehot,  author  of  "The
English   Constitution."  /

History   of   the    Science    of    Politics.  — By  Frederick  Pollock.

Two   books  in   one   volume.     Cloth 75  cents.

THE    LAND    QUESTION.

CONTAINING

The   History   of  Landholding   in    England.— By  Joseph  Fisher,  f.r.h.s.
Historical    Sketch    of   the    Distribution    of    Land    in    England.— By

By  William  Lloyd  Birkbeck,  M.A.

Two  books   in   one   volume.     Cloth 75  cents.

THE   HUMBOLDT  PUBLISHING  CO.,  28  Lafayette  Place,  New  York.

THE     HUMBOLDT     LIBRARY

SELECT   WORKS    BY   J.   ALLANSON    PICTON.
The    Mystery  of   Matter.  — Also,  The    Philosophy  of   Ignorance.
The    Essential    Nature    of   Religion.

Two  books  in  one  volume.     Cloth 75  cents.

SELECT  WORKS    BY  ANDREW    WILSON,   F.R.S.E.

Science    and    Crime,  and    other    Essays.
Science    and    Poetry,  and    other   Essays.

Two  books  in  one  volume.     Cloth 75  cents.

SELECT  WORKS    BY  W.   MATTIEU   WILLIAMS,  F.R.A.S.,  F.C.S.

Current    Discussions    in    Science.

Scientific    Aspects    of  Some    Familiar   Things.

Two  books  in  one  volume.     Cloth 75  cents.

SELECT  WORKS    BY  J.   F.   C.   HECKER,  M.D.

The     Black     Death. — An  Account  of  the  Deadly  Pestilence  of  the  Fourteenth
Century.

The    Dancing    Mania   of  the    Middle    Ages.

Two  books  in  one  volume.     Cloth.       .......     75  cents.

STANDARD    WORKS    BY   VARIOUS    AUTHORS.
The   Naturalist  on  the   River  Amazons.— A  Eecord  of  Adventures,  Habits

of  Animals,  Sketches  of  Brazilian  and  Indian  Life,  and  Aspects  of  Nature  under
the  Equator,  during  Eleven  Years  of  Travel.— By  Henry  Walter  Bates,  F.L.S.,
Assistant  Secretary  of  the  Royal  Geographical  Society  of  England.   Cloth.  75  cts.

The    Rise    and    Early   Constitution    of   Universities,  with  a  Survey  of

Mediaeval  Education. —  By  S.  S.  Laurie,  LL.D.,  Professor  of  the  Institutes  and
History  of  Education  in  the  University  of  Edinburgh.     Cloth.  ...     75  cents.

The  Religions  of  the  Ancient  World:  including  Egypt,  Assyria  and
Babylonia,  Persia,  India,  Phoenicia,  Etruria,  Greece,  Eome. —  By  George  Raw-
linson,  M.A.,  Camden  Professor  of  Ancient  History,  Oxford,  and  Canon  of
Canterbury.  Author  of  "The  Origin  of  Nations,"  "The  Five  Great  Monarch-
ies," &c.     Cloth .        .        .   '     .     75  cents.

Fetichism. — A  Contribution  to  Anthropology  and  the  History  of  Religion. — By
Fritz  Schultze,  Dr.Phil.  —  Translated  from  the  German  by  J.  Fitzgerald,
M.A.     Cloth 75  cents.

Published    semi-monthly.—  $3  a  year.—  Single    numbers,  15  cents.

OF    POPULAR     SCIENCE.

STANDARD    WORKS    BY   VARIOUS    AUTHORS.
Money   and    the    Mechanism    of    Exchange.— By  w.  Stanley  Jevons,

M.A.,  F.R.S.,  Professor  of  Logic  and  Political  Economy  in  the  Owens  College,
Manchester,  England.     Cloth. 75  cents.

On  the  Study  of  Words. —  By  Richard  Chenevix  Trench,  D.D.,  Archbishop
of  Dublin.     Cloth 75  cents.

The  Dawn  of  History. —  -A-11  Introduction  to  Prehistoric  Study. —  Edited  by
C.  F.  Keary,  MA.,  of  the  British  Museum.     Cloth 75  cents.

Geological  Sketches  at  Home  and  Abroad.— By  Archibald  Geikie,
L.L.D.,  F.R.S.,  Director-General  of  the  Geological  Surveys  of  Great  Britain  and
Ireland.     Cloth. 75  cents.

Illusions:  A  Psychological  Study.— By  James  Sully,  author  of  "Sensation
and  Intuition,"  "Pessimism,"  &c.     Cloth 75  cents.

The  Pleasures  of  Life.— Part  I-  aild  Bart  IL—  By  Sir  John  Lubbock,  Bart.
Two   Parts   in   One.     Cloth 75  cents.

English,  Past  and  Present.—  Part  I.  and  Part  IL— By  Richard  Chenevix
Trench,  D.D.,  Archbishop  of  Dublin.    Two  Parts  in  One.    Cloth.     .     75  cents.

The  Story  Of  Creation. —  A  Plain  Account  of  Evolution. — By  Edward  Clodd,
F.R.A.S.     With  over  eighty  illustrations.      ......     75  cents.

Hypnotism:    Its    History    and     Present    Development.— By  Fredrik

Bjornstrom,  M.D.,  Head  Physician   of   the  Stockholm  Hospital,   Professor  of
Psychiatry,  late  Royal  Swedish  Medical  Councillor.     Cloth.    ...     75  cents.

Christianity  and  Agnosticism.— A  controversy  consisting  of  papers  by  Henry
Wace,  D.D.,  Prebendary  of  St.  Paul's  Cathedral;  Principal  of  King's  College,
London. — Professor  Thomas  H.  Huxley. — W.  C.  Magee,  D.D.,  Bishop  of  Peter-
borough.— W.  H.  Mallock,  Mrs.  Humphry  Ward.     Cloth 75  cents.

Darwinism:   An    Exposition    of   the   Theory   of    Natural    Selection,

with  some  of  its  applications. — By  Alfred  Russel  Wallace,  LL.D.,  F.L.S.
With  portrait  of  the  author,  colored  map,  and  numerous  illustrations.  Cloth.   $1.25

The  ablest   living  Darwinian  writer. —  Cincinnati  Commercial  Gazette.

The  most  important  contribution  to  the  study  of  the  origin  of  species  and  the  evolution  of  man
•which  has  been  published  since  Darwin's  death. —  New  York  Han.

There  is  no  better  book  than  this  in  which  to  look  for  an  intelligent,  complete,  and  fair  pres-
entation of  both  sides  of  the  discussion  on  evolution. — New  Turk  Herald.

THE   HUMBOLDT  PUBLISHING   CO.,  28  Lafayette  Place,  New  York.

THE     HUMBOLDT     LIBRARY

STANDARD    WORKS    BY  VARIOUS    AUTHORS.
Modern    Science    and    Modern    Thought.— A  Clear  and  Concise  View  of

the  Principal  Results  of  Modern  Science,  and  of  the  Revolution  which  they
have  effected  in  Modern  Thought. — With  a  Supplemental  Chapter  on  Gladstone's
"Dawn  of  Creation"  and  "Proem  to  Genesis,"  and  on  Drummond's  "Natural
Law  in  the  Spiritual  World."—  By  S.  Laing.     Cloth.  .        .  '      .  75  cents.

Upon   the   Origin   of  Alpine   and    Italian   Lakes;   and   upon   Glacial

Erosion.— By  A.  C.  Ramsay,  F.R.S.,  &c;  John  Ball,  M.R.I.A.,  F.L.S.,  &c;
Sir  Roderick  I.  Murchison,  F.R.S.,  D.C.L.,  &c;  Prof.  B.  Studer,  of  Berne;
Prof.  A.  Favre,  of  Geneva;  and  Edward  Whymper. — With  an  Introduction,
and  Notes  upon  the  American  Lakes,  by  Prof.  J.  W.  Spencer,  Ph.D.,  F.G.S.,
State  Geologist  of  Georgia.     Cloth 75  cents.

Physiognomy  and  Expression. —  By  Paolo  Mantegazza,  Senator;  Director
of  the  National  Museum  of  Anthropology,  Florence ;  President  of  the  Italian
Society  of  Anthropology.     With  Illustrations.     Cloth.    .        .        .  x     .        $1.00

The   Industrial   Revolution  of  the   Eighteenth  Century  in   England.

Popular  Addresses,  Notes,  and  other  Fragments. —  By  the  late  Arnold  Toynbee,
Tutor  of  Balliol  College,  Oxford. —  Together  with  a  short  memoir  by  B.  Jowett,
Master  of  Balliol  College,  Oxford $1.00

The  Origin  Of  the  Aryans. —  An  Account  of  the  Prehistoric  Ethnology  and
Civilization  of  Europe. —  By  Isaac  Taylor,  M.A.,  Litt.  D.,  Hon.  LL.D.—
Illustrated.     Cloth $1.00.

The  Evolution  of  Sex. —  By  Prof.  Patrick  Geddes  and  J.  Arthur  Thomson.
With  104  illustrations.     Cloth $1.00

'  Such  a  work  as  this,  written  by  Prof.  Geddes,  who  has  contributed  many  articles  on  the  same  and
kindred  subjects  to  the  Encyclopaedia  Britannica,  and  by  Mr.  J.  Arthur  Thomson,  is  not  for  the  specialist,
though  the  specialist  may  find  it  good  reading,  nor  for  the  reader  of  light  literature,  though  the  latter
"would  dp  well  to  grapple  with  it.  Those  who  have  followed  Darwin,  Wallace,  Huxley,  and  Haeckel'  in
their  various  publications,  and  have  heaid  of  the  later  arguments  against  heredity  brought  forward  by
Prof.  Weissrnann,  will  not  be  likely  to  put  it  down  unread.  .  .  .  The  aiithors  have  some  extremely
interesting  ideas  to  state,  particularly  with  regard  to  the  great  questions  of  sex  and  environment  in  their
relation  to  the  growth  of-  life  on  earth.  .  .  .  They  are  to  be  congratulated  on  the  scholarly  and  clear
"way  in  which  they  have  handled  a  difficult  and  delicate  subject." — Times.

4

The  Law  of  Private  Right.— By  George  H.  Smith,  author  of  "Elements
of  Right,  and  of  the  Law,"  and  of  Essays  on  "The  Certainty  of  the  Law,  and
the  Uncertainty  of  Judicial  Decisions,"  "The  True  Method  of  Legal  Educa-
tion," &c,  &c.     Cloth 75  cents.

CAPITAL:    A    Critical     Analysis    of    Capitalist     Production.— By

Karl  Marx.— Translated  from  the  third  German  edition  by  Samuel  Moore
and  Edward  Aveling,  and  edited  by  Frederick  Engels.— The  only  American
Edition.— Carefully  Revised.     Cloth.   . $1.75

"The  great  merit  of  Marx,  therefore,  lies  in  the  work  he  has  done  as  a  scientific  inquirer  into  the
economic  movement  of  modern  times,  as  the  philosophic  historian  of  the  capitalistic  era."—  Encyclopedia
Britannica.

"  So  great  a  position  has  not  been  won  by  any  work  on  Economic  Science  since  the  appearance  of
The  Wealth  of  Nations.  ...  All  these  circumstances  invest,  therefore,  the  teachings  of  this  partic-
ularly acute  "thinker  with  an  interest  such  as  can  not  be  claimed  by  any  other  thinker  of  the  present
day." — The  Athenceum.

Published    semi-montnly.—  $3  a  year.—  Single    numbers,  15  cents.

The  Tables  of  Contents  of  the  works  on   the  various    subjects  are  enumerated   in   the

Descriptive   Catalogue.

A    CATALOGUE    RAISONNf,

Containing  all  the  works  in  THE  HUMBOLDT  LIBRARY,  up  to  and  including  No.  138,
GROUPED  ACCORDING  TO  THEIR  SUBJECT-MATTER,  for  the  convenience  of  those
who  desire  to  become  familiar  with  the  results  of  scientific  inquiry  in  any  of  the  following
departments:—

ASTRONOMY.

No.  14—  THE     WONDERS     OF    THE     HEAVENS Flammakion.

No.  20— THE    ROMANCE    OF    ASTRONOMY Miller.

No.  49— THE     SUN:    ITS    CONSTITUTION;    PHENOMENA;    CONDITION.  Care.

Essays  on  astronomical  subjects  are  also  contained  in
No.  1— LIGHT     SCIENCE     FOR    LEISURE     HOURS PROCTOR.

No.  19— FAMILIAR    ESSAYS     ON     SCIENTIFIC     SUBJECTS PROCTOR.

No.  24.— POPULAR     SCIENTIFIC     LECTURES HELMHOLTZ.

No.  41.— CURRENT    DISCUSSIONS    IN    SCIENCE Williams.

No.  82  —  ILLUSIONS     OF    THE     SENSES,   AND     OTHER    ESSAYS.        .        .        PROCTOR.

No.  90.— NOTES     ON    EARTHQUAKES,   ETC Proctor.

No.   120— THE     MODERN    THEORY     OF     HEAT MOLLOY.

BIOGRAPHY— HISTORY    OF    SCIENCE.

No.  43—  DARWIN    AND     HUMBOLDT Agassiz,  etc.

No.  80.— CHARLES    DARWIN:    HIS    LIFE    AND    WORK.  .        .        .      Grant  Allen.

.No.  89.— THE    GENESIS    OF    SCIENCE Spencer.

(  A    HALF-CENTURY    OF    SCIENCE Huxley.

No.  96.?

(  THE    PROGRESS    OF    SCIENCE    FROM    1836    to    1886.  .        .      Grant  Allen.

BIOLOGY— ZOOLOGY— BOTANY.

Nos.  11  and  12— THE    NATURALIST     ON    THE    RIVER    AMAZONS.      .        .  Bates.

.  No.  26— THE    EVOLUTIONIST    AT    LARGE Allen.

No.  29— FACTS     AND    FICTIONS     OF     ZOOLOGY Wilson.

No.  33— VIGNETTES    FROM    NATURE Allen.

No.  48.— LIFE     IN    NATURE Hinton.

No.  64— THE    DISTRIBUTION    OF    ANIMALS    AND    PLANTS.      .        .  Wallace,  Dyer

No.  84.— STUDIES     OF    ANIMATED     NATURE Dallas.

No.  92.— THE    FORMATION    OF    VEGETABLE    MOULD Darwin.

See  also  under  the  head  "  Evolution."

THE   HUMBOLDT  PUBLISHING   CO.,  28  Lafayette  Place,  New  York.

THE     HUMBOLDT     LIBRARY
EARLY    HISTORY    OF    MAN.

No.  25.— THE    ORIGIN    OF    NATIONS Rawlinson..

Nos.  44  and  45.— THE    DAWN    OF    HISTORY. Keary^

No.  60.— THE     CHILDHOOD     OF    THE     WORLD ,        .     CLODD..

No.  71.—  ANTHROPOLOGY.—  ARCHEOLOGY WILSON.

Nos.  130  and  131.— THE    ORIGIN    OF    THE    ARYANS.     .....      ISAAC  TAYLOR-

EDUCATION.— LANGUAGE.

No.  5.— EDUCATION:    INTELLECTUAL,  MORAL,  AND    PHYSICAL.     .        .         Spencer.

No.  8.— THE     STUDY    OF    LANGUAGES MARCEL.

Nos.  30  and  31.—  THE    STUDY    OF    WORDS Trench.

(THE    PHILOSOPHY    OF     STYLE.   .        .  Spencer..

No.  34. 1

(THE    MOTHER    TONGUE.  .        .  Bain.

No.  66.— TECHNICAL     EDUCATION HUXLEY.

No.  91.— THE    RISE    OF    UNIVERSITIES Laurie.

No.  98.— THE     TEACHING    OF     SCIENCE.   . CLIFFORD.

No.  100.— SCIENCE    AND     POETRY Wilson.

No.  105.—  FREEDOM    IN     SCIENCE     AND     TEACHING HAECKEL.

Nos.  108  and  109.— ENGLISH,   PAST    AND    PRESENT Trench.

No.  21.— THE     PHYSICAL    BASIS     OF    LIFE,   AND     OTHER    ESSAYS.      .  Huxley.

No.  53.  — ANIMAL     AUTOMATISM,   AND     OTHER    ESSAYS.        .        .         .        .  Huxley.

No.  61.— MISCELLANEOUS     ESSAYS PROCTOR..

No.  66.— TECHNICAL    EDUCATION HUXLEY.

No.  73.— EVOLUTION    TN    HISTORY,   LANGUAGE,   &c Various   authors.

ETHICS.— MANNERS    AND    CUSTOMS.

No.  9.— THE     DATA     OF    ETHICS '       .         .        .         SPENCER-

No.  28,— FASHION    IN    DEFORMITY.     .  Flower.

No.  55.— THE     SCIENTIFIC    BASIS    OF    MORALS Clifford.

No.  68.  — PROGRESSIVE     MORALITY Fowler.n

No.  88.— SCIENCE     AND     CRIME.      .  - Wilson..

No.  93.— CAPITAL     PUNISHMENT Bleyer.

EVOLUTION    THEORY— DARWINISM.

No.  16.-THE    ORIGIN    OF    SPECIES Huxley..

No.  36.— LECTURES     ON    EVOLUTION '.  HUXLEY.

No.  40.— ORGANIC     EVOLUTION ...        ROMANES.

Published    semi-monthly.— $3  a  year.— Single    numbers,  15  cents..

OF    POPULAR     SCIENCE.
EVOLUTION    THEORY.— DARWINISM.

Nos.  58  and  59.—  THE    ORIGIN    OK    SPECIES DABWIK.

No.  94.—  THE     FACTORS     OF    ORGANIC     EVOLUTION SPEKCEB.

No.  110.— THE     STORY     OF     CREATION Cl.oin

Nos.  115  and  116.—  DARWINISM A.  R.  WALLACE.

Nos.  117  and  118.— MODERN     SCIENCE     AND    MODERN     THOUGHT.      .  8.  ItAOXQ.

Nos.  132  and  133.— THE     EVOLUTION     OF    SEX GEDDES  and  THOMSON.

No.  23.— SCIENTIFIC     SOPHISMS    (criticism) Wainwright.

See  also,  for  essays   coming  under  this  head,

No.   17.— PROGRESS:     ITS     LAW     AND     CAUSE. Spencek.

No.  21— THE    PHYSICAL    BASIS    OF    LIFE Huxley.

No.  73.— EVOLUTION    IN    HISTORY,   LANGUAGE,  &c Various  authors.

GEOLOGY— GEOGRAPHY.

No.  6.— TOWN     GEOLOGY KlNGSLEY.

Nos.  38  and  39.— GEOLOGICAL     SKETCHES Geikie.

No.  104.— TROPICAL     AFRICA Drtjmmond,

Nos.  122  and  123.— THE    ORIGIN    OF    ALPINE    LAKES.        ....  Various  authors.

See,  also,
No.  21— THE     PHYSICAL     BASIS     OF    LIFE,   AND     OTHER    ESSAYS.  HrxLEY.

No.  41.—  CURRENT    DISCUSSIONS    IN    SCIENCE'. Williams.

No.  79.— SCIENTIFIC    ASPECTS    OF    SOME    FAMILIAR    THINGS.      .        .      Williams.

MAN.— ORIGIN.— PLACE    IN    NATURE.— RACES.

No.  4.— MAN'S    PLACE    IN    NATURE Huxley.

No.  71.— ANTHROPOLOGY ARCHAEOLOGY.     .        .        .        .        .        .     WlLSON  and  TYLOR.

Nos.  74,  75,  76,  77.— THE    DESCENT    OF    MAN Darwin.

Nos.  130  and  131.— THE    ORIGIN    OF    THE    ARYANS.     .....      Isaac  Taylor.

MEDICINE— EPIDEMICS.

No.  15.— LONGEVITY Gardner.

No.  67.— THE     BLACK    DEATH.         .                 Hecker.

No.  72.— THE     DANCING    MANIA     OF    THE    MIDDLE     AGES.        .        .        .  Hecker.

No.  87—  THE    MORPHINE    HABIT Ball.

See  also  works  by  Ribot  under  the  head  "Psychology."

THE   HUMBOLDT  PUBLISHING-  CO.,  28  Lafayette  Place,  New  York.

THE     HUMBOLDT     LIBRARY

PHYSICS.

No.  2.— THE    FORMS    OF    WATER Tyndall.

No.  7.— THE     CONSERVATION    OF    ENERGY Balfour  Stew akt.

No.  10— THE    THEORY    OF    SOUND    IN    ITS    RELATION    TO    MUSIC.        .     Blaserna.

No.  18.— LESSONS     IN     ELECTRICITY .        .        .        .        Tyndall.

No.  37.— LECTURES     ON    LIGHT ...       Tyndall.

No.  106.— FORCE    AND     ENERGY Grant  Allen.

No.  119.— THE     ELECTRIC     LIGHT Molloy.

No.  120.— THE     MODERN     THEORY     OF     HEAT Molloy.

Nos.  117  and  118— MODERN     SCIENCE    AND    MODERN    THOUGHT.      .        .  Laing.

POLITICAL,  ECONOMIC,  AND  FINANCIAL  SCIENCE.

No.  3.— PHYSICS     AND     POLITICS BAGEHOT.

No.  27.— LANDHOLDING    IN     ENGLAND Fisher.

No.  42.— HISTORY     OF     THE     SCIENCE     OF    POLITICS POLLOCK.

Nos.  50  and  51.— MONEY   AND    THE     MECHANISM    OF  EXCHANGE.      Stanley  Jevons.

No.  78— THE     DISTRIBUTION     OF     LAND    IN    ENGLAND Birkbeck.

No.  83.— PROFIT-SHARING Sedley  Taylor.

Nos.  102  and  107.— ULTIMATE     FINANCE.        . Black.

No.  103.— THE     COMING     SLAVERY.        . .        .        Spencer.

No.  121.— UTILITARIANISM J.  S.  MILL.

No.  124.— THE     QUINTESSENCE     OF     SOCIALISM '      .        .      Schaffle.

No.  125.— DARWINISM    AND    POLITICS Ritchie.

Nos.  128  and  129.— THE     INDUSTRIAL     REVOLUTION Toynbee.

No.  134— THE     LAW     OF     PRIVATE     RIGHT.    .        .        .        .        .        .        .        .  Smith.

Nos.  135,  136,  137.— CAPITAL '-.        .       .   .      Karl  Marx.

See  also  No.  68,  Essays  by  Herbert  Spencer. —  No.  70.  Essays  by  Spencer.— No.  90,  Essays  by  Proctor.

PSYCHOLOGY—  PHYSIOGNOMY.

No.  13.— MIND    AND    BODY. Bain.

No.  22.— SEEING    AND     THINKING. Clifford.

No.  46.— THE     DISEASES     OF    MEMORY »  Ribot.

No.  52— THE     DISEASES     OF     THE    "WILL Ribot.

Nos.  56  and  57.—  ILLUSIONS :     A    PSYCHOLOGICAL    STUDY.      .        .        .        .  Sully.

No.  82.  — ILLUSIONS     OF    THE     SENSES PROCTOR.

No.  87  -THE    MORPHINE     HABIT Ball.

Published    semi-monthly.—  $3  a  year.—  Single    numbers,  15  cents.

OF    POPULAR     SCIENCE.
PSYCHOLOGY—  PHYSIOGNOMY.

No.  95.— DISEASES    OF    PERSONALITY Ribot.

No.  101.— DREAMS.— ASSOCIATION    OF    IDEAS Sully  and  Robertson.

No.  112.— THE     PSYCHOLOGY     OF    ATTENTION.  .      Ribot.

No.  113— HYPNOTISM:    ITS  HISTORY  AND  PRESENT  DEVELOPMENT.    BJORNSTROM.

Nos.  127  and  128.— PHYSIOGNOMY    AND    EXPRESSION Mantegazza.

See,  also,
No.  32— HEREDITARY    TRAITS,  AND    OTHER    ESSAYS PROCTOR.

No.  53.— ANIMAL    AUTOMATISM,   AND     OTHER    ESSAYS Hux.'.ey.

No.  65.  — CONDITIONS     OF    MENTAL     DEVELOPMENT CLIFFORD.

RELIGION— MYTHOLOGY.

No.  35—  ORIENTAL    RELIGIONS Caird.

No.  47.— THE     CHILDHOOD     OF    RELIGIONS Clodd.

No.  54— THE    BIRTH    AND     GROWTH     OF    MYTH Clodd.

No.  62— THE     RELIGIONS     OF    THE     ANCIENT    WORLD Rawlinson.

No.  69—  FETICHISM SCHULTZE.

No.  81.— THE     MYSTERY     OF    MATTER,    ETC PlCTON.

No.  85— THE    ESSENTIAL    NATURE     OF    RELIGION PlCTON.

See  also  No.  68,  Essays  by  Herbert  Spencer. —  No.  90,  Essays  by  Proctor.

SCIENTIFICO-PHILOSOPHICAL   SPECULATION.

No.  3— PHYSICS    AND    POLITICS Bagehot.

No.  20.— THE     ROMANCE     OF    ASTRONOMY Miller.

No.  48.— LIFE     IN    NATURE Hinton.

No.  81.— MYSTERY    OF    MATTER PHILOSOPHY     OF     IGNORANCE.        .         .  PlCTON.

No.  85.— THE     ESSENTIAL    NATURE     OF    RELIGION PlCTON.

No.  86.- UNSEEN    UNIVERSE PHILOSOPHY    OF    PURE    SCIENCES.      .       Clifford.

No.  89.  — THE     GENESIS     OF    SCIENCE SPENCER.

Nos.  97  and  111.— THE    PLEASURES     OF    LIFE Lubbock.

No.  98— COSMIC    EVOLUTION TEACHINGS    OF    SCIENCE.         .        .        .       Clifford.

No.  105— FREEDOM    IN     SCIENCE     AND     TEACHING.  ....        HAECKEL.

No.  114.— CHRISTIANITY    AND    AGNOSTICISM Various  authors.

Nos.  117  and  118—  MODERN     SCIENCE     AND    MODERN    THOUGHT.      .        .        S.  LAING.
DARWINISM    AND    POLITICS Ritchie.

C  DAK
\  ADM

No.  125.

ADMINISTRATIVE    NIHILISM HUXLEY.

»%  Most  of  the  Essays  under  this  head  are  named  in  other  divisions  of  this  classified
Catalogue;   hut  they  form  a  class  by  themselves.

THE   HUMBOLDT  PUBLISHING  CO.,  28  Lafayette  Place,  New  York.

THE     HUMBOLDT     LIBRARY
MISCELLANEOUS.

No.  1.—  LIGHT     SCIENCE    FOR    LEISURE     HOURS .        PROCTOR.

TsTo.  17— PROGRESS:     ITS    LAW    AND     CAUSE.       . Spencer.

No.  19— FAMILIAR    ESSAYS     ON     SCIENTIFIC     SUBJECTS PROCTOR.

No.  21.— THE     PHYSICAL    BASIS     OF    LIFE,   AND     OTHER    ESSAYS.      .  Huxley.

No.  41.— CURRENT    DISCUSSIONS    IN    SCIENCE .        .      Williams.

No.  48.— LIFE    IN    NATURE HlNTON.

Xo.  53.— ANIMAL    AUTOMATISM,   AND     OTHER    ESSAYS HUXLEY.

No.  61.— MISCELLANEOUS    ESSAYS PROCTOR.

No.  70.— ESSAYS,  PRACTICAL    AND    SPECULATIVE Spencer.

No.  73.— EVOLUTION  IN  HISTORY,  LANGUAGE,  AND  SCIENCE.  Various  authors.
No.  79.— SCIENTIFIC  ASPECTS  OF  SOME  FAMILIAR  THINGS.  .  .  WILLIAMS.
No.  82.— ILLUSIONS     OF    THE     SENSES,   AND     OTHER    ESSAYS.         .        .        PROCTOR.

No.  86— UNSEEN    UNIVERSE PHILOSOPHY    OF    PURE     SCIENCES.      .       Clifford.

JSTos.  97  and  111.— THE     PLEASURES     OF    LIFE Lubbock.

No.  98.— COSMIC    EVOLUTION TEACHINGS    OF    SCIENCE.         .        ,        .       Clifford.

No.  99.— NATURE-STUDIES Various   authors.

No.  100.— SCIENCE    AND     POETRY. WlLSON.

No.  103.— THE     COMING    SLAVERY,   ETC Spencer.

No.  114.— CHRISTIANITY    AND    AGNOSTICISM Huxley  and  others.

A    NEW    SERIES

TO    BE    PUBLISHED    BY

THE    HUMBOLDT    PUBLISHING    CO.

EDITED    BY    W.   D.   P.   BLISS.

THE    SOCIAL    SCIENCE    LIBRARY

OF

THE      BEST     AUTHORS.

In  cheap  editions  for  the  Public.  —  To   be  published  monthly.

.Paper,  25  cents,  or  $2.50  a  year.  |  Cloth,  75   cents,  or  $7.50  a  year.

PAYABLE    IN    ADVANCE.

Ready,  January  1,

SIX    CENTURIES    OF    WORK    AND    WAGES.

By  James  E.  Thorold  Rogers.  M.P.,  Professor  of  Political  Economy,  Oxford,  England.
Abridged,  with  Charts   and   Summary,  by  W.  D.  P.  Bliss.

Beady,  February  1,

MILL    ON     SOCIALISM.

The  only  collection  of  John   Stuart  Mill's  writings  on  Socialism.

TO    BE    FOLLOWED    BY

WILLIAM    MORRIS-POET,   ARTIST,   SOCIALIST.

AND

FACTS     ON     SOCIALISM.

A  collection  of  facts,  mainly  American,  bearing  on  Socialism  or  Nationalism.

A    SPLENDID    COMPILATION    OF    MOST  VALUABLE    MATERIAL.

The  Humboldt  Library  is  :i  splendid  compilation  of  most  valuable  material.
It  is  hard  to  conceive  of  anything  so  valuable  being  had  for  the  same  amount  of
money,  containing  the  best  thoughts  of  the  best  men  of  the  time,  and  put  in
such  readable  and  accessible  shape.  ERASTUS   Wiman.

WHAT    THE     INTELLECTUAL    CIANTS    ARE    THINKINC    AND    WRITINC    ABOUT.

[From  the  Industrial  and  Commercial  Gazette,  Chicago.]
The  publishers  of  The  Humboldt  Library  have  opened  a  mine  of  literary  wealth,
and  they  place  before  the  reader  a  list  of  books  indispensable  to  every  intelligent
man  and  woman  who  desires  to  know  what  the  intellectual  giants  are  thinking  and
writing  about.

CHOICE    SPECIMENS    OF    LITERATURE    AND    SCIENCE.

[Prom  The  Lutheran,  Philadelphia,  Pa.]
The  Humboldt  Library  embraces  in  its  numbers  some  choice  specimens  of
literature  and  science.  Its  large  page  and  good  type  make  it  pleasurable,  to  peruse.
Its  master-writers  are  Darwin,  Huxley,  Tyndall,  Spencer,  Clifford,  Romanes,  Grant
Allen,  and  their  associates,  yet  there  are  many  numbers  of  great  interest  to  the  special
.■student,  whether  he  be  psychologist,  sociologist,  or  naturalist;  and  others  of  equal
interest  to  the  general  literary  reader.

WILL    MAKE    A    NATION    OF    SCHOLARS    OF   OUR    PEOPLE.

[From  The  National  Economist,  Washington,  D.  C]
The  publications  of  The  Humboldt  Publishing  Co.  are  a  boon  to  the  industrial
classes.  They  comprise  the  works  of  the  most  eminent  scientists  of  the  age,
and  are  furnished  at  a  price  that  even  the  poorest  may  enjoy  the  privilege  of  reading
them.  No  course  of  reading  could  be  of  greater  benefit  to  the  average  citizen  or  youth
than  the  publications  of  this  company.  Every  field  of  science  is  represented,  and  the
Tesearches  of  the  ablest  minds  are  put  before  the  readers  in  a  form  adapted  to  the
understanding  of  any.  *  *  *  Such  publications  will  make  a  nation  of  scholars
of  our  people  if  they  will  only  improve  the  opportunity  this  company  offers.

THESE    REMARKABLY    CHEAP    PRODUCTIONS.

[Extract  from  The  Publishers'  Circular,  London,  England,  May  1,  1889.]
The  Humboldt  Publishing  Co.,  of  New  York,  seems  to  be  what  is  called
across  the  Atlantic  a  "live"  concern.  Its  aim  is  high,  for  apparently  despising  the
broad  realm  of  fiction,  it  proposes  to  provide  the  public  with  the  great  classics  of
modern  science;  strong  meat  for  them  that  are  of  full  age;  and  all  tins  for
a  beggarly  fifteen  cents  a  volume!  In  other  words,  the  works  of  such  men  as  Darwin,
Tyndall,  Huxley,  R.  A.  Proctor,  Herbert  Spencer,  Bagehot,  Bain,  W.  K.  Clifford,
Charles  Kingsley,  Sir  John  Lubbock,  and  many  other  celebrated  English  authors  are
placed  before  the  public  at  sevenpence  halfpenny  a  volume.  *  *  *  They  are  sup-
plying the  British  Isles  and  colonies  with  these  remarkably  cheap  productions.

EVERY  VOLUME    IS    OF   ACKNOWLEDGED    EXCELLENCE.

[From  The  Evening  Mercury,  St.  John's,  Newfoundland.]
Among  the  numerous  issues  of  books  at  once  good  and  cheap,  those  of  The
Humboldt  Library  hold  a  foremost  place.  One  volume  is  published  monthly,  and  the
series  now  numbers  over  one  hundred  volumes.  The  paper  and  type  are  excellent, —
all  that  could  be  desired, —  and  the  price  is  a  perfect  marvel  even  in  these  days  of
cheap  literature.  *  *  *  On  the  score  of  mere  cheapness— the  quality  of  paper  and
type  and  the  quantity  of  matter  being  taken  into  account — The  Humboldt  Library
carries  off  the  palm.  In  many  instances  the  price  is  about  one  tenth  that  charged
by  other  publishers  for  the  same  book,  in  cloth  binding.

Books,  however,  like  other  articles,  maybe  at  once  "cheap  and  nasty."  Not  so
with  the  issues  of  The  Humboldt  Library.  Nearly  every  volume  is  one  of  acknowledged
excellence.  All  trashy  productions  are  excluded,  and  only  those  of  writers  who  belong
to  the  front  rank  in  their  several  departments  find  admission  into  The  Humboldt.

Nearly  all  the  volumes  belong  to  the  scientific  and  philosophical  class  of  books,
especially  such  as  are  popular  in  style  and  adapted  to  educated  tastes.  The  order  of
novel-readers  will  find  no  food  to  suit  them  in  The  Humboldt;  but  the  thoughtful  and
intelligent — those  who  wish  to  make  themselves  acquainted  with  the  foremost  writers
in  the  domains  of  science,  in  philosophic  speculation,  in  morals,  in  political  economy,
in  the  science  of  politics,  in  the  history  of  religions,  in  physiology  and  medicine,  in
the  general  evolution  of  humanity,  will  find  in  The  Humboldt  the  productions  of
the  master  minds  of  the  age, —  the  great  leaders  of  modern  thought.

JaSmJih

■■n

9

Hx»5

'••'•'■:-'

SkdhL
MP

mm
Ws8m

HP
Hit

1/ntMwmmwnMMMmMwwwmn

•"   -V---:   '.'■'■■

8H
